Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



-N(/i it.i: 



jiiililiv! f'il (HI i]i(' FIrsf I-/' }h(i-i-!i. \i(M I ■. ■ ■ 

111* III. It nll^r],! i,, In. |>i. K\ \NS"S •• TiilIv Va ' -1 ' 

lnu rliMt work is not vi;t iv;nlv. J Ir- t'l'ii >'\iii ; ■■■ ■ 
l>v. J'jVmus will <'X])hiiii tlio I'CJi.^on. iln sa^s:- 

** I li:!Vc ;i vi-ry .'.■■ri';it «li>liki' tn siMV :il»p«'iiT:"ii-i- i>r iVili'ii- ' 
!:K'i':< \\lii'-|i 1 iinkr. .My j>ri»i>iis('il vdIihim' (Hi llu- Iv.i'y l',;> •'.' 

is, ; ^ y-u k'Kiw, ;ilr ly cdu-siilt'ril'ly inlviiiji-iMl. ;;iii! in-i \\ i,: 

|';;i:!i :': ■ijiii!"*. I i-<nili| liiivc liiii-liiMl tiu- \iiii.l.' iii liiiii-. !•. ". ! • 
15. •■'■■'''.•_: •••. I ■•li:''.'M liiiv<' il'iiif i>ijii:'li''(' ti) tij" > = ' ' i !■ ■■•". . : !:■• ;. •■: 
;:I--ri. -ii i.'l.lif.i'iii In t lu' ii"\v liii'lU')- :\\vi :ii'y ;it ■■■■ii i!;.-r;il. I ■ i.';. 
twii ;i.4 ', li':.>ugli a iinini:i! frii-ml. ic''j.'iv(.''l iln' i- •:!■»>* in _' tV-'Tii r 
(if ^\iii:-L..i<lMii. I <nu»U' I'j'Din jiis li;:i.r: 'In ^■•.■\:\'\u\/.'-\: .'■■ 
<if tiiir Ihiurli, 1 liiivi' f»i;iiiil sm ."tiii'li' cnnt'^iiuiiilf :i.-i- i', !'■■' ! 
l»rt'U'ii(^iiJLC t:» l»r* I!iii>iisis (Sssiyiii, .l.»!iiisii;i, !'i;.';r:t-t. \r. ) v, -'j. 
si-slosy <if tho JL5ii|>lisi ('liiinh hi-ri', iii Imwh 1ci1«ms, iii'.<l <i.: !'< 
faiiji, writk'ii with lluir (»\vii }i;ui'!s lit'puio tlu-ir s!;.j!iM.; l'. .,• 
(set- ('•■..sl)y, \(il. i, j). W). il" your tVic'i'd l)r, I!v:.ii^ iiii;,iii i! ■■ 
tlifsc jnu-.'v?, I :>Tii Ti'inly Id sat'^-fy liiii!.' I'tid''!' I^ii ■■ •■;■■ ■■ 
I ir\i:-t yin:r ii-aiUrs wiii not oltjret li» my voli ii;:- iK-ii./ .'■■! 
lu'xl vc;.i/* 



1 



til.- ( 

N ^ I •: '< 

.\lm-.' 

■ ■ ', ■ I ' ■ 

! • < I : ' ■• I ■■ 



Wu arc liapi)v tr» aiiinmiici', iiistrnJ nf Dr. I^v.-ii 
vohimo, — "I'liK Acts of tiik Apostmis: mii l-'xpn- ii i-.u 
EiiMish Kuadoi-s, on tlu) basis of li ackktt: (.-dii-jMl l»v 

llev. SaMLKL (r. GltKKN, RA., of lt:UV<loil Cnl !(.'-•-: v. 5' 

new Translatiou by the FAlicor." Tliis. vnliiiiH^ will n..,- u 
on the Flr.U of March. 

The names of Siil)scril)ors t<> llio ►S<.';'i« s will si i 
received bv Messis. J. ITeatox i. S^jn, :ii, V/m-wi-l 
Paternoster Ivow, London, 12.C. 



THE BUNYAN LIBRARY: 



rOB THE FUBtJCATION AND REPUBLICATION OF STANDARD WORKS 



BY EMINENT BAPTIST AUTHORS. 



VOL. III. 



THE EARNEST MAN. 



i 



THE EARNEST MAN: 



A MEMOIR 



OF 



ADONIRAM JUDSON, D.D., 



FIRST MISSIONARY TO BURMAH. 



BY 



H. C. CONANT. 



• 


,-■■'" 


."■•■.■.\ 


''[- ■' 




. 1 


k 


« 


' ; 


V 




- ■ .•■■ y 

■ J 


N 


'. 


y 



EDITED BY JOSEPH ANGUS, D.D. 



LONDON: 
J. HEATON k SON, 21, WARWICK LANE, 

PATERNOSTER ROW. 
1861. 



I 



lOAN STACK 



LONDON: 
PRDmED BT J. BEATON AND SON, 
WARWICK LANS. 






INTRODUCTION. 



It is not without reason that the Memoir of Dr. 
Judson has assigned to it an early place in this series. 
The Principled and Practices of the Baptists came 
first, and were followed by the Select Works of Robert 
Robinson, To these last succeeds the Biography of a 
man not inferior to Robinson in genius; while his life 
is an exhibition of our principles in holy consistent 
action as impressive as is found in the volume of Dr. 
Wayland. If a good man is "a Uving epistle," then 
may it be as easy to learn the gospel from a life like 
Judson's as from an inspired book. His history, in 
fact, is Christianity taught by example, and enforced 
by many touching and instructive appeals. 

This volume has also a general interest. It is largely 
an Autobiography, describing the inward struggles and 
progress of a noble nature, and possessing much of the 
&scination which belongs to literature of that class. 
The details of Dr. Judson's life, unlike the monotony of 
many a missionary's course, have all the attractiveness 
of a romance ; while they introduce us to a people whom 
we still regard with mingled curiosity and awe. Nor 
is it the least recommendation of this narrative, that 
the pathos of it is deepened by the presence of noble 
women, who shared in succession in the missionary's 

6G6 



vi INTRODUCTION. 

toil, and who set off his somewhat stem manhood with 
a heroic tenderness peculiarly their own. Add to all 
this, that the volume exhibits a pattern of the qualities 
which are needed in all great Christian enterprises — 
invincible patience and self-denial, profound humility, 
exquisite prudence, ceaseless industry, and such an 
absorption of the soul in zeal for God's honour and for 
man's salvation as has not been surpassed since the age 
of the apostles; and we have said enough to justify 
the recommendation that all should study it. It can- 
not faU to excite lively sympathy: it ought also to 
fortify our principles and ennoble our character. 

After all, however, the chief value of this work is, 
that it gives the history of one of the most successful 
modem missions, and, by implication, a theory of mis- 
sioTis which well deserves the thoughtful consideration 
of the Christian church. It is not often that mission- 
aries can begin and direct a great movement. They 
have generally to work with others — to give as well 
as take. They are controlled, like other men, by the 
"solemn plausibilities of custom" — ^by precedents and 
rules; and their plans are consequently not the best 
absolutely, but the best possible. It was Judson's 
honour to originate the American Board of Missions ;* a 
little later he and his colleagues were the means of the 
formation of the American Baptist Missionary Union ;-|* 
and both naturally left him free. Wishing, at first, 
to settle in India, he was driven thence, under the 
guidance of an over-ruling Hand, to Burmah. There, 
for a time, the noble brotherhood of Serampore supplied 
his wants; bidding him, as their custom was with men 
they received into their confidence, to follow where 



) 



See pp. 30-32. + See pp. 106-107. 



INTRODUCTION. Vll 

God led, and axjt out his convictions. He was too 
simple-hearted to form a theory, and too humble to 
insist on freedom. But in fact he was free; and he 
founded a mission which embodies (as it seems to us) 
the soundest principles, and has certainly been as 
largely blessed as any mission in modera times. 

In studjdng Dr. Judson's labours, there are two or 
three facts in his private life that are deeply signifi- 
cant. They throw light on the secret of his useful- 
ness, and they explain in part the plans he formed. 

It is very noteworthy, for example, that the great 
change of conversion was in his case very clear and 
decisive. Like St. Paul, he was arrested in a sinful 
course, and found mercy. Wherever he went he took 
with him that evidence of the truth of Christianity 
which is at once the most portable and the most con- 
clusive — the vivid consciousness of having himself 
undergone a mighty change. A sudden or a startling 
conversion is not essential to ministerial efficiency, but 
assurance of the truth and blessedness of the gospel is. 
It is this feeling which gives an earnestness to a man's 
appeals, a cogency to his reasonings, a consistent de- 
votedness to his labours, such as nothing else can 
supply. It is this also that sustains the heart amid the 
discouragements of spiritual work. From Augustine 
downwards, the men of glorious achievement in the 
Christian church have been men of clear and deep con- 
victions. " They believed, and therefore they spoke." 

And as Judson knew whom he had believed, so he 
felt that God had called him to his office. The desire 
sprang up in his own heart. For support he trusted 
largely to Providence ; and though ever anxious to 
secure the co-operation of the American chui'ches, it i 



Viii mTRODUCTION. 

was rather from a concern for their welfare, and a 
desire that the work might be efficiently done, than 
from any fear of personal want or any care about 
personal comfort K he desired a gift, it was that it 
might redound to their account For himself, he had 
learnt in whatever state he was, therewith to be 
content Dr. Judson's mission was clearly one of 
conscious duty and of strong fslth. It was not of 
man, nor by the will of man, but of God. 

A third peculiarity of his character — and one that 
tinged his whole life — ^was his reverence for the Bible. 
This habit is significant in connexion with his work as 
a translator, and it often influenced his plans, himself 
unconscious of its power. Judson's name is to be 
added to the names of Waldo and Lefevre, of Wickliffe 
and Tyndale, of Luther, Bedell, and Carey. He did 
th(& same work, and had the same history. France, 
England, Germany, Ireland, India, and Burmah, are 
largely indebted for their Bible to men who themselves 
learnt their religion from the devout study of its pages. 
Their measage, and their convictions, as well as then* 
office, they received from Qod, 

It is not meant, of course, that men must pass 
through Judson's experience to arrive at his con- 
victions. To feel as he felt is the grand concern; how 
he came to feel is a secondary question. As the re- 
ligious life of a missionary needs not to be awakened 
by the lonely death of some infidel friend: so neither 
does a mission need to be begun amid such difficulties 
as Judson encountered; nor does reverence for the 
Bible, on the part of its founders, need to be excited by 
a decision that separates them from the friends of their 
youth, and casts them adrift on the waves of Provi- 
dence. All that is asserted is, that such convictions 



INTRODUCTION. IX 

as Judson's are essential The men who occupy the 
high places of the field must go forth with unwavering 
trust in Christ as their Redeemer — must have a dear 
persuasion of their call to his work — and must resolve 
to honour, not men or human systems, but God's 
word. The true Greathearts of the church are neither 
women nor children — ^in the divine life, — ^but men, 
fiill of faith and of the Holy Ghost. 

Upon Judson's perscmaZ qualities it is not intended 
further to dwell, though they form a very tempting 
theme. Like most really great men, he blended 
boldness, tenderness, and simplicity. He was, in dis- 
position, at once man, woman, and child: while the 
characteristics of each were sustained and ennobled by 
Christian grace. It is with his peculiarities as they 
directly affected his work, we have to deal; and these 
are indicated above. His theory of missions — if that 
can be called a theory that sprang directly from his 
nature and religious instincts — may be summed up in 
the following principles. 

He deemed it the grand business of the church to 
give the gospel to the world. It was, in his judgment, 
the end of her being. At first he was content to act 
on this feeling, and consecrated himself to this work. 
But as he came to know more of the awful state of 
heathendom, and to see more clearly the glory and 
adaptation of the gospel, this feeling deepened and 
expanded into an overpowering conviction that in- 
cluded the whole church. For this work, he believed 
that Christian men were continued on earth. For this 
work they were to live, and, if need be, to die. " The 
church constituted and charged to preach the gospel 
to the world," was the motto of his Ufe. 



X INTRODUCTION. . 

How completely this principle was at variance with 
the spirit that prevailed at the close of the last cen- 
tury, it is needless to show. It is more important for 
us to note how feebly it is held even in the middle of 
our own. Some still think that the work is to be left 
in God's hands. More stand aloof till they can discover 
better agents, or what they deem a more scriptural 
system. Most deem it, alas! one duty only among 
many other duties which are equally important. As 
such it demands no special sacrifices, and may be 
undertaken or given up as taste or convenience may 
dictate. Facts like the followii^g, a man of Judson's 
spirit would fail to understand, except on suppositions 
full of sadness. — A guinea a year to the missions, 
and another guinea to the county registration, or to 
some Adelphic book society! A million a year for the 
conversion of the world, and fifty millions to supply 
Christian England with spirits and snuff*! To defend 
Turkey and preserve the balance of power, we pay a 
hundred millions, and sacrifice a hundred thousand 
lives ; to save the world, we cannot raise a fifth of the 
interest of that sum, and we call a martyr's death a 
needless waste. A just and necessary war, for which 
a sister Christian nation can afford to borrow millions, 
will of course compel her to withdraw her mission 
agents, and will suspend the work of evangelizing 
Europe, though that work costs but two thousand a 
year, and the burden is to be divided among churches 
that number five hundred thousand members. "Borrow 
to defend State-rights ; certainly!" "Pledge our credit 
to meet the spiritual necessities of the world ; never!" 
"Desert our gallant troops, leave them to starve or die ; 
far be such meanness!" "But Bible agents, and col- 
porteurs, and missionaries, it is of coui'se impossible to 



INTRODUCTION. XI 

support." " Polished shafts they are, costly and skilful : 
yet nothing is left us. They may rust, or break, or 
perish; but we Tn/uM throw them aside!" Add to these 
facts another. If the sums spent during the last sixty 
years, by Christian churches and by Christian men — 
those that are really such — on what may fairly be called 
luxuries, were capitalized, they would yield in annual 
interest, and for ever, many times more than aR that 
is now spent by all our societies for the conversion 
of the world — ^the very work which churches are 
formed to prosecute, and which is at once the most 
imperative and the most blessed, a luxury and a duty 
combined ! 

On the comparative claims of home and foreign 
work, Judson felt less strongly; and had probably 
Kttle sympathy with such comparisons. Did the church 
of Christ do all that is done, from a regard for men's 
souls and a desire to save them, that feeling would 
itself guide her in proportioning her liberality wisely, 
and commend her plans, even though occasionally dis- 
proportionate, to the good-will of thoughtful men and 
to the blessing of her Lord. But it is too often a 
question between the pressing claims of heathen men 
" perishing for lack of all saving knowledge," and the 
multiplying of specious home agencies, which even 
when useful are not necessary. No one thinks that 
less should be done for the real wants of our home 
population ; we only ask that more should be done 
for the world. It is the duty of the church collec- 
tively, in each generation, to preach the gospel to every 
creature. This is the church's commission. Ten 
thousand other things may be useful : this is es- 
sential. If other things cannot be done compatibly 
with this, let them give place. This must be fulfilled. i 



XU INTRODUCTION. 

Such was Judson*s spirit.* The difiiision of a kindred 
spirit, and the regulation of Christian beneficence in 
harmony with it, seem to us among the most urgent 
wants of the age. 

Nor have we done justice to Dr. Judson's views on this 
question, till we direct the special attention of the reader 
to the fact that he deemed the preaching of the gospel 
the chief business of the missionary. Other agencies 
he used. He established schools and translated books ; 
but with him everything was subordinate to the 
gospel like Paul, he determined to know nothing 
among men but " Jesus Christ, and him as crucified." 

This fact is the more significant from his character 
and acquirements. He was a scholar, and by his 
patience, and force of will, and winning ways, was 
fitted to be an efficient teacher. He was a keen 
metaphysician, and had sounded the depths of Eastern 
philosophy. He was a man of large sympathies, 
pitying all human wretchedness, and ever ready to 
relieve it. He knew and appreciated the comforts of 
Western civilization, and was ever susceptible of the 
tender and refining influences of domestic life. But, 
among all the appliances these tastes might have 
suggested, he deliberately gave the first place, and 
among really remedial agencies the sole place, to God's 
plan of mercy. He held that the great means of 
promoting human happiness is to improve human 
character, and that for the improvement of human 
character the ''power of God" is the story of the 
Cross. 

Obvious as this principle seems, it is often forgotten 
or questioned. Some deny that men are to be reached 



See p. 256, &c. ^ 



INTRODUCTION. xiii 

by any such message. They put the ordinances, or 
the minister, or the church, or the gradual elevating 
influence of education, in its stead ; and on these they 
rely. With more, perhaps, the story of the gospel, oft 
repeated and oft rejected, loses its freshness. The 
missionary is then tempted to come down from his 
work, and discuss curious questions of philosophy or 
knotty doctrines of the faith — ^with little other result 
than to turn men's thoughts away and to shield their 
conscience against the truth. Oftener still he is led to 
spend time and strength on subordinate agencies, 
which would be commendable enough if they could 
be prosecuted without dissipation of his resources. 
We too often forget that the great aim of Christian 
benevolence is conversion. Make men Christians (we 
speak in devout recognition of the fact that the ablest 
and wisest are but ministers, mere servants, by whom 
men believe, as God gives to every man) and our work 
is done. They will, themselves, God helping them, 
become intelligent, sober, industrious, holy, happy. 
We too often forget that the streams of sin are to be 
changed not in their progress, but at their source ; 
that true religion, unlike every other, works from 
within, outwardly, till the whole man is renewed; and 
that our warrant — the authority that justifies our 
efforts and our hope — ^is the Divine command, bidding 
us to preach the gospel. Above all, we forget that the 
blessed God himself, when exercising His philan- 
thropy,* shows it not in founding schools, or in building 
hospitals, or in bestowing on the nations material 
wealth ; but in giving his law, his prophets, and his 
Son. Are we wiser or stronger than He ? 



* See Titus iii. 4. 



Xiv INTRODUCTION. 

How it is that this message of the gospel has proved 
itself in every age the mightiest means of the ameliora- 
tion of our race, it is unnecessary here to discuss. It 
is enough to note that Judson held it to be so, and 
that to the tenacity with which he held this truth 
must be ascribed a large measure of his usefulness. 
If God but give us men who have themselves felt the 
power of his converting grace, who are sure of their 
interest in it, and of their call to preach it — men who 
will make it the business of their lives to honour and 
set forth their Lord, intelligently, in faith and with tears 
— that gift will be the pledge of every other. Such a 
Pentecostal spirit wiQ be followed, who can doubt, by 
Pentecostal success ! 

*' Intelligently y" I repeat : for it was no part of 
Judson's creed that amy man who believes the gospel 
wiQ do for the heathen. The opinion is too prevalent 
that because there must be in the missionary deep 
conviction, there need be nothing more. It is the 
gospel the heathen require; therefore, it is concluded, 
it is enough if the missionary know the gospel. A 
most serious mistake ! Paul had found mercy ; he 
was called to be an apostle ; everywhere he preached 
the things that concern the Lord Jesus ; and yet he 
taught the nations in their own tongue, — ^he made 
himself acquainted with the errors, the tastes, the 
literature, the games, the very mysteries, of the people 
he visited. He reasoned ; and adapted his reasoning 
with consummate skill to each case, whether at Athens 
or at Csesarsea. He sought to commend himself to 
every man's conscience, and took infinite pains lest in 
anything the ministry should be blamed. Timothy, 
his own son in the faith, was also called ; he preached 
the same gospel, and with the same convictions ; and 



INTRODUCTION. XV 

yet Paul warns him to let no man despise his youth ; 
bids him give himself to reading, that he may prove a 
workman not needing to be ashamed, rightly dividing 
the word of truth. And so, in our times. Most 
missionaries have to learn a new language ; they have 
to ascertain the modes of thought and feeling common 
among nations very diflFerent from their own ; they 
have to state not merely convictions, but evidence ; 
not merely beliefs, but truth ; they have also often to 
master gigantic systems of error, in order to confute 
them ; to meet the difficulties of men, sometimes very 
subtle, sometimes very childish, always depraved ; 
they have often to set forth new truth in words which 
are nearly all polluted by their connection with 
idolatrous worship ; and they have always to preserve 
their own faith amid influences both disheartening and 
seductive. This is their work ; and to do it effectually 
requires not only conviction, but learning ; not only 
faith, but intelligence ; not only feeUng, but power. 
There is aU the difference in the world between an 
ignorant denunciation of systems which men believe 
to be wrong but which they have never studied, 
between the preaching of the gospel by those who 
know nothing else, between the inculcation of some- 
thing called faith — and the devout and intelligent 
spirit for which we plead. As it requires much 
learning to make great truths plain, so it requires 
much knowledge rightly to know nothing but Jesus 
Christ and him crucified — the sufficiency and adapted- 
ness of the gospel to the wants and character of the 
race. Paul and Martyn, Carey and Judson, are each 
in their degree models of missionaries to the heathen. 
With warm hearts, with strong conviction, and with 
simple faith, they could mightily convince the gain- 



< 



XVI INTRODUCTION. 

sayers, and by knowledge put to silence the ignorance 
of foolish men. 

While assigning to Judson s estimate of the gospel a 
first place among the influences that contributed to his 
usefulness, there are two or three peculiarities in his 
plans that deserve to be named. 

He held and taught that churches of Christ should 
be composed of persons giving credible evidence of 
true conversion, and of such only ; and that every 
church among the heathen is a missionary agency, 
formed for the conversion of their neighbours, and pre- 
sided over by a pastor who will naturally be himself a 
convert rather than a missionary. This theory of the 
church he held in common with most Baptists, only he 
vindicated and practised it with a boldness and consis- 
tency which many have hesitated to avow. The pains 
he took to ascertain, in the case of each candidate for 
membership, the reality of the great change which 
originates the Christian life,* the earnestness with 
which he appealed to the missionary churches to 
spread the gospel, and the confidence with which he 
gave over to them all their rights and immunities, 
appear very strikingly in this history. By some, all 
questions on the reality of conversion are rebuked : 
" To his own Master," it is said, " each man stands or 
fells." By othei-s, many besides true converts are 
welcomed into the church : all are to grow together 
till the harvest. But Judson's study of the Bible, the 
principles of the body to which he belonged, and his 
experience, all combined to guard him against such 
practices. On reading the Acta of the Apostles, he 



♦ o 



See p. 272, Ac. 



INTRODUCTION. XVU 

found that those who were added to the church were 
*'the saved," and that they had gladly received the 
word, and obeyed it. K whole families joined the 
Christian society, the members of them were such, in 
age and character, that it might be said of them, as it 
was said of the gaoler's : " They rejoiced, believing in 
God;" or, as of the household of Stephanas, "They 
ai'e the first-firuits of Achaia, and have addicted them- 
selves to the ministry of the sainta" On reading the 
Epistles, he found that the churches are ever described 
as "the beloved of God," whose "feith is spoken of 
throughout the whole world;"* as "sanctified in Christ 
Jesus ;""[• as "children of the promise, by feith in 
Christ;" J as "holy and faithful ;"§ as "having their 
fellowship in the gospel," "the good work being begun 
in them ;"|| as "translated from the kingdom of dark- 
ness into the kingdom of God's dear Son ;"1 as those 
to whom " the gospel had come, not in word only, but 
in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assu- 
rance."** Their members were "begotten again by 
the word of truth." They " gave themselves first to 
the Lord," and then "to his people, according to his 
will." Men who stand and fiill to their own Master, 
as must we all (Judson would have reasoned), the same 
apostle bids the churches to judge, and if need be to 
exclude ; and as for "growing together till the harvest," 
that, he would have noted, is expressly said to be not 
in the church, but in the world; a sufficient reason for 
not taking them to the stake, but no reason whatever 
for keeping them, if unworthy, in Christian fellowship. 
Such, at all events, was Judson's theory. The 



Romans. + 1 Corinthians. % Galatians. § Ephesians. 
II Philippians. "ij Colossians. ** 1 Thessalonians. 

h 



( 



\ 



xviii INTRODUCTION. 

church is a congregation of beheving men, subject 
only to Christ's laws; a compact for promoting mutual 
holiness, and for diffiising the blessings of redeeming 
grace. This fellowship is boimd together (so Judson 
thought) by ties more sacred than those of caste, more 
tender than those of the family, more comprehensive 
than those of nations. And it is part of the business 
of the missionary to preserve the sanctity of the bond. 
Without personal godliness the church is a worldly 
association ; without personal subjection to Christ's 
authority, a lawless democracy; without an aggressive 
and a devoted spirit, a Mutual Benefit Society, with 
nothing nobler or diviner. In every such case, the 
beauty of the original conception is gone, and the 
harmonious working of the community is impaired. 
" Give men the gospel," is the f/rst lesson of Judson's 
life; the second, "Give men a gospel-church — 'the 
ground and pillar of the truth' — ^unless you mean to 
rob it of half its strength." 

And to such societies Judson was prepared to entrust 
aU the rights and duties which belong to churches of 
Christ. They were to watch over one another in the 
Lord, to warn the unruly, to comfort the weak, to 
guard the exposed, to exclude the unbelieving, the 
factious, the immoraL They were to select their own 
pastors; and generally men froin among themselves 
were chosen to this office, till, at length, we find fifty 
or sixty churches in one neighbourhood, each under 
its native pastor, and each pastor supported by his 
people, looking to the missionary for only occasional 
counsel and help. Now, missionary work in that part 
of Burmah needs men of Western culture and habits 
— only to train pastors, to translate books, and to 
occupy ^new fields. 



INTRODUCTION. XIX 

In all this there is nothing really new. Upon these 
principles some missionary societies have always acted; 
but never in modem times, so far as we know, have 
they been acted upon with such consistency, with such 
conjfidence in their power and fitness, or, it may be 
added, with such satisfactory results. Even when the 
propriety of a native pastorate and of independent 
native churches is admitted in theory, in practice it is 
apt to be disowned. European superintendence, it is 
thought, is essential Converts from heathenism have 
too little intelligence, or energy, or power of command, 
to have the rule over their countrymen. Tropical 
piety needs European tone and strength. At all events, 
it cannot but be a blessing to give half-civilized com- 
munities the teaching and the elevating influence of 
men trained in America or in Europe. 

These feelings are natural, and the arguments that 
defend them have force. But, notwithstanding, 
Judson's practice seems to us the more excellent way. 
It is less costly. Three, four, five, or ten native pastors 
may often be supported for one European, whom this 
plan would leave free to break up new ground, and to 
carry the gospel into regions beyond — ^the very business 
of a mission. It is more consistent with our principles. 
At home, we are Congregationalists ; abroad, as repre- 
sented and explained by our missions, we are Presby- 
terians or Episcopalians. It is more natural. Teachers 
just above the people are everywhere more acceptable 
than teachers greatly above them. They more readily 
sympathise with them, their teaching is more intelli- 
gible, they are surer to win confidence. Besides, if our 
system is sound, and churches of Christ are schools 
wherein Christian men are to train themselves to 
understand and apply Christ's laws, this purpose wiU » 



XX INTRODUCTION. 

be best gained not by doing this work for them, but 
by leaving them to do it for themselves. In the 
Christian church, as in the divine life, self-discipline 
is the condition of all true progress : spii-itual growth 
is organic, not mechanical. And it is more scriptural. 
He that ministers to a church in spiritual things, is to 
reap of their carnal things. This mutual dependence 
is meant for the good of both parties. The pastor is 
stimulated, encouraged, and, if need be, checked The 
church feels its fellowship in the gospel, and learns by 
practice^ equity, thankfiilness, love. What in the early 
church was the work of an apostle or of an evan- 
gelist ? What, but to preach the gospel, and when it 
had been thoroughly preached in one region, to go and 
preach it elsewhere? In the great centres of ancient 
civilization — in Ephesus and at Rome — Paul did 
indeed spend *'a year and six months," and under 
pressure "two whole years," but these were exceptional 
arrangements, and in every case the churches seem to 
have obtained permanent teachers from among them- 
selves. If for a time an apostle acted as pastor in one 
church, and received support from another, he felt that 
an apology was due to the church amongst whom he 
gratuitously laboured, and whom therein he wronged. 
Nor did the bad character of the people modify the 
principle. When Titus was left in Crete, among men 
whose low moral standing was a proverb even in 
heathendom, no intimation is given that elders were 
to be brought from Philippi or from Rome. The 
qualities requisite in Bishops are careftilly defined, and 
Titus is warned against ordaining unworthy men. 
But nothing is said of colour or of nation. Even Cretes, 
it seems, may have Cretan pastors; and in a few 



INTRODUCTION. XXI 

months at most — say " by winter" * — ^the men will be 
found and the work be done. 

The common system has, it is admitted, its advan- 
tages. It staves off diflSculties. It seems often to 
preserve and perpetuate a mission. It secures superior 
teaching. Where native churches are very large, it 
seems even necessary; and at some stations it is 
carried on without much exhaustion of missionary 
strength. Still we prefer, with Judson, the apostolic 
model For churches, self-help is better than depen- 
dence. While there are millions within our reach who 
have never heard the gospel, and while (Jod seems to 
leave it with the church whether or not they are to 
hear it ; while our missionary societies have only a 
few thousands to expend, and only a very few hundred 
men to preach — fewer for the whole earth than we 
deem needful for a single city at home — missionaries 
should copy Paul, and make it their aim, a point of 
honour, -f- to labour only where Christ is not known. 
As the denomination neglects its duty that gives a 
mere fraction of its resources — ^wealth and agents — for 
the conversion of the world, so does the missionary 
neglect his duty who becomes a pastor when he ought 
to be an evangelist ; while the church he serves ought 
to feel that they are eating the bread of those who are 
ready to perish. If our missionary societies will 
conscientiously support none but Evangelists, we 
believe that, in the end, the heathen, and the churches 
formed among them, will be gainers by the change. 

Once more. Dr. Judson held tenaciously the per- 
fect equality of all missionaries in their great work ; 

* See Titus iii. 12. t See Romans xv. 20. 



( 



XXil INTRODUCTION. 

their equality when arranging and deciding on joint 
plans ; their independence, when each arranges and 
decides on his own. They axe a band of brethien, 
co-operating with brethren; aad aU responsible to on^ 
Lord. This equality pervaded the entire system — 
authority and support alike. Each drew for just 
enough to provide firugal support ; and making allow- 
ance for the number of each fjGonily, and the compara- 
tive expensiveness of each station, each drew for the 
same sum. To this principle Judson rigorously 
adhered,* so that, more than once, when considerable 
sums were awarded to him for public service, he gave 
over the whole to the American Board, and lived 
himself on his own scanty salary. The Burmese 
mission was %u^ by a son of Dr. Carey. He laboured 
in it with some success, and at length accepted an 
embassy to Ava. " My son Felix," Dr. Carey has 
been heard to say, " was a missionary, and now he is 
shrivelled up into an ambassador." The mission was 
estahlished by one who gave his all to it, and died, as 
he had lived, a poor man. 

And is this a sound principle? That the Christian 
church has no right to require, for a mere pittance, ser- 
vices which in mercantile life would realize thousands^ 
is clear. That missionaries inight feirly claim to be 
paid according to their ability, is also clear. But, 
while holding that the church can never claim such 
services on such terms, we believe that the true mis- 
sionary spirit will ever prompt men to render them. 
A small salary means the consecration of all that is 
thus spared to the support of more men; as a large 
salary means diminished funds and feebler agency. It 

* See page 110. 



INTRODUCTION. XXIU 

is not a question of missionary rights against the 
church, but against the heathen; and the true mis- 
sionary feels that those rights he cannot press. It is, 
indeed, his only reward to preach the gospel without 
reward, and so to prove himself to have fellowship 
with the spirit of Him who is its Founder and Head.* 
It was on this principle the fraternity at Serampore 
acted, in the best days of that mission; and it is to 
this principle the English Baptist Missionary Society 
is now mdebted for its widows' fiind, and for the 
noblest printing establishment in India. 

This equality of support involved, as has been said, 
equality of rights and of authority. " The Missionary 
Bishop," which some deemf so important an office at 
the commencement of great enterprises, Judson repu- 
diated. He thought the work best done by mutual 
conference and prayer. Where these were impossible, 
he left everything to the responsibility of each mis- 
sionary, who was supposed to be a godly and intelli- 
gent man. The only superiority he recognised was 
that of riper judgment, of more matured piety, or, 
what was generally the same thing, of longer and 
more self-denying toil " The chief" was, in his view, 
as in his Lord's, the man who was most completely 
" servant of alL" J 

There are, of course, disadvantages in such an ar- 
rangement. It compels the clear-sighted man, who 
works with others, first to convince his brethren; or, 
if he works alone, it exposes him to misrepresentation 
and censure. Ardour has to wait on dulness, and time 



* See I Cor. ix. 18. + James Douglas and Isaac Taylor. 

t See Matt. xxiiL 11. 



r 



\ 



XXIV INTRODUCTION. 

that might be given at once to labour seems wasted on 
deliberation. But, on the other hand, "The Missionary 
Bishop" is not always the man of quickest thought, of 
largest grasp, of most generous temperament. He may 
be a hindrance bb easUy as a help. His very respon- 
sibility makes him hesitate in his decisions, while he 
is often without the practical experience of those who 
are to be guided by them. Superintendence, moreover, 
implies a complicated agency and vast plans — ^both 
alien to the simplicity of the gospel The work of 
preaching Christ is not a polity; but, if the noblest, 
also the simplest of all enterprises, requiring only in- 
sight into human nature, sympathy with God, faith, 
and love. Missions ought not to need management ; 
nor are they generally improved by it. Besides, 
equality is the genius of our system; nor is there a 
single line in the New Testament to justify the belief 
that the "close connexions, nice dependencies," which 
commend themselves to other bodies, are at all essen- 
tial to the apostolic character of our work, or condu- 
cive to its efficiency. Paul's superiority to Peter 
originated only in Peter's dissembling, and was shown 
only in honest, loving rebuke; while the dispute be- 
tween Paul and Barnabas — on the best agency for the 
mission work of Asia — was settled by each doing 
what he thought best for the common cause. Give us 
men who love and preach the gospel, and who devote 
themselves to that work; and all questions of manage- 
ment dwindle into insignificance. There are even 
advantages in "diversities of operation," provided only 
it is "One Spirit that worketh all and in alL" 

These peculiarities of Judson's practice — springing 
as they did from the first priuciples of his religion. 



INTRODUCTION". XXV 

almost from the instincts of his religious life — we have 
called a Theory of Ifisaions. They deserve that name, 
not because they are matters of speculation, but be- 
cause they regulate practice, and are complete. The 
parts cohere, and the propriety of each depends on the 
presence and the place of the rest. K missionaries 
are not godly men, they are not to be trusted with the 
Uberty and equality that JucJsou claims. If churches 
are not associations of spiritual men, banded together 
for the observance of Christ's laws, they are not fit to 
exercise their rights, nor can they be counted upon to 
co-operate in evangelizing the world. Even if some 
essential parts of this Theory be removed, it may, 
nevertheless, be as good as another. It is still simple 
and just. But it may not work ; it is sure to lead to 
some evils ; and it is at all events ncT longer divine. It 
is as a whole thsi the Theory is eminently scriptural; 
and it is as a whole that it has been productive of 
such glorious results. 

JOSEPH ANGUS. 

London, Nov. 6, 1861. 



Note. — The reader who desires to hear more of the progress of the 
gospel in Bunnah, may find interesting details in the "Memoirs of 
Mrs. Sarah Judson," in the "Account of the American Baptist Mis- 
sion to the Burman Empire," by Ann H. Judson, in "The Karen 
Apostle," in Malcom's "South Eastern Asia," in Gammell's "History 
of the American Baptist Mission," in the "Memoir of Boardman," 
in the Rev. J. Baillie's " Rivers in the Desert," and especially in Mrs, 



< 



XXVI INTRODUCTION. 

Macleod WyUe's " Goepel in Burmah." ThiB last is by an indepen- 
dent and very intelligent witness, who has arrived at conclusions 
which are not dissimilar from those stated in the text, and which she 
reached by a different road : — 

" The idea suggested by the New Testament," she observes, "of a 
mission to the heathen, has been in a remarkable degree realized by 
the American Mission to Burmah. Commenced in faith ; unaided by 
wealth or worldly power; achieving its choicest victories as well 
among the speculative Burmans as the unsophisticated Karens, by the 
simple preaching of the gospel, and that mainly by native evange- 
lists ; blessed in its progress by a succession of faithful believers who 
patiently fulfilled their course, not counting their Uvea dear to them ; 
exerting a wide influence through the whole Christian church by the 
example and the memory of its labours and its success, this mission 
has special claims to the sympathies and the love of the whole house- 
hold of faith. . . . Other missions have been blessed too. Not 
in primitive times alone, nor in the succeeding darker ages, when 
Christianity, in the forests of Oermany, and amidst the din of war 
throughout Europe, won some of her noblest and least-remembered 
triumphs ; but in modem times also, from the missions of Eliot and 
Brainerd, of Ziegenbalg and Swartz, to those of Vanderkemp, Carey, 
and Martyn. . . . But it hath pleased Him, that in the work in 
Burmah his grace should be specially manifested and his power felt ; 
that there the church might behold a prelude of that promised showeir 
of blessing which shall redound through the thanksgiving of many 
to the glory' of God." — The Chspd in Burmah, pp. 1, 2; see also 
p. 512, Calcutta, 1859. 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



It gives me pleasure to comply with the English 
publishers* request to fiimish a brief pre&ce to their 
edition of this volume, since the warm sympathy so 
long manifested in the Burmian mission by British 
Christians, assures me of a kindly reception for it at 
their hands. The protecting care of the British 
Government, under which the mission has grown to 
be one of the great agencies for Christianizing India, 
and the influence and pecuniary aid rendered to it in 
moments of need by individual English officers and 
residents, has long made it theirs, hardly less than it is 
ours. If it is our ofl&pring, it has become, by favours 
which we gratefally remember and acknowledge, their 
foster-child. May the record here given of feUowship in 
this work of Christian love, do its part in reviving 
the consciousness of ties existing between us, too strong 
and sacred to allow of permanent estrangement ! 

It may not be amiss to explain, in a few words, my 
object in preparing this volume. It was not designed 
as an abridgment of Dr. Wayland's Memoir, but as 
an independent view, within the briefest possible 
limits, of the character, labours, and missionary policy, 
of Dr. Judson. Necessarily omitting much rich and 
instructive detail, it was my aim, nevertheless, to 
touch the characteristic points, in all these respects, 
with such distinctness that a clear image would be 
given of the man^ — of what he accomplished, and of 
the conclusions as to the best methods of conducting 



\ 



XXVIU AUTHORS PREFACE. 

missions among the heathen, to which he was led as 
the result of his long experience. On the latter 
subject, the friends of missions in America, and our 
foreign missionaries themselves, have been much 
divided in opinion. As a help towards settling this 
important question, I have endeavoured, in the chapter 
entitled " Missionary Policy," so to bring together Dr. 
Judson's views, gleaned with much pains from his 
letters, journals, and public addresses, as to remove all 
doubt in regard to his position. 

For the most part, the materials used in this sketch 
were already in print; but for one portion of his 
history — ^that depicted in Chapter XX. — the writer may 
claim some special advantages, not open to the public 
nor to Dr. Judson's other biographers. His interior 
life, during the painfully interesting period there 
described, was fully revealed in his letters to my 
mother,* who, in turn, combated his morbid ideas with 
all the earnestness of honest friendship, and sought 
to win him back to more cheerful and Christian 
views. This correspondence was, from motives of 
delicacy, destroyed ; but my own recollection of Dr. 
Judson's letters is quite fresh and clear, and has served 
as my clue in portraying this peculiar, and, to many 
minds, inscrutable phase in the spiritual experience of 
so great and good a man. In general, though I cannot 
hope to have caught every aspect of this many-sided 
character, yet the portrait, I may hope, will be found 
in no respect wanting in substantial accuracy. 

H. C. CONANT. 

Brooklyn, N.Y., Sept. 25th, 1861. 



* Mrs. Chaplin, whose name so frequently appears in the 
** Memoirs of Mrs. Ann H. Judson." 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER L 

PAGR 

ChUdhood 1 . 

CHAPTER n. 

College Life 8 

CHAPTER IIL 

The Returning Wanderer 12 

CHAPTER IV. 

Conversion and Self-Consecration . . . ■. . .19 

CHAPTER V. 

** How shall they Preach, except they be sent ?" ... 26 

CHAPTER VL 

The Door Opened 36 

CHAPTER vn. 
Choice of a Wife 45 

CHAPTER vin. 
Ordination. — Voyage.— Change of Views on Baptism . . 50 

CHAPTER DL 

Persecution by the East India Company . ' . . . .62 

CHAPTER X. 

The Adopted Country 73 

4 



XXX CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XI. 

PAOK 

Buddhism . . 82 

CHAPTER XIL 

The Language 93 

CHAPTER Xm. 

Missionary Spirit among American Baptists. — ^Vicissitudes of 
the Mission 104 

CHAPTER XIY. 

TheZayat 117 

CHAPTER XV. 

Zayat Journal (Continued) 132 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Visit to the Emperor 143 

CHAPTER XVIL 

The Native Church 166 

CHAPTER XVm. 

Sufferings at Ava. 182 

CHAPTER XIX. 

The Desolated Home 214 

CHAPTER XX. 

Peculiar Phase of the Religious Life 225 

CHAPTER XXL 

Missionary Labours in Prome and Rangoon .... 237 

CHAPTER xxn. 
Preaching Tours in the Jungles 258 



CONTENTS XXXI 

PAGE 
CHAPTER XXm. 

Labours of the Study 278 

CHAFTEB XXIV. 

Missionary Policy 289 

CHAPTER XXV. 

Visit to America^ — ^Labours on his Eetum .... 306 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

Closing Scenes of his Life 318 



THE EARNEST MAN. 



CHAPTER I. 

CHILDHOOD. 

Adonibam Judson was bom in the town of Maiden, 
Massachusetts^ on the 9th of August, 1788. His father was 
a Congregational minister, of respectable talents and theo- 
logical attainments, and of great moral worth. A still 
nobler distinction at that time of general spiritual coldness 
and decay among the churches of "the standing order/' 
was his deep and consistent piety. He had, indeed, all the 
unquestioning self-reliance, inflexibility of will, and some- 
what magisterial disposition to enforce rather than persuade 
in matters of opinion, then so characteristic of his class; 
but with this was associated a genuine excellence, and a 
certain Roman loftiness of nature, well fitted to command 
the reverence of the ardent and discerning boy. 

The mother, also, was a person of great domestic and 
Christian excellence, a matron of the true New England 
type. It was doubtless to her careful training that he owed 
those habits of order and personal neatness, carried even to 
the point of womanly nicety and exactness, by which he 
proved that attention to the minor virtues is not incom- 
patible with greatness. From her, probably, he inherited 
that warmth and exquisite tenderness of heart so beautifully 
tempering the native self-confidence and force of will, in 
which he strongly resembled his father. 

As their first-bom, and a child of unusual promise, young 

B 



i 



2 THE EABNEST MAN. 

• 

Judson seems to have been not only an object of peculiar 
fondness to his parents, but of the proudest anticipation of 
what he was to become in future life. His father never 
concealed from the boy his expectation of seeing him a 
distinguished man. The prophecy, no doubt, did its part 
toward its fulfilment. For though it may well be questioned, 
whether the ambition and pride of talent thus implanted in 
his young mind were not essentially unchristian principles 
of action, and in the highest degree perilous to his moral 
development, yet it was a stimulus well adapted to rouse all 
the energies of the high-spirited youth. He was bound alike 
by his father's expectations and by his own self-esteem to 
attempt great things, and never to fail in what he undertook. 
The habit, thus early formed, of fixing his eye always upon 
a high mark, and of conquering all obstacles by concentrated 
and protracted eiSbrfc, which made him the leader among his 
boyish mates and crowned his young brows with their first 
academic honours, doubtless contributed its frill share to the 
triumphs of the Christian hero. But in a nature so active 
and aspiring, the habit could have been grafted on nobler 
instincts than pride, and selfish personal ambition. We do 
not find that it lost any of its force, when these gave place 
to the deepest self-abasement, and love to God became the 
ruling principle of his life. 

His natural constitution seems to have been the happiest 
combination of opposite qualities. The capacity for serious 
and earnest pursuit, and the intense desire for distinction, 
were balanced by buoyant gaiety of spirits, and a disposition 
unusually genial and affectionate. His extreme kindness to 
the inferior animals, and his tenderness towards his younger 
sister, whom he made his favourite companion and confidant, 
are traits which, in a high-spirited boy, always indicate 
a nature of the finer cast. In all his collegiate contests for 
literary honours, we find in him no trace of the insolence or 
malignity so often developed finder like circumstances. His 
college rival was also his intimate and endeared friend. 



CHILDHOOD. 3 

After having dashed off, in the first transport of receiving 
the highest honours of his class, his veni, mdi, vici — ("Dear 
Father, I have got it. Your affec. son.") — we find him taking 
a circuitous walk to the post-office with his laconic letter, 
lest he should betray his exultation to his defeated friend. 
It must be confessed, however, that, magnanimous as this 
appears, the mortification of a failure would have been, to 
such a spirit, a much truer test of moral power. Had the 
genius of his rival friend proved more than a match for his 
best exertions, it may be doubted whether his feelings 
towards him would have been altogether so amiable. Yet 
it is no small testimony to the sweetness of his disposition, 
that, with his evident superiority and unvarying success in 
college, he excited in his associates so warm a sentiment of 
personal affection. He had, indeed, the sensitive quickness 
and irascibility of feeling inseparable from a highly organized 
temperament, flashes of which appeared occasionally even in 
the ripest stages of his Christian life ; but it was, from child- 
hood, wholly immixed with malevolence or sullenness. 

In Dr. Wayland's memoir, Mrs. Emily Judson has given 
some highly characteristic reminiscences of her husband's 
childhood and youth. In the tendencies here developed we 
see the germs of the future man. There was the same 
intense delight in intellectual action, the same disposition to 
think for himself, and to conquer difficulties by his own 
unaided strength. Nothing suited him better than an intel- 
lectual knot which nobody else could untie. Hence the 
solution of hard riddles and enigmas was a favourite pastime 
of his childhood, by which he won great applause from his 
schoolfellows and playmates. Many a Christian parent 
wotdd have frowned on such a waste of time. His wiser 
£%ther made it the point of connection for more valuable 
and earnest studies. One incident connected with this habit 
furnishes a pleasing illustration of the character of both, 
and of the grave and patriarchal dignity of a New England 
father of that time. Adoniram found one day, in a news- 



4 THE EARNEST MAN. 

paper, an enigma which challenged solution in somewhat 
boastful terms ; and having, by dint of hard guessing, pu25- 
zled it out to his own satisfaction, he wrote out his answer, 
in a fair hand, and deposited it in the post-office, addressed 
to the editor of the newspaper. The astute village post- 
master, suspecting danger in the proceeding, returned the 
letter to his father, who solemnly produced it the same 
evening after tea, and inquired respecting its contents. 
"Please, father, read it!" replied the boy, with a trepida- 
tion in which mortified vanity was probably mingled with 
some anxiety as to the possible results ; for, in those d&ys^ 
the enormity of a transgression was often made perceptible 
to a child by another medium than his reason. But he need 
not have feared in this case. The admirable reply, — "I do 
not read other people's letters ; break the seal and read it 
yourself," — ^by which he fixed for life, in his son's mind, a 
lesson of honour and delicacy, is worthy the attention of all 
who are concerned in the management of the young. Nor 
did he deem the exhibition of mental character, furnished' 
by the solution of a riddle, unworthy his attention. After 
a careful comparison of the enigma and its answer, he fell 
into a long reverie, the termination of which was awaited 
with great anxiety on the part of his son. He made no 
further remark, however, and the letter was never again 
referred to. But the next morning the lad was surprised by 
the gift of "a book of riddles" from his father, with the 
promise of another more difficult when this should have 
been mastered. The riddle-book proved, to his great dis- 
appointment, the arithmetic studied by the older boys at 
school ; but the words of praise and hope which had accom- 
panied the gift, touched and kindled the susceptible young 
heart. By his tenth year, he had established quite a little 
reputation as a proficient in arithmetic, extending even be- 
yond the bounds of his native village. So much for the 
^^ wisdom of kindness^' in the management of children. Had 
the study been forced on him as a task, his active mind 



CniLDHOOD. 

would still, no doubt, have done it justice ; but that all-im- 
portant element of high intellectual success, the delight of 
voluntary labour, would, so far, have been entirely lost. 

His education seems to have been pushed with less regard 
to his health than to his mental capacity and thirst for 
knowledge. At the age of ten, he had made considerable 
progress in the science of navigation, under the instruction 
of one Capt. Moreton. But though he excelled in whatever 
he undertook, his peculiar aptitude was for the study of 
language, his future career thus foreshadowing itself in the 
predilections of boyhood. The nickname, " Old Virgil dug 
up," by which he was known among. his comrades at the 
grammar school, indicates him as their acknowledged leader 
in this department. 

But even at this early age, the routine of school exercises 
cotdd not satisfy his cravings for knowledge. He was an 
insatiable reader, and, as might be expected, his father's 
small theological library did not meet all the wants of such 
a mind. It seems, indeed, that he found attractive food 
even among those grave and solid books of divinity; but it 
is not surprising that the honey was likewise sought among 
the flowers. All the village stock of romance and poetry, 
among the rest the novels of Fielding and Richardson, and 
Ben Jonson's plays, was exhausted in his leisure hours. One 
interesting incident, which happened before he was twelve 
years old, shows with what restless vitality his young mind 
was putting out its feelers in every direction of inquiry. 
The gorgeous imagery, and mysterious symbolism of the 
Apocalypse, had taken strong hold of his imagination ; no 
doubt its grand shadowy revelations answered to yearnings 
in his nature which found little response in the Assembly's 
Catechism, or his father's books of doctrinal divinity; and 
he longed to know what it meant One day, when there 
were visitors at his father's house, the conversation turned 
on a new Exposition of the Apocalypse, which w6s thought 
to shed great light upon this dark portion of Scripture, and 



i 



b THE EARNEST MAN. 

it was mentioned that a copy of the work was in the posses- 
sion of a gentleman in the neighbourhood. The silent boy, 
sittiug unnoticed among his grave seniors, listened as if to 
tidings of some newly discovered treasure. That book he 
must have, but how obtain it ? The owner was a person of 
stem, reserved manners, such as a child would not willingly 
approach. It seems a little strange that he did not seek 
his fether's intervention ; perhaps he shrunk, as sensitive 
children are apt to do, from betraying his deep i/iterest to 
one who might deem the subject quite above his comprehen- 
sion. After a long conflict with himself, he resolved to 
make the attempt on his own responsibility. But when this 
modest request for the loan of a Commentary on the Apoca- 
lypse was met by a cold and curt refusal, the disappointment 
and mortification drove him to confess the whole matter to 
his father. " Not lend it to you !" replied the proud fe-ther ; 
"I wish he could understand it half as well !" Again this 
thoughtful guardian caught the hint, thus accidentally fiir- 
nished, of a new stage in the development of his son's mind. 
He saw that he needed a wider range of intellectual employ- 
ment, and thought it worth while to be at the expense and 
trouble of a journey to Boston, for the express purpose of 
making a selection of instructive books for his use. 

Early in his fifteenth year, he had a severe attack of ill- 
ness, terminating in a languishing state of health, which laid 
him aside from study for a whole year. It was not, however, 
a year of mental inactivity. Condemned to bodily repose, cut 
off from occupation and amusement in outward life and 
books, his restless spirit turned all its forces in upon him- 
self Now, for the first time, be awoke into a proud, all- 
absorbing self-consciousness. His own intellectual gifts, and 
the triumphs they were to achieve in future life, became the 
centre of his thoughts. Through long days and nights he 
lay upon his couch, feeding ambition with visions of great- 
ness and glory, such as no mortal had yet won. Now he was 
a second Homer, thrilling a nation with his heroic lays ; now 



CHILDHOOD. 7 

a statesmsm^ guiding, with steady hand, the destinies of his 
country ; but whatever might be the dream of the moment, 
its nucleus was ever his own pre-eminent greatness. 

With his religious training, it could not be but that these 
self-pleasing imaginations should be occasionally disturbed 
by reflectipQS of an opposite character. However brilliant 
hi^ career, would not death put a speedy and a final end to 
it all? Could he satisfy himself with being merely an 
immortal memory 1 His thoughts then turned to the cleri- 
cal profession. Was there not here a path, he asked, iix 
which one might win an enviable ^une on earth, and insure 
its perpetuity in the life beyond? The moral sublimity 
of the calling, as connected with the highest interests of 
humanity, grew upon his thoughts. Yes ; here was honour 
worth possessing,— noble in itself, and noble in duration. 
But the beautiful fabric dissolved, as by a flash of lightning, 
when suddenly there darted into his mind that grand ascrip- 
tion of the Psalmist, to which only the Christian heart can 
say Amen : " Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto 
THY name give glory !" Ah ! he felt in his inmost heart, 
though he dared not confess it even to himself, that here was 
a principle from which he turned with loathing. He could 
not thus cast his own glory at the feet of his Creator. The 
unpleasant subject was therefore dismissed with the deter- 
mination that, whatever else happened^ he must fulfil his 
father's prophecy, and become a great and distinguished 
man. 

Is there not something fearful in this exhibition of a 
human soul, even in the so-called innocent and irresponsible 
days of early youth? What a battle-ground of opposing 
powers ! What thoughts '* that wan^^r through eternity" I 
Who shall say that the child is incapable of estimating moral 
distinctions, and of making for himself an intelligent deci- 
sion between good and evil ? How many such a spiritual 
conflict, over whose issues angels smile or weep, is settled in 
the bosoms of our childrep, while we are delaying their 



( 



8 THE EARNEST MAN. 

religions culture till they shall come " to years of discretion." 
In the case of this highly gifbed youth, the conflict, at least 
for this time, had taken a fatal turn. The claims of religion 
had been clearly seen to be incompatible with the worship of 
Self, — and self had won the day. 

How little the pious father guessed at what was going on 
in the mind of his son ! How little, had he known it, 
would he have suspected that his own hand had helped to 
&n the spark of ambition in that consuming flame ! It wsls 
a sad moral preparation to take into the dangers and tempta- 
tions of college life. This self-idolatry was the full-swollen 
germ, which needed but a congenial atmosphere to develop 
into conscious and avowed scepticism. 



CHAPTER II. 

COLLEGE LIFE. 

On recovering his health, towards the close of his fifteenth 
year, young Judson resumed his studies with fresh ardour. 
Having completed the requisite preparation, previous to his 
illness, he immediately entered Brown University; and, 
although under the disadvantage of being behind his class, 
his unflagging diligence soon placed him in the foremost 
rank. This position, once gained, he never lost. 

As a student, his example offers, in several respects, an 
instructive lesson to young men. Though speedily recog- 
nized as one of the most brilliant minds in college, and as 
we have seen, fully conscious of his own superiority, he was 
as punctilious in every college duty, as anxious never to fail 
in recitation, as if all his hopes of success had rested on 
<mere correctness of deportment and plodding industry. Nor 
did he ever seem to imagine, that genius could strike out 



COLLEGE LIFE. 9 

any more direct path to knowledge than the old beaten road 
of hard study. Genius, with him, was the power of work- 
ing out success, not of flying or leaping to it. He knew 
nothing of those inspirations and intuitions by which some 
hope to arrive at knowledge ; but he could fasten his mind 
on a given theme, with a resolute tenacity which never 
yielded till the task was mastered. He had indeed, in a 
high degree, that healthful love of work, which is an 
unfailing characteristic of minds of the first order. Sloth- 
fulness was so abhorrent to his nature, that he would have 
despised a success not sweetened by previous toil. The 
elevation of his aims, moreover, though purely worldly, 
raised him above those petty temptations of vanity, by 
which so many young men of ready talent lose nearly all 
the benefit of a course of study. One who was bent on 
doing some great work in life, of playing no mean part in 
the coming age, could not neglect the necessary preparation, 
for the sake of being hailed as "a glorious fellow" in the 
club-room, or of astonishing undergraduates by displays of 
florid eloquence. 

The spirit of study seems to have been somewhat high in 
the university at this period, at least among those who 
were contending for the much-coveted prize of college 
honours. As a general thing, it may be said that college 
life then represented the choicer minds of the rising gener- 
ation, to a much greater extent than at present. There 
were more of those .who could conquer destiny, in their 
craving after a liberal education ; more whose lamps went 
not out by night, and who counted not their lives dear in 
the pursuit of knowledge. The literary advantages then 
offered at Providence, were limited in comparison with those 
enjoyed by its students of the present day; yet through 
' that generous intellectual enthusiasm, and manly earnest- 
ness of purpose, which he possessed in common with many 
others, young Judson bore from his Alma Mater a thoroughly 
disciplined and richly furnished mind. His classical attain- 



r 



10 THE EABNEST MAN. 

ments, especially, were of the very first order, and excited 
in his instructors high anticipations of what he might 
accomplish in the field of linguistic research. It appears 
also, that while in college, or during the year succeeding his 
graduation, he made such prc^ciency in the Hebrew lan- 
guage as to fit him for entering the seminary at Andover 
a year in advance ; a fact which, considering his worldly 
character and aims at the time, furnishes a striking indica- 
tion of the bent of his mind. 

So far as human culture was concerned, he had fully 
satisfied his father s wishes. An elegant scholar and writer, 
an acute thinker, a ready, graceful, and impressive speaker, 
his brilliant success in life seemed sure, in whatever path ho 
might choose to seek it. 

But the moral and religious influence of his college life 
had been far less favourable. Infidelity was the fashion 
with young America of that day, and found its rankest 
growth in the seminaries of liberal learning. Nor is this so 
strange, when it is considered to what a degree freethinking 
in religion had then linked itself with the principles of 
political liberty. The political and religious writings of 
Thomas Paine and other deists of the eighteenth century 
were then at the height of their ascendency, and had taken 
the young at once on their noblest and on their weakest side. 
There was something so grand, so captivating, in this idea of 
a new age of reason, in which universal freedom was to be 
ushered in by emancipation from all the old restraints of 
priestcraft and superstition ! It was so pleasant to feel that 
they themselves were no longer children, to be frightened 
by bugbears and old wives' fiibles ! The very boldness with 
which they were taught to lay their hands upon that ancient 
Book, whose warnings had so often crossed the track of 
youthful passion, and pointed the stings of conscience, 
brought an exulting sense of manly power and freedom. It 
was a dark hour in the national Ufa A pestilential 
atmosphere overhung our seats of learning. It seemed as if 



COLLEGE LIFE. 11 

all the educated talent of the country were about being 
swept into the ranks of impiety and irreligion. When, in. 
the year 1795, Br. D wight entered on the presidency of 
Yale College, he found almost the entire body of students 
the avowed adherents of infidelity. It is mentioned by his 
biographer, as an indication of the spirit of the time, that 
several members of the class which first came under his 
instruction, had adopted the names of the principal French 
and English sceptics, and were more familiarly known by 
them in college than by their own. 

Great was the need, at such a period, in all our colleges, 
of that power of earnest, vital piety, by which Bwight so 
soon exorcised the unclean spirit, and drove it forth, in 
shame and derision, from halls founded by the benefactions 
and consecrated by the prayers of God's people. Unhappily, 
Brown University presented, in this respect, a wide con- 
trast to its present condition. Its inmates received little 
aid, in regard to their most important interests, from their 
academic guaxdia^s. 

Under these circumstances, it is no matter of surprise 
that one so young and inexperienced as Judson should have 
been dazzled by the sophisms of the -new philosophy, and 
learned to smile at the narrow prejudices of his education. 
The state of mind which he had brought to college helped 
to betray him into the snare. The scepticism of the heart 
had already prepared the way for that of the head. The 
distinct perception, derived from his personal consciousness, 
that the claims of God, as set forth in the Bible, were at 
war with his dearest plans and hopes in life, would easily 
merge into the conviction that the Bible was itself a cheat. 

The tempter came, moreover, in the guise best adapted to 
lull suspicion. In the class next above Judson, was a young 

man by the name of E , to whom he was drawn by the 

strongest affinity of tastes, and who admitted him, though 
of inferior college rank, to his closest intimacy. Genius, 
wit, literary culture, a genial temper, fascinating manners. 



( 



12 THE EARNEST MAN. 

all combined to make him an idol and an oracle to his 
younger friend. It was chiefly through his subtle argu- 
ments and graceful raillery, that Judson imbibed the poison 
of unbelief; for this brilliant youth was a confirmed and 
active deist. Perhaps no agency less insinuating could have 
so entirely overcome the influences of early life. It was by 
hiding among flowers, that the wily serpent had secured his 
victim. The two friends were now, in all respects, of one 
heart and one soul. They often discussed with each other 
their plaus for future life, and each promised himself and 
his friend a long and brilliant career on earth. To all 
appearance, they were bound together likewise, in one fear- 
ful destiny, as respects the life beyond. 

The influences of his New England home had, indeed, not 
wholly forsaken the misguided youth. The purity of his 
manners remained uncoutaminated. Though excessively 
gay, and disposed to partake freely of social pleasures, he 
seems to have held aloof from everything gross and vicious, 
and to have been guilty of nothing which could cause a 
blush on his mother's cheek. But when the dikes are 
undermined, must not the overwhelming flood be near? 
When the little bark is afloat on the downward tide, 
without mdder or pilot, are not the black whirlpools sure 
of their prey 1 Angel voices still entreat the reckless voy- 
ager from the shore ; but he calls back, with a proud smile, 
" No danger ! " hoists his little sail to the breeze, and hur- 
ries on. A hand from above must pluck him from the fatal 
current, or he is lost for ever. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE RETURNING WANDERER. 

On leaving college, Judson returned to his father's house 



THE BETUBNING WAKDEBEB. 13 

in Plymouth, where he spent the following year as teacher 
of a private school He seems not to have fixed on a pro- 
fession as yet ; and probably r^orted to teaching in order 
to secure means for travelling and seeing something more of 
the world, before deciding that important question. The 
preparation during the same year, in addition to the labours 
of the school-room, of two elementary books on grammar 
and arithmetic, shows with what manly energy, and what 
habits of laborious application, he was entering on the 
career of active life. 

On the 9th of August, 1808, the day on which he com- 
pleted his twentieth year, he closed his school, in order to 
commence a tour on horseback through the Northern States. 
His departure from his father's house was marked by painful 
circumstances. He went not forth, as formerly, accom- 
panied by the cheerful blessing of his parents ; for he had 
turned their fond hopes iftito bitter grief and humiliation. 
Urged by his natural ingenuousness, or by that pride of 
character which scorned to appear other than he was, he 
had taken an opportunity, before leaving home, of disclosing 
his infidel sentiments to his father. The blow seems to 
have fallen on the excellent man wholly without prepara- 
tion ; and it awoke all the emotions of disappointed pride, 
injured affection, and pious grief not unmixed with anger, 
which might be expected from his character. This renunci- 
ation of truths inculcated ou his son from infancy, and 
clear to his own mind as the sun in Ijeaven, seemed to him 
mere wilful perversity, and a reckless disregard at once of 
filial and of relfgious obligation, which called for the sternest 
expressions of paternal displeasure. It is interesting to see 
the proof, afforded by this incident, that whatever of worldly 
pride had mingled in this Christian father's anticipations of 
greatness for his son, it was of a greatness whose essence 
was goodness. He had still every reason to expect that his 
'gon would attain some conspicuous station in the world's 
eye; but the moment which told him that the object of 



< 



14 THE EABXEST MAN. 

his ambitious love was an apostate from his God, turned 
the garnered hopes of twenty years to bitterness and 
anguish. Probably, however, the tone of authoritative re- 
buke was not the one best adapted to influence such a mind. 
The prayer in which the father's heart poured itself out at 
the domestic altar, on the morning of his departure, the 
look of trouble on that father's countenance, and the silent 
tears of his mother, as they bade him farewell, were much 
more dangerous to his new philosophy. Its armoury fur- 
nished no defence against weapons like these. Pride, indeed, 
forbade his yielding to their influence; but they fastened 
themselves in his heart, and went with him in all his wan- 
derings. Thus they parted in mutual pain; the son to 
dissipate his uneasiness, if he could, in the excitement of 
new scenes and pleasures ; the parents to weep and pray for 
Mm in that home which his error had so unexpectedly and 
so sadly darkened. 

After visiting several of the New England States, he left 
his horsp with an uncle, a clergyman in Sheffield, Mass., 
and proceeded to Albany. Thence he took passage for New 
York, in the Fulton steamer, then starting on her second 
trip down the Hudson. It was a trip rich with pleasure to 
his sensitive and cultivated mind. The new revelation of 
beauty furnished by the grand river scenery, comparatively 
little known at that time, stamped itself upon his fancy, 
with a force which all the changes of his subsequent life 
could not obliterate. • Even in his last illness, he recalled 
its features with all the enthusiasm of recent enjoyment. 
But the mam object of his visit to New York was to " see 
life." In furtherance of this plan, he went by the name of 
Johnson, — a sufficient indication how thoroughly he in- 
tended to use his present opportunity. Such a curiosity is 
not to be condemned in unqualified terms. No liberal and 
inquiring mind can be satisfied with knowing human life 
only as it is presented on the fair, upper surface of society. 
Neither outward nature, nor books, open to the man of 



THE RETUBNING WANDEBEB. 15 

reflection a study so profoundly interesting as this great 
problem of humanity, under its various circumstances and 
forms of development. Some minds turn to it by an 
instinct no less strong than that which marks out others, 
£rom earliest boyhood, as devotees of science. It is the 
natural direction of their genius. They read men as others 
read books; and, if right in heart, draw from the study 
lessons of higher import than could ever be educed by the 
solitary labours of the student's cell It was from his 
natural, restless inquisitiveness into every object of know- 
ledge, and especially into human character, that Judson now 
resolved to see to the bottom of New York society; nor 
have we any reason to suppose that his change of name had 
any object more criminal than protection against the misap- 
prehensions and remonstrances of anxious friends. But well 
does he need to be guarded by maturity in virtue, and with 
pnre Christian philanthropy for his leading motive, who 
ventures to search for knowledge in these dark and intricate 
paths of human life. It is a study fraught with peril to 
youth and inexperience. It is rare, indeed, that some dark 
stain, to which the penitent vainly cries, with affcer-tears of 
anguish and remorse, " Out, damned spot 1" — some remem- 
brance " that stings for evermore," must not be numbered 
among the fruits of this "tree of knowledge of good and 
evil." That pride of character, on which our young adven- 
turer relied as his sole defence in these untried dangers, 
would no doubt have soon proved its weakness, had not the 
unseen, unacknowledged, contemned hand of Infinite Good- 
ness, guarded his bosom with a surer panoply. 

In addition to the general objects of this visit to New 
York, Judson had a special errand, — ^that of acquainting 
himself thoroughly with theatrical life, and the regulations 
of the stage, in case he should conclude to adopt dramatic 
authorship as his profession. For this purpose he attached 
himself, for a time, to a theatrical company, — a connection 
which must have furnished sufficiently striking contrasts 
■with his previous life. 



16 TUBE EABNEST MAN. 

But it was "with a far different design that this adventar- 
ons, inquiring ardent spirit, had been fashioned by its Crea- 
tor. Not one of its natural tendencies or powers but had 
been bestowed by Eternal Wisdom ; not one was to be cast 
aside as worthless, in the noble field of Christian labour. 
When the love of Christ displaced selfish ambition, as the 
ruling motive of his life, he did not turn with indifference 
from the study of human nature. He did not withdraw to 
the inner world of contemplation, or even devote himself to 
a life of pious labour with the pen. From the moment 
when he first tasted the joys of a full salvation, his soul 
opened wide its arms, all its native energies and affections 
glowing with new vitality, to embrace his Brother-Man. 
There was no question as to the path in which he was to 
serve his Redeemer, none of the usual conflicts of duty with 
inclination. The whole strong current of his nature flowed 
in harmony with the Divine call. He knew, from the first 
dawn of his spiritual morning, that he was to be, in the 
Saviour's sublimely simple phrase, "a fisher of men." 

But to return to our nari*ative, which now approaches 
the crisis of his whole history. 

Resolutely as he had carried out his plan of independent 
action, and free, practical inquiry, during this journey, he 
had not been able wholly to escape the admonitions of con- 
science. Though firmly maintaining the opinions, to which, 
as he imagined, he had been led by candour and love of 
truth, he could not forget that the disclosure of them had 
planted sharp thorns in the hearts of his revered parents. 
Their sorrowful and downcast looks, at parting, haunted 
him wherever he went. He seems to have been conscious, 
moreover, that his present mode of life was gaining an 
influence over him which he had not anticipated. So much, 
At least, he confessed to himself, that " not for worlds would 
he see a younger brother in the same situation." But he 
repelled such misgivings by the thought, that he was only 
satisfying a liberal curiosity, and that his self-respect was a 
sufficient protection against all danger. 



THE BETUBNING WANDEBEB. 17 

From New York he returned to Sheffield for his horse, 
with the intention of extending his journey in a western 
direction. The story of the next two days is among the 
most striking in the history of religious conversion. At his 
uncle's he found a young clergyman who was supplying the 
pulpit in the minister's temporary absence. Whether he 
was aware of the full extent of Judson's unbelief is not 
mentioned; but finding that he was not a Christian, he took 
the opportunity to urge upon him the importance of per- 
sonal religion, with a tender, gentle earnestness, which 
greatly affected him. Under this softening influence, he 
left his uncle's house, and pursued his journey through one 
day. The solitary ride was favourable to the continuance of 
serious feeling ; and the impressions of the morning were 
not yet wholly dissipated when he halted, for the night, at 
a country tavern. As the landlord showed him to his room, 
he apologised for placing him next door to a young man 
who he feared was in a dying condition. With a stoicism 
which we must believe was more than half assumed, Judson 
assured him, with an expression of pity for the sufferer, 
that, so far as he himself was concerned, the proximity was 
a matter of entire indifference. But such philosophy de- 
mands admiring witnesses, and his vanished in the silence 
and darkness of his solitary chamber. He could not sleep. 
The sounds from the sick room listened on his ear, and sug- 
gested the most agitating reflections. Was the dying man 
prepared for the change which awaited him 1 He blushed, 
as he felt the prejudices of childhood again creeping over 
him. Prepared! What preparation was needed for an 
eternal sleep 1 But still the question would return, Into 
what scenes is his spirit about to pass 1 The landlord had 
spoken of him as a young man. Was he, like the Mthful 
friend whose warnings of yesterday were yet fresh in his 
mind, a Christian ; or, like himself, a sceptic, the source of 
unutterable sorrow and anxiety to pious parents? What" 
were the feelings of the dying youth, in this testing hour ? 

c 



\ 



18 THE EARNEST MAK. 

What would be his own, in a like situation ? Suppose 
he were now stretched on the bed of death, could he look 
with philosophic calmness towards the final moment, sure 
that the next instant his soul, with all its capacities for joy 
and sorrow, would have gone out like an extinguished taper? 
Ah ! there was a shuddering in that soul, which prophesied 
of a future, a future of conscious bliss or woe, a future of 
righteous retribution ! 

He tried to rouse himself fix)m the^ childish terrors, by 
recalling the arguments which once had seemed so con- 
vincing. He thought of his deistical friends, and asked 
what they would think of such weakness. Especially the 

witty and sagacious E , his dearest friend, his master in 

the philosophy of reason ; what would he say ? The poor 
youth cowered in his bed, as he imagined the pitying smile 
and the keen shafts of ridicule with which that firm mind 
would meet such nursery superstitions. 

But aU would not do ; and through the whole night his 
spirit was tossed upon a restless sea of disquietude and 
doubt. Daylight proved a much more effective ally of rea- 
son. The cheerful dawn banished these midnight spectres 
as by a spell ; and the young philosopher sprang up, relieved, 
reassured, and ready to smile at the tricks which £incy can 
play the wisest in the dark. 

On leaving his room, he went immediately to the land- 
lord, with kind inquiries after the sidi: man. ^'He is 
dead !'* was the reply. " Dead !" "Yes, he is gone, poor 
fellow ; the doctor thought he could not survive the night." 
" Do you know his name V* " O yes ; he was from Provi- 
dence College, — a fine fellow ; his name was E " 

Where now was reason and philosophy! Those few words 
had struck away their very foundations. Judson made his 
way back to his own room, where he spent several hours in 
a state of wretchedness, bordering on stupe&ction. The 
words, *' Dead ! Lost ! Lost !*' rang tH>nfcinually in his ears. 
He needed no arguments to convince him that the doctrine 



CONVERSION, AND SELP-CONSECKATION. 19 

in which he had trusted was a lie. Every instinct of his 
awakened soul bore witness that, after death, there is a 
dread heyond, into which his miserable friend had entered, 
and on whose slippery brink he himself stood, just ready to 
follow. When at length he again mounted his horse, it was 
not to pursue his journey westward. Humbled, broken- 
hearted, almost despairing, he had said in his heart, " I will 
arise, and go to my father ! " Filled with indescribable 
yearnings for the counsel, prayers, and tender sympathy, 
which might bring a healing balm to his wounded spirit, 
he turned his horse's head towards Plymouth, and, after a 
most sorrowful ride, presented himself, unexpectedly, to his 
parents. The overwhelming surprise, gratitude, and joy, 
with which they learned the cause of his return, and the 
welcome with which they met the downcast wanderer, may 
easily be imiagined. He returned not, indeed, as a Chris- 
tian ; but surely there was joy in heaven, as well as on 
earth, over that contrite sinner, crashed under a sense of 
guilt, and humbly inquiring for the way of pardon and 
salvation. 



CHAPTER IV. 

CONVERSION, AND SBLF-C0NSBCIIA.TI0N. 

The mind of young Jndson had still a long and painftd 
process to undergo, before it could arrive at light and peace. 
He had proved the utter worthlessness of his infidel philoso- 
phy; and that feeling of personal sinfulness and spiritual 
want had ^been awakened, which is the necessary precursor 
of aU tm^ mward life. But the net of sophistry, in which 
he had sBfibved himself to be taken a willing captive, could 
not be at onoe shaken off; its meshes still clung around him. 



20 THE EABNEST MAN. 

and impeded all his efforts to find the truth. Instead of 
springing at once into the full liberty of the gospel, he must 
begin at the bottom, and unwind, one bj one, with wearjr 
pains, the fallacies with which he had cheated his under- 
standing and dimmed his moral sense. Such is the humilia- 
ting experience of many a daring, speculative mind, when 
roused to a sense of spiritual danger. The death-like sleep 
of sin is broken ; but it is like waking at midnight, in such 
bewildering darkness, to such a dreary sense of loneliness 
and danger, that one could almost wish he had not waked. 
It is, however, an experience full of wholesome lessons to the 
proud heart. When it has found, by repeated trials, that 
the boasted light of reason, though it may attain to an intel- 
lectual conviction of the truth, leaves the soul still a stranger 
and an alien to the source of truth ; still dark, comfortless, 
destitute of all the joyful sensations and active capacities of 
the spiritual life ; then it is prepared to welcome the light 
wherewith God himself shines into the heart. Then it is 
ready, with full assent, to cry, "Not unto us, O Lord, not 
iinto us, but unto thy name give glory ! " 

It providentially occurred that Professors Griffin and 
Stuart, of the Andover Theological Seminary, at this time 
visited his father, and were made acquainted with the pe- 
culiar circumstances of his case. So deeply were their 
Christian sympathies moved in his behalf, that they propo- 
sed his conning to Andover, and prosecuting his inquiries in 
connection with the institution. After some hesitation, 
dictated probably by the shrinking of his proud spirit from 
such publicity, he wisely concluded to avail himself of the 
invitation so kindly tendered. On the 12th of October, 
1808, he removed to Andover, and entered as a special 
student, on the regular course of theological study with the 
Middle Class. By so doing, he not only placed himself in 
the most favourable position for ascertaining the truth, but 
gave a public pledge of earnestness in regard to his personal 
Balvatiou. It was, therefore, a momentous step; probably, 



CONVERSION, AND SELF-CONSECRATION. 21 

at the crisis he had now reached, the decided step in his 
reUgious history. 

During Dr. Judson's visit to this country, it was the 
writer's good fortune to witness a highly interesting scene, 
which proves how well he remembered, through life, his 
debt of gratitude to Andover. In the summer of 1846, 
when he was at Hamilton, N.Y.,-for the second time, it so 
happened that the venerable Dr. Woods was there also, on a 
visit to his relatives,* and preached on Sabbath morning in 
the Baptist meeting-house. Dr. Judson sat by his side in 
the pulpit; a sign, in itself, full of interesting suggestions 
to those who knew their former relations. At the close of 
the excellent and characteristic sermon. Dr. Judson arose, 
and in a brief address referred with touching humility and 
tenderness to the time, thirty-eight years before, when he 
seated himself, "a poor blind sceptic,*^ at the feet of the 
venerable man to whom he had just been listening, and 
sought from him instruction in the way of life. 

Not in vain had he taken that position of humble inquiry. 
Light gradually but surely dawned upon his soul, through 
successive weeks of earnest, prayerful study; till at length 
he was enabled, with the fullest consent of his understanding 
and affections, to accept of Christ as his Redeemer, and to 
make an unreserved dedication of himself to his service. 
The public profession of his faith was made in the following 
May, when he united himself with the Third Congregational 
Church in Plymouth, of which his father was then pastor. 

The object for which he had come to Andover was now 
attained. Intelligent conviction of the truth of Christianity,, 
based on a searching examination of its evidences, and a 
living, joyful experience of its power, had succeeded to the 
state of doubt and wretchedness which brought him thither. 
The night of his bondage had passed, the morning of an 



* An elder brother, the Rev. Abel Woods, formerly a Baptist minister 
in Vermont, was then residing, at an advanced age, in Hamilton. 



i 



22 THE EABXEST MAN. 

eternal daj was beaming in his heart. He knew in himself, 
with the full assurance of consciousness, that he had been 
the subject of a new creation ; that old things were done 
away, and all things had become new ; that he had passed 
from death unto life. -But with this consciousness, there 
came not onlj new joys, but new aims and purposes. Self 
had been dethroned. The enlarged circle of his aflfections, 
with God for its centre, embraced the whole family of man. 
Whatever he had feared for himself, he now feared for them ; 
whatever he enjoyed of light and freedom and heavenly 
communion, and whatever he hoped for of glory and bliss, 
yet to be revealed in a divine, immortal life beyond the 
grave, he yearned to share with them. These feelings, which 
belong in a greater or less degree to every renewed soul, 
assumed in his case a peculiar intensity from his character 
and the circumstances of his conversion. So signal a triumph 
of divine grace demanded a more than ordinary consecration. 
Having been forgiven much, he loved much. His purpose of 
becoming a preacher of the gospel developed itself as 
naturally out of his inward experience as a flower unfolds 
upon a living planir. Without a pang, he laid aside for 
ever all his ambitious projects ; or rather, they vanished of 
themselves, lost and forgotten in that stronger, heaven-bom 
passion which had now taken possession of his soul. With 
his first spiritual consciousness, he recognized "the ministry 
of reconciliation" as his destined work. In June, 1809, he 
received the appointment of tutor in Brown University ; au 
honourable testimonial to his talents and scholarship, and a 
fair opening, had he been disposed to accept it, to a career of 
literary distinction and usefulness. But his heart was set 
upon a higher calling, and he declined the application. 

Such were his feelings and purposes, when, in the following 
September, he met with Buchanan's "Star in the East;*' and 
for the first time the idea of foreign missions took a distinct 
form in his mind. The effect was electrical. So strongly 
did the subject seize upon his ardent soul, that for several 



CONYEBSIOK, AND SELF-CONSECBATION. 23 

days he was unable to attend to the studies of his class. In 
a sort of ecstasy of enthusiasm, he spent his time, as he has 
himself related, "in deploring his previous stupidity, in 
depicting the most romantic scenes in missionary life, and in 
roving about the college rooms, declaiming on the subject of 
missions." If any one is disposed to smile at these ebulli- 
tions of excited feeling, let hinri remember that Judson was 
then but a youth of twenty-one. But there was nothing of 
youthful shallowness and instability in the enthusiasm thus 
suddenly enkindled. Like the first brilliant jet which darts 
from a naphtha spring, at the igniting touch, it only gave 
token of the generous fountains of supply below. Extrava- 
gant as it might seem to more phlegmatic tempers, it had its 
sources in a depth of conviction, a richness of affection, a 
breadth of vision, of which few are capable ; and hence it 
burned on, undimmed, to the end of life. It was the 
strength, not the weakness of his character, — ^his power of 
grasping a sublime idea, and of living or dying to actualise 
it, — that gave to the subject of missions such a spell-like 
influence over his mind. 

It is a mistake, not unfrequently made, that a character 
in which the emotional and imaginative element is so 
strongly developed, must necessarily be defective in sober 
practical judgment. But it is not so. It is the union of 
the two that forms the world's earnest men ; the men who 
undertake and execute the great tasks of humanity. The 
truth of this is remarkably exemplified in the case of Jud- 
son. Though at the first perception of a noble object his 
soul was instantly on fire, yet he was not rash or hasty in 
action. Young and sanguine as he was when his attention 
was first fixed on foreign missions, it was not till afber 
several months of earnest inquiry, reflection, and prayer, 
that he resolved to become himself a missionary. The 
account of his decision is best given in his own words, 
contained in a letter to his friend and former associate, the 
Rev. Luther Eice. "That excitement,'* he remarks, "soon 



i 



2i THE EABNEST HAN. 

passed away; but it left a strong desire to prosecute my 
inquiries, and ascertain the path of duty. It was during a 
solitary walk in the woods behind the college, while medita- 
ting and praying on the subject, and feeling half inclined to 
give it up, that the command of Christ, 'Go into all the 
world, and preach the gospel to every creature,' was presented 
to my mind with such clearness and power that I came to 
a full decision; and though great difficulties appeared in my 
way, resolved to obey the command at all events." This was 
in February, 1810. 

In the course of his inquiries, he met with Col. Symmes's 
"Embassy to Ava;" and from that time his thoughts cen- 
tred upon BuBMAH as the part of heathendom to which, 
above all others, he would choose to carry the gospeL 

After having thus decided the question of duty in his own 
mind, the hard task remained of breaking the matter to his 
parents. Times have so greatly changed in respect to 
foreign missions since then, both in regard to public feeling 
and to the real practical difficulties of the undertaking, that 
we can hardly estimate the greatness* of this triaL A 
Christian missionary had then never left these shores for a 
heathen land. There was no organization to which he could 
look for direction and support. Worse than all, the mis- 
sionary spirit, which now seems one of the vital elements in 
our religious life, had then but just begun to awaken in the 
churches. Even in Andover itself that seat of theological 
influence, he had found little response to his own ardent 
feelings on this subject. He was aware that, in the estima- 
tion of the Christian public generally, his enterprise would 
seem but the harebrained rashness of youth. He knew, too, 
how strongly his parents had set their hearts upon far differ- 
ent things for him. How could he speak the cruel word 
which was to destroy their most cherished expectations? 
How could he tell them that the son, on whose reputation 
they had counted as the pride of their life, and whose affec- 
tionate care they relied on as the staff of their declining 
years, was about to abandon them for ever 1 



CONVEBSION, AND SELF-CONSECRATION. 25 

Being at home, in the winter vacation, he watched for an 
opportunity of making the painfiil commimication. One 
day, when none but the family circle was present, his father 
began to hint at certain brilliant prospects which awaited his 
son, as soon as he should have finished his theological studio 
Adoniram begged his father to explain what he meant, as 
perhaps his own views for the future might not coincide with 
those of his parents. How was he confounded when he heard 
that Dr. Griffin himself, then by universal consent the first 
of New England evangelical preachers, find standing at the 
most distinguished point of influence, had selected him as his 
colleague in " the largest church in Boston" ! Here was a 
temptation which might have dazzled a much older head. 
Who could wonder, if for a time his heart had turned from 
a life of toil and self-denial among the degraded heathen, to 
so flattering a prospect of distinction, and usefulness, and 
comfort in his native land 1 But the subject seems not once 
to have presented itself in this form to his mind. His sole 
concern was the bitter disappointment to his parents. "You 
will be so near home ! " exclaimed his fond mother. His 
heart seemed breaking, and he was unable to utter a word 
of reply. It was not till his sister began to add her con- 
gratulations, that he could command his feelings. "No, 
sister," said he, " I shall never live in Boston. I have much 
further than that to go ! " He then proceeded, in faltering 
tones, but gathering calmness, and soon kindUng into enthu- 
siasm as he went on, to unfold his plans of life. His mother 
and sister listened with many tears ; but his father, from 
whom he had expected the strongest opposition, said scarcely 
a word. Probably he saw the hand of God in the matter, 
and dared not open his lips against it. 

It seems from the foi'egoing incident, that his talents for 
the pulpit had already made a strong impression on his 
instructors. We know that he possessed, to a very uncom- 
mon degree, the qualities which form an eflective popular 
preacher. His mind was at once logical and impassioned, 



( 



26 THE EARNEST MAN. 

his voice powerful, and Ms delivery full of life and fire. His 
sister-in-law, Miss M. Hasseltine, describes "his eloquence 
and oratory" as "a transcript of Dr. Griffin's." Should 
we not be very likely, even at this day, to consider such 
peculiar gifts for usefulness at home, as in a great measure 
thrown away on a missionary to the heathen 1 Would not 
many be ready to exclaim, "To what purpose is this waste 1" 
With such thoughts might vanity and ambition, under the 
mask of duty, have deluded his own heart, had not a voice 
— ^the voice of One whom he loved better than father and 
mother, yea, than his own life or honour — whispered in 
the depths of his soul, " I will send thee fer hence unto the 
Gentiles !" The event has proved how narrow and short- 
sighted is the policy which would withhold such gifts, as too 
precious, from the missionary cause; which would not rather 
offer to it the best talent, the richest culture, the flower 

OF THE CHURCHES. 



CHAPTER V. 

"how shall they preach, except they be sent?" 

While Judson had been anxiously considering his personal 
duty in regard to foreign missions, with but little sympa- 
thy from those around him, a similar process was going on 
in the minds of several young men in Williams College. 
Mills, Eichards, Fiske, EGall, names dear to the Christian 
world, had already, a year before, united in an association 
called by them " The Brethren," for the cultivation of a 
missionary spirit among themselves. But as this society, 
either through the modesty or the timidity of its members, 
was strictly secret, he did not probably know of its existence 
till some time subsequent to his own decision. Several 
of these young men entered the junior class in Andover 
seminary, in the winter of 1809-10; but as Judson was 



"how shall they preach," etc. 27 

now in his last theological year, it is not likely that they 
became at once intimate associates. While, however, these 
things had been going on at Andover and Williams, the 
same touch of fire had kindled the heart of Samuel Nott, 
while pursuing his theological studies with his father at 
Connecticut. Early in 1810, he joined Judson's class at 
Andover, and the two congenial spirits were soon united in 
a warm friendship. It was not long before their classmate, 
Newell, was one with them in heart and purpose. Next 
came Gordon H^l. Just on the eve of accepting a pastor- 
ate, he received a short letter from Judson, then personally 
a stranger to him, which reawakened aH his missionary 
ardour, and "the next rising sun saw him on his way to 
Andover." Ere long, the whole devoted band became 
helpers of each other's faith and zeal. 

Most of them had, till now, been looking chiefly towards 
the aborigines of our own country ; but in the free inter- 
change of thought, and the Christian communion enjoyed 
at Andover, their hearts soon kindled with a more generous 
fire, and their views expanded to the idea of Missions for 
the World. 

** I have ever thought," says Mr. Judson, in a letter to Br. Chapin, 
in 1837, ''that the providence of God was conspicuously manifested 
in bringing us all together, from different and distant parts. Some 
of us had been considering the subject of missions for a long tim^ 
and some but recently. Some, and indeed the greater part, had 
thought chiefly of domestic missions, and efforts among the neigh; 
bouring tribes of Indians, without contemplating abandonment of 
country, and devotement for hfe. The reading and reflection of 
others had led them in a different way; and when we all met at the 
same seminary, and came to a mutual understanding on the ground 
of foreign missions and missions for life, the subject assumed, in our 
minds, such an overwhelming importance and awful solemnity, as 
bound us one to another, and to our purpose, more firmly than ever. 
How evident it is that the Spirit of €rod had been operating in dif- 
ferent places, and upon different individuals, preparing the way for 
those movements which have since pervaded the American churches, 
and will continue to increase until the kingdoms of this world become 
tiie kingdoms of our Lord and of his Anointed ! '' 



( 



28 THE EARNEST MAN. 

From this nucleus the missionary spirit diffused itself 
through the seminary, and gradually extended into other 
institutions of learning, and into the Christian community 
generally. 

The public mind was, indeed, not wholly unprepared to 
respond to their appeals. The early movement of the 
English Baptists, which resulted in the establishment of 
the Serampore Mission, and was, undoubtedly, the head- 
spring of missionary influence in England, had not been 
without marked effects upon the spirit of American churches. 
In this country, the Congregationalists, stimulated by the 
example of their own brethren in England, took the lead in 
promoting an interest in missions. In 1799, an association, 
which had for its object the diffusion of the gospel among 
the Indian tribes, as well as among our own people in the 
remote settlements, was formed in Boston, under the name 
of the Massachusetts Missionary Society. In 1804, its 
amended constitution embraced also the evangelization "of 
more distant regions of the earth, as circumstances shall 
invite, and the ability of the society shall admit" The pre- 
vious year had witnessed the birth of that missionary period- 
ical, which, under the successive names of the Massachusetts 
Missionary Magazine, the Panoplist, and the Missionary 
Herald, has exerted so beneficent an influence upon the 
destinies of the world. 

A similar spirit had, early in the century, manifested itself 
fn the Baptist churches. In 1802, the Baptist Missionary 
Society of Massachusetts was formed in Boston. The next 
year, this society commenced the publication of the Ameri- 
can Baptist Magazine^ now known as the Missionary Maga- 
zine, under the care of the Rev. Thomas Baldwin, D.D., a 
man whose genial, large-hearted, truly missionary piety has 
rarely been equalled. He was the friend and correspondent 
of Carey, Fuller, and Ryland; and it was through him that 
the spirit of these noble English Baptists was, in some 
degree, communicated to their brethren in this country. In 



"how shall they preach," etc. 29 

1812, the Salem Bible Translation and Foreign Mission. 
Society, designed chiefly as an auxiliary to the Serampore 
Mission, was formed in Salem, through the exertions of 
the Rev. Lucius BoUes. 

Still, these organizations were very limited, both as to 
their objects and their pecuniary means. The promotion of 
religion among the Indians and in our frontier settlements 
was regarded as the appropriate work of American Chris- 
tians ; while foreign missions were looked on as something 
rather to be wondered at and admired from afar, than an 
object calling for zealous practical co-operation. None of 
these societies made any provision for sending out mission- 
aries to foreign lands. Nor were Christian youth taught to 
regard the work as one having claims upon their personal 
service. Annual sermons were, indeed, preached in behalf 
of missions. Here and there benevolent individuals, whose 
Christian sympathies had been quickened on such an occa- 
sion, or by the brief visit of an English foreign missionary, 
gave liberal donations to English missions in the East. Dr. 
Carey acknowledged the receipt of six thousand dollars from 
America during the years 1806-7. At another time, more 
than three thousand dollars were sent from Philadelphia, in 
the same direction. But an independent American move- 
ment, for the occupation of foreign fields by missionaries sent 
out and supported by ourselves, seems not then to have 
entered the minds of good men. So slight was the prospect 
of any immediate aid from this country, that the young 
brethren at Andover felt themselves obliged to seek it from 
the liberality of British Christians. Accordingly, in April, 
1810, the following application to the London Missionary 
Society was addressed by Mr. Judson, on behalf of himself 
and his associates, to the Rev. Dr. Bogue : — 

"Divinity College, Andover, Mass., April, 1810. 
"Rev. Sm, — I have considered the subject of missions nearly a year, 
and have found my mind gradually tending to a deep conviction that 
it is my duty, personally, to engage in this service. Several of my 



30 THE EABNEST MAN. 

brethren of this college may finally unite with me in my present reso- 
lution. On their, as well as my own behalf, I take the liberty of 
addressing you this letter. My object is to obtain information on 
certain points, — whether there is at present such a call for missionaries 
in India, Tartary, or any part of the eastern continent, as will induce 
the directors of the London Missionary Society to engage new mis- 
sionaries; whether two or three young, unmarried men, having 
received a liberal education, and resided two years in this Divinity 
school, wishing to serve their Saviour in a heathen land, and indeed 
susceptible of a * passion for missions,* — ^whether such young men, 
arriving in England next spring, with full recommendations from the 
first Christian characters in this country, may expect to be received 
on probation by the directors, and placed at the seminary in Gosport, 
if that be judged expedient; and whether, provided they give satisfac- 
tion as to their fitness to undertake the work, all their necessary 
expenses after arriving in England shall be defrayed from the funds 
of the society ; which funds will, it is hoped, be ultimately reimbur- 
sed by supplies from the American churches. 

"We have consulted our professors on this subject, particularly Dr. 
Griffin, professor of oratory. He intends writing to several in Eng- 
land, and perhaps to Dr. Bogue. But his engagements being such as 
wiU prevent his writing at present, and wishing myself to receive 
a letter from you immediately, containing the desired information, I 
have written myself. I close with an earnest request that you will 
please to transmit me an answer as soon as possible, and a prayer that 
your answer may be favourable to my most ardent wishes. 

"Adonibam Judson, Jr. 

"Bev. Dr. Bogue, Gosport, England. 

"P. S. I shall deem it a favour if you do not confine your remarks to 
the points which I have proposed, but are pleased to give such general 
information and advice as you may think will be useful to me and my 
brethren." 

But their earnest zeal had already awakened a warmer 
interest at home than they, probably, were aware o£ Their 
instructors and the neighbouring ministry had begun to ask, 
whether the singular impressions on the minds of these 
young men did not indicate an era of new Christian activity 
on the part of the churches. On the 26th of June, the 
General (Congregationalist) Association was to meet at 



"how shall they preach," etc. 31 

Bradford. On the day previous, the Andover professors, 
together with several clergymen of the vicinity, met for 
deliberation and prayer on this subject at the house of Pro- 
fessor Stuart. The result was a recommendation to the 
young men to present their case to the association. As not 
only the several associations of Massachusetts, but also the 
general associations of New Hampshire and Connecticut, 
were represented in this body, the step must be regarded as 
a very important one in the progress of this most interesting 
history. 

In accordance with this advice, the following modest and 
manly paper was drawn up by Mr. Judson, and signed by 
himseli^ Nott, Mills, and Newell. The names of Rice and 
Richards, which were also appended, in the first instance, 
were struck off at the suggestion of Dr. Spring,* lest the 
association should be alarmed at so large a number of appli- 
cants : — 

"The undersigned, members of the Divinity College, respectfully 
request the attention of their reverend fathers, convened in the 
G^eral AjBsociation, at Bradford, to the following statement and 
inquiries : — 

* * They beg leave to state that their minds have been long impressed 
with the duty and importance of personally attempting a mission to 
the heathen; that the impressions on their minds have induced a 
serious, and, as they trust, a prayerful consideration of the subject 
in its various attitudes, particularly in relation to the probable sue- 
oess and the difficulties attending such an attempt; and that, after 
examining all the information which they can obtain, they consider 
ihemsdveaaa devoted to this toork for life, whenever God, in his provi- 
dence, shall open the way. 

"They now offer the following inquiries, on. which they solicit the 
opinion and advice of this association : Whether, wifch their present 
views and feeUngs, they ought to renounce the object of missions, as 
either visionary or impracticable; if not, whether they ought to 
direct their attention to the eastern or the western world ; whether 
they may expect patronage and support from a missionary society in 
this country, or must commit themselves to the direction of a Euro- 

* Rev. Dr. Spring, Sen., of Newburyport. 



i 



32 THE EARNEST MAN. 

pean society; and what preparatory measures they ought to take 
previous to actual engagement. 

"The undersigned, feeling their youth and inexperience, look up to 
their fathers in the church, and respectfully solicit their advice, direc- 
tion, and prayers. 

** Adoniram Judson, Jr. 

** Samuel Nott, Jr. 

** Samuel J. Mills. 

** Samuel Newell." 

On the morning of the 26th, Dr. Spring and Mr. Wor- 
cester rode together to Bradford. In the course of their 
conversation on the way, the idea of the American Board 
of Commissioners for Foreign Missions was first suggested ; 
a circumstance to which Dr. Worcester, near the close of 
life, referred with a fondness in which every Christian heart 
must sympathise. 

The subject having been laid before the association, the 
young brethren appeared on the 28th before their assembled 
fathers in the Bradford meeting-house, and after presenting 
their memorial, severally made a statement of their feelings 
and purposes in regard to the missionary work. Their 
application was favourably received, and a committee was 
appointed to consider and report on the subject. On the 
following day the committee submitted a report, embodying 
the substance of that ever memorable conversation on the 
morning of the 26th. Its unanimous adoption resulted in 
the immediate formation of that institution which has since 
borne so signal a part in the conversion of the heathen world 
to Christ, the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign 
Missions. Thus, for the first time, American Christianity 
publicly recognized its universal mission, and pledged itself 
to enter on the great work. 

Still their hearts seemed to have faltered in the very act 
of taking that decisive step. To the deep disappointment of 
the young men, no measures were taken for providing the 
pecuniary means necessary to carry their wishes into effect. 
Indeed, so far was the thought of immediate action &om the 



"how shall they pbeach," etc. 35 

minds of the Board, that a fortnight elapsed before the 
anxious applicants could even ascertain how their petition 
had been disposed of. And when informed, at length, that 
it had resulted in nothing more than the advice, — "in the 
way of earnest prayer and diligent attention to suitable 
studies and means of information, and putting themsely«s 
under the patronage and direction of the Board of CoiBiniS' 
sioners for Foreign Missions, humbly to wait the openings 
and guidance of Providence in regard to their great and 
excellent design," — they felt that all hope of aid from this 
quarter must be relinquished for the present. Their thoughts 
now turned to England with renewed interest. "There are 
now four of us," writes Judson, under date of June 11th, 
"who are i*eady to start at three months' warning for any 
part of the world — Hall, Newell, Nott, and myself. There 
are at least four others in the jimior class, who are ready to 
support the mission, wherever it shall be established. We 
are in a state of suspense as to any immediate measures ; our 
eyes are directed to an arrival from England." 

Early in the following September, the Board held its 
second meeting, and had still nothing to offer "the young 
gentlemen of Andover," but a repetition of their advice in 
June, " to pursue their studies till ftirther information rela- 
tive to the missionary field be obtained, and the finances of 
the institution will justify their appointment" An address 
and a form of subscription, to be printed and circulated 
among the churches, were the only indications of advance 
since the previous meeting. 

In this state of things, the expected letter from the secre- 
tary of the London Missionary Society, in reply to Mr. Jud- 
son*s of April 10th, came to hand, containing strong encour- 
agement of an immediate appointment by that body, should 
its managers be satisfied in regard to the qualifications of the 
candidates. It now became Mr. Judson's most earnest wish 
to proceed to England in ftuiherance of this object. The 
Board, though at first unfiivourable to the plan, and disposed 



34 THE EARNEST MAN. 

rather to wait for the development of the missionary spirit 
in this country, at length yielded to his arguments or his 
importunity, and consented that he should go as their 
accredited messenger. 

Being unwilling, however, to relinquish the control of the 
projected mission, they directed him to ascertain whether a 
concert of measures could not be effected between the 
American Board of Commissioners and the London Mis- 
sionary Society ; " particularly," — thus the letter of instruc- 
tions proceeds, — " whether, if circumstances should render it 
desirable, you and your brethren can be supported in mis- 
sionary service for any time by the London funds, without 
committing yourselves wholly and finally to the direction of 
the London society ; or whether it may be in any case con- 
sistent for the mission to be supported partly by them and 
partly by us ; and if so, imder whose direction it must be 
held." 

But in case such a connection could not be formed, and 
the American Board were still unable to assume their entire 
support, it was the expectation of all concerned that the 
young men would be resigned, unconditionally, to the Lon- 
don society. This is evident from Dr. Worcester's letter to 
the secretary of the London society, of which Mr. Judson 
was bearer. "Should it," he says, "in the event be thought 
best that our young brethren should be resigned to the 
patronage and direction of your society, your venerable and 
highly respected Board of Directors will judge whether, after 
the course of studies through which they have passed, it will 
be expedient for them to spend any time at your school in 
Gosport ; and whether, for any purpose, it will be necessary 
for the other three to go to England before they shall be 
actually engaged in your service." How faint was then the 
prospect that the American Board could sustain an indepen- 
dent mission, or even contribute any efficient aid towards 
the support of the joint mission which they proposed, appears 
from the same letter. It certainly presented no very flat- 



THE DOOR OPENED. 35 

tering inducements to their English brethren to enter into 
"a concert of measures." 

After an elaborate apology for this effort of American 
Christians to send the gospel to Asia, on the ground of a 
general feeling of discouragement in regard to missions on 
our own continent, the letter proceeds : — 

"As yet, however, we had no adequate funds established for the 
support of distant and expensive missions. What may be done in 
the course of a short time, we know not. It is the desire and the 
prayer of many, that American missions may have American support ; 
and we are not without hope that he to whom the silver and the gold 
belong will open the hearts of the rich among us for this interesting 
purpose. Should this hope be realized, and missionary funds to any 
considerable amount be raised, they will probably be placed under 
such an arrangement as to be employed either in the East or on our 
own continent, as divine Providence may direct." 

Furnished with these letters by the Prudential Committee, 
and having by his personal exertions collected the money 
necessary for his expenses,* Mr. Judson embarked, January, 
1811, in the ship Packet, for England. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE DOOR OPENED. 

The voyage was interrupted by a veiy unwelcome inci- 
dent. England and France were then at war, and the two 
governments respectively had ordered the seizure of all 
vessels engaged in trade with the rival power. The Packet 
was captured on her way to England, by the French ship of 
war, LVnvindble Napoleon, and the young missionary, 

* The extra expenses incurred by his detention on the way, were after- 
wards liquidated by the Board. 



36 THE EARNEST MAN. 

arrested on his peaceful embassy, was thrust into her 
crowded and loathsome hold as a prisoner of war. Being 
landed with the captive crew at Bayonne, he was lodged 
with them in a dismal underground dungeon of the prison 
in that city, under a strong military guard. The same night, 
however, he effected his escape, by the aid of an American 
friend; and after remaining a short time in concealment he 
was released on parole. It was, however, some three months 
before he could obtain permission to leave the country. He 
improved the inten^al by gaining a knowledge of French 
society, with special reference to the influence of infidel 
philosophy on the national character and condition. To 
this he referred in after life as among the most profitable of 
his missionary studies. 

Being at length allowed to prosecute his journey, he 
crossed the British Channel on the 3rd of May, 1811; and 
on the 6th proceeded to London, and delivered the letters 
of which he was bearer, and his own letter of instructions, 
to the Board of Directors of the London Missionary Society. 

The following extract from their minutes is not without 
importance in this history : — 

"Meeting, May 20, 1811. 

"Bead a letter, dated January 3, 1811, from Rev. S. Worcester, 
of Salem, secretary to the Board of Commissioners for Foreign Mis- 
sions, requesting the co-ojjeration of this society in sending out four 
young men as missionaries to the heathen. 

"Read also a letter from Rev. Messrs. Griffin, Woods, and Stuart, 
professors of Andover College, recommending Messrs. A. Judson, 
S. Newell, S. Nott, and G. Hall, as having received a liberal educa- 
tion, and of good moral and religious characters, suitable for this 
purpose. 

"Read a letter of instructions to Mr. Judson, also a recommenda- 
tory letter from Rev. Mr. Codman, of Dorchester, dated December 

19, 1810. 

^^ Reaolved, That a committee be appointed, to consist of Messrs. 
Alers, Cowie, and Roberts, with the secretary, to consider what 
measures may be suitable to be. adopted respecting the proposition 
made by the American brethren to this society, and report." 



THE DOOB OPENED. 37 

In Mr. Burder s friendly reply to Mr. Worcester's letter, 
this proposition is passed over in silence; but Mr. Judson 
was informed, orally, that the demands of their own exten- 
sive missionary operations were such, that they rather needed 
help than were able to give it to other organizations ; and 
furthermore, that under any circumstances such a joint con- 
duct of missions would not, in their opinion, be practicable. 

Finding that an appointment under the projected coalition 
was now out of the question, Mr. Judson renewed the in- 
quiries, previously made by letter, on behalf of his associates, 
as to the possibility of their being employed as missionaries 
of the London society. 

This application was received with great cordiality; the 
testimonials which the Board had received from this country, 
as well as their personal intiercourse with one of the number, 
having given the most favourable impression of the talents, 
piety, and missionary zeal of the candidates. In them they 
found an enthusiasm congenial with their own ; and in order 
to secure the services of such men, they would gladly have 
assumed the expense of founding and supporting a new mis- 
fiion in the East. They were particularly desirous of retain- 
ing Judson, who seems to have excited a warm per^nal 
interest in these noble-minded Christians. To his remark 
to one of the secretaries, just before leaving, that the 
American Board might ultimately be able to support them 
all, the reply was made, "No, you must not all leave us; 
and whatever your brethren do, stay you by us, at all 
events." Appointments were voted to the whole number; 
with the full understanding, however, that the young men 
preferred, and would avail themselves of, American patron- 
age, if it could be obtained. 

After a visit to the missionary school at Gosport, and a 
conference on the subject of missions with its venerable 
principal, the Rev. Dr. Bogue, Judson turned his face 
towards home. On the 18th of June, six weeks from the 
time of his arrival, he embarked at Gravesend, and landed 
in New York on the 17th of the following August. 



< 



38 THE EARNEST MAN. 

Just a month after his return^ he met the American Board 
of Commissioners, at Worcester. He soon found that he had 
done well in obtaining, while he had the opportunity, the 
appointment of the London society. The nine months which 
had elapsed since he was sent out by the committee, had not 
advanced the cause at home a single stc]). All this while 
they had been leaning on the hope of aid from a foreign 
institution, and had experienced the inevitable consequence, 
a paralysis of their own powers. The result of his mission 
brought about an entire change of policy. Cut off from all 
hope of help from abroad, and in danger of losing their mis- 
sionary candidates in a body, their only alternative was 
immediate, energetic action. The crisis had come; and 
nobly was it met by those who had before seemed so timid 
and hesitating. 

When fii-st informed that the London society declined the 
proposed connection, and that no pecuniary aid for the sup- 
port of the young men was to be expected from that body, 
unless they were wholly resigned to its control, the feeling 
of disappointment and perplexity was predominant over 
every other. There is reason to fear that had Judson 
returned with this information alone, they would not have 
been able to resolve upon the manly course which has made 
their names illustrious as the founders of American Foreign 
Missions.* The comnuttee's report, on the first day of the 
session, did indeed recommend to the Board to assume the 
entire support of the four candidates rather than resign 
them altogether; but the day passed away without any 
decisive action. 

It soon became known, however, that Judson and Nott, 
at least, were fixed in their purpose to submit to no further 
delay. Distressed beyond measure at this indecision and 
apathy, and seeing no prospect in the present state of things 



See the quotation from Dr, Worcester's Beport, p. 43 of this volume. 



THE DOOR OPENED. 39 

but that they would be detained yet another year,* these two 
young men, after mutual consultation, represented to the 
Board, in strong terms, their anxiety to be on heathen 
ground without delay. They reminded the Board that they 
had already waited long since completing their studies. They 
urged, especially, the impending war with England, which, 
if they were not sent out immediately, might detain them 
years longer from their field of labour. But their plea was 
without effect. One of the members, who had filled the 
office of chief magistrate of a neighbouring State, pledged 
them his word that there would be no war ! 

But the young men, being otherwise advised, were not 
willing thus to risk their missionary prospects. Finding 
every other argument ineffectual, they at length stated to 
the Board their own decision, to avail themselves of the aid 
of the London society, and to embark in the first ship sail- 
ing for India. The announcement was received with evident 
feeling by all present, and by two or three of the members 
with marked displeasure. " This," says Judson, ** we were 
sorry to occasion ; but our dearest interests were at stake." 
He could not regret the step, however, when its happy 
influence was seen in the new energy imparted to the action 
of the Board. He adds, " On breaking up for the night all 
felt, I believe, that some decisive measure must be taken with 
the dawn of another day." 

When they met the Board the next morning they were 
informed that they were not advised to connect themselves 
with the London society. The vote which had been passed 
in regard to this point, was as follows : — 

^* Votedf that this Board do not advise Messrs. Adoniram 
Judson, Jun., and Samuel Nott, Jun., to place themselves 
at present under the London Missionary Society; but to 
wait the further intimations of Providence relative to our 
means of furnishing them with the requisite support in the 
proposed foreign mission." 

Before the dose of the morning session they were able 



4 



40 THE EARNEST MAN. 

to place beneath tliis vote the following ever-memorable 
record : — 

"Messrs. Adoniram Judson, Jun., Samuel Nott, Jun., 
Samuel Newell, and Grordon Hall, were appointed mission- 
aries, to labour under the direction of this Board in Asia, 
either in the Burman empire, or in Surat, or in Prince of 
Wales Island, or elsewhere, as, in the view of the Pruden- 
tial Committee, Providence shall open the most fevourable 
door." 

Another vote fixed the amount of salary and the sum to 
be allowed for outfit ; and made an ap{)ropiiation of three 
hundred dollars for the purchase of books for their use. 

Thus the long agitated question was at length settled, 
and the American mission bark fairly launched upon its 
destined way. 

The narrative just given does no discredit to the excellent 
men who composed the first American Board of Commis- 
sioners for Foreign Missions. For learning, piety, and prac- 
tical wisdom, they were among the noblest representatives of 
their aga But in those last words — their age — is found the 
tsecret of their slow and hesitating policy. They were yet 
standing in the shadow cast backward by the departing 
eighteenth century, in whose ideas and habits their entire 
characters had been formed. Conservatives in all things, 
their aim in the sphere of religion was rather to "strengthen 
the things that remained and were ready to die," than to 
attempt bold aggressions on the kingdom of darkness. What- 
ever was novel, and especially whatever was done in haste, 
was wholly foreign and repulsive to their settled modes of 
thought and action. It is not strange, then, that the sud- 
den outburst of the spirit of the new age, seen in the bold 
plans and fiery energy of the ardent youths of Andover, 
should have been met at first with comparative coldness by 
these considerate men. They were not, indeed, slow to 
appreciate the excellence of the object, but their very sense 
of. its greatness made them timid. A quarter of a century 



THE DOOR OPENED. 41 

would not, to them, have seemed too long for maturing a 
plan of operations, and collecting materials commensurate 
with so vast a work. And who shall say that this caution 
was xiot an indispensable element in the glorious enterprise ? 
It was the union of their deliberate wisdom with the all- 
hoping, all-daring zeal of youth, that secured to the common 
movement all the qualities which insure success, and made 
the change from the policy of the past to that of the present, 
a safe and beautiful transition. 

Th6 point of time in which the undertaking had its birth, 
was, moreover, one of special pecuniary difficulty. The 
energies of the industrial and commercial classes were 
benumbed by an embargo. A general spirit of gloom and 
foreboding overspread the country. Everybody felt poor, and 
inclined rather to retrench ordinary expenditures, than to 
incur new ones. It was, seemingly, the worst time that 
could have been chosen to ask for money to advance the 
spiritual welfare of our antipodes. What could be expected, 
but that the scheme would be at once condemned as too 
visionary and impracticable to be entertained 1 A fatal blow 
might thus be struck at the infant enterprise. To human 
forecast, delay seemed wise ; and we cannot wonder if, in the 
first embarrassment, the generous youthful zeal which insisted 
on immediate action, should, to these cautious fathers, have 
looked rather like rash and self-conceited presumption. But 
the event proved that, in this instance, the uncalculating 
enthusiasm of youth was a heaven-inspired, a prophetic 
impulse. Providence had selected this hour of darkness and 
depression for doing signal honour to the divine principle of 
faith. " Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith 
the Lord," was to be inscribed on the very comer-stone of 
this noblest work of American piety. 

It is animating to remark the immediate effect of the new 
position of the society, on the whole tone of the missionary 
enterprise. It was the only one which could allow full 
development to men like Samuel Worcester and Jeremiah 



( 



) 



42 THE EARNEST MAN. 

Evarts. Released from the cramping influence of mere 
prudent calculation, they stood up in the dignity of a 
sublime faith, and their words went with an awakening, 
thrilling power, into the heart of the American church. It 
was the cry in her ear, long dulled by spiritual sloth, "Arise, 
shine; for tliy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is 
risen upon thee. And the nations shall come to thy light^ 
and kings to the brightness of thy rising." Assuredly, none 
of their successors, in happier times, can show a brighter 
page than that which records the achievements of these men 
in the winter of the year 1812. 

An opportunity unexpectedly offered for sending out the 
missionaries to India, in the ship Harmony ^ which was about 
to sail from Philadelphia, by special permission of govern- 
ment. There was but a fortnight for preparation, and but 
five hundred dollars were in the ti-easury ; while eight or ten 
thousand must be raised in this interval Yet it was decided 
that they should go ! It was not all, even of the most 
ardent friends of missions, whose faith was equal to an emer- 
gency like this. But there were some — ^let it be ever held 
in grateful remembrance — who were thus honoured of God. 
" Brother Worcester," said Dr. Spring,* but a few days before 
the intended embarkation, " I fear you are going too fast. 
I doubt if we shall have the means to pay the sum which 
we must borrow." " There is money enough in the churches," 
answered Mr. Worcester. "I know that very well; but 
how can you get at it 1" " The Lord has the key !" was 
the noble reply, which contained in itself tlie earnest of suc- 
cess. For never yet in the history of Christian benevolence 
was such a trust dishonoured by him who had inspired it. 

The appointments which Mr. Judson had obtained from 
the London society, were found, at this crisis, to be a most 
efficient instrument for securing the desired object at home. 
The statement to the public, that ^'in the last resort, the 

■ ■ ■ ■ M 11 ■ ■ ■ . t^ — . ■ ,■,■■■■■ I , IIIIMI I—— ^1— I < 

* Memoir of Dr. Worcester, vol. ii, p. 122. 



THE DOOR OPENED. 43 

missionaries could place themselves under the care and 
direction of the London society," was a pledge to the faint- 
hearted, that the Board was proceeding with considerate 
foresight; and that their contributions would not be lost to 
the common cause, even should the present attempt prove 
abortive. To the leaders also, in the new movement, it was 
no small comfort to know that the mission bark had a double 
bottom; and that their responsibilities, if found to be too 
great, could be at once transferred to other shoulders. 
Accordingly, the whole Prudential Committee at length 
concurred in the views of the corresponding secretary ; and 
a resolution was unanimously adopted, to send out the mis- 
sionaries by the Harmony* Such importance did Dr. Wor- 
cester ascribe to the above consideration, as to speak of it in 
his report at the next annual meeting of the Board, in the 
following language : " Probably, indeed, the resolution could 
not have been taken at all but for the commission which had 
been obtained from that society. For the committee cast 
themselves upon divine Providence in the case, with the 
alternative distinctly in view, that, should they fail of sea- 
sonably obtaining the funds to enable them to send out the 
missionaries in the employment of this Board, they could, 
in the last resort, let them go under the London commission. 
Having this alternative, they ventured upon a measure 
which otherwise (so doubtful was the prospect of obtaining 
the pecuniary means) they probably would have deemed 
presumptuous. " t 

What then would have been the fate of the proposed mis- 
sion, had Judson neglected this necessary precaution % So 
beneficial to the missionary cause had proved that step which 
his senior brethren were at first disposed to condemn. J 

* Memoir of Dr. Worcester, voL ii., pp. 121 and 122. 

+ Dr. Worcester's Memoir, voL ii, p. 138. 

X The ground of this displeasure, as stated in the life of Dr. Worcester, 
by his son (vol. ii, p. 115), was as follows : *' The agency to England, as is 



44 THE EARNEST MAN. 

Signs of a happy issue soon justified the decision of the 
committee. Providence smiled on the work of faith and 
labour of love. Before the appointed time for sailing 
arrived, a new opening occurred, by which a part of the 
missionaries were permitted to take passage in the ship 
Caravan, from the port of Salem. This circumstance, con- 
nected with the providential detention of both vessels in 
their respective ports some two or three weeks longer than 
was expected, gave an extraordinary impulse to the mission- 
ary spirit at these two important points. In the words of 
the secretary's report : "The Lord made it to be remem- 
bered, that the silver and the gold are his. The hearts of the 
people were wonderfully opened ; money flowed in from all 
quarters ; and by the time the Caravan sailed, the committee 
were able to meet all the expenses of fitting out the mis- 
sionaries, and to advance for them a whole year's salary. 



obvious from the report of the committee, was a disappointment of their 
expectations. Some arrangements with the London society had been con- 
ditionally made, which were not in accordance with their wishes or their 
instructions. And as the result of their deliberations, at their meeting in 
September, 1811, the Board felt constrained to express, in a paternal but 
decided manner, their views of their official responsibilities and preroga- 
tives ; and to communicate their expectations and requirements in regard 
to every one who should be under their direction and supervision." Mr. 
Judson himself says, of this conditional arrangement with the London 
society, "That the Board considered the very proposal of such a measure 
disrespectful" But how could it be r^arded as any violation of their 
"instructions," when it was expressly recognised as a conditional alterna- 
tive in Dr. W.'s letter to the secretary of the London society, as quoted 
above, p. 43? Mr. Judson says, in a letter to his father, "I received 
instructions from the London society, addressed to me and my associates, 
to be used at our option." The London society evidently supposed that, 
in giving these instructions, they were acting in accordance with the 
wishes of the American Board, as conveyed to them through its secretary. 
The assertion that the London Board, with the letters of Br. "W". before 
them, formed any connection with Mr. Judson and his associates in vio- 
lation of the just claims and prerogatives of the American Board, is a 
graver charge against that venerable body than against the young man 
vho accepted their commission, conditionally, and subject to the action of 
the Ameiicau Board. 



CHOICE OF A WIFE. 45 

In addition to this, collections were made at Philadelphia 
during the same time, and delivered to the brethren who 
sailed from that port, to such an amoimt as to make the 
whole which was paid to the missionaries in advance, equal 
to their stipulated salary for a year and a quarter nearly. 
Within about three weeks, reckoniug from the commence- 
ment of the special arrangements, more than six thousand 
dollars were collected for the mission." 



CHAPTER VII. 

CHOICE OF A WIFE. 

Mr. Judson's visit to Bradford, in Jime of 1810, was 
destined to exert, in more than one way, a leading influence 
both on his own life and on the history of missions. He 
there met, for the first time, with Ann Hasseltine, then at 
the age of twenty-one. To judge by her appearance after 
fourteen years' exposure to the severest hardships and priva- 
tions under the debilitating climate of India, she must 
have been, at this earlier age, singularly brilliant and attrac- 
tive. A clear olive skin, glowing with the rich hues of 
healthful youth, harmonized well with the jetty hair which 
fell in natural ringlets round her face, and with the spark- 
ling, intelligent black eye ; while the movements of her fine 
figure were full of native dignity and grace. The serious, 
thoughtful air, with which piety had tempered her excessive 
natural vivacity, and the grand themes on which her musical 
voice chiefly found utterance, were not likely to diminish 
her natural attractions in the eyes of a reflecting man. It 
does not appear that Mr. Judson was at this time in search 
of a wife, or, indeed, that he had ever contemplated mar- 
liage as a necessary preliminary to missionary life. On the 



46 THE EARNEST MAN. 

contrary, we should infer from his first application to the 
London society, written only two months before he saw 
Miss Hasseltine, that his expectation then was to enter on 
his work as a single man. And he would, without doubt, 
have done so, had he not met with a woman whose personal 
qualities answered every demand of his mind and heart; 
whose appearance and manners satisfied his refined taste, 
and whose intellectual, moral, and religious traits promised 
genial companionship for his home, and perfect sympathy in 
his great work. 

To some it may seem trivial to attach the least import- 
ance, in forming such a connection, to any qualities but piety 
and missionary zeaL But a man does not lose his tastes, his 
culture, his aflfections, by becoming a missionary. What- 
ever attractive and endearing qualities in a wife would be 
essential to his happiness among the refinements of a 
Christian land, cannot certainly be more easily spared 
amidst the rudeness and loathsomeness of heathenism. To 
forego these for the sake of obtaining merely a useful co- 
labourer, would be to form a partnerahip rather than a 
marriage. 

But, on the other hand, the loftier qualities of fortitude, 
self-reliance, and strength of purpose, the absence of which 
might scarcely be felt at home, are absolutely indispensable 
in the wife of a pioneer missionary. Many a good and 
lovely woman, whose gentle virtues are the ornament of 
refined society, is yet by nature and by education utterly 
unfitted for such a life of hardship^ vicissitude, and danger. 
Mr. Judson was fully aware of the nature of the work he 
had undertaken. His first romantic day-dreams of mission- 
ary life had sobered into a clear, calm appreciation of its real 
character. He saw before him poverty, sickness, toil, con- 
tact with the most repulsive forms of wretchedness and sin, 
persecution, and probably an early grave. He could not be 
guilty of the folly and the cruelty of asking a refined and 
sensitive woman to share a lot like this, unless she, too, had 



* CHOICE OP A WIPE. 47 

a soul capable of unlimited devotion and self-sacrifice to 
duty, and of a living enthusiasm which could count all 
sacrifice as nothing in compaiison with the glorious end to 
be attained. He, therefore, did not yield hastily to the first 
fitvourable impression. Naturally susceptible, ardent, and 
imaginative, even beyond mo'st young men of twenty-three, 
he took counsel with reason and principle, before commit- 
ting himself to the sacred and indissoluble connection. A 
more intimate acquaintance convinced him that he had not 
mistaken her character; and some time in the autumn of 
1810 he made her an offer of his hand. In doing this he 
■exhibited that manly and Christian sincerity, and sense of 
honour, which were marked features in his entire history. 
Instead of seekiug to win a favourable answer by a flattering 
picture of missionary life, he spread it before her just as he 
himself saw it ; and simply asked whether, for the love of 
Christ, and of perishing humanity, she were willing to share 
it with him. 

Her answer was given with the same reference to the 
highest principles of truth and duty. After several weeks 
of anxious, prayerful self-iuquiry, as to her own fitness for 
a relation so peculiarly responsible and sacred, this noble 
young woman resolved to forsake home, and friends, and 
country, and accompany him as his true wife and helper, on 
his en*and of mercy. 

Is there not something singularly touching, nay, sublime, 
in this spectacle of two young persons, in the fulness of life 
and hope, with every personal and intellectual gift to insure 
a brilliant position in society, thus pledging themselves to 
each other, imder the eye of God, for a life of self-denial, in 
furtherance of the eternal interests of their race 1 Even now, 
in the changed circumstances of the world and of mission- 
ary life, it would be no light trial. What, then, must have 
})een the independence and strength of mind, and how fer- 
vent the piety, which could resolve on such a step, when a 
mission to the heathen was a doubtful experiment even to 



48 THE EARNEST MAN. 

the majority of good people, and when the idea of a female 
missionary almost shocked the public sense of propriety ! 
But he who had destined them to be leaders in one of the 
great enterprises of Chi'istian philanthropy, had made them 
superior to every consideration but that of right and duty. 

Miss Hasseltine's character,* while in some resjiects dis- 
similar to that of Mr. Judson, was in beautiful harmony 
with it. Both had that sanguine, hopeful temperament, so 
necessary in their untried and difficult path, which inclined 
them to look always on the bright side, and to find, in the 
darkest hour, some promise of a happier future. Both had 
the same heroic courage to face danger, the same heroic for- 
titude to sustain that passive suflfering which is the hardest 
trial to active spirits ; both were animated by " a passion 
for souls" stronger than liie or than death. But while his 
many-sided nature continually presents new points of in- 
terest to the student of his life, — and we notice now here, 
now there, a tendency to extremes, the very exuberance of 
spiritual vitality, — in her we remark, as the prominent in- 
tellectual trait, a practical good sense which guided her so 
promptly, so truly in every exigency, as to deserve a place 
far above what is commonly ranked as talent. It was the 
predominance of this trait, in connection with her earnest 
moral purpose, which stamped upon her life such an impres- 
sion of beautiful, we might say majestic consistency, that 
we cannot point to an act in her career with the wish that 
it had been otherwise. 

Their anticipations, in prospect of a union for life, were 
not of the kind which young people are accustomed to 
indulge in. The pensive tone of the following letter from 
Mr. Judson, in which he wishes his Ann a happy new year, 
is such as a man of sensibility would very naturally take, in 
addressing the woman who was about to share his uncertain 
and perilous lot. But it is evident, both that he will not, 
and need not, use the least disguise in depicting to her its 
uncertainties and perils. 



OHOtCE OF A WIPE, 49 

" Jannary 1, 1811. Thtmday morning. 
'* It is with the utmost sincerity, and with my whole heart, that I 
wish you, my love, a happy new year. May it be a year in which 
your walk will be close with God ; your frame calm and serene ; and 
the road that leads you to the Lamb marked with purer light. May 
it be a year in which you will have more largely the spirit of Christ, 
be raised above sublimary things, and be willing to be disposed of in 
this world just as God shall please. As every moment of the year 
will bring you nearer the end of your pilgrimage, may it bring you 
nearer to God, and find you more prepared to hail the messenger of 
death as a deliverer and a friend. And now, since I have begun to 
wish, I will go on. May this be the year in which you will change 
your name ; in which you will take a final leave of your relatives and 
native land ; in which you will cross the wide ocean and dwell on the 
other side of the world among a heathen people. What a great 
change will this year probably effect in our lives ! How very dif- 
ferent will be our situation and employment ! If our lives are pre- 
served and our attempt prospered, we shall next new year's day be in 
India, and perhaps wish each other a happy new year in the uncouth 
dialect of Hindostan or Burmah. We shall no more see our kind 
friends aroimd us, or enjoy the conveniences of civilized life, or go to 
the house of God with those that keep holy day; but swarthy coun- 
tenances will everywhere meet our eye, the jargon of an unknown 
tongue will assail our ears, and we shall witness the assembling of 
the heathen to celebrate the worship of idol gods. We shall be 
weaiy of the world, and wish for wings like a dove that we may fly 
away and be at rest. We shall probably experience seasons when 
we shall be * exceeding sorrowful, even unto death.' We shall see 
many dreary, disconsolate hours, and feel a sinking of spirits, anguish 
of mind, of which now we can form little conception. O, we shall 
wish to lie down and die ! Ajid that time may soon come. One of 
us may be unable to sustain the heat of the climate and the change 
of habits, and the other may say, with literal truth, over the grave — 

*By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed; 
By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed ; 
By foreign hands thy humble grave adorned;' 

but whether we shall be honoured and mourned by strangers, God 
only knows. At least, either of us will be certain of one mourner. 
In view of such scenes, shall we not pray with earnestness, ' O for 
an overcoming faith,' &c. ? " Judson." 

Mr. Jndson's union with this high-minded and lovely 
woman, can scarcelj be reckoned as secondary in importance 

E 



i 



50 THE EABNEST MAN. 

to any other event of his history. Its influence upon his 
happiness, and upon the success of his great work, can never 
be fully estimated. It spreads like a vital element through 
the whole history of the Burman mission. In all his 
wanderings, sufferings^ and labours, her strong yet serene 
spirit kept even flight with 'his; while in those tragic scenes 
at Ava, when thrown wholly on her own resources, her 
constancy, courage, and wisdom rise to the point of true 
moral sublimity. One of the fairest pages in the annals of 
womanly greatness is furnished by the life of Ann Hassel- 
tine Judson. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

ordination; voyage; chanob of views on baptism. 

On the 6th of February, 1812, the five missionary breth- 
ren being assembled at Salem, were solemnly ordained and 
set apart to the work of preaching the gospel to the heathen. 
In expectation of the immediate sailing of the Caravan, 
Mr. Judson had, on the 3rd of that month, taken a final 
leave of his parents and the beloved Plymouth home, and, on 
the 5th, had been united in marriage with Miss Hasseltine. 

The ordination of these young men excited the liveliest 
interest, not in Salem alone, but in the whole vicinity. On 
the appointed day throngs from all the neighbouring places 
mingled, at an early hour, with the streams which poured 
from every quarter of the town towards the Tabernacle 
Church. Many, doubtless, were brought thither merely by 
<;uriosity to witness so novel a spectacle ; and many, whose 
hearts thrilled and whose eyes overflowed with Christian 
sympathy at the affecting scene, as yet doubted the wisdom 
of the undertaking, and trembled for the issue. The ser- 



I 

VOYAGE. 51 

vices of the day were most happily adapted to strengthen the 
fiiith of such, as well as to convince the mere curious spec- 
tator of the divine reality of a religion which could produce 
practical results like these. Even to worldly men it must 
have been a scene of moral sublimity when these five noble 
youths kneeled to receive, " by the laying on of hands," the 
solemn consecration of their work of self-denying love ; and 
not less so when they stood, each with a hand clasped by 
that of a father in the ministry, and received, through the 
lips of Dr. Worcester, the eloquent expression of fellowship 
as preachers and missionaries of the cross. " The irrepres- 
sible sighing and weeping," which rose at times over the 
silence of the house, attested how deeply the heart of that 
vast assemblage was moved. It was, indeed, a day long to 
be remembered, — an epoch day in the history of American 
missions. Through its influence a new impulse was given 
to the missionary spirit in the churches, and the sentiment, 
so beautifully expressed by Dr. Spring in his charge, became 
more and more the feeling of the Christian public: "No 
enterprise comparable to this has been embraced by the 
American church. All others retire before it, like the stars 
before the rising sun." 

Both the vessels in which the missionaries were to sail 
were detained some two weeks beyond the appointed time, as 
already mentioned. But, on the 18th of February, those who 
remained at Salem were hastily summoned on board the 
Ca/ravan. It was an inclement winter day, not unlike that 
wherein the Mayflower discharged its precious freight on the 
ice-bound coast of Plymouth, when this little band of youth- 
ful pilgrims left their native shores to carry the knowledge 
of theii* father's God to the pagans of distant Asia. Nor 
were the two events wanting in other pointsof resemblance. 
Both were weak and contemptible in the eyes of the world; 
both were destined, as the products of great moral principles, 
to unfold in vital changes upon nations and empires, and to 
become leading steps in the world's history. 



52 THE EARNEST MAN. 

The voyage was pleasant and prosperous, unmarked by 
any striking incidents. On the 17th of June, 1812, they 
arrived at the mouth of the Hoogly, and on the 18th, after 
a voyage of just four months, landed at Calcutta. Here 
they were met and welcomed to India by the venerable Dr. 
Carey, who the next day took them up the river fifteen 
miles, to Serampore, where the whole mission family received 
them with every mark of Christian affection. 

The quiet and leisure of the voyage had naturally been 
much employed by Mr. Judson in reflection on the work he 
had undertaken, and which now lay close before him. In 
doing this the Directions furnished to the missionaries by the 
American Board, for their conduct in the various relations 
into which they would be brought in their new field of 
labour, received very special consideration. While following 
these out in his own mind to their practical application, a 
difficulty presented itself which he could not satisfactorily 
dispose of. 

By article 10th of the Directions, he found himself re- 
quired to baptize credible believers and their hovseholda, while 
it forbade the admission of any but the former class to 
church-membership. While considering this point, with re- 
ference to his labours among the heathen, he acknowledged, 
as a matter of course, the propriety of baptizing those who 
seemed to be true converts. But when he proceeded to the 
next step, the administration of Christian baptism to their 
still idolatrous households, there was something in this from 
which he instinctively recoiled. It seemed to him a pro- 
cedure which must necessarily confound the church and the 
world, idolatry and Christianity, tending directly to the 
. establishment of a mere formal national religion. The in- 
quiry arose whether, if the new covenant of the gospel was 
merely a continuation of that made with Abraham, and 
baptism stood in the place of circumcision, consistency did 
not require that all who received baptism should be admit- 
ted to the full privileges, and subjected to the discipline, of 



CHAKQE OF VIEWS OK BAPTISM. 53 

the church ? Had it then been the practice, as it now is 
Among the Psedobaptists of this country, to present only 
their infant offspring at the font, the difficulty might not 
have struck his mind so forcibly. The chasm which must, 
in such cases, separate the two ordinances of the church, 
naturally fosters the impression that there is no necessary 
and close connection between them. But it was then the 
<;ustom, when persons who were already heads of families 
became church-members, to administer baptism to all their 
children, often including those who were of adult age, and 
sometimes also to the domestics of the household. This, 
Mr. Judson acknowledged, was in entire consistency with 
the Abrahamic theory; but on what grounds could such be 
excluded from the Lord's Supper, which was the substitute 
for the Passover 1 This was, indeed, no new question among 
New England divines, some of whom had earnestly advocated 
a more perfect conformity to the Old Testament model. It 
was, as I have been informed, the opinion of the elder Dr. 
Spring, that baptized children should be brought to the 
communion table when twelve years old, and thereafter be 
subjected to church discipline if they did not walk worthily 
of their profession. But the subject had never before en- 
^gaged the particular attention of Mr. Judson. He was still 
very young. It was but four years since he had first felt 
any personal interest in religion ; and since that time the 
one idea of preaching Christ to the heathen, and the diffi- 
culties encountered in securing means for this object, had 
chiefly occupied his time and thoughts. He had never had 
the personal responsibility of administering the ordinances 
of the church in a Christian land. He now felt it for the 
first time; and in connection with the still more fearful 
responsibility of settling the constitution of that church for 
a people who had never before heard of Christ. 

He was, moreover, about to meet the Serampore mission- 
iuries ; men who were looked up to, by the whole Christian 
world, with the veneration due to eminence alike in learn- 



/ 



54 THE EARNEST MAX. 

ing and piety. Mr. Jndson was the bearer of a letter from 
the corresponding secretary of the American Board, solicit- 
ing for him and his associates the kindly notice and aid of 
these excellent men. In anticipation of soon being their 
guest, he began to ask, with some solicitude, after the argu- 
ments with which he should defend his denominational views 
against their objections. 

These inquiries commenced about two months before the 
close of the voyage. The more he examined the subject, the 
more distrustful he became of his former belief; and he used 
to say to Mrs. Judson that he feared the Baptists were in 
the right. This alarmed her greatly, for she saw at a 
glance the distressing consequences which must result from 
a change of denominational views. Believing it to be a point 
of no vital importance, she endeavoured to dissuade him 
from pursuing the investigation. " He always answered," — 
to use her own words, — "that his duty compelled him to 
examine the subject; and he hoped he should have a dispo- 
sition to embrace the truth, though he paid dear for it." 

He arrived in India without having reached any satisfac- 
tory result. But being providentially detained in Serampore 
and Calcutta by the delay of the other missionaries, and by 
difficulties with government, he resumed his inquiries. These 
at length terminated, about two months after his arrival, in 
the conviction that his former views were founded on a mis- 
apprehension of the nature of the Christian church. It 
became clear to his mind that though this was typified by 
the Abrahamic church, which, in various respects, prepared 
the way for it, yet the constitutions of the two were radically 
different : the one being composed of the natural seed of 
Abraham, without regard to piety of individual character;, 
the other, " a selective system, acknowledging none as mem- 
bers of the church but such as gave credible evidence of 
believing in Christ." He now saw the reason why he had 
been unable to find, in the New Testament, directions for 
the baptism of the unconverted households of believers,. 



CHANGE OF VIEWS OK BAPTISM. 55 

answering to those of the Old Testament in regard to cir- 
cumcision. " The more I read," he says in his letter to the 
Plymouth church, '* and the more I meditated on the sub- 
ject, the more clearly it appeared to me that all my errors 
and difficulties had originated in confoimding these two 
systems. I began to see that since the very nature and 
constitution of the church of Christ excluded infants and 
unregenerate domestics, repentance and faith being always 
represented as necessary to constitute a disciple, we had no 
right to expect any directions -for, or any examples of, the 
initiation of such unqualified persons into the church. To 
search for such directions and example^ in the New Testa- 
ment would be as if the citizen of a republic should go to 
search his national code for laws concerning the royal family, 
which, by the very nature and constitution of the republic, 
is excluded. Suppose that such a citizen, disappointed in 
his search, should have recourse to the constitution and 
laws of a neighbouring monarchy for the desired informa- 
tion ? This, it appeared to me, would aptly represent the 
proceeding of those who, unable to find in the New Testa- 
ment satisfactory proof of the right of infants or unregen- 
erate domestics, should have recourse to the Abrahamic and 
Jewish codes." 

A critical study of the Greek New Testament, in connec- 
tion with this inquiry, had led him to doubt the validity of 
sprinkling as a form of baptism ; and, from a careful exam- 
ination of the evidence on both sides, he came to the 
conclusion that his former views on this subject were 
unscriptural. 

Mr. Judson felt, in these convictions, the satisfiiction 
which every candid mind must experience, when, after labo- 
rious and anxious search, it attains to the clear apprehension 
of important truth. " I cannot describe to you, dear breth- 
ren," he says, in the letter already referred to, " the light 
and satisfaction which I obtained in taking this view of the 
matter. In considering the two churches as distinct, and in 



i 



56 THE EABVE6T MAK. 

classing my ideas of each in their proper place, I became 
possessed of a key that unlocked many a difficulty which 
had long perplexed me ; and the more I read the Bible the 
more clearly I saw that this was the true system therein 
revealed." 

But the questions of practical duty which immediately 
ingrafted themselves on these new convictions, were in the 
highest degree perplexing and distressing. If, as he now 
believed, the very nature of the Christian church precluded 
infemt baptism, and the nature of the rite precluded any 
form but immersion, what was to become of his own bap- 
tism in infancy 1 He saw that he was, in a double sense, 
unbaptized, and that the command of Christ to every be- 
liever was, in his case, yet to be obeyed. But how could he 
do it 1 All the consequences which Mrs. Judson had pre- 
viously depicted, as a check to his inquiries, spread out 
before him. He foresaw the disappointment, and grief, and 
mortification, which it would occasion to his parents and 
Christian friends at home; his inevitable dismission from 
the service of the American Board ; and, more grievous still, 
his separation from those beloved missionary brethren with 
whom he had hoped to spend his days in labour for Christ. 
He asked himself whether, under circumstances so peculiar, 
some dispensation from the strictness of the command might 
not be admissible. But the question instantly came back 
upon him. How, then, am I to treat the children and 
domestics of converted heathen ? This, as he aptly expresses 
it, was the "Gordian knot" whose "gripe" he heartily 
wishes that his brethren at home, when passing judgment 
on his case, could feel as he did. 

Till within a few weeks of this decision he had found no 
one to sympathize with his inquiries, though they had been 
a frequent subject of discussion between him and his mis- 
sionary associates. At length Mrs. Judson felt constrained 
to examine once more what the Bible said in regard to bap- 
tism, and the prayerful search soon brought her to the same 
conclusion with her husband. 



CHANGE OF VIEWS ON BAPTISM. 57 

Accordingly, on the 6tli of September, Mr. and Mrs. 
Judson were immersed in the Baptist chapel at Calcutta; 
an event which changed the whole complexion of their lives, 
and ultimately resulted in a signal enlargement of the Ke- 
deemer's kingdom in India. 

In taking this step Mr. Judson had acted with perfect 
simplicity and singleness of heart. He knew that there was 
no organization among American Baptists to which he could 
appeal for support: he was personally a stranger to the 
denomination; and his hopes of adequate aid, in that direc- 
tion, must have been very faint. He had not prudently 
ascertained beforehand, whether he could rely upon the 
patronage of the Serampore Mission; and indeed, in the 
event, this was found to be out of the question. He and 
his devoted wife then anticipated, as not improbable, the 
necessity of taking up their residence alone in some isolated 
spot, and of supporting themselves by their own labour, 
while prosecuting their missionary work. He had cast him- 
self implicitly on divine Providence, and now stood waiting 
to see what Grod would do for him. 

Immediately on coming to his decision, he had made a 
communication on the subject to the secretary of the Ameri- 
can Board, and, by the advice of the Serampore missionaries, 
also addressed letters to Dr. Baldwin and Dr. BoUes, offer- 
ing his services to the Baptist Christians of America, should 
they be disposed to form a society for supporting missions 
in the East. His letter to Dr. Bolles, of Salem, with whom 
he had a slight personal acquaintance, will be read with 
interest, as giving a picture of his situation and feeelings at 
this time. 

TO THE BEV. DB. BOLLES, SALEM, MASS. 

"Calcutta, September 1, 1812. 

"Rev. Sib, — ^I recollect that during a short interview I had with 
you in Salem, I suggested the formation of a society among the Bap- 
tists in America for the support of foreign missions, in imitation of 



4 



5S THE EABNEST MAN. 

the exertions of your English brethren. Little did I then expect to 
be personally concerned in such an attempt. 

"Within a few months I have exi)erienced an entire change of 
sentiments on the subject of baptism. My doubts concerning the 
correctness of my former system of belief commenced during my 
passage from America to this country ; and after many painful tarials, 
which none can know but those who are taught to relinquish a sjrstem 
in which they had been educated, I settled down in the full persuasion 
that the immersion of a professing believer in Christ is the only 
Christian baptism. 

"Mrs. Judson is imited with me in this ^lersuasion. We have 
signified our views and wishes to the Baptist missionaries at Seram- 
pore, and expect to be baptized in this city next Lord's day. 

"A separation from my missionary brethren, and a dissolution of 
my connection with the Board of Commissioners, seem to be necessary 
consequences. The missionaries at Serampore are exerting them- 
selves to the utmost of their ability in managing and supporting their 
extensive and complicated mission. 

"Under these circumstances I look to you. Alone, in this foreign 
heathen land, I make my appeal to those whom, with their permis- 
sion, I will call my Baptist brethren in the United States. 

" With the advice of the brethren at Serampore, I am contemplating 
a mission on one of the eastern islands. They have lately sent their 
brother Chater to Ceylon, and their brother Robinson to Java. At 
present, Amboyna seems to present the most favourable opening. 
Fifty thousand souls are there perishing without the means of life ; 
and the situation of the island is such that a mission there established 
might, with the blessing of God, be extended to the neighbouring 
islands in those seas. 

" But should I go thither, it is a most painful reflection that I must 
go alone, and also uncertain of the means of support. But I will 
trust in God. He has frequently enabled me to praise his divine good- 
ness, and will never forsake those who put their trust in him. — I am, 
dear sir, yours, in the Lord Jesus, 

"Adoniram Judson, Jb." 

The following extract from a letter written on behalf of 
the Serampore missionaries, by Dr. Marshman, which accom- 
panied those of Mr. Judson, is too beautiful in its spirit, 
and too interesting a testimonial of the impression which he 
had made on those excellent and discerning men, to be 
withheld from the reader. 



CHANGE OP VIEWS ON BAPTISM. 59 

EXTBACT FROM A LETTER OF DR. MARSHMAN, OF SERAMFORE/TO 
THE REV. DR. BALDWIN, OF BOSTON. 

"September 1,1812. 

"A note which brother Judson sent to brother Carey last Saturday 
has occasioned much reflection among us. In it he declares his belief 
that believers' baptism alone is the doctrine of the Scriptures, and 
requests to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 

** This unexpected circumstance seems to suggest many ideas. The 
change in the young man's mind, respecting this ordinance of Christ, 
seems quite the effect of divine truth operating on the mind. It be- 
gan when no Baptist was near (on board ship), and when he, in the 
conscientious discharge of his duty, was examining the subject in 
order to maintain what he then deemed the truth, on his arrival in 
Bengal. And so carefidly did he conceal the workings of his mind 
from us, on his arrival, that he scarcely gave us a hint respecting 
them before he sent this note to brother Carey. This was not indeed 
very difficult for him to do, as we make it a point to guard against 
obtruding on missionary brethren of different sentiments any con- 
versation relative to baptism. 

** This change, then, which I believe few who knew brother Judson 
will impute to whim, or to anything besides sincere conviction, seems 
to point out something relative to the duty of our Baptist brethren 
with you, as it relates to the cause of missions. It can scarcely be 
exx)ected that the Board of Commissioners will support a Baptist 
missionary, who cannot of course comply with their instructions, and 
baptize whole houseJwlds on the parents' faith ; and it is certain that 
the young man ought not to be left to perish for want, merely because 
he loved the truth more than father or mother ; nor be compelled to 
give up missionary work for want of support therein. Now, though 
we should certainly interfere to prevent a circumstance like this hap- 
pening, particularly as we have given our Psedobaptist brother Newell, 
gone to the Isle of France, an order to draw there upon us should he 
be in distress, yet, to say nothing of the missionary concerns already 
lying on us, and constantly enlarging, it seems as though Providence 
itself were raising up this yoimg man that you might at least partake 
of the zeal of our Congregational missionary brethren around you. I 
would wish, then, that you should share in the glorious work by 
supporting him. Let us do whatsoever things are becoming, and 
whatsoever things are lovdy, and leave the reverse of these for others. 
After God has thus given you a missionary of your own nation, faith, 
and order, without the help or knowledge of man, let me entreat you 
and Dr. Messer, and brethren BoUes and Moriarty, humbly to accept 
the gift. 



i 



\ 



60 THB EABlfEST MAK. 

** To you 1 am sure I need add no more than to beg you to give 
my cordial love to all your brethren around you. 

**I may probably write you again soon, and in the mean time 
remain yours, in the Lord, 

"Joshua Masshman." 

The long period of suspense which followed this applica- 
cation must have been extremely trying to the young mis- 
sionaries ; but it was, without doubt, the means of maturing 
their Christian graces, and fitting them for richer usefiilness. 
They had the satisfaction, a few weeks after their baptism, to 
be joined by Mr. Bice, who had also been led to an exami- 
nation and abandonment of his previous denominational 
views. Still, the feeling of isolation, the uncertainty of their 
future prospects, and the consciousness of having lost the 
affection and confidence of their best beloved brethren at 
home, were often exquisitely painful. It is a cheering indi- 
cation of the progress in brotherly love and mutual respect 
among American Christians, that we can now hardly under* 
stand the apprehensions expressed by Mrs. Judson on the 
latter of these points. What was there, thousands will at 
this day be ready to ask, in such a conscientious change of 
views, which should alienate the heart of one disciple from 
another who was one with him still in the faith, the patience, 
the work, and the immortal hopes of the gospel ? 

FROM MRS. JUDSON TO A FRIEND. 

"September?, 1812. 

*'Can you, my dear Nancy, still love me, still desire to hear from 
me, when I tell you I have become a Baptist? If I judge from 
my own feelings, I answer, you will, and that my differing from you 
in those things which do not affect our salvation will not diminish 
your affection for me, or make you unconcerned for my welfare. You 
may, perhaps, think this change very sudden, as I have said nothing 
of it before; but, my dear girl, this alteration has not been the work 
of an hour, a day, or a month. The subject has been maturely, can- 
didly, and I hope prayerfully, examined for months. 

** An examination of the subject of baptism commenced on board 
the Caravan. As Mr. Judson was continuing the translation of the 



CHANGE OF VIEWS ON BAPTISM. 61 

Kew Testament, which he began in America, he had many doubts 
respecting the meaning of the word baptize. This, with the idea of 
meeting the Baptists at Serampore, when he would wish to defend 
his own sentiments, induced a more thorough examination of the 
foundation of the Psedobaptist system. The more he examined the 
more his doubts increased ; and, unwilling as he was to admit it, he 
was a/raid the Baptists were right and he wrong. After we arrived 
at Csdcutta, his attention was turned from this subject to the con- 
cerns of the mission and the difficulties with government. But as his 
mind was still uneasy he again renewed the subject. I felt afraid 
ke would become a Baptist, and frequently urged the unhappy conse- 
quences if he should. But he said his duty compelled him to satisfy 
his own mind, and embrace those sentiments which appeared most 
concordant with Scripture. I always took the Psedobaptist side in 
reasoning with him, even after I was as doubtful of the truth of their 
system as he. We left Serampore to reside in Calcutta a week or two, 
before the arrival of our brethren ; and as we had nothing in particu- 
lar to occupy our attention, we confined it exclusively to this subject. 
We procured the best authors on both sides, compared them with the 
Scriptures, examined and re-examined the sentiments of Baptists and 
Psedobaptists, and were finally compelled, from a conviction of truth, 
to enibrace those of the former. Thus, my dear Nancy, we are con- 
firmed Baptists, not because we wish to be, but because truth com- 
pelled us to be. We have endeavoured to count the cost, and be 
prepared for the many severe trials resulting from this change of sen- 
timent. We anticipate the loss of reputation, and of the affection and 
esteem of many of our American friends. But the most trying cir- 
cumstance attending this change, and that which has caused most 
pain, is the separation ^hich must take place between us and our 
dear missionary associates. Although we are attached to each other, 
and should doubtless live very happily together, yet the brethren do 
not think it best we should unite in one mission. These things, my 
dear Nancy, have caused us to weep and pour out our hearts in 
prayer to Him whose direction we so much wish and need. We feel 
that we are alone in the world, with no real friend but each other, 
no one on whom we can depend but God." 

EXTRACT FROM A LETTER TO HER PARENTS. 

"It was extremely trying to reflect on the consequences of our 
becoming Baptists. We knew it would wound and grieve our dear 
Christian friends in America — ^that we should lose their approbation 
and esteem. We thought it probable the Commissioners would refuse 
to support us; and what was more distressing than anything, we 



i 



62 THE EARNEST MAN. 

knew we must be. separated from our missionary associates, and go 
alone to some heathen land. These things were very trying to us, 
and caused our hearts to bleed for anguish. We felt we had no home 
in this world, and no friend but each other." 

Their perplexity and distress were greatly increased by 
the treatment whicb they received from the officers of the 
East India Company; who refused to allow them to con- 
duct a mission, or even to reside temporarily within their 
territories. They lived in the perpetual apprehension of 
being forcibly carried to England^ and thus compelled to 
abandon for ever the field of missionary labour. Under 
these circumstances, it was their most anxious wish to escape 
from the tyranny of this great power into "some isolated 
spot where they might support themselves bj the labour of 
their own hands/' while communicating to the degraded 
heathen the tidings of a Saviour. How different is the 
state of things in our day, when the shadow of the British 
flag is the refuge, not the terror, of the Christian philan- 
thropist; when in every spot where England sets her mighty 
foot, there the peaceful banner of the gospel maj unfold as 
freely as on the green hills of her native island ! 

The story of their trials and wanderings, during this 
period, will be briefly given in the following chapter. 



CHAPTER IX. 

FERSECUTIOK BY THE BAST INDIA COMPANY. 

The East India Company had, as a body, never been 
fevourable to the spread of the gospel in India. Even the 
society's own chaplains, clergymen of the Church of Eng- 
land, were not allowed to preach to the natives, or to do any- 
thing directly for their conversion. This caution was based, 



PEBSECUTION BY TSE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 63 

professedly, on a conscientious regard to the religious rights 
guaranteed to the various idolatrous nations under British 
sway; which, it was argued, would be infringed by all 
attempts to undermine their ancient faith. But the fact 
that the Company derived a large annual revenue from a 
direct tax on idolatry, and that it also opened in various 
ways a market to English merchandize, affords a much more 
reliable clue to their true motives. Of the myriads of pil- 
grims who collected from all parts of India to the yearly 
festival of Juggernaut, — ^the aged, the sick, the poor, the 
women and children, who had dragged their weary limbs 
hundreds and thousands of miles under the burning sun of 
India, to worship the god in whom they trusted, — not one 
wa,s allowed to enter- the sacred precincts till he had paid for 
the privilege a sum of money to his English masters. The 
collectorship of the pilgrim's tax and the superintendence of 
the temple, was a regular office under government. To this 
must be added the general dissoluteness of manners then pre- 
vailing among the British residents of India, to which the 
horrible licentiousness sanctioned by Hindoo idolatry was 
far more congenial than the austere virtue enjoined by 
Christianity. Persons who viewed with indifference the 
hellish orgies of the worship of Juggernaut, the self-immo- 
lation of devotees, and the burning of widows, were yet 
fired with righteous indignation at the scheme of translating 
the Holy Scriptures into the native tongues. The idea seems, 
moreover, to have been generally entertained, that a know- 
ledge of Christianity would render the natives less passive 
and manageable, and would thereby endanger the interests 
and safety of the Company. That noble-hearted philanthro- 
pist, Claudius Buchanan, had to contend, both in his efforts 
for his own countrymen and for the heathen, against the 
whole current of British life and opinion in India. It could 
not be expected that sedarieSy as all dissenters from the 
English church were considered, would meet with more 
favour. The Baptist missionaries at Serampore often felt 



64 THB EARNEST MAV. 

the heavy hand of goyemment. AmericaDS could not plead 
even the claim of their English brethren to toleration, and 
were especially liable at this time, when the relations of the 
two governments at home were so unfriendly, to suspicion 
and hard treatment. Hatred to the gospel found a ready 
doak in national hostility. 

Scarcely ten days after the arrival of Messrs. Judson and 
Newell in India, they were recalled by a government sum- 
mons from the hospitable Mission Home in Serampore, to 
Calcutta. Here an order was read to them requiring their 
immediate return to America in the ship which brought them 
out. They begged to be allowed to settle in some other part 
of India, but received in answer an absolute prohibition of 
residence in the Company's territories, or any of its depen- 
dencies. They then requested leave to go to the Isle of 
France, which was permitted. It was not till the 1st of 
August that a vessel was found sailing thither, and this 
could afford passage only for two persons. The precedence 
being very properly given to Mr. and Mrs. Newell, on 
account of the health of the latter, which required the com- 
fort and quiet of a home, Mr. and Mrs. Judson were obliged 
to wait for another opportunity. A few days after, the 
Ha/rmony arrived with the rest of the missionaries, and as 
every other opening then seemed closed, it was agreed that 
they should proceed in a body to the Isle of France. Cir- 
cumstances, however, induced Messrs. HaU and Nott to alter 
their determination, and attempt a mission in Bombay ; so 
that Mr. Rice alone remained with Mr. and Mrs. Judson. 
But before either party were able to leave Bengal, the change 
already described in the views of the three latter, in regard 
to baptism, had made a still more painful separation between 
the members of this devoted little band, which, in the judg- 
ment of all, rendered a further missionary connection inex- 
pedient. 

While waiting for a vessel bound to the Isle of France, 
Mr. Judson's mind was anxiously engaged in considering 



PEBSECUnON BY THE EAST INDIA COMPAmr. 65 

^er fields of labour. Burmah, the anguoBl destination 
txf the mission, had early been given np. The Serampore 
brethren, after having expended some ten thousand dollars 
in attempting an establishment in that empire, were about 
relinquishing it as totally impracticable. The London Mis- 
sionary Society had been equally unsuccessful. Mr. Nott 
wrote from Bengal to a friend : ** The Burman empire seems 
at present out of the question." Mrs. Newell remarks in 
her journal, "We cannot feel that we are called in Provi- 
dence to go to Burmah. Every account we have from that 
savage, barbarous nation, confirms us in our opinion that the 
way is not prepared for the spread of the gospel thera" But 
so inviting was this field, could a foothold once be obtained, 
that when all the others had relinquished the thought of 
going to Burmah, Mr. Judson still clung to it. The glowing 
pictures of Col. Symmes, which had exoited his youthful 
fancy, had indeed given place to far different views of Bur- 
mah life and character; and so &r as personal comfort and 
happiness were concerned, even he had come to look upon a 
residence there "with feelings of horror." But there was a 
peculiar attraction to him in the fact, that there existed no 
translation of the Scriptures in the Burmese language. Hid 
distinguished attainments as a linguist had already marked 
him out in America as the translator of the Bible for some 
Pagan nation; and he was conscious of an adaptation of 
mind to this object. But the time was not yet ripe for him 
to enter Burmah. Under date of Sept. 19, 1812, Mrs. Jud- 
son writes to a friend : '* We had almost concluded to go to 
the Burman empire, when we heard that there werie fresh 
difficulties existing between the English and the Burman 
government. If these difficulties are settled I think it 
probable we shall go there." Meanwhile he turned his 
attention to other fields. Japan, Ceylon, Java, Amboyna,* 
and finally South America, were successively thought o£ 

* One of the MolacoaB. 



66 THE EARNEST MAN. 

The Isle of France had a peculiar interest, from the hope of 
extending the mission to the great and populous island of 
Madagasoar. But while still deliberating and looking for an 
opening, the government brought him to a sudden decision. 
Towards the close of November another order was received 
by Messrs. Judson and Rice, requiring them to leave the 
country immediately, for England. They were also forbidden 
to quit their place of residence without permission, and their 
names were published in the list of passengei*s about to leave 
for England in one of the Company's ships. Their request 
for a renewal of the permission to go to the Isle of France, 
in the Creole, a vessel now ready to sail for Port Louis, was 
peremptorily refused. 

No alternative now seemed left them ; and it could hardly 
have furnished ground for an impeachment of their mis- 
sionary zeal had they concluded that Providence was by these 
events indicating a return to their native land. But they 
did not so interpret them. In unimpaired health, with 
impressions of the gi'eatness and necessity of the work 
strengthened by what they had witnessed, they could not take 
'* the wrath of man" as an index of the will of God. One 
hope of escape, a forlorn one indeed, yet remained, — to per- 
suade the captain of the Creole to receive them without a 
passport. On making this application to him, he replied, to 
their great joy, that he could take no responsibility in the 
matter, but there was his ship, and they could do what they 
pleased. 

It was at the dead of night when this little company of 
Christian missionaries, two talented, virtuous, educated young 
men, and a beautiful and refined woman, stole, like criminals, 
through the silent streets of Calcutta, followed by the wary 
steps of the coolies carrying their baggage, and directed their 
course towards the city dockyards. By some means the gates 
were opened for the wayfarers, though this was entirely con- 
trary to the rules of the Company, and they soon found 
themselves safe on board their ark of promise, La Belle 



PEBSECUTION BY THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 67 

Creole, Next momiiig the vessel sailed, and for two days 
they flattered themselves that they were virtually beyond 
the reach of their enemies. But characters so dangerous to 
the British supremacy in India could not be suffered thus to 
go at large on the continent or islands of Asia. At the 
close of the second day, a government despatch arrived, for- 
bidding the pilot to proceed any further down the river with 
the vessel, as passengers were on board who had been ordered 
to England. 

The following letter from Mrs. Judson to her parents 
gives a vivid picture of the embarrassments of their situa- 
tion, and of the firmness and spirit with which these were 
met : — 

"At Sea, N. Lat. 12, Dec. 7, 1812. 
" My beab Parents, — We immediately concluded that it was not 
safe to continue on board the remainder of the night. Mr. Kice and 
Mr. Judson took a boat and went on shore to a tavern little more 
than a mile from the ship. The captain said that I and oiu: baggage 
could stay on board with perfect safety, even should an officer be sent 
to search the vesseL The next day we lay at anchor, expecting every 
hour to hear some intelligence from Calcutta. In the evening the 
captain received a note from the owner of the vessel, saying he had 
been at the police to inquire the cause of the detention of his ship ; 
and the cause assigned was, *it was suspected there were persons on 
board whom the captain had been forbidden to receive,' and that the 
ship could not proceed until it was ascertained that no such persons 
were on board. The i)ilot immediately wrote a certificate that no 
such persons were on board, at the same time giving a Ust of all the 
passengers. I got into a small boat and went on shore, where the 
brethren had been anxiously waiting through the day. We knew not 
what course to take, as it was then impossible that we could proceed 
in that ship, without a pass from the magistrate. Brother Kice set 
out directly for Calcutta, to see if it was possible to get a pass, or do 
anything else. We spent the night and the next day at the tavern, 
without hearing anything from the ship, fearing that every European 
we saw was in search of us. Brother Kice returned from Calcutta, 
but had effected nothing. The owner of the vessel was highly 
ofiended at his ship's being detained so long on our accoimt, and 
would do nothing more to assist us. We felt our situation was pecu- 
liarly trying, and could see no end to our difficulties. 



i 



68 THE EARNEST MAN. 

• 

" Early the next morning we received a note from the captain, say- 
ing he had liberty to proceed, but loe most take our baggage from the 
vesseL We thought it not safe to continue at the tavern where we 
were, neither could we think of returning to Calcutta. But one way 
was left — to go down the river about sixteen miles, where there was 
another tavern. I went on board to see about our baggage, as the 
brethren did not think it safe for them to go. As we could get no 
boat at the place where we were, I requested the captain to let our 
things remain until the vessel reached the other tavern, where I would 
try to get a boat. He consented, and told me I had better go in the 
vessel, as it would be unpleasant going so far in a small boat. I was 
obliged to go on shore again to inform the brethren of this, and know 
what they would do. Brother Hice set out again for Calcutta, to try 
to get a passage to Ceylon, in a ship which was anchored near the 
place we were going to. Mr. Judson took a small boat in which was 
a small part of our baggage, to go down the river, while I got into the 
pilot's boat, which he had sent on shore with me, to go to the ship. 
As I had been some time on shore, and the wind strong, the vessel 
had gone down isome distance. Imagine how uncomfortable my situi^ 
tion ! In a little boat rowed by six natives, entirely alone, the river 
very rough in consequence of the wind, without an umbrella or any- 
vthing to screen me from the sun, which was very hot. The natives 
hoisted a large sail, which every now and then would almost tip the 
boat on one side. I manifested some fear to them, and to comfort me 
they would constantly repeat, * Cutcha pho annah, sahib, cutcha pho 
annah.' The meaning, Never fear, madam, never fear. After some 
time we came up with the ship, where I put our things in order, to be 
taken out in an hour or two. When we came opposite the tavern, the 
pilot kindly lent me his boat and servant to go on shore. I immedi- 
ately procured a large boat to send to the ship for our baggage. I 
entered the tavern, a stranger^ b. female, and unprotected, I called for 
a room, and sat down to reflect on my disconsolate situation. I had 
nothing with me but a few rupees. I did not know that the boat 
which I sent after the vessel would overtake it, and if it did, whether 
it would ever return with our baggage ; neither did 1 know where 
Mr. Judson was, or when he would come, or with what treatment I 
should meet at the tavern. I thought of homey and said to myself. 
These are some of the many trials attendant on a missionary life, and 
which 1 have anticipated, 

" In a few hours Mr. Judson arrived, and toward night our baggage. 
We had now given up all hope of going to the Isle of France, and 
concluded either to return to Calcutta or to communicate our real 
situation to the tavern-keeper, and request him to assist us. As we 



PEKSECUnON BY THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 69 

thought the latter preferable, Mr. Judson told our landlord our cir- 
cnmstances, and asked if he could assist in getting us a passage to 
Ceylon. He said a friend of his was expected down the river the next 
diay, who was captain of a vessel bound to Madras, and who, he did 
not doubt, would take us. This raised our mnking hopes. We waited 
two days; and on the third, which was Sabbath, the ship came in 
sight and anchored directly before the house. We now expected the 
tin^e of our deliverance had come. The tavern-keeper went on board 
to see the captain for us ; but our hopes were again dashed, when he 
returned and said the captain could not take us. We determined, 
however, to see the captain ourselves, and endeavour to persuade him 
to let us have a passage at any rate. We had just sat down to sup- 
per, when a letter was handed us. We hastily opened it, and to our 
great surprise and joy, in it was a pass from the magistrate, for us 
to go on board the Creole, the vessel we had left. Who procured this 
pass for us, or in what way, we are still ignorant; we could only view 
the hand of God, and wonder. But we had evety reason to expect 
the Creole had got out to sea, as it was three days since we left her. 
There was a possibility, however, of her having anchored at Saugur, 
seventy miles from where we then were. We had let our baggage 
continue in the boat into which it was first taken, therefore it was all 
in readiness ; and after dark we all three got into the same boat, and 
set out against the tide for Saugur. It was a most dreary night to me, 
bat Mr. Judson slept the greater part of the night. The next day we 
had a favourable wind, and before night reached Saugur, where were 
many ships at anchor, and among the rest we had the happiness to 
find the Creole, She had been anchored there two days, waiting for 
some of the ship's crew. I never enjoyed a sweeter moment in my 
life than that when I was sure we were in sight of the Creole, After 
spending a fortnight in such anxiety, it was a veiy great relief to find 
ourselves safe on board the vessel in which we first embarked. All 
of us are now attending to the French language, as that is spoken 
altogether at the Isle of France. Though it has pleased our Heavenly 
Father lightly to afflict us, yet he has supported and delivered us from 
our trials, which still encourages us to trust in him." 

On the 17th of January, 1813, they arrived, after a long 
and stormy passage, at Port Louis. Here they were met 
with the afflictive intelligence that Mrs. Newell was no more. 
Just at the date of their escape firom Bengal, she was finish- 
ing her short earthly course; so short, if reckoned "by days 
and months and years," but longer than many a life of three- 



( 



70 THE EARNEST MAN. 

score and ten, if counted by holy affections and purposes, or 
by its results to the cause of missions. The stor}' of her 
brief career and early death threw a tender, melancholy 
interest around that caase, as something consecrated by a 
martyi^'s sacrifice, and awoke a kindred spirit of self-devotion 
in many a youthful heart ; so that her lonely grave may be 
said to have blossomed with the richest blessings for the 
world. 

Mr. Newell soon took his departure for Ceylon ; and about 
the middle of March, Mr. Rice sailed for America, with the 
double object of recruiting his own health, which was suffer- 
ing from the effects of the climate, and of awakening a 
deeper interest in missions among the Baptists of this coun- 
try. Thus Mr. and Mrs. Judson were left utterly alone, 
with prospects but little adapted in any respect to cheer 
their spirits. The governor was indeed, at present, friendly ; 
but it was uncertain how long this state of things would last, 
since the persecuting jealousy of the Company had followed 
them to this remote spot, with the warning to the authori- 
ties to " keep an eye on those American missionaries" ! This, 
however, would have weighed little with them had the field 
of usefulness been such as to justify their stay. Madagascar 
was closed against them by the despotic character of its gov- 
ernment. The remainder of the story, and the wonderful 
guidance of Providence, by which their wanderings at length 
terminated in the land they had so dteaded, so longed for, 
will be best given in Mr. Judson's own words : — 

"A slight sketch of our movements, particularly at the time 
of our coming to Rangoon, I now submit. After a mournful separa- 
tion from Brother Rice, at the Isle of France, in March, 1813, we 
remained there about two months waiting for a passage to some of 
the eastern islands, not venturing at that time to think a mission to 
Burmah practicable. But there being no prospect of accomplishing 
our wishes directly, we concluded to take passage to Madras, and 
proceed thence as circumstances should direct. We arrived there in 
June, and were immediately informed of the renewed hostilities of 
the Company's government towards missionaries, exhibited in their 



PERSECUTION BY THE EAST INDIA COMPANY. 71 

treatment of the brethren both at Serampore and Bombay. We were, 
of course, reported to the police, and an accoimt of our arrival 
forwarded to the supreme government in Bengal. It became, there- 
fore, a moral certainty that as soon as an order could be received at 
Madras, we should be again arrested, and ordered to England. Our 
only safety appeared to consist in escaping from Madras before such 
an order should arrive. It may easily be conceived with what feel- 
ings I inquired the destination of vessels in the Madras roads. I 
found none that would sail in season, but one bound to Rangoon. A 
mission to Kangoon we had been accustomed to regard with feelings 
of horror. But it was now brought to a point. We must either 
venture there or be sent to Europe. All other paths were shut up; 
and thus situated, though dissuaded by all our friends at Madras, we 
commended ourselves to the care of God, and embarked the 22nd of 
June. It was a crazy old vesseL The captain was the only person 
on board that could speak our language, and we had no other apart- 
me&t than what was made by canvas. Our passage was very tedious. 
Mrs. Judson was taken dangerously ill, and continued so until, at one 
period, I came to experience the awful sensation which necessarily 
resulted from the expectation of an inmiediate separation from my 
beloved wife, the only remaining companion of my wanderings. 
About the same time, the captain being unable to make the Nicobar 
Island, where it was intended to take in a cargo of cocoa-nuts, we 
were driven into a dangerous strait between the Little and Great 
Andamans, two savage coasts, where the captain had never been 
before, and where, if we had been cast ashore, we should according 
to all accounts have been killed and eaten by the natives. But as 
one evil is sometimes an antidote to another, so it happened with us. 
Our being driven into this dangerous but quiet channel brought imme* 
diate relief to the agitated and exhausted frame of Mrs. Judson, and 
conduced essentially to her recovery. And in the event, we were 
safely conducted over the black rocks which we sometimes saw in the 
gulf below, and on the eastern side of the islands found favourable 
winds, which gently wafted us forward to Rangoon. But on arriving 
here other trials awaited us. 

" We had never before seen a place where European influence had 
not contributed to smooth and soften the rough features of unculti- 
vated nature. The prospect of Rangoon, as we approached, was quite 
disheartening. I went on shore, just at night, to take a view of 
the place and the Mission House; but so dark, and cheerless, and 
unpromising did all things appear, that the evening of that day, 
after my return to the ship, we have marked as the most gloomy and 
distressing that we ever passed. Instead of rejoicing, as we ought 



72 THE EABNEST MAK. 

to have done, in having found a heathen land from which we were 
not immediately driven away, such were our weaknesses that we felt 
we had no portion left here below, and. found consolation only in 
looking beyond our pilgrimage, which we tried to flatter ourselves 
would be short, to that peaceful region where the wicked cease from 
troubling and the weary are at rest. But if ever we conmiended our- 
selves sincerely, and without reserve, to the disposal of our Heavenly 
Father, it was on this evening. And after some recollection and 
prayer, we experienced something of the presence of Him wh« 
deaveth closer than a brother; something of that peace which our 
Saviour bequeathed to his followers — a legacy which, we know from 
this experienoe, endures when the fleeting pleasures and unsubstan- 
tial riches of the world are passed away. The next day Mrs. Jud- 
■on was carried into the town, being unable to walk ; and we found 
a home at the Mission House, though Mr. Carey was absent at 
Ava." 

Those who have since visited Rangoon, under far more 
fcivourable circumstances, cannot wonder that the hearts of 
the lonely young missionaries sunk for a moment at the 
aspect of their future home. A more uninviting spot, at 
first approaiiCh, can perhaps hardly be found. A vast swamp- 
Hke level covered with wretched bamboo huts raised on poles, 
neglected, filthy, unenlivened by a trace of European civili- 
zation, — such was Rangoon when Mr. and Mrs. Judson first 
looked upon it^ in June of the year 1813. To the influence 
of these repulsive outward features were added the most 
gloomy anticipations of the treatment they were likely to 
receive from its despotic and cruel government. But not for 
an instant did they think of abandoning the field. God had 
evidently led them to Burmah, and in Burmah they resolved 
to labour to the end of life. Their repinings went no further 
than to hope that the end might come speedily. But that 
humble beginning, when in weakness and sorrow they cast 
themselves like dependent children on the Saviour's bosom, 
was a better omen for their work than the most heroic flbrm* 
uess based on their own strength. It linked them to that 
strength against which human and satanic powers rage in 
vain. The returning song of hope and thanksgiving soon 



THE ADOPTED COUlTrRY. 73 

proved the blessed promise true, " As thy day, so shall thy 
strength be !" 

On the following morning Mrs. Judson being too ill to 
walk or ride on horseback (the only means of conveyance to 
be obtained), was carried in an arm-chair to the Mission 
House, which had been erected by a former missionary, 
about half a mile from the town. Being outside the walls 
it was exposed to the attacks of wild beasts and of robbers, 
as well as to the stench of the city offal and of the burning 
bodies of the dead, the places of deposit for both being near 
the mission premises. Yet, as it was large and convenient 
for the place, and stood in a garden filled with fruit and 
shade trees, it formed a delightful contrast to the miserable 
filthy streets of Hangoon. Here Mrs. Judson soon recovered 
her health, and both applied themselves diligently to the 
study of the Burman language. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE ADOPTED COUNTRY. 

With a map of Southern Asia before him, the reader 
will obtain from the following brief statements a sufficiently 
dear idea of the geographical position of Burmah, and its 
extent at the time Mr. Judson entered it. Its sea-coast 
then extended along the Bay of Bengal, from the English 
province of Chittagong on the north to Junk Ceylon on the 
south, a distance of more than a thousand miles. Its 
northern limit was Thibet, its eastern the Biver Salwen. 
The ancient kingdom of Ava was the heart of this great 
empire; the kingdoms of Arracan, of Pegu, and the Ten- 
asserim provinces of Siam, having been added to it by 
successive conquests. These had been its limits since the 
year 1793. 



74 THE EARNEST MAN. 

Its two noble rivers, the Irrawaddy and Salwen, intersect 
the entire empire from north to south, and, by their numer- 
ous interlocking branches, cover the whole face of the 
peninsula, Arracan excepted, with a system of natural 
canals. The Irrawaddy, navigable for large vessels as far 
up as Ava, 450 miles from the sea, and for boats much 
further, pours into the Bay of Bengal by fourteen mouths. 
On one of these lies Rangoon, with its secure and capacious 
harbour, seemingly fitted by its position to be the New 
York or New Orleans of Burmah. 

The face of the country, and consequently its climate and 
vegetable productions, exhibit great diversity. The delta of 
the Irrawaddy, extending as far north as Prome, is a rich 
marshy level, furnishing the rice grounds gf the empire. 
Above Prome the country becomes gradually more irregular 
and picturesque up to Ava, where it rises into bold moun- 
tain scenery. North of this is a rugged tract little known 
to Europeans. This middle section, though less fertile than 
the southern, produces excellent wheat and the different 
com and leguminous crops cultivated in Hindostan. Sugar- 
cane, indigo, cotton, both white and yellow, tobacco, and the 
various fruits of the tropics, are indigenous in Burmah. 
Noble forests clothe the mountainous districts. The teak, 
said to sui*pass even the English oak for ship-timber, abounds 
in all pai-ts of the country. 

Its mineral wealth is supposed to be very great, but is as 
yet but impei-fectly developed. Gold, silver, iron, tin, various 
kinds of precious stones, amber, the most beautiful marble^ 
coal, both bituminous and anthracite, sulphur, antimony, 
and petroleum, are among its known products. 

The forests and jungles swarm with wild animals, among 
which the principal are the elephant and tiger. Buffaloes, 
braminy cattle, horses, and other domestic animals common 
to India, are likewise found here. 

The climate, in the more northerly, hilly districts, is 
delightful and salubrious, and even in the level regions is 



THE ADOPTED COUNTRY. T5 

more healthy for Europeans than in most parts of India. 
The natives attest its salubrity by their health, longevity, 
and capacity for great muscular exertion. 

Such was Burmah when Judson entered it in 1813. Many 
a sad change has it experienced since that day ! 

There is always something melancholy in witnessing the 
humiliation of a proud and independent people by a foreign 
power; to see them retiring from their ancient landmarks, 
forced to yield one after another all the advantages which 
gave them a distinguished place among the nations, and 
firadually sinking away to weakness and insiffnificance. We 
^not avoid something of this feeling when contracting the 
present with the former state of Burmah. By the treaty of 
Yandabo, 1826, AiTacan and the Tenasserim provinces were 
ceded to the British, and the last war swept from Burmah 
the whole of Pegu, with its magnificent delta, the granary of 
the empire, and her only remaining seaports, Bassein and 
Rangoon. Of her thousand miles of sea-coast not an inch 
is left. The circle is closing round her, and though, like a 
hunted tigress, she stands for a while at bay in that ancient 
home from which she went forth to prey on weaker nations, 
her final doom is as certain as if already consummated. 

But a recollection of the history of Burmah and of the 
character of its government, leaves little remaining of this 
poetic sentiment. Its subjects were not one great people, 
united by common blood, or even bound together by just 
and equal laws. The conquered provinces hated the govern- 
ment as their pitiless oppressor, and were ready at any 
moment for revolt. Even the Burmans themselves, though 
proud of their country and nationality, were ground to the 
dust by the monstrous exactions and despotic administration 
of their rulers. No man's life or property was secure for a 
moment. The evidence of industry and thrift, furnished by 
a little chow of wealth, was but the scent of prey to the 
government harpies. The very title of a provincial governor 
indicates the odious character of his office. , He was called 



f 



76 THE EARNEST MAN. 

*Hhe eater," or *' consumer," of the district. Notwith- 
standing all the natural advantages of the country and 
their own capacity, — ^being active, acute, and ingenious far 
beyond most Asiatics, — the Burmans could not rise above 
this depressing iufluence. And they never could have ad- 
vanced beyond semi-civilization and become a nation of 
men, while such an iron weight lay upon their energies. So 
&JC as temporal comfort and security of life and property 
are concerned, the Burmese fare much better in the British 
provinces than under the native liionarchs. What they 
have lost nationally they have far more than gained indi- 
vidually. 

In regard to the progress of Christianity in the empire, 
the change is still more beneficial. No one now is in danger 
of fines, imprisonment, scourging, and death, for abandoning 
the national religion. The missionary may proclaim the 
gospel, and the Burman and Karen and Peguan may listen 
to its joyful sound, with none to molest or make them afraid. 
It is not worth while, then, to sigh over the decay of the 
Barman empire. The Anglo-Saxon instinct of annexation 
has seldom been more fortunately developed for the best 
interests of humanity. 

A brief sketch of the interior organization of the govern- 
ment will place this in a still clearer light. At its head 
stands the monarch, sole proprietor of the soil, and absolute 
master of the lives and property of his subjects. His will 
is the law of the empire. No rank or office is hereditary 
but his own. Every noble or dignitary is such by immediate 
royal creation, and is liable at any moment to the forfeiture 
of rank, of property, and of life itself, at the royal will. 

A council of four members, called a/t-werir-woonSy or 
"inside" ministers of state, forms the private advisory 
cabinet of the emperor. All state questions having been 
first debated in this council, are then transmitted to the 
great council of state, lut-d*hani, consisting also of four mem- 
bers, called woon-gy-eesy which has in charge the administra- 



THE ADOPTED COUNTRY. 77 

tion of the goyemment, and is invested with legislative, 
judicial, and executive powers. In both these bodies the 
decision is by a majority of voices. To each is attached a 
large number of secretaries of high official rank and influ- 
ence, but not entitled to vote. 

It might at first seem as if these two councils would form 
some check to royal despotism. But being appointed by the 
king alone, and removable at his pleasure, they are in fact 
his obsequious creatures, the mere organs and instruments 
of his will No freedom of action, or even of opinion, can 
be looked for in such circumstances. So precarious is the 
tenure of their dignity that they are afraid to communicate 
to the monarch political information of the highest impor- 
tance, if it chances to be of a disgreeable character. The 
bearer of such unwelcome news would probably expiate the 
offence with his office, and perhaps with his head. 

The empire is divided into provinces, townships, districts, 
and villages ; not for the more j^erfect administration of 
justice, but for the more speedy, systematic, and thorough 
fleecing of the people by the royal government. No servant 
of the government receives a fixed salary. From the head 
man of a village up to the governor of a province, all derive 
their revenues from direct taxation upon the inhabitants of 
their assigned jurisdictions ; and provided each pays over a 
satisfactory sum to the official next above him, and an ample 
golden stream at length flows into the royal treasury, all 
further account of his stewardship is dispensed with. In 
addition to this, the government claims the right of levying 
a special tax whenever the exigencies of the state require it. 
Industiy and enterprise must necessarily flag imder a system 
which renders every improvement in a man's condition the 
signal for new extortions, and exposes him, upon the mere 
suspicion of concealed wealth, to be torn from his family, 
and subjected to imprisonment and cruel torture till he con- 
fess the fact. These are the causes of the slow progress of 
ihe Burmese in the arts of civilized life; the reasons why. 



78 TH£ EARNEST MAN. 

ia a country teeming with the richest products of nature, 
and with every capacity fitting them to become a great 
agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial people, they are 
still unskilful farmers and artizans, and dependent on foreign 
vessels to carry on their scanty trade with other countries; 
the reason why the larger part of their fine country is still 
covered with jungles swarming with ferocious beasts, and 
why the inhabited portions wear a general aspect of poverty 
and wretchedness. 

The effect on moral character is still more lamentable^ 
Merciless injustice and oppression in the rulers has produced 
its inevitable counterpart, dissimulation and falsehood in the 
people. Lying is a vice so universal, so bred in the Burman 
blood, that detection scarcely awakens a feeling of shame. 
The very precariousness of property lessens the sense of its 
sacredness, so that most of them are very ready to repair 
their losses from the hand of government at the expense of 
their neighbours. Cunning, adroitness in deceiving and 
overreaching others, are held to be the mark of a superior 
mind. The impurity of the Burman character cannot be 
charged upon the government as its direct cause, for heathen- 
ism and moral purity cannot coexist; yet there can be no 
doubt that despotism, by repressing the natural activity of 
the people in proper directions, is a great nurse of vice and 
immorality. 

Yet, with all these drawbacks, there are points in the 
Burman character and social condition which strike one 
with admiration, when contrasted with other nations of 
India, especially the Hindoos. Infanticide, the immola- 
tion of widows, abandonment of the sick and aged, is un- 
known in Burmah. Parental aJOfection is strong in both 
father and mother; and such is the value attached to 
children, that a widow with a family finds her chances 
greatly increased for an eligible marriage. The aged are 
treated with almost as great reverence as in China; their 
counsels are listened to with respect, and the best seats are 



THE ADOPTED COUNTKY. 79 

assigned them in the public assembly. The condition of 
women is, I believe, superior to that allowed them by any 
other Asiatic people, and is equal in most respects to that of 
the sex generally in Europe. The labours of the household 
devolve on them; they weave, draw the water, clean rice, 
cook, &c., and sometimes assist in the lighter outdoor em- 
ployments; but all heavy labours and severe exposure belong 
to the men. Polygamy, though allowed, is seldom practised, 
except by the grandees. None of that jealous seclusion of 
females, general in the East, is witnessed here. They go 
abroad as freely as in Christian countries; make all the 
purchases for their households, and conduct much of the 
traffic both in the shop and bazaar. Development of char- 
acter, and an important social influence, are the necessary 
consequences. 

The means of elementary education are amply provided 
for boys, so that a very large majority of the males are 
acquainted with reading, writing, and accounts. Female 
education in Burmah bears about the same relation to that 
of the men as it does the world over ; it being, seemingly, a 
silent understanding in all lands. Christian, Mohammedan, 
and Pagan, that the one is to be kept at a safe distance below 
the other. The extraordinary talent for computation, how- 
ever, which is a trait of the Burman mind, renders instruc- 
tion in accounts almost superfluous, even to those engaged 
in trade. Private female schools are found occasionally, and 
many females of the higher classes acquire a respectable 
degree of culture, according to the standard of the country. 

Excessive pride and hauteur is a national characteristic of 
the Burmans, a trait which offers great obstacles to improve- 
ment. It is not strange that they shoiild have become thus 
inflated, considering their previous history ; but it has cost 
them dear in their relations with the English. The series 
of humiliations which has so curtailed their power and 
dominion, is almost wholly attributable to their overweening 
self-conceit. It will readily be seen how inaccessible such a 



80 THE EABKEST MAN. 

people would be to the claims of a new religion. The very 
presentation of it, by a despised foreigner, would be an 
afiront to their self-esteem. Still there is something refresh- 
ing, in contrast with the obsequious servility of the Hindoo, 
with his everlasting bows and prostrations, in the aspect of 
this sturdy Oriental, who meets, with erect head and unquail- 
ing eye, the powerful European, — seeming to say, "I also am 
a man ! "* We cannot help believing, too, that this proud 
exterior has for its basis a character of firmer grain, fitting 
it for nobler uses and a finer polish than can be ex{)eoted 
fiponi the osier-like pliancy of their Bengalee neighbours. 
That outward softness evinces, as we well know, no greater 
moral susceptibility. ^'Lascivious and bloody,*' are, as 
Buchanan tells us, the two epithets which best describe the 
effeminate and seemingly passive Biudoo. 

An influence still more powerful than that of government 
in moulding their character and condition, is found in the 
national religion. 

The aspect of poverty, wretchedness, and degradation, 
which had produced so painful and depressed a feeling in the 
young missionaries, on their first arrival at Eangoon, was 
soon found to have a brilliant contrast in the religious 
structures which adorned the suburbs. From the narrow, 
straggling, dirty streets of the town, opened two avenues, 
each two miles long, conducting to the great Shoo-da-gon, 
one of the most magnificent temples of the empire, and 
thrice sacred as enshrining several of the real hairs of 
Gaudama. It looked down from its eminence, upon the 
surrounding landscape, like the monarch of the scene. A 
mile of pagodas, on either side of the avenue, marked the 
approach to the temple. Ascending by several flights of 
broad stairs the terraces of the sacred hill, and passing 



* The same feeling renders it, I am told, almost impossible for English 
families in Rangoon, and other conquered towns, to procure Burmans as 
domestics ; so that they are obliged to import their servants from BengaL 



THE ADOPTED COUNTRY. 81 

through the grand gate, upon the summit a bewildering 
scene of picturesque beauty and barbaric splendour burst 
upon the gazer's view. *^ One's first impressions," says Dr. 
Malcom, "are — what terrible grandeur! what stckening 
magnificence ! what absurd imagery ! what extravagant 
expenditure ! what long successions of devotees to procure 
this throng of buildings of such various dates ! what a poor 
religion that makes such labours its chief meritoriousness ! 
Before you stands the huge Shoo-da-gon, its top among the 
clouds, and its golden sides blazing in the glories of an 
eastern sun. Around are pompous zayats, noble pavements, 
Gothic mausoleums, uncouth colossal lions, curious stone 
umbreUas, graceful cylindrical banners of gold, embroidered 
muslins hanging from lofty pillars, enormous stone jars in 
rows to receive ofierings, tapers burning before the images, 
exquisite flowers displayed on every side, filling the air with 
fragrance, and a multitude of carved figures of idols, wor- 
shippers, guardians, griffins, &c." Under light open sheds, 
scattered over the large area, and half embowered in the 
foliage of the banian, the toddy, and the cocoa, the eye rested 
on huge uncouth figures, representing a young man sitting, 
with crossed legs, in an attitude of profound contemplation 
and repose. This was Gaudama, or Gautama, the presiding 
deity, the great expounder, if not the father, of that vast 
overshadowing system of idolatry, which holds "in chains 
of darkness" one half the human race, — Buddhism. Before 
each image a little altar bloomed with its fioral offerings, and 
around it were clustered carved groups of priests and vota- 
ries. Nor was the scene wanting in the more afi'ecting 
spectacle of living worshippers, bowing with uplifted hands 
behind their gifts, counting their muttered prayers by the 
aid of rosaries, or perchance ofiering on the end of a stick a 
written prayer piirchased for a trifle from the priest. 

Turning from this humiliating scene to the view of the 
surrounding country opened frt)m the parapet, the eye wan- 
dered over a fair and lovely landscape; rice meadows smiling 

a 



82 THE EABNEST MAN. 

with the promise of plenty ; gentle hills spotted with numer* 
ous herds; yallejs rich with verdure; ponds and streamlets 
glittering in the sun. But what was all this scene of beauty 
and abundance to the majority of its inhabitants ) The tall 
spires of Rangoon's five hundred pagados, and the gilded 
roofs of the kyoungs, the sacred houses of the priests, 
gleamed from their gardens and embowering groves in every 
direction. Everything gave token that the national &ith 
was strong in wealth and influence. But what had it done 
for the people ? The wretched town, '* the city of bamboo 
huts," with its swarming, poverty-stricken population, lying 
like a black spot in that ring of gorgeous structures, showed 
that it had accomplished nothing for their outward weL&re. 
What, then, had been its influence on their moral and spirit- 
ual state 9 How much had it done to elevate them above 
the depressing and demoralizing influences of their political 
condition ? With what hopes of the future did it soothe 
their present miseries, — ^what words of consolation had it for 
the dying hour ) Such must have been the thoughts which 
pressed on the missionar/s heart, when he first stood under 
the shadow of the towering Shoo-d4-gon, pondering on his 
future labours. The answer to these questions requires a 
brief view of the leading ideas and doctrines of Buddhism^ 
which will form the subject Of the next chapter. 



CHAPTER XI. 

Bm>DHISBC 



Gautama, the founder of Buddhism, flourished in Hindo* 
Stan about 626 B.C. His teachings, perpetuated by tradition 
through five centuries, and at length, 450 years after his 
death, reduced to writing by one of his disciples in the 



BUDDHISM. 83 

island of Ceylon, form the Bet-otrgtU, or Buddhist Scriptures, 
*Hhe only rule of faith and practice." In the tenth century 
after Gautama, " they were transcribed by Buddh-ha-gantha, 
with an iron pen of celestial workmanship," and brought by 
sea to Pugan ; and in the tenth century of the Christian 
era, Buddhism, after some unessential modifications, became 
the established religion of Burmah. 

The leading ideas of Buddhism, as gathered from Dr. Jud- 
son's view of the subject, may be stated as follows : 1. The 
eternal existence of matter and of finite spirits. 2. Fate 
the supreme ruler of the universe. 3. The eternal trans- 
migration of souls. 4. The development of Buddhs. 5. 
Annihilation the supreme good. 

Tho cosmogony of Buddhism is very peculiar. Perpetual 
dissolution and reproduction is the great law of matter. 
The infinite number of systems, or Sak-yaSy which compose 
the material universe, have, from all eternity, been coming 
into existence, perishing, and again reorganizing; a process 
which, as it was without b^inning, will be also without 
end. ^' Each system consists of one central mountain, the 
surrounding seas and islands, the celestial regions, including 
the revolving luminaries, and the infernal regions. The earth 
on which we live is the southernmost of the four grand 
islands, each of which is surrounded by four hundred of 
smaller size. The celestial regions consist of six inferior 
and twenty superior heavens. Of the six inferior heavens, 
the first occupies the middle, and the second the summit of 
the central moomt, the remainder rising above each other in 
regular gradation. The same remark applies to the superior 
heavens, which are again distinguishable into the sixteen 
visible and four invisible." Immediately beneath the central 
mountain, in the space inclosed by the three immense rocks 
on which it rests, '^ is a race of beings resembling the Titans 
of old, who have been banished from the celestial regions. 
Below this are ranged eight hells, one beneath the other, 
and extending through a layer of earth 1120,000 miles in 



( 



84 . THE EARNEST MAN. 

depth. The earth rests on a rocky stratum of the same 
depth, beneath which is a continually restless flood of water, 
and still below this a similar body of air, by the mighty 
force of whose continued action and reaction the whole 
structure is supported." These several systems are arranged 
compactly in a vast plane, each inclosed by a circular wall 
of incalculable height aud thickness. 

One complete revolution of nature, or the age of a 
world, is termed a ma-ha-kat, and each ma-ha-kat witnesses 
the destruction and reproduction of 10,000 systems like 
those just described. This Grand Period, or cycle, consists 
of four cardinal periods, and each of these of sixty-four 
intermediate periods, or a-then-ky-ays, which latter embrace 
only the brief term of " one hundi-ed quadrillions of quad- 
rigintiUions of years." 

Pain and change are the inseparable conditions of li\dng 
existence. The imiverse swarms with an infinite number of 
souls, which, from all eternity, have been transmigrating 
through different worlds and various forms of life, rising or 
felling in the scale of existence according to the degree of 
merit brought to each new birth. "All beings are con- 
tinually revolving on the great wheel of transmigration, 
from man to monster or the vilest reptile, from the celestial 
inhabitant of an upper heaven to the blackest demon in 
hell, with no hope of rest or reprieve, save in utter extinc- 
tion." "However highly exalted in the celestial regions, 
and whatever number of ages of happiness may roll on," 
say the Burmans, " the fatal symptom of a moisture under 
the armpits will at length display itself. The mortal being, 
when this presents itself, must be prepared to exchange the 
blandishments and dalliance of celestial beauties for the 
gridirons, pitchforks, mallets, and other instruments of tor- 
turfe of the infernal regions." Such is the predominance of 
moral evil in the universe that this process is one of infinite 
suffering to every individual spirit. " The Bet-a-gat," says 
Malcom, " declares that the tears shed by any one soul, in 



BUDDHISM. 85 

its various changes from eternity, are so numerous that the 
ocean is but a drop in comparison." 

No Supreme intelligence presides over this teeming uni- 
verse of material and spiritual forces. Inexorable Fate, or 
the eternal, inward necessity of things, regulates all events. 

Certain of the Grand Periods are distinguished by the 
development of one or more superior beings called Buddhs, 
the feature of this religion from which it derives its name. 
These beings are not to be confounded with the incarnations 
of deity foxmd in Brahminism. The Buddh is simply a finite 
spirit, of the same nature as the others which people the 
universe, who, having passed through an infinite series of 
existences, at length by a happy accident has become an 
inhabitant of the earth, the only part of the Sak-yah in 
which a Buddh can be developed. Here, after another in- 
calculable series of transmigrations through inferior animals, 
he is bom of human parents, and by a life of austerity and 
contemplation attains to a state of abstraction in which he 
is insensible to pain or pleasure, and receives the attribute 
of omniscience. He is then a Buddh, the supreme object of 
adoration to the universe. This dignity imparts, however, 
no control over its affairs, and he is himself still as liable to 
pain, sickness, and death, as the meanest reptile. Accord- 
ingly, the grand ultimatum, the supreme good, towards 
which the Buddh directs all his efforts, is nigban, that is, 
annihilation. 

The present cycle is favoured with five Buddhs, four of 
whom have already attained to nigban, and one is yet to 
"be developed. Gautama, the fourth, is the only one whose 
communications have been preserved. His annihilation 
occurred in the sixth century before Christ. As his suc- 
cessor is not to appear till the ebb of the next Grand Period, 
rthe universe is now, and will remain for an incalculable 
series of ages, destitute of a living God. In the meantime, 
the images, temples^ books, and priests of the last Buddh 
Are to stand in place of himself, as objects of worship; and 



i 



86 THE EABKEST MAN. 

the great aim of human beings is, so to conduct themselves 
that they may remain within the sphere of men and gods 
till the manifestation of the fifth deity, — ^the yet slumbering 
Lord Arimiteya, **whom they may hope to accompany to 
the golden world of nigban." Thus it appears that the idea 
of an eternal Creator, Upholder, and Moral Euler of the 
universe, nay, even of an ever-living infinite Intelligence, is 
unknown in Buddhism; that it is, in &ct, atheism.* 

The following record of a conversation between Mr. Jud- 
son and his Burman teacher, will show that the system, as 
understood by its most intelligent adherents, is in harmony 
with the foregoing statements. 

** September 30th, 1815. Had the following conversation with my 
teacher, as nearly as I can recollect it. This man has been with me 
about three months, and is the most sensible, learned, and candid 
man that I have ever found among the Burmans. He is forty-seven 
years of age, and his name is Oo Oungmen. I began by saying,— 

J, — * Mr. J. is dead.' 

Oo. — * I have heard so.' 

J, — *His soul is lost, I think.' 

Oo.— *Whyso?' 

J, — * He was not a disciple of Christ.' 

Oo. — * How do you know that ? You could not see his souL' 

J, — * How do you know whether the root of that mango tree is 
good? You cannot see it, but you can judge by the fruit on its- 
branches. Thus I know that Mr. J. was not a disciple of Christ, 
because his words and actions were not such as indicate a disciple.' 

Oo* — * And so, all who are not disciples of Christ are lost ?' 

J, — * Yes, all, whether Buimans or foreigners.' 

Oo.—* This is hard.' 

J, — * Yes, it is hard, indeed; otherwise I should not have come all 
this way, and left parents and all, to tell you of Christ.' 



* Learned men may find evidence in the sacred books that the primitive 
idea of nigban was rather that of celestial repose, a state exalted above 
pain, decay, or change, than one of absolute non-existence, — ^a subject 
certainly of much interest to the philosophic inquirer. But, as universally 
understood, the point of practical importance to the missionary, it was 
in the view even of the most intelligent and best educated Burmans, 
nothing short of annihilation. 



BUDDHISM. 87 

" He Beemed to feel the force of this, and after stopping a little he 
said : — 

Oo. — ' How is it that the disciples of Christ are so fortunate above 
all men?' 

J. — * Are not all men sinners, and deserving of punishment in a 
future state ?' 

Oo. — 'Yes, all must suffer in some future state for the sins they 
commit. The punishment follows the crime as surely as the wheel 
of the cart follows the footsteps of the ox.' 

J, — *Now, according to the Burman system, there is no escape. 
According to the Christian system, there is. Jesus Christ has died 
in the place of sinners, has borne their sins; and now those who 
believe on him, and become his disciples, are released from the 
punishment they deserve. At death they are received into heaven, 
and are happy for ever.' 

Oo. — * That I will never believe. My mind is very stiff on this 
one x)oint, namely, that all existence involves in itself principles of 
misery and destruction. The whole universe is only destruction and 
reproduction. It therefore becomes a wise man to raise his desires 
above aU things that exist, and aspire to nigban, the state where 
there is no existence.' 

J. — * Teacher, there are two evil futurities and one good. A 
miserable future existence is evil ; and annihilation, or nigban, is an 
evil, a fearful evil. A happy future existence is alone good.' 

Oo. — *I admit that is best if it could be perpetual, but it cannot 
be. Whatever is, is liable to change, and misery, and destruction. 
Nigban is the only permanent good, and that good has been attained 
by Guadama, the last deity.' 

J. — *If there be no eternal being, you cannot account for any- 
thing. Whence this world and all that we see ?' 

Oo.—* Fate.' 

J. — * Fate ! The cause must alwa3rs be equal to the effect. See, I 
raise this table. See also that ant under it. Suppose I were invisible, 
would a wise man say the ant raised it ? Now, fate is not even an 
ant. Fate is a word, that is aU. It is not an agent ; not a thing. 
What is fate?' 

Oo. — * The fate of creatures is the influence which their good or bad 
deeds have on their future existence.' 

J. — * If influence be exerted, there must be an exerter. If there 
be a determination, there must be a determiner.' 

Oo. — *No, there is no determiner. There cannot be an eternal 
being.* 

J. — * Consider this point. It is a main point of true wisdom. 



88 THE EARNEST MAN. 

Whenever there is an execution of a purpose, there must be an 
agent.' 

Oo. — (After a little thought). * I must say that my mind is very 
decided and hard, and unless you tell me something more to the 
purpose I shall never believe.'" 

Buddhism is not, in itself, an immoral system. The 
communications of Grautama, forming an exceedingly volu- 
minous body of sacred literature, have proved, so far as 
examined, remarkably pure in their moral tone. The stories 
of Gautama's transmigrations, extending through many 
hundred volumes, though a tissue of extravagant and absurd 
fcincies, are entirely free from that obscene spirit which taints 
the sacred legends of the Hindoos. Its moral code, though 
aiming chiefly at the regulation of the outward conduct, is 
based on the foundation principles of morality. "Thou 
shalt not lie ; thou shalt not kill ; thou bhalt not steal ; thou 
shalt not commit adultery ; thou shalt not drink intoxicating 
liquors," are its five cardinal precepts. It also inculcates 
government of the temper, kindness to the needy, and 
purity in thought as well as in action. 

But were its morality a hundred-fold more excellent. 
Buddhism would still be entirely wanting in vital power. 
Its incentives to a life of virtue are purely selfish and 
sensual, and hence cannot touch the moral nature. What 
tendency, on the one hand, has the fear of becoming a wild 
beast or loathsome reptile, or of being broiled for ages on a 
gridiron; or, on the other, the hope of the physical enjoy- 
ments of their material paradise, or of the unconscious 
repose of nigban, to change a sinful being into one who is 
pure, truthful, benevolent, and holy ? The means are not, 
in the slightest degree, adapted to the end. Even were the 
penalty annexed to sin suited to infiuence a moral being, its 
force is nullified by the idea that guilt may be balanced by 
merit, and that the merit of prostrations and offerings to 
priests, of the recitation of prayers, of the erection of 
pagodas and kyoungs, stands on the same level with the 



BUDDHISM. 89 

highest moral excellence. The act highest in the scale of 
virtue is the making of an idol. Ahnsgiving has its regular 
gradations of merit, founded not upon the necessities, but 
the rank of the recipient. Thus, while charity to a common 
labourer insures "long life, beauty, strength, knowledge, 
and prosperity," only through a hundred transmigrations, 
the influence extends through two thousand if bestowed on 
one of the upper classes, still more if on a priest. Pure 
benevolence, founded on heartfelt love to our neighbour as a 
man and brother, is unknown 'to this system. Merit or 
virtue being, moreover, merely so much capital to be in- 
vested in the next state of existence, it knows nothing of 
the virtue of gratitude. So thoroughly has the selfish prin- 
ciple of their religion moulded the popular life, that no 
expression equivalent to " I thank you," is found in the Bur- 
mese language. The donor bestows, and the needy receives, 
with the perfect understanding on both sides that it is all a 
matter of pure selfishness. That divine spirit of love, by 
which Christianity seeks to draw all mankind into one great 
brotherhood, is wholly wanting to this cold and dreary 
system. 

Buddhism has been not inaptly compared to an alabaster 
image, perfect and beautiful to the eye, but utterly destitute 
of life. No living Creator watching with infinite father- 
love over the universe which he has made, caring even for 
the sparrow, and numbering the very hairs of our heads; no 
E/cdeemer, to whom the weary, guilty soul, may flee for par- 
don and comfort ; no source of spiritual life, through whose 
divine influence the soul can be created anew in the image 
of its Father ; no heaven of eternal bliss, above the fear of 
pain or change, as the joyful close of the earthly pilgrimage. 
Imagine, for a moment, these glorious truths blotted from 
our faith. What would it be to us, though its moral pre- 
cepts were left in all their purity ? What motives to virtue, 
what strength in temptation, what consolation to the fainting 
soul under the trials of the present state, could it offer? 



\ 



90 THE EABNEST MAN. 

The change would be like that of passing from the regions 
of life and light into those of eternal despair and the 
shadow of death. But it is especially at the fjial hour that 
Christianity reveals its superiority aver every felse system 
of religion. Buddhism has no comfort for the dying sinner. 
AU his external observances and selfish acts of virtue cannot 
silence the voice of that law, written on the soid of every 
human being, which demands " truth in the inward parts." 
They cannot extinguish the sense of guilt, and of coming 
misery due to the transgressor. We can' hardly wonder, 
then, that the poor Buddhist, casting his thoughts forward 
from the verge of life into that dark, restless, shoreless sea 
of transmigi'ation, should sigh for the eternal sleep of nigban, 
fts the one boon of his religion worthy of the aspirations of 
the truly wise. 

Such, at this moment, is the only religion of four hundred 
millions of the human family. 

The intimate connection between the theological tenets of 
Buddhism, and its theory of the material universe, has led 
some to suppose that the true antidote to its power was to 
be found in science. A correct knowledge of geography 
and astronomy, it has been said, would be the overthrow 
of Buddhism. Did the system exist merely as an abstract 
theory, this would be a just view. But a religion which has 
for ages been identifying itself with the life of a nation, 
cannot be killed by destroying its scientific basis. It has a 
thousand points of attachment through which it clraws sus- 
tenance, quite irrespective of the root from which it sprung. 

The pretty apologue,*, used by a Karen convert to illus- 
trate the insidious influence of sin, applies equally well to 
this case. "The Klurt said to the Teak-tree, 'Let me 



* For this pleasing specimen of Karen literature I am indebted ta 
Miss Yinton, who has spent thirteen years as a missionary in Burmah, 
chiefly among the Karens. 

t A gigantic paralitica! plant, common in Bormah. 



BUDDHISK. 91 

come and sleep to-night in your branches.' The Teak said, 
^You may come/ So the Klnr crept up the trunk, and 
spread itself out among the boughs of the noble tree. The 
next morning the Teak wished his guest to depart; but the 
Klur said, ' Let me stay one night longer.' The second day the 
same thing was repeated, and the Ellur was again permitted 
to remain. But on the third morning, when the Teak said, 
' Now leave me,' the Kllur answered, * Nay, force me to da 
it, if you can !* For the wily plant had by this time so 
fastened itself upon its hospitable neighbour, that it was no 
longer in the power of the Teak to rid himself of it. And 
so, rootless as it was, the Klur grew and flourished, feeding 
itself upon the sap and juices of the tree ; nor could they 
ever again be separated till it had drained out the life of it& 
supporter, and both fell and perished together." 

Like that monstrous serpent-plant. Buddhism had for 
centuries been growing with the life-growth of society. 
Generation after generation had come up under its influ- 
ence. The lisping child had been taught to bow down to 
the image of Grautama, behind its little oflering of rice and 
flowers. The glitter of the tall pagoda on the neighbouring 
hill, and the tinkling symphonies of its gilded bells, were 
among the sweetest recollections of early years. A national 
Hterature of no mean pretensions, which had been for cen- 
turies the chief source of mental culture to the race, was 
the mere efflorescence of the ancient faith. The priesthood, 
though not exercising the mysterious spell over the popular 
mind, as immediate organs and representatives of deity, 
which gives to many false systems their chief power, nor 
even ministering at the altar, yet formed a strong link 
between the people and their religion. The Buddhist priest- 
hood is not, like the Brahminic, a hereditary caste. Any 
man of respectable standing in society may enter its ranks, 
and, if he chooses, for a limited term; returning at its 
expiration to secular business without reproach, and retain- 
ing through life an important accession of personal dignity 



92 THE EARNEST HAN. 

and influence. It is a matter of family pride and distinction 
to count at least one representative among tlie wearers of tlie 
yellow robe; and hence, according to Dr. Judson's testimony, 
"the priesthood has its roots in almost every family of 
respectability in Burmah.'* Then they are the national 
schoolmasters, and, as such, rank deservedly as great public 
benefactors. The five millions of readers whom Mr. Judson 
found in Burmah, owed the ability solely to the gratuitous 
schools taught by the priests, every rainy season, in their 
beautiful kyoungs. Religion and education were thus in- 
separably unibed in the mind of the community. Add to 
these things, that Buddhism is the established religion of 
the empire, sustained by the monarch to whom belong the 
property, persons, lives, and consciences of his subjects; 
that in its outward forms it is a gorgeous system, well 
adapted to dazzle the senses and imagination; and finally, 
take into the account the tenacity with which the human 
heart ever clings to a religioil of works, in preference to that 
which offers salvation freely as the gift of God, — and we see 
that, in undertaking to undermine this hoary structure, the 
young missionary put his hand to no light task. But he 
knew that it had one vulnerable point, — its inadequacy to 
meet the deepest necessities of the human soul. It was not 
by lectures on cosmogony and geography that he proposed 
making his assault, but by speaking directly to the con- 
science; proclaiming an eternal, holy God, the Creator, 
Upholder, and Judge of men, and an atoning Saviour, able 
and ready to save, unto the uttermost, all who come unto 
Ood by him. 



THE LANGUAGE. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE LANGUAGE. 

The labourer had sit length reached his chosen field. It 
stretched out, a wretched, sterile, neglected scene before his 
earnest gaze, and his heart burned with desire to be at work. 
But the implements of labour were yet wanting. The acqui- 
sition of one of the most difficult languages ever used by 
men, lay between him and the first stroke of missionary 
service. Among the various families of Indian tongues, the 
Burmese stood alone, having no marked affinities with any 
which had become known to Europeans. He had neither 
grammar nor dictionary to aid his first steps; nor was a 
teacher to be found who understood both Burman and 
English. 

Nor would such a familiarity with the language as might 
suffice for the transaction of ordinary business, or for mere 
literary research, answer his purpose. The task he set for 
himself was such a command of it as would render it an 
instrument no less pliant to his will, in every variety of 
mental process, than his mother-tongue. To perform the 
whole work of a pioneer missionary, in this peculiar sphere 
of labour, he must become an author in the language, a 
popular preacher, a metaphysical reasoner, a translator of 
the Scriptures. All this he accomplished, and in every par- 
ticular with pre-eminent success. Which of our best Ger- 
man scholars, in this countiy, would undertake such exploits 
in that kindred tongue; for instance, to conduct philosophic 
debates with the disciples of Hegel or Schelling, or to com- 
pose religious treatises, or to prepare a new version of the 
Scriptures for the use of our transatlantic cousins ? In the 
Burman, the difficulty was incomparably greater. A writer 
in the Calcutta Review thus speaks of its characteristics : 
" Some languages, however, — and the Burman is one, — seem 



96 THE EARNEST MAN. 

prehensive conciseness becomes more and more manifest. 
In our limited acquaintance with languages, whether of the 
East or West, we have seen no work in any tongue which 
we should compare with this in brevity and completeness; 
yet we have, in our day, had to study and wade through 
some long, and some would-be short, grammars.'* 

But the mere philosophical analysis of the language had 
little interest for him, except as the means to a practical 
end. For his purposes, he must not only learn to know the 
language, but to live it; it must be not the mere tree- 
skeleton, as it stands in the winter of our frigid clime, stiffly 
pencilled against the sky; but the tree of summer, waving 
and rustling with its crown of innumerable leaves, and full 
of the mysterious murmurs and many- voiced music of hu- 
man life. He had received from nature that poetic warmth 
of temperament, that delicacy of taste and sensibility, neces- 
sary to apprehend the living forms of speech in their infinite 
variety of shape and hue; and these fine natural instincts 
had been richly cultivated by the study of classic and 
English literatura He now made it his great business to 
strip from his mind the specific forms of his previous cul- 
ture, and wholly remould and reclothe it in tho^ of a new 
and strange speech; to become literally a Burman to the 
Burmans, that he might at least save some of them. His 
perfect success in this attempt will appear through the 
whole course of the subsequent narrative. Deliberately 
abjuring the use of English, he talked and read Burman 
till his inward life became identified with it; till his intel- 
lectual processes, and his very emotions, poured themselves 
in this new channel with even a freer and fuller current 
than ever they had done, or perhaps could have done, in his 
native tongue ; for there was something of Oriental fervour 
in his nature, to which the coldness and reserve of English 
expression would always have been a restraint. 

To the study of the living language he soon added that of 
the Pali, the language of the sacred books, through which 



THE LANOUAOE. 97 

the religion of Gautama was first introduced into the empire. 
Its structure he found entirely dissimilar to the Burman; it 
being a dialect of the Sanscrit^ with which the latter has no 
afOnity. But so many of its words had been introduced 
into the vernacular, especially as theological terms, that 
some knowledge of it was necessary to accuracy in the com- 
munication [of religious ideas, and indispensable to a trans- 
lator of the Scriptures. He found the number of its words 
in use to be about 4,000. These he first arranged into a 
dictionary, with Burman definitions ; then the corresponding 
Burman words into a second part, with English definitions. 
He afterwards prepared a larger Burman and English dic- 
tionary, which was probably completed in 1817, and was 
printed in 1826. In thus putting into permanent form the 
results of his labours, he aimed to lay a solid basis for the 
future operations of the mission. 

The following letters, which all belong to the third year 
of the mission, present an interesting view of the progress 
of his studies, as well as of the living missionary spirit 
which he carried into his literary labours : — 

TO THE BEY. DB. B0Ll<ES. 

'* Rangoon, January 16, 1816. 

**Deab Brother, — ^Youra of March, 1816, I lately received, and 
read with real aatisfaction. Neither Brother Bice nor any of the 
others that you mention have yet been heard of in these parts. May 
they not be far distant ! Whenever they shall arrive, I hope to be of 
some real service to them in their preparatory studies, and to be able 
to give them, in a short time, information on many x)oints which it 
has cost me months to acquire. I just now begin to see my way 
forward in this language, and hope that two or three years more 
will make it somewhat familiar; but I have met with difficulties that 
I had no idea of before I entered upon the work. For a European or 
American to acquire a living Oriental language, root and branch, and 
make it his own, is quite a different thing from his acquiring a 
cognate language of the West, or any of the dead languages, as they 
are studied in the schools. One circumstance may serve to illustrate 
thia. I once had occasion to devote about two months to the study 

H 



98 THE EAHNEST MAN. 

of the French. I have now been above two years engaged on the 
Burman ; but if I were to choose between a Burman and a French 
book to be examined in, without previous study, I should, without 
the least hesitation, choose the French. When we take up a western 
language, the similarity in the characters, in very many terms, in 
many modes of expression, and in the general structure of sentences, 
its being in fair print (a circumstance we hardly think of), and the 
assistance of grammars, dictionaries, and instructors, render the work 
comparatively easy. But when we take up a language sjwken by a 
people on the other side of the earth, whose very thoughts run in 
channels diverse from ours, and whose modes of expression are conse- 
quently all new and uncouth; when w6 find the letters and words 
all totally destitute of the least resemblance to any language we had 
ever met with, and these words not fairly divided and distinguished, 
as in western writing, by breaks and points, and capitals, but run 
together in one continuous line, a sentence or paragraph seeming to 
the eye but one long word; when, instead of clear characters on 
paper, we find only obscure scratches on dried palm leaves strung 
together and called a book; when we have no dictionary, and no 
interpreter to explain a single word, and must get something of the 
language before we can avail ourselves of the assistance of a native 
teacher, — 

" * Hoc opus, hie labor est.* 

** I had hoped, before I came here, that it would not be my lot to 
have to go on alone, without any guide, in an unexplored path, 
especially as missionaries had been here before. But Mr. Chater had 
left the country, and Mr. Carey was with me but very little before 
he left the mission and the missionary work altogether. 

"I long to write something more interesting and encouraging to 
the friends of the mission; but it must not yet be expected. It 
unavoidably takes several years to acquire such a language, in order 
to converse and write intelligibly on the great truths of the gospel. 
Dr. Carey once told me that after he had been some years in Bengal, 
and thought he was doing very well in conversing and preaching to 
the natives, they (as he was afterwards convinced) knew not what 
he was about. A young missionary who expects to pick up the lan- 
guage in a year or two, will probably find that he has not counted the 
cost. If he should be so fortunate as to find a good interpreter, he 
may be useful by that means. But he will find, especially if he is in 
a new place, where the way is not prepared, and no previous ideas 
communicated, that to qualify hiinself to communicate divine truth 
intelligibly by his own voice or pen, is not the work of a year. How- 
ever, notwithstanding my present incompetency, I am beginning to 



THE LANGUAGE. 99 

translate tlie New Testament, being extremely anxious to get some 
parts of Scripture, at least, into an intelligible shape, if for no other 
purpose than to read, as occasion offers, to the Burmans I meet with. 
* * My paper allows me to add nothing more but to beg your prayers, 
that while I am much occupied in words and phrases, and destitute 
of those gospel privileges you so richly enjoy in the midst of your 
dear church and people, I may not lose the life of religion in my 
soul. — I remain, dear brother, yours very affectionately, 

**A. JUDSON, Jr," 

TO THE REV. DR. STAUGHTON. 

*' I am sometimes a little dispirited when I reflect that for two or 
three years past I have been drilling at A B C, and grammar. But I 
consider again that the gift of tongues is hot granted in these times ; 
that some one must acquire this language by dint of application; 
must translate the Scriptures, and must preach the gospel to the 
I)eople in their own tongue, or how can they be saved ? My views of 
the missionary object are, indeed, different from what they were 
when I was first set on fire by Buchanan's *Star in the East,' six 
years ago. But it does not always happen that a closer acquaintance 
with an object diminishes our attachment and preference. "We some- 
times discover beauties as well as deformities, which were overlooked 
on a supei^cial view ; when some attractions lose their force, others 
more permanent are more fully exerted; and when the glitter in 
which novelty invested the object has jxassed away, more substantial 
excellencies have room to disclose their influence ; and so it has been 
with me, I hope, in regard to the work of missions. — I remain, 
reverend and dear Sir, yours affectionately in the Lord, 

"A. JuDSON, Jr." 

TO THE REV. LUTHER RICE. 

"Rangoon, August 3, 1816. 

**My dear Brother Rice, — I have completed a grammar of the 
Burman language, which I hope will be useful to you ; also a tract, 
which I hope to get printed as soon as Mr. Hough arrives. 

"If any ask what success I meet with among the natives, tell 
them to look at Otaheite, where the missionaries laboured nearly 
twenty years, and not meeting with the slightest success, began to 
be neglected by all the Christian world, and the very name of ptaheite 
began to be a shame to the cause of missions ; and now the blessing 
begins to come. Tell them to look at Bengal also, where Dr. Thomas 



100 THE EARNEST MAN. 

had been labouring seventeen years (that is, from 1783 to 1800), 
before the first convert, Krishna, was baptized. When a few con- 
verts are once made, things move on ; but it requires a much longer 
time than I have been here, to make a first impression on a heathen 
people. If they ask again. What prospect of ultimate success is there ? 
tell them, as much as that there is an almighty and faithful God 
who will perform his promises, and no more. If this does not satisfy 
them, beg them to let me stay and try it, and to let you come, and to 
give us our bread; or, if they are unwilling to risk their bread on 
such a forlorn hope as has nothing but the Word of God to sustain 
it, beg of them, at least, not to prevent others from giving us bread ; 
and, if we live some twenty or thirty years, they may hear from us 
again. 

" This climate is good— better than in any other part of the East. 
But it is a most filthy, wretched place. Missionaries must not calcu- 
late on the least comfort but what they find in one another and their 
work. However, if a ship was lying in the river, ready to convey me 
to any part of the world I should choose, and that, too, with the 
entire approbation of all my Christian friends, I would prefer dying 
to embarking. This is an immense field, and since the Serampore 
missionaries have left it, it is wholly thrown on the hands of the 
American Baptists. If we desert it, the blood of the Burmans will be 
required of us. — ^Yours ever, 

"A. JuDSON, Jr." 

TO THE KEV. DR. BALDWIN. 

"Rangoon, August 5, 1816. 
** Rev. and dear Sir, — It is about seven months since I wrote ta 
America. The first three months of this time I was employed on the 
Burman language in a more interesting manner than I had ever been. 
I began to enter into my studies with such pleasure and spirit, and to 
make such rapid progress, as encouraged me to hope that the time 
was not far distant when I should be able to commence missionary 
operations. I was going foms^ard in a course of most valuable Bur- 
man reading, and, at the same time, had begun to translate one of the 
Gospels, and to write a view of the Christian religion, in Burman, 
which, in imagination, were already finished, and circulating among 
the natives, when all of a sudden, in the midst of the hot season, 
which, in this country, is most severe during the months of March 
and Appl, I was seized with a distressing weakness and pain in my 
eyes and head, which put a stop to all my delightful pursuits, and 
reduced me to a pitiable state indeed. Since that time, excepting at 



THE LAK6UAOE. 101 

some intervals, I have been unable to read or write, or make any 
exertion whatever. Sometimes I have almost given up the hope that ^ 
I should ever be of any more service ; sometimes I have been on the 
point of tiying a short voyage at sea. This last was my intention, 
when I heard of brother Hough's arrival in Bengal, and concluded to 
wait until he should be settled here, when I could leave more con- 
veniently. But, thank» be to God, it is now ten days since I have 
experienced a turn of severe pain, though I still feel great weakness 
in my head, and, indeed, throughout my whole nervous system. I 
begin now to hope that I shall gradually recover, though I fear I 
never shall be as I formerly was. 

*< Buring my illness, when able to do anything, I have employed 
myself in collectiog what knowledge I have hitherto acquired of the 
language, and putting it together in the shape of a granmiar, that it 
might not be wholly lost to others. My tract, also, is at length ready 
for the press, and I send a copy by this conveyance to Philadelphia, 
which may be some gratification to the Board. I would send a copy 
of the grammar also, if I was able, but it is too bulky to be 
transcribed in my present state. 

** I expect it will not be long before I shall be ordered up to Ava. 
The press, also, which has just arrived from Bengal, will not probably 
be allowed to stop long in Rangoon. This will open a wide field, and 
make it necessary to support two stations. I beg, therefore, that the 
Board wiQ endeavour to send out one or two men with brother Rice, 
or as soon after as possible. The sooner they are on the ground, 
learning the language, the sooner they will be fit for service. I have 
never before thought it prudent to write for more men in addition to 
those I knew were already destined to the place. But some favour- 
able prospects lately begin to open, and the more I become acquainted ' 
with the state of things, the less reason I have to fear that the 
^vemment of the country will, at present, oppose the work. 

** We know not the designs of €rod in regard to this country; but 
I cannot but have raised expectations. It is true we may have to 
labour and wait many years before the blessing comes. But we Bee 
what God is doing in other heathen lands, after trying the faith and 
sincerity of his servants some fifteen or twenty years. Look at 
Otaheite, Bengal, Africa. And is Burmah to remain a solitaiy in- 
stance of the inefficacy of prayer, — of the forgetfulness of a merciful 
and faithful God ? Is it nothing that an attempt is begun to be made; 
that, in one instance, the language is considerably acquired ; that a 
tract is ready for publication, which is intelligible and perspicuous, 
and will give the Burmans their ^r^s^ ideas of a Saviour and the way 
of salvation ; that a press and types have now arrived, and a printer 



102 THE EABNEST MAN. 

is on the way; that a grammar is finished, to facilitate the studies of 
others, and a dictionary of the language is in a very forward state ; 
and that the way is now prepared, as soon as health permits, to pro- 
ceed slowly in the translation of the New Testament ? Is it nothing 
<that, just at this time, the monarch of the country has taken a 
violent hate to the priests of his own religion, and is endeavouring, 
with all his power, to extirpate the whole order, at the same time 
professing to be an inquirer after the true religion ? Is all this to be set 
down a mere cipher? It is true that we may desire much more. But 
let us use what we have, and God will give us more. However, men 
and money must be forthcoming. Work cannot be done without 
men, and men cannot work without bread ; nor can we expect the 
^vens to feed them in ordinary cases. I do not say several hundred 
missionaries are needed here. This, though true, would be idle 
talk. My request I think modest. Five men, allowing two or three 
to each of the stations, is the smallest number that will possibly 
answer. 

** I have received one letter only from Dr. Baldwin ; Mrs. Judson 
has also received one. I hope that brother Hough is the bearer of 
others. We expect him by the first opportunity. — With the greatest 
respect, yours, &c., 

**A. JiTDSON, Jr." 



Let no young eandidate for ministerial or missionary work 
plead, after reading these letters, that progress in piety is 
incompatible with devotion to study. .Here is a man, not 
yet twenty-eight years of age, cut off for nearly three years 
from the advantages of Christian society, of public worship, 
and of active exertion in the cause of religion, and during 
this whole time immersed in the study of a pagan language 
and literature. Yet the early glow of. faith, of zeal, of noble 
resolution, has experienced no chill. Is it said that tlie 
studies on which he was engaged were destitute of those 
seductive charms which beguile the young votary of classic 
literature 1 Judson had not found them so. Few, probably, 
have estimated what was involved in this long course of 
preparatory labour. In the Burman literature, with which 
lie was in such constant and immediate contact year after 
year, a wide and curious field of research was opened, pre- 



THE LANGUAGE. 103 

senting peculiar &sciuatioii3 to such a mind. This singular 
phase of the human intellect, — ^the language itself, with its 
novel modes of expressing thought ; these strange concep- 
tions of material and spiritual being; these extravagant, 
grotesque, yet often beautiful creations of Oriental fancy, — 
how could all this fail to lay a strong grasp on the scholar 
and the man of taste ^ That it did so we have ample proof. 
The flowers of Burmese literature would never have so 
rooted themselves in a mind that did not delight in their 
beauty. His memory teemed with its treasures of sacred 
song and legend; and their very spirit was so transfused 
into his own writings, that the most critical Burman scholar 
could not distinguish them from native compositions. 

Now what was the spell by which this was rendered 
harmless, so that his Christian growth suffered no check in 
the process ? Simply this, — a ruling moral purpose, to which 
all else was merely subsidiary; which, selecting every occu- 
pation with reference to its own great ends, drew it within 
the sphere of the spiritual life, and sanctified it to the ser- 
vice of religion. These treasures of Oriental lore might, if 
judiciously displayed, have made a European fame for the 
humble missionary. But so free from all motives of personal 
vanity and ambition were these literary acquisitions, that 
we find no allusion to them even in his letters, except for 
the brief explanation of some point of direct missionary 
interest. Once, it is said, he for a time entertained the idea 
of awakening a livelier missionary spirit at home, by making 
known these interesting productions of Burman mind. But 
perceiving, on reflection, that this would involve a serious 
diversion of his time and thoughts frt>m proper missionary 
work, he deliberately relinquished the plan, and never again 
resumed it. 

We see, then, that the absence of intellectual enthusiasm 
in a Christian minister, and the neglect of all studies but 
those which are strictly religious, are not necessary con- 
ditions of exalted piety. The life of an earnest Christian is 



t 



104 THE EASNEST HAN. 

a sablime unity; not because lie rejects all that belongs to 
the world, but because he assimilates all to the central object 
of his life, — ^the glory of Qod, and the good of man. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

MISSIONABY SPIRIT AMONG AMERICAN BAPTISTS. — ^VICISSITnDES OP 

THE MISSION. 

Early in the month of September, 1815, our lonely mis- 
sionaries were cheered by the first parcel of letters from 
America. For more than two years they had laboured in 
Burmah, uncertain as to the result of their appeal to Ameri- 
can Baptists. Thus far their necessities had been supplied by 
the noble-spirited brethren at Serampore; but pressed as they 
were to the utmost for the support of their own mission, 
this could only be a temporary dependence. Firmly believing, 
however, that God had sent them to Burmah, Mr. and Mrs. 
Judson had given themselves to the field with a devotion as 
entire, and had worked on the same breadth of plan, as if 
sure it was to be their home for life. With the same con- 
stancy of heart they wotdd, no doubt, have maintained the 
post, even if obliged, as they had once anticipated, to labour 
with their own hands for food and clothing. Yet it must 
have been with anxious eyes that they sought in the various 
letters of the precious parcel for the wished-for news ; and 
we cannot wonder at their joyful burst of feeling on finding 
themselves, and the cause dearer to them than life, welcomed 
to the heart of the Baptist denomination. 

The intelligence of their change of views had reached 
America in January, 1813. It was soon evident that self- 
distrust, rather than lack of interest, had hitherto prevented 
the active participation of Baptists in the missionary enter- 
prise. No sooner was heard the voice of one fitted for the 



MISSIONASY SPIRIT AMONG> AMERICAN BAPTISTS. 105 

work, saying, " Here am I, send me ! " than a response, full 
of Christian warmth, came up from all parts of the land. 
Situated as they then were, the detached churches scattered 
over a vast extent of territory, with no organizations which 
could form a medium of communication and of tmited action, 
the movements which followed must be regarded as a true 
index to the spirit of the churches. Its source was, not the 
intelligence which comes from education, but that experi- 
mental Bible piety whiph was then the one glory of the 
Baptist name. 

Immediately on receiving the letters t)f Mr. Judson and 
the Serampore brethren, of September, 1812, the leading 
brethren of Boston and its vicinity, after having first ascer- 
tained that the American Board of Commissioners no longer 
regarded Mr. Judson as their missionary, organized a << Society 
for Propagating the Gospel in India and other Foreign 
Parts," which assumed at once the responsibility of his 
support. They did not, indeed, decide to undertake at 
present an independent mission ; but with a very proper 
deference to the superior knowledge of those who had been 
60 long familiar with the groimd, they waived that question 
till they should hear from England and Serampora They 
committed their missionary, meanwhile, to the Christian sym- 
pathies and the direction of the Serampore brethren, pledging 
themselves for his expenses, and expressing the hope of being 
able to raise, over and above this, a contribution to the 
general mission fund. ''We shall esteem it^" says Dr. Sharp, 
in his letter on the subject to Andrew Fuller, '* an honour 
and a pleasure to render him that pecuniary aid which from 
time to time he may need. Indeed, we expect that our 
exertions will not be limited to the support of our American 
brother; but that we shall be able to forward to Serampore 
a willing tribute for the promotion of the general cause." 
The proposal of a coalition, made in these letters, has often 
been compared with that made by the American Board to 
the London Missionary Society. It will be seen, however, 
that there were some important points of difference. 



r 



106 THE EARNEST MAN. 

The information, received a few weeks later, that Mr. 
Rice also had become a Baptist, gave a fresh stimulus to 
the missionary spirit, and societies were rapidly formed in all 
the principal cities of the Union. It was soon felt that the 
concert of measures necessary to harmonious and efficient 
action, demanded some general organization, in which the 
societies of different sections could be represented. Steps 
had already been taken to secure this object, when Mr. Rice 
arrived from India. He was immediately put at the head 
of the movement, and, in fiirtherance of it, visited various 
parts of the country, organizing societies, and preparing the 
way for a general imion. 

My younger readers can form but a faint conception of the 
glow and fervour of that early day, when the Baptist heart 
first awoke to a personal participation in the conversion of 
the world to Christ. True, we now raise more money for 
the object ; but it is too much as a matter of business, too 
much as we settle up our secular accounts, and make all 
square with the world. Then, it was the spontaneous out- 
burst of a freshly enkindled life. I recall, from my own 
childhood, vivid recollections of the enthusiasm which the 
topic of missions always awakened in the family circle ; of 
the " Mission Box" in the parlour, through whose lid many 
an offering to the cause was dropped by Christian visitors j 
of the jubilee in the house, when a letter arrived from Mrs. 
Judson, or the Missionary Magazine came, with the joyful 
tidings of some new triumph of the gospel in far-off Burmah. 
Nor was this a mere denominational feeling, embracing only 
our own missions ; it was a true catholic love for all, in every 
land and of every name, who were labouring for the evan- 
gelization of the world. 

In May, 1814, a convention of delegates from the various 
missionary societies, and other religious bodies of the Baptist 
denomination, met in Philadelphia, for the purpose, as ex- 
pressed in the preamble to the constitution adopted by the 
body, of " organizing a plan for eliciting, combining, and 



I 



mSSIONABY SPIBIT AMONG AMEBICAK BAPTISTS. 107 

directing the energies of the whole denomination, in one 
sacred effort for sending the glad tidings of salvation to the 
heathen, and to nations destitute of pure gospel light.'* The 
result of their deliberations was the formation of an associa- 
tion, under the name of the "General Missionary Convention 
of the Baptist denomination in the United States of America, 
for Foreign Missions;"* an organization which, by the bless- 
ing of God, has placed itself, within forty years, among the 
most important missionary institutions in Christendom. 

The first action of its Board of Managers, immediately 
after the adjournment of the qonvention, was to appoint 
Mr. and Mrs. Judson, and Mr. E,ioe, their missionaries to 
the Burman empire. 

Such was the intelligence wnich came, like the light of 
sunrise, to gladden the lonely missionary cottage in the 
suburbs of Eangoon. ''These accounts from my dear native 
land," writes Mr. Judson, "were so interesting as to banish 
from my mind all thoughts of study. This general move- 
ment among the Baptist churches in America is particularly 
encouraging, as it affords an additional indication of God's 
merciful designs in favour of the poor heathen. It unites 
with all the Bible societies in Europe and America, during 
the last twenty years, in furnishing abundant reason to hope 
that the dreadful darkness which has so long enveloped the 
earth, is about to flee away before the rising sun. Do not 
the successes which have crowned some missionary exertions 
seem like the dawn of morning in the east? Oh, that this 
region of Egyptian darkness may ere long participate in the 
vivifying beams of light ! 

'*None but one who has had the experience can tell what 
feelings comfort the heart of a solitary missionary, when, 
though all the scenes around him present no friend, he re- 
members, and has proof, that there are spots on this wide 



* The constitution was subsequently modified so as to embrace the 
Home field. • 



r 



108 THE EARNEST MAN. 

eartli, where Cliristian brethren feel that his cause is their 
own, and pray to the same God and Saviour for his wel&re 
and success. Thanks be to God, not only for 'rivers of 
endless joy above,' but for *rills of comfort here below.'" 

The year 1816 was marked by two events of great im- 
portance in the progress, of the mission,— viz., the arrival of 
a PRINTING PRESS (a gift from Serampore), and the appoint- 
ment, by the Board of Managers, of a missionary printer. 
That mighty engine, which, in the days of the Reformation, 
was the chief instrument in "shaking the powers of dark- 
ness," and humbling "the fiery rage of the old red dragon," 
was now to be brought to bear upon the venerable supersti- 
tions of Buddhism. It was a bright day in the annals of 
Burmah, — ^a day rich with the promise of permanence to the 
gospel institutions which should be planted in her soil, — a 
day which whispered of a Bible for her peopla Mr. Judson 
deeply felt its importance. The following letters indicate 
the widening plans and hopes, the fresh courage and activity, 
inspired by this event : — 

FROM MESSRS. JUDSON AND HOUQ? TO THE GORRESPONDINa 
SECRETARY, REV. DR. STAUGHTON. 

"Rangoon, November 7, 1816. 

"Rev. and dear Snt, — It is with peculiar satisfaction that we 
are, at length, able to address a letter to the Board, in our joint 
capacity. We had a jo3rful meeting in this place on the 15th ult. Mr. 
Hough has settled in one part of the mission house ; and we are now 
united both as a church of Christ and as a mission society. Our 
regulations on the latter point we here submit to the Board. It will 
be evident at first sight, that these regulations have a prospective 
view, and are framed somewhat differently from what they would 
have been, had we not expeci^ that our society would soon be en- 
larged. But we hope that the time is not far distant when they will 
receive the signature of brother Rice also. Indeed, we hope for more 
than this ; we hope that one or two others will be found to accom- 
pany Mr. Rice. 

" It is true that one of us remained al)out three years in this place 
without uttering any Macedonian cries. But we apprehend that the 



VICISSITUDES OF THE MISSION. 109 

time is now come when it is consistent with the strictest prudence to 
lift up our voice and say, Come over the ocean and help us. By a 
residence of three years in this country, many doubts, which at first 
occurred, are removed ; and many points concerning the practicability 
of a mission, and the prospect of success, are ascertained. We cannot 
now enter much into detail ; but we desire to say, that we consider 
the mission established in this land. We unite in opinion that a 
wide door is set open for the introduction of the religion of Jesus into 
this great empire. We have at present no governmental interdict to 
encounter, and no greater obstacles than such as oppose the progress 
of missionaries in every heathen land. It appears to us (and may it 
so appear to our fathers and b^thren ! ) that Grod, in removing the 
English missions from this place, and substituting in their stead an 
American mission, is emphatically calling on the American churches 
to compassionate the poor Burmans, and to send their silver, and 
their gold, and their young men, to this eastern part of the world, to 
the help of the Lord against the mighty. 

•* It is with great pleasure that we announce the valuable present 
of a press and Burman types, made to us by the Serampore brethren. 
We are now closing in a room for a temporary printing office, and 
hope very soon to issue a gospel tract, which has been in readiness 
some time, and which is intended to give the heathen around us some 
idea of the way of salvation through the Lord Jesus. But we cannot 
move one step in the way of printing without money. Though 
favoured with the press, in the ^rst instance, gratis, we have already 
expended, in paper, freight, and sundries, about four hundred rupees. 
We therefore beg an immediate appropriation, not only to liquidate 
the expenses already incurred, but to enable us to proceed in this all- 
important part of our work. The accounts of the mission press we 
propose to keep distinct ; and they shall be submitted, together with 
the accounts of the mission. 

" We know not how long the press will be permitted to remain in 
Kangoon ; we do not, however, deprecate its removal to Ava. Such 
a measure would doubtless tend to the furtl^erance of the cause, and 
to the introduction of religion into the very heart of the empire, 
where Satan's seat is. But in this case, more men and more money 
would be imperatively demanded ; and we trust that the patronage of 
the Board will not fail us in these necessary points. We desire 
humbly to repeat to the Board what the first missionaries from the 
Baptist society in England said to their friends, when on the point of 
embarkation in the great work which seems destined to illumine 
Western India with the light of the gospeL *We are,' said they, 
* like men going down into a well ; you stand at the top and hold the 



t 



110 THE EARNEST MAN. 

ropes. Do not let us fall.' Hold us up, brethren and fathers, and if 
health and life be spared to us, we hope, through the grace of Grod, 
to see Eastern India also beginning to participate in the same glorious 
light. Many years may intervene, in the latter as well as in the 
former case; many difficulties and disappointments may try your 
faith and ours. ' But let patience have her perfect work ; let us not 
be weary of well-doing, for in due time we shall reap, if we faint 
not, — Your servants in the Lord Jesus, 

**A. JuDSON, Jr., 
"George H. Hough." 



ARTICLES OP AGREEMENT. 

'*In order more eiSectually, under the blessing of our Lord and 
Master, to accomplish the important work for which we have come 
into this heathen land, we^ the undersigned, form a union on the 
following principles, namely : — 

"1. We give ourselves to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to one 
another by the will of God. 

** 2. We agree to be kindly affectioned one towards another with 
brotherly love, in honour preferring one another; feeling that we 
have one Master, even Christ, 'and that all we are brethren. 

"3. We agree in the opinion that our sole object on earth is to 
introduce the religion of Jesus Chriet into the empire of Burmah; 
and that the means by which we hope to effect this are, translating, 
printing, and distributing the Holy Scriptures, preaching the gospel, 
circulating religious tracts, and promoting the instruction of native 
children. 

**4. We therefore agree to engage in no secular business for the 
purpose of individual emolument ; and not at all, unless in the opinion 
of the brethren the great object of the mission can be best promoted 
thereby. 

"6. We agree to relinquish all private right to remittances from 
America, avails of labour, and compensation for service ; in a word, 
to place all money and property, firom whatever quarter accruing, in 
the mission fund, provided that nothing in this article be construed 
to affect our private right to inheritances or personal favours, not 
made in compensation of service. 

**6. We agree that all the members of the mission family have 
claims on the mission fund for equal support, in similar circumstances ; 
the claims of widows and orphans not to be in the least affected by 
the death of the head of their family. But it is to be understood. 



VICISSITUDES OF THE MISSION. Ill 

that no one shall have a right to adopt a child into the mission family, 
so as to entitle it to the claims secured in this arfcicle, but by consent 
of the brethren. 

"7. We agree to educate our children with a jwirticular reference 
to the object of the mission; and if any expense be necessary or 
expedient for this purpose, it shall be defrayed from the mission 
fund. 

"8. All appropriations from the mission fund shall be made by a 
majority of the missionary brethren united in this compact ; subject, 
however, to the inspection of our patrons, the Board. 

"A. JuDSON, Jr., 
"George H. Hough." 

TO THE REV. DB. BALDWIN. 

"Rangoon, February 10, 1817. 

"Rev. and dear Sir, — Have just heard that a person whom we 
have some time calculated on as a letter-carrier to Bengal, is unex- 
pectedly going off in the course of an hour. Have, therefore, time 
only to accompany the enclosed tracts with a line or two. 

"We have just begun to circulate these publications, and are 
praying that they may produce some inquiry among the natives. 
And here comes a man, this moment, to talk about religion. What 
shall I do? I will give him a tract to keep him occupied a few 
moments while I finish this. * Here, my friend, sit down, and read 
something that will carry you to heaven, if you believe and receive 
the glorious Saviour therein exhibited.' 

"We are just entering on a small edition of Matthew, the transla- 
tion of which I lately commenced. But we are in great want of men 
and money. Our hands are full from morning till night. I cannot, 
for my life, translate as fast as brother Hough will print. He has to 
do all the hard work in the printing office without a single assistant, 
and cannot, therefore, apply himself to the study of the language as 
is desirable. As for me, I have not an hour to converse with the 
natives, or go out and make proclamation of the glorious gospeL In 
regard to money, we have drawn more from Bengal than has been 
remitted from America ; so that now, if not for their truly brotherly 
kindness in honouring our bills on credit, we should actually starve. 
Moreover, an edition of 6,000 of the New Testament will cost us nearly 
6,000 dollars. And what are 6,000 among a population of 17,000,000, 
6,000,000 of whom can read? that aU the members of the Baptist 
convention could live in Rangoon one month ! Will the Christian, 



I 



112 THE EABNEST MAK. 

world ever awake ? Will means ever be used adequate to the neces- 
sities of the heathen world ? Lord, send help I Our waiting eyes 
are unto thee ! — Your brother in the Lord, 

"A. JuDSON, Jr." 

Under date of August, 1817, Mrs. Judson mentions in a 
letter to a friend that the edition of Matthew spoken of in. 
the preceding letters was now printed, and together with the 
tract and catechism, was in circulation. She adds, "They 
are well understood by those who read them. Many have 
called at the mission house to inquire more particularly 
about the new religion" 

The foundation being thus laid, it was now deemed proper 
to commence the proclamation of the gospel in a more public 
manner. But there were as yet no converts to fonp a con- 
necting link between the foreign teachers and the people, 
and to aid them in their first attempts to convey divine 
truth to the native mind. In Chittagong, however, a de- 
pendency of Bengal, but inhabited chiefly by Arracanese 
speaking the Burman language, it was supposed a few per- 
sons were still to be found who had been converted and 
baptized by an English missionary some years before. Mr. 
Judson, accordingly, determined to proceed thither in quest 
of these native Christians, some of whom he hoped would 
be induced to return with him. 

On the 25th of December, 1817, he embarked at E^ngoon 
in a vessel bound for Chittagong, which was to return with 
very little delay, the whole voyage not being expected to 
occupy more than three months. But he was destined to a 
sad disappointment. After working for a whole month, 
along the coast, without getting near the destined port, the 
captain and supercargo concluded to change the ship's course 
and sail for Madras. " It was with the most bitter feelings," 
writes Mr. Judson, "that I witnessed the entire failure of 
my undertaking, and saw the summits of the mountains of 
Arracan, the last indexes of my country, sinking in the 
horizon, and the ship stretching away to a distant part pf 



VICISSITUDES OF THE MISSION. 113 

India wbich I had no wish to visit, and where I had no 
object to obtain." They had a quick passage across the Bay 
of Bengal; but the contrary winds and currents encountered 
on the Coromandel coast, detained them two months longer 
at sea, during which time they were reduced to the greatest 
extremity for want of provisions and water. A little mouldy, 
broken rice, picked up from native vessels, was their only 
nourishment. Exposure and privation brought on a return 
of the nervous disorder in the head and eyes, by which 
Mr. Judson had been so nearly prostrated two years before; 
and this was followed by a slow fever, which had nearly put 
a final termination to his sufferings. When at length they 
made the port of Mausiilip^tam, his only wish was for a 
place on shore where he might lie down and die. In this 
miserable condition he was found by some kind-hearted 
English officers residing at the place, one of whom took him 
to his own house, suppUed his wardrobe, procured a nurse to 
attend him, and in every way fulfilled, worthily, the part of 
the good Samaritan to the friendless stranger. In a few 
days his health was sufficiently restored to allow him to 
travel ; and after ascertaining that the ship would not leave 
her present port under several months, and that there was 
no hope of a conveyance to Madras by sea that season, he 
hired a palanquin and bearers, and performed the journey of 
300 miles by land. Arrived at Madras, he found no vessel 
bound for Rangoon, nor any prospect of one for an indefinite 
time to come. Here he was detained from the 8th of April 
to the 20th of July, in a state of extreme anxiety, hearing 
nothing from home, and unable to convey thither any intelli- 
gence respecting himself. On the day last mentioned he 
embarked in an English vessel for Bangoon, and on the 2nd 
of August arrived at the mouth of Bangoon Biver, after an 
absence of more than seven months. 

While he had thus been detained on a distant shore, the 
in&nt mission was passiug through fearful trials; and about 
a fortnight before he left Madras, it had seemed on the very 

I 



f 



114 THE EARNEST MAN. 

brink of destructioii. A growing manifestation of ill-will 
in the under-officers of government, the feai-fiil ravages of 
cholera in the city, the protracted absence of Mr. Judson, 
which left scarcely a doubt of bis having perished at sea, and 
finally the prospect of war with England, had led Mr. Hough 
to determine on leaving BurmaL Mrs. Judson could not 
admit the thought of such a step before hearing from her 
husband. But in the early part of July, Mr. Hough having 
concluded to take passage in the last remaining English ship, 
now about to take its departure for Bengal, she was pre- 
vailed on to make preparations for the voyage. The prospect 
of being left alone in this heathen land, and, in the event of 
a war, of being cut off from all possibility of reunion with 
her husband, were he yet alive, seemed to leave her no 
alternative. Yet it was with a heavy, misgiving heart, that 
she yielded to the necessity. After all, he might return ; 
and what would be his feelings on finding his home desolate, 
and the light of the mission utterly extinguished 1 " Some- 
times," thus she writes at this dark moment, " I feel inclined 
to remain here alone and hazard the consequences ; I should 
certainly conclude on this step if any probability existed of 
Mr. Judson's return. The mission has never appeared in so 
low a state as at the present time. It seems now entirely 
destroyed, as we all expect to embark for Bengal in a day or 
two. Alas ! alas ! how changed our prospects since Mr. Jud- 
son left us." 

On the 5th of July they all went on board. The vessel 
was several days getting down the river, and at the moment 
of putting out to sea was discovered to be in so dangerous a 
condition, from being improperly loaded, as to make a still 
further detention necessary. Mrs. Judson, whose reluctance 
to the measure had increased with every hour, could now no 
longer resist the promptings of her heart. She resolved at 
once to relinquish the voyage, and return to Rangoon. . The 
captain, at her request, sent up a boat with her immediately, 
promising to forward her baggage the next day. Once more 



VICISSITUDES OP THE MISSION. 115 

in the lonely mission house, with only Bnrmans around her, 
and no companion but a little Portuguese orphan girl whom 
she had adopted, she now regained her tranquillity of mind. 
It was the calmness of a great soul, which could only be at 
peace with itself when acting in obedience to the highest 
principles of its nature. It was reasonable, it was prudent, 
to care for her own safety by leaving Burmah. But to her 
heroic and disinterested spirit, — ^heroic because disinterested, 
— ^it seemed like a weak and selfish desertion of the post of 
duty. Here, then, she resolved to abide till the dark cloud 
should pass away, or it should become certain that the light 
of her own life and of the mission had sunk to rise no more. 

On the 16th of July, she learned by the arrival from 
Mausiilip^tam of the vessel in which Mr. Judson had sailed 
from Bangoon, that, in the latter part of March, he was still 
living. On the 2nd of August she records the joyful tidings, 
which had that moment reached her, that he had arrived at 
the mouth of the river. 

About six weeks after Mr. Judson's return, the mission 
was reinforced by the arrival of Messrs. Colman and Whee- 
lock,* with their wives, from America. This accession to 
their number was welcomed with the most lively joy by 
Mr. and Mrs. Judson ; the more so as occurring at a time 
when their outward circumstances were far from promising, 
and when the mission had been enfeebled by the withdrawal 
of Mr. Hough, who had taken most of the printing apparatus 
with him to Calcutta. 

* The writer may be permitted to record her own recollection of these 
interesting youths, too early snatched from the scene of their labours. 
They received their theological education in a private theological school, 
under the care of the writer's father, the Rev. Jeremiah Chaplin, then of 
Banvers, Mass. This, it is believed, was the first Baptist theological 
school in the country, and without doubt gave an important impulse to 
the cause of ministerial education in our denomination. Colman and 
"Wheelock I remember as inmates oi our family, endeared to all who 
knew them by their piety and amiable dispositions. From their strong 
attachment to each other, seldom being seen apart, they were familiarly 
known as " David and Jonathan.*' 



( 



116 THE EARNEST MAN. 

Mr. Judson tlms speaks of their situation in a letter of 
October 9, 1818, to the corresponding secretary : — 

"The examination which brother Hough sustained during my ab- 
sence, and the persecution of the Roman CathoUc padres, have made 
us feel more deeply than ever the precarious situation of this mission, 
and the necessity of proceeding with the utmost caution. It was 
only through the favour of the viceroy that the padres were allowed 
to remain here, when they arrived from Ava imder sentence of 
banishment. And it is only through his mediation, and the influence 
of large presents made to the king, that the order of banishment is 
reversed, if indeed it be reversed — ^a report not yet confirmed. One 
malicious intimation to the king would occasion our banishment ; and 
banishment, as the Burmans tell us, is no small thing, being attended 
with confiscation of all property, and such various abuses as woidd 
make us deem ourselves happy to escape with our lives. 

"Such a situation may appear somewhat alarming to a person 
accustomed to the liberty and safety of a free government. But let 
us remember that it has been the lot of the greater part of mankind 
to live under a despotic government, devoid of all security for life or 
property a single moment. Let us remember that the Son of Grod 
chose to become incarnate under the most unprincipled and cruel 
despot that ever reigned. And shall any disciple of Christ refuse to 
do a Uttle service for Ms Saviour, under a government where his 
Saviour would not have refused to live and die for his soid ? Grod 
forbid. Yet faith is sometimes weak — flesh and blood sometimes 
repine. for grace to strengthen faith, to animate hope, to elevate 
affection, to embolden the soul, to enable us to look danger and death 
in the face ; still more to behold, without repining, those most dear 
to us sufiering fears and jwdns which we would gladly have redoubled 
on ourselves, if it would exonerate them ! 

"We feel encouraged by the thought that many of the dear children 
of God remember us at the mercy-seat. To your prayers I desire 
once more to commend myself, — ^the weakest, the most unqualified, 
the most unworthy, and the most unsuccessful of all missionaries." 



THE ZAYAT. 117 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE ZAYAT. 

Lsr every Burmaii village through which he passes, the 
traveller notices a building, distinguished jfrom the ordinary- 
dwellings of the inhabitants by its superior size and style of 
building. At any time past the middle of the forenoon, he 
observes in its broad verandahs, under the shadow of the 
projecting roof, groups of men lounging upon mats, engaged 
in social chat, or listlessly reposing as they chew their fe,- 
vourite betel-leaf and lime. This is the zayat, or place of 
public resort, teither for pleasure or for the transaction of 
business.* The Burman rises with the first dawn, and labours 
at his daily occupation till about ten o'clock. Unlike the 
Hindoo, whose entire morning is given to the sacred ablu- 
tions, anointings, and prayers of his religion, t this Anglo- 
Saxon oriental, if we may so call him, contents himself, on 
ordinary days, with such brief devotions as are consistent 
with the hurry of business, — a hasty prayer before the house- 
hold Gautama, or a moment's pause with bowed head and 
folded hands at the pagoda, as he passes by it to his labour. 
By ten or eleven o'clock work is over for the day, and the 
men come flocking to the zayat, where they remain till the 
cool of evening, when 'they disperse to their respective 
homes. It will be seen that the zayat is not properly a 
place for religious worship ; though the Buddhist preacher 



* It is also a sort of inn, where travellers may lodge without charge, 
providing, however, their own food and bedding. There is an inclosed 
room for this purpose. 

t I am informed by a friend who has lately visited India, £ev. Dr. 
Granger, of Providence, R. I., that he seldom found the bazaars in 
Calcutta open before noon ; while the banks of the sacred Ganges were 
all the morning thronged by devotees, diligently performing their re- 
ligious rites. 



I 



118 THE EARNEST MAN. 

often appoints a religious meeting in these convenient places 
of resort, where he can be sure of an audience to admire his 
eloquent recitation of the acts and sufferings of Gautama.* 
In large towns there are many zayats, so distributed as to 
accommodate the entire population. Some of them are elegant 
specimens of Burman architecture, — the graduated roofe and 
lofty interiors being profusely carved and gilded, and the 
flooring formed of the finest stucco. A number of zayats is 
commonly found around each pagoda, for the accommodation 
of worshippers, — ^the temple itself being a solid structure, 
affording no shelter from the sun and weather. In these 
some of the more pious occasionally remain through an 
entire day or night, repeating many times the routine of 
religious ceremonies. Mr. Malcom says he has often seen 
them reclining on mats, and reading from their palm-leaf 
books; or returning in the morning, after a night's so- 
journ, their light bedding suspended from a pole across the 
shoulder. 

An evening at one of these zayats, described by Mr. Jud- 
son, ftimishes an interesting and pleasing picture of a Bur- 
man religious assembly listening to one of the amateur lay 
preachers mentioned above : — 

"April 6tli. This evening I went for the second time to hear a 
popular Burman preacher. On our arrival we found a zayat, in the 
precincts of one of the most celebrated pagodas, lighted up, and the 
floor spread with mats. In the centre was a frame, raised about 
eighteen inches from the ground, where the preacher, on his arrival, 
seated himself. He appeared to be about forty-five years old, of 
very pleasant countenance and harmonious speech. He was once a 
priest, but is now a layman. The people, as they came in, seated 



* These preachers are not generally priests, who seldom deign to leave 
their luxurious retirement for such a purpose, but laymen, whose call to 
preach consists in a talent for popular oratory, which finds in these exer- 
cises a favourable chance for display. Some of them, as I am told by the 
friend just referred to, exhibit no little histrionic power; and a whole 
assembly has been seen bathed in tears, under the recital of some affect- 
ing passage in the life of Grautama. 



THE ZATAT. 119 

themselves on the mats, the men on one side of the house, and the 
women on the other. It was an undistinguished day, and the con- 
gregation was small, not more than 100. When we entered, some 
said: * There come some wild foreigners.* But when we sat down 
properly, and took off our shoes, they began to say, * No, they are not 
wild; they are civiUzed.' Some recognized me, and said to one 
another, * It is the English, teacher,* — a name by which I am com- 
monly known. The preacher soon took notice of us, entered into 
some conversation, invited us to visit him, and so on ; but on learning 
that I was a missionaiy, or, in their idiom, a religion-making teacher, 
his countenance fell, and he said no more. The people being now 
convened, one appointed for the purpose called three times for silence 
and attention. Each one then took the flowers and leaves which had 
been previously distributed, and, placing them between his lingers, 
raised them to his head, and in that respectful posture remained 
motionless until the service was closed. This ceremony we of course 
declined. Whei\ all things were properly adjusted, the preacher 
closed his eyes, and commenced the exercise, which consisted in 
repeating a portion from their sacred writings. His subject was the 
conversation of the two prime disciples of Gautama, and their subse- 
quent promotion and glory. His oratory I found to be entirely 
different from all that we call oratory. At first he seems dull and 
monotonous ; but presently his soft mellifluent tones win their way 
into the heart, and lull the soul into that state of calmness and 
serenity which to a Burman mind somewhat resembles the boasted 
perfection of their saints of old. His discourse continued about half 
an hour; and, at the close, the whole assembly burst out into a short 
prayer, after which all rose and retired. This man exhibits twice 
every evening in different places. Indeed, he is the only popular lay 
preacher in the place. As for the priests, they preach on special 
occasions only, when they are drawn from their seclusion and inac- 
tivity by the solicitations of their adherents.** 

Of this characteristic feature of Burman life Mr. Judson 
availed himself for the open proclamation of the gospel, 
which he now felt called to attempt. He resolved to build, 
on some frequented road, a zayat, where the wayfarer, 
pausing for rest or for a moment's curious chat with the white 
foreigner, might be induced to listen to the words of life; 
and where, on the Sabbath, the sacred songs and prayers of 
Christian worship should come in direct contrast with the 



4 



120 THE EARNEST MAN. 

mechanical, soxilless forms of Buddhism.* By thus adapting 
himself, externally, to the ideas and customs of the people, 
. he might hope both to win their attention more readily, and 
to escape the special notice of the government ; at least till 
the good seed should have time to strike root a little in the 
soil. 

It was not one of those elegant buildings described above 
which he proposed to erect. There was nothing in the 
thatched roof, plain rafters, and floor of split bamboo, of 
this missionary zayat, to impress the beholder with the wealth 
and dignity of its occupants. Mr. Judson writes respecting 
it:— 

'*The building is now going up, with such scanty materials and 
means as we can afford, or rather, as we think you can afford. The 
whole concern will cost about 200 dollars. And should this zayat 
prove to be a Christian meeting-house, the first erected in this land of 
atheists for the worship of €rod — a house where Burmans, who now 
deny the very existence of Deity, shall assemble to adore the Majesty 
of heaven, and to sing with hearts of devotion the praises of the in- 
carnate Saviour But the thought seems too great to be realised. 

Can this darkness be removed ? Can these dry bones live ? On thee, 
Jesus, all our hopes depend. In thee all power is vested, even power 
to make sinful creatures instrumental in enlightening the heathen ! 

''You want to hear of some poor benighted Burman brought to 
taste that the Lord is gracious ; but O, not more than I want to speak 
of it. 1 hope, I do hope, my dear sir, that we shall both one day be 
gratified." 

A few months later, Mrs. Judson thus describes the daily 
scene at the zayat : — 

" The zayat is situated thirty or forty rods from the mission house, 
and in dimensions is twenty-seven by eighteen feet. It is raised four 
feet from the ground, and is divided into three parts. The first divi- 
sion is laid entirely open to the road, without doors, windows, or a 
partition in the &ont side, and takes up a third part of the whole 

* Buddhism has its sacred days, four in each month, or one at each 
change of the moon ; thus answering, in time, very nearly to the Christian 
Sabbath. 



THE ZATAT. 121 

building. It is made of bamboo and thatch, and is the place where 
Mr. Judson sits all the day long, and says to the passers by, ' Ho I 
every one that thirsteth,' &c. The next and middle division is a 
large airy room, with four doors and four windows, opening in oppo- 
site directions ; made entirely of boards, and is whitewashed to dis- 
tinguish it from the other zayats around us. 

** In this room we have public worship in Burman on the Sabbath ; 
and in the middle of which I am now situated at my writing-table, 
while six of the male scholars are at one end, each with his torch and 
blackboard, over which he is industriously bending, and emitting the 
curious sounds of the language. The third and last division is only 
an entry way, which opens into the garden leading to the mission 
house. 

'*In this apartment all the women are seated, with their lights 
and blackboards, much in the same position and employment as the 
men. The blackboard, on which all the Burmans learn to read and 
write, answers the same purpose as our slates. They are about a 
yard in length, made black with charcoal and the juice of a leaf; 
and letters are clearly imprinted with a species of white stone, a 
little similar to our slate pencils." 

On the 4th April, 1819, Mr. Judson records "a new and 
important era in the mission," — ^the opening of the zayat. So 
it proved. From that point of time the power of the living 
preacher, God's chosen instrumentality for saving souls, was 
felt in Burmah. Five years had been spent in patient pre- 
paratory laboui*; and much religious instruction had been 
communicated in private. But during all this time, not a 
single instance of conversion had taken place. Within one 
month after the opening of the zayat, the first fruits of 
Christ's church in Burmah were gathered in, by the conver- 
sion of Moung Nau; and from that day, the leaven of 
Christianity worked its way, with little, indeed, of outward 
show, but with ever-increasing power, into the interior life 
of the nation. 

A few pages from Mr. Judson's journal, extending from 
the opening of the zayat to the baptism of the first convert, 
give us a vivid picture of the man, and of his labours in 
this new sphere of activity. 



122 THE EARNEST MAN. 

"To-day, the building of the zayat being sufficiently advanced for 
the purpose, I called together a few people that live around us, and 
commenced public worship in the Burman language. I say com- 
menced, for, though I have frequently read and discoursed to the 
natives, I have never before conducted a course of exercises which 
deserved the name of public worship, according to the usual accepta- 
tion of that phrase among Christians ; and though I began to preach 
the gospel as soon as I could s])eak intelligibly, I have thought it 
hardly becoming to apply the term preachincf^ since it has acquired an 
appropriate meaning in modem use, to my imperfect, desultory exhor- 
tations and conversations. But I hope, though with fear and trembling, 
that I have now commenced a course of public worship and regular 
preaching. This would have taken place a year ago, had I returned 
to Bangoon as I expected ; and still earlier, had I not been under a 
government where I thought it prudent to gain a considerable 
acquaintance with the language before commencing public operations, 
lest I should be unable properly to vindicate my conduct when called 
to a judicial account. 

"The congregation, to-day, consisted of fifteen persons only, 
besides children. Much disorder and inattention prevailed, most of 
them not having been accustomed to attend Burman worship. May 
the Lord grant his blessing on attempts made in great weakness, 
and under great disadvantages, and all the glory will be his ! . . . 

"April 28. Nothing interesting through the day. At night, 
encountered a bitter opposer; he had visited Bengal, and some foe 
to missions had poisoned his mind; he manifested a most virulent 
spirit. I felt that he would most gladly be foremost in destroying us. 
But, through divine grace, I was enabled to treat him with meekness 
and gentleness, and he finally left me politely. He appeared to be 
rich, and had several followers. In the evening there were some 
hopeful appearances in Mrs. Judson's female meeting — a meeting 
which she has recommenced since public worship has been set up in 
the zayat. 

"April 29. A precious case has just occurred. A young man of 
twenty-four, by name Moung Koo, happened to stroll in last Sunday, 
and was present at worship. He appeared to be rather wild and 
noisy, though his manners were respectful. He took *& tract and 
went away. This morning he made his appearance again, and has 
been with me about two hours. I have been enabled, through divine 
assistance, to give him a great deal of truth, and especially to expa- 
tiate with some feeling on the love and sufferings of the Saviour. The 
truth seems to have taken hold of his mind. And though he is quick 
and sensible, and has some savage fire- in his eye, he is very docile. 



THE ZAYAT. 123 

and ready to drink in the truth without the numberless cavils and 
objections which are so common among the Burmans. He engaged 
to come next Sunday, promised to pray constantly, and gave me his 
name that I might pray for him, that he might be a disciple of Christ, 
and be delivered from helL I feel considerable attachment to this 
young man, and my heart goes forth to the mercy seat in behalf of 
his precious souL 

* * April 30. I was agreeably surprised in the morning to see the young 
man of yesterday come again so soon. He stayed all the forenoon, 
and seemed desirous of hearing as much as possible about religion. 
Several others came and went. A very busy day; hardly time to 
prepare these minutes to be forwarded by a vessel which leaves this 
IX)rt for Bengal early to-morrow morning. 

"May 1, 1819. Burman day of worship; of course many visitors; 
among the rest, Moung Nau, a man who was with me several hours 
yesterday; but, from his silence and reserve, excited little attention 
or hope. To-day, however, I begin to think better of him. Moung 
Koo came again at night, and appeared pretty well. These two men, 
with the two persons from Kambet, of the 27th, I call the fruits 
of the week. But let us see who of them will remember the day of 
worship. 

"May 2, Lord's day. About three o'clock the quiet and modest 
Moung Nau came in and took his usual place. For the others we 
looked in vain. About thirty present at worship. Very few paid 
much attention, or probably received any benefit. . 

"May 3. Among the visitors of to-day was a respectable man, 
formerly an officer, now a merchant, resident at Little Bridge, a vil- 
lage contiguous to Kambet. After long and various conversation, in 
which he paid close and respectful attention, he said he was a person 
not a little versed in Burman literature, but that he now saw he had 
erred in all ; he regretted that he had lived two years in the neigh- 
bourhood without knowing me ; to-day was an auspicious day ; he 
wished to become my disciple, would read my writings with atten- 
tion, and come as often as possible. 

"May 5. Moung Nau has been with me several hours. I begin to 
think that the grace of Crod has reached his heart. He expresses 
sentiments of repentance for his sins, and faith in the Saviour. The 
substance of his profession is, that from the darknesses, and unclean- 
nesses, and sins of his whole life, he has found no other Saviour but 
Jesus Christ ; nowhere else can he look for salvation ; and therefore 
he proposes to adhere to Christ, and worship him all his life long. 

"It seems almost too much to believe that God has begun to mani- 
fest his grace to the Burmans ; but this day I could not resist the 



( 



124 THE EARNEST MAN. 

delightful conviction that this is really the case. Praise and globy 

BE TO HIS NAME FOB EYERMOBE. Amen. 

** May 6. Moung Nau was again with me a great part of the day. 
He appears to be slowly growmg in reUgious knowledge, and mani- 
fests a teachable, humble spirit, ready to believe all that Christ has 
said, and obey all that he has commanded. He is thirty-five years 
old ; no family, middling abilities, quite poor, obliged to work for his 
living; and therefore his coming, day after day, to hear the truth, 
affords stronger evidence that it has taken hold of his mind. May 
the Lord graciously lead his dark mind into all the truth, and cause 
him to cleave inviolably to the blessed Saviour ! 

*'May 8. Burman day of worship. Thronged with visitors 
through the day. Had more or less company, without intermission, 
for about eight hours. Several heard much of the gospel, and 
engaged to come a^in. Moung Nau was with me a great part of the 
day, and assisted me much in explaining things to new comers. 
Towards night a man came in, by name Moung Shwaa Oo, whom I 
think it time to mention particularly, as he has visited me several 
times ; and though, like Moung Nau, apparently backward at first, 
he appears to be really thoughtful. He is a yoimg man of twenty- 
seven, of very pleasant exterior, and evidently in good circumstances. 
Poor Moung Koo, who appeared so forward at first, — alas ! too 
forward, — ^has quite discontinued his visits. No news yet from the 
villagers of Kambet and Little Bridge. 

"May 9, Lorc^s day. Moung Shwaa Oo came in the morning, and 
stayed through the whole day. Only two or three of all I conversed 
with yesterday, came again. Had, however, an assembly of thirty. 
After worship, some warm disputation. 1 begin to feel that the 3ur- 
mans cannot stand before the truth. In the course of the conversation 
Moung Nau declared himself a disciple of Christ, in presence of a con- 
siderable nimiber ; and even Moung Shwaa Oo appeared to incline the 
same way. 

"May 10. Early in the morning, Moung Nau came to take leave, 
being obliged to go to a distance after timber, his usual occupation. 
I took him alone and prayed with him, and gave him a written prayer 
to help him in his private devotion. He received my instructions 
with great attention and solemnity ; said he felt that he was a disci- 
ple of Christ ; hoped that he should be kept from falling ; desired the 
prayers of us all ; expressed a wish that, if he held out some time 
after his return, we would allow him to profess Christ in baptism: 
and so he departed. The Lord Jesus go with him and bless him ! He 
is poor. I felt a great desire to give him something, but thought it 
safer to put no temptation in his way. If, on his return, he still 



THE ZAYAT. 125 

cleaves to Christ, his profession will be more satisfactory than it 
would be if he had any expectations from us. 

"May 11. Had more or less company, from morning till night; 
among the rest, Moung Shwaa Oo, and two or three others, who 
appear to be pretty well satisfied that the Buddhist religion has no 
foundation. Conversation was very animated, and somewhat en- 
couraging; but I wanted to see more seriousness, and more anxiety to 
be saved from sin. 

'* Heard much to-day of the danger of introducing a new religion. 
All agreed in opinion that the king would cut off all who embraced 
it, being a king who could not bear that his subjects should differ in 
sentiment from himself ; and who has for a long time persecuted the 
friends of the established religion of the empire, because they would 
not sanction all his innovations. Those who seemed most favourably 
disposed, whispered me that I had better not stay in Rangoon and 
talk to common people, but go directly to the *lord of life and 
deaihj* If he approved of the religion, it would spread rapidly; but 
in the present state of things, nobody would dare to prosecute their 
inquiries, with the fear of the king before their eyes. They brought 
forward the case of the Kolans, a sect of Burmans who have been 
proscribed and put to death imder several reigns. I tried to set them 
right in some points, and encourage them to trust in the care of an 
Almighty Saviour; but they speak low and look aroimd fearfully 
when they mention the name of the * owner of thestoord,^ 

"May 13. Had company all day, without intermission. About 
noon, Moung Nau came in, having given up his journey on accoimt of 
the unfaithfulness of his employer. His behaviour And conversation 
were very satisfactory. He regrets the want of a believing associate, 
but declares his determination of adhering to Christ, though no Bur- 
man should ever join him. 

" Moung Shwaa Doan, a man who has attended two Sundays, and 
made some occasional visits, was with me several hours. He professes 
to have felt the truth of this religion ever since he first heard about 
it, and now desires to be a disciple of Christ. He has obtained, I 
find, considerable knowledge of the Christian system, but does not 
appear to have much sense of his own sins. May the Spirit teach him 
what man cannot' ! , 

" May 15. Moung Nau has been with me all day, as well as yester- 
day. He is anxious to be received into our company, and thinks it a 
great privilege to be the first among the Burmans in professing the 
religion of Jesus Christ. He has been told plainly that he has nothing 
to expect in this world but persecution, and perhaps death ; but he 
thinks it better to die for Christ and be happy hereafter, than to live 



) 



126 THE EARNEST MAN. 

a few days and be for ever wretched. All the members of the mis- 
sion have, at different times, conversed with him, and are satisfied 
that a work of grace is begun in his heart. 

'*May 16, Lord's day. In the forenoon a man came in from 
Kyaikasan, a neighbouring village, and listened with more apparent 
sincerity than is commonly manifested the first visit. He had re- 
ceived a tract about a year ago, and had thought considerably on the 
subject. 

"About the usual number were present at worship, but a larger 
proportion than common were strangers. A lawyer, belonging to the 
viceroy, and some other respectable persons were present, and gave 
me much trouble, without, I fear, receiving any benefit. Moimg 
Shwaa Doan was present, and appeared pretty well after worship. 
Moung Shwaa Oo has, I suppose, returned to Henthadah, the next 
city above Eangoon. He took no leave of me ; yet I cannot give up 
aU hope of him. The last visit, he said he should constantly read my 
writings, and pray to the eternal Grod. 

" May 17. Moung Nan has received an advantageous offer to go to 
Ava, in the employ of a boat owner. We were afraid to dissuade 
him from accepting, as he has no way of getting a living, and equally 
unwilling to have him absent several months. At length we advised 
him not to go, and he at once acquiesced. 

"May 21. Had several attentive hearers ; among the rest Moung 
A, who says that the good news has taken hold of his mind. I have 
been so frequently disappointed in visitors who appeared promising the 
first time, but never came again, that I have lost all credit in early 
professions; yet I cannot but hope well of this man, especially 
as Moung Nau appeared to like him better than any other inquirer. 

"May 22. We have taken Moung Nau to live with us, intending 
to employ him in copying some small things for distribution, which 
we cannot get printed at present, and allow him ten ticals a month. 
Our principal object, however, is to keep him in the way of instruc- 
tion, hoping that he will ultimately be useful to his countrymen. 

" At night, Moung A came the second time, and appeared anxious 
to know the way of salvation. But I am grieved to find that he is 
going away on business to-morrow morning, and will be absent a long 
time. 

"May 23, Lord's day. The Kyaikasan villager, Moung Nyo, men- 
tioned last Sunday, came again with three companions. He stayed 
the whole day, and appears to be in the same state of mind as Moung 
A. Both say they are convinced that there is an eternal God ; that 
having denied him all their lives, and of course lived contrary to his 
commands, their sins are great; and that the news of salvation, 



THE ZAYAT. 127 

through the death of the Son of God, is good news. Thus far they 
venture. But whether the Spirit has given, or will give, them true 
love to the Saviour, and thus enable them to trust in him, we must 
leave for time to ascertain. 

"June 6, Lord's day. Had two interesting visitors. They were 
present at worship, and stayed till dark ; certain they should come 
again — ^but will ^hey ? 

" After partaking of the Lord's supper in the evening, we read and 
considered the following letter of Moung Nau, which he wrote of his 
own accord : — 

** *I, Moung Nau, the constant recipient of your excellent favour, 
approach your feet. Whereas my Lord's three have come to the 
country of Burman, — not for the purposes of trade, but to preach the 
religion of Jesus Christ, the Son of the eternal God, — I having heard 
and imderstood, am, with a joyful mind, filled with love. 

" * I believe that the divine Son, Jesus Christ, suflfered death in the 
place of men, to atone for their sins. Like a heavy-laden man, I feel 
my sins are very many. The punishment of my sins I deserve to 
suffer. Since it is so, do you, sirs, consider that I, taking refuge in 
the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, and receiving baptism in order 
to become his disciple, shall dwell one with yourselves, a band of 
brothers, in the happiness of heaven, and therefore grant me the 
ordinance of baptism ?* It is through the grace of Jesus Christ that 
you, sirs, have come by ship from one country and continent to 
another, and that we have met together. I pray my Lord's three 
that a suitable day may be appointed, and that I may receive the 
ordinance of baptism. 

** * Moreover, as it is only since I have met with you, sirs, that I 
have known about the eternal God, I venture to pray that you will 
still unfold to me the religion of God, that my old disposition may 
be destroyed and my new disi>osition improved.' 

**We have all, for some time, been satisfied concerning the reality 
of his religion, and therefore voted to receive him into church fellow- 
ship on his being baptized, and proposed next Sunday for adminis- 
tering the ordinance. 

** June 20, Lord's day. For the last fortnight have had but little 
company at the zayat, owing probably to the rains, which have now 
fully set in. The town has also been in great confusion, in prospect 

* At the time of writing this, not having heard much of baptism, he 
seems to have ascribed an undue efficacy to the ordinance. He has since 
corrected his error; but the translator thinks it the most fair and 
impartial to give the letter just as it was written at first. 



12S THE EARNEST MAN. 

of the viceroy's departure for Ava. We have been called on to pay 
another tax of fifteen ticals, — ^got oflf with paying half. Have had 
several other molestations from petty officers of government. Con- 
cluded to postpone Moung Nau's baptism tiU the viceroy be fairly ofL 
He left Rangoon yesterday, and has arrived at the next village, 
which is a kind of rendezvous to the vast multitude of boats that 
accompany him. ' 

"To-day Moung Shwa Doan appeared again, after an absence of 
several weeks, and a little revived our hopes concerning him. Several 
whom I have particularly mentioned have discontinued their visits, 
though I am satisfied that they are convinced of the falsity of the 
Burman religion, and of the truth of the Christian. I cannot possibly 
penetrate their motives. Whether, after several visits, they meet 
with some threatening suggestion that awakens their fears of perse- 
cution, or whether, at a certain stage in their inquiries, they get such 
an insight into the gospel as rouses the enmity of the carnal heart, I 
am not able from my experience hitherto to ascertain. 

"June 21. The town is in the utmost anxiety and alarm. Order 
after order has reached our viceroy, to hasten his return to Ava, with 
all the troops under arms. Great news are whispered. Some say 
there is a rebellion ; some say the king is sick, some that he is dead. 
But none dare to say this plainly. It would be a crime of the first 
magnitude; for the * lord of land and vxiter* is called immortal. The 
eldest son of his eldest son (his father being dead) has long been 
declared the heir of the crown; but he has two very powerful uncles 
who, it is supposed, will contest his right ; and in all probability the 
whole coimtry will soon be a scene of anarchy and civil war. 

"June 22. Out all the morning, listening for news, imcertain 
whether a day or an hour will not plunge us into the greatest dis- 
tress. The whole place is siting in sullen silence, expecting an 
explosion. About ten o'clock a royal dispatch boat pulls up to the 
shore. An imperial mandate is produced. The crowd makes way for 
the sacred messengers, and follow them to the high court, where the 
authorities of the place are assembled. 'Listen ye: The immortal 
king, wearied, it would seem, with the fatigues of royalty, has gone 
up to amuse himself in the celestial regions. His grandson, the heir- 
apparent, is seated on the throne. The young monarch enjoins on all 
to remain quiet, and wait his imperial orders.' 

"It appears that the Prince of Toung Oo, one of his uncles, has 
been executed, with his family and adherents, and the Prince of Pyee 
placed in confinement. There has probably been bloody work ; but 
it seems, &om what has transpired, that the business has been settled 
so expeditiously that the distant provinces wiU not feel the shock. 



THE ZAYAT. 129 

''June 23. Had some encouraging conversation with Moung 
Thahlah, a young man who has been living in our yard several 
months. He has lately made me several visits at the zayat, and 
appeared very thoughtful and teachable. To-day, on being asked the 
state of his mind, he replied, with some feeling, that he and all men 
were sinners, and exposed to future punishment; that according to 
the Buddhist system there was no way of pardon ; but that according 
to the religion which I taught, there was not only a way of pardon, 
but a way of enjoying endless happiness in heaven ; and that, there- 
fore, he wanted to believe in Christ. I stated to him, as usual, that 
he must think much on the love of Christ, and pray to GU}d for an 
enlightened and loving heart, and then gave him a form of prayer 
suited to his case. 

**In the female evening meeting, his sister. Ma Baik, whose hus- 
band also lives in our yard, manifested considerable feeling, especially 
when Mrs. Judson prayed with her alone, and expressed strong desire 
to obtain an interest in the Saviour. 

"June 27, Lord's day. There were several strangers present at 
worship. After the usual course I called Moung Nau before me, read 
and commented on an appropriate portion of Scripture, asked him 
several questions concerning his faith^ hope, and love, and made the 
baptismal prayer, having concluded to have all the preparatory exer- 
cises done in the zayat. We then proceeded to a large pond in the 
vicinity, the bank of which is graced with an enormous image of 
Gautama, and there administered baptism to the first Burman con- 
vert. O may it prove the beginning of a series of baptisms in the 
Burman empire, which shall continue in uninterrupted succession to 
the end of time ! 

"July 4, Lord's day. We have had the pleasure of sitting down, 
for the first time, to the Lord's table with a converted Burman ; and 
it was my privilege — ^a privilege to which I have been looking forward 
with desire for many years — to administer the Lord's supper in two 
languages." 

Henceforth the zayat was Mr. Judson's chosen, best-be- 
loved sphere of labour. He could indeed leave it at the call 
of duty, and he believed that duty required him to spend a 
large portion of his best years in scholastic labour. This 
sacrifice is perhaps the greatest which he ever made. For 
though one of his leading objects in selecting Burmah as his 
mission-field was the hope of giving it the Bible, yet no 
sooner had he tasted of the work of preaching to the heathen 



130 THE BABNEST MAN. 

than all other kinds of Christian labour faded, comparatively, 
ont of his affections. This direct contact with human beings, 
this labouring, watching, praying for the immediate salva- 
tion of his brother, this divine joy of welcoming the new- 
bom soul into the fellowship of the saints, satisfied the 
deepest yearnings of his heart The long years spent in 
translation seemed not even to diminish this feeling; and 
we see him in the brief intervals of study bounding away 
with almost childish joy to the work he loved. He did, 
indeed, perform the task so clearly assigned him by his 
Master, not only with the conscientious diligence of a 
faithful servant, but with the enthusiasm which so noble 
a work should inspire. He gave to it his best energies as 
entirely as if he had no wish beyond. It is one of the 
characteristics of the truly Earnest Man, thus to be able to 
turn the whole force of his will into any channel marked out 
by Providence. His stronger aflinity for some other form of 
labour is not allowed to make him feeble and half-hearted in. 
his work. But he was always hoping for the time when he 
might be permitted to give himself wholly to direct mis- 
sionary labour; and when death overtook him he was still 
looking forward, with all his youthful enthusiasm, to a few 
last happy years to be spent exclusively in winning souls. 

His adaptation to the work of the gospel minister was 
not less remarkable than the strength of his passion for it. 
His discernment of character, his penetration into motives, 
had almost the quickness and precision of instinct, and his 
heart ran over with instant sympathy at every form of 
human need. One of the native assistants remarked to 
Mrs. Judson, "that it was impossible to conceal a sin from, 
him; and while the culprit was exulting in £uicied security, 
he would suddenly find an eye fixed upon him which was 
perfectly irresistible, and would be obliged, in spite of him- 
self, to go to the teacher and confess." " He knew us," said 
the same person, "through and through, much better than 
we knew ourselves. If we had done anything amiss, he 



THE ZATAT. 131 

called US pleasantly, talked «o" (taking up, by -way of illus- 
tration, a toy that lay beside him on the floor, and passing 
his finger gently round the rim), '^and talked, and talked, 
and talked, till suddenly, before we knew it, he pounced 
upon us there" (striking his finger violently on the centre of 
the toy), ** and held us breathless till we had told him every- 
thing. Ah, no one will ever know us poor Burmans so 
again !" added the old man, mournfully.* 

Another interesting illustration of these traits is famished 
from the same source. 

"A native Christian woman told me that she was at one time 
about to engage in something which Dr. Judson considered not con- 
ducive to her spiritual good. He sent for her, and remonstrated ; but 
she would not give up her darling project. ' Look here ! ' said he, 
eagerly snatching a ruler from the table, and tracing not a vety 
straight line on the floor, ^here is where you have been walking. 
You have made a crooked track, to be sure ; out of the path half of 
the time; but then you have kept near it, and not taken to new 
roads, and you have — ^not so much as you might have done, mind, 
but still to a certain extent — ^grown in grace ; and now, witl^ all this 
growth upon your heart and head, in the maturity of your years, 
with ripened understanding and an every-day-deex)ening sense of the 
goodness of Crod, here,' bringing down the ruler with emphasis to 
indicate a certain position, ' here you stand. You know where this 
path leads. You know what is before you, — some struggles, some 
sorrows, and finally eternal life and a crown of glory. But to the 
left branches off another very pleasant road, and along the air floats, 
rather temptingly, a pretty bubble. You do not mean to leave the 
path you have walked in fifteen years — ^fifteen long years — altogether ; 
you only want to step aside and catch the bubble, and think you 
will come back again ; but y<m never wtU, Woman, think ! Dare you 
deliberately leave this straight and narrow path, drawn by the 
Saviour's finger, and go away for one moment into that of your 
enemy ? Will you ? w'M yon ? will you ? ' 

'* *I was sobbing so,' said the woman, *that I could not speak a 
word; but he knew, as he always did, what 1 meant, for he knelt 
down and prayed that Grod would preserve me in my determination. 
I have made a great many crooked tracks since,' she added, tearfully, 

* Mrs. Judson's Anecdotes and Sketches, in Dr. Wayland's Memoir. 



{ 



132 THE EABHE8T MjUf. 

' but whenever I am nnusually temptcil, I Bee the teacher as he looli 
that day, bending over in his chair, the ruler placed on the floor 
represent me, hix finger pointing along the path of eternal life, 
eye looking ao strangely over bis ahoulder, and that terrible ' V 
you I ' coming from his lips, as though it was the voice of God ; t 
I pray just as Peter did, foe I am frightened.' " 

Such a man muat love to preach, and cannot but pres 
effectively. He had given rich promise of power in ( 
pulpit before he left his native land. But the process 
asaimilation to his adopted country, which made him 
signally successful aa a missionary, involved the total n 
lect of practice in English preaching. Those simple ta 
from the pulpit, which he gave when visiting his nat 
country after thirty years' absence, beautiftil as they we 
gave no idea of his power aa a Burman preacher. For t 
we must look to the testimony of those who heard him wl 
giving unrestrained utterance to hb thoughts and emotii 
in the &miliar assembly of the zayat. 



CHAPTEK XV. 

ZAIAT JOUBNil. COHTINTJBD. 

The character of Mr. Judson's labours, and the progt 
of the mission, during the remainder of the year 1819, \ 
be beet presented through the following eztractH from 
own joumaL This period b particularly interesting, 
introducing us to an inquirer from the most cultivated cl 
of Bnrmans, the metaphysical philosopher, Monng Sh' 
gnong. Some explanation of this case seems necessary, s 
will serve for the illustration of similar ones which I 
Judson was obliged to meet. 

Though Buddhism was the established religion of i 
empire, the abjuration of which rendered the offender lia 



THE ZAYAT. 133 

to the severest penalties, yet the Burmans were not all 
Buddhists. By a natural reaction, similar to that witnessed 
in Catholic France, many of the most acute minds had been 
driven, by the extravagant superstitions of the established 
feith, into the opposite extreme of infidelity. Schools of 
metaphysical philosophy had arisen from time to time, which, 
in the subtlety and force of their reasonings, would not com- 
pare unfavourably with those of their kindred in enlightened 
modern Europe. " The doctrines of idealism and nihilism," 
says Dr. Judson, "were fully and ably discussed by the 
Brahmins and Buddhists, centuries before the time of 
Berkeley and Hume." During several reigns previous to 
the establishment of the mission in Eangoon, the occupant 
of the throne had been strongly inclined to free-thinking, 
and the national religion and its ministers had, in conse- 
quence, been at a discount in public estimation. Under 
such auspices rationalism grew and flourished, though its 
disciples still found it prudent to conform externally to the 
established faith. For, whatever might be the private sym- 
pathies of the monarch, the throne and the temple were too 
intimately connected to allow of any direct countenance, on 
his part, of innovations in matters of religion. 

It would have been no child's-play, under any circum- 
stances, to meet intellects like those of Moung Shwa-gnong, 
Oo Yan, and Moung Long, naturally keen and powerftil, 
and trained by long piuctice to the adroitest use of dialectics. 
But for a foreigner to meet them in their mother tongue, on 
questions so difficult and elusive in their nature, in such a 
manner as to silence and convince them, argues a combina- 
tion of talents and acquirements of which the world has 
furnished few examples. "What!" said Moung Shwa- 
gnong, on one occasion, " do you think I would pay you the 
least attention if I found you could not answer all my ques- 
tions and solve all my difficulties]" And these were not 
merely sceptical cavils, but, in great part, the honest diffi- 
culties of a deeply reflective mind respecting the nature and 



( 



134 THE EARNEST HAN. 

government of God. Would it not have been sad, had that 
fine intellect gone down to death in the thick darkness of 
heathenism, for lack of some one to resolve its doubts, and 
to guide it to the true source of light and wisdom 1 Who 
will say that genius and learning are wasted on one who i» 
to be only a miasioifia/ry to tJie heaJthen ? 

"August 26. Was visited by Moung Shwa-gnong, a teacher of 
considerable distinction. He appears to be half deist and half sceptic^ 
the first of the sort I have met with among the Burmans. He how- 
ever worships at the pagodas, and conforms to all the prevailing 
customs. We had a very interesting debate, in which we cleared up 
some preliminaries, preparatory, I hope, to future discussions. 

"Just at night the viceroy, returning from an excursion of pleasure, 
passed by our road for the first time since the zayat was built. He 
was seated on a huge elephant, attended by his guards and numerous 
suite, and, as he passed, eyed us very narrowly. Several Burmans 
were sitting round me and Mrs. Judson. 

"After he had passed some time, two of his private secretaries 
came in with a viceregal order, signifying his highness's desire to see 
the manner in which printing is executed. I replied, that the teacher 
who understood printing had gone to Bengal, taking the types with 
him, and that it was impossible to comply with the order. They 
departed with evident dissatisfaction. 

"August 27. In order to obviate the bad effects of the report of 
the officers of yesterday, I went to the government house, intending 
to have a personal interview with the viceroy. After waiting two 
hours in the levee hall, he made his appearance, and, on recognizing 
me, immediately inquired about the press and types. I told him my 
story; and when he understood that I was ignorant of the art of 
printing, he appeared satisfied to let the matter rest. In the course 
of the few words which passed between us, he said that he wished to 
get several Burman books printed. He seemed to be more kindly 
disposed towards me than formerly ; but it seems impossible to intro* 
duce the subject of rehgion in his presence, surrounded, as he always 
is, with a crowd of courtiers and secretaries, petitioners and lawyers. 

"Had but just returned home when the teacher, Moung Shwa- 
gnong, came again, and stayed from noon till quite dark. We con-^ 
versed incessantly the whole time ; but I fear that no real impression 
is made on his proud, sceptical heart. He, however, promised to pray 
to the eternal Grod, through Jesus Christ, and appeared, at times, to 
be in deep thought. He is a man of very superior argumentative 
powers. His conversation would probably shake the faith of many. 



THE ZAYAT. 135 

''August 28. A great deal of company all day long. Quite worn 
out with incessant toiL At ni^t the viceroy again passed, as the 
day before yesterday ; and the same secretaries came in, saying, that 
it was the viceroy's desire that I should translate and get printed, if 
possible, some historical writings of my country. I told them that I 
irould take the first opportunity of calling on his highness. 

'* August 31. A man, byname Moung Ing, has visited the zayat 
five or six days in succession. At first, a variety of other company 
prevented my attending much to him, and he conversed chiefly with 
Moung Nau, and employed himself in reading Matthew. He once 
told Moung Nau that he had long been looking after the true religion, 
and was ready to wish that he had been bom a brute, rather than die 
in delusion, and go to helL Sunday I conversed with him largely, 
and his attention during worship was very close and solemn. To-day 
he has made me half inclined to believe that a work of grace is began 
in his souL He says that he formerly had some idea of an eternal 
Grod from his mother, who was christened a Eoman Catholic, in oo&* 
sequence of her connection with a foreigner; but that the idea was 
aever rooted in his mind until he fell in with the zayat. Within a 
few days he has begun to pray to this Grod. He is quite sensible of his 
tins, and of the utter inef&cacy of the Buddhist religion, but is yet in 
fhe dark concerning the way of salvation, and says that he wants to 
blow more of Christ, that he may love him more. Lord Jesus, give 
lim the saving knowledge of thine adoraUe self ! 

'* September 1. Moung Thahlah continues to exju^ss similar senti- 
nents to those already noted ; is still afraid of persecution and death, 
but professes to be labouring to obtain tiiat love of Christ, and faith 
iu him, which will raise him above the fear of man ; and particularly 
requests us to pray that he may obtain these graces. 

** September 3. A great crowd of company through the whole day, 
the teacher Moung Shwa-gnong, from ten o'clock till quite daric, witii 
several of his adherents. He is a complete Proteus in religion, and I 
never knew where to find him. We went over a vast deal of ground, 
and ended where we began, in apparent incredulity. After his 
adherents, however, were all gone, he conversed with some feeling ; 
owned that he knew nothing, and wished me to instruct him; and 
when he departed he prostrated himself, and performed the sheebOj — 
an act of homage which a Bunnan never performs but to an acknow- 
ledged superior. 

** After he was gone, Moung Ing, who has been listening all day, 
followed me home to the house, being invited to stay with Moung 
Nau through the night. We conversed all the evening, and his ex- 
pressions have satisfied us all that he is one of Grod's chosen people. 
His exercises have been of a much stronger character than those of 



f 



I 



136 THE EABKEST MAN. 

tiie others, and he expresses himself in the most decided manner. He 
desires to become a disciple in profession, as well as to be in Christ, 
and declares his readiness to suffer persecution and death for the love 
of Christ. When I stated the danger to which he was exposing him- 
self, and asked him whether he loved Christ better than his own life, 
he replied, very deliberately and solemnly, * When I meditate on this 
religion, I know not what it is to love my own life.' Thus the poor 
fisherman, Moung Ing, is taken, while the learned teacher, Moung 
Shwa-gnong, is left. * 

"September 6, Lord's day. A very dull day, — not one strangei 
present at worship. In the evening, Moung Thahlah was a spectator 
of our partaking of the Lord's supper. Moung Ing could not be 
present. He lives at some distance, and is getting ready to go to sea, 
pursuant to his purpose before he became acquainted with us. We 
have endeavoured to dissuade him from going, and to keep him near 
us ; but we are afraid that his circumstances will not allow him to 
comply with our advice and his own inclinations.. 

"September 6. Spent the evening in conversing with Moung Byaa, 
a man who, with his family, has lived near us for some time, a regular 
attendant on worship, an indefatigable scholar in the evening school, 
where he has learned to read, though fifty years old, and a remarkably 
moral character. In my last conversation, some time ago, he appeared 
to be a thorough legalist, relying solely on his good works, but yel 
sincerely desirous of knowing and embracing the truth. The greatei 
part of the evening was spent in discussing his erroneous views ; hh 
mind seemed so dark and duU of apprehension, that I was almost 
discouraged. Towards the close, however, he seemed to obtain some 
evangelical discoveries, and to receive the humbling truths of the 
gospel in a manner which encourages us to hope that the Spirit of 
God has begun to teach him. The occasion of this conversation was 
my hearing that he said he intended to become a Christian, and 
be baptized with Moung Thahlah. He accordingly professes a full 
belief in the eternal God, and his Son Jesus Christ. 

** September 7. Am grieved that Moung Ing comes no more. Pre- 
sume he has gone off, contrary to our advice, and was reluctant to 
take leave of us under such circumstances. 

** September 10. Surprised by a visit from Moung Ing. It appears 
that he has been confined at work on board the vessel in which he is 
engaged, and has not been ashore for several days. As the vessel is 
certainly going to-morrow, he got leave of absence for a short time, 
and improved it in running out to the zayat. I was exceedingly glad, 
as it afforded me an opportunity of giving him some parting instruc- 
tions, and praying with him alone. He appears very well indeed. He 



THE ZAYAT. 137 

is quite distressed that he has so far engaged himself, and appears 
desirous of getting oflF, and returning to us, if possible ; but I have 
very little hope of his succeeding. I believe, however, that he is a 
real Christian, and that, whenever he dies, his immortal soul will be 
safe, and that he will praise God for ever for his transient acquaint- 
ance with us. May the Lord go with him and keep him safely unto 
the end ! 

"September 11. Moung Shwa-gnong has been with me all day. 
It appears that he accidently obtained the idea of an eternal Being 
about eight years ago ; and it has been floating about in his mind, and 
disturbing his Buddhistic ideas ever since. When he heard of us, 
which was through one of his adherents to whom I had given a tract, 
this idea received considerable confirmation ; and to-day he has fully 
admitted the truth of this first grand principle. The latter part of 
the day we were chiefly employed in discussing the possibility and 
necessity of a divine revelation, and the evidence which proves that 
the writings of the apostles of Jesus contain that revelation ; and I 
think I may say that he is half inclined to admit all this. He is 
certainly a most interesting case. The way seems to be prepared in 
his mind for the special operation of divine grace. Come, Holy Spirit, 
Heavenly Dove ! 

"His conversion seems peculiarly desirable, on account of his 
superior talents and extensive acquaintance with Burmese and Pali 
literature. He is the most powerful reasoner I have yet met with in 
this country, excepting my old teacher, Oo Ooungmen (now dead), and 
is not at all inferior to him. 

"September 15. Moung Thahlah spent the evening with me in 
asking several questions on difficult passages in Matthew. At the 
close, I asked him whether he yet loved Christ more than his own 
life ? He understood my meaning, and replied that he purposed to 
profess the Christian religion, and began to think seriously of being 
baptized. His sister. Ma Baik, appears to have lost her religious 
impressions. 

"September 16. After having lately made two unsuccessful 
attempts to get an interview with the viceroy, I this day succeeded. 
He inquired about the historical writings. I told him I was not so 
well acquainted with that style of writing in Burman as with the 
religious style, and then presented him with a tract, as a specimen of 
what I could do. He delivered it to a secretary, and on hearing the 
first sentence remarked that it was the same with a writing he had 
already heard, and that he did not want that hind of writing, ' 1 sup- 
X)08e that one of the secretaries, to whom I had formerly given a 
tracts presented it without my knowledge. 



4 



138 THE EABNEST MAN. 

'* September 18. Moong Shwa-gnong has been with me a few hours ; 
had spent the greater part of the day with Oo Yah, the merchant 
that I mentioned some time ago, conversing on religion. Our inter- 
view chiefly passed in discussing his metaphysical cavils. 

"September 19, Lord's day. The teacher and Oo Yah came to 
vorship, according to their agreement of yesterday, accompanied 
with part of the family of the latter, and several respectable men of 
their acquaintance, so that the assembly consisted of about fifty. 
Some paid profound attention, and some none at alL After the exer- 
cises, Oo Yah seemed afraid to have it appear that he had any 
acquaintance with me, and kept at a distance. They finally all 
dropped away but the teacher, who stayed as usual, till quite dark, 
fie is, in many respects, a perfect enigma ; but just before he left a 
alight hope began to spring up in our minds that his proud heart 
was yielding to the Cross. He confessed that he was constrained to 
give up all dependence on his own merits and his literary attain- 
ments; that he had sinned against God all his life long, and that, 
therefore, he deserved to suffer helL And then he asked, with some 
feeling, how he could obtain an interest in the merits and salvation 
of JesuA Christ. He appears to have a considerable share of that 
serious solemnity which I have observed to characterize the few who 
persevere in their religious inquiries, apd which has been wanting in 
eveiy instance of mere temporary promise. O that he may be brought 
in, if it is not too great a favour for this infant mission to receive ! 

" September 20. One of the three visitors of the 19th of August 
came again, and, though a long interval has elapsed, his appearance 
is quite encouraging. He says, feelingly, that he knows nothing, is 
distressed at the thought of dying in his present ignorance and un- 
certainty, and wants to find some kind of salvation. 

" September 26, Lord's day. Moung Shwa-gnong came with several 
adherents. Some warm conversation before worship, but nothing 
personaL During worship discoursed from ' Fear not them that kill 
the body,' &c. My discourse was chiefly intended for Moung Thahlah 
and Moung Byaa, but the latter was absent on account of sickness. 
After worship the teacher immediately departed with his people, 
without even saying a word. Fear he has taken some offence. 

** October 5. Received a visit from the teacher. My hopes of lis 
conversion are very low. He is settling down in deism, and evidently 
avoids all conversation of a personal nature. 

" October 6. Conversation with Moung Thahlah and Moxmg Byaa, 
which revives my hopes of their coming forward before long. They 
are both growing in religious knowledge, and give evidence of being 
in the exercise of gracious feelings. 



THE ZAYAT. 139 

"October 7. Was rejoiced in the morning to see the teacher 
Moung Shwa-gnong come again so soon. We spent the d^y together, 
nninterrapted by other company. In the forenoon he was as crabbed 
as possible ; sometimes a Berkeleian, sometimes a Humeite or com- 
plete sceptic. But in the afternoon he got to be more reasonable, and 
before he left he obtained a more complete id^i of the atonement 
than I have commonly been able to communicate to a Burman. He 
exclaimed, *That is suitable; that is as it should be,' &c. But 
whether this conviction resulted from a mere philosophic view of the 
propriety and adaptedness of the way of salvation through Jesus 
Christ, or from the gracious operations of the Holy Spirit, time must 
discover. I hardly venture to hope the latter. Lord, the work is 
thine ! come. Holy Spirit I 

"October 23. Have for some days been wondering at the long 
absence of the teacher. To-day heard a report that he has been 
summoned by the viceroy to give an account of his heretical senti« 
ments. 

" At night Moung Thahlah and Moung Byaa presented a paper, 
professing tl^ir faith in Jesus Christ, and requesting to be baptized, 
but in private. We spent some time with them. They appear to have 
experienced divine grace ; but we advised them, as they had so little 
love to Christ as not to dare to die for his cause, to wait and recon- 
sider the matter. 

"October 29. The teacher came again, after an interval of three 
weeks ; but he appears to be quite another man. He has not been 
personally summoned, as we heard, but, through the instigation of 
the Mangen teacher, he was mentioned before the viceroy as having 
renounced the religion of the country. The viceroy gave no decisive 
order, but merely said, * Inquire further about him.' This reached 
the ears of Moung Shwa-gnong, and he directly went to the Mangen 
teacher, and, I suppose, apologized, and explained, and flattered. He 
denies that he really recanted, and I hope he did not; but he is 
evidently falling off from the investigation of the Christian religion* 
He made but a short visit, and took leave as soon as he could 
decently. 

"November 1. One of the greatest festivals of the year. The 
crowds are truly immense and overwhelming. We vacated the zayat, 
as we have several days of late, beginning to query whether it is pru- 
dent to go on boldly in proclaiming a new religion at the hazard of 
incensing the government, and drawing down such persecution as may 
deter all who know us from any inquiry. 

"November 2. This is the birthday and the coronation day of the 
new king. All the grandees of the empire have, for some time past, 
been assembling at Ava, to be present at the august celebration. 



r 



140 THE EARNEST MAN, 

"November 6, The two candidates for baptism again presented 
their urgent petition that they might be baptized, not absolutely in 
private, but about sunset, away from public observation. We spent 
some hours in again discussing the subject with them and with one 
another. We felt satisfied that they were humble disciples of Jesus, 
and were desirous of receiving this ordinance purely out of regard to 
his command and their own spiritual welfare ; we felt that we were 
all equally exposed to danger, and needed a spirit of mutual candour, 
and forbearance, and sympathy; we were convinced that they were 
influenced rather .by desires of avoiding unnecessary exposure than by 
that sinful fear which would plunge them into apostasy in the hour 
^ of trial ; and when they assured us that, if actually brought before 
government, they could not think of denying their Saviour, we could 
not conscientiously refuse their request, and therefore agreed to have 
them baptized to-morrow at sunset. The following is a literal trans- 
lation of the paper presented this evening : — 

** *Moung Byaa and Moung Thahlah venture to address the two 
teachers. Though the countiy of Burmah is very far distant from the 
country of America, yet the teachers, coming by ship the long way of 
six months, have arrived at this far-distant country of Burmah and 
town of Eangoon, and proclaimed the propitious news by means of 
which we, having become acquainted with the religion, know that 
there is an eternal God in heaven, and that there is a divine Son, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, deserving of the highest love ; and we know that 
the Lord Jesus Christ, the divine Son, endured, on account of all his 
disciples, sufferings and death, even severe sufferings on a cross, in 
their stead. On account of our sins we were like persons laden with 
a very heavy burden. On account of our many sins we found no 
deliverance, no place of refuge, and our minds were distressed. In 
this state remaining, the two teachers produced the sacred system 
from the Scriptures, and we became informed of the existence of the 
one Grod, and of the facts that the divine Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, 
redeemed with his sacred life all who love and trust in him, and in order 
to save his disciples from hell, suffered death in their stead. Now we 
know that we have sinned against the sacred One, and we know, as- 
suredly, that if we become disciples of the divine Son, the Lord Jesus 
Christ, we shall be saved from the hell which we deserve. We desire to 
become disciples, and with the two teachers, like children bom of the 
same mother, to worship the true God, and observe the true religion. 

** * On searching in the Scriptures for ancient rules and customs, it 
does not appear that John and other baptizers administered baptism 
on any particular time, or day, or hour. We therefore venture to beg 
of the two teachers that they will grant that on the 6th day of the 



THE ZAYAT. 141 

wane of the Tanzoungmong moon (November 7), at six o'clock at 
night, we may this once receive baptism at their hands.' 

"November 7, Lord's day. We had worship as usual, and the 
people dispersed. About half an hour before sunset the two candidates 
came to the zayat, accompanied by three or four of their friends ; 
and after a short prayer we proceeded to the spot where Moung Nau 
was formerly baptized. The sim was not allowed to look upon the 
himible, timid profession. No wondering crowd crowned the over- 
shadowing hill. No hymn of praise expressed the exultant feelings of 
joyous hearts. Stillness and solemnity pervaded the scene. We felt, 
on the banks of the water, as a little, feeble, solitary band. But per- 
haps some hovering angels took note of the event with more interest 
than they witnessed the late coronation ; perhaps Jesus looked down 
on us, pitied and forgave our weaknesses, and marked us for his 
own ; perhaps, if we deny him not, he will acknowledge us another 
day more publicly than we venture at present to acknowledge him. 

" In the evening we all united in commemorating the dying love of 
our E«deemer ; and I trust we enjoyed a little of his gracious presence 
in the midst of us. 

'' November 10. This evening is to be marked as the date of the 
first Burman prayer-meeting that was ever held. None present but 
myself and the three converts. Two of them made a little beginning 
— such as must be expected from the first essay of converted heathens. 
We agreed to meet for this purpose every Tuesday and Friday even- 
ing, immediately after family worship, which in the evening has for 
some time been conducted in Burman and English, and which these 
people, and occasionally some others, have attended. 

"November 14, Lord's day. Have been much gratified to find that 
this evening the three converts repaired to the zayat and 

HELD A PRAYER-MEETING OF THEIR OWN ACCORD. 

" November 26. On taking our usual ride this morning to bathe in 
the mineral tank, we were accosted on one of the pagoda roadfi by 
the Mangen teacher, and peremptorily forbidden to ride there in 
future on pain of being beaten. On our return we inquired into the 
afiGur, and find that the viceroy has really issued an order, at the in- 
stigation of this teacher, that henceforth no person wearing a hat, 
shoes, or umbrella, or mounted on a horse, shall approach within the 
sacred ground belonging to the great pagoda, which ground extends 
on some sides half a mile, and comprises all the principal roadfi ; so 
that in future we must take a circuitous route in the woods, if we 
wish to visit our usual place of resort. This consideration, however, 
is very trifling compared with another. The viceroy's order is quite 
unprecedented in Eangoon, and indicates a state of feeling on the 



i 



142 THE EARNEST MAN. 

subject of religion veiy unfavourable to our missionary designs. 
Since the death of the old king, who was known to be in heart 
hostile to religion, people have been more engaged than ever in 
building pagodas, making sacred offerings, and performing the public 
duties of their religion. They are just now engaged in new gilding 
the great pagoda, called Shwa Dag6n, which is considered the most 
sacred in the country, on account of its containing six or eight haixs 
of Gautama. 

''Ever since the affair of Moung Shwa-gnong, there has been an 
entire falling off at the zayat. I sometimes sit there whole days 
without a single visitor, though it is the finest part of the year, and 
many are constantly passing. We and our object are now well known 
throughout BAugoon. None wish to call, as formerly, out of curiosity, 
and none dare to call from a principle of religious inquiry. And were 
not the leaders in ecclesiastical affairs confident that we shall never 
succeed in making converts, I have no doubt we should meet with 
direct persecution and banishment, 

" Our business must be fairly laid before the emperor. If he frown 
upon us, all missionary attempts within his dominions will be out of 
the question. If he favour us, none of our enemies, during the con- 
tinuance of his favour, can touch a hair of our heads. But there is a 
greater than the emperor, before whose throne we desire daily and 
constantly to lay this business. Lord Jesus, look upon us in our 
low estate, and guide us in our dangerous course ! 

''November 21. Moung Shwa-gnong has been with us the greater 
part of the day, and a little revived our hopes concerning him. 

"November 27. This day brotiier Colman and myself came to a 
final decision to proceed to Ava without delay, and lay our business 
before the emperor. 

" November 29. Letters from Bengal and America, the first for six 
months. . Learned the particulars of the melancholy end of our la- 
mented brother Wheelock. The news of his death reached us some 
time ago. Learned also that brother Hough intends staying in Ben- 
gal The tract which we forwarded is not yet printed, — a circum- 
stance which occasions us much regret, as we hoped to have obtained 
some copies to carry up to Ava. 

"December 4. Another visit from Moung Shwa-gnong. After 
several hours spent in metaphysical cavils, he owned that he did not 
believe anything he had said, and had only been trying me and the 
religion, being determined to embrace nothing but what he found un- 
objectionable and impregnable. ' What ! ' said he, ' do you think that 
I would pay you the least attention if I found you could not ^swer 
all my questions and solve all my difficulties V He then proceeded to 



VISIT TO THE EMPEBOR. 143 

say that he really believed in God, his Son Jesus Christ, the atone* 
ment, &c Said I, knowing his deistical weakness, * Do you believe 
all that is contained in the book of Matthew, that I have given you ? 
In particular, do you believe that the Son of God died on a cross ?' 
*Ah,' replied he, *you have caught me now. I believe that he 
suffered death, but I cannot admit that he suffered the shameful 
death of the cross.' 'Therefore,' said I, 'you are not a disciple of 
Christ. A true disciple inquires not whether a fact is agreeable to his 
own reason, but whether it is in the book. His pride has yielded to 
the divine testimony. Teacher, your pride is unbroken. Break down 
your pride, and yield to the word of God.' He stopped and thought. 
* As you utter these words,' said he, * I see my error. I have been 
trusting in my own reason, not in the word of God.' Some interrup- 
tion here occurred. When we were again alone he said, * This day is 
different from all the days on which I have visited you. I see my 
error in trusting in my own reason ; and I now believe the crucifixion 
of Christ, because it is contained in the Scripture.' Some time after, 
speaking of the imcertainty of life, he said he thought he should not 
be lost though he died suddenly. Why? 'Because I love Jesus 
Christ.' * Do you really love him ?' * No one that really knows him 
can help loving him.' And so he departed." 



CHAPTER XVI. 

VISIT TO THE EMPEBOB. 

Fbom several allusions in the extracts contained in Chap- 
ter XIY., it will have been seen that, towards the close of 
1819, a sad change bad come over the prospects of the mis* 
sion. The leading cause of this reverse was the accession of 
it monarch to the throne who was a zealous Buddhist. The 
influence of such an event, in an absolute despotism like 
Burmah, would necessarily be felt in every part of the 
empire. The exemption from open persecution hitherto 
enjoyed by the mission, had doubtless been owing, primarily^ 
to the known indiflerence of the former king towards the 
established religion ; though, even then, an open renunciation 



( 



144 THE EARNEST MAN. 

of it was deemed extremely hazardous. But now, when it 
was ostentatiously patronized by "the lord of life and 
death," and "the owner of the sword," it became the in- 
terest of every one to exhibit great zeal for the ancient faith. 
The timidity of inquirers kept pace with the insolence of the 
priesthood and government officials. The zayat, which in 
previous years had often been thronged with visitors, was 
now shunned as an infected spot. Mr. Judson often sat 
here whole days uncheered by a single call, though people 
were passing by from morning till night. Meantime, the 
new pagodas starting up in all directions, the re-gilding of 
the great temple of Shwa Dagon, the increased number of 
worshippers, and of rich offerings at sacred places, all pro- 
claimed the reviving glory of Buddhism. Mr. Judson was 
convinced that nothing but the assurance of his inability to 
accomplish anything prevented his immediate banishment 
from the country, and that, unless something should speedily 
occur to change the current of public feeling, the last days 
of the mission were at hand. 

It now appeared to him that the moment had arrived 
when a bold step, long revolved in his mind, could no longer 
be deferred. He determined to go up at once to Ava, the 
imperial residence, and endeavour to obtain toleration for 
the Christian religion from his majesty in person. 

Two years before he had anticipated the probable neces- 
sity of such a step, but was unwilling to hazard the conse- 
quences imtil compelled by the pressure of providential 
events. The issue was, indeed, much more doubtful now 
iihan before; yet it was not altogether a hopeless case. With 
a liberality which, as compared with the policy of some 
Christian nations, reflects great credit on its intelligence, 
the Burman government had always allowed to foreigners 
perfect toleration in religious matters, restricted only by the 
prohibition of proselyting the subjects of the realm. The 
Mohammedan practised the rites of his faith as freely and 
openly as if in the land of the Prophet; and the Komish 



VISIT TO THE EMPEBOB. 145 

priests, who had established themselves in the empire many 
years before, suffered no molestation till they were found 
making Burman converts. Could Mr. Judson have con- 
tented himself to labour amoug the English residents of the 
country, he would have done so without danger, under the 
very eye of the Imperial government. Was it not to be hoped 
that, by proper representations, it might be induced to ad- 
vance one step further in this liberal policy, by allowing to 
its own subjects the same freedom of choice which it granted 
to foreigners 1 The mission, as things were, was virtually 
at an end, and an unfavourable act of the government could 
not make its condition essentially worse; while a favourable 
answer from "the golden lips," or a mere fidendly reception, 
without any decided expression of the royal will, would at 
once remove its embarrassments, and place it beyond the 
tyranny of the provincial authorities. Every other door of 
hope being closed, he felt himself obliged to make the 
attempt. 

'* Under these circumstances," thus he writes to the Board, '4t 
api)ears to us that there remains but one course of proceeding — ^to go 
directly into the Imperial presence, lay our missionary designs before 
the throne, and solicit toleration for the Christian religion. By this 
proceeding we hope to discover the real f eeUngs and sentiments of the 
emperor. We hope to ascertain, as distinctly as possible, whether he 
is devoted to Buddhism, or has imbibed in any degree t^e opinions of 
his grandfather, and disguises them at present from motives of policy 
merely. If the former be the case, he will prohibit our missionary 
work, and we shall be under the necessity of leaving his dominions. 
If the latter be the case, and he be in any measure pleased with the 
Christian system, he will, we hope, give us at least such private 
encouragement as will enable us to prosecute our work without 
incurring the charge of rashness and enthusiasm. 

'* In approaching the throne, we desire to have a simple dependence 
on the presence and power of our Saviour, and a single eye to his 
glory. We have indeed no other ground of hope ; we ought to have 
no other view. We trust tiiat, if the set time to favour Biumah is 
come, He who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working, will 
open a wide and efiEectual door for the promulgation of divine truth. 
But if the Lord has other purposes it becomes us meekly to acquiesce, 

L 



( 



146 THE EARNEST HAN. 

and willingly to sacrifice our dearest hopes to the divine will. We 
rest assured that, in either case, the perfections of God will be dis- 
played, and desire to be thankful that we arc allowed to be in any 
way instrumental in contributing to that display." 

Objections have been made to this measure as savouring 
too much of worldly policy. But can it be wrong to ask 
any human government, even that of a pagan despot^ to 
protect its subjects in the exercise of the rights of con- 
science 1 In such a case this cannot, to be sure, be done 
exactly in the form suitable when addressing a professedly 
Christian government; such, for instance, as was used bj 
the Baptists when claiming those rights from the Massa- 
chusetts Assembly. In terms conformed to Oriental ideas 
of propriety, but with no expression of fulsome adulation or 
abject servility, the Christian missionary petitions that Lis 
Royal Majesty will be pleased to open his dominions to the 
preaching of the true religion; and that, should any of his 
subjects be disposed to embrace it, his official servants maj 
be restrained from molesting them. The application is based 
on the emperor's power, as the political head of the nation; 
not on his right to dictate in matters of conscience. Similar 
applications are constantly made to the sovereigns of Europe, 
by their subjects, of various evangelical sects not recognized 
by law, as well as by English and American Christians in 
their behalf. And where perfect religious equality cannot 
be obtained in such cases, it is not thought wrong to receive 
gratefully the most limited form of toleration. Mr. Judson's 
view of the case is thus presented in a letter on the subject 
to the Rev. Dr. Baldwin, written in 1817 : — 

"No local government would dare to persecute the espousers of a 
new religion, if it were known that they had friends at court. I do 
not mean to* imply that all persecution is to be dreaded, but that per- 
secution which would effectually prevent the use of the means of 
grace certainly is. It is true that God will call those whom he has 
chosen ; but since he has made means necessary to the end, since it is 
by the gospel of his Son that he calls his people, it is certainly as much 
the duty of his servants to endeavoiur to avert such persecution as 



VISIT TO THE EMPEEOR. 147 

would effectually prevent the use of means, as it is to use any means 
at aU ; and we may reasonably conclude that, when God has a people 
whom he is about to call, he will direct his servants in such a 
course." 

Dr. Baldwin, a man of great practical wisdom, fully con- 
curred in this view. Mr. Judson thus writes to him on the 
eve of his departure for Ava, in 1819: "Brother Colman. 
and myself have therefore concluded to follow your advice, 
by going up to Ava, and laying our business before the 
monarch."* Through life Mr. Judson continued to regard 
the object which he now sought as of the highest importance 
to the spread of Christianity in Burmah. In 1824 he 
repeated the attempt, in connection with Mr. Crawford's 
embassy; and in 1849, but for the failure of pecimiary 
means, he would again bave proceeded to the capital, and 
spent his last days in furtherance of the object. 

But whatever may be thought of the wisdom or propriety 
of the step, every one must admire the Christian courage 
and self-devotion with which he took his life in his hand, 
and ventured on such an errand into the presence of this 
haughty eastern autocrat. The details of the visit are given, 
with singular beauty and pathos, in Mr. Judson's journal. 

" JOURNAL. 

* 

"December 21. After having made arrangements for our wives' 
residence in town during our absence, brother Colman and myself 
embarked. Our boat is six feet wide in the middle, and forty feet 
long. A temporary deck of bamboos is laid throughout, and on the 
hinder part of the boat the sides are raised with thin boards, and a 
covering of thatch, and mats tied on, so as to form two low rooms in 
which we can just sit and lie down. Our company consists of sixteen 
besides ourselves: ten rowmen, a steersman, a headman, — whose 
name is inserted in our passport, and who, therefore, derives a little 
authority from government, — a steward or cook for the company, 
which place is filled by our trusty Moung Nau, — oiu* own cook, a 
Hindoo washerman, and an Englishman, who, having been un- 

* American Baptist Magazine, New Series, voL ii, p. 380. 



/ 



148 THE EABNEST MAX. 

fortunate all his life, wishes to try the service of his Burman 
Majesty; and this last personage may be called our gunner, he having 
charge of several guns and blunderbusses, which are indisi^ensable on 
account of the robbers that infest the river. 

**"We have been much perplexed in fixing on a present for the 
emperor, without which no person unauthorized can appear in his 
presence. Our funds were evidently inadequate to the piuxihase of 
articles which would be valuable to him in a pecuniary point of view. 
When we considered, also, that there ought to be a congruity between 
the present and our character, we selected that book which we hope 
to be allowed to translate under his patronage, the Bible, in six 
volumes, covered with gold leaf, in Burman style, and each volume 
inclosed in a rich wrapper. For presents to other members of 
government, we have taken several pieces of fine cloth and other 
articles. 

"Thus manned and furnished, we imshed off from the shores of 
BAngoon. The teacher, Moung Shwa-gnong, had not been to see us 
for several days, ashamed, probably, of having declined accompanying 
us ; but just as we were pushing off we saw his tall form standing on 
the wharf. He raised his hand to his head and bade us adieu, and 
continued looking after the boat until a projecting point shut Ran- 
goon and all its scenes from our view. When shall we redouble this 
little point ? Through what shall we pass ere the scene now snatched 
away be re-presented ? The expedition on which we have entered, 
however it may terminate, is unavoidably fraught with consequences 
momentous and solemn beyond all conception. We are penetrating 
into the heart of one of the great kingdoms of the world, to make a 
formal offer of the gospel to a despotic monarch, and through him to 
the millions of his subjects. May the Lord accompany us, and crown 
our attempt with the desired success, if it be consistent with his wise 
and holy will ! 

"At night we moored by the banks of the Kyee-myen-daing. It 
was near this place that, a few days ago, one of the boats belonging 
to Mr. G., late collector of Eangoon, was attacked by robbers, and 
the steersman and another man killed at a single shot. We felt 
unwilling to remain at this village, but found it necessary. 

** On the 30th we reached Kah-noung, a considerable town about 
ninety miles from Rangoon. Here we met a si)ecial officer from. 
Bassein, with a detachment of men, sent in pursuit of a band of 
robbers, who lately made a daring attack on a large boat, wounded 
and beat off the people, and took plunder to the amount of 1,500 
ticals. The commander offered us an escort for the journey of to- 
morrow, which lies through a dangerous tract of country; but we 



VISIT TO THE EMPEBOR. 149 

declined accepting, as we should have been obliged to give the people 
presents, without deriving any substantial assistance in the hour of 
danger. Strict watch all night. 

"January 17, 1820. Reached Pugan, a city celebrated in Burman 
history, being, like Pyee, the seat of a former dynastjy. ' It is about 
260 miles from Rangoon. 

"January 18. Took a survey of the splendid pagodas and extensive 
ruins in the environs of this once famous city. Ascended as far as 
possible some of the highest edifices, and at the height of 100 feet, 
perhaps, beheld all the country roimd, covered with temples and 
monuments of every sort and size; some in utter ruin, some fast 
decaying, and some exhibiting marks of recent attention and repair. 
The remains of the ancient wall of the city stretched beneath us. 
The pillars of the gates, and many a grotesque decapitated relic of 
antiquity, chequered the motley scene. All conspired to suggest 
those elevated and mournful ideas which are attendant on a view of 
the decaying remains of ancient grandeur; and, though not com- 
parable to such ruins as those of Palmyra and Baalbec (as they are 
represented), still deeply interesting to the antiquary, and more 
deeply interesting to the Christian missionary. Here, about 800 years 
ago, the religion of Buddh was first publicly recognized and estab- 
lished as the religion of the empire. Here, then, Ah-rah-han, the first 
Buddhist apostle of Burmah, under the patronage of King Anan-ra- 
tha-men-zan, disseminated the doctrines of atheism, and taught his 
disciples to pant after annihilation as the supreme good. Some of the 
ruins before our eyes were probably the remains of pagodas designed 
by himself. We looked back on the centuries of darkness that are 
past. We looked forward, and Christian hope would fain brighten 
the prospect. Perhaps we stand on the dividing line of the empires 
of darkness and light. O, shade of Ah-rah-han ! weep over thy falling 
fanes ; retire from the scenes of thy past greatness. But thou smilest 
at my feeble voice. Linger, then, thy little remaining day. A voice, 
mightier than mine, — a still, small voice, — ^will ere long sweep away 
every vestige of thy dominion. The churches of Jesus will soon 
supplant these idolatrous monuments, and the chanting of the de- 
votees of Buddh will die away before the Christian hymn of praise ! 

"January 25. Passed Old Ava, the seat of the dynasty imme- 
diately preceding the present, and Tsah-gaing, a place of some note, 
distinguished for its innumerable pagodas, and the residence of one or 
two late emperors, and about noon drew up to 0-ding-man, the lower 
landing-place of New Ava, or Amarapoora, about 350 miles from 
Rangoon. At om* present distance of nearly four miles from the city 
(and we cannot get nearer this season), it appears to the worst ad- 



/ 



1^0 THE EABNEST MAN. 

vantage. We can hardly distinguish the golden steeple of the palace 
amid the glittering pagodas, whose summits just suffice to mark the 
spot of our ultimate destination. 

** January 26. We set out early in the morning, called on Mr. G., 
late collector of Rangoon, and on Mr. R., who was formerly collector, 
but is now out of favour. Thence we entered the city, passed the 
palace, and repaired to the house of Mya-day-men, former viceroy of 
Rangoon, now one of the public ministers of state (woon-gyee). We 
gave him a valuable present, and another of less value to his wife, the 
lady who formerly treated Mr. G. with so much jwliteness. They 
both received us very kindly, and appeared to interest themselves in 
our success. We, however, did not disclose our precise object, but 
only petitioned leave to behold the * golden face.* Upon this, his 
highness committed our business to Moung Yo, one of his favourite 
officers, and directed him to introduce us to Moimg Zah, one of the 
private ministers of state (a-twen-woon), with the necessary orders. 
This i)articular favour of Mya-day-men prevents the necessity of our 
petitioning and feeing all the public ministers of state, and procuring 
formal permission from the high court of the empire. 

** In the evening Moung Yo, who lives near our boat, called on us 
to say that he would conduct us to-morrow. We lie down in sleepless 
anxiety. To-mori'ow's dawn will usher in the most eventful day of 
our lives. To-morrow's eve will close on the bloom or the blight of 
our fondest hopes. Yet it is consoling to commit this business into 
the hands of our heavenly Father; to feel that the work is his, 
not gurs; that the heart of the monarch before whom we are to 
appear, is under the control of Omnipotence ; and that the event will 
be ordered in the manner most conducive to the divine glory and the 
greatest good. Gk>d may, for the wisest purposes, suffer our hopes to* 
be disappointed; and if so, why should short-sighted mortal man 
repine ? Thy will, O God, be ever done ; for thy will is inevitably the 
wisest and the best ! 

"January 27. We left the boat and put ourselves under the con- 
duct of Moung Yo. He carried us first to Mya-day-men, as a matter 
of form, and there we learned that the emperor had been privately 
apprised of our arrival, and said, *Let them be introduced.* We 
therefore proceeded to the palace. At the outer gate we were de- 
tained a long time, until the various officers were satisfied that we 
had a right to enter, after which we deposited a present for the private 
minister of state, Moung Zah, and were ushered into his apartments 
in the palace yard. He received us very pleasantly, and ordered us 
to sit before several governors and petty kings, who were waiting at 
his levee. We here, for the first time, disclosed our character and 



VISIT TO THE EMPEROR. 151 

.object, — told him that we were missionaries, or 'propagators o£ 
religion;' that we wished to appear before the emperor, and present 
our sacred books, accompanied with a petition. He took the petition 
into his hand, looked over about half of it, and then familiarly asked 
several questions about our God and our religion, to which we replied. 
Just at this crisis some one announced that the golden foot was about 
to advance; on which the minister hastily rose up and put on his 
robes of state, saying that he must seize the moment to present us to 
the emperor. We now foimd that we had unwittingly fallen on an 
unpropitious time, it being the day of the celebration of the late 
victory over the Kathays, and the very hour when his majesty was 
coming forth to witness the display made on the occasion. When the 
minister was dressed, he just said, * How can you propagate religion 
in this empire? But come along.' Our hearts sank at these inaus- 
picious words* • He conducted us through various splendour and 
parade, until we ascended a flight of stairs and entered a most mag- 
nificent hall. He directed us where to sit, and took his place on one 
side; the present was placed on the other; and Moung Yo and 
another officer of Mya-day-men sat a little behind. The scene to 
which we were now introduced really surpassed our expectation. The 
spacious extent of the hall, the number and magnitude of the pillars, 
the height of the dome, the whole completely covered with gold, 
presented a most grand and imposing spectacle. Very few were 
present, and those evidently great officers of state. Our situation 
prevented us from seeing the further avenue of the hall ; but the end 
where we sat opened into the parade which the emperor was about to 
inspect. We remained about five minutes, when every one put him- 
self into the most respectful attitude, and Moung Yo whispered that 
his majesty had entered. We looked through the hall as far as the 
pillars would allow, and presently caught sight of this modem 
Ahasuerus. He came forward unattended, — in solitary grandeur, — 
exhibiting the proud gait and majesty of an eastern monarch. His 
dress was rich but not distinctive; and he carried in his hand the 
gold-sheathed sword, which seems to have taken the place of the 
sceptre of ancient times. But it was his high aspect and commanding 
eye that chiefly riveted our attention. He strided on. Every head, 
excepting ours, was now in the dust. We remained kneeling, our 
hands folded, our eyes fixed on the monarch. When he drew near 
we caught his attention. He stopped, partly turned toward us: 
*Who are these?' *The teachers, great king,' I replied. *What, 
you speak Burman — ^the priests that 1 heard of last night ? When 
did you arrive? Are you teachers of religion? Are you like the 
Portuguese priest? Are you married? Why do you dress so? 



/ 



152 THE EARNEST MAX. 

These and some other similar questions we answered, when he. 
appeared to be pleased with us, and sat down on an elevated seat, his 
hand resting on the hilt of his sword, and his eyes intently fixed on 
us. Moung Zah now began to read the petition ; and it ran thus : — 

** *The American teachers present themselves to receive the favour 
of the excellent king, the sovereign of land and sea. Hearing that^ 
on accoimt of the greatness of the royal power, the royal country was 
in a quiet and prosperous state, we arrived at the town of Rangoon, 
within the royal dominions, and having obtained leave of the gov> 
emor of that town to come up and behold the golden face, we have 
ascended and reached the bottom of the golden feet. In the great 
country of America, we sustain the character of teachers and ex- 
plainers of the contents of the sacred Scriptures of our religion. And 
since it is contained in those Scriptures, that, if we pass to other 
countries, and preach and propagate religion, great good will resiilt, 
and both those who teach and those who receive the religion will be 
freed from future punishment, and enjoy, without decay or death, the 
eternal felicity of heaven ; — that royal permission be given, that we, 
taking refuge in the royal power, may preach our religion in these 
dominions, and that those who are pleased with our preaching, and 
wish to listen to and be guided by it, whether foreigners or Burmans, 
may be exempt from government molestation, they present them- 
selves to receive the favour of the excellent king, the sovereign of 
land and sea.' 

"The emperor heard this petition, and stretched out his hand. 
Moung Zah crawled forward and presented it. His majesty began at 
the top, and deliberately read it through. In the meantime I gave 
Moung Zah an abridged copy of the tract, in which ^very offensive 
sentence was corrected, and the whole put into the handsomest style 
and dress possible. After the emperor had perused the petition, he 
handed it back without saying a word, and took the tract. Our 
hearts now rose to God for a display of his grace. * 0, have mercy 
on Burmah ! Have mercy on her king !' But, alas ! the time w^as 
not yet come. He held the tract long enough to read the first two 
sentences, which assert that there is one eternal God, who is inde- 
pendent of the incidents of mortality, and that beside him there is no 
God;, and then with an air of indifference, perhaps disdain, he dashed 
it down to the ground. Moung Zah stooped forward, picked it 
up, and handed it us. Moung Yo made a slight attempt to save ua 
by imfolding one of the volumes which composed our present, and 
displaying its beauty; but his majesty took no notice. Our fate was 
decided. After a few moments, Moung Zah interpreted his royal 



VISIT TO THE EMPEBOB. 153 

master's will, in the following terms: *Wliy do you ask for sucli 
pennission ? Have not the Portuguese, the English, the Mussulmans, 
and people of all other religions, full liberty to practise and worship 
according to their own customs? In regard to the objects of your 
petition, his majesty gives no order. In regard to your sacred books, 
his majesty has no use for them ; take them away/ 

** Something was now said about brother Colman^s skill in medi- 
cine ; upon which the emperor once more opened his mouth, and said : 
*Let them proceed to the residence of my physician, the Portuguese 
priest ; let him examine whether they can be useful to me in that line, 
and report accordingly.' He then rose from his seat, strided on to 
the end of the hall, and there, after having dashed to the ground the 
first intelligence that he had ever received of the eternal God, his 
Maker, his Preserver, his Judge, he threw himself down on a cushion, 
and lay listening to the music and gazing at the parade spread out 
before him. 

** As for us and our present, we were huddled up and hurried away 
without much ceremony. We passed out of the palace gates with 
much more facility than we entered, and were conducted first to the 
house of Mya-day-men. There his officer reported our reception, but 
in as f avoiurable terms as possible ; and as his highness was not appri- 
sed of our precise object, our repulse appeared probably to him not so 
decisive as we knew it to be. We were next conducted two miles 
through the heat of the sun and dust of the streets of Ava, to the 
residence of the Portuguese priest. He very speedily ascertained that 
we were in possession of no wonderful secret which would secure the 
emperor from all disease, and make him live for ever; and we were 
accordingly allowed to take leave of the reverend inquisitor, and 
retreat to our boat. 

''At this stage of the business, notwithstanding the decided 
repulse we had received, we still cherished some hope of ultimately 
gaining our point. We regretted that a sudden interruption had pre- 
vented our explaining our objects to Moun^ Zah in that familiar and 
confidential manner in which we had intended ; and we determined, 
therefore, to make another attempt upon him in private. 

"January 28. Early in the morning we had the pleasure of seeing 
our friend Mr. G. coming to our boat. It may not be amiss to men- 
tion that he is the collector who was chiefly instrumental in relieving 
us from the exorbitant demand which, a few months ago, was made 
upon us in Kangoon. He now told us that he had heard of our 
repulse, but would not have us give up all hope ; that he was particu- 
larly-acquainted with Moung Zah, and would accompany us to his 
house a little before sunset, at an hour when he was acces^ble. This 
precisely accorded with our intentions. 



( 



154 THE EARNEST MAN. 

• 
**In the afternoon, therefore, we called on Mr. G., and he went 

with us into the city. On the way, we paid a visit to the wife of the 

present viceroy of Rangoon, whose eldest son is married to the only 

daughter of the present emperor. We carried a present, and were of 

course kindly received. 

*' Thence we went to the house of Moung Zah, some way beyond 
the palace. He received us with great coldness and reserve. The 
conversation, which we carried on chiefly through Mr. G., it is 
unnecessary to detail. Suffice it to say, that we ascertained beyond 
a doubt that the policy of the Burman government, in regard to the 
toleration of any foreign religion, is precisely the same with the 
Chinese ; that it is quite out of ^e question whether any of the sub- 
jects of the emperor, who embrace a religion diflerent from his own, 
will be exempt from punishment ; and that we, in presenting a peti- 
tion to that effect, had been guilty of a most egregious blunder, an 
unpardonable offence. Mr. G. urged every argument that we sug- 
gested, and some others. He finally stJited, if we obtained the royal 
favour, other foreigners would come and settle in the empire, and 
trade would be gi*eatly benefited. This argument alone seemed to 
have any effect on the mind of the minister, and, looking out from the 
cloud which covered his face, he vouchsafed to say, that if we would 
wait some time, he would endeavour to speak to his majesty about 
us. From this remark it was impossible to derive any encourage- 
ment ; and having nothing further to urge, we left Mr. G. , and bow- 
ing down to the ground, took leave of this great minister of state, 
who, under the emperor, guides the movements of the whole empire. 

** It was now evening. We had four miles to walk by moonlight. 
Two of our disciples only followed us. They had ventured as near 
as they durst to the door of the hall of audience, and listened to 
words which sealed the extinction of their hope and ours. For 
some time we spoke not. 

* Some natural tears we dropped, but wiped them soon ; 
The world was all before us, where to choose 
Our place of rest, and Providence our guide.* 

And, as our first parents took their solitary way through Eden, hand 
in hand, so we took our way through this great city, which, to our 
late imagination, seemed another Eden, but now, through the magic 
touch of disappointment, seemed blasted and withered, as if smitten 
by the fatal influence of the cherubic sword. 

"Arrived at the boat, we threw ourselves down, completely ex- 
hausted in body and mind. For three days we had walked eight 
miles a day, the most of the way in the heat of the sun, which, even 



VISIT TO THE EMPEROR. 155 

at this season, in the interior of these countries, is exceedingly 
oppressive, and the result of our travels and toils has been — ^the 
wisest and best possible ; a result which, if we could see the end from 
the beginning, would call forth our highest praise. 0, slow of heart 
to believe and trust in the constant presence and over-ruling agency of 
our own Almighty Saviour ! " 

The next morning they resolved, on the strength of the 
slight encouragement contained in the minister's words, to 
make one more effort. Through their kind English friend, 
Mr. G., they inquired the opinion of this great dignitary, 
■whether a longer stay in Ava would be likely to promote 
their object. He answered explicitly that there was no 
chance for them, should they wait ever so long. " There- 
fore," concluded the great man, "let them go about their 
business." But Mr. Judson could not yet give up all hope. 
Taking out the tract which the emperor had cast aside so 
contemptuously, he handed it to Mr. G., with the words, 
"This is a brief view of the Christian religion. Do you 
present it to Moung Zah in our name, or persuade him to 
read it or hear it read. We have, indeed, no hope of its 
efficacy; but it is our last resort, and God may help us in 
the extremity." The tract was received kindly, and listened 
to even with approbation ; but nothing further oDSued from 
the attempt. Mr. G. was then summoned to the royal 
presence, and questioned respecting these foreign " religion- 
makers." His majesty was evidently much prejudiced against 
them, but disposed rather to be amused than angry at their 
project "What !" said he, laughing, "they have come pre- 
suming to convert us to their religion ? Let them leave our 
capital. We have no desire to receive their instructions.. 
Perhaps they may find some of their countrymen in lUn- 
goon who may be willing to listen to them." 

It soon appeared that this imperial order was one more 
easily given than obeyed. From* the 1st to the 5th of 
Febru^'ry, Mr. Judson was labouring incessantly to obtain a 
passport for Kangoon, but without success. After being 



( 



156 THE EABNEST 3IAN. 

referred from one dignitary to another, and made to believe, 
at one time, that it would be necessary in their case to pro- 
cure a special permit from the high court of the empire, the 
difficulty was at length solved by a present, about thirty- 
dollars in value, to the minister of state, Moung Zah. Oa 
the 5th of the month, " late in the evening," he writes, " I 
had the pleasure of taking in my hand the pointed palm 
leaf" Their departure, the day following, is recorded in 
characteristic words : " Pushed off from the beach of 0-ding- 
man. I could moralize half an hour on the apt resemblance, 
the beautiful congruity, between the desolate state of our 
feeliDgs and the sandy, barren surface of this miserable 
beach. But * 'tis idle all.' Let the beach and our sorrow go 
together. Something better will turn up to-morrow." 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE NATIVE CmTBCH. 
" Ye are onr epistles — ^known and read of all men. 



»> 



The last expedient had now been tried for retrieving the 
gloomy circumstances of the mission, and it seemed to the 
missionaries that nothing was left for them but to obey the 
Saviour's direction : " When they persecute you in one city, 
flee ye to another." Coidd they have hoped for hearers, they 
would have fearlessly resolved to continue the proclamation 
of the gospel, notwithstanding the frowns of the emperor. 
But that universal dread of the displeasure of the royal 
slaveholder, which had previously cast such a death-like chill 
on the spirit of inquiry, allowed no ground for any su<^ 
expectation. They dared not count on the constancy even 



THE NATIVE CHURCH. 157 

of those hopeful converts, who, under less imminent hazards, 
had made profession of their &ith in Christ. "We thought," 
says Mr. Judson, "that if but or^e out of the three* remained 
firm, it was as much as we could reasonably hope for." 
They concluded, therefore, to withdraw for the present from 
the immediate notice of government, and wait and watch for 
happier times. They selected, as their place of refuge, that 
district of Arracan which Mr. Judson had attempted to visit 
in 1818. Its proximity to Burmah, while yet, as a depen- 
dency of Bengal, it -took them out of the reach of Burman 
power, — ^the similarity of language, — and finally, the little 
nucleus of native Christians already gathered there, natur- 
ally pointed this out as the most favourable spot. These 
circumstances it was hoped, moreover, might induce all or 
a part of the converts to accompany them thither, thus pre- 
serving the germ of a Burman church, to be by and by 
retransplanted to its native soil. It was with this plan in 
mind as their only resource, that the missionaries now turned 
their faces towards Bangoou. 

• But this "sifting time" of the little church was destined 
to a happier issue. Even before they reached Bangoon, 
their hearts were cheered by tokens that God had not for- 
saketi the mission; and they began &.intly to hope that 
something better than flight might be in store for them. At 
Pyee, 230 miles from Ava, they met most unexpectedly with 
the teacher, Moimg Shwa-gnong, who had come thither to 
visit a sick friend. The inteiview is thus described in the 
journal : — 

*'We stated to him all our adventures at court, the distressing 
result of the expedition, and the present danger of propagating or 
professing the rehgion of Christ, and wound off with the story of the 
iron malLf He appeared to be less affected and intimidated by the 

* Moung Nan, the first disciple, had gone with them to Ava. 

i" Belated to Mr. Judson by an English gentleman at Ava, as f oUows : — 
** About fifteen years ago the Boman Catholic priests converted to their 



i 



160 THE EARNEST MAN. 

the rage of their persecutors? Are we willing to participate with 
them ? Though the spirit may be sometimes almost willing, is not 
the flesh too weak ? 

** Pondering on such topics as these, a little ray of hope seemed to 
shine out of the darkness of our despair. But it was not like the 
aoft beam of the moon, ii(;^hich kindly shines on the i>ath of the 
benighted pilgrim, and guides him to a place of shelter. It 'was 
rather like the angry gleam of lightning, which, while for a moment 
it illuminates the landscape aroimd, discloses the black magazines of 
heaven's artillery, and threatens death to the unwary gazer." 

On arriving at Brangoon they called together the same 
evening the three disciples, and laid before them a fall 
account of the occurrences at the capital, in order that 
they might fully understand both their own danger and the 
reasons which had induced their teachers to think of quit- 
ting Rangoon. And now a beautiful scene was witnessed. 
Instead of being struck with terror at the prospect of im- 
pending persecution, these infent converts, just rescued from 
heathenism, gathered round their experienced teachers, and 
sustained their hearts by their own Christian constancy and 
£skith. " All, to a man," writes Mr. Judson, " appeared im- 
movably the same ; yea, rather advanced in zeal and energy. 
They vied with each other in trying to explain away diffi- 
culties, and to convince us that the case was nbt yet quite 
desperate." Still, however, the missionaries deemed it pru- 
dent to retire to Chittagong till their repulse at court should 
be a little forgotten, and, for several days, continued their 
inquiries for vessels sailing thither. On the evening of the 
24th, an affecting scene occurred, which is thus related in 
the journal : — 

"This evening, Moung Bya came up with his brother-in-law, 
Moung Myat-yah, who has Uved in our yard several months, and 
formerly attended worship at the zayat. ' I have come,' said Moung 
Bya, * to petition that you will not leave B^ngoon at present.' *I 
think,' replied I, * that it is useless to remain under present circum.- 
stances. We cannot open the zayat ; we cannot have public worship ; 
no Burman will dare to examine this religion; and if none examine, 
none can be expected to embrace it. , 'Teacher,' said he, *my mind 



THE NATIVE CHUBCH. 161 

is distressed ; I can neither eat nor sle^, since I find you are going 
away. I have been around among those who live near us, and I find 
some who are even now examining the new religion. Brother Myat- 
yah is one of them, and he unites with me in my petitions.' Here 
Myat-yah assented that it was so. ' Do stay with us a few months. 
Do stay till there are eight or ten disciples ; then appoint one to be 
the teacher of the rest ; I shall not be concerned about the event ; 
though you should leave the country, the religion will spread of 
itself ; the emperor himself cannot stop it. But if you go now, and 
take the two disciples that can follow, I shall be left alone. I cannot 
baptize those who may wish to embrace this religion. What can I 
do V Moung Nau came in, and expressed himself in a similar way. 
He thought that several would yet become disciples, in spite of all 
opposition, and that it was best for us to stay awhile. We could not 
restrain our tears at hearing all this ; and we told them that as we 
lived only for the promotion of the cause of Christ among the Bur- 
mans, if there was any prospect of success in Bangoon, we had no 
desire to go to another place, and would, therefore, reconsider the 
matter." 

The usual hour of worship, next evening, brought not 
only the disciples together, but two inquirers. The former 
manifested a spirit worthy of the noblest times of the 
Christian church. "Teacher," said Moung Thalah, at the 
close of worship, " your intention of going away has filled us 
all with trouble. Is it good to forsake us thus 1 Notwith- 
standing present difficulties, it is to be remembered that this 
work is not yours or ours, but the work of God. If he gives 
light the religion will spread. Nothing can impede it." 
Just then a third inquirer was found listening without, and 
was invited in to take his seat with the others. "Moung Bya," 
says Mr. Judson, "now began to be in earnest; his arm was 
elevated, and his eyes brightened. *Let us all,' said he, 
'make an effort. As for me I will pray. Only leave a 
little church of ten, with a teacher set over them, and I 
shall be satisfied.' " 

Under these circumstances, the missionaries felt it to be 
impossible for them cUl to leave Bangoon. Yet as it seemed 
very important to secure a place of retreat, should the ex- 
pected storm burst upon them, it was concluded that Mr. 



( 



162 THE EARNEST MAN. 

Colman should proceed to Chittagong, and collect the native 
converts into a new station; while Mr. Judson was to 
remain at Rangoon till such time as the violence of persecu- 
tion " should suppress all inquiry, and make it useless and 
rash to remain." But this emergency, in the good providence 
of God, was not permitted to arise. Some unseen agency 
silently drew off the dark thundercloud, so that not a hair of 
their heads was injured. The return, at this crisis, of Mr. Jud- 
son's personal friend, Mya-day-men, to the viceroyship of the 
province of Rangoon, seemed a providential occurrence. 
Without any countenance or indeed recognition of the mis- 
sion on his part, which could compromise himself, it soon 
came to be understood that complaints against the disciples 
were not likely to receive much attention from his highness ; 
and this was of itself no small check to the spirit of perse- 
cution. Still the necessity was felt of extreme caution, to 
avoid everything which might unnecessarily provoke the 
subordinate officers of government, and through them reach 
the imperial court. Public worship was held in the interior 
of the zayat with closed doors, and great care was used not 
to betray inquirers. By this means Mr. Judson, now the 
only missionary on the ground, was enabled to continue his 
labours without interruption, and the blessing of heaven 
descended on them like the gentle dew of heaven on the 
field. 

"February 27, Lord's day. Had private worship in the zayat 
— the front doors closed—none present but the disciples and in- 
quirers. 

"February 28. A visit from Moimg Shwa-gnong. He had con- 
sidered, he said, my last words — that one must believe and be bap- 
tized in order to be a full disciple. It was his desire to be such, and 
he wanted to know what outward rules in particular he must observe 
in case he should become a professor. I told him that the disciples 
of Christ, after baptism, were associated together ; that they assem- 
bled every Lord's day for worship, and that from time to time they 
received the sacrament of bread and wine. I then warned him of the 
danger of self-deception, and of the persecution to which disciples 
were exposed in this country, and advised him to reconsider the 



THE NATIVE CHURCH. 163 

matter most thoroughly before he made a definite request for 
baptism. 

"After he had gone, Oo Yan (mentioned December 19) came in; 
was disappointed in not finding Moung Shwa-gnong, having agreed to 
meet him at the mission house. We had a long conversation on 
doctrinal points, in which he discovered a very acute, discriminating 
mind. 

** March 2. Another' visit from Oo Yan. Venture to indulge a little 
hope that truth is beginning to operate on his mind. 

** March 6, Lord's day. Private worship, as last Lord's day. Li 
the evening received the sacrament of bread and wine. Moung Nau 
was not present, having gone on a visit to Bau-lay, his native place. 
Had a refreshing and happy season with the two other disciples. Two 
of the inquirers were spectators. 

** March 8. In the evening had a very pleasant and instructive con- 
ference with the disciples and inquirers. Moung Thahlah api)eared 
to great advantage. Took the lead in explaining truth to the new 
ones, and quoted Scripture with singular facility and aptness. He 
has most evidently very correct views of the doctrines of grace. 
Moimg Myat-yah appears to begin to discern the excellence of 
the Christian system, and to have some right feelings towards the 
Saviour. 

"March 10. Moung Shwa-gnong and Oo Yan have, been with me 
several hours, but the interview has afforded very little encourage- 
ment. The former said but little on his own account, appearing 
chiefly desirous of convincing and persuading his friend, that he might 
gain, as I secretly suspected, some companion of his own rank in life, 
before he embraced the new religion. The latter acted on the defen- 
sive, and spent all his time in raising objections. He was ready to 
admit that the atheistic system of the Buddhists was not tenable, but 
endeavoured to fortify himself on a middle system between that and 
the Christian — the very system in which Moung Shwa-gnong formerly 
rested, and which for distinction's sake may be fitly termed the semi- 
atheistic Its fundamental doctrine is, that divine wisdom, not con- 
centrated.in any existing spirit, or embodied in any form, but diffused 
throughout the universe, and partaken in different degrees by various 
intelligences, and in a very high degree by the Buddhs, is the true 
and only God. This poor system, which is evidently guilty of suicide, 
Oo Yan made every possible effort to keep alive ; but I really think 
that in his own mind he felt the case to be hopeless. His mode of 
reasoning is, however, soft, insinuating, and acute; and so adroitly 
did he act his part, that Moung Shwa-gnong, with his strong arm, 
and I with the strength of truth, were scarcely able to keep him. 
down. 



i 



164 THE EARNEST MAN. 

** March 13. The teacher and Oo Yan, with two of their friends, 
came and spent several hours. The former stayed later than the 
others, and attended evening worship. I asked him whether there 
was any point in the Christian system on which he had not obtained 
satisfaction. He replied that he was not yet satisfied as to the pro- 
priety of God's appointing one particular day in the week for assem- 
bling together, in distinction from all other days. I saw at once ■why 
he has sdways been so remiss in attending worship on the Lord's day ; 
and I therefore proceeded to state the nature of jxjsitive commands, 
and their peculiar excellence, as the best test of obedience ; that it 
was evidently beneficial for the disciples of Christ to as^mble some- 
times ; that God, in appointing that such an assembly should be held 
at least one day in seven, must be supposed to be guided by wisdoni 
infinitely transcending that of man ; that, if the disciples of Christ 
are to meet once at least in seven days, it is evidently best to have 
the day of meeting designated, in order to secure their general union 
and concert ; and that the first day of the week had at least this 
claim to preference, that it is the day on which our Saviour rose from 
the dead. I descanted on these points to his entire satisfaction ; but 
let us see whether he will come next Lord's day. 

" Later in the evening, had an instructive conference with Moung 
Myat-y^ and Moung Shwa Boo. They both appear to have obtained 
some of that light which, like the dawn of morning, shineth more and 
more imto perfect day. 

*' March 15. Another visit from the teacher, accompanied with his 
wife and child. Again discussed the necessity of assembling on the 
Lord's day. Found that the sacraments of baptism and the supper 
are, in his mind, liable to similar objections. Forsook, therefore, aU 
himian reasoning, and rested the merits of the case on the bare 
authority of Christ. *Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I 
command you.' Notwithstanding the remains of his deistical spirit, 
however, I obtained during this visit more satisfactory evidence of his 
real conversion, than ever before. He said that he knew nothing of 
an eternally existing God before he met with me ; that on hearing Uiat 
doctrine he instantly believed it, but that it was a long time before 
he closed with Christ. * Can you recollect the time V said L * Not 
precisely,' he replied, * but it was during a visit, when you discoursed 
concerning the Trinity, the divine worship of Jesus, and the great 
suflferings which he, though truly God, endured for his disciples.' 
He afterwards s]X)ke with much Christian feeling on the preciousness 
of the last j^art of the sixth chapter of Matthew, which he heard me 
read day before yesterday, at evening worship. 

"March 19, Lord's day. Looked in vain for the teacher and his 
acquaintances. 



THE NATIVE CHURCH. 165 

** March 21. Moiing Thahlah introduced one of his relations, by- 
name Moung Shwa-ba, as desirous of considering the Christian 
religion. Spent an hour or two in conversing with him. He was 
afterwards present at evening worship, and stayed to converse after 
the rest had retired. 

"March 22. Another conversation with Moung Shwa-ba. He 
appears to be imder deep religious impressions. His language and 
his looks evince an uncommon solenmity of spirit, an earnest desire 
to be saved from the wrath to come. After praying with him, I 
left him in company with Moung Thahlah. 

*' March 23. In the morning, Moung Thahlah informed me that 
he and his friend had sat up the greater part of the night in the zayat, 
reading, and conversing, and praying. In the afternoon, Moung 
Shwa-ba came in himself. His expressions are very strong ; but I 
have no reason to doubt his sincerity. It only seems strange to us 
that a work of grace should be carried on so rapidly in the soul of an 
ignorant heathen. He presented a writing, containing a statement of 
his faith, and an urgent request to be baptized next Lord's day. 

** March 24. Spent all the evening with Moung Shwa-ba. Feel 
satisfied that he has experienced a work of divine grace, but think it 
advisable to defer his baptism tiU Sunday after next, in order to allow 
him full time to re-examine the religion and the foimdation of his 
hopes. 

" March 26, Lord's day. Three women present at worship, acquaint- 
ances of Moung Shwa-gnong. They have visited Mrs. Judson once or 
twice before. The principal of them renounced Gautama some years 
ago, and adopted the semi-atheistic system, but without obtaining 
any real satisfaction. Two years ago, she met with a copy of the 
tract, which gave her an idea of an etemaUy-existing God ; but she 
knew not whence the paper came. At length Moung Shwa-gnong 
told her that he had f oimd the true wisdom, and directed her to us. 
Her case appears very hopefuL 

"In the evening, after worship, had a protracted conversation with 
the disciples and inquirers, on account of brother Colman's intended 
departure to-morrow. Moimg Shwa-ba apjieared very well indeed. 
Moung Myat-yah said : * Set me down for a disciple. I have fully 
made up my mind in regard to this religion. I love Jesus Christ ; 
but I am not yet quite ready for baptism.' After we dismissed them, 
they went over to the zayat of their own accord, and held a prayer 
meeting. 

** And here I must close my journal We have spent the last even- 
ing with our very dear brother and sister Colman. They expect to 
embark to-morrow morning. Our parting is mournful; for happy. 



166 THE EARNEST MAN. 

uncommonly happy, has been our past intercourse. Nothing but a 
sense of duty could force the present separation. We hope that it 
will be of short duration, and that we shall soon reunite our labours 
in Chittagong or Rangoon. 

** On their departure, Mrs. Judson and myself will again be left to 
our former * loneliness of lot.' In this situation we renewedly com- 
mend ourselves to the remembrance and prayers of the Board. 

*' March 27. Brother and sister Colman took leave of us, and em- 
barked for BengaL 

"April 1. In the evening we had a final conversation with Moung 
Shwa-ba, and became fully satisfied with the evidences of his conver- 
sion. We therefore expressed our willingness to receive him into 
church-fellowship, and I announced to him my intention of baptizing 
him to-morrow, on which he expressed his gratitude and joy. 

** April 2, Lord's day. At night, after dark, we went privately to 
the accustomed pond, and baptized the new disciple. Afterwards sat 
down at the table of the Lord — two foreign and four native commu- 
nicants. Three inquirers were admitted to be spectators. 

"April 11. A visit from Oo Yan, accompanied by two of his 
friends who had been here before. Long conversation on topics of 
the Christian religion. 

"April 14. The women mentioned March 26, spent most of the 
day with Mrs. Judson. They regularly visit her about once a week. 
I mention the visit of to-day because it has afforded pretty satisfac- 
tory evidence that the principal one of the company, by name Mah 
Men-la, has experienced di^dne grace. Her husband is one of the 
visitors who came with Oo Yan on the 11th. 

"April 15. Moulig Shwa-ba has for some days been talking of a 
visit to Shwa-doung, his native place, to communicate the treasure 
which he has found to his numerous relations and friends. This 
evening, after expressing his desires, he said it had occurred to him 
that it might be proper to ask permission or license so to do. Not 
that he aspired to set up as a teacher ; far from that ; but he wanted 
to feel that, in conmiimicating the gospel, he was proceeding in a 
regular authorized manner. He thought that, if two or three disci- 
ples could be raised up in each of the large towns, it would much 
facilitate our operations. He was sure that at least one in ten of his 
relations and friends, on hearing his story, could not help embracing 
the new religion. I secretly exulted at hearing his proposal, so- 
evidently the result of Christian principle, and exhorted him to con- 
stant self-examination and prayer, as the means of discovering his 
own duty and the divine will. 

"April 16, Lord's day. Early in the morning the teacher, Moung 



THE NATIVE CHUBCH. 167 

Shwa-gnoDg, came in, after an absence of just a month. He was soon 
followed by Oo Yan and his two friends. They spent the whole day. 
with me. All appear hopefuL The teacher remained, as usual, after 
the others had left, and thereby afforded me an opportunity for 
private conversation. He admitted that all his objections to positive 
commands were removed, and that it was his desire to be a full 
disciple ; but, when urged closely on the subject, he intimated that 
his wife and friends were opposed to his taking any decided step, and. 
that, if he did, he was, moreover, exposed to imminent danger of 
persecution and death. He mentioned these things with so much 
feeling, and such evident consciousness of simple weakness, as com- 
pletely disarmed me. My heart was wrung with pity. I sincerely 
sympathized with him in his evident mental trials. I could not deny, 
the truth of what he said, but gently hinted, * As thy day is, thy 
strength shall be,' and propoiSed the example of the apostles and 
martyrs, the glory of suffering for Christ, &c. But the thought of 
the iron mall, and a secret suspicion that if I was in his circumstances 
I should x)erhaps have no more courage, restrained my tongue. We 
parted with much solemnity, understanding one another better than 
ever .before. I shall not probably see him again very soon; for it is 
too dangerous for a man of his distinction to be seen coming frequently, 
to the mission house. 

** April 20. Mah Men-la and her friends have been with Mrs. Jud- 
son all day. She gives increasing evidence of being a real disciple, 
but is extremely timid, through fear of persecution. One of her re- 
marks deserves notice as a natural expression of true Christian feeling. 
* I am surprised,' said she, * to find this religion has such an effect on 
my mind as to make me love the disciples of Christ more than my 
dearest natural relations.' She is a woman of very superior discern-. 
ment and mental energy. One of the women who has frequently 
accompanied her in her visits, met with a tract at Old Pegu about six 
weeks ago, and came all the way to Eangoon, chiefly, ^e says, on 
that account. 

** This day I have finished the translation of the Epistle to the 
Ephesians, begun before I went to Ava, but intermitted on account 
of the weakness of my eyes. It is with real joy that I put this 
precious writing into the hands of the disciples. It is a great acces- 
sion to their scanty stock of Scripture; for they have had nothing 
hitherto but Matthew. Intend to give them Acts as fast as my own . 
eyes will allow. 

"April 30, Lord's day. One of the busiest days I have ever spent. 
Not a multitude of visitants, as formerly. That we cannot expect 
in present circumstances. But, besides th.e usual evening assembly, . 



168 THE BABITEST MAN. 

there were eight or ten present at worship, some of whom were with 
me from nine in the morning till ten at night. Mah Men-la and her 
company were with Mrs. Judson ; who, by the way, has had a serious 
attack of the liver complaint for a fortnight past, and is now in a 
course of salivation. 

"Oo Yan, after having searched out all the difficult points of 
religion, came to-day to the ne plus ultra. How are sin and eternal 
misery reconcilable with the character of an infinitely holy, wise, and 
powerfid God ? He at length obtained such satisfaction that he could 
not restrain laughing, from pure mental delight, and kept recurring 
to the subject, and repeating my remarks to those around him. He 
was accompanied, as usual, by his two friends, Moung Thah-a and 
Moung Myat-lah, husband of Mah Men-la. With these came also 
one Moung Yo, a disciple of Moung Shwa-gnong, a poor man, but a 
sharp reasoner. He was, or pretended to be, on the semi-atheistic 
plan. (See March 10.) After ascertaining his precise ground, I used 
an argument which in a late combat with Oo Yan I found invincible. 
It is simply this : * No mind, no wisdom ; temporary mind, temporary 
wisdom ; eternal mind, eternal wisdom.* Now as all the semi-atheists 
firmly believe in eternal wisdom, this concise statement sweeps with 
irresistible sway through the very joints and marrow of their system. 
And, though it may seem rather simple and inconclusive to one 
unacquainted with Burman reasoning, its effect is uniformly decisive. 
No sooner is this short sentence uttered than one significantly nods 
his head, as if to say, * There, you have it.' Another cries out to the 
opponent, * You are undone, destroyed.* Another says, *Talk about 
wisdom ! where else will you find it ?' The disputant himself, who 
was perhaps preparing a learned speech about the excellence, and 
efficacy, and eternity of wisdom, quite disconcerted by this unex- 
pected onset, sits looking at the wreck of his system, and wondering at 
the simple means which have spread such ruin around him ; presently 
he looks up (for the Burmans are frequently candid) and says, * Your 
words are very appropriate ;' and perhaps his next question is, * Ho\r 
can I become a disciple of the Grod you worship ?' All the visitors 
to-day, and, indeed, all the semi-atheists, are despisers of Gautama 
and the established religion of the land. Moung Shwa-gnong has 
disseminated this heresy in Bangoon for several years ; but since he 
has be(K)me acquainted with us, he frequently tells his adherents, * I 
know nothing; if you want true wisdom go to the foreign teacher, 
and there you will find it.* I have reason to believe that this heresy 
is not confined to Bangoon, but is taking root in various parts of the 
country, and preparing the way for the Christian religion. O for 
toleration — a little toleration ! We will be content to baptize in the 



THE NATIVE CHUBCH. 169 

night, and hold worship in private ; but we do pray that we may not 
be utterly banished from the land ; that we may not be cut up, root 
and branch. O that these poor souls who are groping in the dark, 
feeling after the truth, may have time and opportunity to find the 
precious treasure which will enrich them for evermore ! We are all 
looking with anxiety towards the golden feet. Our viceroy, Moung 
Shwa-thah, has gone thither on a visit ; and it is doubtful whether he 
will return, or his rival, Mya-day-men. If the latter, there is some 
reason to hope that we shall keep footing in Eangoon, at least during 
his administration. 

" May 6. Another visit from Moung Myat-lah and his wife, which 
has afforded us good reason to hope that he also has become a true 
believer. His wife apx)ears the same as usual. They are both gaining 
courage in regard to an open profession of the Christian religion, and 
begin to wonder at the backwardness of their former oracle, Moung 
Shwa-gnong. 

"May 8. Moung Thah-a, a friend of Moung Myat-lah, has spent 
most of the day with me, and given equally good evidence of being a 
true disciple. He was formerly an officer under government, and 
amassed considerable property, which he mostly spent in building 
pagodas and making offerings. But he obtained no satisfaction, found 
no resting-place for his soul, until he became acquainted with the 
religion of Jesus. He now rests in this religion with conscious 
security ; believes and loves all that he hears of it, and prays that he 
may become fully a true disciple of the Saviour. 

"Both of these men are respectable householders, rather above the 
middling class. They live in a little village called Nan-dau-gong, 
about half a mile from the mission house. Moung Myat-lah has a 
large family; but Moung Thah-a has none; and were it not for an 
aged mother who depends on him, he would follow me, he says, 
throughout the world. 

** May 12. The three visitors from Nan-dau-gong have been with us 
part of to-day. One characteristic trait in these people is a particular 
love for the Scriptures. They almost quarrel with one another for the 
only copy of the Ephesians which I have given them, and I therefore 
determine to spare them another as soon as it is done. They say that 
the translation of this Epistle is plainer, and more easily understood, 
than that of Matthew ; which is very encouraging to me, as I made it 
without the assistance of any person, not even a Burman teacher. 
My old teacher went to Ava some months ago, and I am now afraid 
to employ another lest he should become too well acquainted with 
the disciples and inquirers, and betray them to government. 

"May 14, Lord's day. A very busy day with the Nan-dau-gong 
visitors, and the usual evening assembly. 



170 THE EARNEST MAN. 

"May 18. Mah Myat-lah and Mah Doke, who have frequcDtly 
accompanied their relation, Mah Men-la, came to-day by themselves. 
They appear to be under solenm religious impressions, sensible of 
their sin and danger, and anxious to obtain an interest in the Saviour^ 
but are yet unenlightened in regard to the way. Mah Baik, also, 
sister of Moung Thahlah, who formerly afforded us some encoiirage« 
ment, but afterwards fell off, has recommenced visiting us. We hope 
that during several months' confinement she has not in vain meditated 
on the truths she formerly heard. She says that her mind is changed, 
that she loves the Saviour, and trusts in him alone for salvation from 
sin and hell, and desires to become his discii)le in full by receiving 
baptism. Her husband, Moung Nyo-dwa, and Moung Thah-y^di, 
another resident in our yard, whom I think I have not yet mentioned, 
are constant attendants on evening worship, and seem to be making 
slow advances in the knowledge and love of divine truth. Moung 
Shwa-ba, the last baptized, begins to ap|)ear to great advantage ; has 
very correct ideas of the gospel system, and communicates truth to 
the inquirers with much feeling and animation. In zeal for the 
extension of the Redeemer's kingdom he surpasses the older disciples. 
This is the man who, from not knowing that there was such a being 
in the universe as a God, became a speculative believer, a penitent, a 
hopeful recipient of grace, and a candidate for baptism, all in the 
space of three dajrs. Some of the above-mentioned have, on the con- 
trary, been several months in making similar attainments, and are 
yet found wanting. Thus diverse are the operations of the Holy 
Spirit." 

In July of 1820, Mrs. Judson's health became so reduced 
that, after trying every other remedy without success, Mr. 
Judson felt obliged to take her to Bengal. Just before 
leaving, their hearts had been cheered by the accession of 
four new disciples, as narrated in the following extract from 
the journal : — 

"July 9, Lord's day. Moung Nyo-dwa and Moung Gway request 
baptism. We have had a good hoi)e of the former for some time. 
With the latter we are very slightly acquainted, though he has been 
a constant attendant on evening worship for nearly two months. 
This application, however, is approved by some of the most discerning 
in the church. The Nan-dau-gong people hope that they shall get 
grace and courage enough to profess the Christian religion by the 
time I return from BengaL 

" July 15. Have been very busy all the past week in getting ready 



THE NATIVE CHURCH. 171 

for the voyage. In procuring a governmental passport, received 
essential assistance from Mr. Lanciego, a Spaniard, the present col- 
lector of the port, and one of the chief magistrates of the place 
during the absence of the viceroy. He has also promised to protect 
the people whom we leave on the mission premises. 

** July 16, Lord's day. A few days ago we concluded to receive the 
two new applicants for baptism; but I thought it most prudent, 
partly by way of trying their sincerity, to send them a message, sug- 
gesting that, since I was greatly occupied in getting ready for sea, 
and since one of them was not so well acquainted with the doctrines 
of religion as was desirable, it might be better to defer their baptism 
till my return. 

"This morning they came up in much trouble. They stated that 
as they had fully embraced the Christian religion in their hearts, they 
could not remain easy without being baptized according to the com- 
mand of Christ ; that no man could tell whether I should ever return 
or not ; and that it was their earnest petition, that if I could possibly 
find time, and thought them worthy of the ordinance, 1 would 
administer it to them before I went away. They did not wish me to 
go out to the usual place, as that was at some distance, but would be 
baptized in a small pond near the mission house. Moung Gwa said 
that, though he was very ignorant, he knew enough of this religion 
to love it sincerely, and to trust in Christ for salvation from all his 
sins. I re-examined them both, stated to them the great danger of 
professing a foreign religion, &c. ; and on their urging their request, 
told them I would baptize them in the evening. 

** Was obliged to be out all the afternoon getting our things aboard 
the ship, as we expect to move down the river to-morrow morning. 
At night, baptized the two new disciples, after which we all partook 
of the Lord's supper for the last time. 

"July 17. Ship to be detained two days. In the forenoon the 
teacher, Moung Shwa-gnong, came in. I received him with some 
reserve, but soon found that he had not stayed away so long from 
choice, having been ill with a fever for some time, and occupied also 
with the illness of his family and adherents. He gradually wore 
away my reserve ; and we had not been together two hours before I 
felt more satisfied than ever, from his accoimt of his mental trials, 
his struggles with sin, his strivings to be holy, his penitence, his faith, 
his exercises in secret prayer, that he is a subject of the special 
operations of the Holy Spirit, — that he is indeed a true disciple. He 
stayed all day. In the afternoon the five Nan-dau-gong visitors, the 
doctor, Oo Yan, and several others came together, and we had much 
interesting conversation. Towards the close Moung Shwa-gnong, as 



172 THE EABKBST MAN. 

if to bring things to a crisis, addressed me thus : * My lord teacher, 
there are now several of iis present who have long considered this 
religion. I hoi)e that we are all believers in Jesus Christ.* ' I am 
afraid,' replied I, *to say that; however, it is easily ascertained ; and 
let me begin with you, teacher. I have heretofore thought that you 
fully believed in the eternal God ; but I have had some doubt whether 
you fidly believed in the Son of God, and the atonement which he has 
made.' * I assure you,' he replied, * that I am as fuUy persuaded of 
the latter as of the former.' *Do you believe, then,' I continued, 
'that none but the disciples of Christ will be saved from sin and 
hell?' *None but his disciples.' *How, then, can you remain 
without taking the oath of allegiance to Jesus Christ, and becoming 
his full disciple in body and soul ?' * It is my earnest desire to do so 
by receiving baptism; and for the very purix>se of expressing that 
desire I have come here to-day.' *You say you are desirous of 
receiving baptism ; may I ask when you desire to receive it ?' * At 
any time you will please to give it. Now, this moment, if you^ 
please.' *Do you wish to receive baptism in pubhc or in private?' 
*I will receive it at any time, and in any circumstances that yon 
please to direct.' I then said, 'Teacher, I am satisfied from your 
conversation this forenoon that you are a true disciple, and I reply, 
therefore, that I am as desirous of giving you baptism as you are of 
receiving it.' This conversation had a great eflfect on all present. 
The disciples rejoiced; the rest were astonished; for though they 
have long thought that he believed the Christian religion, they could 
not think that such a man could easUy be brought to profess it, and 
suffer himself to be put imder the water by a foreigner. I then 
turned to Moung Ths^-a, one of the Nan-dau-gong people, who, I 
hope, is a true believer. *Are you willing to take the oath of 
allegiance to Jesus Christ?' *If the teacher, Moimg Shwa-gnong, 
consents,' said he, *why should I hesitate?' *And if he does not 
consent, what then?' *I must wait a little longer.' 'Stand by,' 
said I, ' you trust in Moung Shwa-gnong rather than in Jesus Christ. 
You are not worthy of being baptized.' Moung Myat-lah, on being 
similarly interrogated, wished to consider a little longer. Oo Yan 
was still further from committing himself. Of the women present, I 
interrogated Mah Men-la only. She had evidently a considerable 
struggle in her mind, probably on account of her husband's having 
just declined. At length she said, that if I thought it suitable for 
her to be baptized, she was desirous of receiving the ordinance. I told 
her that her reply was not satisfactory. I could not consent to bap* 
tize any one who could possibly remain easy without being baptized, 
and then I related the story of the last two disciples ; after which the 
party broke up. 



THE NATIVE CHURCH. 173 

"In the evening I laid the case of Moung Shwa-gnong before the 
church, and we joyfully agreed to receive him to conununion on his 
being baptized. 

"July 18. In the morning the teacher again made his appearance. 
I again asked him whether he preferred being baptized in the day or 
in the evening, and he again left it to my decision; on which I 
advised him to wait till night. He appeared very well through the 
day, his deportment solemn, his conversation spiritual. Just at night 
I called in two or three of the disciples, read the account of the bap- 
tism of the eunuch, made the baptismal prayer, and then proceeded 
with the teacher to the accustomed place, went down into the water, 
and baptized him. 

"On my retmn I found that Mah Men-la, whom I had left with 
Mrs. Judson, had gone away. As soon as she saw that the teacher 
had actually gone to be baptized, she exclaimed : * Ah, he has now 
gone to obey the command of Jesus Christ, while I remain without 
obeying. I shall not be able to sleep this night. I must go home 
and considt my husband, and return.' In the evening we again par- 
took of the Lord's supper, in consequence of the admission of the 
teacher and my expected departure on the morrow. We had just 
finished, when, about nine o'clock, Mah Men-la returned, accom- 
panied by two other women from her village. She immediately 
requested to be baptized. The disciples present assented without 
hesitation. I told her that I rejoiced to baptize her, having been 
long satisfied that she had received the grace of Christ ; and it being 
very late, I led her out to the pond near the house by lantern light, 
and thus baptized the tenth Burman convert, and the first woman. 
Mah Men-la is fifty-one years old, of most extensive acquaintance 
through the place, of much strength of mind, decision of character, 
and consequent influence over others. She is, indeed, among women, 
what Moung Shwa-gnong is among men. 

" On returning to the house, she said : * Now I have taken the oath 
of allegiance to Jesus Christ, and I have nothing to do but to com- 
mit myself, soul and body, into the hands of my Lord, assured that 
he will never suffer me to fall away.' Several visitors spent the 
night at the mission house. 

"July 19. In the morning we all met for worship. After I had 
prayed, Moimg Thah-lah and Moung Shwa-ba both prayed with 
much propriety and feeling. In the course of the forenoon, Mah 
Men-la's husband, and Moung Thah-a, and the doctor, and several 
others, came in, so that we had quite a fuU house. At noon we set 
out for the river, followed by near a hundred people, the women cry- 
ing aloud in the Burman manner, and almost all deeply affected. 



1 



174 THE EARNEST MAN. 

When we entered the boat, I called the teacher, and Mah Men-la, 
and a few others, to go with us to the ship, which lay at some dis- 
tance in the river. The rest remained on the wharf, bidding us fare- 
well, telling us to come back soon, &c. Thus we left the shores of 
Rangoon. Those who accompanied us to the ship stayed an hour or 
two, and then retiuned. We stood as long on the quarter-deck look- 
ing at them, as the others had stood on the wharf looking at us."* 

Mrs. Judaon was greatly benefited by the journey; and, 
after an absence of nearly seven months, they were permitted 
to rejoin the beloved flock in Rangoon, which they had left 
exposed to the trials of persecution, without a guide or 
teacher. But solicitude soon gave place to joyful thanks- 
giving, when the scattered band collected once more at the 
wonted place of meeting, and it was found that not one had 
swerved from the faith or grown cold in his attachment to 
it. When it is remembered that it was not yet two years 
since the earliest of these converts had presented himself as 
an inquirer at the zayat, and that most of them had never 
till within a few months heard of an eternal God and a 
Saviour, this is, certainly, a very striking fact It was not 
because their constancy had been subjected to no trials. 
Some of them had been forced, by the extortions and 
oppressions of the petty officers of government, to fl^ee to 
the woods; others had taken refuge in the employment of 
some government man who could protect them ; all had been 
during the whole time nearly destitute of the means of 
grace. Moung Shwa-gnong, whose rank and character made 
him a conspicuous mark, had been in still more imminent 
danger. At one time all the priests and officers of the 
village where he resided, had formed a conspiracy to destroy 



* One of these female disciples was found at Bangoon by the mission- 
aries, in August, 1852, having attained the age of eighty years. From the 
time of her baptism until now, thirty years, she had maintained, in the 
midst of heathenism, a consistent Christian profession. She remembered 
well Mr. Judson, and "the Mamma" Judson, and was in daily expecta- 
tion of meeting them again in heaven. 



THE NATIVE CHTJRCH. 175 

him. So bold and •determined were their measures, that he 
began to think he must flee for his life. But the very eager- 
ness of his enemies proved the means of their defeat. Desi- 
rous of securing the countenance of the viceroy, one of the 
number, a member of the supreme court of the province, 
waited upon his highness, and, by way of sounding him on 
the subject, began to complain that Moung Shwa-gnong was 
turning the priests' rice-pots bottom upwards. But the curt 
reply, " What consequence ? Let the priests twm them back 
again /" quashed the conspiracy and assured the trembling 
disciples of toleration, so long as Mya-day-men should remain 
in power. 

The history of the mission through the following years 
presents the same general features. The country being at 
this time in a state of universal alarm and distress, in conse- 
quence of war with Siam, the converts dared not expose 
themselves to the notice and the consequent extortions of 
government, by living -near the mission house. Yet, not- 
withstanding this depressing influence, and the furious pri- 
vate opposition encountered at times, the work went on. 
We hear, under certain dates, of assemblies of twenty-five 
and thirty at public worship on the Sabbath ; of a succession 
of visitors through a whole day; of "twenty adults" at one 
time, "in all the various stages of religious inquiry;" of 
conversions and baptisms. 

Under date of May 20th, a new specimen of Burman 
character presented itself, of the same class of minds with 
Moung Shwa-gnong and Oo-yan. 

"Encountered another new character, one Moung Long, from the 
neighbourhood of Shwa-doung, a disciple of the great Toung-dwen 
teacher, the acknowledged head of all the semi-atheists in the country. 
Like the rest of the sect, Moung Long is, in reaUty, a complete sceptic, 
scarcely beheving his own existence. They say he is always quarrel- 
ling with his wife on some metaphysical point. For instance, if she 
says, * The rice is ready,* he wiU reply, * Rice ! what is rice ? Is it 
matter or spirit ? Is it an idea, or is it nonentity ?' Perhaps she will 
say, *It is matter;* and he will reply, *Well, wife, and what is 



i 



176 THE EABNEST MAN. 

matter ? Are you sure there is such a thing in existence, or are you 
merely subject to a delusion of the senses?'* 

'* When he first came in I thought him an ordinary man. He has 
only one good eye ; but I soon discovered that that one eye has as 
'great a quantity of being' as half a dozen common eyes. In his 
manners he is just the reverse of Moung Thah-ee — all suavity, and 
humility, and respect. He professed to be an inquirer after the 
truth ; and I accordingly opened to him some parts of the gospeL 
He listened with great seriousness, and when I ceased speaking, he 
remained so thoughtful and apparently impressed with the truth, 
that I began to hope he would come to some good, and therefore invi- 
ted him to ask some question relative to what he had heard. ' Your 
servant,' said he, *has not much to inquire of your lordship. In your 
lordship's sacred speech, however, there are one or two words that 
your servant does not understand. Your lordship says, that in the 
beginning God created one man and one woman. I do not understand 
(I beg your lordship's pardon) what a man is, and why he is called a 
man.' My eyes were now opened in an instant to his real character; 
and I had the happiness to be enabled, for about twenty minutes, to 
lay blow after blow upon his sceptical head, with such effect that he 
kept falling and falling; and though he made several desperate 
efforts to get up, he found himself at last prostrate on the ground, 
tmable to stir. Moung Shwa-gnong, who had been an attentive 
listener, was extremely delighted to see his enemy so well punished ; 
for this Moung Long has sorely harrassed him in time past. The 
poor man was not, however, in the least angry at his discomfiture, but 
in the true spirit of his school, said that though he had heard much 
of me, the reality far exceeded the report. Afterwards he joined 
us in worship, and listened with great attention, as did also his 
wife." 

On the 4:th of June, Moung Long is again mentioned as 
being present with his wife, who, says Mr. Judson, "proves 
to be as sharp as himself, and has been harrassing Mrs. Jud- 
son with all sorts of questions about the possibility of sin's 
finding entrance into a pure mind, or of its being permitted 
imder the government of a holy sovereign." 

To the reflecting Christian, no period of the missionary 



* The doctrines of idealism and nihihsm were fully and ably discussed 
by the Brahmins and Buddhists centuries before the time of Berkeley and 
Hume. 



THE NATIVE CHUltCH. 177 

histoiy offers points of deeper interest than these two years 
succeeding the unsuccessful application to the emperor. Cut 
off from all human resource, the work assumed more than 
ever the characteristics of a work of God, and proved its 
possession of a divine principle of life whose development no 
man could hinder. At the close of 1821, the church in 
Rangoon counted eighteen native members. This may, to 
some, appear small as the fi:uit of ten years' toil. But if we 
take into the account the various classes of society and types 
of character, the diversity in religious experience and in 
gifts, represented in this little company, it will be seen that 
it contained in itself the germs of a mighty growth. StiU 
more, in the character of their piety we see the pledge of 
the glorious harvest in prospect. Each one had put on 
Christ at the risk of the loss of all things. Conviction of 
the sinner's guilt and danger must be very deep, and percep- 
tion of the reality and excellence of the way of salvation by 
Christ very strong, to induce a poor slavish heathen, under 
outward circumstances so threatening, to renounce the re- 
ligion of his country. No one was admitted to baptism 
without the fullest evidence of a radical change of character, 
and a clear understanding of all the obligations and all the 
dangers involved in the reception of the ordinance. The 
indication, in any case, of a disposition to make obedience 
to the duty dependent upon the action of another, was 
regarded as sufficient reason for setting the applicant aside. 
Each was required to stand by himself in this great matter, 
and to make his decision on his own personal responsibility. 
Hence a depth and strength of individual piety in the con- 
verts, truly marvellous in persons so recently reclaimed from 
heathenism. Deprived of their religious teachers, and sepa- 
rated from each other, they still maintained the life of faith 
in their hearts, and became sources of spiritual blessing to 
others. 

In the following beautiful letter from one of their num- 
ber, we have an expression of intelligent as well as of fervent 



178 THE EARNEST MAN. 

heartfelt piety, which should put to the blush many a pro- 
fessed disciple who has enjoyed a whole life's culture in this 
Christian land. 

"translation op a letter prom mounq shwa-ba to th« 

rev. dr. baldwin. 

'* Moung Shwa-ba, an inhabitant of Rangoon, a town of Bunnah, 
one who adheres to the rehgion of Christ, and has been baptized; 
who meditates on the immeasurable, incalculable nature of the divine 
splendour and glory of the Invisible, even the Lord Jesus Christ and 
God the Father, and takes refuge in the wisdom, and power, and 
glory of God; affectionately addresses the great teacher Baldwin, 
a superintendent of missionary affairs in the city of Boston, of 
America. 

*** Beloved elder Brother, — Though in the present state the 
places of our residence are very far apart, and we have never met, 
yet, by means of letters, and of the words of Yudathan, who has 
told me of you, I love you, and wish to send you this letter. When 
the time arrives in which we shall wholly put on Christ, — ^him in 
loving whom we cannot tire, and in praising whom we can find no 
end, — and shall be adorned with those ornaments which the Lord will 
dispense to us out of the heavenly treasure-house that he has pre- 
pared, then we shall love one another more perfectly than we do now. 

** * Formerly I was in the habit of concealing my sins, that they 
might not appear ; but I am now convinced that I cannot conceal my 
sins from the Lord, who sees and knows all things, and that I cannot 
atone for them, nor obtain atonement from my former objects of wor- 
ship. And, accordingly, I count myself to have lost all, under the 
elements of the world, and through the grace of the faith of Christ 
only to have gained the spiritual graces and rewards pertaining to 
eternity, which cannot be lost. Therefore I have no ground for 
boasting, pride, and self-exaltation. And, without desiring the 
praise of men, or seeking my own will, I wish to do the will of God 
the Father. The members of the body, dead in trespasses and sins, 
displeasing to God, I desire to make instruments of righteousness, not 
following the will of the flesh Worldly desire and heavenly desire 
being contrary the one to the other, and the desire of visible things 
counteracting the desire of invisible things, I am as a dead man. 
However, he quickens the dead, he awakens those that sleep, he lifts up 
those that fall, he opens bhnd eyes, he perforates deaf ears, he hghts 
a lamp in the great house of darkness, he reheves the wretched, he 
feeds the hungry. The words of such a Benefactor if we reject, we 



THE NATIVE CHURCH. 179 

irnist die for ever, and come to everlasting destruction. Which cir- 
cumstance considering, and meditating also on sickness, old age, and 
death, incident to the present state of mutability, I kneel and pros- 
trate myself, and pray before God, the Father of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who has made atonement for our sins, that he may have 
mercy on me, and pardon my sins, and make me holy, and give me a 
repenting, believing, and loving mind. 

** *Foniierly I trusted in my own merits; but now, through the 
preaching and instruction of teacher Yudathan, I trust in the merits 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. The teacher, therefore, is the tree; we 
we are the blossoms and fruit. He has laboured to partake of the 
fruit, and now the tree begins to bear. The bread of life he has given, 
and we eat. The water from the brook which flows from the top of 
Mount Calvary, for the cleansing of all filth, he has brought and 
made us bathe and drink. The bread of which we eat will yet fer^ 
ment and rise. The water which we drink and bathe in, is the water 
of an unfaiUng spring; and many will yet drink and bathe therein. 
Then aU things will be regenerated and changed. Now we are 
strangers and pUgrims ; and it is my desire, without adhering to the 
things of this world, but longing for my native abode, to consider 
and inquire how long I must labour here, to whom I ought to show 
the light I have obtained, when I ought to put it up, and when dis- 
close it? 

** * The inhabitants of this country of Burmah, being in the evil 
.practice of forbidden lust, erroneous worship, and false speech, deride 
the religion of Christ. However, that we may bear patiently deri- 
sion, and persecution, and death, for the sake of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, pray for us. I do thus pray. For, elder brother, I have to 
bear the threatening of my own brother and brother-in-law, who 
say : * We will beat, and bruise, and jwund you ; we will bring you 
into great difficulty; you associate with false people; you keep a 
false religion; and you speak false words.* However, their false 
religion is the religion of death. The doctrine of the Cross is the 
religion of life, of love, of faith. I am a servant of faith. Formerly 
I was a servant of Satan. Now I am a servant of Christ. And a 
good servant cannot but follow his Master. Moreover, the divine 
promises must be accomplished. 

** *In this country of Burmah are many strayed sheep. Teacher 
Yudathan, pitying them, has come to gather them together, and to 
feed them in love. Some will not listen, but run away. Some do 
listen, and adhere to him; and that our numbers may increase, we 
meet together and pray to the great Proprietor of the sheep. 

***Thus I, Moimg Shwa-ba, a disciple of teacher Yudathan, in 



180 THE EAKNEST MAN. 

Kangoon, write and send this letter to the great teacher Baldwin^ 
who lives in Boston, America.' 

"N.B. — Translated from the Burmese original, September 23, 
1823.— A. JuDSON, Jr." 

An interesting development of Christian activity is men- 
tioned in the case of Mah Men-la, the leading female member 
of the church, who, self-moved, opened a school in her own 
house for teaching the boys and girls of the village to read> 
so that they might not be obliged, as formerly, to resort ta 
the Burman priests for education. Moung Ing, " the poor 
fisherman," who was the second Burman convert, but had 
been obliged to leave before being baptized, returns after an 
absence of many months, still ** a sincere and hearty believer 
in the Lord Jesus," and desires to become " a full disciple," 
by putting on Christ in baptism. At Bike, his place of resi- 
dence, the Christian heart of this poor unlettered man could 
not be content with having found the Saviour for itsel£ To 
the best of his ability he had made known the gospel among 
the Burmans and Roman Catholic Portuguese who compose 
its population; and, immediately after his baptism, he re- 
turned, laden with books for distribution among both classes. 
In the course of the summer, Moung Shwa-ba was taken 
into the service of the mission, with a view to his becoming,, 
in due time, a preacher of the gospel. Mr. Judson thus 
speaks of this interesting case : — 

"I have this day taken Moung Shwa-ba into the service of ^the 
mission. He bids fairer than any other member of the church to be 
qualified, in due time, for the ministry. For, though inferior to 
Moung Thahlah in fluency of speech, and to Moung Shwa-gnong in 
genius and address, he is superior to the former in consistency of 
character and gravity of deportment, and to the latter in experimen- 
tal acquaintance with divine things, and devotedness to the cause. 
But the principal trait of character which distinguishes him from the- 
rest, and affords considerable evidence that he is called by higher 
authority than that of man to the Christian ministry, is his humble 
and persevering desire for that office — a desire which sprang up in his 
heart soon after his conversion, and has been growing ever since. I 



THE NATIVE CHURCH. 181 

intend to employ him at present as an assistant in the zayat, on a 
small allowance of seven or eight rupees a month, which I hope the 
Board will approve of. In that situation he will have an opportuniiy 
of improving in those qualifications which are requisite to fit him to 
be a teacher of religion among his fellow-countrymen." 

Ere long it is mentioned that " Moung Shwa-gnong also 
begins to be dissatisfied with being a mere disciple, and 
hopes that he may one day be thought worthy of being a 
teacher of the Christian religion." 

Is not this a glorious specimen of a true church of Jesus 
Christ 1 Might it not well be said that in the gathering of 
this band of believers, few though they were in number, a 
great work had been accomplished, an important step in the 
subjugation of Burmah to the Christian faith? 

A thought of much interest is suggested by the review 
just given of the characteristics of this first native church, 
which, so far as human agency was concerned, was moulded 
solely by the influence of one individual. Even that work 
of God which is most peculiarly his own, the conversion of 
souls, takes its specific form of development in no small 
degree from the human instrumentality used in producing it. 
The piety of converts is, as a general thing, a faithful reflec- 
tion of that of their spiritual guides. What Christians were 
those who, in America, were brought into the church 
under Edwards, and Whitefield, and Nettleton? Beligion 
took hold of their whole natures with the grasp of a giant. 
What depth of conviction; what views of the awful majesty 
and excellence of the Divine nature and law; what an over- 
whelming sense of the love of Christ to creatures so guilty, 
characterised their religious experience ! The life which 
developed itself out of this powerful inward "work," as it 
was well called, bore the stamp of its origin. "Ye are not 
your own; ye are bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Christ," was henceforth written on all their aims, 
on their whole walk and conversation in the world. Place 
beside this the results of some more recent revival labours, 



\ 



182 THE EARNEST MAN. 

the genuineness of which cannot charitably be doubted; yet, 
in comparison, how weak, shallow, and ineffective is the type 
of conversion ! To what can the difference be ascribed, 
except to the wide difference in the personal religious expe- 
rience of their spiritual teachers ? 

In this view how beautiful is the light reflected from the 
piety of these first Buiman converts, upon that of the mis- 
sionary who had been their sole guide in the knowledge of 
God ! All his genius and his rich human culture would 
have availed nothing in this highest work, without that deep, 
earnest, all-pervading spirit of godliness which formed the 
life of his own souL Other aids are indeed necessary for 
bringing into contact minds separated from each other by 
diverse languages, customs, and mental habits; but^ this 
being accomplished, the missionary's success in his real work, 
that of winning souls to Christ, of instrumentally forming 
them into his image, demands in him, as the essential condi- 
tion of success, A SANCTIFIED SPIRIT, A HOLY LIFE. 



CHAPTER XYIII. 

SUFFERINGS AT AVA. 

In the latter part of the summer of 1821, Mrs. Judson's 
complaint returned in' so aggravated a form, that her physi- 
cians prescribed a long sea voyage and change of climate, as 
the only chance for her recovery. After a long course of the 
most active medical treatment, with no effect but to reduce 
her strength, this painful step was at length resolved on; 
and on the 21st of August she sailed for Bengal on her way 
to her native land. Her departure left Mr. Judson in utter 
solitude for nearly four months. In December, he was 
cheered by the arrival of Dr. Price, a missionary physician. 



SUFFEBINOS AT AVA. 183 

recently appointed by the Board; and in January, by the 
return of Mr. Hough and bis family, to resume their con- 
nection with the mission. Prospects at this time looked 
brighter than at any former period. Their plans were, 
however, soon disturbed by a summons for Dr. Price to 
come up to " the golden city," whither the fame of his sur- 
gical successes in Eangoon had spread, and had awakened 
the royal curiosity. Of course, Mr. Judson was obliged to 
accompany him as interpreter. At almost any other time 
he would have embraced the opportunity with joy ; for, as 
before remarked, it was in his view an object of prime im- 
portance, for the spread of Christianity through the empire, 
that it should gain a foothold in Ava. Now, however, the 
promising state of the mission at Eangoon, and especially 
his earnest desire to complete the translation of the New 
Testament, made him very reluctant to go. But "the 
golden lips" had spoken, and there was no room for choice. 
Accordingly, in August, 1822, they left Bangoon, and pro- 
ceeded in a government boat up the river. 

Their reception at Ava was widely different from that 
experienced on Mr. Judson's former visit. The iclat of Dr. 
Price's surgical skill seemed to have dispelled all prejudices, 
and disposed the emperor to be extremely liberal and obliging 
towards all who were connected with him, — even so far as to 
wink at the propagation of a new religion. He learned, 
without any manifestation of displeasure, that some of his 
own subjects in Rangoon had embraced the foreign faith. 
The royal palace itself was frequently the scene of animated 
religious discussion with members of the imperial £Eimily 
and the highest officers of government. One of the king's 
brothers, Prince M., a highly intelligent young man, greatly 
interested in foreign science, and who had attached himself 
strongly to the missionaries, assured Mr. Judson that there 
need be no appi*ehension of religious persecution under the 
present reign. " My brother," said he, " has a good heart, 
and wishes all to believe and worship as they please." On 



i 



184 THE EABNEST HAN. 

one occasion, in a personal interview with the king, his 
majesty renewed, in a friendly manner, his inquiiies respect- 
ing the Burman converts. In the course of his replies, Mr, 
Judson made known the h^i tliat he was accustomed to 
preach every Sabhath. 

** * What ! in Biirman ?' * Yes.' * Let us hear how you preach.' 
I hesitated. An a-twen-woon repeated the order. I began with a 
form of worship which first ascribes glory to God, and then declares 
the commands of the law of the gospel ; after which I stopped. * Go 
on,' said another a-twen-woon. The whole court was profoundly 
silent. I proceeded with a few sentences, declarative of the perfeC' 
tions of God, when his majesty's curiosity was satisfied, and he inter* 
rupted me. In the course of subsequent conversation, he asked whas 
I had to say of Gautama ? I replied, that we aU knew he was the soii 
of king Thog-dan-dah-nah ; that we regarded him as a wise man and 
a great teacher, but did not call him God. *That is right,' said 
Moung K. N., an a-twen-woon who had not hitherto appeared very 
friendly to me. And he proceeded to relate the substance of a long 
communication which I lately made to him in the privy council-room, 
about God and Christ, &c. And this he did in a very clear and satis- 
factory manner, so that I had scarcely a single correction to make in 
his statement. Moung Zah, encouraged by all this, really began to 
take the side of God before his majesty, and said, * Nearly all the 
world, your majesty, believe in an eternal God, aU except Burmah 
and Siam, these Httle spots !' His majesty remained silent, and after 
some desultory inquiries he abruptly arose and retired." 

Subsequent interviews with his majesty proved that no 
unfavourable impression had been made on his mind by this 
exposition of the Christian faith. When Mr. Judson was 
about to leave for Hangoon, in expectation of Mrs. Judson's 
speedy arrival, the king inquii-ed with great interest respect- 
ing his return, and expressed much satisfaction at the assu- 
rance of his intention to make Ava his permanent residence. 
He obtained, likewise, by an imperial order, the grant of a 
small piece of land from the chief public minister of state, 
for the express purpose of building a kyoung, — the designa- 
tion of residences appropriated to teachers of religion. 

Such were the bright prospects of the mission when Mr. 



SUFFERINGS AT AVA. 185 

Judson left Ava, at the beginning of the year 1823. On his 
arrival in Eangoon, he found there a letter from Mrs. Jud- 
son, which informed him that her absence would be pro- 
tracted several months longer. He concluded to await her 
coming in Rangoon, employing the interval in completing 
his translation of the New Testament, — " a work," he writes, 
" which I left unfinished with great reluctance, and which I 
rejoice to have leisure to resume." ^ 

A weary, anxious year followed; for it was not till Feb- 
ruary, 1824, that he had the joy of welcoming his long 
absent wife, and fourteen months had then elapsed since the 
date of her last letter. "We pass lightly over such an item 
as this in the hurry of strange and overwhelming events 
which immediately succeeded. But let any one try to 
realize it as suffered by himself, and it will be felt that the 
uncomplaining endurance of such trials is not among the 
least evidences of a disinterested and heroic spirit. His joy 
at meeting was greatly enhanced by the indications of im- 
proved health, written on the fresh and animated counte- 
nance of his beloved wife. " It is the Ann Hasseltine of 
other days ! " he exclaims, in a letter relating to her arrival 

He had also the pleasure of welcoming, at the same time, 
those excellent missionaries, Mr. and Mrs. "Wade, who after- 
wards became so dear to him as personal friends and asso- 
ciates in the mission. Leaving them for the present to 
acquire the language in Rangoon, Mr. and Mrs. Judson 
immediately took a boat for Ava, which they reached in 
safety after a tedious voyage of six weeks. 

It was not without feelings of anxiety that they returned 
to the capital, for rumours of a misunderstanding with 
England had been for some time whispered in Rangoon. But 
as it was known that the Bengal government desired a con- 
tinuance of friendly relations, it was hoped that the difficulty 
might be peaceably adjusted. When within 100 miles of 
Ava, however, they heard of the declaration of war by the 
Burmese; and not long after, met the then most celebrated 



186 THE EABl^EST MAN. 

general, Bandoola, "seated in his golden barge, and sur- 
rounded by a fleet of golden war boats," proceeding with his 
troops down the river. The missionaries were hailed and 
questioned by his order; but on being infoimed that they 
were Americans, not English, and were going to Ava in 
obedience to the royal command, he allowed them to con- 
tinue their journey. 

On their arrival, they found that all the foreigners were, 
to some extent, under suspicion pf a secret connection with 
the English government, and that even Dr. Price was out of 
favour at court. Mr. Judson's reception, when he paid his 
respects at the palace, was very cold and distant; and no 
encouragement was given for Mrs. Judson to visit the queen, 
though formerly her majesty had expressed great interest in 
her coming. By other branches of the royal family, how- 
ever, they were still treated with much kindness and con- 
sideration. Under these circumstances they thought it most 
prudent to go on with the erection of a house, on the spot 
of ground given them last year by the king, and to prosecute 
their missionary efforts as if nothing had happened; hoping 
thus to convince the government that they had no concern 
with the war. 

" In just a fortnight from our arrival," writes Mrs. Jud- 
son, "we moved into a house built in that time, which is 
sufficiently large to make us comfortable. It is in a most 
delightful situation, out of the dust of the town, and on the 
bank of the river. The spot given by his majesty is small, 
being only 120 feet long and seventy-five wide; but it is our 
own, and is the most healthy situation I have seen. Our 
house is raised four feet from the ground, and consists of 
three small rooms and a veranda." 

. Here, daily, a little assembly of natives gathered at even- 
ing worship, which was conducted in Burman, and every 
IBabbath Mr. Judson preached the gospel in Burman, at the 
bouse of Dr. Price. Mrs. Judson also commenced a girla^ 
school, with encouraging prospects* 



SUPFEBINaS AT AVA. 187 

Soon after their arrival, the court had removed for a short 
time to Ummerapoora, the old capital, preparatory to taking 
formal possession of the splendid new palace, and of Ava as 
the future royal residence. The imposing ceremony is thus 
graphically sketched by Mrs. Judson ii^- 

"I dare not attempt a description of that splendid day, when 
Majesty, with all its attendant glory, entered the gates of the golden 
city, and amid the acclamations of millions, I may say, took posses- 
sion of the palace. The saupwars of the provinces bordering on 
China, all the viceroys and high officers of the kingdom, were assem- 
bled on the occasion, dressed in their robes of state, and ornamented 
with the insignia of their office. The white elephant, richly adorned 
with gold and jewels, was one of the most beautiful objects in the 
procession. The king and queen alone were imadomed, dressed in the 
simple garb of the country; they, hand in hand, entered the garden 
in which we had taken our seats, and where a banquet was prepared 
for their refreshment. AU the riches and glory of the empire were 
on this day exhibited to view. The number and immense size of the 
elephants, the numerous horses and great variety of vehicles of aU 
descriptions, far surpassed anything I have ever seen or imagined." 

An order was soon issued, forbidding all foreigners, Mr. 
Lanciego excepted, from entering the palace. But several 
weeks passed on without any further alarm, during which 
they quietly pursued their missionary avocations ; and Mr. 
Judson, commenced the erection of a small brick house for 
their accommodation in the approaching hot season. 

But on the 23rd of March they were surprised by the 
news that Eangoon had been taken by the English. The 
intelligence produced great indignation at court. Such was 
the pride and self-confidence of the government, that the 
only fear was lest the English should escape from Rangoon 
before the arrival of the army of ten or twelve thousand 
men, now sent down from Ava. 

The detail of the succeeding two years of terror and 
suffering is best given in Mrs. Judson's narrative, so like 
herself in its clear, unpretending, animated simplicity : — • 

*' As soon as the army was despatched, the government began to 



188 THE EARNEST MAl^ 

inquire the cause of the arrival of the strangers at Rangoon. There 
must be spies in the country, suggested some, who have invited them 
over. And who so likely to be spies as the Englishmen residing at 
Ava ? A report was in circulation that Captain Laird, lately arrived, 
had brought Bengal papers which contained the intention of the Eng- 
lish to take Rangoon, and it was kept a secret from his majesty. An 
inquiry was instituted. The three Englishmen, Gouger, Laird, and 
Rogers, were called and examined. It was foimd they had seen the 
papers, and were put in confinement, though not in prison. We now 
began to tremble for ourselves, and were in daily expectation of some 
-dreadful event. 

"At length Mr. Judson and Dr. Price were summoned to a court 
of examination, where strict inquiry was made relative to all they 
knew. The great point seemed to be whether they had been in the 
habit of making communications to foreigners of the state of the 
country, &c. They answered they had always written to their friends 
in America, but had no correspondence with English officers or the 
Bengal government. After their examination they were not put in 
confinement, as the Englishmen had been, but were allowed to return 
to their houses. In examining the accounts of Mr. Gouger, it was 
found that Mr. Judson and Dr. Price had taken money of him to a 
considerable amount. Ignorant as were the Burmese of our mode of 
receiving money by orders on Bengal, this circumstance, to their sus- 
picious minds, was a sufficient evidence that the missionaries were in 
the pay of the English, and very probably spies. It was thus repre- 
sented to the king, who, in an angry tone, ordered the immediate 
arrest of the *two teachers.' 

**0n the 8th of June, just as we were preparing for dinner, in 
rushed an officer, holding a black book, with a dozen Burmans, 
accompanied by one whom, from his spotted face, we knew to be 
an executioner, and a *son of the prison.' * Where is the teacher?' 
was the first inquiry. Mr. Judson jjresented himself. *You are 
called by the king,' said the officer — a form of speech always used 
when about to arrest a criminaL The spotted man instantly seized 
Mr. Judson, threw him on the floor, and produced the smaU cord, the 
instrument of torture. I caught hold of his arm. *Stay,' said, I; 
* I will give you money. ' * Take her too, ' said the officer ; * she also is a 
foreigner.' Mr. Judson, with an imploring look, begged that they 
would let me remain till further orders. The scene was now shock- 
ing beyond description. The whole neighbourhood had collected ; the 
masons at work on the brick house threw down their tools and ran ; 
the little Burman children were screaming and crying ; the Bengalee 
servants stood in amazement at the indignities offered their master; 



SUFFERINGS AT AVA. 189 

and the hardened executioner, with a kind of hellish joy, drew tight 
the cords, bound Mr. Judson fast, and dragged him off I knew not 
whither. In vain I begged and entreated the spotted face to take the 
silver and loosen the ropes ; but he spumed my offers, and immedi- 
ately departed. I gave the money, however, to Moung Ing to follow 
after, to make some further attempt to mitigate the torture of Mr. 
Judson ; but instead of succeeding, when a few rods from the house, 
the unfeeling wretches . again threw their prisoner on the ground, 
and drew the cords still tighter, so as almost to prevent respiration. 

"The officer and his gang proceeded on to the court-house, where 
the governor of the city and officers were collected, one of whom read 
the order of the king to commit Mr. Judson to the death prison, into 
which he was soon hurled, the door closed, and Moung Ing saw no 
more. What a night was now before me ! I retired into my own 
room, and endeavoured to obtain consolation from committing my 
case to Grod, and imploring fortitude and strength to suffer whatever 
awaited me. But the consolation of retirement was not long allowed 
me, for the magistrate of the place had come into the veranda, and 
continually called me to come out and submit to his examination. 
But previously to going out I destroyed all my letters, journals, and 
writings of every kind, lest they should disclose the fact that we had 
correspondents in England, and had minuted down every occurrence 
since our arrival in the country. When this work of destruction was 
finished, I went out, and submitted to the examination of the magis- 
trate, who inquired very minutely of everything I knew ; then ordered 
the gates of the compound to be shut, no person to be allowed to go 
in or out, placed a guard of ten ruffians, to whom he gave a strict 
charge to keep me safe, and departed. 

** It was now dark. I retired to an inner room with my four little 
Burman girls, and barred the doors. The guard instantly ordered me 
to unbar the doors and come out, or they would break the house 
down. I obstinately refused to obey, and endeavoured to intimidate 
them by threatening to complain of their conduct to higher authori- 
ties on the morrow. Finding me resolved in disregarding their orders, 
they took the two Bengalee servants, and confined them in the stocks 
in a very painful position. I could not endure this, but called the 
head man to the window, and promised to make them all a present in 
the morning if they would release the servants. After much debate, 
and many severe threatenings, they consented, but seemed resolved 
to annoy me as much as possible. My unprotected, desolate state, 
my entire uncertainty of the fate of Mr. Judson, and the dreadful 
carousings and almost diabolical language of the guard, all conspired 
to make it by far the most distressing night I had ever passed. You 



192 THE EARNEST MAN. 

and obtain their release,' replied L ' Place yourself in my situation ; 
were you in America, and your husband, innocent of crime, thrown 
into prison, in irons, and you a solitary, unprotected female, — ^what 
would you do?* With a slight degree of feeling she said, *I wiU 
present your i)etition; come again to-morrow.' I returned to the 
house with considerable hope that the speedy release of the mission- 
aries was at hand. But the next day Mr. Gouger's property, to the 
amount of 50,000 rupees, was taken and carried to the palace. The 
officers on their return politely informed me they should visit our 
house on the morrow. I felt obliged for this information, and accord- 
ingly made preparations to receive them by secreting as many little 
articles as possible, together with considerable silver, as I knew, if 
the war should be protracted, we should be in a state of starvation 
without it. But my mind was in a dreadful state of agitation lest it 
should be discovered, and cause my being thrown into prison ; and 
had it been possible to procure money from any other quarter, I 
should not have ventured on such a step. 

"The following morning the royal treasurer, the governor of the 
north gate of the palace, who was in future our steady friend, and 
another nobleman, attended by forty or fifty followers, came to take 
possession of all we had. I treated them civilly, gave them chairs to 
sit on, tea and sweetmeats for their refreshment ; and justice obliges 
me to say that they conducted the business of confiscation with more 
regard to my feelings than I should have thought it possible for Bur- 
mese officers to exhibit. The three officers, with one of the royal 
secretaries, alone entered the house ; their attendants were ordered to 
remain outside. They saw I was deeply aflfected, and apologised for 
what they were about to do by saying that it was painful for them to 
take possession of proi)erty not their own, but they were compelled 
thus to do by order of the king. * Where are your silver, gold, and 
jewels?* said the royal treasurer. *I have no gold or jewels, but 
here is the key of a trunk which contains the sUver; do with it as 
you please.* The trunk was produced, and the silver weighed. * This 
money,* said I, * was collected in America, by the disciples of Christ, 
and sent here for the purpose of building a kyoung [the name of the 
priest's dwelling], and for our support while teaching the religion of 
Christ. Is it suitable that you should take it?* The Burmans are 
averse to taking what is offered in a religious point of view, which was 
the cause of my making the inquiry. * We will state the circumstance 
to the king,' said one of them, * and perhaps he will restore it. But is 
this all the silver you have ?' I could not teU a falsehood. * The 
house is in your possession,' I replied, * search for yourselves.' * Have 
you not deposited silver with some person of your acquaintance?* 



SUFFEBINQS AT AVA. 193 

'My acquaintances are all in prison; with whom should I deposit 
silver?' They next ordered my trunk and drawers to be examined. 
The secretary only was allowed to accompany me in this search* 
Everything nice or curious which met his view was presented to the 
officers for their decision whether it should be taken or retained. I 
begged they would not take our wearing apparel, as it would be dis- 
graceful to take clothes partly worn into the possession of his majesty, 
and to us they were of unspeakable value. They assented, and took 
a list only, and did the same with the books, medicines, &c. My 
little work-table and rocking-chair, presents from my beloved brother, 
I rescued from their grasp, parUy by artifice and pajiJy through their 
ignorance. They left, also, many articles which were of inestimable 
value during our long imprisonment. 

''As soon as they had tinished their search and departed, I 
hastened to the queen's brother to hear what had been the fate of my 
petition, when, alas ! all my hopes were dashed, by his wife's coolly 
saying, 'I stated your case to the queen, but her majesty replied. 
The teachers vjiU not die; let them remain as they are,^ My expecta- 
tions had been so much excited that this sentence was like a thunder- 
clap to my feelings. For the truth at one glance assured me that if 
the queen refused assistance, who would dare to intercede for met 
With a heavy heart I departed, and on my way home attempted to 
enter the prison gate, to communicate the sad tidings to your brother, 
but was harshly refused admittance ; and for the ten days following 
notwithstanding my daily efforts, I was not allowed to enter. We 
attempted to communicate by writing, and after being successful for 
a few days it was discovered ; the poor fellow who carried the com- 
munications was beaten and put in the stocks, and the circumstance 
cost me about ten dollars, besides two or three days of agony for fear 
of the consequences. 

" The officers who had taken possession of our property presented 
it to his majesty, saying, ' Judson is a true teacher ; we found nothing 
in his house but what belongs to priests. In addition to this money, 
there are an immense number of books, medicines, trunks of wearing 
apparel, &c, of which we have only taken a list. Shall we take 
them or let them remain V * Let them remain,' said the king, ' and 
put this property by itself, for it shall be restored to him if he is 
found innocent.' This was an allusion to the idea of his being a spy. 
"For two or three months following I was subject to continual 
harassments, partly through my ignorance of police management; 
and partly through the insatiable desire of every petty officer to 
enrich himself through our misfortunes. When the officers came to 
our house to confiscate our fffoperty, they insisted on knowing how m 



194 THE EABNEST HAN. 

much I had given the governor and prison officers to release the 

teachers from the inner prison. T honestly told them, and they 

demanded the sum from the governor, which threw him into a 

dreadful rage, and threatened to put all the prisoners back into their 

• original place. I went to him the next morning, and the first words 

with which he accosted me were, * You are very bad ; why did you 

tell the royal treasurer that you had given me so much money?' 

'The treasurer inquired; what could I say?' I replied. *Say that 

you had given nothing,' said he, ' and I would have made the teachers 

comfortable in prison ; but now I know not what will be their fate.' 

*But I cannot teU a falsehood,' I replied ; *my religion differs from 

yours; it forbids prevarication; and had you stood by me with 

your knife raised, I could not have said what you suggest.' His wife, 

who sat by his side, and who alwajns, from this time, continued my 

firm friend, instantly said, * Very true ; what else could she have 

done ? I like such straightforward conduct; you must not,' turning 

to the governor, *be angry with her.' I then presented the governor 

with a beautiful opera-glass I had just received from England, and 

hegged his anger at me would not influence him to treat the prisoners 

with unkindness, and I would endeavour from time to time to make 

him such presents as would compensate for his loss. 'You may 

intercede for your husband only ; for your sake he shall remain where 

he is ; but let the other prisoners take care of themselves.' I pleaded 

hard for Dr. Price ; but he would not listen, and the same day had 

him returned to the inner prison, where he remained ten days. He 

was then taken out, in consequence of the doctor's promising a pi^ce 

of broadcloth, and my sending two pieces of handkerchiefs. 

" About this period I was one day summoned to the Lutd'hau in Istn 
official way. What new evil was before me I knew not, but was 
obliged to go. When arrived, I was allowed to stand at the bottom, 
of the stairs, as no female is i)ermitted to ascend the steps, or even to 
stand, but sit on the ground. Hundreds were collected around. The 
officer who presided, in an authoritative voice, began, * Speak the truth 
in answer to questions I shall ask. K you speak true, no evil will 
follow; but if not, your life will not be spared. It is reported that 
you have conunitted to the care of a Burmese officer a string of 
pearls, a pair of diamond ear-rings, and a silver tea-pot. Is it true V 
*It is not,' I replied; *and if you or any other i)erson can produce 
these articles, I refuse not to die.' The officer again urged the neces- 
sity of 'speaking true.' I told him I had nothing more to say on the 
subject, but begged he would use his influence to obtain the release 
of Mr. Judson from prison. 

"I returned to the house with a heart much lighter than I went, 



SUFFERINGS AT AVA. 195 

though conscious of my perpetual exposure to such haxassments. 
Notwithstanding the repulse I had met in my application to the 
queen, I could not remain without making continual effort for your 
brother's release, while there was the least probability of success. 
Time after time my visits to the queen's sister-in-law were re^)eated, 
tiU she refused to answer a question, and told me by her looks I had 
better keep out of her presence. For the seven following months, 
hardly a day passed that I did not visit some one of the members of 
government, or branches of the royal family, in order to gain their 
influence in our behalf ; but the only benefit resulting was that their 
encouraging promises preserved us from despair, and induced a hope 
of the speedy termination of our difficulties, which enabled us to bear 
our distresses better than we otherwise should have done. I ought, 
however, to mention that, by my repeated visits to the different 
members of government, I gained several friends who were ready to 
assist me with articles of food, though in a private manner, and who 
used their influence in the palace to destroy the impression of otlr 
being in any way engaged in the present war. But no one dared to 
speak a word to the king or queen in favour of a foreigner, while 
there were such continual reports of the success of the English 
arms. 

"During these seven months the continual extortions and oppres- 
sions to which your brother and the other white prisoners were 
subject are indescribable. Sometimes sums of money were demanded, 
sometimes pieces of cloth and handkerchiefs ; at other times an ord^r 
would be issued that the white foreigners should not speak to each 
other, or have any communication with their friends without. Then 
again, the servants were forbidden to carry in their food without an 
extra fee. Sometimes for days and days together, I could not go into 
the prison till after dark, when I had two miles to walk in returning 
to the house. O, how many, many times have I returned from that 
dreary prison at nine o'clock at night, soHtary, and worn out with 
fatigue and anxiety, and thrown myself down in that same rocking- 
chair which you and Deacon L. provided for me in Boston, and 
endeavoured to invent some new scheme for the release of the 
prisoners ! Sometimes, for a moment or two, my thoughts would 
glance towards America and my beloved friends there ; but for nearly 
a year and a half, so entirely engrossed was every thought with 
present scenes and sufferings, that I seldom reflected on a single 
occurrence of my former life, or recollected that I had a friend in 
existence out of Ava. 

** You, my dear brother, who know my strong attachment to my 
friends, and how much pleasure I have hitherto exi)erienced from. 



f 



196 THE EARNEST MAN. 

retrospect, can judge from the above circumstances how intense were 
my sufferings. But the point, the acme of my distress, consisted in 
the awful uncertainty of our iSnal fate. My prevailing opinion was 
that my husband would suffer violent death, and that 1 should, of 
course, become a slave, and languish out a miserable, though short 
existence, in the tyrannic hands of some unfeeling monster. But the 
consolations of religion in these trying circumstances were neither 
' few nor smalL' It taught me to look beyond this world to that rest, 
that peaceful, happy rest, where Jesus reigns and oppression never 
enters. But how have I digressed from my relation ! I will again 
return. 

"The war was now prosecuted with all the energy the Burmese 
government possessed. New troops were continually raised and sent 
down the river, and as frequent reports returned of their being all cut 
off. But that part of the Burmese army stationed in Arracan, under 
the command of Bandoola, had been more successful. 300 prisoners, 
at one time, were sent to the capital as an evidence of the victory 
that had been gained. The king began to think that none but Ban- 
doola understood the art of fighting with foreigners ; consequently, 
his majesty recalled him, with the design of his taking command o£ 
the army that had been sent to Rangoon. On his arrival at Ava he 
was received at court in the most flattering manner, and was the 
recipient of every favour in the power of the king and queen to 
bestow. He was, in fact, while at Ava, the acting king. I waa 
resolved to apply to him for the release of the missionaries, though 
some members of government advised me not, lest he, being reminded 
of their existence, should issue an immediate order for their execution* 
But it was my last hope, and, as it proved, my last application. 

"Your brother wrote a petition privately, stating every circum- 
stance that would have a tendency to interest him in our behalf. 
With fear and trembling I approached him while surrounded by a 
crowd of flatterers ; and one of his secretaries took the petition and 
read it aloud. After hearing it he spoke to me in an obliging manner^ 
asked several questions relative to the teachers, said he would think 
of the subject, and bade me come again. I ran to the prison to com- 
mimicate the favourable reception to Mr. Judson ; and we both had 
sanguine hopes that his release was at hand. But the governor of the 
city expressed his amazement at my temerity, and said he doubted 
not it would be the means of destroying all the prisoners. In a day 
or two, however, I went again, and took a present of considerable 
value. Bandoola was not at home ; but hLs lady, after ordering the 
present to be taken into another room, modestly informed me that 
she was ordered by her husband to make the following communica- 



SUFFERINGS AT AVA. 197 

tion : That he was now very busily employed in making preparations 
for Kangoon ; but that when he had retaken that place, and expelled 
the English, he would return and release all the prisoners. 

** Thus again were aU our hopes dashed ; and we felt that we could 
do nothing more but sit down and submit to our lot. From this time 
we gave up all idea of being released from prison till the termination 
of the war; but I was still obliged to visit constantly some of the 
members of government with little presents, particularly the governor 
of the city, for the purpose of making the situation of the prisoners 
tolerable. I generally spent the greater part of every other day at 
the governor's house, giving him minute information relative to 
American manners, customs, government, &c. He used to be so much 
gratified with my communications as to feel greatly disappointed if 
any occurrence prevented my spending the usual hours at his house. 

" Some months after your brother's imprisonment I was permitted 
to make a little bamboo room in the prison inclosure, where he could 
be much by himself, and where I was sometimes allowed to spend two 
or three hours. It so happened that the two months he occupied this 
place were the coldest of the year, when he would have suffered much 
in the open shed he had previously occupied. After the birth of your 
little niece, I was unable to visit the prison and the governor as be- 
fore, and found I had lost considerable influence, previously gained ; 
for he was not so forward to hear my petitions, when any difficulty 
occurred, as he formerly had been. When Maria was nearly two 
months old, her father one morning sent me word that he and all the 
white prisoners were put into the inner prison, in five pairs of fetters 
each ; that his little room had been torn down, and his mat, pillow, 
&c. , been taken by the jailers. This was to me a dreadful shock, as 
I thought at once it was only a prelude to greater evils. 

*'I should have mentioned before this the defeat of Bandoola, his 
escape to Dan-a-byoo, the complete destruction of his army, and loss 
of ammunition, and the consternation this intelligence produced at 
court. The English army had left Eangoon, and was advancing 
towards Prome, when these severe measures were taken with the 
prisoners. 

"I went immediately to the governor's house. He was not at 
home, but had ordered his Wife to tell me, when I came, not to ask 
to have the additional fetters taken ofi^ or the prisoners released, for 
it could not be done. I went to the prison gate, but was forbidden 
to enter. All was as stiQ as death, — not a white face to be seen, or a 
vestige of Mr. Judson's little room remaining. I was determined to 
see the governor and know the cause of this additional oppression ; 
-and for this purpose returned into town the same evening at an hour 



/ 



198 THE EARNEST MAN. 

I knew he would be at home. He was iu his audience-room, and, as 
I entered, looked up without speaking, but exhibited a mixture of 
shame and affected anger in his countenance. I began by saying, 

• Your lordship has hitherto treated us with the kindness of a father. 
Our obligations to you are very great. We have looked to you for 
protection from oppression and cruelty. You have in many instances 
mitigated the sufferings of those unfortunate though innocent beings 
committed to your charge. You have promised me particularly that 
you would stand by me to the Isiat ; and though you should receive an 
order from the king, you would not put Mr. Judson to death. What 
crime has he committed to deserve such additional punishment?' 
The old man's hard heart was melted, for he wept like a child. * I 
pity you, Tsa-yah-ga-dau,' — a name by which he always called me, — 

* I knew you would make me feel ; I therefore forbade your applica- 
tion. But you must believe me when I say I do not wish to increase 
the sufferings of the prisoners. When I am ordered to execute them, 
the least that I can do is to put them out of sight. I will now tell 
you,* continued he, * what I have never told you before, — ^that three 
times I have received intimations from the queen's brother to assas- 
sinate all the white prisoners privately ; but I would not do it. And 
I now repeat it, though I execute all the others, I will never execute 
your husband. But I cannot release him from his present confine- 
ment, and you must not ask it.' I had never seen him manifest so- 
much feeling, or so resolute in denying me a favour, which circum- 
stance was an additional reason for thinking dreadful scenes were 
before us. 

"The situation of the prisoners was now distressing beyond de- 
scription. It was at the commencement of the hot season. There 
were above a hundred prisoners shut up in one room, without a breath 
of air excepting from the cracks in the boards. I sometimes obtained 
permission to go to the door for five minutes, when my heart sickened 
at the wretchedness exhibited. The white prisoners, from incessant 
perspiration and loss of appetite, looked more like the dead than the 
living. I made daily applications to the governor, offering him 
money, which he refused ; but all that I gained was permission for 
the foreigners to eat their food outside, and this continued but a 
short time. . 

** It was at this period that the death of Bandoola was announced 
in the palace. . The king heard it with silent amazement, and the 
queen, in eastern style, smote upon her breast, and cried, * Ama ! 
ama!* (alas! alas!) Who could be foimd to fill his place? Who 
would venture since the invincible Bandoola had been cut off? Such 
were the exclamations constantly heard in the streets of Ava. The 



SUFFEBINGS AT AYA. 199 

common people were speaking low of a rebellion, in case more troops 
should be levied. For, as yet, tbe common people bad borne the 
weight of the war ; not a tical had been taken from the royal treasury. 
At length the pakan woon, who a few months before had been so far 
disgraced by the king as to be thrown into prison and irons, now 
offered himself to head a new army that should be raised on a dif- 
ferent plan from those which had hitherto been raised, and assured 
the king, in the most confident manner, that he would conquer the 
English, and restore those places that had been taken, in a very short 
time. He proposed that every soldier should receive a hundred ticals 
in advance, and he would obtain security for each man, as the money 
was to pass through his hands. It was afterwards found that he had 
taken, for his own use, ten ticals from every himdred. He was a man 
of enterprise and talents, though a violent enemy to all foreigners. 
His offers were accepted by the king and government, and all power 
immediately committed to him. One of the first exercises of his 
power was to arrest Lanciego and the Portuguese priest, who had 
hitherto remained immolested, and cast them into prison, and to sub- 
ject the native Portuguese and Bengalees to the most menial occupa- 
tions. The whole town was in alarm lest they should feel the effects 
of his power ; and it was owing to the malignant representations of 
this man that the white prisoners suffered such a change in their 
circumstances as I shall soon relate. 

** After continuing in the inner prison for more than a month, your 
brother was taken with a fever. I felt assured he would not live 
long imless removed from that noisome place. To effect this, and in 
order to be near the prison, I removed from our house, and put up a 
small bamboo room in the govemor^s inclosure, which was nearly 
opposite the prison gate. Here I incessantly begged the governor to 
give me an order to take Mr. Judson out of the large prison, and 
place him in a more comfortable situation ; and the old man, being 
worn out with my entreaties, at length gave me the order in an 
official form, and also gave orders to the head jailer to allow me to go 
in and out, all times of the day, to administer medicines, &c. I now 
felt happy indeed, and had Mr. Judson instantly removed into a little 
bamboo hovel, so low that neither of us could stand upright, — but a 
palace in comparison with the place he had left. 

"Notwithstanding the order the governor had given for my admit- 
tance into prison, it was with the greatest difficulty that I could 
persuade the under jailer to open the gate. I used to carry Mr. Jud- 
son's food myself, for the sake of getting in, and would then remain 
an hour or two, unless driven out. We had been in this comfortable 
situation but two or three days, until one morning, having carried- 



200 THE EABNEST MAIT. 

Mr. Judson'fl breakfast, which in conseqaence of fever he was unable 
to take, I remained longer than usual, when the governor, in great 
haste, sent for me. I promised to return as soon as I had ascertained 
iiie govemor^s will, he being much alarmed at this unusual message. 
I was very agreeably disappointed when the governor informed me 
that he only wished to consult me about his watch, aDd seemed 
unusually pleasant and conversable. I found afterwards that his 
only object was to detain me until the dreadful scene about to take 
place in the prison was over. For when I left him to go to my room, 
one of the servants came running, and, with a ghastly countenance, 
informed me that all the white prisoners were carried away. I would 
not believe the report, and instantly went back to the governor, who 
eaid he had just heard of it, but did not wish to tell me. I hastily 
lan into the street, hoping to get a glimpse of them before they were 
out of sight, but in this was disappointed. I ran first into one street, 
then another, inquiring of all I met ; but no one would answer me. 
At length an old woman told me the white prisoners had gone 
towards the little river ; for they were to be carried to Amarapoora. 
I then ran to the banks of the little river, about half a mile, but saw 
them not, and concluded the old woman had deceived me. Some of 
the friends of the foreigners went to the place of execution, but found 
them not. I then returned to the governor to try to discover the 
cause of their removal, and the probability of their future fate. The 
<dd man assured me that he was ignorant of the intention of govern- 
ment to remove the foreigners till that morning; that, since I went 
out, he had learned that the prisoners were to be sent to Amarapoora, 
but for what purpose he knew not. * I will send ofif a man imniedi> 
ately,' said he, *to see what is to be done with them. You can do 
nothing more for your husband,' continued he ; * take care ofyoursdf,* 
With a heavy heart I went to my room, and having no hope to excite 
me to exertion, I sank down almost in despair. For several days 
previous I had been actively engaged in building my own little room, 
and making our hovel comfortable. My thoughts had been almost 
entirely occupied in contriving means to get into prison. But now I 
looked towards the gate with a kind of melancholy feeling, but no 
wish to enter. All was the stillness of death ; no preparation of your 
brother's food; no expectation of meeting him at the usual dinner 
hour; all my employment, all my occupations, seemed to have ceased, 
and I had nothing left but the dreadful recollection that Mr. Judson 
was carried off, I knew not whither. It was one of the most insup* 
portable days I ever passed. Towards night, however, I came to the 
determination to set off the next morning for Amarapoora, and for 
tihis puipose was obliged to go to our house out of town. 



SUFFERINGS AT AVA. • 201 

"Never before had I suffered so much from fear in traversing the 
streets of Ava. The last words of the governor, * Take care of your- 
self/ made me suspect there was some design with which I was un- 
acquainted. I saw, also, he was afraid to have me go into the streets, 
and advised me to wait till dark, when he would send me in a cart, 
and a man to open the gates. I took two or three trunks of the most 
valuable articles, together with the medicine chest, to deposit in the 
house of the governor ; and after committing the house and premises 
to our faithful Moung Ing, and a Bengalee servant who continued 
with us, though we were unable to pay his wages, I took leave, as I 
then thought probable, of our house in Ava for ever. 

" On my return to the governor's I found a servant of Mr. Gouger, 
who happened to be near the prison when the foreigners were led out, 
and followed on to see the end, who informed me that the prisoners 
had been carried before the lamine-woon, at Amarapoora, and were 
to be sent the next day to a village he knew not how far distant. 
My distress was a little relieved by the intelligence that our friend 
was yet alive ; but still I knew not what was to become of him. The 
next morning I obtained a pass from government, and, with my little 
Maria, who was then only three months old, Mary and Abby Hassel- 
tine, two of the Burman children, and our Bengalee cook, who was 
the only one of the party that could afford me any assistance, I set off 
for Amarapoora. The day was dreadfully hot; but we obtained a 
covered boat, in which we were tolerably comfortable, till within two 
miles of the government house. I then procured a cart, but the 
violent motion, together with the dreadful heat and dust, made me 
almost distracted. But what was my disappointment, on arriving at 
the court-house, to find that the prisoners had been sent on two hours 
before, and that I must go in that uncomfortable mode four miles 
further, with little Maria in my arms, whom I held all the way from 
Ava. The cartman refused to go any further; and, after waiting an 
hour in the burning sim, I procured another, and set off for that 
never-to-be-forgotten place, Oung-pen-la. I obtained a guide from 
the governor, and was conducted directly to the prison yard. But 
what a scene of wretchedness was presented to my view ! The prison 
was an old, shattered buUding, without a roof ; the fence was entirely 
destroyed; eight or ten Burmese were on the top of the building, 
trying to make something like a shelter with leaves ; while under a 
little low projection outside of the prison, sat the foreigners, chained 
together two and two, almost dead with suffering and fatigue. The 
first words of your brother were : * Why have you come ? I hoped 
you would not follow, for you cannot live here.' It was now dark. I 
had no refreshment for the suffering prisoners, or for myself as I htd 



202 THE EARNEST MAN. 

expected to procure all that was necessary at the market of Amara- 
poora ; and I had no shelter for the night. I asked one of the jailers 
if I might put up a little bamboo house near the prison. He said, No, 
it was not customary. I then begged he would procure me a shelter 
for the night, when, on the morrow, I could find some place to live 
in. He took me to his house, in which there were only two small 
rooms ; one in which he and his family lived ; the other, which was 
then half full of grain, he offered to me; and in that little filthy 
place I si)ent the next six months of wretchedness. I procured some 
half -boiled water, instead of my tea, and, worn out with fatigue, laid 
myself down on a mat spread over the i>addy, and endeavoured to 
obtain a little refreshment from sleep. The next morning your 
brother gave me the following account of the brutal treatment he 
had received on being taken out of the prison. 

** As soon as I had gone out at the call of the governor, one of the 
jailers rushed into Mr. Judson's little room, roughly seized him by 
the arm, pulled him out, stripped him of all his clothes excepting 
shirt and pantaloons, took his shoes, hat, and aU his bedding, tore ofiT 
his chains, tied a rope round his waist, and dragged him to the court- 
house, where the other prisoners had previously been taken. They 
were then tied two and two, and delivered into the hands of the 
lamine-woon, who went on before them on horseback, while his slaves 
drove the prisoners, one of the slaves holding the rope which con- 
nected two of them together. It was in May, one of the hottest 
months in the year, and eleven o'clock in the day, so that the sun 
was intolerable indeed. They had proceeded only half a mile, when 
your brother's feet became blistered; and so great was his agony, 
even at this early period, that as they were crossing the little river, 
he ardently longed to throw himself into the water, to be free from 
misery. But the sin attached to such an act alone prevented. They 
had then eight miles to walk. The sand and gravel were like burn- 
ing coals to the feet of the prisoners, which soon became perfectly 
destitute of skin ; and in this wretched state they were goaded on Tby 
their unfeeling drivers. Mr. Judson's debilitated state, in conse- 
qaence of fever, and having taken no food that morning, rendered 
him less capable of bearing such hardships than the other prisoners. 
When about half way on their journey, as they stopped for water; 
your brother begged the lamine-woon to allow him to ride his horse 
a. mile or two, as he could proceed no further in that dreadful state. 
But a scornful, malignant look was all the reply that was made. He 
then requested Captain Laird, who was tied with him, and who was 
a strong, healthy man, to allow him to take hold of his shoulder, as 
he was fast sinking. This the kind-hearted man granted for a mile 



SUFFERINGS AT AVA. 203 

or two, but then found the additional burden insupportable. Just at 
that period, Mr. Gougher's Bengalee servant came up to them, and 
seeing the distresses of your brother, took off his head-dress, which 
was made of cloth, tore it in two, gave half to his master, and half 
to Mr. Judson, which he instantly wrapped round his wounded feet, 
as they were not allowed to rest even for a moment. The servant 
then offered his shoulder to Mr. Judson, who was almost carried by^ 
him the remainder of the way. Had it not been for the support and 
assistance of this man, your brother thinks he should have shared the 
fate of the poor Greek, who was one of their number, and, when 
taken out of prison that morning, was in perfect health. But he was 
a corpulent man, and the sim affected him so much, that he fell down 
on the way. His inhuman drivers beat and dragged him until they 
themselves were wearied, when they procured a cart, in which he was 
carried the remaining two miles. But the poor creature expired in an 
hour or two after their arrival at the court-house. The lamine-woon, 
seeing the distressing state of the prisoners, and that one of their 
number was dead, concluded they should go no further that night ; 
otherwise they would have been driven on until they reached Oimg- 
pen-la the same day. An old shed was appointed for their abode 
during the night, but without even a mat or pillow, or anything to 
cover them. The curiosity of the lamine-woon's wife induced her to 
make a visit to the prisoners, whose wretchedness considerably exci- 
ted her compassion, and she ordered some fruit, sugar, and tamarinds 
for their refreshment ; and the next morning rice was prepared for 
them, and poor as it was, it was refreshing to the prisoners, who had 
been almost destitute of food the day before. Carts were also provi- 
ded for their conveyance, as none of them were able to walk. All 
this time the foreigners were entirely ignorant of what was to become 
of them ; and when they arrived at Oung-pen-la, and saw the dilapi- 
dated state of the prison, they immediately, all as one, concluded that 
they were there to be burned, agreeably to the report which had previ- 
ously been in circulation at Ava. They all endeavoured to prepare 
themselves for the awful scene anticipated ; and it was not until they 
saw preparations making for repairing the prison, that they had the 
least doubt that a cruel, lingering death awaited them. My arrival 
was in an hour or two after this. 

** The next morning I rose and endeavoured to find something like 
food. But there was no market and nothing to be procured. One of 
Dr. Price's friends, however, brought some cold rice and vegetable 
curry from Amarapoora, which, together with a cup of tea from Mr. 
Lanciego, answered for the breakfast of the prisoners ; and for dinner 
we made a curry of dried salt fish, which a servant of Mr. Gougher 



204 THE EABl^ST MAN. 

had brought. All the money I could command in the world I had 
brought with me, secreted about my person ; so you may judge what 
our prospects were, in case the war should continue long. But our 
heavenly Father was better to us than our fears ; for, notwithstand- 
ing the constant extortions of the jailers during the whole six months 
we were at Oung-pen-la, and the frequent straits to which we were 
brought, we never really suffered for the want of money, though fre- 
quently for the want of provisions, which were not procurable. Uere 
at this place my i)ersonal bodily sufferings commenced. While your 
brother was confined in the city prison, I had been allowed to remain 
in our house, in which I had my conveniences left, and my health had 
continued good beyond all expectations. But now I had not a single 
article of convenience — not even a chair or a seat of any kind, except- 
ing a bamboo floor. The very morning after my arrival, Mary Hes- 
aeltine was taken with the small-i^x, the natural way. She, though 
very young, was the only assistant I had in taking care of little Maria* 
But she now required all the time I could spare from Mr. Judson, 
whose fever still continued in prison, and whose feet were so dread- 
fully mangled that for several days he was unable to move. I knew 
not what to do, for I could procure no assistance from the neighbour- 
hood, or medicine for the sufferers, but was all day long going back* 
wards and forwards from the house to the prison with little Maria in 
my arms. Sometimes I was greatly relieved by leaving her for an 
hour, when asleep, by the side of her father, while I returned to the 
hoTise to look after Mary, whose fever ran so high as to produce 
delirium. She was so completely covered with the small-pox, that 
there was no distinction in the pustules. As she was in the same 
little room with myself, I knew that Maria would take it ; I therefore 
inoculated her from another child before Mary's had arrived at such 
s state as to be infectious. At the same time I inoculated Abby and 
the jailer's children, who all had it so lightly as hardly to interrupt 
their play. But the inoculation in the arm of my poor little Maria 
did not take; she caught it of Mary, and had it the natural way. 
She was then only three months and a half old, and had been a most 
healthy child ; but it was above three months before she perfectly 
recovered from the effects of this dreadful disorder. 

** You will recollect I never had the small-pox, but was vaccinated 
previously to leaving America. In consequence of being for so long 
a time constantly exposed, I had nearly a hundred pustules f ormed, 
though no previous symptoms of fever, &c. The jailer's children 
having had the small-pox so lightly, in consequence of inoculation^ 
my fame was spread all over the village, and every child, young and 
old, who had not previous had it, was brought for inoculation. And 



SUFFERINGS AT AYA. 205 

although I knew nothing about the disorder, or the mode of treating 
it, I inoculated them all with a needle, and told them to take care of 
their diet — all the instructions I could give them. Mr. Judson's 
health was gradually restored, and he found himself much n^ore com- 
fortably situated than when in the city prison. 

** The prisoners were at first chained two and two; but as soon as 
the jailers could obtain chains sufficient, they were separated, and 
each prisoner had but one pair. The prison was repaired, and a new 
fence made, and a large, airy shed erected in front of the prison, where 
the prisoners were allowed to remain during the day, though locked 
up in the little close prison at night. All the children recoTered from 
the small-pox; but my watchings and fatigue, together with mj 
miserable food, and more miserable lodgings, brought on one of the 
diseases of the country, which is almost always fatal to foreigners. 
My constitution seemed destroyed, and in a few days I became so 
weak as to be hardly able to walk to Mr. Judson's prison. In this 
debilitated state I set off in a cart for Aya, to procure medicines and 
some suitable food, leaving the cook to supply my place. I reached 
the house in safety, and for two or three days the disorder seemed at 
a stand ; after which it attacked me so violently that I had no hopes 
of recovery left ; and my only anxiety now was, to return to Oung- 
pen-la, to die near the prison. It was with the greatest difficulty that 
I obtained the medicine chest from the governor, and then had no one 
to administer medicine. I, however, got at the laudanum, and by 
taking two drops at a time for several hours, it so far checked the 
disorder as to enable me to get on board a boat, though so weak that 
I could not stand, and again set off for Oung-pen-la. The last four 
miles was in that painful conveyance, the cart, uid in the midst of 
the rainy season, when the mud almost buries the oxen. You 
may form some idea of a Burmese cart, when I tell you that their 
wheels are not constructed like ours, but are simply round thick 
planks with a hole in the middle, through which a pole that supports 
the body is thrust. 

"I just reached Oung-i)en-la when my strength seemed entirely 
exhausted. The good native cook came out to help me into the house ; 
but so altered and emaciated was my appearance, that the poor fellow 
burst into tears at the first sight. I crawled on to the mat in the 
little room, to which I was confined for more than two months, and 
never perfectly recovered until I came to the English camp. At this 
period, when I was unable to take care of myself, or look after Mr. 
Judson, we must both have died had it not been for the faithful and 
affectionate care of our Bengalee cook. A common Bengalee cook 
will do nothing but the simple business of cooking; but he seemed to 



206 THE EABNEST MAN. 

forget his caste, and almost his own wants, in his efforts to serve us. 
He would provide, cook, and carry your brother's food, and then 
return and take care of me. I have frequently known him not to 
taste of food till near night, in consequence of having to go so far for 
wood and water, and in order to have Mr. Judson's dinner ready at 
the usual hour. He never complained, never asked for his wages, and 
never for a moment hesitated to go anywhere, or to perform any act 
we required. I take great pleasure in speaking of the faithful con- 
duct of this servant, who is still with us, and I trust has been well 
rewarded for his services. 

** Our dear little Maria was the greatest suflferer at this time, my 
illness depriving her of her usual nourishment, and neither a nurse 
nor a di'op of milk could be procured in the village. By making 
presents to the jailers, I obtained leave for Mr. Judson to come out of 
prison, and take the emaciated creature round the village to beg a 
little nourishment from those mothers who had young children. Her 
cries in the night were heart-rending, when it was impossible to sup- 
ply her wants. I now began to think the very afflictions of Job had 
come upon me. When in health, I could bear the various trials and 
vicissitudes through which I was called to pass ; but to be confined 
with sickness, and unable to assist those who were so dear to me, 
when in distress, was almost too much for me to bear ; and had it not 
been for the consolations of religion, and an assured conviction that 
every additional trial was ordered by infinite love and mercy, I must 
have sunk imder my accumulated sufferings. Sometimes our jailers 
seemed a little softened at our distress, and for several days together 
allowed Mr. Judson to come to the house, which was to me an 
unspeakable consolation. Then, again, they would be as iron-hearted 
in their demands as though we were free from sufferings, and in 
affluent circumstances. The annoyance, the extortions, and oppres- 
sions to which we were subject during our six months* residence in 
Oung-pen-la, are beyond enumeration or description. 

** It was some time after our arrival at Oung-pen-la that we heard 
of the execution of the pakan-woon, in consequence of which our 
lives were still preserved. For we afterwards ascertained that the 
white foreigners had been sent to Oung-pen-la for the exjjress purpose 
of sacrificing them; and that he himself intended witnessing the 
horrid scene. We had frequently heard of his intended arrival at 
Oung-pen-la, but we had no idea of his diabolical purposes. He had 
raised an army of 60,000 men (a tenth part of whose advance pay 
was foimd in his house), and expected to march against the English 
army in a short time, when he was suspected of high treason, and in- 
stantly executed without the least examination. Perhaps no death in 



SUFFEEINGS AT AVA. 207 

Ava ever produced such universal rejoicings as that of the pakan-woon. 
We never, to this day, hear his name mentioned but with an epithet 
of reproach or hatred. Another brother of the king was appointed to 
the command of the army now in readiness, but with no very sanguine 
expectations of success. Some weeks after the departure of these 
troops, two of the woon-gyees were sent down for the purpose of 
negotiating. But not being successful, the queen's brother, the acting 
king of the country, was prevailed on to go. Great expectations were 
raised in consequence ; but hia cowardice induced him to encamp his 
detachmcDt of the army at a great distance from the English, and 
even at a distance from the main body of the Burmese army, whose 
head-quarters were then at Maloun. Thus he effected nothing, 
though reports were continually reaching us that peace was nearly 
concluded. 

** The time at length arrived for our release from the dreary scenes 
of Oung-pen-la. A messenger from our friend, the governor of the 
north gate of the palace, informed us that an order had been given 
the evening before, in the palace, for Mr. Judson's release. On the 
same evening an official order arrived ; and, with a joyful heart, I set 
about preparing for our departure early the following morning. But 
an unexpected obstacle occurred, which made us fear that I should 
still be retained as a prisoner. The avaricious jailers, unwilling to lose 
their prey, insisted that as my name was not included in the order I 
should not go. In vain I urged that I. was not sent there as a 
prisoner, and that they had no authority over me ; they still deter- 
mined I should not go, and forbade the villagers from letting me a 
cart. Mr. Judson was then taken out of prison and brought to the 
jailer^s house, where, by promises and threatenings, he finally gained 
their consent, on condition that we would leave the remaining part of 
our provisions we had recently received from Ava. It was noon 
before we were allowed to dej^art. When we reached Amarapoora, 
Mr. Judson was obliged to follow the guidance of the jailer, who con- 
ducted him to the governor of the city. Having made all necessary 
inquiries, the governor appointed another guard, which conveyed Mr, 
Judson to the court-house in Ava, at which place he arrived some time 
in the night. I took my own course, procured a boat, and reached 
our house before dark. 

*' My first object the next morning was to go in search of your 
brother; and I had the mortification to meet him again in prison, 
though not the death prison. I went inmiediately to my old friend, 
the governor of the city, who was now raised to the rank of a woon- 
gyee. He informed me that Mr. Judson was to be sent to the Bur- 
mese camp, to act as translator and interpreter; and that he was put 



208 THE EARNEST MAN. 

in confinemeDt for a short time only, till his afGEkirs were settled. 
Early the following morning I went to this officer again, who told me 
that Mr. Judson had that moment received twenty ticals from gov- 
ernment, with orders to go immediately on board a boat for Maloun, 
and that he had given him permission to stop a few moments at the 
house, it being on his way. I hastened back to the house, where Mr. 
Judson soon arrived, but was allowed to remain only a short time, 
while I could prepare food and clothing for future use. He was 
crowded into a little boat, where he had not room sufficient to lie 
down, and where his exposure to the cold damp nights threw him 
into a ^4olent fever, which had nearly ended all his sufferings. He 
arrived at Maloun on the third day, where, ill as he was, he was 
obliged to enter immediately on the work of translating. He 
remained at Maloun six weeks, suffering as much as he had at any 
time in prison, excepting he was not in irons, nor exposed to the 
insults of those cruel jailers. 

**For the first fortnight after his departure my anxiety was less 
than it had been at any time previously since the commencement of 
our difficulties. I knew the Burmese officers at the camp would feel 
the value of Mr. Judson's services too much to allow their using any 
measures threatening his life. I thought his situation, also, would be 
much more comfortable than it really was; hence my anxiety was 
less. But my health, which had never been restored since that vio- 
lent attack at Oung-pen-la, now daily declined, till I was seized with 
the spotted fever, with all its attendant horrors. I knew the nature 
of the fever from its commencement ; and, from the shattered state 
of my constitution, together with the want of medical attendants, I 
concluded it must be fatal The day I was taken with the fever, a 
Burmese nurse came and offered her services for Maria. This circum- 
stance filled me with gratitude and confidence in God ; for, though I 
had so long and so constantly made efforts to obtain a person of this 
description, I had never been able; when at the very time I most 
needed one, and without any exertion, a voluntary offer was made. 
My fever raged violently and without any intermission. I began to 
think of settling my worldly affairs, and of committing my dear little 
Maria to the care of a Portuguese woman, when I lost my reason, and 
was insensible to all around me. At this dreadful period. Dr. Price was 
released from prison, and hearing of my illness, obtained permission 
to come and see me. He has since told me that my situation was the 
most distressing he had ever witnessed, and that he did not then think 
I should survive many hours. My hair was shaved, my head and 
feet covered with blisters, and Dr. Price ordered the Bengalee servant 
who took care of me, to endeavour to persuade ,ine to take a little 



SUFFERIKQS AT AVA. 209 

• 

nourislmient, wUcli I had obstinately refused for several days. One 
of the first things I recollect was seeing this faithfnl servant standing 
by me, trying to induce me to take a little wine and water. I was^ 
in fact, so far gone that the Burmese neighbours, who had come to 
see me expire, said, * She is dead, and if the King of angels should 
come in, he could not recover her.' 

** The fever, I afterwards understood, had run seventeen days when 
the blisters were applied. I now began to recover slowly, but it was 
more than a month after this before I had strength to stand. While 
in this weak, debilitated state, the servant who had followed your 
brother to the Burmese camp came in, and informed me his master 
had arrived, and had been conducted to the court-house in town. 
I sent off a Burman to watch the movements of government, and to 
ascertain if possible in what way Mr. Judson was to be disposed ot 
He soon returned with the sad intelligence that he had seen Mr. Judson 
go out of the palace yard, accompanied by two or three Burmans, 
who conducted him to one of the prisons, and that it was reported in 
town that he was to be sent back to the Oung-pen-la prison. I was 
too weak to bear ill tidings of any kind ; but a shock so dreadful aa 
this almost annihilated me. For some time I could hardly breathe, 
but at last gained sufficient composure to despatch Moung Ing to our 
friend tne governor of the north gate, uid begged him to make one 
more effort for the release of Mr. Judson, and to prevent his being sent 
back to the country prison, where I knew he must suffer much, as I 
could not follow. Moung Ing then went in search of Mr. Judson ; 
and it was nearly dark when he foimd him in the interior of an 
obscure prison. I had sent food early in the afternoon, but being 
unable to find him, the bearer had returned with it, which added 
another pang to my distresses, as I feared he was already sent to 
Oung-pen-la. 

'* If I ever felt the value and efficacy of prayer, I did at this time. 
I could not rise from my couch ; I could make no efforts to secure my 
husband ; I could only plead with that great and powerful Being who 
has said, * Call upon me in the day of trouble, and / wiU Jiear, and 
thou shalt glorify me,' and who made -me at this time feel so power- 
fully this promise that I became quite composed, feeling assured that 
my prayers would be answered. 

** When Mr. Judson was sent from Maloun to Ava, it was within 
£.ye minutes' notice, and without his knowledge of the cause. On his 
way up the river, he accidentally saw the communication made to 
government respecting him, which was simply this : * We have no 
further use for Yudathan; we therefore return him to the golden 
city.' On arriving at the court-house, there happened to be no one 



{ 



210 THE EARNEST HAK. 

present who was acquainted with Mr. Judson. The presiding oflBcer 
inquired from what place he had been sent to Maloun. He vrsa 
answered, from Oung-pen-la. * Let him, then,' said the ofl&cer, * be 
returned thither;' when he was delivered to a guard and conducted 
to the place above mentioned, there to remain until he could be con- 
veyed to Oung-pen-la. In the meantime, the governor of the north 
gate presented a petition to the high court of the empire, offered 
himself as Mr. Jndson's security, obtained his release, and took, him 
to his house, where he treated him with considerable kindneaa, 
and to which I was removed as soon as returning health would aUow. 
** The advance of the English army towards the capital at this time 
threw the whole town into the greatest state of alarm, and convinced 
the government that some speedy measures must be taken to save the 
golden city. They had hitherto rejected all the overtures of Sir 
Archibald Campbell, imagining until this late period that they could 
in some way or other drive the English from the country. Mr. Jud- 
son and Dr. Price were daily called to the palace and consulted ; in 
fact, nothing was done without their approbation. Two English 
officers, also, who had lately been brought to Ava as prisoners, were 
continually consulted, and their good offices requested in endeavour- 
ing to persuade the British general to make peace on easier terms. It 
was finally concluded that Mr. Judson and one of the officers above 
mentioned should be sent immediately to the English camp, in order 
to negotiate. The danger attached to a situation so responsible, under 
a government so fickle as the Burmese, induced your brother to use 
every means possible to prevent his being sent. Dr. Price was not 
only willing, but desirous of going. This circumstance Mr. Judsoti 
represented to the members of government, and begged he might not 
be compelled to go, as Dr. Price could transact the business equally 
as well as himself. After some hesitation and deliberation. Dr. Price 
was appointed to accomx)any Dr. Sandford, one of the English officers, 
on condition that Mr. Judson would stand security for his return; 
while the other English officer, then in irons, should be security for 
Dr. Sandford. The king gave them one himdred ticals each to bear 
their expenses (twenty-five of which Dr. Sandford generously sent 
to Mr. Gougher, still a prisoner at Oung-pen-la), boats, men, and a 
Burmese officer to accompany them, though he ventured no further 
than the Burman camp. With the most anxious solicitude the court' 
waited the arrival of the messengers, but did not in the least relax in 
their exertions to fortify the city. Men and beasts were at work 
night and day, making hew stockades and strengthening old ones; 
and whatever buildings were in their way, were immediately torn 
down. Our house, with all that surrounded it, was levelled to the 



SUFFERINGS AT AVA. 211 

ground, and our beautiful little compound turned into a road and a 
place for the erection of cannon. All articles of value were conveyed 
out of town and safely deposited in some other place. 

** At length the boat in which the ambassadors had been sent was 
seen approaching, a day earlier than was expected. As it advanced 
towards the city, the banks were lined by thousands, anxiously 
inquiring their success. But no answer was given ; the government 
must first hear the news. The palace gates were crowded; the 
officers at the lut-d'hau were seated, when Dr. Price made the follow- 
ing communication: 'The general and commissioners will make no 
alteration in their terms, except the hundred lacs [a lac is 100,000] 
of rupees may be paid at four different times ; the first twenty -five 
lacs to be paid within twelve days, or the army will continue their 
march.' In addition to this, the prisoners were to be given up inmie- 
diately. The general had commissioned Dr. Price to demand Mr. Jud- 
son, and myself, and little Maria. This was communicated to the 
king, who replied, *They are not English; they are my people, and 
shall not go.' At this time I had no idea that we should ever be 
released from Ava. The government had learned the value of your 
brother's services, having employed him the last three months ; and 
we both concluded that they would never consent to our departure. 
The foreigners were again called to a consultation, to see what could 
be done. Dr. Price and Mr. Judson told them plainly that the English 
would never make peace on any other terms than those offered ; and 
that it was in vain to go down again without the money. It was 
then proposed that a third part of the first siim demanded should be 
sent down immediately. Mr. Judson objected, and still said it would 
be useless. Some of the members of government then intimated 
that it was probable the teachers were on the side of the English, and 
did not try to make them take a smaller sum ; and also threatened if 
they did not make the English comply, they and their families should 
suffer. 

'*In this interval the fears of the government were considerably 
allayed by the offers of a general, by name Layarthoo-yah, who 
desired to make one more attempt to conquer the English and dis- 
perse them. He assured the king and government that he could so 
fortify the ancient city of Pugan as to make it impregnable, and that 
he would there defeat and destroy the English. His offers were 
heard; he marched to Pugan with a very considerable force, and 
made strong the fortifications. But the I^glish took the city with 
perfect ease, and dispersed the Burmese army; while the general fled 
to Ava, and had the presumption to appear in the presence of the 
king, and demand new troops. The king, being enraged that he had 



< 



212 THE EARNEST MAN. 

ever listened to him for a moment, in consequence of which the 
negotiation had been delayed, the English general provoked, and the 
troops daily advancing, ordered the general to be immediately exe- 
cuted. The poor fellow was soon hurled from the palace, and beaten all 
the way to the court-house, when he was stripped of his rich apparel, 
bound with cords, and made to kneel and bow towards the palace. 
He was then delivered into the hands of the executioners, who, by 
their cruel treatment, put an end to his existence before they reached 
the place of execution. 

''The king caused it to be reported that this general was executed 
in consequence of disobeying his commands, ^not to fight the English^ 

*'Dr. Price was sent off the same night with part of the prisoners, 
and with instructions to persuade the general to take six lacs 
instead of twenty-five. He returned in two or three days with the 
appalling intelligence that the English general was very angry, re- 
fused to have any communication with him, and was now within a 
few days' march of the capital The queen was greatly alarmed, and 
said the money should be raised immediately, if the English would 
only stop their march. The whole palace was in motion ; gold and 
silver vessels were melted up ; the king and queen superintended the 
weighing of a part of it, and were determined, if possible, to save 
their city. The silver was ready in the boats by the next evening ; 
but they had so little confidence in the English, that, after all their 
alarm, they concluded to send down six lacs only, with the assurance 
that, if the English would stop where they then were, the remainder 
should be forthcoming immediately. 

"The government now did not even ask Mr. Judson the question 
whether he would go or not ; but some of the officers took him by the 
arm, as he was walking in the street, and told him he must go imme- 
diately on board the boat, to accompany two Burmese officers, a 
woon-gyee and woon-douk, who were going down to make peaces 
Most of the English prisoners were sent at the same time. The 
general and commissioners would not receive the six lacs, neither 
would they stop their march; but promised if the sum complete 
reached them before they should arrive at Ava, they would make 
peace. The general also commissioned Mr. Judson to collect the 
remaining foreigners, of whatever country, and ask the question, 
before the Burmese government, whether liey wished to go or stay. 
Those who expressed a wish to go should be delivered up immediately, 
or peace would not be made. 

**Mr. Judson reached Ava at midnight, had all the foreigners 
called the next morning, and the question asked. Some of the mem- 
bers of government said to him; * You will not leave us; you shall 



SUFPEBINGS AT AVA. 213 

become a great man if you will remiain.' He then secured himself 
from the odium of saying that he wished to leave the service of his 
majesty, by recurring to the order of Sir Archibald, that whoever 
wished to leave Ava should be given up, and that I had expressed 
a wish to go, so that he of course must follow. The remaining part 
of the twenty-five lacs was soon collected; the prisoners at Oung- 
pen-la were all released, and either sent to their houses or down the 
river to the English ; and in two days from the time of Mr. Judson's 
return, we took an affectionate leave of the good-natured officer who 
had so long entertained us at his house, and who now accompanied 
us to the water side, and we then left for ever the banks of Ava. 

'* It was on a cool, moonlight evening, in the month of March, that 
with hearts filled with gratitude to God, and overflowing with joy at 
our prospects, we passed down the Irrawady, surrounded by six or 
eight golden boats, and accompanied by all we had on earth. The 
thought that we had still to pass the Burman camp would sometimes 
occur to damp our joy, for we feared that some obstacle might there 
arise to retard our progress. Nor were we mistaken in our conjec- 
tures. We reached the camp about midnight, where we were detained 
two hours ; the woon-gyee and high officers insisting that we should 
wait at the camp, while Dr. Price, who did not return to Ava with 
your brother, but remained at the camp, should go on with the money, 
and first ascertain whether peace would be made. The Burmese gov- 
ernment still entertained the idea that, as soon as the English had 
received the money and prisoners, they would continue their march, 
and yet destroy the capital. We knew not but that some circum- 
stance might occur to break off the negotiations. Mr. Judson there- 
fore strenuously insisted that he would not remain, but go immediately. 
The officers were finally prevailed on to consent, hoping much from 
Mr. Judson's assistance in making peace. 

** We now, for the first time for more than a year and a half, felt 
that we were free, and no longer subject to the oppressive yoke of 
the Burmese. And with what sensations of delight, on the next 
morning, did I behold the masts of the steamboat, the sure presage 
of being within the bounds of civilized life ! As soon as our boat 
reached the shore. Brigadier A. and another officer came on board, 
<;ongratulated us on our arrival, and invited us on board the steam- 
boat, where I passed the remainder of the day ; while your brother 
went on to meet the general, who, with a detachment of the army, 
had encamped at Yandabo, a few miles further down the river. Mr. 
Judson returned in the evening, with an invitation from Sir Archibald 
to come immediately to his quarters, where I was the next morning 
introduced, and received with the greatest kindness by the general. 



( 



214 THE EARNEST MAN. 

who had a tent pitched for us near his own, took us to his own table, 
and treated us with the kindness of a father rather than as strangers 
of another country. 

''We feel that our obligations to Gen. Campbell can never be cancel- 
led. Our final release from Ava, and our recovering all the property 
that had there been taken, was owing entirely to his efforts. His subse- 
quent hospitality and kind attention to the accommodations for our 
passage to Rangoon, have left an impression on our minds which can 
never be efifaced. We daily received the congratulations of the British 
officers, whose conduct towards us formed a striking contrast to that 
of the Burmese. I presume to say that no persons on earth 
were ever happier than we were during the fortnight we passed at 
the English camp. For several days this single idea wholly occu- 
pied my mind, — that we were out of the power of the Burmese 
government, and once more under the protection of the English. 
Our feelings continually dictated expressions like these : ' What shcUl 
we render to the Lord for all his benefits towards us ? ' 

'* The treaty of peace was soon concluded, signed by both parties, 
and a termination of hostilities publicly declared. We left Yandabo 
after a fortnight's residence, and safely reached the mission house in 
Rangoon, after an absence of two years and three months." 

At the close of this tragic narrative, Mrs. Judson remarks : 
"This letter, dreadful as are the scenes herein described, 
gives but a faint idea of the dreadful reality. The anguish, 
the agony of mind, resulting from a thousand little circum- 
stances impossible to be delineated on paper, can be known by 
those only who have been in similar circumstances." Twenty 
years after, Mr. Judson spoke of the horrors of this period 
as too terrible to be related in full ; and said that when ill 
or sad, the fearful images haunted him even then. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE DESOLATED HOMK 



The close of the Buimese war marks the commencement 
of the second period of the mission. On the return of Mr. 



THE DESOLATED HOME. 215 

and Mrs. Judson to RangooD, after their release from Ava, 
they found the mission house in ruins, the little church dis- 
persed, and such a state of alarm and confusion from the 
rising among the native Peguans, who had seized the 
favourable moment for asserting their independence, that 
it was evident the mission could not at present be recon- 
structed in Rangoon. Had other circumstances been favour- 
able, the decided refusal of the emperor to grant religious 
toleration would have allowed little hope of success to such 
an attempt. 

On the other hand, the Tenasserim provinces, which had 
been ceded to the British, presented an opportunity for a 
new establishment under the most favourable auspices. Here 
were the same races, the same language, as in Burmah 
proper. Under the protecting arm of British rule, they 
could prosecute openly, and on the largest scale their means 
would admit, all the departments of missionary labour, and 
it would be impossible for the utmost vigilance of the 
emperor to prevent the influence from spreading into his 
dominions. The continual intercourse on the frontier would 
inevitably extend the spirit of inquiry. Tracts, those silent 
little messengers so peculiarly adapted to the character of the 
Burman mind, would find their way by thousands across the 
dividing line, and steal along the watercourses, and over the 
hills and valleys, into the very heart of the country. The 
native missionary, too, might occasionally venture into the 
wild jungles and remote villages, to proclaim the words of 
salvation. All these advantages were heightened by the per- 
sonal relations of Mr. Judson to the Bengal government, and 
to its officers in Burmah. Far different, truly, were these 
relations from those in which he stood only thirteen years 
before, when he stole, a midnight ftigitive, through the streets 
of Calcutta! 

The capital of the lately acquired provinces would natu- 
rally be the seat of the new mission ; and accordingly Mr. 
Judson gladly accepted the invitation of Mr. Crawford, 



i 



S16 THE EARNEST MAX. 

Commissioner of the Govemor-Greneral, to accompany hina 
early in April on an exploring tour for selecting a site. The 
tone of his journal, while absent^ shows a spirit unsubdued 
by suffering, ready to enter, with youthful alacrity, on new 
scenes of responsibility and toil. There is a springing buoy- 
ancy in his brief descriptions of the events of the short 
voyage, and of the natural scenery and various objects of 
interest on the way — like that of one to whom the sense of 
freedom and the glad sights of nature were still a delightful 
novelty. 

The result of the expedition was the selection of Kyaika- 
mee, a port at the mouth of the Salwen, protected on the 
south by a bold promontory, and furnishing good anchorage 
about one hundred and fifty yards from the shore. On the 
6th of April, the civil and military authoiities took posses- 
sion of this place, in the name of the king and of the Hon- 
ourable East India Company, by appropriate ceremonies, and 
gave to it, in honour of the governor-general, the name of 
Amherst. In conclusion, the sixtieth chapter of Isaiah was 
read, and prayer was offered by Mr. Judson. It must have 
been to him an hour rich with strange memories, with pro- 
found gratitude and exulting hope. Behind him towered the 
lofby headland, on whose seaward verge rose in decaying 
grandeur, a temple of Gautama ; above his head floated the 
royal flag of England; and around him stood, with heads 
uncovered and in reverent silence, the representatives of 
British sovereignty in India, while he solemnly consecrated 
this new centre of its power to the worship and glory of the 
King of kings. His friend, Mr. Crawford, has recorded his 
admiring recollection of the beauty and appropriateness of 
this prayer; but probably no one of the listeners fully appre- 
ciated the £Etr-reaching significance of the occasion to his own 
mind. 

On his return to Eangoon, Mr. and Mrs. Judson concluded 
to become the first settlers in the new town. The old zayat, 
endeared by so many recollections, was taken down, that the 



THIS DESOLATED HOME. 217 

boards might be forwarded to Amherst for the erection of a 
temporary shelter during the approaching rains. But before 
this could be effected, there came a new interruption of their 
missionary plans. • 

The treaty of Yandabo contained the stipulation for an 
additional commercial treaty, the terms of which were left 
to be subsequently settled. These the Bengal government 
wished to make mutually advantageous to the two countries. 
Mr. Crawford having been appointed envoy to the Burman 
court, for the adjustment of this business, importuned Mr. 
Judson to accompany him. After repeatedly declining the 
proposal,* he was at length induced to comply by a pledge, 
on the part of Mr. Crawford, to do his utmost for securing 
in the treaty an article in favour of religious toleration. 
Mrs. Judson earnestly advised the step as one of great im- 
portance to the mission. 

This being decided, he removed his family, near the close 
of June, to Amherst, where several of the native converts 
had already gone in anticipation of his coming, and had, in 
Mr. Judson's words, *' built the first native houses that 
encroached on the native jungle, and disturbed the deer and 
wild fowl, who had been the undisputed occupants of the 
peninsula." A village of some fifty houses, mostly native^ 
and the military cantonments and officers' houses, about a 
mile distant, had somewhat subdued the inhospitable aspect 
of Amherst, and insured to Mrs. Judson a comfortable and 
secure r^idence during his absence. Captain Fenwick, civil 
superintendent of the place, immediately vacated, for her 
accommodation, a house which he had put up for his own 
temporary use, and exerted himself in every way to make 
her situation pleasant. 

Just before her husband's departure, a present of 300 
rupees, from a benevolent friend, furnished Mrs. Judson 



* He had already declined the situation of government interpreter, witii 
A salary of 3,000 dollars. 



i 



218 THE EARNEST MAN. 

with the means of putting up a small mission house and 
gathering a school. Everything to her view wore a bright 
and promising aspect, and she bade her husband farewell 
with cheerfulness, in the confident ho^je of a speedy reunion 
within three or four months. 

He left Amherst on the 5th of July; but being detained 
at Kangoon for the final orders from Bengal, did not leave 
that place till September 1st, for Ava, where they arrived on 
the 30th. Three weeks then elapsed before an interview 
could be obtained with the emperor ; and when at length 
that haughty personage condescended to be seen by a British 
envoy, it was in an exceedingly sulky humour. Nothing of 
any value could be secured, even for commercial objects ; and 
all talk about religious toleration was found to be out of the 
question. A whole month was thus spent in tedious and 
useless negotiations, in conducting which Mr. Judson was 
obliged constantly to act the wearisome part of interpreter, 
feeling all the time that the interests dearest to himself were 
suffering deplorably by his absence. 

On the 23rd of November the long protracted negotiation 
was brought to an end by the signing of the treaty, and Mr. 
Judson began to exult in the prospect of a speedy return to 
his beloved home and his long suspended missionary labours. 
On the 24th, a letter from the assistant superintendent of 
Amherst brought the tidings that Mrs. Judson was no 
more ! 

His feelings, under this most imexpected and overwhelm- 
ing affliction, can only be fitly given in his own language : — 

TO HIS SISTER. 

"Ava, December 7, 1826. 
"Weep with me, my dear sister and parents, for my beloved wife 
is no more. She died at Amherst, the 24th of October last, of remit- 
tent fever, and is buried near the spot where she first landed ; and 
*they have put up a small, rude fence around the grave, to protect it 
from incautious intrusion.' There lies, inclosed in a coffin, the form of 
her I so much loved — the wife of my youth, the source and centre of 
my domestic happiness. 



THE DESOLATED HOME. 219 

** She had just built a small house, and moved into it three weeks 
before, she was taken ill ; and she writes : * May God preserve and 
bless you, and restore you in safety to your old and new home, is the 
prayer of your affectionate Ann/ Alas ! the new home only remains 
for me ; my old home is broken up for ever. Even little Maria is too 
young to recognize her papa ; and, before I see her, will have forgotten 
her mamma, who loved her so much, and took such care of her. Ah, 
little ungrateful babe ! who will ever love you like your own mamma, 
whom you have so soon forgotten ? Let us go, my chUd, to her grave, 
and plant some flowers there, and water them with our tears, and 
wait for her resurrection at the last day ; for her spirit has been con- 
veyed by angels to Abraham's bosom, and is now existing in paradise 
with the spirits of the just made perfect. And she will come again, 
and resimie the form which now moulders in the grave. Then she 
will be bright as the sun, beautiful as an angel, immortal as the Savi- 
our. Ajid all of us who are entitled to inmiortality, by a union to 
the same inmiortal Head, will live together with her in the enjoyment 
of everlasting life. 

**We will not, then, mourn as those who have no hope; *for, if 
we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also that 
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.' 

" Yet, notwithstanding the consolations of the gospel, grief claims 
its right, and tears their course ; and I must subscribe myself your 
brother, in the deepest sorrow, 

**A. JuDSON, Jr." 

TO MRS. HASSELTINE. 

"Amherst, Febniary 4, 1827. 

''Amid the desolation that death hath made, I take up my i)en 
once more to address the mother of my beloved Ann. I am sitting 
in the house she built, in the room where she breathed her last, and 
at a window from which I see the tree that stands at the head of her 
grave, and the top of the * smaU, rude fence' which they have put up 
*to protect it from incautious intrusion.' 

"Mr. and Mrs. Wade are living in the house, having arrived here 
about a month after Ann's death ; and Mrs. Wade has taken charge 
of* my poor motherless Maria. I was unable to get any accounts of 
the child at Rangoon ; and it was only on my arriving here, the 24th 
ultimo, that I learned she was still alive. Mr. Wade met me at the 
landing-place ; and as I passed on to the house, one and another of 
the native Christians came out ; and when they saw me they began to 
weep. At length we reached the house ; and I almost expected to see 
my love coming out to meet me, as usuaL But no. I saw only in 



i 



220 THE EAKNEST HAN. 

the anna of Mrs. Wade a poor little puDy child, who could not recog- 
nise her weeping father, and from whose infant mind had long been 
erased all recollection of the mother who loved her so much. 

** She turned away from me in alarm ; and I, obliged to seek com- 
fort elsewhere, found my way to the grave. But who ever obtained 
comfort there ? Thence I went to the house in which I left her, and 
looked at the 8i)ot where we last knelt in prayer, and where we 
exchanged the parting kiss. 

"The doctor who attended her has removed to another station; 
and the only information I can obtain is such as the native Christiana 
are able to communicate. 

"It seems that her head was much affected during her last days, 
and she said but little. She sometimes complained thus: 'The 
teacher is long in coming; and the new missionaries are long in 
coming ; I must die alone, and leave my little one ; but as it is the 
will of God, I acquiesce in his wilL I am not afraid of death, but I 
am afraid I shall not be able to bear these pains. Tell the teacher 
that the disease was most violent, and I could not write; tell him 
how I suffered and died ; tell h\m all that you see ; and take care of 
the house and things until he returns.' When she was unable to 
notice anything else, she would still call the child to her, and charge 
the nurse to be kind to it, and indulge it in everything until its father 
should return. The last day or two she lay almost senseless and 
motionless on one side, her head reclining on her arm, her eyes 
closed ; and at eight in the evening, with one exclamation of distress 
in the Burman language, she ceased to breathe. 

"February 7. I have been on a visit to the physician who attended 
her in her illness. He has the character of a kind, attentive, and 
skilful practitioner ; and his communications to me have been rather 
consoling. I am now convinced that everything possible was done, 
and that, had I been present myself, I could not have essentially con- 
tributed to avert the fatal termination of the disease. The doctor 
was with her twice a day; and frequently spent the greater part of 
the night by her side. He says that, from the first attack of the 
fever, she was persuaded she should not recover; but that her mind 
was uniformly tranquil and happy in the prospect of death. She only 
expressed occasional regret at leaving her child, and the natijre 
Christian schools, before her husband or another missionary family 
could arrive. The last two days she was free from pain. On her 
attention being roused by reiterated questions, she replied, * I feel 
quite well, only very weak' These were her last words. 

"The doctor is decidedly of opinion that the fatal termination of 
the fever is not to be ascribed to the localities of the new settlement 



THE DESOLATED HOME. 221 

but chiefly to the weakness of her constitution, occasioned by 
the severe privations and long-protracted sufferings she endured at 
Ava. 0, with what meekness, and patience, and magnanimity, and 
Christian fortitude, she bore those sufferings ! And can I wish they 
had been less ? Can I sacrilegiously wish to rob her crown of a single 
gem ? Much she saw and suffered of the evil of this evil world, and 
eminently was she qualified to relish and enjoy the pure and holy rest 
into which she has entered. True, she has been taken from a sphere 
in which she was singularly qualified — by her natural dis})osition, her 
winning manners, her devoted zeal, and her perfect acquaintance with 
the language — ^to be extensively serviceable to the cause of Christ; 
true, she has been torn from her husband's bleeding heart, and from 
her darling babe ; but infinite wisdom and love have presided, as ever, 
in this most afflicting dispensation. Faith decides that it is all right, 
and the decision of faith, eternity will soon confirm. 

" I have only time to add — for I am writing in great haste, with 
very short notice of the present opportunity of sending to Bengal— 
that poor little Maria, though very feeble, is, I hope, recovering from 
her long illness. She began indeed to recover while under the care of 
the lady who kindly took charge of her at her mother's death ; but 
when, after Mr. Wade's arrival, she was brought back to this houBe, 
she seemed to think that she had returned to her former home, and 
had found in Mrs. Wade her own mother. And certainly the most 
tender, affectionate care is not wanting to confirm her in this idea. — 
I remain, my dear mother, yours, in the deepest sorrow, 

**A. JoDSON, Jr." 

On the 24th of April, just six months after the death of 
Mrs. Judson, little Maria was laid at rest beside her mother. 

TO MRS. HASSELTINE. 

"Amherst, February 26, 1827. 
"Dear Mother Hasseltine, — My little Maria lies by the side of 
her fond mother. The complaint to which she was subject several 
months proved incurable. She had the best medical advice ; and the 
kind care of Mrs. Wade could not have been, in any respect, exceeded 
by that of her own mother. But all our efforts, and prayers, and 
tears, could not propitiate the cruel disease ; the work of death went 
forward ; and after the usual process, excruciating to a parent's heart, 
she ceased to breathe on the 24th instant, at three o'clock, p.m., aged 
two years and three months. We then closed her faded eyes, and 
bound up her discoloured lips, where the dark touch of death first 
appeared, and folded her little hands on her cold breast. The next 



r" 



222 THE EARNEST MAN. 

morning we made her last bed in the small inclosure that surrounds 
her mother's lonely grave. Together they rest in hope, imder the 
hope tree {hopia), which stands at the head of the graves; and 
together I trust that their spirits are rejoicing after a short separa- 
tion of precisely six months. 

'* And I am left alone in the wide world. My own dear family I 
have buried ; one in Kangoon, and two in Amherst. What remains 
for me but to hold myself in readiness to follow the dear departed to 
that blessed world, 

"Where my best friends, my kindred, dwell ; 
Where God, my Saviour, reigns " ? 

**I remain, my dear mother, yours, 

"A. JuDSON, Jr." 

They were all gone ! His " meek, blue-eyed Roger,"* his 
loving, little Maria, his angelic Ann, had all departed. He 
had before this endured sufferings, both bodily and mental, 
such as seldom fall to the lot of one man, and his strong, 
elastic spirit had rebounded from the pressure with even 
increased vigour. But as the tree which has borne unharmed 
the fury of many a storm, yields to the lightning's subtle 
touch at its core, so was it now with this great, stricken 
heart. Instead of depicting this period of Judson's life, we 
would fain sit down at a reverent distance, to weep with 
him in silence, " for we see that his grief is very great." 

What his wife had been to him, from the day when she 
left " her country and her father's house," to share with him 
the hardships and vicissitudes of a pioneer missionary, has 
been in some measure shown by the foregoing narrative. 
But to estimate the strength of the tie which bound them 
together, we must enter deeply into the inward characters 
of both. She was not merely a heroine, competent to meet, 
unassisted, the most sudden and formidable emergencies, to 
overcome difficulty and danger by her own unerring judgment 
and steadfast spirit, to awe or win the most ferocious of 



Bom in Bangoon, September 11, 1815; died May 4, 1816. 



THE DESOLATED HOME. 223 

human beings to her bidding, to influence by her commanding 
intellect the decisions of a haughty Oriental court;* but she 
was one of the purest, brightest, sweetest spirits that ever 
gladdened home, and breathed into a husband's heart the 
sustaining, inspiring life of domestic love. Her character 
in this respect has been imperfectly understood, owing, in 
part, to her possessing in so remarkable a degree qualities 
not generally supposed to exist in connection with it; and, 
in part, to her singularly reserved simplicity of expression in 
words. She is Shakespeare's Cordelia; with all the uncon- 
scious loftiness, scantiness of outward professions, and serene 
but profound depths of feeling and affection, of that match- 
less picture of the imagination. Her words told but little 
of her heart, but her heart wrote itself on her life. Her 
heroism at Ava was but the expression, on an enlarged scale, 
of that wifely devotion, which had linked fond and tender 
memories with every period of their union. The lonely 
mission house in Rangoon, where, shut out for years from 
civilized society, her heart had found in him all it asked of 
earthly happiness, tells of the same nature which afterwards 
defied danger and death in their most frightful forms for his 
sake. 

Traits so noble and engaging, associated with every femi- 
nine charm of person and manner, could not have failed 
under any circumstances to secure the devoted regard of a 
man of Judson's exquisite sensibility. In his many-sided 
<3haracter, the capacity to do and to endure, in which he so 
far surpassed ordinary men, was blended with an equally 
rare delicacy of sentiment, an impassioned tenderness of 
nature, which render him peculiarly susceptible both to the 
joys and sufferings of the affections. Sternly resolute as he 



* " Mrs. Judson was the author of those eloquent and forcible appeals 
to the government, which prepared them by degrees for submission to 
terms of peace, never expected by any who knew the kxitUeur and inflexi- 
ble pride of the Burman court."— 2>r. WaylancTa Memoir^ p. 373. 



i 



224 THE EABKEST MAK. 

was in duty, calm in danger, patient in toil, privation, and 
sickness, the fearless champion of principle though all the 
world opposed, yet a touch at his heart made all its fine 
chords quiver, and his tears gush forth as freely as a child's. 
What must have been the affection inspired in such a man, 
by the loveliness and devotion of that angelic wife 1 She 
had been, too, his most congenial associate in the great work 
of his life. The same divine affections and aspirations 
burned in the hearts of both, and gave a oneness to their 
being, seldom found even in the happiest conjugal relations. 
Not only had she been the sweet companion of his home, 
and his ministering angel in time of peril, but she was his 
friend of friends, his bosom counsellor, in respect to those 
labours in which he stood in most immediate connection with 
God and with the souls of men. 

And all had been taken from him as by a sudden blight. 
How painful, too, were the aggravations of the blow ! She 
who had hung so many months round his loathsome prison, 
wearing out her frail life in sickening fears and toils and 
hazards for his sake, had died, as it were, forsaken of him 
she loved. Among strangers, without a kindred bosom to 
which she might commit her darling child, without a 
Christian fiiend to strengthen her departing spirit with the 
gospel promises, she had met the last dread hour. Her 
plaintive lament to the native women around her bed : 
*' Tlie teacher is long in coming ; and the new missionaries 
are long in coming; I must die alone and leave my little 
one," must have brought the very bitterness of death to his 
heart. True, he had left her only in obedience to a clear 
conviction of duty, and in accordance with her own advice. 
But these considerations, though they justified his absence, 
could not touch the source of anguish. 

He found the circumstances of the mission, on his return, 
in sorrowful harmony with his own. Everything with which 
he was connected seemed to have withered with her who lay 
beneath the hopia tree. Amherst, the selected capital. 



PECULIAB PHASE OF THE BELIGIOUS LIFE. 225 

founded with such high anticipations of its future greatness, 
and which he had exultingly dedicated as a new hill of Zion, 
from which the glory of God was to shine forth on the sur- 
rounding regions, now greeted the mourner with a sympa- 
thetic aspect of desertion and decay. The decision of Sir 
Archibald Campbell to make his great military station at 
Maulmain, a little town twenty-seven miles further up the 
Salwen, had sealed the doom of Amherst. Mr. Crawford, 
from whose enlightened views and warm personal friendship 
for Mr. Judson much had been hoped for the mission, there- 
upon resigned the civil government of the provinces. The 
removal of the troops turned the whole current of native 
emigration towards the new city. Only four of the converts 
were found in Amherst, the rest being dispersed in different 
parts of the country. Moung Shwa-gnong, and several other 
members of the Rangoon church, had previously died in 
Burmah. Thus every circumstance tended to foster his 
dejection, and to present life as a succession of deluding 
hopes, to end only in bitter disappointment. 



CHAPTER XX. 

PECULIAR PHASE OF THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 

Weeks and months passed away, bringing little of the 
alleviation commonly ascribed to time and useful occupation. 
The latter Mr. Judson had tried most &dthfully, for with him 
personal affliction was no plea for release from his Master's 
service. Two days after his return to Amherst, he resumed 
public worship in Burmese; and never were his labours in 
translation, tract writing, and preaching, more abundant 
than at this period. But life was still rayless; nor covld all 
his strivings bring back that- joy in his work which had 



i 



226 THE EARNEST MAN. 

gilded, as with sunshine from heaven, the toil of previotis 
years. 

To one who bears in mind his terrible bodily sufferings, 
and the unnatural tension of his mind, during those two 
years of strange vicissitude in Ava, followed, before he had 
time to recruit his energies, by those overwhelming bereave- 
ments, it cannot seem strange that the strong bow at length 
gave signs of yielding. I envy not those who can speculate 
over scenes of spiritual anguish and conflict, like those which 
must now be briefly depicted, as manifestations of eccentricity 
of cha/racter. They are scenes on which the heart that has 
learned anything of its own mysteries will gaze with trem- 
bling sympathy and awe, and with the involuntary prayer, 
"Save me from this hour!" It is the humbling yet en- 
nobling spectacle of an earnest soxQ, struggling upward, 
under a crushing load of human sorrow and inflrmity, to " its 
source of being and its Father," the infinitely holy God. If 
he made mistakes upon his solitary way, where he saw few 
before, and fewer still beside him, and sometimes trod on the 
verge of dangers upon which in after years he trembled to 
look back, these are our waymarks to guide us in safety 
along on the same path; not, surely, beacons to warn us 
from entering it. 

Gradually there grew in his mind the conviction that 
grief for an earthly loss, so firmly fixed, so strong and 
overshadowing, coxdd have sprung only from a gigantic root 
of selfishness, which drew its nutriment from an inordinate 
and sinful worship of created good Looking back on his 
past religious life from this stand-point, it spread out before 
him as one fearful development of this grand error. Earthly 
pleasure, honour, and affection, seemed to have been his in- 
spiration, — ^had stood to him in the place of God. Not that 
he doubted of having been redeemed by the Saviour's blood, 
of an immortal seed planted by the Spirit in his souL But 
its growth was, in his view, that of a feeble and stifled germ; 
while the rank plants of selfishness, under the name of 



PECULIAR PHASE OF THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 227 

innocent natural feelings and affections, had wound them- 
selves round every fibre of his being. He had loved God 
in his earthly gifts, not them in Him ; and hence it was that 
when they were taken from him, the divine joy had vanished 
also. Such were the bitter things which he wrote against 
himself in this hour of humiliation ; nor have we any right 
to question that they had a foundation in truth. Who is so 
holy, so in harmony with God, his being so centred in the 
Highest Good, that the stroke which rends from him life's 
most cherished object, does not reveal in his heart unex- 
pected depths of self-love and idolatry of the creature? 
Much may already have been nobly done and suffered for 
God ; many precious gifts may have been yielded without 
a murmur; and yet, when that last tie is severed by the 
faithful hand, the soul has to own, in tears of blood, that 
too much of its treasure has been garnered below the skies. 
But let it be remembered that it is precisely those who have 
made the highest attainments in holiness, and stand nearest 
to God, who see most in themselves to condemn. The purged 
sight beholds glories in Him, and by comparison, loathsome- 
ness in itself, which wholly escape the worldly and indolent 
Christian. 

But, beyond all doubt, Mr. Judson eiTed in ascribing his 
intense mental sufferings so entirely to self-love. It was, in a 
great measure, a purely natural effect, the inevitable reaction 
of his overtasked powers, for which he was no more respon- 
sible than for his original constitution. His inferences, too, 
respecting human life and duty, and the spiritual regimen 
which he devised for the attainment of higher sanctification, 
betray his peculiar mental condition at this crisis. Con- 
ceiving that self-love, the great rival to the divine supremacy 
in the soul, is fed chiefly through its numerous points of con- 
nection with the outward world, it seemed to him that the 
mpst direct way to starve the monster was to stop these 
avenues of supply. Could this connection with the business 
and pleasures of life, its honours, and earthly objects of affeo- 



228 THE EARNEST MAN. 

tion, be reduced to such narrow limits as would barely 
suffice for the maintenance of existence, and the j)erforniance 
of religious duty to our fellow-men, the enemy, it might be 
hoped, would be so weakened, that the soul could escape its 
grasp, and rise into the pure regions of perfect holiness and 
perfect love. 

True to his nature, these convictions were carried out in 
unhesitating, uncompromising action. The right hand was 
cut off^ and the right eye plucked out, without parley with 
flesh and blood. The pain it caused only proved its necessity. 
To regulate the tendencies of his ardent nature, and cause 
them to move as living forces in harmony with the Supreme 
will, — ^an object which he had sought with earnestness and 
singleness of purpose through his whole Christian life, — ^now 
seemed to his excited mind altogether too self-indulgent a 
process. To suspect was to condemn, and condemnation was 
followed by instant execution. 

Some of these judicial proceedings, while they show the 
admirable honesty of the man, cannot but provoke a smile. 
Becoming suspicious that his natural love of human appro- 
bation was still lurking in his heart, he burnt whatever 
testimonials he had received to his character and public 
services ; among others, a letter of thanks from the Governor- 
General of India, for his important aid in the negotiations 
by which the peace with Burmah had been eflfected. So fiu* 
as possible he procured the destruction of his own letters 
through the previous period of the mission; obtaining his 
point in regard to his family correspondence, by refusing his 
sister a quitclaim on a certain portion of property till she 
could assure him that his wishes were complied witL The 
materials for a biography being so far disposed of, he could 
now mortify self-love with the prospect of going down to 
posterity as a commonplace sort of a man, about whom there 
was not much to be said. By way of crucifying his excessive 
love of neatness, which was, no doubt, too great for his com- 
fort as a missionary, — ^though there is no evidence that it 



PECULIAR PHASE OP THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 229 

ever interfered with the performance of the most disagreeable 
duty, — he became a frequent inmate of the filthy huts of the 
Karens, ministering to them with his own hands in the most 
loathsome forms of disease. He secured a life of poverty 
and dependence, by a donation of his entire patrimony, some 
6,000 dollars, to the Missionary Board.* 

But these cheap acts of self-mortification could not satisfy 
him. On his return to Amherst, finding Mr. and Mrs. Wade 
in occupancy of the mission house, he became an inmate of 
their family, "and so continued till after the removal of the 
mission to Maulmain. But detecting at length some little 
tendrils putting forth from his poor bereaved heart, and 
clinging round these congenial Christian friends, he saw in 
this an alarming symptom of the returning power of self 
and the world. Severing at once the healthful ties of 
domestic life, he retired to a little bamboo hut in the edge 
of the jungle, where, with the exception of his missionary 
labours, he spent many succeeding months in almost absolute 
solitude, alternating the severest study with vigils, fastings, 
and prayers. Sometimes he remained shut up for weeks 
together in this hovel, which he had named "The Hermitage," 
sustaining life on a scanty allowance of rice, and seeing only 
such as came to him for religious instruction. 

The malady of course increased with indulgence ; for the 
penalty of doing violence to the nature which divine wisdom 
and goodness has bestowed on us, is not repealed in favour 
even of the purest and holiest intention. Being, at a certain 
time, so exhausted by study as to be compelled to suspend 
the labour of translation, he improved his constrained leisure 
by imitating the Saviour's forty days' fast in the wilderness. 

* This was a different case from his relinquishment to the Board of all 
the avails of his services to the English government, amounting to more 
than 5,000 rupees, which he justly regarded as the rightful property of the 
mission. So scrupulous was he in this respect, that even the presents 
made to him in his public capacity, not less than 2,000 rupees more, were 
included under the same rule. 



230 THE EAKNEST MAN. 

He chose for this purpose a spot in the heart of the wild 
jungle, far from the abodes of men, where only the tramp 
and cry of wild beasts, as they sought their prey, interrupted 
the fearful stillness. A moss-grown temple of Grautama 
overlooked the scene; but even the most fanatical devotee 
dared not venture thither with his offering. So dangerous 
was the place, we are told, that the native Christians re- 
garded his preservation as a direct miracle. Here, for six 
weeks, he spent his days in fasting, prayer, and the study of 
the Bible, returning at night to his scarcely less lonely 
hermitage. This stem picture is relieved by a touch of 
beauty, which shows how strong and tender was the affection 
which he had inspired in the native disciples. When he 
reached his wild solitude, early on the second morning, he 
found in it a rude bamboo seat, and the boughs overhead 
woven into a sort of bower to protect him from the sun. A 
love stronger than the love of life had moved some faithful 
heart to track his wanderings, and make this simple pro- 
vision for his comfort ; but with such cautious delicacy as to 
create no suspicion by whom it had been done. Long after, 
it was discovered to be Ko Dwah, a deacon of the native 
church in Maidmain.* 

One of the most melancholy evidences of his peculiar 
mental state, is seen in his treatment of a nervous infirmity, 



* The following note, from Dr. Wayland's Memoir, cannot be omitted r 
" This man was devotedly attached to Dr. Judson. Both were taken sick 
at nearly the same time, so that during their illness they met but once, 
and the old deacon coidd not, with the other disciples, accompany the- 
dying pastor to the wharf. As soon as Dr. Judson removed, the house 
which he occupied, and which had long been condemned by Dr. Morton 
for its imhealthiness, was removed. Ko Dwah was not aware of the dr- 
cumstance, though living in the vicinity, until the spot was left bare. He 
then insisted on leaving his bed to look upon the ruin. He hobbled on his 
staff across the road, ascended the chapel steps with great difficulty, and 
then sitting down, rested his chin on his palms, and burst into a loud, wild 
sort of lamentation, like the waQing at a funeraL Neither mind nor 
body ever recovered from the shock, though he lingered on for some tim^ 
longer." 



PECULIAB PHASE OP THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 231 

such as sensitive poetic temperaments so often contract from 
some accidental shock, or misjudging lesson of childhood^ — 
a haunting dread of the physical decay and corruption of the 
grave. This now transformed itself, to his view, into one of 
the hydra-heads of depraved self-love, to be crushed out of 
existence by a process of justice without mercy. For this 
purpose he had a grave dug, beside which he forced himself 
to sit hours together, following in imagination the successive 
changes in his own body through every loathsome stage of 
decomposition, "weeks and days and months after death," 
till the once pampered instrument of self should be resolved 
into its native dust and ashes. Who can help weeping over 
this spectacle of "the strong man brought low;" of that 
noble intellect and heart reduced to feed on such poor 
Bomish garbage ? 

Through this whole history, indeed, the influence of 
Komish pietism cannot be mistaken. The idea of entire 
self-abnegation, of absolute repose in God, to Be gained only 
by the crucifixion of every human passion and affection, had 
dawned upon his storm-tossed spirit like a ray from heaven, 
revealing a far-off but attainable haven of rest. The works 
of Madame Guion, and others of the Quietistic school, be- 
came, for a time, his text-books for the religious life. It 
seemed to him that a superstitious horror of Popery had not 
only blinded the eyes of Protestant Christians to the purest 
models and guides in the way of holiness, but to the path 
itself by which alone sanctification was to be attained. 

His inward life, at this period, mirrored itself in "The 
Threefold Cord," — a tract somewhat widely distributed, 
though never published, in America, by which he sought 
to bring the subject more generally before the Christian 
brethren. This exquisitely written little production, in 
which the prescriptions of the sternest ascetic piety blend 
with the purest breathings of evangelic love towards God 
and man, might have come from the soul of Pascal. It is a 
noticeable faxity as characteristic of his state of mind, that 



i 



232 THE EABNE8T MAN. 

the study of God's own words forms no part of the " cord" 
which is offered to the Christian as the sure and sufficient 
means of sanctification ; while "the inward voice" is repre- 
sented as the highest, the immediate revelation of the divine 
will. This could not have happened in the earlier or the 
later periods of Judson's religious lifa 

The question will naturally be asked, whether he attained 
by these methods to that which he sought, — ^the conscious- 
ness of perfect sanctification, that celestial repose in will, 
affections, and passions, those supernal joys of heavenly 
communion, expected as their necessary result 1 The two 
following notes, written on the second and third anni- 
versaries of his wife's death, will be the most appropriate 
answer. They seem to me among the most pathetic expres- 
sions of "a rooted sorrow" ever uttered by the suffering heart. 

"Maulmain, October 24, 1828. 

** My dear Sisters M. and A., — You see from the date that it is 
the second anniversary of the triumph of death over all my hopes of 
earthly bliss. I have this day moved into a small cottage, which I 
have built in the woods, away from the haunts of men. It proves a 
stormy evening ; and the desolation aroimd me accords with the deso- 
late state of my own mind, where grief for the dear departed combines 
with sorrow for present sin ; and my tears flow at the same time over 
the forsaken grave of my love, and over the loathsome sepulchre of 
my own heart." 

"October 24, 1829. 

** And now the third anniversary returns, and finds me in the same 
cottage, except that it has been removed nearer the mission house, to 
make way for a government building. I live alone. When I wish to 
be quite so, Mrs. W. sends me my food ; at other times I am. within 
the sound of a bell that calls me to meals. 

** * Blest who, far from all mankind, 
This world's shadows left behind. 
Hears from heaven a gentle strain, 
Whispering love, and loves again.' 

"But 0, that strain I have hitherto listened in vain to hear, or 
rather have not listened aright, and therefore cannot hear ! 

"Have either of you learned the art of real communion with God, 
and can you teach me the first principles ? Grod is to me the Great 
Unknown. I believe in him, but I find him not." 



PECULIAR PHASE OP THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 233 

It would be a study of much interest and instruction, 
could we trace with certainty the steps by which such a 
mind found its way back to spiritual health and peace. It 
was probably a gradual process of mental and physical rein- 
vigoration, in a great degree unconscious to himself. Through 
the whole course of the disease, if we may so call it, the great 
organs of moral vitality had remained unimpaired. He had 
never fancied for a moment that his austerities had in them- 
selves any merit, or formed in the slightest degree the ground 
of acceptance with God. The hand of faith never relaxed 
its hold upon the great sacrifice offered once for all for the 
taking away of sin. Nor did he, in the selfish spirit of some 
Komish ascetics, concentrate his thoughts on his own inward 
state, making his individual salvation the sole end and aim 
of existence. The following beautiful passage, from " The 
Threefold Cord," is a true picture of his own life, even during 
this season of spiritual conflict and darkness : — 

*'The third is the cord of doing good. This imparts beauty and 
utility to the rest. It is written of the Lord Jesus, ^He went about 
doing good J* Art thou his disciple? Imitate his example, and go 
about doing good. Do good. Let this be thy motto. Do good — all 
the good in thy power — of every sort — and to every person. Kegard 
every human being as thine own brother; look with eyes of love on 
every one thou meetest, and hope that he will be thy loving and 
beloved companion in the bright world above. Rejoice in every 
opportimity of doing him any good, either of a temporal or spiritual 
kind. Comfort him in trouble; reheve his wants; instruct his 
ignorance; enlighten his darkness; warn him of his danger; show 
him the way of salvation ; persuade and constrain him to become thy 
fellow-traveller in that blessed way. Follow him with all offices of 
kindness and love, even as thou wouldst be pleased to have another 
do to thee. Bear with all his infirmities. Be not weary in well-doing. 
, Remember that thy Saviour bore long with thee, and is still bearing 
with thee, beyond all conception, and covering thy pollution with the 
robe stained with his own blood, that the wrath of God may not 
strike thee. And when he thus forgives thine immense debt, canst 
thou not bear with thy fellow-debtor? 

"Do good to the Lord thy Saviour. Is he far beyond thy reach? 
True, he reigns on high; but still he lives in all his members. 



i 



234 THE EARNEST MAN. 

'Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my 
brethren, ye have done it unto me.' As thou hast, therefore, oppor- 
tunity, do good imto all men, especially unto them who are of the 
household of faith. As a true follower of Christ, seek not thine own 
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. Since Christ 
has suffered, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but 
have eternal life, extend thy good wishes to earth's remotest bounds ; 
and wherever a human being exists, let thy prayers and thine efforts 
combine to bring down eternal blessings on his beloved soul. But let 
the members of the household of faith, whatever be their language, 
country, or religious denomination, share in thy warmest love. 
Begard each one as a part of thine own dear Saviour; and be as 
happy to wash his feet as if they were the feet of thy Lord himself. 
Kemember that, notwithstanding present imperfections, ye are hasten- 
ing to be united to one another, and to God, in a manner most ine€Ba- 
ble, even as God is in Christ, and Christ in Grod ; that the bosom of 
infinite love is even now opening to receive you all, and that ye will 
all bathe together, for endless ages, in *that sea of life and love 
unknown, without a bottom or a shore.'" 

In the soul thus vitally united to the source of goodness, 
and thus exercising itself in perpetual deeds of goodness, 
there was a recuperative energy which could hardly fail to 
restore healthy action through the whole spiritual constitu- 
tion. Whatever was morbid and sickly in the peculiar phase 
of piety which he had adopted, gradually lost itself in the 
growth of a Christian character, which, in just proportions, 
in the perfect balance of its rich and various elements, pre- 
sents an unsurpassed example of Christian manhood. 

Dr. Judson was accustomed to refer to this period as one 
from which, notwithstanding its hazards and mistakes, he 
had derived great spiritual benefit.* The evidence of this 



* He coidd smile, too, at its extravagances, — the best of all proofs 
that they were the mere incidentals of a temporary state of mental dis- 
ease, and no exponents of his real character. "When, in 1846, he visited 
Hamilton Theological Seminary, the professors collected for an interview 
with him, in the study of the venerable Br. Kendrick. In the course of a 
free, familiar talk, some allusion having been made by himself to this 
period of his history, he added, in a playful, deprecating tone, which 
seqpied to ask if the circumstances of the case did not sufficiently account 



PECULIAR PHASE OF THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. 235 

is seen in his whole subsequent history. How, indeed, could 
it have been otherwise ? Errors in the choice of some of 
the methods, could not hinder the substantial realization of 
what he sought with such intensity of desire, — ^the more 
perfect conformity of his nature to the will of Grod. The 
blessing came, indeed, in a form very different from the one 
expected; instead of blissful absorption of self in the gloiy 
of God, an increased sense of the distance between the 
infinite and holy and the sinful and finite; instead of the 
conscious triumph over human firailty, the perception in 
himself of new depths of innate depravity and loathsome- 
ness. From this humbling experience he rose into a new 
stage of spiritual life. Then, truly, he began to lose sight 
of himself, and to find his all in God ; and, with a depth of 
meaning never felt before, to "count all things but loss 
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his 
Lord." The life which developed itself out of this new 
inward state, bears no trace of the spirit of asceticism. A 
more beautiful example has seldom been witnessed of that 
true mastery over the world, which, while it renders the 
higher nature independent of the earthly and perishable, 
permits the acceptance of every gift of God with confiding 
thankfulness. His heart opened with child-like freshness to 
all the solaces with which a Father's goodness had smoothed 
the path of his pilgrimage. His social affections, once so 
sternly repressed, as rivals to the supreme love, now gushed 
foiiih in the little circle of congenial hearts, especially 
towards such as were in affliction, with a warmth of sym- 
pathy, a depth and delicacy of sentiment, which imparts a 
peculiar grace to his life of severe and self-denying labours. 
As early as 1830, the date of his missionary visits to 
Prome and Rangoon, we perceive a new tone of vigour, cheer- 
fulness, and freedom, in his letters and journals. After his 



for it, *' You know, we got into a rather strange state, for a while, some 
of us, away out there J" The qniet smile, and the manner, said much 
more than the words. 



t 



\ 



236 THE EARNEST MAN. 

marriage, four years later, with the amiable and accom- 
plished widow of Mr. Boardman, the change is still more 
marked. The exceeding loveliness of character which dis- 
tinguished the second Mrs. Judson, joined with her excellent 
sense and fervent piety, most happily adapted her to be the 
companion of this period of his life. And as years passed 
on, and children were once more playing in his home, those 
little ties of earthly affection which he had thought severed 
for ever bound themselves fast around his heart, and claimed 
from him once more a full participation in the wholesome 
common duties and pleasures ^f life. The letters belonging 
to the period of his second marriage are in themselves suffi- 
cient evidence that, while the social affections are heightened 
by piety, piety itself takes its most symmetrical and health- 
ful form amidst the sweet influences of human love. His 
public labours show that they are no necessary hindrance to 
the most faithful and successful prosecution of a great life- 
work. 

In some respects Dr. Judson never changed the views and 
the strict habits of life adopted during the period just re- 
viewed. His standard of Christian self-denial, illustrated 
in his own severe frugality and his persistent withdrawal 
from English society, was, by many, deemed unnecessarily 
ligid and exacting, and sometimes subjected him to the 
charge of singularity. He maintained, too, a very exalted 
idea of the spirit of unconditional submission, without rest- 
lessness, impatience, or effort to escape the trial, with which 
a Christian should receive the dispensations of Providence; 
betraying, it might be thought, a continued bias of mind 
towards the peculiar notions of Quietism. But his life, as 
now laid open in his private correspondence and his domes- 
tic history, reveals a character remarkably free both from 
eccentricity and austerity; a character singular only in its 
wonderful gifts, and in the all-pervading predominance of 
the spirit of New Testament piety, — supreme love to Grod 
and unlimited devotion to the welfejre of his fellow-men. 



LABOURS IS PROME AND RANGOON. 237 



CHAPTER XXI. 

MISSIONARY LABOURS IN PROME AND RANGOON. 

To do full justice to Dr. Judson's character, the record of 
his abundant labours during the period embraced in the two 
preceding chapters should be placed in immediate connection- 
with them. Within the two years following his removal to 
Maulmain, he had gathered, in conjunction with Mr. Wade, 
a church of fifty native members; most of whom adorned 
their profession by a consistent Christian life. Not a few of 
them had endured, with steadfast meekness, opposition, 
revilings, and bitter persecution, for the name of Christ. 
"The husband had risen up against his wife, and the wife 
against her husband; parents against their children, and 
children against their parents." Only a few of the many 
interesting cases can be briefly noted here. One man, on the 
return of his wife after her baptism, tore their infant child 
from her breast, and pursued her through the streets with a 
knife. The brother of the first native chief of the place 
was among the converts; a man of most respectable stand- 
ing, of ready eloquence, and great activity of mind, who, 
after carefully examining the systems of Buddh, of Brahma, 
and of Mahomet, had at length found rest for his soul in the 
religion of Christ. The persecution he encountered in pro- 
fessing his faith was appalling. All his relatives rose up 
against him. His wife sued for a divorce; and his brother 
declared that, if he had the power, he would wash out the 
family disgrace in his blood. A venerable matron, past four- 
score, though bitterly opposed by her family, on whom she 
was entirely dependent, was seen "hazarding the loss of a 
respectable, comfort-able situation, the loss of character, the 
loss of a shelter for her grey head," and "with tottering 
steps, bending under the infirmities of age, doing homage to 
the King of kings in the baptismal stream." Out of the 



i 



238 THE EARNEST MAN. 

mouths of babes and sucklings also was perfected praise. A 
little girly eight years old, is mentioned as among the clearest 
cases of conversion. She also received baptism, though 
imder a threat from an elder brother that he would beat her 
to death. Several others, not much older, resisted, in the 
strength of the love of Christ, the most urgent pei'suasions 
lind threats of their heathen parents; and, after baptism, 
endured in silent submission the most outrageous and abusive 
treatment. There was witnessed, too, in several cases, the 
miracle of the lion changed into the lamb ; the most violent 
persecutors, who had breathed out threatenings and slaughter 
against the disciples, won, by their Christian meekness and 
love, to listen, to repent, and to rejoice with them in a 
<;ommon Saviour. 

Such was the second Christian church which, with the aid 
of his feithful co-labourers, Mr. Judson had planted in Bur- 
mah. It was one of his greatest trials, as has been before 
noticed, to be obliged by his duties as a translator to forego 
his ardent desire of devoting himself exclusively to direct 
missionary labour. "Happy," he exclaims, "is the mis- 
sionary who finds the Bible ready translated to his hands !" 
The longing to preach the gospel was like a fire in his bones. 
It is surprising to see how much this strong impulse accom- 
plished in the way of evangelical labour without neglect of 
the work of the study. His chosen recreation from this toil 
was a missionary excursion into some unexplored field, where 
he could proclaim the glad tidings to ears that never before 
had heard the joyful sound. Sometimes, when he could not 
quit his pen, he would gather up his litei-ary apparatus, and, 
taking with him a few native assistants, repair to some 
lonely outpost where he could at least send out his messen- 
gers into the highways and hedges, and be ready, if inquirers 
should present themselves, to direct them in the way of 
salvation. 

His visit to Prome, a populous ancient city lying on the 
Irrawaddy, half-way between Rangoon and Ava, a place 



LABOURS IN PROME AND RANGOON. 239 

wliere the foot of a missionary had never trod before, is 
among the most apostolic passages in his history. The 
account is given in the following letters to his friends in 
Maulmain : — 

"I proceed, accordingly, to give you some account of my adven- 
tures since leaving Kangoon on the 29th of last month. The after- 
noon of that day we reached Tix-theet, twelve or fifteen miles distant, 
and, the tide being against us, we remained there several hours. I 
went on shore, entered into conversation with several, and gave away 
a dozen of the old tracts ; and it was amusing and gratifying to see 
the groups of boatmen, about simset, employed in reading and listen- 
ing to the truth; and some would be constantly coming to our boat 
for a tract. I could have given away a hundred to advantage ; for, 
though the village contains but very few houses, it is a place of ren- 
dezvous for a multitude of small trading boats. At midnight we 
reached the cluster of villages about Pau-ling, containing, I should 
suppose, a population as large as that of Kangoon. In the morning I 
went on shore at Kat-tee-yah, and spent a couple of hours in preaching 
to little assembhes, and distributed about thirty of the old catechism. 
I could have given away 200 with perfect ease and to the greatest 
advantage ; for they would have spread from this central place into 
every part of the country. It is my way to produce a few tracts or 
catechisms, and after reading and talking a Uttle, and getting the 
company to feel kindly, I offer one to the most attentive auditor 
present ; and on showing some reluctance to give to every person, and 
on making them promise to read attentively, and consider, and pray, 
they get furious to obtain a tract ; many hands are eagerly stretched 
out, and * Give me one, give me one,' resounds from all sides. On the 
31st we reached Gnettong, near the great river. Just became engaged 
with a few people, when the master of our boat concluded to proceed 
further. Gave away two tracts. One of them fell into the hands of 
a respectable elderly man, who, having read part of it, followed us, 
in a small boat, to ask for something more ; and I gave him a copy of 
Matthew. Just at dark reached Yan-gen-tsan-yah, at the entrance of 
the great river, the Irrawaddy, fifty or sixty miles from Kangoon. 

"For several days after entering the Irrawaddy I did nothing 
scarcely, on accoimt of the rainy weather and other unfavourable cir- 
cumstances. At Hen-tha-dah, ninety miles from Kangoon, I walked 
through the place, though it was very wet, and gave away a few 
tracts. Moung En found some relations on shore, at whose house he 
and another of the disciples slept; and they did something in the 
evening. 



t 



240 THE EARNEST MAN. 

** The night of the 6th of June we spent at Yay-gen, a pretty lai^ 
village, just below Ka-noung, on the oj)i)08ite side of the river. Here 
thei^ native country of the tamarind-tree commences, the banks of the 
rivef become high and pleasant, nature assumes a more interesting 
and commanding aspect, and, at this distance, even the character of 
the people always seems to me to be a little more elevated. Immedi- 
ately on landing I went through the place, but without any success, 
and was just coming off, when I descried Moung Ing, with half a 
dozen about him. I drew near, and very soon had a large and 
respectable assembly, to whom I heltl forth, and distributed about 
thirty tracts and catechisms. Several piu^ued us to the boat, 
and begged very hard; and we continued to give away to small 
parties who came in succession, and occupied an empty boat which 
lay between us and the shore, till late in the evening, when our cap- 
tain pushed off into the river, to get rid of the annoyance. However, 
it would not answer ; for they came to the shore, and called out, 
* Teacher, are you asleep? We want a writing to get by heart.* 
And, on being promised one, if they would come and get it, they 
contrived to push off a long canoe which lay between us and the 
said empty boat, and got so near that they could reach a paper stuck 
in the end of a long pole. This continued till nine o'clock at night. 
Once during the evening our captain went on shore ; and he said that 
in almost every house there was some one at a lamp, reading aloud one 
of our papers. I felt some desire to pray that it might not be all in 
vain. It cost us not less than sixty tracts and catechisms. Write 
to Maulmain for several hundred, and ask brother Bennett to get 
ready to print another edition. I have already given away one 
quarter of my whole stock ; and I shall have to send to you for a 
supply before long. 

"We passed the large towns of Ka-noimg, Myan-oung, and Kyan- 
gen, without being able to do anything. But at Kyee-thai, a pretty 
large place, I went on shore, and got the start of the boat by about 
an hour, which time I improved imder a shed, in the midst of an 
attentive crowd. I gave away several tracts. Some of the people 
followed me to the boat, begging the captain to stay all night. And 
after we had pushed off, a little boat pursued us, with a small offering 
of rice and beans, begging another tract. It was quite dark when we 
arrived at Shway-doung, one of the most populous places in the 
country. Above Shway-doung, we came to the flourishing villages 
of Pyoidi-tsik and Mendai, divided by a small creek. The latter is 
our captain's home, and he wished to stay a day or two before soins 
to Prome, which is only a few miles distant. The people at Mendai 
seemed disposed to cavil, and some of them treated mte rather 



LABOUBS IN PBOME AND RANGOON. 241 

uncivilly. I gave away not many tracts. Moiing Ing went out to 
Men-yoo-ah, near which is the residence of the celebrated Toung- 
dwen teacher, the head of a sect of heretics in this part of the 
country ; and in that neighbourhood he found our old friend, Mah 
Zoo, baptized formerly in Rangoon. The next morning she came to 
the boat, accompanied by Mah Wenyo, widow of Moung Long, the 
one-eyed metaphysician formerly mentioned in the annals of the Ran- 
goon mission, who now declares herself a Christian, and one Mah Ping, 
a very hopeful inquirer. These women all begged me to stop one day, 
while they could return and consult their male relations whether it 
would not be better to invite me to come to their village at once, 
without proceeding to Prome. So I consented, and they went off. In 
the afternoon of that day I had a crowded zayat on shore. One man 
appeared to be impressed. But there were mauy cavillers, and some 
discouraging signs. At night the women came back, and with many 
tears said that the chief men of the village were afraid to entertain 
a foreigner, lest, in case of war with the English, they should be 
involved. The next morning the wife of the governor in these parts, 
having heard of me, sent to the boat for a tract ; several other people 
also came on the same errand, imtil we left the place, which we did 
about noon ; and at night, the wind being contrary, we reached this 
place, about 170 miles from Rangoon. I landed and found Mr. M., 
the only European residing here ; and he invited me to stay with him 
a few days until I could get settled. The next morning I left the 
boat and repaired to his house. He immediately took me to the 
governess of the town, whose husband has lately been summoned to 
Ava. In her presence I found the deputy-governor and a number of 
people. I read and preached to theuL They applauded my style of 
reading, &c., but seemed to be more taken with the sound than the 
sense. The governess, however, was evidently impressed. She beg- 
ged for the tract, that she might get it copied. I presented it to her, 
and she received it thankfully. Thence I proceeded to various places 
in search of a house to be let, but was unsuccessful. The people are 
afraid to have any connection with a foreigner. Ever since Major 
Bumey passed up to Ava, the country has been full of all manner of 
rumours and fears. The very face of a white man spreads general 
alaruL Mr. M. has been accused of being a spy, though nothing can 
be more false ; and it was even proposed to put him in confinement. 
I find that the same suspicion is generally felt towards me. I foresee 
that people will be afraid to come near me, and that my usef ulnesa 
here will, on that account, be greatly impeded. Add to this, that th& 
town has been so dreadfully oppressed to pay their contingent of the 
government debt, that poverty, distress, and terror are the order of 



242 THE EARNEST MAN. 

the day. However, the walls of JeroBalem have sometimes beeai 
built in troublous times. 

** Failing in my attempt to hire a house, I went in search of » 
▼acant s^Mt to build on. Fell in with two of the first officers of the 
place, and had a little friendly conversation. Found, in the heart of 
the town, an old, dismantled zayat, in front of a pagoda, with a little 
vacant ground around it. Went to the deputy-governor, presented 
him with a tract, and warned him not to be intoxicated with woaidly 
splendour, for life was short, &c. He read part of the tract, and «q^i^ 
that my words were very proper. One of my people respectfully 
requested leave to repair the old zayat for the residence of tiie kaUh 
pong-gyee, until he should proceed to Ava. The governor was dispo- 
sed to be kind; but fearing, I suppose, for the reasons 'above-men- 
tioned, to do anything on his own responsibility, said that he would 
bring forward my business in the court-house, the next day, before 
the assembled authorities of the place. 

"Notwithstanding this promise, however, nothing was done the 
next day ; and, it being Lord's day, I stayed at home, had usual wor- 
ship with my people, and tried to study patience and Thomas H Tr«m- 
pis in the shattered house that Mr. M. occupies, with the rain beating 
in on every side. 

** On Monday, that is, yesterday, I went myself to the court-house, 
and found the magistrates assembled, each sitting at his i)08t, in Bur- 
man style, and the deputy-governor in the centre. He pretended not 
to see or know me. I waited some time, and in . an interval of 
business addressed some of the inferior magistrates. An inquiiy 
rose who I was, and what I wanted. The deputy-governor began 
slyly to assist me; and, after considerable conversation, it was 
unanimously agreed that I should be permitted to take possession of 
the old zayat, and repair it for my present residence. Prom the 
court-house I went to survey my new estate. I find it to be forty- 
five feet long, and twenty wide. The posts and the main parts of the 
floor, being of teak, are still extant ; but it is all overgrown with wild 
creepers, and makes, on the whole, a pretty venerable ruin. It stands 
on holy ground, occupying one comer of the inclosure of a paffoda • 
which comer I am to surround with a fence, and thus have an inclo- 
sure about four times larger than the ruin itself. This naorninc I am 
sending out people to beg materials and engage workmen to make the 
place habitable as soon as possible." 

"Prome, June 26, 1830. 

" Dear Brethren and Sisters, — To-day I have taken possesaioji 
of the old zayat allowed me by government, as stated in my last 
Part of it we have inclosed in rooms, and the other part we have left 



LABOURS m PROME AND RANGOON. 243 

open for the reception of company. Several people accosted us, as 
they passed : * So you have moved, have you ? We shall come and 
see you before long.' There are at present no hopeful inquirers ; but 
some visitors from Men-dai and Men-yoo-ah approximate towards that 
character. 

"June 27, Lord's day. After usual worship with the disciples, I 
went to spend the day, it being Burman day of worship, at the great 
Shway San-dau pagoda, which is the same to Prome that Shway 
Dag6n is to Kangoon, and Kyaik Thanlan to Maulmain. The zayat 
which we occupied had many visitors, and some heard with attention. 

"July 2. A great change has taken place in the minds of govern- 
ment people towards me. Satan has industriously circulated- a report 
that I am a spy in pay of the British. Last night the deputy- 
governor sent to inquire my name and title. This morning I waited 
on him, and on the lady governess, but met with a very cold reception 
at both places. The deputy-governor is probably reporting me to 
Ava; and what the consequences will be, I know not. Several 
visitors, who began to listen with some favourable disposition, have 
suddenly fallen off. To-day I have had no company at all. 

"July 3. Pastor Ing returned from a visit to Men-yoo-ah. He 
says that the same suspicion is spreading all over the country. Even 
the women mentioned in my last were afraid to have any communica- 
tion with him. By forcing his way, he managed to sleep two nights 
at the house of the Toung-dwen teacher, and had some conversation 
with him and his people on the subject of religion. But the teacher, 
though not a regular Buddhist, feels his consequence, as the head of 
a sect, and is perhaps as far from candid consideration as the most 
bigoted priest. Pastor Lig says that the country is full of villages, 
and that there is some disposition to listen to religion, but that in the 
present state of the public mind, if I should make the tour of these 
parts, as I had some intention of doing, there is not a house where 
the owner would dare to ask me to sit down at the entrance of the 
door. 

** Feel extremely dejected this evening. Never so heartily willing 
to enter into my rest, yet willing to offer, and I do, with some peculiar 
feelings, offer, my poor life to the Lord Jesus Christ, to do and to 
suffer whatever he shall appoint, during my few remaining days. My 
followers feel some courage yet ; for they have, I hope, a little faith, 
and they know, also, that whatever storm comes, it will beat upon, 
their teacher first. 

July 4, Lord's day. Another Burman day of worship, and a great 
day, being the first day of Lent, a season which continues three 
months. After usual worship, took a stroll through the place. All 



244 THE EARNEST MAX. 

gmiles and looks of welcome are passed away ; people view me with 
an evil eye, and suffer their dogs to bark at me unchecked. Near 
Shway San-dau, the zayats were crowded with devout-faced worship- 
pers. I found a vacant place under a shed, built over a large brick 
idol, and, sitting down on the ground, I held converse with small 
parties, who came around in succession. Some company, also, morn- 
ing and evening, at home. I cannot but hope that two persons have 
this day obtained some discovery of the way of salvation through a 
crucified Saviour. But it is really affecting to see a poor native when 
he first feels the pinch of truth. On one side he sees hell ; on the 
other side, ridicule, re2)roach, confiscation of goods, imprisonment, 
and death. 

"July 7. Moung A, one of the persons last mentioned, conies every 
day. He seems to be quite taken with the Christian religion, but 
says he cannot think of embracing it, until the learned and the great 
lead the way. 

"July 8. Many visitors through the day, in consequence of a 
festival held in the vicinity. Moung A begins to speak decidedly for 
Christ. 

" July 9. Having agreed that two or three of our number shall go 
out every day, in different directions, and preach the gospel, whether 
the people will hear or forbear, my lot fell in a public zayat, about a 
mile from home, near Shway San-dau, where I had an uninterrupted 
succession of hearers from morning till night. Pastor Ing and Moung 
Dway were successfully engaged in another quarter, and Moung En 
had some company at home. I presume that 150 people have this day 
heard the gospel intelligibly, who never heard it before. 

"July 10. The same as yesterday, except that, being ill, I left the 
zayat about noon. Moung A was with me in the afternoon. BSs 
case is becoming extremely interesting. He is a bright young man, 
with a smaU family; formerly belonged to Caesar's household, and 
bore a considerable title, which was forfeited through false accusation. 
He began last night to pray to the eternal God. 

" July 11, Lord's day. Several came in during worship and behaved 
decently, though they would not put themselves into a devotional 
posture, or join in the responses. One man, in particular, professed 
to be excessively delighted with the new and wonderful things which 
he had heard. Moung A present at evening worship, but he remains 
in a very critical state. No wine to be procured in this place on 
which account we are unable to unite with the other churches, this 
day, in partaking of the Lord's supper. 

"July 12. A Burman day of worship. Li the morning received 
private infOTmation that the deputy-governor, as I conjectured, did 



LABOUBS IN PROME AND RANGOON. 245 

actually report me to Ava. If any order be given immediately, 
whether favourable or unfavourable, it may be expected in the course 
of a fortnight. Felt rather dejected, but endeavoured to put my 
trust in Grod, and resolve to work while the day lasts. The zayats 
being all full of worshippers, I took my seat on a brick under the 
shed over the great idol, and from morning tiU night, crowd succeeded 
•crowd. Some became outrageously angry, and some listened with 
delight. * Some said. He is a good man ; but others said, Nay, he 
deceiveth the people.' About noon, heard Moimg Dway's voice on 
the other side of the idol. Pastor Ing was busy in another quarter. 
At home, Moung En received a visit from Myat-pyoo, one of the two 
persons mentioned on the 4th. He is sixty-nine years old, a little 
deaf, very timid and retiring. My expectations of him are not dis- 
appointed. He says that he thinks this is the true religion, and the 
only one. that provides a way of escape from hell, of which he is 
^exceedingly afraid, in consequence of his many, many sins. 

"July 13. Took up my position at my favourite zayat. It stands 
at the crossing of two great roads, the one leading from the river side 
to Shway San-dau, and the other from the town to the place of 
burying, or rather burning, the dead. Several funeral processions 
pass every day, and many of the followers, in going or returning, stop 
at my zayat to rest. To-day there was a funeral of distinction, and 
all the officers of government, with their respective suites, attended. 
In consequence of this, the crowd around me was greater than ever 
before. But they were not hearers of the right stamp. Most of them 
being adherents of government, were rude, insolent, and wicked in 
the extreme. A few considerate persons remained till night, particu- ^ 
larly one man, on whose account I also remained, though dreadfully 
exhausted. He has been with me two days, and I have a little hope 
that he begins to feel the force of truth. 

"July 14. Another day of hard conflict. The enemy begins to be 
alarmed, and his forces come on fresh and fierce, while we, few in 
number, have to sustain the combat without any human reinforce- 
ment. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. At night felt an 
entire prostration of strength, so much so that I was unable to go 
through with the evening service as usual.'' 

" Prome, August 23, 1830. 
"Dear Brethren and Sisters, — Tired of minuting down the 
■events of each day, I have written nothing since my last date, July 
16. My time has been spent in the same way as stated in the first 
part of that month. At one period, the whole town seemed to be 
roused to listen to the news of an eternal God, the mission of his Son, 



246 THE EARNEST HAN. 

the Lord Jesus Christ, and the way of salvation through his atone- 
ment. A considerable proportion of the hearers became favourably 
disposed. At length the enemy assimied a threatening aspect; the 
poor i^ople became frightened ; many sent back the tracts they had 
received ; and there was a general falling off at the zayats. I was 
summoned to undergo a long examination at the court-house, not, 
however, on the subject of religion, but concerning all my past life 
since I have been in Burmah. The result was forwarded to Ava. 
The magistrates still preserve a jxirfect neutrality, in consequence of 
the absence of the governor. At Ava, I have been regarded as a sus- 
picious character ever since I deserted them at the close of the war, 
and went over to the British. I know not what impressions the 
governor of this place will there receive, or how he will feel towards 
me, when he is informed of the noise I have made in Prome during 

his absence." 

" Below Prome, September 18, 1830. 

** Afloat on my own little boat, manned by none other than my three 
disciples, I take leave of Prome and her towering god, Shway San-dau, 
at whose base I have been labouring, with not the kindest intentions, 
for the last three months and a half. Too firmly founded art thou, 
old pile, to be overthrown just at present ; but the children of those 
who now plaster thee with gold will yet pull thee down, nor leave <me 
brick upon another. 

"The government writer, Moimg Kjrwet-nee, who recommenced 
visiting us a few days ago, has been hanguig about us for two hours, 
lamenting our departure ; and he is now sitting alone at tlie water's 
edge, looking after our boat as it floats down the stream. * Mark me 
as your disciple; I pray to God every day; do you also pray for me; 
as soon as I can get free from my present engagements, I intend to 
come down to Rangoon,' are some of his last expressions. 

** The sun is just setting. We could not get our boat ready earlier 
in the day ; and, as it is Saturday evening, we intend to proceed as far 
as Men-dai, in order to spend the Lord's day there. There is no 
period of my missionary life that I review with more satisfaction, or, 
rather, with less dissatisfaction, than my sojourn in Prome. This ciiy 
was founded several hundred years before the Christian era. Throu^ 
how many ages have the successive generations of its dark inhabi- 
tants lived and died, without the slightest knowledge of the Great 
Eternal, and the only way of salvation which he has provided ! At 
length, in the year 1830, it was ordered that a missionary of the 
Cross shoiUd sit down in the heart of the city, and from day to day, for 
above three months, should pour forth divine truth in language which, 
if not eloquent and acceptable, was at least intelligible to all ranks. 






LABOUBS IN PROHE AND RANGOON. 247 

What a wonderful phenomenon must this have been to celestial beings, 
who gaze upon the works and dispensations of God in this lower 
world I It was necessary to the accomplishment of the divine pur- 
pose, that, after so many centuries of darkness, there should be such 
an exhibition of light as has been made, and no more. Thousands 
have heard of God who never, nor their ancestors, heard before. 
Frequently, in* passing through the streets, and in taking my seat in 
the zayats, I have felt such a solemnity and awe on my spirit, as 
almost prevented me from opening my lips to communicate the 
momentous message with which I was charged. How the preacher 
has preached, and how the hearers have heard, the day of judgment 
will show. 0, how many will find their everlasting chains more tight 
and intolerable on accoimt of the very warnings and entreaties they 
have received firom my lips ! But what more can be done than has 
been done ? Though warned and entreated, they have wilfully, obsti- 
nately, and blasphemously, refused to listen. But, blessed be God, 
there are some whose faces I expect to see at the right hand of the 
Great Judge. The young man just mentioned, the carpenter, Moung 
Shway-hl£Ui, a poor man, by name Moung Oo, in addition to some 
others mentioned in former letters, give us reason to hope that they 
have received the truth in good and honest hearts. Many also there 
are who have become so far enlightened, that I am sure they never 
can bow the knee to Shway San-dau without a distressing conviction 
that they are in the wrong way. Farewell to thee, Prome ! Willingly 
would I have spent my last breath in thee and for thee. But thy sons 
ask me not to stay ; and I must preach the gospel to other cities also, 
for therefore am I sent. B«ad the 500 tracts that I have left with 
thee. Pray to the God and Saviour that I have told thee of. And, 
if hereafter thou call me, though in the lowest whisper, and it reach 
me in the very extremities of the empire, I will joyfully listen, and 
come back to thee ! " 

Who can doubt that, while Kincaid is gathering in the 
glorious harvest in that ancient seat of idolatry, he that 
then sowed in tears, and he that now reaps, are rejoicing 
together 1 

Being driven from Prome by the jealousy of the imperial 
government, Mr. Judson returned to Rangoon, where, finding 
no missionary on the ground, he remained through the next 
ten months, chiefly occupied with his translation. An interest- 
ing picture of him at that time is furnished by Miss Eoberts, 



248 THE EABKEST MAN. 

an English authoress, who happened to be in Rangoon du- 
ring the year 1830 : — 

**A Visit to Mr. Judson in 1830. 

** Being unexpectedly in Rangoon in the autimm of 1830, and 
hearing that the justly celebrated American missioniuy, good Mr. 
Judson, was still there, with indefatigable zeal prosecuting his 'labour 
of love,* in the conversion of the Burmese, I was extremely anxious 
to see him ; and, having informed ourselves that a visit from English 
travellers would not be deemed a disagreeable intrusion, the captain, 
his wife, and myself, immediately proceeded to Mr. Judson's house. 

**It was a Burman habitation, to which we had to ascend by a 
ladder ; and we entered a large, low room, through a space like a trap- 
door. The beams on the roof were uncovered, and the window 
frames were open, after the fashion of Burman houses. The furni- 
ture consisted of a table in the centre of a room, a few stools, and a 
desk, with writings and books neatly arranged on one side. We were 
soon seated, and were most anxious to hear all that the good man 
had to say, who, in a resigned tone, spoke of his departed wife in a 
manner which plainly showed he had set his affections * where alone 
true joy can be found.' He dwelt with much pleasure on the trans- 
lation of the Bible into the Burmese language. He had completed 
the New Testament, and was then as far as the Psalms in the Old 
Testament, which having finished, he said he trusted it would be the 
will of his heavenly Father to call him to his everlasting home. 

** Of the conversions going on amongst the Burmans he spoke with 
certainty, not doubting that when the flame of Christianity did burst 
forth, it would surprise even him by its extent and brilliancy. As we 
were thus conversing, the bats, which frequent the houses at Rangoon, 
began to take their evening round, and whirled closer and closer, till 
they came in almost disagreeable contact with our heads ; and the 
flap of the heavy wings so near us interrupting the conversation, we 
at length reluctantly took our leave and departed. And this, thought 
I, as I descended the dark ladder, is the solitary abode of Judson, 
whom after ages shall designate, most justly, the great and the good. 
It is the abode of one of whom the world is not worthy ; of one who 
has been imprisoned, chained, and starved, and yet who dares still to 
prosecute his work in the midst of the people who have thus treated 
him. America may indeed be proud of having given birth to so 
excellent and admirable a man, who, amidst the trials, sufferings, and 
bereavements with which it has pleased heaven to afflict him, still 
stands with his lamp brightly bumuig, waiting his Lord's coming. 

** K there be any man of whom we may without presumption feel 



LABOUBS IN PBOME AND BANGOON. 249 

assured that he will hear the joyful words, *Well done, thou good 
and faithful servant ! * it is certainly the pious Judson, the great and 
persevering founder of Christianity in a land of dark idolatry and 
superstition." 

Human life probably presents few more striking contrasts 
between the outward condition and the real greatness and 
influence of an individual. The occupant of this humble 
dwelling was, at that very moment, wielding, in the little pen 
which plied its task so diligently from hour to hour, the 
mightiest agency ever felt in Burmah, — a power to mould her 
destinies, greater than that of Britain with all her armies. 

But, in sight of the moral desolation on every side, he 
could not satisfy himself even with such labours. The mis- 
sionary fire seems to have burned with irrepressible ardour 
in his soul during this residence in Rangoon. Besides the 
care of directing the native evangelists, and receiving the 
most urgent cases of inquiry at his house, he was every 
morning abroad at sunrise, perambulating the streets of 
Rangoon for the distribution of tracts and for religious con- 
versation with such as he could induce to listen. The result 
was most extraordinary. At first he gave away between 
fifteen and twenty tracts a day. Gradually the attention of 
the native population at large was aroused, and the tide of 
interest steadily arose till the number amounted to two or 
three hundred daily, given to none but those who asked. 
During the last three days of January, 1,000 were distri- 
buted, "given only to those who asked earnestly." By 
cautious inquiries it was ascertained that they were in 
almost every house in the city, and were eagerly read in 
secret. Nor was this all. The leaven seemed to be silently 
spreading and working through the whole land. With all his 
precautions to secure leisure for translation, more than half his 
time was consumed by visitors. " People find their way to 
me," he writes, "from all parts of the country." "The 
spirit of inquiry is spreading everywhere. I sometimes feel 
alarmed, like a person who sees a mighty engine beginning 
to move^ over which he knows he has no control." i 



250 THE EARNEST MAN. 

In the midst of this excitement the time arrived for the 
great annual festival of Shway Dagon, bringing innumerable 
crowds of pilgrims to this splendid seat of Buddhistic wor- 
ship. Mr. Judson was now in his element, eager to improve 
the opportunity thus offered of spi*eading the news of salva- 
tion to the remotest limits of the empire. The interest 
which pervaded the town seized upon the strangers, and so 
great was the cry for tracts, that, though he distributed 
10,000 during the progress of the festival, the demand was 
not more than half supplied. Not far from 6,000 applica- 
tions were made at his own door. " Some come,*' he writes, 
"two or three months* journey from the borders of Siam 
and China : * Sir, we hear that there is an eternal helL Do 
give us a writing that will tell us how to escape it.' Others 
come from the frontiers of Kathay, 100 miles north of Ava: 
* Sir, we have seen a writing that tells about an eternal Grod. 
Are you the man that gives away such writings 1 If so, 
pray give us one, for we want to know the truth before we 
die ! ' Others came from the interior of the country, where 
the name of Jesus Christ is a little known : ' Are you Jesus 
Christ's man 1 Give us a writing that tells about Jesus 
Christ.' *' 

A few of his characteristic letters will best depict his 
laboura at this time : — 

"to the missionaries at MAULMAIN, PABTICUIiABLY 

MB. BENNETT. 

"BAngoon, November 13, 1830. 

" Dear Brethren, — I wrote to you lately by Ko Ing, since which 
I have received yours by Moung En. We continue to diatribute about 
forty tracts a day, and should gladly double the number if we could 
depend on a supply from Maulmain. By tracts, I mean not the single 
sheets or handbills,* containing merely a scrap of Scripture, which, 
being wholly inadequate to give any full idea of the Christian religion, 
it is impossible to mock any poor soul with when he holds out bis 



* Two-page tracts of Scripture Extracts. 



LABOURS IK PROME AND RANGOON. 251 

liand for such spiritual food as his case requires. They do well 
enough among the converts ; and if you find they are useful in your 
parts, I shall be happy to send you back those I have on hand, for 
there is no demand for that article here in the present state of the 
mission. . . . But by tracts I mean *The View,' *The Catechism,* 
* The Balance,' and * The Investigator.' I earnestly beg the brethren 
to wake up to the importance of sending a regular supply of all these 
articles. How long we shall be allowed a footing in Rangoon is very 
uncertain. While a missionary is here a constant stream ought to be 
poured into the place. Rangoon is the key of the country. From 
this place tracts go into every quarter. I could write sheets on the 
subject, but I trust it will be unnecessary. Six weeks have elapsed 
since I wrote for * The Balance,' and for a few only, as I did not wish 
to distress any one ; and though it was then out of print, it is not yet 
put to press. And why? Because *The Epitome' has been in the 
way. I am glad *The Epitome' is printed; but, after all, we shall 
not give away one a week of that article. The state of things does 
not immediately require it. But of * The Balance' I shall give away 
one hundred a week. There are daily calls for it. During the last six 
weeks I should have given away 1,000 of *The Balance,' and they 
would now be circulating all over the country. I foimd twenty in 
the house on my arrival, and have been dealing them out Uke drops 
of heart's blood. There are few left. I did expect some by Moung 
En ; but alas ! out popped two bundles of acrippeta. * The hook of 
Scripture Extracts, however, I am thankful for. 1 do not write this 
with any disposition to find fault. I am sure you have done all for 
the best ; and I feel for brother Bennett in his labours at the press. 
I only blame myself that I have not been more explicit, and written 
more urgently on the subject. — Yours ever, 

"A. JUDSON." 

TO THE MISSIONARIES AT MAULMAIN. 

"Rangoon, November 16, 1830. 

"Dear Brethren, — ^We were obliged to give away ninety-five 
tracts and Scriptures yesterday, besides refusing several This morn- 
ing I took twenty in my hand, as usual, and though I avoided streets, 
and kept to the jungle, and walked as fast as possible, yet, notwith- 
standing every precaution, they fleeced me of fifteen by sunrise. We 
shall not be able to stand it longer than fifteen or twenty days at this 
rate. They come from all parts of the coxmtry, and the thing is 

* The two-page tracts mentioned above. 



i 



252 THE EABNE8T MAN. 

spreading and increasing every day. I hope you will not fail me in 
the hour of need. We want thousands of *The Catechism,' 'The 
View,' *The Balance,* and *The Investigator.* Next to these we 
shall want a thousand or two of the Gospel of Luke, that is, after 
the Scripture Extracts are done, which wiU. be shortly, if you will 
only send them along. I am more and more convinced that Bormah 
is to be evangelized by tracts and portions of Scripture. They are a 
reading people beyond any other in India. The press is the grand 
engine for Burmah. Every pull of Brother Bennett's at the poress 
sends another ray of light through the darkness of the empire. I 
write in a hurry, for I am in the middle of the sixty-fifth Psalm ; and 
though I keep snug in the garret, I have had, within an hour, one 
man from Mad-dee-yah, who has come for tracts, having heard the 
gospel from one of the disciples at Prome ; a writer from Kyouk-mau, 
brought hither by your inquirer, Moung Louk ; a disciple from An- 
au-len ; and Moung Hming, from Pan-ta-nau, who requests baptism, 
and brings also a message and request for tracts from Nah-kau-dau, 
who says he heard about Jesus Christ from a foreigner* at Prome. 
And as I am alive, here comes at this moment a priest and his 
followers. So farewelL — Yours, 

"A. JUBSON." 

"Rangoon, February 1, 1831. 

** Dear Brethren, — The great festival falls this year on the 25th. 
Alas! alas! what shall I do? I beg and entreat that you will not 
give any tracts in the vicinity of Maulmain until after the 1st of 
March ; but let everything that can possibly be got ready, be sent 
with all possible expedition to this place. I do beg you will all make 
one effort, and, if possible, send me fifteen or twenty thousand tracts 
between this and the 25th or 28th. The festival will last several 
days. I have lost all hope of hoarding up my present stock. We 
have been obliged to give away above 1,000 within the last three 
days. It is not ^here as at Maulmain, where a great many are 
destroyed. Here, I am persuaded, after a great deal of inquiry, not 
one in a hundred is destroyed. The people are eager to get tracts. 
We don't give to every one we meet as you do, but to those only who 
ask earnestly. Don't think the tracts you print, and stitch, and trim, 
with a great deal of labour, and send here, are lost. I trust that the 
most of them will come to light at the day of judgment. 

" I send this by San-lone, who goes around in Moung Gway's boat 
He, and perhaps the same boat, will return soon ; I hope in time for 



► 



« (( 



Judson himself,'* says Mr. Bennett, in a note. 



LABOURS IK PBOBIE AND RANGOON. 253 

the festivaL Send everything you possibly can, and by every other 
boat or vessel after receiving this. — In great haste, yours, 

"A. JUDSON." 

TO MR. BENNETT. 

' " Rangoon, February 7, 1831. 

"Dear Brother Bennett, — I wrote lately by Moung San-lone, 
saying that the great festival falls on the 25th instant, and begging 
that, until that time, no tracts might be circulated in your quarter, 
but that everything that could be got ready should be sent hither. If 
you listen to that petition, well ; if not, to repeat it, with aU the 
urgency of a dying man, would be of no use. We were giving away 
at the rate of three or four hundred per day until I became alarmed, 
and reduced the allowance to 200. We are just, therefore, keeping 
our heads above water. But we have no hox)es of being ready for the 
festival imless you pour in fifteen or twenty thousand more, between 
this time and that. We have had none since the arrival of Moung En. 
He and A brought good supplies ; but alas ! no * Views,' and but few 

• Balances' and * Investigators.' 0, when will the time come that I 
shall have as much as I want, and of the right kind! I have laboured 
to a very great disadvantage ever since I came down from Prome, for 
want of the right hind of supply. If, instead of printing such a 
variety, the brethren had aimed only at furnishing a sufficient supply 
of the necessaries of life, how much better it would have been ! I 
should not then have been left for months without *The Balance,' or 
any equivalent, nor be left, as I now am, month after month without 

* The View,' — the staple commodity. How distressing it is, when the 
poor people come crying for the elements of the Christian religion, to 
be obliged to give them one of the small numbers of the Scripture 
Extracts, which singly can give them no idea ! By the way, I beg 
you will send no more of No. 8 ; it is just good for nothing in the 
present state of things. I do not write thus by way of finding fault 
with my brethren ; I am quite sure that you have meant aU for the 
best. I have made too many mistakes, and criminal ones, too, all my 
life long, to allow me to find fault with others. I only hope that 
things will now be kept in such a train as to prevent my being 
reduced again to the straits I have been in for several months. When. 
you have made arrangements to insure a supply of the four standard 
articles^ so that we can always have as many of such kind, and of all 
the kinds, as the state of the market requires, I would recommend the 
brethren to issue a small edition of 3,000 of the First Epistle of John. 
I once thought of Luke; but if you take hold of that we shall be left 
to starve again for want of the necessaries of life. You say that 



254 THE EARNEST MAN. 

there arc 1,400 of the Scripture Extracts remaining; and these, 
stitched together or in two parts, will answer to give in cases where 
something more than the four standards is required. As to the Sep- 
tenary, I would suggest that it is to be kept for special cases, and not 
distributed promiscuously, for you will not want to print another 
edition immediately. It was not intended for general circulation, but 
to be kept on hand for the converts and hoi>eful inquirers. As to 
your plan of printing * The Catechism' and * View' togetlier, it is most 
excellent. You cannot furnish too many of that article. As to * The 
Balance,' it is now all the rage, jiarticularly with the cut. I suppose 
you cannot clap the cut on the covers of those that have it not. It 
doubles the value. I presume that from lifty to one hundred per day 
inquire particularly for *The Balance,' and we are obliged to turn 
them off with something very inadequate to their exigency. Is not 
this most awful? Only contrast the countenance of one who has 
No. 8 forced upon him instead of *The Balance,' and goes away 
feeling very * gritty,' with the countenance of another who seizes 
upon the desired article, gloats upon the interesting Bennett cut, and 
goes away almost screaming and jimiping for joy. 

"I see, on re-perusing your letter, that you speak of a second 
edition of * The Septenary.' I have no objection, provided it does not 
deprive us again of the necessaries of life. I hope, however, you will 
not abandon the study of the language. The proverb of the *cat and 
her skin,' I do not like. I have a much better one from, the first 
authority. * My son,' said the head jailer of the death prison at Ava 
to an under jailer, who was complaining that they coidd get no more 
out of a poor fellow whom they had been tormenting for several days, 
his wife and house being completely stripped, — *my son,' said the 
venerable old man, 'be sure you have never wrung a rag so dry but 
that another twist will bring another drop.' . Love to Mrs. Bennett 
and family. — Yours, 

"A, JUDSON." 

TO MR. BENNETT. 

'* Rangoon, March 3, 183L 
"Dear Brother Bennett,— I am in great distress. The 'View' 
has been out several days. It failed us in the midst of the festival 
Why some were not ready to be sent by the Hebe, when the arrival 
would have been so opportune, I cannot conceive. "We had been on 
a short allowance of 100 per day for several days, and were nearly 
exhausted, when, on the morning of the 22nd, the splendid consign- 
ment of Moung San-lone arrived. On that day, Tuesday, we gave 
away 300 ; on Wednesday, 800 ; on Thursday, 900 ; oa Friday, the 



LABOURS IN PROME AND RANGOON. 255 

full moon, 700; on Saturday, 1,100; on Sunday, 800; on Monday, 
600. On Tuesday, the immense crowd of boats began to move otL 
Moung San-lone, second, had been petitioning for 2,000, with which 
to proceed a few miles up the river, and supply the departing boats. 
I could not listen to him, when, at the critical moment, the Hebe hove 
in sight, with your second consignment, and I sent off a couple of 
disciples with 1,200, but no * View.' On the same day we gave away, 
at the house, 600 ; on Wednesday, 700 ; on Thursday, to-day, 500. I 
have been trying for two days to reduce the allowance, but in vain. 
And even if I could reduce it to 200, which is the utmost I hope for, 
how many days should T hold out ? I have no * Views ;' only 600 of 
*The Balance,' ditto * Catechism,' about 150 of *The Investigator,' a 
few Septenaries and Scripture Extracts. That is all ; for we do not 
consider *The Epitome' a suitable thing to give away promiscuously 
to people who have never heard a word of the gospeL Now you see, 
do you not, that I am in distress? In a very few days, imless we 
have a fresh supply, we shall have to shut up the house, and send 
away the hungry souls without giving the crumb of a * Catechism.' 
It is true that we have had a glorious festival ; but when a famishing 
man sees pale hunger advancing with rapid strides, it affords him no 
relief to reflect that he feasted sumptuously a week ago. We have 
had a glorious festival, for which I feel under infinite obligation to 
you ; and as you have begun to run well, I hope nothing will hinder 
you from prosecuting the race. I have the greatest hope that in a 
very few days a supply will arrive. As to *The Investigator,' I 
begin to hesitate about giving it promiscuously. It is an excellent 
work, but appears to be rather too straightforward for the present 
state of Burmah. It gives more offence than *The Balance.' The 
latter work^ being cast in a hypothetical shape, is less offensive. I 
think of pro^wsing a large edition of * The Balance,' say 20,000. . . . 
— Yours affectionately, 

"A. JUDSON." 

"Rangoon, March 16^ ia31. 
"Dear Brother Bennett, — Your last box of * pills' has quite 
relieved my distress, and I perceive as yet no symptom of a return, 
the thermometer being down to 100, in consequence of a persevering 
application of refrigerants. Pretty work for a missionary ! Next box 
of pills you send, please inclose one compounded of 600 * Catechisms.'" 



"March 30. 
" Your splendid consignment came to hand this morning. I feel as 
rich as Croesus. But I am sorry to say (perha2)s you will be glad) 



256 THE EARNEST MAN. 

that, for some reason or other, the tide seems to be taming. There 
are now comparatively few applications for tracts, and I shall not 
need any other supplies just at present. Never, however, hesitate to 
send a few, at least, when a good op|K)rtunity offers, e8X>ecially by 
native boats, if it is only to encourage the trade. Little San-lone 
went off with 500 a few days ago, to be present at the annual festival 
of Shway Mandan, in Old Pegu, which took place the 21 st instant. 
If the present consignment had then arrived, he would have taken 
2,000 or more. I expect him back every day. Pastor Thah-a and 
Shway-too start to-morrow morning with a few hundred for the 
villages of Kambai, &c." 

With this spectacle of spiritual famine before his eyes, he 
felt, witli inconceivable pain and bitterness, the comparative 
coldness and inaction of Christians at home. The fields were 
whitening for the harvest, but there were noue to reap. 
Writing to the corresponding secretary, under date of March 
4, 1831, he says : — 

"Priests and people, from the remotest regions, are alike eager to- 
get our writings. I should have given away double the number if I 
could have obtained sufficient suppUes. But poor brother Bennett 
cannot, single handed, with bad tyjie, and not yet familiar with Bur- 
mese printing, answer all the demands which we make upon him, from 
different quarters. May God forgive all those who desert us in onr 
extremity ! May he save them all ! But surely, if any sin will lie 
with crushing weight on the trembling, shrinking soul, when grim 
death draws near, — if any sin will clothe the face of the final Judge 
with an angry frown, withering up the last hope of the condemned 
in irremediable, everlasting despair, it is the sin of turning a deaf ear 
to the plaintive cry of 10,000,000 of immortal beings, who, by their 
darkness and misery, cry, day and night, ^Corne to our rescue^ ye 
bright sons and daughters of America; come and save us, for wi 

ARE SINKING INTO HELL!'" 

** Brother Bennett works day and night at the press; but he is 
unable to supply us ; for the call is great at Maulmain and Tavoy, as 
well as here, and his types are very poor, and he has no efficient help^ 
The fact is that we are very weak, and have to complain that hitherto 
we have not been well sup|)orted from home. It is most distressing 
to find, when we are almost worn out, and are sinking one after 
another into the grave, that many of our brethren in Christ at home 
are just as hard and immovable as rocks ; just as cold and repulsive 
as the moimtains of ice in the polar seas. But whatever they do, %» 



LABOURS IN PBOME AND RANGOON. 257 

cannot sit still and see the dear Burmans, flesh and blood like our- 
selves, and like ourselves possessed of immortal souls that will shine 
for ever in heaven, or bum for ever in hell, — ^we cannot see them go 
down to perdition without doing our very utmost to save them. And, 
thanks be to God, our labours are not in vain. We have three lovely 
churches, and about 200 baptized converts, and some are in glory. A 
spirit of religious inquiry is extensively spreading throughout the 
country, and the signs of the times indicate that the great renovation 
of Burmah is drawing near. O, if we had about twenty more versed 
in the language, and means to spread schools, and tracts, and Bibles, 
to any extent, how happy I should be ! But those rocks and those 
icy mountains have crushed us down for many years.'' 

The number of effective missionaries had been so reduced 
by sickness, that, in May of this year, he was the only one 
left who could preach the gospel in Burmese. Mrs. Wade 
being obliged, as the only chance for her life, to leave for 
America, Mr. Wade, who was also in feeble health, was 
urged by all the missionaries on the ground to accompany 
her. On hearing this sad news, he writes, after expressing 
his cordial approbation of the step : — 

** I have also written to the brethren to know what I shall do with 
myself in the meantime. I know not whether they can keep the 
press moving without me. And though they can, what will become 
of the native flock in Maulmain? What of the Karens? What of all 
the people in the ceded provinces, from Tenasserim to the frontiers of 
China? What of all the people from Rangoon to Ava? I am startled 
and terrified to find that, by several unexpected moves, I am left, as 
it were, alone ; there being not another foreigner in all the country 
that can preach the gospel to the perishing millions.'' 

The result of the consultation above referred to, was the 
transfer of Mr. Jones to Rangoon, on whose arrival Mr. 
Judson returned to Maulmain. 



B 



258 THE EARNEST MAN. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

PREACHING TOURS IN THS JUNOLBS. 

"Soon after the arrival of the first Barmese missionaij 
in Kangoon, his attention was atti-acted by small parties of 
sti*ange wild-looking men, clad in unshapely garments, who^ 
from time to time, straggled past bis residence. He was 
told that they were called Karens; that they were more 
numerous than any similar tribe in the vicinity; and as 
untamable as the wild cow of the mountains. He was further 
told that they shrunk from association with other meOj 
seldom entering a town, except on compulsion; and that^ 
therefore, any attempt to bring them within the sphere of 
his influence would prove unsuccessful"* 

Such was the first introduction to the notice of western 
Christians, of this interesting race, whose religious history 
has been an almost literal fulfilment of the prediction, "A 
nation shall be bom in a day." 

The deep interest awakened in Mr. Judson's mind by the 
appearance of these forlorn beings, communicated itself to 
the Burman converts; and led, during the war, to the 
redemption, by one of the number, of a Karen bond-slave 
whom he had chanced to find in Rangoon. On the establish- 
ment of the mission at Maulmain, he was brought thither 
by his benefactor, and through the instrumentality of the 
missionaries, particularly of Dr. Judson, became a convert 
to Christianity. His heart immediately began to yearn over 
his brethren according to the flesh, and he became an active 
and successful evangelist among them. This was Ko-thah- 
byu, a name to be remembered among those of the higher 
nobility of the redeemed, who, having turned many to 



* Memoir of Mrs. Sarah B. Judson. 



PBEACHING TOUBS IN THE JUNGLES. 259 

righteousness, sliall shine as the stars for ever.* Through 
him access was gained to his wild countiymen. 

The condition of this people, brought tp light by the 
benevolent inquiries of our missionaries, is among the most 
interesting of ethnological problems. 

Entirely dissimilar to the Burmans in physical traits and 
in character, and with little, in these respects, in common 
with any of the tribes within the empire, no clue to their 
origin has yet been obtained. Their own traditions point to 
no earlier residence, from which their ancestors emigrated 
into the Burmese mountains. One could almost fancy they 
had sprung up spontaneously in the tangled jungles and wild 
mountain fastnesses, where, for ages, they have had their 
homes. They are a mild, docile, peaceful race, yet cherishing 
an unconquerable love of liberty. Treated with extreme 
cnielty and ignominy by the Burmans wherever they came 
into contact; robbed, kidnapped as slaves, and subjected to 
merciless exactions from government, the only refuge of this 
simple and timid people was to scatter as widely as possible, 
so tiat more than two or three families were seldom found 
together. In these little groups they were scattered over 
several distinct districts of Burmah, in the Tenasserim pro- 
vinces, in the region of south Arracan, and in a wild i*egion /.. 

south-east of Ava, to the number of from one hundred and ^^^ 

fifty to two hundred thousand. This mode of life precluded 
social progress. At the time they were discovered by the 
missionaries, they were in the lowest possible condition in 
this respect; their knowledge of the usefril arts being no 
more than would suffice for the construction of a rude canoe, 
the weaving of baskets, and the preparation of a coarse 
cotton cloth for their scanty covering. Agricidture was 
unknown among them. They subsisted upon the products 
of the mountain sti*eams, and the spontaneous fruits of the 
wilderness, migrating from place to place, as the natural 

* See Mr. Wade's account of his life. 



260 THB EABKE8T MAN. 

proyision around them was exhausted. Under such circum- 
stances it would be folly to expect an elevated moral con- 
dition. Though affectionate, confiding, and wonderfully 
truthful, presenting in these points, particularly in the latter, 
an honourable contrast to their haughty Burman masters, 
they were, like all savages, indolent, filthy, intemperate, and 
excessively superstitious. In short, they presented the aspect 
of a people of excellent natural dispositions, but crushed and 
dispirited by the oppression of a more powerful and intelli- 
gent race, below the expectation, and almost below the wiah,. 
for improvement. 

Tet in the bosom of this outcast people was cherished one 
idea, one hope, nobler than had ever dawned on the mind ot 
the proud and sagacious Burman. Amidst the mad idolatry 
of India, and in the very lap of the gorgeous system of 
Buddhism, the Karens alone were found to be free from 
image-worship. They had indeed no religious rites, if we 
except their propitiatory offerings in danger and sickness to 
the iVofe, a sort of petty mischievous agents not unlike the 
Elves of northern Europe. But in their traditionary songs 
and l^ends had been handed down from one generation to 
another, the idea of one GtOD, the invisible, supreme Huier 
of the world, and the prediction that at some future day, 
white foreigners from across the ocean would come to instruct 
them in his worship. One of these legends was found to be 
an account of the creation and fall of man, similar to that 
given in Genesis. Some of their moral precepts also bore a 
striking resemblance to those of Scripture. The date of the 
traditions, and their primary source, were lost in the same 
obscurity as the origin of the people themselves. 

Thus prepared, these rude untutored savages received the 
Christian missionary in a manner far different from that 
experienced among the Burmans. They welcomed him and 
his " glad tidings," as the fulfilment of that Messianic hope, 
— so we might almost call it, — ^for which they long had 
waited; and receiving the seed of the kingdom into good 



PBEACHIKG TOUBS IN THE JUNGLES. 261 

and honest hearts, brought forth fruit an hundred fold 
Never, probably, among any race of men, has the gospel won 
such rapid triumphs, or so signally demonstrated its power 
to improve even the temporal condition. The scion soon far 
outstripped in growth the parent mission. Within thirty 
years after the conversion of Ko-thah-byu, behold these 
vagrant tribes, blighted by a deep sense of their innate 
inferiority and their hopeless state of servitude, assuming 
the beautiful lineaments of true Christian civilization, — ^their 
language reduced to writing, and the Bible translated into 
it, printing presses at work to multiply the means of 
Christian culture, Christian villages gathered, Christian 
schools and churches springing up all over the Karen wil* 
demess ! They have developed an eagerness and a capacity 
for acquiring both human and Christian knowledge, and a 
facility in adopting the habits of civilized life, which is truly 
marvellous ; while in the simplicity, consistency, and fervour 
of their piety, they present a most lovely form of Christian 
character, reminding one of the early Moravians of Germany. 

But the details of this wonderful story do not belong here, y 
except so &r as they are connected with Dr. Judson's limited>^^ 
personal labours among the Karens. To his beloved co- 
labourers was granted, in a far greater degree than to him- 
self, the joy of leading this willing flock into the true fold, 
and of imparting to them the blessings of Christian know- 
ledge. But it was his great delight to labour among them, 
when he could snatch an interval of leisure from his other 
duties ; and if he ever envied his brethren any privilege, I 
beHeve it was that of preaching Christ to the Karens. 

It was found extremely difficult, at firsts to persuade even 
the Christian Karens to abandon their scattered and unset- 
tled mode of life. The habit, first induced probably by the 
instinct of self-preservation, had become a second nature. 
But the missionaries hoped to do little of permanent value 
for them until they could be congregated into villages, where 
not only their religious instruction could be steadily and 



266 THE EARNEST MAN. 

Karen interpreters of being a little partial to their coantrymAn), some 
circumstances leaked out which turned the scale in his faYoor, and he 
gained a clear vote. After his baivtism, he went on his way rejoicing; 
resolving to tell all his neighlx>urs what * great things the Lard had 
done for him.' At mqniiiig worship, our host and the neigjiboor 
mentioned above, appeared to be very near the kingdom of heaven; 
but the other people of this >'illage decidedly reject the goepeL 

** January 19. The boat having last night arrived from Majifmigti^ 
we prei)ared to proceed up the river. The two hopeful inqoiien 
requested us to make them another visit on our return. Kesolve to 
do so; and hope to find that the seed now sown in this and the 
neighbouring villages, will have sprung up and be ripe for harvest 

** Passed Panchoo's village, where we spent an hour, and Nga- 
koung's, too far inland to visit. 

** January 20. Passed the head of Kanlong island, and breakfasted 
near Yet-dau's village, where we found two or three inquirers. One 
woman followed to the boat, and listened attentively. Passed Kan- 
karet Island, beyond which the Yoon-zalen empties into the Salwea 
from the west, and about noon reached Tat-sau's small village. One 
man, who had heard the gospel )>efore, ap|)eared very favourably im- 
pressed. Crossed the river to Lee-hai's village on the Bunuau side. 
In the evening had a considerable assembly at his house. He and his 
son-in-law, their wives and one or two others, appeared open to 
conviction. 

"January 21. Recrossed the river to take in Ko-Myat-kyau and 
Chet-thing, whom 1 had sent away from Kwan-bee, with directions 
to make a circuit to the north and meet me at this place. They have 
proclaimed the gospel in many places where it was never heard before, 
and met with some instances of hopeful inquiry. We then proceeded 
up the Salwen, and in passing the mouth of the Yen-being, which 
falls in from the east, I sent Moung Zu-thee and Tau-nah to make 
another circuit, and meet me at Poo-ah's village ten days hence. At 
night, sent the two remaining Karen disciples to a small village a few 
miles inland. 

''January 22. On their return we again set out, and at three o'clock 
reached the landing-place called Toung Pyouk, where trading boats 
from Maulmain are obliged to stop^ on account of the rapids in the 
river. No village near, and only two boats. A most dreary place. 
Nothing but rocks and sand hills. Sent two of my people forwiud by 
land, intending to follow them to-morrow. 

"January 23. Followed the track of my people, and after travel- 
ling five hours, came to Chanbau's village, in the midst of the 
mountains. In the evening, had a pretty large but not very atten- 






PBEACHING TOURS IN THE JUNGLES. 267 

tive assembly. Two or three received the word with apparent joy, 
and none manifested decided opposition. 

" January 24. Set out for Bau-nah's village, two days' journey ; but 

after travelling an hour over dreadful moimtains, and in the bed of a 

rivulet where the water was sometimes knee deep, and full of sharp, 

slippery rocks, when my bare feet, unaccustomed to such usage, soon 

became so sore that I could hardly step, and having ascertained that 

'' such was the only road for many miles, I felt that I had done all that 

^ lay in my power towards carrying the gospel further in thiri direction, 

^ «nd therefore relinquished the attempt, and reluctantly returned to 

* Chanbau's village. Not so many present at evening worship as yes- 

^ terday. The seed sown here appears, in some instances, to have 

^ fallen on good ground ; but our short stay deprives us of the pleasure 

► of seeing fruit brought to perfection. 

"January 25. Eetumed to the boat, which we reached in two and 
I' a half hours, by a more direct route, and proceeded down the river. 
W Soon came to a landing-place, where, observing a few boats, we stop> 
Ik ped, with a view to communicate the gospel to the boat people. The 
|r two Karen disciples went to a village about a mile inland. In the 
lb evening, had a considerable assembly on the sand bank. 
1^ '* January 26. Some of the villagers came to the boat, and after 
^ listening a- while, invited me to return with them. I found three 
pt houses only, but the inhabitants listened with the best attention. 
|pr . ** January 27. This little village may be said to have embraced the 
gospel. At one time we had eight applicants for baptism ; but two 
pr only were finally received, Ko Shway and his wife, Nah Nyah-bau. 
1^ They both understood the Burmese language pretty well; and the 
^ iroman possesses the best intellect, as well as the strongest faith, that 
C I have found among this people. I invited them, though rather 
( Advanced in life; to come to Maulmain, and learn to read, promising 
^ to support them a few months; and they concluded to accept the 
L invitation next rainy season. They followed us all the way to the 
W .boat, and the woman stood looking after us until we were out of 

^ . '* In the afternoon arrived again at the Yen-being river, and sent 
M iK>me of my people to a neighbouring village two miles distant. The 
W Tillagers listened a- while, and then sent a respectful message, saying 
f ibat they believed the religion of Jesus Christ, and that it was most 
f excellent, &c., but begged that the teacher would go about his busi- 
f ness, and not come to disturb them. 

' ''January 28. Proceeded down the Salwen, touching at several 
villages, and on reaching Yet-dau's, found sufficient encouragement 
f[ to spend the night. 



2G8 THE EABNE8T MAV. 

**Jamuu7 29. Four {jenons, two men and their wiyes, bATii^ 
hoanl the gosfiel bi'fore, and being now quite settled in their miadi^ 
and giving good evidence of having the gnce of Gk>d, were received 
into the Christian church by baptism. Enjoyed a Teiy pleamt 
Lord's day, having several seasona of worBhip, in m little shed per 
taining to the village. Two other persons request baptism, andtteir 
case will be considered to-morrow. 

** January 30. In the morning held a church meeting by the lifff 
side, and received the last two applicants. The chief of the fiOMg^ 
Yet-dau's father, and several other persons, are very frnvwuMj !■■ 
pressed. Not a word of opixisition to be heard. Took an aflfectioBste 
leave of this little church, now consisting of six members, and nat 
down the river on the west side of Kanlong Island, having ooiiie 19 
on the east side from Puo-ah's village. Entered the Mai-seen rirnH 
in Burmese territory, and landed at Thah-pe-nike's village, fdbere we 
spent the day. In the evening had a noisy assembly. Some fnht 
sed to believe, but pleaded the fear of government as an excuse lor 
not prosecuting their inquiries. One young man, Kah-lah by nia^ 
drank in the truth, and promised to come to Manlm^in im goon as ke 
could get free from some present engagements. 

** January 31. Continued our course down the river, and landed os 
the west side, at Ti-yah-ban's village. The chief is said to be veiy 
much in favour of the Christian religion, but, unfortunately, W 
gone up the river, and his people did not dare to think in his abseneei 
In the afternoon, came to the ' upper village,' the first -we found <s 
Kanlong. They listened well, but, about sunset, took a sudden ton, 
and would give us no further hearing. We removed, theielon^ 
to Yai-thah-kau*s village. Some of my })eople went aidioie. 'Bn 
chief was absent, and the principal remaining personage, a Buddhist 
Karen, said that when the English government enforced their religiflo 
at the point of the sword, and he had seen two or three suffer d«(A 
for not embracing it, he would begin to consider, and not hefoie; 
that, however, if the teacher desired to come to the village, he oooU 
not be inhospitable, but would let him come. I sent back word i^ 
I would not come ; but, as he loved falsehood and darkness, I wonU 
leave him to live therein all his days, and finally go the dark wsf ; 
and all my x)eople drew off to the boat. While we were delibeistivg 
what to do, something touched the old man's heart; we heard fte 
sound of footsteps advancing in the dark, and presently a voice. ' Mj 
lord, please to come to the village.' * Don't call me lord. I am no 
lord nor ruler of this world.' * What must I call you? Teacher, I 
supiwse?' *Yes, but not your teacher; for you love to be tau^ 
falsehood, not truth.' * Teacher, I have heard a great deal aga^ 



PBEACHIKG TOUBS IN THE JUNGLES. 269 

this religion, and how can I know at once what is right and what is 
wrong ? Please to come and let me listen attentively to your words.' 
I replied not, but rose and followed the old man. He took me to his 
house, spread a cloth for me to sit on, manifested great respect, and 
listened with uncommon attention. When I prepared to go, he said, 
' But you will not go before we have performed an act of worship and 
prayer ? ' We accordingly knelt down, and during prayer the old man 
could not help, now and then, rex)eating the close of a sentence with 
emphasis, seeming to imply that, in his mind, I had not quite done it 
justice. After I was gone, he said that it was a great thing to change 
one's religion ; that he stood quite alone in these parts ; but that, 
if some of his acquaintance would join him, he would not be behind. 

** February 1. Went on to Pa-dah's village, near the southern 
extremity of the island, where there is a Buddhist priest, and the 
people generally are worshippers of Gautama. Met with a frigid 
reception. But one man, who had heard and received ^e truth 
before, came forward boldly, and requested baptism. He bore an 
excellent examination, and we received him gladly. The opposition 
here is strong. None of the villagers present at evening worship, 
except a brother of the chief and ona other man; but these spoke 
decidedly in favour of the Christian religion, as did the old man of 
yesterday, who followed hither by land. The priest, T hear, is very 
angry, and unfortunately for his cause, uses abusive language. 

*' February 2. Went round the northern extremity of Kanlong, and 
np the eastern channel, to Poo-ah's village, where we found the two 
disciples whom we sent away on the 21st ultimo. They have met 
with a few hopeful inquirers. Some who live near are expected here 
to-morrow. In the meantime, went down the river a few miles, to 
Poo-door's village. My people preceded me, as usual, and about noon 
I followed them. But I found that the village was inhabited chiefly 
by Buddhist Karens, and, of course, met with a poor recepti<m. 
After showing myself, and trying to conciliate the children and dogs, 
who cried and barked in concert, I left word that if any wished to 
hear me preach, I would come again in the evening, and then relieved 
the people of my presence, and retreated to the boat. At night the 
disciples returned without any encouragement. One of them, how- 
ever, accidentally met the chief, who said that if I came he would 
not refose to hear what I had to say. On this half invitation, I set 
out about simset, and never met with worse treatment at a Karen vil- 
lage. The chief would not even invite us into his house, but sent us 
off to an old deserted place, where the floor was too frail to support 
us ; so we sat down on the ground. He then invited us nearer, and 
sat down before oa with a few confidential friends. He had evidently 



i 



270 THE EABNE8T MAN. 

for))idden all his people to approach us, otherwise some would have 
come out of curiosity. And what a hard, suspicioiis face did ke 
exhibit ! And how we had to coax him to join us in a little icgalar 
worship ! It was at least an hour before he would consent at aO. 
But in the course c)f worship his features softened, and his miinJ 
* crossed over/ as he expressed it, to our religion ; and I returned to 
the l>oat, inclined to believe that all things are possible with God. 

" February 3. Some of my i)eople who slept at the village letonied 
with the rci)ort that the place is divided against itself. Some are for 
and some against us. The opiK)sition is rather violent. One man 
threatens to turn his aged father out of doors if he embraces the 
Christian religion. Perhaps this is not to be regretted. Satan never 
frets without cause. Turned the boat's head again to the north, and 
retraced our way to Poo-ah's village, where we spent the rest <rf the 
day. But the two hoi)efid inquirers that I left here on the 29th hare 
made no ifdvance. 

"Febnmry 4. Shway-hlah's wife, mentioned the 16th ultimo, 
having been here three times to meet me, was this time A^i^m^niMl 
and received. She came accom^Minied by Tat-kyee, the principal mas 
in her \'illage, who himself is half a Christian. He had heard that I 
wished to have a zayat in these parts, and invited me to go up to the 
mouth of the Chummcrah rivulet, now dry, where some of his people 
intend settling, and he would assist in building the zayat. I regaided 
this as an intimation of the path of duty, and set out for the plaoe^ 
about three miles distant. It was an additional inducement, that 
Tee-pah*8 village has been lately removed towards the Salwen, and is 
now situated two miles inland from the spot recommended. On oar 
way we met a deputation from Tee-pah, inviting me to fix on the 
same spot, and his people also would assist in building the zayat. Oi 
arriving at the x)lace we were joined by Tee-pah's father and seveni 
other disciples, bringing with them a lad who has for some time 
listened to the truth, and now earnestly requested to be baptiaei 
We held a church meeting on the bank, twelve disciples present boa 
different parts, and unanimously received him. I then marked oat 
a place for the zayat, despatched Tau-nah to bring his family from the 
Dah-gyne district, and build a house near the zayat, as he is to be 
stationed here, by mutual consent of all parties ; and having named 
the new place Chummerah, from the adjoining rivulet, we took leave 
of the disciples, and again went down the river to Poo-door's village^ 
where we arrived late at night. 

"February 6. Went to the village and had worship. The chief 
was absent on some government business. Six persons appeared to 
be near the kingdom of heaven, among whom is the old tnari whose 



PREACHING TOURS IN THE JUNOLES. 271 

son threatens to turn him out of doors. In the afternoon, proceeded 
down the river, and came to a village of Toung-thoos, a race of people 
from whom we have never yet obtained a disciple. They are strict 
Buddhists. Their language is entirely different from the Karen, but 
the men generally understand a little Burmese. We did all in our 
power to gain their confidence, but in vain. They rejected our over- 
tures, and would not even allow us to sleep in their houses. 

"February 6. "Went on our way: entered the Maizeen rivulet, 
which falls into the Salwen from the east, and landed at Bai-ngai's vil- 
lage, where we spent a few hours, but not meeting with much encou- 
ragement, in the evening dropped down to the mouth of the rivulet, 
where finding some relations of Pan-lah, who listened well, we spent 
the night. 

" February 7. Proceeded down the river to Kappay's village, where 
some listened with delight ; thence to a small village on the Burman 
side; thence to Pah-an, on the British side; and thence to Rajah's 
village, on the same side, where we spent the night. The chief, who 
had heard the gospel before, now listened with the utmost eagerness 
till after midnight. 

"February 8. Bajah made a formal request to be admitted into 
the Christian church, and we had no hesitation in complying. He is 
the first Karen chief baptized in these parts. His people show a 
strange aversion. Not one of them would accompany us to the 
water, though he gave them an invitation. They seem to take 
side with his eldest son, a grown man, who has been- a Buddhist 
priest, and is still strongly attached to that religion. After the 
baptism, we went to a small village below Bajah's ; thence to Taroke- 
lah, inhabited by Tailings ; thence to a village of Toung-thoos, where 
we found one man that listened; thence to a Karen village below 
Kan-blike. In the evening had a considerable assembly. Three 
persons professed to believe. 

** February 9. Visited Wen-gyan, Pah-len, and Zong-ing, Tailing 
villages, where we found a few Karens. At the latter place, collected 
a small assembly for evening worship. A few professed to believe ; 
others were violent in opposing. 

"February 10. Visited several Tailing villages in succession. In 
the afternoon reached the confluence of . the Salwen and the Gyne, 
upon which we turned into the latter, and went up to Taranah, where 
Ko Shan resides, as mentioned December 29. The inhabitants of this 
place, like the Tailings in general, are inveterately opposed to the 
gospel, and Ko Shan has had very little success. Two or three indi- 
viduals, however, appear to be favourably impressed ; but the oppo- 
sition is so strong that no one dares to come forward. 



272 THE EARNEST MAK. 

''February 11. Left Ko'Shan, with the promiae of sending him 
aid as soon as possible, and in the afternoon reached Mawlm^in, after 
an absence of six weeks, during which I have bi^ised twenty-five 
and registered about the same number of hopeful inquirers. 

'* February 29. Left Maulmain for the Karen villages on the 
Salwen, accompanied by Ko Myat-kyau, who speaks Karen, three 
other disciples, and the two Karen assistants, Panlah and Chet-thing. 
The other Karen assistant, Tau-nah, I expect to meet at GhunmienJi, 
according to the arrangement of February 4. At ni^t reached 
Tong-eing, and found that the few Karens near the place had con- 
cluded to reject the gospeL 

'* March 1. Touched at the village above Nengyan, and found tiie 
inhabitants have come to the same conclusion, 'till the next rainy sea- 
son. ' Passed by all the Tading towns, and touched at the village bdow 
Bajah's, where we found that the people still adhere to the new Ejoen 
prophet, Areemaday. Moung Zuthee unfortunately encountered a 
very [respectable Burman priest, with a train of novices, who, not 
relishing his doctrine, fell upon him, and gave him a sound beatings 
The ]X)or man fled to me in great dismay, and, I am sony to say, sone 
wrath, begging leave to assemble our forces and seize the agg^ressor, 
for the purpose of delivering him up to justice. I did assemble them; 
and, all kneeling down, I praised Grod that he had counted one of our 
number worthy to suffer a little for his Son's sake ; and prayed that 
he would give us a spirit of forgiveness, and our persecutors eveiy 
blessing, temporal and spiritual ; after which we left the field of batkk 
with cool and happy minds. Beached Bajah's late at ni^t. He 
remains firm, though not followed by any of lus people. TTia in£B^ 
however, and eldest daughter, after evening worship, declared thou* 
selves on the side of Christ. 

" March 2. Spent the afternoon in instructing and examining the 
wife and daughter. The former we approved, but rejected the lattoE^ 
as not yet established in the Christian faith. After the baptian, 
Bajah and his wife imited in presenting their younger ^Tiil^ yftn^ tffit 
I might lay my hands on them and bless them. The elder childraii 
being capable of discerning good from evil, came of their own accoid, 
and held up their folded hands in the act of homage to their paienV* 
God, while we offered a prayer that they might obtain grace to becoDH 
true disciples, and receive the holy ordinance of bi^iam. At nooSt 
left this interesting family, and proceeded up the river, stopping ooci> 
sionally and preaching, wherever we. could catch a liat-Aiing ee& 
Entered the Maisan, and landed at the village above Kai-ngai's, whicl 
Ko Myat-kyau had formerly visited. In the evening had two voy 
attentive hearers. 



PBEACHING TOUBS IN THE JUNGLES. 273 

'* March 3. The two attentive hearers were up nearly all night 
drinking in the truth. One of them became urgent for baptism ; and 
on hearing his present and past experience, from the time he first 
listened to the gospel, we concluded to receive him into the fellowship 
of the church. His wife is very favourably disposed, but not so far 
advanced in knowledge and faith. Returned to the Salwen, and made 
a long pull for Poo-door's village ; but late in the evening, being still 
at a considerable distance, were obliged to coil otirselves up in our 
small boat, there being no house in these parts, and the coimtry 
swarming with tigers at this season, so that none of us ventured to 
sleep on shore. 

** March 4, Lord's day. Uncoiled ourselves with the first dawn of 
light, and soon after sunrise took possession of a fine flat log, in the 
middle of Poo-door's village, a mile from the river, where we held 
forth on the duty of refraining from work on this the Lord's day, and 
attending divine worshipi Some listened to our words ; and in the 
forenoon we succeeded in collecting a small assembly. After worship, 
the old man mentioned formerly, whose son threatened to turn biTn 
out of doors, came forward, with his wife ; and having both witnessed 
a good confession, we received them into our fellowship. Poo-door 
himself absent on a journey; but his wife ready to become a 
Christian. 

'* March 5. Spent the forenoon in examining and receiving another 
couple, and then went on to Chummerah. The disciples from Tee- 
pah's village have built a zayat, and two or three families, including 
Tau-nah's, have arrived, and are settling themselves. At night, went 
out to the village, four miles distant (instead of two, as first 
reported), and had a full assembly of disciples and inquirers at 
evening worshipu 

"March 6. The truth is evidently spreading in this village; one 
inquirer after another is coming over to the side of Christ. After 
morning worship, left some of my people to follow up the work, and 
letumed to the zayat. 

^* March 7. In the forenoon above twenty disciples assembled at 
the zayat; and after worship we examined and received ^ve persons 
more, aU from Tee-pah's village. Left Zuthee in charge of the zayat, 
and took Tau-nah in his place. Visited Pan-choo's village, where 
some listened in silence. 

" March 8. Went several miles inland to visit Nge Koun^s village ; 
but the people being Buddhist Karens, would not even treat us hoepi* 
iably, much less listen to the word. In the afternoon reached Yah- 
dan's village, and visited the little church, chiefly to receive the 
oonfession of two female members, who have been implicated in 



274 THE EARNEST MAN. 

making some offering to the demon who rules over diaeaaes, — ^the 
easily besetting sin of the Karens. Spent the rest of the day in 
preaching to the villagers and visitors from different parts. Sevenl 
professed to believe. Ha<l a profoundly attentive, thou^ tanMS)^ 
assembly at evening worship, on the broad sand-bank of the nv&r, 
with a view to the accommodation of certain boat people. We felfc 
that the Holy Spirit sent home the truth in a peculiar manner. Some 
of the disciples were engaged in religious discussion and prayer a 
great part of the night. 

'* March 9. Several requested baptism. In the course of the day 
we held a church meeting, comi)osed of the disciples from MAnlmMn, 
and others from the neighbouring village, and received three persons 
into our communion, all men, formerly disciples of the new prophet, 
Areemaday. In the afternoon proceeded up the river as far as Zat- 
zan's village, where two old women, of some influence in these parts, 
listened with great attention. At night several of the disciples w^ 
inland a few miles, to Laidan, where the inhabitants are chiefly 
Buddhist Karens ; but finding Mah Kee-kah, the widow of Pan-mki- 
mlo, whose death is mentioned January 12, her parents and sisteis 
drank in the truth. Hope to visit them on my return. 

"March 10. Went on to the mouth of the Yen-being, and as far 
as the great log, which prevents a boat from proceeding further. 
Providentially met with Wah-hai, of whom I have heard a good 
report for some time. He was happy to see us, and we were happy 
to examine and baptize him. We then visited the village whence 
they formerly sent a respectful message desiring us to go about our 
business, and found some attentive listeners. 

** March 11, Lord's day. Again took the main river, and soon fell 
in with a boat containing several of the listeners of yesterday, among 
whom was one man who declared his resolution to enter the new 
religion. We had scarcely parted with this boat when we met 
another, full of men, coming down the stream ; and, on hailing to 
know whether they wished to hear the gospel of the Lord Jesnft 
Christ, an elderly man, the chief of the party, replied that he hid 
already heard much of the gospel, and there was nothing he desiied 
more than to have a meeting with the teacher. Our boats were sood 
sjide by side, where, after a short engagement, the old man struck hii 
colours, and begged us to take him into port, where he. could make s 
proper surrender of himself to Christ. We accordingly went to the 
shore, and spent several hours very delightfully under the shade d 
the overhanging trees, and the banner of the love of Jesus. The old 
man's experience was so clear, and his desire for baptism so strongs 
that, though circumstances prevented our gaining so much testimony 



PREACHING TOURS IN THE JUNGLES. 275 

of his good conduct since believing as we usually require, we felt that 
it would be wrong to refuse his request. A lad in his company, the 
person mentioned January 30, desired also to be baptized. But 
though he had been a preacher to the old man, his experience was not 
so decided and satisfactory ; so that we rejected him for the present. 
The old man went on his way, rejoicing aloud, and declaring his reso- 
lution to make known the eternal God and the dying love of Jesus 
all along the banks of the Yoon-zalen, his native stream. 

*'The dying words of an aged man of Grod, when he waved his 
withered, death-struck arm, and exclaimed, * TJie best of all isy God 
is with usT 1 feel in my very souL Yes, the great Invisible is in these 
Karen wilds ! That mighty Being, who heaped up these craggy rocks 
and reared these stupendous mountains, and poured out these streams 
in all directions, and scattered immortal beings throughout these 
deserts — he is present by the influence of his Holy Spirit, and accom- 
panies the sound of the gospel with converting, sanctifying power! 
* The best of all w, Qod is vnth iis /* 

" 'In these deserts let me labour, 
On these mountains let me tell 
How he died — ^the blessed Saviour, 
To redeem a world from hell.* 

"March 12. Alas! how soon is our joy turned into mourning! 
Mah Nyah-ban, of whom we aU had such a high opinion, joined her 
husband, not many days after their baptism, in making an offering to 
the demon of diseases, on account of the sudden, alarming illness of 
their youngest child; and they have remained ever since in an 
impenitent, prayerless state. They now refuse to listen to our 
exhortation, and appear to be given over to hardness of heart and 
blindness of mind. I was therefore obliged, this morning, to pro- 
nounce the sentence of suspension, and leave them to the mercy and 
judgment of God. Their case is greatly to be deplored. They are 
quite alone in this quarter, have seen no disciples since we left tiiem, 
and are surrounded with enemies, some from Maulmain, who have 
told them all manner of lies, and used every effort to procure and 
perpetuate their apostasy. When I consider the evidence of grace 
which they formerly gave, together with all the palliating circum- 
stances of the case, I have much remaining hope that they will yet be 
brought to repentance. I commend them to the prayers of the faith- 
ful, and the notice of any missionary who may travel that way. In 
consequence of the advantage which Satan lias gained in this village, 
the six hopeful inquirers whom we left here, have all fallen off; so that 
we are obliged to retire with the dispirited feelings of beaten troops. 

" I respectfully request, and sincerely hope, that this article may 



i 



276 THS EARNEST MAN. 

be neither suppressed nor polished. The princijde of 'double selec- 
tion,* as it is termed, that is, one selection by the miaaioiutfy and 
another by the jmblishing committee, has done great mischief, and 
contributc»d more to im^iair the credit of missionary accounts than 
anything else. We in the East, knowing how extensively this prin- 
ciple is acted on, do scarcely give any credit to the statements which 
appear in some periodicals, and the public at large are beginning to 
Gpen their eyes to the same thing. It is strange to me that mission- 
aries and publishing committees do not see the excellency and efficacy 
of the system pursued by the inspired writers, — ^that of exhibiting iiM 
good and bad alike. Nothing contributes more to establish the 
authenticity of the writing. A temporary advantage gained by 
suppressing truth, is a real defeat in the end, and therefore f^an 

** Returned down the river ; re-entered the Yen-being ; had another 
interview with the listeners of yesterday ; met with a Taling doctor 
from Kan-hlah, near Maulmain, who listened all the evening with 
evident delight. 

** March 13. Spent the day and night at Tatzan^s, Sehai's, and the 
village of Lai-dan, where we failed of finding Mah Kee-kah, but 
found her parents, who listened well. In these parts I have a con- 
siderable number of ho|)ef ul inquirers. May the Lord bless the seed 
sown, and give us the pleasure of reaping a plentiful harvest at no 
very distant period ! 

'* March 14. Touched at Yah-dan*s, and went down the west side 
of Kan-long, as before, to Thah-pa-nike*s ; (15), proceeded to Ti-yah- 
ban's, where we left a few hopeful inquirers; and then went on to 
Pa-dah's village. In the evening had worship at the chiefs house. 

*' March 16. The opposition here is violent. The man who was 
baptized on my last visit has been obliged to remove to the outskirts 
of the village, but he remains steadfast in the faith; and to-day 
another man came out, and, having witnessed a good confession, was 
received into the fellowship of the persecuted. At night ran down to 
Poo-door's village, about five miles ; found him at home, and spent 
the evening in persuading him to forsake all for Christ. His language 
is that of Agrippa : * Almost,' &c. I have great hopes and great feais 
for his immortal souL Three of the disciples went several miltt 
inland, to a village where there are some hopeful inquirers. 

** March 17. Betumed up the river to Chummerah. In the evening 
had a considerable assembly of disciples, preparatory to the adminis- 
tration of the Lord's supx)er. 



, 



We must sacrifice only to truth. 



PBEACHING TOUBS IN THE JXJNGLES. 277 

** March 18. Administered the Lord's supper to thirty-six commu- 
nicants, chiefly from villages on the Salwen. 

''March 19. Left Tau-nah and Moung Tsan-lone in charge of the 
2ayat and boat, and set out with the rest of my people, and two or 
three new followers, on a journey overland to the Dah-gyne. Li the 
evening, after marrying a couple at Tee-pah's village, had an interest- 
ing assembly, with whom we enjoyed religious discussion till near 
midnight. Two opposers came over, I trust, to Christ. 

** March 20. Went on our way, and in two hours and a quarter, 
not including stops, reached Kwanbee, on the east of the Leing-bwaL 
Two hours and a quarter more brought us to Mai-pah, where the 
people, being prejudiced against the gospel, gave us a poor reception. 

''March 21. Li a neighbouring village found a few who listened 
well. After spending the morning in instructing them, continued our 
journey eastwardly, and after two and a half hours' hard walking, 
reached a small village near the Dah-gyne, where the people received 
us hospitably, but, being Buddhists, listened with no good disposition. 

"March 22. Reached the new place selected January 9, which we 
call Newville, about forty miles distant, I conjecture, from Chum- 
merah. Foimd two families only settled here, but others are about 
joining them. Some of the disciples went to the neighbouring villages 
to give information of my arrivaL 

"March 23. Most of the disciples visited me in the course of 
the day. Li the evening had a pretty fuU room. Received and bap- 
tized one couple, who applied for baptism on my first visit, but were 
rejected. 

* * March 24. Having removed Moimg Boot from this station, — ^who, 
though a good man, has grown cold and inactive, — appointed Pan-lah 
in his place, and selected a few individuals for the adult school, we set 
out on our return to Ohummerah, and at night reached Mai-pah, 
twenty miles distant, being half-way between the two stations. 

" March 25. Li the morning had a small, attentive assembly, from 
one of the neighbouring villages. Then went on to Tee-pah's village, 
which we reached in season for evening worship. 

" March 26. Three lads from Tee-pah's village, two of them bap- 
tized, joined our company, with a view to the adult school at Maul- 
main. Took the boat at Chummerah and went down the river. Spent 
the night at Rajah's village. Some begin to listen. 

" March 27. Ran down the river without touching at any place by 
the way. At night reached Maulmain, after an absence of nearly a 
month, during which I have baptized nineteen, making eighty Karen 
Christians in connection with the Maulmain station, of whom one is 
dead, and two are suspended from communion. Am glad, yet sorry. 



278 THE EARNEST MAN. 

to find that brother Bennett arrived a fortnight ago from Calcutta 
with a complete fount of tyi^es, and yesterday sent a boat to call me, 
which, however, ]>a88ed us on the way. Must I, then, relinquiah my 
intention of making another trij) up the river before the rains set 
in? Must I relinquish for many months, and perhaps for ever, the 
pleasure of singing as I go — 

' In these deserts let me labour, 
On these mountains let me tell* ? 

Truly, the tears fall as I write." 

The whole number of Karens received to church member- 
ship on profession of their faith, within twenty-five years, 
amounts, as nearly as can be ascertained, to about twenty 

THOUSAND. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

LABOUBS OF THE STUDY. 

Very early in Mr. Judson's residence in Burmah, he 
became convinced that the Press must be one of the chief 
instruments of its regeneration. He found its inhabitants 
a reading people, beyond any other in India;* of a remark- 
ably inquisitive, speculative turn of mind; not disposed to 
admit any new doctrine without a full apprehension of the 
why and wherefore. In regard, especially, to a change of 
religion, which involved so much worldly sacnfLce, and even 
the risk of life, the cool and cautious Burman was doubly on 
his guard ; and, as a general thing, the reception of Christi- 
anity was the result of deep conviction of the understanding. 
"It is," says Mr. Judson at a subsequent period, "rather 



* He states, in one of his letters, that five millions, that is, about one- 
third of the population, knew how to read. 



LABOURS OP THE STUDY. 279 

characteristic of Burman converts, that they are slow in 
making up their minds to embrace a new religion ; but the 
point once settled, is settled for ever." He describes one 
individual as " a pretty fair specimen of a cautious Burman, 
who turns a thing over ten thousand times before he takes 
it; but when once he takes it, holds it for ever." In his 
earliest attempts to communicate Christian ideas, he was met 
with the inquiry : " Where are your sacred books 1 " He 
saw that, in Christianizing such a people, "the hearing of 
the ear" would not alone suffice. " I have found," he writes, 
in 1817, " that I could not preach publicly to any advantage, 
without being able, at the same time, to put something in 
the hands of the hearers. And in order to qualify myself 
to do this, I have found it absolutely necessary to keep at 
home, and to confine myself to close study for three or four 
years." 

A short time previous he had announced the printing of a 
couple of tracts : the one a View of the Christian Religion, 
1,000 copies; the other a Catechism, 4,000 copies. These, 
though written within four years after his first arrival in 
Bangoon, proved to be perfectly intelligible to the natives, 
and have remained standard works to this day. It was not 
long before " the first inquirer** presented himself, with the 
momentous question : " How long will it take me to learn 
the religion of Jesus Christ ? " " How came you," it was 
asked, "to know anything of Jesus 1 Have you ever been here 
before 1 " " No." " Have you seen any writing concerning 
Jesus V* "I have seen two little books." " Who is Jesus ?" 
"He is the Son of God, who, pitying creatures, came into 
this world, and suffered death in their stead." "Who is 
God 1" "He is a being without beginning or end; who is 
not subject to old age or death, but always w." " I cannot 
tell," adds Mr. Judson, " how I felt at this moment. This 
was the first acknowledgment of an eternal God that I had 
ever heard from the lips of a Burman." He then attempted 
to enter into conversation with the visitor, in order to com- 



i 



280 THE EARNEST MAK. 

municate to him something more respecting God and Christ; 
but he gave little attention, seeming intent only on obtain- 
ing ''MORE OF THIS KIND OF WRITINO.'* After WatduDg 

three weeks in vain for the reappearance of this interesting 
inquirer, Mr. Judson learned, accidentally, that the reading 
of these books had been his sole employment in the interval; 
and that he showed them to every one who called on him. 
The story is a striking illustration of the trait of Bcirman 
character above referred to. A similar case, more interesting 
still, from its rich results, was related by Mr. Judson in aa 
address to the students of Brown University, daring his visit 
in the States : — 

"In the early part of his residence in Rangoon (he ^rent on to 
relate), a Bunnan philosopher, attended by his pupils, on their way 
to a neighbouring pagoda, was wont to pass the place where he lived, 
and from which he instructed the people. On one occasion the phi- 
losopher was stopped by the crowd gathered about Mr. Judson, and 
his eye accidentally fell upon the first tract that was published in the 
Burmese language, the opening words of which announced the exis- 
tence of a living, eternal Ood, These significant words arrested his 
whole attention, and he stood a long time as in profound thought, his 
whole soul absorbed with the great truth which they taught. To 
himself, as well as the whole nation, this was a new idea, and it led 
to a long course of study and investigation, which finally resulted in 
the renimciation of the religion of his country, and the adoption of 
Christianity. 

"He was baptized, and commenced a course of zealous labour as » 
Christian teacher. He soon became obnoxious to the government, and 
was tried and condemned to death. But, before the day of execution 
came on, he effected his escape, and fled from the city. Since that 
time Mr. Judson had never seen him, nor learned any particulars of 
his life, but had frequently heard of him through persons who came a 
long distance from the interior, in search of tracts and Bibles, having 
been awakened to inquiry, and converted to the Christian faith by 
his instructions." 

In addition to these ti»cts, he prepared others firom time 
to time; some for awakening attention among the people, 
others for the instruction of the converts, or as aids to the 
native assistants. He did not even think it beneath him to 



LABOUBS OP THE STUDY. 281 

clraw up a little manual of astronomy, and another of geo- 
graphy, for use in the schools. To the class first mentioned, 
belongs The Golden Bcdcmce, written in 1829, a popular 
appeal to the understanding of the sagacious Burmans^ 
founded on a comparison of Buddhism with Christianity. 
Assuming nothing but what they themselves admit concern- 
ing Guatama and his doctrines, a bold contrast is drawn 
between the leading points of the two religions, to which, in 
closing, he challenges attention in a style well adapted to 
those whom he addressed : " O ye Tailings and Burmans ! 
if through fear that your dark neighbours will revile you, 
you dare not open both eyes, do pray open one eye the 
breadth of a hair, and, in pity to yourselves, take one look." 
This tract has been very widely circulated, and has exerted 
a powerful influence on the native mind.* 

But, above all, the knowledge of Grod's own Word was, in 
his view, not only pre-eminently desirable as an adjunct to 
missionary labour, but its only true and permanent foundar- 
tion. Mr. Judson was thoroughly imbued with the great 
Protestant doctrine, — the right of every man to know for 
himself, without the intervention of any human medium, 
the will of God as revealed in his own inspired Scriptures. 
He would not even venture to commence preaching, without 
8ome portion of the sacred volume, to which he could refer 
as his ultimate authority, and by which his hearers could 
themselves test his teachings. 

Accordingly, after trying his hand at Burman composition 
in the tracts first mentioned, he immediately applied himself 
to the translation of the Gospel of Matthew, of which he 
. proi>osed to print a small edition, " by way of trial, and as 
introductory to a larger edition of the whole New Testa- 
ment." This was the commencement of that great work, 
whose completion, twenty-three years after, marks the most 



* A translation of " The Golden Balance," by the author's own hand, 
will be found in the Appendix to Dr. '^yland'B Memoir, voL iL p. 448. 



282 THE EARNEST MAN. 

important epoch in the history of Burmah, when the Bible 
became the inalienable inheritance of her children. 

Through several succeeding years the labour was prosecu- 
ted under great difficulties, the necessities of the mission 
allowing him, for the most part, to devote to it only scat- 
tered intervals of leisure, gleaned from more pressing avoca- 
tions. The translation of the entire New Testament was 
finished in June, 1823.* 

On his return to Amherst, at the close of the war, he 
resumed the work ; and from the year 1828 it became lus 
chief employment. The conviction constantly grew upon 
him, that this was his assigned calling in the kingdom of 
Ood,— his life-work, and that his undivided energies must 
be henceforth consecrated to its accomplishment. On the 
last day of January, 1834, he thus records the attainment of 
his wishes, in the completion of the entire Old Testament :— 

*' January 31, 1S34. Thanks be to God, I can now say I have 
attained. I have knelt down before him, with the last leaf in my 
hand, and imploring his forgiveness for all the sins which have pollu- 
ted my labours in this department, and his aid in future efforts to 
remove the errors and imperfections which necessarily cleave to the 
work, I have commended it to his mercy and grace ; I have dedicated 
it to his glory. May he make his own inspired Word, now complete 
in the Burman tongue, the grand instrument of iilling all Bunnah 
with songs of praise to our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ! 
Amen. 



* The story of the preservation of this precious work, related by Mn. 
Judson, might adorn the page of romance. It was taken to Ava in manu- 
script ; and when Mr. Judson was thrown into prison, was secretly sewed 
up by his wife in a cushion, too hard and xmsightly to tempt the cujiiditf 
even of his jailers, and used by him as a pillow. When, at the dose d 
seven months, he and his fellow-sufferers were so rudely thrust into the 
inner prison, the old pillow fell to the share of one of the keepers * bat 
finding it probably too hard for his use, he threw it back, and it came 
once more into its owner's hands. It was again lost when he was diiva 
to Oung-pen-la ; and being stripped by one of the attendants of the nu^ 
which was tied round it, the roll of hard cotton was again flung back into 
the prison. Here it was foimd by Moxmg Ing, who took it home as a 
memorial of his teacher, without suspecting its priceless contents. 
" Several months after, the majfdscript, which now makes a part of the 
Burmese Bible, was found within, iminjured.'* 



LABOURS OP THE STUDY. 283 

But this was only "the, beginning of the end." He 
immediately commenced a revision of the whole work, 
which occupied him till near the close of 1840; "having 
bestowed," as he writes to the Rev. Dr. Cone, soon after its 
completion, " more time and labour on the revision than on 
the first tmnslation of the work." 

Of the principles by which he had been guided in his 
momentous task, one only, the basis of all the rest, need be 
mentioned here. It was his single object to give a faithful 
expression, in the vernacular tongue, of every thought 
expressed in the original. " I take this occasion," he writes 
in 1841, "to say that I heartily approve of the resolution of 
the American Baptist Board of Foreign Missions, passed 
April, 1833 : 'That all missionaries of the Board who are, 
or who shall be, engaged in translating the Scriptures, be 
instructed to endeavour, by earnest prayer and diligent 
study, to ascertain the exact meaning of the original text, 
and to express that meaning as exactly as the nature of the 
language into which they shall translate will admit, and 
to transfer no words which are capable of being literally 
translated.' " 

Mr. Judson's work, through his conscientious adherence 
to this principle, came under the disapprobation of the 
American Bible Society, from which aid had been received 
in publishing the Burman Scriptures. On learning the fact, 
that the versions by Baptist missionaries allowed no transfer 
of words from the original, which could be expressed in the 
vernacular tongue, the Board of that Society deemed it neces- 
sary to establish more specific rules, by which their patronage 
should in future be regulated. Their deliberations resulted 
in the resolution, "to encourage such versions only as con- 
form in the principles of their translation to the common 
English version." Meanwhile, their aid was suspended till 
they should be assured that the obnoxious translations were 
modified in accordance with this direction. 

Compliance with such a requisition being found impossible, 



( 



284 THE EARNEST MAX. 

the majority of Baptists in the Board and Society retired 
from its ranks. The American and Foreign Bible Society 
was then organized, on the principle previouslj adopted bj 
the Board of Foreign Missions^ and carried out in Mr. Jad- 
son's translation. 

Mr. Judson hailed the formation of this Society, and <^ 
a kindred one in England, as progressive steps in the 
advancement of the kingdom whose foundation is Truth. 
"I approve," he writes to the corresponding secretaiy, 
July 12, 1839, "of the principles on which the American 
and Foreign Bible Society was founded, and which aie 
repeatedly recognized in their first annual report^ particor 
larly th&t foreign trcmelcUions are not to be conforvned to ike 
common English version.*^ See also the '^ Besignation," page 
57 of the said Beport, beginning with, ^ He is bound to 
express;" the letter of Mr. Hinton to Lord Bezley, page 
66^ beginning with ''In the name of all that is honest;" and 
the 5th reason of the " Protest," page 31 of the Oonstitation 
of the American and Foreign Bible Society. In May of the 
same year, Mr. Judson expressed himself as follows, in ft 
letter to the Bev. Dr. Cone : — * 



(t 



Maulmain, May 17, 1839. 

'* Very dear Brother, — Many thanks for your kind letter of list 
September. The intelligence contained therein, and in the amnul 
report, is of a most animating nature. It cannot be doubted tint 
the Divine blessing rests on the * distinct organization' of efforts lif 
the wider circulation of the Holy Scriptures in aU lands, .... 

"In your annual report, I see, that *in the distribution of tie 
Scriptures in the English language, you are to use the commonly 
received version, untU otherwise directed by the Society,^ I do noi 
know that I understand the drift of the resolution ; but it lodes as if 
a new English version was contemplated. I perceive also, that the 
bare suggestion of such a project is sufficient to fill some good moA 



* For the original of this letter, which is given in no previouB aooooB^ 
of Mr. Judson (having been mislaid for some years, and but leoratl^ 
found), I am indebted to the kindness of my venerable friend, to yrhfiB 
it was written. • 



LABOUBS OF THE STUDY. 285 

with horror. But I must say that I cannot sympathize with them. X 
believe that the commonly received version is one of the very best 
that was ever made. But it is not inspired ; and to pay imdue rever- 
ence to any human production, whether it be mother church, or 
mother translation, partakes of the nature of idolatry. I am probably 
less averse to the proposal of a new translation, because the idea of 
correcting the old one has been a favourite with me for many years. I 
commenced the work even so long ago as when I was at Andover, and 
on my passage out to this coimtry ; and it was in studying the Greek, 
and correcting the common version, that I first began to be favour- 
able to the Baptist sentiments. If the work should be attempted, the 
rush of prejudice would, doubtless, for a time, be terrific; but the 
truth is mighty and wiU prevail* 

Of Mr. Judson's qualifications as a translator of the 
Scriptures, it is necessary to add but little here. His 
natural gifts, his thorough linguistic training, both classical 
and sacred, and his wonderful mastery of the Burman 
tongue, have been already noticed in pre4ns chapters. His 
conscientious fidelity in this most sacred of all trusts, is most 
worthy the study of all who are engaged in this work. To 
the end of life he was a close philological student ; availing 
himself of all the aids of modem scholarship within his 
reach, yet never allowing his translation to be, in great or 
in small points, a mere reflection of the ideas of other men. 
Every suggestion was carefully weighed and tested, and its 
claims fully established to his own mind, before it was per- 
mitted to become his guide. He was never weary of revising 
and re-revising his labour, either to conform it more perfectly 
to the sense of the original, or to give to the sense a more 
idiomatic and felicitous expression in Burman. 

The. pains he took, in furtherance of this great object of 
his life, to forget his mother-tongue, and to transfer his 
entire intellectual life into the forms of a foreign language^ 
is a remarkable instance of resolute singleness of purpose. 
iSe preached, it is supposed, but one English sermon during 
bis whole residence in India; and when Dr. Malcom visited 
him in 1847, he had not then heard one for fourteen years. 
He denied Imoself all English reading, except a single news- 



286 THE EARNEST MAN. 

l^aper and a few books of devotion ; relinquished, so £u* as 
possible, English society and correspondence; and songht, 
by exclusive intercourse with the natives, and with the 
literature of the country, the i)ower not merely of using 
the words of the language with facility, but of thinking and 
feeling, of living wholly in it. His mind was steeped in 
Burman literature ; while his constant familiarity with all 
classes of society gave him command of the widest variety 
in the forms of living speech. The result was, a style of 
composition in which his own strong mental characteristics 
spontaneously expressed themselves, with all the freshness 
and force, all the idiomatic accuracy and elegance^ of one 
''to the manner bom.^' His Burman Bible has been pro- 
nounced, by high authority,* ^^ perfect as a litercury toork;^ 
" an imperishable monument of his genius." But its highest 
praise is in the fact, as stated by a brother missionary, that 
" it is free from all obscurity to the Burmese mind. It is 
read and understood peifectly. Its diction is as choice and 
elegant as the language itself, peculiarly honorific, would 
afford, and conveys, doubtless, the mind of the Spirit as 
perfectly as can be." 

Yet, even now, he had not fully reached his own standard. 
He admits, indeed, that in regard to the New Testament, 
and the historical books of the Old, he was better satisfied 
than he ever expected to be. " The language," he says, "ia^ 
I believe, simple, plain, intelligible ; and I have endeavoured, 
I hope successfully, to make every sentence a faithful repre- 
sentation of the original." "But," he writes in another 
letter, " tJie beau ideal of translation, so far as concerns the 
poetical and prophetical books of the Old Testament, I pro- 
fess not to have attained. If I live many years, of whidb I 
have no expectation, I shall have to bestow much mote 
labour on those books." " They are doubtless susceptible d 
much improvement, not merely in point of style, but in the 



* Dr. Wayland's Memoir, voL ii p. 167. 



LABOURS OP THE STUDY. 287 

rendering of difficult passages, about which the most eminent 
scholars are not yet agreed." 

This labour he did not live to perform, but bequeathed it, 
in the noble spirit of a true Christian scholar, to his suc- 
cessors. "I commend the work, such as it is," thus he 
writes to the corresponding secretary, **to God, to the 
church in Burmah, and to my successors in this department 
of labour; begging them not to spare my errors, and yet not 
prematurely to correct a supposed error without consulting 
the various authors whom I have consulted, and ascertaining 
the reasons of my position; and especially not to adopt 
a plausible correction in one instance without inquiring 
whether it is admissible and advisable in all parallel and 
similar passages." Mr. Judson was too great a man to regard 
the application of progressive scholarship to his work as an. 
indignity to his memory; and he was too intelligent a 
Christian, too true a Protestant, to be willing that his 
translation, or any other, should receive the honour due 
alone to the sacred originals. At the same time, his very 
reverence for the originals made him anxious that no inex- 
perienced or rash hand should be laid to the revision of a 
work, on which he had spent the best labours of his life. 

Judging from similar cases in the past, one thing we may 
regard as certain, that, however future revisors may improve 
his work, Judson*s translation must for ever remain, sub- 
stantially, the Bible of Burmah. The first version in the 
language, of such general accuracy, in style and manner so 
felicitous a reflection of the original, and so purely vernacu- 
lar, it must ever be, like Wickliffe's in the English, the basis 
and model of all others for the use of the peopla 

A brief notice of Mr. Judson's purely literary labours will 
close this chapter. 

The Burman Grammar, the Pali Dictionary, and the 
Burman and English Dictionary, which were all prepared 
within the first five years of the mission, have been already 
noticed in Chapter XII. 



( 



288 THE EARNEST MAV. 

When he had finished the final revisioii of his Bible in 
1840, he hoped to be allowed to return to the field of per- 
sonal missionary efibrt, from which he had been so long 
withdrawn bj his duties as a translator. Bat the wish was 
not realized. Nearly two years previous he had been com- 
pelled, by an affection of the throat and lungs, threatening 
to end in pulmonary consumption, to refrain, for many 
months in succession, from his usual Sabbath ministzatiaDS 
to the native church in Maulmain, of which he was pastor. 
Subsequently, he was able at intervals to resume "tiie 
delightful work of preaching;" but he never folly sur^ 
mounted the difficulty, which returned upon him with 
every exposure or unusual fatigue. In June, 1841, he 
writes : ** My own health is poor. I am ever and anon 
subject to some ailment; and every cold I take touches 
the sore place, and breaks down my voice." The state of 
his health at length induced him to yield a reluctant assent 
to the pressing solicitations of the Board and of his mission- 
ary brethren, and turn his attention to the preparaticm of a 
complete Burman and English dictionary. 

While he acknowledged the great importance of the work, 
and could not deny that he had enjoyed better opportunities 
than any other man for becoming qualified for it, he yet 
turned with strong aversion from this dry, and, as he called 
it, '< unmissionary" drudgery. But no sooner was he con- 
vinced that this also was '' a work given him to do," then he 
devoted himself to it with all the diligence and patient pe^ 
severance of a predestined lexicographer. Nay, more; he 
reaped the earnest man's invariable reward, that of becoming 
deeply interested, and almost enthusiastic, in his labours. 

'* We are apt to magnify the importance of any undertaking in 
which we are warmly engaged. Perhaps it is from the influence d 
this principle, that, notwithstanding my long-cherished aversion to 
the work, I have come to think it very important; and that, having 
seen the accomplishment of two objects on which I set my heart whiai. 
I first came out to ithe East, the establishment of a church of con- 






MISSIONABT POUCT. 289 

verted natives, and the translation of the Bible into their language, I 
now beguile my daily toil with the prospect of compassing a third, 
which may be compared to a causeway, designed to facilitate the 
transmission of all knowledge, religious and scientific, from one 
people to the other." 

It was his first intention to make a single work, Burmese 
and English ; but as he proceeded his plan enlarged, and he 
concluded to make it a double work, in two parts, the first 
English and Burmese, the second Burmese and English. 
When he commenced this laborious undertaking, he hoped 
to complete it by the end of 1845. But it grew under his 
hands; and sickness and affliction brought frequent and long 
interruptions to his studies. In 1849, he had finished the 
first part; and had proceeded so far in the second as to 
anticipate its completion in the course of another year. He 
then supposed that it would make two quarto volumes of a 
thousand or twelve hundred pages. But before that time 
came, he had obtained his discharge from all earthly toil, 
" bequeathing," in his own words, " both the plodding and 
the profit, to any brother who shall be willing to carry on 
and complete the work." 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

MISSIONABT POUCT. 

Mb. Judson took with him to India no specific plan of 
missionary operations. A few general ideas were firmly 
fixed in his mind; but the details gradually developed them- 
selves, as the result of long-continued observation of the 
working of various methods. His views never attained, 
indeed, to that iron rigidity of outline which excludes all 
modification, nor was he the man to wish that his particular 

u 



290 THE EARNEST MAK. 

notions should be enforced as laws on others. But the 
mat a re conclusions of so comprehensive and discriminating 
a mind must be of great weight with reflecting men ; for, 
unlike tlie hobbies of narrow minds, adopted by accident or 
caprice, they will always be found to embody some important 
principle. To present briefly the leading features of his 
views on the conduct of missions, is the object of this 
chapter. 

1. The preaching of Christy — in other words, the direct 

communication of gospel ti*uth to individual minds, as the 

grand agency for Christianizing a heathen people. A pre- 
liminary course of training in human knowledge, by which 
they should be gradually prepared to receive Christian ideas, 
was entirely foreign to his theory, which rested on a firm 
belief in the adaptation of the gospel to the niecessities of 
man's inward nature. Why should time be spent in be- 
guiling him along through the flowery paths of science, when 
there is in every human breast a sense of guilt, a demand ^for 
expiation, a foreboding of futui-e retribution, through which 
the gospel can at once reach to the springs of moral life? 
His idea of " preaching," however, embraced more than the 
mere oral communication of truth. In whatever form it was 
brought into direct contact with the mind, whether through 
the spoken or the written word, the Saviour's command, 
"Preach the gospel," was strictly fulfilled. Thus in lus 
address, when in the States in 1846, before, the American 
and Foreign Bible Society, he says : — 

*' The word precuih has in modem usage acquired a meaning rather 
too specific for the originaL Oral communication may be the fint 
and most obvious, but is certainly not the exclusive meaning of the 
original word. It is more faithfully represented in fingliah by ti» 
word proclaim. If a messenger from a king or superior government 
should be sent to a rebellious province to proclaim pardon to the 
inhabitants, he would evidently be fulfilling his commission, whether 
he communicated the intelligence by addressing the people in his own 
person, or by inserting notices in the public prints, or by circulation 
hand-bills, or by distributing authentic documents from the sovereisOf 



MISSIONARY POLICY. 291 

declaring the terms of pardon. The apostle Paul did as really and 
certainly, as effectually and extensively, proclaim the gospel, when he 
penned the Epistles to the Hebrews and the Romans, as when he 
addressed the Jews in their synagogues, or received comx)any in his 
own hired house at Home. The earlier communications of a mis- 
sionary, sent to impart the gosx)el to an imenlightened people, will 
probably be of an oral kind ; but he will have very imperfectly ful- 
filled his commission if he leave them without the written word. 
The mischievous consequences also of such neglect are abundantly 
manifest in the missions conducted by the Man of Sin. Protestant 
missions have patronized the translation and distribution of the Scrip- 
^ tures ; but of late years there has appeared, in one or two instances, a 
tendency to promote the oral communication of the gospel, not indeed 
tu an undue pre,-eminence, but in such a manner as to throw a shade 
over the written communication by means of tracts and Scriptures. 
In examining the annals of modem missions it is difficult to ascertain 
which mode of communicating the gospel among a reading nation has 
received the greatest share of divine blessing, and been instrumental 
in bringing most souls to the knowledge of the truth. And however 
the preaching of the gospel, in its common acceptation, and the dis- 
tri}>ution of tracts, may secure earlier effects, and be regarded as more 
popular, all missionary operations, to be permanently successful, must 
be based on the written word." 

To Mr. Judson's mind there was nothing antagonistic in 
these different methods : they were mutually supplementary. 
Neither of them could do without the other, and each grew 
by the increase of the other. He would have flooded Bur- 
mah, if he could, with Bibles and tracts ; but he would not 
have had, on this account, one missionary the less. As the 
permanent foundation of the Christian church in a heathea 
land, he gave the first place to the diffusion of the Holy 
Scriptures; but as an instrument for the actual ingathering 
of Houls, to the labour of the living preacher. His views on 
this point are very clearly expressed in the following letter 
to the corresponding secretary, written in 1838 : — 

'* Modem missions have been distinguished from the Boman 
Catholic, and indeed from all former missions, since apostolic times, 
by patronizing and honouring the word of God. And I do believe 
that those missions which give the highest place to the divine word 
will be most owned of God, and blessed. There is only one book in 



292 



THE EARNEST MAK. 



the world which has descended from hearcn, or, as I tell the Bur- 
mans, there is only one golden lam)) which God has onapended from 
heaven to guide us thither. Shall we missionaries throw a shade 
aroimd it, or do aught to prevent tlie universal difiiision of its life- 
giving rays? O that one complete volume of the Bible, and nofc 
merely the New Testament, — for the word of God, though not sadi 
a book as human philosophy and logic would have deviaed, ia doubt- 
less, iu the eye of infinite Wisdom, a ])er/ect work, and just fitted to 
answer the great end which Go<l has in view, — O that one copy of the 
Burman Bible were safely dei)osited in every village -wheie the 
language is understood ! Burmah is now shut against us, but it will 
not be so always ; and where there is a will there is a way. Ami 
Arracan, with her two thousand villages or more, is open for the 
rece^ytion and deposit of two or three thousand Bible§. 

**I would not be understood to depreciate the preaching of the 
gospel, the grand means instituted by Christ for the conversion of the 
world. But all our preaching must be based on the written woid; 
and when the voice of the living preacher is passed away from the 
village, the inspired volume may still remain to convict and to edify. 
I would say, therefore, that the preached gospel and the written woid 
are the two arms which are to pull down the kingdom of flurlrwPM, 
and build up the Bedeemer's. Let us not cut off one of these arms; 
for the other will, by itself, be comparatively jiowerless, as the history 
of the church in every age will testify." 

2. Multiplication of centres of infltience, as opposed to t 
system of centralization in a few large stations. The opent- 
tion of the latter method, — ^tbe gradual raying out of light 
from a single point, or a few points, through the bonndles 
regions of heathen darkness, — was altogether too slow a 
process for Mr. Judson. Ere the saving beams could have 
crept to the utmost borders of death, generations, he saw, 
would have sunk unilluminated into the night that knows 
no hope of day. He would hasten towards the perishing 
millions with the light of life, would kindle a beacon simul- 
taneously on eveiy height, that all might see and rejoice 
together in the salvation of God. In that eloquent appeal, 
whose words burn with the fire of his own heart, addressed 
to the Board in 1832, he thus maps out the field which he 
proposed to them for immediate occupancy : — 



MISSIONARY POLICY. 293 

"Respbcted Fathers and Brethren, — At our montHy concert 
this morning it was unanimously agreed that a joint letter should be 
addressed to you, on the importance of sending out more missionaries 
to this part of the heathen world. Being every one of us exceedingly 
pressed for want of time, we cannot stop to prepare an elaborate 
statement, but must come at once to the point in hand. 

" We are in distress. We see thousands perishing around us. We 
see mission stations opening on every side, the fields growing whiter 
every day, and no labourers to reap the harvest. If each one of us 
could divide himself into three parts, happy would he be, not only to 
take leave of his native land and beloved connections at home, but of 
still nearer and more intimate connections. We want instantly to 
send aid to the Tavoy station, where brother Mason is labouring 
almost alona We want instantly to send a missionary to Mergui, ft 
pleasant, healthful town, south of Tavoy, where a small church has 
been raised up, and left in charge of a native pastor. Our hearts 
bleed when we think of poor Mergui and the Karens in that vicinity, 
many of whom are ready to embrace the gospel and be saved. But 
how can we allow ourselves to think of that small place when the 
whole kingdom of Siam lies in our rear, and the city of Bangkok, at 
once a port for ships and the seat of Imperial government? We want 
instantly to desx)atch one of our number to Bangkok. One? There 
ought, at this moment, to be three, at least, on their way to that 
important place. Another ought to be on his way to Yah-heing, a 
large town east of Maulmain, from which there is a fine river leading 
down to Bangkok; there are many Karens at Yah-heing. The 
Christian religion is creeping that way, by means of our Karen dis- 
ciples. North of Yah-heing and the Thoimg-yen river, the boundary 
of the British territory on that side, lies the kingdom or principality 
of Zen-maL There have been several communications between the 
government of Maulmain and Lah-bong, the present capital of that 
country. Moimg Shway-bwen, one of our disciples, formerly with 
brother Boardman at Tavoy, is a nephew of the prince, or deputy 
prince, of that country, and is anxious to return thither. But how 
can we send him, a very young man, without a missionary? If we 
had a spare missionary, what a fine opportunity for introducing the 
gospel into that central nation! It would open the way to other 
neighbouring nations, not even mentioned in foreign geographies, and 
even to the borders of China and Tartary. Between Maulmain and 
Zeu-mai are various tribes of Karens, Toimg-thooe, Lah-wahs, ftc 
The former are literally crying aloud for a written language, that 
they may read in their own tongue the wonderful works of Ood. 
From the banks of the Yoon-za-len, on the north-west, the celebrated 



t 



294 THE EARNEST MAK. 

prophet of the Karens has repeatedly sent down messages and pre- 
sents to us, begging that we would come and instruct his people in the 
Christian religion, fiut how can we think of supplying that quarter, 
when the old kingdom of Arracan, now under British role, and 
speaking the same language with the Burmese, is crying, in the whole 
length and breadth of her coast, for some one to come to her rescue ? 
In that country are one or two hundred converts, and one countiy- 
bom missionary, from the 8erami)ore connection, who is labouring 
without any prus^iect of reinforcement from Bengal, and desirous that 
one of us should join him. Kyouk Phyoo, lately established by the 
English, is esteemed a healthy place. The commandant is disposed 
to welcome a missionary, and afford him every facility. Our hearts 
bleed when we think of Kyouk Phyoo, and the poor inquirers that 
one of our number lately left there, ready to embrace the Christian 
religion, if he would only promise to remain or send a successor. From 
Kyouk Phyoo, the way is open into the four provinces of Arracan, 
namely, ReK-keing, Chedubah, Ramree, and Sandoway ; and what a 
grand field for our tracts, and the New Testament no"w in press ! Of 
all the places that now cry around us, we think that Kyouk Phyoo 
cries the loudest. No ; we listen again, and the shrill cry of golden 
Ava rises above them all. O Ava ! Ava ! with thy metropolitan walk 
and gilded turrets, thou sittest a lady among these eastern nations^ 
but our hearts bleed for thee ! In thee is no Christian church, no- 
missionary of the Cross. 

** Grod of mercy, have mercy on Ava, and Chageing, and Ajnara- 
poora ! Have mercy on Pugan and Prome (poor Prome !), on Toung-oo, 
on the port of Bassein, and on all the towns between Ava and Ban- 
goon. Have mercy on Old Pegu and the siuTounding district. Havo 
mercy on the four provinces of Arracan. Have mercy on the inhab* 
itants of the banks of the Yoon-za-len, the Sal wen, the Thoung-yen, 
and the Gyne. Have mercy on all the Karens, the Toung-thoos, the 
Lah-wahs, and other tribes whose names, though unknown in Chris- 
tian lands, are known to thee. Have mercy on Zen-mai, on Lah-bong, 
Myeing-yoon-gyee, and Yay-heing. Have mercy on Bangkok and 
the kingdom of Siam, and all the other principalities that lie on the 
north and east. Have mercy on poor little Mergui, and Pah-Ian, and 
Yay, and Lah-meing, and Nah-zaroo, and Amherst, and the Island of 
Baloo, with its villages of Talings and Karens. — Have mercy on the 
churches in the United States ; hold back the curse of Meroz * con- 
tinue and perpetuate the heavenly revivals of religion which they have 
begun to enjoy; and may the time soon come when no church «!>»all 
dare to sit under Sabbath and sanctuary privileges without having 
one of their number to represent them on heathen ground. Have 



MISSIONABT POLICY. 295 

mercy on the theological seminaries, and hasten the time when one 
half of all who yearly enter the ministry shall be taken by thine 
Holy Spirit, and driven into the wilderness, feeling a sweet necessity 
laid on them, and the precious love of Christ and of souls constraining 
them. Hear, Lord, all the prayers which are this day presented in 
all the monthly concerts throughout the habitable globe, and hasten 
the millennial glory for which we are all longing, and praying, and 
labouring. Adorn thy beloved one in her bridal vestments, that 
she may shine forth in immaculate beauty and celestial splendour! 
Come, our Bridegroom; come. Lord Jesus, come quickly! Amen." 

For the fartherance of this object, Mr. Judson urged the 
division of forces to the utmost possible extent. He would 
have no two men together at a post where one, by putting 
forth all his energies, could do the essential work. He even 
discouraged youDg missionaries from lingering at stations 
already occupied, under the plea of learning the language, 
and becoming familiar with the routine of missionary ser- 
vice. He would have them go immediately into the field, 
and learn to work by working. ** Look at dear Boardman,** 
he says; '^ eleven months after landing at Amherst, he was 
in Tavoy ! A nd what a light he kindled up in his short life !" 
** With the New Testament in hand, and tracts and prayers 
prepared, a young missionary can begin to preach and 
exhort very soon. How much better for him to dash into 
Toung-oo, or some other place, get the language from the 
living sounds, kindle up a bright light that will never go 
out ! How much better than to be rusting here in Maul- 
main ! " Increasing by scattering, strengtiyening by dividing, 
was, in his view, the great law of missionary warfare. 

But, it might be asked, would not the seeming advantages 
of so great a division of forces be at the expense of their real 
effectiveness 1 Must not this extension of the line of attack 
occasion the weakening of each separate part, and so of the 
whole aggregate 1 Would not a few stations, fully manned, 
with the advantages of combined and systematic effort thus 
secured, accomplish more than ten times the number, with 
only one or two labourers at each? Mr. Judson held the 



296 THE EABKEST MAIT. 

reverse of this to be the fact; and the longer he observed 
the working of the two methods, the deeper grew his convic- 
tion that he was in the right " Formerlj,** thus he writes 
to the Board in 1835, '^ having spent many years alone, I 
felt desirous of missionary society, and was disposed to 
encourage a few to stay together, not doubting that WB 
shovdd all find enough to do. But I have now learned tluit 
one missionary, standing by himself, feeling his individual 
responsibility, and forced to put forth all his effbrtSy is worth 
half a dozen cooped up in one place, while there are unoc- 
cupied stations in all directions, and whole districts, of 
thousands and hundreds of thousands, perishing in the 
darkness of heathenism/' ''This is the way in which I 
think missions ought to be conducted : — One missionary, or 
two at most, ought to be stationed in every impoi'tant cenkal 
place, to collect a chui'ch and an interest around him ; to set 
the native wheels at work, and keep them at work. Very 
few native assistants will hold out well unless w^ell instructed 
and kept under rigid si>perrision. An additional missionaij 
would doubtless do good ; but nearly all the good he would 
do would probably be done if he were away, labouring in 
some other place, which, but for him, would be unoccupied, 
and where, of course, all he should effect would be so mncb 
net gain to the cause." 

Though confined, for the most part, at Maulmain, by his 
duties as a translator, he was always ready to assume eztit 
duties there, in order that his brethren might be free to 
reinforce destitute stations, or to found new ones. Nor, M 
we have already seen, were his affections limited to the 
country of his adoption. He pleaded as earnestly for Assam, 
and Arracan, and Siam, as for Burmah, and was just as 
willing to spare from the missionary ranks for their benefit 
He thus expresses his exultation at the opening of the mis- 
sion in Assam, though it took from Burmah a beloved and 
efficient labourer : — 



MISSIONARY POLICY. 297 

" Maulmain, June 11, 1835. 

"The letters of Pearce, Trevelyan, and Jenkins, copies of whicli 
have been forwarded to you from Bengal, have opened to us a new 
missionary field, blessed with a very healthful climate, and the pro- 
tection of the English government. 

'* Brother Brown embraced the proposal with instant enthusiasm, 
not merely because of the above advantages, for Assam presents a 
splendid opening for missionary efforts, and brother Brown is excel- 
lently well qualified to take ike lead in that great and important 
mission. My heart leaps for joy, and sweUs with gratitude and praise 
to God, when I think of brother Jones at Bangkok, in the southern 
extremity of the continent, and brother Brown at Sadiya, in Assam, on 
the frontiers of China, inmiensely distant x)oints, and of all the inter- 
vening stations, — Ava, Kangoon, Kyouk, Pyoo, Maulmain, and Tavoy, 
and the churches and schools which are springing up in every station, 
and throughout the Karen wilderness. Happy lot to live in these 
days ! O happy lot to be allowed to bear a part in the glorious work 
of bringing an apostate world to the feet of Jesus ! Glory, glory be 
to God!" 

3. Miftsumaries for life, was an idea to which he attached 
much importance. This point is so fully brought out in the 
following letter as to make remarks unnecessary : — 

TO THE CORRESPONDING SECRETARY. 

" Maulmain, January 12, 1833. 

"Rev. and dear Sir, — It is with regret and consternation that 
we have just learned that a new missionary has come out for a limited 
term of years. I much fear that this will occasion a breach in our 
mission. How can we, who are devoted for life, cordially take to our 
hearts and councils one who is a mere hireling ? On this subject all 
my brethren and sisters are united in sentiment. We should perhaps 
address a joint letter to the Board ; but such a measure might not 
appear sufficiently respectfuL May I earnestly and humbly entreat 
the Board to reconsider this matter, and not follow implicitly in the 
wake of other societies (I beg pardon), whether right or wrong? 

"I have seen the beginning, middle, and end, of several * limited 
term ' missionaries. They are all good for nothing. Though brilliant in 
an English pulpit, they are incompetent to any real missionary work. 
They come out for a few years with the view of acquiring a stock of 
credit on which they may vegetate the rest of their days, in the con- 
genial climate of their native land. Do not a man and woman who 
cohabit for a time, quarrel and part the first opportunity ? And is it 
not one end of the marriage tie for life to promote harmony and love? 



398 THE EAllKEST MAX. 

Just 8(> iu the case In^forp lis. As to lessening the trials of the can- 
didate for missions, «ind making tlie way smooth I>cfore tiiwi ^ it is just 
what oudit not to 1>o done. AI'utMionarien neftl more trials on tfuir firtt 
wettiinj ouU inittmd of leM. 

**The motto of every mi.s.".ionary, whether preacher, printer, or 
schoolmaster, ought to 1k\ *^ DtnsttM for l\fe,* A few days ago^ 
brother Kincaid was asked by a Burmese oificer of government hov 
long he intended to stay. * Until all Burmah worships the eternal 
Ood, was the prom])t re])ly. If the limited term system, which 
begins to be fasliionable in some quarters, gain the ascendency, it will 
be the death blow of missions, and retard the conversion of the world 
a hundred years. 

'* Excuse my free<lom of s])ecch, and believe me to be, with aO 
faithfulness and resi)ect, your * devote<l for life,* 

•*A. JuDsoir.** 

4. The entire devotion of the missionary to his specific 
work, — the conversion of the heathen. He urged, in further- 
ance of this object, a mode of lining, tending to separate 
missionaries from European society. ** Be'ware," thus be 
writes to certain missionary candidates in America, "beware 
of genteel living ! Maintain as little intercourse as possible 
with European society. The mode of living adopted by 
many missionaries iu the East, is quite inconsistent with 
that &imiliar intercourse with the natives which is essential 
to a missionary." His own. dwelling was always fixed in th 
native quarter, at a distance from the English population 
He wished the natives to feel that he was their friend, their 
brother, who had given himself vhoUy to them ; and he 
knew that few of them would venture to seek him among 
the residences of their aristocratic foreign rulers. 

His intimate knowledge of Burmese character, by which 
he exercised so strong and beneficent an influence on the 
native mind, and bound the hearts of the converts to him as 
to their spiritual father, justified the wisdom of bis couise, 
and repaid, a thousand fold, any sacrifices of personal ease 
and comfort. 

5. The training of the native churches into the capacity of 
self-management; their growth into such a state of Christian 



MISSIONARY POLICY. 299 

maturity, that they could perform, unassisted, all the func- 
tions of the spiritual body. This result, so essential to the 
permanence of Christian institutions in this country, yet so 
slow and diflficult of attainment among a people just emerged 
from heathenism, and moulded from birth into habits of 
dependence, he sought with a fine tact, and a patient perse- 
verance, which show how much his heart was engaged in it. 
He watched every sign of progress in this respect with no 
less pleasure than the mother watches her child as it 
attempts to stand and walk, and ventures on little inde- 
pendent journeys of a yard or two, without her guiding and 
supporting hand. As soon as three or four disciples can be 
collected at one point, the cases of new candidates for bap- 
tism are always brought before them, by the relation of their 
Christian experience, and the decision is according to the 
judgment of the body. In his journals, while visiting the 
Karens, he more than once records, with the playful fond- 
ness and pride of a parent's heart, the rejection, by the little 
native chui'ch of ^ve or six members, of candidates with 
whom he was himself very well satisfied. In such cases he 
would endeavour by some means to bring the case before 
them for a second hearing, but never overruled their action 
by his authority. So far as possible, the democratic spirit, 
which has ever been one of the grand characteristics of the 
Baptist churches at home, was infused into these new 
churches, planted in the exhausted soil of slavery and des- 
potism, as the only means of gradually training them up 
into a realization of the noble ideal presented in the Kew 
Testament. 

The development of the various gifts in the native 
churches was an object of special solicitude with him. The 
productiveness of the little church in Rangoon, in this 
respect, has been already noticed. The same thing appears 
in those constituted in the second period of the mission, both 
among Burmans and Karens. Of course, all the gifts for 
the edifying of the body of Christ are to be ascribed to a 



300 THE EARNEST MAX. 

divino source ; nor, wanting thi^s higher influence, can anj 
amount of training and culture supply the charch with tnie 
labourers. But it is no less true that the gifts of the Spirit 
are germs to be nurtured ; and, as a general thing, only 
those which arc nurtured come to maturity. Had JudsoD 
and his early associates repressed, or even neglected, the 
native elements of usefulness, can it be supposed that the 
result would have been what we now find it 1 He wouM 
have felt, that to do this was to build the church in Surmali 
on the sand. Foreign hands must indeed do the preparatoij 
work, must start into motion the agencies necessary for tho 
regeneration of the country ; but, for the completion and 
perpetuity of the work, the reliance must be upon the nativB 
churches, and especially the native ministry. To call oat, 
and to cherish by instruction, by pious influence, and hj 
suitable exercises, every talent for Christian usefulness, wti, 
therefore, an object second to none in his esteem. Might not 
some of the methods by which this object was sought, « 
exhibited in the following extracts, if applied in our owb 
Christian land, do much to resolve the question so often and 
so anxiously asked : " How is the spirit of the ministry to be 
revived in our churches?" Writing from Rangoon in 1831, 
he says: ^'Moung En is settled with me; his department i> 
to receive company (Le, inquirei*s) at the house." "Moui^ 
San-lone is becoming a valuable assistant. It is his busines 
to go about the place, distribute tracts, and converse when- 
ever he can get an opportunity; and he sometimes matoi 
short excursions into the neighbouring villages." " I hxn 
sent Moung Shway-doke with 3,000 tracts up the Laiug 
river, which breaks off from the JRangoon outlet a little 
above Rangoon, and joins the great river Tingdau, belof 
Prome. It passes through a populous part of the countij 
where the word of life has never yet been published. MouBg 
San-lone has left me this morning with 2,500 tracts to visb 
the neighbourhood of Old Pegu, on the east; and Mono^ 
Shway-too will shoitly leave me with 3,000, for the hxp 



MISSIONARY POLICY. 301 

towns of Pan-ta-naia and Bassein, on the west." Alid what 
a picture is this, of his arrangements for a missionary tour 
into the jungle ! — 

**In view of my leaving Maulmain, on a second tour among the 
Karens, I have appointed the two deacons, Ko Dwah and Ko Shway- 
ba, to conduct the daily evening worship, and the public worship on 
Lord's day. The former acts also as teacher to Mrs. Bennett, and the 
latter is employed in copying translations. Ko Man-boke, the other 
deacon, and his wife, I send to the aid of brother and sister Wade at 
Mergui, where Pastor Ing also is stationed. Moung San-lone and 
Moung Shway-moung, I send to itinerate in the direction of Yay; 
and Moung Poo, from the head school, and Moung Zah, to itinerate 
between this and Amherst, chiefly in the vicinity of Pah-ouk. Ko 
Shan and family I send to reside at Tara-nah, a populous Tailing 
village, on the Gyne, a few miles above Maulmain, where he has a 
son settled. Moung En exjiects soon to revisit Rangoon. Moung 
Dway has gone to Bengal with brother Bennett. The three Karen 
families who have been in the adult school, and Moung Doot, who is 
now here on a visit from his station at Wadesville, I shall take with 
me, together with Ko Myat-kyau, who speaks the Karen well, Moung 
Zuthee, Moung Tau-ma-gnay, Moung Tsan-lone, the schoolmasteri 
and Moung Ouk-moo, just from school, * all good men and true.' " 

In 1835, he writes from Maulmain : — 

'*I have now five native assistants, who spend an hour with me 
every morning, in reporting the labours of the preceding day, in 
receiving instructions, and in praying together. These men penetrate 
every lane and corner of this place and the neighbouring villages ; and 
since I have adopted this plan, — about four months,— ithere are some 
very encouraging appearances. As soon as I get through with the 
Old Testament complete, I want to double their number, and devote 
part of my time to instructing them systematically. Now, ten such 
persons, half students, half assistants, cost no more than one mis- 
sionary family; and for actual service they are certainly worth a great 
deal more." 

To such training, under the blessing of God, is to be 
, ascribed the wonderful development of the missionary and 

ministerial spirit in the native churches; and to this, in 
i turn, the rapid spread of the gospel among the various races 

embraced in the operations of the mission. Of this, many 



( 



302 THE EARNEST MAK. 

interesting proofH might be given; but for want of spaoe^ 
a single example must suffice : — 

** In April, 1833, Ko Thah-hyoo, the missibnaiy pioneer among the 
Karens at Tavoy and this place, was sent to Maabee, a Karen dirtricfc 
north of Ranj;;oon, and in the course of the year reported about thirty 
hopeful inquirers, five of whom received baptism at the hands of £o 
Thah-a, pastor of the church in Rangoon. At the cloee of the yetr, 
we sent Taunah, Pan-lah, and two younger assistants to the aid of So 
Thah-hyoo. They returned after a stay of about thi^e months, and 
gave a still more encoiu^ging account of the state of religious inquiiy 
in that quarter. Soon afterwards, we despatched Pan-lah and three 
younger'assistants. Taunah was obliged to remain 'with Miss Com* 
mings, in charge of the Chummerah station. Pan-lah and his com- 
pany spread themselves over the district of Maubee, and each one 
acted as schoolmaster and preacher in his own circle, for the space of 
seven or eight months. On their return they reported several hun- 
dred hopeful inquirers, out of whom 210 had made the three sevenl 
applications for baptism, being examined and approved by Pan-lah and 
company, in council with the previously baptized ; but were obliged 
to wait for want of an administrator of the ordinance. " 

6. In regard to scJvoolsy as a branch of missionary agenCT, 
Mr. Judson*s mind seems to have been longer in reaching 
definite conclusions, than in respect to some other pointa 
It is clear, I think, that, from the beginning to tlie close of 
his missionary life, he highly approved of schools when they 
conld be made the medium of direct religious instraction, 
and were held in strict subserviency to the higher a^ncies 
of the missionaiy work. The care of schools he r^arded as 
a department of labour peculiarly appropriate to female mis- 
sionaries. But he did not believe that to educate a people 
in secular knowledge was to Christianize it, or that the pro- 
cess had any tendency, direct or indirect, to this result. To 
convert a mission among the heathen into an educational 
establishment, whose objects should take precedence of direct 
efforts for the conversion of souls, and the gathering rf 
churches, would have been, in his view, an utter subversioii 
6f its true ends. He was particularly opposed to the attempt 
to Anglicise the native mind, by schools in whi(^ the vernft* 



MISSIONARY POLICY. 303 

cular should be superseded by English, as not only a waste 
of time and money, but in every way injurious in its influv 
enca The education of the English country-bom population 
he regarded as not belonging to the sphere of missions to the 
heathen ; and that much expenditure of time and labour in 
this direction was, therefore, inconsistent with fidelity to the 
missionary's true calling. The following letter, written in 
1849, exhibits his maturest views on several of the above 
points, and the grounds of his aversion to making school- 
teaching the business of one who professed, or who could 
acquire, the ability to preach the gospel. There is no indi- 
cation that he did not continue to give his cordial approba- 
tion to missionary schools, which were truly such, and were 
conducted by those to whom the labour properly belonged. 

TO THE CORRESPONDING SECRETARY. 

"Maulmain, March 16, 1849. 

"Dear Brother, — ^When I spoke of brother *s school, in my 

letter to you of the 22iid of November, 1847, as one of our most 
effective engines for the renovation of these provinces, I had not 
become aware of the great change which the school had gradually 
nndergone. 

. . "The propriety of bestowing much missionary labour and 
expense upon country-bom children is very questionable ; that class 
of the population being found throughout India to have less influence 
on the })opulation at large than any other. Their influence, for obvi> 
ous reasons, is geoerally confined to themselves. The propriety of 
teaching English to the Datives, to the exclusion and depreciation of 
their own vernacular, is still more questionable. 

. . "I am more and more convinced of the truth of a remark 
which I made some years ago, that English preaching, English 
teaching, and English periodicals, are the bane of missions at the East. 
There are several missionaries — more, it is true, from Great Britain 
than from America — who never acquire the languages, except a mere 
smattering of them, of the countries to which they are sent, but 
beguile their time and expend their labours among their own coimtry- 
men and the country-bom population, under the fallacious idea that 
l^brough them the Christian religion will gradually reach the masses 
of the native population. There are, however, some symptomis of an 
Approaching change in public sentiment throughout the East, in. 



i 



304 THE EABXEST MAV. 

regard to the mode of cfmducting missionaiy operations. It begint 
to be found that {lopular EuglUh schools, contaiiiing hundreds ol 
pupils, and instructed >>y great and powerful men, — but men ignorant 
of all native languages, —- will never convert the millions of the 
heathen. * Such schools,* as the senior missionary of the Kishnagnr 
mission lately observed to me, on visiting this place, * are very prettf 
things to amuse £nglish visitors with, and make interesting reporti 
for i)eoplti at a distance, who cannot enter into the merits of tiie 
case' 

"Still some good results from every good effort, though not tiw 
most judiciously directed ; and I have always endeavoured to keep 
myself free from strong {tarty feelings. Live and let live, is not a 
bad motto, nor should I have written a word of the above, huA I not 
felt for some time i>ast that I had committed myself too iar in what 
I had said about one of the mission schools, and made myself some- 
what responsible for what I cannot regard as the most judidoos 
expenditure of labour and funds. — Yours faithfully, 

*'A. JUDSON.'* . 

Schools for the instruction of the native ministry he con- 
sidered an indispensable branch of the missionary syst^n. 
But he had no thought of modelling these institutions for 
young men wanting the first rudiments of knowledge, after 
those demanded by the necessities of European or American 
civilization. Their aim should simply be, to fit these native 
youths for the work they were called to do. The admirable 
good sense and right feeling of the following letter will 
commend themselves to every intelligent reader : 

TO THE CORRESPONDING SECRETABT. 

" Manlmain, January 3, 1835^ 
. . . " My ideas of a seminary are very different from those^ 
many persons. I am really unwilling to place young men, that h»f« 
just begun to love the Saviour, under teachers who will striTe to 
carry them through a long course of study until they are able to im- 
ravel metaphysics and calculate eclipses, and their souls become as diy 
as the one and as dark as the other. I have known several promisiii^ 
young men completely ruined by this process. Nor is it called for in 
the present state of the church in Bnrmah. I want to see our yooog 
disciples thoroughly acquainted with the Bible, from, beginning t^ 
end, and with geography and history, so far as necessary to unde^ 
stand the Scriptures, and to furnish them with enlarged, ^^ligh t**"*^ 



laSSIONART POUCT. ZOS^ 

kninds. I would also have them carried through a course of syste- 
matic theology, on the plan, perhaps, of Dwight's. And I would 
have them well instructed in the art of communicating their ideas 
intelligibly and acceptably by toord and by writing. So great is my 
desire to see such a system in operation, that I am strongly tempted, 
as nobody else is able to do anything just now, to make a beginning; 
and perhaps after brother Wade, who is excellently well capacitated 
for this department, has settled the Karen language with brother 
Mason, he will carry on what I shall begin, having both Karen and 
Burmese students imder his care. . . . Yours faithfully, 

**A. JUDSON." 

One characteristic trait of Mr. Judson should not be 
omitted in this statement of his views. He held his opinions 
strongly, and on all proper occasions pressed them earnestly 
on the attention of the Board. But this being done, he sub- 
mitted the result implicitly to their decision. As a veteran 
in the field, practically familiar with the whole routine of 
service, he, if any one, might have claimed exemption from 
control by a body of men located on the other side of the 
world. But so far from betraying any restiveness under the 
restraint, he uniformly sustained the authority of the Board 
by the respectful deference of his suggestions, and by his 
cheerful compliance with their instructions. These some- 
times clashed very much with his own wishes, as when he 
was required to yield his desire of giving himself to preach- 
ing, to their conviction that he ought to prepare a dictionary. 
He remonstrated, indeed, most earnestly; but their deli- 
berate decision is to be his law. ''I must not do it," he 
writes to the corresponding secretary; " I cannot do it, 
' unless the Board expressly order it; and then I will obey, 
I believing that vox aeviaMa vox DeU^ On another occasion he 
I thus expresses himself : '^ But whatever disposition of men 
I the Board be pleased to make, or whatever other orders to 
> issue, I beg that nothing discretionary be lefb with us, at 
' least so far as I am concerned. We shall all obey orders 
from home; but if lefb to ourselves, I fear, from past 
I experience, that we shall sometimes manage to help each 
^ X 



I 



306 THB EARHS8T MAH. 

other to do that which is most pleasing in our own eyes." 
As there must be a directing power somewhere, he thoagbi 
it most safely lodged in the hands of those whom the 
churches had chosen for this trust, and who were directly 
accountable to them. During his long missionary life, ke 
never, in any instance, disobeyed the instructions of the 
Board, nor even sought to control their action, or lessen 
their influence by ap^^eals from their decisions to the publia 



CHAPTER XXV. 

VISIT TO AMERICA. — LABOURS ON HIB BSTUIOr. 

From the year 1832, when Mr. Jndson fixed his residenoe 
permanently in Maulmain, for the purpose of oompleting i^ 
Burman Bible, no marked event occurred in his pnblic lift 
for many years. Even during this period, however, he irtf 
not a mere student. Most of the time he was the pastor of 
the native church in Maulmain, which increased, under his 
care, to 160 members. Mrs. Judson writes, in 1835 : "Mr. 
Judson preaches every Lord's day to a crow^ded BsaanlAj, 
and evert/ evening to a congregation averaging thirty. . . • 
The native assistants go about the town every day, preachiii^ 
the gospel; and Mr. Judson holds a meeting with then 
every morning before breakfast, when he prays with theDi 
listens to their reports, gives them instruction," &c. h 
1837, he gives the following account of his daily round c/ I 
occupation: — " My days are commonly spent in the foUowii^ 
manner : the morning in reading Burman ; the forenoon in 
a public zayat, with some assistant, preaching to those vbo 
call ; the afternoon in preparing or revising something fof 
the press, correcting proof-sheets, &c, ; the evening in cod- 
ductiiig worship in the native chapel, and oonveismg wiA 



VISIT TO AMERICA. 307 

the assistants and other native Christians or inquirers." 
But^ not long after this date, the affection of the throat and 
lungs mentioned in a previous chapter, deprived him of the 
use of his voice; and from that time he was only able to 
preach at intervals. 

In 1845, Mrs. Judson's health, already enfeebled by 
repeated attacks of the diseases incident to the climate, 
failed altogether. After trying, in vain, short excursions at 
sea, and exhausting all ihe rAjources of medical skill, Mr. 
Judson was forced to the conclusion that a long voyage, and 
a residence for a year or two in a colder climate, could alone 
save her life. Her debility rendering it necessary for him to 
accompany her, they took passage with three of their six 
surviving children, in a ship bound for England, intending 
to proceed thence without delay to the United States. As 
he could not turn his visit to account for the mission by 
preaching, he took with him two Burman assistants, with a 
view to prosecuting his labours on the dictionary. On their 
arrival at Port Louis, in the Isle of France, Mrs. Judson's 
health was so greatly improved, that both she and her hus- 
band deemed it safe for her to proceed the rest of the way 
without him. Mr. Judson therefore sent back his assistants 
in a vessel which he found ready to sail for Maulmain, and 
partly engaged his own passage in another, which was to 
leave two weeks later. They were encouraged in this plan, 
by the offer of accommodations for the family in a ship 
bound directly for the United States, — an arrangement 
which promised a speedier voyage and a great saving of 
trouble and anxiety to Mrs. Judson. But before the expir- 
ation of their stay at Port Louis, a relapse came on, which 
reduced her lower than ever before, and at once reversed 
their plans. Mr. Judson now felt that it was impossible to 
leave her ; and near the end of July they re-embarked for 
America. For awhile she seemed to rally again, and hk 
hopes revived. But the improvement was only temporary, 
and she graduaUy declined till they reached the port of St. 



i 



308 THE EARNEST MAX. 

Helena, where she expired on shipboard, a few days after 
their arrival The following touching account of the dosing 
scenes, and of the incidcntn of the funeral, is extracted from 
a short obituary sketch by Mr. Judson : — 

'* On our passage homeward, as the strength of Mrs. Judaon gndn- 
ally declined, I ex])ected to be under the painful necessity of buiying 
her in the sea. But it was so ordered by divine Providence, t M, 
when the indications of approaching death had become stronglf 
marked, the shij) came to anchor in the port of St. Helena. For 
three days she continued to sink rapidly, though her bodily sufferings 
were not very severe. Her mind became liable to inrander; but « 
single word was sufficient to recall and steady her recollection. On 
the evening of the 3l8t of August, she appeared to be drawing nev 
to the end of her pilgrimage. The children took leave of hi^ and 
retired to rest. I sat alone by the side of her bed daring the hoois 
of the night, endeavouring to administer relief to the distressed body, 
and consolation to the departing souL At two o'clock ia the morn- 
ing, wishing to obtain one more token of recognition, I ix>u8ed her 
attention, and said, * Do you still love the Saviour ?' < O yes,' abe 
replied, 'I ever love the Lord Jesus Christ.' I said again, 'Do yon 
still love me?' She replied in the affirmative, by a peculiar explo- 
sion of her own : * Then give me one more kiss ; ' and we exchanged 
that token of love for the last time. Another hour passed, life con- 
tinued to recede, and she ceased to breathe. For a moment I tnoed 
her upward flight, and thought of the wonders which were opening 
to her view. I then closed her sightless eyes ; dressed her for the li>t 
time in the drapery of death ; and being quite exhausted with many 
fdeepless nights, I threw myself down and slept On awaking in tiv 
morning, I saw the children standing and weeping around the body of 
their dead mother, then, for the first time, inattentive to their cries. 
In the course of the day a coffin was procured from the shore, in 
which I placed all that remained of her whom I had so much lo^ed; 
and after a prayer had been offered by a dear brother minister fitHO 
the town, the Kev. Mr. Bertram, we proceeded in boats to the shoie. 
There we were met by the colonial chaplain, and accompanied to tb« 
burial-ground by the adherents and friends of Mr. Bertram and » 
large concourse of the inhabitants. They had prepared the grave in 
a beautiful shady spot, contiguous to the grave of Mrs. Chater, ft 
missionary from Ceylon, who had died in similar circumstances onber 
passage home. There I saw her safely deposited ; and, in the lan- 
guage of prayer which we had often presented together at the throne 
of grace, I blessed God that her body had attained the repose of tbi 



VISIT TO AMERICA. 30& 

grave, and her spirit the repose of paradise. After the funeral, the 
dear friends of Mr. Bertram took me to their houses and their hearts ; 
and their conversation and prayers afforded me unexpected relief and 
•consolation. But I was obliged to hasten on board ship, and we 
immediately went to sea. On the following morning no vestige of 
the island was discernible in the distant horizon. For a few days, in 
the solitude of my cabin, with my poor children crying around me, I 
-could not help abandoning myself to heart-breaking sorrow. But 
the promises of the gospel came to my aid, and faith stretched her 
view to the bright world of eternal life, and anticipated a happy 
meeting with those beloved beings whose bodies are mouldering at 
Amherst and St. Helena. 

** I exceedingly regret that there is no portrait of the second, as of 
the first Mrs. Judson. Her soft blue eye, her mild aspect, her lovely 
face, and elegant form, have never been delineated on canvas. They 
must soon pass away from the memory even of her children, but they 
will remain for ever enshrined in her husband's heart. 

**To my friends at St. Helena I am under great obligation. I 
.desire to thank God for having raised up in that place a most precious 
religious interest. The friends of the Redeemer rallied around an 
evangelical minister, immediately on his arrival, and within a few 
months several souls were added to their number. Those dear, 
sympathizing. Christian friends, received the body of the deceased 
from my hands as a sacred deposit; united with our kind captain, 
John Oodman, Jun., of Dorchester, in defrajring all the expenses of the 
funeral; and promised to take care of the grave, and see to the 
erection of the gravestone which I am to forward, and on which I 
propose to place the following inscription : — 

** * Sacred to the memory of Sarah B. Judson, member of the 
American Baptist Mission to Burmah, formerly wife of the Kev. 
•George D. Boardman, of Tavoy, and lately wife of the Kev. Adoniram 
Judson, of Maulmain, who died in this port, September 1, 1845, on 
her passage to the United States, in the forty-second year of her age, 
.-and in the twenty-first of her missionary life. 

** *She sweetly sleeps here, on this rock of the ocean. 
Away from the home of her youth, 
And far from the land where, with heartfelt devotion, 
She scattered the bright beams of truth.' *' 

Mr. Judson, with his motherless children, arrived in Bos- 
ton about the middle of October, feeble in health and sick 
.at heart; anxious only to be allowed to return, if possible, 
•before the setting-in of winter, to the scene of his ]abour& 



510 THS SARNEST XAK. 

But he was not able to realize this desire; nor that of occa- 
pying, as he had previously requested, some retired comer 
where he could work at his dictionary, '' andisturbed and 
unknown.'* The disease of his throat, which precluded 
public s])eaking, and for several months scarcely allowed 
him to raise his voice above a whisper, increased his natnral 
shrinking from public display. Bat the tide of popular 
feeling was too strong to bo repressed. For more than 
thirty years liLs name had been a ** household word" among 
the friends of missions. A whole generation had grown up, 
familiar with the story of his labours and sufferings, not 
one of whom had ever seen his face. To them he was ft 
sort of Christian Paladin, who had experienced wonderful 
fortunes, and achieved wonderful exploits of philanthropj, 
in that far off, almost mythical land of heathenism. To the 
body of older and maturer Christians his presence spoke 
with a deeper, but not less exciting power. The feeling waft 
of course peculiarly strong in his own denomination. Hun- 
dreds among them yet lived, who remembered when word 
was first brought that God, without waiting for our slow 
movements, had himself planted an American Saptist Mis- 
sion in Asia ; and who recalled with a thiill of grateful joy 
those early efforts, the direct fruits of Judson's conscientious 
sacrifice to duty, in which they had thenLselves participated. 
They saw the entire missionary history of Baptists starting 
fi^m this one point, and growing into a mighty stream of 
blessing to our own churches, and its whole course marked by 
memorials of his influence and laboui's. To he within reach 
of this man, and not be eager to see him, to hear his voice, to 
grasp his hand, would have argued insensibility to the most 
sacred obligations, and indifference to the cause to which he 
was devoted. But the feeling was not confined to Baptists. 
Thousands, i-anged under a different standard in the kingdom 
of Christ, welcomed him with the catholic fellowship of 
Christian love, as one of the pioneers of American Christi- 
anity in heathendom, whose labours the God of missions had 



VISIT TO AMERICA. 311 

honoured with signal tokens of approbation. So general a 
feeling of enthusiasm towards an individual, simply on the 
ground that he was a good man, had never before been 
awakened in America ; and however annoying was the pub- 
licity, to a man of his retiring and almost morbid modesty, 
it cannot but be regarded with i^espect and pleasure, as a 
gratifying index of the moral feeling of the community. 

The public meetings called to welcome him in several of 
our cities, those connected with the benevolent societies, or 
in connection with the anniversaries, and with his visits to 
various seminaries of learning, often presented scenes of 
intense interest. One incident* of the first meeting in 
Boston, two days after his arrival, is too beautiful to be 
passed over : — 

** While Mr. Hague was speaking, a gentleman was making his 
way from the f urbher part of the house towards the pulpit. He was 
welcomed there with surprise and deUght, and was immediately 
introduced to the congregation by Dr. Sharp, as the Rev. Samuel 
Kott, the only survivor, excepting Mr. Judson, of the five mission- 
aries who first went out to India from America, and the very man, 
who, when Judson became a Baptist, stood up and shielded him 
with the mantle of *Chiistian love. *For this,* said Dr. Sharp, 'I 
have always respected him, and I am sure you will be glad to hear 
him.' 

'* It is hardly possible for us to describe the scene which followed. 
For thirty-three years, Nott and Judson had been separated. They 
met at this moment for the first time since that separation ; and as 
they now embraced each other with deep afiiection and grateful 
joy, tears started from many an eye. Mr. Nott proceeded to speak 
with much emotion. More than thirty years ago he gave his brother 
the right hand of fellowship ; and when he became a Baptist it was 
not withdrawn. One reflection most solemnly impressed him : of the 
five who went out to India, three were dead. * The grass withereth, 
the flower fadeth, but the word of our God shall stand for ever.' In a 
Uttle while they would aU be gone, and every agency now employed 
pass away ; but God's word would stand fast, and prevail all over the 
earth. Mr. Nott referred to the small beginning of the American 



* Related in the report of the meeting of the ** Christian Watchman 
and Heflector." 



i 



312 THE EABKBST MAN. 

Board, as weil as the Baptist; their trust in God, and the present 
great and glorious work which was exhibited to ua in contrast. The 
missionary movement in this coontry originated sinitdtaneoosly in 
different hearts; the Spirit of the Most High, and not human 
influence, gave it birth. He deemed it a veiy trifling question 
whether Adoniram Judson or Samuel J. Mills vraa the originato 
of foreign missions. Samuel Nott, Jun., certainly was not. Thqf 
were all mere boys, but with God's ble^ing on their puerile efforia^ 
they had begun an influence which is spreading over the world. 

** It was now discovered that Mr. Bingham, a pioneer missionary 
to the Sandwich Islands, was unexpectedly iiresent; and another 
thrill of pleasure went through the congregation as his name was alao 
pronounced by Dr. Sharp. He addressed the assembly, congratulatiDg 
his missionary brethren, referring to his own early toils and to the 
great success of the Sandwich Island mission, and exhorting the 
people generously to sustain the glorious cause of missions.*' 

On most of these occasions, Mr. Judson, being unable to 
use lus voice audibly, addressed his remarks in a whispered 
tone to some one who stood beside him in the pulpit, and who 
repeated them, sentence by sentence, to the assembly ; a &v 
times he wrote them out in full to be read by another ; and 
occasionally, at some more private meeting in a small roomy 
his audience had the pleasure of catching- the rich thoughtB 
and feelings which came gushing as from an overflo^wing souly 
through his own low but impressive tones. I>r. Wayland 
has preserved several of these addresses in his Memoir. The 
writer would be glad, did space allow, to add a few personal 
reminiscences of similar occasions ; but no description could 
convey the peculiar impression of his manner, — so quiet, sO 
simple and humble, yet breathing a hush, a thrill throngli 
the assembly, such as I have never witnessed elsewhem 
We felt that we were in the presence of one who had 
" entered within the vail ;" one conversant, beyond most of 
his fellow-men, with the mysteries of the invisible world, 
and whose life was " hid with Christ in God." Those whis- 
pered words stole on us like messages from the inner sanc- 
tuary, too sacred to be spoken in common tones to the 
outward ear, but uttered directly to the listening heart. 



VISIT TO AMERICA. 313 

Mr. JudsoQ was greatly interested in what he saw of the 
immense growth and improvement of his native land since 
he left it in his youth ; most of all^ in the progress of 
religous benevolence. He formed delightful friendships with 
many whose faces he had never seen before^ and enjoyed with 
the keenest zest those pleasures of refined social intercourse 
from which he had been so long debarred. No one who had 
the pleasure of his society, found in his simple, genial man- 
ners, and in his lively, though always instructive and eleva- 
ted conversation, any trace of the bigot or ascetic. 

But his heart yearned for '* his home on the banks of the 
Salwen;" and though a longer residence in America was 
urged on him for the sake of his health, he could not be 
persuaded to remain beyond the beginning of the summer of 
1846. On the 2nd of June he was married to Miss Emily 
Chubbuck, a lady widely known by her graceful literary 
productions, whose sprightly charms of mind and devoted 
afifection were the light and solace of his last years.'^ On 
the 11th of July, 1846, they embarked at Boston in the ship 
FaneuiZ Hall, bound for Maulmaiu, which place they reached, 
afber a pleasant voyage, on the 30th of November. 

On his arrival at Maulmain, finding every department of 
labour at that station fully manned, he could not satisfy 
himself with sitting down to the mere literary employment 
of making a dictionary. Previous to his return, he had 
formed the design of again fixing his residence at Ban* 
goon, should it be practicable ; with the further purpose 
of improving any opportunity which might offer for making 
another attempt at Ava, which had always been the central 



* She was the mother of the youngest of the six orphan children to 
whom this volume is inscribed. It should be added, as one of the most 
beautiful traits in her truly noble character, that she knew no difference 
among the six. All were equally the objects, not only of her faithful 
care, but of a deep maternal tenderness, of which there are but few 
examples, and which is sufficient alone to endear her memoiy to all who 
honoured Mr. Judson. 



t 



314 TUS EABNEST MA3L 

point of interest to his miucL He found the circumstances 
of the ein])ire not favourable to his wishes, the reigning 
king beiug no less liOHtile to Christianity than his pi^edeces- 
sor, and apparently disposed to adopt more and more the 
exchisive policy of the Chinese in regard to foreigners 
During a i)reliininary visit to Rangoon, Mr. — now Dr.*— 
Judson was convinced that even such freedom of ndssioDaiy 
effort as had been formerly allowed, would not now be per- 
mitted. In a letter to the cori'esiionding secrctaiyy he sajs: 
''Any known attempt at proselyting would be instantlj 
amenable at the criminal tribunal, and would probably be 
punished by the impiisonment or death of the proselyte, aiMl 
the banishment of the missionaiy." Still, as he rec^ved 
personally a very friendly i*eception from the governor of the 
city, with whom he had been acquainted twenty years before^ 
he resolved to remove thither, — making the dictionary, fiir 
the prosecution of which Bangoon furnished greater facihties 
than Maulmain, his avowed occupation, and doing what mis- 
sionary work he could in private. 

The following extracts from Mrs. Judson's interesting 
** Reminiscences," furnish a brief outline of the incid^ts 
of this visit : — 

'*The first business of my husband, on arriving in Rangoon, was 
to collect the Christians together ; but so scattered was the little flock, 
and so doubtful their state, that he was obliged to reorganize tbs 
church, commencing the new organization with about a dozen mem- 
bers. For a time everything went prosperously with us. Frequent 
meetings were held at our house, and regular worship on the Sabbath. 
Gradually, the congregation enlarged to twenty, to thirty, and stall 
upward, until it attracted the attention of government. It must not be 
supposed that these men were so imprudent as to come in of a morn- 
ing, or leave the house after worship, in a company. They came at 
all hours between daylight and ten o'clock, and dispersed as gradually* 
Some brought parcels, some dishes of fruit, some came with their lobtf 
tucked up like coolies, and some, scorning conceabnent, or believing 
it unavailing, appeared in their usual dress, as though on a matter-of- 



* Dr. Judson received the honour of a Doctorate in 1823, but did not 
know of it till 1828. It was some years after that before he would even 
tolercUe the use of it in connection with his name. 



LABOUBS OK HIS BETUBN. 315 

course visit to the foreigner. When they were assembled, the outer 
door was barred, and it was with great di£5culty that any one could 
gain admittance afterwards. Br. . Judson sometimes smiled at these 
precautions ; but he considered that this was the first time since the 
war that any missionary had been stationed in Burmah, without 
the protection of an English resident at Aya, and was assured that 
there never had been a time of such intolerance throughout the land 
as under the new king. Meantime the Karens had been apprised of 
our arrival, and they came down from the jungle in parties of three, 
four, or a half dozen, remaining at our house till one of the Burmese 
assistants could procure them passports thence to Maulmain. (Previ- 
ously they had escaped, overland.) All this coming and going 
attracted attention to our house, and would have done so much 
earlier, but that it chanced to be on a Mussulman street. 

** One Saturday morning we were startled by some private intima- 
tions that the bloody ray-woon, as one of the vice-governors was 
called, had his eye on us ; and, a little before evening, the hints were 
fully confirmed. "We learned from an undoubted source that a police 
gaaid had been stationed in the vicinity of our house, with orders to 
seize every native not known to be a servant of the house, seen coming 
out of it. We inferred that their policy was not to disturb us at 
present, but the blow was first to fall on the poor Christians, Several 
Karens were stopping with us, and, in addition to our usual company 
of worshippers, quite a number of invited friends and strangers had 
promised to be with us on the next day. The church had been 
making individual efforts to enlarge the congregation. I shall never 
forget the expression of my husband's face, as though really piercing 
to the invisible, when he exclaimed, * I tell you, if we had but the 
power to see them, the air above us is thick with contending spirits, 
— the good and the bad striving for the mastery. I know where final 
victory lies, but the struggle may be a long one.' There was not much 
time for talking, however. He communicated the state of things, as 
far as he thought expedient, to his two native assistants, and sent 
them out to warn the nearer worshippers. In this, great caution was 
necessary, in order to prevent a panic ; and I suppose that the Ran- 
goon Christians have never, to this day, known the extent of their 
danger. As the assistants, by an especial arrangement, did not 
return till after our landlord's hour for closing the gate. Dr. Judson, 
with some difficulty, got the key into his own possession ; and so, in 
the first gray of morning, the Karens were guided out of town, and 
advised to return to the jungle. The last place to which the assist- 
ants carried their warning, on Sunday morning, was a little village 
five miles from Eangoon, where they remained till towards evening. 



f 



316 THE EARNEST MAV. 

Dr. Judson was afraid of compromising the Chriatians by going to 
any of their houses that day ; but he had advised them, tbrou^ the 
assistants, how to hold worship, and we knew of several places where 
little knots of men and women were gathered for prayer. 

*' These demonstrations on the part of government were followed 
up by a series of petty annoyances and insults, which effectually pre- 
cluded the possibility of accomplishing much good. The governor 
was friendly, but weak and cowardly; and we soon found that his 
protection was really worthless, except as he could hold the petty 
officers in awe. The bloody ray-woon laughed at his authority, and 
once actiudly assembled the troops against him, 'vrhen the poor 
governor yielded. Both Christians and inquirers, however, still 
came to us in private; and many a man who refused to take even 
a book from the teacher's hands, would watch his opportunity, when 
going out, to snatch one from a box placed near the door for tliftt 
purpose, and hide it in his dress, congratulating himself, no doobi^ 
that he was imsuspected even by us." 

Dr. Judson was now convinced that to attempt anything 
further, without having first secured a &vourable reception 
in the capital, was a mere waste of time. " I am persuaded,** 
he writes, " as I have been for years past, that the only way 
to keep footing in Kangoon, is to obtain some countenance 
at Ava.'* It was now about ten years since this important 
post had been abandoned, and circumstances had in that 
time changed, in every respect, for the worse. He felt that 
the attempt involved great danger, — ^possibly the risk of 
life itself. But with his dictionary for an introduction to 
the intelligent members of the government and nobility, the 
prosecution of which, moreover, would bring him into close 
relations with the most learned men of the capital, he hoped 
prejudices might be conciliated, and the way gradually paved 
for the accomplishment of his chief object. 

He had become wholly absorbed in this plan ; all his 
arrangements were made for a speedy departure fix)m Ean- 
goon, and a permit obtained from the friendly governor to 
proceed to the " golden city ;" when — ^like a clap of thunder 
^-came the tidings from Maulmain, that the low state of 
the treasury at home had compelled the utmost possible 



LABOURS ON HIS BETUBN. 317 

retrenchment in every department at that station, and that 
nothing remained for carrying out his wishes. This unex- 
pected blow was the more disheartening, as an index of the 
declining state of missionary feeling in the churches at home ; 
and for a moment he was ready to despair of a work depen- 
dent for the means of its accomplishment on such feeble and 
fitful piety. He thus expresses the first bitterness of his 
disappointment, in a letter to the corresponding secretary ; 
which he cannot close, however, without a touch expressive 
of his characteristic hopefulness, and his unwavering adhe- 
rence to his fiivourite apothegm : " Truth is mighty and will 
prevail." 

'* It is my growing conviction that the Baptist churches in America 
are behind the age in missionary spirit. They now and then make a 
spasmodic effort to throw off a nightmare debt of some years' accumti- 
lation, and then sink back into unconscious repose. Then come para- 
lyzing orders to retrench ; new enterprises are checked in their very 
conception ; and applicants for missionary employ are advised to wait, 
and soon become merged in the ministry at home. Several cases of 
that sort I encountered during my late visit to the United States. 
This state of things cannot last always. The Baptist missions will 
probably pass into the hands of other denominations, or be tempora- 
rily suspended; and those who have occupied the van will fall back 
into the rear. Nebuchadnezzar will be driven out from men, to eat 
grass like an ox, until seven times pass over him. But he will, at 
length, recover his senses, and be restored to the throne of his 
kingdom, and reign over the whole earth.*' 

Nothing was now left but to return to Maulmain for the 
present. He never relinquished, however, his plan of 
attempting a mission at Ava; and in all his subsequent 
arrangements reserved the liberty of improving any favourable 
opportunity for it which might arise. He accordingly applied 
to the Board, soon after his return to Bangoon, for a stand- 
ing appropriation for this special service. This was cheer- 
fully granted; but before its arrival another somewhat 
encouraging indication had passed away, and no other 
occurred while he lived. He acquiesced in it as the will of 
Providence, and therefore^ on the whole^ for the best. But 



I 



318 THE EARNEST MAN. 

is it not a pity that, in so many instances, the "wiaest and 
most beneficent schemes for the advancement of trath and 
righteousness, should be frustrated for lack of a few hundreds 
or thousands of dollars, out of the abundance which God 
has lent for this very purpose to the church % No doubt 
all such disappointments will be found, m the end, to have 
been overruled for the best ; but who can tell how long they 
may postpone the incoming of the millennial day ! 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

CLOSING SCENBS OF HIS LIFE. 

After his return from Eangoon, Dr. Judson resided at 
Maulmain, devoting himself with great assiduity to the 
completion of his dictionary. In November, 1849, he todc 
a violent cold, which brought on a fever, similar to those 
from which he had suffered more or less through his whole 
missionary life, but of an aggravated type. He never sur- 
mounted the effects of this attack. Finding himself unable 
to rally as usual, he took a short coast voyage, but withoat 
much relief He then removed with his familj to Amherst, 
for the benefit of the sea air; but the change proved equallj 
unavailing. He at length yielded to the importunities of his 
missionary brethren, and embarked, in a state of excessive 
weakness, in a ship bound to the Isle of France, attended bj 
Mr. Thomas Kanney, a member of the mission, — Mrs. Jad- 
son's health not permitting her to accompany hiTw^ as she 
most earnestly desired. 

From the time of his sailing he sunk rapdly ; and, afters 
few days of intense suffering, "he /ell asleep'^ on the 12th of 
April, 1850, in the sixty-second year of his age. In the 
afternoon of the same day, ''in latitude thirteen degreeB 
north, and longitude ninety-three degrees east, and scarcely 



CLOSING SCENES OP HIS LIFE. 319 

three days out of sight of the mountains of Burmah/* the 
mortal remains of Adoniram Judson were committed to the 
deep. 

The Christian world is indebted to Mrs. Judson for a 
most interesting account of the last year of her husband's 
life, which is here given as the most appropriate close to this 
sketch of his character and labours : — 

CLOSINO SCENES IN DR. JUDSON's LIFE, COMMUNICATED TO 

HIS SISTER BY MRS. JUDSON. 

" Maulmain, September 20, 1850. 

** My dear Sister, — Last month I could do no more than announce 
to you our painful bereavement, which, though not altogether unex- 
pected, will, I very well know, fall upon your heart with overwhelm- 
ing weight. You will find the account of your brother's last days on 
board the Aristide Marie, in a letter written by Mr. Banney, from 
Mauritius, to the secretary of the Board ; and I can add nothing to 
it, with the exception of a few unimportant particulars gleaned in 
conversation with Mr. B-anney and the Ooringa servant. I grieve 
that it should be so — ^that I was not permitted to watch beside him 
during those days of terrible suffering ; but the pain which I at first 
felt is gradually yielding to gratitude for the inestimable privileges 
which had previously been granted me. 

*' There was something exceedingly beautiful in the decline of your 
Invther's life — more beautifid than I can describe, though the im- 
pression 'will remain with me as a sacred legacy until I go to meet 
him where suns shall never set, and life shall never end. He had 
been, from my first acquaintance with him, an uncommonly spiritual 
Christian, exhibiting his richest graces in the unguarded intercourse 
of private life ; and during his last year, it seemed as though the light 
of the world on which he was entering had been sent to brighten his 
upward pathway. Every subject on which we conversed, every book 
we read, every incident that occurred, whether trivial or important^ 
had a tendency to suggest some peculiarly spiritual train of thought, 
till it seemed to me that, more than ever before, * Christ was all his 
theme.' Something of the same nature was also noted in his. preach- 
ing, to which I then had not the privilege of listening. He was in. 
the habit, however, of studying his subject for the Sabbath, audibly, 
and in my presence, at which time he was frequently so much affected 
as to weep, and sometimes so overwhelmed with tiie vastness of his 
conceptions as to be obliged to abandon his theme and choose another. 



\ 



320 THE EABNSST MAH. 

My own illness at the commencement of the year had bron^t eternity 
very near to us, and rendered death, the grave, and the bright heaven 
beyond it, familiar subjects of conversation. Gladly would I give 
you, my dear sister, some idea of the share borne by him in those 
memorable conversations ; but it would be impossible to convey, even 
to those who knew him best, the most distant conception of them. I 
believe he has sometimes been thought eloquent, both in conversation 
and in the sacred desk ; but the fervid, burning eloquence, the deep 
pathos, the touching tenderness, the elevation of thought, and intense 
beauty of expression, which characterized those private teachings, 
were not only beyond what I had ever heard before, but such as I 
felt sure arrested his own attention, and surprised even himself. 
About this time he began to find unusual satisfaction and enjoyment 
in his private devotions, and seemed to have new objects of interest 
continually rising in his mind, each of which in turn became special 
subjects of prayer. Among these, one of the most prominent was 
the conversion of his posterity. He remarked, that he had always 
prayed for his children, but that of late he had felt impressed witii 
the duty of praying for their children and their children's childien, 
down to the latest generation. He also prayed most fervently that 
his impressions on this particular subject might be transferred to his 
sons and daughters, and thence to their offspring, so that he should 
ultimately meet a long unbroken line of descendants before the 
throne of Grod, where all might join together in ascribing everlasting 
praises to their Redeemer. 

** Another subject which occupied a large share of his attention, 
was that of brotherly love. You are, perhaps, aware that, like all 
persons of his ardent temperament, he was subject to strong attach- 
ments and aversions, which he sometimes had difficulty in bringing 
under the controlling influence of divine grace. He remarked that 
he had always felt more or less of an affectionate interest in his 
brethren, as brethren, and some of them he had loved very dearly for 
their personal qualities; but he was now aware that he had never 
placed his standard of love high enough. He spoke of them as 
children of God, redeemed by the Saviour's blood, watched over and 
guarded by his love, dear to his heart, honoured by him in the elec- 
tion, and to be honoured hereafter before the assembled universe ; and 
he said it was not sufficient to be kind and obliging to such, to abstain 
from evil speaking, and make a general mention of them in our 
prayers ; but our attachment to them shoidd be of the most ardent 
and exalted character ; it would be so in heaven, and we lost immea« 
Burably by not beginning now. * As I have loved you, so ought ye 
also to love one another,' was a precept continually in his mind; and 



CLOSING SCENES OF HIS LIFE. 321 

he would often murmur, as though unconsciously, 'As I have loved 
you,' — *as I have loved you,' — ^then burst out with the exclamation, 
* the love of Christ ! the love of Christ ! * 

"His prayers for the mission were marked by an earnest, grateful 
enthusiasm ; and in speaking of missionary operations in general, his 
tone was one of elevated triumph, almost of exultation ; for he not 
ooly felt an unshaken confidence in their final success, but would 
often exclaim, * What wonders ! — what wonders God has already 
wrought ! ' 

**I remarked that during this year his literary labour, which he 
had never liked, and upon which he had entered unwillingly and 
from a feeling of necessity, was growing daily more irksome to him; 
and he alwa3rs spoke of it as his * heavy work,' his 'tedious 
work,* *that wearisome dictionary,' &c., though this feeling led to no 
relaxation of effort. He longed, however, to find some more spiritual 
employment, to be engaged in what he considered more legitimate 
missionary labour, and drew delightful pictures of the future, when 
his whole business would be but to preach and to pray. 

** During all this time I had not observed any failure in his physi- 
cal strengtii; and though his mental exercises occupied a large share 
of my thoughts when alone, it never once occurred to me that thi? 
might be the brightening of the setting sun ; my only feeling was that 
of pleasure, that one so near to me was becoming so pure and eleva- 
ted in his sentiments, and so lovely and Christ-like in his character. 
In person he had grown somewhat stouter than when in America; his 
complexion had a healthful hue, compared with that of his associates 
generally ; and though by no means a person of uniformly firm health, 
he seemed to possess such vigour and streogth of constitution, that I 
thought his life as likely to be extended twenty years longer, as that 
of any member of the mission. He continued his system of morn- 
ing exercise, commenced when a student at Andover, and was not 
satisfied with a common walk on level ground, but always chose an 
up-hill path, and then frequently went bounding on his way with all 
the exuberant activity of boyhood. 

** He was of a singularly happy temperament, although not of that 
even cast which never rises above a certain level, and is never depres- 
sed. Possessing acute sensibilities, suffering with those who suffered^ 
and entering as readily into the joys of the prosperous and happy, 
he was variable in his moods ; but religion formed such an essential 
element in his character, and his trust in Providence was so implicit 
and habitual, that he was never gloomy, and seldom more than mo- 
mentarily disheartened. On the other hand, being accustomed to 
regard all the events of this life, however minute or painful, as 



h 



^22 THE EARNEST MAIT. 

x>nlere(l in wisdom, and tending to one great and glorious end, he 
livetl in almost constant ol)e<lience to the apostolic injunction, 
* Rejoice evermore ! * He often told me that although he had endured 
much personal suffering, and passe^l through many fearful trials in 
the course of his eventful life, a kind Providence had also hedged 
him around with precious, peculiar blessings, so that his joys had far 
outnumbered his sorrows. 

** Towards the close of September of last year, he said to me one 
evening, * What deep cause have we for gratitude to Grod ! Do you 
believe there are any other two persons in the Mride world so 
happy as we arc ?' eniunerating, in his own earnest manner, several 
sources of happiness, in which our work as missionaries, and our 
eternal pros|x?ets, occupied a prominent position. When he had 
finished his glowing picture, I remarked, I scarcely know why, but 
there was a heavy cloud upon my spirits that evening, * We are cer- 
tainly very happy now ; but it cannot be so always. I am thinking 
of the time when one of us must stand beside the bed and see the 
other die.' 

** * Yes,' he said, * that will be a sad moment ; I felt it most deeply 
a little while ago, but now it would not be strange if your life were 
prolonged beyond mine — though I should wish, if it were possible, to 
spare you that pain. It is the one left alone who suffers, not the one 
who goes to be with Christ. If it should only be the will of God 
that we might go together, like young James and his wife ! But 
he will order all things well, and we can safely trust our future to his 
hands.' 

"That same night we were roused from sleep by the sudden 
illness of one of the children. There was an unpleasant, chilling 
dampness in the air, as it came to us through the openings in the 
sloats above the windows, which affected your brother very sensibly; 
and he soon began to shiver so violently that he was oblig^ to return 
to his couch, where he remained under a warm covering until morn- 
ing. In the morning he awoke with a severe cold, accompanied by 
some degree of fever ; but as it did not seem very serious, and our 
three children were all suffering from a similar cause, we failed to give 
it any esi)ecial attention. From that time he was never well, though 
in writing to you before, I think I dated the commencement of hia 
illness from the month of November, when he laid aside his studies. 
I know that he regarded this attack as trifling ; and yet one evening 
he spent a long time in advising me with regard to my future coiuse, 
if I should be deprived of his guidance, saying that it is always wise 
to be prepared for exigencies of this nature. After the month of 
November, he failed gradually, occasionally rallying in such a manner 



CLOSING SCENES OF HIS LIFE. 323 

as to deceive us all, but at each relapse sinking lower than at the pre- 
vious one, though still full of hope and courage, and yielding ground 
only inch by inch, as compelled by the triumphant progress of disease. 
During some hours of every day he suffered intense pain; but his 
naturally buoyant spirits and uncomplaining disposition led him to 
speak so lightly of it, that I used sometimes to fear that the doctor, 
though a very skilful man, would be fatally deceived. 

"As his health declined, his mental exercises at first seemed deep- 
ened ; and he gave still larger portions of his time to prayer, conver- 
sing with the utmost freedom on his daily progress and the extent of 
his self -conquest. Just before our trip to Mergui, which took place 
in January, he looked up from his pillow one day with sudden 
animation, and said to me earnestly, *I have gained the victory at 
last. I love every one of Christ's redeemed, as I believe he would 
have me love them — in the same manner, though not probably to the 
same degree, as we shall love one another in heaven ; and gladly would 
I prefer the meanest of his creatures who bears his name, before 
myself.* This he said in allusion to the text, *In honour preferring 
one another,' on which he had frequently dwelt with great emphasis. 
After further similar conversation he concluded : * And now here I 
lie at peace with all the world, and what is better still, at peace with 
my own conscience. I know that I am a miserable sinner in the sight 
of God, with no hope but in the blessed Saviour's merits ; but I can- 
not think of any particular'fault, any peculiarly besetting sin, which 
it is now my duty to correct. Can you tell me of any ? ' 

"And truly, from this time no other word would so well express 
his state of feelings as that one of his own choosing— peace. He had 
no particular exercises afterwards, but remained calm and serene, 
speaking of himself daily as a great sinner, who had been over- 
whelmed with benefits, and declaring that he had never in all his life 
before had such delightful views of the unfathomable love and infinite 
condescension of the Saviour, as were now daily opening before him. 
* O the love of Christ ! — the love of Christ ! ' he would suddenly 
exclaim, while his eye kindled, and the tears chased each other down 
his cheeks ; * we cannot understand it now ; but what a beautiful 
study for eternity ! ' 

"After our return from Mergui, the doctor advised a still further 
trial of the effects of sea air and sea-bathing ; and we accordingly 
proceeded to Amherst, where we remained nearly a month. This to 
me was the darkest period of his illness — no medical adviser, no 
friend at hand, and he daily growing weaker and weaker. He began 
to totter in walking, clinging to the furniture and walls, when he 
thought he was imobserved (for he was not willing to acknowledge 



324 THE EARNEST MAV. 

the extent of his debility), and his wan face was of a ghastly pale- 
ness. His sufferings, too, were s^>metimes fearfully intense, so that, 
in s]>ite of his habitual self-control, his groans would fill the house. 
At other times a kind of lethargy seemed to steal over him, and he 
would sleep almost incessantly for twenty-four hours, seeming 
annoyed if he were aroused or disturbetL Yet there were jiortions 
of the time when he was comi>aratively comfortable, and conversed 
intelligently ; but his mind seemed to revert to former scenes, and he 
tried to amuse me with stories of his boyhood, his college days, his 
imprisonment in France, and his early missionary life. He had a 
great deal also to say on his favourite theme, 'the love of Christ;' 
but his strength was too much impaired for any continuous mental 
eflfort. Even a short prayer, made audibly, exhausted him to such a 
degree that he was obliged to discontinue the practice. 

**At length I wrote to Maulmain, giving some expression of my 
anxieties and misgivings, and our kind missionary friends, Tvho had 
from the first evinced all the tender interest and watchful sympathy 
of the nearest kindred, inmiediately sent for us, — ^the doctor advising 
a sea voyage. But as there was no vessel in the harbour bound for a 
port sufficiently distant, we thought it best, in the meantime, to 
remove from our old dwelling, which had long been condemned as 
unhealthy, to another mission house, fortunately empty. This change 
was, at first, attended with the most beneficial results ; and our hopes 
revived so much that we looked forward to the approaching rainy 
season for entire restoration. But it lasted only a little "w^hile ; and 
then both of us became convinced that, though a voyage at sea 
involved much that was exceedingly painful, it yet presented the 
only prospect of recovery, and could not, therefore, without a breach 
of duty, be neglected. 

" * O, if it were only the will of Crod to take me now, — ^to let me 
die here!* he rei)eated over and over again, in a tone of anguish, 
while we were considering the subject. * I cannot, cannot go ! This 
is almost more than I can bear ! Was there ever suflFering like our 
suffering?' and the like broken expressions were continually falling 
from his lips. But he soon gathered more strength of purpose • and 
after the decision was fairly made, he never hesitated for a moment 
rather regarding the prospect with pleasure. I think the struggle 
which this resolution cost, injured him very materially; though 
probably it had no share in bringing about the final residt. €r<^ 
who saw the end from the beginning, had counted out his days and 
they were hastening to a close. Until this time he had been able to 
stand, and to walk slowly from room to room ; but as he one evening 
attempted to rise from his chair, he was suddenly deprived of his 



CLOSINO SCENES OF HIS LIFE. 325 

small remnant of muscular strength, and would have fallen to the 
floor but for timely support. 

"From that moment his decline was rapid. As he lay helplessly 
VLpon his couch, and watched the swelling of his feet, and other 
alarming symptoms, he became very anxious to commence his voyage, 
and I felt equally anxious to have his wishes gratified. I still hoped 
he might recover; the doctor said the chances of life and death were, 
in his opinion, equally balanced. And then he always loved the sea 
so dearly ! There was something exhilarating to him in the motion of 
a vessel, and he spoke with animation of getting free from the almost 
suffocating atmosphere incident to the hot season, and drinking in the 
fresh sea breezes. He talked but little more, however, than was 
necessary to indicate his wants, his bodily sufferings being too great 
to allow of conversation ; but several times he looked up to me with 
a bright smile, and exclaimed, as heretofore, * O the love of Christ ! 
the love of Christ ! * 
, " I found it difficult to ascertain, from expressions casually dropped 
from time to time, his real opinion with regard to his recovery ; but I 
thought there was some reason to doubt whether he was fully aware 
of his critical situation. I did not suppose he had any preparation to 
make at this late hour, and I felt sure that, if he should be called 
ever so unexpectedly, he would not enter the presence of his Maker 
with a ruffled spirit; but I could not bear to have him go away 
without knowing how doubtful it was whether our next meeting 
would not be in eternity; and i)erhaps, too, in my own distress I 
might still have looked for words of encouragement and sympathy to 
a source which had never before failed. 

" It was late in the night, and I had been performing some little 
sick-room offices, when suddenly he looked up to me, and exclaimed, 
* This will never do ! You are killing yourself for me, and I will not 
permit it. You must have some one to relieve you. K I had not 
been made selfish by sufiering, I should have insisted upon it long 
ago.' 

"He spoke so like himself, with the earnestness of health, and in 
a tone to which my ear had of late been a stranger, that for a moment 
I felt almost bewildered with sudden hope. He received my reply to 
what he had said with a half-pitying, half -gratified snule ; but in the 
meantime his expression had changed, — the marks of excessive de- 
bility were again apparent, and I could not forbear adding: *It is 
only a little while, you know.' 

** *Only a little while,' he repeated, mournfully; *this separation 
is a bitter thing, but it does not distress me now as it did, — I am too 
weak.' *You have no reason to be distressed,' I answered, *with 



326 THE EARNEST MAK. 

such glorious prospects before you. You have often told me it is the 
one left alone who suffers, not the one who goes to be with Christ' 
He gave me a ra])id, questioning glance, then assumed for several 
moments an attitude of deep thought. Finally, he slowly unclosed 
his eyes, and fixing them on me, said in a calm, earnest tone, * I do 
not believe I am going to die. I think I know why this illness has 
been sent u|)on me ; I needetl it ; I feel that it has done me good ; and 
it is my opinion that I shall now recover, and be a better and more 
useful man.' 

** * Then it is your wish to recover?' I inquired. * K it should be 
the will of God, yes. I should like to complete the dictionary, on 
which I have bestowed so much labour, now that it is so nearly done; 
for though it has not been a work that pleased my taste, or quite 
satisfied my feelings, I have never underrated its importance. Then 
after that come all the plans that we have formed. O, I feel as if I 
were only just beginning to be prei>ared for usefulness ! ' 

** * It is the opinion of most of the mission,' remarked I, * that you 
will not recover.' 'I know it is,' he replied, *and I suppose they 
think, me an old man, and imagine it is nothing for one like me to 
resign a life so full of trials. But I am not old, — at least in that 
sense ; you know I am not. O, no man ever left this world with more 
inviting prospects, with brighter hopes or warmer feelings, — ^warmer 
feelings,' he repeated, and burst into tears. His face was perfectly 
placid, even while the tears broke away from the closed lids, and 
rolled, one after another, down to the pillow. There was no trace of 
agitation or pain in his manner of weeping, but it was evidently the 
result of acute sensibilities, combined with great physical weakness. 
To some suggestions which I ventured to make, he replied, ' It is not 
that, — I know all that, and feel it to my inmost heart. Lying here 
on my bed, when I could not talk, I have had such views of the 
loving condescension of Christ and the glories of heaven, as I believe 
are seldom granted to mortal man. It is not because I shrink from 
death that I wish to live, neither is it because the ties that bind me 
here, though some of them are very sweet, bear any comparison with 
the drawings I at times feel towards heaven ; but a few years would 
not be missed from my eternity of bliss, and I can well afford to spare 
them, both for your sake and for the sake of the poor Burmans. I am 
not tired of my work, neither am I tired of the world; yet when 
Christ calls me home, I shall go with the gladness of a boy bounding 
away from his school. Perhaps I feel something like a young bride, 
when she contemplates resigning the pleasant associations of her 
childhood for a yet dearer home, — ^though only a very little like her, 
for there is no doubt resting on my future^* *Then death would not 



CLOSINa SCENES OP HIS LIFE. 327 

take you by surprise,' I remarked, * if it should come even before you 
could get on board ship?* * O no,' he said, * death will never take 
me by surprise, — do not be afraid of that, — I feel so strong in Christ. 
He has not led me so tenderly thus far to forsake me at the very gate 
of heaven. No, no; I am willing to live a few years longer, if it 
should be so ordered ; and if otherwise, I am willing and glad to die 
now. I leave myself entirely in the hands of God, to be disposed of 
according to his holy wiU.' 

"The next day some one mentioned, in his presence, that the 
native Christians were greatly opposed to the voyage, and that many 
other persons had a similar feeling with regard to it. I thought he 
seemed troubled, and after the visitor had withdrawn, I inquired if 
he still felt as when he conversed with me the night previous. He 
replied, * O yes ; that was no evanescent feeling. It has been with 
me, to a greater or less extent, for years, and will be with me, I trust, 
to the end. I am ready to go to-day, — if it should be the will of God, 
this very hour ; but I am not anxioiis to die ; at least when I am not 
beside mjrself with pain.' 

** * Then why are you so desirous to go to sea? I should think it 
would be a matter of indifference to yoiL* * No,' he answered quietly, 
* my judgment tells me it would be wrong not to go ; the doctor says 
criminal, I shall certainly die here; if I go away I may possibly 
recover. There is no question with regard to duty in such a case ; 
and I do not like to see any hesitation, even though it springs from 
affection.' 

"He several times spoke of a burial at sea, and always as though 
the prospect were agreeable. It brought, he said, a sense of freedom 
and expansion, and seemed far pleasanter than the confined, dark, 
narrow grave, to which he had committed so many that he loved. 
And he added, that although his burial-place was a matter of no real 
importance, yet he believed it was not in human nature to be alto- 
gether without a choice. 

**I have already given you an account of the embarkation, of my 
visits to him while the vessel remained in the river, and of our last 
sad, silent parting; and Mr. Ranney has finished the picture. You 
will find, in this closing part, some dark shadows that will give you 
pain ; but you must remember that his present felicity is enhanced by 
those very sufferings ; and we should regret nothing that serves to 
brighten his crown in glory. I ought also to add, that I have gained 
pleasanter impressions in conversation with Mr. Ranney than from 
his written account ; but it would be difficult to convey them to you ; 
and, as he whom they concern was accustomed to say of similar 
things, * you will learn it all in heaven.' 



328 THE EARNEST MAK. 

" During the last hour of your Bainted brother's life, Mr. Ranney 
bent over him, and held his hand, while poor Panapah stood at a little 
distance, weeping bitterly. The table had been spread in the cuddy, 
as usual, and the officers did not know what was |>a8sing in the cabin, 
till summoned to dinner. Then they gathered about the door, and 
watched the closing scene with solemn reverence. Now, — tha-nlra to 
a merciful Crod!-^his pains had left him; not a momentary spasm 
disturbed his placid face, nor did the contraction of a muscle denote 
the least degree of suffering ; the agony of death was passed, and bis 
wearied spirit was turning to its rest in the bosom of tbe Saviour. 
From time to time, he pressed the hand in which his own was resting, 
his clasp losing in force at each successive pressure ; while his short- 
ened breath, — though there was no struggle, no gasping, as if it came 
and went with difficulty, — gradually grew softer and fainter, until it 
died upon the air, — and he was gone. Mr. Banney closed the eyes, 
and composed the passive limbs ; the ship's officers stole softly from 
the door, and the neglected meal was left upon the board untasted. 

*' They lowered him to his ocean grave without a prayer. His freed 
spirit had soared above the reach of earthly intercession, and to the 
foreigners who stood aroimd it would have been a senseless form. 
And there they left him in his unquiet sepulchre; but it matters 
little, for we know that while the unconscious clay is * drifting, on 
the shifting currents of the restless main,' nothing can disturb the 
hallowed rest of the immortal spirit. Neither could he have a more 
fitting monument than the blue waves which visit every coast; for 
his warm sympathies went forth to the ends of the earth, and 
included the whole family of man. It is all as Ood would have it, 
and our duty is but to bend meekly to his will, and wait, in faith and 
patience, till we also shall be summoned home." 

Thus lived, and thus died, an EarTiest Man. 




\ 



J. HEATON AND SON, PRINTBBS, 21, WABWICK LANS, LONDON. 



jl 



RETURN CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT 

TOm^ 202 Main Library 


LOAN PERIOD 1 
HOME USE 


2 : 


3 

• 


4 


5 < 


S 


ALL lOOKS MAY U RECALLID AFTER 7 DAYS 

R*ii«walt and Rachorg** moy b« mod* 4 days prtor to Ih* du« dato. 

■eokt may b* Raiwwod by calling (42-3405. 


DUE AS STAMPED BELOW 


.ftM «51l9J 


7 




mv J"'' " * 



































































FORM NO. DD6, 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY 
BERKELEY, CA 94720 



(»t 




BEIIEBALLmBABY.U.C. BERKELEY 







