MISSIONARY GAZETTEER;


COMPRISING
A GEOGRAPHICAL AND STATISTICAL ACCOUNT


or ~


THE VARIOUS STATIONS


‘CHURCH, LONDON, MORAVIAN, WESLEYAN, BAPTIST,
AND AMERICAN,


PRissionary. Hocteties,


ge. &c. &e.


. > WITH TAEIR PROGRESS IN


EVANGELIZATION AND CIVILIZATION.


een eae eee


BY CHARLES WILLIAMS.


" « LONDON :

ity REDBRIC K WES1 LEY AND A. H. DAVIS,
he 10, STATIONRAS’-HALL-COURT, AND AVE-MARUA-LANE,
(Bookeellers to the London Missionary Society);


AND SOLD BY JOHN ROY, EDINDURGR ; AND WESTURY AND
TYRRELL, DUBLIN.


ity 1928,


So ae eae ae a emg


O, Duckworth, Printer, 76, Fleet Street.


et Strect.


PREFACE.


!


‘THe character and design of ‘this Volume are too
apparent to render necessary more than a few prefatory
words. Although it partially resembles one published
jsome ‘time since in America, its plan was laid several
ears before it was known that any similar work was
extant; and a large part of it was prepared before that


| referred to was seen. The Editor, however, on making


he discovery, availed himself of its aid, as well as of
ithe assistance afforded by other Missionary records to
hich he had access; but his principal resources have
een found in the Reports of the various Societies
jwhose stations he has described. For the very prompt
‘and obliging loan of those published by the Church,
‘the London, the Moravian, and the Baptist Societies, he
‘begs to offer to the Rev. Messrs. Bickersteth, Arundel,
‘Latrobe, and Dyer, his best thanks.
| ‘That he wished to compress much information into
a comparatively small compass, will be evident on an
inspection of the work ; and its readers may be assured
that still more had been given, but for one of two
easons—his not being able to obtain it, or the limits
assigned him, ‘on which he would gladly and frequently
have trespassed. In all practicable cases, however, he
1as preferred giving the original statements of Directors


7


§


4


a Ae A a ie 1 ea) St


i |g TREFACE,


and Missionaries to any which he might have abridged
from them ; lest,.on the one hand, they should suffer
from misapprehension, or, on the other, from misrepre-
sentation.
_ Deeply solicitous that any future Edition may be
an improvement on this, he will be much obliged by
any suggestions or information communicated to him
at the Publishers’: and he has only, to add,, that should
it meet the kind approval of the religious world he has
anxiously sought (by an amount of labour of which he
leaves others to speak), and should life and health be
afforded, he designs to issue a series of volumes, by way
of continuation, as circumstances may require, affixing
to each a succinct history of one of those important


Institutions, whose proceedings will thus be compre- |,’


hensively and periodically recorded. bin


“+ Ae
°


Newark, May 18, 1828.


ESSAY ON MISSIONS.


Curiosity may well be excited, when the energies of a
multitude, widely differing on other points, are confederated .
for the accomplishment of an object; especially when, in the
hope of success, they submit to intense toils and costly sacri-
fices, through a long succession of years. Perhaps this com-
bination was never more striking than in the history of Chris-
tian Missions: in whatever light they are regarded, they afford
much to stimulate the inquiries both of philosophers and phi-
lanthropists, while a candid examination of their claims and
results is likely to exert a salutary influence on the mind and
the heart. Of no trivial importance is it, therefore, to devise

4 employ all suitable means for the promotion of correct views
and feelings on this subject, wherever entertained; as well as for
the communication of them to those who, from various circum-
stances, have treated it with inattention or indifference. Under
this conviction the present volume was prepared, to which it
has been deemed desirable to prefix the following observations.

It ought, however, to be premised that the genius of Mis-
sions is of no recent origin ;—it is identical with the. spirit of
Christianity ; it emanated from the heart of “ the great Apostle
of our profession;” it kindled an inextinguishable zeal in the
bosoms of his immediate followers; and, through the subse-
quent periods of the Christian era, it put forth its power,—
too often, indeed, to be opposed by the authority, prejudices,
and passions of men,—but still to operate, until, towards the
close of the eighteenth century, it appeared like the sun, after
contending with the mists and vapours of the dawn, the har-
binger of a state of transcendent glory.

Whatever diversities have arisen, or do exist, among those it
has inspired, and whatever considerations may sometimes have
increased its energy, two important principles appear to be in-
volved in all the efforts that have been made for the world’s

b


Vill


evangelization,—principles which must continue to he recog-
nized until that sublime and glorious end is consummated. One
is a deep and abiding sense of the appalling evils of which
sin 7s the source. 'To possess this, it is not necessary to make
the voyage of the world: let the eye, illuminated by the light of
heaven, be turned within; there the consequences of the fall will
be awfully apparent; and it is only for it to glance around
through a limited sphere, greatly to increase the vividness of ‘its


affecting perceptions. For as the chemist, applying a test to


any metal with a definite result, argues that the same result
may be predicated of any quantity of that metal in similar cir-
cumstances ; so, from the specimens of human nature which a
man has in himself and his neighbours, he may as satisfactorily
conclude its universal character and tendency. The refutation
was, therefore, perfectly easy of statements made by politicians,
voyagers, and travellers, who, at one period, and that not far
distant, were accustomed to aver that numbers were living in an
uncorrupt and happy state, inheriting customs and practising
rites which could not be excelled, and rivalling, in the simplicity
of their minds and the loveliness of their dispositions, the Ely-
sian scenes where they lived and expired. If, however, on
this ground, such details were regarded as false, other consi-
derations proved the baseness of their authors. Appalling as
are the circumstances of mankind, notwithstanding the posses-
sion of divine revelation, and the existence of Christian insti-
tutions, it could not escape observation, that of these, millions were
destitute ; and, consequently, that among them the most gross and
fearful superstitions abounded. In the absence of the beams
of divine truth, darkness covers the people, and innumerable
evils, emerging from the bottomless pit, invariably revel amidst
the gloom. ‘The wretchedness of idolaters has been strikingly
portrayed by the prophets of Jehovah; and as a poet familiar
with their state gazed upon it, he exclaimed—


“ They read no promise that inspires be! ief ;
They. seek no God that pities their complaints ;
They find no balm that gives the beart relief ;
They know no fountain when the spirit faints.
O could I picture out the full effect
Of that soul-withering power, idolatry,
I'd write a page, which whoso dared to read,
_His eye, instead 0: (curs, in crimson drops should bleed.’’


$$$ a


recog.
. One
which
» make
ight of
all will
around
3 of its


test to :


- result
lar cir-
hich a
.ctorily
utation
ticians,
not far
g in an
actising
nplicity
he Ely-
yer, on

consi-
ling as
posses-
n insti-
s were
OSS and
beams
erable
amidst
ikingly
amiliar


ix


Nor are the ‘statements of others, in different places, at
variance with those just made. ‘Actual and faithful surveys of
the heathen world, given by various persons and through suc-
cessive years, are all filled with objects whose hideous. features
mingle ‘horror’ with the compassion they excite. They have
shown us the inhabitants of the Northern and Southern Pacific,
removed but a small degree from the most abject barbarism
devoted to the grossest idolatry,’ and guilty of detestable and
fiendish crimes ;—the Chinese, uniting in their idolatry, with


. some inconsiderable variations, that of ancient Canaan, Egypt,


Greece, Rome, Chaldea, and India, and. polluting all the rela-
tions of life by abominable offences ;—the inhabitants of the
Indian Ocean, as overwhelmed: in frightful superstitions,
worshipping. devils, and, in some cases, eating their captives
alive ;—the teeming millions of Hindostan enthralled by a-
system whose rites are obscene and murderous, whose: most
meritorious ‘acts are self-torture and suicide, and whose heaven
is utter annihilation ;—the people of Africa, widely scattered
and. variously distinguished, but all sunk in abject ignorance of
themselves and of Christ, and perishing for lack of knowledge ;—
their brethren in the West Indies, ri where Christianity,
if so it may be. called, has long co-existed with Paganism, but
not for the slave, and consequently leaving multitudes susceptible
of the kindliest emotions of humanity, and of the infinitely
sublimer feelings of piety, to. a thraldom more destructive to the
soul than even the fetter and the lash are to the frame,—yea,
the whole: unevangelized population of the earth, as involved in
moral: necessities and ‘woes, alike defying description and
conception. °° |

Deeply affecting, however, as the present condition of the
heathen 1s, unutterably more awful is their state with regard to
eternity.’ Itis coneeded, that if they avied up to the dictates of
conscience, and to the instructions and admonitions of the
natural world, in the absence of revelation, hope might be
indulged of their acceptance with God; yet no proof has


hitherto been afforded that any one of them has done this.


On the contrary, it is apparent that where they have not the
Gospel to contemn, they violate with eagerness the laws
actually possessed. Of them it may be said, ‘ there is none
righteous, no not one; there is none that understandeth; there
is none that seeketh after God. Their throat is an open


ane ee eet narrate at ents een tantr eatery expanse rms arte eenetitiameaeaes


sepulehre ; with their tongue they have used’ deceit; the acy
of asps is under their lips; their feet are swift to shed blood ;
and even knowing the judgment of God, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, they nct only do the
same, but have pleasure in them that do them.” The
sition that, dying in these circumstances, they can enter heaven,
is diametrically opposed to the clearest testimony of Divine
revelation ; and hence, fearful as is the thought, it is one which
truth eompels us to entertain, that multitudes in “ the dark
places of the earth” are daily and hourly cin / And
wherever these views of their temporal and eternal condition
are united, and produce their proper effect upon the mind, there
will arise one of the elements of missionary zeal,—one of those
means whieh, still applied, will render its flame more pure, its
light more brilliant, and its heat more intense.

Another powerful motive appears in ‘he conviction that
ali who possess the Gospel are solemnly bound to promote

tts diffusion.

- Although this inestimable donation was designed to enrich
its immediate possessor, other objects were contemplated in the
gift, namely, the advantage of those with whom he was asso-
ciated, and the glory of the Divine Benefactor. In this case,
the rule applies with the greatest possible force—* an ability to
do good, constitutes an obligation to its performance.” By


this principle, the first ambassadors of the Cross were habitu- .


ally impelled; while the eommand was obligatory—“ Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.”
Hence, when Peter and John were commanded by the San-
hedrim to speak no more in the name of Christ, they replied,
“ ‘Whether it be right to hearken unto you more than unto
God, judge ye; for we cannot but speak the things that we
have seen and heard.” Instead of imagining that he had laid
the world under irredeemable obligations, Paul esteemed him-
self “a debtor to the Greek and the barbarian; both to the
wise and to the unwise ;” beheld “a woe” hovering over him if
he preached not the Gospel; and, urged by an irresistible
impulse, he proclaimed the truth as it is in Jesus, “from Jeru-
salem, and round unto Illyricum.” ‘The churches formed by
such men could not but be continued with their spirit; the exam-
ples on which they gazed must have exerted a mighty influence,
while the injunctions they received to “ hold forth the word of
life” and to shine as “ lights in the world,’ invested every


ee; es eet es ial lik


i


r heaven, |
f Divine 4
me which b
‘ the dark
g/ And
condition
ind, there
e of those
e pure, its


‘tion that
9 promote


- to enrich
ited mm the
‘was asso-
1 this case,
n ability to
hee.” By


ver him if
rresistible
om Jeru-
ormed by
the exam-
influence,
e word of
ed every


b a


community, and ‘all its members respectively, with a missionary
character. Indeed, wherever the diffusion.of truth is not an
object of intense solicitude, an essential quality. of genuine
Christianity is wanting... On this, no‘lapse of years can effect
a change’;—in every age it must be precisely the same. Beheld,
in itself, it-has exhibited, and must ever discover, its Author’s
perfection., .And_ cruelty is no. less’ inconsistent with huma-
nity, than ‘an exclusive and selfish possession of .the Gospel is
with the genius of: true piety..The compassion for, souls
which it, invariably. breathes, the obedience to divine commands
whieh it imperatively requires, the zeal. for Christ’s honour
which it always enkindles, and the rich experience it affords of
the infinite value of heavenly blessings, ,unite to induce its
possessor freely to give what he has freely received. A neces-
sity is thus laid on every believer in the Son of God to culti-
vate a missionary spirit, the constituent principles of which are
produced in the new creation of his soul, and for whose range
‘a world lying in wickedness” opens an extensive and deeply
necessitous sphere. As the beams of the sun were not designed
to be limited to the orb whence they emanate, soit is the Divine
purpose, trat he whose mind has become the depository of a
purer light, should diffuse around him the rays of truth and
holiness to the utmost extent of the circle in which he is ap-
pointed to move. It is true, that the degree of ability, and the
‘opportunities for its exercise, are alike various; but still there
is an impeachment of individual piety, an accumulation of
personal guilt, and a falling short of the beneficent purposes of
a benevolent God, in proportion as the means actually pos-
sessed are not improved. ie tat

If, then, one impetus has been given to missionary efforts by
a compassionate view of the miseries of men, another has been
furnished by a perception of the claims of the Divine Being,
and by that preparation of the soul for its observance, which is
the noblest of his works. To their united and harmonious ope-
ration, may. be traced the sagacity and: the prudence which -
have marked out various fields of exertion, appointed suitable
labourers, and superintended their progress,—the glowing elo-
quence which has: aroused the torpid from their slumbers; and
inspired the active with unwonted energy,—the contributions,
including the splendid donations of the rich and the far more
splendid donations of the:poor, poured into the-treasury,—and

b 2 |


xii
the heroic exertions ‘of ‘those who, having given’ thems
pin the cawse’ of the Saviour, tant ans elsign sti
manded by his service. : beptas vib q
Should the interrogation arise, How have these principles +4
acted? by what means has the accomplishment of the end g
pe sree been sought ?—it is, oonfessedly, one of mueh interest
id im
tneans hr


nee. In reply, it: may be said, that among: the
erto adopted, much diversity has prevailed. The
chief and invarieble’ instrument, however, is the: preaching
of the Gospel. A large number of these engaged in the dis-
pensation of truth, have been prepared for it im institutions
pin a in this and other countries for the express purpose ;'
and are in possession of all the advantages accruing from
enlivhtened instruction and discipline. Instances have alsa
lately occurred, of ministers who, after labouring in their
native land, have devoted themselves to missionary ‘work
for a limited period; and with these have been associated
many native converts, who, having received some suitable in-
| struction, have gone forth to various parts with the happi
results. The mode of communication generally ad 18,
i of course, characterized by extreme simplicity. Tite elaborate
sermon is ordinarily set aside for the plainest and most un-
adorned statements ; to which attention is frequently excited by
a fact of recent occurrence. An instance of the familiar and
apposite manner in which this is done, appears in the: Diary of
Nriputa, a converted Hindoo :—*I went to Gola ghat, and
there saw a pundit at worship, with a numberof small stone q
images before him. I asked him what he sold there. ‘ What *
do you want?’ replied he. ‘ Nothing in particular,’ answered
I, ‘exeept a small stone to make a weight for my scales; and
one of these stones you have here will just answer. ‘Do you
call these stones?’ said he; ‘they are my gods. What coun-
H tryman are you?’ ‘Of this country,’ said I ; ‘nor can I be-
lieve what you say concerning these stones; for I oan tell: you
better things out of thie'book, and show you where to ‘find the
true God, who is a spirit, and who will have men worship him
in spirit and in truth.’ This discourse drew a erowd of people
together, who paid much attention for about an hour.”
igh it will be absolutely necessary, fora time, that
labourers should be sent forth to the heathen from Christendom,
it is peculiarly pleasing to have proofs of talent, intelligence,


and from among the natives themselves; since
erie gan ptbrmaneccor capt deere da
commenced must ultimately devolve. Already many foreign-
ers have expired, as martyrs, in-the field. "The torrid? zone, in
which a large part of \it appears, is, at best, but ill-adapted to
the physical powers of Kuropeans.' A short term of labour is
‘can, ‘ordinarily, be expected from them. Into their
toils, therefore, those who are the fruits of their efforts must
enter. And able as: they are, constitutionally, to bear the
climate, they possess many peewhar advantages. The heathen
do not feck the same degree of suspicion when one of their own
en addresses ‘them, and.are;: therefore, ' less reserved
their communieations with him. A native teacher is
umaceananenl the character of his own people, with
their habits; and modes of thinking and reasonmg, as. well
as with their idiomatic phrases, with which, though very ex-
pressive and foreible, an Exurepean mur: find it a long and
difficult process to'become fanuliar. Nausives, too, can walk
in the heat of the sun, readily procure food, and gain access to
the bien and ber fh pepe tragh arenes which re
barred against foreigners. Rs, moreover, may be car-
ried on with such instruments, without the expenses of outfit
and a costly voyage, on # much more extensive plan ; while the
interest. a in the bosoms of owns — wilt naturally
induce them to support # cause to are so
indebted. The provision and continuance of College, ome
these at Serampore and Malecca, in which ther mentee may obtain an
accredited introduction to their work, is, undoubtedly, of vast
importance ;—to them the best-attention of Directors and Mis-
sionaries will doubtless be directed, while they demand the
warm regard and liberal contributions of the whole Christian
world. :


Next: in. rank to the means just adverted to, stands she
Translation of the Sacred Scriptures. In additien to the
labours of Dr. Morrison, who has —— a version of the
Oldand New Testaments in the Chinese language ; and to those
of the Baptist missionaries at. Serampore, in accomplishing the
same stupendous task, besides preparing the whole, or parts of
the Scriptures, i in more than twent s of India ;— other
devoted men, in various places, Co enabled the heathen to
read, in their own tongue, “the wonderful works of God.”


xiv


‘ «To. contend that these translations were perfect, would be:to
claim for them what is not due to the far-famed and. justly-
esteemed Septuagint, or to our own amazing and admirable
Authorized Version. It may, however, be safely asserted, that
far more has been accomplished by their learned and indefati-
ene authors, than intelligent and even sanguine minds.could
ave ventured to anticipate. Some of them, indeed, appear to
-begifted with transcendent ability. To one of them Sir George
Staunton, who cannot but be regarded’ as high authority, .bears
the following honourable tribute:—“I cannot say that: I have
examined Dr. Morrison’s. Translation -so critically as to be
able to give a positive opinion on. its precise degree of merit;
but I have no hesitation in saying, that I conceive his qualifi-
cations for the execution of the task to have been far superior
to those of any other person whatever. He is, unquestionably,
our best Chinese scholar—he had made himself fully acquainted.
with the previous labours of the Catholic missionaries—he was
in constant communication with intelligent natives in the pro-
gress of the work—and his general zeal, intelligence, «ad in-
tegrity, in. the cause to which he has devoted himself, are too
well known .to need any confirmation from my testimony.”
And in reference to the Indian versions, it should be remarked,
that various distinguished persons, ansaae Pundits, have
united in acknowledging that they are executed with great skill,
and are perfectly intelligible to those for whom they are re-
sont designed,*—-a circumstance which warranted Mr.
’s declaration—“ I doubt not they will bear to be com-

ared with any other first versions, which, at any time, have

n given to the world.”

But valuable and useful as these translations are in them-
selves, who can estimate their importance as a foundation for
future and improved versions? If so much have been achieved
by those who trod the ¢erra incognita in search of the mine,
what must remain for.them to whom its rich and ponderous
masses have been pointed out, and the instruments committed
by which it may be most successfully worked? Surely it is
only to invoke the continuance of the same energy so happily


* The reader may find 20 versions, each bearing a like satisfactory
attestation, in the ‘Tenth Memoir of Translations conducted by the
Serampore Missionaries.’’


See oii a 3 [lam ee ee ete


yould be: to
and: justly-
‘admirable
serted, that
id indefati-
ninds could
, appear to
Sir George
rity, bears
hat 1 have
pas to be
2 of merit;
his. qualifi-
far superior
estionably,
acquainted
es—he was
in the pro-
ce, and in-
elf, are too
estimony.””
remarked,
ndits, have
great skill,
ey are re-
anted Mr.
to be com-
time, ‘have


in them-
ndation for
n achieved
the mine,
ponderous
committed
Surely it is
so happily


satisfactory
cted by the


xv


me to secure al] th:* is practicable,—all that can be
wished ! ;

A remarkable and ini:.:ating coincidence appears in the
rise of an institution for the universal circulation of the Scrip-
tures, at the very time in which translators stood in need of such
aid. Could they have looked for assistance only to. the funds
of their —? societies, the greater part of what they have
done must have remained unaccomplished. But, providentially,
the British and Foreign Bible name § ‘arose to supply their
necessities with a kind and liberal h

The establishment of Schools exhibits another means
of promoting the welfare of the heathen. In such institutions
have been found adults of every age and rank, including kings
and chiefs; while multitudes of children, of course affording
greater promise, have risen, in consequence of early instruction,
from the debasement of ignorance to respectability and useful-
p scm ee i . schools are, wherever wt isasoeer

emales are peculiar ifying. The influence o

ten on such iain Lie tate too, as well as on husbands and
fathers, renders its exertion at the dictate of sound intelli

of the utmost moment. Heathenism has, however, practically
and boldly denied this; it has brought down woman from her
high and proper rank, to the grade of the brute creation; and
having with ruthless power quenched the light of intellect, has
dared to contend that it never gave forth its beams. What
was wished, was first accomplished ; and then the fact, thus
originating, was advanced as a specimen of what had always
been, must = perpetual. But the fallacy has been
detected, and philanthropy hes assailed one of the strongest
holds of superstition, in female ignorance. Even in India, the
effort is rapidly increasing in popularity, and the good already
accomplished is the prelude and earnest of incaleulably more.

The cause of education has been greatly promoted in distant
lands, by persons who have given it particular attention in this
country, and have carried with them the best plans for its ad-
vancement. The inerease of their number is highly desi-
rable. “Those of an age to receive education in India, greatly
exceed ten millions; those at present educated by Missionaries,
are under twenty and, nor is it ever likely they can much
exceed a hundred thousand. . Thus, any scheme of National
Education is totally out of the question; but that which is im-
possible, in the way it is conducted at present, becomes easy of


xvi


execution by a simple change of plan. There is a large
demand for learning in’ India, and there are no restrictions.
The cheapest and best schoolmastér will draw ‘to himself all the
scholars; and it is only furnishing the new schoolmasters with
better: modes of teaching, to enable them to supplant the present
masters, and so communicate to others, not only the instruction
they have’ themselves received, but the very ‘mode ‘in’ which
they received it.’’*. a
Schools open a wide field for translation and composition in
the languages of the heathen, by producing and increasing the
demand: for elementary and’ other books. To those already
established, much: aid -has.been kindly granted by the School
Societies of this country; and their fostering care will be needed
until the offspring -shall have reached a state of vigorous
ne or has obtained for itself adequate means of support.
‘While to some spots it was not necessary for Missionaries to
carry the arts, in others they have sought the civilization as well


as the evangelization of the heathen. ‘They have looked, however,,


to.the latter as the cause, and to the former as the effect; they
therefore sent the spade and the plough, the axe and the saw,
not merely as the instruments of the mechanic, but as the
attendants of the Christian ‘minister ; persuaded that men in
becoming Christians, would cease to be savages. -Facts esta-
blish and illustrate this conviction. Mr. Nott, the oldest. of
the original missionaries to Tahiti dvers, that no efforts could
ever induce the natives to learn to read: before their conver-
sion to Christianity, nor, indeed, to relinquish one of their
wretched customs; but no sooner did the grace of God take
possession of their hearts, than a desire for civilization arose,
and religion triumphed over the shocking dispositions and prac-
tices of barbarism. Nor is that of the South Sea Islanders a
solitary case. The natives of Africa are equally averse to every
kind of labour; they have no objection to a long journey, but
to.dig for half an hour appéars intolerable ; and some of them,
now in different circumstances, have acknowledged that it was
not till they felt the claims of another world, that they were dis-
poe to attach importance to the affairs of this. ‘The colony of

iberia too, recently recovered from the wilderness, and which,
toa great extent, appears morally what it does naturally, exhibits


* Douglas's Hints on Missions.


t
‘
'
‘
‘


eeest oj ws: &s aw ot FO newt es me ee lUrmelCUr


is a large
restrictions.
self all the
asters with
the present
instruction
in’ which


nposition in
reasing the
ose already
“the School
] be needed
of vigorous
of support.

sionaries to
tion as well
sd, however,
effect; they
id the saw,
but as the
hat men in
Facts esta-
> oldest. of
fforts could
eir conver-


e of their |


f God take
tion arose,
s and prac-
Islanders a
se to every
burney, but
ne of them,
hat it was
y were dis-
colony of
and which,
y, exhibits


Xvi


the powerful influence of divine truth as the exclusive cause
of the transformation effected.’ And still ‘civilization :must be
regarded as the hand-maid of religion; artisans of »piety and
zeal must yet be sought out; and, in some instances, settlers
or colonists should accompany the ministers of the Gospel.
Although arts may not primarily meliorate the condition of


’ men, they will refine the manners and promote the comfort of the


converted, and, by furnishing employment, avert the evils arising
from indolence. The mention of ‘Tracts which have been dis-
tri!uted in large numbers and in many languages must close
this recapitulation of instruments, in connexion with which
the donations of the Religious Tract Society should not be
forgotten. :

The direction and superintendence of the means thus hastily
enumerated, has been the pleasing, but arduous and responsible
duty of the different Boards appointed to the work ; but as per-
sonal inspection is always important, and often peculiarly  de-
sirable, representatives have, in some instances, been appointed
to visit existing stations, and to form others. In accordance
with this plan, the Rev. Mr. Latrobe has examined the set-
tlements of the United Brethren in Africa; the Rev. J.
Campbell those of the London Missionary Society, in two
visits to that country ; and for some years, the Rev. D. Tyerman
and G. Bennet, Esq. have been occupied in inspecting the
stations of the same Institution in various parts of the world.

In reviewing this various instrumentality, the remark of an
eminent writer * occurs :—* The talents which are suited to one
age and station, would be altogether unsuitable to another; and
the wisdom displayed by Providence, in raising up persons
singularly adapted to the work they have to perform for the
benefit of mankind, demands our particular consideration.”
Most strikingly is this attribute exemplified in Christian mis-
sions. One has an admirable talent for preaching the Gospel
to the heathen, another has a valuable tact for the acquisition of
languages, a third can print with accuracy and facility, a fourth
is familiar with many usefut arts, and a fifth has much skill in
instructing the young; while cases are not wanting, in which
some of these talents are happily blended. The success of these
persons will, obviously, depend, in agreat measure, on the selec-
tion of an appropriate sphere for the exercise of their respective


xVili


powers; but so diverse are the circumstances of the heathen
world, that this can easily be done. India wants men who
need not carry with them a knowledge of arts, but to whom an

intance with its history, lenguages, superstitions, and pre-
judices, together with a faculty for familiar and pointed address,
are of the greatest moment. In Africa, and in the islands of
the Northern and Southern Pacific, no such elaborate prepara-
tion is needed ; but a knowledge of arts is indispensable. The
first Christian missionary to China: required “ the studious
habit that spontaneously seeks retirement; but he who labours
among Tartars or North American Indians, must often pass
from place to place, improve Onieeetee of imparting know-
ledge as they arise, and spend his time abroad, in itinerancies,
which the former was compelled to pass in the toils of soli-
tude. It ought, not, however, to be overlooked, that every
individual contemplating missionary work, should aim at ac-
quiring general and scientific knowledge, to the utmost extent


compatible with its more sacred character. The most favour- | j


able opportunities occur to many thus engaged, of pursuing
inquiries deeply interesting to mankind at large: were these


to be improved, and their results recorded, the entrance of the


correspondence and works of missionaries into quarters from
which they are now excluded would be ensured ; existing
prejudices would be dissipated, and the number of the friends
of missions would be greatly increased.

After all, numerous and various as have been the instru-
ments employed in what has been accomplished, a conviction:
has operated (may it do so increasingly !) that the whole appa-
ratus of benevolence is dependent for success on divine influ-


ence,—a conviction which has prompted to fervent prayer.


Independently of public supplications ascending on the Sabbath
from our sanctuaries, and of the domestic and private petitions
which daily arise to “ the Giver of all ”* monthly meetings
for pe have become the usage of Christians, in almost every
part of the British Empire, in various spots in the continents of
Europe, Africa, Asia, and America, and in many islands of the


sea. It has been geographically demonstrated, that in every.


hour of the four and twenty in which the earth performs its


divrnal revolution on the first Monday in the month, the voice


© M‘Crie.


the heathen
ts men who
to whom an
ms, and pre-
nted address,
he islands of
rate ara-
sable. The
the studious
who labours
it often pass
arting know-
itinerancies,
toils of soli-
i, that every
d aim at ac-
tmost extent


most favour- |


of pursuing
: were these

ance of the
wwarters from
ed; existing
the friends


n the mstru-
@ conviction
whole appa-
divine influ-
ent prayer.
the Sabbath
pate petitions
ly meetings
almost every
ontinents of
slands of the


performs its
bh, the voice


at in every:


xix


‘of prayer’ ascends for ‘thé conversion of sinners to God:

this ‘hallowed ‘practice; there is a compliance with the charge
“Ye that make inention of. the Lord, “keep ': not ‘silence, and
give him no tést;’till he establish, ‘and tithe make Jerusalem
a praise inthe’ earth’;”’ ‘and’ with” the ‘Saviour's commind—
“ The harvest traly is great, but the labourers aresfew ; pra
‘ye, therefore, ‘the Lord of the ‘harvest, that-he would’ gen} forth
labourers ‘into his ‘harvest: In vain’is it to object, that: such
petitions are unnecessary,’ because the ‘evatigeliontion:' ofthe
world: is matter’ of ‘a ‘Divine’ decree ; since’ the” means: ate
decreed as well as the end, and one of them is prayer.) Equally
unavailing’ is it to ‘contend, that the ‘special , promise ‘of | the
pet Bu Christ's ‘kingdom > renders ~ supplication’ nugatory ;
since the promise affords’ not only an atgument for prayer, but
the ‘strongest incentivé "to its*exercise. Jehovah’ promised to
Israel & victory over Amalék’ ‘yet 'it was only ‘as the hands: of
Moses were ‘upheld iri ardent‘entreaty, that Joshua ‘prevailed
ist the foe:" im’ like ‘manner,’ He promtised’'to' them: the
essidh ; but the assurance,’ so fat’ from inducing '@ spiritual
torpor, urged the’ pidus Jews, like Zacharias, and Simeon, ‘and
Anna, to’serve God with’ fastings ‘and: prayers, night and-day.
Prayer is, therefore, and must continue to ‘be, ‘indispensable.
When Elijah bowed in profound and importunate devotion ‘on
Mount Carmel, the ‘little’ cloud’ arose ‘like’ ‘@ man’s ‘hand;
and as' he pursued the ‘holy ‘exercise, that cloude ded; and
was augmented’ by others, ’ until the’ face of 'Heaven was
darkened, ‘and there‘ was the sound of abundance Of rain. Just
so, the cloud which ‘now sheds ‘its ‘vivifying and refreshing in
fluence on the moral world; is an answer to the prayers of early
saints ; while,” assuredly, ‘its increase, to the likening of the


M desert to the garden of the’ Lotd, ‘must’ be attributed to Divine


condescension to petitions how'ascending from the Christian
church, and to’those ‘which shall arise’in ages ‘yet to come,’

In ‘the preceding ‘remarks, another inquiry has been partly
anticipated, namely— What are the results of missionary
labour? But it may be well,’ though the limits of this esay
will not allow them all to We stated, to answer the interrogation
a little ‘more fully. And here it may:be’ remarked, that they
have furnishéd @ practical ft domeriagt * ¢ objections long since
advanced, and ‘still reiterated. hen first: urged, these
could only be met by arguments; but now they may be

c


XX


refuted by incontestible facts. ‘The weapon, indeed, was al-
ways powerful ; for what are speculations and hypotheses, op-
osed. to reasonings on sound and immutable principles? , But
its acuteness hag gradually become more palpable; for though
a feeble argument'may be regarded by‘ him who uses it as per-
fectly conclusive, when considered abstractedly, or even. as
opposed to another, yet facts must strip it of its supposed im-
portance and force; and the supporters and advocates of mis-
sions have numerous: circumstances to narrate, which they may
defy their: adversaries to contravene by any others -in the his-
tory of the world. | . bi gikh cde
_ It was asked, for instance, in a tone indicative of contempt-—
when a spirit of missionary enterprize was first, breathed,
“¢ Where will you find agents for such a Quixotic expedition ?”’
It can now be shewn that hundreds have been found in this and
ather lands, among whom are many devoted women;. and that
spots unfavourable to human nature, so far..from repressing


_ Compassionate regard, have awakened, and still do excite, a | b


heroic enthusiasm which has preferred them to all others. And
that no deficiency in this respect shall arise, may be. fairly
inferred. -So long as God has a work to achieve, and is heard
inquiring—“ Whom shall I send?” the devoted: response Will
assuredly be returned—“ Here am I; send me.’’:.: sad ty

It was said, “‘ Such purposes cannot be accomplished without
another Pentecost; the languages of the heathen must be known,
and who will acquire them ?” . It can now be told that, nearly
thirty of the fifty languages of India have been attained by one
small body of men; and that of these,. two are the Chinese and
the Sungskrit—unquestionably the most difficult languages on
earth. -After this, the obstacle once deemed insuperable seems
scarcely formidable ; the path has not only been. opened up, but
its ruggedness is diminished, and the means of the nineteenth
century rival in effect the glorious miracle of the first, |

It was said, “ The chain of caste will defy your power;. the
heathen will never break this to follow your. precepts,”,. It-cap
now ‘be proved that several hundred Hindoos, who were not


before outcasts, have given up all earthly connexjons and pro- |
spects, from their conviction of the truth of Christianity; which |


is, of itself, the most solid proof that can be given of the


reality ‘of missionary success, andthe certainty of the final gq


triumph of the Gospel. :


Se Ot ie es ee


od, was al-
otheses, Op-
ples? , But
for though
es it as per-
preven as
upposed im-
ates of mis-
ch they may
. in the his-
ccontempt-—
:. breathed,
xpedition ?””
d in this and
on; and that
m repressing


do excite, & | |


others. And
ay be fairly
and is heard
esponse will


shed without
hst be known,
d that nearly
ained by one
Chinese and
anguages on
perable seems
pened up, but
he nineteenth


ie:


st, pits,
| power ;. the


anity ; W


pts,’ Itcan &
who were not |
jons and ee 4
ich = often widely separated, and never in danger from each other’s
given of the @% course. And: to this may he added many instances of Chris-


of the final q


Xxi


It’ was - said, “Supposing. the Seri tures were translated,


a they: will ‘do -no good: the people of India will be shocked


by their accounts of sacrificing animals which’ they have been:
accustomed to ‘regard as sacred ; and,-rejecting the Bible, they
will hold their Shasters with greater tenacity.” It can now
be demonstrated, that from the perusal of the New Testament
alone, many ‘interesting conversions from heathenism have: ac-
tually taken: place. ‘“ A number of‘ years ago,” says Mr. Ward,
of Serampore'in .1821, .“Ileft a New Testament at Ram-
krishnu-poor, after preaching in’ the market-place. To the


4 perusal: of this book is to be traced the conversion of Sébik-.


rani, now an excellent and successful preacher—of Krishnii-das,-
who died happily in his work as a bold and zealous preacher—
of Jiginnat’h, and one or two other individuals. Mr. Chamber-
lain, ‘some years ago, left a New Testament in a village ; and,
by reading this ‘book, a very respectable young man of the
writer’ caste,° T'arachiind, and his brother Mithoor, embraced
the Gospel.’ Tarachiind is one of, our best Christian Hindoo
poets; he has composed more than a hundred of the hymns
fond in our Bengaled hyrin-book, and a pamphlet placing
in striking contrast Heathenism and Christianity; and Mithoor
is employed as Persian interpreter in the Dutch Court of Jus-
tice at Chinsurah. . Ihave ‘seen the New Testament lying by;
the sick-bed of the Christian’ Hindoo, as his best companion ;


"= and the truths it- contains have heen the comfort of the afflicted,


andthe source of strong consolations, and firm hope in death,
to many a dying Hindoo.” —
It -was said, ‘ Differences prevail among you: some are.


¥


/ _ Churchmen and others Methodists—some are Baptists and
% others Independents; the heathen will not. know, therefore,


which of ‘you to regard: besides, contentions will arise; and,


4  the-polemical battles you have waged here, you will fight over,
again in other lands.” It'can now be shewn, that though our


Missionary Societies, when regarded as existing, principally, in
the metropolis, may seem like the vessels in the port of ion
don; ‘yet beheld, in. their respective spheres,: they. resemble
those vessels scattered over the surface of the mighty deep-—


tian kindness and» unanimity from those spots on which the,


xxii
representatives of different: Institutions have laboured together,


troversy among them is utterly:unknown.


It was said,. “The time is not come,—-before it arrives some:
of ‘the Apocalyptic’ visions: will: be. realized,. the martyrs will:


live again on the earth, andthe splendid array of instruments


will guarantee the glory: of the result.” And should the objec-:
tion now be reiterated, it may be..rejoined, How then‘ can the:
statements already made be met ?. How: can the ftets mene:
tioned be accounted ::for? ' Let these be reviewed, and let.
others, :yet tobe advanced, be. ‘connected with thiom's, and he:


who thus cavils, will be: like the man who. would assert that the
time of winter had not come, when the eye gazed ‘on frozen


rivers, snow-clad fields; and trees: without & leaf ;:\ or::like him:


who. would declare that'the time of harvest had not:come, when


the’ rich and golden ears ‘waved. with: every breeze, and the.
reapers were eagerly ‘thrusting in the siekle,:while, others were:
binding: the ‘heavy sheaves, and bearing them’ off to the ‘ep


pointed storehouse.


If aman‘ be “ignorant: of ‘whit has bean adbieia, let hin
suspend a decision for whith ‘he “is totally unprepared ;—if' he:
be nly partially informed, let him seek more copious informas.

est’ truth or ingenuousness compel a retraction; by.


tion
no menns. ‘honourable «but if he have listened to all ‘that can


be said, ‘and is’still disposed to’ employ. the objections: just: ad-
verted to, he may be fairly told that he has no:clear pereeption:


of the force of: evidence, or that he is.enthralled by some. pas-


sion of prejudice, Which misleads his judgment, we is unworthy


his character.


«Another important ‘series of results appears in: : ardvdintages


which may be denominated collateral. Among these, no ins


considerable place should be allotted to. the benefidial re-action


invariably consequent on benevolent exertion. :::T'o the : genial
influence of ‘a missionary spirit must ‘be ascribed many vas
luable means which are now employed for: our country’ s benefit.
In blessing others, ‘we have’ ourselves been blest. «' This -has


been exemplified in @ most: remarkable manner; also, by the:
spiritual advantages accruing from missionary exertions tomany.
of our countrymen in‘héathen:lands, whose conduct has:.too:
often furnished a formidable barrier to success. They left the.


sheres of England eontemners of God; the winds which wafted


or where they have: been occasionally: associated ; while con:


" © =


d together,
while con ;


rrives some ;
rartyrs will:
instruments

1 the objec=:
hen'can the:
. facts mens ;
ed, and let
2m}; and he:
ert that the

d ‘on frozen

or:like him:
‘come, when
éze,:and the:


others-were | |


oath


traction: by:

all ‘that: can
ar pereeption:
by some. pas-
‘is unworthy


| advantages:
these, no: In
dial reaction:
‘o the : genial
ie many yas
atry’s benefit.
This -has


which wafted


also, «by the:
ions tomany.
uct. has: too:
hey left the.


XXHi-


tiem over the bosom of the.ocean drank. in their imprecations;
nor: did; all the, wonders of the..deep awaken a desire to, seek
Him. who gave the sea the bounds it. cannot pass. .But ona
far distant shore, the. ‘ still.small, voice’. of a Christian mis:
sionary met. their ear ;,.and, those whom the. storm,cquld not
} awe, nor the lightning illumine, were conscious of a power that
melted: their hearts.into penitence and inspired them with faith :
they joined the.humble. and despised band of Christ’s disciples :
became his “ living epistles, known and read ofall men,;” and,
in.some cases, the preachers.of his Gospel,-—the heralds of his
cross... hes discan 4

- But. not to dwell on. these, or, on. civilization, already
alluded to, missionaries have, formed languages which, weré
never before reduced to a written system, or even to letters ;—
they: have substituted, for the caprice and will of chiefs, gene-
rally. the most. muscular, daring, and cruel, and the will of
priests, the: most superstitious and artful,—a.constitution which
acknowledges the supremacy of the law, and the equality of
every man in its view;—they have established, courts. of judi-
cature, appointed judges, and instituted trial b Jury ;—thus pur-
suing measures which. raise. the political and civil character of
the people, tend. to the confirmation of the acknowledged but
limited: prerogatives of, the hereditary family, and operate to
the protection of religion. Thus, as Dr. Philip, of Cape Town,
. has observed To such: of our friends at home, if there be
# any.such, who are seeking for. signs, and think little is doné
except they continually hear of marvellous and striking con-


versions, I,.must.be allowed to hazard a remark, for the accu


racy of which I can. vouch, so far as my observation extends,—
- that the number of. conversions which.come under the notice of


“® wissionaries does..not bear a greater proportion to the general
7% ‘good done by.the Missions, than the conversions und deaths re-


corded in the monthly Magazines, &c. published in England,


P ; do to the entire sum. of good done in that country by the preach-


ing of the Gospel, and. the institutions, of Christianity. . While
the missionaries are complaining that they have so few striking


“@ instances of the power of Divine grace to record in the com-


munications to their respective Societies, it is highly probable that
their influence is much more extensive, and the change carrying
on by them much greater than they themselves are able toimagine.
In.those countries where our mipeionep have gained a marked
c


SSSA ART N WRRE NS RNERUREBE


xxiv’


ascendancy, there is scarcely one spot, however much secluded,
impervious to their all-pervading. light and heat.» Even while
they are grossly misrepresented ‘and spoken’ against, they are
checking the undue exercise of power; raising the standard of
morals ; literally proclaiming ‘liberty to: the ‘captives;’::and:
opening the prison-doors. to ‘those that are bound; diffusing
abroad the light of science and’literature; underminitg the false
systems of religion with which they have: to- contend; multi-
plying those charitable institutions which; have for’ their objeet
he relief of suffering humanity ; vanquishlng ‘infidelity by the
most direct and painful of all arguments,—by living exhibitions
of the truths of Christianity; changing the face of ‘our colonies;
and accelerating the approach of that'moral revolution, which
will sooner or later usher'in the kingdom of the world, as'the
kingdom of our Lord and his Christ.” In these respects; Mission+
ary Societies have done much,’ which . must: rejoice every lover
‘of his race, and every faithful servant of the Most Highs: i:


But such results are infinitely transcended bythe actuat-cons | 9


verston of many of the heathen to God. ‘To’ the mind familiar
with missionary records, there will o¢cur, at the mention of this,
the case of Pomarre,* the South Sea Islander ; of Africaner;f:the
terror of the wild hordes’ ‘of ‘the desert;: of the Priests of
Budhut; of the Sultan Katagerry||;:of ‘Afa§ the ‘Chinese as:
sistant of Dr. Morrison; of :«Johannes,**: the “Indian of the
Mahikander ‘nation ; of the Esquimaux,t+ whom his country-
men described as * the mai’ whom’ the: Saviour- took’: ‘to
himself ;’ of ‘old’ Simeon,*#' the Hottentot;' and ‘of converted


Hindoos, of whom’ an account has revently: been: given; (7
but, perhaps, there’ is’ not’ a spot ‘on’ which missionary ||
labours have been long pursued, in’ which some ‘savhsin: |


stances have not appeared, ‘* Let ‘the ‘number in: the “So:


cieti:. of Wesleyans, whose ‘moral and: religious limitations (“4


are numerous, be added to that of communicants ‘on'the prin- (7%


ciples of the Church of England, ‘and let this: estimate be @
increaséd by that of those in the churches of Congregatiowahsts |


and Baptists of this country and Ameriva; and, afte: very w- 4
and faithful deduction, a multitude will eppear of siiceve'@nd |


# 3ee Tahiti and Eiméo, . + See Africanet's:Kréals .¢ See Ceylon: |
{| Bee Karass. § See Canton. ** See Greenland, . $+ See Lubrador,,
tt See Pacaltsdotp, a (Uy


uch secluded,
» Even while
nst, they-are
e atic of
aptives;ant =|
nd; diffusing 4 5
ining thefalsé |
ntendy multi- =| 7
ot’ their: object =
idelity by the =
ing exhibitions 4
‘ourecolomes; iF
olution; which |
{ world, asthe
ects; Mission+
se every lover
he actual-con | i
mind familiar @
hention ofthis, 4
Africanerstthé =”
he Priests oof 4
e Chinese.as-
Indian of the |
im his country? |
jour-took’to |
lof converted |


son'the prine
sg estimate be @
jona het


§
Biss)


of siuveve:and i
Bee Ceylon: |


{
3


XXV


devoted converts to the Christian faith. And if there be joy
in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that
repenteth, what raptures must have been experienced in the
heavenly: world, from a spectacle which ought to thrill with
ecstatic delight the heart of every Christian contemplating it in
vurs{”” 3 owes: ihe

Only one way appears of evading the force of these accumu
lated instances of good, arising from missionary efforts ; it is by
that old but most disingenuous method. sometimes adopted, of
eharging on the: authors of such. statements an. interestedness
and: partiality sufficient to impeach their strict veracity. ..Such
a-charge, }.uwever; was never advanced with so illa grace.as
in srefereace ic Vhristian ‘missionaries... Let the conduct; they
have pursucd, which this;volume describes, demand. its proper
tribute to their self-denial, their meekness, their. patience, their
perseverance—in a word, to their. high ant heavenly heroism.
and though they are and: must be fallible, : the jinsinuation: of
falsehood must at: once be rejected as unfounded .as it is base.
Without ‘pretending that they have attained perfection, that all
are alike, ‘or even. that some have not fallen, justice declares
that:higher excellencies of vharacter,are unknown. than:those
which “Missionaries.. have - displayed. To. their...testimony,
however, ‘another may be: added, from which, it is apprehended,
there can’ be no, appeal : .it is that afforded. by many: persons of
distinction; holding various and important official. stations,. who
have “given, their countenance and support. to missionary
labour. Of :its necessity and success, as well as of the exalted
virtues of its agents, they have frequently avowed.their personal
recognition; amd ‘to set aside their open attestation, is to
plunge into the grossest scepticism. ie ig (R08 Jana higR

A word, in conclusion, must. be addressed. to the. friends of
Missions. On them tt 28. peculiarly incumbent to: learn
much from past experience. Already a, mass. of valuable
information has been obtained, which was antecedently beyond
teach; ‘aud every fragment, now accessible, should be. highly
appreciated and safely treasured up. To the philosophy of
Missions, little attention has yet, unhappily, been given; but
its vast importance: loudly calls for more. . A larger induction


‘of general: principles will, in some cases,. prevent unnecessary


expenditure; and, in others it will secure a greater product than


XXVI


without it could have been realized. One distinguished: indi-
vidual* has studied the subject of Missions. for this; purpose ;
and on the cause of philanthropy and piety. he will confer an
invaluable boon, if he.is disposed.to. continue the effort, and to
complete the course of which we have had some interesting
specimens.t No ordinary pleasure will be afforded to: the
writer of these remarks, if this and succeeding volumes should
prove in any degree an auxiliary to such a result ;—to gather
the. stones for a noble edifice is no mean honour.. .

One conclusion has forcibly struck him:in the exam-
ination he has pursued,—it is the importance of . giving
stability and influence to what. has been effected, -in .pre-
ference to the contemplation of new measures. ‘This ap;
plies particularly to those stations which may be regarded
asa centre of influence, or a fulcrum from which others
may be powerfully moved. _ For we have not.to do merely with
the individual case, but with its bearing and tendencies. A
reference must.be had to its relative importanee; as well as to
its actual necessities. To exhaust our means on an isolated
spot might be justified, if that exclusively demanded assistance ;
but when the claims on.sympathy are so numerous and press-
ing, they must at least primarily be expended on those places
which warrant, from their connexion with others,.an expecta-
tion of the greatest amount of good.: When, for example, a
dense cloud enveloped the Mission to Tahiti, the Directors of
the London Society were asked—Why continue your agents
there ? And to this they might have replied, as, perhaps, they
did—*“ Because, if we succeed, who shall limit the bounds of our
triumph? Look at the islands so thickly seattc red over the vast
Pacific, and comparatively so easy of access; and who will assert
that the attractive influence of the Cross, experienced in one,
shall not pass to another, and another, and another, until all,
brethren in Adam,. are brethren in Christ?” On the same
principle, the Christian Knowledge ey no sooner heard
Bishop Heber’s declaration“ Here is the strength of the
cause in India!” $—than, instead of being diverted by other
objects, to the neglect or enfeebling of this, they appropriated
to it what appeared due to its relative importance as well as
to its exigencies. In «his path the Directors of Missionary


* Dr. Chalmers. + See Orme’s Life of Urquhart. { See Tanjore:


uished: indi-
is; purpose ;
| confer an,
fort, and to
> interesting
rded_ to : the
umes should
;—-to gather


the exam-
> of giving
ted, In. -pre-

. This. ap;
be regarded
vhich others

merely with
dencies. A
1s well as to
. an isolated
d:assistance ;

s and press-

those places

‘an expecta-
r example, a
Directors of
your agents
erhaps, they
ounds of our
over the vast
ho will assert
need in one,
er, until all,
n the same
sooner heard
ength of the
ted by other
appropriated
e as well as
f Missionary


See Tanjore:


% will thec


& ty the small part of Britain hitherto evangelized; let this


xxv


institutions will do well to tread. Let them severally follow up.
what they have begun, unless, in any case, the soundest reasons,
should urge them to pause; applying their means like the skil-
ful general, who does not disperse his energies far and wide,
but brings as many as possible to bear on those points which,
if gained, will command for him other trophies.
In all the movements that are made, there should be.-also
a constant reference to first principles; since those on which
the friends of Missions formerly acted, will retain all their
force until the full glory of the millennium beams upon the world.
Then only will the cry of human misery be hushed,—then only
hanes to afford relief be repealéd: As the flight of time
hastens on that period, the eye may glance at the visions of
prophecy, and at the success already obtained; Christians in
America may be stimulated by Christians in Britain, and the
latter may catch the ardent zeal of their Trans-Atlantic friends;
but in none of these things should the mind be absorbed ; the
reference should be direct and unceasing to the woes of man,


® and to the solemn obligation which rests on every possessor of


the Gospel to promote its diffusion. From hence two valuable


‘® results will arise; the one will regard the means employed, and


the other the spirit in which they are used—the one will secure
the proclamation of ¢he ¢ruth, and the other the continued ex-
ercise of that devotion, benevolence, and zeal, which alone are
suited to its dispensation and advancement.

Nor should it ever be overlooked, that in Missions abroad,
and Missions at home, there is no place for supremacy, or


D even rivalry; the support of both should be cordial and con-


femporaneous. While Foreign Missions should not be delayed


® until Home Missions are unnecessary, the latter should not be


sacrificed to regard for the former. Each should have its ap-


> propriate claim ;—it cannot be withheld from one without injury


to the other. To allow the spirit of Foreign Missions to lan-
guish or evaporate, is to avert from our own Jand unnumbered

lessings—since here, it is true, that they who water others,
shall themselves be watered ; and to suffer that spirit to with-
draw our ey from the moral and spiritual wants of
those immediately around us, is to have their blood required at
our hands, and to weaken the cause we intend to promote.
The principal means now operating in heathen lands are afforded


Xxviii


work process more extensively, and the means will be propor-’
tionably increased. Just‘ as’ men are unsolicitous for their own
best interests, will they be unconcerned about the eternal welfare
of others;’ but in every accession to the Christian Church, there
is that of one, who will ‘gladly offer his efforts, his contribu-
tions, and his prayers, that the Saviour he loves may be uni-
versally adored. Well, then,:may we present the petitions
which were poured forth by ancient believers—“ God be mer-
ciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to. shine upon
us, that thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health
among all people! Let God bless us, and all the ends of the
éarth shall fear him!” ° € iry


RBSBSA SRSA Oh SEPOLE aye


ill be propor-
for their own
ernal welfare
Church, there
his contribu-
may be uni-
the. petitions
God be mer-
o. shine upon
saving health
e ends of the


ABBREVIATIONS EMPLOYED IN THE WORK.


L. M. S. or L. S., London Missionary Society.

C. M. S., Church ditto.

W, M.S. or W. ay Wesleyan ditto.

B. M. S., Ba ditto.

S. M. S.; Scottish ditto.

N. M. S., Netherlands ditto.

U.F. M. S., United Foreign ditto (United States).

A. B.C. F. "M., American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions.
A. B.B. F. M., American Baptist Board for Foreign Missions.
C. M. A., Calcutta Missionary Auxiliary.

M.A. Missionary Association.

M. S., Missionary Society.

4. M. S., Auxiliary Missionary Society.

U. B., United Brethren.

C.K. S., Christian Knowledge Society

8. P. ga 'R. P., Society for Proneettne the Gospel in Foreign Parts.
B. & F. B. S., British and Foreign Bible Society.

B.S., Bible Society.

B. A. Bible Association.

A. B. ’S., Auxiliary Bible Society,

L. J. S., London Jews’ Society,

E. J. S., Edinburgh ditto.


T. S.; Tract Society.
B. F.S. S., British and Foreign School Society.
4. S., Auxiliary Society.


ABU :


ABUROW, orn ABOKU, a
village in the island of Harooka,
.which the Rev. Mr. Kam, of the
L. M. S. occasionally visits. Here
a native schoolmaster, Nicholas
Kiriwinno, collected together the
inhabitants, and, on the 18th of
January, 1822, persuaded them to
abandon idolatry, and to demolish
their idols. He was equally suc-
cessful at five different villages in
the same island. The very ashes of
objects esteemed sacred were cast
into the sea. :

ABYSSINIA, an empire of
Africa, 770 m, long, and 550
broad; bounded on the N.. by
Nubia, E. by the Red Sea, S, by
Gingi and Alaba, and W. by Ni-
gritia and Darfur. It is divided
into two grand districts, Tigre and
Amhara, which are subdivided into
several provinces. The country is
mountainous, but inthe vales the
} soil is fertile. The rainy season
continues from April to September.
This is sicceeded, without interval,
by a cloudless sky, and a vertical
sun; but cold nights constantly
follow these scorching days. ‘The
earth, notwithstanding these days,
is. cold to the soles of the feet;
partly owing to the six months’


rain, when no sun appears, and | to E,


partly to the perpetual equality of
nights and days. No country in the
world produces a greater variety of


MISSIONARY GAZETTEER. —


‘nity to the Arabic.
‘ment is legally a ie but in


ABY


quadrupeds, both wild and tame.
Birds are also numerous, and some
are of an immense size and beauty,
There is a remarkable coincidence
between the customs in the court of
ancient Persia and those of Abys-
sinia. The religion of the country
is a mixture of Judaism and. the
Christianity of the Greek church ;
and the language bears a great affi-
The. govern-


an unsettled state; for the power
of the neguz, or emperor, is: very
weak, and the ras, or prince of the
empire, and the chiefs of the pro-
vinces, are generally in enmity with
one another. ‘The people are of a
dark olive complexion ; their dress is
a light robe, bound with a sash, and
the head is cévered with a turban.
The houses are of.a conic form,
meanly built of clay,. and covered
with thatch ; andeven the churches
are of a round form, encircled by a

rtico. The chief rivers are the

ile and the Tacazze, which have
theirsources in thiscountry. Gondar
is the metropolis.

To Abyssinia, the attention of the
C. M. 8S. was called some years
ago, by the circumstances which
occurred during Mr. Jowett’s visits
t. The B. & F. B.S.
Nas since availed itself of all the
means at its disposal, to prepare the
Scriptures for Abyssinia, -_ jn the

B


ABY


Ethivpic, as the ecclesiastical lan-
guage of the country, and in the
Amharic, as the chief vernacular
dialect. By the active aid of its
learned coadjutors, the four Gos-
pels in Amharic, from the transla-
tion of Abu Rumi, procured for
the Society by Mr. Jowett, in Egypt,
were speedily printed and for-
warded to Abyssinia. The Ethio-
pic Scriptures were also soon
under preparation, in aid of which
the Committee of the C. M. S.
presented to the B. & F. B. S.
some Ethiopic manuscripts, pur-
_ chased by Mr. Jowett at Jeru-
salem, among which was a valu-
able copy of the entire New Tes-
tament. Under these hopeful cir-
cumstances @ mission was con-
templated. On the arrivai from
Basle of five ‘Lutheran clergymen
in 1825, (the Rev. Messrs. Gobat,
Kugler, Krusé, Lieder, and Miil-
ler), three of them were destined
to this service, and the other two
to occupy such stations in the Me-
diterranean, as might appear most
eligible, in reference to a con-
nexion with Abyssinia. Mr. Koel-
ner, a German printer, who accom-
panied them. to this country, was
also selected as an assistant in their
important work. Mr. Lieder writes,
in 1826, “In February, or-the be-
ginning of March, I intend to pro-
ceed to Upper Egypt, taking with
ane an Arabie servant, a treasure of
40 or 50 Bibles, 100 New Testa-
ments, and a considerable number
of Tracts and Arabic Spelling
Books. I think, at first, to live
‘two or three months at Kene, as
well for doing good to many as for
improving my knowledge in Ara-
bic.”?» The ancient church of the
‘Copts, who form the largest Chris-
‘tian ¢ommunity, and are the old in-
‘bubitants of the country, will chiefly
‘engage the attention of those who
are occupied in the ‘Egyptian
mission; end as their number
in Alexandria is very emall com-


ABY
pared with that at Cairo, the latter,
where facilities for the introduction
of the Scriptures and religious
publications are great, is suggested
as the proper residence of the mis-
sionaries, Of the Copts and Mus-
sulmans, Mr. Gobat thus speaks :—
‘¢ The Copts are reserved. Brother
Krusé has been well received by
the Patriarch. I hope something
will be done for them; though
nothing encourages the hope of
success, but the promised grace of
God and the misery of the people.
It will be very difficult to do any
thing for the Mussulmans, until the
mighty arm of the Lo.d ‘interfere
in a particular manner. ‘The ‘fol-
lowing fact will give an idea of the
sentiments of the most tolerant
nation of the Turkish empire :—A
Turkish woman, being divorced
from her husband, lived with a
Greek fortwo yeats—whether mar-
ried or unmarried is not known,
nor is it known whether she had
been baptized; but she had made
the mark of the cross on her arm :
her husband (the Greek) had a
Turkish servant, who, being dis-
satisfied with his master, went, four
weeks ago, to the father .of the
woman, who is a man of sonie con-
sequence; the fatber went imme-
diately with some soldiers to take
her into custody; after which she
was examined. As she confessed
herself to be a Christian, ‘she was
condemned to be drowned in the
Nile: they put her upon an ass,
and conducted her to the Boulac,
amidst the maledictions of a mul-
titude: they then took her into a
small boat on the stream, and strip-
ping off her clothes’ and drna-
ments; (the more briskly, as she
continued to say, ‘I shall die a
Christian,’) they bound hes arms

ther on her back, and cast her
into the Nile, where she expired.
Others had, in the mean time,


made a great fire for the husband, |


who had been on to be


ane ae =


a ee eee ee ee


2aA8CG man 2 6 Bw ook


a


a
2SSS7RMS&2 tere or6>


iro, the latter,
e introduction
and religious
t, is suggested
ce of the mis-
opts and Mus-
thus speaks :—
srved. Brother
ll received by
ype something
hem; though
the hope of
mised grace of
of the people.
cujt to do any
mans, until the
Lo.d interfere
ner. ‘The ‘fol-
» an idea of the
most tolerant
sh empire :—A
eing divorced
lived with a
—whetheér mar-
is not known,
hether she had
she had made
oss on her arm :
Greek) had a
ho, being dis-
ster, went, four
father of the
n of sonte con-
by went imme-
oldiers to take
fter which she
s she confessed
istian, ‘she was
rowned in the
r upon an ass,
to the Boulac,
ions of a mul-
ook her into a
eam, and strip-
hes‘ ghd drna-
briskly, as she


Ln a Se ary


‘I shall die a |


ound hes arms
k, and cast her
» she oxpited.
é mean fime,
for the husband,


re to be &


; ACC
burnt; but when be saw it, he said
he would not die, and made himself
a Mussulman in order toreceive the
pardon, which will probably ruin
his soul for ever.’ » The mission-
aties.appointed:to Abyssinia, met
at Cairo with a young ‘native of
that country, named: Girgis, who,
there {s reason to hope, ‘will greatly
facilitate the attainment of their
object: A Mahomedan Abyssinian,
who had accompanied Girgis, was
also admitted into their family. At
the publication of the last Report,
the missionaries had not arrived at
ACCRA, or ACRE, a British‘
Fort on: the coast of Guinea, W.
Africa. E. lon. 1° 29’, N. lat.
5° 40’,


' In. the early part of 1622, a
flourishing school was patronized
here by The African Institution,
consisting of 52 boys, many of
whom had made considerable pro-
gress in writing, grammar, and
‘arithmetic. The teachers per-
formed Divine service in the hall
every Sabbath. The progress of
civilization and morality is also
very pleasing. :

ADANJORE, or ADANJOUR,
a village in Hindoostan, 17 m. from
Tanjore. E. lon. 79°, N. lat. 10°.

In 1802 the missionaries at Zan-
Jore,under the Society for Promoting
Christian Knowléd ge, had laboured
here with success, and stationed a
Catechist; nine families had re-
ceived baptism, and, being assisted
by several Christian families in the
vicinity, they erected a’ house for
public worship.

AFRICA, one of the four grand
divisions of the world; bounded on
the N. by the Mediterranean Sea;
E. by the Isthmus of Suez, the
Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean; S.
by the Southern Ocean ; and W. by
the Atlantic Ocean. : It is a pe-
ninsula of prodigious extent, and
joined to Asia by the isthmus of,
Suez, which is 125 m. over. In


AFR

its greatest length, from the most
northern part'to the Cape.of Good
Hope, it is 4600 m.; and :in the
broadest part, from Cape Verd to
Cape Guardafui, it is 3500... The
greater part lies within the torrid
zone, which,renders the heat almost
insupportable in many places ; but
the coasts in general..are very fer-
tile, the fruits excellent, and the
plants extraordinary. There are
more. wild beasts than in any other
part of the world; also some ani-
mals peculiar to this country. Be-
sides these, there are crocodiles,
ostriches, camels, and many other
animals: not to be met with. in
Europe. There are-several desert,
particularly one of a lerge extent,
called Sahara; but these are not
quite without inhabitants. There
are many large rivers, of which the
principal are the Nile, Niger, Zaire,
Senegal, and Gambia. The most
considerable mountains are, the
Atlas, the Mountains of the Moon-
and the Sierra Leone. The inha,
bitants consist. of Pagans, Maho-
medans, and Christiane. The first,
who possess the greatest part of the
country, from the Tropic of Cancer
to the Cape of Good Hope, are the
most numerous, and are generally
black. The Mahomedans, who
are tawney, possess Egypt and the
coast of Barbary. In ‘the N. of
Africa aresome Jews, who manage
all the little trade of that part of
the country. The principal :divi-
sions of Africa are, Barbary,
Egypt, . Sahara, Nigritia, Guinea,
Bornou, Kassina, Fezzan, Tim-
buctoo, Nubia, Abyssinia, Abex,
Loango, Congo, Angole, Benguela,
Mataman, Zanguebar, Monoemugi,
Caffraria, and the country of the
Hottentots. jie Abyssinia, Afri-
enner’s Kraal, Aloany, Alexandria,
Algoa Bay, Bathurst, Bethany,
Bananas, Bosjeveld, Bethelsdorp,
Bullom, Campbell, Caffraria, Cape
Colony, Cape Town, Charlotte,
Enon, Freetown, Gon, Coast,


AFR

-Gloucesier, Gnadenthal, :Groene-
kloof, Griqua Town rein J Kent,
Khamies Berg, Kissey, takoo,
Leicester, Leopold, Liberia, Ma-
guasse, Namaqualand, Paarl, Pa-
caltsdorp, Pella, Philippolis, Plan-
tains, Regent, Sierra Leone, Stel-
lenbosch, Steinkopff, St. Mary's,
River Gambia, Tulbagh, Theopolis,
Weltington, Waterloo, York.

AFRICANER’S KRAAL,
called also Peace Mountain and
Jerusalem, a séttlement in Great
Namaqualand, S. Africa, a little
N. of the Orange R. 550 m. N. of
Cape Town, late the residence of
the Chief Africaner, who was long
known as a most sanguinary free-
‘booter.

The Rev. Mr. Campbell, of
the L. M. S., when in Africa,
‘wrote to him a conciliatory letter, to
induce him, if possible, to live in
peace with the missionaries. This
appeal ‘was, happily, successful ;
and a mission was formed among
his people. The preaching of the
cross was subsequently crowned
with abundant success. The chief
himself was heard to say, shortly
after the commencement of Mr.
‘Ebner’s labours, in 1815, “T° a

lad that I am deliver-d. I have
ong enough been engaged in the
service of the devil; but now I am
freed from his bondage, Jesus
hath deliveredme ; him therefore I
willserve,and with him Iwill abide.”’

‘© To form a proper estimate,”
says Dr. Philip, soon after, “ of the
change effected upon Africener, his
former character and circumstances
must be taken into consideration.
A few years since, he was such a
terror to the colony, that a thou-
sand dollars were offered to any
man who would shoot him; and
when Mr. Campbell crossed Africa,
in his first journey, he was more
alarmed with the idea of meeting
Africaner, than with all the other
dangers to which he was exposed.
What a change has now taken


AFR


place! The persecutor is turned
into the warm friend of mission-
aries; the savage has laid aside
his barbarous habits, and has be-
come docile and gentle as a child;
and the man who was formerly the
plunderer and terror of the colo-
nists, is now a friend of peace and


justice, and is the centre of union, -


and ‘the bond of harmony, between
the subjects of the British Govern-
ment and the savage tribes with
which they are surrounded, ‘and
even among those tribes them-


selves. In proof of the latter ‘as- |


sertion, Mr. Moffatt states that in
travelling along the banks of the
Orange R. he met with a tribe of
Bastard Hottentots, who were re-
moving from the place of their
former abode. Being asked why
they were desirous of a new sta-
tion, they replied, that it was in
consequence of the intended re-
moval of Africaner from Na-
maqualand. When Mr. Moffatt
asked why that circumstance, if
true, should induce them to change
their place of residence, they re-
plied, that if Africaner removed,
they could not live in that part of
the country; for it was his in-
fluence that kept all the tribes in
peace; and that as soon as he was
gone, they would begin murdering
each other.’’

In 1817, Mr. Ebner had baptized
about 40 convertsand theirchildren,
and about 400 attended public wor-
ship. A school was also prosperous.
Mr. Robert Moffatt joined Mr. E.


in the early part of 1818, and they .


both left the station to the care of


Africager before the close of the ,


year, who efficiently supplied the
place of the missionaries, by regu-
larly meeting with the people on
the Sabbath, and expounding to
them the Scriptures. The B. § IF.
B. S. forwarded 100 Bibles and
100 Testaments to this station, in
the Dutch language, which were
usefully distributed.
4


itor is turned
id of mission-
tas. laid aside
, and has be-
tle as a child;
s formerly the
>of the colo-
of peace and


ntre of union,


nony, between
titish Govern-
re tribes with
‘rounded, ‘and
‘tribes them-


the latter ‘as- _


_ states that in
banks of the
vith a tribe of
who were re-
lace of their
ng asked why
of a new sta-
hat it was in
intended re-
r from Na-
Mr. Moffatt
cumstance, if
hem to change
nce, they re-
ner removed,
n that part of
was his in-
the tribes in
pon as he was
yin murdering


r had baptized
their children,
pd public wor-
30 prosperous,
oined Mr. E.


to the care of


supplied the
ries, by regu-
he people on
xpounding to
The B. & F.
) Bibles and
his station, in
which were


4


$18, and they .


> close of the |


Aul


Since: the death of, Africaner; in
1822, various circumstances have
prevented the continuance of mis-
sionary labours.

AGIMEER, or AGMEER, an
extensive province of Hindoostan
Proper, 350 m. long and 200 broad,
The S. W. part is a sandy desert,
and thinly inhabited; the central
part hilly, containing salt lakes and
springs that produce salt sponta-


neously ; and the S, E. part: moun-


tainous, with fertilevalleys and plains
intervening. Inthe southern part
of. this province are several Rajpoot
states, governed by rajahs and petty
chiefs. . The Rajpoots ere stout
and brave, with hooked noses and
Jewish ‘features ; haughty in their
manners, very indolent, much ad-
dicted to the use of opium, and
extremely attached to their re-
spective chiefs. ais

Agimeer the capital of the above
province, is situated in a pleasant
valley, and is on all sidesxsurrounded
by mountains. Its circumference
is 6 m. ‘It is guarded by, walls,
towers, and a strong fortress, and
has .been lately added to the Bri-
tish territory. E. lon. 75° 20’, N.
lat. 26°24’, .

The-prejudices and superstitions
of the: people are very strong and
inveterate, which may be conceived
from the following circumstance :—

Here is the tomb of a Mahome-
dan saint, who flourished about 600
years since, .reputed one of ‘the
greatest that ever appeared in Hin-
doostan, whom Hindoos and Mus-
sulmans worship, and by whose
name they swear. The number
of priests who subsist on the con-


tributions paid at the tomb by de-:


votees from all regions, exceeds
1,100.

The Rev. Jabez Carey, from the
B. M. S. commenced his labours in


1819, and engaged in establishing


schools,. in order to introduce the
Gospel. The Marquis of Hastings
suggested the enterprise, and made


AGR
two grants for the object, amount,
ing to 10,000 rupees; which being
expended, he. granted 300 rupees
monthly, for the support and in-


crease of the schools.. No accounts


of Mr, Carey’s labours have lately
been received. ya
- AGRA, apravince of Hindoostan
Proper, 250 m. long and 180 broad;
bounded on the N., by Delhi, E. by
Qude and Allahabad, S. by Malwah,
and W. by Agimeer. ;
. The capital of this province is a
large city, the air of which is eg-
teemed very healthy. The .R:
Jumna runsthrough it for five kross.
The emperor Acber founded here
a most magnificent city, which is
now, for the mosf part, a heap of
ruins, The city rises from the R.
Jumna, and extends in a vast semi-
circle. The fort, in. which is.in-
cluded the imperial palace, which
occupied above. 1000 labourers for
12 years, and cost nearly 3,000,000
rupees, is of great extent. This city
was taken by Madhajee Sindia, and
continued in the possession of the
Mabrattas until 1803, when it was
captured by the British army under
General Lake, after a short and
vigorous siege. It has ever since
remained in the possession of the
British Government, and is the seat
of a civil establishment, for the col-
lection of the revenue and.the ad-
ministration of justice. 100 m.
S.5.E. . Delhi, E. long. 77° 56’, N.
lat. 27° 12’. Population about40,000.
At the commencement of 1811,
the Baptist missionaries considere!


it expedient to form a regular mis-


sion in Hindoostan, which should
comprize Agraand Patna, at which
Mr. Moore and his wife had: been
for some time. Accordingly, on
the 21st of January, Messrs. Cham-


-berlain and Peacock, with their


families, and a. baptized Hindoo
named Vrundavun, jset out from
Serampore to occupy the new sta-
tion.

On the 17th of May the mission-
“BQ 5


AGR


aries arrived at Agra, where they
were kindly received by the person
to.whom they were recommended,
and, after a short time, a serjeant
major at the fort accomniodated
them with the use of his quarters,
for the celebration of Divine service
on the Lord’s day,-and on Thurs-
day, evenings. Severe afflictions,
however, both personal and do-
mestic, exercised their faith and
patience. Early in 1812, the mis-
sionaries were prohibited, by a mili-
tary order, from preaching in the
fort ; and, in consequence of Mr.
C. addressing a note on the subject
to the commanding officer, a com-
munication was made by that gen-
tleman to.Government,and an order
arrived for Mr. C. to be sent down
to the presidency. The Agra ma-


gistrate, however, who was intrust-
ed with the execution of this order,
behaved with the utmost kindness
and urbanity, ordering the persons
who should have had the charge of


him to attend him to Calcutta, a
distance of nearly 900 miles, as his
servants. Itis also pleasing to add,
that on his appearance atthe office
of police, nothing more was said to
him, than that he was at Kberty.
Just before this occurrence, the
aspect of affairs began to brighten.
‘¢ Four men,” observes‘ Mr. Pea-
cock, ‘‘ who remained at this sta-
tion, apparently love to read and
hear the pure word of God : and one
of them has, within these last few
weeks, offered himself as a candi-
date for believer’s baptism.”’ This
person was baptized Aug. 7, 1812.
Several persons, previously votaries
of pleasure, exchanged their cards
and backgammon for the Bible and
the Hymn Book, instituted family
prayer, and constantly attended
public worship ; at which a large
congregation of natives ordinarily
‘ assembled. One person set up a
native school on her own premises
and at her own expense, and con-


tributed, in a short time, 550 rupees


AGR


to the mission. Mr. Peacock con-
tinued at Agra till the year 1816,
and many who were brought by his
instrumentality and that of his suc-
cessors, from the pathsof the deé-
stroyer, are stated at a recent pe-
tiod to have been living es burning
and shining lights in that dark part
of the earth.

This place has also engaged the
attention of the C. M.S. In No-
vember, 1812, Abdool Messeeh, .#
converted native of Deihi, one of
the fruits of the Rev. HenryMartyn’s
ministry, accompanied the Rev,
Daniel Corrie to Agre, with the de-
sign of settling there, as a public
reader and catechist. On his ar-
rival he commenced his work with
great zeal, and as many hundred
persons had recently flocked to the
neighbourhood, in consequence of
a scarcity in the Mahratta country,
occasioned by a terrible droughi,
he went among them distributing
pice, or halfpence, and inviting
them to hear the Gospel,and to send
their children to him to learn to
read. At first theyreceived him as
an angel of light; but a report
having been circulated, that he was
an Arabian, who wi.t:d to carry
off their children, the poor natives,
for several days, refused to receive
the charity he offered them, or to
hear any thing from him. In the
course of a week or two, however,
they perceived that their-suspicions
were unfounded; and his public
services were attended by hundreds,
many of whom,on hearing an expo-
sition of the decalogue, cried out
aloud, ‘‘ These are true words; and
the curse of God will fall upon us,
if we obey them not.’’ Indeed, the
congregations soon began to in-
crease rapidly, and comprised many
respectable persons, both Hindoos
and Mahomedans. A school was
also opened for the instruction of
children ; persons visited the cate-
chist every day for religious con-
versation ; and a venerable old man,

6


Peacock con-
he year 1816,
brought by his
hat of his suc-
ths of the dé-
t a recent pe-
ing es burning

that dark part


o engaged the
M.S. in. No-
ol Messeeh, @
Delhi, one of
Henry Martyn’s
nied the Rev,
ra, with the de-
re, as a public
t, On his ar-
1 his work with
many hundred
y flocked to the
consequence of
hratta country,
srrible drought,
em distributing
, and inviting
spel,and to send
im to learn to
received him as
but a report
ted, that he was
wiend to carry
he poor natives,
fused to receive
ed them, or to
m him. In the
two, however,
their-suspicions
and his public
Hed by hundreds,
earing an expo-
logue, cried out
rue words ; and
ill fall upon us,
t.’? Indeed, the
began to in-
omprised many
, both Hindoos
A school was
p instruction of
jisited the cate-
religious con-
erable old man,


F
3
G
P


Me
ee
ed


AGR


who stated that-he was 90 years of
age, acknowledged that his soul
had been greatly refreshed by the

things he had heard.

The 10th of June, 1813, is no-

ticed in Abdool’s Journal, as ‘the

day on which the doctrine of Christ
witnessed a triumph.” ‘ For three

weeks past,”? says he, ‘a faqueer
of the Jogi tribe has come fre-

quently to our morning worship in

the school. On Tuesday, the chap-

ter to be read in order was John 17.
The subject of it, and our Lord’s

manner towards his disciples, ar-

rested the attention of the Jogi, and

the tears flowed plentifully down

his cheeks. To-day he brought his

wife and child; said he was a con-

vert to Jesus, without reserve ; and

began of'himself to take off his

faqueer’s dress. He first took the

beads from his neck; broke the

string to which the charm given him

by his goroo was suspended; and

broke off an iron ring worn round

his waist, and to which an iron rod

about two feet long was attached.

He then put on some old clothes
which we had by us, and said he

wished to be instructed in the
Gospel, and to get some employ-

ment. A rupee being given to pro-

eure food for the family, his wife

went and bought a spinning-wheel,
saying, she would spin and earn a
livelihood ; and the whole family
afterwards eat their dinner with us
of their own accord. These are

wonders in the history of a Hin-

doo.”’? Two. days afterwards, a
Mussulman came to the house, and

asked the Jogi if he had really be-

come a Christian? He answered,

* Yes; and have just now been

eating beef with Abdool Messeeh.”’

The Mahomedan then turned to the
Jogi’s wife, and inquired if she

had embraced the same faith;

asking, at the same time, what
could have induced her to renounce
her former religion for Christian-


ity? She replied, that by the grace


AGR


of God she had become a Christian’
and though she had not yet learned:
much of the Gospel, and being but
a rustic, could not dispute with a
learned man like him} yet what
she had heard of the doctrine of
Christ had Lines rest and peace
to her soul, therefore she had
embraced it. In July, 1814, Ab-
dool visited his relatives at Luck-
now, to whom he published the glad
tidings of salvation; and on the J) th
of August he returned to Agra, ac-

companied by his father and five

other members of his family, with

several other persons, one of whom,
an aged Molwee, appeared desirous
for the welfare of his soul. “About

a week after Abdool’s retarn, the:
Rev. Mr. Corrie was compelled by

ill health to quit Agra, in order

to visit England ; and on his depar-

ture he remarks, that ‘ during the

preceding 16 months, 71 natives
had received baptism, of whom

about 50 were adults, about half
Mahomedans, and the other half
Hindoos. Of these, one had been

expelled; 6 had apostatized; 4 had

gone to their friends, and were, it

was hoped, holding fast their pro-

fession ; and others were occupying’
different stations as’ readers and

catechists.”? Soon after his remo-

val, however, the infant church

began to decline ; but Abdool, not-

withstanding the indolence and in-

attention of some of the teachers
in the schools, and the removal of
Mr. Bowley to Chunar, continued

to bear a faithful testimony to the
truth, and to watch over his flock
with unremitting vigilance; his
health, however, having been for
a considerable time in an infirm

state, he visited Calcutta in 1820;

and, in the month of October, re-

ceived Lutheran ordination.

On his return to Agra, the in-
terest seems to have revived: many
nominal Christians, who, it was be-
lieved, had not entered a place of
worship for many years, became

7


AGR


regular attendants on Sabbath days,
as did many persons of..the. Arme-
nian: and Roman Catholic persua-
sions; while a few Hindoos and
Mussulmans occasionally visited
the church,

The ‘‘ Missionary Register’? for
February, 1825, says—‘ Public.
worship’ is carried on as usual,
at the kuttra; and-the venerable
Abdool’. Messeeh, notwithstanding
the infirm state of his health, has
recently ‘officiated at the military
cantonment,on Sunday afternoon,to
the professing Christians connected '
with the native regiments. An
addition tothe church, of seven
men ahd ‘three women, has been
lately made by baptism.’’

The improved state of feeling
at this station is evident from the
following extractfrom hisjournal: —
“‘ Formerly; 'the people of this city
were much offended with me, and
said very evil things of me; J al-
ways showed them kindness, and
often attended them:with medicines
when they were sick ; and, by the
grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
many of them received healing of
dangerous diseases ; often, also,: I
endeavoured to heal their spiritual
sicknesses, and many of these peo-
ple received and read. religious
books's and it is become evident’ to
all, that Christians love all mankind,
and desire no evil to any one,
Now, in the place of enmity, these
people begin to show kindness ;
and, moreover, invite me -to their
houses, and send me portions from
their friendly entertainments; for
instance, to day, Meer Seynd :Ali,
who is headman to the Collector,
sent me a friendly note, saying—


is to-day to be married: yOw.will
greatly oblige me by making one of
our company.’ I sent'for answer—
‘“‘ Since the day that by the grace


“The daughter of me, a: oul


~ of God [ was honoured with bap-


tism, IT have renounced all as-
semblies for dancing ‘and music,


AIT


and I should be ashamad, with this
white beard, and broken teeth, te


‘show. myself at a wedding feast.’?


He sent, in reply—‘* I have: read
in the:blessed Gospel, that the Lord
Jesus himself honoured a wedding
at Cana of Galilee with His pre-
sence, and ‘there miraculously
turned water into wine: if you
will not come, we shall all con-
clude that you disobey the tradi-
tion of the divine Jesus. If you
excuse yourself on account of the
dancing, &c. I will prepare a sepa-
rate apartment for you, and will
invite some aged person, like your
self, to keep you company.”’ I was


rejoiced on hearing this, since it


appeared these people read the Gos-
pels. In the evening, after wor-
ship, I wentto his house: they had
prepared a_ separate apartment,
where several aged persons, learned
in religion, ‘and wealthy, were col«
lected, all of whom received me
with respect ; and we continued to
converse on religious subjects, in a
very friendly manner, till midnight:
from their conversation, I enter-
tained some hope respecting them.
The blessing of God still appears to
attend Abdool’s labours.
AITUTAKI, one of the Har-
vey Islands, where two native
preachers have been placed by the
L..M. 8. Among’ its inhabitants,
who have embraced Christianity,
decency and order are now:conspi-+
cuous. They are diligent in learn-
ing, and many of them can read
and repeat the catechism Well ; the
number baptized, including’ chil-
dren, is 615. Family and private
prayer are general, and Mr. Bourne
observes, that no congregation in
England could attend with more
propriety tothe ordinances ef reli-
‘gion, than the people of Aitutaki.
A chapel, erected in 1825, has been
completed. Civilization is making
rapid progress. ‘The houses of the


principal chiefs are ~substantial


The number of plas-
8


buildings. |


that the Lord
ed a wedding
vith His pre-
miraculously
wine: if you
shall all con-
yey the tradi-
esus. If you
ccount of the
repare a sepa-
you, and w.
son, like yours
pany.” Iwas
this, since it
e read the Gos-
ng, after wor-
yuse: they had
te apartment,
yersons, learned


Ithy, were col« | x


n received me
ve continued to
s subjects, in a@
ry, till midnight:
ation, I enter-
pspecting them.
1 still appears to


urs.

e of the Har-

e two native

placed by the

its inhabitants,

bd Christianity,

are now.conspis+

iligent in learn-

them can read
hism well; the
including” chil-
ily and private
and. Mr. Bourne
ongregation in
end with: more
inances ef reli-
le of Aitutaki.
| 1825, has been
vation is making
he houses of the
are ‘substantial
umber of plas-

8


ALB


tered dwelling-houses is nearly 150,
many of them furnished with sofas,


‘&e. &ec. '
a newly-established


ALBANY,
district in the Eastern part of Cape
Colony, South Africa, extending
from Bosjesmans River to the
Keiskamma. The extent of the
new settlement is about 60 m.
i by 30. In_ 1820, the settlers

; amounted to 15,000. The con-
dition of grants to the colonists is,
that they cultivate the soil with-
out slaves. The soil is productive,
_ and the climate healthy.

The Albany mission was origi-
nally commenced by the Wesleyan
Soctety, with the settlers who
went out from, England, in the
hope that it would connect itself
with the Hottentots, and. ulti-
mately prepare the means for ex-
tending the Gospel among the Caf-
fre tribes, These hdpes have been
realized, and that more immediately
and extensively than was previously
anticipated. Agents have likewise
been raised up to accompany those


fo


selves among the savages in Caf-
fraria.’ From this mission, esta-
blished but a few years, the follow-
ing stations have arisen:-- Graham’s
Town, where there is a chapel with
about 600 hearers; a congregation
andsmall society of Hottentots; and
an English and a Hottentot school.
Salem, a smaller station, with a
chapel also, and a school. /Ves-
= ley-Mount, where are a chapel, a
msociety, and a school. At Poré
Francis, Salem Hills, and Clum-
ber, societies also have been
‘formed, and chapels are about to
be erected. Somerset, a promising
new station, has been lately visited,
and gives access to many of the
heathen as well as to the colonists.
These are regarded as highly gra-
tifying prospects ; for the increased
influence of pure religion among
he colonists, ‘must furnish, to a
Harge extent, suitable agents for


| brethren, who have planted them- |.


ALE,


the conducting of schools and mis-
sions among the neighbouring
tribes of Pagan Africans. The
commercial intercourse of this
colony with some of these tribes’
will also probably become exten-
sive, and will co-operate, with
means of religious instruction, to
bring them under the influence of
Christianity ; and the whole seems
to furnish another example of that
connexion of providential events
with the purposes of Christ as. to
the salvation of the Heathen,which,
in the present day, has been so
often and so strongly marked, On
these Christian settlements, as they
advance in population, and are
brought into regular intercourse
with the heathen around them,
the care of extending: the know-
ledge of Christ into the .‘‘ regions
beyond,’? ‘will ultimately chiefly
devolve, and the Society be left at
liberty to employ its efforts in be-
half of tribes more distant.. Two
missionaries are employed in the
Albany Mission.

ALEXANDRIA, a. town of
Egypt, now much decayed, though
there are still some remains of
ancient splendour. It was first
built by Alexander the Great, and


‘was several miles in extent; but at


present it consists chiefly of one
long street. It was formerly ia
place of great trade, all the traa-
sures of the East Indies being de-
posited here, before the discovery
of the route-by the Cape of Good
Hope. Alexandria was taken by
the French invaders under Buona-
parte, in 1798, and. taken’ from
them by the English, in 180}. It.
surrendered to the English in 1807,
but was soon after evacuated.
Here is an obelisk called Cleopa-
tra’s Needle; also Pompey’s Pillar,
and the ancient Pharos, now a’
castle called Pharillon. Alexandria
is seated on the Mediterranean,
125 m. W.N.W. Cairo, E. lon.


30° 10’, N. lat. 31° 1)’,


ALG


The intercourse which has in so
extraordinary aud unexpected a
manner, sprang. up-hetween this
conntry and Egypt, bas brought
this very: degraded country under
the eye of-those who are deeply
solicitous for the universal spread
of the'Gospel. The reviving com-
merce. of Egypt has already led to
the: residence of many of our own
countrymen at its principal sea
port, who are as yet destitute, for
‘the most part, of Christian ordi-
nances, in that land of Mahome-
dan. darkness .and almost extinct
Christianity... To meet, in some
degree, the wants of the people,
the Rev. Mr. Macpherson was sent
out to Alexandria in 1825, by the
W.M. S. He was for some time
preverited from any reguler en-
gagement, by the prevalence of
the plague, but. has since held reli-
gious’ conversations, in different

ges, with various persons,
and has hopes of the con,ersion of
arespéctable Abyssinian lady, whom
he found unacquainted with almost
every form of religion, and to
whom he has administered bap-
tism.: He has for some time regu-
larly preached to the seamen in the
Port, an board one of the vessels.
In w lettter recently received, Mr.
M. says :—‘‘ On" the Subbath, I
preach at the Consular Hall, at 9
A. M, afloat at 11 o’clock, and in
my house at 4 p.m. I hope soon
to be enabled to report more fa-
vourably of Alexandria, I have
some thoughts of soon commenc-
ing preaching in Arabic. My
teacher informs me that he thinks
several of the natives might be in-
duced to attend.’’.

ALGOA BAY, a settlement of
Hottentots, on. Zwartkopts River in
Cape Colony, South Africa, 500
m. E. of Cape Town, E. lon, 26°53’,
S. lat. 39°60’

. Dr. Vanderkemp and Mr. James
Rend arrived at ihis place in 1802,
both being .connecied with


ALG


LE. M.§. About 100 Hottentots
accompanied them from

Reynet, under the escort of Major
Sherlock, some of whom sepa-
tated from them on the way, and
others joined them, so that there
were about 80 on their arrival.
This measure was the effect of a
correspondence betwixt his Ex-
cellency General Dundas, the
Governor of the colony, and Dr,
Vanderkemp; the former having
requested the latter to furnish
him with a plan for the formation
to a Hottentot village, with a view
to civilization. The plan sug-
gested was approved by the Govers
nor, who expressed. his intention
of supporting it, by furnishing pro-
visions to the Hottentots for a rea-
sonable time, and sending a part
of the materials necessary for the
construction of the intended settle-
ment. This‘design was accom:


plished, so far as related to the .


provisions, which were sent in a
ship appointed for that purpose;
but the final adjustment of the
measure was postponed.

In the course of the year 4 set-
tlement was formed at Bota’s-
place, about 8 m. from the Bay,
and its aspect was very encouraging;
but, unbappily, some violent dis-
eases, supposed to be occasioned
by the stagnated waters of the
neighbourhood, began to hake
thelr appearance among the peo-
ple. Dr. Vanderkemp himself was-
afflicted; by which his public
labours were totally suspended,
and his patience tried by a con-
finement to his bed for eleyen
months. The efforts of his coad-
jutor, Mr. Read, were continued,
with no small difficulties and ob-
structions of a local nature; on
which account his Excellency Go-
vernor Dundas favoured the Doctor
with a visit; and representing to
him the unhappy posture of affairs,
and the extreme danger to which


the | the missionaries would be exposed,


0 Hottentots 7
from is
cort of Major |
whom sepa-
the way, and a
so that there {
their arrival.
e effect of @
vixt his Ex-
Dundas, the
ony, and Dr, Be
ormer having = @%
yr to furnish
the formation !
e, with a view
he plan sug-
by the Gover

| his: intention
furnishing pro-
ntots for a rea-
sending a part
cessary for the
ntended setile-

n was accome-
related to the .
vere sent in @
that purpose ;
istment of the
ned.

the year & set-
ed at Bota’s-
from the Bay,
y encouraging;
me violent dis-
be occasioned
waters of the
van to snake
mong the peo-
imp himself was-
h his public
lly suspended,
ied by a con-
ed for eleyen
ts of his coad-
ere continued,
ulties and ob-
al nature; on
xcelleney Go-
red the Doctor
epresenting to
sture of affairs,
hnger to which
ld saa ai


ALG


when’ the English gafrison should
be withdrawn from the neighbour-
ing fort, at Algoa Bay, strongly
recommended it to him to desist,
for the present, from the prosecu-
tion of his benevolent plan in that
quarter, and to retire to a place of
greater safety. The Doctor, how-
ever, respectfully replied, that he
was determined to remain faithful
to: the call of his God ; and should
his life be made a sacrifice in con-
sequence of abiding withthe peo-
ple, he was perfectly ready to lose
it for the sake of the least child
among them. Mr. Read, actuated
by the same fortitude of spirit,
though left hy his colleague entirely
to the dictates of hisown judgment,
made the same resolution, adding,
that should Dr. Vanderkemp have
thought proper to withdraw from
the scene of danger, it was his own
determination to abide with the
people. The worthy Governor,
finding his prudential admonitions
fruitless, desisted, and could further
manifest his benevolence only by
presenting them with a very liberal
supply of oxen end -sheep, with
other useful articles for their sup-
port, and for their assistance in
agriculture; -and by: empowering
them immediately to take posses-
sion of the fort, as a place of
safety. This latter measure, the
missionaries thought proper to de-
cline for the present; reserving,
however, the right of availing
themselves of the generous offer,
should future circumstances render
it necéssary.

This necessity, alas! was too
soon apparent ; for only eight days
had elapsed after the departure of
the soldiers from the garrison,
when the ‘missionaries were sud-
denly assnulted in the middle of a
dark night, by a furtous barftitti,
whose object seemed to be, not only
the destruction of their property,
but of their lives also. The as-
sailants fired their muskets at them


ALG
not less than fifty:times; yet, -bap-
pily, no lives were lost. In ‘this
awful moment of danger, the Hot-


tentots who were with the Dactor


insisted’ on repelling force by force,


and accordingly fired twice, and
twice only, and at random, among
the invading party. The assault,
frm what cause they could not
then guess, immediately ceased,
and-the party withdrew. ‘When.the
morning arrived, it was found :that
one of the shots had penetrated the
thigh of the Hottentot chief, ‘and
by dividing a principal artery, oe-
casioned such .e loss of blood, as
put a period to his life-in a few
minutes. The enemy, however,
enraged and reinforced, renewed
the attack in the following night;
but, finding the settlement in a
better state of defence; judged it
prudent to withdraw ; after which
the missionaries thought themselves
called by Providence to retire
to the asylum which the neigh-
bouring fort afforded, and in which
they were preserved in safety from
the violence of their enemies.

When his Excellency Governor
Jansens had taken possession of
the Cape for the Dutch Republic,
he paid a visit to Dr. Vander-
kemp, and expressed his opinion
that the missionaries should re-
move to a more eligible situation ;
and having himself looked out for
a suitable spot, recommended their
immediate removal to it. ‘With
this advice they thought it their
duty at once to. comply, and
accordingly removed to the ap-
pointed place, situated westward
of Algoa Bay, at the mouth of the
Zwartkopts River, and geve it the
name of Bethel Village.

In the midst of these unfavour-
able and threatening circumstances,
the work of God was proceeding : a
goodly number of the poor Hotten-
tots were convertéd from the ‘error
of their ways, and of this afford-
ed the most sutisfactory —

1


ALL


Tnone year more than 200. were
baptized, and many of them. were
admitted to the communion. They
kept every week a feast of charity,
resembling the Agape of the first
Christians, which they always con-
cluded by the celebration of the
Lord’s Supper.—[ See Bethelsdorp.]

ALLABAG, capital of an inde-
pendent Mahratta Prince, Hindoos-
tan, about 20 m. down the coast
from Bombay, and 9 N. of Rawa-
dunda.

The American Missionaries - at
Bombay have established a prosper-
ous school here, under a Jewish
teacher, which they occasionally
visit. In 182] it contained about
40 scholars, 12 of whom were from
Jewish families.

ALLAHABAD, a province of
Hindoostan Proper, 260 m. long
and 120 broad ; bounded on the N,
by Agra and Oude, E. by Bahar;
S. by Guadiana, and W. by Mal-
wah and Agra.

The Nerbudda, which rises on
the S. E. border of the province,
flows from E. to W. near its S.
side; and the Ganges, which is
here joined by the Jumna, crosses
it from W. to E. near its N. side,
The S. W. part, called Bundelcund,
is an elevated hilly territory ; but
in‘ other parts it is flat, and very
productive. It was ceded to
Great Britain in 1798. The in-
habitants are very numerous, and
mostly Hindpos. Its cavalry and
infantry have amounted to about
260,000, and its revenue to more
than three millions of sicca rupees.

Allahabad, the capital of the
above province, hasa magnificent
citadel. It was founded by the Em-
peror Acber, who intended it as a
place of arms ; and its fortifications
are now impregnable to a native
army. It stands at the conflux of
the Jumna with the Ganges, which
is the largest and most holy prayaga
of the Hindoos; so noted, that it
is called ‘the king of worshipped


ALL


places,’? and the territory, to the


extent of 40 m. round, is. deemed
holy ground. So numerous are the
pilgrims who resort hither -for ab-
lution, that for this indulgence an
annual contribution of 50,000
rupees. has been paid into the
vizier’s treasury. It is 470 m,
W.N.W. Calcutta. E. lon. 81° 50’,
N. lat. 25° 27’.

At this place human sacrifices
are of frequent occurrence. The
following instance, as described by
a spectator of the scene, is: thus
given by Mr. Ward :— Sixteen
females, accompanied by as many
priests, went in boats on the river
opposite Allahabad, and proceeded
to the spot where the Ganges and
the Jumna, two sacred rivers, unite
their purifying streams. Each vic-
tim had a large earthen pan slung
over hershoulders. She descendetl
over the side of the boat into the
river, and was then held up by a
priest, till she had filled the pans
from the river, when the priest let
go his hold, and the pans dragged
her to the bottom. And thus died,
amidst the applauses of the spec-
tators, and assisted by the priests of
the country, sixteen females, as a
single offering to the demon of
destruction. They died under the
firm persuasion that this was the
direct way toheaven. The priests
enjoyed the scene, and spoke of it
to their friends as a pleasant morn-
ing gambol. We have here no
weepers; no remonstrants; no
youth interposing to save them to
society. They go down to the
bottoin, as loose stones which have
no adbesion to the quarry—as crea-
tures for which society has no use,
Nor must it be supposed that this
is a solitary instance ; these immo-
lations are so common, that they
excite very little anxiety indeed at
Allahabad, and beyond that city
as” are scarcely mentioned.”

hen the Rev. Messrs. Cham-


berlain and Peacock, with their
12


at oe a 2 oe ee


ritory, to the
d, is. deemed
yerous are the
hither for ab-
ndulgence an
of 60,000
aid. into the
t is 470 m.
3. lon. 81° 50’,


nan sacrifices
wrence. The
s described by
scene, is: thus
i:—“ Sixteen
ed by as many
ts on the river
and proceeded
1e Ganges and
ed rivers, unite
ms. Each vic-
then pan slung
She descended
. boat into the
n held up by a
filled the pans
n the priest let
e pans dragged
And thus died,
es of the spec-
by the priests of
in females, as a
the demon of
died under the
t this was the
n. The priests
and spoke of it
pleasant morn-
have here no
onstrants; no
to save them to
down to the
nes which have
huarry—as crea-
ety has no use,
posed that this
»; these immo-
mon, that they
xiety indeed at
yond that city
entioned.””
Messrs. Cham-


ALL


‘families, ‘and abaptized Hindoo)
‘named Vrundavun, set out from;


‘Serampore to occupy a new station
at Agra, the news of their going
‘appears to have preceded their pro-

as in different places they
‘met with people inquiring for the
sahibs, who gave away the new
shaster ; and in consequence, on
‘making their appearance in the
city-of Allahabad, the people as-
sembled in great numbers. So
«much interest was ‘awekened, that
Mr. C. remarks, ‘‘ I have becn in
‘many places where the word of
‘God has excited much attention,
but never saw a spirit of greater
inquiry, after the ew way, than
was discovered at Allahabad. Hin-
doos and Mussulmen, learned and
‘unlearned, all seemed eager to hear
the word of salvation; and even
after we had left the city, several
‘persons followed us, in quest of
books, to a distance of eight or
nine miles.”

Mr. Mackintosh was subse-
quently fixed at this place, and in
1819, assisted by two native bre?
thren, Seeta Rama and Nriputa,
his labours appear to have excited
considerable notice. The mis-
sionaries beheld two Mabhratta
woman immolate themselves here
in the manner of those just de-
scribed, after attempting in vain to
induce them to forego their pur-
pose. ‘Mr. M. had also, about this
time, an interview with a goroo,
or teacher, famed for his austeri-
ties, who desired to see him. “ His
looks,’’? says he, ‘‘ were grim and
dreadful, having his face black-
ened; a human skull, with the
upper jaw and teeth to it, hung
before him, suspended by an iron
chain round his neck; his ancles
environed with a heavy chain and
bangles; he wore no clothes, and
bis naked body appeared much
emaciated. I asked him whit was
the object of his worship; by said,
four things—air, water, earth, and


ALL


fire; and that he should mingle in
these four elements after death.
©Then,’ said I, “it appears you have
no future prospects. But ‘why do
you go through such penances,
when you believe you are to be
annihilated, and to have no exist-
ence -after this life? Surely you
‘are taken in the snares of Satan,
deceiving your own soul, and feed-
ing upon ambition, that men may
fall down at your feet, and worship
you asa God; and because this flat-
ters you, therefore you go through
such penances.’ He told me that
be had been in this state for twelve
years, and meant to continue in jt
till death delivered him from it.
When I came up to him, he was
worshipping fire. I advised him to
throw away these delusions.”

Mr. M. continued to labour .for
some time with butlittle success; but
an English friend, in token of grati-
tude for the benefit derived from his
ministry, generously sent him 2,000
rupees, to build a place of worship.
In 1826, however, the prospect. ap-
peared brightening ; a church was
formed, consisting of 9 members,
among whom were two or three
pious Europeans ; and five Hindoo
youths read the New Testament
with Mr. M. In the following
year, the church over which he
presided was still small. Seeta-
ram, who was long of great as-
sistance to him in his work, sub-
sequently went to Gorruckpore,
where he is employed as a nutive
doctor, and maintains an honour-
uble profession. Sectuldas, another
Brain, has since been with Mr.
M., anc has given proof of piety
and zea, ; and an interesting young
man, of the writer caste, who had
relinquished his caste, has also
been under instruction for several
months. Others, likewise, have
come to Mr. M. in the year; and
it is evident a very considerable
impression is produced by bis la-

Ts.

c 13


ALL
r: In addition to various engagé-
«ments, he preaches the Gospel at
different spots, in.and near'the city,
and also at the numerous. Heathen
.and .Mussulman assemblies; which
are continually. occurring. ‘The
-greatest. of these is on the occasion
.of the annual bathing at the junc-
, tion of the Ganges and the Jumna ;
-and thera Mr. Smith : generally
“comes up from Benares. to assist.
‘Many pleasing circumsiances have


-lately occurred at these seasons ;-


, and opportunities have been enjoyed
of sending the sacred volume, and
religious tracts, and reports of the

‘promulgation . of the Gospel, to
.very distant parts of the country.

- To Bandha, a town in Allaha-

‘bad, Amarint Messeeh, a native
convert from Agra, in connexion
with the C. M. S. came in 1814,

. attempting to diffuse the know-
-ledge of the Sospel. The Rev.
Mr., with Mrs., Greenwood’ have

‘been recently appointed to this
station.

ALLEPIE, a large town on the
Malabar Coast, about 40 m. from
Cochin, and 120 N. of Cape Co-
‘morin, is the chief place at which
the Company’s ships call to take in


pepper and spices ; it has a heelthy
climate, an about 13,000 inhabi-
tants.


' A good house and garden having
heen granted by the rannee of
Travancore, at the request of the
resident, a church was begun in
1816, sufficiently spacious to accom-
-modate 700 or 800 persons ; and the
Rev. Mr. Norton was settled there.
The church was opened on the 18th
of July, 1818, and greatly attracted
-the attention of the natives. Mr.
Norton preached three times on
the Sabbath, and established a lec-
‘ture on Thursday evenings, for the
‘more immediate benefit of all who
sanderstood English. | At this time
‘4% children were in the schools,
and 24 in the Orphan Asylum. A
new school was opéned in the pre-


ADL


vious’ August, built in.the. Great
Bazaar, about a mile from the Mia-
sion-house, capable of .containing
100 children.. Some principal. na-
tives had promised to.use their.in-
fluence in filling it with scholars;


-but the opposition .of the. Roman


Catholics (of whom there are great


numbers in the town), was violent;
‘and the Roman Syrians, in particu-


lar, seemed to have, succeeded: in
possessing the minds of the people
with unfounded suspicions’ and
fears. ‘ baie
In 1819, the English congrega-
tion consisted of about 40 persons,
and the native of about 100, of all


ages, Syrians, converts. from the
-Romish Church, and catechumens.


Occasional auditors of all persua-
sions also attended. The schools
suffered material diminution at this
period, in. consequence: of the. dis-


turbance between the Syrians. and ,


the Roman Catholics, most of the
Roman children having been with-
drawn. ‘At the end of the year
the number of scholars was about
‘50; but subsequently the scholars
generally returned. A school was
also established in the suburbs of


_Allepie, from which much benefit


was anticipated, and the general
aspect of the mission was encou-
raging. During the following year
Mr. N, baptized 26 persons; in-
cluding children, and distributed
122 Bibles and Testaments, in dif-
ferent languages, and 18 copies
of Genesis in Tamul, with 180
Prayer Books and Psalters in vy
lish or Tamul, The schools aga

fell off on the arrival of an Euro-
pean bishop; the people. were
prohibited sending their children,
on pain of excommunication, in
consequence of which many were
much alarmed, The bishop or-
dered all the Bibles and Teste-
ments which had been distributed,
tu be delivered to him at Verapoly ;
but many were courageous enqugb
to oppose him in this, wey allow

4


BSRS8s Ferrer sapere ne msan ag Da


SPASS SS ess


~~


in. the. Great
» from the Mia-
of .containing
» principal, na-
o.use their .in-
with scholars ;
of the Roman
there are great
n), was violent;
ans, in particu-
, succeeded: in
is of the people
suspicions and


flish congrega-
out 40 persons,
yout 100, of: all
verts. from the
1d catechumens.
s of all persua-
i. The. schools
iminution at this
nce of the. dis-
the Syrians and |
ics;, most of the
wing been with-
ond of the year
olars was about
tly the scholars
A school was
) the suburbs of
h much benefit
nd the general
sion was encou-
he following year
26 persons; in-
and distributed
staments, in dif-
and 18. copies
hmul, with 130
Psalters in Eng-
he schools aga
ival of an Euro-
p people. were
a their children,
mmunication, in
hich many were
The bishop or-
bles and Teste-
been distributed,
him at Verapoly ;
urageous engugb
his, aay allow


a3
Cj
+ ’


peprsoch oe
thelr’ children ‘to. ‘come again,
About sia persons, however, heard’
the: Gosp ofa { A 3 rh f i x
"In 1822, the 2 schools contained.
109 children, ‘whose progress, in.
learning. wes satisfactory; and
an--occurrence ‘in’ this mission
evinced the happy effects of the pe-
rusal:of the sacred Scriptures, A


7m Hindoo youth. belonging to the


school, was employed by Mr.
Norton to transcribe portions of the
Gospels in the vernacular tongue,
became impressed with a convic-
tion of the truths contained in them,
and gradually discontinued the ob-
servance of the idolatrous rites of:
his family.. He was removed by.
his relations ‘iato the interior of
the ‘country, in. order to. detach
him from the mission; and violence
was threatened, to induce him to‘
conform to the customary practices.
of his caste, Urged’ by this treut-
ment, he fled from the country,
and coming into the Tinnevelly dis--
trict, he heard of the mission in the
town of that name, ahd sought en-
trarice into theseminagy there. The:
missionaries at Tinnevelly wrote to
Mr. Norton, to ascertain the truth
of as much of: the youth’s account:
of himself as he might be acquaint-’
ed with; and: he was enabled, so
far; to confirm its accuracy. . The
youth applied himself diligently to
his duties in the Tinnevelly seimi-
nary, preparatory to baptism ; and
the: missionaries there wrote in
terms of entire approbation of his
conduct. A Roman Catholic, who
joined the Protestant Church, suf-'
fered, like this youth, much_perse-.
cution. ‘We are obliged,’’ says
Mrs. N., “ to take him under our
care, or they would confine him in
what they call the Black-hole. The
bishop sent a petition to the British’
resident, requesting him to make
Mr. Norton give him up. The resi-
dent sent it to Mr, Norton, wish-
ing him to communicate a full
secount of the case, which he did;


Abt:


‘and: the ‘young. man begged leave»
to write to. him aienee ch he was:
permitted to do, He told the re-" °
sident, that he had been in ye
school more than, four years; thet:
he had'thus learnt to.read his Bible ;:
and that he could not belong toa:
church which would deprive him of.
the only book that would teach him:
‘the way to heaven. Several others
‘in the school told their parents that '
they could not give up reading the’
‘Scriptures,”? "3
In 1823, the number of the Eng-’
lish congregstion was about the: ©
same as the previous.year; the na-
tive congregation had experienced:
a small increase ; and the state of’
‘the schools was pleasing, both as:
to the numbers in attendance and:
the progress of the scholars. Mr.°
Norton, who had recently lost his’
excellent and. zealous wife, was'
now aided in his work by a native:
reader and an Indo-British assist-'
ant. The native reader was the'
Hindoo youth of whom some ac-*
count has been given: his name:
is Sandappen;, he was baptized by: —


‘Mr. Rhenius, at Pelamcottah, on -


Christmas-day 1822; and was mar-: -
ried, soon after his return to Alle-:
ple, to one of: the females brought °
up in -the mission-school. “ The’
assistant was brought up a heathen, °
and was ys tte by Mr. Norton
in April 1823, when his heathen
name of Appoo was exchanged for
that of Daniel. Mr. Norton, some:
time after, married a lady at Colom-:
bo: and a Sunday-school was esta-'
blished by Mrs. N., on her arrival at:
Aleppie, which was attended by
many childven, with a good prospect
of usefulness and permanency. In


the following year, the missionaties®
‘were joined by Mr. James Roberts.


At this period, about 30 persons,’

2 or 3 of them ‘Europeans and the

reat country-born, attended the:

English services; and from 50 to:

60 the Malayalim and Tamul.

The average number of +7
5


AMB


eants was.14. In the Snunday-.
school. under Mrs... Norton’s: care
there were 40 scholars; and about
adozen young persons of both sexes
attended her daily instruction. Be-
sides'these, she taught 9 or 10native
girls. The Roman Catholic clergy
endeavoured to prevent the attend-
ance of the children, and some few
in: consequence left; but the num-
ber was soon made up: by others.
The ‘average: number attending 3
schools, of which Mr. Roberts and
2 native teachers: had. charge, was


194,

AMBOYNA,) an island in the
Indian: Ocean, the Dutch metro-
polis of the Moluccas. It is 56
miles long ; and divided, atthe S.W.
end, by alarge bay into two limbs,
the ay called Hetou, and the
other Leytimor: The surface is
beautiful ; woody hills and verdant
plains being interspersed with ham-
jets, and ‘enriched by cultivation.
The chief products are cloves, the


trees of which are about 40 or 50 |


‘feet high, nutmegs, sugar, coffee,
and many delicious fruits; also, a
peculiar wood that is used for beau-
tiful. cabinet-work. The natives
are: generally Mahomedans; but
there are Protestants among them.

‘Phe English and Dutch had fac-
tories here at the beginning of the
_ith century; but the Dutch ex-
pelled the English, and, in 1629,
tortured and put. to death many of
them. The island was taken by
the British in 1796, restored in
1902, and again taken in 1810, and
restored in 1816.


Amboyna, the chief town, is
neatly built, and stands near the
middie of the bay, on the smaller
limb, defended by the Fort Victo-
tia. The Dutch are tolerably
polished, bat the natives are rude
and uncultivated. The houses are
made of bamboo-canes and sago-
trees, generally one story high, on
account of frequent earthquakes.
KE, lon. 128° 15’, S. lat. 3° 40",


AMB


The. Rev.. Joseph Kam, from.the:


Bu: mM, S.,; fixed upon. this island, in
1814, as the ies of his an
Rarly. in }816, his. congregation.

the Dutch church,. on the Lord’s:


day, amounted in general. to. 800.or .


1000 personss: and when he preach-.
ed in the Malay. language he had.
usually from 500:to 600 hearers...


Speaking of the inhabitants. of -
Amboyna, he says, “ The great.


body’ of Christains residing here are
not. Europeans, or half-castes, but
persons whose: ancestors: have re-
sided here from generation to gene-
ration.. Among them, I will venture.
to say there are thousands who would.
past with every thing they possess to:
obtain a.copy of the Bible in their


own tongue; and. if they. hear that.
Tam. to: preach in the Malay. lan-


guage, which is, at present, more
my business. than preaching: in.


Dytch, many collect together two |


hours. before the service com-
mences,”?

“ As tu the slaves,” he says,
“many of their masters lid not, for-
merly,. apoenns of their coming te
receive instruction, and some. came.
to me without. having previously
obtained permission; but now se-
veral of the masters request me to
teach their slaves, having found, by.


experience, that those who are re- |


ligiously instructed are more faith-
ful and diligent than others.”
After visiting the islands of Ban-
da, Harooka, Ceram, . Nalaliwu,
Saparuwa, and Nusalout, Mr. K.
returned to Amboyna, where the
work of the Lord continued to pros-
per, especially among the heathen,
who destroyed the houses formerly
erected for the worship of devils,
and put away from them every ves-
tige of idolatry. Such, indeed, was
their zeal in the cause of divine.
truth, that when Mr. Kam inti-
mated his intention of erecting a
new church for the separate use of
the slaves, they cheerfully volun-
teered their services in one tim-


pe ART Wy ey ernie Wate


an


aoe


Kam, from-the .
this island, in
of his labours.

regation. irl
on the Lord’s:
1eral. to. 800.0F .


i he The great.
siding here are:
half-castes, but.
stors: have ree


r possess to:
» Bible in their
t they bear that:
the Malay. lan~


preaching: in.
ot together two


service, Come


y they


aves,” he says,
ers didnot, for-
heir coming to
and some came.
ving previously
3; but now se-
request me to


yna, where {
bntinued to pros-
ng the heathen,
houses formerly
brship of devils,
them every ves-
h, indeed, was
cause of divine
Mr. Kam. inti-
m of erecting @


separate use of


heerfully volun-
in wege tim-


See
~ os


: AMB
ber int the forests for’ the:purpose ;
and thus precluded the necessity of
his applying to the Directors. for
pecuniary assistance. Within about
4years, 1200 heathens andMahome-
dans embraced Christianity in. the
extensive field of his labours, The
communicants :were about 2800;
and the scholars 2000.
From a ‘letter, written by Mr.
Kem, after his. return from a visit
he» paid to Celebes Sangir, and
other islands, it appears that: this
zealous . and. laborious missionary
had: baptized, in the several islands,
upwards of 5000 children, and near-
ly 500: adults;. and that in Am-
boyna he had baptized, chiefly of
those who had been Mahomedans,
128 adults, besides children.

In ‘January 1821, an Auxiliary
Missionary Society was formed at
Amboyna, for the purpose of. con-.
tributing to the maintenance and
support of several missionaries re-
cently sent out by the N.S., and
also with a: view to assist in the
printing of school-books and ‘reli-
gious tracts,.a second printing-
press having arrived, from the Direc-
tors in London, in the course of the
preceding year.

About this time, a place was’
erected immediately contiguous to
Mr. Kam’s dwelling-house, for the
initiatory instruction of such con-
verts from paganism as might be
desirous of receiving baptism; and,
during the year, that solemn rite
was administered to 30 persons,
who had abjured heathenism and
embraced the truths of Christianity,
Towards the close ‘of December,
in the same year, Mr. Kam had the
satisfaction of receiving into his
church about 100 new members, of
whom several had formerly been
idolaters, and one a Mahomedan.
Atdifferent times the B. & F. B.S.
have ‘sent to the disposal. of Mr.
Kam 9000 Malay Testaments, the
distribution of which has been ex-
tensively followed by the renunci-


AMB


ation of idolatry. The Bible has
been sold by auction for 46 dollars.
An Auxiliary Bible Society wax
formed in 1815, the subscriptions to
which amounted to 4000 dollars,:*

In 1824, there were in Mr. Kam’s
school, including adults, 54 scholars,
During the twelve months immedi-
ately preceding June 1824, he bap-"
tized 107 persons, of both sexes,
protons converts from heathen«
ism. Four Chinese, 2'men, and 2.
women, to whom the reading of
Dr. Morrison’s Chinese version ‘of:
the Scriptures had been made use-:
ful, were also baptized by Mr. Kam,
and admitted into Christian fellow-:
ship, as the first fruits of his mis-.
sion among that people. Seven
persons were employed at that
period in the printing establish-.
ment.. Mr. K. had received the
sum of 3500 Java rupees, or about
400/., from the sale of Malay Bibles,
and a supply of Psalm-books in that
language from the N. S.

In the following year, there
were 18 young men in Mr. Kam’s
native seminary, under preparatory
instruction for the office of native
teacher. The first volume of the
‘€ Village Sermons,”’ in Malay; was
ready for circulation. The number
of native converts from: Paganism
and Mahomedanism, who were
candidates for baptism, was con-
siderable. His Excellency the
Governor Geueral, who, accom-
panied by his lady and his Excel-.
lency the Governor of the Mo-
luccas, had inspected Mr. Kam’s.
missionary establishment; and ex-
pressed himself much _ gratified,
particularly with his chapel and:
printing office; ordered him a:
monthly allowance of 600 Java
rupees, towards defraying his tra-.
velling expenses. At the close of


this year Mr. Kam_ performed


another extensive missionar


tour,
among the islands of the


alayan


Archipelago; particulars of which
have not yet come to hand. Daring.
c2 17


AMB
February 1826, five native teachets
were sent from Amboyna to several
of the Molucca ‘Islands, in conse-
quence of applications previously
received from the inhabitants. Two
teachers, natives of Banha, have
also been sent to that island, in
compliance with their own earnest
desire to instruct their countrymen
in the knowledge of the Gospel.
Mr. Kam’s Malay translation of
the first volume of ‘the “ Village
Sermons” is now in circulation.

In 1814, the Rev. Jabez Carey,
from the B. M. 8. was appointed
inspector of the schools in this
island. In 1615, he says, “‘ The
number of scholars is 808. On the
“t6th of January, I was appointed
to the office of manager of the
poor fund, with this emolument
attached to it, namely, that of at-
tending to the wants and good of
the- poor. The fund was a very
rich one, and wil! be so yet, if the
English government should return
the loan made to it by the Dutch
government, which is more than
20,000 rix-dollars: besides which I
have in hand about 6000 rix-dollars.
Last December I visited the neigh-
bouring islands of Saparooa and
Huerooka.”” ;

On June the 5th, a few of ‘the
children under Mr. Carey’s in-
spection, that is 20-out of 300, were
examined at theGovernment-house,
in presence of the resident; the
acquitted themselves well, and each
obtained a ‘suit of clothes from
government.

In ‘the course of a week the
chiefs had destroyed five idolatrous
temples, with every thing belonging
to them, at Harooka.

A few years after, a change took
place relative to the government ;
but the conduct of Mr. Carey had
so effectually recommended him,
that the new government requested
him to continue his employment
as superintendent of schools, A


valued missionary, Mr. Ricketts,


AME


was the first fruits of the Amboyna
mission. Various difficulties, how-
ever, subsequently arose; and in
1818, Mr. Carey left the island and
attived at Bengal. ie sak
In 1819, Mr. Finn, from‘ the
N. M. S. joined Mr. Kam, and
has since successfully assisted him
in his labours, Messrs. Ferdinand
Bormeister, Frederick Mueller,
from the Baste Seminary, and Mr.
Akersloth, from Holland, sleo ar-
rived in 1821, and commenced the
study of the language preparatory
to their becoming missionaries in
different islands.
AMERICA, one of the four
grand divisions of the world, and
by much the latgest, ig bounded on
all sides by the ocean. It took its
name from. Americus Vespucius, a
Florentine, who having eaccom-
panied Ojeda, a Spanish navigator,
in 1497, drew up an amusing his-


tory of his voyage, in which it was |


insinuated that the glory of having
first discovered the continent of the
New Werld belonged to him. This
was in patt believed; the country
began to be called after the name
of its supposed first discoverer ; and
the unaccountable caprice of mans
kind has pérpetuated the error.
But America was first discovered,
in 1402, by Christoval Colon, a
Genoese, better known by ‘the
name of Christopher Columbus,
It is called the New World with
great propriety; for not nly the
men, but the birds and beasts, differ


in some respects from those known


before. It has likewise a great
number of trees and plants, that
grew nowhere elee before they
were transmitted to other places.
All ‘the men, except the Esqui-
maux, near Greenland, seem te
have the same origin; for they
agree in every particular, from the
Straits of Magellan in the 8. to
Hudson’s Bay in the N. ‘Their


skins, unless daubed with grease or


oil, are of a red copper colour, and
‘ 18


TSR eae tove «


the Amboyna
ficulties, how-
rose; and in
the island and


srs. Ferdinand
ick Mueller,
nary, end Mr.
liand, also at-
ommenced the
ge preparatory
nissionaries in


. of the four
he world, and
, ig bounded on
n. It took its
is Vespucius, &
aving accom-
nish navigator,
n amusing his-
in which it was
jory of having
ontinent of the
to him. This
1; the country
ter the name
discoverer ; and
aprice of mans
ted the error.
Arst discovered,
oval Colon, 8
known ‘by ‘the
her Columbus.
World with

r not nly the
id beasts, differ


im those known '


ewise a great
nd plants, that
» before they
p other places.
ept the Esqui-
land, seem te
gin; for they
cular, from the
n in the S. to
he N. ‘Their
with grease or
ner colour, and
18


ce
by:
om


AME


they|have no:beards or hair on Any
other parts of their bodies, except
their beads, where it is. black,
straight, and ~—— Poser are
the conjectureg about the peopling
of “this vast continent, and erat
as various as their authors. Ame-
rica is so long, thet it takes in the
torrid zone, the two temperate
zones, and part of the northern
frigid zone. A continent so ex-
tensive must naturally be various in
its climate, soil, and productions,
In the most northern end most
‘southern parts the countries are
cold, sterile, and desert; while in
the centre are found the richest
metals, minerals, precious stones,
and abundance of the. most valua-
ble and useful commodities. It is
hard to say how many different
languages there are in America, a
vast number being spoken by the
different people in different parts ;
and, as to religion, there is no
giving any tolerable account of it
in general, though some of the
most civilized of the Aborigines
seem to have worshipped the sun.
The principal motive of the
Spaniards, in sending so many co-
lonists here, was the thirst of gold;
and, indeed, they and the Portu-
guese are possessed of all those
parts. where it is found in the
greatest plenty. This vast con-
tinent is divided into North and
South America, which are joined
by the Isthmus of Panama, It has
lofty and immense ranges of moun-
tains, such as the Andes and Alle-
gany; and the most stupendous
rivers, such as the Amazon, Plata,
Orinoco, Mississippi, and Missouri.
emp | the Aborigines, who in-
habit the interior parts, and the
United States of America, who
possess many of the finest provinces,
the different European powers have
rich and flourishing colonies here.
In North America, Britain pos-
sesses New Britain, Canada, Nova
Scotia, and New Brunswick ; Spain


AMS
had. Mexieo, New Mexico, New
Albion, and California; and Russia
has. some settlements on Cook
Inlet. In South America, Spain
possessed Caraccas, New Grenada,
Peru, Chili, and Buenos Ayres;
Portugal. * ‘ Brazil, and. part of
Guinea; and France, Britain, and
Holland, have the remainder of
Guinea. The Spanish Colonies
have now asserted their inde-
pendence, and contain Mexico, in
South America; Colombia, in the
N.; Chili, and the United Pro-
vinces, including the §, of Peru,
and Buenos Aytes, Brazil is now
an independent empire $ and Pata-
gonia remains in the possession of
the native Indians. [See Canada,
New Brunswick, Newfoundland,
Nova Scotia, New Fairfield, Ooch
gelogy, Paramaribo, Ked River,
and Spring Place. :

AMLAMGODDE, orn AM-
LAMGOODY, a town on. the
S.W. Coast of Ceylon, near a
smail river of the same place. .

The Rev. Wm. Read, of the L.
M. S,, commenced his labours here
in 1805 and subsequently became
pastor of the Dutch Church, and
superintendent of schools. The
Wesleyan missionaries, at Galle,
take this into their field of labour,
and have several native members.
and a school,

AMSTERDAM, a city of .the
Netherlands, capital of Holland.
Next to London, it is deemed the
most commercial city;in the world,
and contains upwards of 220,000
inhabitants. The walls are high
and well fortified; and the bridge,
which joins the rampart, is built
over the river Amstel. Towards
the water it is only protected by
a double range of great piles,
strengthened by transverse beams,
with openings to admit vessels into
the canals, which are closed by
booms at night, But its chief se-
curity consists in the facility of in-
undating the vicinity by mane of

; 9


#aives, Few ‘cities’ have.’ their
public buildings so.fine, numerous,
and well kept. ‘The Exchange’ is
one:of the principal ornaments. of
the city,’ and the harbour is one of
the. finest in: Europe, - The Stadt-
house, ‘now the royal palace, has
long been celebrated for its extent
and: durability ; and: the furniture
and: decorations of the-interior are
in a’style of costly magnificence.
The. streets are -broad and well
paved, and most of. them have
canals, with rows of -trees. on
each side ; but there are -no spaci-
ous public places, nor squares. It
surrendered to the king of Prussia,
in 1787, when. that prince invaded
Holland, in favour of the stadt-
holder; it. received ‘the: French
troops in 1795, without any re-
sistance; and, in. 1813, it was the
first place that declared for the
restoration of the House of Orange.
It is seated at the conflux of the
Amstel and Wye,’ 70 m. N.W.
of Cleves, and 80 N. by E. of Ant-
werp. -E. long. 4° 40’, N.. lat.
52° 25’.

The Rev. A. S. Thelwall, agent
of the L. J. 'S., assisted by Mr.
Chevallier, has been assiduously
engaged to promote Christianity
among. the Jews, and: to. excite
among Christians an enlightened
interest in their behalf, with con-
siderable success. Much. good has
also been effected through the me-
dium of a Tract Society; and an
institution has been formed to edu-
cate poor Jewish children.

Mc. T. who is now. in Eng-
land, from impaired health, has
lately received several letters from
his friends in Holland, which tes-
tify that the work of. the Lord is
still going on.

Towards the close


of last year,
he heard from one of those
converted Israelites with whom
he had enjoyed much: Christian
intercourse, conveying the intel-
ligeace, that, within two months,


AMS:


he had lost five. of: his nearest :tes
latives—an uncle, a father, a-bro-
ther, and two:aunts. . Respecting
his. father, he mentions. several
things which give:reason to hope,
that, during the: latter weeks of his
life, a great change had taken
place. in his: heart.: But. of his
brother he gives a most interesting
account. »He was taken ill only
three weeks after the father’s
death, andthe disease came. on
so rapidly, that he had a very early
presentiment of his own approach-
ing dissolution. ‘The convictions
under. which he had evidently been
labouring even in health, now be-
came a source of severe. internal
conflict. For a:time his mental
anguish was extreme. On ohne oc-
casion he said, ‘‘ You, my dear
brother, can:understand:me; I am
tormented with the devil. . Our
dear mother does not believe that
there is one.. There was a time
when. I did not believe it myself;
but now I feel that he tortures my
soul. I have deserved it. Oh! my
brother, what a sinner I have
been!’? ‘ Then it was,’’ says the
writer of this letter, ‘‘ that I first felt
freedom and boldness in speaking
to him of our Saviour, in telling
him of the love of God towards
such sinners as humble themselves
before him, and in. exhorting him
to pray to the Lord Jesus to be
delivered from the wicked one.
He soon began to pray most
earnestly, and seemed to be com-
pletely overwhelmed with a deep
sense of sin. He confessed that-he
had long been under conviction.
On the seventh day of his illness,
after a violent paroxysm of the
disease, he sunk into a kind of
torpor, from which, in a few hours,
he. raised himself up, and, in the
full possession of his faculties, to
the surprise of all, he exclaimed,
‘Call my mother, my sister, and
my friends ; I die in the faith of the
Lord Jesus Christ—of the Triune
20


s nearest ‘tes
ather, a_bro-
Respecting
tions. several
son to hope,
- weeks of his
e had taken
But. of «his
st interesting
aken ill only
the father’s
ase came on
d a very early
wn approach-
e convictions
svidently been
alth, now be-
evere. internal
ie his mental
, On ohe oc-
fou, my dear
and: me ; J am
» devil. . Our
t believe that
‘e was a time
eve it. myself;
he tortures my
dit. Oh! my
inner I have
as,” says the
« that I first felt
ks in speaking
bur, in telling
God towards
ble themselves
exhorting him
d Jesus to be
wicked one.
0 pray most
ed to be .com-
with a deep
ifessed that he
er conviction.
of his illness,
oxysm of the
to a kind of
in a few hours,
, and, in the
s faculties, to
he exclaimed,
my sister, and
he faith of the
of the Triune
20


m this to my other friends,, that. they
ae age expressed, hisdeep conviction
uae «of h ot


ANT:
ment of Sierra. Leone, since which.
time. successful measures ha she Ba in
taken by the. dfrican Institution
to establish schools. The natives,
evince a very.anxious wish for, the
instruction of their children in the,
Hingis language and in the Chris-
pa aS (0) e le 0 oe
Nolet, a0, sn aM
IGUA, one of.the Cari

Islands, 16 miles long and 12 broad,
and 60 E, by S. of St. Christopher.
It has several good 3 and. in
that called the English Harbour,,
on the.S.E. side, are a royal. n
yard and arsenal. It is destitute o;
fresh water, and. the inhebitanta
save tain. water in cisterns. _ It,
Mig bora ki He French, in 1782,
at Ps gc ti 7” the | in 1817, 34,18, of ‘wines Sard
-then avow and:
this way he died. Was ‘ an this ae ip biltotieaiiionitd
a reat plucked. from the burn- Antigua, isthe seat 6f Govern-
i g : ment for the Leeward Islands. Its
r. Thelwall also received, about | legislature isc sed the com-
the same thai « Jotian eon aneties mander-in-chief, a council of 12
ewish convert, giving a very af-| members, and an assembly of 26.
feating account of ab soni of his | This legislature presented to’ the

pother-in-law, after two. years’ | sister island pple |
one peeden at big koe tbe motioration sf the nin ine

ity. . Thelw en | respecti vir
present at her baptism, at the age er contend te homeae ort . fate:


of 65. years: — : d alow;
ENGUILLA, on SNAKE |alcottlotcn’ atu tetventtee
ISLAND, the most northerly, of tal cortviction, 4 days between the


the Caribbee Islands possessed by time of sentence and the execu-,


Great Britain in the West Indies. tion. The military generally Con,


ists. of 2 regiments of infan
It takes its name from its wi hg try, and,
igre, and la 60... N-W. of 84 | salod in tbe danas Thp farce


Christo 2g, Taised in the island. The capital.
ear tas W. lon. 434 10’,| is St. John’s, It lies in W. lon,


62°0/, Nolat, 194.
one it, es. | We Rera,,ot
Pie Blah, and 120 slaves. ‘our r bat seen tie Bast
eA NNAMABOE, «ings rap: | RE as oer «
Coast of Africa. In 1822, it was ral phat ot


plece of ground
annexed to the general govern. | the town ofr ele antace,
21 a


' ANG
God—the. true Messias—the King
of the, world. He is revealed. to.


| have died. Say. to all, and you
| (addressing an intimate Jewish
| friend) listen to my voice, and. say


must.come to him.’ After this he


is own sinfulness. The disease
returned upon him with increased.
_ strength, and he became: delirious
nearly to the. time of. his departure,
which took place on the following
morning. In the intervals,of com-.
posure, he declared his perfect
knowledge of what, he had said,


ANT.”
pose of & missionary establishment,
antd & place ‘of worship was erected
for the ° accommodation | “of! the
ng


hee years after, Samuel Isles:
‘was Yémoved by death from the’


scené of his labours; and for' about
five years the mission: continued in


- & very languishing state ; but: at:


the-expiration of that time, a mis-


sionary, ‘named Brown, arrivéd;:


and his labours were so abundantly
blessed, that it soon became neces-
sary to enlarge the chutch ; and on
that occasion the zeal of the con
verted negroes was most pleasingly
deronstrated. On coming to the
evening meeting, ‘each. individual
brought a few ‘stones and’ other
materials with ' him’; ‘the ‘different
“departments: of ‘the ‘work were
divided among sucli as were masons


and carpenters; and those who:


could’ ‘not assist in ‘enlarging the
edifice, provided refreshments for
the builders ; so that the requisite
alteration wes completed by ‘the
volontary labour~ of these ‘poor
slaves, after the completion of their
res ective daily tasks.
ed the midst of calamities, which
uently arose, the work con-
tinal te o forward; and, imme-
diately after © the hurricane of
1772, a new ‘awakening appeared
among the slaves,’ and spread in
all directions. ‘A desire for: re-
ligious instruction was, of course,
augmented; and, in 1775, the
number of persons who attended
public worship amounted to 2000,
and from 10 to 20 were-baptized
almost every month. .A new and


more spacious church was, there-


fore, erected 'in St. John’s, in 1773;
and, in the following year, a piece
of ground was purchased at Bailey
ao near the town of Falmouth,

for-the ie of forming a second
establishment, for the accommoda-.
tion of those negroes who lived at
a considerable distance from the
former station.


ANT
From’ this place, ‘which proved’


inconvenient, owing to the steep:


ness of the ‘ascent, the’ brethren’
removed,’ in 1782, to a more eligi-‘
ble« spot, which they designated:
Grace fill; and, though the ex-*
ternal ‘circumstances of the mission

were rather ‘difficult, the Christian '
slaves being exposed to ‘famine, '
sickness, persecutions, and depre-°
dations, and the island being taken

by the French,—the cause of Divine’
truth remained firm and immove-’°
able; and, after the restoration of
peace'in 1783, 60 adults were re-'
ceived into'the church of St. John’s,
by the rite of baptism, in one day ;'
and, ‘in the course of 12 months,‘
the congregations in that town and
at Grace Hill were augmented by


‘the’ accéssion of more than 700°


persons. The missionaries ‘also’
preavhed, at stated times, in ‘dif-:
ferent plantations ; and one of the’
native assistants actually built ‘a:
chapel at his own expense, suff.


‘ciently capacious to accommodate’
400 hearers.


Many of the planters were now
convinced of the ‘beneficial effects
of ‘the Gospel on their'slaves, but:
athers became violent: perecdvany
of the truth.

The word of the Lord, however, '
continued to‘run; and was glorified.
The .two congregations, in 1788,
consisted of more than 6,000 mem-


bers; and so many new doors were


opened to the Gospel, that the mis-
sionaries were exceedingly thank-
ful when they found zealous and
useful assistants in: many of their
converts, to visit the sick, give.ad-
vice and reproof if needed, and-to’
report to the missionaries the state
of the congregation.

Although indisposition compelled
Mr. Brown to ‘retire in 1790, a
suitable successor: was found in
the Rev. H. C. Tschirpe ; afd the
Cause Was so prosperous, that'a third
settlement was formed, psi serena
Grace Bay. pe


‘which proved’
- to the steep-
the brethren‘
o a more eligi-‘
rey designated’
ough the ex-*
of the mission
, the Christian’
ed to ‘famine,’
ns, and depre-
nd being taken
cause of Divine’
n and immove-—
s restoration of
adults were re-'
th of St. John’s,
sm, in one day ;
of 12 months, ‘
n that town and
augmented by
more than 700°
issionaries also.
1 times, in “dif-:
‘and one of the’
ctually built ‘a:
expense, suffi-
o accommodate’


initers Were Now
henéficial effects
their'slaves, but’
lent: persecutors:


Lord, however,'
hnd was glorified.
ations, in 1788,
an 6,000 mem-
new doors were

' el, that the mis-
eedingly thank-
d zealous and
many of their
he sick; give.ad-
f needed, and:to
onaries the state


n.

position compelled
tire in 1790, a
was found in
schirpe ; afd the
erous, that’a third


med, and named


22


‘week.


and the other at, Moungj


‘ANT
In, 1810, the. missionaries ;com-
menced a Sunday-school, on the


_Lancasterian plan of. instruction,


at St. John’s; and though at first


‘they had but 80 scholars, that num-


ber was soon increased to 700; and


‘the progress not only of the chil-


dren, but of their parents, who ap-


peared equally anxious for tuition,


both. surprised. and delighted the


‘teachers. A school was also opened


on one of the. plantations .. near


“Grace Hill, where the scholars


swere. instructed one day in every
In 1817, the brethren were en-
couraged to form a fourth settle-


‘ment, by the solicitation of the


Colonial Government ;. which, with
the most praiseworthy liberality,


‘presented them with ten acres of


land for this purpose, together with
1000/. currency towards building a
church and dwelling- houses, and a

ant of 3007. per annum. for the


_ support. of the .missionaries.. The


proprietors of the adjacent, planta-
tions, also, aware of the benefit
which their negroes would receive
from religious instruction,. contri-


‘buted a handsome sum towards the


erection of the necessary buildings.


. The difficulty of procuring stones


was for some time a considerabe


hindrance to the work; but at


length a quarry was opened, about


_ three quarters of a mile from. the


spot, and the missionaries obtained
such kind assistance from the ma-
sons, carpenters, and labourers,


| belonging to their neighbours, that


their church (a substantial well-


| built edifice, 64 feet by 30 in the


clear) was solemnly consecrated on


_ the 6th of December, 1818.


To this new settlement, which
the brethren named New/ield, two
others were subsequently added, in
the year 1822; one at Cedar Hail,
3 and. it
is peculiarly pleasing to add, that in
each of these stations large con-'
gregations were collected, many


“ANT


were joined to the church by bap-
tism, and the word of God appears
to,"have been. followed’. with, an
abundant blessing. ene

. On the llth of July, 1823, the
United. Bic.bren. celebrated the


fiftieth anniversary of the opening


of their church at St. John’s; when
it appeared that there had been
baptized and received into the.con-
gregation at that town, 16,099 ne-
groes, young and.old; .and that 35


‘Male, and. as many. female,. mis-


sionaries had been employed in the
important service of making known
to their benighted fellow-creatures
the way of. salvation.. And. it was


stated by the Rev.,C. F. Richter,


that, between Easter 1822 . and
Easter 1823, 408 adult negroes
had been baptized or received into
the congregation at St. John’s;
104. at..Grace Hill; 40 at. Grace
Bay; 115, at Newfield; and 89 at
Cedar Hall; forming a total of 765
in. the year; and during the same
period, 482 were admitted, in the
different settlements, to the Holy
Communion.

On the 26th Sept..1825, -the de-
voted missionary, Richter, . after
30 years’. labour in Antigua, was
unexpectedly removed to his, re-
ward. In announcing his peaceful
removal, Brother Shill says:-—*
“When we lately spoke with the
individuals belonging to the class of
mew. people, about 1400 negroes
called upon us. At such a time,
we are, as you may suppose, occu-
pied from morning till night.”

In a letter, dated Feb. 1827, he
says:—‘* I subjoin an accurate
statement of the congregation at
St. John’s. The total number of
the people under our care appears


somewhat less than at the close of


1825. . This is owing to our having
struck off our lists the names. of
such as had ceased to come regu-
larly. to church, or to speak with
us individually, according to the
rule prescribed. In the yeas-1826,
23


Lea ee


SRT:


ANT
“there ‘have been ‘baptized 72 adults,
and’#34 children ; received into the
‘Congregation, 150 ; ‘re-admitted 51 ;
admitied to the holy communion,


172'; departed ‘this life, 143 adults,


“42 children’; excluded, 173 persons.
‘Our present numbers are as follow :.


$360 communicants; 1352 baptized


“and candidates for communion;
children under twelve years of age,
about'1000: in all'4732; to which,
if “we ‘add ‘the ‘new ‘people, ‘and
“those whoare for the time excluded
from the: privileges ‘of the ‘church,
‘amounting together to 1696, the
‘total’ willbe 6408. =}
In'the yeat 1760, ‘Nathaniel Gil-
bert, esq. who had experienced the
saving power of the Gospel in‘Eng-
land, became a ‘resident of this
island; and whilst deploring the
spiritual condition of the persons
by whom he was surrounded, he
felt an earnest desire for their wel-
‘fare. His ‘first efforts were con-
fined to a few individuals, whom he
invited to assemble in his own house
‘onthe Sabbath-day; but finding
that his exertions were evidently
“blessed of God, he went forth
boldly, and preached the Gospel to
the poor benighted ne » not-
withstanding the situation he held
as speaker of the House of As-


sembly,
‘Mr. Gilbert continued to labour,


without any abatement of ardour,
or any diminution of success, till
the period of his decease ; but as he
had no means of appointing a suc-


cessor in his spiritual office, his be-
reaved flock were left as sheep
. without a shepherd for nearly 20


years, In 1778, however, Mr.
John Baxter, a member of the
Wesleyan connexion in England,
removed to Antigua, for the pur-
pose of working as a shipwright in
service of Government; and
after his arsival took upon
himself, in the intervals of his em-
ployment, the care of the remains
of Mr. Gilbert’s Society.


ANT
-’ Through the ‘superintendence of
Mr. Baxter, the assistance of ‘Mrs.
Gilbert, andthe subordinate ins
mentality of an‘old Irish emigrant,
who had been providentially led to
the island towards the close of 1783,
things went on ‘prosperously ;


‘that these ‘individuals ‘had ‘under —


‘their care upwards of 1000: ‘mem-
“bers, chiefly blacks, who appeared
to be ‘earnestly ‘stretching ‘forth
their ‘hands towards God. Many
new places were opened, and're-
quests were ‘made for preaching,
with which Mr. Baxter could. not
“possibly comply. :
In the month of January, ‘1787,
Dr. Coke, after mature’ delibera-
tion, resolved ‘that Mr. Warrener,
one of the ‘missionaries originally
appointed to Nova Scotia, should
remain in Antigua; and Mr. Bax-
ter avowed his determination of
resigning the lucrative ‘situation
which he held as under storekeeper
in English Harbour, for the express
purpose of devoting himself ‘unre-
servedly to the work of the ministry.
Two years afterwards it appeared
that Mr. Warrener, during the
comparatively short period of his
residence on the island, had been
made the instrument of ‘adding
1000 members to the Society, who
were dwelling together in ‘the spi-
tit of love.
In April, 1816, the island of An-
tigua was placed under martial law,
in consequence of an insurrection }
which had recently broken out in
Barbadoes. Mr. Woolley, one of
the Wesleyan missionaries, on
hearing that the militia of "the
colony was called out, went, in
company with bis colleagues, ‘to
the president, and offered their
services in any way that might be
deemed beneficial to the govern-
ment. “ His honour,” says Mr.
Woolley, ‘‘ thanked me for the
offer, and observed that we could
render more important service than
that of bodily'exercise. I ussured
24


Ss 8 2s fw es ewe ek Lae ee ee ES anes oe


rintenderice of
stance of Mrs.
fdinate ins’
ientially led to
e close of 1783,
jusly } so


als ‘had ‘under —


of 1000°mem-
who appeared
retching ‘forth
~ oo ce,
pened, arid Te-
for ‘preaching,
xter could. riot ,


January, 1787,
ature’ delibera-
Mr. Warrener,
aries originally
, Scotia, should
3; and Mr. Bax-
termination of
vrative ‘situation
dur storekeeper
, for the express
i¢ himself unre-
of the ministry.
wards it appeared
er, during the
rt period of his
sland, had been
ent of adding
he Society, who
other in e spi-


he island of An-
inder martial law,


y broken out in
Woolley, one of
missionaries, on
militia of “the
1 out, went, in
s colleagues, ‘to
d offered their
ny that might be
to the govern-
our,”’ says Mr.
ed me for the
he ard
rtant 6
reise. I ussured
24


an insurrection }


a


‘ANT
him, in return, that nothing on our


part should be yang do away


any bad impressions which the pre-
sent painful report might have pro-
duced. . It:is not more strange than
true, that some personstbink religion


a seditious, and that the implantation


of religious principles in the minds
of. the negroes. is calculated to
bring about revolt. The subjects
of such sentiments, however, are

rant of the nature of religion,
and utter strangers to its influence.
A gentleman, who entertained
these ideas, assembled his negroes,
and told them what had happened at
Barbadoes ; when, to his astonish-
ment, they observed, ‘ Massa, dem
no have religionden.’ I have been
at some pains to discover whether
any of our people’s minds have re-
ceivedan unfavourable bias from the
alarming reports. in circulation ;
and am happy in being able to state,
that I found in. them: no disposition
even to murmur at their situation,
much less to rebel.. One well-in-
formed man, of whom I inquired,
took up a book, and said, ‘ Sir,
with this bool: in your hand, you
will do more to prevent rebellion,
than all the King’s men,’ ”’

The latter part of 1818 was un-
usually sickly ; and early in the en-
suing year Mr. Woolley was com-
pelled, by indisposition, to go to
Bermuda ; while Mr. Jones, a pro-
mising missionary, was removed
by death.

In 1820, a hurricane occurred in
Antigua, which, though it did but


| little comparative injury in the


island, carried away the two Wes-
leyan school-rooms in the town of

arham. Indeed, as they were
only what is termed wattled build-
ings, they could not be expected to
resist a strong wind. The com-
mittee, therefore, resolved to exert
themselves in order to raise a dura-
ble edifice, 60. feet in length by
26 in breadth, It was accordingly
commenced, and a subscription was


ANT


opened to defray the expense of its
erection. ‘ Some of the respect-
able inhabitants,’ says one. of the
missionaries, ‘“came forward on
this occasion in the most handsome
manner ; but from others we receiv-
ed bard words, and stern repulses.”’

In. February, 1821, a niissio-
nary society was formed in St.
John’s ; when a very lively interest
was excited, and the subscriptions
and collections amounted to about
93/. currency, exclusive ofa quantity
of trinkets thrown into the boxes,
Previous to the close of the year,
the hearts of the brethren at An-
tigua were gladdened by the con-
version of a Mahomedan negro,
who was publicly baptized by Mr.
‘Whitehouse, renouncing all the
delusions of the false prophet.

- On the 23d of September, 1822,
a new place of worship, called Zion
Chapel, was opened at Zion-hill,
the estate of the Hon. J. D.
Taylor; and on the Ist of Decem-
ber, in the same year, Mr. White.
house laid the foundation-stone of
another chapel in Willoughby Bay,
in which ceremony the Moravian
missionary assisted; while the ne-
groes connected with his congre-
gation at Newfield brought several
loads of stones in carts, and many
of them were ready squared.

From the last report of the An-
tigua district, the following parti-
culars are taken :—

St. John’s Civision.— Although
the number of members isnot aug-
menting, yet more stability and
harmony prevail than at any pre-
vious period. The services in the
chapels, and catechetical exercises
on the estates, are both abundantly
attended.

Barbuda.—In answer to their ap-
plication, the missionaries were in-
formed by the gentleman who has
the care of the island, that the bishop,
who had taken it under his ch .
had appointed a catechist to reside
upon it; and would seas, piamee

»


ANT
with his clergy, regularly visit it.
The people seem exceedingly dis-


satisfied with this arrangement, as
they have only been allowed once,
during this year, to‘enjoy the ordi-
nances of religion. They have in-
deed. been ' prohibited assembling,
as formerly, in the chapel, which
was erected chiefly by the industry
of Mr. Jeffry, who was recently
taken away from: his little flock,
after having laboured, with affec-
tion and fidelity, for several years:
however, they continue to meet in
their Own houses—it is hoped, tq
their comfort and edification.
English ‘Harbour.—The people
here walk worthy their . “high


vocation,’’ and’some have recently .


been impressed with a sense of their
lost condition.

Willoughby Bay.—Here is a
commodious chapel, capable of cou-
taining several hundred people.
The: congregations are composed
principally of slaves: a number of
these really fear and love God, but
some have turned to sin and folly.

Parham Division.— A eonsistent
enforcement of discipline has caused
a diminution, during the year, in this
district; ameasure which will,doubt-
less, be ultimately advantageous.

At Parham the attendance has
continued moderately good. Ade-
crease here is probably owing, in
part, to the unusually long conti-
nuance of the crop, together with
the excessivewetness of the weather.
Many, however, appear to have
made real improvement in know-

e and love.
it Zion Hilla considerable de-

crease in the society has taken
pluce. Several proprietors, and
other respectable individuals in that
neighbourhood, entertaining a pre-
dilection for the church, have used
their influence over the negroes to
induce their attendance there.
From one estate, formerly visited,
the missionaries have also, on the
same principle, been excluded.


ANT

Still some are *‘ growing in grace.»
One‘ circumstance, both with ‘te-
spect to the Parham and Zion Hill
Society, is worthy of remark,—that
amidst the unustal prevalency’ of
the favourite amusement of danc-
ing, only four or five have been
excluded for indulging in that, to
them, demoralizing entertainment:
Number in society—Whites, 28;
free-coloured, 4815; slaves, 3066;
total, 3575. St. Juhn’s Schoo’ is
attended by 263 children; the Par-
ham Branch School by about 190;
and the'school at the Point by 114;
Several have lately been admitted
members of the society.

Mr. Wm. Dawes, a member of
the committee of the C. M. S.;
being about to settle in Antigua in
1814, was, at his own request, ac-
credited ‘as a gratuitous catechist


and correspondent. In 1817, Mr.


Charles Thwaites, who was ac-
companied by his wife, was also
appointed superintendent of schools,
and assistant catechist. At this
time there were three stations—
English Harbour, Bethesda, and
the Hope; and the work was aided
by Wm. Anderson and his wife,
resident teachers of colour. Be-
tween that period and 1823, the
number of schools was increased
to ten; containing 774 boys, 1029
girls, and 133 adults. These
means had, under the Divine bless-
ing, many happy effects. Allud-
ing to one of the estates, Mr:
Thwaites says, ‘‘We have among
us several young men and women,
who grew up in the school, and
maintain unblemished characters.
Whata contrast to past times, when
it seemed as though slavery and
unchastity were inseparable! We


have gone to Lynch’s on Sunday >


evenings, in time past, when our

ears have been saluted with the

sound of the fiddle and the dance ;

but now the fiddle is no longer

heard—the dance is abolished—and

bymns and spiritual songs are often
26


SS =——— = © Ama a el


ing'in grace.
beth. with rs
and Zion Hill
remark,—that
prevalency’ of
ment of danc-
ive have been
ing in that, to
entertainment.
—Whites, 285
slaves, 3066;
yhn?s Schoot' is
jren; the Par-
by about 190;
» Point by 114
been admitted
ety.
» a member of
the Cc. M. Ss;
e in Antigua in
wn request, ac-
uitous catechist
In 1817, Mr.
who was &c-
wife, was also
ndent of schools,
chist. At this
hree stations—
Bethesda, and
work was aided
, and his wife,
of colour. Be-
and 1883, the
was increased
174 boys, 1029
adults. These
he Divine bless-
effects. Allud-
e estates, Mr:
We have among
en and women,
the school, and
shed characters.
past times, when
ugh slavery and
separable! We
nch’s on Sunday
past, when our
aluted with the
» and the dance ;
lie is no longer
is abolished—and
hl songs are often
26


, con


resounding from. the little ones.
Khia improvement of the children
as had an effect on-the elder
slaves ; not only are the fiddle and
dance abolished on Sundays, but
they crowd the house of prayer,
and are thankiul for the care taken
of their little ones. Some of these
pious parents express themselves in
a yery affecting manner, in grati-
tude to God, and in praying for
blessings on the teachers.”’ Other
agents have been sent to the aid of
ese successful instructors. From
the Report for 1825-8, it. appears
that here were 15 schools ; contain-
ing, of coloured people, 15 men,
S$ women, 88 boys, and 77 girls;
and of Blacks, 96 men, 65 women,
621 boys, 712 girls; total, 1682.
Since then, however, the number
of children in attendance has been
much diminished. ‘a

ANTRIM, a maritime county in
Ulster, Ireland, Fopulation, in
1821, 269,856. . ‘ounty is
much encumbered , vogs and
morasses, though i. .uys.a tole-
rable air. It has a great natural
curiosity on the N. coast, called
the Giants’ Causeway, which pro-
jects 600 feet into the sea. It is
ormed of above 3000 perpendicu-
lar pillars of basaltes, standing in
t with each other, and ex-
hibiting a sort of polygon pave-
ment, somewhat resembling the
appearance of a solid honeycomb.
In 1821, the 7. .M. S. appointed
Mr. Robert Bailey to labour here,
and preach in the Irish language.
The B. & F. S. S. exerts also a
very salutary influence,

ARCOT, a city of Hindoostan,
the nominal capital of the Carna-
tic. In the vicinity are celebrated
temples, visited by numerous pil-


} grims ; 73m, from Madras. E. long,


79° 29’, N. lat. 12° 52’,

. The missionaries at Bellary, con-
nected with the Z, S., have been
useful to the inhabitants, by the
distribution of tracts,


ARK


ARKANSAS, a country of the
United States, bounded, N. by the
state and territory of Missourly E.
by the Mississippi; S. by Louisi-
ana and Red K. which separates
it from the Spanish dominions ;
W. by the Spanish dominions.
The northern boundary on the Mis-
sissippi is in lat. 36° N.

The territory is very extensive,
and abounds with excellent land.
For navigable streams it is almost
unrivalled. On the east is the Mis-
sistippi, into which St. Francis,
White, Arkansas, arid Red Rivers
empty themselves ; the three first are
almost entirely in the territory, and
the greatest part of the last are on
the southern boundary. St. Francis
is navigable about 300 m.; White
R. aboiit 700, and receives four
tributaries, navigable -from 20 to
70 miles; Arkansas, about 1500,
with not less than nine tributary
streams, navigable from 15 to 150
m, The Grand and Verdigris
Rivers, which are about as large as
the Connecticut, flow into the
Arkansas from the N, in less
than half a mile of each other.
About thirty miles below, on the
same side, the Illinois, on which is
the missionary station, Dwight; so
called in affectionate remembrance
of the late President of Yale Col-
lege, who was a distinguished and
active member of the Board, and
the first who died after its incor-
poration.

This body sent hither, in 1820,
the Rev. Messrs. Alfred Finney,
Cephas Washburn, and Asa Hill-
brook, as missionaries; Mr. James
Orr, as a mechanic; and Mr. Jacob
Hitchcock, and Miss Ellen Stet-
son, as teachers. These persons

have laboured under numerous dis-
couragements—from sickness, the
wars between the Cherokees and
the ier andthe degra’ ‘d state
and violent prejudices c those
whose good they seek. Their
prospects, however, ie nid


a hn A


ce pnt me OAR EIR 8 femme Ne 9A


peer


|


ee ee


eee


a


er
en ID


ARK


encouraging. Hicuses have been
erected for the mission family, two
for schools, a saw-mill and ‘ grist-
mil], together with other buildings ;
and an extensive plantation has
been cleared and fenced. A church
was organized April 12, 1822} and,
on the first day of the same year, a
school was opene*, which, in the
May follow:ng, tained 50 pu-
pils. In Octobe, 1823, the num-
ber of Cherokee children in the
family, who were enjoying the pri-
vilege of:literary, moral, and reli-
gious instruction, was 60-24 males
and 26 females, who were making
very encouraging progress. ‘I'k=
missionaries have gained the con-
fidence of the Cherokees, and might
greatly enlarge their ‘school, if
their resources would permit. A
majority feel that this institution is
the glory of their tribe ; and so far
as this feeling obtains, it is accom-
panied by a desire to act worthy of
the efforts which are made to en-
lighten and reform them. The
missionaties preach on the Sabbath
to a small be ig bre who un-
derstand English. About 3 m. be-
low this, the Canadian, as latge as
Grand R., enters from the S.

All the tributaries of the Arkan-
sas, on the N., are beautiful, clear,
gravelly bottomed, streams ; while
allon the S. are of a clayey bot-
tom. All the streanis are lined on
either side by the first quality of
bottom land. For some distance


the soil is alluvial, of exhaustless.


fertility, and well adapted to the
growth of Indian corn, cotton, and
tobacco, These bottoms, in a state
of nature, are impenetrable cane
brakes; the cane growing from
1 to 2 inches in diameter, and from
15 to 25 feet high. Under this,
in the eastern part of the terri-
tory, is a prodigious growth of

es, which, with the cane, af-
ford ample sustenance for immense
herds of cattle in the winter; while
the forests! on the upland, covered


ARK


with a luxuriant growth of grass, -


and the immense prairies, yield an
exhaustless supply for summer. The
face of the country, 100 m: ‘front
the Mississivpi, is almost uniform-
ly level. To the W. of this, the
country rises, and is beautifully
variegated with hills and valleys,
which usually afford a considerable
stream of water. The hills are not
formidable, til! you approach ‘the
Shining or Rocky Mountairs., The
indigenous vegetables ate nume-
rous, and many of them valuable for
their medical properties. Botanists
have discovered not less than 100
plants, not found elsewhere in the
United: States, and not less than
60 ondescripts.

Malt springs and licks are very
humetous and valuable, some of
which are occupied by extensive
salt works. The‘Indians are fre-
quently seen with cubic bodies of
salt, from 6 to 12 inches, ‘which
they say they broke off from a
mountain.

The climate is mild. After
leaving the low country on the E.,
the whole territory may be called
healthy.

The White population, in 1820,
amounted to nearly 15,000, ' In


1823, it was estimated at about —


20,000. A considerable part of
this population are French, or, as
they are called, Creoles—being
generally mixed blood, French and
Indian, of almost every tribe in
North America. These, generally,
are a miserable race of beings.

The greatest part of the popula:
tion are emigrants from different
states in the Union, mostly from
‘Tennessee and Kentucky.

There are very few schools or
religious institutions ; and the state
of morals is deplorable, with a few
honourable exceptions. Here is
u wide field for missionary enter-
prize. The number of professed
Christians is very small. In this
territory are many tribes of ev

2


wth of grass,
iries, yield an
summer. The
"100 m: ‘front
nost uniform-
V.of this, the
is beautifully
; and valleys,
a considerable
he hilfs are not
‘approach the
ountains., The
es ate nume-
ym valuable for
ties. Botanists
less than 100
where in the
not less than


licks are very
able, some of
i by extensive
idians are fre-
‘ubic bodies of
inches, which
ke off from a


mild. After
intry on the E.,
may be culled


lation, in 1820,
\ 15,000. ’ In


Herable part of
French, or, as
Creoles—being
bod, French and
every tribe in
hese, generally,
p of beings.

of the popula’
from different
m, mostly from
ptucky.
few schools or
s; and the state
ble, with a few
ions, Here is
issionary enter-
ber of professed
small. In this


\


ated ‘at about |


ribes of Indians,
28


ARK
concerning some of which little is


Quawpaws live on the banks
of the Arkansas, between the Post
and Little Rock, estimated not to
exceed 500 souls. They are said
to have originally belonged to the
Osages of Missouri. Their lan-
guage is radically the same. ‘l'hey
ere very friendly to’ the Whites in
their. neighbourhood; manifest a
disposition to receive instruction ;
and are very anxious for the esta-
blishmentof a mission among them.
Tatemperance and uncleanness
most shockingly prevail; :and, by
these, vast multitudes are falling
sacrifices to death every year.
Tt is vastly important that some
missionary society should. imme-
diately embrace them within, the
objects of its benevolent efforts,
as the only means of arresting their
rapid progress to entire extermi-
nation. :

The Cherokees, the next tribe
on the river, are a branch of the
tribe of the same name, E.. of the
Mississippi. The first emigrants
were a few malcontents, who left
their tribe soon after the revolu-
tionary war. About 30 years ago,
they were reinforced by a company
of about 26 men, with their wives
and children, who fled from the
hand of justice. From that, time,
this country afforded a refuge to
such as were exposed to the penal
laws of the tribe, and to such. as
were, on any account, discontented
with their situation. In this way
the number became sv great az to
attract the atiention of govern-
ment; and, in 1813, an agent was
appointed to the superintendence, in
the same mainer as in the old
nation. The emigration, in 1811,
which excited so much interest in
the Christian community, raised the
number here to the present estima-
tion of 6000, The corrupting in-
fluence of the Whites, with other


Causes, bas produced a most dis-


ARK


treasing state of moral degradation
among them... The yourg. and
middle aged are. almost universally
destitute of any religious principle,
or moral restraint.. Among the
oldest are remnants of their old
system of religious belief. [See
Cherokees.]


The Os¢ges, the next tribe up.
the river, are in an untutored, sa-
vage state. Their mode of life pre-
sents very great obstacles to the
success of missions, on the play
hitherto pursued. F

About half the year they: forsake
their villages, and wander. in pur-
suit of game, with their women
and children. Until they can be
persuaded to abandon this course. of
life, few children can be retained
in the schools during the season. of
their excursions. When stationary,
they occupy: several villages; the
principal of which contains. about
300. lodges, or huts, end about
3000 souls. The lodges, irregularly
arranged, cover a surface of about
halfa mile square. They are con-
structed of posts, mattings, bark,
and skins, with neither floors. nor
chimneys. The fire is built on the
ground, in the centre of the lodge,
and the family and guests sit around
in a circle, upon skins or mats, As
in all uncivilized and pagan coun-
tries, the women perform the drud
gery of the nation, while the men
resort to the chase or the battle, or
consume their time in vain amuse-
ments, Their redigton differs from
all the tribes to the east of them.
They are idolaters and polytheists,
having four primary. deities, . viz.
the sun, moon, earth, and thunder.
In addition to these, they have a

at multitude of inferior gods.
hey are apparently very conscien-
tious and devout in their religious
rites and worship,—always rising,
while it is yet dark, toattend to their
morning devotions. All the pur-
suits of war and peace, hunting
and stealing, they make eae of
5 ;


ac Degen enn LOE AOC TEN


ge


SAE ees eat sd


ARK


prayer ond thanksgiving. - They
are friendly to: the: Whites, but
hostile to other Indians. © Among
this tribe is a. missionary station,
commenced. in 1820, by the U.
F. .M. S.,.called the Union.

It is:situated on the W. side of
the Grand R., about! 25 m. N.
of its entrance into‘ the Arkansas,
and 700 above the junction of the
Arkansas and the ** ssi: cippi. The
buildings areerc + 1 ¢ moderate
eminence, about a smile from the
R. The situaticn is pleasant, the
soil fertile, and the air and climate
more salubrious than in most places
under the same latitude. The
tract of land ceded to: the mission
by the Indian chiefs, embraces a
prairie of about 4 square m. in ex~-
tent. Coal and salt are found in
the vicinity. W. long. 97° 20’,
N. lat. 35° 30’,

The. follawing persons left the
city of New Yorkin April, 1820 :—
The Rev. W. F.Vail, bis wife, and4
children; Rev. Epaphras Chap-
man, and his wife; Dr. Marcus Pal-
mer; Abraham Redfield; W.C.


Regna;; Alexander — Woodruff; :


Stephen Spaulding ; Eliza Cleaver ;
Mary Foster; Clarissa Johnstone ;
Susan Lines; and Dolly E. Hoyt.
The two latter died on the jour-
ney. Suitable buildings and mills
have been erected, a small schcol
maintained, and the farm: is be-
coming productive in cotton, grain,
and vegetables for the support of
the family. Different members of
the mission are skilled in various
mechanic arts. In 1822, the pro-
perty belonging to this establish-
ment was estimated at about 24,000
dollars. The mission already
exerts a favourable influence on
the Osages, many of whom have
abandoned the chase, and cultivate
the soil. Owing to their roving
habits, and the disturbed state of
the tribe since, the: mission was
established, the progress has been
slow ; but enough bas been done


ARO
to raise ‘a cheering hope. of ulti:
mate success. In the latter’ part
of 1824, the following persons were


‘at this station —the Rev. ‘W. F,


Vail, Dr. Palmer, Messrs. F. Ful
ler, Redfield; Spaulding, Wood-
ruff, and Requa.' The scheol in-
cluded 21 Osage children, who live
in the family. ; nie m

Hopefield,.a new station, about:
4m. from Union, was commenced
Dec, 1823, by the Rev. E. Chap-
man, and Mr. W. C. Requa as en
assistant. Here are 1) Indian fa+
milies, each occupying a log build-
ing, and cultivating a small farm.
All are attentive to religious in-
struction, and: are acquiring the
habits and customs of civilized life.

To the W. of these are nume-
rous other ¢ribes, of whom ° very
little is known, except by the re-
ports of explorers and huaters: By
these they are represented as pa-


cific, and desirous of the protec»


tion of the United States, and of
being embraced ‘in the efforts
making for Indian improvement.
They ought to excite-the imme-
diate attention of the Christian
public, before they become conta-
minated by the example of un-
principled white men.’ - They
are wandering tribes; and mis-
sionaries should go prepared to
follow them, till they are per-
suaded to settle down in fixed habi-
tations, and toseek the comforts of
civilization, and the blessings of
the Gospel. | :
ARLAVERTTY, oa: village in
Mallagum, in the island of Ceylon,
in which the American mission-
aries have established a school.
AROO, five islands in the -In-
dian Ocean, ‘to the S, and:W. of
New Guinea, extending from 5° 30
to 7° 0 S, lat., with narrow chan-
nels between’ them. Population
between 19,000 and 20,000: souls.
The inhabitants being very desir-
ous to receive Christian instruction,


Mr, Kam, of: the Z,; §., sent: them:
30


—


i — a ond a


hope. of ulti:
he latter part
y persons were
2 Rev. ‘W. F.
fessrs. F.: Ful
lding, Wood-
he school in-
dren, who live


station, about:
as commenced


Rev.E. Chap» |


}. Requa as en
» 1) Indian fa+
ing a log build-
-a small farm.
> religious in
acquiring the
of civilized life.
ese are nume-
of whom ~ very
rept by the re-
nd huaters: By
resented as pa-
of the protecs,.
| States, and of
in the efforts |
» improvement. |
ite-the imme-
the Christian
become coénta-
ample: of un-
men. - - They


bes, and mis- ,


ro prepared to
they are per-
mn in fixed habi-
the comforts of
he blessings of


» & village in
sland of Ceylon,
erican mission-
ed a school.

nds in the In-
he S, and W. of
ding from 5° 30'
h narrow chan-
m. Population
id 20,000 roo
being very desir-
: taninetruction,
Sy —


\
of
ae
re:


~


ARR


& native teacher, who had been pre-
viously prepared ‘for the employ-
ment, at’ the seminary which he


had-erected for the purpose, in


Amboyna.
ARRACAN, ‘a province in the
W. part of the Burman empire,
S.E. of Bengal, on the eastern
- coast of the sea ied Bengal, yd
| Rangoon-and Chittagong. n
500 he breadth from 20 to’ 200.
Population between 2 and 3 mil-
lions. ‘The country is fertile, and
the mountains’ are : covered with
etual verdure.

The ‘inhabitants are idolaters,
and worship images made of clay.
Arracan. was’ formerly an inde-


to the Burman empire in 1783 ;
since which time it has been sub-
ject to a viceroy, appointed by the
Barman government.

Arracan, the principal city, is
situated on’ a river of the same
name; in E. long. 93° 25’, N. lat.


in circumference; and tv contain
160,000 inhabitants.

Land has been’ granted to the
Bapt: S. for the establishment of a
mission. at Akyab, an island of
this province, which is eligibly
situated at the mouth of the Arra-
can R. The whole number of na-


mat tive members of the church in full


communion, according to the last
report, is 71; -but of these not
quite one-half are fixed in the
Christian colony. About 20 still
remain at the old stations, and
14 are in the town of Arracun.
= There are also about 30 members
® ut a place called Kaptai, under the
government of an independent
chief, who being ¢xceedingly ini-
nical to the Gospel,.has for several
years effectually prevented all in-
tercourse’ between ' these people
and the brethren. ‘The enmity of
the buman heart has displayed itself
here as in other places; «yet Mr.
Pink has fourid a frankness of inquiry.


pendent: kingdom, but strrendered-


20° 40. It is said to be 15 m.°


: ARR

and an éarnest attention, whitch
are exceedingly encouraging. Thé
Arracanese essentially the
same as the Burmans, and have no —
caste ; | and, compared with the
Hindoos, have but a limited nim-
ber of objects of idolatrous worship,

‘Besides the native Christians, e
number of heathen Arracanese have


gth | been admitted into the colony: as


residents. © They, however, ‘coms
ply with such regulations as Mr..
Fink sees fit to appoint, and ‘they
have the Gospel regularly preached
to them, and their children ‘will
receive a Christian education’ in
the school. Tuesdays and 'Satur-
days have been fixed as marketdays j
the shops: are open on the other
days of the week, with the excep-
tion of the Sabbath, when there
is a cessation of all public busi-
‘ness. ? ai

Meearung, one of the preachers,
is stationed: in the colony, and
both conducts public worship and
teache: the school, which is held
in the chapel erected by the people
the elves. The other preachers
a: . uisposable for the: general dif-
fusion of the Gospel; and one of
them, by “rotation, is usually’in |
the town of Arracan. As’ the
country is much’ intersected by
rivers and creeks, Mr. Fink has
purchased and fitted up a small boat
in which the brethren can convey
themselves to a number of im-
portant places at considerable ‘dis:
tances from their home; and. hi-
therto they have met with no unkind
treatment from their countrymen,
when thus engaged. These four
brethren ‘are supported by the
contyibui: sas of two associations of


‘young gentlemen in Glasgow, who


unitedly send them 40/,
for that purpose.

In providing copies of the Scrip-
tures, or rather parts of them, and
tracts, the missionariés enjoyed the
co-operation of some of their Ames
rican brethren, connected with the
31


per annum


4


Burmen.mission, ’ particularly from
the Rev, G. H. Hough.

. There.js also a town of Arracan,
called Cox’s Bazaar, containing a
population of 30,000, where the
Burman language is spoken, which |
has. attracted benevolent regard.‘
This town is about 40 m. within |
the British territories, which are
separated from the Burman empire
by the Gnat R. It is well. calcu-
lated for a station, both for preach-
ing and the extensive distribution
of tracts. . To this place, there-
fore, the Rey. James Colman, from
the American Baptist Board for
Foreign. Missions, removed, in
1821, from Chittagong, and com-
-menced his labours with favourable
prospects, but was suddenly re-
moved by death in less than 8
months. Occasionally, efforts have
been made in this important spot,
and several persons have joined the
church at Chittagong. _

ARROWACKS, a Wandering
tribe of Indians, scattered over. a
great extent of territory in Guiana,
‘South America. They are humane.
and friendly.

The United Brethren seni 2
missionaries to Berbice, a Dutch
settlement near Surinam, in 1738,
who laboured among the Pagan
inhabitants around them for several
years, but with little success, .

In the mean time they became
acquainted with the Arrowack lan-
guage; ‘and, from 1748 to 1757,
they baptized about 400, and suc-
ceeded in introducing among them
the habits of civilized life. In
1769, a church was.erected to ac-,
commodate the increasing congre-
gation of Lewis C. Dehne, at Hope
or Hoop; and, though many dis-
couragements still attended the
labours of the brethren, yet they
‘were permitted to reap some fruit.
An 1789, the number of baptized
persons was 83; in 1800 it had in-
creased to 169. Afterwards they
removed to the R. Neukeer,


AST


Another . station was formed at
an early period, named Pilgerhut,
in the neighbourhood of which
most of the baptized persons lived.
Amidst many trials, the brethren
persevered: at this place till 1793,
when the negroes rose in rebellion
against their masters, murdered
many of the white people, burnt
the settlement at Pilgerhut, and
laid waste almost the whole coun-
try. By this fire an Arrowack
Grammar and Lexicon, and some
translated portions. of the Scrip-
tures, prepared by one of the mis-
sionaries, were consumed...

A third station, named Sharon,
was also occupied for many years,
but was relinquished from the oc-


currence of uncontrollable. cir- |
It is pleasing to add |
a quotation from a letter written §
by one of the missionaries at Suri-


cumstances,


nam, dated Feb..12, 1823 :—


_. Now and then I see andcon- 5
verse with the’Arrowacks. A com- |
pany of these people were here not |
long ago,, some of whom told me {|
that they could not forget what §


they had formerly heard of Jesus
Christ our Saviour.”


ASBURY, a missionary station in |
Georgia, among the Creek Indians,


recently established by the M. S,


‘Carolina Conference.
The missionaries, Messrs, im. |


Capers, Isaac Smith, and Andrew
Gummil, have encountered much


opposition from the Big Warrior; @
‘but the difficulties have considera: |
bly subsided, and the prospects of }
the mission are brightening. In #


1822, a hope was entertained. that


100 scholars would soon be ob- iim


tained in the school.
ASSOONDY,.. a village near
Bellary, Hindoostan, where 1
flourishing school was established
in 1817, by the missionaries of the
L. S. at that station, with
obtained by contributions from


adras.
ASTRACHAN,. or i
3


Of MWM as ase Ee ew wee ee,


funds #


AST


was formed at CAN, a province of Asiatic Russia,
ned Pilgerhut, in the government of Caucasia, It
ood of which borders on the Caspian sea, on the


side of which are long marshes
that produce a vast quantity of salt.
Rain seldom falls in the province,
but it is crossed by thé Volga,
which overfiows annually; and
7 when the water retires, the grass
grows in less than a month.
he whole coun- (93% 4strachan, a city, capital of the
. an Arrowack | (3% province, isa place of very great and
icon, and some | 43% extensive trade, surrounded by a
of the Scrip- wall 3m. in‘ length. It contains
one of the mis- 4 monasteries, 25 Russian churches,
sumed... 2 Armenian, 1 Lutheran, and 1
named Sharon, a Roman Catholic monastery, with a
for many years, #m church. Population 70,000. E.
ed. from the.oc- | long. 47° 50’, N. lat. 46° 22’,
ontrollable. cit. | The ‘Rev. Messrs. Wm. Glen,
| pleasing to add | John Dickson, John Mitchell, and
a letter written @ Macpherson Selby, from the Scotch
sionaries at Suris 3a MM. S., commenced their: labours
2, 1823 :— ; here in 1814. The original design
n Isee andcon § of this mission was to print and
owacks., A. com- distribute tracts, and portions of the
nle were here not | Scriptures, in various languages.
f whom told me | Its situation is peculiarly favoura-
not forget what ble for this purpose, being the mert
heard of Jesus for Persian and numerous’ other
? merchants, who assist in extensively


1 persons lived.
» the brethren |
place till 1793, ||
ose in rebellion
ters, murdered
2 people, burnt
Pilgerhut, and


issionary station in circulating these publications.
he Creek Indians, me From 1815 to 1822, the missiona-
ed by the M. S, ries distributed about 40,000 copies


of tracts, Testaments, and portions
of the Scriptures, in the following
languages and dialects, viz. Hebrew,
Tartar, Turkish, Persian, Arme-
nian, Calmuc, Jagatai Tartar,
Orenberg Tartar, and Turkish
Tartar. Thus, truth has been dis-
seminated, and the fruit begins to
appear.

; Several of the missionaries,
m= having acquired a knowledge of
different languages, commenced
itinerant preaching in the suburbs
and vicinity, where are about
= 25,000 Tartar Mahomedans, many
of whom heard with attention, and
™ warrant strong hopes of the ulti-
mate prevalence of truth. A con-
siderable population of Jews, on the


ce.
les, Messrs. Wm. |
nith, and Andrew
ncountered much
the Big Warrior; |
s have considera- |
1 the prospects of j
brightening. In §
s eniertained, that |
buld soon be ob- }
ool.

. a village near
ostan, where 4
on). was established
issionaries of the §
ation, with fund
ontributions from


N, or ASTRA:
32


_ ATU


W. and E. of the Caspian, has alsé
excited the regard of the missiona-
ries, and the L. J. S. haz favoured
their designs by placing a quantity
of suitable books at their disposal.
The Russian B. S. has also afforded
important aid, by printing’ the
Scriptures in the different Tartar
dialects. In 1815, an auxiliaryB. S.
was formed at Astrachan, which
has béen efficient in disgeminating
the Scriptures among Persians and
Tartars, who have been eager to
receive them. A seminary has
been erected for the education of
native youths, to become teachers
of their countrymen; which is also
designed to embrace the children
of the missionaries, and to qualify
them to take the place of their
fathers in future years. Much en-
couragement has recently been
afforded ‘by the conversion of
a Persian Mahomedan priest, who is
influential and zealous in making
known the way of salvation.

The United Brethren have made
attempts here, but the results have
not been great. A few years since,
the L.S. alsosent a missionary hither
in order to instruct the neigh-
bouring Calmucs; but he found it
expedient to return to Sarepta.

ATCHAVELLY, a village in
Ceylon, between Point Pedro and
Jaffnapatam. In 1816, the Wes-
leyan Missionaries at Point Pedro,
with permission from the local
government, occupied the ancient
place of worship, and established
schools. Here they found some
reliques of piety, among hosts of
mosques, pagodas, and images,

ATUI, one of the Harvey
Islands, where the L. M. S. has -
two native teachers, but which has
made, of these islands, the least
progress. The king and a few'of

is people attend to instruction,

and behave kindly to their teachers,

and it is hoped the rest will be led

te imitate their example. The

chapel here is a good building, and
33


asian pert ee nn a YS ene ee eo


é


reer


ere


. AUS
one of the teachers is building


himself a commodious house.


_ AUSTRALASIA, a name now


’ applied to the circuit that includes


those islands lying S. of the con-
tinent of Asia; as Terra Australis,
New Guinea, New Britain, New
Ireland, New Caledonia, New
Zealand, and those of Solomon,
Aroo, New Hebrides, &c. [See
Areo, New, South Wales, New Zea-
land, and Van Dieman’s Land.]


af

BADDAGAMME, a village in
the S.W. part of Ceylon, about 12
m. from Galle, on the R.
Gindrah, one of the largest in the
island. Population, in 1802, 1,644 ;
the houses are built of mud and
sticks. Villages of the same kind
are extensive in the neighbour-
hood. The situation is healthy,
and affords the missionaries easy
access to the natives. :
- Here is a station of the C. M.S,
The .Rev. Mr. Mayor having ob-
tained a tract of land from the
government, erected a comfortable


‘house on an eminence, which com-


mands a delightful prospect of a
winding river, a fertile valley, well-
cultivated fields, and distant moun-
tains. Here, on the Lord’s day,
he had sometimes an opportunity
of addressing about 100 children,
besideg adults; and the latter ap-
peared to be gradually losing their
confidence in their heathen super-
stitions. Some of them, indeed,
ingenuously confessed, that the
doctrines of Christianity were more
reasonable, and better adapted to
the wants of man, than the religion
of Budhu. The priests, however,
‘were so well convinced that it was
their own interest to uphold the
ancient system of delusion, that
they were almost invariably found,
upon all occasions, to resist every
argument adduced in support of


BAH


the truth. This. branch of the
mission was afterwards strength-
ened by the labours of Mr. Ward,
who removed hither from Nellore,
as the climate at the latter place was
found unsuitable to his constitution.

On the 14th of February,
1821, the foundation-stone of a
church was laid; the stones for
which were blasted from a rock,
at the expense of 700 pounds


of powder. A great number of a


natives were present at the service.
About four months afterwards,
Mr, Ward was requested to visit -a
young woman on her dying bed,


who said, that she had heard of |
Jesus Christ, at Baddagamme, and |


that she trusted, in him alone. for


the sulvation of her soul... The 4


missionaries at present here, are


the Rev. Robert Mayor and the |
Rev. J. C. Trimnell, with Mrs, |
Mayor and Mrs. Trimnell, The
exercise of their ministry. seems |
attended with but little encourage- |


ment, Twelve natives, connected
with this station, embraced the op-
portunity afforded them, by the
bishop holding a confirmation, of


making a public profession of their |


faith in Christ,'.and of their deter-
mination to devote themselves to


his service. (The schools, which |


are 6 in number, have recently


suffered from the prevalence. of |


disease. In these some pleasing
instances of usefulness have ac-


curred, A Sunday-school hasbeen #
established for adults, and the con- |
duct of all the ‘boys 16) in the |

as to de- |


boarding-school is suc
serve commendation. aa

BAHAMA, or LUCAYO
ISLANDS, in the Atlantic Ocean,
extending along the coast of Flo-
rida to Cuba, on two sand banks,
called the Little and Great Bank of
Bahama; the former lying N. of
the latter’. ‘

The islands are near 600 in
number; some of them mere rocks,
but 12 are large and mii Few


‘das — raw wan eee


BAH


In a letter; dated Nov. 4th, 1824,
Mr. Turtle gives: an affecting ac-
count of .a hurricane which. had
macouily occurred, and which had

monet on many heavy calamities.

arpum Bay, the chapel and
lhe ge were dashed to
pieces; but though, in other cases,
the mission buildings were con-
siderably shattered, they were after-
wards repaired. ‘‘ With regard to
the horror of the scene,’”’ says Mr.
T., ‘1 certainly never beheld any
thing like it before—houses falling
—ruins flying about in all direc-
tions—husbands dragging .. their
wives from one house to another
for shelter, and mothers lamenting
for. their. children, supposed to be
dashed in pieces!?? The Report
.of 1825 communicates the follow-
ing intelligence :—
. New Providence Circutt.—We
have two schools, one at: the E.
and the other at the. W. end-of the
town ; the attention of both teachers
and children, with visible improve-
ment as the consequence, has been
pleasingly increased in the past
year. West school:—boys, 65;
girls, 110; total 175... East school:
—boys, 82; girls, 101;- total 183.

Eleuthera . Circuit—Recksound,
—tThis school has recently im-
,proved, though rather fluctuating.
“Through: the course of the year
about 20 adult blacks have attended
on the Sabbath for instruction, as
also on some of the week evenings ;
but since the late gale, they have
not been so regular. Number ;—
White boys, 30 ; White girls, 35;
Blacks, 12.

Tarpum Bay.- ~Attendance ir-
regular, since the destruction of the
chapel,

Savannah Sound.—The * most
_prosperous school on the circuit.
Number :—Boys, 16; girls, 22;
men, 16 ; women 14.


Palmetto Point.—This school :


is doing well. Adults, 8 ; girls, 14;
boys, 12. ‘ ”


BAH


: Harbour Island. Thisschool bas
recently improved. © Number, '8C.
+ Cove.—The school here has been
much neglected. Children, 30.

‘Bluff.—Number about 26.

Current.—Number 20.

Turks Island Circuit school is
conducted with good order. : Naum-
ber, 80.

From: the. last accounts, it ap-
pears that the state of the mission
at New ‘Providence is not’ very
gratifying. A nomingl reduction

ad been marked in the society, of
at least 100, from removals: and
other circumstances; but.72 mem-
bers were added,' of which nearly
the half were whites, -The schools
here were in a fluctuating state.
Good, however, had been done ; and
by improving, the place. of, the
schools, more was anticipated. ‘
. Hleuthera.—The work: of God
throughout this circuit is not pros-
perous, which is'principally owing
to an illegal importation of articles
brought by the Americans, who
take the hats, &c, of this island in
exchange: -for the produce they
bring hither. The missionaries
will not, countenance smuggling,
and their congregations are small
in consequence. The scheols, on
this account, suffer much from the
want of. efficient teachers and
proper books; the attendance given
both by teachers and scholars is
very irregular, which is more espe-
cially the case at Rock Sound and
Tarpum Bay. At Savannah Sound
and Palmetto Point the attend-
ance is more Per and regular.

Harbour Island and Abuca.—
The members of this society have,
in general, been very teachable.
Scuoots :—Station Island.—This
school is a little more orderly than in
the preceding. year. Cove Harbour.
—Because of the shattered state of
the chapel, occasioned’ by the late
hurricane, this school had: nearly
falien through in the ‘beginning of
the year; but since the chapel has

36


shool has
ber. ch 8¢e e
has been
n, 30.
25.


school is
. Num-


its, it ap-
e mission
not’ very
reduction
society, of
ovals: and
, 72 mem-
ich nearly
‘he schools


ally owing
. of articles
ans, who
is island in
duce they
issionaries
smuggling,
5 are small
scheols, on
Ih from the
achers and
lance given
scholars is
more espe-
Sound and
mnah Sound
he attend.
nd regular.
HH Abuca.—
pciety have,
teachable.
and.—This
herly then in
ve Harbour.


BAL’


been roofed, it has been revived.
Biuff.—Several children have made
considerable progress. Current
and Spanish Wells schools have
been given up; the children hav-
ing no place to. meet in.since the
hurricane. a

BALASORE,. a town. of Hin-
doostan, in Orissa, and a place of
considerable trade. The town,


_ with this part of the district of


Mohurbunge, was ceded by the
Mahrattas to the British, in 1803.
It is situated on the Gongehar,
8 m. from its mouth, in the bay of
Bengal, and 120m. S. W. of Cal-
cutta. Long. 86° 56’ E., lat, 21°
32’N. This place derives pecu-
liar interest from its proximity, to
the temple of Juggernaut, to which
many thousand devotees annually


resort. ?

The idol itself is a large block
of wood, having a frightful visage
painted black, with a very wide
mouth, of a bloody colour. His
arms are of gold, and he is dressed
in gorgeous apparel. _A numerous
retinue of priests and other servants
are always.in attendance upon his
temple, to receive the olferings
made to the idol, and superintend
the performance of his worship.

‘Multitudes. of persons assemble
from all parts of India to pay ho-
nour to this odious deity. . Of their
number no accurate calculation
can be made.’ The natives them-
selves, when talking on this sub-
ject, usually say that a lack of
people (100,000) would not be
missed. And so mad are they upon
their idols, that thousands of lives
age annually lost, by. the fatigues
and. privations to which they are
exposed in the long journeys un-
dertaken for this purpose. Several
years ago, Dr. Carey computed the
number sacrificed in this way alone,


at one. hundred and: twenty.thou-


sand | Ri,
. But the worship. of Juggernaut


is, in -a. more: direct and evident:


BAL*


manner; a system: of cruelty. and
blood. Dr. Buchanan thus de-
sprites the conten wee :—* After:

e tower had proceeded some way,
a pilgrim pede he was’
ready to offer himself a sacrifice to
the idol. He laid himself down in:
the road, before the tower, as it
was moving along, lying on_ his
face, with his arms stretched for-
wards. The multitude passed round
him, leaving the space clear, and
he was crushed to, death by: the
wheels of the tower. A shout of
joy was raised to the god. He is
said to smile, when the libation .of
blood is made. The people ‘row °
cowries, or small money, on the
body of the victim, in approbation
of the deed. He was left to view
a considerable time ; and was tien
carried to a place a little way out
of the town, called by the English
Golgotha, where the dead bodies
are usually cast forth, and where
dogs and vultures are ever seen.
There I have. just been viewing
his remains.’’

He thensays—‘‘I beheld another
distressing scene at the Place. of
Sculls—a poor woman lying dead,
or nearly dead; and her two chil-


‘| dren by her, looking at the dogs


and vultures which were near. The
people passed by without noticing
the children. I asked them where
was their home. They said, ‘ they
had no home, but:where their
mother was.’ Oh, there is.no pity
at Juggernaut ; no mercy, i ten-—
derness of heart, in Moluc.) ; king-
dom !?? ; j
Mr. John Peter, of the B, Jf, S.
a zealous and eloquent Bengalee
preacher, formerly a member of the
Armenian church, arrived at Bala-
sore in 1810 ;. he met with a very
friendly reception from the Euro-
pean inhabitants, and, in a short
time, baptized a number of English
soldiers. His labours, together
with those of Kristno Dass, a native
assistant, were aati extend-
E 7


BAL


éd to vatious villages, from Bala-
sore to Cuttack, a distance of about

100 m.

- Early in February, 1812, Mr. Peter
had an opportunity: of introducing
the New Testament, in the Orissa
language, into the temple of Jug-
gernaut. He accordingly disiri-
buted several copies among the
principal persons belonging. to that
place, and gave one of them into
the hends of one of the purichas,
or pfincipal ministers of the idol;
accompanying his gift with an ar-
dent prayer, that the intense dark-
_ hess of superstition might be spee-
dily dispersed by the glorious light
of Divine revelation. In the autumn
of the same year, he, and his friend,
Kristno Dass, went to a place call
Poorooha-pota. ‘‘ It being the last
day of the festival of Juggernaut,’’
says Mr: Peter, ‘“‘ more than a
thousand persons were assembled,
and three cars of the god were
dragged along. In the midst of
the crowd T stood upon a chair, and

reached the everlasting Gospel.
The people, almost to a man, left
the cars, and, surrounding me,
heard the word with attention.

We sang three hymns; preached
and prayed twice; and distributed
16 Orissa New Testaments and
Psalters, besides many tracts. One
Oriya was insulted by his country-
men for accepiig » Testament:
their derision, however, made no
impression on him; he received
the book, and went his way. On
this occasion several military of-
ficers, with their ladies, were pre-
eent upon elephants.”

In the year 1813, Kristno Dass
‘was removed by death.

In January, ‘1814, great astonish-
ment was excited in Balasore, by
the conversion of a Brahmin of
high rank, named Jugunat’ha
Mookhoojye. This man, who was of
a rich family, and well versed both
in the Orissa and Bengalee lan-
guages, was so thoroughly con-


BAL

vinced of the truth of the Gospel,
that he renounced his caste—threw
away his poita, or sacred thread—
and- ate publicly with Mr. Peter; to
whom he expressed an earnest desire
for baptism. One evening, whilst
the missionary was reading and
explaining to him part of the Ben-
galee Testament, he expressed his
joy that Christ was able to dis-
possess Satan even of his strong
holds, and observed: “‘ The debtas
are evil spirits, and the followers of
Jesus have power from him to
overcome the devil and all his
temptations. I am growing fear-
less of the power of debtas, and all
persecutors. I know that God
alone has the power to kill, and to
give life; and that without his per-
mission neither good nor evil can
befall me. If he be my Redeemer,
therefore, I will not fear what man
can do. Should the people of my
casté kill me, I will not fear; since
I hope that heaven is secured to
me by Jesus, the Son of God.
From this time may I appear be-
fore all men a decided follower of
Christ! I hope the Lord will re-
ceive me, and keep me for ever, as
his own child: for though I am the
greatest of sinners, I bless the
Almighty, and will thank him for
ever, that he has brought me out
of darkness into his marvellous
light !?*

The statement he afterwards
made being perfectly satisfactory,
he was baptized in March, ‘ After
the service, an Oriya, named Khos-
alee, told his coun en, both
near the tank where the baptismal
rite was administered, and on his
way home, that their shasters were
all false ; but that the’ shaster of
Jesus was certainly true.

In 1816, Mr, Peter wrote :—
‘¢ Since my arrival at Balasore, 34

ersons, natives and Europeans,

ave been baptized ; some of whom

have been taken to heaven, © and

others are residing’ at _—
3


BAN
strumental of much good. The
Netherlands M.-S. has also ap-
pointed three missionaries to labour
in this long neglected field.

‘ BANGALORE, a town and mili-
tary station in Mysore, Hindoostan,
in the centre of the Peninsula, 74
m.'N.E. of Seringapatam, and 215
W. of Madras; a place of great
political importance, strongly for-
tified, and from situation the bul-
wark of the Mysore country to-
wards Arcot: © Silk and woollen
cloths are the principal manufac-
tures, and all sorts of English
vegetables grow plentifully. It is
healthy, being elevated above the
level of the sea at Madras, 2900
feet. In the Pettah,: or Native
Town, are about 30,000 people,
who speak the Canurese language.
The cantonments of the troops,
about a mile distant, forming a
neat viilage, with the bazaars and
huts built by the followers of the
army, make a town as large and
populous as the Pettah. These,
witb the exception of about 2000
English troops, speak the Tamul.
The native inhabitants ere mostly
Hindoos; but loosely attached to
their religion.

The importance of the station is
increased, by its vicinity to Serin-
gapatam, and its connexion with
many other populous towns; and
by its being the central mart for
merchandize in this part of India.
E. long. 77°, N, lat, 13°,

The Rev. Messrs. Andrew
Forbes and Stephen Laidler, from
the L, M. S., commenced their
labours here in 1820, The mis-
sionaries were for some time en-
g in the study of the language,
and other th ce measures,
A chapel was built, principally by
the zeal and liberality of Major
Mackworth, who subscribed 100
pagodas to the building, procured
a grant of timber for the seats,
drew the plan ofthe chapel, and
also superintended its erection.


BAN


The commanding officer had pre-
viously made a grant of land. if

Mr. Laidler brought with him
from Madras, in the’ capacity
of servant, ‘a native who had
received Christian instruction
under the Danish missionaries
at Tranquebar,- who understands
the Canara as well as the Ta-
mul, Twice a week he visited
a neighbouring village, to read
the Scriptures, and to give an ex-
hortation. When, on his first
embracing Christianity, he was
baptized by the Rev. Mr. Spring,
he received the name.of Samuel ;
and, on account of his piety, his
disinterestedness, the mildness of
his disposition, and his being an at-
tentive observer of the providence
of God, ‘Mr. Laidler subsequently
added that of Flavel, Some trans-
lations and schools were com-
menced. Congregations for Eng-
lish worship on the Sabbath even-
ings nearly filled the chapel. A
Christian church was formed in
April 1821, when 31 members,
chiefly soldiers, were admitted to
communion, some: of whom had
previously renounced popery ; and
a small society was instituted
among the soldiers, for the joint
support of the Missionc:4, Bible,
and Tract Societies. In the courge
of the next year, a friend of the
mission opened a house in the
bazaar, both as a chapel and a depo-
sitory for the sale of the Scriptures,
religious books, tracts, d&c. in the
vernacular languages. Here the
natives call, read, inquire, and
converse, on the subjects of the
books on sale; from which much
good is anticipated. In 1823,
the missionaries were joined b
Mr. and Mrs. Chambers; and,
in addition to pursuing the works
already commenced, a seminary
was opened for preparing native
youths, of pious character and pro-
mising talents, for preaching the
Gospel to their eed ts Six


BAN:


students were at thet time going
through a course of theological:
study, under the direction: of Mr.
Laidler, . They were named Isaac,
Joshua, Peter, Shadrach, Jacob,
and Moses. Isaac':and Joshua had
been for some re ‘time
engaged in addressing {peir coun-,
trymen. Peter read 5 eich well,
and was learning Greek and Latin.
Shadrach had made good profic‘ency
in Tamul.. Jacob and Moses, the
junior pupils, had made, compara-
tively, little progress.

On the 27th of June, 1824, Mr.
and Mrs. Campbell. joined: those
who had been thus successfully
labouring. Of» the first native
service at which he was. present,
Mr. C. gives the following account;
—‘‘T went to see the native service
conducted sy Samuel Flavel. It is
no small matter to hear a converted
heathen address his countrymen
with so much: fluency and earnest-
ness as was then done. It is a
greut matter to see the heathen
listening with attention to the
word of life, and to witness two


from — them receiving the
ordinance of baptism, es followers


of Christ, as was then done. . But
it is a greater matter still, to sit
down to the table of the Lord,
ond commemoraie bis death with
twenty who were once idoleters,
now no longer heirs of wrath, but
children ef the living God, and see
them give evidence of their con-
version to Christ, as I then did.
Long shalt I remember the feelings
I then experienced, and wish that
those who pray for the cause, and
port its interests at home, could
whetee such a seene. Nor doves
Samuel labour alone; two other
youths, endned, I trust, with fer-
vent piety, labour assiduously, as
far as their ability extends; and
shonld the Lord: Ged of Israel pive
success to our plans, there will,
I » soon ge forth a host of
to fight the battles of the


Lord, and to warn their eountry-
men of ‘the danger. and destruction
te which they are: exposed. me
- Mr. Chambers, unable to bear
the climate, even at this compara-.
tively salubrious station, was. re-
commended to return to Europe.
He, however, died at sea, on the:
7th of January, 1826, the day‘ after:
his embarkation; but: Mrs. C; and
her two children arrived safely in
this country. From the last re-.
1 the following particulars: are
taken :—

Native Seminary.—The number
of students in this ‘institution is
13 ‘some of whom occasionally
engage in preaching the Gospel
to their countrymen. w

The progress made by the stu-'
dents in the native languages; viz.
Sanscrit, Tamil, Canarese, ‘Te-
loogoo, and Hindoostanee, is very
satisfactory. They have also made
considerable proficiency in Eng-
lish. Their answers to questions
in theology, at a late examination,
evince their acquaintance with the
Scriptures, and their aptitude in
referring to proofs. Generally
speaking, there is apparently among:
them a steady advance in know-
ledge, and a consistent Christime
deportment,


partment, 3 are.
under the tuition of Mr. Campbell.
Theamount of subscriptions inindia,
towards the enlargement of this


institution, is 4500 rupees, of
which upwards of 2000 rupees
were subscribed by le in-
dividuals at Bombay, on the appli-
cation of Mr. Massie, when on his
visit to that Presidency. ~The
Committee of the Madras B. 8.
hed presented to the missionaries
here 100 volumes, being separate
portions of the Old and New Tes-
taments, in Tamil, Canarese, Te-
leogoe, Hindoostanee, and Portu-
guess. The native students, with
avidity, purchased, at a reduced
price, the copies in en for the.
B2 4


BAN*
use of the members ‘of their re-
spective families.. On: this :occa-
sion, his excellency, the late Go-
vernor: Elphinstone, made: a hand-
some donation to the object.

- Native Schools.—Of these schoois
there are three, two for boys, and
one for girls.. One of the boys’
schools is under the: superinten-
dence of Mr. Laidler.s» The
scholars, in number upwards of 20,
are instructed in the several Jin- |
guages taught in the seminary, ‘he |
Sanscrit excepted. Fait

In the other boys’: school, in
which Canarese is chiefly taught,
are 10 scholars. This school is
superintended: by Mr. Campbell,
who speaks of their talents, applica-
tion, and progress, in very ‘favour-
able terms. Moral and religious
instruction is constantly imparted ;
and four of the boys:appear tc have
received the truth in the love of it.

While they fearlessly protest against
idolatry, they evince much of the
meek spirit of Curistianity. |

The native girls’ school; under
the superintendence of Mrs. Laid-
Jer, succeeds as well as could rea-
sonably have been expected.

Preaching in the Native Lan-
ruage.—The native services at the

Ntission Chapel, and in the Fort,
are continued as usual, and are both
well attended. 4

Mr. Campbell’s Canarese con-
gregation has had many difficulties
tocontend with, &nd is somewhat
reduced in number ; but some of its
members afford pleasing evidence of
attention, seriousness, and thirst for
divine knowledge. Generally speak-
ing, the females manifest indiffe-
renée to religion, |The native
teacher, David, assists Mr. Camp-
bell in his Canarese services.

About 50 peo: natives, who as-
semble gee time to veligs for yo

urpose of receiving religious in-

Seaton, are addressed, on those
occasions, by one or other of the
students. '


BAN.

The number of ‘adults baptized; -
from the 1st of January to August,
1826, was 17, viz; 3 heathens, ‘and
14 Roman Catholics. The number


of Hindoos received into church- —


fellowship, during the same period,
was 13. The*total number ad-
mitted to communion, since the
formation of the church in 1823,’
is. 72. The number of commu-
nicants, in August last, was 41.
Itinerancies, 8c.—The: native:
teachers continue to itinerate within
a circuit of between 30 and 40
miles. ‘While on these ‘tours, they
enter, us opportunities occur, inte
religious conversation with the
natives, who, in general, listen with
atterition. During one of them}
performed in October, 1826, they
visited 36 villages, and conversed
with nearly 1200 people, of whom
some asked the teachers many
questions—others entered into dis-
putations with them—some said,
‘* Well, if we believe the things
u declare unto us, when shall we
ear more? who will again come
and teach us???


what they heard, and expressed a
desire to be baptized.
Two of the’ native teachers,


during the past year, have itinerated.


for several months between Serin-
gapatam and Mysore. The teacher,
Isaac David, with one of the stu-
dents, who acted in the capacity of
reader of the Scriptures, been
sent to Cannanore, on the Malabar
coast, in pursuance of a request


transmitted to the misstonaries by


an European gentleman and some
of the natives resident there.’ The
teacher was ordained on the 13th of
May, 1826, and, with his compa-


nion, proceeded to Cannanore iv


J ? following.

ith regard to the native teach-
ers who have been reared unde? the
wing of this mission, the mission-
aries observe, generally, that they


have been very useful in or )


While others ap-:
peared considerably affected with.


\
\


sugar, rr
t has m¢
the clim
hence ig
plantatio|
called B
froin crey
E. coas
surface
bene
onged
hized iti


iq

a

me
e


, BAN

Mr.end Mrs. Reeve and family em-
barked on the 11th of Aprillast;:on
their return to India.’ Mr... had
been appointed to Bangalore, its


climate being more'!:::-!; ‘>suit the -


health of. Mrs, ".eeve: than tha: of
Bellary, whe’< heformerly laboured.


BANKOTS, a town of Hindoo-:


stan, 60. m.S. Bombdy, possessed by
the English, including its depen-
dent villages, contains about 1700;
inhabitants. The language and
people are similar to those in. Bom-


Rev. Samuel Newell,: front the
A. B. of Commissioners for Foreign
Missions, ate missionary at Bom-:
bay, made several visits to this place
and its vicinity, where he found the
people attentive and inquisitive, and:
among them he sowed much pre-.
cious seed... Besides other labours:
for their goad, at one time he dis-
tributed 300 books; at another, 30
copies of the Acts; 50 of St. Mat-
thew’s Gospel, and 200 tracts.

BARBADOES, the easternmost
of the Caribbe islands, 25 m. long
and 12. broad. The exports are
sugar, rum, cotton, and gingers and
it.beas most of the fruits common to
the climate. The sugar exported
hence is finerthan that of any other
plantation: and it has a production
called Barbadoes tar, which exudes’
from crevices in the clay hills on the
E. coast; and is collecte’ si the
surface of water in holes dug for
the purpose. This island always
belonged to the British, who colo-
ee
priva' till se C)
crown fie « Jt has suffered

much irom hurricanes ; particularly
from oye in 1780, when 4326 of
the inhabitants lost their lives. The
capital is Bridgetown.

n 1765, two of the United Bre-
thren. were sent to this, island to
commence a missic.:. One of them,
howev2r, died soon alter his arrival :


BAR:

abandoned the cause; ‘and a thitd,;
who wassent'to fill-up the place of
the first, followed him shortly after
tothe tomb.' In May, 1767, Mr..
Benjamin Bruckshaw arrived, and
his ‘design being approved by the
president of the council and the re-:
sident clergy, he began immediately
to preach to the negroes at Bridge-:
town, with the. gonsent of many of
the planters, who not only permit-
ted their slaves to hear the Gospel,
but occasionally encouraged the:
missionary by their own attendance.

In the month of August, Mr..
Bennet came from.North America.
He was soon joined by otherlabour-
ers; and as the hearers were conti-
nually increasing, they purchased
and fitted up a ‘building, both as/a
place of worship. and a dwelling-
house. Here 6:negroes were bap-
tized, and several. of the planters.
invited the missionaries to preach
on their own estates. A variety of


‘| difficulties, unhappily, afterwards:


arose; the slaves absented them-
selves from the chapel, pecuniary
wants embarrassed the mission, and
after the removal of Mr. Bruck-
shaw to Antigua, in 1771, and the
death of Mr. Bennet, the following
year, a spirit of dissension was ex-
cited among the remaining mis-
sionaries, and, at length, only one
was left on the island.

In 1773, some success appeared
to attend the zealous labours of,
Mr. Augerman; but scarcely two
years had elapsed, when he was re-,
moved by the hand of death, and,
though his successors continued the
work, no change of importance oc-.
curred for severgl years. Very few
negroes, except those who had for.
merly been baptized, and whose
number did not exceed 20, attended,
the ministrationsof the missionarius;
and even those who assented to the.
truth, afforded melancholy proof
that they were not under its power.


hie companion, seduced by the love } I'he planters, also, with a few
af the world, neglected and finally | exceptions, were now wu tothe


’


*


Ban BAR:
instruction of their slaves; anc, in  saivation; butiat:present, FE find it,
1780, a tremendous hurricane in- | impossible to visit them. Difficul-,


volved the ‘missionaries ‘and their
hearers in the most serious diffictl-
ties. In 1700, however, circum-


ties enough, indeed, exist in the:
very structure of society, andthe’
usages which prevail among the


stances appéared more’ favourable| negroes in these islands. Among:
‘ than before; the congregations in- | these I may specify ‘the ‘Sunday-
creased, end sumetimes amounted! | markets, and the dancing and re-
to 160; the deportment of» the | veiry in) which toe. many ers
negroes became more consistent: | engaged from Suturday eveniug +.
several, having’ given satis!xciory | Sunday night, and which preeiude
evidenee of conversion, were bap- | attention to more serious con: tus.
tized, the proprietors of different | Here the missionary stands in es-
plantations were gradually induced | pecial need of the guidance oj the:
to lay aside their prejudices, and | Holy Spirit, that he muy fulfil the


the Iccx! government treated the
missicnaries with kindness and re-
spect. As their situation was an-
healthy and inconvenient, they
porchased’ a smai! estate, in 1704,
consisting of aspe ious house and
four acres of lai, very eligibly
situated, to which they gave the |
name of Sharon.

In the month of Naver.ner, 1798,
Mr. James Weller and bis wile,
together with an unmarried sister,
named Mary Grunt, emberked at
Bristol, and, after encountering im-
minent per!!s, reached Barbadoes.

Towards the close of 1817, the
congregation consisted of 214 mem-
bers, of whom 68 had been admit-
ied to partake of the Lord’s Supper.
‘The whole number of negroes bap-
tized from the commencement’ of
the mission, did not exeeed 330
adults, and 150 children. ‘Throagh
subsequent years, the work pro-
ceeded, notwithstanding many trials
arising from the want of labourers,
and from the sickness and death of
those who entered the field. In
August, 1825, Mry Bromner an-
nounces, that more’ interyst had
recently been excited among the
children, and says—“ We have hi-

‘herto met with no hindrance inthe

sosecution of our great object—
Pans instruction of the negroes; on
the contrary, several A s0 heave


fmike known the glad tings of } ners. etal ae
a ° 4


etm of his inportant and blessed
calling.’?

A short time afte:, he wxote :~
‘¢ Every successive Sunday we bave
the pleasure to see on increase in

the number of our hearers; ax
the aitendance at the evening incet-
ing is much greater than ever: I
could have expected. When we
last spoke with the new people be-
longing to our small flock, no less
than 24 negroes came, for the: first
time, and most of them appeared
to be truly concerned for their sal-
vation. On Sunday next 5 women
will be added to the church by holy
baptiem.”

At the commencement of 1827,
he says—*“ In the year 1824, there
have been baptized at Sharon, 28
adults, and 14 ehildren ; 3 persons
have been received into the con-
gregation, and 9 re-admitted; 32
admitted to the holy communion;
14 aduits, and 6 children, have de-

; parted this life; and 3 have been
excluded. At the close of the-yeer,
the congregation consisted of 79
communicants, 78 baptized adults,


and 33 baptized children. If to |


these wre added 86 cdndidates for
baptism, and 188 new people, &.,
the total of individuals under our
care, will be 464,”

+ Our Saviour,’ he subsequently
remarks, ‘* continues to bless ow
feeble testimony of bis love to-sin-


hours ;
suon a
and int
sible,
Mobs y
and int
at the |
lecture


cision,

committ

it was 4

to punish
time im
night ;
several
the same
= ev
Obiiged
pr :
wards jo
other pe
open the

> :i this, ¢

dows abo

tured am

sooner s¢

f them atte


hag To
preclude
ONnCOTIS.
sin @s-
eo the:
fulfil the
} blessed


wrote t—
we bave
srease i
FS } ac
ing meet-
an ever: I
When we


BAR

church was filled with very atten-
tive hearers ;6 adults were baptized,
and 12: of the new people added to
the class of candidates for baptism.
Previous to this solemnity, we had
conversed individually with 270
candidates for baptism, and new
people! of the latter class, about
450 came to us for the first time.
Qn the same day, at Mount Tabor,
ont: ‘dult was baptized, and one
rece ted into the congregation ;
aid 7 were admitted into the class
of candidates for baptism or recep-
tion.

A favourable opportunity for the
prom algation of the Gospel appear-
ing in Dec. 1788, Mr. Pearce, of
the W. M. S., commenced his la-
bours; but a spirit of persecution
svon arose among persons of rank
and influence, who resolved, if pos-
sible, to prevent his progress,
Mobs were encouraged to disturb
and interrupt public worship ; and,
at the close of one of the weekly
lectures, the most disgraceful up-
roar and confusion occurred. Mr.
Pearce, of course, applied for re-
dress; but, though the magistrate
to whom he applied appeared very
indignant at such a breach of the
peace, on the case being proved,
he came to the extraordinary de-
cision, that, “ as the offence was
committed against ALMIGHTY Gop,
it was not within his jurisdiction
to punish it.’? It was now for some
time impracticable to preach at
night; and when, after the lapse of
several months, it was attempted,
the same hostility was manifested,
One evening the preacher was
obiiged to dismiss the congrega-


f tion. .The rioters being after-


wards joined by about a hundred
other persons, endeavoured to break
open the chapel doors ; and, failing
i this, they demolished, the win-
dows above, Mr. Pearce now ven-
tured among them; but they no
sooner saw him, ‘han several of
them attempted to strike him, and


‘BAR


followed him to his house, which
they surrounded for some time, with
the most meénacing ‘words and
gestures; but he, providentially,
escaped unhurt; and the mob at
length retired, without executing
their threats. :

Mr. Pearce resolved once more
to seek justice—and he was suc-
cessful. Warrants were issued by
one of the magistrates, with the
utmost readiness. The affair was
brought to a hearing in the Town
Hall, and five of the rioters (who
had previously attempted to com-
promise the business) pleaded
guilty. They were, therefore, dis-
missed, after a severe reprimand
from the bench, on condition of
their paying all the expenses of
the day, together with half the
sum which Mr. Pearce had given
to those .he had consulted. This
they did, expressing their sorrow
for the offence, and promising not
to disturb the congregation any
more. Such a decision produced
a sensible impression, and mate-
rially tended to dissipate existing
prejudices. Accordingly the mis-
sionary was invited to visit a planter
in a distant part of the island; and
the sermons he preached served
also to dispel the unfounded calumr
nies which had been so industriously
circulated. But some of the rioters,
in his absence, assailed his house
with stones, and severely hurt Mra,
Pearce. As the delinquents were
unknown, nothing remained but to
bear the injury with patience, and
to watch the return of those who
had inflicted it.

In 179), Mr. Lumb succeeded
Mr. Pearce, but his labours were
attended with very little success;
though permitted to attend 26
estates in the country, which he
4, od visited once. a fortnight.
‘‘ The negroes, in general,’ he
ed of res


says, “are as much

ligion as the whites; and such a

place for holding divine Mings: in
6


BAR


contempt, I never. saw before.??
And, in 1797, the regular congre-
gations seldom consisted of more
than 40 persons, most of whom
were whites, and 30 of them mem-
bers of the Society. In thecountry
places, they seldom amounted to
more than. 10 or 12; and through
the whole island, exclusively. of
Bridgetown, the members of the
society did not exceed21]. —
In. March, 1801, however, Mr.
,Hawkshaw, who was proceeding
to another place, in company with
some other ministers, came to an
anchor at Bridgetown, and went on
shore, expecting to spend a few
hours with the missionary ; but, to
his greatsurprise, he found that the
preacher had locked up the chapel,
seat the key into the country, and
retired, about three weeks before,
either to Antigua or St. Christo-
pher’s, Several of the people, who
were lamenting the loss of their
rivileges, earnestly entreated Mr.
awkshaw to remain, and he. com-
ied with their request. His la-
purs were attended with consider-
able suecess.. The chapel, which
he found in a very dilapidated state,
‘was repaired, and rendered more
commodious, during his stay; and
though he was sometimes inter-
rapted in divine worship, the de-
cisive measures adopted procured
a restoration of tranquillity. Owing
to his remova) to Grenada, the in-
terest again sunk into a low state ;
but it was revived by Mr. Bradnock,
who reached Barbadoes, March
2Ist, 1804; and who, encouraged
and protected by the civil authori-
ties, re-established the evening ser-
vice, which, for a considerable
time, had been given, up. New
spheres opened in the country,
while divisions which had existed
in the church at Bridgetown were
healed, backsliders. were reclaimed,
and members gradually increased.
In 1806, Mr, Bradnock was suc-
ceeded by Mr. Richard Pattison,


BAR


who, mourning over the state of
feeling discovered, returned; and
Mr. Robinson, bis. successor, la-
boured with zeal and fidelity till
July, 1807, when his life was sud-
denly terminated,

In 1811, the society was com-
posed of 30 persons, 11 of whom
were whites, 13 were free persons,
and 6 were slaves.

In the spring >f 1816, an insur-
rection broke out among ‘the ne-
groes on some of the plantations,
but it was soon terminated by a
military force. This circumstance
was charged on missions, although,
out of a population of 71,215 ne-
groes, there were not more than 36
belonging to the society; and in
the report of the committee ap-
yalolne by the House of Assembly

sqse into it, the mischief is

traced to other causes,
, In 1818, the, mission was re-
commenced; and, in the ensuing
year, a new and commodious cha-
pel was erected ; towards it several
of the principal inhabitants con-
tributed liberally; it. was licensed
by the goveynor’s special authority
—prejudice appeared to be giving
way—and hope animated the bo-
soms of the labourers.

In 1820, Messrs. Shrewsbury
and Larcum thus wrote:—‘ Our
prospects at present cannot. be
deemed flattering, but they are
certainly brightening, as thure is
more likelihood of prosperity than


was ever previously known in Bar- §


badoes, On Sunday evenings our
chapel is thronged, and multitudes
crowd ubout the door to squeeze
in, when there is. the least open-
ing. Besides our labours in Bridge-
town, we have three estates in the
country, at which we preach once
a. fortnight. The proprietors (one
of whom is a member of the House
of Assembly), are firm friends to
the missionaries, and have promised
to use all their influence with other
gentlemen of the colony m permit


us.to:
encot
the m
to he:
added
liary s


previous
demolis.
th: leas
check th
milita

tially,
to St.
governor
tion, offe
the con
Such, ho
‘ed effron
they im
circulate
threateni
came for
them,sho
ment— ob
could be
were firm
ing that tl
‘not by the
but that th


an insur
the ne-
ntations,
ted by a
umstance
although,
|,215 ne-
‘e than 36
-; and in
ittee ap-
Assembly
nischief is


» was re-
e ensuing
dious. cha-
is it several
tants, con
as licensed
1 authority
he giving
bd the bo-


Shrewsbury
e:—‘ Our
cannot. he
t they are
as there is
erity than


nin Bar §


enings our
multitudes
to squeeze
least open-
in Bridge-
ates in the
reach once
jetors (one
f the House

friends to
ve promised
2 with other
y to. permit

46


BAR
us to instruct their negroes.” More
encouraging still did the aspect of
the mission become ; crowdsflocked
to heavy the Gospel—members were
added to the society, and an auxi-
liary society: wasestablished, which,
it was expected, would make an an-
nual remittance of not less than 50/.
sterling. Buta fearful storm soon
arose ; Mr. Shrewsbury was abused
as a villain in the streets, and vio-
lently molested by the press. On
Oct. 5th, 1822, the congregation
was insulted, and the chapel was
assailed by violence ; and so strong
was the feeling in favour of the de-
linquents, that no hopes of their
punishment could be entertained.
On the following Sabbath the as-
sault was renewed, and the most
dreadful opposition contemplated ;
in the midst of which the mission-
ary preached with considerable en-
largement and freedom, from 1
Cor. i. 22, 24, and thus closed his
ministry in Barbadoes. On the
19th, there was no service in the
chapel, in consequence of the go-
vernor refusing to interpose on be-
half of Mr. S.; and a multitude,
previously organized, completely
demolished the building, without
th: least igi being made to
check them, either by the civil or
military authorities. | Providen-
tially, Mr. 8. and his wife escaped
to St. Vincent’s in safety. The
governor now issued a proclama-
tion, offering a reward of 100/. for
the conviction of the offenders,
Such, however, was the unparallel-


‘ed effrontery of the rioters, that


they immediately printed and
circulated a counter-proclamation,
threatening that any person who
came forward to impeach one of
them,should receive merited punish-
ment—‘ observing that no conviction
could be obtained «hile the parties
were firm to themselves, and stat-
ing that the chapel was destroyed,


‘not by the rabble of the community,


but that the majority of the persons


BAR


‘assurbled ~~ere of the first respec»

tability! A.ter Mr. S.’s departure,
the people continued to’ meet,
though they were threatened -with
similar acts of violence—but these
were happily averted.

The re-establishment of the mis-
sion was confided to Mr. Rayner
in 18263 but, after a correspon-
dence with the governor, im-
portant considerations prevented
his landing. In‘ 1826, however, \he
returned to. fulfil ‘the trust com-
mitted to him: the mission-house
in Bridgetown is rebuilt; and the
measures of the legislature, ‘it is
hoped, will prevent the recurrence
of scenes which his predecesso
was called to witness.

In the early part of lastcentury,
col. Codrington bequeathed two
estates to the Society for Propagat-
ing the Gospel in Foreign Parts,
to provide for the religious instruc-
tion of the negroes in this and the
other Caribbe islands, and for
erecting and endowing a college
at Bridgetown, especially requiring
the religious instruction of the
slaves on these estates. The so-
ciety faithfully eomplicd with these
conditions, and the result has been
auspicious. The ne:‘roes on these
v lates ‘were quiet duting the
dreadful insurrection in 1816, in
which about 100° negroes were
massacred, either as actual in-
surgents, or on u.ifounded -uspi-
cion. This circumstance has
greatly abated: the bitter preju-
ices which usually prevailed here
against the religious ‘instruction of
the slaves, and has convinced many
ae that no such event would
ave occurred if their slaves had
been diligently instructed, and
brought under the influence of the
Gospel. The ‘college ‘has been
built; but: it is said not to have
answered the designs of its bene-
volent fowider. ‘The annual re-
ceipts, on account of these estates,
amounted, ‘om Jan. 26th, 1819, to

47


BAR


Jan. 31st, 1820, to nearly 20,000 | cutta, 158.N.W. of Lucknow,. and
dollars, and the payments to about | 140 E. of Delhi. E. long. 80°,
15,732 dollars. In 1817, anauxiliary | N. lat. 28°.


B.S. was formed, which has been


the ‘means of diffusing. much light their field of labour in 1818, by the
Many are] appointment of Fuez Messeeh,


among the slaves.
anxious to receive the Scriptures,


and many more are learning tc’ was born at Mooradabad, and was
read in order to possess then. Inj} about 45 years of age. At the age
1822, an auxiliary W. M.S. was{ of 18, being disgusted with the


Tormed.


The C. M. S.-has had for some | a Mahomedan, and, till about the
years a school in Barbadoes, which | year 1817, lived after the strictest
the lord bishop las recently taken | manner of that people, becoming


under his own charge; it con-


tained, in 1525, 114 boys and 44 | ples by his austerities and reputed


girls, making a total of 158 scholars ;


of whom 81 were slaves, and 77 | lady, at Bareilly, a copy of Mar-
free; 6 of them were admitted | tyn’s Hindoostanee Testament,


to confirm :i:cn.


BARBUDA, or BERBUDA, | version to the Christian faith, He
one of the British Caribbe islands | afterwards removed to Delhi.


in the West Indies. Length 20 m.,


breadth 12. It belongs to the heirs | therlands. The Netherlands M.
of col. Codrington, who obtained | S. has a seminary here to prepare
a grant of it for his important ser- | missionaries for their future labours,
vices to the crown of England, in | containing 16 students.


the West Indies, and is said to yield


about £5000 a year. At his death, | Bengal, Hindoostan, on the E. side |
in 1710, he bequeathed a large | of the Hoogly R., 16 m. above Ca!-
part of the island to the Society for | cutta,, and nearly opposite. Seram-
Propagating the Gvspel, for the | pore. It is the country seat of the
instruction of the negroes in this | governor-general, and a military
and the neighbouring islands in the | station,


Christian religion, and for erecting
and endowing a college in Barba-


does; The esleyan Missionaries | the earnest solicitations of several


have laboured here with some suc-


cess. Population, 1500.. W. long. | duced the Gospel here, by occa-


62°, N. lat. 17° 50’.
BAREILLY, a large, populous,


and flourishing city inthe province | gularly maintained, yet their la-
_of Delhi, Hindoostan, ceded to the | bours have been greatly blessed,
British in 1802, and is the seat of | and several of their countrymen
their judicial establishment for the'| and natives have been added to the
district of Bareilly. Under the | church at Serampore.
fostering hand of the British Go- | the Marchioness of Hastings esta-
vernment, in one year, 1820-1, | blished a school here, with due
more thin 2270 houses were built | provision for its suppoyt, and com-
in the city, and the country around | mitted it to the care
is. proportionably increasing in} S., whiclf has adepét of books and


population and agriculture. The
eity is about 800 m. N.W. of Cal-


BAR


The C, M. S. took this into


native reader und catechist, who


idolatry of the Hindoos, he became


a Fakeer, and gaining many disci-


sanctity, when he obtained of a


which was the means of his con-


BARKEL, a town in the Ne-


BARRACKPORE, .a town in


pletely d
and dwe
it was b


M4 repai
In 1814, the Baptist Missionaries finan
at Serampore, in compliance with from Mj


from St,
funeral ¢
remains,

«The
waited o
vernor,
at our lo
Chapel ‘w
you find ¢
sitnated,
will give
not able
obliged 'to
is in the’ q
1200° do
subscribed
dollars, an


non-commissioned officers, intro-


sionally preaching at their houses.
Though preaching has been irre-


In 1821,


the C. K.


tracts which are usefully distri.
buted..
48


ist, who
and was
{ the age
vith the
pe became
about the
, strictest
becoming
any disci-
4 reputed
ned of a
y of Mar-
‘estament,
f his con-
He


to prepare
ure labours,


a town in
the E. side }
above Cai-

site. Seram-
seat of the
a military


Missionaries
liance with
s of several
cers, intro-
e, by occa-
heir houses.
3 been irre-
ret, their la-
atly blessed,
countrymen
added to the
In 1821,
astings esta:
, with due
» and com
m the C. K.
of books an
efully distri-


48


BAR :
’ BARRIPORE, a town of ‘Ben-
gal, Hindoostan, 16 m, S.E, of
Calcutta.

~ For several years the C. K. S.
has supported a large school here,
for which a school-house has been
recently erected.

- BARTHOLOMEW, ST., one
of the Caribbe<islands, 24 m. in
|. circuit, and 25 N. of St. Christo-
pher. The French ceded it to the
Swedes .in 1785," and it is’ the only
spot in the West Indies possessed
by them. The chief exports are
cotton, ‘drugs, and lignum: vite ;
and it has a good harhour, ‘called
Gustavia. W. long. 63° 40’, N. lat.
17° 46°. Pete |

~ This was one of the first stations
of the 7. M. S. The Rev. Mr.
Dace laboured here ten years, and
was called to his reward in 1816,
The governor, and most of the re-
spectable persons on the island, at-
tended his funeral. In every place
in which he was engaged in the
WestIndies, Mr, Dace was deserv-
edly esteemed. A few days after his
death, a dreadful hurricane’ com-
pletely destroyed the mission chapel
and dwelling-house,—a loss which,
it was hoped, would in great part
be repaired by the exertions of the
friends of the mission there. The
following is an extract of a letter
from Mr.’ Hirst, who went over
from St. Martin’s to perform the
funeral ceremony over Mr, Dace’s
remains,

“The morning after the gale I
waited on his excellency the go-
yernor, who expressed his regret
at our loss, but said, ‘As your old
chapel ‘was in a bad situation, if
you find a vacant plot more eligibly
sitnated, belonging to the king, I
will give it you.’ “This we were
not able to do, and have been
obliged'to purchase. ‘i iu¢ situation

is in the centre of the town, and
mn 1200 dollars have  been_ already
subscribed: ‘hls excellency gave 30
dollars, and 3 gentlemen 100 each.


.| doubt


BAS
had suffered’ much’
by the gale, gave 25; and. I
not but 2000 dollars will be
raised for the new building. - His
excellency says that. he will repre-:
sent the loss we have sustained to’
his majesty, the king of Sweden,
and doubts not but some grant will :
be made ‘o us.”? :
Tn the following year it is stated,
that though the congregation, since
the destruction of the chapel, was
without a convenient place to meet’
in, yet the people were attentive to:
religious services in private houses ;°
and, by the exertions of the leaders,’
the society was kept together and:
was prospering. In 1823, the mis- |
sion suffered materially from local
and vuravoidable' circumstances,
which were not only felt by the:
members of the se in parti-,
cular, but by the community at
large. The stagnation of trade’
obliged nearly 100 members to’
leave the island, to seek support
for themselves and their owners
elsewhere. Notwithstanding these’
difficulties, the society increased,’
until the alarms arising out of the:
affair at Demarara caused some re-
strictions to be imposed. Latterly,
however, the cause of God has’
prospered, The number in the so-'
ciety, by the last report, was 255.
ps inthe school were 152 children, °
whose progress was encouraging. -
BASEL, the largest lag Sl
‘Switzerland, on the Rhine, favour-
ably situated for commerce, con-
taining about. 15,000 inhabitants.
It has an university, founded by’


Another, v


‘Pope Pius IT.,, about the year’


1460. E. long. 7° 30, N. lat.
47° 35’, : Pe

A seminary was established here |
in 1815, for the education of miss’
sionaries to the heathen. | Its
origin and progress were thus de- '
scribed, in. 1823, by the Rev. Mr.
Blumhardt, the inspector :—

“It was in the last calamitous
war, in the year 1815, _" the

F 4


BAS


spirit of missions struck its first
roots in the hearts of, some Chris-
tian friends, at Basel, in Switzer-
land. In this eventful year, a Rus-
sian army encamped on one side cf
our town ; and, on the other side,
the fortress of Huningen began to
pour out a dreadful torrent of
bombs against our dwellings. In
these sorrowful moments, the
Lord of the elements sent a very
violent E. wind, which had a won-
derful effect on the fire of. the
enemy. The bombs were ¢x-
hausted in the air before they could


reach our homes, without injury to |. ,
_ British in 1180, but restored to the


any life of the inhabitants, While
the fire of the fortress was, in this
remarkable manner, quenched by
the wind of God, a holy flame of
missionary zeal was kindled in. the
hearts of some Christian friends,
They. resolved to establish a mis-
sionary seminary, as ®, monument
of this remarkable salvation of the
town ; and to train up a number of
ploy teachers for the instruction
of the heathen Mahomedan tribes,
who were sent from the interior of
Asia to be our deliverers.

. «In the Ist year, 1816, we had.
only a few rooms, inhabited by a
spall number of missionary scho-.
yal in the 6th year the blessing of

od enabled our committee to build
a missionary college. In, the Ist
year we had an income of little
‘more than 60/.; in the 6th year
the blessing of our.Lord increased
it to about 6000/, In the Ist year
our, society consisted only of a
sinall number of Christian friends,
at Basel; by the 6th year more
than 40 auxiliary. societies had,
been éstablished in Switzerland, in
Germany, and among the Pro-
testants of France.”’ |

The term of study is. four years,
during which time particular at-
tention is given philology,
comprehending the English, Latin,
Greek, Hebrew, and Arabic lan-
guages; other sciences are em-


_W. coast.of Hindo


BAT


braced, and also a systematic cours:
of theology. The students eri/.y
privileges in the university. Abo:.!
16 students may be annually ad-
mitted, and the hope is dadulges,
that the increasing liberality of its
friends will provide for a much
greater number, The government
has approved of the. design, and
afforded the institution its favour
and protection, . qed
BASSEIN, 8 large town on the
| ostan, 30.m. N.
of Bombay,, on an island separated
by a narrow strait from the island
of Salsette,” It was. taken by the


Mahrattas in 1783; and here, .in


1802, was signed the celebrated


treaty between the Peishwa and
the British, which annihilated the
Mabrattas as a federal empire,
_This town is ancient, and was a


place of great importance when the |


Portuguese power was at its zenith.
The fort, which is larger than that
at. Bombay, was formerly filled
with houses and inhabitants, and
contains the splendid ruins of 12.


churches. Many monuments of §


national wealth and power are still
Yemaining, The inside of St,
Paul’s church, the roof of which
is fallen in, was completely over-
laid with gold, The idol, Huna-
munt, set up in the gateway of
these churches by. the Mahratta
power, reminds the beholder that
absolute heathenism has long super-
‘seded Roman Catholic superstition.
The American missionaries, at
Tannah and Bombay, have fre-.
quently visited this. place, and. dis-
tributed books and tracts; and, in
1819, they opened. a flourishing
school of about 30 boys, taught by
8 Brahmun. re ae
BATAVIA, a city and seaport
of Java, capital of ‘the island, and
of all the Dutch settlements. in the
East Indies, _It.is in the form of
a paraielogran, 4200 feet lon
and 3000 broad; nad te, streets,


and 2 in


ic cours®
ts erin
vy tf


ally. ad-
indulge?
ity of its
a much
vernment


sign r and
its favour


en by the.
pred to the
d here, in
celebrated
ishwa, and
hilated the
al empire,
and was @
¢ when the. |
tits zenith.
sr than that
erly filled
nitants, and
ruins of 12.
numents of


wer are still i


ide of St.
of of which
pletely over
idol, Huna-
gateway of
e Mabratta
pholder that


Hand seaport
2 island, and
ments. in the
“the form of
D0 feet yd
i the. streets,
a!)


BAT


- gross each ‘other at. right angles,
le


The public edifices consist o

great church, a Lutheran and Por-
tuguese church, a née, a Chi-
nese tzmple, the stadthouse, the
spenhouse, thé infirmary, atid the
chamber of orphans. The fort is
built of coral rock, brought from


some of the adjoining islands, and |


has a fortification of brick. A part
of the town wall is built of dense
lava, from the mountains in the
centre of Java. No-stone of any
kind is to be found for many miles
beyond this city; but marble and
em aré brought here from

hina. The harbour is excellent ;
and there are canals in the prin-
cipal streets, planted on each side
with trees. Batavia contains a pro-
ages number of inhabitants, of
various countries; and all the go
brought from other parts of the East
Indies are laid up here, till they
ate exported to their places of des-
tination. The city surrendered to
a British force in 1821, It is
situate 2 R. pet ane
swamps and stagnant pools, which,
with the fogs and climate, render
the air unwholesome to Europeans.
It once contained about 160,000
inhabitants, which do not now
amount to 48,000, E. long. 106°
52’, S. lat. 6° 8’.

In 1813, the B, M.S. com-
ménced a mission at Batavia, by
means of théir agent, Rev. Mr. Ro-
binson, His personal afflictions were
great; but he says, in a letter dated
April Sth, 1815--“« Last Monday
evening I preached in a new place,
where I had about 60 hearers. I
now preach in Malay 4 times a-
week.’? He mentions also a very
interesting instance: of usefulness,
Towards the end of that. year he
had finished the rough copy of St.
Matthew’s Gospel, in the Malay.
language, and proceeded to revise
it for the press. In July, 1816, he
baptized 4 peony viz. 2 soldiers,
and 2 inhabitants: of Batavia. In


BAT .

1820, he says, ‘We have now 4
members who have been, baptize
in Java; and we have, besides them
& men of hopeful piety, who pray
in. turn at’ our prayer Le
There are also a few women wh
seem to be pious; and 2 péreons
if no more, appear to have dieé
in, the Lord; to say tothing of a
Chinese, who says ‘ he will di¢ at
the feet of Jesus: add these to-
gether, and you will find them
more than 10—the number ‘for
which Sodom might have been
saved.’ Mr. Robinson’s' labours
were subsequently impeded, by re-
strictions which greatly diminished
his hopes of future uséfalness.

After an unsuccessful applica
tion for thetr remioval, to the ki
nd the ba etsblcagen ig hye
patient. struggling w em, My..
Robinson deemed it expedient to
remove to. Bencoolen. . Thé sta.
tion was not, however, neglected.
Mr. Diering, one of the ne.
alluded to as baptized, who was vety.
useful to Mr. Robinson, was actively.
employed, after his departare, in
doing good. Twice on the Sab-
bath, and oncé during the week,
he engaged in expounding the
Scriptures to his ignorant neigh-
bours; and appeared’ désirovs t6.
employ every méans in his power
to promote the cause of the Go:
in that city ; but in October, 1825,
he was removed, after a short illness.
* The Rev. Mr. Supper, of the L.
M. S., arrived at Batavia on the
26th of May, 1814, and at: the
request of-Dr. Ross, the venerable,
Dutch minister of the city, became
his colleague. In. a. letter dated
November, 1814, Mr. Supper speaks
of an increase in his congregation,
and states that several persons had
appeared to be convinced of their
sins under the ministry of the word,
but. they. had encountered mach
opposition from their gay connex-
ions; and many others were offended
with the faithfulness of ag dis-

5


\ BAT


courses which had been delivered’
“inthe church,
-» In another letter, dated August
-12,. 1816, and addressed to the
Rev. Dr. Steinkopff, Mr. Supper
says—“ The German, French,
Dutch, and English Bibles and Tes-
taments, as well as the Portuguese
_ New Testaments, which, through
your goodness, I carried out with
me, or received fram you after-
wards, have almost all been ex-
pended; and I can assure you, that
they have fallen into hands where
they are daily made use of. The
Chinese New Testament, which
the zealous missionary, Mr. Milne,
distributed among the Chinese, and
those which I had the means of
distributing, have been visibly at-
‘tended with blessed effects. I
mention only a few instances.—-A
member of, my Portuguese congre-
gation came to me last week, and
said—‘ I am acquainted with some
Chinese who generally come to me
twice a-week, when the. word of
God’is the theme of our conversa-
tion: they have read the Chinese
New Testament, and find the con-
tentsof it of far greater excellence
than those of any other book they
have ever read, but yet they do
not understand every thing that is
said in it, and consequently apply
to me to explain and clear up some
passages which they cannot com-
prehend; I then give them such
illustrations on the subject as I have
remembered from your discourses.
This Portuguese is one of my pu
pils, and, thanks be to God! I
wer truly say, that he is my crown,
and the first-fruit of my labours
‘arfiong the nominal Christians here.
The Chinese have already turned
their idols out of their huuses, and
are desirous of becoming Ch-istians,
- Another of my P.: tuguese
upils,‘-a man of 58, came to me a
ew days ago, and told me that a
‘certain Chinese, who hud read the


New Testament in his. mother


BAT


tongue, visits him three times a-
week, to converse about the doc-
trines of Christianity ; he. seems to
love Jesus Christ better than. Con-
fucius, and expressed a wish for a
few more books in the Chinese
language. He likewise turned his
paper idols out of his house, and is
ardently desirous of. becoming a
Christian.

. §*T was lately on a visit to.a cer-
tain gentleman, where one of the
richest Chinese in this country was
also a guest. He spoke to.me- in
Dutch, and said—‘ I have read Mr,
Morrison’s New Testament with
pleasure. It is very fine, and it
would be well if every one led such
a life as Jesus Christ has taught
people to lead.’ I cannot describe
to you, what effect these words,
spoken by the mouth of a Chinet,
had upon me.
discourse with him about his idols,
and said—‘ You believe, according
to the doctrines of Confucius, that
there is buione God, who made
heaven, the earth, man, and every
living creature.’ ‘ Yes,” he replied ;
* but God is so far above -us, that we
dare not address ourselves to him,
without the intervention of the
demi-gods.’ I then said, ‘ As God
is the Creator of mankind, should
we not call hir. our common
Father?’ ‘ Yes, certainly,’ . was
his reply. ‘ Well; if this be ad-
mitted, are not children obliged to
place confidence in their fatier?’
‘ Most assuredly.’ ‘In what consists
this confidence and trust?’ No
answer.. ‘ Are not you the father
of five sons? ‘Yes,’ ‘ Now, what
would you think or do, if three of
your sons took it in their heads to
paint images upon paper, or carve
them upon wood; and, when
finished, pay them all the venera-
tion, and put that confidence in
them, which ts justly due to you as
their father? Would you quietly
submit to such conduct in your
sons?’ ‘ No, I would certainly

62


I commenced a\


|


quented
contents
New Te
gious wri
him from
likely the
the kin
He 0
oly Spi
Chinese
Many of
inclined te
fore loo
hecessery
seemingly


imes a-
he doc-
eems to
an. Con-
h for a
Chinese
red. his
p, and is
yming &


to.a cet

e of the
ntry was
Oo me. in
read Mr.
ent with
2, and it

y led such
as taught
t describe
se words,
} Chine®,
nenced & |
his idols, |
according
icius, that
who made
and every
1e replied 5


at consists
ist? No
the father
Now, what
if three of
r heads to
pr, Or carve
nd, when
e venera-
vfidence in
we to you as
you quietly
t in your
d certainly
62


BAT


the respect w
me; they bein


Father?’ ‘ Ah,’ replied the Chi-


views so far; but I am convinced,

that our idolatry can never be

pleasing to the only and true ‘God,

and that by so doing we provoke

his vengeance upon ts,’

‘ The conversation being ended,

he went home, seemingly dissatis-

fied with himself and on his arrival

there, ture all the painted images

Srom the walle, and threw them into
the fire. He has never since fre-
quented the Chinese temples; and
contents himself with reading the
New Testament, and other reli-
gious writings with which I supply
him from time to time. Is it un-
likely that this Chinese is far from
the kingdom of God? Are not the
grace of God and the power of the
Holy Spirit able to converteven the
Chinese to the true Chr'stian faith ?
Many of the Europeans here are
inclined to doubt this, and there-
fore loox upon my labour as an un-
necessery waste of time; but their
seemingly repulsive doubts animate


reparing iniages, and paying them
Ng reipe which is clone due to
unablé to hear,
move, or help themselves, I pro-
nounce you to be out of your
But,’ said I, ‘do you
act more W.ely 6n this supposition,
than your children would have
acted, when you worship the idols
ia your temples, and pay every
honour to them in your houses,
which is only due to your heavenly


nese, ‘ we have never directed our


BAT
mé to greater zeal, and strengthen
my faith atid hope thet Gok oll


of insanity.’ * ‘they stated, | convince such unbelievers, by the
by way rf exouipaliya Re from evidence of facts, that the Be rn
the great veneration ‘liad for | Of his servants among the Chinese’
you, as theif father, they could | will not be ‘ in vain tn the Lord.’


You will rejoice with me when
F tell you, that the Lord ‘has sigx
nally blessed the labours of my
catechumens. -Four of them have
| sdlemnly miade’a confession of thetr
faith, and have been accepted ag:
members of our community ; as
their conduct is a sure ep
of the true Christian life they lead;
and they continue to give proofe
| that they act under the influence
Of the Holy Spirit and the Gospet
}Of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
| power of which unto salvation th
have already an experience of.
One of my catechists reads the Holy
Scriptures with some Maliomme-
dans three times a-week, converses
with them upon what they have
read, and they join in prayer in his
house afterwards. Some of the
priests have applied to me, through
this my beloved pupil, for an Arabic:
Bible, which, after repeated re-
quests, I shall send them.”?

Mr. Supper was, in the course
of the same year, summoned froni
the scene of his labours to the
mansions of eternal rest. And
from the period of his decease, the’
L.M.8. had no misstonary in Java,
until the summer of 1819, when
Mr. John Slater, who nad been for
a considerable time occupied with
the study of the Chinese language
at Canton and Malacca, arrived
there, and shortly after took under
his instruction four Chinese chi-
dren, as the commencement of a
school, designed to be conducted,
as far as circumstances would per-
mit, on the Lancasterian plan. He
also employed himself sedulous'y
in circulating copies of the New
Testament and religious tracts
among the heathen; ard, with the
assistance of a native teacher, de-

r2 03


BAT;
voted a considerable portion of his
time to‘the study of the Chinese
“language. But a few months
only had elapsed, when‘ bis labours
were suspended by a calamity at
once alarming and destructive. On
the 2d of October, 1819, his house’
was burnt down; when his Chinese
books, with varidus articles of fur-
niture, were consumed. This cala-
mity, however, was considerably
alleviated by the kindness of several
friends; and particularly by that of
one family; with whom Mr. and
Mrs. Slater found an hospitable asy-
lum for several weeks.

After this’ accident, a piece of
ground was purchased, on account
of the society, for a mission-house
and garden; and, by the liberal
subscriptions. of sueh of the inha-
vitants as appeared to take an in-
terest in his object, Mr. Slater
was enabled to build a: convenient
habitation, capable of accommo-
dating 2 or 3 missionaries, besides
his.own family. On the adjoining
premises, a schcol’ was afterwards
erected, and opened with 26 pupils.

Of the various idolatrous cere-
monies which were performed in
this place, at the time of his visit,
Mr. Siater has given the following
description :— ;

‘© Within the temple yard, which
prevents the idol from being seen
from without, is an elevated stage,
on which the Chinese players per-
form their exploits, to the astonish-
ment of the crowd below. On
passing this, the attention is excited
by the geudy appearance of golden
ornaments, and various coloured
paper cut in shreds; but principally
by the quantity of painted candies
burning in front of the idols, the
smoke of which, together with the
incense, is intolerable «at first en-
tering. The candles are about 100
in number, and of various sizes,
from } foot to 3 feetin height, and
measuring from 2 to 6 inches in
circumference. These are kept


BAT.


buraing during the:whole time of
worship; but, as every worshipper
brings ¢ candles; they are, constantly.
changing them, so that I suppose
the entire number is changed every
20 minutes. Two men are em-
ployed to keep afew places vacant,
that no one may be prevented from
vlacing his candles, and that the
worship may go on without. inter-
ruption. The candles which are
removed are for the benefit of the
temple, and they must amount to a
considerable sum, as the smallest
of them cost about 2 dollars a-piece.
- © On entering the temple, , every
worshipper presents his lights, and
receives six sprigs of incense. ‘Three
of them; after bowing te tlie ima-
ginary deity, as an intimation that
he is about to worship, he places
close to the image, and the other
at a short distance; then retiring
to a cushion th front of the.idol, he
pays his homage, which consists in
knoeling down, and bowing the
head thrice to the ground, and this is
repeated three times: He then goes
on to a large table on the left side
of the idol, where there are persons
to enrol his name and receive, his
contribution; and here the devo-
tees appear anxious to exceed each
other in the sums which they give
toward the support of this abomina-

ble worship.
** During all this time, one’s ears


are stunned by a large drum, and a


gong, used to rouse the idol; and
these are beaten with increased
vehemence when any person. of
note comes to worship. Several fe-
males, most richly dressed, brought
offerings of fruit and sweetmeats,
These, I am informed, were the
wives of the rich Chinese; who
were glad to embrace such an op-
portunity of appearing abroc = *
probably they bad not seen any
nor been seen by any, but their uwn
husbands, since they visited this
temple, on a simHar occasion, in
the preceding year.
5


longing
brought
to resen
in the n
Mr e 4
preachi
week : ¢
7 o’cloc
on Tues
house i
evenin
at 2 othe
pened, h
congre
and the |
duced, at
dispensat
in the te 1
sayers, a
cessions
veracity,
quent obli
vanced a
ayentes
‘oward
year, the
80 much {|
necessar
voyage a
according]


wing the
and this is
then goes
b left side
re persons
beeive: his
the devo-
ceed each
they give
abomina-


one’s ears
jum, and &
idol; and
increased
person. of
everal fe-
d, brought
eetmeats,
were the
ese; who
ch an Op-
bror ns
any

their Uwn
isited this
casion, in


54


BAT:
_4%Another part of the scene: is,


performed by about a dozen: cooks, | thoug


chopping up pork for dinner; and. I.
a pe pressing invitations to sit.
down, and dine withthe, worship-.
pers, many of whom appeared. as-
tonished at my refusal ;, as on other.
occasions, whilst distributing tracts
from house to house, I readily ate
and drank with them, for the sake.
of an opportunity to discourse with.
them respecting Christ. and. his.
Gospel. In the tempie yard there
were as many gaming-tables as
could be conveniently placed.”’

On the 7th of January, 1822,


Mr. Medhburst end his family. ar--


rived at Batavia, where they were.


received with great cordiality by | po


Mr. and Mrs, Slater; and shortly
after their arrival, a‘dwelling-house
was built for them..on the mission
premises. The contiguous land be-
longing to the svofety, was also
brought from the wildness of nature
to resemble the cultivated grounds
in the neighbourhood.

Mr. Medhurst now commenced
preaching in Chinese 4 times a-
week; on the Sabbath morning, at
1 o'clock, in the mission chapel ;
on Tuesday evening, at a dwelling-
house in tavia; and on the
evenings of Thursday and Friday,
at 2 other places. It seldom hap-
pened, however, that either of the
congregations exceeded 30 persons;
and the only apparent effect pro-
duced, at this time, by. the public
dispensation of the truth, consisted
in the temporary conviction of gain-'
sayers, and in the extended con-
cessions of the heathen to the
veracity, consistency, and cgnse-


quent obligations, of what was ad-


vanced on moral and religious
—

‘owards the autumn of this
year, the health of Mr. Slater was
so much impaired as to render it
necessary that he should take a
voyage for its recovery. This he
accordingly did, with the desired


7


BAT
effect; but as, he, afterwards
hought proper.to. dissolve: his con-
nexion with the society, the entire:
weight of the. mission. at. Batavia
was. thrown. upon Mr. Medburst..
That valuable missionary, however,’
continued to labour with unremit-.
ting assiduity and unabated zeal ‘in:
the cause. of.. his. divine. Master ;:
and during the year 1823, he esta-.
blished a printing-office, which will,:
no doubt, prove of essential benefit
to the mission at thisstation. The:
necessary supply of paper and print-.
ing materials was obtained from:
Canton, through the kind. interven-
tion. of Dr. Morrison; and type-:
cutters were. procured fram .Singa-.


re,

The report of 18265 speaks favour-
ably of 2 Chinese schools—one 2%
Batavia and one at Tanabang--and.
also, of a.third school in. the town,
not entirely under the direction. of.
the mission. Worship in Chinese.
and Malay was also statedly per-
formed, In the Malayan service,
Mr. Medhurst received the friendly:
assistance of Mr. Diering, Each
person in the congre had a.
copy of the Scriptures before him,
to refer to during the sermon. A
bungalow chapel had been built:
by an European gentleman at }°» .,
tavia, in one of. the native Kaiu-
pongs, chiefly inhabited by natives:
of the island of Balt, originally
heathens, but recent converts to:
Mahommedanism, The >eople bad
attended more than 12 months, end:
the congregation was increasing.
Mr. M, statedly visited 2 villages
inhabited by Malays professin
Christian religion: one of m,
called Depok, situated about 20 m..
to the 8.; the other named Tugot,
situated about 12 m. E. of Batavia.
Atterdance on an average 30 ;
s-~ times from 50 to 60. No small
enc vuragement attended the Eng-
lish preaching, Mr. M. speaks of.
the rey ular attendance of the con-


gregation, the marked seriousness.
56


BAT
’ @f acontiderable part of it, aid of
clearer and more enlarged: views

uth, .: pehsary.‘had . beety
opened for the: purpose. of g¢ratul-
tously supplying medicines, ond
communicating religious instruction:
to the Chinese, a pritieds had
been prepared and printed, Up ‘*+
Jan. 1, 1825, the number of. books:
and tracts printed exceeded 60,000.
In disttibuting tracts, Mr. .M. ‘had:
also been active. “ Isometimés,’”
says he, ‘‘ go, with a few tracts: in
my hand,. into the market-place,
where I sit down and read: to those’
persons who may be about nie;
when ingnediately more. guther
round, and listen or look on, to.
wiom i enlarge on the subject. of
the tract, and endeavour to press it
home on their minds. Atthe con-
clusion, I present them with a few
copies thus explained, and always
find them well received. Even the
Malays, who on common occasions
will not receive our books, when
they hear them read, and perceive.
that their general tendency is to
benefit mankind, solicit them as a
favour.”

The present state of the mission
is thus described in the last re-


Chinese Schools.—-The number
of these is 4; 3 in the Fokeen, and
1 in the Canton dialect.
evidence is from time to.time af-
forded of the improvement of the
children in Christian knowledge,
while the ideas they imbibe of the
folly of idolatry, Mr. Medhurst
thinks, might reasonably be ex-
pected to prepare their minds for a
more candid attention to the truth,
and a more ready reception of it, at
a future period of life. He has com-
menced, for the benefit of the ad-
herents to the mission, an English
school, which is under his own
immediate superintendence.

- Native Preaching. — The Chi-
nese and Malay services, on the


Pleasing’


BAT

Sabbath, are continued. ‘The Chi-
any except by the teachers and
children belonging: to: the schools ;
but Mr. Medhurst “considers: the
non-attendatice of others as attri~
butable to’ the indifference felt by
the: Chinese to all religion, rather
than a bigoted attachment to their.
own, Mr. Medhorst still preaches

| évery Friday evening in Malayan,

| and with more encotiragement than

, formerly. very Wednesday after-
ron he delivers an exhortation to

e

}and every Thursday evening’ ex-
pounds the: Scriptures to a few per-
sons, who formerly enjoyed ‘the
labours of Mr. Robinson, Baptist
missionary, and of the late Mr.
Diering.

The Canton and Fokeen collo-
quial dialects having now. become
comparatively familiar to Mr. Med-
auret, he feels little difficulty in ad-
dressing the people. Inthe evenings
ue goes from house to house, con-

-versing with all who manifest any


disposition to listen to him. At


places of public resort he usually
procures auditors, but is seldom
able to collect half a dgzen together
atone time. What, therefore, he
cannot effect by preaching to larg
assemblies, he endeavours to make
up by the frequency of his addresses
to rug auditories. uM
n, egation. — Mr.

Medharst’s E ish congregation
has been still r reduced, by
the at so of European residents
from Batavia, chiefly in conse-
quence of the war which has lately
prevailed in Java. Among the re-
spectable Europeans who formerly
attended the English services at the
mission chapel, and have been re-
moved by death, wus the lute Geo
Livett, Esq., who has been for
many years a steady friend and sup-
porter of the mission.

Printing Establishment.—-Dw-
ing the past year, Mr. Medhurst

56


a


patients in the native hospital ;


6


prosperous
beer intro
whici is d
slave trade.
more than |
commercia
is expected
tish establis
it affords th
the interior
of 2000, alr
Mandingoes
and many a:


BAT BAT


has. printed a new. tract, in.Chi- { instruetion.; ‘They are). Mahom
nese, On the Redemption by.Jesme | medams. 6 ees Soy
Christ; a Dialogue between an |. . Rev. R. Hughes, from the C.M.S,
Englishman and @ Chinaman, and | arrived. here in March 1821, ..as
a Keply to a printed handbill of | choplain to the garrison and super-
a Chinese; which handbill. main- | intendent of schools, but died in
tains the absurd proposition, that | August following. Previous to this,
because European. governments, | schools had beenestablished.. .
and natives of Europe, in certain |. Rev./ohn Horton and others soon
alleged particulars, violate the | succeeded Mr. Hughes,. In 1826,
principles of justice, &c., therefore | there were in the schools 43 boys
the. Christian religion is tobe ‘ve- | and, 23.girls, ‘There were also, 16
fused, Accordingly, the drift of the | communicants. The congregations
latter two tracts is. to show that | were somewhat improved, and the
not Europeans, .as such, but those | people were becdming more. quit
only who, in character, resembled | and industrious.. yt
Jesus Christ, are really. Chrise| The Wesleyan missionaries have
tians.. , been stationed here with the view

~The mission books circulated | of extending their labours among
among the heathen in Batavia.are | the numerous tribes on the. banks
frequently read, and form the sub- | of the Gambia, and into the inte-
jects of conversation and discussion | rior. Thenative school under their
among them when the missionary | care is promising, and will doubt-
ie not present. From these facts | less produce ultimate fruit: Among
Mr. Medhurst -derives a measure | the adult natives, there have been
of encouragement, hoping that the | some encouraging symptoms.. Num-
leaven has at len begun to | berin society, 25, The obstacles to
work, which, in process of time, | rapid success, however, appear to
will leaven the whole lump. _ | be numerous,

The Chinese Magazine, edited| _BATTICALOE, «small island,
and published by Mr. Medhurst, | about 3) or 32 m, in circuit, on
continues to be acceptable to that | the E. coast of Ceylon; 60 m. N.
part of the public in Batavia, &c, | Matura. E. long. 82°, N..lat. 70°
for whom it is designed. 45’. Here isa fort; afew English

BATHURST, a new, flonrish- | families, and a small village of
ings and hea!thy British settlement | Mabommedans and Hindops, are
in W. Africa, on the island St.Mary, | dupes to the vilest superstitions,
at the mouth of the Gambia, be- | They mostly speak Tamul. 1
tween 13° and 14° N, lat. By | heathen population is numerous on
means of this settlement a very | the adjacent shores, but they are.
prosperous commercial trade has | remote and secluded from any other
beer introduced up the Gambia, | missionary station, the intermedl-
whici: is designed to suppress the | ate country being wild and dan.
slave trade. The river is navigable | gerous,
ore than 500 m,; and, in point of} Rev. Mr. Ault, of the WW. M,
commercial importance, this place | S., commenced a mission here in
is expected to become the first Bri- | 1824, and rested from his very active
tish establishment on the coast, as | and successful labours in the follow,
it affords the best intercourse with | ing year; yet, in this short space,
the interior. Population upwards | he had nearly pre an exten-
of 2000, almost entirely Jaloofs and | sive circuit. At this time, he wus
Mandingoes. They are friendly, | the only missionary, from Jaffna
and many are desirous for religious | on the N, to Matura on the S.; 4

' 67


= Sr a ae
Hon “ohare mweecoa


BAT
distance of 830 mites. He acquired
the Tamul, and preached oftén and


’ e@xtensi ely f° large’ and ‘attentive


congregations, besides superinitend-
pin Mca ‘schools of about 140
scholars ; into which hé introduced
portions of’ the Gospel, ‘copied’ by
the scholats upon their o/as, for


preety nin the ‘books | 8° 4


and Vain songs of the‘heathen. He
began to sée precious fruits of his
labours, After’ his death, the mis-


sion was ofily partially supplied, till | for


about 1821, ‘when Mr. Roberts,
having previously acijuited a know-
‘edge of the ‘T'amul at Jaffna, res
sumed 10° Se

“The report” of’ 1626 farnishes
the: followiiig patticilars” of ‘this
S¢ation ¢— jMired dyin

English School, Mission  Pre«
mises, contains 23 children, who
attend pretty régulatly. Nearly all
“S< boys are natives, anid find Eng.
sis difficult to acquire; but seve.
ral read the New Testament, and
Write tolerably well. Two.or threa
ave ready at translating sentences
from English into Tamiul, and it ts
hoped may ultimately: be useful as
teachers and pnts + dot ;

_ Native School, Mission Premises,

bcd sh children. * . Many
ys with riety; and un-

derstand the catechieme.’

Native Sehool, Kottikoliam.—
The village contains about 200 in-
habitants; 28 names are ou the
school-list.’ ‘This school is in very

order sévéral boys can fe-
peat the whole translation of the
Catechism. The people attend
service with apparent interest.

Vallierravoo Seheool contains 20
children.

Navacuddy School contains 40
children, and has always been well
attended. The village has nearly
1000 people.

Kattancuddi vo School con-
tains 40 children, 20 of whom are
of Mahommedan parents, Popu-
bation of the village nearly 3000,


BAT
‘BATTICOTTA, 4 parish in'the
district of Jeffia, on the northern
tage Aad the island of re 's
6 in. N.W. Jaffhapatam ; 2 °‘N.W.
Manepy, and 3 S.E. Panditeripo.
Previous to the desolating sickness
in 1819, the patish contained 13
families. E, lon, 80° 15’, N. lat,


6",
“The Rev. Messts. Benjamin C.
Meigs, and Richards, from the
American Board of Commissioners
Foreign Missions, commenced
ce here in 1817. Gabriel
Tissera is the native preacher.
~ Having gained permission of
goverhment to occupy the glebe
lands at this place, the mission-
aries commenced repairing the
buildings in 1816, and removed
their families here in June, 1817,

The méssion premises contain.
nearly 4 acres of land, on which the
missionaries found the following
appurténatices; achurch, dwelling-
house, 56 other small buildings, 2
yards, a garden, 4 wells, 11 mana-
gosa trees, and 51 palmyra trees,
o helonging to the government of

e


yon.

The church is 171 feet long aiid
65 wide, the walls, 4 feet thick,
are chiefly of coral stones. From
one end to the other are 20 massy
pillars, 10 feet in circumference, in
two rows, supporting 18 fie arches,
which are so much higher then the
walls as to support the roof. It


&.


was built by the Portuguese in the |


16th century, and repaired by the
Dutch in 1678. Since the English
took possession of the island, in
1706-6, all the buildings had been
rapidly decaying, till the mission-
aries mri> the repairs. The ra-
of time had nearly demo-
lished all that pertained to them of
wood,
The church and dwelling -house,


according to the custom of the |


couniry, are one storyhigh. The

latter is 100 feet long, and 42 wide ;

the walls of coral stones, the floor
58


@


ee a


parishes, ¢
who were


5 ig of
+» Richa:
ful here as


ti In the
iorthern


diteripo.
sickness
ied 1306
, N. lat.


jamin C.
from the
nigstoners
mmenced
Gabriel
cher.
nission of
the glebe
] mission-
iting the
| removed
né, }817.
es contain
ywhich the
following
¥ dwelling:
uildings, 2
, 11 mane-
myra. trees,
ernment of


et long atid
feet thick,
mes. From
e 20 massy
ference, in
fixe arches,
1er then the
roof.
uese in the
ired by the
the English
h jshand, in
had been
he mission-
The ra-
arly demo-


58


h to them ol


ling -house,
tom of the §
high. The
nd 42 wide j
bg, the floors


an Tl


f,


» parishes, The banding -schant, at


2 veral of whom are hopeeily pious,


| wission.


BAT


of brick, and, in the. time of the
Dutch, was the country sea:


second officer incommandat Jaffna.
In front is the church, about 20


rods distant. At. the back of the |


house.are the yards, enclosed by a
wall about 8 feet high. Thro,
one of these is an entrance into the
garden, which contains nearly two
acres, enclosed by a fine wall of
coral stones, laid in mortar, 9 feet
high, _ In this are 3 wells to water
it in the dry season, and the pal-
myra_ trees, the, fruit of which
constitutes the principal food of the
natives during half the year; the
leaves are used to cover the roofs of
buildings, and, instead of paper, for
writing. The mangosa trees are
in front of the house; from the
nuts a valuable oil is expressed, and
the trunks of these, and the pal-
myra, are valuable for timber,

The first object of the mission-
aries was to learn the Tamul Jen-
guage, and establish schools. In
abouta year they acquired the lan-
guage, so as to preach. without in-
terpreters, both in the mission-
house and in the neighbouring


this station, was commenced July.
26th, 1818, with 5 boys. Owing
to the prejudices of the natives
against their children eating on the
church land, a small house was
erected on an adjoining acre, of
land belonging to a heathen. In
1822, the school consisted of 22
boys, 17 of whom had received
English names, according to the
request. of their benefactors ; se-


the
At the same time. were
4 girls, 3 of whom were named.
In 1819, Mr. Meigs superintended
6 schools in this and neighbouring
parishes, containing 300 children,
who were instructed in the prin-
ciples of the Christian religion.

rt. Richards was eminently use-
ful here as a missionary and physi-


and render important a


BEE


cign, till 162}, when he removed
italy ad, ger
Mr. Woodward. succ
him at this station... See Jaffna. ,
BAY OF KENTY, a hay on
the northern shore of Jake Ontario,
Upper Canada, inhabited by, the
ohawks. ae
Messrs, John, Ail and John
Green, schoolmasters. rom the Se:
ciety for propagating the Gospel in
ine Parts, labour tah (ails
: nace Js occaslo vis
by the Rev a ; Stay of Kinge,
_ston, who superintends the school,
and performs. other. missionary la-


_bours. .The Mohawks are very de-


sirous, of instruction, . The pupils


make encouraging progress and a


ee thee sintended.. .
BI M district in
Bengal, Hindoostan, 1,.W. of Cal-
cutta; 80 m. long and 30 wide, bor-
coring on Monghyr N. and Burdwan
S. About 60 m. from Cutwa, Al-


though this place had been visited


for. some. years, as opportuni

offered, by the Baptist. he
it was not, till 1823, made a_.se-
parate station, At that period,
Mr. Hampton, who, was baptized
some years before by Mr. Sutton,
and had for.some time been exerts
ing himself very successfully among
his heathen neighbours at Tum-
look, near the Sunderbunds, was
appointed to it. Animated by
Christian zeal, be, ranianed bie se-
culer engagements, evoted
himself pn sh to missi la-
bour. The village in which he
fixed his residence is called Seuri,
and he had soon the pleasure of re-
ceiving several new members into
the church. His sphere of action
being very extensive, a number of
itinerants. were em d under his
superintendence, - Hampton
afterwards resigned his connexion
with the society,but a pious friend
on’ the spot exerted himself, in
consequence, so. zealously, that
the deficiency was pannoaly elt,

0


BEL:
until! Mr.’ Williamson arrived
ftom Sérampore, who entered
on his’ work, in 1896, with great
energy. ‘He had four native ‘as-
cintari its. The church consisted, at
thie date of his last letters, of 97
mbéers,; nearly all of whom’ are
converts from Heathe ism. In his
endeavours to instrict the female
part of his flock, only one of whom
was’ ‘found able to read, Mrs. W.
takes an active part, and the pro-


gress ‘already made is highly én- '


couraging.
« BELGAUM, ‘a populous town
and military station between Bom-
bay and’Bellary, ‘and 200 m. N.W.
of the latter place. The Canara
is chiefly spoken here, and’ in the
extensive country between this and
Bellary; and the Mahratta between
- this and Bombay.
* Rev. Joseph Taylor, of the L. M.
§., accompanied by the native
teacher, Ryndass,: proceeded, in
September, 1820, from Bellary to
Belgaum, for the purpose’ of com-
mencing' a ‘new mission. They
were very kindly ‘received ‘by ge-
neral Pritzler, as well'as by several
other respectable Europeans, whose
solicitations, ‘with those of the
general, had, amongst other causes,
nduced Mr. Taylor to remove to
Belgaum. On his arrival, Mr.
Taylor conducted public worship,
on the ‘Sabbath mornings, at
general  Pritzler’s house ;~ on
which occasion,’ a considerable
proportion of the military offi-
cers stationed at Belgaum ° at-
tended. On the Sabbath’ even-
ings he’ also preached to the sol-
diers in the camp. Jn 1821, Mr.
Taylor had succeeded in the for-
mation of two native schools; one
of which is situated in Belgaum,
and the other in the neighbouring
town of Shawpore. The number
of boys under instruction was about
120. At Shawpore, by the kind-
néss of Dr. Millar, of his Majesty’s
58d regiment, Mr. Taylor had beea


‘fnto the schools.


BEL ue
énabled to provide « convenient
school-house. Besides elementary
books, Dr. W atts’s First Catechism,
and a larger Catechism used’ at
Bellary, together with Scripture
tracts, &c. had been’ introduced
“The ebildrén
not only cominitted to memo


‘ldtge portions of the Scriptures
Catech i


sms, &¢,, but’ endeavoured


‘to understand what they learned.
‘Mr. Taylor devoted two ‘évenings


iv each ‘week to conversations


‘with the heathen. These meet-


ings, which were held in the school-
house at Shawpore, and '“con-
ducted in the Canara language,
were occasionally well attended,
On the Sabbath, Mr. Taylor con-
ducted three public services’ in
English ; two of them tn the camp,
and one at the commanding officer’s
quarters, lildir
capable of holding from 250 to 300


persons, had been erected in the


camp; where divine worship was
‘regularly performed; and, on the
Sunday morning, all ‘the soldiers,
then off duty, were marched down.
The rest, together with volunteers,
attended the camp service in the
evening. The service at the Com-
manding officer’s quarters was at-
tended by all the staff officers, and
others residing in the fort, and xlso
by the soldiers of the royal ‘artil-
lery. On Wednesday evenings, Mr.
Taylor held a service in the camp;


and, on Friday evenings, at his own §


house, in the fort. All the soldiers


who assembled for worship on these


occasions, attended ' voluntarily.
—Mr. Taylor was encouraged to
hope ‘that the above-mentioned ser-
vices, which he described, particu-
larly those in whe fort, as truly ani-
mating, had noi been in vain.
Some of his hearers acknowledged
the benefit'derived from his‘ public
ministry, and confirmed this ac-
knowledgment; while they adorn-
éd their profession by a holy con-
versation and consistent 4

0


A temporary building,


worship Was
and, on the
he soldiers,
rched down.
n volunteers,
vice in the
at the com-


nt life.
60


y


b they adorn:
a holy con


tion, of whom I hope well.


BEL BEL


‘Ow the’ applica:ion of General | replied to several important and un-
Pritzler, the Madras government | expected questions, in a manner
granted Mr. Taylor a liberal al- | that almost surprised me; and would
lowanee for his services in the | have done credit to’ & school in
camp ; which he generously devoted | England. Some of them have had
to the mission, A society, deno-' | their minds'so far affected by what
minated the Belgaum Association, | t!:ey have learned of Christianity,
had been formed; es on auxiliary | tha: they have refused to offer the’
to the Bible, Gisstoxar, ond Tract | usual worship to the household gods
Societies, v4 the circuation of | of their parents, and have*endea-
the Scriptures and religious tracts | voured to show them the sin and
had been ,remoted, in‘ five lan- | folly of worshipping such gods..
guages. Ryndass continues as a catechist
Mr. Hands, wi.o, during the year | with Mr. Taylor, and has, I think,
1822, hed am opportunity of wit- | considerably improved since he has
nessing {ue progress of the mission, | been with him. Mr. Taylor was
wrote as follows:—- ~ anticipating a removal from the
“<1 was exceedingly gratified by | fort to a house weil adapted for the’
my visit to Belgaum. Dear brother | mission, inthe . entre of the native:
Taylor has shown himself to be | town.’’
“a workinan that. neeus not to be Through’ succeeding years, the
ashamed.’ “His public services, | mission was blessed with prosperity ;
both in the camp and in the fort, | and, in Nov. 1825, two brahmins
are well attended; and the great | and a rajpoot, the first fruits of the’
Heud of the Church has honoured | mission at Belgaum, were baptized
him with very considerable success. | at Bombay, after a satisfacto
There are several humble, devout | avowal of their faith in Christianity,
soldiers; now members of ‘his | in the presence of about 300 na-
church, who consider him as their | tives. Various reasons induced Mr,
spiritual father; and, during my:| Taylor to fix on Bombay as the
journey last year, I met with several | place where the rite should be ad-
at Bangalore, Cananore, &c., who | ministered. Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Lil-
blessed God for the benefit they | lie arrived safe at Belgaum, on the
had received from his labours. His | 19th of November, 3826, The
exertions among the natives have | following are the la: accounts of
also been blessed; one, a brahmin | this station :—
at Belgaum, has, I irust, received Native Schools.—The ‘school at
the truth in love, and become a | Shawpore has been suspended, and
sincere disciple of Jesus Christ. I | aconsiderable reduction in the nyum-
saw much of this branmin while at | ber of the scholars in the other
Belgaum, and: he afterwards ac- | schools has also tuken place, in
companied us part of the way to | consequence of the baptism ui the
Bellary. _ I was so well satisfied of | two brahmins and a rajpcot, at
the sincerity of his profession, that | Bombay, in 1825, The number of
I advised Mr. Taylor to baptize | native schools, in connexion with
him on his arrival at home, which | the station, isstill 6; another schoed
I imagine he has done. There are | having been opened during the past
also a few other natives at this sta- | year. The progress mai'2 by many
‘| of the boys is, on the whole, very
‘“‘ His English and-native schools | satisfactory.
afforded me much satisfaction, par- | Native worship, §:c.—We deeply
ticularly the native school at Shaw- | regret to state, that persecutions,
pore. A number of children there, | directed against the baptized and
@ 61


BEL


their connexions, induced one of
the brahmins just mentioned, and
the rajpoot, to surrender them-
selves to the will of their respec-
tive families. The brahmin, we
are, however, happy to staie, has
since, rejoined the mission. The
other brahmin, who remained firm
under persecution, has removed to

Bombay to labour in connexion
with the 4merican mission at that
presidency.

In consequence of the opposition
manifested at Shawpore against the
baptized brahmins, it has been
judged expedient for the present to
discontinue the native service at
that out-station, and, instead there-
of, to commence one at Belgaum.

Distribution of the Scriptures,
&e.—During the past year, niany
tracts have heen distributed, and a
few copies of portions of the Scrip-
tures; the latter chiefly among
Roman Catholics, and some Pro-
testants, who were urgent in their
application: for copies.

. The poc. people in the chari-
table asylum, superintended by. Mr.
and Mrs. Taylor, are anw favoured,
daily, with the me: of religious
instruction. One «{ tha school-
masters attends thx a!:s-house, and
reads a portion of the Scriptures, a
catechism or tract, and an evening
prayer. Many of the poor people
express their thanks for the kind-
ness and attention thus shown to
them.

- Mr. Taylor has projected a cir-
culating library, in connexion with
the mission, for the use of the mili-
tary, stationed at Belgaum, and
others,

Belgaum Association.—-The re-
ceipts of this institution, for the
year ending 30th of April, 1826,
amounted to rupees, 959. 12; of
which.the sum of 420 rupees has
been voted to the parent society.

- BELLARY; a town situated in
the most northern part o1 the pro-
vinge of Mysore, and surrounded


ms


BEL


by numerous populous towns and
villages. Here the Rev. J. Hands,
from the L. M..S., arrived in April,
1810, and was treated with great
respect by the European residents,
among whom he soon began ¢? ce-
lebrate divine service. He ha‘, at
first, some great difficulties to von-
tend with, in acquiring the Canara
language, which is spoken from the
borders of the Mahratta nearly to
the bottom of. the Mysore. He
applied himself, however, so pay
tiently and perseveringly to this
study, that he not only soon col-
lected several thousands of words,
which he formed into a vocabulary,
but also began preparing a gram-
mar, with the assistance of his
moousheg, who appeared to be a
very learned man. The brahmins
in this place are said to be com-
paratively few in number. Some
of these visited the missionary in a
friendly manner; a considerable
number of country poor, or “ half-
caste” persons, attended his minis-
try; and, in some instances, his la-
bours appear to have been suc-
cessful. One man, in particular,
informed him that he had been con-
strained to commence family wor-
ship, both morning’ and evening.
Many pleasing circumstances
subsequently transpired. Mr. Hands
preached thrice every Lord’s day to
his countrymen, and the Portuguese
half-caste, with much encourage-
ment. The principal people treat-
ed him with great kindness; and
several of the natives, on certain
festival days, brought him an abun-
dance of @uit, His residence had
been a pagoda, and several huge
gods of stone lay about his pre-
mises. In the spring of 1812, with
the assistance of a young friend
from Madras, he opened a native


school, which was soon attended |


by 60 children. Here he preached

the Gospel twice a week. Upwards

of 20 soldiers belonging to one

regiment were brought to a saving
62


were
would
groun
of Lon
Her
who h
at Be
ceiving
paid a
Anago
90 yee
going ¢
to proj
conceiy
They fe
from th
tions j
rounded
brahmi)
already
underg ‘
and fro 1
they co
devotee
for a co
efficiend
the favo
to hear
epi
, idolatry,
At B

the annu


ms and
Hands,
} April,
h great
sidents,
g 19 Ce-
had, at
to cone
Canara
‘rom the
early to
‘e; He
, SO par
‘to this
oon col-
yf wordsy
cabulary,
a gram-
e A his
1 to be a
brabmins
be com-
yr, Some
onary in a
oaidereble
or * half-
his minis-
es, his la-
been suc-
particular,
i been con-
mily wor-
bvening.
umstances
Mr. Hands
prd’s day to.
Portuguese
encourage-
ople treat-
dness 3 and
on certain
m an abun-
idence had
veral huge
nt his pre-
1812, with
bung friend
\d a native


n attended §


he preached
‘ Upwards
ng to one
to a saving
62


BEL


“acqnairitance with divine: thitigs, '
iuder his ministry, and, with some’


- others, wete formed into a society. .


In 1816, Mr. Hands. was joined
bythe Rev. Wm. Reeve, by which
time many schools had been esta-
blished.

In:the month of March, 1817,
Messrs. Hands and Reeve took a
journey to visit the spot once oc-
cupied by the famous city of Bis-
nagur. From the top of a pagoda,
on a high mountain, and with the
aid of a good telescope, they had a
fine. view of the extensive scene
of desolation, comprising the ruins
of palaces, pagodas, and other pub-
lic buildings; the architecture of
which appeared to have beén of a
very superior kind. It is said, if
all the buildings which now remain
were placed .close together,’ they
would occupy a greater extent of
ground than that on which the city
of London stands.

Here they met with many people
who had visited the mission-house
at Bellary, for the purpose of re-
ceiving religious instruction. They
paid a visit to the aged rajah of
Anagoody, who seemed to be about
90 years of age, and’ was under-
going a severe coursé of penance,

to propitiate his deity, whom he
conceived to be angry with him.
They found him at a short distance
from the city, performing his devo-
tions in one of his pagodas, sur-
rounded by servants, musicians, and
brahmins, in abundance. He had
already fasted nine days, besides
undergoing other mortifications;
and from what they saw and heard,
they considered him as a complete
devotee, Mr. Hands spoke to bim
for a considerable time on the in-
efficiency of his penances to obtain
the favour of heaven ; but he seemed
to hear with reluctance what was
advanced against his infatuating
idolatry.

At Bisnagur, on the last day of
the annual festival, the missionaries


BEL


beheld a grand religious proces-
sion, in which two ponderous cars
of the idols were dragged along by
the multitude. ‘I counted nearly
1000 people,” says Mr. Reeve,
‘who were drawing one of them,
and, on measuring one of the wheels,
I found it.to be 14 feet in diameter.
The height of the car, including its
trappings and ornaments, was, I
suppose, not less than 200 feet ; so
that it was very fatiguing work to
make if move a © Indeed, I
believe, that if and sol-
diers had not their


swords and spe god
would have been ad left
in the road.??

After: their return to Bellary,
they had the satisfaction of adding
to their little church 10 persons;
and they were particularly gratified
with the experience of one indivi-
dual, who stated that he was the
son of an aged Moravian mission-
ary, still labouring in the West In-
dies. He had run away from a
boarding-school, and enlisted for a
soldier ; in these circumstances he
was brought to India, and, under a
sermon at Bellary, he was convert-
ed to God.

In the course of the summer,
Mr. Hands was induced, by the un-
favourable state of his health, to
take a journey to Madras, which
was very beneficial; but, on his
return, he found that of his beloved
wife on thedecline. She languished
until the Ist of Aug. 1818, when
her disembodied spirit entered “the
house not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens,’ | She was one of
the oldest missionaries connected
with the Z. M.S. in India; having
been employed in the work 12
years—first as the wife of the ex-
cellent Mr. Des Granges, and after-
7 as the beloved partner of Mr.

ands.


In January.
Bible S. was formed at
principally through the zeal of the

68


1819, a juvenile
ellary,


a ; y, ———— yy ” is
Bont Vy 4 WwW ¢&
% Vv WY oo é ¥ et €


V4 2, Sc 6}
WF o © ‘SE Ad


Oy %.:


\“


IMAGE EVALUATION
TEST TARGET (MT-3)
HLZS LA, mes.

6
phic


<! _ ~~ y 2
oP —® ah


‘BEL BEL


‘master of the! charity-school, and | - Towards the latter end of the
ithe activity:of one of the scholars, |.following year, Mr. Hands deter-
“who was .formerly notorious for his |.mined_to commence a missionary
‘wickedness: and’audacity. . The | tour through the Balaghaut ceded
attendance also at the mission cha- | districts, and Mysore, to Seringa-
pel became so numerous, that an | patam; and, on the 14th of March,
enlargement ‘was considered in- | 1822, returned to Bellary with
dispensable. The expense of this, | Mrs. Hands, having been married
together with additional seats and | during his absence. On_ their
lamps; was:‘computed at £50; but | journey Mrs. Hands became eeri-
the pious soldiers, and other friends, j-ously ind d; .and, after her
‘who were in the habit of attending | arrival at her husband’s residence,
on the. means of grace, felt so | she w much worse; and -
-deeply interested in the object, that | dually declined, till the 25th of
‘they collected: nearly the whole | May, when she bade an everlastin
sum in the course of 24 hours. farewell to the partner of her af-
On the 2d of March, the mis- | fections—to the mission—and to
sionaries received a visit from the | the world.
-rajah of Harponally, who had ar- From the report of 1824, ft
‘rived at Bellary on the preceding | seems that the number of schools
evening, seated upon a very large | was 15, and the number of scholars
-elephant, and followed by three | about 500. Anevening school had
-Others,amidst an immense concourse | been opened. The Canarese and
-of people. ‘ He came to us,’’ says | Tamilese services were continued,
‘Mr. Reeve, ‘with all: the pomp | and not without encouragement.
end parade of oriental princes, and | One of the baptized had died. ap-
‘our garden was almost filled with | parently very happy. The enmity
his splendid retinue. He showed | formerly mauifested against the
no disposition to enter into anypar- | converts had, in @ great degree,
ticular conversation, but expressed | subsided, and intercourse had been
-himself highly gratified with the |.restored between them and their
attention which had been shown to | relations. Instancesof conversion
chim.” : occurred, from time to time, from
At the close of 1819, Mr. Reeve | the English services; and the im-
observes—‘‘ During the progress of | proved example of many Europeans,
this year, the Gospel has been car- | including civil and military officers,
‘vied several hundred miles through |-in the E.I,Company’s service, had
the dark viliages, and several thou- |-made a favourable impression on
. sands of tracts have been distributed. | the natives. The translations of
The translation and revision of the | the Scriptures, and other works,
Scriptures in Canara, have also | were advancing: 6000 tracts hed
been ‘proceeding. A new edition | been distributed during the year,
of Dr. Watts’s First Catechism, in | in many places, besides large sup-
that language, with numerous im- | plies being sent to Seringapatam
span and corrections, has | and Canaanore. The number of
en prepared for the press. A | tracts issued by the Bellary 7. 8S.
‘copy ofthe same has also been | from its establishment in 16)7, was
prepared in the T'amul. The pro- | 26,734; The contributions of the
- gress of the native schools has been | Bellary 4. M. S., for the year
favourable, and several hundreds of | 1823, amounted to rupees; 627. 18.
‘the pupils know perfectly the First | In consequence of the removal of
Catechism, ard the greater part of | some of his coadjators, and of Mr.
our Lord’s Sermon on the Mount. | Reeve’s visit to — Mr.


|


ported,


of the
deter-
lonary
ceded
sringa-
March,
> with
married
their
ye eeri-
ter her
rere
gra-
25th of
riastin
her af-


lations of
pr works,
tracts had
the year,
mir
ingapa'
he of
lary T. 8.
18}7, was
the year
ps; 627. 13.
amoval of
and of Mr.
Nand, Mr.
64


BEL BEL


Handslaboured forsome time alone, | useful: results; The ‘number. of
-but successfully. The-new chapel | scholars, on the 3lst.of December,
was opened in October 1824. Its | 1826, was. 445 of whom 28 were
total cost was more:than. 7000. ru- | boys, ana the rest girls. The re-
pees, or about £700 sterling. This | ceipts for the year then terminating,
debt,, through... the liberality..of | amounted to 1258 rupees.
driends in India, was, however, soon Services in the Native Lan-
liquidated... The Rev. Mr. and Mrs. | gwages.—These: services had been
‘Beynon, reached: Bellary at the.) increased to 6. Those in Canarese
close of 1825, and Rev. Mr. and | were. performed. by. Mr... Hands,
-Mrs.. Pain arrived in the course of | thosein Tamilby Mr, Walton. The
the. following year. ~The follow- | number who attended the Canarese
ing statement will convey an idea | service on Sabbath mornings, was
of the state of the mission in 1826. | more than 100, but: they consisted
Native Schools.—These schools | chiefly of: boys belonging to the
had been again increased to 20; | schools, and their masters. The
the number of; boys under instruc- | largest attendance of natives here
tion was 864. Portions of the | was at the Canarese service in the
Scriptures had been introduced as | Pettah on Wednesday evenings.
reading books into all the schools; | Two more native converts, making
and as the boys usually made known | 9, one a Gooroo, and the other of the
to their parents what they learned, | merchant caste, had ‘been proposed
anuch scripture knowledge was thus | for baptism.- Many: privately ex-
indirectly communicated among the | pressed their conviction of the folly
adult heathen. At most of the | of worshipping idols, and of the
schools established at the villages | truth of Christianity, who were de-


in the surrounding country, the vil- | terred by fear of persecution from
lagers, when ut leisure, attended open’y avowing it. .


to improve themselves in knowledge orship in eepeeeniane
—sat down among the scholars— | pious individuals belonging to the
read in. the, religious books taught | military had removed to other
in the schools; and when the su- | stations, but their place in the mis-
perintendent, .on bis . inspecting | sion chapel had been filled up by
tours, visited them, they asked for | others; so that in; general, on the
explanations of such passages as | Sabbath evenings, there was a very
they had not been able fully to | respectable congregation. The in-
understand. crease of piety among the Euro-
The schools, generally speaking, | peans, at this and other stations, in
connected with this station, as at | this part of the worl¢, the mis-
many other stations in the East, | sionaries considered. source of en-
suffered greatly from the want of | couragement;} since one of the rea-
Christian schoolmasters, sons which the natives assigned for
A new school had been lately |'their rejection of Christianity waa,
opened in the Pettah of Bellary, | the immoral lives of many of those
and a spot of ground purchased for | ‘‘ who professed and called them-
a school-house, for the erection of | selves Christians,” —
which funds. nearly sufficient to The Sabbath-evening school,
defray the whole expense had been | which had been discontinued from
liberally supplied by friends at} the want of proper superintend-
Bellary. ance, had, since Mr. Pain’s ar-
Churity School.—This institu- | rival, been re-commenced.
tion continued to be liberally sup- | . J'ranslatien of the Scriptures. —
ported, and to be attended with | The Canarese version of ry Bible
G2


BEL


was finished-on the 18th of Sep-
tember, 1826. The Canarese New
Testament was under revision for
a second edition. (ois
. Printing Eetablishment.—The
printing -of .the « Pentateuch, | in
anarese, was advanced, in the
beginning of December, 1826, ‘as
far as the 16th chapter of Numbers.
Distribution of ‘Tracts.—The
number of tracts, in various lan-
guages, put into circulation by
the B. 7. S. during 1826, amounted
to upwards of 20,000.
BELTOLLAH, «4 town in
Bengal Hindoostan. In 1821, the
C. K. S, established 5 Bengalee
schools in this vicinity ; and a cen-
tral English school at this place
under the superintendence of Mr.
Van Gricken. '
BENARES, a large district of
Hindoostan, in the B..part of the
province of Allahabad. It contains
the circars of Benares, Juanpoor,
and Mirzapoor, and was ceded to
the English in 1775. ‘The manu-
factures of this district are nume-
rous, and the chief articles of pro-
duce are barley, peas, wheat, sugar,
salt, indigo, and opium. ‘
Benares,: a famous city, is the
capital of the above district, and
may be called the Athens of the
Hindoos, It is celebrated as the
ancient seat of brahminical learn-
ing, and is built on the left bank of
the Ganges. Its ancient name is
Casi (the Splendid) which the Hin-
doos still retain ; and it is so holy,
that many distant rajahs have dele-
ates residing here, who perform
or them the requisite sacrifices and
ablutions. The shasters affirm, and
the natives suppose, that whoever
dies here will be saved. _ Several
Hindoo temples embellish the bigh
banks of the river, and many other
public and ‘private buildings are
magnificent. The streets are ex-
tremely narrow ; the houses high,
with terraces on the’ summit, and
sume of them inhabited by different


. BEN


families; but the - more - wealthy
Gentoos live in detached houses
with ‘an open court;: surrounded by
a wall. : The:number-of stone and
brick houses, from 1 to ’6 stories, -is
upwards of 12,000; end :of mud
houses, above 16,000.:. The per-
manent inhabitants, in 1803, ex-
ceeded 582,000; and during the
festivals, the concourse .is beyond
all calculation., Nearly inthe cen-
tre of the. city: is a-considerable
Mahomedan mosque, ‘built. by Au-
rengzebe;. who destroyed a magni+
ficent Hindoo temple inorder to
make room ‘for it; and from the
top ofthe minars there is an ex-
tensive view of the. town and: ad-
jacent country, and of the nume+
rous Hindoo temples scattered over
the city; and the surrounding
plains... The rajah of Benares-re-
sides at Ramnagur, about 5 m. from
the city, on the opposite side of the
R. Benares is 136m. W. byS.-:
E. long. 83° 10, N. lat. 26°. 30’. .
Some years since, a Hindoo Col-
lege was founded here by a late Eng-
lish resident, Mr. Duncan, to encou-
rage learning among the brahmins,
which ‘has recently revived, and-is
becoming a very important institu.


tion. Thegover ntallows20,000
rupees,or }1,1< ‘ars,annually for
its support. 1... course of study is


12 years, and students are admitted
from 12 to 18 years of age. The
first annual examination was held
in 1820. In 1822, the number of
students was 172, more than 100 of
whom received ‘no support from the
funds. : y r

The ‘C. K. S. has. a valuable
depdt of books in this city.

The Rev. W. Smith was appoint-
ed to Benares by-the Baptist M. S.
in 1816, and pursued his work with
much constancy and vigour. Se-
veral Hindoos were reclaimed by
his instrumentality, and baptized
in the name of Jesus} among the
rest, a breahmin of the name of
66


the. sake
intimida
sults of t
and desis
ance, In
sisted of ]


t institu-
bws 20,000
anually for
of study is
» admitted
. The
was held
umber of
an 100 of
; from the


valuable


BEN


Ram-dass, whose subsequent con-
cern on behalf of his deluded coun-
trymen was described as happily at-
testing the sincerity of his profes-
sion. The powerful interest excite
by the first introduction of the Gos-
pel into this famous city appeared,
in after years, not-to have wholly
subsided. Crowds of attentive Hin-
doos were said to hear the word;
and many instances. occurred in
which: evident :impressions were
made. On one occasion, a brah-
min, after listening to the Gospel,
exclaimed, ‘ I will leave all my
frierds to be instructed in the know-
ledge of Christ;’? throwing away,
at the same time, a god of stone
which he had been used to worship.
Another ventured to predict—‘‘ In
80 years hence the worship of
Gunga will vanish, the chains of
the caste will be dissolved, and all
will have the true knowledge of
God and become Christians;”? while
a third invited-Shiva, Chunda, and
Lukshumna, the native’ itinerants
assisting Mr. Smith, to dine with
him. They accepted his invita-
tion, and had a long conversation
with him respecting the Gospe!; in
the course of which he commended
them for the part they had taken
in embracing Uhristianity. In the
establishment of schools, Mr. Smith
had been greatly encouraged by a
rich native, resident on the spot,
who subscribed very liberally to-
wards their support.. These schools
were in a flourishing state, and
the boys were said to read the
Scriptures with delight. Instances
of disappointment, however, .oc-
curred here as well as elsewhere.
Several persons, who gladly received
the word, and seemed for a while
disposed to make any sacrifices: for
the. sake of the Gospel, were
intimidated by the threats and in-
sults of their former companions,.
and desisted from further attend-
ance. In 1824, the church con-
sisted of 12 members, among whom


BEN


several. brahmins were included.
Ram-dass, .a native itinerant, was
associated with Mr. S, in_his.la-
bours; and so. much was he re-
spected by the European inhabitants
of the city, that. they . subscribed,
almost without solicitation, 1000
rupees.to assist him in. erecting a
small place of worship.

work. of the S prosper;
here. I find.the le very ps
tentive to the Gospel: last month
I baptized Mr. S..a serious.. young
man; -and 4 persons gave in their
names as candidates for the ordi-
nance—a Heathen, a. Mussulman,
and 2 Roman Catholics, The good
people here (referring to missionary
brethren. from other . societies). all
live in union, which is a great bless-
ing. At the assemblies of . the
heathen, we all. meet. together,
reading, singing, speaking, and
giving away books to those who
apply for them, or are able to read
them.” Voluntary drownings, he
remarks elsewhere, are less fre-
quent than formerly.; and it would
appear, from an anecdote in Mr.
Smith’s journal, that even.in this
holy city, and among brabmins
too, idols are fulling into disrepute.
‘* T. asked a brahmin,’’ says he,
‘¢ why they took no notice of some
stone gods lying under a wall. ‘We
worshipped them several years,’
answered the brahmin; ‘ but not
deriving any benefit,’ we laid them
aside, knowing they are but stones,
and are not able to. do good or
evil.? »

The Rev. Mr. Corrie, having
been appointed to the chaplaincy
at. Cawnpore, left Calcutta towards
the: end of. November 1817, uc-
companied by Mr. Adlington, a
native youth, who had been under.
the Rev. Messrs. Greenwood and
Robertson, of the C, M. S., and the
recently baptized Fuez Messeeh.
They were much aided in their
efforts by a liberal a he Jay

7


BEN
Narain. Ghossaul;. giving. a. large’
house in the city: for: a,school,;and
endowing it with .200 rupees..per


‘month (about. 300/.: per:annum). |.


The school wag opened.on.the 17th
of July, 1818, :and:in November,
116 scholars ; had: -been. admitted,
.and the. school. was becoming yery
poplar among the natives... .....
The: Rev. -Benedict..La Roche,
and the Rev.. John. Perowne, were
afterwards appointed,.to this sta-
tion... They were accompanied, by
Mr.. ‘Thomas. Brown, who. had
‘diligently . prepared himself to cone
duct all the departments of 2 print-
ing.and stereotyping establishment,
and who carried out with hima
printing-press, .and founts.of . Eng-
lish, .Arabie, and: Persian types,
It became, however, soon apparent,
that the monthly allowance, grant-
ed by the founder, was greatly exe
‘ceeded by the. necessary expenses
of the establishment... Jay. Narain,:
therefore, formally applied: to the
governor-general. in. council,, for
pecuniary assistance ; .accompany-.
ing his letters by a statement of
the monthly disbursements, _ from
whi. .it. appeared, that a surplus
of 262 :sicca. rupees. (nearly 400/,
sterling) above. the sum..allowed
by. himself, .was.. necessary,..in
order to :carry on the school with
effect... It. is.. most . gratifying, , to
add, that. the application was gra-
ciously received by the governor-
general in. council; . and that the
proper directions were issued to, his


agent at Benares, for the regular |


monthly payment, of the above
mentioned excess. _ .

From .Mr. Adliagton’s first re-
port, it appears that the attendance,
on an. average, was about 121; of
these, 63 were acquiring the Eng-
lish, 82. the Persian, 11 the Hindee
and Sanscrit, and 15 the Bengalee.
Divine: worship was generally held
in a bungelow) which had been

urchased, three times on the Sab-


th, #. e. morning and evening in


BEN


close. to Benares, which, was. sup-
ported by the, residents in. the


In,1821, Rev, Mr. and Mrs,.Mor.
risarriyed at this station, and found
the schools in, a. prosperous state.
Abeut,.Christmas, the, founder, of
the.. school,...,in, addition. to, the
liberal, monthly allowance. for sube.
sistence. to poor, scholars, added a.
suit. of clothes to.each..,.That.be,.
nevolent individual soon closed his
mortal. career, Unhappily, the
legal, transfer. of- property, . in-
tended to have. been; assigned hy.
him to .the, support of. the. schools,.
was, never .effected ;., but. his.son,.


Kolly Shunker Ghossaul, declared


his purpose of securing to the..sq,
ciety the. monthly. payment, as-
signed by-his father.. ‘Through the
kindness. of. his excellency the.
commander-in-chief, a suitable,
person from H. M.’s. 17th, regi-
ment was obtained as.schoolmaster;
Mr, Stewart, who had been brought,
to the. notice of the pestitt het
committee by lieut.. Peevor, be-
fore, his. departure for. England,
took possession, of the upper:story
of the house in Benares, which was


fitted . up , for... his..reception in.


ton, baving recruited
his,strength by.a visit to Calcutta,
where; he. married, devoted his
time to the: city school; leaying
Mr. Morris more. at, leisure, to ac;
quire the language, and to give his
time to more immediate missionary,
labours. A. schoolmistress was
also obtained :from, Chunar, and a
few girls were. learning . to read,
knit, und sew. A few. other girls
were in.a second school, , Both
were supported .by ladies. at. the
station. Hi Gf

In 1823, several of me elder


pption in,


repruited
Calcutta,
voted his.
; leaying
: to acs
' give his
ess Ws
ar, and &
to, read,
other girls
bh}, ; Both
ps. nt. the


the elder
68


BEN BEN .
on | have..proceeded beyond ‘the Rule
le, .| of Three; and aie showed con-


usually assembled ;' and, occasion: | ‘‘ We. also examined,” says Mr.
ally, the chapel was attended by a | Corrie, ‘ a school of eleven Chris-
few Hindoos and: Mahomedans. + | tian superintended by: Mrs.
“ On Sunday, the 18th of April, | Morris, who read only their native
1824,” says Mr. Morris, “ I'preach- | tongue. Even the Christians were
ed my first sermon in Hindoostanee, | brought to send their children. to
at the new. chapel. J had long | school with some difficulty; but
ago, as opportunity offered, endea- | they now begin to be pleased with
voured to converse with the | their improved conduct... Mrs.
heathen, and hope now to be able | Fraser overlooks another school for
to do so frequently.”. The bishop | girls, who are destitute children of
of Calcutta passed Sunday; 5th | European fathers. In. this, I’ be-
of September, at this station. At | lieve, are 17 scholars, and they
an early hour, his lordship attended | are taught English.’’ eS
the mission chapel, when Mr.| The. following are the circam-
Morris read and preached.in Hin- | stances of the mission last pub-
doostanee, in which tongue the | lished:—Mr. Adlington, admitted
bishop pronounced the blessing, | some time . before to deacon’s
On the same day, the company’s | orders, exercises his ministry at
church was consecrated, a con- | Secrole: from 40 to 60 attend.
firmation was held, and the Lord’s | A monthly prayer meeting is main-
‘Supper was administered: in the | tained. Nine adults have been
evening the bishop preached in | baptized at this station, who were
English. On this occasion, 14 | brought to the knowledge of the
native Christians were confirmed, | truth by the instrumentality of the
and were admitted to the Lord’s | society’s missionaries. The at-
‘table; the bishop officiating, as | tendance at the chapel is improved,
‘respected them, in Hindoostanee. | and the behaviour of the congre-
-Archdeucon Corrie gives. the fol- | gation is orderly. The two girls’
lowing account of his lordship’s | schools continue in. operation.
visit to the society’s school, in Jay Narain’s charity school is in
city, on the following Wednesday :— | excellent order: 131 boys are in
“The classes examined; exhibit- | attendance. Two youths, edu-
ed good proficiency in Christian | cated in this school, were engaged
knowledge, in translating the His- | in January last, as assistant Eng-
tory of England into Hindoostanee, | lish teachers in the Cawnpore free
and in English grammar: they'| schools; they give asa“ paamal


BEN


mending ‘the schools to thé natives,

Six youths, educated in the school,

have, during the last year, been

appointed monitors, with an allow-

ance sufficient to allure them to
accept the situation. Six schools
have been established in different
parts of the city, containing about
140 boys: in these, after the first
books, the Gospels are read. The.
streets being mostly very narrow,
the boys assemble in long veran-
dahs; andsometimes a hundred
persons, or upwards, will crowd
around while’ the boys are ex-
amined in the previous week’s
exercise, and thus their knowledge
is diffused. The English school has
been honoured by several. delight-
ful instances of usefulness, The
Rev. T. Morris, since his recovery
from serious illness, has removed
to Cawnpore. Mr. R. Stewart con-
ducts the school, and is assisted
by a native, Noor Messeeh. Mrs,
Adlington superintends the Chris-
tian native female school. Fuez
Messeeh has removed to Agra.

On the 6thof Aug. 1820, Rev. Mr.
and Mrs. Adam arrived at Benares
as the agents of the LZ. M. S.
Although chiefly employed in the
study of the Hindoostanee, Mr.
Adam preached to a company of
English artillery-men, on the Sab-
bath and Wednesday evenings, in
his own dwelling at Secrole, and
entered on compiling, for the use
of the natives, a ‘* Life of Christ;”’
in which it was his intention to
contrast the dignity and purity of
our Lord’s character, with the op-
en qualities, as found in the
Hindoo mythology.

‘In the month of May, 1821, Mr.
Adam opened a native school. He
also availed himself of favourable


religious tracts} and particularly,


tion; and their success in obtain- | at the great. public festivals, when
ing such a comfortable situation, | the resort of Hin
has hed a good effect! in recom- | from the various


opportunities for the distribution of | have in view.”’


BEN


arrive
doos to Benares, work.
parts of India, is The
immense. ee contai
In 1823, there were two native which
schools within the city; one in were g
the Kashepoor district, containing boys ¢
35; and the other in that of pared |
Habeebpoor, containing 30 boys. and a
In the school, situated in the can- progres
tonment, established in 1821, the Sen. ir
attendance was about 20. In this a riptu
school is a class in which the = ‘ap
Scriptures are read. dail stil
A commodious chapel was built book: al
by subscription in 1824, chiefly Mr.
through the exertions of persons i al i
holding inferior stations in the for the fe
army, who formerly attended Mr. eeoate eu
Adam’s ministry at his private ; suitable .
house, in which he preached on vol es
Sabbath and Tuesday evenings. pe ot
Concerning this station, Mr. A.' dhe t
forcibly says :— 4» sg ; te
«¢ Benares exhibits, in full ope- the ie ry
ration, some of the worst princi- the cnitd
ples of Hindoo superstition. The bi er he
Gospel offers its invaluable bless- q His
ings to the ‘ poor in spirit;’ but besenaatter
these people fancy themselves chapel y
‘ rich, and increased in goods, and fotme d be
having need of nothing.’ The wission y
Saviour is a Saviour to them who pulatio nid
feel themselves lost; but they to the eh °
fancy themselves already at the it shoul d be
‘gate of heaven,’ and ‘certain of original o}
obtaining an easy admission through Shercs y
it. Add to this, the awful wicked- of diffe ¥
ness of their lives, occasioned or donieeiaten
fostered ‘by the local superstitions, applicatio
and it will easily be perceived that Hi for thy oa
Benares presents many and pecu- for the we
liar obstacles, both to the mis IMI he cheerful
sionary exertions and to the re- appearan ‘,
ception of the Saviour. Amid such conversions


a population, it is a great blessing
to' dwell in peace and safety, and to
do any thing that may lead, though
the effects may be remote, to the


tives, were


su
important and happy object we much to iney
ze
In 1826, Mr. James Robertson seniae
70


evenings.
Mr. A. '


full ope-
st princi-
on. The
ble bless-
pirit 3? but
hemselves
roow Sy and
bg. The
them who
put they
ly at the
certain of
on through
ul wicked-
asioned of
erstitions,
eived that '
and pecu-
the mis-
» the re:
Amid such
at blessing
fety, and to
bad, though
ote, to the
object we


Robertson
"0


BEN BEN


arrived at Benares, to assist in the | formed at the mission chapel every
work of the mission. Sunday and Wednesday evening.
The native schools, 3in number, | The number of the congregation
containing 170 boys, and in all of | fluctuated considerably ; but, after-
which Christian books were taught, | wards, much increased by the at-
were going on well. Some of the | tendance of many seriously-disposed
boys committed a catechism, pre- } men belonging to a company of
pared by Mr. Adam, to memory ; | British artillery, stationed there.
and a considerable number made | It is pleasing to add, that good was
progress in reading, and it is hoped | done by these services.
also, in the understanding of the Mr. Adam printed 1000 copies
Scriptures and other useful books, | of his tract on the “ Ten Com-
A pundit was engaged, at a mode- | mandments,”’ and 500 of his Cate-
rate stipend, to. visit the schools} chism. Beside the Hindawee
daily, and to prepare suitable school | translation of Scripture Lessons
books. - | already noticed, he had, in prepa-
Mr. Adam prepared a Hindawee | ration, a tract under the following
translation of Seripture Lessons, | title—Jesus, the Deliverer from
for the use of the schools. Such a | the Wrathof God. Aconsiderable
work, as a school-book containing | number of tracts are, from time to
suitable selections from the sacred | time, distributed by Mr. Adam and
volume, he considered as peculiarly | the teachers in the native schools,
adapted to native schools similarly | especially at the melas, held in and
circumstanced with those at Be- | round Benares,
nares, from which, on account of |} BENCOOLEN, a sea-port town
the great poverty of their parents, | and fort, on the S.W. coast of the
the children were taken away ata | island of Sumatra, about 2: m. in
very early age, compass, where the English have a
. A Hindoostanee service was oc- | settlement and factory. The town
casionally held at the mission | stands upon a morass, and is un-
chapel, which:was sometimes per- | healthy. \ It is chiefly inhabited by
formed by Mr. Smith, the Baptist | native Malays, who build their
missionary, in conformity to a sti- | houses on pillars of bamboo wood.
pulation in the grant of the chapel | There are also some English, Por-
to the society, which provided that | tuguese, and Chinese; but few of
it should be open, aecording to the | this class survived the effects of the


original plan, to the occasional | climate, till fort Marlborough w::.:


labours of evangelical ministers | built on a dry and elevated situa-
of different denominations. In| tion, about 3 m. distant, where
conformity with this stipulation, | these inhabitants repair during the
application was made to Mr. Adam | rage of disease. The principal
for the occasional use of the chapel | establishment of the East India
for the purpose mentioned; which | Company on the island, is at this
he cheerfully granted. Though | place. E. long. 102°, N. lat.
appearances, in reference to the | 3° 49’,
conversions from among the na- Mr. Nath. Ward, of the B.
tives, were not such as might be | M@. S., proceeded hither from
wished, there was still, Mr. Adam | Bengal in 1818, and was fol-
thought, no cause to despair of | lowed by Mr. Robinson. Here
success; but, on the contrary, |} they found the press a very use-
much to inspire hope and impel to | ful auxiliary, and formed schools
zealous exertion. under the immediate sanction of

Services in English were per- | the government. A i mae


e


BEN


of Malay tracts were printed and
circulated. In 1823, it’ was re-


d, that’ the progress of ‘the |'


schools was satisfactory—that 123
pupils were in regular attendance—
that progress in Christian instruc-
tion was visible in many—and that
6 neighbouring’ villages had peti-
tioned for the establishment of
schools. The richest blessings also
seemed td have followed the la-
bours of ‘the missionaries, warrant-
ing the hope, that the spirit of God
had commenced a work, where, for
ages, all had been apathy and
death. In 1825, illness obliged Mr.
Robinson to remove, but Mr. Ward
remained for a-time; since which
he has retired to Padang.

BENGAL, a province of Hin-
doostan, on each side of the Ganges;
bounded N. by Bootan; W. by
Bahar and Orissa; S. by the bay
of Bengal; and E. by the Burman
empire and Assam; 400 m. long
and 300 broad; between 86° and 92°
E.long., and 21° and 37°N. lat. The
coast between the Hoogly and the
Ganges, 160 m., is a dreary inhos-
pitable shore, which sands and
whirlpools render inaccessible to
ships of burden. Bengal consists of
one vast plain, of the most fertile
soil, which, in common with other

arts of Hindoostan, annually yields
2, and in some parts even 3, crops.
The rainy season continues from
June to September, but the inun-
dations from the Ganges and Bur-
hampooter continue only about a
month in the latter part of July and
beginning of August. After the
waters subside, diseases rage, espe-
eially.among those who sre not
accustomed to the climate.

The presidency of Bengal in-
cludes several provinces, and yields
an immense revenue to the British,
_ who gained possession in 1765. The

population is estimated at more than
25,000,0°: within the presidency
are about 40,000,000. It is peopled
by various nations, but the principal


BER

are the Moguls, or Moors, and’ the Ber
Hindoos, or Bengalese. The Ben- of tl
ese and’ Moors have each’ 4 dis- Mi
inct language. The former are onee
idolaters; they generally live in Th
huts built of mud and straw, seldom man
use chairs or tables, but sit on the W. i
ground, and eat with the fingers. sucks
Among their horrid superstitions, -
4s that of burning widows on the the j
funeral piles of their deceased hus- poor.
bands, of whom between 8 and:900 learn
are atinually sacrificed in the presi- for::th
dency of Bengal alone. : many
The Moors, originally: natives of estate
Tartary, are descendants of :those the cs
who subjugated the empire of: Hin- sons |}
doostan 2 or 3 centuries ago, and subseq
are Mahomedans. There are also with:c
many English, Dutch, French, and belong
Danes, who come here for the pur- were 0
pose of commerce ; of these, Eng- Decem


lish are the most numerous, and ,
their chief settlement is at Cal-
outse Barrackpore, B

© Barrackpore, Barripore,
Beerbhoom, Bébhanapere, Burdwan,
Calcutta, Chinsurah, Chittagong,
Cutwa, Dacca, Doorgapere, -
Dum, Goamalty, Jessore, Maida,
Midnapore, Moorshedabad, ’ Seram-
pore, Silhet, Tumlock.]

BERBICE, a settlement, on a
river of the same name, in Guyana,
to the W. of Surinam. The land
is low and woody. It was taken
from the Dutch by the British in
1796, andin 1803 ; and it was ceded
to Britain in 1814. The R. enters
the Atlantic in long. W. 32° 13'
N. lat, 6° 25’,

A new and wide door of useful .
ness.appeured to be opening in this
colony, in the year 1812. Several
estates belonged to the British
crown, and were under the direction
of commissioners, who | were ‘dis-

d to encourage the instruction
of the slaves. ‘These: gentlemen,


who were well acquainted with the great
valuable services of the’.Rev: Mr. & 3

Wray, of the L. M. S., at/ Deme- On Mr,
rara, proposed to him to remove to 1818) his!


12


BER


catechism—and-the occasional: la-
bours: of Mr, Wray at plantations
in the vicinity were. attended: with
considerable success. Qn the 27th
of January, 1823, a very gratifying
public examination of the school
was beld in conformity to the de-
sire, and in the presence. of, , his
Excellency, accompanied by other
persons of distinction,

. For some time prior to the dis-
turbances in Demarara, the pros-
pects of, Mr. Wray. were brighten-
ing, and his sphere of labour ea-
larging. Just before their occur-
rence, he had received invitations
from several respectable proprietors,
to instruct.the slaves on their es
tates, one of which contained as
many as 1600; and he had just en-
tered into these additional engage-
ments, under highly. promising cir-
cumstances, when those events at
once. interrupted his labours, and
exposed him. to much unmerited
reproach,

Mr. Wray was summoned, on
false and, injurious charges, to. ap-
pear. before the Governor. Here,
in the: presence of the gentlemen
who had brought. them forward,
he positively asserted his inno-
cence, and requested his Excel-
lency..would(direct the Fiscal to
investigate the affair, in order that
his innocence might fully. appear.
With this request his Excellency
complied, and. the, result. was the
entire -vindication , and : most ho-
nourable acquittal of Mr. Wray.


BER


itself secured to the. society in con-
formity to the regulations of the
colony. i eat Wis eS ;

Although Mr. Wray’s. labours
were thus greatly. circumscribed, he
availed himself of such. opportuni-
ties as. were afforded, to communi-
cate Christian instruction both; to
the slaves and. free people. The
members of his church, although
not increased in number, advanced
in piety. On the Ist of, March,
1825, the foundation of the, new
chapel. was. laid; and it was.opened
on the.12th of June, when a large
and attentive congregation assem-
bled. The collection at the doors
amounted: to, about 162 guilders.


His, Excellency Sir Benjamin —


D’Urban, governor of the. colony
of Demarara, kindly presented Mr.
Wray with a. handsome donation.
The deht was reduced, in 1826, by
the liberality of gentlemen on the
spot, to about 600 guilders, or about
£55 sterling. '

The number . of aduiis baptized,
during the year 1826, was 4}; inthe
sincerity of whose religious, pro-
fessions Mr. Wray has full. con-
fidence. 13, during the same pe-
riod, were. admitted to the Lord’s
table. The members. of the church
are highly spoken of by.the mana-
gers.of the estates on which they
labour.

The number instructed in. the
Sabbath-school, consisting of both
children and adults, was, at. the
close of the year, about 230; and


Not much more than a fort-:} many. more, belonging to each
night had elapsed, when he was | class, have beenadmitted since that
-again plunged, into trouble, from a.| period. ‘In consequence of ‘the


very different cause.. His chapel,
which had been a second time en-.
larged, was destroyed by. fire, toge-
ther with the. school-house.


| great increase. of scholars, Mr.


Wray is desirous to fit up the
school-room under the chapel,


This | which: will hold from.3.to 400. The


calamity happened on the 22d of*| cost .of this would be about 1000


September..
and furniture of Mr. Wray also re-


The dwelling-house | guilders, or £90sterling.. |


The. increase in the Sabbath-


ceived considerable damage. A very.| school is. attributed .in part to. the
short time before, the debt on the | encouragement given. by. his Me-


chapel was paid off, and the building | jesty’s  Conutsaioners ¢, jnwry


consider,
natiyes,.
tachmen
their for
establish
digenous
of Hinde
Mahome;
condacter
and Mrs,


era
1826, by
n on the
» or about


tized,
ar inthe
lous. pro-
full. con-
same pe-
he Lord’s
he church
e mana-
hich they


BER


to the crown slaves’ (about 300 ‘in|


-BER
milardifficulties; established anative


number) to attend on the means of || female school, in bebalf of which she


religious instruction. Hct
_ Mr. Wray daily instructs about:
40 negroes in religious knowledge,
and, on every Wednesday, holds a
catachetical meeting with the chil-
-dreémin the chapel. ° Peay
‘The thirst for -knowledge
amongst the negroes, and the con-
sequent desire ‘to learn to read, ap-

ear to be greater than at any
‘ormer : period’ of the mission.
Scarcely a day passes without ap-
plications: for spelling books and
catechisms, from different parts of
the colony.

In consequence of this desire for
instruction, an adult school has been
commenced, which is held on
Friday evenings.

_ Mrs. Wray, as: usual, continues
to take an active part in the labours
of the mission.” }

BERDITSCHEW, a.town: in
Poland, containing about 30,000
Jews, among. whom the agents of
the Edinburgh J. S. have la-
boured in distributing and ex-
plaining the Scriptures, and found
rie diligently inquiring after the
trut: %


uth.

BERHAMPORE, a town of
Hindoostan, in Bengal... It is
seated on the Cossimbazar, 7. m.
S. of Moorshedabad, and has.a fire
range’ of cantonments for troops.

Rev. Micaiah Hill, of the ZL.
M. S.,; removed to this station from
Calcutta in 1824. He calculated
that a circle of 2'm. drawn around
him would include‘a population of.
about 20,000. After encountering
considerable opposition from the
natiyes,: arising from a peculiar at-
tachment to the superstitions of
their forefathers, he succeeded in
establishing’6 schools on the in- |
digenous plan (4 for the children.
of Hindoos, and 2: for those of,
Mahomedans; the latter being |


} appealed to t


European residents
at the station, and not without suc-
cess. Mr. Gogerly recently removed
from Calcutta, to. assist Mr. Hill.
Considering , the formidable obsta-
cles ‘with which the missionaries
have struggled—obstacles greater
than those occurring in the southeyn
‘parts of Bengal—it is pleasing to
.find, by the last report, that the
schools under the wing of this mis-
sion amount to 8; ,of which, 6 ere
for boys; containing 280, and 2 for
girls, containing 40.° The latter
are under the jointsuperintendence
of ‘Mrs. Hill and Mrs. Warden.
Mr: Hill has 3 native: chapels, and
3 stations out of doors, and preaches
‘almost daily at one or other. of
those places. On ‘every Sabbath
dayy ‘a congregation assembles in
his court yard, consisting of.
and ‘impotent persons, with whom
he converses, and to whom. he
preaches in Bengalee.. The Hin-
doostanee services are attended by
20 regular hearers. ' A native te-

amale; formerly a  Mahomedan,
has been baptized, and 4 half-caste
females: appear to be under. reli-
gious impressions, Myr. Hill oc-
casionvally attends the melas (or
festivais), on which occasions some
thousands of tracts have-been dis-
tributed. At least 30. Europeans,
belonging to regiments.successively
stationed here,- have given prac-
tical evidence of having: received
the truth, from the Divine blessing
on the English services. A church


-has been formed, consisting: of 13
members, into which it is proposed


to admit the Mahomedan female


‘above-mentioned. ..


BERLIN, a city. of Germany,


capital of the marquisate,of Bran-
denberg, and of all. the King of


Prussia’s German dominions: — It


is 12 m. in: circuit, surrounded


conducted by Persian moonshees); | partly by walls and partly by palli-


and Mrs. Hill, after overcoming si-


sades, and has 16 gates; but within
xt)


BER


“this inclosure are numerous  gar-
“dens, orchards, and fields. ©The
“streets are straight, wide, and long ;
~and ‘its large squares, magnificent
‘palaces, churches, and other build-
-ings, are scarcely to be equalled.
‘Berlin is seated on the Spree,
from which there’ is a canal to the
“Oder on the E., and another to
the Elbe on the W.}; so that it bas
a@°communication by water — both
“with the Baltic Sea and the Ger-
“man Ocean. It was taken in 1760,
‘by an army of Russians, Austrians,
and Saxons, who were obliged to
evacuate it in a few days. In 1806,
soon ‘after the battle of Jena, the
- French entered this city, and Buo-
naparte held a court in the palace.
It is 100m. N. of Dresden, and 185
N.W. of Breslau. E. long. 13°22’,
N. lat. 62° 3)’. 7

' In’ 1818, including the military,
the: population was 188,485. The
Jews are also numerous; among
whom the most encouraging indi-
‘cations appear, that the time of
mercy towards Israel is approach-


‘ing.
In 1822, a society for promoting


‘Christianity among the Jews was
‘formed in this city, under the ex-
“press sanction of the King, and
much zeal and liberality is mani-
fested in the cause. A considera-
‘ble number of Jews have already
‘made a public profession of their
faith in Christ.
~ In 1826, above 100° persons of
the Jewish persuasion were bap-
tized in Berlin ; of whom 64 were
‘baptized in some one of the 4
‘churches, under the  superin-
tendence of a distinguished eccle-
siastic, and a member of the com-
mittee of the Berlin S. An old
‘and highly respectable Jew said to
him, “ We are all coming, we
cannot hold to Judaism any longer.’’
The Berlin Missionary Institu-
ion was founded in 1800, and is
supported by the volun contri-
butions of individuals, It is de-


“BER
signed to qualify pious young meh


for: missionaries, end is under the


immediate care ofthe Rev, Mr.
Jenicke, of Berlin. -Many faith-
ful missionaries have already gone
forth from this school of the pro-


BERMUDAS, or SOMMERS
ISLANDS, four islands in the
‘Atlantic Ocean, 500 m. E. of Ca-
rolina, and surrounded by numerous
rocks and shoals, which ‘render
them difficult of approach. They
were discovered by Juan  Ber-
mudez, a Spaniard, in 1522; but
were not inhabited till 1609, when
Sir George Sommers was cast away
upon them; and they have be-
longed to Britain ever since. They
contain above 10,000 inhabitants,
who carry on some trade with


America and the West :Irdies, |


The principal one is called’ St.


eorge.

In the beginning of 1799, the Rev.
John Stephenson, a native of Ire-
land, proceeded to these islands. On
his arrival, it was quickly known that
a Methodist missionary from Ireland
was in the harbour; and the report
soon made an impression to ‘his
disadvantage. Coming from Ire-
land, it was concluded that he must
be a rebel, and, as such, sustaining
the character of a missionary, it
was instantly apprehended that he
was about to introduce disaffection
among the slaves. Full of these
preposterous’ notions, many were
unwilling that he should come’ on
shore, and would probably’ have
exerted themselves to prevent it, if
an enlightened magistrate, then
standing on the quay, had not dis-
armed their momentary pret
dices, and dispelled the gathering
storm.

After waiting upon the Governor,
and laying before his Excellency
the certificate of his ordination,
and the pass which he had received
prior to his quitting Dublin, cer-
tifying that he was a as 8

7


his liber


ONO TRF


—
@
So
—
aul
¢


any ‘were
come’ on
ably’ have
event it, if
ate, then
’ not dis-
ry preju-
gathering


Governor,
xcellency
‘ dination,
ad received
blin, cer-
nted as 4
16


BER
missidnary to thé isldnd of Ber.
muda,:Mr. Stepherison commenced
his ministerial labours; and though,
at first, his hearers.were but few. in
number, and of those, the greater
part appeared either hostile or in-
different to the subjects introduced
to their stores art
judice and:op; soon began
‘aubside } the congregation visibly
increased ; subscriptions were raised
jor the erection of a chapel; and
in the month of April, 1800, 74
whites and 30 blacks had joined
the society.
. The prosperity which now
to shine upon the infant ion
was viewed with a malignant eye
by the enemies of religion ; and as
they found themselves incapable of
checking its progtess without the
aid of law, they procured an edict
to be passed by the house of as-
sembly, prohibiting all pre not
ordained according to the rites and
ceremonies of the church of Eng-
land or Scotland, from preaching,
lecturing, or exhorting, to any c
lected audience, public or private,


under. a penalty of £60, and 6 | riously


months’ imprisonment for every
offence; and inflicting a similar
punishment on the person in whose
bouse the meeting should be held.
Mr. Stephenson, considering this
law as hostile to the spirit of tole-
ration——as an infringement upon
the birthright of every subject—
and as diametrically te to the
avowed sentiments o —
monarch—continued his ministeri
labours as formerly; but though
he was suffered to proceed for a
few weeks without interruption,
he was at length apprehended, car-
ried before the magistrates, and
committed to the common gaol, to
take his trial at the néxt assizes.
Mr. Pallais, the person in whose
house he had preached, was also
committed with him: Mr. 8., how-
ever, procured bail, and obtained
bis liberation on the 16th day of


BER.

his imprisonment, as his companion:
had done some days before:.:*

In December, Mr. Stephenson:
was brought to trial for the crime
of having preached the Gospel; .or,.
as one of the principal evidences
swore, of having ‘ read: prayers
from a book which he held in his
hand, and sung psalms to.a con-
gregation,’® And for this high
offence he was sentenced to «be
confined 6 months in the common
gaol, to pay a fie of £60, and to
discharge all the fees of the court. .
After he had been imprisoned about
5 weeks, the Governor offered to
set bim at liberty, on condition of
his promising to quit the island
within 60 days; but, as he con-
ceived such a proposition dis-
hor.vvrable to the cause for which
he cud hitherto: suffered, he de-
clined accepting it, and remained
a prisoner till the month of June,
180), when the: period of his in-
carceration expired. ;

Mr. S. continued’on the island
during the remaining. part of the
year; but his health was so se-
impaired, that he was «no
longer equal to the exertions. he
had formerly been accustomed to
make ; and, as the interdiction of
the law precluded him from uniting
in public or social worship with the
members of tlie society, he was re-
called from Bermuda early in 1802,
and those who had formerly beard
the word of God with. gladness,
were left as sheep without a shep-


rd.

Applications, in the mean time,
had been made to his .Majesty’s
government in England, to disallow
the intolerant edict which bad
driven Mr. Stephenson from the
scene of his labours; but though
the request of the petitioners was
readily granted, nearly 3 years
elapsed before the repeal of the act
was pu announced. And even
subsequently to that period, such a
— of determined -hostility. was

u ; 17


BER


exhibited against .the introduction
of the Gospel, that no missionaries
could be induced, for some: time,
to. venture among the inhabitants.

. At. length, in the spring of 1808,
Rey. Joshua Marsden sailed from
New Brunswick to Bermuda, with
the .view .of re-establishing the
mission... After: repeated inter-
views with the Governor, Mr, M.
was .permitted to commence. his
ministration; and though, at first,
he was. merely attended by 20 or
30 hearers, his congregation soon
began to increase 4 and, in the be-
ginning of September, he had the
satisfaction of uniting about 50
persons in society, most of whom


were negroes or people of colour, |


who appeared truly anxious for
spiritual instruction. A chapel
was afterwards erected, and some
of the most respectable persons in
the island became regular at-
tendants on the means of grace,
whilst others could hardly be re-
strained by their relatives from
uniting with the society.
- In 1811, a quantity of Bibles
and religious tracts were sent to
Bermuda, and the happy effects
resulting from their distribution are
thus pleasingly described by Mr.
M., in a letter dated Sept, 24th :—
*‘ The Bibles which you sent to
this place were as the sun rising
upon a dark and benighted land,
The poor blacks, who could read,
eagerly inquired for them; and
those who could not, began. to
learn, that they might peruse the
word of God. To. this new em-
ployment, their intervals of rest,
their uueal-times, and their Sab-
baths, were devoted. Passing
through a field or a lane, with a
spelling-book :in: their hands, they
would solicit little boys coming
from, school to teach them; and
would frequently beg of me, “—
the road, that I would stop a few
moments, and hear them repeat
their lessons, To be able to read,


BER


was to them like being pleced:in.a
new world, .aq. they beheld things
in a different light, and a: train of
new: ideas sprang up in their minds,
In a little time-many of them un-
derstood the word preached,. and a
work .of reformation was imme-
diately visible among. them. | Pro-
fane oaths and imprecations were
now .laid aside ;—the. polygamist
left all his. wives but the-one: who
had a prior claim ;—the evening
worship called them from the li-
bidinous dance, and the midnight
theft;—the stupid and slothful be-
came pliant. and diligent ;—mon-
sters were transformed into men;—
and the voice of religious melody
sounded from huts and cottages,
formerly blackened with the vilest
pollutions.”’

Nothing of particular interest
occurs.in the history of this mission,
from the date of Mr. M.’s letter
till the month of May, 1824, when
the annual meeting of the auxiliary
M. S., held at Hamilton, appears to
have excited a very lively interest ;
and the following observations
were made by the Hon. J, C, Esten,
the Chief Justice of the island,
who presided on the occasion :—

‘* T will maintain that your mis-
sionaries, in the scene of their
operations of, all others the most
interesting to us,—-I mean the West
India colonies,— have entitled
themselves to the thanks of the
established. church, which : they
cannot, without being calumniated,
be accused of undermining. We
see a splendid religious establish-
ment, and not moresplendid than I
sincerely hope will be useful, going
out to our West India colonies ;—
2 bishops, 3 archdeacons, .and
number of clergy. One of the
“principal objects of their appoint-
ment, as stated by Lord. Bathurst,
the colonial Secretary of: State, is
to improve the religious conilition
of the slave population. J will
maintain, therefore, that your

78


cottages,
the vilest


interest
s mission,
28 letter
24, when
auxiliary
appears to

interest ;
servations
C. Esten,
ne island,
sion ¢-—
your mis-
of their


4
t


: BER. BER


missionaries, sent free: parent’| onaccount ‘of their reluctance to
society, have'prepared:: - way for | comply with the rules respecting
this establishment; they asve ‘been | marriage. bs akatati
the humble, butuseful pioneers, who | Port Royal.—The society in this
have preceded and removed: impe- | place consists of 6 white persons,
diments from ‘its march';:and, in-| who shew much kindness to. the
stead of being accused-of a wish to | missionary, and are remarkably
subvert it; they ought to be per- | steady and pious. There is no
mitted to share in its triumph ; for |. chapel here, and the’ congregation
what they: have sown’ in tears, the | is'small.  — ei
church ‘will reap in joy ;—they Paget.—In this place a’
have, in fact, laid the foundation | stone chapel has lately been built,
upon which the fabric of the church | which will seat about 200 persons.
will-be reared among the slaves in | It was opened: Nov. 27, 1826,
the West Indies.” when it was filled with attentive
The state of the mission last re- | hearers, chiefly black and coloured
ported is as follows :— persons. The society consists of
Hamilton.—The society here | two classes of black and coloured
consists of four classes—three of | persons, chiefly slaves; one of
whites, and one of coloured and | which hasbeen formed in the course
black persons, who, by the steadi-| of the year. Many of them re-
ness and uprightness of their con- | gularly receive the Lord’s Supper;
duct, adorn their Christian profes- | Their walk is regular, and consis-
sion. In this place the missionary | tent with their profession: gentle-
leads two classes, conducts aj men in the neighbourhood, who
prayer-meeting, and preaches three | daily observe them, speak in their
times a-week. ‘The children of | praise; and most of their owners
the Sunday-school have lately been | give every encouragement to their
taught and catechised, in the in- | religious endeavours. . é j
tervals of preaching, on the Sab- Schools. —At the time of the last
bath. The congregations, when | report of the Sunday-schools ‘on
the weather is fine, are numerous | this station, the missionary’s ex-
and attentive ; and there is reason | pectations were considerably raised ;
to believe, that many of the regular | and, in many respects, they have
hearers are deeply impressed by the | been realized ; but, in others, they
truths of the Gospel. The num-/| have met with disappointment.
‘ber of black and coloured commu- | The long affliction of one of the
nicants is now much larger than in | coloured teachers for Somerset and
the preceding year; and the pro- | Heron Bay schools, has proved
spects promise an increase of mem- | greatly detrimental, and occasion-
bers to the society. ed, in these places, a considerable
St, George’s.—In this place the | decrease in the number of scholars,
congregation: is. not large. The | In Hamilton and Paget, the schools
society consists of 23 white, colour- | have suffered from the want of pa-
ed, and black persons, in one class, | tient and active teachers. At the for-
who, in general, are decided Chris- | merplace, during the last quarter, in
tians. ; . | the intervalsof public worshipon the
Barley’s Bay.—Here is a small, | Sabbath, Mr. Moore, the missionary,
but good, chapel. The congrega- | taught and catechised the children
tions ‘have, of late years, been very | liimself; and, at the latter,:some of
fluctuating ;. and the few black and | the more advanced have taught the
coloured persons who wish to meet | junior and less advanced scholars,
in class, have been refused tickets, | In all the places where schools are
79


BET BET


established, they suffered much | their head, earnestly entreated bim.
from want of superintendents and |'to continue among them. Mr. S..,
zealous teachers. However, to | wished to decline this, but they:


counterbalance . these discourage-
ments, the Lord has given his bles-
sing. A few of the scholars have
become members of the society,


' would take no denial.. Great suc-:
-cess followed his acquiescence : a:
concern about religion became ge-
neral—20 persons were baptized,


and many have improved much in| on a ctedible profession of faith.
reading and spelling. The First | —a school was opened, which soon.
Catechism hus been committed to | contained 140 children—and eivili-.
memory by the majotity. Order | zation commenced. These bappy
is becoming more and mote esta- | results, however, were not of long
blished;,and the prospects of the | continuance; Mr.S., after strug-
missionary are by no means dis- | gling with many difficulties, partly.
conraging. arising from the failure of the

In the Bermudas, the Society for | crops—no rain having fallen in some
the Prapegsrion \of the Gospel in| parts of Namaqualand for 3 years—
Fore‘gn Parts, has laboured for | and partly from the disturbed. state
5 years. ‘“ The Bermudas,” says| of the tribes after the death of
the last report, “‘ are divided into| Africaner, left Bethany in 1822,
9 parishes, each provided with a | accompanied by many of his people,


respectable church; and though | who settled with him near the |


‘ these churches had been for many | mouth of the Great Orange River.
years very insufficiently supplied | BETHEL,’e mission station at
with ministers, the Bishop of Nova | the French Camps, in Mississippi,
Scotia, during his visit, made pro- | among the Choctaws, on the pub-
vision for the regular weekly .per- } lic road from Teinessee to Natches,
formance of divine service in every | about 60m. S. W. from Mayhew,
one of them. Throughout the co- | and the same distance S..E. from
lony; the zeal of the clergy, and | Elliot, an elevated and healthy
the excellent dispositions of the | situation on the high land, between
people, excited his admiration. | the Pearl and Big Black rivers;
He administered the rite of confir- | 4m. S. of the upper French Camp.
mation in each church, and to more | The mission buildings are pleasantly
than 1200 persons in the whole, of | situated 50 rods W. of the road,
whom above 100 were blacks.’’ In the vicinity are several whites,
BETHANY, formerly Kiip | with Indian families;most of whom:
Fountain, a settlement in Great | speak the Indian and English lan-
Namaqua country, South Africa, | guages; as do their slaves, who are
about 560 m. from Cape Town, | numerous. Within 40 m. are many
near the former station, called | natives, groping in spiritual dark-
Warm Bath. ness. The pernicious examples of
. Rev. Mr. Schmelen, of the L. M. | unprincipled whites, have poisoned
S., on his return from the Damara | theit minds and corrupted their
country, which he went to explore | morals; so that, with very few ex-


in 1815, fell in with a kraalof Na-
maquas. At first they were greatly
alarmed at the appearance of him-
self and his people; but finding
that he was not the freebooter,
Africaner, but a peaceful mission-
ary, they expressed the highest joy,
and, with Flemerius, their chief, at


ceptions, they have been degraded
by every pest of vice. This
place was formerly known ‘by the
name of French Camp, afterwards
Newell, and, recently, Bethel. ‘The
Rev. Loring S. Williams, assistant
missionury, and Mr. Stephen B, Ma-


'comber, schoolmaster, from the
80


cipally by
dren were
of schoo;
cienoy,

of the est;
made for
poor child
expense o.


sd bim.
Mr. 8.

t they)

xt suc’
nce: .a
me ge~

\ ized,

f£ faith.
ch. soon:

d civili-:

> happy
of long

r phere:

s, paruy:
pe
nin some

} years—
ved: state
death. of
‘in A
‘is people,
ass the |

ze River.
pation *

Lississipp!;.

the pub-
o Natches;
Mayhew,
5. E. from
d. healthy
d, between
ck rivers}


ral whites,


nglish lan-
BS, who are
h, are many


$0


st. of whom:


BET
uAmevican Board of Commissioners
for Foreign Missions, labour here.
Mr. M. arrived in the spring of 1823,
Inthe summer of 1821, Mr. Williams
had charge of the school at Elliot ;
and, being obliged to travel for
his health, was directed to visit
different parts of the Choctaw
nation, in order to learn their
disposition as to the instruction
of their children. At this place
he found the white inhabitants very
anxious on the subject; made ar-
‘rangements to establish a local
school; removed his family in Oct.
following ; and took up hisresidence
‘in an old cabin, where he opened
a school on the 5th of Nov. He
selected a site for the station on a


‘pleasant eminence, in a thick fo-


rest; and such was the zeal of the
inhabitants, that, in less than a
month, they nearly completed a
large dwelling-house, divided into
& apartments, besides a hall 16
‘feet wide, a piazza in front, and


-one 44 feet long in the rear; tbe


whole covered by a roof, 90 feet
by 40; | a meat-house, and a
cabin for & cook. In addition to
this, they agreed to provide for the
teacher’s family, and for such of
the children as could not board at
home; to supply the necessary do-
mestic ‘help ; and to clear 10 acres
of land for a garden, corn-field,
and other necessary purposes. In
Jan. 1822, there were 165 scholars ;
and, in Feb, 1823, ‘there were 24,
besides 2 of Mr. Williams’s chil-
dren: 7 of this number were fe-
males; 8 full blooded Chectaws ;
8 supported wholly at the expense
of the Board, and the others prin-
cipally by their parents, The chil-
dren were very diligent, in and out
of school, and made great profi-
ciency. From the commencement
of the establishment, provision was
made for the accommodation of
poor children, to be educated at the
expense of the mission, A small


» BET


cotigrégation usually collects on the
Sabbath, at th: house of Mr. Wil-
liams, for religious worship; and,.
in the summer of 1822, a consider-
able revival prevailed at the sta-
tion, principally among the blacks:
and as many as 10 or 12 gave evi-
dence of real conversion to God;
some of whom were formerly no-
torious for their wickedness. __

On the 17th Nov. following, a
church was organized, and 4 pub-
licly professed their faith in Christ.
On the 19th of Jan. 5 others united
with the church; and it was ex-
pected that more would soon come
‘forward. This station is important,
as a depository for Bibles and tracts,
Many people emigrating from the
States to the new purchase’ are
destitute of Bibles and other books ;
and, among the white settlers’ in
the neighbourhood, only 4 Bibles
and ] Testament were found when
Mr. Williams first visited them.
Many Bibles and tracts have already
been distributed to residents and
travellers. The Sabbath is now
regarded, especially by the black
population, and vice is, to a great
extent, réstrained,

BETHELSDORP, or Village
of Bethel, situated westward of
Algoa Bay, at the mouth of the
Zwartzkopts R., and about 600
m. E. of the Cape. (To ‘this
station, Dr. Vanderkemp and
Mr. Read, the representatives of
the L. M. S. removed, in conse-
quence of the dangers to which
they were exposed at Bota’s place.
Having marked out a plot’ of
ground, 240 paces in length and
144 in breadth, they divided it into
different portions for the families
under their care, and gave the
name of Bethel Fountain tw’ a
stream that ran through the middle
of the settlement. They then
erected a temporary church, and
houses for their own accommoda-
tion—the walls and - being


BET ‘


chiefly:constructed of reeds; and,:
in July, 1824, they commenced
public worship, and opened:a school:
for: the instruction of the young..
Nor. were the missionaries per-
mitted to labour in vain. Cupido, a
man notorious for vice, and distin-
guished above all his neighbours for
the enormity of his crimes, found,
in the blood of Christ, a remedy.
sufficient to heal all his diseases ;'
and when he heard that the Son of
_God-‘was able to save sinners, he
cried out, ‘ Thisis what I want!
This is what I want!’? This con-
‘vert, like Saul of Tarsus, no sooner
_ received the faith of the Gospel,
than he straightway preached it to
his countrymen; and, in one year, '
he could number of them 17 adults’
converted by his instrumentality—
one of whom became the wife of
Mr. Read. Many other instances
of usefulness, peculiarly pleasing,
occurred. Just before the
re-capture of the Cape, however,
the opposition of many persons had
risen to a great height; and the
missionaries feared that. they shauld.
be compelled to relinquish their la-
bours. They were summoned to
the Cape, where they vindicated
their conduct to the satisfaction of
the Dutch Governor; yet so ma-
lignant were their enemies, that
he recommended the missionaries
. to delay their return till a more
favourable opportunity. That op-
portunity was unexpectedly afforded
by the capture of Cape Town;
which was no sooner effected, than
the General, Sir David Baird, sent
for Dr. Vanderkemp, whom he
treated in the most cordial manner,
Shortly after, full permission was
granted to resume the care of the
congregation at Bethelsdorp, where
the doctor arrived, March 2ist,
1806. Mr. Read, who was desired
by Sir David Baird to return by
sea, was preserved from the most


imminent danger of being ship-| such an abundance of milk and
82


BET


wrecked on. the coast of Caffraria, butte
and providentially reached the been
settlement in safety. The efforts soap,
of Messrs. Ulbricht, Tromp,. and cloth
Erasmus Smith, having been greatly by th
‘blessed in the absence ofeDr. V. : mark
and Mr. R., the mission wes flou- this a
rishing; and a valuable coadju- fairs,
tor had been found in Mrs. Smith, word
who formerly lived at Rodezand, ° amon;
and had devoted herself to the in- not w
struction of the heathen. | The those
missionaries were received by their lieve,
beloved flocks with the most en- knowl
thusiastic tokens of joy. “ Even their c
the old Hottentot women, who inward
could scarcely leave their houses, yet, fro
made their appearance,”’ ‘says Mr. from o
Read, ‘ on this accasion, to join conside
‘the general acclamation of clapping ever, ni
of hands; and I was almost afraid of conv


of being ‘smothered by their ca-|
resses.’?

The report of the missionaries, in
1810, demonstrates their success,
‘The external state of Bethels-
dorp,”’ they remark, “‘ puts on gra-
dually a more promising appear.
ance—the people become more in-
dustrious, The knitting school
flourishes under the direction of |
brother Read’s wife. Formerly we
had no corn of our own}; but this
year the Lord has shown that it is
in his power literally to change a
desert into fertile ground, by af.
fording, throughout the whole year,
such an ubundance of rain, that we
have been able to sow wheat and
barley sufficient for our provision,
which is almost ripe, and promises
a copious harvest. The number of
inhabitants also increases; so that
we have been obliged to surround
the square, which forms Bethels-


greater ¢
he had e)
of the ne


dorp, with a second, and that with . ad

a third, which, in all probability, f grea
will-soon be filled up. Our. fields i ae
are covered with cattle, amounting wushet |


to about 1200 head, not including
the sheep and the goats. There is


the Hotte
for the sj
amounted


‘affraria,
ned the
ie efidrts
MPs. and
n greatly
feDr. Vv. ‘
wes sae.
» coadju-
rs. Smith,
Rodezand, °
o the in-
en. . The
od by their
most en-
sé Even
men, who
pir houses,
> gays Mr.
on, to join
of clapping
most afraid
y their ca-|


sionaries, in
sir success.
of Bethels-
a uts on gra-
ing appear-
me more in-
ing school
‘ rection of »
Formerly we

ny but this

wn that it is

to change 6

bund, by af.

» whole year,

rain, that we
r wheat and
ur planets
and promises
he number 0

ases } 80 that
to surround
rms Bethels
nd that with
ability,


82


, Our. fields
e, amounting
ot including
ts. There is
of milk and


BET


butter, that this, lust article has
been employed in manufacturing
soap. Other necessary articles, as
clothing, corn,and flour, are brought
by the boors in waggons, as to a
market-place.’?? Connected with
this account of their. temporal af-
fairs, the missionaries say :—‘‘ The
word of truth is by no means lifeless
among us: and although we can-
not well estimate the number of
those who, we have reason. to be-
lieve, are favoured with a. saving
knowledge of Christ, on account of
their concealing, in great part, the
inward dispositions of their hearts ;
yet, from what we hear accidentally
from others, we believe it to be
considerable. There are, how-
ever, not a few in whom the work
of converting grace is more evident
to us.””

In 1811, Messrs. Wimmer, Verg-
host, Bartlett, and Coner, (a con-
verted black from Demerara), were
added to the labourers at this set-


| tlement, Dr. Vanderkemp having


long contemplated a mission to
Madagascar; but, in the midst of


| his anticipations of removal to a


new sphere, he was summoned to
the enjoyment of eternal rest.

On the 20th of March, 1813,
the Rey. Jobn Campbell, who had
kindly undertaken, in behalf of the
L. M. S. to visit S. Africa, arrived
at Bethelsdorp, and beheld a much
greater degree of civilization than
he had expected. He found many
of the natives exercising the busi-
ness of smiths, carpenters, sawyers,
busket-makers,brickmakers, thatch-
ers, coopers, lime-burners, mat-
manufacturers, stocking-makers,
tailors, &c. &c. Cultivation was
also much extended, and the stock
had greatly increased. The effects
of religion were likewise’ displayed
in the existence and prosperity of be-
nevolent institutions formed among
the Hottentots. They had a fund
for the sick and indigent, which
amounted to 256 rixdollars ; and


BET


they had recently proposed erecting
a house for the reception of part
of their poor. They had also a
common fund for the purpose “of
improving the settlement, amount-
ing to 130 dollars, and about 30
head of cattle; and, in addition
to this, they had contributed, dur-
ing the preceding 12 months, the
sum of 76 dollars in aid of the
L.M. S.

The colonial government having
demanded the payment of taxes,
and ‘¢ remonstrances,”? savs Mr.
Read, in a letter dated April 9,
1815, ‘* having proved in vain, the
only alternative was for our people
to exert themselves to the utmost
in order to raise the money. <Ac-
cordingly, they dispersed them-
selves, and applied themselves, some
to hewing and sawing timber, and
others to beating bark and burning
charcoal. The smith, the wheel-
wright, the carpenter, &c. ull ex-
erted themselves to comply with the
demand made on them and their
poorer relations, so that at the ap-
pointed time the tax was paid,
amounting to 3000 rixdollars, or
about £700. And, on the follow-
ing day, aregular 4usxiliary Society
was established for this settlement,
in consequence of many of the
natives having long expressed a
desire to do something more for
the cause of Christ than they had
hitherto déne., Twelve of the
members were chosen to form a
committee, and subscriptions were
immediately made to the amount of
860 rixdollars, or about £160.”
In the same year, a _ general
awakening took place; and, ina
short time, 50 persons were added
to the church, among whom was
the son of a Caffre chief, who had
been a ringleader of the young
people in their follies. His con-
version made a deep impression on
the minds of many, especially of
his companions. Affecting scenes
took place at some of their public

83


BET BET
meetings: the greater part of the | were under the superintendence of


assembly being bathed in. tears, | Mr. and Mrs. Monro. by
and. crying for mercy; while the | In the following year, the new: tle
believing Hottentots wept for: joy, | ‘school-house was finished. A range. ten
on beholiing so -many turned from | of alms-houses, 17 in number, had . che
darkness, to light. been erected, by the labour and at pre
The mission, was subsequently | the expense of Hottentots:' The . The
strengthened by the arrival of | merchants’ store succeeded ‘beyond jor
_ Messrs. Messer and Barker, who | al! expectation. The contract with the
were permitted to rejoice in in- | government afforded seasonable re- ; reac
creasing prosperity. ‘ | Hef under privations arising from ‘Gos
In July, 1819, the church con-.| want of corn seed and of genial thei;
sisted of about 200 members. The | weather. They were also further The
deputation, who visited it at that | assisted by profits derived from a chap
time, were. of opinion that as much | species of aloe, which Dr. Vander- ; ‘tech
piety existed among them as exists | kemp supposed, in 1810, would re- ; Tong!
among an equal number of persons | quire a herculean effort to induce read
connected with any Christian so- | them to gather. Every Monday,, was
ciety in England, in which atten- | by unanimous consent, was appro- . ,
tion is paid to the personal religion | priated. by the people to public ;


of its members. They observe, | labour, when all the men in the vil: .
also, that, independently of the good | lage engaged in the execution of |
effected at this station, in reference | some work for the:common benefit. |
to persons of real and decided piety, The Sabbath-school was also
a standard of morals had been esta- | prosperous. Dr. Philip says—
blished generally among the people, | “‘ The people meet at 8 o’clock in
and their minds and condition con- | the morning, and in the afternoon.
siderably improved. Here all is activity: the wives of

In 1822, the former reed houses | the missionaries, and the daughters
were removed, arid streets formed, | of others belonging to the institu.
the houses of which were arranged | tion, with the Messrs. Kemp, the
fn regularrows. A public shop or | merchants, are all engaged; and it.
store was opened for the sale of | is a delightful sight to see all ages,
goods. The Hottentats had become | from childhood to grey hairs, under
contractors with the government to | snch superintendence, conning over
eonvey stores from Algoa Bay to | their lessons, from the A BC to
Graham’s Town. The agents ap- | the most.advanced classes, reading.
pointed, at the two places were | the most difficult parts of the sacred
likewise Hottentots, all of whom | Scriptures without the aid of
acquitted themselves to the perfect | spelling. There is scarcely any
satisfaction of their respective offi- | thing at Bethelsdorp I take more
cers. And besides supporting them- | pleasure in than this school. Here
selves by their own industry, the | we see all the energies of the ‘insti-
Hottentots of Bethelsdorp paid, in | tution, all the talents of the station,
the course of a few months, 7000 | in full exercise; and it is truly
dollars, or about £580 sterling, for a | affecting to behold children of 7 and.
farm called Hankey farm, situated | 10 yearsof age (which is frequently
on the Chamtoos River; built a| the case) acting as monitors to
school-house nearly equal in value | classes of aged people, from 40 to
to that sum ; and, in many instances, | 70 years of age,”
erected houses for themselves.- His Majesty’s Commissioners of
At this period, Mr. Kitchingham4 Inquiry arrived at Bethelsdorp on
was the missionary,.and theschools | the 28th af Dec., arn

: 4


$


ence of


» afternoon.

ie vie

e dal ors
ne ‘Tpstitu-
Kemp, the
4 ed ; and it
see all ages,
hairs, under
onning over
BC to


ses, reading.
of the sacred
he aid of
carcely any


is frequently
monitors to
, from 40 to


missioners of

ethelsdorp on

accompanied
64


per’
by their secretary and a gen-
tiéman of the ‘colony. _ They at-
tended divine service at the mission
chapel,’ when ' Mr,’ Kitchingman
preached from Psalm cxxvi, 3—


‘The Lord hath. done great things


for us, whereof we are glad. After
ar ta, eereat ee 20° Hottentots
‘read the 3d chap(er of St. John’s
‘Gospel, and were examined as to
their knowledge of the Scriptures.
The children afterwards read a


chapter in the Bible, and were ca- |.


‘techised. The English class, be-
fonging to the mission-school, then
read afew easy lessons. “When all
was finished, the Hon. Commissi-
oners announced the object of their
visit; when some cf the eld men of
the institution rose up and replied,
thanking the King of England, and
thanking them for the interest they
took in’ the Hottentots of Bethels-
dorp. The Hon, Commissioners
expressed their satisfaction at the
progress which the people had
made in the knowledge of the
‘Gospel and in civilization. An
auxiliary’ B, S.° was formed at
Bethelsdorp, on the 5th of January,
1826. :

‘The school, formerly superin-
tended by. Mr. Monro, has recently
been placed under the care of Mr.
Cornelius Vanderkemp, the elder
son of the late Dr. Vanderkemp,
who acquits himself, in this inte-
resting office, greatly to the satis-
faction of the missionaries. ‘The


‘scholars, in number 165, are, gene-


rally speaking, making rapid pro-
gress, The average attendance is
about 125.. °°

‘An -evening school has been
commenced for the benefit of
adult Hottentots, among whom a
great thirst for knowledge is pre-
valent. . They are instructed in
reading, writing, and arithmetic.
In this’ school, which is well at-
tended, the Messrs. Kemp render
valuable personal aid. :
The Rev, Mr. Foster, who arrived


BET

with Mrs. F. in 1826, has under his
tuition several promising youths be-
longing to different: African tribes,
besides sevéral of the sons‘ of the
missionaries. sh

A ‘new and more commodious
school-house is being erected at
this station. ge penlhd

The ‘attendance on the public
religious services, both on the Sab-
bath and on week days, is, in gene-
ral, good. . bait r

That interesting feature of this
mission, the Sabbath adalt schoo),
still continues to wear an encou-
raging pe t

One of the missionaries spends a
considerable portion of his time in
visiting the ‘people at their own
dwelling-houses ; when he endea-
vours to. impress upon their minds
the importance of attaining a right
understanding of the Scriptures,
and of giving their’ children the
benefits of education. . ‘

Stated services, and a Sabbath-
school, have. been commenced at
Port: Elizabeth, in the vicinity of
Algoa Bay, for the benefit of the
Hottentots and slaves. . Messrs.
Helm, Robson, and, Foster, alter-
nately, preach there on the Sab-
bath; and it appears, from -the
testimony of respectable individuals
resident at the place, that their‘lu-
bours bave not been in vain. -It is
intended to erect a chapel, towards
the expense of which a considera-
ble sum has been subscribed on the
spot. The committee of the Cape
A. S. has granted 450 rix dollars in
aid of the object.

Mr. Robson and Mr.. Helm also
preach alternately, every Sabbath-
day, to-a body of Hottentots be-
longing to the institution, who re-
reside at a place a few miles distant
from Bethelsdorp.
. Mr. Helm having completed the
arrangements of a small printing-
office, has begun to print elemen-
tary books for the. use of. the
mission,

i ’ 85


‘BET


‘The anniversary of the Bethels-
A. M. S. was held on the 10th
of May, 1826, when several. Hot-
tentots, addressed the meeting with
‘much Hood sense and feeling.
- On the 16th-of ;the same month,
Mr.. Brownlee, missionary to the
broly was ordained at this sta-


on.
‘More Hottentot families continue,
from time to time, to join the insti-

tution.

‘The number of couples married

during the year 1826, was 37.
BETHESDA, formerly Orlams
Kraal, a settlement in the interior
of S. Africa, on Great Orange R.,
about 600 m. N. of Cape Town,
inhabited by Orlams, Corannas, and
Bushmen, in a very rude; unculti-
vated state. The Rev. Messrs,
Sass and Helm, of the L. M.S.,
commenced a mission here in 1808,
where many were soon after con-
verted to God. More than 80 were
tized in the course of one year.
‘Mr. Helm, however,: was, at an
‘early period, compelled by ill-health
toremoveta Griqua Town... Mr.
Sass relates inhis journal, received
41818, many pleasing . instances of
the power of divine grace in the
hearts of the:poor Corannas, :many


of whom appeared to be truly | state


pious. About 20 adults were bup-
tized in the course of the previous
year, besides children.

The converted people of this
settlement, in their intercourse
with kraals of: Bushmen and others,
frequently. took occasion affection-
ately to speak of Christ and salva-
tion to them, and sometimes appa-
rently with much effect. In .one
place they found a large kraal of
Bushmen, and were surprised to
hear their chief speaking to them
of ‘the things of God, which he had
occasionally heard at Bethesda,
and conducting divine service in. an
orderly manner, ,

They frequently suffered by the
incursions of the wild Bushmen,


BEY. :
who stole theircattle. Inone in-
stance, they. apprehended several
men, who some months before: had
robbed them ; but instead, of .pu-.
nishing them; as was expected,
they treated them with kindness,
‘and made them a present of several,
sheep and goats. :- They were astor
nished and ashamed; and. one ;of
them, trembling,. said to, some
others, ‘‘I shall not beligve they
will spare my life, until [get home
‘in. safety; for. though : they: deal
thus kindly. with us at present, they
will certainly kill us as‘we return.’?
They found, however, that the be- -
nign principles of the Gospel.pre-
vailed; and thus. the Christians
“ overcame evil with'good.” >.
. Unable to endure: the excessive
theat.of the. summer months, ; Mr,
Sass removed, in 1820, from Be- |
thesda to:Campbell.. .The Griquas,
‘who previously resided at the former
place, followed him to the: latter;
and of ‘the Corannas on: the: Great
R., whom he occasionally visited,
are some who were formerly:ynder
his ‘instruction at Bethesda... .,
BEUVILLE, a town’ in‘France, .
containing nearly 2000 inhabitants,
Here the 7’. M. S,'bes a congre-
gation in-a stedfast and prosperous


BEYROUT, a. city of Syria,:at
the foot: of Mount Lebanon. «It
has a fertile:soil, and is abundantly
furnished with good water,’ by the
springs which flow from ‘the: adja- |
cent hills. -The houses are built of
mud, and of a soft, sandy, .crumb-
ling stone ; and are dark, damp, and
inconvenient, The streets are
narrow and. dirty; and. during: the
winter, are seldom dry. On the W.
and N. W. Beyrout is entirely open
to the sea. At-no great distance
to the E. is Lebanon; which
stretches forth to the. N. andthe S.,
and affords a pleasant resort for the
summer, and, it is said,: a safe re-
treat in times of political disturb-
ance, On the §. is a lavge and


' BEY
(beautiful plain, varied by small


one in hills, covered with: olive, palm,
several , lemon, pine, and: mulberry
fore:had treées—especially the last; enriched
|, of -pus, with ‘vines; and. enlivened by: nu-:
xpected, merous cottages. Beyrout was once
cindness, the chief town‘of the Druses; and
f several, though it is now possessed by the
ere Astor Turks, yet it-is still the great em-
1. one of poriam ofvall'that dwell upon the
to, some mountains. Besides ‘three large
gve they mosques’ and: several ‘small. ones,
et home the city contains‘a Roman ee aloe
they: deal a Maronite; aGreek, anda Catholic
sent, they. Greek church. ‘The whole popu-
y return.” lation is supposed to be notless than
at, the be- 6000: souls: Here the American
ospel.pre- missionaries, the Rev. Messrs. Fisk
Christians and:King, took up their residence
Me? | in 1828, and others from: the same
excessive Board have since entered into their
mths, | Mr. labours, The church missionaries,
from Be- who.were going to Abyssinia, ar-
e Griquas, rived at Beyrout, . in. February;
the former 1827, and:they have transmitted the
the latter; following remarks on: the state of
. the: Great the mission :-—* It-has pleased God

y visited, so to bless. the labours: of the . bre-
norly-ynder thren. Bird and Goodell, that -there

Bey are 10 or 12. persons whom they
‘insFrance, . consider to’: be: truly converted ;
nhabitants. while many diligently search: the
8 @ Congres Scriptures, to :see: if. things be so
prosperous as the missionaries say. But.it is


here as it is throughout the world—
* He that is born . after. the flesh,
, persecutes: him ‘that: is. born after
the spirit.’?:: The Greeks, in gene-
ral, receive: the missionaries well ;
but the: Greek patriarch of Beyrout
fulminates ‘againstthem ; ‘under the


dy, cromb-


ik, damp, .and Meronites and othér Roman: Ca-
streets . are tholics. _Not:only are calumnies
during. the circulated against the missionaries,


. On the W.


but the patriarch ‘curses and excom-
bntirely open


municates those:who maintain any
intercourse. with. them,—even the
poor who receive their:alms! | The
samé. Roman: patriarch has: also
seized @ young convert, and:has
kept ‘him in: prison: inthe convent
now for more: than a year :-he often


influence; it is. supposed, ofthe |.


BOG


causes his victim to be beaten, and
compels him to undress; and to pass


‘|: the night in the: cold ;: limiting ‘his


sustenance to the. smallest portion
of ‘bread and) water which ‘will
prevent him from dying! ~He as-


‘sembles the monks daily round the _


prisoner, to insult him, and allows:
him neither to read nor write. But’


“when they smite Asaad on. the:
‘right cheek, -he: tums to them: the


other also; and when they tell him
he'has a devil, and curse him, he
blesses ; when they interrogate him,’
heanswers by a passage of Scripture,:
whether they promise:or threaten.:
The - Mussulmans © are ° tolerably.
quiet}; but they avail themselves of
all opportunities to fill their purses.
This is'the manner of effecting
their purpose :: When any one begins
to read the Scriptures, ‘or to visit
the missionaries, those ‘of his sect
go to the Mussulman judge, doubt-
less with a presentin their hands,
and beg him to cause such an’ one
to be punished : the poor man ‘has
no apprehension of the mischief,
till a ‘Turk meets him in the street,
and tells him that he is condemned
to. buy, for example,: 100 lbs, of
soap, of the manufacture of the
pacha, at’3 livres per lb., whereas
the just price is but: 1 livre: if
he refuse,’ they: put him: in prison,
and there beat him till he: consents.
to: pay. © This Roman: patriarch
has given the missionaries and. other
Christians, the name of ‘ Bibli-
cals,’—a new word, which denotes.
a follower of the:Bible.”?

BIG SPRING, Upper Sandusky,
Ohio. - The. : Methodist. mission-
aries: in, Upper Sandusky have.
laboured here among the Wyandots
with success;. In 1822, many at-
tended with much seriousness ;:and,
on‘one.oceasion; 10° offered: them-
selves for ‘admission as members‘of
the society. Bie! Ie
'> ‘BOGLIPORE, «a town: 240: m.
N. v4 W. of Calcutta, and 2. miles
S. of the Ganges. -


BOG | BOG


' Mr. Christian was placed'here by ;,them. As ‘these people have no
Bishop Heber. ' ‘| distinction of castes among’ them,
‘‘ Boglipore, as an European sta- | the success, Mr. Christian trusts,
tion (says the archdeacon of Calcut- | will be gréat' and decisive. ‘The
ta), is midway between Berhampore | present obstacles exist in their hin-
and Dinapore, the nearest stations | guage, which has no written cha-
where a chaplain resides. There | racter; and allthe aids to be ob-
are only about 20 European Chris- | tained in that country, are yery
tians of all descriptions at Bogli- | insufficient to remove these’ diffi.
pore ;, but westward, Monghyr is | culties: he is engaged, at present,
little more than 30 m.; northward, | in writing a vocabulary.’ He'is
‘Purneah, about 60; and eastward, | anxious, if possible, to ge pt

Malda, from 70 to 80. At each of | these people in December, wht
these stations are civil and military | is the best time for visiting them ;
servants of government; and in| when he purposes. to establish
these districts are many families of | schools in different purts of ‘the
‘hills, as ‘aids to his higher views.


Indigo planters, who would occa- }
sionally visit Boglipore for the ser- | He gets on so slowly with his work
of preparation, that he almost feats


vices of a clergyman; or these sta-

tions might be visited, with little |-at that time he shall fall short. of
trouble and expense, in the cold
season, by.a clergyman, tothe great
comfort. of these residents and
others.”’ _

With a view to the superin-
tendence of native schools, Bogli-
pore offers considerable advantages ;
there being no one large town in
which. the inhabitants reside, but
several. bazaars, within a circum-
ference of 6 or:8 m., containing


would be desirable to give:them
some portions-of re dd in their
own language, W © purposes
writing in ‘the Nagree character,
He has been visited by some of
their chiefs, to whom he. men-
tioned his wishes to communicate
better knowledge among them ‘than
they had hitherto received; they


the requisite quelifications; as it |


about 15,000 people.


: Boglipore is’ particularly inte-;
Testing, as the head-quarters of the
district which includes the Raje-
mahel Hills, containing a popula.:
tion of a totally different kind from
the inhabitants of ‘the plains. These
hills are a separate cluster, sur-
rounded by a level cultivated


country on all sides,


. The Board, in their last report,


gives the following views relative
‘to the people and the mission :-—

: The people who inhabit these
hills are distinct from the Hin-
coos; their customs, religion, lan-
gaage, and features, bear no re-
sembin.°¢.to those who live around
them. ‘1*.>y have many religious
CerEAO:3, ANS Bre wxtremely
superstitious, but Ibere! in their
opinions of those who d‘fier from


destitute o ur
gyman, the bisiiop eat him to


seem to be pleased with this mark
of consideration; and observed;
that they would forward his’ views,


respective villages’ to ‘attend the
schools when evected, |:
“The hills, from’ their insalubrity,

are only to be approached 8 mon’
in the year; and his residence’ for
the other months has been fixed at
the civil station-of ‘Bogiipore, with
directions to periire the’ clerical
duties of it. Tre eerticmen of
the station have shown iam the

kindest ' attentiviis ; and; bein

chiefly of the church of Englan
are regular in their attendance at
divine worship. He has also: re-
‘ceived instructions:to make: o¢ca-
sionel visits’ to the invalid: station
‘at Monghyr}‘ this station being
f the services of a cler-


by directing ‘the children of: their


close. af
Bheels;*4


ns 5 as. it }
ive: them
@ in their


Boa"


go thére once a month. On leav-
ing Calcutta, be proceeded, in the
first instance, to Mongbyr; when a

ar attendance on the services

the church was observed by a
number exceeding 70. But as the
facilities: which offered, to obtain
an ‘acquaintance with the Hill lan-

ge, were egal at Boglipore,
t made thatof greater consequence
as ascttled residence.”?

Tie coumittee of public in-
gisotiot hppropriated 3600 rupees
ver 2Mui to the support of a go-
yernment school at Bhagulpore, or
Buglipore.’ In‘a volume published
by Mr: Charles Lushington, of the

engal civil ‘service, on religious,
heritable, and. benevolent institu-
tions connected with Calcutta,
the author statesthe: allowance to
be 400 rupees per month, and gives
the following particulars:—
. “© This school was established by
government, for the purpose of in-
structing the recruits. and children
of the ‘corps’ denominated Hill
Rangers,; in the Hindoostanee
language, and the: elements of
arithmetic.. It is also’ open to the
children of the Hill chiefs; so
that' there ‘is‘every just reason to
expect that the institution is cals
culated to strengthen the efficiency
of the corps of Hill Rangers, and
to: promote civilization: among ‘the
rude tribes from which it is em-
bodieds The number of pupils
averages abst 200 ;' at a late exa-
mination many: exhibited a cre-
ditable ‘proficiency... Captain Gra-
hau, with whom the project of the
school originated, has compiled @
vocabulary of the language spoken
by: the Boglipore mountaineers,
which is conjectured ‘to bear a
close. affinity . with that of | the
Bheels,”* . &
' BOGUE: TOWN, « station of
the De M. S., in Taiarapu, of
re peninsula, Georgian Is-
an e * i

“The Rev. Mr, Crook settled here,


BOM,


at the request of the inhabitants,
atthe end of 1923; and soon had
a congregation - of about 600, a
church of 4% members, and a

| flourishing school, In 1826, the
number baptized, of adults, was
241; of children, 92; m a
total of 388 adults and 170 chil-
dren. Besides these, there were
about 100 natives, who were bap-
tized; prior to this station being
formed. Tle candidates for bap-
tism were 28; the church consisted
of 90 men and 70 women; and
the congregation had increased to
upwards of 1000. A Female Bes
nevolent S., superintended by Mrs,
Crook and her eldest. daughter,
had also been’ in full operation for
some time, with good effect ; and
a similar society was afterwards
formed among the men. The
schools are still well attended, and
both adults and children make en+
couraging progress, Many have
been recently baptized, and the
number in ‘communion: announced
in the-last report was 236, Anew
and commodious chapel wasopened
Sept. 21, 1825. ‘ The congregation
‘keeps up, and has been joined by
all the principal people, with many
others from: the apposite side of the
peninsula,

BOMBAY, a small island: near
the W. coast, Hindoostan, about’? m.
long and 1 wide, riear the fort, con-
taining a very strong and capacious
fortress, a large arid populous city
of the same namie, a dock-yard, and
marine arsenal. It has,a very spa-
‘@ous and safe harbour; was ceded
to the English, by the Portuguese,
in 1062 ; and was. chartered to the
East India Company, who retained
the possession, in1668. Toleration
is granted to persons of every re
ligious profession. The population
has been'¢stimated at 220,000; but
@ late census gives 161,550, of the
following classes':—British, 4,300 5
native Christians, i.e. Portuguese,
ars and esa 1900 3

1 9


BOM
Jews, 800; Mahoniedans, 28,000;
Parsees, 13,150; Hindogs, 103,800.
‘The Jews, Mahomedans, Catho-
lics, Hindoos, and. Parsees, are
‘strongly addicted to their several
superstitions. . The Armenian
Christians have little of religion


Hut the name; and very few of the | .


English settlers manifest the power
of it. The Hindoos generally
speak the Mahratta; the Parsees
the’ Guzarattee. The climate is
unhealthy, and the water brackish.
Bombay has an extensive com-
merce with the neighbouring con-
tinent and the fertile island of
Salsette. j

. BOMBAY is a city at the S. E.
end of the above island, and one
of the three presidencies of the
English East India Company, by
which their oriental territories are
governed. It has a strong and ca-
pacious fort, a dock-yard, and ma-
rine arsenal, Here the finest mer-


chant ships are built, and all of
teak, supplied chiefly from Bassein.


‘The inhabitants are of several na-
tions, and very numerous. This
city commands the entire trade of
the .N. W. coast of India, and that
of the gulf of Persia. It is 156
m.S. of Surat. E. long. 72° 55’,
N. lat. 18° 58’.

On the western side of this is-
land, about 3 miles from the city
of Bombay, is the celebrated temple
of. Maha Luxumee, or the great
Goddess of Wealth, to which anan-
nual pilgrimage is made, principally
by the idolaters of the island. In
1815, it was judged that 100,000
people were assembled on this oc-
casion, who went individually into
the temple—got a glaace at the
idol—made a prayer about half a
minute in length -presented a tri-
fling offering—and then retired.

This is the seat of the British

residency, and capital of the
ritish possessions on the-W. coast
of Hindoostan,.as Madras is ‘of the
Coromandel coast, and Calcutta of


7


BOM :
Bengal. E. long. 72° 38’, 'N. lat.
18° 58’, 4 ’ oi ,

The Rev. Gordon Hall, misstonary,
andMr.James Garrett, printer,from
the American Board of Commis-
sioners for Foreign’ Missions, com-
menced their labours here in 1813.

This was the first station esta-
blished by the Board.. The first
missionaries, Rev. Messrs. Newell,
Hall, Nott, Judson, and Rice,
sailed Feb. 1812; and, after va-
rious wanderings and disappoint-
ments, Messrs, Hall and Nott ar-
rived at Bombay in about a year,
and were joined by Mr. Newell
the year following; before which
time, Mrs. Newell died at the Isle
of France. Mr. Judson and his
wife, and Mr. Rice, became Bap-
tists in Bengal, and left the con-
nexion; and Mr. and Mrs. Nott
returned to’ America, on account
of his health, in 1815. About this
time Messrs. Hall and Newell,
the only missionaries at this sta-
tion, began to instruct the natives
in the principles of Christianity,
and to translate the Scriptures and
tracts into the Mahratta language ;
they also established a . promis-
ing school for European and :half-
caste children ; and, from the first,

reached to such as understood

nglish. Rev. Horatio Bardwell
and his wife arrived Nov, 1, 1816:
about the same time, a printing-
press was procured from Calcutta,
which he was competent to ma-
nage; and another valuable addi-
tion was made to the mission, by
the marriage of Mr. Hall to an
English lady, who had acquired a
knowledge of the Hindoostanee,
one of the principal languages
spoken at Bombay.

In Feb. 1818, Rev. Messrs. Alien
Graves and John Nichole, with
their ‘wives, and Miss PAslomela
Thurston, joined this mission; and,
in March following, Miss Ty was
married to Mr. Newell. In, Jan.
1821, Mr. and Mrs, — left


NN; let.


SONATY
ter, from
Commis-
ns, COM-
in 1813.
ion esta-
The first
‘ Newell,
nd Rice,
after va-
isappoint-
Nott ar-
it a year,
r, Newell
ore which
it the Isle
n and his
ame Bap-
| the con-
Mrs. Nott
m account
About this
d Newell,
at this sta-
the natives
hristianity,


1, In, Jan.
ardwell left
90


BOM


the station, and embarked for Ameé-
rica, on account of his ill health ;
and Mr. Newell died May 30th of
the same year. A few. weeks pre-
vious: to: this, Mr. Garrett arrived,
who has married the widow of Mr.
Newell. In 1822,: Mrs. Graves
embarked for America for the reco-
very of her health, and. sailed for
‘Bombay, with Rev. Edmund Frost
and his wife,.in Sept. 1829. Not-
withstanding the numerous changes
and bereavements of this mission,
much ‘has. been done. to irradiate
this land.of gross pagan. darkness
with» the: light of .the Gospel.
Three important stations have been
formed beside this one. at Mahin,
on the same: island, and one at
Tannah, on the island of Salsette,
‘,, Bombay is the seat of the mis-
‘sion; the 3 companies form but
one church and one missionary
association, subject to the same
rules. The missionaries have
translated and printed most of the
New Testament and portions of
the Old into the Mahratta, which
is spoken by $2,000,000 of pagan
idolaters in Bombay and the ad-
joining country, amounting | to
30,000 books and tracts ; nearly all
of which have been circulated
among the natives, and read, pro-
bably,, by several hundred thou-
sands. At each of the stations,
and on the continent, they super-
intend several schools, which had
increased to 25 in 1818, containing
1200 heathen pupils, who received
Christian instruction ; but, for want
of funds, the schools were reduced,
in 1823, to 18, and the pupils to
about 900, many of whom make a
gratifying proficiency in literary
and Christian knowledge. Several
children are supported in each fa-
mily, and some whose expenses are
defrayed by their parents. A Jew-
ish school promises much good, in
preparing teachers for the other
schools, .The Female -Jew’s Soe
ciety of Boston has contributed


"BOM
liberally for its support. Benevo-
lent persons in Charlestown, South
Carolina, and. Sayannah and Au-
gusta, Georgia,. have engaged to
support 3. free schools in or near
Bombay, to be named. after. those
places respectively. Accordingly
the missionaries have called the
first school established at Bombay,
Charlestown; one atTannah,Savan-
nah; and one at Mahin, Augusta.
The annual expense of a school of
50 scholars, is estimated at about
150 dollars. ; ina

The missionaries mingle , with
the natives, to communicate Chris-
tian instruction and preach to
such congregations as they. oan
collect, which are very _ irre-
gular; but they are much en-
couraged by the hope that the
time of favour to this people is not
far distant. At this place they
have bought a valuable piece of

ground, on which they have built a
stone chapel, 60 feet by 35, which
was opened on the 30th May, 1823,
in the Mahratta. This is the first
house of public worship erected by
protestant Christians to. accommo-
date the natives in the vast region,
extending N. from Cape Comorin
to the Russian empire, and W. from
the interior of India to the Medi-
terranean. A mission college is
contemplated.

Besides the schools at the sta
tions, Bombay, Mahin, and Tannah,
the missionaries have established
one at each of the following places :

Allabug, Basseen, Chundnee, Choud,
Cullian, Kaup, Nagotnea, Pane,
Panwell, and Rawadunda. _.

The Bombay Education Society
was formed in 1815, to rescue the
half-caste children of soldiers, and
other Europeans, from profligacy
and heathenism, in Bombay and
the one country. The num-
ber scholars reported is more
than 1000, who make very satisfac-


; progress,
hhe Society for the ne


‘BOM
of Christian Knowledge commence-
ed operations here in 1816, and has |
procured to be printed, at the press
of the American missionaries, vast
numbers of books and tracts, which
have been furnished gratuitously
to the schools of the Education So-
ctety, and otherwise advantageously
distributed.

In 1816, a mission was begun by
the W. S., but ill-health compelled
its agents to retire. Since that
period, the work. appears not to
have been revived.

The Rev. Richard Kenney was
appointed to Bombay by the C. M.
S.in 1820. About 2 years after,
he had 150 boys under religious
instruction in ‘the native schools.
Upwards of 20 attended at’ his
house, to learn Mahratta and
English, and thus afforded him’ an
‘opportunity of conveying to them
a knowledge of the saving truths
of the Gospel.. About this time
one of these youths, in a letter to
Mrs. K., which was entirely his
own uncorrected composition, thus
wrote :—‘ Wo have visited the two
Mahratta schools Saturday even-
ing, and heard some of the children
read Gospel and say the ‘Ten Com-
mandments perfectly. well, We
put them some questions, naniely,
Who God is? &c. They’ seemed
quite ignorant ‘of Him and His
will, They answered: ‘ Sun, moon,
sea, cow, and the trees, &c., are
the objects of their worship.’ We,
being sorry for them, taught them
that there is but one God} the
Maker of heaven and earth: he
ought to be worshipped, I oun?
my time very well in attending,
every Sunday, except few, with my
companions, divine service, where
we hear Mr. Kenney prenchings
which I understand perfectly well,
and find gladness in it.’

Mr. Kenney has been recently
compelled, by domestic indisposi-
tion, to return to this country:
the Rev. Messrs. Mitchell und


BOO
Steward, with Mrs. Mitchell: and
Mrs. Steward, have, therefore,
been appointed to succeed him,
In . Sept. 1826, a native’ female
school: was opened, at: which
about 20 girls attended; and early
in October a second school was
opened, in which there are ‘about
15 girls. These institutions, how-
ever, soon experienced a heavy loss
in the removal, by death, of Mrs.
Steward. On Sundays, the mis-
sionaries employ some part of the
day in giving instruction to some
native youths, This is conducted
in English ; and it is gratifying to
find that several of those who were
formerly instructed by Mr. Kenney,
are tolerably regular in attending
on these occasions. Itis hoped the
readiness to receive instruction of
a decidedly religious nature, which
appears, will one day be followed
by beneficial results. The mis-
sionaries urge the erection of a
mission chapel. An auxiliary J. :S,
has been established, the contribu-
tions to which, during the last year,
have considerably increased.

The Londth Jews’ Society has.a
school here, which is conferring.
many benefits: on the descendants
of the house of Israel.

BOOTAN, a province of northern
Hindoostan, 200m. long: and 90
broad ; bounded on the N..by Thibet,
E. by Assam, 8S. by the same and
Bengal, and W. by Sikkim. It
abounds in mountains covered with
verdure, and rich with abundant
forest trees: there is scarcely a
mountain whose base is not washed
by some toyrent; and many of the
loftiest bear on their sides populous
villages, amid orchards and planta-
tions, The Booteas are much
fairer and more robust than their
neighbours the Bengalese 3 with
broader faces and higher cheek
bones; their hair invariably black,
and cut short; theireyes smaltend
black, with long pointed corners;
and their skins ne 7


a white sj


The mis-
tion of &
jiary M.S.
» contribu:
» last year,
sed


ciety has‘a
conferring.
escendants


of northern
ng and 90
by Thibet,
same and
ikkim. It
bvered with
h abundant
scarcely @
not wash
any of the
»6 populous
and planta-
are much
than their
lese 3 with
pr cheek
iably black,
os smaltaand
d corners}
bly smooth.
92


BOO —
The houses are built on posts, and
ascended by a ladder: the lower
part, closed on all sides, serves for
holding stores, and accommodating
hogs, cows, and other animals. The
capital is Tassisudon.

In March, 1797, Messrs. Thomas
and Carey, of the B. M. S., set out
on. an expedition to the Bootan
country ; anu, in about 4 days, ar-
rived at that part of it which is be-
low the hills. They then went. to
a place called Gopalgunge, and
waited on a Bootea officer, called
the jinkyf, who received them very
kindly, and appeared much pleased
with the different articles which
they had brought forhis acceptance.
They found that it would be ne-,
cessary to see. some other officer,
and to get a regular permission to
ascend the hills... During the
greatest part of the day, however,
they remained in the jinkof’s house,
which consisted of two stories, and
was constructed of bumboos and
mats, with pillars of what is called
saul-tree. He offered them some
bacon and tea, called runga, but of
this they could not partake.

From Gopalgunge the missiona-
ries went to Bote-Haut, to see the
soobah, who is.a kind of viceroy,
and the greatest officer in these
parts. <A letter having been for-
warded to him by the jinkof, he
sent two horses for them, and. the
jinkof himself accompanied them.

“ On our approaching the town,’’
says Mr, (now. Dr.) Carey, “a
number of females met us, and made
their salaam, by putting their
hands to. their, head and gently
bowing ; after which they ran be-
fore the horses, and all the inha-
bitants of the place, I should sup-
pose to the number of 2 or 3000,
joined the procession,’’

- In this manner the missionaries
went to the house of the soobah,
who received them with great po-
liteness, and presented then with
a white silk scarf, in the name of


‘\


the grand lama, a red one in hisown
name, and another:red one in the
name of a friend. _ After receiving
these presents, they ascended by a_
ladder to his house, which was
something like that of the jinkof,
but larger. and more elegant; com-
prising four rooms in :the upper
story, which were. entirely covered
with mats. At the farther. end of
the principal room was the seat of
the soobah, elevated about 2 feet
.from the floor, covered with: red
cloth, and hung round with cur-
tains of thin gauze. Here the mis-
sionaries were. seated: by the side
of the soobah, whose distinguished
‘ urbanity is said to have. exceeded
every thing which our European
visitors could have imagined, and
his generosity was equally striking.
‘‘ He insisted,” says Dr: Carey,
*¢ on supplying all our people with
every thing they wanted; and if
we did but cast our eyes on any
thing in the room, he immediately
presented us with one of the same
sort. Indeed, he seemed to inter-
pret our looks before we were
aware; and in this manner he pre«
sented each of us, that night, with
a sword, shield, and helmet; also
with a cup made of a very light
beautiful wood, used by all the
Booteas in drinking. .’ ’
‘¢ After eating, we talked about
Bootan, and respectingthe Gospel j
and the. appellation of Jama. was
given to us, which appears to mean
teacher, and which title. is em-
phatically given to the grand
laina. ne
‘* We found that the soobah had
determined to give the people a
testimony of his friendship for us
in a public manner; and the next
day the performance of the cere-
mony took place, in our tent in th
market-place, ‘.
‘¢ When the ceremony was over,
we were conducted to the goobah’s
house, where we found another
Officer, I believe, the vakeel, or
03


BOO
attorney of the: court below the
hills. . This man was just. the:re-
verse of all we.had seen. He pro-
posed to us various questions, but
our atiswers were very brief, and
did not give him satisfaction.

“ After exchanging a few angry
words with. the soobah, he:took his
leave abruptly ; and when he was
gone, thé soobah appeared trans-
ported with rage, and threatened.
him dreadfully. He tore off his
upper garment, seized a kind of
dagger, called a creve, stuck it
into: the table; beat his breast, and
threatened to go after him and
kill him. We endeavoured to.ap-
pease him, however, and were suc-
cessful.

** Our people were now much
afraid; for though the Hindoos
had: hitherto expressed the greatest
confidence in the gentleness of the
natives, they now began to propa-
gate a number of sanguinary. tales,
and nothing was talked of but the
insincerity of the Booteas. As
for ourselves, we were not quite so
timid, though we were not with-
out our cogitations, We told them,
however, to run away for their
lives, if any danger appeared. For
fear of . wild elephants, we had
taken ‘a gun.or two; but we or-
dered that no piece should be
Toaded, nor, any additional precau-
tion manifested; though we were
certain the people could not'sleep
much that night. We then com-
mended ourselves to Godiin prayer,
and tetired to rest.

-“* The next-morning, the soobah
came with his usual friendship, and
brought more presents, which we
received, and took our leave. He
then sent us away with every
honour that he could heap upon
us; asa band of music, guides to
show us the way, &c. In short,
the whole of his conduct towards
us. was; invariably as generous,
polite, and friendly, as I ever wit-
nessed. I suppose the conduct of


BOO


the vakeel arose from his:thinking
himself.a.gfeat man, end somewhat
slighted in. not: receiving any pre-
sent from us; but, .in truth, we
had: nothing to present, The
soobah proposed paying us @ visit
in a short'time.

“So great a contrast: I have:
never before seen between two
neighbouring nations, as the Hin-:
doos and. Booteas... The former
are a. small,-puny, timid. people;
the latter athletic and. fearless,
They have a written language,
and, I am informed, many books
written in. it. The names of the
letters are the same as: the Ben-
galee, with a few exceptions; and
are written in. the same order, with
only this difference,—that theBen-:
galees have five letters. in a line of:
the alphabet, but the. Booteas have.
only. four, Bootan is subject to
the dib-rajah, The dama-goroo,
as they call him, is, I think, only
considered as a representative of
God}; and they have his. image in
their houses, about the size of a
large. man’s thumb, The soobah
said, ‘ there was a greater object
of worship, who could only be seen
by the mind.’ ” -

In 1809, Messrs. Robinson and
W. Carey, jum, accompanied by
two of the native converts, Sebuk«
ram and Ghorachund, made a
second attempt at forming a set
tlement at, or near, Bote-Hart,
near the Bootan country, on the
borders of Thibet. On the 25th
of March they arrived, after @
fatiguing journey on horseback, at
Barbaree, where they passed the
Sabbath; and on, Monday evening
they arrived within 2 m. of Bote-
Havt. Here they were desirous
of prosnring an_ eligible i of
ground for the erection of a house,
but could find none. that was se-
cure from inundation in the rainy
season, On the 28th, a urge
markg being heid at Bote-Hwut,
they sent their two ba ty come


p
habitatic
two nati
ill, that
the nec
them 0
Robinso
of fatig
posure ta
seized
dangered
divine bli


former


ple 3
as 0
ry books
1s of the.
he Ben-
ons; and
der, with
t theBen-
a line of
‘teas have:
abject to
ma g07r00;
hink,. only
ntative of
image in


Bate Fant,
on the

% the 25th
bd, after &
rsebuck, at
assed the
day evening


‘re desirous


04


size of &


Me of Bote-


ible spot of
of a Bouse,
hat ‘was se-
n the rainy
a lange
Bote-Hwt,
native com-


BOO


panions thither, in quest of intel-
ence. ¢
the utmost civility, both by the
Booteas and Bengalees ; and the
katma, or chief magistrate of the
place said, that if the -missiona-
ries chose to write him a letter,
expressing their wish to visit Bote-
Haut, he would send them an.invi-
tation. This hint was of course
attended to by the brethren, who
addressed note to the katma the
following day ; and, -in the course
of a few hours, they received a
reply, in which the magistrate in-
vited them to ‘come and stay with
bim a few days, and tell: him all
their joys and sorrows.”
- On the 30th, after breakfast,
they arrived at Bote-Haut, where
they met with a. very cordial
reception from the katma, and
the next day were formally re-
ceived into his friendship, by
a peculiar ceremony; and, after
taking leave, they returned to
Barbaree, where a spot of ground
was promised for the erection of a
habitation. Here, however, the
two native converts were taken so
ill, that Mr. W. Carey was under
the necessity of returning with
them to Dinagepore: and Mr.
Robinson himself, in consequence
of fatigue, and an imprudent ex-
posure to the sun, was afterwards
seized with a fever, which en-
dangered his lifé; though, by the
divine blessing on the means pre-
scribed, he was mercifully restored
to health.

On the. 2ist of March, 1810,
Mr. Robinson returned to Bar-
baree, from which he had, for some
time, been absent, on account of
severe indisposition; and, in a
letter addressed to Mr. Marshman,
he says, ‘ Our situation here is


These were treated with |


BOO


cooler than at Serampore, in oon-'
sequence of the frequent breezes
from the N.E. The surrounding
country is not thinly peopled; on
the contrary, I suppose there may
be 2000 persons who attend our
market twice a-week, and there
are several other larger markets at
no great distance. I have now had
preaching at my house three Sab-
baths. On the first, my hearers
were few and inattentive: on the
next, I suppose there were 40 men
present, besides a number - of
women; and some heard with at-
tention, Last: Lord’s day we had
more, both males and females; so
that the house was filled, and, be-
fore 1 had done, numbers had col-
lected about the door.”?

In January, 1811, Mr. Robinson
returned to Barburee, after a visit
to Serampore (in consequence of
the death of Mrs. R.), accompanied
by Mr. and Mrs. Cornish, two
members of the Baptist church at
Calcutta. They arrived on Satur-
day, the 19th; and during the fol-
lowing Monday and Tuesday, they
were employed in arranging various
articles, and in writing to ‘the
soobuh of Chemerchee, requesting
permission to pay him a vis:t. The
letter was to have been sent off the
next morning, and they hoped, in
about a fortnight, to have obtained
an_ introduction into Bootan.
‘* But,” as Mr. Robinson justly
remarks, ‘‘ we know not what a
day may bring forth !””

On Tuesday night, about 12
o’clock, the house of the missiona-
ries was attacked by an atmed
band of 50 or 60 robbers; and the
total loss, in property of different
kinds, was supposed to amount to
2000 rupees, or about £250.

’ Dreadful and appalling, how-


leasant and healthy; we have a | ever, as was this disaster, the pro-
ne circulation of air; and, on the | vidence of God was clearly mani-


| whole, a good prospect, which is | fested on behalf of his servants,


imptoved by a view of the moun-,| who all made their escape from


tains, The weather, also, ismuch | the house, except Mr. : “tne


BOO
little apprentice girl, Jannetta,
who' concealed herself in the stoye-
room. ii
: In addition to, the loss of his
property, Mr, Robinson’ had, on
this melancholy occasion, received
no‘fewer than four wounds; one on
his right;knee, one on his left arm,
one on the abdomen, and another
on the breast; and had. not the
spear struck against the bone, the
last of these would probably have
proved mortal... The wound in Mr.
Cornish’s. side might, also, have
been fatal, had it not besn for a
similar circumstance. In this dis-
tressed state, and with scarcely
sufficient clothes to cover them,
they set out on Wednesday morn-
ing for Dinagepore ; and arrived
there at the end of three days, after
experiencing many difficulties. At
this place they were received in
the most affectionate manner by
Mr. and Mrs. Fernandez, and other
friends, who supplied their wants
with the utmost promptitude, and
exerted themselves unremittingly
to sooth their distresses. Though
the robbers for some time eluded
the arm of justice, they were at
length taken and brought to pu-
nishment. Three of them were
hanged ; several were condemned
to perpetual imprisonment, and 39
lashes with: the kora; the others
were imprisoned for a stipulated
time, and scourged in the same
manner; and all of them were
condemned to hard labour.
BORABORA, one of the So-
ciety islands ; itlies about 4 leagues
N.W.ofTaha. W.long. 151° 52’,
N, lat, 16° 32’. Ithas one harbour
for shipping. Inits centre is a very
lofty double-peaked mountain ¢ its
eastern side appears almost wholly
Darren, but, the western part is
more fertile; and a low border
around the whole island, together
with the islets in its reef, are pro-
ductive and populous. The inha-
bitants were formerly noted for


BOR
more daring ferocity. than any of
the neighbouring islanders, all of
whom, at one time, they subjugated,
This island renounced idolatry with
the rest of the Society islands, in


| the year 1816, and many of the na-


tives were long very desirous that
a missionary should settle among
them. ‘To meet their wishes, the
ReV. Mr. Osmond, from the J. ©M,
S., left Raiatea on the 13th of Nov,
1820. The natives received him
with much ccrdiality, and soon
after commenced the building of a
place of worship, and also of better
habitations. The chapel was opened
in Jan, 1822. ‘* The spot selected
for this settlement,” say the depu-
tation, ‘‘ is unequalled by any other
on the island. It is on the western


side of the great central mountain,


extending along its buse, and is


upwatds of 13 furlongs in length,


parallel with the winding shore. In
front is a fine harbour, in which
several hundred ships might lie at
anchor with perfect safety, in all
weathers. On the west side of this
beautiful bay is the long island
Tobura, and two small coral islets ;
where is an opening through the
reef, with the island of Maupiti in
full view, at the distance of 35 or
40 m. A more beautiful and
suitable situation cannot be ima:
gined; while a rich border of low
land, and some valleys near, afford
sufficient garden-ground to. the
people for growing the food com-
mon to the country.

A Christian church was formed
here in 1820. In 1824, it had 36
members, of whom 6 were deacons,
The number baptized was, of
adults 643, of children 440, Na-
tive schools for adults and children
were well attended. In the school
for the latter were 149 boys and
139 girls, of whom about 70 could
read the Taheitan New Testa-
ment with fluency. An Adulé and
Juvenile M. S. bad been. formed.
, The contributions ' of —


n 440.
and children
in the school
49 boys and
out 70 could
New Testa
An Adult and
heen. formed.
the ' formet
06


BOR


amounted to: 2017 bamboos of
cocoa-nut oil, and those of the
latter to 39].' Excellent roads had
been made, and a noble stone pier
erected, which was. carried out
nearly 365 feet into the sea. The
village consisted of a street ex-
tending nearly 2 m. in front of the
bay, composed of well-built houses.
‘A code of laws, which had under-
gone a very careful revision, had
been promulgated by the authority
of the king and chiefs, and with the
consent of the ‘people. Although
the mission was at this period in its
infancy, it had had the honour of
sending forth three native teachers
with their wives to Rimatura, two
with their wives to Maupiti, two
married and one single to the
Friendly Islands, three to Navi-
gators Islands, and two with their
wives to Harvey Islands.

The Rev. Mr. Platt removed to
Borabora in 1824, to fill the place
of Mr, Orsmond, on his taking the
charge of the academy at Eimeo.

The number baptized during
1826, was.5 adults and 21 children.
Total baptized, since the com-
mencement of the mission in 1820,
of adults; 618, of children, 589;
members added to the church 48.
6, during 1826, had died in the
faith: $ had been excluded from
communion ; of whom one, on re-
pentance; had been re-admitted :
4 had incurred censure; of whom 3,
on repentance, had been restored.
Total number received into church-
fellowship since Nov. 1821, 240.

Many of the young people at
this station have, of late, unhap-
pily, manifested a very untractable
disposition, and occasioned no
small trouble to the missionary.

An increased quantity of land
has been brought under cultiva-
tion. The people display their
ingenuity and industry in the ma-
nufacture of a considerable number
of chairs and tables, and‘ other use-
ful articles ; such as a press-mill for


.4


BRA
the’ sugar-cane, a turnery lathe,
&e. &e.: 4 ‘ :
Tefaaro, one of the two. kings,
or principal chiefs, of this: island,
died during 1826, while on a visit.
at Tahiti. AS
BOSJESVELD, sometimes
called Kramer’s District, in the
district of Tulbagh, about 40 m.
from Cape Town, Seg cod, er
‘In 1817, the Rev. Cornelius
Kramer, of the Z. M. S., was em-
ployed in preaching to. the slaves,
Hottentots, and colonists, who
greatly needed his assistance. Mr,
K., who is the only survivor’ of
the first missionaries sent out to
Africa in 1799, of whioh number
was the late Dr. Vanderkemp,
continues to labour to the present
time with the same diligence and
devotedness as have always charace
terized him. ay as
BRAINERD, formerly Chicka-
maugah, in. Chickamaugah dis-
trict, a Cherokee nation, about 30
m. from the N.W.. corner of
Georgie, in an easterly. direction,
2 m. within the chartered limits of
Tennessee, on the western, side of
Chickamaugah creek, which is
navigahle to.Brainerd, being 15 m,
ftom its confluence with the Ten-
nessee. It.is.nearly equi-distant
from the eastern and western ex-
tremities.of the Cherokee country,
and perhaps 25 or 30 m. from the
northern.limit, which is the mouth
of the Hiwassee. It lies 250 m.
N.W. of Augusta, Georgia, 150
S. E. of Nashville, 110 S,W. of
Knoxville, Tennessee, about 2 m.
N.E. of the road from Augusta
to Nashville... W.. long. 86°, N,
lat, 35°.. “
The. fuce of the country is un-


even ; but. there are few mountains.


Lookout is about 6 m. westerly

from Brainerd, and is supposed to

be at least 2500 feet high. The

woods are generally open; but on

the bottom-land, near the rivers,

the timber is thick and heavy,
K 07


BRA


and the ‘herbage luxuriant. The
climate is temperate. Though the
days of'summer are: hot, the nights
are very cold. The seasons 4@have
& much.greater. resemblance to
those of the central parts of New
England, than to those of Savan-
nah or Charlestown. Snows some-
times: lie.upon the: ground a week
or more, and the surface of: the
» earth is occasionally frozen hard;
yet, during the winter, cattle are
seldom foddered,):and are, not un-


In addition to these. natural

vantages. of the. place,'there is, at
the landing, what is called a fish-
trap, formed by a partial dam. : It
was rebuilt.in 1817, and is of great
benefit'to the establishment. The
fish are caught as they pass down


have been taken out at a time;
the largest. weighing 30 pounds,
and aiconsiderable. proportion from
6 to 10 pounds eacb most of
which are of.4n excellcat quality.
The property of the mission was
summarily estimated, .as follows,
ela ' Dollars,
Improvements of land ...... 1300
Agricultural implements..... 550
Live stock... efeeweeeensveeeeee 2730
Saw-mill and grist-mill .... 4000
School-house for girls. ..... 1000
Other buildings .......... 1265
Mechanical tools.......... 420
Iron, steel, lumber, &c..... | 485
Household: furniture, loom,

J owheels, &e. eweeeeewonces 2500
Library and globes ........'-1000
Medicines, ‘surgical instru- .
 Me@nts, AC. ..ccccecedee 300
Provisions on hand ........ 1840


Total ......°17,390


« The: mission ises are' in the
midst of a. wilderness, and were
purchased for 600 dollars of. a
white man, who had cleared: a few


frequently, very fat in .the spring.


the stream in the night, and 150


iis used. as the plac
, the Sabbath. Most of the buildings
, are constructed of logs; having the
, interstices: filed with mortar, . and
| make but a plain appéarance:; |

! Phe ground on the: S.E. side of
| thediane is: divided into..a gar‘en,
acres, and erected 3: or 4 log  an‘orchard, and several — lots,


BRA


cabins. There are now between
30 and 40 buildings of various
descriptions, mostly of logs, ona
gentle eminence. principally on a
line from. N.E.. to'S.W. .As you
enter from the N.E. you pass the
creek: where are the saw-mill and


gtist-mill ; thence you enter.a lane,


which: extends across the clearing
80. or. 90. rods, on either side of
which ere the. principal -buildings
Nearly in the centre. of. the: row
is the: mission-house, . twa : stories
high, having a piawa its whole
length; with: a pleasant court-yard
in ‘front.' - Behind: it, and imme-
diately connected with it, are the
dining-hall and kitchen for the es-
tablishment. ref ics

. A few feet to the S.W; is a two.
story framed building forthe. fe-
male ‘school, well -finished,» and
built by the direction: of the Pre.
sident:.of the United States, who
called here’ in 1819; and: was
pleased to: express, his: approbation
of the plan.of instruction, and of the
deportment and improvement. of
the pupils. Before his: departure,
he gave the missiondries a letter
directed to ‘the United States
agent,,.. and. observed, ‘¢ I: ‘have
written to him: to pay the balance
of your account, for ‘what you have
expended in these. buildings, : and
also to repay ‘the expense of the
house ; "you ‘are about. to: : build,
Make a good house, having-due re-
gard to economy.?’. Besides this, the


American government furnished va-
‘rious implements of husbandry and |


domestic manufacture. At theS.W.
extremity ofthe lane is the school-
house for the: boys} large enough
taaccommoadate 100schalars,-which
eof worship on


wing:due re-
ides this, the


Bs P
the buildings
s; having the
mortar, . and
arance: : 77°
.§.E. side 0
to..a gare,
other lots,
98


BRA‘
whicls eré :neatly fenced, and pre-
sent.a pleasant prospect ‘in front
of the imission-house: ..Near the
school-house for: boys is.the grave-
yard, where lie the remains of the
Rev.:Dr. Worcester, late Cor. Sec’:
of. the Board; who died oa a visit to
this:station, June:7th, 182).

The. American; Board. of Com-
misstons for Foreign: Missions. sent
the following persons herein 1817:
Rev. 4rd Hoyt; and Messrs: Biizur
Butler, physician; Sylvester Ellis,
schoolmaster » John. Vail,. Henry
Parker; Frederick Elsworth, far-
mers; Erastus Dean and Ainsworth
E..Blunt, mechanics; all married.
In Nov: 1828, the following per-
sons arrived ‘on their way. to dif-
ferent. stations, assigned~or.to be
assigned ; —- Rew.: Samuel Mosley,
licensed peer and missionary ;
Messrs: David Wright and. David
Gage, schoolmusters ;. all married:
Messrs. Wm... Holland. and Josiah


Hemmi » farmers, with the
wife of Mr. Holland Mr. Ebenezer
eral or. W panther with

isses Hlecta. May, Sophia Sawyer
and Philena Thatcher... About the
middle of: Jan, 1824,;Mr. and Mrs;
Gage were instructing: the: schools
on account. of the sickness of Mr.
Ellis. . At- this, time. there: were
about 20 labourers, some of whom
were expecting, to...open new
schools... Many others .bhave la-
boured here,. who have removed to
other. stations, or, from various
causes, have left:the field.

The Rev. Cyrus: Kingsbury: vi-
sited the Cherokees with a view to
a mission among them, in Sept.
18165 and, im the early part of
October, presented the subject to a

eneral council; of the chiefs of the

herokees and Creeks,, who were
desirous that his plans for the in-
struction of their: children might
speedily: be put into operation, and


appointed one of. their number to
go:with him and to select a suitable |


place for an establishment... In


BRA’


| pursuance,:of: his :instructions, . he:
ithen communicated the..désigns of
‘the Board tothe heads of depurt-
{ ments at’ Washington, and solicited
| their patronage... Itis worthy of re-


cord, that they fayoured the design,


: which has; been already noticed :in


this article... After making suitable


’ preparation, Mr. K: commenced his


labours, Jan. 1817, and was joined
by Messrs. Moody Hall and Luring
S.. Williams, with their wives, in:
March. A school was soon operieds
and in June following they had ad-
mitted 26 pupils, mostly to be pro-:


vided for in their families. ‘Within


about a year the number. had in-:
creased {to 46, and the: year:fol-> .
lowing to 83, which may be near
the average number since, In
Jan. 1824, the: number was con-
siderably. reduced, in consequence,
of # prevailing sicknéss in the fa-
mily.:' The pupils, generally, liave
matle very satisfactory progress in
English studies, and rapid improve-
ment in domestic ‘industry, being
required to labour when out of
school.. Several have become pious,
and are rendering importait aid in
this benevolent enterprize. From
April 1820, the American govern-
ment made an allowance of 250dol:
Jars a quarter for the school. In
1822, the quarterly sum was raised
to, 300 dollars. A church was orge-,
nized: in Sept. 1817,. consisting
only of the mission family..' In
less than a year, 9. were. added;
some of whom resided in the vici+
nity, and had been accustomed ta
attend worship, on the Sabbath, a
this place. Among these were 5
natives, one of whom was Catha«
rine Brown,—a name dear to every.
friend of Indian missions. She
was the first fruit: of missionary
labour in this heathen land. Early
in 1823, 26 had been admitted into
the church, exclusive of missiona-
ries and assistants. ‘“iany of these
have been transformed from an
idle, dissolute, and mene life,
9


BRE :


* into laborious, prudent, and exem-
it Mi ite and even ornaments
to their Christian profession. This
isthe first attempt of the Board to
introduce the arts of civilized life,
and, at the same time, to plant the
Gospel among the wandering tribes
of the west; and the. successful
experiment excites a cheering hope
that ‘this growing plant will soon
become a great tree— fill the land,
and bless ‘the nations with its
fruit.
This is the principal seat of the
mission among the Cherokees, and
was called Brainerd, in affectionate
remembrance of the devoted ‘mis-
sionary, who, about 80 years ago,
‘anticipated the spirit of the present
day, and laboured alone, but suc-
cessfully, for the salvation of. the
‘Aborigines of this country.’
- BRESLAUDU, a beautiful city,
capital of the duchy of Silesia. It
is seated on the conflux of 'the
Ola with the Oder, ‘and is.one :of
the ‘most beautiful cities in Ger-
many, about 2 German m. in
length. E. long. 17° 8, N. lat.
61° 3’. It is the centre of the trade
in Silesia, and its manufactures are
considerable and various. Here
are 26 Catholic and 8 Lutheran
ehurches, and a Catholic univer-
sity, with 14 professors and 400
students. One considerable part of
this city is inhabited almost exclu-
sively by Jews. It is thought that
more than half of them are con-
vinced .of their errors, and are, tn
@ good measure, prepared to.em-
hrace Christianity. A society has
recently been formed here for pro-
moting Christianity among the
Jews, and receives liberal support
from men of influence and wealth.
Three of the members, the Rev.
Mr. Edward, Professor Fischer, and
Dr. Lichtenstult, are converted
Israelites, who now stand forth as
‘advocates for the Gospel among
their brethren after the flesh.
An efficient auxiliary B, S. has


BRU:
been formed here, which had, in
1820, distributed . about _ 16,000
Bibles and Testaments, _ Popula-
tion, including the military, 76,813,
‘ BROACH. The Education. S.
at Bombay has opened a native
school here, under the superin-
tendence of the chaplain at Surat...

BROTHERTOWN, a village of
Oneida Indians, in . Paris,..New
York, containing about 400 ‘souls,


‘whe subsist principally by agricul-


ture.

The Rev. Samson Occom, a Mo-
hegan Indian, the first native edu.
cated at Moor’s Indian . charity
school, left his charge on Long
Island, and came to this place in
1761, where he was kindly rec eived,
and: laboured about .6 yexrs- with


considerable usefulness. He then |
went to England ‘to :make .collec- ©


tions for the school, in which he
was very successful, .In 1788, he
returned to America, .and, removed
with the Indians under his, care
from Connecticut to .this place,
where he continued until his death,
which happe:\¢'1.a few years after.
At that time, the Indians here were
all Christians, in distinction from pa-
gans; and many. adorned their pro-
fession. Since then, their spiritual
interests have not :been entirely
neglected. * ‘
RUSSELS, a.city of the Ne-
therlands, capital of Brabant, and
of the other 9 provinces, which
were formerly denominated the
Austrian Low Countries. It is 7m,
in circuit, contains 80,000. inhabit-
ants, and has many magnificent
squares, public sais walks,
and fountains. It was, bombarded
by Marshal Villeroy, in 1695, by
which 14 churches and 4000 houses
were destroyed. It has been, seve,
ral.times taken since; the last time
by. the French, in 1794. It isseated
partly on an eminence, and partly
on the R. Senne, 23m. S. Antwerp,
and 155 N. by E. Paris, E,, long,
4° 22’, N. lat, 60°. 51’, , 100 * ‘


their. ph
prepare
ment of
structio

returne:
purposes
these inh


mi gation atte
i structions
able and
received od


received,
ars. with
He then |
e .collec- ©
which he
1788, he
|. removed
his, care
is place,
his death,
pars. after.
here were
n from pa-
their. pra-
y spiritual
entirely


f the Ne-
bant, and
es, which
\ ated the
Itis 7m.
0. inhabit-
agnificent
3, walks,
bombarded
1695, by
DOO houses
peen, sever
le last time
It is seated
and arily
Antwerp,
E. long,


100


+


“At the — of someé English
residétits in’ pers nat Midherairts
in: 3615. ; ‘Mr. Ho
pies rs mission; !and: found


30° much encouragement, ‘as in-:


duced'the appointment of @ second,
Mr: De Kerpezdron; who could
preach in French, English, and
German; with directions to visit
Antwerp.’ A large
builtat Brussels, and considerable
success has followed their labours,

‘i BUDDALORE, or BUDA-
LOOR, ‘a considerable village in
the Carnatic Hindoostan, 12° m.
W. Tanjore, inhabited by Collaries,
@ set-of people infamous for theft
and ‘robbery, as their name denotes.
In 1777; they were all heathens, ~
Phe‘Rev. Mr. Swartz, and other
Danish ‘missionaries, occasionally
laboureil here, and persuaded many
to cultivate their fields, and abandon
their plundering expeditions, which
prepared:the way for the establish-
ment of schoois and religious in-:
struction. In‘one ‘day, 7000 men
returned: to’ their ‘villages ‘for the
purposes'of agriculture ; the rest of
these inhabitants'soon followed their
example, and gave the following
assurance to Mr. Swartz :—‘ As’
yow have shewed: kindness to; us,
you shall not have’ reason to repent
of it; ‘we intend to work nighv ‘and
day to shew our regard for you.”
To this resolution ‘they seemed to
adbere ; and, about the close of the
last. century, in. this country,
through which:a traveller could not
safely pass, no robberies were com-
mitted, and’ many had .embraced
Christianity. In 1800, the Chris-
tiin: Knowledge. Society had, for
some time, exerted ‘a happy in-
fluence at this place, by'their mis-
sionaries, and ‘the establishment of
schools, A house for prayer was
erected, in which a large’ congrt-
gation attended on’ the stated in-
structions of Daw-asagayam, an
able and faithful catechist; who
received occasional assistance from


is city; the W. M. Sv


chapel has been’


BUE:

thé missionaries: at’: Tranquebars
Daring this year, ‘the following in-
crease of ‘the sag kia ab is nos:
ticed;* 46. ‘children: bajitized, | 04:
heathens properly . instructed * and:
baptized, ‘and: 17 converts from the’
Romish‘communion. Four schools:
were regularly maintained. =~

These efforts have’ since been.
suecessfully continued. ' 4

BUENOS AYRES, so called on’
account of the:peculiar salubrity of
its climate ; a country of S. Ame-:
rica: bounded N. by Peru; E. by:
Brazil and the Atlantic;’ S. by:


Patagonia; N. W. by the ‘Andes,’


which separate it from Chili.’ It
extends from 14° to 38° 30’ S. Yat.
about 1700 m. It.is rich in mines’
of gold, silver, and other valuable:
metals, ‘Those of Potosi are the
richest, and have yielded between:
4 and 5,000,000 of dollars an-:
nually. wary
In 1817, the official estimates of
the population were 1,300,000, ex-
clusive of Indians, of: whom it is!
supposed ‘more ‘than 700,000’ are:
civilized, :
Numerous wandering’ ‘tribes oc:
cupy the N. part of this country... °
uenos Ayres was formerly #
Spanish ‘colony, but ‘independence
was declared July 9, 1816. . Thees-
tablished religion is‘Roman ‘Catho~
lic; yet there are many advocates
for. universal toleration, ‘and it is
thought the time ‘is not far distant
when Protestants will be permitted
to introduce their own forms of
worship, notwithstanding thestrong:
prejudices of the Catholics, and the
violent opposition of the priests.
Buenos: Ayres, the capital of the
above province.’ This city was


‘founded by Mendoza, in 1535, but


was afterwards abandoned; and in
1644, another colony of' the Spa-
niards came here, who left it also;
but it was rebuilt in 1582, and inha«
bited by Spaniards and the native
Americans. It is well fortified ; the
streets are straight and paved; and
Kk 2 01


BUE’


the houses built: of brick ‘or chatk,
generally of two stories; with atiled
roof, ./It, has: about, 50,000 inha+
bitants. Buenos , Ayres . surren-
dered ‘to the English in 1806, but
they were obliged to abandon itsoon
after. In 1807, the English made
an unsuccessful atiack on this. city.
In 1810, a. revolution took place,
the viceroy was deposed, and a pro-
visional. government: established,
which - still remains. ‘The city
stands on, a peninsula; on the S.
side.of the Plata,.220 m. fram: the
ocean, though. the river is here 2]
m, in breadth.. .W..long. 58° 3)’,
S. lat. 34° 36’,

» Mr. Janes Thompson, agent to
the B..& F. S.. S.. arrived here
from. Edinburgh, October, 1818 ;
when he presented a memorial. to
‘the government on the subject of
education; at. length obtained its
sanction ; and was appointed, Sept.
1819, superintendent of schools,
which. he.;was. authorized to esta-
blish, with a salary from govern-
ment. He remained about a year,
in which time he collected up-
wards of 400 boys-and:100 girls in
the’ central. schools. Having put
these schools into successful ope-
ration, he proceeded to Chili, where
he -was also successful ; thence to
Peru; and intended to visit-all.the
states of S. America, with a view
to promote the means of education
on the British system.

Messrs. John C. Brigham. and
Theophilus: Parvin, from the 4me-
vican Board of Commissioners for
Foreign Missions, embarked from
Boston, July 25, 1823, and landed
at this city onthe 24th of October
following, where they found a wide
sphere for usefulness. Here they
were instructed to. reside several
months; then cross the continent
to Chili; pass along the: coast,
through Peru, to the isthmus of
Darien ; visit Mexico; and advance
to the N. as far as Santa Fe. Their
inquiries were to. relate to every


BUL'


stibject which: might have a :bear.
ing on. the .moral: and. religious;
state of the people ;. how far.)the.
principlesof religious toleretian are,
likelyto prevail ; and. what.are:the
most eligible. places: for making.
evangelical, exertions . of a) per-
manent character. ryt

Since then, this province has.taken
the lead in. education as well as
other ‘things. The» sum: appro«
priated to the purposes of educa-
tion, for 1825,..was. upwards. of
125,00€ dollars, being about 40,000
more than in 1824, The: echools:
are 1055; and. contain about .5000
children, of whom twoethirds: are:
hoys: of these schools, 30, at least,
are free schools, and ure taught on;
the British: system, the. expense
being defrayed by the. government;
the others are private schools:..On.
female education, to-which the gos:
vernment pays especial attention;:
an American gentleman, who long.
resided in the province, says—‘' A
society. of. females.of the first: re.
spectability, denominated ‘ The
Society of Beneficence,’ was lately
established by ‘public « authority;
and to it is committed the superin-
tendence and: direction of all the
public schools for females, the house
of orphans, and other public insti-
tutions intended for the benefit: of
young children and: of the female
sex. According to the latest state.’
ments, this: society had. under: its:
care 6 public: schools, containing


between 5and 600 femalechildren.” .


The university had, .according to
the last printed statement, 419
students,
BULLOM( country, W.. Africa,
N. Sierra Leone colony.
- The. Bulloms ere a! numerous
people, extremely degraded and su-
perstitious, and very much addicted
tor witchcraft. » Among. them: the
tyranny and: cruelty. of::'satanical
delusions are most _affectingly dis
played.
In. every. town.are. ast houses


BUL


“pear to guard ‘the’ place ; . and almost
ligious. ' every Bullom-house- has some re-
far) the. presentation of Satan. Before the
ian are: devil’s houses, which are small
are the thatched huts, 3 or 4 feet high, the’
making. blood of animals is sprinkled, 8 li-:
8) pets bation of palm wine poured out,
mvt and. an offering of fruit and rice

as taken occasionally made. The Bulloms
well as believe-in a state of existence after
appro- death, and. erect huts over the

} educa- graves of the:dead, in which they
vards. 0 place a jug or two to supply the
it 40,000 spirits:of the deceased with what
,,achools: they want when they come out, as
put 5000 they suppose they do, at different

are: times.) :

avast, In 1818, the: Rev. Mr. Nylander,
aughton having resigned his . situation as
expense chaplain at Sierra Leone, for the
ernment} purpose of commencing a mission-
ools.. On ary station among the Bulloms,
th the gor: B-ohad fixed his residence at a place
attention; *~galled Yongroo Pomoh, which is
who long: described, by the Rev. C. Bicker-
saye— A steth, as “ pleasantly situated at
a first: re+ the mouth of the Sierra Leone R.,
ed * The nearly opposite to Free Town, and
was lately about 7 miles from it.’?» Here he
authority; pee aschool; and by the suavity
e superin- his manners, and the consistency
of all the of his conduct, :so effectually con-
the house ciliated the respect and esteem


of the natives, that a considerable
number of them were induced to
place their children under his tui-
tion, Even the king of Bullom
entrusted one of his sons to the
care of this excellent missionary ;
but the young prince had not been
long in the seminary before he died.
“‘ After he was dead,” says Mr.
Nylander, ‘ the people were going
to ask him, according to their
custom, who had killed him: but I
was very ‘glad that, after: long rea-
soning in.opposition. to their opi-


blic insti-
benefit: of
he female
| teat rtate-’
under: its:
containing
children.” :
ording to
ment, 419


. Africa,


‘numerous
hed. and sue


b addicted nions, they were ‘satisfied that he
them: the had not fallen:a victim to the arts
«satanical of any witch or gregree; but that


God, who gave him life at first, had
now called him home, to be with
him, in;a. good and happy place :


tingly di»


iV?s houses
102


‘notice,


BUL


‘and I’ assured his friends, that if
they would begin to pray to God,
they: would. once more meet him in
that place, and rejoice with him for
ever. AsI stated my belief that
‘God had killed him, I was allowed
to bury him, in ‘.white man’s
fashion,’ and the king gave me a
burying-place separate from their
own.

‘It is lamentable,” .says the
same writer, in another communi-
cation, ‘that the Bulloms should
have been left so long without any
religious instruction, They live in
gross darkness, worshipping evil
spirits, and dealing’ very cruelly.
with: each other, on account .of
their superstitious . witchcraft ;
which, perhaps,,was encouraged
by the inhuman. traffic: in. slaves.
If. any slave ship had been per-
mitted. to appear .in. the Sierra
Leone R., about 15 or more witches
would have been sold, and sent. off
for the coast, since I have been at
Bullom.”: The following facts will
exhibit some of their superstitions .
in an affecting manner.

“A young man, named Jem
Kambah, was employed by me, and.
attended pretty regularly on our
family and public worship. Going
one day to. visit his mother, she
gave him two small smooth stones,
which she had laid by for that pur-
pose; telling him to wash them
every day, and rub them.with oil;
and that then they would take care
of him, and be would prosper-—be-
cause they were two good spirits.
‘ Mother,’ said he, ‘ these are
stones, how can they take care of
me?.I hear the white man at.
Yongroo Pomoh telling us that God
alone can help us, and that all our
gregrees (charms) are good for no-
thing. These stones can dome no
good: I will, therefore, look to
God, and beg him to take care of .
me.’ Thus saying, he. threw the
stones into the fire, as unworthy of


103


BUL
against him; and said, * I witf


BUL™
i CCPMis"was lat hethous saérilege ¢
and, on his hiotheracquainting her:
fttends with it? theysharply reprovs:
ed"him ; ‘and told’ hin that, by: thus’
acting, “he' would“inuke the devil
angry, ‘afd would ‘bring’ mischief
upon: ‘the! coulhtty. ‘fe assured’
them, howevér;' that he “would ‘pay
no‘mhbre attention:to any of their
customs, but would listen to what’
hie heard at ‘Yongrou’Pomoh.* *’
“4 One Sabbath; after: divine ser
vice, Jeni ‘agath ‘went ‘to’ see his:
mother, and met the people danc-
ing, and’ trying’ some ‘persons for
witehcraft.' He told then that it:
was''the Lord’sday, and that they
should not darice, . butgo to” Yon-
groo'Pomoh, to ‘hear what’ the’
white’ man had to’ say;":* And then,’
he added, “you ‘will leave off all
dancing’ end witch-palavers, which
afe “nothing ‘but*the ‘work of: the’
oe ” This speech; together with
the throwing of the stones ftito the
fire, affronted theiiso, much, that
they threatened’ to punish” him ;
and, the next morning, he ‘was
summoned befote ‘the king, and &o-
Cused ‘of having made a witch-gun,
dnd concealed ‘it if his house, ‘for
thepurpose of killing and injuring
hisinmate. Jem replied— I never
saw w witch-gun, and do not know’
how to maké one: He, therefore,
who told you this,'did not: speak
the'trutb.’’ He was urged'to ac-:
Knowledge it; ahd then the whole
palaver would have an end. ‘ No,’
safd he, * I cannot tell a He merely
to please you,’ He'was then called
upon to prove his itmocence, by
rubbing’ his'arm’ with ‘a ‘red-hot:
iron, or'by dritiking red water ; but
he coolly replied‘ I am no fool, to
burh “nyself with ‘the hot’ tron;
and' ds for the red .water palaver,
F shall look in my head first ;’ mean-
ing that he should take time to
consider the matter. He after-
wards came to me, and told me the’
charges which had been brought


self; and ‘to bring my pay out ‘of:
théeblathe—and TF hope God wilt
and to.consider well’ what he was'
going todo: - Tie ahead gta |


confined’; ‘ahd petsons of both ‘par.’
tids,; his’ frtends’'‘and enemiés,
questioned him, and “urged him ‘to
confess “every: thing ‘he~ had‘ done’
evil. At last’ the’ day came § ‘he.
was Cattied to the vars of ‘execu- :
tion,’ stripped’ of his clothes; and’
had some plantain léaves'tied round’
his waist. About two tea-spoow-'
fuls' of white rice had‘ been given to.
him ' in ‘the’ morning and if*this
rice were thrown up with ‘the red’


Jem now ascended \the’ scaffold;
and drank 8 calabashes (about 4
ayer)
edmin
‘could swallow. it. He threw all up
again, with the ‘rice which he had
‘eaten in'the morning 5 but, as he
fainted before he could get down
from’ the scaffold, it ‘was’ said: that
some ‘witch-palaver must ‘be left in’
‘his stomach, because the devil
wrestled with him ; and he was rev
uested-to drink the'water again.
his, however, he’ ‘refused ;° ob-
serving that Ke had wierely drank
it fh the first instance to please his:
accusers, and ‘to shew that he’ way
no witch. A few days afterward’
he came’ to. work again, and’ the


not appear so serious, nor did he
80 vepularly attend on public wor-
shi > as be ore.”” tt
® ‘poor creature whose case
is néxt narrated, had not ‘the cou-
rage of Kambah, but was tervified
into the confession of an imagi-
nary crime, in order to save herself
from the further cruelty of her per-
secutors. Pee Wty
T was told,” wo Ny-
(4


drink: the red ‘water to’ clear ‘miy-‘


"0A day before the trial, Jom was:


weter, it was to prove him innocent.


of red water;. which was’
Stered: to him’as fast ‘ashe’


business was dropped; but Jem did.


consent pd


public yor:


whose case
ot ‘the cous
ras texsified
an imagi-
save herself
of her per-


Ws Mr. Ny-
14


BUL


lander, “ that there was.a woman
very ill with the small-pox, and
that another woman, who had just
fallen ill of the same disease,
bewitched her. I visited the sick
woman first, and found her dar yer-
ously ill; afterwards I went to the
place .where the supposed witch,
name’. Dumfurry, was lying in
chains, under a tree, in a high
fever—the sinall-pox just coming
out. I. begged the people to re-
lease her, and to let her lie down
comfortably in .a house ; but they
said they could not do it, I must
ak to the head man of the town,

e king not being at home. I.ap-
plied to. him, but he refused; al-
leging that she was a bad woman,
who had been in the Sheerong (a
sort of purgatory, where the cvil
spirits dwell, and whither the sup-
eee oe beso =

ug: © -smali-pox, and, by
witchcraft, brought the disease
upon this woman.

“ ¢If she be. so skilful,’ I said,
‘you can make money by her.
Loose her, and let her go this night
again to the Sheerong, and brin:
the small-pox, jn order to: wi
the small-pox upon me; vad if I
catch the disease, I will pay you
ten bars.’ One said that I had
them, and therefore she could not
ha them on me, ‘ Why,’ said
I, ‘if she be a witch, she can cause
a stick to have the small-pox to-
morrow ;_ and if she knew any thing
of witchcraft, she would not
before you to be flogged, but would


| bind you all, that you could not


catch her. She knows meting,
however, ahout witch-palaver, and,
in your dealing so hardly with her,


you do extremely wrong, and dis-
please God.’

“ As the poor creature could not
be loosed without the consent of
the sick .woman’s husband, I sent
for him; and, after some time, he
consented that she should be taken


BUL


out of the stocks—and so I left
them. But the relations of the
person dangerously ill: be: to:
question the supposed witch, and
gave her a severe whipping end
the woman, at length, conféssed
that she had bewitched her. :

“‘ The doctor was now called in
to examine the sick person, and he,
in his turn, by pretended witch-
craft, pretended to take out of the:
woman’s head, 1. A worm, called,
in Sierra Leone, the forty foot;
8. A small bag, containing the im
struments of a -witch—such asa
knife, a spoon, a basin, &c,; 3. A
snail ; 4. A rope 3 and, 5, the small-
pox !! The witch was then whipped
a second time, and asked whether
she had not.put all these things
into the head of the woman, who
was now almost dead. She .con-
fessed it; and brought. forwerd a
man and two women, as having.
joined with her to kill this woman.

he man said that he knew no-
thing of witchcraft, and consented
to prove his innocence by drinking
the red water. The two females
were whipped, and sent to work;
and the principal one was. to be
put to death, as soon as the sick
woman should die, Till then,
Dumfurry, the supposed witch,
was appointed to guard the sick
person, and to drive the flies from

er,’

*¢ T oppose these foolish witch
accusations,’ says Mr. N. “‘ where~
a I can; vod tg of the

\ » @8 y the younger
pen, ne plainly that it is the power
of darkness and ignorance which
works upon the minds of the old
people; but they.dare not .say a
word in o tion to this evil prac-
tice, for fear of being themselves
nee ties ete ed tenho,

mong these ted people,
Mr, Nylander continued to labour
for a considerable time, with the
most unwearled enerne oa uQ-


BUR


BUR


remitting 2eal;:and,:in- addition to | selves bonnets ofiaispecies of grass’
ther. instruction: of ithe :<children’| adapted to-this purpose.) Scarcely a’


woman, was.to bejseen in the ‘cone:
gregation without a bonnet, ora man
without:a hat, of this. simple: mann-:
facture.) A printing-establishment
was formed here, and 5000 ‘copies
of the: Gospel:by: Matthew, . and
3000.of that: by John,::in the. Ta-
heitan.; language, «printed ; .which
‘were ireceived :by - the. natives with
the greatest avidity. .Mr. Boume
having, soon after, removed from
this station,:Mr. Darling continued
his. zealous exertions, attended. by
the most anecesnenags ener nere yt
- Inthe. middle of 1823, thenumber
of the baptized had increased to.76),
of whom 411 were adults; that: of
candidates for baptism was 15,. The
church: consisted of 50 members, |
and ‘there were 10 candidates for
admission; Among the latter was
a man named - Maiohaa, who was
formerly distinguished by, taking the
lead in acts of rebellion,:and whoge
Office it was ‘to recite all the ancient
speeches of wars Others, once
atrocious transgressors, had recent:
ly died in the Lord, . A striking
: proof: of the peaceful influence of
the Gospel must also be mentioned.
+~During the early part of the pre-
vious year, some .mischievous per-
sons having raised a report, tending
to excite. war between the people
inhabiting the districts of Atehuru
and Pare, those of the former dis-
trict.came to Mr. Darling, and de-
clared that they would not take up
arms—that they ‘would not: fight
with their countrymen, as they had
formerly done, ds they had now re-
ceived the Gospel of peace, and were
become brethren in the Gospel.
The greatness of the change willbe
felt, when it is remembered that,
before the overthrow of idolatry,
the Atehuruans were notorious for
violence, and had delighted in war
and bloodshed for ages unknown.
The schovls, in Jus 1823,


piaced:in bis school;:and the preach- :
ings ofi:.the | truth,::he itransiated:
the: four':Gospels; the epistles of:
St,:.dohn, the morning and: even-
ing |e Soma of the Charch of Eng-
land,: ‘some:;hymus; and  séveral
elementary books;,::into «the : Bul-
lom' language. Im: 1818; -how-
ever,’ -the . pernicious ‘influence. of
the slave trade réndéred the prospect
ef success::more dark. and ‘distant
than :-ever,: tind: the mission was
consequently: abandoned ;) Mr. .N..
retiring into. the: colony ,with the
gteater:part. of the pupils, who, at

time, were ‘underhis ‘instruc-


oe : SS? SR 5 , ;
eeBURDERS POINT,:a station
in: thendistrict-of Atehura,:in the
Ni KE. part of Taheite.:
 Ins3821,*the Rev. Mr; Bourne
joined: Mr. Darling, who had com-
menced' s mission ‘to: ‘the. Orapoas ;
the: inhabitants of:this district, and
the station: ultimately formed, as-
sumeéd. the above-mentioned name.
Public: religious cy rm
regularly: kept up: from the time
of Mr.::Darling’s: arrival, -About
900: adnite ‘had been. carefully
examined, and 200. children: had
been “baptized, § Of ‘the former;
21 were admitted to the Lord’s
Supper, and the rest were under
instruction as candidates for com-
mutiion. Schools had also been
established, both: for adults and
children. _ They contained, at this
time; of the’ former, ':386.5.0f. the
latter, 230.. At anotber place,’ in
thé same district, there wasa school,
ch contained about 80, chiefly
adaits...A large and commodious
place of worship, ‘in: the English
opie, had been built, in the erection
which the natives cheerfully as-
sisted. pea ass a a eae,
nome degree, inured to industry.
. Bourne and Mrs. Darling had
taught the females to make them-


flourishi
school

the proj
pleasing


the ancient


ers,
‘had recent+


unknown.


of idolatry,
rhted in wat


July. 1823,
106


°
‘BUR
contained 126 boys and 121 girls ;
45: natives performed the part of
teachers in the schools, of whom
16 were women. Subsequent re
ports assure us that, in both a civil

‘and religious point of view, the af-
fairs of this station are prospering.
From that of 1827, it appears that an
endemic had been: very prevalent.
Ithad carried off 13° adults and 14
children. Among the deceased was
a truly pious and devoted deacon of
the church, who had: wished to go


asa teacher tosome Of the surround- |


ing islands, but no opportunity had
occurred for that purpose. Hedied
in peace. ‘Of the children who de-
parted, two or three’ of the ‘boys
gave pleasing evidence of a spiritual
change. Several: of ‘those who,
after having professed Christianity,
had returned to their former evil
ways, had give 1 nga of repent-
ance. Among the rest: was the
father of a family, whose children
attended the mission school. It
seems that his compunction’ was
awakened, by observing his chil-
dren’s attention directed to that
which is good, while he himself was
living in sin. The weekly meet-
ings were numerously and he arly
attended. The day-schools, for
adults and children, were in 4
flourishing state. At the Sabbath-
school the attendance was good;‘and
the progress of the children was
pleasing. Several books had been
printed. The Tahitian public’ H-
brary for the Windward Islands,
formed at this ‘station, had been
enriched by many presents. A new
mission-house, a very commodious
school-house, and several ‘good
dwelling-houses; had been erected.
A few road had been ‘made, and,
throughout the district, the people
were engaged in making plantations
of taro, dc. dsc.'} and several pious
meh ‘had giver themselves up’ to
the work of the Lord: among thie
swrounding islands. --The total


BUR


number - of ‘adults’ * baptized .'was
427 ;' of children, 416. Total ‘num-
ber of communicants, 14]. Several
more Were candidates for church
fellowship ;'32°had been added to
the church during the‘ year; 3 hed
incurred censure, but none had been
excluded; ‘and, during the ‘same
period, 9 had been married. * °°"
BURDWAN, a town of Hin-
doostan in Bengal, capital of a dis-
trict which is: the first ‘in ‘rank for
agticultural riches’ in all India.’ ‘It
is seated ‘near the Dummooda,' 58
m. N.W. of ‘Calcutta. 'B: long.
87° 57/, N. lat. 289 15%, 2 cee
At the ‘close of the year, 1816;
the Corresponding Committee ‘at
Calcutta, connected with ‘the 'C.
‘M. S., received & communication
from Lieut. Stewart; ' stationed’ at
Burdwan, ‘proposing ‘ati extensive
plan of native schools at tnd near
that place. Three sclioolsin
Burdwan, and at Lackoody, ard
Ryan—were accordingly taken
under’ the society’s' care. - With
the concurrence of the committee,
the plan was afterwards exter
and additional schools opériéd.’ "
Of the state of the Burdwan
schools, an. impartial obsérver*tés-
tifies, under date of Aug. 26th,
1817 :—* I am at Burdwan, inthe
house of Lieut. Stewart; an‘officer
in the coinpany’s service. If évery
missionary did ‘as much’ as he ‘Has
done, and is doing, for the causé-of
civilization and religion, ‘he need
be in-no fear as to bis reputation
with those who employ him. ‘He
has done wonders in this neigh-
bourhood, in regard to education.”
The’ number ‘of schools was' soon
after increased to 10; ‘in? Which
about ‘1000 ‘children: were aught
the’ Bengalee lange vy * th
‘new method so wcebeataty ted
in' Europe, with’ judicious modift-
cations and improveiments by Lieut.
Stewart. The’ places’ at ‘which
they were built, in a “y those


BUR
mentioned, were—Konshunnugur,
Komilpore, Goituupore; Poura, Ga- |
e; Mirz . and Coilgong.
The most. distant: of these fllages
is but 6 miles from Burdwan, but
the greater number are only from 2
103m. distant. Though Lieutenant
Stewart.did not formally and regu-
larly teach the Scriptures, he con-
tinually. distributed copies of the
Guaspels and religious tracts, which


e

‘BUR
ter writes, on occasion of a visit paid
them by a kind friend—“ We were
much grieved that he could not see
much of the schools, as the natives
had, just then, 2 holy-days; if we
may call them so, when all the
schools were shut up. ‘They wor-
shipped, during those two days,


paper, pens, und ink! By doing


so, they say, they become wise.”
In 1821, an English clergyman


were eagerly sought after by the | being much wanted, the Rev. John .
young people when they had learned | Perowne proceeded to this'station.
to read. Receiving an impulse and | His reception by the residents was
borrowing light from the plans and | most cordial: a subscription was
operations of the late active and | set on foot for the erection of a
excellent Mr. May, at Chinsurah, | suitable place of worship ; and, on
he still further improved his system; ‘| application to government by the
and of its efficiency, Mr. Robertson | local authorities, an eligible spot of
and Mr. Thomason speak in the | ground was assigned for the site of
highest terms. The latter says, | a church, and an order issued to
after an examination he conducted | supply the sum Wanted to complete
-—“ It was very pleasing to heer a | the estimate out of the public chest,
simple and account of the | The success of the schools was
English government,the two houses | demonstrated by an interesting and
of parliament, the army and navy, | extensive examination. Mr. Deer,
and universities, of England, with | in - addition to his ordinary en;
its chief towns, cities, and rivers, | gagements, took five boys into


from a company of poor Bengalee | his house at his own expense,
boys, who, unless they had been|to whom he gave religious in.


brought under instruction, must | struction. ‘2 am sometimes de.


have remained inentire ignorance,
and stupid indifference to improve-
ment.’”’ ‘

The Rev. Messrs. Jetter and
Deerr were settled at Burdwan, on.
the 17th November, 1819, Captain
Stewart having purchased a piece of
ground,and built a house for the ac-
commodation of the missionary fa-
mily. The former took charge of |
the central school recently erected,
tin which the English language
was bt; and Mr. Deerr super-
intended the Bengalee schools.


lighted,” he says, “ with the an-
oe — I obtain, be me I ask

ese boys the meaning of a passage
of Scripture. For instance, when
I asked, ‘ What did our Lon
mean, when he said, Whosoever
seeth me, seeth the Father ?? One
who is of the brahmin caste an-
swered, ‘I think it may be under.
stood thus: As the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, are one,
therefore whosoever seeth the Son,
seeth the Father also.’ At ano-
ther time, when I asked how it was


In July, 1820, there were about | that David called Christ his ‘ Lord,’
40 scholars in the central English | though he was also called the Son
school, and 1050 in 13 Bengalee | of David? the same boy said,
schools, Their attendance was in- | ‘ David had become acquainted,
terrupted by the frequentrecurrence | through the prophets, with that
of heathen festivals, and by occa- | great. Redeemer who was to come};
sional labours in the field. Mr.Jet- | and in that respect he —

r ' 08


isit paid
Ve were
| not see
con ina

. if we
Mall the


hey wor-
vO days,
By doing
wise.”

lergyman


lev. Jolin .


a'station.


» complete
iblic chest.
hools. was
resting and
Mr. Deer;
dinary en-
boys into
expense,
ligious in-
hetimes de-
ith the an-


BUR
his Lord ;-and because he. became
incarnate in. the. family of David,
he is called his Son.’?.., to
In, 1822, the Rev..J. Perowne
and the Rev. W. Deerr (Rev. Mr.
Jetter haviag suspended... his - la-
pours. at Burdwan , from, impaired
health) were joined in the charge
of the mission and schools by. the
Rev, Jacob. Maisch. In, April, a
oburch: was nearly. finished. Di-
vine service was, held. twice on
Sundays, The first converts in this
mission were. baptized on the 5th
of.May.., An adult native received,
on. this. interesting. occasion, the
name. of Daniel, and a-youth of
13 years of age that of John.
Another promising, youth was a
candidate for admission to the holy.
ordinance. - Mrs. Perowne, after
many unsuccessful attempts, .suc-
ceeded. in. forming a female Ben-
galee school. _ Mr. Perowne ob-
serves, ‘‘The remarks and ques-
tions. of the children in the schools
evince that a foundation is laid for
much future good. There is abun-
dant reason to. bless God for what
has been done. Who would have
expected, a year ago, to see 1000
Hindoo children reading the Gos-
pel? Nay, so greatly are these
prejudices removed, that those very
boys, who,.a few months. since,
disliked or refused to read any
book which contained the name of
Jesus, are now) willing to read.a
professed history of his life and
doctrine; and, what is more, in
some. cases they have solicited the
Gospel in preference to every other
tz)


- In 1823, the work appears to
have increased and prospered. Two
more adult youths were added
to the church; and the blessing
of God, manifestly rested on the
teligious instruction afforded to
the elder youths. . To. the schools
on the western. side of the town,
uoder the more particular care
of Messrs. Deerr and Maisch, Mr.


BUR


Perowne added two on the east-.
ern; one containing 80. boys, and
the other about. 100. ..At the an-.
nual «examination, conducted by
the Rev. Mr. Thomason, there was
a much. wider range than on
former occasions of subjects, purely
religious; the doys. continued. to-
manifest the same zeal and interest,
in the bocks they.-read, and their
sensible; and pertinent answers to.
the questions. put. to. them were
highly gratifying... The. English.
school, also, which had been la-
bouring: undet . various , disadvan-
tages, was in a more_ pleasing
state than at any former period:
it contained 55 boys; about 32 of
whom, at an examination in March,
passed very satisfactorily, Four
more schools were opened for fe-
male children; containing, with
the one previously established, up-
wards of 100 girls... The opera-
tions of -the missionaries were con-
tinued with much energy in all the
departments.of their labours, until
many of the, school buildings were
either seriously injured, or entirely
swept away, by an alarming inun-
dation, in the autumn pf 1823. All
the houses of the, pcor Bengalees
fell in, and the people were obliged
to climb up the trees in order to
save their lives. ‘‘There they sat,
without sustenance, for four days,”’
says Mr., Reichardt, then on a vi-
sit at Burdwan, “ crying to their
gods, ‘ Hori! Hori!, save us—we
are lost!? .Brethren Deerr and
Maisch, and myself, were together
in one house; and if the. water had
risen but one inch higher, it would
have entered our rooms, and we
should have been obliged to flee to
the roof; for which purpose we
kept a ladder ready: however, we
were spared this danger, by the
water decreasing. Many idols,
and particularly those which they
had prepared to celebrate the poo-
jab. of the goddess Doorga, were
ken to pieces, or poe away,

. :


‘


BUR BUR


I saw a heap of them, about 60 in | English school... The pundit of
number, lying broken near ‘the | that school also; and two friends of
road. The impotency of these idols | his, have, for some time, attended
re fey exposed ; and many of | the meuns of grace} and ‘two of
the Bengalees began to ridicule’) them (both Coolin brahmins) pro-
them, saying, ‘ Our gods are'‘déad | fess themselves desirous of embrac-
—they could not prevent the flood.’ | ing Christianity.’ Three chapels
But, T am sorry to say, this impres- | have been erected in neighbouring
sion’ of the nothingness of ‘idols, | villages: the average atténdance
which they, during this awful catas- | at each of these is not less than
trophe, recvived, is already worn | 100 persons, often 150 or 200. On
off; for, soon after that, instead of | Mr. Deerr’sremoval to Culna, some
the ‘image of Doorga, they wor- | of the most remote and worst at-
shipped ‘a ‘water-pot, into which | tended village schools were, of ne-
they had’ cited hei spirit.”? ‘The | cessity, given up. Still, hqwever,
injury ‘sustained ‘by this calamity | 15 schools remain under the direc-
was, however, repaired as soon as | tion of Mr. Perowne and his assist-
possible, | : ant, containing about 11,000 chil-
Tn 1825, Burdwan was deprived | dren. These are collected: ‘from,
of two valuable missionaries. The | perhaps, not less than 150 different


death of Mr. Maisch took place, | villages. Mr. Thomason and’ Mr, |


Aug. 203 and Mrs. Maisch’s con* | Sherer were present, recently, ‘at
tinued ‘ill-health rendered her re- | the examination of ‘the’ boys ° of
turn to this country necessary. The | the central school, and speak
encouraging prospects of the male | highly of the.r proficieicy and
and female schools continued. Of | religious knowledge. The girls’
the examination of the latter, it is | schools, 12 in number, which ‘are
said, “* The general impression | superintended by Mrs. Perowne,
seemed to be, that the children ex- | have been taken under the ‘pa-
ceeded the expectations formed of | tronage of the Nutive Female Edu-
them. ‘The order, regularity, and | cation Society.
respectful behaviour, for which the |} © BURMAN EMPIRE. This is
Burdwan boys’ schools are noted, | an extensive empire in Asia, to the
were equally exemplified in ‘those | E. of the bay of Bengal, contain-
of the girls; there was no confu- | ing the kingdoms of Burmeh, Cas-
sion, no improper conduct—but all | say, Arracan, and Pegue, and all
conducted themselves in a modes‘ | the western coast of Siam. This
and becoming manner. All read | and some adjacent countries have
or answered the questions without | sometimes been termed Indo-Chi-
fear or hesitation; but nothing for- | nese nations, as ‘situated between
ward or presuming was seen in any | India Propet and China. * The em-
of them.’’ pire of Burmah, in its present state,
The most recent accounts are | is about 1200 m. in length, and 800
very favourable. A small chapel | or 900 in the broadest part. It ex-
was opened for native worship, | tends from the Oth to the 28th deg.
on the mission premises, on the | N. lat., and from the 9)st to the
18th of Dec. 1825. Divine ser- | 108th deg. E. long., and contains
vice is held therein twice on Sun- | @ population estimated at about
days ; and daily morning and even- | 10,000,000. ‘The kingdom of Bur-
ing worship. Several ns seen | mab, frequently called’ Ava, from
to be thinking of ‘their eternal | the name of its ancient capital; hus
interests: among these is a young | Pegue on the S., Assam on the N.,
man (4 brahmin) brought up in the | Arracan and Cassay on a rg and


BUR
China ‘and Upper Siam on. the E.
This kingdom was conquered in
1762, by the King..of, Pegue, who
carried the Burman monarch pri-


soner.to Pegue, where he was mur-


dered in 1754. But.Alompra, who
was a Burman of low distinction,
and continued by.the conqueror as
chief at Monchabon,.a small.place


‘ to-the N. of Ava, revolted against
- the Peguese, got possession of


Ava in 1753, and, after numerous
battles, with various. success, be-
came the.conqueror of Pegue in
1757. This deliverer of his country
continued in a-state of warfare till
his death, in 1760; and his succes-
sors have added the other countries,
which now form. the Burman em-
pire. .The, northern part of the
country is barren and mountainous;
but the plains and valleys, situated
more southerly, are. very fertile,
The climate is considered salu-
brious ; and the natives are remark-
ably healthy and vigorous; the sea-
sons being regular, and the ex-
tremes of heat and cold seldom ex-
perienced. The soil is remarkably
fertile, producing rice, sugar-canes,
tobacco, indigo, cotton, and all the
tropical fruits, in perfection ;, and


son the banks of the , Irawaddy,


which runs S. through the whole
country, is produced pure amber,
and the finest teak timber in the
world. The kingdom of Burmah
abounds in minerals; it has mines of
gold, silver, rubies, and sapphires ;
and affords amethysts, garnets,
chrysolites, jasper, loadstone, and
excellent marble ; it has also, neag
Yanangheoum, cvlebrated wells
of petroleum... The government is
strictly monarchical. The Emperor
is an absolute sovereign, and is re-
garded as the sole lord and proprie-
tor of life and property in, his do-
minions; and, without the. concur-
rence. of anys his word is _irresis-
tible law. Like the sovereign, of
China, he acknowledges no equal.
The prevailing characteristic of his


BUR


court is pride... Four private. minis-
ters of state (called, Atwenwoon),
and four public ministers of, state
(Woongyee), are the organs, of ad-
ministration: the latter compose
the. supreme court. of,the. empire
(Tlowtdau), in the name of which
all imperial edicts are issued, There
are no hereditary dignities or.em-
loyments in the government; for all
onours and offices, on the demise
of the possessor, revert to the crown.
, The, Burman, empire is divided
into districts, each. of which is, go-
verned by a viceroy (Myoowoon)
and a court (Yongdau). e dis-
trict courts are composed of a_pre-
‘sident (Yawoon),, chief magistrate
(Sitkai), collectors of the port
(Akoukwoon), . auditors. (Narkan-
dau), and secretaries. (Saragyee).
The members of the district.courts,
and the wives, relations, and fa-
vourites. of viceroys, have also the
privilege of holding private courts,
and of deciding petty. causes, sub-
-ject to appeal to higher authority.
The Burmans are boodhists, or
a nation of .atheists.. They be-
lievé that existence involves in it-
self the principles of misery and
destruction ; consequently there is
no eternal God. _ The whole uni-
verse, say they, is only destruction
and reproduction. , It. therefore
becomes. a wise, man to. raise, his
desires above all things that exist,
and aspire, to. Nighan, the state in
which there. is no existence,  Re-
wards and punishments follow me-
ritorious and sinful acts, agreeably
to the Nature of things, Gauda-
ama, their last boodh, or deity, in,
consequence of meritorious acts,
arrived at that state of perfection
which made him deserving of an-:
nihilation—the supreme good. His
instructions are still in force, and
will continue till the appearance of


‘the next deity, who is supposed now


to exist somewhere in embryo;
and who, when he appears, as the
most perfect of al beings, will


. &c. &c. were displayed on carpets,


‘BUR
beifig secured ‘by ‘ropes. » His bed-
ding consisted of a thick straw mat-
trass; covered ‘with ‘the: finest ‘blue
“cloth, over which ‘was’ spread’ an.
‘other of ‘softer: materials, ‘covered
with crimson silk; The anime? has
a regular household; consisting’ of
a Woonghee, or chief-minister;
Moondduk, or ‘secretary of" state’;
Sereghee, or ‘inferior’ secretary;
Nakaun, or obtainer of intelligence;
and other inferior’ ministers 5 who
were all present to receive us.’ Be:
sides théese;’ he has other officers
who ‘transact the business of several
estates that he ‘possesses in various
parts of the country; ‘and an esta.
blishment of 1000 ‘men, including
Ruards, servants, and other atten-
dants. His trappings are of extreme


BUR
‘fntroduce'a few dispensation. The
‘hoodhist system ‘of morality is pure,
‘though itis destitute of power’ to
‘produce ‘purity of life in those who
professits 8 oer for enes
-'In'the empire ‘of Burmah, it is
‘the ‘practice ‘to’ pay very éxtraordi-
sary honours to: a white elephant,
which 1s’ ‘considered ‘peculiarly
‘sacred, lodged near the palace, and
attended ‘with great dévotion, even
by the monarch himself. The fol-
lowing ‘account ’ of ’'this singular
custom is extracted from the jour-
nal of a traveller who lately visited
Ava; ‘and ought'to inspire ‘deep
tommiseration fora whole empire
sunk in such astonishing ‘stupidity
as thus to hionour and reverence a
mere unconscious brute !
*. © Phe residence of the white
elephant is contiguous to the royal
valace, with which ‘it is connected
y a long open gallery, supported
by numerous ‘rows ‘of pillars. At
the further ’ end ' of this ‘gallery, a
lofty curtain of black velvet, richly’
émbossed with gold, conceals the
animal from ‘the eyes of the vul+
gar. Before this curtain the pre-
sents intended to be offered to him,
consisting of gold and silver mus-
lins, broad-cloths, otto of roses,
rose-water, Benares brocades, tea,


and the richest gold cloth, thickly
studded with large diamonds; ‘pearls,
sapphires, rubies, and other pre-
cious stones: His betel box, spit-
ting pot, and bangles, and the ves
séls out of which he euts and drinks;
are ‘likewise of gold,’ aid inlaid
with numerous precious stones. On
the curtain being drawn ‘up, we
were desired to imitate the Bur-
mese ‘in their prostrations; com-
pliance, however, was not insisted
on. The white elephant appeared
to me fo' be ‘a’ disédsed . animal;
whose colour had been changed by
a species of leprosy.” FT aT

‘¢ Phese' honours are said: to be
paid to the white elephant, on ac:
count of an animal of this déserips
tion being the last stage of many
ihillions of transmigrations through
which a soul passes previous ‘to
entering Neibaun, or Paradise ;' or,
according to the Burmese doctrine,
previous to her being absorbed into
the divine ‘essence, ‘or rather alto-
gether annihilated,’ One of ’ the
King’s titles is Lord of: the White,
Red, and Mottled Elephants ; and,
Tam informed, the: same distines
tion is shown to those ‘of the ‘first
mentioned colours, by ba oe


After wé had been mude’ to wait'a
short time, asis usual at the audi-
énces of the Burmese’ princes, the
curtein was drawn up, and discover-
ed the august beast, of a small size,
the colour of sand, and very inno-
cently playing with his trunk, un-
conscious of the glory by which he
was ‘surrounded; the Burmans, at
the same time, bowing their heads
to the grounc. ‘The dwelling of
the white elephant is « lofty Hall,
richly gilt from top to bottom, both
inside and outside, and supported
by 64 pillars, 36 of which are.also
richly gilt. His two fore-feet were’
fastened by a thick silver chain to
one of these pillars, his hind legs


magnificence—being all ‘of gold, °


people
civiliz
nation
did ;/ ¢
mity. v
dogs, : t
nity wl
Malay
jealous
ern nat,
and sw
seems ti
minds, ¢
Wives a


intercor
the rule;


mit,
ly fond
and thei
cultivate
ek nun

s
‘alte i
tiful style
manifest¢
their sto
are. pow¢
delight i
jects...
All the
taught by
pendent
Contributi
attention
“on, exce
In the hig
: The Cap
the metro
Ummerapq
ANS 00N. }


is bed.
w mat-
st blue
vad’ an+
sovered
mal has
ting’ of
inisters
f state's
pretary 5
ligernice;
3} who
us.’ Be+
» officers
f several
y various
) ani estae
including
ey atten-
fextreme |
iof gold,
hi, thickly ©
ds; pearls,
ther pre-
box, spit-
d the ves
and drinks,
aiid inlaid
tones. On
n up, we
the Bur-
bns$ cOom-
ot irc
t appea'
{ seeitinel}
hanged by
gaid: to be
rit, On acs
his descrip-
p of many
ns through
revious to
radise 3: OF;
le doctrine,
sorbed into
ither’ ulto-
ne of the
the White,
ants; and,
e distine/
e Siamese.
112


BUR . BUX
An elephant, termed red; was: kept | BUXAR, a town in. Bahar


in, a verandah. of the white ele- | Hindoostan, stunted in a healthy, |


phant’s residences but I could per- | plexsant plain, on the S, side of the
ceive, in: his colour, little ‘differing | “ges, about 70. m.. below Be-
from. that. of‘any other. . The King | nares, and about 400 N.W, of Cal-
was in the habit of paying his re- | cutta, in the midst of a.very nu-
spects to the. white slo phent every | merous beaten pocaletion, Here
morning, and of attending when he | are ‘about 90 European. invalids,
was taken 19 the river to be washed, | ‘and nearly that number of native
and paid him:the. same honours as | Christian women. Less. than half
he.received from his household.” ; | ‘@ mile from the town, is.a. place
. The. Burmans are. ‘a lively, in- | where numerous. devotees, . from
dustrious,, and. energetic race of | different parts. of India, tuke up
people, and. farther advanced in | theit residence, mostly for. life.
civilization than most of the, eastern | T'wo grand fairs are annually held,
nations... They are frank and can- {| which greatly increase . its im-
did ;: and destitute of the pusillani- | portance as a missionary station.

mijty. which characterizes the Hin- | —Anative Christian, Kurrum Mes-
doos,: and: that revengeful. malig- | seeh, from Chunar, commenced his
nity which is a leading trait in the | labours in this place in 1820, under
Malay character. The passion of | the direction of the C. M. S.. Ha
jealousy, which prompts most east- | was very useful in teaching the na-


ern nations to immure their women | tive Christians to read the New "


and surround them with guards, | Testament, and to repeat the ca-
seems to:have little influence on the | techism, as well as in leading their
minds, of. the Burmans; for their | worship, according to the Hindoos-
wives and daughters have as free | tanée Prayer-book. About 40 re-
intercourse with the other sex; as | ceived instruction at this time, jin
the rules of European society ad- | various ways, and he has continued
mit,. The Burmans are extreme- | his efforts with some success. One
ly fond. both of poetry and music.; | adult was baptized by the Rev, Mr.
and their language has been highly | Bowley, and, subsequently, Arch-
cultivated in composition, for they | deacon Corrie writes :—

have numerous works in religion,| ‘‘ The Bishop saw Kurrum Mese
history, and science; some of them | seeh’s congregation, consisting of
written.in the most flowing, beau- | abouf 30 women, young and old.
tiful style: and much ingenuity‘is | He heard them read in the Hin-
manifested in, the construction of | doostanee Testament, and ques-
their stories. Some of their men | tioned them in their catechism.
are. powerful logicians, and take | His Lordship expressed to me his
delight in. investigating new sub- | entire satisfaction. with the pro-
jects... ficiency they manifested.”

All the boys in the empire are In a letter dated Sept. 25th,
taught by the priests, who are de- | 1826; the Archdeacon says ;—
pendent, for their support on the ‘*T passed a Sunday at Buxar,
contributions of the people; butno | when about 35 adults attended
attention is given to female educa- | divine service. The people here
tion; excepting in afew instances | are very attentive, and Kurrum,
in the higher classes of society, Messeeh cuntinues to enjoy their

The capital of the kingdom, and | confidence and esteem, The want
the metropolis of the empire, is | of a place of worship has long been
Ummerapoor, [See Arracan and | felt here. A circumstance oc-
Rangoon. curred which led me to ~ one,

’ L2 ° 3


CAF.
Mary ‘Carrol, @ native’ Christian,
having’ obtained some: ‘arrears 0
pension, asa widow of: Serjeant
Carrol, brought’ me 100 -rupees,
‘as'an offering,’ to use her own
words, ‘to the church.’ © This
woman has been long one of the
most attentive and ¢onsistent Chris-
tians at the station: her religious
inipressions were first received at
Chunar; and this offering she made
of lier own accord; in tokén of her
gratitude for the blessing of Chris-
tian instruction. 2 obtained from
the commanding officer ‘leave ‘to
inclose’ a small ‘piece of public
ground, adjoining the parade; and
with ‘a donation ftom another
friend, added’ to Mary Carrol’s
gift, commenced ‘a small building,
convenient ‘also for ‘the natives
who live in the adjoining bazaar.”


C.

CAFFRARIA ‘ commences at
the “Great Fish R., which divides
it from Albany in the colony ; and
runs along the. Indian Ocean, ina
N.E. direction, to the R. Bassee,
which divides it from the ‘Tam-
bookie country. ' It does not ex-
tend more than 70 m. up the coun-
try; or to the W.—at least at the
S. end of it—being’ separated from
the colony and Bushman country
on that side by a‘chainof moun-
tains. It’abounds with mountains,
woods, and water, and is far more
populous than either the Bushman,
Coranna, or Namaqua countries,
The people also are taller, more
robust, and more industrious, ‘“Bet-
ter shaped men,” says Mr. Camp-
bell, “I never saw.” They are
a warlike race, and many of them
are greatly addicted to plunder-
ing. Like the Chinese, they con-
sider all other people inferior to
themselves, and suppose that Euro-
peans wear clothes merely on ac-


CAF


| count’ of having feeble: dtd: sickly
f | bodies.’ They have scarcely ‘any


religion ;- but'‘some ‘of them ‘pro«
fess: to believe ‘that: ‘some great
being came from‘ above, and made
the world, after which ‘he returned,
and cared-no more ‘about it.: It is
very probable; that even this feeble
ray of light was ‘obtained by means
of their intercourse with the Dutch
boors during several ages, They
consider man as ona ‘level ‘with
the brutes, with regard to the du-
ration of his being; so that when
he is dead, there is‘an end of his
existence. | Like the Matchappees,
they ‘have’ circumcision among
them, though ignorant of what
gave rise to the custom. © They
perform this ceremony on their
young men at the age of 14 years,
or more. ‘Polygamy is very ge-.
heral among them.’ The common
people have seldom more than one


or two wives, but their. chiefs ges


nerally four or five. When & Caffre
is sick, they generally send for a
person who ‘is considered a physi-
cian, who pretends to extract from
the body of the sick, ‘serpents,
stones, bones, &c. At other' times
he beats them on the elbow, knees,
and ends of their fingers, till, as
the Hottentots express it, these
are almost rotten : they sometimes,
also, kill cuttle in the way of sacri-
fice for the person : and: at ‘others
the doctor pretends ‘to drive out the
devil, and to kill him. ‘The Caifres
have a barbarous custom «of ' ex-'
posing their sick ‘friends; who, in


their opinion, are not likely to re-.


cover. They bury none but ‘their
chiefs and their wives; others are
thrown out to be devoured by tb»
wild beasts. Should a person uie
iccidentally in his own house, the
whole kraal is: déserted. Many
of them are Very aeiaaee to
‘strangers ; not waiting till they ask
for victuals, but bringing it of their
own accord, and setting it before
' them, and always of —— they
1]4


hive
chie;
whic
He |
nhise:
use ti
cept
one |
his ki
milk
conta:
gratifi
them:
which
gallop
eads: |
and th
on suc
his bes:
treats t
The C
milk; |
and by
They sc
is kno
name of
ing, it v
corn, on
like the
and rou
palatabld
it betwe
kind of *j
is the wa
scatter tl
which,
the surfa
wooden
like a Spo
operatio
ground, i
from ‘und
and rotte
springs uy
kins, wat
various
wild. TI
smoke it,
through
snend thei
ho émple
and milk
women co


than one
chiefs ge*
nu Caffre
send for a
4 a physi-
tract from

serpents,
ther times
ow, knees,
rs, till, as
it, these
sometimes,
-of sacri-
i: at others
ve out the
he Caffres
m «of ex:
s, who, in
kely to re-:
b but ‘their
others are

erson die
house, the
d. Maeny
spitable, to
li they ask
rit of their
g it before
e-best they
114


CAF CAF

hive; "Phe‘tiches ‘of a Caffre | cattlé, utensils, and clothes; they
chiefly consist’ of: his’ cattle, of | also'till ‘the ground, and cut wood:
which he is extravagantly fond. | ‘They likewise menufacture: mats
He keeps them ‘as’ carefully as the | of rushes, and neat baskets, wrought
miser does his gold. : He does not | so close as to contain ‘milk, but
use them as‘beasts of burden, ex- | which are seldom washed or cléan-
cept when he is removing: from | ed, except by the dogs’ tongties,
one place to another along with | They, moreover, build houses in the
his kraal, and! then they carry the shape of a dome, ‘formed of lon
milk bags, ’ or skin bags which | sticks bent into that shape, thatch
contain milk. He is never more | with straw, and plastered in the in-
gratified than when running before | side with a mixture of clay afd
them with his shield, by beating on | cow-dung: the entrance is low—
which the whole are taught to | seldom higher than two or three
gallop after him. In’ this way he | feet; and having’ no chimney, the
leads them out to take exercise, | smoke proceeding from the fire,
and those oxen which run quickest | which is placed in the middle of
on such occasions, are considered | the hut, must find its way out the
his best ; of these he boasts, and | best way it can, through the roof
treats them with peculiar kindness, | or by the door.  '
The Cafires chiefly subsist upon | Next to these people is another
milk; but in part, also, by hunting, | numerous tribe, called Tambookies ;
and by the produce of their gardens. | and further to the N.E., near Des
They sow a species of millet, which | lagoa Bay, are the Mombookies,
is known in tke colony by ‘the | who are very numerous. These
name of Caffre corn. While 7- | ave said to be of the Caffre race
ing, it very much resembles Indian | as are the numerous tribes of the
corn, only the fruit growsin clusters, | Bootchuanas to the W.
like the grape; the grain is small | “Dr. Vanderkemp, ' with ‘other
and round, and when boiled is very | agents of the L. M. S., attempted
palatable.’ They frequently bruise | anestablishment on the Keiskamma
it between two stones, and make’a | R. in 1799; but owing to the dis-
kind of ‘bread from it. To sow it | turbed state of the ‘country, and the
is the work of the women. They | prejudices’ of the people, they re-
scatter the seed on the grass, after | moved to Graaff Reynet, within
which, they push off the grass from | the colony, in 1801 ; not, however,
the surface, by means of a kind of | till they had conciliated many of
wooden spade, shaped something | the Caffres, and prepared -the way
like a spoon at both ends, by which | for future labours, © :
operation the seed falls upon the | © The Rev. Josiah Williams, ‘ac-
ground, and is covered by the grass; | companied by his wife, Mr. Read,
from ‘underneath which withered | and a native convert, Tzatzoe, ar-
and rotten grass, it afterwards | rived ata place intended for a sta-
springs up. ‘They also sow pump- | tion, near Cat R., in 1816. . The
kins, water-melons,: &c., and use | chiefs of this country welcomed
various vegetables, which grow | them with the greatest: kindness.
wild. They cultivate tobacco, and | Several of them remembered Dr.
smoke it, like the Matchappees, | Vanderkemp, whom they called
through water in a horn. The men | Jankanna, and for whose memory
snend their days in idleness, having | they entertained a high venera-
ho employment but war, hunting, | tion. One of the chiefs said, ** You
and milking ‘the. cows. The | must not be tired of us, though we
women construct inclosures for the | are perverse; but often visit us;'

ny 115


CAF

Jankanna js dead, and, you are, ine
stead of him.’’ T’Geika, the princi-
pal chief, appeared to be deeply .con-
vinced of his sins ;.which he com-
‘ pared one night, after, the public
service, to the stars, then glitter-
ing over his head. . He. lamented
his neglect of the word formerly
preached by Jankanna;_ but, said
“that God, who would not suffer bim
to die in his sins, had sent. Jan-
kanna’s son. (for,so he .and .the
people styled Mr. Read) : and now
he declared,: that if God would be
pleased.,.to strengthen him,,. he
would renounce the world, and give
himself .wholly to Christ; with-
out whom, .he said, all things are
nothing; adding, that if the Caf.
fres refused to hear the Gospel, he
would -leave them and cleave to
the missionaries and their friends
at Cape Town, that he might enjoy
it. He also desired that his thanks
might be given to the Governor,
and to the King of, England,, for
sending missionaries to Caffraria.

Under these auspicious circum-
stances, Mr, Williams commenced
his labours. He _ built a house,
formed a garden, inclosed ground
for corn, and prepared for con-,
ducting water to it from a distance.
About 100 Caffres attended his mi-
nistry on the Sabbath, and about 70
on other days. <A school.he com-
menced, contained about 150 native
children, Butin the midst of his
efforts, Mr. W. was called, on the
24th of August, 1818, to his re-
ward. Obstacles afterwards arose,
partly from the existence of a
Cuffre war, which prevented, for
a time, the establishment of the
Mission.

In 1825, the Rev, John Brown-
lee, who had been successfully en-
gaged at Chumié, at the expense
of the Colonial Government, agreed
to attempt its revival. _Accom-
panied by Jan Tzatzoe, who, since
the death of Mr. Williams, had
been. a teacher at Theopolis, he


course of cultivation, A


| tant, British colony—the


CAF


proceeded to Tzateoe’s,kreal, on


the. Buffalo..R.,, the; residence of
his . assistant’s..father,. who).is a


Caffre .. chief .of considerable: ins
-fluence, ..A quantity of ground has


since, been, enclosed, and. is in
good con.
gregation: has, been a Plae tie and
he place of worsh p is, at, times,
full... Jn aletter dated April,6th,
claims of Caftreland. to, missionary
efforts ;— “ids gh Selah

. CA. dense. population, living in
the, vicinity of a Christian Protes.
Caffre
language perfectly understood and
spoken, -with little, variation, for
500 m. along the. eastern, coast—
access to the Caffre country from
the colony, anda daily intercourse
maintained between the Cafires '
and the colonial frontier—a weekly
market in the vicinity of the fron-
tier, attended by the Caflres and
other. tribes beyond them—the su-
periot local. advantages. of the
Cafike country, . compared. with
other tracts of South Africa,, and
a..free and uninterrupted. inter.’
course ,maintained between . the
Caffres, the, Tambookies, and some
of the Mombookie. tribes, ,, The
population of the Caffres. subject
to T’Geiha, Hinza, and Slambie,
does not probably amount to less
than 130,000. souls. The Tam-
bookies may amount to the same
number; and their. most. distant
kraals are not much more than 200
m. from the colonial territory, At
present there. would be no objec-
tion.made by the above-mentioned
tribes. to. missionaries _ settling
amongst them.

« Missions among. the Caffres
would form connecting links with
others that. may in future be. esta-
blished among the . Tambookies,
Mombookies,; and other tribes,
But, perhaps, the strongest. rea-
son that could be ,adduced for in-
creasing the missionary ensien in


blished.?
termine,
the nam
of the fo
1824, M
has been
and the
of buildi
tifying 0
living tog
instead :d
huts $' thi


menced,
finished by


ation, for
n. coast—
ntry from
ntercourse
ie Cafires '
—a weekly
the fron-
‘afires and
n—the su-
s.. of. the
ared , with
\ frica,, and
ted, inter-’
ween . the
, and some
bes. ., Lhe
res. subject
d Slambie,
unt. to, less
rhe Tam-
h the same
host. distant
ritory. At
no objec-
-mentioned
s settling


e Caffres
+ links with
re be, esta-
ambookies,
her sien
¢ Ss Teas
vey for in-
stations iv
118


CAF


Caffraria, ‘is* the success which has
attended the’ feeble means already
yseds??) or 8 { Wet ay

‘The Rev.’ Gottlieb’ Frederick
Keyser,’ from the ‘university at
Halle, has recently been appointed,
in consequence: of these circum-
stances, ® missionary of the society
to Cafiraria.’ AB

The Rev.'Wm. Shaw, accom-
panied ‘by’ other members of the
W M.'S., travelled through a con-
siderable part of this country in
1823, and the northward, to take
possession of a’place for a mission,
which lay between the’ residence
of two'chiefs. ‘Mr.:S, says, “ We
saw ‘as’ many’ kraals, or’ villages;
within 2 m. of the place, as must
contain’ a population of at least
1000 souls; and this number will
doubtless: be increased from other
parts as soon as the mission is esta-
blished.” ‘To the station thus de-
termined on, the missionaries‘gave
the name of ‘Vesleyville, in honour
of the founder of their society.’ In
18924, Mr. S. says :-— The village
has been laid out on a regular plan,
and the houses are now in progress
of building. ' It will be highly gra-
tifying to see a number of natives
living together in decent cottages,
instead ‘of their miserable straw
huts: this change in their howses
will imperceptibly draw after it a
change of habits, which is a mat-
ter of much ‘moré consequence.
Two strong wattled and plastered
houses, of fotir rooms each, have
been finished. I am living in one,
and Mr. one occupies the
other: so'that, compared with our
own residence in’ the waggon and
tent, we are now quite’ comfort-
able.’ ‘The Caffres,. both' men and
wonien, readily work for us‘ at any
thing we have for’ them to do,. re-
ceiving, as their wages, 5° strings
of beads per day. A school-room,
40 feet ‘by 15, “has béen com-
menced, afd will probably be
finished by June} when it will: be


CAP
used ‘for’ the’ double: purpose’ of &
school-room: and’ chapel, untit ‘it
may. appear desirable to: commence
a larger: building for divine wor.
ship. At present, service is held
in the open air, and, when excess
sively hot, which has frequently
been the case this ‘sumnier,
we avail ourselves of the ‘shadow
afforded by some large spreading
trees.”’ RA rit s

“¢ T am extremely anxious for the
completion of the school-room, that
I may be able to organize ‘a school
for the children, and such adults ‘as
may be anxious to learn. . This
cannot be effected until: the build-
ing is ready. Many of the chil-
dren have, however, learned the
Alphabet.”? '

«A four months’ residence in‘a
Pagan country hardly warrants my
saying any thing as to the direct
effects produced ‘by the preaching
of the Gospel ; and indeed itis not
at present in my power to speak of
any true conversions: but I ‘may
state, that a considerable number
of the natives have become regulat
hearers of the «word; and I ‘trust
that some of them will prove it to
be ‘ the power of God unto salva-
tion.’ Much discussion on the sub-
jects spoken of by the missionaries
has been induced; many contend-
ing for, and’ many producing their
strong reasons against, the ‘ Ink-
wadienkooloo’ (Great Book). They
are generally very attentive and
decorous during service; and one
of the pleasing things which IT
ought not to omit mentioning, is,
that although in a heathen country,
the Lord’s day is reverenced and ob-
served by the inhabitants of Wesley
ville and its immediate vicinity in a
most gratifying manner. This is
some encouragement, when it is
considered there was no such day
known, or observed, ‘among these

people previously to the commence-

ment of the mission among them.”

‘¢ The three brother wae Pato,
17


CAF


Congo, and Kama, are very sel-
dom absent from divine ; worship.
The last-named. is particularly: in-


quisitive, very docile, and:telis:me :


he often. prays to the, Great God,
that he- may be guided into the
truth, We. haye. great. hope of
this young man, and:shonld he be
truly converted to God; he will, no
doubt, be a very, useful auxiliary
to us. Of his wife we have also
great hope; she is.a daughter of
Gaika.”’ diuediah 4

_ © The .obstacles with,which we
have .to ,contend. in this mission,
arising from the extreme ignorance
and wickedness of the people, are
neither. few nor,small, In. Eng-
land, . books are frequently pub-
lished in defence of what. is. very
falsely called the religion of na-
ture, as opposed to the religéon of
the Bible. .I wish the authors of
these speculations enjoyed. the be-
nefit of merely a 4: months’ resi-
dence in Caffreland ; it, would give
them a melancholy opportunity of
beholding the folly and wretched-
ness of man, unblessed with the
light of revelation. They would
behold in the Caffres—-those ‘sim-
ple children of nature,’ who daily
appear in public, without shame,
in a stats of complete nudity, and
who profess no religion but that of
nature—an exhibition.of all the
grosser vices. Here are liars,
thieves, adulterers, murderers, &c.,
N appalling numbers; and not a
few who will even justify such
things against the contending mis-
sionary, and that without, blush or
shame.” :

In 1826, Mr. Shaw says, ‘‘ The
population continues much _ the
same as that reported to be re-
siding on the station last year; viz.
about 150 souls. Besides these,
there is a considerable number of
natives, who occasionally reside
here for several months at a time,
and who are either employed in
the public works of the station, or


CAF
in’ the ‘service of-.those that are
settled, at. the Institution. ‘There
are two things which at ‘present
operate against any very Consider-
able population being assembled at
a: mission village :-leé, the nature
of their feudal customs and rela-
tionships; and 2d/y, their love of
cattle, and decided predilection for
grazing pursuits, inducing them to


live a partially wandering life, not


much. unlike that of the graziers
‘and herdsmen. of patriarchal times,
as described. in the Book of Ge-
nesis,’’

Public Worship.—‘ The attend-
ance at public worship has been,
on. the whole, very encouraging
during the past year; the congre-
gations on Sabbath days have fluc.
tuated. between 80 and 200 per.
sons, whose decorous behaviour at
divine service is very remarkable
considering that, with ‘most of
them, the worship of. Almighty
God was but recently a new thing,
It is a gratifying circumstance, that
we usually have a number of na-
tives not belonging to the Institu-
tion at public worship ; as, by this
means, we hope that the influence
of Christianity will silently, yet
widely, extend itself. The scat-
tered manner in which the natives
live along the banks of the various
streamlets that water the country,
induces us occasionally to itinerate
among the neighbouring kraals,
for the purpose of preaching the
Gospel ;—we are génerally heard
with attention, and sometimes find
the natives inquisitive as to the
great truths revealed in the Scrip-
tures ;—at one place (only ahout
2 m, from the mission. premises)
we have always had a congrega-
tion averaging 100 souls. \Itine-
rant, labours must always. form 4
very necessary and important part
of missionary work }': Caffreland.

‘¢ The Society was formed about
ayearagu. At the time the num-
bers were reported to 7" district

8


meeti:
beside
its nul
have |
with t
our me
astonis
priety.
duct,
baptize
past ye
dates fe
sincere
Christi
doubt,
them t
words «
fruits ye
The |
. scholars
ral of th
first diffi
able to 1
scholar i
of this t
he can |


scholar,
teacher, in


hat are
‘Phere
present
onsider-
mbled at
e nature
and rela-
r love of
action for
x them to
y' life, not
> graziers
hal times,
ok of Ge-


he attend-
has been,
1couraging
1e Congres
; have fluc»
1 200 : per-
ehaviour at
emarkable
h “most 0
f. Almighty
new thing,
ystanice, that
mber of na-
the Institu-
as, by this
he influence
slently, yet
The scat-
h the natives
the various
he.country,
to itinerate
ring kraals,
paching the
prally beard
metimes find
» as to the
n the Scrip-
(only about
n. premises)


118


srmed about
e the num-
our district


CAF


meeting, it consisted of 5.members,
pesides the mission families; but
its number is increasing, and we
have much reason to be satisfied
with the character and conduct of
our members 3 indeed, I am quite
astonished at the general
priety and consistency of their con-
duct. 3 adult. natives have been
baptized on this station during the
past year; and we have 4 candi-
dates for that ordinance, of whose
sincere belief in the doctrines of
Christianity we have no reason to
doubt, even though we apply to
them the test contained in the
words of the Saviour, ‘by their
fruits ye shall know them.’

The School.—‘ The number of


_scholars in our school is 56; seve-


ral of these have passed over the
first difficulties, and will shortly be
able to read with ease. Our best
scholar is Yingana, a young chief
of this tribe, and brother to Pato;
he can read with fluency any part
of the Spelling-book published at
Chumie. A select number of the
girls are taught to .séw, and make
much improvement therein; they
are all taught to read the Caffre
language ; but such as pass through
the spelling-book will be also
taught to read the English lan-
guage. The school is a very im-
portant. branch of the work of a
station in this country; it is only
by its means thet we can indulge a
hope of raising up native inter.
preters, schoolmasters, and A-
ers: T am therefore greatly con-
cerned for its welfare and effi-
ciency ; and being myself unable
to devote such a portion of my time
to the instruction of the scholars,
as is indispensable. for their im-
provement, I have engaged a pious
young man (D. Roberts, son of a
settler of that name) as

master ; he was trained up as a
scholar, and was afterwards a
teacher, in our. school at Salem, I


CAF
sent him. to Theopolis, . where
there is a good school of Hottentot


children, managed after the’ Bri-
tish system, in order that he might
make himself acquainted with that
method of teaching.”
Cultivation.—‘* There areabout

30 acres of ground in cultivation on
‘this institution, and belonging to
its inhabitants; they have just reap-
edan abundant harvest of maize,
and Guinea or Caffre corn.’ We
prevailed on a few of thcm last sea-
son to try the plough ; and the cops
on the ploughed lands have yielded
so much better than those cultivated
in the native: manner, that an ini-
pression favourable ‘to the plough
appears to have been made.”

Buildings.— We have erected 2
additional cottages on account of
the mission ; one is used as a work-
shop, and the other affords store-
room, dc. Last year I reported
that one of the natives had built
himself a house, after the manner
of the colonists. I have now the
satisfaction to state, that 6 more of
our people have followed bis ex-
ample, and built themselves very
strong and comfortable wattled cot-
tages ; so that the village now con-
sists, of 14 houses, including the
school-house, which, as before
stated, is also used as a place of
worshiv, The remainder of our
people sti®! live in their native h

ut the greaterpart of them in
building decent cottages. The
effort to effect this, is, to them, a
great one; but as we think it of
much importance, we stimulate
and encourage their exertions of
this kind as much as possible, With
better and more convenient habita-
tions, a desire has arisen among the
le for clothing, and other use-

ul articles of civilized life.”

Another station hes been com-
menced by the Rev, Mr. Kay, to
which he has given the name of
Coke’s Mount; and Mr. nen,


CAL


in a letter, dated Sept. 1, 1826,
thus intimates the commencement
of a third :— | pene
' 4 Having corresponded with my
brethren, preparatory measureshave
been taken for commencing a third
missionary circuit in Caffreland.
It:is proposed that my residence be
with Hintza, who is the principal
ehief of Caffraria, and who is dis-
posed 'to give a friendly reception
to a messenger of peace. I shall
be about 90 m. in the interior be-
yond: Wesleyville and Mount Coke ;
the relative situation of the 3:sta-
tions forming a kind of triangle.
The population is large, butscatter-
ed; even those who belong to the
same tribe, or:clan, do not reside to-
gether; but, being subdivided again
into families, it is seldom that more
than 6. or 8 ‘houses, or huts, are
found in one spot. It is probable,
however, that they will unite to-
gether more closely when mission-
aries dwell among them. Some-
thing. of this kind is now taking
place at Mount Coke, for Brother
Kay’s people are increasing daily.
The Caffre mission is certainly one
of great promise. Fruit, as well
as blossoms, already begin to ap-
pear at Wesleyville; and, of Bro-
ther William Shaw, it may be said,
that he dives for the Caffres. His
whole heart is in the mission, and
_ is bent on one object as
principal end of his lite—the
promotion of their ¢emporal, and
spiritual, and eternal good.

§* Brother Kay, also, has reason to
believe that é¢wo of the Caffres at-
tending on his ministry at Mount
Coke are awakened, and beginning
to inquire earnestly after God our
Saviour.”

- CALCUTTA, a city of Hin.
doostan, the emporium of Bengal,
the seat of the supreme govern-
ment of British India, and the See
of a Bishop, with a citadel called
Fort William. It is situated on the


CAL


‘left: bank of the Hoogly, or western


arm of the: Ganges, 100 m. from:
its: mouth, and extends from. .the
W. point of Fort Wiltiam; up the
river, about 6 mr, ; the breadth, in
many parts, is inconsiderable. \Ge-
nerally speaking, the description of
one Indian city is a desctiption of
all;: being all built on one plan,
with very narrow and crooked
streets, interspersed with numerous
reservoirs, ponds, and gardens,
A: few of the streets are: paved
with brick. The houses are
variously built; some with brick,
others with mud, and a greater
proportion with bamboos and mats:
these ‘different’ kinds of : fabrics,
intermixed with each other, form
a motley appearance. Those of
the latter kinds are invariably of
one story, and covered with thatch;
those of brick seldom exceed two
floors, and have flat terraced roofs;
but these are so thinly scattered,
that fires, which often happen, do
not, sometimes, meet with the ob-
struction of a brick house through
the whole street. But Calcutta is,
in part, an exception to this rule of
building ; for the quarter inha.-
bited by the English is composed
entirely of brick buildings, many
of which have the appearance of
alaces. The population — has
en variously estimated between
600,000 and 1,000,000; but it has
been recently ascertained, by an
accurate enumerafion, that the re-
sidents amount only to 179,917;
viz. 13,138 nominal Christians;
48,162 Mahomedans;. 118,203
Hindoos; and 414 Chinese: beside
these, it is estimated that about
100,000 daily enter and depart
from the city. The number of
premises inhabited is 67,619,—of
which 6430 are. upper-roomed
houses, 8800 lower-roomed houses,
ao tiled buts, and 37,497 straw
uts.
The city is said to. be aa
2


both
T802
clirci
2,23

S gre
Ther
estab)
try, ¢
Ther
guese.
churcl
Hindo
colleg

is a mc
likewis
house,
In 1'

the sou
the fee]
to thea

@ small
Hole,
alive th
re-taken
tory of
inhuman
put to de
mediate]
erection
liam con
ror in r¢
any fort
have cost
ling, and
15,000 m
without b
of the for
prouch by
cerned at


: fabrics,
her, form
Those of
ariably of
th thatch;
xceed two
iced roofs;
scattered,
ha ’
iit the ob-
Jalcutta is,
this areca
rter inha-
composed
n many
ation
od between
but it bas
ned, by a
that the re-
> 179,017;
Christians}
118,203
hese $ beside


bpereroo


120


that about
and depart
number of
61,610,—of


med houses;
37,407 straw


» decreasing


CAL CAL


both in wealth and population. In departments of government, into
1802, the population, including a | the languages of the country, and
ciccvit of 20 m., was estimated at | also to’ promote the translation of
2,225,090. “Unlimited toleration | the Scriptures into those languages.
is granted to all forms of religion. | Early in 1801, Dr. Carey was con-
There are three churches of the | nected with the institution as
establishment of the mother coun- } teacher of Bengalee and Sung-.
try, one of which is the cathedral. | skrita, with the design of rendering
There are also a Scotch, a Portu- | it the centre of all the translations
guese, a Greek, and an Armenian | of Eastern Asia; and to facilitate
church, several mosques, many | these purposes, in less than 5&
Hindoo temples, and a Mahomedan | years, about 100 learned men, from
college. The government-house | different parts of India, Persia, and
is a most superb edifice ; here are | Arabia, were attached to it; the
likewise a court of justice, a town- | translations of the Scriptures in 7
house, @ custom-house, anda bank. | different languages were in a pro-
In 1756, Calcutta was taken by | gressive state, and portions were
the soubah of Bengal, who forced | printed in several. About the close
the feeble garrison of the old fort, | of this period, the college con-
to the amount of 146 persons, into } tinued to afford important aid to
a small prison called the Black | this benevolent work, yet the care
Hole, ox « with only 23 came | of the translations devolved prin-
alive the y«. « orning, It was] cipally upon the Baptist missiona-
re-taken ths wxt year; the vic- | ries at Serampore.
tory of Plassey followed; and the | ' In 1816, a Hindoo college was
inhuman soubah was deposed, and | founded. This institution is re-
put to death by his successor. Im- | markable as being the first which
mediately after this victory, the | has been projected, superintended,
erection of the present Fort Wil- | and supported, by the natives, for
liam commenced, which is supe- | the instruction of their sons in the
rior in regularity and strength to | English and Indian languages, and
any fort in India, is supposed to | in the literature and science of
have cost about £2,000,000 ster- | Europe and Asia.
ling, and is capable of containing | The supreme government has
15,000 men. No ship can pass | resolved to establish and liberally
without being exposed to the fire | endow another Hindov college here,
of the fort, nor can an enemy ap- | to encourage the study of the
prowch by land without being dis- | Sungskrita, and, through the me-
cerned at the distance of 10 or | dium of that language, of general
12 miles. literature. It is to be placed under
Sir William Jones instituted | the superintendence of a committee
here, in 1784, the Asiatic S., de- | of European gentlemen,
signed to concentrate all the va- A large sum having been placed by
luable knowledge, which might be | the Society for Propagating the Lios-
obtained in India, The “‘ Asiatic | pel in Foreign Part: xt the disposal
Researches”? are the productions of | of the Rev. Dr. M: idleton, while
this society, forming a noble and | bishop of Calcutta, he established
splendid monument of British | Bishop’s College. The objects of
science in a distant country. this institution are ;—1. To prepare
In 1800, the College at Fort Wil- | native and other Christian youths
liam was founded by the Marguis| to become preachers, catechists,
Wellesley, to initiate the English | and schoolmasters; 2. To teach
youth, who were to fill the different | the elements of useful knowledge


M 121


CAL


and the English language to Mus-
sulmen and Hindoos; 3. To trans-
late the Scriptures, the Liturgy,
and tracts; 4, To receive English
missionaries, sent out by the so-
ciety, on . eir first arrival in India.

The supreme government was
induced, in consequence of the
late Bishop Heber’s known wishes
on the subject, to make a large
and extremely important addition
to the land already granted to the
college. The Society for *4e Pro-
pagation of the Gospel it is under-
stood, has given instructions for ‘he
immediate completion of the bu''d-
ings according to their original
plan, and proposes to enlarge them
with as little delay as possible, to
an extent which will admit of the
reception of 40 students.

The Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge has increased
the number of scholarships found-
ed by it to 7; and various amend-
ments, originally suggested by

. Bishop Heber, have’ been intro-
duced by the Society Sor the Pro-
pagation of the Gospel into the
statutes, from which it is expected
that the funds and general useful-
ness of the institution will reap
material advantage. As a resi-
dence for missionaries on their first
arrival in Jndia—as a seminary for
native preachers and catechists—
and as a source of accurate trans-
lations of the Scriptures and the
Liturgy into the Huastern lan-

uages,—the college is now in ef-
ectual operation. The attention
of the public, both in this country
and in India, more especially of
that part of it which is employed
in promoting Christian knowledge
according to the principle: of the
Church of England, is steadily di-
rected to this quarter; and there
appears every reason to believe,
that the day is not far distant,
when, in the glowing language of
its late visitor, “‘ The college will
present a spectacle illustrious to


CAL


Asia and the world, and the talents
and distinguished learning of the
professors will maxe themselves
known, we will not say from the
Indus to the Ganges, but, as ap-
pearances now indicate, from Jeru-


salem to the farthest limits to.


which British arms, or commerce,
or enterprise, have made the East
accessible to us.”
The Rev. Johu Zack Kiernander,
from the Society for Promoting
Christian. Knowledge, in 1766, was
the honoured instrument of esta-
blishing the first Protestant mission
in Bengal. After labouring many
years at Cuddalore, he came to
Calcutta, in 1766 ; where he erect-
ed a place of worship, and formed
a church, which was the only Pro-
testant one in Bengal for about
30 years. About 1773, the comn-
municants were 173, of whom 104
were natives. In the two suc-
ceeding years 89 were added,
mostly Hindoos, Amidst numerous
discouragements, he continued to
witness many precious fruits of his
labours, till 1787 ; when Mr. Grant
purchased the house for 5500 dollars,
called it the Missionary Church,
and devoted it to its original design.
About this time, the Rev. David
Brown, some years first chaplain
of the Presidency and :provost of
the college at Fort William, among
other zealous efforts for the pro-
motion of Christianity in India,
devoted much of his time to the
spiritual good of this flock, till
about 1811; when the Rev. 7. 7.
Thomason teok the charge, and
continued to preach for many years
in the mission church, to a large
and respectable congregation which
raised a fund for his support.
About 1815, the society renewed
its labours in the establishment of
English and Bengalee schools, and
the circulation of the Scriptures
and tracts, under a diocesan com-
mittee at Calcutta, who appointed
district committees See


truth, ”


seminar:
satisfied
be so
foundati
A begi
among
munity,
want of
require
but pec
slonarfag
hee
Villages
its shade,
shelter,
the effe
over such
impossible
founded o
the most
withstand


While


only Pro-
‘or about
the com-
vyhom 104
two suc-
e added,
numerous
ntinued to
its of his
Mr. Grant
£00 dollars,
y Church,
nal design.
Rev. David
+ chaplain


to a large
ration which


pport.
a renewed


plishment of


CAL


parts of India, by which means its
labours have become extensive and
efficient. Mr. Van Gricken is
superintendent of the society’s
prosperous schools hvre.

_ The native schools in the neigh-
bourhood of Caleutta, which were
originally established by Bishop
Middleton, have also received a
gteat accession of strength from
the patronage of the late Bishop of
Calcutta: 16 schools are now
maintained in that district, and
1280 native boys are receiving the
blessings of education, and imbibing
principles of morality and religion.
They are at present superintended
by the missionaries residing in
Bishop’s Cullege; and as the
number of missionaries increase,
and new missionary stations are
occupied, new schools will follow
in their train.

{The Rev. Thomas Robinson, se-
cretary to the Calcutta district
committee, states, ‘‘ That their
native schools in Bengal hold out
most encouraging prospects oi suc-
cess, in converting the heathen to
our holy faith. I have visited these
seminaries,”? he says, “and am
satisfied that no human means can
be so effectual in sapping the
foundations of idolatry as they are.
A beginning has also been made
among the female part of the com-
munity, on a limited scale, for
want of funds to extend it. We
require nothing,”? he continues,
‘ but pecuniary resources and mis-
sionaries, to assemble the whole
youthful population of our Indian
villages, wherever a tree can afford
its shade, or a thatched roof give
shelter. You may easily imagine
the effect of a Christian system
over such plastic minds, and how
impossible it is for a superstition,
founded on ignorance, and abetting
the most revolting cruelties, to
or the diffusion of light and

’ s


While the Bapt, M. S. was de-


CAL

liberating on its first efforts, . the
committee learned that Mr. John
Thomas, who had been several
years in Bengal, preaching the
. Gospel to the natives, was then ir:
London, endeavouring to establish
a fund for @ mission to that coun-
try, and that he was desirous of
engaging a companion to return
with him to the work. On »arti-
cular inquiry, it appeared that Mr.
Thomas, after having emb:aced
the Gospel, under the ministry of
Dr. Stennet, went out, in the year
1783, as surgeon of the Oxford
East Indiaman: that while he was
in Bengal, he felt a desire to com-
municate the Gospel to the natives ;
and being encouraged to do so, by
a religious friend, he obtained his
discharge from the ship; and, after
learning the language, continued,
from the year 1787 till 1791, preach
ing Christ in different parts of the
country, Of the conversion of
three persons he entertained hope ;
two of whom were brahmins.
Mr. Thomas was accordingly in-
vited to join the Rev. Wm. Carey}
and having acceded to the proposal,
he; with Mr. Carey and family,
arrived in India in Nov. 1793.
Severe trials, however, awaited
them. Their remittances failed,
and they were without support.
Early in the following year, Mr.
Carey accepted an invitation to
take charge of an Indian factory at
Mudnabutty, 200 mn. N, of Cal-
cutta, and Mr. Thomas acceded to
a similar appointment at Moypaul-
diggy, 16 m.: further N. ere
their means were ample; and at
the same time they had charge of
several hundred Hindoos, to whom
they gave instruction, besides
preaching to the natives, both at
their places of residence and in
various excursions,

Mr. Carey’s appointment, in 180},
to an important station in the new
college at Fort William, prepared
the way for the ee of «


CAL


mission in this city. In Jan. 1803, a
place of worship, was opened; a few
Only attended, perhaps 20. More
attention was shortly afterwards
awakened. A. shed was. taken in
Lal Bazar, in which large con-
gregations asse'nbled ; and in Jan.
1809, av 'c apel was opened.
In a fey + «s from that time, 6
persons were baptized; others were
inquiring the way of salvation ; and
2 native missionaries were sent out.
'. In 181], an auxiliary B.S. was
formed. , Many persons, who had
lived in drunkenness, in profane
' swearing, and in -gross impurity,
laid. aside their: vicious practices.
Not 4 corner was there in the
fort wherein’ the Gospel had not
found..a reception: indeed,,; a
wider extension of truth took place
during -this year than. in any one
preceding. The word of God
continued to prevail, and a con-
‘siderable number of persons, Eu-
ropeans and natives, were added to
the church. Certain Hindoos,
condemned for an extensive rob-
bery, were visited in the jail bya
native preacher. They received
his attentions with gratitude ; and
two of them. united in .a request
that he would attend them to the
place of execution; with which he
readily complied.
. Among. the laborious native
preachers at Calcutta, Sebul:ram
was particularly distinguished for
the zeal he displayed, and the re-
Spect in which he was held, On
one occasion, in 1812,. he was
visited by nearly 300 persons at
once, . chiefly fishermen, from a
town about 30 m. distant; who,
having received a book they could
not fully understand, came to-him
to have it explained. . This proved
to be a copy.of the Scriptures; on
which he discoursed to them great
part of: 3 days, which was the ex-
tent of their visit.

On Jan. 11th, 1816, the Rev.
Messrs. John Lawson and Eustace


CAL


Carey were ordained: co-pastors of
the church at Calcutta, in con-
nexion with the senior brethren.

A new chapel was opened for
English worship, in 1821, the ex-
pense, about £3000, was, nearly
defrayed by, subscriptions. on the
spot. A chapel was_also_erect-
ed at the charge of a pious fe-
male servant. A benevolent in-
stitution, and other schools in con-
nexion with the mission, were use-
ful. Indications. of, hopeful seri-
ousness were observed in many of
the pupils ; and. one, who died, is
said to have given undoubted evi-
dence of conversion to God,, Sick-
ness and death invaded, the mis-
sionary brotherhood, but other
agents were raised up. |,

That useful knowledge was mak-
ing great progress at, this period, is
obvious from the following passage
from. a: missionary’s _ journal :—
‘‘ This morning, asked my pundit,
who has lately visited every school
connected with the Culcutta School
Society, to examine its progress,
whether he had witnessed any ef-
fects of the instruction now af-
forded.to children? He replied,
‘ Yes, Sir;. the effects are asto-
nishing, both among the children
and the parents. A few months
ago, before your books were intro-
duced, if I had asked a boy at
school what was the matter during
the late eclipse, he would have
replied, that the giant Rahoo was
eating the moon, and, would have
joined in the beating of drums, &q.
to frighten him, that he might let
go his grasp. But now they all
know better; they see such an
event without alarm, know it to be
produced by the shadow of the

earth, and despise the foolish ideas
and customs they formerly enter-
tained and practised. A few months
ago, had a snake bit a person, he
would have done nothing but imme-
diately call for a priest, to repeat a
muntra (or incantation) over him;
24


inth
as he
munt
Over
iron ¢
son—
there
very,
poison
In
young
aptitud
work,
mission
the Be
thus aff
of the u
had bee
dren of |
The s
describe
“The ¢
chapel, '
binson, —
creasin
added ie
are natiy
chund, th
tinue to
ra ende
spect!
Circular R
thren, ina
We are ha
the death
have expe
= val. The
dently beer
Sregation,
lieve that {
dying breat
ther, Hig
Monitions
People pro
conversion,
happy frame
@ encounte
Were greatly
the drooping
bis friends, |
trlarchs, lea
him, His ty


rs of
con-
Ne

j for
e ex-
early
n the
prect-
us fe-
nt in-
n con-
re usé-
1 seri-
any of
died, 1s
ted evi-
.. Sick-
he mis-
t other


ras mak-
yeriod, is
, passage
urnal an
iy pundalt,
¥ Fechool
tta School
progresé,
ad any ef-
now af-
» replied,
are asto-
b children
> months
ere intro-
a boy at
er during
puld have
ahoo was
ould have
rums, &¢.
might let
they all
b such an
Dw it to be
WwW ‘of the
olish ae
rly enter:
2 : months
erson, he
but imme-
o repeat 4
over him}
124


CAL


over the wound, and


very, even though the snake were
oisonous,? ??

In 1824, Mr. Kirkpatrick, a
young man, had discovered such
aptitude and inclination to the
work, that he ‘was adopted as a
missionary, He was educated in
the Benevolent Institution, and
thus affords unother striking proof
of the utility of those exertions that
had been made to instruct the chil-
dren of the poor.

The state of the mission is thus
described in the last Report :—
“The congregation in Lal Bazar
chapel, under the care of Mr. Ro-
binson, has been gradually j
creasing, and 9 persons have b -u
added to the church, 5 of whom
are natives. Chodron and Gora-
chund, the native itiserants, con-
tinue to labour as usual, nor are
their endeavours without effect.

Respecting the church in the
Circular Road (say the junior bre-
thren, in aletter recently received),
we are happy to state that, since
the death of brother Lawson, we
have experienced a gracious revi-
val. The Spirit of God has evi-
dently been poured out on the con-
gregation, We have reason to be-
lieve that it commenced with the
dying breath of our belovel bro-
ther. His solemnly affectionate
admonitions to some of the young
people proved effectual to their
conversion. The firmness and
happy frame of mind with which
he encountered the last enemy,
were greatly sanctified in revivin
the drooping graces of several o
his friends. He died as the pa-
triarchs, leaving a blessing behind
him, His funeral sermon, preach-


CAL °


| ;
and, if the snake were poisonous, die |'ed by brother Yates, was also
inthe repetition :—but now, assoon | blessed to several; so that, during
as he is bitten, he puts no faith in | the last year, 30 have been added
muntras, but directly ties a bandage | to the church, most of whom are’
gets a hot | young people, from'the age of 13
iron applied to burn out the poi- | to 20. Several of these are Por-
son—and if he get it done quickly, | tuguese young men, who speak the .
there is great hopés of his reco- | Bengalee language, and who per-


form, to a certain extent, the work
of missionaries among the heathen,
both by their example end faithful
addresses.’? .
From the annual Report of the
Calcutta Ausiliary Bapt. M. S.,
which was held in Aug. 1826, when
Dr. Carey filled the chair, it appears
that there are 4 native places of
worship occupied by the society,
situated in the most public places
in the city, and generally attended
by many hearers. Mr. Kirkpatrick
and Mr. Carapiet are principally
engaged in this service, which not
. only effords them an opportunity of
preaching the Gospel to thousands,
but also of distributing great num-
bers of tracts, Gospels, and other
portions of the Scriptures. On an
average, it is estimated that not
less than 20 native services are
held every week in these Bungalow
chapels; and frequently the whole
day is spent in them, either in con-
ducting public worship, or con-
versing famitiarly during the inter-
vals with those who remain for
that purpose. 3 members had
been admitted into the native
church, and @ fourth was proposed
for baptism, but was soon afterwards
reti.,2d by death. The present
number in connexion with this na-
tive society is 15.

The Rev. James Thomas renders
assistance at the English chapel,
while his principal attention is
devoted to the Mussulman popu-
lation of Calcutta, who are com-
puted at 10,000 souls, without any
missionary expressly engaged for
their benefit. Mr. Thomas was


prepared for this branch of ser-
vice by his acquaintance with the
125


u2


CAL


Hindoostanee, acquired before he.
_ left England, td
The Benevolent Institution, con-
ducted by. Mr. and Mrs, Penney,
continues to be a source of much
. benefit to, the. indigent'youth of
Calcutta, The present number of
pupils is 258—among whom are
to be found Europeans, Hindoos,
Mussulmans, . Portuguese, Indo-
Britons, Chinese, Africans, Arme-
nians, and Jews. Since the esta-
blishment cf this institution, up-
wards of .1000 children have been
fostered under its benevolent wing,
who .would otherwise, in all pro-
bability, . have been doomed to a
life of ignorance, wretchedness,
and vice. Instead of. this, many
of them are now filling respectable
stations in life, with honour to
theniselves, and satisfaction to
their employers; while in some
there is reason to hope that effects
far more pleasing have been pro-
duced. Two brothers, who had
been educated in the institution,
died lately, testifying their faith
in the Son of God, and pray-
ing for their relations, teacher,
and the whole world. Nor must it
be forgotten that the Calcutta Ju-
venile Society, who are zealously
engaged in conducting prayer-
meetings from house to house,
distributing tracts, and establishing
Sabbath-schools, is ¢omposed of
young men who have been edu-
cated here. It is gratifying to add,
that the value of this institution is
evidently appreciated by the pub-
lic and the Government. For se-
veral years past, a highly respect-
able lady bas presented each girl


with a garment, on condition of


her making it herself. . The go-
vernment have also made a gene-
rous donation of 13,000 rupees,
during the year 1826, in order to
liquidate the debts and repair the
school-reom of the institution.

The srenting-aifee, conducted
by Mr. Pearce, is becoming more


CAL:


‘and more important as a means of
diffusing intellectual, moral, and
religious, truth. _, Besides. many
thousand tracts and school-books,
in various languages, and other
miscellaneous works of a. larger
size, there have issued from. it a
Commentary on the: Romans in
Bengalee, by brother Eustace Ca-
rey;—a work on geography, with
other small publications,» in the
same language,by brother Pearce;—
with a Harmony. of the Gospels, in
Hindoostanee, a new translation
of the Psalms, and an epitome of
Natural History, with various other
works, in Bengalee, by brother
Yates. About 70 persons are em-
ployed in various capacities in the
office, among whom are several
native Christians, thus comfortably
supported by their own labour. A
service is held for the benefit of all
the office servants twice or thrice a
week, which, it is hoped, may lead
many of them to an acquaintance
with the truth of the Gospel, and
eventually, under the divine bless-
ing, to an experience of its power,

A Corresponding Committee, in
connexion with the C. A. S., was
formed at Calcutta, in 1815, to
which the affairs of that institution
in the N. of India were entrusted:
£1500 per annum. were allowed to
them by the society, and the Eu-
ropean residents added to this sum
several hundred pounds, The pro-
ceedings of the committee were
commenced by carrying into effect
a plan which had been long in con-
templation, viz. the education of
native youths and half-castes, al-
ready professing Christianity, in
such a manner as might admit of
their being afterwards ordained to
the ministry, if they should appear
suitable instruments.

On the Sth of June, 1816, the
Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Greenwood
and Mr. Schroeter arrived, and
were gladly received by the
society’s friends, who had long

126


express
attempt
school -
dren, hi
,On the
Calcutte
Roberts¢
pany Mr
Greenwc
the scho


ns of
|, and
many
pooks,
other
larget
ans in
Ace .
ly, Wi
Ma the
ATCej;——
spels, in
inslation
itome of
ous other
brother
are eme-
es in the
e several
mfortably
bour. A
nefit of all
yr thrice @
» may lead
yuaintance
ospel, and
vine bless-
its power.
mittee, in
iM. S., was


institution
entrusted:
, allowed to


b, 1616, the


Greenw


brrived, and


ed by
126


CAL
been waiting their coming. They
were placed, pro tempore, in .@
house just purchased at Garden


Reach, about 4,m, below the city,


where they were diligently em-
ployed in learning Bengalee. Six
native’ youths,” the fruit of Mr.


Corrie’s niinistry, were put under:


Mr. Greenwood’s care, and were
attended by Serjeant M‘Cabe, their
protector and provider.

At Kidderpore, a village near
Garden Reach, a native having
given ground »for the purpose, a
school-room was erected, and a
teacher was appointed to carry into
effect the new system of instruc-
tion.. Some brahmins, who wit-
nessed the opening of the school,
expressed their approbation of this
attempt to diffuse knowledge. The
school commenced with 33 chil-
dren, but soon increased to 100.
.On the 6 native youths leaving
Calcutta, first to return to Mr.
Robertson, and finally to accom-
pany Mr. Corrie to: Benares, Mr.
Greenwodd devoted ‘more time: to
the school; attended the Female
Orphan. Asylum; containing be-
tween 20 and 30 destitute children ;
and was enavled to establish divine
service, in English, in the large
hall: of the: mission-house every
Sunday morning.

On the 12th Oct. 1817, after
the first discourse had been deli-
vered, professedly with a mis-
sionary object, from a pulpit of the
established church in India (which
produced about. £300), a native,
from Bareilly, was baptized by the
name of Fuez Messeeh, who had
been a year under instruction, and
had given satisfactory evidence of
his sincerity.

The native, who


ve the. ground
for the erection of the school at
Kidderpore, wished that those boys,
who should become most proficient
in Bengalee, should be taught Eng-


lish, This was attended to, and
between 20 and 30 boys received


CAL


instruction.. Of the state of the’
school Mr. G. reports very favour-
ably, under date of. Nov. 5; 1817.
In :consequence of a_ particular
necessity for his services, he .soon
after proceeded to Chunar, and the
Rey. Deocar and Mrs, Schmid
were appointed to the station. One
chief object of Mr. Schmid’s re-
moval from Madras was the super-
intendence of a periodical work,
connected with the plans and exer-
tions of the society, to which he
had particularly applied his atten-
tion. : About the time of his arrival
at Calcutta, a vacancy occurring in
the situation of mistress of the Fa-
male Orphan Asylum, Mrs. Schmid
was appointed to. that office, for
which she was well fitted. The
charge of the, school at Kidderpore,
and others lately opened, devolved
on Mr. Sandys, son of Col. Sandys,
of Cornwall, who was both well
qualified and disposed for the task.
Of Mr. Schmid, the Correspond-
ing Committee observe in the fol-
lowing year :—‘‘ His acquaintance
with Tamul has, in some degree,
facilitated his. Bengalee studies, in
which language he has just pre-
pared a useful school-book,— being
a collection of extracts of Holy
Writ, with the corresponding Eng-
lish in the opposite columns,—de-
signed, at once, to assist the scho-
lar in his acquisition of English,
and to enrich his mind'‘with Evan-
gelical truth.”? They also remark :
.— The school at Kalee Ghaut
(one of the 4 lately under the
charge of -Mr. Greenwood) has
been transferred to the Diocesan
School Committee, in consequence
of its having been judged to fall
most conveniently within the line
of that. committee’s operations.
Of the other 3 schools belonging
to the Kidderpore station, 1 of
them—the school erected on the
ground made over to the com-
mittee by Colly Shunker, a few
years ago—has been ars | changed
7


CAL


into an English school, at. the pure
ticular request of Colly Shunker ;
who expressed his regret that the
English language had not been re-
gularly taught at the school, and
handsomely offered hiniself to pay
the monthly sum of 16 sicca .ru-
pees, for the support of an English
schoolmaster. A suitable person
has been found, it is hoped, in Mr.
Parker, who has lately been put in
charge of the school.” On the
subsequent removal of the Baboo,
Colly Shunker, to Benares, the ex~
pense of the school devolved again
on the committee.

About this time the B. & F. S.
S., in concert with some members
of the Calcutta S. S., then in Eng-
land, had obtained funds for send-
ing out a suitable female teacher
to India. Such a person was found
in Miss Cooke, whose services, o1
her arrival in India; were surren-
dered by her first supporters, to the
Corresponding: Committee, who
were extremely desirous of promo-
The com-


ting female education.
mencement of her exertions was


singularly interesting. While en-
gaged in studying the Bengalee
language, and scarcely daring to
hope that an immediate openin

for entering upon the work to which
she had devoted herself would be
found, Miss Cooke paid a visit to
one of the society’s boys’ schools,
in order to observe their pronuncia-
tion. This circumstance, trifling
in appearance, led to the establish-
ment of her first school, Unaccus-
tomed to see an European female in
that part of the native town, a crowd
collected round the door of the
school. Among them was an inte-
resting looking little girl, whom the
school pundit: drove away. Miss
Cooke desired the child tobe called,


and, by an interpreter, asked her if


she wished to learn to read? She
was told, in reply, that this child
had, for 3 months past, been daily
begging to be admitted to learn to


CAL


‘read, among the boys; ard that :if’


Miss Cooke (who had made known
her purpose of devoting herself to
the instruction of girls) would at-
tend:next day, twenty girls should
be collected.

On the following day, Miss Cooke,
accompanied by a female friend,
who,speaks Bengalee fluently, at-
tended. accordingly. About 15 girls,
accompanied, in several cases, by
their mothers, assembled; anc the
following few particulars of a long
conversation which took place with
them, will afford some insight into.
the modes of thinking prevalent
among them. On their inquiring
Miss Cooke’s circumstances, they
were told that she had heard in
England that the women of this
country were kept in total igno-
rance; that they were not taught
even to read or write—that the men
alone were allowed to attain any
degree of knowledge: and it was
also generally understood; that the
chief objection to their acquiring
knowledge, arose from their having
no females who would undertake
to teach them. She had, therefore,
felt compassion for their state, and
had determined to leave her coun-


try; parents, friends, and every other |


advantage, and to come here for the
sole purpose of educating theit fe-
male children. They, with one
voice, cried out, smiting their bosoms
with their right hands—‘ Oh! what
a pearl of a woman is. this!’’ It was
added, ‘‘ She has given. up every
earthly expectation to come here ;
and seeks not the riches of this
| world, but to promote your best in-
terests.”” ‘Our children are yours
—we give them to you,”’ replied
two or three of their. mothers at
onc3, After a while, one asked,
*¢ What will be the use of learning
to out female children? and what
advantage will it be to them??? She
was told, that “ it will enable them
to be more useful in their families,
and increase their knowledge ; and
128


should }
low-cre¢
spoke to
the high
Thisde
plans see
suspicion
to her m
her inter
Petitions
to time, {
the native
were soo
might hay
allowed.
of the s
tutored Be
interested
may be we
The firs
self, after
some wee
under the


promised,
child to sche


hat :if'
snown
self to
uld at-
should


Cooke,
friend,
tly, at-
5 girls,
ises, by
anc the
fa long
ice with
rht into.
ppb
nquiring
es, they
heard in
n of this’
al igno-
ot taught
t the men
ttain any
id it: was
, that the
acquiring
pir having
undertake
nerefore;
state, and
ner bent
e er .
; ator the
p theit fe-
with one
leir bosoms
Oh! what
1? twas
up every
me: here 5
s of this
r best in-
h ate yours
,” replied
others at
f learning
and what
Pm tL She
able them
r families,


128


edge; and


CAL


it is to be hoped, that it will tend
also to gain them respect, and in-
crease the harmony of families.”
“True,” said one of them, ‘ our
husbands now look upon us.as little
better than brutes.”? And another
added, *¢ What benefit will you de-
rive from this: work?’? She was
told that the only return we wished,
was to promote their best interests
and happiness. ‘ Then,” said the
woman, ‘¢ I suppose this is a holy
work in your sight—and well pleas-
ing to God.”? As they were not yet
able to understand our motives, it
was only said in return, that “‘ God
is always well pleased that we
should love and do good to our fel-
low-creatures.”? The women then
spoke to one another in terms of
the highest approbation.
 Thisdevelopement of MissCooke’s
plans seems to have preve:ted much
suspicion from being entertained as
to her motives, and the effects of
her intercourse with the children:
Petitions were presented from time
to time, from different quarters of
the native town ; so that 8 schools
were soon established, and more
might have been begun, had time
allowed. Qne instance, however,
of the suspicion with which un-
tutored minds are apt to view dis-
interested labours for their good, it
may be well to notice.

The first girl who presented her-
self, after having attended daily for
some weeks, was withdrawn ; and,
under the pretext of going to a dis-
tance, was absent about a fortnight.
Daily inquiry being made after her,
the father, one day, presented a
paper, written in English, which he
required Miss Cooke to sign; and
promised, in that case, to send his
child toschool again. This proved
to be an agreement, by which Miss
Cooke was required to bind herself
to make no claim upon the child
hereafter, on the score of educating
her; and that her parents should
be at liberty to take her away when


CAI.


they chose.. Miss Cooke, with the
utmost readiness, signed the agree-
ment: the child returned to schvol
—nor has any further interruption,
except what the ignorance and in-
dolence of the parents: occasion,
arisen in any quarter,

At the time of printing the fifth
Report, there were 277 girls in the
10 schools; about..200 of whom
were in daily attendance.

It-is pleasing to add, that several
of the elder girls at the Asylum for
the Female Orphans of European
perents, who had given evidence of
having beeome truly pious, entered,
with gladness of heart, on the study
of Bengalee, in order that, under
Miss Cooke’s _ instructions, they
might be prepared to act as teachers
in the female schools. Other
schools for boys were opened, and
the various means of usefulness were
plied with great activity. The
visits of the Marchioness of Hast-


/


ings to the female schools seem to °


have: been attended with happy re-
sults, ‘Certain it, is,’ say the
committee,. ‘‘ that since her Lady-
ship’s visit, the mistress of the Shy-
am bazaar school (the only female
teacher that could at first be found)
bas been called to instruct a re-
spectable brahminee, a widow, with
2 other adult females, at her own
house, during the hours not occu-
pied in the school: and this wi-
dowed. brahminee, though herself
still a learner, attends daily at the
house of a brahmin to instruct his
two daughters.”? ,

-On the 28th of August, 1893,
an auxiliary 44, S. was formed,
and 3000 rupees. contributed ; and
a. Ladies’ S. for the promotion of
female education was subsequently
established, under the patronage of
Lady Amherst. The total number
of publications reported the follow-
ing year, as issued from the so-
ciety’s press, was 55,200.

From the last Report, the following
particulars are oe — The


CAL
death of Bishop Heber produced an

impression highly honourable to his

character and usefulness. At Cal-

cutta, it was determined to erect

@ monument in the cathedral, and

to appropriate any surplus in the

fund to the founding of “ Heber

scholarships” in Bishop’s College.

The sum of 8300 rupees was sub-

scribed. The committee also,

wishing to perpetuate the memory

of their regard to the late Bishop,

have directed the founding of 2

scholarships in Bishop’s College to

bear his name. The society, at its
annual meetings, having repeatedly
sanctioned the yearly i He seg
so long as the state of the funds
would allow, of the sum of £1000
to the use of Bixhop’s College, the
committee have ‘acted on that
authority; and have, at the proper
seasons, voted the said sum for the
years 1822, 1823, 1824, and 1826
respectively. In voting the grant
for 1826, which was done unani-
mously, at the monthly meeting of
the committee, on the llth of
Dec., the committee have request-
ed the committee of the Calcutta
auxiliary to appropriate the said
grant, in conjunction with such a
portion of former grants as may be
requisite for the ‘purpose of form-
ing 2 theological scholarships in
Bishop’s College, to bear the name
of “ Bishop Heber’s Church Mis-
sionary Scholarships.’’ A special
meeting of the committee was held
at Freemason’s Tavern on the 15th
of Dec. 1826, when the minutes of
the previous meeting, relative to
this subject, were confirmed. Re-
solutions were passed, expressive of
the feelings of the committee oc+
casioned by the death of Bishop
Heber, and of their. conviction of
the inadequacy of one bishop to the
due discharge of the duties of so
vast a diocese ; anda memorial to
government agreed On for the ap-
pointment of more than one pre-
late to this arduous station.


CAL


Among the losses which the
cause of religion has sustained in
India, it is impossible to overlook
that which has been occasioned by
the departure of the tried and zeal.
ous friend of the society—the Rev,
T. Thomason.

The second anniversary of the
Calcutta C. M. A., was held at
the old church-room, on the even-
ing of the 9th of Dec.; the late
lamented Bishop in the chair. The
receipts of the 2d year amounted to
2586 rupees, and the payments to
3593. The annual sermon. was
preached for the society, at the old
church, on Whitsunday, when about
800 rupees were collected. The
annual meeting was held on the
26th of May, and a collection of
600 rupees made,

The Rev. John Theophilus Rei-
chardt, and Mrs. Reichardt, with the
Rev. Isaac Wilson, are more iinme-
diately connected with the direct
objects of the mission; while Mrs,

Wilson (late Miss Cooke), attends
to the native female school depart-
ment; andthe Rev. Deocar Schmid;
and Mrs. Schmid, have the superin-
tendence of the Female Orphan Asy-
lum. The committee having been
unable to send out a suitable per-
son to succeed Mr. Brown. as a
printer, Mr. Reichardt, who con-
ducts that department in addition
to his other duties, is at present as-
sisted by Mr. de Rozario.

An idea may be formed of the
extent of its operations from the
following statement :—From June,
1824, to Feb. 1826, there were
printed 52 different books and tracts,
forming a total of 123,344 copies:
these works were of various sizes,
from a tract of 4 pages, to a book
of 432; and the editions varied
from 80 copies to 6000, but pro-


duced a total of nearly 6,000,000 of


ages: of these pages, more than
one-half consisted of single Gos
pels, the Acts, and the book of
Isaiah,—printed for the Aria S.}


nearly:
for oth
and the
the use
The
speak o}


in writin;
the missic
questions
son of C]
Christian ;
be require
coming Ch
casionally
on contro
between
dooism, w
their being
sible’ objec
they concl
saying —.
Pundits firs
then all th
low.’ »
Besides
pore and
chardt write
“ Anothe
erected in
gible spot.
about amo
therto had g


CAL


50 youths; among these are 5 na-
tive Christian boys, whose atten-
dance being more regular, they
make greatex progress than the
other scholars, both in their Ben-
galee and English studies.”’

‘The committee of the auxi-
liary have it in view to establish a
school for the instruction of the
missionaries’ children ; and also for
the education of poor native chil-
dren, preserving their usual habits
in respect of food, in order to their
being apprenticed out to house-
holders who will watch’ over them ;
and thus they hope to raise a race
of trustworthy and pious native
servants.’?

With reference to native female
education, the committee of the
Ladies’ S. remark :—

“The subject of native female
education in this country is be-
coming increasingly popular among
all ranks of society, and is evidently
gaining rapid accessionsof strength,
both from the wisdom and zeal with
which its plans are executed, and
from the increase of its funds,
which are annually augmented by
the generous contributions of Eu-
ropeans and native gentlemen.”

' “We look upon facts as unan-
swerable weapons in the cause of
truth; and to facts we can now
appeal, as far as the work of fe-
male education, under the care of
the Ladies’ S., is concerned. Mrs.
Wilson commenced her labours
under the patronage of the C. M.
S., in the year 1822. During the
first year, 8 schools were opened,
containing 200 children; in the
second year, they had increased to
above 300; during the third, the
number of children was about 500;
when the Ladies’ S. was founded,
and, Mrs. Wilson was joined in her
labours by Mrs. Jetter, who is now
in England, and shortly after by
Mrs. Reicbardt. Thus, in the
space of 4 years, above 500 native


CAL


females have been brought under a
course of instruction, and -have
made fair progress in reading,
writing, and needle-work.”?

“ The separate fund, which has
been opened by the society, in
support of the native female edu-
cation in India, amounts to nearly
£1800: of this sum, upwards of
£400 has been produced by a sale
of ladies’ work. The opening of
this fund, by a grant of £500 from
the society, encouraged the Ladies’
S. to begin the central school.
For this object, 43,000 rupees have
been raised: of these, 20,000
rupees have been contributed by a
native rajah, Budinath Roy;
18,000 have been raised by the
exertions of the ladies; and the
remaining 5000 by the society’s
grant. Of the sum thus raised,
20,000 rupees were applied to the
purchase of the ground, and the
remainder appropriated to the re-
quisite buildings. The foundation-
stone was laid on the 18th of May,
by the lady of the Governor-ge-
neral; and solemn prayer was of-
fered by the Archdeacon of Cal-
cutta for the divine blessing. Many
natives, particularly women and
their daughters, were present. ‘The
liberal benefactor of the school,
Budinath Roy, addressed Lady
Amherst, through his interpreter,
in terms of deep gratitude for the
obligation bestowed on his coun-
trywomen, and congratulated her
ladyship, and the other ladies, on
the ‘success attending their exer-
tions.’?

The number of schools is thus
stated by Mrs. Wilson, in Feb, :—

“The society supports 30 schools,
with the requisite superintendents
and expense of conveyances}; and
it has taken charge of the Burd-
wan schools, 12 in number, under
the superintendence of Mrs, Pe-
rowne, at a monthly cost of 170
rupees. The Ladies’ Association
132


\ Puekah
the use
ment an
measure
Bishop |
annual
appropri
01 1000 r
at. his di

Promotty
About }
were subs
In the
Forsyth
the patre
e prea
every Sun


nen also ¢

with accept
likewise op
ing at How


the R. He
tendance +:


their insti)
N the esta


nder a
| -have
vading,


ich has
sty, in
le edu-

» nearly
ards of
ya sale
ening of
500 from

3 Ladies’

| school.
ees have
20,000
uted by &
h Roy;
i by the
; and the
- gociety’s
jus raised,
ied to the
, and the
to the re-
foundation-
ith of May,
hvernor-ge-
ver was of-
on of Cal-
ing. Many
vomen and
esent. ‘The
the school,
injergeel
tude for the
his coun-
Ltulated het
ladies, on
their exer:


hools is thus
in Feb.:—
30 schools,
erintendents


CAL “CAL


has 7 schools, which will be in- | Mr. Townley built a school-room
creased to 10,”? 9 at Calcutta, capable of accommo-
The demand for tracts is thus | dating about 100 children, . and
noticed by Mr. Reichardt ;— Mr. Keith engaged a poojah-house,
‘¢ After’ addressing the natives, | (a place for. pagan worship), for
tracts are distributed to those who | another. A Sunday-school was
are desirous to obtain them. The | also commenced; in which the
eagerness for them is sometimes | children learnt the catechism, and
quite overwhelming — a hundred | at which some of their parents at-
hands lilted up at*an instant; | tended.
while one crfes, ‘I will have aj ‘In 1817, a School Book S. was
book :’ another, ‘I can read; let | established, principally for the
me have one:’ another, ‘ I wish | supply of native schools, as was also
to get one for my brother, who | the Calewtta School S., the design
will read it to me:’ thus, 50, 80, | of which is, to improve existing
100, or more tracts are occasionally | schools, and to establish and sup-
distributed.’ port any further schools and semi-
The committee further state, | naries which may be requisite;
that on the society’s premises a | with a view to a more general dif-
Puekah chapel is now erecting for | fusion of knowledge among the in-
the use of the missionary establish- | habitants of India, of every descrip-
ment and the neighbourhood. This | tion, especially within the pro-
measure received the sanction of | vinces subject to the presidency of
Bishop Heber ; who, at the second | Fort William. The missionaries
annual meeting of the C. M. .4., | were exceedingly active in distri-
appropriated to this object the sum | buting Scripture and evangelical
o: 1000 rupees, from a fund placed | tracts among the people; and to
at. his disposal by the Sveéety for | assist them in doing this, a printer
Promoting Christian Knowledge. | (Mr. Gogerly) and printing ma-
About 1500 rupees, in addition, | terials were sent to Calcutta.
were subscribed at the meeting. The erection of a spacious and
In the year 1798, the Rev, Mr. | commodious chapel, to he called
Forsyth was sent to Calcutta, under | Union Chapel, was contemplated
the patronage of the Z. A S.| in 1818, towards which the sum
He preached for several years | of 14,000 sicca rupees (about
every Sunday at Chinsurah, where:| £1750 sterling) had been sub-
he resided, and also at Calcutta, | scribed ;, exclusive of which, the
where he had the use of a large | sum of 2200 sicca rupees (or £275)
chapel open to all denominations | had been contributed in support of
of Christians. public worship, The Bengul 4.
The Rev. Messrs. Townley and | Af, S. produced, in 2 years, 2400
Keith arrived at Calcutta in Sept. | sicca rupees (or about £300). The
1816, and, at an early period, began | total sum, in sterling money, con-
to preach, in Bengalee, the Gospel | tributed at Calcutta for religious
of God. ‘To their own pountry- purposes, and received by Messrs.
men also they proclaimed the truth | Townley and Keith, up to Aug.
with acceptance and success. ‘They | 18}8 (é.¢. in less than 2 years),
likewise opened a place for preaches | amounted to upwards of £2300,
ing at Howrah, on the other side The Rev. Messrs. Hampson and
the R. Hoogley, where the at- | Trawin arrived, with their wives,
tendance ‘as good, Agreeably to | at Calcutta, Feb. 8th, 1819; but,
their instvuctions, they were active | a few months after, Mrs. H. was
in the establishment o/ schools, | removed by death. In 7. declins
N * 1338


CAL


of the previous year, Messrs. Town- | derpore.


CAL
It was opened on the


ley and Keith occupied a new sta- | 5th of March, 1820, when about


tion, called Tally Gunge, situated
about 4 m. from the southern
boundary of the city, in the midst
of an extremely populous neigh-
bourheod, In a circuit of about
20 m., reckoning 3 m. from Tally
Gunge in all directions, it is cal-
culated that there are not less than
100,000 souls. Messrs. Townley
and Keith had continued to visit
this place until the rains set in,
and to preach alternately, some-
times not only to attentive but to
large congregations; availing them-
selves of the opportunity of dis-
tributing tracts as they passed
along. the road. A school-room
was built here, and 30 or 40 chil-
dren attended, who were taught to
read the Scriptures. A gentleman
of Calcutta kindly accommodated
the brethren with a substantial
brick-house, which they were per-
mitted to occupy for 3 yéars, with-
out payment of rent.

In consequence of the arrival of
Messrs. Hampson and Trawin, re-
ligious services had again been
established at the Howrah, where,
for want of assistance, they had
been reluctantly discontinued. The
brethren had obtained 2 plots of
ground on the N.E. side of the city,
for the erection of two bungalows,
to be used as native chapels.

On the 2st Sept. 1820, the
mission sustained a heavy loss, by
the dissolution of Mr. Hampson,
During that year, the missionaries
had devoted themselves more ex-
clusively to the preaching of the
Gospel among the heathen. They
established for that purpose, 21
stations, at each of which they
preached in Bengalee once every
week. The largest bungalow
chapel for native worship, erected
hy a member of the English con-
gregation, and presented by him to
the Rengal A. M. S., for the use
of the mission, is situated at Aid-


150 natives attended the service
throughout.

For the spot of ground on which
another bungalow chapel was built,
the brethren were indebted to the
kind influence of a very eminent
native, a brahmin. The proprietor
of the ground, who was also a
brahmin, had more than once at-
tended the chapel, and, at the con-
clusion of one of the services, so
far expressed his approbation as to
say, ‘‘ that he deemed it a good
work to point out to his country-
men the delusion of worshipping
idols, and bowing down to gods
which cannot save.”’

Divine worship, in English, was
regularly held at the Free Masons’
Lodge, which continued to be gra-
tuitously afforded to the mission,
twice every Sabbath day. In the
morning, about 120 assembled; in
the evening, about 140. The
church consisted of about 30 mem-
bers, who walked worthy of their
holy vocation. Every Sabbath
morning, children of all denomi-
nations, whose »arents were dis-
posed to send them, were, at the
same place, instructed in the prin-
ciples of Christianity. ;

‘ printing-press was established
in connexion with the mission at
this station ; and-was placed under
the more immediate superinten-
dence of the Bengal A. S,

The Rev. Messrs. James Hill,
Micajah Hill, and J. B. Warden,
arrived, with their wives, at Cal-
cutta, March Sth, 1822. Mr.
Trawin, shortly after, removed to
Kidderpore with his family. The
native schools gradually increased,
and one for native females, which
had been under the care of Mn.
Trawin, was in a flourishing sta
It was ascertained, that fem


education was anciently prevalent.


‘among the Hindoos, notwith-
standing it is, at present, so much
134


disco


Ul


hn


as be
of M
ing tl
at th
ley, th
An |
tian §
Calcut
to intr
into tl
schools,
ment of
A Be
Calcutt
Baptist
Serampc
same ye
B. A.
ealled to
removal
count of |
and after
In 182:
panied th
sionaries,
attended,
gent in th
as pastor
The Sabbs
perous stat
was conti
chapel, J
ra befo
place was
dence of
galow chap


n the
about
sexvice


which
s built,
i to the
yminent
pprietar
also a


ynee at-
the con-
rices, sO
on as to
; a. good
country-
rshipping
to gods


re, at the
n the prin-


established
mission at
aced under
uperinten-


S.

ames Hill,
3, Warden,
es, at Cal-
R22. i
emove

: ily. The
increused,
re of Mn.
shing sta
hat fem


y P


134


revalent .
notwith-
t, so much


CAL


discountenanced by the brahmins,
as being contrary to the institutes
of Menou. To assist in further-
ing this object, the M. S. placed
at the disposal of Mr. Town-
ley, the sum of 1000 sicca rupees,

An institution, called the Chris-
tian School S., was also formed at
Calcutta, the object of which is,
to introduce Christian instruction
into the indigenous, or native,
schools, under the entire manage~
ment of native schoolmasters.

A Bethel S. was established at
Calcutta, in connexion with the
Baptist brethten who reside at
Serampore and Calcutta, in the
same year ; as was also an auxiliary
B.A. The station, however, was
ealled to suffer a severe loss in the
removal of Mr. ‘Townley, on ac-
count of health, first to Chinsurah,
and afterwards to England.

In 1823 and 1824, success accom-
panied the various efforts of the mis-
sionaries, Union Chapel was well
attended, and Mr. Hill was dili-
gent in the discharge of his duties
as pastor of the infant church,
The Sabbath school was in 4 pros-
perous state. Bengalee preaching
was ee at the bungalow
chapel, Mirzapore, opened some
time before, and the school at that
place was under the superinten-
dence of Mrs. Warden. A bun-
galow chapel had been erected for
divine worship in the native lan-
guage, on the main road of Bho-
pantzore. The station at Tally
Gunge was occupied for some time,
but was afterwards vacated at the
request, and in favour of, the Dio-
cesan Committee. At Kidderpore,
Mr. Trawin’s prospects were be-
coming daily more interesting and
encouraging. A chapel had been
erected, nearly the whole sum for
which (about £400) had heen sub-
soribed. A Sabbath adult school
had been commenced, composed of
the workmen of a gentleman at
Kidderpore. A native school for


CAL


boys, and another for girls, had
been commenced at Chitlah, a few
miles from Kidderpore. At Howa-
fe, a village near Chittah, a na-
tive girls’ school had been com-
menced, called the Irvine Female
School. A native boys’school had
been opened at Bealbad, a large
village situated about 3 m. S. of
Kidderpore, under circumstances of
extraordinary promise. The vil-
lage, which is very populous, is
situated in the midst of several
other villages, and is inhabited
chiefly by brabmins. One of these,
a respectable and wealthy indivi-
dual, named Haldam, publicly
countenanced the school; and of
the 100 boys’ which composed it,
he was instrumental in placing 80
under instruction.

In the summer of 1823,Mr.Trawin
performed a tour in Bengal, for the
purpose of conversing with the na~
tives on religious subjects, preach-
ing, and distributing tracts. And in
Dec. of the same year, Mr. Trawin,
accompariied by Messrs. Hill and
Warden, proceeded as far as
Gour, the ancient capital of Ben-
gal. At some of the places visited
in the course of the jowney, the
people remembered the illustra-
tions used by the brethren in con-
versations on a former tour, and
requested that one of their number
might remain among them, as a
missionary.

The proceeds of the Bengal 4.
M, §S. for the year ending 31st
Dec., 1823, were,

§. R. 3313 8 6
Calcutta Ladies’ Br.S. 818 4 0
Chinsurah....do..... 557 0 0

The Rev. Mr. and Miss Piffard
reached Calcutta at the close of
1826, and found the various means
of religious instruction vigorously
employed. In addition to those al-
ready mentioned, a new station at
Wellesley-street had been taken, u
bungalow bad been erected, and a
school commenced for at sexes,


CAL


The bungalow was opened for
worship in Bengalee, on the 27th
Jan. 1826, and the natives listened
to the Gospel with attention, and
the appearance, at least, of appro-
bation. Mr, and Miss Pt!'ard took
up their residence at Kidderpore,
and proceeded to estelish addi-
tional schools forthe benefii of the
native population, The total num-
ber of native converts baptized at
‘Kidderpore, all of them fruits of
Mr. Trawin’s ministry, was 8.
The native convert, Ramhurree,
had also entered into regular em-
ploy at this station. .

‘ On the 8th Jan. 1826, Mr.
Warden departeé this life. It
being his earnest desive that Mrs.
W. mizht, after his decease, con-
tinue in India, and exert herself
in promoting native female educa-
tion, sie removed, shortly after
the melancholy event, to Berham-,
pore, to assist Mrs. Micaiah Hill.
Mr. Ray, who had, soon after his
return to India, joined Mr.. M.
Hill, settled at Calcutta. The fol-
lowing particulars will exhibit the
present state of affairs at this im-
portant station :-— ‘

The schools in/Vellesley-square,
formerly superintended by Mr. and
Mrs. Warden, were, after Mr.
Warden’s decease, placed under
the direction of Mr. and Mrs. Go-
gerly.. The former had commenced
a school in the bungalow chapel
at Mirzapore, in which were 45
scholars; the latter had opened a
school in Sooty Bagan Jaun Ba-
zaar, in which were 12 girls.
These schools had, however, been
suspended, in consequence of the
necessity for Mr. Gogerly taking a
voyage to Ceylon for the recovery
of his health,

Union ty oh ent James Hill
preaches at this chapel every Sab-
bath-day alternately with one or
other of his colleagues, to the Eu-
ropean congregation ; and in the
morning meets the young people


CAL


belonging to it, as formerly, to
instruct them in the principles and
duties of Christianity. . Additions
are, from time to time, made

the church. et

Kidderpore Station.—Beside oc-
casionally preaching in the streets
and market-places, the following
stated services are periormed in the
chapel :—Sabbath murning, Ben-
galee worship — Afternoon, read-
ing the sacred. Scriptures, and
sometimes preaching — Lvening,
English worship.—7Zuesday even-
tng, native worship. —Friday even-
ing, ditto, reading the Scriptures,
conversation, and prayer. Large
congregations are occasionally col-
lected at the school bungalow, when
the boys are catechised. By these
various means the Gospel has been
proclaimed to multitudes, and-there
is reason to believe not without
good effect.

Mr. Piffard assists Mr. Trawin
in the English services, .and ex-
pects to be soon. able to preach in
Bengalee, °

- Christian Seminary.~-The mis-
sionaries have determined to re-
ceive into this institution, which is
designed to provide a supply of na-
tive preachers and schoolmasters,
‘the descendants of native Chris-
tians only, unless others should
offer of unquestionable picty. They
regard themselves unJer an indis-
pensable obligation io furnish the
means of a good education, con-
ducted on Christian principles, to
the sons of their native converts;
and they trust this important object
will not be retarded by the wart
of funds, The number of native
Christian youths at present in the
seminary is 3; but the missionaries
are looking forward to a speedy
enlargement of it. Mr. Piffard
has, in connexion with this institu-
tion, rendered. valuable,aid to Mr.
Trawin, in the work both of
tuition and superintendence,

Native Schools, — Tie.eiemy

3


¢


i;
i


ceived in
consists
them Ch
fording ry,
sincerity
the 7 last
tized in
belong to
kal-choke
of age, a
vert bapti
ps e Tra vv
e baptisy
fested a
truth ; but
believe the
heart, an
thankfulne
saving her


ly, to
es and
ditions
ade to


3


side OC-
streets
lowing
din the
y, Ben-
ny Tead-
ps, and
Vveneng’y
Ly even-
lay even-
sriptures,
. Large
nally col-
iow, when
By these
| has been
and-there
rt without


4


ir. Trawin
;, and eX-
preach in


The mis-
ined to re-
Ny which is
pply of na-
oolmastets,
tive Chiris-
ers should
viety. They
ay an indis-
furnish the
ation, con-
inciples, to
converts;
rtant object
the wart
r of native
esent in the
in issionaries
0 a speedy
Mr. Piffard
this institu-
. said to Mr.
ik both of
ence,
‘he school,
136


CAL


=-- ee


CAL


12 of the boys read the Scriptures, ae of them.
and give appropriute answers to hitlah.—Regular services are
questions’ relating to’ their léading | statedly performed on every Wed-
doctrines. Beside this school, | nesday morning and Saturday even-
there are 4 other boys’ schools | ing, and the people are very atten-
under Mr. Trawin’s superintend- | tive to the preaching. On the
ence. There are also’ connected | market-days, many also, who come
with the Kidderpore station 5 boys’ | from a distance, hear the word of
schools, which were raised by Mr. | God. At. this place two native
Piffard, and are supported, and in| converts, at Ram-makal-choke,
part superintended, by him. The | first heard the Gospel} which event
number in each school is be-| has led to the introduction of
tween 50 dnd 70. Respecting | Christianity into that'village. The
several of these schools, some par- | attendance at the boys’ school
ticulars will be found under” the | fluctuates between 40 and 55. The
heads of the respective out-sta- | first class read the Gospels, and
tions. can answer questions put to’them
Native Church.—The native | with readiness.
eonverts who were baptized at this| Bealla.—The number of boys in
station in October, 1825, remain | the school is about 100, 16 of whom
stedfast, amidst much opposition. | read in the Gospels, Many in the
Seven more have been since re- | first class are youths from 16 to 18
ceived into the church, which now | years of age. Occasionally, some
consists of 15 members; all of | adults may be seen reading the
them Christian Hindoos, and af- | Scriptures with the boys. When
fording satisfactory evidence of the | the missionaries visit the school, it
sincerity of their profession. Of | is usual for the brahmins to attend,
the 7 last-mentioned, 4 were bap- | forthe purpose of cavilling. Some
tized in March, 1°99, of whom 3'| of the best-instructed boys are at
belong to the viliage of Ram-ma- | times called upon to answer the
kal-choke ; one a female of 80 years | objections of the brahmins, who
of age, and the mother of a con- | are not seldom confuted by them
vert baptized in October, 1825, by | before the multitude, and silently
Mr. Trawin. For some time afte: | withdraw. Much Christian know-
the baptism of her son, she mani- | ledge is now diffsed through the
fested a strong aversion to the | village, and the missionaries ex-
truth ; but there is reason to | press confident expectation that
believe that God hath changed her | the gross errors of the people will,
heart, and she now speaks with | eventually, be chased away by the
thankfulness of his goodness in| light of divine truth which has
saving her at the eleventh hour. been introduced among them.
Bhowane-vore. — Worship, in| Ram-makal-choke.— At this vil-
Bengalee, is performed, as ustial, | lage a bungalow, designed to serve
in the chapel. Large congrega- | the purposes of a native chapel and
tions are frequently present; and | school-room, was opened for Chris-
many, who come from a distance | tian worship on the 26th of Jan.
died their devotions to the idol | 1826, On the 20th of the follow-
Kalee, are here invited to ‘‘ behold | ing month, the emblem of one of
the Lamb of God, which taketh | the forms of the need |) Seevd
N 2 37


CAL


was cast out of one of its tem-
ples.

This event ‘s represented. by
the missionaries to have produced
amongst the people of the village a
great degree of consternation. The
proprietor of the temple afterwards
presented the materials composing
it to the missionaries, to be used
in building a chapel for Christian
worship ; and he would also have
given. the ground on which tie
temple formerly stood, had. the
situation been eligible. Thechapel ;
was Opened for. divine service on
the 7thof Nov. The Deputation
were pres>!:t on the occasion, and
were high]: ;;ratified with beholding
the individual who had been the
proprietor of (}.° ‘emple, sitting an
attentive hearse and devout wor-
shipper of the living and true God,
In the beginning of the same
month a school was established, in
which are more than 60 boys. A
young brahmin, who had received
instruction at Kidderpore, and pos-
sesses a knowledge of the Gospel,
is the teacher. A female native
school has also been formed. The
decidedly Christian aspect with
which these schools have been com-
menced, and the circumstance of
other adjacent villages having’since
applied for instruction, together
with the open rejection of one of
the idols most generally worshipped
by the Hindoos—the missionaries
hail as among the indications of
the dawn of a brighter day in this
part of India.

Ram-makal-choke is distant
about 8 m. from Kidderpore, and
stands in the centre of a number of
villages, the aggregate population
of which is at least 30,000. Of
these villages, 8 have been, within
a short time, brought into the light
of Christianity.

Schoulmaster:.— The schvol-
masters of the above-mentioned
native schools assemble at the cha-


-. pelevery Thursday morning, where


-


CAL


they go through a course of Chris-
tian instruction. ‘The benefit, thus
obtained is communicated io the
boys of their respective schools. .

_ Native Female Schools.

Kidderpore Schoo’ was com-
menced in 1822. At thé gubii
examination, in Feb, 1826, it con-
tained 30 scholurs, whic::, from va-
rious couses, had, in the following
June, been reduced to 18. It was,
however, expected that in a short
time its former number would be
restored.

Chitlah Schoo! was astabli.iod
about 4.years ago, and hus almost
invariably. afforded satisfaction.

Irvine School was established in
Oct. 1824, at the village of How-


allee, and consists of 18 scholars. ;


Bhowaneepore School was opened
about 3 years since, and has afford-
ed great encouragement, The
number in the scheol is about 20.
Another school was opened in a
different part of this village in Jan.
1826, which contains 16 scholars.

Cashee- Bagan School was open-
ed in Nov, 1625, and contains 25
girls,

Dhopa-Paran School was open-
ed on the Ist of Dec. 1825, and
consists of 12 girls.

Giral School was opened on the
2isit of December, 1826, and con-
tains 18 girls,

Sonai School was opened in
March, 1826, and contains 16 girls.

Bhookuilosh School contains *!
girls.

The Scriptures and other Chris-
tian books are taught is» all the
schools—and the progress of the
scholars, generally speaking, in
the several branches of learning in
which they are instructed,. reflects
much credit oa the female mem-
bers of the mission who superin-
tend, and on the teachers who
have the immediate charge of the
schools.

On, the Ist of cd., 1826, the
. ; 138


f "ence of ti


were fe
Mrs, I
were f
perinte:
latter,
into th
Mr. Ra
is situate
the. supe
female
Kidderpe
upon Mi
lady res
h °
Ben Q
Svoiety
institutio


900 sicca
sum than
on a simil
The tot
won for t
to upward
The prin
belonged
relinquish
determine
the Com
M.S., an


present o:
brethren

Press have
on hand a
n0 loss jras
society,


Chriss
fit: thus
jo. the
VOLS: -.


com- rf
» yrablic Py
_Ait-con-
from: va-
ollowing

It was;
-a short
vould be


tabli-i
a almost
ion.
blished in
‘of How-
scholars. ;
as opened
1as afford-
it, The
about 20.
ened in a
ige in Jan.
scholars.
was open-
ontains 25


was open-
1825, and


ned on the
5, and con-


opened = in
ins 16 girls.
ontains *!


ther Chris-
ia all the
SS of the
eaking, in
learning 10
ed,: reflects
male mem-
ho superin-
achers who
arge of the.


, 1826, the
138


CAL


anniversary of the opening of Kid-
derpore chapel,’ a public examina-
tion of the boys and girls from the
15 schools then connected with
the station took place; when it
appeared, that the boys examined
in the Scriptures, :catechisms, and
geography, considerably exceeded
in number those examined at the
preceding anniversary, and that the
progress made by them in Christian
knowledge was highly creditable
both to teachers and pupils.

Of the female native schools, 5
were formed and superintended by
Mrs. Trawin;: the remaining 4
were formed, supported, and su-
perintended, by Miss Piffard. The
latter, however, having entered
into the marriage-relation with
Mr. Ray, whose sphere of labour
is situated in the heart of Calcutta,
the. saperintendence of. the native
female schools belonging to the
Kidderpore station: has devolved
upon Mrs. Trawin, assisted. by a
lady resident in that neighbour-
hood.

Bengal Auxiliary Missionary
Suciety.— The anniversary of this
institution was held on the 12th of
April, 1826, when W. Chalmers,
Esq., M.D., presided. The col-
lection at the doors amounted to
900 sicca rupees, which is a larger
sum than was ever before collected
ona similar uccasion.

The total receipts of the institu-
tion for the year 1825-6 amounted
to upwards of 5000 sicca rupees.

The printing establishment which
belonged to this station has been
relinquished. ‘This measure was
determined upon at a meeting of
the Committee of the Bengal A.
M.S., and met with the concur-


} rence of the Deputation, who were


present on the occasion. As the
brethren of the Baptist Mission
Press have purchased the materials
on hand at their estimated value,
no loss has been sustained by the
society, Mr, Gogerly, who hag for


CAL


several years had the superintend-
ence of the printing establishment,
being now at liberty to devote him-
self entirely to missionary labours,
has been appointed, pro tempore,
to Berhampore ; to which station,
should his health have been: suffi-
ciently restored, it is probable he
has; ere this, proceeded with his
family.

CALEDON, a Hottentot vil-
lage in. S. Africa, about 120 m.
E. Cape Town; formerly called
Zuurbrack, from the valley in
which it is situated. . In 1820, the
inhabitants were estimated at about
1100.

The Rev. John Seidenfaden,
from the L. Mf. S., laboured here
about seven years with success.
Permanent buildings were erected
for the mission, dnd many of the
Hottentots ; and inclosures were
made for cultivation, sufficient for
the subsistence of 500 families. For
several years, the members of the
church varied from about 60 to 80;
and the scholars averaged about 50.
A Bible Society was also formed,
and a fund was raised for charita-
ble purposes.

After ashort vacancy, the Rev.
W. Anderson came hither from
Griqua Town, about 1821, preach-
ed to the Hottentots, and super-

Intended the school for a short
time; but afterwards removed to
Paceltsdorp, where his services
were likely to prove much more.
useful.

CALLENBERG Institution was.
founded at Halle, in Germany, in
1728, by a pious evangelical mi-


-hister, principally for the conver-:


sion of the Jews, and derived its
name from Professor Callenberg,
who raised it to eminence and use-
fulness. The Gospels of Matthew


and Luke, and more than 70 dif-
ferent tracts calculated to under-.
mine the foundation of Jewish pre-
judices, were published in great
numbers, ‘ar’ neeeed circus,
3


CAL


lated among the Jews in Europe,
Asia, ard Africa, which were the
means of converting many to Chris-
tianity. Provision was —_ for
su ing proselytes, catechumens,
pe orn A The Rev. Stephen
Shulze laboured extensively as a
missionary for the institution, from
- 1783 to 1756; but the opposition
was so violent and discouraging, as
to dishearten its friends, and they
yielded in sad despondency.

CALPENTYN, a large native
village on the W. side of Ceylon
about 100 m. 8. of Jaffna, an
about the same distance N. of Co-
lombo. E, long. 79° 50’, N. lat.
8°15’, The inhabitants are chiefly
Roman Catholics, Mahomedans,
and Gentoos; but there are many
native Protestants in the district,
who have little of religion but the
name.

The Rev. Benjamin Ward, mis-
sionary from the €, M. S., with
his wife, arrived here from Co-
lombo, Sept. 26, 1818, but left the
station in less ‘than a year, on ac-
count of ill health. He found it
one of great importance, affording
access fo at least 40,000 persons
destitute- of proper instruction ;
there being no resident minister for
about 100 m. on the coast. During
his stay, he succeeded in establish-
ing several promising schools, and
found some who seemed to profit by
his preaching. These efforts, how-
ever, have not been resumed,
' CALTURA, avillage and fortress
of Ceylon, 27 m. S. of Colombo, at
the mouth of one of the largest
branches of the Muliwaddy, which
is here about a mile wide. It washes
two sides of the fort which com-
mands it, and is navigable by boats
to the sea. The adjoining country is

pulous, and certain native manu-

etures are carried on to a con-
siderable extent. IK. long. 78° 50’,
N, lat. 6° 34’,


The Rev. Messrs. John M' Kenny


and James Sutherland, from the


CAL


W. M. S. commenced their la»
bours in 1817. The circuit ex.
tends S. 20m. and N. 10; and
is the intermediate one between
those of Galle and Colombo; In
1822, there were 6 schools and
329 pupils, with a suitable num-
ber of masters and catechists; and
frony that time to the present,
the work of God has prosper.
ed. ‘ Prayer meetings,’ says a
missionary, * have spread a wide
and gracious influence ; and almost
every house is open to us for the
purposes of prayer and exhortation.
Our congregations continue to he
steady in their attendance. Our
classes, too, give us great satisfac-
tion. At Bentotte our work, from
various causes, does: not keep pace
with the other parts of the circuit.
It lies far from us, and it requires
the constant and zealous efforts and
holy example of a missionary, or
an assistant missionary, resident
there. At Pantura our work cheets
us greatly. The residence of our


| assistant brother here has been of


great utility, as he has spent almost
every evening in religious services
in the native huts round the village,


‘and has kept alive the good feelings


excited by more pvblic services,
We have no doubi but the next
‘year will be one of still greater
good in this part of the station, I
was lately witness toa very interest-
ing circumstance, which will shew
how truth operates where least ex-
pected. On walking out one even-
ing, three or four weeks ago, I saw
a group of people assembled a little
way from the door of a native hut.
I went, through curiosity, to in-
quire the cause, and was surprized
and pleased to hear a boy, of about
13 years of age, reading the 3d
chapter of the Gospel by St. John,
to three brothers and his mother,
while the people w'thout were at-
tentively listening. I passed the
| door one evening’ since, and heard


| the same boy. readhg 7 *
4


i‘


1822, i:
bouring
La Ma:
pulatio.
little fr
fulness
the efto
* CAI
among
40m. E
700 m. ]
Rev, Mr
removed
place in
bours bet
veral k
Great Ri
was enca
with tri
and, in ]
qué Tow)
wards, a
place, by
formed a
instructin,
100 child
about 60,
useful,


t sutisfac-
york, from
keep pace
the circuit.
it requires
: efforts and
sionary, or
y, resident
work cheets
nce of our
as been of
spent almost
ous services
ithe village,
pod feelings
ic services.
+ the next
still greater
y station. 4
very interest-
bill shew
lere least ex-
ut one We
sago, I saw
abled alittle
n native hut.
psity, to in-


vas surprized


CAN


prayer. Many very interesting
things, of a somewhat similar na-
ture, have come within my notice,
and demonstrate that our labours
have not been in vain.”

CALVADOS, a department of
France, bordering on the British
Channel, is 2,233 square m. in
extent, and contains a population
of 505,500.

Messrs. Henry de Jersey, and

Philip Tourgis, two Wesleyan mis-
sionaries, were stationed here in
1822, in connexion with the neigh-
pouring departments of L’ Orne and
La Manche. The extent and po-
pulation of each of these differ but
little from those of Calvados. Use-
fulness appears to have attended
the efforts that huve been made.
* CAMPBELL, a settlement
among the Griquas, South Africa,
40m. E. of Griqua town, and about
700 m. N.E. of Cape Town. The
Rev. Mr. Sass, from the L. M. S.,
removed from Bethesda to this
place in 1821, and divided his la-
hours between the Griquas and se-
veral kraals of Corannas on the
Great River. Here, however. he
was encompassed, for some years,
with trials and discouragements ;
and, in 1824, he removed to Gri-
qué Town. In about a year after-
wards, a gratifying revival took
place, by means of a catechist, who
formed a Sabbath and a day school,
instructing, in the former, about
100 children, and, in the latter,
about 60. He still continues to be
useful. A school-room is being
erected, which is designed to serve
ulso as a chapel.

CANADA, a large country of
North America, bounded on the
N. by New Britain, E. by Labra-
dor and the Gulf of St. Lawrence,
8. by New Brunswick and the
United States, and W. by unknown
lands. Jt was discovered by John
on’ Sebastian Cabot, of Bristol, in
1407; and was settled by the


CAN


French in 1608. The summer
here is very hot, and winter con-
tinues for 6 months very severe ;
but the sudden transitions from heat
to cold, so common to the United
States, are not known in Canada,
and the seasons are more regular.
The uncultivated parts are a con-
tinued: wood, in which are many
kinds of trees unknown in Europe;
but the land that is cleared is fer-
tile, and the progress of vegetation
so rapid, that wheat sowed in May
is reaped in August. Of all the
animals, the beaver is the most
useful and curious. Canada turpen-
tine is greatly esteemed for its
balsamic qualities. This country
abounds with coal, and near Quebec
is a fine lead mine. The different
tribes of Indians, or original na-
tives, in Canada, are almost innu-
merable; but they have been cb-
served to decrease in population
where the Europeans are most
numerous, owing chiefly to their
immoderate use of spirituous liquors.
Canada was conquered by the Eng-
lish in 1759; and confirmed to
them by the french at the peace
of 1763. fr 1791, this country
was divided into two provinces,
Upper and Lower Canada, which
have since :nade greet progress in
population and agricuiture.

Upper Canada is hounded N. by
the territory of the Hudson’s Bay
Company}; E. by Lower Canada ;
S. by the United States: on the
W. the limits are undefined. In
1783, the population did not exceed
10,000 souls; in 1814, it was 95,000.
Upper Canada is deenied the gar-
den of America, and not subject to
the extreme heat or cold of the
Lower Province, The chief pro-
ducts for exportation are flour,
wheat, potash, oak, and pine-
timber; masts, staves, planks, and
firewood. The principal. incon-
veniences to which this province is
subject, are the falls aud rapids of

141


CAN


the. St. Lawrence, which impede
the navigat'nn between Kingston
and Montreai. The principe] town
is York,

Lower Canada is between 63°
and 81° W. long., and 45° and 62°
N. lat.; bounded N. by the territory
- of the Hudson’s Bay Company; 8.

by New Brunswick and the United

tates; I. by the Gulf of St.
Lawrence and part of Labrador;
and W. by Upper Canada. It is
divided into 2) counties, contain-
ing a population of about 400,000;
about 350,000 of whom are Roman
Catholics, mostly of French descent.
There are about 200 Catholic cu-
rates and missionaries in Lower
Canada, supported, in part, by re-
yei.ues arising from lands formerly
granted for that purpose. Quebec
is the chief town.

The United Brethren, in 1792,
founded a settlement in Upper Ca-
nada,on the R.Retrench or Thames,
which falls into Lake St. Clair, in
the midst of numerous tribes of the
Chippeways, to which they gave the
name of Fairfield. The brethren
were accompanied by their Indian
congregations, who hadbeen driven,
in,1781, from their settlements on
the Muskingum. During that in-
terval they had removed trom place
to place, and found no rest till they
sat down here in peace, ona tract
of land, containing about 2500
acres, assigned them by the British
government, The settlement be-
came a regular township, about 12
m. long, and 6 wide, and was so
well cultivated, that the wilderness
was literally changed, into a fruit-
ful field. No striking success was

nted in the conversion of the
Indians; but there was a gvadual
increase of communicants, chiefly
from the children born in the set-
tlement, when grown up to matu-
rity. <At the close of 1819, the
number of com™.uicants was 126,
After enjoying tranquillity for more


CAN


than 20 years, the settlement was
destroyed by the American army,
under General Harrison, in 1818.

After residing, for some time, in
huts on the site of their old build-
ings, they erected a town on the
opposite bank of the river, to which
they geve the name of New Fair-

field. To this place they removed

in the autumn of 1815, when their
numbers amounted to 109 persons,
The following. year, an Indian
named Onim, whe, from his youth,
had evinced the most inveterate
hatred against the missionaries,
was savingly converted to God,
was baptized, and died in the faith
of the Gospel ; and by this citcum-
stance an impression was made,
both among the Indians and the
white people, which afterwards led
to an-extensive awakening in the
neighbouzheod.

On the 25th of June, 1822; Mr.
Luckenbach ' wrote, that though
some circumsiauces of a painful
nature had occurred, the missiona-
ries were enabled to rejoice, that
by far the greater part of their
congregation continued to be faith.
ful followers of Curist, and that
their confidence in the help of the
Lord was. frequently revived and
strengthened by proofs of his mercy
towards them. A new mission
house was, at this time, partly
erected ; and it is stated that the
Christian Indians most cheerfully
lent their assistance towards the
building, without anyremuneration.

Afiér 3 years had passed away with-
out any of the heathen tpi publicly
devoted to God by the rite of baptism,
the missionaries had the pleasure of
baptizing 3 Indian females; one
on Christmas-day, 1822; a second
on New Year’s-day, 1823; and the
third on the Feast of the Epiphany.
Two of these, an aged woman, end
her daughter about 14 years old,
had removed in the preceding
spring, from the “0 Monsy


gtegation
10 years
returned
begged

admission
sumption ;


Te-admitte
giveness o


5 ti
they learn
pear delig:
instruction,

he mo
from this. s
Ina letter d
which Mr,
follows ;<«


nt was
army,
1813.
ime, in
| build-
on the
» which
o Fair-
emoved
an their
persons.
Indian
is youth,
wveterate
ijonaries,


to 9
the faith
; circum-
as made,
. and the
wards led
ng in the


1822; Mr.
at Wot
a painiu
missiona-
joice, that
of their
0 be faith-
, and that
help of the
ayived and
f hismercy
mission-
ime, partly
bd that the
cheerfully
muneration.
i away with-
bing publicly
BO baptism,
s pleasure of
males $: one


CAN CAN


Town to New Fairfield, and here | number of our inhabitants has been
their hearts were opened to the | augmented by 16 persons from
word of the Gospel. The other, | Goshen, 2 from among the hea-
who was sister-in-law to one of | then at Sandusky, and 4 of the
the female assistants, had resided | Monsy tribe. The latter is a
4 or 5 years in the settlement; | family, ‘consisting of an aged
and, during that time, had been a | mother, who, four years ago, was
diligent ‘attendant on the means.of | baptized at Old Schoenbrunn, on
grace, but had not appeared to de- | the Muskingum, her son, grand-
sire a closer connexion with the | son, and great grandson. Her son
church. Now, however, she en- | is upwards of 50 years old, and bas
treated, with tears, that she might | very indifferent health. Being
be baptized; and as she made a_/| asked why he wished to reside in
satisfactory confession of her faith, | our settlement, he replied, ‘ I have
and avowed her exclusive depen- | no greater wish than to lay down
dence for salvation on the all- | my bones in this place. All I long
sufficient sacrifice of Calvary, her | for is to experience the pardon of
request was granted, and the divine | my sins, through the mercy of our
presence seemed to be enjoyed by | Saviour, before I die, and to be
al! who witnessed the ordinance. received by baptism into the Chris-
In a communicati:n, dated April | tian church. I now believe all
8th, 1823, Mr. Luckenbach says— | which I formerly heard at Schoen-
“ An Indian named Simon, who | brunn, concerning our incarnate
had been baptized at Petquotting, | God and Redeemer, who died upon
but had afterwards left the con- | the Cross to save us from eternal
gregation, and lived for more than | death. In this place my poor soul
10 years among the wild heathen, | derives comfort and good hope;
returned hither this spring, and | and I am therefore come to dwell
begged most earnestly for re- | among the believers, and to die with
admission. He wasin a rapid con- | them, because among the heathen
sumption; and, as. we believed he | I find neither rest nor peace,’ ”’
had sought and obtained mercy “On the 7th of Sept. we had a
from Him who treats all returning | true festival-day, when a heathen
prodigals with compassion, he was | woman’ and her child were bap-
readmitted, and assured of the for- | tized ; ‘and a person, baptized as a
giveness of the congregation on his | child, was received into the con-
sick-bed.?? gregation. The husband of the
“ Many of the boys in the school | former was baptized a year and a
have made good progress, and are | half ago. They removed hither
able to read their own language | from the Upper Monsy Town, thst,
well, They even begin to under- | as they said, they might believe,
stand English, and read the three | and be converted to Jesus. She is
epistles of St. John in that lan- | sister to a man named Simon, who
guage, After hearing single verses | departed this life last spring, re-
4 or 5 times distinctly tepeated, | joicing in the Lord. His end, as
they learn them by heart, and ap- | a believer, and that of her mother,
pear delighted with this mode of | who died among the heathen, made
instruction.?? a deep and salutary impression upon
The most: recent intelligence | her mind, insomuch that she began
from this settlement is contained | most seriously to be concerned
ina letter dated Oct. 16, 1823, in | about the salvation of her immortal
which Mr, Luckenbach wrote as | soul. During her baptism, a power-
follows :—-“¢ Since my last, the } ful sense of the presence ot Jesus


143


CAN


was felt by the whole congrega-
tion. Thus one after another finds
the way to our Saviour, and we
have reason to rejoice that, by the
power of his word, some small
additions are made to his church,
and that the reward for the travail
of his soul is increased from among
the Indians. Painful occurrences
are indeed not wanting; but, in
general, we have much cause for
thankfulness, seeing that our la-
bour is not in vain in the Lord.”’
The WV. M. S. comprises the fol-
lowing stations in the Canada dis-
trict: the annexed extracts from
the last Report of their agents will
intimate their present condition :—
Quebec Circuit. Mission. —
‘¢ Several have been awakened to
a sense of their danger, and brought
to a saving knowledge of the truth.
Our members generally are grow-
ing in grace, and the congrega-
tions are much improved.”’
Schools.—* In this school there
are 80 scholars, divided into !1
classes. We are happy to say, that,
during the past year, considerable
improvement has been made in the
behaviour and learning of the chil-
dren; and some favourable symp-
toms of early piety appear in se-
veral of them.”?
Montreal.—A report for this year
has not been received ; the previous
one says, “* We have 130 children
in this school, but the average
number who attend does not ex-
ceed 90. The children generally
make great progress; and the
teachers manifest the most decided
interest in the prosperity of the
schoul, by a regular and cheerful
attention to their duties.”’
Kingston Circuit. Mission.—
‘© Through the past year we have
had in this station many seasons of
refreshing {rom the presence of the
Lord. The society is at present in
a. good state.”
Schools. — ‘‘ We have here a
large and flourishing Sunday-


CAN


school, of at least 100: chiléron,
which is well attended, both by
teachers and scholars, There is a
circulating library for their use,
consisting of a variety of interest.
ing and instructive books, which
we have reason to hope are ren-
dered very useful to the children,”

St. drmand’s Circuit, Mission,
—* With unfeigned gratitude to
God, we have to record the pros-
perity of the work in this circuit,
At the commencement of the year
every thing bore a gloomy aspect;
the station had been leit without
a preacher for 12 months—the or-
dinances of religion had been neg-
lected—immorality and careless-
ness had become awlully preva-
lent ; and a universal stupor had
spread through all the classes. But
a delightful change has since taken
place; the Lord has poured out
his Spirit upon the people; the
meuns of grace are well attended ;
and more than 100 persons have
manifested a change of heart, and
joined the society.’

Sehools.—‘* We have three Sun-
day-schools in this circuit, con-
taining about 150 children, who ma-
nifest a great desire to attend ; and
some of whom haye become very
serious.”?

Three Rivers Circuit. Mission.
—‘* Our society in this place is
still small; but, as. the Protestant
population is becoming morenume-
rous, we hope that, by the blessing
of God, many more will be added
to our ‘ little flock.’ During the
past year our chapel has been
well attended, and the preaching
of the Gospel hus been made the
power of God to the salvation of a
_few, who are enjoying the peace-
ful fruits of the Spirits; and who
show, by their general deport:
ment, that they have passed from
death unto life. The members of the
society are much united, and are
giving all diligence to make their
calling and election sure.”’

144


St

& Th

cuit i

have

ing \
year.
severs
The |
gener:
their (
are go
attenti


reachii

ave be
hew on
the cong
rally goc
School

on this c
relinquis
superable
obtaining
One sch
has bee
during th
others h
menced,
doubtful,
carelessne
of this a +
but sole]
which we
Odell
“The su
from the
in this cir
e@ -warm
tude,
In Upy
for the Pr
in Forei g,
ing statio
mherst be
Belleville,
Place, Ca
wall, Kige


CAN


allowed for European maritime
* traffic. Within the bocca, or mouth
of the river, is a small island, which,
bearing some resemblance to a
tiger couchant, is called Tiger
island; and the river is hence
named Tigris, but the Chinese call
it Taa. The city consists of 3
towns, divided by high walls, but
so conjoined as to form almost a
regular square. The streets are
narrow, paved with small round
stones in the middle, and flagged
at the sides. The houses are only
a ground-floor, built of earth, and
covered with tiles. The better
class of people are carried about in
chairs ; but the common sort walk
bavefooted and bareheaded. The
river is covered with barks, which
have apartments in them for fami-
lies, where many thousands reside,
and have no other habitation. The
number of inhabitants is supposed
to be 1,500,000. The immense
quantity of goods and money which
foreign vessels bring to this city,
draws hither a crowd of merchants
from all the provinces; so that the
factories and warehouses contain
the rarest productions of the soil,
and the mostvaluable of the Chinese
manufactures. In 1822, a fire
broke out, which destroyed many
lives, 15,000 houses, and property
to an immense amount. It is 1180
m. S. by W. Peking. E. Long.
113° 18’, N. lat. 23° 7’,

The person deemed most suit-
able for this station, by the LZ. M.
S., was the Rev. Robert Morrison,
whose studies at Gosport had been
peculiarly directed to a preparation
for so important an undertaking ;
and who was subseque » ly assisted,
in London, by a native of China,
in learning the language, and in
transcribing a Harmony of the
Gospels and other parts of the New
Testament, from a manuscript copy
in the British Museum. His at-
tention was also directed, under a


suitable tutor, to the mathematics


CAN


and astronomy, and he attended
the lectures at the Royal Institu
tion ; this course of studies having
been determined upon, in conse-
quence of some valuable informa-
tion received by the directors,
from an intelligent correspondent
at Macao,

.In the month of Jan. 1807, Mr,
Morrison sailed. from England ;
and, in Sept., he arrived in safety
at Canton, where be applied him-
self with unwearied assiduity to the
study of the language ; though, in
doing this, he was obliged to ob-
serve the greatest possible secrecy,
and the persons who assisted him
intimated that they trembled for
their own safety, under the antici-
pation of being discuvered.

In consequence of a temporary
misunderstanding between the Eu-
ropean residents at Canton and
the Chinese government, the latter
prohibited ai! intercourse with fo-
reigners, and the commencement
of hostilities was seriously antici-
pated. Mr. Morrison, therefore, re-
tired, in the beginning of Nov., to
Macao, where he resumed the study
of the languagz. Matters, however,
were soon amicebly arranged, and
he returned to Canton, where, in
1809, he was appointed Chinese
translator to the English factory,
Alluding to this circumstance, he
says, ‘* My reasons for accepting
this situation were briefly, that it
secured my residences; that its
duties contributed to my improve-
ment in the language ; and that the
salary attached to it would enable
me to make my labour in the Gospel
less chargeable to the churches of
Great Britain. The — situation,
however, whilst it has the advan-
tages which I state, bas also its
disadvantages, It occupies a great
part of my short life, in that which
does not refer to my first object,
Whilst F am translating official
papers, I could be compiling my
dictionary, which, I hope, will by

146


of ess
sionar
Int
his as
eve (
the 7
throug!
existen
true Ge
he obse
ceeding
people,
seen, hi
ligent,
being
of the -
ever, lor
before w
and to y
The wor
guage, is
it seems
its precis
ever vary
An atone
think nec
SINS; and
sins they h
In a let
rectors, a
Mr. Morri
fleet, whic
ago, I Wro
copy of
Gospel by
tract on


shall be ca
notice of

hotwithstand
of My own y


cability of ac
in no great


ended
stitue
aving


;onse-
orma-
actors,
ondent


1, Mr.
gland ;
) safety
d him-
y to the
ugh, in
1 to ob-
secrecy,
ted him
sled for
e antici+


mporary
the Eu-
‘ton and
he latter
with fo-
encement
ly antici-
efore, re-
Nov., to
the study
howeve!,
ged, and
here, in
+ Chinese
i factory,
tance, he
accepting
Y> that it
that its
improve-


CAN


of essential service to future mise
sionaries.’’

In the course of his reacing with
his assistants, Mr. M. embraced
every opportunity of speaking of
the Lord Jesus, and salvation
through him, as well as of the
existence of the one only living and
true God. On this latter subject,
he observes, ‘‘ their ideas are ex-
ceedingly obscure. The Chinese
people, according to what I have
seen, have no idea of one intel-
ligent, independent, and perfect
being—the Creator and Governor
of the vorld. They have, how-
ever, lords many and gods many,
before whose images they worship,
and to whom they offer sacrifice.
The word Heaven, in their lan-
guage, is exceedingly vague 3 and
it seems impossible to determine
its precise signification, as they
ever vary in their definition of it.
An atonement my people do not
think necessary, at least for small
sins; and of the pardon of great
sins they have no hope,”?

In a letter addressed to the di-
rectors, and dated April 2d, 1812,
Mr. Morrison says, “ By the last
fleet, which sailed about a month
ago, I wrote, and enclosed you a
copy of my translation of the
Gospel by Luke, and a Chinese
tract on the way of Salvation,
which I hoped would reach you in
safety. I now enclose you a trans-
lation of a Chinese edict; by
which you will see, that to print
books on the Christian religion, in
Chinese, is rendered a capital
crime, I must, however, go for-
ward, trusting in the Lord; though
I shall be careful not to invite the
notice of governmeni. Indeed,
notwithstanding my consciousness
of my own weakness, I am not dis.
couraged, but am thankful that my
most sanguine hopes have been
more than realized; as the practi-
cability of acquiring the language
in no great length of time, of


‘CAN


translating the Scriptures, and of
having them printed in China, have
been demonstrated. { am grateful
to the Divine Being -for having
employed me in this good work;
and, should I die soon, it will
afford me pleasure in my last mo-
ments.’?

The Rev. Wm. Milne arrived


!at Macao, with Mrs. Milne, in


July 1813, as a colleague to Mr.
Morrison, by whom he was most
gladly received. By the instigation
of the Roman Catholic clergy,
however, the Portuguese govern-
ment ordered him to quit the
island in 10 days. To this severe
measure Mr. Milne was oblized to
submit, and he removed to Canton,
where, under suitable teachers, he
applied himself assiduously to the
study of the language. As Euro-
pean females are not permitted to
reside at Canton, he was necessa-
rily separated from Mrs. M., who
continued with Mr. and Mrs, More
yison at Macao. Mr. Morrison,
however, subsequently joined Mr.
Milne for the season, which con-
tinues 5 months.

In Feb. 1814, Mr. Milne left
China, in a vessel which conveyed
nearly 500 Chinese emigrants, for
the purpose of distributing the
copies of the New Testament and
the tracts which he and Mr. Mor-
rison had prapered’§ and he had
the pleusure of seeing many, while
on board, reading, in their own
language, the wonderful works of
God, He touched at the island of
Banca, a new settlement, where
the Chinese were landed, when,
by permission of the commanding
officer, he distributed his bool.s.

It having been deemed of grect
importance to commence a mission
at Malacca, Mr. Milne, at the
urgent request of Mr. Morrison, re-
moved thither in tire summer of 1815.

Mr. Morrison’s labours among his
domestics were not in vain. One
man was baptized in > on @

7


CAN


credible profession of his faith; and
some others were inclined to declare
themselves Christians, but were in-
timidated by apprehension of the
consequences.

In a letter dated September 4,
1817, Mr. (now Dr.) Morrison
says—* I have translated the morn-
ing and evening prayers, just as they
stand in the book of Common Pray-
er, altering only those which refer to
the rulers of the land. These I am
printing, together with the Psalter,
divided for the 30 days of the month:
I intend them as a help to social
worship, and as affording excellent
and suitable eapressions for indivi-
dual devotion. Mr. Milne wished
to modify them, so as to render them
more suitable to our peculiar cir-
cumstances; but as they possess
here no authority but their own
general excellence, and are not
binding on the practice or consci-
ence of any; and as they are not
extlusive,—I judged it better to
preserve them as they are. Addi-
tional helps may be afforded, if
they shali not be fully adequate.
The heathen, at first, require helps
for social devotion; and to me it
appeared, that the richness of de-
votional phraseology, the elevated
views of the Deity, and the explicit
and full recognition of the work of
our Lord Jesus Christ, were so
many excellences, that a version of
them into Chinese, as they were,
was better than for me to new
model them. The church of Scot-
Jand supplied us with a catechism ;
the congregational churches af-
forded us a form for a Christian
assembly; and the church of Eng-
land has supplied us with a manual
of devotion, as a help to those who
are not sufficiently instructed to
conduct sociai worship without
such aid, We are of no party.
We recognize but two divisions of
our fellow-creatures—the righteous
and the wicked—those who love
our Lord Jesus Christ, and those


CAN


who do not.” Other useful works
were also executed.

On the 25th of Nov. 1819, the
translation of the Holy Scriptures
into the Chinese language was hap-
pily brought to a termination. On
this interesting oceasion, Dr. Mor-
rison’ wrote to the directors as
follows :—‘‘ To have Moses, D wid,
and the Prophets, Jesus Chris: and
his Apostles, using their own ‘vords,
and thereby declaring to the inha-
bitants of this land the wonderful
works of God, indicates, F hope, the
speedy introduction of a happier era
in these parts of the world; and F
trust, that the gloomy darkness of
pagan scepticism will be dispelled
by the day-spring from on high;
and that the gilded idols of Buddah,
and the numberless images which
fill this land, will one day assuredly
fall to the ground before the power
of God’s word, as the idol Dagon
fell before the Ark.”?

In the annual Report, communi-
cated to the general meeting of the
L. M. S., in 1828, the directors
observe— The completion of Dr,
Morrison’s Chinese and English
Dictionary, (which has occupied
more or less of his time during a
period of 15 years), as well as that
of the Chinese version of the Holy
Scriptures, forms a kind of epoch in
the history of the mission. |

It is due to Dr. Morrison to ob-
serve, that by means of his Chinese
and English Dictionary, in cdviuge-
tion with the Chinese Grammgly.


compiled by him, and . published ‘


about 12 yerrs ago, he-has furnished
for the use of English students of
Chinese, highly valu ‘2 faciiities
for attaining a know — >» of this


| very difficult language ; and, at the


same time, he has contributed to
open more widely the door of access
to the stores of Chinese literaiure
and philosophy.

But his labours in this depart
ment are chiefly important, as th
supply the Christian missionary with


§


» and America


referenc

of Dr.)
contribu
the futu
pean lea
the med
guage, a
The ints
empire, a
first place
gradually
‘would nat
fetters of s
to substitu
more feigy
respect an
bitants of
length, to
tion, on tl
quisitive ¢
to the doc
Christianit
Ever sir
Gospel has
larly preac
Chinese, ej
Nor has th
Christian m
it were, an
the extremit
been wholl
Besides the
these religio


some Chines¢
of Dr, Morrj
Sciences divir
impression,»?
On the 9

'. Morrisc
land, where l
the 20th of
year, Prayig
from China, hy
and impesitio
convert to ty
Relist among


vorks


, the
ytures
; hap-


ispelled
| high;
3uddah,
; which
ssuredly
e power
Dagon


ymmuni-
ig of the


directors
of Dr.
English
occupied


CAN


the means of attaining with accu-
racy, and, as far as possible, with
ease, the language of a people who
compose about a fourth part of the
entire population of the globe.

It may further be observed, in
yeference to the philological labours
of Dr. Morrison, that they have also
contributed to prepare the way for
the future dissemination of Euro-
pean learning and science, through
the medium of the English lane
guage, among the natives of China.
The introduction of these into the
empire, as objects of study, in the
first place to the more learned, and
gradually of education to others,
would naturally tend to loosen the
fetters of superstition and prejudice ;
to substitute for a contempt, perhaps
more feigned than real, a degree of
respect and veneration for the inha-
bitants of Europe; and thus, at
length, to procure a candid atten-
tion, on the part of the more in-
quisitive of the Chinese. at least,
to the doctrines and evidences of
Christianity.

Ever since the year 1813, the
Gospel has been more or less regu-
larly preached, both in English and
Chinese, either at Macao oy Canton.
Nor has this small portion of the
Christian ministry, thus insulated, as
it were, and conducted almost to
the extremities of the eastern world,
been wholly destitute of effect.
Besides the advantages derived from
these religious services by European


» and American residents, ‘‘ there are


some Chinese,’’ to use the language
of Dr. Morrison, *‘on whose con-
sciences divine truth has made an
impression.’

On the 9th of December, 16.”
Dr. Morrison embarked for Eng-
land, where he arrived in safety on
the 20th of March, in the ensuing
year, Previous to his departure
from Chiva, he dedicated, by prayer
and impesition of hands, a native
convert to the work of an evane
gélist among his own country-


CAN


men; securing to him a small
annual stipend for the duties to be
performed in discharge of his sacred
obligations, and, at the same time,
permitting him to pursue his secular
calling, as the principal means of
his support.

Shortly after Dr. M.’s arrival in
England, he had the honour to be
introduced at Court, by Sir George
Staunton, Bart., as the first Pro-
testant missionary to China; and
was presented to the King by the
President of the Board of Control,
the Right Honourable Charles
Wynn. Dr. Morrison was per-
mitted to Jay before his Majesty a
copy of the Chinese version of the
Holy Scriptures, made by himself
and the late Dr. Milne; and also
to present to the King an account
of the Anglo-Chinese college and
Singapore institution.

In an official communication of
Sir George Staunton, dated April
12, 1824, Mr. Peel, the Secretary
for the Home Department, stated,
that, in laying the Chinese Bible
before the King, be had mentioned
the very singular and a): itorious
exertions made by Dr. Morrison
for the promotion of religion and
literature in the East: and that he
had it in command to communicate
his Majesty’s ma:!ed approbation
of that gentlemen’s disiinguished
and useful labours.

Another letter was subsequent!
addressed to Dr. Morrison himself,
by his Majesty’s librarian; in
which the writer observes—‘ I
have received his Majesty’s com-
mands to convey to you his ac-
knowledgment, and to express his
sense of your attention in present-
ing, through Mr. Peel, a copy of
vour Chinese Bible.

** And his Majesty has been
pleased to direct me to take it into
my particular care, as an important
and valuable addition to his li-
brary.’?

After rendering many invaiuabie

ox 149


CAN


services to the cause of missions,
and to that of China in particular,
Dr. Morrison left England in 1826,
with his family, and arrived at
Macao on the 19th of September.

The first Sabbath after his arrival,
he resumed the religious services
he had been accustomed to perform
previvusly to his visit to Europe.
During his absence from China,
Leang-a-fa composed, among other
works, a small volume, in Chinese,
containing explanatory notes on
the epistle to the Hebrews. Of
this work, considering the few ad-
vantages Afa possessed, Dr. Mor-
rison speaks favourably. Afa had
also written asmall Essay in favour
of the Christian Religion, entitled,
The True Principles of the W orld’s
Salvation ; in which he points out
the necessity of a Saviou., ‘and
shews that Jesus Christ has made
an atonement for sin. He directs
the attention of his countrymen to
the Bible, which, he informs them,
European Christians have, at a
great expense, caused to be trans-
lated into Chinese, printed, and
given to the people. He had like-
wise drawn up a short account of
several interesting conversations,
held at different times, witb certain
of his countrymen, who had casu-
ally taken up the Bible when he
was himself present. Since Dr.
Morrison’s return, Afa has drawn
up a brief statement of the religious
progress of his own mind while
under the tuition of the late Dr,
Milne at Malacca, which, atlength,
issued in his determination fully to
embrace Christianity.

The above accounts relative to
Leang-a-fa, however in themselves
pleasing, derive additional interest
from the almost universal rejection
of the Gospel by the inhabitants of
China, with which they stand con-
trasted. An empire is here pre-
sented to our view, containing 150
millions of souls, involved in gross
spiritual darkness; while standing,


CAP


as it were, on its utmost verge, we
behold a single individual of that
empire defending the existence and
perfections of the true God, the
necessity and efficacy of our Lord’s
atonement for the sin of the world,
and inviting his countrymen to read
the Scriptures, which have been
translated for their use, as contain-
ing words by which they may be
saved. May this light—small, indeed,
and comparatively dim,—increase
more and more, until it shall at
length break forth in all the bright-
ness of meridian day!

So fully persuaded is Dr. Mor.
rison of the importance and utility
of comments on the Scriptures, in
reference to converted and inquir-
ing heathens, that, while the present
obstacles to preaching the Gospel
in China continue, he conceives he
cannot more profitably employ his
time than in composing explanatory
notes on the Chinese Bible. :

CAPE BRETON, an island in
the gulf of St. Lawrence, 109 m,
long ; separated from Nova Scotia
by a narrow strait. Population
about 3000.

The Society for paoges the
Gospel in Foreign Parts labours
here.

The principal station is at Sid-
ney, where are a missionary and
about 90 communicants. .

Several schools are supported on
the islarid by the society.

CAPE COAST, or CAPE
COAST CASTLE, a British set.
tlement on the Gold Coast, W,
Africa. Population 8000.

The Society for propagating the
Gospel in Foreign Parts com-
menced its efforts here in 17@.
The principal design was .to be-
nefit the negroes in the vicinity;
but it was soon relinquished, and
renewed in 1766, by the sappoint-
ment of the Rev. Philip Quaque,
a native, educated by the society in
England for the purpose. He con-
tinued to labour as a missionary,

150


catech
F about ~
ceeded
chaplaj
who dic
lowed |
For sev
pany ha
of abou
stitions
retarded
and Chri
CAPE
OF TE
HOPE,
easterly f
m. to tl
breadth, f
200 to 3.
district of
taken by
Dutch, in
original p|
to the seu,
of the cou
proceed to
mountains,
cording to
107,516,co


"


recently ado
born ministe
are conversa
Dutch lan
promote the
the church
colony there
about 14 Dp
July, 1822, ¢
schools arriy¢
were also in
language, to
public expens
lucilitating t
English lang
swclety. Soo
4 proclamatio
it was orderd


©, we
T that
se and
i, the
Lord’s
world,
fo read
3 been
ontain-
nay be
indeed,
ncrease
shall at
bright-


rt. Mor-
1 utility
ures, in
| inquir-
e present
> Gospel
seives he
nploy his
planatory


las .to be-
vicinity }
shed, and
» appoint
, Quaque,
society In
He con-


CAP


catechist, and schoolmaster, till
about "1816. He was soon suc-
ceeded by the Rev. WM. Philip,
chaplajn to the African.Company,
who died soon after, and was fol-
lowed by the Rev. James Collins.
For several years the African Com-
pany has patronized a school here,
of about 75 pupils ; but the super-
stitions of the natives have greatly
retarded the progress of civilization
and Christianity.

CAPE COLONY, or COLONY
OF THE CAPE OF GOOD
HOPE, South Africa, extending
easterly from the Cape, about 700
m. to the Keiskamma R.;_ the
breadth, from N. to S. varies from
200 to 315 m. Except the new
district of Albany, the colony was
taken by the British from the
Dutch, in 1806; who were the
original planters. The soil, next
to the seu, is tertile, and the face
of the country level; but, as you
proceed to the N., it rises into lofty
mountains. The population, ac-
cording to late official returns, is
107,516,consisting mostly of Dutch,
English, and Hottentots.

The colonial government is
taking active measures to abolish
slavery; and several schools have
been opened for the instruction of
slaves. Measures have also been
recently adopted to employ British-
born ministers in the churches, who


are conversant with the English and |


Dutch languages, with a view to
promote the established system of
the church of England. In the
colony there are 4 episcopal, and
about 14 Dutch churches. In
July, 1822, 6 English teachers of
schools arrived from England, who
were also instructed in the Dutch
language, to be employed at the
public expense, for the purpose of
facilitating the acquirement of the
English language to all classes of
society. Soon after their arrival,
a proclamation was issued, in which
it was ordered that the English


CAP
language should exclusively super-
sede the Dutch in all judicial and
official acts and proceedings, from
the Ist of Jan. 1827. ‘These in-
structors are placed at Caledon,
George, Graaff Reynet, Stellen-
bosch, Tulbagh, and Uitenhage. It
is intended to establish similar
schools at. every principal place in
the ‘colony ; within which are se-
veral missionary stations. ‘ Cape
Town is the capital, and it is situ-
ated in E. long. 18° 23’, S. lat. 34° 6’,

CAPE TOWN, the capital of
the territory of the Cape; a set-
tlement founded by the Dutch. It
stands on the W. side of Table Bay,
and is a town rising in the midst
of a desert, surrounded -by black
and dreary mountains. Here are
two churches; the great one used
jointly by the English and the
Dutch Calvinists, the other by Ger-
man Lutherans: also an hospital
for sailors, situated close to the go-
vernor’s gardens, to which there is
free access. ‘The mountains be-«
hind the town, are the. Table
Monntain (3315 feet high), the
Sugar Loaf, the Lion’s Head,
Charles Mount, and James Mount,
or the Lion’s Rump. From these
mountains descend several riyulets,
which flow into the different bays,
as Table Bay, False Bay, &c.
Among these mountains, extend-
ing along the valleyg and rivulets,
are a great number of plantations ;
and 10 m. S.E. of the town is the
celebrated farm of Constantia,
yielding the wine of that name.
This town, with its extensive co-
lony, surrendered to the British in
1795, and was restored, in 1802,
by the treaty of Amiens; it again
surrendered to the British in 1806,
and was finally ceded to them in
1814. Cape Town is 34m. N. by
W. from the Cape, E, long. 18° 23’,
S. lat. 30° 50’.

« Mahomedanism,’’ suys the Rev,
J, Campbell, in 1812, “ is greatly
on the increase in ~—- Town,

b


CAP
They have, I believe, 6 mosques,


‘CAP
slaves from Madagascar and Mo-


where they assemble for their wor- | sambique, was lately captured by


ship. About 20 free Mahomedans
club together, and rent a large


one of our cruizers. The slaves
were landed at Cape Town, and


house, to which they invite poor | apprenticed to masters for 14 years,


ignorant sfaves, to gain them over
to their party. By this method,


who are bound by agreement to
treat them well, to teach them a


an alarming number have been | trade, and to instruct them in read-


persuaded to join them, and ren-
dered ten. times more prejudiced
against truth, and against all white
people, or persons called Christians,
than they were before.”

“¢ The masters say that such houses
are dens-of thieves, and receptacles
of goods which the slaves steul
from them. Perhaps this circum-
stance may induce masters to at-
tend better to the instruction of
their slaves, which may ultimately
prove a blessing and a security to
the colony. In general, the slaves
are treated ‘with tenderness in Cape
Town. In the haquse where I
lodge, they are treated as if they
were their own children, and most
of them would be sorry to leave the
family. Their children are put to
school, and play about the room
where the family sit at their meals,
with as much freedom, and receive
as much attention, as if they were
their own children. But they are
slaves !—-a condition which shocks
wuman nature, All the children
of a female slave are the property
of her master, whether the father
be bond or free: of course, it is
the interest of the master to see
that even the mother treats the
child well, on the same principle
on which the farmer takes care of
his young foals, because, by their
death, or their disease, he becomes
a loser. Slaves are not permitted
to marry; which is not only an act
of great injustice towards them,
but & heinous sin against God,
There are, however, many slaves
who consider theinselves, by their
own mutual consent, husbands and
wives.’’

*¢ A slave-ship, contalning many


ing, and in the principles of the
Christian religion—all which, in
some cases, will be performed. |
visited a school of 20 of these
strangers, entirely supported by
Commissioner Shiels. They all
appeared to be from 18 to 24 years
of age. Several of them read tbe
New Testament tolerably well,
and repeated questions (rom Watts’s
Catechism. On the Lord’s-day
they are well dressed in a kind of
uniform, and attend the church.
I have no doubt that their tempo-
rary captivity will not only be a
blessing to themselves, but also to
their country, should they ever
return,’?

The Rev. Geo. Thom, from the
L. M. S., arrived at Cape Town in
1812, and laboured zealouslv to
promote the cause of relig' + -, not
only there, but also in other purts
of the colony, for several years;
and afterwards accepted the office
of Dutch minister at Caledon, un-
der the appointment of the colo-
nial government. In 1818, the
Rev. Dr. Philip, who had been
appointed superintendent of the
society’s missions in that part of the
¢iobe, increased the congregation
previously collected, and obtained
permission to build a chapel. This
commeodious place of worship was
opened, Dec. 1, 1822, ‘Through
Dr. Philip’s agency, premises have
also been purchased, to be occu-
pied, in part, as a dwelling-house
by the society’s resident agent,
and as a temporary abode for it
missionaries who may touch at the
Cape, disembark there, or occa
sionally visit it from the interior.


The building will also afford faci:


1é8


their benefits


lities in
which e
the Soci
seminati
Africa.

merly cc
can M.S
many ye
fect, was
and gratu
thens wer
ship, and
Between:
were unde
instructior
consisted |
succeeding
cess attend
ployed. | J
sary for Dy
his place is
by the Rey
iliary M.S,
The W.
veral of its
welfare of t
A building,
and meeti
June 16, 1
however,

connexion


few; and


children, ha


are patronized
tities, and are


d Mo-


red by :


| slaves
m, and

1 years,
nent to
them a
in read-
of the
rich, in
med. I
of these
ted by
hey all
24 years
read tbe
ly well,
n Watts’s
ord’s-day
a kind of
> church.
ir tempo-
ynly be a
ut also to
hey ever


from the
» Town in
louslv to
ig! ve, not
ther parts
al years;
the office
ledon, un-
the colo-
1818, the
had been
4 of the
part of the
maregation
dd obtained
1. ‘This
porship was
Through
mises have
h be occu
Ling-house
ent agent
de for its
buch at the
or occh


e interior
afford faci
158


CAP


lities in aid of plans of education,
which enter into the measures of
the Society for promoting the dis-
semination of the Gospel in South
Africa. The Rev. Mr. Beck, for-
merly connected with the S. 4fri-
can M. S., which laboured here, for
many years, with considerable ef-
fect, was at this time an important
and gratuitous coadjutor ; 16 hea-
thens were united in church-fellow-
ship, and under his pastoral care.
Between 300 and 400, chiefly adults,
were under his weekly catechetical
instruction ; and the Sabbath-school
consisted of about 100. Through
succeeding years, considerable suc-
cess attended the means thus em-
ployed. It being deemed neces-
sary for Dr. Philip to visit England,
his place is supplied, pro tempore,
by the Rev. R. Miles. An aux-
iliary 47. S. has been established.

The W. M.8., by means of se-
veral of its agents, has sought the
welfare of this once destitute town.
A building, designed for a school
and meeting-house, was opened,
June 16, 1821. This mission is,
however, more important in its
connexion with the interior mis-
sions than in itself. But still the
opportunities of usefulness are not
few; and the preaching to the
slaves, and the school for slave
children, have conveyed to many
of this class the knowledge of
Christ, and brought them under its
moral influence.

The Rev. Mr. Wright, a mis-
sionary from the society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Fo-
vign Parts, restored the national
school to a state of efficiency, in


| 1821, which soon increased to more


than 300 scholars, mostly Dutch.
He also preached to a congregation
at Wynberg.

Efficient Tract and Bible Socie-
ties were formed here in 1820,which
are patronized by the local autho-
tities, and are designed to extend
their benefits throughout the co- |


CAR


lony. The B. S., within about a
year of its formation, declined a
grant of about £200 from the Pa-
rent Institution, in consequence of
the sufficiency of its pecuniary re-
sources.

CARRADIVE, asmall island of
North Ceylon, about 4 m. from Bat-
ticotta. Here ate several thou-
sands of people, mostly Roman
Catholics, among whom the Ame-
rican Missionaries in Ceylon have
frequently laboured and distributed
tracts and portions of the Scrip-
tures. The influence and opposi-
tion of the priests are the most dis-
couraging circumstances against
the prevalence of truth.

CAREY, the mission station of
the American Baptist Board for
Foreign Missions, among the Pu-
tawatomie Indians in Michigan.
This station was so called by the
Board as a token of fraternal affec-
tion and respect for the Rev. Dr.
Carey, missionary at Serampore.
It is situated on St. Joseph’s R. in
the southern part of Michigan ter-
ritory, 100 m. N. W. Fort Wayne,
about the same distance from any
white inhabitants, and nearly 200
m. from any compact settlement,

The Rev. Isaac M‘ Coy, who had
been for several years at Fort
Wayne, removed here in the latter
part of 1822; encouraged by the
generous offer of the Indians, that,
on condition of his settling among
them, they would give him a mile
square in the heart of their settle-
ment, in addition to 1000 dollars 2
yeur for 16 years, secured to them
by the government of the United
States, to support a teacher and
blacksmith. A school-house and
a dwelling-house, containing 3

apartments, have been erected. A
school was commenced, Jan. 27,
1823, which contained 53 native
pupils at the close of the year.
The Indians appeer very friendly,
and are ready to commit their chil-


dren in greater numbers to the care


i538


CAR
wf the missionaries,


CAR


than their | 1823, a church was organized;


means will enable them to sup- | when 6 Cherokee converts were


port.
the arts of civilized life, and ac-
customed to habits of industry. A |


The pupils are instructed in admitted to Christian fellowship,
and with their households, 2) in
number,


were baptized. The


considerable farm is cultivated, | scene was witnessed by a 2xume-


which has been mostly stocked by |
individuals in the neighbouring
states. Before the end o! i323,
Mr. M‘Coy had several associates |
in his labours. Their prospects

are very encouraging.

CARMEL, formerly Taloney,
a mission station of the American
Board of Commissioners for Fo-
reign Missions, among the Che-
rokees,, 62 m. S, E. Brainerd, and
30 S. E. Spring Place, on the di-
rect road from Augusta to Nash-
ville, near a small river, called
Talking Rock Creek, and 5 m.
from the Cherokee town of Talo-
hey, which lies off from the road,
in a north-easterly direction. Mr..
Moody Hall removed. his family
here from Brainerd, and opened a
school, May 9, 1820, in compliance
with the earnest solicitations of
the principal men of the village
and its vicinity : previous to which,
suitable buildings had been erected.
About 20. entered the school the
first week ; and the number soon in-
creased to50. The average num-
ber may be about 30, who generally
are eager in the pursuit of use-
ful knowledge, make good profi-
ciency, and cheerfully submit to
wholesome regulations.

The agricultural prospects of
this station are pleasing ; and it is
expected that provisions for the
mission family will easily be fur-
nished from the land here culti-
tivated. The labours of Mr. Hall
have been blessed to the spiritual
good of many.

He has given religious instruc-
tion to a small congregation on the
Sabbath, when the scholars are re-
quired to attend, who are cate-
chised in the presence of the con-
gtegation. Early in the spring of


rous assembly from different parts


of the nation, and excited great
interest,


The seriousness, which
then prevailed, continued in the
early part of 1824, and gave in-
creasing hope that many would
become savingly benefited by the
Gospel. Previous to that time, 3
more Cherokees and a white
woman, wife of a Cherokee, had
been admitted to the privileges of
the church ; and several now gave
evidence of a saving change. The
Rev. Daniel S. Butrick, who has
labonred as an evangelist in almost
every part of the nation, has be-
stowed much attention on the con-
cerns of this mission.
CATARAUGUS, an Indian re.
servation in the State of New
York, on the eastern shore of Lake
Erie, about 40 m. S.W. of Buf-
falo. It comprises about 26,000
acres of land, and 450 inhabitants,
a large majority of whom. are pa-
gans, and opposed to the introduc-
tion of the Gospel. They belong
to the Seneca tribe, except a few
families of Munsees, so called from
the name of the place where my
formerly resided. ‘The Rev. Vm. A.
Thayer, assistant missionary from
the United Foreign M. S. (United
States), commenced labouring here
in 1822. Mr. T. was appointed to
this station in compliance with the
earnest solicitations of 22 chiefs
and 2 interpreters. Of the chiefs,
7 belonged to Cataraugus, 3 to
Allegany, and 12 to Buffalo, He
arrived, with his family, in May,
1822, but found the opposition of
the pagan party so violent, that he
judged it inexpedient to settle on
the reservation, and procured ac-
commodations for his school in
the immediate vicinity, — he
54


opened .
end of t
who wei
mily, *
highly ¢
and th»
in theiy |
to afford
their sear
piece of ]
bounded ¢
24m. %¢
house, or
been erec)
Thayer ha
Christian
ings with
In the lat
Bradley ax
were assign
CAWNI
portant mi;
habad, Hin
of the Ga
Lucknow,
26° 30’,
Early in]
Henry Mar
napore to th
his faithful |
diers and na
of the follow
time, he ind
translation ¢
Hindoostane
procured the
for worship,
In conseq
some pious
quartered at
one of the
Baptist miss
was sent hit
very useful,
A Free-Se
organized b
pean resident
Oth, 1821, t
struction to K
orphan ehildr
"8 vicinity, ad
wre destitute,
years, the nun


sized $
were
wship,
2) in
The
nume-
+ parts
1 great
which
in the
ave in-
r would
by the
time, 3
2 white
see, had
ileges of
low gave
re. The
who has
in almost
has be-
. the con-


indian res
of New
e of Lake
. of Bul-
ut 26,000
habitants,
a are pa-
introduc-
hey belong
ept a few
alled from
here the
ev. Vi " .
pnary from
3. (United
buring here


gus, 4
ffalo.


y?


154


pointed to

- with the
22 chiels

the chiefs,
s 3 to


He
in May,
osition 0
nt, that he
lo settle on
vared ac-
school
which he


*


CAW


CEL


opened Jan. 14, 1823; and at the { amounted to 158. The funds are


end of the year he had 27 pupils,
who were provided for in -his fe-
mily. The Christian party ar
highly svatified with the school,
and the pleasing’ chenge effected
in theiy children, ancl seem ready
to afford every assistance which
their scant) means will allow. A
piece of land has been purchased,
bor nded on the reservation, about
24 m. ‘om the Seneca mission-
house, on which buildings have
been erected fer the mission. Mr.
Thayer has been very useful to the
Christian party >y helding meet-
ings with them on the Sabbath.
In the latter part of 1823, ‘Mr.
Bradley and Miss Lucy Beardsley
were assigned to this mission.

CAWNPORE, a town and im-
portant military station in Alla-
habad, Hindoostan, on the W. bank
of the Ganges, 49 m. S.W. of
Lucknow. E. long. 81°, N. lat.
26° 30’.

Early in 1809, the lamented Rev.
Henry Martyn removed from Di-
napore to this place, and continued
his faithful labours among the sol-
diers and natives till the latter part
of the following vear. At the same
time, he indefatigably pursued the
translation of the Scriptures into
Hindoostanee and Persian; and
procured the erection of a house
for worship.

In consequence of the zeal of
some pious soldiers who were
quartered at Cawnpore, Nriputa,
one of the natives assisting the
Baptist missionary at Allahabad,
was sent hither in 1818, and was
very useful,

A Free-School Associution was
organized by the principal Euro-
pean residents at this station, May


| 10th, 1821, to afford gratuitous in-


struction to European and Hindoo
orphan children in Cawnpore and
its vieinity, and to support such as
are destitute. Within about two
years, the number of beneficiaries


supplied by subscriptions and sa-
cramental collections. The Dis-
itict Committee of the Christian
Knowledge S., furnish books for
the children. They have also es-
tablished a Lending Library. This
is an encouraging field for mis-
sionary labour.

The C. M. &. also labours here.
The following account, given by
Archdeacon Corrie, is from the
last Keport:—* The native con-
gregation, commenced last cold
season, has continued to increase,
under the steady labours of the na-
tive catechist (Peter Dilsook), who
is now encouraged and supported
by the presence of the Rev. Mr.
Torriano. The number attending
on Sunday worship is now about
30, and a separate place of wor-
ship has become necessary for their
accommodatinn. There are se-
veral candidates for baptism.”

CELEBES, or MACASSAR,
an island in the Indian Ocean, to
the E. of Borneo. It is 560 m.
from N. to S., and divided into va-
rious portions by large bays, so that
the breadth is c »mmonly not above
60m. The E. side of the island
is sometimes called Celebes, and
the W. Macassar; but, in general,
the former name is given to the
whole island. The inhabitants are
Malays, consisting of several na-
tions or tribes, and the best soldiers
in these parts. The most power.
ful tribe are called Buges, and have
something free and dignified in
their manner, superior te other
Malays, and are remarkably in-
dustrious, Their chief town is
Boni, situated on a river, near its
entrance into the Bay of Boni.
The Dutch have some settlements
on the coast, of which the chiet' is
Macassar, In 1810, the English
obtained poszession of those of
Goroniaie «'' Manado; and, ih
1812, of thai oi Macassar ; but they
were restored in 1815, ;
155


CE”

The Netherlands M. S. appointed
the Rev. Mr. Kellendroon to Ma-
_ cassar, the capital, having a po-
pulation of 100,000, in 1820, This
island is also occasionally visited by
the Rev. Mr. Kam, of the Z.M.S.

CERAM, one of the Molucca or
Spice Islands, in the East Indian
Ocean, near the N. E. coast of
Amboyna, 190 m. long, and nearly
40 broad, belonging to the Dutch.
The inhabitants, including 3 small
islands in the vicinity, are estima-
ted at 15,000.

The Rev. Mr. Kam’s occasional
visits have been instrumental of
much good to the native Christians,
and recently a mission has been
established here under his direction.
The inhabitants of two villages in
this island, where the Rev, Mr.
Starnink then laboured, have de-
stroyed their idols, The children
were summoned to attend, with
their parenis, ‘¢ witness the spec-
tacle, thei ‘hey might keep the
eventin yen yrance, The people
ef these villages were formerly
notorious ivr wickedness; but since
they have embraced Christianity, a
great improvement in their con-
duct has taken place.

CEYLON, an island in the In-
dian Ocean, separated from the S.E.
point of Hindoostan, by Palk Strait,
and the Gulf ‘of Manaar. The
natives call it Cingala, whence they.
are called Cingalese, and by the
drabs it is called Screndib. It is
270 m. long, and 140 in its greatest
breadth, nearly resembling a ham in
shape, the narrow part to the N,;
and hence the peninsula of Jaffna-
patam was called Hamsheel by
the Dutch. The flat track around
the coast, covered ‘vith rich fields of
rice, are bounded by groves of co-
coa-nut trees; and the prospect is
usually terminated by woods, which
cover the sides of mountains. The
woods and mountains completely
surround the kingdom of Kandy,
and forma strong natural barrier.


ei gon,
we


CEY


The climate on the S. and E. coasts
is more temperate tiv:: onthe con.
tinent of Hindoostaxn; but, in the
interior of the country, the heat is
often extremely sultry and un-
healthy. The most considerable
mountain is called Adam’s Peak,
in the S. part of the island, and is
visited by numerous pilgrims. It is
of a conical form, about 7000 feet
in height; and, in the area, on its
top, is a rock of iron stone, with an
impression on it in the shape of a
man’s foot, but considerably larger:
the Cingalese have a tradition that
Budha, the great author of their
religion, left the print of hjs foot
on this rock, when he ascended
into heaven. The only consider.
able river in the island is the Ma-
hawelle; but there are many other
fine ones, yet few of them are na-
vigable, even for small boats, higher
up than 16m. from the sea. Be.
side the rivers, with which the is-
land abounds, there are many lakes,
tanks, and canals, communicating
with them; also many natural sa-
line pools, some of great extent,
from which much salt is produced,
In some places there are rich mines,
whence are procured rubies, sap-
phires, topazes, and other stones of
less value; also iron and manga-
nese. Colombo is the capital.
E. long. 79° 50’ to 82°, N. lat. 5°50
to 9° 52’,

The inhabitants are divided into
Malabars, Cingalese, Portuguese,
Dutch, and English, and have been
estimated at 1,500,000; and by
some between 2 and 3,000,000,
They are mostly pagans of Hindoo
origin, or, as they are often deno-
minated, a nation of atheists,
There are, however, many natives
who bear the Christian name;
amounting, it is estimated, to
200,000, one-fourth of whom ar
Catholics. In the northern part of
the island are about 7000 Maho:
medans ; and, in, the interior, is 4
race of wild, independent "hia

5


who ha
either tc
to the E
graded, «
civil gove
The 4
language
religion,
N. part
gombo on
on the E,.
na on the
people, mi
galese, an
ferior-to ¢
dia. At
forced to pi
thenism, a:
of Christi
never radic
gion ; nor,
their custor
been broke
burning of 1
and some
such as the
in all essent
are the sa
as they ey
the British ¢
liberty to y
temples wey
ihose who
fession of
their former
nimously y¢
The a
& most decei
men, who su
€ minds of
absurd tenets
The Cing
the ancient p
inhabit all ¢
southern par
lese languag
ignorant, and |
They seem
Judices agai
the followers
system, chie
ference about


. coasts
ne cone
in the
heat is
nd un-
iderable
s Peak,
, and is
is. Itis
000) feet
a, on its
, with an
ape of a
y larger:
tion that
of their
js foot
ascended
considers
; the Ma-
any other
m are Nar
ats, higher
sea. Be-
ich the ise
xany lakes,
unicating
atural sa-
at extent,
produced,
ich mines,
ubies, sap-
Ly stones of
d a
he capital.
T, lat. 5°50


Hivided into
Portuguese,
d have been
0; and by

3,000,000.
s of Hindoo
often deno-


imated,


any natives
‘ian name;


CEY


who have never been subjected,
either to the native Cingalese or
to the Europeans ;. and are so de-
graded, as to be incapable of any
civil government, +

The Malabars speak. the Tamul
language, and profess the Hindoo
religion. They occupy all the
N. part of the island, from Ne-
gombo on the W., and Batticaloe
on the E., to the extremity of Jaf-
naonthe N. They are a manly
people, much superior to the Cin-
galese, and are said to be not in-
ferior-to any of the tribes of In-
dia. At times they have been
forced to put off the forms of hea-
thenism, and to take the semblance
of Christianity; yet they have
never radically changed their reli-
gion; nor, to any great extent,
their customs. Some barriers have
been broken down, such as_ the
burning of widows, and polygamy ;
and some have been weakened,
such as the rights of caste; but,
in all essential respects, the people
are the same grovelling idolaters
as they ever were. As soon as
the British government gave them
liberty to worship their idols, the
temples were rapidly rebuilt; and
ihose who had assumed the pro-
fession of Christianity to please
their former masters, almost una-
nimously relapsed nto idolatry.
The brahmins are of the first caste,
a most deceitful, treacherous set of
men, who succeed in imposing on
the minds of the people the most
absurd tenets,

The Cingalese, supposed to be
the ancient possessors of the island,
inhabit all the interior, 4nd the
southern parts—speak the. Cinga-
lese: language—are indolent and
ignorant, and worshippers of Budhu.


| They seem to possess fewer pre-


156


whom are
hern part of
000 Maho:
nterior, is ¢
ent savages,


judices against Christianity, than
the followers of the brahminical
system, chiefly from their indif-
ference about all religion, They,


CEY


having no hereditary priesthood, nor
division of caste,’ are more ac-
cessible than the Malabars or Hin-
doos. Their temples are nume-
rous, in which are gigantic images
of Budhu, 30 or 40 feet high.
Their priests amount to. about
1500, who differ so much in their


sentiments, is very difficult
to ascertain ns their reli-
gious syste: that Na-
habrachmea God, and


that he dwei shest hea-
ven, but does ot con ern: himself
with the affairs of this world. Be-
side him, they have gods, whose
names they can mention, to the
number of 30,000! They deny the
existence of a Creator, and main-
tain that the worl l- owes its being
to chance! They hold the doc-
trine of the transmigration of the
soul, for a certain time ; and when
that has elapsed, they suppose it is
totally annihilated. Budhu is the
object of their worship, because
they think he superintends the af-
fairs of men.

Throughout the island, devi/-
worship prevails, but the Cingalese
are most dreadfully devoted to it.
Devils are regarded as the authors
of all temporal evils ; to avert which,
they have temples and priests de-
dicated to them. This is entirely
distinct from Budhism; and, in
many districts, is rapidly gaining
the ascendancy. It leads to the
most inhuman secrifices and prac-
tices. When the Portuguese made
inroads upon the island, in 1505,
they brought their artillery to bear
upon the heathen temples, and
levelled them with the ground;
and thus thousands, through fear,
were induced to acknowledge the
supremacy of the Pope. In 1658,
the Dutch took possession of the
island, and introduced the. protes~
tant religion; yet their policy was
calculated to make nominal Chris-
tians, rather than real converts, by

P 157


BOOKA aw
ZH \ ag 4 VW < <# < <
NN f/ ZF

W <


S cS
* x :
so”


5?


eS
A N GY |
AN yy


29 WEST MAIN STREET
) 072


hic


IMAGE EVALUATION
TEST TARGET (MT-3)
2S Has


Pha
Co


p Y


A
SS


“oe


«


CHA


issuing a decree, thatno one should
hold an office under government,
who was not a baptized Christian.
They, however, did much to. en-
lighten the people, and had many
faithful ministers, the vestiges of
whose pious labours are still appa-
rent, They divided their posses-
sions on the island, into240 parishes,
in each of which a protestant school
wag established. They also trans-
lated and published considerable

rtions. of the Scriptures in the

amul and Cingalese languages.
Since 1796, most ‘of the island has
been in the possession .of the
British.

The Governor is appointed by
the King of England, and not by
the East India Company. Fora
considerable time the religious in-


struction of the natives occupied | ti


no part of the attention of their
new masters. After the lapse of
about 3 years, most of the schools
were revived, and the Dutch minis-
ters resumed the charge. of their
congregations ; but these are mostly
dead; or have left the country ; and

people are now, in a great mea-
gure, destitute of Christian instruc-
tion, except what is afforded by
chaplains and missionaries. 11 is
a Hs interesting and important
field for missionary labour.

[See Amlamgodde, Atchavelly,
Reddagomme, Batticaloe, Batti-
cutta, Calpentyn, Caltura, Colom-
bo, Cotta, Galle, Jaffna, mg
Kornegalle, Manepy, Maturu, Ne-

bo, Nellore, wdooville, Pan-


iteripv, Point Pedro, Tillipally,


Trincomalee.)

CHANGANY, or CHAN-
GANE, a parish in Ceylon, about
2 m. N. of Batticotta. The Ame-
rican missionaries at Batticotta
have bestowed much attention on
the people here in preuching, dis-
tributing Scripture tracts, and es-
tablishing schools, In 1818, a
large school was opened, which is


CHA


supported by children in the Sab.
, bath-school in Charlestown, S. Ca.
rolina, The missionaries have
| Opened 2 other schools in: this pa.
'rish, in the villages of Moolai and
| Sittinkerny. Many seem anxious
| to receive religious instruction,
CHARLESTOWN, a town in
|Rhode*Island, Washington Coun-
{try (America), on the sea-coast, 19
im. S.W. of Newport. Here are
about 400 of the Narraganset tribe
\of Indians, who have a Baptist
bg and @ shee The Society
for gating the Gospel. among
the lans and others, in. N. Ame.
-Yica, erected a school-house and
‘established a school, in 18)2,
which has been maintained, with
occasional interruptions, and has
been highly beneficial to the na-


ves.
CHARLOTTE, a town of libe-
rated Africans, in the parish of St.
John, Sierra Leone, W. Africa,
In 1817, the inhabitants amounted
to only 85. In 1823, there were 676,
hither Mr, Cheiatspher Tayler and
ither Mr. Christ lor and
Mrs. Taylor, school-teachers, and
Mr. John Jackson, native assistant
The progress of education was pleas-
ing, and habits of industry have been
happily induced. A school-house,
30 feet by 30, was built, and was used
as a place of worship, but was soon
foundinsufficient. A Missionary As-
sociation was formed, and 6 native
collectors ones who. rege |
_— 3 . ~~. of their of-
ce. It having n suggested
that produce would be received in
lieu of money, 160 bushels of cas-
sada were presented in the course
of a few days. The amount of
contributions, in 1894, was £26 és.
The returns of the school, at the
Close of this year, were: — Boy;’
day-school, 57—girle’: day-school,
73—schole:3 residing with their pe
rents, 20—adults’ cfening school,
48 ;—total, 108. ar - time,
; )


CHA


the Sab-
a, S. Ca- bourers have been sent. At pre-
es have sent the church services, on Sun-
, this pa- days and week-days, are regularly
polai and kept. by Mr. Pierce, as far as is
. anxious consistent with his lay character.
ction. He states, that about 100 adults
town in attend on Sundays, and from 12
on Coun- to 16 on the week evenings. The
-coast, 19 attendance has been much im-
Here are proved, in consequence of Mr. P.
anset tribe recently visiting from house to
a Baptist house. The numbers in the schools
he Soctety at Michaelmas 1826, were, boys,
ot j girls 52. - bi
in. N. Ames ATTOOGA, a settlement
-house and onene Se Cherokees, about 60 m.
in 1812, S.W. Brainerd, and 6 from Fort
ained, with Armstro In -1820, Mr. Milo
s, and hes Hoyt, of Brainerd, opened a school
to the na- for the natives, which was relin-
quished before the close of the year.
own of libe- CHEROKEES, an Indian na-
parish of tion, whose territory embraces the | h
W. Africa. 8. W. corner of N. Carolina, the


N. W. part of Georgia, the N. E.
part of Alabama, and that portion
of Tennessee which lies S, of the
Hiwassee and Tennessee rivers ;
containing at least 10,000,000
acres. Its greatest length is about
250 m., and its greatest breadth
about 130, from the mouth of the
Hiwassee, in aS.S.E. direction, to
the boundary-line between the Che-
rokees and Creeks, The climate is
generally healthy, and the soil fer-
tile. The population is estimated at
about 12,000, exclusive of about
6000 who reside in the Arkansas
territory. Those who emigrated to
the A R., as well as those
on their ancient grounds, have
made considerable advances in ac-
quiring the useful arts, particularly
in the manufacture of cotton and
woollen cloths. In 1816, they had
upwards of 500 looms, most of which
they made; and about as many


$s.
They live mostly in log cabins
not much inferior to those of the
whites in the neighbouring settle-


CHE


Mr. Taylor has died, but other la- | ments, and cultivate their land.


Many have targe stocks of cattle
and raise an abundant supp of
provision, About one-half of the
nation are of mixed blood, by in
termarriages with the white people.
They ure brave in war, and

remarkable for their hospitality.
In their dress, they have almost
universally adopted the English
habits, and are neat and clean in
Their intéllectual
powers have been sufficiently tried,
to prove, nd debate, that they
are not inferior to the whites in
mental capacity, and that they are
capable of receiving the highest
improvement. The structure and
regularity of their language evince,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that
their remote ancestors were refined
and improved. The Hon. John Pic
kering, of Salem, Massachusetts,
as, with the assistance of Mr. Da-
vid Brown, a Cherokee, nearly pre-
pared for the press a Grammar of
the language, which will render
important aid in systematizing the
kindred dialects of the Choctaw,
Chickasaw, Creek, and several


their persons.


others.

Many of their religious rites bear
a striking resemblance to those of
the Jews, and, some think, forcibly
argue that the aborigines of Ame-
rica are the lost ten tribes of Israel.
They believe in the existence of the
Great Spirit, and can form no com-
bination of words in their language,
by which they can profane the name
of God. They are said to have a
tradition among them, that the
Great Spirit has made provision for
the recovery of bad men by pro-
mising his Son, which is yet to be
fulfilled. By their intercourse with
unprincipled white men, they had
become, generally, divested of re-
ligious principles and moral re.
straints ; but, by the introduction of
schools, their situation is rapidly
improving, both in morals and ci-
vilization ; and it is not —_—


CHE CHE


to calculate, that, at a period not far | dheirnames. His congregation con-
distant, they will become English in | sisted at this time of 9 baptized adults,
‘their language, Christian in their | of whom 6 were communicants,
religion, and civilized in their gene- A chief,. and. several . natives,
ral habits and manners. residing at Oochgeelogy, 30 m,
. In 1709, the Rev. Abraham Stei- | from Spring Place, Georgia, the
ner was sentout.by.the United Bre- | central point. of the national Go.
thren, to ask permission to establish | vernment of the Cherokees, having
“a school in the nation. He pressed | been converted by means of the
the subject in the national council, | missionaries at Spring Place, a new
and was seconded. by ihe officers of | station was formed there in 182),
government, but was utterly refused. | Divine service is attended in the
In 1800, he renewed his applica- | house of a chief; and, in May, 1824,
tion, and was again refused: but, be- | 8 persons belonged to the Society,
fore the close of the council, two in- | The Rev. Gideon Bluckburn,
fluential chiefs agreed to patronize | under the auspices of the Gene.
the school, which was soon opened | ral Assembly of the Presbyterian
on land cleared by one of them; | Church, instituted a mission among
and shortly after, the mission and | the Cherokees in 1804, which he
school were commenced at Spring | conducted in person, and with very
Place. At this time no waggon- | inadequate assistance and support:
road had ever been cut in the terri- | and within about 5 years, between
tory, and no one was. permitted to | 4 and 500 young perscas, of both
own a waggon. The objection was, | sexes, were so instructed as to be
if waggons were owned, roads must | able to read, with a good degree of
‘be made, which would afford faci- | facility, in the English Bible; were
lities for the whites to come among | proportionably advanced in spelling,
them. writing, and arithmetic; and, at
. In 1824, the work of God was pros- |.the same time, were taught the
‘pering—new instances of usefulness | principles of the Christian religion;
occurring from time totime. Bro- | and, several became hopeful and
‘ther, Schmidt says, in a letter dated | exemplary Christians.
“May 26th:—‘‘ On Whitsunday, one ' They have now public roads, and
‘young person will be baptized, anc. ve made astonishing advances in
two confirmed for the first enjoy: ciculture, domestic manufactures,
iment of the Lord’s Supper. In this ; und the mechanical arts ; and have
manner the Lord encourages us, {made a liberal grant of about
and strengthens our faith, He also | 100,000 acres of land for a perpe-
.grants the children in otr school to | tual school-fund, to be applied, under
give us much pleasurs. We have | the direction of the President of
at present 13 scholars, viz., 10) the United States, to the educa-
boys and 3 girls; who all shew | tion of their children, They bave
“diligence and obedience. They all | instituted a civil government, and
‘board with us, and, out of school- | their legislative proceedings are
time, assist us in our housekeeping. | marked by integrity and patriot-
The girls couk and wash, and the | ism. They have divided their coun-
boys are very serviceable in the | try into 8 districts, or counties,
garden and the. farm.’”? The mis- | laid a tax on the people to \builda
sionary had recently procured 2 court-house in each of these coun
Cherokee children for their school, | ties, and appointed 4 circuit judges.
‘who were to be educated at the| Their incipient jurisprudence ap-
expense of certain friends of the] pears to secure the respect of the
brethren at Boston, and to bear] people. ye


-* Not
raging
is not
things,
Cherok
piored.
edness ;
ticularl;
almost
law, an
need to

people
proper
immorta
already «
municati
though
such indi
spiritual |
ment of 1
@ mere sp
agency, '
tended, n
the Cher
the Indiar
and to all |
[See .4r
mel, - ©;
Creek Pat,
Valley- Tor
ie IAU
longi !
Indian "De
equator, in
he Rey,
has extende
occasional]
gtegations,
pious man,
promote the
devotes muc
tion of his
8 large hous¢
one visit Mr.
persons
CHICK AS
country lies x
tered limits o
ces asm
ma; bounde 1
E. by part
the Choctay
by the Missis


yn cone
adults,
nts.
natives,
0 m,
‘ia, the
1al Goe
, having
of the
2, a new
in 1821.
1 in the
BY» 1824,
society.
uckburn,
ie Gene-


ible ; were
in spelling,
aught the
n religion;
ppeful and


roads, and
advances in
nufactures,
3; and have
of about
r a perpe-
plied, under
resident of
the educa-


act of


140


They bave
ment, and
edings are
ind patriot:
their coun-
counties,
a to \puild a
ese coun:
uit judges.
dence &p-
the Choctaw country,
by the Mississippi; about 120 m.


CHI


-- Notwithstanding these encou-
raging appearances, however, it
is not to be disguised, that many
things, still remaining among the
Cherokees, are greatly to be. de-
piored.. Much poverty and wretch-
edness 3; several gross vices,—par-
ticularly drunkenness, and an
almost total ignorance of God, his
law, and the plan of salvation ;—
need to be chased away, before the
people generally can reach the
proper standard of rational and
immortal beings. What has been
already done in the way of com-
anti evangelical instruction,
though of inestimable value to
such individuals as have received
spiritual benefit, and as an experi-
ment of what may be done,—is yet
a mere specimen of that benevolent
agency, which needs to be ex-
tended, not only to every part of
the Cherokee country, but to all
the Indian tribes in N. America,
and to all the heathens on theglobe.
[See Arkansas, Brainerd, Car-
mel, - Chattooga, Coosawaytee,
Creek Path, Haweis, High Tower,
Valley- Towns, /Vilistown.)
CHIAUW, or ZIAUW, an island
belonging to the Dutch, in the E.
Indian Ocean, situated near the
equator, in E. long. about 128°,
The Rev. Mr. Kam, of Amboyna,
has extended his labours here, and
occasionally preaches to large con-
gregations. The King is a truly
plous man, is .much disposed to
promote the spread of the Gospel,
devotes much time to the instruc-
tion of his slaves, and has erected
a large house for worship. During


one visit Mr. Kam baptized about


2000 persons.
CHICKASAWS, Indians, whose
country lies mostly within the char-


tered limits of Mississippi, but em-


braces a small portion of Alaba-


ma; bounded N. by Tennessee,
E. by part of Alabama, 8. by
and W.


CHI


long, and nearly the same in
breadth. The population, accord-
ing to the return of the United
States’ agent, d few years since,
was 6466. In 1823, it was esti-
mated at only 4000: and of this
number, it is supposed, 300 are
resident whites and negroes.

Like their neighbours, the Che-
rokees and Choctaws, they are
considerably advanced in civiliza-
tion. They are said to possess
more than ordinary capacity for
learning, are naturally good-hu-.
moured and affable, and exceed-
ingly fond of mirth and ornaments.
Their territory is divided into 4
districts ; over which are 4-here-
ditary princes, wHo are under the
direction of a hereditary prince or
king. The succession of these is
in the female line of the family.
Beside these officers, they have a
chief counsellor and speaker, and, in
every district, a chief warrior, with
some other subordinate chiefs,
These are all elective. They are
governed by laws of their own;
but almost all their regulations are
very defective. They have, how-
ever, passed an act against the
introduction of ardent spirits into.
the nation, which has produced a
salutary restraint, and rendered
the vice of intoxication less fre-
quent than formerly. The spirit of
civilization is evidently advancing,
and they are more and more con-
vinced of the importance of educa-
tion, and of the necessity of a dif.
ferent mode of life from that which
they have hitherto pursued. Their
previous dependence for subsistence
is becoming more precarious, and
the only alternative left is to aban-
don the pursuit of game, and to
turn their attention to the culture
of the soil. Such a state of things
is peculiarly favourable to the in-
troduction of the agricultural and
mechanical arts, and the Gospel at
the same time.

A school was established among

P2 161


CHI


his ‘people by the ‘Cumberland
M.S. in 1821, containing between
20 and 30'scholars. ‘The governs
ment of the United States allows 400
dollars annually to this institution.
The M: S. of the Synod of S.-Ca-
rolina and Georgia also selected a
station, in 182), situated within the
chartered limits of the Mississippi,
about 50 m. from its eastern boun-
dary, on an elevated spot of the di-
viding ridge between the waters of
the Tombeckbee and Jazoo, 2 m.
S. Mackintoshville, about 30 W. of
Cotton-gin-Port, and 70 N. W.
Columbus. This station is called
Monroe. Eighteen months were
occupied in clearing land and
erecting buildings. In 1823, about
40 acres were under cultivation..
In May, 1822, the school com-
menced; the average number of
scholars, who are orderly and in-
dustrious, is about 50. Religious
meetings are well attended, and
several persons have hopefully em-
braced the truth. Local schools
are contemplated in the vicinity.
CHILI, or CHILE, a country
of South America, extending, on
the coast of the Pacific Ocean, from
lat. 25° to 45° S. from the desert of
Atacama to the River Biobio. Its
length is 1400 m., but it varies in
breadth from 140 to 340, to its
eastern boundary, which is the great
chain of the Andes. It was go-
verned by a Spanish officer, who
held the title of Captain-general of
the kingdom of Chili, and was the
president of the royal audience,
established at St. Jago and Con-
ception. But, in 1810, a revolu-
tion took place among the inhabi-
tants of this country, who separated
themselves from the Spanish mo-
narchy ; and, on Jan. 1, 1818, the
Chili government issued a procla-
mation from the directorial palace
at Conception, declaring Chili and
its adjacent islands an independent
state, and for ever separated from
the monarchy of Spain, By the


CHT


constitution of 1818, the Republic
“was governed by a Supreme Direc«
tor. and a Congress. The former
possessed all the executive power,
but his acts must have the sanction
cf the latter. “The government is,
however, still in an unsettled state.
Chili, though bordering on the tor-
-rid zone, never feels the extremity of
heat, being screened on the E. by
the Andes, and refreshed from the.
W. by cooling sea-breezes. The
fertility of the soil corresponds with
the benignity of the climate, and is
wonderfully accommodated to Euro-
pean productions. Chili is not in-
fested by any kind of insect, except
the chiguas, or pricker; nor by any
poisonous reptile. In the woods
and fields some snakes are found,
but their bite is not dangerous; nor
does any savage or ferocious beast
excite terror in the plains. The
chief rivers are the Maule, Biobio,
Cauten, Tolten, Valdivia, Chaivin,
Riobueno, and Sinfondo, which,
with many others, rise in the An-
des, and flow W. into the. Pacific
Ocean. The population is 600,000,
exclusive of Indians. It is divided
into the three intendencies of Co-
quimbo, St. Jago, and Conception.
St. Jago is the capital.

Mr. Eaton, from the B. & F,
S. S., became superintendent of
schools here in 182). After suc-
cessfully establishing schools on the
British system, at Buenos Ayres,
Mr. Thompson also proceeded to
this country, and was no less pros-
perous in the objects of his mission,
He was followed by Mr. Heaton,
who arrived at S¢. Jago, the capital
of the country, Sept.. 1821; was
favourably received by the Supreme
Director of the government, and
was immediately engaged to super-
intend a school for 150 boys. \ An-
other school, on a larger scale, was
soon opened, in rooms provided by
government; and several more
were in progress to be established
in the Literary nr

1


the gre
separat
to the C
and abo
the Paci
frontiers


Asiatic R
separated
by og !

e
has devne
but is gene
150,000, 04
The lan
the most ,
is, perhap
early ages
by the livi
used by a
the inhabit
possesses pn
Which has b
the constan
China ; whd
high degree
elegant co
of classical
80 that the
learned is n
the plain la
as that of a


necessities o


public
Direc
former
powery:
unction
nent is,’
d state.
the tor-
amity of
e E. by
rom the
3. The
nds with
2, and is
to Euro-
s not in-
t, except
or by any
ie W
re found,
rous } NOF
ious beast
ins. +The
, Chaivin,
y, which,
the An-
he. Pacific
Ss 600,000,
is divided
ies of Co-
onception.


B. & F.
endent of
After suce
pols on the
os Ayres,
pceeded to
less pros:
8 mission.
. Heaton,


the capital
821; was
e Supreme
ment, and
ih to supers

Se \ Ane


CHI CHI


The American B. S, has‘ for- | Christian missionaries ; and is now °
warded aconsiderablenumberofSpa- | rendered tributary to the diffusion
nish Bibles and Testaments to Chili, | of Gospel light among this immense
which have been gladly received; | portion of mankind, notwithstand-
and the translation has been approved | ing the violent opposition that 1s
by the Roman Catholic clergy. made to Christianity.

CHINA Proper, extends from | The government is patriarchal.
the great wall’on the N., which | The emperor is absolute ; but ex-
separates it from Chinese Tartary, | amples of tyranny are very rare, as
to the Chinese Sea, about 1300 m.; | he is taught to regard the people
and about the same distance from | as his children, and not as slaves.
the Pacific Ocean on the E., to the | The first principle instilled into the
frontiers of Thibet on the W. ; lying | people, is to respect their prince
between 100° and 120° E. long., and | with so high a veneration, as almost
between 21° and 41° N. lat. The | to adore him. All places of bonour
territories of the empire embrace | or profit are at his disposal, as well
Thibet, -Mandshuria, Mongolia | as the lives and property of his
Proper, and the whole of central | subjects. He is seldom seen, and
Asia, between Hindoostan and | never addressed but on the knees,
Asiatic Russia; On the W. it is | Of the officers, or mandarins, there
separated from Independent Tartary | are 9 classes, from the judge of the
by a chain of mountains. village, to the prime’ minister.

The population of China Proper | The national pride, and exclusive
has been estimated at 333,000,000 ; | claim to pre-eminence, of the Chi-
but is generally supposed to be about | nese, derives most powerful support
150,000,000, from the vain idea that their go-

The language is not only one of | vernment is formed on the model of
the most ancient in the world, but | nature; and is a transcript of the
is, perhaps, the only one of the | noblest of its visible parts,—v#z.,
early ages, which is still spoken | the heavens. The form of their
by the living. It is supposed to be | cities—the regulation of the palace
used by about one-third part of | —the duties of prince and people—
the inhabitants of the globe. It | the evolutions of their armies—the
possesses much ancient literature, | order of their standards—the make:
which has been, for many centuries, | of their chariots—the ascent and
the constant study of the literati of | descent— the arrangements at their
China; who have polished it to a | feasts— and even the very shape and’
high degree of: what they deem an | fashion of their garments, &c. &c:—
elegant conciseness, and richness | were all anciently, and still are‘in
of classical quotation and allusion ; | a good degree, supposed to bear a
so that the written style of. the | resemblance to something in the
learned is nearly as different from | visible heavens; to some star or
the plain language of the people, | constellation—to some motions,
as that of ancient Rome from the | supposed or real—to some grand ter-
modern dialects of Europe. This | restrial objects, or to some recon-
language, the most singular upon | dite physical principle. They often
varth in its construction, and sup- | judge of the intentions of Provi-
posed to be so difficult, that any | dence with regard to the events of
knowledge of it was limited among | war, ‘and the destiny of nations,
Europeans, to the curiosity of afew | from the appearances in the hea-'
learned men and to the imperious | vens. Of old, they sent forth their
necessities of commercial inter- | armies—they overturned thrones—-
course, has been conquered by | they punished oppressors—they


CHI


seized on territory ; all in obedience,
as they supposed, to the aspects o
celestial phenomena. If to these
erroneous conceptions be joined
their antiquity, their vast popula-
tion, their immense riches, their
defect in scientific improvements,
their want of sound principles, and,
especially, the depravity of the hu-
man heart, which they have in com-
mon with others,—we tan hardly
wonder at the high and exclusive
tone which they assume; or at
their extravagant claims to supe-
tiority over the nations of the earth.
’ Thereligion of China isa strange
mixture of superstitions, of which
every one receives or rejects as much
as he pleases. From time immemo-
rial, peculiar homage has been paid
to the memory of the dead by the
Chinese. What is known of their
religion previous to the time of
Confucius, is fabulous and uncer-
tain. This most celebrated ancient
philosopher of China, was born
about 460 years before the Christian
era; and seemed designed to re-
form, in some measure, the corrup-
tions which prévailed in the civil
and religious establishments of his
country, He condemned the ido-
latry practised by his countrymen,
and maintained that Deity was the
most pure and perfect principle,
—eternal, infinite, indestructible,
omnipotent, and omnipresent. He
considered the sun, moon, c&c. the
immediate agents of Deity, inse-
parably connected with Him, and,
as such, objects of worship. Many
parts of his doctrine were calculated
to preserve the superstitious notions
still prevalent. By his sage coun-
sels, his moral doctrine, and exem-
plary conduct, he obtained an im-
mortal name, as the Reformer of his
country; and, from respect to his
memory, his descendants enjoy, by
inheritance, the title and office of
mandarins.

Soon after his death, a species
of Lamanism was introduced into


CHI
China from Thibet ; and, about the


f | year 65, the sect of Fo was intro-


duced from India. The name was
derived from the idol Fo, supposed
to be the Budhn of. Hindoostan,
About the 15th century, many of
the literati embraced a new system,
nearly allied to atheism ; but this
is confined to afew. The Chinese,
in general, are so far from being
atheists, that they go into the oppo.
site extremes of polytheism. In
China no religion is preferred or
encouraged by government. At
the present time, its gods are, to
use an expression of the sect o
Fuh, cig et te. “In
number like the sands of Hang
river”? Most of the forms of my.
thology, which make any figure in
the page of history, now exist in
China, except that. their indecent
parts, and their direct tendency to
injure human life, have been cut
of. The idolatry of ancient Ca-
naan, of Egypt, of Greece, of Rome,
of Chaldea, and of India, are all to
be found here, though with some
slight variations. China has her
Diana, her Aolus, her Ceres, her
Esculapius, her Mats, her Mercury,
her Neptune, and her Pluto, as
well as the western pagans had,
She. has gods celestial, terrestrial,
and subterraneous; gods of the hills,
of the valleys, of the woods, of the
districts, of the family, of the shop,
and of the kitchen! She adores
the gods who are supposed to pre-
side over the thunder, the rain, and
the fire; over the grain, over births
and deaths, and over the small-pox.
She worships “‘ the host of heaven—
the sun, the moon, and the stars.”
She also worships the genii of the
mountains, rivers, lakes, and seas;
= with birds, beasts, and
fishes. She addresses prayers, and


offers sacrifices, to the spirits of
departed kings, sages, heroes, and


parents, whether orbad. Her
idols are silver and gold, wood, and
stone, and clay,carvedor molten, the
‘ 164


an Asiatic
Fortified: |
producing
water, yie]
arge as
showers of
8 land the
gold—myri
exquisite pl
of gold, wi


The suft
which their


ir indecent
endency to
» been cut
uncient Ca-
e, of Rome,
y are all to
with some
ma has her
Ceres, her
Mercury,
oy en
) ns °
“Scireaitial
of the hills,
nods, of the
of the shop,
She adores
sed to pre-
over births
b small-pox.
of heaven—
the stars.”
yenii of the
» and seas;
beasts, and
prayers, and
he spirits of
heroes, snd


164


hr bad, Her
, wood, and
molten, the


CHI


work of men’s hands. - Her altars
are on the high hills, in the groves,
under the green trees. She has
set up her idols-at the corners of the
streets, on the sides of the high-
ways, on the banks of canals, in
boats, and in ships. Astrology,
divination, geomancy, and necro-
mancy, everywhere prevail, Spells
and charms, every one possesses :
they are hung about the neck, or
stitched up in their clothes, or tied
to the bed- posts, or written on the
doors; and few men think their
pccsmns, children, shops, boats, or
goods, safe without them. The
emperors of China, her statesmen,
her merchants, her people, and her
philosophers also, are all idolaters.

With regard to future retribu-
tions, those of the sect of Confu-
cius profess to know no life to
come, but that which their children
and posterity shall enjoy on earth:
hence their views rise no higher;
in this their fears and hopes seem
to terminate.

The Elysium of the West, which
the followers of Fuh look for, is
such as the deluded imagination of
an Asiatic would naturally paint.
Fortified palaces—groves of trees
producing gents—pools of fragrant
water, yielding the lotus flower as
large as the wheel of a cart—
showers of sweet odours, falling on
aland the dust of which is yellow
gold—myriads of birds, of the most
exquisite plumage, singing on trees
of gold, with the most harmonious
and ravishing notes, of a hundred
thousand. kinds, &c. &c. Such is
their paradise ; but, in conformity
with the comparative contempt in
which the female character is held
throughout the east, they exclude
all women, as such, from a partici-
ation therein. Those females who
ave acted well on earth, are first
transformed into men, and then ad-
mitted into that palace of delights.

The sufferings of the Tartarus
which their terrified imaginations


‘CHI
have figured, are’ represented in
pictures, as the punishments: in
purgatory and ‘Tartarus were
exhibited in the Eleusinian and
other heathen mysteries: with this
difference, however,—that these
are exposed to public view ; those
were seen by the initiated only.
Lakes of blood, into which women
who die in child-bed are plunged ;
red hot iron pillars, which the
wicked are’ caused. to embrace }
devouring lions, tigers, snakes, &c. ;
mountains stuck. all over with
knives, on the points of which the
condemned are cast down, and seen
weltering in gore; cutting out the
tongue—strangling—sawing asun-
der between flaming iron posts;
the condemned creeping into tha
skins of those animals in the form
of which they aré destined to ap-
pear again on earth; boiling of the
wicked in caldrons; the wheel, or
apparatus, by means of which all
the operations of the metempsycho-
sis are performed; horned demons,
with swords, spears, hatchets, and
hooks; wretched mortals alter-
nately shivering with indescribable
cold, and burnt to coals with de-
vouring fire ;—these, with number-
less other such things, are repre-
sented with gross and disgusting
minuteness. Instead of producing
any salutary fear ‘1: the mind, they
fill the imaginatio: with horrid
figures ; the real existence of which
the better informed surely cannot
believe; or which, if believed,
must either totally weaken the
springs of action, or render those
deluded heathens inconceivably
wretched even in this life.

Their system of morals, as ex-
plained by the sect of the learned,
contains much that is good. Many
of the duties of relative life are set
forth with as much clearness as
could be expected from a people
who know not the true God. But
to those who can compare it with
the system of Christian = cony


CHI


tained bd ihe New bgessngei
must perticulars appear
fective, orig many exceedingly
erroneous; especially if the mo-
tives and ends of human actions,
and the spirit in which they should
be performed, be taken into the
account. Some important duties
are also entirely left out ; and others
carried to such extravagant lengths,
as'to render them not only irksome,
but oppressive.

Female infanticide, which still
prevails in China, if it had not ori-
ginally sprung from their doctrine
of YIN and YANG, which sets
every thing masculine in so ex-
alted, and every thing feminine in
so inferior, a light, was doubtless
greatly increased thereby.

Their general belief in the me-
tempsychosis, and in the inevitable
decisions of a numerical fate, pre-
vents the cordial exercise of bene-
volence and beneficence.

Their cold-hearted philosophy,
indeed, teaches and applauds the
— of alms-deeds. .. Charity

ls clear as the dew-drop from
the lips and pens of their sages,
but often freezes ere it reach the
ground. Even the natural desire
which all men, as human beings,
feel to assist their fellow-creatures
in distress, is greatly weakened in
China—often entirely counteracted
—by a fear of opposing the will of
the gods, who send men back to
endure poverty and misery in this
world, as a punishment for the
crimes of a former life; or bya
belief that all efforts which tend to
counteract the decrees of fate, are
not only fruitless, but wrong; or
bye criminal selfishness, hardness
of heart, and indifference to other
people’s happiness, which some-
times allows them even to sit still
at ease, and suffer another man,
close by, to drown in the waves, or
his property to consume in the
flames, when a little effort on their
part might save both.


CHI


It is true, indeed, that some of
the more rational condemn these
evils, and have written against
them ; especially against female in-
fanticide; but of how little avail
can all such well-meant efforts to
correct the horrid crime be, while
the principles which gave it birth
are held in honour! They are in.
consistent with themselves. In
one. part of their writings, they
deplore the bitter consequences,
and warn men against them;
while, in the other, they inad.
vertently magnify the causes from
which they rise, as the only source
of excellence and perfection in the
universe. They deprecate the
mortal stream, and yet feed the
impoisoned fountain; they strive
to lop the branches, and yet manure
the root!

Though vice, in all its diversified
forms, exists in China, still, per.
haps, its external features do not
at first sight appear so gross as in
some other countries. But it is
not to be concluded from hence,
that the degree of it is less than in
other parts of the heathen world,
For the opinions and customs of
all ranks of society not only fur-
nish sufficient excuse for the com:
mission of many sins against the
law of God, but have even raised
them to a certain degree -of re.
spectability and honour ; and hence
it becomes very difficult to con-
vince them of the moral turpitude
of those evils in which their parents,
and their best and wisest men, have
from age to age indulged. Chinese
manners and customs are thrown
into so regular and digested 4
form, as that a stranger, but super-
ficially acquainted with the lan-
guage and real spirit of the Chi-
nese people, seems to see much to
praise, and, comparatively, little to
blame: while, at the same time,
the nation groans under oppression
and violence ; their courts are filled


with bribery and injustice ; their
; 166


markets
their h
their mc
dolent, ¢


under Mr, M
which there -


s, they
quences,
. them;
ey inade
ises from
ly source
on in the
sate the
feed the
ey strive
et manure


diversified
still, per-
res do not

oss as in
But it is
om hence,
ess than in
hen world.


ustoms of
only fur-
br the com+
pgainst the
even raised
rree -Of Te
; and hence
It to con-
1 turpitude
eir parents,
men, have
bd. Chinese
are thrown
digested 8
, but super
h the lan-
of the Chi-
see much to
ply, little to
same ‘time,


166


rts are filled
stice ; their


CHI


markets with: cozening and deceit ;
their houses with concubines;
their monasteries with ignorant, in-
dolent, and filthy ascetics, “‘ who,”?
to use the words of a Chinese
writer, ‘‘are not worth the down
of a feather to society;’” their
schools and colleges with high-
minded, self-sufficient /iterati, to
whose. proud and sophisticated
minds the humbling doctrines of
the Gospel will be no less ob-
noxious than they were to the sar-
castic pride of a Celsus ! 3
Such is the state of China! Such,
after enjoying the philosophy: of
Confucius for more than 2000
rs! Such, after Roman Ca-
tholic. Christianity has existed in
it for upwards of two centuries !
Such it was, when the: mission to
China was proposed, and such it is
at the present hour!— [See Can-


ton.]

CHINSURAH, a town of Hin-
doostan, in Bengal, with a fortress.
It stands. on the W. bank of the
Hoogly, 20 m. N. ef Calcutta.
The principal houses are built of
brick, with terraced roofs, in the
Moorish style. In consequence
of a convention entered into on
the part of his Britannic Majesty
with the King of the Netherlands,
it was ceded to the English in
1825. )

The Rev. Robert May, who was
sent out by the ZL. Jf. S., witha
view of aiding the mission at Vizi-
gapatam, especially in. ihe tuition
of children, for which be had a
peculiar talent, was enabled, after
a long detention in America, to
proceed to India. He landed at
Calcutta, Nov. 21st, 1812; and, by
a peculiar concurrence of circum-
stances, was led to settle at Chin-
surah. Soon after entering on his
me he was bereaved of Mrs.

ay.
In 1816, the number of schools
under Mr. May’s care was 30, in
which there -were more than 2600


CHl


children. ‘The Rev. Mr. Pearson,
who was highly qualified for the
work, was afterwards sent out to his
assistance; and he was also joined
by an European, Mr. Harle, who
was fully approved by Mr. Townley
and himself, to assist in the super-
intendence of these seminaries. In
the benevolent effort still further
te extend the means of instruction,
Mr. May finished his earthly career.
Mr. Pearson received from: the in-
habitants a written’ request to per-
form the: duties of the settlement
church, which he accepted.. With
vigour and success, he, with his
colleague, Mr. Harle, carried’ on
the schools; and into one or tw6
of them the British: system was
introduced, in which it approached
the perfection: exhibited in Eng-
land in: schools conducted on the
same principle.

Messrs. Townley and Hampson,
who: visited’ the schools at Chin-
surah and its vicinity in 1819, re-
ported, that they were in: the most
prosperous state; and, of the schools
at Bankeepoor, under the particu-
lar superintendence of Mr. Harle;
their: account: was equally favour«
able.

In addition to these engage-
ments, the missionaries were vari~-


ously occupied.


My. Pearson: established a print-
ing press, partly under the patro-
nage of the Caleutta School S.,
the profits of which he designed to
devote to the Bengal’ 4. M. S.
During the summer of 182], his
health suffered interruption, but a
short voyage in the Bay of Bengal
was the means of his restoration.
During his absence, his place was
filled by Mr. Trawin, of Calcutta:
In the previous spring, Mr. George
Mundy arrived at this station. At
this period the Bengalee boys in ©
the school manifested a. laudable
and highly useful spirit of emula-
tion. There was also prevalent
among them a strong _ te

16


CHI CHI


learn English; and, in order to | daily took their stand. Mr. Pear.
attain this object, they appeared to | son thus describes the plan pursued
be willing to read the Scriptures, | in the. evening native service at the
or any other book. Mr. Pearson, | bungalow chapel, which he con-
aware of the importance of meet- | sidered as replete with important
ing this disposition, compiled. a | advantages.

grammar and vocabulary, in Ben- ‘¢ On: a raised part of the floor
galee and English, with a view, | we place a table, a stool, and a
when they were printed, to open | candlestick ;.one of us sits down,
an English school; in which the | and the people coming in, take
reading of the Scriptures should be | their seats also on stools and
indispensable ; and, by this method, | benches, in front, and on either
me he hoped to pave the way for their | side. The missionary opens the
introduction into all the native | Bible, reads, expounds, and prays;
schools. then, sitting down again, converses
The native schools at this sta- | with his hearers on what has been
tion were visited by many respect- | considered. Afterwards tracts are
. able individuals of intelligence and | distributed among those who can
discernment, who highly admired | read. Often,’? continues Mr, P,
their economy ; and regarded them | ‘‘ do I think I could sit and con-
as models for all schools of this | verse thus night and day! All is,
description. The,manner in which | as it were, clear gain. Indepen-
they were conducted, met also | dently of the good which, by the
with the entire approbation of | blessing of God, we may expect
his Excellency, Mr. Overbeck, the | will accrue to the people, here is
Dutch governor of Chinsurah, by | rapidimprovement in the language;
whose liberality, on the part of his | in the knowledge of popular ob-
government, they were supported. | jections, with the mode of refuting
_ The Chinsurah schools were gra- | them ; and, best of all, in the ex-
tuitously.supplied with books by the | ercise of faith and love ; for we find
Calcutta School Book Society, who | that hard words, or hard arguments,
ordered 1000 copies of Mr. Pear- | if alone, will, do just as much as
son’s Bengalee and English Gram- | hard stones towards making men
mar to be printed at their sole ex- | Christians.” Mr. P. adds, “ Mr,
pense. ; Townley is now looking. out for
Religious books, in Bengalee, | another spot of ground within the
were extensively circulated, and | gates, where it is intended to pur-
scarcely a day passed without nu- | sue the same plan of native instruc-

merous applications for them at the | tion.’
Mission-house. Connected with In 1821, an additional native
the circulation of religious tracts, | school commenced. at. a village
the brethren sent copies of the | called Khonnian; the expense of
‘¢ Gospel Magazine,’’ published at | which was defrayed by his High-
Calcutta, to between 200 and 300 | ness the Rajah of Burdwan. The
respectable natives of the town; | active exertions of Mr. Pearson, in
and they intended to pursue the | this department, also received the
same plan every month. It was | express approbation of his Excel-
understood the magazines were | lency the Marquis of Hastings.
very generally read. Mr, Townley, who had removed
In 1820, a bungalow chapel was | from Calcutta in consequence of ill-
erected on, the outside of one of | ness, now assisted the missionaries
the gates of the town. Here, or | in their labours, and a native fe-
on the road-side, the missionaries | male school was opened in a room

: 4 168


j


in concert wi


of the
Dutel
under
Town
and M
of the
Mrs, '
soon af
and arr

1823,
prosper
attende
Gospel :
galow c
school ]
preparec
creased '

of the
Calcutta
amounte;

The
Pearson’s
this coun
atrived.or
At the
John Edn
arrived at
Yr. Mund
aid in the
and was dé
loss of Mrs
this life aff
30th of the
Pleasure w
duration.
incapable /
r, e E, Wa 7
return with
they reach
T. Pearso
teturn to In(
arrived safe
sumed the g
native schoo
The Rey,
merly of the
& commit
deemed it @
eir missio
World, was r
Connexion wi
Will, for the


Pear-
rsued
at the
. Cone
ortant


e floor
and a
down,
, take
is and
_ either
ens the
| prays;
ynverses
as been
racts are
who. can
Mr. P.
and con-
All is,
Indepen-
h, by the
ry expect
e, here |s
language;
opular ob-
of refuting
in the ex-
for we find
arguments,
s much as


168


CHI


of the fort, kindly assigned by the
Dutch governor for the purpose,
under the superintendence of Mrs.
Townley and Mrs. Mundy. Mr.
and Mrs. Townley, in consequence
of the very unfavourable state of
Mrs. T.’s health, were, however,
soon after compelledjto leave India ;
and arrived in England, April 17th,
1823. In 1824, the mission was
prospering—the schools were well
attended—the preaching of the
Gospel was continued in four bun-
galow chapels, and the number of
school publications in Bengalee,
prepared by Mr. Pearson, had in-
creased to 12. The contributions
of the Chinsurah branch of the.
Calcutta A. M.S., for one year,
amounted to rupees 773. 2. 3.

The indifferent state of Mr.
Pearson’s health rendered a visit to
this country necessary, where he
arrived.on the 8th April, 1824.

At the close of the year, the Rev.
John Edmonds and Mrs. Edmonds
arrived at Chinsurah, to the joy of
Mr. Mundy, who greatly required
aid in the business of the mission,
and was deeply suffering from the
loss of Mrs. Mundy, who departed
this life after a short illness, on the
30th of the preceding July. This
pleasure was, unhappily, of short
duration. Mrs. Edmonds being
incapable of bearing the climate,
Mr. E. was reluctantly obliged to
return with her to England, which
they reached, March 29, 1827.
Mr. Pearson, who embarked on his
return to India on the 20th of June,
arrived safe at Chinsurah, and re-
sumed the superintendence of the
native schools. —

The Rev. A. F. Lacroix, for-
merly of the Netherlands Suciety,
the committee of which had
deemed it expedient to relinquish
their missions in this part of the
world, was recently received into
connexion with the L. M. S., and
will, for the present at least, act
inconcert with its missionaries at


CHI


this sation, where he had for se-
veral years | previously laboured.

The present number of the schools
supported by the Bengal govern-
ment is 16; and that of the boys
instructed in them upwards of 2000.
They are in a state of great ef-
ficiency. The mission schools,
which are three in number, contain
295 boys, who make encouraging

rogress,

Besides the preaching in the mis-
sion school-rooms (of which another
very commodious one, _ eligibly
situated, was lately built, and
opened for that purpose), the peo-
ple still. continue to be addressed

. whenever congregations can be col-
lected. During the cold season,
numerous visits ere made to the
surrounding villages by the mis-
sionaries, whoon these tours, preach
to the natives and distribute tracts.
The people listen with apparent
attention ; sometimes propose se-
rious inquiries, and even manifest
much earnestness in the investiga-
tion of truth; but, in general, they
evince an awful indifference to the
claims of Christianity and the wel-
fare of their souls.’ ?

Every Sabbath morning the chil-
dren of the mission schools. are
collected in one of the school-
rooms, when they read the Scrip-
tures, which are explained to them
in a course of catechetical instruc-
tion. A considerable number. of
the natives attend on those occa-
sions, and listen with surprise to
the definitions (frequently express-
ed in an admirable manner) which
the boys give of the doctrines of the
Christian faith. This mode of
communicating instruction is fre-
quently employed when the schools
are visited by the missionary, who
usually addresses the. people that
assemble at such times.

During the year 1826, great suc-
cess attended the preaching of the
Gospel to the Europeans at this
station, a considerable number of

Q 169


CHI


whom appear to be decidedly pious.
A church was formed, consisting
of about 20 members, Mr. Mundy
was ordained to the office of Chris-
tian minister in Nov. 1825, on which
occasion the Rev. Dr. Carey gave
the charge.

The ‘following observations are
extracted from printed Report
of the Bengal 4, S. for 1826.

“¢ In this branch of labour the ex-
ertions of the missionaries (at Chin-
surah) have been rendered pecu-
liarly useful ; and we are convinced
that it will be considered as a great
honour conferred: on the society,
that its missionaries have been use-
ful in preserving the influence of
real religion during the last 20
years, in this place; the inhabi-
tants of which, without their gra-
tuitous labours, would have been
destitute of the ordinances of pub-
lic worship, and would, doubtless,
resemble others who, in similar
circumstances, have manifested a
fearful indifference to pure and un-
defiled religion.”

The Netherlands M. S., through
the means of their late agent, the
Rev. Mr. Lacroix, succeeded in
forming among the Dutch inhabi-
tants, an auxiliary to the society at
Rotterdam.

CHIPPEWAYS, a tribe of In-
dians in North America; the seat
of whose country is about Mackina,
Lake Huron, Sault de St. Marie,
and the S, side of Lake Superior ;
‘but, within a few years, many have
emigrated to the extensive country
between Lake Superior, and the
N.W. end of Lake Winipek. They
are very warlike and superstitious.
They believe there is one Supreme
Being, and many subordinate gods,
whom they usually invoke; sup-
posing that they have considerable
power and influence over mortals.

Their ee is very variously
estimated. Mr. Harmon, the author
of a volume of travels in the N.W.
parts of the continent of America,


CHI


states—‘‘ When the white people
first came among them, they were
a numerous and brave nation, who
could turn out 20,000 or 30,000
watriors; but mow they have
dwindled down to no more than
800 or 1000.” The Rev. Mr,
Laird, the missionary among them,
whose information must be mostly
derived from Mr. Schoolcraft, the
United States agent at Sault de St.
Marie, and who deserves much
credit, says, in 1823, ‘The Chip-
peway tribe is one of the most con-
siderable in North America. The
usual computation makes them more
than 20,000 in number. Their
language is spoken from Montreal
to the Rocky Mountains.”? Mr,
Schoolcraft has made diligent re-
searches into the language, and has
formed a grammar and dictionary,
which he proposes to publish, or to
resign the manuscripts to any mis-
sionary who may desire to use
them. These will afford very im-
portant facilities to missions among
them. The language is said to
bear a very striking resemblance to
the Hebrew. [See Fort Gratiot,
Machinaw, Sault de St. Marie]

CHITPORE, a village in the
north part of Calcutta. The
C. K. S. has recently established a
promising native school here.

CHITTAGONG, a district in the
S. E. partof Bengal, Hindoostan ;
extending 120 m. by 25 average
breadth; separated from Burman,
E., by a range of mountainous fo-
rests; the Buy of Bengal is on the
W., 230 m. E. Calcutta. It was
ceded to the British in 1760, who
have here a military force, and a
civil establishment. The inhabi-
tants are Mahomedans, Hindoos,
and Mugs, with a few Portuguese,
amounting in all to about 1,200,000.
The Mugs fled from the tyranny of
the Burman government.

They resemble the Burmans in
language and manners; have no
caste ; and are intelligent, frank,

7


and k
try S.
m. to
Chi
town
e the
hitté
Buy ¢
N. lat.
the to:
tuguese


that seizi
it into the
and friend
day and a 1
ever, befo
judge of the
deed of his
ing that he
Although
fered so pre
entirely de.
named Re
among the
ruyn, exe
possible to
until the »
in 1818, wh
& superinte
In the ear)
Ward, fron


Chittagong,


82? My.
ligent re-
an and has
jictionary,
lish, or to
> any mis-
re to use
rd very im-
ions among
is anid to
mblance to


ta. The
stablished a
here.

strict in the
indoostan ;
25 average
Burman,
ntainous fo-
u al is on the


orce, and a
The inhabi-
8, Hindoos,
Portuguese,
it} ,200,000.


nt.


170


he tyranny of


Burmans in
rs } have no


CHI


and kind. They otcupy thé coun-
try S. of Chittagong, for about 100
m. to Ramoo. ’
Chittagong, ovr Islamabad, a
town and capital of the district
of the same name, on the river
Chittagong, about 12 m. from the
Bay of Bengal. E. long. 91° 45’,
N. lat. 22°20’. Two divisions of
the town are occupied by Por-
tuguese eatholics, who have two
chapels, but are very ignorant. The
proportion of Mahomedans is large,
and their mosques are numerous,
while the Hindoo temples are few.
- The Rev. Mr. De Bruyn, from
the Bapt. M. S., commenced la-
houring heré in 1812, with very
encouraging success, especially
among the Mugs. The ~vreat ene-
my of souls, however, behold with
an evil eye these attempts to rescue
from his grasp those over whom he
bad long tyrannized without oppo-
sition, and meditated a blowin a
way little expected. A young man
whom Mr. de Bruyn had taken into
his house, and treated asa son, be-
ing repreved by him for improper
conduct with more severity than
usual, Satan so inflamed the pas-
sions of this headstrong youth,
that seizing a knife, he plunged
it into the side of his benefactor
and friend; who, after languishing a
day and a night, expired ; not, how-
ever, before he had written to the
judge of the court, excusing the rash
deed of his murderer, and entreat-
ing that he might not be punished,
Although the infant church: suf-
fered so great a loss, it was not left
entirely destitute. A young man,
named Rereiro, who had been
among the first baptized by Mr. de
Bruyn, exerted himself so far as
possible to supply the deficiency,
until the arrival of Mr. Peacock,
in 1818, who was chiefly employed
as superintendent of the schools,
In the early part of the year, Mr.
Ward, from Serampore, visited
Chittagong, and baptized 7 con-


CHI


verts, which raised the number of
members to 100.

On the death of Mr. Pea-
cock, in 1820, Mr. Johannes,
who was educated in the Be-
nevolent Institution, proceeded to’
this station. At this period the ©
church consisted of 150 members,
residing in four or five villages.
The care of it subsequently devolved
on the Rev. Mr. Fink. He was
aided in his efforts by 6 native iti-
nerants, but considerable opposition
urose. One chieftain, in particu-
lar, was so hostife, that he would
neither suffer Mr. F. to enter his
petty domain, norallow his people to
leave it for the sake of hearing him.

War, with all its attendant evils,
has been permitted, since that time,
to ravage the district of Chitta-
gong, and to disperse the nume-
rous church formed there among
the Mugs. Still they have re-
tained their attachment to the
means of grace; and, since the
conclusion of peace between the
Burmese and our Indian govern-
ment, these poor people, who were
originally refugees from the neigh-
bouring province of Arracan, now
ceded to the British, have returned
thither in a body, with their pastor
at their head. Thus, in a most
unexpected way, a new and easy
access is obtained into the Burman
empire ; and, from the relative po-
sition of that country to China, it
seems not at all improbable that,
ere long, the extensive frontier of
that vast and populous region, may
be laid open to the Gospel.

At present the church is very
small, and contains no native mem-
bers. The station is, notwith-
standing, exceedingly interesting,
chiefl from the promising charac-
ter of the Benevolent Institution,
under the care of Mr. Johannes.
This school, which is on the Lan-
casterian model, furnishes the
means of a plain English, and a
Christian education to "a 140

7


CHI


CHO


poor children, principally of low , 1821, provision having been made
Portuguese families, which abound | for his establishment at Cox’s ba-
in Chittagong. The temporal be- | zaar, where the Burman language is
nefits which the children receive | spoken by a numerous population,
from being educated in the school, | he removed to that place, and died
are so great and manifest, that the | soon after.


people continue to send them, in


CHITTOOR, a town of Hin.


spite of the warnings and solicita- | doostan, on the W. frontiers of the


tions of their priests. And the spi- | Carnatic, chief of a wed,
ritual benefit received withdraws | district. It is 82 m. W. vy
- lat,


hilly
N.


many from the dark and miserable | Madras; E. long. 79° 10’,
thraldom of popery, and makes them | 13° 15’.


spiritual worshippers of the living


The Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Jen-


and true God. An interesting society | nings have recently been appointed,


has been formed among these youths | by the LZ.


M. S., to this station.


for prayer and mutual exhortation | Messrs. Crisp and Taylor have en-
onreligious subjects, and they have, | gaged to visit this promising field of
by subscription, raised a conveni- | labour, alternately, every 4 months,
ent house for holding their meet- | until the arrival of the missionary,


ings, and are collecting a small li-


Mr. Crisp commenced these pe-


brary for their improvement in | riodical visits in the early part of
knowledge. Mr. Johannes preaches | 1826, and, during his stay, formed,
in his school-room every Lord’s | in compliance with their own re-
day, first in Bengalee, and then in | quest, a number of native Chris-
English. At the former service | tians belonging to the place (con-
the masters of several native schools, | verts from paganism and Mahome-
and a number of their scholars, at- | danism) into a Christian church,
tend, with many other persons; and | He also administered to them the
at the latter the children of the | Lord’s Supper (on which occasion
Benevolent Institution, with a | 70 members were present); preach-


number who have formerl


been | ed both to the native Christians


educated in it, and some families | and the European residents; bap-


connected with the army.


Mr. | tized 40 natives, including chil.


Johannes also goes out to different | dren, and married 1) native


places to preach the Gospel pub-


couples. ‘Two large native schools,


licly, both on Sabbaths and on other | one for boys, and the other for


days of the week, and meets gene-
rally with a respectful reception ;


girls, have been established, and
are supported at the charge of re-


and instances frequently occur of | spectable European residents, who
persons, who have been his hearers | propose to erect, at their sole ex-
on such occasions, calling for fur- | pense, a chapel for the missionary.


ther conversation. He receives no


TheRev, Henry Harper,the chap-


emolument as a missionary, but | lain at this station(C. Af, S.), ac-
draws his salary from the funds of | tively superintended the schools for


the Benevolent Institution.
The C.


about 3 years, till his removal to


K.S. has established a | Hydrabad, and was otherwise in-


lending library here, and has also | strumental of much good, ,


a depdt of books.
When the Burman emperor re-
ulsed the American missionaries,


CHOCTAWS, a tribe of In-
dians, whose territory lies S, of
the Chickasaws, chiefly within the


n 1820, Mr. Colman removed to | chartered limits of Mississippi, but
this place from Rangoon, and took | extends to Tombigbee river in


charge of the mission; but; in| Alabama. The soil aa


lace (con-
Mahome-
n church.

them the


ir sole @X-
nissionary.


CHO CHO


especiai:, ‘he extensive prairies, | ciful notions of the Great Spirit and


with Waich the country abounds. | of a future state; but these ap-
The poputation is scattered over | pear to be very seldom the subjects’
a: large extent of country, and {of contemplation, and have no
is estimated by some at 15,000, | effect ‘upon their conduct. The
by others at 25,000; a medium be- | general feeling is, that the dead
tween these is probably nearest the | cease to be.
truth. They have made consider- As.a people, they are in almost
able advances in agriculture and | tota! darkness on moral and reli-|
the arts of civilized life. Their | gious subjects, exposed to various.
country is divided into 3 districts, | and imaginary terrors from sup-'
vis, Lower Towns, Six Towns, | posed witchcraft and other causes,
and Upper Towns ; and these again | and addicted to the inteyperate use
are divided into clans. In 1816, | of ardent'spirits ; in short, ignorant,
they sold’a portion of their country | degraded, and miserable. They
tothe United States, for which they | are, however, awaking to some
were to receive 6000 dollars an- | just sense of their condition, are
nually for PT years. In 1820, they | desirous that their children should
made the following appropriation | see better days, and are importu-
of this annuity for the’ benefit of the | nately asking the charity of the
mission schools in the nation, un- | Christian community to aid them
der the patronage of the American | in becoming acquainted with the
Board: the Lower Towns 2000 | arts of civilized life and the Chris-
dollars a year for I7 years ; the Six | tian religion. It is fondly hoped
Towns 1000dollars for theschool for | that those who have the means
lt years; and 1000 dollars, for the | will be prompted to greater exer-
same period, for a biacksmith’s | tions, to promote the present com-
shop; and the Upper Towns 2000 | fort and everlasting welfare of this
dollars for 16 years, for the school | interesting people, Experience bas.
atElliot ; making an amount of 6000 | abundantly taught, that the plain’
dollars, annually, for the time spe- | truths of the Bible, presented to
cified. their understandings and consci-
In several clans, in the S. E.| ences, must be relied upon as the
part of the nation, laws have re- | efficient cause of civilization; and
cently Seen made to prevent drunk- | that by no other process can any
enness, infanticide, and other gross | change be expected materially for
vices, The introduction of whis- | the better.
key has been, and still is, very| Beside the following mission sta-.
destructive to the morals and im- | tions, Bethel, Elliot, Emmaus,
provement of the Choctaws. The | [-ik-hun-nah, Mayhew, and Yokena
practice of infanticide has pre- | Chukomah, several small schools
vailed among them, from time im- | have been opened in private families.
memorial ; and parents have pos-| CHOUB, a town on the W.
sessed, and frequently exercised, | coast of Hindoostan, near Bombay,
the unquestioned but barbarous | under the Mahratta government.
right of murdering their own off-| The American missionaries at,
spting, whenever it was trouble- | Bombay established a large school
some to rear a child. here. about 1817, which promises
The first punishment for the | much cf ;
commission of this crime, was CHOULE, a district on the W.
inflicted about the beginning of | coast of Hindoostan, about 25 m.
1633, : S. Bombay; length about 6 m.;
They have very vague and fan- | population about 30,000, mostly
' Q2 173


‘


CHR CHR


Hindoos, This wasaplace of great| The U. B. in Antigua hav.
importance under the Portuguese | ing been repeatedly solicited to
government; and the stupendous | extend their missionary labours to:
ruins of their fortifications, their | this island, Messrs. Birkby and
ecclesiastical and other public | Gotwald were sent thitherin June,
buildings, strikingly evince the | 1777.
opulence and power which that | Having hired.a house in the town
government once -possessed here. | of Basseterre, they commenced
It is now in possession of the Bri- | preaching to the negroes; but,
tish. The American missionaries | though these attended in consider-
at Bombay have established schools, | able numbers, and the brethren
and distributed tracts, with encou- | were countenanced in their under-
raging success. taking by many of the proprietors,
CHRISPOPHER, ST., or St.| the progress of the Gospel was
Kitt’s, one of the Caribbee islands, | comparatively slow; as, in 1784,
in the W. Indies, 60 m. W. An- | seven years from the first establish-
tigua. It is 19 m. long, and 6| ment of the mission, the number
broad, with high mountains in the | of converts scarcely exceeded 40,
middle, whence rivulets flow. Be-| In 1785, the brethren purchased
tween the mountains are dreadful | a piece of ground for the establish-
rocks, horrid precipices, and thick | ment of a regular settlement, and
woods ; and in the S. W. parts hot | the place of worship which they
sulphureous springs at the foot of | now erected was so numerously
them, The produce is chiefly su- | attended, that a more spacious
ger, cotton, ginger, indigo, and | church soon became indispensably
le tropical fruits. - | necessary. This was accordingly
The natural strength of the | completed in 1789; the believing
island is such, that a garrison of | negroes not only assisted in. the
2000 effective troops would render | work by manual labour, but also
it impregnable to a formidable in- | aided it by pecuniary contributions.
vasion. It was first discovered, in| On the day of consecration, 18
1493, by Columbus, who gave it| persons were baptized, and 3, who
his own Christian name. had previously belonged to other
The first English settlement was | denominations, were admitted as
formed in 1620. For several years, | members of the church. The num-
the me dy ian inhabitants lived on | ber of baptized persons, at this
friendly terms with the settlers,| time, amounted to 279, besides
end supplied them with provisions, | about 80 catechumens.
till the plantersseized their lands.— | A sacred flame was now kindled
After a severe conflict, in which | in the island, which continued to
many of the Caribbees were inhu- | spread, until, in the course of a few
manly murdered, they were driven | years, the congregation consisted
from the island. of 2500; and the attendance on
It was in the pon of the | public worship was so numerous,
French and English, alternately, | that it was only on the week-day
till 1763, when it was permanently | evenings the hearers could be ac-
restored to Great Britain. The |.commodated within the walls of the
chief towns are Basse Terre and| church: on the Sabbath, when


Sandy Point. Inhabitants, 20,000, a | the negroes were in the habit of


large proportion of whom are | coming from various distant planta-
slaves and coloured people. The | tions, great numbers were obliged
N. point lies in W. long. 62° 47’, | to remain in the open air around
e t, 17° 27'. | the building. ,
; 74


‘


preachi:
than 50
The i
by a Fre
viously t
on the §
General
quarters
the miss
guard of
at the e
ground.
being
quitted t]
contributi
spiking th
the powe
brethren
their labo
of interru
For so
occurrenc
narration
the missio
ployed in
in their ir
remitting


»prietors,
pel was
in 1784,
establish-
» number
ded 40.
purchased
establish-
nent, and
hich they
umerously
y spacious
lispensably
.ccordingly
» believing
ted in. the
r, but also
ntributions.
ration, 38
and 3, who


now kindled
lontinued to
rse of a few
pn consisted
endance on
) numerous,
e week-day
ould be ac-
b walls of the
bbath, when
the habit “
stant planta-
vere obliged


alr a


174


bd to other
hdmitted as
The num-
s, at this
19, besides


CHR


CHR.


_In.1792, the town of Besseterre | church at that place wa¢ solemnly:


was visited by-a dreadful inunda- |


tion; and a hurricane which raged
in the ensuing autumn, proved ex-
tremely destructive; but, on each
of these occasions, the missionaries
were mercifully preserved, though
their premises sustained consider-
able injury. The work of the
Lord also continued to. prosper,
and, in the course of a short time,
they obtained the privilege of
preaching to the negroes on no less
than 50 plantations.

The invasion of St. Christopher’s
by a French fleet, which had pre-
viously been anticipated, took place
on the 5th of March, 1805; when
General Balbot fixed his head-
quarters in the neighbourhood of
the missionaries, and stationed a
guard of 4 privates and a corporal
at the entrance of their burial-
ground. A capitulation, however,
being agreed upon, the enemy
quitted the island, after levying a
contribution, burning six vessels,
spiking the cannon, and destroying
the powder-magazine; and the
brethren were enabled to resume
their labours. without further fear
of interruption.

For some following years, no
occurrence worthy of particular
narration marked the progress of
the mission. Those who were em-
ployed in it, however, persevered
in their interesting work with un-
remitting zeal and faithfulness :
the vacancies occasioned by the
death of some of their number,
were soon supplied by other de-
voted servants of Christ; and, in
every year, some of the negroes
were received into the church by
baptism, whilst others exchanged
worlds, rejoicing in the grace of
God, and in the atonement of
Christ.

In the year 1819 a new settle-
ment, called Bethesda, began to
be formed on the Cayon estate;


and on the 25th of Feb, 1821, the


consecrated for the celebration of
divine worship;—a_ circumstance
which appeared to excite the most
fervent gratitude in the breasts of
many aged and infirm negroes,
who, on account of their distance
from Basseterre, had previously
enjoyed but few opportunities of.
attending, on the Sabbath, to hear
the word of God..

In 1824, one of the missionaries
at: Basseterre says:— It affords
us, indeed, great comfort and en-
couragement that our church is ge-
nerally filled with attentive hearers,
and that the presence of our Lord
and Saviour is powerfully felt when
we meetin his name. The number
of this congregation is about 2000,
besides about 500 new people.
Those also who were formerly ex-
cluded on account of transgres-
sions, constantly attend the public
worship. A great proportion of
the congregation give evidence
that they are children of God.
On the first Sunday after Easter,:
those who had attained to different
privileges in the church, had, as
usual, a particular meeting:. 133
were baptized, or received into the
congregation since Easter, 1823,
and 72 admitted to partake of the
Lord’s Supper. At the close of
1826, the congregation consisted
of 691 communicants, 737 bap-
tized adults, 554 children, 404 can-:
didates for baptism ; 248 were ex-
cluded for a time, but most of them
still attended worship, and begged:
for re-admission; and 370 new
people;—in all, nearly 3000 souls.

At Bethesda, during the year
1825, 23 adults and 79 children
were baptized, 131 persons were
received into the congregation, 17
were re-admitted,60 were admitted
to the holy communion, 149 were
candidates for baptism. and recep-
tion, 42 had departed this life, and
31 had been excluded. The number
of the congregation at the close of

i)


CHR >


the year was 360 communicants,
509 baptized adults, 276 children
under 12 years of age, 313 can-
didates for baptism, and about 400
excluded and new people,—in all
1858 ; 168 more than at the close
of 1821.
In Jan, 1787, the Rev. Dr. Coke,
accompanied by the Rev. Messrs.
Baxter, Clarke, and Hammett, of
the WY. S., visited this island. Their
intention, it seems, had, by some
means, been communicated to the
inhabitants,: by several of whom
they were received with great cor-
diality-and respect, and encouraged
to commence their labours on the
very evening of their arrival.
After a few days, indeed, both the
doctor and Mr. Hammett were in-
vited to preach in the court-house
at Basseterre, and 6 or 7 of the
principal gentlemen in the town,
including the clergyman of the
parish, politely asked them to their
respective houses; where they had
a very favourable opportunity of
communicating their intentions and
explaining the objects which they
had in view. These proved fully
satisfactory; and as it was finally
arranged that Mr. Hammett should
be stationed on the island, a house
was immediately taken for his ac-
commodation in Basseterre, and a
gentleman at a small town called
Sandy Point, promised to use his
endeavours for preparing a place
in that neighbourhood for the oc-
casional dispensation of the word
of truth.
In Feb. 1789,” says Dr. Coke,
“ T again visited St. Christopher’s,
and had the satisfaction of being
personally convinced of the great
benefits which had resulted from
the introduction of the Gospel into
this island. The labours of Mr.
Hammett had been unremitting ;
and, in the space of two years,
through the divine assistance, he
had raised @ society of 700 mem-
bers, the greater part of whom, I


CHR


had reason to believe, were mem-
bers of the mystical body of Christ.
The great Head of the Church had
also raised up in this society two
preachers, qualified to impart in-
struction to.others; and to these
he had communicated a willing-
ness, eqgtal to their ability, to‘de-
vote themselves entirely to the
work of the ministry.””
From this period the mission
continued to flourish, under the
superintendence of those ministers,
who, from time to time, visited the:
island, on the itinerating pian
adopted in the Wesleyan con-
nexion. Many of the white resi-
dents treated the missionaries with
the utmost kindness ;—the negroes
thronged to hear the word of God;
und as a proof that many of them
had really profited by the instruc-
tions which they received, it was
found that they might be safely
entrusted with arms for-the pro-
tection of the colony, when an
attack was anticipated from the
combined forces of France and
Spain. ‘* Nothing,’® says Dr.
Coke, “ but the power of divine
grace could induce the negroes to
offer themselves for the defence of
a country in whieh they were held
as slaves; and to protect their
masters, many of whom, doubtless,
had treated them with severity.
And nothing but this persuasion
| could incline their masters to place
'in them a degree of corifidence
which they felt reluctant to repose
in others.’’

In the spring of 1802, the mem-
bers in the society at St. Chris-
topher’s amounted to 2587, and s
great blessing appeared to rest on
the general affairs of the mission.
In the month of April, in the same
year, Messrs. Debill and Bradnack,
two pious and zealous young men,
arrived to the assistance of Mr.
Brownell, who had been previously
stationed there ; and, on the same
day that they landed, one , thent

mk


preache
gregatio
astonish:
dance or
increase
precedin
Brownel
strained
ment of |
says this
aisles of :
with whit
miscuous]
seat upor
with num
former d
brought t


state of th
pher’s, til
Messrs, VW
Whitehouse
of the year
the islands
we feel ple
though ma
our societie
death, yet,
they witnes
During the
mas), at wi
lation have
disposal, suc
or prayer a
astonishing,
then saw, w
by them at
to the intro
among the
claim, ‘Wha
“In Sept.
grass, ** the
island were
4 hurricane,
there has bee
work of any
and every art
very dear ind
none day, afi


mem-
Christ.
ch had
ety two
art in-
o these
willing-
, to‘de-
to the


mission’
der the
1inisters,
sited the’
ng pian
an con-
hite. resi-
ries with
2 negroes
d of God;
y of them
» instruc-
ed, it was
be safely
-the pro-
when an
from the
rance and
says Dr.
of divine
negroes to
defence of
were held
otect their


‘conifidence
t to repose


the mem-
St. Chris-
587, and 8
H to rest on


he mission.


CHR


preached to such a crowded con-
gregation as struck them with
astonishment.
dance on the means of grace had
increased considerably during the
preceding 12 months; so that Mr.
Brownell observes, he was con-
strained to pray for an enlarge-
ment of their borders. ‘ When,”
says this missionary, ‘I see the
aisles of the chapel closely wedged
with white and black people, pro-
miscuously interspersed, without a
seat upon which to sit, together
with numbers in the yard, who, in
former days, could scarcely be
brought to. worship God in the
same place, I cannot but acknow-
ledge that this is the Lord’s doing,
and it is marvellous indeed.”’

From this period we have no
historical documents relative to the
state of the mission in St, Christo-
pher’s, till the year 1816, when
Messrs. Whitworth, Raby, and
Whitehouse, observe—‘‘ The fall
of the year in this, and in many of
the islands, has been sickly ; but
we feel pleasure in stating, that
though many of the members of
our societies have fallen victims to
death, yet, in their last moments,
they witnessed a good confession.
During the late festival (Christ.
mas), at which the negro popula-
lation have a little time at their
disposal, such multitudes assembled
for prayer and praise as were truly
astonishing. Contrasting what we
then saw, with the conduct pursued
by them at this season, antecedent
to the introduction of the Gospel
among them, we were led to ex-
claim, ‘What hath God wrought !? ”

“Tn Sept. 1819,’ says Mr. Gil-
grass, ‘the inhabitants of this
island were dreadfully alarmed by
‘hurricane. Since the hurricane
there has been very little trade, or
work of any kind, for free people,
andevery article of food has become
very dear indeed, Flour was raised
inone day, after the gale, from 77. 4s.


Indeed, the atten-


CHR


to 107. 16s. a barrel. Some of our
people have unavoidable fasts two
or three times a week; whilst
others have no other alternative
than that of dying with famine, or
of begging their bread from door
to door. Many also have nota
shed of any kind to screen them
by day from the heat of the sun, or
by night from the heavy dews and
torrents of rain.’?

Notwithstanding the afflictions
which the missionaries and the .
people of their charge were thus
called to endure, the word of God
continued to be promulgated with
success ; and the chambers of sick-
ness and death sometimes exhi-
bited scenes well adapted to sup-
port and comfort those whose’ pa-
ramount wish was, that they might
be made instrumental in the con-
version of sinners, ‘“ A coloured:
boy, about the age of eighteen, be-
longing to our school,’’ says Mr.
Pinnock, ‘‘ was taken ill of a
fever, of which he died. In his
affliction, he sent to request that I
would visit him. Accordingly I
I went; and on my approaching
his bed-side, he laid hold of my
hand, and. pressed it to his bosom
with apparent gratitude and de-
light. On my speaking to him re-
lative to the state of his mind, he
told me he was happy, and that he
longed to be with Jesus. He then
requested me to sing some of the
hymns which I had taught in the
school, and he occasionally joined
with me. At his funeral all the
scholars attended, and followed the
corpse to the grave; each of them
having a piece of black crape tied
round the arm, as a badge of
mourning. This was a new and
interesting sight in this.:place, and
I doubt not it has had a tendency
to establish the reputation of our
school,’?

On Saturday, Jan. Ist, 1826,
Wesley Chapel, belonging to the
society, from whose nee it

T


CHR


takes its name, was dedicated to
the solemnities of religion, before
& vety crowded and attentive con-
gregation, at which were many
persons of the first distinction.

The chapel is an oblong
square, 81 feet by 56, and 30 feet
in the elevation. It is a substantial
building of stone, with a slated
roof; and, when completed, will
accommodate, it is supposed, about
3500 persons.

¢ After the’close of the opening
service,’? says Mr. Morgan, one of
the missionaries, “‘ we waited on his
Excellency at the government-
house, to express our sense of his
kindness, in contributing to the
erection of the chapel, and in at-
tending at its dedication. He ex-
pressed, with much feeling, his sa-
tisfaction as to the chapel and the
services; and said, that our well
organized school had given Mrs.
Maxwell, as well as himself, much
pleasure; and that our labours
should have, as they justly merited,
his countenance and support.”’

The following account of the
various stations on this island, the
number of which has of late greatly
increased, is given in the last Re-

rt


Sandy Point.—““ A variety of
pleasing circumstances in combi-
nation, induce the hope that the
state of this society is improving.
Still we must lament the superficial
religion, and consequent incon
sistency, of many among us. The
piety of some of our members has,
however, obviously deepened during
the past year. Solid religion, we
believe, is extending among us,
though not rapidly. Number in
society, 623 ;—2 Whites, 94 Free
Coloured and Blacks, 527 Slaves,
and 41 on trial.”’

Deep Bay.—*“‘ The condition of
the society connected with this
place excites our warmest grati-
tude, and presents a most joyful
contrast to its state a few years


CHR


ago. The society, including those
on trial, has been more than dov-
bled since Dec. 1824; and those
who have been united to us have
almost invariably brought forth
fruits meet for repentance. The
chapel has been too small for us
since May. Our classes are fre.
quently obliged to stand on the
outside.
continues to augment their Serip-
tural knowledge. Number, 302;—
2 Whites, 20 Free Coloured and
Blacks, 280 Slaves, and 34 on
trial.”

Palmetto Potnt.—“ It gives us
great pleasure to report that the
work of God in this place is ina
prosperous state. Number in so-
ciety—8 Free Coloured and Blacks,
and 105 Slaves. Total; 1135 and
9 on trial.”?

Old Road.—“ The state of so-
ciety, in this place, is by no means
sO prosperous as we could wish.
Latterly, the congregations have
greatly increased, and we hope we
shall yet see good days in this
place. Number in society — 6
Whites, 50 Free Coloured and
Blacks, and 192 Slaves. Total,
248. On trial, 11.”

Half-Way Tree.— During the
past year, this society has suffered
a small declension in numbers, and
the want of sufficient diligence in
some of the remaining members
gives us great pain. Not many
have come forward during the year
for admission into society, The
congregations, however, have re-
cently increased,and we hope that we
shall soon see our exertions crowned
with success. Number in society—
24 Free Coloured and Blacks, ‘and
72 Slaves. Total, 96. On trial; 1.”

Basseterre.—“ On reviewing the
circumstances of the past year, we
have cause to acknowledge with
gratitude, that the good hand of
the Lord has been with us. With
regard to our society, though we
have not witnessed a ~~ —


Catechetical instruction |


Total, 718


Cayon
“Our cha
i by the éoc
Nichola ' T
have no hoi
latter place
gtet that se
| missionary
little cultiv
is génerall;
‘cally on th


, pher’s Wes!
School Tiisti
Basseters
longing to
tinued to x
stowed upo
gards regula
genetal im
6 girls have,
admitted in
of the child
number in +h
girls and 8)
“The Cou
thig town an
ment to pers¢
limited atte
owing to the
on the esta
their impr
There axe in
dren 47 DO
teachets, wh
other schoo!
i


ling those
than dou-
and those
© us have
ght forth
ice. The
vall for us
§ are fre-
nd on the


instruction §


heir Serip-
er, 3025;—
loured und
and 34 on


it gives us
rt that the
ace is ina
mber in so-
and Blacks,
3H, 1135 and


state of so-
yy NO means
could wish.
ations have
we hope we
ays in this
society — 6
ploured and
ves. Total,


« During the
has su
umbers, and
diligence in
ng members
Not many
ing the year
ciety. The
r, have re-
b hope that we
ions crowned
ir in society—
Blacks, ‘and
On trial; 1.”
sviewing the
hast year, we
wledge with
ood hand of
th us. With
, though we
eat increase
178


i by the


urn
of invembets, yet soifie Have ‘beeh


added ‘to’ the ‘Lord, who prdmise
fait to be ‘ortianients to the ‘causé


they have eapdtited; atid We Have:


reason td hope that bi ‘Of Our
members aie it grate;
anid in the khowlddge of a Loki
end Saviour, Jésus Christ. “Nim
ber in society —94 Whites, 343
Free Coloured,: and 426 Slaves,
Total, 718. On trial; 16:77 -°
Ad Cayon gy Rea Tobn:—
« Our thapel ton js 006 iéd
socket) there, ard ,
Nichola: Tove, alternately, as we
have no Kdusé té preach ih ‘at the
latter place. We cannot but re-
gtet that so protiising # spot of the


| tnissionary field shiotild have 80


little cultivation. Our preaching
is generally well attended, espe-


dally on the Sabbath. Number iii


society —- 19 Frée Coloured atid
Blacks, and 367 Slaves. Total;
886. - On trial, 5.

Schools; —Extract from the Fifth
Annual Report of thé St, Chtisto-
pher’s Wesleyan Methodist Sunday


’ School Institution :—


Basseterre.—“ The children be-
loiging to this school have con-
tinted to réwatd the lebour be-
stowed upon them; both as it re-
gards regularity of attendance and
genetal improvement: 4 boys and
6 girls have, during the yéar, been
admitted into the society, Several
of the children have received cloth-
ing daring the year. The present
number in this school is 264—203
girls and 81 boys.

“The Country Children’s School in
this town affords some ericourage-
ment to perseverance ; although the
limited attendance of the children,
owing to their various occupations
on the estates; materially impedes
their improvement in readin
There are in this school 132 chil.
re i ditt 86 girls ; “and 6
also belong "to the


Palmetto Point. — The stute


that of |


of this: scliddl,' wei el to

is quite  discoutiging ving ius
bey on the pipes at present,
is $116 girls and 16 boys.”

Old: Read. — The setidot tn this
place is iti ‘an ‘Imprc i iis &
number vf ‘se holars,

113—76 gitls Ged art

. Half-Way Tree— Oe ts
great pain 4 state, tat the snes.
in this place is né arly

ie number of children, ut present,
is only 14-410 gitls and.4 boys.”
Béndy Point .—* Throbghoat ita
past year, this school has much. im
proved, aiid yielded ts a
tification.: Number of ¢ eit;
250—108 boys and ie Bite. The
avere @ attendance is

ur Friday-night ee was
ita established for the be:
fiefit of ddiilts; but as few have
availéd themaetves of its aivan-
tages, thé Dies have ‘been adé
tiiitted 5 an resent condition
affords us no  eahinasy degree of
satisfaction. It is beiligeaaet of


adults afd aur nt; and through
the present: ag been so én-
larged, that é tdiiBer Is Hove 283:


About 50 of these are adults. Soind
of our children attend our Siinday-
school also; but the’ majority are
youths of both sexes, who have no
instraction elsewhere, or at any
other time. The application and
advancement of the scholars ate
subjects of gre ateful reflection.”

“¢ About 60 children, from a few
of the neighbouring estates, re-
ceive catechetical instruction in
the Chapel, on Thursday after-


a "
pid Ay —<* God has blessed
oe lin this town in & very
ecial manner. The number of
scholars is 249—99 boys and 150
pier under the care of 13 teachers.
The averdge attendance fs 131.”
Cayon. —** Our schotl in this
place is not, at present, in’ a vé
flourishing state. The nui
under instruction, ie iad past


CHU


year, has ,been..86 boys and 64
girls, with only 3.teachers.”’ -

» Nichola Town,— The children
mentioned as being under cateche-
tical instruction in.this place, have,
during the year, been formed into
@ school, in which there are 18
boys and 30. girls, whose improve-
meut,: although they have been
under, the care of but one regular
teacher, has been satisfactory.

_ There are, at, present, in the |’
schools, of the. Institution, 1388
children, being an increase, during
the year, of.445,.”
_ Adult Schools.—‘ The. number
in..each, school is as follows :—

asseterre, 20; Palmetto Point,
8 ; Old Road, 62; Half-Way Tree,
oh ;Sandy Point, 50; Nichola

own, 10. Total, 192,’

_CHUMIE, a mission station, in
South Africa, among the Caffres,
situated on the Chumie river, in
the midst of a fertile and populous
country. The village is laid out ona
regular plan, to which all the Caftres
submit who build on the premises.
_ _In 1821, the Rev. J. Brownlee,
and W..R. Thompson, missionaries,
and Mr. John Bennie, assistant,
commenced labouring here. The
colonial government supports the
two missionaries, and the Glasgow
Missionary Society the assistant.
This mission was commenced in
compliance with the earnest solici-
tation of Gaika, one of the princi-

al chiefs of the Caffres, for a
Christian instructor, and one to
teach him and his people the most
useful arts of. civilized life. A
small congregation of attentive
worshippers has been callected,
and of the piety of many hope. is
indulged.. The missionaries are
extensively gaining influence with
the Caffres, and the way is. rapidly
preparing for the introduction of
the Gospel and the arts of civilized
life. Mr. Brownlee has lately. re-

oyed to Tzatzoe’s Kraal.

. CHUNAR, or CHEMARGUR,


CHU


a town and fortress of Hindoostan,
in Allahabad, chief of, a district
which is fertile to the north, and
mountainous to the. south, The
fort, built on a, rock, was unsuc:
cessfully attempted by the British
in 1764; but in 1772 it was ceded
to them by the Nabob of Oude,
It is seated on the right bank of the
Ganges, 15 m. S8.S. W. Benares,
and 68 E.S.E. Allahabad,

Mr. William Bowley, a young
man born in the country, and con-
nected with the C. M. S., was set-
tled at this place in 1816, From
the time of his arrival, he was di-
ligently occupied in forming and
superintending schools for the na.
tives. .To one. central school he
attached others in the surrounding
villages, at convenient distances, so
as to admit of stated or occasional
visitation, _He also conducted the
assemblies of native Christians. At
the end of 1817, the state, of his
schools was as follows:—1.. An
English Free School, contained 24
boys, chiefly.of European extrac.
tion, or sons of native Christians:
all read the Scriptures, many of
them wrote, anda few learned arith.
metic. 2. 4 Persian and Hindoos-
tanee School, had 33 scholars, 26
of whom were native Christians,
and 7% heathens: all the native
Christians, and 3 of the heathens,
read Martyn’s Translations. 3, 4
Persian School in the town, had26
Hindoo and Mussulman children, 2
only of whom read the Persian and
Hindoostanee Gospels. 4. 4 Hin-
dee School, had 36. boys, learning
writing and arithmetic; of these
20 had learnt, from a tract, the Ten

Commandments, in verse. Beside
these, a Sunday-school was opened
for the native Christians, , for tha
repetition of passages of Scripture,
and, catechising. The Rev. Mr.
Corrie, on visiting. Chunar at the
commencement of 1818, says,—
‘¢ The usual number of Europeans
who attend Divine service regulary


is abo
‘Christi
in Hin
The nu
has be
increas:
to the
conduct
blessing
I conve:
appear t
truth: of
yet prep:
sequence
Some of
ley occa:
of them,
considere
the Chri:
that in ey
gion, wor!
| of justific
1 only faith
while, wa
duced mc
than any o
congregati
during ase
ley set ‘bef
sufferings 3)
nion, the g
deeply affe
exceeding!)
‘A éonve
the erectio
been. fixed
proprietor,
dispose of i
as a gift, fo
and the Me
pleased to ai
very liberal ¢
rupees,
In the mo
anda. moon
this. interest
tegular | wors
from Mr. Bo
forward. TT]
dressed the he
declare: befor
and Mussulm
my words: I I


rrounding

stances, sO

occasional
ducted the

istians. At
ate, of his
s:—-1s. An
mtained 24
an extrac-
hristians:
, many of
rned arith-
! Hindoos-


180.


cholars, 26
Christians,
he native
» heathens,


children, 2
Persian and
4, A Hin-
s, learning
; of these
act, the Ten
Le, Beside
was opened
ns, for the
f Scripture,


Europeans
e regularly


CHU


js about 40, and that of native
Christians; who attend worship
in Hindoostanee,’ about 70 or 80.
The number‘in both congregations
has been gradually and pir rreery fi
increasing, and testifies, of itself,
to the diligence: and exemplary
conduct of Mr. Bowley, and of the
blessing attendant on his Jabours.
I conversed'with ten Hindoos, who
appear to be fully convinced of the
truth: of ‘Christianity, though: not
yet prepated to encounter the con-
sequences’ of ‘an ‘open profession,
Some of them-even join Mr: Bow-
ley occasionally in prayers. One
of them, on being asked what he
considered. the’ great peculiarity of
the Christian religion, answered;
that in every other system of reli-

jon, works. were made a condition
of justification, but’ in Christianity
only faith in Christ is required ;
while, wonderful to say, it pro-
duced more exemplary holiness
than any other system. The whole
congregation almost were in tears
during a sermon in which Mr: Bow-
ley set before them the Saviour’s
sufferings }‘and, during the commu-
nion, the greater. number appeared
deeply affected, and all of them
exceedingly serious and attentive.’?
‘A ¢onvenient spot of ground for
the erection of a church having
been fixed on, Mr. Turnbull, the:
proprietor, on being requested: to
dispose of it, generously offered it
asa gift, for the purpose intended ;
and the Marquis of Hastings was
pleased to aid the collection by the
very liberal donation of 1000 sicca
rupees. :

In the month of July a brahmin
and a. moonshee were baptized. At
this interesting service, after the
regular worship, and an address
from Mr. Bowley, they both came
forward. The brahmin then ad-


dressed the hearers :—‘‘ Behold! I
declare before all, and let Hindoos
and Mussulmans pay attention to
my words: I have been on pilgrim-


CHU


age to Jugger-nauth, to Dwarka-
nauth, to Budee-nauth, and to the
different Teruths (or. Pilgrimages) ;
but, in all my travels, I found not
the true way of salvation,’ till I
came to this place, and: heard the
Gospel, which by Go(’s grace I
am convinced is the only way to
happiness; and I truly believe and
declare, before Hindoos and; Mus-
sulmans, that if they do not em-
brace the Gospel, the wrath of God
will abide upon them, and they
shall be cast into hell.’? On say-
ing this, he drew out his brahminical
thread, and broke it asunder before
the people, saying, ‘‘ Behold here
the sign of my delusion!?? and then
delivered it to Mr. Corrie.

After him, Moonee Ulee, the
moonshee, thus addressed the peo-
ple :—‘*‘ Attend brethren, and hear-
ken unto me. I was a Mussulman,
and had spent much of my time in
the company of learned men of the
same profession. I have studied
the meaning of the Koran, and I
have paid adoration at the tombs of
peers—[saints, or spiritual guides].
In those days, whenever I saw a
Christian, my spirit was stirred up
within me to slay him; but on
hearing the holy Gospels, :ight has
sprung up in my mind, which has
increased; and I have been more
confirmed in this faith since I saw
the Pentateuch and Psalms, To
receive Christian baptism, I have
come from Delhi. My mind has,
moreover, been strengthened and
established by the instructions
which I have: received from the
Rev. Mr. Corrie; and now,:-before
all my brethren present, L embrace
this true way of salvation.??" > > *

After this, Mr. Corrie addressed
the people from Matt. xxviii.19; and
then baptized the two candidates,
the brahmin by the name of Ke-
roul Messech, ‘‘ Only Christ 3°? and
the Mussulman by that of Moonef
Messeeh, ‘‘ Eminent. Christ.”’

The church having been com-
R


wikin y
een ace
‘of this
lifferent


e of the
the in-
e native
sh as re-
illage in
sy. Some
nd others
and the
viet, thi
» thai ye
wn there.
Jie it in
accoull,
ybservable
xemselves,
y that the
ered since
preached,
s of goods
ng to the
for they
or advice,
hing; and
nlace have
sus Christ,
him to all


by says ?—
ndults (two
and.nine
Christians,
tians. One
ee teacher,
when Mr.


e.”?


182


Sie se


, intimated
but fear of
made him


stiaiis con-
aries, ‘to
he satisfac:
Lord Jesus
xception of
suspended
t who have
manifest-
The
60. From


CHU


our sacramental collections made
from the native Christians, toge-
ther with a pecuniary aid received
from a Christian afar off, we are
enabled to dispense to poor indi-
ent widows 22 rupees per month °
they also subscribe about 12 rupees
per month, tothe B.§ C. M.S.,
and we obtain about the same sum
from the European invalids tor
these societies, But really I feel
pained to accept so much from
them, being satisfied that they are
willing beyond their means and


tanee service three times a week,
besides a meeting for prayer every
Sunday morning, and a monthly
prayer meeting for the propagation
of the Gospel. Our Christian at-
tendants are from 80 to 100, and
heathens from 3.to 30.” Mr,
Bowley’s report of the schools at
this period is also encouraging;
the labours of the missionaries
were subsequently continued, and
prospered.

In 1824, Mr. Bowley’s. impor-
tant Hinduwee Testament (al-
tered from Martyn’s) was com-
pleted. :

The Bishop of Calcutta, accom-
panied by the archdeacon, passed
Sunday, Sept. 12th, 1825, at this
station, of which the latter gives
the following account :—-

“At Chunar, I may say, we be-
held more then had previously been
told us. On Saturday morning, 57
of Mr. Bowley’s congregation were
admitted to confirmation, together
with nearly the same number of Eu-
ropeans. Next day, a still greater
numberof native Christians commu-
nicated, together with a large num-
ber of Europeans. Several gentle-
men came from Benares, and some
oficers from Sultampore. ‘The
whole had the appearance of a
jubilee ; and the fine church, which
the Bishop calls handsome and ap-
propriate, was entirely filled.”’

Mr. Bowley continues to labour


power. « We have public Hindoos-:


CHU


with assiduity at Chunar. He has
been joined by Mr. J. Landeman, a
country-born person, who was dis-
missed to his station by the Calcutta
committee, on the 15th of Dec.
1826. On the 17th of Feb. 1827, he
opened one of the schools, which
is in the bazaar, for public worship,
for the special benefit of the hea-
then, intending to hold Hindoos-
tanee service there twice a week,
in addition to the services in the
church; about '50 were present..
The novelty soon attracted great.
crowds, especially of the higher class
of the natives; and a subscription
was, in consequence, opened for
the erection of a chapel and school-
house in the bazaar. Several of
the natives appear to have already
felt here the power of the Gospel :,
8 adults received baptism in the
course of a few months; of these,
3 were devotees, 2 of whom were
deeply learned in all that belongs to
the Hindoo system.

Besides his usua} ministration in
the church, Mr, Bowley has, since
his return.to Chunar, opened a
chapel in the midst of the native.
town, where he is attended, on the.
evenings when he officiates, by a
considerable number of natives of
respectability, who would not, for
fear of incurring reproach, enter.
the church. He is heard with
much attention; and only on one
occasion has any one offered .to
dispute on the points of controversy.
An adult, somewhat advanced -in
life, and a youth, have, in conse-
quence of this service, proposed
themselves. as candidates for bap-
tism, and been admitted.

‘The last report of the Calcutta
auxiliary states, that there are 6
schools at Chunar,—one for Eng-
lish, one for Persian, one tor
Oordoo or Hindoostanee, one for
Nagree Hinduwee, and two for
Kythee Hinduwee. The number
of boys generally attending is 180 ;
no return of the girls’ schools has

183


Nearly 100 per- | entreated Mr. Bowley to delay,
and he also would consider whe-
ther he should not join with his
, Mr. ‘Bowley, on this, re-
visit to this station, gives the fol- | commended delay to the son: he
has continued «steady; and the

‘¢ The congregation:of Hindoos- |.father and mother, and some other
tanee worshippers is rather on the | members of the family, are now
increase: the day I was there, up- | resolved to embrace Christianity.
wards of 200 attended, of whom at
least 50 were unbaptized natives. | a town in Bengal, about 60 m.
I conversed with some of the recent | N. of Vizagapatam, and capital of
converts, who appeared to be really | a cicar of the same name. By the
sincere, Among them, some are | establishment of schools, the dis-
natives of villages in the neigh- | persion of the Scriptures, and the
were | occasional labours of the mission-
greatly opposed by their relatives; | aries at Vizagapatam, the folly of
but, retreating to Chunar, con- | idolatry begins to be felt, and many
tinued to receive renewed strength | are making promising advances to-
and ‘encouragement by attending | wards the religion of Christ.

CLAN WILLIAM, a town in
Cape Colony, S. Africa, about 250
m. N. Cape Town.

The Netherlands and S. African


been received.
sons partook recently of the com-


Archdeacon Corrie, after his | son.


lowing acexunt of it :-—-


CICACOLE, or CHICACOLE,


bourhood, who,


on the means of grace.
peating their visits home at in-
tervals, they have at length over-
come prejudice so far as to be
heard with attention on the subject | Jf. S. have aided missionary opera-
of their change ; and in one case, | tions here since about 1817, which
the convert, wha is one of several | have been followed by pleasing
brothers, brahmins, who are the | fruits among the colonists and
principal cultivators of the village, | slaves.

has been acknowledged by his fa-
mily, and allowed to resume his | W. coast of Southern Hindoostan,
place among them. These circum. | lying between those of Malaber
stances afford much encourage- | and Travancore, 80 m. long and
They have | 70 broad. Nearly one-third of this
made the subject of Christianity | province is attached to that of Ma.
much talked of; and he finds him- | labar, The remainder, which con-
self more and more attended to by | tains extensive forests of teak, is
He bas} governed by a Rajah, who is tribu-
tary to the British, and generally


COCHIN, a province on the


ment to Mr. Bowley.


the people generally.
purchased a house in the bazaar,
which he is fitting up for a school- | resides at Tripontary.
room, and for the purpose of
preaching: the cost of the whole | had 7 synagogues, were estimated,
will be about 700 rupees, which | by Dr. Buchanan, at 16,000. The
Mr. Bowley has received from va-
rious friends in the neighbourhood. | rous, were formerly Christian in
Of those natives who attend Chris-
tian worship, one whole family | nerally, relapsed into idolatry or
have become candidates for bap- | Mahomedanism, or become Roman
The first of the family who | Catholics, for want of protestant in-
became impressed with the subject | struction. The native and country:
of religion was the eldest son. | born Portuguese population is very


Cochin, @ sea-port of 9 abore


The white and black Jews, who


Dutch inhabitants, who are nume-
their religion, but they have, ge-


About 2 years ago, he
himself for baptism ; but


provin
forme:
below,
1503, t
which
them i
taken |
from th
to whor
traffic o
and the
cardame
coa-nuts
Itis 971
76°17’, |
The n
at Allepi
fully labo
offered,
Jews anc
lish, A
of this cla
have repa
was found
A Malay
been appol
Rev. Sam
been fixed
following
the use of
gtegation
derstand
prospect o
service, J
20 children
hope, wi
and the
other schoo
1000 childre
The Jer
established
under the di
Sargon, a
Jewish schol
in 1823, to
thle obstac] 0
iisen, which
to impede th
urer,
COLD Ss b
Seneca Indig
vation, in th


COL


oD delay, province, situate on a low island,
ler whe- formed by a river which, a little
with his below, enters into the sea. Here, in
this, Te- 1503, the Portuguese erected a fort,
non: he which was the first possessed by
and the them in India. In 1663, it was
ome other taken by the Dutch; and taken
Fpl ach from them, in 1795, by the British,
stianity. to whom it was ceded in 1814. The
SACOLE, traffic of this place is considerable,
mat SO 'm and the chief exports are pepper,
capital of cardamoms, teak, sandal-wood, co-
e. By the coa-nuts, coir cordage, and cassia.
s, the dis. It is 97m. 8. S. E. Calicut. E. lon.
8, and the 769.17’, N. lat. 99 57’,


1e ~mission-


‘he folly of The missionaries of the C. M. S.
e


at Allepie and Cotym have success-


t, and many fully laboured here, as opportunity
advances to- offered, principally among the
hrist. Jews and Dutch, who speak Eng-
, a town in lish. A respectable congregation
a, about 250 Hof this class has been collected, who
‘ have repaired a large church, which
d S. African was found in a very decayed state.
lonary opere- A Malayalim schoolmaster has
, 1817, which been appointed to this place. The
by pleasing Rev. Sam. Ridsdale, who has also
colonists and been fixed at this station, gives the
following account of it:—‘*‘ I have
ince on the the use of a noble church—a con-
Hindoostan, Hi regation of about 200, who un-
of Malabst Mi derstand English—and immediate
» long and He rospect. of establishing a native
-third of this Hi sevice, I have also a school of
o that of Mt- Hil 99 children, the number of which,
r, which con Hi | hope, will shortly be doubled;
s of teak, Hi ind the prospect of establishing
who is tribu-


other schools, amounting to about
1000 children.
The Jews’ Society at Mudras


and generally


k Jews, bey established schools here in 182),
pre on ar under the direction of Mr. Michael
16,000. 12° HE Sargon, a converted Jew; the


ho are nume-

Christian in
hey have, f°
o idolatry 0
acome Roman
protestant in-
» and country:
lation is very


of the abort
184


Jewish scholars in which amounted,
in 1823, to 116. Some consider-
able obstacles, however, have lately
arisen, which, for a time, are likely
toimpede the progress of this la-
bourer.

COLD SPRING, a village of
Seneca Indians, Alleghany Reser-
vation, in the S. W. part of New


COL


York, in the midst of a numerous
Indian population.

The Society of Friends has, for
several years, supported here a
flourishing school.

COLOMBIA, in the N. W. part
of S. America, including the coun-
tries of Caraccas, or Venezuela and
New Granada. These two coun-
tries separately declared their in-
dependence, and were united in a
republic by a law passed Dec. 17,
1819. It is bounded N. by the
Caribbean sea, W. by the Pacific
Ocean, S. by “Peru, and E. by
Guiana ; extending from S. lat. 4°
to N. lat. 12°. The population, in —
1822, was 2,644,600; a very large
proportion are Indians. The pre-
vailing religion is Roman Catholic.

Schools are authorized by law,
and supported by the public funds,
Colleges have been built, and uni-
versities endowed, by the generosity
of individuals, or by the grants
of government. The Lancasterian
system of instruction has been in-
troduced in some places, with its
usual success; and provision has
been made at the several colleges,
for the education of native youths
at the public expense. The inter-
course between the Republic and
the United States is becoming more
easy and frequent. A passage is
ordinarily made from La Guira to
New York in 15 days.

Such has been the policy of the
Spanish government in keeping
their subjects in ignorance, that
very few can -read; consequently
the distribution of the Scriptures
must be very limited for some time
to come. The American B. 8S,
has forwarded Bibles and Testa-
ments toColombia ; many of which
have been sold, or gratuitously
distributed.

COLOMBO, the capital of Cey-
lon, It was built in 1638, by the
Portuguese, who, in 1656, were
expelled by the Dutch; and the
R 2 185


COL.


atter surrendered it to the British
in 1796, Tho fort, upwards of a
mile: in circuit, stands on the ex-
tremity of .a peninsula, and is
strong both by nature and art. The
city is built more in the European
style than any other garrison in In-
dia, and is nearly divided into four
equal quarters by two principal
streets, to which smaller ones run
parallel, with connecting lanes be-
tween them. The Pettah, or Black
Town, without the wallsof the city,
is very extensive ; and in the street
next the sea is an excellent fish-
market. On the rivers in the vi-
cinity of Colombo, there are about
300 flat-bottomed boats moored,
with entire families on board, who
have no other dwellings. The in-
habitants amount to above 50,000,
Colombo is the chief place for the
staple trade of the island, and is
situated in a rich district on the W.
coast, toward the S. part of the
island, 65 m. W.S, W. of Kandy.
E. long. 80° 2’, N. lat. 6° 63’,

In and about Colombo are thou-
sands of half-caste people, who un-
derstand the English language, and
need instruction as much as the
heathens. Two long streets are
almost exclusively inhabited by
Mahomedans, who are firmly ri-
vetted to their wretched delusions,
They view the Christian religion
with contempt, and will hear
nothing on the subject. There are
many who bear the Christian name,
but they are awfully deficient in
Christian knowledge and practice,
Since 1817, Colombo has been the
seat of an archdeaconry for the
whole island, under the direction
of the Bishop of Calcutta.

Inthe year 1740, the Rev. Messrs,
Eller and Nitschmaun, jun., of the
U. B., visited the island of Ceylon,
On their arrival at Colombo, every
thing appeared auspicious to their
undertaking, as Mr. Imhoff, the
Governor, received them with the


COL


greatest kindness, and readily agreed
to facilitate their journey into the
interior of the country. The Cin-
galese, to whom they addressed
themselves, were, at first; very re.
served, in consequence of having
been cautioned against them, as
men whose principles were com.
pletely atheistical. The absurdi

of this idea, however, became suf.
ficiently obvious when they began
to speak on religious subjects; and,
after a short time, the natives ap-
peared to listen to them both with
attention and pleasure. But it un.
fortunately sayy rst at this junc.
ture, that Mr. Imhoff retired from
his situation ; and as some persons
at Colombo bad begun to hold de.
votional meetings at their houses,
the new Governor was petsuaded to
issue an order for the removal of
the missionaries from the island.
Short, however, as was their stay
at Ceylon, they had a pleasing in-
stance of usefulness, as, through
their instrumentality, a surgeon,
named Christian Dober, was brought
to a saving acquaintance with di-
vine truth, and afterwards removed
to one of the Brethren’s European
settlements, accompanied by a Ma-
labar, who was also instructed in
the things pertaining to his ever.
lasting peace, and was admitted
into the church by baptism in 1746,

In 1805, the &. M. S. sent out
several missionaries to Ceylon;
one of whom, the Rev. Mr, Palm,
was appointed, 8 yeurs after, to the
Dutch church at Colombo. He
had previously been useful in visit-
ing und reviving some schools that
had been formed ; and in the situa.
tion to which he was thus intro-
duced, has better opportunities than
ever of being serviceable, to the
missionary cause,

In 1812, the Rev, Mr. Chater, of
the Bapt, M. S., was recommended
to attempt the establishment of a
missionary station in ~~ One
86


circams
to the u
of Cing
edition
that la
under tk
Auxilia
and the
that soc!
approbat
sion, as
type inte
On the
Mrs, Che
and, afte
days, arr
where tt
much kir
and some
colony ; ¢
opening ¢
pishment
their pro,
school wa:
periodical
M.S. wer
some res
appeared
dition: to
stances, NV
obtained
in English


poi Ry


dial friend,
a week in E

In 1814,
have been
Dutch frie
hot find out
lies to who
0 impart s


min, and ,
gious instru
ee and

is house
the fort, eve


ly agreed
into the
The Cin-
vddressed
very re-
of having
them, as
ere com-
absurdi
came suf-
ey began
rots; and,
atives ap-
both with
But it un-
this junc.
ne persons
o hold de-
eir houses,
yrsuaded to
removal of
the island.
. their stay
leasing in-
AS, through
a surgeon,
was brought
e with di-
s removed
's European
bd by & Ma-
structed in
lo his ever-
admitted
sm in 1746,
S. sent out
o Ceylon;
Mr. alm,
after, to the
ombo, He
hful in visit
schools that
in the situa-
thus intro-
unities than
able to the


186


. Chater, of
hcommended
shment of &
his city, One


COL


circumstance particularly favourable
to the undertaking: was, that a fount
of Cingalese types, for printing an
edition of the New Testament’ in
that language, was then casting,
under the patronage ofthe Calcutta
dusiliary B.. S., at Serampore ;
and thé President and Secretary of
that society expressed their decided
approbation of the projected mis-
sion, as tending to bring their new
type into operatiqn and effect.

On the 20th of March, Mr. and
Mrs, Chater embarked for Ceylon,
and, after a voyage of about 26
days, arrived in safety at Colombo,
where they were received with
much kindness by. the Governor,
and some other gentlemen of the
colony ; and though no immediate
opening appeared for the aceom-
plishment of their principal object,
their proposal of poe a
school was cordially approved. The
periodical accounts of the Bapt.
M.S. were also introduced among
some respectable persons, who
appeared rather friendly. In ad-
dition. to these pleasing circum-
stances, Mr. C. soon afterwards
obtained _ permission to preach
in English, previous to his ac-
quiring the Cingalese language ;
three friends — to purchase a
warehouse, and to put it in decent
repair, for the celebration of divine
worship ; and in Mr. Palm he found
an ble neighbour and a cor-
dial friend. Mr. C. ‘preached twice
a week in English.

In 1814, Mr. Chater says —: “I
have been directing one of my
Dutch friends to try if he could
not find out some Cingalese fami-
lies to whom I might endeavour
to impart some spiritual benefit.
He has accordingly found: a ma-
handaram, who is a well-disposed
man, and much wishes for reli-
gious instruction for himself, his
family, and his neighbours. I yo
to his house, which ts 2 m. from
the fort, every Sabbath morning at


COL


7o’clock, and he welcomes me in
the most cordial manner. On the
first occasion, .only his own family
were present; but on the follewing
Sabbath, he had collected 14 or 1$
grown persons, besides children, of
whom 8 or 9 were females. ‘The
mahandaram can speak no Eng:
lish ; but he has brought a nephew
to me, who speaks it better than
almost any Cingalese I ever heard;
and itis he who acts as my inter-
preter. ‘This, whilst it is an: im-
mediate attempt at doing good,
will help me forward in the language
more than almost any thing else.?’

On the last Sabbath in May, a

young man, named Sierce, formerly
a member of the Dutch church,
was publicly baptized; and, as a
little Baptist church had now been
formed, the ordinance of the Lord’s
Supper was solemnly administered
on that day week. About the same
time, some pious soldiers belonging
to the 73d regiment, who had
recently come from New South
Wales, obtained leave to attend
the services of the sanctuary, and
appeared likely to strengthen the
infant cause.
' Mr. Chater now turned his at-
tention to the attainment of the
Portuguese language, whichis more
generally used in Colombo than
any other; and his services in it
were very acceptable.

In 1817, he observes—* It is
with no small pleasure’ I inform
you, that translating into Cinga-
lese, with the ‘aid of a brahmin,
nained Dhun, is become. an easy
and pleasant work to me. Our
congregations, in general, are
small; but the ‘Lord does not seem
to have forsaken us. On the con-
trary, one after another is reclaimed
from a life of sin; and, so far as we
can: judge, they appear to become
new creatures in Christ Jesus.
Two of our members, who appear
to be Christians of the right stamp,
recently left this place for England;

187


COL


and it is truly satisfactory to re-
flect, that they found ‘ the pear! of
great price’ whilst in Colombo.
Since their departure, 3 more have
proposed themselves for baptism ;
and a fourth has joined our expe-
rience. meeting, who affords good
evidence that he has ‘ received
with meekness the engrafted word.’
Some others, also, are under se-
rious impressions, which we hope
will terminate well.’’

In 1818, new stations were oc-
cupied by Mr. Griffith and by Mr.
Sierce (the latter of whom had,
for some time, given himself up to
the missionary cause), at Point de
Galle, and at a village called Hang-
well; but, in 1819, Mr. G. was com-
pelled, by extreme ill health, to quit
his station at Point de Galle, and
return to England.

Early in the ensuing year, the
aspect of affairs began to brighten ;
as the attendance on public worship,
both in the Portuguese and Cin-
galese languages, was much more
numerous than it had been for some
time past: new openings presented
themselves for the introduction of
the Gospel into some of the adja-
cent villages; and three natives of
Ceylon, two of whom had formerly
been Budhist priests, ‘expressed
an inclination to make a public
avowal of their change of faith, by
submitting to the rite of baptism.

After a long continuance of ap-
parently unproductive labour, Mr.
Chater had the pleasure, in Sept.
1824, of receiving into the church 8
members, chiefly young persons;
and several others appeared to be
under hopeful impressions. In 1825,
other additions were made to their
number; but the schools fluctuated
much from sickness and other
causes. Mr. Chater published a
free translation of Alleine’s Alarm,
in the Portuguese language, and
was appointed Secretary to a He-
ligious Tract S, recently formed.

In 1826, the congregation sup-


COL


plied. by Mr. Chater considera.
bly increased; and the mode he
adopted, of employing native Cin.
galese to read the Scriptures to


. their countrymen, proved the means


of exciting much attention in the
surrounding villages. At one of
these, called Ooggalla, avery pleas-
ing circumstance occurred. The
mahandaram, a native headman of
the place, one of whose sons had
previously been united to the little
chureh at Hangwell, was baptized
with his wife and other son; pub-
licly assigning, on the occasion,
intelligent and scriptural reasons
for renouncing the errors in which
he had been educated. The sub.
sequent conduct of this family well
accorded with their profession, and
the case has excited considerable
attention and inquiry in the neigh.
bourhood.

Mr. C, has found it expedient to
request the assistance of Mr. Sierce
at Colombo. Several additions have
been made to the church at Hang.
well; a native youth, called Ca-
rolis, is appointed assistant there,
and Mr. C. himself will visit this
station as often as he can.

In 1814, several // esleyan mis-
sionaries arrived at Ceylon, and
two were stationed at Colombo.
As the government seminary at
that place contained many Cinga-
lese youths who had acquired a
sufficient knowledge of the Eng-
lish language to enable them to
interpret it to their countrymen,
and as native congregations could
easily be collected in the different
schools which were opened, Messrs.
Harvard and Clough resolved, in
this way, to disseminate the truth;
and, under their superintendence,
several of the villages in the neigh-
bourhood were supplied, every Sab-
bath, with public means of reli-
gious instruction. Divine service
was also performed by the mis-
sionaries, in different parts of the
capital; a Sunday-school (the first

188


\


in Ceylo
exertion


religious s
with which
to the thin,
eternal w
couraging
the word sy
Lord seem
with comp
vidual, kno
the Ava /
acuteness o
scientific
and who
ciple, and
disprove the
led to renot
baptized ing
the name
Silva, at the
Shortly ¢
was introdu
by George
to renounce
long dissatis
ultimately i
Benjamin
being chose
Clough, and


ynsidera-

node he

ive Cin-

ytures to

he means

m in the

t one of
ary pleas-
ad. The
adman of
sons. had
the little
s baptized
on 3 pub-
occasion,
1 reasons
3in which
The sub-
amily well
ssion, and
ynsiderable
the neigh-


cpedient to
Mr. Sierce
itions have

at Hang-
called Ca-
ant there,
1 visit this


buntrymen,
ions could


every Sab-
ns of reli-


COL


in Ceylon) was established by their
exertions; and, on the arrival of
a press and ‘types from England,
they applied themselves sedulously
to the’ printing of ‘elementary and
religious. books, of which some
thousands were soon put in circu-
lation. . They also resolved on
attempting the erection of a new
and handsome place of worship ;
and, in the subscription list, they
had soon the pleasure of enrolling
the names of his Excellency the
Governor, the Hon. Chief Justice,
the Archdeacon Twisleton, and
every member. of his Majesty’s
Council, as well as those of many
of the most respectable inhabitants,
both civil and military.

The dwelling-house occupi
by the brethren, was situated on
the main road leading from the
fort into the country; and this
gave them frequent opportunities
of conversing with the natives on
religious subjects. The atiention
with which many of them listened
to the things connected with their
eternal welfare was highly en-
couraging ; and, on one occasion,
the word spoken in the name of the
Lord seems to have been crowned
with complete success. An indi-
vidual, known by the appellation of
the Ava priest, possessing much
acuteness of intellect, enriched by
scientific and literary research ;
and who was an atheist in prin-
ciple, and asserted his ability to
disprove the being of a God,—was
led to renounce Budhism, and was
baptized into the faith of Christ by
the name of George Nadoris de
Silva, at the fort church.

Shortly after this, another priest
was introduced to the missior ries,
by George Nadoris, whq wished
to renounce Budhism, having been
long dissatisfied with it, and was
ultimately baptized by the name of
Benjamin Parks; the first name
being chosen out of respect to Mr.
Clough, and the second from the


COL


same feeling towards Mrs. Har-
vard’s father.

From the first residence of the
missionaries in this city, it : was
their practice to deliver a sermon
to children end: young people, at
the commencement of the yéar,
at Easter, and at Whitsuntide;
and, on these occasions, they were
generally attended by crowds of
natives) both old and young, who
flocked together from the surround-
ing villages, The service héld on
New Year’s-dey, 1818, was ren-
dered peculiarly interesting by the
attendance of two priests, named
Don Adrian de Silva, and Don


| Andris de Silva ; who, having been


convinced of their former errors,
and having passed the usual time
of probation, made an open re-
nunciation: of Budhism, and took
upon themselves, in the most so-
lemn manner, the name and cha-
racter of disciples of Christ. Don
Adrian was afterwards appointed
to officiate as a Cingalese local
preacher, and Don Andris as a
master in one of the native schools;
and it is pleasing to add, that they
have continued to prosecute their
holy calling, under the superin-
tendence of the mission.

In 1821, there were reported, as
belonging ivthis station, 11 schools,
9165 children, and 28 teachers. That
right sentiment was making pro-
or appears, from the following

act :—

“A few nights ago,” says Mr.
Fox, ‘“‘ we were requested by the
inhabitants of a neighbouring vil-
lage, where a dangerous sickness
had made its appearance, to go and
pray with them; hoping that God
might be pleased to remove from
them a scourge which threatened
to lay waste the whole village.
The request was rather an unusual
one in the Cingalese country,—the
people having recourse, almost in-
variably, under such circumstances,
to devil-ceremonies, and wry rites


COL


of a'similar description: We felt,
however, no hesitation in comply-
ing with the request, humbly trust-
ing that God would in some way
make it a means of good. About
8 o’clock in the evening, hearing
that all the village was assembled
in a large school-room, we set out,
accompanied by Mr. Rask, Pro-
fessor of the Royal College of Co-
penhagen. Lamps were hung on
the trees as we passed along, and
the silence of death was in the vil-
lage. At length we reached the
place where the whole village, old
and young, except’ the sick and
their necessary attendants, were
assembled ; and perhaps a more
striking sight can scarcely be con-
ceived,—a whole village assembled
on such an occasion. Brother
Clough, though very weak, de-
livered @ very appropriate exhorta-
tion; and after two prayers had
been offered up on their behalf,
one in Cingalese and one in Por-
tuguese, with a second short ex-
hortation, the company separated
with almost the silence of a de-
parting cloud. Our own minds
were nota little affected with the
solemnity of the scene; and our
hearts were rejoiced that the
people were at length brought to
exclaim, ‘ Truly in vain is salva-
tion hoped for from the hills, and
from the multitude of mountains ;
truly in the Lord God only is salva-
tion,’

In reporting, at the close of the
year 1826, the missionaries say—
‘We feel it a pleasing duty to
state, that we have, in some de-
gree, prosperity in all our borders,
Our congregations, English, Por-
tuguese, and Cingalese, have been,
taking the average for the year,
respectable and encouraging. We
have now, at the mission-house,
3 classes; one Cingalese and Por-
tuguese, and 2 English. The good
work in the fort, among the soldiers,
goes forward. The congregation


COL
has much improved. © The class
there is favoured .with a steady
and pious leader, and the members
live in harmony and love,”? They
also announce the printing of the
book of Genesis in Tamul.

In 1823, the translation of the
whole Scriptures into Cingalese
was completed on the mission
premises in Colombo, under the
direction of the Columbo B. S., by
the united efforts of Mr. Armour,
one of the colonial chaplains ; Mr,
Chater, Baptist missionary; Messrs,
Fox and Clough, Wesleyan mis-
sionaries; and C. Laird, Esq.3
assisted by some learned natives,
Soon after, the Colombo Wesleyan
Native Institution was formed,
and a strong and neat building
erected.

Mr. Clough has also finished a
Cingalese and English dictionary,
which has been printed in an
octavo volume of $42 pages, and
will be of incalculable use in
translating from the English into
Cingalese. It contains about 45,000
words.

The C..K. S. and the C. M.S.
have afforded important aid to the
mission, by forwarding and printing
books to be distributed.

The Colombo B. S. was orga-
nized in 1812, under the patronage
of government, which distributed,
during 10 years, more than 9000
Bibles and Testaments in English
and otherEuropean tongues, obtain-
ed chiefly from the kindness of the
B.& F. B. S. With the assistance
of other liberal grants from the
Parent S., the Colombo S. had, in
1820, printed 6500 copies of the
New Testament in Cingalese ; and
has since printed 1000 copies of
the Bible in the same language,
besides vast numbers of tracts and
portions of the Scriptures.

COLPETTY, a large and po-

ulous village in the neighbour-
hood of Colombo, which is visited
by the Wesleyan —
90


Early in
opened ; \
and about
One. of 1
Mr. Clou;
at Galle,
neral mas
tant teacl
girls were
an intelli
Dutch ext
recommen
In complia
of the nati
ferent cas
from each
quence of {
were indu
otherwise,
joyed the
This school
mediate pa
| Lady J., ¢
by the He
other disting
became the
through the
and numer
made for th
from distan
the son of
walked to t
ing, from t
and returned
another lad,
whose atte
cheerfully
lay, to enjo
institution,
In 1823, t
“The numl
quite so la
scarcely a c
at the schoo
ment: the
have gone o
on passing th
travelling alo
often gratifie
faces of ou
grown up a
young men,
ble situations


COL


: class Early in 1817, a school-house was
deny one ; when upwards of 100 boys,
nembers and about 50 girls, were admitted.
> They One. of the pupils, instructed by
zy of the Mr. Clough in the mission school
: ‘ at Galle, was appointed the ge-
n of the neral master, with a native assis-
Jingalese tant teacher under him; and the

mission irls were placed under the care of
nder the an intelligent young woman of
B.S. by Dutch extraction, who had been
Armour, recommended by Lady Johnstone.
ins; Mr. In compliance with the prejudices
'; Messrs. of the natives, the children of dif-
yan misé ferent castes were seated upart
rd, Esq. } from each other; and, in conse-
1 natives. quence of this regulation, numbers
Wesleyan were induced to attend, who,

formed, otherwise, would never have en-

| building joyed the means of instruction,
This school, being under the im-

finished a mediate patronage of Sir A. and
lictionary, Lady J., and occasionally visited
ad in an by the Hon. Chief Justice and
ages, and other distinguished characters, soon
e use in became the theme of conversation
lish into through the circumjacent country,
out 45,000 and numerous applications were


made for the admission of children
from distant villages. One boy,
the son of a native washerman,
walked to the school every morn-
ing, from the distance of 6 miles,
and returned in the evening. And
another lad, of the highest caste,
whose attendance was punctual,
cheerfully walked 16 miles every
day, to enjoy the advantages of the
institution. .

In 1823, the missionaries say—-
“The number of children is not
quite so large as formerly; but
scarcely a child remains who was
at the school at its first establish-
ment: the boys then admitted
have gone out into active life, and
on passing through the streets and
travelling along the roads, we are
often gratified in recognizing the
faces of our old scholars, now
grown up and become creditable
young men, employed in respecta-
ble situations. On meeting us, they


was orga-


patronage
Histributed,


b assistance
from the
S. had, in
bies of the
ralese ; and
copies of
language,
tracts and
bs.


COM


seldom fail to assure us of their
sense of obligation, by the signi-
ficant native salam. In this way
the native population is becoming
enlightened and moralized, to a
degree which will greatly open the
way of subsequent labourers.’? The
school having decreased, a more
convenient spot was found, and the
number in attendance was aug-
mented. It still continues fo
prosper.

COMBOOCONUM, a village
between Tranquebar and Tanjore,
Hindoostan. About the com-
mencement of the eighteenth cen-
tury, the Danish missionaries la-
boured here with success; and, in
1747, their congregation amounted
to upwards of 500. Recently, the
C. K. S. has supported a native
priest at this place.

In 1823, the Rev. G. T. Baren-
bruck came here from Madras, with
a view of fixing himself in the
most convenient place for super-
intending the establishments of the
C. M. S. in the Tanjore country.

The Rev. Mr. Mead, of the
L. M. S., who removed, in 18265,
to Combooconum, for the be-
nefit of his health, continues to
labour here. He has a small Eng-
lish congregation; also a Tamul
congregation, consisting of about
40 persons. He has performed
several missionary tours in the
neighbouring country, preached
the Gospel to many people, and
seen the Scriptures and tracts well
received; of the latter several
thousands have been put into cir-
culation.

The native readers, of whom
there are six, under Mr. Mead’s
direction, continye to itinerate
among the adjacent villages, for
the purpose of publicly reading the
Scriptures, and conversing with the
people on religious subjects. That


they perform these services with
considerable ability and zéa! is
journals,
l


apparent from their


CON


extracts from which have ‘been in-
serted in the society’s periodical
publications. The ‘native schools
at Combooconum, of ‘which 9 have
been formed, contain about 350
boys: It is proposed to build a
chapel here, towards the expense
of which several’ hundred rupees
have been subscribed on the spot.
The brahmins in the vicinity ap-
pear'very friendly, hear the Gospel,
and subscribe to the schools.

CONGO TOWN, a town of
liberated negroes, Sierra Leone,
W. Africa, upon an inlet of the
bay of Sierra Leone, about 2 m.
W. Freetown, formed in 1811. -In
1819 the number had increased to
about 400, exclusive of children.
The inhabitants are in an advanced
state of improvement. The Wes-
leyan missionaries have a chapel
here, and several members.

-" In 1817, the Church missionaries
dttempted.to unite this with Bassa
and Cosso Towns, under the name
of Wilberforce Town; but such is
the distance of Congo Town ‘from
the other two, that it is thought
‘the union of this to them will exist
only in name.

CONJEVERAM, a _ populous
city in the Carnatic, Hindoostan,
W. Madras, divided into Great and
Little Conjeveram. The city is
very ancient, and has 2 pagodas,
which bear the marks of ‘great
antiquity. The people are blinded
by the grossest superstitions; yet
many'listen to Christian teachers.
The Church missionaries at Ma-
dras established schools here under
native teachers, in 1817, which
have been highly useful. They
often visit the schools, and give
much religious inptruction to these
benighted Pagans.

CONSTANTINOPLE, the chief
city of the Turkish empire, si-
tuated on the W. side of the Bos-
phorus, between the Black Sea and
the Sea of Marmora. E. long.
28° 56’, N. lat. 41°. Including the


CON


suburbs, it is upwards of 30 m. ‘in
circumference, and presents @ grand
appearance. ‘The number of in-
habitants is by some éstimated at
1,000,000, but it is commonly com-
puted at 400,000; of whom’ 200,000
are ‘Turks, 100,000 are' Greeks, the
remainder are Jews, Armenians,
Franks, and various other nations,
The Turks are Mahomedans. Its
public edifices are very numerous
and splendid. There are 14 vast
and magnificent imperial mosques,
richly endowed with ample reve.
nues, derived from the rents of real
estates, long ago devoted to their
support. The revenue of the grand
mosque of St. Sophia is more than
1,000,000 piastres per annum, equal
to 125,000 dollars. Attached tothese
are-colleges, called Medarses, de.
voted to teaching the principles of
the Mahomedan religion and juris-
prudence: and imareths, or hotels,
where the students are supported
free of expense. At these hotels,
more than 30,000 souls ‘aredaily
fed. There are also upwards of
200 mosques ; and 36 public libra-
ries, each containing -from 2 to
6000 manuscript volumes, ' which
are attached to the mosques; and
about 20 Christian churches. Here
are: also about 2050 schools, esta-
blished and endowed by the wealthy
‘men of the Ottoman’ Empire,’ in
which the children are instructed
gratuitously in various branches of
literature,’ and in the principles of
their religion. Such liberal and
Systematic measures to perpetuate
Mahomedanism should awaken the
zeal of Christians to extend ‘the
knowledge of the Saviour.

The Rev. James Conner, ‘from
the C. M. S. was svationed here
from 1819 to 1821, during which
time he was usefully employed in
procuring the translation of nearly
the whole Bible into modern Greek,
and in opening channels for the cir-
culation of the Scriptures through-
out the islands of Candia, Rhodes,

. 192


\


and Cy
Syria.
In_ th
sults hay
labours «
A spirit
very co)
the Jew:
great nui
brew Ol
been act
The Rat
vain atte:
circulatic
to the dis
tinually t
of Christ
Mr. Wolf
of the re
pleased G.
Jerusalem
stantinopl
himself to
their colle
they impr
name and |
quiring the
he had bee
at Jerusale
had writte
and had d
where the
away man
the ancien
him that th
who were r
his errors,
rejoiced to
testimony
pel from
Jews, and
am deligh 3
that I sha
number,”?
the Gospel
until his d
Several a
but, at the
British A
complying
quest, feari
excitement
Constantina


0 m. in
ye grand
r of in-
nated at
nly com-
200,000
seks, the
menians,
nations.
ans. Its
AumMerous
p 14 vast
mosques,
ple reve-
its of real
1 to their
the grand
more than
yum, equal
ed to these
larses, de-
inciples of
and juris-
, or hotels,
supported
ese hotels,
are daily
wards of
lic libra-
from 2 to
es, ' which
sques 5 and
ches. Here
hools, esta-
he wealthy
mpire, in
b instructed
branches of
rinciples of
liberal and
perpetuate
awaken the
extend ‘the
ur.
nner, ‘from
tioned here
ring which
pmployed in
bn of neatly
ern Greek,
b for the cit-
res through-
ia, Rhodes,
192


CON


and Cyprus, and in all parts of
Syria.

In. this city, some important re-
sults have followed immediately the
labours of the London Jews’ Society.
A spirit of inquiry prevailed to a
very considerable extent amongst
the Jews of Constantinople, and a
great number of copies of the He-
brew Old and New Testaments had
been actually purchased by them.
The Rabbis took.the alarm, and in
vain attempted to put a stop to the
circulation of the sacred books, or
to the discussions which were con-
tinually taking place on the subject
of Christianity. It appears that
Mr. Wolff was. by no means aware
of the result with which it had
pleased God to bless his labours at
Jerusalem, until his arrival at Con-
stantinople; when, on presenting
himself to the Rabbis assembled in
their college for teaching the law,
they imprecated curses upon his
name and his memory. On his in-
quiring the cause, he was told that
he had been disseminating his errors
at Jerusalem ; and that certain Jews
had written down his arguments,
and had come to Constantinople,
where they had already .turned
away many of their brethren from
the ancient faith. They informed
him that there were about 300 Jews
who .were more or. less ‘affected with
his errors. ‘The zealous missionary
rejoiced to receive such unexpected
testimony to the power of the Gos-
pel from the lips of unbelieving
Jews, and immediately replied, ‘I
am delighted to hear it, and. I hope
that I shall soon add you to the
number.’? He continued to preach
the Gospel to his inquiring brethren
until his departure for England.
Several applied to’ him for baptism ;
but, at the recommendation of the
British ambassador, he declined
complying with their earnest re-
quest, fearing lest, in the political
excitement which then prevailed in
Constantinople, his motives should be


CON


misconstrued, and he should be ac-
cused of improperin’ ‘erence with
the subjects of the G man Porte.

The committee are. at this time
anxiously looking out for a duly
qualified missionary—a man of
warm piety and sound discretion—
whom they might send to Constan-
tinople, to strengthen the hands of
Jewish believers, and to prosecute
the good work thus happily begun.

The British and Foreign B. S.
has recently employed two agents
here and in the vicinity, viz. Messrs.
Leeves and Barker, who are still
industriously promoting the circu-
lation of the Scriptures, This is
a very commanding post for ob-
servation and labour, owing to its
central situation, its extensive come
merce, the great influence of foreign
merchants and travellers, and the
facility of communication with the
N. of Europe, the shores of the
Black and Caspian Seas, and the
most interesting countries of the
Mediterranean. For many years,
however, the disturbed state of the
country has greatly retarded bene-
volent efforts.

In a letter, dated Dec. 27, 1826,
Mr. Leeves says :—

*‘ IT cannot close, without men-
tioning that an important event has
taken place among the Jews of this
capital. Several Jews had come
to Mr. Hartley, of the C. M.S.,
and myself, professing their belief
in Christ, and desiring baptism.
This coming to the knowledge of
the Jewish Rabbis, two of the num-
ber were seized, bastinadoed, and
thrown into prison. Three others
secreted themselves, and were bap-
tized by Mr. Hartley. They were
subsequently discovered, and the
Jews demanded of the Porte. the
execution of one of them, which
was refused by the Turks; but they
were all condemned to the bagnio
for six months, with an Armenian,


in whose house they were found.


Herc they still are, and hitherto
8 193


CON.


firmly maintain the faith, which,
under the view of death, they had
boldly professed, when brought be-
fore the Grand Vizier and other
authorities. Since they were in pri-
son, they have suffered much ill-
treatment, stripes, &c., from the
Turkish guards, whom the Jews
bribed to use them ill, in the hopes
of shaking their constancy ; but in
vain. I have used, and-am using,
every means to procure them some
alleviation; and, by the inter-
ference of our Ambassador, the
extraordinary persecution they were
subject to has been withdrawn from
them, although they are still in
chains, and labouring in the heavy
work of the arsenal. This affair
has ~ produced a strong sensation
among all classes in this metro-
polis; and God grant that their
patience may remain unshaken,
and their sufferings, like those of
the Christians in early times, pro-
duce its effects upon their brethren !
This is a new thing in this capital ;
and we shall, doubtless, have great
difficulties to encounter, even v-hen
these new Christian brethren are
released, who must still expect to
suffer persecution. May Provi-
dence lead us to such means as
may insure their safety, and leave
the way open for others to join
themselves to this little band! A
youth of 16 is one of the number,
who shows great fortitude and zeal,
and has resisted all the solicita-
tions and tears of father, mother,
and relations, to draw him away
from his faith, with offers of mo-
ney, clothes, and an immediate re-
lease from his fetters and prison.
He told them, that Jesus Christ was
now his father and mother ; that he
preferred his prison to all they
could offer him ; and that, when
they became Christians, he would
acknowledge them as his rela-
tions.”

A. sum of money having been


demanded for the knocking off their


COR


chains, it was sent as required, but
the answer was :—** An order has
come from the Vizier not to take off
the chains, but to use every possible
severity towards the prisoners.”
“‘ We are also informed,’ says Mr,
Hartley, ‘‘ that the Jews have di-
vided 2000 piastres among the Turks
who have charge of the prisoners,
for the purpose of obtaining their
exertions in tormenting them to
the ‘utmost possible degree. Thus
are our poor friends suffering a con-
tinual martyrdom! The object of
the Jews is clear: they hope to
wear out the constancy of the con-
verts by incessant sufferings ; or, if
that attempt should fail, to bring
them down to the grave.’ In
reference. to one, the object was
accomplisted, in his return to
Judaism; two of .them, however,
adhered to their profession. ' A
friend at Constantinople says, on the
10th of Nov. 1827,—** A'few days
ago, our poor Jews were, a third
time, put in heavy irons; but, I
thank God, they are firm in their
confession of Christ, under all
trials.’

COPENHAGEN, the capital of
Denmark, situated on the E. coast
‘of the island of Zealand. It is en-
compassed with walls, and is the best
built city inthe N. of Europe. E.
long. 12° 35’, N. lat. 55941’. In
1807, there were, in the city and
suburbs, 3156 houses, and 104,000
‘inhabitants.

In the history of missions, this
place deserves particular notice, as
being the seat of the Danish Mis.
sion College, founded by Frederic
the IVth, in 1714, which has, for
about a century, furnished mis-
sionaries to Greenland and to the
‘E. Indies ; who have been support-
ed, in part, in the different fields
of their labour, from the funds of
the institution.

CORFU, one of the Ionian
islands, in the Mediterranean, at
the entrance of the Gulf of Venice,

194


45 m.
popula’


commen
vourable
preachin,
Wednesd
house, M
in mode
having be
tracts at
between -
in pursuar
many cop’
also circul


ministry hi
young me
tory evide
Sabbath-se.
is superinte
and is in
Charity-se,
the instrum
Lowndes,
considerabl
the counte
leading Bri
Mr. L.'s
lish Lexico
edition wil
and he pu
that langua
Ssays, and
English wo
the Reli gia
n transla


red, but
rder has
) take off
possible
ners.??—
says Mr.
have di-
he Turks
isoners,
ing their
them to
e. Thus
nga con-
object of
- hope to
T the con-
gs; or, if
to bring
ve.” In
bject was
return to
, however,
ssion. | A
ays, on the
few days
re, a third
in their
under all


e capital of
he E. coast
. Itisen-
d is the best
urope. E.
6° 41’. In
he city and
and 104,000


issions, this
pr notice, as
Danish Mis-
by Frederic
ch has, for
ished mis-
and to the
pen support
herent fields
he funds of


the Ionian
erranean, at
f of Venice,
194


COR


45 m. long, and 25. broad; The
population is about 60,000; the
people are principally of the Greek


religion,

Corfity the capital of the above
island, on the E. coast, has a po-
pulation of 15,000. E. long. 20°17’,
N. lat. 39° 40’. In 1819, the Jonian
B. S. was established here.

The Rev. Isaac Lowndes, from
the L. M. S., removed from Zante
in 1822, with the design of making
Corfu the seat of the mission. He
commenced his labours with. fa-
vourable prospects.. In addition to
preaching on the Sabbath, and on
Wednesday evenings at his own
house, Mr. L. prepared some .works
in modern Greek. Permission
having been granted to him to print
tracts at the government press,
between 4 and 5000 were printed,
in pursuance of this privilege, and
many copies of the Scriptures were
also circulated.

In the Report of 1825, the fol-
lowing particulars of his labours
were given :—

‘¢Mr. Lowndes continues to
preach in English, as usual. The
attendance is encouraging. His
ministry has been blessed to seven
young men, who exhibit satisfac-
tory evidence of genuine piety. A
Sabbath-schvol has been formed. It
is superintended by Mrs. Lowndes,
and is in a promising state. A
Charity-school, established through
the instrumentality of Mr. and Mrs.
Lowndes, has been attended with
considerable success : it meets with
the countenance and support of the
leading British residents at Corfu,
Mr. L.’s Modern Greek and Eng-
lish Lexicon is in the press ; the
edition will consist of 2000 copies ;
and he purposes to translate into
that language the Rev. Mr. Scott’s
Essays, and some other approved
English works. Several tracts of


| the Religious Tract Society have


been translated into Albanian, and


COR


some are in course of printing. A
translation of Mr. Wilson’s Mo-
dern Greek Spelling-book is pre-
paring in the same language. Dur-
ing the past year, Mr. Lowndes has
been instrumental in putting into
circulation the following tracts and
copies of the Scriptures:—Tracts in
Modern Greek, 4843; Italian, 782;
English, 680: total, 6305: Copies of
the Scriptures.in various languages,
1232. Among other places to which
the Scriptures and tracts have been
sent is Missolonghi;. of the Scrip-
tures, to the extent of 500 copies:
Mr. Lowndes understands, that
they were received with much
eagerness by the Greeks, who,
while encamped and waiting the
approach of the enemy, were often
found reading the word of God.
He has supplied with tracts many
of the Ionian schools, in which
they are regularly read as school-
books. He has engaged a person
to itinerate for the purpose of re-
tailing tracts, as he did formerly
when stationed in the island of
Zante. Much of his time has lately
been employed in correcting the
proof-sheets of the Albanian Ver-
sion of the New Testament, printing
at Corfu, for the British and Fo-
reign B.S. He cannot ascertain
that any book was ever before
printed in the Albanian language,
and: thinks it probable that the
volume containing the Gospel of
Salvation will prove-to be the first.
He has performed two missionary
tours in Corfu, for the purpose
of distributing the Scriptures and
tracts. In these tours he has met
with considerable encouragement.
At Carusades, during his second
tour, he gave public notice that be
had books to distribute, and the
Greek Primate instructed the peo-
ple to attend, which they did ac-
cordingly, in considerable num-
bers: so that Mr. L. was not able
to meet the wishes * all the

5


COR


applicants. At Perulades, he had
the satisfaction of learning that the
tracts left there on his first tour
had been read by the people. Be-
side distributing, during these tours,
many copies of the Scriptures and
_tracts, and disposing of school-
books, copies of his translation, Ma-
son on Self- Knowledge, &c., he en-
deavoured tomake himself useful by
sometimes preaching to the people
in their own language, on which
occasion he had many auditors. A
Misericordia Society, commenced
by Mr. and Mrs. L., is much encou-
raged by persons of rank in Corfu ;
and in the female branch of it Mrs.
Lowndes takes an active part.’

«* On the approach of winter,’’
fsays the last Report, ‘Mr.
Lowndes resumed his Greek Lec-
ture, and had a very pleasing at-
tendance. He washappy to observe,
among others, some who had at-
tended during the preceding | sea-
son. The Greek Sabbat.i-school
still contains about 40 scholars, who
commit to memory portions of the
New -Testament, andthe Cate-
chisms of Dr. Watts. The attend-
ance on the Znglish services has
been more encouraging during the
past year, and Mr. L. has reason
to hope that he has not laboured in
vain. The English Sabbath-school
is in a more promising state, and is
better supplied with teachers. The
printing of Mr. Lowndes’s Eng-
lish and Modern Greek Lexicon is
finished ; and that of the Greek
and Albanian Testament, carried
on under the superintendence of
Mr. Lowndes, has advanced as far
as the first Epistle to the Corin-
thians. Another Albanian tract,
making the fifth, has been sent to
press. Portions of the New Tes-
tament in Albanian, have been
forwarded to Constantinople, for dis-
tribution. Dr. Watts’s Catechisms,
in Italian, have been printed.’’

* The translation of the Rev. Mr.


COR


Scott’s Essays into modern Greek
is finished, and will shortly be sent
to press, The translation of the
Rev. Mr. Bickersteith’s Treatise
on Prayer is in progress, Mr,
Lowndes has been amply. supplied
by Mr.. Wilson with tracts, ele.
mentary, and other school books,
for sale and gratuitous distribution ;
and he has introduced Mr. Wilson’s
Greek Spelling-book, into several
schools. He has also received
books, for distribution, . from. the
Rev. Mr. Jowett, of the C.-M. S,
The lamented fall of Missolonghi
closed up an important channel for
the distribution of books in Greece.
Mr. L., however, has been enabled
to open a communication with it,
through the medium of a gentle.
man resident in the Morea, who
has engaged to take measures for
putting into circulation copies of
the Scriptures and tracts, supplies
of which have been consigned to
his charge for that purpose. Mr.
L. has again visited Cepha/onia and
Zante, and has made arrangements
for promoting a constant and ex.
tensive circulation of the Scrip.
tures, and the mission publications,
in both of those islands. He has
also. performed another tour in
Corfu, during which ‘he preached
in Greek to the natives, and on one
occasion had more than 300 hearers,
The . people were, in general,
anxious to obtain books. The
Misericordia Society, established
some time since, goes on prosper-
ously. The sum expended in the
relief of objects in distress, during
the past year, exceeded £80.”
CORNPLANTER’S VIL-
LAGE, at Jénnesadaga, on the
Allegany R. within the limits of
Pennsylvania, among the Seneca


Indians. - i


The Western Missionary Society, |


New York, established ‘a school
here in 1815, at the urgent request
of Cornplanter, which has been
196


very useful
ration.

CORNWA
Litchfield coi
the E. side o|
m. N. W, Li
1662.

In 1816,
School was in

May, 1817, u
the Americay

stoners for Fo
Rev. H. Dag
John H. Prent
object of this |
cate heathen y.
ner as, with
sional instruc
them to become
physicians, surg
or interpreters
cate to the heat
knowledge in a
arts, as may pi
promoting Chri:
zation, ‘The co
vides, that Amer
knowledged pie
into the school
pense,

In 1823, the
was 36; of who
different tribes ¢
rigines, 9 fro
Islands, 1 from
from Malayan A
the Portugal, 3
mi the Greek
and 3 young me
States, Since tI
of the school, a
of the pupils he

plous $ and many
their native lands,

viour to their benig
y= The governme;
States has paid 400
four years, to defi
of 4 Indian youth
_COSSIPORE,
district, N. and j
Vicinity of Calc


Cos
my am to the rising gene-


CORNWALL, a post town in
Litchfield county, Connecticut, on
the E. side of Housatonick R. 10
m, N. W. Litchfield. Population,
1662.

In 1816, a Foreign Mission
School was instituted, and opened
May, 1817, under the direction of
the American Board of Commis-
sioners for Foreign Missions; the
Rev. H. Daggett, principal, Mr.
John H. Prentice, assistant. The
object of this seminary is to edu-
cate beathen youths in such a man-
ner as, with subsequent profes-
sional instruction, will qualify
them to become useful missionaries,
physicians, surgeons, schoolmasters,
or interpreters; and.to communi-
cate to the heathen nations such a
knowledge in agriculture and the
arts, as may prove the means of
promoting Christianity and, civili-
gation. ‘The constitution also pro-
vides, that American youths of ac-
knowledged piety may be admitted
into the school at their own ex-
pense,

In 1823, the number of pupils
was 86; of whom 15 were from 9
different tribes of American Abo-
rigines, 9 from the Sandwich
Islands, 1 from. New Zealand, 1
from Malayan Archipelago, 1 from
the Portugal, 3 from China, 2
jrom the Greek Islands, 1 Jew,
and 8 young men of the United
States. Since the commencement
of the school, a very large portion
of the pupils has. been hopefully
pious; and many have returned to
their native lands, to publish the Sa-


viour to their benighted countrymen.


The government of. the United
States has paid 400 dollars a-year, for
four years, to defray the expenses
of 4 Indian youths at this school.

COSSIPORE, a very. populous
district, N. and in the immediate
vicinity of Calcutta, where the


COT


C. K. S. has a circle of several
very flourishing Bengalee schools.

- COTTA, a village in Ceylon,
about 6 m.,.S. E. of Colombo,
situated in a very populous district.
Inhabitants 4500.

The Rev. Samuel Lambrick, of
the C. M, S.,. entered on this de-
sirable station in Dec. 1822. A
piece of ground of about 5 acres
was purchased in perpetuity from
government; and adwelling-house
and printing-office erected. The,
people among whom he laboured ure
nominally, Christians, though many
of them profess to hold buddhism
also; they seem, in fact, to be
budhists i in heart, while, for tempo-
ral interest, they call themselves
Christians. Lamentable ignorance,
however, generally prevails among
them. Mr. L. in addition to the
establishment of schools, has been
exceedingly active in the discharge
of his ministry, but hitherto he bas
seen but little fruit, and mourns
over the spiritual torpor of the people.

The Rev. Joseph Bailey arrived
at this station on the 28th of August,
1826, and Mr. and Mrs. Selkirk,
on the Ist.of Sept. The schools;
since Mr. Selkirk’s arrival, have
been placed under his charge:
in seven schools there are 16)
scholars, with an average attend-
ance of 108, In addition to these,
there is an English school contain-
ing 16 boys.

The masters of the respective
schools come to Mr. Selkirk’s every
Saturday afternoon ; when he re-
ceives an account of the attend-
ance during the week, and gives
such directions as appear necessary
to each master.. The meeting is
concluded with reading a portion
of Scripture and Prayer.

Mr. S. reports, in November,
1826, that the attendance of the
boys had ratber increased.

During his yisit to Ceylon, Bishop
Heber examined the different
8 2 197


CcoT COT


schools, and expressed much plea- | among them is, that the Gospel
sure in the progress of the chil- | was planted in Hindoostan by the
dren; and announced on the oc- | apostle Thomas. Landing at Cran-
casion, his intention. of giving a | ganore, or Chenyanoor, from Aden
benefaction to the society of 200] in Arabia, he was well ‘received
rix-dollars, and directed that the | by Masdeus, king of the country,
children should have a dinner pro- | whose son, Zuzan, he baptized,
vided at his expense. and afterwards ordained deacon,
The ground for a Christian In- | After continuing some time at
stitution has been cleared, and the | Cranganore, he visited the coast uf
building is expected soon to com- | Coromandel, and preached the Gos.
mence, Some pieces of land, con- | pel at Melapoor, and finally at St,
tiguous to the mission premises, | Thomas’s Mount, near Madras,
have also been purchased, which | where he was put to death. ~ His
will be found of great advantage. | tomb long remained an object of
The Printing Department is | veneration. Dr. Buchanan enter.
coming into action ; a second press | tained a decided opinion, that we
has been obtained ; several pieces, | have as good authority to believe
in Cingalese and in English, have | that the apostle Thomas died in
been printed; St. Matthew’s Gos- | India, as that the .apostle . Peter
pel, of Mr. Lambrick’s version, | died at Rome.
has been circulated, and he was| That Christians existed in India,
about to put to press either the | in the 2d century, is a fact fully
Book of Genesis or the Acts of | attested. The Bishop of India was
the Apostles. present, and signed his name at the
COTYM, a village on the Ma- | councilof Nice, in 325. Thenext
labar coast, Hindoostan, about 18 | year Frumentius was consecrated
m. from Allepie: including a small | to that office by Athanasius, of
circuit, it contains about 1000} Alexandrie, and founded many
houses, and is in the midst of a | churches in India. In the 5th cen-
very populous country. The la- | tury, a Christian bishop, from An-
bours of the missionarieshere are | tioch, accompanied by a small
principally devoted to the spiritual | colony of Syrians, emigrated to
good of the Syrian Christians on | India, and settled on the coast of
this coast, of whom it is necessary | Malabar, The Syrian Christians
to premise some account. enjoyed a succession of bishops,
The Syrian Christians, otherwise | appointed by the patriarch of An.
called St. Thomas’s Christians, in- | tioch, from the beginning of the 3d
habit the interior of Malabar and | century, till they were invaded by
Travancore, in the S, W. part of | the Portuguese. They still retain
Hindoostan, They extend from | the Liturgy anciently used in the
N. to S. 150 or 200 m., and in| churches of Syria, and employ in
breadth 40 or 560. Between 60 | their public worship the language
and 60 churches belong to this | spoken by our Saviourin the streets
ancient’ branch of the Christian | of Jerusalem. The first notices of
Church, which has preserved the | this people, in modern times, are
Syriac Scriptures, in manuscript, | found in the Portuguese bistories,
from Christ and the apostles ; and, | In 1503, there were upwards of 100
unconnected with the rest of the | Christian churches ‘on the coast of
Christian world, has stood for ages, | Malabar. As soon as the Portu-
amidst the darkest scenes of idola- | guese were able, they compelled
try and persecution, The tradition | the churches nearest as to
8


acknov
Pope ;
the Syr
records
their he
were tl
Syro-R
the col
form ¢
150,000
would 1
after a
time, fl
1653, hic
selves u
native pr
been key
These at
tians, 4
63 chur
Catholics
the corru
manners
have falle
and very
character
sessed, ca
With re
of these
arrive at
appears,
as well fr
as from t
Du Perr
= am
Of people
they pm
themselve
belonging
65 have
pendence
According
estimate
number
these 56 ¢
lowest co
majority
support th
Others em
chandize ¢
many amo
respectabl


» Gospel
an by the
rat Cran-
‘com Aden
| received
» country,
baptized,
d deacon.
time at
he coast uf
1d the Gos-
ally at St.
r Madras,
eath. ~ His
1 object of
unan enter-
m, that we
to believe
nas died in
ostle . Peter


ed in India,
a fact fully
of India was
name at the
» Thenext
consecrated
hanasius, of
nded many
the 5th cen-
DP, from An-
by a small
bmigrated to
the coast of
hn Christians
of bishops,
harch of An-
ing of the 8d
re invaded by
py still retain
used in the
nd employ in
the language
in the streets
first notices of
rn times, are
ese bistorles.
pwards of 100
In the coast of
as the Port:
hey compelled
the coast to
108


COT


acknowledge the supremacy of the
Pope; and in 1599, they burnt all
the Syriac and Chaldaic books and
records on which they could lay
their hands. The churches which
were thus sub¢ued, are called the
Syro-Roman Ci'ristians, and, with
the converts from other tribes,
form a population, of nearly
150,000. Those in the interior
would not submit to Rome; but,
after a show of union for a
time, ‘fled to the mountains in
1653, hid their books, and put them-
selves under the protection of the
native princes, by whom they have
been kept-in u state of depression.
These are called the Syrian Chris-
tians. About 10,000 persons, with
63 churches, separated from the
Catholics; but in consequence of
the corrupt doctrines and licentious
manners of their associates, they
have fallen from their former state,
and very few traces of the high
character which they once pos-
sessed, can now be discovered.
With regard to the actual number
of these people, it is difficult to
arrive at any exact conclusion. It
appears, however, most probable,
as well from the reason of the case,
as from the accounts of Anquetil,
Du Perron and others, that they
were a much more numerous body
of people in former times than
they are at present. They now
themselves reckon up 88 churches
belonging to their body, of which
65 have maintained their inde-
pendence of the Roman Pontiff.
According to the most accurate
estimate that can be formed, the
number of families belonging to
these 56 churches amounts, at the
lowest computation, to 13,000 ; the
majority of these are poor, and
= themselves by daily labour ;
others employ themselves in mer-
chandize and agriculture. Though
many among them are most highly
respectable, especially those of the


COT


class termed Tarragan, yet there
are none who can. justly be styled
men of property; there are very
few indeed among them possessed
of property to the amount of
5000 rupees.

The number of officiating priests,
commonly called Catanars, is 144,
These are wholly supported by the
offerings of the laity, on festival
days, and on the administration of
the occasional rites of the Church,
which, for the most’ part, afford
but a very scanty support; and in
very few instances do the monthly
offerings received by a Catanar ex-
ceed five rupees. They are gene-
Tally of the best families, and con-
sequently upon their character, as
to morals and information, depends,
ina great degree, that of the dis-
tricts in which they reside,

The Syrian Christians are, in
themselves, awfully sunk and de-
graded. The total disregard of
the Sabbath, the profanation of the
name of God, drunkenness, and, to
a considerable extent, especially
among the priesthood, adultery,—
are very prevalent among them.

In 1806, this people was visited
by the late Dr. Buchanan, who
presented their case to the pub-
lic, in his Christian Researches,
since which much has been done to
meliorate their condition. He
commenced a translation of the
New Testament into the Syrian
language, which has been com-
pleted and published since his
death, and copies sent to each of
the churches, ‘

Some account of other means
adopted for their welfare remains to
be given.

Colonel Munro, the Company’s
resident in ‘Travancore, having
erected a college at Cotym, for the
education of the Syrian priests,
wished to place an English clergy-
man on the spot. Accordingly t
Rev. Benjamin Bailey ——"

99


COT


with Mrs. Bailey, overland to Tra-
vancore, and they were fixed at Co-
tym about the beginning of 1817.
All the measures planned by Col.
Munro were cordially approved by
the Syrian clergy, and aided by them
so fur as it had been practicable, to
carry the arrangements for their
accomplishment into effect. For
the translation of the Syrian Scrip-
tures and Liturgy into Malayalim,
the vernacular language of the
country, a number of learned Ca-
tanars were assembled by the Me-
tran; and at this period they had
advanced in their labours as far as
the First Book of Samuel in the
QOid Testament, besides the Books
of Psalms, Proverbs, and part of
Isaiah; and in the New, to the
Epistle to the Philippians. The
execution of this work was super-
intended by the Rev. Mr. Bailey,
and the expense of it was borne by
the Calcutta dua. BR. S. The Col-
lege also was committed to the
charge of Mr. Bailey, for whom a
house was erected adjoining that
institution.

In the course of 1818, her High-
ness the Rannee of Travancore
presented the College with 20,000
rupees, which were laid out in
land; besides a previous gift of 1000
rupees, for erecting a chapel, and
furnishing the buildings of the Col-
lege. She also annexed to it a
tract of land in the neighbourhood
of Quilon, at least 7 m. in circum.
ference, with several subsidiary
grants, in order to render it pro-
ductive; and, lastly, appointed a
monthly allowance of 70 rupees
from the state, for the support of
a hospital, to be attached to the
college. The Rajah of Cochin,
also, emulous of her Highness’s
bounty, presented 5000 rupees for
the benefit of the Protestant mis-
sions; the whole of which was ap-
propriated by the resident to the
support of the southern mission,


COT
under the Rev, Mr. Mead, of the
L.M.S,

Till the end of 1818, at which
time Mr. Fenn arrived, Mr. Bailey
was the only missionary resident at
Cotym ; and the number of his oc-
cupations prevented his making so
much progress in the arrangements
of the college as he wished, and,
eonsequently, this accession was of
great importance,

In Dec, 1819, the missionaries
wrote :— “The year has been an
anxious one. The departure of the
late resident depressed our spirits
at its commencement; and a con-
stant succession of events, per-
plexed in their connexion, and im.
portant in their consequences, has
kept our minds on a continued
stretch, ‘and occupied much of our
most valuable time; while they
have been as a dead weight upon
our spirits. The efficiency of the
missionaries, in the past year, has
therefore been small.” of the
College they say:—‘ The number
of students receiving  instrue-
tion is 25; their studies are the
Syriac and the English: 3 of the
students are surpassed by very few
of the catanars in their knowl
of the Syriac. Their progress in
the English is small; the pronun-
ciation they are gradually acquir-
ing, and 6 or 7 of them can read
any book with tolerable ease: be-
yond this, their knowledge of the
language can scarcely be said to
extend. Besides the students, there

are 18 children receiving instruc-
tion in English, The difference of
these from the students congists in
their having received no Ordina-
tion, by which the students are ir-
revocably set apart to ‘the clerical
office.” There was also a, school
at this time in Cotym, the scholar
of which varied from 30 to 50 in
number; and another on the col-
lege property in Calada, having
16 scholars, the instruction being
200


then co
referenc
the Syrii
give the
first is tl
and the
made ag
present |
rals of t
tan is a
The num
ried is 1
vourable
sure with
and seve}
ceived M
English
tongue.
of the cat
churches,
marks of |
ing decor
&e »


Througl
slonary we
energy ar
tion of th
the Mala
was made
Hopeless
least for a
Bailey, w
type-foun
any kind,
portion of
other work
Soon aS Pos
deavour ta
with such ¢
books alos
workmen,
to the En
and, with

he derived
smaller we
carpenter, ¢
succeeded
sent a spe
print, to th
admired the
ness, and c¢
his success,


upon being


COT
of the metrans’ title, and the orders
which they had conferred—in-
sisted, if he were acknowledged,
on their being stripped of ‘their
robes, and resigning their cross and
pastoral staff—and excited. such a
tumult, by his proceedings, as com-
pelled. the resident, Col. Newall,
to remove him from the country.

This event has, as might have
been expected, in some degree af-
fected the interests of the mission ;
but it appears, from recent ac-
counts, that its effects are gradually
subsiding.

The college, which,.on Mr.
Fenn’s departifi was placed under
Mr. Doran’s superintendence, con-
tains 47 students, who are divided
into 6 classes. In consequence of the
Pelee disorder which had arisen
rom Mar Athanasius’s proceedings,
many of the students had left the
college, and Mr. Doran had sup-
plied their places with boys from
. the grammar-school. ,
. The greater part of the boys in
the grammar-school having been
transferred to the college, the pro-
ficiency of the boys in this school is
not great; the whole number is about
70, of whom some are day-scholars
from Cottayam, and some heathen
children. After giving an account
of their studies, Mr. Baker adds—
“‘Qn the Sabbath, the larger
boys attend the English service in
the college chapel, while the smaller
boys go to one of the Syrian
churches in the village; and the
whole receive religious instruction
in the afternoon.’”? The parochial
schools are 29 in number, and con-
tain 170 scholars; of these 445 are
Syrians, and 325 are heathens.
‘Many of the former schools,”
says Mr. Baker, ‘were very thinly
attended; and this, added to the
total failure of contributions from
the churches, has léd to the neces-
sity of giving up some of them ; be-
sides being thinly attended, several
were so inconveniently situated,


CRA


that they could be visited but se].
dom, and then not without consi.
derable labour and difficulty. It
was therefore deemed, advisable to
remove the schoolmasters from
thence, and to place them in some
ofthe more populous districts nearer
home; and this has been accord.
ingly done in two or three instances,

Petitions for schools having heen
presented by the heathen popula.
tion around us, some schools have
been opened in the vicinity of Cot.
tayam, with the prospect of much
good; many petitions were pre.
sented, but they could not all be
attended to, as the mission funds
would not allow of more schools
being established.”

It appears, from the list of schools,
that, while most of them have kept
up their numbers, several, which
used to be well attended, are now
almost deserted. The schoolmas.
ters are, however, continued ; and
there is no reason to doubt but that
the people will send their children
again, after a time. , In such
schools as have continued to be well
attended, the attention of the
schoolmasters has been regular;
and several of them, though hea.
thens, have given considerable sa-
tisfaction by their diligence in
teaching the catechisms and other
religious books,

The press, which continues un-
der the superintendence of Mr.
Bailey, is still in active operation,

CRANBERRY, a town in the
central part of New Jersey, from
N. to 8.

In May 1746, the Rev. David
Brainerd removed from Crossweeks
to this place, with the whole body
of the Indians under his care,
and in less than 12 months they
had cleared about 40 acres of land,
Here he continued till March 20th,
1747, when, owing to the ravages
of pulmonary consumption, his
labours, as a missionary, were ter-
minated, and he bade —

. 2


his belo
died at
setts, O
soon suc
ther, M
whom tl
continue
years. '
prosperoi
dians, in
anxious t
stand the
The m
to about $
ful subjec:
CREE!
Cherokee
Tennessee
100m. W
The Re
American
for Forei;
in 1820.
urgent rex
Cherokees
cinity, the
John Arcl
Brainerd i
Creek Path
pediency o
Such was
kees on the
short time,
houses, in y
opened, an
amounted t4
under the c¢
a native co
self to the
mission unt
1823, Soo
ment of this
awakening
people, and
jects of sal
A chure
which consi
bers in 182
lent Society
consisting
forwarded, t
to an educat
hessee,


1 but ‘sel.
ut consi-
culty. It
ivisable to
ers from
m in some
icts nearer
en accord.
instances,
aving heen
en popula.
‘hools have
lity of Cot-
ct of much
were pre-
not all be
ssion funds
ore schools


t of schools,
m have kept
pral, which
ad, are now
schoolmas-
tinued ; and
ubt but that
eir children
' In such
pd to be well
on of the
en regular;
hough hea-
iderable sa-
Hiligence in
s and other


pntinues un-
ce of Mr.
e operation.
own in the
Hersey, from


Rev. Davi
Crossweeks
» whole body
ry his care,
months they
cres of land,
March 20th,
the ravages
mption, his

yo were ters
e farewell to
202


CRE


his beloved church and people, and
died at Northampton, Massachu-
setts, Oct. 9th, 1747. He was
soon succeeded by his younger bro-
ther, Mr. John Brainerd, under
whom the affairs of the mission


continued to flourish for several '


years) The school was also ina
prosperousstate. Many of the In-
dians, in advanced life, were very
anxious to learn to read and under-
stand the Scriptures.

The number of Indians increased
to about 200, and many were hope-
ful subjects of renewing grace.

CREEK PATH, a town of the
Cherokee nation, on the S. side of
Tennessee river, in Alabama, about
100 m. W.S. W. Brainerd.

The Rev. Wm. Potter, from the
American Board. of Commissioners
for Foreign Missions, came here
in 1820. In consequence of an
urgent request from the principal
Cherokees in this place and its vi-
cinity, the Rev. D.S. Butrick, and
John Arch, a native convert, left
Brainerd in March, 1820, and visited
Creek Path, to inquire into the ex-
pediency of establishing a school,
Such was the zeal of the Chero-
kees on the subject, that, in avery
short time, they erected two school-
houses, in which schools were soon
opened, and the scholars in both
amounted to 80. One for girls was
under the care of Catherine Brown,
anative convert, who devoted her-
self to the advancement of this
mission until her death, July 18th,
1823. Soon after the commence-
ment of this mission, a considerable
awakening prevailed among the
people, and numbers were the sub-

jects of salutary convictions.

A church was soon arganized,
which consisted of 10 native mem-
bers in 1823, A Female Benevo-
lent Society was formed in 182),
consisting of 14 members, which
forwarded, the first year, six dollars
to an education society in W. Ten-
nessee,


CRE


CREEKS, Indians inhabiting
the W. part of Georgia, and E. ,
part of Alabama.’ Their country
is extensive and fertile. The po-
pulation is estimated at about
20,000 souls. They are a warlike
tribe; have w general idea of a.
Supreme Being; but observe no
religious days, nor: arly religious
rites, unless the green corn dance
be one. Confidence and generosity
were formerly their characteristic
virtues ; but a desire of gain, caught
from the whites, has chilled their
liberality; and abused credulity bas
taught them suspicion and deceit.

The introductioggof whiskey has
produced a very icious effect.
The more reflecting are fully con-
vinced that, with respect to their
future destiny, it is a question of
Civilization or extinction; and a
question, the decision of which
cannot long be postponed. They
have, therefore, become very soli-
citous for the establishment of
schools, and the introduction of the
various arts, from which the whites
derive their superiority. In some
of these they have made consider-
able progress.

In. 1735, the United Brethren
attempted a mission among the
Creeks, which was soon relin-
quished.

In 1807, they made another
effort on Flint R., about 60 m.
from Milledgeville, the seat of go-
vernment in Georgia. Here their
prospects were flattering at first;
but the mission has since been
abandoned.

The American Baptist Board
has a station among the Creek
Indians, named Withington, in the
town of Tuchabanchee, Georgia,
on the Chatahooche R., in the
neighbourhood of the late Big
Warrior, Suitable buildings having
been erected, the school was com-
menced, May 12th, 1823. The
number of scholars soon increased
to 37, which was about . at the
03


CRE


commencement of 1825. In less
than:a year, previous to Sept. 1823,
nearly 3000 - dollars had been for-
warded: to. this station ; 2000 dol-
lars from: the Board, the remainder
from individuals and associations in
the: vicinity. This is called the
Withington Station, as a tribute of
respect: to the late Mr. John
Withington, of New York, who
bequeathed 40,000 dollars to dif-
ferent benevolent institutions.—
{See Asbury. ]}

CREMEN » & town in Livonia,
where the United Brethren super-
intended an institution for the edu-
cation of sc ters, for several
years, which was sanctioned by the
Ecclesiastical Court of the empire in
1739 ; in consequence of which, the
number of pupilssoon amounted to70.

These measures extensively ex-
cited a desire for religious knowledge
in different parts of the country.

CRIMEA, a peninsula of Euro-
pean Russia, in the S. part of the
government of Taurida, formed by
the Black Sea on the W. and S.,
and the sea of Azofon the E.,about
200 m. long and: 124 broad. The
population is estimated at 300,000.
A large portion of these are native
Tartars,who are rigid Mahomedans.
There are also many Jews, Arme-
nians, and Greeks. This isbecom-
ing a very interesting field for mis-
sionary labour, and much attention
has been excited on the subject of
Christianity, especially among the
Jews, by the distribution of Bibles
and Testaments, furnished princi-
pally by the B. & F. and the Rus-
sian B.S. The Tauridian A. B. S.
has become very efficient. The
Sultan Kategerry has taken up his
abode at Sympheropole, the modern
capital of the-Crimea, and mani-
fests a deep interest in the spiritual
welfare of his countrymen. He has
a school under a Tartar teacher,
who uses the Scriptures, asa school
book, instead of the Koran.

On the west side of the Crimea,


CRO


about 20 m.from the south coast, is
the town .of Baktcheserai, which
is regarded by the Tartars of the
Crimea as the seat of learning, and
has contained 31 mosques.. The po-
pulation was formerly 20,000, but,in
1800, the number was reduced to
6776; of whom 3000 were native
Tartars,1162 Jews,and the rest were
principally Armenians and Greeks,

Here the Rev. Dr. Ross, of the
Scotch M. S., laboured for some
time, but afterwards removed to
Astrachan. The Rev. J. J. Car.
ruthers, of the. same society, having
become sufficiently master of the
language, began to itinerate through
the Crimea. At first he was very
favourably received ; and copies of
the New. Testament were readily
accepted, but were afterwards,. in
many instances, returned. . The
Greeks were hostile from the first,
and represented him as an infidel,
and his books as impositions. But,
in the midst of these difficulties,
the work of conversion. began to
appear. Mehmed, a Tartar, the
first-fruits of the mission, was bap.
tized Aug. 6, 1823. Soon after.
wards, three other Tartars requested
to be taken under Mr. C.’s care,
with the view of being instructed in
the principles of Christianity; and
as, after some time, they not only
renounced the delusions of Maho-
medanism, but appeared to give
evidence of true piety, he baptized
them also.

It is painful to find that various
difficulties subsequently arose: that
Mrs. C. was prevented from pur.
suing her endeavours to instruct the
Tartar females ; that Mehmed con-
ducted himself inconsistently ; and
that Mr. C. has recently retired
from this benighted part of the earth.
* CROIX, ST., one of the Virgin
islands, 20 m. long, and\7 where
broadest, lying 40 m. S. by E. of
St. Thomas. It belongs to the
Danes. The chief town is Chris
tianstadt, on the N. one with ¢


thus soundd


in. establish
island were
and two oth
joyfully rec
negroes ; b

in their neig


fine hi
W. lor
In 1

but lor
by the
Danist
the Lo
purcha:
Count |
United
seers of
time tc
religiou
accordi
10 um
Herrnht
purposes
After
voyage,
Croix in
lubrity
their inc
the land,
their hea,
and befo
year, 10.
, Moved to
places, in
in the e
company
hut; but
by the sé
proved fa
and, as tl
in other re
vived, eith
or returne
of a settle
a time al
however,
titute of i
aries in S|
occasional]
in. awake
the import


The first


ih coast, is
ai, which
ars of the
uming, and
s. The po-
000, but,in
reduced to
yere native
he rest were
nd Greeks.
loss, of the
d for some
removed to
J e J ° oh
‘iety, having
wae of the
rate through
he was vety
nd copies of
were readily
fterwards,. in
ywmned. . The
rom the first,
as an infidel,
itions. But,
e difficulties,
ion. began. to
Tartar, the
ion, was bap-
Soon after:
ars requested
r. C.’s care,
r instructed in
stianity ; and
hey not only
ons of Maho-
eared to give
y, he baptized


-


i that various
ly arose: that
ed from put
to instruct the
Mehmed con-
sistently ; and
cently retired
Art ofthe earth.
» of the Virgin
and)? where
. Ss. by E. of
elongs to the
own is Chris
coast, with ¢
204


CRO


fine harbour, defended by a fortress.
W. long. 65° 28’, N. lat. 17° 45’.

In 1733, this fine and extensive,
but long neglected, island was sold
by the crown of France to the
Danish West India company; and
the Lord Chamberlain Pless, having
purchased six plantations, applied to
Count Zinzendorf, for some of the
United Brethren to go out as over-
seers of his estates, and at the same
time to employ themselves in the
religious instruction of the slaves ;
accordingly, 4 married couples, and
10 unmarried brethren quitted
Hernhut, in August, for these
purposes.

After a tedious and dangerous
voyage, the colonists arrived at St.
Croix in June, 1734; but the insa-
lubrity of the climate, added to
their incessant labour in clearing
the land, had such an effect upon
their health, that they all sickened ;
and before the expiration of the
year, 10 of their number were re-
moved to the world of spirits. Their
places, indeed, were supplied, early
in the ensuing-year, by a second
company of 1] persons from Herrn-
hut; but these were soon attacked
by the same diseases which had
proved fatal to their predecessors ;
and, as the colony did not answer
in other respects, the few who sur-
vived, either went to St. Thomas,
or returned to Europe, and the idea
of a sett.ement in St, Croix was for
a time abandoned, The negroes,
however, were not left_wholly des-
titute of instruction, as the mission-
aries in St. Thomas visited them
occasionally, and were successful
in. awakening their attention to
the important truths which were
thus sounded in their ears,

The first persons who succeeded
in establishing themselves’ on this
island were Mr. George Ohneberg
and two other brethren, who were
joyfully received by the Christian
negroes ; but both they und theslaves
in their neighbourhoodwere for some


CRO


time kept in a state of constant alarm
by the repeated attempts of some
wicked incendiaries to burn their
houses. In some instances, the fire
was discovered and extinguished
before it had done much mischief ;
but, in others, the huts of the ne-
groes were completely consumed ;
and Ohneberg’s house was eventu-
ally destroyed, though his furniture
was happily rescued from the con-
flagration. Nothing, however, could
shake his resolution of remaining
at his post; and when bis inflexi-
bility on this point: became known,
the torch of persecution was extin-
guished, and the mission began to
assume such a promising aspect, that
the brethren, who had previously
resided on one of the company’s
plantations, purchased an estate of
4 acres, to which they gave the
name of Friedensthal, and erected
a church and dwelling-house upon
it.. The number of persons who
attended the preaching of the Gos-
pel also rapidly increased, and up-
wards of 100 negroes were annu-
ally received into the church by the
rite of baptism.

In 1765, a new mission-house at
the west end of the island was un-
fortunately destroyed by fire. But
in the course of a few years, in ad-
dition to the rebuilding of this edi-
fice, a second church was erected,
and, in 1771, the settlement in this
district received the name of Frie-
densberg.

The ensuing year was a period
of severe trial, By a hurricane
which occurred on the 3)st of
August, the church, the dwelling-
houses, and all the offices of Fried-
ensthal, were completely blown
down ; the newly erected house at
Friedensberg was removed from its
situation, and materially injured ;
and the brethren and their families,
who had sought an asylum in their
cellars, were, for several hours,
kept in constant expectation of
death. ‘The famine and epidenic


T 205


CRO CRO


sickness which followed the tempest | services were performed in the
swept off many of the slaves, and | chapel, and attended by numerous
diminished the number of the mis- | congregations; butthe situation be.
sionaries. Amidst the general dis- | coming every day less tolerable, it
tress, however, the cause of God | was relinquished. Some of the
continued to flourish; the negroes | missionaries went to Friedensthal,
appeared more and more anxious to | and others were kindly accommo-
ascertain the way of salvation; and | dated on a neighbouring plantation,
such was the spirit of hearing among | for about 2 months, when the hos-
them, that, notwithstanding the | pital was removed to the west end
publie services at Friedensthal were | of the island.

held for nearly 12 months in the On the 23d of February, 1819,
open air, the auditory frequently | the new church at Friedensfeld was
consisted of more than 1000persons, | consecrated to the worship of the
and many were every month ad- | living God; and on thatjinteresting
mitted to the privilege of Christian | occasion, a great number both of
baptism. Such, indeed, was the | the coloured and white inhabitants
rapid progress of the mission, that | of the island, comprising several
it soon became desirable to obtain a | members of the legislature, assem-
third and more central situation ; | bled together; indeed, the congre-
and, in 1778, an estate was pur- | gution was so numerous, that not a
chased for that purpose, to which | third part could obtain admittance
the brethren gave the name of | within the doors ; and the services of
Friedensfeld. the day appeared to be attended with

In 1796, Colonel Malleville, for- | a peculiar blessing.

merly the Commandant of St. Tho- The most recent intelligence re.
mas, and a kind patron of the mis- | lative to St. Croix is contained in a
sionaries, was appointed Governor | letter of the late venerable Matthew
General of the Danish West India | Wied, dated Friedensberg, August,


Indians,
where h
Indians,
CUD!
Carnatic
of St. D
lat. 11° 4
Twon
S.» were
who lab
much stu
the soldi
they had
members,
man, who
to India,
faithful
pring
who spent
India, mac
tion. He
} and, durin,
siderable |
Mr. Holzb
continued
the co: Ul)
At the!
vacant,
CUDD4


islands, and took up his residence in
St. Croix, which had been consti-
tuted the seat of the government.


1823, in which he says—* As to
the progress of the mission in this
island, though we cannot speak of


district of 1
conda, Hin
contain fro:


Butthe joy which this event diffused | any great awakening among the
among the brethren was of short | negroes, yet we may declare, to the
duration ; as this excellent friend | praise of God, that He carries on
was seized with a fit of apoplexy | his work in our congregations, and
which proved fatal. In compliance | also leads many to us from among
with his own desire, his remains | the heathen, who earestly inquire
were interred in the burial ground | what they must do to be saved.”
of the missionaries at Friedensthaly | CROSWEEKS,orCROSWEEK-
a funeral oration having been pre- | SUNG, a place about 20 m. W. Am-
viously delivered by the incumbent | boy, New Jersey, on the road from
of the Dutch Calvinistic church, in |] Amboy to Bordentown. This was
which he had been educated. formerly anIndian vi!lage,where the
St. Croix, together with St. Tho- | Rev. David Brainerd successfully
mas and St. Jan, was spared the | laboured in 1745-6, in which time
horrors of bloodshed by the capitu- | many became hopefully pious;
lution of the Governor in 1801]; but | and he baptized 38 adults and 36
the brethren at Friedensberg were | children. Here about 150 Indians
severely tried, in consequence of | became resident, moral, industri-
their mission-house being occupied | ous, and to a considerable extent
as a hospital for the British troops. | civilized. On May 3, 1746, he re-
For some time, indeed, the regular | moved with the whole body of the
206


tants, E. lo
To this
superintend
in connexia
N sion, unde
L. M., S,
At the req
Esq. Regist
he took ¢
schools, pre
that gentle

them, they s
tive female
blished, and
the followi
within a di
Cuddapah, Vv
Chinmaar, a
aggregate n
dren in the
all of which


CUL.


removals, to 9; and a prayer-meet+
ing was held every Friday morning.
A Hindoo, about 25 years of age, of
the Sanessi sect (or caste), who
came to Cuddapah in the month of
Oct. 1825, unattired, with long
clotted hair, and his body besmeared
with ashes, had embraced Chris-
tianity, had been baptized, and
prayed, when called upon in the
social meeting, with much pro-
priety. A chapel had been com-
pleted ‘and opened on the 11th of
Oct., the expense of which was
defrayed by subscriptions on the
spot. By the aid of respectable
European residents, a workshop
was established for native Chris-
tians who had not the means of
supporting themselves. A_selec-
tion of psalms.and hymns, in Te-
loogoo, had been revised, and the
Book of Psalms and the history of
Joseph had been translated into
the same language. About 1200
Teloogoo tracts had been circu-
lated, principally at Hindoo festi-
vals. Copies of portions of the
Scriptures in the same language
had been distributed among re-
spectable natives and children in
the schools; and English tracts
had been occasionally given to tra-
vellers and to individuals in the
cantonment.

The Rev. Mr. and Mrs, Crisp
have recently been sent to aid Mr.
Howell.

CULLIAN, a large town in
Hindoostan, about 40 m. N. E. of
Bombay, and about 15:E. of Tan-
nah. It was formerly the seat of a
petty rajah, and has now the ap-
pearance of decay.

The Rev. Mr. Nichols, of Tan-
nah, established a school here in
1818. ‘The visit of an Englishman
is so rare, that it excites much cu-
riosity and suspicion among the
people, and especially among the
brahmins, whereby the prosperity
of the school has been greatly re-
tarded.


CUL


CULNA, a town on the W. bank
of the Hoogly, 47 m. N. of Cal-
cutta. This place has lately called
forth the efforts and liberality of
the C, 7.8.

From the spot where the society’s
premises are, a continued range of
houses extends 4 m. south-easterly,
on the western bank of the bend of
the R., down to Gootipala, below
Santipore, on the eastern side; and
there is an equal range for 4 m,
westerly towards Burdwan. The
inhabitants form, according to-the
account of the natives, 18 or
20,000 houses: or families ; if only
5 persons are supposed to be in one
family, the number would amount
to between 80 or 100,000 souls,
The inhabitants opposite Culna,
straight across the R. in Santipore,
are stated by the natives as forming
not less than 20 or 22,000 families,

* In this region,’? says the mis.
sionary ‘‘ a considerable part of the
population are brahmins; but the
general occupation of the’ bulk of
the people is in different branches
of trade, and employments in
offices; in agricujture not many
are engaged. The place properly
called Culna, is chiefly inhabited
by those who come from different
parts of the country to carry on
their trade here: this may be a
reason why the people there have
not the simplicity which villagers
generally have, but are more de-
ceitfal; and yet they have not so
much of the liberty which people
in other towns possess, where they

care but little for one another; for
the first people of the place have
great influence over the others. I
have also formerly observed, that
the people wh» often came from that
quarter were very obstinate idola-
ters; and even now, idolatry is
carried on there with far greater
force than it is in Burdwan.”
' In Jan. 1827, it was stated that
there were nearly 1000 boys and
girls in the 9 schools, mentioned
208


by Mr.
tract ;—
66 In
are unit
boys? sc
of the
sionary
two boys
one at th
other of
tances, §
and 1 bi
Santipore
taining a
place.”?
In Sept
“ The |
deed. Ti
of large b
other stat:
ciety in t
m 6are the fe
tively speal
thing is pi
that in Cu
the bulk of
ino native
all the chilc
struction.
habitants
already fo
I look for s
the blessing
gtace is no
cular place.
mention, th
Culna are ¢
any other p
addicted to i
The cire
sion having
that Mr. De’
at Culna, a
ing been app
addressed 1
was drawn u
the principal
once exhibits
feel for Chri
their view of
they expect
bours of a mi
CUTTAC


V. bank
of Cal-
y called
ality of


ociety’s
ange of
sasterly,
bend of
» below
ide; and
or 4 m.
n, The
ag to-the
8 or
3 if only
ye in one
d amount
00 souls.
e Culna,
jantipore,
is forming
) families.
s the mis-


+ branches
rments in
not many
e properly
inhabited
m different
carry ‘On
may be 8
there have
h villagers
more de-
ave not s0
hich people
where they
other; for
place have


WW n.?


208


others. I
Lerved, that
ne from that
nate idola-
idolatry is
far greater


an.

tated that
0 boys and
mentioned


CUT


by Mr. Deerr in the following ex-
tract:— -

“In Culna and Ombica, which
are united, we have established 4
boys’ schools, and + for girls ; one
of the girls’ schools is on the mis-
sionary premises. Besides these,
two boys’ schools lie easterly of us,
one at the distance of 2 m. and the
other of 4; and, at the same dis-
tances, 2 are established westerly ;
and 1 boys’ school is opened at
Santipore, with the design of ob-
taining access to that interesting
place.”? ;

In Sept. Mr. Deerr writes,—

‘¢‘ The schools are promising in-
deed. The 8 boys’ schools are full
of large boys—more so than in any
other station occupied by our so-
ciety in this presidency; neither
are the female schools, compara-
tively speaking, ill attended. One
thing is particularly pleasing, viz.
that in Culna and Ombica, where
the bulk of the people reside, there
i:no native Bengalee school ; but
all the children are under our in-
struction. With the principal in-
habitants of the place I have
already formed an acquaintance,
I look for success, however, only to
the blessing of our Lord, whose
grace is not confined to any parti-
cular place. I would not omit to
mention, that the lower classes in
Culna are as much depraved as in
any other place; they are equally
addicted to imposition and deceit.”

The circumstances of the mis-
sion having rendered it probable
that Mr. Deerr might not be fixed
at Culna, and the inhabitants hav-
ing been apprized of this, a petition,
addressed to Archdeacon Corrie
was drawn up, and signed by 15 of
the principal inhabitants, which at
once exhibits the desire which they
feel for Christian instruction, and
their view of the advantages which
they expect to derive from the la-
bours of a missionary.

CUTTACK, a district in Orissa,


CUT

Hindoostan, between 20° and 22°
j N. lat. 140 m. long, and 60 broad,

containing about 1,200,000 inhabi-

tants. The temple of Juggernaut
is about 40 m. distant. ‘The in-
fluence of the Gospel has greatly
lessened the number of attendants.

Missionaries have taken advantage

of the favourable opportunity af-

forded for the distribution of tracts.

At a late festival, those of the

B. M. S, distributed about 8000

pamphlets in the Bengalee lan-
guage,

Cuttack, a fortified town, and
capital of the district of the same
name, 250 m. S. W. of Calcutta,
is calculated to contain 574]
houses. Every foot of it is es-
teemed holy ground, and _ the
whole of the land is held free of
rent, on the tenure of performing
certain services in and about the
temple.

The Rev. Messrs. Bampton,
Peggs, and Lacy, from the General
B.M.S., arrived here in 1822. The
study of the language at first chiefly
occupied their attention: from its
affinity to Bengalee, of which they
had acquired some knowledge,
they were soon able to make ex-
cursions among the natives, and to
hold intercourse with inquirers,
who would sometimes visit them
from a distance of 20 m. English
preaching was begun on Sunday
mornings and evenings, for the
benefit of the European residents ;
few, however, attended. A monthly
missionary prayer meeting was esta-
blished ; and, in 6 schools, the mis-
sionaries collected 120 scholars.
Four are Orissa—3 for boys and
girls, and one is the evening school
for adults; one is Hindoostan ; and
the sixth is English.

CUTWA, «a town on the west-
ern banks of the river Hoogly, in
the province of Bengal, district of
Burdwan, 75 m. N. of Calcutta.
At the period when the Mah-
rattas were contending with the
T2 209


CUT .
Mussulmans, it was once the scene of
“‘confused noise, and of garments
rolled in blood ;?? and it still retains
many signs of ancient warfare. The
Rev. John Chamberlain, of the
Bapt. M.S., entered this new field
of effort in 1824, and laboured in
it and its neighbourhood most inde-
fatigably and zealously. Two years
after, he wrote :—‘“ But little suc-
cess attends the work in this place ;
yet, blessed be God! I am not with-
out hope, nor without some en-
couragement. Kankalee and _his
wife, who have been baptized, are
a comfort to me, and in him we
daily see the triumph of truth. He
was once an idle, religious beggar ;
but since he has turned from dumb
idols to serve the living and true
God, he labours cheerfully with


cuT
of wood; THAT was not worthy of
it: but to-day I have found one


that is, and He shall have it—Jesus |


Christ is worthy of my flower.”
His subsequent conduct proved his
sincerity. He learned to read:
from being an idle devotee, he be.
caine an industrious old man; and
was, for some years, a most devout,
judicious,and indefatigable preacher
of the Gospel.

In 1810, Mr. Chamberlain left
Cutwa; his place was supplied by
the Rev. Wim. Carey, jun. ; and at
the commencement of the next
year we have the following account
of the mission from Dr. Carey :—.
“The church at Cutwa is now
small; but they have lately had the
addition of one member, a native;
and I hear of six or seven more who


his own hands to provide things’ are desirous of being baptized. One


honest in the sight of all men.
Three others, who live at a dis-
tance, give us hope. People are


of these is a native merchant, of
considerable property, who formerly
had a house of gods. After hear.


often coming to hear; and when | ing and reading the Gospel, he


they seem attentive, nothing so
gladdens my heart as to téll them
of the love of our Saviour.’’
Another circumstance ought not
to be omitted :—A‘Hindoo, named
Brindabund, had been also for many
years a religious mendicant. His
hair had been sutfered to grow so as
almost to conceal his eyes, and he
had indulged in smoking to such an
excess as nearly to deprive himself
of sight. He first heard the Gospel
at a large fair between Cutwa and
Berhampore. He was observed to
pay great attention the whole day;
and was seen sometimes to laugh,
and at other times to weep. At
night he came to Mr. C., and said,
in allusion to the custom among the
natives of presenting flowers, ‘I
have a flower (meaning his heart)
which I wish to give to some one
who is worthy of it. I have, for
many years, travelled about the
country to find such a person, but
in vain. I have been to Jugger-
naut, but there I saw only a piece


expelled his idols, tied them up in
straw, and sent them to brother
Chamberlain, who sent them to
Serampore. This was a year and
ahalfago. Healsoclave up a fine
Rutha, or car, of the god Krishna,
and used it for fire-wood. His ci-
devant temple is filled with mer.
chandize, There are others who ad-
here to him, and who have received
the word of God. These. people,
living too far from Cutwa to attend
the Gospel (about sixty miles),
have, I understand, sanctified: the
Lord’s day to reading the word and
carrying on the worship of the true
God in the best manner they are
able. Their heathen neighbows
have taken every opportunity in
their power to injure them, and
have, by some false charges in the
Zillah Court of Beerbhoom, occa-
sioned one of them considerable
expense. I hear, however, that
the magistrate has been informed of
this villainy, and obliged them to
enter into security respecting their
210


future ¢
they live
town lyi
entrance
try, and
trance |
which cc
visits in ¢!
Throu
Carey ex
in person
outandw.
number o
aS reader:
means a §
Gospel wi
part of th
Beerbhoo
became ay
sure, witl
message,
vouts who
mediate fy
were bapti
the far gre
fast in the
or three di
useful to t}
By the F
intelligenc
and serioug
people, an
to the chu
verted Hi
faith, suste
by the cow
true religie
journal of ¢
ofS Will shd
ficient in
Divine tru
mode of cq
“Spoke tc
galee,.
thoughtof I
I said, *
who shews
jungles, bu
way or dod
Roy points
hot point o}
80 his instr


rthy of
nd one
—Jesus ,
ower.?’
yved his
» read:
he be-
mm; and
devout,
preacher


lain left
plied by
3; and at
he next
account
Sarey i—
is now
'y had the
a native;
more who
ized. One
chant, of
» formerly
{ter hear-
ospel, he
hem up in
o brother
them to
year and
e up a fine
id Krishna,
. His ci-
rith mer-
prs who ad-
e received
se people,
a to attend
ty miles),
ctified. the
e word and
of the true
ler they are
neighbours
ortunity in
them, and
arges in the
noom, occas


210


onsiderable
ever, that
informed of
ed them to
hecting their


CUT


future conduct.. The place where
they live (Lakra-koonda), is a large
town lying on one side just at the
entrance into the Mahratta coun-
try, and on another, just at the en-
trance into South Bahar; both
which countries the merchant often
visits in the way of trade.’?

Through subsequent years, Mr.
Carey exerted himself greatly, both
in personal labour, and in sending
outand watching over a considerable
number of native brethren employed
as readers and itinerants. “By these
means a general knowledge of the
Gospel was diffused through a great
part of the districts of Burdwan and
Beerbhoom, and many thousands
became acquainted, in some mea-
sure, with the nature of the Gospel
message. Nor were these endea-
vouts wholly unattended with im-
mediate fruit, About 70 persons
were baptized in ten years, of whom
the far greater part continued sted-
fast in their profession, while two
or three discovered a desire to be
useful to their countrymen.

By the Report of 1825, we have
intelligence of increasing attention
and seriousness on the part of the
people, and also of many additions
to the church. Some of the con-
verted Hindoos had died in the
faith, sustained in the last conflict
by the consolations and hopes of
true religion. A quotation from a
journal of one of thenative preach-
ots Will shew that they are not de-
ficient in an acquaintance with
Divine truth, or unskilled in the
mode of conveying it to others :—
“Spoke tc a brahmin,” says Kan-
galee,. “* who asked me what I
thoughtof Ram Mohun Roy’sway?”?’
Isaid, ‘‘ that he was like a man
who shews me a fine house in the
jungles, but cannot. point out the
way or door to it. Ram Mohum
Roy points out one God, but does
not point out the way to him; and
so his instructions can be of no use


DAC


to me: Christ is the door, and none
can go to God but by him.”’

Mr. Carey, more recently laments,
that although his hearers are often
deeply affected under the word, in-
stances of conversion are few ; still,
those who have been unitedinchurch :
fellowship afford him pleasure by
their general steadiness and consist -
ency, and two or three have lately
expressed a wish to.join the church,
though he is not yet quite satisfied
of their piety. Mrs. Carey has en-
deavoured to revive the female
school at this station, but hitherto
can procure none but the children
of native Christians. The preju-
dices of the heathen, stronger in
this distant part of the province
than in Calcutta and: its environs,
not allowing them to send their
daughters,


D,


DACCA, the richest district in
Bengal, 180 m. long, and 60 broad.

Dacca, or Selapore, the ca-
pital of Dacca, situated on a
branch of the Ganges, N.E. Cal-’
cutta, 170 m. travelling distance,
containing 150,000 inhabitants, of
whom more than half are Maho-
medans, and a few are Armenian
and Greek Christians. E. long. 90°
17’, N. lat, 23° 42’.

The Rev. O. Leonard, from the
Bapt. M. S., accompanied by a na-
tive, arrived in 1816. In 1822,
there were 1300 pupils in 17 Ben-
galee schools, into most of which
the Sevriptures were introduced
without exciting alarm. <A school
for indigent Christian children in
the city formed many into valua-
ble members.of society, who would
otherwise have been wandering
about in vice and wretchedness,

The hands of Mr. Leonard have
lately been strengthened by the
accession of Mr. D’Cruz, from
211


DEL


Serampore, Mrs. Peacock, the wi-
dow of a missionary, has also gone
to Dacca to take charge of the
female schools. Several interviews
have been held by the missionaries
with the Suttya Gooroos, a singular
sect of Hindoos, who have re-
nounced idols and profess to ap-
prove Christianity, of which,
through yo medium of the Scrip-
tures in their own language, they
have acquired considerable know-
ledge. While these have excited
some hope, Mr. L. has been encou-
raged in his exertions for the
young, by pleasing evidence that
two of his pupils have died in the
faith of Christ. Very little fruit
has yet been reaped at this station
in the conversion of the natives.
The missionaries, however, still
labour abundantly in preaching the
Gospel, both to stated congrega-
tions and to occasional assemblies
of heathen and Mussulmen. On
Sabbath days they have two English
services, and two also during the
week, They have likewise corre-
sponding services in Hindoostanee
and Bengalee. They associate
their preaching with the superin-
tendence of the large and interest-
ing circle of schools under their
care; converting nearly every school
into a chapel, and every visit into
a season of worship, They are
called, every week or fortnight, to
preach to 300 or'400 paupers, who
are regularly collected near the
English church to receive public
alms from the funds of the vestry.
They also attend all religious festi-
vals and assembiies of the natives
within their reach, to preach and
otherwise make known the word of
God; and, during the cold season,
make excursions into the adjoining
districts.

The C. K.S. has a depot of
books In this place.

DELAGOA BAY, situated on
the E. coast of S, Africa, and ex-


DEL


tending from about 26° to 27°,
lat. It presents to emigrants, su.
perior advantages to any in Africa;
it is spacious, and extends about 60
m, from N. to S. and 20 from W,
to E., and. is much frequented by
whales. Three large rivers fall into
the bay: Manica is the most north.
ern; Machavanna, on the S., and
Delagoa, the central river, is na.
vigable for nearly 200 m. by large
boats, and for more than 40 m, b

vessels which draw about 12 fee

water. The following countrids
are in the vicinity of the bay,
Inyack lies S. of the cape and
island of that name, and contains
about 10,000 inhabitants, The na.
tives are a naked, timid race: they
have no religion ; yet use circum-
cision, and are under the influ.
ence of witchcraft. Their king is
tributary to the king of Mapoota,
which is bounded N. by Delagoa
Bay, and contains 20,000 inhabit-
ants. These people are a fine race
of Caffres, and warlike. In reli.
gion and manners they resemble
those of Inyack. The people of
Temby are tractable and industrious,
and, including Panyedly, amount
to 25,000. These countries are
all tributary to the king of Temby.
The language of the people is only
a different dialect te that spoken
by the Caffres, the Bootchuannas,
and the inhabitants of the Comoro
Islands, A large tract of land, in
the vicinity of the bay has re-
cently been ceded to the British
by the natives, on condition that
they should be supplied with Chris.
tian teachers. Accordingly a mis-
sion was commenced here, in 1823,
by the W. M. S.

The Rev, Mr. Threlfall, in his
praiseworthy zeal, but contrary to
the intentions of the committee,
went from Cape Town alone, and
fixed himself near the coast, which
is exceedingly unhealthy. He was,
in cc asequence, soon — hy


+ fan and are


disorde
after g’
taken ¢
tion’ of
a reg
inland
and me
this pu
sent out
his. arri
he foun
sel ther
in a dis
and as p
tained f
expiratic
the crey
W. went
solation
under ar
until the
be expire
pended, i
DELE
tan, 240
bounded ¢
by Serina,
Agra, anc
been the
during the
depopulat
sesses, in
that can b
is but littl
cipal rive
Jumna, w
border,
joyed a st
1800, it me
in cultivat
riod the ci
trict has, i
the Britis.
people are
thority of t


the great
sive empire
Dethi
above provi
capital of
actually so
of the time


to 27°S,
rants, su-
n Africa;
about 60
| from W,
xented by
s fall into
ost, north-
ie S., and
r, is na-
. by large
40 m. b
ut 12 fee
countrids
the bay,
cape and
d contains
.» The na-
race : they
se circum.
the influ.
eir king is
f Mapoota,
y Delagoa
00 inhabit-
a fine race
. In reli-
vy resemble
people of
industrious,
yy amount
ntries are
of Temby.
ople is only
hat spoken
btchuannas,
he Comoro
of land, in
has re-
he British
dition that
ith Chris
gly a mis
\ e, in 1823,


all, in his
ontrary to
committee,
alone, and
loast, which
vy, He was,
httacked hy
212


‘DEL


disorders incident to the bay, and
after great sufferings, was at length
taken off by a vessel. The inten-
tion of the committee was to form
a regular mission-establishment
inland of the bay, on the higher
and more healthy parts; and for
this purpose ,Mr. Whitworth was
sent out to join Mr. Threlfall. On
his arrival at the Cape, however,
he found Mr..T. on board a ves-
sel there under strict quarantine,
in a distressing state of sickness ;
and as permission could not be ob-
tained for bis landing before the
expiration of a long quarantine,
the crew being also sickly, Mr.
W. went on board to afford con-
solation to his afflicted brother,
under an engagement to remain
until the time of quarantine should
be expired. The mission thus sus-
pended, is, for the present, vacant.

DELHI, a province of Hindoos-
tan, 240 m. long and 180 broad,
bounded onthe N. by Lohore, N.E.
by Serinagur, S. E. by Oude, S. by
Agra, and W. by Agimeer Having
been the seat of continual wars
during the 18th century, it is almost
depopulated; and though it pos-
sesses, in general, every advantage
that can be derived from nature, it
is but little cultivated. The prin-
cipal rivers are the Ganges and
Jumna, which enter on the N. E.
border, The country having en-
joyed a state of tranquillity since
1800, it may be expected to t:nprove
in cultivation, &c. From tiis pe-
riod the city of Delhi and its dis-
trict has, in reality, been subject to
the British government; but the
people are nominally under the an-
thority of the emperor of Hindoos-


; fan and are now all that remains to


the great Mogul, of his once exten-
sive empire, ‘

Delhi is the capital of the
above province. It is the nominal
capital of all Hindoostan, and was
actually so during the greatest part
of the time since the Mahomedan


DEL


conquest In the time of its splen--
dour, it covered a space of 20 miles,
from the appearance of the ruins.
The present city is built on the left
bank of the Jumna, and is about 7
m. in circuit, surrounded on 3 sides
by ‘a wall of brick and stone, in
which are 7 gates. The palace
stands on the bank of the R. sur-
rounded by a wall of red stone,
about 1 m. in circuit. Adjoining
it is a fortress, now in ruins; and
there are many splendid remains
of palaces, with baths and ‘gar-
dens. The grand mosque is a
magni‘icent edifice of marble and
red free stone, and there are 30
others of an inferior size. The
streets are in general narrow,
except 2 that lead from the palace
to different gates; and there are
many good houses, mostly of brick.
Caravans arrive annually from
Cashmere and Cabul with shawls,
fruit, and horses. Precious stones
of a good quality aiv to be had at
Delhi. It is 320 m, N. W. Calcutta,
E. long. 77° 5’, N. lat. 28° 41,

The Rev. Mr. Thompson, of the
Bapt. M. S., removed from Patna
to Delhi in 1822. Soon after his
arrival, disease, which was we
lent in Bengal, began its awful ra-
vagesin this imperial city ; sweeping
away, among the first, four mem-
bers of the royal iamily, besides
numbers of inferior rank. Still
more awful, however, were the
proofs exhibited of spiritual death.
But while the missionary was much
discouraged on this account, he dis. »
tributed a number of Gospels among
the Afghans, who are supposed to
be descended from the twelve tribes
of Israel. Some of them, when leav-
ing Delhi, repeatedly solicited Mr.
T. to accompany them; assuring him
that their own countrymen would
be very anxious to possess and to
search the writings of inspiration.

He wasafterwards much engaged
in extensive journeys to the N, and
N.E. of Delhi, during which he

213


DEL


distributed large quantities of the
Scriptures, and religious tracts, in
various languages. Among his
accounts of these, he says—‘‘ Some
strangers from Nabn, in the hills,
‘were one morning at the jogee’s,
whither I had gone to read the Gos-
pels and pray. They consisted of 2
vakeels from the Nahn Raja, with
their attendants. Our books are
not new to these people, Sookha
having been amongst them, and
read and distributed pretty widely.
Some who had not an opportunity
then, now took tracts. One of the
vakeels had taken tracts in 1818,
at Kurnal, and was entrusted with
the books (Punjabee Scriptures)
which Captain Bird had obtained of
me for the Nahn Raja, his master.
These people lend an attentive ear
whenever I have beenreading at the
jogee’s, or they attend at my house.

‘* These vakeels and their at-
tendanis gave me a horrible account
of the sacrifice of eight and twenty
Auman lives, under the fallacious
name of Suttee, which took place
not 2 months agoin the hills. The
individual who died was Isree Sein,
the Raja of Mundee, a town and
rajasbip in the hills; and the per-
sons who were thus cruelly burnt,
were not all wives or concubines,
but some of them slave girls. One
ranee, being pregnant, bas escaped
the flames for the present; another,
through good interest, perhaps, was
emboldened to declare her deter-
mination not to be burnt, and they
have not dared to immolate her.
Some 30 years ago, a raja having
been slain in battle, 25 women were
burnt with hiscorpse. Twelve years
ago, the betrothed wife of a brah-
min, only 7 years old, was cruelly
burnt with his corpse. Many more
instances of murders under the
cloak of Suttees, were related by
them, as having taken place in the
hills, of which they were either eye-
witnesses or received most certain
information,”


DEL


In his journal Mr. T. also noted a
fact which deserves attention. |]
found,”? he remarks, ‘ that of all
who came to hear me, such as
were most remote from the British
provinces were the readiest ard
most unreserved in receiving our
Scriptures. I know not how it is,
but the western nations certainly
possess a thirst for knowledge above
those in Hindoostan.”’

In 1823, Mr. T. was cheered
by an event, highly gratifying
to himself, and which excited
a great sensation in this populous
city. An aged brahmin, held in
the higiest estimaiion among
his neighbours for his attain.
ments in Sanskrit literature, and
for his knowledge of the Shas.
ters, after hearing the Gospel for
some time, publicly renounced
idolatry; and, notwithstanding all
the efforts made both to allure and
terrify him from his purpose, openly
professed his faith in Christ, and
was baptized by Mr. Thomas in the
presence of many spectators. On
this occurrence the Serampore bre-
thren observe—‘ This renunciation
of Hindooism, being in that part of
the country quite a new thing, has
procured much attention to the
doctrine of the Gospel. It seems
to shew, among other things, the
safety with which Christianity may
be promulgated in the darkest parts
of India. All the threatened oppo-
sition to this man’s open profession
of Christianity, ended in a few
expressions of personal dislike from
his old acquaintance, on account of
the course he had taken, and his
having tacitly condemned them and
all their religious observances, by
nobly daring to follow his own con-
victions of the truth. For all this,
however, he was prepared 5 and by
sustaining the whole in the spirit of
genuine Christianity, he in a great
measure disarmed the resentment
of his neighbours and acquaintance.
So completely quiet ry they,

ah


indeed,
dislike,
referen
time of
of the
police :
transac
The
1] men
whom,
Sookha
latter is


D noted a
on. “1
at of all
such as
e British
diest and
iving our
how it is,
certainly
dge above


s cheered
gratifying
Y pies pn
$ populdus
. Reld in
n among
is attain.
ature, and
the Shas-
Gospel for
renounced
tanding all
o allure “
Ose, Openly
Christ, and
yomas in the
tators. On
ampore bre-
enunciation
that part of
thing, has
tion to the


n account of
en, and his
ed them and
arvances, by
his own con-
For all this,
red 3 and by
the spirit of
he in & qrent
resentment
cquaintance.
were they,
aia


ES


LY
‘
oO:


DEL


indeed, in the expression of their
dislike, that not only was there no


reference to any European (at the
time of his baptism), but the attention
of the lowest person in the native
police was notofficially called to the
transaction.’?


The church at present consists of
1] members in full communion ; of


whom, however, only 2, Kiaba and
Sookha Misr, are natives. The
latter is actively engaged in spread-
ing abroad the knowledge of the
Gospel in the neighbouring coun-
tries, and seems to meet with great
acceptance among the people. His
own Character is much improved,
and he gives pleasure and satisfac-
tion to all who know him.

Mr. Thompson’s labours are
abundant and highly interesting.
In English, he has regular worship
on Sabbath morning and evening at
his own house, and the same on
Wednesday evening; and, except
mn the first Monday of the month,
when he holds a missionary prayer-
meeting at his own house, he has a
prayeremeeting on Monday even-
ings at the house of one of the
members of the church. The usual
congregations, at these times,
amount to about 20 persons. Hin-
doostanee worship he has at his own
house every Sabbath afternoon,
which is very variously attended ;
and, indeed, on every afternoon he
has worship of this kind, varying in
some degree according to the
number and circumstances of the
visitors he may have. He also fre-

uently conducts worship in Hin-

tanee, with a number of Chris-

tian drummers in the military lines,
at some distance from his house.

To preach the Gospel to the
heathen, he continually frequents
several places which are the head-
quarters of some Hindoo sects, and
also some ghats, which are places
of great resort. In addition to these,
he attends many religious assem-
blies in the city and neighbourhood ;


th» east coast of the colony.


DEM


and, in spring, he travelsto the great
annual assembly at Hurdwar, and
in November, to that at Gurrmook-
teswar. On all these o¢asions he
finds opportunities of circulating the-
knowledge of the Gospel to an unu-
sually great extent, and of marking
the progress which is made in the


work of missions. Many resort to
him for instruction, and he has now
several very promising inquirers.


The C. M. S. sent Annud Mes:


seeh, a native teacher, to Delhi, in


1822. His time is usually em-


ployed in reading and conversing
with the Hindoos, brahmins, and
others, who seek him for the sake of


information in the Christian Scrip-


tures, and, as is sometimes the case,
in the hope of confounding him and
entangling him in his talk.
under the eyes of Mr. Fisher, the
chaplain, and with him pursues bis
scriptural inquiries,


He is


“He is as
warm-hearted and regular in the
good cause,” says Mr, F. “ as he
ever was.’’

DEMARARA, a settlement in
Guyana, on a river of the same
name, contiguous to Essequibo.
The river is 2 miles wide at the
mouth, defended by a forton the
east bank, and navigable upward of
200 miles. The country produces
coffee, sugar-canes, and the finest
kinds of wood; it was taken from
the Dutch by the British in 1796,
and in 1803; and it was ceded to
them by the Dutch in 1814. This
settlement and that of Essequibo
form one government, and the ca-
pital is Starbrock.

In December, 1807, the Rev.
John Wray was sent hither by the
L. M. S., in compliance with the
solicitations of Mr. Post, a pious
and respectable Dutch planter on
He
cc amenced his labours on the plan-


tu:ion of Le Resouvenir, belonging
to Mr. P., who had upon it about
600 slaves, under the most encou-
raging circumstances. A few months


215


DEM DEM


after his arrival, he announced the | moved by the advantages which
conversion of more than 20 negroes | they beheld accruing from mission.
-—that upwards of 200 had learned | ary labours.
Watts’s First Catechism—that he In the early part of 1811, Mr,
had baptized 4 adults, and several | Wray was iniroduced to Mahaica, a
children—and that his congregations | village upon the coast, about 25 m,
were large and attentive. Thissuc- | from town, and in the vicinity of
cess increased during the year 1808; | several estates. The gentlemen
so that early in the ensuing spring | residing here not only expressed a
the number of slaves admitted into | desire that a missionary might la.
the church by baptism amounted to | bour among them, but actually
24, and not less than 150 appeared | subscribed 10002, towards the erec.
to be seeking the salvation of their | tion of a place of worship. Mr. W,
souls. Nor was this all—the truths | afterwards remarks, with respect to
-they had learned they were anxious } the mission. at Le Resouventr, ‘“‘One
to communicate to others, ‘I am | of the negroes told me that 113 had
informed,’’ says Mr. W. “ that | come to him to be instructed; and
some, at tha.distance of 20m., who | I am sometimes astonished to find
_have never seen our chapel, have | how correctly they learn the cate.
learned Dr. Watts’s First Cate- | chism from one another. About
chism ;. and 10 of our people, who j 200 attend public worship regularly,
best understand it, have taken 8 | several of whom can conduct the
each under their care, to instrict | singing without the assistance of
them, to watch over their conduct, | white people; and muny begin to
and to settle disputes among them. | pray, in our social meetings, with
The manager of these slaves, who | great fluency, and very often in
attends our place of worship, is | scriptural language.”
astonished at the change wrought The colonial government having,
among them. Before they heard the ; on the 25th of May, issued a regu.
Gospel, they were indolent, noisy, | lation which was found to operate
and rebellious; but now they are | almost to the total suppression of
industrious, quiet, and obedient.’? | the religious assemblies of the ne.
Whilst Mr. W. wes rejoicing | groes, Mr, W. visited England; and
in the blessing which thus rested on | a representation of the restriction
his labours, he was called to endure | being made to the government at
a severe trial, in the removal of his | home, the evi!, which bad thus ori.
friend and patron, Mr. Post, who | ginated, was removed. Shortly
fell asleep in Jesus, amidst the sin- | after his return, a proclamation was
cere and bitter lamentations of his } made, recalling the previous one,
slaves. Desirous that the privileges | and stating, among other things,
of Christian instruction should be | that instructions had been received
enjoyed after his decease, he had | from his Royal Highnessthe Prince
secured to the use of the mission, | Regent, to give every aid to mis-
the chapel and the dwelling-house } sionaries, in the communication of
of the minister; and generously as- | religious knowledge; an announce.
signed 100/, sterling, as an annual | ment which was accompanied by
contribution to his support, so long | the most friendly and liberal con-
as one should be provided by the | duct on the part of the governor.
society to preach the doctrines of | The eflectof this was very apparent,
the reformed church. Other friends, | in the increased attendance of the
however, were afterwards raised | slaves—6 or 700 of whom frequently
up, among whom were some plant- | assembled. Soon after, the Rev,
ers, whose prejudices bad been re- | Mr, Davies, who had been sent out
216


was much
short time
insufficient t
People that f
ihe pla


previo
opener
chapel
the er
ants co
and ab
the ne
half a
About |
includir
slaves, y
and the
first inst
’ Mr. ¥
Berbice,
fectiona’
regret o1
In Dece:
who had
at Tobag
rara, and
witnessin,
thren, «
marked, ¢
Son of G
sinners; @
hundreds
saving of
two years
able to obt
to Mr.
time the ¢
Mr. Davies
Mr. A Elliot
laboured w
cess; in the
Town, and
coast, whe
abundantly
improveme
rals of great
1 Sabbath e
fering them
baptism.
Immediat
the Rev. Jo
Le Re


VuUE


¥


tir slaves


3 which
mission-


11, Mr,
ihaica, a
ut 25 m.
cinity of
ntlemen
pressed a
night la-
actually
the erec-
. Mr. W.
respect to
ur, “One
1t 113 had
cted; and
2d to find
the cate-
r. About
regularly,
nduct the
istance fe
begin
‘ings, with
y often in


ent having,
ed a regu-

to operate

pression of
of the ne-

bland and
restriction

ernment at

ad thus ori-
Shortly


im frequently

r, the Rev.

een sent out
216


-DEM


previously to the death of Mr. Post,’


opened a large and commodious


chapel at George Town, towards


the erection of which the inhabit-
ants contributed upwards of 600/.;
and about 60/. was subscribed by
the negroes—euch of whom gave
half a bit, or twopence halfpenny.
About the same time an 4. M. S.,
including people of colour and
slaves, was formed at George Town,
and the subscriptions raised in the
first instance amounted to 80/.

’ Mr. W. subsequently removed to
Berbice, amidst expressions of af-
fectionate regard, and’ poignant
regret on the part of his people.
In December, the Rev. Mr. Elliott,
who had for some years laboured
at Tobago, paid a visit to Dema-
rara, and was highly gratified at
witnessing the success of his bre-
thren. ‘*Some thousands,’ he re-
marked, ‘‘ know that Christ is the
Son of God, and the Saviour of
sinners; and I doubt not that some
hundreds believe in him to the
saving of their souls.”” For nearly
two years, the directors were un-
able to obtain a resident successor
to Mr. W., though during that
time the chapel was supplied by
Mr. Davies, and other missionaries,
Mr. Elliott also appears to have
laboured with v4 or zeal and suc-
cess; in the first instance at George
Town, and afterwards on the west
coast, where his services were so
abundantly blessed, that a striking
improvement was visible in the mo-
rals of great numbers ; and scarcel
1 Sabbath elapsed without some of-
fering themselves as candidutes for
baptism.

Immediately after the arrival of
the Rev. John Smith, in 1817, at
Le Resouvenir, the attendance
was much increased, and in a
short time the chapel was found
insufficient to accommodate all the
people that flocked together, Some
i" the planters would not suffer
their slaves to attend, but others


DEM


feand it most conducive to théir
own interests to give ther. permis-
sion. In one of Mr. S.’s letters,
he says, ‘‘ The white people attend
much better than they have hitherto
done, and express themselves much
pleased with the decent behaviour
and clean appearance of the ne-
groes, who are usually dressed in
white. With respect to the’ reli-
gion of these poor people, I believe
it does not consist in outward ap.
pearances so much as in the ho-
nesty and siniplicity of their con-
duct. Their masters speak well of
them in general; nor have I heard
(though constantly inquiring) more
than one complaint made by any
planter or manager in consequence
of religion.”” The exception al-
luded to is worthy of notice. One
of the planters said, ‘ that the
man concerning whom inquiry was
made, was too religious ; and that,
not satisfied with being religious
himself, he was in the habit of sit-
ting up at night to preach to others.
In every other respect, however,”
said he, “‘he is a good servant; so
much so, that I would not sell him
for 6000 guilders, which, according
to the present exchange, would be
about 460/. sterling.’?

In June, 1819, the church mem-
bers are stated to amount to 107;
and Mr. 8. mentions his. having
baptized 249, of whom about 180
were adults. Among various in-
stances which might be adduced of
the happy effects of his ministry
upon many of the negroes, the
abandonment of a custom may be
mentioned, which they had long
considered, not only as innocent in
itself, but as an important source
of profit to their families. The
plantation slaves, comprising nearly
seven eighths of the whole negro
population of Demarara, are usual-.
ly allowed a piece of ground, which
they are expected to cultivate, for
the purpose of furnishing themselves
with such necessaries as i other

U a7


DEM
means do not provide fer them ;-
but the only time they have for

carrying their produce to market is

the Sabbath, that being the market-

day. ‘‘ Although,” says Mr. S.,

“this practice is a shameful viola-

tion of the Lord’s day, and ex-

tremely fatiguing to the negroes,

who are often compelled to carry

their saleable articles, such as yams,

Indian corn, bananas, &c. to a dis-

tance of six, eight, or even twelve

miles ; yet the trifling profit they

derive from their labour, and the

pleasure they find: in going to the

market in town, strongly attach

them to it. With pleasure, how-

ever, I see many of our baptized ne-

groes abandon this practice—a prac-

tice so specious in its appearance to
them, and so deeply rooted by cus-
tom, that nothing but the power of
religion could cause them volunta-
rily to relinquish it. Many, very
many, new neither go to market,
nor yet cultivate their grounds, on
the Sabbata ; and yet these are the
persons that make 'the cleanest and
best appearance, and have more
of the comforts of life than most
others. The reason is obvious—
they are diligent in raising live
stock, fowls, ducks, turkeys, é&c.,
which they dispose of to per-
sons who go about the country to
purchase them. By not going to
market, they have less inducement
to spend their money in buying
useless Or pernicious articles; and
by a little economy, such as the
Bible teaches, they make their
money go further than others.’

Tn the autumn of 1820, as many
of the negroes resided at a conse
derable distance from Mr. S.’s
placé of worship, it was proposed
to build a chapel at Clondbrook,
about 15 m. from Le Resouvenir,
and that the Rev. Mr. Mercer, of
the L. M. S., then in the colony,
should instruct the negroes in that
quarter. And, with a view to in-
terest the gentlemen of Clonbrook


DEM


in. this object, a recommendatory.
certificate of the good effects of
religious instruction was :given by
Messrs. Van Costen and Hamilton,
the attorney and manager of the

psantation Le Resouvenir.
After stating that the number of
adult negroes. baptized during the
preceding year was. 320; that the
number admitted to the Lord’s
table, during the same period, was
61; that the total number of mem-
bers of the church was 203, and
that of marriages 114 ;—Mr. Smith
observes :—‘‘ We have now many
candidates, both for baptism and
the Lord’s supper: our average
congregation is 800 persons. We
have. certainly much cause to be
thankful to the great Head of the
Church, for the success that.attends
our labours. We behold, every
Sabbath, an overflowing congrega-
tion, behaving with praiseworthy
decorum ; and we see them zealous
for the spread of Christianity,
They are fast abandoning their
wicked practices for more regular
habits of life, as is evident from the
number of ma: es, few of which
(not as one in jifty) have hitherto
been violated. A great proportion
of them are furnished with Bibles,
Testaments, Dr. Watts’ First or Se.
cond Catechism, and a hymn book ;
and these being their whole library,
they usually bring them to chapel
on the Sabbath. Our congregation,
young and old, bond and free, are
catechised every Sunday ; first in-
dividually, in classes, and after.
wards collectively. This depart.
ment is managed by Mrs. Smith.”
Mr. Smith at the same time
added, that the Mission Register
contained the names of about 2000
persons, who had professedly eme
braced the Gospel at Le Resouvenir
and the adjoining plantations. His
subsequent labours, and those of
Mrs. S., who took an active part in
the instruction of the female ne
groes, were attended “_— mort
218


Custody ;
other pape
Mrs, S. lod
After a pa
weeks, du
tefused all
friends, Mi
acspel, w
charge of
‘peace of h
and for ab
ance amo
lony. Bein
anilitary ¢
of thtee 0


his depart.
3, Smith.”
same time
n Register
about 2000
pssedly elie
Resouvenir
htions.
d those of
tive part ia
female ne
th the mod
218


DEM


gratifying results. But, instead of
their s meeting with that
sanction and countenance from the
civil authorities, and other leadin


individuals, which they merited,


they had in many instances to con-
tend with increasing opposition and


pe aon This, however, was not:
uw


ersally the case. Some of the


‘white inhabitants candidly acknow-


ledged the advantages resultin
to the negroes from the labours of


the missionary ; while several re-|


spectable gentlemen, in the neigh-
bourhood of Le Resouvenir became
subscribers to the Demarara A. S. ;
and gave their testimony to the im-
proved character and good beha-
viour of the negroes who had re-
ceived the benefit of religious
instruction.

The contributions of the Le Re-
souvenir branch of the Demarara
a S. for 1822, amounted to about


00. ;
To enter inte details of those.


transactions which afterwards oc-
curred, is e present impossible:
suffice it te _ serve, as the report
for 1824 states, that Mr. Smith,
who, * at the period of the pre-
vious anniversary, was peaceably
and usefully labouring in the midst
of an extensive slave-population,
by whom he was universally re-
spected and beloved, was, on the
ist of August, 1823, taken into
custody ; his private journal and
other papers seized; and himself and
Mrs. S. lodged in the Colony-house,
After a painful imprisonment of 7
weeks, during which period he was
tefused all communication with his
friends, Mr. Smith, a minister of the
Guspel, was summoned before a
court-martial, to be tried on a
charge of conspiracy against the


‘peace of his Majesty’s government,


and for abetting the late disturb-
ance among the slaves of the co-
lony. Being thus nade amenable to
amilitary tribunal, he was deprived
of those ordinary civil rights and


‘DEM
privitegés which belonged to him
as a British subject.. An immense
mass of evidence was brought for-
ward by his accusers, which, in-
stead of establishing his guilt,
‘served, on the contrary, to show the
general excellence both of his per-
sonal and official characters. The
court, nevertheless, thought proper
to find Mr. Smith guiity of death !
and he ‘was accordingly sent as a
felon to the common gaol of the
‘colony. The sentence of the
court wus referred home for his
Majesty’s decision. His Majesty
was pleased to remit the sentence ;
but Mr. Smith was required to quit
‘Demarara, and to enter into his re-
‘cognizance not.to reside, in future
in any part of the British West
Indies. Before, however, these


determinations of his Majesty’s go-
‘vernment reached Demarara, his
happy spirit ad ascended to that
‘place where “ his judgment shall
be brought forth as light, and his


righteousness as the nuon-duy.”?

The congregation of Mr. Davies
suffered greatly from these distress-
ing events; it, however, revived in
the course of 1824. The last
report states, that the average at-
tendance at the chapel on the Sab-
bath, is about 400: but as the con-
gregation consists chiefly of ne-
groés from the adjacent country,
the fluctuations in the attendance,
arising from the seasons of the year,
are considerable, Those who at»
tend the Wednesday evening ser-
vices, amount to about 140. The
number in church-fellowship is 130,
of whom upwards of 50 have been
admitted since Mr, Davies’s return
to the colony in 1823. Most of them
had been his hearers for many years.

Beside the services above men-
tloned, there are, during the week,
two catechetical meetings, and two
meetings for religious conversation
and prayer.

In the Sabbath-school there are
300 adults and 100 ena Most

219


DEM


of the teachers, who were educated
by Mrs. Davies, are well acquainted
with the principles of the Christian
religion, and are regular attendants
at the chapel. Some of them have
been lately admitted to communion.
The children of the Sabbath-school
are also instructed on other days
during the week.

A distressing bereavement was,
however, in reserve for this sta-
tion;— Mr. Davies departed this life,
after a comparatively short illness,
on the 20th of April, 1826.’ :

The Wesleyan missionaries have
also laboured for some years in
Demerara. Their cause greatly
suffered from the events to which
allusion has been made. The exist-
ence of martial law for some time
prevented their evening meetings ;
and a hostile spirit against missions
of every kind prevented the at-
‘tendance of the slaves, and many
others, on the Sundays. The cha-
pels, especially in the country,were
for some time nearly deserted—the
societies were greatly scattered,—
and though the two missionaries
éscaped the hand of legal violence,
they were exposed to many oblo-
quies and insults. One of them,
indeed, but narrowly escaped a
base attack from certain white
people, who waylaid him on his
return by night from his duty in
the country. The clouds began,
however, afterwards to disperse.
In 1824-5, there was much cause
for gratitude ; and in the last re-
port the following statements are
made :—

“In George Town, our course
has been unobstructed, nor have
we been without considerable en-
couragements. Our congregations
throughout the year, and at each of
the different services, have been
large, attentive, and orderly ; they
consist of persons of all the varie-
ties of grade and station of which
the colony is composed ; but chiefly
of slaves and free coloured people.


DEM


Nor has the regular administration
of the word and ordinances among
this people been in vain in the
Lord. <A considerable number have
been added to the society, chiefly
young people of both sexes; and
it is a matter of great joy to several
of our old members, and to us also,
to see their children, for whose
conversion they have long and
ardently prayed, giving themselves
to the Lord. During the last year
increased exertions were made
among the slaves belonging to this
station.”?

Mahaica.—‘“* Here many are in-
quis their way to Zion, with

eir faces thitherward. Since the
repeal of martial law, and the res-
toration of religious ordinances,
the congregations have much in-
creased, and a considerable addi-
tion has been made to the society :
many more are anxious to be
added; but the want of chapel-room
obliges the missionary to refuse
them, or to put them off and only
select a few. ; ‘

‘¢ We continue to preach at Gia-
zier’s Delight, abuut 5 m. up the
coast, and there we have an in-
crease in the congregation, and also
of members to the society.

“ The little place fitted up as a
chapel at Mahatcony, continues to
be well attended ; the society has
increased, and several are on trial.
Numbers in society —9 Whitcs,
182 Free coloured, and ‘1392
Slaves. Total 1583.”

Schools.—** There are, in the
Sunday-school in George Town,
about 126 scholars. Most of them
are free children, attending the or-
dinary week-day schools, which ere
very numerous here. We direct
the children, without exception, to
remain in the chapel during our
Sunday forenoon service. The
visitor for the day also catechises
them; and this is done likewise
more largely by the preacher in
town on two mornings ve ay week,


We hav
que de
teaching
Hess ‘


phalia, Jr
with a fo
N, W. Pa
Here is
nexion Wit
opération «
a of th
lomberg,
the missioz
been recei
und contro!
been for so
but, upon t
of Baron
mittee have
be again ,
where he |
the one har
work alreac
the Jews i
and on the
afresh the ze
professing C
their Jewish
Mr. Petr
this comme
the Westphe
are the pro
mold nie
DIGAH,
Bahar, Hin
bank of the’
tensive canta
320 m. N.W
Two natiy
with the Ba
hither severd
1816, Mr. Ch
station; and
dated Jan. 3
evening to h
clare what Ga
souls, Their
interesting an
of these pers
urutpore, ¢
€ was on h
gunnath, but


DET
We have several young people
quite devoted to the work of
teaching, of whose piety we haye


leasing evidence.”?
DETMOLD, a town of West-
phalia, in the county of Lippe,
with a fortified castle, 17 m. x
N, W. Paderborn, |

Here is a Jews’ Suciety, in con-
hexion With that at Berlin, kept in
operation, chiefly Seven she exey-
tions of the venerable Baron von
Blomberg. Mr. Petri, formerly
the missionary of this society, has
been received under the patronage
and control of the LZ. S. He has
been for some time at Hamburgh ;
but, upon the pressing solicitations
of Baron Blomberg, the com-
mittee have resolved that he should
be again stationed at Detmold,
where hé may be the means, on
the one hand, of carrying on the
work already commenced amongst
the Jews in that neighbourhood,
and on the other, of awakening


afresh the zeal and the energies of
professing Christians on behalf of
their Jewish brethren.


Mr. Petri has probably before
this commenced his tour through
the Westphalian provinces, which
are the proper sphere of the Det-
mold corey? operations,

DIGAH, a populous town in
Bahar, Hindoostan, on the S.
bank of the Ganges, near the ex-
tensive cantonments at Dinapore,
320 m. N.W. Calcutta.

Two native brethren connected
with the Bapt. M. S. were sent
hither several years since. In
1816, Mr. Chamberlain visited the
station; and says in his journal
dated Jan. 3—**We assembled this
evening to hear four natives de-
clare what God had done: for their
souls, Their declaration was very
interesting and encouraging, One
of these persons is a native of
Bhurutpore, a town beyond Agra,
He was on his way so far for Ju-
gunnath, but here divine mercy


DIG


shone upon him; he was picked
up by the native brethren by the
way side, Another is a native
of Joypore, which is still further
beyond Agra. He was arrested
by divine grace on his return from

ugunnath, by meeting with the
brethren Brindabund and Kureem.
Two others were Byraggees from
those parts of the country; one
of them was a Gooroo, who bad
made many disciples. He had
been under a conviction of his
sins for some time before he heard
of Jesus and his salvation. He told
us, that he had, from the pressure
of his sins upon his conscience,
been accustomed to go out into
the fields, and call upon God to
shew him the way of salvation.
Upon which he declared, that, at
a certain time, he saw, in a vision,
a form much like a European,
which told him to go to the Euro-
peans, from whom he would learn
the true way to obtain safety.
This wrought so much upon his
mind, that he told his disciples
what he had seen and heard, and
that he had determined to act
accordingly. Many of them en-
deavoured to dissuade him from
his purpose, but he invited his dis-
ciples to a farewell feast before
he left them. A few attended to
his invitation ; and these were very
urgent, persuading him not to act
so rashly. The result was, that he,
and one who cleaved to him, left
all, and came to Dinapore in quest
of salvation to be gained from the
Europeans. Here they, at different
times and places, met with the na-
tive brethren, who proved the way-
marks to conduct them to the ful-
filment of their wishes.”? Mr. C.
afterwards sat down with 23 per-
sons, 9 of whom were natives, at
the Lord’s Supper.

After this the Rev. Mr. Rowe
was appointed to this station, and
native schools were opened. The
missionaries procured the disch .rye'

v2 221


DIG


from the army of a serious young
man of the name of Stewart, who
assisted Mr, Rowe in his school,
and made much progress in the
Hindoostanee. “ Of late,” says Mr.
R. in 1819, “‘ we have had three or
four inquirers, who examined the
Gospel message with considerable
attention ; but there is not one
among them of whom we can say,
‘ Behold, he prayeth !’ I was lately
visited by a rich Mussulman of
Patna, into whose hand I put an
‘Arabic Bible, which I had for sale
On account: of the Bible Society.

é was much pleased with the
printing, read the first chapter of
Genesis, and was so delighted that
he immediately purchased it.”’

In 1820, female education was
making progress. Mrs. Rowe had
compiled a  Spelling-book and
Grammar of the Hindoostanee
language, which were published
by the Calcutta School Book So-
ctety. The station had sustained
a loss by the death of Mr. Stewart,
and some other circumstances had
occurred to exercise the faith and
patience of the missionaries; but
still they met occasionally with
incidents, such as the. following,
adapted to cheer them with the
hope that their labour would not
be in vain in the Lord. ‘ Some-
time ago,’’ say they, ‘‘a man of the
name of Narion came from Chand-
pore, a village about 60 m. N. of
us. He was then very anxious to be
baptized, and appeared to be equally
anxious to obtain a salary, and to
be employed as an itinerant. We
thought his latter request rather
premature, and could not help
doubting the sincerity of his pro-
fession on account of it. We
therefore advised him to return to
his village, to follow his occupa-
tion—a smith,— and to do all in his
power for the good of his neigh-
bours; and promised that one of
our native brethren should visit
him in the course of a few months,


DIN.


to see how he was going on, aftey
which we would consider the pro.
priety of his baptism. A few days
ago, two of: his relatives came
hither. They say Narion works
at his trade, and reads and ex-
plains the Scriptures tu some of
his relations and neighbours daily,
From their account there are 10
of his family who have renounced
idolatry, and are of one mind re-
specting the Gospel. He is per-
secuted by. many, and especially
by those of his own caste; but he
is determined to persevere. He
wishes to be baptized in his own
village, that he may make a public
profession before those who know
him.”’

In the following year, the num.
ber of schools under the direction
of Mr. and Mrs. Rowe, was 7,
containing in all 178 boys and 46
female pupils. After continuing
his labours and _ superintending
those of native itinerants with stil]
greater success, Mr. R. was re-
moved by death in 1823. Mr. Bur-
ton was appointed, since that pe-
riod, to this station ; the schools
having been superintended in the.
interim by Mrs. Rowe. Several
members of the native church hav-
ing left the neighbourhood, the
number, according to the last ac-
counts, is reduced to4. This in-


cludes the 2 itinerants, who are.
constantly engaged among’ their’


countrymen at fairs, and other
places of public resort, besides re-
gularly preaching at six places, in-
cluding the city of Patna, every
Sabbath day. Mr. Burton, while
acquiring the language, is not
without more congenial employ-
ment; preaching at Dinapore toa
number of Europeans, chiefly sol-
diers, and  superintending the
schools, which were under,the di-
rection of Mrs. Rowe, who has
lately found it necessary to return
to this country.
DINAGEPORE, acity of Bengal,
222,


\


capital of
name, 240
taining 40,0
close of 18¢
was formec
members wl
bourhood, vy
were dismis:
church for t
the Rev. M
pastor. Sch
established ;
of reading
hands ; and 1
the mission y
In 1821, n

to have been
any other st
The number
and the whole
had renounce
latry, indeed,
among the ne
district ; many
by former Ra
to rnin ; and t
ance allotted
€ native gove
and annually
station contin
derable share
The members

communion,
whom 12 were
to tne church d
viz. 7 "men a
church is nea
into two porti
upon premises
Fernandez, and
house at Dinag
tion v the dist
ona factory, th
F y) at Sadayah |
Dinagepore.
ers on at Sad
conducting wor.
the Christian cc
In proclaiming
market places
Vicinity. Thro
several of the 1¢
been made, M


ays:
me
rks
eX-.
of
ily.
. 10
iced,
| Te~
per-.
jally
it he
He
own
ublic
now


nume
ction.
as 7,
nd 46
nuing
nding
h still
pis
. Bur-
at pe-
heols
n the.
pveral
h hav-
» the
st ac-
his in--
ho are
their.
other
Hes re=
es, in-


DIN -
capital of a district of the same:
name, 240 miles N. Calcutta, con-
taining 40,000 inhabitants. Atthe
close of 1805, anew Baptist church
was formed here. Several of the
members who resided in the neigh-
bourhood, with Mr. and Mrs. Biss,
were dismissed from the Serampore
church for this purpose, who chose
the Rev. Mr. Fernandez for their
pastor. Schools were subsequently
established ; the children were fond
of: reading the tracts put into their
hands; and the general aspect of
the mission was very encouraging.

In 1821, more persons were said
to have been baptized here than at
any other station of the society.
The number in the church was 72,
and the whole number of those who
had renounced caste was 167. Ido-
latry, indeed, was visibly declining
among the natives at large in that
district; many large temples, built
by former Rajahs, were hastening
to ruin; and the pecuniary allow-
ance allotted for their support by
the native government was reduced,
and annually decreasing. This
station continues to enjoy a consi-
derable share of the divine blessing.

The members of the church, in full
communion, amount to 85; of
whom 12 were baptized and added

to tne church during the year 1826,

viz. 7 men and 5 women. The

church is nearly. equally divided
into two portions; one residing
upon premises belonging to. Mr.

Fernandez, and close to his own

house at Dinagepore, the civil sta-

tion of the district ; and the other
ona factory, the property of Mr.

F., at Sadamahl, about 24 m. from

Dinagepore. ‘The native preach-

ers reside at Sadamahl, and besides

conducting worship regularly with
the Christian congregation, labour
in proclaiming the Gospel in the
market places and villages in the
vicinity. Through these labours,
several of the late accessions have
heen made, Mr, Fernandez visits


DIN :
‘Sadamahl as frequently as possible,
but resides at Dinagepore. Here,-
on every evening during the week, .
he conducts family worship in Ben-
galee, at which from 20 to 40 of
the Christian people generally at-.
tend. After singing, he reads the
Scriptures, gives an exposition and:
suitable address, and concludes with
prayer. On Friday evenings @
prayer meeting is held in the house
of one of the native brethren in.
rotation; and a prayer meeting is
likewise held amongst the sisters.
every Wednesday morning, in the.
same manner, in their own houses.
On the Sabbath there are two regu-
lar services—one at half-past 9
a.m., and the other at 4 p.m.:
The morning service, being attend-
ed only by Christians, is held in.
the hall of Mr. F.’s house ; but that
in the afternoon is in acommodious,
bungalow chapel, and is attended
by the servants, the masters, and
some children of four schools esta-
blished by brother F., and a few.
people from the town, as well as
the Christians. There is also, as
at all the other stations, a prayer
meeting on the evening of the first
Monday of each month, for the-
spread of the Gospel.

It is necessary to observe, that all
the expenses of this station are de-
frayed by Mr. F. himself, except
that some gentlemen contribute to
the support of his schools. He has
expressed an earnest desire that the
B. M. S. should take Sadamahl un-
der its care, and supply it with a
missionary ; and he has generously
offered to make a present of the
factory there; which perhaps might
be made, without improperly inter-
fering with the missionary’s spiri-
tual labours, to furnish all the ex-
penses of the station. The arrange-
ment is not without difficulty, but
its accomplishment is hoped for be-
fore long.


In Oct. 1826, the Rev. Mr.


Mack had an opportunity of visiting,
, 223


DIN

Dinagépore and Sadamahl (at the
latter he had the pleasure of bap-
tizing four young men), and was
greatly delighted with the humble
and affectionate deportment, and
indeed the whole appearance, of
the people. Their revered pastor
seemed to rule them all by love.

DINAPORE, ao town in Bahar,
Hindoostan, on the S. bank of the
Ganges, 11 m. from W. Patna, for
the defence of which an extensive
military cantonment has been con-
structed by the British. E. long.
85°, N. lat. 25° 38’,

In 1808, the Tamented Rev.
Henry ‘Mattyn was stationed here
ds chaplain, missionary, and trans-
lator, and laboured with uncon-
querable perseverance and zeal for
some time. He was very active in
the establishment of schools; and,
through his instrumentality, a large
house for ‘worship was erected at
the expense of government.

The missionaries at Digah have
enteréd into his labours.

DINDEGAL, or DINDIGUL,
a fortified city in Mysore, Hin-
doostan, the capital of a district to
which it givesname. E.long, 78°
5’, 'N. fat. 10° 23’.

The Soctety for Promoting
Christian Knowledge takes this
within its field of labour. Here a
chapel was erected, at the expense
of a Malabrian and Portuguese
congregation, about the year 1800,
which has been occasionally visited
by missionaries and catechists.-

DINGLE, a sea-port and bo-
rough of Ireland, in Kerry county,
where the Wesleyan Society has a
missionary.

~ DIX COVE, a British fort on

the Gold coast, W. Africa, 40 m.
S. W. Cape-coast Castle, where
The African Institution has re-
by opened a school.

DOMINICA, one of the Carib-
be islands, which lies about half
way between Guadaloupe and Mar-
tinico, and is 28 m. long, and 13


DOM


broad. The soil is thin, but it fs
well suppiied with rivulets, and the
sides of the hills bear the finest trees
inthe West Indies. It was taken by
the British fn 1761, and confirmedto
them in 1763, ‘The French took
it in 1778, but restored it in 1783;
and in 1795 they made an unsuc.
cessful attempt—for all the French-
men that landed, were either killed
or taken prisoners. The capital is
Charlotte Town.

In the month of Dec. 1788, the
Rev. Dr. Coke, accompanied by a
few missionaties, visited Dominica,
and met with a very cordial recep.
tion from some of the inhabitants,
particularly from his Excellency,
Governor Orde.

After spending a few days there,
Dr. C. determined on leaving Mr,
M‘Cornock on the island. The
missionary thus appointed, imme.’
diately commenced his labours with
great zeal. Multitudes flocked to
hear him; and his preaching was


attended with such success, that in


the space of a few months, about
150 individuals appear to have been


deeply impressed. But whilst the


work was thus prosperous, the de.
voted missionary fell a maityr to
the cause he had espoused.

Those who had been benefited
by his ministry were now left
without a pastor, and several years
elapsed before another missionary
could be sent to supply his place,
Many, however, to whom the
word of God had been blessed, re-
tained their stedfastness, and con-
tinued to shine as lights amidst the
gross darkness by which they were
surrounded.

In 1794, Mr. Cook was appoint-
ed to take charge of the mission ;


and he continued to labour with


unremitting assiduity till 1796, when
another missionary was sent to suc-
ceed him. Under the instrumen-
tality of this person, the congrega-
tions began to increase both in
number and a aia The
224


preaching |
dently prodi
many indivi
prosperity
long enjoyec
tering, howe
seemed, they
lusive : the I
preaching tc
spire them w
began to spre
and gave rise
sition; and |
Oct. 1796, h
sionary receiy
pear in the fi
Sabbath, to le
Surprised at |
call, he waite
nel who had
afterwards upo
whom the mesg


a and petitioned


exempted from
order that he :
ministerial dut
however, was
tempt; and, a
he was conside
cious characte
petnicious’ doc
slaves, he was
to quit the islan
After the 1,
years, Mr. Du
to Dominica, y
society in a ver
prejudices of +
means removed
&@ recomme

an English no
the Governor wa
mise him his pro
the people perce
assemble for relig
out molestation
were rapidly aug
fore the end of {
gregation had b
derable, Prejud
subside ; and, int
individuals, who
tested against th


| is
the
ce
1 by
dto
ook
33
suc.
ache.


illed
‘al is


, the
by a
nica,
Bcep-
tants,
lency,


there,
r Mr,
The
mme-'
s with
ced to
ig Was
hat in.
about
e been
st the
he de-
yr to


mefited
w left
ll years
sionaty


lace,
: the
ed, re-
d con-
dst the
py were


ppoint-
ission 3
ur with
B, when
to suce
rumen-


DOM


preaching of .the Gospel was evi-
dently productive of real benefit to
many individuals ; and peace and
prosperity appeared likely to be
long enjoyed by the society. Flat-
tering, however, as these prospects
seemed, they were found to be de-
lusive : the hackneyed notion, that
preaching to the slaves would in-
spire them with ideas of equality,
began to spread among the planters,
and gave rise to a determined oppo-
sition; and before the month of
Oct. 1796, had expired, the mis-
sionary received a summons to ap-
arin the field, on the’ ensuing
Sabbath, to learn the use of arms.
Surprised at such. an unexpected
call, he waited first upon the Colo-
nel who had summoned him, and
afterwards upon the President, with
whom the measure had originated ;
and petitioned that he might be
exempted from military service, in
order that he might attend to his
ministerial duties. His petition,
however, was treated with con-
tempt; and, after being told that
he was considered as a very suspi-
cious character, who disseminated
pernicious doctrines among the
slaves, he was peremptorily ordered
to quit the island. ;
After the lapse of about two
years, Mr. Dumbleton proceeded
to Dominica, where he found the
society in a very low state, and the
prejudices of the planters by no
means removed, In consequence
of a recommendatory letter from
an English nobleman, however,
the Governor was induced to pro-
mise him his protection ; and when
the people perceived that they could


assemble for religious worship with-
out molestation, their numbers
were rapidly augmented, and be-


fore the end of the year the con-
gregation had become very consi-
derable, Prejudice began now to


subside ; and, in the year 1800, many


individuals, who had formerly pro-
tested against the residence of a


DOM


missionary in the colony, were
ready to contribute towards the
erection of a new chapel,

Mr. Dumbleton was succeeded
by Mr. Boocock ; but this mission
ary hg pace debilitated’ by the
effects of an unpleasant p .
and preached but twice after ile
arrival. His death plunged. the
society and congregation into a
state of deep distress; as no preacher
was on the island to supply his
place, and many months necessarily
elapsed before any assistance could
be procured from England. :

Mr. Shepley arrived at Dominica
in February, 1803, and had the
satisfaction of re-uniting those
members of the society who had
been scattered whilst destitute of a
pastor. He hud, also, invitations to
visit sever! of the «states; «::d on
some of these he found tii: the
negroes, with the consen‘ »: their
masters, had erected wooden huts
for the celebratio:: of divine wor-
ship. Mr. Shepl::y was afterwards
joined by Mr. Ricaardson, as there
were now two principal establish-
ments formed in the island ; the one
in the town of Roseau, and the other
at Prince Ruperi’s Bay, about 30
m. distant. The marshy situation
of Prince Rupert’s Bay, however,
proved so extremely unhealthy, that
Mr. Shepley was repeatedly seized
with an intermitting fever, which
brought him almost to the grave ;
and Mr. Richardson, after an illness
of 5 days, was called to his eternal
reward.

In isecember, 1805, Mr. John
Hawkshaw arrived in Dominica;
and after spending a few days at
Roseau, he went to St. Rupert’s
Bay, the place which had already
furnished to other labourers abun-
dant employment and an untimely
grave. Although the people had
been severely tried by a violent
hurricane, yet, previously to his ar-
rival, they had contrived, through
the further generosity dn their

i)


DOM


ftiends, to’rebuild another chapel,

- @apadle of accommodating a con-
gregation of about 1000 people;
and at thé time he visited this insa-
lubrious spot, thé society consisted
of nearly 600.

After preaching at this place
wbout a month, with considerable |
su¢cess and much personal satis-
faction, he was seized with the
same malignant fever which had
@lreally proved fatal to Messrs.
M‘Cornock and Richardson, and
from which Mr. Shepley and Mr.
Dumbleton (the latter of whom had
some time since returned to Domi-
ni¢a) had escaped with extreme
difficulty. On hearing of this cir-
cumstance, Mr. Dumbleéton has-
tened from Roseau to visit his
afflicted brother, and soon witnessed
his departure from this world.

‘' From this time, nothing of parti-
‘cular interest occurs in the history
‘of this mission, till the year 1813,
Son bie John Willis, who was
‘appointed to it, narrowly esc
‘destruction from the effects ofa
‘horricane which destroyed the mis-
‘sfonary buildings,

In 1816, Mr. Boothby com-
meticed his labours at Dominica;
‘where he found things in a very
discouraging state, there being
neither a chapel nor a residence for
‘a minister. Premises, however,
‘were, at length, obtained tn Roseau,
for these purposes} and the exer-
tions of the misstonary began to be
evidentiy crowned with success,
when, by a mysterious providence,
his work was cut short, and he was
summoned to enter into his rest.

In.1822, the Earl of Huntingdon
arrived at Dominica, to assume the
okt heen of that island; and,

aving assured the missionaries of
his countenance and protection, in
tion stove of a new chapel in the
town of Roseau ; the opening service
of which, accompanied by several


DOM


persons of distinction, he afterwards
attended.

In 1824, Mr. Felvus appears to
have been zeslously engaged in
communicating religious instruc.
tion to the negroes in a district of
the island called S¢, Joseph’s ; and
in alluding to the Roman Catholics,
who are there very numerous, he
observes, ‘‘ Their superstitions are
suchas many persons would scarcely
credit. On Good ae a
a tstir among them, in driv
Judas and the Devil out of ms
‘church; and for this purpose, all
‘the old barrels, drums, and staves,
they could procure, were brought
into use, and the noise and tumult
were intolerable. Theday follow.
ing, at the sound of a bell, all the
good Catholics ran into the sea, to
wash away their sins.”’

“ Another form of superstition


practised among them, is, to takea 4


bottle of water, on Good Friday, to
the priest; and when he has conse.
crated it, they take it home, ase
charm against evil spirits and
thieves, end as a pledge of good
fortune.”

*¢ When an African is baptized by
a priest, and admitted into the
Romish church, shoul’ he be after.
wards robbed of his property, in-
stead of going toan Obeah man, to
get him to perform certain magical
tricks, in order to put the thief to
excruciating pain, until he die or
restore the stolen goods ; he brings
a number of candles to burn in the
church, and is told that as long a
those candles continue buming,
the depredator will be in torment.”

The following account exhibits
bn last reported state of the mis
sion :—

Roseau,—“ Our members here
have long been remarkable for
steadiness; evincing to all the sin
cerity of their faith, by a consist.
ency of character becoming the
Christian name. The ny year

2


(1826) h
prosperity
continued
progressix
ways dist,
this place,
“ Preju
to the forc
of many
formerly b
of Rome.’
Saint Jo
had to ca,
culties,
been regar
our minds
opposition ;
ventageous
ciety has |
fluence of x
tending am
Valley. Th
| belong to us
highest app:
society; but
sent themsel


their relief,
wards of 10
prospect of i
SOY Cwm
meets us,
once in two
ing the little
them, contin
we have the
hear with att
ral testimony
by those who
assures us th
the grace of


il he die or
3 he brings
burn in the
as long &

e burning,
torment.”
hnt exhibits
of the mis-


mbers here
arkable for
b alll the sin-
y a consist.
coming the
b past year
226


DOM


(1826) has been one of general
prosperity. The work of God has
continued to advance in the same
progressive manner which has al-
ways distinguished our society in
this place.??

“ Prejudice has likewise yielded
to the force of truth in the minds
of many respectable individuals
formerly belonging to the church
of Rome.’?

Saint Joseph.— Here we have
had to contend with serious diffi-
culties, Our proceedings have
been regarded with jealousy, and
our minds wounded by a spirit of
opposition ; yet, under every disad-
ventageeus circumstance, our so-
ciety has prospered, and the in-
fluence of religion is evidently ex-
tending among the slaves in Layon-
Valley. The conduct of those who
belong to us is such as merits the
highest approbation.’’

Calthdut.—“‘ Here we have no
society; but pleasing prospects pre-
sent themselves.”?

Prince Rupert’s. —‘‘ Here. we
have suffered considerably from the
want of a chapel. The situa-
tion of the people calls loudly for
Christian sympathy. Visited only
once a month by a preacher—des-
titute of a chapel—poor in their
circumstances, and unable to build
one,— they can only wait till Chris-
tian liberality comes forwerd to
their relief. Here we have up-
wards of 100 members, with the
prospect of increasing usefulness,”
| Lasoye.—‘‘ Here the same want
meets us. This society is visited
once in two months ; and, consider-
ing the little influence we have over
them, continues to prosper. Here
we have the largest congregation
in the whole island: the people
hear with attention, and the gene-
ral testimony borne in tneir favour
by those who are competent judges,
tssures us they have not received
the grace of Godin vain, Number


DOO


in society—Whites 12, Free colours,
ed 177, Slaves 274; total 463,”

Schools.—‘‘ The state of the Doe,
minéca Sunday-school is such as,
calls for our gratitude. In number,
we have increased something } in.
regular attendance much. We,
have also been favoured with a
number of teachers, who appear to
take great interest in the s:hool.,
Those children who can mike it.
convenient to attend, ars also
taught three mornings in the week,
and catechised by the missionary.
The blessed effects of religious in-.
struction have been seen here, as,
well as in other places. We have.
many young persons, of both sexes,
who were brought up in the school,
who are now steady members in the
society, and adorn their profession
by a useful ‘ife. Others are teach-
ers in the school; and several of.
the larger girls are met in class,
preparatory to their being admitted
into the society. Number in the
school—boys 69, girls 78, teachers
16; total 163.”?

Mr. Dawes, agent of the C. M.
S., opened a school at Roseau in,
1823, and procured the organiza-
tion of an auxiliary society, which,
is cordially patronized by the most
distinguished and respectable per-
sons on the island.

DONEGAL, a town of lreland,
where the WV. S. has a missionary.

DOORGAPORE, a town in,
Bengal, Hindoostan, 4 miles from
Calcutta, in the midst of a nume-
rous heathen population,

In 1819, a station, was formed
here by the Bapt, M. S.; where a
neat place of worship now stands
by the side of the public road, in a.
very favourable situation for col-
lecting a congregation. It has been
visited. by several labourers, In
1826, it was stated that a number
of poor natives of the lowest class,
whose conduct had always been so.
riotous and disorderly as omeer to


DRE


emnoy the missionaries, had come
forward of their own accord, to re-
quest that a service might be held
once a week for their accommo-
dation; and even offered, out of
their own pfoperty, to defray the
expense of lighting the chapel on
the evenings when they assemble.

* DRESDEN, a city in Germany,
on the Elbe. Population, in 1811,
45,000, many of whom are Jews.
It contains 11 Lutheran churches,
2 Catholic, and 1 Calvinist.

- The L.J/. S, stationed Mr. J. P.
Goldberg, a converted Jew, in this
city, in 1822, to instruct his bre-
thren according to the flesh. He
has opened a school for Jewish
children, and his labours have been
much blessed. An institution has
been formed, under the patronage
of many distinguished men, for
promoting true biblical knowledge
among the Jews; and a Ladies’
Association also, under equally dis-
tinguished patronage. The greater
partof the Jews begin to inquire into
the truth of Christianity; and the
New Testament, and other works,
are read with avidity by multitudes.

DUM-DUM, a military station,
about 7m. N. E. of Calcutta, oc-
cupied by the E. I. Company’s az-
tillery.

The Serampore missionaries
have long preached the Gospel to
the European solciers here, as
circumstances .woula allow; and
have employed a native brother
to preach it in Hindoostanee and
Bengalee to their wives, who, in
general, are either natives, or the
daughters of European soldiers and
native mothers; and therefore
speak the native languages. From
these labours a church has been
raised, of avery pleasing character.
Its members are liable to be scat-
tered over all parts of the country ;
and though this subjects their re-
per principles to rather severe
trial, yet they frequently are made


DUS


the means of doing good and of
spreading: the knowledge of sulva-


tion where it was unknown or un.
attended to before,: The number
of members in communion at pre.
sent cannot be less than 20; these
are all females, with the exception
of 4 soldiers, and the native preach.
er, whose ministry has been greatly
blessed; and there is now a
work going on amongst the Euro-
peans. During the year 1826, nine
women were baptized, and ‘added
to the church: there was, also, one
soldier ; but he has fallen away,

Soobhroo devotes much of his
time to the instruction of his flock,
and the remainder to the superin-
tendence of two native schools, and
the preaching of the Gospel both in
them and in the bazaars and vil-
lages around the station.

DUSSELTHAL, an asylum for
Jews, near Dusseldorf, at the junc.
tion of the Rhine and Dussel rivers,
in the Prussian dominions. E. long.
6°. 40’, N. lat. 51°, 14‘,

In 1819, Count Von Der Recke
erected an institution here for the
reception of orphans and the chil.
dren of criminals; and in 18323,
enlarged his original plan, so as to

i embrace such Jews as may desire a
knowledge of the Christian religion,
and wish to be colonized, Accord.
ing to their dispositions and talents,
instruction is given in agriculture,
the mechanic arta, or manufactures,
This is intended as a prepurator
school for the American Jewi
colony ; and there is much reason
to hope that there will soon be
gathered, by this means, a peo
of the Lord from among the
scendants of Abraham. In April,
1823, the Count states, ‘We are
already pnt numerous here:
about 80 Christian children, among
whom the grace of God is richly
displayed, live happily and content
ed in our asylum, With the Jews
of the institution, we are someting

238


like 12
of the
Early i
learnin


ap
Jews f
receiver
sake of
beyond
tion.
The ¢
sum of §
of 40 ac


pressions
change th
a wander
useful ind
have still
ance, and
laws of s:
tion of pe
an access
improvem
CXoi8, in
are bro Ls f
tian charit


asylum for
t the junc-
ussel rivers,
ns. E. long.


Der Recke
ere for the
hd the chil-
d in 1822,
an, so as to
ay desire a
an religion,
l. Accor:
and talents,
iculture,
Anufactures.


DUS


like 120 persons, to whom the hand
of the Lord gives daily bread.”
Early in 1824, 9 young Jews were
learning different trades, and press-
ing e@pplications were made by
Jews from different parts to be
received into the institution for the
sake of Christian instruction, . far
beyond the means of accommoda-


tion.

The Count has purchased, for the
sum of 20,000 rix-dollars, an estate
of 40 acres, with buildings used as
a monastery, the whole encom-

by a wall; and provided for
the permanency of the institution
in case of his decease,

The Rev. Mr. Treschow, who vi-
sited it in 1826, was gratified by
its improved state. He says, ‘‘ The
workshops are in full activity, and
] was delighted, not only. to see
the proselytes cheerfully employed,
put also tO hear from their lips ex-
pressions of gratitude for the happy
change they have experienced, from
a wandering life regular and
useful industry ; but the workshops
have still a very humble appear-
ance, and all is regulated by the
laws of strict necessity, An addi-
tion of pecuniary means would be
an access of neatness, and many
improvements. An institution here
exiois, in which 24 adult Israelites
are brought up, by the aid of Chris-
tien charity, in habits of regularity,
cleanliness, and industry; submit-
ting to-rules and privations, from
which, a few years back, they
would have shrunk with horror;
and, under rebukes, suffer them-
selves to be instructed, reprimand.


« On Whitsunday, in last year, a
most interesting occurrence took
place ;—8 converts were received
into the Christian church, by bap-
tism, in a very solemn manner,’’

Mr, Treschow says in a subse-


DUS


quent letter,—‘‘I rejoice to say that
the institution still goes on well; se-
veral of the & proselytes, who were
baptized on Whitsunday, came ori-
ginally to Dusselthal, with no other
intention than that of working for
a short time as journeymen, and
were far from intending to be-
come Christians, A few of these
still remain in the institution, others
of them have left it to exercise
their trade in other piaces, and all
of them have continued to do ho-
nour to their profession by their
Christian conduct.”

‘‘A young Jew had been admitted
into the institution, where he fre-
quently annoyed the ussembled con-
gregation by his irreverent beha-
viour; but on the last Sunday,
when the Rev, Mr. Schmidt, in
his sermon, was led to speak of
persons whose glory is in their
shame, who boast even of the
crimes they have committed, in
cheating or defrauding their neigh-
bours, this individual was visibly
affected, turned pale, and fell into
fits. He was carried to his bed-
room. After the service was over,
he was visited by the minister; on
seeing whom, he exclaimed, ‘I
am lost—lost without remedy !’
In the course of the conversation
which ensued, he confessed his
having cheated a widow of 1000
dollars; said that his whole life
had been a series of crimes; add-
ing, that even here he had con-
tinued in his wicked course, by
assuming @ false name, after hav-
ing robbed a sailor of his passport.
The minister did not palliate the
guilt of the penitent, but, as he
appeared to be of a contrite heart,
set forth the atoning power of the
blood and the death of theRedeemer,
and encouraged him to seek par-
don through the Lamb of bod
which taketh away the sin of the
world, This at length melted the
guilty conscience of the sinner,
and he felt it his ad go to

x Ph]


EIM

the place where the widow re-.
sides; to make an open confes-
sion vf his crime, and to suffer
for it what the law requires. He
was seiting out for this purpose,
when I left Dusselthal. He has
a letter from the superintendent
of the ‘institution to the widow,
and alse to the’ authorities of the
place, explaining the reason of his
comiiz ; end without presuming to
intericre with public justice, the
supex:ntendent has, in consequence
of his conscientious motives in thus
giving himself up to the rigour of
the law, recommended him to a
favourable consideration. If the
widow does not prosecute him, he
is determined to pay his debt by
working for her. May the-Lord
guide and strengthen him to per-
severe |”?

This account may be properly
closed by a letter received from
Count von der Recke, dated Jan. 4,
1827. ‘Your kind letter of the
17th Nov. last, containing the in-
formation that an unknown friend
has presented my institution with
£50, arrived just at a time when
an urgent payment was pressed
upon me; and thus I have expe-
rienced once more how the Lord
truly and mercifully provides for
those who serve him, putting their
dependance entirely upon him.

**T rejoice in having to give you
nothing but favourable accounts
respecting my proselyte institution.
The advantages of the method I
have adopted towards them, are
more and more apparent every
day.”?

E.


EIMEO, one of the islands of
the Pacific Oceun, more com-
monly called by the natives Morea.
It was formerly independent; but
having been subjected by the late
King, it afforded a seasonable re-
fuge to his son, when expelled
from his proper dominions, It is


EIM


said t. be 10 m. or more in
length from N. to S.; and about
half as much in breadth. It has
a very narrow border of low land
aiong its coast, from which the’
hills rise in steep acclivities, ex-
cept on the N., where a capacicus
harbour, called Talu, is sheltered
from the prevailing winds, and the
land has a gradual ascent to the
interior. This harbour is situ-
ated in 17° 30’ S, and 150° W., of
Matavdi. In form Eimeo varies
greatly from Tahiti, having spa-
cious valleys, and several land.
locked harbours on its coast. The
lower hills are fertile; but the
air is thought less salubrious than
that of the greater island.

Several missionaries of the L. S,
having been driven from Tahiti,
commenced an establishment on
this island, at Papetoai, in 1811],

Pomarre showed them much
kindness ; and, in the summer of
the following year, he gladdened
their hearts by declaring his en-
tire conviction of the truth of the
Gospel, his determination to wor-
ship Jehovah as the only living
and true God, ant his desire to
make a public profession of his
faith: by baptism; but notwith-
standing many pleasing appear-
ances, they deemed it prudent to
defer this ordinance until he should
be more fully instructed in the
truths of revelation.

During the years 1813 and 1814
an sbundant blessing was poured
out on this station, so that the
missionaries could report that no
less than 60 of the natives had
renounced their idols, and desired
to be considered as the worship-
pers of the Most High.

At the commencement of the
year 1815, the congregation was
considerably increased by, n in-
flux of strangers from other islanu’,
whose earnest desire to receive re-
ligious instruction prompted them
from time to time ad this

3


straction, |


place.
neral, ¢
the nu
soqneste
ten dow
of the t
upwards
schools,
were ac
those wl
to be in
Jehovah
and 3 v
about th
Papetoai
brethren
Christian
and publi
the flam
speedily f
natives ;
former ob
ship cast
morais an
and even
were com
common !
classes, an
discrimina
of ancient ¢
The bre
a that
@ people
drawn .
some of th
fain the tr
er erriv
prayer-mee
blished in t
out the }
missionarie
with 2 of
hamed Oit
enjoyed th
struction lo
according
among the
dened sinn
having fel
guilt, in co
ressions w
ing, appli


ore in

1 about

It has

yw land

ich the /
ies, ex-

pacicus
heltered
and the
t to the
is situ-
o W. of
Oo varies
ing spa-
al land-
st. The
but the
ious than


the L. S.
n Tahiti,
ment on
n 181).
ym much
ummer of
gladdened
g his en-
th of the
n to wor-
nly living
desire to
ion of his
notwith-
ge appeat-
prudent to
1 he should
ed in the


8 and 1814
was poured
h that the
rt that no
atives had
and desired
e worship-


ent of the
gation was
by an in-
her islanu’,
receive re-
ted them
visit this
230


EIM


place. The congregation, in ge-
neral, consisted .of about 300, and
the number of persons ‘who had
zequested their names to be writ-
ten dowu as professed worshippers
of the true God, was increased to
upwards of 200; the pupils in the
schools, of whom the major part
were adults, were about 260. Of
those who had desired their names
to be inscribed as worshippers of
Jehovah, 4 individuals, (1 man
and 3 women,) died very happy
about this time. The priest of
Papetoai (the district in which the
brethren resided) also embraced
Christianity, renounced idolatry,
and publicly committed his god to
the flames. His example was
speedily followed by many of the
natives; and not only were the
former objects of superstitious wor-
ship cast into the fire, but the
morais and altars were destroyed ;
and even the wood of whigh they
were composed was used to dress
common food, of which different
classes, and both sexes, partook in-
discriminately, in direct violation
of ancient customs and prohibitions.

The brethren at Eimeo having
heard that the attention of some of
the people in Tahiti had been
drawn to the subject of religion,
some of them went over to ascer-
‘ain the truth of this report. Upon
‘ei errival, they found that a
prayer-meeting had been esta-
blished in the district of Pare, with-
out the knowledge of any of the
missionaries, It originated entirely
with 2 of their former servants,
named Oitu and Tuaheine,who had
enjoyed the means of religious in-
struction long before, but remained,
according to their own language,
among the “ greatest and mos: bar-
dened sinners in the place.” Oiw,
having felt strong convictions of
guilt, in consequence of some ex-
ressions which had fallen from the
ing, applied to Tuaheine for in-
straction, knowing that he had Jong


‘EIM


lived with the missionaries. This
was a means of deepening his.con-
victions. Both these inen now agreed
toseparate from their heathen com-
panions, to converse and pray toge-
ther. ‘Thisconduct speedily brought
upon them the scoffs and derision
of their idolatrous acquaintance ;
nevertheless, several of the young
people joinedthem. These formed
the prayer-meeting above-mention-
ed; and they had. frequently as-
sembled, amidst much contempt,
prior to the visit of the missionaries.
Two of the brethren, after having
made a tour of the larger peninsula
of Tahiti, for the purpose of
preaching to the people, returned to
Eimeo, and brought over with them
Oitu and Tuaheine, and their com-
panions, that they might be more
thoroughly instructed in the know-
ledge of Christianity.

In this island the Gospel had now
been embraced by abou* 1200 per-
sons; and in every district a place
had been built for Christian wor-
ship, in which the people held
prayer-meetings three times every
Sabbath day, and once every Wed-
nesday. Almost every house had
family worship daily, and most of
the people retired for private devo-
tion twice and sometimes three
timesaday. .

On the 13th of May, 1818,
general meeting was convened ‘in
imitation of the meetings held in
London, when about 2000 of the
natives assembled, and agreed to
form an Tahitian A. M. S., to aid
the parent society in England in
sending the Gospel to other nations.
Mr. Nott preached on the occasion
to this large auditory, who were
very attentive ; after which the King
delivered a sensible and interest-
ing address of considerable length,
on the propriety of forming the
proposed society. With a view toex-
cite the people to emulation in this
good work, he adverted’to the for-
mation of similar ata among

23


EIM


the .Hoitentots: in.. Africa, and to
their contributions of sheep or other
property, in places where they had
no money. He also reminded them
of the labour which they had pers,
formed, andthe pains they .had
taken jor their. false » and
showed how. trifling the offerings
they were called upon. to make’ to
the true: God. were, in comparison
with those they formerly offered to
their idols; observing fuvther, that
even their lives were sacrificed io
the God, that was indecd no God,
being nothing but a piece of wood
or cocoa-nut. husk! He then re-
commended that they showd collect


BEIM


in the several districts of the island
and the people dispersed appa.
rently highly gratified.

- In 1823, a new chapel, of. coral
rock, was commenced. at the sta.
tion in this istend,. now called Roe
by?s Piace, Biest Tewn. A cotton
manufactory was also erected. The
partic darsof the contr: butions dure
ing the year were— i0,* 4 bamboos
of obt-belag 1578 mers than. the
preceding year——19% balls .of arrow
root, 105 baskets of cotton wool,
and.}7 pigs. The Deputation paid
theiy official visit to this island: in
1824, and on th's oucasion thus
wrote :—


a little propetty for the spread of } ‘“‘ The church tiat was organized
the Gospel:in other islands, where | here in 18::. has greatly increased,
it. was not yet .enjoyed. He. ob- | and now numbers among its come
served, that although they. had no | municunts no fewer than 210, who
noney, they might give pigs, arrow | appear to be truly pious and con.
rool, cocoa-nut oil, and cotton, to | sistent professors of the Gospel,
buy money with. ‘* Yet,’? said he, | living in great peace and harmony
“ let it not be by compulsion, but | with each other, while their spirit
voluntary. He thatdesires the Word | and deportment adorn the doctrine
of God to grow where it has been | of God their Saviour. Often. have
planted, and to be taken to countries | we surrounded the table of the Lord
miserable us ours was before it | with this worthy: flock, with inex.
~ came here, will contribute freely and | pressible delight, while we have
_ liberally towards promoting its ex- | assisted in the administration of the
tension. He.who is insensible to | Holy Supper. Difference of clime
its call, or ignorant of its benefits, | and of colour from ourselves seemed
will not exert himself with this | but to endear these our - Christian
view. So let it be. Let him not | brethren and sisters the more to our
be called an illiberal man, neither | hearts. So long as life lasts, we
let the chiefs, hissuperiors, be an shall remember these sacred sea.
with him on: that account.”? Such | sons, both with this and all theother
was the substance of the King’s | churches in these islands, with the
speech. When he drew to the | noblest feelings of Christian affec
close of it, he proposed that all per- | tion; while sorrow fills our hearts
sons present, who approved of the | that we shall break bread and drink
plan, and were willing to unite in | wine with the: + 110 more,till wesball
promoting it, should hold up their | drinkitnewin our Father’s kingdom,
right hands. A most interesting | While we have reason to think well
sight ensued, when -in an instant | of the piety of the members of the
every hand in the assembly was | church, a general air of seriousnes
raised, to signify their readiness to | was ever apparent in the whole con-


unite in the glorious work of spread-
ing the Gospel of . Jesus Chrisi
among the unenlightened heathen.
,"omarre then read the rules of the
proposed society ; persons were ap-
pointed as treasurers and secretaries


—— who crowd the piace on J
)


rd’s days, and on other occasions;
and the greatest. decency of dress is


seen throughout among both sexes, &


meny of whom dress in European
clothing.” 232


In fl
ings a1
cotton
On the
tage, i
the firs
collecte
tian As
the ope:
menced
of warp
the 30th
The nati
as to th
cloth fro:
tified by
stration |
period, t
schools h;
as to nun
diligent a
ers are d
ranged 1
Both. the
Mr. Henr
Armitage’
nexion w
having re
heshould


hopes, a sin
voluntaril y
acknowled


island
| appa


of. coral
the sta-
led Ros
A. cotton
ted. ‘The
‘ions dure
bamboos
than..the
.of arrow
ton wool,
ation paid
island: in
sion thus


organized
increased,
zy its come
1210, who
s and con-
he Gospel,
id harmony
their spirit
the doctrine
Often. have
of the Lord
, with inex-
e. we have
ation of the
nce of clime
elves seemed


“{n European


‘BEIM


In the following year, the build-
ings and various apparatus of the
cotton factory were completed.
On the Ist of March, Mr. Armi-
tage, its superintendent, received
the first supply of native cotton,
collected by members of the Tahi-
tian As S. On the 5th of July,
the operation of carding was com-
menced ; on the 26th of Sept. that
of warping the first web; and on
the 30th, the process of weaving.
The natives, who were incredulous
as to the possibility of producing
cloth from cotton, were highly gra-
tified by receiving ocular demon-
stration of the fact. Since that
period, the adult and children’s
schools have considerably increased
as to number, and improved as to
diligent application. All che leern-
ers are divided into classes, and
ranged under proper teachers.
Both the schools are now under
Mr. Henry’s superintendence ; Mr.
Armitage’s engagements, in con-
nexion with the cotton factory,
having rendered it necessary that
heshould relinquish the boys’ school.
Mrs. Henry has taken the girls’
school at Bunnell’sPlace, under her
immediate charge.

The number baptized at this sta-
tion is 10 adults and 38 children,
Members added to the church, 31,
The whole number in communion,
in May, 1825, was 270: in 1825-6,
five of the members removed by
death; two of them were very
happy, and the others with a good
hope. During the same period, 3
of the members were excluded ; of
whom 1, on repentance, has been
restored. A Raiatean, who, about
two years ago, had acquired undue
influence over the minds of some of
the judges in Eimeo, and had begun
to use it to the prejudice of the mis-
sionaries, has become, Mr. Henry
hopes, a sincere convert. He came
voluntarily to the missionary, and
acknowledged his criminal conduct,
professed repentance, has been


EIM


since baptized, and, us far as ap-
pears, behaves consistently.’ A Be-
nevolent Society, superintended by
Mrs. Henry, has been instituted
among the native females, with
whom she keepsup her conversation«
meetingsas formerly. —A good mis-
sion-house, 60 feet by 31, has been
built by the natives for Mr. Henry,
who receives, from time to time,
many proofs of their attachment and


:affection. The people here, urged


by the privations and sufferings they
have endured from the scarcity of
the preceding season, have fenced a
considerable extent of ground, and
brought it into‘ cultivation.—The
cotton factory is still under the di-
rection of Mr. Armitage. It has
met with many difficulties, arising
from local circumstances; but,
under more favourable auspices,
no doubt as to its success is enter-
tained. A quantity of strong
calico, preferred by the natives to
that brought by vessels touching at
the islands. has been manufactured.

There is another station of the
L. M. S. on this island, at Bogue’s
Harbour, called Grin ‘own,
where the Rev. Mr. Orsmond la-
bours,

In 1825-6, the buildings of the
South Sea Academy were com-
pleted: 17 pupils were received ;
all, with the exception of the young
king Pomarre, then about 7 years of
age, children of the missionaries,
for whose benefit the institution
was founded. The natives also
erected a chapel, which was opened
on the 8th of May, 1825. Two
native schools, one for adults and
another for children, were likewise
formed, and placed under the care
of native teachers.—In 1826, the
number of youths in the academy,
including the young king Pomarre
(who departed this life on the 1)th
of January, 1827, after afew days’
illness), was 27. ‘The result of an
examination was satisfactory.

Mr. and Mrs. Blossom, with the
x 2 , 233


ELL


full‘concurrence ofthe missionaries,
removed: from. Blest Town’ to
Bogue’s: Harbour, to take the
general superintendence of the ex-
ternal affuirs-of the academy } by

“this arrangement’ Mr. and’ Mrs.
Orsmond have been enabled to de-
vote much more of their. time and
attention to the work of tuition.
Notwithstanding some instances of
exclusion during the past year, the
church under Mr. Orsmond’s care
is in a flourishing state, He
preaches 3 or 4:times during the
week, and the congregation at-
tends with commendable regularity.

Mr. O. continues, as far as his
duties itt connexion with the aca-
demy will allow, to engage, beside
his public ministry at the station;
in general missionary services. He
has prepared a Catechism and a
small book of Exercises, in Tahi-
tian } also a dictionary of that lan-
guage, which is nearly finished,
He has also translated several por-
tions of the Bible into Tahitian.
The people of the station are laud-
ably engaged in building portly
houses, and making gardens for
themselves; in which labours they
would have made greater progress,
had they not latterly employed a
portion of their time in the erec-
tion of the chapel at Blest Town,
of which they have performed a
moiety of the stone work,

’ . The marriages, at the two mls-
sionaty stations in Eimeo, during
1825-6, were 10.

ELIM, first called Fogelstrings-
kraal, a settlement of the United
Brethren on New Year’s River,
near Cape Aiguallas, 10 or 12
hours’ ride 8, E. from Gnadenthal,
8} E. from Hemel en Aarde,
which last is 7 hours S.W. from
Gnadenthal; the 3 settlements
thus forming the points of a tri-
angle, each being a day’s journey,
on horseback, from the other. The
first adult heathen was baptized
here on Oct. 9, 1825, About 200


ELL


strangers celebrated the following
new year’s festival. In the begin«


‘ning of Feb. 1826, the settlement


had 70 inhabitants, and the gar.
dens were in a flovrishing state:
the third crop of beans, within 8


months, was in forwardness on the


sume’ piece of ground. Brother
Luttring had greatly improved their
mill, which was resorted to from
all quarters. He also attends to


e <aily school for the children of,


the settlement, and to a Sunday.
school for those of slaves, Hot-
tentots, and farmets. Of the state
of this mission he gives the follow-
ing account: ‘Our neighbours
are friendly and well disposed to-
wards us; externally we have no
cause for complaint.. As to the
spititaul course of our small con-
gregation, we may with truth as-
sert, that the blessing of God our
Saviour attends our labours ; though
it cannot be denied, that Satan
also endeavours to set his snares in
the way, when souls are awakened
by the Gospel, fearing to ‘lose his


aa
LLIOTT, a station of the
American Board of Commissioners
for Foreign Missions, among the
Choctaws, within the chartered
limits of Mississippi, about 100 m,
from the northern line, and near
the iniddle of the state from E. to
W. It is near the Yalo Busha
Creek, about 40 m. above fts junc-
tion with the Yazoo; 400 m. W.
S. W. Brainerd, and 145 N, E.
Walnut Hills. W. long. 89° 50’, N.
lat. 33° 30’. By means of the Yalo
Busha, Yazoo, and Mississippi, it
has a communication with New
Otthe Rev. C

The Rev. s Kingsbury and
Mr. L. 8. Williams commenced
this station in an entire wilderness,
in 1818; they were soon joined by
others. In April, 1819, a school
was opened, which consisted of


about 60 pupils at the end of the |


veut ; all boarded in the family,
234


In ¥89:
it was
school i
terian |
general;
progress
made to
ment of
average
dollars fe
In 182
of 70 ac
bllding
uildin

lars, a
March 2
Mr. B:
time in r
ments of
This stati
honour o:
who, in 4
England,
salvation «
lated the


languages,
EMM!
Long Pr¢
easterly fr
which se
Alabama,
white set
E. side é
among the
populous ¢
Messrs,
ter, A. Dy
son, mech
Board of
Missions
1822, Afte
ings for th
was opene
vourable p
ENGLI
Bengal, ne
N, of Cal Uy
About ]
convert of
moved fro
and labour
this and ¢
aed villag


liowtng
» begin-
tlement
he gar.
a at
within 8
is on the
Brother
ved yey
to from
ttends to
jildren of ,
junday-
2s, Hot-
the state
e follow-
pighbours
posed to-
) have no
s to the
mall con-
truth as-
f God our
rs; though
hat Satan
s snares in
awakened
to ‘lose. his


in of the
hmissioners
among the
chartered
put 100 m.
and near
from E. to
alo Busha
e its junc-
400 m. W.
145 N. E.
89° 50’, N.
of the Yalo
ississippi, it
with New


gsbury and
commenced
wilderness,
on joined by
9, a school
onsisted of


the family.
234


end of the @


_ EMM
fn 1829’ the number was 803 but
it was diminished in 1823. ‘The
school is conducted on the Liancas-
terian plan, and the pupils have
generaliy made very satisfactory
progress. The annual allowance
made to this school by the govern-
ment of the United States, may
average 1000 dollars; beside 2000
dollars for the erection of buildings.

In 1822, the property, consisting
of 70 acres of improved land, well
stocked, and having convenient
buildings, amounted to 15,490 dol-
lars; A church was organized,
March 28th, 1819.

Mr. Byington has devoted much
time in réduicing to four the ele-
ments of the Choctaw language.
This station was named Hilio¢t, in
honour of the Rev. John Elliott,
who, in the first settlement of New
England, laboured’ much for the
salvation of the natives, and trans-
lated the Bible into one of their
languages.

MMAUS, sometimes called
Long Prairies, about 140 m. S.
easterly from Mayhew,near the line
which separates Mississippi from
Alabama, and about 2 m. from the
white settlements at the S., on th:
E. side of .suckatunnee Creek,
among the Choctaws, in the most
populous clan in the S. E. district.

Messrs, M. Jewell, schoolmus-
ter, A. Dyer, farmer, and A. Gl:a-
son, mechanic, from the American
Board of Commissioners for Foreign
Missions, were stationed here in
1822, Aftererecting suitable build-
ings for the establishment, a school
was opened, July, 1828, with fa-
vourable prospects.

ENGLISH BAZAR, a town in
Bengal, near Malda, about 170 m.
N. of Calcutta. ae ce

About 1815, Kristnoo, a native
convert of the Bapt. Mission, re-
moved from Goamalty to this place,
and laboured wilh some success in
this and the neighbouring towns
ard villages.


ENO


ENNIS, a borough : ! Ireland;
capital of Clare’ county, in which
the W. S. has a missionary.’ © ~~

ENON, ‘a station of the United
Brethren, upwards of 500 m. E, of
Cape Town, in the district of
Vitenhagen, Cape Colony,’ 8.
Africa, near Algoa Bay. The


| brethren commenced their efforts,


in 1818, for the benefit of the Hot-
tentots, with the best, prospects of
success; the ‘government having


_ assisted them in procuring land for


& settlements ‘but early in 1819,
the predatory Caffres came upon it,
and drove off 235 head of cattle.
Not content with this, they: bar-
barously murdered 9 of the Chris-
tian Hottentots, and the station
was broken up. Most of the stock
was, however, retaken, and’ mis-
sionary labour was resumed. Of
the rapid and interesting improve-
ments subsequently made, an accu-
rate idea may be formed from the
following remarks of the Rev. H.
P, Hallbeck, contained in a letter
dated Nov. 30, 1821 :— ;,
“ What I felt at the first sight of
this village of the Lord, no lan-
guage is able to describe: ‘7 had,
indeed, been informed of the
changes that had taken place here
since I ‘first witnessed its begin-
nings; but even the lively descrip-
tions given in brother Schmidt’s
letters, presented things much more
fainity than I now saw them with
my awn eyes. The wilderness and
the impenetrable thicket of 1819
were still present to my imagina-
tion. Judge, therefore, of” my
surprise, when I saw that wilder.
ness transformed into fruitful gar-
dens; that thicket extirpated, and
a fine vineyard planted in its place ;_.
the lurking places .of tigers de-
stroyed, and in their stead the com-
fortable habitations of men erected, '
Imagine my heartfelt pleasure,
when on the spot where two years
ago we knelt down in the fresh
track of an elephant, and offered
235


ENO.


up our first prayer, I now found a
beautiful orange tree, adorned at
once with ripe fruit and fragrant
blossoms; and when, shortly after
my arrival, I was invited to tea
under the huge yellow tree, in the
shade of which, but lately, there
were no assemblies but those of
wild buffaloes, elephants, and other
dreaded inhabitants of the desert.
You used to say, that ev'ry tree
and shrub planted at GnajJenthal
was an ornament, not only to the
place, but to the Gospel; and you
may say, with equal truth, that
every tree and thorn-bush which is
extirpated here, to make room for
more useful plants, is not so much
a proof of the strength of the hu-
man arm, as of the efficacy of God’s
holy word ; for by its influence the
work was accomplished. It is cer-
teinly more than I had expected, to
find here a piece of ground nearly
3 times as large as the great garien
atGnadenthal, cleared, levelled, and
laid out as a garden and vineyard
for the missionaries, besides about


40 gardens of the Hottentots; and !


all this done amidst a variety of
other needful work, and even in
the most distressing times.”


Other proofs of the power of re- |


ligion were soon visible. Although
for two years the people, generally
speaking, did: not taste a morsel of
bread—for it was not to be procured
in any way—they did not lose their
confidence in their heavenly Father,
but said, “‘ He who did not aban-
don us in our most dreadful distress
during the Caffre war, will not
forsake us now.” Their circum-
stances continued to be very dis-
tressing in the latter end of 1823,
in consequence of a great flood, as
appears from « letter written by
Mrs. Schmidt, Nov. 2, in whichshe
says :—

' © Qur owi: buildings have suf-
fered no material injury, nor our
garden and vineyard; but the lower
part of the Hottentots’ gardens,


ENO
which lie in a line with our corn
land, is entirely swept away. The
poor people had been very diligent
in planting, and it was a pleasure to
see every thing was thriving; but
now all is carried away, and a bed
of stones coversthe ground! Much
as these misfortunes afflict us, how-


ever, we have great reason to thank |


God that we have built just, on: this
spot; for there is not so safe a place
along the whole river, in case of
floods. Had we built on the old
place, we must have fled to the


“hills ; for nearly all, from one hill


to the other, was under water.”

Needed relief was, however, ulti-
mately afforded, and the cause of
truth and righteousness flourished,
During the year 1824, there were
baptized 15 adults and 13 children ;
9 persons were received into the
congregation, and 12 were ad-
mitted to the Holy Communicn,
At the close of the year, the num.
bers were as follows :—28 baptized
adults, of whom 72 are communi-
cunts ; 82 baptized children : in all,
219 persons. Besides these, there
were 29 candidates for baptism,
and 89 new people and children,
Total of inhabitants, 328 persons,

In Sept. 1825, brother Schmidt
sas i—

‘* Enon has been so much en-
larged, and in every respect im-
proved, within these few years,
that I am often excited to joy and
thankfulness towards our gracious
God and Saviour, by whose pro-
tection, grace, and blessing, the
work has been founded and main-
tained. He has, indeed, fulfilled
the promise. Jer. xxxiii., 12.”

‘As to their external support,
the Hottentots find Enon, by the
blessing of God, a very eligible
place to dwell in. Those that will
work may earn their livelihood.
Many who came hither without a
farthing, and clothed in nothing but
a kaross, have, by their industry,
become possessed of cottages und

236


ardens,
eth th
away. the
build or
decently
effected |
could hb
Though 1
of ‘new c
to live. he
and most
none. hay
Several o
reaped go
dens. G
garden-gr
we have r
Indian co)
insomuch
many that
fruit, we
the kind
poors’ boy
assistance,
EUSTA
least of tl
m. N.W,
is a mou
sugar loaf,
for its size
of all the ¢
taken by th
afterwards
and restore
It. was. age
in 1810, a
in 1814,
name, with
63° 5’, N,
The nu
ported in 1
care of o
instances o
of the po
claiming s
doned neg
from the |
racters, m
in favour
tian instr
was that ¢
his hand to
master, by


ur corn
diligent
asure to
ng 5 but
id a bed
! Much
as, how-
to thank
t on: this
eaplace
case of
the old
1 to the
one hill
ater.”?
ver, ulti-
cause of
ourished.
lere were
children :
into the
were ad-
mmunicn.
the num-
3 baptized
ommuni-
in; inall,
se, there
baptism,
children.
persons,
Schmidt


much en-
spect im-
ew years,
0 joy and
r gracious
hose pro-
ssing, the
and main-
d, fulfilled
i. 12.”

al support,
on, by the
y eligible
ke that will
livelihood.
without a
othing but
r industry,
bttages and
236


EUS


gardens, though they were bliged,
with, their own hands, to clear
away the thicket before they could
puild or plant: they are likewise
decently, clothed. ' All. this they
effected ata time; when no bread
could be. purchased for them:
Though the increase, by the arrival
of ‘new. comers;: who’ ol:tained leave
to live here, was: very. considerable;
and most. of them. were'very poor,
none have suffered from hunger.
Several of our inhabitants last year
reaped good crops from their gar-
dens. God has given to our own
garden-grounds his blessing, and
we have reaped an abundant crop of
Indian corn, beans, and pumpkins,
insomuch. that we could’ supply
many that had need.. Of the latter
fruit, we had about 4000, and: by
the kind gifts of our friends, our
poors’? box was able: to lend much
assistance, 7?

FUSTATIA, ST. ' one: of the
least of the Caribbee islands, 10
m. N.W. of St, Christopher. | It
is a mountain in the form of: a
sugar loaf, whose top is:hollow ; yet,
for its size, it is the. most valuable
of all the Caribbee. islands, It.was
taken by the British in 1781, but was
afterwards taken by the: French,
and restored to the Dutch in 1783.
It. was again taken by the British
in 1810, and restored to the Dutch
in18]4... It hasa town of the same
name, with a good fort. W. long.
63° 5’, N. lat. 17° 314,

The number in the W, S.; re-
ported in 182], was 323, under the
care of one missionary. Several
instances occurred about this time
of the power.of religion in re-
claiming some of the most aban-
doned negroes, whose'reformation,
from the notoriety of their -cha-
racters, made a..great impression
in favour of the value of Chris-
tian instruction, One. instance
was that of a negro who.cut off
his hand to be revenged upon his
master, by disabling himself, An-


EUS


other case is thus stated :-—* I have
on this island four: places,” sayy
the Rev. Mr. French,‘ in each of
which I preach once in the course
of the week. - The last of these
was opened under the following
peculiar ‘circumstances : —-a' slaye
belonging to. a person on ‘this
island, had ran away: from ‘his
master, and become a most. no-
torious. robber ;).and having: got
others to join. him; he :was ap:
pointed their captain. ‘He resided
with them in the mountains 14
months ; but having been surprised
while on one of his :predatory ex +
cursions, he was taken and put
in confinement. His master ex<
postulated with him en his con-
duct; but the slave replied, that
no.one had cared:for his religious
concerns, and therefore he had
been ignorant and wicked.

The master applied to. me, and
{ told Khim that if he would suffer
me to preach to his negroes, it
would save him a great deal of
trouble. -I went to the robber,
conversed with him, and left him
apparently sorry for his past wicks
edness, and purposing to activery
differently in future. The master
offered me a: large warehouse for
worship, .and has since fitted it
up for ‘that: purpose. I preach in
it to all’ his negroes, who, with
his .own family,. and’ many. others;
attend from the. neighbourhood.
The late robber himself, I am
happy to. state, manifests a real
change of life and heart, to thé
truth of which his master bears
a pleasing testimony. He has
been received as a scholar into
our Sunday-school, and has since
requested to be admitted on trial
as a member of society. |

Our excellent governor lately
visited, with his secretary and a
member of the council, the Sun-
day-school; and expressed his
high satisfaction with the improve-
ment of the children. P

37


ad


FIJ


In 1828, the missionaries say,
**We have much pleasure in being
‘able to report the spiritual pros-
perity of the society in this island,
although the past year has been
to our people a year of distress
and trial, arising from the want
of many of the common neces-
saries of life. They have, how-
ever, manifested the sincerity of
their faith by their Christian obe-
dience, and their love for the ordi-
nances of the Lord’s house. Our
prospects of future usefulness are
of an encouraging nature ; our con-
gregation is large, and very atten-
tive during divine service, and we
receive great encouragement from
the ruling authorities.”’

The missionaries observe, in
their last accounts, that “the at-
tachment of the members to the
cause of the Lord Jesus, unites
the two characteristics of ardency
and constancy, which they display
by their exertions to promote it.
The congregations continue as
large as they have ever been,
and are deeply attentive. At the
E. side of the island, a place for
preaching has been recently ob-
tained, and is visited three times a
week. The congregation, though
small, is regular, and very atten-
tive. Number of members in
Town Society—Whites, 13; . Free
Coloured and Blacks, 76; Slaves
135. E. side do. 20. Total 244.
At present there are belonging
to the school, 115 ‘girls and 58
boys. Total, 173.” |


F,


_ EIJIISLANDS. These islands
lie between )6° and 19° S. lat.,
and between 177° and 180° E., and
177° and 180° W. long.

Soon after the return of Mr.
Davies, of the L. M. S., from a
visit. to the islands of Raivavai to
Tahiti, the members of his church


FIS

were ¢..veued for the purpose of
considering the propriety of send.
ing out two of their own body, as
teachers, to the island of Lageba,
one of the Fiji islands, as the
Minerva and Macquarie were on
the point of sailing again, in that
direction.


It seems that several months:


before, two strangers, from New
South Wales, came to Tahiti, with
the hope of procuring a passage
to the Fiji Islands. What they
had seen while in the colony had
given them an unfavourable idea
of Christianity ; but they acknow.
ledged that the new religion, as
they called it, had effected much
good at Tahiti. They had seve-
ral times expressed a wish that
teachers might accompany them,
on their return home, to instruct
the Fijians, and had proposed, as a
suitable place for an experiment,
the island Lageba, which is not
disturbed by wars as Takaunove
and Bau, and the other larger
islands, are. They also added, that
Tuineau, the chief of Lageba, isa
quiet and friendly man.

At the meeting of the church
at Papara, to which allusion has
been made, the two strangers
being present, it was decided, not
in the first instance, to send fa-
milies, but that two single men
should accompany the strangers,
as teachers; and. provided they
were well treated, and a prospect
of success presented itself, that
one or two families should follow.

Mr. Davies had hiinself visited
the Fiji islands, in the year 1809-10,
and had then made some pro-
gress in the language. During his
short stay there, he wrote down
many words and sentences, which,
with the assistance of the strangers
who were now at Tahiti, he was
enabled to revise. He has also
compiled. a small spelling-book,
&c. in the Fiji language, which
has been printed. In oe little


book, tl
quitted ©
derable
On tl
Tahitian
are Hap
lemnly s
and, on t.
panied
sailed © in
Ebrill, wl
lony of N
Presen
strangers,
and partly
FORT:
post, . Mic
Clair rive:
trance int
about a m
In 182]
New York
the instru
which was
Foreign M
tember, 1!
school con
dren, livin
Rev, S.
missionary.
FRANK
Germany,
above its i
long. 8°. 3
lation 41,5
are Jews.
for Calvini
9 for Cathd
& converte;
has for sev
cessfully a:
pally in thi
baptized ;
against the
ened ; mult!
to convers
ae of
and appeal
truth 44 it
tesides at ¢
a short di
The brothe
Christian,


Irpose of
of send-
body, as
‘Lageba,
» as the
were on
» in that


| months :
rom New
hiti, with
2 pass

That they
olony had
rable idea
r-acknow-
gion, as
‘ted much
had seve-
wish that
any them,
to instruct
yosed, as a
xperiment,
ich is not
Takaunove
her larger
added, that
ageba, is a


he church
llusion has
strangers
ecided, not
o send fa-
single men
strangers,
bvided they
8 prospect
itself, that
uld follow.
self visited
par 1809-10,
some pro-
During his
yvrote down
ces, which,
he strangers
nhiti, he was
e has also
elling-book,
age, which
in this little
238


FOR


pook, the strangers, before _they
quitted Tahiti, had made consi-
derable proficiency.

On the 27th of January, the
Tahitian teachers, whose names
are Hape and Tafeta, were so-
lemnly set apart to their work ;
and, on the 2d of March, accom-
panied by the two. strangers,
sailed: in the Minerva, Captain
Ebrill, who was bound to the co-
lony of New South Wales.

Presents were given to the
strangers, partly for themselves,
and partly for the chief of Lageba.

FORT: GRATIOT, a military
post, Michigan territory, on St.
Clair river, which defends the en-
trance into Lake Huron, and is
about a mile below the outlet.

In 1821, the Northern M. S. 9
New York opened a school here for
the instruction of Indian children,
which was transferred to the United
Foreign M. S. (United States) Sep-
tember, 1823. Early in 1824, the
school consisted of about 15 chil-
dren, living in the family. The
Rev. S. Hudson is the assistant
missionary.

FRANKFORT, a large city’in
Germany, on the Maine, 20 miles
above its influx into the Rhine. E.
long. 8°. 30’, N. lat. 50°.. Popu-
lation 41,500, of whom about 9000
are Jews. Here are 2 churches
for Calvinists, 7 for Lutherans, and
9 for Catholics. Mr. J.D. Marc,
aconverted Jew, from the L.J.S.,
has for several years laboured suc-
cessfully among the Jews, princi-
pally in this city. Many have been
baptized; the prejudices of others
against the Gospel are much weak-
ened ; multitudes seek opportunities
to converse with Mr. M. on the
subject of the Christian religion,
and appear desirous to know the
truth as it is in Jesus.
resides at Offenbach, which is only
a short distance from Frankfort.
The brother of the sovereign prince,
Christian, who is president of the


He now:


FRE


Darmstadt B. S., has kindly inte-
rested himself in his favour, to
secure to him the undisturbed exer-
cise of his office among the Jews,’
under the declared protection of
government. An auxiliary society
has been established, but its funds
are very low, and its efforts much
circumscribed: Jews who apply for
Christian instruction receive it
but none have been baptized for a
long time. Such as appear to be
in earnest, are sent: to Dusselthal,
with a moderate sum of money, just
sufficient to reach that place; and
‘this is the chief use the society can
make of its scanty income.
FREETOWN, aseaport of Gui-
nea, capital of the colony of Sierra
Leone. The harbour has three


of | wharfs, and is protected by a bat-


tery. Itstands on the S. side of the
river Sierra Leone, 7 m. above its
entrance into the Atlantic ocean.
W. Long. 12° 56’, N. lat. 8° 30’.
Some missionaries from the W.
S. took up their abode here in1816 ;
and in 1820, so successful were
their efforts, that in Freetown and
its neighbourhood, there were in
society upwards of 1100 persons,
almost exclusively blacks and peo-
ple of colour. Some misunder-
standings afterwards arose, but the
prospect was soon more favourable.
A chapel, built by the Maroons at
Freetown, was opened, and others
at West End, Congo Town, and’
Portuguese Town, were regularly:
sapplied. The chapel at the latter
place was destroyed by a fire, which
almost consumed the whole place ;
but one of stone was subsequently
erected. Towards this work, and
the rebuilding of the town, many .
of the Europeans very handsomely :
subscribed, among whom were the
Governor and the Chief Justice. In
1823, a painful dispensation of provi-
dence deprived this mission, in rapid
succession, of both its labourers,
The society was consequently be-.
reft, for a time, of pastoral care, and


FRE


of public ordinances, Two heroic
men were at length found to give the
preference to this post of danger.
One of them, Mr. Pigott, wrote :—

‘¢ Through the ‘kind | providence
of God, brother .Harte. and myself
arrived here ‘on Friday, March 19,
1824, after a voyage of five weeks.
Never could two missionaries be
more joyfully received. The news
of our arrival soon spread; and to
see the poor blacks running from
one house to another to inform
their. brethren and: sisters—lifting
up their: eyes and hands towards
heaven— thanking and praising
God, was such a scene as we never
witnessed before ; ‘and we could
not for a moment regret having
left’: home to preach salvation to
those of whom it may be said, ‘ the
fields are white already to harvest.’
On Saturday, the £0th, I examined
the class. papers, and met the lead-
ers, and was happy in finding ‘that
the society had been wonderfully
preserved. On the Sabbsths the
leaders have had service in each of
our chapels, In the Maroon cha-
pel some one regularly read prayers
every Sunday morning; and occa
sionally one or two of the leaders
gave exhortations. The number of
members in s.ciety is 81, andthere
are several on trial. We have called
upon several gentlemen, and they
promised us every assistance.”” In
little more than 12 months, how.
ever, Mr. Harte was no more.

In 1826; Mr. Pigott says-—‘‘ A
little after the death of brother H.,
I began to urge the friends to get
the chapel finished, but was in-
formed that nothing more could be
done till an old debt of 93/., which
was due for the slates dnd copper
on the roof, was paid. I called a
tru. ee meeting, proposed tc pay
the shires in small sums, and un-
dertook to collect it myself; and I
am happy to say, that during the
year, not only has the debt been
discharged, but more than that sum


FRE


again has been collected and spent
upon the chapel. Conce:ning Por.
ituguese Town, we have tried our


(utmost to get. the chapel finished, -


: but: find we try in vain, ‘unless we
ireceive help from home. ' In rela-
tion to the cirguit, the Lord conti-
nues ‘0 visit us with his blessing,
Out of'20 members that form the
class at Portuguese Town, believe
| 18 clearly enjoy the pardoning love
of God. . Our chnpels, aré ‘pretty
well attended ;. and our number of
; members this quarter (June) is 94,
| .. Since; 1818, the colonial schools
at Freetown have been committed
‘to the care of the C.M.S., and
of the chaplains, who have super-
intended. tb< schools, and have
faithfully la. ~ured to promote the
best interests. of the people. In
1823, benevolent efforts were much
interrupted: by the death of both
chaplains, and several of the teach-
ers. Other labourers were sent out,
but bereavements still occurred,
The Rev. John Raban, assisted by
Mr. George Fox and his wife, who
have the management of the schools,
had, for some time, the. charge of
this station.

Mr. Raban continued the exer-
Cise of his ministry till June 1826,
when an attack of dysentery, fol-
lowed by fever and ague, disabled
him from attending to his duties,
The usual services at the Court.
room had,. till Mr. Raban’s sick-
ness, been regularly performed ; and
an increased attention had been
manifested by the European part of
the ee. Few interrup-
tions had taken place, till the same
period, in the services at Gibraltar
Town, on Sunday and Wednesday
evenings. A small, chapel was
opened there on the Oth of April:
from 60 to 70 persons generally
attended, with mucin devotion ; and
several adults had been baptized, or
- were candidates for baptism.

At Michaelmas, Mr. Raban’s
disorder, though much abated, still
240


call forth tha


prevented
active dut
Wellingto:
Regent, bh
tions, kep:
Court- hou:
tar town |
left, excep
people the
no prospect
diate resurr
was agreec
remove, wi
acting gove
Freetows,,
assecond re
visit the me
administrati
At Christma
that the nun
the quarter |
23; of these
had previous!
and who, the
hope, were gs
sion of faith,
By the ret
appears that
in the numbe
Colonial sch¢
been occupies
temporary hg
months, were
their origina
rior accomr
these rooms,
the attendan¢
Christmas wr
1%. The a
last quarter,
attending, we
In the begi
meetings werd
Ausiliary B
ary, and P,


Governor,
circumstance,
“ Though al
witnessed on
Was ardentiy
enough was §
ragement to fi


| spent

t Por-
dour
rished, °
ess we

1 Tela.

| conti-
essing.
rm the
believe
ng love

) pretty
mber of
2) is 04,

schools
mmitted
S., and
e super-
id have
mote the
ple. In
2re much
of both
he teach-
sent out,
occurred,
ssisted by
W ife, who
eschools,
harge of


he exer-
une 1826,


H apel ‘was
of April:
generally


FRE


prevented him from resuming his
active duties. Mr. Metzger, from
Wellington, and Mr. Betts, from
Regent, had, with some interrup-
tions, kept up the services at the
Court-house; but those at Gibral-
tar‘ town had from necessity been
left, except'in one instance, to the
people themselves, There being
no prospect of Mr. Raban’s imme-
diate resumption of his labours, it
was agreed that Mr. Betts shoyld
remove, with the consent of the
acting governor, from Regent to
Freetowx:, and be there stationed
assecond rector; and that he should
visit the mountain villages for the
administration of the sacraments,
At Christmas, Mr. Betts reports,
that the number of baptisms during
the quarter then ending, had been
93; of these, two were adults, who
had previously received instruction,
and who, there was good reason to
hope, were sincere in their profes-
sion of faith.

By the returns of the school, it
appears that there was an increase
inthe number of the scholars. The
Colonial school-rooms, which had
been occupied by the military as a
temporary hospital for about 12
months, were restored, in July, to
their original occupants: the supe-
rior accommodation afforded by
these rooms, immediately increased
the attendance. The numbers at
Christmas were—boys, 344}; girls,
195, The number of adults in the
last quarter, with boys occasionally
attending, was 27.

In the beginning of May, public


| meetings were heldin support of the


Ausiliary Bible, Church Mission-


ay, and Prayer Book Societies,
whic


h were attended by the acting
Governor. With reference to this
circumstance, Mr. Raban writes —
“ Though all that zeal was not


witnessed on these occasions which


was ardentiy to be desired, yet
enough was seen to afford encou-
ragement to future exertions,and to

| forth thankfulness to God, who


FRI
put it into the heart of the chief
magistrate of the colony to counte-
nance these benevolent institutions,
in a manner so public and decided.’’

FRIEDENSTADT, or Town
of Peace, formerly a settlement
of the U. B. among the Indians
in Pennsylvania. About 1770,
the Christian Indians at Gosh-
goshuenk removed here, and at-
tempted to form a settlement; but
the outrageous persecution of the
heathen Indians induced them soon
to remove to Gnadenhutten, on
the Muskingum.

FRIENDLY ISLANDS, a
large collection of islands in the
Pacific Ocean, so denominated by
‘Captain Cook, from the apparent
disposition of the inhabitants. These
islands, of which there are 188,
including the Harpies and Vavaoo,
are generally very low, not exceed-
ing from 10 to 20 feet above the
sea. They are all skirted round by
a reef of coral rocks, and present a
beautiful appearance from the ocean,
being almost covered with trees, the
most plentiful of which is the cocoa-
nut, The soil is generally fertile.
Medium E, long. 125°, S. lat, 20°,
The natives have no knowledge
of God, but seem to entertain some
confused notions of the immortality
of the soul. Their views of this
yon are, however, so indistinct
and corrupt, as to produce no salu-
tary influence on their conduct,
Navigators who first visited these
islands, represented the inhabitants
as possessing many social qualities,
and much gentleness of character ;
but subsequent visitors have shown
them capable of the greatest ex-
cesses of cruelty and revenge.

Of the 3 teachers lately sent by
the LZ. M. S. from Borabora to the
Friendly Islands, 2 only appear to
have reached the place of their
déstination. These settled in Va-
vaoo, one of the islands of that
group; but their labours do not ap-
pear to have been attended with any
visible benefit to the oo

¥ 24


FUT; GAL


One of them, after the decease of , who frequently appeared in com.
his wife, having fallen into immo- | pany with the missionary on public
rality, ceased to bear the office of | occasions, and was seldom absent
teacher. His colleague has since | from the cottage where the reli.
removed to Tongatabu, and has | gious meetings were held. On the
taken up his residence with one of | European residents, this conduct, on
the chiefs of that island. [See] the part of his lordship, produced
Tongatabu. | the most pleasing effects; and the
FUTTYGHUR, a town in| military were not only induced to
Agra, Hindoostan, 90 m. N. N. W. | attend to the word of God, but se.
of Lucknow, and adjoining Fur- | veral of the private soldiers united
ruckabad. in society, and though a few re-
A Baptist missionary has la- | turned to the world, the residue
boured here since 1821. Some of | remained stedfast, and some of
the natives have been baptized, and | them died rejoicing in the salvation
hope of much usefulness has been | of Christ.

awakened. A brahmin, named Amidst all the encouragements
Porundas, on hearing the Gospel, | which he received, and the pleasure
threw away his poita, and renounc- | which he felt in the prosecution of
ed his caste; and another acknow- | his present avocations, Mr.Clough’s
ledged that for 9 years he had been | attention was anxiously directed to
anxiously seeking, but all in vain, a | the natives of Galle, as the more
solid ground of hope. immediate objects of his mission,
Sach, indeed, was his desire to
commence his work among them,
G. that he formed the idea of resid.

ing aay bane them, Ls —

E,or POINT DE GALLE, | tostudy their language, and to exe

Bn tec the S. coast of Ceylon, | himself unremittingly for their spi-
in a rich and beautiful district, with | ritual welfare; and an event soon
astrong fort and a secure harbour. | occurred, which enabled him to
1t is populous, and in point of trade | carry this favourite scheme into
ranks next to Colombo. The chief | execution. He was one day visited
branch of its traffic consists in the | at the government house by the
exportation of fish tothe continent ; | maha, or great moodeliar of Galle,
but a great part of the products of | a man of good understanding anda
the island are shipped here for Eu- | liberal mind, who, from his rank,
rope. It is 68 m..S. by E. Co- | was possessed of unlimited infu.
lombo, E. long. 80° 17’, N. lat. 62°. | ence throughout the district, After
On the arrival of several Ves- | the usual compliments, he addressed
leyan wissionuries at Ceylon, the | Mr. Clough in English, and said,
Rev. Mr. Clough was appointed to | “ I am come, reverend Sir, to offer
this place, where he conducted an | my children to your protection ani
English service in the Dutch church | instruction. I have heard that you
every Lord’s day, and, by the joint | are desirous of establishing a school
subscriptions of some of his heerers, | for the sons of our native head-
a private house in the fort was fitted | men; and I have a house, ready
up for a weekly lecture, and for the | fur hed. sear my own residence,
purpose of conversing on spiritual} wi. ~ is at your service for that
subjects with such persons as ap- | purpose. If you will please to see
peared to be under serious impres- | whether it will suit you, I shall
sions, The infant cause was also | consider it an honor to have such
essentially benefited by the decided | a reverend yentleman Living $0 near
patronage of Lord Molesworth ; | to me; and wi"! render ved all the


assistant
for such


ence ont
Mr. C.’s
by some
boys in t
was so sti
visited by
sons of v
to inquire
which he
through 1
preter, he
nities of c
faith in C
stances, h
them dep
with the r
Attend :
afforded
meeting
Budhist
Panditta §
he had ac
nence, and
marks of hi
resided fo
king of K
tion as a p
own elephe
versally ce
with the m
others, unt
elapsed, w
conviction
Christianit
to profess j
fices he wa
pod gt
’ Mr.
the gover
that if the
embraced


in come.
Nn public
1 absent
the reli.
On the
rduct, on
produced
and the
duced to
» but se-
rs wnited
. few re-
> residue
some of
salvation


‘agements
e pleasure
ecution of
ers.
lirected to
the more
is mission.
desire to
rong them,
. of resid-
1, in order
nd to exert
r their spi-
event soon
ed him to
heme into
p day visited
use by the
ar of Galle,
ding anda
his rank,
ited influ
trict. After
he addressed
» and said,
Sir, to offer
btection ani
ard that you
ing a school
ative head:
house, ready
n residence,
lice for that
hlease to see
you, I shall
» have such
ving sO near
you all the
2422


.


assistance in my power.” Grateful
for such an unexpected and wel-
come proposal, Mr. Clough has-
tened to visit the premises, which
he found situated in a sweetly re-
tired and romantic spot, about a
mile from the fort, and within a
stone’s throw of the house of the
kind proprietor ; and, of course, ac-
cepted the generous offer. The
friendship and patronage of the
moodeliar had an astonishing influ-
ence on the surrounding population.
Mr. C.’s school was soon attended
by some of the most intelligent
boys in the island; and curiosity
was so strongly excited, that he was
visited by learned priests, and per-
sons of various classes, who came
to inquire respecting the religion
which he professed. With these,
through the medium of an inter-
preter, he had frequent opportu-
nities of conversing concerning the
faith in Christ; and, in some in-
stances, had the pleasure of seeing
them depart, evidently impressed
with the result of their inquiries.
Attendance at a grand festival
afforded Mr. C. an opportunity of
meeting with a learned priest off the
Budhist religion, named Petrus
Panditta Sehara. The reputation
be had acquired raised him to emi-
nence, and secured for him various
marks of high distinction. He had
resided for a long time with the
king of Kandy: at his inaugura-
tion as a priest he rode on the king’s
own elephant, and was indeed uni-
versally celebrated. His interview


with the missionary was followed by |


others, until about two months had
elapsed, when he expressed his first
conviction of the divine origin of
Christianity, and his wish publicly
to profess it. Aware of the sacri-
fices he would have to make, and
the perils to whict he would be ex-
posed, Mr. C. lo * his case before
the governor, why kindly stated,
that if the priest, from conviction,
embraced the Christian religion,


GAL
protection should be afforded, and a
small allowance granted. In con+-
sequence of the unavoidable absence
of Mr. C. for a short time, this con-
vert was placed in much danger: 14
of the head priests were sent by the
high priest to reason with him, and
their number in the course of the
interview increased to 57. To their
arguments, to the’ tears and threats
of destruction by which his family
assailed him, and to large presents
brought by the head men of the
district, Petrus wes immovable;
and he retired for safety to the
house of an European in the fort of
Galle, till he received directions to
proceed to Colombo. On his arrival
at that city, he experienced every
kind and christian attention; and,
though affected by the continued
entreaties and remonstrances of
his relatives, he steadily adhered
to the cause he had espoused. On
Christmas-day, 1814, he received
the ordinance of baptism, in the
presence of a large congregation.

This newly converted Christian
had received from Mr. C. the va-
luable present of a New Testa-
ment in Cingalese ; which not
only caused him to read it through-
out with a mind bent on the search
after truth, but induced him, at a
numerois meeting of priests of
Budhu, io take the Testament
with him, andlecture them, during
a whole night, from the Gospel
of Matthew, which they heard
‘vith no less astonishment than
aitention. J

The literary qualifications of
this convert procured for him the
situation of Cingalese translator
to the government at a certain
salary ; and as his return to Galle
would have exposed him to the
insults of those who were most
violently enraged at his renuncia-
tion of Budhism, it was deter-
mined that he should remain at
Colombo, under the care of Mr,
Armour, the master cf the principal

243


GAL


school in that city, and that his
studies should be directed with a
view to his becoming, at some
future period, a preacher of the
Gospel. among his own country-
men. At the same time, as the
change which his sentiments had
undergone was likely to produce
a pecuar influence on the minds
of both natives and Europeans,
Mr. C. was requested by the go-
vernor to draw up a connected
statement of the case; to which
his Excellency condescended to
prefix an appropriate introduction,
and ordered the whole to be in-
serted in the Ceylon Governmen
Gazette.

The citcuit afterwards formed,
extended, in one direction, over a
tract of country of upwards of 30
miles; and in addition to the ser
vices conducted in the chapel in
the fort, in the English, Portu-
guese, and Cingalese languages,
there were. in 1824, 12 places sup-
plied with at least one service a
week. A considerable part of
this work was done Dy native
young men, whom God had raised
up on the spot, and who laboured
with greut acceptance and success.
At this time the fort school con-
tained 50 boys and 27 girls: 30
boys and 5 girls read the English
Testament, .and all of them wrote
on paper or slates.

he missionaries remark, in’ a
recent communication :—

‘‘ Among the few who com-
pose our little society in Galle,
6 or 6 profess to enjoy a sense of
the favour of God, and their con-
duct in general is such as to give
satisiactory evidence of their sin-
cerity. Their attendance at the
class meeting, and other means
of grace, is very regular; and they
seem, upon the whole, to be much
attached to our discipline. The
members of our congregation in
the fort, seem to be generally
improving in religious knowledge ;


GAM


andin many, an outward feforma
tion of conduct has been effected,
We hope, however, as they become
more alive to the. privilege of
Christian communion, ,they will
avail themselves of it, and be more
decided, As it respects the Cin.
galese, we do not feel at liberty to
speak with much confidence, as we
have so often. been deceived by
what we thought promising ap.
pearances amongst them. There
are some, however, concerning
whom we are not, without hope;
but trust that the kingdom of hea-
ven, like a grain of mustard-seed,
is taking root in their hearts. Time
alone will prove whether our hopes
are well-founded. It is our inten.
tion, by God’s help, to continue to
watch over them, and minister
unto them with all care and dili-
gence, trusting eventually that
they will bring forth fruit unto
perfection.”

The Church, London, and Bap.
tis¢’ missionaries, have laboured
‘here at different times, but have
made no permanent settlement,

GALWAY, a borough and sea
port, capital of Galway, a county
of Ireland. W. long. 9° 30’; N,
lat. 36° 11’,

The W. M.S. has a missionary
here, who labours also at Conna-
mara.

GAMBIER, formerly a mission
station of the C. M. S. among the
Bagoes, West Africa, on the Rio
Dembia river, at Kapparoo, a very
considerable native tewn, about 70
m. N.W. of Sierra Leone.

The Rev. J. S. Kiein came here
about 1813, and removed to Isles
de Loss, in 1819, with a view toa
more extended field of labour, de-
signing at the same time, to devote
some attention to the spiritual good
of this people. During his resi-
dence, he preached in 23 native
towns in the vicinity, and gained
much attention by the distribution
of books and tracts. _— * of


the time
tained al
family.
made on
several ¢
fully pic
enjoyed
tion of th
GAMI
that nan
S. Africa
Piquena
N. of Gr
is freque:
in the fis!
intercour:
the Euro;
The Ek
the W. J
bours in
assistant $
ragements
some plea:
till 1823, »
of the cou
move,
GANJ P
town, in
pital of
369 m. S
Wm, Lee
moved fro
place in 18
spect of us¢
ciating che
A house
erected by
ment, in
gtegation
school wa
continued
ance and
when the
nant fever
the state a
dered it ex
GAYA,
in Bahar,
Bahar dist
parts: the
eminence,
Priests 5 anc
Plain, the


teforma-

. effected.

y become

vilege of

they will

d be more

the Cin-

liberty to
ace, as We
ceived by
ising’ ap-
». | There
oncerning
out hope;
m of hea-
stard-seed,
arts. Time
‘ our hopes
our inten-
sontinue to
d minister
e and dili.
tually that
fruit unto


» and Bap-
re laboured
s, but have
lement,

h and sear
y, a county
9° 30'; N.


missionary
at Conna-


ly a mission
among the
ion the Rio
ATOO, & Very
n, about 70
ne.
1 came here
ved to Isles
a view toa
labour, de-
2, to devote
piritual good
g his resi-
23 native
and gained
distribution


244


home part of


GAM


the time 30 children were main-
tained and educated in the mission
family. A salutary impression was
made on the minds of the childrea ;
several of the girls became hope-
fully pious; and the missionary
enjoyed the confidence and affec-
tion of the natives.

GAMMAP, avillage of achief of
that name, in G. Namaqualand,
§. Africa, in the vicinity of Angra
Piquena Bay, more than 300 m.
N. of Great Orange R. The bay
is frequented by vessels employed
in the fishery, and thus occasional
intercourse’ is maintained between
the Europeans and the natives.

The Rev. J. Archbell from

the W. M. S. commenced his la-
bours in 1821, with a Hottentot
assistant; he endured many discou-
ragements and hardships, yet had
some pleasing fruits of his efforts,
till 1823, when the disturbed state
of the country induced him to re-
move.
GANJAM, a very populous
town, in Orissa, Hindoostan, ca-
pital of the district of Ganjam,
369 m. S. Calcutta. The Rev.
Wm. Lee from the ZL. M. S. re-
moved from Vizagapatam to this
place in 1813,with the pleasing pro-
spect of usefulness, especially as offi-
ciating chaplain of the settlement.

A house for public worship was
erected by the assistance of govern-
ment, in which a considerable con-
gregation attended, and a native
school was established. Mr. L.
continued to labour with accept-
ance and some success till 1816,
when the prevalence of a malig-
nant fever among the people, and
the state of his own health, ren-
dered it expedient for him to retire.

GAYA, a town of Hindoostan,
in Bahar, and the capital’ of the
Bahar district. It consists of two
parts: the old town, on a rocky
eminence, wholly occupied by
priests; and the other part on a
plain, the residence of tradesmen


GIB


and others, called Sahebgunge.

It is a celebrated place of worship ;

the last is now visited by numerous
pilgrims, and stands on the left
bank of the Fulgo. 55 m. S. by W.:
of Patna. E. long. 85°, N. lat.

24° 49/,

Mr. Forbes, a native of Tiudia,
resided here on his own estate,
which comprised several villages,
and laboured in connexion with the
Baptist M. S. for several years.
His efforts appear to have been
useful,

GEORGIAN, or WINDWARD
ISLANDS, four islands in tbe
South Seas, so called in honour of
our late king. ‘Through the in-
fluence of missionaries, idolatry has
been renounced, Christianity intro-
duced in its stead, and the temporal
and moral state of the people has
been improved: almost beyond any
former example. [See Burder’s -
Point, Bogue Town, Kimeo, Haweis
Town, Hidia, and Tahiti.|

GIBRALTAR, a town in the
S. of Spain, between the Atlantic
and Mediterranean, on the N, W.
side of the promontory, belonging to
the British, In the bay, it is said,
more than 3000 sail of shipping
anchor annually, a considerable
part of which are English or Ame-
rican, The town is large and
strongly fortified: the population,
exclusive of the garrison, is about
12,000, combining British, Spa-
niards, Italians, ‘and Jews, all
attracted by mercantile enterprize.
The Jews amount to nearly 2000.
W. long. 5° 19’, N, lat. 37° 7’.

The Rev. Wm. Croscombe,
from the #, M. S., laboured here
for some time, and the station fora
long period has been highly bene-
ficial, especially to the soldiery.
Witbin a year, including part of
1821-2, 50 members were admitted
into the society.

Considerable exertions were also
made to supply the neighbouring
parts of Spain with copies of the
¥2 245


GLO


Setiptures in Spanish, a number of
which have, at differenttimes, been
kindly furnished by the British and
Foreign B. S., and useful tracts
were distributed among the
Spaniards, F.U. Tripp, Esq. Cap-
tain in his Majesty’s 26th regiment,
‘was one of the fruits of this mission.
In token of his cogaei he left by
will £50 to the funds of the society,
and £600 to liquidate the debt on
the mission chapel.

The Rev. Messrs. Dixon and
Barber succeeded Mr. Croscombe
in 1823. Notonly are the English
congregation, the society, and the
school, at present in a state of re!i-
gious prosperity, but the preaching
and other services in the Spanish
tongue, still promise to be useful to
many of the Spaniards, occasionally
or permanently resident on this
station. The Scriptures and useful
tracts in that language continue to
be circulated, and are received with
great eagerness § and in many in-
stances are conveyed into Spain,
notwithstanding the vigilance of
the priesthood.

GLOUCESTER, a town of libe-
rated negroes, Sierta Leone, W.
Africa, situated between Free Town
and Regent’s Town,

The Rev. H. During, from the CG,
M. S., commenced his labours Dec.
3816,and found 107miserable beings,
almost entirely without shelter, who
had recently been released from the
chains of the slave-trader, and sent
into this ‘crest with an European
to manage them: many of them,
by want and sickness, were reduced
to mere skeletons. Reside super-
intending tiie tempo’: concerns of
the settlement, Mr. and Mrs. D,
soon opened schools, and under their
fostering care a flourishing settle-
ment arose from the most unpro-
mising materials. In 1823, there
Were about 150 communicants, and
416 pupils in the schools. In Aug.
of that year, Mr. and Mrs. D,
soiled for England, but the vessel


GLO


end ail on board are supposed ty
have been lost at sea. William
Tambza, the native teacher, laboured
diligently,after this most distressing
event, and the Rev. Chas. Knight,
was sent to his aid, but was re.
moved by death within a few weeks
after he -entered on the duties of
his station. The former reported,
at Lady-day 1825, that the schools
had been kept regularly, and spoke
well of the progress which both the
boys and girls were making. There
were in the schools, at Christmas,
59 boys and 95 girls. The Lord’s
Supper had been regularly admi-
nistered. every month, with one
exception — when circumstances
prevented the Rev. Mr..:Gerber’s
attendance. The number of com.
municants residing in the parish is
128. The Sunday and week-day
services ate well attended; the
numbers on the Sunday averaging
400, and on the week-days 170,
The people conduct themselves
on Sundays in an orderly and quiet
manner, and go to church cleanly
and neatly dressed; a few only ex-
cepted, who still follow their coun-
try fashion. The lives of many of
the communicants afford hopeful
evidence th»*. they are true Chris-
tians ; con-cisation at the Saturday
evening meeting is often edifying;
and. many fervent petitions are of.
fered up at prayer meetings, for
their countrymen, for the society,
and for more labourers.

The surplus produce brought to
sale during 1825,was— £ 5s. d,
Cocoa, 2257 bush, at le. 112 17 0
Cassada, 2286 bush, at 9d. 86 13 9


£198 10 9


After the death of Mr. Knight,
Mr. Lisk had the care of this sta-
tion. He continved in charge of
it till the Rev. Alfred Schoidin
was placed here, at the end ©
February, and afterwards assisted
in the duties of it, till hts departure
246


for E y
of Apri
It ple
Scholdi:
cester. '
events, '
inhabita
pean ins
itis obv:
very des
T. Hard
now the
liam Da
what ass
In At
that the
chureh |
dow in it
and schoc
Attendar
has, how
increase.
GNAI
of Grace
of the |
about 3¢
hear the
Lecha r
menced
Christian
from She
1744, and
pleasant
worship ay
gation in
mission p
sions on
During th
brethren
sufferings
obliged ta
the Iroqua
of their d
like natioy
message
following
ns ©
» Sped
They rejo
lieving I
Wayomik
remaining
Wares, AY


posed to
William
laboured
stressing
, Knight,
, was Tee
pw weeks
duties of
reported,
e schools
and spoke
) both the
ig. There
~hristmas,
he Lord’s
rly admi-
with one
umstances
.» Gerber’s
r of com-
> parish is
week-day
nded; the
averaging
days 170,
themselves
and quiet
ch cleanly
iw only ex-
their coun
f many of
rd hopeful
true Chris-
he Saturday
edifying }
ons are of-
betings, for
he society,


brought to

£ sd,
. 112 170
id. 85 13 9


£198 109


r. Knight,
lof this sta-

charge of
ih Schaidin
the end o
rds assisted
ts departure
246


GNA


for E igland about the beginning
of April, 1826,

It pleased God, soon after Mr.
Scholdine’s arrival, to visit Glou-
cester. with a series of afflictive
events, which entirely deprived its
inhabitants of any reguler Euro-
pean instruction. From these losses,
it is obvious that Gloucester is in a
very destitute condition. Matthew
J, Harding, a native assistant, has
now the charge of it; while Wil-
liam Davis, from Leicester, renders
what assistance he is able.

In August, Mr. Betts’ reports,
that the place looked deserted ; the
church had scarcely a whole win-
dow in it, and the dwelling-house
and school were much out of repair.
Attendance on the means of grace
has, however, since been on the
increase.

GNADENHUTTEN, or Tents
of Grace, formerly a settlement
of the U. B., in Pennsylvania,
about 30 m. from Bethlehem,
near the juitction of Mahony and
Lecha rivers, which was com-
menced for the benefit of the
Christian Indians who were driven
from Shekomeko by the whites, in
1744, and soon became a regular
pleasant town, with a place for
worship andaschool. The congre-
gation increased to 500, and the
mission produced salutary impres-
sions on many heathen Indians,
During the war with France, the
brethren were called to peculiar
sufferings: not only were they:
obliged to pay a sort of tribute to
the Iroquois, as an acknowledgment
of their dependence on that war-
like nation, but a new and singular
message was sent to them, to the
following effect: —‘‘ The Great
Council of the Iroquois, in Onon-
dago, speuk the truth and'lie not.
They rejoice that some of the be-
lieving Indians have removed to
Wayomik ; but now they lift up the
remaining Mahikans and Dela-
wares, and set them down in


_ GNA
Wayomik also ; for there a fire is
kindled for them, and there they
may plant and think on God :: but if
they refuse to hearken to this mes-
sage, the Great Council will come
and cleanse their ears with a-red
hot iron (implying that they would
burn their houses), and shoot them
through the head with musket
balls.” This menace induced'some
of the congregation to remove,
but the majority resolved to con-
tinue with their teachers ; some of
them observing, in reference tothe
threat of the Great Council, ** The
God who created and redeemed us,
is also able to protect us; norneed
we dread the displeasure of. man,
since not a hair can fall from the
head of a Christian without the di-
vine permission.’?

The missionaries at this station
now began to resume their itinerant
labours among the heathen ré-
siding at a distance ; and, though
the journies which they performed
were attended with many inconves
niencesand dangers, they considered
themselves amply remunerated for
all their toils, when, through the
instrumentality of their preaching,
converts were added to the church,
and those who had already cest in
their lot with the people of God,
were seen to continue in the faith
and hope of the Gospel. Little did
some of them suppose, whilst thus
rejoicing over their occasional
visits, that so terrific a catastrophe
awaited them at home.

On the commencement of hosti«
lities between the French and
English, an Indien war broke out,
accompanied by its usual horrors,
and spreading consternation and
dismay throwgh ali parts of the
country. The first outrage was
committed in the vicinity of Sho-
mokin, where three of the Moravian
missionaries resided ; but by the
overruling providence of God, they
were mercifully prese.ved. The bre-
thren at Gnadenhutten, however,
247


GNA


who had resolved to remain at their
post, notwithstanding the imminent
danger to which they were exposed,
as friends of the British government,
,were doomed to drink the cup of
bitterness, even to the dregs. In
the evening of Nov. 24, 1755, whilst
the brethren in the mission-house
were sitting at supper, they heard
en unusual barking of dogs, fol-
lowed by the repo.t of a gun.
Some of them immediately went to
the door, wien they perceived, to
their unspeakable terror, a party of
French Indians, wit. their muskets
pointed towards the house; and in
the space of a second they fired,
and killed Martin Nitschman on
the spot: his wife and some others
were wounded, but they precipi-
tately rushed up stairs to the garret,
and barricadoed the door so firmly
with bedsteads, that their savage
pursuers found it impossi‘ie to force
it open.

Resolving, however, not to be dis-
appointed of their prey, the san-
guinary monsters set fire to the
house, which in a short time was
completely enveloped in flames.
Two of the brethren had pre-
viously effected their escape by
jumping out of a back window,
and now one of the sisters and
a boy saved their lives by leaping
from the burning roof. One cf
the missionaries, named Fabricius,
attempted to follow their example,
but, being discovered by the In-
dians, they dispatched him with
their hatchets, cut away his scalp,
and left him lifeless on the ground.
All the others, who had fled to
the garret, were burned to death.
Mr. Senseman, who on the first
alarm had gone out at the back
door, had the heart-rending anguish
of beholding his wife perish in this
dreadful manner. When literally
surrounded by the devouring ele-
ment, this excellent woman was
heard to. exclaim, in the true
spiritof a Christian martyr, “ Dear


GNA


Saviour ! t¢ is ali well.” No less
than 11 persons perished on this
melancholy occasion, viz. 7 mis-
sionaries, 3 of their wives, and
a female child only 15 months
old! The inhuman savages having
completed their work of butchery
at the mission-house, set fire te
the stables, and thus destivyed
all the corn, hay, and cattle
They then regaled themselve:
with a hearty meal and departed.
They afterwards returned, how-
ever, to burn the town and ravage
the plantations; but the wucle
of the congregation providenially
escaped, having fled to the woods
as soon as they saw the mission-
house in flames, and were apprised
by one of the brethren of the
tregical catastrophe.

Dreadful and disastrous as were
these events, they became the
means, in the hand. of. Divine
Providence, of averting a much
more extensive calamity: a de-
termination having been formed
that such a carnage should be
shortly made in all the Moravian
settlements, as had never pre-
viously been heard of in North
America,

A station was afterwards formed,
about a mile from Bethlehem,
called Nain; and the members
soon increased, so as to render it
expedient to form another. With
this view, the brethren purchased
about 1400 acres behind the Blue
Mountains, whither several repair-
ed, and built a town called Vech-
quetank. During the war in 1763,
the brethren and the Christian In-
dians were forced to abandon these
settlements, and the Indians were
taken under the protection of go-
vernment at Philadelphia, Even
in these circumstances, the fury of
the mob could scarcely be restruin-
ed; for the whites were inveterate
against all Indians, however peace-
able or friendly. After the ces-
sation of hostilities, a + aia

248


was forme
and. call
“Tents «
erected 1;
then 40 he
The_settl
heathen I
schools w
piexching
tc be bles
many. T
quois, hoy
English tl
formally «
Indians at
pelled the
of 241 pe
settlement
Gnadenhu'
GNADI
mission ste
on the .W
in 1772, hk
herger, tog
Indians, y
abandon : J
were soon
gation at F
_ The Chr
now collec
this river,
formed as
10 m. up
Shoenbruna
Springs. 1
settlement,
rassed by ]
was at len
prospects o
neighbourir
tering. Se
converts.
request fro
voted in ful
Gospel, an
commenced
called Lich:
of 1778, th
tlements am
While the
pily prosper
check from
Britain and


No less
on this
7 mis-
es, and
months
s having
butchery
t fire to
lesti vyed
| cattle
emselve*
departed.
d, how-
d ravage
e wucle
ideritially
he woods
mission-
) apprised
1 of the


IS as were
‘ame the
f. Divine
a much
73 a de-
n formed
hould be
Moravian
ver pre-
in North


ds formed,
ethlehem,
members
render it
pr. With
purchased
the Blue
ral repair-
ed Wech-
br in 1763;
ristian In-
don these
hians were
bn of go-
a. Even
he fury of
Pp restruin-
inveterate
ver peace-
the ces-
ettlement
48


GNA


was formed on the Susquehannah,
and. called Friedenshutten, or
«Tents of Peace”? Here they
erected 13 Indian huts, and more
then 40 houses in the English style.
The_settlement was frequented by
heathen Indians from all quarters;
schools were esiahlished, and the
pierching of the ¢--spel appeared
tc be blessed to the conversion of
many. The treachery of the Iro-
quois, however, in selling to the
English the land which they had
formally ceded to the Christian
Indians at this place in 1765, com-
pelled the congregation, consisting
of 241 persons, to abandon that
settlement, and they remeved to
Gnadenhutten on the Muskingui1.

GNADENHUTTEN, formeriy a
mission station of the U. B. in Ohio,
on the Muskingum, commenced
in 1772, by the Rev. David Zeis-
berger, together with 240 Christian
Indians, who were obliged to
abandon Friedenshutten. These
were soon followed by the congre-
gation at Friedenstadt.

The Christian Indians were all
now collected at 2 settlements on
this river, The other station,
formed a short time before about
10 m. up the river, was called
Shoenbrunn, or the Beautiful
Spring.. Here, as at their former
settlement, they were at first ha-
rassed by Indian wars; but peace
was at length restored, and their
prospects of usefulness, among the
neighbouring Delawares, were flat-
tering. Several became hopeful
converts, In compliance with a
request fiom the Delawares, who
voted in full’ council to receive the
Gospel, another settlement was
commenced in the vicinity, and
called Lichtenau ; and at the end
of 1778, the converts in the 3 set-
tlements amounted to 414 persons.

While the mission was thus hap-
pily prospering, it received a fatal
check from the war between Great
Britain and the Colonies. To add


GNA


to these trials, a party of apostates
was formed in Shoenbrunn, who
were ready to murder: or imprison
the missionaries; on which account
the faithful abandonded the place,
and removed to the other station,
They, however, soon after formed
a settlement on the opposite side
of the river, and called it Salem.

In 1781; they received orders.
from the governor of Detroit to
remove, and were permitted to go
to Sandusky, where they suffered
extremely from cold and hunger
during the winter. In the spring, a
company of them returned to gather
the corn on their former settie-
ments, when they were attacked
by alarge body of soldiers, who
threatened them with instant death,
They pleaded for their lives in vain;
but a short space was reluctantly
granted to prepare for their fate.
Immediately after singing and pray-
ing to God for mercy, 96 defence-
less Christian Indians were mur-
dered, and the settlement was
burnt. After this the remnant were
driven about from place to place,
and, in 1792, was settled on a tract
of land assigned them by the British
Government in Upper Canada.
See Canada.

GNADENHUTTEN, formerly a
settiement of the U.B., about 30 m.
from Detroit, on the Huron river;
formed after the destruction of Gna-
denhutten on the Muskingum, and
previous to the settlement at Fair-
field. They continued here about
3 years, and began to prosper,
when they were driven off by the
Chippeway Indians,

GN ADEN T HAL, or Grace
Pale, a station of the U. B., 130
m. E. of Cape Town, S. Africa,
near Serjeant’s river, formerly
called Baviansiloof. This mission
wis begun by the Rev. George
Schmidt, in 1737, who laboured
successfully among the Hottentots,
till he had formed a small congre-
gation, when he went 7 ———


GNA


to represent its promising state and
procure assistants ; but he was not
permitted by the Dutch East India
Company, for some time, to re-
some his labours. After repeated
applications, leave was granted to
send hither 3 missionaries, who
commenced their labours in 1792,
on. the spot where Mr. S. had re-
sided.

In 1800, they built a church, and,

under the British, enjoyed both
civil and religious liberty. On the
restoration of the colony to the
Dutch, they found a kind friend in
the new governor, Gen. Jansens,
and one of the missionaries was ap-
pointed chaplain to the Hottentot
corps, which had been raised for
its defence ; in which situation he
was highly approved by the consti-
tuted authorities.
. In Jan. 1806, the Cape was once
more attacked successfully by a
British force; but though the
government was transferred into
other hands, the missionaries con-
tinued to meet with the same favour
and protection which had formerly
excited their warmest. gratitude.
Sir David Baird and many English
Officers. and gentlemen visited
Gnadenthal in the most condescend-
ing and friendly manner ; and Lord
Caledan, who was appointed go-
vernor in 1807, evinced the most
friendly disposition towards the
brethren, and encouraged them to
form a second settlement at a place
called Groenekloof, or Green Glen,
in the high road between Cape
Town and Saldanha Bay.

To this spot Messrs. Schmidt and
Kohrhammer removed, with their
wives, in March, 1808, and took
up their residence in a farm-house,
the lease of which had just expired.
They then applied to the Hotten-
tot captain of that district, explain-
ing the object they had in view,
aul requesting him to convene his
people, that the word of salvation
might be addressed to them. About


GNA


100 persons were aceciicingly as.
sembled ; and, after listening with
the most profound at‘<ution to a
solemn and pathetic discourse, se.
veral of them agreed to reside in
the vicinity of the mission-house,
and eighteen lots of ground were’
iramediately measured off for the
erection of their huts, and the
formation of their gardens. The
subsequent labours of the brethren
at this new station, were evidently
attended with the blessing of the
Holy Spirit.

But whilst they were contem.
plating, with sacred delight, these
indications of the work of God upon
the minds of the heathen, a cir.
cumstance occurred which threat-
ened to be productive of the most
disastrous consequences. One night,
the slaves in a district called Hot.
tentot. Holland, rose in rebellion,
to the number of 300, and resolved
to set fire to Cape Town, tomurder
all the European males in the co.
lony, and to reduce the females to
slavery. They had actually seized
and bound several of their masters,
carried off arms, horses, and wag-
gons, and committed a variety of
depredations. By the prompt ex.
ertions of government, however,
this formidable insurrection was
crushed, and the ringleaders of the
plot, with many of their deluded
adherents, were made prisoners,

The mission still continued to
enjoy the patronage and protection
of government ; and, under the
smile of the Almighty, the converts
at each of the settlements appeared
to make considerable progress in
the knowledge of divine truth,
Many of the heathen, also, who
came from considerable distances,
evinced, by their artless: observa+
tions, that they had been led to the
brethren by the immediate influence
of Him who had resolved to bring
them under the sound of his Gospel.
One of them, in speaking to ‘the
missionaries on _ this ; oo


remarked, ‘
wonderful w
country to th
first told |
by some tre
said that teac
the great °
press purpost
Hotientots, :
courses they
ous personas
from heaven,
sinners from
which we ha
accounts, anc
after death, i
country. Fr
thoughts wer
pied with the
this place; br
plish my desi
providence le
another occas:
that when she
ther one day
around him, a
the following
children, thou.
tots, and despi
your study to
have a strong
God will, at so
teachers to ou
tant country.
advanced in
that I may not
but you, who
after discover
told you the tr
fore, as you ar
people. have ¢
asten to their
they take up
obedient to
Shortly after th
tentot, his pred
and when the
his daughter, s
denthal, where
in the way of
some time, wa
church by the 1
he yisit o


GNA


remarked, ‘‘God has led me in a
wonderful way from the lower
country to this settlement. I was
first told about Bavian’s-kloof
by some travelling natives, who
said that teachers had come across
the great waters for the ex-
press purpose of instructing the
Hotientots, and that in -their dis-
courses they described an illustri-
ous personage who came down
from heaven, in order to save poor
sinners from the black kloof, of
which we had heard such disma!
accounts, and to introduce ther
after death, into a most delight
country. Fromethat time,
thoughts were continually occ
pied with the necessity of visiting
this place; but I could not accom-
plish_ my desire,: till God in his
providence led me hither.”? On
another occasion, a woman stated,
that when she was a girl, her fa-
ther one day called his family
around him, and addressed them to
the following effect :—‘* My dear’
children, though you are Hotten-
tots, and despised by men, let it be
your study to behave well; for I
have a strong presentiment that
God will, at some future time, send
teachers to our nation from a dis-
tant country. As I am_ already
advanced in years, it is probable
that I may not live to see that day;
but you, who are young, will here-
after discover that your father ‘has
told you the truth. As soon, there-
fore, as you are jnformed that such
people. have arrived in our land,
asten to their residence, wherever
they take up their abode, and be
obedient to their instructions.”
Shortly after the death of this Hot-
tentot, his prediction was fulfilled ;
and when the intelligence reached
his daughter, she removed to Gna-
denthal, where she was instructed
in the way of salvation, and, after
some time, was admitted into the
church by the rite of baptism. — ,
The yisit of the Rev, Mr, La-


GNA


trobe, to this place, in. 1815-16,
appears to have been productive of
much benefit, both in a spiritual
and temporal sense; as the bre-
thren were animated to proceed in
their arduous labours with increas-
ing zeal and diligence ; and vgrious
disorders, which had formerly oc-
curred at Gnadenthal, were effec-
tually prevented, for the future, by
the introduction of several salutary
rules, and the establishment of a
regular police, consisting princi-
pally of fathers of families in the
lement.
he beginning of December,
»itants were suddenly in-
distress, by the descent of
t from the mountains, which
overwuelmed great part of .their
premises with destructive violence.
“©On this occasion,’? the mis-
sionaries abserve, ‘‘ we are much
pleased to see such willingness and
diligence as are not always met
with among the people, and-are by
no means natural to the Hottentot
nation: and when we spoke with
them of the damage which had
been done to their grounds, they
replied, that they had cause to °
thank the Lord for his mercy, that
notwithstanding their great deme-
rits they had been chastised with
so much lenity.”? On the 29th of
January, 1817, the governor, Lord
C. Somerset, accompanied by his
two daughters, Captain Sheridan,
and Dr. Barry; paid a visit to the
settlement at Gnadenthal, and ex-:
pressed the highest gratification,
whilst surveying the various im-
provements in that district. In
the evening, the whole party at-
tended the celebration of divine
service in the church, and appear-
ed much pleased with the singing
of the Hottentots; and the follow-
ing day, his Excellency and suite
visited the school, the smithy, the
cutlery, and the joiner’s shop; and


‘| before they departed, his lordship


presented the brethren, in the.
251


BN
>


GY


&


a
o°
=
<=
>.
eq uu
> O
iy Ge
wi
or
su
as


2
Wee Md Wes


GN. :
names of himself and his daughters
‘with 300 rix-dollars, for the useof
the school; an example which was

rously followed by Captain
eridan. RPS aget tat BSN CEO


- n-1822, the rains and floods.


were.excessive.. Qne of the bre-
thren wrote:—‘ Though none of
_ the buildings belonging to the mis-
sionaries have fallen, our poor Hot-
tentots. have suffered most severely :
48 houses have been so materially

red as to be rendered uninha-
bitable, for.some time; and, of this
number, upwards of 20 lie in ruins.
The rivulets which irrigate our
valley have’ overflowed, and” -da-
maged: some of the ‘gardens; but
the river Sonderend rose to an enor-
mous height. All the boats be-
longing to the farms higher up the
river were carried away, and pick-
ed up by our Hoftentots. Great
quantities of trees, bushes, roots,
and trunks, were also brought down
the stream, and collected at- the
foot of the bridge, the wood-work
’ of which was “now dislodged, and
some ‘of the beams and planks
carried to the distance of several
English miles.

« Besides ‘the loss sustained: by
the falling of houses, our Hotten-
tots lmve also lost a great many
cattle, by wet and cold, I have
this morning made a list of all the
oxen which remain, and by this
means have discovered, that, of
400 head, which they possessed on
the 96th of May, one half are either
consumed, in consequence of fa-

‘ mine, or have perished by the se-
verity of the weather, in the short
space of 3 months. In fact, we
fouenaie yk - all the

‘hopes of progressive improve-
ment, which once cheered the spi-
rits of the missionaries, will be
entirely blighted, unless God dis-

e the hearts of benevolent friends

grant us their assistance. Often
have I used that ex » ema-
ciated with hunger, but never did


I feel: the force of the phrase so
powerfully as in these days, when
‘ny door is incessantly besieged by
women and children, who present
to my-eyes the frightful reality of
what was formerly: only a faint
pieture in my imagination.”
'<Enabled to surmount the diffi.
culties of such circumstances, by
benevolent aid; and the-blessing of
the Lord, discouraging circum.
stances again-appeared at the close
of 1825, as toxthe subsistence of
the Hottentots, — the wheat at
Gnadenthal having been: entirely
destroyed: by the wet. . The work
of God, however, continued to
prosper. At this time, 1200 Hot-
tentots inhabited this place, of
whom 305 were school ‘children;
besides which, a number of youn
people, who had left the daily
school, weré instructed once a


week. As faras possible, the Bri. .


tish system had been adopted,

GOAMALTY, a town in Hin-
doostan, near the ancient city of
Gom, which was formerly the ca-
pital of Bengal; between Cutwa,
and Dinagepore, about 200 m. N,
Calcutta.

The Bapt. M. S, has a station
here. Mr. and Mrs. Mardon, with
Kristna Dass, and several other
native converts, were formed into a
church in 1608, and Mr. M. super.
intended the Bengalee schools,
which had been before introduced,
Kristna, who was afterwards ap-
pointed to this place, laboured with
diligence and assiduity his
countrymen, and distributed |


| quantities of Bibles and tracts,


1818, this station was removed to
English Bazar, near Malda.
OLD COAST, a rag in
W. Africa, which extends from
Cape a to the Rio Volta,
where European settlements have
been formed, and trade has been
carried on more extensively than
in any other part of Africa: The
settlements on this — have


with a vier


ll reality of
ly a faint


GOR


entlybeen annexed tothe govern~-
ptt of Sierra Leone. Chaplains
have been appointed to the chief
stations, and other important mea-
sures have been taken, to introduce
and enforse the principles of Chris-
tianity;. but it will require vigo-
yous and persevering efforts to
bunish the superstitions by which
the natives are oppressed.—[{See
oy, ame Cape Coast,

iv Cove.
PGOREE, a small island of Africa,
on the south side of Cape Verd, of
importance for its good trade, and
defended by a fort.. The French
gurrendered, it to the British in
1800 ; it was retaken in 1804, by
the French, who were soon com-

lied to surrender it again; but
it was restored to them in 1816.
W. long. 17° 25’, N. lat. 14° 40°.
The town, which includes the ha-
bitable part of the island, cantains
about 5,000 inhabitants, chiefly
Jaloofs, who are crowded together
in a deplorable state of ignorance
and superstition,

Mr. Robert Hughes, from the
C. M. S., succeeded in establishing
schools.here, which contained more
than 100 pupils; but, after a few
years, the number was much dimi-
nished, the island having been


_ Jestored to the French, and the sta-


tion was relinquished. Since that
time the Education Society of Paris
has stationed a teacher at this
place.

GORRUCKPORE, a town of
Hindoostan, about 100 m. N. of
styrene having about 70,000 in-

Some leading members of the
European Society in this place
having long desired the presence
of an English missiqnary, and
having engaged to provide a house,
and also to qupply a considerable
portion of the necessary expense,
the Rev. Mr. Morris, of the C. M. S.,
proceeded to it in March, 1823,


with a view to ascertain, from ac-


GOR


A severe


attack of fever, however, gf
debilitated Mr, M. soon si $5


commencement of his efforts,
which required a temporary ces-
sation from all labour. The Rev.
Michael Wiikinson and Mrs, Wil-
kinson were, therefore, appointed
to the station, where Mr. W. ‘still
continues; but repeated attacks of
illness have so weakened Mrs. W.
as to compel her to return home.

The church was opened on the
first Sunday in August, 1826; and,
since that time, there have been
two English and two Hindoostanee
services on Sundays.

“My. more general labours,”
says Mr. W. “consist of a regular
service among the Romish Chris-
tians twice on Sundays; besides
which, a number attend my house
at 9 o’clock every morning: the
Scriptures are read and expounded,
and this exercise concludes with
prayer. Some good, I think I may
aay much, has already resulted from

is daily attendance.

‘¢] have administered the Lord’s
Supper to 3 persons: 2 were for-
merly of Mr. Bowley’s congre-
gation,—a converted brahmin, and
a brahminee, his wife; she is a
recent convert, and apparently very
humble and sincere: the third was
of the Romish communion, and I
trust is now a Christian indeed.”’

e, of the native Christians
of Betegh and Crowree having
shewn 4 disposition to settle here,
professedly jor the sake of religious
advantages, a range of tiled houses
has been built, where they have
taken up their quarters, to the
number of 26—men, women, and
children.

Mr. W. has found it difficult

Zz 258


GOs
to obtain native’ assistants in the


schools; dnd this has led him to} Ca
commence a seminary for training |


youths as catechists and readers
of the word among their country-
men, There are at present 6 stu-
dents; ‘of whom 2 are of Christian,
2 of Mahomedan, and 2 of Hindoo,
parentage,

There are 3 boys” schools; 1
called the upper school, consisting
ef 68 boys; a second formed for
the sepoys, in which the numbers
are not stated; and a third on the
mission premises ;—of which Mr.
W. gives an encouraging account,
- Before the establishment of «
female school, Mrs. Wilkinson had
some girls under instruction, some
of whom read very well in the
Pentateuch and Testament ; but
@ schoolmistress having been ob-
tained from Chunar, e school was
commenced, and from 6 to 8 girls
attendéd. .

GOSHEN, lately a station of
the United Brethren, among the
Delawares on the Muskingum,
Ohio. °
' After peace was restored be-
tween the Indians and the United
States, Congress grantedthebrethren
12,000 acres of Jand to renew their
settlements on‘ the Muskingum,
which had been destroyed during
the war. In 1708, after a lapse
of 17 years, about 30 of the sur-
vivors of the old mission, under the

idance ‘of the venerable David

eisberger, removed from Fatrfield,
Upper’ Canada, where they had
taken refuge, and commenced
building @ new town, near the site
where Shoenbrunn once ‘good,
which they called Goshen.

Here a he number of Indians
were gathered into’ the charch,
many of whom adorned their pro-
fession ; but the thinness of ‘the
Indian population, and the influ-
ence of abandoned whites, induced
the brethren to remove with their


congregation in 18628 higher up.


GRA
the river to New Fairfield, [See


nada. |
GOSHGOSHUENK, ' formerly
a settlement of Indians on ‘the
Ohio R. ‘

Tn 1767, the Rev. D. Zeisberger,
one of the United Brethrén, who
established a mission among these
most abandoned natives, was soon
joined by several others, and they
laboured with very pleasing’ suo.
cess for some years.

Driven, however, from this
ground, by a war between 2 na-
tions of Indians, they removed to
Friedenstadt, and afterwards em-
barked with their congregation in
16 canoes, and rested at Beaver
Creek, where they were joined
by the congregation from Sus-
quehannah, and both emigrated
to the Muskingum, where they
formed the station called Gnaden.
hutten.

GRAAFF REYNET, an ex-
tensive district in the eastern part
of Cape Colony, S. Africa, ‘The
population is upwards of 15,000;
nearly 9000 of whom are Hot-
tentots. In 1822, there were 6000
heathens, not- under the care of
missionaries.

The town of Graaf’ “~ynet is
situated on the Zonda¢ ry and
contains nearly 2000 in... ants,

The Rev. Dr. Vanderkemp, with
Messrs. Vanderlingen and Read,
from the L. M. S. attempted a
settlement here in 180). Mr,
Vanderlingen took charge of the
colonial chureh } while Dr. Van-
derkemp and Mr. Read laboured
successfully for a short time among
the Hottentots. The colonists soon
raised a persecution in consequence
of this, which induced the mis-
sionaries to remove with such 4s
adhered to them to Fort Frederi«,
neat hey Bay, in Feb. 1803,
and finally to form -a settlement
at Betheledorp. About 60 of the
Hottentots were left under the
care of Mr. Vanderlingen, 7 a


Howard, ¢
United Sti
the garrisc


eld. {See


formerly
s on the


eisberger,
thren, who
nong these
‘was soon
, and they
asing su0-


from this
yeen 2 na-
removed to
Wards em-
regation in
at Beaver
ere joined
from Sus-

emigrated
vhere they
ed Gnadeni-


he care of


“ane is
ry and

no A vants,
kemp, with
and Read,
ttempted a
180]. Mr
ar; of the
» Dr. Van-
Ad laboured
time among
blonists soon
onsequence
d the mis-
th such 0s
1 Frederi*,
Feb. 1802,
settlement


t 60 of the

under the

an, on about
254


‘GRA


$0 ecres of land, given by Com- |


missioner Marpuier to the Mis-
sionary Society. Mr. Kicherer,
who had laboured with great suc-
cess at Happy Prospect Fountain,
near Zak river, took charge of the
Dutch thurch at this place, about
1804, but retained his connexion
with the ‘mission, and was followed
by the remnant of his native con-
gtegation, in 1806. Here he con-
tinued to labour with considerable
guecess among the Europeans and
Hottentots for more than 10


ears.
: The Rev. A. Faure, now Dutch
ininister at this place, is zealous in
promoting missions and the instruc-
tion of the slaves. He has recently
established a mission among the
Bosjesmans, to be supplied with
native teachers.

RAND RIVER, which rises

N. of lake Huron, and falls into
the St. Lawrence above Montreal,
after a course of 500 miles. It
forms the boundary fine between
Lower and Upper Canada. The
number of Mohawks on this river
isestimated at 2000, among whom
the Genesee Methodist Conference
hes two missionaries. This mis-
sion has been eminently blessed.
In the latter part of 1828, there
were 30 converted natives, an
equal number of converts among
the white population, and a Sab-
bath school for Indian youth.

GREEN BAY, a town on the
W. side of Michigan lake, Michi-
gan territory, United States, on
Fox river, 1$ m,. above its en-
trance into Green Bay, 184 m.
S.W. Mackinaro. The inhabitants
were formerly French Jesuits; but
by intermarriages with the Meno-
minee Indians, they are almost
without exception of mixed blood.
A little below the town is Fort
Howard, a military. post of the
United States, The number of
the garrison is about 600, W.
long. 86°, N. lat, 45°,


GRE

The Rev. E. Williams, now in
connexion with the Domestic and
Forei Missionary Society ©
the Protestant Episcopal
(United States), has laboured here
for several years, and has employed
a teacher, who had, in 1823, 6@
children of the Menominee tride
under his charge.

The pupils have made consider-
able improvement. The tribe is
represented as very interesting,
and extremely anxious for in+
struction.

GREENLAND, an extensive
region toward the N. pole, which,
whether continental or insular, is
regarded as belonging to North
America. This country was disco-
vered in the year 983, by somé
Norwegians, from Iceland; and
it was named Greenland, from its
superior verdure to Iceland. They
planted a colony on the eastern


‘coast ; and the intercourse between


this colony, Iceland, and Denmark,
was continued till the beginni
of the fifteenth century. . In tha
century, by the gradual increase of
the arctic ice upon the coast, thé
colony became completely inacé
cessible ; while on the W. a rangé
of mountains, covered with perpe+
tual snow, ‘precluded all approach.
This settlement contained several
churches and: monasteries; and is
said to have extended about 200
m. in the S.E. part. In more
recent times, the western coast
was chiefly explored by Davis, and
other English navigators ; but there
was no attempt to settle a colony.
The country is said to be inhabited
as‘ far as 76° N, lat., but the Mora-
vian settlements are chiefly in the
S. W. part. The people have some
beeves, and a considerable number
of sheep, for whose winter sub-
sistence they cut the grass in sum-
mer, and make it intohay. The
short summer is very warm, but
foggy ; and the northern lights di+
versify the gloom of winter, which
z2 255


@RE

ig very severe. It is said that the
N. W, coast of Greenland is sepa-
vated, from America by a. narrow
strait ; that.the.natiyes: of the two
countries have some. intercourse §
pnd that the Esquimaux of America
perfeetly resemble the Greenland-
ers, in their aspect, dress, mode of
living, and language. Cape Fake-
well, the S, W. point, is in W. long.
42° 49’, N. lat. 59° 38’,

. The Danish Mission was com-
meneed in 173), by the Rev. Hans
Egede, of Norway, who felt an
anxious desire to become acquaint-
ed.with the situation of his coun-
trymen in Greenland, and te convey
to them the truths of the Gospel.
After struggling 13 years with
difficulties seemingly insurmount-
able, he suceeeded in getting a
small colony fitted out. At first
the King of Denmark patronized
the mission, and appointed Mr.


Egede pastor of the colony, and:


missionary to the heathen, with a
salary of 60/,, Soon after this,the


mission was patronized by the Da-


nish Mission College. When the
Greenlanders became convinced
that Mr. E. intended to make a
permanent settlement, they were
alarmed, and fled into the inte-
rior; but at Jength he allayed their
fears, and in some measure gain-
ed their confidence, though for
a long time few became hopeful
converts. Other missionaries and
colonists afterwards came to his
assistance, who endured almost in-
credible hardships and privations,
and ‘sometimes their hopes gave
way to despondency.

e Danish settlements now ex-
tend on the W. coast, from about
69° to 74° N., lat, @ distance of
more than 1000 miles.

The population was estimated,
in 1805, at 6000; though the
rambling life of the natives renders
it difficult to ascertain the exact
number. ‘

The following are the principal


GRE
settlements, or cotonies, formed
the Danish missionaries. on this
coast. The figures shew the time
of their establishment, and about
the latitude in which they are si.
tuated; viz, Julianshaab, or Jun
liana’s Hope, about 1780, 61°,
Frederickshaab, or Fredericks
Hope, 1142, 62° 30’. Fiskernaces,
63°.—Godhaab, or Good Hope, on
Ball’s river, 1721, 64°,
172), 64°.— Sukkertop, or Zukkar.
67°. — Christianshaab, or Chris
tian’s Hope, 1734, 68° 10’; ry.
moved a few miles N. to Clan:
shaven, 1152.—Hgedesminde, ox
Eigede’s Memorial, 1759, 68° 30,
Jacob’s Haven, 1141, 68° 40°,
Godhaven, or Good Huven, 69°.
Rittenbenk, 1756, 69° 40°. The six
last mentioned settlements are in
the vicinity of Diske Bay.—Ura:
nak, 11°, Upernavik, 1796, 73°,

It is now more than a century
since the truly apostolic Egede first
attempted totintroduce Christianity
into Greenland ; and, if we except
the northerly colony, Upernavik,
and the most southerly, Julian.
shaab, there are scarcely any hea-
thens left in the known parts of
Greenland, and these but 9 few
old people. Formerly. there were
nine Danish missionaries, but lats
terly the number has been much
diminished. Beside the missiona-
ries, the number of catechists hes
been considerable,—in some of the
colonies, no less than 6 or 8. The
Danish missionaries have trans-
lated the New Testament, which
has been circulated; . they have
also printed a hymn-book, a cates
chism, and a spelling-book, in the
same language.

Since the year 1733, the U. B,
have laboured in this inhospitable
land: their first 3 missionaries
were, Matthew Stach, Christian
Stach, and Christian David, In
about 2 years they were joined by
two others, For nearly A years,


first
Christianity
f we except
Upernavik,
ly, Julian-
ly any hea-
n parts of
but 9 few
there were
es, but late
been much


“eonvert to the


Mhey laboured without gaining e
Christian fa th.


‘They, however, formed a settle-


‘ment, sitvated a short distance from.


Godshaab, the residence of Mr.
‘Egede, in N. lat. 64°, and called
‘New Herrnhut.

The year 1740 was rendered re-
‘markable by the change which
took place in the brethren’s mode
‘of preaching ; which is most hap-


pily described in the following nar- :


‘ration of an encouraging instance
‘of usefulness :—

. Johannes, an Indian of the Ma-
‘hikander hation, who had formerly
‘been a very wicked man, was the


first of that tribe whose heart was | als


‘powerfully awakened. Through the
preaching of the missionary, Chris-
tian: Henry Rauch, the Divine
‘yower was manifested in him in so
effectual a manner, that he not
only became a believer in Jesus
Christ, but a bléssed witness of
the truth ‘to his own nation:

The change which took place in
the heart and-conduct of this man
was very striking ; for he had been
Uistitiguished in all parties met
for riotous diversion as the most
outrageous, and had even made
‘himself a cripple by debauchery.
He afterwards became a fellow-
labourer in the congregation ga-
thered from among the heathen.
Atone of the meetings which the
brethren held for pastoral conver«
sation, and inquiry into the state of
the see neat he related the
occasion of his conversion in the
following manner, in consequence
of their speaking. with oné another
about the method of preaching to
the heathen :—


‘* Brethren; I have been a hea-
then, and have , ‘own old amongst
them: thereforé I know very well
how it is with thé heathen, and


how they think, A preacher once
tame to us, desiring to instruct us,
and began by proving to us that
there was a Gods on which we


GRE
said to him—‘ Wells; ‘and doat
thou think we are ignorant of that?
Now go back-again to the place
from whence thou camest.?

“ Then, again, another preacher
camé, and began +o instruct. us,
saying; ‘You must not steal, nor
drink’ too much, nor lie, nor lead
wicked lives.? We answered him,
*Fool that thou art! dost thou
think that we do not know that?
Go, and learn it first thyself, and
teach the people whom thou be+
longest to not to do these things ;
for who are greater drunkards, or
thieves, or liars, than thine own
people?? Thus we sent him away,


0.
“¢ Some time after this, Christian
Henry, one of the brethren, came to
me, into my hut, and sat down by
me. The contents of his discourse
to me were nearly these: ‘I comé
to thee in the name of the Lord of
heaven and earth; he sends me
to acquaint thee that’ he would
gladly save thee, and make thee
happy, and deliver thee from thé
miserable state in which thou liest
at present. To this end, he becamé
aman, gave his lifé a ransom for
man, and shed his blood for man.
All that believe in the name of this
Jesus, obtain the forgiveness of sin §
to ali them that receive him, by
faith, he giveth power to becomé
the sons of God: the Holy Spirit
dwelleth in their hearts, and they
are made free, through the blood
of Christ, from the slavery and do-
minion of sin, And though thou
art the chief of sinners, yet; if thou
prayest to the Father, in his name,
and believest in him, as a sacrifice
for thy sins, thou shalt be heard,
and saved, and he will give thee a
crown of life, and thou shalt live
with him in heaven, for ever.’
‘When he had finished his dis«
course, he lay down upon a board
in my hut, fatigued by pyr aera
and fell into a sound sleep, I
thought within myself, what mane
257


GRE


ner of man is this? There he lies,
and sleeps so sweetly 3. I might kill
him, and throw him out into the
forest—and who would regard it?
But he is.unconcerned ;—this can-
not be a bad man; he fears no
evil, not even from, us, who are
to savage, but sleeps comfortably,
- and places his life in our hands.
However, I could not forget his
words, they constantly recurred
to my mind; even though I went
to sleep, yet I dreamed of the blood
which Christ had shed for us. I
thought—this is very strange, and
quite different from what I have
ever heard; so I went and inter-
preted Christian Henry’s words to
the other Indians,”’
As the result of the preaching of
the cross, an extensive awakening
took place. One of the baptized
Greenlanders informed the mis-
sionaries, that he had found his
countrymen many leagues N. so
anxious. to be instructed in the
things of God, that they urged him
to spend a whole night with them
in conversation ; and after he had
retired, on the second night, some
af them followed him, and con-
strained him to resume the subject.
Even one of the angekoks, or ne-
cromancers, was brought under
such serious impressions, that he
wept almost incessantly during two
days, and assé that he had
dreamed he was in hell, where he
witnessed scenes which it would
be. utterly impossible for him to
describe. At the close of the year
3748, no less than 230 Greenland-
exe resided at New Hernnbut, of
whom 36 had been baptized in the
course of that year.

The unusual intensity of cold,
some years after, was productive
of all the horrors of famine. In an
account of one of their visite to the
heathen, at this awful crisis, the
missionaries observe—

“¢ Near a habitation, which had


long since forsaken, we found |


GRE
15 persons half starved, lying :
such a small and low "eve
house, that we could not stand up.
right, but were forced to creep in
on our bellies. - They lay upon one
another in order to keep themselves
warm 3 having no fire, nor the least
morsel to eat; and they were s9
emaciated that they did not care tq
raise themselves, or even to
tous, At length a man broughtin
a couple of fishes; when a git);
who looked pale as death, and
whose countenance was truly
ghastly, seized one of them, raw as
it was, tore it in pieces with her
teeth, and devoured it with the
utmost avidity. Four children had
already perished with hunger. We
distributed among them a portion
of our own scanty pittance, and
advised them to go. to our settle.
ment; which, however, they seem.
ed rather reluctant to do, as they
evinced no inclination to: hear the
Gospel, and carefully avoided aj)
intercourse with our Greenlanders,”
To. the horrors of famine were


now superadded the calamities. of |


disease. No less than 365. of the
Greenland converts were carried
off; but whilst the brethren wept
over so extensive and unexpected a
bereavement, they were excited to
rejoice in the success of that pre
cious Gospel which had supported
thesé poor creatures in their most
trying circumstances, and had even
enabled them to exchange worlds
with serénity and holy composure.
They had also the most pleasing
and substatitial proofs of the reality
of divine grace in many of their
surviving disciples, when they saw
the readiness with which they un-
deztook to: assist in the support of
the widows and orphans of the
deceased ; and they were especially
grateful for the triumph of divine
influence, when they saw such of
the female converts as were mothets


| alternately suckling the helpless


infants, who must 7 an


were eith
by the: s
France,
escaped
lehem, th
immedia
little co
selves,
a fine rei
give.’ -¢
new pair
I-will che
I, added


‘


senlanders,”
amine were


n 35. of the
rere carried
athren wept
inexpected a
p excited to


alamities.of |


GRE


without their timely aid, and who, '


if, left..in similar circumstances
among. the heathen, must have been
juried alive with their parents; as
pathing is so abhorrent to the feel-
ings of a Greenland woman, unac-
quainted. with the Gospel, as the
jdea of nourishing, with her own
milk, the child of another. «

Another pleasing instance of the

wer of Gospel truth, in expand-

the heart and exciting to sym-
pathy and active benevolence, is
thus related :—*‘ It. was customary
with: the brethren, at some of. their
meetings, to.read to. their flock the
accounts which they received from
their congregations in Europe, and
especially such as related to missions
among the heathen. These com-
munications were generally heard
with a considerable degree of in-
terest; but no intelligence ever
affected them so deeply as that of
the destruction of the Moravian
settlement among the Indians at
Gnadenhutten. When they were
told that. most. of the missionaries
were either shot or burnt to death,
by the savages \in the interest of
France, but that the Indians had
escaped to the settlement at Beth-
lehem, they burst into tears, and
{immediately prepared to raise a
little contribution among, them-
selves.
a fine rein-deer skin, which I will
give.’, ‘I,’ said a second, ‘have a
new pair of rein-deer boots, which
I-will cheerfully contribute.’ ‘ And
I,’ added a third, ‘ will send them
aseal, that they may have some-
thing both to eat and to burn,’
Such contributions could not fail
to be: highly appreciated by the
missionaries, and the value of them
was faithfully transmitted accord-
ing to. the wish of the simple-
hearted and benevolent donors.’

In 1768, a new station was form-
ed, which the brethren called Lich-
tenfele, at which the settlers were
compelled to endure many priva-


‘I,’ exclaimed one, ‘ have |


GRE


tions, from the scareity that pret
vailed_in the district, during the
continuance of which many, of the
pg Se died of absolute want; even
the Greenland families were at last
reduced to the necessity of feeding
principally upon muscles and sew-
weed, and the missionaries were
often brought into the most painful
straits. Amidst a succession of
temporal trials, and of successes in
their spiritual efforts, a third sta-
tion: was formed at the island. of
Onartok, where they had disco-
vered, with surprize, at the mouth
of a warm spring, a verdant mea-
dow adorned with different kinds
of flowers. This was, of course,
a powerful attraction in. such a
country ; but as the situation would
have been inconvenient in some
respects, they fixed upon.a spot a
few miles distant, to which. they
gave the name of Lichtenag. This
district, situated about 400 m. from
Lichtenfels, contained within the
circuit of a few miles not less than
1000 inhabitants. At: first, consi-
derable numbers flocked .to the
brethren ; so that previous to the
erection of a church, they were
frequently obliged to worship in the
open air; and during the winter of
1775, nearly 200 persons took yp
their abode with them. Many of
these were baptized at the expira-
tion of a few months, and in a few
years the believing Greenlandets
at Lichtenau exceeded in number
those at either of the other settle-
ments. Trials and deliverances
still attended the progress of this
mission. Some thousands have been
baptized since its commencement.
Vast numbers have died in lively
hope of a blessed immortality. The
missionaries have translated the
New Testament into the language
of Greenland, which has been
printed by the British and gy
B. S.; and its reception in 1833,
by the natives, was. accompanied
by indescribable joy. “— time


GRE
pefore this, the congregations were
‘as follows:—At New Herrnhut,
‘869 5 at Lichtenfels, 331; and at
Lichtenau, 588 ;~ ‘in all, 1278, old
and young. A fourth station was


‘at this périod contemplated at S¢a-
-tenhook


GRENADA, one of the Caribee

‘islands, lying 30 leagues N. W. of
Tobago. Itis'18 m. long and 12
‘broad finely wooded, and the soil
suited to produce sugar, tobaccb,
‘and indigo, It was taken from the
‘French in 1762, confirmed: to the
‘English. in. 1763, taken by the
‘French“in 1779, and restored to
the English in 1783. In 1795, the
‘French landed some troops, and
caused an insurrection, which was
not quelled till 1796. - St. George
is the capital.
' The Wesleyans commenced a
mission here in 1788; but the pro-
‘gress of the Gospel has been slow
‘among the negroes, who ure almost
‘wholly ignorant of the English lan-
guage, and spenk a corrupted dialect
-of French, without proper words and
phrases in which to receive ade-
quate instruction. In addition to
this, they are under the influence
_of the gross superstitions of popery,
and also of those derived from their
African ancestors. In their last
communications the missionaries
say c-——

‘i In the town of St. George, the
Lord ‘has lately owned his word,
and rend¢red it effectual to the sal-
vation of many. Severul respect-
able young men of colour have
united themselves to us, who are all
‘zealously engaged as teachers in
the Sunday-school, and of whose

rseverance we have pleasing

opes. In. addition to these, 4
-whites, 2 males and: 2 females,
‘have cast in their lot among us.
‘On ‘two of the estates we visit,
‘there is some good doing ; several
‘members: having | received on
oth of them. Upon the others we


wearcely dare to. say we see any


GRY


good, except that the negroes ‘iy.
pear to be a little more serious a
attentive while we are speaking tp
them. Upon the whole, we trust
‘that things in this department of our
‘work are more hopeful than before,
which we can attribute only to our
‘morefrequent visits to them : but,
as most of them are Roman Catho-
lics, our hopes of their being bene.
fited By out labours, ate not san.
guine. Holy water is their God,
which they purchase of the priest,
and upon which they entirely
depend for salvation. In refer.
ence to the windward part of the
island, we have to observe, the
labour bestowed upon it has been
immense; but the: fruit of it ah
most nothing. We have a few
members there who were in society
in Antigua.. These'we visit once 4
quarter, when on our tour ‘to the
Isle Rhonde. Numbers in society—
11 Whites; 168 Free coloured and
Blacks; and 199 Slaves. Total
370. The order of the school has
been recently improved, and by its
means the demoralizing influence
of evil example has received a
check. Number of children—93
males and 124 females ; total 217,
GRIQUA TOWN, formerly
Klaar Water, a station of the
L. M. S., South Africa, N. of
the Orange R., 700 m. N. E. Cape
Town, in the country of the Gri-
quas, formerly called Bastard Hot:
tentots, Population about 5000,
When the missionaries, Messrs,
Anderson and Kramer, first arrived
in 1802; they found the Griquas a
horde of roving and degraded sa-
viges 3 but after travelling about
with them for several years, they
induced them to settle at Klaar
Water, the place where Griqua
Town now stands. Agriculture wa:
intreduced, a school established,
and a church built. In 1805, 784
persons were under the care of the
missionaries ; of whom about 80
were taught to read, and 30 gave
260


themselve
these mé
effect.
their. prin
that view,
is extracts
Melvill,
Griqua T«
South A,
for the pu
misstatem
inserted ii
that. pape
trates: the
dency of |
the Griqu
“The

to the stat
take such
stop to th
they were
tribes arc
showing
their con
mando at
that attit
with rain
escape.

to Griqua
cattle, fo
of the p
tribes, to
part of th


negroes ay.
© serious and
8 speaking to
le; we trust
rtment of our
‘than before,
e only to our
» them : bu

oman Catho-
‘ being bene.
ate not san.
s their God,
of the priest,


nit of it ak
have a few
re in society
2 visit once
tour ‘to the
in society
oloured and
aves, Total
e school has
l, and by. its
g influence
received a
hildren—93
total 217,
» formerly
ion of the
rica, N. of
N. E. Cape
of the Gri.
astard Hot
out 5000.
es, Messrs,
first arrived
é Griquas 4
pgraded sa-
ling about
years, they
p at Klaar
pre Griqua
culture wa:
established,
1805, 784
care of the
h about 80
d 30 gave
260


GRI
evidence of piety. Soon after this,

ravages: of the small-pox,
the hostility of the natives, threats
ened the destraction of the settle-
ment. The missionaries, however,
continued to labour with diligence
end success. In 182), the church
consisted of about 200 members,
many of whom evinced the reality
of their Christian principles by cor-
responding deportment.

A. number of Griquas, called
Bergenaers (or Mountaineers),
from their having stationed them-
selves emong the mountains, com-
mitted, a few years after, many
acts of depredation and violence.
The Griqua chiefs had, on several
eceasions, commendably exerted
themselves to disperse and reclaim
these marauders, but without
effect. In reference to one of
their principal efforts made with
that view, the following statement
is extracted from a letter from John
Melvill, Esq. government agent at
ae Town, to the editor of the
South African Chronicle (written
for the purpose of obviating certain
misstatements of a communication
inserted in a preceding number, of
that paper), as: it beautifully illus-
trates. the moral and civilizing ten-
dency of Christianity in relation to

“The Griqua chiefs proceeded
to the station of the Bergenaars, to
take such measures as might put a
stop to the system of depredation
they were carrying on against the
tribes around them. Instead of
showing any disposition to alter
their conduct, they set the com-
mando at defiance, and maintained
thet attitude till night came on
with rain, when they made their
escape. The commando returned
to Griqua Town with 4000 head of
cattle; followed by some hundreds
of the people of the plundered
tribes, to whom a_ considerable
part of these cattle belonged and,


GRi
contrary to the practice of savagé


and | tribes, ascene of justice took place


which would have done credit: to
any civilized people. The chiefs
restored to these poor people atl
their ‘cattle, without reserving a
single hoof to themselves to which
any one of those poout could estas
blish a right. When the people
had got their cattle; they were told
that they might go to their own
place of abode; but they were so
struck with the justice of the Gri-
qua chiefs, that they begged to be
allowed to put themselves under
their protection, and follow them
to Griqua Town,”

The following paragraphs from
the same letter, exhibit pleasing
evidence of missionary influence in
promoting peace and security
among uncivilized, or partly civi<
lized tribes :=-

“ Finding it necessary to visit
Cape Town. (says Mr. Melvill),
and to bring the chiefs and some of
the leading people with me, ‘in
our absence the Bergenaars came

Griqua Town, and having
attacked a place in: the vicinity,
they killed two people and burnt'a
woman in a house, to which they
set fire. After this they proceeded
to attack the village, but hearing
that there was a missionary still
residing there, they retired to a
distance and sent for him, and he
brought them to terms of peace.

Here we. see a missionary, so
far from being the cause of war,
has so much respect attached to
his character, that even the Berge-
naars, would not attack the place
because he was there: the presence
of Mr, Sass afforded a protection to
the whole people.’’

Indeed, there is good reason for
believing that the missionaries,
either directly or indirectly, have
been for many years instrumental
to the preservation of peace be-
tween the colonists reat tribes


GRI


beyond it; by promoting, in the |


fornrer, a sense of justices in the
latter, a'spirit of forgiveness, when
the:former have violated that prin-


e.
om During the past year,” says
the last: report, “great improve-
ment has taken place both in
the state and prospects of this
mission, The religious services
are» more numerously and more
regularly attended. On the Sab-
bath, the place of worship, which
is large, is. well filled. . While the
missionaries endeavour to awaken
the people to .a concern for their
own salvation, they are careful to
urge upon them the obligation
they are under to promote the
religious instruction of their chil-
dren, and these endeavours have
not been. ineffectual. A Sabbath-
school, devoted entirely to the re-
ligious instruction of the children,
has. been commenced. It excites
considerable interest among the
people, and has been already the
means: of. effecting great god.
Many of the parents attend the
school, and one of the mission-
aries usually gives an address on
the. occasion.’ The attendance at
the day-school; which had declined
to about 40, .is now increased to
180. The children make good
ess.

-: The number of Bechuanas who
have settled at Griqua Town,
chiefly in consequence of the Man-
tatee invasion, ‘is upwards of 800.
The missionaries are active in pro-
moting their religious instruction,
through the. medium of an. inter-
preter, whom: they have engaged
for. the purpose. The children of
the Bechuanas‘ regularly attend
the school, and make good pro-

The missionaries consider
itnot improbable that some of these
youths may be the first to convey
the Gospel to their own countrymen.
i #* The Bergenaars are. desirous
to share.again in the religious and


GRO
civil privileges of Griqua Tov
and many of them bare eeternat
there for that purpose. ;
‘¢ ‘fhe Griquas are becoming mote
sensible of the advantages of pros


‘curing the means of their subs


sistence on the spot, and are, in
consequence, paying greater ats
tention ‘to agriculture, which will,
of course, be favourable to industry,
and the formation of settled habits,»
GROENEKLOOF, 4 station of
the United Brethren. in: South
Africa, about 40 m. Ni of Cape
Town, among the Hottentots.’ «
This. station was commenced in


1808, under the patronage of ‘the


Earl of Caledon, the’ Governor ‘of
the Cape. The brethren were
assigned about 6000 acres of: land,
on which they permitted none to
build, but such ‘as engaged to. live
regular lives; and on these prin-
ciples a settlement was. soon
formed. In 4 years, 93 were bap.
tized. The number of inhabitants
in 1822 was 400. Boopk?
About ‘this time »a large and
handsome chapel, that had: been
erected, was much damaged by the
rains and floods, from which ‘the
whole settlement: sustained great
injury. In the following year this,
though still felt, was in a great
measure repaited ; the hearts of the
brethren were animated by many
proofs: of the Divine regard ; and
the harvest was, providentially, very
abundant, At the close of 1825,
also, this station enjoyed much of
the blessing of God. ° ar
The B. and F. B.S. has made
valuable donations of Bibles ‘and
Testaments to this mission,


H.. |
HANKEY, a new station of the:
L. M.S. in 8. Africa, named after


its Treasurer, ‘in a situation pé+
culiarly beautiful,. near the. Chams;


toos R., between ase i and


the wild ge
villages


winter to 1
com, the}
place, whi


winter, w


age of ‘the
yovernor ‘of
hren were
es of: land,
ed: none to
ged to. live
these prin-
was: soon
3 were bap-
inhabitants


tion ofthe:
; med after
ation: pes
be. Cham;
tsdorp and
262 .


HAR.

Bethelsdorp, The- Rev. W. Foster
proceeded to Africa, to take charge
of a seminary to be formed here
for the education of the children
of thé misstonarjes. in that coun-
try, and for the preparation of
Christian natives for instructing
their own countrymen. This place,
however, is deemed by Mr. F.,
for many important reasons, ineli-

ple. The. attendance at the
school, which is represented as in
a prosperous state, is: usually about


80.

HARMONY, a station of the
U. F. M. S., commenced in 182),
among the great Osages of the
Missouri, situated on the Marias
deCein, a good mill-stream, 6 m.
above its junction ‘with Osage river,
1$m. from the largest of the Great
Orage villages, and about 80 m.
§.W, Fort Osage, on the Missouri.
. The Osages of the Missouri are
very similar in their habits and
character to those on the Arkansas.
They are divided into Great and
Little Osages, this distinction being
merely nominal, and till recently
they lived in two separate villages,
onthe Osage river, about 360 m.
from its junction with the Mis-
souri; but they wander about like
the wild game they pursue, Their
villages are’ nothing more than
what they can remove upon the
shortest notice; one horse being
capable of carrying house and
household furniture at one load,
From the commencement of the
winter to the time of planting their
com, they usually reside in one
place, which they call their village.
The remainder of the year, they
separate into parties, and stay but
a few days. in a place, according
to the abundance or scarcity of
game where they set. up their
lodges. In summer the men go
in a state of nature, except a
cloak about their waists; and in
winter, when the thermometer is


‘HAR


‘below Zero, most of their little


children are seen. naked. They:


the great body of this tribe removed
about 60 or 70 m. south-westerly,
ta the grand river. The tract of
land given by the Indians for the
use of the mission contains about
15,000 acres, which are very fer-
tile, and well supplied with ma-
terials for building.
Dwelling - houses, a school-
house, a grist-mill, a saw-mill,
and other suitable buildings, have
been erected for the accommo,
dation of the mission family; and
in the. course of the summer of
1822, 5 fields, embracing upwards
of 90 acres, were enclosed, a corn-
field of 40 acres planted, and the
farm stocked with 100 head of
cattle. Sickness at first retarded
the progress of the mission; but
the confidence of the chiefs has
been secured, and the prospects of
extensive and increasing influence
in the tribe continued to be en-
couraging, in the early part of.
1824, The school, in the latter
part of 1823, consisted of 18 Osage
children, who make such profi-
cjency in acquiring the English
language, and in domestic and
agricultural arts, as to render
much service to the family,. and
to promise extensive usefulness
to the mission and to: their nation. .
The government of the United
States contributes to this work.
The Rev. Messrs. Pixley and
Montgomery have devoted their
time principally to. the study of
the language, and are cheered
with the prospect of soon preach-
ing the Gospel in the Indian
tongue. In pursuing this object,
Mr. Pixley has lived several months
with the Indians, accompanying
them in their hunting rig and


HAR


depending for subsistence upon
their precarious sources for sup-
port. The mission family, fitted
eut in this enterprise, consisted
of 41 persons; 20 married, 5 un-
married females, and 16 children ;
but several have died.

HARVEY ISLANDS, a name
adopted as a general designation of
the group, from one ofthe eight
islands of which it consists being
called Harvey Island, and because
that island is better known in
geography than any other of the
group. One of them is unin-
habited. [See Aitutuke, Atui,
Mungeea, Mitiaro, Maute, Raro-


es

AWAITI, called, according to
ancient orthography, OWHYHEE,
an island in the N. Pacific Ocean,
the a of the Sandwich islands,
07 mif€s long by 78 wide, contain-
ing 4000 square miles. It lies S. E.
of the group, the N. point being
in W. long. 155° 58’, N. lat. 20° 1%.
Capt. Cook discovered this island,
‘Nov. 30, 1778,: and was killed by
the natives, Feb. 14, 1779. It is
divided into 6 large districts. In
the N. E. part of this island is the
mountain Kaah, the top of which
is continually covered with snow;
the height is estimated to be 8400
feet. Many parts of the island are
very fertile and populous, In the
southern part the ground is covered
with cinders, and intersected with
‘many black streaks, which seem to
mark the course of lava that
flowed from the mountains some
ages ago. The population is esti-
mated at above 80,000, by some at
100,000, and formerly at 150,000.
The following stations have been
formed on the island :—

Kairua, on the western’ coast,
nearly equidistant from its N. and
.8. points. The inhabitants amount
to about 3000. Kairua is the seat of
government, under Tamehameha I. ;
and .the residence of Kuakim, the


HAW


Governor, known among Americans
by the name of “ John Adams,” —

The Rev. Mr. ‘Thurston, of the
A, B.C. F. M., removed hither


from Honoruru in Oct. 1823, and 23
\was assisted for some time by the §


Rev. Mr. Bishop. A place of
worship was built by the Governor,
the size of which is 60 by 30 feet,
Two services have since been held
in iton Sundays. ‘‘ The congre.
gation,” says the Board, “ usually


consists of from 600 to 1000 souls, |


who listen to instruction with a
good degree of seriousness, The
Governor uniformly attends, and re.
quires his people to observe the
Sabbath in the strictest manner,
At his particular request, also, Mr,
Thurston conducts amily worship
at his house, morning and evening;
and, in imitation of his example,


this practice has been intreduced }


into the families of the inferior
chiefs.”

In August, 1824, the usual at-
tendance at public worship, was
about 400. The missionaries ob.
serve— In addition to preaching,
we have the daily charge of two
schools: one at the king’s house
adjoining our dwellings, consisting
of nearly 50 scholars, and con-
ducted by Mr. and Mrs. Bishop;
another in a house lately erected
for the purpose in the Governor's
inclosure, consisting of the chiefs
and principal persons of the place,
and conducted by Mr. Thurston
and Honorii. Mrs. Thurston has,
likewise, under her care a class
of girls, whom she is instructing
in needle work.

“© We have distributed in this
village, since the commencement
of instruction, about 400 spelling
books, and 100 hymn books, to
nearly as many different indivi-
duals; nearly all of whom may be
considered as under a course of in-
ytruction, though not all are regular
attendants at our — hey
2


are in the hab
panies to. rea
as with one
method of lea
desirable, . whe
pursued ; yet
many more i
could instruct
qualifying the


holy Scriptures
Pp }


be able
hands,’?

‘Kaavaroa, ¢

Kairua,.. on
Keopuolani, t
Rinorino, live
Thurston setilg
would go to the
Sunday. Kam
tinguished chie
the sume. Of
sionaries writes
pedple working
Sabbath ; and
them twice, .to
with them on

this has been hi
months past. ¢
tended his exer
Bay, and there |
and conducting
He has received
tion from the
there are few n
who have more
religious subjec
have been sear
for hidden treast
him pray in hi
much surprised
fervency,~ and

which were man
with the correc
sentiment whic
tained,’

The Rev. Mr,.
F. M., it appears
at the very spot
was killed. He
which that great
ruins of the tem,
kiah once worsh
bones of human


HAW


are in the habit of uniting in com-
‘panies to read their lessons aloud,
as with one voice, Though this
method of learning to read is not
desirable, where a better can be
pursued ; yet we are persuaded that
many more indjviduals' than we
@ could instruct are, in this way,
qualifying themselves to read the
| holy. Scriptures, whenever we shall
be able to’ put them into their
hands.’?

‘Kaavaroa, about 16 miles S. of
Kairua,. on the western coast.
Keopuolani, the late mother of
Rinorino, lived here when Mr.
Thurston setiled at Kairua; and
would go to that place to spend the
Sunday. Kamakau also, the dis-
tinguished chief of Kaavaroa, did
the same. Of him one of the mis-
sionaries writes—‘‘ He. forbids his
pesple working or bathing on the
Sabbath ; and regularly assembles
them twice,.to pray and converse
with them on religious subjects:


this has been his Practice for many


months past. Of late, he has ex-
tended his exertions ; crossing the
Bay, and there meeting the people,
and conducting religious services.
He has received but little instruc-
tion from the missionaries; yet
there are few natives on the islands
who have more correct views on
religious subjects. He seems to
have been searching for truth as
for hidden treasure. I once heard
him pray in his family; and was
much surprised at the simplicity,
fervency,” and apparent sincerity
which were manifested, as well as
with the correctness of religious
sentiment which the prayer con-
tained,”

The Rev. Mr.Ely, of the 4, B,C,
F. M., it appears, is. stationed bere,,
at the very spot where Capt, Cook
was killed. He sees the rock on.
which that great navigator fell—the
ruins of the temple in which Oboo-
kiah once worshipped an idol—the
bones of human beings which lie on


the sea-shore, Yet his prospects are
very apimating. Of their own ac-
cord, the chiefs have built him a
house of worship (which was. dedi-
cated on the 28th of April, 1824)
and a dwelling-house. They have
made laws, forbidding any disturb-
ance, or sleeping in the house of
God; the monthly concert is well
observed; the house is crowded on
the Sabbath, and the .assembly is
very solemn. Mrs. Ely has.a Sab-
bath school of 40 children ; and, on
other days, more than 100 are
taught the rudiments of knowledge.

In a recent communication of the
Board it is said—*‘T he people, a lit-


tle more than two years ago, were


opposed to Christianity—given to in-


ebriation—quarrelsome—often en-


gagedin dome-iic broils—and gro-


Nelling in the luv.est ignorance and


debasement; but within a few months .


‘we have been informed, on authority
not to be questioned, that. intoxi-


cation is no longer to be witnessed


jin that place—that there are no


more family quarrels—that family
prayers are uniformly attended—.
that kind offices are everywhere
rendered—and that, from remote
villages, individuals come to inquire
respecting the ‘‘ New Way,’ and,
with tears, beseech that some one
may be sent, to instruct them.’’
Vaiakea, on the eastern coast,
nearly in a line from Kairua, ona
large and commodious bay. The
Rev, Messrs. Goodrich & Ruggles,
of the 4. B. C, F. M, arrived here
Jan, 24, 1824. Twosmall schools
were immediately commenced, but
under some discouragements from
the extreme ignorance of, the
people ; which rendered some afraid
of the “ palapala,”’ and nearly all
insensible of its value. On the 7th
of February, Koakou, a chief,
under whose protection they were
to live, arrived: he was much
pleased that missionaries had come
to Waiakea, and promised to erect
a house for public worship. Inthe
AA 265


HAW


interim, one of the native houses
was used for the purpose. Coming
to this house one Sabbath; Mr.
Ruggles found the natives at their
*¢ poe’? dishes: on his entrance
they inquired, if eating was ‘‘ ta-
bued”’ (forbidden) on the Sabbath :
they were answered, of course, that
it was not: they continued eating
but a short time, however, when
the headman said, ‘“‘ Come, let us
put up our calabashes, that the
King’s curiosities may pray.’’ The
missionaries are said to be often
spoken of under that denomination.
Their church was completed on
the'19th of May, being the ninth
which has been erected for the wor-
ship of the true God on those islands.


In Not. 1824, the missionaries | L. M. S.


say, ‘© We had feared that the
station at Waiakea must unavoid-
ably, for the present, be given up ;
but the prospect begins to brighten.
Mr. Goodrich has a school of about
40 scholars : the natives have begun
to show themselves more friendly,
and their attention to the Word of
God has, for some time, been in-
creasing ; so that now the house of
God on the Sabbath is sometimes
crowded with hearers.’ [See
Sandwich Islands.]

HAWETIS, formerly Turnip
Mountain, a station of the 4. B,
C. F. M. among the Cherokees,
about 60 m. southerly from Brain-
erd, about a mile N. of the Coosa
river, not many m. E. of the char-
tered limits of Alabama, and about
three quarters of a mile from the
road which passes through the na-
tion from Georgia to Alabama,
The principa: settlements are in
opposite directions, on the River
Coosa, which here runs nearly W,

Mr. John C,. Elsworth, school-
master, commenced this station, in
an entire wilderness, about the end
of April, 1823, in compliance with
the urgent request of the converted
Cherokee, named Samuel J. Mills,
who resides in the neighbourhood,


HAW


and whose ardent desire for tte
conversion of his countrymen ip
duces him to make many efforts in
their behalf. _ Suitable “buildings
have been erected, and a few acres
of land cleared. A smallschool was
commenced, November, 1823; and
in the early part of 1824, ‘a serious
attention to religion was apparent
in the neighbourhood, and several
persons gave satisfactory evidence
of w saving change. The people
are generally desirous of religious
instruction. This station was named
Haweis, in respectful remembrance
of the late venerable Dr. Haweis,
a very ardent and persevering
friend of missions, and, for some
time, an active member of the

HAWEIS TOWN, in the dis.
trict of Papara, Tahiti, Georgian
Islands, where the work of civili-
zation and evangelization are pro-
ceeding by means of the ZL. M. S,
This station also takes its name
from the late Rev. Dr. Haweis;
and for several years, it has been at-
tended with prosperity. ‘When vi-
sited by the deputation in 1893,
they stated that the number of the
baptized was 1008—of whom 559
were adults, and 450 were children,
The congregation consisted, at that
time, of from 1200 to 1500 persons;
450 adults could read in the Gospels,
and about 100 more read elemen-
tary books. In the children’s schools
were 90 boysand 110 girls.’?

A new school-house has lately
been erected for the children, one
end of which is occupied by the
boys, and the other by the girls,
with their teachers.

Mr, Davies has completed trans-
lations of the epistles of James,
Peter, John, and Jude, and also
of the book of Psalms.

The subscriptions to the Tahi-
tian Auxiliary ©, S. for the year
1826, exceeded that of former
years. In the year ending May,
1825, they amounted Me A 1748


of adults 771,
number added
was.62; the f
municants is 3
-During the
the church hay
excluded, 2 o
ance, have bi
have withdra
other churche:
received on ¥
churches, . 8
different times
teachers to oth
occasions the
gation have
dance of their
ing, them witl
property for th
Separate me
people and chil
baptized, are
once a fortnigh
in general is
ypung people |
separate meeti.
those which the
where they w
presence of the
disease hav
at this station,
d deaths ne:
arriages, dur
HAYTI, I
Domingo, one |
in the W, Indie
from. 60 to 12
the W. part, w
two peninsulas,
that to the S.
and extending
covered by Col:
called it Hispe
Bartholomew _
which he gave
Domingo, the i
frequently calle
by Hispaniola,


: the
n in
rts in
dings
acres
DL was
3 and
erious
arent
everal
dence
people
igious
named
yrance
aweis,
vering
some
of the


1e dis.
orgian
civili-
€ pro-
J M, S.
| name
aweis ;
een at-
hen vi-

1823,
of the
m 559
ildren,
at that
Brsons;
bospels,
lemen-
schools


lately
en, one
by the
> girls,


1 trans-
James,
d also


Tahi-
he year
former


s May:
1743


'


gallons of cocoanut oil. Thenuir-


ber of baptized in 1826 was,—oi


adults 27; of children 645 and se- ;


veral were candidates for baptism.
The total number of baptized is—
of adults 771, of children 692, ‘The
number added to the church in 182¢,
was.62; the total number of com-
municants is 344.

During the year, 6 members of
the church have died; 4 have been
excluded, 2 of whom, on repent-
ance, have been re-admitted; 3
have withdrawn, on removal to
other churches; and 4 have been
received on removal from other
churches. .8§ members have, at
different times, been sent out as
teachers to other islands; on which
occasions the church and congre-
gation have manifested the abun-
dance of their liberality, by supply-
ing, them with various articles of
property for their use.

Separate meetings of the young
people and children, who have been
baptized, are held at this station
once a fortnight. The attendance
in general is regular; and the
young people seem to like these
separate meetings far better than
those which they formerly attended;
where they were interrogated in
presence of the adults. The ravages
of disease have been experienced
at this station, reducing the births

d deaths nearly to an equality.

arriages, during the year, 20.

HAYTI, Hispaniola, or St.
Domingo, one of the richest islands
in the W, Indies, 370 m. long, and
from. 60 to 120 broad, except at
the W. part, where. it divides into
two peninsulas, about 25 m. broad,
that to the S. being the longest,
and extending 150 m._ It was dis-
covered by Columbus, in 1492, who
called it Hispaniola; but his son
Bartholomew building a city, to
which he gave the name of St.
Domingo, the island became more
frequently called by that name than
by Hispaniola, The natives call it


HAY


‘ayti, or Island, for such it pre-.

ats itself, particularly to the N.
jt has mines of gold, talc, and
crystal ; extensive and rich vallies,
and immense verdant plains, where
numerous herds pasture incommon.
The chief rivers are, the Artibo-
nite, St. Jago, Neyba, Yuna, Oza-
ma, and Nisao. The Spaniards
had possession of the whole island
for 120 years; inthe first 15 of
which they reduced a million of in-
habitants to 60,000. They were af-
terwards forced to divide the island
with the French, who had the W.
part, but not equal to one third;
and the Spaniards retained the E.,
which is the more fruitful. This
joint possession continued till 1795,
when the Spaniards ceded their
part to the French. Since the re-
volution in France, this island has
been subject to great calamities.

The E. part, originally settled by
Spaniards, remained under the go-
vernment of Spain until December
1, 1821, when a formal declaration
of independence was made by the
people. The resolution appears
to have been unanimous, for the
change was effected without the
loss of blood. St. Domingo, and
Port au Prince, are the capitals,
The independence of Hayti has
recently been acknowledged by
France.

Domingo, St.,is the capital of
the E. part of the island, and an
archbishop’s see. It is the most
ancient town in America built by
Europeans; and was founded in
1504, by Bartholomew Columbus.
The cathedral forms the S. side of
the main square; and in it is pre-
served the first cross Columbus
planted in the island. On the right
of the high altar, for many years,
rested his remains, brought from
Seville, in a brass coffin; but on
the island being ceded tothe French
they were removed to Havannah, in
1796. This city was the last prin-
cipal place in the island retained

267


HAY


by the French, who surrendered it,

ih 1809, to the British and Spanish
The inhabitants are ‘esti-
thated at 12,000; but before the
late calamities they were far more
yiumerous. W. long. 69°50’. N.


forces:


Lat. 18° 28’.


Under the Spanish and French,
the religion was Roman catholic,
and the mass of the people was
The present
government supports schools in all


extremely ignorant.


the principal settlements.


In the early part of 1824, the
government of Hayti sent an agent
to the United States, who was ‘au-
thorized to defray the expense of
transporting, during the year, 6000
coloured people to Hayti, and to
promise the emigrants a perpetual
title to the lands which they culti-
vate ; and, in consideration of these
proposals, a society has been formed
in the city of New York, to pro-'


mote the same design. In 1820,
the B. & F. S. S. reported 1300 pu-
pils, in theirschools in this island.


" At Cape Henry, or Cape Haytien,
a town on the N. coast of this


island, having in 1803 a population


of 20,000, a college was instituted
by the late king, Henry, about


1817, for the instruction of those
who were designed to fill the most
importantoffices inthe government;
and the Rev. W. Morton, of the
Church of England, was appointed
to the office of classical professor,
and commenced with 20 pupils,
The number soon increased to 40;
and in 1820, to 80. There is also
a’ professor of surgery and medi-
cine. About 1815, Mr. Gulliver,
patronized by the National Edu-
cation Society, opened a Lancas-
terian school, which increased, in
a‘ few years, to between 2 and
300 pupils.

In 1820, the Rev. Messrs, Jones
and Harvey, Wesleyan missionaries,
arrived here, and were cordially re-
ceived by the king; but were obliged
toleave soon,on account ofill health.


the rabble.


‘HAY
At Port au Prince, a town at the
head of the bay of’ Leogane, on the
W.. coast of Hayti,estimated to cons


sive academy has recently been
established, in which all ‘branches
of jurisprudence and literature, and’
the principles of astronomy and


medicine, are taught. Schools have’
also been established bygovernment,


In 1817, two missionaries, from
the Wesleyan S, were sent to this
place, with the special permission
of government. They were cor-
dially received by ‘the President,
who gave them liberty to establish
schools, and build churches in any
part of the republic. They had
collected attentive and increasing
congregations in the town, and in
the country villages.
30 members had been formed, with
18 on trial, when the Roman ca.


tholics raised’ a violent opposition.


against them, and the President
thought it expedient, that preaching
should be discontinued. The mis-
sionaries removed ‘about 2 years
after their arrival, when the Presi.
dent addressed an obliging letter to
the committee of the’ Society, ac.
companied with a benefaction of
500/. Since the departure of the
missionaries, the Methodist Suciety
has been cruelly persecuted, and
some of the members have been
imprisoned. In 1822, there were
56 members in the connexion.

At this period it ‘was under the
care of Messrs. Pressoir and St.
Denis, natives. After having been
wholly prevented, for a time, from
assembling together, and suffering
imprisonment, they renewed their
meetings, and courageously en-
dured the hostility of their per.
secutors; This was followed by
heavy trials; ro worship was
prohibited, and the private meet-
ings of the society were exposed
occasionally to the insults of
An application was
made to the government in their


tain 20,000 inhabitants, an exten.’


A society of


behalf, . by
nected with
reply. ’ ‘thoug
tone, contai:
of the noti
Hayti, on th
The method:
is acknowle:
mob; but the
of the excit
have renoun
tumults whic!
be allowed.
the Haytian
them? for it
but the Cath
tually comm
answet is, tha
lics to keep tl
persecute the’
Such is the s
gular letter.
Messrs. W
ton, and — H
sionariés, hav
from the U. F
rican emigran
cated at the
Parcippany,
the patronage
York and Ney
from the city
Mth, 1824, w
grants, several
viously formed
H. sailed abo
same year, and
sustained the.
coloured cong
phia, He iss
thission.
Early in 1829
B. M. S. sent
coloured preach
missionary tou
Port au Prince
received by the
mitted to preac
and halls, He
Haytien, he wa
veral weeks in
Various means,
mission,


HAY


behalf,. by a gentleman uncon-
nected with the committee, and the
reply, though not in an unfriendly
tone, contains a curious exposition
of the notions which prevail in
Hayti, on the subject of toleration.
The methodists are persecuted, it
is acknowledged, by the Catholic
mob; but then they are the cause
of the excitement, because they
have renounced Popéry, and the
tumults which this occasions cannot
be allowed. Why, then, does not
the Haytian government suppress
them? for it is not the methodists,
but the Catholic mob, which ac-
tually commits the riot. The
answet is, that to oblige the Catho-
lics to keep the peace, would be to
persecute them for their religion !
Such is the substance of this sin-
gular letter.

Messrs. William, G. Penning-
ton, and — Hughes, coloured mis-
sionariés, have been seht hither,
from the U. F. M. S., to the Ame-
rican emigrants. Mr. P. was edu-
cated at the African school, at
Parcippany, New Jersey, under
the patronage of the synods of New
York and New Jersey. He sailed
from the city of New York, Oct.
l4th, 1824, with nearly 200 emi-
gtants, several of whom were pre-
viously formed into a church. Mr.
H, sailed about the close of the
same year, and had, for some time,
sustained the. pastoral charge of a
coloured congregation in Philadel-
phia. He is superintendent of the
thission.

Early in 1823, the Mussachusetts
B. M, S, sent the Rev. T. Paul, a
coloured preacher, of Boston, on a
missionary tour to this island. At
Port au Prince he was courteously
received by the President, and per-
mitted to preach in private houses
and halls. Here, and at Cape
Haytien, he was occupied for se-
veral weeks in accomplishing, by
various means, the object of his
mission,


HER


HEMEL EN ARDE, ahospital
for the relief of Hottentot lepers,
about ‘12 m. from Caledon, South
Africa, and a short distance from
the sea. The Rev. Peter Leitner,
one of the U. B., came here in 1823,
and principally confines his labours
to the hospital, under the superin-
tendence of the government, which
contained, at that time, about 156
patients. The cordiality,with which
he was received excited hopes of
success, which have been more
than realized.

In January 1826, he writes :—
“ Among our pdtients many are
very weak and declining; ’ and
during last year, 12 baptized, and
14 unbaptized, departed this life:
25 adults, and 6 children, were
baptized, and 8 were admitted to
the Lord’s Supper. The whole
number of inhabitants of this hos-
pital was, at the close of 1825, 106.
To all of them the: glad tidings of
great joy are proclaimed, and they
are both publicly and privately in-
structed in the blessed truths of the
Gospel. Our people are remark-
ably attentive and devout at all
their meetings.”’

HENREEPORE, formerly Kow-
abee, the most central of the Saadh
villages, about 40 m. N. W. Delhi,
Hindoostan. The Saadhs are se-
paratists from the prevailing reli-
gion of the Hindoos; a name
expressive of their great purity
and devotion.

The C. M.S. took this within
its tield of labour, in 1820, Native
teachers have been stationed here,
and have laboured, with consider-
able success, in several neighbour-
ing villages of this interesting peo-
ple. By means of one of them, a
brahmin has lately been brought to
the feet of Jesus,

HERRHUT, a town in Saxony,
in Upper Lusatia, founded, in 1722,
by the U. B., who settled on lands
belonging to Count Zinzendorf, It
has become their metropolis, and
AA2 269


‘th


the chief nursery of their humerous
missions among the heathen. |

- HIDITA, a district on the N. E.
side of Tahiti, Georgian islands, —
’'In May, 1826, the number adé
mitted to baptism was 139, of whom
11 had received this initiatory rite
at other stations. The church, at
that time, consisted of 69 members,
of whom 22 were admitted into
communion at other stations. The
congregation consisted, on the Sab-
bath, of between 500 and 600, and
on. Wednesday evenings, of about
300. A school was formed, in
which about 200 children attended.
An adult school was also com-
menced, and attended by between
200 and 300; and a chapel and
dwelling-house were erected.

The Rev. Mr. Jones, of the L.
M. S., removed from Papara to
this place in March, 1825, where
no missionary had before statedly
laboured, On the 18th of Novems
ber, he was deprived of his wife by
death. After this event he appears
to have found himself incapable of
attending to his missionary duties,
He left the islands in October, 1826,
retired to N. America, and dissolved
his connexion with the Society.

No missionary appears to bave
laboured at this station since the
departure of Mr. Jones.

. HIGH TOWER, a station of
the 4. B. C. F. M. among the
Cherokees, 25 m. S. S. W. Carmel,
and about 80 S.S.E. Brainerd,
situated on the R. Etowee, now
called High Tower. In 18)8, the
Indians were desirous of religious
instruction for their children; and
in Nov. 1822, Mr. J. Procter,
assistant missionary, visited them.
A school-house was immediately
erected, and in April, 1823, he
opened a school under favourable
auspices. This school is in an
important place, both on account
of the number of children, who
live within a moderate distance,
and the solicitude their parents


Hin
manifest for their regulér’ and
punctual attendance. Oct. 12th,
1823, a church was formed, ‘con.
sisting of 6 persons, belonging to
the mission family ; a ‘revival took
place, and, as its fruits, 16 natives
were receivell into Christian ‘fel.
lowship in April’ 1824, and 25 of
their children were baptized."

HINDOOSTAN, or INDIA, a
region of Asia, which extends from
Cape Comorin to the Himuleh
mountains, by which ‘it is sepa.
rated on the N. from Thibet and
Tartary. The northern part’ ex.
tends from the. R. Sinde, or Indus,
on tie W. bordering upon Persia,
to the mountains which separate
Bengal from Cassay and the Bur-
man dominions; in the southern
part, the Bay of Bengal lies E,
and the Indian Ocean S. and W.
It is situated between N. lat, 9°
and 359; and E, long. 66° and 92°,
Its greatest length is about 1890
m. 3 its breadth 1600. The climate
and seasons are considerably diver-
sified by difference of latitude and
local situation ; but through the
regions of ~Hindoostan there is
some similarity of climate,

This vast as omgir § consists chiefly
of large plains, fertilized by nu-
merous rivers and streams, and
interspersed with a few ranges of
hills. The periodical rains and in-
tense heat produce a luxuriance
of vegetation almost unknown ‘in
any other country on the globe.
Hindoostan has been known to
Europeans for three centuries,
The Portuguese, at that time the

atest naval power in the world,
ormed the first commercial es-
tablishment in the country. The
Spaniards, the Dutch, the French,
the Danes, and the English, have
since been attracted by commercial
‘interests ; but it was reserved for
the last-mentioned power to gain
almost unlimited sway.

The Lateral has been vari-
ously estimated, from 100 t
270


habits of 1:
to each, ¢
castes, wl
sprung fro
ma’s body


establish t.


Ist were t
digts ;. the
bandinen ;
servants,
temote al
time, the
tended to
ployments
100 diffe
are includ
denominat
sooders,
addedto s
caste of sd
mits of m
extending
servile occ
riably fol
orefu
generat.
low that
the same
me w
aspiring a
buted fo 4
Hindoo a
however,
right of de
ployments,
are menial
of caste, th
ermarry,
with thoce


‘he chimate
ably diver-
atitude and
hrough the

there is


te,
sists chiefly
ed by nu-
pams, and
y ranges of
hins and in-
luxuriance
nknown ‘in
the globe.
known to
centuries,


HIN


120,000,000, who’ ate, principally,
idolaters ; and about half British


subjects. Mahomedans, Christians,”


and Jews, are numerous,

‘Among the Hindoos there is a
yemerkable distinction of caste.
Caste is. a Portuguese word ;
Jati, the’ Indian ‘term, signifies a
genus or kind. The different castes
of the Hindoos are, therefore, con-
sidered as so many ‘different species
of human beings, and it is believed
that different forms of worship and
habits of life are necessarily adapted
to each, Originally there were four
castes, which are supposed to have
sprung from different parts of Brah-
ma’s body, and from such parts as to


' establish their different ranks. The


Ist were theologians, or the brah-
mins; the 2d were kings and'sol-
didts ; the 3d, merchants and hus-
bandmen ; the 4th, mechanics and
servants, This distribution is of
remote antiquity, In process of
time, the original distinction ex-
tended to a subdivision of em-
ployments. There are now about
100 different castes, all of which
are included under the general
denominations of brahmins and
sooders, Subdivision has been
addedto subdivision. The lowest
caste of sooders, for instance, ad-
mits of many subordinate castes,
extending to persons of the most
servile occupations, and each inva-
riably follows the occupation of
his forefuthers. From generation
to generation the same family fol-
low the’ same business, and hold
the same rank; wu circumstance
which, while it suppresses every
aspiring aim, has greatly contri-
buted to perfect the ingenuity of
Hindoo artisans, The brahmins,
however, reserve to themselves the
right of descending to secular em-
ployments, and even to those which
are menial. According to the rules
of caste, those of one may not in-
termarry, nor even eat or drink,
With those of another, It is said none


‘homedans


| of the high castes will’ even dritife


water in the family of a white
man; and’ in ‘ those’ countries -
where Europeans are their rulers,
the héathen rank them under the
peta ce The acces hig
caste is intetwoven every cir-
a fathnée of life ;: dahevence to
it is viewed as a matter of reli:
gion, and the castes become so
many religious sects. If one vio-
lates the rules of his caste he
is excommunicated,’ which is
called losing caste. From that time |
his nearest relations abandon him ;
and’ he can seldom recover his
former’ standing, and, only by &
large fee to the brahmins. In this
way he may generally be restored,
but not always. Dr. Carey men-
tions the case of a man, who had
lost’ caste by means of a woman
in his family ; who, while the Ma-
lad possession of the
rovince, had been compelled to
ive with a Mussulman. He offered
£10,000,’ or about 44,400 dollars,
for the recovery of his caste, but
he could not regain it. ©
As to religion, three of the six
schools of philosophy, once famous
in India, were atheistical. The
doctrines of these atheists were
established for a considerable pe-
riod, and they are still taught in
the systems, which prevail through-
out China, Japan, the Burman
empire, Siam, Ceylon, &c. ‘These
philosophers, of whom Védvas, the
compiler of the Védt, was one of
the most distinguished, taught, that
everything we can see, or form any
conception of, is to be referred
to one or other of two princi-
ples; it is either spirit ‘or matter,
since, beside these, nothing elsé ex»
ists; that all spirit is God ; and that
God exists without attributes, in a
state of eternal repose, intangible
and unconnected with any of the
forms of matter. They also teach,
that the spirit of man is individuated
deity; that in this —— with
1


HIN


¥natter, spirit is. degraded and im-
prisoned; and that the great and
only business of man on earth is to
seek emancipation, and return to
the blessed source from. which, he
(that is, spirit, for I, thou, and he,
are referrible only to spirit) has
been’ severed.. The mode of ob-
taining emancipation, is by the
practice of ceremoniesdenominated
Jogue, all‘of which are connected
with bodily austerities and tortures,
having for their object the annihi-
lation of all conscious connexion
with the body and with material
things. Such.a deliverance, it is
supposed, will leave spirit, even
while in the body, in a state of
divine tranquillity, resembling that
of God—for the passions alone
are the sources. of pain; and
will fit the individuated spirit for
reunion to God-—for the passions are
the sources of life and death ; and
confine the individuated spirit to a
continued course of transmigra-
tions, and rivet its union to matter.
These speculations form the be-
lief of all the Hindoos; and there
are still a number of mendicants
in India who imitate the jogees.
The people at large do not become
jogees, because these austerities
are incompatible with the existence
of human society; but they make
constant allusions to this doctrine
. Of spirit; to the subjugation of the
passions, and jto transmigration as
inevitably attaching to men, till
perfect abstraction and absorption
are obtained.

The popular superstitions of
the Hindoos are deeply affecting.
While they verbally admit the
doctrine of the divine unity, they
he of 330,000,000 of gods,

hey prostrate themselves before
dead matter; before the mon-
key, and, the serpent before idols,
the very personifications of sin 5
and this animal, this reptile, and
the lecher Krishni, and his con-
cubine Radha, are among the


HIN


gements;

whom to
obey, or in whom to confide,
Equally ignorant are they of the
laws of God, and of sin as con.
nected with a disposition. different
from the Divine mind, and as a
moral evil. Hence they attribute
to the waters of the Ganges ex.
traordinary virtue ; thé whole po-
pulation residing in its neighbour.
hood crowd morning and evening
to the river; the holy water is
carried for religious uses to fhe
most distant parts; and the dying
are hurried, in their last moments,
to receive their last purification in
the sacred stream. Under the
delusion that sin is to be removed
by the merit of works, others
undertake long and dangerous pil-
grimages, in_ which thousands
perish ; or inflict on their bodies
the most dreadful tortures; or sit
through the day and through the
year, repeating the names of their
guardian deities. As to the real na-
ture of the present state, they la-
bour urider the most fatal apprehen-
sions; they believe the good or evil
actions of this birth are not produced
by tlie volitions of their own wills,
but arise from, and are the una-
voidable results of, the actions of
the past birth; that their present
actions will inevitably give | rise
to the whole complexion of their
characters and conduct in the
following birth ; and that thus they
are doomed to interminable trans-
migrations, to float as some light

272


they have
fal erime;
e time, int
ful states
the Shastr
except he
to the ’ pri
some othe:
or except
sacred: rive
reral pile-
heppiness
are: suppor
are said‘ to
the gods,
riod, they.
indulgence
This is the
# Hindoo,
conditions‘
the people
The state
exclusively
tion, or a ¢
existence, |
the world,
Awful, |
female soc:
the Hindoc
May preser
upon the p.
supposes hi:
pend, and
the support
make the |
Hindoo fair
The case of
the rajpoot
relation bel
Hindoo tril
tive proof ¢
which even


erver, and
no love of
settled rules
ften quar.
r, and sub.
‘angements;
ot whom to
lo. confide,
they of the
jin as con-
on. different
, and as a
ay attribute
Ganges ex-
whole po-
neigtibour-
nd evening
ly water is
ises to the
1 the dying
t moments,
ification in
Under the
be removed
ks, others
gerous pil-
thousands
heir bodies
res; or sit
hrough the
es of their
he real na-
By they la-
apprehen-
ood or evil
bt produced
own wills,
p the una-
actions of
bir present
give | rise
pn of their
t in the
thus they
Able trans-
some light
272


HIN
sdbstance on the bosom of ‘an: irre-
ustible: torrent,’ With reference
to a futute state, their ideas are


jually erroneous and pérnicious. :
this they: commonly under-"
sand, hothing more ‘than transmi-'


gration, and‘ they die: with: ‘the
expectation ‘of immediately rising
into birth again in some other body
in that of a dog‘ or acat, ora
worm feeding on. ordure ; and! if
they have committed some -dtead-
fal crime} ‘they expect to fall; for
time, into some one of the dread-
ful states of: torment ‘described ‘in


the Shastrti.:: Indeed, no Hindoo,


except’he has given all his wealth
to the priests,- or has performed
some other- act of splendid: merit ;
or except: he drown himself in a
sacted river, or perish on the fu-
neral pile—has the least hope of
happiness after death.’ Those who
ste: supposed to attain. happiness,
are said’to. ascend to the heaven of
the gods, where, for a limitted‘pe-
riod, they. enjoy an unbounded
indulgence in sensual gratification.
This is the only heaven held out to
#Hindoo, and held out to him on
conditions which the great bulk of
the people find to'be impracticable.
The state beyond this, reserved
exclusively for jogees, is absorp-
tion, or a complete loss of separate
existence, in union to the soul: of
the world,

Awful, indeéd, is the state of
female society. The anxiety of
the Hindoo to obtain a son; who


may present the funeral offering, |


upon the presentation of which he
supposes his future happiness to de-
pend, and the expenses attending
the support and marriage of girls,
make the birth of a female in a
Hindoo family an unwelcome eyent.
The case of female children among
the rajpoots' exhibits—though this
relation belongs only to one of the
Hindoo tribes—a strong corrobora-
tive proof of the low estimation in
which even the lives of females are


HIN”


held iri India. | One of ‘the families’
of the rajpoots, it is said, began thd:


practice of ‘butchering their female


children, to prevent the® fulfilment’


of a prédiction, that throtigh &‘feé


male the succession ‘to’ the crown’
would’ pass‘out of the family. “All:


the tribes ‘have ‘since ‘followed the


toyal‘example ; and now not oné
female child ‘sutvives—the parents, *


it is believed, are’ themselves thé


murderfers, The boys marry in the -


tribe next in “rank to ‘them. A


‘bramhin from one ‘of’ the western’


provinces,’ says Mt.’ Ward, of Se-


raimpore, (from whose statements
ve me”


this article is conipiled), “
this telation ‘A rajpoot, forsome


unassigned reason, spared his female’


child, which grew up in the father’s


house to the age in ‘whith girls in’


India are married. The sight of


girl, however, ‘in the ‘house ‘of a’


rajpoot was so'novel, and so’ con-


trary to the customs of the tribes, '
that no parent’ sought her in mat- ©
riage for his son.’ The father, suf”
fering under thé frowns of his own’!
tribe, ‘and trembling’ for the chas-’
tity of his daughter and thé honour:


of his family, was driven into a
state of phrenzy; ‘and in this state,
taking his daughter aside,‘ he ace


tually put a period to her exist, -


ence.” To the Hindoo female all
education is denied by the positive
injunction of the Shastri, and | by


the general voice of the population. |
Not a'single school, ‘therefore, for
girls, ‘is found all over the country.’

ith knitting, sewing, embroidery,
painting, music, and drawing, ‘they’
have no more to do than with let- '
ters; even the washing is done by''


men of a particular tribe. The Hin-


doo girl, therefore,spends the first 10°'
years of her life in shéer idleness, ’
immured in the house of her father, '


Before she has attained to this age,


however, she is sought after by the”
ghutuks, men employed by parents


to seek wives for their sons. She


is betrothed without her — a
7


e


HIN -
Yegai agreement, which binds her
for life, being made by the parents
on both sides, while she is yet a
child. Ata time most convenient
to the parents, this boy and girl are
brought together for the first time,
and the marriage ceremony is per-
formed ; after which she returns to
the house of-her father. Before
the marriage is consummated, in
many instances, the boy dies, and
this girl becomes a widow; and as
the law prohibits the marriage of
widows, she is doomed to remain in
this ‘state as long as she lives. The
greater number of these unfortu-
nate beings become a prey to the
seducer, and a-disgrace to their fa-
milies. Not long since, a bride, on
the day the marriage ceremony was
to have been performed, was burnt on
the funeral pile with'the dead body
of the bridegroom, at Chanderna-
gore, a few miles N. of Calcutta.
Concubinage, to a most awful ex-
tent, is the fruit of these marriages
without choice. What a sum of
misery is thus attached to the lot
of woman in India before she has


attained even her 15th year! In.


some cases, as many as 50 females,
the daughtdrs of so many Hindoos,
aye given in marriage to one bram-
hin, in order to make these fami-
lies something morer espectable :
and that the parents may be able to
say, we are allied by marriage'to
the kooleens, the highest rank of
bramhuns. Supposing, however,
that: the Hindoo female is happily
married, she remains a prisoner and
a.slave in the house.of her husband,
She knowsnothing of the advantages
of aliberal intercourse with man-
kind. She is not permitted to speak to
a.person of the other sex, if she be-
long to a respectable family, except
to old men very nearly allied in
blood ; she retires at the appear-
ance of a male guest; she never
eats with her husband, but partakes
of what he leaves. She receives
no benefit from books or from so-


HIN

ciety ;, and: though the Hindoos do
not affirm, with some Mahamedans,
that. females have no, souls, they
treat them as though: this was their
belief, What companions for their
husbands !—- what, mothers: these!
Yes; it.is not females alone who are
the sufferers. ...While: such 18: the
mental condition of the sex, of how
much happiness,. must . hus

children, and society at large be
deprived |! What must be the state
of that country where female mind,
and the female presence, are things


unknown; for the lowest orders. of.


females alone are seen in numbersin


the streets! This vacuity of thought,.


these habits of indolence, and this


total want of information, of prin-.


ciples, and of society, leave the


Hindoo female an easy prey. to the.


greatest evils. Faithfulness to mar.


riage vows is almost unknown in In-:


dia’; and where the. manners of the
East allow of it, the females mani-
fest.a more enthusiastic attachment


- to the superstitions of. the country,


than even the men. The religious
mendicants, the priests, and the


‘public shows, preserve, an Over-


whelming influence over their
minds, Many.become mendicants,
and some undertake long pilgrim.
ages; in short, the power of su-
perstition over them. in India, has
no parallel in any other country,
But the awful state of female so-
ciety appears in nothing so muchas
in dooming the widow to.be bumt


alive with the, putrid carcase.of her


husband. The Hindoo legislators
have sanctioned this. immolation,
shewing herein a studied determi-
nation to insult and degrade woe
man. She is, therefore, in the
first, instance, delyded. into. this act
by the writings of these bramhins;


in which also she is promised, ‘thet:


if she will offer herself, for .the
benefit of her husband, on the fune-
ral pile, she shall, by the extraor-
dinary merit of this action, rescue
him from misery, and Sy him and


fourteen ge
family with
she shall en
happiness
shall


throne of hi
‘of years) !

Mr. Ward,
ferent times
repeated opp
sent at simil
courage fail
pile consists
gots laid o
height abou
ground, abo
six feet in

male has de
“eat fire,’
she leuves }j
time, accom
relations, ay
She’ proceeds
priest attend
certain cere
ed, accomp
These over, *
which may b
brink of th
round the pil
tering parch
goes round, ©
self down o1
body, laying
cords having
pile, ‘and und
these cords t
living body a
ther. A lar,
are then laid
two levers ar
to press’ do
prevent » ‘he
when the fi


her. Her el


face, with a
hand, then
The drums a
ed, which, \
mob, effectus
of the wido
flames, The
dows manife


amhins;
sed, ‘thet
‘or .the
he fune«
extraor-
,» Tescue
him and


HIN


fourteen generations of his and her
family with her to heaven; where
she shall enjoy with them celestial
heppiness, until 14 kings of the

shall have’ succeeded to the


throne of heaven (that is, millions |
‘of years) !


«T’ have seeh,”’ ‘says
Mr. Ward, “three widows, ‘at dif-
ferent times, burnt ulive ; and had
repeated opportunities of being pre-
sent at similar immolations, but my
courage failed me.” ‘The funeral
pile consists of a quantity of fag-

laid on the earth, rising in
height about three feet from the
ground, about four feet wide, and


six feet in length. r the fe-
male has Heolaed net Meotation to
“eat fire,” as’ the ‘people call it,
she leaves her house’ for the last
time, accompanied by her children,
relations, and a few neighbours.
She' proceeds to the river, where a
priest attends upon hef, and where
certain ceremonies are perform-
ed, accompanied with ablutions.
These over, ‘she comes up the pile,
which may be ten yards from the
brink of the river, She walks
round the pile séveral times, scat-
tering parched corn, &c. ‘as she
goes round, and at length lays her-
self down on the pile by the dead
body, laying her arm over it. Two
cords having beén laid across the
pile, ‘and under the dead body, with
these cords the dead body'and the
living body are’ now tied fast toge-
ther. A large quantity of faggots
are then laid upon the bodies, and’
two levers are brought over the pile
to press down’ the widow, and
prevent - her from. escaping
when the flames begin to scorch
‘her, ‘Her eldest son, ‘averting his
face, with a lighted torch in his
hand, then sets fite to the . pile.
The drums are immediately sound-
ed, which, with the shouts of the
mob, effectually drown the shrieks
of the widow surrounded by the
flames, The burying alive of wi-
dows manifests, if that. were pos-


“many


“perstition,


HIN


sible, a still more. abominable state
of feeling towards women than the
burning them alive.
bury their,dead. When, therefore,


The weavers


a widow of this tribe is deluded
into the determination not to sur-


vive her husband, she is buried
alive with the dead body. In this


kind of immolation the children


and relations dig the grave. After


certain ceremonies have been at-


tended to, the poor widow arrives,
and is let down into the pit. She sits


in the centre, taking the dead body


on her‘lap and encircling it in her ‘
arms, These relations now begin
to throw in the soil; and after a
short space, two of them descend


into the grave and tread the earth


firmly round the body of the widow.
She sits a calm and unremonstrating
‘spectator of the horrid process, She


sees the earth rising higher and-
higher around her, without up-


braiding her murderers, or mak-
ing the least effort to arise and


make her escape. At length the
earth reaches her lips—covers her
head, The rest of the earth is
then hastily thrown in, and these
children, and relations mount the
grave and tread down the earth
upon the head ‘of the suffocating
widow—the mother! By an offi-
cial statement from India, it ar-


‘pears that every year more than 700


women (more probably 1400) are
burned or buried aglive in the pre-
skloney of Bengal alone. How
n the other parts of India ?

At other smmolations we also.
shudder with instinctive horror.
Instigated by the demon of su-
mapy mothers, in
fulfilment of a>: vow; entered
into for the purpose of 'procur-
ing the blessing of children,
drown their first-born in the Brum-
hu-pootru and other rivers in India.
When the child is 2 or 3 years old,
the mother takes it to the river, en-
courages it to enter, as though
about to bathe it, but ri it to

15


HIN,


pass into the midst of the current,
when she abandons it, and stands
an inactive spectator, beholding the
struggles, and hearing the screams,
of her perishing infant! At Sau-
‘ gur island, mothers were, formerly,
seen casting their living offspring,
among a number of alligators, and
standing to gaze at these monsters
uarrelling for their prey, beholding
e writhing infant in the jaws of
the successful animal, and standing
motionless while it was breaking
the bones and sucking the blood of
the poor innocent! At the annual
festival in honour of Muha Devo
(the great god), many persons are
suspended in the air, by large hooks
thrust through the integuments of
the back, and swung round for a
uarter of an hour, in honour of
is deity. Others have their sides
plewes and cords are introduced
etween theirskin and the ribs, and
drawn backwards and forwards.
While these victims of superstition
dance through the streets, others
cast themselves from a stage 10
feet from the ground, upon open
knives inserted in packs of cotton.
Sometimes one of these knives en-
ters the body, and the poor wretch
is carried off to expire. At the

_ same festival numbers have a hole
cut through the middle of. the
‘tongue, in which they insert a stick,
aram-rod, or any thin substance,
and thus dance through the streets
in honour of the same deity. At
the <.ose of the festival, these de-
votees dance on burning coals, their
feet being uncovered. Thousands
of Hindoos enter upon pilgrim-


ages to famous temples, to con--


secrated pools, to sacred rivers,
to forests rendered sacred as the re-
treats of ancient sages, to places
remarkable for some: natural phe-
nowsens, &¢. &c.. These pilgrim-
ages are att. uded with the greatest
fatigue end ;y'vaitons; frequently
with starvaiio:.. discas’. and pre sae,
ture death. ilundrecs are suposed


HIN


to. perish on these journeys; and
some of these places, the resort of


pilgrims, become frightful ceme.


teries; to oneof which, Jugunnaut,
in Orissa, Dr. Buchanan has very
roperly given the name of Golgo.


a.: ‘TT once: saw,” says Mr, #4


Ward, “a man making succes.


ive prostrations to Jugunnaut,


and thus measuring the’ distance
between some place in the north,
down to the temple of Jugunnaut,
which stands nearly-at the southern
extremity of India. The Hindoo
writings encourage petsons afflicted
with incurable distempers to put an
end to their existence, by casting
themselvesunder the wheels of the
car of Jugunnaut, or into some
sacred river, or into a fire prepared


for the purpose; promising such Mi


self-murderers, that they shall rise
to birth again in a healthful body,
whereas, by dying a natural death,
they would be liable to have the
disease perpetuated in the next
and succeeding births. Multitudes


of lepers, and other children of |


sorrow, perish annually in’ these
prescribed modes, Mr. W, Carey,
of Cutwa, the second son of Dr,
Carey, states, that he was one
morning informed that some people
had dug a deep hole in the earth,
not far from his own house, and
had begun to kindle a fire at the
bottom. He immediately pro-
ceeded to the spot, and saw a poor
leper, who had been deprived of
the use of his limbs by the disease,
roll himself over and over till, at
last, he fell into the pit amidst the
flames. Smarting wit) avony, his
screams became most dreaii!n!. ii
called upon his famiiy, who su

rounded the pit, and exticuted them
to deiiver him from the flames.
But he called in vain. His own
sister, seeing him lift his hands to
the side, and make a dreadful effort
to. escape, pushed him back again;
where, these relations still coolly
gazing upon the ge be


| the Ganges is


water of the ri
fully down hin
it; and bis by
arms, are besm
ofthe river (


purifying prove
the soul quits
on the earth,
upto ihe mid
while bis rela
him, torment:
‘ast moments
vités, and incre
the pains of d
where recovery
hy for, th
bring. on pr
poly certain,
murders, in us.
perpetrated.
also, are enjoin
certainly made |
superstition — ix:
nor are they ux
sentday. The
rites to be obsey
of a man; and
declares. the d
tashed to sucha
with the offerin
And while |
cruel, its smme
tested. The wi
door, évery cle
thei: works on
abominable alle
tions ; so that th
Mey Were ages |
rivalled for impu
of the works,
of the Poorans, a
writings, are . s
they cannot poss
ey Can never s


HIN


petished, enduring indescribable
agonies. Every Hindoo, in the
pour of death, is hurried to. the
side. of the Ganges, or to some
other sacred river, if near enoug
to ond3 where he is laid, in the
agonies Of death, exposed to the


burning sun. by day, and to. the | ti


dews-‘and cold of the night. The
water of the river is poured plenti-
fully down him, if he.can swallow
it; and bis breast, forehead, and
arms, are besmeared with the mud
ofthe river (for the very mud of
. the Ganges ie supposed to have
purifying propert ies). . Just before
the soul quits the body, he is laid
on the earth, ad then immersed
upto the middle, in the stream ;
while bis relations stand around
him, tormentinz him. in these his
‘ast moments with superstitious
vt and increasing a hundred-fold
the pains of dying, Very often,
where recovery might be reasonably
hoped for, these barbarous rites


pretty certain, that many private
murders, in using these rites, are
perpetrated. uman_ sacrifices,
also, are enjoined in the védu, and
certainly made a part of the Hindoo
superstition iw very early times,
nor are they unknown at the pre-
sentday. The védu describes the
rites to be observed at the sacrifice
of a man; and the Kalika pooran
declares. the degree of merit ate
tashed to sucha sacrifice, compared
with the offering of a goat, &c.
And while Hindooism. is thus
ctuel, its immortality is fully ate
tested. The writings of the Hin-
door. ¢very class of. them, even
thei. works on ethics, are full of
abominable allusions, and descrip-
tions ; so that they are to-day, what
they Were ages ago,—a peopie un-
rivalled for impurity. Many parts
of the works, called the tam,
of the poorans, and of their poetical
writings, are. so indelicate, that
they cannot possibly be translated ;
they can never see the light, But


rel on premature death. It is


HIN
what is a. million-fold: more atro-
cious, the object of worship a
pears as the personification of sin
itself... One or two of the Hindoo
objects of worship cannot possibly
be named: but in ‘he acts of
Hindog worship the same licen-
ousness prevails, In the songs
and dances before the idols, ut the
periodical festivals, impurity throws
away her mask. The respectable
natives themselves are absolutely
ashamed of being seen in their
temples. Gopal, a bramhin, ac-
knowledged that he never witnessed
these. spectacles -without hiding
himself behind one of the pillars
of the temple. The scenes ex-
hibited in the boats on the Ganges
every, year, at the festival of the
goddess Doorga, in the presence of
hundreds of spectators, are grossly
impure; and at the annual festival
f the goddess of learning, the con-
duct of the worshippers is intole-
rably offensive. The figures painted
on the car of .Jugunnaut, which
is exhibited. to the public. gaze for
fifteen: days together, at the festi-
tivals in honour of this deity, are
equally licentious. And, as might
be expected, the priests and the
religious mendicants, under this
profligate system, are the very
ringleaders in. ctime. The whole
country. is, indeed,, given up to
abomination to that degree, that,
according to the opinion of one of -
the oldest and most respectable
residents in India, delivered in Mr.
Ward’s hearing more than once,
there is scarcely a chaste female to
be found among all these myriads
of idolaters.

Such is a brief. account of Hin-
dooism as it, still exists, Thanks
be to God that the efforts of various
bodies . of Christians in England
aild America, made in his strength,
have already obtained a rich re-
ward. Several hundreds of Hindoos
have renounced theig gods, the
Ganges, and their priests; and
have shaken from ‘their limbs the

BB 277


‘HON


iron chain of caste. A large humber |


of converted natives have become
in some sense missionaries, and have


been the instruments of “ turning
many to righteousness.” Anxiety
has been generally awakened for


instruction, which promises the
happiest results; and a vast band
of’ agents, too numerous and too
various for recapitulation, are car-
rying forward the work so auspi-
ciously commenced. May He, to
whom the heathen are to be given
for an inheritance, still send pros-
perity !

HONDURAS, a province in
Mexico, North America, bounded
N. by the tr bo Honduras, E. by
the Caribbean Sea, S. by Nicaragua,
and W. by Vera Paz. It is 390m.
long from E. to W., and 150 from
N. toS. Its soil is rich and fertile,
producing, in great abundance,
most of the tropical fruits; it has
a few English settlements, but the
principal inhabitants are Musquito

ndians. In consequence <{ an
urgent request of the Rev. J,
Armstrong, chaplain to the English
settlement, seconded by the bene-
volent wishes of the Commandant,
Col. Arthur, the C. M. S: sent
to their assistance the Rev. J.
Ditcher, 2d chaplain, Mr. and
Mrs. Moore, teachers, and Mr.
Moore, printer. The principal
design of this reinforcement was to
promote more extensively the good
of the settlement, and also to dif-
fuse the blessings of Christianity
among the Musquito Indians, who
inhabit a ceuntry from 1000 to
‘1200.m. in extent, on the southern
shores of the Bay of Honduras.
They are characterized by the
general marks of gps. beitg
indolent, » and supersti-
tious; though not so st.ongly ad-
dicted to viciows habits as man
barbarous nations. They are muc
‘attached to the English. Their
king, who has received his educa-
tion at the expense of the British


“HOW


government, avows himselfa Chris.
tian, and has promised his supp
to any efforts to Christianize his
subjects. Many of his chiefs wish
their children to be instructed, and
various circumstances combine: to
recommend those rode natives to the
attention of the Christian world. -'
The B. M.S. stationed the Rey,
J. Bourne at. Belize,’ in. 1899,
which is situated on a river of ‘the
same name; who, on account ‘of
some difficulties attending a mis:
sion among the native tribes at the
time, turned his attention ‘to the
disbanded ‘African soldiers, who,
with their families, resided near that
place. In his labours he derives
much assistance from one of his
friends, a man of colour, who is
acquainted with the “French and
Spanish languages, as well as with
the Indian spoken on the coast, andi
diligently employed in preaching
and holding prayer meetings among
the people in different parts of the
neighbourhood. The number of
communicants has recently in
creased from 4 to 12, and the at-
tendance at the chapel is good.
HOWRAH, a populous suburb
of Calcutta, on the opposite side of
the Hoogly, in which reside many
Englishmen, and thousands’of na-
tives. Since 1821, the Baptist
Missionceries at Calcutta heve la-
boured here with encouraging sue-
cess. The Rev. Mr. Statham was
fixed at this station, and a chapel
built, at an expense of 10,000 ru-
pees defrayed by subscriptions: on
the spot, was well attended. A
school was also formed, and tracts
were distributed in great numbers,
which were carried to different
parts of the country. <A second
chapel was afterwards erected,
Here a Mussulman moonshee, or
teacher, was ‘baptized; an event
which occasioned great surprise
among that class of natives, and
led to much inquiry. Among other
pleasing incidents, Mr. S. men-
278


ed.’

elt with
+ ape se we

. ,
asked the. gr
She clasped.
which lay b
I find Chris
pork’ and Ch
or !
how he Gen
lieve he will ::
so sweetly, th
crying out, ¢ ¢
si 2 be like h
0 another


‘S 6when if I offe
‘ tea rich Baba


more books. t
female educati
by the rich nat!
ry to their
esirous to get
their wives and


the native wit
preach in; no
often—tell us
things!’ I hav
the sons


surmise,??

Mr. Statham
compelled to i
for w time, and


' ‘show he is able to save me.


, . HOW


tions the following.— ‘‘ A poor
old’ woman: was sick, and sent
for mej she appeared to be very
il indeed, yet calm and. re-
signed. On my asking her how
she felt with regard to entering on
an eternal world, she said, ‘It. will
be. a bappy change for me.’ I
asked-the grounds of such a hope.
She clasped her Bengalee Bible,
which Iay by her cot, and said,
*1 find Christ here, Christ in my
heart, and Christ is'in heaven. He
died for poor sinners like ms dy I
lieve he will:’ and then she paved
so sweetly, that I could not forbear
crying out, ‘ Oh, that my latter end
my be like hers!’ ”

n another communication, he
observes, “ There is, and none can
deny it who know any. thing of
these matters, a far greater pros-

t'of the establishment of the

edeemer’s kingdom among the
Hindoos than ever presented itself
before. I well remember the time,
when if I offered a tract, or Gospel,
toa rich Baboo, he would reject it
in scorn; and- now -the same cha:
racter. is continually inquiring for
more books. Not two years ago,
female education was looked upon
by the rich natives asa thing dero-
gatory to their caste ; now they are
desirous to get female teachers for
their wives and daughters. I recol-
lect, when in Sulkea Bazaar, the
natives would not let myself and
the native with me get a place to
preach in; now they say, ‘ Come
often—tell us more about these
things!’ I have at this moment 36
boys, the sons of natives of good
estate, reading the Scriptures in my
who some time were
afraid to touch a book. Depend
on it, that the Lord is fulfilling his
promises quicker than our thoughts
surmise.’?

Mr. Statham was subsequently
compelled to intermit his labours
foru time, and seek, by revisiting


HUA


his native -land, for,a renewal of
that vigour..which long continued
exertions bad materially impaired.
During his absence, the services he
has hitherto. conducted will be
chiefly maintained by Mr. George
Pearce.

HUAHINE, one of the. So-
ciety Islands. in the Pacific Ocean,
30 leagues from Tahiti. It is 21
miles in circuit, populous, and fer-
tile, and has a commodious harbour
called Owbarre, W. long. 151° 5’
S..lat. 16944...

Here the LZ. M. S. has a station.
.Previous to its formation, idolatry
had been abolished through the in-
fluence, of the efforts made at
Tahiti; but the missionaries, on
their arrival, were received with
apparent coldness by the body of
the people, who manifested little
desire to enjoy religious instruction.
The tone of feeling, however, soon
changed ;—the onaries were
treated with the greatest deference
and respect, and every exertion was
made to facilitate their object. In
1822, it was stated, that the con-
gregation on. the. Sabbuth-days
usually consisted of from 1000 to
1400 persons; that 72 adults had
been baptized, and 38 children ;
that 400 candidates for baptism
were receiving preparatory instruc-
tion;. that a Sunday school had


been formed, containing about 230
boys and 1) gins that the average
ults


number of and children in
the native schools was about 450;
and that the contributions at the
Third Anniversary of the Huahiné
4,M. 8S. amounted to 12 balls of
arrow root, and 6349 bamboos of
cocoa-nut oil. Civilization was
also rapidly advancing.

Some time after this, a code of
laws was drawn up, approved by the
king and chiefs, and adopted by the
people ; some works were prepared
for the press 5 and ak grtk for the
relief of the sick and disabled was
established by the meaty After


‘HUA
describing the particulars of the
‘change produced by this mission,
the Deputation proceed as follows :
—‘In fact, the improvement ofthe
people in industry, and their ‘ad-
‘vancement in’ the’scale of society
are so evident, that every foreigner
‘who comes here is struck with
‘surprise and delight. We seemed
rather to be in an English town
‘than in a country so lately in a bar-
‘barous state. That all this mighty
change should have been effected
in so short.a time as six ‘years,
~would appear almost incredible, did
we not witness the fact with our
‘own eyes. But it is the work of
ia a sre of yrviel ag inter-
vention of an~ Almi n
can alone account for the ‘Mfecte
produced. At the same time, we
‘will not withhold our meed of
‘praise from those who have been
made the honoured instruments of
‘effecting this great work.”? The
Deputation conclude their report
as ‘follows:—-“ On a general and
minute view of both the temporal
and religious condition of this mis-
sion station, there is every reason
for gratitude to God, and encovu-
ragement to that society which has
had the honour of wining, Me
many blessings on thispeople. Had
nothing more been done by the
LL. M.S, than has been effected in
this one station, all its labours and
expenses would have been most
amply compensated, ”’

The children’s school, which
contains about 300, and that for
the adults, which comprises the
chief part of the inhabitants of the
station who have arrived at years
of maturity,are still in a flourishing
state. The children are taught
reading, writing, and arithmetic ;
and make good progress, Of the
adults, the greater number are
able to read the Scriptures, and
write a tolerable hand.

As the greater part of the people
have been dedicated to God in bap-


HUA:
tism, the number whoappeat, ‘fruit
time to time, as candidates for that
ordinance, nécessarily hecories
smaller. The number. of’ adults
baptized at this station, during the
year 1825-26, was 5; that of chil.
dren of Christian patents, 63, "The
total number, baptized since the


‘commencement of the mission; th


4]


1818, is, of adults, 783 3‘of chfldrén,
623. The number: ‘added to the
church, during 1825-26, was 43,
The total number in communion {s
375 $ and the number of candidates
for Foeniisbtove is considerable,’

e con jon ust cons
sists of from ¥ to 1400p. aa Ons
whose attendance is. regular, and
many of whom afford proof that
they do not hearthe Gospel in vain.
The week-day meetings for exhor-
tation, religious conversation, 4nd
prayet, in which a very fively’ in.
terest prevails, dre ‘attended with
profitable results. Mrs, Batffeve
week meets the female members
the church, about 200 in number
for religious conversation “and


prayer. . |
he chapel, which * has beeh
rebuilt on an enlarged scale, will
hold about 2000 persons, and con-
tains a gallery that accommodates
400 children.

Mr. Barff has in hand a transla:
tion of the prophecy of Jeremiah.

Civilization continues to advance,
Several new houses have been
lately erected, and many ‘more ate
in progress. More ground has
also been brought into a state of
cultivation.

After these pleasing statements,
it is the more painful to add, that a
calamitous event, which happened
nigh to this station during the year
1626, has been made an occasion,
on the part of some of the natives,
for acts highly discreditable to thelr
character, It seems that an Ameti-
can vessel called the Hyweo, com-
manded by Capt. Coffin, on tho 21st
of November struck on a teef,
%


' gbove-menti:


no connewior
but it is pain
of them mic
gion. With
have since n
and have be
accustomed |
fellow Christ
jealousy and
pears to hav
generally am
station by the
more dilige
means of {
result,


_JAFFNA,


TAM, a per
ern part of C
the island by


m.long, and
district is on


JAF .


‘The people belonging to the vessel,
considering their situation perilous,
sbandoned it to a body of natives,
who were requested by'the. captain
to make every possible effort to save
y on board. These
natives haying, during the night,
found, a quantity of spirits, and
drank of thém immoderately, pro-
ceeded to appropriate to their own
ise a number of articles belonging
tothe. ship. They afterwards re-
stored apart of tHis property, ‘but
not the whole.. Mahiné, the prin-
cipal chief of Huahiné, who was at
the time on the opposite side of the
island, on being informed of what
had taken. place, acted in a most
commendable manner. He made
present. to the captain, as some
compensation for the loss he had
sustained, adopted measures for thé
protection of the remaining pro-
perty, and even himself personally
engaged .in watching it. . The
greater part of the natives who
were involved in. the guilt of the
above-mentioned transactions, had
no connewion with the mission ;
but it is painful to state, that some
of them made a profession of reli-
gion. With few exceptions, these
have since manifested repentance,
and have been restored to their
accustomed intercourse with their
fellow Christians. A spirit of holy
jealousy and self-examination ap-
pears to have been excited very
generally among the people of the
station by these occurrences, and a
more. diligent attention to the
means of grace has been the
result.


J,


JAFFNA, or JAFFNAPA-
TAM, a peninsula, in the north-
ern part of Ceylon, connected witb
the island by an isthmus, It is 40
m.long, and 10 wide. The whole
district is one continued plain, no


JAF


- part of it rising higher than 30 feet


above the level of the ‘sea; and is
considered the most healthy, fer-
tile, “and populous part of the
island. The population, variously
estimated from 120 to 200,000,
consists, ‘principally, of Malabars,
‘who emigrated from the continent :
they are a brave ‘people, and far
superior in energy to the Cingalese,
the original inhabitants. With the
exception of a few thousand Roman
Catholics, a small number. of
Mahomedans, and 2 or 300 nominal
Christians, the whole population of
this district are heathens,

While the Dutch held possession
of the island, considerable effort
was made to ‘infuse into their
minds the principles. of Christianity.
As no one was eligible to any of-
fice of. government, unless he pro-
fessed the Christian faith, the great


“mass of the people, probably: from


motives of interest, were baptized ;
but “a change of masters produced
an alteration in their retigious prac-
tices ; for no sooner was permission
given by the British government,
than they, almost with one consent,
threw off their profession, and re-
sumed their former superstitions.

ey have nut, however, given
their sanction to some of the more
appalling customs of heathenism,
such as those of burning widows,
and polygamy. Their religion is
that of ‘the brahmins, though they
are not so devotedly attached to
their peculiar rites as are some of
the devotees’ of that system; and
they have feebler prejudicesagainst
Christianity. A few miles from
Jaffhapatam is a famous Hindoo
temple, at whose shrine they pay
their devotions. They speak the
Tamul or Malabar language, which
is spoken by 8 or 9 millions of
people on the adjacent continent.
A considerable part of the sacred
writings, together with other books
of a religious nature, were trans-
lated and published in the Tamul

BB? 281


ate My, Zi
language by the Dutch; but soon
after their departure, the district
was enveloped in ignorance and
superstition, and remained in that
condition, with little exception,
till 1816, when the Rev. Messrs.
Richards, Meigs, Poor, and War-
ren, from the 4. B. €. F. M.
arrived, and established them-
selves in the district of Jaffna.
Application was immediately made
ta government, and liberty was
soon granted them to occupy the
ancient church buildings and glebe-
lands in several of the parishes,
Having determined upon Tiliipally
and Batticotta, as suitable placesto
commence their operations, they
repaired immediately to Jaffna,
and proceeded to make the neces-
sary repairs.
_ In June, 1819, the Rev, Messrs,
Winslow, Spaulding, and Wood-
ward, together with Br. John Scud-
der, sailed from Boston tostrengthen
this mission. Next. to their prin-
cipal employment, viz. the’ acauisi-
tion of the Malabar language, was
the establishment of free-schools.
Such natives, therefore, as wished
to be employed as teachers, were
sent out into different parishes to
collect scholars, whose immediate
instruction was entrusted to them,
under the superintendence of the
missionaries, Boarding schools,
also, were established at each of
the stations, in which children
were supported by the bounty of
benevolent individuals, or societies,
in America. These schools are
under the immediate care and in-
struction of the missionaries or
their wives. At their first opening,
12 dollars was considered a sum
adequate to defray the expenses of
one scholar a-year; but after a
thorough trial, this sum was found
insufficient to cover the contingent
expenses, and in 1821, the sum was
raised to 20 dollars,

The number of pupils in the
boarding schools in 1823, was 170,


‘


JAF -
the whole number of day-s¢hodis
attached to the mission was 49,
containing 1300 children, who daily
attended. . peices
Owing to the superstitious views
of the people at the commencement
of the mission, boys only were
suffered to receive the benefit of
instruction ; but their prejudices
have been so far removed, that day


‘schools have been recently opened


for,the benefit of females. ©
A plan is now contemplated, and
will probably be shortly executed;
of establishing a native College.
Such an institution, it is thot st,
will tend to a more general diffu.
sion of Christian knowledge, and,
by connecting the study of the
sciences with Christianity, ‘wilt
raise the standard of education,
and strike with power at the root of
idolatry. Here, also, native preach.
ers, translators, teachers, and ass
sistants, can be well qualified for
each of these departments, who
will ultimately render important
service to the mission.
An Academy, also, is about to be
established at Batticotta, as a school
preparatory to admission into the
college. af
Soon after the arrival of the first
missionaries at Colombo, they were
organized into a Church. After
their removal to Jaffna, though sta
tioned at different places, it was
thought best to act in concert, and
have but one church, with which all
the mission family might be united,
Since the establishment of the
mission, 24 natives have been te-
ceived into Christian fellowship;
and, with the exception of 2 or 3,
have uniformly adorned their Chris-
tian profession, and exemplified the
beneficial effects of missionary la-
bours. Three individuals have been
licensed to ,»reach the Gospel to
their deluded brethren. ese,
together with some of the more
forward scholars in the boarding.
schools frequently — into


4


by:reading tl
versations wi
essential : ai
Some of the
ing to the,
to be pious,
seriously disp
at. this place
schools, the
conversations
continually e:
happy influen


Sars s
(/] 9 OF
and very

tal of the di
tuated. ‘several
on 8 navigable
cond town in
residence of
the district, .
principally of
tion. E. long.

The Rey.

Bott, and Mr
missionary, fr
came here in
aries preach ir


was formed,
have since mu

JALOOFS,
Africa, inhabi
tween the lowe


? JAL

different: parts of the district, and,
by:reading the Scriptures and con-
versations with the natives, afford
essential: aid .to the mission.
some of the scholars, not; belong-
ing to the: church; are believed
to be pious, and many more. are
seriously disposed. The missionaries
at. this place, by means. of their
schools, the distribution of tracts,
conversations, and preaching, are
continually exerting a powerful and
happy influence on a large popula-
tion.

In addition to the stations occu-
aot 4 the American missionaries,
the Wesleyan and C.. M. S. have
each stations in Jaffna, and their
missionaries -have laboured with
considerable success.

daffna, or Jaffnapatam; a large
and very populous town, capi-
tal of the district of Jaffna, si-
tuated. “several miles from the sea,
ona navigable river. It is the se-
cond town in the island, and the


residence of the superintendent of
the district.. The inhabitants are
principally of Mahomedan extrac-
tion. E. long. 80°18’, N. lat. 9° 42/,

The Rev. Messrs. Carver and
Bott, and Mr. J. Hunter, assistant
missionary, from the W. M. S.


came here in.1614. The mission-
aries preach in the Tamul language
toa large and attentive congrega-
tion, in a new chapel, towards
which a very handsome subscription
of not less than 3000 rix dollars
was raised; and also itinerate in the
eps parishes, and preach
with much acceptance to numerous
crowds of people.

In addition to these labours, they
have the care.of.12 schools, Pu-
pils, 683 catechists and school-
masters, 11; members in society
22, In Dec. 1821, a branch B.S,
was formed, the funds of which
have since much increased,

JALOOFS, a people of W.
Africa, inhabiting the country be-
tween the lower part of the Gam-


JAM


bie and the Senegal, They are jet
black, are divided into several
Classes or castes, aré very expert in
war, and are, therefore, dreaded by
other nations. Many of them pro-
fess the Mahomedan religion ; but
their.extreme ignorance,, and ridi-
culously absurd prejudices, are be-
yond conception. The Society of
Friends hes made some advances
towards elegy, Bn light of divine
truth among this people. Hans
nah Kilham, one of their number,
has made considerable progress. in
learning their language, and in re-
ducing it to order, with the design
of translating into it the Bible and
other religious books,
‘JAMAICA, an island of the
West Indies, discovered by Colums
bus in 1494, and occupied by Spain
in 1559. It was. attacked by the
British, and ceded to them in 1656.
It lies 80 leagues W. St. Domingo,
nearly the same distance S. Cuba,
and is of an oval figure, 170 m. long
and 60.broad. It is divided into 3
counties, Middlesex, Surrey, and
Cornwall, and contains upwards of
4,080,000 acres. A ridge of hills
runs: lengthwise from E. to W.
whence numerous rivers take their
rise on both sides, though none of
them are navigable, In the valleys
are sugar-canes, and such a yariety
of fruit-trees, as to make the couns
try exceedingly beautiful. The
year is divided into 2 seasons,
the wet anddry; but the rains are
not so frequent as formerly, which
is supposed to be owing to the cut-
ting down of the woods, The pro-
ducts and fruits are in great variety
and plenty. This island is now the
most valuable of the British West
India colonies,
- In }%95, the Maroons, or original
natives, who inhabited the moun-
tains; rose against the English ;
they were not quelled for v months,
and by cruel means, St. Jago de
la Vega is the seat of government,
but Kingston is the saat S trade,


JAM

In. this island the ’'U.' B. have
faboured: amidst: many trials and
difficulties, since the year 1754.

« Im-1804, 50’years from the com-
tmenecement of the . mission, the
brethren observe :—‘ Though we
cannot exult over an abundant
in-gathering of souls, or even over
our present prospects, yet we have
‘sufficient cause of gratitude to the
Lord; for having preserved a seed
in Jamaica, which, in his own good
time, may grow up into a rich hare
vest. It appears, that from the be-
ginning of this mission to the pre-
sent period, 938 negroes have been
daptized.’

New stations were afterwards
comnienced, which “appeared to
be-the scenes of @ very serions
end progressive: awakening. The
following accounts’ will -describe
the-state of the various departments
of the mission, at the. dates affixed.
: New Bden, May, 1828.— “When
I came to this place, 12 years ago,”?
says Brother Becker, “‘I found very
few who knew any thing more than
that they had been formerly baptized
by a missionary. Not long after, I
perceived, that by the power of his
word, preached in simplicity, the
Lord caused convictions to arise
in the minds of the negroes, and
their blind eyes to be opened: many
came to inquire what they must do
to be saved. At present this is still
more: frequently done. Our new
ehurch is too small to hold the cone
gregation. About 500 may find
room in it, and our auditory is ge-
nerally 900. April 27th being our
prayer day, 12 persons were bap-
tized, and 22 added to the candidates
for baptism. From Easter, 1822,
to Easter, 1823, 99 adults have been
baptized, or received into the con-
regation, and 52 have become par-
takers of the Lord’s Supper.’’

- Irwin, September 7, 1826, Bro-
ther Light remarks; — “ During
the ten yeurs of my residence here,


Thave buptized, on the estates of |


JAN
Messrs. ‘Hall ‘and’ Lawrence, ‘¥46
adults, and 182 children sénd-re.
ceived 63, baptized by others, -into
church’ ‘fellowship. The ‘congre-
gation at Irwin consists of ‘116
persohs; of whom 40. are commu:
nicants, 19 candidates, and’69 baps


tized adults, not yet communicants:


to these may be added 32 baptized
children, under'12 years of ‘age’:
in all 160. At Musquito Cove-~es.
tate, in Hanover parish, 20 m: off,
which I visit every 9 weeks; ‘there
are 26 adults, and 14 children, ‘bap-
tized at the special requést‘of- the
proprietor,” JT POR Ah

uirfield,, February 14, 1996;
Brother Ellis announces the finish.
ing a.d opening of a new church
at this place, and observes ;—“ In
the year 1825, the number of per-
sons at Fairfield who attained to
further privileges in the church,
were as follows :—admitted can-
didates for baptism’ or reception;
110; baptized us adults, 22; re.
ceived into the congregation, 74;
admitted candidates for the holy
communion, 91; communicants, 99;
re-admitted to the congregation, 9;
children baptized, 31. In the course
of the year, 27 persons, exclusive
of Europeans, have departed - this
life. Atthe end of the year, the
congregation consisted of 328 com-
municants; 97 candidates for the
communion; 135: baptized .adults,
not yet communicants; baptized
children, 130; candidates for bap-
tism and reception, 126; new ped-
ple, 375 :+-in all 1190; 143° more
than last. year.”

In 1789, the Rev. Dr.:Coke of
the W. M.S. visited Jamaica, and
preached a few times to increass
ing congregations, and with but
little opposition.’ Mr.’ Hammett,
however, who was afterwards ap-
pointed to labour ‘in Kingston,
where a commodious chapel was
erected, experienced so much
persecution, that -his life was fre-


quently endangered, — was.
2


abpsliteby nce
reaching by.
of the them
necessity of gi
worship, lest

should demolts
between 11 a
persons actua
wees of the «
chapel, and v
committed sti
had they not b
lawless: proces
of ‘the towneg
remonstrances
influence in tl
trates were in
advertisement,
time, kept the
rable bounds.
papers,” says
diled, for se
ietters for: and
thing bad was s
and every dis;
given to him.


horse-stealing,
rica to escape
few persons,

credited the re
rioters were |
jury acquitted
clearest eviden

r


cution
Mr wun


were soon éne
ministrations t¢


that their labou
In April, 18¢
preachers, belo


JAM


ttedintely compelled to refrain from
preaching by candlelight. Some
ofthe members were under the
gecessity of guarding their place of
worship, lest the outrageous mob
should demolish it; and one night,
between 1] ahd 22 o’ clock, some
persons actually broke down the
gates of the court leading to the
chapel, and would probably have
committed still greater outrages,
had they not been checked in their
Jawless: proceedings: by the arrival
of ‘the town-guard. Through the
remonstrances of a gentleman of
influence in the town, the magis-
trates were induced to publish: an
advertisement; which, for somé
tine, kept the rioters within tole-
table bounds, * But the news+

ers,” says Dr. Coke, ‘ were
filed, for several months, with
letters for’ and against us. Every
thing bad was said of Mr. Hammett,
and every disgraceful name was
gen to him. With t - to


respec!
upsell they published an anecdote
my being tried in England for
horee-stealing, and flying to Ame-
rica to. escape from justice, though
few persons, if any, I ‘believe,


credited the report. Some of the
rioters were prosecuted, but the
jury acquitted them, against the
clearest evidence. Harassed with
cution, opposition, and fatigue,
r. H. was compelled to relinquish
hislabours ; and as:I was shortly to
visit the continent, I determined to
take him with me, as two other mis-
sionaries were sent to the island.’’
The flames of persecution, which
had hitherto raged so furiously,
now began to subside, and the bre-
thren who were left in Jamaica
were soon énabled to extend their
ministrations to Port Ruyal,: Mon-
tego Bay, and several plantations
in the country; and they had the
pleasing. consciousness of knowing
that their labours were not in vain.
In April, 1802, some of the local
preachers, belonging to the society


JAM
at Kingston, paid a visit to a villagéd
called Morant Bay, and found many
of the inhabitants disposed to join
in public worship. They were se-
conded in their endeavours’ by
Messrs. Fish and Campbell, then
residing’ in the island; and in 4
short time a small society wes
formed. .The enemies of religion,
however, viewed these proceedings
with indignation, and resolved, if
possible, to crush the rising cause:
They accordingly presented the
houses in which divine service was
performed as nuisanhcés, at <hé
quafter sessions; but, as they could
substantiate no charie, their mu-
lignant attempt proved unavailing }
and the meetings were continued
with every appearance of increasing
prosperity, Severe trials and impri-
sonments still awaited the labourets;
and at length the house of assemb!
thought proper to ‘pass an act,
which, whilst it professed to recom-
mehd the instruction of the slaves
in the doctrines of the established ©
church, strictly prohibited the Wes-
leyan missionaries from presumin
to teach them, or even to adm
them into their houses or places
of worship, utidet the penalty of
fine or imprisonment. :
The situation of the missionaries
was now painful indeed. ‘Fre
uently,’”? says Dr. Coke, ‘‘beforé
the chapel was completely shut,
while. men of free condition en«
tered, to hear the ‘preaching, the
slaves crowded about the doors,
which the edict forbade them to
efter, with looks of the most ex-
pressive sorrow, and words of the
most penetrating. eloquence.’ Ii-
deed, we do not envy the feelings
of that man who could hear un-
moved these pathetic expressions;
accompanied with tears ;—‘ Massa,
me no go to heaven now. White
man keep black man from serving
God, Black man got no soul,
Nobody teach black man now!’
If ever the words of — had
85


‘SAM


a:meaning, when he)says, ‘I heard
his ehains, and. the: iron entered
* -fto his‘soul !” it. must -have been
- On this occasion ; -and the man
who. stood. at the, chapel doors, to
forbid: the entrance of the slaves,
must have’ felt: them in all their
force.?? * Hg?

The’ ‘intolerant act “passed by
the house of - assembly was no
sooner. transmitted ‘to England,
than it. was set ‘aside by his late
Majesty. But though the  ene-
mies. of religion: were thus frus«
trated in their attempt, they con-
trived, by temporary ordinances,
to throw insuperable obstacles. in
the way of the missionaries, whose
chapel was, in consequence, shut
up. for a succession of years, In
December, 1815, however, it was
re-opened by Mr. John Shipman,
who succeeded, after several un-
successful applications, in obtain-
“ing -a licence to. preach the Gos-
pel.. The same privilege was

s obtained by other: mis-


“gionatiess.and jn 1818, 8 second.


“chapel was opened in King son,
‘and the magistrates in Moncego
Bay consented to:licence a new
piace ‘of worship in that part of

fislanc; ,
. In succeeding years the mis-
gionary work was greatly extended,
6 will appear from the following

culars. of the Jamaica dis-
irict, recentiy furnished by °the
' missionaries :—

Kingston Circutt.. Kingston.
% Here large congregations conti-
nue to attend our ministry, many
of whom. have found the Gospel to
be ‘ she power of God unto salva-
tion,’ Number in society— Whites
66; Free Coloured, 1862; Slaves,
2136. Total 4064,”

Port Royal.—‘ This infant so-
ciety is in a very pleasing state.
Number in society—Whites, 5;
Free Coloured, 86; Slaves, 49,
Total, 140,”


, Spanish Town Circuit, Spanish


JAM

Town.—“ The: present statd ofthe
society is encouraging.” °°)
- Old Harbour. —* At: this place,
the small society is:in- @ ‘very pros.
perous state.” uy
- Halse: Hull, Clarendon-—“ Tix
estate - has. been visited with’ gs
much regularity as: circumstances
would possibly allow; but® our
work - here labours — under ‘great
disadvantages, on ‘account ‘of: its
distance from the: mission station,
Number in | society— Whites; :§;
Free Coloured, 243; Slaves,*109,
Total, 363. . wertiey
- Qur Sunday-schook at Spanish
Town is at. present: in .a very low
state, and the hopes of: its friends
have been greatly disappointed,
It is, however, ‘a Mepis
circumstance, that several of the
scholars, both male. and female,
have become members: of ‘thes.
ciety, and there are several «now
on trial.?? drat

Morant-Bay ‘Circuit, -Morant.
Bay.—‘ The society | during : the
past: year hes not, ‘increased. in
mimber, =


‘‘ At Yallaha, the society com
tinues to increase in number, piety,
knowledge, and: zeal. . Number-in
society Whites, 4; Free Coloured,

“The school at Morant Bay has
suffered much for want. of :proper


‘books; but the ‘children, to ‘the


number of 50,- attend well, and
are making improvement.”
. Bath and Manchioneal ' Circuit,
Bath.—“ The society and: congre-
gations are acquiring a considerable
degree ofstability and character, anil
afford very great encouragement as
to their future piety and usefulness,”

‘ At -Manchioneal the congre-
gations are very large and respéct-
able, and an excellent spirit pre-
vails amongst them. Number ih
society —Free-coloured, 97 ; Slaves,
1928, Total, 2025,”

Grateful Hill Circuit. Grateful-
Hill.—-“ The congregation ‘ond

8


~ geptions, the m


society are, rap
place.”
Unity —
congregation .
creasing 5 and,


sincerity by th
moral.conduct
Highgate.


Stoney- Hill ¢
~AfAt this |s
stete.of. the so

ing.??
ded. Hills .—
holds out. mu
a net increase.
beep..made to
course ,of the
society — Whit
63; Slaves, 49
_ At Stoney
was commence
under, .rather
stances; but th
have fallen, in
year have. grei
gress, as. the
been . prevente
The, teachers

nt, in, their
dlults have hee
Scriptures. Sc
vantage May
happy to say
Lord at; this..st
and. that, ther
increasing: pros
in, society. is 4
crease during tl

‘Our, Sund
prospered .so 1
desire... Nevertt
to, be able te
children, who h
conduct, have
derable progres
mise fair, for,
vineyard of ..0


JAM.


society: are, rapidly increasing at this
place.”


“Unity Here ,also..both the.


congregation .and-, society are in-


creasing ; and, with very. few ex-.


~ geptions, the membersevidence their
sincerity by the correctness of. their
moral .conduct.??


Highgate. This place,, which |


hasbeen but.. recently opened,
affords ground for much , encou-
ement,.. Number in .society—
Whites, .@3. Free Coloured, 1383


Stoney- Hill Circuit. Stoney-Hill.
-S¢At this station the. spiritual
stgte.of.the society.is very encou-

; 9


Sed. Hille.— ‘This infant society
holds out. much, encouragement;
anet i increase.of 146 members. has

made to. the society in. the

y Number in

mlety— Whites, 4; Free Coloured,
63; Slaves, 498. Total, 665.”?

At Stoney-Hill a Sunday-school
was commenced. in February, 1826,
under, rather ayeplojous circum-
stances; but the severe rains which
have fallen, ing the. mater os the

have. greatly retar ts pro-
pes as ‘the children have often
been prevented ; from, attending.
The, teachers have ‘been most di-
nt,.in, their .work, anda few
ults have been taught to read. the
he ptarencry Scholars, 33.
ego Bay Circuit.—“ Weare
reat. ea say thatthe work: of the
Lord at; this..station is prospering,
and...that, there. is a prospect . of
increasing: prosperity.. The number
in,society.is 411, making an in-
crease during the year of 76,

‘Our, Sunday-school,. has not
prospered so much as..we could
desire. Nevertheless, we are happy
to. be able to..state, that cheae
children.who haye shown a.better
conduct, have made. very consi-
derable progress, and several pro- .
mise fair. for, auiee in: the |
vineyard , of..our JN camel


| them to attend.


JA.M
in. the sohoghes 8, dd |
31. . Total, 55. He hi "4

The :ne children -on: ithe
estates B/ue-Hole and Spring: are .
very interesting.» ~

. At the commencement of. the
year we made an attempt to esta-
blish an evening school, for adults,
in which we suceveded. ‘The pro-
gress has exceeded ‘our.most san=
guine expectations,’’ bys

: Falmouth . Circuit.—**: The -so-
ciety in this place, though small,
is prospering. . The number in.'so-
ciety is: 66; 34 have been added
during the. year.” Veckte

Saint Ann's Circuit. -- Saint
Aun’s _ Bay. —*‘ The word -of
God appears. to make but slow
progress: ameng the people of’ this
town, who are: exceedingly, igno-
rant of divine things, and manifest
but little desire to attend the means
of grace... The members of society,
however, both free and. slaves, ‘are
very stedfast and. consistent ; and
several have been, added during the
past year.” «

Bellemont.— This station. pre-
sents encouragement... Number in
society— Whites, 6; Free Coloured,
25; Slaves, 188. Total, 219.97, ;

In compliance with the solicita~
tion of a mulatto Baptist preacher,
numed Moses Baker, who had for
sqme years laboured. among: the
negroes in Jamaica, the Rev. John
Rowe, of the B, M. S.. arrived
in February, 18]4. - In ao he
took a house at. Falmouth, and
opened a school, with the hope of
lessening the expenses of the com~
mittee on his account. He also
opened a gratuitous Sabbath school,
for the children of poor people, and
slaves whose owners would permit
Preaching was
subsequently commenced ; and the
persons who assembled to hear
the: word of ‘life, both negroes‘and
white people, conducted themselves
with the utmast decorum and appa.
rent. attention ; thaugh: —— vi

287


‘JAM
pemecution had, for several years
previous, raged in the island, and
numbers the inhabitants were
said to be strangly prejudiced against
the Baptist denomination.
On: the 2ist:of Nov. 1815, Mr.
Lee.Compere, accompanied by his
wife. and two of the members of
Dr. Ryland’s church, :in Broad-
mead, sailed from Bristol to occupy
other stations in Jamaica, with an
especial view to the instruction of
the slaves, and the children ofsleves,
under «the sanction of their re- '
spective proprietors. On their arri-
val, they at first fixed their residence
near Old: Harbour, St. Dorothy ;
but afterwardsremovedto Kingston,
at the: pressing invitation of the
negro Baptists; who are said to


amount to some thousands in and


near that place. Here Mr. Com-
pere obtained a license from the
_Mayor;.and he had the pleasing
prospect of becoming useful. Mr.
‘Rowe; mean while, was removed
from his. labours. by the hand of
death. ne ;

As assistance was much needed,
the Rev. James Coultart arrived in
Kingston harbour, May 9, 1817,
and in less thén.a fortnight suc-
ceeded in obtaining a license. to


preach among the negroes, Both’


-he and Mrs, Coultart were, how-
ever, much grieved on finding Mr.
Compere in such a debilitated state,
from repeated attacks ‘of the ague,
that he was scarcely able to walk
across his apartment; and when he
partially recovered, he judged it
advisable to quit-the West Indies,
and remove to America.

Thus. unexpectedly deprived of
his fellow-labourer, and left to sus-
tain the whole weight of the
mission in which he hed merely
anticipated: employment as an as-
sistant, Mr, Coultart was doomed
to encounter still more serious diffi-
culties, and to submit to a loss
much more afflictive. He was for
some time severely exercised in his


own pers
of September, the
affections was seized with ‘a yio.
lent fever, which, ina short t{me,
puta period to her mortal’ ex.
istence,


JAM


person ; and towards the close
rtner of his


Subsequently to this, Mr. Coul.


tart’s indisposition increased to
such an ‘alarming degree, that it
became in


dispensably ‘nec


for him to return, at! least for a
season, to England.
Messrs. Kitching and. Golden were,
therefore, sent to: Jamaica, the
former of whom proceeded, in
the autamn of 1818, to his place
of destination, and the latter sailed ‘
-from England early in the ensuing
spring. Their. reception appears
to have been extremely kind ; and
they were encouraged, by the sir:
cumstance of the’ congregatioy,
increasing so rapidly, to enlarge
the place of worship, so as to
accommodate 250 persons more
than had ever previously: attended.
Scarcely, However, had they en.
tered fully upon their labours, and
congratulated themselves on the
promising aspect’ «i' tie mission,


The Rey,


when Mr..Godden was deprived
of his amiable and excellent wife;
and within legs: than two months


after that affiictive providence, Mr,


Kitching, who had transmitted the
‘‘heavy tidings”? to England, was
himself numbered with the dead.

Mr, Coultart, in the mean time,
having derived much benefit from
a residence of several months in
England, and having entered a
second time into the conjugal
state, returned -to Jamaica, and
resumed his labours at Kingston,
In’ bis public ministrations, how-
ever, he appears to have suffered
severely from the confined: limits
of the place of worship, and the
heat arising from an overflowing
congregation, . «

At Spanish Town, thc , scene
of Mr. Godden’s labours, a most
brutal attempt was made, in July

288


_ vent of the R


1820, to. but


and. though
was provident
house in whic
duced to: ash
which , had. b
delicate state


following anec
ing instance 9
to a spiritual
night of the
who had ‘been
exerted hersel
water from tI
assist in oxtin
When: her stre
hausted, she
the by-standers
fexi??? A DeTs
has been b
creature
this dreadfeal
fell down and
without. utteri


| At Kingster


in. the mean
the erection of
chapel, situat
nett the. entr
aud calculated
He had, also,
evidences that
tended the dis
of truth, as ne
been. admitted
ship. within the
notwithstandir
mination app
exercised.
Mr. C. re
proof of high
coon pereee
owner ta |
to attend wi
pray: his ans\
tather sell you
buy you” ‘
“suffer me te
me van? ‘ If
dearly for ye


JAM

1820, to burn that devoted ser-
vant of the Redeemer. in his bed ;
and. though this barbarous design
was providentially. prevented, the
house in which he resided was re-
duced to ashes, and his health,
which had. been. previously in a
delicate state, was. much affected
by the alarm’ connected with so
lamentable. a..catastrophe... The
following anecdote affordaan-affect-
ing instance of strong. attachment
to a spiritual instructor:—On_ the
night of the fire, a female sleve,
who had been previously baptized,
exerted herself greatly in carrying
water from the river, in order to
assist in oxtinguishing the flames.
When: her strength was nearly ex~-
hausted, she éagerly inquired of
the by-standers, ‘“Where my minis-
teri??? A person: answered, ‘‘ He
has been burnt in. his bed.” The
peor creature was so affected by
this dreadful intelligence, that.she
fell down and expired immediately
without uttering another word!

_ . At Kingston, Mr. Coultart had,
in. the mean time, commenced
the erection of a. neat, substantial
chapel, situated on. lofty.. ground,


nett the. entrance inte the city, |


aud calculated to hold 2000 persons,
He had, also, many. eneouraging:
evidences that the power of God at-
tended the dispensation of the word
of truth, as nearly 200 persons had’
been. admitted. into church fellow-
ship. within the space of 12 months,
notwithstanding the utmost discri-
mination appears to have been
exercised, :
Mr. C, relaies the following
proofof high estimation of reli-
il pag :—** £ slave wished
owner to give him permission
to attend with God’s people to
pray: his answer was ‘ No; J will
rather sell you to any one who will
buy you.’ ‘ Wilk you,’ said he,
“suffer me to buy myself free, if
me van? ‘ If youdo, youshall pay
dearly for your. freedom; .as you


JAM


are going to pray, two hundred and
fifty pounds is your price.’ ‘ Well,
massa,’ said the negro, who knew
that the common price for a slave
was about 140/, ‘it a great deal
of money, but me must pruy ; if
God will help me, me will try and
pay you,’ He has been a long
time working hard, and at last sold
all himself and. his wife: had, ex-


cept his blanket; to purchase liberty
| to pray in publie, or, in other words,
| to meet with those


who love Jesus
Christ !??
Towards the close of the year,
Mr. Coultart was induced, by the
pressing invitation of a friend, to
pay a visit to the parish of Manchio-
heal, and make an excursion to
Montego Bay, where he found the


‘venerable Moses Baker blind with
age. He was much gratified with


the interview, and received: from
the proprietor of the estate on


‘which Mr. Baker resides, a most


satisfactory testimony to the moral
improvement which had taken place
among his negroes, in consequence
of the pious instroctions of that ex-
cellent man. So convinced, indeed,
was this gentleman of the advan-

resulting from an attendance
upon the Gospel, that he expressed
an earnest wish for some person to
be sent thither, under the sanction
of the B. Jf. S., who might take
charge of the congregation, which
Mr. Baker was now unable to
supply in consequence of lis years
and attendant infirmities. The
Rev. Mr. Tripp. was afterwards
appointed to this station.

n January, 1822, thenew-chapel
at Kingston was opened, and was
both numerously and respectably
attended. Upwards of 2000 -per-
sons were numbered within’ the
edifice, aad above. 500 were ac-
commodated with benches on the
outside. Mr. Coultart having of-
fered some remarks on the reports
and other statements of the society,


some unknown gentlemen: were
8


‘JAM


/


‘advantageous to the general wel-
fare.”? On the: first Sabbath in
March, the Lord’s Supper was ad-
‘ministered, in the new. edifice, to
about 1600.communicants, and Mr.
Godden, came over from Spanish
Town to assist in. the pleasing
solemnities of the day. sty h4
* Ina letter dated March 18, 1822,
Mr. Knibb, who had recently ar-
rived, wrote—“ You have, perhaps,
beén informed that we have opened
a house at Port Royal, about.5 m.
from: Kingston, on. the opposite
side of the harbour. It ‘is a .very
wicked place; a short time ago,
it could vie with’Sodom and
_ Gomorrah in wickedness.: . Once
it was wholly swallowed up by an
earthquake; and, in 181], almost
the whole town was consumed by
fire.—22 persons are received as
Candidates for baptism.”?.
‘ In the course of the year 1823,


added to,the churches in Kingston,
and from that time, notwithstanding
various personal and relative afflic-
tions, the’ missionaries have had
much cause of rejoicing. The'last
Report says—‘* The increase of
members in, the first. church’ at
Kingston . has been considerable ;
and:though Mr: Coultart has been
constrained, .on account of Mrs.
C.’s continued indisposition, . to
leave his important charge for. a
season, the. worship. of God has
been regularly maintained among
them by. the united efforts of Mr.
Tinson, Mr. Knibb, and Mr. Flood;
the last of whom left England
shortly before the last anniversary,
with ‘Messrs. Mann. and . Baylis.
The school conducted by Mr.Knibb
appears, to be of growing utility.
_A public.examination of the pupils
was held in December last, when
many persons of respectability at-


' induced not only to espause but to
advocate the cause, and to solicit
the public to support an institution
which appeared ‘so likely to be


some hundreds of members were.


JAM

tended, and expressed mach plea
‘sure and surprise at the progress of
the pupils. It is highly’ encoun.
raging to add, that many who were
educated in this school: have be-
come members of. the church, and
others are candidates for’ the same
privilege?” =. i,

_- The chapel hitherto occupied
by Mr. ‘Tinson’s congregation, hav.
ing been found, in point of situation
and otherwise, inconvenient, pre.
mises better adapted for: their use


-have been engaged “in the’ city,


They were opened: for ‘divine wor.
ship, after the necessary repairs
and alterations had been completed,
on the 24th of December.. “ Ap.
pearances,’’ says Mr. T.. “ are very
encouraging.’? -
- The exertions which have for
several years been’ made at’ Port
Royal, the ancient capital of the
island, have issued in the formation


‘of a church there, of which Mr,


Knibb has taken: the ' charge,
About 150 members belonging to
Kingston have been ‘united to it;
and at the date of the last accounts
the number of converts had conti-


‘ derably increased.??


“At Spanish Town,?? Mr. Phi-
lippo ‘writes, * our prospects: are
indeed cheering; the number: of
our stated congregation nearly
doubles what it was last year. Not
less than .400 young persons have
been added to it within the last:two
or three months,’ almost all’ of
whom seem earnestly inquiring the
way to Zion, .with their. faces: thi-
therward.””> Mr. Philippo has


been laboriously engaged, for seve-


ral months past, ‘in superintending
the erection of a new chapel; and
such is the interest’ taken by the


“people in this service, that’many


free persons of colour, both ih the
church and in the congregation,
submit to’ the greatest drudgery,
solely that they may‘ present’ the
fruits of their labour as an offering


290


‘to the hotise of God.’’


“WS AtOld A
and several
neighbourhoc
by the joint «
lippo and Mr.
are equally a1
a week passe:
sent dawn -'to
the contiguor
the Macedon
and help us.??

“ Although
Bay, occasio:
Mr. Phiilips,
plied,-the wo
not been altos
Flood’ has oc
station; -and’h
ceive upwards
the church at

*“ The chur
Bay and Cro
very. pleasing
The exertions
ing Mr. Bur
country, had
successful';~a1
bath: in Mar
baptized. M
menced preac
Falmouth, wh
hundreds’ hav,
visits, Arra
been made. fo:
at Ridgland, i
moreland,??

“ But whi
statement of,
gion in Jamai
telligence has
of a‘nature ta
hensions for
the mission.
law passed the
on the 22d °-q
which, among
merts of a wi
ter, several ¢
&-tendency e
unjust. -Repea
been made to
subject, and
the. represen


. med


nearly
r. Not
s have
last: two
all’ of
ing the
es thi-
io. has
Dr. Seve-
tending
PL} and
by the
‘many
in the
isang

’
pat the


pffering


JAM

**:At Old Harbour, Passage Fort,
and several. other places in the
neighbourhood, which are supplied
by the joint exertions of Mr. Phi-
lippo and Mr. Baylis, the prospects
are equally animating; and scarcely
a week passes but deputations are
sent dqwn'to Spanish Town, from
the contiguous parishes, reiterating
the Macedonian cry, “ Come over

and help us.?? ears
‘‘ Although the.vacancy at Anotta
Bay, occasioned by the decease of


Mr. Phillips, has not yet been sup-:


plied, the work’ of the mission has
not been altogether at a stand. Mr.
Flood’ has occasionally visited the
station; «and-had the pleasure to re-
ceive upwards-of 20 members into
the church at'the’vlose of 1826.”
-The churches both at Montego
Bay and Crooked Spring are in a
very pleasing and prosperous state.
The exertions of Mr. Mann, dur-
ing Mr. Burchell’s visit to this
country, had been unremitting and
successful;~and on the third Sab-
bath: in March, 75 persons -were
baptized. Mr. Burchell has. com-
menced preaching at the town: of
Falmouth, where: for .a long time
hundreds have eagerly desired his
sits, Arrangements have also
been made. for occupying a station
at Ridgland, in the parish of West-
moreland,’?

‘‘ But while so ‘encouraging a
statement of the progress of reli-
gion in Jamaica may be made, in-
tellizence has lately been received
of a ‘nature to excite serious appre-
hensions for the future- welfare of
the mission. A, consolidated slave
law passed the House of Assembly
on the 22d of December last, in
which, among many other enact-
merts of a widely different charac-
ter, several clauses are inserted of
a-tendency equally injurious and
unjust. _Repeated applications have
been made to government upon the
subject, and it is earnestly hoped
the. representations will not be-in


3 a


JAN -


vain, May He by whom kings:
reign and princes decree justice,
graciously'interpose, to defend his
cause in this important island from’
the danger which threatens it !’”
The C. K.S. has several schools
on this island, which are‘in a pros-
perous state. ies
‘ A’ correspondence having been
entered into with the Bishop of Ja-
maica, by which it appeared that’
openings of usefulness’ presented’
themselves in the establishment of
schools. in'‘the island, the com-’
mittee of the C. M. S. have placed
the sum of £200 at his Lordship’s
disposal, for that purpose. © =**'”
~ An opportunity having occu
for the beneficial employment ‘of
the society’s funds in the parish “of
St. Thomas in the East, the com-:
mittee have granted the sum. of
£100, to be appropriated at the dis-:
cretion of the rector. With this
sum a catechist has been provided
for the district. of Blue Mountain
Valley, containing a population of
5500 persons, who have ‘hitherto:
had no means of ‘spiritual instruc-'
tion. i :
Mr. Taylor and Mr. Jones, with
their wives, pursue the work of
education on the’ estates of Salt
Savannah, and Papine. In the
school under Mr. -Taylor’s care
there are 83 scholars, consisting of
adults and children ; and in ‘that of
which Mr. Jones has the charge, 81.
. JAN, ST. one of the Virgin
Islands, W.Indies, about 36 m. E.
Porto Rico. - e
- In 1741, a pious man,named Jens
Rasmers, an overseer of one of the
plantations, who had formed an ac-
quaintance with the missionaries at
St. Thomas, began to preach to the
negrces under his care, and occa-
sionally invited some of the U. B.
to come over to his aid. Great at-
tention was thus excited among the
slaves; and in the course of a few
years, it was so evident that the
word spoken ‘was cia“ with a:
29


JAN
divine blessing, that a small estate
‘was purchased as a missionary set-
tlement, and called Bethany; and
in November, 1754, Mr. Brucher,
from the island of St. Thomas, took
up his residence there,

In 1766, the church, which had
been unfortunately blown down by
a tempest, was rebuilt ; andin 1782,
the brethren purchased a house and
a piece of ground, in another part
of the island, for the accommoda-
tion of those negroes who were
precluded by distance from regu-
larly attending the worship at Be-
thany. In this settlement, which
was called Emmaus, a new church
was erected anda missionary was
settled; two circumstances which
appeared to gratify the white inha-
hitants of the neighbourhood, as
well as the peculiar objects of the
mission,

In August, 1793, a dreadful hur-
ricane occurred in the West India
islands, and proved particularly de-
structive to St. Jan. Of the two
missionary settlements, Bethany
and Emmaus, the former was most
exposed to the fury of the tempest,
and there the scene was truly ap-
palling; the storm commenced in
the evening of the 12th ; and before
morning, the brethren and many
persons, both Europeans and peo-
ple of colour, who had fled to them
from different parts of the neigh-
bourhood, could scarcely find shel-
ter in any part of the buildings.
About 8 o’clock the wind suddenly
veered to the S., when all the
houses of the negroes were swept
away in an instant; and soon after,
the church fell with a tremendous
crash, and its ruins were whirled
_ into the air, and carried to a con-
siderable distance—boards, beams,
rafters, and shingles, flying in all
directions. The mission-house also,
was in the most imminent danger,
Providentially, however, this was
preserved, together with the church
and dwelling-house of the brethren


JER


at Emmaus, though all. the sur.
rounding buildings were completely,
destroyed. '

In the year 1813, the congrega.
tions of the brethren on this island
consisted of 1461 baptized persons,
including children; and of this.
number 677 had been admitted ta.
the holy sacrament. | 1

The hurricane which was felt go.
severely in St. Croix, in the autumn
of 1819, also visited the island. of
St, Jan, and did considerable da».
mage to the missionary settlements,

JERUSALEM, a city of Asia,


capital of the ancient Judea and


of modern Palestine, situated about
25 m. westward of the Jordan, and
40 E. Mediterranean. E,. long,
35° 20’, N. lat. 31° 48, It is supe
posed to have been founded by Mel-
chizedeck, and named Salem ; but
when the Israelites entered the
land of Canaan, it was called Jebus,
from the Jebusites, whose capita]
it was. It was the capital of Dae
vid’s kingdom, under its present
name. Here Solomon, his. suc.
cessor, built his magnificent tem-
ple, which was dedicated 004
years B.C. About 418 years after,
the city and walls were demolished
by Nebuchadnezzar, It has been
several times destroyed by the ene
mies of God, and rebuilt by: his
chosen people. In the: reign of
Tiberius, it was rendered memo
rable by being the scene of: many
of Christ’s miracles, and especially
of his death and resurrection ; and
was taken and destroyed by Titus,
A.D. 70. At the siege, according
to Josephus, 97,000 were taken
prisoners, 12,000 perished with
hunger; and the whole number of
slain and prisoners, during the war,
was 11,000,000. It wassoon rebuilt;
has since been often plundered and
partially destroyed ; and, for several
centuries, bas been annexed to the
Turkish empire. It has long been
an object of much veneration, and
the resort of numerous pilgrims of


various der
tries, who p
‘to the Turk
. The city
‘viz. Zion, at
vary, at the
‘8. E.5. and
It.is nearly :
of 3 m. in ci
‘is estimated
mans, 10,000
2000—Cathc
‘ans, 500,—'
think the Je
than the Mu
however, a
the city than
and have 5 s:
ter where t
also 11 mosq
ties, belong
denominatio:
“AI that’:


,once ‘splend


walled town,
heavy, unorn
with here ar
and vacant
rugged hills,
bidding soil,-
midst of a de
in fact, no mc
site seems o
graphical ing
ment of Jew
the: very cot
changed, and
ancient city ¢
The monks |
sites of the sa
ther Calvary
chre, much le
the house of
the slightest |
probable iden’
cality to whic
The general
in the immedi
Jerusalem is
“the bare ro
santy sward,
in doubt whet!
lurity, or to di


JER
various denominations and coun-
tries, who pay an immense revenue
to the Turks.
. The city is built on several hills ;
viz. Zion, at the S. W. part; Cal-
vary, at the N. W.; Moriah, at the
8. E.;. and Bezetha, at the N. E.
It.is nearly square, and little short
of 3 m.incircvit. The population
‘is estimated as follows :—Mussul-
mans, 10,000—Jews,6000--Greeks,
2000—Catholics, 1500—Armeni-
ans, 500.—Total, 20,000. Some
think the Jews are more numerous
than the Mussulmans; they occupy,
however, a much smaller part of
the city than the Turks and Arabs,
and have 5 synagogues in the quar-
ter where they live. There are
also 11 mosques, and 20 monaste-
ries, belonging to the different
denominations of Christians.
‘All that’ remains now of. this
once ‘splendid city, is a Turkish
walled town, enclosing a number of
heavy, unornamented, stone houses,
with here and there ruined heaps
and vacant spaces, seated amid
rugged hills, on a.stony and for-
bidding soil,—‘‘ a cemetery in the
midst of a desert.”” Jerusalem is,
in fact, no more; what exists on its
site seems only to mislead topo-
graphical inquiries. Not a monu-
ment of Jewish times is standing,
the very course of the walls is
changed, and the boundaries of the
ancient city are become doubtful.
The monks pretend to show the
sites of the sacred places; but nei-
ther Calvary nor the Holy Sepul-
chre, much less the Dolorous Way,
the house of Caiaphus, &c. has
the slightest pretensions to even a
probable identity with the real lo-
cality to which the tradition refers.
The general aspect of the country
in the immediate neighbourhood of
Jerusalem is blighted and barren:
“the bare rocks look through the
santy sward, and the grain seems
indoubt whether to come to ma-


lurity, or to die in the ear.”’. On


7


SER

approaching the city from the W.
toward the Jaffa, or Pilgrim’s gaté,
little is seén but the embattled
walls, and the gothic citadel,—the
greater part of the town being con-
cealed in the hollow formed by the
slope of the ground toward the E.
But, from the high ground in the
road to Nablous and Damascus,
where the distant city first bursts
on the traveller, the view is ex-
ceedingly noble and picturesque.
Amid a seemingly magnificent as-
semblage of domes, and towers, and
minarets, it is said, the eye rests
with delight on the elegant propor-
tions, the glistening gilded crescent,
and the beautiful green blue colour
of the mosque of Omar, occupying
the site of the temple of Jehovah;
while, on the left, the lovely slope
of Mount Olivet forms a soothing
feature in the landscape. The ge-
neral character is a sort of forlorn
magnificence ; but the distant view
is all. On entering at the Damas-
cus gate, meanness, and filth, and
misery, soon reveal its fallen and
degraded state. The traveller is
lost among ‘narrow, unpaved, de~-
serted streets, where a few paltry
shops expose to view nothing but
wretchedness: the houses are dirty
and dull, looking like prisons or
sepulchres; scarcely a creature is
to be seen in the streets, or at the
gates; and throughout the whole
city, there is not one symptom of
either commerce, comfort, or hap-
piness. ‘ How doth the city sit
solitary, that was full of people !
How is she become as a widow ! she
that was great among the nations,
and princess among the people ;
how is she become tributary! From
the daughter of Zion all her beauty.
is departed. All that pass by, say,
Is this the city that was called the
perfection of beauty, the joy of the
whole earth ?”

But even that distant view of the:
modern town, which has been pro-


/nounced so exceedingly beautiful,
‘ 293


cc@


JER

{ig revolting to the mind; for what
can reconcile--the feelings of a
protestant Christian to the mon-
strous incongruity of Turkish
domes and minarets towering over
the site of the temple, and the
triumphant symbol of the Mahom-
‘medan imposture glittering amid
the towersof convents and churches
dedicated to fraud and idolatry ?
The features of nature, however,
possess an unchangeable interest ;
and it is on these, not on the pre-
tended holy places, and intrusive
shadows, that the eye reposes with
complacency,—with these it is that
the heart communes. ‘The beau-
tiful gate of the temple,’? remarks
Dr. Clarke, ‘is no more; but. Si-
loa’s fountain haply flows, and
Kedron sometimes murmurs in the
Valley of ican gg A . few
gardens still remain on ing
base of Mount Zion, wabsend oes
the pool of Siloam. The gardens
of Gethsemane, the vale of Fat-
ness, are in a sort of ruined culti-
vation; the olive is still found
growing spontaneously in patches
at the foot of the mount to which
it has given its name; there, too,
the road to Bethany still winds
round the: declivity, and Mount
Olivet itself retains a languishing
verdure.

To Jerusalem the attention of
various societies has been directed,
as furnishing the most favonrable
opportunities for the distribution of
the Scriptures and of tracts. —

In 1818, the Rev, C. Burckhardt
visited Jerusalem, as agent of the
Malta Bible Society, and distributed
the Scriptures in 12 languages,
during the festival instituted in
honour of the day of Pentecost.

In 1819, the Rev. J. Conner,
Church missionary, made a visit to
this city for a similar purpose.

Mr. J. Wolff, a converted Jew,
and missionary of the L. J. S., has
visited Jerusalem several tintes
since the early part of 18¥3, and


JER


laboured indefatigably emong: his
brethren according to the flesh,

The Rev. L. Parsons, of the A. B,
C. F. M. entered Jerusalem Feb,
17, 1821, and continued there more
than 2 months. Near the close
of his labours, he said, “I have now
visited 13 Greek monasteries, }
Catholic, 1 Armenian, 1 Syrian,
and 1 Coptic, within the walls of
Jerusalem : and distributed, in all,
including the church of St. Constan-
tine, 1000tracts. These tracts are
to be widely distributed; and, per.
haps, read, by persons several thou.
sands of miles from the Holy City,
The very fact, that they were
brought from Jerusalem, will attach
to them a degree of sanctity, and
give them higher claims upon the
attention of a multitude of Chris.
tians.”’

The Rev. Messrs. P. Fisk and
J. King, of the same Board, spent
about 2 months in this city, in 1823,
mostly in May and June ; and during
their residence they sold 84 copies
of the Scriptures, and gave away 52,
and circulated 770 tracts. Among
the Greeks and Armenians they
found a very gratifying eagerness to
possess the Scriptures. In thelatter
part of the same year, Mr. Fisk,
accompanied by the Rev. W. Jowett,
Church missionary, again visited this
city ; and in the early part of 1824,
they were joined by the Rev. I, Bird.

The Rev. Mr. Cook, Wesleyan
misstonary. was appointed, in 1823,
to visit Jerusalem, and to report,
from personal observation, on the
facilities which might present them-
selves for commencing a mission in
Palestine. His statements, on the
whole, are deemed favourable to the
enterprize, and present no greater
obstacles than the circumstances of
that interesting but long benighied
region might be expected to ex-
hibit. The purpose of the coms
mittee, though still kept in view,
has not, as yet, been accomplished.

JESSORE, or — a

204


town of Hi
capital of: th
which exten
bunds. It is
long. W.8
A church
place throug
of the Bapt
visited montt
tenchers. . ]
converted, bi
happily resto:
mother were
the church
branches, ea:
tance from t
comprehendi:
try of little 1
diameter. A
brethren wer
different bran
in his indefat


the brethren
exclude ; whe
sufficient kno’
to keep them
idolatry, On
sickness, dec)
ence for salv
alone ; and ca.
her injthe mc
fenounce eve
forcing this, |
earnestness, ¢
condition of h
property he pc
additions are re


and in visitin,
and other pla
8 co


JES


down of Hindoostan, in Bengal,
capital of the district of Jessore,
which extends into the Sunder-
bunds. It is 62 m. N.E. Calcutta.
long. _W. 89° 15’., N. lat. 23° 7’,

. A church was formed at this
place through the instrumentality
of the Bapt. M. S. in 1807, and
visited monthly by one of the native
tenchers. . Not only were many
converted, but one individual was
happily restored, and his wife and
mother were baptized. In 1810,
the cburch consisted of four
branches, each about 30 miles dis-
tance from the other ; the whole
comprehending an extent of coun-
try of little less than 100. miles in
diameter. At this period 4 native


brethren were stationed at these
different branches, to assist Carapeit
in his indefatigable labours, which
had been the means of greatly in-
creasing the church.- The Rev.
Mr. Thomas afterwards occupied
this station, in connexion with the


natives. Additions were made to
the number of believers, but some
the brethren were compelled to
exclude ; who, happily, retained a
sufficient knowledge of the Gospel
to keep them from relapsing into
idolatry. One of them, in his last
sickness, declared that his depend-
ence for salvation was on Christ
alone ; and calling his wife, pressed
her injthe most earnest mantier to
renounce every other hope,—en-
forcing this, indeed, with so much
earnestness, as almost to make ita
condition of her inheriting the little
property he possessed. Every year
additions are reported as being made
to the church; and, in 1824, the
district in which it is situated, ts
described as ‘‘one of the best cul-
tivated fields in Bengal;” My. Tho-
mas, and his itinerants, being per-
petually employed in traversing the
numerous villages, fields, and roads,
and in visiting the bazars, ghats,
and other places of public resort,

.& considerable extent of


JES


country.. The church, at this time,
consisted of nearly 80 members, in-
habiting 10 different villages: At
Neelgunj, in this. district, a school
was formed at the expense of the
Serampore School Institution. 3
native youths were sent by Mr.
Thomas to the Serampore college ;
and the distribution of the Bengalee
Testament in this quarter-was very
considerable.

The present state of this mission
is rather discouraging. As great
alterations have lately taken place
in the residence of many members,
an exact statement of their num-
bers cannot be given: it is feared
the members in communion do not
exceed 30.

The whole population, nominally
Chrtstians, amounts to about 100,
Mr. Thomas resides at Sahebgunj,
which is the civil-station of the dis«
trict. formerly the greater part
of his flock were situated ut Chris-
tianpore, 16 m. N. Sahebgunj ; but,
during the year 1826, they have been
brought into Sahebgunj, that they
might enjoy the benefit of his con-
stant instruction and care. Other
portions of his people are situated
at Bakuspole, a village 12 miles to
the south of Sahebgunj, and at
several villages scattered in different
directions through the district, and
some at great distances.

Mr. Thomas conducts regular ser-
vices on the Sabbath, and on several
days of the week, chiefly for the
edification of the native Christians,
He iikowise visits different parts of
the town and neighbourhood, to
preach .he Gospel to the heathen
and the Mussulmen, and he supers
intends 4 native schools, which are
supported by funds for that purpose,
by gentlemen formerly resident at
the station. In the schools the
Scriptures are read, and Chris-
tian catechisms taught; and one of
the gentlemen, now at the station,
takes a deep interest in their
welfare, and promotes ny by bis

5


‘SEW


wwisits ‘and: liberality in rewarding
‘the. children.

“A considerable «portion of Mr.
‘Thomas’s time should aiso be spent
an visiting those parts of the district
“where Christian families reside ;
.but interruptions: continually occur
in this part of his duty, from wea-
-‘ther.and other circumstances.

There has been an addition. of
one person, a female, to the church
during the year 1826.

‘JEWS, in the most extensive
sense of the word, is a term com-
.prehending all the descendants of
-Abraham; but, in its more. re-
stricted sense, it includes those
-who belong.to the tribe of Judah,
and who inhabited Judea. This
‘name was given them soon after
the Babylonish captivity, when the
tribe of Judah became the most
considerable of what was left of
Israel. In preceding times, they
were. called : Israelites, or, more
commonly, Hebrews. According


to ancient prediction, the Jews be-
came stibject to the Romans at the
destruction of Jerusalem, A. D. 70,
‘were persecuted und dispersed
through the earth, and have ever
since ceased to be a distinct na-


tion, They still remain a monu-
ment of the truth >f Christianity,
unincorporated: among the inha-
bitants of the countries in which
they reside. They profess to. pay a
regard to the worship and cere-
monies enjoined by the law of
Moses; to which they have added
‘many rites, that are merely of tra-
ditional authority, andentertain the
unfounded expectation of a Mes-
siah, to deliver them from their
present state of subjugation and
oppression. The following is sup-
posed to be as accurate an esti-
mate of their present population as
circumstances will admit, viz. under
the dominion of the Grand Seignior,
2,600,000; States of Barbary,
850,000; in Poland, before the
partition of 1772, 1,000,000; in


JEW


Russia, -comprehending ‘Moldayin
.and Wallachia, 300,000 ; in the dif.


ferent states of Germany, 600,000 ;


-in Holland and. Belgium, 100,000;


in Sweden. and Denmark, 6000;
in’ France, 50,000; in Great Bri-
tain and her dependencies, 80,000;
in the Italian States, 200,000; in


ithe United States of America,


3000; in Persia, China, Hindoos-
tan, &c., 2,500,000. — Total
7,658,000. The aggregate of the
Jewish population is usually estj-
mated ut 8,000,000. Within a
few years, the friends of missions
have. awoke from the slumber of
nearly 2000 years : they have begun
to feel their obligations to the de-
scendants of those through whom
they have inherited the blessings of
the Gospel, and to employ many
means for their advantage.

The London Jews’ S. was formed
in 1809, and its missionaries and
agents have widely distributed the
New Testament and tractsin several
languages $ and taken other efficient
measures to remove the veil from
the-eyes of the Jews, in France,
Italy, Switzerland, Holland, Ger-
many, Prussia, and Poland, on the
continent of Europe, and in other
parts of the world. :

The Philo-Judaan S. designed to
promote the temporal and spiritua!
welfare of the descendants of
Abraham, was instituted in London
in May, 1826.

The Edinburgh S. for promo-
ting Christianity among the Jews
was formed in 1819, It has
cordially and vigorously engaged
in the service indicated by its name,
and promises a lasting and power-
ful influence. A very efficient
ally of this society has been formed
in Glasgow. There .are mony
other smaller, but: similar and not
inconsiderable, associations in Ire-
land and on the continent, and.one
or more in Asia. Similar societies
have been formed in the United
St. tes, of which the dmerican S.

296


yet it may b
mencement

identified wi
neration. of

general fulfil
which annou
minion of th
. [See Ams
Berlin, Bres
stantinople,

Dresden, Fr
Jerusalem. ]


KANDY,
containing a
island, in the
theS. The
ous, very wa
and difficulto
quantity of ju
The cent:
mountains cu
mits, intersp
rivulets, and
and other gra
paths in all d
valleys, with ¢
and cocoaer., 1
In many part:
canoes have bh
times; and th
the principle
Tron and othe
with ; but the


past, have pa
covering or


veins. Thee
fogs and dews


by excessively


ther by day ;
also frequent
inhabitants us
and arrows for
The king was
he was clothe


splendour of «


with the pecu


‘oldavin


merica,
indoos-
- Total
of the
ly esti-
ithin a
nissions
iber (of
2 begun
the de-
whom
sings of
y many


formed
ies and
ted the
several
ficient
il from
rance,
i, Ger-
on the
in other


‘KAN

formeliorating the Condition of the
Jews is the most important, though
pot the oldest. Although the sum of
good accomplished by these insti-
tutions cannot be precisely stated,
yet it may be viewed as the com-
mencement of a train of effects
identified with the ultimated rege-
neration of Israel, and with the
general fulfilment of the prophecies
which announce the universal do-
minion of the Redeemer.
. [See Amsterdam, Berditechew,
Berlin, Breslau, Callenberg, Con-
stantinople, Detmold, Dusselthal,
Dresden, Frankfort, Konigsberg,
Jerusalem. |


K.


KANDY, akingdom of Ceylon,
containing about a fourth of the
islund, in the interior part towards
the S. The country is mountain-
ous, very woody on the frontiers,
and difficult of access from the great
quantity of jungle.

- The central part consists of
mountains cultivated to their sum-
mits, interspersed with villages,
rivulets, and cattle, fields of rice
and other grain, well trodden foot-
paths in all directions, and fruitful
valleys, with groves of areka, jacca,
and cocoaer. uts, limes, oranges, dc,
In many parts of the interior vol-
canoes have burst forth at different
times; and the hills seem to possess
the principle of those eruptions.
Tron and other ores are to be met
with; but the Kandians, for years
past, have paid no attention to dis-
covering or working any of the
veins. The air is subject to heavy
fogs and dews at night, succeeded
by excessively hot and sultry wea-
ther by day; rain and thunder are
also frequent and violent., The
inhabitants use fire-arms and bows
and arrows for weapons of offence.
The king was long absolute; and
he was clothed in all the state and
splendour of other Asiatic princes,
with the peculiar distinction of a


KAN

crown. Thetyrannical government
of the last ruler, and his cruelties,
were in the extreme ; so that. many
of his subjects removed to the
British settlements, His atrocities
continuing to spread, the British,
in 1815, took up arms against him
solely, promising security and. pros
tection to his subjects. They.en-
tered the capital, which was found
deserted, and stript.of all valuable
property; but the king’s retreat
being’soon known, he was taken
prisoner, sent’ to Colombo, .and
thence to Vellore, where he. ;is
still in. confinement. The cone
quest was bloodless on the part.of,
the British, who, with  Kendian
chiefs, settled a treaty for deposing
the King, and establishing his Bri-
tannic Majesty’s government in
Kandian provinces, etter

Kandy, the capital, stands at
the head and widest part of an ex-
tensive valley, in the. midst,- of
wooded hills and mountains, and.is
more regularly built than most -In-
dian towns. The palace is a
square of great extent, built, of a
kind of cement perfectly white,
with stone gateways. The temples
of Budhu and the gcds are nu-
merous; and that of Malcgava is
the most venerated of any in the
country, as it contains a precious
relic,—the tooth of Budhu. The
houses that constitute the streets
are all of clay, of one story, stand-
ing on a low terrace of wee end
are all thatched, except those of
the chiefs, which are tiled. Kandy
was entered by the British troops
in 1808, the king and principal
inhabitants having previously fled ;
but the expedition terminated inthe
massacre or imprisonment of the
whole detachment,

In 1815, it was again entered,
and with better success, es noticed
in the preceding article. The town
is nearly surrounded by the river
Mahawelle, and an artificial lake,
made by the late ning. “ag m,


KAN,
E.N.E. Colombo. E: long. 80°
47, N, lat. 79:18’. ,
‘The directors of the C. M. S.
having determined on sending four
clergymen to Ceylon, the Rev. Mr.
Lambrick was appointed to Kandy.
In a ietter dated Oct. 27, 1818,
he Says, ‘(I have had full employ-
. mént for the exercise of my mi-
nistry among the numbers of our
countrymen here, both civil and
military, and especially in the
crowded hospitals; but hitherto I
have been precluded from any
public missionary exertions. The
town, indeed, has been elmost de-
serted by the native inhabitants
ever since the rebellion broke out ;
but we have the greatest’ encou-
ragement to hope that God is
about torestore the blessings of
peace, and with it the people will
réturn. I cannot, at present,: be
permitted to preach to the natives;
but I have obtained authority to
open schools, and have engaged
two of the priests to be the masters
of them,.as they have promised
to conform to my direvtions.
’ A few days ago, the *Governor,
in the prospect of the rebellion
being speedily ‘terminated, pro-
posed returning to Colombo, and
desired that I might be asked
whether I would remain here after
he had left. And, on my signi-
fying my assent, his Excellency
conferred upon me the appoint-
ment of assistant chaplain to the
forces in Kandy; which, as long
as I retain it, will save the society
my personal expenses.’’


"In this situation, Mr. L. had.


continual calls of duty among his
countrymen, and the best oppor-
tunities of studying Cingalese in its
purity. He also established a large
school on the national system.
The Rev. Mr. Browning joined


him in 1820; and on the arrival of


an additional chaplain, Mr. L. re-
dired from the office he had held to
Cotta, on which occasion he re-


KAR
ceived the- thanks of the governs


ment for the exemplary attention,


which he had paid to the Europeans,
Mr. B., however, continued his


efforts at this station,—conducting.
Cingalese services,
gaol, in which’ from 60 to 70 pri.
soners were confined, and actively,


visiting the


superintending 5 schools.


A school-house wus opened with.


divine: service, on the 19th of Jan,
1826: besides Sunday services, Mr,
B. has a Cingalese service-on Wed-
nesday evenings, and ‘one in Por.
tuguese on. Thursday evenings,
-The attendance at public worship
had previously been small; many
of the scholars were kept away by
their perenle ; few adult heathen
could be prevailed: on to attend; and
of the prisoners, though some listen
to the word, others are indifferent
and callous; but he continues to


‘avail himself of various opportu-


nities to make known the Gospel,
Sickness having agai \ disabled ‘the
chaplain, ‘it devolved ‘on Mr,
Browning, early in the year 1826,
to take such part of his duty .as
could be done without material in-
jury to his own. f

At the annual meeting in Sep-
tember, Mr. Browning reported
that the service in Cingalese was
somewhat better attended than it
had been a few months before, and
particularly by the females; and
that there were 5 schools, with an
average attendance of 105 schulars.

It is gratifying to learn, that the
sons of the Kandian chiefs, who
attend to learn English, have lately,
of their own accord, come forward
to purchase the Cingalese and
‘English New Testament, to read
and compare at home. |

KARASS, : a large villege in
Asiatic Russia, situated near the
source of the River Cuban, at the
northern foot of Mount Caucasus,
between the Black and Caspian
Seas, and a short distance from
Georghiersk, Hey ,

208


The Rev. :
‘gon, and Gall
tish M. S., (
here in 1802,
duce the Gos]
Though for
many’ difficul
ments to enc
perienced ev
divine favour
great good hi
persevering ef
had establishe
rass, ‘the Rus
consequence «
tion, gave a g
than 14,000 a
of the mission
nities flatterii

‘pects.- Native
Circassians a
were early re
sionaries, anc
where they re
the Turkish ar
and. were - tar
and’ the _princ
Among ‘those
the Gospel, we
gerry, who ha
aid to the mi:
its cause in ‘th
gland. : In 18
of -missionari
press, was san
New. Testame
translated « inte
guage by the ;
Mr, Bainton,.
tracts written .
hommedanism,
printed, and ci
people. Some,
superiority of
nounced their f
toembrace it; '
of others’ in th
tem wus great
whom were so!
tors. One pri
exchanged his
Testament, ,
. The German


oven;
tention,
peans,
ed his
lucting.
1g the
70 pri-
Ctively,


id with.
of Jan.
as, Mr.
n Wed-
n Por-
enihgs,
worship
; Many
way by
1eathen
nd; and
ie listen
ifferent
nues to
pportu-
Gospel.
led ‘the
n Mr,
r 1826,
duty as
rial in-


n Sep-
eported
ese was
than it
bre, and
bs; and
with an
holars.
hat the
fs, who
e lately,
forward
bse and
to read


e in
so the
, at the
ucasus,
Caspian
e from


‘KAR
The Rev. Messrs. Jack, Patter-


‘gon, and Galloway, from the Sco¢-


tish M. S., commenced exertions
here in 1802, with a view to intro-
duce the Gospel among the Tartars.
Though for some time they had
many’ difficulties and discourage-
ments to encounter; yet they ex-
perienced evident tokens of the
divine favour and protection, and
great good has resulted from their
persevering efforts, Soon after they
had established. themselves at Ka-
rass, ‘the Russian: government, in
consequence of an urgent solicita-
tion, gave a grant of land, of more
than 14,000 acres, for. the benefit
ofthe mission, with certain immu-
nities flattering to its future pros-
pects.. Native youths, slaves to the
Circassians and *Cuban Tartars,
were early redeemed by the mis-
sionaries, and: placed’.in schools,
where they receiyed instruction in
the Turkish and English languages,
and. were taught the useful. arts
and'the principles of Christianity.
Among ‘those who early embraced
the Gospel, was the Sultan, Kata-
gerry, who has rendered essential
aid to the mission, and advocated
its cause in the metropolis of En-
gland. : In 1805, a reinforcement
of missionaries, with a printing-
ptess, was sent,to this place. The
New. Testament, which had been
translated into the Turkish lan-
guage by thé assiduous labours uf
Mr, Bainton,. together with some
tracts written .by him against Ma-
hommedanism, were immediately
printed, and circulated among the
people. Some, perceiving the great
superiority of . Christianitv, re-
nounced their former superstitions,
toembrace it; while the confidence
of others’ in the truth of their sys-
tem was greatly shaken, among
whom were some effendis, or doc-
tors. One priest is said to have
exchanged his Koran for the New
Testament, ,

: The German. M.S. has also a


KAR


station at. Karass, which . is ine.
creasing ; and, in consequence, Mr.
Fletnitzer was removed from . the
neighbourhood of Odessa, . to assist
Mr. Lang. The latter has la-
boured with success in the German
congregations committed to him,
and has itinerated with Mr. Gal-
loway among the Tartar tribes,
Speaking of these visits, he says :—
‘© In general, the more sensible
among them, acknowledged, that,
on our side, there is more truth
than on theirs; but also. among
them it. is said, What is truth?
Their indifference toward every
serious thought is almost unbear-
able. There is not one that un-
derstundeth: there is none that
seeketh after God. The mission-
aries have, however, lately con-
templated the. trial of a schopl
among these people.’?’ Of Mad-
char, @ second German congre-
gation of which Mr. L. has the
care, he writes :—‘* With feelings
of great delight do I turn to my
dear congregation: with sure hope
I am waiting for the day of their
salvation. At my last visit to this
people, I examined more -parti-.
cularly into their, real state; and
oh, how. delightful was it to. my
soul, to find many a precious plant
in this garden of our God—in this

otherwise barren field! What-feel-
ings of adoration and. thanksgiving
filled my breast, when I heard,
during divine service, the sacrifices
of prayer and praise rise with deep
veneration. to God Almighty, from
this newly awakened people! How
lovely sounded the voice of the
little children !. And. how many. a
heart exclaimed,. O. Lord hear us!
O Lord have mercy upon us! The
zeal among the school-children. is
very great, The. spelling-book
sent from Basle is already com-.
mitted to memory ;-and it is. with
difficulty the parents can keep the
children from school. The Lord’s-


‘day is kept holy ; dedicated. to the.
2008


KAU


exclusive worship of God our Sa-
viour, and to the building up in
our holy faith and religion. Tie
defaults of a few members of the
congregation were noticed by the
Elders of the chapel ; and reproved
in Christian love, according to the
Gospel. The flourishing state of
this. church is the more interesting,
as it is surrounded with numerous
tribes of Tartars, to whom their
Christian conversation, by the grace
of God, may become a light toguide
their-feet into the way of peace.”

*‘ KAUNAUMEEK, formerly an
Indian settlement between Stock-
bridge, Massachusetts, and Albany,
New-York. Here the Rev. David
Brainerd commenced his missionary
Jabours among the Indians, April J,
3743, under the patronage of the
C. K. S. in Scotland 3 and laboured
* @. year, when he persuaded the
Indians to remove to Stockbridge,
and attend on the ministry of the
Rev. Mr. Sergeant. Mr. Brainerd
was ordained as a missionary at


Newark, New Jersey, June 12,
2744; and on the 22nd of the same
month entered on his labours at
Sakhauwetung, within the Forks


of the Delaware. He visited, for
the first time, the Indians on the
Susquehannah, and commenced his
labours at a place called Opehol-

ng, Oct. 5, 1744; whence he
removed June 19, £745, to Cross-
weeks.

KENT, a town of Africans, in
the parish of St, Edward, at Cape
Shilling, about 40 m. S, Freetown,
Sierra Leone, W, Africa. Popu-
lation, in 1823, 418, of whom 318
were liberated slaves.

This station was commenced by
the C. M.S. in 1819. About 200
people were placed under the care
of Mr. Randle, wko was brought
tee serious concern for his own
salvation under the ministry of
Mr. Johnson at Regent’s Town.
He had at this time an evening
school of nearly 70 boys and adults.


‘ment has prospered.


KEN


{ Painful circumstances arrested his


labours, and Mr. Renner was in
consequence appointed to the sta.
tion. The sum of 2/, [3¢. 1},
was contributed by a missionary as.
sociation, formed here in Septem.
ber, 1820, in the first:4 months,
A singular circumstance occurred
on this occasion, in the opposition
of an African, which, however, he
soon withdrew: his country peo.


| ple, he said, had sold him for a


slave ; he had no wish, therefore,
to do them any good, who had


| dene him so much injury ; but he


relented, after a suitable admoni-


| tion, and became a subscriber to its
| funds.


Mr. Renner being removed
by death, Mr. Beckley was ap.
eon: his successor, while Mrs,
enner was lefi‘in charge of the
females. -
The official return of scholars,


in January, 182), was 35 women


and 58 men and boys. A large
stone building, the floor of which
was to be appropriated to divine
worship, was finished ; the liberated
negroes’ were making progress, and
cultivation was extending. The
average number of adult scholars,
through the year 1824, was between
89 and 90). Both the boys’ and
men’s schools continued to improve
under the care of a native youth
from the Christian Institution. At
this tine Mr. Beckley remarks :—
“’ With much sorrow I state, that
this settlement has received injury
in 1 Maha things, on account of
my frequent absence from it. The
church is by no means so well at-
tended as before, though, at the
same time, I have great reason for
thankfulnesss. It has pleased God
to continue his grace in the up-
holding of such as profess to love
him. In outward things, such as
building and cultivation, the settle-
A wall has
been completed, enclosing the su-


-perintendent’s house, with boys’
and girls’ school-houses in the


300


respective w
feet of. maso
school. is . a
them to be :
school in it,
sada purchas
ing the last t
3620 bushel
with the sta
ment was wl
me much sa


coyamuniean
The Rev.
labauys at th
Sunday servi
Wednesday: .
The average
former about
ghout 14.
there were 14
Miehaelaaas |
to exelude ;
which had |
summer and
ig indigpe
im from re
neighbouring
chaelmas the:
146 boys an
increased ay
Mr. G. “ in
is, on Sunda
and on wee
239. Our pr
has become te
large a numb
to.sit outside
G, had also
for baptism a
and nveationes
esting case. of
§ A womar
8 strict wors
made of woo
man and won
Bacnmbag:
from time to ¢
when canving
God that she


worshipping


KEN


respective wings, containing 10,200
feet of. mason work, and the boys’
school. is ao far finished, as for
them to be able to live and keep
school in it. The quantity of cas-
sada purchased by government dure
ing the last two quarters, has been
3420 bushels; which, contrasted
with the state in which the settle-
ment was when I first.came, gives
me much satisfaction: a bushel of
cassada, net quite 3 years since,
was not te ba found throughout all
Cape Sbilling.”. The number of
communicants was 13, 6
The Rev. Mr, Gerber at present
labouys at this place, Besides the
Sunday services, he has others on
Wednesday and Friday Pleo
The average attendance is, at the
former about 120, and at the latter
ghout 15. At. Midsummer, }826,
there were 10 communicants, but at
Miehaclmas he had fejt it his duty
to exelude 3. The heavy rains


which had fallen between Mid-


summer and Michaelmas, and fre-
ge indigposition, had prevented


from regularly visiting the |


neighbouring stations. At Mi-
chaelmas there were in the school
146 boys and 95. girls, ‘“ The
increased average number,’ says
Mr. G, “ inclusive of children,
i, on Sundays from 369 to 419,
and on week,days, from 229 to
239. Our present place of worship
has become {oo small to contain so
large a number, so that many have
tosit outside in the piaaza.”? Mr.
G. had also 30 persons preparing
for baptism and the Lord’s supper,
and nvegtions the following inter-
esting case of one of them :-—

‘ A woman at Housa, who was
® strict worshipper of two idols
made of wood, in the figure of o
man and woman, whom she call-
ed Bacumbagee, and to whom she
from time to time sacrificed a fowl;
when canvineed by the Spirit of
God that she was thus ignorantly
worshipping the devil, out her


KHA


idols to pieces and threw them
away, and is now worshipping God
in spiritand truth.” _ Ting
Two days * star Mr. G, settled at
Kent, one .« the Commissioners of
Inquiry visited the settlement, and
wished an examination of the
schools to take place. In canse-
quence, 166 boys and 75 girls were
examined: ofthe bays, 9 only could
read the Scriptures tolerably well],
and 14 could read the New Testa-
ment imperfectly ; of the girls, 11
could read the Scriptures fluently,
and spell very well, and 13 could read
the New Testament imperfectly,
and were incorrect in apelling.
The commissioners, on neg the
state of the schaols, advised Mx.
G. to obtain assistants more ade-
quate to the proper instruction of go
large a number of schalars, Wil-
liam Neville and his wife having
baen placed at Kent with that view,
und the hoys being withdrawn fram
that labouy which had fora consi-
derable period left them far top
little time for instruction, Mr. G.
was enabled to report at Michael-
mas a remarkable improvement in
the schools. Exeminations are
now held every quarter—-which
plan acts as a great stimulus to the
children,
KHAMIESBERG, a station of
the 4. M, &., on the Khamies
Mountain, Little Namaqualand, S.
Afriea, S. Orange R., and near
Cape Colony. As early as 1809,
Mr, John Sydenfaden made an at-
tempt to establish a mission among
the Namaqua Hottentots, and spon
succeeded in gaining 4 or 600 fol-
lowers; among whom many seemed
to serve the Lord in sincerity,
Qwing to numerous embarrass-
ments, however, his stay was short.
At this place, and in its neighs
bourhood, two Mesleyan missson-
aries are employer, A large part
of the tribe of the Little Nama-
ua Hottentots have been reduced
rom, migrating saair’ ae the
DD


KIL
cultivation of the. ground, to the
‘practice of useful arts; and, above
all, have wholly renounced super-
stition and idolatry, | Buildings,
fields, and gardens, have taken the
place of the former Hottentot
kraal, and’ the chapel’ and - the
school are regularly attended by the
christianized adults and their chil-
dren. From almost the first com-
mencement of the: mission, ~ the


most satisfactory instances of true | :


conversion’ have taken place, and
they stil! occur. .One: converted
Hottentot family alone bas fur-
‘nished three native teachers, of de-
cided piety and suitable knowledge
of the truth, and others have ac-
‘quired such a maturity of religious
experience’as to be’ useful to: their
fellows. kighv

KILKENNY, capital‘ of a
county of Ireland of the same
name, where the W. M. S. has
placed one of its labourers.

KILLALOE, a town in Ireland,
in Clare’ county, where the W.
-M.-S. has'a missionary.

KISSEY, a town of liberated
Africans, in the parish of St. Pa-
trick, Sierra Leone «colony, W.
Africa, about’ 3 m. E. Freetown,
on the’ Sierra R. Inhabitants in
this town and its vicinity 1500.

The C, M. S. commenced its
benevolent efforts here in 1916. By
an official return of ‘April 1, 1817,
it appears that» the- Rev. C. T.
‘V/enzel’ had the charge, at that
time, of 404'negroes, of whom 74
males’ and 77° females’ attended
school. On: Mr. W.’s death; soon
‘after,-the’ Rev. G.. R. Nylander,
from the Bullom shore, and Ste-
phen Caulker, a native usher, pro-
‘ceeded to’ this station. * In: 1819,
Mr. N. gives the» following ac-
count of his situation and labours :—

‘¢ J have family prayers, morning


and evening, with about 200 adults -


and children; ~and, through the


day, my:time is taken up with the : bipek eed!
affa 4*~ In March,- 1826, a nal


irs of ‘the'settlement. ~ On ‘the


KIS


Lo:d’s day, there is.a congregation
of 300 or more assembled; but
none, as yet, seem to have ears. to
hear or hearts’ to understand;
However, seeing so many precious
souls assembled before me, I am
often refreshed inspeaking to them,
and encouraged to continue in: the
‘work ;* though sometimes much
dejected because I see ‘no fruit,
as others do. war Oke

‘¢The school is carried on» by
Stephen Caulker and another lad
from Rio Pongas. We have: also


an evening and a Sunday school};


and if I could spare a little time, I
would introduce a Bullom. school
here ; as there are about 50 Bullom
and Sherbro children, who: under-
stand one another, and converse in
their tongue. Estates,

‘* Here are about -500: people,
young: and old, on. rations from
government ; and, of course, under
my immediate care. About :450
more live in scattered huts; -near
Kissey, and the Timmanees: and
Bulloms are in our neighbourhood;
so that if a missionary were not so
confined by the care and manage-
ment of the affairs of the settle-
ment, he might make himself
useful in visiting all the places in
the vicinity. I have introduced a
weekly prayer meeting, on Wed.
nesday evenings: about a dozen
adults attend.’ » . tyes
~In 1822, the number of. inha-
bitants being greatly increased, Mr.
N. says—‘“* Divine service is at-
tended on Sundays by 600 people
and upward; and about 400 attend
morning and evening prayers on
week days. About 50 mechanics
attend evening’ school: 100 boys
and 100 girls are at the day
schools; a few married women
attend, but very irregularly.” - In
October, a M. A. was formed,
when 4/. 6s, 9d. was collected,. and
the - subsequent monthly contribu-
tions were pleasing.


02


reported tha
negligent al
few besides '
tending the
At Midsum
had somewh
The. num
at Michaelm
the three qu
ing, 10 adult
been baptize
The retw
Christmas, w
» KONDAI
Susoo count
40 m. up ‘tl
Freeport.
Brunton ‘an
Episcopal M.
sion “here in
under ‘many
interruptions,
company of |]
Greig, and tl
quished, thou;
ofusefulne:
KONIG
capital of P
mouth of the
30, N. lati 4
55,000, of w
A university
1544, which
about 300 st
A wide. fie
has been ope
Jews, upon Ww
missionary le
stowed.
' KORNEQ
town in the
tricts, of th
about 26 m. J
60 N. E. of
1821, the Re
the W. M.
permission o
vernor, and
of Henry W
dent, ta co
slonary «stab
On the firs
arrival, he p


egation
d; but
ears. to
rstand:
recious
9 I am
o them,
}in- the

much
> fruit,


on» by
her lad
ve: also
school ;
time, I
school
Bullom
under-
verse in


people,
is. from
>, under
put 450
ts; near
pes: and
rhood;
e not:so
anage-
settle-
himself
aces in
duced a
n Wed.
h dozen


inha-
bed, Mr.
bis at-
people
0 attend
yers on
chanics
00 - boys
he day
women
y.?? In
formed,
ed, and
mtribu-


Metzger
02


KON

reported that the people were very
negligent about spiritual things,
few besides the communicants at-
tending the ministry of the word.
At Midsummer their attendance
had somewhat improved.

The number of communicants
at Michaelmas was 40; and within
the three quarters then: terminat-
ing, 10 adults and: 17 children ‘had
been baptized.

The returns of the schools at
Christmas, were beys-22, girls 34.

* KONDAIA, asettlement in the
Susoo ceuntry, W.. Africa, about
40'm. up ‘the Rio Poengas from
Freeport. The ‘Revs Messrs.
Brunton ‘and Greig, from the


Episcopal M. S. commenced a mis-.


sion “here in 1798, and laboured
under ‘many discouragements and
interruptions, till 1800; when a
company of Foulahs murdered Mr.
Greig, and the mission was relin-
quished, though favourable prospects
ofusefulnesswere beginnin; to open.

KONIGSBERG, a city ‘and
capital of Prussia, 4 m. from the
mouth of the Pregel. E. long. 20°
30, N. lat. 54° 40’, Population
55,000, of whom 8000 are Jews.
A university was founded here in
1544, which has 18 professors and
about 300 students.

A wide field of useful. exertion

has been opened here among the
Jews, upon which much successful
missionary Jabour has been be-
stowed.
' KORNEGALLE, the - chief
town in the Seven Korles, or. dis-
tricts, of the Kandian -territery,
about 26 m. N. W. of Kandy, and
60 N. E. of Colombo. Early in
1821, the Rev. Mr. Newstead, of
the W.M. S., was enabled, by
permission of the Lieutenant-go-
vernor, and by the friendly offices
of Henry Wright, Esq. the Resi-
dent, ta commence here: a- mis-
sionary * stablishment.

On the first Sabbath day after his
arrival, he preached in an unfi-


KOR


‘nished bungalow intended for a


temporary hospital. Sir E. Barnes
having unexpectedly: arrived, he


-was waited upon by Mr. N., who
was informed that he might build


upon any place he deemed eligible;


and a piece of ground about 600
. feet in.circumference was therefore


allotted for that purpose.

“ Here is,” said Mr. N. “a
garrison of 200 soldiers, many offi-
cers and European children; houses
are building, and streets forming,
every day; a rest-house is also to
be immediately built, and new
barracks ; hence it is easy to see
the station is one of growing im-
portance. Schools have ° been
Opened, and we ‘have gained ad-
mission on a very friendly footing
to two Budhist temples in the
neighbourhood. The most: inte-
resting fact, however,.is, that a
small company have begun to learn
the English language in the house
of a Budhist priest, contiguous to
his temple; himself being one of the
scholars, and at his own request!
The temple-school arose from a
conversation with the priest, who
solicited instruction; I, of course,
assented, and proposed a small
school at: his house, .which our
teacher should visit’ every day.
In the afternvon of the same day,
I had the priest’s house ornamented
with large English alphabets, spell-
ing and reading lessons, é&c., and
several young Kandian ‘students
were seated on their mats round
our schoolmaster, who continues to
visit them every day.

‘‘There will bean Europeancon-
gregation every Sabbath, of .at
least 200 persons, and the natives
are not at all indisposed to assem-
ble; having already come together,
both priests and people, in consi-
derable numbers, to hear : the
preaching.

- © The 3lstof December, 1821,’’
says Mr. N. “was the day appro-
priated to the purpose of owe

303


KOR. .
te God the first house erected to
the honour of his glorious name in
the Kandian kingdom, and. we
trust it will, be remembered through
eternity with joy?

In 1823, Mr. N. reports: ‘‘ The
last quarter. has, I think, produced
more pleasing instances of. real
good than any preceding one. Se-
veral native chiefs: of different
ranks have lately come from. con-
siderable . distances, . voluntarily
bringing their sons to place under
our instructions. It is a circum-
stance which,,has been. « real sup-
port. to me, to, see the: constant
attendance, every Sabbath, of two
entire village schools, all.of Kan-
dian children, without: .objection
attending the otdinances of: Chris-
tian worship; it hes excited: my
surprise almost as much as my gra-
titude; and their frequently being
accompanied by their. parents and
friends hae rendered our native
congregation far less fluctuating
and uncertain than the English.
The latier continues, of course, ex-
tremely small; not from neglect,
but because of their number. The
Kornegalee school begins to revive,
and we have the prospect of many
additions. Two village schools will
be regularly opened in 4 few days,
the bungalows having been com-
pleted, and all things in a fair train
for permanent usefulness,”’

In 1826, it is said,—‘ The
prospects of usefulness in the Se-
ven Korles are aa encouraging
as can be expected in a country
professedly heathen, considering
the confined’ means possessed of
communicating religious instruc-
tion during the past year. The
few members of society wa have
in that district being school-mas-
ters, are hecéssarily separated much
from each other, and seldom are
able to meet in class; but it is
hoped that by their Christian con-
duct and: conversation, a willing-
ness to consider the truths of our


KUR


holy. religion has been intuced
among the natives. Although much
ground may not have been gained
during the year; yet it is satisfac.
tory to know that. none. bas been
lost, but that some progrese is.pera
ceptible.’? [See Kandy.] ..
URREECHANE, the  pritci-
pal town of the Marootze tribe of
Bootchuanas, S. Africa, upwards of
1000 m. N. E. Cape: Town; in
about 24°S, lat, and not farfrom the
eastern coast. The population, in
1820, was estimated at16,000, The
Bootchuanas are jet black, a very
athletic, warlike race, free in. ge.
neral from every species of delof.
mity. Their manners are peculiaf,
and the grossest superstition is in.
terwoven in all their customs} they
are very thievish, but hold the erlme
of adultery in the utmost abhor.
rence. Their language possesses
no regular ferm, but is’ filled with
all the unsoftened barbarity of sas
vage sounds. It is not.uncommdn
to find from 2 to 10 of ¥2,000 living
in a compact body, and scarcely any
thing will induce them to remove,
Each tribe has its laws, | gotetns
ment, and king, who is invariably
hereditary, They have advanced in
the arts of civilization beyond, their
neighbours, and are passionutelyfond
of hunting. The men hunt, build,
and take care ef the inclosurés fot
their cattle, and pfepere their wear.
ing apparel, which cohesists chiefly
of skins sewed together with the
sinéws of goats, sheep, ahd oxen.
The females build the house, make
its hedge, dig the garden,:and:sow
the: land, which they appear to per-
form with the utmost cheerfulness;
Sorcery and witchcraft: universally
prevail; and their faith is firm:in
almost any thing fictitious, espe.
cially when affirmed by their me
gicians. The majority carry pieces
of stone, horn, or roots, suspended
from their necks, which they use
for magical purposes, according to
the direction of their sorcerers,
304


‘


“In 1820, the
bell and- Mofi
visited: this a
the vicinity,

establishment:
was favoured. |
tie nation ; bu
cept by way of
the town was ¢
pany of about
who passed thr
a plundering ¢
1823, and. disp
tribe. » This d
ranged the» Sa
is confidently |
tually turn to
the Gospel in ¢


LABRAT
country in N
on the N. E. p
bounded W.. by
by-Hudson’s St
Straits, the Atl:
of Belisle ; an
St. Lawrence
Between 55° a
60° and 63° N
the country is r
ous, the soil po
productions th:
plants, “adapted
of deer and. gc
the K. coast ex
appearance ; tk
more fertile, «
numerous. T
severe, is sal
little appearan
about the mid
September, wit
proach ;~—this s
mote intensely
Greenland. Im
ice render th
colder than the
mometer, from
is generally 7


point; and sho


LAB


nduced In 1820, the Rev. Messrs. Camp-
bh much bell and» Moffat; of the L.M. S.;
gained visited: this and other places in
atisfac. the vicinity, to prepare for the
8 ‘been establishmentiof a mission; which
| is. pera was favoured. by the chief men of.
4s tie nation ; but little was done, ex-
prificie cept by way of preparation, before
tribe of the town was destroyed by a com-:
yards of pony Of about 40,000. Mantatees,
wh; in who passed through the country on
rom the a plundering expedition, in June,
tion, in 1823, and. dispersed the Marootze
0. The tribe. - This disastrous event de-
& very ranged the» Society’s plans; ‘but it
in ge- is confidently believed it will even-
defor. tually turn to the furtherance of
ney the Gospel in these parts,
1 19 Ife ‘


Ly ¢

LABRADOR, an extensive
country in N, America, situated
on the N. E. part of New Britain:
bounded W. by Hudson’s Bay; N.
by-Hudson’s Straits; E. by Davis’s
Straits, the Atlantic, and the Straits
of Belisle ; and S. by the Galf of
St. Lawrence, and. L. Canada.
Between 55° and 79" W. long. and
6 and 63° N. lat.: The face of
the country is rough and mountain-
ous, the soil poor, and the natural
productions those of the coarsest
plants, “adapted to the subsistence


govetns
atiebly
need in
md. their


the KR. coast exhibits a very barren
anpearance ; the inland territory is
more fertile, and trees are more
mumerous. The citmate, though
severe, is salubrious. There is
little appearance of summer ,till
about the middle of July, and in
September, winter indicates its ap-
proach ;—this season is longer, and
mote intensely cold than that of
Greenland. Immense quantities of
ice render the sea-coast much
colder than the interior. The ther-
mometer, from December to April,
is generally 70° below freezing-
point; and shoals of ice, from the


of deer and. goats. . The whole of |


LAB


N., frequently’set in in'spring and
summer. The inhabitants of this
country are two distinct ‘tribes of
Indians— Mountaineers and Esqui-
maux, between whom there subsists’
an invincible aversion. The Moun-
tatneers inhabit the interior of the
country towards the N., and are 2
small, hardy race of people, well
adapted to the rocky country which
they are continually traversing.’
The » Esquimaux are inferior to
Europeans, and flat visaged; their


‘hair is black and very coarse, and


their hands and feet are remarkably
small: their dress is made entirely
of skins: their food consists chiefly
of seals, deer, fish, and birds. The
men are extremely indolent, the
women are mere drudges. Constant
dread of the Mountaineers induces
them to live near the shore. In
summer the natives occupy tents,
made circular with poles, and co-
vered with: skins; and in winter
they live in caverns and snow-
houses. Before the arrival of mis-
sionaries, the Esquimaux believed
in the existence of an invisible
Being, influencing both the good
and the bad, which they called the
Torugak. Sorcery and witchcraft
were universally practised; and
stealing, perfidy, and murder, were
common crimes. Their number
has not been accurately ascertain-
ed; it:has been estimated at about
1,600. The exports are fish, whale-
bone, and furs ; the latter of which’
are of superior quality.

The first idea of sending out
missionaries to the Esquimaux ap-
pears to have originated in'a con-
jecture that a national affinity
subsisted between those people and
the Greenlanders ; and though the
excellent and devoted Matthew
Stach did not succeed in bis ap-
plication to the Hudson’s Bay
Company for permission to attempt
the evangelization of the Indians’
‘belonging to their factories, a ship
was fitted out in 1752, by some of
DD2 305


LAB


the U. B. and severd] other mef«
ehants, for the purpose of trading
on the coast of Labrador. Four
missionaries sailed from London
on the 17th of May, taking with
them the frame and materials of a
house, a boat, various kinds of
seeds, and different implements of
agriculture 5, and, on their arrival
in a fine bay, they went on shore,
‘and fixed on a spot for their future
residence, to which they gave the
‘rame of Hopedale ; but some pain«
iul circumstances occurring, the
mission was for a time abandoned.

Jens Haven, however, sailed for
Labrador in May, 1765, accompae
nied by C. L. Drachart, formerly
me of the Danish missionaries in
Greenland, and 2 other brethren.
On this occasion they penetrated
farther into the interior of the
country; and on their teturn to
the coast, they bad an opportunity
of addressing several hundreds of
the natives; who seemed to listen
to them with profound attention 3
but on several other occasions they
either evinced a total indifference
to the truths which were sounded
in their ears, or spoke in a way
which demonstrated the hardness
of their hearts, and the blindness
of their understandings.

A tract ox land in Esquimaux
Bay was afterwarils granted, by
an order of council, for the esta-
blishment of a mission ; and a brig
f about 120 tons burthen was
purchased, with the design of an
nually visiting Labrador, and tra-
ding with the natives: In the
month of May, 1770, Messrs. Ha-
ven, Drachart, and Jensen, sailed
from England, in order to explore
the coast, and to fix on a conve-~
nient situation for a settlement.
Qn their atrival they availed them«
selves of the first opportunity of
preaching} and, notwithstanding
the grant which they had previously
obtained, they deemed it advisable
to purchase from the savages the


LAB"


' piece of ground which they intend:


ed. to occupy as. a tissionary sta.
tion, They then returned to En
land, to make further preparations
or the accomplishment of their
benevolent design,

The interest excited by an atu
tempt to introduce the. cheering
light. of revelation among the
wretched and benighted Esqui.
maux was very great, and several
members of the Moravian church,
both male and female, avowed thei#
willingness to abandon alt the com.
forts of civilised society, dnd to
expose themselves to every species
of incorivenience and privation, for
the furtherance of so important an
object. Accordingly, in the spring
of 1171, a company of 14 persons,
comprising 3. matried couples, a
widower, and seven single brethren,
sailed for Labfador}; ard after a
tedious and hazatdous voyage, ars
rived on the 9th of August at their
place of destination,. The day
after theit arrival, they took poss
session of the spot which had been
purchased in the preceding summer,
and gave it the appellation of Nain;
They also immediately commenced
the erection of a mission-house,
the frame and materials of which
they had brought from England;
but great exertions were required
to complete it before the com-
mencement of winter, which, if
these northern regions, is +so in-
tensely cold, that rum, placed in
the open air, freezes like water,
and rectified spirits in a short tim
become as thick as oil. '

In this situation the brethren
could obtain but few of the neces
saries of life; and as a considera
ble delay occurred in the forwards
Ing of supplies ftom England in the
ensning year, their provisions were
almost entirely exhausted; . but,
ha pily, deliverance appeared.

he conduct of the Esquimaux


had been uniformly friendly towards
them from their first arrival ; and o
306


‘pel; and, in


the bfethren
sions, in phe
nuous mann
was © soon

them. In fe
pean could
among these
racterized as
without the
ger; but n
regardless o
the season,
ite and snow
winter house
entertained

nights succe
were afterwi
consequence
course thus
hot only ask
brethren in

even chiose

their dispute:
thitted to th
also listened °
tion to the |


hope was ent
sions were n
a subsequent
of some fruit
Redeemer.

however, the
quainted witli
wretchedness


gratification
passions, an


teceiving the

A man ne
ever, who h
ferocious and


intent:
ary sta-

to Em
arations
of . their


_ ate
heering
ng the

Esqui-
several
church,
yed theit
he com.
, and to
y species
tion, for
rtant an
1e spring
persons,
uples, a
srethren,
| afte® a


le water,
hort time


brethren
he necese
pnisiderae
forwards
and in the
ons were
d3 . but,
red.

quimaux


* LAB:


the brethren acted, upon. all occa.
sions, in the most open and inge-
nuous manner, entire confidence
was soon established between
them. Informer times, no Euro-
pean could have passed a night
among these savages, then cha-
racterized as thieves and murderers,
without the most imminent dan-
ger; but now thé missionaries,
regardless of the inclemency of
the season, travelled actoss the
fee and snow to visit them in their
winter houses, and were hospitably
entertained fot several days and
nights successively, These visits
were afterwards returned; and in
consequende of the friendly inter
course thus opened, the natives
not only asked the advice of the
brethren in all difficult cases, but
even chioss them as umpires in
their disputes, and invariably sub-
thitted to their arbitration. They
also listened with silence and atten-
tion to the preaching of the Gos-

1; and, in a few instances, the

e was entertained that impres-
sions were made which might, at


asubsequent period, be productive


of some fruit to the honour of the
Redeemer, Generally speaking,
however, they were too little ac-
quainted with their own guilt and
wretchedness to discover the ne-
cessity of salvation, or the suitabi-
lity and preciousness of that Sa-
viour who was represented to thein
as the only refuge from the wrath
tocome. Though devoted to the
gratification of the most brutal
passions, and habitually commit-
ting the grossest sins with delight,
they were never destitute of ex-
cuses and causes of self-gratula~
tion, The angekoks, or sorcerets,
also, as might naturally be exe
pected, employed all their, arts to
prevent thelr countrymen from
receiving the Gospel.

A man nained Anauke, how.
ever, who had been formerly a
ferocious and desperate character,


LAB
was at length induced to attend


the preaching of the brethren ;
and, after hearing them repeatedly,


che pitched his tent in their settle.


ment in 1772, and remained there


: till the month of November, when


he removed to his winter house.
Even then his anxiety for further
instruction in the things of God
was so ‘great, that he actually
returned on foot, for the purpose
of spending a few days more with
the heralds of the cross; though
the Esquimaux were never accus-
tomed to travel in that manner 3
as in summer they pass ftom one
place to another in their kajaks,
and in winter they perform their
journeys in sledgus. From the time
of his second departure, the mis-
sionaries heard nothing of him till
February; 1773, when his wife
came to Nain, and stated that he
had died, calling on the name of
the Lord Jesus. Though no Chris«
tian friend: was present to direct ot
influence him, he would not pers
mit one of the angekoks, who are
considered as the physicians of the
Esquimaux, to come neat him j
but committed himself unreservedly
into the hands of that great Phy«
sician who descended from heaven
to bind up the broken hearted, and
with whom he was enabled to hold
sweet communion even when heart’
and flesh wete fuiling. After his
demise, this person was invariably
spoken of by the natives as “the
man whom the Saviour took w
himself,”

The brethren now resolved to
select from among their hearers
such as appeared, the most seriously
inclined, and to form them into a
class of catechumens, in order to
prepare them, by suitable instrue-
tions, for the holy rite of baptism.
At the same time they determined
to erect a church capable of con-
taining some hundreds of persons,
as the apartment in the miskion-
house, which had been hitherto
307


LAB’
used for-the celebration of divine


service, could .no longer hold the:


congregation. we
“Th the summer of 1775, in com-
pliance with the instructions which
they’ had received from Europe,
Messrs. Haven and Jensen set out
with the design of commencing a
new settlement at a place called
Okkak, about 169 m. to the:north-
ward of Nain.
peared peculiarly eligible for the
purposes. of .a mission, . being
abundantly furnished with wood
and fresh water, contiguous to an
excellent haven, and surrounded
hy a numerous population of. the
heathen, the land was immediately
purchased from. the Esquimaux ;


and as soon as the ensuing season:


permitted, the missionaries took
up their residence here, and began
to preach the glad tidings of sal-
vation to the natives in the vici-
nity. At first they met with much
discouragement; but at length
some indications of success began
to appear ; and in 1781, they had the
satisfaction of ministering among


38 persons who had been baptized.
in the faith of Christ, besides 10°


others, who, as catechumens, were
receiving particular instruction.

In the month of August, 1782,
the brethren proceeded to form a
third setilement, at a place to the
southward of Nain, to which they
awe the appellation of Hopedale.

‘his spot had been formerly re-
connoitred, and considered parti-
cularly suitable for a missionary
station; and it was now hoped
that great numbers of the Esqui-
maux would rejoice in the oppor-
tunity of receiving religious instruc-
tion. This pleasing anticipation
was, for the present, disappointed ;
and for several years the preaching
of the Gospel on this spot appeared
to be attended with so little suc-
cess, that both the missionaries
and the directors in Europe felt
inclined to relinquish such an un-


As this spot ap-.


LAB‘ *
profitable station. The great Head:


of the church, however, had other. ;:
‘| wise determined,’ and Hopeduale,:
in. the sequel; became the’ scene -


of an awakening which afterwards:
extended its blessed influence to
the other settlements, and con-.
strained. the friends of the Re..
deemer to exclaim,.‘* What hath
God wrought !?? .; Waa

At the commencement of 1804,
the missionaries were much dis.:
couraged on a review of the small.
success which seemed to have at.’
tended their faithful ministrations
among the heathen in Labrador;
but before the end of that year, it
was their privilege to behold the
dawn of a brighter day, and to
witness effects which they were
aware could only -have been pro.
duced by the agéncy and influences
of the Holy Spirit,..In former
times it had .been a subject of
deep regret that the instructions
received by the Esquimaux in the
different settlements, during the
winter, were too generally for.
gotten in their summer excursions,
when, by associating. with their
heathen countrymen, they laid
themselves ope: to temptation,
and in many instances relapsed
into their former practices: on
the return of the professing natives
to Hopedale, however, in the year
to which allusion is now made,
the brethren were abundantly gra-
tified to find that their souls were
prospering, and, by their means,
many who had previously possessed
nothing more than the form of
religion, were awakened to a
sense of its vital importance,
and began earnestly to inquire:
how they might be delivered trom
their offences and received into.
the divine favour.

The awakening, so happily com-
menced at Hopedale, ‘soon com-
muni¢ated its sacred influence to


ain.
On the 9th of August, 1620,
308


the missioha:
satisfaction:

ship called t
en anchor i:
years after t
there, with |
ters..on boar
forming a C|
e:land whic!
period, had
thick darknes:
therefore, to
hoisting two
white one, o:
sisters had fo
with red rib
it with a wre
eiisll Cannon |
and answered
ship, ‘and th
their musket:
fondet laste
ymns expres
for divine m
mean time, |
struments; wi
¢ suitable imp
of the hed
8 tolerable id
joicing. The
meister, exple
the number o
tended t dei
the fiftieth. tix
come safely t¢
their sakes, ¢


spirit of joy a
vailed through
gtegation 3 and
adults tended |
this festival,’?
The jubilee
also celebrated
tlements with


LAB


the missionaties at Nain liad the
satisfaction’ of seeing the hew
ship called the Harmony. come to
an anchor in tieir bay, just 50

after the fitst vessel arrived
there, with 24 brethren: and sis-
ters,on board, with the view of
forming a Christian settlement ih
a‘land which, previously to that
period, had been covered with
thick darkness. They endeavor ‘ed,
therefore, to express their joy, by


hoisting two small flags, and’ a | titud


white one, on which some of the
sistots had formed the number 50
with red riband, and surrounded
it with a wreath of lautel. Their
snail cannon were also discharged,
and answered by the guns of the
ship, and the Esquimaux fired
their muskets as long as their

wdet lasted. Some tunes of
ymns expressive = ©) ‘sgiving
for divine mercies «+», in the
mean time, played .. wind in-
struments; which aliogether made
esuitable impression on the minds
of the converts, and afforded them
a tolerable idea of 4 jvbilee re-
joicing. The missionary, Kohl-
meister, explained to' them that
the number on the flag was in-
tended to denote that this was
the fiftieth time that a ship had
come safely to the settlement for
their sakes, and that the gracious
preservation which had been af-
forded during that long period was
the cause of the present rejoicing.
They listened to this with profound
attention, and then exclaimed,
“Yes! Jesus is worthy of thanks !
Jesus is worthy of thanks, indeed !’’

“In the public services of the
day,’ the missionaries observe, “a
spirit of joy and thanksgiving pre-
vailed throughout the whold con-
gregation ; and the baptism of two
adults tended greatly to solemnize
this festival.’’

The jubilee of the mission was
also celebrated in the other set-
ements with due solemnity, and


LAB
many of the Esquimaux after
wards obsetved that it had been
@ most important and blessed sea-
son to their souls.

The. most important benefits
appear to have resulted from the
translation and * pdosge of different
parts of the New Testainent in
the Esquimaux language ; and the
contributions which the people
made of seals’ blubber is a
striking illustration of their gra-
e.

The brethren wrote from Hope»
dale, July 2%, 1825 :«=** We have,
indeed, even in the year past, richly
experienced that the good seed
has not been sown in vain. The
Spirit of God accompanied the tes
timony of the life, sufferings, and
death of Jesus, with power.in the
hearts of our people; and we er
joyed with them many rich bies-
sings whenever we met in His
name. It gave us peculiar satie-
faction to perceive, that all those
who had for some time past been
excluded from the congregation,
returned with true signe of repen-
tance, bemoaning their sine and
transgressions, and crying to the
Lord for mercy, We could, there-
fore, at different opportunities, re-
admit them all to fellowship with
the believers. Several persons ad-
vanced in the. privileges of the
church ; two girls and eight chil
dren were baptized; four persons,
baptized as children, were received
into the congregation ; seven be.
came candidates for the holy com-
munion; six partook of it for the
first time) a youth was added to
the class of candidates for baptism.
One child departed this life. The
Esquimaux congregation at Hope-
dale consists of 65 commu’ ‘ants,
36 baptized adults, 83 bv otized
children and youths, 7 canuidates
for bapticm, and 2 children yet un-
baptized ;—in all, of 192 persons!

“In extetnals we have cause to
thank our heavenly wee _ his

3


—— - sae epee: 3 =”
SE i MBL mn scab aGE lar %. mage <i as SS ere eared 3 = =
aie =< Sp Se =


LAB:
care of Dis. eKildren.” TE
few seals re em baci ie


. - ;
=e ‘th ati
could alwa, . procare a good s
es
ng,
markably successful: in catehing


seals;:v;aich enabled them to'dty'a


consijerable stock of meat. We
had little snow: du
but from the 24th of ‘Nov. to ‘the
Oth ‘of June, ‘this year, our bay
‘was frozen.’? | -

/On August 18, 1895; the mis-
‘sionaries wrote from Nain :-~" The
internal .state ‘of our’ Esquimaux


hes, by the Lord’s


congregation |
mercy, afforded us more ‘joy than
‘Most of the tmptized have
been desirous of pi arg te the
‘power of our Saviour’s to
qpable them to: walk y of” the
:Goepel, :and pe a. oy honour to Him
who has delivered from’ darkness
and the power of'sin. Some painful
occurrences may be expected ; for
-the enemy of souls is ever active,
God Ne to do harm to the ‘cause of


eyen:
into mise


has he spared us,° but
\t' to. lead the children
lief, and create ‘disturb-—
ance oe § them. But the spirit


.of God, ruling in the congregation,


proved more Fs ghty ; and the evil,


being brought to rligtit, the machi-
nations: of. pod ya were soon

re eat the spirit of
our ‘peop is with us, and all are
intent upon putting away that
which, ie evil: n the sight of God.
Against such ‘a spirit, which is his
gift, Satan cannot Jong exert his


with success. May the Lord |


preserve it a us! As to ex-
pc we can declare with gra-
E ore that our mercifal heavenly
Father has cared for our people,
None have suffered extreme ‘hun-


Oe ete!
st autumn |'n
id real


omy $0° oat ‘we |"


‘Towards the: end '
Esquimaux ‘were re+ |


‘the wihter ;


Pease il


Bi liga the wttite se1008,
S ddults and 4 children were ‘bup:
tized.;°3 persons were received into


the ‘congregation } 14° were added


to the Candidates for the Lord’s
Supper, anc 3 becamé partakers;
At present our Esquimaux ‘congre-
gation consists of 207 persons, of
‘whom 82 are communicants. ; ‘Nore
have departed this life,


‘About 70. children: attend ‘the |


Jneetings and schools, with dili-
gence and profit.”?’ |

‘In a letter dated Ofkak, August
24; 1825, it is said :—‘ Since the


departure ‘of the ship last yenz, |
9 children and 13:adults were bap. ff
tizeds 18 became. partakers-of the.


-Lord’s Supper ; 3 youths were ‘re-
ceived into the congregation
persons came to live ive bere, deci
to be converte! to the Lo
family: of 6 persons sienpnat! to
Nain; is ane and Rais de-
parted this: life. . They ve
evidence of: their: faith, ond ae
‘han their desire to depart and
with Christ. » Our congregation
consists of 338 persons, of whom
07 are communicants.” =":

The support of the: mission at
Labrador ‘is attended with great
expense, and can only be effected
by a vessel, belonging to the So-

ciety, annually sent out. It is
worthy of grateful notice, that,
amidst the many dangers attending
the navigation’ of this rocky coast,
ho interruption occurred for about


60 years in transmitting the annual


supplies: In 1816, the vessel was
for the first time rt by the
ice and the fury ‘of storms, from
touching at Hopedate } and was
| return to Europe, having

€ missionaries on board.
The’ Rev. Mr. att 14 lately


been sent
KB MSs,
he. wasi Dr


pice, bat


attend “the |


with dili-


vateaon e
with grea
| be effected


r to the So-
out. It is
otice, that,

attending
rocky coast,
pd for about


; was
nted, by the
yond was
\ ope, having


has lately
310


g¢ the annoal


=


LAT
peen sent .to. Labrador,» by: the


| BM. S.5and at the last account
he: was: Duilding...a: house: for a| h


winter residence, to.;:the great


election: of the natives, = © i |
.LATTAKQO, acity and:capiial


of: ithe: Matehappee tribe, about


| 900 m. N, E. of Cape: Town, South


Africas. In. June, ‘1813,;the Rev.
John Campbell, - .of.. Kingsland,


| visited this place,..with.the:hope of
. obtaining. permission to.send mis-
_ donaries. ito. that» part .of, South


Africa... After-waiting-a consider-
able time for.an interview with the
king, Mateebe, and overruling his


| objectionsy the king said—*


instructors, and J witl.be.a Sather


| tethem.??


Encouraged by this. assurance;
directors of the L. 4. S..:sent
out missionaries, Messrs, Evans,


‘Hamilton, Williams, und Barker,


in February, 1815. On: their. ar=
rival, Mateebe and several of his
people shook,.hands. with. them
with, great cordiality,. supposing


them. to. have: been traders. come


for the ..purpose: of. exchanging
goods; Lut. on finding that. they:


B were the» Peng prdiniond bp


Mr, C ey?
pec ag os o
seemed to: express their d sen
vation, and: in their feelings the
people concurred,

eeply : grieved. by. this, un-
expécted disappointment, the bre-
thren returned to» Griqua -Town.
Mr, Read: was, bowever, resolved
to attempt:the establishment: of a
mission; ahd .soon, after, this he


wight nye ae


m proceeded thither with.7 w Ns,


and a number of persons of different
nations. On their arrival, Mateebe
very cool, and. repeated


‘appeared
his former observations with respect


to. the ancient customs, of ; the
Rostchuanas, . and | their - avetelon
toinstruction. “To these objece | ¢
tions,” says. Mr. Read, ‘I gave
little. heed ; but told him, that "4
conformity to.the. agreement with


Mr.. Contpheall, sopts ar tr
wa


might,.unyoke our: oxen. under a:
large. tree. which. stands near: his
house; and two days.afterwards, on;
his being asked :where:we: should
get wood. and reeds. for: buildjng,
and where. we: should build, he
replied that wood and reeds were.
at hand, and that wre might build.
where we pleased,?? +.
Mateebe’s: mind was, deeply. af.
fected by a-defeat he experienced


| about. this: time ; and be not-only.


acknowledged. that; he +had done
wrong in refusing to. listen to the

adyice.of the . missionaries, who.
attempted; to..dissunde him: frony¥


war, but: declared that, in future, .


he would be. guided. by ner wa
rections,

On: the 24th. of April Mr.-and
Mrs. ‘Jamilton arrived at Lattakoo,
and were very kindly received by


the king, who told them that they.


must consider. his country as their

own, and spend the remeinder of

their dives with his people... ..
On the 4th of June the. mlaston~


aries, in compliance with the wish
| of the king). removed to the Kroo-
| man R. ; und on the 8th arrived at


the place. of their destination,


| which, appeared to be well situated
| for a permanent settlement. ‘‘ The
plain,” says one of the. brethren,


is as large as the gitg of London,
and surrounded..by. lofty : trees,
which afford a delightful shade in
the summer, and give it a very
pleasing we ere. On “this
ey were accompanied
by: Matecbe and ‘several ‘of his
who went with them. in or-
der to. determine on the spot: where
the: new town should. ‘be. built.
Many of were. extremely


ong yn neni ene mn a


pater ii pai salaidactlnciabicail
AILS POTEET SO «DIF PT A TE Me TT EO EE eT


nnn neers


im
i:


LAT


' the sa
averse, both to the King’s. ren air’ se
Br Bet Mes ieebe,. othe pst and c:
leclared his determination of ncting | ea same form, ‘ai
bse rd jo thats of hie | te ler ae" rel
judgment ; nd. observed, that the “We vis
ane thren ‘had evinced their attach. | in. closares, - whi

| towards dis, by. regularly ate | d spend the day

ig to ds, 8 in conversati

has what' may

house, which

th berg I é AOE is eastern corne

beg ot, dated Now Lattakoo, oo, | worship had been erected, capable retire when 1
March 9, jate, one. of the mise | of containing about ee persons, becomes ‘oppr
stonaries olsewds,—~‘‘ Things are | and... .long..row . 0 missionary. posed'of stron
going on better here than we. ex- | houses, with excellent gardens _ » bent as: to
ted in so short.a time, es we | hind; a neat fence, .com od. rests upon a
have no longer aay opposition from | reeds, had.also becn plaged invent (Ml middie of the
the Boatehuanas; ‘but, on the | of the houses, which tendedtoim MM yricace
contrary, some.of them are thank- | prove the general ar peeneee sit branches twist
ing God {ur sending his word among | the rina of Burderis Rew was ees Matche
ate vied eee |e the Bootchua
fond of potat

never been inc

because nothii

pears to :have

their forefathe


and manners
attached, as t
disciples of Mc
sible, also, in-t
lence may be
adherence to a
Mr. C. observe
fat requesting
chappees, who
him'in Mr. He
asist:in gathe
beans, they con
citation; but in
pee rset
| Krooman be.emptied by the canal, eir arms y
ever, they continued to speak .on | it soon becomes ny with the labour
their favourtie mabiect, quar intste in vence. of 32 or
bg peng trsonflihg an ie a querter of a mile lower


L,

ken a. Jong journey ; and
ae place through which they | Mv. Campbell. -went,. one rie oe
passed, they: told.all they knew of | after breakfast, te view: Serpe
Jesus Christ to. the inhabitants, | work, and a kp pe


es the children
t they


ation on.
ro bi instruct
attendance ough
Crery day, eth


i


Fess
eee


LAT
neatly the’ same number’ of ' inha-
bitants, ‘perhaps: 4000-each. The:
houses’and cattle-kraal are of the
same form, and arranged in a simi-
lar manner.’? |
| © We visited 3-of the ‘public:en-
clostres;: where the men ‘usually
spend the day together, at work, or
in conversation... Each enclosure.
has whati may be: called a summer-
house, which is generally in» the
eastern corner ;' and: to: this they
retire when the: heat of the sun
becomes ‘oppressive. It is com-
posed of strong branches of trees,
® bent.as to form«a roof, which
rests upon.a pillar placed in the
middle of the house ; and the whole
is neatly ‘covered with thorn-
branches twisted together.”
. The Matchappees,who constitute
one of the most numerous tribes of
the Bootchuanas, are extremely
fond of potatoes; but they have
never been induced to plant any,
because nothing of the kind ap-
pears to have been cultivated by
their forefathers, to whore customs
and manners they are as strongly
attached, as the ‘Hindoos or the
disciples of Mohammed. It is pos-
sible, also,‘in:this case, that indo-
lence may be united with a bigoted
adherence to ancient practices; as
Mr. C. observes, that‘on Mr. Mof-
fat requesting two strong Mat-
chappees, who were walking with
him in Mr. Hamilton’s garden, to
asist:in gathering some kidney-
beans, they complied with his soli-
citation; but in less than 10 minutes
they desisted, and complained that
“their arms were almost broken
with the labour.”

The exertions of the mission-
tries to form:a school had hitherto
been attended with little success ;
es the children seemed to consider
that they were conferring an
ps awa on them by: attending
to their instructions, and that their
attendance ought to be remunerated
every day, either by a supply of


LAT


‘vietaals, or presents’ of beads, :&c.,
‘The ‘same. feeling, also, «pre-.
vajled among many of ‘the adults,
with fespect to coming under: the.
sound of: the Gospel; so that when .
‘a captain was ordered to attend :
regularly fora short time, who had.
not previously been in the habit of
hearing the word, the: missionaries
generally anticipated an early
‘application for the loan of their
‘waggon, or their plough, or some-.
thing which he particularly wished
to obtain: -

Notwithstanding theese discou-
ragements, however, Mr. €
found that some of the young people
had-paid considerable. attention to
the »instruction of ‘the mission-
aries, and had evidently profited by
them.
Previous to his final departure,
a poor female Matchappee called.
on him, and said, that when
she first heard of the Bible she
did ot thik it was true, but
w’ 4 she found it describe her
heart ‘so exactly she could not but
believe what it said. She was de-
termined, she added, always to live
near some place where the
word of God was preached, and
where she might hear about a
crucified Saviour, even though she
might starve.

After the removal of Mr. Camp-
bell, the missionaries continued
their labours among the Bootchu-
anes, preaching, catechising, and
conversing with them. The at-
tendance on public worship, how-.
ever, fluctuated extremely; the
number of bearers being sometimes
very considerable, and at other
times very small. Mr. Moffat
occasionally: itinerated among the
neighbou kraais, where, as in
the town, his congregations varied
a as . and
the people listened message
with more or less attention. |

‘A defeat of the Mantatees was
afterwards overruled 7 : la

EE


LAT


the report of 1824, the Directors
observe, “‘ The expulsion of the
Mantatees from the Bootchuana:
country, effected, under Provi-
dence, ‘chiefly ‘by the courage ‘of
the Griqtas, and the promptitude
and intrepidity of Messrs. Moffat
and Melville, has given an entirely
new aspect to the mission at New
Lattakoo. Mateebe and his people,
aware that they owe their ssteiy
to the missionaries, are far more
disposed to listen to their counsel.
The King has consented to remove
the town to a neighbouring valley,
where, it is expected, many ad-
vantages will be obtained, and
many evils obviated. Of this: val-
ley he had formerly ceded a portion
for the exclusive use of the mission.
The chiefs, who formerly revolted
from Mateebe, observing that New
Lattakoo, where the missionaries
reside, has been protected from
the invaders, while the old town,
where they themselves remuined,
has been destroyed by the barba-
rians, have again submitted. to his
authority, and engaged to remove
with their people to the Krooman.
Thus the inhabitants of Old and
New Lattakoo will be re-united,
under the same government; and
all of them, more or less, with
impressions favourable to the mis-
sionaries, naturally resulting, as to
each party, from the late events.’’
The Bootchuanas, it appears
from .the last report, manifest in-
creased attachment to the mission-
aries, and listen to the preaching
of the Gospel; but no spiritual
change is, as yet, apparent. The
s*hool, which has been placed
under the care of Mr. Hughes, is
chiefly confined: to the children of
those natives who are ‘connected
with the mission. 2000 copies of
a spelling-book and catechism, in
Bechuan, prepared by Mr. Moffat,
have been, during the year 1626,
printed in ‘London, and, in: part,
forwarded to Africa. » A mission


LEI


house has been completed. Severat
gardens have been: formed by the
Bootchuanas for their own’ use,
Mateebe and his people have a
‘length removed to the fine valley
in which the missionaries reside,
where they purpose to erect their
new town. During the year 1826,
the surrounding country was visited
by swarms of locusts, which des.
troyed all vegetation. It is re.
markable, that while these insects
-seemed to threaten nothing ‘but
famine, they themselves furnished
means of support to the natives,
many of whom appeared entirely
to subsist upon them.
- The general aspect of this mis-
sion, at present, is not encouraging;
and the school, in particular, appears
to be ina languishing state. When,
however, the books in the Bechuan
language, which have been lately
sent out, are received, doubtless a
more systematic ‘plan of school-
instruction will be adopted ; which,
it is hoped, may be attended with
beneficial results, both as regurds
an increase in the number of the
scholars and their improvement in
learning. ‘The Mantatees have
continued to hover near this station
and neighbourhood, by which the
people have been kept in a constant
state of anxiety and alarm, ani ef-
forts in furtherance of the mission
are thereby de pt bethons
LEICESTER MOUNTAIN, in
the colony of Sierra Leone, W.
Africa, about 3 m. fram Freetown.
Soon after the commencement
of a mission by the C.M. S. in
1816, a grant of 1100 atres was
made to the society, on which a
Christian institution was esta-
blished ; where*negro children of
various tribes, ‘re-capturyd from
smuggling slave-ships, have. been
supported, and received religious
instruction. The number of Pe
pils, in 1817, was: 286. he
original design ‘of the institution
‘| being, however, soon after shang,
a


twice on
in the we
1825. and.
v. Mr,
assisted Vi
evening ai
building u
and a schc
but anoth
The peop
attentive.
sick in th
Mountain
the town.
decreased
excluded
scholars .
1826, 9
were an
inhabitan
cultivatio
. LEOPG
Afrivans,
Sierra p
This stati
1818, by
following
300 30


0 pers
care of the
scholars, ¢
mechanics
Shortly a
much aug:
young, in
was very '


. Several
id by the
wn" use,
) have at
ne valley
es reside,
rect their
ear 1826,
vas visited
hich des-
It is re-
se insects
thing ‘but
furnished
e natives,
d entirely


' this mis-
couraging ;
ar, appears
te. When,
e Bechuan
been lately
doubtless a
of. school-
ed; which,
nded with
as regurds
nber of: the
ovement in
atees have
this station
which the
a constant
rm, ani ef-
the mission
eded.
NTAIN, in
Leone, W.
Freetown.
mencement
C. M.S. .in
D atres was
on which a
was | esta-
children of


» institution
rer changed,
$14


- LEI


it.was removed to Regent’s Town;
when. most of: the pupils were dis-
tributedin the neighbouring schools,
and a. part .of the teachers turned
their. attention, to the liberated
negroes inhabiting Leicester Town. :

LEICESTER TOWN, a hamlet
of liberated negroes, nearly 3 m.
from, Freetown, W. Africa, It is
the. oldest ; of those. settlements,
baglng been formeéd in 1809..

_n 1816, aschool was established
here’ by. the. .C. Mf. S. and the mis-


‘, slonaries. have. laboured with some


SUCCESS. © _ 3
The. station remains under the
care of Wm. Davis,,, a. native
teacher.. Divine service is held
twice on Sundays, and three times
inthe week, In the latter part of
~ and the beginning of 1826, the
v. Mr, Lisk, from Gloucester,
assisted Wm. Davis on Wednesday
evening and Sunday afternoon. The -
building used ‘as a place of worship,
and a school, has fallen into ruins;
but another is about to be erected.
The people continue to be very
attentive.. Wm. Davis visits the
sick in the hospital at Leicester
Mountain, and those who live about
the town.. The communicants have
decreased to 4,—several having been
excluded for sinful conduct. The
scholars were, at Michaelmus,
1826, 9 boys and 4 girls: they
were anxious to improve. The
inhabitants are very industrious in
cultivation.
, LEOPOLD, a town of liberated
Africans, in the parish of St. Peter,
Sierra Leone. . Inhabitants, 1083.
This station, was commenced in
1818, by the C. Jf. S.; and in the
following year, there were about
300 persons. collected under the
care of the Rev. M. Renner. The
scholars, of whom .about 50 were
mechanics, amounted to 103.
Shortly after the population was
much augmented ; and among the
young, in particular, the prospect
was very promising. A missionary


LEO


association was formed here June
20, 1820, and'6/, 0s..9d. collected.
At this period, there were 40 com-
municants..., Cultivation was. also
happily advancing. — ‘

In }823, there were 213 scholars ;
the place of .worship was ‘under
enlargement, so as to receive up-
‘wards of 1000. persons ; ::contribu-
‘tions to the society amounted to
‘171. 128. 6d. ; the people had sold to
poreriment during the year; 6112 .

ushels of:.cocoa and cassada, for
which they received 296/. 18s. 7}d.';
and the Rev. Mr. Davy, their su-
perintendent, gave pleasing proof
of the. right use which some of his
‘people made of the Word of God. .

In the accounts of the year 1826,
itis said : —* The’ attendance
at public worship: increased in the
early part of the year, but after-
ward somewhat declined. 4 adults
were baptized by Mr. Raban; and
the number of communicants had
increased to 14, The aver
number of persons attending divine
worship was, .at Christmas, 100.
The following were the numbers
in the Sehools at Christmas :—boys
166; girls, 188. . The secular
business in which Mr. Weeks is
engaged (having had, since Mr.
Raban’s removal to Freetown, the
charge of Regent in addition to
Gloucester and Leopold), has pre-
vented his attending to the boys’
school so often as he wished. Not-
withstanding this disadvantage, he
reports of the boysat Michaelmas—
‘I think that,.on the whole, their
progress is satisfactory: 18 of ‘the
larger boys have been sent to pre-
pare: farms, and build .houses for
themselves; most of them attend
evening prayer during the. week,
and all on Sundays.’ ’”’

Of their spiritual state, Mr. .
Weeks remarks :—‘ I cannot say
any thing with respect to the love
they have to the ways of God; yet
charity leads me to hope, that,
while they continue to se the

315


LIB
way. of: hearing and receiving spi-
ritual instruction, they will find


- Christ, ‘as. many others: bave found
him, to be the way, the truth, and


the life.”
At Michaelmas. Mr. Weeks gives
the following satisfactory statement


relative tothe girls’ school:—‘ The.


greater part of the girls) in the
school can read tolerably well;
the first. and second classes. are
‘very worthy of notice, for the pro-
ficiency which they have made in
sewing, reading, and: the’ under-
standing of; the Scriptures: ‘this
has not; been attained by any rapid
progress; but is the resultiof many
years? labour bestowed on these
girls by one Mrs. Davey, whose
name remains dear to them all;
3.of ‘her. girls, who were baptized
by. Mr. Raban, just before her de-
parture for England, are, I believe,
sincerely following Christ.”
LIBERIA, a small territory on
the S. W. coast of W. Africa.
This: territory ‘was purchased, in
1821, by the American Colonization
Society, for the establishment of a
colony of free people of colour
fromthe United States. It is situa-
ted onthe western extremity of the
Gold: Coast, on. the river Mesurado,
and includes. the whole of a cape


of the same name. The tract ori- |


ginally belonging to the Society
was about 40 miles square, exclu-
sive of one or two small islands in
the mouth of: the river. Distant
from. Sierra Leona, ‘about: 250 m.
W. long. 15°, N. lat. 6°, :

The climate is said: to be salu-
brious and healthy, especially to


the blacks. In the hottest seasons,


- the mercury in Fahrenheit’s scale
never Nses above 90. The sun is
seldom visible at:noow, being ob-
scured by a dense vapour. The
soil is exceedingly rich and fertile ;
and all plants and trees, peculiar to
a tropical region, have an astonish-
ingly rapid and luxuriant growth.
Rice, indigo, cotton, coffee, and


LIB
sugarcane, are. produced in great
bandana’ The forest-trees, par.
ticularly on. the cape, are lofty,
resembling the sturdy forests of
N. America, The situation of the
cape is ‘open and somewhat: ele-


‘vated, and commands a large and


commodious harbour, which’ offers
advantages for commercial enter.
prise superior to any on the ‘African
coast. 'Plie: territory ‘is well wa-
tered, and seems ta possess ever

necessary. requisite for the accom-
modatiog and convenience of an
increasing colony... The natives
in the vicinity are. exceeding!

ignorant and superstitious, thou
mild and inoffensive for rude chil-
dren of nature. .

In the early part of the year
1819, a vessel; chartered by the
society, was dispatched to the
African coast, with abont 80 co-
loured people for ‘forming ’ the
intended colony, together with the
Rev. S.:Bacon and Mr. John P.
Bankson, as agents from the
American. government, ‘and ‘ Dr.
‘Crozer, as’ agent from the Colonj-
zation Society.

The first location of the colonists,
‘on their arrival, which’ was. at the
Sherbro country, unhappily: proved
to be, in every vespect, disadvan-
tageous. The 3 agents, together
with about 20 blacks, were within
a few weeks carried off by a'ma-
lignant fever ; but notwithstanding
this distressing and melanchol
event, the society did not relinguis
the object in view, nor’ despair
of ultimate success. In Jan. 1821,
a second expedition was sent out,
consisting of 40 blacks; the Rev.
J. R. Andros and Mr. S Wilt.
‘berger went as agents on the part
of he society, and Mr. John B.
Winn: and Mr. Ephraim Baeon, 6s

ts‘on the ‘part of government.
‘This reinforcement, with the sur-
vivors of the first‘ dispatch, were
put under the protection of ‘the
English © government er


Leone.’ T!
humanity,
called to m
of two more
fatigaule frie
drus and Mr
died in. July
firstplace des
settlement o
to'be unheal:
and @ ‘comp
made .with ©
territory - in
lying betwee
St. John’s,
relinquished,


‘ called’ Liber


diately after
tinguished as
Lieut. Stoc!
States navy.


| colonists wer


Léone, in Ap
dation of a |
the town call
of the chie
United State:
services .he
colony.
Asecondr
50, arrived at
1822; Mr. A
this time:so
on the part
threatened. t]
feeble settlem
after one or
gles with th
peace and sa
standing wh
between the
adjusted, and
propitious to
petuity of the
society has f
and code. of
ment of the c


in 1823, co
The A, B. ¢
coloured misg


elanchol
relinguis
or di t


Bacon, as
ernment,
h the sur-
ich, were
on of the
at. ‘Sierm
316


LIB
Leone. ' The: society and friends of
humanity, .were, however,. soon:
called to mourn. the early, removal;
of two more. of the zealous and inde-:
fatigaule friends of Africa--Mr. An-:
drug and Mr. Winn—both. of whom
died in July of the same year. Asthe
firstplace designed for the permanent.
settlement of the colony, was found
to be unhealthy, it-was relinquished,
and @ compromise was soon ,after
made .with the natives for a small
territory - in. the’ Bassa country,:
lying between the rivers Bassa and.
St. John’s. This also was soon
relinquished, and another.territory,
called Liberia,; purchased imme-
diately after by Dr. Ayres, a dis-
tinguished agent of, the society, and,
Lieut. Stockton,. of, the. United
States navy. To this place the


i colonists were removed from Sierra


Léone, in April, 1821, and the foun-
dation of a. settlement.was laid, at.
the town called Monrovia, in honour
of the chief magistrate of the.
United States, for the distinguished
services he rendered the infant
colony. ¢
Asecond reinforcement, of about
50, arrived at Monrovia: in August,
1822; Mr. Ashmun, agent. About
this time: some dissatisfaction arose
on the part of the natives, who
threatened. the destruction of the
feeble settlement ; but the colony,
after one or two successful strug-
gles with them, settled down in
peace and safety. The misunder-
standing which at first existed
between them, was satisfactorily
adjusted, and every thing seemed
propitious to the growth and _ per-
petuity of the establishment. The*
society has formed a constitution
and code of laws for the govern.
ment of the colony, to which every
emigrant is required to subscribe his
name, and to take an oath that he
will support them, The settlement,
in 1823, consisted of about 240,
The 4, B.C. F. M. appointed, 2:
coloured missionaries to W. Africa, .


‘LIB


) in 182) ; viz. Messrs. Collin Teague


and Lot. Carey,..who commenced
their labours on the island of Yonce,
in the vicinity of Sierra Leone, with.
favourable prospects of success.
Mr.Carey ‘has since removed ' to
.Liberia;: and has the care of a
Baptist church, which has. been.
formed inthe colony and has re-
cently been joined by the Rev. Mr.


Waring, a coloured preacher from:


Virginia.

The Protestant Episcopal Mis-
sionary Society, (United States,)
has also appointed Mr.. Ephraim
Bacon to this station.

‘The effect of these missions has
been most happy. . Should this in-.
fant colony proceed as it has begun,


_ it will become a powerful auxiliary


in the.cause of African conversion,
and civilization.. ‘‘:The mana-
gers,’? says the last report, “‘ are-
happy to state that the efforts of
the colonial agent. to enlarge the.
territory of Liberia, ahd particu-:
larly to bring under the: govern-
ment of the colony a more extend-.
ed line of coast, have been, judi-.


-Cious andenergetic,. and, in nearly.


every instance, resulted in complete
success,” Two hundred and twen-
ty-four plantations, of from 5 to 10
acres each, were, in June last
(1826), occupied by the settlers ;
and most of. them are believed to
be at present’ under cultivation.
114 of these areon Cape Mesurado ;
33 on, Stockton Creek, denomi-
nated Halfway Farms, because
nearly equi-distant, from. Monrovia
and Caldwell, the St. Paul’s set-
tlement; and 77 at the confluence.
of Stockton Creek: with the St.
Paul’s. ;

Between the Ist of January and
the 15th: of July, 1826, no less
than 15 vessels. touched at, Monro-


via, and. purchased the produce of

the country, to the amount, accord-

ing to..the best probable estimate,

of 43,980 dollars, African value.

The exporters of: this produce,
RE2 317


LIB


realize; on the sale of the goods
given in barter for it, a profit of
21,900 dollars; and on the freight,
of 8786 ;. making the total profit of
30,776 dollars. :


plished. | Two handsome churches,
erected solely by the colonists, now
adorn the village of Monrovia.
Fort Stockton has been: rebuilt in
a style of strength and beauty.

A receptacle capable of accom-
modating 160: emigrants is com-
pleted.. The new Agency-house,
Market-house, Lancasterian school,
and Town-house;- in Monrovia,
‘were, some months since, far ad-
vanced, and the: finishing strokes
were about to-be given to the go-
vernment house on the St. Paul’s.
The wing of the old Ageney-
house has been handsomely fitted
up for the colonial library, which
now consists of 1200 volumes,
systematically arranged in glazed
cases, with appropriate hangings:
all the books are substantially
covered and -accurately labelled ;
and files of more-than 10 news-
papers, more or less complete, -are
preserved. . Phe library is fitted
up so as to answer the purpose of
a reading-room ; and it is intended
to make it a museum of all the
natural curiosities of Africa which
ean be procured.

The moral-and religious charac-
ter of the.colony exerts a powerful
influence on its social and civil
condition. That piety which had
guided most of the early emigrants
to Liberia, even. before they: left
America, to respectability and
usefulness among: their associates,


prepared:them, in laying the foun-:


dation -of.a: colony, to act with a
ee of wisdom and: energy
which no eurthly metives could


inspire.
most part unlettered men, -born'and
-bred in circumstances th ’
unfavourable ‘to mental’: culture,


LIB
Humble, “and for: the
@' most:
unsustained by the hope of renown,


and: unfamiliar with the history of
great. achievements and -heroit:


' virtues,—theirs was, ‘nevertheless,
/@ spirit unmoved by ‘danger or by


sufferings, whieh niisfortunes coud


‘not darken; ‘nor’ death . dismay,


They left America, and felt that it
was for ever.’ They: landed’ in
Africa, possibly to find ‘a home; but
certainly a ‘grave. Strange would
it: have been, had the religion of
every individual of these early set-
tlers ‘proved genuine: but im.
mensely changed’ ‘es have’ been
their circumstances, and severely


‘tried their faith, most: have pre-.


served untarnished the honour of
their profession ; and to the purity


of their morals, and the consistency:


of their conduct, is, *in ‘a ‘great
measure, to be attributed the social


| order and general prosperity of the


colony of Liberia. Their example
has proved fhost salutary; and,
while: subsequent emigrants have
found themselves awed. and’ re-
strained by their’ regularity, seri-
ousness, ‘and devotion, the’ poor


natives have ‘giver their-confidence;


and acknowledged the excellence of
practical Christianity. °° ‘
Mr. Ashmun wnites— “It :de-
serves record, that religion hasbeen
the principal ‘agent’ employed: in


laying and: confirming the founde-:


tions of the settlement. ‘To thissen-
timent ruling, restraining, and:ac«
tuating the minds of the colonists,
must be referred the whole strength
of our civil government.’? '

' Examples of intemperance, pro-
faneness, or licentiousness, ‘are ex-
tremely rare ; and vice, wherever


dit exists, is obliged to seek con-'


cealment from the public eye. The
Sabbath is: universally respected;
Sunday-schools; ‘both for : the chil-


dren -of. the: colony’ ee
3


that the dee;
ject of religic
ward the co
1835, in’ the
Christianity b
has in'a meast
few cases of
curred and t
ing out’

nd. habits o
which require
managers ha
that there’ is:
preponderamce
rect principle
(LILY FOU
the W. M.S.
land, near the
Rev. B. Shaw,
ed at this plac
1825, by Mr.
bers in society
fall, who cam
very of his he
this object, se
of June; 1825
tians, on a;
coast; in‘ searc
for a mission
have met'a m
sassination, in
wot one of. th
lieved, 30 year
Of the influe
the people at th
gives an anim
number of pe
Fountain as th


cumstances co:
pel, the means
perty and frie
them ‘an intere


lence of


It de-
has been
pyed iin


his sen»
and ac«
olonists,
strength


founde-*


LIL


natives, are established; all classes
attend’ regularly on the worship
of God ; some charitable associa-
tions: have been formed for the
penefit of the ‘heathen 5 and,
though it must not be concealed
that the deep’concern on the sub-:
ject of religion, which resulted to-
ward the conclusion of ‘the year
1825, in the public profession of
Christianity by about 50 colonists,
has in‘ measure subsided, and some


faw cases of delinquency since oc: -


curred and though there are faults
growing out of the early condition
and habits of the early settlers;
which require amendment,—yet the
managers have’ reason to believe
that there’ is ‘a vast and increasing
preponderance on the’ side of cor-
rect principle and virtuous practice.

\LILY FOUNPAIN, a station of
the W.'M. S. in Little ‘Namaqua-
land, near the Khamiesberg. ‘The
Rev. B. Shaw, who has long labour-
ed at this place, was joined in Aug.
1825, by Mr. Haddy, The mem-
bers in society are 83. Mr. Threl-:
fall, who came hither for the reco-
very of his health, having attained
this object, set forward at ‘the end
of June; 1825, with 2 native Chris.
tians, on a journey towards the
coast; in‘search of ‘a suitable place
for a mission; but they appear to
have meta melancholy end by as-
sassination, in the bloom of .life,—
wot one of them being, it ‘is be-
lieved, 30. years of age.” ’

Of the influence of the Gospel on
the people at thisstation, Mr. Haddy
gives an animating view :—“ The
number of persons who regard Lily
Fountain as their home, is between
7 and 800; and though’ the Nama-
quas are naturaily . addicted ' to
wandering, yet now they’ seldom
leave the institution, «unless cir-
cumstances compel them: the Gos-
pel, the means of grace, their pro-
perty and friends,—all tend to give
them an interest in the: place, and
to unite them together ;—a rare


LIL


sight this, in this thinly inhabited
and barren part of the globe! ‘They
have derived another great advan-'
tage—the absence of those ‘hostt-
lities, which ‘none of the tribes of
Africa, yet discovered, in a purely
heathen state, are free from.’ Be-
fore Christianity was’ introduced,
their neighbours the Bosjesmazs
were frequently making attacks of
them, and stealing theit cattle; the
consequence’ of which was,” that
much blood was shed: tut’ sinve
they have ‘been ‘concentrated into
a body, and: have hada ‘missionary
residing among ‘them, they havs
had ‘nothing to fear, elther from
enemies without, or from ‘any who
might be’ disaffected within';’ for
the Bosjesmans dare not venturé to
attack the Namaquas now, and the
Namagquas will not attack the Bos-
jesmans—having been taught by the
Gospel to regard them ‘as the ‘off-


| spring of the same common pareht.


Their spititual and moral improve-
ment is'seen in their regard'to truth


‘and sincerity in’ their intercourse


with one another, and with all
men. While enveloped in darkness,


| having no fear of God before their
‘eyes, but little, if any, regard was
| shewn to honesty; but, on the con-


trary, he who most ‘excelled in
deception, judged himself thée‘most
praiseworthy. Their veneration of
Jehovah, as the God of Providence,
and the Sovereign Disposer of’ all
things, is greatand affecting. +1.
though the Namaquas were hiv! :do-
laters, in the commonacceptation of
the term, yet many degrading cus-:


| toms and: ridiculous idexs prevailed


among them : divine li¢ht has shone:
into their hearts; aad most; if notall,
of these are laid aside. ‘They have
been taught to look above the earth
for fruits, and higher than” the
clouds for rain.—even to Him ‘who
gives both the former‘and the latter
rain,’ and commands * the eurth to
yield her increase.’’ Of many it


may be truly said—* be coriver-:
. 319


LIV


sation is in heaven, from whence also
they look for the Saviour; — their
souls breathe after,God.’ I have


been frequently struck with: grati-


tude and admiration, while hearing
them, in their r:(ely. constructed
huts, offering praise and supplica-
tion to the God of Israel; and se-
veral -times, late at night, after I
bave gone to. rest, I have heard
them continting to sing the songs
of Zion. I do not mean to convey
the idea that they have all received
and obeyed the Gospel. No! much
remains yet to be done; but surely
these fruits of the el—of the
grace of God—call loudly for grati-
tude, and furnish the most encou-
raging motives to be. ‘ stedfast,
immoveable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord.’ ”’
LIVONIA, a province of consi-
derable extent, in the N. W. part of
European Russia, situated E. of
the Baltic, and N. of Courland.
Population, 600,000. The inha-
bitants are principally Hsthonians
_ and Lettonians. The Lower ranks
are much addicted to intempe-
rance. Unfaithfulness toward their
masters, a disposition to cheat and
steal, and other vices, prevail, which
arise in part from the slavery in
which they ave held. They rarely
rob one another, but are very in-
genious in devising means to im-
pose upon their employers. Chris-
tianity was introduced among them
in the twelfth century, by the Ger-
mens and Danes; yet there are
many remains of heathenism: they
live in a miserable state of igno-
rance and degradation; but edicts
have recently been issued, to miti-


ay their vassalage, and provide
or. their instruction.

About 1739, in compliance with
a request of several noblemen and
clergymen, the U. B. commenced
an institution at Cremen, to educate
schoolmasters, to be employed


among the Esthonians and Letto-
nians, The influence of these


Liv


: teachers was soon apparent among
: the natives: a desire for religioug


knowledge was manifested, and a
general seriousness spread through
the :country ;' which was : follo

by a visible reformation in the mo.
ral deportment of many. In 1744;.


however, a persecuting spirit arose,’


and the brethren were prohibited
intercourse with the natives: some
of them were imprisoned, others
were banished, and the people were
not permitted to meet for ‘social
edification.: In 1764, the brethren:


‘resumed their labours here, by per-


mission of the Empress Catherine ;.
and the harvest has been great.
Their labours have been particu-
larly blessed in and near Peddlg,
Reval, Seswegen, in the district of
Wenden, and many other places,
Beside their seminaries for edu-
cating schoolmasters at Cremen;
Lindheim, and Balgsen, in Cour.
land, they have 2 schools for girls
at Newwelke; 1 for Germans of


lower stations, who are trained for .


domestic purposes, and 1 for those
of higher rank. In 1818, the num-
ber of Lettonians and Esthonians,
united with the Brethren, was
32,000; the number of German
brethren, at that time, was only
10. The mission is principally
conducted by native assistants,

The Lettonians and Esthonians
associated with the Brethren are
very active in nese the cir-
culation of the Scriptures.

In 1817, an Auwiliary B.S. was
formed for a few parishes. On the
first day 200 members entered their
names; and their number soon in-
creased to 1000, mostly Lettonian
peasants. Within 6 months of its
establishment, 400 ‘l'estaments
were gratuitously distributed to the
poor, and such children as had
made the best proficiency in read-
ing.

The success of the Brethren’s
labours has been universally ac-
knowledged by the — gu-


Ha
schools, wh
40 years,
here at h
was ‘recom
sponding co:


f at Calcutta


him 60 rupe
ployment o


fortified ville
chilimachine
connect the
Huton, with
ys territe:
t is pleasant
tds Gf the


it among
religioug
“4 and a
roug

‘followed
| ‘the mo.
In 1744,,
irit arose,
rohibited
es: some
d, others
ople were
for social
brethren:
e, by per-
atherine ;.
en great,
1 particu-
r Pebilg,
district of
er places,
for edu-
; Cremen,
in Cours


g the cir-


S.

B.S, was
s. On the
tered their
er soon in-

Lettonian
nths of its


LUC:
vernments, and they. have eminently
enjoyed the favour. and protection
of men in power.. :

LUCKNOW, a city in Hindoo-


stan, and. capital of Oude, situated.


ontheS, side of Goomty, a branch of
the G 5 Fava pat N. ae
habad. .It is very ancient, and.o
considerable extent; it. was for-
merly the residence of the Nabobs
of Oude. The houses of the mer-
chats are constructed of brick,
lofty, and strong, but the. greatest
part.are in the native style. The
streets are narrow and filthy. Po-
pulation, including the vicinity,
500,000. E, long. 80°, 55°, N. lat.
oe? 5)’, ;

Mr. Hare, superintendent of
schools, who has resided in India
40 years, had opened a school
here at his own charge, when he
was recommended to. the corre-
sponding committee of the C. M. S.
at Calcutta, They have allowed


4 him 60 rupees monthly, for the em-


ployment of native teachers, and
other charges necessary. to. give
efficiency to his school. Children
of ail classes and descriptions, Pro-
testant, Armenian, and Ca-
tholic Christians, with Mussulmans
and Chinese, appear on the list of
schools, About 25 children of
Christian parents, who would other-
wise be wholly destitute of educa-
tion, aré taught.


family worship,
The. C, Kk. S. has a depot of
here,


M.


MACHINAW, or Makinaw, a
fortified village on the {sland Mi-
chilimachinaw, in the straits which
connect the lakes Michigan and
Huron, within the limits of Michi-

an territory, 813 m. N, Detroit,
{ is pleasantly situated on the S.E.
tds Gf the island, on a amall cove,


MAD


which is surrounded: by a hf
150 feet highy.on which stands the
fort., Half‘a m, distant.from th
on another. cliff, 300, feet above the
level of the lake, is Fort Holmes,
From this,spot.there is an extensive
prospect'of the lakes, During the
summer, Machinaw is the resort.of
many. fur traders, and 4-or 5000
Indians, many of whom belong:to
the paipperray sibs. a stae  oUee
The Rev. W. M. Ferry, from the
U. F. M. S., Miss Omar, and Miss.
E. M‘Farland, commenced a rais-
sion here in 1823. Previous to its
location, Mr. Ferry spent a year:in
Machinew, during which he-or-
ganized a church, and persuaded
the inhabitants generally to. aban-
don secular employments on the
Subbath, and to attend public wor+


menced a mission for the. benefit of


the Indians. Within a.few monthe


after his .arrival, 20 children: were
received into the mission family.y
4 others were soon added, and.a


considerable accession was expect-
‘ed, The children have. all been


accustomed.to habits of order and


diligence in their studies. It. is
intended, that, in addition to a mi-.
inister of the Gospel, the family at


this station shall ultimately com-


| prise one male. and two .female.
| teachers, a

ugh }woman to conduct domestic con-
The children attend Mr. Hare’s | cerns. hen sud he
| MADAGASCAR, a large island
in the Indian Ocean, discovered by
| Portuguese, in 1492. .[t lies 40


r, and a man and


leagues E. of the. continent. of
Africa, from which it is seperated
by the strait of Mosambique. '%
extends 900. m, from, N, to S., and
is from 200 to 300 broad. The


inhabitant, amounting to more than
| 4,000,


are divid
ber of tribes. They are commonly
tall, well-made,, of an olive com-

exion, and some of them pretty
lack. Their hair is black, but
not woolly, and for Be soe. PAR


into a num-


MAD :
curls naturally ; their nose is small,
though not flat; and they have, thin

ps.. ‘They. have no, towns, but a
great. number of. villages, a small
distance from each other. Their
houses are _ pitiful huts, without
windows or chimneys, and. the
roofs covered with reeds or leaves.
Those that are dressed in the best
menner, have a piece of cotton
cloth or’ silk wrapped round their
middle ; but the common sort'have
still less clothing. Both men and
women are fond of bracelets, neck-
laces, and ear-rings.: They have
little knowledge of commerce, and
exchange among themselves goods
for goods; gold and silver coins
brought by Europeans are imme-
diately melted down for ornaments,
end no currency of coin is. estab-
lished. There are agreat many petty
kings, whose riches consist in cat-
tle and slaves, and they are always
at war with each other. There
are only some parts of the coast
yet: known; for both the air and
the soil are destructive to strangers.

The Madagasses believe in one
only true God, the Creator of all
things, and the preserver and su-
Shey eal Zangahara, “When they
c Be. en they
speak of him, they do it with the
greatest degree of solemnity and
veneration. Though they consider
him so infinitely exalted, that he
does not stoop to notice the con-
cerns of men ; yet he has delegated
the government of the affairs of this
world to four inferior lords, whom
they denominate lords of the North,
South, East, and West. One of
these only, they consider the dis-
penser of the plagues and miseries
of mankind ; while the other three
are engaged in bestowing benefits.

The souls of all men, they
believe, will, after death, ascend to
Zangahara, and enjoy perfect hap-

tness in his presence, while all
men will be tormented, ac-
cording to their demerits, by the


MAD:
evil. spirit, which they. call Ang.
gatyr.>The four. great, lords are
rh apc by them as having great
influence with. Zangahara. Each
family has its guardian angel, who
conveys their prayers to the. four
lords, who are the only medium of
access to the Deity. Some appear,
ances of Judaism are seen among
these islanders. They practise cir.
cumcision, and offer the first-fruits
of harvest. Of a Saviour they have
no knowledge. The lang: xge of
the Madagasses is very melodious,
and is said to be copious ;: though
it had never been reduced to a
written form till since mission.
aries resided among,them. .In the
interior are some Arabs, who in-
troduced into the island many of
the arts of civilization, ‘It is pro-
bably owing to the influence of
these emigrants on the neighbour-
ing tribes, that many of them,
exhibit evident marks of a state of
improvement considerably removed
from barbarism.

The Rev. Messrs. Jones and
Bevan were sent by the L.¥.5S.,
in 1818, to this island, and com-
menced their missicn auspiciously.
These devoted Iabou*2rs were soon
called, however, to experience
heavy afflictions in their persons
and families ; which were followed
by th: death of Mr. Bevan, and
by Mr. Jones’s removal from his
station to~ the Mauritius, from a
decline in his health.

In the autumn of 1820 his Ex-
cellency R. T. Farquhar, Esq. Go-
vernor of the Mauritius, concluded
a treaty with Radama, King of
Madagascar, having for its o yect
the total extinction of the slave
traffic in that island. With the
full approbation of the Governor,
Mr. Jones, being sufficientiy re-
covered, accompanied the agent,
Mr. Hastie, to the court of Ra-
dama, by whom he was received
with much cordiality. The King,
being satisfied with the a and


objects of 1
explained.
wrote to t
sionaries t
Christian ki
weful arte.
intention. t
Mauritius, |
the treaty ;
a ‘formal in
he consent
nerivou, wh
him one o
his residence
tend upon
stipulation
aluded to,
were to be j
with a viey
tion in their
10! were . se
the Maurit;
arrived . in
placed in th
instructed it
on the plan
In the mea
under: the
receive: an.
native child
children of
of the thred
the crown
dren of diffe
The Rey.
the spring ¢
1822, the .
was increas
Rev, Mr. Je
Mrs. J. and
The valuab


40 children
forded con
the erectio
bitation for
with a schd
pable of
children ; a
for the us


call Ang-
lords, are
ving great
ach


nge age of
melodious,
is ;. though
uced to a
e mission-.
m. .In the
s, who in-
d many of

‘It-is pro-
fluence of
neighbour-
* of them
f a state of
ly removed


Jones and
e L.M.S,
» and com-
uspiciously.
B were soon
experience,
eir persons
re followed
evan, and
nl from his
us, from a


820 his Ex-


The King,
e views and
$23


MAD


objects of the society, which were
explained. to him. by Mr. Jones,
wrote to the Directors. for mis-
sionaries to instruct his people in
Christian knowledge, and also in the
weful arte. -It was Mr. Jones’s
intention to have returned to the
Mauritius, after the conclusion of
the treaty ; but in consequence of
s formal invitation from the King,
he consented to remain at Tana-
netivou, when the King allotted to
him one of the royal houses 4s
his residence, with servants to at-
tend upon him.: According to a
stipulation of the treaty already
aluded to, 20 Madugasse youths
were to be instructed in useful arts,
with a view to promote civiliza-
tion in their own country; of whom
10; were sent for this purpose to
the Mauritius, and 10 soon after
arrived .in England, and were
placed in the Borough school, to be
instructed in the English language
on the plan of the B. and F. §. S.
In the mean time, the King placed
mder the care of Mr. Jones, to
receive: an English education, 16
native children ; of whom 3 were
children of his own sister; and one
of the three was heir apparent to
the crown ;—the rest were chil-
dren of different nobles.

The Rev. Mr. Griffiths arrived in
the spring of: 1821; and in June,
1822, the missionary brotherhood
was increased by the arrival of the
Rev. Mr. Jeflreys; accompanied by
Mrs. J. and four missionary artisans.
The valuable patronage of the King
semained undiminished. After pro-
viding for Mr. Jones a dwelling-
house contiguous to the royal
school in which were upwards of
40 children under his care, he af-
forded considerable assistance in
the erection of a commodious ha-
bitation for Mr. Griffiths, together
with a school-house attached, ca-
pible of containing about 200
children ; and also allotted a house
for the use of Mr, Jeffreys and


his family. Allowances were also
ordered for each of the mission-
aries, by Governor Farquhar, as
well as for the artisans. On the
arrival of the latter at Tananarivou,
the King gave them a piece of
ground for their residence and for
the carrying on of their respective
trades. About 2000 of the natives
were .employed to prepare the
ground for the erection of the. re-
uisite buildings. By direction of
the King 3 Madagasse youths were
placed with each of the artisans ;
two of them respectively as ap-
prentices, ‘and the other as a ser-
vant, of whom very favourable
reports were made. One of the
artisans, Mr. Brooks, was, how-
ever,. suddenly called from his
earthly engagements. :

. At this early stage of mis-
sionary effort, good effects ap-
peared; among which may be
noticed the suppression of-common
swearing; though it should be
stated, to the reproach of multi-
tudes‘called Christians, that it was
the custom of the inhabitants of
the kingdom of Ovah to swear
by the name of the King and by the
name of the Queen, not by the
name of the Almighty Creator and
Benefactor of mankind. The B.
and F, B.S, made a grant to the
Madagascar mission of 50 English
Bibles and 200 Testaments.

The kingdom of Radama, now
called Imerina, is. divided into 4
provinces; in all of which, during
1824, schools were established,
with the sanction, and under the
patronage, of the King. At the
close of the year they amounted to
22, and the number of children to
above 2000, The three schools
successively formed at Tananari-
vou were united into one, which
the King denominated the Ruyal
College. From this seminary,
containing about 270 boys, 50 of
the rs ee gifted und best in-
structed were sent to = charge

3


MAD =


of ‘the schools . in’ ‘the : tountry:
Publie “examinations: of: the boys’
‘and girls’ schpols:took place in the
presence of the King, some of the
members of the royel family, the ge-
yerals of bis Majesty, and Jas. Has-
tie, Esq: the British agent, ‘which
were highly satisfactory. + 2ssrs.
ones: and : Griffiths, commenced
preaching in Madagasse in I sbruary
of the same year; their cougrega-
‘tions . consisting usually oi «about
1000, but occasionally of‘as many as.
- Sand even5000. «Several parts of
the Scriptures had also been trans-
lated; and some books: were ‘pre+
pared and preparing for publication.
On the 23st of April, .Mr. Jeffreys
removed :to Ambatoumanga, a
large village situatec about 20 m.
from Tananarivou, where he com-
menced a school for boys, and Mrs.
J. another for girls,-and conducted
stated services in Madagasse. It
having been judged expedient that
the artisans should superintend the
schools, Mr. Canham removed to
a-village about 12 m. ftom the ca-
pital, where he had a school of 110
boys; and Mr: Rowlands to another
village sbuut 15 m. distant from the
e me, where, he had a school: con-
taining 100 boys. Each of them
superintended apprentices, who
learned their respective trades ;
and Mr. Chick was diligently em-
ployed on the Sabbath in cate-
chising children ; and on'the week
days in his trade. In the following
year, the labours of the mission-
avies were continued; the transle-
tion of the Madagasse New Testa-
ment was.completed ; a printer, a
cotton-spinner, and a carpenter,
were sent out; and the mission was
deprived of a valuable agent by the
death of Mr. Jeffreys. About this
time some of the Madagasse youths,
one of whom had been at his
own earnest request baptized, ar-
tived at the capital. ‘
The last reportesys :—'' The Rev.
Me. Jobns, and Mesers. Cameron


MAD
and Cummings, missidnary artisans,


with their wives, accompanied
‘Roloun


Roloun, another of the
Madagasse youths who ‘hed ‘also
been baptized; arrived: at Tananari-
vou ‘on the Filth of September,
Mr. Johns will reside for a'time in
the capital. During a part of: the
day he will instruct: some of: the
boys in the school in English,andin
the other apply himself to the study
of Mada » with the assistance
of Mr.’
turn in English preaching with the
other missionaries.’?

Native Schools:—‘ The number
of these is 28, containing 1500
boys and 460 girls; making a total
of nearly 2000 ; of whom, ‘on an
average, about 1700 are regular in
their attendance, These schools
are scattered over ‘the country,
within ‘a circuit of 30 m. around
the capital. His Majesty; Radama,
has signified his pleasure that 12 of
the more wrereeaes 3 ‘boys in the
central school (or Royal College)
should be instructed in Greek and
Latin. In this school there are
about 160 boys.

‘* Two of the best instructed

boys assist us ushers in the cen-
tral school, and another has the
sole charge of a large school in
the country; with some of his
late school-fellows for assistants,
Many more boys are capable of
taking a similar charge, sdould the
enlargement of the school-fund
enable the missionaries to increase
the number of schools.
- The'result of the Publie Exa-
mination of the schools for 1825-6,
which took place at Tananarivou,
in March of the latter year, was
highly satisfactory. His Majesty,
Radama, was present, and person-
ally engaged in the examination.
The missionaries exercise a general
superintendence \over the schools;
and veers ye visit a we the
purpose of inspecting them and ex-
emining the scholars. — state,
32


riffiths. © He takes his |


that the pre
dren, gene
knowledge,
gion, is trul
as reflects c
both of the t
_A societ;
has been es
vou, with th
denominate
sionary. Sc,
contributiar
from, indivic
narivou, anc
the missions
port, in this
of missions
nexion with
a repository
requisite fi
schools.
Native. S
of Madagas:
not, large:
cerned to sa:
mark, that
speaking, e
hear the Go:
persons belo
pear very atte
for, the. hope
reference to
Mr, Hov
would comn
the Madaga
New Testay
suddenly ter
ever, the me
Scriptures i
will, relativ
important i
number of n
read them ;
able augmel
Aumber will
hency and e
of educatior
ies;—i
how powerfi
schools und
ence have fe
tality of su
imparting


anied by

of the
hed ‘also
‘ananari-
ptember,
f time in
rt of: the
e of: the
ish,andin
the study
issistance


lakes his |


with the


2 number
ing 1500
ig @ total
m, On an
epular in
e schools

country,
n. around
; Radama,
that 12 of
ys in the
1 College)
Greek and
there are


instructed
the ‘cen-
'y has the
school in
e of his
assistants,
apable of
spould the


MAD
that the progress made by the chil-
dren, generally speaking, in, the
knowledge, of the Coristiau. zsli-
gion, is truly gre<fying.; and such
reflects crest, upon. the diligence
both of the teachers and their pupils.
_A society in aid. of the schools
has been established: at. Tananari-
vou, with the sanction of the King,
denominated the Mudagascar Mis-
sionary. School. Society. Several
contributions have been received
from individuals. resident at Tana-
narivou, and at the Mauritius; but
the missionaries chiefly look for sup-
port, in this measure, to the friends
of missions at. home. In con-
nexion with the School Society, is
a repository for such articles as are
requisite for carrying on. the
schools.
Native Services.—The number


of Madagasses who attend these is.


not, large: indeed, we are con-
cerned to say,, the missionaries re-
mark, that the adults, generally
speaking, evince. little desire to
hear the Gospel ; but many young
persons belonging to the schools ap-
pear very attentive,and afford ground
for the ,hope.of better things, in
reference to the rising generation.

Mr, Hovenden, it was hoped,
would commence the printing. of
the Madagasse transtatic?: of the
New Testament, but his fife was
suddenly terminated. . As,. how-
ever, the measure of providing the
Scriptures in the vernacular wngne
will, relatively, be more or less
important in proportion to the
number of natives who are able to
read them; and as any consider-
able augmentation of the present
umber will depend on the perma-
nency and extension of the means
of education provided by the mis-
slonaries;—it wit! be atonce evident
how powerful a.ciaim. the native
schools under their superintend-
ence have for support on the libe-
tality of such as are desirous of
imparting the knowledge of the


MAD


Gospel to those numerous and _in-
teresting islanders. For this pur-
pose they, have established, in the
centre of the island, with the
sanction and under the patronage
of the. King, Radama, nearly 30
schools. .

The rapidly advancing im-
portance of this.mission induced


the directors, during the year


1826, to accept the offer, on the
principle of. limsted service, of the
Rev, J. J.. Freeman, late minister
of the Gospel at Kidderminster, to
unite his efforts with those of the
missionaries,. for the dissemination
of the Gospel in Madagascar.
Volave and Thotoos, the 2 Mada-
gascar youths still remaining. in
this country, are making good pro-
gress in various branches of learn-
ing, and in the knowledge of use-
ful arts: they conduct themselves
with great propriety. Of those
originally sent, one had died, leav-
ing behind. him pleasing evidence
of real conversion ; and others had
been compelled to return to.Mada-
ascar from an ill state of health.

MADEWISPATNAM, a large
city in the vicinity of Tranquebar,
Hindoostan, where the Danish mis-


sionaries at Tranquebar have la- .


boured with pleasing success, As
early as 1747, their congregation
consisted of 540 persons, and their
schools of 57 pupils.

MADRAS, formerly called. Fort
St, Geerge, a populous and cele-
brated city in the southern part of
Hindoostan, on the E. coast of the
Peninsula, near the margin of the
sea. E. long. 80° 17‘, N. lat. 13° 4’.
Travelling distance from Calcutta,
1,020 m., from Bombay, 770.
About the year 1620, or, as some
suppose, 1640, the English E. india
Company obtained permission of
the King of Golconda to establish
a settlement at Madras, and built
what is now called Fort St. George.
The town was taken by the French
in 1744, but was ceded to the

FF 326


MAD


British in 1749; since which time
it has been gradually rising in im-
portance. It is one of the strongest
fortresses in British India, ranks as
second of ‘the 3 tnglish Presi-
dencies, and ‘is the ‘seat of an
arch-deaconry. The town ‘stands
on ‘a barren, sandy plein, so ex-
ceedingly sterile, that nothing will
come to maturity without the ‘most


diligent cultivation and care. The


water with which the city is sup-
plied, is brought from a’ distance
o: more than a mile. Madras is
diviaed into two distinct parts, each
receiving an appellation charac-
teristic of the colourof its inha-
bitants, The -AVAite Town,  in-
cluding Fort *:. George, is the
residence of al. ihe officers of the
English government. [ft is en-
circled by a subsinnt's! wall, and
strongly fortified by iutteries and
bastions. Near the centre of this
is the fort, about 100 yards square.
The houses are principally built of
brick. The Black Town, anciently
called China-patam, is situated
about a mile N. of the White
Town, and is also encompassed by
a'wall 17 feet thick. The houses,
though many.of them are built of
brick, make but an indifferent ap-
pearance, The situation of Madras
for mercantile business is extremely
unfavourable. There is no com-
modious port for the convenient
lading and unlading of vessels, the
coast’ forming nearly a straight
line, against which’e violent and
dangerous surf dashes incessantly ;
yet it is a place of vast wealth and
importance, and the grand mart of
all the southern part of Hindoostan.
The population is estimated at
about 300,000. A college has
been recently instituted at Fort Si.
George, for the instruction of the
junior civil students in all the
hative languages. Here is also a
type-foundry.

- The Rev. J. P. Pyitler, D.D.
and L. P. Haubroe, from the C. K.


MAD
S. now labour here. ‘The Rev. B,
Schultz formed the first mission
establishment at Madras. He vi.
-ited it in 1727, under the patronage
of Frederic IV. king of Denmark,
and opened a school at Vepery, one
of the suburbs of Madras, whic}; jig
been the principal seat of this mis.
sion ever since. The favonrabic
circumstances which attended the
commencenient of his laborirs, in.
duced Mr. S. to setiie, with a view
of estebiishi ag a permanent mission;
He was soon received under ‘the


immediate care of this society;


end prosecuted his labours with
unwearied diligeace, and -riih
much success, {1 1728, he suc.
ceeded in organizing a church,
which consisted of 17 members,
The following year, 140 were
added to it, and considerable ac-
cessions continued to be made for a
number of years. In 1736, a house
for public worship was erected.
In 1746, the city was taken by the
French: the mission premises were
destroyed, and the- station was
abandoned. It was, however, re
sumed in 1750, and a church built
by the Roman Catholic Portuguese,
was Offered for the accommodation
of the missionaries. From. the
commencement of the mission to
the year 1760, no less than 1470
were united with the church. The
number’ of communicants in 1800,
was 143. About ‘this time ‘the
mission began to decline; but,
within a few years, effectual
measures were adopted to restore
it to a state of efficiency. In 1820,
a depét of books was established,
which has been of great service.
A printing ‘press has been ‘te-
established, which issued, during
the first year, 4,000 books and
tracts. In 1822, about 300 scholars
were regularly instructed in the
rhission-schocls, and the congre-
gation was rapidly increasing.

In 1805, the benevolent attention
ofthe L. M.S, was directed to:this

328


-ithporta
_Mr.' Loi
years, p
at Blac’
ported |
siaathes
of urog
«<derable
joialn gy
Pe Uygui
an. indivi
his: nem
700 pago
formed,
Socis iy”?
Rev. Mr.
Jabourer,
nemes: v
free scho
for girls
which th
the. schoc
about 400
was learn
a short
schools w
afforded g
there. we
3 English
all of wh
perous st¢
health, h
relinquish
exertions
colder clir
therefore
In 18]
opened’ ¢


» Rev. B,
; mission
, He vis
patronare
Jenmark,
pery, one
which: has
‘this mis.
avourabie
sanded the
bovirs, in-
th a view
t mission.
under «the
society ;
ours” with
md = wiih
» he suc.
a church,
members,
140 were
prable ac-
made for a
6, a house
; erected.
cen by the
mises were
ation © was
wever, re»
hureb built
ortuguese,
mmodation
From the
mission to
than 1470
urch, The
ts in 1800,
time ‘the
line + but,
effectual
to restore
r, In 1820,
established,
pat service.
been Te-
hed, during
books and
300 scholars
sted in the
he congre-
asing.
nt attention
ted to’this
328


MAD


-ithportant:city, and in it the Rev.
_Mr.' Loveless laboured for several


years, particularly in a new chapel


at Black Town, which was sup-


ported by the liberality of his con-
sixat hearers. Here the attendance
of Europeans: and. natives was:con-


<iderable 3 -and 2 free schools: ad-


jvlaly 3 the chapel went on well.


Te Uyuidate the debt on the latter, |


an individual, who would not suffer
his: name to appear, contributed
700 pagodas. Asmall church was
formed, and a.‘ Missionary Fund
Socis.iy’’ established. In 1816, the
Rev. Mr. Knill arrived as a fellow-
Yabourer. T'wo years after, 147
names: were on the bocks of the
free schools for boys; a free school
for girls had been commenced, in
which there were about 40, while
the schools for natives contained
about 400, and the New Testament
was learned and repeated. When
a short time had: elapsed, the
schools were increased to J1, and
afforded great encouragement; and
there. were 4. congregations, viz.
3 English, and 1 Tamul, or native,
all of which. were now in a pros-
perous state. Mr. K.’s declining
health, however, compelled his
relinquishment of his impurtant
exertions, and his pursuit of a
colder climate: other agents were
therefore sent forth.

. In 1819, a new chapel: was
opened’ at Pursewankum, icar
Vepery. In 1820, John Apavon,
who had some time before been
taptized, had the charge of a
Tamul congregation; and the.va-
tious: schools which had been
opened, together with the religious
institutions which had been esta-
blished, as well as the sacred services
which were conducted, were all
flourishing. Fresh labourers arriv-
ing, the inroads made by removals
and death were jiiled up, and new
designs. were accomplished. _ In
1823, e native female school was
established, under the superin-


‘MAD
tendence of Mrs. Crisp; and:a
-centyal school was also opened for
qualifying native youths, of pro-
mising cheracter and talents, for
the office. of. schoolmaster; into
which about 30 were admitted.
The following extracts from the
last report, will. show the effect of
this and subsequent efforts :—

“ Central School_—We are con-
cerned to state, that this institution,
the object of which was the train-
ing of promising native youths for
the office of schoolmaster, has not
hitherto. been so productive of, be-
nefit as the missionaries anticipated.
A new plan of arrangement and
organization for this seminary; has,
however, been prepared,: which, it
is hoped, when curried into effect,
will be attended with more pro-
mising results,’’

‘¢ Native Schools.— These schools,
in number 12, contain about 600
boys. At a public examination,
held: on the 17th of April, 1826,
gratifying evidence of proficiency
was exhibited. The Hindoostanee
-school at. Royapettah, has been dis-
continued, and a seminary . for
-Mussulmen children, under the-im-
‘mediate superintendence of Mr.
Taylor, commenced.”’

‘‘ Native Preaching.—The Tamul

services are continued as. usual in
Black ' Town. .At Pursewankum,
where there is a prospect of forming
a native church, an, additional
Tamulservice has been commenced.
A Tamul service has been. also
commenced at Periamoattoo.’’
. A place of worship has been
erected at Royapooram, which is
supplied alternately by Mr. Crisp
and Mr. Nimmo. We regret to
state, that, the missionaries have
not found the opening for the
Gospel here so encouraging as they
had been led to expect. At Tri-
passoor, a church has been formed,
and a school commenced, contain-
ing nearly 80 children.”

‘In the early part of 1826, Messrs.

327


MAD


Crisp and Taylor alternately ‘per-
formed missionary tours, ‘during
which they visited Chittoor, Tri-
passoor, Wallajah, &c.; and'there
is redson to believe that beneficial
effects have resulted’ from their
visits to these places. “Mr. Taylor
has translated into Tamul, Ayliffe’s
Catechism on ‘the Evidences {of
- Christianity, abridged from ‘Dr.
Bogue’s Essay.”

“ English Preaching. — The
English services at the chapel in
Black Town:are performed'as usual.
The English serviceat Parsewankum
chapel has been discontinued, and
another Tamul service substituted,
as already intimated. The atten-
dance at the prayer-meeting at
Pursewankum, we regret to say,
is not encouraging.”’

‘* Madras Ausiliary Society.—
The amount of the contributions to
this Institution, for the year 1825-6,
‘was 1000 Madras rupees. At the
anniversary meeting, held on the
11th of July, 2 sermons were
preached,—one in Black Town, by
the Rev. R. Carver, of the 7.91.8. ;
the other by Mr. Taylor, at Purse-
wankum chapel. The united collec-
tionsamounted to about630rupees.”’

“¢ This mission is advancing with
a firm and steady, though gradual,
progress,”?

A corresponding committee ‘was
formed at Madras, in eonnexion
with the C. M. 8, in 1815, and the
Rev. Messrs. Schnarré and Rhenius
were soon after appointed to labour
in that city. The society placed
1500/, at the disposal of its friends
there, and the mission commenced
under circumstances truly auspi-
cious. In 1816, the missionaries
had so far advanced in the acquisi-


tion of Tamul, that they began to '


preach in Dr. Rottler’s chapel, in
Black Town, where their services
were highly acceptable both to Dr,
R. and his songregation. A school
was formed for native citildren in
the mission-garden, within a few


MAD


months after the settlement of the
missionaries in the Black Town,
and four others ‘were successive

raised. A fatal.epidemic, which,
like a pestilence, had ravaged: the
N.of India, found its ‘way to: Ma-


-dras' in 1818, ind awakened the
-superstitions »f the natives. “An


extract of a letter written at the
time, gives an affecting picture of
the state of the native mind under
this calamity :—‘ Alas! it is an
awful and depressing monient,
We have heard that the natives,
affrighted and trembling, ‘have of-
fered, what has not been done hete
‘these many years, a living sacri-
fice !—an idiot boy, to one of their
gods: and to-morrow there are to
be a procession and feast, which
will cost 1500 pagodas, to appease a
goddess who has been neglected for
many years, and who they say has, in
offended anger, sent this scourge.’
During this year the schools had
increased to 13 in number, at
which the average monthly attend.
ance throughout the year was 364,
In the following year, the ‘missiona-
ries wrote :— The congregation
remains much as before. Alas! so
far as our knowledge reaches, we
must say that their hearts, are still,
in general, like the stony-ground
hearers. The Christian school-
masters, with the catechists, anda
few other members of the congre-
gation, area salt among the ‘rest,
and have been our encourage.
ment, Some others, who seemed to
awaken, and to give us some ‘hope
of a thorough purification of their
minds and conduct, have not
realized our hope, and hardness of
heart seems to have again seized
on them. One of two grown per-
sons preparing for baptism, disco-
vered wicked and worldly designs,
and is no mote in preparation; the
other, a young man, has been bap-
tized—the first-fruit of the mission,
Two men and two wonier are now
preparing for baptism. Poy aged


woman, |
amitted in
was subs
‘March, 1
moved to
on the pr
society; a
foundatior
laid, whic
the expen
About. thi:
sent out |
and was se
version of 1
by Dr. Roi
Mr. Harri
made the s
he left Indi
types. This
the types,
it! into the
sponding cc
work with
success. J]!
were printe
lated. . Exe
tives were li
by the miss.
means thus
through af
employed; ¢
the senior
those who,
tived to supp
In 1828, ser
every day in
to the advan
gregation ;
of scholars
was 568,

A. lendi
recently es
was opened
for eventual
ing to their ¢
tions, in’ th
and about 40,
the press du
day,’? says
his commun,
to Work: J
sance ih th


MAD {
woman, the second heathen ad-


nt of the
« Town, mitted into the Christian \church,
cessively was subsequently baptized.” In
cy which, March, 1819, the missionaries re-
aged: the moved to the new mission-house,
y to Ma- on the premises purchased by the
ened the society; and on July the 20th, the
ves. An @% foundation of a new church was
sn at the laid, which was to be erected at
victure of the expense of the government.
ind under About this time -a printing press
it is an sent out by the society, arrived,
moniént, and was set to work on the revised
a natives, version of the Scriptures in Tamul,
, have of- by Dr. Rottler and Mr. Rhenius.
done hete Mr. Harrington, of Calcutta, had
ing sacri made the society a present, before
1e of their he left India, of a fount of Tamul
ere are to types. This liberal benefaction, with
ist, which the types, &c. sent from home, put
appease a it: into the power of the ‘corre-
slected for sponding committee to proceed to
say has, in work with the best, prospect of
scourge.” success. 18,600 copies of 4 tracts
shools had were printed in Tamul, and circu-
amber, at lated. | Excursions among the na-
bly attend. tives were likewise frequently made


r was 364,
» missiona-
ngregation
Alas! so
: are ‘still,
pny-ground
m school-
‘ ists, and a
ne Congre-
g the rest,
encourage-
) seemed to
some hope
on of their


by the missionaries. The various
means thus put in action, continued
through after years to be vigorously
employed; and also increased, by
the senior missionaries, and by
those who, on their removal, ar-


In 1823, services took place almost
every day in the week, with a view
to the advantage of the native con-
gtegation; and the total number
of scholars in the various schools
was 558.

A lending library had’ been
recently established; a seminary
was opened for training up youths
for eventual employment, accord-
ing to their capacities and disposi-
tions, in the soctety’s missions;
and about 40,000 copies of different
works, in Tamul, had issued. from
the press during the year, ‘ To-
day,’? says Mr, Ridsdale, in one of
his communications, “we began
fo work '< new press, @ circum-
sance ih the history of which is


eh are now
‘An ag


32%


tlved to supply their lack of service. °
c


‘MAD
rather interesting. , A little while
ago, an old chariot, belonging to
the Pagoda near the mission-house,
was sold; and from a partof.one of
the wheels we made the platen of
our new press, This suggested to
me the idea of turning . Satan’s
weapons upon himself; and accor-
dingly, with this. piece of wood,
which had been for years employed
in his, service, we struck off 1000
copies of that beautiful portion of
Holy Scripture, the 40th chapter
of Isaiah, in the form_of a tract.”’
The work of translation was also
happily advancing.

The Rev. Messrs. Ridsdale and
Sawyer continued to occupy this
station. The following view of
their labours is given by Mr. R., in
March, 1826:— . )

‘It has pleased our heayenly
Master to. give us much encou-
ragement in the various, branches
of our mission. I have great rea-
son to believe that a deep and
broad foundation is laying in the
Tamul labours: of my colleague,


Sawyer ; he is devoted io his work. ‘


Our several congrege‘ions are all
c the increase.
‘In the interesting work of


female education, w', have. unex-


pected success, Qui native girls’
schools are 4 in number, and con-
tain 130 children; our Frvlish
girls’ schools are 3 in number, and
contain about 120. The first pub-
lic examination of our female
schools took place in the mission-
church, on the, 31st of December.
We have raised a separate fund for
this important work, for whiclf I
have collected upwards of 1500
rupees. We are on the point of
beginning a central girls’ school,
under Mrs. Ridsdale’s immediate
care ; into which we intend to col-
lect the most; proficient girls from
the different schools, in ,order to
give’ them a superior education,
that they’ may be employed as
school mistresses.


FF2 329


MAD


The applications made to me
from all parts of southern India for
‘Teligious books, are so numerous
thet it is quite } sinful te be unable
to supply them.”* ’

The seminary. designed for the’
training up of young men as school-
masters and assistants in the work
of missions, was commenced upon
a small scale, in the beginning of
the year 1822. In January,’ 1895,
a considerable accession was made
to this number, by the arrival of'
12 boys from the ‘society’s institu-
tion at Tranqueber. ©

From that time to the present,
the ntjivers have been gradually
increasing; and the total number
of boys. now under instruction, is
30, of which 23 are natives, and
7 country-born. Since the este-
blishment of the seminary; 8 of
the elder youths have been: placed
in differcnt situations, according
to their qualifications.

Mrs. Ridsdale has‘ the charge '
of the female schools, of which 3 '
are Tamul, and: 2 English, and
contain 233 scholars, with an ave-
rage. attendance of about 190.
There is. a steady-advance in this
interesting field of labour, and’
many encouraging circumstances,
by the blessing of God, attend it:


The Rev. Mr, Carver, of the 7. |:


-M. S. wrote, from Madras, March
22, 1826:—** We have upwards of
30 members in society, at this
place, chiefly pensioners, with their
wives and offspring-—men who have
seen great trials, and have little
hope of revisiting their native land.
Our prayer to God for them is, that
they may be saved. We have
sometimes preached to them in the
open air, but they have commenced
a-subscription, and are erecting a
room for worship, ‘which may ccst
perhaps 50/. sterling: a piece -of
ground, on which the Rev. Mr.
Hough once had a native school,
has’ been kindly. granted for this
purpose by the commandant, On


MAD
their list I see nearly 200 subscrij.
tions of 1, 2, or 3 fanams, (J4d,)
mostly by poor females: their mites


‘will not ‘be despised by the Lord:
‘The school department has been


increased a little; not, howéver,
according ‘to the numerous avpli-
cations mace by tiatives to be ti
‘structed, by’; as our’ limited means
of supportirg schools would allow,


‘We were ertreated, repeatedly, to


establish schools in a very populous
part of Black Town, ‘and at:length,
with some fear on account of our
funds, we did placé one -scheol
more upon our list, which contains
now upwards of 100 children; but
we were under the’ painful ‘neces.
sity of refusing admittance to up:


wards'of 300 children, who might |


have been formed’ into schools in
the neizhbourhood: of the’ other.
This schovi, which is @ bungalow
chapel’ also; big the people’ an
‘Opportunity of hearing the word of
God preached, This: point is‘aléo
‘very'suitablé from ‘whence tc dis.
tribute the holy Sefiptures and’ te.
ligious traéts; ‘which the people
have’ sought with considerable
mess, “Some thousands of se:
veral publications Havé: been dis-
persed, we hope usefully,’ among
the people during the past 4 months.
The Madras Jews Society was
founded Feb. 23, 1821, to aid in the
dissemination of the Scriptures and
religious’ tracts! among the léarned
Jews inhabiting Asia ; and to trace
the respective histories of the Jews
called ‘< Beni ‘Israel,’ and’ the
black arid white Jews. ~~
The missionaries who ‘have’ la-
boured at this place, have always
been greatly’ assisted’ and encov-


| raged in their efforts, by the ready


services arid counsels of the chap-
lains of the East India Company,
who have manifested a deep soli-
citudée for the moral’ improvement
of the natives.

- MADURA, a” populous “and
fortified town in the —
33


Hindoostar
of the sam
dered to the
mSS.W.'
Madras. |
9 62. T
blished a m
British too
efforts have
the Gospel
teachers al
addition tc
have distrib
tracis, in

among the


bars.
‘-.MAHIM
part of the i
6 m; from
containing
of about 2
immediate 4
pulous. TI
place is a
forest—as n
there were
The Rev
A. B.C. FP.
in 1818.
Newell spe
preaching tI
had never I
schools were
and 2 in
since incres
prosperous
supported b
in Augusta
the Augusta
of 1822, M
compassione
destitute chi
their observ
into their
were promi
dear to their
an accessio
however, th
declined; a
pedient for
America,
were receily
milies at Ba


4 eople an
le word of
int is'aléo
ee tc dis
es and te-
he people
ynsiderable
inds of se:
‘been dis
ly,’ among
t4 months.
perety Was
> aid in the
iptires and
he learned
nd to trace
f the Jews
and’ the


o have’ la-
ave always
ind encou-

the ready
{ fhe chap-
» Company,
| deep soli-
aprovement


yulous “and
» Carnatic;
330


MAH


Hindoostan,and capital of aprovince,
It was surren-:
dered to the British in 1801 ;.it is 80,


of the same name.


m.SS.W. Tanjore, and2368.3.W.
Madras. E. long. 78° 14’, N. lat.
9 62’. The C. K..S. has esta-
blished a mission here. Since. the


British took possession of the town, :


efforts have been made to introduce
the Gospel, principally by native
teachers and catechists, who, in
addition to their other labours,


have distributed the Scriptures and.


travis, in considerable numbers,


among the Portuguese and Mala-.
bars. q i :
- MAHIM, atownon the northern .


part of the island of Bombay, about
4 m, from the town of Bombay,
containing a compact population
of about 20,000 héathens.. The
immediate vicinity is also vezy po-
pulous. The soil is sandy, and the
place is a complete cocoa-nut
forest—as much s0, indeed, as if
there were no inhabitants...

The Rev. A. Graves, from the
A. B.C. F. M. errived at Mahim
in 1818.
Newell spent several weeks here,
preaching the Gospel to many who
had never heard. it before. Two
schools were established in Mahim,
and 2 in the vicinity; they have
since increased to 7, and are in a
prosperous state. One school is
supported by benevolent individuals
in Augusta, Georgia, and is called
the Augusta school, In the spring
of 1882, Mr. Graves and his wife,
compassionating the wants of some
destitute children who eame: under
their observation, took 20 of them
into their family. The children
were promising, and became very
dear to their instructors. Under such
an accession of ‘cate and labour,
however, the health of Mrs; Graves
declined; and as it was deemed ex-
pedient for her toitake a voyage to
America, some of the children
were received into the mission fa-
milies at Bombay and Tannah, and


Previous. to this, Mr. |


MAS


the ‘remainder returned to their
parents, Soon after Mr. Graves
entered:.on his ‘mission, he .com-
menced preaching in the Mahratta
‘language, und has faithfully ‘em-
‘braced. opportunities: which have
offered ‘for instructing the natives.
A large portion’of his time has re-
cently been spent in itinerating at
a distance’; and though there have
-been no special instances of convic-
tion and: conversion; the influence
of the Gospel on the minds of the
natives ‘is eppatently increasing.
{See Bombay. |
‘MAIAOITI, one of the Society
‘Islands.
The mission in this island is under
the immediate care of two native
teachers, of the L. M. S.; sentthere
by: the church at Huaheiné. . The
church, consisting of 33 members,
all of whom:are regarded as: truly
pious, is. under the pastoral care of
Mr. Barff, who visits them as often


| as his other engagements will allow,


when he administers the ordinances
of the Lord’s Supper and baptism.
In his absence the teachers conduct
the public worship, end explain the
Scriptures to the people; they also
superintend the schools, which em:
brace, infants excepted, the whole
population’ of the island, which
consists‘of-210 souls.
. «A chapel has been built, 60:feet
by 30, which was entirely. the work
of the natives: They have: also
built and furnished a house for. the
accommodation of Mri Barff; when
on his‘ occasional visits.
” The deptitation could hear of no
crimes: in ‘this island; and the
judges, as. to criminal ‘cases, were
consequently without employment.
They suppose a happier people.than
those of this island do not exist. -
MAJABURAM, 4 populons
town in the vicinity of Tranquebar,
Hindoostan. The Danish mission-
aries at Tranquebar' formerly la-
boured here, and occasionally gain-
ed. many converts, a


MAL
: heir ‘congregation, in 1747,
‘amounted to upward of 1400.
- \MALACCA, or. Malaya, a pe-
insula at the southern: extremity


of Asia, connected with the king-'


‘dom of Siam: by the isthmus of
Kraw, bounded W. by the Indian


Ocean, and E, by the:Chinese Sea.


It extends from about. 1° to about
hH°.N. lat.. It is computed to be
‘715m. long; and its average breadth
about 150,. The surface of the pe-


ninsula is delightfully variegated.


with plains, gentle hilis, ‘and -lofty
mountains. Its soil is, generally,
highly vegetative, producing rice
in abundance, and various other
tropical fruits. The climate is fa-
vourable for, its latitude, there
being a constant alternation of land
and sen breezes, which render the
air pure and healthy.- The whole
country was formerly subject to the
‘government of Siam, but the south-


ern part has become emancipated -


from the yoke of tyranny, and the
northern ‘pays but a small tribute.
The inhabitants of Malacca are
principally Malays, though there
are many Portuguesc, Moors, and
Chinese. The Malays, as a people,
re exceedingly ferocious and vin-
dictive, faithless and treacherous,
fond of conquest and plunder, much
addicted to habits of piracy, and
dreadfully cruel to enemies and
strangers. They are, however, in
some measure, intelligent and: ac-
tive, and exhibit evident marks of
advancement in the arts of oiviliza-
tion. Their language has been
compared, for softnessand harmony,
to the French and Italian. It is
peculiarly adapted to poetry, of
which the Malays are passionately
fohd. It is extensively used in
mercantile business in all the
islands of the Malayan Archipe-
lago, and in all eastern India.
.. Malacca, the principal town on
the peninsula: above described, is
situated near the W. coast, on the
Straits of Malacca. E. long, 102°


»


MAL
16’; N. lat. 2°13, . The foundation


of this town was laid by the Maho.
medans, ‘in' the 13th century, and


.was subject to the Portuguese till


164), when it was captured by the
Dutch, and.remained in their pos.
session till it was taken by, the Bri-
tish forces. in 1796. The English
restored it to the Dutch at. the
peace of Amiens; recaptured it,
and. again restored it, Sept. 1818,
From its. peculiarly favourable si-
tuation it has, in a commercial
point of view, become a place of
great interest and importance. A
ready naval intercourse subsists be-
tween it and all the Malayan Ar-
chipelago, Siam, China, Cochin-
China, India, and Madagascar,
This circumstance renders it a fa-
vourable place for the establish.
ment of a mission, from which the
Bible and religious tracts may be
diffused through all the adjacent
countries...The inhabitants. are
variously. estimated, from 12 to
15,000; the. greater portion of
whom are Malays. The principal
religions ure Mahomedanism and
Paganism. .

In January, 1816, the Rev. Mr.
Milne, of the L. M. S., paid.a visit
to Penang, when he waited on the
Honourable the Governor and mem-
bers of.the council, who readily
granted him, at his request, a piece
of land at Malacca, on which: to
erect a missionary-house and other
needful buildings. The - Chinese
scholars under. the care of Mr. M.
soon amounted to 70, and his coad-
jutor, Mr. Thomsen, commenced a
day-school and.an evening-school,
for the instruction of the Malays.


Partly in consequence. of. illness,
Mr. M. subsequently paid a visit to
Penang. Here he met with;Sabat,
aman of talent, who some years
before renounced the religion - of
‘Mahomed, and ‘professed. to .em-


brace that of the Gospel... The
religious .public formed sanguine
expectations of _ his journo


usefulness.


f apostate, an
tianity. He


to repent, an
Gospel. He
letter to Mr.
which comm
the corrupte
servant of th
tothe man «
Milne,” &c.
he says —‘¢:
not ‘with the
soul, and uni
it; nor’shall
away from it
or the riches
pleasixe’ of s
While here
with many e}
of sending
Néw Testam
tricts, to Sia
20,000 Chine
Cochin-Chine
places, wher
foutid in ‘grea
of ‘conversing
with the sail
vessels by wl
veyed. In Pe
said'to be 800)
among whom
house to ‘ho
Scriptures an


m@ lated, that in


together, ther
and ‘circulated
less than 36; 04
and ‘tracts, ex
Scriptures, 'T;
pense of prin
the ‘Religions
London, libe
sum Of 5007.
Mr. Milne’s
dant’: contiiiu
the’ Scriptures
dying the Mal
ing two Chit
works were @
tides'Which th
advantage of


undation
ie
tury, and
ruese till
ed by the
heir pos-
7 the Bri-
2 English
h at. the
tured it,
pt. 1818,
irable si-
mmercial
, place of
ance, A
bsists be-
ayan Ar-
Cochin-


oO. readily


which: to


of illness,
1 a. visit to
ith; Sabat,
me years
pligion - of


MAL
usefulness.


pleasine of science,” &c. &e.
While here, Mr.'M. was favoured
with many excellent opportunities
of sending copies of the Chinese
Néw Testament, catechisms, and


tracts, to Siam, where, it is said,


20,000 Chinese - reside, to ‘Rhio,
Cochin-China, and various’ other


places, where the Chinese ‘are’


fod in great numbers, as well as
of ‘conversing on religious subjects


with the sailors: belonging. to the.
vessels by which they were’ con-


veyed. In Penang only, there ‘are
said'to be 80000 Chinese inhabitants;
among whom Mr. ‘Milne went from
house to ‘house, distributing
Scriptures and tracts. | He calcu.


. eo Ne in China and: Malacca


together, there -had been printed
and ‘circulated at that period, not
lessthan 36,000 Chinese pamphlets


und tracts, excltisive of the Holy:


Scriptures. Towards the great ex-
pense of printing Chinese tracts,
the Religious. Tract ab
London, liberally contribu
sum Of 5007. se hyg

Mr. Milne’s labours were abun-
dant’? contitiuing his tratislation of
the Scriptures into Chinese, stu-
dying the Malay, and superintend-
ing two Chinese schools. Other
works were also proceeding ; be-
ides'which the settlement had the
advantage of two presses; with


But he is
y apostate, and wrote against Chris-
ceaity, ‘He professed, however, |-
torepent, and again to receive ‘the
Gospel. He wrote an affectionate
letter to Mr. Milne on the subject,
which commenced thus :—-“‘ Sabat,
the corrupted, turned, and lost
servant of the: Lord Jesus Christ,
tothe man of God, the Rev. W.
Milne,”? &¢. Towards the close,
he says — Though my body ‘be
not with the trath, yet my ‘heart,
soul, and understanding, ‘are with
it; nor’shall they ever be turned
away from it by silver, gold; jewels,
or the riches ‘of the world, or any:


‘the :


MAL
suitable workmen, and an able
‘superintendent.
‘Among other important objects
which ’ engaged the ‘attention of
‘Dr. Morrison:and Mr. Milne, dar- —
ing a visit’of the jatter°to Canton, —
“was the establishment ‘of a ‘semii-
nary, nowdenominated tlie Anply-
Chinese College, the principal ob-
jects of which ‘are, to impart the
‘knowledge of the English langnage,
‘andthe principles of the Christian
‘religion, to Chinése youth; and the
instruction of missionaries and
others in the language and litera-
ture of China. Dr. M. generousty
‘ptoposed, on certain conditions; to
contribute towards the object the
‘sum of 4000 dollars, exclusive*of a
‘separate donation of 5002. to defray
‘the ‘expenses of educating, in the
college, ! European and 1 Chinese
youth, for 5 successive’ years, ‘Th
the importance'of this plan ‘the
directors concurred, ‘and ‘the
foundation-stone' of the institution
was laid Nov. 11, ‘1818, by Major
‘William ‘Farquhar, «late English
Resident and Commander of Ma-
lacca; and ‘several persons: of “high
distinction, as well as the ¢hief
‘Dutch inbebitants were pleased to
attend the ceremony. The college,
since erected, stands on the mission
premises, in an open and’ aif
situation, close to the westéern'ga
of ‘the town, and commands ‘a ‘fine
view of the roads and of ‘the sed.
At this time a Fund was formed
for widows and orphans of ‘the
Ultra Ganges Mission—the Chinese
schools were in a flourishing’ state


, in| —tracts were extensively circi-
the |


lated—the work of translation was
making rapid progress—the press
was tne! be and much
was done in the direct communica-
tion of the Gospel.

About ‘ this. period 3° Chinese
schools were going on prosperously,
and the Malabar school was well
attended ; in the English: and Ma-
lay school several aces had


MAL


learned to read the Holy’ Scrip-
‘tures ; a Malay school, which was
‘fora time suspended, was re-
opened}; and a female Malay school,
-the first establishment of the kind
in Malacca, was commenced.: On


.June 1, 182), Mr. then Dr. Milne |.


publicly baptized a heathen woman
(her father was a Chinese, and her
‘mother a Siamese) ; and on the 8th
.of July following, Mr. Thomsen
baptized 2 Malays, all of whom
‘were apparently sincere converts to
Christianity.

in consequence of the decease
-of Dr. Milne, which took place
Jan. 2, 1822,—the Chinese ser-
vices previously conducted were
‘necessarily suspended. During a
‘visit which Dr. Morrison paid to


-Ma'acca, however, they were re-_


sumed four times: on the Sabbath,
‘and twice on week days : a Chinese
‘youth, formerly a student in the
‘Anglo Chinese College, occa-
sionally assisted in these services,
‘This individual, who understands
‘both the Fihkeen and Canton
dialects, was also employed, in
‘Connexion with the mission, as a
public reader, explaining the Scrip-
tures to his countrymen according
to his ability; and occasionul’y
conducting Christian worship in the
‘Pagan temple, where Dr. Milne
formerly preached. The Malayan
female servants, and the female
Portuguese servants who understand
‘Malay, belonging to the mission
compound, assembled every Sab-


‘bath evening, when the Scriptures | the students attend. On the Sab-


were read, and an_ exhortation
given in Malay by Mrs. Hum-


phreys.

On the 20th of May, 1823, the
printing of the wholeChi”-ese version
of the Scriptures was fi:..shed ; Afa,
a Chinese convert, had the honour
‘both to commence and to complete
this work, having arrived from
China for that purpose. The num-
ber of students on the foundation
of the college, was then 15, that


MAL
of candidates for admission, 7,
-These youths had  professedly em-
braced Christianity, and, generally
speaking, entered with zeal and
cheerfulness into the religions
exercises of the institution.

In after years, fresh tabourers
were sent forth ; and the most
recent account of the state of the
mission is as follows:—- _

Chinese Schools.—‘‘ The num.
-ber of these schools is 7, contain.
ing from 240 to 250 boys. They
are.all conducted on decidedlyChris-
tian principles.. The Deputation
visited and instructed each of them
in January 1826, and so far as they
were able to judge, were satisfic :
both with the progress of the boys,


and the principles on which the |


schools are conducted.”’

Malay Schools, §¢.—~* The local
government has engaged to support
two native schools, one Malayan,
and the other Tamul, A free-
school, to be supported by the
inhabitants, has also been opened:
it contains about 170 Malay boys,
who are instructed in the princi-
ples of Christianity. These three
schools are under the superintend-
-ence of Mr. Humphreys, who has
the charge of the Malay branch of
the mission, and whose attainments
in Malayan qualify him for preach-
ing therein.”’

\ Worship in Chinese, §c.—“The
Chinese services continue. to be
performed every morning and even-
ing in the College Hall, when all


bath, besides three short lectures,
there are other religious exercises,
adapted to imbue the mind with
truth, and to impress it upon the
conscience. ‘The foundation of ihe
chapel, which is being erected at
this station, was laid on the 28th
of January, 1826, at the time the
deputation were there. A consi-
derable number of persons, of dif-
ferent nations, attended on the
occasion, who were respectively
334


N


m uddressed by |


Collie, and Hu
lish, Chinese,
dimensions of *
has been secure
40feet by 30.
sate, that the s
spot, towards
pense attending
exceeded their 1
yectations ; but
theless, that. fri
aid them in the
The mission:
fo itinerate in -
district of Malac
of preaching to
which occasions
xccompanied by
dents belonging
Chinese college,
hope, that by
Chinese youths,
college, with the
ing tours, they
tained for the wi
earnestly desired
tually engage,
Gospel to their fe
Mr, Kidd emplo


mime in going


people, end con
won religious’ s
sare able to rea
fo such as are
portion of som
Several works ¢
others are in pra
bas translated in
sermons on the
of Christianity,
have been. print
circulation. By
isenabled to pro
provement in the
the same time, p
for the. heathen,
‘Anglo Chines
June, 1825, to
Chinese youths
the foundation ;
ame period,’ le
he number o
books, at the te


on, 7,
lly em-
nerally
al and
pligious


bourers
8 most
2 of the


e num-
sontain-
, They
lyChris-
putation
of them
r as they
satisfi¢
he boys,
lich the


“he local
) support
Vialayan,
A free-
by the
opened:
lay boys,
e princi-
ase three
erintend-
who has
ranch of
inments
yr preach-


— “The
ue. to be
land even-
when all
the Sab-
lectures,
exercises,


MAL


@ xddressed by Messrs. Tyerman,


Collie, and Humphreys, in -Eng-
lish, Chinese, and Malayan. ‘The
dimensions of the chapel, which
has been secured to the society, are
40 feet by 30.. The missionaries
sate, that the subscriptions on the
got, towards defraying the ex-
pense attending its erection, have
exceeded their most sanguine ex-

tations ; but they. hope, never-
theless, that. friends at home will
aid them in the work.’’

The missionaries still continae
to itinerate in the interior of the
district of Malacca, for the purpose
of preaching to the: Chinese ; on
which occasions they-are uniformly
xcompanied by some of the stu-
dents belonging to the Anglo-
Chinese college. ‘They express a
hope, that by thus. taking the
Chinese youths, belonging to the
college, with them on their preach-
ing tours, they may be gradually
tained for the work in which, it is
earnestly desired, they may even-
tually engage, viz. preaching the
Gospel to their fellow-countrymen.
Mr. Kidd employs a portion of his
time in going out among the
people, and conversing with them
won religious’ subjects. To such
sare able to read, he gives tracts ;
to such as are not, he explains a
portion of some suitable book.
Several works are: prepared, and
others are in progress. Mr. Kidd
bas translated into Chinese‘several
sermons on the leading doctrines
of Christianity, some of which
have been. printed and put into
tirculation, By this method, he
isenabled to promote his own im-
provement in the language, and, at
the same time, provide useful books
for the. heathen. '
‘Anglo Chinese College.—From
June, 1825, to June, 1826,: six
Chinese youths were received on
the foundation ; and 2, during. the
ume period, left the institution.
The number of students on the
books, at the termination of the


MAL


above-mentioned period, was 20;
of whom 17 were supported by the
college funds, and 3 by private
individuals. . There. were, at. the.
same time, 6 candidates; some of
whom, it was probable, would be
admitted on the foundation. Two
Dutch youths attend the college,
for the purpose .of acquiring the
English and Chinese languages.
The total number of. students,
exclusive of an evening class, con-
sisting of Chinese and Portuguese,
who are learning English, was 28.
The morel and literary effect desired
has not as yet been produced, but
it is hoped ground has been gained.
MALAPEETZEE, a town of
Corannas, near the scurce of the
Molareen, S. Africa, about 100 m.
E. Lattakoo, and 1000 N. E. Ca
Town. In 1813, the Rev. Mr.
Campbell, of the L. M. S., explored
this region, with a view to the
establishment of a mission; and
obtained permission of the chief,
and a majority of the inhabitants,
to send missionaries among them,
though they had never before seen
a white man. His proposals were,
in like manner, favourably received
at Makoon’s Kraul, situated 8S. of
Malapeetzee, which is the residence
of Makoon, the chief of all the
Bushmans in this part of Africa.
In 1817, Cupido Kakkalah, a native
Hottentot teacher, was stationed
at Malapeetzee, and laboured with
considerable success about 2 years ;
when he removed to Mobatee with
part of the inhabitants, on account
of the scarcity of grass. The
others settled about 20 m. from
that place, and are still attached to
the mission,
‘ MALDA, a populous town, and
capital of a district of the same
name, situated on the Ganges,
abou} 170 m. N. Calcutta, E. long.
established a mission here in 1813 ;
when. the station at Goumalty
was removed to English Bazar,
near this place, and has since‘been
335


“MAL


known as the Malda Station.
Though this was among the first
places, in Bengal, where the in-
habitants heard the Gospel in their
own tanguage,:it has met witha
less. favourable. reception, than in
many athers where, it has been
more recently introduced...

MALLAGUM, ‘a large parish
qn.the island of Ceylon, 2: miles
from. Tillipally, towards Jaffna-
patam,: nearly in the centre of the
§ parishes which are under the
care.of the Americun missionaries
in the district of Jaffna. In this,
as, in others, they have permis-
sion from government to occupy.
the church buildings and glebe
lands.

Soon after the. establishment of
the mission at Tillipally, the mis-
sionaries opened p school here, and
commenced, preaching regularly
on.the Sabbath, in the court-
house of the Dutch magistrate. In
1818, Francis Maleappa, a native

reacher, who has since removed to

odooville, was stationed here, in-
structed in English, superintended
the moral instruction of the Tamul
schools, read to the people on the
Sabbath, and superintended several
schools in the vicinity, The mis-
sionaries at the other stations
continue to preach here on the
Sabbath, and make frequent visits
abroad. In 1821, a Tamul Bible
Society was formed at this soa
composed almost entirely of hea-
thens, who pay an annual subserip-
tion for the spread of the word of
God in their own language. During
the first year, nearly 300 rix-dollars
were collected.

MALTA, a celebrated island
in the Mediterranean Sea, under
British authority, memorable for
the shipwreck of St. Paul. It is
about 60 miles S. Sicily, and nearly
60 in circumference. E, long. 14°
10’, N. lat. 86°51’, The shore is,
for the most part, abrupt and


rugged, there
convenient harbours; one called


MA\,
Marsa, the other, on the W, side


of the island, called Marsa Musciet, §


The island is strongly fortified by
gartisons and bulwarks; to man
which 30,000 men would be requi-
site. Valetta, the capital, stands
at the N. end of the island, is built
entirely of stone, and contains 20
or 25,000 inhabitants. Malta was
given to the Knights of St. John
of Jerusalem, by the Emperor


Charles V., in 1530, to whom it |


was subject till 1798; when it
was forcibly taken, from them by
Buonaparte. In 1800, it was be.
siegedand captured by the British,
to whom it was confirmed in the
treaty of 1814.

The surface of the island is, ge-
nerally, level, with a soil naturally
unproductive, but much improved
by cultivation. The island is divi-
ded into about 20 lasals, or town-
ships—a lasal including a village
and the surrounding country. The
inhabitants, with: those on Gozo,
a small neighbouring island, are
estimated at 110,000. They are
generally miserably poor, and de-
plorably ignorant. It is thought,
that among a population of 100,000,
not more than 1000 were able to
‘read or write; and in one village,
containing 6000 inhabitants, only
30 had ever been instructed in the
elements of knowledge. Their
language is a dialect of the Arabic;
though, till missionaries visited the
island, it could hardly be said ever
to have been reduced to a written
form. The principal literary insti-
tutions are, the library of tiv
Knights and the Jesuits’ College,
or University of Malta; both now
under the reguiation of the British
government. The lit: vy con.
tains 50 or 60,000 volu. ~ .aoatly
ancient Latin works, thu gh there
ere many Italian and some French
Looks. The library is open for
the reception of the literati, ¢ |
others, at stated hours ; but no books


being but two | are permitted to be carried from


Connected with the
336


the room.


* lands and cov:


]

University are
sors, and in 182

The religio
exclusively Ro:
common p
kept by their
in a state of ig
believe whate
priests tell ther
ditions of the
the people ar
session of thei
The Inguisities
few years
las been, wi
administration,
hospital,

The island ¢
central situation


he cranted to all in


nations, has bec
importance an
Christian world
focus, or rallyi;
sionaries from .
who wish to per
the languages
tions, and the h
the various miss
shores of these

this place there
nication with E
Africa, with all
Mediterranean

with those pa
which have bee
rendered memora
hora! movement
mankind,—the

and subsequent
Christianity, t
God’s chosen per
tion of Maho
coincident with
Here Jews,
Pagans, may be
jidicious, pious,
ibjects conned
lianity, and the
it has upon the

kind. Malta is vis
titdes from all


MAL |
'. side Hl University are from 15 to 20 profes-
sciet, srs, and in 1622, about 200 students.
ied by The religion of the Maltese is
/ man exclusively Roman Catholic. The
equi- common people are designedly
stands kept by their religious instructors
s built in a state of ignorance, and réadily
sins 20 believe whatever their infatuated
ta was priests tell them is true. The con-
+ John ditions of the late treaty secure to
mperor the people an undisturbed pos-
1om it @% wssion of their favourite religion.
hen it MM The Inquisition at Malta, which a
em by i few years ago was in full force,
vas be- lias been, under the present
British, administration, converted into a
in the Gi hospital.


The island of Malta, from its


Lis, ge- HM central situation, and the protection
aturally Bal granted to all individuals of different
nproved nations, has become a place of vast


is divi- importance and interest to the


ir town- Christian world. It is a kind of
village @ focus, or rallying point, of mis-
y. The iM sonaries from different countries,
h Gozo, HM who wish to perfect themselves in


ind, are
hey are
and de-
hovght,
100,000,
able to
village,
hts, only
bd in the

Their
Arabic;
sited the


the languages of the adjacent na-
tions, and the head-quarters of all
the various missions destined to the
shores of these inland seas. From
this place there is a ready commu-
nication with Europe, Asia, and
Africa, with all the islands of the
Mediterranean and Levant, and
with those particular countries
which have been distinguished and
rendered memorable by the grandest
hora! movements iu the history of


suid ever i mankind,—the first establishment
A written HM ond subsequent promulgation of
ary insti- Hi Christianity, the dispersions of


of the #@ (od’s chosen people, and the diffu-


College, HM sion of Mahomedanism, nearly
oth now HM wincident with the rise of Pepacy.
e British HF Here Jews, Mahomedans, and
ty CO" Ba Pagans, may be addressed by the


* nostly Hi jidicious, pious, and learned, upon
gh there Hi ubjects connected with Chris-
e French | tinity, and the unytelding claims
open for H it has upon the obedience of man-
ratl, © | HM kind. Malta is visited yearly by mul-
no books # tides from all the circumjacent


ied from F islands and countries, and is the
with the *.


36


MAL
resort of many men of literary
distinction. In 1810, and some
years before and after, not léss
than 40,000 foreigners resided
there, of whom 12,000 were
Greeks, and 6 or 7000 Jews.

The Rev. Mr. Blomfield, who
was sent out by the L. M.S. iri
1811, to promote the’ knowledge
of the Gospel among the Greeks,
was directed to reside for a time
at Malta, where he might have
an opportunity to learn the Italian
language, and to perfect himself
in the modern Greek, as well as
to obtain the best information
concerning the places to which
he might afterwards direct his
course. While faithfully fulfilling
his trust, he preached: to a number
of Englishmen resident at Valetta,
and, it is believed, with spiritual
advantage to many. He was alsu
active in distributing copies of the
Scriptures, of Dr. Doddridge’s
Rise and Progress in Italian, and
of religious tracts, some of which
were sent to Sicily, &c. He was’
informed that a gentleman who
visited the Morea, left two Greek
Testaments at a convent, with
which the inhabitants were so
delighted, that they rang the {1's
for joy, and performed some © x-
traordinary religious ceremoay.
In the midst of these cheering
circumstances, however, Mr. B,
resigned his work to receive his
reward.

In Sept. 1816, the Rev. Mr.
Lowndes of the Z. M.S. was sent
out for the same purposes as those
contemplated for his excellent pre-
decessor, and his ministry was not
in vain.

The Rev. S.S. Wilson of the same
socicty arrived at Malta at the com-
me:. ‘mentof 1819; in consequence
of wuich Mr, L. left that place, to
carry into effect the various objects
of his iission : he ufterwardssettled
at Zante, and ultimately at Corfu.
Mr. W., in addition to various

aa 337


MAL :
engagements, prepared _ several
books for publication in. modern
Greek. In 1823, his congregation
had increased to about 250 hearers,
of whom a considerable number
gave satisfactory evidence of ge-
nuine piety, and many others of
most. promising moral qualities.
The number of. communicants was
increased to 50. In the Sabbath-
school there were about 30 English
children ; 20 Greek boys and girls
alsc attended, who learned Mr. Wil-
son’s Greek catechism, and passages
of Scripture both in Greek and
Italian. Mr. Wilson resumed
his Greek services; the attend-
ance, including children, was about
50. During his absence in Eng-
land, the American Brethren
commenced a small school for
Greeks; an English young ladv,
whom Mr. Wilson formerly in-
structed in modern Greek, had the
charge of the female department
of it. The boys were taught by
Mr. Temple, assisted by Mr. Wil-
son. The latter devoted a portion
of every day to the instruction of
a few Greek boys, from Scio, in
ancient Greek, English, and Ita-
lian. One of these boys translated
a considerable part of Turner’s
“Arts and Sciences,’? and pro-
ceeded with the work under Mr.
Wilson’s direction.

After his return to Malta,
he printed, in modern Greek,
at the American mission-press,
about 10,000 books and tracts ;
other works were in progress; a
Religious Tract Society, formed
some time before, in connexion
with the English chapel, doubled its
funds; about 700 tracts, of which
a portion were sold; and about 60
Bibles and Testaments, in Greek,
French, Italian, English, and other
languages, were circulated; some
of them were given to poor Greeks
proceeding to the war.

A “ Poor’s Working Society,”
established by Mrs. Wilson, com-


MAL:


posed of several respectable ladies,
produced about 15/. per annum ;
and, during one winter, furnished
clothing to about 40 persons.

The last report says:—‘‘ The
English congregation goes on well,
and the Sabbath-school is in a
prosperous state. Mr. Wilson con-
tinues to preach once a week, in
Italian; and the services are at-
tended with encouragement, as
regards both native Maltese and
Greeks. The ministerial labours
of Mr. Wilson continue to he at-
tended with spiritual benefit to
his hearers, Several works have
been printed, during the past year,
ai the mission printing-oflice. The
printing of Mr. Wilson’s modem
Greek translation of the Rev. Mr.
Burder’s Village Sermons has been
commenced, and is rapidly ad-
vancing. A collection of hymns,
translated into Italian by Mr,
Wilson, has been printed at Corfu.
A Catechism on the Sacrament,
by the late Rev. Mr. Brown, of
Haddington, translated into Italian
by Mr. W., is also in course of
printing at the same place. Mr,
Wilson has engaged, as an appren-
tice in the printing-office, a Greek
youth, to whom he has given some
instruction in languages, and finds
him a great acquisition. Of the
Greek Spelling-book and Dr.
Watts’s Catechism, 1000 copies
each have been sent to Constan-
tinople, and 500 of each sold, for
the purpose of being sent thither.
School-books have also been sent
to Cerigo, for the use of the chil-
dren of Greek refugees from Mis-
solonghi. The elementary school-
books and tracts, in modern Greek,
prepared by Mr. Wilson, have been
widely dispersed. In case of the libe-
ration of that country,—an event,
it is to be hoped, not far distant,—
many of the natives will be ready
to go immediately into different
parts of it, for the purpose of
organizing and conducting schools
338


4


on the L
have deriv
selves wer
of their fit
the school
by Mr. Wil
The La
Society, cor
son, contin
indigent an
Malta; and
of providin
decent clotl
their admis:
Schools. T
for the year
1826, was u
The atte:
having been
terranean a:
of labour, |
send thither
Rev. Wm. J
for this servi
paration, pre
‘1815, to Mal
able place
society had
gestion of
Buchanan,
literary repr¢
of this natu
sionary labo
cable; and
benefit of m
with that di
had himself |
en admirable
Aucting of
The objects
establishing
Mediterrane.
sition of in
the state of
with the be
oration, and
Christian ka
by journeys
Mr. Jowett
family, to
renovation
year 1820,
of his absen


ladies,
Anum 3
mnished


“ The

n well,

; ina

yn COn-

eek, in

are at-

nt, as

se and

labours

he at-
nefit to
‘s have
st year,
e. The
modern
ev, Mr.
vas been
idly ad-
hymns,
yy Mr.
t Corfu.
rament,
own, of
o Italian
ourse of
e. Mr.
appren-
a Greek
ren some
and finds
Of the
nd Dr.
D copies
onstan-
sold, for
thither.
een sent
the chil-
om Mis-
y school-
n Greek,
ave been
| the libe-
n event,
listant,—
be ready
different
Irpose of
g schools
338


on the Lancasterian plan, who
have derived, while they them-
selves were under tuition, much
of their fitness for the work from
the school publications furnished
by Mr. Wilson.”

The Ladies’ Malta Charitable
Society, commenced by Mrs. Wil-
son, continues to afford relief to
indigent and infirm persons in
Malta ; and by affording the means
of providing their children with
decent clothing, is instrumental to
their admission into the Normal
Schools. The amount of receipts,
for the year ending 31st December,
1826, was upwards of £57,

The attention of the C. M.S.
having been drawn to the Medi-
terranean as an important sphere
of labour, it was determined to
send thither a representative. The
Rev. Wm. Jowett offered himself
for this service ; and after due pre-
paration, proceeded, in the year
‘1815, to Malta, as the most suit-
able place of residence. The
society had adopted, on the sug-
gestion of the late Rev. Dr.
Buchanan, the plan of sending a
literary representative to a sphere
of this nature, where direct mis-
sionary labours were not practi-
cable; and Mr. Jowett had the
benefit of much friendly conference
with that distinguished man, who
had himself led the way, and given
en admirable model, in the con-
Aucting of Christian researches.
The objects of the society, in
establishing representatives in the
Mediterranean were—the acqui-
sition of information relative to
the state of religion and of society,
with the best means of its meli-
oration, and the propagation of
Christian knowledge, by the press,
by journeys, and by educetion.
Mr. Jowett returned, with his
family, to this country, for the
renovation of his health, in the
year 1820. During the 6 years
of his absence, be had been resi-


MAL
dent chiefly in Malta; but he had
spent a considerable time in Corfu,
and had twice visited Egypt and
some parts of Greece, ti

The results of this visit to the
Mediterranean have been in many
respects highly imporiant; these
he has since given to the public,
in a very interesting and valuable
volume, which has awakened a
lively interest in behalf of the
sphere'in which his energies have
been engaged. Mr. Jowett sub-
sequently returned to Malta, and


has since been variously occupied


in benevolent exertions.
The A. B. C. F. M. commenced
a mission here in 1820, with the


design of benefitting the mingled


inhabitants of Palestine. The first
missionaries, sent by the Board
to the Holy Land, were the Rev.
Messrs. L. Parsons and P. Fisk,
who arrived at Smyrna, Jan. 15,
1820, and were cordially welcomed
by the chaplain and other gentle-
men. After obtaining the requisite
information for the government of
their future measures, they em-
barked for the island of Scio,
where they spent some time in the
study of the modern Greek, and
soon after visited the 7 churches of
Asia. Mr. P, then went to Jeru-
salem, where he spent some months
in distributing the word of life,
and religious tracts in 9 different
languages. In Jan. 1822, in con-
sequence of his declining health,
he sailed with Mr. F. for Alex-
andria, where, on the 10th of Feb.,
he yielded up his spirit to him who
gave it, The Rey. D, and Mrs.
Temple arrived at Malta, Feb. 22,
1822. A printing establishment
was also sent; which has been,
and will probably continue to be,
a powerful and useful engine in
promoting the designs of the mis-
sion: this press was procured, and
is to be kept in operation for the
term of 5 years, by benevolent
individuals ia Boston, It was
330


‘MAL


calculated that in about: two years
there were printed by it more than
two million snd a half of pages of
religious tracts.

‘The Rev. Messrs. Goodell and
Bird, with their wives, arrived at
Malta, Jan. 2), 1823. These mis-
sionaries were under the direction
of the American Board ; but were
supported by a benevolent associ-
ation in the city of New York,
entitled the Palestine Missionary
Society. After their arrival, they
continued at Malta till October ;
when, in compliance with the
wishes of their brethren, they
sailed jor the Holy Land, where
they expected permanently to be
settled. On their removal they re-
mark :—

“ Agreeably to our instructions,
we have devoted our principal
ume and attention to the attain-
ment of the language; and, in
‘tthe mean time, have assisted in
preaching several times a week, in
English, to very attentive hearers ;
in conducting various religious
meetings with different classes of
society, in different stages of reli-
gious knowledge and experience ;
and in managing a Sabbath-school,
consisting chiefly of English and
Greek children and youth of both
sexes, who have committed to me-
mory about 40,000 verses of Scrip-
ture and hymns. We have been
happy in possessing these imme-
diate means of usefulness, while
we have been engaged in study ;
and we trust a future day will shew
that the labour bestowed upon
Maita, by other missionaries and by
ourselves, has not been in vain.”’

The Rev. Mr. Fisk, in com-
pany with Mr. Wolff, of the L.
J. S8., and Mr. King, of the French
Protestant Misstonary Society at
Paris, \eft Malta, Jan, 3, 1823,
on a tour to Egypt and Jerusa-
lem. While on their way, at
Alexandria, they preached in 6
different languages to small assem-


MAL


blies, and distributed the . Bible,
or portions of it, in 10 languages,
On April 25, they entered the
Holy City, where they spent some
months, labouring for the spiritual
good of its mingled inhabitants,
Though ‘the missionaries of the
American Board, in commencing.a
mission to the land of promise, have
been called to endure many hard-
ships and deprivations, and to expe-
rience numerous discouragements;
yet there are many circumstances
calculated to encourage and ani-
mate them to more persevering
diligence and fidelity. Greeks and
Armenians manitest an increasing
eagerness to obtain the word of
truth, and Jews and Mahomedans
are disposed to listen wiih can-
dour to arguments in favour of
Christianity.

Dr. Naudi bas also been an effi-
cient and active agent in promoting
the cause of truth, and the inte-
rests of the Mediterranean mis-
sion, He was educated a Roman
Catholic ; but was induced to
change his views in consequence of
reading some religious books, sent
to Malta by the B. and F. B.S.
As early as.1812, he suggested to
the society the propriety of est:
blishing @ permanent mission at
Malta, and offered to accompany
a missionary under their auspices
on a tour of investigation. While
engaged as a physician in the
island, he was very active in ex-
tending the knowledge of a cru-
cified Saviour. In 1817, be was
received under the patronage of
the society, and employed in com-
piling and translating into the
eastern languages; in which oc-
cupation be has been eminently
useful,

The society hus a printing esta-
blishment at Malta, at which the
Scriptures and religious tracts have
been printed in several languages.

The Reverend J. King, from
the French Protestant a
3


Society at 1
labours here
a native of
but then re
induced to
mission for
consequence
tations of J
Mr. Parsons’
stance of hi
awakened in
spirit of m
which resulte
this society,
under their p:
one year, but
direction of 1
He laboured,
their missiona
which was |
With Mr. K.
founts of Gree
mission.

The follov
important inst
sulted from }
Malta and its

The Malta
in 1817. The
the disturbed
society has be
barrassed in i
quarter; yet, t
nels, the Ita
nian, Arabic,
French Bibles
been distribute
countries bordé
the Mediterra
The vital inte
have been grea
~_ of its ¢
arged, by the
at heaton
their itineratic
countries the
with Bibles b
have obtained

its future prog

In 1818, ase
at Castle Zoi
Cammilleri,


n -mis-


ts have
ages.

z, from
psionary
40


MAL


Society at Paris, commenced his
labours here in 1822. Mr. King,
a native cf the United States,
but then residing in Paris, was
induced to join the Palestine
mission for a limited period, in
consequence of the urgent solici-
tations of Mr. Fisk, soon after
Mr. Parsons’ death. The circum-
stance of his going from Paris
awakened in a few individuals a
spirit of missionary enterprise,
which resulted in the formation of
this society. Mr. K. was received
under their patronage, for at least
one year, but was to be under thc
direction of the American Boud.
He laboured, in conjunction with
their missionaries, since his arrival,
which was November 2d, 1822.
With Mr. K. the society sent 2
founts of Greek types in aid of the
mission.

The following are among the
important institutions that have re-
sulted from missionary efforts at
Malta and its vicinity.

The Malta B. S. was organized
in 1817. Though, on account of
the disturbed state of Greece, the
society has been considerably em-
barrassed in its operations in that
quarter; yet, through various chan-
nels, the Italian, Greek, Arme-
nian, Arabic, Syriac, Hebrew, and
French Bibles and Testaments have
been distributed in most of the other
countries bordering on the shores of
the Mediterranean and the Levant.
The vital interests of this society
have been greatly promoted, and the
sphere of its operations much en-
larged, by the American, Church,
and London S. missionaries, In
their itinerations into the adjacent
countries they have been furnished
with Bibles by this society, and
have obtained subscriptions to aid
its future progress.

In 1818, a school was established
at Castle Zeilun, by Don Lugi
Cammilleri, a-Roman Catholic


MAN


| priest. This enlightened man com-


menced his school’ in a private
house, at his own expense, with 30
boys. Having received his educa-
tion in Spain, the Spanish Consul,
on being made acquainted with his
design, seconded his efforts by con-
tributing upwards of 3000 dollars
for the erection of a commodious
school-house. In 1823, the number
of pupils in this school was 100.
A female school was attached to it
in 1822, which, in 1823, contained
50 scholars. Mr. .Cammilleri’s
instructions are gratuitous, and he
expresses a strong desire to have
his countrymen become more en-
lightened and less superstitious.

The Malta Jews’ Society was
commenced May 9, 1823. The
object of this association is to form
a centre of correspondence and
communication for all societies
which may wish to send missiona-
ries into these parts for the conver-
sion of the Jews.

A School Society was formed at
Valetta, in 1819, through the
efficient exertions of Mr. Jowett
and Mr. Wilson; and a convenient
room was soon appropriated by the
government to the use of an in-
creasing school under its direction.
Lieutenant-governor Power is the
President; and his Lady Patroness
of a female school, which was esta-
blished by means of the unremit-
ting efforts of a few benevolent
ladies. The number of pupils in
both these schools, in 1823, was
about 320; and the whole number
that had been admitted, from their
commencement, was 606 boys and
330 girls. These schools are con-
ducted on the Lancasterian system,
and exert an extensive and salutary
influence, A school has been re-
cently commenced on the island of
Gozo; and preparations are making
to open them in several villages in
Malta.

MANAPAR, a town in the
@a2 34]


MAN


Carnatic, Hindoostan. Themission-
aries of the (. K, S. have laboured
here with considerable success.

In the latter part of the 18th
century, there was a chapel, in
which a catechist officiated, besides
superintending a school.

MANEPY, a parish in the dis-
‘trict of Jaffna, Ceylon, 44 miles
N. by W. from Jaffnapatam and 4
from Batticotta.
‘the church and mansion-house be-
longing to the mission are 10 idol
temples, where heathen offerings
are daily presented.

The Rev. H. Woodward, of the
_A. B.C. F. M., commenced a mis-
sion here, in the early part of 1821,
but was soon obliged to remove, in
consequence of ill health; and the
Rev. Mr. Spaulding immediately
succeeded him, as resident at the
station, and superintendent of its
concerns. Before the establish-
ment of the mission, the missiona-
ries from Batticotta occasionally
laboured here, and opened schools.
The first school was commenced in
December, 1818, and soon con-
tained more than 60 boys. In
1822, there were 5 schools con-
nected with the mission, containing
about 260 pupils. During the same
year, a boarding school was begun,
which, in June, 1823, consisted of
16 boys and 8 girls, who had re-
ceived names in compliance with
the wishes of benevolent individuals
by whom they are supported ; and 6
others were on trial. The children
have, generally, made satisfactory
progress, and many of them have
manifested considerable anxiety for
their spiritual welfare. The native
preachers, interpreters, servants,
and larger boys in the niission, hold
u meeting once a month, for the

urpose of acquiring religious in-

lligence. [See oy 7

MANGE A, or Manaia. Da-
vida and Tiere, two native teachers,
were left at this, which is one of


Within 2 m. o!!


MAN


the Harvey Islands,
tion from the L.


the depu‘a-
~S. During
the first two months of their yesi-
dence on the island, a few embraced
the Gospel} ;-—-that number has since


increased to 120, ‘‘ These were
easily distinguishable,”’? says Mr.
Bourne, ‘‘ among the crowd that
collected on our going on shore,
by the neatness of their dress and
their orderly behaviour. We pro-
ceeded to the teachers’ house,
which we found equal to any, and
superior to most, of the houses of
the natives at the Society Islands,
Not far from the teachers’ house,
is the chupel, round which the
dwellings of the Christian converts
are scattered, The number of in
habitants is from 1000 io 1400; the
people who have embraced Chris-
tianity ere diligent in their learning;
a few are beginning to read the
Scriptures ; and family and private
prayer are strictly observed among
them. They pay great respect to
their teacher; and although the
King and the principal part of the
people are still idolaters, yet they
are all upon friendly terms with
Davida, frequently visiting him, and
bringing him presents of food. All
idolatrous distinctions have been
abandoned by those who have em-
braced Christianity. Infanticide
eing here unknown, the children
are numerous. There is little
sickness among the people, and the
diseases are few. They display
great ingenuity in the. fabrication
of their cloth, canoes, stone axes,
and ear-ornaments ;_ their heads
are profusely covered with figured
cloth, red beads, and sinnet, of
beautiful work:nanship. The teach-
ers have been industrious in culti-
vating yams, pumpkins, and melons,
all of which were before unknown
here; fowls also, and hogs, have
been introduced, and are upon the
increase. We left some sweet po-
tatoes for seed, which will form a
342


valuable add
catables.”?
MAQU Af
Bootchuana
near the J}
about 120 m
Yellow River
supplied with
salubrious.
chief, with
from Yattab
escape the fu
and here he
permanen’. a¢
the country v
confusion tha
are about 500
and.a numbe:
lages in the n
vast populatio
inhabitants ar


' then people,


istence of a
being, superio
seem, howeve
rant of a futu
As far as the n
able to asce
smallest vesti
ship among th
The W, ]
Hodgson and
1823. Their
ever, broken
the Mantated
tribes. With
in the spirit
prise, they afi
its re-establis
dured, in con
tance, and the
many privatic
they are hop
success. Mr,
press and ty
they have pri
school-book
printed in that
which’ bears
quasse, 1826,
language with
. MARQUE!


eputa-
Yariag
r yesi-
braced
s since
. were
is Mr.
id that
shore,
ss and
'e pro-
house,
ny, and
yuses of
Islands.
house,
ch the
sonverts
r of in
00; the
1 Chris-
varning;
ead the
| private
1 among
spect to
gh the
of the
yet they
s with
him, and
od, All
ve been
have em-
tanticide
children
is little
and the
display
rication
ne axes,
ir heads
figured
net, of
he teach-
in culti-
1 melons,
nknown
gs, have
upon the
weet ))0-
form a
42


MAQ


yaluable addition to their stock of
eatables.”’

MAQUASSE, a tewn in the
Bootchuana country, S. Africa,
near the Magquasse mountains,
about 120 m. from the Great, or
Yellow River. his piece is well
supplied with “at, anu the air is
salubrious. },, 4822, Sitbbunel, the
chief, with iis le, rernoved
from Yattaba uw Maquasse,. to
escape the fury oi the Mautatees;
and here he intended to form a
permanen’. settlement as soon us
the country wus relieved from the
confusion that had arisen. There
are about 500 houses tn the town,
and.a number of considerable vil-
lages in the neighbouri.ood, with a
vast population in the vicinity. The
inhabitants are an interesting hea-


‘ then people, believing in the ex-


istence of a good and an evil
being, superior to themselves ; they
seem, however, to be entirely igno-
rant of a future state of existence.
As far as the missionaries have been
able to ascertain, they have not the
smallest vestige of religious wor-
ship among them.

The W. M. S. sent Messrs.
Hodgson and Archbell hither, in
1823. Their mission was, how-
ever, broken up by the invasion of
the Mantatees and other native
tribes. With great courage, and
in the spirit of Christian enter-
prise, they afterwards proceeded to
its re-establishment. They have en-
dured, in consequence of the dis-
tance, and the state of the country,
many privations and dangers, : but
they are hopeful as to ultimate
success. Mr. A. took with him a
press and types from the Cape, and
they have printed an elementary
school-book (the first book, ever
printed in that language or country)
which’ bears the impress ‘‘ Ma-
quasse, 1826,’? It is in the Sichuan
language with the Roman character.

MARQUESAS, ive islands in


MAR


the Pacific Ocean, named: Chris-
tina; Magdalena, Dominica, St.
Pedro, and:Hood.. The first four
were discovered'by Quiros, in 1595 ;
the last by Cook, iz 1774. : Domi-
nics is much the largest, being
abort 48 m. in circuit. The pro-
ducts of these “islands are bread-
fruit, bananas, plantains, cocoa-
nuts, scarlet beans, paper mul-
berries (of the bark of which their
cloth is made), casuarinas, with
other tropical plants and trees.
The Marquesans are of large sta-
ture, well made, strong, and active,
of a tawny complexion, but look
almost black iv being tattooed
over the whole body. Some of
the women are nearly as fair as
Europeans, and among them tat-
tooing is not common, and then
only on the hands and arms. Their
language much resembles that of
the Society Islands. Two Tahitian
teachers were stationed by the
Rev. Mr. Crook, of the L.M. S.,
on Tahuata (or Santa Christina),
in 1825; but after continuing there
about 10 months, and seeing no
prospect of success, they returned
home. It has been since deter-
mined to attempt a missionary
settlement on Nugabiva, another
island of the sume group, consi-
dered for that purp. se as superior
to Tahuata. Maracore, one of
the teachers who were stationed at
the latter island by Mr. C., pro-
poses, with that view, to return to
the Marquesas, accompanied by
three or four familics from Tahiti.
Mr. C. has prepared a Maxquesian
Spelling-book, an edition of which
has been printed for their use.

- Maracore, and his companions,
expected to proceed to the Mar-
quesas, in the Minera, Captain
Ebrill, who is son-in-law to Mr.
Henry, missionary in Eimeo, and
well disposed to proinote their
views. Mr. Crook has supplied
them with stationery, and the
343


MAR


members of his church and con-
gregation have furnished them
abundantly with articles of apparel
and food, useful implements, &c.
Fach of them presented some gilt
on the occasion; they have also,
jointly, presented to Capt. Ebrill
about half a ton of cocoa-nut oil,
as a compensation for the passage,
&c. of the teachers, Mr. Alex.
Simpson, one of the missionaries
who have accompanied Mr. Nott
on his return to Tahiti, is ap-
pointed to labour in this group.

MARSHPEE, a town on the
sea-coast, Barnstable County, Mas-
sachusetts, near Plymouth. The
Rev. R. Bourne, wishing to effect
the civilization of the Indians in
this neighbourhood, purchased, at
his own expense, a small territory
at Marshpee, and gave it to them,
by deed, about the year 1660. His
son soon after obtained an entail-
ment of the land to them and their
children for ever. Mr. B. had
previously laboured among the
Indians here, aud was permitted
to witness in them the happy effect
of his instruc:‘nis, About 1666,
an Incian chureh was organized,
and Mr. B. ordzined pastor of it.

In 1674, there were at this
place and in the immediate vicinity
upwards of 500 Indians, of whom
90 had been baptized, and 27
were in full communion. Many
had made considerable progress in
the elements of knowledge. After
the death of Mr. B., an Indian,
named Simon, was settled over his
brethren, who laboured among
them above 40 years.

In. 1693, there were 214 cate-
chumens here, and at two neigh-
bouring villages. During the 18th
century, the number of Indians
continued about the save as at the
close of the 17th. Thev were all
professed Christians, ehd many ex-
hibited the spirit of the Gospel.
Mr. Hawley commenced his la-


MAR


bours among them about 1757, and
continued till 1807, when he was
removed by death. He was for.
merly supported by a Corporation
in London for propagativg the
Gospel in New  Engiand ; but
this society having withdrawn its
support, he received some assis.
tance from a society in Boston
for propagating the Gospel among
the Indians and others in North
America. The present number of
Indians is about 150, over whom
the Rev. Mr. Fish is settled as
a minister.

MARTHA’S VINEYARD, an
island S. E. Massachusetts, about
8 miles S. of Falmouth, and 12 W,
Nantucket Island, which is 2) m,
long, and from 6 to 7 wide. Popu.
lation about 3200. Indians 400,
The Rev. T. Mayhew, jun. esta.
blished himself here in 1642, and
commenced learning the Indian
language, with a view to the
Christian instruction of the
natives. Hiacoomes, who after-
ward became a preacher of the
Gospel, was the first fruit of his
labour. This convert, though op-
posed and derided by his brethren,
manifested so much boldness and
intrepidity in the cause of Christ,
that many were induced to re-
nounce their former idolatrous
practices and embrace the Gospel.
In 1650, such was the anxiety of
a considerable part of the Indians
to hear the word of life, that Mr,
Mayhew, to accommodate them,
preached weekly at different parts
of the island. About this time,
schools were established among
them. In 1674, there were sup-
posed to be 2 or 3000 Indians on
this and a neighbouring island, of
whom 1500 were praying Indians,
and 50 were regular church mem-
bers. Soon after, the number of
Indians began to decrease; so
that in 1792 the whole number
amounted only to i 440,

344


‘in the proprie


Wi:ite the Indi
toward annibil
Mayhew famil:
to a knowled,
not abate. Fj
rations have
labourers on ‘
bouring islands
The Rev. F
patronage of th
gating the |
Indians and otl
has laboured fa
and in the vic
manifest an ii
hear the Gospe
children receiv
B, extends his
Christiantown,
Shore, and Gag
the small isla:
at some of wi
structs or superi
number of pu
schools, in 182;
MARTIN,
Caribbee islanc
It has neither
It was long join
French and Du
by the British
end is 5.m. S. of
63° 8’, N. lat.
agents of the
some years bee
they observe ;
have had reason
take courage!
been, within
opened to our lg
the first instang
of them are visi
at noon, and t
chised and prea


house, The
night; and be
neighbourhood
attended by pe
tions. On each
and from the
attention given


1, and
le Was
is for-
ration
g the
3 but
wn its
assis.
Boston
among
North
aber of
whom
led as


tD, an
about
12 W.
; 21m,
Popu-
ns 400,
1. esta.
42, and
Indian
to =the
* the

after-
of the
of his
gh op-
ethren,
ess and
Christ,
to re-
Dlatrous
Gospel.
iety of
Indians
at Mr.

them,
nt parts
s time,
among
re sup-
ians on


and, of
ndians,
h mem-
nber of


se; 80
number
t 440,


« MAR


Wi:ite the Indians were fast verging
toward annihilation, the zeal of the
Mayhew family, in bringing them
to a knowledge of the truth, did
not abate. Five successive gene-
rations have been indefatigable
labourers on this and the neigh-
pouring islands.

The Rev. F. Bailies, under the
patronage of the Society for propa-
gating the Gospel among the
Indians and others in N. America,
has laboured for several years here
and in the vicinity. The Indians
manifest an increasing desire to
hear the Gospel, and to have their
children receive instruction. Mr.
B. extends his parochial duties to
Christiantown, Farm Neck, North
Shore, and Gay Head, and also to


, the small island Chabaguéddick ;
‘at some of which places he in-


structs or superintends schools. The
number of pupils in the several
schools, in 1823, was 141.
MARTIN, ST., one of the
Caribbee islands, 44 m. in circuit.
It has neither harbour nor river.
It was long jointly possessed by the
French and Dutch ; but was taken
by the British in 1810. The W.
end is5m. S.of Anguilla. W. long.
63° 8’, N. lat. 18° 4’, Here the
agents of the W. M.S. have for
some years been engaged. Recently
they observe ;—*‘ On this station we
have had reason to thank God, and
take courage! Three estates have
been, within the last '3 months,
opened to our labours: these bein
the first instances of the kind, two
of them are visited once a fortnight
at noon, and the slaves are cate-
chised and preached to alternately,


‘in the proprietor and manager’s


house, The other is visited at
night; and being in a populous
neighbourhood, is likely to be well
attended by persons of all descrip-
tions, On each we have members;
and from the serious and earnest
attention given to the word, there


“MAR

is every reason to expect good-will
bedone. From Cole Bay (where
our week night as well as Sunday
congregations are from 80 to 100,
chiefly coming from .4 or 5 of the
neighbouring estates), several, in
the course of the lust year, have
joined our society in town. Many
have been baptized there, and 2 or
3 more added to the communicants ;
but the want of a chapel! evidently
retards the work. In town the
stated hearersare b 2 and 300
who are, for the truly
serious and devoi ore
have, during the | 26),
established family v ad a
considerable number Lave been
added to the communicants, and to
the society. Upwards. of 40 have
been admitted in the year, but 15
or 20 have been excluded or have
withdrawn: of those who have
died, 2 especially left this world in
the joyful assurance of entering
into the rest that remaineth for the
people of God, Number in society—
Whites, 95; Free coloured, 53 5
Slaves, 151: Total 229.”

There are 179 children now on
the class-papers of the schools;
the average of their attendance, in
the former part of the year, was
from 130 to 150; but during the
latter part, the attendance, from
various unavoidable causes, has
heen only from 100 to 120. Many
of the children have made a
marked proficiency in reading and
other attainments ; several of the
oldest girls have been dismissed,
with credit to themselves and their
teachers; two or three of them
still frequent the school, and act
as assistants in teaching the ju-
nior scholars, when ‘their help
is ‘required. In the week morn-
ing school, there have been from
40. to 80- children attending
throughout the year. ‘‘Concern-
ing the Women’s Sunday School,
kept at the missionary’s house, the

345


2 hen te te aah emneRNRtR sm cate mali


' MAR


superintendent reports, ‘ that it has
been unceasingly carried on, though
the attendance has often F . 2n small;
some of the most diligent, how-
' ever, have, ir the course of the
year, attained to reading the New
Testament with tolerable ease.’
In this school there are 5 teachers
and 30 learners.”’

MARY, ST., a small island . at
the mouth of the Gambia, N.
Africa, separated from the main
land by a creek, between 13° and
14°'N. lat. The inhabitants are
from different parts of the continent,
and inany from the heart of Africa.
The island is well situated for
commerce, and the settlement is
flourishing. Bathurst is the prin-
cipal town. Here the W. M.S.
has a society and a school, both of
which are attended by pleasing
circumstances. [See Bathurst. ]


MATURA, a small town and
fortress near the southern extremity
of Ceylon, at the mouth of Melipu
river, near Dandra Head, 100 m.


S. E. Colombo, 30m. 8S, Galle,
and 110 S. Kandy. :E. long. 80°,
37’, N. lat. 5° 55’.. The surrounding
country is wild; but well supplied
with provisions of all kinds, parti-
cularly game. The inhabitants
are mostly Cingalese and Portu-
guese, who are extremely super-
stitious, and profligate to a proverb.
The place is famous for budhism,
priests, temples, and Cingalese
learning. Intellect, and even ge-
nius, are very strikingly manifest
in the children at this station,

The Rev. Mr. Errhardt, from
the L. M. S., arrived at Ceylon in


~ MAU


the latter years of his residence, he
was supported by government ; and,
about 1815, he removed to Caltura,

Mr. W. H. Lalman, assistant
missionary from the /. M. S.,
commenced labouring here in 1814,
The Matura circuit extends 6 m,
E. and 14 N. W., comprehending
14 places to which missionaries
itinerate regularly; others are oc.
casionally visited.

In 1820 there were connected
with this station 14 schools, con-
taining 720 scholars; but for want
of funds, the schools have since
been reduced to 9, and the pupils
to about 500, with 12 masters and
catechists, A chapel was opened
in 1822.

The missionaries have preached
in Cingalese, Portuguese, and
English; and notwithstanding the
forbidding appearances of the peo-
ple, and the numerous embarrass-
ments under which they have la-
boured, several of the natives
have embraced Christianity; and
the missionaries are encouraged
to hope that their labours will
be extensively useful, especially
to the rising generation. In 1823,
the society had 25 members. The
number of the schools at present
on this station is 8, of children
$79, and of persons in society, 29.

Several schools in the district
are supported by government.
Mr. Errhardt, formerly superin-
tended them; they have recently
been under the care of Messrs.
Mayor and Ward, Church mission-
aries at Galle.

MAUI, one of the Sandwich


1804, and was soon after directed,’| Islands, 48 m. long and 29 broad.


by Governor North, to settle at
Matura; where he laboured amidst
much opposition, and many dis-
couragements, with Christian for-
titude and prudence, more than
10 years. His congregations, how-
ever, were small, and his labours at-
tended with little success, During


Population 2500, At Lahaina, on
the N. W. coast, there is a mission
station.

The Rev. W. Rishards, and C.
8. Stewart, with Beisey Stockton,
wu coloured female assistant from
the 4, B. C. F. M., commenced
their residence here, Aug. S)st,


1823, in ]
dowager |
style, line
sugar Ce
grass, Wi
Mr. Pitt,
them a sn
to cultiva
closure of
was imme
by 40. 7
open bea
the surge:
s of t
ion af
sionaries
fowls, an
constantly
other ; in
gregation
respect, he


| coming te


life to th
tality, or
love and g
“Tt is
“that hu
the books
will do so,
can possib
our prospe
by our ov
the circu
The de
station wa
ducing Ch
the people
wishing ta


idence, he
ment ; and,
to Caltura,
» assistant
WV, M. S,
pre in 1814,
tends 6 m.
prehending
nissionaries
ers are OC-


» connected
thools, con-
mut for want
have since
d the pupils
masters and
was opened


ave preached
iguese, and
standing the
s of the peo-
s embarrass-
hey have la-
the natives
stianity ; and
encouraged
labours will
1, especially
In 1823,
pmbers. The
bls at present
, of children


government.
erly superin-
have recently


ire is a mission


‘hards, and C.

isey Stockton,

assistant from

,» commenced

» Aug. 3)st,
346


MAU’


1823, in houses built by the Queen |


dowager for their use, in the native
style, lined with the leaves of the
gugar cane, and thatched with
grass, Without floors or windows.
Mr. Pitt, the prime minister, gave
them a small plantation, with men
to cultivate it. Adjoining the in-
closure of the missionaries, a chapel
was immediately erected, 100 feet
by 40. The houses stand upon the
open beach, so near the sea that
the surges break within a dozen
s of the doors.

Soon after their arrival, the mis-
sionaries wrote: — “ Pigs, hogs,
fowls, and goats, have been sent
constantly, by some person or an-
other; in fact, no Christian con-
gregation in America could, in this
respect, have received a clergyman,


. coming to administer the word of


life to them, with greater hospi-
tality, or stronger expressions of
love and goodwill.’’

“Tt is literally true,”? say they,
“that hundreds have committed
the books to memory, and probably
will do so, faster than the mission
can possibly furnish them. Indeed
our prospect of usefulness is limited
by our own strength, and not by
the circumstances of the people.’’

The death of Keopuolani at this
station was the occasion of intro-
ducing Christian marriage among
the people. Her husband Koapini
wishing to take another wife, they
were united with great solemnity.

At Lahaina, not long since,
scarcely any thing could be kept
from the rapacity of thieves, who
were as numerous as the inhabi-
tants themselves: locks, guards—
the utmost vigilance—every pre-
caution, were ineffectual; but so
great has been the moral change,
that for successive months, although
every thing was exposed, and no-
thing was guarded, and hundreds of
natives were entering tie mission-
ary’s habitation every day, nothing,
absolutely nothing, was lost.


MAU


new church, 94 feet by 24, was -
opened July 10, 1825, when two
adults, the first-fruits of the mis-
sion, were ba;‘ized; from that time
the church has been completely
filled. ‘ Not a day passes,”’ says
Mr. Richards, ‘* but what we see
evidence that the Lord is here.??
[See Sandwich Islands. }

MAUPITI, one of the Society
Islands in the S. Pacific Ocean ;
40 m. W. Borabora.

About 1822, two native teachers
were sent here from the L. M. S.’s
station at Borabora.

In 1823 the deputation visited
Maupiti, in compliance with the
earnest request of the King. They
witnessed the rapid progress which
the people had made in the know-
ledge of the Gospel, and were pre-
sent at the baptism of 74 persons,
291 having been baptized—in all,
365. They assisted also in the
formation of an 4. M. S., the sub-
scription to which amounted to
> ie 1000 bamboos of cocoa-nut
OM.

Subsequent efforts have not been
without reward.

The number of members added
to the church during the year
1826, was 36: a few died truly
happy.

Some of the young people, un-
happily, have turned aside to folly,
of whom one only has repented,
and rejoined the Christians; it is
pleasing, however, to ad, that the
state of religion and morals has
been, on the whole, during the year,
favourable.

The ieachers, beside attending
to their appropriate missionary du-
ties, have not been inattentive to
civilization; they have displayed
their industry and skill in the
erection of dwelling-houses, boat-
building, and in making, with dried
goat-skins, a pair of bellows for a
smith’s ae.

MAURITIUS, or Iele of France,
an island in the Indian Ocean, 400

347


MAU


- m..E.,of M ascar.., It. was dis-
covered, by the. Portuguese ; . but
the, first settlers were the Dutch, in.
1598.;.. They: called it Mauritius
in- honour. of Prince. Maurice, their
stadtholder, but on their acquisition
deserted it, and it. continued unset-
tled till the French.landed in 1720,
and, gave it the name of the Isle
f France... In: 1810 it was taken
m them by the British, to whom
it.was.ceded in 1814... The. island
is .150:.m..in. circuit, and the cli-
mate healthy, but the soil not very
fertile; there are many mountains,
some of which. have their tops co-
vered with snow; but they produce
the best.ebony in the world. The
valleys are watered by rivers, and
made productive by cultivation, of
which coffee;.and indigo are the
principal objects; and there area
great number of cattle, deer, goats,
and sheep... The town and spacious
harbour, .called. Port Louis, are
strongly fortified; but. in the hur-
ricane months the harbour cannot
afford shelter for more than eight
vessels, In 1816, a fire consumed
1417 houses: in the most opulent
part of the town; and in 1818, the
island suffered great devastation by
a tremendous hurricane. . Port
Louis. is situate on the E.. coast.
E. long: 57° 28',.S. lat. 20° 10’.
The Rev. Mr. Le Brun, an agent


of the :L. M..S. arrived here in June.


1814, and immediately commenced
his important work.
In.1817, Governor Farquhar, in


addition to placing at the disposal of


Mr. Le Brun ‘a spacious building,
well adapted to the purpose of edu-
cation, wrote to the directors in
terms of high. approbation of his
labours.

_ Twenty-five persons were about
this time united: in. a Christian so-
cjety. In 1821 these had increased
to 43; the congregation was con-
siderable ; 1)2 boys, and 80 girls
were under instruction, Governor


‘| day schor


MAU

Farquhar ordering an allowance of
30 dollars per month towards the
support of the former ; and school
at -Belombre. continued in’a prog.
perous state. : eiselg

Success: has: attended missionary
efferts to the present time.’ fry

-“ Mr. Le Brun,’’ says the Repoit
of 1827, ‘ still. continues’ bis: le.
bours, chiefly among the’ coloured
people, of .which: numerous: class
his church is* chiefly composed,
The number of children in: the
Sabbath-school is increased to 100,
The day school is also-on the: in.
crease; there are now under. in-
struction about 180  boys,: who
attend with tolerable regularity,
About 70 liberated negroes’ and
slaves are instructed by members
of Mr, Le Brun’s church ; some of
them bave expressed'a desire to’be
baptized.. The favourable ‘change
wrought in their character’ by-the
instruction imparted, has been at:
tested by'their masters.

“ Mr. Forgette, in ‘April,. 1626,
took charge of the religious in:
struction of the slave population at
Riviere du Rempart, where e small’
chapel has been built.’ A Sabbath
school has been: commenced, in
which are ~hout 25 children, 4
» has been establish.
ed. Mr. . Jrun visits Riviere:da
Rempart .every month, when’ he
preaches to about 40-or 50 coloured
people. A few French families;
resident in the neighbourhood;
usually attend. His Excellency
Sir L. G. Cole has afforded: alt
possible facilities for the dissemi:
nation of Christian instruction ‘at
this place.
~ & Mr, Le Brun has commenced
another school, at a place culled
re hea inhabited by, several!
hun negroes, who were before
entirely destitute of the means of
religious instruction. From 26 to
30 children attend, some of whort
are able to read in the New Testa-
ment, Once a week Mr. Le Brut’

348


gives an
there


“The:
instructec
the win

930. fi
about 70
from 10,
course: 0:
visited a ¢
Riviere |
about 16:
found the
ignorance
ling to r
in conten
at this pla
“ The :
for the er
worship a
4000 doll


\ 6000 dolla


‘Mr. Jer
commence


extensive
has superi
Mr. J.’s
MAUT
one of the
two of the
ere engage
The pe
universally
They are
and behave
teachers. F
is observed
been erect
tention to
Gospel is
the other {
advancing.
extract Hy
voyage 0.
the visit of


April, 1626,
bligious ins
ppulation at
here ® smail’
A Sabbath
nenced, in
hildren. A
mn establish-
s Riviere da
» when’ he
&O coloured
h families;
rhbourhond,
Excellency
afforded alt
he dissemi:
struction ‘at


commenced
place culled’
a by, several’
were before’
he means of

From 26 to
ime of whorr
New Testa-

r. Le Brot
348


MAU
gives an: address to the people


there. y

“The te number of slaves
instructed, at different places, under
the wing of the mission, is about
$30. ie number in the island is
about 70,000; that of Europeans
from 10,000 to 19,000. In_ the
course of iast year, Mr. Le Brun
visited a district of the island called
Riviere des Tamarins, situated
about 16 m. from Port Louis. He
found the people in a state of entire
ignorance as to religion, but wil-
ling to receive instruction. It is
in contemplation to form a school
at this place.

“ The subscriptions on the spot,
for the erection of a new place of
worship at Port Louis, amount to
4000 dollars.
6000 dollars.”?

‘Mr. Jenkins, of the B. & F. S. S.
commenced a school, in 1823, at
this place, where the lamented
Harriet Newell expired, Nov. 1812.

At Belle Ombre, Mr. Jones, of
the L. M. S., opened a day and a
Sabbath school, of about: 50 scho-
lars each, on visiting it from Ma-
dagascar for the recovery of his
health, Mr Telfair, on whose
extensive plantation this was done,


Mr. J.’s return.

MAUTI, or Parry’s Island,
one of the Harvey Islands, where
two of the L. M, S.*enative teachers
ere engaged.

The people of this island have
universally embraced the Gospel.
They are diligent in’ leazning,
and behave with kindness to the
teachers. Family and private fay on
is observed. A neat chapel has
been erecteds and the same. at-
tention to the preaching ‘of the
Gospel is manifested here as at
the other islands. Civilization is
perso ge The following -is an
extract from the records of the
voyage of the Blonde, describing
the visit of Capt. Lord Byron :—


The estimate was |


has superintended the schools since | from


MAU


“ Two persons, who, by their
dress and appearance, seemed to
be of some importance, stepped
on board, and, to our great: sur-
prise, produced a written’ docu-
ment from that branch of. the
L. M. S. settied at Tahiti, qua-
lifying them to act as native
teachers in the island ‘of Mauti.
They were very fine-looking men,
dressed in cotton shirts, cloth
jackets, and a sort of petticoat of
' very fine mat, instead of trowsers.

‘* When the teachers had satisfied
their curiosity in surveying the
ship, at the size of which, and with
almost every thing on board, they
were much astonished, his Lord-
ship and suite accompanied them,
as their guides, on shore.

‘We embarked on the 9th of
August, 1825, in two boats, taking
one of the missionaries in each ;
but we found the surf on the beach
so violent, that we got into the
natives’ canoes, and trusted to their
experience for taking us safely
through : this they did with admi-
rable dexterity; and our
in the canoes convinced us that
no boat of ours could have effected
a landing. The coral bank at the
landing-place extends 50 yards
the land, at about 2 feet
under water ; when we reached it,
the natives carried us ashore on
their shoulders. When arrived, it
appeared as if the whole male po-
pulation had assembled to greet us ;
the only two women, however,
were the wives of the missionaries,
decently clothed from head to foot.
Each individual of this numerous
assembly | sen forward to shake
hands, and seemed unhappy till the
sign of friendship had passed ; and
this ceremony being over, they con-
ducted us towards their habitations
which were about 2 miles inland.

ur path lay through a thick shad
oooh on the skirte of which, in :
small open space on the left,’ 2


canoes were building. They were
‘HA 349


MAU;
each 80 feet long; the lower, part, as


usual, of a single. tree, hollowed out,
with, great. skill, The. road , was,


rough, over the. fregments of coral;


" but. it, wound egreeably through the.,


grove, ,which, improved in. beauty,


as. we, advanced, and. at. length, to,,
our, surprise ; and , pleasure, . ter-,


minated in. a beautiful green lawn,
’ where, there were, two. of the pret-
tiest, white- washed ;cottages ima-
ginable—the dwellings of the mis-
sionarjes, shawls

| The inside of these habitations


corresponded with their exterior,


neatness.. The floors were. boarded ;
there; were @ sofa. and some.c


of, native workmanship : ‘windows, |
with, Venetian. shutters, rendered |,
the apartments: cool .,.and. agree-.


able. The rooms were divided


from each other by screens. of:


tapa; in one, there was a bed


of, white tapa, end. the floor. was |.
covered with..coloured, varnished j.


tapa,. resembling .oi]-cloth. We
were exceedingly, struck with, the
uppearance of , elegance and. clean-


liness of all. wroynd us,, as well. |


MAY


as with the modest and decorons,| Tran


behaviour of the. people, especially
the women,

CY r partaking of the refresh-
ment offered us by, our hostess,
which consisted of baked pig,
bread-fruit,, and yams, we accom,


‘panied the missionaries to their:
It. stands on ,a_ rising,


church,
ground, about, 400 yards from, the
cottages, A..fence, composed, of
the. trunks of cocoa-nut trees, sur-
rounds the area in which it stands.
Its form is oval, and the, roof is
supparied by 4 pillars, which bear
up the ridge. It is capable of con-
taining 200. persons. Two doors
and 12: windows give it light and
air; the pulpit and reading-desk
are neatly carved and painted, with
a variety of pretty designs, and the
benches for the, le are arranged
neatly round, Close, to.the church
is the burying-place,, which is a


9 adults, most of whom .w


sion, premises lie between this .
town and the village of Coinadoo; |
the foundation-stone of the, build-
ings. was laid June 10th, 1825,


The Rev. Mr. Barenbruck had
spent the greater part.of 1824 at
ombooconum, not without a bles.


sing on his Jabours; in April and


June 1826, he admitted to bap
tism, before he left Tranquebar,

re the,
fruits .of his labours when at Com-
booconum, and had come to him at |
Tranquebar for baptism, On.one
of these, occasions, some children
also were baptized, in pereecirt


- MAY \


scholars, April 30, 1822; at the close
of one month, it contained 34. On
Dec. 30th, of the same year, a
school-house, constructed on the
Lancasterian system, was opened
for.the reception of the school.
. . The schools at the station are in
8 flourishing state, and contained,
in 1824, 60 pupils. Many of the
- scholars. have received English
names, and are supported by . the
munificence of benevolent indivi-
duals or associations. A church
was. organized May Sth, 182),
com; principally of the mis-
sion family. A pleasing work of
grace has since been experienced,
‘and as fruits of it, several have
ga their faith in Christ.
he property belonging to the
station, consisting of lands, build-
ng live stock and utensils, was
ated, in 1822, at 93065 dollars.
_- Mooshoolatubbee, one of the
chiefs of the Choctaw nation,
- yeaiding about 20 miles southerly
from Mayhew, has been a steudy
friend of the missionaries, and, in
compliance with his request, a
school was. commenced in _his
house in June 1823, for the in-
' struction of his family, and such
other children as may conveniently
attend. This mission is under the
patronage of the 4. B. C. F. M.
Adin C. Gibbs, schoolmaster.
At I-ik-hun-nah, there is also
.8 Choctaw settlement of about
25 families; it is about 20 m. W.
es ned It has been . formed,
within 3 or 4 years, through the
influence of Capt. Folsom, an en-
lightened chief. Most of these
families, previous to their coming
together, were wanderers, without
peer: industry, or character.
ce about the commencement of
1823, they have excluded whiskey
entirely from their settlement, have
built comfortable houses, and possess
fields in which they raise a
supply of corn and other vegetables.
he 4. B, C. F. M. has recently


- MEE


commenced a mission at this piace.


[See Choctaws.]
MEERUT, a large town in the
province of Delhi, Hindoostan,
22 miles S. E. Delhi, having one
of the most important military
establishments in the Presidency of
Bengal. E. long. 77° 52’. N, lat.
29°. 10’.
| The ig hag aairg | Committee
of the C. M.S. at Calcutta, first
employed 2 native Christians at
Meerut, to read the Scriptures and
superintend schools; but in 1815,
the Rev. H. Fisher arrived as
chaplainof the military department,
who has since been active in pro-
moting the spiritual welfare of the
heathen around him. He hasbeen
instrumental in bringing several
natives to the knowledge of the
truth, and of collecting a small
church and congregation to which
he statedly preaches once on the
Sabbath.in Hindoostanee. Several
schools have . been established in
the vicinity, under the superia-
tendence and instruction of native
Christians.
Alluding to a8 conversation
which Mr. F. had with the native
Christians, according to his usual
practice on the Sabbath, ‘he says :—
‘¢ Last Sunday we were conversing
on the universality of the feeling
that prevails in all nations, that
some atonement for sin is neces-
sary. 1 related to them what my
three sons had’seen as they re-
turned with me from Hurdwar,
A fakeer was observed by the road-
side, preparing something extra-
ordinary; which, having never
observed before, excited a curiosity
to draw near and examine his em-
ployment, He had several Hindgo
ilgrims round him, all on their
way from the Holy Ghavt; who
assisted in preparing the wretched
devotee for some horrible pereeer,
to which he had voluntarily bound
himself, in order to expiate the
guilt of some crime a + had


s


effe
this moans
the ‘¢


MBE


committed ‘long hee se poet


tended ‘brahdh of an old “tte; tol M
this branch the fwkeer fastened two


fepsiter a aistahoe toward ‘the “end
of ‘the brancir) was fixed, by which |

he sncceéeded with dne Hand to set | ‘and }
@ ‘pleasing.


himself in 4 ‘swinging tidtion
backward and forward throiizh ‘the


ae
oe


blisbinenit
wilich * ve "e, emanetn My “My:


a cena ‘8
this,


usdal, ‘resides ay
_ smoke and flaming fire, which ‘was | 1
kept ‘blazing ‘by & ‘constant supply i


of fuel, ministered’


‘of ‘his
followers’; with ‘the’


er hand, he | '
counted a string of: beads & fixed |.


number of tines; so ds to ascertain | state


the termination of the ‘four hours, |’
for which He ‘had doomed ‘hinaelt | ti
daily to ‘enluire tits ‘exerdive ‘for


12 years, '9 of ‘which are: neary | n


expired, A < nérrow


over his’6yes, ahd ‘another over his | algo’


mouth, ‘to: guard ‘a:
Sian effects: of.


the ‘gutlt

made ‘holy
hour of the" fer hours, his peopte | and
viy, He ‘stands ‘upright ‘and swings |
in a'circulér tuotion round ‘the ‘fire. |
On coming down, Hie rolls hiviself
in thie’ hot ashés: ‘of Bhd fire. Tie |b
boys went to’ ste ‘fin again in the |
evening,‘ when ‘he Was engaged in
his prayers, but’ to what ‘or whom
they Could higt‘tell.

7 asked thy little congregation
what they thongttt of'ell this. They
sat : stent, “With théit ‘eyés cas
down, ‘and’ ater Heavily, A
length, Anurid turned to Matthew
Phiroodeen, ‘and, p ssi ni his’ arms
fowind hfs eck, Oxel
the most , touching ‘expression of
affection us Wéll-as of gratitude
to Wore Ah, my brother! my.


AL| sony


bd, with |:


alte the ieee | (


eet es
Ur ceaiee, en totter /pfo-
feelin, thougs I ‘haVe if parti.
culars, oo
Degg “‘Jibraty and depot of
g wg tee ea ose


ar feces Comey tte af |
ex oc e
CK S., i 2 the “Atreetion . hp
the chap ain.
; » one of thie Molucca
sate in the EB. tniaian ‘Ocean,
whose inhabitants the Rev. Mr.
ha, has ‘gees
where
ear ad i, he stationed ond of
Wis fellow-labour
MENIOLAGOD EKAH, for;
merly an Indian ‘about &
day’s journey rat ‘Bethtehein,
ie" tna About bf ‘middie


MID


formed a ishment of
Christian Indians:at this place, and
settled a missionary among them.
MER, 2a town in France, con-
taining .4,300 inhabitants. The
Rev. Mr. Kerpezdron, a Wesleyan
missionary, has laboured here with
enco ing... success for several
years. He has opened 4 Lancas-
terian school, and formed a Bible,
Missionary, and Tract Society.
MIDNAPORE, a town in the
province. of Orissa, and capital of
a district of. the same name, 70 m.
W. by S. Calcutta. It isa populous
Lava through which multitudes of
pass on their way to visit
the temple of Juggernaut, and
where the Rev. Domingo D’Cruz,
a Portuguese missionary, and
Muden, a native assistant, com-
menced.a mission in 1817. By
means of Mr. D’C., who itinerates
into the neighbouring region, many
have heard the tidings of the
Gospel with joy. The inhabitants


‘of one village in the vicinity, who |


had formerly, through: the instru-
mentality of a Roman Catholic
priest, renounced caste, and become
proselytes to the Catholic faith,
iecaived the Scriptures with glad-
ness, having never before seen
them, and requested that a house
for ‘religious worship might be
erected in their villuge. Where
a few years ago religious books
and tracts. were refused by the
ponte, many are anxious to peruse
the Sacred Volume, and appear to
be zealous inquirers after the way
of eternal life. In 1827, Mr. D’C.
had distributed about 1200 Orissa
and Bengalee books, and 9 persons
had been "baptized, of whom 6 were
Hindoos, ] was a’ Mussulman, and 2
were Roman Catholics. But as
these were all, in the course of pra-
vide °o, removed from that neigh-
bourhood, and he. had _ recently
experienced many discouragements,
he proceeded to another station.


the .16th century, the .U..B. |)
.establ


MOH


MIRZAPORE, « large-town ia
the district: of Chunar, Allahabad,


Hindoostan, ‘on 8. bank of the .


Ganges. -E. long. 82° 35’, \N, lat,
25° 10’, It is onfe-of the greatest in-


land trading towns of Hindoostan,


and consists of handsoine European
houses and native inhabitants; with
clusters of Hindoo ba te crowd-
ing the banks of the .G
Since 1818, the Rev. Mr. Bowley,
missionary at Chunar, has visited
it at the annual Hindoo fair, on
which occasion it is estimated ‘hint
40,000 people assemble, among
whom he. distributes the word of
life’ with the cheering hope ‘that
many will be savingly benefitted,


Previous to his visits, the seed of ©


the Gospel had not been sown in
this most extensive: field for mis.
sionary labour.

MITIARO, one of the Harvey
Islands. _ This island is barren:
the inhabitants, ‘although they ‘do
not exceed 100, find it difficultto
subsist. . They are attentive to in-
struction, diligent in their reading,
and kind to their teachers, sent
them by the L. M.S. They have
erected a neat plastered chapel,
and several have offered themselves
as candidates for baptism. « Mr.
Bourne baptized, during a visit,
22 adults and 24 children,


MOBATSE, the most northerly |


Coranna town in the Bootchuana
country, about 100 miles N. E,
New Lattakoo, S. Africa. Cupido
Kakkalah, a native visitant

the L. M.S., labours at this place.
He removed from Malapeetze with


a portion of the inhabitants,


about 1820, and assembles the
people morning and_ evening ‘for
instruction and. prayer, and also
three times on the Sabbath. The
influence of his labours. has been
very apparent in the moral change
among the people both here and
in the vicinity.
MOHAWKS, one of the siz
nations of Indians, ee in


spoken by ¢
England, «


MOH


the: history. of America. ‘They
were formerly powerful, and
resided on the Mohawk: : river.
About 1776, a part of them emi-

ted to Upper. Canada, with Sir
Soh Johnson, in ¢ uence of
a strong previous attachment to
the Johnson Family. Having lost
their possession on the Mohawk,
during the revolution, they settled
on a tract of land on the Grand
River, peso for them by the
King of Great Britain for their
loyalty. and attachment during the
tevolutionary war. They were
afterwards joined by their brethren.
This tract 100 m. long, and 13
wide, is. intersected by the: river.
The liturgy of the Church. of
England, and some parts of the
Scriptures, have been translated
into the Mohawk. language; and
efforts to introduce the knowledge
of Christianity among them. have
been. crowned with the Divine
blessing. At Mohawk village,
they have. a. chapel and school-
house, where public worship is
attended and children are in-
structed. They have enjoyed the
labours of several school-masters
and .catechists, and the occasional
visits of missionaries. Two churches
have been organized, one by the
Wesleyan missiunaries, and the
other by the missionaries of the
Society, prop. G. F. P., which, in
1823; sent: out the Rev. Mr.
Morley to continue as a missionary


emong them.

MOHEGAN, formerly a power=
fu). tribe of Indians in Connecticut,
only a small remnant of which
remains, in. a village of the same
name on the N. bankofthe Thames,
4miles S. Norwich. Through the
instructions. of missionaries, and
other. means, many have been
brought under the influence of
Christianity. Different- dialects
of the Mohegan language
spoken by all: the Indians’ in New
England, and by many other tribes.


MON


The languages of the Delaweres
in Pennsylvenia, the. Penobecots on
the borders of Nova Scotia; the
Indians of St. Francis in Canada;
the Shawanese on the Ohio; the
Chippeways to the westward of
lake Huron; the Ottaways, Meno-


minees, and many others, are radi-
cally the same as the. Mohegan.
A portion of this tribe of the


number,
‘Samson


Narragansetts, 400 in

removed with the Rev.
Occum, in 1788, to lend given
them by the Oneidalake, which
was confirmed to them by the State
of New York. The U. B.:also
laboured among this people at
Shekamoko, formerly. an Indian
town, about 25 miles easterly-from
Ponghkeepsie, New .York, - and
near Sharon. The Rev. C. H.
Rauch commenced his labours here
in.1740 ; and, amidst numerous
sufferings and discouragements, he
witnessed some fruits of his toils.
Many of the most notorious of this
abandoned clan were awakened.
In 1742, and soon after, several
were baptized, and reinforcements
arrived. At. the first communion
season, 10 Indians were admitted ;
at the second, 22. At the close of
1743, the. number of baptized was
63. By the blessing of God upon
the labours of the brethren, the
Gospel made rapid progress in
several neighbouring towns, parti-
cularly Pachpatgoch and Wach.
quainach. .In\ 1744, they were
charged with being in alliance with
the French, and were brought
before the Governor: on being
finally banished from the province,
they removed to Bethlehem. The
whites, at length, became so in-
censed, that they drove away the
Indians, who sojourned, for a time,
at Bethlehem, and the brethren |
formed a_ settlement in Penneyl-
vania, which they called Gnaden-


are | hutten


MONGHYR, a: populous. city
and capital of the Monghyr district,
355


MON
imihe of Bahar, Hihdoos-
ar at: tn? situated on ‘the ‘S.ibank


of the G. ‘950 m. N; W.'Cal-
cttta; and has'a ‘station forthe dih-
‘walids of ‘the British:


army.
- The .Rev. Jotm: Chamberlain, of
the (Bi 1M. °S., was ‘an. active: and
faithfal fees ‘this place for
a number of


dbitie oem es of: the Old
into‘the Brij. Basha: dialect, and
some ‘parts of ‘the New into the
Hindee.. | Mr.’ C.'s widow! remains
at the station, ‘and ‘is eed vefictent
agent im promoting the ‘intrest of
the mission.

In: 1890," thers were about: 60
pupils; ‘a number °of whom Were
able ‘to ‘read ‘the Scriptures ‘with
readiness. ‘Divine service was per-
formed ‘on the Sabbath by native


labourers, ‘whoron other duys were"


en “in ‘reading’ and ‘speaking
to the people voncetming the ‘way
of salvation

In 1925, the Rev. Mr... Leilie
proceeded to this station, ind found
the stute:of the chiirch and schools
to be highly encour ' Having
applied:hinmelf with great asdiduity
to ‘the study:‘of ‘the: Hindoostanee
on the‘voyage, he was ‘enabled ‘to
commence: addressing ‘the natives
in their own ‘language, ‘in about 6
monthsafter his arrival. were
Misser, # ‘converted ‘brahmin, who
had been labouting here, ‘and ‘to
whose moral ‘and’ religious: bani:
ter Mr. L: bears most honourable
testimony, was ‘subsdquently ‘te-
moved by death; but ‘the surviving
itinerants were very laborious, ‘and
considerable attention ‘was paid to

- It was then, and


their

it is'still, by no ‘meahs ‘uncommon |} p
peebs of the mission are hij a
_couraging. Relizious mee ine oe

i well attended, ‘arid seveitl ‘have
hopefully embraced the’ trith.—


for the natives to call them ‘tito
their houses and seb and there


sit'around, and eagetly listen to the
word of God. Nine persons ‘were


‘MON
added, during ‘the ’ yéar, ‘to the
eliurch, ‘some of whoin ‘fotiied
striking’ instarices of ‘the power of
divine grace ‘in’ réneWing ‘thse
‘who ‘seemed ‘least ‘likely to yield


to its'influence. © -
' Phirtesn schools tre re; ported;


in 1896, ‘to'have been operon
the ‘thumber having “béen ‘ine

at’ Fai ie of Banca
parents, ‘wid’ now: F Spornait théir
, | obiilifien to’ reud ‘thoée’ Chriitian


Doolks, the ‘tise ‘of which heretofore.


wiisan titil bar to ther ‘enter.
ing’the sthools. ~

* Phe chttch consists;;” ‘says the
last Report, “‘ of 85 niemibisrs ¢ ‘the


worthip ‘of ‘God ‘is ‘wen: ‘attended: ‘


and ‘the: png for *natae ehilétren


 MONROB, a station of the M8,
of the Synod of Sowth'Curdtiha ina
Georg ia,'th the’ Chickasaw
sitnated within the charteréd lim ts
of Mississippi, + San 50 m. from'its

eastern* bcp bg ah? elevated
spot of the ‘dividing vidge: ‘between
the waters of the Tombeckbee and
Yazoo, 2m, 'S. Mackifitoshville,
about 80 W. Cotton-gin ‘port, and


70'N. W. Oolambus, In Ten, the -
Rev, ‘C, Stuart, ‘H. Wilson; W:C:


Blair, and 2 mule ‘and 4 female as-
sistents,' ‘formed 4 mission here. Mr.
Line wb the station, end
eyed about 18 months in
seen Kary and ‘erecting gal
ble ‘buildings “for the mission, In
1628, ‘about 40 ‘acres were under


 eultivation. In May, 1622, the
| school commienced; and the average.
“nuthberof scholars, who'are onferly


and industrious, ts about 60.' Theit
rogtess is gratifying, and the pros-


356


oe


Local scho
‘the vicini

MONTS.
India island
rity. . It is
and contain
11,000, of w
W. long. 6:
There are n
this island.

The ge
school wi
1820. In 36
tothe schools
pleas rs imp
ers of the e; :
sionary effor
berally to the
chapels have
are crowded \
m) for the bread

and instructic
have .. produc
change amon;
of whom have
subjects of d
habits of dis
formerly pre
order r
1624, there we
Pee 44 blacks
formed At
patronage os
pei on
formation abd
contributed.

“¢ Through
missionaries
hand of our
86 have been
clety, 2 have
number from
main on trial
have been thro
class has beer


ponder well
slow to take
importance, :


m, for the bread of life.


MON
Local schools are contemplated in


‘the vicinity.


: MONTSERRAT, one of the W.
India islands under. British autho-
rity... It is about 25 m..in circuit,
and contains a population of about
11,000, of whom 10,000 are‘blacks.
W. long. 62° 17’, N. lat. 16° 465'.
There.are more than 40 estates on
this island.

The Rev. J. Maddock, from the
W.M. §., visited it, and opered a
school with 103 scholars, May 28,
1820. In 1622, 22) pupils belonged
tothe schools, who, generally, made
pleasing improvement. Many own-
ers of the estates encourage mis-
sionary efforts, and contribute li-
berally to the mission. One or two
chapels have been erected, which
are crowded with persons famishing


and instructions of the missionaries


have . produced a visible. moral


change among the inhabitants, some
of whom have become, it is hoped,
subjects of divine grace. Where
habits of dissipation and rioting
formerly prevailed, decorum: and
good order now predominate, In
1624, there were in society 5 whites
and 44 blacks. An 4, M.S. was
formed Au $, 1823, under the
patronage of the most influential
characters on the island. At its
formation about 130 dollars. were
contributed.
‘‘ Throughout the year 1826,” the
missionaries. remark, ‘the good
hand of our God has been upon us,
36 have been admitted into the so-
ciety, 2 have been added to our
number from Antigua, and $ re-
main on trial. Two new estates
have been thrown open ; and a small
class has. been formed at the N.
part of the island. The increase
to the society is not so rapid here
as in some places. The people
ponder well the matter, and are.
slow to take a step of so much
importance. This was formerly a


MON


Roman Catholic country; and, 20
doubt, one great cause of their de-
liberation is the fear of what is
called by Roman Catholics chang-
ing their religion! From this fear,
however, about 60 souls have been
happily delivered, who are now
members of our society. Much good
isdoing in the island by the mission,
and the prospect iz very cheering.
A blegsed spirit forreading religions
books is prevalent. The number
in society are—8 Whites; 72 Free
coloured and Blacks, and 67 slaves;
making a total of 147; and an in-
crease, during the year, of 22.” .
,Scnoors.—The following are
extracts from the Montserrat School
report :—
fymouth Sunday-school.—“The


| number of children in this school,
The labours


after striking out all who have been
long absent without cause, d&c. is
107 boys and 167 girls; making a
total of 275, and a clear in


for the year of 32 scholars’?


. Adult Male Sunday-school.—
‘¢ There are in this school 28 men; .
increase in the year, 3. The
average attendance has been 12.5
which is, upon the whole, good, as __
they are all country negroes, and
many have far to come. Sixtéen
advances have taken place to higher
classes, and all seem animated
with a desire to read the word of
Life.”

Adult Female Sunday-school.—


© This school has increased during


the year 16 scholars, and now con-
tains 53. Here, too, the average
attendance, which is 18, is as great
as can be well expected. Most of


them are country negroes, who have


affairs of a domestic nature to at-
tend toon the Sabbath day. The
improvement in many has been very
pleasing ; and several who came to
the school ignorant, can now read
the word of God. To facilitate the
progress of two, who complained of
their sight, Mrs. Hyde ae spectacles
xf


MON
from England, for which they paid’
a pas ‘andwere very thankful.” |


* Plymout,
““This school ’ ar Minnie
prove ‘a’ powerful auxiliary to ‘the,
‘Plymouth Sunda: school, Tt eon.
tains 46 boys and’6?'girls. During’
‘the year, 6 scholars have been raised
‘to 'the rank ‘of teachers ;'36 ‘have
‘gone’ into'various employments, or’
‘become ‘useful at’ home ; “and 80,
have ‘beeh advancéd to higher
‘classes,?? ° sate pray ei |

Sunday ‘Schoo? at North.—
<i There‘ate here’ 6‘ boys’ and 29)
girls -having increased’3. Theat-'
‘tendance of the'children; teachers,
‘and superintendent, ‘has ' beén ‘re-


gular.” ey

"Two ‘Rivers’ Sinday:school.—
©This school, ' which’ was’ opéenéd
‘on ‘the 16th’ of ‘Aug. ' 1624, ‘now


4 (rr ‘ ts
vane ‘Town School: * contains
11 boys, “@wirls; and 3” teachers.
“The incréase for the year hasbeen
*4° scholars: they have ‘acquired
‘considerable | kriowletige of ‘thie;
‘cetechisms. The averaye atterd-
‘ance has:been 16.’ ee
Brodevicks' Betate ‘Stinday-|
' ‘gehool:—** There’ are now in this
‘school 24 boys' dnd '22 girls, ‘a de-'
‘crease Of 6 having’ taken place in:
the year” ;
ebb’s Estate Sunday-school.—
~<¢ "Phe numbers i this school are
‘boys, 9 girls, and3 ‘adults ; being al
“increase of 3. ‘It has ‘been
tice
ite’s Metate Sunday-school,
‘© "This sehool’ was opened ‘by
‘mftasionary, on ‘Friday, 12th of Aug
“last, with 32 children. It now con
‘tains 21' boyn,'165 girls,‘ atid 2aduits
“When opened, only one littie gir
‘could read ; ‘all the ‘rest: were igno-
‘rant of the alphabet.”
Ter River Sunday-school.
‘* This achool was opened on the
same day ‘as ‘White’s: 42 children


were then’ admitted, ‘and there tre
now 22 boys, 22 girls,’ and 14
ith Morning ‘School.— | adults. ciel
Xeamination of ‘the’ Children,
“ Déceinber * the
‘27th, 1825, being Christmas Tues.
‘day, the examination ‘of the Town
‘Sunday and Morni
‘dten ‘took place’ in’ the * chapel,
before the largest and most fespect.
able congregation -éver assembled
‘here for that purpose.
‘dren’ on: that Océasion ‘displayed
great! capacity,’ and* a’ stténgth of
‘memery ‘witich ;


‘mémbers ‘cf his “Majesty’s Coun.
cil were ‘present, iy
‘took ‘part in the examination. ‘The
tification ‘éxpressed’ by all, was
‘felt by the committee and teachérs,
"ag Very encouraging to’ their futtre
‘contains ‘91 scholars—7' boys ‘and | labo sith =
;' “MOORSHEDABAD, ‘a ‘very

re ulons town,’ atid for-
‘imetly chpitdl of Bengal, extending
‘ein. On both sides of em


“On Tuesday,


timated at about 200,
||" Ws Ricketts; of the B. 27. 'S.: com-
ménced ‘missionary ‘éfforts here, by
opening ¢chools for native children,


Mr. Sutton, who déine ‘to his‘aid
‘fn 1819, entered:on his labours with
but in 1820 he had
‘eollected'an attentive congregation,
‘Daptized 29 individuals, and gather-
te ‘a church of more than


Ts.

‘Besides his exertions in this town,
‘he preached to a large congregation
of soldiers at ‘Berhampore, where
‘he had ¢ church of 60 members.

Native ‘assistants were also ‘dili-
ly employed {n communicating
messages of ‘salvation in the
‘streets And’ markets,

“On ‘Sune 16,'1819, a ‘Schvol So-
‘oléty ‘was ‘formed, ‘by ‘European
‘gentlemen, at this ee at


Berhampore,
upwards of 6
supports seve)
sion was, hov
labours of M
and of thase_.


where the sax
to. support. nat
umish the —


f e
| books. These
singular phenor
of men in Ind
temple. In 18
§2 converts fro
127. communice
Schools have als


Viservarsemard
labours here,


of ee adver
ing a lar
Allahabad oa
centre of attre
from all quarte
The Rey, R.
M.S., accomp
preacher, Ram¢
tra, in Feb, 1826
woman has rece
and added to th
other, female (n
Mr. Richard’s
Fy ghur , beg ‘
tnd baptize her.
did, About six b
have staid with
ond others for
time, during th


MOT.
Berhampore,. The society raises


upwards of


sion was, however, deprived of the


ren. — labours of Mr. Sutton,, by. illness ;
rt’ the and of thase. of Kurreem, a. native’
Tes. assistant, by death, whose instru-:,
Town mentality, had been, eminently,
1 chil.’ blessed, Of its recent state no ac-
chapel, counts have been received,
espect. MOTHELLOOR, a. village in
embled Tinnevelly district, Hindgostan, a,
@ chil. few m.S. Nazareth,
splayed About 1800, the Rev. Mr,
ngth of Jenicke, from. the C. K,.S...com-
nany ‘of menced a mission here, and. also
courable Ti st Nazareth, and established a
 Coun- Protestant church at. each place,
"Kindly where the same. society continues
n. ‘The to support. native priests, and . to
pM . nen napa, ‘ith
” | books. ese V. S present the
it futtre Hi singular phenomenon of the abodes
of men in India without an_ idol
a very Hi temple. In 1818, there had been
arid’ for- 52 converts from heathenism, and
tenting i 197 communicants at both places.
pat Sacred Schools have also been established.
B0.'m. N, Viservarsemarden, a country priest,
lon tées- Ti labours here,
Me. J MUTTRA,. or, Matra, ot Ma-


thura, 8 town 30 m. N. by W..of

a, of ae repute among the
Hindoos, as the scene of the. birth
were beset poi
having a large population, a e,
Allahabad and Watnsen it is. the
centre of attraction to Hindoos
from all quarters.

The Rev. R. Richards, of the B.
M.S., accompanied by a native
preacher, Ramdas, arrived at Mut-
tra, in Feb, 1826, One Mussulman
woman has recently been baptized
and added to the church; and an-
other, female (not a native), one of
Mr. Richard’s stated hearers . at
ir Ga begged him to return
and baptize her last July, which he
did, About six brahminsand others
have. staid with him, some for Hong
and others for shorter periods o
lime, during the past year; and


; dollars. yearly, and,
supports several schools. This mis-..


NAG


several have. given up caste, and,
their conduct induces him to hope.
te may be soon added to the,


urch,

capital of a province ofthe same.
name. It was ruined by. the late 3.
sultans; but. since the, British re-,
stored the ancient family, in. 1799,

and made it the rajah’s seat of go-. .
vernment, namerous buildings have

beenerected. The principal street
is about a mile, long; the fort is,
well built, and the.palace is small,
and neat... It is seated in a valley,

9 m..S. 8 W. Seringapatam. E.


long. 76° 42’, .N. lat..12° 13’,
, This ;


place is visited by the L. M.:
S.s agents, at Bangalore...Here 15,
natives have offered themselyes for
beztism. ‘* We were received and,
We.cumed,” says Mr. Massie, “ by
a young disciple, who, with, all his,
family, .was lately baptized by .the ,
native preacher, Samuel Flavel ; he ,
is one of the medical attendants of,
the rajah. We met for worship in,
@ bungalow, which the. Hon. Mr.
Cole, the, British Resident, has
most kindly .given for this. purpose,
There were,nearly 30 present.


N,


NAGERCOIL.. is .the head.
quarters of those missionary opera |


tions,in S, Travancore,. ef which ,


Magilady was formerly the centre. .
Here, in 1822, was.a female school ,
of 14 pupil a bazar school for,
heathen children of 40,,and a cen-,

tral school, designed loprepere the ,
more. forward. scholars, from. all.,
the other schaols, for future. use»

fulness. In this, above 50 pupils ;
were maintained. A school of in- ,
dustry was also established, which .
supports itself. A large chapel and ,
dwelling-house . were. presented to .
the mission, principally through the

liberality of the Queen of Travan-.

core and Col. Munro, who have ren- ..
dered important. aid to rT ama .


NAG
efforts in this siete. In 1822,
there were 36 schools at this place,
and 28 out-stations, at several of
which chapels have been erected.
More than 6000: ‘people, re-
nouncing their heathenish super-
stitions, have become nominally
Christians, and are enjoying ‘the
blessings of scriptural instruction.
Several hundreds have been bap-
tized.’ A printing-press hes been
established, the influence of which
is extensively felt; and a Tract so-
ciety has been recently formed.
This mission is in part supported
by the produce of lands granted for
its use: by the native authorities,
The following are the last accounts
of the operations of the L. M. S.:—
© Native Seminary.—The number
of youths inthis institution is 24.
Most of them have been recent!
admitted, and fill the places of suc
as have lately left the seminary, to
occupy different situations, in con-
nexion with the mission, either as
readers or schoolmasters.. While
the attention of the youths is en-
gaged in attaining differentbranches
of humen learning, it is chiefly
directed to the Scriptures, in the
knowledge of which some of them
have made pleasing progress,
¢ Boys’ School.—The number at
present is 45, containing nearly
1600 boys. The schools are in
most places’ well attended. The
proficiency made by many of the
scholars in reading, and the taste
for it which has been inspired,
warrant a hope that the surround-
moral and intellectual darkness
be gradually dispelled. A small
proportion of the children edu-
eated in the heathen schools, are
capable of et a book so as to
understand it. Independently of
their advance in common learning,
their attainment in the knowledge
of the doctrines and duties of
Christianity, are considerable ; and,
what is of still greater importance,
some of the boys manifest a


NAG.


serious attention to the religious
instruction imparted ; encouragin
@ hope that the Idbour bestowed
upon them has not, in @ spiritual
point of view, been tn vain.

‘¢ The boys belonging to 5 ofthe
schools, : situated in the immediate
vicinity of ih Naber amounting to
about 200, attend weekly at the
mission-house, where they are cate-
chised by Mr. Mault. The children
in the schools situated in the
Christian villages, constantly attend
public worship on the Sabbath, ‘at
the respective chapels; on which
occasions they are catechized by
the readers, who have been care.
fully instructed by Mr. M., with
special reference to this important
work. Instances now and then
occur, of boys, who have been pre-
sent at such seasons, returning
home sostrongly impressed with the
folly of ‘idolatry, “as to entreat
their parents to renounce it, and
become Christians.

** Some of the schools suffer
greatly for the’ want of properly
qualified schoolmasters, and some
have been suspended, during the
past year (1826), on that account.

“The race made in the know-
ledge of the Scriptures, by the
boys in the schools which are
under good management, demon-
strates the vast importance of edu-
cation in the prosecution’ of mis-
sionary undertakings; and indicates
that it is likely to become a power-
ful instrument, inthe hand of Pro-
vidence, in christianizing India.

“6 Native Female School.—In this
school, which is under the superin-
tendence of Mrs. Mault, upwards
of 40 girls are receiving 4 religious
education. The good conduct of
most, and the serious attention paid
by many to the instruction im-

, plainly evince that the
jabour bestowed on them has not
been in vain. Several, during the
past year, finished their education,
and their places have ~— a. by


tion, of whor
senior girls j
the teachers,


supplied with
“ Printing
veral portion:


| tracts, in Tar


during the

sha: ‘The on
the extensive
are, generally
crease 3 2 or
during the pe
ag are m
nthe knowle
Proofs of the
from time to
kening the co
the evil and
some are led t
must do to be
cordially emb
and live cons.
obligations.
progressively
cient’ instrur
forward the
A few of the
begin to feel i
pagation of th
Miritual welfe
» and dey
time and pro
their instructi
sholars in -th
increased, and
from the insty
more apparen
hative females


NAG
others. The profits
done in the school cu::tribute, in


part, to its support.
« Congregation at Nagercoil.—


The attendance on the Sabbath


hes, in a small degree, increased
during the past year, and there is
satisfactory proof of good having
been done. A- Sabbath adult
school has been commenced for
females belonging to the congrega-
tion, of whom about 15 attend. The
senior girls in the female school are
the teachers, and they appear to take
t delight in the employment.

“ The missionaries have also
about 30 out-stations, which are:
supplied with various success.

“ Printing Establishment.—Se-
veral portions of the Scriptures and


| tracts, in Tamul, have been printed


during the past year. = =s_—

' «The congregations throughout:
the extensive range of the mission
are, generally speaking, on the in-
crease } 2 or 3 have been raised
during the past year. Many of the

le are making rapid progress
Inthe knowledge of the Scriptures.
Proofs of the power of the Gospel
from time to time appear, in awa-
kening the conscience to asense of
the evil and danger. of sin; and
some are led to inquire, what they
must do to be save! # Some have
cordially embraced the Gospel,
and live consistently with its holy
obligations. The readers are
progressively becoming more effi-
cient instruments in carrying
forward the work of the mission.
A few of the people, of both sexes,
begin to feel interested in the pro-
pagation of the Gospel, and in the
spiritual welfare of their neigh-
bours, and devote a portion of their
time and property in promoting
their instruction. The number of
stholars in the native schools has
increased, and the benefit derived
from the instruction imparted is
more apparent. The number of
hative females under Christian in-


. the work


| NAG
‘struction, “including ‘the ‘out. sta.-


tions, is not less than 100. A great:
desire to learn. to ‘read is now pre-
valent among the adults, -both-
heathens and professing Christians ;
and several: evening : schools have!
= ate eh stg which ,
ey support and regularly attend,
This issupposed to be chiefly owing’
to the circulation of tracts, and the’
curiusity felt to know their con-
tents.. By these various means.
though, in some cases, the motive
may not be pure, knowledge: is un-
questionably increasing, more or
less, throughout the country,
Those who are considered as real
converts have renounced caste, on
the ground of its being incon-
sistent with the exercise of certain
Christian virtues, such, for example,
es humility; and among the re-
strictions imposed by the Hindoo
code, is the forbidding of widows
to marry. This prohibition forms
@ considerable barrier 'to moral and
Civil improvement, and continually
leads to crimes.of the most appal-
ling character. In Travancore, ‘
however, this barrier has been,’ at
length, assailed. A Hindoo widow
as been united in marriage, by
tr. Mault, to a member of the
congregation at Agatesurum. Both
of the parties are considered to be
sincere converts, They were first
baptized, and afterwards married,
in the presence of an immense mul-
ae of heathens,

‘here are many other indications
in this part of India, of the decline
of prejudice and superstition, The
following instance is peculiar :—
About thirty persons, who reside
in the vicinity of Cape Comorin,
have applied to the missionaries for
instruction, not because they, at
present, attach a just value to the
Gospel, but because, as they them-
selves state, they are tired with
idolatry.

NAGOTNEA, a town in the
Mabratta country, about 24 m, E.

in 36]


NAN


Allabag; containing 7 or 800 inha»
bitants. The American, missiona-
vies at, Bombay established a school
here in 1821.
NAMAQUALAND, GREAT.
[See Africaner’s Kraal, Bethany.]
NAMAQUALAND, LITTLE.
[See Khamies-Berg, Lily, Foun-
t My ,Pella, Reed Fountain,


einkopff.] ,

NANTUCKET, anislandin Mas-
sachusetts, about 10 m.,E. Martha’s
Vineyard, and about. 15 long. The
Messrs. Mayhews and Mr. Elliott
laboured with much success among
the Indians, who resided here, in
the early settlement of this country,
In 1674, the number of Indian fa-
milies was estimated at 300, Among
these were about 30 members in the
church, and about. 300 who prayed
to God, and observed the Sabbath.
They had meetings in 3 different
places, and,4 Indian teachers. .

NARRAGANSET, . formerly a
numerous tribe of Indians in Rhode
Island. They have been scattered
and reduced to. about 400, who re-
side at Charlestown. In 1733, the
Rev. Mr. Parks was sent, by the
Commissioners of Indian affairs, to


preach to this tribe, and. to such of


the English as would attend on his
instructions, ,

After some years, several of the
Indians were seriously impressed
with the truth; and, in 1743, the
power of God was most remarkably
displayed among them : the greater
part were impressed with a serious
concern for their souls, ayd many
gave convincing evidence of a
saving change. They have since
greatly degenerated ; but there are
still the remains of a Christian
church among them.

At Charlestown, a town in Rhode
Island, on the sea coast, 19m.S. W.
Newport; there are about 400 of the
Narraganset tribe of Indians, who
a a yet Gor Pr and a epg

he Society for Propagating the
Gospel oneas the indians “ond


NAZ


others, in North America, erected
a, school-house, and. established a
school here in 1812, which has


been maintained, with occasional


interruptions, and has been highly
beneficial to the natives.

NATICK, a town of Massachu-
setts, on Charles River, 18.m, 8,
W. Boston. In 165), a number of
Indians, who. had. embraced. the
Gospel. under the. labours of. the
Rev, J. Elliot, united in forming a
settlement, which . they called Na-
tick. In 1660, the first Indian
church was organized at this place,
which consisted of about 45.mem-
bers in 1670,

It continued for many years with,
little variation ; was, reduced to.10
members in 1698; and was extinct
in 1761, when the Rev, O. Peabody
commenced his labours 3. which
were continued for about 30 years,
During that period a church was
organized,; 189 Indians, were bap-
tized, and 422 white persons, 35
Indians. were admitted into. the
church under his. ministry, and 130
whites, Since that time. the. In.
dians have. gradually diminished in
numbers, and are nearly extinct,

NAZRAN, a mission station
among the Inguish Tartars, on the
River Soundje, near Vladikavkas,
Russia. Within a short distance of
this. place are about 30 villages,
containing about 10,000. inhabi-
tants; some of whom are Maho-
medans, but a greater portion make
no pretensions to any religion,

he Rev. G. Blythe, from the

S. M. S., commenced a mission in
1821; and having gained the respect
and confidence of the Inguish, he
applied himself to the acquisition of
their language : but in 1822 he was
unexpectedly ordered by govern-
ment to quit the province, and a
termination was suddenly put.to his
lans of benevolence, It is be-

leved, however, his labours among


this people were not altogether


fruitless. ;
i 362


, Communica:
there had b
crease of th
or 70 childre
lar instruct
since decres
direction of

The Rev.
Katts, assist,
arrived in 1t
of that year
visited this 1
Tamul to cc
Other missic
cupied the §
has been es
raging prosp
ciety, in 182
thé circum

have much i

ve The p ;


villages.
inhabi-


ruish, he
isition of
2 he was
gevern-
By and a


but. to his
t is he-
s among
together


NEG


NEGAPATAM, or Negapata-
ean, & sea-port town on the Coro-
mandel const, in the Carnatic,
Hindoostan, 48 miles E. Tanjore,
having a population of 30,000 in-
habitants, who are ‘notorious for
immorality and idolatrous ceremo-
nies, where the C. K. S. established
a mission, in 1787. Their agents
collected a Congregation, and open-
ed a school soon after their arrival,
and their persevering efforts have
been, generally, crowned with suc-
cess. In 1806, 65 Portuguese and
19 Malabars were members of the
church, In 1815, the number of
communicants was about the same;
there bad been a considerable in-
crease of the congregation, and 60
or 70 children were receiving regu-
lar instruction. The school has
since decreased, and is under the
direction of the C. M.S.

The Rev. J. Mowat, and Mr. J.
Katts, assistant, from the .M.S.,
arrived in 1821, In the early part
of that year the Rev. Mr. Squance
visited this place, and preached in
Tamul to considerable assemblies.
Other missionaries have since oc-
cupied the station. A native school
has been established, with encou-
raging prospects.--Members in so-
ciety, in 1823, 20. Since that period
the circumstances of the mission
have much improved.

“The brcnpects this station pre-
sents,’? says Mr. Mowat, February
22, 1826, ** are to me more cheer-
ing than ever. The appointment
of Mr. Martens to Negapatam,
there is little doubt, will prove the
means of great benefit to the Por-
be a and Roman Catholic in-
habitants. The first Sunday Mr. M.
preached in Negapatam, the chapel
was crowded to excess; and a great
number stood at the outside to hear
one who, a few years since, ap-
peared among the people as a Ro-
man Catholic teacher. We have,
of course, to endure a little opposi-
tion and ignorant slander from the


NEG


Roman Catholics; but I have rea-
son to hope, from the interest ex-
cited, that his. appointment ‘to
Negapatam will be the means of
extending the influence of real reli-
gion ‘among that class of people,
while it will afford me greater lei-
sure to labour among the ;natives,”’

NEGOMBO, a populous town
on the W, coast of Ceylon, 20m.N, .
Colombo. Population estimated at
15,000, Missionary operations were
commenced here by the W. M. S.
about 1815.

In their last accountsthe mission-
aries remark :—‘“ Upon a general
view of the work of God on this
station, there appears to be cause
for gratitude ee with regret.
The interests of vital religion are
very low in the town of Negombo
anditsimmediate vicinity, The con- '
gregations are exceedingly small;
and the numbers of those who from
the commencement of the mission
were regular in their attendancé
upon the means of Beg! have
been gradually reduced by death ;
yet we rejoice in knowing that
they have ‘been removed to the
church triumphant. But although
there is not much prospect of im-
mediate usefulness in that part of
the circuit, an indirect benefit bas
been conferred; a higher tone of
morals has been induced, and the
rays of divine light spread over the
Catholic poostasion through the
medium of our flourishing schools,
cannot fail, by the gracious influ.
ences of the Holy Spirit, of pro-
ducing some good, At present, in
several instances, the Holy Scrip»
tures are carefully read in private
by individuals who are eterred
from attending our ggg 4 by the
menaces of the priest. The most
pobagcieta and rapier ep. part of
our work is in the village of Sedua.
Though adjoining schools had been
established in that ps gh i
for several years, and had difflised
@ sanctifying sen or the


;NEL
cangregations . remained genetally
exceedingly small. During the year
1826, efforts have.been made, with
success, to introduce _ eveni
preaching, both cn the Sabbath an
week days. The congregations
have been. considerably increased,
the Word is received with the
deepest attention, and, in. that
neighbourhood, 21 souls have been
gathered from the world, within
the last 6 or 7 months, who are
with sincerity seeking salvation
throngh Jesus Christ. With one
exception, they have received their
religious convictions by attendance
upon the word preached. Service
has.also been introduced into two
new villages, the majority of the
inhabitants of which are professedly
Protestants. No. classes. have yet
been formed in those places, the
preaching having been but lately
introduced. The general state of
the classes is encouraging—no ex-
ercise of discipline having been ne-
cessary.in the course. of the prece-
ding year, although we have 7
classes, and 72 members; and we
have every reason to believe that
the work of grace is Geapening in
the hearts of the members of so-
ciety; and we trust that, by the
power of the Holy Spirit, there
‘will be an extension of the work in
the ensuing year.’’ ¢
. NELLORE, aparish near Jafina-
patam, in the district of. Jaffna,
Ceylon. Population 5 or 6000,
The Rev. J. Knight, from. the
C.M.S., and a native master of 9
schools, removed from Jaffnapa-
tam to Nellore, Nov. 1818.

‘This,’ says Mr. Knight, ‘is
one of the strong-bolds of idolatry,
as.one of the largest temples in the
whole district (in which there are
‘said to be not lessthan a thousand)
is.at Nellore. There are annual
exhibitions, such as are described.
by Dr. Buchanan in his Researches;
and I have, myself, witnessed the
procession of a car, where. thou-


NEL


| sands. of deluded worshippers were
collected together, to poe rt
themselves, and pay their homage
to. a god which could not save,
Their prejudices are, at present,
deeply rooted in favour of _ their
ancient. customs and superstitions;
and the brahmins, in addition to
their prejudices of caste and regard
for reputation, have all their tem-
poral interests at stake ; for if once
they renounced idolatry, they would
have no nteanis of support.

“With respect.to the Roman
Catholics, the show and parade of
their worship and processions
greatly attract the attention of this
people, and their pretended power
of working miracles is admirably
Calculated to operate on their weak.
ness and credulity. At their festi-
vals, they are said to. effect won-
ders with the ashes of a deceased
saint,.and | numbers flock to them
with their maladies and their offer.
ings 3 by which, pow Pa and their
influence .are rapidly incregsed ;
indeed, the Catholics and Gentoos
seem to vie with each other, who
shall make the most splendid show ;
while many look on with careless
indifference, or are even amused
with what they witness.”

Among the proofs afforded of the
influence of superstition, it is stated
that a person who had done some
work for Mr. Knight came - to ask
for hismoney, saying that he wanted
it. to buy rice forthe devil. 1
ft seems, was in consequence of the
approach of an annual .ceremony,
when the deluded heathens endee-
vour to ascertain their fate for the
ensuing year. On this occasion,
each person, however. poor,.con-
trives to ppncoane a little rice, which
is boiled, with. much ‘superstitious
veneration, in an earthen dish, usec
only for this purpose, and , then
broken, or laid aside till that day
twelvemonth. . They profess. to

discover their destiny by the man-
ner in which the rice at to


or if once
ley would


», Roman


parade of


rocessions


NEL
doll. If it boil up free!
pose the deyil phy Ao bn bre they
expect prosperity; -bat if hehe
the: most ’


sation, Mr. Knight
housé for preaching, and was ocoa-
sionally assisted by the Rev. Chris-
tian David, of whom Dr. Bachanan
mhakes honourable mention: He
also went out into the adjacent
vi » and édhversed with the
e wherever he could find them
~in their temples—at their houses
or ‘by the way side. And, in
addition. to these exertions, he
opened a school for the purpose of
instructing boys in reading the Holy
Scriptutes; ‘and hed, in
ume, the pleasure of collec
twenty-four pupils, who evince
an éxcellent capacity, and made a
g@ progress in their studies.
i the midst of all these exertions,
however, the: cholera: morbus ap-
peared in the districts in conse-
quence of which his labours were


necessarily suspended, the school |.


was byoken up, and the state of
the natives, under this afflictive
visitation became ‘truly distressing.


His Iubours were, however, sub- |


eonently resumed.

m the Report for 1826-7, it
appears thatthe work of the Mine.
ty has been continued ; and a new.
service; on Wednesday afternoons,
has been added.

Of the effect of missionary la-
boars, Mr. Adle writes: —* The
first month of th r (1896) has
been a time-of special’ mercy. Four
persons connected with the station


@ deep concer for the
salvation of their souls, that they
have been admitted as: candidates
for baptism.. 8 or 10 of the elder
boys, aleo, who evince-anxiety ree


NEL


) specting their eternal welfare,.are


assembled, once a week, for’ far-
ther instruction and — Fi

' One of the candidates for bape
tiem cook to a in thé
Family Schools, “Mr. y Tes
hiner ea | hosenanens say, that
it is truly delightful to see a partof
Our cook-houwse, which, from the
trials that we have: had with some
of the servants, may almost literally
be said to have been a den of thieves;
now converted into a howe of
prayer: four or more: of the ‘set-
vants meet there two or three even-
ings in the week, to read the


.Scriptures, and for conversation
} and prayer.??


Three perrons were admitted into


a short | the church on the 12th of March,


Mr. Knight writes in January!

— <The cholera has been aghin —
raging in this district, from about
the time of our return from: Co- .
lombo. Most of our schools have
been broken up agains happily it
has not yet attadked any on. ‘the:
mission premises,’’

The number of schools is 8, and
the: average number of boys who:
attend is from 280 to 300; and
about 25 or 30 girlsi .

‘In the Family School, whieh


continues under the care of Mr:
-and Mrs, Adley, there have been


about 29 scholars throughout the:
year; and they rp Mr.
A. much encouragement, § ©

On Saturday evenings he meets:
the boys and the servants of the
mission for religious instruction and!
prayer, especially reminding them
of the prayers continually offered
up by their friends in magnae, on
their behalf,

Mr. A. allows a few boys, sons .
of some of the chief natives, to .
learn with the different classes in:
the schools, on condition of their
—, at church; and commit-:

Scripture lessons to memory.

e Lord’s supper was adminis-

tered, for the first time at thie
112 365


NEV
station; on:; the -first.. Sunday .-in
February.» Four natives, who:had
been previously... baptized. at . St.
‘John’s Church ':in Jaffna, commu-
nicated. - The. whole.congregation
were. allowed to stay, that. they
might witness the solemn and.edi-
fying ordinance.
o: The Press has been employed. in
printing. tracts; some thousands of
which have been distributed. «. Go-
vernment granted to the mission an
‘old church, with a-piece. of land,
upon. which. a new chapel, and
buildings for a printing establish-
ment have been erected. In 1823,
9 schools were.connected with the
mission, containing about . 300
children; whose advancement in
knowledge was considerable. Be-
tween. 60 and -70 females »were
under regular instruction...
-» NEVIS, one of the West India
islands, W. long. 62° 40’, N..lat..17°
8’. The island is a gradual elevation
of land, being about 23 m. in cir-
cuit. It.is well watered, and: fer-
tile, and is divided into 5 parishes.
Charlestown. is the principal town.
Population, 10,600. The Rev. Dr.
Coke established the first, mission
on the island, in.1788, . The plant-
ers, however, greatly opposed: his
exertions; but. their . prejudices
were soon removed, and they them-
selves listened to the glad tidings of
the’ Gospel. - Very happy effects
followed the- labours: of the. mis-
sionaries among the negroes, From
1803 to 1610, the average num-
ber of members in society was more
than 1200. Membersin society, in
1823, 25 Whites and 936 Blacks.
The recent circumstances of the
stations are thus given :—
Charlestown.—‘In this part of
the society, we have had,to lament
some painful events in the last year,
which have caused our hands tohang
down. Our congregations, how-
ever, on the week days, are, we
hope, improving ;.and on the. Sab-
bath day morning our chapel is too


NEV


small for the congregation.--Whites,


13; Free-coloured,, and: Blacks,
54; Slaves, 5606. . Total 633, .... .

. Gingerland:—“ Our chapel heye
is too. small .for..the:.c tion.
There; bave been, a few.added :to
the. society, and.a few. excluded,
Great: attention has been. paid to
the Sunday, school ; and the. people
show an-eager desire .to hear the
word.-—Whites, 5; Free-coloured,
6;.Slaves,.66.. Total, 77... .

_ New: Castle.—“‘ Here we: have
had great satisfaction. . This infant
society have shown great punctu-
ality in their attendance. Wehave
lately.. opened .a-place of public


| worship on Tobin’s Lstate, where


we have a large congregation ; this
has lately become one of. the most
promising parts of..our mission,
The manager has fitted up a. large
boiling house asa chapel,;. it is well
lighted with lamps, and is crowded
with negroes—3 Free-colowred and
Blacks, and.24 Slaves... Total, 27.”

Scnoous.—— Charlestown.—‘“ In
reporting the state of this Sunday
and morning school, we cannot
give that favourable representation
which we anticipated. In. the
commencement of the year,. our
numbers increased from 26 to 140,
At this period, .4.. respectable
characters ireely, offered.themselves
as teachers, whose. influence and
instructions contributed : consider-
ably to the. improvement of : the.
scholars, and thee ment - of
the school. Just then a free school
had been formed, under the :pa-
tronage. of the Bishop of Barba-
does, which received a- large pro-

rtion of the: best. of our male,and
emale scholars, under. an. injunc-
tion not; to return,to the.. chapel
again; or, if. they did, they must
forfeit their privileges in that school.
These, circumstances reduced. our
school in town to aboutthe number
of 50, including .male and female,
who..are: free children, and live in
or near the town.’’ re


province.in |]
N. by Canade
St Lawrenc .
Fundy, and

States. It»is
ties, and con
about 80,000.
capital. The
this province,
instruction, . b
pathies of a


ministers -of
Many schooln
are also enge
under whose t'
400 children
struction,


‘NEW
Gingerland.—* This school" has


laboured uudér many disadvantages.
The children, however, evidence.an


attachment -to the school, atd-an,


earnest.desire to improve.. There
are’ now on. the list about 237
names, ‘and 211. regularly. attend.”’
» New ; Castle. — ‘This. infant
school labours. under.many embar-
rassments.. There are, on our list
~ Boys, slaves 24; Girls, slaves 19 ;
l Frea:bo a Total, 44.” ; 4s
The -' Messrs. Daniel G.
Davis,:and‘W. Hendrickson, of the
Society for the Conversion of Negro
Slaves, have \aboured:in this island
with considerable success. In 1823;
they-had 130 pupils under their care.
Communicants, 36 ;. baptized 52.
An 4.M.§. to aid equally . the
Church and Wesleyan Missionary
Societies, in-spreading. the know-
ledge of Christianity, was formed
August 3, 1620, under the patron-
age of the President and many of
the respectable inhabitants of the
island. ; More than 350 dollars were
very soon:contributed to its funds.
NEW BRUNSWICK, a British
province-in N. America, bounded
N.\by Canada; E. by the gulf: of
St, Lawrence; 8. by the bay: of
Fundy, and. W. by. the United
States. It-is divided into 9 coun-
ties, and. contains a population of
about 60,000. .-Fredericton is the
capital. The destitute situation of
this province, in regard to religious
instruction, has excited the sym-
pathies of a number of benevolent
societies, which have done .much
to.extend to.the people the bles-
sings of salvation. - The Socie
for the propagation of the Gospel,
in:1826, occupied 29 stations, and
supported 15 missionaries, most of
whom -are. employed as. regular
ministers -of parishes or towns.
Many schoolmasters and catechists
are also engaged by this society,
under whose tuition between 3 and
400 children were .receiving in-
struction.


NEW


rally, in @ good, state... Members


ing 497, in, an. English sq
fitted.out by Henry the Se 3
and in 1583, it was formally taken
possession of, by. Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, in--the name of Queen
Elizabeth. ::| After many. di

with the French, it was ceded: to
the English in 1713, It has nue
merous, bays and harbonrs;. and.is
@ mountainous, ; woody? country,
and :very cold, being. covered with
snow 5. months in the -year; .:The
inhabitants of the interior are,a
savage race, called .Red. Indians;
from their skins being daubed: or
stained with that colour; but: they
are now supposed not to -be:.nu-
merous, for though often: heard,
they are rarely seen.. A: few Mice
mac and other Indians are scattered
along the coasts. . About 500. Bri-
tish families continue: here. all. :
year, beside the garrison of. S
John, Placentia,: and other. forts.
In the fishing season for: cod,
which begins in ‘May and.ends: in
September,: many of its bays and
harbours: are resorted to by.. at
least 10,000 people ;: for. here they
cure and pack the fish, which.are
sent not only .to England, but. to
the. Mediterranean and the West
Indies, in immense quantities, In
winter the chief employ of ;the
inhabitants is to cut wood; and
the .smallest kind, used for fuel,
is drawn: by their large dogs,
trained: up and. harn for. that
purpose. St. John. is the principal
settlement... The 7. M. S, has
had several labourers, here. since
1822. LS,

The missions continue to exert
a.most beneficial. and cheering in-
fluence. The settlers and _

367


NEW
oh these: coves: and harbours have
been sought out and visited; the
worship of God hes beén es-
tablished among those who would
otherwise have sunk into entire
ignorance and unchecked vices’;
and the mission-schools have pro-
vided. for their children the means
of a religious and useful education.

The following are extracts from.
the Minutes of the Meeting of this
district for 1828.

St. John’s Circuit.—Mission.—
“‘'Phe past year. has. been a pros-
perous one; and we have cause to
rejoice in the increase of our con-
gregations, and the general im-
provement of the mission.’’

Scwoors.—Day-schevi at Por-
tugal Cove.—“ We have visited this
school frequently during the last
year; and can bear testimony to
the diligence of the master and to
the. improvement of the children
during that time. The number of
scholars at present is 60; average
attendance, 55. These are taught
reading, writing, and arithmetic.””

Sunday-school at St. John’s.—
«‘ This school has greatly improved
during the past year. The present
number is,—boys, 30; girls, 36.
Total 66.’

Carbonear Circuit.—*‘ The cause
of truth is here, though slowly, yet


progressively improving. Our num- | good


ber is a little increased, and our
members‘are more spiritual,’?
Schools.— ‘* During the past year
our school has been a good deal
neglected, on account of the want
of proper teachers: The opening
of the Newfoundland Soctety’s
school also took away a number
of our children; so that we had
litle more left than a meeting of
the children: to be catechised,
About 40 attended this: instruc-
tion, and. made considerable pro-
gress, There is every reason to


hope, that this summer our school:


will. be brought up to, at least, its
former state.’’ vee


NEW


Harbour Grace Cirouit.—“ The
work of God in this circuit appears.
almost. at a stand; yet the fields
are white to the hatvest. Many
of our regular heaters are
convinced of the truth, and often
weep under the word; but.I fear
that many of them are in danger
of losing their impressions, Some


of our members are, however, emi. |


nently devoted to God, end in
creasing daily in knowledge and
holiness.’? ‘
Black Head and Western Bay
Circuit.— In this station, while
we feel cause for sincere.
there is not more real piety and
more abundant prosperity, yet we
have cause to rejoice that. our las
bour has not been’ altogether in
vain in the Lord.” -
Scnoors. — “ Fhe number of
scholars in this school is 117; of
which 75 are boys and 42 are girls.’’
“¢ Broad Cove School. — The
number of scholars who have
attended through the winter, has
been 50 by day, of whom 23 were
boys and 27 girls; 30 at night,
all boys, That benefit has resulted
already from the school,’ there is
not the least room to doubt ; some
of the children having manifested
a degree of seriousness and.-atten-
tion which promises much: future
. A great change has already
taken place in their moral conduct;
and we trust that this proceeds not
merely from the exercise of the
. master’s authority, but from a de
gree of the fear of God.”’ |
Island Cove and Pelican Circuit,
+‘ At Island Cove, although we
have not augmented our numbers,
I trust the work of grace has
deepened ;.and there has been an
increase in the con jon ; some
who had not attended the service
of the sanctuary for some time
now attend with tolerable regu-
larity ; and the whole seem to
hear with increased interest.”
“ At Pelican, there “ a. few
368


“At Job's
tally preache
in our . returr
We have no
fruit; yet ou

| ath: said, «
' the waters, f
after many da
_ Scxoots,—
rances tothe
schools are,
cold. (for we.
chape, I) whic
keeping open
winter seaso:
more .able ¢
yet, with the
children have
able progress
‘ § At Ie ai
Consists of 2
who are atter
reading.??
“At Pelier
Mnsisting of 44
veral of whom ¢
Port De G
de. Grave,—««
this place have
fo witness a
Visitation of 4
matter of deep
‘4 general indif
landing these
dead as.is the ce
yet we have
that we. have


NEW


who traly love the Lord, who walk in
the light of .his countenance, and
increase in spiritual good. .: The
prayer. meetings in general have
been well attended; and we trust
that those opportunities for .im-
provement will not be lest.”

“* At.Northern Bay we feel
much the want of some active
pious person to reside among them,
who would. feach the children,
-read to them. on the Sabbath, meet
the class, &c.””

“ At Grates. Cove we have a
society of 20 persons,”?


NEW


instemce in proof that our Jabours
are. a> hig , a
“In Bay es our congre+
getone are -increasing, and we
ave a society of 33. members;
during the past, year we have added
9 members.”’
» Sewoora,—.In this circuit there
are two Sunday.schools.. -
“In the: Port. de Grave school,
there are 61 boys and 36 girls.”’.
“In Bay Robert’s.school, there
are about.68 boys and 42 girls,”?
Brigus . Circuit. — Brigue.--
‘¢ The congregations. here are.very


“At Job's Cove we have. gene- large and. attentive, and this attens
tally preached about once a month, | tion is.daily increasing.” ©,
in our return from Northern Bay. | . Bull-Cove.—‘‘. Here. the society
We have not seen any immediate | is in an excellent state.” .
fruit; yet our eyes are to Him who |  Scroois.—“ Sunday ‘schools
hath: said, ‘Cast.thy bread upon | bave proved to the. -children. of
\ the waters, for thou. shalt find it | Brigus, Bull Cove, and: Qubite; an
after many days.? ??” invaluable ; blessing, : as, hundreds
_ ScHoors.—* Two great hind- | have been by-this means instructed
rances _to-the improvement of our | to.read the, Bible.””,
schools are, the intensity of the | ‘ The Brigus school has existed
cold (for we have no stoves in our | 80 long, and its interests, have-been


chapel), which .prevents us from | watched over with so. much’ ane
keeping open the schools in the | and vigilance by Mr. Cozens, that

winter season, and the want of | you can,converse with scarcely an
more able and active teachers; | individual of the present generation
yet, with the means we have, the | who has not been benefited by: it.
children have made some consider- | The jother schools are now in an


able progress in learning.’’ ‘| improving state.” _ .

. At. Ieland. Cove the school “6 Brigus, boys, 253. girls, 40.
consists of 2) boys and 14 girls, | — Bull Cove, boys, 15; girls, 20.
who are attentive, and improve in | — Cudbéts,.. boys, 30; girls, 40.
reading.?? Total 170.”

“At Pelican there is a school|.. Trinity Circuit. — Trinity. —
qonsisting of 44 boys and27 girls, se- | ‘ This station. having been.almost
yeral of whom can readpretty well.”? | wholly without a missionary from

Port De Grave Circuit.— Port | May, 1824, until October, 1826,
de Grave.—‘ The - inhabitants of |.has:greatly declined. ‘The society
this place have of late been called | may. be said to have-been as sheep
to witness a more than. ordinary | without a shepherds but, through
visitation of mortality... But it ie is | Divine.mercy, they have again .had
matter of deepest lamentation, that | Gospel ordinances. administered to
a general indifference to vital god- | them, and «the effects..are truly
‘liness continues to exist, notwith- | pleasing.” —
standing these powerful calls. But}. ‘At Frage. Harbour we have
dead as.is the cause of religion here, | a society.of 35,persons, who, as, far
yet we have reason. to be.thankful |.as we know, are Christians in ex-
‘hat we have now and then an’ perience.’’ iio


NEW


* Senoors, — “* Our school at
English Harbour \s ina ‘state of
ams, ,Piekcs RS Sr


Cireust?.— Bonavista.
++“ 'In consequence of the general
poverty t this station,
occasioned by the faflure of the
bod and seal ‘fisheries for the'two
last years, ‘many of our regular
hearers, “tind some of our steddy
mémbers, have been under the ne-
Gessity, of ‘leaving the different
ha in quest. of new settle-
ments, “Those: removals are ex-
ceedingly painful, as by them they
are cut off from the public ‘ministry
of God’s holy ‘word, and deprived
af ‘Christian communion, except it
be that which they derive from
their ‘own immediate families.
Such of ‘our members as remained
on this station, havé been growing
in grace, and in a further know-
ledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

They have been remarkably steady
in their conduct, and regular in
their attendance on divine wor-
ship.’”

' © At Bird Islands the conduct
of our members has been steady
end uniform; they have been
éleaving to the Lord, and to each


other,” }
“At Catalina the society is
to such


greatly decreased, owin
ovals as those alteady stated;
but those who remain are sted-
fast.??
Scnoors,—** The poverty of this
circuit has been such, that many of
the children have not had sufficient
raiment to attend the school during
the-winter; but those who have
been able to attend, have made
such proficiency as is highly satis-
factory, and as reflects great credit
upon teachers and children, Our
present number is 98.°?
Grend Bank Circuit.—“Tn this
svt dine-tenths of the popula-
aon ar, hearers utour chapels, and
nite} of these ste very constant fn
thel+ attendanc.*, both on preaching


, NEW
and at prayer


meetings. Bot in yet: it is
order to make w proper ‘estimate of this place t
the benefit which a place like this good are bri
has derived ‘from missionary 19. Hant’s Ha
bours; it is right to compere it not Harbour —*
with large and long-established this extensiv:
ae ene at home, er ee’ itself 9m siderable
prior to the coming of Mr. Knight congregation
thse frst toemtovaryand weiner I codh tence
places which are in its immediate hearing the v
neighbourhood. In this comparison Harbour, an
the inhabitants of Grand Bank there is a po


stand on advantageous ground,


Nl inhabitants,
Indeed, the condition of the greater


ioviaved.??


part of the inhabitants of thisbay "A  “ Scnovns,-
(for the missionary can attend only m | on this station
to a small part of it) is one of jm Lot whichis:
greatmorel destitution 5 there being In ihe Hant’s
no example of piety, no prenc!iinz are 59 -schola
of the Gospel, and scarcely 1 in 60 gitls. In the
persons that can read the Bible, there are 16s
Hermitage Coye, Senboyse Cove, The 8. for
Brunet, and many other places, #% shout 30 static
might be ‘adduced as instances, [ “Zmissionaries,
It is worthy of remark, that in this masters, seve
place, those who were ‘addicted to. upwards of 90
drunkenness, are* generally persons struction. —_.
advanced in life ; which fact,affords NEWSATZ
evidence that the Aadi¢ of drunken- Crimea, to. w
ness has not been acquired in the Boerlin, of. th
same proportion, since the Gospel Basle, proceed
was introduced among them, as it charge of a,
was before.’’ emigrants,


Scnoots.—* The schools in this -NEW. SO
circuit, are 2; the number of scho- country of gre
lars— Grand Bank, boys, 24; girls, coast: of New.
26. Total 50. Fortune, boys, 15; authority of th
girls, 20. Total 35.” veral m, on th

Burin Cireait.— It is rather dif- exhibits a san
ficult to report the real state of the pearance but
society at this station, at this sea- the. interior,
son of the year. Rut, as far as we luxuriant,

Gan judge, ‘he vanst, if not all of The climate,
them, (i795 reversed, not o..:y aot interior, . is salu
fallen {iors ‘20d, but deeply thankful In..1788, the
to him for his dness to them exiled a numhbel
during their dispersions,' and his victs,  to..this 5
éare over them in saving them #% first to.commer
from the petils of the sea in rd has since contiy
from and returning to their habi- population has.
tations. But still we are pained HF in-1810, the inh
to inform you that we have no H mated at 10
increase in the number of members;


370


paching
1 in 60


Bible,


p Cove,
places,
stanices,
at in this
dicted to.
persons


irunken+
A in the
b Gospel


ls in this

of scho-
p4; girls,
boys, 16;


ather dif-


te of the
this sea-


NEW


Harbour .—‘ The work of God on
this extensive station gives us con-
siderable rapa yr —
congregations are generally large,
and remarkably. attentive while
hearing the word of life. In New
Harbour, and its vicinity, where
there is « population of about 400
inhabitants, @ class. has: been
foravod.??


« Senoous.—The Sunday schools


yi on this station are only 2 in number,


Lot which:is nota little promising.
In the Hant’s Harbour school there
are 59. scholars—34 boys, and 25.
gitls. In the. school at Seal Cove
there are 16.scholars.’’ ;

The S. for P. G..in F. P.. has


ahout 80 stations in New/oundiand,


7missionaries, more:than 20 school-
masters, several catechists,. .and
upwards of 900-children under in-
struction. . f, , yet
NEWSATZ,.a settlement in the
Crimea, to. which the. Rev.. Durs
Boerlin, of: the German M. S...at
Basle, proceeded, in 1823, to take
charge of a. colony of German


emigrants, :

-NEW. SOUTH WALES, a
country of great extent on the .E.
coast of New. Holland, under the
authority of the English. For se-
veral m. on the coast: the surface
exhibits.a sandy and. sterile ap-
pearance; but as you advance into
the: interior, it becomes: highly
luxuriant.

The Sivamthy particularly in the
interior,. is salubrious. and healthy.
In. 1788, the British government
exiled a number of felons, or:con-
victs,. to.this place, who were the
first to. commence a colony, which
has since continued-to flourish. Its
population has. rapidly increased ;
in-1810, the inhabitants were esti-
mated at 10,500, and, in 1822,
ley had increased to 36 or 40,000,


NEW


Wheat, maize, barley, and are:
cultivated, and many of the wopleal
fruits attain to maturity.
Considerable exertions have been.
made by the C. M.S. to. support.
the institutions of the Gospel here,
and the. Governor has promised
his countenance and sup=


The settlement, together with.
the aboriginal. inhabitants, has
also received much attention from
the W. M.S... A. society was
formed at Sidney, March 7, 161%,
under. the rag? of the
4usiliary B. S. for. N.S. W.:
Governor Macquarie, with many of
his officers, and other individuals.of
distinction, were active in its or-
ganization. Its establishment is
regarded: as an event of great
moment, since, from its future ope-
rations, much benefit will probably
result to. the colony. and the adja-
centislarids.. In 1822, about 6000
dollars had been contributed to
‘its funds,.and 3772 Bibles and Tes-
taments bad-been circulated by. its
exertions. Several other. institu-
tions have been established in the
settlement, which contemplate the
spiritual prosperity of the colonial
inhabitants, and also.that of the
natives.

The last meeting of the New S.
Wales district announces the follow-.
ing circuits and stations :— .

Sydney Circuit.— ‘We lament
to say that this has been a year
abounding with trials to our faith
and patience. We have, however,
a few names which have not defiled
their garments, and who are an
honaur to. the church in which
they are enrolled.”’

Parramaita. Circuit. — Parra-—
matta.—‘* The members, in gene-
ral, are growing in. grace,. and::in
Christian union and_ brotherly.
love. The congregations: have
gradually increased.’”

Kissing Point.—* The people
have been, upon the hae eae

7


NEW”


and serious in attending the word of
salvation:?’ ti WY Hhite
. Lah ¢ has been for 2 years
past a discouraging place; but that
has been done ‘here by the
preaching of the Gospel, there is no
doubt. .“ The prospect of  useful-
ness before us in this circuit is, on
the whole, somewhat encourag-
ing.’? f .
eVindsor Circuit. — Windsor.—
‘The congregation is somewhat
variable, but:not small.’?
. Richmond.—“ The number of
rather


persons attending has
increased, though it is still
small.’?


Castlereagh.—‘‘ Both the con-
gregation and society have im-
proved.??

Nepean.—‘* A: very attentive
little company regularly assemble
here.’? ’

' Yellow Monday’s Lagoon.— “This
station was adopted a few months
ugo with favourable prospects,”’

Pitt Town.—“ The Gospel has
long been preached here, but hi-
therto with little effect.’

. Wilberjcrce.—“ A few indivi-
duals have lately been formed into
a Class at this place.’?

' Sackville Reach.—“ This is a
new station, which has been come
menced under very auspicious cir-
cumstances,’’

Here the C.K. S. has laboured
for some years,

The Rev. Mr. Threlkeld, of the
IL. M. S., removed to Bahtabah,
Reid’s Mistake, Lake Macquarie,
in the latter part of 1826. He has
continued to exert, himself in ‘at-
taining a knowledge of the abori-
ginal language, of whichspecimens,
published by him, have attracted
considerable interest among the
more respectable classes in the
colony.

The great expense attending this
mission has induced the directors
to.apply to the local government
for aid in support of the measures


‘NEW


requisite for promoting industry and
civilization among the . aborigines
located ‘at the'station, Should such
aid-be declined, itis probable the
mission will be abandoned. ... .
NEW STOCKBRIDGE, anIn.:
dian town, near Oneida Lake, New.
York. The Indians at,this place,.
formerly resided on the Housatonic:
R.BerkshireCounty, Massachusetts,
In 1734, the Rev. John Ser.
geant began a mission among
them, and succeeded in collecting
his hearers. at Stockbridge, where
he laboured many years under va-
rious discouragements; but with
very considerable success. At his
death, in July, 1740, he had . bap.
tized 182 of his congregation ;} 42
were im full communion. The
Rev. J. Edwards succeeded Mr,
Sergeant, in 1751, who being called
to fill ‘the chair, as President, at
Nassau Hall, was succeeded by the
Rev. Mr. West. Soon after, Mr,
J. Sergeant, son of the. original
founder of the settlement, took the
charge of these Indians, with whom
they removed, in 1784, to. tractof
land, about 6 miles square, given
them by the Qneida Indians, to
which they gave the name of New
Stockbridge. These Indians are
sometimes called. Moheakunnuks,
Tn 1822, the total number amounted
to about 300, many of whom have
made considerable p in the
arts of civilization. Mr.’ Sergeant
is supported by the S. for P. the G@,
among the Indians: and others in
N. America. ‘Through his faithful
labours many are enjoying thé con-
solations of the Gospel. The
church, in 1822, consisted of 32
members. Schools are muintained
and instructed by the Indians.
NEW ZEALAND, | 2 lar
islands in the S. Pacific ocean, E.
of New S. Wales. The northern
island is about 600 m, in length;
its average breadth is 156; and the
southern is nearly as large: it is
separated from the — strait


12 or 15 m
lie- between
long. 166°
pear to: hay
1642, by .
a Dutch »
from Batav
making disc
Ocean. Th
island ‘is, ge
many parts v.
Zealanders ‘a
originated fre
the overflowi
the Argonaut
dently alludec
In their perso
common stat
able for perfe
and great mus
possess strong
and, like othe
grateful for fa
rest satisfied ti
aminjury. W
fighting the pr
conversation,
and devour
slain in attle,
make a repas
They are exce
and their: relig
rites the mos
gusting. Pride
and licentious
principal cha
believe in th
Supreme Being
Shadow,” whd
Their languag
same as the ‘I's
lation of the
been variously e
by some
The Rev, Sa
cipal chaplain
who had beco
the character a
people, and cq
noblest race of
the civilized we
C. M.S. the fo
ment for thei


ntained
S.


lar
pean, on
orthern
length ;
and the
a; it is
a strait


NEW


12 or 15m. broad: These islands
lie between S, lat. 34° and 48°, E.
long. 166° and 179°. They ap-
pear to: have been first visited, in
1642, by Abel Jansen Tasman,
a Dutch navigator, who sailed
from Batavia for the purpese of
making discoveries in the Pacific
Ocean. The land in the northern
island is, generally, good,‘ and in
many parts very fertile. The New
Zealanders are supposed to have
originated from Assyria, or Egypt ;
the overflowings of the Nile, and
the Argonautic expedition are evi-
dently alluded to in their traditions.
In their persons, they are above the
common stature, and. are remark-
able for perfect symmetry of shape
and great muscular strength. They
strong natural affections,
and, like other savage nations, are
teful for favours ; but they never
rest satisfied till they have revenged
aninjury. War is theirglory, and
fighting the principal topic of their
conversation, They are cannibals,
and devour their enemies - when
slain in battle, and not unfrequently
make a repast upon their slaves,
They are exceedingly superstitious,
and their religion is constituted of
rites the most offensive and dis-
gusting. Pride, ignorance, cruelty,
and licentiousness, are some of its
principal characteristics. They
believe in the existence of a
Supreme Being, orthe ‘ Immortal
Shadow,’? whom they call Atua,
Their language is radically the
same as the Tahitian. The popu-
lation of the two islands has
been variously estimated, and is sup-
posed by some to exceed 500,000.
The Rev, Samuel Marsden, prin-
cipal chaplain of New 8S. Wales,
who had become acquainted with
the character and disposition of the
people, and considered them the
noblest race of heathens known to
the civilized world, proposed to the
C. M.S. the formation of a settle-
ment for their civil and religious


NEW


improvement. The proposal having
been adopted, a mission of:26 per
sons was fitted out, which arrived
at Port Jackson in 1810, on their
way to New Zealand ; but their ob-
ject was defeated. Having gained
the confidence and affection ofseve+
ral of the chiefs, Mr. Marsden pur-
chased a ship called the Active, for
the benefit of the mission ; and, in
1815, Messrs. Kendall, Hall, and
King, with their wives, and some

mechanics arrived, accompanied by
two New Zealand chiefs, who had

visited England, and were fixed at

Ranghee Hoo, inthe Bay of Islands,

on the N. E. coast of the northern

island of New Zealand, where a

transfer of land had been made to

the C. M. S. of about 200 acres in

extent, for the consideration of 12
axes. The grantwas signed ina man-

ner quite original; the chief, named

Ahoodee O Gunna, having copied,
as his sign manual, the marks
tatooed upon his own face. '

The missionaries endeavoured to
instruct the natives in various useful
arts; but though the New Zea-
landers are naturally both active
and ingenious, their improvement
was materially retarded by their
predilection for a roving life.
Parties of them, indeed, were wil-
ling to make rough fences, to cul-
tivate the ground, or to perform
any work which required but little
time to learn; but they had not
patienceto wait for future profit,—
immediate gratification being their
permanent object. Hence. it 7
pears, that their predilection for
iron, sometimes induced them to
cut a wheelebarrow to pieces, to
cut up a boat, or even to pull down
a house, for the sake of getting at
the nails. Mr. Kendall also ob-
serves, in respect to his scholars,
when he first gathered them out of
the woods—“ While one child is
repeating his lesson, another will:
be. playing with my feet— another
taking away my hat—and another
KK 373


NEW


carrying off my books ;. yet-all this.
inthe most friendly manner, so
that I cannot:be angry with them.
During the first 4 months, indeed,
my little wild pupils were all noise
and play; and we: could scarcely
hear them read, for their incessant
shouting, singing, and dancing.’
After’'some time, however, the
distribution of provisions and. re-
wards among the children was
productive: of very beneficial ef-
fects; and many of the adult na-
tives began to acquire a tolerable
knowledge of some of the more
necessary arts:of life.

In January, 1819, the Rev. J.
Butler, with Mrs. Butler and their
two: children, Mr. Hall, and Mr.
and Mrs. Kemp, sailed from Eng-
land$ and, soon. after their arrival
at Port Jackson, they were accom-
panied: to New Zealand by Mr.
Marsden ;: who, during his second
visit to the island, purchased from
Shunghee a tract of land :consist-
ing of 18,000 acres, about 12 m.
distant from Ranghee Hoo, for the
purpose of a newsettlement, The
selection of this spot, called Kiddee
Kiddee, however, gave ; consider-
able umbrage to Korrokorro, a
chief, commanding a large extent
of the coast on the S. side. of the
Bay of Islands; and some of the
other chiefs evinced much  disap-
pointment that none of ‘the settlers
were inclined to take up their resi-
dence with them. ‘ One of them,
named Pomarre,”’ says Mr. Mars-
den, ‘‘ told me he was very angry
that I had not brought a blacksmith
for him; and that when he heard
there was none for him, he sat
down. and wept much, and also bis
wives. 1 assured him he should
have one as soon as possible; but
he replied it would be of no use to
him to sen! a blacksmith when he
was dead, and that he was at pre-
sent in the greatest distress. His
wooden spades, he stated, were all
broken, and he had not an axe to


NEW


make any more ;: his canoes were


‘going to pieces, and he, had. not a


nail to mend them. with ;, his .po-
tato-grounds were lying. waste, as
he had not a. hoe to, break them up;
and for want of: cultivation, he and
his people would ;have nothing to
eat. Iendeavoured to pacify him
with promises ; but he paid little at-
tention to what I said, in respect to
sending him a smith at a future pe-
riod. 1 then promised. him a few
hoes, &c. which operated like a
cordial on his wounded mind.”
On the 2d of March, 1820, Mr.
Kendall; sailed from the Bay. of
Islands, in company with two na-
tive chiefs, Shunghee and Whyka-.
to, and arrived in the Thames on
the Sth of August. After their re.,
turn from this country, the mission-;
aries at Kiddee Kiddee were exposed.
to various insults and. injuries, in
consequence of the altered temper
of Shunghee,. who. had . recently
committed acts of appalling, atro-
city. Early in 1822, Shunghee and
his .adherents. recommenced. the
work of: destruction, and, the mis.
sionaries .were frequently, com,
pelled to witness scynes,of dreadful
cruelty, «Loox ; ,
. © This morning,’’ says, one. of
the settlers,“ Shunghee..came. to
have his wounds. dressed 4. heving
been tatooed:, afresh upon. his
thigh, which is. much _ inflamed.
His eldest daughter, the widow of
Tettee, who. fell in the.expedition,
shot herself through the fleshy part
of the arm, with two balls, .She
evidently intended to destroy her-
self, but we suppose that, in the
agitation of pulling the. trigger
with her toe, the muzzle of the
musket was removed from the fatal
spot. Yesterday they shot, a poor
slave, a girlof about ten years old;
and ate her. The brother of Tettee
shot at her witha pistol } but, as he
onlywounded her,one of Shunghee’s
little children . knocked her. on
the head! We had heard of the
374


gitt being k
to dress the
dow,’ we |
They told
were ‘hung:
and ate her
toes; and ¢
ttle conce
shawn — had
killing of a
“On the
Mr. Halll, «
the war, br
bodies of 9 cl
ed by the up:
heavy sea, -
great destruc
many prisone
been ‘‘alread
There is aro
choly din,  }


; Ww
joicing at the
relatives and
isin high spir
one place, on
coto, his part
1800 individu
of the 7th of
Shunghee’s
moved, and me
drive away the
intention to w
but we were
ghee had shot
about’ to have
ill-fated victin
together, with
r approac
Shunghee leve
ing to shoot th
unhappy
wounded, atte
Was soon caugh


On the 6th
following !
repectng the


4


, NEW


gitt being killed; and when we went
to‘dress the wounds of Tettee’s wi-
dow, we inquired if. it were so.
They told us, laughingly, that they
were ‘hungry, and that they killed
and ate her with some’ sweet pota-
toes; and this they stated with as
ttle concern as they would have
shawn had they mentioned the
killing of a fowl-or a goat.” ”
“On the 29th ‘of July,’” says
Mr. Hall, “a party arrived from
the war, bringing with them the
bodies of 9 chiefs, who were drown-
ed by the upsetting of a canoe in a
heavy sea. The tribes have made
great destruction, and have taken
many prisoners, two of whom have
been ‘already killed and eaten.
There is around us‘a most melan-
choly din. Wives are crying after
their deceased husbands, and the
prisoners. are bemoaning their cruel
bondage; while others are: re-
joicing at the safe arrival of their
relatives and friends: Shunghee
{s\n high spirits, and says that at
one place, on the banks of the Wye-
coto, his party succeeded in killing
1600 individuals! In the morning
of the 7th of August, the bones of
Shunghee’s son-in-law were re-
moved, and many guns were fired to
drive away the Atwa. It was our
intention to witness this ceremony,
but we were informed that Shun-
ghee had shot two siaves, and was
about’ to have them eaten. These
ill-fated victims were sitting close
together, without any suspicion of
their approaching destiny, when
Shunghee levelled his gun, intend-
ing to shoot them both at once, but
the unhappy female, being only
wounded, attempted to escape; she
was soon caught, however, and had
her brains immediately dashed
out! 19?

On the 6th of May, 1824, the
following particulars are stated,
+ sa e stations in New Zea-


NEW


one of the Wesleyan missionaries,
remarks—‘‘ It is -near a large: and
populous native town, called Tapoo-
neh : within’T m. there are-8 or 10
villages, all of which a missionary
may visit bya’ pleasant walk ; and
in every village a number of chil-
dren and adults may be daily col-
lected for instruction. The natives
about this settlement have made
considerable advances: in civiliza-
tion; and I consider the place to
be a grand station for active and
extensive missionary operations.’’

Of the second missionary station
in New Zealand, the same writer
observes,—*‘Kiddee Kiddee resem-
bles a neat little country village,
with a good school-house erected in
the centre. When standing ona
contiguous eminence, we may see
cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and
horses—houses— fields covered with
wheat, oats, and barley,—and gar-
dens richly filled with all kinds of
vegetables, fruit trees, and a va-
riety of useful productions. Inthe
yards may be seen geese, ducks,
and turkeys; and, in the. evening,
cows returning to the. mission fa-
milies, to supply them with good
milk and butter. Indeed, the
settlement: altogether forms a
most pleasing object, especially as
being in a heathen land.”

Since that period other stations
have been formed. The following
are the last accounts of this
mission :—

Ranghee Hoo—Mr. Shepherd la-
bours here. Mr. King visits the
natives on the Sunday, and on the
Wednesday makes excursions to the
neighbouring places, for the purpose
of imparting religious instruction.
At the » mane meeting in July
he reports—‘‘ During the last 3


months I have attended to the

school as usual: the scholars are

improving in their learning and

behaviour: from 7 to 10 boys have
375


’ NEW


. attended the school, and 7 girls, and
.3 adults.”
‘ In November he writes—

** The natives here continue to
behave’ quietly towards us: ‘the
scholars, and those who live in our
houses, are increasing in know-
‘ledge ; they attend divine service,
vand are fond of singing hymns.
heir parents are much pleased to
see them write, and to hear them
‘ready and say that they are mis-
sionaries; and employ them to write
tome foranything they may want.
It is pleasing to visit the other set-
‘tlements, and see so many natives,
young and old, assemble together
‘to sing and pray with their teachers.
In past years, they stood without,
pelting our houses with stones, driv-
ing and killing our goats, stealing
our fowls, breaking our fences, and
psing all manner of obscene and
cruel language. There is evi-
dently a great change in their out-
ward behaviour.

‘Kidder Kiddee.—This station is
occupied by Me-srs. Kemp, Clarke,
Hamlin; and their wives. Mr. Kemp
and Mr. Clarke are employed
on the Sunday, and at every
other convenient opportunity, in
imparting religious instruction to
the natives resident with them,
who seem from time to time to pay
increasing attention to the great
truths which are proclaimed to
them. Of the services at the sta-
tion, Mr. Clarke gives the follow-
ing account :—

“ The religious instruction of
those about us is especially attended
to, twice on the Sunday, and one
evening in the week: and every
morning and evening all the na-
tives in the settlement are assembled
together for prayer in our little
chapel. Some of our natives seem
fully convinced that they are sin-
ners; but the same obstacles pre-
vent them from closing with the
offers of mercy, as prevent multi-


NEW
tudes in our own and every other


‘country: they want to go to hea-


ven, they tell us, but they want
also to live after the course of ‘this


world.’?

Mr: Clarke reports, in July; that
the attention of those who’ are
under instruction has been pleasing
during this and the préceding


quarter. There were then in’ the


‘boys’ school, 14 boys and 6 adults;


in the girls’ school, 13 ‘girls; some
of: whom were living in his house,
the rest in Mr. Kemp’s : the total
number under instruction, besides
several working natives who attend,
was 33, residing in the two fami-
lies. Several had left during the
quarter, of whom he entertained a
favourable opinion: they could
read and write their own language
with propriety. Of those who were
under their care in November, Mr,
Kemp remarks—-

‘¢ It will afford you great plea-
sure to hear that we have consi-
derable encouragement from the
rising generation, to persevere in
the work of the Lord. The na-
tive adults who live with us are very
regular in their attendance onthe
means of grace: some of them, |
hdpe, begin to feel some concern
for their souls, Their conduct in
general is pleasing.”’

He adds-—‘‘ We do not meet with
much encouragement in visiting the
native villages ; but we hope, ifthey
will hear what we have w say, our
labours shall not be in vain. We
hope to visit the villages more fre-
quently, which, I trust, will be at-
tended with good.”’

The outward improvement of the
natives is considerable.

Pyhea.—Besides the Sunday ser-
vices for those who are imme‘liately
connected with the mission, the
Rev. Messrs. Williams and their
associates make excursions in va-
rious directions among the na-
tives. Mr, HenryWilliams - also
37


our employ,
the schools


vis was em

cultivation:; t
some

which, were


ties, wi
from. Kiddee §


other
hea-
want
this


; that
; are
asing
eding
n’ the
dults;
. some
house,
e total
pbsides
attend,
fami-
ng the
ruined a
“could
nguage
10 were
er, Mr,


at plea-
» consi-
m the
vere in
he na-
are very
on‘ the
them, |
concem
duct in


eet with
iting the
b, ifthey
aay, Our
nN. We
ore fre-
Hi be at-


nt of the


day sets
e‘liately
ion, the
a their
3 in vas
the nae
has also
6


NEW


commenced a service on board one
of: the ships in the Bay, for the
benefit of the:sailors,

. The want ofa room sufficiently
large for the natives to assemble in
for prayers, has induced the mis-
sioneries to commence a building
40 feet by 20, which will serve for
this purpose, and as'a school.

There were in the: schools, in

July, 24 men and boys; and in the
girls’ school, 10, Mr. H. Williams
writes, with reference to them, in
‘October: —‘‘ The schools make
considerable progress, and the chil-
dren are anxious to be taught. We
have many men and women under
inetruction—indeed, all who are in
our employ. We could enlarge
the schools considerably, but we
want the means to instruct and
feed.the scholars.”

At Kanakaua ten acres of land
pve arn a Asal R.

avis was empl n getting into
cultivation:; there appear, however,
to. be, some obstacles in the way,
which, were not. at first contem-


plated.

Intelligence of a distressing na-
ture was, more recently received.
Disturbances having been renewed
emong the natives in the vicinity of
the Wesleyan settlement at Whan-
garooa, several of the Church mis-
sionarjes,; with a party of natives
from. Kiddee Kiddee, went thither
to the assistance of their friends,
They soon returned, accompanied
by the Wesleyan. missionaries, one
of whom, Mr. Turner, was to pro-
ceed to Port Jackson. Mr. W.
Williams: gives the following par-
ticulars, under date‘of the 18th of
January, from Pyhea: — ‘ The
whole of the premises at Whanga-
tooa, which have been put up at a
great expense, are now destroyed,
either by fire or in some other way,
and the property has been carried
abroad, to any place within distance.
Intelligence was then received


NEW


that Shunghee was-killed ; and the
natives belonging to Kiddeé Kiddee
said that the. missionaries: would
certainly-be.stripped of ea J thing
that they. possessed, according to
the New Zealand custom; and
recommended them to do the best
for themselves, In addition to


| these things, we have every reason


to be apprehensive for the safety
of ‘this settlement; it being pro-
bable, that: if. one part of the
mission is broken. up, the natural
disposition of, the natives would
lead them to complete their work
in the destruction of the whole.
Mr. Williams adds, on the 22d,
— ‘Since I finished my letter on
the 18th, we have received news
which leads: us to suppose: that
Shungheeis either dead, or very near
his.death, from the wounds which
he received at Whangarooa. If
this be true, ‘all that we have ‘anti-
Cipated respecting our. settlements
is likely to come to pass.”?:
The: suppert which God  mer-
cifully. granted to his servants on
this trying occasion is abundantly
shewn : by the sentiments’ which
they express. Mr. H. Williams
writes :—** About 9 o’clock, a mes-
senger from Kiddee Kiddee brought
a letter: stating that Shunghee was
dead, and that they hourly expected
to be turned out of doors, and plun-
dered of every thing. Our boat was
sent up immediately to fetch Mrs.
Clarke, asshe was not well; the re-
mainder purpose to stand to the last.
We felt thankful to the Lord that
our minds were preserved free from
that anxiety which might be ex-
pected, believing that, be it as it
might, he would overrule all to the
glory of his majesty.”

Dispatches since received have
been, however, of an pact
nature ; and from some dated chiefly
in September. 1827, a few extracts
are subjoined..— “The natives
around us are, at present quiet, but

KK? 377


NIC


I do. not.expect that.they. will con-

tinue so long;..there is much. ill

will existing among.the tribes at

this. part of the,island. -Shunghee

is much recovered, and will proba-

bly. resume his operations in the

spring, if he can assemble a

force: but there is no calculating
on their movements; for those who
are acting in alliance one month,
may the following. be at war, and
the third month acting in conjunc-
tion against a,common foe. Our
prospects. are more pleasing than
they have been; and we now hope
to go out.regularly among the na-
tives who live within our reach, so
that the greater number may be vi-
sited once a fortnight; we have
made, the attempt, and find it prac-
ticable, with a few exceptions.
We all continue in health and
peace. On a review of the whole
missign,.I think I may say that all
our operations are proceeding de-
cently and in order; for ‘this we
may, praise the Lord of all. We
need daily the renewing influence
of the Holy Spirit; and that we
may obtain it, we would beseech
you to bear us up by your supplica-
tions ;—that you have done so is
manifest, and it has encouraged us
areal [See Whangarooua.]

NICKERY, a settlement on a
river of the same name, Guiana S.
America. The Rev. F. A. Wix,
missionary from the N. M. S. com-
menced his labours in 1823, He
discharges the duties of a chaplain
to the garrison, and devotes the
remainder of his time to. the in-
struction of the Arrowack. Indians
and.the negroes.

NOACULLY, a town in the
district of Tipperah, India, N. Chit-
tagong, near the Burman domi-
nions., In this place and the vicinity
are the descendants of the Portu-
guese, who settled at Chittagong
about a century ago. They are of
the lowest class, extremely poor,


NOR
and but little removed from Pagan.


ism ;, many of them are so entirely °


incorporated ‘with the natives, ag
hardly to bear a distinguishing mark,
exceptin the name of Feringees,
or Christians. They profess the
Roman Catholic religion, but. are
generally ignorant, of its tenets,
Through the instrumentality of T,
C. Plowdon, Esq. resident. at Noa-
colly, schools have been established
by the C’. K..S. for the benefit of
the children of this long-neglected
people.. A faithful -missionary is
greatly desired, and might be emi.
nently useful,

. NOGAY,.a race of Tartars in-
habiting the Steppes on the N. side
of the Caucasian mountains and
Black Sea.

Mr. D. Schlatter visited this
place, in 1823, at his own expense,
He found the people entirely desti-
tute. of religious knowledge; and
that he might instruct them in. the
truths of revelation, he subjected
himself to privations and hardships
almost unheard of. Though no
fruit has hitherto crowned his self-
denying labours, he yet cherishes
the hope of ultimate success.

NORFOLK ISLAND, an island
in the S. Pacific Ocean, about 15
m. in circuit, which was discovered,
uninhabited, ‘by Captain Cook, in
1774. It is well wooded and fertile,
and has been used as a place of
banishment for refractory convicts
from Botany Bay. The.settlement
was made, in 1788, and contains
at least 10,000 inhabitants. E.
long. 168° 12’, S. lat. 29° 4’. The
S. P. G. F. P. has. employed
school-teachers.on this island.

NORTH AMERICAN IN.
DIANS, aboriginal inhabitants of
N. America, a remnant of whom
remain. among the white popula.
tion in several of the States ; while
the great body are roving through
the forests, and obtain a precarious
subsistence by the chase. ‘es their

1


rude state,
sally believ
a Supreme
call‘ the Gre
they worshiy
Preserver of
tions of him
obscure, and
little practic
are’ remarkal
of gratitude,
injuries, “Dr
velled very ex
on @ commis
ment of the
view to asce
and conditior
is an abstrac
port to the |
the subject
1. Those E.
amount to 1:
the Mississip
Mountains, 1
Rocky Mount
471,417. The
vision are asf
Massachusetts
420; Connect:
6184; Ohio,
N.W. Territo
and Illinois, 17
20,000 ; Chere
taws, 25,000 ;
Of the 2d di
is the estime
districts : viz,
between the
Rivers, and the
Rocky Moun
between the
del Norte, 44
number of t
dispersed over
country is abd
about 70 are
90 in the 2d,
Between 1784
vernment of
purchased la
amounting to


gan-

irely
3) as

nark,

gees,

; the
t. are
nets,
of T,
Noa-
lished
fit of
lected
ary is
> emi-


rs. ine
VN. side
is and


d this


cpense,
y desti-
2; and

in the
bjected


rdships
igh no
is selt-
erishes


in island
bout 15
overed,
ook, in
fertile,
lace of
onvicts
tlement
ontains
ts. E.
‘, The
mployed
( eer
N_ IN.
tants of
f whom
popula-
; while
through
ecarious
In their
8


NOR


rude state, they ‘almost: univer-
sally believe in the existence of
a’ Supreme Being, whom they
call‘ the Great Spirit, and whom
they worship as the Creator and
Preserver of all things. © ‘l heir no-
tions of him are, however, very
obscure, and ‘their belief has very
little practical influence. They
sre remarkable for paying a debt
of gratitude, and also for revenging
injuries. ‘Dr. Morse has lately tra-
velied very extensively among them,
on a commission from the govern-
ment of the United States, with a
view to ascertain their numbers
and condition; and the following
is an abstract of his official re-
port to the Secretary of War on
the subjec. of their. population.
1, Those E. of the Mississippi
amount to 120,625; 2. Between
the Mississippi and the Rocky
Mountains, 179,592; 3. W. of the
Rocky Mountains, 171;200. | Total
471,417. The details of the Ist di-
vision are as follow: Maine, 956;
Massachusetts, 750; Rhode Island,
420; Connecticut, 400 ; New York,
6184; Ohio, 2407; Michigan and
N.W. Territory, 28,380 ; Indiana
and Illinois, 17,006 ; Virginia,Caro-
linas, and Florida, 5497 ; Creeks,
20,000 ; Cherokees, 11,000; Choc-
taws, 25,000; Chickasaws, 3626.
Of the 2d division, the following
is the estimated population, in
districts: viz. W. of the Mississippi,
and N. of the Missouri, 33,150;
between the Missouri and Red
Rivers, and the Mississippi and the
Rocky Mountains, 101,072; and
between the Red River and Rio
del Norte, 45,370. The whole
number of tribes and branches
dispersed over this vast tract of
country is about 260; of which
about 70 are in the” Ist division,
90 in the 2d, and 100 in the 3d,
Between 1784 and 1821, the go-
vernment of the United States
purchased land of the Indians
amounting to nearly 192,000,000


NOR


acres,’ In consideration of such
land and under treaties, at the last
date, annuities‘ were payable: to
the Indians by the States to the
amount of 154,275 dollars: of this
sum, 73,600 are annuities for dif;
ferent periods, from 5 to 20 years,
the last of which will terminate
in 1834 650 dollars are for life;
and 80,025 dollars’ are per-
manent ‘annuities. Many of the
tribes, where missionaries have la-
boured, have -appropriated. ’ their
annuities to promote the establish-
ment of schools. By an act of
Congress, in 1819, the annual sum
of 10;000 dollars wes given for
Indian civilization and improve-
ment, under the direction of the
President, to be distributed among
individuals or societies, who have
established, or ‘who may. contem-
plate establishing schools for the
education of Indian children, and
who desire the co-operation of
government, The distribution of
this sum is to be governed by the
following regulations :—The situ-
ation selected, and a plan of the
proposed buildings, with an esti-
mate of the costs, must be sub-
mitted to the Secretary of War to
be laid before the President. Go-
vernment will, if it has the means,
and approves of the arrangement,
pay two-thirds of the expense of
erecting the necessary : buildings,
and aid the operations of the
schools according to’ the number
and progress of the pupils. This
provision is made for the Indians,
within the United States, and
those in the adjoining country
already described. Among the
170,000 inhabiting the country
between the Pacific and the Rocky
Mountains, no missions have been
attempted ; among the 180,000
between those Mountains and the
Mississippi, missions are chiefly
confined to the Osages and the
migration of the Cherekees ; among
the 120,000 scattered through the
379


‘ NOR


States between the Mississippi and
the Atlantic, ‘missions are in ac.
tive: operation. On many-of : the
tribes inhabiting this territory, and
on others: now extinct, were: for-
merly' bestowed: the missionary
labours: of. Hiliot, the Mayhews,
Bourne, Edwards, the Sergeants,
Kirkland, Wheeluck, Rauch, Zeis-
berger; Occem;'and others. Within
the last few years, missions have
been established among the Creeks,
Choctaws, Chickasaws; and Che-
vokees ofthe Southern States;
While" in Jadiana, Illinois, Michi.
gan, and the North-west Territory,
about'45;000, open'a wide field for
benevolent exertions. Among the
Chippeways of ‘the last two states,
upwards of 15,000 in number, mis-
sions have been recently formed.
To ‘the Indians of ‘Ohio, of whom
there: are about 2400, attention
has been’ given by different bodies.
Ia the state of New-York, upwards
of 5000 Indians, consisting chiefly
of ‘Oneidas; Senecas, Onondagas,
and: Tuscuroras, the remnants of
the former‘cenf. ‘eracy of the Six
Nations, together with: 2500 of va-
rious tribes in New England, :have
been supplied for many years, more
or less, with moral ‘and religious
instruction. To the north of the
United States, in the British ter-
ritories, itis given to the Mohawks,
Delawares, Chippeways, and Red
River Indians. ‘To the riorth of
these,:in the extensive territories
of the Hudson’s Bay Company, and
in the vast country beyond, are
numerous wandering tribes, who
begin to excite the sympathies of
British Christians, but no estimate
is yet formed of their number.
The same remark may be made of
those on the North American con-
tinent,. who range the country
southward ‘of the territory of the
United States. Among the Mos-
wo in the Bay of Honduras,
owever, a mission has been at-
tempted.


NOR
NORTH WEST INDIANS,
aboriginals of British: America, in.
habiting the vast territory fromthe
United States tothe farthest known
point: towards the North ;: and from
Canada to the N.: Pacific Ocean,
a distance of nearly: 4000. miles,
Little is known of the population
of the numerous :tribes in this sec-
tion of ‘country; among whom, if
we except the Red: River Settle.
ment, south of Winnipeg Lake, no
Protestant. missionary is found,
The North West and Hudson’s Bay
Compantes conduct an extensive
fur trade with the Indians. in this
vast range-of country, and are dis
posed to favour missionary efforts
for their spiritual good. The Rev,
John West, late chaplain to the
Hudson’s Bay Company at the.Red
River, gives the following picture
of these natives:— AF iy
§*It. is painful to . consider. the
state of the: numerous tribes who
wander through this vast territory,
hitherto unheeded, and strangers
to British. missionary. exertions,
They rove through the.:woods ‘and
plains with all the wretchedappear.
ance of gypsies in England. They
appear to be sunk into the lowest
state of: degradation. Their. life
seems to be one constant course. of
difficulties in procuring subsistence ;
and they wander through it without
hope and without God in the world,
When shall this hitherto neglected
race come to the knowledge of the
Saviour ??? ;
This description relates to those
who inhabit the country between
the Rocky Mountains and Hudson’s
Bay. Concerning those between
the Rocky Mountains and the Pa-
cific, .in the N..W. Company’s ter-
ritory, the Committee of the CM,
S., in their 20th report, give the
following particulars: — wa
“It has been suggested to the
Committee, tiat: the western part
of British America offers a more


extensive, promising, and practi- |
°80


cable ‘field
than any oth
the ‘globe.
general, ten


7 ‘sonably prod


face of ithe
people are
and  wanderi
villages, and
somewhat c
in ‘the haunt
arts; ‘no lette
ledge, but
taught by wi
periority they
“NOVA SC
vince in’\N. A
bythe Gulf o


sides’ are was
The populati
about 100,000,
though there :
Irish. ‘The e:
that ‘of the ¢
‘The means of |
many, through
of’ benevolent
& P.G.F.
40 ‘stations: in
employs near
more than 40
several © schod
tween 3 and’ 4(¢
joying’ the ble.
instruction. I
685 communic
The W. M.S. }
employed, in
ber of agents,
extracts from
teport :—.
Halifax Cir
thankfully to s
of God is by no
this circuit, I
added, during th
members, The
connexion, a. sa
and consistent :
our borders, and


NOV


cable field for missionary labours,
than any other in’ that quarter of


m-the the ‘globe.. The climate is, in
nowy general, temperate, the soil sea-
) from f ‘sonably productive, andthe: sur-
cean, face of the country level. The
miles. people are not savage, ferocious,
lation and ‘wandering; but settled in
is sec- villages, and in several respects
om if somewhat civilized, though still
Settle. in the hunter state; with few
ke, no arts; ‘no letters, no general know-
found, ledge, but a great desire to be
’s: Bay taught by white: men, whose su-
ensive periority they clearly discern’?
in this ‘NOVA SCOTIA, a British pro-
re dis» vince in'N. America,’ bounded N.
efforts bythe Gulf of St. Lawrence, ‘W.
e Rev, by the Bay of Fundy, and N. W. | '
to the by New Brunswick. The other
he. Red sides’ ure washed by the Atlantic.
The population is estimated at


about 100,000, principally English;
though there are many Scotch and
Irish. ‘The established. religion is
that ‘of the’ Church of England.
‘The means of grace are enjoyed by
many, through the active exertions
of’ benevolent associations. The
8 P. °G.: F. P.-has more than
40 stations: in the province, and
employs nearly 30 missionaries,
more than 40 schoolmasters, and
several © schoolmistresses. §Be-
tween 3and 400 children are en-
joying’ the blessings of religious
instruction. In 1823, there were
685 communicants, at 1] stations.
The W’. M.S. has, for some years,
employed, in Nova Scotia, a num-
ber of agents. The following are
extracts from the last district
report :—

Halifax Circuit.‘ We have
thankfully to state, that the cause
of God is by no means declining in
this circuit. In Hakfax, we have
added, during the 2 past years, 19
members. ‘There is not, in the
connexion, a. society more ‘steady
and consistent: we have peace in
our borders, and our congregations


NOV


are large and attentive. Our Sun.
day school, of :205.-children,...

prospering.”? ey
. Lunenburgh :Circuit.— No res
port. ; cee iP LF aT Gay
Liverpool Circuit.--‘< The society
in town‘ continues in a. state, of
growing stability, unity, and peace;
the Sunday school continues active
and useful in: its operations ; and
the prospect, on the whole, is en-
couraging.’’

Shelburne and Barrington Cir-
cuit.“ The sphere ‘of labour. in
this circuit is very extensive. . Our
congregations are, in general, large
and attentive,. particularly at Bar-
rington and Cape Negro.”

Yarmouth Circuit.—No report...

Horton:und Windsor Circutt:—
Horton.—“‘ We: have had .a little
success the last two years; afew
have been’ added ‘to: the. society,
and it is hoped, to the Lord, during
the last year.” Windsor.— Dur-
ing the greater part of the past year,
there has: been an unusual degree
of affliction and mortality among
the inhabitants, which, -by the
blessing of God, has been sanctified
to them.?? FT aaa

Newport Circuit.—“ The society
has’ increased 17 in number,. and
12 others are on trial.”’ . H

Scnooits.—** We have formed a
Sunday school at Kempton, and
have been making arrangements
for the establishment of others.’?

Parrsborough and Meccan Cir-
cuit.—‘ Our members are growing
in grace, and regular in attending
their classes. Another very com-
modious chapel is erected and
finished at Nappau, where our con-
gregations are large.”’ rat

Wallace Circuit.—“ The religious
state of the society may be consi-
dered as prosperous,’’

Charlotte Town Circuit.“ In
Charlotte Town, the members, in-
cluding the class across the har-
bour, are much uniteJ in Christian
38]


NOV


affection, striving together for the
faith of the Gospel, and unanimous |
in their efforts to co-operate with
the missionary for the promotion of
the work of God.
s§.At Little York, the: society,
‘which consists of about thirty mem-
ters, is very stedfast: several who
united themselves in church fellow-
ship during the ‘first year of our
iabours in this place, are now ex-
cellent members.

- “ A& new preaching place has
been opened at: the North River,
‘about -four miles from Charlotte
Town, the fruit of which already
eppears. Nine persons have been
united together, and now regularly
meetin class.’ 5:

-- Scsoors.—“ There are three
Sabbath schools in the -Charlotte
Town circuit; — viz. one at Charlotte
Town, consisting of 140 children ;
about 40 children‘at. Township, No.
49, and the same:number at Little


York®:

- Tpyon and ‘Bedeque : Cireutt.—
¢. In Tryon a large increase of our
Congregations “has taken place.
They are far more attentive than
formerly, and are frequently deeply
effected.”

In Crappaud, which is'a neigh-
bouring settlement: about 3° miles
distant, the prospects at present are

29


«In Bedeque, the congregations
have not been so large for the last
few'months. We have preaching
at'three other places, one 4 miles,
another 6 miles, and the other 10
miles, from the preacher’s residence,
once a fortnight on the week
nights, but: no classes have as yet
been formed.”’

* ScHours.—** There are two
Sunday schools in the circuit, one
in Bedeque and one in Tryon,
which, until the approach of the
last winter, were in successful
operation; but here they always
éuffer an interruption of six months


NUL
in the year, owing to the badness
of the roads, and the inclemency


of the :weather ‘in ‘the fall’ of ‘the


year, the winter, and the spring.”
Murray Harbour Circuit.“ The
state of this circuit is, -at'this time,
in rather a growing condition,’
' & At Three Rivers we have-a
small and‘ poor society who’ ate
endeavouring to build a chapel;
towards which ‘they ‘have ‘sub.
scribed about £60,.' There’ is not
a minister of any other: denomi-
nation within ‘the compass of this
circuit. ”? -
NUDDEA, the capital ‘of an
extensive ‘district of the same
name, ‘Bengal, - Hindoostan, on an
island at the conflcence’ of ‘the
Hoogly and.‘ Jelinguy rivers, 60
miles above Calcutta. It: is the
great. seat of native literature in
Bengal. The Baptist missionaries
at Calcutta have prepared’ ‘tracts
in the Sungskrit language, to.com-
municate their message to: the
learned men -in this populous city
in the’ most acceptable form, and
the result has been highly grati-
fying. A ‘number of: these publi-


cations, which, in any other shape, |


would probably ‘have been rejected
with contempt, were received with
great readiness; and thus, in the
language’: of the missionaries,—
‘The Gospel was intreduced into
the only University of Bengal, by
means of publications in the Latin
of the East.”
NULALIWU, a place in the
Molucca Islands, containing about
400 inhabitants, who were formerly
Christians ; but were conquered by
the Mahomedans, who burnt their
churehes, destroyed their Bibles,
and reduced them to a wretched
state of ignorance and ‘idolatry.
Through the instrumentality of the
Rev. Mr.
Amboyna, the people renounced


idolatry, and destroyed their idols §


and: devil- houses,
382


Kam, missionary at |


OAH U, oI
Islands, 130 n


7 46 long by.


mountains, an
interspersed ¢
exhibit: very re
render, it. by...
group.'The salt
barren hills, ¢
W.. Hononoor
greatest natura
the islands, J
of water, abou
ference, a snat
sea, Supposed

its level, and

with common
by. asalt spr
neighbouring hi
talizes. in. vast
bottom. of the
continuous. whi
to:shore.. .. The.
procured in con
foruse.. The pop
estimated at. 6
survey of; the

aries have esti

1000, and the in
This is the ..xres
the: seat, of. Ove
of all: the. pri

other islands,


y persons of influ


group.

00700, a
good harbour,
Oahu, ; which
square mile, and
houses. The vi
to-contain betwe
habitants, . “besid
Whom,’ a. times
derable numbers,
16 merchants, in
rican Consul, wh
stantly to transé
he natives, and
of vessels, who
putting in for g


OAH


yd OAHU, one .of the Sandwich
toe Islands, 130 miles N..W.. Hawaii,


‘The mn 46 long by. 23, broad, The high
time, mountains, and:very fertile valleys,
ite interspersed throughout the island,
veal exhibit very romantic scenery, and
b* ate render, it. by. far the finest. of. the
apels jm StoUPs The salt lake, situatedamong
sub. fm darren hills, about 6 miles-W..N.
is not W., Hononooroo, is one. oi the
nomi- greatest natural curiosities found in
of this the islands. It isan insulated body
- Gi of water, about 2 miles in circum-
‘of an | ference, a small.distance from the
same seay supposed to bea little above
-on an its level, and is entirely saturated
of the with common salt. It is supplied
cs, 60 my by. a-salt spring issuing from a
is the (@m ueighbouring bill. .'The salt chrys-
ure in talizes. in, vast. quantities at the
ofseries bottom. .of the lake, and forms a
tracts continuous white crust from shore
10 comi- toshore. .The. salt. thus: formed is
+o: the procured in considerable quantities
ous city foruse., The populationwas formerly
rmy:and estimated at 60,000; but: after a
y grati- survey of; the island,, the missicn-
2 publi- aties have estimated; the houses at
shape, §y 1000,and the inhabitants.at 20,000,
ejected fm This is the. residence of the King,
ed with the: seat, of. government, the abode
in the of all the. principal. chiefs of. the
aries; other islands, and of most of the
edinto jm petsons of influence in:the whole
gal, by group.
Hononooroo, a large town, with a
good harbour, in the island, of
Qahu,: which occupies about one
square ‘mile, end contains. about 550
houses. The village is estimated


habitants, besides foreigners, of
whom, a. times, there are consi-
derable numbers, . There are:about
16 merchants, including the Ame-
tican Consul, who reside here con-
santly. to: transact. business .~ith
the natives, and withthe masters
of vessels, who. are continually
putting in for supplies. After a


eir idols §
2


tocontain between 6 and 6000 in--


OAH


prosperous. voyage, the: first Ames
rican missionaries to the Sandwich
Islands, .entered the harbour April
18th, 1820, and commenced their
labours of love among these long
neglected -heathens... They soon
settled on.a piece of land, assigned
for the purpose, about. half .a mile
from the: village, where the first
temple on these islands for the wor«
ship of the. living. God has::been
erected. :


In 1822, Mr. Bingham began to


preach .in the native language ;.


and the King and Queen, as well.as
some of the chiefs, have been num-
bered among, the pupils in the
schools, . On the. first: Monday .in
January, 1822, the press was. put
in operation, and the first: sheet of
a Hawaiian spelling-book |... -was
struck off; the. distribution of
which gave an immediate impulse
to the work of instruction. ;
The number of regular scholars
soon amounted to about 200, and
the progress of the learners, gene-
rally, was: very apparent.
after. the: missionaries . arrived, 8
subscription was opened:for an Ore
phan School. Fund, which is favours
ed by foreigners, and, in little more
than a. year,. the .sum subscribed
exceeded 800 dollars, In June,]1824,
the chapel was:burnt down, hut, in
about a month, it was replaced at
the charge oi.the natives, by alarger
and more substantial structure... A
week-day service was begun at
Waititi, a village «about 4 mi
distant. The Rev. Mr. Ellis, with
2 native teachers, of the L.M.S.,en-
tered into the labours of this station,
The effects of them were truly de
lightful. As the brethen took their
evening walks: they derived high
gratification frem .hearing the
hymns of the chapel and the les-
sons of the schools recited by the
people, instead of the monotonous
sounds of their. ceaseless ‘‘ hura,”?
or praise to their.gods and departed
383


OAH


heroes ; while. the ‘book, the slate,
and the pen, were superseding
games of chance and other hurtful
amusements, which formerly con-
sumed much of the people’s time.
The power of’ true religion was
manifested in the daily conduct of
many of the chiefs, as well as in
that of the people, Several of them
uniformly asked a blessing, and re-
tarned thanks at their meals, sur-
rounded by their friends and do-
mestics, who frequently amount to
40 or 50 persons. They were also
known to attend, morning and even-
ing, to their devotions.

Mr. Ellis wrote, in 1824 :—*‘ In
addition to the usual good attention
given to the preaching of the word,
and other public means of grace, a
considerable awakening has taken
place here, among the chiefs and
teachers, and many of the people.
Many new schools have been esta-
blished ; and there is a great in-
crease of scholars, who continue
diligent and persevering. About
600 were present at. a public exa-
mination on the 19th of April. We
have 796, under 22 native teachers,
who attend at school twice, and
some of them three times, every
day ; besides which, there are a
good many small schools among the
people, the teacher of which is,
perhaps, himself a scholar in one
of the larger schools. Indeed we
cannot train up the teachers fast
enough to satisfy the demands of
the people for them. So great is
the attention of the people to their
books, that we never walk through
the town without seeing several
passing from one place to another
with their books in their hands.

“ The chiefs, particularly Karai-
moku and Kahumanu, have taken a
very decided stand in favour of
Christianity.’’

A fact communicated by Mr.
Ellis, in a private letter, ought to
be mentioned, as forcibly illus-


OAH


trating the value which the chiefs
put on instruction: he says—

‘* Previously to my leaving (a
circumstance. rendered necessary
by the illness of Mrs. Ellis), I pub-
licly askedthe chiefs what I should
bring them out when I returned
from England; they answered,
simultaneously— Come BAckK your.
SELF, AND WE HAVE NOTHING ELSE
TO DESIRE.”?

In 1825, the hearers increased to
nearly 3000, and Karaimoku or.
dered a large stone chapel to be
erected for their accommodation,
The scholars were nearly 2000,
and the teachers 40. The health
of Karaimoku had then for some
time been on the decline. This
was the more to be regretted, as
advantage seemed to have been
taken of his illness to inflict a most
serious injury on the morals of the
people. A law had been made, and
strictly enforced, to prevent fe-
males from resorting on board ves-
sels for evil purposes ; the captain
and crew of a schooner, belonging
to the United States, and lying off
Hononooroo, had recourse to the
most violent outrages, in order to
procure the repeal of this law.
Boki, who visited England, was at
the head of the government during
the illness.of his brother Karai-
moku; though well disposed toward
the mission and the morals of the
people, he had not courage to bear
up against the violence of this offi-
cer and his crew, supported as they
were by other sailors; and. took
such measuresas led to the renewal
of the evil, which had, with so
much advantage to the people, been
suppressed.

The results of an examination of
the schools at this station and its

vicinity, on the 19th of April, §
1826, exhibited such evidence of
improvement and advancement
in civilization, as excited the
surprise of the foreign _visitants
384


present, Thi
Hawaiian, t
ham, then ju
translation of
Richards, we
casion. [Se
ODESSA,
town, on a sr
Sea,- betwee
rivers ‘Dniest
was founded i
II. “Populati
The £../, S.
deric L, Be
Sallet, in 18:
the Jews in
Black Sea, Vv
some time to :
spoken by the
have since visi
| teighbourhood
have distribute
OESEL, an
Sea, at the mc
Riga, contain
neighbouring is
of 35,000. A
U. B. has lab
ears, and, ami
jas been protec
OHONOQU
Indian town on
quehannah, ' J
G. in New E
missionaries to
dians, They
ceived; but, ag
tended their eff
soon abandoned
ONEIDAS,
Nations ‘of Indi
country S, of O
W. part of Ney
Oneida Resery
divided into 3 tr
Wolf, and the
sent number is es
of 1100, - This
annuity from th
York of 3552
purchased of the
annuity of abou
the United Ste


ODE


hiefs present, The Gospel of Matthew, in
Hawaiian, translated by Mr. Bing-
r (a ham, then just finished, and another
sary translation of the sameGospel by Mr.
pub- Richards, were produced on this oc-
10uld casion. [See Sandwich Islands.]
ined ODESSA, a populous sea-port
ered, town, on a small bay of the Black
OUR- Sea, between the mouths of the
ELSE rivers Dniester and Dnieper. It
was founded in 1792, by Catherine
sed to II. Population, in 1820, 40,000.
{U OT The E.J. S. sent out Messrs. Fre-
to be deric L, Bezner and Bernhard
ation, Sallet, in 1820, to labour among
2000, the Jews in the vicinity of the
health Black Sea, who remained there
- some some time to acquire the language
This spoken by the Polish Jews. They
ted, as have since visited many Jews in the
» been @% tieighbourhood, among whom they
amost # have distributed Bibles and Tracts.
of the OESEL, an island in the Baltic
de, and Sea, at the mouth of the gulf of
ant fe- Riga, containing, with 2 small


neighbouring islands, a population
of 35,000. A missionary of the
U. B. has laboured here several
ears, and, amidmuch persecution,
til been protected by government,
OHONOQUAGIE, formerly an
Indian town on the bank of the Sus-
quehannah. ‘In 1762, the S. prop.
G. in New England, sent out 3
missionaries to christianize the In-
dians. They were cordially re-
ceived; but, as little success at-
tended their efforts, the station was
soon abandoned. ;
ONEIDAS, one of the Six
Nations of Indians, inhabiting the
country S, of Oneida Lake, in the
W. part of New York, called the
Oneida Reservation. They are
divided into 3 tribes, the Bear, the
Wolf, and the Turtle. Their pre-
sent number is estimated at upwards
of 1100, This’ nation receives an
annuity from the State of New
York of 3552 dollars, for lands
purchased of them in 1795,.and an
annuity of about 600 dollars from
the United States. They have


during
Karai-
toward


le, been


ation of
and its
April, §
ence of


ONE


their name from their former pagan
deity, which was an upright stone,
as the word signifies in their lan-
guage. For many years there
has not been a pure Oneida among
these Indians, from their having
been mixed with whites of different
nations. In 1776, the Rev. Sa-
muel Kirkland, patronized by the
corporation of Harvard College,
visited the principal town of the
Oneidas, accompanied by 2 or 3
other missionaries and_ school-
masters from Dr. Wheelock’s In-
dian school. A flourishing school
had already been commenced; the
people were anxious for the per-
manent establishment of a minister,
and Mr. K. consented to continue
with them, provided they would
engage to abandon their habits of
intemperance. To this they con-
sented, and took efficient mea-
sures to prevent the sale of ardent
spirits. Drunkenness soon disap-
peared, in a great measure, and
many received the truth in the love
of it. In 1773, Mr. Kirkland was
received under the patronage of the
Society in Scotland for Promoting
Christian Knowledge. During the
revolutionary war, his labours were
interrupted; but after peace was
restored, at the request of the
Indians,he returned and found them
very desirous of religious instruc-
tion. He died in 1808, after having
laboured among the Indians more
than 40. years. In 1809, the
Northern M. S. employed Mr.
Jenkins, as a missionary among
the Oneidas. They have also re-
ceived the attention of the Friends
and other benevolent associations,
by which they have been supplied
with religious teachers. The
Episcopal church of New York,
supported Mr. Eleazer Wil-
liams, several years, at Oneida
Castle. He isthe son of a chief
of the Iroquois nation, and was
licensed by the Bishop of New
York, in 1816, in compliance with
LL


ONO.


the earnest request of the Oneida
‘ chiefs. He became eminently
useful to the pagan party, who, in
1817, renounced their idols, pro-
fessed the Christian faith, and united
with the old Christian party in
erecting a new place for public
worship, which was consecrated in
1819. In 182], the communicants
were between 40 and 50,
The Hamilton B. M. S. supports
a school at Oneida Castle, which,
in the early part of 1824, consisted
of 30 pupils. They have also sta-
tioned a missionary, a carpenter,
and a blacksmith here. In March,
1824, a church was formed, con-
sisting of 20 members. As a tribe,
the Oneidas have made consider-
able progress in civilization.
ONONDAGAS,, formerly the
principal tribe of the Six Nations
of Indians, who inhabited the State
of New York. Onondaga, the
chief town in Onondaga county,
149 m. N. W. New York, and 50
from Utica, was their principal set-
tlement, and the seat of Indian
power. They are now scattered
in small numbers in different parts
of the State, and in Upper Canada ;
only 2 or 300 remain at Onondaga.
They receive annually 2000 dollars
from the State of New York, being
the interest of sales of the ‘ Mili-
tary Tract.’’? Of this sum, 1000
dollars belong to those at Onon-
daga, who are represented to be
sober and well disposed. They
acknowledge the Bible to be a
revelation from God, and many of
them are anxious for the instruc-
tion of their children. About 1750,
the U. B. sent 2 missionaries to
Onondaga, who were cordially re-
ceived; but the mission was soon
relinquished. Other benevolent in-
dividuals, who have occasionally
laboured among them, have met
with a kind reception.
OODOOVILLE, a_ populous
parish, district of Jaffna, Ceylon,
5 miles N, Jaffhapatam, and about


ORE


2 miles N. E. Manepy. It stands
on an extensive plain, covered with
groves of palmyra, cocoa-nut, and
other fruit trees, in the mudst of
which are many villages of natives
and idol temples. The Rev. M,
Winslow, from the 4. B.'C. F. M.,
arrived herein 1820. Mr. F. Mal-
leappa is the native preacher. Mr,
Poor established the first school
here, in 1818. In 1823, there
were, exclusive of the boarding-
school, 9 schools connected with
the station, containing more than
330 pupils. The boarding-school
was also flourishing. In 1833, it
consisted of 32. boys and 8 girls,
A Sabbath-school of 165 scholars
was commenced in 1823. The
congregations are large and atten-
tive. A number, it is hoped, have
been savingly benefited; and others
are seriously disposed. In 1823,
9 natives had united with the
church. The anxious inquiries of
the natives respecting Christianity,
afford much encouragement to the
missionaries. [See Jaffna.]

OOTTUR PARRAH, a vil-
lage in Bengal, Hindoostun, near
Calcutta, in the Cossipore district.
The C. K.S. established a school
here in 1822, which then consisted
of 100 scholars.

ORENBERG, a town in a pro-
vince of the same name, in Asiatic
Russia, on the Ural, about 600 m.
N. E. Astrachan, containing 2000
houses, and surrounded by nu-
merous hordes of Tartars. The
permanent Tartar population, re-
siding in town, is also very ccnsi-
derable; while numbers become
temporary residents from different
parts of the province, and from the
most remote districts of Tartary.


It is. the great thoroughfare for §


caravans between Siberia and Great
Tartary, and European Russia.
E. long. 56° 4’, N. lat. 51°46’, The
Rev. C. Fraser, G. M‘Alpine, and
J. Gray, from the S.. Jf, S., com-
menced their labours ~~ " 1815,
3


with W. Buc
sistant. Thi:
nally designec
the Kirghisia
settled in tent
N.E. andS. o
described as 3
less race of be
than the mou
thev are pro!
but, in gener
doctrines of t
however, rece
of mercy with
and manifeste:
become acqua
of Christianity
the missionar
benevolent de
destitute and
and not withor


| Of ultimate si


continued thei
sacrifices, and
in Christian kr
gave evidence «
principal chief:
for the perma:
a missionary ar
measures were
with his wishes
to be establishe
the Kirghisian
Tracts had bee
New Testame
Orenberg Ta
order of gover
the horde was
tensive Steppe
ofthe Russian ¢
have become
themselves, anc
Russians, that
for the missio
their itinerati
Some of the r
moved; others
labours at Ore
other tribes of
Testament and
and tracts aree
at this station ;
the regular dj


iries of
tianity,
to the


a vil-
» hear
district.
school
onsisted


& pro-
Asiatic
600 m.
by nu-
. The
ion, Te-
iv ccnsi-
become
lifferent
rom the
Tartary.
are for |
d Great
Russia.
p’. The
ne, and
yy COM-
in 1818,
6


_ Of ultimate success,


ORE


with W. Buchanan, the native as-
sistant. This mission was origi-
nally designed for the instruction' of
the Kirghisian Tartars, who were
settled in tents in the vast Steppes,
N.E. andS. of Orenberg. They are
described as a very degraded, list-
less race of beings, but less savage
than the mountaineers of Caucasus;
they are professed Mahomedans,
but, in general, ignorant of the
doctrines of that religion. They,
however, received the messengers
of mercy with gratitude and joy;
and manifested an earnest desire to
become acquainted with the truths
of Christianity. For several years
the missionaries prosecuted their
benevolent designs among these
destitute and despised wanderers,
and not without cheering prospects
Many’ dis-
continued their stated Mahomedan
sacrifices, and made rapid progress
in Christian knowledge, and 2 or 3
gave evidence of piety. One of the
principal chiefs expressed a desire
for the permanent establishment of
a missionary among his people, and
measures were taken to comply
with his wishes: a school was about
to be established in Orenberg, for
the Kirghisian children and youths.
Tracts had been prepared, and the
New Testament translated into the
Orenberg Tartar ;~when, by the
order of government, the body of
the horde was removed into an ex-
tensive Steppe beyond the precincts
ofthe Russian territory, where they
have become so disunited among
themselves, and so hostile to the
Russians, that it is deemed unsafe
for the missionaries to continue
their itinerations among them.
Some of the missionaries have re-
moved; others still continue their
labours at Orenberg, and among
other tribes of Tartars, The New
Testament and other suitable books
and tracts are extensively circulated
at this station; and, in addition to
the regular distribution which is


ORE


made among the strangers at Oren-
berg, the missionaries have taken
several tours 2 or 300 miles, visiting
all the principal villages in their
way, conversing with the Mollehs,
and giving books to those who could
read them. From 1820 tothe
close of 1822, they had distributed
upwards of 1000 Testaments, 2150
copies of separate books of the Scrip-
tures, and 1840 tracts. In their
itinerating excursions, and in their
labours among the Tartars, they
have been much assisted by Walter
Buchanan, a converted Caucasian,
one of the youths ransomed at
Karass, who is distinguished for
his piety, Christian zeal, and
knowledge of the Scriptures.

Oufa, or Ufa, the capital of the
government of Orenberg, Asiatic
Russia, 230 miles N. by E. Oren-
berg, near the junction of the Be-
laia and Oufa rivers, E. long. 56°,
18’, N. 64° 42’, Population, 14,000.
Though no Tartars reside within
the city, except the Mufti and
merchants, yet it is so constantly
resorted to by them for the purposes
of trade from the neighbouring
villages and districts, that, to a
stranger, more than half the inha-
bitants would appear to be Tartars.
In 1820, Messrs. Alpine and Gray,
missionaries at Orenberg, made a
tour to this city for the purpose of
ascertaining the number of Bash-
kurts and Tartars in the vicinity,
and the expediency of attempting
a permanent mission among them.
They distributed about 300 copies
of the Tartar New Testament and
tracts, which were eagerly received,
and many pressed on them for
copies when their supply was ex-
hausted, The Oufa Tartars are an
industrious people ; most of them
can read. They are firmly attached
to the religion of the false prophet.
In subsequent visits, the misssona-
ries have distributed, many books,
and it is to be hoped a missionary
will soon be settled here;


OTT


OTTAWAS, the remnant of a
once formidable tribe of Indians,
now consisting of about 3000, dis-
persed in the states of Ohio and
Michigan, the largest and most
opulent in that vicinity. They are
indolent and superstitious ; and, in
consequence of their intercourse
with vicious whites, have become
exceedingly degenerated. Through
the instrumentality of the Rev. Mr.
M‘Coy, Baptist missionary at Ca-
rey, they have made some advances
towards civilization, and are desir-
ous that their~ annuities, which
have formerly been chiefly expended
for whiskey, should be appropriated
to the improvement of their chil-
dren, and the support of religious
institutions among them. By a
late treaty, the United States go-
vernment has appropriated 1500
dollars annually, for the support of
4 blacksmith, agriculturist, and
teacher among them, and appoint-
ed the Rev. Mr. Sears, Baptist
missionary, as teacher. The 8.3.
F. M. has contemplated a perma-
nent mission among thistribe. In
18232, the Western M. S. com-
menced a mission for their benefit,
in the N. W. part of the state of
Qhio, on the banks of the Maumee,
or Miamee of the lake, neur the
W. end of lake Erie : The Rev. L.
Robbins, and A. Coe, missiona-
ries; —— Clark, physician; J,
Barnes, L. Sacket, 1. Van ‘Tassel,
M‘Pherson, W. Potter, Miss Ste-
phens, and Miss Biggs, assistants.
In 1823, the society possessed pro-
perty here valued at about 10,000
dollars, and had received, the same
year, 300 dollars from the secretary
of war. In 1824, the school con-
sisted of about 40 children, 20 of
whom could read in the Testament,
and all were becoming daily more
pleased with the industrious and
active habits of civilized life. The
children of the Munsees and Dela-
wares are also instructed in the
school. The chiefs and parents of


PAA


the children are becoming more
friendly, and the missionaries begin
to exert a salutary influence,


P,


PAARL, a settlement in Cape
Colony, S. Africa, about 45 m,
N.E. of Cape Town. There isa
Dutch church in the place. Here,
and in the vicinity, are about 5000
heathens.

The Rev. E. Evans, from the
LL. M. S., commenced a mission
here in 1819, which was designed
more particularly for the Hottentot
slaves, Several years previous to
its commencement, a chapel had
been built, in which missionaries
occasionally preached. Soon after
the arrival of Mr, Evans, an/. M. S.
was formed, to which the slaves
contributed so liberally as to re-
quire restraint rather than incite.
ment. Schools were established,
in which, in 1823, more than 200
children and adults were instructed.
The number of hearers in the Paarl,
and the vicinity, are about 1100
whites, and 1200 coloured people.
The number in communion is 27,
all of whom adorn their Christian
profession. The Rev. Mr. Miles,
of Cape Town, who lately visited
this station, says that the mission
school here is well conducted. For
the benefit of such as cannot attend
the day school, an evening school,
held on two days of the week, has
been lately opened.
mistress has been engaged, at a
small stipend, to instruct the female
slaves and their children. Ata
public examination, which took
place during the year 1626, the
progress which had been mare by
the scholars, was observed with
great satisfaction, It is in con-
templation, if funds can be provided,
to establish schools in all the sur-
rounding country of the district,
as one means of a lead


A school. }


-Moliamedan
this vicinity.
PACAL
called Hooge
of Hottento
Africa, in t
3m. from th
and 2 from t
commenced |
Mr. Camp!
account of it:
* About 25
my waggons
nity of Geor
commencing.
there, I was |
‘ Thickhead, ’
of Hooge Kr
m. distant, to
of his people


| earnest desir
might be stati


On asking hi
a missionary,
that he and |
taught the sa
taught to r
could not te
were. I the
stay with us
he would hear
related by C
countryman o
gon-driver, :
people readily
evening. ‘To
also with muc


mously fn the «
their chief,

any reason, exq
same things wi
the white pea
miserable - loo


more
begin


Cape
15 m.
re isa
Here,
t 5000


m the
nission
signed
ttentot
ous to
el had
onaries
yn after
1.M.S.
» slaves
to. re-
incite-
blished,
han 200
ructed.,
e Paarl,
t 1100
people.
is 27,
hristian
. Miles,
y visited
mission
id. For
bt attend
school,
eek, has


school- |


bd, at a
e female
. Ata
h ‘took
426, the
marie by
ad with
in con-
provided,
the sur-
district,
practing
88


Pac


-Moliamedanism, which prevails in
this. vicinity.

PACALTSD ORP, formerly
called Hooge Kraal, a settlement
of Hottentots, Cape Colony, S.
Africa, in the district of George,
3 m. from the town of that name,
and 2 from the sea. The L. M.S.
commenced a mission here in 1813.

Mr. Campbell gives the following
account of its origin :—

s About 250 m. wey “pt ie ,
my waggons encamped in the vici-
nity 0 Gedige; a town then just
commencing. Soon after my arrival
there, I was visited by Dikkop, or
‘Thickhead,* the Hottentot chief
of Hooge Kraal, situated about 3
m. distant, together with about 60
of his people, who expressed an
earnest desire that a missionary


' might be stationed at his residence.


On asking his reason for desiring
a missionary, he answered, it was
that he and his people might be
taught the same things that {were
taught to white people, but he
could not tell what things these
were. I then requested him to
stay with us until sun-set, when
he would hear some of those things
related by Cupido, who was a
countryman of his, and my wag-
gon-driver. Dikkop and all his
people readily agreed to stay till
evening. To Cupido they listened
also with much attention the fol-
lowing morning. I inquired whe-
ther they were all desirous of hav-
ing a missionary to settle among
them, which was answered unani-
mously tn the affirmative ; but, lie
their chief, they could not ——
any reason, except to be taught the
same things which were taught to
the white people. A very aged,
miserable- looking man coming
into the hut during the conference,
with scarcely a rag to cover him,
excited my attention; he came
and took a seat by my side, kissed
my hands and legs, and by most
tignificant gestures, expressed his


PAC


extreme joy in the prospect of ‘a
missionary: coming among them.
His conduct having deeply in-
terested me, I asked him whether
he knew any thing about Jesus
Christ? His answer was truly af-
fecting-—‘I know no more about
any thing than 4 beast.’

‘¢ Every eye and ear were directed
toward me, to learn whether a
missionary would be sent to the
Kraal; and when I told them that
an excellent missionary, I had no
doubt, would be soon with them,
they expressed, by signs, a degree of
joy and delight which I cannot
possibly describe. Mr. Pacalt ar-
rived soon after my departure.’?

On Mr. Campbell’s second voy
age to S. Africa, he again visited
Hooge Kraal, in June 1819. In
his account of this visit he thus
describes the striking chan
which had been effected by the
blessing of God on the labours of
the missionary, who had been a
few months before removed to his
heavenly rest :—‘

** As we advanced toward Hooge
Kraal, the boots, or Dutch farmers,
who had known me on my former
journey in that part of Africa,
would frequently assure me, that
such a change had been produced
on the place and people since I
had left it, that I should not know
it again. The nearer we ap-
proached the settlement, the re-
ports concerning its rapid improve-
ment increased, till at length we
atrived on the spot, on the evening
of June 2.

Next morning, when the sun
arose, | viewed, from my waggon,
the surrounding scene, with great
interest. Instead of bare, unpro+
ductive ground, I saw two ng
streets with square-built houses on
each side, placed at equal distances
from one another, so as to allow
sufficient extent of ground to each
house for a goad gurden: a well-
built wall, 6 feet high, was in front

LL2 389


PAC


of each row of houses, with a gate
to each house. On approaching
one of them, I found a Hottentot,
dressed like a European, standing
at his door to receive me with a
cheerful smile. ‘This house is
mine!’ said he, ‘and all that
garden!’ in which I observed there
were peach and apricot trees,
decked with their delightful blos-
soms, fig-trees, cabbages, potatoes,
pumpkins, water- melons, &c. I
then went across the street to the
house of a. person known by the
name of Old Simeon—the very
man who sat in such a wretched
plight, by my side, in the hut,
when I first visited the place, and
who then said he knew no more
about any thing than a brute. I
vas informed that he had become
a Christian, had been baptized,
and named Simeon; and because
of his great age, they called him
Old Simeon. I found him sitting
alone in the house, deaf and blind
with age. When they told him
who I was, he instantly embraced
me with both hands, while streams
of tears ran down his sable cheeks.
‘TI have done,’ said he, ‘ with the
world now! I have done with the
world now! I am waiting till Jesus
Chris* ays to me,'Come ! I am just
waiting till Jesus Christ says to me,
. Come.’ ”’

‘¢ The case of this singular mo-
nument of the grace of God was
very well described by a missionary
who visited Hooge Kraal, on his
way to Bethelsdorp, soon after his
conversion. He relates it thus: —

‘‘On Tuesday evening, April 8th,
1817, before we left Hooge Kraal,
an old man, about 90 years of age,
prayed. He expressed great gra-
titude to God for sending his Gospel
to his nation,—and that in his days,
and particularly for making it effi-
cacious to his own conversion.

“In his youthful days he was the
leader of every kind of iniquity.
He was a great elephant and buf-


PAC


falo hunter, and had some wonder-
ful escapes from the jaws of death.
Once, while hunting, he fell under
an elephant, who endeavoured to
crush him to death ; but he escaped.
At another time, ke was tossed
into the air by a buffalo several
times, and was severely bruised ;
the animal then fell down upon
him ; but he escaped with life. A
few years ago, he was for some
time to appearance dead; and was
carried to his grave soon after, as
is the custom in hot climates ; but,
while the people were in the act
of throwing the earth over him,
he revived, and soon entirely re-
covered. The second time Mr,
Pacalt preached at Hooge Kraal,
he went from the meeting re-
joicing, and saying, that the Lord
hed raised him from the dead three
times, that he might hear the
Word of God, and believe in Jesus
Christ, before he ‘died the fourth
time.’

‘¢ He was baptized last new year’s
day, and was named Simeon. Mr,
Pacalt told us that it was impossi-
ble to describe the old man’s hap-
piness on that occasion. Heavenly
joy had so filled his heart, and
strengthened his weak frame, that
he appeared as lively as a youth,
although 90 years of age. He said,
“ Now I am willing to die: yes, I
would rather die than live, that I
may go and live, for ever and ever,
with my precious Saviour. Before,
I was afraid to die. Oh, yes! the
thoughts of it made my very heart
to tremble; but I did not know
God and Jesus Christ then. Now,
I have no desire to live any longer:
I arn too old to be able to do any-
thing here on earth, in glorifying
God, my Saviour, or doing good to
my fellow Hottentots. I served
the devil upwards of eighty years,
and was ready to go to everlasting
fire; but, though a black Hottea-
tot, through infinite mercy, I shall
go to everlasting happiness Won-

39


derful lov
Astonishin,
§¢The ne:
my attentio
surrounded
for the pro
from the in
and of the y
A place
been erected
persons. O;
delighted to ;
into it, cloth
printed cotto
ed like Eur
their Bibles
their arms;
instead of th
and singing t
solemnity anc
Psalm-books,


; ' bles to the te


and listening
serious attent
church of (
about 45 belie
whom I had
portunity of
death of our I
‘On the
school, consis
regularly taug
worship, Th
tentot. lad,
young savage
the kraal, anc
hever seen a
life. When I
door of the s
mending a pe
brought him fd
action was suc
tion, that, refle
on his former
was tlmost Ové
“T found a
of cultivated le
which the Ho
sow with whea
& portion of it
by their cattle |
the herd boys
from which n¢


ider-
eath.
inder
ed to
aped.
‘tossed
averal
ised 5
upon
Be A
some
d was
ter, as
3 but,
the act
y him,
ly re-
e Mr.
Kraal,
ng re-
e Lord
d three
ar the
n Jesus
2 fourth


Ww year’s
n. Mr.
mpossi-
’s hap-
eavenly
brt, and
he, that
youth,
e said,


» that I
d ever,
Before,
es! the
ry heart
t know

Now,
longer:
HO any-
orifying
good to

served
ly years,
prlasting
Hottea-
, I shall

Won-
0


yes, I |


PAC


detful love! Wonderful grace!
Astonishing mercy !?

‘¢ The next thing which attracted
my attention was the wall which
surrounded the whole settlement,
for the protection of the gardens
from the intrusions of their cattle
and of the wild beasts.

“* A place of worship has also
been erected, capable of seating 2010
persons. On the Lord’s day I was
delighted to see the females coming
into it, clothed neatly in white and
printed cottons; and the men dress-
ed like Europeans, and carrying
their Bibles or ‘Testaments under
their arms; sitting upon benches,
instead of the ground as formerly,
and singing the praises of God with
solemnity and harmony, from their


| Psalm-books, turning in their Bi-


bles to the text that was given out,
and listening to the sermon with
serious attention. I also found a
church of Christ, consisting of
about 45 believing Hottentots, with
whom I had several times an op-
portunity of commemorating the
death of our Lord.

‘On the week days I found a
school, consisting of 70 children,
regularly taught in the place of
worship. ‘The teacher was a Hot-
tentot lad, who was actually a
young savage when I first visited
the kraal, and who, perhaps, had
never seen a printed word in his
life. When I first looked in at the
door of the school, this lad was
mending a pen, which a girl had
brought him for that purpose; this
action was such a proof of civiliza-
tion, that, reflecting at the moment
on his former suvage condition, I
was ulmost overwhelmed.

“T found a considerable extent
of cultivated land outside the wall,
which the Hottentots plough and
sow with wheat every year, though
a portion of it is destroyed annually
by their cattle getting into it while
the herd boys are fast asleep, and
from which no punishment could


PAC


altogether deter them. An officer
of the Hottentot regiment told me
that had they shot all the Hotten-
tot soldiers who were found asleep
upon their guard, they must have
shot the whole regiment;—‘ and
what would have been the use of
officers then?’ said he.

‘The Hottentots were, at the
recommendation of the missionary,
about to surround their fields with a
wall like that which enclosed their
houses and gardens; but whether
this has been effected I have not
yet learned.

‘¢ Indolence, and procrastination
of labour from indolence, is almost
universal among Hottentots. At
all our stations they endeavour to
put off digging their gardens, and
ploughing their fields, as long as
possible, with this apology—‘ Jt és
time enough yet.’

‘* Mr. Pacalt had much of this
temper to contend with; but his
fervent zeal, his persevering appli-
cation, his affectionate counsels,
and his personal example, so pow-
erfully counteracted this prevailing
disposition, that they actually per-
formed wonders, All the Hotten-
tots are still on a level with each
other; there are yet no distinctions
of rank amongst them. Some dress
better than others; some have a
waggon and more oxen than others,
and, it may be, a better house, but
these things produce no elevation
of rank; they will as readily com-
ply with the advice or injunction of
the poorest as the richest. The
operation of this state of things,
was’ severely experienced during
the period that elapsed between
the death of Mr, Pacalt and the
arrival of his successor, which I
think was about 4 months, The
Hottentots were like an army with-
out a commander—every improve-
ment ceased. Some of the Hotten-
tots were for going on with the
improvements which were included


in the plan of their deceased teacher


391


PAC


-and friend, but the rest of the
«people would not attend to their
advice, but desired that every thing
should remain in the same state
until the arrival of another mis-
sionary. They then began to la-
none with the same activity as be-
ore. ’

“‘Soon after the death of Mr.
Pacalt, the government of the
Cape colony, in order to perpe-
tuate the memory of that excel-
lent and laborious missionary, was
pleased to alter the name of the
settlement from Hooge Kraal to
Pacaltsdorp (or Pacalt’s town)
which spontaneous act was equally
creditable to the government, and
to the excellent man whose me-
mory will thus be perpetuated.

*¢ Dikkop, who was chief of the
kraal, and who petitioned for a
missionary on my first visit, was
also dead before my return; and
Paul Dikkop, whom I brought with
me to England, and who lately
died (we hope in the Lord), was a
son of his, and was making consi-
derable progress in his education,
and likely to be instrumental of
gro to his fellow countrymen on

return; but God, whose thoughts
are not as ours, saw fit to call him
to the eternal world, professing, as
a sinner, his sole dependence on the
Saviour. I bow to his holy will,
saying, Amen !

‘His Majesty’s Commissioners
of Inquiry have since visited this
settlement. They were present at
divine service on the Sabbath, and
heard the children read and repeat
theircatechisms., They were pleased
to express their satisfaction at the
general appearance of the people,
with their knowledge of the Scrip-
ture, and promised to do all in
their power to forward the laudable
objects of the Institution.

_ On this occasion a scene equally
unexpected and affecting presented
itself. The honourable Commis-
sioners having briefly stated to the


PAC

congregation the object of thelr
visit, a respectable Hottentot rose
up, ‘and addressed them as follows;
—‘I thank God for putting it into
the heart of the King of England
to pity us; and I thank the great
gentlemen (groote heeven) for
coming so far to inquire into our
state.’ He was followed by several
others; then by all the men in the
assembly collectively, who stood up
and expressed their gratitude to the
Commissioners. When the men
sat down, the women rose, and ex-
pressed: themselves. in a similar
manner, some of them in neat and
appropriate language. Many of the
people were.seen in tears. The sa-
tisfaction expressed by the Honour.
able Commissioners on this occu-
sion, conveyed to them in the Dutch
language by Mr. Anderson (the
missionary then there ), was received
by the assembly with the most lively
emotion 3 of pleasure.”’

Mr. ‘.'. Edwards, of Theopolis,
has lately removed to this station,
and taken charge of the school,
which had been for some time pre-
viously superintended by Mr. An-
derson, assisted by his daughters,
who still have the care of the girls’
school. The number under instruc.
tion is 63, but the average attend-
ance does not exceed 40. The
introduction of English teaching
has given great satisfaction to
the people. The school-room is
about to be fitted up for the adop-
tion of the British system ; towards
this object the Committee of the
Cape A. S, has granted 150 rix-
dollars,

The congregation, which is com-
posed of Hottentots of the In-
stitution, slaves from the neigh-
bouring village of George: 'Town,
and a few colonists, usually consists


on the Sabbath day, of about 200. |


Their attention and behaviour are

commendable. The people are

frequently catechised, after the ser-

vices, on the subjects of ay —_
3


they have |
prayer and r
held every ey
-week, Whi
seem sincere
their own sx
others, too
with the me
Some suspen:
have, howeve
sequence of
There are 4
tism.
Marriage

among the H
tion. Severa
been built, an
Institution are
better cultivat
have been pla
1826, makin;


| planted 800,


of the harve
felt by the He
ion. A farm
the. use of the |
-has received t!
Place, is like
acquisition to


miles N, W. o
port of cons
importance, s
merous Malay


The Rev,
B. M. S., ar
After a long
suspense, the p
sion began to
ficulties, whic


ment. Male


st lively


eopolis,
station,
school,
me pre-
T. An-
ghters,
he girls’
nstruc-
attend-
The
paching
ion to
pom is
e adop-
owards
of the
150 rix-


PAD


they have heard. Meetings for
prayer and religious edification are
held every evening throughout the


.week, While some of the people


seem sincerely concerned both for
their own salvation and that of
others, too many seem content
with the mere form of godliness.
Some suspensions from the church
have, however taken place, in con-
sequence of irregular conduct.
There are 4 candidates for bap-
tism.

Marriage is become general
among the Hottentots at this sta-
tion. Several new houses have
been built, and the gardens of the
Institution are, generally speaking,
better cultivated. About 400 shrubs
have been planted during the year


1826, making the total number


planted 800. The repeated failure


of the harvest has been severely


felt by the Hottentots at this sta-
ion. A farm lately purchased for
the. use of the Institution, and which


-has received the name of Burder’s


Place, is likely to prove a great
acquisition to the settlement. The
Hottentots have already subscribed
a considerable sum towards the
payment.

PADANG, a Dutch settlement
on the W. coast of Sumatra, 300
miles N. W. of Bencoolen. It isa
port of considerable commercial
importance, surrounded .by a nu-
merous Malay population, and con-


‘sidered the key to the large inland
. kingdom of Menancabow. E. long.


99° 46’. S. lat. 0° 50’.

The Rev, C. Evans, from the
B, M. S., arrived here in 1821.
After a long season of painful
suspense, the prospects of the mis-
sion began to brighten, many dif-
ficulties, which, at first, appeared
formidable, were surmounted, and
& patient continuance in well
doing recommended the mission-
ary to the respectful notice of the
Dutch authority of the settle-
ment. Male and female schools


PAL


have been established. Mr. Evans
preached regularly on the Sabbath
in English and Malay, but has
been compelled to visit England
from impaired health. Mr. Ward
has removed from Bencoolen to
Padang, with his printing press;
and Mr. Bruckner has lately been
associated with him in the duties
of the station, [See Sumatra.] '
‘PALAMCOTTA, . a* fortified
town in Tinnevelly district, Car-
natic Country, Hindoostan, about
3 miles from Tinnevelly, 55 E. N.
E. Cape Comorin, and 200 S. W.
Tanjore In the latter part of the
last century, the Rev. Mr. Swartz,
and his associates at Tanjore,
from the C.K. S. were active
and successful here. Previous to
the death of Mr. S., in 1798, a
church was built, and a congre-
gation collected of more than 200
persons. At his expense, chapels
were also erected for the Chris-
tians in Padpanadaburam and
Parani. Besides the provincial
schools, he employed a_school-
master and catechist at his own
expense, to instruct in English and
Malabarian schools, and take
charge of the congregations. Since
1800, the C. K. S. has placed here
a native catechist, or country
priest. The Rev. J. Hough, for
inany years previous to 1822, was
chaplain to this station, and was
very active in forwarding plans of
benevolence. When he left it,
283 children were instructed in
9 schools, under the patronage of
the society; and in 1819, there
were 84 converts from the hea-
then, and 174 communicants. Mr.
Hough’s congregation contributed
liberally to the support of schools,
The Rev. Messrs. Rhenius and
Schmid, and Mr. R. Lyon, country
born, English asssistant, David, na-
tive assistant, and 15 Tamul school-
masters, from the C.M/.S., com-
menced a mission here in 1820, and
opened a seminary for —!


PA L


of native schoolmasters and cate-
chists; the happy influence of which
begins to be perceived, by enabling’
them to furnish competent teachers
in the schools, which Mr. Hough
had established previous to their
arrival:in 1800, and also to provide
for:this extensive establishment of
schools in different parts of the
district. ;

The Rev. Messrs. Rhenius and
Schmid, with Mrs. Rhenius, Mrs.
Schmid, and Mrs. Schnarré, still.
continue their labours. A new
church has been erected, and was
opencd on the 26th of June, 1826 ;
.the expense amounted to 2000 ru-
pees, of which the Madras com-
mittee advanced 800: the remainder
was raised by contributions from
all classes of people in the neigh-
bourhood, Europeans, native Chris-
tians, Mahomedans, and heathens.
The work of God, which has re-
cently commenced in the vicinity
of. this station, by the instrumen-
tality of the missionaries, appears
to be steadily proceeding. The
progress of truth, and the opposi-
tion which is made to it, are thus
noticed by Mr.Rhenius :—‘“‘ Every-
where, the number of persons who
renounce idolatry, and put them-
selves under Christian instruction,
increases. In one district, perse-
cution is at a great height: a
modeliar, related to one of our se-
minarists, has expressed murderous
designs, not only against the people,
but against his relation, and has
declared ‘ Christianity shall not be
in that district ”’

The missionaries continue their
visits to those villages where con-
gregations have been formed with
much encouragement. The past
and present condition of one of
them, Satangkoolam, are thus con-
trasted by Mr. Rhenius :—

* About 11 o’clock, divine ser-
vice was held, when the whole
place was filled, and large numbers
of heathens were standing at the


PAN


doors and windows. Our dear
friends in Europe, who pray for
the prosperity of Zion, would haye
greatly rejoiced at such a sight,
What a change has taken place in
this town during the last 2 years!
When brother Schmid and myself
were here 5 years ago, for the first
time, all was darkness; now the
light of the Gospel shines, and the
sound of it goes forth into the sur.
rounding country! Then not a
school could be established; now a
fine large church is in the midst of
nie and a large congregation to fill
t {>9

There are, it appears, 12 schools,
averaging in attendance 232. In
the seminary there are 35 youths,
whose studies and proficiency give
much satisfaction. There ate 27
girls in the Female Seminary, who
are considerably improving in their
conduct. eed Tinnevelly.]

PALLISERS, a cluster of
islands in the Pacific Ocean, E.
Tahiti. W. long.
lat. 15° 38’.

After the example of the Society
and Georgian islanders, many
of the inhabitants renounced ido-
latry, demolished their idols, and
professedly embraced the Christian
religion. They have visited Tahiti
for the purpose of obtaining ele-
mentary books and Christian in-
struction.

PANDITERIPO, a parish in
the district of Jaffna, Ceylon, ad-
joining Tillipally on the W., 9 m,
N.W. of Jaffnapatam. <A large pro-
portion of the people are Roman
Catholics.

Dr. J. Scudder, missionary an
physician, George Kock, member
of the Church and medical assist-
ant, from the 4. B. C. F’, M., ar-
rived here in 1820. Before that
time the missionaries at Tillipally
considered this parish as under their
care, and opened a flourishing free-
school in 1818. In 1822, there
were 6 schools of this i a


146° 30, 8. |


connected v
which were i
apperty, Su
dipoo, and M
ing-school, v
very import
mission, was
1823, it con
girls, several
an anxicty fo
faré, and 2
chuych,

Dr. S. find:
to the native:
his medical s}
to relieve si
exists. Heh
cursions in t
and the neig
distributing be
the natives i
the boys of
have been us
reading to the

iffna. |
Hindoostan, 2
supposed to cx
inhabitants.

The Amert
Bombay estab
ip 1821, unde
In 1823, beside
ber of native ¢
15 Jewish boys
Bombay. |

PANWEL
doostan, in A
m. E. of Bomt
of considerable
for great. num
who bring thei
sometimes fro)
300 miles, and
pean articles, <
constant ingres
tives from mi
render Panwel
able for a wid
truth. The 4
tt Bombay hai
itfor the purpos


- dear
ay for
1 have
sight.
lace in
years !
myself
he first
ww the
nd the
he ‘sur-
not a
now a
nidst of
n to fill


schools,
32. In
youths,
cy give
ate 27
wy, who
in their


]
ister of
ean, E.


30, S. |


> Society
» many
ed ido-


04


hristian
ed Tahiti
ing ele-
stian in-


barish in
lon, ad-
.» 9 Mm,
arge pro-
a Roman


naty ani
member
al assist-
", M., ar-
{fore that
Tillipally
der their
hing free-
2, there
escription


PAN


connected with the station, 4 of
which were in the villages of Make-
apperty, Surlepuram, Vardeala-
dipoo, and Mutherkel.
ing-school, which promises to be a
very important auxiliary’ to the
mission, was Opened: in 1820: in
1823, it contained. 25 boys and 8
girls, several of whom manifested
an anxicty for their spiritual wel-
faré, and 2 had united with the
church,

Dr. S. finds many ways of access
to the natives, in consequence of
his medical skill, and his disposition
to relieve suffering wherever it
exists. He has made frequent ex-
cursions in the district of Jaffna
and the neighbouring islands, for
distributing books and preaching to
the natives in their villages ; and
the boys of the boarding-school
have been usefully employed in
reading to their countrymen. [See
Jaffna. |
‘PANE, a town in Aurungabad,
Hindoostan, 24 m. S. of Panwell,
supposed to contain 17 or 18,000
inhabitants.

The American missionaries at
Bombay established a school here
iy 1821, under a Jewish master,
In 1823, besides a respectable num-
ber of native children, there were
15 Jewish boys in the school, [See
Bombay.]

PANWELL, 2a town of Hin-
doostan, in Aurungabad, 12 or 15
mn, E. of Bombay, which is a place
of considerable trade, and a mart
for. great numbers in the interior,
who bring their produce to market,
sometimes from the distance of
300 miles, and carry back Euro-
pean articles, &c. This large and
constant ingress and egress,of na-
tives from many distant pinoes,
render Panwell peculiarly favour-
able for a wide dispersion of divine
truth. The American missionaries
it Bombay have frequently visited
it for the purpose of communicating


The board- |


PAR


| Christian instruction and distri-
buting the Scriptures and_ tracts.
They opened a school here in 1820,
» which, in 1823, 7. Jewish chil-
j ie aga instructed. [See Bom~«

Ys

PARAMARIBO, a considerable
town in S. America? and capital
of Surinam, or Dutch Guiana,
about 18 miles from the sea; on
the river Surinam, which is here
about a m. wide, affording a good
harbour. About one-third, the most
valuable part of the town, was burnt,
January 1621. The missionury-
premises escaped) Before this, it
contained 2 churches and 2 Jewish.
synagogues; the streets were all
perfectly straight, and lined with:
trees, such as lemons, oranges, shad-
docks,and tamarinds, which present
continual verdure; bearing, at the
same time, blossoms and ripe fruit.-
It is a place of much business, and
contains about 20,000 inhabitants.
The owners of the soil are mostly
Europeans, but are large slave-
holders. W. long. 65° 13’, N. lat.:
§ 33’.

The U. B. commenced a mis-
sion here in 1735, and have had
numerous seals to their ministry,
principally from among the negroes.
At the close of the year 1812,
their congregation of Christian ne-
groes consisted of 400 communi-
cants, 42 baptized adults, not ad-
mitted to the Lord’s Supper, and 66
baptized children; in all 507 per-
sons, besides candidates and cate-
chumens. At the commencement.
of 1823, there were 1243 negroes
under their care, 775 of whom were
communicants ; 80 had united with
the’ church during the preceding
year, and since then many have
participated Christian ordinances.
.Most of the negroes walk worthy
of their profession. In the vicinity
of Paramaribo, the missionaries
occupy several stations, and visit
various estates, with sis * "ata ;


PAR


among which are Fairfiel’, on the
Connewyne, Kiynehoop, and Mol-
hoop,on the Cottica. [See Surinam.]

PARRAMATTA, a. town in
the S. E. part of New South Wales,
25 m. W. of Sydney. It is thesecond
town in the colony, and is situated
at the head gf Port Jackson har-
bour. In 1818, it consisted of one
principal street, nearly a mile in
length, and contained 1200 inhabi-
tants, chiefly inferior traders, arti-
ficers, and labourers. The public
buildings are a church, an orphan-
house, a hospital, and amanufactory,
in which female convicts are em-
ployed.

Jn. 1814, Governor. Macquarie
founded an institution for the edu-
cation. and civilization of the na-
tives, which has been highly useful.
It has been removed about 12 m.
from Parramatta.

The Rev. S. Marsden, first chap-
lain in the colony of N. S. Wales,
who has resided here several years,
has been very active in the cause of
missions. Principally through his
instrumentality, a colony of English
malefactors, who were more un-
likely subjects for Gospel influence
than the native inhabitants, have
become an orderly and respectable


community. [See New South
Wales.]
PASSAMAQUODDY _IN-


DIANS, about 380 in number, in
the state of Maine. Their princi-
pal village is at Pleasant Point, in
the town of Perry, where they
have a Roman Catholic church.
They have heretofore resided on
the shores of the Schoodiac, and
obtained their sustenance by hunt-
ing, and taking porpoises and seals,
The state has recently made them
a grant of, 400 do‘lars to purchase
land and agricultural implements.
They own a township of 27,000
acres, and are in agood condition to
improve, by the attempts made to
civilize them. In the early part of


PAU


1824, the national government or.
dered a school-house to be erected
for them in Perry, and the Society


Sor Propagating the Gospel among


the Indians, engaged to furnish
them with a teacher for the season,
The Rev. Mr. Kellogg, from the
same society, has occasionally
visited them, and given them such
counsel as their state and character
seemed to require. His labours
have been highly approved by go-
vernment.

PATNA, an extensive, popu-
lous, commercial, and fortified city,
capital of Bahar, Hindoostan ;
situated on an eminence on the §,
side of the Ganges, 11 m. from the
cantonments of Dinapore, 12 from
Digah, and about 320 from Cal.
cutta. The European inhabitants
reside in the suburbs of Bonhipore,
a mile or two W. Patna. E. long,
85° 15’, N, lat. 259 37’. It is sup.
posed to contain 500,000 inha.
bitants. The Rev. T. S. Thomp-
son, from the B. M. S., came here
in 1812, and laboured with dili-
gence and success till about 1819,
when he removed to Delhi. He
established a school upon the Lan-
casterian system, preached in Eng-
lish, Bengalee, and Hindostanee,
and circulated the Scriptures and
tracts in the Hindee, Persian, Ben-
galee, and Arabic languages. He
also made several long journeys to
Benares, Allahabad, Lucknow, and
other places, which afforded oppor-
tunities of widely proclaiming th
truth, and of distributing the Scrip-
tures to multitudes who. had never
before seen or heard of them.
The missionaries at Digah occa-
sionally labour here.

PAUMOTU ISLANDS, in the
S. Pacific ocean, from 7 .:to 150
m. E. Tahiti.. Formerly the in-
habitants were notorious for abject
superstitions, abominable vices, and
unrelenting cruelties ; but through
the influence of the maiperopaales at

39


the Society 1
most universes
changed thei
in name, bec
language is
_that‘ of Tah
nearer the Ms
Teraa,’ native
M.S., are st
persons are n
Islands: they
at Wilks’s H
in compliance
desire, were se
in the early pa
settled on the
previous to th
had been gene
in every distric
erected for the
God


| PELLA, a.
S., Little Nan
8. of the Orar
500m. N. of C
When Me:.:
ner were drive
derer from the
Bath, they rey
and called it
proved a refug
from Warm Bd
Pella to the fug
Jerusalem. -']
by 500 of the
tinued to labo
till 1815. In
were added to
this time, seve
were sent fro
Bath, Steinkoy
After the r
missionaries, th
structed. by o
chists, and the g
toprosper. The
ed to about 350
60 and 70 made
of Christianit:
were nearly 10
church was er
possessed about


5 waggons, a


L Ore
acted
ciety
mong
rnish
asoll.
1 the
mally
such
racter
bours
Y g0-


popu-
i city,
stan 5
the S.
m the
2 from
n Cal-
bitants
1ipore,
. long.
is sup-
inha-
‘homp-
1e here
h dili-
1819,
i. He
e Lan-
in Eng-
stanee,
es and
b, Ben-
s. He
neys to
bw, and
Oppor-
ng th
b Scrip-
never
them.
occas


in the
ta 150
he in-
abject
es, and
hrough
aries at


PEy,
the Society Islands,. they have al-


most universally renounced idolatry,
changed their habits, and, at least


in name, become Christians. - The
language is radically the same as


that‘ of Tahiti, but it approaches


nearer the Marquesan. Moorea and
Teraa, native teachers of the L.
M. S., are stationed here. These
persons are natives of the Paumotu
{slands: they were communicants
at Wilks’s Harbour, Tahiti; and,
in compliance with their earnest
desire, were sent hither on a mission
in the early part of 1822. They are
settled on the island Anaa, where,
previous to this time, Christianity
had been generally embraced; and,
in every district, a house had been
ilaga for the worship of the true
' PELLA, a ‘station of the L. M.
S., Little Namaqualand, S. Africa,
8. of the Orange river, and about
500m. N. of Cape Town.

When Mes:.:rs. Albrecht and Eb-
ner were drive: by a lawless plun-
derer from their station at Warm
Buth, they repaired to this place,
and called it Pella, because it
proved a refuge to the dispersed
from Warm Bath, like the ancient
Pella to the fugitive Christians from
Jerusalem. ‘They were followed
by 500 of the Namaquas $ and con-
tinued to labour here with success,
till 1815. In 1814, more than 50
were added to the church. About
this time, several native preachers
were sent from Pella to Warm
Bath, Steinkopff, and other places.

After the removal of the first
missionaries, the people were in-
structed by others, and: by cate-
chists, and the settlement continued
toprosper. ‘The Namaquas amount-
ed to about 350, of whom between
60 and 70 made an open profession
of Christianity. In the -school
were nearly 100 children; a good
church was erected; the people
possessed about 600 head of cattle,
15 waggons, and about 30 good


PER


gardens, and were advancing in
knowledge, industry, and civiliza-
tion.

‘ Excessive droughts have recently
compelled the Namaquas belong-
ing to this station to remove to the
vicinity of the Orange River. A
chief, named Gert:de Klark, has
since invited them to remove to
Steinkopff. : Cops

PENOBSCOT INDIANS, a

tribe, principally on Old Toun
Island, in the Penobscot River,
Maine, 12m. above Bangor, con-
sisting, in 1824, of about 340 souls.
These Indians are mostly Roman
Catholics, and are poor, degraded,
and wretched. In 1730, the So-
ciety in Scotland for propagating
Christian Knowledge, aided by a
grant from the General Court of
Massachusetts, supported a mis-
sionary to labour for their spiritual
good, till 1737, when ‘he was dis-
missed for want of success.
* In March, 1823, a society was
formed in Bangor to promote the
civilization and the moral and re-
ligious improvement of this tribe,
which immediately employed Mr.
J. Brewer, a graduate from Yale
College, to take a school at Old
Town Island, which, in a month,
contained about 30 children. It
continued only a few months, but
was resumed in 1824.

PERSIA, a country of Asia,
whose limits have been various at
different periods. Its ancient name
was Elam, and its inhabitants were
denominated Elamites, as the de-
scendants of Elam, the son of
Shem; under which - appellation
they formed, about the time of
Abraham, a powerful state. The
limits assigned by nature to Persia
are the Persian Gulf and the In-
dian Ocean, S; the R. Indus, E. ;
and Oxus,N. E.; the Caspian Sea,
and Mount Caucasus, N.; and the
mountains of Armenia, and the
Euphrates and Tigris, W.; extend-
ing from about 45°.to 70° E. long.,

MM 397


PER


and from 25° to 43°,N. lat. The
provinces of Georgia, Daghestan,
and Shirvan, between the Caspian
and Black Seas, to about 40° N.
lat., are now subject to Russia.
The wandering tribes to the E.
are governed by their own Khans,
who merely pay a military service
to the King of Persia when re-
quired. In this way, it is sup-
posed, the present King might col-
lect a force of 160,000 men.

The government is monarchical.
The king is absolute master of the
lives and property of his ‘subjects.
In 1816, 8 of his sons were gover-
nors in as many principalities.
Teheran is the capital.

Estimates of the population of
Persia are founded on corjecture,
and are very various. It probably
does not exceed 10,000,000, though
some have supposed it to be
20,000,000. The general charac-
teristics of the people are mildness
and gentleness, with a very consi-
derable degree of refinement.
Though the Mahomedan religion
prevails, they have long been satis-
fied with a lax system of faith, inso-
much that the i'urks and Arabs call
tham heretics. In addition to this,
aclass of infidel Mahomedans is
rising up, called Soofies, or Free
Thinkers, supposed to amount to
about 100,000, who renounce the
system of Islamism, and seem dis-
posed to examine the claims of the
Christian religion. The rapid in-
crease of this sect portends the
downfal of Mahomedanism, by
‘principles silently operating in its
very bosom, and proves that the
thinking part of the community are
ripe for a change.

There are no missionary esta-
blishments in Persia; yet it be-
gins to be viewed as a field of
promise.


Like other Mahomedan coun-.|


tries, it has been too long believed
to be inaccessible to the efforts of
Christian enterprise ; but the rea-


PER


sons, which were powerful in other
spheres of Mahomedan influence,
never existed in the same force in
Persia, and the force which they
did possess is much weakened by
the extensive circulation of Tracts,
and the Persian New Testament
translated by the late Rev. Henry
Martyn, who is known, even in this
country, by the distinctive appel-
lation, ‘that Man of God.’ In
1811, this devoted and intrepid sol-
dier of the cross went almost single
handed into the heart of the em-
pire, and performed the difficult task
of translating the New Testament
and the Psalms into the Persian,
the vernacular language of 200,000
who bear the Christian name, and
which is known over one-fourth
of the habitable globe. This may
be considered as the commence-
ment of the great work of giving
the Gospel to the millions.ot Per-
sia, and the time will come, when
his memory will be cherished
among its natives as the first and
great benefactor of their country.
His bold and able attack on Islam-
ism, during his 12 months? stay at
its head-quarters in Shiraz, made an
impression on the learned, and
produced an effect, which will be
held on record, in Persia, to the
latest age.

The Rev. Mr. Robinson, chap-
lain at Poonah, is advancing in the
translation of the Old Testament
into Persian; and the King of Oude
has compiled and printed a Persian
Dictionary, in 7 folio volumes.

Encouraged by the effects already
produced, the Scottish M. S. esta-
blished, in 1814, a mission at
Astrachan, ip Russian Tartary,
near the N. W. shores of the Cas-
pian, which is exerting a happy in-
fluence in Persia. The German
M. S. has also appointed several
missionaries to enter this field, who,
after spending about a year at
Astrachan in preparation, set for-
ward for Tifflis in their way for
398


Shirvan, on

Caspian, in

names are, H
Dittrich, anc
all educated
PETERS]
TERSBUR(
the empire ot
ment of the
archbishop’s ;
It is seated o
Gulf of Finlar
some islands {

partly upon
ground on wh
@ vast morass
fishermen’s hi
first began thi
of a citadel |
1703; he buil
himself, and s
' In- 1710, Cow
first house of
year, the Em,

hands, laid the
of the same m:
small beginnin
city; and in
after the wo
erected, the s
transferred toi
inhabitants ar
286,000. The
that of the Ho
named after the
the first in the e
Christianity ;
edifice, comple
are upwards o
appropriated td
gion, and thos
which are tol
restrictions. P|
siderable trade
products of the
communicatio
rivers with me
provinces, as fa:
borders of the
#25 m. N. W.
N. Stockholm,
Vienna. EB, le
59° 56’,


1is may
mence-
giving
of Per-
) when
verished

t and
ountry.
Islam-
stay at
nade an
bd, and
will be
to the


» chap-
ig in the
stament
of Oude
Persian
nes.

s already
S. esta-
psion at
artary,
he Cas-
appy in-
German
several
ld, who,
year at
set for-
way for
08


PET


Shirvan, on the W. shore of the
Caspian, in April, 1823. Their
names are, Henry Brenz, Augustus
Dittrich, and Felican Zuremba,—
all educated at the Basle seminary.

PETERSBURG, or ST. PE-
TERSBURG, the metropolis of
the empire of Russia, in a govern-
ment of the same name, and an
archbishop’s see, with a university.
It is seated on the Neva, near the
Gulf of Finland, and built partly on
some islands formed by the R., and
partly upon the coatinent. The
ground on which it now stands was
avast morass, occupied by a few
fishermen’s huts. Peter the Great
first began this city by the erection
of a citadel with six bastions, in
1703; be built also a small hut for
himself, and some wooden hovels.
In-1710, Count Golovkin built the
first house of brick; and the next
year, the Emperor, with his own
hands, laid the foundation of a house
of the same materials. From these
small beginnings arose the imperial
city; and in less than nine years
after the wooden hovels were
erected, the seat of empire was
transferred to it from Moscow. The
inhabitants are computed to be
286,000. The principal church is
that of the Holy Virgin of Kasan,
named after the province of Kasan,
the first in the empire thatembraced
Christianity; and is a beautiful
edifice, completed in 1813. There
are upwards of 40 more churches
appropriated to the national reli-
gion, and those of other sects,
which are tolerated without any
restrictions. Petersburg has a con-
siderable trade in exporting the
products of the empire, and has a
communication by canals and
rivers with many of the southern
provinces, as far as Astrachan,on the
borders of the Caspian sea. It is
425 m. N. W. Moscow, 500 E. by
N. Stockholm, and 1000 N.N. E.
Vienna. E. long. 30° 19’, N. lat.
59° 56’,


PLA


The Rev. Mr. Knill of the
L. M.S., has been labouring for
several years in this city, not with-
out indications of the favour of God
and the approbation of good
men.

PHILIPPOLIS, a station of the
L. M. S., 8. Africa, (so called from
respect to the Rev. Dr. Philip),
which was formed a few years
since, with the hope of reviving the
mission to the Bushmen ; for which
purpose Jan Goeyman, a Hottentot
teacher, was sent hither, but no dis-
cernible success attended his la-
bours. Ashe thought an European
missionary would succeed where he
failed, Mr. Clark was appointed
to this place.

An out-station, belonging to it,
was, in the course of the year 1828,
attacked by a party of plundering
Caffres, who, horrible to relate,
destroyed no less than 31 Bush
people, in order to get possession of
their cattle. Mr. C., having re
ceived information of this dreadful
catastrophe, proceeded, as soon as
he was able, to the spot, and re-
moved the survivors to Philippolis.
He had previously directed some
Hottentots, belonging to the latter
place, to pursue the murderers, in
order, if possible, to recover the
cattle; in which attempt they com-
pletely succeeded.

PLAINTAINS, several small
islands, lying about 40 m. S. E.
Freetown, W. Africa; 22 m. from
Kent, and 3 W. the main land.
They belong to the family of
Caulkers, native chiefs in the
Sherbro country, W. long. 12° 18’,
N, lat. 7° 54’.

The C. M. S. commenced a mis-
sion in this place, by means of S.
Caulker, schoolmaster. G. Caulker,
chief of these islands, was edu-
cated in England, and is anxious to
introduce Christianity into his
native country. He has translated
into the Sherbro, which is a
dialect of the Bullom, the morning
399


* PO!
services of the United


and evenin
Church, which have been printed
by the society for the benefit of the


natives. He has also translated a
collection of hymns, Watts’s Cate-
chism, and a part of the Bible, and
is proceeding with the remainder.
S. Caulker, a younger brother, was
educated in the society’s schools,
and acted as usher to Mr. Nylander.
In 1823, he had a promising school
of 23 scholars, some of whom could
read the Bullom and English
fluently. They have daily prayers,
morning and evening, in a small
place of worship, and divine service
is performed regularly on the
Sabbath by the two brothers.
According to the last report, there
were in the day school 21 boys,
and in the evening school 8 boys
and adults, whose progress is fa-
vourably spoken of.

POINT PEDRO, a town at the
northern extremity of the district
of Jaffna, Ceylon, 21 miles from
Jaffhapatam. E. long. 80° 26’,
N. lat, 9° 62’.

This station of the W.M.S.
is connected with that of Jaffna-
patam, and is generally supplied
with preaching. Several schools
are connected with it. In 1826,
there were, with Jaffna, 70 mem-
be.s in society. [See Jaffna.]

POLYNESIA, a term applied
to the numerous islands in the
Pacific Ocean, including the Pelew,
Sandwich, Friendly, Society, Mar-

uesas, and several other islands of
ess note; from W. long. 130° to
230°, and N. lat. 36° to 8. 60°.

POONAH, a populous city of
Hindoostan, about 75 miles 8. E.
Bombay. It is the seat of the
late Mahratta power; but is now
subject to the British government
in India.

The C. K. S. has a depot of
books at this place, under the care
of the chaplain, the Rev. Mr.
Robinson, who is translating the
Old Testament into the Persian


PUL


language, under the auspices of the
S. Prop. G.F. P. This work, in
conjunction with the New Testa-
ment of the late Rev. H. Martyn,
will, it is hoped, be the means of
supplying the Mahomedan natives
of India, and other parts, with e
classical version of the Scriptures
in their favourite language,
PRINCE EDWARD’S IS-
LAND, or St. John, an island on
the 8S. part of the Gulf of St,
Lawrence, having New Brunswick
on the W.; Nova Scotia on the §.;
and Capr Breton on the E. It
is 60 m. ae and 30 broad, and
exceedingly fertile, with several
streams. In 1745, it surrendered,
with Cape Breton, to the English.
The capital is Charlotte Town.
W. long. 62° 50’, N. lat. 46°50’,
The S. Prop. G. F. P. has two
missionaries and one catechist


ere.
PULLICAT, a sea-port town
in the Carnatic, Hindoostan, 25 m.
N. Madras. E. long. 80° 27’, N.
lat, 13°24’. In 1609, the Dutch
settled here, and built a fort. It
is now the seat of their government
on the Coromandel coast.
Formerly the missionaries of the
C, K. S. laboured here with suc-
cess. In the early part of. the
present century, their communi-
cants were about 200. The Rev.


J. Kindlinger, from the N. M.S, |


arrived, in 1821, and soon. after
had 301 Christians under his di-
rection, divided according to their
languages; 121 Tamul, 140 Portu-
guese, and 40 Dutch. The Tamul
and Portuguese were baptized in
their youth, and had little but the
name of Christianity ; heving been
visited by a missionary only once
a year, for 23 years. He soon
opened a Tamu! and Dutch school
with nearly 100 pupils, collected
& congregation, and instituted a
weekly prayer-meeting in Dutch
and Tamul.

The Rev, Mr. Iron — in

4


June, 1823, ;
Dutch depan
time, Mr. Ki
in Tamul, an
numerous ni


= He has been


chisings of the

evidence appe

bestowed on 1

been without |

PULO PIN
nut Island, ci

Wales’s Isian

coast of the M

which, it is se

strait. It conta
miles, was tray

India Compan;

aregular gove

only to the G

India. When

possession of it

few miserable
coast. The po
toa census taki

1825, amounte:
nearly 38,000
nearly 14,000
Bugguese, and ¢
Since the peri
merous migrati
rounding coun
population, accd
ment of a res
in Pinang, to é
divided by a re
running north
Europeans occu
The harbour
affords good a
siderable trade
E. India Comps
trade of Malacc
islands centres
point is in E
N, lat, 6° 25’,

In January, 1
Medhurst, of the
previously assiste
lacca, embarked
the design of com
and Malay missi
Having explain


itechist


| town
|, 25 m.


| possession of it, there were only a


PUL


June, 1828, and has charge of the j
Dutch department. Since that


| time, Mr. Kindlinger has preached


in Tamul, and has, in general, a
numerous native congregation.


" He has been blessed in his cate-


chisings of the people, and decisive
evidence appears that the labours
bestowed on the scholars has: not
been without fruit.

PULO PINANG, that is Betel-
nut Island, called also Prince of
Wales’s Island, \ying off the W.
coast of the Malay peninsula, from
which, it is separated by a narrow
strait. It contains about 160 square:
miles, was transferred to the East
India. Company, in 1786, and has
aregular government, subordinate
only to the Governor General of
India. When the British took


few miserable fishermen on the
coast. The population, according
toa census taken up to 3)st Dec.
1825, amounted at that time to
nearly 38,000 persons; of whom
nearly 14,000 were Malays and
Bugguese, and about 7,500 Chinese.
Since the period mentioned, nu-
merous migrations from the sur-
rounding countries have raised the
population, according to the state-
ment of a respectable individual
in Pinang, to 65,000. Pinang is
divided by a range of mountains,
running north and south. The
Europeans occupy the E, side only.
The harbour is capacious, and
alfords good anchorage. A con-
siderable trade is carried on by the
E. India Company, and the whole
trade of Malacca and the adjacent
islands centres here. Its N. E.
point, is in E. long. 100° 19%
N, lat, 6° 25’,

In January, 1819, the Rev. Mr.
Medhurst, of the L. M. S., who had
previously assisted Dr. Milne at Ma-
lacca, embarked for Pinang,. with
the design of commencing a Chinese
and Malay mission in that island.
Having explained his object to the


PUL


Governor in council, he was kindly
enco to commence his ope-
rations, and was informed that he
might expect from Government an:
allowance of 20 dollars monthly,
towards the expense of the Chinese
schools ; and half that sum towasds
the support of a Malay seminary.
The Chinese residents, also, cheer-
fully granted the gratuitous use of
one of the temples as a school
room; and a considerable number
of religious tracts were accepted
by them with readiness, and pe-
rused with attention

Subsequently to this, the Rev.
Messrs. Beighton and Iuce ar-
rived, and other schools were
opened. On one occasion, the
latter went to witness the great
idolatrous festival of Shaou and


‘Tseaou, which is considered as a


feast of pure benevolence ; being’
celebrated on the behalf of those
poor bereaved spirits who have
no relations to mourn for them—:
to supply them with clothes,
money, and other necessaries—to
rescue them from Tartarus—and
to exalt them to higher and more
felicitous regions, On Mr. Ince’s
arrival at the temple, he found it
surrounded by a vast concourse of
people, whose general appearance
reminded him of .the crowds which
usually attend a fair in England.
On one side of the temple was
2 laiye paper idol of a most uncouth
form, and about 14 feet in height,
with uncommonly large glass eyes,
and painted with various colours,
Immediately before this hideous
deity was a long table, set out
with all kinds of provisions, inter-
spersed with small paper idols. At
one end of the table were a number
of carpets spread on the ground,
on which sat half a dozen priests,
worshipping their god, chaunting an
unintelligible jargon, and bowing
themselves to the ground. There
were many other smaller paper
idols, represented as riding on
MM2 401


PUL .


animals of the same material ; and
the whole scene was illuminated
by a profusion of lanterns and
candles. Behind the great idol
was a large quantity of pieces of
paper, many of which were covered
with gold leaf. . These papers
were burned by the idolaters, under
a firm. persuasion that they are
transformed into money. in the
world of spirits. Mr. Ince’s ex-
pestulations with the people were.
in vain ;.and on a second visit to
the same festival, he observes,
‘¢ Thousands of people were assem-
bled, and the noises made by the
beating of drums, gongs, &c. were
of such. a horrid description, that
it appeared as if the gates of the
lower regions had been thrown
open,. and all the infernals had
issued forth at once to terrify
mankind. These people spare no
pains nor.cost in the worship of
their idols; but if they are so
zealous in the cause of error, what
ought Christians to be in the
glorious cause of: truth ?”’

On the 27th of December, 1820,
Mr. Medhurst, who was then at
Pinang, went to. the house of an
old man, who had recently died,
with the design of improving the
solemn event, by addressing the
surviving relations. None of these,
however,. could find leisure to at-
tend to him. The body, when laid
in the coffin, was dressed in a com-
plete suit of new clothes, though
the relatives were very poor, and
an abundance of gilt paper was
kept continually burning near the
corpse. After the coffin was nailed
down, an incense pot, with eat-
ables, was placed before it; and
the relatives, beginning with the
eldest son, bowed down nine times,
with their faces toward the earth,
before the deceased. The mat and
pillows belonging to the late occu-
pier of the house were then taken
out, to be thrown away; and all
the friends who bad assisted in the


PUL .


! ceremonies washed their hands in


oil, in order, as they said, to pre-
vent any noxious influence from
adhering to them. - :

During the year }823, the mis-
sionaries at Pinang issued: proposals
for erecting a chapel by subscrip-
tion, to be used ‘indiscriminately
for. Chinese, Malay, and English
worship, The. foundation stone
was laid on the 11th of June, and
in the course of the ensuing .sum-
mer the chapel was opened:and at-
tended by large and’ respectable
congregations. In 1825, Mr. Ince
was called to the 2oncurs that
await the faithful labourer.

The following particulars of the
mission are those most recently

ven :—

Malay Schvole.— These schools
have been increased to 6; of which
5 are for boys and 1 for girls. The
numberof the former on the school-
register is 127, of the latter 38;
making a total of 165. Mr. Beigh.
ton founds much of his hope of use-
fulness among the Mohamedans,
in many of whom a decline of pre-
judice is perceptible, on the-Chris-
tian instruction disseminated by
means of the native schools.


wtalay Worship.—On every Sab-
beth morning the missionary ex-
plains the doctrines of the Gospel
to a small congregation of Ma.
lays, partly consisting of the
teachers «and scholars belonging


to the schools. In_ the alter.
noon, he visits one or other of the
schools, and gives an exhorta-
tion to the children, and to such
adults as may attend from the im-
mediate vicinity, Of the adult
Malays who hear the Gospel, se-
veral of whom appear to make pro-
gress in the knowledge of the Scrip-
tures, the number is increasing.
Some who privately acknowledge
the divine authority of the New
Testament, fear to avow their con-
viction openly.

English Worship. — yaaa

4


preached by.
on Sabbath
by several o
Europeans o
service, whic
fui to. indivi
to keep alive
of the miss
formed on tl
Among its n
man and lad;
who have lat
The state
among the
when compa:
7 years
cided nod gn
In 1816,
fermed in co:
cutta Bible
tronage of tt


| mandants,


PUT AW.
fawe tte. °:,
3600 In:
Iilinois, ... .
Isaac M‘Coy,
missionary fr
M. S., was i
good amon: |
villages, mur
were persua
perance, and
family worshi
has recently
improvement
Michigan te
ment of the U
Baptist Boara

UTHUP
collers, or
Christianized
the instrume.
They are oc
missionaries,


QUILON,
port of Tra


nds in
to pre-
» from


ne mis-
oposals
bscrip-
jinately
English
» stone
le, and
g sum-
‘and at-
ectable
ir. Ince
Irs. that


s of the
recently


schools
f which
Ils. The
p school-
tter 38;
- Beigh-
e of use-
amedans,
p of pre-
@Chris-
ated by


Se

ery Sab-
ary ex-
e Gospel
of Ma-
of the
longing
e ‘alter-
pr of the
exhorta-
to such
the im-
he adult
pel, se-
ake pro-
lhe Scrip-
creasing.
owledge
ne New
heir con-


lecture,
D2


PUT


preached by. Mr. B. at the chapel,
on Sabbath evenings, is. attended
by several of the more respectable
Europeans of the settlement. .-This
service, which has proved very use-
fui to individuals, tends generally
to keep alive an interest-in favour
of the mission... A church. was
formed on the llth of. July, 1826.
Among its members are a gentle-
man and lady, residents in Pinang,
who have lately renounced popery.

The state of religion, generally,
among the European residents,
when compared with what it was
7 years ago, exhibits proofs of de-
cided and gratifying improvement.

In 1816, a Bible Society was
fermed in connexion with the Cal-
cutta Bible Sociey, under the pa-
tronage of the Governor and com-


| mandants,


PUTAWATOMIES, or Pot-


tawatt:. .., a tribe of about
3600 In: dispersed in Indiana,
Illinois, .... wlichigan. The Rev.


Isaac M‘Coy, while an itinerating
missionary from the American B,
M. S., was instrumental of. much
good amon this people,. In two
villages, many of the inhabitants
were persuaded to abandon intem-
perance, and regularly to observe
family worship. An establishment
has recently been formed, for the
improvement of this tribe, in the
Michigan territory, by the Govern-
ment of the United States, and the
Baptist Board of Foreign Missions.

UTHUPETT, a village of
collers, or thieves, who became
Christianized, principally through
the instrumentality of Mr. Swartz.
They are occasionally visited by
missionaries.


Q.
QUILON, or Coulan, a. sen-
port of Travancore, Hindoostan,
88 m. N.W. of Cape Comorin. The
population was formerly estimated
at 100,000, and latterly at 80,000.
A station was commenced here by


RAI


the L. M. S. in 182), and ‘the Rev.
Messrs. Smith and Crow, and: se-
veral native readers, laboured with
much zeal and energy. The num-
ber of schools under their superin-
tendence, in 1825, was 8 ; that,of
scholars, including. 15 girls, : who
also received Christian instruction,


,353 5 and all of them were in-a


prosperous state. About this: time
Mr. S. was obliged, on account of
ill health, to return home ;,and Mr.
C., whose constitution was also un-
able to bear the climate of India,
arrived in England, Dec. 12, 1826.

. On his departure from Quilon, the
mission was placed under the super-
intendence of Mr. Ashton, assistant
missionary from Nagercoil. He has
collected a native congregation,
consisting of about 20 persons, who
assemble every Sabbath afternoon,
when a service is performed, . in
which he is assisted by the reader,
Rowland Hill. The readers, beside
visiting the bazars and other places


of public resort, itinerate ‘in the ,


neighbouring villages.


The native schools, which con- “:


tain about,300 children, are in an
improving state.


R.


RAIATEA, sometimes called
Uléeteu, one of the Society Islands,
in the 8S. Pacific Ocean, about W.
long. 151° 30’, S. lat. 16° 60;
30 m. S. W. Huahiné, and 60 in
circuit, with muny. good har-
bours, containing about 1300 inha-
bitants. This island was formerly
the chief seat of idolatry, and the
source of all political authority to
this group. Human sacrifices were
brought hither from all the neigh-
bouring island:. and offered to Oro,
the god of w”’ ; and here the now
Christian Pri:.ce, Tamatoa, was
once prayed to as a deity.

The Rev. L. E. Threlkeld and
Jobn Williams, from the L. A. S.,
removed from Eimeo, ney aaa


ee


RA!
Sept. 1818,.on the W. coast, in the
midst of a forest, where scarcely a
habitation stood.

In 1823, a beautiful town had
been built, extending about 2 m.
along the margin of a bay, having
several bridges over streams which
fel ito the bay. In the centre is
eaapel, 156 feet by 44, in which
1000: persons usually assembled for
Christian instruction. Agriculture
rad the mechanical arts have been
introduced by the missionaries with
happy effect; but the triumph of
the cross must ba revarded as one
of the most signal ever achieved
since the world began. ot a ves-
tige of idolatry remains.

In tracing the introduction of
Christianity into this island, we
are carried back to 1809, when
a few of the nutives were in-
structed at Eimeo. In 1816,
the Rev. C. Wilson, missionary at
Fimeo, and Pomarre, late King of
Tahiti, were providentially cast
upon this island, and obliged to re-
main for some time. Mr. W. em-
braced the opportunity of preaching
the Gospel to the natives, while
Pomarre employed all his influence
to induce them to abandon their
idols and embrace the truth. Suc-
cess attended their united efforts ;
and the King, with his chiefs and
people, avowed themselves Chris-
tians. Immediately they desisted
from offering human sacrifices, from
idolatrous worship and infanticide ;
built places for Christian worship ;
but knew little of the Gospel ex-
cept the. name, -and continued in
the indulgence of every evil desire,
till after the settlement of the mis-
stonaries among them.

In 1823, the Deputation thus
wrote concerning the religious
state of the people :—

¢ With much satisfaction, we
witnessed the baptism of 150
persons in one day, making the
number of baptized about 1100;
leaving @ remainder of persons in


RAT
the island, unbaptized, about 200,
In examining the ruined morais,
or temples at Opoa, we could hardly
realize the idea that 6 or 7 years
ago they were all in use ; and were
rather inclined to imagine these the
ruins of some wretched idolatry,
which had suffered its overthrow
15 or 20 centuries ago. In look-
ing over the large congregation,
and in seeing so many decent and
respectable men and women, all
conducting themselves with the
greatest decorum and propriety, we
have often said to ourselves, ‘ Can
these be the very people who par-
ticipated in the horrid scenes which
we have heard described ?—nay,
the very people who murdered their
children with their own hands;
who slew and offered human sacri-
fices; who were the very perpetra-
tors of all these indescrib=ble abo-
minations? To realize the fact is
almost impossible. But, though
6 or 7 years ago they acted as
if under the immediate and unre-
strained influence of the most ma-
lignant demons that the lower
regions could send to torment the
world, we view them now in
their houses, in their various
ineetings, and in their daily avoca-
tions, and behold them clothed, and
in their right minds.’ ’’

On the subject of the instruction
enjoyed by the natives, in con-
nexion with the Raiatean mission,
the deputation observe—‘* All the
people, both adults and children,
who are capable of it, dre in a
state of school instruction. Many
of the men and women, and not 4
few of the children, can read,
fluently and with accuracy, those
portions of the sacred Scriptures
which have been translated, and of
course all the elementary books;
the rest read in one or other
of these elementary books; many
can write, and several cypher.
Such is the state of things, and
such is the system of ee


‘


that is now in


a single child |


remain in this


s The children,


and girls, ass
at sunrise for
house erected |
the adults asse
in the chapel,
mornings exce
peat their ca
school hours a
8 o’clock, the;
occupations fo

Of the prog
Raiatea, they
account :—

¢ Around th
the valleys, the


sto a great ex


fences, In the


s are of different


and sugaer-can
both tobacco a
have learnt to )
ket. The s
have seen of b
quality, and, w
he exceeded by
in any count
in great luxuria
produces three
year; sugar so
one. The peo
to make salt
boiling it in le
we have seen ig
English salt.
sugar-mill, but
some of the
jobs, such as n
very well. Mo
work at carpel
seen some chai
made by them,
surprised us, J
to emulate the
modes of living,
possess every ¢
Which is necess¢
to live in the E
Since that ti
attended the y


8 single child or


RAI


that is now'in operation, that nota
grown person can
remain in this island unable to read.


a The children, comprising 350 boys


and girls, assemble every morning
at sunrise for instruction in a large
house erected for the purpose; while
the adults assemble at the same time
in the chapel, Saturday and Sabbath
mornings excepted, to read and re-
peat their catechisms. After the
school hours are over, which isabout
8 o’clock, they go to their several
occupations for the day.’?

Of the progress of civilization in
Raiatea, they give the following
account :—

‘“¢ Around the settlement, in both
the valleys, the ground is enclosed,


sto a great extent, with bamboo


fences, In these enclosures, which
are of different dimensions, tobacco


| and sugar-canes are planted; and


both tobacco and sugar the people
have learnt to prepare for the mar-
ket. The specimens which we
have seen of both were of the best
quslity, and, we conceive, cannot
be exceeded by similar productions
inany country. Both grow here
in great luxuriance. The tobacco
produces three or four crops in the
year; sugar something more than
one. The people have also learnt
to make salt from sea-water, by
boiling it in large iron pans: that
we have seen is equal to the best
English salt. Here is not only a
sugar-mill, but also a smithy; and
some of the natives do common
jobs, such as making hinges, &c.
very well. Most of the men can
work at carpentry; and we have
seen some Chairs and other articles,
made by them, which have greatly
surprised us. In fact, they begin
to emulate the missionaries in their
modes of living, and are anxious to
possess every article of furniture
which is necessary to enable them
to live in the English style,”?

Since that time prosperity has
attended the various efforts that


RAI


have been made. Several portions
of the Scriptures, and other works
have been translated.

The members of the church ra-

pidly increase, and their conduct
continues to be as becometh ‘the
Gospel.
. During the year 1826, 7 or 8
native Christians in Raiatea died
happily in the Lord, among whom
was Tahitoe, one of the principal
chiefs. The school contais 400
scholars. Mr. Williams has trans-
lated into Tahitian the Asseinbly’s
Shorter Catechism, and has in hand
a translation of the Prophecy of
Isaiah.

The cocoa-nut oil contributed
by the members of the Raiatean
auxiliary society, for the year
1825-6, has been sold for 300).
sterling, of which sum 30/. was
subscribed by the children belong-
ing to the schools of the station.
[See Society Islands.] |
_ RAIVAIVAT, a group of islands
in the S. Pacific Ocean, at const-
derable distance from each other,
viz.: Ratvaivat, Rurotoa, Rimatara,
Rutut, Rurutu, and Tupuai. The
inhabitants resemble those of Ta-
hiti, and speak a similar language.
Till recently they were ignorant
of God, gross idolaters, and ad-
dicted to crimes common to such
a state of ignorance and super-
stition. But the change produced
calisalike for wonder and gratitude.

The Rev. Mr. Davies, of the
L.'M. S., arrived at Raivaivai, where
3 native teachers lubours, on the
4th of February, 1826, On the fol-
lowing morning, it being the Sab-
bath, he attended an early prayer-
meeting, and found a_ olerably
large congregation assembled. The
worship was conducted by two of
the natives of the island (one of
them the son of a chief), each of
whom read a chapter in the Gos-
pels and prayed. ‘The congrega-
tion that assembled in the forenoon
consisted of from 900 pA ai


RAN


many from the opposite side of the
island having returned home, the
congregation in the afternoon was
much smaller. In the school he
found 17 of the natives capable of
reading in the Tahitian Gospels.
During his visit he preached’ three
times *o the natives; held a meet-
in’ wi’) the baptized adults, in
s 4h ¢ £225 and admitted 17 can-
Cidaies, after due examination, into
church-fellowship. [See Rimatara,
Rurutu, Tapuai.)

RANGOON, a fortified city, and
chief port of the Burman Empire,
on a branch of the Irrawaddy, 30
m. from its mouth, and 6708S. E.
Calcutta. E. long. 96° 9, N. lat,
26° 48’. Population 30,000, of va-
tious nations. Having long been
the asylum for insolvent debtors
from different settlements of India,
it is crowded with foreigners of
desperate fortunes, who carry on a
small trade. The Exchange exhi-
bits a motley assemblage of mer-
chants, of Malabars, Moguls, Per-
sians, Parsees, Armenians, Portu-
guese, and French, who are per-
mitted to enjoy the most liberal
toleration in their various religious
creeds. It is the only port in the
empire where Europeans have
been allowed to trade.

In January, 1807, the Rev.
Messrs. Chater and Mardon, from
the B. M. S., having consented
to undertake an expicratory visit,
arrived at Rangoon, and were re-
ceived in the most friendly man-
ner by some English gentlemen, to
whom they had been recommended
by a friend at Calcutta. They
were also treated with great
civility by the Shawbundar, or In-
tendant of the port, and by one of
the Catholic priests, who resided in
the vicinity of the town. On the
23d May they returned to Seram-
pore, and expressed their most san-
guine hopes of the establishment of
a mission. Mr. Mardon, however,
having subsequently declined the


RAN


undertaking, on the plea of ijl.
health, Mr. Felix Carey volunteered
his services, and was chosen his
successor. In November, Messrs,
Chater and Carey, with their fami-
lies, left Serampore, with appro.
priate, affectionate, and faithful
instructions, and the most fervent
prayers; and shortly after his ar.
rival, Mr. C., who had previously
studied medicine at Calcutta, in.
troduced vaccination into Burmah,
and after inoculating several per-
sons in the city, was sent for by the
Viceroy, and, at his order, perform.
ed the operation on 3 of his chil-
dren, and on 6 other persons of the
family.

The missionaries and their fami-
lies were for some time involved in
considerable difficulty, for want of
a suitable habitation, and also of
bread; in consequence of which


the health of Mrs. Chater and Mrs. |


Carey was so seriously affected,
that they were obliged to return to
Serampore about the middle of May,
1808,


' The medical skill of Mr. Carey |


procured him, however, high repu-
tation among the Burmans, and
also some influcnce with the Vice.
roy. A dwelling-house for the
missionaries, and a place of worship,
were erected at Rangoon; and a


handsome sum was subscribed by |


the merchants residing in the neigh-
bourhood, towards the expense.
But towards the end of 1809, Mr.
Chater remarks, “ So little inclina-


tion towards the things of God was |


evinced, even by the European
inhabitants, that though the new
chapel had been opened for wor-
ship on 3 successive Sabbaths, not
an individual residing in the place
came near it.”’? At the same time
he describes the aspect of affairs as
very gloomy and discouraging, from
the Burman government being em-
broiled in hostilities with the Sia-
mese, and the country being in
consequence involved in =


Soon afterw
Rangoon, e:
the houses
officers, was
and the capi
a similar fa
British capt
be there at
houses were
he came ay
that no fewe
lost their liy
been the wor
the flames bu
of the city at
fort, the roya
of the princes
ings, were all
he genera
now became 1
in the summe
} Femarks—<‘¢ 7
rig Aree to
and Rachmur
cut off the FR
and. the Burn
forming large
different prince
ened, and wil
tacked, thoug
after the rainy
this, Mr. Cha
station at Rang
Columbo, in C
of his future le
Mr. Carey,
busily employe
Scriptures intc
puage, till the a
e visited Sere
put one or twa
press, and to co
end brethren
returned with ¢
league, named
by declining he
rampore, T
the Siamese he
and the Burm
established, Mr
the summer ¢


f ill.
teered
m his
Aessrs.
 fami-
appro.
aithful
fervent
his ar-
viously
ta, in-
urmah,
al per-
by the
arform-
is chil-
3 of the


ry fami-
olved in
want of
also of
which


nd Mrs. |


affected,
eturn to
of May,


ir. Carey
rh repus
ns, and
e Vice-
for the
worship,
3 and 4


he neigh-
expense.
809, Mr.
inclina-
God was
uropean
the new
for wor-
laths, not
he place
ame time
affairs 9s
ng, from
eing em-
the Sia-
being in
onfusion.
06


RAN


Soon afterwards the whole town of
Rangoon, excepting a few huts and
the houses of the two principal
officers, was completely burnt down;
and the capital of the empire shared
a similar fate. It is stated by a
British captain, who happened to
be there at the time, that 40,000
houses were destroyed; and before
he came avway, it was ascertained
that no fewer than 250 persons had
lost their lives, It seems to have
been the work of an incendiary, as
the flames burst out in several parts
of the city at the same time. The
fort, the royal palaces, the palaces
of the princes, and the public build-
ings, were all laid in ashes.

The general appearance of things
now became worse and worse ; and
in the summer of 1811, Mr. Chater
remarks—‘‘ The country is com-
pletely torn to pieces, as the Mugs
and Rachmurs have revolted and
cut off the Burman governmet;
and the Burmans themselves are
forming large parties unc the
differentprinces. Rangoon’ sreat-
ened, and will most likely be at-
tacked, though probably not till
after the rainy season.’’ Soon after
this, Mr. Chater relinquished his
station at Rangoon, and pitched at
Columbo, in Ceylon, as the scene
of his future labours.

Mr. Carey, now left alone, was
busily employed in translating the
Scriptures into the Burman lan-
puage, till the autumn of 1812, when

e visited Serampore, in order to
put one or two of the Gospels to
press, and to consult with his father
and brethren respecting the mis-
sion, Af the end of November he
returned with a very promising col-
league, named Kerr, but who, in
less than 12 months, was compelled
by declining health to go back to
Serampore. The differences with
the Siamese having been adjusted,
and the Burman government re-
established, Mr.Carey was ordered,
in the summer of 1813, to proceed


RAN


to the court of Ava, for the purpose
of inoculating some of the royal
family, by whom he was received
with many marks of peculiar dis-
tinction. Unhappily, however,
though Mr. Carey lost his wife
and his children,—the family being
wrecked on their way to Bengal, to
obtain a new supply of virus by
order of the King, he was so en-
snared on his return to Ava, as to
accept the appointment of ambas-
sador to Calcutta, for the purpose
of arranging some differences which
existed between the two govern.
ments. Thither he proceeded, and
lived in a style of Oriental magni-
ficence : but his connexion with the
Burman government was of short
duration; and after having been
subsequently employed by an east-
ernRajah,he returned to Serampore,
where he was engaged in trans-
lating and compiling various literary
works till the time of his death.
The superintendence of the mission
‘was, in the mean time, transferred
to others, of whom some account
will shortly be given.

chett and Brain, from the L. M. S.,
proceeded to the Burman Empire,
but the valuable life of the latter
was suddenly terminated soon after
his arrival. it was the wish of his
Colleague to continue there, and if
possible to proceed, as was origi-
nally intended, to Ava, the capital,
to commence a mission; but the
distracted state of the country,
owing to the war with the Siamese,
rendered it absolutely impractica-
ble. Rangoon seemed to be the
only place in which a missionary
could reside with safety; and as 2
of the Baptist brethren continued
at that station, and Mr. Pritchett
was earnestly requested by the
missionaries at Vizegapatam, who
greatly needed his assistance, to
come to them, he judged it his duty
to comply with their wishes.

The Rev. A. and Mrs. Judson,

407


' RAN


from the 4. B. B. F. M., arrived at
Rangoon in 1813, and found a home
at the mission house erected: by Mr.
Chater. The aspect of affairs at
that period was truly discouraging.
Mr. and Mrs. J. applied themselves
with much assiduity to the study
of :the language, soon after their
. arrival, and found it attended by
many difficulties; they succeeded,
however, in preparing a catechism,
and also a summary of Christian
doctrines, which the present of a
press and types from the Serampore
brethren enabled them subsequently
to print, by the assistance oi Mr.
Hough, who with Mrs. H. joined
them, October 15, 1816. Finding
after this that they had paper suffi-
cient for an edition of 800 copies of
St. Matthew’s Gospel,. they com-
menced, in 1817, this important
work, as introductory to a larger
edition of the wholeNewTestament.
Mrs. J. was, also, able to collect
from 15 to 20 females on the Sabbath,
who were attentive while she read
and explained the Scriptures; and
4 or 5 children committed the
catechism to memory, and: often
repeated it to each other. In De-
cember, 1822, Mr. J., for the reco-
very of his health, and hoping to
obtain the assistance of one of the
Arrakanese lately converted at
Chittagong, took-a voyage to sea.
Sden after his departure, some cir-
cumstances occurred which threat-
ened the destruction of the mission ;
but, happily, the evil was averted.
Not till July, however, did any in-
telligence arrive respecting Mr. J.
The captain of the vessel in which
he sailed stated, on his return, that
he was not able to make Chitta-
gong; that after being tossed about
in the bay for 3 months, he made
Masulipatam, a port north of
Madras, on the coast; and that
Mr. J. left the ship immediately
for Madras, hoping to find a pas-
sage home from thence, About a
month atter, he reached Rangoon ;


RAN


previously to which, Mr. and Mrs.
Hough had sailed for Bengal, and
in four or five weeks Messrs Col-
man and Wheelock arrived as co-
adjutors, A piece of ground was
now purchased, anda place of wor-
ship was erected. On April 4th,
1819, Mr. J. says—‘** To-day the
building of the Zayat being suffi-
ciently advanced for this purpose, I
called together a few people who
live around us, and commenced
public worship in the Burman lan-
guage. I say commenced, for
though I have frequently read and
discoursed to the natives, I have
never before conducted a course of
exercises which deserved the name
of public worship, according to the
usual acceptation of that phr;
among Christians; and though ‘I
began to preach the Gospel as soon
as [ could speak intelligibly, I have
thought it hardly becoming to apply
the term preaching (since it has
acquired an appropriate meaning
in modern use) to my imperfect,
desultory exhortations and conver-
sations. .The congregation, to-day,
consisted of fifteen persons only,
besides children. Much disorder
and inattention prevailed, most of
them not having been accustomed to
attend Burman worship. May the
Lord grant his blessing on attempts
made in great wenkness and under
great disadvantages, and all the
glory will be His,”

After Mr. Judson had thus com-
menced public preaching, Mrs. J.
resumed her female meetings, which
were given up, from the scattered
state of the Burmans around them,
at the time of their government
difficulties. ‘They were attended
by thirteen young married women.
One of them said, she appeared to
herself like a blind person just be-
ginning to see. And another
affirmed that she believed in Christ,
prayed to him daily, and asked
what else was necessary to make
her a real disciple of a “|

4


told her,» |
not only sq
Christ, but
her heart,”
were some ¢
lieving with
the manner
but one of |
could obtai
others came
and use abus
from retaliati
to. bear with
for, them, |
are particula
ling ; and, to
be a most de
change of he
the missionari:
visitors ; amon
Nau, describe
old—no famil
—quite poor—
his living, —wh
eat the ti
0, & young |
terior and of 7
and Moung Sh
6th of June t
which Moung
hisown accor
sidered :—
“T, Moung
recipient of yo
approach your
Lo-d’s three
country of Bu
purpose of trade
religion of Jes
the Eternal Go
and understood,
mind, filled wit
“*T believe th
Jesus Christ, s
place of men,
sins Like a
feel my sins are
punishment of
suffer, Since it
consider, that
sp of the
and receiving b
become his 4 \


RAN


told. her,?? says Mrs. J, ‘she must
not only say that she believed in
Christ, but must believe with all
her heart.”? She again asked what
were some of the evidences of be-
lieving with the heart? . I told her
the manner of life would be changed}
but one of the best evidences she
could obtain, would be, when
others came to quarrel with her,
and use abusive language, if, so far
from retaliating, she felt a disposition
to. bear with, to pity, and to pray
for, them. The Burman women
are particularly given to quarrel-
ling ; and, to refrain from it, would
be a most decided evidence of a
change of heart. About this time
the missionaries had some interesting
visitors ; among whom were Moung
Nau, described as thirty-five years
old—no family—middling abilities
—quite poor—obliged to work for
his living, who came, day after day,
tohear the truth; Moung Shway
Oo, a young man of pleasant ex-
terior and of good circumstances,
and Moung Shway Doan. On the
6th of June the. following letter,
which Moung Nau had written of
hisown accord, was read and con-
sidered :—

“J, Moung Nau, the constant
recipient of your excellent favour,
approach your feet, Whereas my
Lo-d’s three have come to the
country of Burmah, not for the
purpose of trade, but to preach the
teligion of Jesus Christ, the son of
the Eternal God, I, having heard
and understood, am, with a joyful
mind, filled with love.

‘“T believe that the Divine Son,
Jesus Christ, suffered death, in the
place of men, to atone for their
sins; Like a heavy laden man, I
feel my sins are very many. The
punishment of my sins I deserve to
suffer, Since it isso, do you, Sirs,
consider, that I, taking refuge in
the merit of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and receiving baptism in order to
become his disciple, shall dwell,


RAN


one with yourselves, a band of bro-
thers, in the happiness of heaven,
and (therefore) grant me the ordi-
nance of baptism.

[At the time of writing this, not
having heard much of baptism, he
seems to have ascribed an undue
efficacy to the ordinance, He after-
wards corrected his error; but the
translator thinks it most fair and
impartial to give the letter just as
it was written at first.]

‘*]t is through the grace of Jesus
Christ, that you, Sirs, have come,
by ship, from one country and con-
tinent to another, and that we
have met together. I pray my
Lord’s three, that a suituble day
may be appointed, and that I may
receive the ordinance of baptism.

‘€ Moreover, as it is only since I
met with you, Sirs, that I have
known about the Eternal God, I
venture to pray, that you will still
unfold to me the religion of God,
that my old disposition may be de-
stroyed, and my new disposition
improved.’?

The missionaries having been for
some time satisfied concerning the
reality of his religion, voted to re-
ceive him into church fellowship ;
and, on the following Sabbath, Mr.
Judson remarks, “ After the usual
course, I called him before me,
read, and commented on an appro-
priate portion of Scripture, asked
him several questions concerning
his faith, hope, and love, and made
the baptismal prayer; having con-
cluded to have all the preparatory
exercises done in the Zayat. We
then proceeded to a large pond in
the vicinity, the bank of which is
graced with an enormous image of
Gaudama, and there administered
baptism to the first Burman con-
vert. This man was subsequently
employed by the missionaries as a
copyist, with the primary design
of affording him more ample in-
struction. In November, 2 other
Burmans,—Moung Byaay, a man

NN 400


RAN


who, with his family, had lived near
them for some time, had regularly at-
tended worship, had learned to read,
though 50 years old, and a remark-
ably moral character; and Moung
Thahlah, who was superior to the
generality, had read much more,
and had been for some time under
instruction,—applied by means of
very interesting statements for bap-
tism; which was administered by
their particular request at sun-set,
November 7, and a few days after,
the 3 converts held the first Burman
prayer-meeting at the Zayat of
their own accord. ,

In the midst of these pleasing
circumstances, Mr. Wheelock, who
had long been unwell, left Rangoon,
and soon afterwards died; and so
violent a spirit of persecution arose,
that the Zayat was almost de-
serted, and Mr. Judson and Mr.
Colman determined on presenting a
memorial to the young King. As
the Emperor cannot be approached
without a present, the niissionaries
resolved to offer one appropriate to
their character—the Bible, in 6
volumes, covered with gold leaf, in
Burman style, each volume being
enclosed in a rich wrapper.

. After an anxious and perilous
voyage, they obtained an intro-
duction to the King, surrounded
by splendours exceeding their ex-
pectation, when, after a long con-
ference, Moung Zah, the private
minister of state, interpreted his
royal master’s will in the following
terms :—‘“‘ In regard to the objects
of your petition, his Majesty gives
no order. In regard to your sacred
books, bis Majesty has no use for
them; take them away.” Aftera
temporary revival of their hopes,
the missionaries found that the po-
licy of the Burman government,
in regard to the toleration of any
foreign religion, is precisely the
same with the Chinese; that it
is quite out of the question, whe-
ther any of the subjects of the


RAN


Emperor, who: embrace a: religion
different from his own, will be
exempt from punishment; and
that they, in presenting a petition
to that effect, had been guilty uf
a most egregious blunder—an un-
pardonable offence.

- In February, they returned to
Rangoon, and after giving the
three disciples a full understanding
of the dangers of their condition,
found, to their great delight, that
they appeared advanced in zeal and
energy ; and vied with each other
in trying to explain away difficulties,
and to convince the teachers that
the cause was not quite desperate,

After much consideration it
was, subsequently, resolved that
Mr. Colman should proceed imme-
diately to Chittagong, collect the
Arrakanese converts, who speak a
language similar to the Burman,
and wre under the government of
Bengal, and form a. station, to
which new missionaries might first
repair, and to which his fellow-
labourers should flee with those of
the disciples who could leave the §
country, if it should be rendered
rash and useless to continue at

Rangoon ; and that Mr. and Mrs,
J. should remain there, in case
circumstances should prove more
propitious.

Private worship was now resumed
in the Zayat, the front doors being
closed; but shortly afterwards it was
abandoned, and a room previously
occupied by Mr. Colman, who died
soon after his arrival at Chittagong,
was appropriated to this purpose.

Inquirers increased, notwithstand-
ing surrounding difficulties and
prospective sufferings, and five per-
sons were baptized. Among these
were Mah Men-lay, the principal
one of Mrs. J.’s female company,
and Moung Shway-gnong, a teacher
of considerable distinction, who
appeared on his first acquaintance
with the missionaries to he half
deist and half warren om who§
0


had for a
disputation
was added
nity, after
visited Ben;
distressing s
Mr. J. on
by Mou
revision of 1
Testament ;
lated but no
menced' oc
Mah Myat.
Men-lay, ¥
July 8, the ff
was perform
pure Burma
 J.8
was compell
bark fer Be
America, anc
at Ra:


illness of 19
persons were
was much ref;
of Dr. and M
pectations o
Testament
were blasted
order from th
Dr. P. to J
his medical s
i 4 left Ra
footing in he
lace, Mr.
the mission i
In Dec. 182
and proceeded
during her ¢
preparations f
war broke out
and Burmese
tinuance, Mr,
in prison iand
vicinity of Ava
temained at.


ligion
ll be

and
tition
ity of


in une


red to
ig the
anding
dition,
nt, that
eal and
h other
culties,
ers that
perate.
tion it
ed that
1 imme-
lect the
speak a
Burman,
ment of
ation, to
ight first
s fellow-
» those of


eave the #


rendered
tinue at
and Mrs.

in case


410


bve more §


y resumed
ors being
yds it was
hreviously
who died
hittagong,
purpose.
ithstand-
ties and
i five per-
ong these
principal
company,
, a teacher
ion, who®
huaintance
> he half
and who}


RAN


had for a long time engaged in
disputation with them. A sixth
was added to this sacred commu-
nity, after the missionaries had
visited Bengal in consequence of the
distressing state of Mrs. J.’s health.

.Mr. J. now proceeded, ‘assisted
by Mo Shway-gnong, in the
revision of those parts of the New
Testament which had been trans-
lated but not printed; and recom-
menced’ occupying the Zayat.
Mah Myat-lay, sister of Mah
Men-lay, was baptized; and on
July 8, the first Christian marriage


was performed between persons of


pure Burman extraction.

Mrs. J.’s malady increasing, she
was compelled, in August, to em-
bark for Bengal on


at Rangoon alone.


he escaped.


illness of 19 hours.
persons were baptized.


lace.
the mission in the interim.


In Dec. 1823, Mrs, J. returned,
and proceeded with Mr. J., who had
during her absence been making
preparations for that purpose, to |
Ava. In the May following, the |
war broke out between the Bengal |
and Burmese governments, and

ater part of its con- |
r. Judson was confined |
in prison and chains, at and in the |
vicinity of Ava; Mrs. J., however, |
temained at liberty, and was per-.


during the
tinuance,


er way to
America, and her husband was left
Two attempts
were made upon the life of Moung
Shway-gnong, but, providentially,
Moung Thahliah, the
second convert, expired after an
Three more
Mr. J.
was much refreshed by the arrival
of Dr. and Mrs. Price; but his ex-
pectations of finishing the New
Testament, without, interruption
were blasted by the arrival of an
order from the King, summoning
Dr. P. to Ava, on account of
his medical skill; and on August
28, he left Rangoon with the Dr., |
hoping by his means to gain some |
footing in the capital and the pa- |
Mr. Hough superintended |


RAN


mitted, though under difficult efy-

cumstances, to minister in some

degree to the wants of her suffer-

ing husband. At the close of the

war she returned with him to Ran-

goon ; from whence, in the latter
part of June, 1826, with'a view
to the formation of a new mis-

sionary station, they proceeded to
Amherst Town,—a place which had
been selected for the site of a new
town, but at that time a wilder-
ness, with the exception of a few
bamboo huts, erected for the ac-
commodation of part of 4 regiment
ef sepoys and a few natives. Hav-
ing left Mrs. J. ‘in this place as
comfortable as circumstances would
permit, Mr. J. returned to Ran-
goon, and proceeded with the
envoy to Ava, as interpreter. Mrs.
Judson, a5 soon as was practicable,
commenced a native school, which
eonsisted, at the time of her illness,
of about 10 pupils. But after an in-
termittent fever of nearly a month’s
continuance, this excellent and de-
voted woman closed her eyes in
death, in the absence of her affec-
tionate and zealous husband.

Other labourers have since been
sent by the Board to Burmah,
and in their last report the fol-
lowing general view of the hopes
and prospects of the mission is
given :— ;

‘In view of all the circum-
stances connected with the late
war in Burmah, and the conse-~-
quences resulting from it, the
Board feel justified in expressing
their belief, that it has widened
the sphere of their labours incal-
culably ; and rendered the pros-
pect of success on the part of their
missionaries far greater than be-
fore, perhannny within the con-
quered provinces. They may now
have free access to;the people with-
out fear, and employ all the means
of instruction within their reach ;
they may preach, and establish
schools in which. the principles of

411


RAP
Christianity shall--be taught; the
natives may also inquire, read the
Scriptures, hear. the: Gospel, and
embrace it, without . being sub-
ject. to.penalty or oppression. Here-
tofore it has. been, otherwise :
when the . missionaries’: preached,
it was with caution; and-when the
people wished to hear and converse
on religion, they were often de-
terred: by the certain displeasure
of their rulers. If, then, some-
thing was accomplished for. the
cause of Christ. under former dis-
advantages, how much more may
be. anticipated, now these hind-
rances are removed! . Divine Pro-
vidence has committed this field of
labour..to the American Baptists ;
and it now calls on them, in amost
impressive manner, for increased
and vigorous exertions, as several
new stations ought soon tobe com-
menced and supported.’’ [See 4r-
racan and. Burman Empire. }

RAPA, or OPORO, one of the
Society Islands. .S. lat. 27° 50’,
W.-long. 144°, j

In July, 1825, the Snapper cut-
ter, belonging to the chief Tati,
and commanded by.Capt. J. Shout,
sailed for the. Paumotus, with in-
struction, if wind and circumstances
would permit, to call at Rapa, and
to endeavour to ascertain the state
of the island, and the disposition of
its inhabitants. :

On the ]3th of September, 1826,
Captain Shout ; returned to Tahiti,
and informed Mr. Davies, that
when he, arrived off Rapa, a few
of the natives, in the first instance,
came on boa:d the cutter; but a
considerable. number of: canoes
afterwards putting off, he deemed
it prudent,to put to sea forthwith ;
—that at the moment of his sailing,
two of the.natives of Rapa, named
Paparua and. Aitaveru,.; remained
on board ;the cutter ;—that he had
brought them, with him to Tahiti ;
—that they had been treated with


kindness, both by himself and his


RAP
crew on the voyage;—and that he


was desirous they should reside for


a time under the care of the chief,
Tati, and the missionaries;. in
order that, should they return to


| Rapa, they might go with favour-


able impressions.on their minds,.in
reference to the Tahitians and the
missionaries. He moreover stated,
that as he had learned, during the


| voyage, that their island contained


sandal-wood, it was his intention,
in a short time, to go there for'a
cargo of that article ; when the na-
tives of Rapa would have an op-
portunity of returning to their
country. In pursuance of these
representations, the strangers were
invited to take. up their residence
with Tati. During their visit,
which extended. to several weeks,
they, however, spent the greater part
of every day with Mr. Davies, who
took them to the mission schools,
gave them books, and taught them
the .alphabet. They were. also
present at. the meetings for public
worship, &c.

On the 27th of September, the
Snapper again sailed . for’ Rapa,
having on board the two natives of
that island, accompanied by..two
Tahitians, named Hota.and Nene,
members of .Mr. Davies’s church,
who had often expressed their de-
sire to be sent out as teachers
to other islands. The. Tahitians
were supplied with a variety of
useful articles, as presents to the
chiefs of Rapa. ‘Their object, in
the first. instance, was to see the
country, to. ascertain the: number
and character of its inhabitants;
and then return to Tahiti.

On their arrival at Rapa, they
met with a kind reception from the
principal chief, an old man named


Teraau (or Teranga). The two |


natives of the island, who accom-
panied the. teachers, were wel-
comed by their countrymen with
no small joy,.as ‘they had been
given up as dead men. ne i


1


On

Tahiti, | sever
people of Ps
it was at le
concurrence °
old chief, the
should return
Rapa, to inst
accompanied
tiens, Mahane
both of them
consistent: in
fession ; the :
master and ¢¢
who is an inge

builder, &c.
The Tahitie
and approved
held at Papara
the missionarie
were: afterwar
nated to the
had devoted the
They were
and the -‘memb
with various
themselves; ¢
for the natives ¢
spelling-books
Scriptures, &c.
planting. = Th
supplied by the
provisions for tH
and rafters for ¢
Mr. Davies y


at he
le for
chief,
3. in
mn to
vour-:
ds;-in
id. the
tated,
1g the
fained
ntion,.
> fora
he na-
an Op-
their
these
's were
idence
visit,
weeks,
ter part
28, who
chools,
x¢ them
‘e also
public


er, the
Rapa,
tives of
DY -two
Nene,
burch,
heir de-
pachers
renee
tety 0
‘to. the
ject, in
see. the
mumber
pitants;


a, they
om the
named
he two
accom-
e. wel-
bn with
d been


RAP


- ‘Hota end Nene remained on
shore about a fortnight (during the
time the captain and men belonging
to the cutter were engaged in pro-
curing sandal-wood), and were


. considered in the light’ of friends of


the-ald’: chief, who, as well as
other: natives, entreated them to
return with their wives and fami-
lies, and reside in the island, to
teach: them’ the good things that
were known at Tahiti; and, as
there: were no Jarge trees in Rapa,
adapted to the erection of a place
of worship, they were requested to
bring with them the requisite tim-
ber, for that purpose, from Tahiti.
This the teachérs engaged to do.

On’ the return of the teachers to
Tahiti, several meetings of the
people of Papara were held; and
it was at length determined, in
concurrence with the wish of the
eld chief, that the two teachers
should return, with their wives, ‘to
Rapa, to instruct the people there,
accompanied by two other Tahi-
tians,, Mahana and Pauo by name,
both of them intelligent men, and
consistent: in their Christian pro-
fession ; the former as a school-
master and ¢ cultivator, the latter,
who is an ingenious mun, as a boat-
builder, &c.:

The Teahitians were examined
and approved at a public meeting
held at Papara, at which several of
the missionaries were present, and
were afterwards solemnly desig-
nated to the work ‘to which they
had devoted themselves.

They were furnished by Tati,
and the members of the church,
with various useful articles for
themselves; and also, as presents
tor the natives of Rapa, a supply of
spelling-books and. portions of the
Scriptures, &c., with shrubs for
ete They were likewise
supplied by the congregation with
provisions for the voyage, and posts
and rafters for a chapel.

Mr. Davies was requested by his


RAP


brethren, the missionaries, to ac-
company the teachers to Rapa;
and as Mr. Bourne, on his voyage
in 1826, to the islands S.W. and 8.,
had not been able to visit those of
Raivaivai and Tupuai, it was

that Mr. Davies should afterwards
proceed thither.

On: the 16th of January, 1827,
Mr. Davies, accompanied by the
teachers, went on board the brig
Macquarie, which arrived off Rapa
on the 24th of the same month ;
when Mr. Davies and his com-
panions were grieved to hear that
the old chief, Teraau, was deud.
As, however, Koinikike, his sin,
and other members of the family,
were favourable to tiie object in


view, they went on shore on ‘the


27th, and the teachers were shortly
settled on a pleasant and convenient
spot of land belonging to Koir:ik'so,
the young chief. They immeiiate!y
proceeded to erect for themselves
dwelling-houses; in which ‘work
they were assisted by Mr. Davies,
the natives from Eimeo, and by
Koinikiko and his people. The
site of the proposed chape! was
also fixed upon. ;

The 29th of January, 1827, being
the Sabbath, Mr. Davies preached
on shore, and afterwards adminis-
tered the Lord’s Supper to the Ta-
hitian Christians. The teachers,
Pauo and Mahe:;2, and the crew of
the Macquar's, attended; also
some of the chieis of Rapa, who
viewed the service with silent amaze,

It afforded Mr. Davies great
satisfaction, before he left Rapa,
to observe that Koinikiko, and
another chief named Koenga, who
appear to be the chief men of the
island, manifested a friendly dis-
position towards the teachers.

‘Mr. Davies describes Rapa as
greatly resembling the interior of
Eimeo, which, had Rapa the addi-
tion of a border of low land, would,
he says, nearly equal it in extent.
Mr. Davies supposes the number of

NN2 413


RAR


inhabitants on Rapa to be about
2000; their complexion is darker
than that of the Tahitians, but
their features. are .very, similar;
their superstitions resemble, those
which jormerly prevailed in Tahiti,
but.in a ruder form, without the
parade and show .of the latter.
Their language is a dialect of the
Polynesian.. When. the Snapper
first visited the island, the inhabit-
ants were ail without clothing ; but
when itreturned with the Tahitians,
in September, many had begun to
attire themselves, ) ‘

RAROTONGA, a large and
populous island in the S. Pacific
Ocean, belonging to a group of 7
more, which lie S. W.of the So-
clety Islands, between, W. long.
158° and 160°, and S, lat. 19° and
22°, Four of these are very nu-
merously inhabited. In 1523, two
missionaries of the. Society Islands
visited them, stationed native teach-
ers on 4 —viz. Aitutake, on which
teachers. had been settled before,
Maute, Mitiaro, and Karotonga.
They persuaded the King of Aéué,
where teachers had also been
placed, to sail with them to Maute
and Mitiaro, two adjacent islands,
of which he is also King, to use his
isfuence in” establishing teachers
there. ‘He came on board,’’ say
the missionaries, ‘‘a bigoted idola-
ter; he was induced to embrace the
true word, to use his influence in
overthrowing the adoration of ages
at the two islands, and returns to
his own with a full determination
todo the same there.’”? . They also
prepared the way for the establish-
ment of teachers at Mangeea, one
of the group. In several of these
islands, chapels have been erected.

The whole of the inhabitants of
Rarotonga, whose number is cal-
culated to be between 6 and 7000,
have embraced Christianity; and
their principal idol has been sent to
this country, and deposited in the
L. M, Ss museum. Infanticide


RAW


hes ceased. A chapel, 240 feet by
42, has been erected, and numerous
paaaveced dwelling-houses (includ-
ng one for the teachers, 90 feet
by 30), have been built. The mis-
sion-house is furnished with sofas,
chaixs, tables, &c.,. all of native
manufacture.’ The people are in-
dustrious also in the cultivation of
the earth. It is probable that Mr.
Pitman, who was sent. out to the
South Sea Islands by the society, in
1824, and Mr. Buzacott, one of the
missionaries who have -accompa-
nied Mr. Nott on his. return to
Tahiti, will be eventually stationed
in this island.

RAWADUNDA, sometimes
called Choule, a large, populous,
and anciently fortified town, W,
coast Hindoostan, about 30m. §,
Bombay, formerly a. Portuguese
settlement, but now in possession
of the English. Soon after the
Portuguese came to. this country,
they commenced a settlement, and
built a fort in front of ‘the town,
nearly 2m. in circumference, which
at present is one uniform cocoa-nut
grove, spreading a wide and me.
lancholy shade over the mouldering
ruins of churches, monasteries, and
other splendid edifices, once the
superb mansions of a Christian
people, but now inhabited only by
loathsome reptiles, , Within 2 m.
of the same spot, the ruins of Ma-
homedan fortifications, temples,
seraglios, monuments, &c., shew
that in some former periods another
empire must have existed, flourish-
ed, and then vanished away. The
inhabitants are mostly Hindoos,
with a few Jews, and a small rem-
nant of Roman Catholics. This
was formerly the residence of St,
Francis. Xavier, who removed to
Goa in 1640.

The American missionaries at
Bombay have devoted much time
to. the distributing of books and
tracts, and to other labovis, ‘or
the benefit of the people in this

414


]


town and |
they establi:
dunda, more
children, -- v
scholars in
whom. were
aties have r
School, 60 ¢
tributed by
in Andover,
support of. ¢
their directic
RED RI\
a trading est,
son’s Bay Cx
about 50 m.
luke Winnip
by Fort Doi
in 1812, an
settlers, besi
halfsbi eed Ww
W..long. 98°,
In 1820, t
chaplain to 1
his services .
among the m
dians in the
and the C. &
his disposal f
immediately ‘
settlement,
his care and in
house, 60 fee
wards erected,
a8 a place of
r. W.'
the society to


Sr a to add
or the instrud
in the vicinity ;
and Hudson's


encouraging ci
nday service


et by
erous
clude
) feet
> mis
sofas,
native
re in-
ion of
t Mr.
to. the
ety, in
of the
ompa-
urn to
itioned


etimes
pulous,
yn, W.
Om. S.
tugnese
ssession
ter the
sountry,
nt, and


RED


town and its vicinity. In 1818,
they established .a school at Rawa-
dunda, more particularly for Jewish
children, which consisted of 84
scholars in 1824, more than 30 of
whom were Jews. The mission-
aties have named this the Andover
School, 60 dollars having been con-
tributed by benevolent individuals
in Andover, Massachusetts, for the
support of a Jewish school under
their direction. {See Bombay.]

RED RIVER SETTLEMENT,
a trading establishment of the Hud-
son’s Bay Company, on Red River,
about 50 m. S. of its entrance into
luke Winnipeg, which is defended
by Fort Douglas. It was formed
in 1812, and contains about 700
settlers, besides Canadians and
half-bieed, who are very numerous,
W. long. 98°, N. lat. 49° 40’.

In 1820, the Rev. John West,
chaplain to the Company, offered
his services to establish schools
among the numerous tribes of In-
dians in the Company’s territory,
andthe C. M. S. placed 1002. at
his disposal for the purpose. He
immediately opened a school in the
settlement, and found the Indians
willing to commit their children to
his care and instruction, A school
house, 60 feet by 20, was after-
wards erected, which is also used
pr none: of worship. Thesuccess
of Mr. W.’s: attempt encouraged
the society to send other labourers
to his aid, that he might have op-
ater i to adopt similar measures
or the instruction of the natives
in the vicinity; and the North West
and Hudson’s Bay Companies are
disposed to renderevery practicable
assistance to this benevolent enter-
prize, » Another church has since


™ been provided, and schools have


been opened,

In the midst of much outward
distress, it appears, from the mis-
sionaries’ accounts, that their mié-
nistry has been attended by many
encouraging circumstances. The
Sunday services at both churches,


RED


and the prayer-meeting at Image
Plain, in the week, are well at-
tended. '

‘¢Thave had,” says Mr.Jones, in
Dec. 1825, ‘* several conversations
with a female native Indian of this
colony, in regard to her partaking —
the Lord’s Supper. She has been
most assiduous in the use of the
means for a long time; and her
knowledge of divine things has
been increasing so rapidly, as to

' become a striking proof of the gra-
cious and efficient teaching of the
Holy Spirit. She came to-day
again with her hal/-breed daughter,
who is also determined to forsake
the world and follow Christ, I
could not help shedding tears of joy
at this additional proof of divine
approbation afforded to my labours,
This is the first real Indian who
has become a communicant.

‘¢ Last fall, an Indian came to
the settlement for the benefit of
medical assistance, having had his
hand shattered by the bursting of a
gun. He is a very extraordinary
man—his inquiries concerning our
religion manifest a de of intel-
ligence, which would make him
shine as a light in the world, if
illuminated by the Gospel. He is
gps yg anxiousto learn all that

e can before he returns to his
wilds in the spring, in order, as he
says, to make his ‘ friends and chil-
dren more wise.’

‘¢ The half-breed young woman
just mentioned, told me to-day,
that she does all that she can to in-
struct him, but finds it very difficult
to explain herself to him in the
Indian language on particular sub-
jects. She said, ‘1 was never so
anxious to speak well to him as I
was this morning; and never made
a worse hand of it: my sister and
I both tried, again and ageln, but
could not get on wellat all.’ ‘My
young friend,’ said I, ‘ what were
you so anxious to tell him of?’
She replied, ‘I was endeavouring to
tell him what the ee —


RED


for him, and why it was necessary
that he should suffer as He did, in
order to save sinners.’ I encou-
raged her to proceed in her instroc-
tions with him and his wife, by set-
ting before her the promises of God
which bore on the subject, At
the same time I could not but think
how delighted many Christian
ladies in England would be with
this my young disciple. ‘Two years
ago this young woman was as ig-
norant as any Indian in the country;
but now she has learned to read her
Bible, and has found a Saviour
there, the sweetness of whose love
makes her long for the time when
her poor countrymen shall partici-
pate therein. Let the friends of
missions then go on, and they shall
reap if they faint not; yea, they do
reap, in part, already.’’

Of the Schools, Mr. Cockran
thus reports, in July, 1826 :—

‘¢ Both the Sunday and week
day schools were in a flourishing
state in the winter: the children
regularly attended, even when the
weather was very stormy ; but since
the latter end of April, we have all
had to pass through many vicissi-
tudes: from the 3d of May, the
settlers have been so dispersed, that
it is impossible for’ their children to
attend the schools. We hope ‘iat
ina few weeks they will be more
eollected, and then our schools will
flourish again. The Indian boys
are making considerable progress
in knowledge : some of them seem
to attend with a great deal of sin-
cerity when religious instruction is
delivered, but it is natural to them
to give close attention to every-
thing.’’

The desire which some of the
‘Indians evince for the instruction
of their children, appears from the
following circumstance mentioned
hy Mr. Jones :—

“ Mr. Ross told me, in reference
to the parents of the boys brought
to Red River school, that they were
very indignant when he first, at the


RED


instance of Governor Simpson, so.
licited their giving up their sons;
anc asked him if they ‘ were looked
upon as dogs, willing to give up their
children to go they knew not whi-
ther.’ But when he told them that
they were going to a minister of
religion, to learn how to know and
serve God, they said he might have
* Hundreds of children in an hour's
time ;’ and he ‘selected two, being
the sons of the most powerful
chiefs in that part of the coun-
”?


Mr. Jones thus describes the
state of the people :—

“ A striking combination of cir.
cumstances tends at present to
throw a gloom over the temporal
interests of this colony. The
failure of the buffalo in the hunt.
in ds commenced the dis-
tress; since that time, the season,
both in duration and severity, has
exceeded any former instance of
the kind within the memory of the
oldest inhabitant. The settlers
have, for a long time, been obliged
to support their cattle entirely on
whew‘ and barley, and the consump-
tion he: been so great as to lead me
to apprehend a ecarcity of ‘seed for
the soil. The season is getting %
late as to render it probable that no
wheat — can be expected at all;
and should anything occur to pre-
vent the prosperity of barley and
potatoes, we shall be threatened
with a famine. Many prayers and
strong cries are sent up to Him who
alone can save, and I hope they will
be heard.”

The distress occasioned by the
severity of the weather, was in-
creased by a destructive inunda-
tion from the bewinnina of May
till the middle of June, in the
course of which nearly every house
was swept away, and the country
laid under water as far as the eye

could reach. The missionarjes, in
common with the rest of the inha-
bitants, were obliged, for about a
month, to leave their —


themgelves,


ris reside ir
spot of grou
On the 12
states, in hi
now nearly
dwellings,
one room, a
yesterday, wi
Mr. Cockrai
hills, where |
0 |
work to-day
f shall yet
and potatoes
now drawin
the river, to
habitations,
comes in God:
We want not!
on Him,”
Mr.Cockrar
— Though tl
almost every |
escaped very w
received ve


; churches are s


ling-house, wi
and the school-
as ~' were, as m
servin mercy ¢
REED Fe
Namaqualand,
m. from Lily F
The Rev, M
aa S., com
among the
vernor, in 1819
with that at ‘
acquired an eg
interesting che
Paganism amo
the tribe, and
their temporal w
At this place
also a station.
longing to it kee
Ip) morning 4
the Scriptures dil
the catechist {
places, perform


REGENT’S


REE


and reside in tents pitched on a high
spot of ground.


ONS $ On the 12th of June, Mr. Jones
oked states, in his journal,—‘ We are
their now nearly re-established in our
whi- dwellings. The parsonage is all in
1 that one room, and served for a church
er of yesterday, where I preached twice ;
y and Mr. Cockran having gone to the
have hills, where the people are still en-
lour’s camped. The ploughs are at
being work to-day, and I trust that we
werful Hi shall yet have crops of barley
ooun- and potatoes. The people are
now drawing near the banks of
s the the river, to the site of their old
habitations. Thus deliverance
of cir. comes in God’s own time and way.
ent to We want nothing but faith to rely
mporal on Him.” :
The Mr.Cockran subsequently writes:
» hunt- —‘ Though the flood has destroyed
we dis- almost every house, yet we have
has escaped very wonderfully: we have
ty, ot received very little damage ; our
at in ™ churches are standing; our dwel-
fared ling-house, with the schoolmasters’


and the school-house, are left alone ;
as it were, as monuments of the pre-
serving mercy of God.’’

REED FOUNTAIN, Little
Namaqualand, S. Africa, about 40
m. from Lily Fountain.

The Rev. Mr. Archbell, of the
W. M. S., commenced a settlement
here among the Bastard Hottentots,
with the approbation of the Go-
vernor, in 18193 and in connexion


datall;
to pre-
ley and


| svapee with that at Khamies Berg, it has
) rh tin acquired an established and highly
aly i fy teresting character; abolishing

ey w Paganism among ‘ue people of


the tribe, and greatly promoting
their temporal welfare.

At this place the ZL. M. S. has
also a station. The Namaquas be-
longing to it keep up family wor-
ship, morning and evening—read
the Scriptures diligently— and when
the catechist is absent at other
places, perform divine service
themselves,

REGENT’S TOWN, formerly


by the
was in- j
inunda- }
of May
in the
ry house
country
the eyé
arjes, in
he inha-
about a
welling’,
6


REG


called Hogbrook, a town of libe-
rated negroes, Sierra Leone, W.
Africa, 5 m. 8. S. E. Freetown, in
a valley near the heights of the
Sierra Leone mountains,

Its situation is healthy and highly
romantic. No less than 8 moun-
tains, covered with evergreen fo-
rests, rear their heads, and form a
chain around the settlement.
Streams descend from the various
cliffs, and make a large brook,
which runs through the middle of
the town. On the banks isa mea-.
dow for the cattle, which is always


green.

In 1813, this then uninhabited
spot was set apart for the recep-
tion of negroes delivered from
slave ships by the vigilance of Eng-
lish cruizers, who are here sup-
ported by government till they can
be taught to earn a livelihood.

In 1816, the number amounted
to 1100, from 22 different tribes—
some of them barbarous to an asto-
nishing degree; the mixed multi-
tude speaking many different lan-
guages, having no medium of
communication except a few
words of broken English; all to-
tally destitute of principle, disin-
clined to civilization and improve-
ment, and addicted to stealing, and
to the worship of devils.

In 1823, the number had in-
creased (o upwards of 2000. In the
midst of the habitations, which are
built of stone, is a large stone
church, 80 feet by 64; which has
been five times improved and en-
laiged, to accommodate the crowds
which assemble to hear the word


of God.

The Rev. W. A. B. Johnson,
and his wife, were sent from Eng-
land by the C. M. S, in 1816, and
were appointed to this station by
the colonial government, which was
accountable for their salaries.
They soon obtained a school of
160 pupils, from the rude mass of
people in the ee in


REG


161%, there were only 12 commu-
nicants, and very few attended
public worship.

In 1821, about one-fourth of the
whole population were in commu-
nion, and about one-half were in
the habit of atte::ding morning and
evening prayers in the church;
besides which, the communicants
regularly condvcted family worship.
An English captain, who visited the
town in 1817 and 1821, writes—“ In
contrasting its then condition with
the present, I must confess a just
description cannot be given without
the appearance of exaggeration.
The change is so visible, that no
sceptic, however hardened, but
must confess the band of the Lord
hath done ii.”

About the middle of 1822, the
communicants had increased to 3765 ;
and .in the spring of 1823, they
amounted to 450. The whole body
of the people formed one indus-
trious and happy community; the
authority of the word of God, in
connexion with Christian disci-
pline, almost entirely superseded
the necessity of human laws; all
relics of former superstitions were
banished, and flagrant vice and pro-
faneness were almost entirely un-

wn.

In 1818, a society was formed for
the relief of the sick, and an Aux-
iliary Missionary Society. The
contributions to the latter amounted,
in 1823, to upward of 1156 dollars ;
and to both, during one year, they
have exceeded 600 dollars. In
1823, the schools embraced 1052
pupils,

he Christian Institution, esta-
blished at Leicester Mountain, was
removed to this place, in 1820, with
the design of rendering it a semi-
nary, in which the most promising
youths in the colony may be edu.
cated for schoolmasters and mis-
sionaries to their different tribes.
The Rev. Mr. Johnson died,
May 3, 1823, much esteemed and


REG


lamented by the community aroun
him, and especially: by multitudes
of the once wretched and degraded
sons and daughters of Africa,whom
he was the instrument of bringing
out of darkness into marvellous
light. Various labourers have since
that period been employed at this
place, but the trials that have
arisen invest it with a deep and
melancholy interest.

The Rev. W. K. Betts has re.
cently been appointed to the charge
of this station, and entered on the
duties of it the .end of February,
1826. In May, David Noah re.
moved from Kissey, and assisted in
visiting the sick, and the care of
the people, and took the oversight
of the boys’ school, in the manage,
ment of which he is assisted by
John Essex Bull, a native teacher,

In the exercise of his ministry,


Mr. Betts has met with little en. |


couragement.

Only one School, and that for
boys, has recently beenkept. The
numbers at Christmas, 1826, were
—liberated, 48; living with their
perents, 59: Total 107.

Mr. Betts thus speaks of the two
classes of children of which the
schools now consist :——

‘¢ The behaviour of the liberated
children is as good as can reason-


ably be expected, from poor chil- |


dren, on whose tender minds the
first impressicns were made by the


errors and vices of heathenism. I


have been much struck by the con-
trast between these children, and
those who were born of liberated
parents and have been reared in
the town: these last appear more
intelligent, frank, and happy, and
have the air of liberty, in their
whole deportment; while the others
exhibit, in their downcast, ‘imid,
and suspicious mien, the appear-
ance of a servile and oppressed race.

“I regret that there are many


nice little girls, belonging to the
people of the town, w ye ag no


instruction ;
here *; tan


scbzol, A |
taat trying ¢
dence, by wl
my dear wife
number of pl
come up into
to let them
steady and cl
of acting as :
be very valuat
At Christm
the following:


A “The regula


cants attendir
at this time, is
ward conduct,
good. The g
the people at
Sabbath day,
on week days
consequence
working at Fre
ing and evenin
kept, and divin
on Sundays, '
Regent is m
We are now
shepherd. TT
plenteous, but
few: may we
will be pleased
bourers into hi
In the C4;-¢
are at present
The Rev, C,
lately departe
having tendere;
society with an
education of t
The frequent 1¢
ciety has sustai
by sickness or
employed in th
therto been an
ciency of the
sibje.:* has for
ihe attention of
ey have come
mination of Pp
means in their
Place, whethe.


ound
des
aded
hom
ging
lous
since
; this
have
) and


1s Te-
harge
mn the
ruary,
th re-
sted in
are of
pisight
un e
ted by
vacher.


nistry,


ile ens


hat for
. The
B, were
bh their


he two
ch the


berated
reason-


br chile §


nds the
b by the


ism. I §


he con-
en, and
iberated
ared in
more


} and
Ye elt
he others
» timid,
appeare
sed race.
B many
ir to the
have no


REG


instruction ; there being no female
here #3; ‘ano charge of a girls’
scbzol. A little while previous to
tuat trying dispensation of Provi-
dence, by which I was deprived of
my dear wife, we had frequently a
number of pleasant little children
come up into our piazza, asking us


to let them come to school. A.


steady and clever woman, capable
of acting as schoolmistress, would
be very valuable.’’

At Christmus, David Noah gives
the following view of this station: —


i “The regular number of communi-


cants attending the Lord’s Supper
at this time, is 100; and their out-
ward conduct, for the most pazt, is
good. The general attendance of
the people at divine service, on the
Sabbath day, is encouraging; but
on week days very few attend, in
consequence of many of the men
working at Freetown. Daily morn-
ing and evening service is regularly
kept, and divine service three times
on Sundays. The present state of
Regent is much to be lamented.
We are now as sheep without a
shepherd. The harvest truly is
plenteous, but the labourers are
few: may we pray that the Lord
will be pleased to send out more la-
bourers into his harvest,’?

In the C47:stian Institution there
are at present no youths.

The Rev, C. L. F. Haensel has
lately departed for the colony,
having tendered his services to the
society with an express view to the
education of the African youths,
The frequent losses which the so-
ciety has sustained, in the removal,
by sickness or death, of persons
employed in the mission, have hi-
therto been an obstacle tp the effi-
ciency of the institution. The
subje. has for some time occupied
ihe attention of the committee, and
they have come to the fixed deter-
mination of prosecuting, by all
means in their power, and in any
place, whether in Europe or in


RIM


Africa, which may ultimately prove
most eligible, the education of in-
telligent and pious natives, with the
view of their becoming Christian
teachers among their countrymen.
In pursuance of this plan, they have
placed two African youths under.
the care of a clergyman in the W.
of England.

RIMATARA, one of the islands
of Raivaivai, in the 8S. Pacific
Ocean, in which idolatry has been.
renounced. Its population is about
300. ‘

This island is capable of support-
ing a great number of inhabitants ;
but it has hitherto been the custom
for the women to labour, while the
men did nothing: this has been a
great obstacle to marriage, since the
women knew, that if they married,
they should have to work hard. The
teacher from the L. M. S. had re-
peatedly attempted to alter this sys-
tem of things, without success ; but
the people had promised that, should
a missionary visit them, they would
pay regard to his advice on the sub-
ject. ‘On hearing this, I called,”
says Mr. Bourne, who visited the
island, ‘‘ ameeting of all the people,
and, addressing the King and
Chiefs, represented to them the
nature of the obligations which
they had laid themselves ynder in
embracing Christianity; and in-
formed them that the females in
other islands, whose inhabitants
had embraced the Gospel, did not
till the ground and prepare the
food, but made cloth, bonnets, hats,
&c. I exhorted them to have
compassion on their wives, and not
make them work like slaves, while
they themselves did nothing at all.
I then calledon each chief,by name,
to give his opinion on the subject:
they all spoke inanswer 5 and I was
happy to find that there was not a
single dissenjient voice. It was


} therefore agreed, that, from that


day forward, the men should plant,
dig, and prepare the " = the


RUR


women make cloth, mats, bonnets,
&c. The women who were pre-
sent manifested their joy on the
occasion; but I cautioned them
against idleness, snd to take care
that they themselves had good
clothes and bonneis, and their hus-
bands good bats. One of the Ta-
hitian teaclers of the UL. M. S.,
who leboured here, is deceased.
Faaraoa, the survivor, earnestly
Calls for assistance. The work of
the Lord continues to prosper. A
number have been bapiized, all of
whom appear firm in théeir religious
profession. ‘They have esiablished
a small missionary society.

RURUTU, one of the islands of
FRaivavat, which are situated about
SU0 m. sorthward of Tahiti. The
renunciation of idolatry in this
island 1s unexpectedly effected
in the nsanner thus described by
the missionaries of the L. M.S. at
Raiatea :—

‘Ss We one day perceivedastrange
sail at sea, which made towards
the reef, and appeared to be deter-
mined to hazard running on. it,
instead of bearing up for the proper
harbour,—a practice resorted to by
the natives when in extremity.
Perceiving their imminent danger,
the chiefs manned our boats, and
went off to pilot the strangers
safely into the barbour, When
they arrived, we found they were
natives of the island of Rurutu.
They had come from Maupiti, and
touched on their voyage at Bora-
bora, but could not get in for the
contrary wind. They had been
drifted about at sea for three weeks ;
and latterly, without either food or
water, except sea water, which
they were obliged to drink. Con-
trary winds drove them from their
own island; butthe Lord, to whose
merciful designs winds and waves
are subservient, protected and
guided thei. hither.

‘“ They were exceedingly as-
tonished at the difference of cus-


RUR


toms here, particularly in seeing
men and women eating together,
and the Areoi Society, their dances,
and every lascivious emusement,
completely put away. When they
heard of the new system of religion,
and saw the peo ie worshipping the
living and true Cod, they wera
convinced of its propriety and su.
periority, and immedinieiy: bey,
to learn to read. 4

‘*'The chief, with his wife and a
few others, went on shore at
Borabora. Mr. Orsmond, tha
missionary at that ciation, . patu
every aitention to them during
their short stay; guve them books,
and begen to teach thev. to read;
but as the cance and the greater
part of the people were at Raiatea,
they soon followed. They were
about 25 in number, men and
women. We set apart a certain
time for their instruction, supplied
them all with elementary books,
and gave them in charge to our
deacons, who were very much
pleased with, and diligent in the
discharge of, their new office. Their
language being somewhat different,
the deacons could make themselves
understood better than we could.

‘“¢ Auura, their chief, paid par-
ticular attention, as well as his
wifc ; the greater part of the others
appeared indolent. He appeared
to appreciate the worth of know-
ledge, and the value of the good
tidings of salvation; and his ques-
tions upon our discourses were such
as surprised not only the Raiuteans,
but ourselves also. We ‘hink he
possesses a very acute judgment, so
far ashe knows. We do not wish,
in thus speaking, to be understood
that we believe him to be what


would be called, in England, 4 |


converted character; though we
have indubitable evidence that he
isa true convert from idolatry to
Christianity. God hath called them
out of darkness to the knowledge
of his Son Jesus Christ. May they
420


soon really
know aris
Auura was
his anxious
own land,
countrymen
obtained of
Son Jesus
fears in’ an
that when |
find very fey
was rapidly |
* Opportr
Rurutu havir
Hope touch
were accom,
quest, by twc
letters subsex
pears, that |
return of Au
chiefs was
cogent argu
forward in b
religion, that
decreed the
latry. In or
the power of
it was agreed
this resolutic
should, contre
usage, eat to
in ‘company
children, ‘If
who asserted
suming to ea’
or any other
eat uvon a sad
inevitably de
spirit, then ¢
nounce their
were injured
them all. TT
at the time
satisfying the
drawing upe
threatened 4
ceeded to th
morais, and ¢
helpiess deities
at Raiatea.
“It is we
when the boat


ceeing
ether,
ances,
ment,
1 they
ligion,
ng the

Wer
WL SU
bear


2 and a
ore at
.. tha
y+ palu
during
books,
» read 3
greater
taiatea,
y were
en and
certain
supplied
books,
. to our
+ much
in the
ifferent,
pmselves
ould.
aid par-
1 as his
he others
appeared
f know-
he good
his ques-
rere such
niuteans,
hink he
ment, so
ot wish,
nd prstood


bugh we
b that he
olatry to
tiled them
owledge
ay they
0


’)
r


be what §
gland, a |


RUR


soon really know Him, whom to
know aright is eterna! life!
Auura was continually expressing
his anxious desire to return to his
own land, and to carry to his poor
countrymen the knowledge he had
obtained of the true God, and his
Son Jesus Christ; expressing his
fears in an affectionate manner,
that when he got back he should
find very few left, as the evil spirit
was rapidly destroying them.

*¢ Opportunity for their return to
Rurutu having arrived, from the brig
Hope touching at Raiatea, they
were accompanied, at their own re-
quest, by two native teachers, From
letters subsequently received, it ap-
pears, that immediately after the
return of Auura, a meeting of the
chiefs was convened, and such
cogent arguments were brought
forwatd in behalf of the Christian
religion, that the assembly formally
decreed the abandonment of ido-
latry. In order, however, to put
the power of their gods to the test,
it was agreed, that before carrying
this resolution into effect, they
should, contrary to their established
usage, eat together the next day,
in ‘company with their wives and
children. If any died according
to the predictions of the priests,
who asserted that any female pre-
suming to eat either hog or turtle,
or any other person venturing to
eat uvon a sacred place, would be
inevitably devoured by the evil
spirit, then they wouid not re-
nounce their idols; but if no one
were injured they would destroy
them all. They accordingly met
at the time appointed; and after
satisfving their appetites without
drawing upon themselves the
threatened calamity, they pro-
ceeded to the demolition of the
morais, and agreed to send their
helpiess deities to the missionaries
at Raiatea.

“It is worthy of remark, that
when the boat with Auura and the


SAD


native teachers, first reached the
shora, those persons, with their
companions, knelt down to. return.
thanks to God for their preser-
vation, not knowing that the spot
was sacred to Oroo, one of the
idols. The Rurutuans said imme-
diately, ‘ These pecple will die !?
The party also ate inadvertently
on a sacred spot. When the
Rurutuans saw that, they said,
‘No doubt they will die for this
trespass on the sacred ground,’
and looked earnestly, expecting
some one to have swollen or fallen
down dead suddenly; but after
they had looked a considerable
time, and saw no harm come to
them, they changed their minds,
and said, ‘ Surely theirs is the
truth ; but, perhaps, the god will
come in the night and kill them—
we will wait and see.? One man
actually went in the night to the
wife of the chief (Auura), who
also ate a part of a hog or turtle
on the sacred spot, and said, ‘ Are
you still alive?’ When the morning
arrived, and the Rurutuans found
that no harm had happened to any
of them, they became exceedingly
disgusted at their having been so
long deceived by the evil spirit.”

It appears from a recent commu-
nication of Mr. Bourne’s, that the
population of this island does not
exceed 200 persons, all. of whom
have been baptized. The church
consists of 30 members. . The
people continue diligent inlearning.
They carry on cultivation to a
great extent, and their houses are
well built,


Ss.


SSADRAS, a Dutch settlement
on the sea-coast, 47m. south of
Madras. Inhabiiants, 4 or 6000.
Here are upwards of 30 pagodas.
In the latter part of the last cen-
tury, the missionaries of the S. Prip.

v0 421


SAG


G. began their labours at this place,
and have had many seals to their
ministry. The Netherlands M. S.
sent the Réev. J. C. T. Winkler
and. a native assistant hither, in
1823. In 1826, it is stated by the
society’s representatives at Chin-
surah, that though Mr. W. had
been much afflicted, he was so far
advanced in Tamul, as to be able
to address the congregation in that
language. On New Year’s day,
he received 5 catechumens as mem-
bers of the church; and, on the
following day, administered the
sacrament to 17 persons. He has
collected 190 rupees for the schools;
which serves to defray, if not all,
a ot of their expense. A boys’
school is conducted regularly, and
Mr. W, thinks of establishing a
girls’ school. Mrs. Regel, the
widow of the late Resident, has
offered to superintend it.

SAGANAW BAY, a large bay,
60 m. by 30, on the 8. W. shore of
Lake Huron. Saganaw River enters
this bay. The adjoining territory
is very fertile, and was recently
urchased by the United States of
he Chippeways and Ottawas. On
the re ch between the Lakes
Huron and Michigan, the Indians,
computed at about 8000, are ina
state of ignorance, vice, and
wretchedness; but the different
tribes ate disposed to favour the
establishment of schools among
them. Within a few years, the
Northern M.S. of New York has
made some attempts to enlighten
and reform them;. and more re-
cently the U. F. M. S. has con-
templated 4 mission to the Indians
in the viciniiy.

SALATIGA, ‘® town on the
island of Java, about 40 m. inland
from Samarang. The inhabitants
are less attached to the doctrines
.of Mahomed than in many other

arts of the island. The Rev. G.

ckner commenced his labours
@. Samarang, under the London


SAL


Society, in 18143 but soon joined
the Baptists. Owing to the un-
healthiness of the situation, and
the want of success, he removed to
this place, in 1822, and has trans-
lated the New Testament, and
some tracts on Christian doctrines,
into the Javanese language. The
population, for whose benefit these
works are intenied, is computed at
2,000,000. .

After a long series of diligent
exertions, attended with liftle ap-
parent benefit, he was compelled,
by a formidable insurrection of the
natives against their Dutch masters,
to remove to Batavia; and subse-
quently, other difficulties arising,
to Sumatra ; where his knowledge
of the Malay. would be of imme-
diate service, and where he can
also carry forward the work of
translation for the benefit of the
Javanese, for whose best interests
he appears deeply concerned.

SALSETTE, a British island on
the W. coast, Hindoostan, situated
N. of Bombay, from which it is
separated by a narrow strait, across
which is a causeway. It is about
18 miles long by 14 broad, very
fertile, and about 200 yards from the
continent. The population is about
60,000, chiefly Hindoos. Parsees,
Jews, and Portuguese, are nu-
merous,


Tannah, the capital of the island §


of Salsette, 25 miles N. of Bom-
bay, commending the passage from
the. island to the neighbouring
continent, is a populous and in-
creasing town. The Rev. J.
Nichols, from the 4. B.C. F. M.,
came here in 1818 ; and soon after
his arrival commenced a_ free
school for native children, which
has since been named the Savannah
School. The expenses of this
station are nearly defrayed by a
boarding schoul, superintended
principally by Mrs. Nichols. In
the early past of 1828, it consisted
of 26 pupilse—ié of = were


5


supported |
the missio:
individuals
orphan chil
tenance a n
secured by
ciation has
the scholar
in Ceylon, te
2 deceased ¢
The childre
laudable py
Care is tak
instruction.
time has hee:
Catholics 3h
free schools
and Tunnah.
Is One scho
which 192 Je
structed. Ti
received ma
European re
has been use
lating official
SANDUSK
settlement, O
brlig about ¢
and 65 N, of C
nationa] ese
Indians. The
ppared this t
counsel
fom 1803
lerian chure,
sionary and
ment among th
the fruits of ¢
to death, o
religion, by
Indians. ‘A
man of colour,
the Methodisi
successfully
50 embraced t]
Th Method,
stationed the
at this place,
labour for the
Wyandots. A
son Opened,
1824, 60 schola
who are suppo


wledge


sland on
situated
ch it is
i, across
is about
hd, very

om the
is about
Parsees,
Are ju-


he island ¥


bf Bom-
Age from
hbouring
and in-
Rev. J.


22


Ye F. ° M.,
loon after

a free
n, which
Savannah
of this
yed by &
intended
hols. In
consisted
om wert


SAN


supported by their parents, 4 by
the mission, and 4 by benevolent
individuals in the country; and 2
orphan children, for whose main-
tenance a moderate allowance was
secured by their father. An asso-
ciation has been formed among
the scholars to support 2 children
in Ceylon, to bear the names of the
2 deceased children of Mr. Nichols.
The children, generally, have made
laudable proficiency, and great
care is taken in ther religious
instruction. Much of Mr. N.’s
time has been devoted to the lapsed
Catholics ; he also superintends the
free schools at Basseen, Chandnee,
and Tunnah. In the latter place
is one school of 50 scholars, in
which 12 Jewish children are in-
structed. The mission family has
received many kindnesses from
European residents, and Mr. N.
has been useful to them by trans-
lating official papers. ;
SANDUSKY, Upper, on Indian
settlement, Ohio, on the Sandusky


‘SAN


family, and make very encouraging
progress. ‘he buildings and farm
are extensive. In 1823, about 50
acres were planted with corn.

In the early part of 1824,
260 had betome hopeful converts,
and joined the society; among
whom are several chiefs, who
‘render important aid to the mission.
The notte are generally fast im-
proving in the arts of civilization
and the knowledge of Christianity.
A special work of grace has pre-
vailed, which has extensively pro-
duced a very salutary influence.
The Hev. Mr. Elliott has recently
been associated with Mr. Finley.
This station has sometimes been
called Camp Meigs.

SANDUSKY, er, a post town,
Ohio, on the Sandusky River, a few
miles from its mouth, about 120 m.
S. of Detroit, among the Wyandot
Indians. The Rev. J. Badger was
stationed here, in 1806, by the
Synod of Pittsburgh, and was
afterwards patronized by the Society


River, about 60 m. S. of Lake Erie, | for propagating the Gospel among


and 65 N, of Columbus, in the large
nationa) reserye of the Wyandot
Indians. The Society * Friends
pypared this tribe for iniprovement,

counsel and pecuniary aid.
rom 1803 to 1810, the Presby-
terian church supported a mis-
sionary and a farming establish-
mentamong them. A few converts,
the fruits of the mission, were put
to death, on account of their
religion, by the Romen Catholic
Indians. A few yeprs since, a
man of colour, named Stewart, of
the Methodist church, laboured
successfully with this tribe, and
60 embraced the Gospel.

Tho Methodist Ohio Conference
stationed the Rev, James B. Finley
at this place, October, 1821, to
labour for the spiritual good of the
Wyandots. A Small school was
soon opened, which contained, in


the Indians and others in North
Americ:. When this mission was
comme.:ced, there were no white
settlements within 100 miles of the
staticn, ‘The Wyandots at. this
place, and Upper Sandusky, made
consirerable progress in civilization,
and some, it was hoped, were
benefited by the religious instruc-
tions of Mr. B. and his associates.
In consequence of Mr. B.’s ill
health, the care of the mission was
assigned to the Rev. W. Matthews
in 1810, and it was relinquished
during the first year of the late war
with Great Britain.

SANDWICH {SLANDS, a
group of 10 islands in the N. Pacific
Ocean, W, of the southern part of
N. America, discovered by Captain
Cook in 1778. They extend in a
direction W. N. W. and E.-S, E.
between W. long. 154° 68’ and


1824, 60 scholars, chiefly Wyandots, | 160° 15’, .and N. lat. 18° 60’ and
who are supported in the mission | 22° 20’; Hawaii being the south


423


SAN


eastern island, and Niihau the north-
western. The distance of the
extreme ports is about 390 m.
He xaii is 97 m. in length by 78 in
breadth; Maui, 48 by 29; Tahu-
rawa, 11 by 83; Ranaj, 17 by 9;
Morokai, 40 by 7; Oahu, 46 by 23;
Tauai, 33 by 28; Nithau, 20 by 7;
Taure and Morokiné are uninhabited.
The following are the distances ir
Fnglish miles, and the bearings
from Hawaii:—Maui, 30 N. W.;
Tahurawa,38 W.N.W.; Morokai,
15 N.W.; Oahu, 130 W. N. W.3
Tuuai, 250 W. N. W. The cli-
mate is salubrious, and the soil fer-
tile. The missionaries say the
whole population does not exceed
130 or 150,000, of which 85,000
inhabit Hawati, The inhabitants
ere hardy and industrious, of a
complexion considerably darker
than the Tahitians; and though
very civil and friendly, much less
- inquisitive and loquacious than their
southern neighbours. In the con-
struction of their canoes, sleeping-
mats, war-cloaks, and helmets, and
in dying their calmbashes and print-
ing their cloth, they discover a su-
_perior degree of ingenuity and
neatness ; but in their houses, and in
the fabrication of, their cloth, they
are inferior to them. The simi-
larity of their features, habits, tra-
ditions, and language, to those of
the natives of New Zealand, the
Marquesas, and the Society and
Friendly Islands, affords proof that
they were originally one nation, or
emigrated from the same country
and people.

Until recently, the inhabitants
of these islands were gross idolaters.
The Taboo system had been in ope-
ration, and mostly rigidly observed,
for thousands of years. By this
every thing was prohibited which
was contrary to the will of the
King. It perpetually interdicted
certain kinds of food. Women
were utterly forbidden by it. to eat


pork and plantains, two very im- |


SAN


portant articles in these islands ;
or to eat with the men, and even
to have food cooked by the same
fire. It prohibited also the doing
of certain things on certain days ;
gs at the new moon, full, and
quarters, when the King was in
the morai, performing the various
mummeries of idolatry; and wo-
men were forbidden to go on the
water. A breach of these, anda
multitude of such like unmeaning
restrictions, imposed by this sys-
tem, exposed the delinquent to
the punishment of death !

The morais were sacred in-
closures, formed by a sort of
fence, where human sacrifices
were offered. Before them, stood
the idols, from 3 to 14 feet high,
most fantastically decorated, while
the upper part was carved into a
hideous resemblance of the human
face ! To these idols expensive sacri-
‘ices were constantly presented, and,
on certain occasions, the high priest
was permitted to require and de-
signate human victims !
delightful to remember that this
is the story of former times. In
the early part of Nov. 1819, only
a few days after the first mis-
sionaries ‘o these islands sailed
from Boston, America, the charm
was broken, and the work of de.
struction commenced in Hawaii, by
the order of ‘the young King, who
succeeded his father a few months
before. About the 25th of the
same month, the King’s orders to
burn the monuments of idolatry
were dispatched to Oahu and Tauai,
which were promptly obeyed. In
Tauai the morais and the conse-
crated buildings, with the idols,
were set on fire the first evening
after the order arrived ;‘and the
same was done in all the islands,
The motives which influenced the
monarch in this decisive measure,
the war it occasioned, and the con-
sequences which ensued, are fully
detailed in a most interesting

424


But it is |


‘and able witne


berlain, agri


‘work, ent
Tour throu,
Wm. Etiis.
Tn tracin

to have led
sion, in the
of God, on
ting: wars m
have often
islands, whe
native of f
about 10 or
orphan, and
‘on these in
this forlorn ¢
years, he wa
rican capteil
Thomas Hop
America. 1
Haven, Conr
of 1609, whe
‘by some stud
‘Henry was af
that devoted
Rev. 8, J. Mi
plan of educe
sionary to his
efficient mee
his benevole
were soon fo
other heathet
rise to the Fo
at Cornwall,
to this missi¢
came decided
advocated a n
ed countryme
ardently longe
was ordered
at Cornwall, §
elevated hope
he would soo


his countryme
but “his man
and the missi
C.F. Mz sail
23, 1819, and
March 30, 182
Bingham and
Holman, physi


Whitney, me


lands 5
1 even


same
doing
days ;
1, and
was in
various
id wo-
on the
, and a
eaning
jis sys-
ent to


ed in-
sort of
crifices
1, stood
et high,
1, while
1 into a
human
ve sacri-
ted, and,
zh priest
and de-
But it is
hat this
es. In
19, only
rst mis-

sailed
e charm
k of de-
hwaii, by
ng, who
y months

of the
brders to
idolatry
d Tauai,
ved. In
e conse-
1e idols,
evening
and the
islands.
ced the
easure,
the con-
are fully
eresting
D4


¢


‘on these inhospitable shores.


‘SAN


‘work, entitled ‘Narrative of a
Tour through Hawaii,”? by the Rev.
Wn. Ellis.

In tracing the events which seem
to have led to this important mi.
sion, in the mysterious providence
of God, one of.those extermina-
ting: wars must be mentioned, which
have often almost desolated these


islands, when Henry Obookiah, a.


native of Hawaii, at the age of
about 10 or 12 years, was made an
orphan, and left almost: frieadless
In
this forlorn condition, after a few
years, he was noticed by an Ame-
rican captain, who took him and
Thomas Hopoo on board, to sail for
America. They landed at New
Haven, Connecticut, in the autumn
of 1609, wher: they were -noticed


by some studsnts of Yale College.
‘Henry was afterwards instructed by


that devoted servant of God, the
Rev. S. J. Mills, who conceived the
plan of educating him as a mis-
sionary to his native land, and took
efficient measures to accomplish
his benevolent designs. Others
were socn found, from these and
other heathen lands, which gave
rise to the Foreign: Mission School
at Cornwall, and _ subsequently
to this mission.’ Henry seon be-
came decidedly pious, and strongly
advocated a mission to his benight-
ed countrymen, in which he most
ardently longed to engage; but it
was ordered otherwise. He died
at Cornwall, Feb, 17, 1818, and the
elevated hopes of the church, that
he would soon become a faithful
‘and able witness for the truth among
his countrymen, were cast down ;
but “his mantle fell’? upon others,
and the missionaries of the 4. B.
C.F. M. sailed from Boston, Oct.
23, 1819, and arrived off Hawaii
March 30, 1820 ;—viz. the Rev. H.
Bingham and A. Thurston; Dr.
Holman, physician; Mr. D. Cham-
berlain, agriculturist; Mr. S.
Whitney, mechanic and school-


SAN


master ; and Mr.S. Ruggles, ‘school
master, who have since become
licensed preachers; and Mr, E.
Loomis, printerand schoolmaster ;—.
all married. The following na-
tives of the Sandwich Islands, hav-
ing been educated at the Foreigu
Mission School, Cornwall, Con-
necticut, sailed with the mission-
aries as teachers, viz. :— J. Honoo-
ree and T. Hopoo, of Hawaii; W.
Tennooe, of Tauai; and G. P.
Tamoree, son of the King of Tauai
and Niihay: these were organized
into a church previous to their em-
barkation, except the young King.
Not long after their arrival, the
missionaries were called to the
painful duty -of withdrawing their
fellowship from Dr. Holman and
W. Tennooe; and the former re-
turped to America soon after. Mr.
Chamberlain returned in 1823, with
the approbation of the missionaries
and the Board; and George
Sandwich, a native of these islands,


having been educated at Cornwall,


and given evidence of piety, sailed
as an assistant, Nov. 1820. The
missionaries were very cordially re-
ceived by the natives, and imme-
diately engaged in the appropriate
duties of the mission. They found
the encouragement so great, that
they sent an urgent request to the
Board for additional labourers. Ac-


cordingly the following missien-


aries embarked at New Haven,
‘Nov. 19,° 1822:—The Rev. W.
Richards, C. S, Stewart, and A.
Bishop, missionaries; J. (soadrich,
and J. Ely, licensed preachers ; and


‘Dr. A. Blatchely, physician ;—all


married:— Mr. L. Chamberlain,
superintendent of secular concerns
and assistant missionary; S. Po-
Seer, a native of the Society
‘Islands ; Wm. Kum-mo-oolah, R.
Kriouloo, and Kooperee,—natives
of the Sandwich Islands, all hope-
fully pious; and Betsey Stockton,
coloured woman, teacher; who
arrived April 27th, 1823,

002 425


‘SAN


‘In April, 1822, the Rev. D.
‘Tyerman, and G, Bennet, Esq. the
‘Deputation of the London Society
tw its various stations, and the Rev.
Wm. Ellis, with 2 pious Tahitians
end their wives, visited the mis-
sionaries, and the result was the
establishment of the latter on these
islands. After rendering very im-
portant aid to the mission, during a
stay of more than 4 months, Mr.
Ellis returned with the deputation
to the Society Islands; where he
had laboured about 6 years; and
joined this mission, with his family,
Feb. 5, 1823, still patronized by
the L. M, S. Here a wide and
interesting field for missionary en-
terprise has thus been opened, and
a very desirable progress has been
amade toward the accomplishment of
those benevolent designs which the
missionaries and their friends have
in view.

In a joint letter of the mis-
sionaries, dated May 24, 1823, it
is said: — ‘‘ God has indeed pro-
vided kindly for this mission. It
has hitherto been emphatically the
child of providence, rocked in the
cradle of faith and prayer; and
though not free from the sorrows
of infancy, it has enjoyed the pre-
sence of a kind and faithful parent.
If we trace the history of the
mission from the wanderings of
the friendless orphan Obookiah,
pass by his early grave and the
Foreign Mission School at Corn-
wall, through the interesting scenes
at Goshen and Hartford, and at Bos-
ton, ‘where the little band was
organized, and where the affec-
tionate voice and well directed pen
of Worcester’s wisdom cheered,
and guided, and impelled it on-
ward ;—if we trace its path over
the mighty waters, and witness its
auspicious reception ;-if we call
to mind the downfall of idols, and
the vanishing of the taboo system,
—the issuing the first elementary
book in the language, containing


SAN
the first principles of the Gospel,.
received and read by a goodly numn-
ber of the chiefs and people, who
had before no alphabet ;—the unex.
pected visit of the London mis.
sionary Deputation, —the happy
settlement of Mr. Ellis, —the early
correspondence opened between the
rulers of these islands, and the
Christian rulers of the Society
Isles,—the attendance of the chief
rulers to the preaching of the Gos-
pel in their own tongue on the
sacred Sabbath of Jehovah, now
acknowledged as their God;—if we
remember the kindness, and promp-
titude, and liberality, with which a
Christian public have furnished and
sent forth so large a reinforeement—
their favoured embarkation at New.
Haven, their delightful passage,
their safe and seasonable arrival,
their welcome reception by kings,
and chiefs, and people, whose calls
for teachers, and for books and
slates, are greater than we can
supply ;—or if we look forward
to the mighty work before us,
waiting for our hands; and to what
the Redeemer of the nations has
purposed and promised shall be ac-
complished, well may we exclaim
with Nehemiah, ‘ The God of Hea-
ven, He will prosper us; there-
fore we his servants will arise and
build.’ ” ;

Notwithstanding the evils en-
dured here from unprincipled
Europeans and Americans, the
mission in all its parts is prospering,
as will appear from the following
enumeration of the chief facts,
extracted from a late official publi-
cation of the 4. B.C. F. M.:—

‘“‘ Here are nine chiefs, embodying
a proat portion of the civil influence
of the islands, publicly professing
their faith in Christ, and heartily
entering on the discharge of their
duties toward God and their fellow-
men — half a score, and more,
churches, erected by the natives
themselves for the worship of
426


XS -


has forwaided


Jehovah, aj
tive hearer
islanders, n
interesting
their shoulde
tains, the me
of one of t
when comp
4000 people,
overflowing ;
under instru
petent native
aries have qu
—more than
to read the w
blessed volun
into their ha
desire, every
come into spe
richest treasu
the Holy Spir
Hawaii, at _
Lahaina ;—an
these heaven
than 2000 nat
in the deep g
paganism, erey
for the mo
worship of the
meetings for
females, and
these islands,
among ourse]
flourishes—and
and cruel chief:
satisfaction,
they once des
in the solemn
[See Hawaii, J
SANGIR, a
islands in the
largest, called
about 40 miles
Population, abd
125° 21’. N. lat
have a fort on
missionaries ha
tianity among
considerable ,s
Mr, Kam, of ;
been useful to
these islands, a


SAN


spel,: Jehovah, and crowded with atten-
umn= tive hearers— more than 2000
who islanders, moving along in one
nex- interestifg procession, bearing on
mis- their shoulders, from distant moun-
appy tains, the materials for the erection
sarly of one of these churches, which,
n the when completed, could contain
the 4000 people, and was thronged to
ciety overflowing ;—nearly 20,000 people
chief under instruction, taught by com-
Gos- petent natives, whom the mission-
n the aries have qualified for the service ;
now —more than 12,000 persons able
if we to read the word of God, were that
romp- blessed volume ready to be put
lich a into their hands; and a longing
od and desire, everywhere expressed, to
vent— come into speedy possession of that
t New. richest treasure; the effusions of
ssage, the Holy Spirit in different parts of
rrival, Hawaii, at Honorooroo, and at
kings, Lahaina;—and as the results of
e calls these heavenly visitations, more
cs and than 2000 natives, lately shrouded
je can in the deep gloom of a barbarous
orward paganism, erecting the family altar
re us, for the morning and _ evening
p> what worship of the true God ;—regular
ns has meetings for prayer, among the
be ac- females, and among the males of
xclaim these islands, just. as there are
f Hea- among ourselves when _ religion


flourishes—-and the once haughty
and cruel chiefs mingling, with high
satisfaction, among those whom
they once despised and oppressed,
in the solemn acts of devotion.’’
[See Hawaii, Maui, Oahu, Tauut.]

SANGIR, a numerous group of
islands in the eastern seas. The
largest, called Sangir island, is
about 40 miles long, and 12 broad.
Population, about 12,000. E. long.
125921’, N. lat. 3° 36’.. The Dutch
have a fort on the island, and their
missionaries have propagated Chris-
tianity among the natives with
considerable ,success. The Rev.
Mr. Kam, of Amboyna, has also
been useful to the inhabitants of
these islands, and the B. & F. B.S.
has forwaided to them Malay


heartily
bf their
fellow-

more,
natives
: hip of


SAR


Testaments, which have been
thankfully received.

SAREPTA, a missionary set-
tlement in European Russia, on the
river Sarpa, 24 miles below Cza-
ritzen, on the Wolga, near the
borders of Asiatic Russia ; situated
on the high road, by way of Astra-
chan, to Persia and the E. Indies.
Inhabitants, nearly 500. In 1823,
three-fourths of the settlement was
consumed by fire.

After two unsuccessful attempts,
in which several of the missionaries
of the U. B. were imprisoned at St.
Petersburg, they obtained permis-
sion to settle in the Russian domi-
nions ; and in 1765, 5 of them
commenced the settlement of Sa-
repta, with a view to evangelize
the Calmucs, a very numerous tribe
of Mongul Tartars extensively
scattered over European and Asi-
atic Russia,

Since the destruction of the
Mongolian monarchy, they have
become divided into 3 main hordes;
viz. the Koshot, the Dorbat, and the
Torgutsk. Some few of them are
Mahomedans; but they, for the
most part, embrace Budhism, to
which they are very superstitiously
attached. Large portions of each
inhabit the following regions :—,

The Koshot Horde ranges with
their herds and flocks on the banks
of the Wolga between Sarepta and
Astrachan. <A few years since the
number of priests in it was no less
than 800, when their tents amounted
only toabout 1000. Prince Tuman,
feeling the burden ofsupporting such
a disproportionate number of priests,
reduced them to 250; but mani-
fested no disposition to renounce
his oppressive rites, and embrace
Christianity.

‘The Dorbat Horde is extremely
numerous, and ranges between the
Kuma and the chain of mountains,
which divides the great steppe,
or plain, on the western side of
the Wolga, up to the ey of

27


SAR


Sarepta; in which, during the
summer, they reside, while, in the
winter, they dwell on the banks
of the Kuma.

The Torgutsk, or pig ind Horde, |
inhabits the steppe near Astruchan.
Within a few days’ ride of this
city, it is estimated that there are
100,000 Calmucs belonging to the
different hordes.

A great feast among the Cal-
mucs, called the feast of ‘* Burcham
Bakshi,” or ‘‘ God the Teacher,”
a title given to their principal idol,
Dshagdshamuni, is thus described
by Mr. Rahmn :—

The gallongs, or priests, erecteda
wooden frame, about 7 or 8 yards in
height,and3 in breadth, covered with
coloured woollen carpets. Before
this an altar was placed, covered
also with a brocaded carpet, at the
foot of which stood a tabouret
of Chinese workmanship. Round
about, in the front of this stage,
felts and carpets were spread on
the ground.

In the afternoon, about half-
past 4 o’clock, a procession com-
menced, consisting of 150 or 200
gallongs, followed by a great mul-
titude of common reople. The
gallongs, dressed in their red and

ellow coats, bearing “ chadaks,”’

ans, and musical instruments,
marched up from the churall to
the above-mentioned frame: and,
at the head of their body, 3 grave
looking men walked, or rather
danced, holding each of them an
image of brass, about a quarter of
a yard in height, aud gilt, repre-
senting 3 of their burchans, and a
fourth gallong carried a large scroll
about 2 yards long. The “ chadak”’
is a kind of .an, consisting of small
but long pieces of silk, like a tail:
they are held in high repute, for
being great and powerful amulets,
as well as ornaments in the tem-
P . A whole apparatus belong-
ng to a heathen altar, according
to the custom of the Lamities, was


SAR


also carried by other ongs.
Arriving at the frame, fhe gal.
longs surrounded it. A noisy kind
of music began ; and a yellow silk
cover was slowly drawn up by small
strings, till a large picture was
unveiled. ‘This picture represented
Dshagdshamuni neatly painted on
blue taffety, with light yellow, red,
and blue. At that moment, the
whole multitude, gallongs and peo-
ple, prostrated thrice before the pic-
ture: after which ceremony, the
gallongs and their disciples seated
themselves ifi rows, and began to
sing, from their Thibetan Shastres,
to the honour of thei; ‘dol. During
their singing, tea, tshigan (or sour
mares’ milk), and white bread, were
distributed among them. In the
mean while, the Prince, hisfamily,
and all the people, walked the
place, praying their usual form of
prayer, ‘Om-ma- ni-bad- me.
chom-ti;*? and continued so till
sun set, when, in an inverted order,
all was brought back to the chu-
rall again.

With what emotions I witnessed
this spectacle may easily be con-
ceived. How fervently I prayed,
that, for many of the people pre-
sent, this might be the last time
they should perform such an un-
reasonable service. To a man
who asked me how I liked it, |
answered, “1 dislike it very much.
This people are committing a hei-
nous sin, worshipping the work of
their own hands, although we*have
but one God, and one mediator
between God and inan, viz. Jesus
Christ.” At this answer he made
a sneer,

An old gallong sat at a distance
from the others. He was almost
blind, and seemed to be deranged.
He, like the others, worshipped,
and uttered with a loud voice «
kind of prayer or thanksgiving ;
but nobody took notice of ‘him.
In younger days he may have
acted his part as well « any, but

28


now he y
cause infi
heathenisn
cruelty,
Soon a
brethren,
quaintance
the Dorba
every oppo
the Gospel
their mann
panying th
but with 1
the princit
the vicinit
missionarie
was likely
them, turne
education o
to the Ge
on the Wo
been assiste
ciety, they
renew theit
Calmucs, '
aries, Mess
C. Hubner,
gutsk Horde
cordially re
lected a sn
consequence
Prince, wer
their congre
to land belo
near Sarepte
the brethren
government
lect con !
to baptize as


and the o
the Calmue A
& suspension
amidst all tt
the missionar
ing hope, tie
heathens hav
faith, and thet
followers of ¢
and several
translated in
guage,


id, were
In the }


sfamily,
ed ‘the
form of
ad = me-
| so till
dd: order,
he chu-


itnessed
be con-
prayed,
ple pre-
last time
an un-
a man
ed it, |
ry much.
ga hei-
work ol
we have
mediator
iz. Jesus
he made


h distance
s almost
deranged.

voice 4
ksgiving ;
of “him.
nay have
k any, but
28


SAR


now he was quite overlooked be-
cause infirm ;—a fresh proof that
heathenism tends to hardness and
cruelty,

Soon after the arrival of the
brethren, they commenced an ac-
quaintance with the Calmucs of
the Dorbat Horde, and improved
every opportunity of making known
the Gospel to them, conforming to
their manner of living, and accom-
panying them in their migrations ;
but with little success. In 1774,
the principal horde retired from
the vicinity of Sarepta, and the
missionaries, finding that nothing
was likely to be effected among
them, turned their attention to the
education of heathen children, and
to the German ccicnists living
on the Wolga. In 1815, having
been assisted by the London So-
ciety, they were encouraged to
renew their mission among the
Calmucs. Two of their mission-
aries, Messrs. J. G. Schill and
C. Hubner, settled with the Jor-
gutsk Horde. They were, at first,
cordially received, and soon col-
lected a small society; but, in
consequence of the hostility of the
Prince, were obliged to remove
their congregation, 22 in number,
to land belonging to the settlement,
near Sarepta. Since their removal,
the brethren applied to the Russian
government for permission to col-
lect congregations, to instruct and
to baptize as in other countries, but
were refused, This circumstance,
and the opposition manifested by
the Calmuc tribes, has occasioned
a suspension of the mission. But
amidst all these discouragements,
the missionaries indulge the cheer-
ing hope, taat some of, these poor
heathens have already died in the
faith, and thet others are the sincere
followers of Christ, ‘The Gospels,
and several Tracts, have been
translated into the Calmuc lan-


guage,


SAU


The Rev. C. Rahmn, from the
L.M.S., spent the summer sea-
sons of 1820, 1821, and 1822,
among the Calmucs of the Doréat
Horde, distributing _parts of the
Scriptures and Tracts, and exerting
himself particularly in the instruc-
‘tion of the children. The attention of
many was excited, and the progress
of the school was encouraging. On
his return to Sarepta, in the winters
of those years, his time was occu.
pied in preparing a Calmuc gram-
mar and dictionary, with a version
of the psalms; and in learning the
Thibet language.

In consequence of Mrs. R.’s
state of health, however, he was
subsequently compelled to remove
to St. Petersburg, where he was
usefully employed until affliction
unfitted him to engage actively in
missionary labours at a foreign
station.

In 1821, in consequence of the
visit of the Rev. Drs. Patterson
and Henderson, an auxiliary to
the Russian Bible Society was
formed for the benefit of the Ger-
man colonists and Calmucs.

SAULT DE ST. MARIE, or
Falls of St. Mary, a settlement,
Michigan territory, at the S. E.
extremity of Lake Superior, a few
miles below the outlet, 90 m. by
water, N. W. of Mackinaw.

In 1823, the population in this
place and its vicinity consisted of
about 300 officers and soldiers be-
longing to the UnitedStates garrison,
150 to the British garrison, about
150 settlers, and, at certain seasons
of the year, from 3 to 500 Indians,
It is from 3 to 400 miles beyond
where the Gospel has been statedly
preached. The Western M. S.,
under the direction of the Synod of
Pittsburg, has appeinted the Rev.
R, M. Laird to visit this place, who
arrived, October, 1823. He found
a few professed disciples of Christ
of different ea whose

4


SEB


edification he seeks as well as the
spiritual good of the soldiers and
settlers; but one of the leading
Pes nt of his mission is to acquire
information respecting the number,
character, and history of the va-
rious tribes of Indians traversing
the vast territory of the great lakes,
and penetrating into the distant
and chilling regions of the north,
with a view to the establishment of
schools among them. Mr. L. has
been much encouraged by the suc-
cess of his labours among the sol-
diers and settlers.

SEBOLGA, a village on the bay
of Tapanooly, W. coast of Suma-
tra, about 300m. N.W. of Padang,
situated among the Battas, in the
vicinity of a numerous population,
under the authority and protection
of the English company at Tapa-
nooly, and about 3 miles from the
island Punchon, on which the Eng-
lish settlement is situated.

The Rev.R. Burton, from the B.M.
S. arrived here in 1822: he was cor-
dially received both by the settlers
and the barbarous natives, and the
Rajah gave land on which to erect
a dwelling-houre. He made con-
siderable progress in acquiring the
Batta language, which is spoken by
nearly 1,000,000 of people, and Mrs.
Burton had a small school of or-
phan girls. Such success, how-
ever, attended the warlike opera-
tions of a set of insurgent reform-
ers, called Padries, that Mr. B.
with his family, and the females
under Mrs. B.’s care,were obliged,
from regard to personal safety, to
Itave Sebolga in July, 1825, and
they reached Calcutta in the fol-
lowing month. The timid Bataks,
among whom Mr. B. had laboured,
had all determined to become Mus-
sulmans, when their invaders took
possession of their country. At the
period of his removal, he was en-

ged in compiling a dictionary,

nglish, Malay, and Batak, having


SEL


previou:ly completed his translation
of the Gospel of St. John.

SELINGINSK, a town and mi-
litary station in the government of
Irkutsk, Siberia, about 160 m.S. E.
of the city of Irkutsk, and about
4000 m. easterly from St. Peters-
burgh, on the Selinga R. It is a
thoroughfare for the Chinese trade
carried on at Kaiachta. Inhabitants
about 3000, exclusive of those of
several villages. E. long. 107° 28’,
N, lat. 51°16’. Selinginsk is in the
centre of all the Buriats, a name
given to several populous tribes of
Tartars in the government of
Irkutsk, who are, in general, very
ignorant, even of the tenets of their
own superstition; nor is it requi-
site, according to their ideas, that
they should know them.

Their religion is suited to their
indolence of mind, as well as the
depravity of their natures ; and they
are not easily induced to change it
for one which addresses the under-
standing and the heart.

The following practice illus.
trates their predominant characte-
ristic. The Buriat procures a prayer,
written on a long slip of paper, and
suspends it where it will be moved
by wind or passengers, or rolls it
round the barrel of a small wind-
mill, which keeps his petition in
motion, and satisfies his conscience
that it is acceptably offered to the
god. ‘These praying mills are very
numerous; and they have various
other modes of worship equally
suited to their indolent habits. In-
deed, their whole system is a delu-
sion, and their services are un-
me*ning forms, Their restraints
from animal indulgences are con-
fined to th ot time spent in
their temples vm which they re-
turn to comiait all uncleanness
with greediness,

They speak the Mongolian lan-
guage, but their books are in an
unknown tongue. The “slinginsh

30


ae


Buriats are
Buriats on
lake, and ai
16,000 5 the:
not less than
priests. Th
distinguished
They are di
inhabiting tl
Selinginsk, a
and have o}
scarcely 200
100,000 male
of Buriats,
The Rev.
Swan, and Yu
arrived in 18
first commen
received the
aid of the |
The missionar
order of the
ports to the
through whos
to travel on
was also direc
general of Sib
every necessa
afforded them
they were t
kindness by th
who engaged
his power tow
designs. A gi
land was acco
peror’s engage
expense of 62
by the erectio
The mission
the Buriats in
wanderings, vi
distributing the
and = othetwi
Christian instr
her in which
soon after thei
wrote :— «Th
where receiyi
Tracts with ay
coming to us
quarters ; and


|, very
f their
requi-
3, that


» their
as the
nd they
ange it
under-


illus-
aracte-
prayer,
ber, and


SEL

Buriats are in the centre of all the
Buriats on the E. side of Baikal
lake, and are estimated at about
14,000 ; they have 10 temples, and
not less than 2000 lamas, or chief
priests. The Chorinsk tribe are
distinguished for their wealth,
They are divided into 11 tribes,
inhabiting the country easterly of
Selinginsk, are estimated at 30,000,
and have only 4 temples, and
scarcely 200 lamas., Upwards -of
100,000 males belong to the nation
of Buriats.

The Rev. Messrs. Stallybrass,
Swan, and Yuille, from the L.M.S.,
arrived in 1819, and this mission,
first commenced at Irkutsk, has
received the full approbation and
aid of the Russian government,
The missionaries were furnished, by
order of the Emperor, with pass-
ports to the several governors,
through whose districts they were
to travel on their route; a letter
was also directed to the Governor.
general of Siberia, requesting that
every necessary assistance might be
afforded them. A/ter their arrival,
they were treated with peculiar
kindness by the Governor-general,
who engaged to do every thing in
his power towards promoting their
designs. A grant of 112 acres of
land was accompanied by the Em-
peror’s en ge to defray the
expense of 5250 dollars, incurred
by the erection of the buildings.

The missionaries frequently visit
the Buriats in their different hordes,
following them in their various
wanderings, visiting their temples,
distributing the Gospel and Tracte
and = othetwise communicating
Christian instruction. Of the man-
ner in which they were, received,
soon after their arrival, Mr. Swan
wrote:— ‘The Buriats are every-
where receiving the Gospel end
Tracts with avidity, and are daily
coming to us for them frura all
quarters; and from a distance of


SEL


hundreds of versts. We have like-
wise daily applications for medi-
cine and advice ; and our being able
to prescribe simple remedies, and
furnish medicine for some of their
prevailing diseases, has contributed
not a little to secure their good
opinion of us; while we have, at
the same time, the finest opportu-
nities for distributing the word of:
God. The lamas, or priests,
themselves, not only come for the
Gospel, but are sometimes seen
sitting at the door, reading it to a
listening audience of their own
people.””

Of a new opening for a mission-
ary, the report for 1823, states,
that “a large district round Ner-
chinsk is inhabited by the Tun-
gusians, a people who are not in
possession of a written language of
their own. Their neighbours, the
Chorinsk Buriats, have introduced
among them books relative to their
superstitions, written in Mongolian,
which the Tungusians are, at length,
able to read and understand. Thus
the way was prepared, by the zeal
of the Buriats themselves, for the
dissemination of Christianity among
the Tungusians, who will now be
able to read the “longolian Scrip-
tures circulated « aong that tribe,
which otherwise, from their igno-
rance of letters, would have been
to them a sealed book.”

Since that period the missiona-
ries have employed various means
for the advantage of the people,
which, with the effect of their
efforts, will be apparent from their
last report.

Seminary for Buriat Youths,—
The number of youths at present
in the seminary is six. They are
instructed in Greek, Latin, Russ,
English, and Mongolian; in the
mathematics, in general knowledge,
and in the Seriptures. They make
good progress in the several
branches of learning, and render

431


SEL


useful services in the literary de-
partment of the mission, particu-
larly in transcribing manuscripts,
ac. The number of youths ad-
mitted since the commencement of
the seminary is 14. Some of them,
from local causes, remzined but a
short time in the institution; yet
they did not quit it until they had
learned to read and write their own
language, and made such progress
in other valuable attainments, as
cannot fail to be of great use to
a in the course of their future
life.

Native Services.—The mission-
aries still continue statedly to
preach the Gospel to the Buriats,
chiefly dependants on the mission,
but hitherto without apparent
success.

Translation of th: Scriptures.—
The Mongolian translation of the
New Testament was completed
during the year 1826, and consi-
derable progress has been made in
that of the Old Testament. The
importance of this translation of
the Scriptures will be more fully
uppreciated, when it is considered
that Mongolian is spoken and un-
derstood, not only among the Bu-
riats, but extensively in Chinese
Tartary, and in a south-westerly
direction, among the inhabitants
of all the intermediate coun-
try, from Selinginsk to Thibet.
The Mongolians Proper are sub-
jects of the Chinese empire, and
the isadkas and Eluths, also under
the same government, use the same
language.

Mr. Stallybrass has again visited
the missionary station on the Ona,
He was absent from Selenginsk
about two months, during which
time be availed himself of such
opportunities as occurred of preach-
ing the Gospol to the people.

The lamas in that quarter are
zealous in their attempts to make
proselytes among the Shamans,


SEN


whose religion is considered the
most ancient religion of the inha-
bitants of the Buriats, Tongats,
é&c. and consists partly of a kind
of adoration paid to fire, a reliance
on amulets, &c. The people in this
part of the country appear to be
less under the influence of prejudice
than the other Buriats.

Mr. Yuille has visited Kaiachta,
and was received in a friendly
manner by the Russian Director
of Trade, and by the military chief
on the Chinese frontier. The
former presented to him a valuable
work in the Mongolian language,

Towards the close of the year
1826, Mr. Swan visited a tribe of
Buriats, who inhabit that part of
the country, which lies along the
shores of the Baikal, near the
mouths of the Selinga. He con.
versed with the Taisba and princi-
pal people, endeavoured to direct
their minds to the importance of
education, and informed them of
the existence of the seminary at
Selinginsk. They were fully aware
of the importance of learning to
read and write Russ ; and several of
them seemed inclined to send their
children to the seminary, but were
prevented, on finding that the mis-
sionaries seek no remuneration for
the instructions they impart. A
plan of doing good disinterestedly,
they regard as justly liable to sus-
picion.

There are few parts of the world,
perhaps none, in which the society
has stations, where more formidable
impediments are to be overcome
by missionary labours, than those

which (independently of the moral
causes which operate everywhere)
exist among the Buriats. These
arise principally from their want of
education, their deeply-rooted su-
perstitions, and the influence oi
their priests,

SENECAS, the remnant of a
tribe of the Iroquois, or Six Nations

432


| this tribe with ¢


of Indian
veral villa,
York, co.
They resi
ing places
reservatio


easterly fro)
amount are
ber of Ca
Onondagas,
Senecas,

450 Seneca:
Ohio. The
7 the six
village, nea
their nation

he people
on the most i
important
death of a pe
peers from g
issionary 9
are sent to ac
of each villag
Their anci

& powerful
morality, and
poverty, To
sidence of th
phet, where al
in cases of sic
and to learn
rites of their n
most learned d
still reside the
ad quarters
who assembled
spread of the (
pearance, Th
vernment ap
annually for
mission schools
and several ¥
have employed


Itis thought m¢


| the
inha-
igats,
kind
iance
in this
to be
judice


aluable

uage.

le year

ribe of
part of
yng the
var the
le con-
| princi-
o direct
ance of
hem of
nary at
y aware
ing to
leveral of
bnd their §
but were
the mis-
ation for
art. A
restedly,
mB to SUs-


he world,
e society
brmidable
nvercome
an those
he moral
rywhere)
These

y want of
poted sie
ence oi


ant of a
x Nations
432


SEN


of Indians, scattered through se-
veral villages in the W. part of New
York, consisting of about 2500.
They reside mostly in the follow-
ing places,—viz. on the Buffalo
reservation, near Buffalo, about
700; on the Tonewanta reserva-
tion, 30 m. N. E. of Buffalo, above
300 ; on the Cataraugus reservation,
40 m. S, W. of Buffalo, 450 ; on the
Alleghany reservation, 70 m. 8S,
of Buffalo, on the Alleghany River,
nearly 600; on the Genesee River,
easterly from Buffalo, 450: in this
amount are included a small num-
ber of Cayugas, Munsees, and
Onondagas, who reside with the
Senecas, There are also about
450 Senecas on Sandusky River,
Ohio. The seat of public business
for the six nations is at Seneca
village, near Buffalo, where all
their national councils are held.
The people in all the villages live
on the most intimate terms. In all
important concerns, such as the
death of a person of note, copies of
papers from government, reports of

issionary Societies, &c., runners
are sent to acquaint the inhabitants
of each village,

Their ancient religious rites had
a powerful tendency to dissipate
morality, and produce indolence and
poverty. Tonewanta was the re-
sidence of the famous Seneca pro-
phet, where all the villagers resorted
in cases of sickness and witchcratt;
and to learn more perfectly the
rites of their ancient religion. The
most learned disciples of the prophet
still reside there; and it is now the
head quarters of the Pagan party,
who assembled there to oppose the
spread of the Gospel on its first ap-
pearance, The United States go-
vernment appropriates 450 dollars
annually for the support of the
mission schools among this nation ;
and several benevolent societies


| have employed missionaries among


this tribe with encouraging success,
It is thought more than one-third of


‘SEN


the whole population are desirous
of Christian instruction, among
whom are several warriors and
principul chiefs; while a strong
Pagan party are strenuously op-
posed to the establishment of mis-
sions.

In 1764, the Rev. Samuel Kirk-
land visited the Senecas, with the
design of introducing Christianity
among them. After remaining 2
years, suffering almost incredible
hardships, and finding no prospect
of success, he returned home, and
soon after commenced a mission
among the Oneidas. About 1795,
the Society of Friends, with the
approbation of President Washing-
ton, commenced their exertions for
the benefit of the Indians in the
state of New York, and more par-
ticularly for those of the Seneca
tribe ; and in20 years they expend.
ed more than 40,000 dollars, with
good success, in supporting schools,
and attempting to introduce the
arts of civilized life. In 182], a
school which has been established
several years on the Alleghany
reserve, was in active operation.
They have also laboured among the
Senecasin Ohio. The New York,
and other missionary societies,
have occasionally employed agents
among this people. The mission
at the Seneca village, about 4 m.
E. of Buffalo, on Buffalo Creek,near
the outlet of Lake Erie, was com-
menced by the New York Misston-
ary Suciety, in 181}, and trans-
ferred to the U. F. M. 8, in 1821.

In 1811, the Rev, John Alex-
ander and Mr. J. Hyde, were sent
to this tribe with the hope of form-
ing a permanent mission station.
Alter repeated conferences with
the chiefs in council, the mission-
ary was rejected, while the teacher
was invited to remain and instruct
a school for the children of the
nation, Mr. Hyde continued among
them in the capacity of a teacher,
till 1819, when he was appointed

PP 433


SEN
catechist, and Mr. J. Young sup-
plied his place. He removed from
the station in 1821, and was suc-
ceeded by the Kev. T.S. Harris.
During the first 7 years of Mr.
Hyde’s residence among the In-
dians, he suffered much from ill
Health, was entirely unacquainted
with the language, and laboured
under many disadvantages for its
acquisition. The war, which com-
menced soon after his arrival,
greatly impeded the prosperity of
the mission. In 1818, the prospects
began to brighten, and a serious
inquiry after truth prevailed, more
or less extensively, in alt the vil-
lages. In 1820, the chiefs reported,
that in the’4 reservations, 660 were
in favour of Christianity. The
morals of the Christian party were
considerably improved: revelling
and intemperance were almost
wholly abandoned; though 3 years
before, those who refused to unite
in the prevailing dissipations, for-
feited their reputation and in-
fluence. They also made rapid
improvement in agriculture, and
in thoir manner of living. With
the assistance of the catechist, a
decent house for publie worship was
erected, in which they regularly
assembled on the Sabbath. Mr. H.
translated and printed several por-
tions of the Scriptures inthe Seneca
language. The property belonging
to the Koatd consisted of 2 dwel-
ling-houses and a_ school-house,
with the use, for an indefinite pe-
riod, of the land on which they
were erected. Mr. H. arrived at
the mission-house, Oct. 29, i921,
and was received with gratitude
and strong assurances of the per-
manent friendship and kind offices
of the chiefs. Measures weresoon
‘adopted for the establishment of a
boarding-school; and in July, 1823,
23 children were committed to the
care and authority of the mission.
On the 12th of April, of the same
year, a church was organized, and


SEN


4 intelligent young chiefs were ad-
mitted to communion; 3 others
have since been added, and several
more give evidence of piety. The
report of the Board, May, 1824,
says—‘‘ The progress of this mis-
sion, since the last annual meeting,
has been unusually interesting:
attended by many tokens of divine
favour, it has steadily advanced
towards the ultimate objects for
which it was established. Under
the regular preaching of the Gospel,
the knowledge and worship of God
have been gradually acquiring an
asceniuncy over the deep-rooted
attachment of the Pagan party to
the customs of their ancestors, and
the ignorance and superstition of
the whole tribe. The intellectual
and moral elevation of the Christian
party, equally distinguished by a
practical recognition of the sanc.
tity of the Sabbath, and an increas.
ing attention to their agricultural
and domestic pursuits, furnish con-
clusive evidence of the utility and
efficacy of Indian missions.”

The school had also assumed a new
and interesting character, and the
general aspect of the mission excited
the gratitude of its fr’. nds, and gave
a new impulse to eftoris in behalf of
this tribe. Such was the flattering
state of the mission at the close of
February, 1824, when some of the
Pagans were urged to disperse the
school, and to expel the mission
family from the reservation. This
measure was effected by the co-
operation of white inhabitants in
the vicinity, under a law of the
state, which was designed to pre-


vent the encroachments of dishonest {


whites, and not to interrupt the
operations of Christian benevolence,
The school was consequently re-
moved to Cataraugus, and the
missionary to Buffalo, where he
still continues to visit the Indians,
and to communicate religious in-
struction on the Sabbath. If per-
mission cannot be obtained from
434


governm
sion pret
establish


from the
Africa, ¢
the count
gal and G
to the F
principal:
Population
principal
island St,
pital of the
the Sene;
people hay
nature,
Society ser
them, who
superintenc
native chil;
of these ha
carry into
ledge they
whom are
Mr. Dard }
langu
and has fo
SERAM
gal, Hindog
anes, ple¢
Ww. bank of
Calcutta,
22° 45’,
worship are
mission cha
chapels for
is the seat o
its ostablishy
1799, see
its comme
aries have
having all ¢
accumulate


sm,


a Indians,
us in-
Ne If ere


ined {from
434


SEN


government to return to the mis-
sion premises, it is contemplated to
establish the mission on the border
of the reservation, within 3 m. of
the principal village, where it will
be independent of the Pagan party,
and will probably derive many im-
portantadvantages from the change.
{See Cataraugus.]

SENEGAL, acountry extending
from the northern limits of W.
Africa, to 10° N. lat., including
the countries watered by the Sene-
gal and Gambia rivers. It belongs
to the French, and is inhabited
principally by Jaloofs, having a
population of about 10,000. The
principal settlement is on the
island St. Louis, which is the ca-
pital of the country, and is situated
N. of Cape Verd, near the mouth of
the Senegal. Till recently, this
people have been left in a state of
nature. The Paris Education
Society sent Mr. Dard to instruct
them, who has, for some years,
superintended a school of about 290
native children at St. Louis. Many
of these have become competent to
carry into the interior the know-
ledge they have acquired, among
whom are several sons of chiefs.
Mr. Dard has reduced the Jaloof
language to grammatical order,
and has formed elementary books.

SERAMPORE, a.town of Ben-
gal, Hindoostan, belonging to the
Danes, pleasantly situated on the
W. bank of the Hoogly, 15 m. N. of
Calcutta, E. long. 88° 26’, N. lat.
22°45’. The houses for public
worship are, a Danish church, the
mission chapel, and several small
chapels for native preachers. This
is the seat of the Baptist mission in
India. For its history previous to
its establishment at this place, in
1799, see Calcutta B. M. 8S. From
its commencement, the mission-
aries have acted on the principle of
having all the property they could
accumulate in common}; thus af-


SER


fording an example of entire disin-
terestedness.

In 1800, Dr. Carey gave the
following mournful intelligence :—

“It is now 7 years since we en-
tered upon this mission; and it is
uncertain, to this hour, whether
any of the heathen are truly con-
verted.”

In the month of December, 1800,
however, the missionaries were
gratified in beholding the first de-
cided convert to the faith, volun-
tarily breaking his caste, and boldly
encountering the reproach of Christ.
On this delightful occasion, Kristno,
a converted native, was baptized,
together with Dr. Carey’s eldest
son, after having, a few days be-
fore, publicly renounced caste, by
eating with the missionaries. This
event rejoiced their hearts, and gave
them renewed courage to pursue
their high but difficult calling ;
some of them had now, for years,
patiently waited and prayed for this
day ; some had entered into their
heavenly rest without the gratifica-
tion of beholding it; and one of
them, who hardly survived six
months, was carried in an emaci-
ated state to witness a scene so
cheering to his soul, that he was
almost ready to say with Sinieon-—
‘¢ Lord, now lettest thou thy servant
depart in peace; for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation.” Thus
was one of the strong holds of
Satan broken down, and the way
opened for numerous accessions to
the church of Christ from this peo-
ple, hitherto entrenched in preju-
dices and superstition, and impene-
trable to all the convictions of
Divine truth and the evidences of
the Gospel.

In the following year, several
more renounced caste and were
beptized ; the New Testament was
printed atthe mission press; and
the missionaries subsequently con-
tinued the work of translating,

435


SER


rinting, and Sppiaating ie Scrip-

ures and portions them, and
using various other important mea-
sures to instruct and enlighten the
heathen.

Mr. Ward gives the following
short but interesting account of the
first attempt of a Hindoo to preach
the Gos, el to his countrymen :—

‘* March 6, 1803.—In the even-
ing, brother Carey gave out a hymn,
and read a chapte, after which,
old Petumber preached in Ben-
galee to a congregation of H-ndoos,
Mussulmans, Armenians, Feringahs,
English, &c. His text was asmall
pamphlet of his own writing, which
we printed forhim. After praying
a short time with fervour and con-
sistency, he sat down, and with his
hands joined together and stretched
out, he craved their attention. He
then spoke for an hour, with faitis-
fulness and much propriety; and
closed the whole with prayer. We
were much pleased with this first
attempt. He is the first Hindoo
who has become a preacher. This
is another new era in the mission,
for which we have reason to bless
God. O that he may increase
the number of faithful native la-
bourers! This is the grand desi-
deratum that is to move the Hindoo
nation.”

In 1804, the missionaries were
increased to 10, besides 2 natives,
and 14 were baptized. In 1805,
13, 9 of whom were natives, were
baptized; and, in 1806, 24 na-
tives. At this time 14 missionaries
were connected with the mission,

and about the same number of
native assistants; who had now
formed 4 churches in Bengal, viz.
—at  Serampore, Dinagepore,
Cutwa, and Jessore; and 1 at
Rangoon, in the Burman Empire.
Another event of considerable im-
portance to the cause of God oc-
curred in the year 1806 ;—this was
the commencement of the printing


SER


of the New Testament in the
Shanserit, or learned language of
India. This language occupies the
same place among the eastern na-
tives, that the Latin does amongst
us; it is the vehicle by which the
learned communicate their literary
information from one to another,
through the numerous xations that
people that vast continent, the de-
pository of their ancient records,
and of all the science they possess:
and, what is more, as it gives it a
sacred character in their estima-
tion, it is the language in which
the stories of their theology, the
exploits of their deities, and the
rites of their religion, are treasured
up; so that it is certain of being
cultivated by the literati of every
district, and is in no danger of
becoming entirely obsolete in any,
To translate the Holy Scriptures
into this language, therefore, was
like laying them up in the archives
of the country; giving them a de-
gree of reverence in the eyes of the
people, and making all future
translations comparatively easy and
certain. This great work Mr.
Ward had the privilege of seeing
accomplished ; and, in the month of
June this year, he thus notices the
commencement of the printing,
“¢ June 6.— We have begun to
print the Shanscrit Testament, the
publication of which is of great
importance. Every Eastern pundit
knows the Shanscrit, and could
make from it a good transla-
tion into his own vernacular
tongue. By translating the Scrip-
tures, therefore, into this language,
we, in effect, translate them into
all the languages of Asia.”

In 1810, there were 19 ministers
and 8 churches. During this year,
106 were baptized, most of whom
were in Jessore. In 1812, a great
calamity befel the mission, in the
loss of their large printing-office by
fire, containing the types = all the

43


Scriptures
to the vi
This was
Providenc
ness of 4
overwhela
was fel rx:
Was taxed
time at lia
the public.
eitogether
rr infinite
us to !
in this 7,
manner. "
cover from
castin.s ney
and assista:
the spui w
offered 5 a1
tidings mad
than every.
feeling: of tl
hand ready
repairing th
every denon
other in the
of condolen
paratively s
raised and fc
of the king q
covered the
they had 5
thus occasior
publication a
however, ver
to begin muc
and had they


Calcutta ; :a
year, the mig
tions, contai

rs. ‘In ab
loss of ‘the y
the - missione
with printin;


_ the
ye of
1s the
n na-
ongst
h the
erary
other,
s that
ae de-
cords,
ISSESS +
sita 7
stima- ‘%
which
ry, the
nd the
2asured
f being
f every
ger of
in any.
riptures
re, Was
archives
m a de-
es of the
future

pasy and
rk Mr.
f seeing
onth of
ices the
rinting.
egun to
ent, the
bf great
in pundit
hd could
transla-
rnacular
e Scrip-
hnguage,
em into
d


inisters
his year,
f whom
) a great
, in the
office by
bf all the
36


SER SER


Scriptures that had been printed, , greater extent than ever, havin

to the vilue of at least 10,000/. | versions in the press, and 3 cit De
This w2s a severe dispensation of | a state of forwardness, Inthe same
Providence, not only as the great- | year, about 1000 scholars were in
ness of the loss threatened to] ali ihe schools connected with the
overwhelm their feeble e:"sirs, but | mission. In 1814, the stations were
was fers vost intensely by «10m: it | inereased to 20, and the preachers
was inared tiat, for a considerable j to 41. They had now extended
time at loast, it would put. step to | their translations to 26 languages ;
the publication of the Scriptures | 21 of which had been put to press.
altogether; yet that God, who in | Previous to the close of this year
hi: iufinite wisdom, judged it right | the B.and F. B. S. had made them
thus to try them, appeared forthem | grants of more than 67,720 dollars.
in this crisis in a most wonderful | in the month of August, 1816, the
manner. They were able to re- | work of the missionaries received 0
cover from the fire the moulds for | partial and temporary check. On
castings new types: the sympathy | t2 arrival of two brethren from
and assistance of their friends on | England to join them in their la-
the spvi was most affectionately | bours, they were refused permission
offered ; and no sooner were the | to proceed to Serampore, and at
tidings made known in Britain, | the same time an intimation was
than every heart was alive to the | conveyed from the highest autho-
feeling of their situation, and every | rity to Dr. Carey, “ that he and
hand ready to contribute towurds | his colleagues must not interfere
repairing their loss. Christians of | with the prejudices of the natives ;
every denomination vied with each | that, in fact, they were not to
other in the most solid expressions | preech to them, or suffer the native
of condolence 3 80 that, in a com- | converts todo so; they were not to
paratively short time, a sum was | distribute religious tracts, or suffer
raised and forwarded from all parts | the people to distribute them 3 the
of the kingdom, which more than | were not to send forth ecnverted
covered the amount of the damage | natives; or to take any step, b
they had sustained. The delay | conversation or otherwise, to per
thus occasioned to the work of the | suade the natives to “embrace
publication of the translations was, | Christ.unity.”?> Though this inter-
however, very distressing: they had | ruption, through the wise and tem-
to begin much of their labour anew; | perate conduct of the missionaries
and had they not found among the | and the appointment of the two
rubbish the steel punches of all the | brethren recently arrived to a fo-
Indian languages, uninjured by the | reign station, was at that time
flames, years must have elapsed | removed, yet, in the year followin
before they could have replaced the | new attempts were made to resigitt
types they had lost. About 70| their oxortions; so that for a short
members were, however, added to | time, they were not allowed to
the churches at Serampore and | preach in some places,—especiall
Calcutta ; and at the close of the | at Calcutta. Endeavours were aso
year, the mission embraced 12 sta- | used to \):fluence the British cabinet
tions, containing about 500 mem- | against them, and measures pro-
bers. In ebout a year after the | posed in Parliament, which were
loss of the printing establishment, | calculated to stop the spread of
the missionaries were proceeding | the Gospel among the heathen in
with printing the Scriptures to a | our colonial possessions; ‘but: the


r PQ 437


SER


powerful appeals of enlightened
and Christian men at last prevailed
over the ignorant clamours of infidel
alarmists.

Previous to 1815, 756 had been
baptized at all the stations; and in
the 3 succeeding years more than
400 were added to the churches
connectedwith this mission; making
the whole number amount to nearly
1200, at the close of 1817, gathered
from 14 different nations. At the
last-mentioned date, the mission-
aries say— ‘‘ Throughout the whole
mission, there are scarcely less
than 10,000 children, of every de-
scription, brought in some way or
other under instruction ; and this
has been hitherto done chiefly by
means furnished on the spot: the
Gospel is made known at 25 sta-
tions, of which 20 are occupied by
teachers raised up in India. Surely,
when we consider what aspect all
this bears on a future harvest of
enlightened converts,—of gifts that
may spread light and knowledge to
the uimest bounds of India,—we
cane but feel grateful. But, if
we juyn our attention to the trans-
laiions which already lay open the
path of divine knowledge to so many
millions, and glance at those in pre-
paration, which will open the way
to nearly every nation, from China
to the borders of Persia,— nations
that, with the Indian Isles, can
scarcely include a less number than
200,000,000, besides the 150,000,000
China is allowed by al! to contain,
and with these a full half of man-
kind,—the whole will surely Turnish
matter for gratitude and encou-
ragement.’? About the same time
the printing establishment, includ-
ing the making of paper, fur-
nished employment for about 300
natives.

In 1818, vhe missionaries pur-
chased ground, and commenced a
college ; the objects of which are,
to train up pious youths for the


SER


Christian ministry, to augment ihe
biblical knowledge of such as are
already employed in preaching, and
to enable tia who, by the loss of
caste have been reduced to indi-
gence to maintain themselves. It
contained, in 1819, 37 pupils, under
the Presidency of Dr. Carey, who
delivers theological lectures in Ben-
galee. In 1819-20, Mr. Ward
visited England and the United
States in its behalf, and obtained
25,000 dollars. The missionaries
contributed 11,000dollars from their
own labours.

From the 10th Memoir of the
Translations and editions of the
Sacred Scriptures, conducted by
the missionaries, published in 1824,
the following particulars are ex-
tracted :—

: Com- Finished
menced. at Press,


The Bengalee, 6th


edition in the press 1794 1801
— Hindee, 2ded.do. 1802 18)1
—Sungskrit,2d do. 1803 1810
— Orissa, Q2ddo. 1803 1811
— Mahratta,2d do. 1804 1811
— Telinga - - 1805 1818
—Sikh - - - - 1807 1815
— Gujuratee - - 1807 1820
— Kunkuna - - - 1808 1819
— Kurnata - - - 1808 1822
— Pushtoo, or Affghan 1811 1819
— Assamee - - - 181] 1819
— Wutch, or Multanee 1812 1819
— Bikaneer - - 1813 1820
— Kashmeer - - 1810 1820
— Bhuguikhund - 1814 1821
— Maruwar - - 1814 1821
— Napalee % = 812 1821
— Harotee - = 1815 1822
— Kanoja - - - 1815 1822


— Chinese, 2d editio
of the Gosp. printed 1806 1817.


The following list exhibits the
ten versions in the press at that
period, with the time of their
commencement, and the state of
their progress at press aa?


“To th
aries, “ w
edition, w
the curve:
chiefly use:
trading cla
the earnest
Chamberlai
of types fo
the New T
is advanced
the Apostle:
which comp
the New T'
State of
Testament:
The Ben
advanced to
The Sun;
advanced to
The Oriss
at press in ]
The Ma
printed off i
The Chin
April 1822,
The Sikh,
torical books
printed to Je
The Assa n
ed, Historica
The Pushtc
tateuch adva
The Kash
vanced to Ge
The Teling
and the vers
Madras Bible
“« The O
printed off j


SER


Begun
1814
1814
1814
1814
1815
1815
1815
1816
1816
1817


The Jumboo
The Munipoor
The Mugudh
The Khasee
The Oojjuyunee
The Bruj

The Kumaoun
The Bhutneer
The Sree-nugur, or Gurwal
The Palpa - -


“To these,” say the mission-
aries, ‘we may add the Kythee
edition, which is the Hindee, in
the current Naguree character,
chiefly used by the mercantile and
trading classes, and in which, at
the earnest request of the late Mr.
Chamberlain, we prepared a fount
of types for the sake of printing
the New Testament. This edition
is advanced as far as the Acts of
the Apostles, the ninth chapter of
which completes precisely half of
the New Testament.”

State of the versions of the Old
Testament :—

The Bengalee, second edition,
advanced to 1 Sam. 20.

The Sungskrit, second edition,
advanced to Exod. 31.

The Orissa, first edition, finished
at press in 1819,

The Mahratta, first edition,
printed off in 1820.

The Chinese, finished at press
April 1822.

The Sikh, Pentateuch, and His-
torical books, printed; Prophetic
printed to Jer. xiii.

The Assamee, Pentateuch finish-
ed, Historical books begun:

The Pushtoo, or Affghan, Pen-
tateuch advanced‘to Deut. 30.

The Kashmeer, Pentateuch ad-
vanced to Gen. 36,

The Telinga, Pentateuch printed,
and the version resigned to the
Madras Bible Society.

‘ The Old Testament now
printed off in Chinese, forms the


SER


Printed to
Phil. iii. 9.
2 Cor. xiii. 4.
Rom. xiii. 4.
Acts xix. 29.
Phil. i. 10.
2 Cor. ii. 9.
Luke x. 23.
Rom. xiv. 13.
Luke xi. 21.
Matt. xxvii. 8.


se © @ @ op ee 8 8
see 8 @ g @ 2 8 8


si completed here of the
vw »s in the different
In ages, This was
fini: ss in April this year ;
and thus, alter 16 years of unre-
mitting labour, we have been
enabled, thrqugh the good hand of
our God upon us, to redeem our
pledge to the Christian public, by
presenting them with a Chinese
Bible complete. As the Gospels
of St. Matthew and Mark were
printed about twelve ‘years ago,
with wood blocks, in the Chinese
manner, and that of St. John,
eight years ago, with our largest
metallic moveable characters, we
have, since finishing the Old
Testament at press, printed a
second edition of these Gospels
with the same moveable characters
in which the rest of the Scriptures
are printed. This appearing a
favourable opportunity. for such a
revision, we compared these Gos-
pels anew with the original text,
and also with our esteemed friend,
Dr. Morrison’s version; and al-
though we do not presume that
these Gospels yet perfectly accord
with the original text, we are
ready to hope, that this edition of
them is brought somewhat nearer
to it than any one which has
before appeared. As leisure may.
be afforded, we are about to adopt
the same course with the remainder
of the New Testament.’? The low-
ness of the general fund for trans-
lation compelled the sgarment


v


v4


IMAGE EVALUATION
TEST TARGET (MT-3)


Ww & .
WF


SER


of other translations of the Old
Testament.

In 1928, the excellent and de-
voted Mr. Ward was removed from
the labours of this ‘world to the
glories of another. In 1825, it
appears, that ‘the translators were
prosecuting their labours with un-
abated ardour, though they had
many difficulties to contend with—
that a of trustees had been
appointed for the security of the
Coll property—that the con-
tributions ‘derived from the re-
sources of the missionaries was,


and that Dr. po aay had —
Copenhagen, for purpose

obtaining from the Danish Govern-
ment a Royal Charter of Incor-
poration, in which he succeeded ;


so that it possesses the of
conferring literary and hendiony
degrees, and the property is im-
mutably secured for the purposes
contemplated in its establishment.

In the last report the following
statements ere made :—

‘‘ The church consists at present
of 67 members in ‘full communion.
19 of these are Europeans or de-
scendants of such, and include a
few friends resident in the settle-
ment, in addition to the members
of ‘the different families connected
with the mission; 4 more reside at
Barrackpore, on the opposite side of

and the remainder are
natives of the country, turned from
idols to serve the living and true
God. The accessions to the church
during the year (1626), have been
such ‘as to fill our hearts with the
liveliest gratitude. Of 18 who have
been baptized ard received into the
church, one is en elderly gentle-
mean residing in the town; 2 others,


jis highly gratif
i senior students in :


SER


the daughters of Mr. Ward and
Mr. F. Carey ; 3 more English
stadents in Serampore college,
viz. John Smith, son of bro-
ther Smith of Benares, Joshua
Rowe, eldest son of our late bro-
ther Rowe of Digab, and James
Domingo; 6 others are native stu-
dents in the college, of Christian
parentage, another was for
student also, but has recently been
taken into employment in the
printing-office, und the last was
long @ servant in the college, and
has since been engaged as @ do-
mestic in the mission femily. It
that all the
college are
now members of the church, and
that their general deportment is
such as becomes their profession. ”

‘ Including the members of the
church, and the various branches
of their respective families, there
is a nominally Christian population
of natives residing in | pore
of ‘not less than 160 individuals.
To provide for the religious in-
struction of these, regular seasons
of worship are appointed on Bab-
bath days and throughout the week.

“A Christian village has lately
been established, for the purpose
of promoting the -general comfort
of our native, brethren, and also
facilitating the communication of
religious instruction to them. It
now consists of 13 dwelling-houses,
with a small chapel in the centre ;
and will, we trust, be considerably
enlarged during the present season,
as several families are desirous of
removing to it from the town, from
which it is distant but a very short
and elevated spot
one of


chapel, and in other ways seeks the
edification of the:people under his
charge. On Tuesday, Saturday,
and Sabbath evenings, —


preached,


is conduct
missionari
is held on
by Mr. B
active yor
with us s
lamented
received |
religion,
“ Praye
held on 3
amongst tl
and the s
en boot
sion chapel
6 These 1
with those
Occupy a g
attentions
prevent ou
the streets
bours in ti
chiefly cont
noon. It i
two parties
uccompanie
the mission
bazaar, or
bouring Wille
pel; or so
boat and sp
going from
8 or 10
errand. At
Juegernaut,
tudes assemh


are accuston
entire days
the word of
by tracts and
and at some
made by diff
siderable d
the months o.
ber last, Mr.
panied by «
pg
oogiy, ri
bad, Burdw
visiting seve
Gospel had


* Of these


SER


is conducted by one or other of the
missionaries; and an adult school
is beld on Sabbath, in the chapel,
by Mr. Buckingham, a pious and
active young man, who has been
with us since before Mr. Ward’s
lamented death, from whom he
received his first instruction in
religion.

‘¢ Prayer meetings are. likewise
held on 3 evenings of the week
amongst the brethren in the town
and the students of the college,
and there is a sermon in the mis-
sion chapel every Thursday evening.

‘* These various services, together
with those in the English language,
occupy a great part of our time and
attention; but they do not wholly
prevent our visiting the heathen in
the streets and villages. Our la-
bours in this way, however, are
chiefly confined to Sabbath after-
noon. It is then usual for one or
two parties of the native brethren,
accompanied by one or other of
the missionaries, to repair to the
bazaar, or to one or two neigh-
bouring Villages to preach the Gos-
pel; or sometimes a party take a
boat and spend the whole day in
going from place to place, within
8 or 10 miles, on this blessed
errand. At the annual festivals of
Juggernaut, too, when vast multi-
tudes assemble in our vicinity, we
are accustomed to devote several
entire days to the distribution of
the word of life, by preaching, and
by tracts and portions of Scripture;
and at some seasons excursions are
made by different brethren to con-
siderable distances. In this way, in
the months of October and Novem-
ber last, Mr. Buckingham, accom-
panied by one native brother,
rg through the districts of

oogly, Krishnugor, Moorsheda-
bad, Burdwan, and Beerbhoom,
Get several places where the
Gospel had never before been
preached.

‘*Of these labours we have seen


SER


no other fruit of late, than the
occasional calls of persons who
profess to come for inquiry respect-
ing salvation. Some of these have
exhibited considerable promise,
but none have persevered. Still
we have no thought of remitting
these labours,—but rather it is our
desire to abound in them more and
more.”? -

SERINGAPATAM, or PA-
TANA, a fortified city of Hin-
doostan, capital of the S. district of
Mysore, and lately of the whole
country. Before this city, in 1792,
the British compelled Tippoo to
cede half of his dominions to them
and their allies; and a new war
breaking out in 1799, the British
carried the fort by an assault, in
which Tippoo was killed. The
city and island have since been re-
tained by the British. E. long.
76° 45’, N. lat. 12° 26’.

Of this place, the Rev. Mr.
Massie, of the L. M.'S., who vi-
sited it in a journey from Madras,
thus speaks :—‘‘ Here, for the first
time, I beheld native built houses,
in regular streets, rising toa second
story, and some witha third. There
are about 20,000 inhabitants, I un-
derstand, within the walls: most of
them are Mussulmans, though there
are also many Hindoos. There is
a considerable number of country-
born people, and some Europeans,
who hold situations under govern-
ment. Nochaplain officiates here,
and many are desirous to be blessed
with the stated meuns of grace.
Mr. Laidler has been very atten-
tive to the spiritual wants of this
people: they are much attached
to him, and contribute towards the
funds of the L. M.S. They are
very desirous that a labourer should
be settled amongst them, not only
for their own benefit, but also to
assist them in their operations in
behalf of the poor natives, for
whom they are very active. I met
nearly 20, and away Py them


SHA


the words of eternal life. Four
natives have expressed their wish
for baptism.”

SHAWANEES, Indians, in
Ohio, near the head of the Miami,
consisting of about 800 souls, in
3. settlements — Wupaghkonetia,
Lewis ~Town, and Hog Creek.
They have made considerable im-
provements, principally by the
efforts of the Society of Friends.

SHOMOKEN, formerly a large
Indian settlement on the Susque-
hannah R., about 120 m.W. of Cros-
weeks, New Jersey. It was inha-
Bited by 300 of 3. different tribes,
speaking languages wholly unin-
telligible to each other. About
one-half were Delawares, the
‘other Senecas and Tutelas. They
were the most vicious and mis-
‘chievous people in the whole
country.

About 1740, the U. B. stationed
2 missionaries here, who exerted
themselves a short time in this
place and its vicinity, at the hazard
of their lives, In 1745, the Rev.
D. Brainerd laboured here with
some little success.

SIERRA LEONE, a country in
the W. part of Guinea, so named
from being mountainous, and the
mountains supposed to abound in
lions; but it is now certain that
these animals do not exist in this
country. Its limits are from the
Grain Coast on the 8. E., to Cape
Verge on the N. W.; that is, be-
tween 7° and 10° N. lat. The wet
season, from May to October, is
ushered in and terminated by
stormy weather. The cultivated
‘parts are rich in rice and millet;
‘and, upon the whole, it is one of
‘the best countries on the coast. It
embraces several kingdoms of na-
‘tives, who are in a wretched state
of ignorance and degradation. In
the N. part of the coast, are the
Negroes ; in the interior, the Susoos
and Foulahs; 8. of these are the


Mandingoes; about the colony, the


SIE


Timmanees; S. of this, on the
coast, are the Sherbroes, Bulloms,
and Foys.

Sierra. Leone, a British colony
of re-captured negroes, in the
country of the same name, W.
Africa. Theoriginal purchase was
10 m. square, on the S. side of the
Sierra Leone R., and its local si-
tuation is very favourable for com-
merce. The lands on the river are
very fertile, producing cotton, rice,
sugar, and most of the tropical
fruits. Since the first purchase,
the colony has been extended about
80m. S. In 1821, all the British
possessions on this coast, from 20°
N. lat. to 20° S. lat. were annexed
to the government of Sierra Ieone,
under the late Sir C. M‘Carthy.
The colony is divided into the fol;
lowing parishes or districts, in
which ‘the negro towns are si-
tuated; viz.:—St. George’s, St.
James's, St. Peter’s, St. John’s,
St. Charles’s, St. Paul’s, St. Pa-
trick’s, St. Edward’s, St. Mi-
chael’s, St. Thomas’s, Arthur, St.
Henry’s, St. Ann’s, and St. An-
drew’s.

Colonization in Africa, with re-
ference to civilization, appears to
" ~e been contemplated in England

arly as 1780. A definite plan
i. 2 projected by Dr. H. Smeath-
man, in his letters to Dr. Knowles,
in 1783. Several favourable cir-
cumstances soon after occurred,
which excited the public atten-
tion to the subject, and gave rise
to the Society for the Abolition of
the Slave Trade. Mr. Wilberforce
introduced the subject into the
British Parliament; and his per-


severance and success are im- :


printed on the memory of every
philanthropist.

The slaves who, during the war
of the revolution had served under
the British standard, were, after
the peace in 1783, sent to the
Bahama Islands and Nova Scotia ;
and numbers of them “e to


London, ’
every mise
with every
formed for
length, ab
about 60 w
women of
were emba:
and arrived
following §
was reduce
death and
continued t
of the sam
colonists wi
town burnt |


the St. Geor
whose effort:
pease we
ree nh es
Scotia, In ]
plundered at
nial town; |
remedied, th
lony increas
wews were |
however, the
profits were
the expenses
transferred 1
British Gon
Since the a
sure, the c
degree of I
accessions a


and sold intc
the


Jamaica; 72:
West-Indians
natives, 9556
)108 dishand
Kroomen, |
exclusive of t
families, 1


SIE


London, They became subject to
every misery, and were familiar
with every vice. A Committee was
formed for their relief; and, at
length, about 400 blacks, with
about 60 whites, who were chiefly
women of abandoned character,
were embarked for Sierra Leone,
and arrived May 9, 1787. In the


was reduced to 276 persons, by
death and desertion ; the latter
continued to increase ; and in Nov.
of the same year, the remaining
colonists were dispersed, and the
town burnt by an African chief.

In 179), some friends of Africa
ines Ps eka ona A og
the St. George’s Bay pany, by
whose efforts some of the dispersed
colonists were collected, and 1200
free negroes transported from Nova
Scotia, In 1794, a French squadron
plundered and destroyed the coto-
nial town; but this evil was soon
remedied, the influence of the co-
lony increased, and its commercial
views were promoted. At length,
however, the Company, finding the
profits were inadequate to cover
the expenses of the establishment,
transferred their property te the
British Government, in 1808.
Since the adoption of this mea-
sure, the colony has enjoyed a
degree of prosperity, and large
accessions are annually made, by
the vigilance of British cruisers in
rescuing from slave ships those
Africans, who have
from their country and friends,
and sold into bondage. In 1811,
the population was about 2000.
Ih 1822, it had increased to 16,671,
of the following descriptions; viz.
128 E ans, 601 Maroons, from
Jamaica ; 722 Nova-Scotians; 85
West-Indians and Americans, 3526
natives, 9559 liberated Africans,
1108 dishanded soldiers, and 047
Kroomen, ‘This enumeration is
exclusive of the military and their
families. Those rescued from


been torn


STE


slave-ships, were taken intd the
colony destitute, ignorant beyond
conception, unacquainted with all
the arts of civilized life and of
every kind of hope for eternity. .
The British Government early es-
tablished schools for the instruction
of the colonists, and provides for


| their support till they acquire
following September, the colony |


the means of maintaining them-

The Wesleyanax.d Church missi-
onaries have successfully laboured
here, principally since 1816. Since
that time, out of this strange mass
of people, a colony was formed,
*¢ which, in order, and decency,
and sobriety, and in the knowledge


| selves.


-and practice of Christian duty,’ says


an English gentleman, “ not only
may rival, but, I firmly and from
my heart believe, exceeds any
equal population in the most fa-
voured part of this highly favoured
country.”? The following state-


| ment was made by the late Chief
| Justice of the colony, at a quarter


session, about the close of 1822 :—
‘“¢ Ten years ago, when the colony
was only 4000, there were 40-cases
on the calendar for trial ; and now
the population is upwards of 16,000,
there are only 6; and not one
from any of the villages under the
superintendence of a missionary or
school-muster.”’? In 1823, the na-
tive communicants, in connexion


| with the church missionaries, were


680; scholars, 3523. At that pe-
riod it was that the first serious blow
was given, by the death of the
Rev. Messrs. Johnson and Deering,
to the prosperity of the mission.
Subsequent and continual changes,
from the death of their successors,
and the labourers at other villages
of liberated Africans ; the necessity
of employing incompetent teachers,
and frequently the want of all
teachers; the heavy burden of the
civil superintendence of the settle.
ments, which exhausted the strength
and spirit of the —
4


SIL

together with other circumstances,
—present this mission at the pre-
sent time in an aspect peculiarly
painful, especially in the review. of
its former prosperity. May that be
far exceeded by the success of
benevolent exertions in future
years!

[See Bananas, Bathurst, Char-

lotte, Freetown, Gloucester, Kent,
Kissey, Leicester, Leopold, Regent,
Waterloo, Wellingtun, Wilber-
force, and York.]
- SILHET, orSYLHET,, the capi-
tal of a district of the same name
in the N. E. part of Bengal, Hin-
doostan, 310 m. N. E. of Calcutta.
The nativesare in a wild and wretch-
ed state. John de Silva, a Portu-
guese, and Bhagvat, a native teach-
er, both members of the Baptist
church at Calcutta, laboured here,
and at Pandua, for several years;
but the want of the Scriptures, the
fierce manners, and. the supersti-
tious customs of the natives, re-
tarded their progress. Bhagvat
died in 1817, and soon after the
mission was relinquished.

SINCAPORE, orSINGAPORE,
a.town situated on a small island of
the same name, at the southern
extremity of the peninsula of Ma-
lacca, E. long. 104°, N. lat. 1°24’,
The town and principality were
founded .by. adventurers from Su-
matra: it. was but. thinly peopled
till the English took possession of
it, in 1819; since which, it has
rapidly increased in commerce and
population. In 14 months, the
inhabitants increased from 200 to
10,000, a large proportion of whom
were Chinese.

The Rev. S. Milton and C. H.
Thomsen, from the L. M, S., com-
menced a mission here in 1819,
and a plot of ground was given by
government for its use. The mis-
sionaries preached in English, Chi-
nese, and Malay, and flourishing
schools were established for the in-
struction of the children in each of


SIN


these lanruages. Mr. Milton has
erected, chiefly at his own expense,
aline of buildings 90 feet by.18,
intended as apartments : for the
schoolmasters, teachers, &c.,: in
connexion with the Chinese de-
partment of the mission. In 1823,
it was agreed to connect, with the
Anglo-Chinese College at Malacca,
a Malay College at Sincapore. _ Sir
Stamford Raffles, governor of Ben-
coolen, Col. Farquhar, the magis-
trates, and other gentlemen: of
Sincapore, liberally lent their aid
to this object. Mr. Thomsen was
appointed professor. of Malay, and
Mr. Milton of Siamese.

Of the mission, the last report
thus speaks :— :

‘* Native Schools.—Here are 3
Malay schools; of which two are


‘for boys, and the other for girls;


and one Chinese. In the former
schools about 30 children receive
Christian instruction, and in the
latter school 12. The Malay chil-
dren attend irregularly, and their
progress is small; the Chinese re-
gularly, and their proficiency is
considerable.

‘Malay Preaching.—One of the
Malay. services has been, for the
present, suspended, in consequence
of the dispersion of the people of
the place where it was held, bya
fire that consumed nearly 200
houses.. The services at the cha-
pel are continued as formerly, but
the attendance seldom exceeds 20,
Of these, however, some make
good progress in Christian know-


ge.

‘A Malay female, who formerly
shared in the benefit of the school,
after a suitable term of probation,


has been baptized. She is the first
adult native who has, in this way,
manifested her desire to put on the
yoke of Christ,

Distribution of the Scriptures,
Tracts, §¢.—The number of these,
in Chinese, Malay, and English,
put into circulation > year


sen, besi
the harbc
portunitic
shops of t


Station, e1
on-the’!1t
Dyer, hay
made cons
attainmen
with the
entering, s
upon direc:
SIRDH
small inde
‘doostan, . n
try of the Si


time he est
teaching Pe

SIX NA‘
a formidab)
dians, celeb


te of Nev
French, Iroq
sisted of 6
Mohawks, C
hecas, and O
caroras from
in 1712, an


yn’ has
pense,
by -18,
yr the
Cy: in
e de-
| 1823,
ith the
alacca,
s. Sir
{ Ben-
magis-
en of
wir aid
yen was
ny, and


report


» are 3
wo are
or girls;
former
receive
| in the
lay chil-
nd their
nese re-
iency: is


e of the
for the
equence
eople of
ld, by @
200
he cha-
prly, but
eeds 20,
» make
' know-


‘ormerly
p school,
pbation,
the first
his way,
ht on the


, ‘
of these,
English,
the year
44


SIR


1826, was upwards of 6500, The
chief part consisted of tracts, given
either to Chinese settlers, or to
those’ on board the junks, who re-
ceived them with apparent interest,
and sometimes applied for them
with earnestness. In the distribu-
tion. of Malay tracts, Mr. Thom-
sen, beside ' supplying the prows in
the harbour, avails himself of op-
portunities of leaving copies in the
shops of the Chinese, to ke given to
their Malay customers.

‘* Printing’- Office.-- About25,000
Malay tracts have been printed
during the year; of which, part
have been sent for distribution to
Pinang, Malacca, and Batavia.

‘© Mr.S. Dyer, ‘appointed to this
station, embarked with Mis. Dyer
on the} 1th of April. Mr. and Mrs.
Dyer, having each of them already
made considerable progress in the
attainment of Chinese, proceed,
with the pleasing expectation of
entering, shortly after their arrival,
upon direct missionary labours.’’

SIRDHANA, the capital of a
small independent territory, Hin-

‘doostan,: near the Punjab, or coun-
try of the Sieks, about 920 m. N. W.
of Calcutta, and 200 N. E. of Agra.
The Rev. J. Chamberlain, from
the B. M. S., came here in 1813,
at the request of the Prime Minis-
ter of ‘Her Royal Highness the
Begum Sumroo, by whom he was
favourably received. He continued
here ebout’ 2 years, during which
time he established 5. schools for
teaching Persian and Hindoostanee.

SIX NATIONS, the remains of
a formidable confederacy of In-
dians, celebrated in the history of
N. America, who were originally
ste of a ‘great part of the

ate of New York; called by the
French, Iroquois. It formerly con-
sisted of 6 nations, viz.:—The
Mohawks, Cayugas, Oneidas, Se-
necas, and Onondagas. The Tus-
caroras from Virginia joined them
in 1712, and several remnants of


SIX


other tribes have been added at
different times. Their compact
existed at the time of the first
settlement by Europeans, and the
time of their union was then lost in
the uncertainty of ancient occur-
rences. In 1635, they were a nu-
merous and powerful people, hold-
ing most of the neighbouring tribes
under a kind of subjection. Pos-
sessing a large: extent of territory,
opulent in native supplies, and very
fertile, the Iroquois extended the
terror of their arms to far distant
tribes. They were able to send
several thousand warriors on dis-
tant expeditions. Onondaga was
their principal settlement, and the
seat of Indian power, where all
their councils were beld; it had
fortifications of sufficient magni-
tude and strength for Indian war-
fare at that period. Each tribe
maintained a separate government }
but the grand council settled the
affairs of the whole confederacy.
Since the Americans took posses-
sion of the country, like the other
aboriginal tribes, they have been
gradually diminishing. Most: of
the Mohawks and Cayugas have
emigrated to Canada; the remains
of the other 4 nations, with some
other tribes, which they have re-
ceived among them, amounted, in
1818, to 4575, and resided on 14
reservations, on portions of land
reserved to the Indians, but. sur-
rounded by whites. These reser-
vations contain 265,315 acres, and
are in separate parts of the State ;
the extreme points being 250 m.
distant from each other. These
Indians have, of lute years, made
great advances ‘in agriculture and
civilization. Religious instruction
is provided for them by several so-


‘cieties, assisted by the government,


but there is a strong Pagan party,
which opposes the introduction of
the Gospel.


‘ SIX: TOWNS, the most populous
clan in the 'S, E. district: of: the
22 445


SOC


‘Choctaw nation. Population, in
1822, 2164. ‘The whole district
has sometimes been called by this
name, but improperly. Formerly,
the Indians lived in 6 compact
towns; but are now scattered over
the country, for the convenience of
wood, water, and agricultural pur-
suits, In 1823, a school was
opened in this clan, in compliance
with the earnest request of the
chief.

SOCIETY, or LEEWARD IS-
LANDS, a cluster of islands in the
S. Pacific Ocean, so called after the
Royal Society, at whose instance
the expedition under Capt. Cook
was fitted out, in 1768. They are
situated between 151° and 152° 30’
W. long., and 16° and 17° S. lat.
Huahine, the south-eastern of the
group, is about 90m. N. W. Ta-
biti, Through the influence of
the Z. S. missionaries, idolatry has
been universally abolished, and the
Gospel is making rapid progress.
oe Borabora, aine, Maiaoiti,

laupiti, Raiatea, Tahaa.)

SOMMELSDYK, a town in
Surinam, S. America, a few miles
distant from Paramaribo.

The U. B. commenced a mission
here in 1736. The missionaries
resided here, and instructed the
slaves on the neighbouring plant-
ations, Their labours were at-
tended with less success than those
of the missionaries at Paramaribo.
In 1798, 66 baptized negroes were
connected with the mission. At
the close of 1819, the congregation
consisted of 89, 300f whom were
communicants,

SPRING PLACE, a mission
station among the Cherokees, in
the N. part o. eh oo 35 m. S.E.
of Brainerd, and 120 N. W. of
Athens. [See Cherokees.]}

SQUAKIE HILL, a principal
settlement of the Seneca Indians,
on the Genesee River, New York,
containing about 200 souls. The
Rev. D. 8S, Butrick attempted, in


STE


vain, to make an establishment in
this tribe. Since that time, they
have made application to the bene-


volent in the vicinity to establish
a school amo them, and the
Presbytery of Ontario have fur-


nished a teacher. The Indians


have built a school-house, and the .


“majority are in favour of Christian
instruction.

STEINKOPFF, formerly By-
zondermeid Kraal, Little Nama-
qualand, S. Africa, about 200 m.
S. of Orange River.

Previous to the establishment of
a mission by the L. M.S., this sta-
tion was favoured with the occa-
sional labours of missionaries. Mr.
J. Kitchingman was stationed here,
in 1817; a place for worship had


been previously erected, and the,


people manifested a general desire
to hear the word. A school was
soon opened, which consisted of
about 70 scholars. This mission
has encountered many disadvan-
tages from local circumstances; but
has been productive of much good
to the natives, who are making
encouraging progress in civilization.
In 1823, 10 adults and 14 children
had been baptized. Mr. Kitching-
man removed, about 1820, and
was succeeded by a_ catechist,
who continues his labours with an
encouraging measure of success,
Many of the Namaquas, from to
time, receive the Gospel, and it
has latterly effected a pleasing
reformation in some formerly tur-
bulent characters.

The continuance of excessive
drought, by confining ‘he catechist
to the spot, has prevented him
from visiting the people at Reed
Fountain, and at other places.

Many, it appears, have died
from famine, in consequence of
the want of rain.

STELLENBOSCH, a town in
a district of the same name, Cape
Colony, S. Africa, 26 m. eastward
of Cape Town, pleasantly hea


at the |
mountai:

The |
LM. §
here in
zealous |
the Hott
the vici
when h
obliged h
vice. . Hi


missionar
main in tl
took pos:
Good Hc
many yea
baptize h
them to ;


long, and f,
separated

Strait of the
by the Strai
tor divides


extremity, i
chain of m
its whole e
many parts
treble, hoe! i
many volcan
tuate near]


SUM


at the foot of a range of lofty
mountains.

The Rev. J. Bakker, from the
L. M. S.;. commenced a mission
here in 180], and continued his
zealous labours, principally among
the Hottentots and slaves, and in
the vicinity, more than 20 years,
when his age and _ infirmities
obliged him to relinquish the ser-
vice. _He was succeeded by Mr.
Smit, who commenced a school for
native children soon after his ar-
rival. Mr. Bakker was the only
missionary who was allowed to re-
main in the colony after the Dutch
took possession of the Cape of
Good Hope, in 1802: and for
many years he was not allowed to
baptize his converts, nor admit
them to the Lord’s table. Yet,
notwithstanding these and many
other embarrassments, he witnessed
many pleasing fruits of his labours.
About 1815, an auxiliary mission-
ary society was formed, which, be-
side supporting Mr. B., contributed
liberally to the Parent Society.

About 1823, a colonial grammar
school was opened, under Mr.
Brown, with 150 scholars; a new
chapel was built, and well attend-
ed; and a Sabbath-school was
established for the benefit of the
slaves.

SUMATRA, an island in the
Indian Ocean, the most western
of the Sunda Islands. It is 950 m.
long, and from 150 to 200 broad;
separated from Malacca by the
strait of that name, and from Java
by the Strait of Sunda. The equa-
tor divides it into almost equal
parts; the one extremity being in
6° 36’ N., and the other in 5° 50’
S. lat.; and Acheen Head, the N.
extremity, is in long 95° 34’ E, A
chain of mountains runs through
its whole extent; the ranges, in
many parts, being double and
treble, and among them there were
many volcanos: Mount Ophir, si-
tuate nearly under the equator, is


SUM


| about the height of the Peak of


Teneriff, The inhabitants con-
sist of Malays, Achenese, Battas,
Lampongs, and Rejangs; the latter
are taken as'a standard of descrip-
tion, with respect to the person,
manners, and customs, of the Su-
matrans. They are rather below
the middle stature ; their limbs, for
the most part, slight, but well
shaped, and particularly small at
the wrists and ancles: their hair is
strong, and of a shining black.
The men are beardless ; great pains
being taken to render them s0,
when boys, by rubbing their chins
with a kind of quick lime. Their
complexion is properly yellow,
wanting the red tinge that consti-
tutes a copper or tawny colour;
those of the superior class, who are
not exposed to the rays of the sun,
and particularly the women of rank,
approaching to a degree of fair-
ness: but the major part of the
females are destitute of beauty. A
man may purchase as many wives as
he may wish to have; buttheirnum-.
ber seldom exceeds 8. The original
natives are Pagans; but when the
Sumatrans, or any of the natives of
the eastern islands, learn to read
the Arabic character, and submit to
circumcision, they are said to be-
come Malays,--ihe term Malay
being understo:: :o mean Moosel-
min. Sumatra is ‘ivided into man

petty kingdoms, the chief of whic.

are Acheen, Indrapore, Palenbang,
and Jambi. The English have two
factories on this iskand— Fort Marl-
borough and Bencoolen. The
Battas compose about one-third
part of the population, whose re/é-
gion is a compound of the most
ridiculous and barbarous supersti-
tions founded on human depravity.
They do not worship images, but
believe in the existence of certain
deities, whose attributes bespeak
the existence of a better race of
people than the present. Under
their principal deity, ba have a

7


SUM


god of mercy ; .another of justice ;
anda third, the. source of discord
and contention, . the , instigator, of
malice and revenge, the inciter of
anger, and, the source of fraud, de-
ceit, lying, hypocrisy, , and, murder.
The latter has the most, influence,
They beseech him when they, have
been guilty of these vices, and very
rarely offer petitions to the other
deities,. The only religious cere-
mony. noticed among them is the
invocation. ofthe shades of their
ancestors., A person named Dattoo,
skilled in every sort of superstition,
is the only resemblance of a priest
among them. Every village has
one, who expounds ,all their reli-
gious books, and whose influence is
such, that they engage in no un-
dertaking, however trifling, without
first consulting him. , ;

_ Themoral conduct of the Battas
‘appears to be influenced by all the
vile’ passions of an irregular and
irritable constitution. Truth is


seldom regarded, when in the way
of their interests and feelings ; and


honesty is never founded on prin-
ciple, but on the fear of detection.
‘They practise eating prisoners taken
‘in-war, and the capital punishment
of the country ‘is eating the crimi-
nal alive. Yet, notwithstanding
these dark shades in their moral
character, they respect foreigners ;
and a. little before the arrival of
the missionaries, they sent a depu-
tation to the British Governor,
requesting to know of what reli-
gion they should be. The interior,
from Bencoolen, is inhabited by
‘the nations of Rajangs and Lam-
pongs, each vf whom has a lan-
guage and written character pecu-
liar to itself. Their moral condition
is exceedingly wretched. Padang
is considered the key to a large in-
land kingdom named Menancabow,
-which, in 1823, was ravaged by
war, with a view to restore the
-Mahomedan religion. Of the in-
habitants of other portions of this


SUR


vast island little is known, except
that they are wild and savage, like
the tigers which abound in_ their
forests. (See Bencoolen, Padang,
Sebolga.). .
SURAT, a city of Hindoostan,
in Goojuratt, with a strong citadel,
situate on the left. bank of the


Tuptee, about 20 m.. from its


mouth. It ‘is one of the most an-
cient cities of Hindoostan; the
outer wall is 7 m. in circuit, with
12 gates, and irregular towers be-
tween each. Thestreets are dirty,
narrow, and irregular; the houses
generally lofty; and. the inhabi-
tants estimated at 600,000. The
public buildings are few and mean,
and the nabob’s palace is contemp-
tible. The mosques and: minarets
are small, and the Hindoo edifices


equally insignificant, A great’


portion of the trade of Surat has
been transferred to Bombay, but
yet it is considerable. It is the
emporium of the most precious
productions of Hindoostan; for
hither are brought from the interior
an immense quantity of goods,
which the merchants export to the
Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, the
coasts of Malabar, the Coromandel,
and even toChina. Here aremany
Mahomedans, Gentoos, Jews,‘ and
Christians, of various denomina-
tions. The Mahomedans at Surat
are not, by far, so strict as they are
in Arabia, or in other Turkish
countries; nor are the distinctions
of tribes among the Hindoos who
reside here strictly observed. , The
Hindoos ure almost all of the caste


of the brahmins; and their skill:


and dexterity in matters of calcu-
lation and economy often. ruise
them to places .of considerable
trust.. The country round Surat is
fertile, except toward the. sea,
where it is sandy and barren. . Be-
fore the English East India Com-
pany obtained possession of Bom-
bay, the presidency of their affairs
on the coast of Malabar was at
448


Surat: |
after the
to Bom
conclude
by whic
city and
British,
Matratt:
abandon
on this ¢;
rity in th
oars is }
ong, 73°
C. C,
Armenia:
B. M. S.,
1812, anc
adjoining
preaching
and porti
several la)
removed :


employed
natives in 1
villages,
Scriptures
Skinner di
same day
sailed fron
mission. _
the mission
printed th
their press
with the O}
Oct. 1822
Psalms.
was defraye
Society, an
the B. and
ha up
or the expe
lating, and {
types. Lar,
were also
tributed. |
Goojuratt 1
culated, anc
hess, Abor
missionaries
in the city.


andel,
emany
ws, and
omina-
t Surat
ney are
urkish
nctions
hos who
. The
e caste
bir skill
calcu-
ruise
derable
Surat is


Str


Sutat} dnd they had a factory here,
after the presidency was transferred
to Bombay. In 1800, a treaty was
concluded with the nabob of Surat,
by which the management of the
city and district was vested in the
British. By a treaty in 1803, the
Mahrattas were compelled to
abandon all their vexatious claims
on this city, and the British autho-
rity in this place became supreme.
Surat is 158 m. N. of Bombay. E.
long 73° 7’, N. lat. 21° 12’,

- C. Aratoon, a converted
Armenian connected . with the
B. M.8., proceeded to this city in
1812, and laboured in it and the
adjoining country for about 9 years,
preaching and distributing tracts
and portions of the Scriptures in
several languages. He afterwards
removed to Calcutta. The Rev.
Messrs, Skinner and W. Fyvie, of
the L. M, S., commenced a station
here in 1815, and were usefully
employed among the soldiers and
natives in the city and neighbouring
villages, and in translating the
Scriptures into the Goojuratt. Mr.
Skinner died Oct. 30, 1821, the
same day on which Mr. A. Fyvie
sailed from Gravesend to join the
mission. Previous to that time,
the missionaries had translated and
printed the New Testament at
their press, and were advancing
with the Old Testament, which, in
Oct. 1822, was printed to the
Psalms. The expens: of printing
was defrayed by the Bombay Bible
Society, and the paper supplied by
the B. and F. B. S., which also
grated upwards of 2000 dollars
or the expenses incurred in trans-
lating, and the supply of necessary
types. Large quantities of tracts
were also printed and usefully dis-
tributed. In 1822, about 10,000
Goojuratt tracts had been cir-
culated, and received with euger-
ness, About the same time, the
missionaries had 4 native schools
in the city, containing about 200


SUR


pupils. Since that period they
ave pursued their work indefa-
tigably, as will be evident from
their latest statements :—

Native Schools.—-“« The number
of these is 6, and that of the boys
under instruction about 360. The
progress made by many of them in
the knowledge of the Sacred
Scriptures is truly pleasing, The
eal part of them attend as
ormerly, with their teachers, every
Sabbath morning, to repeat their
catechisms, to sing a Christian
hymn, and to engage in prayer.
Several European gentlemen, who
have attended on those occasions,
have expressed mingled surprise and
satisfaction on witnessing the in-
teresting scene.’’

Native Services.—“'The stated
services have been regularly held
in the school-rooms, and the natives
have been also frequently addressed
in the temples, bazaars, and other
places of public resort; many of
those occasions have proved highly
interesting. During the past year,
the missionaries have made several
tours into the interior of the
country, during which the Gospel
was published to many .thousands
of the natives, who, in general,
listened with attention, and re-
ceived books with thankfulness.”

English Worship. —“ Of the
English services, which are sta-
tedly held on the morning of each
Sabbath, and on every Wednesday
evening, no report has been re-
ceived during the past year.’

Printing Ofice.—“ Mr. Salmon
has placed this office under an im-
proved arrangement, which is ex-
pected to conduce much to the
dispatch of business, as well as to
the accuracy of the work. It has
been also furnished with a new and
improved fount of Goojuratt types
from Bengal. As they are larger
than the former ones, and ap-
proximate nearer to the written
character, the natives are able to
2Q2 449


SS


SSS


‘SUR


read the books for which they
have been uséd with greater
facility than those formerly pub-
lished. Aer

‘ The printing of tracts with
the new types commenced in May,
‘1826. After -18,600 tracts had
been thrown off, a quarto edition
of the New Testament, in Goo-
juratt, was commenced. The im-
ptession is to be equal to 1000
copies.”?

Circulation of the Scriptures
and Tracts.—“ The missionaries,
during the year ending the 30th of
Sept. 1826, distributed in Surat,
in ‘the surrounding villages, and
while on tours in the interior, the
remainder of the first edition of the
Old Testament, and the second
edition of the four Gospels,


amounting, in all, to more than
8000 parts, and about an equal
number of tracts.” f f

Books preparing for publication.
— Mr. W. Fyvic il engaged,
during the year 1826, ' in revi-
sing his English and Gogfuratt


Dictionary, and expected to have
it ready for the press in Decem-
ber. He has also ready for the
press, a vocabulary in the same
form. Beside these, several new
tracts are in hand; also a small
book of prayers, in a simple and
appropriate style. »’

 Goojuratt Auxiliary Missionary
Society.— The total of receipts,
for the year ending October, 1826,
is 1500 rupees, 550 of which were
contributed by one gentleman, and


100 by another, without: any soli-


citation, further than that the
missionaries had circulated — the
First Report of their Auxiliary
Society, to inform the members
and contributors in what way they
had employed their money. Several
other gentlemen also favoured them
with donations, on the object being
submitted to their consideration.”’
‘In Nov. 1825, a society was
formed at Bombay, called the


SUS


Bombay. Miesionury Union, . the


‘objects of which. are. to promote


Christian fellowship, and to con-
sult on the best means of ‘advancing
the kingdom of Christ in that
part of India. The missions repre-
sented at this meeting were, the
American and the Church in
Bombay, the London Society’s at
Surat and Belgaum, and the
Scottish mission in the southern
Konkan. The missionaries ex-
press their: hope that ‘this Unton
will be productive of much good
to the missions at present con-
nected with it, and also to any
other Protestant mission which
may hereafter join the associa-
tion.

The missionaries at Surat are
very desirous of establishing a
mission at Abmedabah, ' the capital '
of the province of Goojuratt.

SURLEPURUM, a: village of
about 800 houses, in: Changany
parish, Jaffna district, Ceylon,
about 1 mile and an half from
Panditeripo. Dr. Scudder opened
a school here of about 40 scholars,
in 1820, which promises to be
useful. The American mission-
aries occasionally preach to a small
congregation, in this village.

SUSOOS, a numerous and
powerful people, inhabiting an ex-
tensive country north and south
of the Rio Pongas River, Sierra
Leone country, W. Africa. They
have 3 independent sovereignties,
and each king can command about
20,000 men: They live in villages,
containing commonly from 100 to
2000 people; and few less than
3 or 400 inhabitants. They have
made considerable progress in
agriculture and manufactures. The
Mahomedan religion prevails to
some extent among them; but
they are generally superstitiously
attached to devil-worship, and
shew little disposition to examine
the claims of Christianity.

Missions have been oe


among tl
In the e
Rev. Mes
from Ed
Port, a f
Sierra Le
on the R
town cal
they staid
daily visite
a view of
Though tl
bier confi
natives ;
them to r
up the riv
ondaia.
daia,]
SYRIA)
Cotym.]


. TAHA,
Society Islz
rence, situa
tea. It has a;
and harbour.
almost to tl
Extensive
heads of the
of the moun
leys is of gy
all the veget
country, suc
tii-plant, fre
ants former!
tities of rum, |
tain plantai
The inhal
were former
war, disease
claims of O
number to a
an air of ind
tlement, and
industrious
A few yea
most of the
Gospel, and
Raiateans to
was defeated


SYR

among them with little success.
In the early part of 1798, the
Rev, Messrs, Brunton and Greig,
from Edinburgh, went to Free
Port, a factory belonging to the
Sierra Leone Company, situated
on the Rio Pongas, near a native
town, called Tugekiring. Here
they staid about 10 weeks, and
daily visited the native town, with
a view of learning the language.
Though they gained the affection
and confidence of many of the
natives ; yet the chief obliged
them to remove, and they passed
up the river, about 40 miles, to
Kondaia. [See Canoffee, Kon-
daia.)

SYRIAN CHRISTIANS. [See
Cotym.)  -


be


' TAHA, or OTAHA, one of the
Society Islands, 40 m. in circumfe-
rence, situated about 5 m.N. of Raia-
tea. It has a greatnumber of fine bays
and harbours, some of which extend
almost to the centre of the island.
Extensive valleys reach from the
heads of these bays up to the foot
of the mountains ; one of these val-
leys is of great extent, and full of
all the vegetable productions of the
country, such as wild ginger, the
tii-plant, from which the inhabit-


ants formerly distilled great quan- |,


tities of rum,the bamboo, the moun-
tain plantain, arrow root, &c.

The inhabitants of this island
were formerly very numerous; but
war, disease, infanticide, and the
claims of Oro, have reduced the
number to about 700. There is
an air of industry all over the set-
tlement, and the King ‘is the most
industrious man in the island.

A few years ago, the King and
most of the chiefs opposed. the
Gospel, and went to war with the
Raiateans to suppress it; but he
was defeated and taken prisoner.


TAH


The kind manner, in:which he was
treated by T'amatao,,.the. Christian
King of Raiatea,, so afiected
him, that he cordially embraced
Christianity; he was restored to. his
authority, and rendered .indepen-
dent by his conqueror.. Places of
worship were soon built, the Sab-
bath observed, and the same order of
things adopted as in the neighbour-
ing islands. The people were, how-
ever, long destitute ofa minister ;
until, in February, 1822, the Rev.
Mr. Bourne, then in Tahiti, lis-
tened to their pressing invitation,
and settled among them, with every
demonstration of joy. . A very ex-
cellent house, 60 feet by 30, has
been built for him, having. a large
garden. :

-Pateo, in 1818, was. the largest
and most populous district, where
a. house of worship was, built. In
1823, almost the whole population
had removed their houses near the
residence of the missionary, on the
coast, and the. people were about
to build a.good place of worship,
80 feet by 40, equal in extent to
any chapel yet, erected in these
islands. The number of adults
who had been baptized, February,
1823, was 178; children, 266 ;
candidates for baptism, 84: 140
of the adults read the New Tes-
tament, and 160 of them elemen-
tary books. ‘

A new chapel was


opened at
this station, in April, 1825. The
number of natives in church fel-
lowship is increased to 80, whose


conduct is creditable to their
Christian profession. The school
is well attended. The Epistles to
the. Galatians, Philemon, He-
brews, and those of James and
John, in Tahitian, have been
printed by Mr. Browne. . The


-book of Revelation is in the press.


Mr. B. has also prepared a ca-
techism in Tahitian, chiefly taken
from that of Dr. Brown.
TAHITI, one of the Georgian
451


TAH


Islands, in the S. Pacific Ocean,
consisting of 2 peninsulas con-
nected by a low isthmus about 3
m. across. The larger, Tahiti
Nue, or Opeureonu, is about 20
m. by 30; or 90 in circuit; the
lesser, Tahiti Ete, or Tutarabu,
is about 30. W. long. 149° 15’ to
149° 50’, S. lat. 1'1° 30’ to 17° 55’.

The face of the country, except
on the sea-coast, is very uneven ;
it rises in ridges to the middle of
the island, which form mountains
that may be seen at the distance
of 60 miles,

The island has many good har-
bours, and a border of low land on
the coast, except in several points,
where the mountains terminate in
high cliffs of coral rocks. The
soil, except on the tops of the
ridges, is very fertile, and is co-
vered with fruit trees of various
kinds, of spontaneous growth.

The population of the 2 penin-
sulas, in 1774, was estimated at
200,000 by Capt. Cook; in the
“¢ Missionary Voyage,’’ published
in 1709, it is stated to be about
50,000 ; but a census taken by the
missionaries, soon after their set-
tlement, enumerated only about
16,000.

In 1808, accounts state that
disease and war had made such
havoc as to reduce the population
to 6 or 7000. Previous to their
conversion to Christianity, the
practice of infanticide and human
sacrifices, and the universal licen-
tiousness of morals, threatened the
entire depopulation of the island.
Since the Gospel has been success-
ful among them, and removed these
causes of decay, the population has
rapidly increased. The inhabitants
are above the common size. The
men are tall, strong, and finely
shaped. The government is mo-
narchical, and hereditary in one
family. ‘There is also, an aristo-
cracy consisting of chiefs of the
several districts.


TAH


On the 10th of Aug. 1796, 29
missionaries embarked from Lon-
don for this and the neighbouring
islands. March 6, 1797, 18 landed
at Tahiti; iG at Tongataboo, in
the following morith; the other at
St. Christina, in the succceding
June. <A number of most auspi-
cious circumstances attended this
commencement ; and the report of
Capt. Wilson, upon the return of
the ship Duff, elated the friends
of the: mission beyond measure.
Something like triumph was €x-
pressed over the cool and calcu.
lating minds of those, who wished
for some more civilized part of the
world to be selected for the field
of the first efforts of the society.
But the triumph was soon turned
into lamentation. Successive re-|


ports of disastrous and discouraging:


events tried the patience and reso-
lution of the society to the utter-
most. The capture, by the French,
of the Duff, in her second voyage
to the South Seas, with 10 married
and 19 single missionaries — the
report of the departure of 11 of the
number that were at Tahiti, for
Port Jackson, on account of the
ill-treatment of the missionaries
by the natives—-the murder of one
of them at New South Wales—
the murder of 3 others at Tonga-
taboo—and the departure of the
remainder for Port Jackson, and,
with one exception, their subse-
quent arrival in England,—almost
overwhelmed the society, and for
a season threatened to quench


the missionary zeal of the religious _


public. The persons, who at first
had objected to the mission, pitied
the weakness and censured the
temerity of those who projected
it. The cause of the South Sea
Islanders, however, was not re-
linquished. The Directors encou-
raged the 7 missionaries re-
maining at Tahiti to continue,
urged those that were at Port
Jackson to return, and sent out


aries at

Tahiti; i
there, en
accomplis
they wer
cumstanc
raged the
when, ov
the. nativ
except Mi
left. the is
at Port J
their «first
news aga
afflicted th
of final. st
tinguished
verance w
sumption
triumphan
tempting

before the
longer. a
it. is now
More tha
in. the : dire
missionarie


’ It was, ho


anxiety an
majority p
presenting

the missio
Wales, tha
circumstan
islands, the:
and make

strength of
the society,
fare of the
aries did ret
of prosperity
The set tim
Several of

become quit
guage, and
Spirit accom
The King, «
priest of the
verted to Ch
tives, held,


friends
easure.
7aS MBX-
calcu-
wished
t of the
he field
society.
1 turned
sive re-|
uraging:
nd reso-
ie utter-
French,
1 voyage
married
es— the
1 of the
hiti, for
of the
sionaries
of one
ales—
Tonga-
of the
on, und,
subse-
almost
and for
uench .
eligious
» at first
in, pitied
ired the
rojected
uth Sea
not re-
s encou-
fes ree
ontinue,
at Port
ent out
2


TAH


12 ‘more. . missionaries in the
Royal Admiral,...commanded, by
Capt. Wm. Wilson. The mission-
aries at Port Jackson returned to
Tahiti; an’, with those previously
there, endeavoured to persevere to
accomplish: the work .for. which
they .were sent; .and some cir-
cumstances. arose, which encou-
raged their'-hopes, till in 1810,
when,.owing to the wars among
the natives, all the missionaries,
except Messrs, Nott and Hayward,
left. the islands, and sought refuge
at Port Jackson, 13 years after
their »first reaching Tahiti. This
news again greatly humbled and
afflicted the society; and their hopes
of final success were almost. ex-
tinguished. Patience and, perse-
verance were thought “9 be pre-
sumption and enthusiasm. It was
triumphantly said, the foily of at-
tempting to evangelize a people,
before they are civilized, is no
longer. a subject of reasoning ;
it. is now decided by experiment.
-More than once it was proposed,
in the direction, to recall all the
missionaries from the South Seas.


It was, however, a time of great


anxiety and much prayer. |The
majority prevailed in favour of
presenting an urgent request to
the missionaries at New South
Wales, that when more auspicious
circumstances should arise in the
islands, they would return to them,
and make another effort in the
strength of the Lord. Happily for
the society, the cause, and the wel-
fare of the islanders, the mission-
aries did return; and now, the sun
of prosperity brightened upon them.
The set time to favour Zion came.
Several of the missionaries had
become quite masters’ of the lan-
guage, and the saving power of the
Spirit accompanied their prepening.
The King, a principal chief, and a
priest of the first order, were con-
verted to Christ. Some of the na-
tives, held, by their own appoint-


TAH


ment meetings, for prayer. At the
close of 1814, 50 on. this island
and Eimeo .had , renounced. their
idols, and wished to, be considered
worshippers of Jehovah, and more
than 200, principally adults, at-
tended the schools. _ .

About this time, not less than
600, in all the islands, had deter-
mined to turn from their lying vani-
ties to the living God. nia

Now the enemy began to raise
his terrific front. The. idolatrous
chiefs in Tahiti formed. a. con-
spiracy, and resolved to massacre
the praying people. These were
apprized of their, danger, and fled
toEimeo. , | ..

The Pagans, then quarrelled
among themselves, and the chief
instigators of the, plot were slain.
Still they were resolved on war,
and for some time the issue was
doubtful; .but the counsel of
the froward was defeated, . and
Pomarre was restored to, the go-
vernment of Tahiti and its depend-
encies, Nov, 1815, by universal
consent. . This was the dawn of a
most glorious day in this and the
neighbouring islands, Pomarre,
in his progress through the several
districts, to replace his friends in
their estates, constituted, as chiefs,
many of those who had made a
public profession of their, faith.
The people, assisted and encou-
raged .by their chiefs, demolished
their morais, overthrew the altars,
and burned. their gods in the fire.

Of the great morai in Opare, Mr.
Jefferson gave the following ac-
count :—

“This place, appointed for the
worship of the eatooa, stands on a
sandy point of land, projecting a
little, way out towards the sea, and
forming a small bay on each side,
I arrived, in company with a Ta-
hitian priest, between eleven and
twelve o’clock in the fordénoon,
and observed a number of bread-
fruit, cocoa-nut, and — trees


TAH


growing close to the morai. Be-.
ore we entered, my guide gathered
a bunch of: green leaves that grew
upon the beach; and, as soon as
we came to the accustomed place
for making offerings, he threw
them upon the pavement, and re-
peated, ina careless manner, a few
words soliciting the favour of the
deity supposed to preside there.
The place where this ceremony
was performed is dedicated to their
principal eatoou, called Oro, and
is a rough stone pavement, about
eighteen fcet square. At the
north end, opposite to the sea, is a
large pile of stones, upwards of five
feet high, three or four feet wide,
and about eighteen feet long. Upon
the top are several pieces of board,
some of them six feet long and
twelve inches broad ; the ends being
slit into five parts, to represent a
human hand, with the fingers a
little extended. At the south end
are set up five stones, three of
which are larger than the other
two. These‘are designed to mark
out the places of the officiating
priests, both of superior and inferior
rank, who sit cross-legged upon
the pavement, supporting their
backs against the stones; and in
this posture, with their faces to-
wards the pile of stones and boards,
they present their prayers. The
middle space is where the human
victims are slaughtered, by being
knocked on the head with stones
and a club: after which, a princi-
pal priest scoops out the eyes of the
murdered person; and, holding
them in his hands, presents them
to the King, who opens his mouth
as if intending to swallow them.
When this ceremony is concluded,
the carcase is thrown into a pit,
and covered with stones ; and, from
the number of pits surrounding the
place, as well as from the expres-
sions of my conductor, I appre-
hend that many hundreds of men
and women have been here sacri-


TAH


ficed by the abominable supersti.
tion of these idolaters. Besides
the captives taken in war, the bo-
dies of those slain in battle, or those
cut offby the command of the King,
or that are purposely immolated in
any other part under his jurisdic.
tion, are brought to the morai,
that prayers may be made over
them previously to their interment,
+ “A little to the right of this
pavement of blood, and nearer
towards the point, is an altar to
Oro, raised upon three rows of
wooden pillars, thirteen in a row,
nearly seven feet high, and four or
five feet broad; the top being
covered with cocoa-nut leaves, and
the front and ends decorated with
leaves of the sugar-cane so fixed
that they may hang down like long
fringes. Upon this altar was
large hog, with other offerings of
fish, bread-fruit, and mountain
plantains. A little more to the
right, was the frame of an altar
going to decay, dedicated to an
imaginary deitynamed Ora-madooa;
and a few yards farther towards
the extremity of the land appeared
a pile of stones, ten or twelve feet
high, and about twenty in length,
sacred to a marine god, called Tu-
peh, and said to be the occa-tonal
scene of human sacrifices, By
this time, however, I was tired
and disgusted with these awful
proofs of man’s apostacy, and of
Satun’s power over him; and
therefore desired my guide to
withdraw.’

Idolatry was at length, however,
completely abolished; the worship
of Jehovah substituted in its place ;
numerous buildings were imme-
diately erected for worship and
schools in every district, amount-
ing to upwards of 60, and the
missionaries resumed their labours
in this island. In June, 1816, one
of them staied:—‘* All accounts
agrée that a most wonderful chan
hus been produced 7” 4

5


Societ

of the «

universal.
wrought,

upon miss
a people tl
count of
suality, ar
grades the
chiefs we
eruel, and
lives, both
sacrifices -
were. univ
yond desc)
grossest su
ready to 1
slightest.
chiefs; th
was also t
perpetrated
without sb
morse.

An Auxil
was formed
by the peop
of which Pi
was ‘preside
the several .
governors,
crowd was
erected, in
at Papaoa,
wide, with
200 feet froi
extreme orn
ends of the


by a similar
the contrib
267 balls of
baskets of


deputation a
and on the g


TAH


Societ ‘ands; and the spread
of the « -:pel seems to be almost
universul.’? This change has been
wrought, by the blessing of God
upon missionary exertions, among
a people the most unlikely, on ac-:
count of their savageness, sen-
suality, and every thing that de-
grades the human character. The
chiefs were intriguing, perfidious,
eruel, and prodigal of their people’s,
lives, both in war and in furnishing
sacrifices to demons; the people
were. universally thieves, lewd be-
yond description, enslaved by the
grossest superstitions, and always
ready to murder any one at the
slightest. intimation from _ their
chiefs; the strangling of infants


was also the crime of every day,
perpetrated by almost every mother
without shame and without re-


morse.

An Auxiliary Missionary Society
was formed here, May 13, 1818,
by the people of Tahiti and Eimeo,
of which Pomarre, the late King,


was ‘president, and the chiefs. of
the several districts were appointed
governors, On this occasion the
crowd was so great, that the King
erected, in 1819, a large building
at Papaoa, 712 feet long and 54
wide, with 3 pulpits, upwards of
200 feet from each other, and the
extreme ones 100 feet from the
ends of the house, which he called
the Royal Mission Chapel. May
1], 1819, the chapel was opened,
and 3 of the missionaries preached
at the same time to an assembly of
natives consisting of about 6000.
On the following day, the anni-
versary of the Missionary Society
was observed with peculiar interest,
by a similar assemblage. In 1822,
the contributions amounted to
12,055. bamboos of oil, 36 pigs,
267 balls of arrow root, and 191
baskets of cotton-wool.

On the 2ist of Sept. 1821, the
deputation arrived safely at Tahiti,
and on the 3d of December they


TAH


wrote from Eimeo to the following
effect :—

** We are in health and comfort
up to the present moment, and
have been more delighted with the
victories and blessed results of
preaching and living the Gospel
of Christ than we are able to ex-
press, at every station where we
have already been in Tahiti, and
in this island (Eimeo). _Truty,
‘THE HALF WAS NOT TOLD vs!’
God has indeed done great things
here, in acivil, moral, and religious
view. The people here exhibit as
literal and pleasing a proof of
being ‘turned from darkness into
light, and from the power.of Satan
unto God,’ as can be conceived.

‘*A nation of pilferers has be-
come eminently trustworthy. A
people formerly universally ad-
dicted to lasciviousness, in all its
forms, have become modest and
virtuous in the highest degree :
those who, a few years ago, de-
spised all forms of religion, except
their own horrid and cruel super-
stitions, have uniformly declared
their approbation of Christianity—
study diligently those parts of the
Christian Scriptures which have
been translated for them — ask
earnestly for more—and appear
conscientiously to regulate them-
selves by those sacred oracles,
under the direction of their kind
teachers, whose self-denying zeal
and perseverance have been. almost
as remarkable as the success with
which God has been pleased to
honour them.

“ The King was unwell, and
was at this island when we arrived
at Tahiti. He soon made two
obliging communications to us,
through our excellent friend, Mr.
Nott, in which he expressed his
hope of soon being at Matavia to
receive us. On finding, however,
that he rather grew worse than
better, we came over to Eimeo,
and were received by him with the

455


TAH


utmost: demonstrations of - kindness,
and with marked tokens of-respect;
Messrs; Nott and~ Henry accom-
panying us, and interpreting for us.
His information, for a person who
has read only ‘the Tahitian la‘i-
guage, appéared tous considerable,
from the questions he asked re-
specting our society’s labours, their
success, and their intended fields of
labour ; ‘also his inquiries respect-
ing the civil affairs of England and
Europe.

‘“* You have learned, we trust,
from letters sent’ home before we
reached’ Tahiti; that the transla-
tions and printing are going on
well. Matthew and John. are
printed ‘in the Tahitian language,
and are in innumerable hands: the
book of Genesis,’ Joshua, the


Psalms, Isaiah, the Acts, the
Epistles‘ to the Romans, and the
other Epistles, are in course of
translation; and are: waiting the
mutual corrections of the brethren.
The grammar and dictionary are


not in'so forward a state ; but both
these are so important, that we
hope to make a more encouraging
report of their progress at no dis-
tant period.”

* “ Weare gratified in observing,
almost everywhere, many marks of
improvement. Better houses and
chapels’ having ‘ been built, or in
preparation for being built, at nearly
every station—rapid improvement
in reading and writing—European
dresses partially superseding the
Tahitian—the chiefs ingeniously
and diligently building their own
boats in’ the European form, with


European tools—many cultivating


tobacco and sugar-—and nearly all
manufacturing cocoa-nut oil.
‘¢Among other marks of improve-
ment, we must mention a road,
whieh is already made to a consi-
derable extent, and which is in-
tended to go round the whole
island. This is of very: great and
obvious importance, It hag been


TAH
formed by persons who ‘were pu-


‘nished, ‘according to the new-laws,


for evil doing ; and the intention is,
that it shall: be completed by per.
sons of that descriptions. It is re-
markable that these persons have
no need to be superintended in
their labour, but they uniformly
perform the portion of work: al.
lotted to them. Before this, there
was no road in any part of ‘the
island, except the narrow winding
tracks by which the natives ‘found
their way from one place to an.
other.”’

The King’s illness continued to
increase rapicly ; and on the 7th of
December,. Mr. Crook was re-
quested, by a messenger, to attend
immediately, as Pomarre had
fainted. He accordingly hastened
to the royal residence, with Mr:
Redfern, a surgeon from. Port
Jackson, and found that his patients
end was fast approaching. After he
had revived, Mr. Crook reminded
him, that though he was‘a great
sinner, the Lord Jesus was a great
Saviour, and he alone could aid him
in the article of death. ‘The
dying monarch replied, emphati-
Cally, Jesus alone! and ‘then sank
into a kind of stupor, which conti-
nued till about 8 o’clock, when bis
spirit was summoned into the un-
seen world.

During the year ending May,
1823, the number baptized at Aa-
tavai, in the district. of that name,
was, of adults 120, of children 100;
making a total of the former, 384,
of the latter, 238: candidates for
baptism, 18; addition to the com-
municants, 33; making a ‘total of
108. Marriages during the same
period, 12. .

This station was afterwards
named Waugh Town. Mr. Hay-
ward was compelled, by Mrs. H.’s
state of health, to return to New
South Wales, where he is usefully
employed; and his devoted coad-
jutor, Mr. Nott, after a diligent

456


and fait!
nearly ..;
country,
On bi
care of
Town.
upon M
that of
removal
latter in
number
from Mi
period of
was, for
and 33 ©
the settle
Wilks’ H
number b
districts c
14 adults
members
two. distr
time to a
communi
73. couple
1825-6, .1
Among
several yo
pily, had
former pe
who were
years ago,
relapsed it
their . evil
pede atte:
meetings a
Some ps
fallen, und
proof of r
mitted to ¢
‘The sery
in general,
people man


ngs
tion, dec. di
nue to: be. ri
on Saturday
and children
attended.


atient’s
After he
eminded
a great
a great
aid him
The
mphati-
en: sank
h conti-
vhen bis
the un-


g May,
at Ma-
t name,
en 100;
er, 384,
Hates for
e com-
‘total of
he same


eprwards
tT. Hay-
rs. H.’s
to New
usefully
hd coad-
diligent


TAH


and faithful service in the islands of
nearly ..30 years, visited his native
country. bsiid

On his departure for Europe, the
care of the stations at Waugh
Town and Hankey City devolved
upon Mr. Wilson, together with


that of Wilks’ Harbour, until the.


removal of Mr. Pritchard to the
latter in November, 1825. ..The
number. baptized by .Mr. Wilson,
from May in that year, until the
period of Mr. Pritchard’s removal,
was, for the 3 stations, 31 adults
and 33 children. Subsequent to
the settlement of Mr. Pritchard at
Wilks’ Harbour, in May, 1826, the
number baptized, belonging to the
districts. of Pare and Matavai, was
14 adults,.and 32 children, The
members in: the churches of these
two districts amounted at that
time to about 400; candidates for
communion, 87 ; those for baptism,
7}. couples married during the year
1825-6, ll. s ' i
Among those lately baptized, are
several young persons, who, unhap-
pily, had adopted some of their
former pernicious customs. Some
who were baptized here several
years ago, and who had afterwards
relapsed into sin, have renounced
their evil. courses, and resumed
their attendance on. the special
meetings appointed for the baptized.
Some church members, who had
fallen, under censure, have, on
proof of repentance, been re-ad-
mitted to communion.
‘The services on the Sabbath are,
in general, well attended, and the
people manifest a laudable desire to
understand the meaning of what
they hear. The number who at-
tend the preaching on the Wednes-
day evenings is small. . The various
meetings for catechetical instruc-


tion, dsc. during the week, conti-.


nue to be regularly attended, that
on Saturday excepted. ‘The adult
and children’s schools are both well
attended. The number of chil-


TAM


dren under instruction is 170. A
new school-room of large dimen-
sions has been lately erected. .

The parts of the New Testament
not hitherto circulated, have been
translated, and, when. revised, will
be sent to-press; so that it'is pro-
bable, shortly after Mr. Nott’s 're-
turn to the islands, the New ‘Testa-
ment-will be given to the islanders
ina complete. form. [For other
stations in Tahiti,see Bogue Town,
Burder’s Point, Haweis Town,
Hidia, Wilks’ Harbour. ]

TAMARACOOLUM, or TA-
MARANGCOOLUM, a village in
Travancore, Hindoostan, near
Nagercoil, in the midst of a wood
of palmyra-trees; inhabited by a
large number of native Christians,
whose employment is. the cultiva-
tion of the palmyra-tree, The
paddy fields, given by the Queen
to the mission, lie near this village.
A heavy quit-rent, formerly attach-
ed to this grant, has been removed.
In 1818, the congregation consisted
of 4 or 500, -More than 1000 have
entered their names as renouncing
heathenism. They have a large
church, where the congregation
soon assemble at the sound of the
tom tom, or Indian drum. The
missionaries wish to substitute a
bell for this appendage of heathen
worship. The Scriptures are read
every Sabbath by a native catechist.
A flourishing school is in operation ;
more than 1100 verses from the
Bible were recited by the boys to
Mr..Knill, during one visit. ‘The
London missionaries at Nagercoil
superintend the school and congre-

ation.

TANJORE, a8 province in: the
Carnatic, Hindoostan, bounded N.
and W. by port of the Carnatic, and
8. and E. by the Bay of Bengal.
The effects of the faithful labours of
the apostolic Schwartz, and his asso-
ciates, are very apparent in this part
of Hindoostan. In 1705, Frede-
rick the Fourth, King of Denmark,

RR 467


TAN


sent:2 missionaries to’Tranquebar ;
B. Zegenbalg and H. Plutcho,
who, with their associates and suc-
cessors, did much to introduce the
Protestant religion into the king-
dom of Tanjore, which, has since
‘een. gradually increasing. In
1809, the native Christians belong-
ing to the Tanjore mission, in-
cluding the Tinnevelly district,
‘amounted nearly fo 12,000. There
is. scarcely a village in the whole
country, in which the missionaries
have not been requested to esta-
blish schools. :
‘Tanjore, a populous city, and
capital of a province of the same
name, in the Carnatic, Hindoos-
tan, on the Cavery R., about 50m.
from its mouth ; travelling distance
S.S. W. Madras, 205 m. IJt was
formerly the great seat oflearning in
the S. of India. Including the sub-
urbs, it is about 6 m. in circuit, de-
fended by a double wall and a large
ditch, E. long. 79° 10’, N. lat.10° 46’,
The Rev. Christian F. Schwartz,
from the Soc. for Prom. C. K.,
undertook a mission to India,
under the government of Den-
mark, in 1750; and after labour-
ing many years, at Tranquebar,
and in the neighbouring country,
he was established at Trichino-
poly, in 1766, under the C..X. S.,
where he remained, till «about
1778; when he removed to Tan-
jore, and continued here till his
death, in 1798. While at Trichi-
appoly, he had 8 congregation at
Tanjore, to which he devoted much
attention, employed several native
preachers, and witnessed the con-
version of many heathen. Soon
after, his establishment at Tanjore,
he erected a church for the garri-
gon, and another for the natives.
His unblameable conduct, and de-
votedness to the cause of his Mas-
tex, gave him a decided influence
ever all classes, and secured the
confidence of the bigoted Hindoos,
In the time of war with Europeans,


.


TAN


the Rajah forbade his subjects to
injure that good man. They ho-
noured him in life, and moumed
long for him after his death. Two
miles E.of Tanjore, Mr. Schwartz
built a house for his residence, and
made it an orphan asylum. Here
the last 20 years of his life were
spent in the education and religious
instruction of children, particularly
of indigent parents, whom he gra-
tuitously maintained and instructed,
and, at his death, willed his pro-
perty to the mission at Tanjore.
His success was extraordinary : it is
said he reckoned 2000 persons,
savingly converted by his means,
Mr. Kolhoff is his. successor, and is
faithfully devoted to the extended
interests of the mission. For
muny years after the death of Mr,
Schwartz, Mr. Halzberg was asso-
ciated with Mr. Kolhoff. At this
place a school-hause was erected
in 1802, which may accommodate
upwards of 1000 scholars. . The
schools and congregations ‘under
the care of the missionaries at this
station are prosperous. The con-
gregations extend about 200m. In
1816, the Christians in the city of
Tanjore were about 1500; and in
the vicinity, about 1000. Country
priests have long been employed
with happy effect, in the diiferent
congregations connected with this
mission. The country congrega-
tions of the Danish mission in
Tranquebar have been recently
transferred to the C. K. S., and
attached to this station, which has
thus received an addition of 1927
souls, The Rajah favours and pa-
tronizes the missionaries, and has
done much to forward their plans
of benevolence.

Bishop Heber arrived at Tanjore
on the 25th of March, 1826; and it
was there, in the institutions of the
venerable Schwartz, in the labours
of the excellent men who have
succeeded him in the same field,
and. in the numerous churches of

458


pronounci
amul, §
to me, say
while taki
would I
years of
lowing m«
he confir
Europeans
same chur,
of the sam
service in
chapel in
After the
from his se;
the missio:
sent, and
whom they
exhorted t
gence, and
tience in |
neglect for
for the rec
earnest pra:
him, for th
Rajah, who
ness of the |
alluded beat
Schwartz, c
then standin
to follow his
effect produc
presént was


ts to
- ho-
Imed
Two
wartz
» and
Here
were
igious
ularly
e gra-
ucted,
3. pro-
njore.
re it is
aTsONs,
means.
and is
tended
For
of Mr,
IS USSO-
At this
erected
modate
. The
s under
at this
he CONe
m. In
city of
and in
ountry
loyed
iiferent
th this
ngrega-
sion in
ecently
S., and
ich has
of 1927
and pa-
nd has
plans


Tan}

5 and it
s of the
labours
o have
e field,
ches of
58


TAN


native Christians which they have
founded and built up,—that his
interest was most powerfully
excited, and the energies of his
mind most earnestly employed.
The morning after his arrival
(Easter-day ), his Lordship preached
in the mission church in the fort,
and administered the Lord’s Sup-
per to 53 native Christians, using
(as was his constant custom in all
native congregations) the words of
administration in their own lan-
guage. In the evening he attended
the Tamul service: in the same
chutch ; the liturgy being read by
the missionaries present, and the
sermon preached by Dr. Caemerer,
of Tranquebar ; and he himself
pronouncing the benediction in
Tamul. “ Gladly,’? be exclaimed
to me, says the Rev. T. Robinson,
while taking off his robes, ‘ gladly
would I purchase this day with
years of existence.’ On the fol-
lowing morning (Easter Monday),
he confirmed 12 descendants of
Europeans, and 50 natives in the
same church; and in the evening
of the same day he attended divine
service in Tamul, at the small
chapel in the mission gurden.
After the sermon, his Lordship,
from his seat’at the altar, addressed
the missionaries who were pre-
sent, and the native teachers by
whom they were attended. He
exhorted them to fidelity, dili-
gence, and increasing zeal, pa-
tience in bearing privations and
neglect for Christ’s sake, looking
for the recompence of reward, to
earnest prayer for themselves, for
him, for their flock, and for the
Rajah, who had shewn such kind-
ness of the church of Christ. He
alluded beautifully to the grave of
Schwartz, over which they were
then standing, and charged them
to follow hits bright example. The
effect produced on the minds of all
present was such as I never wit-


TAN
nessed — it will never be oblite-
tated.”

The importance of this station
will be fully apparent from another
quotation from the same pen :—

“I commend the Tanjore mis-
sion, with all its important labours,
to the patronage and support, I will
venture to say more,—to the affec-
tionate regard, of the Committee.
Most richly do they deserve all the
nurture, all the assistance, all the
kindness, that can be shewn them.
The wisdom of all. the institutions
of the venerable Schwartz (whose
name is yet as fresh in every town
and village of the Christians, as if
his' earthly labours were just ended,
and whose memory is held in sach:
deep and holy veneration, as we are
accustomed to' render to Apostles
only): is visible to all who visit that
most interesting country, and leaves
no doubt un the mind, that the best
and wisest method of sending the
kingdom of Christ in this country,
is to strengthen these existing es-
tablishments. ‘They have in them
a principle of unlimited self-ex-
tension ; and if in the last 20 years,
with many and great discourage-
ments, the labours of those vene-
rable men, who have trod in the
steps of Schwartz, have effected
so much, what may we not hope
from the same men,: when their
means of usefulness are increased
by yourbounty? But, alas! they
have a still stronger claim upon
your hearts, They were the ob-
ject of the deepest interest and
most intense anxiety to our dear
lamented Bishop. It would be
hardly too much to say, that his
blood was a libation on the sacri-
fice of their faith; for he died
while caring for their welfare; and
labouring for their good. He had
seen every part of India, but he
had seen nothing like the Society's
missions in Tunjore. Again and
again did he repeat to me, ‘ Here
459


TAR:


te. the th of the Christian
are in In ale Fesait mit
¢: &: grievous eavy sin, |,
Ragland, and all the agents of
tis bounty, do not nourish and
protect these churches.’ ?? ;
.On the receipt of this commu-
nication; a: desire to accomplish
as far as possible the plans’ of the
lamented prelate prevailed'in every
besom ; and at a special general
meeting, although the superin-
tendance of | the missions had been
transferred to: the» Society for the
propagation: of the: Gospel in Fo-
reign: Parts, it was) resolved: to


carry the recommendations of Bi-.


shop ‘Heber ‘into | full effect. : In
pursuance of this:resolution, it was
determined to expend ‘the sum: of
£4500, : partly: in building, repair-
ing, and enlarging churches, cha-
pels, missionary premises, and
school-houses In the Tanjore dis-
trict, partly in extending the mis-
slon-press at /’epery; and partly in
the endowment of two additional
scholarships at: Bishop’s College,
Calcutta, to be for ever called
Rishop Heber’s scholarships, and
to be appropriated, in compliance
with his earnest wish and recom-
mendation, to the maintenance
and education of members of fo-
reign episcopal churches in the
East, not in subordination to the
see of Rome.

TARTARY, in the most ex-
tensive sense of the word, includes
all that vast country of Asia, be-
tween the Frozen Oceun and Per-
sia, Hindoostan, and China, Russian
Tartary embraces all the northern
patt of this territory; Chinese
Tartary includes the S. and E.

art; and Independent Tartary lies
E. of the Caspian Sea.

The inhabitants, scattered over
a wide extent of country, are ge-
nerally called Tartars; but they
are divided into 3 distinct races of
men} viz, the Huns, or Proper


‘TAU


Tartars, the Mandshurs, and Mon-
goles; ‘and these into ‘a great
variety of: tribes, each of which
has its: appropriate name: .These
3 families of Tartars: have’ distinct
languages; in addition to which
many different dialects prevail.

The: religion’ of many of the
Tartars in the S.W. part: of: the
country is: Mahomedan; others of
them, with the great body: of the
other Tartars: in’ Asia, ‘whether
Huns, Mongoles, ' or Mandshurs,
are’ Pagans, or worshippers: of
Budhu. They have, generally, a
strong: aversion to: the’ Christian
religion, and are dupes to their
own superstitions.

A true -estimate of the widely
extended population of this country
cannot be formed; but that. there
are many millions, who need the
hand of Christian charity to extend
to them the light: of life, cannot
be doubted. waste

The mission stations, which have
been established to diffuse the light
of the Gospel among the, different
Tartar tribes, are Astrachun, Ka-
rass, Nazran, Nogay, Orenberg, Sa-
repta, und Selinginsk. (Whichsee.)

The missions established in this
vast range of territory were greatly
assisted by the Russian Bible So-
ciety and its numerous auxiliaries,
The Petersburgh Tract Society also
rendered valuable aid; and, by the
liberality of the: Princess Mest-
chersky, they are supplied with
tracts .in the Russian language.
She‘ has’ translated a’ nomber: of
English Tracts in that language};
hundreds of thousands of which
are in circulation.

TAUAI, one of the Sandwich
Islands, 33 miles in length, and 28
in breadth, the residence of the
Governor, Kaikioeva; having a4
population of 15,000. At Waimea,
on the southern coast, there is a
station of the 4. B.C. F. M., which
was commenced in acai pe


In Je
the fol
66 T h
pense,
venient,
iniwhic
in. the:
months
and: o¢
Our: me
attende i


tion which
learning. an
business.of |
built a ney
which. | is p
that ever w
[See Sandw
TELLIC
Hindostan,
the Malaba:
246 m. S. §,
the English,
lat, 119 40’,


liaries.
pty also
by the
Mest-
\ .. with
ruage.
ber of
puage }
which


dwich
and 28
‘of the
ing &
aimed,
e is a
which


TEL


In Jan, 1824, Mr. Whitney gives
the following, account of it:— .

‘6 The chiefs, at their own ex-
pense, have built: us a very.cone
venient:house for. public. worship ;
in:which: L have: preached regularly,
im the: vernacular tongue, for 8
months past, twice every. Sabbath,
and: occasionally on other daysi
Our. meetings are generally well:
attended, and. many of the people
are.desirous of Jecoming acquaint:
ed with: the, Gospel. Under our:
immediate inspection, we have 2
flourishing; schoels, of about 120:
scholarsi:; there are other schools:
in: different: parts of the island.
Many: more:ate anxious to learn;
but, for want of books and teachers,
they must, forthe present, be denied:
that. privilege.. Orders have lately.
been given out for all the people,
without exception, on this and the
neighbouring island, Niihau,.. to
observe the Sabbath as holy time,
devoted to the service of Jehovah.
Drunkenness is prohibited; and in-
fanticide,, which: heretofore has
been practised to no inconsiderable
extent, is now -punisbable. with
death.”?

On June 24,1825, Mr. W, says :—

“While I was writing this, our
Governor, Kaikioeva,came in, and
inquired: to whom I was writing.
On.being informed; ‘ Give, them,’.
suid he, with much warmth of ex-
pression, ‘my affectionate saluta-
tion; Tell. them. I thank them,
much for’ the good news of saiva-
tion which they have sent.us; that
learning. and religion shall be the |
business.of my life? He has lately
built'a new church, 90 feet by 30,
which is probably the best. house
that ever was erected on Tauai.’’
[See Sandwich Islands. ]

TELLICHERRY, a city of
Hindostan, pleasantly situated. on
the Malabar. coast, N. W. Cochin,
246 m. 8S. S. W. Goa, belonging to
the English. E. long, 75° 43’, N.
lat, 119 45’,


TER

The: C. M. S. commenced a mis-
sion here in. 1817, which was for
some. years superintended by. the
Rev. Francis Spring, the chaplain.
He prepared the church catechism
and liturgy in Malayalim. A school
of 50 scholars here has been highly
useful, and formerly, supported
itself.. Many who were educated
in it are engaged in. public offices;,
or useful. occupations; and have
done credit to. the instruction they
had, received. Much. opposition:
has been made by.the Roman Catho-
lics. Respecting this station, Mr.
Spring. writes:—‘‘ Something is
almost. daily, occurring to animate
us in our course, Here, flashes of.
the heavenly light are continually
gleawing through the darkened at-
mosphere. I hear that there is,.on
every side, areadiness among great
numbers tg receive the tidings of:
the Gospel.”? A poor man’s fund,
was also established, which relieved
400 persons weekly ; 20,000 rupees
were bequeathed to it by. a. deceased:
frisnd, who was.the principal agent


in its establishment. This measure:


conciliated the natives, and gave
them favourable views of Chris-
tianity.

In 1823, Mr. Spring left. this
station for England, having made
the best arrangements in his power
to secure the continuance of the
school established by him, and. now
maintained by the Madras.Corre-
sponding Committee of the C. Af. S.
In 1824, since which no accounts
of it. have been published, it con-
tained 59 children of various castes
and classes, ,

TERNATE, a. small, island in
the E. Indian Sea, one of. the prin-
cipal of the Moluccas, of a circular
form, 18 miles in circumference.
A large volcanic mountain in the


centre extends nearly, to the sea.in ,


every direction. This island was first
settled by the Spaniards, who were
driven away by the Dutch, to whom
the King of the island.is in some
RR2 461


THE


degree subject. The government
of Ternate includes: the islands of
Tidore, Motir, Machian, and Ba-
Cloves are the principal
E. long.


chian,
article of commerce,
127° 32’, lat. N. 0° 50’.

The Rev. Mr. Jungmichel, of the
N. M. S., was stationed here in
1819. ‘Under his care are 22
churches in'Ternate and the neigh-
bouring: islands... The Rev. Mr.
Kam, missionary at: Amboyna, has
been instrumental of much good in
his occasional visits to Ternate.

- THEOPOLIS, a settlement of
Hottentots, in the district of: Al-
bany, Cape Colony, S. Africa, 60
m. NE. of Bethelsdorp, and about
600 E. of Cape Town; situatedin a
valley, surrounded on all sides: by
hillscovered with trees. The land
belonging to the L. M. S. extends
3 miles down a river: to the sea, is
well watered, and affords abun-
dance of pasturage, and many faci-
lities-for a comfortable subsistence.
The inhubitants are 500.

- This settlement was commenced
by the: Rev. Messrs. Bartlett and
Ulibricht,‘ and‘ other: settlers from
Bethelsdorp, in 1814, on a spot

, selected and granted to the society
by Governor Cradock. Mr. B.
continued here a short time, and
was succeeded by the Rev.’ Mr.
Barker, in 1816, Mr. U. remained
till his death, in 1821. The mis-
sionaries have abundant: evidence
that their labours have not been in
vain. Both the temporal and
spiritual condition of the people
have greatly improved. They have
generally become industrious, and
many of them give evidence of
piety ; more than 70 were added to
the church, during one year. In
1819, the church consisted of 106
members, and there were 240 chil-
dren in the school. Since: this, the
prosperity of the mission has been
somewhat retarded by the absence
ahd'death of the missionaries. In
1828, the settlement was again


THI


flourishing: Many. disadvantages
attending the local situation, a new
village was forming. | The mission
has suffered much from the repeated
invasions of ‘the Caffres. . In 1819,
when the station was invaded, more
than 3 months, by several thousand,
the bravery of the Hottentots at
Theopolis saved the colony from
much depredation, An: auxiliary
Missionary Society. hag been form-
ed, which contributed, in one
year, more than 200:dollars.

. The. congregation: on the Sab-
bath-day still con‘inues good; the
attention of the people is pleasing,
and some appear seriously impress.
ed with the truth. The members
of the church grow in. Christian
experience, but few additions:have
been lately made to their number,
The school is ina prosperous state,

The anniversary of the Theopolis
Auxiliary Society was held on the
7th of June, 1826, when it appeared
that the receiptstor the preceding
year amounted to rix dollars 374,
or about 26/. sterling. It: would
be improper to pass by this contri-
bution, without observing, that it
is from a single congregation of
Hottentots.

Several of the people belonging
to this institution have gone. to as-
sist in the secular operations of ‘the
mission lately established on the


. Buffalo River, Caffreland.


THIBET, a country in. Asia,
including Bootan, extends from the
source of the Indus ‘to the borders of
China, and from Hindoostan to the
deserts.of: Cobi; 1600 m. from E.
to W,; the breadth is unequal, and
in some parts unknown ; between
E. long. 70° and 100°, N. lat. 26°
and 38°,: The population is: vari-
ously estimated, from) 12° to
16,000,000.: i

This country’ is. tributary to
China; but is: governed: by: the
Grand Lama, . who. is. sovereign
pontiff.of the greater: part of Chi-
nese and Independent =

4t


He te
natives
foreign
painful
Costly
homag,
sessing
and the
every t
of Tart
blessing
putting
while t
he does
the grea
rarely,
Worship,
some. di
dence is
and mos
top of P
near the
7.m..fro1
a vast: b
stone, an
who area
and perf
mountair
rection..f
which ar
superb st,
plain. B
20,000 la
circles, ac
dignity. re
to approac
Those la
higher cir
and repute
and. toma
sions.to ho!
before the
to imagin
lated to. ove
worshipper
HolyMoun
more, and.4
him neare;
being, wha
culate, imn
omniscient
permitted te
at the obje


contri-
that it
tion of


onging

to as-
s of ‘the
on the


Asia,
om the
ders of
h to the
om E.
al, and
etween
at. 26°
$s vari-
2: to


j to
me the
rereign
f Chi-
artary.
fe)


THI


He teceives the adoration of the
natiyes,, as well as vast. crowds. of
inreagners, who undertake long and
painiul journeys to,. bring their
costly offerings,. and pay. him
homage.__He is worshipped as pos-
sessing. all the attributes of Deity,
and the, p6wer to impart divinity to
every thing he pleases.. The kings
of Tartary, by rich gifts, obtain his
blessing, which. he. bestows by
putting his hand on their heads,
while they kneel before him; but
he does not deign to converse with
the greatest monarch in Asia. He is
rarely, if ever, seen by common
worshippers, except.in the, rear of
some distant. window. His resi-
dence is the centre of an enormous
and most, splendid. palace, on. the
top of Patelli, or Holy Mountain,
near the. Burrampooter, and about
7.m..from, Lassa, the capital. It is
a vast. block. of temples, built of
stone, and inhabited. by 700 lamas,
who are attached totheGrandLama,
and perform daily worship, The
mountain descends in. every di-
rection from the temple; around
which are. circles of buildings. of
superb structure, extending to the
plain. Bentick says, more than
20,000 lamas reside in these several
circles, according as their rank and
dignity. render. them. more worthy
to approach their sovereign pontiff.
Those lamas, who reside in. the
higher circles, possess great wealth
and reputed sanctity of character ;
and: to maintain their high preten-
sions to holiness, they seldom appear
before the multitude. It is difficult
to imagine a scene better calcu-
lated to. overwhelm the superstitious
worshipper than the ascent of the
Holy Mountain. Every step becomes
more;and,more sacred,. and brings
him nearer to the courts of that
being, whom be adores as.imma-'
culate, immortal, omnipresent, and
omniscient ;. and: though he is only.
permitted to glance a distant look
at the object of his worship, or


THI
behold his portrait at the entrance
of the court, to which he pays his
devotions as to the god himself. he
feels confident of his favour, and is
richly rewarded for a pilgrimage of
1000 miles.

The votaries of the Grand Lama
maintain, that when. he seems to
die, his soul, or, the divinity, onl
quits a crazy habitation to see
another; and that it is discovered
again in the body of some: child by
certain tokens, known: only to the
lamas, in which order: he always
appears. The infant lama is. then
conducted to Terpaling, about 20
ma, from L into the centre of
the monastery, which isa mile in
circumference, enclosed by. lofty
walls, and situated on the summitof
a high hill. In this ae of build.
ings, 300 priests per.
service with Teshoo Lama, for. se-
veral years, when he is prepared for
his inauguration; after which he
resides. in his palace on the. Holy
Mountain, and receives. the adora-
tions and costly gifts of his deluded
votaries, who are supposed to em-
brace about one-third part.of the
human family! |.

Thibetian: idols are numerous,
Budhu,, Fo, and Manippe, belong
to the firstrank. Budhu seems to
be venerated chiefly for his anti-
quity. Fo is supposed to reside in
the Grand Lama. Manippe. is a
large idol, sitting on a throne, with
9 heads placed one above another
in the form of a.cone, and is. the
great goddess of the Thibetians.
In. their temples are an almost
endless variety of images, which
are increasing. When the Grand
Luma dies, his body is placed erect
in a golden shrine, and ever after
visited with sacred awe. The body


of every inferior. lama is burnt


immediately. after death, and the

ashes are enclosed in a little. brass

image, which is placed in the sacred

cabinet.. In addition to these,

almost every man has small mange,
463


orm, religious,


TAT


and: pictares of the Grand Lama in:
his: house, whioly receive family:
worship; In common with: the’
Hindoog; they holdithe water-of'the:
Ganges; and a variety. of! other:


- Objects, sacred.
They: believe in the transmigra-


tion of the souls that when: it:


leaves the body it goes to heaven,
or is born again into the world, as-
suming another human body, or that
of an animal, according to the
degree of sanctity; or the multitude
of good works performed: They
also believe, that all the sufferings
incident to a man in this life are
the evil consequences of sin com-
mitted in his former life, before his
last birth.

This: article. might be extended
to great length, in detailing a par-
ticular account of their unmeaning
- modes of worship, and a multitude
of: inhuman practices; but:this par-
tial view. of their deplorable condi-
tion must awaken Christian sym-
pathy, and prompt the inquiry, Can


any: efficient measures be taken to:


enlighten: and reform this people?
To this question it may be answered,
The obstacles to the introduction of
the Gospel into Thibet are great
and appalling; but the magnitude
of the object demands: no trifling
sacrifice. A mission station at the
head-quartersof lamaism would be,
perhaps, more important than any
now in.existence. For a long pe-
riod, all books printed in the Thi-
betian language have been consi-
dered sacred. ‘This. prepossession,
with the sanction of some lama of
distinction, would give the Scrip-
tures, printed in that language, a
high character; and they would be
read by every learned lama in Asia,
and might be most extensively cir-
culated among the vast crowds of
pilgrimsto the Holy Mountain. Let
ihe Gospel be introduced into
‘isibet, ar’ an effectual door would
+o opened into China, as the Em-


THO


peror and court look to Thibet for
their religion. With the conver-
sion of the lamas, the paganism of


‘all’ Asia would: tremble from. its
foundation, and the Gospel would
flow. in the: deserted channels of


Lamai?m through: mrt Thibet,
and the vastempire of Chin.

is the strong hold of: Satan, and
must be assailed by the Christian
soldier. Let the fortress no longer


be viewed as impregnable till, at-.


tempts have been made. ‘The heart
of ‘the Grand Lama’ is in t)-
hand of the Lord.” [See Téta/ya. |

THOMAS, ST. the principal of
the Virgin Islands, W. Indies, wbou‘
25 mi in circumference, under the


| authority of the Danes. ‘uhas a
commodious harbour, and isa place


of considerable trade. A greut
portion ofthe population are slaves.
A negro; named Anthony; who
became acquainted with the servants
of Count: Zinzendorf, whilst. that
nobleman:was attending the coro-
nation of Christian VI., in 1731,
at Copenhagen, first gave 'rise'to the
idea of sending out missionaries to
these benighted islands, where the
miseries of personal slavery were
superacded to those of satanic
bondage. This man, in the course
of conversation, stated that‘he had
a sister in the island of St. Thomas,
who, with many of her hapless
companions, earnestly desired to be
taught inthe way of salvation,
and earnestly implored God to send
some person to .their assistance,
capable: of giving them religious
instructions, This statement was
afterwards sepeated at’ Herrnhut,
Anthony. oving obta.oedpermis-
siun to visi, that settlement; and,
though it was now added, that the
negroes could obtain no opportunity
of attending to the truths of the
Gospel, unless their teachers were
united with them in their daily
and laborious avocations, 2 young
men, Leonard Dober oe
464


+ This .


Leupo
solutio
tored.
declare
themse
4 step
complis
Thoug!
quired,
were su
but afte
ships a
even im
last beg
toil and
their cc
nearly
eagerne:
than 10
The pro,
had stre)
to enligh
knowled;
brethren:
and. enct
on the m
sionaries
two. diffe:
called Ne
where the
accommo
In 1812,
Heryvnhut,
communic
the: baptiz
nicants to
sion was i
TILLII
district of
of Jaffnap
Battieotta.
1300. At
Tillipally,
annually re
The missio)
sons for di
among ther
The Rev
LL. M. S.,
1805. He
Duteh chur


in former ti.


t for
iver~
mn of
n its
rould’
ls of
‘ibet,
This’
and
istian
mger
1, ate
heart
n the
Lye |
pai of
woOW'
pr the
has a
place
greut
slaves.
who
rvants
t. that
coro-
173),
to the
ries to
pre the
were
atanic
ourse
ne had
omas,
apless
to be
vation,
p send
tance,
igious
t was
rnbut,
prmis-
5 and,
at the
unity
of the
were
daily
young
obias


|


h


}
ry


TIL


Leupold,immediately formed the re-
solution of going to these poor untu-
tored: creatures; nd. absolutely
declared their willingness to . sedi
themselves as slaves, should sch
a step prove necessary to the ac-
complishment of their purpose.
Though ‘this sacrifice was not re-
quired, others little less painful
were submitted to for many years;
but after encountering many hard-
ships and. discouragements, and
even imprisonment ‘itself, they at
last began to reap the fruit of their
toil and perseverance. About 1750,
their congregations consisted of
nearly 1000, who sought with
eagerness the bread of life. More
than 100 they baptized yearly.
The proprietors of the island, who
had strenuously opposed all efforts
to enlighten the negroes, now ae-
knowledged the happy effects of the
brethrens’ labours on the slaves,
and encouraged their attendance
on the means of grace. The mis-
sionaries established. themselves at
two. different places on the island,
called New Herrnhut and Niesky ;
where they have chapels and other
accommodations for the mission.
In 1812, the baptized, at New
Herrvnhut, amounted to 1009; the
communicants to 430., At Niesky,
the baptized to 1276; the commu-
nicants to 758. In 1823, the mis-
sion was in a flourishing state.

TILLIPALLY, a parish inthe
district of Jaffna, Ceylon, 9m. N.
of Jaffnapatam, 7 or 8 m. from
Battieotta. Population nearly
1300. Ata place about2 m. from
Tillipally, many thousand pilgrims
annually resort to bathe in the sea.
‘The missionaries improve these sea-
sans for disseminating the Gospel
among them.

The Rev. J. D. Palm, from the |
LL. M. S., was stationed here in
1805. He preached in the old
Dutek church, in which Baldaeus,
in former times; used to preach to


TIL


2000 natives; and which has re-
cently been repaired by the Ameré-
can missionaries, He had made
considerable progress in the lan-
guage, and had opened a school for
the instruction of native youth,
when the ill bealth of Mrs. Palm
rendered it necessary to remove for
a season to Colombo. After the
death of Mrs. P. in 1812; having
no missionary associate at ‘Tilli-
pally, Mr. P. accepted an invita-
tion to become pastor of the Dutch
church at Colombe, During their
residence in this place, Mrs, Palm
instructed a female school, and Mr,
Palm frequently preached and cate-
chised the children in Jaffnapatam,
It appears that the Gospel was
there heard with general attention.

The property granted by govern-
ment to the mission at this station,
under the direction of the 4. B.'C.


“F. M. consists of about 4 acres of


land, a large. church and mansion-
house, built by the Portuguese in
the 16th century, chiefly of .coral
stone, and 50 palmyra-trees, the
fruit of which constitutes the prin-
cipal food of the natives about half
the year.» The Rev. Messrs. E.


Warren and D. Poor commenced —


this mission, and took up their re-
sidence at Tillipally, October 1818.
Their objects were the establish-
ment of schools, in which they:
were very successful, the acquisi-
tion of the Tamul language; and
occasional preaching by interpre-.
ters. But scarcely had they entered
on their work, when their flatter-


ing prospects were clouded by the -


sickness of Mr. Warren. On the
13th of August, 1817, he had an


attack of bleeding at the lungs, and


on the 6th of October, left Jafina


for Colombo, to avoid the rainy:


monsoon. Thence, in company
with Mr. Richards, he proceeded
to the Cape of Good Hope, where
he rested from his labours, August
1], 1818, aged 32, beloved and
465


TIL


lamented by all who knew his worth.
Death has been repeatedly com-
missioned to assail this little band of
labourers. Mrs. Poor, a most ex-
cellent and faithful helper of the
mission, greatly endeared to all
who were associated with her, and
particularly to the children of the
heathen, whose spiritual’ interests
she habitually consulted, was re-
leased from the cares and labours
of this world, May 7, 1821. Soon
after the death of Mrs. P., Mr. and
Mrs. Richards removed to Tilli-
pally, and took the whole charge of
the temporal concerns of the fa-
mily and boarding-school, till the
death of Mr. Richards, August 3,
1622. In January 1823, Mr. Poor
was married to Miss Knight, the
sister of the Rev. Mr. Knight,
church missionary at Nellore, and
in July of the same year, removed
to Batticotta, to take the superin-
tendence of the mission college.
His place:is supplied at Tillipally
by Mr. Woodward, In 1824, Mrs.
Richards was married to Mr.
Knight, of Nellore.

This is one of the most interest-
ing of the Ceylon stations, and the
prospect of usefulness is highly en-
couraging. Immediately after the
arrival of the missionaries, a free
school was commenced, and about
30 boys were collected in a few
months. From this school several
of the most promising children
were selected and boarded at the
expense of the mission. In 1823,
there were 9 free schools connected
with this.station, in which 35 girls
and 355 boys were instructed. In
the boarding-schvol were 8 girls
and 30 boys, who were named and
supported by benevolent associa-
tions, and individuals in America,
and 7 others were on trial. The
improvement of the pupils bas, in
general, been highly satisfactory.
Many of them have been subjects
of religious impressions, and seve-


TIL


rab have publicly professed Chris-
tianity, and-are useful assistants in
the mission. In the early part of
1823, 10 natives had been received
at this place as members of the
church ; 5 of whom then resided at
the station.
Although the missionaries have
met with considerable opposition
and indifference from the natives,
they have the satisfaction to find
that their prejudices and super-
stitions are gradually removing,
particularly those relating to fe-
mule education. Through their
instrumentality, a hospital has
been provided for the benefit of
the sick, by the aid of benevolent
individuals at Jaffna. Since ac-


quiring the language, the mission- |


aries have sought interviews with
the Brahmins and the people, at
the temples, in the highways,
and in the fields. The aged and
the young, the rich and the poor,
have been warned to flee from the
wrath to come, and invited to ac-
cept of the blessings of the Gospel.
The need of divine agency has
been felt and acknowledged. The
promises of the Scriptures in behalf
of the heathen have been impor-
tunately pleaded in the midst of
pagans; and cheering tokens have
been received, that the great Head
of the church has kindly regarded
the labours and prayers of his
servants.

In the early part of 1824, a
general seriousness prevailed at
each of the stations, connected
with the American Board in Jaffna.
The gracious work first became
signally manifest at this station,
on the 18th of January, and con-
tinued to increase till all the
scholars in the boarding - school,
the domestics in the family, and
2 or 3 schoolmasters, were among
the anxious inquirers. It soon pre-
vailed, in a similar degree, at each
station; and, in the ae part of

4


religio
gan.

ever, p
at the


E. and |
and W, |
it is sepa
tains, 7
is 200,0¢
Brabmin
lics, and
Hindoos |
into no
wre deept
superstitic
mul lange

The fr
hours, in
apparent
C.K.S. co


ut Muthel,
churches,
by the nab
and it su


with books


TIN ©
March, 80 had become the hopeful
subjects of renewing grace, and the
missionaries were still cheered with
the hope that they should see
greater things than these. [See
Jaffna.

TIMOR, a Dutch island in the
Indian Archipelago, 250 m. long,
by 50 average breadth. E. long.
123° 36’, S. lat. 1099’. The inha-
bitants are of a dark colour, in
countenance more nearly resem-
bling the South Sea Islanders than
any of the Malay tribes. They
appear to have no regular system
of laws, being governed principally
by the will of the sovereign. The
religion of the island is mostly pa-
gan. Most of the ‘princes, how-
ever, profess Christianity ; but are,
at the same time entirely guided
-by pagan priests and customs.

In 1820, the Rev. Mr. Le Brunn
was stationed here by the N. M.S.
with 3 native assistants, educated
hy Mr. Kam at Amboyna.

TINNEVELLY, a district in
the Carnatic, Hindoostan, 150 m.
long, by average breadth 50; oc-
cupying the S, E. extremity of the
peninsula ; bounded N, by Madura,
E. and 8. by the Gulf of Manaar,
and W. by Travancore, from which
it is separated by the Ghaut moun-
tains. The number of inhabitants
is 700,000, of whom 175,000 are
Brahmins, 30,000 Roman Catho-
lics, and 4000 Protestants. The
Hindoos are divided and subdivided
into no less than 60 castes, and
wre deeply rooted in idolatry and
superstition, They speak the Ta-
mul language in great purity.

The fruits of Mr. Schwartz’s la-
hours, in the last century, are still
apparent in this district. The
C.K.S. commenced a mission here,
in 1800; it has 2 native priests,
ut Muthelloor and Nazareth,—27
churches, erected on land given
by the nabob,—as many catechists,
and it supplies the congregation
with books.


TIT


The Rev. Wm. T. Ringletaube,
from the L. M. S., arrived, in 1806,
and continued, in the district and
Travancore, till about 1816. He
preached in 6 churches erected by
him, among the Shanars, S, of
Palamcotta, near the Ghauts, and
superintended several schools. -His
labours were followed by consider-
able success. Several hundreds
were baptized. a See Palamcotia, }

TIRUPALATUREY, a town
in the Carnatic, Hindoostan, 65
miles westerly from Tranquebar
near Tanjore. About the com-
mencement of the 18th century,
the missionaries at Tranquebar,
laboured here with some success ;
and, in 1747, their congregation
amounted to 639. Much hassince
been done to promote the spiritual
good of tbe people by schools and
other means of instruction.

TITALYA, a town and British
military station, in Hindoostan,
in the district of Rungpore,
on the borders towards Nepaul,
From its situation, it rds
favourable access Bootan,
Thibet, and China. Through the
instrumentality of Major Barre
Latter, Commanding Officer, the
Rev. Frederick C. G. Schroeter,
of the C. M.S., was stationed at
Titalya, in 1816, for the purpose of
acquiring the Thibet language,
with the ultimate design of trans-
lating the Scriptures into that
difficult and important tongue.
Here he continued, with little in-

terruption, in the steady pursuit of
his new and arduous work, till his
death, July 14, 1820. He possessed
uncommon talent in the acquisition
of languages, and amid many
difficulties, without any properly
ualified assistant, had prepared a
Thibetian and English dictionary,
consisting of 74 quires of paper,
which, with a supplement to it,
written on 15 quires, forms a come
lete dictionary, Thibetian and
English, He had also cqeeenenets

7


TIT


a Thibet grammar, on which he
‘was employed at the time of his
decease. The dictionary has been

t into the hands of the Rev,

r. Carey, of Serampore, who has
_ andéertaken to correct and publish
it, and also to form a grammar of
the .Thibet language from Mr.
Schroeter’s materials. The dic-
tionary will occupy. between 900
and 1000 quarto pages, and will be
printed on a type cast for the
‘purpose at Serampore. Notwith-
standing ‘the ardour with which
-Mr. Schroeter devoted himself to
these objects, he did not lose sight
of: his more direct work as a mis-
sionary. He had’ divine worship
twice on the Sabbath, in Hindoos-
tanee, and improved other oppor-
tunities of spreading the know-
ledge of Christianity. Native
schools were established, as far as
practicable. In a journey to the
hill country of Nepaul, he made
himself known as a preacher of
righteousness, and was everywhere
received with attention and respect.
There appeared no unwillingness
in the people to instruct him in
the language of the country, and
they were very desirous that he
‘should in return teach them
English. During the first years
of Mr. Schroeter’s residence, he
was supported by the Society; but
through the instrumentality of
Major Latter, he afterwards re-
ceived a stipend from the English
Government for his support, while
prosecuting the translation of the
Scriptures,

Soon after the death of Mr.
Schroeter, the Rev. B. La Roche,
who had just arrived at Calcutta
from England, was accepted by
government to prosecute the work
sc auspiciously begun. His ill-
health, however, frustrated this de-
sign. Theintended establishment of
the Rev. Messrs. Maisch and Reich-
ardt at Titalya was prevented by the


TOB


1822. This worthy benefactor of
the heathen spared neither exer-
tion nor expense in forwarding
the object of the mission. He
obtained an extraordinary degree
of influence over a number of tribes


‘before: unknown to Europeans, and


carried: on a. friendly intercourse
with various lamas, from whom he
received much valuable intorma-
tion, and procured several of their
religious books in exchange for
Bibles. By his will, he directed
that his literary collection of ma-
nuscripts and printed books in the
Thibet language, relating to the
language, history, mythology, man-
‘ners, and the social and civil state
of the inhabitants of Thibet, should
be presented ‘to some society, under
whose care they might be best em-
ployed for the promotion of litera-
ture and religion. ‘They were ac-
cordingly presented to the library
of the Bishop’s College at Calcutta.
The Society fur propagating the
Gospel has also purchased for the
same library the very valuable and
expensive collection of books,
which Major Latter made tn rela-
tion to Thibet. His purchases were
made in Paris, at the time of the
dispersion of many of the conti-
nental libraries, under the influence
of the French Revolution, which
placed numerous rare and valuable
books within his reach.

The Corresponding Committee
of the C. M. S. at Calcutta, de-
sign to avail themselves of the first
opportunity of renewing their ex-
ertions in this very promising field
of labour; a field which will open
a medium of communication be-
tween the labourers of India and
those of Russia, enable them to
carry their co-operations into Thi-
bet, and facilitate the circulation
of the Scriptures among the Tartar
tribes bordering on China, and
through the western part of that
empire. [See Thibet.)


death of Major Latter, in October; ‘ OBAGO, the most southern of


468


N e
inh


lat.
abita


ses were
7 of the
2 conti-
nfluence
» which
valuable


mmittes
tta, de-
the first
heir ex-
ng field
vill open
ion be-
dia and
them to
to Thi-
ulation
» Tartar
a, and
of that


thern af
8


TOB
the Caribbee Islands, and the most
eastern except Barbadoes. It is
37 m. long and 8 ‘broad; and near
the N. E. extremity is Little To-
bago, which is 2m. long: The
climate is not so hot as might be
expected from its situation so near
the equator; nor is it visited by
such dreadful hurricanes as fre-
quently desolate the other islands.
It is diversified with hills and vales,
and equal in richness of produce
to any island in these seas. In }748
it was declared a neutral island,
but in 1763. was ceded to the Bri-
tish. I¢ was taken by the French
in 1781, and confirmed to them in
1783.. In 1793 and 1803 it was
taken by the British, and ceded to
them in 1814. The principal place
is‘Scarborough. W. long. 60° 30’,
N. lat. 12° 16, The number of
inhabitants is about 15,000.

At the particular request of Mr.
Hamilton, one of the planters, the
Rev. J. Montgomery, of the U. B.,
was sent as a missionary to the
slaves, in 1780; but the death of
himself and his wife, together. with
the unsettled state of the island, oc-
casioned the suspension of the mis-
sion till 1798, when it was renewed
by the Rev. C. F. W. Shirmer, who
met with a very favourable recep-
tion from several of the planters.
In }801, the brethren and the other
white inhabitants were much alarm-
ed by a conspiracy among the ne-
groes to murder all the white peo-

le on the island, and the mission
bas since been abandoned.

About 1808, the Rev. R. Elliott,
from the LZ. M. S., commenced a
mission here. A chapel waserect-
ed for his accommodation at Scur-
borough, where he had a small
congregation of white and coloured
people. He also laboured among
the slaves on several estates ; but as
the mission was attended with much
expense and little success, Mr. El-
liott removed to Demarara, about
1814,


TOB
In 1816, the Rev. Messrs. Nel-
son and Stephenson, of the W. M.
S., arrived,were cordially received,
and’ heard with attention. Soon
after, in addition to preaching at
Courland and Scarborough, they
visited several estates with much
success. Sabbath-schools were also
established. In 3823, there were
50 members in society.
re = 1826, the state a the mission
us reported :—*‘ Our congrega-
tions continue generally good, both
in the town and country, and are
serious and attentive. In some
places there is a peculiar spirit of
hearing manifested. A few have
been added to our society, most of
whom give good evidence of a
change of heart. The society in
general maintain a pious, circums
speet, and consistent walk and
conversation ; and though most are,
as yet, only babes in Christ, some
have attained a good degree of
stability, and are our rejoicing in
the Lord. Number of members—
Whites, 2; Free-coloured and
Black persons, 57; Slaves, 24.
Total, 83.
Schools. — ‘* It is with regret


|} that we review this department


of our labour for the past year.
At its commencement, our school
at Scarborough was in a flourishing
condition, but we have now to re-


| port that our numbers are reduced


one half. We have, however,
some hope, that on the re-appoint-
ment of 2 missionaries to this sta-
tion, it will revive,and again become
effective and well attended. Those
children who have continued, have
been attentive, and afford us en-
couragement.

‘* The negroes that we have been
able to visit and instruct, are ac-
quiting a good knowledge of the
catechism ; and we entertain the
hope, that the truths thus learned
will be productive of the happiest
effects. Scholars— 60 females and
26 males, Total 76.”

s8 469


TON


TONAWANTA, a reservation
of Seneca Indians, in the State of
New York, 80 m. from Buffalo,
and 10 N. W.of Batavia. The popu-
lation is upwards of 300. This is
the head yuarters of the Pagan In-
dians, and few have embraced the
Gospel, though different mission-
aries have occasionally laboured to
enlighten them. [See Senecas.]

TONGA, TONGATABU, or
the Sacred Tonga, one of the most
southerly of the Friendly Islands,
in the S. Pacific: Ocean, about 16
m. long, and 8 at its greatest
breadth. The soil is fertile, and
the general productions are similar
to those of Tahiti. Thesugar-cane
grows to the uncommon height of
20 or 30 feet. Except occasionally
a cultivated field, the island is
almost covered with fruitful trees.
Before the arrival of the late mis-
sionary, the only quadrupeds on the
island were the dog, hog, and cat.
The only venomous reptile is the
centipede, and this is rarely found.
This island was discovered by Tas-
man,and visited by Captain Cook in
1777. Tonga is divided into three
large districts; viz. Aheefo, at the
N. W. part; Ahagee, at theS. E.;
and Mooa, in the centre. Each
district is governed by a chief, who
reigns with absolute authority, and
Claims a right to dispose of the lives
and property of his subjects. These
districts are subdivided into smaller
ones, which have their respective
chiefs, who exercise the same
authority as the superior chiefs, to
whom they are in some measure
accountable. Palau, the chief of
Mooa, possesses the most influence,
and has the principal authority
among the neighbouring islands.
Tata, the chief of Aheefo, is next
in power. The population is esti-
mated at about 10,000. W. long.
174° 46’, S. lat. 21° 9’.

The inhabitants, though superior
to the New Zealanders, are indo-
lent and treacherous ; but not ad-


TON


dicted to human sacrifices and in-
fanticide, as the inhabitants of Ta-
hiti were. For the last 20 years,
the people of this and the neigh-
bouring islands have been engaged
in desolating wars; and it is thought


by the natives, that these sanguin-


ary contests have occasioned the
depopulation of one-half of them.
They believe in the transmigration
of the soul, and that most of the
aunt spirits retire into human


ings.

The L. M. S., first attempted a
mission on this island. In 1797,
Captain Wilson, after settling the
missionaries at Tahiti, visited
Tonga, and left 9 unmarried mis-
sionaries: but this attempt had an
unhappy termination; 3 of the 9
fell victims to the intestine com-
motions and the ferocious disposi-
tions of some of the islanders, in-
stigated by a felon who had escaped
from Botany Bay: one of: their
number apostatized, and became a
chief, and the remaining 6 were
taken off by a vessel, in January,
1800.

Since that period, the difficulties
attending a mission to these islands
have appeared extremely formi-
dable. For several years, a vessel
could not touch here with safety.
In December, 1806, the ship Port-
au- Prince arrived in these seas, and
was treacherously seized by the na-
tives. Of her crew, consisting of
60 men, 26 were inhumanly mas-
sacred, 17 left the island, and 17
remained scattered in the different
islands. Mr. W. Mariner, after 4
years’ residence, made his escape ;
and has furnished materials for 2
interesting volumes, with a gram-
mar and vocabulary of the lan-
guage.

The W. M. S. having deter-
mined, .in 1822, to attempt a re-
newal of missionary labouron these
islands,the Rev.Mr.Lawry,who had
been for some years in New South
Wales, set sail with Mrs. L. and bis

470


compac
It wast


The isla


| . and his
0


TON


associates, and landed at Mooa,
August 17. The Governor furnish-
ed him with cattle and sheep; he
and his companions were received
in a friendly manner by the natives,
and they were taken under the pro-
tection of Palau, the King. After
ashort residence at Tatatamatonga,
they removed to Cokevernal, where
the missionary buildings, d&c. had
been prepared.

In 1623, Mr. L. wrote :—

‘¢ There are in Tonga 19 towns,
and 3 sacred places. Itis at one of
these latter that we reside. 1 think
— are not m8 than 700 souls 7
this: village. e large town o
Hoey is only one mile to the E.,
and the: towns of Holonga and
Vinee are about a mile and a half
to the W. Beside these, there are
Talafoo, Toony, .and Toamoto,
from 6 to 7 miles hence. These
ere all within the reach of the mis-
sionary at Cokevernal. This sta-
tion may embrace, in round num-
bers, 4000 souls. Another station,
exceedingly convenient for a mis-
sionary, is the Bea, which is very
—— and in its vicinity are the

llowing towns; viz. Ootoolow,
Colofoo, Navi, Howma, Noogro,
Noogoo, and Hoorey. The next
district proper for a mission is
Heeheefoo, a very large town, ad-
jacent to which are Tahafa, Fague,

ewcaloffa, and Vado. The peo-
ple are very numerous on that side,
and it. would constitute the most
compact station on the island.
It was here that the missionaries,
26 years ago, erected their Master’s
standard. At each of these 3
stations, there should be 2 mis-
sionaries 3 which, I think, would be
the number sufficient to afford in-
struction to the whole of Tonga,
and to some small islands conti-

ous to it. The beautiful and
ertile island of Eooa lies about 1.
miles east of Tonga, and would be
@ fine station for 2 missionaries,
The islands called Hapie are some


TOR:


of them 80, and others 50, miles
from Tonga, and being many in
number, would probably uire
full as many - instructors. hat
large and fine group of islands,
called by the natives Wavow, is
still further N., and would consti-
tute a larger station than either
Tonga or Hapie.. These all speak
the same language; the Wavow
natives hold intercourse with the
natives of Samao, or Navigator’s
Islands; and the Tonga people
sometimes go as far as the Fiji
Isles. But the -nafives, both. of
Samao and Fiji, speak a dialect not
easily understood by the Tongese.”?

Mr. L. laboured with diligence
until his departure for England,
when the mission was suspended :
but ithas lately been resumed ; other
labourers having been sent forth.

TORTOLA, the principal of the
Virgin Islands, in the West Indies,
12 miles long and 4 broad. It
belonged to the Dutch, who built.a
strong fort, from which they were
expelled by the British in 1666.
The harbour is at the east end of
the island. W. long. 64° 50’,
N. lat. 18° 28’. The number of
inhabitants, in 1805, was 10,500,
of whom 9000 were slaves. The
pee has considerably de-
reased.


In 1788, Dr. Coke, of the
WM, S., commenced. a mission
here ; but owing to the degraded
state of society, the progress was
slow for some years. At length, a
chapel was erected, religion was
respected by all classes, and pub-
licly countenanced by the pence
inhabitants of the island. The
missionaries also extended theirla-
bours successfully into many of the
neighbouring islands. Since the
commencement of the present
century, the average number of
members has been about 2000.
The number, in 1823, was 42
Whites, and 2035 Blacks, As an
expression of enn, aA the


TOR


Wesleyan Society for the labours
of ‘ite missionaries, the expense of
which hes been defrayed by the
people, an auxiliary society was
formed at Road Town for this and
the other Virgin Islands, Aug. 18,
1628, which is patronized by the
Pte. men on the island.

‘sé The state of our society in
Tortola and ‘the Virgin islands,”


the missionaries observe, in 1626, |


s¢ is of so mixed a kind, that it
excites many regrets, while it
furnishes frequent matter of joy.

* Connected with Road Town
chapel are upwards of 1000 mem-
bers. Out of this number, during
che past year, we have been under
the painful necessity of excluding
many 3; nevertheless, we have many
excellent people in Road Town,
who ere walking in the fear of
God. We have witnessed, during
the year, instances of the support-
ing and consoling power of Chris-
tianity, in seasons and circum-
stances of deep affliction; and
‘some of our people have died in
full hope of a better world.

“¢ To characterize our society
at the West End, would be to
repeat the same things. Calls for
the exercise of discipline prevent
an increase of number, but leave,
we trust, @ purer mass.

‘¢ Our society at the Kast Fnd
is become very small, in conse-

uence of the removals of last year.

y removals and exclusions, our
society at Peter’s Islund is also
reduced to a very ‘ little flock.’
We hope they are ‘ working out
their own salvation ;’ but they
labour under great disadvantages,
and we have not been able to give
them adequate attention during the

ear.

me At Jos Van Dykes, the en-
forcements of marriage discipline
has compelled us to cut off a few
members, whose cases had been by
some means overlooked: other-
wise we have no reason to think


~ TRA
that the people are going back-
wards. Affliction has prevented
our visiting them so often as they
ought to have been visited, else it
is probable we might have reported
@ greater improvement among
them. We have similer reports to
-_ of Anagada and Spanish


own.

‘‘ The present number in s0+
ciety in the Virgin Islands, : is—
Whites, 25; Free Coloured and
Blacks, 275; Slaves, 1232: Total,
1632. On trial, 30.”” ;

Schools.—** In our school in
Road Town, we have 73 boys and
84 girls, with 20 adults, under the
care of 17 teachers.

*‘ We cannot re any other
school as being in an efficient


state. The reasons are, a want of |


teachers, and also of that attention
and oversight fromthe missionar!2s,
which, from unavoidable cireum-
stances, could not possibly be given
them.”

TRANQUEBAR, ® populous
seaport, and principal ‘Danish
settlement,in the southern Carnatic,
Hindoostan, with a good harbour,
at the mouth of one of the branches
of the Cavery river, defended by a
fortress erected by the Danes in
1621. The town is between 2 and
3 miles in circumference, | sur-
rounded by a wall and several
bastions. The territory belonging
to the town ‘is of considerable ex-
tent, and is full of populous villages.
Within the walls are 2 churches
for Protestants; 1 for Roman Ca-
tholics, descendants of Portuguese,
who were in possession of the
town before the Danes; a large
mosque for the Mahomedans, and
several pagodas for Gentoos. It is
146 miles 8. by W. of Madras, and
56 S. of Pondicherry, which is the
seat of the Roman Catholic missions
in this: part of Hindoostan. E.
long. 70° 56’, N, lat. 1)° 2.

The first Protestant mission in
India was established at i place

47


native p1
ever, the


fteld of tl


TRA


by Frederick IV. King of Den-
mark, in 1706, in consequence of
the recommendation of one of his
chaplains, the Rev. Dr. Lutkens;
and the Rev. Messrs. Bartholomew
Ziegenbalg and Henry  Plutcho
‘were the first missionaries, Here,
under many embarrassing and dis-
couraging circumstances, they
commenced the study of the Tamul
language, soon formed a grammar
and vocabulary, and engaged in
the arduous work of translating the
Scriptures. In May, 1707, they
baptized 5 natives, the first fruits


TRA


in alj, 3517 converts. In 1747,
the converts, including the children
baptized in infancy, amounted to
8066. In 1750, the Rev. Messrs.
Schwartz, Hutteman, and Polzen-
hagen, joined the mission. During
the first century, the converts to
the Christian faith were estimated
by Dr. Carey at 40,000; and, by
Dr. Buchanan at 80,000,—at all
the branches of this mission. It is
to be feared, however, that many of
these were only nominal Christians,
as the Hindoo converts were not
required to violate the rules of their


of their labours among the heathen, | caste


and erected a chapel. They like-
wise opened several schools. In
July, 1709, the following mission-
aries joined them; viz. Messrs.
Grundler, Boeving, and Jordan.
Soon after the C. K. S. came for-
ward with alacrity and zeal in the
cause, furnished a printing esta-
’ blishment, and, ever since, has been
a principal instrument of supporting
and extending the undertaking.

In 1714, the Danish Mission Col-
lege was founded at Copenhagen ;
and, since that period, this mis-
sion has been the object of its spe-
cial care and patronage.

Principally through the indefati-.
gable labours of the eminent mis-
-sionary, Saeoney a grammar
and dictionary were formed, andthe
Scriptures translated into the
Tamul language. The translation
was completed after his death, in
1719, by Mr. Schultze. His faithful
colleague, Mr. Grundler, died in
the following year; not, bowever,
before 3 missionaries arrived, viz.
Messrs. Schultze, Dal, and Kisten-
macher. ‘In 1783, Aaron, 8 native
convert, was ordained. to the pas-
toral office. He was the first


native preacher ; at this time, how-
ever, there were 24 native converts
employed as assistants in the various


departments of the mission. At
the close of 1736, in the extended
field of the mission, they reckoned,


aste.

About 1772, Dr. John com-
menced his labours here, and de-
voted his time to the instruction of
the young, to prepare them to be-
come assistants to the mission, and
to be otherwise useful. A seminary
has been established for this pur-
pose. In 1810, he commenced the
establishment of free schools in
Tranquebar, and in thesurrounding
towns and villages, on the plan of
Dr. Bell and Mr. Lancaster,which,
in 2 years, he increased to 20. The
number was annually augmented ;
and, in 1815, nearly 2000 scholars
had been admitted, of whom up-
wards of 1000 were then under
instruction. In 1822, the number
of communicants at this station
was 125,

Dr. John died in 1813, and, in
1816, the C. M. S. took charge of
the seminary and the schools.
Their number and usefulness, for
many years, greatly increased,
under the care of the Rev. J. C.
Schnarre. Previous to 1824, 5292
scholars had been admitted; of
whom 1760 were under instruction.

The Rev. Mr. Barenbruck now
regularly edministers the word of
truth. In June, 1826, he reported
that the total number of children
attending the schools, ‘hich are
33 in number, had been, during
the preceding quarter, 1738—
being an increase of 86 on former

ss 2 473


TRA


attendences; and that the number
during the current quarter was 1749.

In the Seminary at this station
there are 14 youths, of whom John
Dewagsaga makes the following
report in October:—

“(Since our last report of the
Seminarists, in October last, two of
them have been promoted; one as
a@ reader, and another as an ds-
sistant to the Seminarist school-
master. Both of them are very

romising youths, and have hi-

erto given us satisfaction, by
their good behaviour and strict at-
tention to their respective duties.
In the daily conduct of the former
we frequently witness an ardent
desire for the salvation of his fel-
low-creatures, and for proclaiming
the love of God in giving us his
only begotten Son. The latter, as
well in respect of his age as his
attainments, is qualified to oecupy
an employment as an assistant
reader, at any time. The other
Seminarists, who are 12 in number,
having ad great advantages since


ourse\..ing here, under Mr. Biren-


bruck’s Instruction, their progress
has been very satisfactory”?

Many pleasing circumstances
have recently occurred at this sta-
tion, which evince the concern of
the natives for the instruction of
their offspring, the desire and gra-
titude of the children themselves,
and the disposition of the gentlemen
resident in that part of the country
to take a warm interest in the
school establishment.

TRAVANCORE, a very popu-
lous country on the S. W. coast of
Hindoostan, separated from the
southern Carnatic by the Ghaut
Mountains, and extending irom
Cape Comorin, about 150 miles, to
Cochin. It Is divided into 30 dis-
tricts, in 2 of which only the Ta-
mul language fs well known; the
Malayim is generally spoken. It
is inhabited by various religious de-


nominations; Christians, Jews, Ma-


TRI


homedans, and Hindoos, worship
according to their different creeds,
without molestation from each
other; and churches, synagogues,
mosques, and pagodas, are inter-
mingled. Impediments to the
progress of Christianity, it is
thought, may be expected from
political rather than from religious
jealousy.

Travancore is chiefly inhabited
by the tribe of Nairs, a caste next
to the brahmins: they are the no-
bility of the country, and the
strictest of all the Hindoos in ob-
serving the rules of their caste.

The Rev. Wm. T. Ringletaube,
of the L. M. 8., commenced his
labours in South Travancore, in
1805, and continued till 1816. He
was stationed at Magilady. He
preached at several neighbouring
places, and occasionally in remote
districts; distributing Portuguese
and Tamul tracts, and superin-
tending schools.

A view of the missions in Tra-
vancore may be obtained by re-
ference to the following articles: —
Allepie, Cotym, Nagercoil, Quilon,
and Trevanderum.

TREVANDERUM, a populous
town in Travancore, Hindoostan,
about 40 miles N.W. of Nagercoil,
and the same distance S.E. of Qui-
lon. For some years, the mission-
aries at Quilon have superintended
a school at this place, and it is con-
sidered highly etigible as a mission
station; next in importance to Co,
chin. It is the residence of the
Rannee, who has uniformly acted
with great liberality towards the
different missions in the country ;
and no doubt is entertained of her
disposition to extend her encou-
ragement to every prudent mission-
ary. Within a circumference of 9
miles, the inhabitants are estimated
at 50,000,

TRICHINOPOLY, a city of
Hindoostan, in the Carnatic, capi-
tal of a fertile district, which was

474


TRI


formerly a principality. It is sur-
rounded by a double wall, with
towers and a ditch; and stands on
the south side of the Cavery, which
a little above divides into branches,
and forms, opposite the city, the
island of Seringham, on which are
two magnificent pagodas. It is 27
m. W. by N. of Tanjore. E. long.
78° 60’, N. lat. 10°50’.

In 1766, the Rev. C. F. Schwartz,
from the C.K.S., was appointed
to preside over the missions then
recently established at this place.
He employed 8 or'9 catechists un-
der him in the extensive field, which
opened here and in the adjoining
country. He removed to Tanjore,
about 1778; and left the care of
the mission to the Rev. Christian
Pohle, who continued till his death,
in 1818, and was succeeded by Mr.
Rosen, Previous to 1776, Mr.
Schwartz received 206 converts
from heathenism ; to the number
of ‘whom almost annual additions
haye been made. In 1819, there
‘were 169 communicants, of whom
37 were English, 24 Portuguese,
and 108 Tamul.°

On Sunday, the 2d April, 1826,
the morning after his arrival at Tri-
chinopoly, Bishop Heber preached
at St. John’s church (the govern-
ment church, which bad been con-
secrated by Bishop Middleton) with
all his accustomed animation; and,
in the evening administered con-
firmation to 42 candidates, and de-
livered his charge to them with
something more than his ordinary
impressiveness and affection of
manner, “On the following morn-
ing, at day-break, he attended
divine service in the Tamul lan-

uage, atthe mission church in the
ort, and confirmed fifteen natives,
in their own tongue. He inapected
the schools and the mission house,
and received an address from the
poor Christians, earnestly praying
that he would send some.-pastor.to.


™RI


‘watchover then. d instruct them.
He answered them with all: that
gentleness and kindness of manner
which never failed to win every
heart;:and assured them that he
would immediately provide for their
wants. 4 A

*¢ There is a church in the fort,”
says the Rev. Thos. Robinson, in
1626, capable of ‘‘ containing 1500
or 2000 persons, but requiring
considerable repairs; and a house
for the residence of the missionary,
with small school rooms for Tamul
and English. The present number
of the congregation is 490 persons;
and it is melancholy to find this
number annually decreasing, en-
tirely from the want of a resident
European missionary, and the ne-
cessary establishment of catechists
and schoolmasters, for -which the
funds have hitherto been ‘utterly
inadequate ; the whole inconie of
the mission appears to be about 30

ees per month. There can
hardly be desired a field of greater
promise than this interesting con-
gregation. Labourers only are
wanting to make it realize, to its
fullest extent, the hopes of its
first founder, and of its last friend,
(Bishop Heber). It was his lord-
ship’s intention. to place here a
resident missionary, with as little
delay as possible; and to make
other arrangements for its future
prosperity.”? These intentions, it
appears, will not be altogether frus-
trated. An appeal made by Mr.
Robinson to the liberality of the
British inhabitants of Trichinopoly,
was nobly answered on the follow.
ing morning, when a meeting was
convened at the church for this
object.

TRINCOMALEE, a large town
on the N. E. coast of the district of
Jaffna, Ceylon, 70 miles N. E. of
Kandy.It bas one of the safest and
best harhours on the island, capable
of vontaining 1000: vessels. The

475


TRI


country around is barren, and the
air unwholesome. E. long. 81°17’,
N e lat. g° 32’ ry :

-In 1822, the W.M. 8. had a
chapel here, 13 members, and 4
schools, containing 304 scholars.
In January 1821, the first native
convert was baptized. By the last
accounts, the number in the schools
appears to have been greatly re-
duced; that of persons in society


is 8. ;
TRINIDAD, an island in the
West Indies, near S. America, se-
parated from Tobago by the Strait
of Trinidad, 90 miles long, average
‘breadth about 30; belonging to
the British. It contains about
40,000 inhabitants, a large portion
of whom are Roman Catholics.
Port of Spain is the principal town.
’ The W.-M. S. commenced a
mission here in 1788. Members,
in 1823, 145. - Restrictions which
formerly retarded the progress of
the mission have recently been re-
moved, and the missionaries are
now patronized by the legislature
aud many of the planters. Scho»i:
have been established; and the pro-
spect of future usefulness among
the slave population is very encou-


raging. .

‘¢ Port of Spain,’ the mission-
aries remark, in 1826, ‘is our prin-
cipal settlement. Our congregation
here has suffered a reduction during
the rebuilding of the chapel. The
society continues stedfast, and a
few are casting in their lots with
us—filling up the places of those
who are gone to join the church

“‘ The Quarters of Arima and
Tacarigua.—In each of these quar-
ters we preach every other Lord’s
day ; but we have no society in
either place, and our congregations
are very limited, owing to the want
of a proper place of worship: at
present we preach in the houses of
the proprietors.’’


-TRI

“The Quarter of Diego Martin.
—Here we visit an estate every
other Lord’s day. ‘There are about
170 n upon it, all from the
island of Tortola, This people are
not in a good state, which may be
owing, in a great measure, -to their
removal ;-all their jittle establish-
ments having been broken up,: and
new ones were to be effected under
circumstances of difficulty. . How-
ever, to whatever cause their reli-
gious declension is attributable,
they seem to have. little spirit to
pursue the things of God; appear-
ing almost as indifferent to the
things of this life, as they are un-
concerned about eternity. On this
estate we have nochapel; and as it
is a place where our prospects are at
present beclouded, we use negro
hats, or auy other place, until cir-
cumstances of a more auspicious
aspect shall arise. We now go
down the Gulf of Paria, and Ca-
rapichaima, Cagjacul, Savanetta,
Point a Pierre, and South Napa-
rima, are the quarters in which we
have gained partial openings dur-
ing the year.’ In these quarters
the great mas: of the negro popu-
lation of the island have their lot;
and yet there is not a minister of
any denomination to shew to them
the way of salvation. We have
formed a smail society in Carapi-
chaima, and could form others in
Casjacal and Naparima; but these
places lie so far from Port of Spain
and from each other, that we have
been able to attend them only par-
tially; and with but two mission-
aries this year, we shall not be able
to visit them oftener than once a
quarter. We are satisfied, after
mature reflection, that a settlement
in the quarter of Cava has also most
pressing claims.on the consideration


.of the committee.


'“ Schoole.—A great decrease
has “aken: place in, the number of
our scholars and teachers. This is

476


visits.
and gales a
the buildi:
sequence
the missio
difficulties
surmounte
Mr. Vo:
with unab
though wit
consequen
advancing


9 popu-
heir lot;


deration


decrease
mber of

This is
16


TUL


an occurence which it has not been
in our power to prevent, and may
be. traced to a variety of causes,
We have, however, yet, a few
scholars, who have continued to
attend tolerably well. up to the
present time. This affords us con-
siderable pleasure; as they have
manifested, . by their attendance in
unfavourable circumstances, an
attachment to the school, which we
trust will not only remain, but-in-
crease; and which, .by the blessing
of God, will, we hope, be over-
ruled to their spiritual welfare in
time and in eternity. This hopeis
encouraged by the pleasing fact,
that 7 of the senior scholars, viz.—
4 girls and 2 boys, are now on trial
for admission as members into the
society, Scholars—60 females and
10 males ; total 60.”

The L. M. S. has hed 3 stations
on this island; but from various
causes they have, of late, been re-
linquished.

TULBAGH, a town. of Cape
Colony, 8, Africa, in Tulbagh dis-
trict, about 100 miles N. E. of Cape
Town. After labouring success-
fully at Rodezand, and in the
vicinity, among the Christians,
Hottentots, and slaves, for 10 or
16 years, the Rev. Ariel Vos, of
the L. M. S., was stationed at this
place. The beneficial effects of
his labours here and in the vicinity
are very apparent among the Hot-
tentots and others; and also in the
wide extent of country which
forms the sphere of his itinerant
visits. In 1822, desolating rains
and gales almost entirely demolished
the buildings in Tulbagh ; in con-
sequence of which, the progress of
the mission was retarded. These
difficulties were, however, at length
surmounted. ;

Mr. Vos couitinues his labours
with unabated zeal and delight,
though with diminished activity, in
consequence of the feebleness of
advancing age. The various reli-


TUP


gious services, for the benefit of
the heathen, are -well attended,
and many of the people make good
progress in divine knowledge. The
monthly prayer-meetings, in parti-
cular, for free persons and slaves,
are frequented with much interest,
On Mr. V.’s missionary tours, of
which be performed six during the
year 1826, his congregations often
amount to between 150 and 200.
They consist of colonists and per-
sons of colour, who are generally
very attentive; while not a few ap-
pear to listen with deep feeling.
Mr.V «states, that, to the bestof his
knowledge,: all the adults who,
from time to time, have been bap-
tized by him, adorn their profession
by an irreproachable conduct.
Among those to whom, during the
past year, the rite of beptism was
administered, is a Mosambique
slave, whose piety appears to be of
the most decided character,

In the school at Tulbagh there
are some who read. well; but Mr.
Vv. Apsnamia io maine mate aoe
sequence 0: requent and long
absence from home, on his mission-
ery tours, the scholars, in general,
make comparatively small progress.

UPUAI, one of the Islands of
Raivaivai, situated about 500 m.
southward of Tabiti.

The names of the teachers of the
L. M. S. who labour here, are
Huapanie and Samuela, whom Mr.
Davies found, with their wives, in
good health, when he visited this
place in J826. While on the
island, he preached twice to re-
markably attentive and apparently
intelligent congregations, and bap-
tized 38 adults, with whose prompt
and appropriate answers to
questions proposed to them on the
occasion he was much gratified.
He heard both of the principal
chiefs, Tamatoa and Tahuhu, read
in the Tahitian Gospels, and speaks
highly of the manner in which they
acquitted themselves. aa


TUS


TUSCARORAS, .a remnant of
the Six Nations of the Indians, re-
siding in Tuscarora village, 4 m.
E. of. Lewiston, Niagara County,
New York, about 3 m. from Niagara
River, and 4 from its mouth, ad-
joining New Stockbridge. The

ndians are about 300 in number,
and hold a considerable tract of
land, which is well cultivated.

y are nominally Christians,
and considerably advanced in civi-
lization,

The New York Missionary So-
ciety employed the Rev. E. Holmes,
in 1800, among the Indians in the
western part of New York, who
met with a very cordial reception
from the Tuscaroras, and the next
year returned and commenced a
permanent mission among them.
He was patronized by Government,
who made provision for a'school-
house’ and meeting-house. After
a few years, Mr. H. was succeeded
by the Rev. A. Gray. In 1817,
the Rev. J.C. Crane was employed
by the same society ; and continued
in their service till January, 182),
when the mission was transferred
to the United Foreign Missionary
Society. In 1823, Mr. Crane re-
signed the charge of the mission,
and the Rev. D. Smith, of Lewiston,
was appointed a temporary supply.
The mission farm comprises about
140 acres, with a good house, barn,
and orchard, occupied by an ex-
emplary farmer. They have also
a house for the accommodation of
the mission, and a school in the
centre of the Tuscarora village.

The faithful labours of the mis-
sionaries at this station have
evidently been attended with a
Divine blessing, and have been
instrumental of much good, in
meliorating both the temporal and
spiritual condition of this people.
They live in comfortable dwellings,
have, in a great measure, aban-
dloned.the chase, and depend upon
the produce of the soil for. their


VAL


principal support. They-generally
regard the Sabbath, and attend
public worship regularly with de-
corum and solemnity. Schools
have been taught by the different
missionaries. Some of the youth
have made considerable proficiency
in the elementary branches‘of an
English education, and discover an
increasing desire for improvement.
In the early part of 1824, there
was a regularly organized church
of 21 members.


V.


VALLEY TOWNS, in the
upper part of the Cherokee country,
situated on the Hiwassee River, in
the S. E. part of Tennessee. In
this part of the nation are from
6:to 8000 Indians, among whom
the A. B. B. F. M., in 1818, com-
menced a mission. The mission-
aries cultivate 70 acres of land,
and have ‘several buildings. © The
mission property is valued at 4000
dollars. ere: is a flourishing
school,: limited to 50. scholars.
There is another school at: Notte,
16 miles distant. Several Indians
have -been baptized by the Rev.
T. Roberts, who was formerly su-
perintendent at Valley Towns, and
is now agent’ for the mission. In
1820, there was a small school at
Tinsawatta, about 60 miles S. E.
of Valley Towns, connected with
this mission.

-VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, a
fertile island in the Southern
Ocean, separated from New Hol-
land by Bass’ Straits ; 170 m. long
‘by 180 broad; between E. long.
145° and 148°, and S, lat. 40° and
43°, The climate is healthy. The
European inhabitants are about
10,000 ; many of whom are con-
victs, banished from England for
their crimes, and given to almost
every .vice ‘which debases ~ the
human character. ae

4


wander j


and lodge
their fires,
make no
except as
necessity,
idea of ¢
Though th
witnessed
and pursui
have made
original bar
English
counties o
Cornwall.
the S. E.
which Hob
is situated ;
side, at |
Macquarie
side, . incor
banished.
The Wes
ployed. seve
island since
extensive c
the English
members of
to which .
have been |
are the. mo:
their procee:
Hobart
society is ye
ground to bi
state is imp
members ha
and some of
been stirred
increase of
movals, how
reduced our 1
» © Qur con
numerous}; y
that the bea
ing have, for
very encoura;
As to. our
Glass-meeting
attended, and


VAN


wander in the interior, and are
among the most wretched of the
human species. Their complexion
is black ; they wear no clothing ;
and lodge in all seasons, around
their fires, in the open air. They
make no provision for the body,
except as they are impelled by
necessity, and appear to have no
idea of God or a future state.
Though they have, for several years,
witnessed the superior comforts
and pursuits of civilized men, they
have made no advances from their
original barbarism. The principal
English settlements are inthe
counties of Buckinghamshire and
Cornwall. The former comprises
the S. E. part of the island, in
which Hobart Town, the capital,
is situated ; the latter is on the N.
side, at Port Dalrymple. To
Macquarie Harbour, on the W.
side, incorrigible . offenders are
banished.

The Wesleyan Society has em-
ployed several missionaries on this
island since 1820, who have formed
extensive circuits, chiefly among
the English. They found a few
members of the Methodist Society,
to which considerable additions
have been made. The following
are the most recent accounts of
their proceedings:— ..

“© Hobart Town Circuit.—The
society is yet feeble, but there is
ground to believe that its spiritual
state is improving. Several new
members have joined the classes,
and some of the old members have
been stirred up to press alter an
increase of grace. . Various re-
movals, however, have somewhat
reduced our numbers.

. Our congregations are seldom
numerous; yet it should be stated,
that the bearers on Sunday morn-
ing have, for some time past, been
very encouragingly on the increase.
As to. our prayer-meetings and
class-meetings, they are pretty well
attended, and are not unfrequently


VAN


times of refreshing from the pre-
sence of the Lord. ;

‘¢ There are four out-stations,
viz. Glenarchy, Clarence Plains,
re og Point, and Sandy Bay.
At the two places first mentioned,
the men continue to be mustered
regularly, The number. of hearers
is from 20 to 80, most of whom
are Government servants. At
Kangaroo Point, the attendants are
chiefly composed of a few aged men,
and a small number of young chil-
dren. Sandy Ray is visited by our
local brethren only. The average
number of hearers is about 12.

“© With respect to the schools in
Hohart Town, they have been
united since the occupation of our
new chapel, and will henceforth be
only one. The teachers, as a body,


have. exerted themselves well;


absentces have been sought after
with vigilance and perseverance.
And hence the attendance of the
children is encouraging; and as
the school has lately received from
London a good supply of suitable
books (of which there was before
a deficiency), I trust something
more cheering will ere long deve-
lope itself.’? ited
VANS-VARIYA, a settlement
in Bengal, Hindoostan, 30: m. N.
of Calcutta, and 60 S..of Cutwa.
In 1813, several natives of this
place were baptized by the Buptist
missionaries at Serampore. Pre-
viously to their knowledge of the
missionaries, they had obtained
copies of the Scriptures, renounced
idolatry, and assembled together
for divine worship. Two native
teachers, Tarachund and Mut?-
hoora, under the superintendence
of the Baptist missionaries, have
supported themselves by their own
industry, and have laboured here
successfully for the benefit of the
natives. Mut’hoor taught. a


school, in which many of the pu-
pils.were so well instructed in
Christianity, as to be able to refute
- 479


VEP


the arguments of idolaters, and to
explain the Scriptures with much
intelligence.

VEPERY, avillagenear Madras,
Hindoostan, where the C. K. S.
has laboured since 1727, and has
now 2 missionaries.

The annual examination of the
schools took place Dec. 24, 1625:
the Tamul school had 64 boys and
47 girls; the English classes con-
sisted of 140 boys and 77 girls.
The examination afforded great sa-
tisfaction to those present, among
whom were some persons of dis-
tinction.

VINCENT, ST. one of the
Caribbee Islands, lying 55 m. to
the W. of Barbadoes. It is inha-
bited by Caribs, a warlike race of
Indians, between whom and the
aborigines of the larger islands
‘ there is a manifest distinction.
They are conjectured to have been
originally a colony from North
America ; their fierce manners ap-
proaching nearer to those of the
original natives of that continent,
than they do to that of South Aime-
rica, and their language also hav.
ing some affinity to that spoken in
Florida. St. Vincent was long a
neutral island ; but, at the peace of
1763, the French agreed that the
right to it should be vested in the
British. ' The wot soon after,
engaged in a war against the Ca-
ribs, on the windward side of the
island, who were obliged to consent
to a peace, by which they ceded a
large tract of land to the crown.
The consequence of this was, that
in 1770, they greatly contributed to
the reduction of this island by the
French, who, however, restored it
in 1783, St. Vincent is 14 m. long
and 10 hroad ; a ridge of mountains
passes along the middle through its
whole length, the highest of which,
called Souffrier, is at the N. ex-
tremity. From this mountain, in
1612, after the lapse of near a cen-
tury, proceeded a dreadful erup-


VIN


tion, by which the island was ene
veloped in a chaotic gloom for 3
days, and wholly covered by show-
ers of volcanic matter. - King-
ston is the capital.

Mr. Clarke, who accompanied
Dr. Coke to the West Indies, com-
menced a mission on this island, by:
opening a school among the Caribs,
and the legislature gave an estate
for the support of the institution ;
but the Catholic priests soon ex-
cited a jealousy among the people,
which rendered it necessary to re-
linquish the mission. Among the
negroes they were more successful,
and soon collected a flourishing so-
ciety. In 1793, the Colonial Go-
vernment passed an act prohibiting
the missionaries from preaching to
the negroes, under the penalty of a
fine for the first transgression, cor-
poreal punishment and banishment
for the second, and death for the
third. This restriction was, how-
ever, of short duration; as the
King of England disallowed the
act, as inconsistent with the prin-
ciples of toleration. Since that
period, no material impediment has
been thrown in the way of the
mission. Por more than 20 years,
the average number in society has
exceeded 2200. In 1823, there
were 2904.

“In reporting the state of this
circuit,’? the missionaries say,
* notwithstanding various hin-
drances to the prosperity of this
mission, during the year 1826, the
Lord has been pleased to crown
our humble but united endeavours
to extend religious instruction to
many hundreds by whom we are
surrounded, far beyond our most
sanguine expectations. This good
work has not been exclusively con-
fined to the negro ep om 3 but
many respectable free persons of
colour, both male and female, old
and young, have felt the saving in-
fluence of the Gospel, and have
joined the society. a we


VIN


hope, will prove ornaments to:re-
ligion, by becoming : extensively
useful :in ‘this large-and growing
part-of thechurch of :Christ.': Gur
chapels are numerously attended in
every ‘pi rt of the Circuit, and our
cause is evidently increasing in im-
portance, both at the windward and
leeward part:of ‘the island. ~ °

‘“ We’ ‘have’ ‘also attended, ‘for
some time past, to a small ‘village
called:Calliaqua, about 3 miles‘and
a half from ‘Kingston, ‘and have
been so ‘far encouraged as to. con-
tinue our. ‘labours, ‘in the hope that
our masons A visits will be accompa-
nied by: the Divine blessing,’ and
that this little town will become a
central preaching place for many
negtoes'of the neighbouring estates.
Our ‘congregations are, in this
oneeaeieal and attentive; and we

ope to'sée a chapel built. Our
nambers insociety are—13 Whites,
64 Free-coloured, 124 free Blacks,
and 3277 Slaves. Total, 3478.” -

Schools. On this island we
have four Sunday-schools; one in
Kingston, one in’ Prince’s Town,
one at Chateau- Bellair, and one-at
Layon.. The school in Kingston
is by far the most important, and
at present assumes a very pleasing
aspect. Many respectable young
people of colour, who have re-
cently joined themselves to the so-
ciety, have offered their services as
teachers, and are very diligent in
the great work of instructing the
rising generation in the rudiments
of our holy religion. Peace and
unity prevail among the teachers,
and a good degree of prosperity has
crowned their labours. In this
school we have 204 children; 98
boys and 106 girls.”

“ The school in Prince’s Town
is attended to every Lord’s day, as
well as that in Kingston, and is
more or less under the superintend-
ence of the resident missionary, —
which is an advantage the other
country schools do not possess,


ViZ


Many’ 'of ‘the children can read
well; and all of them, ‘as well as
the teachers, are regular in ‘their
attendance. © Number of children
in the school, 58—20 boys and 33
girls; and & teachers—! ‘male and
4 females.”

~The schools at Chateau- Bei.
lair and’ Layon, are small; and as
they cannot be attended’ to more
than ohee'a fortnight, are fer from
being so en Nab as we could
wish. Notwithstanding all the care
of the missionaries, e schools
have decreased in the year 1626;
but we hope they will soon be re-
vived again, as the teachers are far
from bya etd At Cha-
teau-Bellair we have 28 children—
15 boys and 18 girls. At Luyon
we have 26 children—1!0 boys and
16 girls. So that we have 4 schools,
—311 children; 143 boys and 168
girls, ' Besides these, the mission-
aries catechise, in different parts of
the island, 636 slave children, be-
longing to estates. ”’

TRGIN ISLANDS, a cluster

of smail islands, W. Indies, E. of
Port Rico, belonging’ to different
Buropean powers}; extending about
70 m. from E. to W., and 36 from
N.toS. [See Crotx St.,' Jan St.
Thomas St., Tortola.]
' VIZAGAPATAM, a town in
the Circar of Cicacole, ‘on the
coast of MS a Mgr 483
m. NE. of'M » and 667 8.W.
of Calcutta, Itis a large civil and
military station, containing about
20,000 inhabitants, with many con+
siderable villages in the vicinity.
Near the town is'a large pagoda,
dedicatzd to monkeys; which abound
in the neighbourhood, E, long.
83° 24’; N. lat. 17942’,

In 1806, the Rev. Messre. Cran
and Des Granges, of the L. M. S.,
arrived here. Besides acquiring
the Telinga language, which is
unde over a very extensive
country, they preached to Euro-
peans residing in the a and

TT 48


VIZ


performed the office of chaplain in
the fort, for which they received a
monthly allowance from govern-
ment. They also established
schools, and taught the natives in
their own language. In 1808, they
obtained a very important assistant,
in Anundarayer, a converted brah-
min. But scarcely had they en-
tered on the most important part of
their missionary work, when they
were both unexpectedly removed
by death; Mr. Cran in 1809, and
Mr. Des Granges the following
year. The latter, with the assist-
ance of Anundarayer, had trans-
lated the Gospels of Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, into the Telinga,
which have been printed by the
Baptist missionaries at Serampore.
Messrs. Gordon and Lee joined the
mission in 1809, Mr. Pritchett
-about 1811, and Mr. Dawson in
1815. About 1818, Mr. Pritchett
completed the translation of the
New Testament, and superintended
the printing of it at Madras, ander
the patronage of the Calcutta B.
S. After the completion of this,
till his death, in 1820, he was em-
ployed in the translation of the Old
Testament, in which he had made
considerable progress. In 1823,
Mr. Gordon was carrying forward
the version of the Old Testament,
and Mr. Dawson was superintend-
ing 5 native schools. Since the
New Testament has been circu-
tated among the natives, and.pub-
licly read and explained to them,
an increasing interest has bee ex-
cited in favour of Christianity.
The Native Schools have re-
cently been increased to 12, and the
scholars to 625. They continue to
inspire in the missionaries a lively
hope of many among the now rising
generation at Vizagapatam even-
tually becoming Christians. The
progress of the scholars is very en-
couraging ; their prejudices, gene-
rally speaking, are abating, and
their acquaintance with Christia-


WAR.


nity increasing.  Scarcely a day
passes in which some circumstance
does not transpire indicative of the
beneficial influence of. religious in-
struction upon their hearts ; and
some of the elder boys not unfre-
quently ask questions, which. the
most sagacious brahmins find
themselves unable to answer.

Such is the repute in. which the
schools are held, that many: more
would forthwith be established;
were the means of support and of
efficient superintendence within the
reach of the missionaries.

A Gooroo not long ago, having
discovered the second command-
ment in one of the books used in
the.school, employed his influence
in removing several .of the boys
from the school to which they be-
longed; . their places, however,
were soon filled up by others.

An English lady, resident at
Vizagapatam, to whom the mission-
aries ure under many obligations
for the kind aid she has rendered to
the mission, has taken the native
girls’ school, superintended by the
late Mrs. Dawson, under her own
immediate charge, together with
two other: native girls’ schools
situated in the fort.

The (€..M. S. supports a flou-
rishing English, school here, for
the benefit of the children of Euro-
pean invalids, who would otherwise
be neglected. The school was
opened in 1819, by Mr. Church,
then chaplain at the station, and
who was highly useful among: this.
class of people.


Ww.


WARM BATH, formerly a sta-
tion of the L. M. S.. in Great Na-
maqualand, S. Africa, near the
Orange R. about 500 m. N. of
Cape Town.

t was commenced about 1805,
; 482


openec
In 182
was fo
were c
The
Mrs. V
attende
duties.
teacher
selves,


y a sta-
bat Na-
ar the


WAT .


by the Rev. Messrs. C. Albrecht,
A. Albrecht, and J. Sydenfaden,
who laboured among the neigh-


bouring savages with considerable.


success, ‘till 1810; when Mr. A.
Albrecht died: and, soon after, the
missionaries were. plundered and
driven from ‘their settlement by
Africaner, at that time, the terror
of all this part of Africa ; but,
afterwards, a Christian teacher at
Afvicaner’s Kraal. In October,
1808, the congregation had in-
creased to 700; and some months
after, it is stated, that the number
of names on the church books
amounted to about 1200, including
men; women, and children. Of
these about 300 resided at Warm
Bath ; the rest lived in the vicinity,
and some ata considerable distance.
Several became hopeful subjects of
renewing grace. In 1811, the
station was removed to Pella, in
Little Namaqualand, with about
600. of the Namaquas.
WATERLOO, a town of libe-
rated negroes ‘and disbanded A fri-
can soldiers, in the parish of St.
Michael, E. part of Sierra Leone
Colony, W. Africa, near the head
of the Bunce River, bordering on
the Timmanees, about 18 m. S. E.
of Freetown. This settlement was
commenced in 1819. Population,
in 1822, 647, of whom 16 were
communicants. The town is well
laid out, and the houses are rather
superior to those in the other vil-


lages. ,

In 1820, the C. M. S. come
menced a mi*sion here; large
farms were cleared, and schools
opened with encouraging prospects.
In 1823, a Missionary Association
was formed; and about 26 dollars
were collected.

The Rev. J. G. Wilbelm and
Mrs. Wilhelm have for some years
attended here to their respective
duties. There being no European
teacher at this station besides them-
selves, the care of the schools de-


WEL


volves on them, in which they are
assisted by Henry Steady.

The Ministry of the word has
been regularly attended to; but Mr.
W. gives a melancholy account of
the body of the people, who have
been very considerably increased by
accessions from captured slave ves-
sels. He writes at Michaelmas,
1826 :—‘‘ The greater part of the
inhabitants not only keep them-
selves purposely ignorant of the
worship of Jehovah, and the way
of salvation, but clandestinely op-
pose what is good.’’

The average number of commu-
nicants is about 16, and their con-
duct becomes their Christian pro-
fession. An Ebo man, whe had
been baptized in May, was admit-
ted among the communicants at
Midsummer.

By the returns of the Schools, it
appears that. there hus been a con-
siderable accession of scholars
from slave ships. The numbers
hg as follow :—Boys, 108; girls,

6


The Mediterranean press will
here find a new vent for its valuable


labours.

WELLINGTON, a _ town of
discharged African soldiers and
their families, in the parish of
Arthur, E. side of Sierra Leone
Colony, W. Africa, commenced in
1819. Population, in, January,
1822, 547, of whom 351 were men.
At the same date, John Sandy, .
native teacher of the C. J. S., was
placed here, and prosperous schools
were opened. '

This station, in the present des.
titute circumstances of the mission,
is, with Kissey, under Mr. Metz-

er’s care, On his removal to

issey, in the Midsummer quarter,
the immediate charge of Weilling-
ton was committed to Wm. Tamba,
He is assisted in the boys’ school
by Henry Jobnson, while Mrs,
Macfoy continues to take charge
of the girs, as


WES


Mr.: Metzger preaches: at. Wel
lington every. Sunday evening, and
dhe people cantinue to. attend very
numerously, He has appointed. a
few; pious and experienced men to
take charge,- each. of a suitable
number ,of persons, .whom they
meet. at) fixed, times, to warn, di-
rect, and encourage them as there
sway: be: occasion. ; A

Mr. .M.; administers the Lord’s
Supper. once. a month. The ave-

-Yage number of communicants is
108 ; 13, adults have been baptized.

As regards the attendance.on di-
vine. service on the. Sunday morn-
ing, Mr.: M.. says—‘‘:It-still. con-
tinues to bear an encouraging’ ap-
pearance. - There are. as many as
our temporary grass-house can hold,
although enlarged since last rains,
On Sunday afternoons, and on week

. days, we have, on an average, 200
adults; they are at all times ap-
parently attentive. There are 33
on trial; some of, them will soon be
admitted to. the ordinance of bap-
tism. The communicants, who
ate 108 in number, continue stea-
dily to attend at the Lord’s supper;
and they manifest a pleasing cor-
diality towards each other, und a
consistent conduct on the whole,’’
At Lady Day, 1826, there were in
the school— Boys, 121 ; girls, 75.;

WEST INDIES, islands in the
Atlantic, extending from Surinam,
S. America, to the:coast of Flo-
rida, between N. Int. 10° and 28°;
and W. long. 68° ‘and 86°, They
belong to various ‘European na-
tions, but principally to the English
and Spaniards. The inhabitants
are estimated at about 2,000,000,
of whom about three-fourths are
slaves,

The missions of the United
Brethren were commenced in
these islands in .1782, those of the
Methodists in 17683; since which
time several other societies have
supported missionaries here. In

1824, the United Frethren had no


WHA


less than 28,000 negroes. under in-
struction,; in, 1826,.the; Methodists
had £7,358 members in society, of
whom 876 were whites. . |
./ [See dnguilla, Antigua, Baha-
mas, Barbadoes, Bartholomew St.,
Chri her Sts Dominica; Eus-
tatia St):
maica, Martin St... Montserrat,
Nevis, Tobago, Trinidad, Vincent
Sty Virgin: lands.} ,
WHANGAROOA, a: town of
New. Zealand, on the E.-coast, S.
of the Bay. of Islands.; .Here the
Wesleyan: mission was commenced
in June; 1823. ..1t was established
in ‘a;:beautiful and’ fertile, valley,
now denominated Wesleydale, and
situate about 7 m. from the mouth
of .a: river, which empties; itself
into.the. harbour of. Whangarooa,
and about 20 W. from Kiddee Kid-
dee, the nearest settlement of the C.
M.. S. in the Bay of Islands. A
substantial. and commodious dwel-
ling-house, together with :a barn,
Carpenter’s shop, and various other
out-buildings,had been erected. An
excellent and productive ; garden
had been formed; which with a
plat, cultivated for .wheat, com-
prised about:4 acres. The whole
premises were surrounded by a good
fence ; and constituteda respectable
specimen, of English ciyilization
in the midst of a barbarous people.
The natives who .resided:in the
valley amounted to near. 200, and
were Called the: Ngatehuru tribe :
they were headed by several chiefs,
of whom the principal was Tepui.
At a distance: of 5. miles. dwelt
another tribe, called the Ngatepo ;
which contained 600 or 700 souls.
To these two tribes the; missiona-
ries directed their labours. Having
made some proficiency in the lan-
guages they regulurly employed the
abbath, and as much of their time
on the other rt of the week as
could be spared from other occupu-
tions, in communicating to them
Christian instruction, A school
484


Grenada, -Hayti, Ja- .


down y
is deser
people,’
andof s
and was
of numb
who hac
at the

departur


chiefs,
Tepui.
dwelt
atepo 5
souls.
iona-
aving
lun.
red the
r time
pek as
cupas
them
school


_ WHA
was aiso established, which was at-
tended: daily by about 20 youths:
8 of these had learned to read and
write their vernacular tongue ; and
on their minds, as well as on ‘the
minds of many of the adult popu-
lation, the truths of God have been
assiduously inculcated, and, in sonie
cases, received with much apparent
interest,

** We. began,”? say the mission-
ariés, referring to these results,
“to be gteatly ‘encouraged in
our work; a good deal of the
most fatiguing and disagreeable
part of-our undertaking had been
accomplished, and we entertained
lively hopes of increasing and per-
manent prosperity. This cheering
prospect has, however, by a mys-
terious dispensation of Providence,
been suddenly darkened, and our
pleasing anticipations, at least for
the present, blighted.”

Shunghee, it.appears, had been
driven almost to a state of despe-
ration by a variety of circumstances,
and he resolved to abandon the spot
which had been the scene of them,
and where he was perpetually re-
minded of their occurrence. Thus
chafed and irritated, however, there
was much reason to dread, that
wherever he might remove, there
war and bloodshed would accom-
pany him. In Jan. 1827, some
men of his tribe came to the
station, saying, on their business
being asked—‘‘We are come to
take away your things, and burn
down your premises ; for your place
is deserted, and you are a broken
people”? ‘The work of plunder
and of spoliation soon commenced,
and was cafried on by an increase
of numbers; until the missionaries,
who had resolved not to leave, but
at the last extremity, took their
departure, and with heavy hearts
directed their course towards Kid-
dee Kiddee, the nearest station be-
longing to the Church mission;
where, after excessive toils and


WHA


appalling dangers, they at length
found a friendly asylum. They
subsequently learnt, that on the ar-
rival at the mission settlement, of
the Shuke-angha party, whom they
had actually met to their great
alarm when fleeing to Kiddee Kid-
dee they had driven away the first
plunderers who belonged to Shung-
hee’s party, and who were able to
catry off only the more portable
part of the booty; and that they
had seized the remainder them-
selves; that they had returned to
Shukeangha the following morning,
loaded with the spoils; that the
mission premises, together with
about 100 bushels of wheat in the
straw, which had just before been
deposited in the barn, were com-
pletely burnt to ashes; that the
cattle, of which there were eight
head, the goats, poultry, &c. were
all killed ; that the heads and feet,
and other parts of the stock, were
lying strewed about upon the
ground, mixed with other articles
which the robbers did not think
worth their while to carry away ;
that, not content with what they
found above ground, thesebarbarians
had dug up'the body of Mr. Turner’s
child, which had been interred a
few months before, merely for the
sake of the blanket, in which they


supposed it was enveloped; and


that they had Jeft the corpse of the
tender babe to moulder on the sur-
face of the earth,-a monument of
their relentless cruelty. ‘ These
men also informed us,’? say the
missionaries, ‘ that Shunghee was
not dead, but that he had been
shot through the body; that’ the
ball, having broken his collar bone,
and passed in an oblique direction
through the right breast, had come
out a little below the shoulder
blade, close to the spine ; and that
after his return from purauing the
Ngatepo, his principal wife, Turi,
wihtes heroism and judgment were
much admired, and whose abilities
TT2 486


WHA
m ‘war! were ‘so surprising; ‘that
notwithstanding her blindness and
other infirmities of age, she:always.


accompanied ‘her | husband in his |!


fighting ‘enterprises, had died -at
Whangarooa. ‘ On:-the 19th, some
natives arrived ‘at Kiddee Kiddee,
in. a canoe, from the .S.:E. ‘past
of the island; who-reported that
the news © of: Shunghee’s: mis-
fortunes was receiyed there with
every expression ‘of joy and tri-
umph, - such ‘as'singing and danc-
ing, which were kept up with-
out intermission night and day ;
and that, in case ‘of. his. death; a
very large body might:be: expected
at'the Bay of Islands, to’revenge
the atrocious’ injuries which he had
inflicted upon them. This evening
. letter ‘was received by:the Rev.

Henry: Williams, from Capt. Hurd,
of the New Zealand: Company’s
ship, the Rosanna, then: lying at
Shukeangha, ‘in which the Captain
very kindly expressed the deep
eoncern that he felt on hearing of
our disasters, ‘and generously of-
fered to accommodate us with a
passage to Sydney, ‘and to render us
any other assistance that lay: in his
power; such kindness, manifested
by a stranger, under circumstances
so peculiarly ‘trying as ours were,
excited in our: bosoms the live-
liest emotions of gratitude and re-

ect? -
-' ©The Church missionaries con-
sidered their situation -in New
Zealand as.so:precarious that they
shipped: about 20 tons of ‘goods:on
board the Sisters, to be conveyed 'to
Sydney; and,’ of the rest, what
was of any value, and not: required
for immediate use; they either
buried under ground, or deposited
on board a vessel inthe harbour.
They adopted these precautionary
measures, to secure what might be
requisite for their voyage: deem-
ing it not improbable that they
should be compelled to flee to Port
Jackson ; and fearing that, if the


WHA


‘natives:should suddenly come upon
‘them, they. would, like us, be
. Stripped of: every thing.”


“* On: Wednesday, the 24th, a let-


 ter'was received from. Mr.Clarke, of


Kiddee Kiddee, stating, that some


messengers, who had been sent to


Shunghee, had brought intelligence
of his being likely to-yecover, and
of his having almost utterly de-
stroyed the Kaitangata tribe, who
resided on the ; western sid@ of
Whangarooa Harbour ; their state-
ment was, that only 10 .0f the
unhappy tribe. were supposed to
have escaped; that old Matapo,
the chief, who was the principal
actor in plundering the brig, Mer-
cury, was among ‘the slain.;. that
Shunghee’s advice to the mission-
aties at Kiddee: Kiddee was, to re-
main on their station while he lives,
but to flee to their own country as
soon as he dies; that the contest
in that quarter had been brought to
a close ;, and that the natives were
dispersing to their respective places
of abode. The head of Matapo
was, ‘a few days afterwards, exhi-
bited on a pole at the Bay of
Islands, as a trophy of Shunghee’s
success.

‘When: we left New -Zealand,
which was on the 28th of January,
a very large party, led by the Chief
Tarria, was laying in Kororadika
Bay, which is on the E, side of the
Bay of Islands, . This was so for-
midable a body, that when they
were making: toward the Sisters,
Captain Duke thought it expedient
to fire two 6, pounders over their
heads,: to. deter them from ap-
proaching. Their real views were
not. known; but their leader,
Tarria,. is one of those chiefs who
had threatened the Pyhea. tribe;
considerable alurm was, therefore,
felt in that quarter.

‘“* We forbear to express our
opinion as to what may be the
result of this tumultuous state of
things ; though we cannot but fear

4 486


statio
N.E. :
In Ma
baptiz
childre
nicant
adult si
childre
irregul
Mr.
mence
The co
is larg


but fear


WIL


that ‘the: immediate consequences
will be ‘disastrous. However, we
beg it-to be distinctly understood,
that our: mission- to New Zealand,
though suspended, is by no means
abandoned... _While we are not
blind. to the difficulties which. at
present. obstruct. its. progress, we
are ‘convinced that it may yet be
prosecuted with rational hope. of
extensive and lasting usefulness.”? |
‘Mr. Marsden-writes on the 7th of
March, 1827, that he-wasen the
point of sailing from port Jackson,
in H. M. S. Rainbow, on a visit to
New Zealand ; in order to: render
advice and assistance in the criti-
cal state of affairs. [See New Zea-
lund. |
: WILBERFORCE, a: town of
Africans, in the parish of St. Paul,
Sierra’ Leone: colony, .W. Africa,
formed ‘in 1817,- by the union of
Bassa; Congo, and Cosso. Towns.
In January 1822, the inhabitants
were 596;::0f whom 365 were
liberated slaves, 116 Kroomen, and
the rest other natives. “Hy


In 1817, the C. M. S: commenced :


‘this station. The ‘Rev. H. C.
Decker reported, in 1821, that 70
adults had been baptized, ‘and that
there were 40 communicants, most
of whom walked according to the
Cospel, and 90 scholars. At the
same time, a spirit of inquiry gene-
rally prevailed. A missionary as-


sociation has been formed. No,


report has lately been received.
WILKS’ HARBOUR, a mission
station of the L. M.8., on the
N.E. side.of the island of Tahiti.
In May 1822, 323 adults had been


baptized at this station, and 193:


children: there ‘were 73 commu-


nicants, 28 candidates for baptism ; |


adult scholars, from 100 to 150; and
children, whose attendance was
irregular, from 60 to 200,

Mr. Pritchard has recently com-


menced preaching in Tahitian. |
The ——: on the Sabbath, |


is large. he several week-day


meetings are also, in general,
well attended. The English ser-
vice, for the benefit of the seamen
belonging to ships in the harbour,
is continued, and the congregation
which assembles on those occa-
sions is usually considerable. A
new and commodious chapel, with
extensive galleries, erected at this
station, was opened for public
vane on the 28th of December,

26.

The. attendance of the children
at the school is, unhappily, very
irregular. Mr. Pritchard has com-
menced an English and Tahitian
Dictionary, which he hopes will
afford considerable facilities for the
acquisition of the latter language.
The natives, beside completing the
chapel, have built a good dwelling
house for the missionary. _

. The number baptized, from Nov.
1825, the time:of Ms. Pritchard’s
settlement here, up to May 1826,
was 74... The members! of the
church;, amounted, at the latter
period, to 208. -Of, the baptized,
many are desirous of entering into
church. fellowship.

: WEILLSTOWN, .a Cherokee
village, within the chartered limits
of Alabama, about 50 miles S. W.
of Brainerd. The Revi Mr. Cham-
berlain, of the A. a CG. F. M.,
visited. the people of this settlement,
Dec: 10, 1822, and found them
anxious for a school. . They soon
erected buildings for | the school
and family ; and Mr«C. removed
his family from Brainerd to this
place in March following. A small
school was commenced on:the 12th
of May. A church: bas been


organized, and public. worship is


attended by. a considerable number
of natives, who hear with serious-
ness.. A larger:ndmber of Che-


} rokees in this. place understand


English, than in most other places
in the nation. Mr. C.:itinerates
in different parts of the Cherokee
country.

487


YOK


re


YOKENA CHUKAMAH, re-
cently called Goshen, a station of
the 4.B. C.F. M., in the state of
Mississippi, among the Choctaws,
about the centre of the Six Towns,
116 miles S, by W. of Mayhew, 50
W. by N. of Emmaus, and 25 from
the southern limits of the nation ;
commenced in August, 1823. A
prosperous school has been opened,
and a church organized. The po-
pulation for 10 miles round, is
thought to be more dense than in
any other part of the nation ; but
they are in gross darkness, and live
very miserably, though there are
some marks of industry. -

YORK; a town of liberated
‘Africans, in the parish of St.
Henry, Sierra Leone colony, W.
Africa, on the Whale river, near
its mouth, about 10 miles N. of
Kent. Population about 500. This
town has been supplied with
preaching mostly from the neigh-
bouring settlement. In 1822,
about 40 were admitted to com-
munion. This station, which is
under the care of Henry Chris-
tian, a native teacher, has been
visited by the Rev, Mr. Gerber.
There is among the people a hun-
gering und thirsting after the word
of God, which promises well for the
future labours of a missionary, if
one could be placed among them.
The number of communicants at
Christmas, 1826, was 84. There
were in the schools at Lady-day,
72 boys ; and 3) girls had been re-
moved hither from the Bananas.

The wife of a discharged sol-
dier, who attended several times
the meetings of one of the co-
loured people at Freetown, be-
came powerfully convicted by the
word of God, and determined to
spend her remaining days to the
glory of God ; in which determina-
tion she has several years con-


ZAK
tinued. After her return to York,
she tried to persuade her husband
(who, according to his own con-
fession, lived a very wicked life
before) to follow her example;
after her patience had been greatly
exercised, her prayers in this be-.
half were answered: he not only.
became a sincere follower of the.
Lord himself, but began to entreat
his.countrymen to flee from the:


‘wrath to come: he is about 50


years of age, and lame; he could
neither read nor write; but from
his anxiety to read the word of
God, he has, within a short time,
improved himself so far as to be
now able. to read a little in the
New Testament.

He has built a small neat grass
house, in which he holds a meet-
ing every morning at 5 o’clock,
and also in theevening. The pre-
sent number of both men and
women, who have joined with him
to follow the Lord, is 29; of whom
the greater part walk consistently
with their profession, and are, ac-
cording to the testimony of Mr.
Johnstone, the superintendent, the
best. of the. inhabitants. These


people, in particular, desire a mi-,


nister to be sent among them.


Zz.


ZAK RIVER, 4 or 500 m.
N.E. of Cape Town, South Africa,
on which a station was formed by
the L. M.S.

In May 1799, Mr. Kitchever and
his colleague, Mr. Edwards, left
Cape Town, and arrived on the
6th of August, at a spot near the
Zak River, where they agreed to
take up their abode. The cir-
cumjacent country was barren and
thinly inhabited, but the place at
which they felt inclined to-settle
was evidently adapted for cul-
tivation, and was contiguous to
two fine springs of water. Here,

488


dexteri


’ tain, and solemnly devoted both:


_ Sick, for hours together.


ZAK


therefore, they began: to prepare a
plot of ground for a garden, and
to erect a hut’ ‘eds, no timber:
being within their reach. To this!
humble settlement they gave the
name of Happy Prospect Foun-


the :place and themselves to the
service of the Lord.

Of the’ natives .among: whom
the brethren were now to labour,
Mr. Kitcherer: observes— ‘ They
have no idea. of a'Supreme Being, |
and, consequently, they practise no
kind of worship... They bave a su-


perstitious: reverence, however, for | |


an insect: known by the name of
the creeping leaf, a sight of which
they: consider as an indication of
something fortunate, and to kill
it they suppose will bring ‘a curse |
upon the perpetrator. They have,
also, some notion of ‘an evil ‘spirit,
which occasions diseases and other
mischief ; and to ‘counteract his
evil purposes, a certain descrip-
tion of men/are appointed to blow
with @ humming: noise over the


' 6 Their mode of life is extremely
wretched and disgusting. Utter
strangers to cleanliness, they never
wash their flesh, but suffer the dirt’
to accumulate, till, in some in-’
stances, it literally: hangs from :
their elbows.: They delight, how- |
ever, in smearing their: bodies with |
the fat of animals, mingled with
a powder which gives them a:
shining appearance. They form
their huts by digging a hole about
three feet deep, and then thatching
it over with reeds, which are not,
however, impervious to the rain.
Here they lie: close to each other,
like pigs in a sty; and they are so
extremely indolent, that they will
remain for days together without
food, rather than take the pains to
procure it. When constrained, by
extreme hunger, to go out in quest
of provisions, they evince much
dexterity in destroying the various


‘animals with which their country
abounds 3: or, if they do not: happen
to procure any of these, they make
a shift:to live upon snakes, mice,
and almost any: thing they can
find. There are,  also,:some pro-
ductions of -the earth, of the bul-
bous kind, whieh they: occasionally
eat, particularly the cameron,
which is as large as a child’s head,
and the daro0, about the sizeof an
apple.: There are, likewise, some
little berries, which are edible, and
which the women go out'to gather ;
but the men are too idle to do this.
‘¢ Fhe men: have’ several‘ wives,
but. conjugal’ affection is: little
known, and they are total strangers
to domestic happiness. «They take
little care of their children, and
when they correct them, they
almost kill them by severity. In
fact; they will destroy their off-
spring ‘on a variety of ‘occasions,
as.when they are in want of food,
or obliged to flee from the farmers,
or when an infant happens to be
ill-shaped, or when the: father has
forsaken the mother. -In any of
these cases they will strangle them,
smother them, bury them alive, or
cast them away in the desert.
There are even instances of pa-
rents throwing their tender off-
spring to the hungry lion, which
stands roaring before their cavern,
refusing to depart till some peace-
offering -be given to him. In
general, ‘the children cease to be
the. object: of -maternal care as
soon as they are able to craw! in
the field. They go out every morn-
ing; and, when they return in the
evening, a little milk, or a piece
of meat, and an old sheep’s skin
to lie upon, are all they have to
expect. In some: few instances,
however, @ spark of natural affec-
tion is to be met with, which
places its possessor on a level with
the brute creation.

“ The bushmen frequently forsake
their aged relations, when removing


nN


ZAK


from. place to pluce, for the sake |
of hunting. In this case, they
leave the old person with a piece
of meat, and an ostrich egg-shell
full of water. As soon as this lit-
tle stock is exhausted, the poor de-
voted creature must perish by hun-
ger, or become a prey to wild
beasts.’?. ,

Soon after their arrival at Zak
River, the missionaries were vi-
sited by a party. of about 30 bush-
men, who were anxious to under-
stand the object of their settlement.
At. first, however, they were ex-
tremely shy ;:and in consequence of
some base slanders, which had been
propagated among them, they were
induced to fear that the brethren
had some design against their li-
berty or their lives. Asa proof of
their mistrust, it is stated, that on a
’ certain occasion; Mr. Kitcherer,
hoping to. conciliate the affections
of these wild Hottentots, invited
a number of them to partake of a
little repast which he had provided.
Having cut: up a large cake, he
presented a piece to each of the
busbmen, but not an individual
ventured to taste it. On perceiving
this, and guessing that they were
apprehensive of poison, the mis-
sionary took a slice of the cake
himself, and ate it before them.
He then stated, that he had called
them together to assure them of his
friendship, and to inform them that,
as they were all invited to eat of
one cake, there was one Saviour,
called the bread of life, of whom
Hottentots, as well as others,
might freely partake, in order to
obtain eternal life, This explana-
tion removed every evil surmise,
and Mr. Kitcherer’s token of love,
was received by every individual
with evident satisfaction.

From this time the number of
bushmen who visited the mission-
aries increased considerably ; and
Mr. Kitcherer observes, that he felt
inexpressible pleasure whilst at-


ZAK


tempting to explain to these poor
and perishing creatures the infi-
nite grace of the Lord Jesus; so
that though le began his work with
a heavy heart, he frequently .con-
cluded it with joy and exultation.
When the bushmen were first told
of a God, and of the resurrection
of the dead, they knew not how to
express their astonishment in terms
sufficiently strong, that they should
have remained such a length of
time without one idea of the Crea-
tor and. Preserver of all things.
Some of the people now began to
pray with apparent earnestness, and
with the most affecting simplicity.
“QO Lord Jesus Christ,’ they would
say, ‘‘ thou hast made the sun, the
moon, the hills, the rivers, and the
bushes; therefore thou hast the
power of changing my heart: O,
be pleased. to make it entirely
new!” Some of them asserted,
that the sorrow which they felt on
account of their sins prevented
them from sleeping at night, and
constrained them to rise and pour
out their souls in supplication before
the Lord; and they declared that
even in their hunting expeditions
they sometimes felt an irresistible
impulse to prostrate themselves be-
fore the throne of grace, and to
pray for a renewed hea:t. Some
of them, indeed, seem to have had
interested views in their profes-
sions, and to have displayed, as
Mr. Kitcherer expresses it, ‘‘ much
pharasaical ostentation ;’’ but there
were some others, whose language
was evidently that of Christian ex-
perience, and who manifested, by
their conduct and conversation, that
they had become the subjects of a
divine change.

Soon after this occurrence, Mr.
Kitcherer was invited to become
the minister of the Paarl, a rich
village near the Cape, with a hand-
some church. Alter matuse de-
liberation and earnest prayer,
however, he was led oy aaa
4


possib|
and th
enable
marks
they sk
his. spe
tion th
the tot,
pastor,
One
named
Mary a
to accc
Europe
Englan
fication


ZAK:
se poor


1e infi- ; tom his attention to the heathen
sus ; sO ' rather than a Providential call to a
rk with station of greater usefulness. And
ly. con- from this time his labours amon
Itation. : the bushmen were crowned with
irst told 4 such remarkable success, that he
tection Observes, « Many persons, whose

how to | hearts had been harder than. the
4 téims j Tocks among which they lived, be.
should gan to inquire what the
eth. of to be saved $ and it frequently hap-
e Cren- 4 pened that the hills literal] ence ;—

things, sounded with their loud complain “ What pity *tis, what sin *tis,
egan to Mr. Kitcherer had for so at you have so many years got
ess, and entertained: the thoughts of visit- | that heavenly bread, and hold it for
plicity. ing Europe, partly with a view to yourselves, not to give one little bit,
y would the settlement of some domestic | one crumb to poor heathen ! There
un, the concerns, and also with the desi are so many millions of heathen, and
and the of Consulting the directors of the | you have so much bread ; ‘and you
st:.the | L, M.S. on the best meastres to | could depend upon

rt: O, be adopted in future, Accordingly,

ntirely On the 17th of January, 1803, he

serted, ‘took leave of his congregation,

felt. on with an assurance that he would

vented endeavour to return in about 12

ht, and months. The scene exhibited on | h

d pour this occasion was deeply affecting

| before some of the peopie express-

ad that ed an apprehension that it was

ditions ' On account of their Suilt, and be-

sistible Cause the ad not sufficiently

ves be- prized the Gospel, that their be

and to loved minister was now to be re.

Some moved from them 3 Others, eager]

ve. had Stasping his hands and weeping bit-

profes. terly, declared they found it im-

ed, as possible to consent to his departure

¢ much and those who were in some degree

it there enabled to restrain the external

nguage marks of their Stief, declared that

ian ex> they should unremittingly pray for every

ed, by his. speedy return, under a convic«

yn, that tion that they should never survive

te Ofk the total loss of such a friend and work more and more ‘

: pastor. in dust at his feet, to put on his

e, Mr. One of the male Hottentots, | head crown of glory. © when you
ecome named John, and 2 females, called know in what situation Hottentot

a rich Mary and Martha, _ Were permitted were, then you willhave mor com-

| hand. to accompany their instructor ty passion for them; and when yo

ve des Europe ; and on their arrival in

rayer, ngland, they afford ;


onsider


a


ESA A EEN EOD, A ECE II


ZAK


assistthem. I thank English nation,
that sent missionary to us; but
pray they may not neglect, but go
on; because Lord open door, and
so many thousands know not Lord
Jesus., We pray for them, and do
all we can to help Missionary ,So-
ciety, and. we shall see the Lord
will bless it. I go to far land, and
shall never see this people no more
in this world; so people of Gad,
farewell. I shall meet you again
before the throne of glory. And
people that know not God, I admo-
nish them to come. to Jesus; then
we shall all meet.at right band of
God. Last thing I say—O pray
Sor poor heathen.”

Mr. Kitcherer now paid a visit to
his friends in Holland,. where he
was detained a considerable. time.
On the 2ist of October, 1804,
however, he sailed from the Texel
with the Hottentot. converts, and
some new missionaries, and arrived
at the Cape of Good. Hope.on the
19th of Jauua.y, 18065, .

On his return to Zak River, Mr.
K. found his congregation in: a
yery dejected and. wretched situa-
tion,, in consequence of:a long con-
tinued drought, and. the robberies
committed by the. bushmen.
«* Many of the people,” says Mr.
K. “* had been already comyelled
to take refuge in another place,
and the remainder seemed ready to
perish for want of every necessary
of life. We used our utmost en-
deavours-to keep our dear congre-
gation together, on a spot which
had been formerly so much bless-
ed, but all our efforts were in vain;
and our prospects became darker
and darker; so that neither cattle
nor corn could be procured at any
price, and it was impracticable. to
send to a distance for provisions, on
account of the plundering bush-


ZAN


men, who had already murdered 2
of our baptized Hottentots.*’

Whilst the concerns of the set-
tlement were in this situation, Mr.
K.. was providentially appointed to
the living of Graaf Reynet, which
he accepted on condition of his
being still considered as a mission-
ary of the: London. Society; and
thither he was-followed by the
greater: part of his congregation,
who either took up their abode in
the village, or were placed with
different families in the vicinity, as
servants.or labourers; so that they
were gradually inured to habits of
industry, whilst they retained the
important privilege of still hearing
the Gospel. from the lips. of their
beloved pastor, |

ZANTE, an island in the Medi-
terranean, about 12 m. long by 6
broad. .It is the most southern
and the most fertile of the Ionian
Islands, and for its size the most
populous. .: Inhabitants 40,000;
chiefly.of the Greek church. This,
with 6 other islands in the vicinity,
form 8: yepublic, which was put
under: the protection of Great
Britain in 1815. The town of
Zante is the largest in the Seven
Islands, and. contains 16,000 inha-
bitants,

The Rev. I, Lowndes, of the
i. M. S.; was stationed here in
1819,:and removed to Corfu in
1822, asamore eligible place for the
establishment of a mission for these
islands, the principal object of
which is to awaken the members of


| the Greek ‘church ‘to religious in-
| quiry, and to promote ‘the circula,;


tion of the Scriptures in modern
Greek. . Previous to his removal;
he nearly ‘completed a Lexicon in
modern Greek and English, and
translated Mason on. Self-Know-
ledge. -


THE END.


G. Duckworth, Printer, 76, Fleet Street.


murdered 2
tots.??

; of the set-
uation, Mr.
ppointed to
ynet, which
tion of his
3a mission-
ciety; and
red by the
ngregation,’
ir abode in
laced with
vicinity, as
0. that they
‘0 habits of
etained the
till hearing
ps. of their


1 the Medi-
long by 6
t southern
the Ionian
e the most
s ~§640,000;
rch. This,
he vicinity,
h was put
of Great
e town of
the Seven
},000 inha.


es, of the
id here in
Corfu in
lace for the
n for these
object of
nembers of
ligious in-
1e circula,
mn modern
; removal;
.exicon in
slish, and
21f- Know-
