»R  6015 
.015  T4 
1910 
Sopy   1 


THINGS 

CONCERNING 

HIMSELF 


"Things  Concerning 
Himself" 


SACRED   SONGS   AND 
BIBLE   STUDIES 


By 
ADA  R.  HABERSHON 

Author  of 

'The  Study  of  the  Types,"  "The  Bible  in  the  British 
Museum , ' '  Etc. ,  Etc. ,  Etc. 


New  York 

FLEMING  H.REVELL   COMPANY 

158  Fifth  Avenue 


.  A  I "5  T4- 

1^10 


Copyright  1910 

BY 

Charles  M.  Alexander 


International  Copyright  Secured 


The  whole  of  the  poems  contained  in  this  volume  are  print- 
ed by  permission  of  Charles  M.  Alexander.  They  are  copy- 
righted throughout  the  British  Empire  and  the  United  States 
of  America.  They  must  not  be  reprinted  without  the  written 
permission  of  the  owner. 


CCLA280166 


3 
AN   EASTERN   SHEPHERD. 


k 


"He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd,  He  shall  gather  the 
lambs  with  His  arm,  and  carry  them  in  His  bosom. 

Isaiah  xl.  2. 


An  Eastern  shepherd  led  his  sheep, 
o  Towards  a  river's  brink, 

,But  when  they  saw  the  stream  was  broad, 

Their  hearts  with  fear  did  shrink; 
And  though  the  shepherd  went  across, 

In  view  of  all  the  sheep, 
They  did  not  dare  to  follow  him, 
And  ford  the  waters  deep. 
» 

And  so  he  took  a  little  lamb, 

Right  from  its  mother's  side, 
He  clasped  it  in  his  shelt'ring  arm, 

And  with  it  crossed  the  tide. 
The  mother  missing  what  she  loved, 

Was  eager  now  to  gain 
The  distant  shore,  that  she  might  find, 

Her  precious  lamb  again. 

She  quickly  made  her  way  across, 

And  soon  the  stream  she  passed, 
And  other  sheep  soon  followed  her, 

Till  all  had  crossed  at  last. 
She  found  the  lamb  which  she  had  lost, 

Within  the  shepherd's  care, 
And  he  had  used  her  little  one, 

In  leading  many  there. 

Oh  mother  has  your  little  lamb 

Been  carried  on  before? 
The  Shepherd  wants  to  have  you  too, 

Upon  the  farther  shore. 
And  so  He  clasped  your  treasured  one, 

Unto  His  shelt'ring  breast, 
That  you  might  come  and  seek  it  there, 

And  find  in  Him  your  rest. 


4 
ARE  YOU  PRACTISING  HIS  PRESENCE? 


"And  there  I  will  meet  thee;  and  I  will  commune  with  thee 
from  above  the  Mercy-seat." — Exodus  xxv.,  22. 

Are  you  practising  the  presence  of  your  Saviour  and 

your  Lord? 
Do  you  love  to  hear  Him  whisper  some  sweet  promise 

from  His  Word? 
Do  you  find  it  very  precious  oft  to  come  apart  awhile? 
Do  you  seek  your  choicest  blessings  in  a  life  beneath 

His  smile? 

Are  your  lives  so  full  of  hurry,  that  you  scarce  have 

time  to  spend 
E'en  a  little  quiet  season  with  the  One  who  calls  you 

m   "friend?" 
It  is  good  to  meet  His  servants,  but  to  feel  the  Master 

near, 
Is  more  blessed  than  communion  with  our  friends — 

however  dear. 

We  shall  surely  greatly  wonder  when  we're  called  to 

see  His  face 
That  we  did  so  seldom  seek  Him  at  the  Father's 

throne  of  grace, 
That  we  chose  the  busy  camp-life  and  the  thronging 

tents  around 
When  we  might  have  sought  His  presence  in  the  place, 

where  God  is  found. 

He  has  told  us  we  may  enter  by  the  new  and  living 

way, 
That  because  the  blood  was  offered  all  our  sin  is  put 

away; 
So  we  hush  the  heart  in  silence  as  we  let  the  Master 

speak 
And  we  know  that  He  is  granting  just  the  very  thing 

we  seek. 


THE  LAND  OF  ANSWERED  PRAYER, 


"I  love  the  Lord  because  He  hath  heard  my  voice  and  my 
supplications." — Ps.  cxvi.}  1. 

We  are  exiles  still  from  the  Home  we  love, 

In  the  country  bright  and  fair, 
But  are  learning  lessons  of  patient  trust 

In  the  land  of  answered  prayer. 

There  will  be  no  pain,  there  will  be  no  tears, 

All  is  sunshine  over  there, 
But  we  learn  to  know  what  a  Friend  we  have 

In  the  land  of  answered  prayer. 

In  the  days  of  trouble  and  earthly  grief 

To  our  Refuge  we  repair, 
And  we  find  our  Lord  is  a  present  help 

In  the  land  of  answered  prayer. 

We  shall  often  think  in  the  da}'s  to  come 

Of  the  sorrow  and  the  care, 
And  the  way  in  which  every  need  was  met 

In  the  land  of  answered  prayer. 

We  shall  see  His  face  in  a  little  while, 

And  His  glory  we  shall  share, 
But  shall  not  regret  all  the  lessons  learnt 

In  the  land  of  answered  prayer. 

When  we  leave  behind  us  the  rugged  road 

As  we  meet  Him  in  the  air, 
We  shall  see  how  good  was  the  way  He  led 

Through  the  land  of  answered  prayer. 


6 
THY  WILL  BE  DONE. 


"Thy  will  be  done." — Matt,  xxvi.,  42. 

These  words  have  been  used  so  much  in  connection  with  sor- 
row and  trial  that  we  are  inclined  to  forget  that  God's  will  for 
us  is  to  give  us  the  very  best,  and  to  make  us  happy.  We  shrink, 
it  may  be,  from  the  thought  of  yielding  unquestioningly  to 
His  will  lest  that  will  should  mean  something  hard  to  bear,  and 
yet  we  are  told  that  if  we  yield  He  finds  our  service  acceptable, 
and  we  find  His  will  acceptable.  (Rom.  12:  1,  2.)  The  words  "all 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God"  are  al- 
most invariably  applied  to  the  things  that  do  not  seem  good  at 
the  time,  but  they  are  just  as  true  of  the  glad  surprises,  the 
pleasures,  the  enjoyments  He  gives.  If  we  delight  to  do  His 
will,  we  shall  soon  find  His  will  delightful. 

Thy  love  our  Father  day  by  day, 
Has  strewn  new  joys  upon  our  way, 
Thy  goodness  makes  it  sweet  to  say 
Thy  will  be  done. 

How  oft  have  we  misjudged  Thy  will, 
And  thought  that  Thou  with  grief  would'st  fill, 
it  is  such  rest  to  trust  Thee  still, 
Thy  will  be  done. 

How  bright  our  path  with  heaven's  own  light! 
It  groweth  ever  still  more  bright, 
The  joy  Thou  sendest  must  be  right, 
Thv  will  be  done. 

What  wondrous  gifts  Thou  dost  bestow, 
As  more  of  Thee  we  learn  to  know, 
And  evermore  it  will  be  so, 
Thy  will  be  done. 

Upon  the  cross  our  Saviour  bled, 
That  joy  might  ever  crown  our  head, 
It  was  in  agony  He  said 
Thy  will  be  done. 

He  took  for  us  that  bitter  cup, 
No  dregs  remain — He  drank  it  up, 
From  blessing's  chalice  I  may  sup, 
Thy  will  be  done. 


1 

THY  WILL  BE  DONE  (Continued). 

Thou  grantest  us  Thy  peace  and  rest, 
In  Thy  sweet  service  we  are  blest, 
It  is  Thy  will  to  give  Thy  best, 
Thy  will  be  done. 

Thy  will  is  far  beyond  our  thought, 
And  is  with  perfect  blessing  fraught, 
The  echo  of  heaven's  song  we've  caught, 
Thy  will  be  done. 


A  BETHANY  SONG. 


'Now  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and  Lazarus." 

John  xi.,  I 

Oh  favoured  home  of  Bethany, 
To  which  our  Lord  repaired, 

Where  Martha  and  her  sister  lived, 
And  for  His  comfort  cared; 

There  Martha  first  received  her  Lord, 

And  Mary  learnt  to  love  His  Word. 

When  sorrow  entered  that  fair  home, 
It  was  to  Him  they  turned, 

His  heart  knew  all  about  their  grief, 
And  over  them  He  yearned. 

In  loving  sympathy  He  wept, 

Then  waked  their  brother  as  he  slept. 

In  Bethany  they  made  a  feast, 

In  honour  of  their  Lord, 
And  he  who  had  been  raised  from  death, 

Was  seated  at  the  board; 
And  Martha  gladly  once  more  served, 
The  One  who  all  their  love  deserved. 

Then  Mary  poured  upon  His  head, 
Her  box  of  ointments  rare, 

And  by  the  perfume  that  escaped, 
Men  knew  that  He  was  there, 

The  costly  spices  love  did  bring, 

Revealed  the  presence  of  her  King. 


8 
DARKNESS  AND  LIGHT. 


"The  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  them." 
"The  sun  was  darkened." — Luke  ii.,  9;  xxiii.,  45. 

In  the  fields  around  the  city, 

Where  the  shepherds  watched  their  sheep, 
Lo  there  flashed  a  light  from  heaven, 

In  the  midnight  of  earth's  sleep. 
Myriad  angels  trod  the  ladder, 

Which  united  earth  and  heaven, 
And  they  told  a  wondrous  story, 

"Unto  you  a  Son  is  given." 

On  the  hill  without  the  city, 

Crowds  surround  a  cross  of  shame, 
And  the  mid-day  sun  is  hidden, 

None  can  see  that  suff'ring  frame. 
'Twas  as  though  earth's  deed  of  darkness, 

Had  eclipsed  the  sun's  bright  face, 
Nature  owned  its  great  Creator, 

Dying  for  a  fallen  race. 

At  His  advent  midnight  brightness, 

Was  the  herald  of  His  birth, 
At  His  dying  mid-day  darkness, 

Veiled  the  sunshine  from  the  earth. 
When  He  comes  in  all  His  glory, 

Darkness  then  will  flee  away, 
As  the  sun  in  splendor  rising, 

Floods  the  waking  earth  with  Day. 

Oh,  the  brightness  of  that  moment, 

When  the  sorrow  all  is  past, 
And  the  world,  no  more  in  darkness, 

Gladly  owns  her  Lord  at  last! 
There  will  be  no  evening  shadows, 

Telling  of  approaching  night, 
For  that  Day  will  have  no  ending, 

Christ  our  Lord  will  be  the  Light. 


9 
FROM  EVERLASTING  TO  EVERLASTING. 


"But  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  from  everlasting  to  everlast- 
ing|upon  them  that  fear  Him." — Psalm  ciii.,  17. 

When  we  mount  the  heights  of  glory, 

What  a  scene  will  meet  our  gaze, 
As  we  view,  spread  out  before  us, 

All  the  beauty  of  His  ways. 
Like  a  distant  panorama, 

All  the  wonders  will  unfold, 
We  shall  look  on  far-off  vistas, 

Of  His  purposes  of  old. 

Yonder  lofty  sun-lit  mountain, 

Rising  out  of  endless  space, 
Marks  where  first  He  chose  His  people, 

As  the  objects  of  His  grace; 
Then  we  see  a  long  dark  shadow, 

Like  a  valley  wrapt  in  night, 
Where  the  clouds  of  sin  and  sorrow, 

Hid  the  sunshine  from  earth's  sight. 

But  a  nearer  peak  of  glory, 

Soars  above  the  valley's  shade, 
Leaving,  far  below,  the  sorrow, 

And  the  darkness  sin  had  made. 
From  the  distant  hill  of  glory, 

God  could  look  across  the  gloom, 
He  could  see  the  brighter  summits, 

Rising  up  beyond  the  tomb. 

Time  is  but  a  streak  of  shadow, 

Drawn  across  immensity, 
'Tis  a  short  though  gloomy  valley, 

Which   divides  eternity; 
When  we  view  it  from  His  presence, 

See  the  sin  and  sorrow  past, 
Then  the  sunshine  will  seem  brighter, 

For  the  shadows  that  were  cast. 


10 
THE  LIFE  MOST  LIKE  HIS  OWN. 


"Know  ye  not  that  they  which  run  in  the  race  run  all,  but 
one  receiveth  the  prize?    So  run  that  ye  may  obtain." 

J.  Cor.  ix.,  24. 

Hast  thou  found  that  earth  grows  dreary? 

Does  it  seem  a  lonely  place? 
Surely  it  must  ever  be  so, 

To  the  winners  in  the  race. 
As  with  quickly  hastening  footsteps, 

They  outstrip  men's  slower  pace. 

When  the  eagle  leaves  its  eyrie, 

As  it  soars  toward  the  sun, 
Does  it  fly  with  many  others? 

Nay — they  mount  up  one  by  one. 
Wait  on  Him  and  He  will  give  thee, 

Strength  to  mount,  to  walk,  to  run. 

Many  throng  the  Temple  precincts, 
Multitudes  may  crowd  the  door; 

Some  together  pass  the  threshold — 
And  there  might  be  many  more; 

But  alone,  within  the  Holiest, 
We  must  enter  to  adore. 

'Tis  the  place  of  highest  honour, 

For  we  learn  His  secrets  there, 
And  in  holy  separation, 

In  His  sufferings  may  share; 
And  though  few  perchance  will  join  us, 

Nothing  can  with  this  compare. 

Be  not  then  cast  down  or  saddened, 

If  thou  dwellest  much  alone, 
They  who  walk  with  God  must  often 

Other  fellowship  disown, 
And  the  life  of  isolation, 

Is  the  life  most  like  His  own. 


11 
THE  GLORY  SIDE. 


'Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suffered  these  things,  and  to  enter 
into  His  glory?" — Luke  xxiv.,  26. 

He  stood  in  Joseph's  garden, 

Beside  the  empty  tomb, 
For  He  had  done  with  dying, 

Had  passed  through  death's  dark  gloom. 
He  stood  in  living  power, 

Had  taken  back  His  life, 
Rejoicing  in  His  conquest, 

He  viewed  the  finished  strife. 

He  saw  perchance  on  Calv'ry, 

The  cross  where  He  was  nailed, 
He  saw  the  shaded  garden, 

Where  agony  assailed. 
He  gazed  upon  the  city, 

Which  He  had  so  much  loved, 
The  citizens  who  slew  Him, 

Within  the  walls  still  moved. 

But  on  that  Easter  morning, 

With  Mary  at  His  side, 
He  knew  the  work  was  finished, 

The  work  for  which  He  died. 
His  heart  was  ne'er  so  joyous, 

Since  first  He  came  to  earth, 
As  when  in  resurrection, 

He  trod  His  land  of  birth. 

We  too  may  stand  beside  Him, 

And  know  that  death  is  o'er, 
For  we  with  Him  were  raised, 

And  live  to  die  no  more! 
To  this  glad  place  He  brings  us, 

We  live  because  He  died, 
We  see  the  depths  of  suffering, 

But  from  the  glory  side. 


12 


GIVE,  BE  ALWAYS  GIVING, 


"Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you:  good  measure,  pressed 
down,  and  shaken  together,  and  running  over,  shall  men  give 
into  your  bosom.  For  with  the  same  measure  that  ye  mete 
withal,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again." — Luke  vi.,  38. 

Would  you  receive  good  measure, 
Pressed  down  and  running  o'er? 

Then  give,  be  always  giving, 
From  out  your  Father's  store, 

And  men  into  your  bosom, 
A  full  return  will  pour. 

For  with  the  self-same  measure 

Which  you  to  others  mete, 
It  will  return  with  increase 

When  they  the  gift  repeat; 
Your  bread  upon  the  waters, 

Again  you'll  surely  meet. 

If  we  are  always  giving 

We  more  and  more  receive, 
For   constant   overflowing, 

No  empty  void  doth  leave ; 
He  always  gladly  gives  us 

Far  more  than  we  receive. 

Would  you  be  like  your  Master? 

God's  wondrous  gift  is  He, 
You  have  received  so  freely, 

Your  gifts  should  be  as  free ; 
He  gave,  He  gives,  and  will  give 

To  all  eternity. 


13 


LORD,  TEACH  US  TO  PRAY. 


"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." — Luke  xi.,  1. 

This  verse  is  generally  quoted  "Lord,  teach  us  how  to  pray." 
But  we  need  to  learn  to  pray  rather  than  merely  how  to  pray. 
We  most  of  us  know  something  about  the  "how",  but  very 
little  about  putting  it  into  practice. 

Prayer  reaches  to  earth's  utmost  bound, 
It  circles  all  the  world  around, 
And  makes  rich  blessings  to  abound. 
Lord,  teach  us  to  pray. 

Prayer  in  all  the  prevailing  Name, 
Which  e'en  the  feeblest  tongue  can  frame, 
An  answer  from  the  throne  can  claim, 
Lord,  teach  us  to  pray. 

Prayer  is  the  channel  God  selects, 
It  sweetly  heaven  with  earth  connects, 
And  brings  the  answer  faith  expects1 
Lord,  teach  us  to  pray. 

Prayer  even  mountains  can  remove, 
The  faithfulness  of  God  will  prove, 
Omnipotence  itself  doth  move, 
Lord,  teach  us  to  pray. 

Prayer  is  a  never  failing  power, 
It  brings  to  us  the  plenteous  shower, 
And  drops  of  grace  for  every  hour, 
Lord,  teach  us  to  pray. 

New  blessings  come  when  prayer  revives, 
The  answer  from  our  Lord  arrives, 
And  souls  are  won  by  prayerful  lives, 
Lord,  teach  us  to  pray. 


14 
ONES  AND  TWOS. 


"Go  ye,  therefore,  into  the  highways  and  as  many  as  ye  shall 
find  bid  to  the  marriage." — Matt,  xxii.,  9. 

There  are  thousands  who  are  living 

In  their  hunger  and  their  sin, 
Who  have  not  received  the  message, 

Hasten  now  to  bring  them  in. 
If  you  cannot  win  the  thousands, 

You  can  find  the  ones  and  twos, 
You  can  tell  them  of  the  banquet, 

So  that  none  the  feast  may  lose. 

If  you  cannot  speak  the  message 

In  the  crowded  city  street, 
You  can  give  the  invitation 

To  the  lonely  ones  you  meet. 
If  you  cannot  do  the  great  things, 

If  a  voice  you  cannot  be, 
You  may  always  be  a  finger 

For  the  wayfarers  to  see. 

One  by  one  they  leave  the  highways, 

And  the  hall  is  filling  fast; 
See,  the  guests  are  all  assembling, 

Not  a  vacant  seat  at  last. 
But  when  all  are  safely  gathered, 

In  the  palace  of  the  King 
You  will  feast  midst  joy  and  gladness 

With  the  guests  you  helped  to  bring. 

When  the  multitude  is  counted, 

When  the  number  has  been  told, 
We  shall  find  they  entered  singly, 

And  were  one  by  one  enrolled. 
One  by  one  men  take  salvation, 

One  by  one  reject  or  choose, 
And  the  myriad  host  up  yonder 

Will  be  made  of  ones  and  twos. 


15 
MARY  AT  HIS   FEET. 


"Mary  which  also  sat  at  Jesus'  feet  and  heard  His  word." 

Luke  x.,  39. 

"She  fell  down  at  His  feet." — John  xi.,  32.  "Then  took  Mary 
a  pound  of  ointment  of  spikenard,  very  costly,  and  anointed  the 
feet  of  Jesus." — John  xii.,  3. 

In  these  three  passages  we  read  of  Mary  at  the  feet  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  On  the  first  occasion  He  was  teaching  her  as  her 
Prophet;  on  the  second  He  was  sympathizing  with  her  as  her 
Priest;  and  on  the  third  she  was  anointing  Him  as  her  King. 

''Mary  sat  at  Jesus'  feet," 

Close  beside  her  Lord, 
'Twas  the  place  that  most  she  loved, 

Where  she  heard  His  word; 
There  she  gazed  upon  His  face, 

There  she  learnt  His  heart, 
And  she  gave  up  all  besides, 

For  this  better  part. 

Mary  fell  down  at  His  feet, 

In  her  deep  distress, 
She  had  learnt  His  power  to  help, 

Sympathize  and  bless; 
When  the  Master  came  to  her, 

All  things  soon  were  right, 
Even  death  before  Him  fled, 

Vanquished  by  His  might. 

Mary  stood  at  His  dear  feet, 

When  a  feast  they  gave, 
Poured  her  spices  on  the  Lord, 

Nothing  would  she  save — 
Spices  for  His  burial — 

For  He  soon  would  lie 
In  the  grave,  but  He  would  rise, 

Never  more  to  die. 

"At  His  feet",  most  blessed  place, 

There  my  need  I  bring, 
And  I  find  Him  just  the  same, 

Prophet,  Priest  and  King; 
Here  I  too  would  learn  His  Word, 

Here  my  burden  lose, 
Here  my  love  anoints  Him  Lord, 

This  the  part  I  choose. 


16 
SHEW  ME  MYSELF. 


"Now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee,  wherefore  I  abhor  myself." 

Job  xlii.,  5,  6. 

"Shew  me  myself," 
I  come  within  Thy  presence  with  this  prayer, 
Oh,  show  me  Lord  as  much  as  I  can  bear, 
Then  let  me  feel  that  Thou  indeed  dost  care, 

Shew  me  Thyself. 

Shew  me  myself, 
Search  me  O  Lord,  and  then  do  Thou  reveal, 
The  sins  which  self  with  shame  would  fain  conceal, 
Then  great  Physician  come  Thou  in  and  heal, 

Shew  me  Thyself. 

Shew  me  myself, 
Alone  I  would  not  dare  to  ask  the  sight, 
I  could  not  stand  the  brightness  of  Thy  light, 
Unless  I  knew  Thy  blood  could  make  me  white, 

Shew  me  Thyself. 

Shew  me  myself, 
One  look  at  self!    O  Lord,  do  Thou  forgive, 
And  then  a  life-long  look  at  Thee  to  give, 
A  steadfast  gaze  at  Thee  in  whom  I  live, 

Shew  me  Thyself. 

Shew  me  myself, 
Too  long  I  dare  not  inward  turn  my  gaze, 
To  Thy  dear  Face  my  weeping  eyes  I  raise, 
Thus  shall  my  broken  heart  be  filled  with  praise, 

Shew  me  Thyself. 

Shew  me  myself, 
I  do  not  fear  to  ask  it  at  Thy  feet, 
The  bitter  shall  be  followed  by  the  sweet, 
And  evermore  I  will  this  prayer  repeat, 

"Shew  me  Thyself." 


17 
BEST   OF  ALL. 


"Looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of 
the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." — Titus  ii.,  13. 

We  think  of  to-morrow  with  all  its  cares, 

Of  trials  that  may  befall; 
We  pray  that  our  Father  will  help  us  through, 

And  we  for  deliverance  call, 
Supposing  the  Lord  were  to  come  to-day, — 

Ah!  that  would  be  best  of  all! 

We  think  of  to-morrow  with  busy  work, 

Of  duties  on  every  side, 
We  try  to  discover  the  step  to  take, 

We  ask  Him  to  be  our  Guide — 
Supposing  the  Master  returned  to-day, — 

The  work  would  be  laid  aside. 

We  think  of  the  foes  we  may  have  to  meet, 

Of  battles  that  we  must  fight; 
We  tremble  to  view  all  the  gathering  clouds, 

Which  threaten  to  dim  the  light, 
Supposing  the  Lord  were  to  come  to-day, — 

Why  that  would  set  all  things  right! 

We  think  of  the  evils  throughout  the  world, 
The  sorrows  of  earth  are  great; 

We  long  to  do  something  to  soothe  distress, 
To  make  all  these  ills  abate ; 

Supposing  our  Lord  were  to  come  to-day, — 
The  crooked  would  soon  be  straight! 

We  think  of  the  farewells  that  must  be  said, 
We  shrink  from  to-morrow's  pain, 

For  how  can  we  travel  this  earth  alone, 
As  loved  ones  the  Homeland  gain ; 

Supposing  the  Lord  were  to  come  to-day, — 
How  soon  we  should  meet  again! 


18 


BLESS  THE  LORD,  O  MY  SOUL. 


"Bless  the  Lord!  O  my  soul." — Psalm  ciii.,  1. 

Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,  and  His  mercies  recall, 
It  were  vain  to  attempt  to  make  mention  of  all, 
For  their  sum  is  too  great,  but  we  need  not  forget 
To  give  thanks  for  a  few — He  is  blessing  us  yet! 

As  we  go  through  the  list  with  this  boon  we  begin, 
That  the  Lord  in  His  grace  doth  forgive  us  our  sin, 
From  the  burden  of  guilt  by  His  death  He  doth  ease 
In  the  midst  of  our  sickness  He  healeth  disease. 

From  eternal  destruction  our  soul  He  redeems 
And  our  night  has  been  banished  for  aye  by  His  beams, 
With  His  tenderest  mercy  He  lovingly  crowns, 
And  He  gives  only  smiles  when  we  merit  His  frowns. 

With  the  dainties  of  heaven  He  filleth  our  mouth, 
Like  the  strength  of  an  eagle  renewing  our  youth, 
As  a  father  the  child,  he  doth  tenderly  love, 
So  the  Lord  pities  us  when  He  looks  from  above. 

As  the  height  of  the  heav'n  from  the  earth  far  below 
The  expanse  of  His  mercy  no  measure  can  know, 
And  as  far  as  the  east  from  the  west  is  removed, 
So  all  boundless  the  pardon  His  people  have  proved. 

For  He  knoweth  our  frame,  He  remembers  we're  dust, 
But  His  goodness  is  great  toward  the  people  who  trust, 
For  the  mercy  of  God  lasts  from  age  unto  age, 
And  His  praises  for  ever  our  hearts  shall  engage. 


19 


GETHSEMANE. 


"With  lanterns  and  torches  and  weapons." — John  xviii.,  3. 

"A  great  multitude  with  swords  and  staves." 

Matt,  xxvi.,  47. 

It  was  George  Herbert  who  wrote: — "How  with  their  lanterns 
do  they  seek  the  Sun!"  It  is  remarkable  that  this  fact  is  only 
mentioned  in  John's  Gospel,  and  it  is  he  who  tells  us  so  much 
about  the  Light  of  the  World.  In  each  verse  of  this  hymn  there 
is  a  similar  contrast  between  the  captors  and  the  Captive. 

They  came  to  the  garden  with  swords  and  with  staves, 

To  seize  on  the  Prince  of  Peace; 
They  made  Him  a  prisoner  although  He  had  come 
To  give  captive  souls  release. 

They  came  with  their  lanterns  and  torches  ablaze, 

They  groped  in  the  darkest  night; 
They  searched  for  the  Sun  with  their  glimmering  lamps 

And  saw  not  His  shining  Light. 

He  gave  Himself  up,  and  they  led  Him  away 

To  stand  in  the  Judgment  Hall; 
They  knew  not  that  He  who  by  men  was  condemned, 

Would  one  day  be  Judge  of  all. 

They  offered  their  shekels  to  one  of  the  twelve, 

Who  thus  did  his  Lord  betray ; 
But  He  who  was  priceless  had  come  to  the  earth 
To  give  Himself  all  away. 

They  stretched  forth  their  hands  and  laid  hold  on 
their  King, 

His  hands  were  stretched  forth  in  vain ; 
They  put  Him  to  death — the  great  Author  of  life, 

His  dying  our  life  did  gain. 


20 
THE  PILGRIM'S  SONG. 


"I  beseech  you  as  strangers  and  pilgrims,  abstain  from  flesh- 
ly lusts,  which  war  against  the  soul." — /  Peter  ii.,  11. 

"Now  a  little  before  them,  there  was  on  the  left  hand  of  the 
road  a  meadow  and  a  stile  to  go  over  it,  and  that  meadow  is 
called  By-path  meadow." — Pilgrim's  Progress. 

I  must  not  wait  to  gather 
The  flow'rets  bright  and  gay, 

Which  grow  in  By-path  meadow, 
And  tempt  me  from  the  way. 

I  dare  not  heed  the  voices 

That  call  on  every  side, 
And  bid  me  leave  the  pathway, 

Once  trodden  by  my  Guide. 

There  may  be  hidden  dangers, 

Which  He  alone  can  see, 
And  all  these  bright  allurements 

Would  only  hinder  me. 

The  honey  of  earth's  pleasures, 

Beset  by  countless  stings, 
Is  nothing  to  the  sweetness, 

Which  comes  from  heavenly  things. 

I  have  not  time  to  linger, 

For  I  must  hasten  on, 
Each  mile-stone  on  the  journey 

Proclaims  it  nearly  done. 

The  pathway  oft  is  rugged, 
But  always  fenced  with  love, 

How  short  will  seem  the  distance, 
Amidst  the  joys  above! 

A  stranger  and  a  pilgrim, 
The  roadside  is  not  home, 

A  stranger  and  a  pilgrim, 
My  joys  are  still  to  come. 


21 
THEY  LOOKED  UNTO  HIM, 


There  is  a  little  reprint  in  many  of  our  Bibles  in  the  marginal 
reading  of  Psalm  xxxiv.,  5.  "They  looked  unto  Him  and  were 
lightened."  The  alternative  reading  "flowed"  belongs  to  the 
words  "were  lightened,"  not  to  the  word  "looked"  as  given  in 
some  Bibles.  The  verse  might  read,  "They  looked  unto  Him 
and  flowed."  The  look  made  them  flow  towards  Him.  The 
Hebrew  word  may  mean  either  lightened  or  flowed. 

"They  looked  unto  Him  and  were  lightened."     (or  flowed) 

Ps.  xxxiv.,  5. 

They  looked  unto  Him  and  their  hearts  grew  light, 

As  His  loving  smile  they  caught ; 
It  rivetted  them  and  dispelled  their  night, 

As  He  read  their  every  thought. 

They  looked  unto  Him  and  how  glad  they  were 

That  they  ever  turned  their  gaze; 
One  glance  from  Himself  did  their  longing  stir, 

And  it  set  their  hearts  ablaze. 

They  looked  unto  Him,  His  attractive  power, 

Like  a  magnet  drew  them  on: 
They  came  as  they  were  in  that  self-same  hour, 

For  their  rebel  hearts  were  won. 

They  looked  unto  Him,  and  the  ice  and  snow; 

In  His  beams  began  to  melt; 
And  they  like  a  river  toward  Him  did  flow, 

As  His  love  and  grace  they  felt. 

They  looked  unto  Him  with  an  unveiled  face, 

And  it  made  them  like  their  Lord ; 
They  into  His  image  were  changed  by  grace, 

As  they  saw  Him  through  His  Word. 

They  looked  unto  Him  and  were  lightened, 

They  looked — and  so  may  we; 
They  looked  and  their  way  was  brightened, 

Oh  Lord,  we  look  to  Thee. 


22 
DAYS  OF  HEAVEN, 


"As  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth." — Deut.  xi.,  21. 

A  wonderful  promise  was  given  to  the  children  of  Israel, 
that  if  they  fulfilled  certain  conditions,  their  days  should  be 
"as  the  days  of  heaven  upon  the  earth." — Deut.  xi.,  18-21. 

Probably  to  them  it  was  a  promise  of  long  life  in  the  land,  but 
to  us  it  has  a  much  more  glorious  meaning.  The  conditions 
however,  all  clustering  around  the  treatment  of  God's  Word, 
are  the  same  for  them  and  for  us.  It  was  to  be  kept  in  four 
places.  In  the  heart  and  soul,  in  the  hand,  and  on  the  forehead. 
No  mention  is  made  of  it  beginning  in  the  head.  As  Christopher 
Ness  quaintly  put  it  (A.D.  1678),  "The  Word  must  sink  as  well 
as  swim.  'Tis  not  enough  that  it  swim  in  the  head,  it  must  also 
sink  down  in  the  heart." 

It  is  to  be  used  for  three  purposes.  It  is  to  be  taught,  spoken, 
and  written — and  this  at  four  different  times,  or  in  four  attitudes 
which  cover  the  whole  of  life — sitting,  walking,  lying  down, 
and  rising  up.  If  these  rules  are  carried  out  we  shall  have  the 
days  of  heaven  begun  below. 

The  days  of  heaven  on  the  earth  below, 
E'en  here  by  grace  He  would  have  us  know, 
And  taste  the  glory  He  can  bestow, 

Ere  the  days  of  heaven  in  heaven  shall  dawn. 

There'll  be  no  night  in  that  land  of  day; 
E'en  now  the  darkness  has  fled  away, 
We  see  the  light  of  the  Sun's  first  ray, 

Ere  the  days  of  heaven  in  heaven  shall  dawn. 

His  servants  serve  Him  and  see  His  face; 
We  serve  Him  now  and  His  smile  we  trace; 
Before  we  reach  that  most  blessed  place 
Where  the  days  of  heaven  in  heaven  shall  dawn. 

The  endless  pleasures  at  God's  right  hand 
Will  all  be  ours  in  that  heavenly  land, 
We  may  by  faith  in  His  presence  stand 

Ere  the  days  of  heaven  in  heaven  shall  dawn. 

We'll  never  hunger  or  thirst  again, 
When  we  the  home  of  our  God  attain, 
Heart  satisfaction  we  here  may  gain, 

Ere  the  days  of  heaven  in  heaven  shall  dawn. 


23 
THE  CROWN   SHALL   BE  HIS. 


"Behold  the  King's  son  shall  reign,  as  the  Lord  hath  said." 

2  Chron.,  xxiii.,  3. 

One  of  the  most  beautiful  prophetic  pictures  in  the  Bible 
is  the  story  of  King  Joash.  (Compare  the  two  accounts  in  2 
Kings  xi.,  and  2  Chron.  xxiii.)  Athaliah,  the  daughter  of  Jeze- 
bel, tries  to  slay  all  the  seed  royal — one  "from  among  the  slain" 
is  taken  and  "hid"  in  the  house  of  the  Lord — the  usurper  reigns 
— the  high  priest  summons  the  priests  and  Levites  and  says, 
"The  king's  son  shall  reign" — "He  showed  them  the  king's  son." 
This  is  a  picture  of  the  present  time.  They  are  summoned  to 
take  their  place  by  the  king's  side  before  the  "crowning  day." 
And  this  is  what  we  are  waiting  for.  "Be  ye  with  the  King  when 
He  cometh  in,  and  when  He  goeth  out,"  reminding  us  of  1  Thess 
iv.,  "So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  Then  we  read,  "They 
brought  out  the  king's  son  and  put  upon  him  the  crown,"  "They 
set  the  king  on  the  throne  of  the  kingdom,  and  all  the  people  of 
the  land  rejoiced:  and  the  city  was  quiet"  after  the  usurper  had 
been  overcome. 

The  promise  to  David  was  certain  and  sure, 
That  promise  must  still  be  fulfilled, 

His  kingdom  for  ever  shall  firmly  endure, 
The  Throne  by  his  Son  must  be  filled. 

To  crowds  in  the  city  He  still  is  unknown, 
They  choose  the  usurper's  proud  sway, 

The  secret  is  shown  to  His  servants  alone, 
They  know  He  is  living  to-day. 

And  though  for  a  time  out  of  sight  He  remain, 

The  enemy  cannot  succeed, 
The  Son  of  the  King  shall  assuredly  reign, 

For  thus  hath  Jehovah  decreed. 

All  ye  who  have  been  to  the  house  of  the  Lord, 
To  whom  the  King's  Son  hath  been  shown, 

Be  ready,  be  ready  to  hear  the  glad  word, 
For  soon  will  the  trumpet  be  blown. 

The  summons  to  enter  His  presence  will  sound, 
Ye  soon  shall  be  called  to  His  side, 

And  gathered  around  when  the  King's  Son  is 
crowned, 
For  ever  with  Him  shall  abide. 


24 
CONSIDER  THE  LILIES. 


"Consider  the  lilies  how  they  grow,  they  toil  not,  they  spin 
not;  and  yet  I  say  unto  you  that  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was 
not  arrayed  like  one  of  these." — Luke  xii.,  27. 

Consider  the  lilies  which  grow  in  the  field, 

And  note  how  each  one  is  arrayed, 
They  toil  not,  they  spin  not,  for  God  clothes  them 
all, 

Though  quickly  each  blossom  must  fade. 
E'en  Solomon  never  had  robes  such  as  these, 

For  beauty,  for  texture,  for  hue, 
If  God  can  give  raiment  to  flowers  and  grass, 

He  surely  will  much  more  clothe  you. 

Then  why  are  you  fearful, 

Oh,  child  of  the  Lord? 
The  lilies  should  teach  you, 

To  rest  in  His  Word. 

* 

Consider  the  ravens,  the  fowls  of  the  air, 

Are  ye  not  much  better  than  they? 
Their  needs  by  His  goodness  are  always  supplied, 

He  gives  them  their  food  day  by  day. 
They  sow  not,  they  reap  not,  nor  gather  in  barns, 

They  have  neither  garner  nor  store, 
Your  Father  in  Heaven  who  cares  for  the  birds, 

Will  care  for  His  children  much  more. 

Consider  the  sparrows,  remembered  by  Him, 

Though  worthless  and  helpless  and  small, 
He  never  forgets  them;  without  His  consent, 

Not  one  is  permitted  to  fall. 
And  you  are  worth  more  than  a  number  of  them, 

He  counts  e'en  the  hairs  of  your  head, 
Then  be  not  so  anxious,  He  knoweth  your  need, 

By  Him  you  will  surely  be  fed. 


25 
THE  SON  OF  GOD  IS  GOME. 


'We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come." — /.  John  v.,  20. 

"The  Son  of  God  is  come." 
Oh  wondrous  mystery! 

To  this  sad  earth, 

By  Virgin  birth, 
"The  Son  of  God  is  come." 

"The  Son  of  God  is  come," 
The  One  who  made  the  worlds ; 

Oh,  matchless  grace! 

To  take  our  place 
"The  Son  of  God  is  come." 

"The  Son  of  God  is  come," 
The  Father  sent  His  Son ; 
His  heart's  delight, 
And  heaven's  own  light — 

"The  Son  of  God  is  come." 

"The  Son  of  God  is  come," 
He  trod  the  steep  descent; 

From  heaven  on  high, 

He  stooped  to  die, 
"The  Son  of  God  is  come." 

"The  Son  of  God  is  come," 

The  Father  to  reveal ; 

Such  love  unknown, 

By  Him  was  shown, 

"The  Son  of  God  is  come." 

"The  Son  of  God  is  come," 
And  soon  will  come  again 

To  claim  His  own, 

And  take  the  throne, 
"The  Son  of  God  is  come." 


26 

BEFORE  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  THE  WORLD, 
OR  ETERNAL  LOVE. 


"Thou  lovest  Me  before  the  foundation  of  the  world." 

John  xvii.,  24. 

"Therefore  doth  My  Father  love  Me  because  I  lay  down  my 
life."— Jo/m  x.,  17. 

"According  as  He  hath  chosen  us  in  Him  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world." — Eph.  i.,  4. 

"The  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish 
and  without  spot!  who  verily  was  foreordained  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world." — /.  Peter  i.,  19-20. 

Before  the  world's  foundation, 

Or  suns  received  their  light, 
The  Father's  first-begotten, 

Was  all  His  heart's  delight. 
He  loved  Him,  oh  so  dearly, 

As  He  the  glory  shared, 
But  saw    the  time  was  coming 

When  He  must  not  be  spared. 

Before  the  world's  foundation, 

That  love  intenser  grew, 
When  Christ  the  Son  had  offered, 

The  Father's  will  to  do. 
The  shadow  of  the  sufferings, 

Was  seen  by  them  before; 
Because  He  gave  His  life  blood, 

God  loved  Him  all  the  more. 

Before  the  earth  was  founded, 

Or  stars  were  strewn  in  space, 
The  church,  His  heart's  dear  object, 

Was  chosen  by  His  grace. 
He  spanned  time's  fleeting  moments, 

And  saw  the  Eternal  Day, 
When  He  should  have  His  chosen, 

In  all  their  bright  array. 


27 


Before  the  world's  foundation, 

Or  man  God's  image  bore, 
He  looked  all  down  the  "ages, 

And  saw  the  need  was  sore. 
And  long  before  sin  entered 

He  made  the  glorious  plan, 
By  which  the  Lamb  so  spotless, 

Should  die  for  sinful  man. 


LOOK  NOT  AT  SELF. 


"Looking  unto  Jesus." — Hebrews  xii.,  2. 

Look  up,  oh  look  up,  do  not  look  within, 
A  look  at  yourself  never  cleansed  from  sin, 
A  look  at  your  heart  will  but  make  you  sad, 
A  look  at  the  Lord  will  soon  make  you  glad. 

If  hope  be  bright,  or  hope  be  dim, 
Look  not  at  self,  but  look  at  Him. 

For  one  glance  at  self,  often  gaze  above, 
For  this  is  the  way  to  increase  your  love; 
To  measure  yourself  will  not  make  you  grow, 
The  roots  will  not  spread  if  you  dig  below. 

A  look  at  the  evil  which  lurks  within, 
Will  never  give  power  to  conquer  sin; 
A  look  at  the  risen  One  on  the  Throne, 
Will  give  you  the  vict'ry,  and  this  alone. 

A  look  at  the  midnight  ne'er  brought  the  dawn, 
The  sun  as  it  rises  must  herald  the  morn; 
A  look  at  the  dark  never  made  it  light, 
A  look  at  the  heart  never  set  it  right. 

The  cable  remaining  within  the  hold, 

Can  never  the  vessel  through  storms  uphold, 

The  anchor  that's  lying  upon  the  deck, 

With  "breakers  ahead,"  will  not  save  from  wreck. 


28 
LOVEST  THOU  ME? 


"Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  Me?" 

John  xxi.,  15,  16,  17. 

The  scene  in  the  Judgment  Hall  may  be  very  strikingly  com- 
pared with  the  scene  on  the  lake-side.  There  was  a  fire  of  coals 
in  each,  and  as  Peter  warmed  himself  by  the  fire  which  His 
Lord  had  lighted,  he  must  have  remembered  that  other  fire. 
Then  we  may  compare  the  three-fold  denial  and  the  three-fold 
confession.  The  two  words  used  for  love  have  often  been  point- 
ed out,  the  one  stronger  than  the  other.  It  was  as  though  He  had 
said,  "Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  Me  dearly?"  and  Peter, 
afraid  to  confess  too  great  an  affection  after  his  denial  had  an- 
swered, "Yea,  Lord  Thou  knowest  that  I  care  for  Thee."  Again 
the  Lord  used  the  same  word,  "Lovest  thou  Me  dearly?"  Again 
Peter  made  the  same  answer,  "Thou  knowest  that  I  care  for 
Thee."  Then  the  third  time  the  Lord  said,  "Simon,  carest  thou 
for  Me?"  and  Peter  was  grieved  because  He  said  unto  him  the 
third  time,  "Carest  thou  for  Me?"  It  is  beautiful  to  notice  that 
in  his  Epistle  he  uses  the  Lord's  own  word.  He  has  no  doubt 
about  it.    "Whom  not  having  seen  ye  dearly  love." 

The  morning  had  come  and  upon  the  shore 
They  gazed  on  the  One  who  would  die  no  more; 
All  night  they  had  toiled,  but  without  reward, 
Until  they  were  met  by  the  risen  Lord. 

The  Master  Himself  did  the  feast  prepare, 
And  warm  was  the  fire  which  He  kindled  there, 
And  he  who  denials  did  thrice  repeat, 
With  eagerness  hasted  to  His  dear  feet. 

Three  times  he  before  had  his  Lord  denied, 
Three  times  to  His  question  he  now  replied, 
To  him  who  had  thus  been  restored,  forgiven, 
A  wondrous  new  trust  by  his  Lord  was  given. 

The  heart-broken  tears  which  he  once  did  weep, 
Had  made  him  more  fitted  to  feed  the  sheep, 
Had  taught  him  his  weakness,  and  still  much 

more, 
The  love  which  did  constant  through  all  endure. 


The  question  comes  home  to  our  hearts  to-day, ." 
Lord  help  us  each  one  through  our  tears  to  say, 
"I  love  Thee,  I  love  Thee,  I  love  Thee  now, 
My  heart's  true  devotion  I  would  avow." 


THE  EXILE'S  SONG. 


'This  is  not  your  rest." — Micah  ii.,  10. 

They  who  fight  their  country's  battles, 

Through  a  long  and  hard  campaign, 
Far  away  from  all  their  loved  ones, 

Long  to  see  their  home  again; 
And  to  exiles  who  are  dwelling 

On  a  distant  foreign  shore, 
As  they  think  of  home  and  kindred, 

Dream  of  meeting  them  once  more. 

We  are  weary,  often  weary, 

And  the  time  seems  very  long, 
For  the  Lord  Himself  is  absent, 

And  without  Him  all  is  wrong; 
For  the  house  without  the  Master 

Never  can  become  our  home, 
And  the  servants  who  are  faithful, 

Wait  and  watch  for  Him  to  come. 

Through  a  foreign  land  we  journey, 

Only  for  a  little  while, 
But  the  thought  of  coming  glory, 

Cheers  us  through  each  dreary  mile; 
And  the  signs  of  His  appearing 

Gleam  at  times  through  earthborn  haze, 
But  the  mists  will  soon  be  scattered, 

As  upon  our  Lord  we  gaze. 


BETWEEN  MY  LORD  AND  ME. 


"Called  unto  the  fellowship  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord."— /.  Cor.  i.,  8. 

Since  I  have  need  of  Him, 

And  He  has  need  of  me, 
There  is  a  very  special  link 

Between  my  Lord  and  me; 
I  need  His  ever  boundless  store, 
And  He  on  me  His  love  doth  pour. 

If  I  make  use  of  Him, 

And  He  makes  use  of  me, 
A  blessed  partnership  exists 

Between  my  Lord  and  me. 
His  wealth  on  me  He  doth  bestow, 
Through  me  He  longs  His  grace  to  show. 

If  I  can  speak  with  Him, 

And  He  can  speak  with  me, 
What  wondrous  intercourse  takes  place 

Between  my  Lord  and  me! 
His  voice  within  the  Word  I  hear, 
And  to  my  prayer  He  bends  His  ear. 

If  I  remember  Him, 

And  He  remembers  me, 
What  thoughts  of  love  are  interchanged 

Between  my  Lord  and  me! 
I  love  because  He  loved  me  first, 
He  loves  to  satisfy  love's  thirst. 

When  I  abide  in  Him, 

And  He  abides  in  me, 
Sweet  fellowship  can  be  enjoyed 

Between  my  Lord  and  me. 
Apart  from  Him  no  fruit  I  bear, 
He  makes  my  branch  His  special  care. 


31 


If  I  am  close  to  Him, 

And  He  is  close  to  me, 
No  clouds  can  ever  separate 

Between  my  Lord  and  me. 
His  joy  in  me  is  thus  fulfilled, 
And  all  my  heart's  desires  are  stilled. 


A  SONG  OF  REAPING, 


'  "Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the  up- 
right in  heart." — Psalm  xcvii.,  11. 

God's  light  has  been  sown  for  the  righteous, 

And  joy  for  the  upright  heart, 
Then  patiently  wait  for  the  harvest, 

Though  sometimes  the  tears  may  start. 

The  light  must  be  sown  in  the  darkness, 

And  hidden  from  sight  away, 
The  Harvest — a  rich  weight  of  glory, 

Awaits  us  at  break  of  day. 

The  gladness  is  buried  in  sorrow, 

But  surely  will  spring  again, 
More  lovely  the  flowers,  and  more  plenteous 

The  sheaves  we  at  last  shall  gain. 

The  seed-time  may  seem  to  be  "grievous," 

And  dark  are  the  wintry  days, 
But  "peaceable  fruits"  are  now  ripening, 

And  harvests  of  joy  and  praise. 

The  light  and  the  joy  may  be  buried, 

And  left  in  the  dark  to  die, 
We'll  reap  from  the  soil  of  our  sorrow, 

A  hundredfold  by  and  by. 


32 
UPWARD  AND  HEAVENWARD. 


"And  He  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  Bethany,  and  He  lifted 
up  His  hands,  and  blessed  them.  And  it  came  to  pass,  while 
He  blessed  them,  He  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up 
into  Heaven." — Luke  xxiv.,  50-51. 

He  led  them  forth,  that  chosen  band, 

To  Olivet  once  more, 
They  trod  the  oft-frequented  road, 

His  work  on  earth  was  o'er; 
The  cross,  the  grave,  were  empty  now, 

And  glory  lay  before. 

Upward  and  heavenward, 

Right  to  the  throne, 
Upward  and  heavenward, 

Blessing  His  own. 

He  lifted  up  His  pierced  hands, 

And  blessed  them  as  He  went, 
With  joy  and  wonder  they  beheld, 

That  marvellous  ascent; 
And  on  their  Lord's  receding  form, 

Their  raptured  gaze  was  bent. 

A  cloud  received  Him  from  their  sight, 

That  cloud  with  glory  lined, 
They  saw  Him  carried  up  to  Heaven, 

And  they  were  left  behind ; 
But  all  His  precious  parting  words, 

With  joy  they  called  to  mind. 

And  still  His  hands  are  raised  to  bless, 

Though  He  remains  unseen; 
The  cloud  that  hid  Him  long  ago 

A  while  may  intervene; 
But  soon  we'll  see  Him  once  again, 

And  nought  will  come  between. 


33 

Downward  and  earthward, 
Right  from  the  Throne, 

Downward  and  earthward, 
Blessing  His  own. 

To  Olivet  He'll  come  again, 
His  foot  will  surely  stand 

Upon  that  sacred  hill  once  more, 
Within   Emmanuel's  land; 

And  Israel's  sons  will  then  receive, 
Rich  blessings  from  His  hand. 


A  HUMBLE  AND  CONTRITE  SPIRIT. 


"A  broken  and  contrite  heart,  O  God,  Thou  wilt  not  despise." 

Ps.  H„  17. 

"For  thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eter- 
nity, whose  Name  is  Holy;  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  place, 
with  him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit,  to  revive 
the  spirit  of  the  humble,  and  to  revive  the  heart  of  the  contrite 
ones." — Is.  Ivii.,  15. 

When  Mercy's  Messenger  made  His  way, 
Through  a  land  of  want  and  pain, 

He  looked  around  for  a  place  of  rest, 
But  He  often  sought  in  vain. 

No  room  He  found  in  the  lordly  house, 
Nor  the  crowded  wayside  inn, 

He  came  at  last  to  a  humble  home 
Where  they  gladly  asked  Him  in. 

The  busy  world  with  its  toil  and  pride, 
Never  welcomes  such  a  guest, 

The  lowly,  trembling  and  broken  heart, 
Is  the  home  He  loves  the  best. 

He  stands  without,  will  you  let  Him  in? 

Will  you  open  wide  your  heart? 
If  once  you  give  Him  a  welcome  there, 

He  will  nevermore  depart. 


34 
UNTIL  NOW. 


"The  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature we  know- 
that  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain 
together  until  now." — Rom.  viii.,  19-22. 

Men  were  filled  with  expectation 

When  the  Saviour  came  to  earth, 
Restless  with  anticipation 

At  the  moment  of  His  birth; 
In  the  darkness  they  were  groping, 

Longing  for  the  coming  light, 
And  unconsciously  were  hoping, 

For  the  ending  of  the  night. 

So  to-day  the  earth  is  groaning, 

Panting  for  her  liberty, 
None  but  Christ  can  still  the  moaning 

Of  the  long  captivity. 
All  is  waiting  His  appearing, 

Though  men  know  not  what  they  need, 
And  the  morning  must  be  nearing, 

For  the  night  is  dark  indeed. 

Earth  is  growing  strangely  weary 

Of  her  efforts  to  improve, 
And  the  prospect  would  be  dreary 

Looked  we  not  for  God  to  move; 
Restlessness  fills  every  nation, 

Wondering  what  will  happen  next, 
*  Sons  of  men  and  all  creation, 

In  their  ignorance  perplexed. 

And  the  love  of  some  grows  colder, 

As  their  vision  seems  less  clear; 
But  the  foe  is  waxing  bolder 

For  he  knows  the  time  is  near. 
Seas  of  trouble,  waves  of  error, 

Beat  upon  the  Church's  bark, 
Christ  will  come  across  the  water, 

Then  no  more  it  will  be  dark. 


35 


We  shall  find  Him  close  beside  us, 

Thus  shall  end  our  night  of  pain, 
Never  more  shall  ill  betide  us 

When  we  see  our  Lord  again ; 
For  His  coming — long  expected — 

Will  remove  sin's  curse  and  blight, 
And  the  One  whom  men  rejected 

Will  at  last  set  all  things  right. 


PATIENCE. 


"Let  patience  have  her  perfect  work." — James  i.,  4. 
Patience  is  the  daily  learning 

Of  the  lessons  taught  by  grace; 
Patience  is  the  earnest  yearning 

For  the  sight  of  His  dear  Face. 

Patience  is  the  gentle  straining, 
Of  the  sinews  of  our  hope; 

'Tis  the  athlete's  constant  training; 
'Tis  the  proving  of  the  rope. 

Patience  is  the  fruit  of  testing 
'Tis  the  art  of  lying  still ; 

And  the  happy  peaceful  resting 
In  the  goodness  of  His  will. 

Patience  is  the  calm  endurance 
That  doth  never  weary  grow; 

For  it  has  the  blest  assurance 
What  He  promised  must  be  so. 

Patience  is  the  precious  outcome 
Of  our  faith  and  hope  and  love ; 

As  we  wait  to  hear  the  welcome 
When  we  join  our  Lord  above. 

Be  ye  patient,  therefore,  brethren, 
For  the  coming  of  the  Lord ; 

Be  ye  patient;  and  His  coming 
All  your  patience  will  reward. 


36 


PASS  FROM  THE  SERVANTS  AND  GOME  TO 
HIS   FEET. 


"It  was  but  a  little  that  I  passed  from  them,  but  I  found 
Him  whom  my  soul  loveth." — Song  of  Solomon  in.,  4. 

The  experience  of  the  bride  in  the  Song  of  Solomon  is  very 
suggestive  of  our  experience  when  our  hearts  grow  cold  towards 
the  Lord.  She  had  got  out  of  touch  with  Him  whom  her  soul 
loved — and  she  could  not  find  Him,  but  at  last  she  met  with 
those  who  could  direct' her.  "I  sought  Him  but  I  found  Him 
not.  The  watchmen  that  go  about  the  city  found  me:  to  whom 
I  said,  'Saw  ye  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth?'  It  was  but  a  little 
that  I  passed  from  them,  but  I  found  Him."  That  was  what 
she  wanted,  nothing  less  would  do.  The  watchmen  could  not 
satisfy  her.  How  gladly  we  pass  on  from  those  who  help  us,  to 
Him — as  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  said,  "Far,  far  beyond  the  servants 
pass  to  the  Master." 

Are  we  like  watchmen  in  the  city  trying  to  direct  wanderers? 
We  do  not  want  to  gather  them  to  ourselves  but  are  glad  when 
they  pass  from  us  and  find  Him.  The  same  lesson  is  taught 
in  the  little  parable  in  Deut.  xxii.,  1,  2 — "Thou  shalt  not  see 
thy  brother's  ox  or  his  sheep  go  astray,  and  hide  thyself  from 
them;  thou  shalt  in  any  case  bring  them  again  unto  thy  brother 

it  shall  be  with  thee  until  thy  brother  seek  after 

it." 

The  One  whom  I  loved  was  absent, 

His  face  He  had  ceased  to  show, 
The  watchmen  who  knew  Him  found  me, 

I  asked  them  the  way  to  go. 
I  passed  but  a  little  from  them, 

Scarce  waiting  for  their  reply, 
I  came  to  the  One  I  sought  for, 

He  only  could  satisfy. 

Oh  pass  from  the  servants, 

And  come  to  His  feet, 
No  presence  so  helpful, 

No  presence  so  sweet. 


37 


I  love  to  be  with  His  people, 

When  speaking  about  my  Lord, 
But  long  to  go  on  still  farther 

And  hear  from  Himself  a  word ; 
Their  company  may  be  precious, 

It  is  not  enough  for  me, 
I  pass  but  a  little  from  them, 

A  glimpse  of  His  face  I  see. 

No  matter  how  dear  the  friendship. 

The  converse  is  not  complete, 
Until  as  we  reach  His  presence, 

A  smile  from  Himself  we  meet. 
To  talk  of  His  beauty  thrills  us, 

'Tis  sweet  of  His  love  to  tell, 
But  better  to  pass  the  servants, 

And  speak  with  the  Lord  as  well. 


YESTERDAY. 


'Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread." — Matt,  vi.,  11. 
Yesterday's  grace  will  not  do  for  to-day 
Yesterday's  light  will  not  brighten  our  way, 
Yesterday's  sunshine  by  nightfall  had  gone, 
But  with  the  morning  new  radiancy  shone. 

Yesterday's  manna  has  melted  away, 

Give  us  a  portion  Lord,  just  for  to-day. 

What  we  have  proved  of  Thy  love  has  been  sweet, 

So  in  our  need  Lord,  we  come  to  Thy  feet. 

Oft  we  have  fed  on  the  manna  before, 
Feed  us  again,  we  are  hungry  for  more, 
Thou  in  the  past  hast  been  wondrously  good, 
Freshly  each  day  Thou  must  give  us  our  food. 

Many  the  answers  to  prayer  Thou  hast  sent, 
But  what  Thou  gavest  has  long  since  been  spent, 
If  Thy  blest  Spirit  did  yesterday  fill, 
We  for  new  fulness  must  look  to  Thee  still. 


HEAR  THOU  IN  HEAVEN. 


"Hear  Thou  in  heaven  Thy  dwelling  place,  and  forgive  and 
do."— 7.  Kings  viii.,  33-41. 

The  refrain  of  Solomon's  wonderful  prayer  was  "Hear  Thou 
in  heaven  Thy  dwelling  place  and  when  Thou  hearest  forgive." 
Again  and  again  it  is  repeated  in  some  form  or  other,  but  each 
petition  is  punctuated  with  "Hear  Thou  in  heaven"  and  the 
second  petition  follows  "forgive."  The  answer  looked  for  was 
"as  the  matter  shall  require," — I.  Kings  viii.,  59;  but  forgive- 
ness was  always  required. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  has  said,  "In  our  highest  joys  we  have  still 
to  say  'forgive.'  Our  hearts  are  out  of  order  when  that  word 
does  not  rise  to  our  lips." 

We  see  a  beautiful  illustration  of  one  part  of  Solomon's  prayer 
in  the  history  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba.  He  prayed  "concerning 
a  stranger  that  is  not  of  Thy  people  Israel,  but  cometh  out  of  a 
far  country  for  Thy  Name's  sake."  (For  they  shall  hear  of  Thy 
great  Name.)  This  was  just  what  she  did,  and  having  prayed 
that  God  Himself  would  receive  such  an  one,  Solomon  himself 
as  God's  representative  received  her  and  bestowed  on  her  the 
kingly  bounty  that  he  had  asked  God  to  bestow. 

If  enemies  fall  on  the  host  of  the  Lord, 

Because  they  have  sinned  and  have  turned  from 

His  Word, 
If  humbly  they  pray  and  confess  Thy  great  Name, 
Forsaking  their  sin  with  true  sorrow  and  shame: 
Then  hear  Thou  in  heaven,  give  vict'ry  complete, 
And  lead  them  in  triumph  the  foe  to  defeat. 

When  heaven  is  shut  up  and  the  rain  is  withheld, 
Because  we  have  sinned  and  our  hearts  have  re- 
belled, 
If  humbly  we  pray  and  we  plead  in  Thy  Name. 
Forsaking  our  sin  with  true  sorrow  and  shame, 
Then  hear  Thou  in  heaven  and  send  us  the  rain, 
Forgive  us  our  sin  and  revive  us  again. 

If  bread  becomes  scarce  which  was  plenteous  before, 
If  harvests  have  failed  and  the  famine  is  sore, 
A  famine  of  hearing  the  Word  which  we  loved, 
Because  we  have  sinned  and  unfaithful  have  proved, 
Then  hear  Thou  in  heaven  as  hungry  we  cry, 
Forgive  us  our  sin  and  our  longings  supply. 


39 

When  those  who  are  strangers  to  Thee  and  Thy 

Name, 
Have  heard  from  afar  of  Thy  wonderful  fame, 
And  come  unto  Thee  with  a  penitent  prayer, 
And  unto  Thy  footstool  believing  repair. 
Then  hear  Thou  in  heaven,  do  just  what  they  need, 
Revealing  that  Thou  art  a  Saviour  indeed. 


THEY  WORSHIPED  HIM. 


"Where  is  He  that  is  born  King  of  the  Jews?    For  we  have 
seen  His  star  in  the  east,  and  are  come  to  worship  Him." 

Matt,  ii.,  2. 

The  wise  men  from  the  east  did  bring, 
Their  offerings  to  the  infant  King, 

They  worshipped  Him; 
They  laid  their  treasures  at  His  feet, 
Their  golden  gifts  and  spices  sweet, 

And  worshipped  Him. 

They  gazed  upon  the  little  Child 
So  holy,  spotless,  undented, 

And  worshipped  Him. 
And  now  that  He  is  on  the  Throne 
His  Majesty  and  grace  we  own, 

And  worship  Him. 

With  incense  from  a  grateful  heart, 
By  love  constrained,  we  take  our  part, 

And  worship  Him; 
With  awe  and  reverential  fear 
To  His  blest  presence  we  draw  near 

To  worship  Him. 

And  when  upon  His  face  we  gaze, 
With  sinless  homage,  perfect  praise, 

We'll  worship  Him; 
And  not  with  poor  unworthy  thought, 
We  then  shall  love  Him  as  we  ought, 

And  worship  Him. 


40 
SEALED. 

"The  king  sealed  it  with  his  own  signet. that  the 

purpose  might  not  be  changed." — Daniel  vi.,  17. 

"For  the  writing  which  is  written  in  the  king's  name,  and 
sealed  with  the  king's  ring,  may  no  man  reverse." 

Esther  viii.,  8. 

"The  Holy  Spirit  of  God  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the 
day  of  redemption." — Eph.  iv.,  30. 

We  are  told  in  Eph.  iv.,  30,  that  we  are  sealed  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God  "unto  the  day  of  redemption,"  and  we  find  good 
illustrations  of  the  meaning  of  this  simile  from  Daniel  and  Es- 
ther. If  the  seal  of  an  earthly  king  meant  so  much  what  must 
the  seal  of  God  Himself  imply?  "The  purpose  might  not  be 
changed." — Dan.  vi.,  17.  "That  which  is  sealed  with  the  king's 
ring  may  no  man  reverse." — Esther  viii.,  8.  The  Holy  Spirit 
given  upon  believing  is  God's  seal  of  appropriation  securing 
till  the  day  of  redemption.  It  cannot  be  changed,  it  cannot  be 
reversed. 

Besides  this  seal  carries  with  it  the  impress  of  what  is  en- 
graved and  this  thought  is  also  conveyed  in  the  simile.  He 
seals  us  in  order  to  place  His  superscription  upon  us. 

It  ought  not  to  be  necessary  to  ask  concerning  those  whom 
God  seals  "Whose  is  this  image  and  superscription?" 

It  was  sealed  with  the  king's  own  signet, 

That  the  purpose  might  not  be  changed, 
It  was  signed  with  the  king's  inscription, 
It  rehearsed  what  the  king  arranged. 
Bearing  His  name, 

Sealed  with  His  ring, 
None  can  reverse 

What  is  sealed  by  the  King. 

It  was  stamped  with  the  king's  own  image, 

And  encircled  with  his  great  name, 
So  the  coin,  whether  gold  or  silver, 
Could  his  own  kingly  might  proclaim. 
Bearing  His  Name, 
Who  dare  deface, 
Coin  of  the  realm, 
Which  is  stamped  with  His  face? 


41 

We  are  sealed  with  the  King's  own  signet, 

As  a  sign  we  belong  to  Him, 
And  no  other  can  claim  possession, 
Of  the  one  that  is  sealed  by  Him. 
Sealed  by  Himself, 

Claimed  for  His  own, 
Safe  till  the  day, 

When  the  glory  is  shown. 

We  are  sealed  for  the  time  soon  coming, 

When  redemption  will  be  revealed, 
And  the  Spirit  which  He  has  given, 
Is  the  earnest  with  which  we're  sealed. 
Sealed  by  Himself, 

Claimed  for  His  own, 
Safe  till  the  day, 

When  the  glory  is  shown. 


THE  GRACE   YOU  NEED  TO-MORROW. 


"As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be." — Deut.  xxxiii.,  25. 
Fear  not  the  coming  sorrow 

That  may  o'ercloud  thy  way, 
The  grace  you  need  to-morrow 

Will  not  be  yours  to-day. 

The  cloud  seems  quickly  nearing, 
You  dare  not  lift  your  eyes, 

Why  should  you  thus  be  fearing, 
A  blessing  in  disguise? 

On  shelter  you  may  reckon, 
If  storms  should  overtake, 

But  clouds  which  seem  to  threaten 
May  pass  and  never  break. 

Do  anxious  cares  assail  you, 
And  rob  you  of  your  sleep? 

His  goodness  will  not  fail  you, 
Through  sorrow  He  can  keep. 


42 
REJOICE  WITH  ME, 


"  "Rejoice  with  me." — Luke  xv.,  6,  9.  "Likewise,  I  say  unto 
you,  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one 
sinner  that  repenteth." — Luke  xv.,  7,  10. 

The  Lord  said  in  His  parable  in  Luke  xv.  (for  it  is  one  par- 
able in  three  parts),  "Likewise  I  say  unto  you  there  is  joy  in 
the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth." 
Verses  7,  10.  Joy  in  their  presence,  but  God  Himself  rejoices 
more  than  the  angels,  just  as  the  shepherd  rejoices  more  than 
his  neighbors  or  the  sheep,  and  the  father  more  than  the  prodi- 
gal or  his  servants.  In  Jude's  Epistle  we  read  of  something  bet- 
ter still — not  merely  joy  over  the  faulty  wanderer,  but  exceed- 
ing joy  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  when  His  saints  are 
presented  faultless  before  Him.  So  dwelling  only  on  "Glory 
for  me"  is  but  thinking  of  self  after  all — "Glory  for  Him"  is 
what  should  fill  our  hearts  with  joy  and  worship.  This  shines 
out  all  through  the  fifteenth  of  Luke.  He  is  the  One  who  re- 
joices most  and  the  more  we  are  in  fellowship  with  Him  the 
more  shall  we  rejoice  in  His  joy  which  is  expressed  in  Scripture 
under  so  many  figures. 

"The  Shepherd's  joy  over  the  sheep." — Luke  xv.,  5,  7. 

"The  seeker's  over  the  piece  of  silver." — Luke  xv.,  9,  10. 

"The  Father's  over  the  prodigal." — Luke  xv.,  22-24,  32; 
(Prov.  x.,  1;  See  also  xxvii.,  11,  xvii.,  21). 

"The  Purchaser's  over  the  treasure." — Matt,  xiii.,  44. 

"The  Healer's  over  the  cleansed  ones." — Jer.  xxxiii.,  9. 

"The  Creator's  over  His  Works."— -.Ps.  civ.,  31. 

"The  Sower's  over  His  sheaves." — Ps.  cxxvi.,  6. 

"The  King's  over  His  willing  people." — J.  Chron.  xxix.,  9, 17. 

"The  Master  over  His  disciples." — John  xv.,  11. 

"The  Bridegroom's  over  His  bride." — Is.  Ixii.,  5;  Song  of 
Sol.  Hi.,  11. 

"The  Lord's  over  Zion." — Zeph.  Hi.,  17;  Is.  Ixv.,  19. 

"The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength." — Nehemiah  viii.,  10. 

"Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  Thy  Lord." — Matt,  xxv.,  21. 


43 
REJOICE  WITH  ME  (Continued) 


Rejoice  with  Me  is  the  shepherd's  cry, 

I  have  found  my  sheep  at  last, 
The  painful  toil  and  the  weary  search, 

And  the  sorrow  all  are  past. 
His  friends  and  neighbors  are  filled  with  joy, 

As  they  hear  the  Shepherd's  call, 
But  He  who  sought  for  the  wand'ring  sheep, 

Is  the  gladdest  of  them  all. 

Rejoice  with  me  is  the  woman's  cry, 

For  my  silver  is  found  once  more, 
The  nine  without  it  were  incomplete, 

And  its  loss  had  grieved  me  sore: 
Her  friends  were  glad  when  she  told  the  news, 

For  they  knew  the  search  was  long, 
But  she  who  found  that  most  precious  coin, 

Was  the  gladdest  of  the  throng. 

Rejoice  with  me  is  the  father's  cry, 

For  my  son  is  home  again, 
The  weary  watching  for  him  is  o'er, 

And  the  sorrow,  sin  and  pain. 
His  friends  and  household  rejoice  with  him, 

At  the  feast  which  he  has  made, 
The  father's  heart  is  the  gladdest  there, 

Over  him  who  once  had  strayed. 

All  heaven  must  hear  of  the  gladsome  news, 

That  the  lost  one  has  been  found, 
Like  waves  of  joy  on  the  golden  shore, 

Let  it  reach  the  utmost  bound. 
But  He  who  suffered  the  lost  to  win, 

Is  the  One  who  sounds  the  call, 
The  gladdest  heart  in  the  mighty  throng, 

Is  the  King  and  Lord  of  all! 


u 


TILL  THE  DAY  BREAK. 


"Until  the  day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away." 

Song  of  Sol.,  ii.t  17,  iv.t  6. 

Till  the  day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away, 
Waiting  for  the  shining  of  the  Sun's  first  ray, 
Looking  for  the  brightness  that  proclaims  Him  near, 
Longing  for  the  presence  which  has  grown  so  dear. 

Through  the  hours  of  darkness,  waiting  for  the  light, 
For  the  cloudless  Sunrise  that  will  end  the  night, 
Watching  for  the  morning  when  our  Lord  will  come, 
And  His  voice  will  call  us  to  the  Heavenly  Home. 

Many  of  His  waiting  ones  in  Him  now  sleep, 
Till  the  night  be  over  earth  their  dust  will  keep, 
But  at  daybreak  they  from  out  their  graves  will  rise, 
And  with  all  His  people  meet  Him  in  the  skies. 

He  is  waiting  patiently  for  that  bright  Day, 
When  the  earth-born  shadows  will  have  fled  away, 
When  He  will  receive  us  to  Himself  at  last, 
No  more  separation,  sin  and  sorrow  past. 

Till  the  day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away, 
Till  the  day  break  when  He  comes  for  me, 
Till  the  day  break  and  the  shadows  flee, 
Longing  for  the  moment  when  His  face  I  see. 


45 


HE  CALLED  THEM   AND  THEY  CAME. 


"He    calleth  unto  Him  whom  He  would  and  they 

came  unto  Him,  and  He  ordained  twelve  that  they  should  be 
with  Him,  and  that  He  might  send  them  forth." 

Mark  in.,  13,  14. 

He  called  them  and  they  came, 

He  drew  them  to  His  side, 
That  they  apart  with  Him  might  be 

And  with  Himself  abide. 

They  first  must  be  with  Him, 

And  in  His  presence  dwell, 
For  they  must  find  out  what  He  is 

Before  of  Him  they  tell. 

He  called  them  and  they  came, 

How  could  they  stay  away? 
He  took  them  up  the  mountain  side, 

They  ne'er  forgot  that  day. 

He  chose  them  as  He  would, 

And  had  a  work  for  each, 
But  they  must  learn  to  know  Him  first 

Ere  they  could  go  and  teach. 

And  then  He  sent  them  forth, 

But  left  them  not  alone, 
He  gave  them  of  His  mighty  power, 

And  He  their  work  did  own. 


46 
THE  WEIGHT  OF  GLORY. 


"For  our  light  affliction  which  is  but  for  a  moment  worketh 
for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 

2.  Cor.  iv.f  17. 

The  children  in  God's  school  need  to  learn  their  "weights 
and  measures."  and  the  Christian  needs  to  have  good  scales. 
"A  just  weight  and  balance  are  the  Lord's;  all  the  weights  of 
the  bag  are  His  work"  (Prov.  xvi.,  11);  and  if  we  do  not  obtain 
our  weights  and  measures  from  God  Himself  we  are  very  like- 
ly to  weigh  things  wrongly. 

In"the  scales  of  earth,  worldly  pleasures  and  riches,  and  earth- 
ly joys  seem  to  be  more  weighty  than  the  things  of  eternity, 
but  if  we  put  them  into  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary  we  find 
they  are  altogether  lighter  than  vanity.  And  so  with  the  trials 
of  earth,  how  heavy  they  seem;  but  if  we  weigh  them  as  Paul 
did  we  shall  see  that  "the  light  affliction"  is  scarcely  worth  put- 
ting into  the  scales  with  the  "eternal  weight  of  glory."  See 
also  Rom.  viii.,  18. 

Though  you  pass  through  sore  affliction, 

And  endure  a  constant  fight, 
It  is  only  for  a  moment, 

And  the  trial  is  but  light. 
You  must  put  the  weight  of  glory, 

In  the  balances  as  well, 
It  is  far,  far  more  abundant, 

And  exceeds  what  tongue  can  tell. 

When  you  weight  the  heavy  trial, 

Put  the  glory  in  the  scale, 
Weigh  the  future  with  the  present, 

And  the  glory  will  prevail. 

When  the  darkness  o'er  you  gathers, 

And  the  light  begins  to  fail, 
When  you  think  the  cloud  is  heavy, 

Put  the  sunshine  in  the  scale. 
Even  now  the  sun  is  shining, 

Though  the  mist  the  darkness  dims, 
Faith  will  help  you  to  discover, 

That  the  clouds  have  silver  rims. 


47 

Drops  of  grief  from  clouds  of  sorrow, 

Thus  it  is  the  showers  fall, 
Floods  of  sunshine  on  the  morrow, 

Glory-beams  outweighing  all; 
Fleeting  clouds  which  quickly  gather, 

And  as  quickly  pass  away, 
An  eternity  of  sunshine, 

In  a  cloudless,  endless  Day. 

Are  your  burdens  hard  to  carry? 

You  have  something  else  to  weigh 
For  with  benefits  He  loads  us, 

Many  blessings  day  by  day. 
Weigh  the  glory,  not  the  sorrow, 

Count  the  mercies,  not  the  grief, 
Note  the  sunshine,  not  the  darkness, 

This  will  surely  give  relief. 

Think  of  all  the  weight  He  carried, 

All  He  bore  upon  the  tree, 
Was  not  that  a  heavy  burden, 

Which  He  took  for  you  and  me? 
Weigh  His  past  and  weigh  your  future, 

Then  your  present  will  seem  light, 
It  will  fail  to  move  the  balance, 

If  you  learn  to  weigh  it  right. 


NOT  A  STRANGER. 


Job's  experience  was  that  his  friends  were  "verily  estranged," 
"they  count  me  a  stranger." — chap  xix.,  13,  15.  But  he  looked 
forward  to  the  time  when  he  would  meet  in  resurrection  with 
One  who  was  "not  a  stranger."    Verse  27.     (Marg.) 

The  two  disciples  on  the  way  to  Emmaus  did  not  recognize 
the  One  who  had  joined  them  in  their  walk  and  they  asked, 
"Art  Thou  only  a  stranger?" — Luke  xxiv.,  18;  but  there  is  an- 
other question  in  Jeremiah  which  we  too  may  ask — 

"O  the  hope  of  Israel,  the  Saviour  thereof  in  time  of  trouble, 
why  shouldst  Thou  be  as  a  stranger  in  the  land,  and  as  a  way- 
faring man  that  turneth  aside  to  tarry  for  a  night?"   Jer.  xiv.,  8. 


48 


NOT  A  STRANGER  (Continued) 


If  we  can  say,  "the  stranger  did  not  lodge  in  the  street;  but 
I  opened  my  doors  to  the  traveller," — Job  xxxi.,  32,  we  shall 
very  soon  be  able  to  say  with  Job  that  He  is  "not  a  stranger." 

When  we  invite  Him  to  be  our  guest  He  always  becomes 
our  host,  as  He  did  when  the  two  disciples  constrained  Him 

saying,  "Abide  with  us And  He  went  in  to  tarry  with  them." 

He  at  once  took  his  rightful  place;  and  we  always  prove  it  to 
be  so. 

Oh,  come  not  as  a  stranger, 

To  sojourn  for  a  while, 
But  let  me  know  Thy  presence, 

And  feel  Thy  constant  smile. 
Oh,  dwell  within  my  dwelling, 

And  make  my  home  Thine  own, 
For  since  Thou  once  hast  entered, 

I  cannot  be  alone. 

Then  come  not  as  a  stranger, 

To  tarry  for  a  night, 
I  need  Thee  in  the  darkness, 

But  also  in  the  light. 
Come  in  and  be  the  Master, 

And  take  complete  control, 
I  give  Thee  full  possession, 

I  yield  to  Thee  the  whole. 

And  when  I  leave  this  dwelling 

To  go  with  Thee  to  Thine, 
Thou  wilt  not  be  a  stranger, 

Thy  Home  will  then  be  mine. 
I  shall  have  learnt  to  know  Thee, 

Since  Thou  hast  dwelt  with  me, 
I  shall  not  be  a  stranger, 

When  I  shall  dwell  with  Thee. 


49 


TWO  PLACES  AT  ONCE. 


"The  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
He  hath  declared  Him." — John  i.,  18. 

To  live  in  two  places  at  once 

Is  the  privilege  we  may  know, 
To  worship  God  in  the  courts  above, 

And  yet  serve  on  the  earth  below. 

To  enter  the  Holiest  place 

And  remain  'neath  His  shelt'ring  wing, 
And  yet  perform  in  the  camp  outside, 

All  the  duties  each  day  doth  bring. 

Our  Lord  whilst  He  lived  upon  earth 
In  the  Father's  own  bosom  dwelt, 

And  this  the  secret  of  all  His  power, 
Which  the  sinners  around  Him  felt. 

The  birds  of  the  air  had  their  nests, 
He  had  nowhere  to  lay  His  head, 

And  yet  He  leaned  on  His  Father's  breast 
While  His  feet  on  this  earth  did  tread. 

The  heart  of  my  God  for  my  centre 
Here,  here  let  my  Home  be  found, 

Thus  into  His  purpose  I  enter, 
Then  work  in  the  circle  round. 


50 
HE  GAVE  THANKS. 


"He  gave  thanks And  when  they  had  sung  a  hymn 

they  went  out  into  the  Mount  of  Olives — Matt,  xocvi.,  27,  30. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  sing  when  we  are  happy.  The  Apostle 
James  says,  "Is  any  merry?  let  him  sing  psalms."  But  when 
we  are  passing  through  a  crushing  sorrow  who  would  expect  to 
hear  us  singing  ?  At  such  times  we  do  not  find  it  easy  to  lift  our 
voices. 

And  yet  we  read  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which 
He  was  betrayed — just  before  He  went  out  to  that  scene  of 
agony  in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane — "gave  thanks,"  and  start- 
ed a  hymn.  We  have  the  record  of  some  of  His  words,  in  that 
matchless  prayer  and  song  of  praise  in  John  xvii.,  and  probably 
the  words  of  the  Psalm  are  to  be  found  in  the  Book  of  Psalms. 
The  "Hallel"  which  was  sung  at  the  Passover  service  consisted 
of  Psalms  cxiii.  to  cxviii. 

Amidst  the  circle  of  His  own, 

The  night  He  was  betrayed, 
The  Man  of  Sorrows  offered  thanks, 

By  death  still  undismayed. 

He  looked  beyond  the  shameful  cross, 

The  wormwood  and  the  gall, 
He  saw  the  opened  road  to  God, 

That  well  repaid  for  all. 

He  viewed  the  new  and  living  way, 
By  which  His  followers  went, 

He  counted  not  the  agony, 
By  which  the  vail  was  rent. 

His  eye  was  fixed  upon  the  joy, 

That  lay  beyond  the  gloom, 
And  so  He  raised  the  voice  of  praise, 

Within  that  upper  room. 

He  thought  of  all  the  loving  hearts, 

Who  till  He  came  again, 
Would  oft  in  glad  obedience  keep, 

The  feast  He  did  ordain. 


51 

And  so  the  shadow  of  the  cross, 
Could  not  exclude  the  praise, 

And  midst  the  sorrows  of  that  night, 
His  voice  the  song  did  raise. 

And  now  the  anguish  all  is  o'er, 
•  The  precious  blood  is  shed, 
With  gratitude  faith  looks  behind, 
And  hope  with  joy  ahead. 

But  as  Thou  standest  in  our  midst, 
When  gathered  in  Thy  Name, 

Memorials  of  Thy  death  to  share, 
We  need  Thee  just  the  same. 

Oh  lead  our  praises,  blessed  Lord, 
Give  thanks  Thyself  once  more, 

Present  the  incense  at  the  Throne, 
Whilst  we  Thy  love  adore. 


FAITH  AND  WORKS. 


'Faith  without  works  is  dead." — James  it.,  26. 
Faith  without  works  is  only  vain, 
Works  without  faith  no  praise  will  gain, 
Faith  is  revealed  by  loving  need, 
Works  without  faith  are  dead  indeed. 

Faith  is  the  living  growing  root, 
Works  are  the  ever  rip'ning  fruit, 
Faith  may  be  hidden  out  of  sight, 
Works  will  expand  towards  the  light. 

Faith  is  the  fountain  far  below, 
Works  are  the  streams  which  overflow, 
Faith  like  the  furnace  underground, 
Works  like  the  heat  which  must  abound. 

Faith  on  the  firm  foundation  lies, 
Works  make  the  solid  building  rise, 
Faith  must  come  first — we  look  and  live, 
Then  use  the  strength  that  He  will  give. 


52 
STILL  IN   REMEMBRANCE. 


"Remember  Mine  affliction  and  My  misery,  the  worm-wood 
and  the  gall.    My  soul  hath  them  still  in  remembrance." 

Lam.  Hi.,  19-20. 

The  third  chapter  of  the  Lamentations  is  very  wonderful  when 
we  hear  in  it  the  lament  of  the  greatest  Sufferer  this  world  has 
ever  known.  We  have  heard  His  voice  in  those  familiar  words 
in  the  first  chapter,  "Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by? 
behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  My  sorrow;" 
and  we  cannot  fail  to  associate  Chapter  iii.,  19,  with  Him  also 
as  He  says,  "Remembering  Mine  affliction  and  My  misery,  the 
wormwood  and  the  gall." 

In  the  next  verse  He  adds,  "My  soul  hath  them  still  in  remem- 
brance, and  is  bowed  in  Me."  He  has  been  in  the  glory  for  nearly 
two  thousand  years,  but  still  the  sorrows  of  Calvary  are  un- 
forgotten. 

Amidst  the  joy  and  gladness, 

Each  pang  Thou  dost  recall, 
Remembering  the  sorrow 

The  wormwood  and  the  gall, 
Gethsemane  and  Calv'ry, 

The  garden  and  the  tree, 
The  palace  and  the  city, 

Are  not  forgot  by  Thee. 

The  kiss  and  shameful  spitting, 

The  thorns  and  bloody  sweat, 
The  scourge  and  cruel  mockings, 

Thou  dost  remember  yet. 
By  God  and  man  forsaken, 

Midst  crowds  and  yet  alone, 
Without  one  eye  to  pity, 

'Tis  thought  of  on  the  Throne. 

And  shall  not  we  remember, 

What  Thou  for  us  didst  bear, 
And  view  with  silent  wonder, 

Thine  awful  suff 'rings  there? 
Oh  stir  our  recollections, 

And  let  us  see  that  sight, 
And  ne'er  forget  the  darkness, 

That  brought  us  into  light. 


53 


Six  hours  of  patient  dying, 

Upon  the  cross  of  shame, 
Eternity  of  glory, 

And  everlasting  fame. 
Three  hours  of  solemn  darkness, 

Three  days  within  the  grave, 
Then  light  and  resurrection, 

With  all  Thou  cam'st  to  save. 

And  was  the  price  too  costly, 

Which  Thou  for  us  didst  pay? 
No!  Thou  dost  not  regret  it, 

For  glory  will  repay. 
Thou  dost  not  think  with  sorrow, 

On  all  the  anguish  borne, 
That  night,  -though  still  remembered, 

Was  herald  of  the  Morn. 


THE  PRINCE  IN  DISGUISE. 


"For  ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  though 
He  was  rich  yet  for  your  sakes  He  became  poor ;  that  ye  through 
His  poverty  might  be  rich." — 2.  Cor.  viii.,  9. 

A  long  time  ago  'neath  the  bright  Eastern  skies, 
There  lived  on  this  earth  a  great  Prince  in  disguise, 
Who  though  He  was  rich,  had  such  wonderful  grace, 
He  made  Himself  poor,  to  give  sinners  His  place. 

In  the  palace  He  left  He  was  worshipped  by  all, 
And  myriads  of  angels  would  come  at  His  call, 
He  stepped  from  His  throne,  and  His  robes  laid  aside 
Came  down  to  this  earth  where  He  suffered  and  died. 

He  came  to  His  own,  but  they  welcomed  Him  not, 
And  earth  ever  since  has  been  stained  by  the  blot ; 
They  took  Him,  and  nailed  Him  to  Calvary's  tree, 
He  let  them  do  this,  for  He  loved  you  and  me. 

Although  this  took  place  such  a  long  time  ago, 
The  Prince  is  still  living  in  heaven  we  know : , 
He  soon  will  return  to  this  earth  once  again, 
No  longer  disguised,  He  will  come  back  to  reign. 

Yes,  Jesus  our  Saviour  whose  story  we  sing, 
Disguised  as  a  poor  man  was  really  a  King, 
A  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  our  pardon  He  won — 
Have  you  ever  thanked  Him  for  all  He  has  done? 


54 
THE  PASSOVER. 


"When  I  see  the  blood  I  will  pass  over  you." 

Exodus  xii.,  13. 

What  did  this  really  mean?  We  have  most  of  us  been  taught 
to  believe  that  God  promised,  when  He  was  passing  through 
the  land  of  Egypt,  at  the  destruction  of  the  first-born,  that 
when  He  came  to  a  house  which  was  sprinkled  with  the  blood 
of  the  lamb,  He  would  pass  by  that  house  and  go  on  to  the  next. 
Sir  Robert  Anderson  has,  however,  shown  that  the  word  trans- 
lated "pass  over"  means  just  the  opposite.  The  Hebrew  of 
the  Bible  is  practically  a  dead  language,  and  the  only  way  to 
discover  the  real  meaning  of  a  Hebrew  word  is  to  find  out  how 
it  is  used  in  other  parts  of  Scripture. 

This  word  is  found  seven  times:  three  times  in  Exodus  xii., 
verses  13,  23,  27;  in  2.  Samuel  iv.,  4,  where  it  is  said  that  Mephib- 
oseth  was  "lame";  in  1.  Kings  xviii.,  21,  where  Elijah  asks, 
"How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions?"  and  in  ver.  26  of 
the  same  chapter  where  the  priests  of  Baal  "leaped  up  and  down 
at  the  altar." 

All  these  three  clearly  denote  a  motion  from  side  to  side  or 
up  and  down.  The  last  of  the  seven  passages  is  in  Isaiah  xxi.,  5, 
"As  birds  flying,  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts  defend  Jerusalem; 
defending  also  He  will  deliver  it,  and  passing  over  He  will  pre- 
serve it."  "As  birds  flying" — and  a  bird  does  not  protect  its 
nest  by  flying  to  the  next  tree.  So  we  see  that  the  meaning  of 
the  words,  "I  will  pass  over  you"  are  much  more  beautiful  than 
we  have  supposed.  The  Lord  Himself  became  their  Saviour. 
He  mounted  guard  over  every  blood-sprinkled  house,  and  did 
"not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  in." 

In  the  fields  of  Goshen,  they  seek  with  care 

For  a  lamb  that  has  no  spot, 
And  they  lead  it  home  to  be  offered  there, 

'Tis  their  best — they  spare  it  not; 
And  the  precious  blood  in  the  bowl  they  pour, 
That  blood  they  must  sprinkle  outside  the  door. 

Then  upon  the  side-posts  and  o'er  the  porch, 

The  deep  crimson  stains  are  seen, 
The  destroying  angel  may  not  approach, 

For  the  blood  has  come  between; 
For  Jehovah  said,  When  the  blood  I  view, 
Lo  I,  even  I,  will  pass  over  you. 

And  within  those  dwellings  with  blood-stained  door 

On  the  roasted  lamb  they  feed, 
For  the  One  who  told  of  deliverance  sure, 

Also  knew  their  every  need: 
So  that  as  they  feast  they  obtain  new  strength, 
They're  ready  to  start  for  the  land  at  length. 


55 

It  was  long  ago  that  the  Lamb  was  slain, 
And  His  blood  He  did  outpour, 

But  we  know  He  never  need  die  again, 
As  we  sprinkle  thus  our  door ; 

And  Jehovah  said,  When  His  blood  I  view, 

Lo  I,  even  I,  will  pass  over  you. 

Not  a  fear  have  we  of  the  gleaming  sword, 
For  we're  sheltered  by  the  blood, 

We  may  rest  in  peace  on  His  precious  Word, 
Which  has  ever  faithful  stood; 

And  in  perfect  calm  on  the  Lamb  we  feed, 

For  He  who  has  died  meets  our  every  need. 


A  SUNSET  NEARER. 


'Now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed." 

Rom.  xiii.,  11. 

We're  just  a  sunset  nearer, 

Each  time  the  daylight  fades, 
The  glory  that  excelleth 

Will  know  no  evening  shades. 
A  sunset  nearer  every  night, 
A  sunset  nearer  glory  bright. 

It  may  be  we  shall  see  Him 
Ere  sinks  the  sun  to-day, 
And  hear  the  welcome  summons 
1  'Arise  and  come  away." 
A  sunset  nearer  every  night, 
A  sunset  nearer  glory  bright. 

If  Christ  should  come  to-morrow, 

This  night  would  be  our  last, 
Then  farewell  pain  and  sorrow, 
The  darkness  will  be  past. 
A  sunset  nearer  every  night, 
A  sunset  nearer  glory  bright, 

A  sunset  nearer  daybreak, 

When  suns  will  set  no  more, 
This  evening  we  are  nearer 
Than  we  have  been  before. 
A  sunset  nearer  every  night. 
A  sunset  nearer  glory  bright. 


56 
THE  GLORY  OF  THAT  LIGHT. 


"I  could  not  see  for  the  glory  of  that  light." — Acts  xxii.,  11. 

In  one  of  the  galleries  of  the  British  Museum  we  see  in  "the 
Elgin  marbles"  some  of  the  beautiful  sculptures  that  adorned 
the  Acropolis  of  Athens  in  the  time  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  As 
he  stood  on  Mars  Hill  he  could  see  the  Parthenon  from  which 
they  were  taken  and  he  must  have  pointed  to  them  and  to  the 
other  temples  around,  as  he  cried,  "God  that  made  the  world, 

and  all  things  therein   dwelleth  not  in  temples  made 

with  hands We  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  is 

like  unto  gold  or  silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's  device." 
Even  in  their  ruin  these  fragments  are  very  beautiful. 

Some  years  ago  I  was  standing  in  the  great  hall  at  Eastnor 
Castle  which  is  surrounded  with  all  sorts  of  works  of  art  and 
interesting  objects,  when  Dr.  Flavel  Cook  turned  to  me  and  said, 
"How  was  it  that  Paul  cared  so  little  for  all  the  glories  of  Athens?" 
I  said  "Why  was  it?"  He  replied  by  quoting  Acts  xxii.,  11.  "I 
could  not  see  for  the  glory  of  that  light."  The  dazzling  bright- 
ness which  Paul  saw  on  the  road  to  Damascus  blinded  his  eyes 
for  ever  to  the  brightness  of  earthly  things. 

'Twas  not  the  scene  of  sorrow, 

That  moved  mine  eyes  to  tears, 
It  was  the  voice  from  heaven, 

That  fell  upon  mine  ears. 
It  told  me  He  was  risen, 

Who  on  the  cross  had  died, 
That  He  was  in  the  glory, 

Whom  we  had  crucified. 

One  beam  of  heavenly  radiance, 

One  word  from  glory  came, 
And  He  whom  once  I  hated, 

Addressed  me  by  my  name. 
Such  love  was  in  those  accents, 

That  when  I  heard  His  voice, 
My  heart  at  once  surrendered, 

And  quickly  made  its  choice. 

"The  gospel  of  the  glory,"* 

Was  like  a  flash  revealed, 
The  meaning  of  the  suffering, 

No  longer  was  concealed. 
My  dazzled  eyes  were  blinded, 

The  glory  of  that  light, 
Which  shone  upon  my  pathway, 

Had  robbed  me  of  my  sight. 


*2  Cor.  iv.,  4  (R.  V.) 


57 


The  radiance  of  the  glory, 

Still  fills  mine  opened  eyes, 
It  took  away  the  brilliance, 

From  things  I  used  to  prize. 
Since  that  eventful  journey, 

When  glory  filled  my  soul, 
The  hope  of  coming  glory, 

Has  been  my  constant  goal. 


HEART'S-EASE  IN  THE  VALLEY. 


"Who  passing  through  the  valley  of  Baca  make  it  a  well." 

Ps.  Ixxxiv.,  6. 

There  is  heart's-ease  in  the  valley, 
Where  my  Saviour's  feet  have  trod; 

There  are  many  precious  blossoms 
All  along  the  toilsome  road. 

There  is  heart's-ease  in  the  valley, 

By  the  path  it  springs; 
There  is  heart's-ease  in  the  valley, 

Oh  what  peace  it  brings! 

Long  before  I  trod  the  valley 
He  had  gone  that  way  before, 

And  He  only  leads  me  onward 
Where  my  Master  went  of  yore. 

He  went  forth  to  meet  the  tempter 

In  the  wilderness  alone; 
If  we  follow  in  His  footsteps, 

He  will  never  leave  His  own. 

Often  'tis  an  uphill  journey, 

For  the  road  to  heaven  is  steep, 

But  our  footsteps  shall  not  falter, 
When  beside  our  Guide  we  keep. 

And  He  knows  our  feet  grow  weary, 
As  we  climb  from  day  to  day, 

So  He  gives,  in  tender  mercy, 
Resting  places  on  the  way. 


58 
PETER  AND  HIS  LORD. 


"And  when  Peter  was  come  down  out  of  the  ship,  he  walked 
on  the  water  to  go  to  Jesus." — Matt,  xiv.,  29. 

We  hear  a  good  deal  of  Peter's  want  of  faith  when  he  looked 
at  the  waves  and  began  to  sink,  yet  we  cannot  but  admire  the 
faith  that  made  him  walk  on  the  water.  It  must  have  needed 
real  faith  to  lower  himself  over  the  vessel's  side  and  walk  even 
a  few  steps.  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  a  beautiful  sermon  entitled  "The 
History  of  Little^Faith,"  says,  "I  think  I  have  seen  a  picture 
of  Peter  sinking  and  Christ  stooping  to  save  him;  but  I  wish 
that  some  eminent  artist  would  paint  the  two  walking  together 
in  peace,  Peter  and  his  Lord.  We  have  aforetime  seen  the 
Son  of  God  walking  in  the  fire  with  the  three  holy  youths,  and 
now  we  see  the  obverse  of  the  medal — a  saint  walking  on  the 
water  with  the  Son  of  Man." 

Francis  Quarles,  in  "Divine  Fancies,"  has  some  quaint  lines 
on  this  scene. 

"When  walking  Peter  was  about  to  sinck 
Into  the  sea.     In  what  a  case  d'ye  thinke 
H'ad  bin;  if  he  had  trusted  his  complaint 
To  the  intercession  of  some  helpfull  saint; 
Believe  it;  if  Rome's  doctrine  had  bin  sound 
And  soundly  follow'd,  Peter  had  bin  drowned." 

He  walked  upon  the  water, 

He  hushed  the  waves  to  rest, 
He  trod  upon  the  turmoil, 

The  sea  its  Lord  confessed; 
Mine  eyes  beheld  His  coming, 

I  begged  to  cross  the  sea, 
I  could  not  bear  the  distance, 

Between  my  Lord  and  me. 

His  voice  came  o'er  the  waters, 

I  heard  His  answer  "Come," 
And  from  the  ship  descended, 

Regardless  of  the  foam: 
Mine  eyes  were  on  the  Master, 

The  waves  I  could  not  see, 
I  walked  upon  the  waters, 

Between  my  Lord  and  me. 


59 


But  when  the  winds  were  boist'rous, 

My  heart  began  to  fear, 
I  looked  upon  the  billows, 

Forgetting  He  was  near. 
He  stretched  His  hand  and  caught  me, 

And  raised  me  from  the  sea, 
And  thus  there  was  no  distance, 

Between  my  Lord  and  me. 

I  might  have  walked  undaunted, 

But  did  not  pause  to  think, 
That  while  He  was  beside  me, 

He  could  not  let  me  sink. 
I  learnt  the  only  power, 

Of  walking  on  the  sea, 
Is  just  a  gaze  unbroken, 

Between  my  Lord  and  me. 


SONGS  IN   THE  VALLEY. 


'Who  teacheth  like  Him?" — Job  xxxvi.,  22. 
There  are  songs  to  be  learnt  in  the  valley, 

Which  could  not  be  learnt  on  the  hill ; 

As  we  pass  through  the  valley  of  shadow 

His  presence  with  gladness  doth  fill. 

There  are  lessons  to  learn  on  earth's  journey 
Which  could  not  in  heaven  be  gained, 

We  must  learn  them  this  side  of  glory, 
Where  all  will  be  clearly  explained. 

There  are  lessons  we  learn  in  the  tempest 
Which  could  not  be  learnt  in  a  calm, 

For  we  prove  mid  the  waves  and  the  billows 
The  strength  of  His  sheltering  arm. 

There  are  lessons  we  learn  in  our  sorrow, 
Which  could  not  in  gladness  be  taught; 

Oh  how  wondrous  the  tints  of  the  rainbow 
Which  we  through  our  tear-drops  have  caught  i 

There  are  songs  to  be  learnt  in  the  darkness 
Which  could  not  be  learnt  in  the  light, 

We  shall  sing  the  sweet  notes  He  has  taught  us, 
When  we  in  heaven's  praises  unite. 


60 
IT  PLEASED  THE  LORD  TO   BRUISE  HIM, 


"Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him." — Is.  liii.,  10. 

Upon  the  hill  of  Calvary 

Outside  the  city  gates, 
A  marvellous  event  took  place, 

From  which  all  blessing  dates. 
The  central  fact  of  history, 

The  pivot  of  all  time, 
The  greatest  deed  of  highest  love, 

The  blackest  human  crime. 

The  priests  who  throng  the  temple  court, 

Who  at  the  altar  wait 
To  slay  the  evening  lamb,  despise 

The  cross  outside  the  gate: 
They  little  dream  that  every  lamb  . 

Which  on  that  altar  died, 
Is  but  a  shadow  of  the  One 

Who  there  is  crucified. 

Each  hill  and  road,  each  field  and  wall, 

Was  thronged  with  those  who  gazed 
Upon  the  One  who  suffered  there, 

And  heaven  looked  on  amazed. 
But  none  save  God  could  comprehend 

The  work  that  then  was  wrought, 
The  mighty  issues  there  at  stake, 

Surpassed  all  human  thought. 

What  meant  that  scene  to  God  himself, 

As  He  beheld  that  sight? 
Pain  must  have  filled  His  heart  divine, 

Grief  mingled  with  delight; 
He  saw  His  plans  all  carried  out, 

His  purposes  fulfilled, 
His  holy  law  was  satisfied, 

The  claims  of  justice  stilled. 


61 


The  Man  of  Sorrows  hanging  there, 

Was  His  beloved  Son, 
And  ever  had  been  dear  to  Him, 

Ere  time  had  been  begun ; 
He  loved  Him  then,  He  loved  Him  now, 

With  even  greater  love, 
Because  He  yielded  up  His  life, 

To  win  His  treasure  trove. 


REVISED   PRAYERS. 


"Seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them." 

Hebrews  vii.,  25. 

Take  Thou  Thyself  the  burden  of  my  cares, 
And  by  Thine  intercession  sift  my  prayers, 
Let  all  petitions  passing  through  Thy  hands, 
Be  changed  by  Thee  to  what  Thy  love  has  planned. 

I  know  not  what  to  ask  for  as  I  ought, 
Do  thou  translate  my  poor  unspoken  thought, 
That  passing  through  the  channel  of  Thy  will, 
My  prayer  may  ever  Thy  desire  fulfill. 

Do  Thou  remodel  every  blind  request, 
Correct  where  I  have  asked  what  is  not  best, 
Let  every  sentence  be  by  Thee  revised, 
Thus  shall  I  be  most  blessedly  surprised. 

Add  to  the  prayer  when  I  might  ask  for  more, 
Instead  of  drops  do  Thou  the  floods  outpour, 
Thy  asking  will  surpass  my  utmost  thought, 
Till  I  scarce  recognize  the  answer  brought. 


WHEN  WILL  HE  COME? 


"Surely  I  come   quickly;    even  so    come,    Lord    Jesus."- 
Rev.  xxii,  20. 

Will  He  come  as  some  Christmas  season, 

Reminds  of  His  lowly  birth, 
When  the  heavenly  choir  of  angels, 

Proclaimed  how  He  came  to  earth? 
As  we  talk  of  the  angel's  message, 

And  sweetly  the  carols  ring, 
Shall  we  see  Him  in  all  His  beauty, 

Who  came  as  the  infant  King? 

Will  He  come  as  some  New  Year's  evening, 

The  hands  of  the  clock  reveal, 
That  the  Old  Year  is  passed  for  ever, 

While  bells  have  begun  to  peal? 
Will  the  midnight  of  watching  for  Him, 

Be  turned  to  a  morning  bright, 
As  the  years  are  for  us  completed, 

And  lost  in  eternal  light? 

Will  He  come  on  some  Easter  morning, 

Which  speaks  of  the  empty  tomb, 
As  we  tell  how  the  Lord  has  risen — 

As  first  in  that  upper  room? 
Shall  we  find  ourselves  in  His  presence, 

As  saints  from  their  graves  arise, 
And  together  with  those  still  living, 

Behold  Him  with  joyful  eyes? 

Will  He  come  on  some  Lord's  Day  morning, 

When  gathered  around  His  board, 
His  disciples  shew  forth  His  dying, 

And  speak  of  their  absent  Lord? 
It  is  only  until  He  cometh, 

We  feast  on  these  mem'ries  sweet, 
But  what  joy  if  we  leave  the  Table, 

Our  Master  Himself  to  greet! 


Will  He  come  on  some  busy  week-day, 

When  we  at  His  bidding  toil, 
And  we  plow,  or  we  sow,  or  gather, 

The  grain  from  the  fruitful  soil? 
Shall  we  pass  from  the  earthly  service, 

To  that  which  is  much  more  blest, 
When  the  weariness  all  is  over, 

And  we  in  His  presence  rest? 


A  RAINBOW  SONG. 


"And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  I  bring  a  cloud  over  the 
earth,  that  the  bow  shall  be  seen  in  the  cloud." — Gen.  ix.,  14. 

A  rainbow  is  made  of  the  tears  of  earth, 
Lit  up  by  the  smiles  of  heaven; 

Whenever  God  sends  us  a  heavy  cloud, 
The  covenant  bow  is  given. 

He  promised  whene'er  He  should  bring  a  cloud, 
To  stretch  out  the  radiant  bow, 

A  token  that  He  would  recall  His  Word, 
And  floods  should  not  overflow. 

The  promise  of  God  is  as  sure  to-day 

As  when  it  was  spoken  first; 
The  sun  is  still  shining  behind  the  cloud, 

And  soon  on  our  sight  will  burst. 

We  never  should  see  the  bright  rainbow  tints, 
Without  the  dark  background  there; 

We  never  should  test  the  sweet  promises 
If  skies  remained  always  fair. 

If  we  can  look  upward  and  praise  the  Lord 
The  sun  will  stream  through  the  rift, 

The  rainbow  will  shine  with  its  varied  hues, 
And  soon  the  dark  cloud  will  lift. 


64 
I  WILL  LOVE  THEE,  O  LORD,  MY  STRENGTH 


"I  will  love  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength." 

"The  Lord  is  my  rock  and  my  fortress,  and  my  deliverer; 
my  God,  my  strength  in  whom  I  will  trust;  my  buckler  and  the 

horn  of  my  salvation,  and  my  high  tower He  sent 

from  above,  He  took  me,  He  drew  me  out  of  many  waters." 

Ps.  xviii.,  1,  2,  16. 

There  is  wonderful  progress  in  the  opening  words  of  Psalm 
xviii,  "The  Lord  is  my  rock" — but  we  need  something  more 
than  a  rock  to  shelter  us.  There  is  a  building  on  the  rock,  a 
fortress;  and  in  the  fortress  a  deliverer,  and  a  God,  who  pro- 
vides us  with  armour  for  the  fight,  and  lastly  there  is  a  high 
tower  from  which  we  get  a  view  of  distant  glory.  Some  have 
thought  that  this  verse  is  the  summary  of  the  contents  of  the 
Psalm  itself.  The  last  verse  is  taken  from  the  verse  which  des- 
cribes the  Psalmist's  experience  as  he  is  delivered  from  the  sea 
and  placed  upon  the  Rock. 

Amid  the  raging  of  the  sea, 
A  refuge  is  my  Lord  to  me, 
And  to  this  mighty  rock  I  flee, 

I  will  love  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength. 

From  dang'rous  foes  and  stormy  wind, 
A  shelter  on  the  rock  I  find, 
A  Fortress  and  a  home  combined, 
I  will  love  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength. 

When  to  this  hiding  place  I  flee, 
My  Lord  reveals  Himself  to  me, 
A  strong  Deliverer  is  He, 

I  will  love  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength. 

The  fortress  is  a  temple  now, 
Before  my  God  with  praise  I  bow, 
His  loving-kindness  I  avow, 

I  will  love  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength. 

He  is  my  buckler  and  my  shield, 
He  teaches  me  the  sword  to  wield, 
And  arms  me  for  the  battle  field, 

I  will  love  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength. 


65 

And  from  my  tower  up  reared  on  high, 
A  wondrous  distance  I  discry, 
A  land  where  foes  can  ne'er  come  nigh, 
I  will  love  Thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength. 

He  caught  me  with  His  mighty  arm, 
He  raised  me  out  of  reach  of  harm, 
I  will  praise  Him  now  with  joyful  psalm, 
I  will  love  Thee,  0  Lord,  my  strength. 


THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY. 


'The  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  rejoice." 

Psalm  xcvii.,  1. 

A  little  globe — a  tiny  point  in  space, 
And  yet  it  was  a  greatly  honoured  place, 
The  home  first  chosen  for  the  human  race, 
This  little  world. 

A  tiny  planet  moving  round  the  sun, 
Compared  with  others  such  a  little  one, 
Yet  here  God's  great  redemptive  work  was  done, 
This  favoured  world. 

So  small  and  yet  upon  the  world  there  lay, 
An  awful  load  which  did  so  heavy  weigh, 
The  load  of  guilt  which  none  could  roll  away, 
This  guilty  world. 

The  great  Creator  of  the  universe, 
Saw  how  His  once  fair  earth  grew  worse  and  worse, 
So  He  Himself  came  down  to  bear  the  curse, 
This  fallen  world. 

More  guilty  now  His  blood  has  left  a  stain, 
Which  still  upon  this  earth  doth  dark  remain, 
And  ever  will  till  He  comes  back  to  reign. 
This  blood-stained  world. 

Oh  wondrous  thought  that  He  should  love  it  still. 
His  throne  will  stand  where  men  their  Lord  did  kill, 
The  knowledge  of  the  Lord  this  world  shall  fill, 
This  happy  world! 


THE  GOD  OF  THE  PAST— THE  GOD  OF  TO- 
DAY. 


"This  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever." — Psalm  xlviii.,  14. 

The  God  of  the  past  is  the  God  of  to-day, 
His  love  is  the  same  it  ne'er  passes  away, 
He  gives  us  the  Bible  to  show  what  He  is, 
To  teach  what  unfailing  compassion  is  His. 

Oh  study  the  Word  if  your  God  you  would  know. 
And  then  in  your  need  to  His  mercy-seat  go, 
The  hearts  of  poor  sinners  are  ever  the  same, 
And  just  as  unchanged  is  the  power  of  His  name. 

The  One  who  was  seen  in  the  land  of  Judaea, 
Is  now  in  our  midst — in  His  love  He  draws  near. 
He  healed  men  of  old  when  they  came  with  their 

pain. 
And  what  He  did  once  He  can  do  yet  again. 

He  never  refused  those  who  came  to  Him  there, 
And  still  He  doth  hear  every  suppliant's  prayer. 
The  very  same  Lord  only  vailed  from  our  sight, 
Is  waiting  to  help  and  to  bless  us  to-night. 


MORE  AND  MORE. 


"I  will  yet  praise  Thee  more  and  more." — Psalm  Ixxi.,  14. 

They  who  see  much  of  God  would  fain  see  more, 
They  who  know  most  of  Christ  will  most  adore, 
They  who  are  much  forgiven  will  love  Him  much, 
They  who  live  nearest  Him  will  feel  His  touch. 

They  who  have  seen  their  sin  feel  deepest  need, 

They  who  have  tasted  once  will  often  feed, 

They  who  have  quenched  their  thirst  will  prize  the 

streams, 
They  who  have  seen  the  Sun  will  love  His  beams. 


07 


They  who  behold  His  face,  His  face  reflect, 
They  who  have  much  received  will  much  expect, 
They  who  God's  Word  believe,  its  truth  will  test. 
They  who  are  often  heard  will  pray  the  best. 


BENEATH  HIS   SHADOW  HIDING. 


"Look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  black,  because  the  sun 
hath  looked  upon  me."  "I  sat  down  under  His  shadow  with 
great  delight,  and  His  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste." 

Song  of  Sol.  i.,6,  ii.,3. 

The  Sun  looked  down  upon  me, 

My  blackness  was  revealed; 
I  crept  beneath  His  shadow, 

He  is  both  Sun  and  Shield. 

I  need  not  fear  the  brightness, 

My  shelter  is  complete, 
His  sunshine  and  His  shadow 

Have  made  this  refuge  sweet. 

I  sit  beneath  His  shadow, 

And  find  it  very  blest, 
Such  beautiful  protection! 

Such  calm  and  quiet  rest! 

I  feast  beneath  His  shadow, 

His  fruit  I  here  can  eat, 
His  love  and  joy  I'm  tasting, 

His  peace  is  always  sweet. 


68 
TAKE  CARE  OF  THE  STEPS. 


"Leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  in  His  steps." 

/.  Peter  it.,  21. 

Take  care  of  the  steps  and  the  walk  will  be  right, 
Take  care  of  the  channels,  the  light  will  be  bright, 
Take  care  of  the  moments,  take  care  of  the  days, 
The  years  will  then  pass  in  a  service  of  praise. 

Take  care  of  your  thoughts  as  you  journey  along, 
With  heart  full  of  Christ  you  can  never  go  wrong ; 
Take  care  of  the  seed  which  you  sow  in  the  field, 
And  thus  a  good  harvest  your  corner  will  yield. 

Take  care  of  your  words  and  your  speech  will  be  sound, 
Take  care  of  the  notes  and  sweet  chords  will  resound ; 
Take  care  of  each  stitch  as  the  fabric  doth  grow, 
Completed  at  last  the  full  pattern  will  show. 

Take  care  of  the  witness  you  give  in  the  home, 
If  you  in  the  world  would  a  blessing  become ; 
Take  care  by  His  grace  for  each  life  after  all 
Is  made  up  of  things  which  alone  seem  but  small. 


HIS  SERVANTS  SHALL  SERVE  HIM. 


"His  servants  shall  serve  Him  and  they  shall  see  His  face." 

Rev.  xx.  ,3,  4. 

"His  servants  shall  serve  Him" — and  this  is  heaven, 

His  service  is  their  delight, 
And  all  through  the  day  they  are  serving  Him, 

All, day — and  there  is  no  night. 

"His  servants  shall  serve  Him" — they  served  before, 

Now  nothing  their  work  can  spoil, 
The  service  of  heaven  the  happy  rest 

Which  comes  after  earthly  toil. 

"His  servants  shall  serve  Him" — the  best  reward 

Which  He  can  in  love  bestow: 
And  perfectly  now  they  can  please  their  Lord, 

Though  often  they  failed  below. 


69 

"His  servants  shall  serve  Him"  without  mistakes 

His  will  they  can  comprehend, 
They  run  on  His  errands  with  willing  feet, 

Where'er  He  may  choose  to  send. 

"His  servants  shall  serve  Him,"  they  see  His  face, 

He's  near  to  them  all  the  while, 
No  wonder  the  work  seems  so  sweet  to  them 

Lit  up  by  the  Master's  smile. 

NEVER. 


"I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee." — Heb.  xiii.,  5. 
He  never  sent  a  sorrow  unless  He  saw  it  good, 
He  never  gave  a  burden  but  He  beside  us  stood, 
He  never  makes  us  carry  a  single  care  alone, 
He  never  bids  us  journey,  unless  the  path  be  shown. 

There's  never  a  temptation  from  which  there's  no 

escape, 
And  ne'er  a  cross  He  gives  us,  but  what  His  hand  doth 

shape, 
There  never  was  a  danger  that  He  had  not  foreseen, 
And  never  foe  attacks  us  but  He  can  come  between. 

He  never  sets  us  lessons  too  difficult  to  learn, 

We  never  pass  through  darkness  but  light  we  may 

discern 
He  never  gives  commandments  that  we  cannot  obey, 
He  never  sends  on  errands  unless  He  leads  the  way. 

There  ne'er  was  draught  so  bitter  but  He  could  make 

it  sweet, 
There  never  was  a  question  too  hard  for  Him  to  meet, 
There  never  was  a  sinner  who  proved  for  Him  too  bad, 
There  never  was  a  mourner  whom  He  could  not  make 

glad. 

He  never  sought  a  treasure  unless  He  meant  to  keep, 
He'll  never  leave  to  perish  a  single  blood-bought  sheep. 
They  ne'er  are  disappointed  who  on  Jehovah  wait, 
There  never  was  a  moment  when  He  appeared  too  late. 


70 
IN  HIS  PRESENCE. 


"It  was  too  painful  for  me,  until  I  went  into  the  sanctuary 
of  God;  then  understood  I." — Ps.  Ixxiii.,  16,  17. 

Face  thy  problems  from  His  presence, 

Do  not  try  alone  to  meet 
All  the  sore  perplexing  questions, 

Bring  them  to  the  mercy-seat. 

Face  thy  sorrows  in  His  presence, 
There  the  troubles  disappear, 

All  the  bitterness  will  vanish, 
And  the  love  will  be  made  clear. 

Take  the  pattern  from  His  presence, 
He  will  give  thee  His  design, 

Let  Him  plan  and  shape  thy  service, 
Let  no  part  of  it  be  thine. 

Use  the  balance  in  His  presence, 
For  no  other  weights  are  just, 

Weigh  thy  profits  and  thy  losses, 
There  thy  every  thought  adjust. 

Learn  thy  lessons  in  His  presence, 
With  thy  Master  at  thy  side; 

He  will  teach  the  hidden  meaning, 
And  His  secrets  there  confide. 


WHAT    HAS    BECOME    OF    OUR    PRAYERS? 


"Pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret;  and  thy  Father  which 
seeth  in  secret  shall  reward  thee  openly." — Matt.  vi.t  6. 

Oh  what  has  become  ol  our  prayers, 
The  prayers  all  unanswered  as  yet? 

We  surely  shall  see  them  again  some  day, 
For  God  surely  cannot  forget. 

Like  drops  that  are  drawn  from  the  sea, 
As  clouds  they  did  upward  arise, 

We  wait  for  the  showers  of  blessing  now, 
To  pour  from  the  opening  skies. 


Our  prayers  are  recorded  by  God, 

Not  one  can  be  ever  ignored; 
The  time  for  the  answer  may  not  be  yet, 

The  blessing  in  heaven  is  stored. 

And  when  all  our  life  is  made  plain, 
Perchance  we  shall  each  be  surprised, 

To  find  that  the  sorrows  we  had  to  bear, 
Were  answers  to  prayer— but  disguised. 

We  asked  to  be  made  like  our  Lord, 
His  love  and  His  will  to  discern, 

And  so  in  His  school  we  had  lessons  set, 
Which  have  not  been  easy  to  learn. 


THE  BITTER  IS  SWEET. 


"That  I  may  know  Him." — Phil,  Hi.,  10. 
It  is  good  to  be  weary  for  so  we  seek  rest, 
And  we  find  it  at  last  as  we  lean  on  His  breast, 
It  is  well  to  be  lonely  for  thus  we  may  prove, 
That  the  Saviour  can  fill  every  void  with  His  love. 

It  is  good  to  be  weak  so  that  thus  we  may  turn, 

To  the  Strong  One  for  help,  and  His  mightiness  learn; 

It  is  well  if  we  find  that  the  desert  is  drear, 

It  is  thus  we  are  taught  that  our  home  isjiot  here. 

It  is  good  when  our  burdens  are  heavy  to  bear, 
If  they  send  us  to  Him  and  they  drive  us  to  prayer; 
Every  need  is  a  boon,  every  sorrow  is  blest, 
When  it  leads  us  to  put  His  great  love  to  the  test. 

It  is  good  when  the  clouds  shade  our  pathway  below, 
Or  we  never  should  see  the  bright  tints  of  the  bow; 
It  is  well  when  our  way  He  in  wisdom  doth  hide, 
Or  we  never  should  find  out  our  need  of  a  Guide. 

It  is  good  to  be  empty,  for  thus  He  can  fill; 
And  the  tempests  but  cause  Him  to  bid  them  "Be  still" 
'Tis  because  of  our  wounds  that  we  value  His  balm, 
It  is  after  rough  storms  that  we -joy  in  His  calm. 


HOW  DOTH  HE  TEACH? 


I  am  the  Lord,  the  God  which  teacheth  thee  to  profit." 

Isa.  xlviii.,  17. 

How  doth  He  teach? 
Little  by  little  and  line  by  line, 
Lessons  are  learnt  in  the  life  divine, 
Just  as  the  children  must  all  be  taught, 
Slowly  we  gather  our  Teacher's  thought. 

How  doth  He  teach? 
Through  all  events  on  the  homeward  way, 
Gently  and  tenderly  day  by  day, 
Wonderful  pains  He  doth  take  with  each, 
Till  we  have  learnt  what  our  Lord  would  teach. 

How  doth  He  teach? 
Out  of  the  pages  of  His  own  word ; 
Many  fresh  lessons  it  doth  afford, 
This  is  the  text-book  in  Christ's  own  school 
Here  are  the  precepts  our  lives  to  rule. 

How  doth  He  teach? 
Through  His  own  Spirit  He  doth  instruct, 
By  the  right  way  He  will  safe  conduct, 
Teaching  to  profit  by  all  He  sends, 
Till  in  subjection  our  will  He  bends. 


HE  TOOK  ME  BY  THE  HAND. 


'That  He  might  bring  us  to  God." — I.  Peter  Hi.,  18. 
He  took  me  by  my  trembling  hand 

And  led  me  to  the  throne ; 
I  trod  with  Him  the  palace  courts, 

The  beggar  with  the  Son, 
It  was  no  merit  of  my  own 

The  welcome  there  produced, 
It  was  by  wondrous  love  alone 

That  I  was  introduced. 


73 


That  He  might  bring  me  to  the  court 

He  first  must  step  outside, 
He  found  me  in  my  poverty 

And  His  own  robe  supplied. 
I  entered  with  the  Prince  Himself, 

And  none  could  bar  His  way, 
No  suppliant  escorted  thus 

Was  ever  turned  away. 

He  gives  me  access  with  Himself, 

No  challenge  need  I  dread, 
My  right  and  title  to  be  there 

The  precious  blood  He  shed. 
Oh  who  would  think  that  such  as  I 

An  audience  would  gain, 
And  in  the  presence  of  the  King 

Be  bidden  to  remain! 


THREE  GROSSES. 


"They  crucified  Him,  and  two  other  with  Him,  on  either 
side  one,  and  Jesus  in  the  midst." — John  xix.,  18. 

Three  crosses  stand  upon  a  hill, 
Three  forms  are  hanging  there, 

My  Lord  the  central  place  doth  fill, 
That  He  my  guilt  may  bear. 

No  sin  within  the  Lamb  of  God, 

But  guilt  is  on  Him  laid, 
The  sinless  One  must  bear  the  load, 

He  is  my  Saviour  made. 

He  in  the  midst — oh  wondrous  place, 
Between  two  thieves  He  dies; 

The  one  beholds  the  Saviour's  grace, 
The  other  mocks,  defies. 

They  both  are  sinners,  and  within 
Their  hearts  are  just  the  same; 

But  one  has  lost  his  load  of  sin, 
One  bears  his  guilt  and  shame. 


74 

THREE  GROSSES  (Continued). 

One  looks  beyond  the  cross  and  meets 

The  King  in  Paradise; 
The  other  with  reviling  treats 

The  One  whom  men  despise. 

Three  crosses  standing  side  by  side, 

Of  broken  law  the  sign, 
Where  two  for  their  transgressions  died, 

And  One  because  of  mine. 


AS  IT  WERE  A  NEW  SONG. 


"They  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the  throne." 

Rev.  xiv.,  3. 

"They  sang  as  it  were  a  new  song," 
But  the  words  were  just  the  same, 

'Twas  the  song  they  had  sung  in  olden  days, 
When  they  learnt  to  love  His  Name. 

"They  sang  as  it  were  a  new  song," 

But  it  was  not  really  new, 
It  had  often  been  spoilt  with  discord  once, 

Now  each  note  rang  clear  and  true. 

"They  sang  as  it  were  a  new  song," 
And  each  voice  was  fully  trained, 

They  could  sing  it  in  unison  at  last, 
Only  harmony  now  reigned. 

"They  sang  as  it  were  a  new  song," 
And  the  choir  was  all  complete, 

For  not  one  ransomed  voice  was  missing  there, 
And  the  song  was  wondrous  sweet. 

"They  sang  as  it  were  a  new  song," 

'Twas  the  place  that  had  been  changed, 

Mid  the  shadows  of  earth  they  sang  it  first, 
But  now  round  the  throne  are  ranged. 


'They  sang  as  it  were  a  new  song," 
We  must  learn  to  sing  it  here, 

Though  we  sing  it  on  earth  in  minor  key, 
Yet  the  Lord  Himself  will  hear. 


THE  LORD  LOOKED  UPON  PETER. 


"And  the  Lord  turned  and  looked  upon  Peter." 

Luke  xxii.,  61. 

"And  the  Lord  looked  upon  Peter," 
And  Peter  looked  at  his  Lord, 

And  their  eyes  met  in  a  moment 
As  Peter  thought  of  His  Word ; 

And  into  the  night  with  shame  he  crept, 

And  bitter  the  tears  that  Peter  wept. 

"And  the  Lord  looked  upon  Peter," 
And  Peter's  heart  was  laid  bare, 

And  he  saw  how  he  had  fallen — 
That  look  convicted  him  there. 

The  Lord  he  had  thrice  denied  with  shame, 

Now  turned  on  him  eyes  like  fiery  flame. 

"And  the  Lord  looked  upon  Peter," 
And  as  He  looked  He  forgave, 

There  was  love,  tender,  reproachful, 
Within  the  look  He  gave. 

That  love  was  too  much — it  broke  his  heart, 

And  Peter  went  out  to  weep  apart. 

"And  the  Lord  looked  upon  Peter," 
And  called  him  back  to  His  side, 

For  he  met  when  He  had  risen, 
The  Lord  whom  he  had  denied. 

With  faltering  lip  he  did  adore, 

And  loved  as  he  ne'er  had  loved  before. 


76 


MUCH  WITH  THEIR  LORD. 


"And  they  took  knowledge  of  them,  that  they  had  been  with 
Jesus." — Acts  iv.,  13. 

Two  humble  disciples  of  Jesus  their  Lord, 

Before  the  great  council  did  stand, 
They  fearlessly  witnessed  for  Him  whom  they  loved, 

Now  raised  to  the  Father's  right  hand; 
Their  judges  astonished,  with  fullest  accord, 
Took  knowledge  that  they  had  been  much  with 
their  Lord. 

Unlearned  and  ignorant  though  they  might  be, 
The  power  of  God  was  their  strength, 

And  he  who  had  once  been  ashamed  to  confess, 
Was  filled  with  true  courage  at  length ; 

E'en  foes  who  beheld  as  they  published  the  Word, 

Took  knowledge  that  they  had  been  much  with 
their  Lord. 

The  Name  of  the  Master  alone  was  their  theme, 

Salvation  in  no  other  Name, 
Christ  Jesus  of  Nazareth — Name  so  despised, 

Gave  strength  to  the  weak  and  the  lame. 
The  council  who  saw  the  man  healed  at  their  word, 
Took  knowledge  that  they  had  been  much  with 
their  Lord. 

Do  those  who  are  watching  our  life  and  our  walk, 
Take  knowledge  from  day  unto  day, 

That  we  who  profess  to  be  saved  by  His  grace, 
Are  walking  with  Him  by  the  way? 

Do  they,  by  the  witness  that  our  lives  afford, 

Take  knowledge  that  we  have  been  much  with  our 
Lord? 


YESTERDAY  AND  TO-DAY. 


Psalm  xxii  and  Psalm  xxiii. 

The  contrast  between  these  two  Psalms  is  very  great,  and 
can  only  be  understood  in  the  light  of  the  New  Testament. 
We  could  never  have  made  the  beautiful  words  of  the  23rd 
Psalm  our  own,  unless  the  Lord  Jesus  had  made  the  language 
of  the  22nd  Psalm  His  own.  It  is  the  Cross  of  yesterday  that 
has  made  possible  the  green  pastures  of  to-day.  Almost  every 
experience  in  the  23rd  has  its  contrast  in  the  22nd. 

With  the  24th  Psalm,  which  carries  our  thoughts  on  to  the 
coming  glory,  we  have  a  wonderful  threefold  cord  which  cannot 
be  broken. 


Psalm  xxii. 

Yesterday, 

The  Cross. 

"A  worm  and  no  man." 

The  good  Shepherd  that 

died. — John  x.,  11. 

The  object  of  faith. 


Psalm  xxiii. 
To-day, 
The  Green  Pastures. 
My  Shepherd. 
The     great     Shepherd 
that  rose. — Heb.xiii., 
20. 
The  object  of  love. 


Psalm  xxiv. 
For  Ever, 
The  Crown. 
The  King  of  glory. 
The  chief  shepherd  that 
will    appear. — I.  Pet. 
v.,  4. 
The  object  of  hope. 


Heaven  must  be  emptied  that  earth  might  be  filled, 
Songs  must  be  hushed  that  earth's  sobs  might  be 

stilled. 
Christ  must  be  outcast  ere  we  enter  heaven, 
He  was  forsaken,  and  we  are  forgiven. 

He  is  our  Shepherd  and  we  shall  not  want, 
Weary  and  hungry,  with  thirst  He  did  pant, 
He  from  the  cup  of  God's  wrath  did  not  shrink, 
Full  is  the  cup  of  rich  blessing  we  drink. 

He  trod  the  desert,  the  Shepherd  must  die, 
In  the  green  pastures  His  sheep  safely  lie; 
Stormy  the  billows  the  Shepherd  must  breast, 
By  the  still  waters  He  maketh  us  rest. 

He  felt  the  darkness  and  tasted  of  death, 
Only  its  shadow  can  fall  on  our  path ; 
He  midst  His  enemies  suffered  and  died, 
We  midst  our  foes  have  a  table  supplied. 

He  became  poor,  so  that  we  might  have  wealth, 
He  must  be  bruised  so  that  we  should  have  health, 
He  wore  the  thorns  to  give  us  a  bright  crown, 
He  bore  the  cross — we  shall  soon  share  His  throne. 


78 
IT  IS  MORNING,  ALMOST  MORNING. 


"My  soul  waiteth  for  the  Lord  more  than  they  that  watch 
for  the  morning:  I  say,  more  than  they  that  watch  for  the 
morning." — Psalm  cxxx.,  6. 

In  the  streets  of  London  there  are  very  few  hours  out  of  the 
twenty-four  when  quiet  reigns.  The  roar  of  the  traffic  ceases 
late  and  begins  again  very  early  in  the  morning.  To  those 
who  are  accustomed  to  the  incessant  noise  it  seems  strange  to 
listen  to  the  perfect  stillness;  but  even  this  is  broken  before  the 
morning  traffic  commences  by  the  twitter  of  the  city  sparrows. 
What  a  noise  they  make  as  they  chirp  and  chirp  again  to  each 
other!  One  June  morning  when  lying  awake  after  long  sleep- 
lessness it  seemed  to  me  that  their  twittering  fell  into  rhythm 
and  this  was  the  message  that  was  chirped  forth  from  the  tiny 
throats — "It  is  Morning,  almost  Morning"  and  thus  they  lifted 
the  thoughts  to  that  blessed  time  when  the  Day  shall  break 
and  the  shadows  flee  away,  and  were  unconscious  heralds  of 
the  coming  of  the  Lord. 

When  the  night  is  almost  over, 

'Ere  the  morning  light  doth  break, 
There's  a  hush  of  quiet  stillness, 

'Ere  the  song-birds  are  awake. 
But  as  soon  as  day  is  dawning, 

And  before  we  see  the  sun, 
We  can  hear  the  voices  round  us, 

And  they  tell  us  night  is  done. 

It  is  Morning,  almost  Morning, 

Is  the  song  we  seem  to  hear, 
It  is  Morning,  almost  Morning, 
And  the  Sun  will  soon  appear. 

There's  a  hush  upon  my  spirit, 

Though  night's  shades  are  all  around, 
I  am  list'ning  for  the  Morning 

I  would  catch  the  faintest  sound: 
And  the  song-birds  in  my  bosom, 

Have  begun  their  joyous  song, 
For  they  know  that  Day  is  coming, 

We  shall  see  the  Sun  ere  long. 

But  we  cannot  hear  the  chirping 

Of  a  single  morning  bird, 
If  we  lie  all  wrapt  in  slumber, 

Not  a  song  will  then  be  heard. 
It  is  only  when  we're  watching, 

That  the  day-break  is  so  sweet, 
May  our  hearts  be  kept  from  sleeping, 

That  the  Sunrise  we  may  greet. 


FULNESS  OF  JOY. 


"Thou  wilt  show  Me  the  path  of  life:  in  Thy  presence  is  ful- 
ness of  joy;  at  Thy  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore." 

Ps.  xvi.,  11. 

From  the  quotations  in  the  New  Testament  we  can  see  that 
the  16th  Psalm  gives  us  the  very  thoughts  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  Himself.  It  is  a  Messianic  Psalm,  and  must  have  been 
one  of  those  which  the  Lord  expounded  to  the  disciples  on  that 
first  Lord's  Day  when  He  opened  their  understanding  that 
they  might  understand  the  Scriptures,  especially  "the  things 
concerning  Himself"  in  the  Law,  the  prophets  and  "in  the 
Psalms."  In  the  light  of  that  Bible  Reading  the  Apostle  Peter 
preached  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  from  this  and  another 
psalm.  He  quoted  the  four  closing  verses  as  the  language  of 
the  Lord  and  showed  that  David  "being  a  prophet"  spake  "con- 
cerning Him." 

Perhaps  we  have  been  too  much  in  the  habit  of  only  taking 
them  as  precious  promises  for  ourselves.  They  are  full  of  added 
meaning  when  we  see  their  application  to  the  Lord  Himself, 
and  exultingly  remember  that  their  fulfilment  for  Him  has  al- 
ready begun. 

"The  Man  of  Sorrows  is  He  no  more 
But  Lord  of  Gladness  for  evermore." 

He  has  entered  the  fulness  of  joy  at  last, 
And  the  fulness  of  sorrow  is  overpast, 
Nevermore  the  dark  waters  of  death  to  tread, 
The  bright  pathway  of  life  is  before  Him  spread. 

As  He  views  all  the  pain  from  the  glory  side, 
He  rejoices  that  once  on  the  earth  He  died, 
For  the  pleasures  eternal,  for  Him  begun, 
Can  be  shared  by  the  souls  which  by  death  He  won. 

He  had  banished  Himself  from  His  God's  right  hand, 
When  as  Sinbearer  He  in  our  place  did  stand, 
Now  He  sits  in  that  presence  upon  the  throne, 
And  He  waits  to  receive  to  Himself  His  own. 

Where  the  thorns  had  been  pressed  on  that  holy 

brow 
The  anointing  of  gladness  is  shining  now, 
He  has  entered  the  fulness  of  joy  at  last, 
For  the  fulness  of  sorrow  is  overpast. 


80 


CALM  AND  STILL  AND  GLAD  AND  QUIET. 


"He  maketh  the  storm  a  calm,  so  thai;  the  waves  thereof  are 
still.  Then  are  they  glad  because  they  be  quiet;  so  He  bringeth 
them  unto  their  desired  haven. "Ps.  cvii.,  29,  30. 

Calm  and  still  and  glad  and  quiet, 
For  He  makes  the  storm  a  calm 

As  we  sail  towards  the  haven 
Where  no  tempest  can  alarm. 

Calm  and  still  and  glad  and  quiet, 
He  the  tossing  waves  can  still, 

He  can  bear  us  o'er  the  billows, 
And  with  praise  our  hearts  can  fill. 

Calm  and  still  and  glad  and  quiet, 

He  has  made  us  very  glad, 
When  we  have  His  presence  with  us 

Nought  has  power  to  make  us  sad. 

Calm  and  still  and  glad  and  quiet, 
Thus  He  saves  us  from  distress, 

For  the  winds  and  waves  obey  Him 
When  He  gives  us  quietness. 

Calm  and  still  and  glad  and  quiet, 

He  can  keep  in  perfect  peace, 
Till  we  reach  the  heavenly  haven 

Where  the  storms  for  ever  cease. 

Calm  and  still  and  glad  and  quiet, 

Till  the  voyage  is  o'er, 
Calm  and  still  and  glad  and  quiet 
Evermore. 


INDEX 


Page 

An  Eastern   Shepherd    3 

Are   you  practising  His   Pres- 
ence ? 4 

As   it   were   a   new    song    ....  74 

Before  the  foundation,   etc...  26 

Beneath  His  shadow  hiding..  67 

Best  of  all  17 

Bethany   (A)   Song .  7 

Between    my    Lord    and   me..  30 

Bitter    (The)    is   sweet         71 

Bless  the  Lord,   O  my  soul...  IS 

Calm   and   still   and  glad   and 

quiet .  so 

Consider  the   lilies    24 

Crown  (The)  shall  be  His  ....  23 

Darkness  and  Light   8 

Days  of  Heaven 22 

Exile's   (The)   song   29 

Faith  and  Works 51 

From   everlasting  to   everlast- 
ing   9 

Fullness  of  Joy 79 

Gethsemane 19 

Give,  be  always  giving   12 

Glory    (The)    side    11 

Glory    (The)    of    that    Light..  56 
God  of  the  past,  God  of  today  66 
Graee  (The)   you  need  tomor- 
row      41 

Hear  Thou  in  heaven . . .  38 

Heart's-ease  in   the  valley..,  57 

He  called  them   -.  .  45 

He   gave   thanks 50 

He  too1-    ne  by  the  hand.  ...  72 

His  servants  shall  serve  Him  68 

How  doth   He   teach    72 

Humble    and   contrite    spirit..  33 

T  V : His    nrftspnr.p L-i 7a 


One  copy  del.  to  Cat.  Div 


Page 

Look   not   at   self 27 

Lord       (The)       looked       upon 

Peter 75 

Lord,    teach  us  to  pray 13 

Lovest    Thou    me  ?    28 

Mary    at    His    feet    15 

More  and  more ...  66 

Much  with   their  Lord    76 

Never    . 69 

Not   a    stranger    47-48 

Ones  and  twos 14 

Pass  from  the  servants 36 

Passover  (The) 54 

Patience    . 35 

Peter   and    his   Lord 58 

Pilgrim's    (The)    song    20 

Prince   (The)   in  disguise 53 

Rainbow   (A)    song 63 

Rejoice  with  me    42 

Revised   prayers 61 

Sealed    40 

Show  me  myself   16 

Son    (The)    of  God' is   come..  25 

Song   (A)    of  reaping   31 

Songs   in   the   Valley    ........  59 

Still  in   remembrance    52 

Sunset    (A)    nearer    ..........  55 

Take  care  of  the  steps   ..... .  68 

Till  the  day  breaks  .  . 44 

They   looked   unto   Him    .....  21 

They   worshipped   Him    39 

Three  crosses    73 

Thy  will  be  done 6 

Two   places   at   once    49 

Upward  and  Heavenward  ....  82 

Until    Now     34 

Weight    (The)    of    glory    ....  46 
What  has  become  of  our  pray- 

70 

ill  He  come? 62 

(The)    history     65 

y 37 

y  and  today   77 


■'        :        '  M 


a  mi 


