issasmBsssm 


,1 


THINGS  NEW 
AND  OLD 


^HUHatmLifJ  Z  ?~^n'?TTl»rTsgjtv  ryjnoQjrJUl 


M 


^^.^ 


Class^_S_£__ 

Book L_. 

CfilXRICHT  OEBOSm 


THINGS  NEW  and  OLD 


Old  and  New  Testament  Studies 

by 

DR.  C.  I.  SCOFIELD 

Editor  ''Reference  Bible" 
Author  of    Addresses  on  Prophecy^ "  etc. 


Compiled  and  edited  by 
ARNO  C.  GAEBELEIN 


PUBLICATION  OFFICE  "OUR  HOPE" 

456  Fourth  Avenue 
NEW  YORK  CITY 


Copyright,  1920, 
By  A.  C.  Gaebelein 


©CI.A630243 


m  12/92/ 


Foreword 

"Things  New  and  Old"  is  a  compilation  of  Old  and  New 
Testament  Bible  Studies  covering  very  interesting  historical 
portions  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  Four  Gospels.  They 
were  written  by  Dr.  C.  I.  Scofield  for  "Our  Hope"  eighteen 
years  ago  under  the  title  "The  Heart  of  the  Lesson,"  being 
explanations  of  the  Sunday  School  lessons.  Inasmuch  as 
the  International  Sunday  School  lessons  are  taken  periodi- 
cally from  the  same  portions  of  Scripture  the  volume  is  of 
permanent  value. 

It  is  needless  to  call  attention  to  the  sane  and  spiritual 
expositions  of  Dr.  Scofield,  the  excellent  style  and  the  fine 
illustrations.  We  are  sure  this  book  will  be  widely  used  by 
thousands  of  Sunday  School  workers,  Bible  teachers,  and 
all  believers  who  love  real  Bible  study. 

But  "Things  New  and  Old"  contains  more  than  that.  It 
contains  a  number  of  lectures  and  addresses  delivered  by 
Mr.  Scofield  at  the  former  Sea  Cliff  Bible  Conferences. 
These  lectures  were  stenographically  reported  and  published 
in  "Our  Hope."  In  re-publishing  them  they  were  carefully 
edited  by  the  writer;  their  happy  style  in  the  form  of  a 
spoken  address  has  been  maintained  throughout.  The  ad- 
dresses on  the  Holy  Spirit  especially  are  of  great  importance 
today.  May  the  Lord's  blessing  be  upon  the  publication  of 
this  volume. 

Arno  Clemens  Gaebelein 
Editor  "Our  Hope" 


Contents 

Part  I.     Old  Testament  Studies. 

The    Suffering    Saviour    9 

The   Gracious   Invitation    11 

The    Prince    of    Peace    14 

Hezekiah's    Prayer    15 

Hezekiah   Opens  the  Temple    18 

I'he  Kingdom  Divided    . ., 20 

Jeroboam's    Idolatry    22 

Captivity  of  the   Ten  Tribes    24 

Asa's  Good  Reign    27 

Jehoshaphat's    Reform    29 

Joash   the    Boy   King    31 

Joash   Repairs  the  Temple    , 33 

Isaiah's  Message  to  Judah    35 

Josiah's  Good  Reign    37 

Josiah  and  the  Book  of  the  Law    39 

Jehoiakim  Burns  the  Word  of  God 41 

Jeremiah   in    the    Dungeon    44 

Manasseh's  Sin  and  Redemption   46 

Omri  and  Ahab    48 

God  Taking  Care  of  Elijah    51 

Obadiah   and  Elijah    53 

Elijah  on  Mount  Carmel   56 

Elijah  Discouraged 5'9 

Elijah  Encouraged     61 

Elijah  Taken  Up   Into   Heaven 63 

Israel    Reproved     65 

Elisha   Succeeds   Elijah    67 

The  Widow's  Oil   Increased    70 

Elisha  and   the    Shunamite 73 

Elisha  and    Naaman    75 

Elisha  at    Dothan    78 

The  Captivity  of  Judah   80 

The  Life  Giving  Stream    82 

Daniel  in  Babylon    85 

Daniel  and  Belshazzar    87 

Daniel  in  the  Lion's  Den 89 

Returning  from   the   Captivity    92 

Rebuilding  the  Temple    94 

Power  Through  God's  Spirit   96 

Esther  Pleading  for  Her  People 99 

Ezra's  Journey  to   Jerusalem    102 

Nehemiah's   Prayer 104 

Part  II.    New  Testament  Studies. 

The  Boyhood  of  Christ    m 

The  Preaching  of  John  the  Baptist    113 

Baptism    and    Temptation     115 

Rejected    at    Nazareth    117 

Calling  Four  Disciples   120 

A   Sabbath  in  Capernaum    122 

5 


6  CONTENTS 

Christ  Forgives  Sin 124 

Christ   and   the    Sabbath 127 

Hearers  and  Doers  of  the  Word 129 

He   Calms   the   Storm    .....'.  131 

The  Death  of  John  the  Baptist    .!.*.*.!.!.!.!.....  134 

Feeding   the    Five    Thousand    136 

I'he   Visit  to  Tyre  and   Sidon    138 

Peter   Confesseth    Christ    141 

The   Transfiguration    143 

The  Mission  of  the  Seventy   146 

Prayer  and   Promise    149 

Watchfulness     152 

The  Prodigal   Son    155 

Christ    Teacheth    Humility    159 

The   Passover    161 

Christ's   Trial   Before    Pilate    164 

Christ    Crucified     1 66 

Christ   Risen    169 

Christ  the   Life   and   Light    172 

The  Witness  of  John  the  Baptist   174 

His  First  Disciples    176 

The  First  Miracle  in  Cana 1 79 

Nicodemus      i8i 

At   Jacob's    Well    183 

The  Second  Miracle  in  Cana   186 

At  the  Pool  of  Bethesda   188 

The  Miracle  of  the  Loaves  and  Fishes 190 

At  the  Feast   of  Tabernacles    192 

The  Slavery   of    Sin    194 

The  Healing  of  the   Man  Born  Blind    197 

The  Good   Shepherd    199 

I'he  Raising   of   Lazarus    201 

The  Supper   at    Bethany    204 

The  Entry    Into    Jerusalem     206 

Washing  the   Disciples'   Feet    209 

The  Vine   and   the   Branches    211 

His    Prayer    214 

Before    Pilate    217 

The   Crucifixion    219 

The    Resurrection     222 

The  Message  of  the  Risen  Christ   225 

The   Heavenly   Home    228 

Abstinence  for  the  Sake  of  Others    230 

Part  III.    Lectures  and  Addresses. 

The  Book  of  Job    237 

The  Song  of   Solomon    247 

The  Church  and  the  Churches   257 

The  Personal  Relationships  of  the  Holy  Spirit 275 

The  Work  of  the  Indwelling  Spirit   283 

Barabbas'  Theory  of  Atonement    294 

May  the  Lord  Come  at  any  Time  ?    297 

The  Walk   of   Faith    301 

Notes    Qti    Colossians    307 


old  Testament  Studies 


THE  SUFFERING  SAVIOUR. 

(Isaiah  lii:  13 — liii:i2.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  Christ's  ultimate  triumph  (lii:  13-15).  2.  The  rejected 
Christ  (Hii:  1-3).  3.  The  suffering  substitute  (Hii :  4-6).  4. 
The  resignation  of  the  sufferer  (liii:  7-9).  5.  God's  victori- 
ous purpose. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

As  to  the  whole  meaning  of  this  great  chapter  there  is,  of 
course,  no  controversy.  It  is  the  great  atonement  chapter.  It 
is  to  the  prophetic  part  of  the  Old  Testament  what  the  i6thof 
Leviticus  is  to  the  typical  part.  In  the  i6th  of  Leviticus  we 
have,  so  to  speak,  the  anatomy  of  atonement,  in  the  52d  and 
53d  of  Isaiah  the  philosophy  of  the  atonement.  As  both 
chapters  are  expressly  appropriated  in  the  New  Testament  to 
Christ  (Heb.  ix:  7-12;  Acts  viii:  32-35),  it  follows  that  any 
theory  of  the  atonement  which  claims  to  be  Scriptural  must 
gather  into  itself  the  teachings  of  both.  Our  lesson,  however, 
requires  us  to  look  at  but  one  of  these  two  great  chapters. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  heart  of  things  here  is  three-fold. 

I.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  in  atonement  were  substitu- 
tional, vicarious.  He  died,  not  as  a  piteous  spectacle,  with 
intent  to  produce  by  his  agonies  a  subjective  moral  influence 
on  human  hearts,  though  surely  the  fact  that  we,  like  the 
brutal  Roman  soldiers,  can  apathetically  "watch  him  there" 
(Matt,  xxvii :  36),  is  the  final  proof  of  our  depravity. 

9 


10  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Nor  did  he  die  as  a  martyr,  immolated  in  a  great  cause. 
He  was  under  no  necessity  of  death  so  far  as  human  power 
was  concerned.  Of  his  hf e  he  said,  "I  lay  it  down  of  myself, 
no  man  taketh  it  from  me."  When  the  traitor-led  crowd 
came  out  against  him  into  the  garden,  he  had  but  to  say  the 
dread,  "I  AM,"  and  they  "went  backward  and  fell  to  the 
ground."  More  than  twelve  legions  of  angels  were  ready 
to  deliver  him. 

There  is  but  one  explanation  of  the  death  of  Christ  which 
satisfies  the  Scriptures:  "He  was  wounded  for  our  trans- 
gressions, he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities;  the  chastise- 
ment of  our  peace  was  upon  him;  and  with  his  stripes  we 
are  healed.  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we  have 
turned  every  one  to  his  own  way;  and  the  Lord  hath  laid 
on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 

"For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no 
sin;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in 
him." 

"Who  his  own  self  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the 
tree  that  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  might  be  made  the  right- 
eousness of  God  in  him." 

"Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being 
made  a  curse  for  us." 

2.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  in  atonement  were  not  chiefly 
physical,  but  spiritual. 

His  soul  was  made  an  oflFering  for  sin.  The  soul  is  the 
seat  of  the  affections,  desires,  will.  Yet  in  the  death  of 
Christ  we  see  the  sufferings  of  the  only  man  who  ever  loved 
God  perfectly;  whose  whole  desire  was  the  father's  pleas- 
ing and  who  could  say  of  himself,  "Lo,  I  came  to  do  thy 
will,  O  God."  But  his  holy  soul  was  made  an  offering  for 
sin.     No  man  could  have  done  that.     Inevitably  it  must  be 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  ii 

written,  "It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him ;  he  hath  put  him 
to  grief." 

The  token  of  this  was  Christ's  desolate  cry  from  the  cross  : 
''My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Put  the 
emphasis  hard  on  the  "thou,"  and  the  "me."  Why,  indeed, 
should  the  only  perfectly  holy,  perfectly  obedient  Servant 
whom  the  Father  ever  had  on  earth  be  forsaken  of  God  in 
his  utmost  need? 

The  answer,  and  there  can  be  but  one,  is  that  the  Holy 
One  was  in  that  dread  hour  the  sinner's  substitute. 

3.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were  germinant.  Death  pangs, 
indeed,  they  were  also  birth  pangs.  The  anguish  of  his 
death  was  that  we  might  never  "taste"  death  (though  we 
may  die),  and  therefore  true  death  agonies ;  but  the  anguish 
was  also  the  anguish  of  our  new  birth.  It  was  the  "Travail 
of  his  soul."  The  corn  of  wheat  had  fallen  into  the  ground 
and  was  dying  that  the  life  of  it  might  pass  into  countless 
corns  of  the  wheat  of  God. 


THE  GRACIOUS  INVITATION. 

(Isaiah  Iv:  1-13.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  An  invitation  to  perfect  satisfaction  (verses  i,  2).  2. 
An  invitation  to  prosperity  and  power  (verses  3-5).  3.  An 
invitation  to  pardon  (verses  6,  7) .  4.  The  assurance  of  the 
Lord  (verses  8-11).  5.  The  promise  of  peace  and  joy 
(verses  12,  13). 


12  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

But  for  the  53d  of  Isaiah,  the  55th  could  never  have  been 
written.  God  can  sell  wine  and  milk  without  money  and 
without  price  because  another  has  paid  the  price.  If  God 
forgave  sin  with  no  vindication  of  his  holy  law,  he  would  be 
an  accomplice  in  the  violation  of  that  law.  A  law  command- 
ing what  is  right,  and  forbidding  what  is  wrong,  with  no 
penalty  for  its  violation  would  be  the  jest  of  the  criminal, 
and  if  so  it  were  with  the  law  of  God  it  would  be  the  derision 
of  devils.  Sin  is  the  most  awful  fact  in  the  universe.  The 
word  awful  and  its  synonyms  would  have  no  place  nor  use 
in  the  vocabularies  of  men  if  sin  had  never  been.  Sin  is 
even  a  more  awful  fact  than  hell,  for  hell  is  but  a  consequent 
and  inevitable  corollary  of  sin.  Without  sin  there  could  be 
no  hell,  for  hell  is  but  eternal  sinning. 

It  suits  the  "liberal"  churches,  apparently,  to  forget  the 
fifty-third  of  Isaiah,  with  its  suffering  Servant  of  Jehovah, 
and  to  call  the  fifty-fifth  chapter  the  "Gospel."  No.  The 
fifty-fifth  of  Isaiah  is  not  the  Gospel — it  is  but  the  Gospel 
invitation.  A  dinner  and  an  invitation  to  dinner  are  two 
different  things. 

And  this  Gospel  feast  of  wine  and  milk  is  the  costliest 
feast  this  universe  ever  saw  or  ever  will  see.  It  cost  the 
agonizing  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  Gospel  is  the  glad 
tidings  that  God  himself  has  undertaken  to  do,  and  has  done, 
everything  needful  for  the  salvation  of  the  greatest  of  sin- 
ners, and  that  now  God  can  be  just  and  the  justifier  of  him 
that  believeth. 

But  the  emphasis  of  this  lesson  certainly  falls  on  the  f ree- 
ness  of  Gospel  salvation.  There  is  absolutely  nothing  to 
apply.  Any  "Gospel"  that  leaves  one  single  atom  of  salva- 
tion to  be  wrought  out  by  the  sinner  is  that  "other"  Gospel 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  13 

upon  the  preaching  of  which  rests  the  solemn  anathema  of 
God  (Gal.  i :  6-9) .  If  the  true  Gospel  is  preached  the  hearer 
may  indeed  reject  it,  but,  also,  he  may  accept  it  some  other 
day.  But  if  the  false  Gospel  is  preached  he  is  left  with  noth- 
ing to  accept.    He  is  led  astray  by  a  false  guide-post. 

'Without  money  and  without  price."  That  is  the  mark 
of  the  true  message.  If  there  are  some  pains  to  be  borne 
by  the  believer  to  complete  his  salvation,  whether  here  or  in 
purgatory;  if  there  is  some  work  of  righteousness  which 
rests  upon  the  beHever  as  part  of  the  redemption  price,  then 
it  is  the  false  Gospel. 

'*Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and 
he  that  hath  no  money ;  come  ye,  buy  and  eat ;  yea,  come, 
buy  wine  and  milk  without  money  and  without  price." 

"For  God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only  begot- 
ten Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life." 

"And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life 
freely." 

The  heart  of  this  lesson  lies,  I  think,  in  two  solemn  facts. 

The  first  is  that  this  very  freeness  of  the  Gospel  leaves 
every  man's  salvation  wholly  in  his  own  power.  God  has 
done  all  that  is  required  whether  by  his  holy  law  or  by  the 
sinner's  extreme  need.  Both  have  been  considered.  If  some 
were  too  great  sinners  to  be  reached  by  the  mercy  of  God, 
or  if  the  Gospel  required  of  man  any  other  act  but  faith  in 
order  to  his  salvation,  then,  indeed,  for  many  there  would  be 
excuse. 

And  the  second  part  of  the  matter  is  that  it  is  an  urgent 
affair.  No  call  is  made  to  consider  or  to  promise.  "Seek 
the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon  him  while 
he  is  near." 


14  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

THE  PRINCE  OF  PEACE. 

(Isaiah  ix:  1-7.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Gentile  Opportunity  (verses  i,  2). — In  these 
verses  there  is  a  mere  suggestion,  mysterious  doubtless  to 
the  Prophet  himself  (see  i  Peter  i:  10,  11),  in  this  reference 
to  "Galilee  of  the  Gentiles,"  and  in  a  "great  light"  to  people 
sitting  in  darkness,  of  the  blessing  of  the  Gentiles  anterior 
to  the  full  blessing  of  Israel.  From  Matt,  iv:  13-16;  Rom. 
ix :  30-33 ;  xi,  we  know  that  the  prediction  refers  to  the 
present  Gentile  age. 

2.  The  Millennial  Blessing  of  Israel  under  the  Prince  of 
Peace,  on  David's  Throne  (verses  3-7). — (See  below.) 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Here  we  have  the  glorious  fulfilment  in  the  reign  of  the 
Prince  of  Peace,  of  that  old,  immutable  Davidic  covenant. 
Note  the  order. 

First,  there  is  the  obscure  prophecy  of  the  first  advent  of 
Christ  and  of  the  present  blessing  of  the  Gentiles,  which, 
in  the  New  Testament,  notably  in  Matt,  iv:  13-16,  and  in 
Romans  ix :  30-33,  and  Romans  xi,  is  expanded  into  glorious 
fulness  of  meaning.  It  should  be  remembered  that  while 
the  Old  Testament  prophets  did  not  see  the  church  (Eph. 
iii:  i-io)  they  did  see  a  period  of  Gentile  blessing  which  is 
fulfilled  as  they  did  not  know,  but  we  in  the  light  of  a 
fuller  revelation  do,  in  the  church. 

Secondly,  there  is  a  reference  to  the  trials  of  the  remnant 
of  Jews  in  the  land  just  before  the  setting  up  of  the  king- 
dom (Isa.  viii :  21,  22;  ix:  i,  4,  5).  Other  passages  in  Isaiah 
and  in  other  of  the  prophets  make  clear  what  taken  alone 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  15 

seems  an  obscure  statement.  Briefly,  the  prophetic  fore- 
view  is  that  before  the  setting  up  of  the  kingdom  at  the 
second  coming  of  Christ,  a  remnant  of  Jews  will  return  to 
the  land.  As  the  day  draws  near  severe  persecution  falls 
upon  them,  even  the  "great  tribulation"  spoken  of  by  our 
Lord  (Matt,  xxiv:  21,  22).  This  culminates  in  the  gather- 
ing of  the  Gentile  powers  against  Jerusalem  (Zech.  xiv :  i, 
2)  and  the  return  of  the  Lord  in  glory  for  the  deliverance  of 
His  people,  and  the  establishment  of  His  Kingdom  (Zech. 
xiv:  3,  5;  Rev.  xix :  19-XX :  4 ;  Isa.  ix:4,  5). 

Thirdly,  we  have  that  wonderful  description  of  the  King 
which  of  itself,  and  if  it  stood  alone,  would  establish  for- 
ever the  full  deity  and  humanity  of  our  Lord.  Observe  the 
exquisite  accuracy  of  Scripture.  The  child  is  born,  the 
Son  is  given.  It  could  not  be  said  of  him  who  ''was  in 
the  beginning  with  God,  and  who  was  God"  that  he  was 
"born."  No.  Mary's  child  was  born,  and  incarnate  in 
that  child  the  eternal  uncreated  Son  was  "given." 

Fourthly,  the  divine-human  King  sits  upon  the  throne  of 
David.  By  no  ingenuity  can  this  be  explained  of  the  pres- 
ent. He  is  seated  now  on  the  throne  of  his  Father,  and  is 
coming  to  sit  on  his  own  throne  (Rev.  iii:  21). 

And  the  heart  of  it  all  is,  that  despite  the  unbelief,  wick- 
edness and  failure  of  man,  God  literally  fulfills  all  of  his 
covenants. 


HEZEKIAH'S  PRAYER. 

(Isaiah  xxxviii :  1-8.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  King's  Prayer  (verses  2,  3).     (See  Heart.)     2. 
The  Lord's  answer  (verses  4-8). 


i6  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

No  wholly  consistent  lesson  can  be  made  of  the  eight 
verses  selected.  Never  was  the  context  more  necessary  to 
the  right  understanding  of  a  passage  of  Scripture.  We  shall, 
therefore,  consider  the  whole  chapter. 

1.  Hezekiah's  thoughts  about  death  give  with  complete- 
ness the  Old  Testament  view.  The  Old  Testament  horizon 
was  the  grave.  Not,  of  course,  that  the  Old  Testament  saint 
had  no  intimations  of  immortality.  Abraham  laid  hold  on 
the  thought  of  resurrection  when  he  "Accounted  that  God 
was  able  to  raise  Isaac  even  from  the  dead."  Job  knew 
that  though  after  death  worms  should  destroy  his  body,  yet 
in  his  flesh  he  should  see  God ;  and  two  hundred  years  after 
Hezekiah's  time  resurrection  was  plainly  taught  throiigh 
Daniel. 

But  these  were  but  dim  and  occasional  f  oregleams  and  by 
no  means  filled  the  Jewish  mind.  Long  life  was  the  crown- 
ing blessing  of  the  righteous,  and  grey  hairs  the  crown  of 
glory.  All  the  distinctive  blessings  of  the  Israelites  were 
earthly  blessings,  and  the  curses  were  earthly  deprivations 
and  sufferings  (Deut.  xxviii:  1-37).  Sheol  was  the  place 
of  silence,  of  cessation.  No  voice  praised  God  out  of  a 
grave ;  in  the  coffin  no  hands  worked  for  God.  What  might 
be  beyond  the  grave  was  not  revealed.  It  was  little  in  the 
thoughts  of  a  godly  Jew.  To  live  long  in  the  land  which 
the  Lord  his  God  had  given  him,  and  therein  to  serve  and 
glorify  Him,  was  the  characteristic  thought  of  such  a  Jew. 

2.  It  is,  therefore,  absurd  to  quote  from  the  Old  Testa- 
ment to  prove  the  state  of  the  righteous  dead.  All  that  is 
fully  disclosed  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  not  that  the  one 
contradicts  the  other,  but  that  the  later  revelation  supple- 
ments and  completes  the  older.    It  is  still  true  that  there  is 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  17 

no  devising  nor  praising  in  the  grave.  Whatever  work  our 
hands  find  to  do  must  be  done  now  or  not  at  all.  But  the 
newer  revelation  lifts  the  veil  and  shows  us  that  only  the 
body  enters  the  grave,  and  that  for  the  righteous  to  be  "ab- 
sent from  the  body"  is  to  be  ''present  with  the  Lord." 

The  plan  of  the  life  of  the  New  Testament  saint,  there- 
fore, takes  in  two  worlds,  and  he  knows  that  the  chief  sig- 
nificance of  this  life  is  its  relation  to  the  life  beyond  the 
grave.  Long  life  is  not  an  unmixed  blessing,  nor  brevity 
of  life  a  calamity. 

3.  We  are  now  ready  to  see  the  significance  of  Hezekiah's 
distress  and  the  meaning  of  his  plea:  "Remember  now,  O 
Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  how  I  have  walked  before  thee  in  truth 
and  with  a  perfect  heart,  and  have  done  that  which  is  good 
in  thy  sight." 

The  king  does  not  mean  that  his  heart  has  been  sinless, 
but  that  it  has  been  "upright,"  which  is  the  literal  meaning 
of  the  word  rendered  "perfect."  He  has  been  over  on  God's 
side.  He  has  desired  God's  will,  and  so  his  life,  as  to  its 
whole  trend  and  intent  has  been  good. 

And  his  point  is  that,  according  to  the  promises  made  dis- 
tinctively to  the  Israelitish  people,  such  a  life  should  be  long. 
But  he  was  sick  unto  death,  as  a  prophet  of  God  had  just 
told  him.  It  seemed  like  a  failure  of  the  covenant,  and  his 
prayer,  which  would  be  arrogant  self-righteousness  in  a 
Christian  under  grace,  was  a  true  utterance  of  faith  in  a 
sincere  and  godly  Jew  under  the  old  dispensation.  Being 
what  he  was,  why  should  he  die? 

Therefore  the  abiding  heart  of  this  lesson  is  a  truth  good 
for  all  time  and  in  all  dispensations,  that  the  life  of  the 
godly  is  a  life  of  tested  and  exercised  faith.  The  promises 
of  God  are  yea  and  amen,  but  they  do  not  work  automati- 
cally.   Back  of  the  promise  is  the  living  God,  and  he  will  be 


i8  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

inquired  of.    His  promises  are  eternally  good  at  their  face 
value,  but  they  must  be  presented. 

Apparently,  Hezekiah  had  overlooked  that.  He  was  deal- 
ing with  the  promises  of  God  as  many  good  people  now  do 
— apart  from  God  Himself. 


HEZEKIAH  RE-OPENS  THE  TEMPLE. 

(2  Chr.  xxix:  18-31.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  Cleansing  of  the  Vessels  (verses  18,  19). — The  spe- 
cial form  of  consecration  here  is  the  restoration  to  the 
divine  service  of  that  which  belonged  to  Him. 

2.  Sacrifice  in  View  of  the  Sin  of  Judah  (verses  20-24). 
— The  law  required  sacrifices  such  as  these  to  be  oft  re- 
peated— we  have  "one  sacrifice  for  sins  forever"  (Heb. 
x:  12). 

3.  The  Praise  of  a  Cleansed  and  Restored  People  (verses 
25-28). — This  is  the  order  of  Psalm  li  (see  below). 

4.  The  Worship  of  a  Praising  People  (verses  29,  30.)  — 
(See  below.) 

5.  The  Gifts  of  a  People  Right  with  God  (verse  31). — 
(See  below.) 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

So  intimately  connected  are  the  parts  of  this  precious 
lesson  that  they  must  be  considered  together.  The  lesson 
is  all  heart ;  and  it  is  found  in  the  moral  order  of  the  return 
to  God  of  His  own  people  who  have  become  backslidden 
through  sin.  Very  much  superficial  and  therefore  unsatis- 
fying work  is  done  along  this  line.    Conscious  of  a  loss  of 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  19 

communion  and  so  of  joy  and  power,  we  come  to  God  with 
general  and  indefinite  confessions  of  coldness  and  sinfulness, 
but  without  deep  searching  of  heart  and  exercise  of  con- 
science, and  we  find  ourselves  soon  back  on  the  old  ground 
of  failure.  Here  thorough  work  was  done,  and  the  divine 
order  of  restoration  is  here  illustrated.  Let  us  mark  the 
steps. 

1.  Cleansing  of  the  vessels.  For  the  Christian  this  takes 
two  forms,  (i)  The  cleansing  of  the  ways  of  the  daily 
walk.  This  is  illustrated  by  John  xiii :  4-10,  and  is  performed 
according  to  i  John  i :  9 ;  for  confession  is  just  bringing  the 
defiled  feet  to  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  made  clean.  (2)  The 
second  form  of  cleansing  is  separation  from  vessels  unto 
dishonor  according  to  2  Tim.  ii :  20,  21.  This  makes  us 
"vessels  unto  honor,  sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master's 
use." 

2.  The  acknowledgment  of  the  efificacy  of  the  "one  sacri- 
fice for  sins  forever" — the  restoration  of  the  Cross  to  its 
right  place  as  the  sin  offering  which  has  settled  forever  the 
whole  sum  of  our  guilt  and  demerit  before  God;  and  the 
burnt  offering  in  which  Jesus  Christ  "offered  Himself  with- 
out spot  unto  God"  in  our  stead  and  behalf.  Faith,  dimmed 
by  backsliding  and  sin,  once  more  sees  that  as  all  our  demerit 
was  borne  by  Christ,  so  all  His  glorious  merit  is  accounted  to 
us.    What  inevitably  follows  is  : — 

3.  The  praise  of  a  cleansed  and  restored  heart,  now 
again  rejoicing  in  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  taber- 
nacle the  incense  which  was  burnt  on  the  golden  altar  was 
kindled  by  a  live  coal  from  the  brazen  altar  where  sacrifice 
was  offered,  so  true  praise  like  true  worship  is  set  aflame 
by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Then  follows  something  deeper, 
higher  than  praise : — 

4.  The  worship  of  cleansed,  restored,  and  singing  hearts. 


20  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Praise  is  vocal,  expressive,  a  testimony.  David  said  that 
many  should  hear  his  new  song.  Worship  is  "in  spirit"; 
the  bowing  of  the  whole  inner  self  in  adoration,  wonder 
and  love  before  the  Father.  Note  this  order  in  i  Tim.  i :  12- 
17.  Paul  breaks  into  praise  in  verse  12,  into  worship  in 
verse  17,  "Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible, 
the  only  wise  God,  honor  and  glory  forever  and  ever. 
Amen." 

5.  And  now  the  heart,  cleansed,  restored,  filled  with  the 
new  song,  and  bowed  in  adoration,  is  ready  for  service. 
"Come  near  and  bring  sacrifices  and  thank  offerings  unto 
the  house  of  the  Lord." 


THE  KINGDOM  DIVIDED. 

(i  Kings  xii:  12-20). 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  folly  of  the  King  (verses  12-14) .  When  will  the 
people  of  God  learn  that  they  need  divine  wisdom  as  well  as 
divine  righteousness?  Not  all  the  calamities  of  life  come 
from  wickedness,  for  folly,  too,  brings  in  its  train  manifold 
evil. 

"Earth  bears  no  balsam  for  mistakes; 

Men  crown  the  knave,  and  scourge  the  fool 
That  did  his  will ;   but  Thou,  O  Lord, 
Be  merciful  to  me,  a  fool." 

2.  The  unfailing  purpose  of  God  (verse  15  ;  see  below). 

3.  The  kingdom  divided  (verses  16-20).  It  should  be 
remembered  that  this  division,  which  still  continues  though 
all  the  tribes  are  in  dispersion,  is  but  the  disciplinary  and 
not  the  ultimate  purpose  of  God.     The  whole  nation  is  to 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  21 

be  restored  to  Palestine  and  reunited  as  one  nation  under  the 
millennial  reign  of  Christ  (Jer.  xxiii :  5-8;  Ezk.  xxxvii :  15- 
28;  Hosea  iii :  4,  5  ;  Luke  1:30-33;  Acts  xv:  14-17). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  heart  of  this  lesson  is  the  truth,  too  little  regarded 
and  too  often  forgotten,  that  God  holds  nations  equally 
with  individuals  to  a  moral  accountability  the  basis  of 
which  is  righteousness.  The  only  distinction  is  that  per- 
sonal responsibility  has  eternal  consequences  because  man 
is  an  immortal  being,  while  nations,  which  are  creatures  of 
time,  are  judged  and  punished  in  this  present  world. 

The  general  truth  that  God  holds  nations  and  their  rulers 
to  a  moral  accountability  based  on  righteousness  has  both 
general  and  particular  illustrations  in  Scripture.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, the  ruler  of  the  first  universal  Gentile  world 
power  (Dan.  ii :  37,  38),  was  taught  that  his  authority  was 
due  to  the  permissive  will  of  a  God  whom  he  had  neither 
known  nor  worshipped  (Dan.  iv:  34,  35)  ;  and  well  indeed 
would  it  have  been  for  his  successors  in  the  Gentile  world 
dominion,  which  began  with  him  and  still  continues,  had 
they  remembered  Nebuchadnezzar's  lesson.  Forgetting  it, 
they  have  unconsciously  submitted  to  the  usurpation  of  Sa- 
tan, who  is  now  the  unseen  prince  of  this  world  (John 
xiv:3o;   Matt,  iv:  8,  9;  Eph.  vi:  12,  R.  V.). 

For  this,  and  the  misgovernment,  bloodshed  and  cruelty 
that  have  resulted  from  it,  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  to  be 
judged  at  the  second  coming  of  Christ  (Matt,  xxv:  31-45). 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  nations  as  such  (the  judg- 
ment of  Matt,  xxv  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  last 
judgment  of  Rev.  xx:ii-i5,  which  is  1,000  years  later) 
are  subjected  to  a  great  final  test  just  before  the  return  of 
the  Lord  in  glory,  and  by  that  test  they  are  judged.    A  Jew- 


22  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

ish  remnant  will  turn  to  Christ  after  the  departure  of  the 
church  (i  Thess.  iv:  14-17)  and  will  herald  the  kingdom 
among  all  nations  for  a  (final)  "witness".  These  are  the 
'"brethren"  of  Matt,  xxv  140-45.  A  last  illustration  of  the 
principle  that  God  judges  the  Gentile  nations  according  to 
their  treatment  of  the  Jew  (Gen.  xii:  3;  xv:  13,  14;  Deut. 
yiyi'.^,'^',   Micah  iv:  11-13;   Joel  iii :  6,  8) . 

But  Israel,  as  a  nation,  stands  upon  different  promises 
and  is  held  to  a  different  responsibility.  Chosen  to  be  a 
witness  to  the  unity  of  God  in  the  midst  of  polytheism,  and 
of  the  personality  of  God  in  the  midst  of  pantheism,  the 
point  of  Israelitish  failure  is  not  misgovemment,  but  idol- 
atry. Traced  back  through  the  secondary  causes  of  Hadad's 
rebellion  and  Jeroboam's  capacity,  and  Rehoboam's  folly 
and  vanity,  the  primary  cause  of  the  rending  of  the  Hebrew 
commonwealth  is  distinctly  stated  to  be  the  introduction 
of  idolatry  by  Solomon  (i  Kings  xi:  6-13). 

But  whether  in  the  ancient  divisions  and  captivities  of 
Israel,  or  in  the  swift  coming  crash  and  divine  judgment 
of  the  great  Gentile  nations,  the  principle  holds — God  judges 
and  punishes  nations  equally  with  persons. 


JEROBOAM'S  IDOLATRY. 

(i  Kings  xii  125-33.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  king's  substitute  religion  (verses  25-31).  The 
choice  is  never  between  true  religion  and  no  religion,  but 
between  true  religion  and  false  religion.  Man  must  have 
something  which  at  least  pretends  to  respond  to  the  soul's 
demand  for  God,  and  to  the  accusings  of  conscience.    Cain 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  23 

had  a  religion,  the  heathen  have  rehgions,  and  antichrist 
will  have  a  religion. 

2.  The  king's  innovations  (verses  31-33).  The  student 
of  Scripture  has  but  to  compare  the  two  feasts  of  Pharaoh, 
charged  as  they  were  with  great  typical  and  dispensational 
meanings,  with  Jeroboam's  substitutes  to  see  how  poor  and 
barren  are  mere  human  rituals. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Jeroboam  is  the  finest  instance  in  Scripture  of  an  apos- 
tate. Apostasy  and  heresy  are  widely  different  things. 
Heresy  is  error  about  truth;  apostasy  is  deliberately  for- 
saking truth.  Note  the  marks  of  Jeroboam's  apostasy. 
It  began  in  his  unwillingness  to  be  subject  to  the  authority 
of  God.  For  it  was  God  who  established  the  kingdom  in 
the  family  of  David  (2  Sam.  vii :  11-17),  and  to  reject  the 
rule  of  that  royal  line  was  to  reject  the  authority  of  God. 
All  apostasy  begins  in  self  will,  in  insubordination  to  the 
divine  ordering  of  things.  The  first  apostate,  Satan,  began 
by  saying,  "I  will"  (Isa.  xiv:  13).  The  underlying  motive 
in  the  great  apostasy  into  which  Christendom  is  now  rushing 
is  rebellion  against  the  authority  of  holy  Scripture.  And  an 
able  and  energetic  apostate  easily  draws  away  with  him  all 
the  tribes  of  those  who  hate  God's  way.  Satan's  "Yea,  hath 
God  said?"  (Gen.  iii:  i)  is  speedily  followed  by  "Ye  shall 
not  surely  die." 

But  an  apostate  must  have  a  religion,  so  only  that  it  be 
not  a  religion  of  divine  authority.  Jeroboam,  therefore, 
having  set  aside  God's  king,  now  sets  aside  God's  altar  and 
God's  priests,  and  substitutes  an  altar  and  a  priesthood  of 
his  own  making.  Jehovah  had  appointed  Jerusalem  as  the 
alone  place  where  sacrifices  might  be  offered  and  the  tribe 
of  Levi  as  the  priestly  tribe,  but  all  that  was  nothing  to 


24  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Jeroboam.  The  great  apostasy  from  the  purity  and  simplic- 
ity of  apostohc  Christianity  has  substituted  for  the  Christian 
priesthood  of  all  believers  equally  an  order  of  priests  or 
"clergymen,"  who  alone  have  right  to  preach,  to  baptize,  or 
to  administer  the  Lord's  table.  Jeroboam  knew,  also,  the 
desire  of  the  natural  heart  for  holy  places  and  religious  cer- 
emonial, and  provided  these  things.  But,  most  of  all,  the 
apostate  king  showed  that  satanic  craft  which  marks  all 
apostasy  by  building  his  new  religion  so  largely  out  of  genu- 
ine Jewish  materials.  He  established  his  city  between  Ebal 
and  Gerizim,  and  his  temple  upon  the  latter,  the  mount 
of  the  blessings  (Deut.  xi :  29)  ;  and  he  made  much  of 
Penuel,  where  Jacob  had  wrestled,  and  Bethel,  where  Jacob 
had  dreamed.  It  is  a  solemn  truth  that  one  may  call  oneself 
a  Christian,  and  build  a  religious  system  very  largely  out  of 
Christian  things,  adopting  the  Christian  standards  of  moral- 
ity and  good  works,  and  yet  be  an  utterly  godless  apostate. 
For  if  I  reject  the  absolute  authority  of  God's  Word,  and 
make  a  Christ  to  please  myself,  I  am  an  idolater,  even 
though  I  call  my  human  conception  by  His  holy  name  and 
erect  a  cross  upon  the  summit  of  my  costly  church.  Only 
he  who  receives  the  Christ  of  God  is  that  God-Man  who 
saves  through  the  shedding  of  His  precious  blood  all  who 
simply  believe  on  Him. 


CAPTIVITY  OF  THE  TEN  TRIBES. 

(2  Kings  xvii:  6-18.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.     The  End  of  the  Northern  Kingdom  (verses  i,  18). — 
It  is  significant  that  while  a  remnant  of  Judah  returned  from 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  25 

the  Babylonian  captivity,  the  ten  tribes  have  not  yet  been 
brought  back,  nor  is  their  whereabouts  known. 

2.  Jehovah's  Indictment  of  Israel  (verses  7-17)- — I'his 
is  reducible  to  general  counts,  i.  Ingratitude,  verse  7.  All 
their  sins  were  against  that  Jehovah  who  had  compassion- 
ated their  slavery  in  Egypt  and  had  redeemed  them.  2. 
Disobedience,  verses  8,  15,  16.  They  forsook  the  will  of 
God  for  self  will,  and  the  statutes  of  the  heathen.  3.  Apos- 
tasy, verses  9-17.  They  forsook  the  worship  of  Jehovah 
for  the  worship  of  false  gods  and  idols. 

3.  The  Lord's  Long  Suffering  (verse  13). — Every 
prophet  testified  against  the  sins  of  Israel,  but,  also,  had 
testified  of  the  willingness  of  God  to  forgive,  and  to  heal  if 
only  they  would  turn  to  Him  in  repentance  and  obedience. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Inevitable  judgment  for  unforsaken  sin — that  is  the  large 
truth  of  this  lesson.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  seven  hun- 
dred years  of  Israelitish  history  lie  between  this  act  of  final 
judgment,  and  the  day  when,  under  the  warnings  of  Moses 
as  recorded  in  Deuteronomy,  God  had  brought  the  people 
into  that  land.  Moses  had  sounded  the  faithful  warning: 
"If  thou  wilt  not  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law 

that  are  written  in  this  book then  the  Lord  will  make 

thy  plagues  wonderful and  the  Lord  shall  scatter  thee 

among  all  people,  from  the  one  end  of  the  earth  even  unto 
the  other"  (Deut.  xxviii :  58-65 ) . 

How  little  the  warning  was  heeded,  how  soon  the  sin 
came,  the  inspired  history  bears  witness.  Then  came  that 
which  had  not  been  foretold — the  six  hundred  years  of 
the  divine  forbearance  and  long  suffering,  together  with 
ceaseless  efforts  to  win  back  His  people.  So  far  as  Moses' 
words  went,  judgment  might  have  fallen  instantly  upon  the 


26  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

disobedience.  What  God  did  not  reveal  through  Moses, 
was  the  age  long  interval  of  forbearance.  Just  so,  in  the 
Old  Testament  prophecies  the  first  and  second  advents  of 
Messiah  blend  in  one  horizon,  for  to  the  Old  Testament 
prophet  the  day  of  grace  which  has  lasted  now  almost 
nineteen  centuries  was  not  revealed  (Eph.  iii:2-io).  No 
wonder  they  "searched  diligently,"  "what  manner  of  time 
the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify,  when  he 
testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glories 
which  should  follow"  (i  Pet.  i:  lo,  ii). 

But  "the  long  suffering  of  God  waited,"  as  in  the  days  of 
Noah,  and  because  "judgment  was  not  speedily  executed" 
men  ceased  to  believe  in  retribution.  A  parallel  only  on  a 
cosmic  instead  of  limited  Palestinian  scale  is  found  in  our 
own  age.  Nothing  can  be  at  once  more  simple,  direct  and 
awful  than  the  testimony  of  scripture  to  the  dread  alterna- 
tive of  neglecting  or  rejecting  the  offered  grace  of  God. 
The  Lamb's  book  of  life  or  the  lake  of  fire — these  are  the 
only  two  possible  ultimate  destinies.  "He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,  but  he  that  believeth  not 
the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him"  (John  iii:  36). 

And  what  we  need  to  see  is  that  the  inevitableness  of 
eternal  separation  from  God  of  those  who  do  not  believe,  de- 
sire or  love  God,  rests  not  upon 'some  arbitrary  decree,  but 
upon  the  eternal  and  indestructible  distinctions  between 
good  and  evil,  faith  and  doubt,  love  and  hatred.  "He  loved 
cursing,  so  let  it  be  unto  him ;  he  hated  blessing,  so  let  it  be 
far  from  him,"  is  God's  sorrowful  assent  to  man's  deliberate 
choice. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  2.^ 

ASA'S  GOOD  REIGN. 
(2  Chr.  xiv:  1-12.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  Asa's  reforms  (verses  1-7;   see  below). 

2.  The  Secret  of  Asa's  Victory  (verses  8-12).  Asa's 
beautiful  prayer  is  good  for  all  dispensations,  for  it  deals 
with  the  great  permanent  factors  of  man's  need  and  weak- 
ness and  the  strength  of  God.  Note  that  it  is  not  a  prayer  of 
despair,  but  the  confident  petition  of  a  heart  that  "rests" 
(verse  11)  on  God. 

11.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

As  not  infrequently  happens,  we  must  go  outside  the 
lesson  to  find  its  deepest  truth.  Our  lesson  records  the 
activities  of  Asa  in  the  things  of  God,  but  a  little  word 
concerning  this  king  in  another  book  of  the  Bible  gives 
the  secret  of  his  power  to  do  the  Lord's  work :  ''Never- 
theless, Asa's  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord  all  his  days." 
Reading  tjtat  we  no  longer  wonder  that  the  idol  houses 
came  down  and  walls  of  defense  went  up.  The  real  causes 
of  things  are  often  hidden  from  the  world. 

When  loving  hands  prepared  Martin  Luther's  body  for 
the  grave  it  was  found  that  his  knees  were  calloused  from 
his  hours  of  unceasing  prayer.  The  world  saw  Martin 
Luther  nailing  the  immortal  theses  to  the  church  door,  and 
heard  him  thundering  from  pulpit  and  printing  press  against 
the  iniquities  of  Rome.  The  Lord  saw  on  his  knees  a 
humble  man  whose  ''heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord  all  his 
Hfe." 

And  any  man,  king  or  peasant,  scholar  or  unlearned,  great 
or  small,  whose  heart  is  perfect  with  the  Lord  will  be  owned 


28  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

and  used  of  the  Lord.  What,  then  is  it  to  have  a  heart  per- 
fect with  the  Lord?  It  is  not  to  be  sinlessly  perfect  in  Hfe, 
nor  absolutely  flawless  in  obedience,  for  Asa  was  neither. 
Not  all  of  the  high  places  were  removed ;  and  Asa  gave  the 
Lord's  treasure  to  Ben-hadad  (i  Kings  xv:  14,  18).  And 
yet  the  Word  of  God  expressly  says  that  "Asa's  heart  was 
perfect  with  the  Lord." 

That  heart  is  perfect  with  the  Lord  which,  in  all  sincerity 
of  desire  and  intent,  longs  to  do  and  permit  to  be  done  the 
will  of  God.  Such  a  man  will  not  be  perfect,  but  he  will 
long  to  be,  and  will  mourn  when  he  is  not.  He  has  en- 
throned the  will  of  God  as  the  supreme  object  of  his  desire. 
But  he  lives  his  life  in  the  presence  of  three  hindering  forces. 

First  of  all  his  hinderances  is  himself  as  he  is  by  nature. 
He  is  not  in  the  flesh  as  to  standing  (Rom.  viii:  9),  but  the 
flesh  is  in  him,  and  the  old  self  will  is  a  vigilant  seeker  after 
the  throne  from  which  it  has  been  cast  down. 

Secondly,  the  man  whose  heart  is  right  with  God  lives  his 
life  in  a  vast  world-system  of  which  Satan  is  the  veiled 
prince  (John  xiv:3o)  and  god  (2  Cor.  iv:4).  It  spreads 
before  the  man  of  God  its  kingdom  of  pleasure ;  of  profit 
and  of  power. 

And,  finally,  such  a  man  is  hated  of  Satan,  and  the  prin- 
cipalities and  powers  of  evil  are  arrayed  against  him. 
Doubtless  the  divine  provision  for  his  threefold  need  is 
ample  (Gal.  v:  16,  17)  ;  Eph.  vi :  10-13),  but  doubtless,  too, 
the  man  of  God,  to  his  shame  and  sorrow,  before  God  will 
again  and  again  come  short  of  absolute  perfection.  But  he 
will  make  no  weak  excuses  for  his  failures,  judging  them 
honestly  before  God,  and  such  a  man  God  will  surely  use. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  29 

JEHOSHAPHAT'S  REFORM. 

(2  Chr.  xix:  i-ii.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  king's  sin  laid  hare  (verses  1-3).  It  is  easy  to 
forget  that  our  God,  all  gracious  though  He  be,  must  ever 
deal  in  exact  righteousness.  He  can  be  merciful  to  us  be- 
cause on  the  cross  every  demand  of  His  holy  government 
has  been  met. 

2.  The  fruits  of  righteousness  (verses  4-11).  He  is 
a  lovely  illustration  of  i  John  iii :  7,  "My  little  children,  let 
no  man  deceive  you;  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is  right- 
eous." Doing  never  makes  us  righteous,  but  when  by  faith 
we  have  been  made  righteous  (Rom.  iii:  21-26;  2  Cor.  v: 
21),  the  fruit  of  righteousness  must  follow. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Here  is  a  lesson  in  the  restoration  to  the  divine  favor  and 
the  divine  service  of  a  sinning  saint.  It  is  worth  our  while 
to  look  a  little  closely  at  what  is  before  us. 

First  of  all,  are  we  sure  that,  apart  from  the  stern  re- 
buke of  God's  seer,  we  should  have  noticed  that  Jehosha- 
phat  had  sinned?  Suppose  the  record  had  informed  us  of 
the  fact  merely  that  Jehoshaphat  had  "joined  affinity"  with 
Ahab  ?  "Doubtless  it  was  a  wise  thing  to  do."  For  there  is 
a  strange  tendency  to  venerate  Bible  good  men  unduly. 
The  Bible  does  not,  but  shows  them  as  they  were,  men  of 
like  passions  with  ourselves  (James  v:  17),  but,  as  to  the 
trend  and  chief  tenor  of  their  lives,  devoted  heart  and  soul 
to  the  Lord.  So  of  the  writers  of  Scripture ;  they  were  fal- 
lible men — Peter  dissembled  at  Antioch,  and  Paul  shaved  his 
head  at  Jerusalem — but  they  wrote  in  the  words  which  the 


30  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Holy  Spirit  taught  (i  Cor.  ii:  3),  and  so  gave  us  infallible 
Scriptures. 

Jehoshaphat  did  evil  in  "joining  affinity"  with  the  wicked 
and  idolatrous  Ahab,  but  when  the  Word  of  God  by  the 
prophet  John  came  to  him  he  bowed  under  its  authority, 
"prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  Lord,"  and  then  went  forth 
in  renewed  strength  to  do  a  great  work  for  God. 

What  a  lesson  of  hope  is  this  for  a  sinning  saint !  Surely 
it  is  a  needed  word,  for  there  is  a  tendency  to  despair, 
if  not  of  restoration  to  communion,  at  least  of  restoration  to 
service,  in  the  heart  of  a  child  of  God  who  has  failed  in 
obedience.  And  he  will  find  in  the  religious  literature  of  the 
day  enough  to  confirm  his  fears.  A  very  common  and  wide- 
spread opinion  finds  expression  in  the  verses  everywhere 
said  or  sung  about  a  bird  with  a  broken  wing  who  could 
never  fly  very  high  again.  Out  upon  such  unbiblical  bosh ! 
Peter  did  his  very  best  flying  after  his  wing  was  broken 
that  awful  night  of  his  denial.  It  was  he,  not  John  or 
James,  who  could  say  to  all  Israel :  ''Ye  denied  the  Holy 
One." 

We  are  not  told  what  heart  searchings  before  God  Je- 
hoshaphat had  under  the  prophet's  rebuke.  We  do  not  know 
what  passed  between  the  Lord  and  Peter  in  their  first  inter- 
view after  the  resurrection  (i  Cor.  xv:  5;  Luke  xxiv:  34), 
but  we  do  see  the  Hebrew  king  doing  valiantly  for  God  in 
his  kingdom;  and  we  do  see  Peter  winning  souls  in  Jeru- 
salem and  writing  of  the  "precious"  things  of  Christ. 

In  one  such  case,  that  of  David's,  we  are  shown  the  whole 
method  of  restoration.  When  Nathan  brought  home  to 
David  the  great  and  awful  sin  of  his  life,  he  uttered  the 
fifty-first  Psalm.  That  Psalm  is  the  highway  over  which 
any  sinning  servant  of  God  may  pass  once  more  into  the 
presence  of  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.    Its  steps 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  31 

are:    Confession,  cleansing,  restoration  of  joy  and  power, 
service,  worship,  communion  (Psa.  li;   i  John  i:9). 


JOASH,  THE  BOY  KING. 

(2  Kings  xi :  1-16.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Reign  of  Athaliah  (verse  i). — The  annals  of 
human  wickedness  contain  no  record  more  evil  than  this, 
for  Athaliah  destroyed  her  own  grandchildren.  How  brief 
the  record,  how  awful  the  deed! 

2.  God's  Promise  Cannot  Pail  (verses  2,  3). — See  Heart 
of  the  Lesson. 

3.  The  Wise  Measures  of  Jehoiada  (verses  4-12). — The 
guidance  of  God  is  by  His  Spirit,  and  He  is  the  Spirit  "of 
power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind"  (2  Tim.  i :  7).  All 
these  attributes  are  manifest  in  Jehoiada's  actions  toward 
Joash. 

4.  The  Pate  of  Athaliah  (verses  13-16). — It  should  be 
remembered  in  reference  to  all  such  instances  of  retribution 
as  this  in  the  Old  Testament,  that  they  are  not  massacres 
but  executions,  in  accordance  with  Gen.  ix :  6. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  immutability  of  God's  covenants  is,  of  course,  the 
outstanding  truth  of  this  lesson.  More  than  a  century  and 
a  half  before  the  birth  of  Joash,  Jehovah  had  entered  into  a 
voluntary,  unconditional  covenant  with  the  great  ancestor 
of  Joash,  King  David,  by  which  He  pledges  Himself  to 
give  to  David  an  undying  posterity,  an  unending  kingdom 
(2  Sam.  vii:  7-14).    In  the  89th  Psalm  Jehovah  confirmed 


32  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

that  covenant  by  an  oath.  One  proviso  was  made:  If 
David's  posterity  should  become  disobedient  or  apostate, 
then  Jehovah  would  "visit  their  transgression  with  the  rod, 
and  their  iniquity  with  stripes"  (Psa.  Ixxxix :  28-36)  ;  but 
even  here  He  is  careful  to  add,  "My  covenant  will  I  not 
break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my  lips." 

This  covenant  becomes  the  great  theme  of  the  prophets. 
Isaiah  tells  us  that  Jerusalem  will  be  the  capital  of  the  prom- 
ised kingdom,  and  that  the  final  King,  born  of  a  virgin,  will 
be  "Immanuel,"  "the  mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Father, 
the  Prince  of  peace."  And,  lest  this  should  be  interpreted  as 
of  some  so-called  "spiritual"  and  invisible  kingdom,  he  is 
careful  to  tell  us  that  it  shall  be  "upon  the  throne  of  David" 
(Isa.  ii:i-3;  vii  113-14;   ix:6-8). 

Jeremiah  takes  up  the  theme :  "The  days  are  come,  saith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise  unto  David  a  righteous  Branch, 
and  a  King  shall  reign  and  prosper,  and  execute  judgment 
and  justice  m  the  earth;"  and  he  adds  a  detail  of  the  estab- 
Hshment  of  the  kingdom  which  is  never  afterwards  lacking 
— the  promise  of  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  their  own  land 
(Jer.  xxiii:3-8;  Ezk.  xxxvii :  21-25).  See,  also,  Hos.  iii : 
4-5;  Joel  ii:i-7;  Luke  i  126-33;  Acts  xv:  14-17).  The 
promised  chastisement  has  fallen  upon  the  Davidic  family; 
the  ultimate  Heir  has  appeared,  been  rejected,  crucified,  and 
raised  from  the  dead,  and  is  coming  again  to  sit  on  the 
throne  of  His  father  David. 

So  much  by  way  of  explanation.  Now  read  the  history  of 
the  kings  of  Judah,  descendants  of  David,  in  the  light  of 
Satan's  endeavors  to  frustrate  the  covenant.  King  after 
king  wa5  led  into  disobedience  and  apostasy ;  and  now, 
through  Athaliah,  the  Adversary  seeks  to  exterminate  the 
royal  seed.  Well  he  knew  that  if  that  were  done  he  need 
no  longer  dread  the  Head-Bruiser  of  Gen.  iii:  15.    Almost 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  33 

he  succeeds,  but  Joash  was  saved.  Again,  when  the  final 
Heir  appeared  Satan  seemed  to  have  succeeded,  for  during 
three  days  and  nights  the  Son  of  David  lay  dead.  But  God 
had  resurrection  in  reserve. 


JOASH  REPAIRS  THE  TEMPLE. 

(2  Kings  xii :  4-15.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Failure  of  the  Priests  (verses  4-6). — It  appears 
from  verses  7  and  8  that  the  money  brought  to  the  temple 
under  the  varied  requirements  of  the  law  had  been  appro- 
priated by  the  priests,  and  not  expended  upon  the  repairs 
of  the  temple. 

2.  The  Temple  Repaired  (verses  7-15). — This  division 
calls  for  no  comment.  Jehoiada,  with  that  practical  wisdom 
which  he  manifested  in  the  dethronement  and  execution  of 
Athaliah,  and  the  enthronement  of  Joash,  took  measures  to 
secure  the  temple  revenues  for  the  repair  of  the  temple. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Every  revival  in  Israel  centered  itself  upon  the  temple. 
The  first  thought  of  a  good  king,  especially  in  the  first  flush 
of  his  faith  and  gratitude,  was  for  the  restoration  of  the 
honor  and  authority  of  Jehovah,  of  which  the  temple  and  its 
rituals  were  the  manifestation.  The  temple,  too,  was  the 
token  of  the  unity  of  Israel.  In  no  other  place  could  the 
offerings  under  the  law  be  brought;  nowhere  else  could 
Jehovah's  priests  lawfully  minister ;  nowhere  else  were  the 
ark  of  the  covenant  and  the  shekinah  glory. 

It  was  inevitable,  therefore,  that  a  truly  spiritual  revival 
3 


34  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

should  be  first  of  all  solicitous  for  the  temple,  God's  earthly 
abiding  place.  Any  movement,  for  example,  which  sought 
only  to  bring  one  tribe  back  from  a  low  to  a  high  state  of 
obedience,  ignoring  the  eleven  tribes,  would  have  been  in- 
finitely below  the  Spirit's  level — even  though  calling  itself 
a  revival,  it  would  have  been  clannish,  sectarian,  divisive. 
The  revival  under  Elijah  may  seem  to  form  an  exception, 
but  really  estabHshes  the  rule,  for  (i)  the  temple  was  in 
the  power  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  and,  (2)  when  Elijah  re- 
paired the  altar  of  the  Lord  on  Carmel — an  old  altar  ante- 
dating the  temple — "he  took  twelve  stones,  according  to  the 
number  of  the  tribes  of  the  sons  of  Jacob."  Of  the  tribes 
ten  were  wholly  unrepresented,  but  a  prophet  of  Jehovah 
could  not  ignore  the  unity  of  Israel,  of  which  temple  and 
altar  were  the  token. 

And  all  this  is  typical,  as  we  learn  from  Eph.  ii :  19-22,  of 
the  church,  which   "groweth  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the 

Lord builded    together    for    an    habitation    of    God 

through  the  spirit."  Thank  God,  that  temple  can  never 
have  "breaches"  nor  fall  into  ruin  (Matt,  xvi :  18)  ;  but  the 
greater  part  of  our  modern  talking  and  modern  working  for 
what  we  are  pleased  to  call  revivals,  wholly  ignores  the 
temple.  The  sense  of  the  unity  of  the  one  body  is  gone, 
together  with  the  yearning  for  blessing  for  every  member 
of  that  body — every  living  stone  in  that  temple.  In  the  mul- 
tiplicity of  sects  we  have  lost  the  vision  of  the  unity.  We 
need  a  renewal  of  that  vision,  and  with  it  a  yearning  for  a 
revival  of  holiness  and  of  power  which  shall  hold  in  its 
longing  not  man-made  sects,  but  God-made  saints. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  35 

ISAIAH'S  MESSAGE  TO  JUDAH. 

(Isa.  i:  1-9,  16-20.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Condition  of  Jiidah  (verses  1-4). — This  is  a  cry- 
out  of  the  heart  of  God;  His  children  have  rebelled;  they 
are  more  brutish  than  the  ox  or  the  ass. 

2.  The  Failure  of  Chastisement  (verses  1-8). — That 
great  charge  to  Israel,  Deut.  xxvii-xxix,  holds  a  warning 
that  if  the  people  should  become  disobedient  and  apostate, 
increasingly  severe  chastisements  should  fall  upon  them  in 
the  land  (Deut.  xxix:  22-25);  ^^^  that,  failing  these,  the 
people  should  be  cast  out  of  the  land  (verses  26-28) .  Isaiah 
announces  the  failure  of  the  chastisements  to  restore  Judah ; 
there  remains  only  dispersion. 

3.  The  Mention  of  the  Remnant  (verse  9). — The  doc- 
trine of  the  remnant  is  one  of  the  most  important  in  Scrip- 
ture. There  is  always  in  Israel  a  remnant,  as  in  the  church 
there  are  always  some  who  are  of  the  Philadelphian  spirit 
(Rev.  iii:8)  and  whether  in  Israel  or  the  church,  God's 
fellowship  and  testimony  are  always  with  the  remnant. 

4.  The  Offer  of  Mercy  (verses  16-20). — Before  resort- 
ing to  the  terrible  judgment  of  dispersion  God  sends  tender 
appeals.  Even  in  their  depth  of  iniquity  He  will  save.  See 
2  Chron.  xxxvi:  15-17. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Neither  the  disclosure  of  the  heart  of  God  in  verses  2  and 
3,  nor  of  the  compassion  of  God  in  verses  16-20,  wonderful 
as  these  are,  can  be  considered  the  distinctive  truths  of  this 
lesson,  because  these  two  revelations  of  God  are  everywhere, 
from  Genesis  to  Revelation.    Never  do  "we- weary  of  them; 


36  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

never  do  we  get  beyond  the  need  of  being  reminded  that 
our  sins  afflict  the  Father's  heart,  nor  beyond  the  need  of 
assurance  that  for  the  greatest  of  those  sins  pardon  and 
cleansing  may  be  found  in  the  sacrifice  provided  by  the 
Father's  love. 

But  in  verse  i8  something  is  said  concerning  our  sins 
which  is  wholly  lost  sight  of  in  our  common  way  of  dealing 
with  that  text.  We  read  it  as  if  it  said :  ''Though  your  sins 
be  as  scarlet,"  you  "shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they 
be  red  like  crimson"  you  "shall  be  as  wool" ;  but  that  is  not 
what  is  said.  It  is  the  scarlet  sins  which  are  to  be  white; 
the  crimson  sins  which  are  to  be  as  wool.  Is  not  here 
something  which  should  arrest  our  attention?  Have  we 
not  here,  if  only  we  may  come  at  it,  the  heart  of  this  lesson? 

But,  we  ask,  how  can  sin  be  anything  but  sin,  loathsome, 
guilty,  abhorred  of  God?  A  thousand  times  let  it  be  re- 
peated— sin  as  sin  can  never  be  anything  else.  But  the 
divine  thought  here  seems  to  go  back  of  the  act  into  origins. 
This  is  our  Lord's  way  in  that  most  searching  of  all  scrip- 
tures— the  very  point  of  the  two-edged  sword — the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount ;  the  guilt  is  there  in  all  its  unspeakable  vile- 
ness — only  it  is  traced  back  to  its  origin. 

But  the  sex  instinct  is  not  evil ;  it  is  holy  and  good.  Upon 
it  God  has  built  the  holiest  thing  on  earth,  the  family.  About 
it  cluster  the  sacredest,  sweetest  words.  Husband,  wife, 
father,  mother,  brother,  sister,  child,  home.  And,  by  as 
much  as  the  instinct  is  pure  and  ineffably  beautiful,  by  so 
much  is  its  perversion  the  most  infernal  and  loathsome  of 
all  the  sins  possible  to  man. 

But  suppose  the  redemptive  processes,  tracing  a  hateful 
sin  back  to  its  origin  the  instinct  perverted,  degraded,  fallen, 
propose  to  preserve  the  instinct,  the  foundation  of  all  social 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  37 

order  and  of  all  manliness  and  womanliness,  but  to  free  it 
absolutely  from  evil  ?  to  make  it  as  white  as  snow  ? 

Take,  again,  the  capacity  for  forming  moral  judgments. 
That  capacity  implies  the  capacity  for  wrath,  for  noble  in- 
dignation. That  capacity  inheres  in  God  Himself.  But, 
fallen,  degraded,  perverted  and  centered  on  self,  wrath 
murders.  Suppose  God  has  lodged  in  the  blood  of  Christ 
and  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  power  to  preserve  wrath, 
but  to  make  it  like  wool — the  wrath  of  the  Lamb ! 

And  so  with  all  the  primal  instincts.  And  the  wonderful 
heart  of  this  lesson  is  that  God  in  saving  us  does  not  de- 
humanize, but  rather  rehumanizes  us. 


JOSIAH'S  GOOD  REIGN. 

(2  Chron.  xxxiv:  1-13.) 
II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  beautiful  sequence  in  verse  3,  opens  to  us  the  heart 
of  this  lesson.  A  young  man  of  sixteen — for  maturity  comes 
early  to  kings — Josiah  ''began  to  seek  after  the  God  of 
David  his  father ;  and  in  the  twelfth  year  he  began  to  purge 
Judah  and  Jerusalem."  The  result  and  the  cause  have  the 
inevitability  of  a  law  of  nature.  Whoever,  king  or  peasant, 
begins  to  seek  after  God,  and  keeps  it  up  for  years,  as  Josiah 
did,  will  begin  to  do  things.  God  fills  the  seeking  soul  with 
Himself,  and  the  God-possessed  soul  cannot  rest  in  a  world 
packed  with  evil.  "My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I 
work,"  said  Christ. 

Josiah  begins  right.  "In  the  beginning  God,"  is  the  sub- 
lime opening  sentence  of  holy  writ ;  and  in  the  final  sifting 


38  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

it  will  be  found  that  all  great  work  for  humanity  began,  not 
with  humanity  but  with  God. 

As  the  young  king  went  on  seeking  after  the  God  of 
David  his  father,  and  as  each  discovery  in  the  shoreless 
ocean  of  the  Infinite  One's  wisdom,  love  and  power  stimu- 
lated him  to  yet  closer,  deeper  seeking,  he  began  to  see  that 
only  God  counts,  only  God  matters ;  and  that  the  quality  of 
sin  which  makes  it  horrible  and  intolerable  is  that  it  insults 
and  grieves  God. 

Josiah  may  well  have  pondered  a  great  saying  of  his  an- 
cestor David  in  that  wonderful  penitential  psalm,  the  cry  of 
a  heart  broken  by  the  revelation  of  its  own  evil;  ''against 
Thee,  Thee  only  have  I  sinned."  What !  had  he  not  sinned 
against  his  good  soldier  Uriah  and  against  his  sister  woman 
Bathsheba?  Oh,  yes — in  a  secondary  sense,  but  the  essence 
of  his  sin  was  that  in  corrupting  Bathsheba,  and  in  com- 
passing the  murder  of  Uriah,  he  had  dared  to  lift  his  hand 
against  a  man  and  a  woman  whom  God  had  made. 

And  in  his  four  years'  quest  of  the  God  of  David  he 
would  inevitably  come  to  see  why  idolatry  is  the  first  and 
greatest  of  sins  just  because  it  displaces  God  from  the  soul 
and  usurps  His  throne  in  heart  and  life. 

Our  world,  like  Josiah's  Jerusalem,  is  full  of  high  places 
and  altars  of  Baalim,  and  there  is  sore  need  that  one  arise 
with  power  to  cast  them  down  and  break  them  in  pieces. 
Covetousness  is  idolatry,  and  never  was  Mammon  so  wor- 
shipped as  now,  and  never  did  the  altars  of  Baalim  in  Jeru- 
salem smoke  with  such  sacrifices  as  are  cast  on  Mammon's 
altars  in  America.  The  current  revelations  tell  the  awful 
tale.  Honor,  virtue,  happiness,  benevolence,  love  and  life 
are  the  sacrifices  freely  offered  to  that  Mammon  whom  Mil- 
ton called,  ''The  least  erected  fiend  that  fell." 

And  many  friends  of  humanity  perceive  this,  and  there 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  39 

is  much  casting  about  for  the  remedy.  Doubtless  in  Jerusa- 
lem many  true  lovers  of  God  mourned  the  all  but  universal 
apostasy  around  them,  and  considered  how  Judah  and  Jeru- 
salem might  be  purged — and  all  the  time  a  young  man  in  Je- 
rusalem was  thinking  about  God,  and  seeking  God.  And 
when  God  had  grown  so  great  to  him  that  all  life  had  sig- 
nificance because  of  its  relation  to  God,  and  all  human  af- 
fairs were  of  importance  because  humanity  is  God's — then 
he  saw  the  high  places  and  the  altars  of  Baalim  and  smote 
them  down. 

The  Puritans,  despite  their  curious  and  grotesque  travesty 
of  Christianity,  had  a  great  conception  of  God  in  His  holi- 
ness and  majesty,  and  because  they  were  so  filled  with  Him, 
the  high  places  of  evil  in  England  went  down. 

The  great  need  to-day  is  to  seek  after  God. 


JOSIAH  AND  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW. 

(2  Chron.  xxxiv :  14-28.) 
II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

*'The  law  is  good  if  a  man  use  it  lawfully,"  and  the  lawful 
use  of  the  law  has  a  beautiful  illustration  in  this  lesson: 
*'And  it  came  to  pass  when  the  king  had  heard  the  words  of 
the  law  that  he  rent  his  clothes" — the  oriental  gesture  of 
despair.  That  gesture  told  better  than  words  how  convic- 
tion had,  through  the  law,  struck  through  the  king's  soul. 
It  was  as  if  he  had  said :  *lf  that  is  the  law  of  the  Lord 
then  am  I  undone,  and  my  kingdom  is  undone." 

And  that  is  precisely  the  work  of  the  law.  Josiah  might 
have  expressed  himself  in  the  very  words  of  Paul :  "By  the 
law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin" ;   "I  had  not  known  sin,  but  by 


40  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

the  law" ;  "For  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once ;  but  when 
the  commandment  came,  sin  revived,  and  I  died." 

For  the  law  has  but  one  language :  'What  things  soever 
the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the  law ;  that 
every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  become 
guilty  before  God."  "For  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of 
the  law  are  under  the  curse,  for  it  is  written,  cursed  is 
every  one  that  continueth  7iot  in  all  things  which  are  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them" 

Perhaps  the  most  serious  and  hopeless  feature  of  the 
present  condition  is  that  the  law  has  lost  its  cutting  edge. 
And  yet  the  law  is  the  same,  and  its  lawful  use  is  the  same. 
It  would  be  more  exact  to  say  that  the  sword  of  the  law  is 
sheathed.  It  is  still  flourished,  and  many  attempted  thrusts 
are  made  with  it,  but  no  garments  are  rent,  no  one  is  guilty 
and  undone  because  of  it. 

And  the  scabbard  in  which  it  has  been  sheathed  and  made 
harmless  is  the  teaching — a  survival  in  Protestantism  of 
Roman  theology — that  the  law  is  a  rule  of  life,  and  not,  as 
Paul  says :   "A  ministration  of  death." 

No  one  is  cut  down  by  the  law  because  we  are  all  hoping 
yet  to  keep  it  better.  But  the  law  never  says :  "Try  again," 
to  the  sinner;  it  simply  launches  its  curse;  pronounces  its 
sentence :   "The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die." 

And  we  honor  the  law  when  we  accept  its  righteous  sen- 
tence, and  turn  to  God  for  His  mercy  through  Christ  Jesus. 

Nor  is  it  the  commandments  only  which  we  should  read 
or  hear  with  heart-searching  and  conviction.  The  Beati- 
tudes afford  an  illustration  of  this.  We  preach  sermons  in 
praise  of  the  beatitudes ;  we  expound  them,  explaining  what 
it  means  to  be  "poor  in  spirit,"  to  "mourn,"  to  be  "meek," 
and  so  on.  But  why  do  we  never  say :  "Woe  is  me  because 
I   am  proud   in   spirit,   self-satisfied,   self-seeking,   and   so 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  41 

wholly  lacking  this  nine-fold  blessedness  ?"  In  like  manner 
we  read  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  ist  Corinthians,  admir- 
ing it  as  if  it  were  a  mere  poem.  Or,  if  we  go  beyond  liter- 
ary admiration  we  only  say :  "How  beautiful  is  this  love  of 
which  Paul  speaks,"  and  never,  or  rarely,  **Alas !  how  un- 
like am  I  to  all  this,"  going  away  to  God  in  the  secret  place 
in  brokenness  of  spirit — not  because  of  this  or  that  overt 
sin,  so  much  as  that  our  hearts  are  cold  and  hard  and  proud  ? 

When  Paul  wrote  the  first  letter  to  the  Corinthians  the 
effect  of  its  faithful  and  tender  rebukes  and  exhortations 
showed  the  work  of  the  word  in  exercised  consciences. 
"What  carefulness  it  wrought  in  you,  yea,  what  clearing  of 
yourselves,  yea,  what  indignation,  yea,  what  fear,  yea,  what 
vehement  desire,  yea,  what  zeal." 

There  is  great  need  that  we  should  cleanse  our  ways  by 
taking  heed  thereunto  according  to  His  word. 


JEHOIAKIM  BURNS  THE  WORD  OF  GOD. 

(Jer.  xxxvi.  21-32.) 
II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Two  thoughts  dominate  this  lesson:  the  indestructibility 
of  the  word  of  God,  and  the  way  men  seek  to  destroy  it. 
Incidentally,  also,  the  inner  reason  why  men  desire  to  de- 
stroy the  word  of  God  is  disclosed.  In  the  present  instance, 
"the  roll  of  a  book"  which  Jeremiah  had  dictated  to  Baruch, 
the  scribe,  contained  "all  the  words"  that  Jehovah  had 
spoken  "against  Israel  and  against  Judah,  and  against  all 
the  nations" ;  and  the  roll  of  the  words  was  written  in  the 
hope  of  Judah's  repentance.  "It  may  be  that  the  house  of 
Judah  will  hear  all  the  evil  which  I  purpose  to  do  unto  them ; 


42  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

that  they  may  return  every  man  from  his  evil  way,  that  I 
may  forgive  their  iniquity  and  their  sin." 

But  Jehoiakim  had  no  mind  to  accept  humbly  the  rebuke 
of  his  sins,  nor  to  forsake  them.  Perhaps  he  thought  that 
by  destroying  the  indictment  he  might  escape  the  judgment. 

And  just  there  is  the  reason  for  all  the  attempts  of  men 
in  all  the  ages  to  destroy  the  book  of  God.  It  testifies 
against  the  pride  and  evil  of  the  human  heart,  and  asserts 
the  sovereign  right  of  God  to  the  implicit  obedience,  love 
and  worship  of  all  men. 

In  no  other  way  is  it  possible  to  account  for  the  ceaseless 
enmity  which  this  one  book  alone  of  all  the  books  in  the 
world  has  encountered.  Why  else,  should  this  one  book  be 
singled  out  for  human  hatred  ? 

And  observe :  It  is  not  so  much  the  book  itself  which 
provokes  the  hatred  of  the  human  heart  as  the  claim  which 
it  makes  to  be  authoritative.  Once  concede  that  it  is  a 
human  production,  written  along  through  the  ages  by  a 
people  "with  a  genius  for  religion" — as  other  people  have  a 
genius  for  art,  or  for  invention — and  the  Bible,  thus  de- 
prived of  its  divine  authority,  is  tolerated.  That  is  the  dis- 
tinctive note  of  present-day  assaults  upon  the  Scriptures, 

And,  secondly,  the  lesson  discloses  the  method  of  the  war- 
fare against  the  Bible — by  little  and  little.  **And  it  came  to 
pass  that  when  Judah  had  written  three  or  four  leaves,  he 
cut  it  with  the  penknife,  and  cast  it  into  the  fire  that  was 
upon  the  hearth." 

Wholesale  denunciations  of  the  Bible  are  out  of  fashion. 
On  the  contrary,  the  modern  Jehoiakim  will  say  beautiful 
things  about  the  Bible.  He  freely  concedes  to  it  the  first 
place  among  the  so-called  "sacred  books"  of  the  nations, 
and  affirms  that  in  a  greater  degree  than  any  of  them  it  has 
"caught  true  concepts"  from  God. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  43 

But  when  this  is  said,  then  the  penknife  work  begins. 
We  must  cut  out  the  bibhcal  conception  of  the  being  and 
character  of  God.  He  is  not,  the  modern  Jehoiakim  says, 
capable  of  wrath,  nor  does  he  "punish"  sin.  Sin  punishes 
itself.    Therefore  there  is  no  hell,  no  eternal  punishment. 

We  must,  too,  cut  out  the  whole  Bible  conception  of  man 
as  having  been  created  upright  and  innocent — an  innocency 
from  which  the  first  man  fell.  Man  began  as  protoplasm  or 
as  a  "primeval  germ,"  and  blundered  up  and  is  still  blunder- 
ing up. 

That  makes  it  necessary  to  cut  out  the  Bible  view  of  sin. 
Sin  is  only  traces  of  the  lower  forms  through  which  man 
has  emerged — traces  for  which  "he  is  no  more  responsible 
than  a  puppy  is  for  its  tendency  to  destroy  things." 

But,  thirdly,  the  word  of  God  is  absolutely  indestructible 
When  Baruch's  roll  lay  a  heap  of  blackened  ashes  on  Jehoi- 
akim's  hearth,  the  king  imagined,  no  doubt,  that  the  matter 
was  ended;  but — 

"Then  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Jeremiah,  after  that 
the  king  had  burned  the  roll,  and  the  words  which  Baruch 
wrote  at  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah,  saying:  "Take  thee  again 
another  roll  and  write  in  it  all  the  former  words  that  were  in 
the  first  roll." 

No :  "The  Scripture  cannot  be  broken."  "Forever  is  my 
word  settled  in  the  heavens."  But  the  faith  of  millions  in 
that  word  may  be  broken,  and  is  being  broken  by  the  pen- 
knife work  of  Jehoiakim's  successors. 


44  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

JEREMIAH  IN  THE  DUNGEON. 

(Jer.  xxxviii :  1-13.) 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  permitted  affliction  of  the  good  is  evidently  the  heart 
of  things  here.  In  a  time  of  final  declension  and  utter  apos- 
tasy Jeremiah  stands  forth  uttering  in  a  blameless  life  the 
terrible  messages  of  God.  No  braver,  more  devoted  servant, 
save  only  Jesus  Christ,  did  Jehovah  ever  have  on  this  earth. 
And  furthermore,  the  very  point  of  his  pleading  with  king 
and  people  was  the  power  of  God  to  deliver  Judah  even  yet 
from  all  the  power  of  Babylon  if  only  Judah  would  return 
to  Jehovah,  her  covenant  God. 

And,  now,  in  the  mystery  of  God's  will,  the  very  preacher 
of  His  power  to  deliver  is  not  delivered !  "Then  took  they 
Jeremiah,  and  cast  him  into  the  dungeon  of  Malchiah  the 
son  of  Hammelech,  that  was  in  the  court  of  the  prison 
so  Jeremiah  sunk  in  the  mire."    Why  ? 

We  must  remember  that  this  case  does  not  stand  alone. 
Job,  the  best  man  of  his  time,  is  given  over,  as  to  all  else 
but  his  life,  into  the  hand  of  Satan.  The  three  faithful  Jews 
are  cast  into  the  burning  fiery  furnace.  Daniel  himself  must 
go  into  the  den  of  the  lions.  John  the  Baptist  loses  his  head 
at  the  request  of  a  lewd  dancing  girl.  Stephen  is  stoned. 
Paul  is  beaten  and  imprisoned.  All  the  apostles  save  John 
die  by  the  executioner.  Countless  Christian  maidens  are 
torn  by  lions  and  devoured  by  flames.    Why? 

We  may  not  go  to  the  end  of  this  mystery  of  the  permitted 
suffering  of  the  good,  but  we  may  go  some  way  in  it. 

Think  first  of  the  cases  illustrated  by  this  instance  of 
Jeremiah's — the  cases  which  end  in  deliverance.  In  all  of 
them  three  facts  are  clearly  discernible. 

First :     The  power  of  God  is  far  more  strikingly  shown 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  45 

in  His  deliverance  of  His  servants  from  the  trials  into 
which  they  were  permitted  to  be  drawn,  than  it  could  have 
been  in  simply  keeping  them  out  of  the  trial.  It  was  an 
amazing  manifestation  of  the  power  of  God  that  Shadrach 
and  his  companions  were  not  hurt  by  the  flames,  nor  Daniel 
by  the  lions.  Jeremiah,  mute  and  meek  in  his  horrible  miry 
pit,  was  an  appeal  to  whatever  of  heart  and  conscience 
Judah  had  left. 

Secondly:  We  cannot  doubt  that  for  them  there  was 
great  gain.  Not  always  do  the  narratives  show  this,  but 
they  show  it  often  enough  to  make  us  sure  that  suffering, 
unjustly  inflicted,  meekly  borne,  is  always  a  process  of 
blessing. 

Cleansing  and  a  resultant  nearness  to  God  are  invariable. 
In  the  burning,  fiery  furnace  the  three  men  of  the  captivity 
were  seen  wallcing,  their  bonds  burnt  away,  but  not  even 
their  garments  hurt,  while  with  them  was  the  ineffable  pres- 
ence of  "the  Fourth." 

Job,  good,  but  too  conscious  of  it,  was  brought  to  see 
God,  and  in  the  light  of  that  vision  to  see  also  and  to  abhor 
himself. 

Thirdy:  The  permitted  suffering  of  the  Saints  often 
turns  out  to  the  furtherance  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  their 
greater  efficiency.  Job,  purified,  becomes  the  priest  through 
whom  his  accusing  friends  are  pardoned.  Aged  John,  exiled 
to  Patmos,  is  given  the  Apocalypse  to  write.  There  are. 
mysteries,  but  we  do  know 

"  'Tis  suffering  sublimes  the  soul, 
So  perfect  peace  may  come  at  last, 
And  we  shall  know  God's  kind  intent 
When  these  sharp  pains  are  past." 


46  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

But  of  the  undelivered,  what  shall  we  say  ?  To  what  end 
the  murder  of  John  the  Baptist,  the  stoning  of  Stephen,  the 
cruel  deaths  of  the  unnumbered  martyrs? 

Let  us  remember  that  there  are  two  spheres  of  life  to  be 
taken  into  account.  When  earth's  last  word  is  said,  eter- 
nity's first  word  is  uttered.  Never,  until  we  pass,  **To 
where,  beyond  these  voices  there  is  peace,"  shall  we  know 
the  other  side  of  agony  and  death  of  the  good ;  but  this  at 
least  faith  confidently  affirms — that  everything  which  seems 
hardest  in  the  permitted  suffering  of  the  good,  will  some 
time  be  seen  to  be  God's  sweetest  touch  of  love. 


MANASSEH'S  SIN  AND  REPENTANCE. 

(2  Chron.  xxxiii:  1-13.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  Manasseh's  life-record  (verses  i,  2). 

2.  The  king's  great  sin  (verses  3-10). 

3.  ManasseWs  terrible  punishment  (verse  11).  The 
king's  repentance  and  restoration. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  core  of  the  matter  in  this  lesson  is  in  the  twelfth 
verse :  "And  when  he  was  in  affliction,  he  besought  the  Lord 
his  God,  and  humbled  himself  greatly  before  the  God  of  his 
fathers."  Two  things  followed  Manasseh's  humbling:  he 
got  an  answer  to  his  prayer,  and  he  got  really  acquainted 
with  God. 

Put,  as  you  truly  may,  into  the  word  affliction  all  the  mean- 
ings of  those  other  words  of  Scripture,  "chastening,"  "tribu- 
lation," and  "purging,"  and  think  of  these  experiences  not 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  47 

as  the  accidents  and  mere  chances  of  the  believer's  life,  but 
as  the  sent  experiences  of  the  Father's  disciplinary  dealing, 
every  one  a  deliberate  plan ;  every  one  fitted  with  exquisite 
skill  to  the  effecting  of  a  certain  object;  every  one  held 
steadily  in  the  Father's  hand  with  His  loving  faithful  finger 
on  the  pulse  of  His  child — think  of  the  word  affliction  that 
way,  and  you  are  in  the  very  heart,  not  alone  of  this  Sunday 
school  lesson,  but  of  the  deepest  mysteries  of  Christian  ex- 
perience. 

Manasseh's  great  ancestor  and  covenant  head,  king  David, 
said,  "It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted;"  never 
once  does  he  say,  "It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  ex- 
alted." David  poor,  cast  out,  hunted  like  a  partridge  on  the 
mountains  of  Israel  was  always  a  humble,  hopeful,  holy 
David.  But  David  on  a  throne,  rich,  idle,  overfed,  was  a 
David  ready  for  any  sensuality,  any  cruelty. 

Why  are  the  good  afflicted?  That  problem  is  as  old  as 
Job,  and  not  much  has  been  added  to  the  solution  of  the 
problem  since  Job.    It  is  all  answered  there  at  last. 

And  perhaps  the  sorest  trial  of  the  afflicted  is  still  that  to 
him  comes  Eliphaz  the  Temanite,  and  Bildad  the  Shuhite, 
and  Zophar  the  Naamanite,  with  their  little  self-righteous 
theories  about  the  affliction  of  the  good.  The  affliction  itself 
is  hard,  but  it  is  as  a  bed  of  down  compared  to  Eliphaz  and 
Bildad  and  Zophar.    But  these,  too,  must  be  borne. 

Paul  calls  affliction  "tribulation,"  from  the  Roman  thresh- 
ing implement.  And  that  means  more  than  that  it  falls  like 
the  blows  of  a  flail.  It  means  that  under  the  blows  chaff  gets 
separated  from  wheat.  Paul  tells  us  that  the  justified  man, 
who  has  peace  with  God,  and  stands  in  God's  grace,  and  re- 
joices in  the  hope  of  God's  glory,  comes  under  the  flail  and 
to  what  end. 

"And  not  only  so,  but  we  glory  in  tribulations  also :  know- 


48  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

ing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience ;  and  patience  experi- 
ence;  and  experience  hope." 

Some  one  has  beautifully  said  that  "Tribulation  is  God's 
way  with  us,  sometimes;  and  patience  is  just  letting  God 
have  His  way ;  and  experience  is  finding  out  that  God's  way 
was  best." 

Our  Lord  calls  it  "purging" ;  and  He,  too,  tells  us  what  it 
is  good  for.  "Every  branch  that  bearef|i  fruit,  he  purgeth 
it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit."  And  the  word  means 
both  cleansing  and  pruning.  The  tendrils  reach  out  after 
forbidden,  or  at  least  unwise  things,  and  the  Husbandman 
severs  the  outreaching  tendril.  But  the  great  autumn  clus- 
ters make  it  well  worth  while. 

The  writer  of  the  Hebrews  calls  it  "chastening,"  and  he, 
too,  tells  us  why  the  good  are  afflicted.  It  is  "for  our  profit 
that  we  might  be  partakers  of  His  holiness."  And  he  says 
that  though,  "No  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be 
joyous,  but  grievous,  nevertheless,  afterward  it  yieldeth  the 
peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  unto  them  which  are  exer- 
cised thereby." 

So  Manasseh's  affliction  was  his  exceeding  great  blessing. 


OMRI  AND  AHAB. 

(i  Kings  xvi:  23-33.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  God's  judgment  of  prosperous  evil    (verses   23-27; 
see  below). 

2.  The  greater  wickedness  of  Ahab  (veises  28-33) »   see 
below). 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  49 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

In  the  first  of  our  lesson  the  story  of  Omri,  the  deepest 
meaning  is  to  be  found  in  the  contrast  between  God's  judg- 
ment and  man's.  The  contrast  does  not  so  much  appear 
from  the  portion  selected  as  from  all  that  is  said  in  Scrip- 
ture of  Omri.    And  yet  enough  is  here. 

From  the  human  standpoint  Omri's  reign  was  brilliant 
and  successful.  In  the  judgment  of  men  he  was  no  doubt 
regarded  as  a  constructive  statesman.  He  was,  in  a  sense, 
the  Peter  the  Great  of  his  time.  Beginning  in  Tioga,  as 
Peter  in  Moscow,  he  built  a  new  capital  city  as  Peter  built 
St.  Petersburg.  Such  a  man  would  do  other  notable  things. 
The  "rest"  of  his  acts,  it  appears,  were  recorded  in  the 
"chronicles  of  the  kings  of  Israel,"  and  the  record  has  per- 
ished. We  may  imagine  that  a  man  so  strong  and  aggres- 
sive would  fill  a  large  place  in  that  chronicle. 

But  all  the  time  a  different  chronicle  was  being  written  in 
heaven.  Here  it  is  only  said  that  "he  wrought  evil  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord."  What  that  evil  was  will  appear  in  the 
great  day  when  the  "dead"  shall  be  judged  (Rev.  xx:  ii, 
12).  In  the  days  of  Noah  it  was  just  the  same.  "There 
were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those  days,"  "mighty  men,  men 
of  renown."  They  builded,  they  bought  and  sold.  Then,  as 
now,  the  great  "captains  of  industry"  were  flattered  and 
envied.  Never  were  earth's  prospects  more  fair ;  never  was 
there  less  apparent  justification  for  forebodings.  But  just 
at  that  very  time  ''God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  was 
great  in  the  earth."  Never  before  have  those  days  been 
more  exactly  paralleled  than  just  now,  and  it  may  be  well 
to  remember  that  it  is  one  of  the  sure  signs  of  the  coming  of 
the  Lord. 

The  one  fact  concerning  Ahab  upon  which  Scripture  puts 


50  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

most  emphasis  is  the  fact  of  his  bad  marriage.  It  was  not 
a  bad  marriage  according  to  the  ethics  of  the  world.  It  was 
good  politics  for  young  Ahab  to  marry  the  daughter  of  the 
king  who  largely  controlled  his  access  to  the  sea.  And,  be- 
cause Ahab  was  young  and  an  oriental  despot,  we  may  be 
sure  that  Jezebel  was  as  beautiful  in  person  as  she  certainly 
was  brilliant  in  mind  and  determined  in  character. 

But  that  woman  was  Ahab's  evil  genius,  and  every  wife 
is  either  the  best  or  the  worst  element  in  her  husband's  life. 
Marriage,  an  institution  divinely  established  in  humanity,  is 
precisely  that  human  relationship  which  Scripture  most 
sternly  safeguards.  Great  as  is  the  emphasis  which  the  Bible 
puts  upon  parenthood,  that  holy  relation  is  subordinated  to 
marriage.  "For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and 
mother,  and  shall  be  joined  unto  his  wife." 

Designed  by  divine  love  to  afford  both  the  highest  happi- 
ness and  the  purest  pleasure  to  humanity,  it  is,  if  misused, 
the  most  awful  of  life's  curses.  And  no  other  human  rela- 
tionship is  more  vilely  misused. 

The  recurring  agitations  for  improved  divorce  laws  are 
folly.  No  amendment  of  these  could  cure  or  even  touch  the 
real  evil.  Not  easy  divorce,  but  easy  marriage,  is  the  true 
crime.  Never  until  Christians  are  taught  the  great  and  sa- 
cred meanings  of  marriage,  so  that  the  conscience  will  be- 
come more  sensitive,  if  possible,  to  wrong  marriage  than  to 
murder  itself,  will  the  great  evil  and  sorrow  of  the  social 
life  of  humanity  disappear. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  51 

GOD  TAKING  CARE  OF   ELIJAH. 

(i  Kings  xvii:  1-16.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  Elijah's  Faith  in  a  Living  God  (verse  i) . — How  much 
modern  faith  is  in  a  God  who  once  Hved  and  acted  sover- 
eignly, rather  than  in  the  Lord  God  who  now  Hves  and  acts 
sovereignly.  It  took,  not  more  than  ordinary  faith,  but  real 
faith,  to  say  to  a  wicked  king : — ''There  shall  not  be" — con- 
fident that  it  should  not  be,  because  back  of  Elijah  was  the 
"Lord  God  of  Israel"  that  "liveth." 

2.  God's  Resources  Unlimited  to  a  Faith  Harnessed  to 
Obedience  (verses  2-16). — Divine  guidance  as  to  the  "east- 
ward," and  "by  the  brook  Cherith  that  is  before  Jordan," 
is  not  to  be  relegated  to  a  former  dispensation,  but  is  to-day 
at  the  command  of  the  weakest  child  of  God.  However,  the 
path  of  obedience  has  many  side-tracks,  and  a  turn  to  the 
right  or  to  the  left  may  so  switch  one  off  the  line  of  guid- 
ance as  to  impede  progress.  But  of  this  we  may  be  certain, 
that  at  God's  ''there"  is  everything  needed  for  our  develop- 
ment and  welfare.  His  way,  however,  is  not  always  along 
a  direct  route,  for  we,  too,  sometimes,  "must  needs  go 
through  Samaria." 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

I  think  we  must  find  the  heart  of  this  lesson  in  a  word 
which  we  may  easily  pass  over  unnoticed.  It  is  the  word 
"there,"  in  verses  4  and  9 :  "I  have  commanded  the  ravens 
to  feed  thee  there'' ;  "I  have  commanded  a  widow  woman 
there  to  sustain  thee." 

Suppose  EHjah,  having  such  a  command,  had  said  :  "Of 
course  the  Lord  does  not  care  especially  that  the  brook  by 


52  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

which  I  am  to  Hve  should  be  the  brook  Cherith.  That  would 
be  to  interpret  His  word  after  the  manner  of  the  literalists, 
in  a  hard,  mechanical  way.  A  brook  is  meant,  not  any  par- 
ticular brook,  and  I  know  a  far  pleasanter  brookside  in  my 
own  country  of  Gilead ;  I  will  go  there."  Does  any  one  im- 
agine that  God's  ravens,  who  seem  to  have  been  very  exact 
literalists,  would  have  gone  elsewhere  than  to  Cherith  ? 

Or  suppose  he  had  chosen  another  city  than  Zarephath,  or 
another  house  in  Zarephath  than  that  of  the  widow,  would 
he  have  been  on  claiming  ground  in  respect  of  God's  prom- 
ise ?    Clearly  not. 

The  thought  is  that  our  heavenly  Father  has,  for  every 
one  of  His  children,  a  life  plan  which  of  necessity  extends 
to  the  minutest  detail.  Of  necessity,  because  no  act  or 
thought  in  human  life  is  unrelated  or  detached,  but  is  in- 
timately connected  with  every  other  act  or  thought.  There 
were  reasons  in  the  divine  choice  of  Cherith  and  the  ravens, 
and  of  Zarephath  and  the  widow,  even  though  the  reasons 
were  not  disclosed. 

By  the  brook  the  prophet  himself  was  disciplined  for  the 
greater  tasks  before  him.  What  a  lesson  in  patient  obedi- 
ence was  his  life  by  that  slowly  drying  stream!  Day  by 
day  the  brook  shrank  in  its  channel  until  at  last  no  water 
remained.  Most  of  us  would  have  taken  that  as  a  sufficient 
indication  of  the  divine  providence,  and,  like  Obadiah,  would 
have  gone  elsewhere  looking  for  a  more  abundant  supply. 
Not  so  Elijah.  Not  till  the  word  of  command  came  again, 
did  the  prophet  move.  How  unlike  very  many  of  us !  It 
seems  never  to  occur  to  us  that  we  may  need  the  discipline 
of  constantly  diminishing  resources.  And  thousands  of 
God's  dear  children  are  in  straits,  and  have  little  token  of 
the  Father's  care,  because  they  have  chosen  the  "there"  of 
their  lives  in  self-will  and  self-pleasing. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  53 

Elijah  himself  committed  that  error  later  in  his  ministry, 
and  for  once  in  the  life  of  that  great  prophet  *'the  word  of 
the  Lord"  came  to  him  with  an  accent  of  rebuke:  "What 
doest  thou  here,  Elijah  ?"  ( i  Kings  xix :  9) .  It  might  be  the 
beginning  of  better,  larger  things  to  many  troubled  Chris- 
tians if  they  would  set  themselves  earnestly  to  seek  the  will 
of  God  as  to  the  "here"  and  "there"  of  their  lives. 


OBADIAH  AND  ELIJAH. 

(i  Kings  xviii:  1-16.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  God's  ''Go''  Precedes  His  ''And  I  Will"  (verses  i,  2) . 
— This  is  seen  also  in  the  previous  lesson.  If  God  were  a 
despot,  as  some  men  assert.  His  Word  would  be  full  of 
"go's,"  with  no  "and  I  will."  A  human  monarch  launches 
out  a  good  many  go's,  but  instead  of  and,  he  offers  an  or. 
In  other  words,  the  laws  of  the  land  are  all  attached  to  pen- 
alties, not  to  rewards.  The  laws  of  heaven  are  all  attached 
to  gracious  promises.  How  much  fallacious  teaching  along 
these  lines  has  implanted  in  many  a  heart  an  unbiblical  idea 
of  God,  our  loving  heavenly  Father. 

2.  Secret  Discipleship  (verses  3-15). 

3.  The  Lord  and  His  Hosts  Elijah's  Cohort  (verses  15, 
16). — Elijah  had  no  fear  for  his  life,  as  Obadiah  had,  for 
unlike  the  latter,  his  faith,  as  in  the  previous  lesson,  was  in 
a  living  God  with  unseen  hosts  at  His  command,  and  the  out- 
flow of  such  a  faith  is  always  an  upright  life,  free  from  the 
fear  of  men.    Oh  for  more  men  like  Elijah  to  say  in  the  face 

of  danger, — of  ridicule — of  temptation — "the  Lord" 

"before  whom  I  stand." 


54  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

These  two  prophets  of  Jehovah  in  a  day  of  apostasy  and 
idolatry  in  Israel  are  not  only  strongly  contrasted  characters, 
but  are  representative  of  two  classes  of  servants  of  God  in 
every  age.  Both  were  sincere,  both  had  the  prophetic  gift. 
But  there  the  similarity  ends  and  contrast  begins. 

Obadiah  is  a  type  of  the  Christian  minister  who  sincerely 
loves  the  Lord,  and  who,  within  certain  limitations,  means 
to  be  loyal  and  true.  But  he  cannot  break  with  the  world. 
Obadiah  held  an  important  office  at  the  court  of  the  vilest 
king  who  ever  disgraced  a  throne.  That  court  was  domi- 
nated by  Jezebel,  a  cruel  idolater  whose  name  has  become  in 
Scripture  a  symbol  of  persecution  and  corruption  (Rev. 
ii:2o).  In  that  court  the  open  confession  of  the  name  of 
Jehovah  was  impossible.  When  Jezebel  slew  the  prophets 
of  the  Lord  (verse  13)  it  is  evident  that  Obadiah  was  not 
suspected.  On  the  other  hand  he  evinced  the  reality  of  his 
secret  discipleship  by  sheltering  and  sustaining  an  hundred 
of  his  fellow  believers.  But  he  could  not  give  up  his  place 
of  favor  with  its  emoluments  and  influence,  and  take  his 
place  openly  with  God's  fearless  witnesses  against  evil  in 
high  places.  A  Jewish  tradition  asserts  that  when  Jezebel 
caused  the  torture  and  death  of  the  prophets  of  Jehovah, 
many  who  were  unknown  and  unsuspected  came  forward  to 
suffer  with  their  brethren;  and  Saphir  thought  these  were 
meant  in  Heb.  xi :  35,  "not  accepting  deliverance,"  when 
Obadiah  oflfered  to  secrete  them.  Such,  then,  was  Obadiah 
— a  man  of  sincere  faith,  but  a  truckling  time-server,  sup- 
pressing his  profound  convictions,  and  having  no  word  of 
rebuke  for  the  shameless  idolatry  about  him. 

What  a  contrast  to  all  this  is  Elijah.  Into  that  very  court 
where  Obadiah  was  selling  his  manhood  and  betraying  his 
God  through  cowardice  and  ambition,  came  this  stranger 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  H 

from  Gilead  with  his  stern  message  of  the  divine  wrath  and 
judgment.  How  Obadiah  must  have  longed  for  courage  to 
cast  off  his  livery  of  shame  and  stand  forth  at  whatever  cost, 
as  Elijah's  co-witness.  But  he  could  not — he  had  sold  his 
manhood  for  place  and  power. 

What  a  day,  too,  of  contrast  between  the  religious  world- 
ling and  the  separated  servant  of  God  was  that  which  fol- 
lowed this  meeting  of  Obadiah  and  Elijah,  when  all  Israel 
was  gathered  to  Carmel  for  the  contest  between  the  four 
hundred  and  fifty  prophets  of  Baal  and  Jehovah's  one  fear- 
less witness. 

The  "governor"  of  Ahab's  court  (verse  3)  must  have  per- 
ceived that  the  real  monarch  that  day  was  not  the  Jezebel- 
ruled  Ahab,  but  the  solitary  Tishbite. 

Such  a  contrast  recurred  in  the  morning  of  the  Reforma- 
tion between  Erasmus  and  Luther.  The  satirical  scholar 
was  as  little  of  a  papist  as  the  converted  monk,  but  when 
Luther  was  delivering  his  shattering  blows  upon  the  citadel 
of  the  later  Jezebel,  he  in  vain  summoned  to  his  side  the  one 
man  in  all  the  w^orld  who  could  have  helped  him  most.  The 
same  contrast  recurs  when,  as  to-day,  there  stand  in  the 
same  age  and  with  like  convictions  men  who  dare  strike  hard 
and  straight  at  the  monstrous  covetousness  which  underlies 
every  colossal  fortune,  every  crushing  trust,  and  the  men 
who  stand  daily  in  the  presence  of  the  modern  Ahabs,  know- 
ing well  that  they  have  taken  the  vineyard  of  many  a  help- 
less Naboth,  but  with  craven  hearts  speak  smooth  things. 

And  the  peculiar  peril  of  all  men  of  that  type  is,  that  they 
salve  their  consciences  with  some  good  deed  which  their 
position  of  favor  with  the  world  enables  them  to  do.  Have 
they  not  induced  Croesus  to  found  an  orphanage,  or  endow 
a  Christless  college? 


56  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

ELIJAH  ON  MOUNT  CARMEL. 

(i  Kings  xviii :  30-46.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Recognition  of  Israel's  Unity  (verses  30-32). 
God  has  gathered  two  bodies  on  this  earth,  both  charged 

with  the  duty  of  representing  Himself — Israel  and  the 
church.  The  first  great  fact  concerning  the  Deity  is  unity : 
"Hear,  O  Israel,  the  Lord  thy  God  is  one  Lord,"  and  the 
point  of  most  grievous  failure  in  both  cases  is,  that  divisions 
came  in  to  mar  the  expression  of  that  unity.  The  two 
kingdoms  in  Israel,  and  the  numberless  sects  in  the  church 
mark  that  failure.  Elijah  here  finely  illustrates  the  indi- 
vidual part  in  a  time  of  division.  He  took  no  position  which 
ignored  the  entire  unity  of  the  people  of  God. 

2.  The  Courage  and  Composure  of  True  Faith  (verses 
33-36). 

So  sure  was  Elijah  that  the  power  of  his  God  was  suffi- 
cient, that  he  deliberately  heaped  difficulty  upon  difficulty, 
and  then,  in  the  quietness  of  a  heart  stayed  on  Jehovah,  he 
waited  for  the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice. 

3.  The  Prayer  of  Elijah  and  God's  Answer  (verses  36- 
39)- 

This  prayer  is  one  of  the  most  admirable  models  of  prayer 
to  be  found  in  the  Bible — ^that  treasury  of  wonderful 
prayers.  It  is  based  on  God's  covenants ;  has  the  exaltation 
of  God  and  the  salvation  of  His  people  for  its  object. 

4.  The  Execution  of  the  False  Prophets  (verse  40). 

Do  not  conceive  of  this  scene  as  the  triumph  of  bigotry. 
The  government  of  Israel  was  a  theocracy,  and  idolatry  was 
the  supreme  treason  against  the  King. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  57 

5.     The  Final  Test  of  Faith  (verses  41-46). 

The  justification  of  Elijah  as  God's  true  prophet  was  in- 
complete till  rain  should  come  again.  Israel,  however 
temporary  the  repentance  might  be,  had  that  day  turned 
back  to  God,  and  now  it  was  His  time  to  be  gracious. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  heart  of  things  here  is  not  far  to  seek.  It  is  the 
lesson  taught  in  Scripture  again  and  again,  that  the  religion 
of  the  Bible  is  absolutely  exclusive  of  all  other  religions. 

Neither  Christianity  nor  Mosaism  can  be  put  into  a  pan- 
theon. When  the  ark  of  God  was  set  up  in  the  house  of 
Dagon,  they  of  Ashdod  found  the  fish-god  on  his  face  with 
head  and  hands  gone.  In  Ahab's  day,  as  in  our  day,  men 
supposed  they  might  worship  both  Jehovah  and  Baal.  Men 
in  high  place  in  the  Christian  church  to-day  are  telling  us 
that  we  must  reconstruct  our  missionary  ideals  and  methods, 
and  recognize  the  many  excellent  things  in  the  heathen  re- 
ligions as  giving  a  common  ground  upon  which  to  build  the 
better  things  of  Christianity.  "A  great  vantage  ground 
would  be  gained  were  missionaries  to  see  that  idols  were 
in  the  beginning  mere  symbols,  and  to  lead  the  people  back 
from  the  idol  to  the  truth  symbolized."  Indeed,  we  are  told 
that  it  is  an  insult  to  call  such  cultured  people  as  the  Hindu 
and  Chinese  "heathen." 

But  Scripture  knows  nothing  of  this  false  "breath."  "If 
Jehovah  be  God,  follow  Him,  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him." 
"And  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at ;  but  now 
commandeth  all  men,  everywhere,  to  repent."  "Neither  is 
there  salvation  in  any  other:  for  there  is  none  other  name 
under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved." 
"I  am  the  way,  the  truth  and  the  life :  no  m.an  cometh  unto 
the  Father  but  by  me."    "Ye  turneth  to  God  from  idols  to 


58  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

serve  the  living  and  the  true  God."  "Thou  shalt  have  no 
other  gods  before  me." 

It  is  significant  that  when  Jesus  Christ,  bringing  in  the 
new  dispensation  in  which  we  Hve,  reaffirmed  the  old  ex- 
clusiveness,  He  spoke  not  of  Baal  nor  of  any  of  the  old 
false  gods,  but  of  the  false  gods  whom  He  foresaw  as  in  a 
peculiar  sense  the  symbol  of  Satan  as  the  god  of  this  age — 
mammon.  ''Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  In  nothing 
is  the  contrast  between  the  Jewish  age  and  the  Christian  age 
more  marked  than  in  the  new  attitude  toward  wealth.  Under 
the  old  order,  wealth  was  a  token  of  the  divine  blessing,  and 
when  Jesus  said :  "How  hardly  shall  those  that  have  riches 
enter  the  kingdom  of  God,"  the  Jews  exclaimed  in  amaze- 
ment :   "Who  then  can  be  saved  ?" 

As  in  ancient  Israel  men  imagined  that,  notwithstanding 
the  express  words  of  the  law,  they  might  keep  well  with 
Baal  and  with  Jehovah  also,  so  no  professing  Christians 
imagine  that  they  may  serve  both  God  and  mammon.  And 
precisely  there,  in  the  frantic  pursuit,  by  millions  of  profess- 
ing Christians,  of  wealth  as  an  object  of  life,  may  be  found 
the  open  secret  of  the  present  powerlessness  of  the  churches. 
The  churches  of  one  of  the  leading  denominations  in  Illi- 
nois, Michigan,  Wisconsin,  and  Iowa,  actually  shrunk  nu- 
merically last  year ;  and  similar  ominous  signs  are  accumu- 
lating all  round  the  horizon.  But  the  members  of  those 
churches  are  as  moral  and  decent  in  their  lives  as  ever.  No 
charge  is  made  that  they  have  gone  off  into  flagrant  vice. 
No,  they  are  making  the  most  of  the  present  "era  of  pros- 
perity"; that  is  all.  And  that  is  a  respectable  sin  which 
the  pulpit  does  not  feel  itself  called  upon  to  rebuke.  A  dying 
millionaire,  in  a  southwestern  city,  sent  for  his  pastor. 
"Why,"  said  the  dying  man,  "did  you  never  warn  me  of  the 
sin  of  making  wealth  my  pursuit?"     "Because,"  answered 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  59 

the  minister,  '1  do  not  think  it  a  sin  to  seek  wealth."  "Then 
I  beg  of  you,  study  the  word  covetousness  in  your  New  Tes- 
tament," said  the  dying  man:  "I  have  been  an  idolater  all 
my  Hfe." 


*  ELIJAH  DISCOURAGED. 

(i  Kings  xix:  i-8.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

This  touching  story  does  not  yield  to  rigid  analysis.  In 
the  heart  of  the  lesson  (see  below)  its  central  spiritual  theme 
is  discussed. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  lesson  for  to-day,  like  Peter's  denial,  and  Jacob's 
subterfuge,  and  David's  sin,  furnished  a  theme  for  endless 
sermonic  moralizings,  mostly  of  the  self-complacent  sort. 
One  would  fain  raise  a  voice  of  protest  against  this  misuse 
of  great  names  by  small  men.  But  it  would  be  useless  !  The 
dealers  in  pious  platitudes  find  the  occasions  too  tempting. 

The  old  Puritan  preachers,  who  certainly  had  brains  for 
better  things,  especially  delighted  to  set  up  their  pulpits 
beside  Elijah's  juniper  tree.  "Aha!"  begins  one  of  them. 
"And  is  this  our  bold  denouncer  of  king's  vices  ?  Come  out, 
come  out,  Elijah!    Art  thou  afraid  of  a  huzzy?" 

All  this  is  contemptible  enough,  and  might  be  passed  over 
without  remark,  if  it  had  not  become  in  a  sense  the  settled 
attitude  of  the  Christian  mind  toward  this  episode  in  the 
life  of  Elijah — an  attitude  which  completely  misses  the  true 
meaning,  and  blinds  us  to  one  of  the  sweetest  lessons  in  the 
book  of  God. 

The  despondency  of  Elijah  was  natural  enough.    It  was 


6o  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

the  reaction  from  the  intense  nervous  tension  of  nearly  four 
years  of  tremendous  service;  and  the  heart  of  the  lesson 
must  be  found  in  the  Lord's  attitude  towards  His  over- 
wrought servant. 

It  certainly  is  noteworthy  that  Jehovah  did  not  say  any  of 
the  things  which  so  monotonously  recur  in  commentaries 
and  sermons.  And  when  Elijah  said  that  he  had  been  very 
jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  Hosts,  he  said  no  more  than 
the  truth.  When  Paul  writes  at  the  end  of  his  life,  "I  have 
fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept 
the  faith,"  we  do  not  accuse  him  of  self-righteousness.  And 
when  Elijah  said,  "1,  even  I  only,  am  left,"  he  said  what 
appeared  to  be  the  truth.  Mr.  Moody  used  to  say  that  he 
would  rather  have  been  Elijah's  little  finger  than  all  of  the 
seven  thousand  secret  disciples. 

No,  what  Jehovah  did  was  very  tender  and  very  beautiful. 
He  first  of  all  gave  Elijah  what  a  man  suffering  from  nerv- 
ous reaction  most  needs — sleep.  "He  giveth  His  beloved 
sleep" ;  and  a  beautiful  gift  it  is.  And  then  He  sent  an 
angel  to  cook  Elijah's  breakfast.  In  verse  7  it  is  "The 
angel  of  the  Lord,"  and  many  understand  that  expression  as 
always  referring  to  the  second  Person  of  the  Trinity.  If  so, 
then  it  means  that  Jehovah-Jesus  Himself  prepared  food  for 
His  servant,  as  afterward  by  the  lake  in  Galilee,  He  laid 
bread  and  fish  on  the  coals  for  another  company  of  discour- 
aged disciples. 

And  then  He  gave  the  prophet  sleep  again,  and  when  he 
awoke,  once  more  gave  him  food.  What  tenderness,  what 
motherliness  fills  the  heart  of  God  for  His  weary,  over- 
wrought, disheartened  servants  on  earth !  Again  and  again, 
in  the  sense  of  their  failure  and  weakness  they  say :  "It  is 
enough;  now,  O  Lord,  take  away  my  life;  for  I  am  not 
better  than  my  fathers" — forgetting  that  the  divine  love  and 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  6i 

compassion  will  not  respond  by  judgment,  but  by  tenderest 
acts  of  restoration  and  of  comfort.  Elijah's  God  had  a 
better  thing  for  him  than  death  under  a  juniper  tree  in  the 
wilderness.  God  knew,  what  Elijah  did  not,  that  one  com- 
ing day  He  would  lead  His  aged  servant  dry-shod  across 
Jordan,  and  there  meet  him  with  *'The  chariot  of  the  Lord 
and  the  horsemen  thereof,"  thus  to  take  him  untouched  of 
death,  into  the  glory  above. 


ELIJAH  ENCOURAGED. 

(i  Kings  xix:9-i8.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Interview  in  the  Cave  (verses  9,  10). — Elijah 
was  in  the  wrong  place,  but  God  sought  him  where  he  was. 
It  reminds  us  of  the  first  question  in  Scripture,  the  "Where 
art  thou"  of  Gen.  iii :  9.  A  God  forsaking  saint  is  not  a 
God  forsaken  saint. 

2.  The  Interview  on  the  Mount  Before  the  Lord  (verses 
11-14).     (See  below.) 

3.  Elijah  Again  Brought  into  Service  (verses  15-18). — 
Elijah  is  not  expelled  from  Jehovah's  service,  but  is  sent 
upon  the  highest  of  embassies.  The  Lord  does  not  reject 
His  servants  because  of  their  seasons  of  despondency. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  might  of  quietness — the  truth  that  God's  work  is  best 
done  in  the  world  when  men  have  learned  the  way  of  the 
peaceful  heart — that  is  evidently  central  in  this  lesson.  The 
Lord  was  not  in  the  wind,  though  it  brake  in  pieces  the 
rocks  before  Him ;   He  was  not  in  the  earthquake,  though  it 


62  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

shook  Horeb  like  a  reed ;  He  was  not  in  the  fire,  though  it 
may  have  swept  the  mountain  as  with  a  besom  of  wrath. 
But  He  was  in  the  still  small  voice. 

Here  is  a  message  to  this  age  of  noise  and  clamor  and  lust 
for  "power,"  and  display  of  fleshly  energy  and  wordy  en- 
thusiasm, and  mighty  conventions  which  proclaim  that  they 
are  going  to  "take  the  world  for  Christ" — by  committees ! 
Elijah  had  been  a  man  of  the  earthquake,  the  wind,  and  the 
fire.  Perhaps  there  are  times  when  such  men  must  be,  but 
God  would  not  let  Elijah  pass  from  the  scene  without  mak- 
ing it  forever  clear  that  such  men  and  such  methods  are 
apart  from  His  customary  ways.  His  work  is  ever  after 
the  way  of  the  building  of  Solomon's  temple :  "There  was 
neither  hammer,  nor  ax,  nor  any  tool  of  iron,  heard  in  the 
house  while  it  was  in  building"  (i  Kings  vi:  7). 

For  no  student  of  Scripture  can  doubt  that  the  Lord  is 
ever  in. the  still  small  voice.  What  are  the  great  prophetic 
messages  ?  "The  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace,  and 
the  effect  of  righteousness  quietness  and  assurance  forever  " 
"He  shall  not  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be 
heard  in  the  street."  "I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel : 
he  shall  grow  up  as  the  lily."  "Not  by  might  nor  by  power, 
but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  Think  of  the  great  words 
of  Jesus,  the  words  most  central  in  His  message.  They  are 
rest,  peace,  joy.  "Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and 
are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke 
upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For  my  yoke 
is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light."  "These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace."  And, 
as  all  know,  these  are  Paul's  great  words,  and  John's. 

And  how  blessed  they  are  to  the  heart  aweary  of  the 
hortatory  whips  and  spurs  under  which  God's  dear  servants 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  63 

are  driven  in  these  days  to  that  over-organized,  overstrained 
thing  which,  as  if  in  irony,  is  called  "the  Lord's  work."  Is 
it  indeed  the  work  of  the  Lord  ?  Did  the  Lord  hold  shout- 
ing conventions,  and  multiply  presidencies,  and  secretary- 
ships, and  committees  ?  The  true  work  of  the  Lord  is  done 
when  restful  and  quiet  hearts  trust  Him  to  work  through 
them.  *'So  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  if  a  man  should  cast 
seed  into  the  ground,  and  should  sleep,  and  rise  night  and 
day,  and  the  seed  should  spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth 
not  how."  The  seven  thousand  in  Israel  who  had  not 
bowed  the  knee  unto  Baal  were  Jehovah's  converts,  not 
Elijah's.    Indeed,  he  did  not  know  of  their  existence. 


ELIJAH  TAKEN  UP  INTO  HEAVEN. 

(2  Kings  ii:  i-ii.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Walk  to  Jordan  (verses  1-7). — The  walks  of 
Scripture  would  furnish  material  for  a  series  of  wonderfully 
helpful  meditations.  This  is  one  of  the  most  significant  of 
them — the  walk  to  power.  The  sons  of  the  prophets  make  a 
poor  figure  here:  they  have  knowledge  (verse  5),  but  are 
utterly  destitute  of  faith,  and  they  seek  to  discourage  the 
one  earnest  man  in  the  land. 

2.  The  Crossing  of  Jordan  (verse  8). — As  the  Red  Sea 
stands  for  Christ's  death  for  us,  so  the  crossing  of  Jordan 
signifies  our  death  with  Him  (Rom.  vi:  1-5)  as  the  coming 
up  out  of  Jordan  speaks  of  resurrection  life  shared  with 
Him. 

3.  The  Rapture  of  Elijah  (verses  9-11). — Elijah  is  here 
an  illustration  of  the  future  rapture  of  the  church  (i  Thess. 
iv:  1-16). 


64  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

If  we  think  of  Elijah  only,  or  even  chiefly,  the  two  great 
outstanding  truths  of  this  lesson  are,  first,  that  a  Christian 
life — any  Christian  life — is  a  unity ;  it  has  a  climax,  but  not 
anti-climax.  If  Elijah  had  died  under  the  juniper  tree,  as 
he  desired  to  do,  that  would  have  been  indeed  a  sad  anti- 
cHmax  to  a  life  so  full  of  the  whirlwind  and  of  fire.  And 
the  other  truth  is  that  in  the  translation  of  Elijah  we  have 
at  once  a  proof  that  death  is  not  inevitable  to  the  believer 
(i  Cor.  XV :  51,  52),  and  that  life  survives  the  change  from 
earth  to  heaven,  for,  centuries  after,  this  same  Elijah  is 
with  Christ  in  the  Transfiguration. 

But,  dramatic  as  is  the  whole  scene  which  the  lesson 
brings  before  us,  and  central  as  is  Elijah  in  that  drama,  I 
cannot  but  feel  that  we  shall  find  the  deeper  and  more  abid- 
ing truths  of  the  lesson  in  what  is  there  said  of  Elisha. 
There  is  something  most  significant  in  the  order  of  places 
along  the  line  of  Elisha's  last  walk  with  the  elder  prophet. 

That  fateful  walk  of  Elijah  to  glory,  and  of  Elisha  to 
mighty  power,  follows  an  order  which  must,  essentially,  be 
reproduced  in  the  experience  of  every  child  of  God  who 
enters  into  a  vital  experience  of  God's  best.  That  walk 
began  at  Gilgal.  The  typical  significance  of  Gilgal  cannot 
be  mistaken  by  any  reader  of  Joshua.  Gilgal  was  the  place 
where  a  redeemed  people  rolled  away  "the  reproach  of 
Egypt"  (Joshua  v:  i-ii).  The  reproach  of  Egypt  was  that 
there  the  Israelites  had  neglected  circumcision,  the  divinely 
commanded  sign  of  their  separation  as  a  people;  and  typi- 
cally Gilgal  stands  for  practical  separation  from  the  world, 
and  unto  God.  We  may  say,  therefore,  that  as  a  separated 
man,  Elisha  began  the  quest  of  power. 

The  next  stage  was  Bethel,  "house  of  God,"  the  place  of 
vision,  of  spiritual  insight,  for  Bethel  was  the  place  where 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  65 

Jehovah  gave  to  Jacob  the  great  ladder  vision  (Gen.  xxviii: 
11-19).  To  have  tarried  at  Bethel  would  have  been  analo- 
gous to  that  satisfaction  with  mere  knowledge  of  divine 
things — a  snare  to-day  to  thousands  of  the  best  instructed 
believers.  No  soul  can  thrive  on  the  mere  knowledge  of 
positional  truth.  There  is  an  experience  corresponding  to 
position,  and  he  who  would  go  into  the  fulness  of  Christian 
blessing  must  not  be  satisfied  with  being  in  the  land,  but 
must  eat  the  old  corn  of  that  land — a  Christ  in  glory.  He 
must  go  on  from  Bethel  to  Jordan. 

Jordan  stands  for  the  New  Testament  truth,  "crucified 
with  Christ."  This  truth,  too,  may  be  held  as  a  mere  Bible 
doctrine ;  but  there  is  a  making  of  that  truth  real  in  experi- 
ence, a  "receiving  of  the  sentence  of  death  in  self,"  a  "bear- 
ing about  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  which 
is  very  different  from  merely  reiterating  a  doctrine.  There, 
on  the  resurrection  side  of  Jordan,  the  gift  of  power  awaited 
the  prophet. 


ISRAEL  REPROVED. 

(Amos  v:  4-15.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  God  Outside  the  Former  Means  of  Blessing  (verses 
1-6). — See  below. 

2.  The  Resource  of  An  Apostate  People  (verses  7-10). 
— God  always  remains,  no  matter  how  deep  the  transgres- 
sion, and  the  way  back  to  Him  is  ever  open. 

3.  The  Sins  of  Israel  (verses  11-15). — It  is  most  strik- 
ing that  here  we  have  enumerated  the  conspicuous  sins  of 
the  present  time. 

5 


66  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  significant  thing  here  is  that  God  puts  Himself  out- 
side the  accustomed,  time-honored  and  even  divinely  insti- 
tuted places  of  blessing.  Corrupt  and  iniquitous  Israel  is 
exhorted  to  "seek  the  Lord,"  but  not  at  Bethel,  Gilgal,  nor 
Beersheba. 

This  is  no  new  thing  in  the  ways  of  God,  nor  is  this  by 
any  means  an  isolated  instance.  The  brazen  serpent  which 
had  been  so  wonderfully  used  of  God,  instrumentally,  in  the 
wilderness  (Numbers  xxi:  8,  9),  became,  at  last,  a  fetich  to 
the  people,  and  then  to  God  "nehustan,"  a  piece  of  brass 
(2  Kings  xviii:4).  How  solemnly  and  with  what  awful 
sanctions  was  Jerusalem  set  apart  as  the  place  where  God 
had  set  His  name,  and  where  alone  sacrifices  and  offerings 
might  be  made  to  Him.  But,  when  the  place  rather  than 
the  God  of  the  place  became  the  sacred  fact  in  the  thought 
of  the  people,  how  easily  was  it  said,  "Woman  believe  me, 
the  hour  cometh,  when  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor 
yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father." 

With  what  mighty  promises  Israel  was  set  apart  as  God's 
portion,  and  with  what  minuteness  of  inspired  detail  was 
its  ritual  established,  and  yet,  how  summarily  was  it  all 
swept  aside  when,  as  an  instrument,  it  broke  in  the  divine 
hand.  The  very  religion  which  He  had  ordained  became, 
without  the  change  of  a  single  form  or  ceremony,  a  mere 
"Jew's  religion"  (Gal.  i:i3)  in  His  eyes.  "Let  us  there- 
for go  forth  unto  Him  without  the  camp,"  becomes  the  call 
to  the  faithful. 

The  application  of  this  tremendous  principle  is  obvious. 
The  one  vital  question  in  any  age  is,  Where  is  God  now? 
Much  has  been  made,  is  being  made  of  the  question,  Which 
is  the  true  church?  But  even  if  it  could  be  demonstrated 
that,  historically,  this  or  that  was  the  original  church,  such 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  e'] 

demonstration  would  not  go  one  step  toward  proving  that 
God  had  not  long  ago  spewed  it  out  of  His  mouth  as  His 
representative.  And  if  this  be  true  of  ancient  churches  hav- 
ing some  claim  to  historic  continuity  from  the  apostles,  how 
much  more  may  it  be  true  of  our  Protestant  sects  which  are 
of  yesterday? 

The  deeper  truth  is,  of  course,  that  whenever  the  sect,  or 
the  creed,  or  the  form,  becomes  the  sacred  thing,  the  object 
of  loyalty,  so  that  we  boast  ourselves  of  being  loyal  to  it, 
rather  than  to  Him,  it  becomes  "nehushtan." 

It  can  scarcely  be  necessary  to  add  that  the  reference  to 
a  search  or  the  "true"  church,  is  illustrative,  merely.  There 
never  was  a  ''true  church,"  using  that  word  in  the  modern 
sense  of  a  church  made  up  of  a  body  of  churches.  The  Bible 
knows  nothing  of  such  a  ''church."  The  Bible  knows  in- 
deed of  a  church  "which  is  His  body,  the  fulness  of  Him 
which  filleth  all  in  all" ;  and  it  knows,  too,  of  local  churches, 
but  not  of  an  aggregation  of  local  churches  which  compose 
a  church. 

The  believer  who  has  wandered  from  God  may  return  to 
Him  in  confession  any  time,  anywhere,  and  believers  who 
seek  His  fellowship  find  Him  ever  with  outstretched  arms. 


ELISHA  SUCCEEDS  ELIJAH. 

(2  Kings  ii:  12-22.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Condition  Met  (verse  12). — Elijah  had  said  that 
if  Elisha  saw  him  when  he  w^as  taken  up,  the  Spirit  should 
come  upon  him  as  he  had  prayed. 

2.  The  Energy  of  Faith  (verses  13,  14).- — True  faith 
counts  upon  God's  faithfulness.     Nothing  is  said  of  any 


68  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

peculiar  feelings  on  Elisha's  part.     He  had  met  a  divine 
condition,  and  expected  the  answering  power. 

3.  The  Barrenness  of  Knowledge  Without  Faith  (verses 
15-18).     See  "Heart  of  Lesson." 

4.  The  Second  Miracle  (verses  19-22). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Many  things  in  this  wonderful  lesson  appeal  for  the  place 
of  primacy.  The  faith  of  Elisha  is  one  of  them.  Possibly 
the  Bible  furnishes  no  instance  of  faith  which  surpasses 
this,  save  the  faith  of  the  repentant  thief  on  the  cross. 
When  Elisha  took  up  the  fallen  mantle  of  Elijah,  and  in 
the  full  view  of  the  fifty  doubting  theological  students  on 
the  other  bank,  smote  the  waters  of  Jordan,  calling  upon 
the  Lord  God  of  Elijah,  he  had  absolutely  no  warrant  for 
his  faith  but  the  word  of  the  departed  prophet  of  God  that 
Spirit  power  should  rest  upon  him  if  he  met  the  condition : 
"If  thou  see  me  when  I  am  taken  from  thee."  He  had  met 
the  condition,  and  his  faith,  resting  upon  the  immutable 
word  of  God,  expected  the  power  to  be  manifested.  Just 
at  this  point  of  expectancy  thousands  of  believers  fail  to- 
day. Having  complied  with  the  biblical  conditions  of  the 
filling  with  the  Spirit,  they  halt  and  wait  for  feeling.  It 
might  be  a  very  perilous  thing  for  a  servant  of  Christ  to 
feel  strong.  Paul  reminds  the  Corinthians  that  he  was 
with  them  in  weakness,  fear,  and  much  trembling,  and  that 
just  then  his  preaching  was  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit 
and  of  power.  Indeed,  he  expressed  an  habitual  experience 
in  the  phrase,  "When  I  am  weak  then  am  I  strong." 

Then,  too,  the  sons  of  the  prophets  present  a  great  temp- 
tation to  a  writer  on  this  lesson.  They  present  all  the 
characteristics  of  machine-made  prophets — characteristics 
repeated  in  every  age.    They  had  knowledge  (2  Kings  ii :  3) , 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  69 

but  did  not  really  believe  the  thing  they  knew.  They  knew 
that  Elijah  was  to  be  taken  that  day,  but  they  did  not  believe 
that  he  had  been  taken  (2  Kings  ii :  16-18)  ;  and  they 
"bowed  themselves  to  the  ground"  before  a  real  prophet. 
Knowledge  is  good,  and  the  prophets  of  God  should  have 
knowledge;  but  the  man-made  prophets  and  the  God-made 
prophets  differ  just  at  the  one  point  of  triumphant,  resistless 
faith.  And  faith  is  something  the  schools  of  the  prophets 
are  far  more  likely  to  destroy  than  to  create,  to  impair  than 
to  strengthen. 

But  the  effort  in  the  writing  of  ''The  Heart  of  the  Lesson" 
is  to  discover  in  each  lesson  the  truth  which  is  deepest,  most 
formative.  Examples  of  faith,  and  instances  of  knowledge 
without  faith  abound  in  Scripture,  and  are  by  no  means  pe- 
culiar to  this  lesson. 

Is  not  the  heart  of  things  here  to  be  found  in  the  fact 
that  the  one  eternal  Spirit  manifests  Himself  and  His  power 
so  variously  through  different  men  ?  The  same  Spirit  came 
upon  the  gentle  Elisha,  who  had  inspired  and  empowered 
the  tempestuous  Elijah.  Two  greatly  precious  conclusions 
follow.  First,  that  the  Spirit  acts  through,  and  not  con- 
trary to,  the  human  personality.  The  method  of  inspiration 
illustrates  this  truth.  Every  book  of  the  Bible  is  instinct 
with  the  distinctive  personality  of  its  writer.  John  does 
not  write  like  Paul,  nor  Paul  like  Peter,  nor  Peter  like 
Isaiah,  yet  all  of  them  wrote  in  the  very  words  given  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  By  personality  is  meant  of  course  those  quali- 
ties which  make  each  human  being  to  differ  from  all  otber 
human  beings. 

And  the  other  lesson  is  that  the  work  of  God  in  the 
world  requires  an  almost  infinite  variety  of  instrumentali- 
ties. When  a  Wesley,  or  a  Spurgeon,  or  a  Moody  dies,  the 
cry  goes  up  to  God  for  another  like  man,  but  the  man  whom 


70  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

God  sends  is  never  another  Wesley  or  Spurgeon  or  Moody. 
Let  our  cry  to-day,  when  the  need  of  a  new  voice  of  power 
is  so  great,  not  be  "Where  is  EHjah?"  but  "Where  is  the 
Lord  God  of  EHjah?"  Somewhere,  be  sure,  He  has  ready 
our  EHsha. 


THE  WIDOW'S  OIL  INCREASED. 

(2  Kings  iv:  1-7.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Cry  of  Need  (verse  i). — This  widow  and  this 
widow's  prophet  ahke  beheved  that  Jehovah  would  in  some 
way  show  Himself  the  husband  of  the  widow  and  tlie 
Father  of  the  fatherless. 

2.  The  Dimne  Method  of  Supply  (verse  2). — See  "The 
Heart  of  the  Lesson." 

3.  The  Triumphant  Answer  to  the  Cry  of  Need  (verses 
3-7). — There  is  always  the  mark  of  abundance  upon  God's 
answers.  He  is  a  great  God,  and  does  not  bestow  like  a 
miser,  but  like  a  king. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  incident  related  in  this  lesson  is  in  itself  but  one  of 
the  evidences  of  the  power  and  love  of  God  as  shown  in 
His  providences,  in  which  Scripture  abounds.  But  there 
are  certain  details  which  clearly  point  toward  great  prin- 
ciples of  the  divine  government,  and  these  principles  are  per- 
manent and  therefore  well  worth  our  learning. 

The  first  is  that  God  begins  with  what  we  have.  "Thine 
handmaid  hath  not  anything  in  the  house,  save  a  pot  of  oil." 
But  that  pot  of  oil,  plus  the  creative  power  of  God,  was 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  71 

quite  enough.  It  is  the  principle  underlying  the  miracle  of 
the  loaves  and  fishes :  "We  have  here  but  five  loaves  and 
two  small  fishes,  but  what  are  they  among  so  many  ?"  They 
were  enough  and  more  than  enough,  when  Jesus  had  added 
to  them  His  power.  But  the  point  is  that  He  began  with 
what  the  disciples  had.  Most  Christian  lives  are,  so  far  as 
human  eye  can  see,  barren  and  unfruitful.  May  it  not  well 
be  largely  because  we  are  saying  within  ourselves  that  if 
only  we  had  more  time,  or  money,  or  capacity,  or  gift,  we 
would  do  great  things  for  God,  while  God  is  only  asking 
that  what  we  have  shall  be  brought  to  Him  to  multiply  ? 

A  man  once  told  Mr.  Moody  that  he  was  asking  God  for 
money  to  care  for  five  thousand  orphans ;  and  Mr.  Moody 
said :  "Friend,  begin  with  one ;  you  could  take  care  of  one, 
could  you  not  ?  Well,  find  that  one,  and  turn  your  home  into 
an  orphanage."  Mr.  Moody  began  the  great  Northfield 
Seminary  in  his  own  home,  a  plain  New  England  farm 
house. 

It  is  the  old  story  of  Moses  protesting  his  lack  of  elo- 
quence while  all  the  time  he  held  in  his  hand  the  old  shep- 
herd's crook  which,  cast  down  before  God  and  then  taken 
up  again  at  God's  command,  became  that  "rod  of  God"  with 
which  Israel  was  delivered.  It  is  the  old  story  of  Sham- 
gar's  ox  goad,  and  Dorcas'  needle. 

There  is  the  story  of  the  winning  of  a  great  prize  at  a 
flower  show  by  a  poor  woman  w^ho  lived  in  an  attic  and  had 
but  one  flower  in  a  pot.  But  she  tended  that  one  flower  and 
kept  it  in  the  sun,  and  watered  it  and  fertilized  it  until  it 
was  more  beautiful  than  any  flower  in  any  nobleman's  con- 
servatory. Every  behever  has  some  gift  of  the  Spirit  (i 
Cor.  xii:7-27),  and  the  Lord  lays  upon  none  of  us  any 
greater  burden  than  just  to  use  that  gift. 

And  a  second  great  principle  of  the  divine  outworking 


^2  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

is  that  He  multiplies  as  we  pour  out.  Somewhere  in  Eu- 
rope I  saw  a  painting  of  the  miracle  of  the  water  made 
wine  at  Cana,  and  the  artist  had  caught  the  very  secret  of 
matter,  for  the  liquid  left  the  vessels  water,  crystal  clear, 
and  entered  the  water  pots  wine,  ruby  red.  It  was  trans- 
formed between  the  vessel  it  left  and  the  vessel  it  entered. 
The  sun's  rays  traverse  millions  of  miles  of  space  black  as 
blackest  midnight  and  inconceivably  cold,  and  it  is  only 
when  they  strike  upon  the  atmosphere  of  earth  that  they 
burst  into  a  glory  of  light  and  warmth.  If  we  now  add  to 
these  two  truths  the  significance  of  the  element  used  in  this 
miracle,  oil,  we  shall  have  a  deeply  important  lesson  all  told 
out.  For  oil  is  constantly  the  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Every  believer  has  received  the  Spirit,  contains  the  Spirit 
(i  Cor.  vi :  19;  Rom.  viiiiQ;  i  John  ii :  20,  2"j^ — a  mighty 
fact'  big  with  possibilities  in  life  and  service.  But  Christ, 
using  another  symbol  of  the  Spirit,  water,  teaches  that  the 
manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  not  stagnation,  but  motion — 
the  upspringing  fountain,  the  outflowing  rivers.  When, 
then,  we  exercise  our  gift,  however  small  it  may  seem,  the 
Spirit  Himself  moves.  The  whole  secret  of  true  service, 
and  of  multiplied  power  and  blessing  lies,  then,  in  that  ques- 
tion, "What  hast  thou  in  the  house pour  out  into  all 

those  vessels." 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  73 

ELISHA  AND  THE  SHUNAMITE. 

(2  Kings  iv:  25-37.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Faith  of  the  Shunamite  (verses  25,  26). — The 
woman's  answer,  "It  is  well,"  was  a  sublime  instance  of 
true  faith.  Her  child  lay  dead,  but  she  could  still  say,  "It 
is  well." 

2.  The  Sorrow  Told  Out  (verses  2y,  28). — Faith  says, 
"It  is  well"  in  the  very  instant  that  faith  grasps  as  it  were 
the  feet  of  God  to  tell  Him  all  the  sorrowful  story. 

3.  The  Fruitless  Errand  (verses  29-32). — See  "The 
Heart  of  the  Lesson." 

4.  The  Effective  Service  (verses  32-37). — See  "The 
Heart  of  the  Lesson." 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  intensely  vital  character  of  true  Christian  service  is 
the  heart  of  things  here.  There  is  a  vast  deal  of  so-called 
Christian  service  which  is  naught  but  sending  a  servant  with 
a  dead  stick.  If  there -is  a  need  somewhere  we  proceed  to 
organize.  A  society  is  formed,  or  at  least  a  committee. 
These  require  chairmen,  secretaries,  treasurers,  and,  above 
all,  much,  very  much,  talk.  Then  these  chairmen,  secretaries 
and  treasurers  are  supposed  to  be  in  "Christian  service," 
and  all  the  rest  of  us,  who  are  not  officers,  but  "belong,"  are 
also  supposed  to  be  in  "Christian  service."  If  it  is  a  home 
aflfair  the  "service"  consists  in  holding  stated  meetings  of 
the  society  or  committee,  and  in  more  or  less  zealous  efforts 
to  induce  others  to  "join."  As  some  one  has  wittily  said, 
"We  have  a  lookout  committee,  but  not  a  go-out  committee." 

If  it  is  a  foreign  affair  we  send  some  one,  after  a  farewell 


74  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

meeting  somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  that  which  Elisha 
held  for  Gehazi.  What  a  ''charge"  that  was !  "Gird  up  thy 
loins,  and  take  thy  staff  in  thine  hand,  and  go  thy  way :  if 
thou  meet  any  man  salute  him  not."  How  impressive !  The 
staff  we  send  by  our  Gehazi  has  been  fashioned  and  polished 
during  three  years  in  a  theological  seminary.  Thank  God 
many  a  Gehazi  finds  a  better  one,  a  living  and  life-giving 
staff  in  the  Word  of  God — but  we  do  not  require  him  to 
have  this  staff,  but  only  that. 

And  when,  equipped  well  or  ill,  we  once  send  Gehazi  we 
practically  wash  our  hands  of  him.  A  few  pray  for  him,  a 
few  send  him  of  their  substance,  but  for  the  immense  ma- 
jority of  us,  he  is  a  forgotten  Gehazi.  And  all  this,  and 
more  of  like  method  and  quality,  we  call  Christian  service. 
And  Christian  service  it  truly  is  for  him  who,  in  real  de- 
votedness  to  Christ,  goes ;  and  Christian  service  it  truly  is 
for  those  who,  in  ceaseless  prayer,  and  in  sacrificial  gifts, 
are  really,  in  the  sent  one  stretching  themselves  upon  the 
spiritually  dead  ones  to  whom  he  has  gone — but  for  us ! 
Alas,  what  mockery ! 

True  service  costs,  and  costs  vitally — costs  life  itself.  Not 
a  dead  staff  but  a  living  heart  laid  upon  a  dead  heart — that 
counts,  and  that,  be  it  repeated,  costs. 

When  the  woman  in  the  Syrian  street  touched  the  sway- 
ing hem  of  Christ's  seamless  robe  as  He  walked,  she  was 
instantly  healed.  What  else?  The  Lord  of  life  stopped. 
'*Who  hath  touched  me?  for  I  perceive  that  virtue  is  gone 
out  of  me."  The  woman  was  healed,  but  it  cost,  cost  vitality. 

An  American  woman  whose  giving  is  the  giving  of  a 
princess  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  said  to  me :  *'It  is  so  easy 
just  to  sign  checks  if  one  happens  to  have  money  at  the 
bank,  but  I  don't  think  that  counts  unless  we  find  a  way  to 
give  ourselves,  too." 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  75 

And  we  must  remember  the  terms  of  our  commission, 
"Go  ye."  Doubtless  the  Lord  knew  that  the  church  would 
soon  come  to  read  that  personal  imperative,  "Send  Gehazi," 
but  nevertheless  what  He  actually  said  was  "Go  ye!'  One 
does  not  recall  that  he  ever,  when  message  bearing  was  in 
question,  asked  a  disciple  to  ask  another  disciple  to  go. 

All  this  does  not  mean  that  some  measure  of  organization 
is  not  necessary  to  some  spheres  of  Christian  service.  Good 
order  and  efficiency  sometimes  requires  this;  but  it  does 
mean  that  in  so  far  as  we  are  not  ourselves  losing  our  lives 
in  this  service  that  we  may  find  them  again,  we  are  mere 
senders  of  Gehazi.  For  He  who  said  of  Himself,  "except  a 
corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die  it  abideth  alonC; 
but  if  it  die  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit,"  said  in  the  next 
breath,  "if  any  man  will  save  his  life  he  shall  lose  it,  but 
if  he  lose  his  life  for  my  sake  and  the  Gospel's  he  shall  find 
it  again." 


ELISHA  AND  NAAMAN. 

(2  Kings  v:  1-14.) 
L     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Fatal  Word  of  Three  Letters  (verse  i). — If  we 
could  see  as  God  sees  we  should  say  that  the  most  fortunate 
man  on  earth  is  the  most  unfortunate  if  his  sin  has  never 
been  taken  away. 

2.  The  Faithful  Witness  (verses  2-4). — There  is  some- 
thing touching  both  in  the  courage  and  compassion  of  this 
little  captive  maid.  She  was  the  victim  of  a  great  wrong, 
but  free  from  resentment. 

3.  The  Reasoning  of  the  Flesh  (verses  5-7). — See  "The 
Heart  of  the  Lesson." 


76  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

4.  The  True  Remedy  (verses  8-14). — See  "The  Heart 
of  the  Lesson." 

5.  The  Peril  of  Naainan  from  Three  Enemies  (verses 
II,  12). — See  "The  Heart  of  the  Lesson." 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  story  of  Naaman  has  been  the  theme  of  countless 
Gospel  sermons,  and  rightly  so,  for  it  is  packed  with  Gospel 
analogies.  These  group  about,  or  grow  out  of,  certain  sig- 
nificant words  or  phrases.  The  first  of  these  is  that  little 
"but"  which  mocked  all  the  good  fortune  of  Naaman  and 
shut  the  sunshine  out  of  his  life.  Everything  favored  him 
"but" — .  He  was  captain  of  the  host — "but."  He  was  a 
great  man  and  honorable — "but."  Mighty  was  he  in  valor 
— "but."  He  was  even  a  man  whom  the  Lord  had  used 
providentially — "but  he  was  a  leper." 

That  little  qualifying  word  of  three  letters  nullified  all  the 
great  swelling  words  in  which  his  state  and  prosperity  were 
described. 

The  writer,  in  years  agone,  had  a  friend  whom  the  world 
envied.  He  was  stately  of  stature,  great  of  intellect,  clean, 
brave,  successful.  He  had  a  beautiful  young  wife  whom  he 
idolized.  One  day  his  doctor  met  him  on  the  court  house 
steps.  "I  do  not  like  your  color ;  come  at  once  to  see  me." 
The  next  day  he  passed  two  hours  with  three  physicians  in 
consultation.  At  the  end  they  said:  "Set  your  house  in 
order;  you  have  three  months  of  life  at  farthest."  The 
world  envied  him — "but." 

And  so  one  might  go  through  this  lesson,  finding  in  all 
the  pivotal  words  wonderful  Gospel  analogies. 

But  we  are  concerned  with  the  heart  of  the  lesson  and 
that  seems  to  lie  in  the  fact  that  Naaman  came  so  perilously 
near  to  missing  his  healing.    With  a  perfect  knowledge  of 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  "j^ 

the  conditions  which,  once  met,  made  his  recovery  sure,  he 
actually  "turned  and  went  away  in  a  rage." 

Three  enemies  of  Naaman's,  all  pampered  and  nourished 
by  him  as  his  dearest  friends,  came  near  to  accomplishing 
his  destruction  that  day.  They  were  all  within  his  own 
heart,  as  they  are  within  the  heart  of  every  one  of  us. 

The  first  enemy  was  Pride.  In  the  very  outset  Pride  be- 
gan to  work.  Pride  said:  *'You  are  a  great  man;  go  on 
this  journey  in  state.  Impress  this  prophet  with  the  fact 
that  he  has  no  common  leper  to  deal  with.  Then  Pride  was 
ready  to  suggest  an  affront  because  the  prophet  did  not  come 
out  to  so  distinguished  and  celebrated  a  leper. 

The  second  enemy  was  Preconception.  "Behold  I  thought 
he  will  surely  come  out  to  me,  and  stand,  and  call  on  the 
name  of  the  Lord  his  God,  and  strike  his  hand  over  the 
place?  Naaman  had  a  preconceived  opinion  or  plan  con- 
cerning the  manner  of  his  healing.  Thousands  of  sinners 
have,  often  unconsciously  no  doubt,  a  plan  about  their  con- 
version. Appealed  to  in  a  quiet  conversation,  or  in  a  quiet 
meeting,  to  make  an  instant  decision  for  Christ,  they  draw 
back — "Not  now,  not  this  way." 

And  the  third  of  Naaman's  enemies  that  day  was  Preju- 
dice. "Jordan?"  said  Prejudice,  "Wash  in  Jordan?"  The 
rivers  of  Damascus  are  better.  Suppose  Spurgeon,  Baptist 
born  and  Baptist  bred,  had  said  to  the  Spirit  that  stormy 
morning  in  the  Primitive  Methodist  chapel,  "What  a  Spur- 
geon converted  in  a  Methodist  chapel  ?  Never !"  How  the 
current  of  his  life,  of  uncounted  thousands  of  lives,  might 
have  been  changed.  It  is  awful  to  die  without  Christ  in  an 
African  jungle,  but  to  turn  away  from  the  Gospel  in  a  land 
of  Bibles  and  churches,  oh,  this  is  more  unspeakably  tragic. 


78  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

ELISHA  AT  DOTHAN. 

(2  Kings  vi:  8-23.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Perplexity  and  Wrath  of  the  King  (verses  8-13). 
— The  world  is  often  puzzled  by  the  deliverances  of  the 
Lord's  people.  Be  sure  back  of  the  event  is  ever  the  hand 
of  God. 

2.  The  Unseen  Resources  of  the  Saints  (verses  14-17). 
—See  ''The  Heart  of  the  Lesson." 

3.  The  Pozver  of  God  and  the  Prayer  of  Faith  (verses 
18-21). — EHsha  called  upon  the  unseen  God  and  the  answer 
came. 

4.  The  Pity  of  the  Saintly  Heart  (verses  21-23). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  unseen,  but  none  the  less  real,  resources  of  the  man 
of  God — that,  obviously,  is  at  the  core  of  things  here.  It 
is  a  timely  lesson.  Never  before  in  the  history  of  the  church 
have  the  forces  of  anti-supernaturalism  been  so  numerous, 
never  before  have  their  assaults  at  every  point  been  so  de- 
termined and  continuous. 

Probably  the  projection  into  the  thought  of  the  world  of 
the  hypothesis  of  evolution  began  the  battle;  probably  this 
hypothesis  is  back  of  every  assault.  It  seemed  to  ehminate 
God,  if  not  as  the  remote  first  Cause,  at  least  from  every 
succeeding  step  of  causation  in  the  universe.  Then  the 
whole  ground  of  supernaturalism  became  a  battlefield.  Mir- 
acle was  declared  to  be  a  scientific  absurdity ;  the  inspiration 
and  authority  of  the  Bible  were  first  questioned,  then  de- 
nied, and  now,  as  Dale  of  Birmingham  predicted  thirty 
years  ago,  the  storm  is  gathering  ''above  one  sacred  Head," 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  79 

in  the  philosophic  evaporation  into  nothingness  of  the  virgin 
birth  of  our  Lord,  and  the  denial  of  His  physical  resurrec- 
tion. 

With  these  negations  as  weapons  of  open  and  avowed 
adversaries  of  supernaturalism  we  have  been  long  familiar — 
the  peril  of  to-day  is  that  those  weapons  are  in  the  hands  of 
avowed  friends. 

And  yet  it  remains  true  that  Christianity  is  essentially 
supernatural,  or  else  it  is  false.  Paul's  triumphant  chal- 
lenge cannot  be  ehminated  from  Christianity  without  de- 
stroying it.  "Without  controversy  great  is  the  mystery  of 
godliness ;  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justified  in  the 
Spirit,  seen  of  angels,  preached  unto  the  Gentiles,  believed 
on  in  the  world,  received  up  into  glory." 

Nay,  he  makes  the  whole  system  to  hinge,  not  upon  its 
ethical  beauty,  as  is  the  present  day  fashion,  but  upon  the 
physical  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection :  "If  Christ  be  not 
raised,  your  faith  is  vain ;  ye  are  yet  in  yours  sins." 

And  the  Christian  ethic  is  as  supernatural  as  the  Gospel 
history.  "Christianity,"  said  an  acute  and  not  unfriendly 
critic,  "is  the  impossible  religion.  No  man  can  be  as  good 
as  Christianity  requires  all  men  to  be."  And  no  truer  thing 
was  ever  said  if  there  are  no  supernatural  powers  encamped 
round  about  the  believer.  Christian  character  includes  mor- 
ality, but  rises  heaven  high  above  it.  Christian  character  is 
"love,  joy,  peace,  long  suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, 
meekness,  temperance,"  and  not  one  of  those  graces  is  in- 
digenous in  the  natural  heart;  they  are  all  exotics.  But 
the  "mountain  is  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round 
about"  the  Christian.  The  whole  power  of  God  is  round 
about  and  within  him.  He  that  is  for  us  is  ever  and  always 
more  than  they  that  be  against  us.  Prayer  is  as  practical 
a  force  as  electricity  or  steam.    The  angels  still  live  and  still 


8o  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

serve.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  lost  no  whit  of  His  power. 
God  is  still  faithful  who  promised,  and  will  not  suffer  us  to 
be  tempted  above  that  we  are  able,  but  will  with  the  tempta- 
tion also  make  a  way  of  escape.  Christ  still  lives  to  make  in- 
tercession for  us,  and  is  still  able  to  keep  to  the  uttermost 
all  who  come  unto  God  by  Him.  He  is  still  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  still  able  to  succor  us 
when  tempted. 


THE  CAPTIVITY  OF  JUDAH. 

(2  Chron.  xxxvi:  11-21.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Wicked  King  (verses  11-14). — Note  that  the  re- 
jection of  the  words  of  Jeremiah  was  in  reality  the  rejection 
of  God's  words. 

2.  The  Wicked  Priests  (verse  14). — The  priests  were, 
equally  with  the  king,  rejectors  of  the  word  of  the  Lord.  In 
all  history  priests  side  with  kings  against  prophets. 

3.  Warning  and  Judgment  (verses  15-20). — This  is  ever 
the  divine  way — warning  precedes  judgment. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

''Till  there  was  no  remedy" — that  awful  phrase  opens  the 
deepest  heart  of  this  lesson.  It  is  not,  observe  that  man 
had  no  remedy  as  against  the  king  of  the  Chaldees,  but  that 
God  had  no  remedy  for  His  people — "till  there  was  no 
remedy."  There  had  been  a  remedy.  Jeremiah  and  Isaiah 
and  all  the  preexile  prophets  had  published  abroad  the  di- 
vine and  perfect  remedy.  Isaiah  had  said,  "Hearken  to  me, 
ye  that  follow  after  righteousness,  ye  that  seek  the  Lord : 
look  unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are  hewn,  and  to  the  hole  of 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  8i 

the  pit  whence  ye  are  digged."  "If  ye  be  willing  and  obedi- 
ent, ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land." 

Jeremiah  had  cried :  ''O  Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart 
from  wickedness,  that  thou  mayest  be  saved."  "The  word 
that  came  to  Jeremiah  from  the  Lord,  saying,  Stand  in  the 
gate  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  proclaim  there  this  word,  and 
say.  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  ye  of  Judah  that  enter 
in  at  these  gates  to  worship  the  Lord.  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel,  Amend  your  ways  and  your 
doings,  and  I  will  cause  you  to  dwell  in  this  place." 

In  Jehovah  was  a  perfect  remedy  for  all  the  evil  of  Judah, 
but — "They  mocked  the  messengers  of  God,  and  despised 
His  words,  and  misused  His  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of  the 
Lord  arose  against  His  people,  and  there  was  no  remedy f' 

In  other  words,  when  God's  remedy  is  rejected,  "there 
is  no  remedy." 

Doubtless  the  majority  called  Jeremiah  a  "gloomy  pessi- 
mist." The  times  were  good,  the  comfort  of  life  constantly 
increased,  men  spoke  of  the  ruder  times  of  their  fathers 
and  boasted  of  progress.  The  priests  would  be  ready  to 
point  out  the  improbability,  even  the  absurdity,  of  the  notion 
that  Jehovah  would  permit  His  city  and  temple  to  be  over- 
thrown. Had  not  Israel  a  great  mission  yet  unaccomplished 
so  long  as  all  peoples  did  not  recognize  the  unity  of  God? 
To  say  that  He  would  destroy  the  religion  which  He  had 
Himself  planted  would  be  to  say  that  the  purposes  of  God 
were  thwarted. 

Just  so  men  reason  in  this  Gospel  age.  To  speak  of 
coming  judgments  of  an  apostate  church,  of  another  advent 
of  Christ,  is  to  say  that  the  Gospel  has  failed. 

The  answer  both  then  and  now  is  that  neither  the  ulti- 
mate purposes  of  God  through  Israel  nor  through  the  Gospel 
will  fail.  It  is  men  who  fail;  men  who  become  apostate, 
6 


82  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

whether  in  Israel  or  the  church  and  then  ''there  is  no  rem- 
edy," so  far  as  men  are  concerned.  But  God  remains,  and 
in  other  ways  He  accompHshes  His  purposes. 

Judah  was  judged  and  sent  into  captivity.  ''There  was  no 
remedy"  for  that.  Judah,  after  seventy  years,  was  restored 
and  held  in  the  land  till  Christ  came  and  was  rejected.  Then 
again  "there  was  no  remedy,"  and  Judah  was  sent  into  a 
dispersion  which  still  continues.  But  Israel  will  be  restored, 
and  then,  that  people  will  not  fail. 


THE  LIFE-GIVING  STREAM. 

(Ezek.  xlvii :  1-12.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Source  of  the  River  (verses  1-2). — All  blessing 
proceeds  from  the  altar. 

2.  The  Magnitude  of  the  River  (verses  3-5). 

3.  The  Power  of  the  River  (verses  6-12). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Perhaps  no  passage  of  the  prophetic  Scriptures  has  been 
more  tortured  out  of  its  right  and  true  meaning  than  this. 
By  most  commentators  it  has  been  taken  as  a  symbol  of  the 
spread  of  the  Gospel  in  a  stream  ever  wider  and  deeper  till 
the  whole  world  has  been  converted.  But  against  this  inter- 
pretation three  objections  lie.  i.  The  Scriptures  do  not 
teach  the  conversion  of  the  whole  world  by  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel,  but  rather  that  the  present  age  is  to  witness  the 
outcalling  of  a  people  for  His  name,  who  are  to  form  the 
church  which  is  His  body.  2.  Other  Scriptures  make  it 
clear  that  the  river  is  to  be  a  literal  river,  issuing  from  the 
temple  which  will  be  built  in  Jerusalem  after  the  restoration 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  83 

of  the  Jews  (Zech.  xiv:8;  Rev.  xxii :  i).  3.  The  seas  into 
which  it  will  flow  will  be  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Mediter- 
ranean, though  the  former  is  most  prominent.  Such  geo- 
graphical indications  are  too  much  a  vital  part  of  the  narra- 
tive to  be  set  aside  by  the  necessities  of  a  fanciful  interpreta- 
tion. It  will  be  remembered  that  in  connection  with  the 
judgment  of  the  nations  and  the  return  of  the  Lord,  cata- 
clysmic changes  are  predicted  for  the  reign  about  Jerusalem ; 
"The  mount  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof 
toward  the  east  and  toward  the  west,  and  there  shall  be  a 
very  great  valley."  "All  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain, 
from  Geba  to  Rimmon,  south  of  Jerusalem  (Zech.  xiv:4, 

10). 

Strange  that  this  should  seem  incredible  to  a  generation 
which  has  seen  the  blowing  into  mere  dust  of  the  Krakatoa 
by  an  explosion  from  within,  and  of  the  desolation  of  a 
whole  land  by  the  eruption  of  Mount  Pelee !  Why  should 
not  a  little  hill  like  the  Mount  of  Olives  cleave  in  the  midst 
thereof  ?  Why  should  not  the  God  who  brought  water  out 
of  a  rock  in  the  wilderness,  bring  a  river  out  of  Mount 
Moriah  ? 

So  much  for  interpretation.  But  application  and  interpre- 
tation are  quite  different  things.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
is  to  be  interpreted  of  the  future  kingdom,  but  it  is  always 
true  that  the  meek  are  happy,  and  that  the  pure  in  heart 
see  God. 

So  there  may  well  be  an  application  of  EzekieFs  river  to 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  now.  W^ater  is  even  a  type  of 
both  the  Spirit  and  the  word,  and  Christ  uses  "rivers  of 
living  water"  (John  vii :  49)  to  illustrate  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  at  and  after  Pentecost. 

The  ankles  speak  of  the  walk,  and  suggest  "walking  in  the 
Spirit."     The  righteousness  of  the  law  is  "fulfilled  in  us 


84  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

who  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  the  Spirit"  (Rom.  viii : 
6),  and  "if  we  walk  in  the  Spirit  we  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts 
of  the  flesh"  (Gal.  v:  i6). 

Again,  the  knees  suggest  prayer,  and  we  are  reminded 
that  it  is  peculiarly  the  Christian's  privilege  to  "pray  in  the 
Spirit."  Perhaps  there  is  no  greater  need  than  this — that  we 
cease  to  pray  in  the  sphere  of  the  will  or  of  the  desires,  and 
learn  to  abandon  ourselves  to  the  Spirit  that  He  may  pray 
through  us. 

And  so  the  loins  speak  of  service.  No  truth  for  this  dis- 
pensation stands  out  more  clearly  than  that  all  fruitful  and 
acceptable  service  must  be  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  The 
very  apostles  of  our  Lord,  men  who  had  been  for  three  years 
under  His  personal  training,  and  to  whom,  after  His  resur- 
rection he  had  taught  kingdom  truth  for  forty  days  (Acts 
i:3),  were  forbidden  to  begin  their  great  mission  till  they 
were  endued  with  power  from  on  high.  How  presumptuous, 
then,  for  us  to  presume  to  serve  except  in  the  power  of  the 
Spirit. 

"Waters  to  swim  in"  speak  of  the  divine  fulness  which  is 
for  us. 

But  perhaps  the  heart  of  this  lesson  is  to  be  found  in  the 
one  exception  to  the  healing  power  of  the  waters.  *'But  the 
miry  places  thereof  and  the  marshes  thereof  shall  not  be 
healed." 

The  interpretation  here  is,  of  course,  liberal,  but  the  ap- 
plication is  obvious.  A  miry  place  and  a  marsh  are  places 
where  much  water  has  already  come  in  vain.  The  miry 
place  has  turned  it  into  mud,  and  the  marsh  into  an  uncul- 
tivable  bog — a  place  of  miasma  and  malaria.  Surely  here  is 
an  apt  picture  of  one  upon  whom  the  convictive  and  per- 
suasive influences  of  the  Spirit  have  come  in  vain.  "For  the 
earth  that  drinketh  in  the  rain  that  cometh  oft  upon  it,  and 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  85 

bringeth  forth  herbs  meet  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dressed, 
receiveth  blessing  from  God :  but  that  which  beareth  thorns 
and  briars  is  rejected,  and  is  nigh  unto  cursing;  whose  end 
is  to  be  burned. 


DANIEL  IN  BABYLON. 

(Daniel  i:8-20.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Purpose  of  Daniel's  Heart  (verse  8). 

2.  The  Answering  Favor  of  God  (verse  9). 

3.  7'he  Perplexity  of  the  Steward  and  the  Victorious 
Test  (verses  10-20). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  heart  of  this  lesson  is  the  exceeding  value  of  a  definite 
heart  purpose.  ''Daniel  purposed  in  his  heart."  That  is  the 
key  to  the  character  of  Daniel,  and  the  key  also  to  his  life 
story.  "Daniel  purposed  in  his  heart  to  be  loyal  to  Jehovah 
in  even  so  minor  a  detail  of  obedience  as  eating  and  drink- 
ing, and  we  may  reverently  say  that  Jehovah  purposed  in 
His  heart  that  Daniel  should  be  a  monument  in  Babylon  of 
His  power  and  wisdom.  And  we  read :  "And  Daniel  con- 
tinued even  unto  the  first  year  of  King  Cyrus."  That  was 
God*s  answer  to  Daniel's  purpose  of  heart.  King  followed 
king  in  Babylon,  even  the  dynasty  changed,  but  "Daniel  con- 
tinued." Great  cabals  were  formed  of  might}^  princes  and 
influential  courtiers  to  put  down  Daniel,  but  "Daniel  con- 
tinued." Daniel  himself  was  a  sinner  (ix:2o),  but  "Daniel 
continued."  The  one  steadfast  thing  in  all  that  changing, 
shifting  court  was  an  alien  and  hated  Jew  because  Daniel 


86  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

had  "purposed  in  his  heart,"  and  because  Jehovah  had  pur- 
posed in  His  heart. 

Do  not  suppose  the  purpose  in  Daniel's  heart  arose  from  a 
mere  dietary  question — of  whether  the  king's  meat,  or  pulse, 
were  the  better  food.  Not  at  all.  Daniel  belonged  to  a 
people  in  covenant  relations  with  God.  In  Daniel's  nation 
the  government  was  a  theocracy.  Whoever  might  sit  visibly 
on  David's  throne,  the  invisible  One  was  the  real  king,  and 
He  had  ordered  even  the  dietary  of  His  people.  Daniel 
would  not  eat  the  king  of  Babylon's  meat  because  Daniel's 
king  had  instructed  otherwise. 

Think  how  many  excuses  Daniel  might  have  made  at  the 
bar  of  his  own  conscience.  He  might  have  pleaded  his  cir- 
cumstances. He  was  in  Babylon  through  no  wish  of  his 
own.  God  in  His  providence  had  permitted  him  to  be  car- 
ried away  captive.  He  might  have  pleaded  a  reasonable  and 
prudent,  self-interest,  fearing,  not  unreasonably,  to  offend 
that  irresponsible  despot  whose  slave  he  was.  He  might 
have  pleaded  the  relative  unimportance  of  the  matter. 

It  was  no  question  of  breaking  the  moral  law.  He  was 
not  asked  to  worship  other  gods,  nor  to  bear  false  witness, 
nor  to  blaspheme.  It  was  just  a  question  of  eating  and 
drinking — why  carry  to  such  an  extreme  the  puritanic  cus- 
toms of  remote  and  provincial  Judaea? 

Thousands  of  young  men  have  reasoned  thus  who  have 
gone  down  from  the  home  farm  to  the  new  scenes  and  new 
ways  of  the  great  city,  and  thousands  have  fallen  by  the  way 
just  because  they  had  not  firmness  of  moral  fibre  and 
strength  of  conviction  to  purpose  in  their  hearts  to  maintain 
the  temperance  in  eating  and  drinking  in  which  they  had 
been  nurtured,  and  which  their  best  convictions  approved. 

Other  thousands  have  maintained  simplicity  of  life,  but 
have  given  way  at  the  point  of  business  rectitude.     Great 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  87 

financial  prosperity  may  have  come  to  some  of  them,  but  at 
the  awful  cost  of  an  approving  conscience,  and,  too  often, 
of  an  old  age  of  public  contempt  and  obloquy. 

The  story  of  Daniel  can  never  grow  old  so  long  as  there 
are  young  men  to  be  tempted  to  surrender  principle  at  the 
demand  of  expediency — so  long  as  men  and  women  of  any 
age  are  called  upon  to  choose  between  the  easy  way  of  con- 
formity to  lower  standards,  and  the  other  way  of  a  purpose- 
ful heart. 


DANIEL  AND  BELSHAZZAR. 

(Daniel  v:  17-30.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Unheeded  Lesson  of  History  (verses  17-24). 
Daniel  rehearses  to  Belshazzar  the  well-known  circum- 
stances of  his  father's  reign.  The  impressive  lessons  of  that 
history  Belshazzar  had  passed  by  unheeded.  Now  nothing 
remains  but  his  deposition. 

2.  The  irreversible  sentence  (verses  25-30) .  Belshazzar 
was  yet  a  very  young  man.  It  is  one  of  the  fearful  things 
about  sin  that  the  human  heart  may  become  hopelessly  set  in 
the  love  of  it  at  a  very  early  age. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

We  must  bear  in  mind  the  peculiar  circumstances  under 
which  the  prophet  Daniel  writes.  He  was  a  Jewish  prophet, 
but  a  prophet  out  of  the  land.  Israel,  under  the  chastening 
hand  of  Jehovah,  often  warned,  but  apostate  and  unheeding, 
has  been  given  into  captivity  under  the  Babylonian  power  of 
Nebuchadnezzar.  With  the  captivity,  and  with  the  empire 
of  Nebuchadnezzar  begun  that  long  period  of  Gentile  world- 


88  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

empire  which  our  Lord  designates  as  "the  times  of  the  Gen- 
tiles'' (Luke  xxi:24),  which  still  continues,  and  which  will 
continue  till  *'the  God  of  the  heavens"  (Daniel  ii:44)  shall 
smite  with  judgment  the  whole  fabric  of  Gentile  civilization 
and  authority,  and  set  up  a  kingdom  which  shall  never  be 
destroyed  (Dan.  ii:44;  vii:  14-18).  The  visible  token  and 
sign  of  the  continuance  of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  is  that 
Jerusalem  is  under  alien  and  Gentile  domination.  That  dom- 
ination, be  it  remembered,  is  not  broken  by  the  gradual  ab- 
sorption into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  of  the  Gentiles,  through 
conversion.  The  end  of  Gentile  political  supremacy  over  the 
Jew  and  over  the  earth  is  sudden,  catastrophic,  destructive 
(Daniel  ii:34,  35;  vii :  9-1 1;  Rev.  xix:ii-2i;  i  Thess. 
v:2,  3;  2  Thess.  ii:  3-8). 

Daniel,  then,  placed  at  the  beginning  of  this  long  period 
in  which  we  still  Hve,  writes  on  two  great  themes :  First,  he 
tells,  prophetically,  the  whole  course  and  end  of  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles,  i.  e.,  the  present  civilization ;  and,  secondly,  he 
enters  into  minute  details  concerning  the  events  in  which 
Gentiledom  ends,  especially  as  those  events  bear  upon  the 
Jews. 

Putting  ourselves,  then,  at  Daniel's  viewpoint,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  see  that  the  heart  of  this  lesson  is  to  be  found  in 
that  explanation  of  Elohim's  disciplinary  dealing  with  Neb- 
uchadnezzar, the  first  of  the  Gentile  World-Kings,  which  we 
have  in  verses  18-21.  At  the  very  threshold  of  an  epoch 
which,  as  He  Knew,  would  be  of  long  continuance,  and 
f  rought  with  events  and  consequences  of  cosmic  significance, 
He  impressively  taught  that  "the  most  high  God  ruleth  in 
the  kingdom  of  men,  and  that  He  appointeth  over  it  whom- 
soever He  will."  It  is  a  lesson  long  since  forgotten  by  the 
Gentile  civilizations.  Even  we  boast  of  our  government  that 
it  is  "of  the  people,  by  the  people,  and  for  the  people,"  and 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  89 

the  name  of  God  does  not  appear  in  the  Constitution.  This, 
doubtless,  is  better  than  that  monstrous  perversion  of 
Daniel's  doctrine  which  was  called  *'the  divine  right  of 
kings,"  and  under  which  Gentile  kings  shamelessly  subjected 
the  people,  and  especially  the  Jewish  people,  to  awful 
tyranny,  but  it  is  none  the  less  a  setting  aside  of  Daniel's 
doctrine.  And  yet,  there  have  been  some  in  all  the  ages  of 
Gentile  supremacy  who,  taught  of  God  through  His  prophet 
Daniel,  have  perceived  that  the  only  true  philosophy  of  his- 
tory is  to  be  found,  not  indeed  in  the  divine  right  of  rulers, 
but  in  their  divine  responsibility.  Nations  are  creatures  of 
time,  not  of  eternity,  and  therefore  the  divine  judgments 
fall  upon  nations  now,  and  are  not  postponed  to  eternity. 
Nations  have  arisen  during  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,  have 
come  to  great  power,  have  abused  that  power  and  have 
passed  away,  or  have  been  swallowed  up  in  other  powers. 
Every  such  national  extinction  is  but  another  instance  of  the 
putting  forth  of  the  unseen  Hand  which  branded  Belshaz- 
zar's  wall  with  the  sentence  of  doom. 


DANIEL  IN  THE  LIONS'  DEN. 

(Daniel  vi:  10-23.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  prayer  of  Daniel  (verses  10,  11).  The  words,  "as 
he  did  aforetime,"  are  significant.  They  speak  of  the  power 
of  habit.  We  say  much  concerning  the  power  of  evil  habits 
— not  enough  of  the  power  of  good  habits.  Many  a  young 
man  going  from  his  country  home  into  the  temptations  of 
city  life  has  been  carried  through  his  dangerous  first  year 
by  the  inveterate  habit  of  church  going.  2.  The  foolish 
law  (verses  12-15).    The  unchangeableness  of  the  laws  of 


90  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

the  Medes  and  Persians  was  but  a  codification  of  that  wor- 
ship of  consistency,  which,  as  DisraeH  said,  is  the  ''virtue  of 
feeble  minds."  No  one  but  a  fool  never  changes  his  mind. 
Wider  knowledge,  deeper  experience,  larger  vision — these 
constantly  change  both  opinion  and  conduct.  3.  The  per- 
mitted peril  (verses  16,  17).  Over  such  providences  we 
write  a  wistful  '*Why?"  Daniel  was  the  best  man  of  his 
time ;  God's  most  faithful  servant — why  the  den  of  lions  for 
him?  4.  The  delivering  God  (verses  18-23).  ''Many  are 
the  afflictions  of  the  righteous,  but  out  of  them  all  the  Lord 
delivereth  him." 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

It  is  not  easy  to  say  what  is  most  surely  central  in  this 
lesson.  Most  obviously  we  have  here  another  striking  in- 
stance of  that  truth  which  was  before  our  minds  when  we 
were  with  Jeremiah  in  the  dungeon,  the  permitted  afflictions 
of  the  good,  and  the  permitted  power  of  the  wicked.  Why 
is  "truth  forever  on  the  scaffold,  wrong  forever  on  the 
throne?"  It  is  the  problem  of  Job  ;  it  sorely  troubled  Asaph 
(Psalm  Ixxiii).  The  mystery  of  the  sufferings  of  the  godly 
is  indeed  in  this  lesson,  but  it  is  also  everywhere  in  Scripture 
and  therefore  cannot  be  distinctively  the  core  truth  before  us 
to-day. 

I  think  we  shall  most  surely  find  it  in  the  king's  question 
at  daybreak:  "O  Daniel,  servant  of  the  living  God,  is  thy 
God,  whom  thou  servest  continually,  able  to  deliver  thee 
from  the  lions?"  Form  out  of  this  a  phrase,  "the  God  of 
Daniel,"  and  find  the  heart  of  the  lesson  therein. 

The  whole  Bible,  nay,  the  whole  creation,  is  but  a  method 
of  the  self -revelation  of  God.  He  is  ever  seeking  manifesta- 
tion, for  He  knows  that  the  one  supreme  need  of  the  world 
is  really  to  know  God.    "This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  91 

know  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou 
hast  sent"   (John  xvii:3). 

Now,  among  the  various  means  used  by  the  unseen  God 
for  His  self-revelation  is  His  association  with  certain  human 
lives.  What  does  He  mean,  for  example,  when  He  says,  "I 
am  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac  and  of  Jacob?"  This, 
evidently:  *'I  am  the  God  who  revealed  what  manner  of 
being  He  is  by  associating  myself  with  the  lives  of  three 
men,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  These  men,  though 
closely  related  by  blood,  were  men  of  diverse  characters,  and 
circumstances.  The  God  of  Abraham  is  a  God  who  calls 
men  out — out  of  idolatry  into  true  worship;  out  of  small 
things  into  great  things;  out  of  barrenness  into  marvellous 
fruitfulness.  The  God  of  Isaac  is  the  God  who  does  not 
despise  negative  and  commonplace  men — for  such  Isaac 
was — but  so  deals  with  them  as  to  pass  down  and  carry  out 
the  great  purposes  which  had  their  beginnings  in  larger 
souls.  The  God  of  Jacob  is  the  God  who  transforms  char- 
acter, who  takes  up  a  mean  trickster,  a  ''supplanter,"  and  so 
deals  with  him  that  at  last  He  makes  him  an  Israel,  a  "prince 
with  God." 

Who,  now,  is  this  God  of  Daniel  whom  we  have  before  us 
in  this  lesson?  Very  obviously  He  is  the  God  who  is  able 
to  deliver.  Surely,  in  such  a  world  as  this — a  world  in  which 
the  lions  of  temptation  and  of  destructive  lusts  crouch  in 
every  pathway,  a  God  who  was  not  able  to  deliver,  would  be 
a  lacking  God — a  God  weak  at  a  vital  point. 

A  missionary  saw  a  heathen  neighbor  one  morning  throw 
his  favorite  idol  to  the  ground  and  then  proceed  to  kick  it 
out  of  his  compound.  When  the  missionary  asked  the  cause 
of  such  treatment,  the  heathen  explained  that  the  god  had 
no  power  to  deliver  him.  A  powerless  god  is  an  object  of 
just  contempt.     If  the  one  living  and  true  God,  the  God  of 


92  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Daniel  and  of  Paul  and  of  all  the  tested  saints  in  all  the  ages 
had  not  shown  Himself  mighty  to  deliver  His  people,  no  one 
would  to-day  believe  on  Him.  Our  God — the  God  of  Daniel, 
is  "able  to  deliver." 


RETURNING  FROM  CAPTIVITY. 

(Ezra  i:  i-ii.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  proclamation  of  the  King  (verses  1-4).  2.  The 
response  of  the  Jews  (verses  5-11). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

It  is  right  and  logical  that  in  arranging  a  series  of  Sunday 
school  lessons  which  tells  of  the  captivity  of  Israel,  there 
should,  in  due  order,  be  a  lesson  recording  the  return  (in 
part)  of  Israel  from  that  captivity.  But  why,  in  all  the 
wealth  of  historic  material  concerning  that  return,  these 
particular  verses  should  have  been  selected,  must  remain,  to 
most  Bible  students,  one  of  the  inscrutable  mysteries  of  the 
lesson  committee.  But,  though  infelicitous  as  a  selection,  it 
is  yet  Scripture,  and  therefore  infinitely  precious. 

Though  not  strictly  germane  to  the  heart  of  this  lesson,  it 
may  be  well  to  remind  the  scholar  that  the  return  from  the 
captivity  was  partial,  the  ten  tribes  which  had  formed  the 
northern  kingdom  having  never,  to  this  day,  been  restored. 
Also  that  the  return  of  the  remnant  was  in  three  detachments, 
at  three  different  times,  and  under  three  different  leaders. 
In  B.  C.  535  a  company  returned  under  Zerubabel  and  laid 
the  temple  foundations ;  B.  C.  458  Ezra  returns  and  restores 
the  law  and  ritual ;  B.  C.  445  Nehemiah  led  up  a  company 
and  restored  the  walls,  and  the  civil  authority.     Our  lesson 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  93 

has  to  do  with  the  first  of  these.  Sheshbazzar  was  the  Per- 
sian name  of  Zerubabel. 

It  is  not,  therefore,  the  fact  of  the  restoration  which  is 
pecuHar  to  this  lesson,  nor  may  we  find  its  heart  in  the  fact. 

Is  it  not  to  be  found  in  something  out  of  which  the  fact 
of  the  return  grew — something  which  made  the  return  a 
more  absolute  necessity  than  a  law  of  nature,  or  the  cosmic 
order?  The  latter  will  undergo,  as  it  has  undergone,  great 
changes,  but  there  is  one  thing  in  the  universe  which  never 
changes,  which  is  immutable  and  inevitable,  and  that  is  the 
Word  of  God. 

Henry  Drummond  said  that  the  one  stable  thing  in  the 
universe  was  a  law  of  nature — a  seeming-wise  but  really 
foolish  saying.  For  Who  is  this  Nature,  personified  con- 
tinually in  the  writings  of  skeptical  "scientists,"  so-called, 
who  makes  laws?  It  is  God.  And  the  power  to  make  in- 
volves the  power  to  unmake :  "Whose  voice  then  shook  the 
earth:  but  now  he  hath  promised,  saying.  Yet  once  more  I 
shake  not  the  earth  only,  but  also  heaven.  And  this  word, 
Yet  once  more,  signifieth  the  removing  of  those  things  which 
are  shaken,  as  of  things  that  are  made"  (Heb.  xii:26,  27), 
among  which  are  these  "laws  of  Nature."  It  is  the  Scripture 
"which  cannot  be  broken.^'  It  is  easier  for  heaven  and 
earth  to  pass,  than  one  tittle  of  the  law  to  fail." 

Seventy  years  before  the  events  recorded  in  this  lesson, 
God  had  said  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah:  "This  whole  land 
shall  be  a  desolation,  and  an  astonishment ;  and  these  nations 
shall  serve  the  king  of  Babylon  seventy  years"  (Jer.  xxv :  11). 
"For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  that  after  seventy  years  be  accom- 
plished at  Babylon  I  will  visit  you,  and  perform  my  good 
word  toward  you,  in  causing  you  to  return  to  this  place" 
(Jer.  xxix:  10). 


94  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

And  now  the  seventy  years  are  accomplished  and  by  a  di- 
vine imperative  the  thing  spoken  must  be  done. 

The  heart  of  this  lesson  then  is,  generally,  the  immutability 
of  the  written  Word  of  God ;  and,  more  specifically,  of  the 
prophetic  word.  At  no  other  point  is  unbelief  or  doubt  so 
little  excusable.  For  already  a  great  number  of  explicit 
prophecies  have  been  literally  fulfilled.  And  these  predic- 
tions were  uttered  so  long  before  the  event — usually  centu- 
ries— that  no  human  foresight  could  have  anticipated  them ; 
and  they  were  so  specific  as  to  time,  place  and  circumstance 
that  no  accidental  combination  of  circumstances  could  have 
fulfilled  them.  When,  therefore,  we  turn  to  predictions 
whose  fulfilment  is  yet  future,  we  are  sure  of  two  things: 
first,  the  thing  spoken  will  come  to  pass ;  and,  secondly,  it 
will  come  to  pass,  not  figuratively  or  allegorically,  but  with 
exact  literalness. 


REBUILDING  THE  TEMPLE. 

(Ezra  iii:  lO-v:  4.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  foundation  of  praise  (verses  10,  11).  2.  Ill-timed 
grief  (verses  12,  13).  3.  The  counsel  of  separation  (verses 
1-3).    4.  The  hired  counsellors  (verses  4,  5). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Three  perils  in  the  face  of  which  all  Christian  building  is 
done,  three  methods  of  opposition  to  all  constructive  Chris- 
tianity are  present  in  this  lesson,  and  form  the  heart  of  it. 

First,  the  opposition  from  pessiiuists.  It  was  a  poor  thing 
to  drown  the  shout  of  the  workers  in  the  noise  of  the  weep- 
ing of  "many  of  the  priests  and  Levites  and  chief  of  the 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  95 

fathers"  because  they  had  ''seen  the  first  house."  There  is  a 
shallow  and  unthinking  pessimism  as  there  is  also  a  shallow 
and  unthinking  optimism.  Men  of  the  first  type,  many  of 
them,  in  our  day,  men  of  a  deep  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures 
and  who  should  be  mighty  for  God,  are  so  persuaded  of  the 
degeneracy  of  the  times,  of  the  wide-spread  apostasy  from 
sound  doctrine,  and  of  the  pervading  sectarian  confusion 
that  they  discourage  all  constructive  work  for  Christ.  "To 
what  end?"  they  ask,  "Since  all  is  confusion,  since  so  few 
give  a  clear  testimony?  Why  seek  to  reconstruct  a  ruin? 
If,  indeed,  we  might  hope  to  reproduce  the  order,  the  zeal, 
the  doctrinal  soundness  of  the  Apostolic  church,  then  would 
we  build  with  you.    But,  alas  !   alas  !  that  may  not  be." 

The  truth  being  that  there  never  was  an  "apostolic  church" 
in  the  sense  of  a  great  organization  of  churches,  and  all  per- 
vaded by  holy  zeal  and  biblical  accuracy.  It  is  purely  a 
figment  of  the  imagination.  There  were,  in  apostolic  times, 
scattered  churches,  made  up  for  the  most  part  of  slaves  and 
of  the  very  poor ;  and  some  of  these  were  zealous  and  holy 
and  well  instructed,  and  some  were  carnal  and  mistaught. 

Never  since  Christ  has  there  been  so  grand  a  chance  to 
build  local  churches  after  the  Apostolic  mould  and  faith  as 
just  now  when  there  is  so  much  confusion  and  discord. 
There  is  no  real  room  in  Christianity  for  pessimism.  The 
Christian  knows  that  this  age  ends  in  apostasy,  but  he  need 
not  be  an  apostate.  The  very  clamor  about  him  of  destruc- 
tive criticism,  of  evolutionism  gone  mad,  of  theosophy,  Chris- 
tian Science  and  "new  thought"  is  but  a  call  to  him  to  abide 
faithful.  Similarly,  the  fact  that  churches  have  swung  so 
far  away  from  the  simple  primitive  order  is  but  a  call  of  God 
to  every  local  church  to  resume  that  order. 

Second,  the  opposition  from  world-mixture.  "Let  us  build 
with  you:   for  we  seek  your  God,"  etc.     Never  was  there  a 


96  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

time  when  it  was  more  necessary  for  the  churches  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  remember  Zerubabel's  noble  answer:  "Ye  have 
nothing  to  do  with  us,  to  build  an  house  unto  our  God." 
To-day  the  churches  of  Jesus  Christ  stand  upon  every  high- 
way with  the  mendicant's  whine  of  need,  and  the  mendicant's 
outstretched  palm.  When  a  new  meeting  house  is  to  be  built 
every  devise  is  resorted  to  to  secure  from  a  religion  patroniz- 
ing world  as  great  a  share  of  the  cost  as  possible.  No  money 
is  too  ''tainted"  to  be  taken  for  the  Lord's  work.  Men 
against  whom  reputable  and  responsible  persons  make 
charges  of  perjury,  fraud,  greed,  deliberate  injury  of  the 
weak  and  defenseless,  are  approached  for  great  gifts  to  so- 
called  Christian  work.  It  is  a  time  for  the  old  Bible  cry: 
"Come  ye  out  from  among  them  and  touch  not  the  unclean 
thing." 

Third,  the  open  opposition  of  the  world.  The  late  Lord 
Salisbury  said,  at  the  outbreak  of  the  boxer  rebellion,  "Mis- 
sionaries are  very  unpopular  persons  in  the  foreign  minis- 
tries of  all  governments."  What  a  confession.  There  is  to- 
day, in  the  United  States  Senate,  an  absolute  impossibility 
of  securing  a  vote  on  the  pure  food  bill.  Why?  The  De- 
partment of  Agriculture  says  because  of  the  influence  of  dis- 
tillers and  manufacturers  of  injurious  foods.  Let  righteous- 
ness strike  a  profitable  evil,  and  that  evil  will  find  means  to 
"frustrate  their  purpose." 


POWER  THROUGH  GOD'S  SPIRIT. 

(Zech.  iv:  i-io.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  prophet's  vision  (verses  1-3).  2.  The  angelic  ex- 
planation (verses  4-6).  4.  The  exaltation  of  the  headstone 
(verse  7).     5.  The  comforting  promise  (verses  8-10). 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  97 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  lesson  is  full  of  precious  things  of  God  and  of  Christ, 
but  scholar  and  teacher  must  choose  between  teaching  the 
lesson  of  the  candlestick,  the  olive  trees  and  the  headstone, 
and  teaching  the  truth  embodied  in  the  lesson  title,  "Power 
through  God's  Spirit,"  which  is  also  the  truth  of  the  golden 
text:  "Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith 
the  Lord." 

It  is  not  meant  that  the  two  parts  of  the  lesson  are  in  con- 
flict— far  be  the  thought — but  only  that  in  the  candlestick 
and  the  headstone  we  have  two  precious  types  of  Christ, 
while  the  latter  part  of  the  lesson  the  thought  is  more  upon 
the  Spirit. 

But  this  very  difficulty  suggests  that  underlying  truth 
which  is  the  heart  of  the  lesson — the  truth,  namely,  that 
Christ,  the  Candlestick  and  the  Head  Stone  is  to  be  brought 
forth  and  exalted  only  through  the  power  of  the  Spirit. 

So  much,  in  our  day,  is  said  and  printed  concerning  the 
Holy  Spirit  that  the  mighty  word  by  Zechariah,  "not  by 
might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord,"  is 
in  danger  of  becoming  a  mere  cant  phrase — a  mere  platitude 
of  modern  religious  life.  We  answer,  "Of  course — who  does 
not  know  that?"  but  we  go  on,  nevertheless,  in  methods 
which  assume  that  Christian  victories  are  to  be  won  by 
might  and  power  and  by  God's  Spirit.  We  forget  the  ''not 
by,"  and  the  ''but  by." 

It  is  no  uncharity  to  say  that  in  Christian  work  we  all  de- 
pend to-day  chiefly  upon  three  sources  of  power  other  than 
the  Spirit  of  God. 

The  first  of  these  is  organization.    To  the  simple  apostolic 

and  inspired  organization,  the  local  church,  we  have  added 

an  infinitude  of  purely  human  devices.     We  have  gathered 

numbers  of  churches,  sometimes  many  thousands  of  them, 

7 


98  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

into  a  something  which  we  call  a  church.  Still  building,  we 
have  equipped  our  "church"  with  from  three  to  eleven  boards 
or  societies,  and  with  a  multitude  of  smaller  groupings  of 
churches  according  to  local  contiguity  or  convenience,  and 
each  of  these  groupings  has  from  two  to  eight  officers. 

Invading,  then,  the  local  churches  themselves,  we  have 
organized  a  bewildering  system  of  societies,  committees, 
treasurers,  chairmen,  etc.,  etc.  We  have  thus  sophisticated 
the  divine  order  and  model  because  we  believe  in  all  good 
faith  that  power  and  efficiency  will  be  thus  increased. 

The  second  source  of  power  other  than  the  Spirit  of  God 
upon  which  we  chiefly  depend  ir,  intellectual  training.  We 
have  said,  with  the  pagan,  ''Knowledge  is  power."  We  have 
said,  and,  through  our  religious  journals  are  constantly  say- 
ing that  what  we  need  for  greater  efficiency  is  a  more  highly 
trained  ministry;  and,  by  that  phrase  we  mean  a  ministry 
with  a  better  equipment  of  learning.  We  verily  believe  our 
ministers  will  have  more  Christian  efficiency — more  power 
for  God — if  we  teach  them  more  things  drawn,  not  at  all 
from  Scripture,  nor  from  centuries  of  Christian  experience, 
but  from  the  latest  hypotheses  of  men  of  science,  the  latest 
guesses  of  psychology,  as  to  what  the  inner  phenomena  of 
life  are,  the  latest  proposals  for  the  amelioration  of  the  hard 
conditions  of  the  present  social  order. 

And  the  third  source  of  power  to  which  we  seek  with  far 
more  of  faith  and  persistency  than  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  is 
money.  We  verily  do  believe  that  if  we  had  money  enough 
we  could  convert  the  world.  It  has  been  recently  gravely 
stated,  and  in  an  influential  quarter,  that  we  may  not  in  the 
future  hope  to  secure  for  the  foreign  field  the  "best  equipped 
men  and  women"  unless  we  "bravely  face  the  fact"  that  they 
must  be  offered  as  much  more  money  than  they  can  earn  at 
home  as  the  perils  of  climate,  discomforts  and  deprivations 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  99 

of   intellectual   and   social   opportunities   weigh  against   the 
choice  of  the  foreign  field. 

No  sane  person  undervalues  training,  but  many  sane  per- 
sons overvalue  it  as  a  source  of  power.  Money  is,  indeed,  in 
some  sort,  absolutely  essential  to  the  prosecution  of  extended 
Christian  enterprises — but  it  is  never  a  source  of  power. 
Organization  is  necessary — as  witness  the  organization  of 
the  primitive  Christian  life  into  assemblies — but  organization 
is  never  power.  When  these,  in  utter  subordination  and  ab- 
negation, are  put  into  the  hands  of  the  Spirit  He  may  and 
will  use  them  for  the  manifestation  of  His  power. 


ESTHER  PLEADING  FOR  HER  PEOPLE. 

(Esther  iv:  10-43.) 
L     The  Analysis. 

I.  Esther's  call  and  her  response  of  faith  (verses  10-16). 
2.  The  prayer  of  the  people,  and  God's  answer    (iv:  17; 

v:3)- 

IL     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

This  lesson  is  so  integral,  so  completely  one,  that  we  shall 
best  come  to  understand  its  most  central  teaching  by  consid- 
ering it  all.  It  has  been  urged  against  the  inspiration  and 
canonicity  of  this  Book  that  the  name  of  Deity  does  not  occur 
in  it.  Perhaps  nothing  could  better  illustrate  tlie  folly  of  the 
destructive  criticism.  Against  Israel  at  this  time  had  gone 
forth  the  word,  lo  ammi — "not  my  people"  (Hosea  i:  9,  10; 
ii:23).  It  was  not  the  abrogation  of  the  Abrahamic,  Deu- 
teronomic  and  Davidic  covenants  (Gen.  xii:  1-4;  Deut.  xxx: 
i-io;  2  Sam.  vii:  5-17),  for  these,  it  is  repeatedly  declared, 


100  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

shall  never  fail ;  it  was  the  chastisement  of  the  ancient  peo- 
ple by  the  withdrawal  of  the  divine  fellowship. 

But,  though  withholding  Himself  from  personal  commun- 
ion with  his  people,  Jehovah  nevertheless  worked  for  them 
behind  the  screen  of  His  providences.  Denied,  because  of 
their  sins,  the  joy  of  the  felt  presence  of  God,  they  were 
all  the  more  the  objects  of  His  tender  love  (Hos.  xiv:  i-6), 
of  His  ceaseless  care. 

How  exquisitely  in  character,  therefore,  with  this  period 
in  the  history  of  the  chosen  people  is  this  dealing  in  Esther. 
God's  name  is  not  mentioned,  but  God's  hand  is  everywhere. 
It  is  even  so  through  all  the  present  church  age.  The  ''nat- 
ural branches"  are  ''broken  off,"  but,  "beloved  for  the  fa- 
thers' sake,"  God,  whose  "gifts  and  calling  are  without  re- 
pentance," "is  able  to  graff  them  in  again"  (Rom.  xi) .  Mean- 
time, the  true  philosophy  of  Gentile  world-history  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Divine  dealing  with  the  Jew. 

Turning  now  to  the  lesson  we  shall  have  the  heart  of  it, 
I  think,  in  a  certain  sequence  which  gives  to  the  events  the 
relation  of  cause  and  consequence;  and,  supremely,  in  a 
word  of  Mordecai  to  Esther. 

That  order  of  events  is:  the  humiliation  before  God  of 
the  imperilled  Jews;  the  message  to  Esther;  the  response 
of  Esther's  faith ;  the  preparation  by  fasting  and  prayer ; 
the  answer  of  God  in  His  providential  deliverance  of  His 
people.  How  easily  it  might  all  have  been  otherwise!  The 
threatened  Jews  might  have  heaped  their  wealth  at  Haman's 
feet  to  placate  his  hatred.  They  might  have  sought  to  avert 
the  impending  doom  by  corrupting  influential  courtiers. 
They  might  have  sought  safety  in  flight.  But  they  began  by 
getting  right  with  God,  and  all  that  followed  had  the  inevita- 
bility of  cause  and  effect.  For  then  God  begins  to  work,  and 
their  safety  was  at  once  assured. 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  loi 

But  we  must  not  pass  over  a  word  in  Mordecai's  message 
to  the  beautiful  young  Jewess  who  was  to  be  God's  instru- 
ment in  the  deliverance  of  her  people:  "And  who  knoweth 
whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as 
this?" 

Who,  indeed,  shall  say  that  the  whole  past  of  Esther  up 
to  the  moment  when  she  stood,  unbidden,  before  the  king 
had  not  been  ordered  in  view  of  the  use  God  meant  to 
make  of  her  that  day  ?  For  that,  she  had  been  born  a  Jewess 
that  she  might  be  bound  up  with  the  destinies  of  that  people ; 
for  that,  she  had  been  dowered  with  beauty,  that  she  might 
reach  the  heart  of  a  sensual  pagan  king  through  the  only 
avenue  of  access  to  the  heart  of  such  a  man — his  senses ;  for 
that,  she  had  been  raised  to  share  that  king's  throne. 

But  if  it  were  so  with  Esther,  there  emerges  a  principle  of 
wide  application  in  the  interpretation  of  the  divine  provi- 
dences. Is  not  that  principle  this:  that  opportunity  to  do 
good  is  at  once  the  divine  call  to  do  that  thing,  and  the  in- 
terpretation of  the  divine  dealing  in  the  past  which  has  at 
last  brought  the  person  and  the  opportunity  together? 

What,  fundamentally,  is  the  meaning  of  the  crucifixion? 
"Him,  being  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  fore- 
knowledge of  God."  "A  lamb  without  blemish  and  without 
spot :  who  verily  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world"  (Acts  ii :  2^;  i  Pet.  i:  19,  20).  How  many  cen- 
turies it  required  to  bring  at  last  Christ  and  the  cross  to- 
gether ! 

So  we,  in  the  measure  of  our  opportunity  are  to  find  the 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God.  For  such 
a  time — though  the  service  may  be  a  small  one — we  came  to 
the  Kingdom. 


102  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

EZRA'S  JOURNEY  TO  JERUSALEM. 

(Ezra  viii:  21-32.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  right  beginning  (verses  21,  23).  2.  The  resolve 
of  faith  (verse  22).  3.  Care  about  holy  things  (verses  24- 
30).    4.  The  care  of  God. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Surely  the  heart  of  this  lesson  is  not  far  to  seek.  Ezra 
had  bravely  borne  a  clear  testimony  to  the  power  and  right- 
eousness of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  now  he  was  not  minded 
to  stultify  that  testimony  by  seeking  the  aid  of  the  world  in 
a  matter  which  concerned  God.  In  other  words,  he  was  de- 
termined to  be  consistent.  Having  testified  to  the  power  of 
God,  he  felt  bound  to  rest  his  case  on  that  power.  Doubtless 
many,  possibly  the  king  himself,  who  had  heard  Ezra's  clear 
testimony,  sneered:  "We  shall  soon  see  this  servant  of  so 
great  a  God  asking  for  a  military  escort." 

There  is  a  true  consistency,  and  a  foolish  consistency,  as 
we  have  often  remarked  in  these  papers.  The  latter  is  illus- 
trated by  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians  "which  change 
not."  Times  change,  circumstances  change,  laws  must 
change.  So  must  opinions,  convictions  even.  To  all  grow- 
ing natures  there  comes  a  larger  vision,  a  new  sense  of  the 
relations  of  things,  new  knowledge,  deeper  receptivity,  and 
with  these  change  is  inevitable.  In  this  sense  is  Johnson's 
famous  dictum,  "Consistency  is  the  virtue  of  fools,"  to  be 
taken. 

But  there  are  unchangeable  things.  God  never  changes. 
Jesus  Christ  is  "the  same,  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever." 
And  the  truth  of  God  never  changes.    It  is  as  immutable  as 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  103 

God  Himself.  The  revealed  will  of  God  never  changes: 
"the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken"  (John  x:  35). 

It  follows  that  faith  establishes  certain  relationships  with 
God  which  do  not  change.  Our  apprehension  of  the  wonder 
and  privilege  of  our  position  as  sons  of  God  may  grow 
broader  and  deeper,  but  we  are  never  any  more  really  sons 
of  God  than  in  the  moment  when  we  first  believed  in  Christ, 
nor  can  we  ever  be  any  less  than  sons  of  God. 

In  the  same  way  it  is  true  that  the  world  of  unsaved  hu- 
man beings  does  not  change.  Individuals  out  of  the  world 
believe  and  pass  into  the  family  of  God  by  the  new  birth. 
When  they  do  that,  they  change,  but  the  world  of  unsaved 
humanity  is  left  unchanged. 

The  customs  and  manners  of  the  world  change.  The 
world  for  nineteen  hundred  years  has  been  growing  more 
cultured,  agreeable  and  law  abiding.  It  is  a  far  pleasanter 
place  to  live  in  than  formerly.  The  modern  city  is  vile 
enough,  but  one  would  rather  live  in  New  York  than  in  the 
Rome  of  the  first  century,  or  the  Paris  or  London  of 
the  sixteenth  or  seventeenth  centuries.  The  ethic  of  Christ, 
the  presence  in  the  world  of  Christianity,  have  made  the 
change. 

And  this  change  is  very  misleading.  Because  the  world 
is  gentler  in  its  normal  states  than  formerly,  we  say  it  is 
more  Christian.  But  the  world  is  just  the  sum  of  the  indi- 
viduals at  any  one  time  on  the  earth,  and  an  individual  is  not 
a  Christian  so  long  as  he  does  not,  by  a  definite  act  of  faith, 
receive  Jesus  Christ  as  Saviour  and  Lord.  He  may  take  on 
some  ways  customary  among  Christians,  as  church  going  and 
contribution  giving,  but  that  no  more  makes  him  a  Christian 
than  a  stage  crown  makes  an  actor  a  king,  or  burnt  cork 
makes  a  white  man  a  negro. 

So  of  the  world.     It  is  the  unchanged  enemy  of  Jesus 


104  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Christ,  the  unrepentant  rebel  against  God.  The  greed  of  its 
''captains  of  industry"  is  precisely  the  greed  of  the  brutal 
robber  barons  of  five  hundred  years  ago.  Its  essential  cru- 
elty in  condemning  to  painful  deaths  10,000  industrious  rail- 
way employees  every  year  to  save  the  expenditure  of  a  few 
millions  in  preventive  devices,  is  precisely  the  cruelty  of 
Roman  nobles  witnessing  the  deaths  of  the  arena.  The  only 
fundamental  difference  is  that  the  railway  barons  do  not  like 
to  see  the  mangled  victims  of  their  dividend  producing  greed. 
Now  the  application  of  Ezra's  counsel  of  consistency  is 
evident.  The  Church  testifies  to  the  world  that  belief  in 
Jesus  Christ  brings  one  into  the  family  of  the  God  of  all 
the  universe,  the  owner  of  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills,  of 
all  the  treasures  of  earth,  that  this  Father  has  left  His  chil- 
dren in  the  world  to  bring  the  world  to  His  riches.  And  the 
church  stands  a  mendicant  at  every  rich  man's  door ! 


NEHEMIAH'S  PRAYER. 

(Neh.  i:  i-ii.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  evil  estate  of  God's  heritage  (verses  1-3).  2.  The 
prayer  of  a  man  who  cared  (verses  4-11). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Two  men,  during  the  70  years'  captivity,  were  unceasing 
remembrances  of  the  Lord  in  behalf  of  Israel — Nehemiah 
and  Daniel  (Dan.  ix:  1-19).  Their  recorded  prayers  are 
strikingly  alike,  and  each  of  them  is  a  preciously  complete 
lesson  on  prayer.  Aside  from  the  touching  application  to 
the  Jewish  people,  I  cannot  but  think  the  permanent  value 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  105 

of  this  lesson  lies  just  there — it  is  a  lesson  in  the  divine  art 
of  prayer.    Let  us  so  consider  it. 

1.  The  first  fact  about  this  great  prayer  which  arrests  at- 
tention is  that  it  was  intercessory.  Most  of  the  prayers  pre- 
served for  us  in  Scripture  are  intercessory.  Doubtless  the 
believer  is  to  pray  concerning  his  own  life  and  its  needs. 
Doubtless,  though,  the  divine  intent  is  that  such  prayers 
should  by  no  means  constitute  the  bulk  of  our  praying.  The 
New  Testament  believer  is  a  priest  ( i  Pet.  ii :  5-9 ;  Rev.  i : 
5,  6),  and  "every  priest"  is  "ordained  for  men  in  things  per- 
taining to  God."  He  must  'have  compassion  on  the  ignorant, 
and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way"  (Heb.  v:  i,  2).  And 
the  will  of  God  is  that  His  New  Testament  believer-priests 
shall  offer  "supplications,  prayers,  intercessions,  and  giving 
of  thanks,"  "for  all  men." 

What  an  interceding  believer-priest  Paul  was!  His 
Epistles  are  fragrant  with  the  breath  of  unselfish  prayer, 
often  with  tears,  and  often  "for  as  many  as  had  not  seen  his 
face  in  the  flesh." 

2.  Then,  secondly,  Nehemiah  was  moved  to  tears  and  fast- 
ing and  prayers  for  Israel  because  they  were  "the  children 
of  Israel,  Thy  servants."  It  was  something  that  touched  the 
heart  and  the  honor  of  God  that  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 
should  be  broken  down  and  the  gates  thereof  burned  with 
fire.  Jerusalem  was  "the  city  of  the  great  King,"  the  "place 
which  the  Lord  God  had  chosen."  It  was  His  people  who 
had  transgressed. 

Every  wholly  right  prayer  puts  God's  honor  first.  "Our 
Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  Thy  name;  Thy 
Kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done." 

3.  Thirdly,  it  was  a  prayer  which  confessed  the  whole 
failure  and  need.     There  was  no  silly  optimism  in  Nehe- 


io6  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

miah's  prayer.  "Both  I  and  my  father's  house  have  sinned. 
We  have  dealt  very  corruptly  against  thee." 

Just  at  that  time  Nehemiah  was  in  a  place  of  great  inti- 
macy and  trust  at  court.  All  persecution  of  the  Jews  had 
ceased.  They  had  grown  rich  and  influential.  A  shallow 
optimism  would  have  pointed — as  perhaps  many  did  point — 
to  the  prosperity  in  a  temporal  sense  of  the  Jews  as  reason 
for  gratulation  and  self-complacency.  That  is  the  prevailing 
note  in  our  day.  But  the  spiritually  minded,  like  Nehemiah, 
knew  that  Israel  had  shamefully  failed  in  her  distinctive  mis- 
sion in  the  world,  which  was  to  be  a  witness  to  the  unity  of 
God  in  the  midst  of  universal  idolatry  (Deut.  vi:  4,  with  Isa. 
xliii:  10-12),  and  to  illustrate  to  the  nations  the  blessedness 
of  serving  the  true  God  (Deut.  xxxiii :  26-29 ;  i  Chr.  xvii: 
20,  21;  Psa.  cxliv:  15).  In  like  manner  the  Church,  to 
which  was  committed  one,  and  but  one,  mission — to  evan- 
gelize the  world  (Matt,  xxviii :  18-20 ;  Acts  i :  8) — has  never 
in  any  generation  told  the  story  to  one-third  of  the  human 
family,  and  has  turned  aside  to  the  production  of  the  mere 
by-products  of  Christianity — schools,  hospitals,  and  orphan- 
ages. The  Church  will  see  a  red  revival  when  Daniels  and 
Nehemiahs  are  moved  to  weep  and  confess  her  sin  and 
failure. 

4.  Fourth,  Nehemiah  acknowledged  the  condition  of  Israel 
and  Jerusalem  to  be  due  to  the  chastening  hand  of  the  Lord, 
according  to  His  solemn  warning  in  the  Deuteronomic  cove- 
nant (Deut.  XXX :  i-io).  It  was  no  "misfortune"  which  had 
"happened"  to  Israel.  The  holy  nation  was  captive  in  a 
strange  land  because  God  was  chastising  it. 

Just  such  a  word  is  given  to  the  believer.  "If  we  would 
judge  ourselves  we  should  not  be  judged ;  but  when  we  are 
judged,  we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord  that  we  should  not  be 
condemned  with  the  world"  (i  Cor.  xi:3i,  32). 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  107 

5.  And,  lastly,  the  very  failure  and  sin  of  Israel  but  drove 
Nehemiah  to  the  promises.  The  Deuteronomic  covenant  had 
more  than  warnings  of  disaster  and  of  the  chastening  hand 
of  God,  and  the  suppliant  cup-bearer  fell  back  upon  the 
promises  of  that  covenant  with  unquestioning  faith. 

May  we  of  the  Church  age,  sons  of  the  Father,  remember 
as  we  see  and  mourn  the  failure  of  the  Church  His  gracious 
promise:  "If  we  confess  our  sins.  He  is  faithful  and  just 
to  forgive  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteous- 
ness." 


New  Testament  Studies 


THE  BOYHOOD  OF  CHRIST. 

(Luke  11:40-52.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  True  Humanity  of  Jesus  (verses  40,  51,  52). — It  Is 
of  the  utmost  importance  to  be  clear  at  this  point.  Error  as 
to  the  Person  of  Christ  is  so  fundamental  that  it  is  sure  to 
invalidate,  in  the  end,  every  doctrine  of  the  Gospel.  In  one 
respect  only  did  the  humanity  of  Jesus  differ  from  that  of 
all  men — He  was  sinless  both  as  to  nature  and  act.  In  every 
other  respect  He  was  one  of  us,  and  one  with  us. 

2.  The  Jewish  Nurture  of  Jesus  (verses  41,  42.) — Our 
Lord  was  "made  under  the  law"  (Gal.  iv:4),  and  the  inci- 
dent recorded  in  this  lesson  shows  how  carefully  He  was 
brought  up  in  all  its  ordinances.  It  should  be  remembered 
that  Jesus  Christ  was,  as  to  His  earth  life,  "a  minister  of 
the  circumcision,"  whose  ministry,  therefore,  related  to  the 
confirmation  of  ''the  promises  unto  the  fathers"  (Rom.  xv: 
8)  ;  and  that  the  proclamation  of  mercy  to  the  Gentiles  did 
not  begin  till  after  His  ascension  and  the  descent  of  the 
Spirit  at  Pentecost.  Failure  to  see  the  legal  and  Jewish  ele- 
ment in  our  Lord's  teaching  leads  to  the  effort  to  bring  tliat 
teaching  over  literally  into  the  church — a  thing  wholly  for- 
eign to  the  Divine  purpose. 

3.  The  Danger  of  Losing  the  Fellowship  of  Jesus  (verses 
44-48). — See  below. 

4.  The  Full  Divine  Self -consciousness  of  Jesus  (verses 
47,  49.) — Thirty  years  ago  Dale  of  Birmingham,  speaking 
upon  the  earlier  phase  of  the  higher  criticism  which  seemed 

m 


112  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

comparatively  harmless,  predicted  that  within  thirty  years 
the  storm  would  ''gather  over  one  sacred  head !"  That  time 
has  come.  It  is  evident  that  Satan's  work  of  undermining 
the  authority  of  Scripture  was  but  preliminary  to  an  assault 
upon  the  deity  of  Jesus  Christ.  How  important,  then,  this 
inspired  testimony  to  the  fact  that  even  at  the  age  of  twelve 
Jesus  was  in  the  full  consciousness  of  His  divine  sonship. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  present  lesson  may  be  said  to  have  two  centres — one 
doctrinal,  the  other  practical.  The  doctrinal  heart  of  the 
lesson  concerns  the  Person  of  Christ.  The  higher  criticism 
finds  itself  confronted  at  every  step  by  the  testimony  of 
Christ  concerning  the  inspiration  and  authority  of  the  Old 
Testament.  It  is  incontestable  that  He  received  the  Holy 
Scriptures  as  of  final  authority,  not  only  in  the  sphere  of 
revelation  of  truth,  but  also  as  absolutely  inerrant  in  every 
statement  of  fact. 

But  if  Jesus  Christ  spoke  as  a  first  hand  witness,  with  the 
authority  of  One  who,  in  His  eternal  sonship,  saw  every 
word  of  the  Old  Testament  written,  then  His  testimony 
makes  an  end  of  the  higher  criticism.  It  became  necessary, 
therefore,  for  the  critics  to  impugn  the  divine  knowledge  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  this  they  do  by  inventing  what  is  called 
the  kenotic  theory,  i.  e.,  the  theory  that  in  becoming  flesh 
the  eternal  Son  laid  aside  His  divine  knowledge  and  con- 
sciousness, and  came  under  purely  human  limitations.  The 
full  answer  to  that  dishonoring  notion  cannot  be  given  here, 
but  our  lesson  (verses  47,  49)  is  of  itself  a  sufficient  refuta- 
tion. "As  human  He  grew;  as  divine  He  knew,"  said 
Luther. 

The  practical  heart  of  the  lesson  is  most  precious.  It  lies 
in  the  phrase:    "Supposing  Him  to  be  in  the  company." 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  113 

As  the  Nazareth  party,  happy  in  the  sacred  events  o£  the 
week,  started  upon  the  return  journey,  Mary  assumed  that 
her  wonderful  and  holy  Son  was  somewhere  in  the  company, 
but  when  the  evening  halt  came  she  learned  the  bitter  lesson 
which  millions  of  Christians  have  also  had  to  learn  in  dis- 
tress and  sorrow,  that  it  is  most  dangerous  to  take  the  fel- 
lowship of  the  Son  of  God  by  way  of  easy  assumption. 

How  many  of  us,  happy  in  yesterday's  blessings,  have  gone 
a  day's  journey  "supposing  Him  to  have  been  in  the  com- 
pany," only  to  learn  at  night  that  we  have  been  occupied 
with  past  experiences,  and  not  with  Himself.  Two  links 
unite  us  to  Jesus,  the  link  of  life,  which,  thank  God,  can 
never  be  broken ;  and  the  link  of  fellowship,  which  may  be 
interrupted  by  a  heedless  walk. 


THE  PREACHING  OF  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST. 

(Matt,  iii:  1-12.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  Message  and  the  Mission  of  John  (verses  1-3,  10, 
12). — The  position  of  John  the  Baptist  with  reference  to 
Christ  is  simply  defined  by  himself ;  he  was  "the  friend  of 
the  Bridegroom"  (John  iii:  29),  as  Abraham  was  "the  friend 
of  God"  (James  iii:  22).  He  was  the  last  and  greatest 
(Matt,  xi:  9,  10)  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets,  and  to  him 
was  given  the  blessedness  of  seeing  the  Bridegroom  and  of 
hearing  His  voice.  But  John  the  Baptist's  ministry  was  pre- 
paratory to  the  kingdom,  not  the  church ;  nor  was  his  mes- 
sage, "repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,"  a 
Gospel  message.  There  is  no  preparatory  message  for  this 
Gospel  age.  The  Gospel  says :  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved"  (Acts  xvi:  31). 


114  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

2.  The  Test  of  True  Repentcmce  (verse  8). — Repentance 
is  a  change  of  mind  about  Christ,  but  true  repentance,  Hke 
true  faith,  is  an  energizing  principle — it  bears  fruit  (Matt. 
xxi:  28-31). 

3.  The  Two  Classes  in  Especial  Peril  (verse  9). — The 
appearance  amongst  those  who  sought  baptism  at  the  hands 
of  John  of  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  aroused  in  John  **the 
spirit  and  power  of  Elijah"  (Luke  i:  17).  The  Sadducees 
were  the  rationalists  and  higher  critics  of  that  day  Matt, 
xxi:  23-29),  and  the  Pharisees  the  strict  legalists.  In  many 
things  they  were  far  apart,  and,  upon  a  superficial  view, 
seemed  antagonistic,  but  the  Spirit  pierced  down  to  their 
essential  unity;  they  both  said,  "We  have  Abraham  to  our 
father."  They  were  quite  too  good  by  natural  descent  to  be 
lost.  That  was  their  peculiar  peril — false  security,  self- 
satisfaction.    It  is  the  peril  of  millions  to-day. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

But  the  heart  of  this  lesson  must  be  found  in  the  tenth 
verse :  "Now  is  the  ax  laid  into  the  root  of  the  trees."  The 
long  trail  of  human  nature  is  over.  Beginning  with  what  the 
infidel  evolutionist,  Herbert  Spencer,  declares  to  be  a  scien- 
tific definition  of  heaven,  "a  perfect  being  in  a  perfect  en- 
vironment," man,  at  the  first  temptation,  fell  into  sin.  Tested 
thereafter  under  natural  conscience,  under  human  govern- 
ment, under  covenant  and  promise,  and  finally  under  law, 
human  nature  was  shown  to  be  incurably  evil.  Neither  the 
goodness  nor  the  severity  of  God  availed  to  produce  fruit 
for  God  from  that  tree  (Isa.  i:  2-6,  v:  1-7;   Rom.  iii:  9-18). 

The  current  theological  notion  that  man  is  now  under 
probation  is  wholly  misleading  and  untrue.  Man  is  under 
condemnation  (John  iii:  18,  19),  and  spiritually  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins   (Eph.  ii:i,  5).     The  unbeliever  is  in 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  115 

precisely  the  condition  of  a  condemned  criminal,  execution 
of  whose  sentence  is  indefinitely  deferred.  Before  him  is, 
in  any  event,  no  matter  what  he  may  do,  but  one  prospect — 
he  must  die.  But,  blessed  be  God,  he  may  choose  the  manner 
of  his  death.  He  may  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and 
then  he  dies  in  and  with  Christ  (Rom.  vi:2-6;  Gal.  ii:  19, 
20),  or  he  may  go  on  in  unbelief  and  find  his  part  in  the 
"lake  of  fire  which  is  the  second  death" — a  death  which  is  not 
the  extinction  of  being,  but  an  endless  and  never  consum- 
mated dying.  But  in  any  event,  God,  nineteen  hundred  years 
ago,  ceased  to  expect  anything  from  human  nature.  The  old 
tree  is  hewn  down. 


THE  BAPTISM  AND  TEMPTATION. 

(Matt,  iii:  13-iv:  11.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

The  lesson  is  in  four  divisions: — 

1.  Jesus'  Baptism  by  John  (iii:  13-15). — The  fulfilling  of 
ail  righteousness  by  the  sinless  One,  who,  for  Himself, 
needed  no  baptism  of  repentance,  but  who,  in  the  very  initial 
step  in  His  public  ministry,  acts  vicariously  in  behalf  of 
sinners  who  deeply  need  that  baptism.  This  is  precisely  the 
doctrine  of  Col.  ii :  12,  which  is  not  to  be  confused  with  Rom. 
vi :  4,  5.  Doubtless,  also,  Christ's  baptism  in  Jordan,  the 
river  of  judgment,  was  typical  of  His  coming  death  (Luke 
xii:3o).  Reject  the  notion  often  taught  that  this  baptism 
was  a  priestly  washing.  Jesus  Christ's  high  priestly  work 
did  not  begin  "on  the  earth"  (Heb.  viii:4),  but  when  He 
was  "lifted  up  from  the  earth"  (John  xii:  32),  and  "offered 
Himself  without  spot  to  God"  (Heb.  ix:  14)  on  the  cross. 

2.  Jesus'  Baptism  by  the  Holy  Spirit  (iii:  16,  17). — From 


ii6  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

this  moment  He  becomes  the  Christ,  which  means  the 
Anointed,  the  equivalent  of  the  Hebrew  Messiah.  This 
anointing  is  unto  His  three-fold  office  of  Prophet,  Priest 
and  King.  He  immediately  enters  upon  His  prophetic  minis- 
try; His  priestly  ministry  began  on  the  cross;  His  kingly 
work  will  begin  at  His  appearing.  The  scene  is  also  a  com- 
plete manifestation  of  the  Trinity. 

3.  Jesus  Christ's  Temptation  (iv:  i-io). — The  tempter  is 
Satan  himself.  It  is  the  testing  of  the  "last  Adam,''  the 
"second  man"  (i  Cor.  xv:45,  47)-  'The  appeal  was  to  His 
three-fold  being — body,  "command  that  these  stones  be  made 
bread" ;  soul,  "cast  thyself  down" ;  spirit,  "all  these  things 
will  I  give  thee."  In  each  the  core  of  the  appeal  was  to 
Jesus  Christ  as  man,  to  act  from  Himself,  in  independence 
of  the  Father.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  quotations  used 
are  from  Deuteronomy — the  book  especially  singled  out  by 
the  higher  critics  as  a  late  forgery.  Imagine  two  beings  like 
the  Son  of  God  and  Lucifer,  both  of  whom  knew  the  facts, 
seriously  quoting  from  a  writing  that  both  knew  to  be 
spurious ! 

4.  The  Angelic  Ministry  of  Jesus  (iv:  11). — It  is  impor- 
tant to  note  here  that  angels  exercise  a  ministry  of  physical 
restoration  and  renewal   (Luke  xxii:43;    ^f-  i   Kings  xix: 

5-8). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  central,  vital  truth  of  this  lesson  is  not  far  to  seek. 
Each  of  these  first  temptations  of  our  Lord  had  one  object — 
to  seduce  Him  from  the  pathway  marked  out  for  Him  as 
the  Son  of  God  on  a  mission  to  this  world.  The  first  would 
have  taken  Him  from  His  appointed  state  of  dependence  on 
the  Father  for  personal  need.  The  second  would  have  led 
Him  beyond  faith  into  a  fanatical  and  presumptuous  act  for 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  117 

which  He  had  no  word  of  Scripture,  though  Satan  endeav- 
ored to  persuade  Him  that  He  had.  Here  lies  one  of  our 
subtlest  dangers. 

Every  excess  of  fanatacism  grounds  itself  on  some  misap- 
plied passage  of  Scripture.  Kingdom  promises  are  put  be- 
fore believers  who  are  members  of  Christ's  body,  not  subjects 
of  His  millennial  kingdom.  Satan  can  quote  Scripture,  but 
Satan  never  applies  it  correctly. 

The  third  temptation  was  still  addressed  to  the  one  object — 
to  get  our  Lord  out  of  His  appointed  path.  Nothing  is  more 
certain  than  that  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  to  become 
''the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ"  (2  Sam.  vii: 
8-14;  Psa.  ii;  Jer.  xxiii:5-8;  Isa.  ix:6,  7;  Luke  i  130-33; 
Acts  XV :  14-17),  but  between  the  Son  of  man  as  He  stood 
that  day  in  the  wilderness  of  the  temptation,  and  the  throne 
of  His  father  David,  lay  the  cross  of  Calvary.  Every  one 
of  these  temptations  come  to  fellow-sons  and  co-heirs  with 
Jesus.  The  pathway  of  faith  lies  through  testings  which 
appeal  to  bodily  needs ;  to  fanaticism  instead  of  faith,  and  to 
the  avoidance  of  that  suffering  which  for  us,  too,  lies  be- 
tween conversion  and  the  crown  (Rom.  viii:  17). 


REJECTED  AT  NAZARETH. 

(Luke  iv:  16-30.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  ''Custom"  of  Jesus  (verse  16). — It  is  only  a  word, 
but  what  a  wealth  of  revelation  it  contains.  "As  His  cus- 
tom was."  It  suggests  the  profoundly  religious  life  of  our 
Lord  during  the  long  years  of  silence  at  Nazareth.  The 
word  "religious"  is  used  advisedly.  Israel  had  a  religion  to 
practice  (Gal.  i:  13)  ;   Christians  have  a  life  to  outlive  (Gal. 


ii8  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

ii:  20) — a  very  different  thing.    It  suggests,  too,  the  exceed- 
ing value  of  right  habits  (cf.  Dan.  vi:  10). 

2.  The  Fulfilled  Prophecy  (verses  17-21).  Here  is  a 
wonderful  illustration  of  the  minute  accuracy  of  that  verbally 
inspired  Word  of  God,  so  impiously  assailed  by  modern 
critics.  The  passage  quoted  by  our  Lord  is  found  in  Isaiah 
Ixi:  I,  2,  reference  to  which  will  show  that  our  Lord  sus- 
pended the  reading  at  a  comma,  and  in  the  middle  of  a 
sentence:  *'to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord" — 
"and  he  closed  the  book  *  *  *  and  began  to  say  unto 
them,  This  day  has  this  Scripture  been  fulfilled  in  your  ears. 
The  conclusion  of  the  sentence  is,  "and  the  day  of  vengeance 
of  our  God."  But  that  day  had  not  come  then,  nor  has  it  yet 
come.  It  will  be  the  baptism  with  fire  (Matt,  iii:  11)  at  His 
second  coming. 

3.  The  Rejection  of  Jesus  (verse  22). — Men  foolishly 
fancy  that  if  they  could  see  our  Lord  as  in  the  days  of  His 
humiliation  they  would  instantly  believe.  Ah,  no.  "If  they 
hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  per- 
suaded though  one  rose  from  the  dead"   (Luke  xvi:3i). 

4.  Jesus  Rejecting  the  Rejecters  (verses  23-27). — This  is 
the  invariable  order  (Matt,  xi:  19-24).  The  rejection  may 
be  cast  in  a  polite  form  (Luke  xiv:  16-24),  or  a  contemptu- 
ous one  (Matt.  xxii:2-7),  but  the  result  is  the  same — the 
rejecter  of  Jesus  will  find  himself  rejected  at  last.  Not  even 
the  cloak  of  profession  will  avail  (Matt,  xxv:  10-12,  24-30). 

5.  Jesus,  Rejected  by  Israel,  Will  Turn  to  the  Gentiles 
(verses  25-27). — This  foreview  was  wonderfully  fulfilled  in 
the  Apostolic  age,  and  since  (Acts  xviii:6;  xxviii :  25-28; 
xv:i4). 

6.  The  Wrath  of  the  Rejecters  (verses  28,  29). — Deep  in 
the  heart  of  every  rejecter  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  black  hatred 
of  Him,  and  of  His  will.    The  world  of  unbelief  would  tear 


NEW  TESTAMENT  Sl'UDIES  119 

God  from  His  throne  if  it  were  possible.  Think  what  a 
message  of  love  and  of  helpfulness  had  been  given  from  the 
lips  of  Christ  that  day.  What  a  revelation  of  the  deep  evil 
of  the  natural  heart  is  involved  in  the  hatred  of  perfect  grace ! 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

If  the  underlying  philosophy  of  the  moral  influence  theory 
of  the  atonement  were  true,  Jesus  would  have  won  His  first 
mighty  victory  that  day  in  Nazareth;  for  He  was  in  the 
company  that  knew  Him  best.  For  nineteen  years  that  small 
community  had  been  in  contact  with  the  blameless  and  holy 
life  of  our  Lord.  Every  soul  in  Nazareth  would  have  some 
story  of  His  loving  helpfulness;  every  soul  had  felt  the 
sweetness  and  power  of  His  nature.  One  would  say  that 
here  of  all  places  He  would  be  surest  to  win  converts. 

But  it  was  not  so.  They  wondered  at  His  gracious  words, 
but  when  He  came  to  press  His  messianic  claims  they  drew 
back.  "Is  not  this  Joseph's  son?"  And  He  made  them  see 
that  He  understood  their  thoughts.  He  was  a  Prophet  in 
His  own  country,  and  could  do  mighty  works  there  because 
of  their  unbelief.  Unbelief — that  stubborn  barrier  against 
which  even  divine  power  beats  in  vain.  Mysterious  limita- 
tion upon  almightiness !  With  a  breath  He  could  have 
blotted  them  out  of  existence,  but  He  "could  do  no  mighty 
work"  in  the  face  of  their  unbelief.  With  unbelief  alone 
millions  are  staying  the  grace  of  God  which  seeks  to  save 
them. 

But  it  is  only  the  grace  of  God  which  can  be  thrust  back 
by  unbelief.  When  again  our  Lord  shall  call  for  the  roll  of 
the  prophet  Isaiah,  and  begin  to  read  at  the  place  where  He 
stopped  that  day  in  Nazareth,  He  will  say:  "And  the  day 
of  vengeance  of  our  God,"  and  then  unbelief  will  not  stay 
His  hand. 


120  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

CALLING  FOUR  DISCIPLES. 

(Luke  v:  i-ii.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Preaching  from  Simon's  Boat  (verses  1-3). — Our 
Lord  had  returned  from  Nazareth  to  Capernaum,  and  was 
preaching  in  GaHlee.  We  know  from  Matthew  and  Mark 
the  burden  of  His  preaching.  It  was  the  Gospel  of  the  king- 
dom, not  the  Gospel  of  God's  grace  (Matt,  iv:  17)  :  **Repent, 
for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand"  {cf.  Matt,  x:  5-7). 
The  King  had  come  and  was  offering  the  kingdom  (2  Sam. 
vii :  12-16 ;  Isa.  i :  1-3  ;  Jer.  xxiii :  3-8 ;  Ezk.  xxxvii :  21,  25  ; 
Luke  i:  31-33),  not  the  church. 

2.  The  Difference  Between  Self-Directed  and  Christ- 
Directed  Work  (verses  4-7). — Here  is  a  beautiful  lesson  in 
service.  Mark  the  contrast :  ''Master,  we  have  toiled  all  the 
night,  and  have  taken  nothing" — ''and  when  they  had  this 
done,  they  inclosed  a  great  multitude  of  fishes."  If  there 
was  anything  these  men  knew  all  about  it  was  fishing.  It 
was  their  trade.  And,  moreover,  they  knew  all  about  that 
lake,  and  all  about  the  habits  of  the  fish  in  that  lake.  Like  a 
highly  trained  ministry  who  have  added,  besides,  experience 
to  training,  and  who  still  catch  no  souls;  and  who,  like 
Simon,  James  and  John,  must  learn  that  all  their  training 
and  experience  is  nothing  unless  directed  by  the  Word  of 
God.    "At  thy  word  I  will  let  down  the  net." 

3.  The  Strange  Prayer  of  Peter  (verse  8). — Why  should 
a  convicted  sinner  run  away  from  God?  Because  every 
revelation  of  divine  power  brings  with  it  the  thought  of  judg- 
ment. It  is  impossible  for  the  natural  man  who  is  thor- 
oughly convicted  of  sin  to  think  of  God  as  merciful.  Self- 
satisfied,    self-righteous   man,    thinks   with   complacency   of 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  121 

God.     He  is  sure  that  God  approves  him.     But  let  a  due 
sense  of  quiet  come  to  him,  and  fear  comes  with  it. 

4.  The  New  Fishing  (verses  10,  11). — Mark  renders 
(i:  17)  ''Come  ye  after  me  and  I  will  make  you  to  become 
fishers  of  men."  The  Lord  said  both  things:  "Come  ye 
after  me,  and  I  will  make  you  to  become  fishers  of  men. 
Fear  not,  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  men." 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Obviously  we  are  to  find  the  heart  of  this  lesson  in  that 
circumstance  toward  which  the  lesson  tends,  and  in  which 
it  terminates :  the  Gospel  method  of  using  men  to  catch  men 
for  salvation.  If  we  press  the  terms  of  our  Lord's  call  we 
shall  find  them  full  of  precious  instruction  in  soul  winning. 
Three  kinds  of  fishing  are  mentioned  in  Scripture — the  drag 
net  (Matt,  xiii:  47),  the  casting  or  hand  net,  and  the  angle. 
The  first  suggests  great  revival  meetings  where,  indeed,  after 
results  often  prove  that  the  net  ''gathered  of  every  kind," 
good  and  bad.  The  sifting  at  the  end  of  the  age  will  reject 
very  many  whose  names,  in  time  of  religious  excitement,  are 
put  upon  church  membership  rolls.  Still,  we  should  thank 
God  that  many  ''good"  fish  also  get  into  the  drag  net. 

The  casting  or  hand  net  suggests  the  work  of  preaching 
the  Gospel  in  a  quieter  way,  and  to  few  rather  than  to  great 
crowds.  The  great  majority  of  Christian  preachers  have  not 
the  gifts  for  gathering  multitudes,  though  they  may  stand 
by  the  great  sea  of  humanity  and  faithfully  make  repeated 
casts.  Such  work  was  done  by  a  poor  Wesleyan  preacher 
the  day  that  Charles  Spurgeon  was  saved.  That  was  a  great 
catch  out  of  a  small  audience.  Let  no  fisher  of  men  despise 
the  opportunity  of  preaching  to  a  mere  handful.  Many  such 
may  read  these  words  who  are  disheartened  by  scant  success. 


122  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Courage,  brother!    there  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner 
that  repenteth. 

Then  there  is  the  angle,  which  catches  but  one  fish  at  a 
time.  Those  who  cannot  use  the  great  drag  net,  nor  even 
the  hand  net,  may  at  least  patiently  angle  for  one  fish.  But 
this,  too,  requires  skill  and  care.  Be  sure  the  bait  is  the  true 
Gospel.  Be  willing  to  take  infinite  pains,  and  to  have  long 
patience.  Remember,  too,  the  word  of  the  little  country  lad 
to  the  unsuccessful  city  angler:  "You  show  yourself  too 
much,  sir." 


A  SABBATH  IN  CAPERNAUM. 

(Mark  i:  21-34.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Authority  of  Christ's  Teaching  (verses  21,  22). 
— A  scribe  was  a  mere  preserver  of  traditional  interpreta- 
tions, like  a  modern  commentator.  His  teaching  had,  there- 
fore, only  the  authority  of  tradition.  The  postulate  was : 
This  is  true  because  all  the  great  rabbis  from  Ezra  down 
agree  that  so  it  is.  But  Jesus  taught  with  original,  underived, 
divine  authority  (cf.  Matt.  V.,  verses  21,  22). 

2.  The  Power  of  Christ's  Word  (verses  23-28,  32-34). — 
The  distinction  between  the  work  of  Christ  in  casting  out 
demons  and  that  of  His  disciples  was  that  He  wrought  by 
His  inherent  divine  power — they,  by  the  power  of  His  name 
(Acts  xvi:  18). 

3.  The  Power  of  Christ's  Hand  (verses  30,  31). — The 
healing  of  Simon's  wife's  mother  was  another  manifestation 
of  divine  power  which  is  of  special  interest  by  the  method 
adopted.  The  extended  hand  of  our  Lord  may  have  been  a 
crutch  to  the  weak  faith  of  the  sufferer.     It  was  the  method 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  123 

imitated  by  Peter  (Acts  iii:7)  and  is  full  of  suggestion  to 
Christian  workers. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  divine  and  therefore  absolute  authority  and  power 
of  Jesus  Christ  are  the  outstanding  truths  of  this  lesson. 
Never  was  a  lesson  more  timely,  for  the  undertone  of  mod- 
ern religious  thought  is  a  subtle  questioning  of  the  authority 
of  Christ's  teaching  and  the  power  of  Christ's  word.  The 
ethical  beauty  of  His  teaching  is  still  loudly  praised,  but 
only  one  who  is  in  close  contact  with  current  theology  can 
appreciate  the  alarming  extent  to  which  the  sovereign 
power  of  Christ  is  covertly  questioned. 

Three  modern  tendencies  combine  to  effect  this  evil  result. 
The  first  and  most  influential  is  incidental  to  the  prevalency 
of  the  evolutionary  hypothesis.  Still  a  mere  working  theory 
with  real  scientists,  the  swarm  of  echomen,  who  deal  with 
science  at  second  hand,  and  who  fill  professorships  in  schools 
and  colleges,  teach  evolution  as  a  certainty  of  science.  The 
result  is  that  men  have  come  to  think  of  God  as  a  mere  re- 
mote First  Cause  who  is  powerless,  or  at  least  indisposed  to 
interfere  with  the  incredibly  slow  processes  of  evolution. 
Such  a  Christ  cannot  cast  out  demons  by  His  Word,  nor  re- 
buke fevers  by  the  touch  of  His  hand. 

The  second  of  the  causes  operating  to  eliminate  faith  in 
Christ  as  authoritative  is  the  low  estimate  everywhere  now 
placed  upon  His  Person.  Much  teaching  on  that  vital  sub- 
ject is  indistinguishable  from  Unitarianism,  and  even  in 
quarters  where  the  Trinity  is  still  held  to  be  true,  it  is  said, 
as  stated  before,  that  the  Son  of  God,  in  His  incarnation, 
laid  aside  divine  power  and  knowledge. 

The  third  agency  at  work  to  destroy  practical  faith  in 
Christ's    authority   and    power   is   the   widespread   present 


124  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

teaching  concerning  the  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.  In 
such  pubHcations  as  the  ''Outlook,"  and  such  books  as  Glad- 
den's  "Who  Wrote  the  Bible,"  the  "Temple  Bible,"  and 
"Messages  of  the  Bible,"  the  higher  criticism  is  popularized 
and  brought  level  to  the  comprehension  of  the  average 
reader.  The  result  is  that  the  authority  and  power  of  Christ 
as  working  forces  in  the  life  that  now  is  are  increasingly 
displaced  from  the  sphere  of  faith. 


CHRIST  FORGIVES  SINS. 

(Mark  ii:  1-12.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  A  Lesson  in  Christian  Service  (verses  3-5). — The  four 
men  who  brought  the  palsied  man  to  Jesus  had  great  and 
necessary  qualities  for  effective  service.  They  could  work 
together  in  harmony;  each  was  willing  to  bear  his  share  of 
the  burden;  they  were  moved  by  loving  sympathy  for  the 
unfortunate  man ;  they  were  willing  to  take  great  pains  to 
accomplish  his  cure,  and  they  had  unquestioning  faith  in  the 
power  and  willingness  of  Jesus  to  heal. 

2.  A  Lesson  in  Cause  and  Effect  (verses  5-12). — Jesus 
looked  back  of  the  palsy  to  its  cause,  sin  (Comp.  John  v :  14). 
All  disease,  all  death,  is  but  a  result  of  sin.  Not,  it  should 
be  needless  to  say,  necessarily  of  the  personal  sin  of  the  suf- 
ferer. Babes  are  born  in  an  inheritance  of  sin  and  sin's  con- 
sequences (Psa.  li:5;  Rom.  v:  12-14;  John  ix:i-3).  So 
our  Lord  deals  first  with  the  sin. 

3.  A  Lesson  in  the  Primary  Use  of  Miracle  (verses  9-1 1.) 
— The  primary  use  of  miracle  is  not  beneficent,  but  eviden- 
tial. It  required  nothing  less  than  divine  authority  to  heal 
the  palsied  man ;    it  required  nothing  more  than  the  divine 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  125 

authority  of  Him  who  was  to  expiate  human  guilt,  to  forgive 
that  guilt.  Every  dispensation  is  ushered  in  by  miracle,  be- 
cause miracle  is  the  divine  method  of  authentication. 

4.  A  Lesson  in  the  Secondary  Use  of  Miracle  (verses 
II,  12). — Though  the  divine  power  manifested  in  miracle 
is  primarily  for  the  authentication  of  a  message,  yet  the  wis- 
dom and  love  of  God  so  orders  the  miracle  that  it  is  benefi- 
cent. True  miracle  is  never  spectacular,  but  always  con- 
nected in  some  way  with  a  present  need.  It  is  not  merely 
an  exhibition  of  power,  but  an  exhibition  of  power  in  the 
doing  of  some  actual  good.  "Lying  wonders"  always  break 
down  at  this  point.  The  revelations  of  demons  in  spiritism 
are  always  foolish  and  useless.  The  false  prophet  will  do 
"wonders,"  but  of  a  purely  dramatic  kind  (Rev.  xiii:  15). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  power  of  faith  is,  from  the  human  side,  the  heart  of 
this  lesson.  Here,  as  ever,  faith  is  shown  in  its  two  great 
uses.  It  inspires  to  effort  in  divine  as  in  human  things,  and 
it  furnishes  the  means  by  which  divine  power  may  link  itself 
with  human  need. 

It  inspires  to  effort.  Doubt  never  brought  a  palsied  man 
to  Christ,  even  though  a  roof  must  be  broken  up  to  accom- 
plish it.  Doubt,  indeed,  never  effects  any  good  thing. 
Doubt,  unbelief,  disbelief  and  misbelief  all  belong  to  Satan's 
kingdom,  and  are  the  offspring  of  the  father  of  lies.  They 
enfeeble  and  discourage.  Even  in  the  affairs  of  men  all 
great  things  are  wrought  by  men  who  believe.  Cyrus  W. 
Field  believed  that  an  electric  current  could  be  sent  under 
the  Atlantic  through  a  wire  cable.  At  first  no  one  else  be- 
lieved, but  faith  is  contagious ;  it  invariably  gathers  to  itself 
strong,  aggressive  souls.  So  others  came  to  believe,  and  now, 
under  every  sea,  nation  talks  to  nation.    Probably  the  effort 


126  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

which  brought  the  palsied  man  to  Christ  was  born  first  in 
the  faith  of  one  of  this  immortal  four.  Probably  this  saving 
enterprise  began  with  one  convinced  and  believing  man.  At 
any  rate,  it  commonly  is  so.  When  Paul,  on  the  corn  ship 
of  Alexandria,  stood  forth  after  long  abstinence,  the  one 
man  of  faith  on  that  ship,  it  was  he,  the  Jew  prisoner,  who 
instantly  became  the  real  commander.  He  had  the  word  of 
the  Lord  that  not  a  soul  aboard  should  perish,  though  the 
ship  must,  and  his  faith  made  him  supreme.  And  how  his 
faith  inspired  them  all  to  work !  No,  faith,  not  doubt,  is  the 
mother  of  effort.  Among  all  the  shallow  sayings  of  Henry 
Drummond  none  was  shallower  than  his  statement  that  all 
advancement  had  its  origin  in  a  doubt.  Apparently  he  was 
unable  to  distinguish  between  a  doubt  and  a  question.  The 
longing  to  know  is  of  God,  as  is  also  faith  to  believe  that 
more  knowledge  may  be  had  by  patient  and  noble  effort,  but 
a  doubt  is  a  poor,  negative,  devil-born  thing,  infertile  and 
apathetic. 

And  then  faith  links  man  and  his  needs  with  God  and  His 
power.  It  is  the  only  capacity  godward  left  of  sin  in  the 
natural  man — God's  last  unsquandered  gift.  By  it,  if  he  will 
(John  v:  40),  he  may  return  to  God.  And  faith  in  the  saint 
is  still  the  bridge  over  which  heaven's  fulness  comes  into  his 
life.  Absolutely  all  things  are  possible  to  faith,  absolutely 
nothing  is  possible  to  unbelief. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  127 

CHRIST  AND  THE  SABBATH. 

(Matt,  xii:  1-13.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  A  Dispensational  Lesson  (verses  1-4). — Always  ob- 
serve the  time-notes  in  Scripture.  "In  that  day"  is  a  phrase 
which  holds  the  key  to  Old  Testament  Prophecy.  The 
phrase  "at  that  time"  marks  the  turning  points  in  the  life 
of  Christ.  In  Matt,  xi :  16-24  the  rejected  Christ  turns  Re- 
jecter. The  cities  where  the  mightiest  works  had  been 
wrought  had  not  repented.  For  them,  henceforth,  probation 
was  ended.  "The  judgment"  (xi :  22-24)  is  now  their  one 
horizon.  "At  that  time  Jesus  went  on  the  Sabbath  day 
through  the  corn."  His  disciples  unquestionably  violated  the 
Sabbath  (Numbers  xv:  32-36)  and  Jesus  justified  them  by 
the  example  of  David  and  his  men  in  the  time  of  his  rejec- 
tion by  Israel.  The  Son  of  David  took  His  right  place 
typically  as  the  unacknowledged  King  of  Israel. 

2.  The  One  Greater  them  Temple  and  Ritual  (verses  5-8). 
— See  below. 

3.  How  Formal  Religion  Hardens  the  Heart  (verses  9- 
13). — ^AU  history,  biblical  and  secular,  bears  witness  that  no 
influence  known  to  man  so  hardens  the  heart  as  religious 
formalism.  The  inveterate  hatred  which  Jesus  encountered 
was  the  hatred  of  the  most  religious  men  of  His  time.  It 
was  the  hatred  of  priests  and  scribes  that  hounded  the  Son 
of  God  to  the  cross.  The  crudest  persecutions  known  to 
history  have  been  incited  and  carried  through  by  formal  reli- 
gionists. 

4.  The  Splendid  Courage  of  Jesus  (verses  1-13). — None 
knew  so  well  as  He  that  a  blow  struck  at  the  current  Jewish 
notion  of  the  peculiar  sanctity  of  the  temple  and  the  Sab- 


128  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

bath  would  create  a  fatal  and  final  breach  with  Judaism. 
None  knew  so  well  as  He  that  beyond  that  Sabbath  eating 
of  corn,  and  healing  in  the  synagogue,  lay  the  cross — yet 
Jesus  unhesitatingly  struck  the  fatal  blow. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

All  that  Jesus  did  on  that  eventful  Sabbath  day  was  but 
the  illustration  of  His  two  great  sayings:  "In  this  place  is 
one  greater  than  the  temple" :  "For  the  Son  of  man  is  Lord 
even  of  the  Sabbath  day."  The  Revision  omits  "even"  and 
"day"— "The  Son  of  man  is  Lord  of  the  Sabbath."  This 
is  the  true  form,  simpler,  grander  than  that  of  the  author- 
ized version.  Apparently  the  Protestant  translators  drew 
back  from  the  more  austere  declaration.  For  Protestantism 
is  Galatianized  to  the  core,  and  has  never  escaped  from  a 
scarcely  modified  Judaism  concerning  the  Sabbath.  To  this 
day  it  is  legality's  most  sensitive  spot.  Great  denominations 
will  bear  with  the  higher  criticism  more  patiently  than  with 
the  truth  concerning  the  Sabbath. 

First  of  all,  it  is  remarkable  that,  even  in  His  strictly  Jew- 
ish ministry  (Rom.  xv:  8;  Matt,  x:  5,  6;  xv:  24),  our  Lord 
never  repeated  the  seventh  day  commandment.  Secondly, 
as  Lord  of  the  Sabbath,  He  cleared  that  Jewish  institution 
from  an  unbiblical  strictness;  declaring  that  the  Sabbath 
was  made  for  man ;  i.  e.,  to  serve  man,  not  to  impose  a  yoke 
of  bondage  upon  man — and  teaching  that  it  was  "lawful" 
to  do  good  on  the  Sabbath  day.  Thirdly,  He  knew  that 
through  the  entire  dispensation  which  would  begin  from  Pen- 
tecost, Christians  would  observe  a  wholly  diflferent  day, 
namely,  the  first  and  not  the  seventh  day.  Fourthly,  He 
Plimself  set  the  pattern  of  first  day  observance  by  what  He 
did  and  said  on  the  first  of  the  first  days,  that  of  His  resur- 
rection.    It  was  not  a  day  of  enforced  rest,  but  of  holy 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  129 

activity.  Rising  from  the  dead  He  revealed  Himself  to  the 
sorrowing  Magdalene;  sent  a  message  of  wonderful  import 
to  His  disciples ;  held  a  secret  interview  with  Peter ;  walked 
to  Emmaus  expounding  the  Scriptures ;  appeared  to  the  as- 
sembled disciples,  and  imparted  to  them  the  Holy  Spirit, 
The  Sabbath  belonged  to  the  dispensation  of  law,  was  a  day 
of  enforced  rest,  and  guarded  by  terrible  legal  sanctions. 
The  first  day  belongs  to  the  dispensation  of  grace,  is  a  day 
of  Christian  activity,  and  finds  its  sanctions  in  the  renewed 
hearts  of  Christ's  redeemed  ones. 

No  greater  anomaly  can  well  be  imagined  than  that  which 
is  expressed  in  the  phrase  "Christian  Sabbath."  Its  precise 
equivalent  would  be  ''legal  grace."  The  Sabbath  had  its 
great  and  honored  place  in  the  national  life  of  Israel;  will 
again  have  its  great  place  in  the  millennial  earth ;  and  is  to 
the  Christian  a  precious  ''shadow"  (Col.  ii :  16,  17)  of  that 
rest  of  God  (Heb.  iv :  3,  4)  which  he  finds  in  Christ  and  His 
finished  work. 


HEARERS  AND  DOERS  OF  THE  WORD. 

(Matt,  vii:  21-29.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Testing  of  Profession  (verses  21-23). — See  below, 
"The  Heart  of  the  Lesson." 

2.  The  Right  Foundation  (verses  23-25.) — Two  points 
must  be  observed  here,  (i)  it  is  not  what  the  wise  man 
builds,  but  where  he  builds  which  marks  him  a  saved  man 
(i  Cor.  iii:  10-15).  The  "rock"  is  Christ  (i  Cor.  x:  4),  and 
the  man  who  builds  thereon  is  neither  a  professor  ("Lord, 
Lord"),  nor  a  mere  hearer  (Hebrews  iv:2),  nor  a  tireless 
worker  (verse  22),  but  a  believer  (John  vi:  28,  29). 


130  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

3.  The  Wrong  Foundation  (verses  26-28). — Conversely, 
the  sandy  foundation  man  is  a  hearer  who  may  indeed 
prophesy,  cast  out  demons,  and  do  many  wonderful  works; 
but  who  fails  to  "work  the  works  of  God"  (John  vi :  28,  29). 
In  a  word,  the  right  foundation  is  Christ  received  by  faith ; 
the  wrong  foundation  is,  knowledge  without  the  obedience 
of  faith. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Evidently,  the  heart  of  things  here  is  the  solemn  fact  that 
God  accepts  from  no  man  the  "Lord,  Lord"  of  mere  pro- 
fession. No  one  is  in  so  much  danger  as  the  professor  who 
is  not  a  possessor.  It  is  a  position  which  may  be  wholly 
free  from  any  conscious  hypocrisy.  Millions  "join  the 
church"  who  never  join  Christ  (i  Cor.  vi:  17;  xii:  12,  13)  ; 
and  their  danger  lies  in  the  very  fact  that  they  are  saying 
"Lord,  Lord,"  as  a  parrot  might,  without  any  vital  faith  in 
Him  who  "died  for  our  sins,  and  rose  again  for  our  justifi- 
cation." 

Supposing  themselves  to  be  Christians,  they  are  unmoved 
by  Gospel  appeals.  The  men  of  this  lesson  are  genuinely  as- 
tonished to  find  themselves  excluded.  "Many  will  say  to 
Me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  Thy 
name?  and  in  Thy  name  have  cast  out  devils?  and  in  Thy 
name  done  many  wonderful  works? 

That  a  notable  preacher  has  won  thousands  of  converts 
is  no  proof  that  he  is  a  Christian.  It  is  the  name  of  Jesus, 
and  the  potency  of  His  Word  (Isa.  lv:2)  which  have 
wrought  the  "wonderful  works,"  not  the  faith  of  the  un- 
converted preacher. 

It  is  to  be  noted,  furthermore,  that  Matthew  is  the  book 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  is  filled  with  warnings  to 
mere  professing  subjects  of  that  kingdom.     In  Matthew  it 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  131 

is  Christendom — the  sphere  of  profession — wliich  is  promi- 
nently in  view.  What  Christendom,  as  distinguished  from 
the  church,  is,  is  told  out  in  Matthew  xiii.  There  tares  and 
wheat  are  seen  growing  together  till  the  harvest.  The  tares 
are  the  children  of  the  wicked  one,  and,  under  the  garb  of 
profession,  are  so  like  the  wheat,  the  real  children  of  the 
kingdom,  that  only  the  angels  can  be  trusted  to  separate 
them  (Matt,  xiii:  24-30,  36-43;  xxv:  8-12,  24-30).  There- 
fore tests  are  given  by  which  false  teachers  may  be  distin- 
guished from  the  true  (Matt,  vii:  15,  16)  ;  and  by  which  a 
deceived  professor  may  be  undeceived  (vii:  21).  That  test 
is  not  zeal  (verse  22),  but  simple  obedience  to  the  known 
will  of  God.  What  that  will  is  Jesus  plainly  declared  (John 
vi:28,  29).  Not  casting  out  demons,  not  preaching,  not 
wonderful  works,  but,  "this  is  the  will  of  God  that  ye  believe 
on  Him  whom  He  hath  sent,"  that  is  the  true  test.  Every 
such  believer  is  building  on  the  Rock. 


HE  CALMS  THE  STORM. 

(Mark  iv:  35-41.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  Difficulties  in  the  path  of  obedience  (verses  35-37). — It 
is  easy  to  misinterpret  the  providences  of  God,  and  this  we 
are  in  especial  danger  of  doing  when  troubles  seem  over- 
whelming. We  may  hastily  say :  "Somehow,  I  have  missed 
the  Lord's  guidance;"  or,  "I  am  under  chastening  for  fail- 
ure."- We. forget  that  testings  are  inevitable  in  the  path  of 
faith  (James  i:  12;  i  Pet.  iv:  12,  13).  The  path  of  obedi- 
ence for  Shadrach,  Mesach,  and  Abednego  led  straight  into 
a  fiery  furnace,  and  for  Daniel,  into  a  den  of  lions. 

2.  The  hunmn  Christ/(YtvsQ  38).— It  had  been  a  day  of 


132  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

intense  activity,  and  Jesus  was  physically  exhausted.  True 
service  is  costly — costs  life  itself.  When  the  woman  with  an 
issue  of  blood  touched  Jesus'  garment  she  was  healed,  but 
He  said:  *'I  perceive  that  virtue  is  gone  out  of  me"  (Luke 
viii:46).  But  more  than  physical  eflfort  had  marked  this 
particular  day.  In  it,  our  Lord  had  taken  the  place  of  the 
rejected  One  of  Isa.  vi:  9-11,  and  who  shall  say  what  sorrow 
for  Israel  had  rent  His  heart  (Comp.  Mark  iv  with  Matt, 
xiii:  10-15). 

3.  The  Divine  Christ  (verse  39).  How  striking  the  con- 
trast! In  one  instant,  the  weary  Servant  is  in  the  sleep  of 
utter  exhaustion;  in  the  next.  He  is  creation's  Lord,  com- 
manding the  very  elements  of  nature  into  obedience !  Scrip- 
ture never  "reconciles"  these  paradoxes  of  the  Incarnation — 
that  is  the  poor  botch-work  of  men. 

4.  The  question  of  unbelief,  verses  40,  41  (See  below). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

"Carest  thou  not?"  The  disciple's  question  of  unbeHef  is 
clearly  the  heart  of  things  in  this  lesson — the  question  of  our 
Lord,  "Why  are  ye  fearful?  Have  ye  not  yet  faith?"  (R. 
V.)  makes  it  evident  that  not  the  wonder  of  the  miracles, 
but  the  wonder  of  the  disciples'  unfaith  occupied  His  mind. 
"Carest  thou  not?" — the  disciple's  question.  "Why  are  ye 
fearful?" — our  Lord's  question.  Let  us  think  about  these 
two  questions. 

And  first  the  disciple's  question.  The  storm  was  very 
great,  so  that  even  the  hardy  fishermen,  whose  familiar  ele- 
ments were  wind  and  wave,  began  to  lose  hope — but  the  Lord 
of  storms,  the  Master  of  waves,  slept  on.  The  peril  grew 
greater,  "insomuch  that  the  boat  was  now  filling"  (R.  V.) — 
but  He  made  no  sign.  Truly,  it  seemed  as  if  He  did  not 
care.    Wliy  should  He,  creation's  Lord,  be,  or  at  least  seem 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  133 

to  be,  indifferent  to  the  danger  and  distress  of  those  who  had 
left  all  to  follow  Him  ?  It  was  indeed  a  most  real  difficulty 
to  mere  sense  and  reason. 

And  the  disciples  applied  to  the  difficulty  mere  sense  and 
reason.  There  were  the  wind  and  waves,  and  the  rapidly 
filling  boat ;  and  there.  His  head  upon  the  boat  cushion,  in 
the  stern  sheets,  lay  the  Saviour,  apparently  unconscious  and 
indifferent.  Is  the  situation,  in  its  deep  heart  and  essence, 
unknown  among  us,  the  disciples  of  to-day?  Is  it  just  an 
old  Bible  story,  with  no  modern  instance  and  illustration? 
Alas,  no.    It  is  a  very  modern  matter ;   it  is  the  sin  of  us  all. 

Our  business  matters  go  wrong.  It  is  not  our  fault;  a 
great  storm  is  sweeping  over  the  world  of  business,  and  our 
little  boat  begins  to  fill,  and  we  make  our  prayer,  but  no 
answer  comes,  and  we  say:  "Carest  thou  not?"  Or  a  dear 
one  lies  desperately  near  to  death.  Despite  every  effort, 
every  resource  of  science,  our  heart's  treasure  slips  through 
our  clinging  arms  into  death.  We  pray,  but  no  answer 
comes,  and  in  our  bitterness  we  ask :   ''Carest  thou  not  ?" 

Or  there  is  before  us  some  object  of  desire.  It  seems  so 
near,  so  dear,  so  altogether  innocent  and  right.  We  per- 
suade ourselves  that  life's  chiefest  good  lies  in  the  thing  de- 
sired. But  heaven  seems  deaf,  and  we  sadly  say:  "Carest 
thou  not?" 

It  is  all  mere  shameful  unbelief  and  cruel  wrong  to  Christ. 
He  always  cares — cares  day  and  night — cares  when  we  for- 
get. But  He  cares  for  our  highest  good,  and  faith  knows 
that  He  never  cares  more  than  when  He  seems  asleep. 


134  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

THE  DEATH  OF  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST. 

(Matt,  xiv:  1-12.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  cowardice  of  a  had  conscience  (verses  1-3). — Men 
who  reject  the  truth  of  God  are  sure  to  be  the  victims  of 
superstition  and  error  (2  Thess.  ii:9-i2),  and  men  who  do 
wrong  must  suffer  from  an  outraged  conscience. 

2.  The  mystery  of  a  perverted  conscience  (verses  3-1 1). — 
Herod  was  afraid  of  John  the  Baptist  with  a  superstitious 
fear.  He  was  a  degraded  sensuaHst.  If  conscience  could  be 
utterly  slain,  Herod's  would  have  been  long  since  dead  with- 
in him.  But  though  the  conscience  may  be  perverted  to  any 
imaginable  degree,  dwarfed,  or  misdirected,  it  is  sure  to  sur- 
vive in  some  form.  This  man  was  willing  enough  to  murder 
a  righteous  man,  but  not  willing  to  break  an  unrighteous 
oath  to  a  dancing  woman  (comp.  Acts  xxvi:  9-1 1). 

3.  The  resource  of  troubled  saints,  verse  12  (See  below). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

"And  went  and  told  Jesus."  There  was  wisdom !  Think 
how  absolutely  overwhelming  was  the  disaster  of  John's 
death  to  his  little  company  of  followers.  To  become  a  dis- 
ciple of  John  the  Baptist  meant  little  in  the  first  flush  of  his 
popularity,  but  to  remain  his  disciple  after  his  biting  in- 
vective had  enraged  the  religious  authorities,  meant  utter 
ostracism.  And  now  he,  the  last  and  greatest  of  the  old 
line  of  Israel's  prophet's,  was  dead — done  to  death  by  the 
whim  of  an  unclean  despot  at  the  request  of  a  dancer !  What 
was  left  to  John's  disciples  ?  Why,  to  take  up  his  dear  body 
and  bury  it,  and  to  go  and  tell  Jesus.  But  that  was  every- 
thing.    It  is  not  merely  that  so  long  as  Jesus  is  left  to  us  no 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  135 

disaster  is  irremediable.  Far  more  than  that:  so  long  as 
Jesus  is  left  to  us,  everything  is  left.  To  go  and  tell  Jesus 
is  the  supreme  resource. 

It  is  the  resource  for  consolation.  There  is  a  wonderful 
reticence  in  the  Scripture  narratives.  We  are  not  told  what 
the  Lord  said  to  Simon  Peter  in  that  interview  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  resurrection — that  talk  was  too  sacred  for  words. 
We  are  not  told  what  Simon  told  Paul  when,  fourteen  years 
after  his  return  from  Arabia,  the  great  Apostle  to  the  Gen- 
tiles went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Peter.  Neither  are  we 
told  what  wonderful  words  of  comfort  Jesus  spake  to  John's 
grief-stricken  disciples.  These  things  cannot  be  told.  Can 
you  tell  what  Jesus  said  when  your  dearest  one  lay  dead, 
and  you  went  and  told  Jesus?     No,  you  cannot. 

One  feels  sure  Jesus  spoke  much  of  the  past.  He  would 
remind  them  how  blessed  they  had  been  to  have  such  com- 
panionship, to  know  the  uplift,  the  inspiration  of  such  a 
man's  friendship.  He  would  speak  of  the  future,  too  ;  telling 
them  that  John's  work  and  theirs  was  not  lost,  could  never 
be  lost.  And  He  would  be  sure  to  say  a  word  of  heaven  and 
of  how  they  should  reknit  the  old  friendship  up  there,  never 
more  to  be  broken. 

To  go  and  tell  Jesus  is  the  resource  for  renewal  of  strength 
when  hope  is  faint,  and  the  way  seems  hard,  and  the  heavens 
brass.  "How  can  we  go  on.  Master  ?"  John's  disciples  would 
ask.  "Go  on  with  Me,"  would  be  the  answer.  "Do  you  not 
remember  how  John  said,  "I  am  not  the  Christ?"  Here  am 
I — ^the  Light,  the  Life,  the  Truth,  the  Way — go  on  with 
Me." 

It  would  be  a  poor  thing  to  keep  this  resource  only  for  the 
days  of  bereavement,  of  sorrow,  of  discouragement.  When 
hope  is  high,  and  the  pulse  of  life  strong,  and  the  horizon 
all  aglow;    when  victory,  not  defeat;    new  life,  not  death, 


136  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

have  come,  oh,  then,  too,  go  and  tell  Jesus.     There  is  no 
sharer  of  joy  and  peace  and  power  to  compare  with  Jesus. 


FEEDING  THE  FIVE  THOUSAND. 

(Matt,  xiv:  13-23.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  compassion  of  Jesus  (verses  13,  14). — Mark  tells 
us  the  cause  of  our  Lord's  compassion :  "Because  they  were 
as  sheep  not  having  a  shepherd."  He  adds,  also,  that,  **He 
began  to  teach  them  many  things."  There  is  grave  danger 
in  the  allegorizing  habit,  which  must  always  find  some 
occult  meaning  in  our  Lord's  miracles.  Again  and  again 
the  Scriptures  ascribe  compassion  as  His  sufficient  motive 
(Matt,  ix  136;  xiv:  14;  xviii :  27  ;  Lukevii:i3;  x:  33,  etc.). 

2.  The  super  service  able  disciples  (verse  15). — This  is  the 
first  recorded  example  of  the  habit  of  giving  advice  to  the 
Lord — a  habit  which  is  all  but  universal  among  disciples  to- 
day. It  is,  of  course,  a  mere  impertinence  (Luke  viii :  45 ; 
John  xi :  39 ;    Matt,  xvi :  22.) 

3.  Anything,  plus  the  Lord  Jesus,  is  enough,  verses  16-21 
(See  below). 

4.  The  divine  order  in  ministry  (verse  19). — From  the 
Lord,  through  man  to  men,  is  ever  the  divine  order.  It  be- 
gan with  the  incarnation,  when  *'God  so  loved  the  world  that 
He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,"  to  be  "made  of  a  woman," 
that  through  a  man  He  might  save  men.  It  is  continued  in 
this  present  church-age  when  the  glorified  Lord  is  giving 
gifts — "some,  apostles ;  and  some,  prophets  ;  and  some,  evan- 
gelists;  and  some,  pastors  and  teachers"  (Eph.  iv:  11). 

5.  The  loneliness  of  Jesus  (verse  23). — It  seems  incredi- 
ble that  of  all  whom  He  had  that  day  healed,  taught,  fed,  not 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  137 

one  refused  to  be  sent  away — that  not  one  followed  even 
afar  off,  and  then  crept  near  to  the  lonely  One  in  the  dark- 
ness.   What  a  commentary  on  human  nature! 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

"Bring  them  hither  to  me."  How  amazed  the  disciples 
were  when  Jesus  said  of  the  hungry  multitude :  "They  need 
not  depart ;  give  ye  them  to  eat."  ''Shall  we  go  and  buy  two 
hundred  pennyworth  of  bread,  and  give  them  to  eat  ?"  they 
asked  (Mark  vi:  37).  But  Philip  was  of  opinion  "that  two 
hundred  pennyworth  of  bread  is  not  sufficient  for  them,  that 
every  one  of  them  may  take  a  little"  (John  vi:  7). 

Clearly  the  thing  could  not  be  done.  The  Lord  had  for- 
gotten the  slenderness  of  their  resources.  He  was  suggesting 
the  impossible.  So  they  would  set  Him  right,  and  bring  the 
matter  to  an  end  by  plainly  telling  Him  the  facts.  "There  is 
a  lad  here,  which  hath  five  barley  loaves  and  two  small  fishes  ; 
but  what  are  they  among  so  many?"  (John  vi :  8,  9).  That, 
of  course,  settled  the  matter,  for  the  church  had  not  yet 
reached  the  point  of  suggesting  a  pink  social,  or  a  Trilby 
party  to  increase  its  resources,  nor,  indeed,  was  there  time. 

But  no,  the  quiet  command  came :  "Make  all  sit  down  by 
companies  on  the  green  grass"  (Mark  vi:39).  And  then 
He  "took  the  five  loaves,  and  the  two  fishes,  and  looking  up 
to  heaven.  He  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  the  loaves  to  His 
disciples,  and  the  disciples  to  the  multitude" — and,  oh,  won- 
der of  wonders ! — "they  did  all  eat  and  were  filled ;  and  they 
took  up  of  the  fragments  that  remained  twelve  baskets  full." 

How  this  story  repeats  itself !  For  we  are  forever  meas- 
uring the  possibilities  of  Christian  life  and  service  by  our 
five  loaves  and  two  fishes  of  resource,  forgetting  that  we  are 
a  supernaturally  redeemed  folk,  set  to  live  by  an  ethical 
standard  which  is  impossible  to  mere  human  nature,  and  to 


138  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

perform  tasks  absolutely  impossible  to  the  natural  man. 
Think  of  the  command  given  by  the  risen  Lord  to  a  hand- 
ful of  illiterate  Galileeans,  to  evangelize  the  world!  Was 
any  enterprise  so  vast  ever  committed  to  resources  so  in- 
adequate? We  are  always  forgetting  that  with  God  all 
things  are  possible. 

The  deeper  truth  is  that  there  has  never  been  a  genera- 
tion since  Pentecost  to  which  that  enterprise  was  impossible. 
And  to-day,  in  this  present  generation,  disregarding  entirely 
the  professing  church  with  its  boundless  wealth,  it  is  entirely 
possible  for  ten  thousand  devoted  Christians  to  evangelize 
the  world  if  only  they  will  put  themselves  and  their  resources 
into  the  power  giving  hands  of  Christ. 


THE  VISIT  TO  TYRE  AND  SIDON. 

(Mark  vii:  24-37.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Christ  who  cannot  be  hidden  away  (verses  24,  25). 
— It  was  not  only  true  of  the  earth  life  of  our  Lord  that,  once 
manifested  to  Israel,  retirement  became  impossible  (Mark 
ii:i;  iii:7,  8;  Luke  vii:  37;  Mark  vi:  31-33);  but  in  a 
deeper  sense  it  is  continuously  true  that  wherever  Christ  is 
He  cannot  be  hid.  Secret  discipleship  is  never  a  permanent 
possibility.  If  Christ  be  "in  you  the  hope  of  glory"  there 
will  inevitably  be  some  manifestation  of  His  presence. 

2.  The  dispensational  lesson  (verses  26-28). — Matthew 
tells  us  (xv:22)  that  the  Gentile  woman  began  by  seeking 
to  put  herself  on  Jewish  ground:  "Have  mercy  on  me,  O 
Lord,  thou  son  of  David."  But  on  that  ground  she  had  no 
rights  (Eph.  ii:  11,  12),  for  as  a  Gentile  she  was  outside  the 
Davidic  Covenant  (Matt.  xv:24).     But  when  she  took  her 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  139 

place  on  universal  ground  and  called  Him  "Lord"  (Matt. 
XV :  25)  she  obtained  her  request.  On  that  ground  "there  is 
no  difference  between  the  Jew  and  the  Greek :  for  the  same 
Lord  over  all  is  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him"  (Rom.  x: 
12,  13). 
3.  The  sigh  of  Christ  (verses  31-37).     (See  below.) 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

That  Jesus  should  have  preserved  vital  dispensational  dis- 
tinctions, remaining  silent  when  addressed  by  a  Gentile  as 
"son  of  David"  because  the  Gentiles  as  such  are  "strangers" 
from  the  Davidic  "covenant  of  promise"  (Eph.  ii:  11,  12)  ; 
that  He  should  have  responded  when,  taking  her  true  Gen- 
tile position,  she  called  upon  Him  as  "Lord"  (Rom.  x:  12, 
13)  ;  that  He  should  heal  the  man  who  was  deaf  and  dumb — 
these  cannot  be  the  core  truths  of  this  lesson,  because  they 
are  equally  taught  in  many  lessons.  He  was  always  care- 
fully preserving  divinely  made  distinctions;  He  was  always 
healing  the  sick,  and  restoring  the  infirm.  But  only  twice 
is  it  said  of  Him  that  He  sighed.  Our  lesson  records  the 
first  instance,  and  again  (Mark  viii:  12),  when  the  Pharisees 
sought  of  Him  a  sign,  "He  sighed  deeply  in  His  spirit,  and 
saith,  Why  doth  this  generation  seek  after  a  sign?" 

The  character,  the  heart,  the  inmost  thought  of  Jesus — 
these  for  centuries  have  been  the  study  of  those  who  have 
loved  Him ;  who  have  with  passionate  intensity  desired  above 
all  other  desires  that  they  might  by  any  means  come  to  be 
like  Him.  They  have  sought  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of 
these  deeper  facts  of  His  being  by  meditation  upon  His 
words,  and  His  actions.  And  this  is  a  true  method,  for  with 
Him  whatever  was  outward,  visible,  audible,  was  in  truth 
the  natural  and  unforced  expression  of  His  inner  self. 

But  may  not  an  even  surer  highway  into  the  heart  of  our 


140  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Lord  be  found  through  His  emotions  ?  Beyond  question  this 
is  true  of  all  other  human  beings — why  not  of  Jesus,  who 
was  more  truly  human  than  we?  Tell  me  what  makes  a 
man  laugh,  what  makes  him  weep,  what  stirs  his  indigna- 
tion, what  arouses  his  wonder,  what  amazes  him — and  I  shall 
come  at  no  greatly  inaccurate  knowledge  of  the  man  himself. 

Now  Jesus  was  no  stoic.  He  stood  an  unfallen  man  in 
the  midst  of  fallen  men,  but  foursquare  to  all  the  winds  that 
swept  over  them,  and  He  opened  His  heart  to  all  the  influ- 
ences, not  sinful,  which  played  in  upon  their  hearts.  He 
loved  children  and  flowers  and  birds.  What  does  His  sigh 
tell  us  of  Him? 

A  sigh  is  the  natural,  physical  expression  of  the  peculiar 
depression  caused  by  sadness.  It  does  not  imply  discourage- 
ment— still  less  doubt  or  despair.  It  is  the  expression  of  the 
soul  cast  down.  David  knew  this,  and  when  his  soul  was 
cast  down  he  still  held  high  his  faith  and  hope,  and  manfully 
talked  with  his  soul.  "Why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul, 
and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me?  Hope  thou  in  God, 
for  I  shall  yet  praise  him." 

We  know  oft  and  again  the  soul  cast  down,  and  the  sigh 
upbreathed  from  the  depths.  Oppressed  by  the  ears  deaf  to 
the  message  of  God,  and  lips  dumb  to  the  praises  of  God ; 
oppressed  by  the  hardness  of  the  Pharisee's  heart;  feeling 
the  dead  weight  of  the  accumulated  sin  of  the  centuries,  we 
sigh ! 

Well,  our  blessed  Lord  sighed  too,  and  under  the  same 
burden,  but  he  healed  as  before,  and  fought  steadily  on — 
and  so,  God  helping,  will  we. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  141 

PETER  CONFESSES  THE  CHRIST. 

(Mark  viii :  27-38 ;   Matt,  xvi :  13-21.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  folly  of  human  opinion  about  Jesus  (verses  27, 
28). — For  more  than  two  years  our  Lord  had  pursued  a  min- 
istry of  extraordinary  pubHcity  and  activity  in  a  small  and 
densely  populated  land.  He  was  the  most  conspicuous  figure 
of  His  time.  Every  one  had  heard  of  Him,  or  at  least  heard 
about  Him.  His  own  account  of  Himself  as  the  Sent  One 
of  the  Father,  the  Messiah,  the  Saviour,  was  well  known. 
And  these  were  the  opinions  of  the  public  concerning  Him 
— "John  the  Baptist,  EHas,  one  of  the  prophets,"  What  a 
comment  on  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  words  in  John  vi :  44 ! 

2.  The  great  confession  (verse  29;  Matt,  xvi:  16). — 
"Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  Our 
Lord's  answer  was  two-fold.  He  first  points  out  the  source 
of  Peter's  faith,  "flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto 
thee,  but  my  Father  in  heaven."  Flesh  and  blood  said: 
"EHas  or  one  of  the  prophets" ;  the  Father  said :  "This  is 
my  beloved  Son."  So  much,  and  so  little,  is  mere  human 
opinion,  however  scholarly,  worth  in  the  sphere  of  faith. 
Secondly,  our  Lord  announced  the  church  to  be  built  upon 
Himself  the  Rock,  in  His  character  of  "the  Christ  the  Son 
of  the  Living  God." 

3.  Satan  rebuked  through  Peter  (verses  31-33). — Com- 
pare Gen.  iii:  14,  15;  Isa.  xiv:4,  12.  In  the  first  instance 
Satan  is  addressed  through  Peter;  in  the  second,  through 
the  serpent;  in  the  third,  through  the  king  of  Babylon.  It 
is  the  way  of  Scripture.  But  the  deeper  lesson  is  that  the 
servant  of  the  Lord  is  never  in  greater  danger  of  becoming 
the  mere  mouthpiece  of  the  devil  than  in  the  moment  of 
some  peculiar  spiritual  revelation. 


142  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

4.  The  gredt  law  of  the  Christian  life   (verses  34-38.) 
(See  below.) 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  Christian,  Hke  Peter,  is  a  confessor — which  is  quite 
another  thing  from  being  a  professor.  Like  Peter,  he  be- 
lieves that  Jesus  is  ''the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,"  and,  so  be- 
lieving, he  "has  life  through  his  name"  (John  xx:3i),  and 
he  confesses  that  faith  before  men.  But  to  believe  on  Christ 
implies  vastly  more  than  to  believe  that  He  interposed  be- 
tween the  sinner  and  the  doom  of  perdition.  The  act  of 
faith  identifies  the  believer  with  Christ ;  he  becomes  a  branch 
in  that  Vine — a  member  in  that  Body  (John  xv :  1-4 ;  i  Cor. 
xii:  12,  13),  sharing  His  nature  (2  Peter  i:4),  His  life,  His" 
future  (Col.  iii:  3,  4). 

And  because  of  this  absolute  identification  of  the  believer 
with  "the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,"  he  is  committed  to  live 
the  Christ  life  on  earth.  In  its  perfection,  indeed,  he  may 
not  hope  to  reproduce  that  life,  but  what  he  may  do  is  to 
accept  its  basal  principle. 

When  our  Lord  began  to  open  that  principle  as  applied  to 
Himself,  and  "to  teach  them  that  the  Son  of  man  must  suf- 
fer many  things,  and  be  rejected  of  the  elders,  and  of  the 
chief  priests,  and  scribes,  and  be  killed,"  Peter  cried  out 
(Matt,  xvi:  23),  "Pity  thyself,  Lord."  It  was  Satan's  word, 
as  our  Lord  declared,  but,  also,  it  was,  and  ever  is,  the  word 
of  the  old  self -life  within. 

What  Peter  passed  over  in  his  haste  was  our  Lord's  clos- 
ing word,  "and  after  three  days  rise  again."  Ah,  that  may 
make  all  the  difference!  Yes,  it  is  that  linking  of  eternal 
consequences  to  actions  done  in  life  that  does  make  all  the 
difference.  Christ  "endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame, 
and  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God"   (Heb.  xii:  2), 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  143 

and  He  endured  for  that  "joy  set  before  him." 

That,  precisely,  is  the  principle,  the  philosophy,  of  the  law 
of  the  Christian  life  enunciated  in  our  lesson:  "For  who- 
soever will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it;  but  whosoever  shall 
lose  his  life  for  My  sake  and  the  Gospel's  the  same  shall 
find  it."  When?  "When  He  cometh  in  the  Glory  of  His 
Father  with  the  holy  angels." 

Here,  then,  is  the  heart  of  this  lesson.  To  confess  Jesus 
as  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  not  only  to  find  a  Saviour, 
but  to  accept  the  Christ  theory  of  life.  That  theory  takes 
account  of  two  worlds,  and  finds  the  life  that  now  is  to  be 
incomparably  the  most  precious  and  valuable  thing  which 
the  believer  possesses.  The  garmenture  of  life — wealth, 
learning,  power,  position — these  are  mere  dross  compared 
with  life  itself.  The  believer  may  do  two  things  with  his 
life:  he  may  use  it  for  self — and  use  it  up.  So  used  it  is 
gone.  Or  he  may  invest  it  in  others  for  Jesus'  and  the  Gos- 
pel's sake.  So  used  every  moment  of  it  is  transmuted  into 
the  gold  of  the  eternal  kingdom — "he  shall  find  it  again." 

THE  TRANSFIGURATION. 

(Mark  ix:  1-13.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  fulfillment  of  a  promise  (verses  1-7). — The 
Lord  had  promised  that  some  standing  with  Him  should  not 
taste  death  till  they  had  seen  the  kingdom.  Verses  1-7 
record  the  fulfillment  of  that  promise.  The  transfiguration 
scene  w^as  not  only  a  prophecy  in  action  of  the  kingdom  in 
its  future  manifestation,  but  was  the  kingdom  in  all  its 
essential  elements.  These  are,  first,  a  glorified  Christ,  the 
centre;   secondly,  glorified  saints,  represented  by  Moses  and 


144  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Elijah,  one  of  whom  entered  the  glory  through  death,  the 
other  through  rapture  (i  Thess.  iv:  14-17)  ;  and  living 
saints  in  their  natural  bodies  on  the  earth,  represented  by 
Peter,  James  and  John.  When  all  was  thus  arranged,  the 
Father's  voice  was  heard  over  all. 

2.  Peter  forgets  the  great  law  of  the  Christian  life 
(verses  5,  6). — It  was  so  "good"  to  be  in  that  great  scene 
that  Peter  quite  forgot  the  multitude  at  the  foot  of  the  moun- 
tain (verse  14),  and  even  the  less  privileged  disciples. 

3.  Jesus  completes  and  supplants  the  law  of  the  prophets 
(verses  7-9).     (See  below.) 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Peter  had  fallen  into  a  twofold  error — he  had  put  Moses 
and  Elijah  on  the  same  plane  with  Jesus,  and  he  had  for- 
gotten both  the  less  privileged  disciples  and  the  unsaved 
multitudes  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  (verses  14-29). 
Down  there  was  a  powerless  church  and  an  afflicted  world. 
Moses  was,  indeed,  "faithful  in  all  his  house  as  a  servant," 
but  "Christ  as  a  Son,  over  His  own  house."  And  Christ 
was  as  immeasurably  out  of  comparison  with  Moses  as  God 
ever  is  and  ever  must  be  out  of  such  comparison  (Heb. 
iii:  3-6).  Both  mistakes  were  quickly  corrected.  Moses  and 
Elijah  disappeared,  and  they  saw  "no  man  any  more  save 
Jesus  only" ;  and  He  led  them  down  from  the  mount  of 
vision  into  the  sore  need  of  the  earth  below. 

And  that  is  the  true  use  of  vision.  Moses,  indeed,  might 
have  taught  Peter  that,  for  he  had  once  been  forty  days  in 
the  glory  studying  "the  patterns  of  the  things  in  the  heav- 
ens," only  that  he  might  come  down  again  and  reproduce 
them  on  the  earth :  "For  see,  saith  he,  that  thou  make  all 
these  things  according  to  the  pattern  showed  to  thee  in  the 
mount."     If  the  servant  of  God  is  privileged  to  "mount  up 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  145 

with  wings  as  eagles,"  it  is  only  that,  renewed  in  faith,  and 
with  vision  purified,  he  may  "run  and  not  be  weary,  and  walk 
and  not  faint"  (Isa.  xl:  31). 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  largely,  Peter's  folly  was 
due  to  a  supposed  necessity  for  saying  something :  "For  he 
wist  not  what  to  say."  Doubtless,  then,  he  should  have  said 
nothing.  Possibly  many  a  church  service  would  be  quite 
wonderfully  fruitful  if  the  minister  should  humbly  say: 
"Brethren,  I  have  no  message  from  God  this  morning. 
Whether  it  be  your  fault  or  mine  I  know  not,  but  this  I  do 
know,  that  I  have  no  message  from  Him." 

But  these  are,  after  all,  gleanings  from  the  surface  of  this 
lesson;  the  lesson  of  the  lesson  is  that  in  Jesus  is  the  con- 
summation of  all  the  counsels  of  God,  and  that  neither  the 
church  nor  the  world  needs  any  "man  any  more  save  Jesus 
only."  In  Him  dwells  "all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily" ;  and  in  Him  are  "hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge"  (Col.  iirg,  3). 

It  is  "Jesus  only"  for  salvation.  There  is  "none  other 
name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be 
saved" ;  and  upon  finding  the  right  answer  to  Pilate's  ques- 
tion :  "What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus  who  is  called  Christ," 
depends  the  eternal  destiny  of  every  human  being  to  whom 
the  offer  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus  is  made.  Even 
after  nineteen  hundred  years  of  Gospel  preaching  it  is  still 
but  dimly  apprehended  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God's  only  open 
proposition  to  the  world.  The  age  of  law  is  past,  and  the 
sentence  of  the  law  rests  upon  every  human  being  who  is 
out  of  Christ.  God  is  no  longer  saying:  "If  ye  will  enter 
into  life,  keep  the  commandments,"  but,  "Believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  And  it  is  not 
only  Jesus  for  salvation,  but  "Jesus  only/'  Nothing,  abso- 
10 


146  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

lutely  nothing  but  faith  in  Him  is  either  required  of  the  sin- 
ner or  accepted  of  God. 

It  is  "J^sus  only"  for  sanctification.  ''Beholding  as  in  a 
mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  are  changed  into  the  same 
image  from  glory  to  glory."  True  it  is  by  *'the  Lord  the 
Spirit,"  but  the  Spirit  effects  the  wonderful  transformation 
simply  by  showing  us  His  glory  (John  xvi:  14),  and  at  last 
the  final  consummation  of  sanctification  will  be  brought  by 
the  vision  of  "Jesus  only,"  when  we  shall  "see  Him  as  He 
is"  (i  John  iii:  2). 

It  is  "Jesus  only"  for  whom  we  watch  and  wait.  Having 
"turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  the  true 
God,"  the  believer  waits,  not  for  death,  still  less  for  judg- 
ment, but  "for  his  Son  from  heaven"  (i  Thess.  i:  9,  10). 


THE  MISSION  OF  THE  SEVENTY. 

(Luke  x:  1-16.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  servants  of  the  Lord,  when  divinely  guided,  will 
he  sent  only  where  He  is  also  going  (verse  i ) .     (See  below.) 

2.  The  divine  rule  for  obtaining  missionaries  (verse  2). 
The  church,  alas,  has  largely  forsaken  this  direction,  and  has 
substituted  for  simple  prayer  to  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  the 
method  of  frantic  appeal;  of  enthusiasm,  too  often  of  the 
flesh,  induced  by  great  conventions  and  inflammatory  ad- 
dresses. The  lamentable  consequences  on  the  mission  fields 
are  too  sadly  well  known. 

3.  A  great  principle  in  the  divine  government  (verses  3- 
16). — The  preaching  of  the  Seventy  was  local  and  Israelitish 
in  its  scope  (verse  i  with  Matt.  xv:24),  and  their  message 
was  simply,  "the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand" ;  "the  king- 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  147 

dom  of  God  is  come  nigh  unto  you."  The  preaching  of  the 
church  age  differs  in  scope  and  message.  Its  scope  is  uni- 
versal; its  message,  "beHeve  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved." 

But  the  principle  involved  is  identical:  the  alternative  to 
those  who  reject  the  message  is  judgment  (Acts  xvii :  30,  31  ; 
Hebrews  x:  26,  27). 

3.  The  identification  of  Christ  with  His  messengers 
(verse  16.) — Surely  most  comforting.  If  we,  faithfully 
bearing  His  message,  are  rejected,  He  is  rejected.  If  He 
patiently  bears  it,  surely  we  may. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  mission  of  the  Seventy  was  local  and  transitory,  and 
their  message  was  simply  one  of  warning  and  preparation. 
Into  whatever  city  the  Lord  sent  them,  He  was  shortly  to 
appear  also.  The  kingdom  was  '*at  hand,"  and  the  King,  al- 
ready manifested  to  Israel  by  mighty  works,  would  soon 
enter  their  gates.  Neither  mission  nor  message  was  com- 
parable in  scope  or  power  to  the  mission  and  message  of  the 
church.  The  Seventy  were  shut  up  to  Palestine.  Not  even 
the  Jews  of  the  dispersion  were  to  be  sought.  Our  mission 
is  to  "all  the  world."  The  message  of  the  Seventy  was  one 
of  warning :  **The  kingdom  of  God  is  come  nigh  unto  you." 
Our  message  is  one  of  immediate  and  complete  salvation: 
''Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 

But  in  one  important  respect  both  missions  are  alike — the 
Lord,  in  both,  identifies  Himself  with  His  servants.  That 
is  the  heart  of  this  lesson:  "He  that  heareth  you,  heareth 
me  and  he  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  me." 

It  is  beautiful  to  note  the  progress  of  doctrine,  the  enlarge- 
ment and  unfolding  of  truth  in  the  Scriptures.  The  Seventy 
were  heralds  of  the  King.    Their  mission  was  to  announce 


148  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

His  coming.  To  refuse  them,  therefore,  was  equivalent  to 
saying,  "We  do  not  want  this  King."  The  affront,  the  rejec- 
tion, were  not  at  all  personal  to  the  Seventy  as  men,  but  as 
heralds. 

But  when  the  great  commission  was  given  to  the  church 
to  go  to  all  the  world  and  make  disciples  of  all  nations,  a 
closer  identification  is  indicated:  "And  lo,  I  am  mith  you 
all  the  days  even  unto  the  end  of  the  age"  (Matt,  xxviii :  20). 
It  is  not  that  we  are  heralds  going  "before  his  face  into  every 
city  and  place  whither  he  himself  would  come,"  but  that 
He  Himself  marches  with  us.  And  if  with  us,  surely  in 
advance  of  us,  as  "princely  Leader."  When  Joshua  before 
Jericho  saw  a  man  over  against  him  with  a  drawn  sword 
in  his  hand,  he  demanded  of  him:  "Art  thou  for  us,  or  for 
our  adversaries?"  he  answered:  "Nay,  but  as  princely  cap- 
tain of  the  host  of  the  Lord  am  I  now  come."  No  wonder 
that  Joshua  "fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth,  and  did  worship, 
and  said  unto  him.  What  saith  my  Lord  unto  his  servant?" 

The  Christian  consciousness  has  sadly  failed  to  grasp  the 
great  sense  in  which  the  Lord  is  "with"  us  "all  the  days." 
We  have  thought  of  Him  as  helper — as  a  kind  of  reserve 
force  for  times  when  the  battle  goes  hard,  and  we  seem  about 
to  be  beaten  back.  That  was  Joshua's  hope  as  he  accosted 
the  Stranger  with  the  drawn  sword ;  he  saw  in  Him  a  pos- 
sible reinforcement.  Ah,  no ;  he  came  to  go  before  Captain 
Joshua;  to  lift  all  responsibility  for  plan  and  strategy  and 
result  from  Joshua,  leaving  to  him  the  simple,  restful  duty 
of  obedience. 

A  subordinate  Confederate  general  has  recorded  in  his 
memoirs  the  immense  sense  of  relief  which  came  to  him 
when,  in  one  of  the  desperate  battles  of  the  Civil  War,  Gen- 
eral Lee  arrived  upon  the  field.     Much  fighting  was  still  to 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  149 

be  done,  but  the  responsibility  for  all  save  obedience  rested 
now  upon  another. 

It  is  a  great  day  for  any  servant  of  the  Lord  when  he  sees 
that. 

PRAYER  AND  PROMISE. 

(Ivuke  xi:  1-13.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Disciples'  Request  (verse  i). — Note  that  the  dis- 
ciples did  not,  as  usually  quoted,  ask  the  Lord  to  teach  them 
how  to  pray,  but  ''to  pray" — a  far  more  vital  thing.  These 
Jews  had  already  known  how  to  say  prayers,  but  they  ob- 
served (**as  He  was  praying  in  a  certain  place")  that  one 
great  contrast  between  themselves  and  their  Lord  was  that 
He  was  a  man  of  prayer,  while  they  were  not  men  of  prayer. 
That  contrast  exists  in  the  church  to-day.  We  greatly  need 
to  be  taught  to  pray. 

2.  Our  Lord's  Answer  (verses  2-13) . — Our  Lord's  answer, 
be  it  remembered,  is  designed  not  so  much  to  teach  us  how 
to  pray  as  to  make  praying  Christians  of  us.  This  He  ac- 
complishes by  (i)  laying  a  foundation  for  prayer:  ''When 
ye  pray,  say,  Our  Father"  (See  below).  (2)  He  teaches 
us  that  all  right  prayer  desires  above  all  else  the  exaltation 
of  God:  "Hallowed  be  thy  name."  (3)  Right  prayer  puts 
the  general  good  above  personal  desire :  "thy  kingdom  come." 
(4)  Right  prayer  takes  before  God  the  real  need,  whatever 
it  may  be:  "give  us  day  by  day  our  daily  bread,"  etc.  (5) 
Right  prayer  is  definite:  "Friend,  lend  me  three  loaves." 
(6)  It  must  not  be  thought  that  our  Father  is  like  an  earthly 
friend  who  must  be  importuned  before  he  will  rise  and  give. 
On  the  contrary,  so  willing  is  He  to  give  that  "I  say  unto 
you,  ask  and  it  shall  be  given  you,"  etc. 


150  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Nothing  could  more  grossly  misinterpret  this  parable  than 
to  say  our  Lord  meant  to  compare  our  Father  to  the  sleepy, 
reluctant  friend.  Contrast,  not  similitude,  is  before  us  here. 
(7)  Prayer  is  an  exceedingly  simple  thing.  For  these  seven 
reasons — pray. 

Note. — It  can  scarcely  be  necessary  to  remind  the  student 
that  the  model  prayer  given  here,  and,  in  substance  in  Matt. 
vi:9-i3,  is  of  use  to  the  Christian  not  as  a  form  of  prayer, 
but  only  as  a  lesson  on  praying.  Suited  to  the  then  state  of 
the  disciples  as  being  still  under  law,  and  with  redemption 
still  unaccomplished,  it  is  wholly  unsuited  to  the  Christian. 

1.  It  is  not  a  prayer  in  Christ's  name  (cf.  John  xvi:  23,  24). 

2.  It  conditions  the  forgiveness  of  sins  upon  something  the 
disciple  has  done,  whereas  the  Christian  is  forgiven  because 
of  what  Christ  has  done  (i  John  ii:  12;  Acts  xiii:38,  39; 
Eph.  iv:32). 

It  should  be  added  that  the  promise  concerning  the  gift 
of  the  Spirit  has  been  superseded  by  Pentecost.  The  Holy 
Spirit  has  been  given,  and  every  believer  is  indwelt  by  Him 
(iCor.  vi:i9;   Rom.  viii:9;   Eph.  i  113;   iv:3o). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

When  ye  pray,  say,  *'Our  Father,"  that  is  Jesus  Christ's 
philosophy  of  prayer.  The  Christian  is  a  child,  and  has  a 
Father,  and  that  Father  is  on  the  throne  of  the  universe, 
therefore  it  is  supremely  rational  to  pray.  Goldwin  Smith 
has  said  that  "the  worst  consequence  of  atheism  is  that  it 
leaves  us  orphaned  and  guideless  in  a  vast  vortex  of  blind 
force."  Unfortunately  there  are  many  who  are  by  no  means 
atheists  whose  dismal  creed  would  only  change  one  word  in 
that  sentence.  For  ''blind"  they  would  say,  "ordered."  The 
vortex  remains,  and  the  force,  only  the  force  is  conceived  of 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDlES  fSI 

— and  rightly  enough  if  we  take  only  the  natural  into  view — 
as  governed  by  majestic  laws. 

That  philosophy  does  not  deny  the  existence,  nor  even  the 
creatorship  of  God,  but  only  that  He  has  given  nature  cer- 
tain laws  which  are  irreversible  and  uncontrollable,  even  by 
the  God  who  made  them.  He  leaves  volitional  capacity  to 
men  and  to  angels,  but  has  put  volition  out  of  His  own 
reach.  Having  set  the  wheels  to  spinning,  and  the  cogs  to 
grinding,  the  mightiest  force  conceivable,  the  power  of  God, 
is  bound  hand  and  foot. 

Prayer,  say  these  men,  is  by  no  means  useless,  for  the 
communion  with  God  which  it  necessitates  exerts  an  impor- 
tant reflex  influence  on  him  who  prays.  True,  he  does  not 
get  anything  unless  his  prayer  happens  to  coincide  with  some 
working  of  natural  law,  but  as  he  prays  he  sees  that  it  is 
really  unimportant  whether  he  gets  anything  or  not. 

Then  there  are  those  who  conceive  of  God  as  a  great 
decree-maker.  Foreseeing  everything.  He  has  prearranged 
everything.  If  we  seem  to  have  an  answer  to  prayer  it  is 
only  because  we  happened  to  ask  for  something  decreed. 
These,  too,  make  much  of  the  reflex  benefit  of  prayer. 

Now,  over  against  these  theories  which  inevitably  dis- 
courage prayer,  and  logically  would  end  all  praying,  Christ 
puts  the  great  word  Father.  He  is  far  from  denying  that 
God  is  a  law-maker  and  a  decree-maker,  but  He  affirms  a 
larger  fact  concerning  God.  He  does  indeed  make  laws  for 
nature,  and  laws  in  the  sphere  of  the  moral  being  of  man. 
He  does  indeed  make  and  execute  decrees.  But,  to  Christ, 
what  was  a  law  of  nature?  His  Father's  usual  way  of  doing 
things.  Christ  neither  manifested  nor  taught  the  pseudo- 
scientific  superstititious  veneration  for  a  law  of  nature.  The 
general  manager  of  a  great  railroad  imposes  upon  it  of  ne- 
cessity a  minute  and,  to  any  one  save  himself,  an  inexorable 


152  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

system  of  rules.  Perhaps  there  is  no  better  illustration  of  a 
law-regulated  universe  than  that  afforded  by  a  great  modern 
railway.  But  the  rules  imposed  by  the  general  manager  do 
not  make  it  impossible  for  him  to  send  out  an  extra.  On  a 
notable  occasion  the  president  of  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad 
ordered  every  train  between  Altoona  and  Pittsburgh  side- 
tracked to  leave  the  way  open  to  him  as  he  sped  to  the  side  of 
an  injured  son.    His  fatherhood  was  greater  than  his  laws. 

So  much  Christ  affirms.  Creatorship  and  law-making  are 
so  to  speak  swallowed  up  in  the  vastly  greater  fact  of  father- 
hood. 

The  Old  Testament  saint  grounded  his  prayer  on  the  cove- 
nant; the  New  Testament  saint  grounds  his  prayer  on  re- 
lationship. 

WATCHFULNESS. 

(Luke  xii :  35-48.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Believer's  Attitude  in  View  of  the  Possible  Return 
of  the  Lord  at  Any  Moment  (verses  35-40). — Doubtless, 
there  is  an  especial  word  here  for  the  converted  Jewish  rem- 
nant who  will  be  the  "servants"  during  the  great  tribulation 
— that  period  of  universal  woe  (Jer.  xxx:4-8;  Joel  ii:2; 
Matt,  xxiv:  15-22),  which  is  to  be  terminated  by  our  Lord's 
return  from  His  wedding  to  the  church  (Rev.  xix:  7,  8),  but 
this  attitude  is,  if  possible,  more  absolutely  that  of  the  church 
(Phil.  iii:20,  21;    i   Thess.  \:g,   10;    iv:  14-17;    Titus  ii: 

11-13)- 

2.  Service  now  is  unto  Joint  Rulership  with  Christ  in  the 
Kingdom  (verses  41-44). — It  cannot  be  too  clearly  held  that 
(i)  the  church  is  not  the  kingdom.    That  so  far  from  now 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  153 

seeking  subjects  for  the  kingdom,  the  Lord  is  calling  out  the 
co-rulers  over  the  future  kingdom  ( i  Pet.  ii :  9 ;  Rev.  i :  5,  6 ; 
2  Tim.  ii:  11,  12;  Rev.  iii:  21).  (2)  That  the  church  is  not 
now  reigning,  but  suffering  and  serving. 

3.  Any  teaching  which  says:  ''My  Lord  delayeth  His 
coming''  is  ''evil"  (Matt.  xxiv:48).  Verses  45,  56.  The 
thought  here  evidently  is  that  any  teaching  which  involves 
such  a  "delay"  of  the  Lord's  return  as  destroys  the  attitude 
of  constant  "watching"  and  "waiting"  is  forbidden.  How 
can  it  be  possible  for  a  servant  to  "watch"  and  "wait"  for  an 
event  which  cannot  possibly  occur  till  after  the  millennium? 

4.  Penalty  is  in  proportion  to  light  sinned  against  (verses 
47,48). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Presumably,  the  present  lesson  was  selected  as  the  tem- 
perance lesson  for  the  quarter  because  it  contains  the  word 
"drunken."  It  is,  of  course,  a  lesson  on  the  second  coming 
of  Christ,  and  only  by  inference  a  temperance  lesson,  and  yet 
the  inference  is  a  perfectly  sound  one,  for  the  Holy  Spirit 
elsewhere  bases  a  direct  appeal  to  sobriety  in  respect  of  in- 
toxicants on  the  very  ground  of  our  Lord's  imminent  re- 
turn (i  Thess.  v:  1-7).  The  cogency  of  that  expectation  as 
a  motive  to  all  right  living  is,  therefore,  the  heart  of  this 
lesson.  In  considering  it  no  attention  will  be  given  to  dis- 
cussions as  to  the  nature  and  time  of  our  Lord's  return. 

Let  it  suffice,  then,  to  say,  first  of  all,  that  which  all  agree 
in  saying,  that  the  fact  of  our  Lord's  return  is  invariably 
stated  as  an  event  for  which  all  Christians  are  to  "wait"  and 
"watch."  That  appears  sufficiently  from  our  present  lesson. 
Believers  are  to  be  "like  unto  men  that  wait  for  their  Lord." 
That  company  may  be  "in  the  second  watch,"  or,  "in  the  third 
watch,"  but  whether  it  be  soon  or  late,  "blessed  are  those 


154  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

servants  whom  the  Lord,  when  He  cometh,  shall  find  watch- 
ing." 

That  is  the  parable,  and  the  application  of  it  (verse  40) 
is  natural  and  simple:  **Be  ye  therefore  ready  also;  for 
the  Son  of  man  cometh  at  an  hour  when  ye  think  not."  The 
coming  of  the  Lord,  an  event  predicted  by  the  Lord  Himself, 
but  the  time  of  which  is  nowhere  revealed,  gives,  therefore, 
the  characteristic  attitude  of  the  Christian.  This  is  the  uni- 
form teaching.  The  Thessalonians  are  reminded  that  they 
**turned  to  God  from  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God, 
and  to  wait  for  His  Son  from  heaven"  (i  Thess.  i :  9,  10). 
Titus  is  taught  that  *'the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation 
hath  appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us  that,  denying  ungodli- 
ness and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously, 
and  godly  in  this  world,  looking  for  that  blessed  hope  and 
the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour, 
Jesus  Christ"   (Titus  ii:ii-i3). 

But  this  truth  is  not  revealed  as  a  mere  curiosity  of  the 
Divine  purpose,  still  less  as  a  theme  for  theologic  contro- 
versy, but  is  invariably  charged  with  the  highest  ethical  and 
practical  bearing.  The  Christian  is  to  be  sober  because  of  it 
(Luke  xii:45;  i  Thess.  \:i-y);  patient  under  wrong 
(James  v:  7,  8)  ;  moderate  (Phil,  iv:  5)  ;  charitable  (i  Cor. 
iv:  5)  ;  diligent  (Luke  xii:  42,  43)  ;  pure  (i  John  iv;  iii:  2, 
3)  ;  and  always  abiding  in  Jesus  (i  John  ii:  2'^). 

One  great  peril  besets  this  mighty  motive,  and  of  this 
peril  we  are  warned.  Men  will  say,  "My  Lord  delayeth  His 
coming."  The  picture  is  a  household  expecting  the  master's 
return,  but  in  ignorance  of  the  time.  So  far  as  they  know, 
it  may  be  at  any  time.  The  effect  upon  the  servants  of  this 
combined  certainty  and  uncertainty — the  certainty  that  he  is 
coming,  the  uncertainty  of  the  time — is  evident  they  must 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  155 

be  always  ready.     The  lights  must  be  burning  and  them- 
selves girded. 

But  the  case  is  supposed  that  one  of  the  servants  may  suc- 
ceed in  convincing  the  other  servants  that  some  delay  has 
occurred — that  the  master  cannot  come  until  some  other 
event  which  they  may  observe  has  transpired.  Obviously  the 
lights  will  go  out,  the  servants  will  lay  aside  the  girdle  of 
service,  and  a  servant  taking  the  place  of  the  absent  master 
will  begin  to  lord  it  over  the  other  servants,  and  to  live  the 
mere  life  of  the  senses — "to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  to  be 
drunken."  It  is  the  one  peril  to  this  mighty  motive  against 
which  we  are  warned.  It  is,  therefore,  a  grievous  thing  to 
say,  "my  Lord  delayeth  His  coming."  As  all  know,  pre- 
cisely this  thing  occurred  historically.  For  three  centuries 
the  church  was  in  the  attitude  of  expectation.  Then,  with  the 
rise  of  false  priesthood  heading  up  in  the  papacy,  the  evil 
servant  began  to  say:  "Thy  Lord  delayeth  His  coming," 
and  the  predicted  result  followed.  The  child  of  God  does 
not  need  to  be  an  expert  in  the  prophetical  casuistries;  he 
needs  only  to  know  that  any  theory  which  destroys  his  watch- 
ing attitude  is  of  the  evil  servant. 


THE  PRODIGAL  SON. 

(Luke  XV :  11-24.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  father,  not  the  sons,  the  primary  object  of  the  les- 
son (verses  11,  12,  20-24). 

2.  The  essence  of  all  sin,  insubordination  to  the  will  of  the 
Father  (verses  12,  13). — The  implication  here  is  evident. 
The  younger  son  preferred  independency  to  authority.    It  is 


156  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

the  core  of  all  sin  (i  John  iii:  4,  R.  V.).    The  "man  of  sin" 
(2  Thess.  ii:3)  is,  literally,  *'the  lawless  one." 

3.  The  universe  is  not  arranged  to  make  self -mill  result  in 
happiness  (verses  14-16). — The  father  does  not  follow  his 
lawless  son,  but  leaves  him  to  the  inevitable  operation  of  the 
universal  law,  which  rivets  together  sin  and  suffering.  It 
is  only  grace  which  rivets  together  suffering  and  glory  (Rom. 
viii :  17 ;   Luke  xxiv :  26) . 

4.  A  backslider's  repentance  (verses  17-19,21). — It  should 
be  remembered  that  the  son  here  is  a  type  of  the  backslider, 
rather  than  of  the  unrenewed  sinner  (2  Cor.  vii:  9-11). 

5.  The  joy  of  our  Father  God  over  a  returning  son 
(verses  20-24). — What  a  picture!  It  may  be  commended  to 
all  backsliders  for  their  encouragement,  and  to  all  theologians 
who,  in  a  misplaced  zeal  for  the  authority  of  God,  have  de- 
fathered  Him  for  their  condemnation.  What  is  our  God  and 
Father  like  ?    Like  this  father  in  the  parable. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

This  is  but  a  half  lesson.  We  habitually  speak  of  Luke 
XV :  11-32  as  ''the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son,"  but  the  Bible 
says  it  concerns  "A  certain  man  who  had  two  sons."  The 
emphasis  falls  neither  upon  the  prodigal  nor  upon  the  prodi- 
gal's brother,  but  upon  the  ''certain  man."  The  two  sons  in 
their  different  ways  bring  out  what  is  in  the  father's  heart. 

So  considered,  the  heart  of  the  lesson  is  the  most  surpris- 
ing and  altogether  astounding  revelation  that  Jesus  Christ 
ever  gave  to  humanity.  It  is  only  our  familiarity  in  a  super- 
ficial, often  half  sentimental,  way  with  the  form  into  which 
Jesus  cast  the  revelation  which  blinds  our  minds  to  the  won- 
der and  unexpectedness  of  it.  We  are  possessed  to  think  only 
of  the  boy  who  went  away  into  the  far  country. 

Take  a  proof.    Every  one  has  seen  either  in  the  original  or 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  157 

in  one  of  the  numberless  reproductions  the  remarkable  pic- 
ture by  Vibert  of  the  prodigal  son.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  it  is  a  triptich.  The  great  central  third  is  a  picture  of 
the  prodigal  wasting  his  substance  in  the  far  country.  It  is 
a  revel.  Beautifully  habited,  the  boy,  holding  aloft  a  wine 
glass,  is  the  central  figure,  about  whom  are  grouped  the  danc- 
ing girls  and  revellers.  The  picture  at  the  right  is  still  of 
the  boy — now  in  his  degradation  and  misery.  Finally,  at  the 
left  is  a  picture  of  the  return,  in  which,  though  the  father  ap- 
pears, the  prodigal  is  vastly  the  more  prominent.  It  illus- 
trates the  strange  and  all  but  universal  misconception. 

But  our  Lord's  purpose  made  God  the  Father  the  subject 
of  the  parable.    Let  us  think  about  this. 

Remember,  first  of  all,  that  the  primary  purpose  of  the 
incarnation  was  the  revelation  of  God.  "No  man  hath  seen 
God  at  any  time;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared  Him"  (lit.  "led  Him 
forth,"  John  i:  18).  Even  the  cross,  and  the  complete  atone- 
ment there  accomplished,  is  but  the  supreme  revelation  of 
God  in  His  altogether  infinite  love  (John  iii:  16;  i  John  iii: 
16).  But  there  is  something  dazzling  in  the  rays  of  the 
cross.  Such  love  is  too  high  for  us ;  it  overwhelms  us.  We 
feel  as  John  did  when  he  looked  first  at  the  throne.  He 
could  not  describe  Him  who  sat  there.  His  description  is  like 
that  of  one  who  saw  an  insupportable  radiance  and  who 
gropes  for  words — "like  a  jasper  and  a  sard — like  unto  an 
emerald"  (Rev.  iv:2,  3).  A  poor  account  of  the  glory!  It 
reminds  one  of  most  theories  of  the  atonement.  And  so  our 
Lord  will  paint  one  picture  of  the  Father  in  such  wise  that 
we  may  forever  know  what  our  Father  God  is  like.  Think 
of  it,  Jesus  paints  a  portrait  of  God,  and  we  poor  stupid 
word  painters,  and  pigment  painters,  imagine  He  was  giving 
us  a  portrait  of  a  boy ! 


158  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

What,  then,  is  the  Father  God  Hke?  He  is  "Hke  a  cer- 
tain man  who  had  two  sons,"  one  of  whom  in  utter  selfish- 
ness left  the  father's  home  and  broke  the  father's  heart  in 
the  indulgences  of  a  base  sense-life,  and  had  to  be  whipped 
by  his  very  vices  and  their  inevitable  results  into  even  think- 
ing of  the  home  he  had  left.  And  then  he  did  not  think  of 
his  father,  but  only  of  the  misery  of  the  far  country,  and  the 
abundance  of  the  father's  house.  He  was  like  the  ass  who 
only  knew  his  master's  crib — just  a  picture  of  every  sinner 
who  has  preferred  the  life  of  the  senses  to  the  fellowship  of 
the  Father,  till  the  life  of  the  senses  has  palled  and  brought 
insupportable  misery  upon  him. 

Now  the  question  is :  What  will  the  Father  God  do  with 
such  a  sinner  coming  with  such  a  motive?  The  Father  God 
will  see  him  a  long  way  off,  and  will  run  to  meet  him  and 
kiss  him.  That  is  one  portrait  of  the  Father.  Think  of  the 
other.  It  concerns  a  son  who  is  outwardly  correct  and  obe- 
dient, who  has 

"Never  strayed  from  the  beaten  path, 
Nor  ever  squandered  his  portion  of  gold," 

but  whose  heart  is  adamant.  Living  in  the  house  with  the 
Father,  he  has  been  farther  from  him  than  the  senses  and 
passions  ever  carried  the  poor  prodigal — as  far  from  the 
Father's  heart  as  hell  is  from  heaven.  There  is  no  character 
so  ineffably  and  hopelessly  vile  as  that  of  a  snug  pharisee. 
What  will  the  Father  God  say  to  him  ?  "Son,  all  that  I  have 
is  thine?"  And  the  heart  of  the  lesson  is  that  this  is  our 
Father. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  159 

CHRIST  TEACHES  HUMILITY. 

(Mark  x:  35-45.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  underlying  weakness  of  most  prayer  (verse  35). — 
See  below. 

2.  The  lam  of  exaltation  in  the  kingdom  (verses  36-44). 
— Suffering  and  glory  are  inseparable.  The  highest  places 
in  the  kingdom  are  for  those  who  have  drunk  deepest  of 
Christ's  cup  of  suffering  for  others,  and  have  been  most  con- 
formed to  Christ's  death  (John  xviii:  11;  2  Cor.  iv  17-18; 
Phil,  iii:  10;    Col.  i:  24). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Not,  if  the  lesson  committee  please,  a  lesson  in  humility, 
except  in  a  very  secondary  sense,  but,  rather,  a  radiant  light 
upon  the  pathway  to  the  only  true  greatness. 

A  great  deal  of  sermonic  condemnation  has  been  visited 
upon  the  sons  of  Zebedee  because  of  the  ambitious  request: 
"Grant  unto  us  that  we  may  sit,  one  on  thy  right  hand,  and 
the  other  on  thy  left  hand,  in  thy  glory."  After  all,  they 
were  only  a  little  more  outspoken  than  the  rest  of  us.  Before 
any  man  presumes  to  make  a  text  for  moralistic  platitudes 
out  of  James  and  John  let  him  be  very  sure  that  ambition 
and  vanity  and  the  itch  for  applause  and  greed  of  place  are 
wholly  cast  out  of  his  own  heart. 

For,  first  of  all,  the  theory  of  prayer  propounded  by  these 
brothers  is  an  exceedingly  popular  one.  No  theory  concern- 
ing prayer  is  more  widely  taught  to-day  than  that  if  we  can 
only  bring  enough  faith  to  bear  on  God.  He  must  "do  for 
us"  whatever  we  desire.  Nay,  more,  we  are  instructed  that 
if  we  cannot  come  by  this  all  victorious  faith,  the  fault,  the 


i6o  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

most  grievous  fault,  is  ours.  Our  failure  to  harness  omnipo- 
tence to  our  orphanage,  or  our  school,  or  our  mission,  is 
proof  positive  that  some  secret  sin  is  preying  upon  the  very 
vitals  of  our  spirituality — for  Bildad  the  Shushite  is  always 
with  us.  "If  thou  wert  pure  and  upright,  surely  now  he 
would  awake  for  thee  and  make  the  habitation  of  thy  right- 
eousness prosperous"  (Job  viii:6). 

At  bottom  all  this  may  cloak  a  lust  for  spiritual  eminence, 
the  true  phrasing  of  which  would  be:  ''Master,  we  would 
that  thou  shouldest  do  for  us  whatsoever  we  shall  desire." 
The  very  core  of  true  prayer  is  utter  submission  to  God's 
better  wisdom,  more  perfect  love. 

Note  with  care  our  Lord's  answer.  He  by  no  means  de- 
nies that  there  are  real  distinctions,  veritable  thrones  of 
power  in  His  kingdom.  Rather  He  points  out  the  way  to 
them.  But  it  is  not  the  way  of  the  world.  The  world's 
great  ones  exercise  lordship  over  them.  The  whole  desir- 
ableness of  earthly  greatness  lies  in  the  power  to  make  others 
serve  the  possessors  of  that  greatness.  Strip  a  king  of  his 
authority,  take  from  him  his  palaces,  his  armies,  his  servants, 
his  pomp  and  state,  and,  except  for  the  vanity  of  his  empty 
title,  he  would  fling  away  his  crown.  That  kind  of  greatness 
Jesus  neither  desired  nor  offered  to  others. 

And  yet  He,  too,  was  on  His  way  to  a  throne,  and  an 
earthly  throne  at  that  (Matt,  i:  i;  ii:  i-6;  Luke  1:31-33; 
Acts  XV :  16,  17)  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  part  of  His  mission 
to  earth  was  to  gather  out  from  amongst  the  sons  of  men 
those  who  will  sit  with  Him  on  His  throne  (Rev.  iii:2i; 
Luke  xiv:  12,  19).  Indeed,  those  very  men,  James  and  John, 
are  to  have  thrones  of  peculiar  distinction  (Matt,  xix: 
27,28). 

Now,  then,  was  their  petition  amiss?  No  doubt  their 
thought  was  of  an  immediate  setting  up  of  the  Messianic 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  i6i 

kingdom,  and  of  obtaining  such  a  place  in  that  kingdom  as 
would  be  the  gratification  of  a  mere  fleshly  vanity.  But, 
deeper  than  their  misconception  of  the  time  of  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  kingdom  was  their  misconception  of  the  moral 
conditions  of  that  kingdom.  They  thought  to  gain  its  dis- 
tinctions by  mere  royal  favor ;  they  had  to  learn  that  those 
distinctions  are  not  in  the  gift  of  the  King.  His  salvation 
is  indeed  a  free  gift,  but  every  crown,  every  plaudit,  must  be 
earned.  The  kingdom  distinctions  are  offered  only  as  a 
reward  for  suffering  and  service  (Luke  xix:  12-19;  i  Cor. 
iii:ii-i5;  ix  119-25;  2  Tim.  iv :  7,  8;  Rev.  ii:io;  Rom. 
viii:  18).  This  is  the  twofold  lesson  of  co-crucification 
(verses  38,  39)  with  Jesus,  and  of  accepting  as  the  only 
highway  to  the  throne  the  path  of  lowly  service.  It  was 
Christ's  own  pathway,  and  along  that  via  crucis  must  all  pass 
who  would  sit  at  His  right  hand. 

THE  PASSOVER. 

(Matt,  xxvi:  17-30.) 
I.     The  Analysis, 

1.  The  guidcmce  of  Christ  over  our  service  extends  to  the 
smallest  details  (verses  17-19). — We  are  accustomed  to  refer 
the  greater  decisions  of  our  lives  to  the  Lord's  better  wisdom, 
but  we  are  equally  accustomed  to  decide  in  our  own  wisdom 
the  smaller  problems  of  service.  When  we  remember  that 
the  most  important  consequences  often  follow  apparently  un- 
important actions,  we  should  be  warned  to  ask  Him  concern- 
ing even  so  small  matters  as:  ''Where  wilt  thou  that  we 
prepare  for  thee  to  eat  the  passover?" 

2.  The  latent  possibilities  of  evil  in  every  heart  (verses 
22-24). — See  below. 

3.  The  meaning  of  the  Lord's  supper  (verses  26-29). 
II 


i62  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  Passover  and  the  Lord's  Supper  have  very  much  in 
common;  indeed,  the  latter  feast  may  be  regarded  as  the 
continuation,  with  larger  meanings,  of  the  earlier.  Both 
alike  are  memorial — the  one  perpetuating  the  memory  of  the 
great  deliverance  in  Egypt;  the  other  of  the  great  Deliverer 
of  whom  the  Jewish  passover  lamb  was  but  a  type.  Both 
commemorate  a  deliverance  by  blood  alone  (Exodus  xii:  13; 
Heb.  ix:  13-15;  x:  10).  Both  speak  of  that  which  renders 
secure  from  judgment  all,  however  guilty,  who  apply  the 
blood  by  faith.  Both  present  a  lamb — ^the  best  expression 
in  nature  of  innocency  and  non-resistance  to  evil. 

The  parallels  might  be  farther  drawn  out,  but  these  must 
suffice.  For  our  concern  is  not  so  much  to  expound  the  les- 
son as  to  find  in  it  that  truth  which  is  either  uniquely  taught 
here,  no  other  Scripture  having  it;  or  (which  is  equally  to 
the  point),  that  truth  better  taught  here  than  elsewhere.  So 
considered,  must  we  not  say  that  it  lies  in  that  sudden  over- 
whelming wave  of  self-knowledge  which  forced  to  all  their 
lips  the  awful  question  concerning  the  betrayer,  "Lord,  is  it 
I?"  Mark  it  well — this  is  a  final  question.  Just  as  the  tre- 
mendous miracle  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  makes 
credible  all  other  and  lesser  miracles,  so  this  question,  "Lord, 
is  it  I  ?"  if  answered  affirmatively  render  credible  all  the  tes- 
timonies of  Scripture  concerning  the  incurable  evil  of  the 
natural  heart.  Always,  in  all  spheres,  the  greater  includes 
the  less.  If  we  all,  then,  left  to  ourselves  and  to  the  unhin- 
dered work  of  our  omn  hearts,  are  capable  of  the  consummate 
infamy  and  crime  of  the  betrayal  of  Jesus  Christ,  then  such 
small  matters  as  theft,  murder,  adultery,  covetousness,  and 
the  like  may  at  once  be  acknowledged  as  latent  possibilities 
in  every  heart  of  man  (Mark  vi:  21-23;  Rom.  iii:  10-18; 
Gal.  v:  19-21).     What  is  certain  is  that  under  the  divine 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  163 

searchlight  every  one  of  the  apostles  saw  the  crowning  crime 
to  be  possible  to  him ;   and  they  were  at  least  as  good  as  we. 

"Lord,  is  it  I?"  It  is  related  of  a  great  preacher  that, 
having  to  preach  in  the  Massachusetts  penitentiary,  he  was 
stricken  dumb  as  he  saw  the  long  lines  of  fellow-men  clad 
in  the  livery  of  shame,  shamble,  lock-step,  to  their  places  in 
the  chapel.  For  he  said,  "How  may  I  preach  to  these  men? 
What  know  I  of  thieves  and  forgers  and  murderers  ?  I  have 
done  none  of  these  things.  Between  them  and  myself  is  a 
chasm  hell  deep  which  I  can  neither  overpass  to  get  to  them, 
nor  they  to  get  to  me."  And  then  God  showed  him  his  own 
natural  heart.  Down  through  layers  of  Puritan  tradition, 
of  moral  habit,  inherited  from  generations  of  God-fearing 
ancestors,  the  revealing  ray  shot  and  lighted  up  the  real  heart 
underneath,  and  the  man  of  God  saw  there  the  possibility 
of  every  crime  represented  in  the  long  rows  of  furtive-eyed, 
low-browed,  bestial-faced  humanity  before  him — and  then 
he  could  preach  to  them  as  a  sinful  man  to  sinful  men. 

'Xord,  is  it  I  ?"  Every  one  of  us  must  ask  this  question. 
We  are  in  nothing  better  than  Peter  and  James  and  John. 
"Lord,  is  it  I?"  Is  it  I  who  am  now  living  in  thy  very 
presence,  whose  fellowship  is  my  delight,  whose  service  is 
my  joy,  whose  words  are  my  daily  food — is  it  I  who,  in  some 
unwatchful  moment,  am  to  betray  thee?  "Lord,  is  it  I"  who 
am  reserved  to  the  slow  spiritual  paralysis  of  going  on  with 
the  outward  form  of  communion  and  service  after  the  glow- 
ing heart  of  it  all  is  dead,  who  am  at  last  in  some  kiss  of 
final  falseness  to  betray  thee  ?    "Lord,  is  it  I  ?" 


i64  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

CHRIST'S  TRIAL  BEFORE  PILATE. 

(Mark  xv:  1-15.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  Jesus  and  Pilate  (verses  1-5). — See  below. 

2.  Jesus  and  Barahhas  (verses  6-15). — The  foundation 
doctrine  of  redemption  is  vicarious  sacrifice,  and  in  all 
Scripture  there  is  no  better  illustration  of  substitution. 
(i)  Barabbas  means  "son  of  his  father,"  and  that  describes 
us  all.  By  nature  we  are  all  sons  of  our  father,  Adam. 
(2)  Barabbas  was  justly  condemned  to  die.  He  was  not 
on  probation  to  see  if  he  would  become  a  good  man.  The 
law  had  condemned  him;  he  was  awaiting  execution  (Rom. 
iii:i9;  John  iii  118-36).  (3)  He  was  unconditionally  re- 
leased simply  because  another  was  dying  in  his  place.  (4) 
He  did  nothing  whatever  to  secure  his  pardon  but  accept  it. 

3.  The  Pinal  Testing  of  Man  Under  Law  (verses  6-15). 
— For  centuries  man  had  been  under  the  testing  of  the  law. 
What  was  the  result  ?  The  religious  leaders  of  the  nation  to 
whom  the  law  was  given  could  not  discern  the  Lord  of 
glory,  though  they  were  expecting  Him,  and  had  a  wonder- 
ful mosaic  portrait  of  Him  in  the  law  and  the  prophets. 
Neither  could  they  discern  perfect  moral  loveliness,  but 
clamored  for  the  release  of  a  murderer  and  the  crucifixion 
of  Jesus. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

It  is  not  easy  to  say  what  is  the  deepest  heart  of  things 
here.  In  a  very  supreme  sense,  of  course,  Jesus  is  the  cen- 
tral figure,  as  in  any  scene  in  which  He  appears.  But  so 
incontestable  is  His  prominence  that  often  it  is  not  the  fact 
to  be  insisted  upon — it  goes  without  saying.  Often  the  real 
question  is :   What  will  this  or  that  man  or  body  of  men  do 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  165 

concerning  Jesus  who  is  in  the  midst?  For  the  Incarnate 
Word,  Hke  the  written  Word,  is  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart,  and  His  very  presence  compels  dis- 
closures of  what  is  passing  in  the  inmost  being  of  the  by- 
stander. 

In  this  lesson  the  human  interest  centers  upon  Pontius 
Pilate. 

Think  of  Pilate.  When  a  famous  skeptic  saw  Munck- 
acsy's  "Christ  Before  Pilate"  he  said  with  a  sigh,  after  look- 
ing long  at  that  great  picture,  "The  artist  has  reversed  the 
positions  of  these  men ;  he  has  painted,  not  Christ  before 
Pilate,  but  Pilate  before  Christ."  And  so  it  was.  One 
pities  Pilate  while  condemning  him.  Compelled  to  admit 
the  sinlessness  of  Jesus,  and  therefore  urged  by  the  law, 
by  his  conscience,  and  by  the  importunities  of  his  wife  to 
deal  justly,  he  yet  dealt  unjustly.  Even  his  inclination  seems 
to  have  been  strongly  on  the  side  of  Jesus ;  he  "sought  how 
he  might  set  Him  free." 

Do  not  imagine  that  there  has  been  but  one  Pontius  Pilate 
in  the  personal  history  of  Jesus  Christ.  Alas,  there  have 
been  countless  millions  of  Pilates  during  the  nineteen  cen- 
turies in  which  Christ  has  been  on  trial  in  the  forum  of  con- 
science and  of  reason.  When  Pilate  said :  "I  find  no  fault 
in  Him,"  he  acknowledged  a  fact  unique  in  human  history. 
Of  no  other  human  being  could  that  justly  be  said.  Jesus 
alone  among  the  sons  of  men  has  been  without  fault.  All 
other  goodness  has  been  flawed  with  badness ;  all  other 
greatness  has  been  linked  with  littleness;  Jesus  is  the  only 
sinless  one.  And  so  Pilate  believed.  So  all  men  who  know 
the  story  of  His  life  have  believed  and  do  believe. 

So,  believing,  Pilate  pronounced  the  sentence  which  sent 
Him  to  the  cross ;  so  believing  thousands  are  "crucifying  to 
themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh."    In  what  essential  re- 


i66  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

spect  do  they  differ  from  the  Roman  governor  of  infamous 
memory? 

Three  possible  courses  were  open  before  the  first  Pilate — 
have  been  and  are  open  to  all  succeeding  Pilates.  The  first 
course  was  the  obvious  one  of  evasion  and  delay.  Catching 
at  a  word  (Luke  xxiii :  6)  Pilate  sought  to  shift  upon  Herod 
the  decision  for  or  against  Jesus.  But  no,  it  was  Pilate's 
question,  and  he  could  not  pass  it  over  to  another.  Again 
Jesus  stood  before  Pilate;  evasion  had  failed.  Then  two 
courses  only  remained — to  act  upon  the  logic  of  his  own  ad- 
mission of  the  faultlessness  of  Jesus,  or,  in  deliberate  viola- 
tion of  conscience,  to  cast  Jesus  out.  He  chose  the  latter 
course.  Why  ?  Because  it  seemed  to  accord  with  his  present 
interests.  To  side  with  Jesus  might,  in  the  then  precarious 
favor  in  which  he  stood  with  Caesar,  mean  the  sacrifice  of 
his  worldly  prospects.  To  incur  at  that  time  the  enmity  of 
the  Jews  might  mean  the  sacrifice  of  his  governorship,  and 
he  was  not  prepared  to  do  right  by  Jesus  at  the  cost  of 
worldly  prosperity.  For  the  present  prosperity  of  a  ques- 
tionable business,  for  a  dance,  or  a  game  at  cards,  or  a  sen- 
sual play,  millions  are  rejecting  that  very  Jesus  whom  they 
profess  to  admire  and  to  find  without  fault. 


CHRIST  CRUCIFIED. 

(Mark  xv:  22-29.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Sure  Word  of  Prophecy  Fiilfiiled  (verses  22-29). 
— The  twenty-second  Psalm  is  a  picture  of  the  crucifixion 
painted  with  photographic  minuteness  of  detail  by  the  Spirit 
of  God  more  than  1,000  years  before  the  cross  was  set  up. 

2.  The   inescapable   Alternative    (verses   26-32). — "Let 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  167 

Christ,  the  King  of  Israel,  descend  now  from  the  cross." 
"He  saved  others,  Himself  He  cannot  save."  Most  true! 
that  was  the  actual  alternative.  He  had  descended  from 
the  cross;  if  He  had  permitted  His  own  rescue  by  the 
twelve  legions  of  angels,  not  a  human  soul  would  have 
seen  the  face  of  God  in  peace. 

3.  The  forsaken  Son  (verses  33-36). — See  below. 

4.  The  Voluntary  Death  of  Jesus  (verse  37). — Make  no 
mistake  here.  Jesus,  even  in  the  agonies  of  the  cross,  did 
not  die  of  necessity.    He  "gave  up"  His  spirit. 

5.  The  Rent  Veil  (verse  38). — Only  one  instructed  in 
the  tabernacle  types  can  appreciate  what  that  meant.  Briefly, 
so  long  as  the  veil  between  the  holy  place  and  the  holy  of 
holies  remained,  the  way  into  God's  presence  was  impossible 
for  all  humanity  save  only  one  man,  the  high  priest,  and 
he  could  enter  but  once  each  year.  The  rent  veil  made  "a 
new  and  living  way"  into  God's  presence  for  all  men  who 
would  come  by  that  way  (John  xiv:6;  Heb.  ix:  1-12;  x: 
19-22) . 

6.  A  Convinced  Spectator  (verse  39) . 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  heart  of  this  lesson  must  be  found  in  an  adequate 
answer  to  Jesus'  desolate  cry  from  the  cross,  "My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?"  The  emphasis  must  be 
put  on  the  personal  pronoun  "thou"  and  "me."  "Why 
hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?"  The  cry  was  appropriated  by 
our  Lord  from  the  twenty-second  Psalm,  the  Psalm  of  cru- 
cifixion (see  verses  14-18),  and  in  that  Psalm  the  argument 
implied  in  the  words  of  Jesus  is  more  drawn  out.  "Our 
fathers  trusted  in  thee ;  they  trusted,  and  thou  didst  deliver 
them ;  they  cried  unto  thee  and  were  delivered."  Why  were 
the  fathers,  though  faulty  and  sinful  men,  delivered  when 
they  cried  unto  Jehovah,  when  the  sinless  One,  whose  de- 


i68  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

light  had  ever  been  the  father's  will,  was  forsaken  of  Je- 
hovah in  the  extremity  to  which  perfect  obedience  had 
brought  Him?  The  difficulty  is  a  real  one,  and  any  ade- 
quate theodicy  must  meet  it.  God  is  the  moral  Governor  of 
the  universe,  and  in  all  the  ages  of  His  rule  over  men  He  had 
but  One  sinless  and  perfectly  holy  subject — His  own  incar- 
nate Son,  Jesus  Christ.  Why  should  the  only  human  being 
who  ever  deserved  the  entire  approval  of  God  be  abandoned 
to  the  whim  of  a  despot,  the  insensate  rage  of  a  mob,  the 
cold  hatred  of  bigots,  and,  so  abandoned,  be  forsaken  of 
God  in  the  extremity  of  a  cruel  death  ? 

Let  it  be  repeated — the  difficulty  is  a  real  one.  For,  if 
mobs  and  despots  and  bigots  are  supreme  in  authority  over 
perfect  goodness,  then  God  has  resigned,  or  is  a  myth. 
There  is  no  Supreme  Ruler. 

For  all  other  suffering  save  the  suffering  of  Jesus  Christ 
many  reasons  may  be  found  in  perfect  harmony  with  both 
the  goodness  and  justice  of  God.  It  is  eternally  right  that 
God,  in  Plato's  phrase,  should  "rivet  together"  sin  and  suf- 
fering; and  furthermore,  suffering  is  often,  in  the  moral 
government  of  God,  both  purifying  and  remedial.  Suffering 
is  the  crucible  in  which  dross  is  burnt  out,  that  the  gold  of 
God  may  be  pure. 

"  'Tis  suif  ering  sublimes  the  soul 

So  perfect  peace  may  come  at  last, 
And  I  shall  know  God's  kind  intent 
When  these  sharp  pains  are  past." 

But  in  Jesus  Christ  was  no  dross  of  Adamic  nature,  no 
sin  to  which  suffering  might  justly  be  "rivetted."  And  not 
only  so,  but  even  those  who  deserved  to  suffer  were  delivered 
if  they  cried  to  Jehovah.  Amongst  all  [he  suffering  sons 
of  men  Jesus  only  was  forsaken."    Why? 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  169 

Men  have  thought  the  doom  of  the  wicked  heathen  to 
reflect  upon  the  moral  government  of  God,  but  here,  for- 
saken of  God  is  no  fihhy  heathen  sinner,  but  the  holy  Son  of 
God.    Let  this  be  accounted  for. 

And  just  here  is  the  necessary  test  of  any  theory  of  the 
atonement — does  it  account  for  a  holy  Son  forsaken  in  a 
cruel  death?  If  Jesus  dies  only  to  afiford  such  a  spectacle 
of  moral  grandeur  as  must  forever  enchain  the  hearts  of 
men,  and  so  transform  human  character,  then  the  forsaking 
of  him  by  God  meant  that  God  disowned  the  act,  dissoci- 
ated Himself  from  it.  If  the  cross  meant  only  a  supreme 
manifestation  of  divine  love,  then  the  Father  could  not  have 
been  absent.  But  if  Christ  were  indeed  the  sacrifice  for  the 
guilt  of  the  world;  if,  in  infinite  compassion  toward  man, 
and  honor  toward  God,  He  was  in  one  supreme  act  of  suffer- 
ing doing  right  by  the  moral  order  of  the  universe,  and 
putting  everlasting  shame  and  ignominy  upon  sin,  then  in- 
deed we  may  understand  that  God  could  not  associate  Him- 
self with  human  guilt,  and  that  the  forsaken  One  suffered 
the  forsaking  that  we  might  never  be  forsaken. 


CHRIST  RISEN. 

(Matt,  xxviii:  1-15.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  Bfnpty  Tomb  (verses  1-6). — From  the  very  mo- 
ment when  Jesus  "gave  up  the  ghost"  in  expiating  our  sins 
His  triumph  began.  His  bones  were  not  suffered  to  be 
broken ;  His  incorruptible  body  lay  in  a  new  tomb ;  and, 
when  the  days  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  were  ended  an 
angel  rolled  back  the  stone  that  the  true  Rock  might  come 
forth. 


170  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

2.  The  First  Message  of  the  New  Dispensation  (verses 
7,  8). — The  incarnation  ministry  of  Jesus  began  with  an  in- 
vitation, ''come  and  see";  the  resurrection  began  with  a 
message,  "go  quickly  and  tell"  (John  i:39;    Matt,  xxviii: 

7). 

3.  The  Reward  of  Those  Who  ''Go  Quickly  and  Tell" 
(verses  8-10). — "As  they  went,  Jesus  met  them." 

4.  The  Impotence  of  Hatred  (verses  11-15). — The  fool- 
ish lie  is  repudiated  to-day  by  all  candid  readers  of  the  nar- 
rative ;  the  resurrection  is  believed  by  millions. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  crucifixion  of  Christ  has  many  meanings,  but  they 
all  converge  upon  one  great  fact — the  expiation  of  man's 
guilt.  But  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  which  also  has  many 
meanings,  cannot  be  interpreted  by  a  phrase  or  a  definition. 
Let  us,  then,  gather  up  into  one  view  the  greater  meanings 
of  the  resurrection  and  find  in  them  the  heart  of  that  great 
event. 

The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  fact.  It  has  been  said  with 
truth  that  no  event  in  human  history  is  better  authenticated. 
The  evidence  upon  which  an  intelligent  faith  in  the  stupen- 
dous miracle  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ  rests  is  summar- 
ized by  Paul  in  i  Cor.  xv :  4-8.  ( i )  The  Scriptures  required 
the  resurrection  (Psa.  xvi :  8,  11;  Acts  ii:  23-32).  (2) 
After  His  resurrection  He  "was  seen  of  Cephas"  (Luke 
xxiv :  33,  34) .  This  is  not  only  a  touching  illustration  of  the 
shepherd  work  of  the  risen  Lord  in  seeking  first  a  sheep  that 
had  strayed,  but  is  an  evidential  fact  of  great  importance. 
(3)  "Then  of  the  twelve."  These  were  the  men  who  knew 
Him  best,  whom  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  deceive. 
Remember,  too,  that  one  of  the  twelve,  Thomas,  was  utterly 
incredulous  and  was  convinced  only  by  actual  evidence.     (4) 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  i;i 

"After  that  he  was  seen  of  above  five  hundred  brethren  at 
once."  The  witnesses  were  not  only  persons  who  knew  the 
Lord  intimately,  but  they  were  also  numerous,  and  of  a 
character  which  excludes  the  thought  of  imposture.  (5) 
"After  that  he  was  seen  of  James."  It  will  be  remembered 
that  James  was  the  Lord's  brother.  (6)  "Then  (again)  of 
all  the  apostles,"  The  fact  of  the  resurrection  does  not  rest 
upon  one  fleeting  or  phantasmal  view  of  the  risen  Christ, 
but  upon  many  and  long  continued  interviews  with  intervals 
for  reflection.  (7)  "And  last  of  all  he  was  seen  of  me  also." 
The  testimony  of  Paul  is  of  final  and  unanswerable  weight. 
He  was  a  prejudiced  and  unwilling  w^itness;  he  saw  the 
risen  Lord  years  after  His  ascension ;  he  "suffered  the  loss 
of  all  things"  because  convinced  that  Jesus  was  indeed  risen 
from  the  dead. 

The  resurrection  of  Jesus  affirms  the  truth  of  His  claims. 
If  Jesus  had  been  but  a  self-deceived  enthusiast  honestly 
supposing  Himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Messiah, 
His  death  would  have  ended  His  claims,  for  He  Himself 
appealed  beforehand  to  His  resurrection  as  the  one  great 
"sign"  by  which  His  demand  upon  the  faith  and  obedience 
of  the  world  should  rest.  God  could  not  have  raised  from 
the  dead  an  impostor,  or  a  mere  religious  enthusiast. 

The  resurrection  of  Christ  confirms  our  justification.  He 
went  into  death  under  the  burden  of  our  sins ;  that  He  rose 
from  the  dead  is  the  evidence  that  His  sacrifice  was  accepted 
on  our  behalf. 

The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  proof  of  the  believer's 
resurrection.  "If  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so,  them 
also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him"  (i 
Thess.  iv :  14) .  This  certainly  it  is  which  gives  us  triumph 
even  in  the  brief  of  bereavement;  because  of  this  we  "sor- 
row not  as  others,  which  have  no  hope,"  for  "then  shall  be 


172  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

brought  to  pass  the  saying  which  is  written,  death  is  swal- 
lowed up  in  victory." 


CHRIST  THE  LIFE  AND  LIGHT  OF  MEN. 

(John  i:  1-18.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Eternal  Deity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — The 
words  of  John's  sublime  introduction  admit  of  no  qualifica- 
tion nor  evasion.  They  assert  in  the  most  positive  terms 
not  only  His  preexistence,  which  some  amongst  Unitarians 
accept,  but  His  absolute  Deity  (verses  1-4). 

2.  The  Uncomprehended  One  (verses  5,  10,  11). — What 
a  proof  of  the  total  alienation  of  the  world  from  God,  that 
it  did  not  know  the  Creator  when  He  appeared.  And  this, 
be  it  remembered,  was  the  religious  world — the  very  people 
who  had  the  Scriptures !  Just  as  the  world  of  culture  knew 
not  God  by  ''wisdom,"  so  the  Jewish  world  knew  not  God 
by  religion. 

3.  The  Forerunner  and  His  Mission  (verses  6,  7,  8,  15). 
— It  cannot  be  too  clearly  held  that  John  the  Baptist  was  not 
a  preacher  of  the  Gospel,  but  a  herald  of  Him  who  was  to 
create  the  Gospel. 

4.  The  Conditions  of  the  Nezv  Sonship  (verses  12,  13). 
— If  no  other  passage  or  teaching  of  Scripture  contradicted 
the  current  teaching  that  all  men  are  sons  of  God,  these 
verses  would  suffice.  That  all  men  are  by  creation  the 
"offspring"  of  God,  that  is,  different  essentially  from  the 
beasts,  is  most  true  (Acts  xvii :  20),  but  "sonship"  is  a  word 
of  position  and  of  relationship.  All  the  born  ones  are 
''offspring  of  God" — only  the  born  again  ones  are  the  sons 
of  God. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  173 

5.  The  Incarnation  (verse  14). — The  modern  teaching 
is  that  in  the  incarnation  "flesh"  was  first,  and  that  after- 
ward this  Man  became  one  in  whom  God  became  manifest 
in  a  larger  sense  than  had  ever  been  true  of  any  other  man. 
But  the  Scripture  says  that  the  Word  was  first,  and  "be- 
came" flesh. 

6.  The  New  Dispensation  (verse  17). — The  disjunctive 
conjunction  "but"  shows  the  relation  of  the  Mosaic  to  the 
Christian  dispensation.    The  latter  is  in  contrast  to  the  first. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

What  mortal  shall  assume  to  say  what  is  the  heart  of 
things  in  this  lesson  ?  Bengel  called  these  verses  "the  sanc- 
tum sanctorum  of  the  Bible."  They  hold  such  great  doc- 
trines as  the  personality  and  transcendence  of  God,  as  against 
pantheism ;  His  unity,  as  against  polytheism ;  His  plurality, 
as  against  unitarianism ;  His  true  incarnation,  as  against  all 
forms  of  gnosticism,  whether  ancient  or  modern;  and  His 
power  of  self-revelation,  as  against  agnosticism. 

But  all  of  these  stupendous  truths  are  also  taught  else- 
where in  Scripture.  We  are  not,  therefore,  to  find  the  cure 
of  this  lesson  in  the  fact  of  their  restatement  here.  Is  it 
not  to  be  found  in  the  one  word,  revelation  ?  And,  since  the 
revelation  is  unto  the  end  that  God  may  be  known  and  wor- 
shipped, must  we  not  say  that  the  heart  of  this  lesson  is  the 
personal  revelation  of  God? 

There  are,  then,  three  thoughts  for  our  learning : 

First.  The  revelation  of  a  personal  God.  Our  God  is 
neither  a  theological  abstraction,  a  mere  bundle  of  attributes, 
nor  yet  a  scientific  abstraction,  a  mere  form  of  Force ;  nor 
yet  a  philosophical  abstraction,  a  Somewhat  coextensive 
with,  and  indistinguishable  from,  matter.  He  is  a  Person, 
and  we  were  made  in  His  likeness  and  image. 


174  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Secondly.  He  reveals  Himself  in  this  final  and  supreme 
way  in  a  Person.  The  Word,  who  in  the  beginning  was 
(not  became,  or  began)  God,  incarnated  Himself  in  a  Man 
who  began  a  human  life  as  we  began  ours,  and  lived  for 
thirty-three  years  a  divine  life  in  human  conditions,  not 
heavenly  conditions. 

Thirdly.  This  divine  life,  under  human  conditions,  was 
to  the  end  that  we  who  are  persons  might  know,  love,  wor- 
ship and  obey  the  divine  Person  God.  Now,  any  reverent 
human  person  may  thus  come  into  personal  relations  with 
the  divine  Person.  In  no  other  way  could  we  really  know 
Him.  All  previous  revelations  were  about  Him,  the  per- 
sonal revelation  was  Himself.  But  in  revealing  Himself  He 
also  revealed  the  perfect  man.  What  is  God  like?  Like 
Christ.  What  is  perfected  humanity  like?  Like  Christ. 
Ah,  how  limited  and  poor  is  our  vision  of  divine  truth! 
Have  we  really  believed  that  redemption  is  not  only  from 
the  immeasurable  debasement  of  humanity  in  hell,  but  unto 
the  conformation  of  humanity  to  Christlikeness  in  glory? 


THE  WITNESS  OF  JOHN  THE  BAPTIST  TO 
JESUS. 

(John  i:  19-34.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  John's  Self -abnegation  (verses  19-23). — No  finer  ex- 
ample can  be  found  in  all  Scripture  of  the  right  relation 
toward  the  public  of  a  servant  of  God.  John  would  neither 
take  the  place  belonging  of  right  to  Christ  in  the  public 
mind,  nor  would  he  claim  for  himself  any  other  exalted 
position.    To  be  a  "voice"  was  enough  for  him. 

2.  John's  First  Testimony  (verses  24-29). — Questioned 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  175 

as  to  his  authority  for  introducing  a  new  ordinance,  viz: 
the  baptism  of  repentance,  John  connects  his  actions  with 
his  work  as  the  forerunner  of  One  mightier  than  himself. 

3.  John's  Second  Testimony  (verse  29). — See  "Heart." 

4.  John's  Third  Testimony  (verses  32,  33). — John  had 
seen  the  convincing  fact  of  the  descent  upon  Jesus  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

5.  John's  Fourth  Testimony  (verse  34). — ''This  is  the 
Son  of  God."  The  student  should  add  to  these  John's  testi- 
mony, as  reported  by  Matthew,  against  the  formal  religion 
of  the  time,  and  to  Jesus  as  the  baptizer  with  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  great  word  of  this  lesson  is,  the  word  "witness." 
John  was  not  that  light,  but  was  sent  to  bear  witness  of  the 
Light.  We  have,  therefore,  as  the  open  heart  of  the  lesson 
the  word  witness ;  and  this  in  three  ways  : — witness  bearing 
as  the  method  of  the  new  dispensation  of  "grace  and  truth," 
which  Christ  brought  in;  Christ  Himself  as  the  object  of 
the  witnessing;  and  one  particular  fact  about  Christ  as  the 
message  of  the  witnessing. 

First.  The  idea  of  building  up  the  kingdom  of  God  by 
means  of  testimony  was  one  of  the  most  striking  of  the  new 
ideas  of  the  new  dispensation.  Mosaism  was  built  up  by 
the  natural  increase  of  a  family,  the  family  of  Abraham. 
Every  Hebrew  child  was  in  the  Theocracy  just  by  virtue  of 
having  Hebrew  parents.  The  Law  never  had  a  missionary. 
From  Sinai  came  no  command:  "Go  ye  into  all  the  earth 
and  preach  the  law  to  every  creature."  But  witnessing  is 
the  peculiar  method  of  this  dispensation.  From  the  ascen- 
sion to  this  day,  Christ  has  no  other  way  of  winning  men 
but  by  the  testimony  of  Spirit-filled  witnesses  (Acts  i:  8). 


176  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Secondly.  That  testimony  concerns  a  Person,  not  pri- 
marily, an  ethical  system,  nor  even  a  body  of  doctrine,  still 
less  a  church,  but  Himself,  Jesus  the  Christ.  At  no  point 
has  the  church  more  conspicuously  failed  in  her  responsibil- 
ity than  just  there.  Rome  presents  an  ecclesiastical  system, 
Protestantism  a  thousand  theological  systems,  in  the  place 
of  Jesus  Christ.  The  Lord  made  Himself  the  one  issue. 
"Whom  say  ye  that  I  the  Son  of  man  am  ?"  ''Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  you,  he  that  believeth  on  Me  hath  everlasting 
life."  "He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  Hfe,  and  he  that  believeth 
not  the  Son  hath  not  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him." 

Thirdly.  The  message  about  Christ  centers  with  tremen- 
dous emphasis  on  one  definite  act — His  sacrificial  death. 
Read  the  twenty-one  Christian  Epistles,  seeking  carefully 
for  the  references  to  His  earth-life  as  the  emphatic  fact 
concerning  Him.  You  will  find  five  brief,  unemphatic  pas- 
sages. Read  them  again  for  references  to  His  atoning  death. 
You  will  find  them  by  scores.  Then  enter  the  churches  and 
hear  the  sermons ;  or  read  the  so-called  Christian  literature 
of  the  day.  How  often  will  you  find  the  chief  emphasis  put 
upon  the  atoning  death  of  Christ?  Is  it  not  time  to  come 
back  to  the  Apostolic  testimony?  "Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.*' 


HIS  FIRST  DISCIPLES. 

(John  i:  35-51.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Very  First  Disciples  (verses  36-39). — They  heard 
a  true  testimony ;  they  followed ;  they  abode. 

2.  The  First  ''Finder''  (verses  40-42). — The  man  who 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  177 

had  heard,  followed,  and  abode,  quite  naturally  ran  to  tell. 
Have  you  complied  with  the  three  conditions?  We  do  not 
know  that  Andrew  became  a  great  preacher,  but  that  day 
he  brought  a  great  preacher  to  Jesus. 

3.  The  Great  ''Finder"  at  Work  (verse  43). — You  are 
going  to  meet  many  a  soul  in  heaven  whose  testimony  will 
be,  "No  man  cared  for  my  soul,  save  the  Man  of  Calvary 
only."  Philip,  the  Jew  with  the  Gentile  name,  seems  to  have 
been  a  pretty  dull  disciple  (John  xiv :  8,  9)  ;  perhaps  no  one 
but  Jesus  would  have  thought  him  worth  finding. 

3.  The  Third  "Finder"'  (verses  44-46) . — Note  his  simple 
but  sublime  testimony:  "We  have  found  HIM."  Philip 
could  not  answer  Nathaniel's  hard  question,  but  he  could 
suggest  a  good  way  out :   "Come  and  see." 

4.  The  New  Testimony  to  Christ  (verses  47-49) . — John 
had  already  witnessed  to  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God;  Na- 
thaniel adds,  as  an  instructed  Jew  who  knew  the  Davidic 
covenant  (2  Sam.  vii:8-i6),  "the  King  of  Israel." 

5.  The  Promise  of  Greater  Things  (verses  50,  51). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

We  have,  first,  a  precious  lesson  in  Christian  service.  It 
began  that  day  by  Jordan  in  a  certain  specific  testimony, 
"Behold  the  Lamb  of  God !"  Did  you  ever  notice  that  John 
the  Baptist  never  explains  his  messages?  That  day,  so 
significant  as  the  day  which  saw  the  first  disciples  gathered 
to  Christ,  John  did  not  explain  what  he  meant  by  calling 
Christ  "the  Lamb  of  God."  Every  Jew  knew  that  he  was 
pointing  to  Jesus  as  the  fulfiller  of  the  sacrificial  types — 
knew  that  every  lamb  sacrificed  from  the  first  Passover  till 
that  day  pointed  forward  to  a  coming  One.  The  applica- 
tion is  obvious :  the  first  secret  of  successful  service  is  to 
point  to  Christ  as  the  Sacrifice,  the  sin-bearer,  the  atone- 
12 


178  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

ment  maker.  All  true  knowledge  of  Christ  begins  at  the 
cross.  Afterward  we  may  go  back  to  the  cradle,  and  follow 
the  sinless  feet,  and  contemplate  the  great  example. 

And  the  second  lesson  in  successful  service  is  that  only 
one  who  has  been  with  Jesus  can  win  men  to  Him.  One 
may  be  saved  and  yet  know  but  little  of  the  blessedness  of 
communion  with  Christ.  Personal  faith  is  commonly  the 
result  of  the  testimony  of  another.  John  bore  witness  to 
Christ  as  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  John  and  Andrew  followed 
Him.  But  more:  they  ''abode  with  Him."  Belief  made 
them  disciples,  abiding  made  them  soul  seekers,  and  soul 
winners. 

The  third  lesson  in  service  is  that  it  should  begin  with 
what  is  nearest.  Andrew  went  after  his  own  brother,  Simon. 
Too  many  people  whose  hearts  begin  to  be  stirred  toward 
service,  quiet  their  aroused  consciences  with  great  plans  of 
of  what  they  will  do  when  they  are  somewhere  else.  Mr. 
Moody  used  to  tell  his  boys  and  girls  at  Mount  Hermon 
and  Northfield  that  one  who  could  do  no  service  right 
where  they  might  happen  to  be,  would  not  do  service  any- 
where. And  note  that  Andrew  was  not  satisfied  with  telling 
his  brother  about  Jesus.    He  ''brought  him  to  Jesus." 

The  fourth  lesson  is  that  Jesus  Himself  is  actively  at 
work  with  His  servants.  It  was  Jesus  who  found  Philip. 
The  Lord  is  constantly  making  converts.  Many  a  saint  in 
glory  owes  his  conversion  to  no  human  agency.  A  Bible,  a 
sincere  reader  of  the  Bible,  the  risen  Christ,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit — these  are  enough. 

Underneath  the  last  seven  verses  of  the  lesson  is  a  won- 
derful dispensational  picture  upon  which  there  is  no  room  to 
dwell.  It  is  prophetic  of  the  future  conversion  of  the  Jewish 
remnant  in  the  last  days,  and  of  the  national  conversion  of 
Israel  after  our  Lord's  return. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  179 

THE  FIRST  MIRACLE  IN  CANA. 

(John  ii:  i-ii.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Social  Christ  (verses  i,  2). — With  a  world's  sal- 
vation for  His  mission,  and  with  but  little  more  than  three 
years  for  testimony,  our  blessed  Lord  could  find  time,  and 
think  it  worth  while,  to  share  and  increase  the  innocent 
social  joy  of  a  wedding.  A  lesson,  surely,  to  those  who 
think  such  things  "wordly."  The  definition  of  ''the  world" 
in  the  bad  sense  in  which  that  term  is  used  in  Scripture 
needs  enlarging  in  the  minds  of  many  truly  earnest,  but 
narrow  minded  Christians.  The  "world"  in  the  bad  sense 
is  that  kingdom  of  Satan  here  in  the  earth,  the  badge  of 
which  is  ostentation,  or  the  desire  for  things  not  for  the 
ministry  there  may  be  in  them  to  man's  manifold  being, 
but  for  mere  display,  pride,  and  conspicuity;  and  the  re- 
wards of  which  are  present  wealth,  power,  or  position.  At 
the  heart  of  it  lies  self -exaltation.  Of  that  world  no  follower 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  should  ever  be  a  part.  But  to  condemn 
eating  and  drinking  as  part  of  a  large  and  beautiful  social 
life,  and  to  reprobate  surrounding  such  occasions  as  wed- 
dings, birthdays,  anniversaries  and  the  like  with  joyous 
companionship,  is  to  be  holier  than  Christ,  and  to  go  back 
to  John  the  Baptist. 

2.  The  Manifestation  of  His  Glory  (verses  3-11). — See 
"Heart." 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson, 

The  heart  of  this  lesson  is  plainly  indicated  in  verse  11. 
The  "sign"  was  a  manifestation  of  "His  glory." 

Perhaps  there  is  no  more  difficult  word  in  Scripture  than 
the  word  "glory."     And,  as  in  the  case  of  the  word  "world," 


i8o  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

the  difficulty  arises  from  the  diverse  uses  of  the  word. 
Sometimes  it  means  outward  splendor,  merely,  as,  *'The 
kingdoms  of  this  world  and  the  glory  of  them"  (Luke  iv :  6) . 
Sometimes  the  word  is  used  of  that  superhuman  radiance 
which  announces  the  immediate  presence  of  Deity  (Ex.  xvi : 
id;  I  Kings  viii:  ii).  Sometimes  the  word  is  used  of  the 
people's  praises  of  God  (Matt.  xv:2i).  But  always  the 
fundamental  idea  is  the  manifestation  of  Deity  in  some  or 
all  of  His  excellences.  We,  for  example,  glorify  God  when 
we  make  known  in  life  or  testimony  "the  excellences  of 
Him  who  hath  called  us  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous 

light." 

With  this  explanation  we  are  prepared  to  see  how,  in 
making  the  water  wine  Christ  "manifested  His  glory."  It 
was  a  creative  act,  and  creative  power  belongs  to  God 
alone.  The  "sign,"  however,  had  a  purpose  beyond  the 
demonstration  of  the  fact  that  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  God  was 
Himself  among  men.  In  the  structure  of  John's  Gospel 
the  announcement  of  a  new  truth  is  commonly  accompanied 
by  an  illustrative  miracle.  In  John  viii :  12,  for  example, 
our  Lord  says,  "I  am  the  light  of  the  world."  In  the  suc- 
ceeding chapter  He  performed  the  illustrative  miracle  of 
giving  sight  to  a  man  born  blind. 

So  here  He  prefaces  the  great  teaching  on  the  new  birth 
by  turning  water  into  wine.  The  "sign"  at  the  wedding 
feast,  therefore,  represents  Him  as  the  Author  of  the  new 
creation  (i  Cor.  xv:  45-49). 

Still  another  "glory"  of  our  Lord  was  manifested  at  the 
wedding  feast.  Here,  at  the  outset  of  His  great  work,  He 
revealed  Himself  as  the  social  Christ.  It  is  the  character- 
istic of  the  new  dispensation  that  all  innocent  human  joy 
is  sanctified  in  Christ.  John  the  Baptist,  the  last  of  the  Old 
Testament  prophets  and  saints,  was  an  ascetic.     He  came 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  i8i 

neither  eating  nor  drinking.  Christ  as  He  said  of  Himself, 
came  eating  and  drinking.  He  was  constantly  found  in 
human  habitations.  He  sought  the  family.  Puritanism  has 
woefully  hidden  the  social  Christ. 


NICODEMUS. 

(Johniii:  1-15.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  Candid  Inquirer  (verses  i,  2). — Nicodemus  has 
been,  not  without  reason,  called  "the  best  natural  character 
in  Scripture." 

2.  The  Necessity,  Mystery  and  Means  of  the  New  Birth 
(verses  3-15). 

3.  The  Outrageous  Omission. — The  august  International 
Lesson  Committee  not  infrequently  does  foolish  things,  and 
as  frequently  leaves  wise  things  undone;  but  to  stop  this 
lesson  short  of  verse  16  is  inexplicable.  That  verse  is  the 
central  verse  of  the  Bible,  "the  Gospel  in  little,"  as  Luther 
called  it.  There  certainly  is  a  personal  Satan,  and  in  his 
activity  he  often  beguiles  good  and  well  meaning  men.  He 
hates  John  iii :  16. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  heart  of  this  lesson  lies,  I  think,  in  the  two  impera- 
tives of  verses  7  and  14.  "Ye  MUST  be  born  again."  "The 
Son  of  Man  MUST  be  lifted  up." 

First.  The  imperative  of  life — "ye  must  be  born  again." 
There  is  no  going  around  a  divine  imperative.  The  "must's" 
of  God  are  final.  Let  us  not  suppose  that  they  are  there- 
fore arbitrary.  Not  one  of  the  divine  imperatives  is  arbi- 
trary.   Something  "must"  be,  not  because  of  a  whim  of  the 


i82  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Sovereign  of  the  universe,  but  because  it  could  not  be  other- 
wise in  a  moral  universe. 

The  imperative  of  the  new  birth  is  a  "must"  because  of 
two  facts  in  the  being  of  fallen  man.  He  is  spiritually  dead, 
and  "must"  have  life  if  he  is  to  know  and  enjoy  God  (Eph. 
ii :  I ;  Col.  ii :  13  ;  Eph.  iv :  11)  ;  and  his  nature  is  depraved. 
It  is  not  to  be  understood  that  man  by  the  fall  has  lost  im- 
mortality, but  only  that  he  is  "alienated  from  the  life  of 
God"  It  is  that  life  which  our  Lord  calls  "eternal  life"; 
eternal  being  a  word  of  quality,  not  of  duration,  primarily. 
Eternal  life  is  imparted  by  the  new  birth,  and  without  that 
life  man  could  not  know  God  (John  xvii:  3). 

The  second  reason  why  man  "must"  be  born  again  is  that 
his  human  Adamic  nature  is  hopelessly  corrupted.  It  is 
"flesh."  What  Christ,  who  knew  what  was  in  man  (John 
ii :  25),  thought  of  the  old  nature  may  be  learned  from  Mark 
vii:  21-23.  By  the  new  birth  a  new  nature  is  imparted  (i 
Peter  i :  23 ;  2  Peter  1:4). 

Equally  unavoidable  is  the  second  of  these  divine  impera- 
tives, the  imperative  of  death.  For  man,  whom  Jesus  came 
to  save,  was  not  only  "dead,"  "alienated  from  the  life  of 
God,"  and  incurably  corrupt  by  nature,  but  he  was  also  per- 
sonally a  guilty  violator  of  the  divine  law.  He  was  a  sin- 
ner. He  had  despised  the  holy  will  of  God,  and  was  a  rebel 
in  a  moral  universe.  A  holy  God  could  not  ignore  the 
guilt  of  man,  nor  make  light  of  it.  Something  "must"  be 
done  to  express  the  divine  abhorrence  of  sin ;  to  express 
the  divine  love  for  the  sinner ;  to  liberate  the  "eternal  life" 
which  was  in  Christ  (John  i:4),  so  that  it  might  be  im- 
parted to  the  redeemed  (John  xii :  24)  ;  to  pay  to  the  broken 
law  of  God  its  inescapable  penalty  of  death  (Rom.  vi :  23 ; 
Gal.  iii:  16,  18),  and  to  draw  Godward  those  who  were  lost 
(John  xii:  32). 


NEW  l^ESTAMENT  STUDIES  183 

And  all  of  this,  and  who  shall  say  how  much  more,  was 
wrought  by  the  lifting  up  of  the  Son  of  man. 


AT  JACOB'S  WELL. 

(John  iv:5-i4.) 
L     The  Analysis. 

(i)  The  Human  Christ,  verses  1-2.  Our  adorable  Lord 
was  as  truly  human  as  He  was  truly  Divine.  As  we  are 
wearied  in  His  service,  though  never  wearied  of  it,  so  was 
He  in  His  Father's  service. 

(2)  The  lesson  in  wayside  service,  verses  7-26.  With 
their  not  common  fatuousness  the  lesson  committee  fail  to 
give  us  the  whole  of  even  this  brief  story,  so  we  must  go  be- 
yond the  strict  lesson  limits  to  get  it.  Note:: — (a)  That 
weariness  does  not  keep  the  model  Servant  from  working. 
(&)That  the  Wise  Servant  began  at  some  point  of  common 
interest,  verse  7.  (c)  That  He  refused  to  be  drawn  into  a 
sectarian  discussion,  verses  8-10.  {d)  That  He  responded 
to  the  woman's  first  gleam  of  personal  interest  by  touching 
her  conscience,  verses  16-18.  {e)  That  He  swept  aside  cere- 
monialism and  mere  religiousness  as  the  resource  of  an 
awakened  conscience,  verses  19-24.  Too  many  moderns 
would  have  said:  "Join  the  church,  and  live  right."  (/) 
That  He  revealed  Himself  as  the  alone  resource  for  a  sinner, 
verses  25-26. 

IL     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  heart  of  this  lesson  is  to  be  found  in  the  contrast  be- 
tween Jacob's  well  and  the  upspringing  fountain.  Jacob's 
well  is  the  Law,  the  old  order  of  laborious  ceremonial,  the 
old  legal  system  of  personal  merit  by  obedience.    The  water 


i84  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

in  the  well  was  good,  but  the  well  was  deep  (verse  ii). 
Every  drop  gained  from  that  well  cost  effort.  Bucket  by 
bucket,  a  little  at  a  time — that  was  the  law  of  the  Well  at  its 
very  best.  But  Jacob's  well  had  come  to  stand  for  mere  tra- 
ditionalism in  religion,  for  mere  intolerance  of  new  light. 
*'Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Jacob  ?"  was  the  woman's 
answer  to  him  who  was  speaking  of  the  upspringing  water. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  Jacob  was  the  father  of  the  Samaritans 
in  no  real  sense.  The  Samaritans  of  our  Lord's  time  were  a 
hybrid  race,  outside  of  real  Judaism.  Jesus  was  careful  to 
set  that  right:  "Ye  worship  ye  know  not  what;  we  know 
what  we  worship,  for  salvation  is  of  the  Jews."  Spiritually, 
the  Samaritans  drawing  water  from  Jacob's  well  were  pre- 
cisely in  the  position  of  modern  Gentile  believers  who  put 
themselves  under  the  Law;  conceiving  that  as  Christians, 
the  Law  is  their  rule  of  life.  That  is  the  very  error  against 
which  the  Spirit  by  Paul  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians. 

The  upspringing  fountain  is,  first  of  all,  the  Holy  Spirit 
Himself,  indwelling  the  behever;  and  then  the  nine-fold 
"fruit  of  the  spirit,"  which  is  "love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffer- 
ing, gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance." 
And  that  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  Christian  character.  Under 
the  Law,  character  is  sought  to  be  formed  by  habits  of 
obedience  to  a  rule  of  life — thou  shalt,  and  thou  shalt  not. 
The  formula  is :  "Our  choices  make  our  habits,  and  our 
habits  form  our  characters."  That  is  drawing  water  out  of 
Jacob's  well.  It  is  that  "other"  Gospel,  of  which  the  Apostle 
speaks  in  Galatians.  It  is  Samaritanism — that  is,  neither 
pure  Judaism  nor  pure  Christianity. 

Christianity  is  not  a  kind  of  pump  in  Jacob's  well,  helping 
us  to  draw  life  out  of  the  law ;  it  is  the  Spirit  of  life,  and  the 
life  of  the  Spirit  implanted  in,  and  outflowing  from  the  be- 
liever himself.     That  is  the  least  understood  fact  of  Chris- 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  185 

tianity  to-day,  after  nineteen  hundred  years  of  preaching. 
"The  water  that  I  shall  give  shall  be  in  him  a  fountain  of 
water,  springing  up  into  everlasting  life." 

The  contrast  between  Jacob's  well  and  the  upspringing 
fountain  is  just  the  contrast  between  the  VII  of  Romans 
and  the  VIII.  In  the  former,  a  believer  is  in  an  agony  of 
effort  to  do  something  under  the  law  of  merit,  the  goodness 
of  God.  In  the  later,  a  believer  is,  by  the  indwelling  Spirit, 
made  "free  from  the  law,"  and  so  finds  that  the  righteous 
ness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  (not  "by,"  but)  "in"  him  as  he 
walks  after  the  Spirit. 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians, 
after  stating  in  the  first  three  chapters  the  exalted  position 
into  which  the  believer  is  brought  by  grace  through  faith,  in 
turning  to  the  walk  that  should  characterize  one  in  such  a 
position,  gives  as  the  test  of  the  walk,  and  as  that  which 
gives  it  its  distinctive  character,  not  the  law,  but  the  new 
position :  "Walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye  are 
called" ;  "For  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodness  and 
righteousness  and  truth." 

The  transformation  of  Christian  experience  from  the 
average  one  of  painfully  drawing  blessings  out  of  Jacob's 
well,  to  the  triumphant  one  of  bearing  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit, 
is  effected  by  two  acts,  one  of  faith,  one  of  the  will.  The 
act  of  faith  is  just  to  believe  that  the  Spirit  does  dwell  within 
(i  Cor.  vi :  19).  The  act  of  the  will  is  just  to  live  in  yield- 
edness  to  the  Spirit. 


i86  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

THE  SECOND  MIRACLE  OF  CANA. 

(John  iv:  43-54.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  prophet  without  honor,  verses  43-44.  Note  why 
He  was  without  honor ;  He  was  a  Prophet.  A  prophet  was 
never  sent  to  Israel  except  in  times  of  declension,  and  every 
prophet's  message  was  one  of  stern  rebuke. 

2.  The  miracle  at  Cana,  verses  46-54.  See  Heart  of  the 
Lesson. 

II.    The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  power  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  is  the  emphatic  fact 
of  this  lesson.  Many  were  healed  by  our  Lord's  touch  and 
presence,  but  the  healing  of  the  daughter  of  the  Syro-Phce- 
nician  woman,  and  of  the  Nobleman's  son,  were  wrought  by 
the  Word  of  an  absent  Lord.  Doubtless  this  has  its  dispen- 
sational  significance,  for  these  suppliant  parents  were  Gen- 
tiles, and  the  great  Gentile  church  is  being  called  out  and 
saved  by  the  preaching  of  the  Word  of  a  Lord,  who  is,  per- 
sonally at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  and  invisible,  save  to 
the  eye  of  faith.  But  we  are  concerned  with  the  practical 
rather  than  the  dispensational  aspects  of  truth. 

So  considered,  we  have  here  the  power  of  the  Word  in  two 
ways.  And  first,  the  power  of  the  Word  to  heal.  We  are 
saved  simply  by  believing  in  Christ  as  He  is  presented 
through  the  Word  of  God.  "He  that  believeth  not  God 
hath  made  him  a  liar;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record 
that  God  gave  of  his  Son"  (i  John  v:  10).  We  are  *'born 
again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible  by  the 
Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  forever"  (i  Peter 
1:23).  Apart  from  the  Word  of  God,  we  know  nothing 
whatever  about  Christ.     It  is  true  that  the  believer's  ex- 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  187 

perience  accords  with  the  word,  for :  "He  that  beHeveth  on 
the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself,"  but  even  after 
behef,  we  still  need  the  Word  to  interpret  to  us  that  very 
experience  which  the  Lord  gives  to  his  own. 

There  is  great  need  amongst  Christian  workers  of  a  re- 
vival of  faith  in  the  power  of  the  simple  Word  of  God.  His 
promises  concerning  the  Word  have  ever  been  confirmed  by 
his  providences.  Multitudes  have  been  convicted  and  con- 
verted by  the  silent  power  of  the  Scriptures,  quite  apart 
from  argument  or  emotional  appeal. 

And  the  incident  recorded  in  our  lesson  marks  another 
way  in  which  the  Word  has  power.  The  healing  Word,  *'Go 
thy  way;  thy  son  liveth,"  was  spoken  at  one  o'clock  P.  M. 
Capernaum,  where  the  healing  took  effect,  was  about  twenty 
miles  away.  The  late  Prof.  Curtis  rode  from  Cana  to  Cap- 
ernaum easily  in  a  little  more  than  four  hours.  The  Noble- 
man might  have  been  back  and  by  his  son's  side  by  five 
o'clock,  yet  we  read  that  it  was  the  next  day  before  he  went 
home.  What  kept  that  father,  but  a  moment  before  Jesus 
spake  the  life-restoring  Word  so  filled  with  fear  and  dis- 
tress about  his  son,  quietly  at  Cana  all  those  hours  ?  Noth- 
ing, clearly,  but  a  new  born  faith  in  the  power  of  Jesus' 
word,  and  a  new  born  love  for  Jesus  Himself.  Noth- 
ing less  than  this  could  have  kept  that  father  from  the 
bedside  of  his  son. 

And  here  again  the  experience  of  millions  confirms  the 
truth  of  the  incident ;  for  the  Christian's  assurance  rests  on 
the  word  of  God  and  on  that  alone.  We  are  saved  by  be- 
lieving in  Christ  according  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  we  have 
quietness  and  assurance  by  believing  what  the  Word  says 
about  the  finished  work  of  Christ.  When  the  Word  says : 
"Through  this  man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of 
sins ;  and  by  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all  things, 


i88  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses," 
the  heart  of  the  believer  has  assurance. 


AT  THE  POOL  OF  BETHESDA. 

(John  v:  1-15.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  This  lesson  does  not  fall  into  divisions,  but  is  one 
scene,  one  act.  For  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  inci- 
dent of  the  lesson  see  ''Heart,"  &c. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

There  is  much  in  this  beautiful  lesson  that  presses  for  the 
first  place  in  relative  importance.  Dispensationally,  we 
have,  as  in  the  scene  by  Jacob's  Well,  law  and  grace  brought 
into  contrast.  Perhaps  this  scene  by  Bethesda  marks  even 
a  stronger  contrast.  Bethesda  would  have  been  effectual  if 
only  the  infirm  man  could  have  met  the  conditions.  Alas, 
the  very  infirmity  which  brought  him  to  the  pool,  kept  him 
from  getting  down  into  it. 

When  the  lawyer  in  Luke  x  asked  what  he  must  do  to 
inherit  eternal  life,  Jesus  told  him  to  do  the  Law  and  he 
should  live;  but  the  Law  says,  *'Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul  and  with  all 
thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind,"  and  neither  that  lawyer 
nor  any  other  human  being  save  Jesus  ever  did  that  for  one 
fraction  of  a  second.  The  trouble  is  not  with  the  Law, 
which  is  "holy,  just  and  good,"  but  with  man  who  is  unholy, 
unjust  and  evil.  The  Law  "made  nothing  perfect"  (Heb. 
vii:  19),  because  it  was  "weak  through  the  flesh." 

And  in  many  minds  law  and  grace  are  confused  hopelessly 
just  at  the  point  which  troubled  the  infirm  man  by  the  pool 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  189 

of  Bethesda :  "Sir,  I  have  no  man,  when  the  water  is  trou- 
bled, to  put  me  into  the  pool."  Galantianized  Protestantism 
teaches  that  Christ  comes  to  be  that  missing  "man" — that 
He  helps  us  into  the  pool.  But  here  He  does  nothing  of  the 
kind.  By  His  own  power,  He  makes  the  man  whole  and 
then  sends  him  away  from  the  pool.  Later,  meeting  him  in 
the  temple,  He  tells  him  to  cease  living  a  sinful  life.  But  this 
is  not  the  heart  of  this  lesson. 

Again,  a  most  striking  illustration  is  here  given  of  the 
hardening  and  blinding  effects  of  putting  the  sense  of  sacred- 
ness  at  the  wrong  place.  With  the  Jews,  as  with  the  Pur- 
itans, the  Sabbath  was  the  supremely  sacred  thing;  with 
Jesus  Christ,  humanity  was  the  supremely  sacred  thing. 
All  sense  of  joy  in  the  restoration  of  the  infirm  man  was 
swamped  by  the  fear  that  the  Sabbath  had  been  desecrated. 
It  never  occurred  to  them  that,  in  Jesus'  phrase,  "The  Sab- 
bath was  made  for  man";  that  man,  not  institutions,  holds 
the  first  place  in  the  thought  of  God.  I  have  known  a  great 
evangelist  refuse  to  speak  to  a  crowded  meeting,  because  to 
reach  it  he  must  use  a  public  conveyance  on  the  Lord's  Day. 

But  it  seems  to  me  that  the  deepest  thing  in  this  wonder- 
ful lesson  is  in  those  words  of  the  healed  man :  "And  he  that 
was  healed  wist  not  who  it  was."  The  unrecognized  Christ 
is  in  the  heart  of  this  lesson.  It  was  the  pathetic  fact  in  the 
earth  life  of  Christ  that  men  were  so  ready  to  accept  his 
blessings,  so  slow  to  recognize  him.  It  has  been  the  pathetic 
fact  in  the  history  of  Christendom.  Every  distinctive  bless- 
ing of  Christian  civilization  as  distinguished  from  pagan 
civilizations,  has  come  directly  from  Christ,  and  yet  the 
enormous  majority  of  civilized  men  to-day  do  not  see  that 
the  very  things  which  make  life  endurable  to  them  are  His 
gifts. 

Vastly  more  pathetic  is  the  fact  that  to  so  many  of  His 


iQO  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

own  who  are  in  the  world,  He  is  an  unrecognized  Christ. 
Like  the  Emmaus  disciples,  we  walk  with  holden  eyes,  and 
though  He  is  by  our  side,  we  do  not  know  that  it  is  He. 
Like  those  disciples,  we  are  puzzled  or  made  sad  by  His 
providences,  and  speak  of  disappointments  of  our  faith  more 
than  of  faith's  victories. 


THE  MIRACLE  OF  THE  LOAVES  AND  FISHES. 

(John  vi:  1-14.) 
I.    The  Analysis. 

1.  Jesus  leaving  Galilee,  verse  i. 

2.  The  gathering  multitudes,  verses  2-5. 

3.  The  incomparable  Teacher,  verse  3  (see  parallel  ac- 
counts in  Matt.,  Mark,  Luke). 

4.  The  hungering  multitudes,  verse  5. 

5.  The  impotent  disciples,  verses  5-9.     See  "Heart." 

6.  Feeding  the  multitude,  verses  10,  11. 

7.  Gathering  the  fragments,  verses  12-14. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Christ  commands  the  impossible ;  with  Christ  the  impossi- 
ble becomes  possible — that  is  manifestly  the  core  truth  here. 
It  is  a  parable  in  action,  this  feeding  of  the  five  thousand; 
a  parable  of  interpretation,  for  it  explains  the  whole  mystery 
of  the  co-working  of  God  and  man ;  a  parable  of  this  dis- 
pensation, for  it  illustrates  the  method  of  the  dispensation. 

Christ  commands  the  impossible.  Five  barley  loaves  and 
two  small  fishes  zvere  too  few  for  so  many.  When  our  Lord 
said:  ''Give  ye  them  to  eat"  (Matt,  xiv:  16),  He  told  them 
to  do  what  they  were  wholly  unable  to  do.  The  enterprises 
of  Christ  are  all  humanly  impossible.     When  he  ordered 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  191 

twelve  unlettered,  untravelled  fishermen  and  Galilean  vil- 
lagers to  assault  Judaism  in  its  central  stronghold,  Jerusalem, 
and  then  to  attack  the  heathen  world  system,  a  system  organ- 
ized by  the  immense  skill  and  experience  of  Satan,  and  in- 
trenched in  the  high  places  of  the  earth.  He  flung  a  handful 
of  spring  water  against  Niagara.  And  His  ethic  is  just  as 
impossible.  When  He  tells  us  that  we  are  perfectly  identi- 
fied with  Himself,  and  that  therefore  we  are  to  ''Walk 
worthy  of  the  Lord,  unto  all  pleasing,"  He  commands  what 
men  cannot  do.  The  yoke  of  the  laW,  which  neither  the 
Apostles  nor  their  fathers  were  able  to  bear,  was  child's 
play  compared  to  it. 

When  His  Word  requires  that  our  hearts  shall  hold  an  un- 
ceasing song  of  gratitude,  and  be  filled  with  humility  (Eph. 
v:  19-21),  He  requires  the  impossible. 

But  with  Him,  all  this  becomes  so  possible  as  to  seem  ax- 
iomatic. Five  barley  loaves  and  two  small  fishes  plus  the 
creative  power  of  Almighty  God,  are  enough,  not  for  five 
thousand  daily,  but  the  whole  world.  Twelve  unlearned 
men  plus  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  enough  to  deliver  souls  out  of 
the  power  of  the  very  Sanhedrin  itself,  and,  in  three  cen- 
turies, to  drive  heathenism  from  the  throne  of  the  world.  A 
saved  sinner,  weak  as  water  in  himself,  and  the  sport  of  the 
demons,  may,  in  the  power  of  the  same  Spirit,  beat  back 
Satan,  and  (an  even  greater  victory)  dethrone  self  and  en- 
throne Christ  over  the  kingdom  within. 

And  note:  Doubtless  Christ  could  have  set  aside  the 
human  instrumentality  entirely.  His  own  hands  were  suf- 
ficient for  the  task  that  day,  and  all  the  days,  and  all  the 
tasks  ever  since.  Not  only  so.  He  could  have  used  the 
angels.  It  was  not  imperative  that  He  should  have  us,  but 
it  was  His  plan.  He  made  it  part  of  the  eternal  counsels 
that  as  the  salvation  of  mankind  was  entrusted  to  a  Man,  so 


192  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

the  tidings  of  that  salvation  should  be  carried  to  man  by 
man.  But  from  the  first  messengers  to  the  last,  it  is  part  of 
the  plan  that  the  power  shall  be  of  God.  The  sense  of  this 
is  almost  the  lost  sense  of  the  churches  of  Christ.  Organ- 
ization, money,  high  training — these,  which  are  but  the 
loaves  and  fishes  of  the  great  enterprise,  have  been  made 
the  ground  of  confidence.  Like  the  prophet's  servant  on 
Dothan,  we  need  to  have  our  eyes  opened  to  see  that  the 
mountain  round  about  us  is  full  of  the  horses  and  chariots 
of  the  fire  of  the  Lord. 


AT  THE  FEAST  OF  TABERNACLES. 

(John  vii:  37-46.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

(i)   The  cry  of  Christ.     (See  "Heart".) 

(2)  A  theological  controversy  (verses  40-42). 

(3)  The  usual  result  of  theological  controversy  (verses 

43-44). 

(4)  A  great  truth  (verse  46). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  cry  of  the  Lord  is,  of  course,  the  open  heart  of  this 
lesson.  "If  any  man  thirst."  All  of  the  invitations  of 
Scripture  are  addressed  to  states  of  soul.  "Come  unto  me 
all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden."  "Ho,  every  one 
that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."  There  is  a  cry  in 
this  lesson  which  should  find  many  a  heart  in  this  day. 

Note  the  time  of  the  cry:  "In  the  last  day,  that  great 
day  of  the  feast."  Do  you  see?  Jesus  waited  till  all  the 
ceremonial  was  over ;  till  all  the  sacrifices  had  been  ofi^ered ; 
till  all  the  elaborate  ritual  had  been  performed;   till  all  the 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  193 

processionals,  and  recessionals,  and  antiphonies  had  been 
sung  and  chanted — then  He  stood  forth  and  Hfted  up  His 
cry,  *4f  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink." 
He  said,  in  effect :  "If  among  you  there  is  one  whose  soul 
cannot  be  satisfied  with  ceremonials,  and  pretty  religiosities ; 
with  that  which  at  its  freshest  and  best  is  but  the  shell  and 
outer  garmenture  of  faith,  and  at  its  worst  is  faith's  shroud 
and  coffin;  if  there  are  any  among  you  who  want  realities 
and  not  shows  and  shadows,  "let  him  come  unto  me  and 
drink."  "Out  of  his  inmost  being  shall  flow  rivers  of  living 
water." 

Our  Lord  was  speaking  of  the  Spirit  "whom  they  that 
believe  on  Him  should  receive."  In  due  time  the  Spirit 
came,  and  now  every  believer  has  the  Spirit,  for  the  Spirit 
is  given  upon  the  alone  condition  of  faith,  but  who  would 
say  that  all  believers  give  evidence  of  the  outflowing  rivers 
of  spiritual  power  and  blessing?  The  difficulty  is  that, 
having  the  Spirit,  believers  are  not  filled  with  the  Spirit 
(Eph.  V.  18).  And  they  are  not  filled  with  the  Spirit  be- 
cause, satisfied  with  the  externalities  of  religion,  with  church 
membership,  church  going,  and  formal  and  mechanical  ser- 
vice, they  do  not  meet  the  Saviour's  condition — they  do  not 
"thirst." 

There  are  three  conditions  which  we  must  meet  if  we  are 
to  know  the  "rivers."  The  first  is  "thirst."  It  is  to  be 
divinely  discontented  with  any  life  but  the  highest  and  best. 
It  is  to  turn  away  from  forms  to  realities.  The  second 
condition  is,  "come."  Not  a  sinner's  coming  for  salvation, 
but  a  saint's  coming  for  power  and  blessing.  It  is  just 
going  back  to  Jesus  to  fall  at  His  blessed  feet  in  confession 
of  powerlessness,  uselessness.  And  the  third  condition  is, 
"drink."  Very  many  meet  the  first  and  second  conditions 
13 


194  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

who  draw  back  in  unbelief  at  the  third.     To  "drink"  is  to 
receive  by  faith. 

The  snare  of  ''feeHng"  is  doubtless  the  great  hindrance 
to  faith  in  this  vital  matter.  Athirst  for  the  deeper,  more 
vital  things  of  the  life  in  Christ,  we  come  to  Him  for  "help." 
There  is  no  definiteness  in  our  quest.  We  go  away  com- 
forted, but  we  do  not  definitely  receive  the  filling  with  the 
Spirit  by  that  same  simple  act  of  faith  through  which  we 
received  Christ.  Or,  better  instructed,  we  go  to  Him  defi- 
nitely for  the  filling,  and  then  wait  for  feeling.  Filling  and 
feeling  are  not  the  same  words,  do  not  mean  the  same  thing. 
We  have  heard  or  read  some  thrilling  experience  which 
was  accompanied  with  great  emotion,  and  we  seek  the  emo- 
tion instead  of  the  Spirit.  Not  feeling  it,  we  conclude  that 
we  have  somehow  missed  the  way.  Take  the  filling  by 
naked  faith,  thank  God  that  you  are  filled,  and  expect  the 
power  to  be  manifested,  as  you  touch  other  lives. 

THE  SLAVERY  OF  SIN. 

(John  viii :  31-40.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

(i)  The  test  of  discipleship  is  continuous.  All  who 
truly  are  disciples  do  continue. 

(2)  Truth  or  tradition;  truth  or  privilege,  which? 
(verses  32-40). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

That  sin  enslaves  is  a  truth  level  to  all  human  experience. 
The  most  obvious  instance  is  that  of  the  drink  habit. 
Neither  argument  nor  illustration  is  needed  to  convince  us 
that   drink  enslaves   its  victims.     But   the   men   to   whom 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  195 

Christ  was  talking  in  our  lesson  for  to-day  were  not  drink- 
ing men.  They  lived  lives  of  the  extremest  puritanic  strict- 
ness. Moreover,  they  were  religionists  whose  whole  lives 
were  absorbed  in  religious  observances.  And  not  only  so, 
their  religion  was  not  heathenism,  but  a  religion  revealed 
by  the  true  God,  and  every  form  of  it  was  observed  by  them 
with  scrupulous  exactness.  They  had  the  profoundest  rev- 
erence for  the  name  of  God,  and  were  assiduous  in  attend- 
ance on  synagogue  and  temple.  Why  should  Jesus  tell 
such  men  that  they  were  the  bond  slaves  of  sin  They  did 
not  steal,  nor  blaspheme,  nor  drink.  They  did  not  play 
worldly  games,  nor  attend  the  theatres  when  in  Rome. 

Their  sins  were  bigotry,  self-righteousness  and  unbelief. 
And  to  those  sins  they  were  in  a  slavery  so  absolute  that 
they  did  not  even  know  it.  Nay,  they  were  most  self-right- 
eous and  self-complacent  at  those  very  points.  There  is  no 
heart  so  hard  as  the  heart  of  a  religious  formalist.  No 
other  sort  of  man  is  so  hopelessly  cruel,  so  relentlessly  un- 
forgiving. No  other  man  is  so  merciless  toward  the  weak 
and  erring.  The  two  offences  of  Jesus  which  condemned 
Him  in  the  estimation  of  these  good  people  were  His  con- 
stant violation  of  their  conventional  ideas  of  strict  Sabbath 
observance,  and  His  close  touch  upon  the  lives  of  ''sinners." 

They  were  bound  hand  and  foot  in  mere  traditionalism 
and  formalism ;  and,  with  a  real  zeal  of  God,  they  hounded 
Jesus  to  the  cross.  The  lesson  is  that  the  slavery  of  sin  is 
not  confined  to  the  outbreaking  and  openly  shameful  sins ; 
that  spiritual  deadness  and  the  monstrous  sin  of  self-right- 
eousness also  enslave. 

That  is  one-half  of  the  heart  of  this  lesson.  The  other 
half  is  that  whether  the  bondage  be  that  of  drink  or  of 
Pharisaic  correctness,  the  one  delivering  power  is  the  truth. 
"Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you 


196  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

free."  And  all  real  knowledge  of  the  truth  begins  with 
knowing  Him  who  is  the  Truth.  Truth  is  not  an  imper- 
sonal ethic,  primarily.  Truth,  primarily,  is  just  Jesus 
Christ;  the  ethic  is  incidental.  Then,  in  a  secondary  but 
equally  important  sense,  the  whole  body  of  revelation  which 
gathers  about  and  interprets  Christ  and  His  work  is  "the 
Truth." 

Have  we  wondered  sometimes  at  the  tremendous  em- 
phasis which  Scripture  puts  upon  the  divine  sacredness  of 
that  body  of  revelation?  Has  it  seemed  to  us  harsh  when 
Paul  solemnly  denounces  the  anathema  of  God  on  the 
preacher  of  "any  other  gospel  than  that  which  you  have 
received"?  Does  it  seem  unduly  harsh  when  a  Spirit  filled 
apostle  delivered  to  Satan  that  he  might  learn  not  to  blas- 
pheme one  worse  error  was  the  seemingly  venial  one  of 
maintaining  that  the  resurrection  had  passed  already?  (i 
Tim.  i:2o;  2  Tim.  ii:  17-18).  It  was  because  the  only 
means  which  can  avail  for  the  saving  and  disenthrallment  of 
men  is  the  Truth. 

The  incarnate  Truth,  Christ,  saves  the  slaves  of  sin  by 
His  power,  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  as  He  saves  them  from 
the  guilt  of  sin  by  His  blood ;  and  the  revealed  Truth  saves 
men  from  mental  and  spiritual  bondage  by  the  new  light 
which  it  brings. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  197 

HEALING  OF  THE  MAN  BORN  BLIND. 

(John  ix:  i-ii.) 
I.    The  Analysis. 

(i)  The  natural  condition  of  all  men  (verse  i). 

(2)  The  right  and  the  wrong  explanation  (verses  4-6). 

(3)  The  Light  giving  light  (verses  5-7). 

(4)  A  faithful  witness  (verses  8-11). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

This  lesson  presents  our  Lord  in  perhaps  the  greatest  of 
His  characters,  that  of  the  light  of  the  world.  To  all  out- 
ward seeming  nothing  could  have  been  more  audacious. 
What  the  unbelieving  world  saw  as  it  looked  upon  Jesus 
was  a  young  Jewish  artisan,  from  a  remote  and  ill-reputed 
village  of  Galilee.  He  spoke  of  the  world,  but  He  had 
never  travelled.  Not  once  had  He  been  beyond  the  con- 
fines of  the  little  land  given  to  His  ancestor,  Abraham.  The 
civilizations  of  Greece  and  Rome  were  known  to  Him  only 
by  rumor.  The  great  literatures  of  the  world  and  its  science 
and  art  were  unknown  to  Him.  He  had  neither  wealth  nor 
great  position.  His  followers  were  a  few  ignorant  fisher- 
men, tax  gatherers  and  converted  harlots.  He  had  not 
written  a  book,  and  He  was  about  to  go  out  of  life  as  an 
executed  criminal.  All  this  was  what  the  world  saw,  and 
all  that  it  saw. 

Nineteen  hundred  years  have  passed  since  Jesus  an- 
nounced Himself  as  the  Light  of  the  World.  What  does 
that  world  see  now  ?  It  sees  the  absolute  verification  of  that 
claim.  Wherever  Jesus  is  known  there  is  light;  and  the 
measure  of  the  light  in  any  part  of  the  world  to-day  is  the 
precise  measure  of  the  degree  in  which  Jesus  is  known. 


198  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

To  any  civilized  man  life  is  intolerable  just  where  Jesus 
is  not  known.  He  has  proved  Himself  to  be  not  only  the 
sole  spiritual  light  which  this  world  has,  or  has  ever  had, 
but  He  is  the  light  of  intellect  and  of  the  affectional  life  as 
well.  Everywhere  the  ethic  of  Jesus  has  formed  the  human 
conscience.  Millions  are  living  in  conscious  violation  of 
that  ethic,  but  they  are  all  living  with  a  bad  conscience  be- 
cause of  it.  The  intellectual  light  which  Jesus  has  shed 
abroad  in  the  world  has  been  awfully  perverted,  and  for 
this  the  Gentile  nations  will  be  called  to  an  awful  account 
when  He  comes  back  again,  but  the  light  came  from  Him. 

He  has  given  the  only  light  on  the  mysteries  of  life  and 
of  death  which  has  been  found  adequate.  He  has  inter- 
preted both  life  and  death.  Life  here  is  immensely  im- 
portant because  it  is  the  vestibule  to  the  life  beyond ;  and 
death  is  a  conquered  enemy,  who  can  at  the  worst  but  open 
the  gates  of  glory  to  a  passing  saint.  He  has  given  light  on 
the  philosophy  of  life,  on  the  true  life-method.  Life  is  to  be 
invested,  not  hoarded,  and  the  investment  is  to  be  made 
in  other  lives,  not  in  stocks  and  bonds.  Religion  is  not  say- 
ing prayers,  but  visiting  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their 
affliction,  and  keeping  himself  unspotted  from  the  world. 
When  ecclesiasticism,  and  creed  and  custom,  and  form  give 
place  to  conversion,  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  invested 
life,  there  will  come  such  a  revival  as  this  world  never  saw. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  199 

THE  GOOD  SHEPHERD. 

(John  x:  7-18.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

(i)   The  Shepherd  as  the  door  of  the  sheep,  verses  7-9. 

(2)  The  Life-giver,  verse  10. 

(3)  The  Good  Shepherd  and  the  hireHng,  verses  11-14. 

(4)  The  Good  Shepherd  and  the  Father,  verses  15-18. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  shepherd  office  of  our  Lord  is  differentiated  in  three 
ways :  He  is  called  the  "good,"  the  "great,"  and  the  "chief" 
Shepherd.  As  the  good  Shepherd  he  gives  his  life  for  the 
sheep.  As  the  great  Shepherd  he  comes  again  from  the 
dead  to  care  for  the  sheep.  As  the  chief  Shepherd  he  is 
coming  again  to  gather  the  sheep  into  the  eternal  pas- 
tures (John  X :  1 1 ;  Heb.  xiii :  20 ;  i  Peter  v :  4 ;  John  xiv : 
1-4;  I  Thess.  iv:  15-18).  In  the  present  lesson  we  have 
before  us  the  first  of  these  shepherd  characters.  He  does 
not  here  speak  either  of  raising  from  the  dead  to  care  for 
the  sheep,  nor  of  coming  again  to  gather  the  sheep. 

As  the  good  Shepherd  he  is,  first,  the  door  of  the  sheep. 
Four  things  are  true  of  those  who  enter  in  by  the  door 
of  Christ  Jesus,  (i)  Salvation.  "He  shall  be  saved."  The 
sheepfold  of  the  good  Shepherd  is  a  place  of  perfect  secu- 
rity. The  Shepherd  becomes  responsible  for  the  safety  of 
every  sheep  who  simply  "enters  in"  (John  x:28).  (2) 
"He  .  .  .  shall  go  in."  This  speaks  of  communion,  the 
privilege  of  access  in  prayer  and  fellowship. 

It  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  our  peace  to  get  this  set- 
tled once  for  all,  that  our  right  of  access  to  the  Father  does 
not  depend  on  our  sanctification,  but  only  on  our  justifica- 


200  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

tion.  We  "enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by 
that  new  and  living  way  which  he  hath  consecrated  for  us 
through  the  vail"  (Heb.  x:  19-20).  We  are  made  nigh  by 
the  blood  (Eph.  ii:  13),  not  by  goodness.  (3)  "And  out," 
that  is  for  testimony  and  service.  The  second  and  third 
blessings  of  those  who  enter  by  the  door  Christ  Jesus  are 
closely  related;  for,  if  we  "go  out"  more  than  we  "go  in," 
our  testimony  will  be  feeble  and  formal.  And  (4)  "He 
.  .  .  shall  find  pasture."  The  door  is  a  door  of  abund- 
ance, not  of  want.  They  who  begin  by  entering  in,  and  go 
on  in  communion  and  service,  will  assuredly  eat  of  the  fat 
of  the  land,  of  the  very  finest  of  the  wheat. 

Then,  the  second  characteristic  of  the  good  Shepherd 
is  that  he  "gives  his  life  for  the  sheep."  The  contrast  sug- 
gested here  is  with  the  law.  Under  law  the  sheep  must  die 
for  the  shepherd  (Gen.  iv:4;  Exodus  xxix:  15-16;  Levit. 
V :  5-6).  Under  grace  the  Shepherd  dies  for  the  sheep  (John 
i:29). 

The  third  characteristic  of  the  good  Shepherd  is  that  he 
knows  his  sheep,  and  his  sheep  know  him.  "He  calleth  his 
own  sheep  by  name."  One  of  the  sweet  discoveries  of  the 
heavenly  fold  will  be  the  new  names  that  our  Shepherd 
has  given  each  of  us  as  we  entered  by  the  door  into  the 
sheepfold  (Rev.  ii:  17).  Som.e  of  the  early  saints  seem  to 
have  been  given  their  new  name  at  once.  "Thou  art  Simon, 
thou  shalt  be  called  Cephas,  which  is  by  interpretation,  a 
rock."  Afterward  the  Shepherd  called  him  "Petros,"  call- 
ing himself  at  the  same  time  "this  Petra."  Petra  means 
a  rock ;  Petros,  a  piece  of  a  rock,  a  little  stone.  It  was  an 
affectionate  play  upon  the  two  names,  and  how  tender  and 
intimate  it  all  is  ! 

Probably  the  word  tenderness  most  fully  expresses  the 
varied  nature  of  the  shepherd  offices  of  our  Lord.     There 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  201 

is  nothing  in  all  the  Bible  that  more  speaks  to  our  hearts 
than  the  Twenty-third  Psalm,  or  this  Tenth  of  John.  But 
we  must  remember  that  the  tenderness  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
never  sentimental.  It  is  always  the  tenderness  of  perfect 
strength,  and  perfect  righteousness.  The  Shepherd  has  a 
rod  as  well  as  a  staff. 

A  story  is  told  of  one  who  talked  with  a  shepherd  in  the 
higher  Alps.  While  talking  the  shepherd  gathered  a  hand- 
ful of  the  best  grass  and  went  to  a  low  shelter  near  by. 
"I  have  a  sheep  there  with  a  broken  leg,"  he  said.  "How 
did  that  happen?"  queried  the  traveller.  "It  did  not  hap- 
pen," answered  the  shepherd;  "I  broke  it  intentionally. 
That  sheep  was  headstrong,  and  unruly.  It  did  not  love 
me,  and  was  always  leading  the  other  sheep  astray.  Now  it 
knows  its  dependence  on  me,  and  loves  to  eat  from  my  hand. 
When  it  is  well  again  it  will  keep  nearer  to  me  than  any  of 
the  sheep." 

THE  RAISING  OF  LAZARUS. 

(John  xi:  32-45.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

(i)  The  meeting  of  Jesus  with  Martha,  verses  20-27. 

(2)  The  meeting  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  verses  28-34. 

(3)  The  resurrection  of  Lazarus,  verses  35-45. 

(4)  The  blessed  result,  verse  45. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  deeper  meanings  of  this  lesson  are  indicated  by  our 
Lord  himself. 

First.  "To  the  intent  ye  may  believe"  (verse  15).  The 
miracle   of   Lazarus'   resurrection,  then,   was,  first   of   all 


202  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

a  testimony  to  believers  to  his  own.  A  testimony  intended 
to  produce  faith,  not  in  the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection  "at 
the  last  day" ;  that,  in  common  with  all  spiritual  Jews,  they 
already  believed.  With  Job  they  believed  that,  *'After  I 
shall  awake,  though  this  body  be  destroyed,  yet  out  of  my 
flesh  shall  I  see  God"  (Job  xix:25).  Martha  expressed 
that  common  faith  when  she  said,  *'I  know  that  he  shall 
rise  again  at  the  last  day."  It  was  the  old  promise  to  Dan- 
iel, '*Thou  shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the 
days." 

But  the  addition  to  the  faith  of  his  disciples  which  the 
resurrection  of  Lazarus  was  to  effect  was  faith  in  Jesus 
as  having  in  himself  resurrection  power.  Martha,  indeed, 
went  beyond  mere  belief  in  a  resurrection :  "I  know  that 
even  now,  whatsoever  thou  wilt  ask  of  God,  God  will  give 
it  thee."  She  believed  in  a  resurrection,  and  in  Christ  as 
an  Intercessor  of  such  prevalency  that  through  his  prayers 
God  would  even  raise  the  dead.  But  Jesus  is,  himself,  the 
resurrection.  The  ancient  Syrian  church  called  him  "the 
Vivifier" ;  the  ancient  Abyssinian  church,  "the  Resurrec- 
tioner." 

The  resurrection  of  Lazarus,  then,  is  not  only  a  new 
demonstration  of  the  Deity  of  Christ,  but  also  the  presenta- 
tion of  Christ  to  our  faith  in  a  new  character,  "the  resur- 
rection and  the  life."  Obviously,  since  death  is  the  result 
of  sin  (Rom.  v:  12),  a  perfect  Redeemer  must  be  able  to 
annul  death. 

Second.  "That  the  Son  of  God  might  be  glorified  there- 
by" (verse  4).  This  is  not  something  different  from  the 
first  meaning,  but  the  same  meaning  applied  to  Christ  in- 
stead of  to  the  faith  of  the  disciples.  For  Christ  is  glorified 
when  something  of  his  divinity  is  revealed.  On  the  mount 
of  transfiguration,  for  example,  he  "appeared  in  glory" — 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  203 

that  is,  His  essential  Deity  shone  forth  through  the  veil  of 
flesh  which  usually  hid  it.  In  the  first  miracle  at  Cana  he 
"manifested  forth  His  glory"  in  the  act  of  creative  power — 
a  power  belonging  to  Deity  alone.  So  here  again  the  resur- 
rection of  Lazarus  was  a  work  of  divine  power,  and  so  a 
manifestation  of  His  glory. 

Then,  third,  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus  was  to  the  end 
that  the  bystanders  (not  his  disciples)  might  believe  (verse 
42).  And  this  actually  occurred,  as  we  learn  from  verse 
45 :  "Then  many  of  the  Jews  which  came  to  Mary,  and 
had  seen  the  things  which  he  did,  believed  on  him." 

If,  now,  we  sum  up  the  matter,  we  shall  find  the  heart 
of  the  lesson  in  the  disclosure  which  it  makes  of  the  divine 
motive  in  miracle.  Every  miracle,  especially  the  perpetual 
miracle  of  the  new  birth,  which  is  life  to  a  dead  soul,  as  the 
resurrection  of  Lazarus  was  life  to  a  dead  body,  is  for  the 
strengthening  of  our  faith  in  him  as  the  Lord  of  life ;  not 
in  a  general  sense,  but  in  a  particular  sense  as  the  one  who 
is  able  to  give  the  new  life  to  the  one  whom  we  love,  and 
for  whom  we  pray ;  is  a  showing  forth  of  his  divine  glory, 
and  a  testimony  upon  which  faith  in  those  who  see  the  great 
work  may  rest. 

For,  after  all,  there  is  no  more  convincing  testimony  to 
the  divine  power  of  Christ  than  that  of  a  life  redeemed  to 
purity,  piety  and  usefulness.  "Beholding  the  man  that  was 
healed  standing  with  them,  they  could  say  nothing  against 
it"  (Acts  iv:  14). 


204  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

THE  SUPPER  AT  BETHANY. 

(John  xii:  i-ii.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

(i)  The  Supper,  verses  1-2. 

(2)  The  act  of  Mary,  verses  3-4. 

(3)  The  insincere  objection,  verses  5-6. 

(4)  Jesus'  vindication  of  Mary,  verses  7-8. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  central  figure  in  this  scene  is,  incontestably,  Mary  of 
Bethany.  Our  Lord  himself  makes  her  so.  To  her  He  gives 
the  highest  praise  ever  bestowed  by  God  on  a  mere  human 
being,  "She  hath  done  what  she  could."  Mary  of  Bethany 
is  the  highest  type  of  discipleship  in  the  New  Testament, 
and  in  this  lesson  she  is  seen  at  her  highest  reach,  so  that 
the  character  of  this  simple  village  girl  becomes  the  heart  of 
the  lesson. 

She  comes  into  the  narratives  of  the  earth  life  of  Christ 
three  times,  and  these  have  a  sequence  which  must  be  fol- 
lowed if  we  are  to  understand,  not  Mary  alone,  but  the 
conditions  of  the  highest  discipleship.  In  the  first  two 
scenes  she  is  brought  into  contrast  with  her  sister  Martha; 
in  the  last  her  spiritual  intelligence  and  her  utter  devoted- 
ness  appear  against  the  foil  of  the  stupidity  of  all  the  other 
disciples,  and  especially  of  the  traitor,  Judas. 

We  meet  Mary  first  sitting  at  Jesus'  feet  and  hearing  His 
word.  It  was  the  place  of  a  learner,  of  one  who  would, 
first  of  all  comprehend  her  Master.  Martha,  on  the  other 
hand,  begins,  not  by  knowing  Him,  but  by  a  noisy  burdened 
service  for  Him.  She  has  had  her  followers  in  every  age. 
Every  church  knows  them:    the  bustling,  fussy,  troubled 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  205 

getters  up  of  fairs,  and  suppers  for  the  indirect  raising  of 
the  money  which  the  Bible  tells  us  to  quietly  give.  She, 
like  her  modern  sisters,  has  little  patience  with  them  who 
quietly  sit  at  Jesus'  feet  and  she  must  meet  her  Lord's 
gentle  rebuke,  his  vindication  of  Mary:  "She  hath  chosen 
that  good  part,  which  shall  not  be  taken  away  from  her." 

We  next  meet  Mary  on  the  occasion  of  the  resurrection 
of  Lazarus.  Again  she  is  in  contrast  with  Martha.  Mary 
abides  quietly  in  the  house  till  the  Master  calls  for  her; 
Martha  meets  and  rebukes  him,  even  while  confessing  a 
faith  shortly  to  contradict  itself  at  the  grave-side.  It  is 
easy  to  repeat  a  formula,  to  say,  "Yea,  Lord,"  when  asked, 
"Believest  thou  this?"  concerning  a  great  truth;  quite 
another  matter  to  use  that  faith  in  the  moment  of  testing. 
"He  hath  been  dead  four  days"  was  the  actual  measure  of 
Martha's  faith.  In  all  this  scene  little  is  said  of  Mary  till 
we  come  to  that  statement  which  we  may  so  easily  pass 
over:  "Then  many  of  the  Jews  which  came  to  Mary,  and 
had  seen  the  things  which  Jesus  did,  believed  on  him." 

Mary's  friends,  not  Martha's  were  converted.  They  saw 
something  in  Mary's  bearing  under  trial  which  convinced 
them  that  she  had  a  resource  in  sorrow  all  unknown  to 
them.  Oh,  the  power  of  the  quiet  faith  that  has  ripened 
in  meditation  at  Jesus'  feet  and  in  the  hearing  of  his  word ! 
In  the  first  scene  we  might  well  think  of  Mary  as  gentle 
and  winsome,  but  unpractical.  Now  we  see  that  her  Master 
made  no  mistake  when  he  said,  "Mary  hath  chosen  that 
good  part."  And,  in  the  light  of  that  saying  how  idle  to 
speak  of  the  different  temperaments  of  these  two  sisters. 
Jesus  said  the  difference  was  one  of  choice,  not  tempera- 
ment. 

And  now,  in  our  present  lesson,  we  have  Mary  in  the 
highest  privilege  of  discipleship,  "the  fellowship  of  His  suf- 


2o6  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

ferings."  Only  Mary,  of  all  His  disciples,  had  really  under- 
stood the  Master  when  He  said  that  He  must  be  crucified 
and  rise  again  the  third  day.  They  were  dismayed  by  the 
crucifixion,  and  incredulous  of  the  resurrection.  But  Mary 
came  to  anoint  his  body  beforehand  tq  the  burying.  Well 
she  knew  that  if  she  were  ever  to  perform  that  office  of 
love  toward  her  Lord  it  must  be  before  the  burying.  She 
of  Bethany  is  not  among  the  women  who  went,  in  all  ten- 
derness of  love,  indeed,  but  ignorantly,  to  anoint  Christ 
who  had  already  risen  from  the  dead. 

And  who  shall  say  what  solace,  what  comfort  it  gave 
His  loving  heart  to  perceive  that  one  at  least  of  those  for 
whom  He  was  about  to  die  was  entering  with  Him  by 
anticipation  into  Gethsemane  and  Calvary? 

THE  ENTRY  INTO  JERUSALEM. 

(John  xii:  12-26.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

(i)  The  triumphal  entry,  verses  12-16. 

(2)  The  confused  opinions  of  the  people,  verses  17-19. 

(3)  The  desire  of  the  Greeks,  verses  20-22. 

(4)  The  answer  of  Christ,  verses  23-26. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

There  is  a  beautiful  order  in  the  incidents  which  form 
our  lessons,  for  the  present  and  following  weeks,  to  which 
a  brother  called  the  attention  of  the  church  many 
years  ago.  ,  Beginning  with  the  twelfth  chapter,  the  events 
fall  into  the  order  of  the  tabernacle,  or  temple  service. 
That  order,  it  will  be  remembered,  was,  first,  the  brazen 
altar  whereon  the  burnt   oflfering   was  oflfered;    then  the 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  207 

la^er  of  cleansing;  then  the  holy  place,  the  scene  of  fel- 
lowship and  worship ;  and,  last  of  all  the  most  holy  place, 
into  which  the  high  priest  entered. 

Following  that  order  we  have  in  the  twelfth  chapter 
the  death  of  the  Lord  in  three  aspects,  as  the  corn  of 
wheat,  the  judgment  of  the  world,  and  irresistible  attrac- 
tion. In  the  thirteenth  chapter,  the  laver  of  cleansing;  in 
the  fourteenth  and  sixteenth  chapters  the  High  Priest  and 
his  associate  priests  in  the  Holy  Place,  in  intimate  com- 
munion, and  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  the  High  Priest 
passes  as  it  were  behind  the  veil  into  the  Holy  of  Holies, 
and  the  listening  priests  hear  his  voice  in  intercession  ac- 
cording to  Hebrews  vii :  25. 

Every  Christian,  certainly  every  Sunday  school  teacher, 
ought  to  study  with  care  the  typology  of  the  Tabernacle. 
It  gives  the  mould,  or  form,  of  the  divine  plan  of  redemp- 
tion, and  in  many  ways  recurs  through  the  whole  Scrip- 
ture. 

Turning  now  to  the  lesson,  we  are,  I  think,  to  find  its 
deeper  truth  in  the  answer  of  Christ  to  Philip  and  Andrew 
when  certain  Greeks  wished  to  see  him:  "The  hour  is 
come  that  the  Son  of  man  should  be  glorified.  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the 
ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone:  but  if  it  die  it  bringeth 
forth  much  fruit." 

What  did  our  Lord  mean?  How  do  his  words  consti- 
tute a  reason  for  not  seeing  the  Greeks?  These  Greeks 
were  Gentile  proselytes  to  Judaism.  Why  should  he  not  see 
them? 

Briefly,  because  a  King  offering  himself  to  his  own 
proper  subjects,  the  Jews,  was  no  object  of  faith  to  a  Gen- 
tile. Rejected  by  Israel,  He  was  about  to  be  crucified  for 
the  sins  of  the  world,  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  then,  as  the 


2o8  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Crucified,  He  would  become  the  right  Object  of  faith  to 
both  Jew  and  Gentile.  An  uncrucified  Messiah  could  save 
no  Gentile,  no  Jew.  This  is  His  own  word:  "Except  a 
corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone." 

And  this  word  of  Christ's  is  the  sufficient  answer  to  all 
the  theories  of  the  atonement  which  ignore  the  liberation 
of  the  life  of  Christ  that  it  might  be  imparted  to  all  who 
believe.  *'In  Him  was  life,"  and  on  the  cross  that  life  was 
set  free  to  enter  those  who,  through  faith  in  Him  are  born 
again,  just  as  a  corn  of  wheat,  planted,  dies  into  countless 
corns  of  wheat.  Only  through  death  could  Christ  become 
the  life-giver. 

We  have  not  before  us  in  John  xii  the  sin-offering  aspect 
of  our  Lord's  death,  but  rather  the  whole  burnt  offering 
aspect,  that  sense  in  which  His  death  was  all  for  the  Father. 

The  heart  of  this  lesson,  then,  is  that  Christ  would  not 
show  himself  to  the  Greeks  because  salvation  is  not  by  the 
influence  of  His  spotless  life,  as  some  say,  but  by  faith 
in  Him  as  crucified  for  us  that  we  might  not  perish,  but 
have  eternal  life.  He  had  offered  himself  as  a  king  to 
Israel,  but  during  the  time  of  his  earth-ministry  His  dis- 
ciples were  carefully  instructed  not  to  go  in  any  way  of  the 
Gentiles,  but  only  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel. 
After  the  crucifixion,  however,  the  word  was  to  go  to  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,  but  the  message  was  no  longer 
to  be,  ''The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,"  but  ^'Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 

An  uncrucified  Christ  was  not,  could  not  be,  an  object  of 
faith  to  the  Gentiles. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  209 

WASHING  THE  DISCIPLES'  FEET. 

(John  xiii:  1-14.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

(i)  The  unfaiHng  love  of  Jesus,  verse  I. 

(2)  The  symbolical  service  of  Jesus,  verses  2-5. 

(3)  The  objection  of  Simon,  verse  6. 

(4)  The  explanation  of  the  feet-washing,  verses  7-14. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Cleansing,  in  order  to  service  and  communion,  is  evi- 
dently the  central  truth  of  this  lesson.  Our  Lord  makes 
this  clear  in  his  answer  to  Peter's  protestation,  "Thou  shalt 
never  wash  my  feet."  Our  Lord  answered  him,  "If  I  wash 
thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me/'  The  reference  is 
not  to  salvation,  as  the  Lord  makes  clear  in  verse  10;  "He 
that  is  bathed  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his  feet." 

As  this  distinction  is  a  vital  one,  we  linger  a  moment 
upon  it.  It  is  in  a  word,  the  distinction  between  justifica- 
tion and  sanctification.  Justification  is  cleansing  from  the 
guilt  of  sin;  sanctification  is  a  progressive  cleansing  from 
the  habit  of  sin.  Both  these  aspects  meet  in  such  passages 
as  Psa.  li :  7,  and  Eph.  v :  25-27.  David  says  :  "Purge  me 
with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean :  wash  me,  and  I  shall 
be  whiter  than  snow."  Hyssop  was  the  little  shrub  with 
which  sacrificial  blood  was  applied,  and  speaks,  therefore, 
of  the  guilt  of  sin.  Purged  with  blood  David  was  "clean" 
before  God ;  but,  as  with  us  after  conversion,  he  discovered 
sins  of  habit  from  which  he  needed  to  be  "washed"  if  he 
were  to  be  indeed  "whiter  than  snow."  So,  in  the  Ephe- 
sian  passage,  Christ  "loved  the  church,  and  gave  Himself 
for  itj'l  which  was  redemption  by  blood,  justification;  "that 
14 


210  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water 
by  the  word,"  which  is  progressive  sanctification,  and  an- 
swers to  the  feet  washing  of  John  xiii. 

The  thought  is  of  the  "walk"  of  the  believer,  not  of  the 
salvation  of  a  sinner;  and  the  imagery  is  drawn,  not  only 
from  the  place  of  the  laver  in  the  temple  order,  which  was 
between  the  place  of  sacrifice  and  the  place  of  worship, 
service  and  communion,  but  also  from  the  daily  life  of  the 
Orient.  In  the  public  bath  the  body  is  washed  clean,  but 
the  feet,  in  passing  from  the  bath  to  the  home,  contract  de- 
filement by  the  way.  This  must  be  removed  as  a  prelude  to 
the  happy  fellowship  of  the  home. 

Christ,  who  was  about  to  bring  the  disciples  into  the  in- 
timacy of  the  first  Lord's  supper,  must  have  them  clean  first. 

The  lessons  are  obvious.  As  the  priest  could  not  pass 
from  the  altar  on  which  offerings  were  burnt  to  the  holy 
place  where  he  offered  incense,  type  of  prayer  and  worship, 
without  stopping  at  the  laver  for  cleansing,  so  Christ  would 
teach  us  that,  saved  though  we  surely  are  if  we  have  believed 
on  Him  crucified,  yet  we  cannot  have  His  intimacy,  cannot 
serve  Him,  cannot  acceptably  pray  to  Him,  or  worship  the 
Father  unless  we,  too,  have  been  to  the  laver. 

In  I  John  1 : 9  we  find  the  New  Testament  laver :  "If  we 
confess  our  sins.  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our 
sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness." 

Note  the  words  "faithful  and  just."  Why  not  kind  and 
merciful?  Because  the  forgiveness  of  the  daily  sins  of  the 
believer  does  not  proceed  from  the  general  benevolence  of 
God,  but  from  His  recognition  of  the  work  of  Christ  on  the 
cross.  He  is  just  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  faithful  to  His 
covenant. 

But  let  us  not  leave  this  all  important  subject  without 
noticing  our  Lord's  words,  "Except  /  wash  thee,  thou  hast 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  211 

no  part  with  Me."  Confession  does  not  cleanse  us  from  the 
defilements  of  our  walk.  The  great  passage  only  says  that 
if  we  confess  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  and  to 
cleanse.  Let  us  not  be  proud  of  our  confessions  of  sin,  for 
confession  is,  after  all,  but  putting  the  defiled  feet  into  the 
pierced  hands  of  Jesus  for  cleansing. 

THE  VINE  AND  THE  BRANCHES. 

(John  XV :  1-12.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  Christ  the  "true"  Vine.  The  word  "true,"  in  John's 
writings,  means  "real."  The  contrast  is  not  between  truth 
and  falsehood,  but  between  type  and  fulfilment.  Israel  was 
a  vine  (Isa.  v)  but  a  wild-grape  vine.  Christ  is  the  real 
vine.    Verse  i. 

2.  The  fruitless  branch.  Verse  2.  This  is  a  believer,  a 
true  branch  in  the  Vine,  but  one  which  in  the  soil  of  earth, 
does  not  bear  fruit;  so  the  Husbandman  transplants  it. 
"Taketh  away"  is,  literally,  "taketh  up  out  of." 

3.  The  cleansing  Word.  Verse  3.  The  application  of 
the  Word,  by  the  Spirit,  to  the  believer's  ways.    Eph.  v :  26. 

4.  The  condition  of  f ruitfulness.  Verses  4,  5,  7.  "Abide." 
The  sphere  of  the  believer's  life  is,  "in  the  heavenly,  in 
Christ."  Eph.  i :  3 ;  ii :  6.  To  abide  is  just  to  live.  "The 
heavenly"  is  not  a  place — the  word  should  be  stricken  out  of 
Ephesians :  it  is  a  state  of  being.  Heaven,  on  the  contrary, 
is  a  place.  We  are  in  the  heavenly  now ;  we  shall  presently 
be  taken  to  heaven,  and  then  we  shall  still  be  in  the  heavenly. 
So  long  as  we  are  living  a  heavenly  life  down  here  we  are 
"abiding"  in  Christ. 

5.  The  mere  professor.    Verse  6.    Here  our  Lord  does 


212  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

not  say :  "Every  branch  in  me" ;  but,  "If  a  man  abide  not." 
Even  "men"  despise  a  fruitless,  non-abiding  professor. 

6.  The  three  degrees  of  fruit-bearing.  Verses  JX  5,  8. 
"Fruit,"  "more  fruit,"  "much  fruit."  Not  until  much  fruit 
is  reached  do  we  glorify  God. 

7.  The  "Father's  commandments"  and  the  Son's  "com- 
mandment." Verses  9-12.  This  is  a  distinction  of  vital  im- 
portance. Christ  came  to  fulfil  the  law,  and  kept  His 
Father's  commandments.  To  us  He  gives  the  new  com- 
mandment of  love,  and  He  writes  that  on  our  hearts.  Heb. 
viii :  10.     We  do  love  one  another. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  emphatic  word  in  this  lesson  is  "fruit,"  and  the  lesson 
itself  is  an  unfolding  of  the  conditions  which  must  exist  if 
fruit  is  to  be  borne.  A  preliminary  word  as  to  the  meaning 
of  the  word.  In  Galatians  (v:  22,  23)  fruit  is  defined  to  be 
"love,  joy,  peace,  longsufifering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, 
meekness,  temperance" ;  in  other  places  fruit  is  good  works ; 
in  still  others,  converts.  I  think  the  word  in  our  lesson  is 
generic,  and  includes  the  graces  which  make  the  Christian 
character,  good  works,  and  the  winning  of  souls.  In  other 
words,  our  Lord  here  lays  down  the  conditions  which  result 
in  fruitful  Christian  lives.  It  is  well  to  note,  before  leaving 
the  word,  that  three  degrees  of  fruit-bearing  are  mentioned; 
"fruit,"  "more  fruit,"  "much  fruit,"  and  not  until  we  bear 
much  fruit  is  our  Father  glorified.  The  reason  is  that  up  to 
a  certain  point  the  graces  of  the  Christian  character  may  be, 
and  are,  imitated  by  persons  who  are  naturally  gentle  and 
amiable,  kindly  and  cultured.  The  ideals  of  Christ  are 
universally  known  and  approved,  and,  in  so-called  Christian 
lands,  the  behavior  of  respectable  people  is  based  upon  them. 
But  the  winsomeness  of  the  gentle  and  amiable  worldling 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  213 

never  goes  so  far  as  the  winning  of  souls,  and  the  Christian's 
"love,  joy,  and  peace"  cannot  be  counterfeited. 

What,  then,  are  the  conditions  of  fruit-bearing?  They  are 
two,  and  two  only.  That  is  part  of  "the  simplicity  which  is 
in  Christ." 

And  first,  there  must  be  such  a  vital  union  to  Christ  as  is 
implied  in  the  figure  chosen  by  Him  to  express  that  union — 
a  vine  and  its  branches.  I  have  called  it  a  "vital,"  that  is 
living  union.  Let  us  try  really  to  grasp  that  fact — the  fact 
that  the  believer  is  as  really  a  part  of  Christ  as  the  branch 
of  a  vine  is  a  part  of  the  vine.  Do  not  think  of  our  Lord's 
words  as  a  mere  figure  of  speech.  He  uses,  indeed,  a  figure 
drawn  from  nature,  but  He  uses  it  because  it  exactly  ex- 
presses His  meaning ;  the  believer  is  an  actual  part  of  Christ. 

This  is  the  truth  taught  even  more  vitally  in  the  revelation 
concerning  the  Body  of  Christ.  "For,  by  one  Spirit  have  we 
all  been  baptised  into  one  body,  and  have  all  been  made  to 
drink  into  one  Spirit"  (i  Cor.  xii:  12).  "He  that  is  joined 
to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit."  "I  am  crucified  with  Christ, 
nevertheless  I  live;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me." 

For  every  believer,  then,  the  primary  condition  exists. 
We  are  the  branches  of  Him  who  is  the  Vine.  We  have 
not  to  make  it  so ;  it  is  so. 

The  second  condition,  therefore,  is  the  one  upon  which 
our  Lord  puts  the  emphasis.  He  does  not  say:  Become 
members  of  my  body — branches  in  me — but,  "I  am  the  vine, 
ye  are  the  branches."  It  is  upon  the  maintaining  by  us  of  a 
continuous  experience  according  to  that  fact  that  Christ 
insists.  That  is  the  force  of  the  word  abide.  To  "Abide" 
means  to  live.  The  fruit -bearing  branch;  the  branch  that 
does  not  bear  fruit,  and  the  "man"  who  takes  the  place  by 
profession  of  a  branch,  but  who  not  abiding  proves  that  he 
is  not  a  branch,  must  be  discriminated.    The  first  is  "purged" 


214  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

(cleansed,  pruned)  that  he  may  bear  more  fruit;  the  second, 
a  true  branch  but  fruitless  is  taken  away."  The  Greek  here 
is  very  sweet.  It  is,  literally,  "taken  up  out  of";  and  is  the 
Husbandman's  gentle  way  with  a  true  vine  so  circumstanced 
as  not  to  bear  fruit.  The  third  is,  "Cast  out  as  a  branch"; 
disowned. 

What  is  it,  then,  to  abide  in  Christ?  It  is  best  expressed 
in  Paul's  great  testimony  already  quoted :  "I  am  crucified 
with  Christ,  nevertheless  I  live,  yet  not  I  but  Christ  liveth 
in  me,  and  the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for 
me." 

Practically,  it  is  the  continual  attitude  in  all  the  scenes 
and  experiences  of  life  of,  "yet  not  I,  but  Christ."  It  is  to 
oppose  to  every  temptation,  "not  I  but  Christ" ;  to  summon 
to  every  opportunity  "not  I  but  Christ" ;  to  win  men  by  the 
manifestation  of  "not  I  but  Christ";  to  depend  in  every 
emergency  on  "not  I  but  Christ." 

HIS  PRAYER. 

(John  xvii:  15-26.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

See  Our  Hope:  for  May,  1904,  page  654,  where  the  Edi- 
tor has  given  a  most  spiritual  analysis  of  the  great  inter- 
cessory prayer  of  Christ. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

There  is  a  close  moral  connection  between  this  lesson  and 
the  parable  of  the  vine  and  the  branches.  In  both  the 
underlying  truth  is  the  oneness  of  the  believer  and  Christ. 
In  that  parable  the  truth  of  the  oneness  was  considered 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  ^15 

in  its  relation  to  the  believer's  f ruitf ulness ;  in  this  lesson 
the  emphasis  is  more  on  his  perfect  security,  and  his  joy. 
It  is  important,  therefore,  that  we  see  how  the  unity  of 
Christ  and  the  believer  is  the  very  groundwork  of  all  that 
He  asks  in  our  behalf  in  this  great  prayer.  "Thine  they 
were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me."  Because  of  that  He  has 
given  them  everything  He  has,  and  asks  for  them  every- 
thing God  has.  The  Father  gave  Him  to  have  life  in  him- 
self and  to  give  away,  so  He  gave  life  to  the  disciples.  God 
was  His  Father,  so  He  made  the  disciples  children,  too. 
The  Father  gave  Him  certain  words,  so  He  gave  those 
words  to  the  disciples.  Now  He  asks  that  the  disciples  may 
be  with  Him  where  He  is,  and  that  they  may  share  all  there 
is  in  heaven  for  Him.  And  all  this  based  on  the  great  fact 
of  identity.  "All  mine  are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine."  "I 
in  them,  and  thou  in  me." 

This  is  the  immense  truth  which  marks  off  the  saved  of 
this  dispensation  from  the  saved  of  past  ages,  and  of  the 
ages  to  come.  The  Old  Testament  saint  was  a  "friend  of 
God,"  like  Abraham,  or  a  "friend  of  the  Bridegroom,"  like 
John  the  Baptist.  The  Tribulation  saints  will  be  "before 
the  throne  of  God,  and  serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  tem- 
ple." The  millennial  saints  will  be  subjects  of  the  King. 
But  the  Christian  is,  by  the  new  birth,  identified  with  the 
Father  by  nature  (2  Peter  1:4);  with  the  Son  by  oneness 
of  life  (i  John  v:  12;  Col.  iii:  4;  John  xiv:  19)  ;  and  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  by  His  indwelling  ( i  Cor.  vi :  19 ;  i  Cor. 
vi :  17).  It  is  the  truth  which  the  Reformation  did  not  dis- 
cern, and  to  a  consciousness  of  which  the  church  is  coming 
but  slowly. 

But,  after  all,  important  as  it  is,  and  central  as  it  is  to  the 
possibility  of  such  a  prayer,  the  identity  is  not  the  heart  of 
this  lesson. 


2i6  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

What  that  heart  is  our  Lord  makes  clear:  "And  these 
things  I  speak  in  the  world,  that  they  might  have  my  joy 
fulfilled  in  themselves."  Or,  as  Weymouth  renders :  "that 
they  may  have  my  gladness  within  them,  filling  their  hearts." 
That  is,  the  things  which  the  Lord  was  saying  were  the 
things  which  filled  Him  with  gladness ;  and  He  spoke  them 
in  our  hearing  that  we,  knowing  them,  might  be  filled  with 
the  same  gladness. 

Those  "things"  are,  (i)  an  accomplished  redemption.  "I 
have  finished  the  work  thou  gavest  me  to  do."  Our  Lord 
in  this  prayer  puts  Himself  this  side  the  cross.  All  that  was 
necessary  for  our  perfect  salvation  He  accomplished  on 
Calvary.  (2)  A  perfect  manifestation.  He  not  only  re- 
vealed the  Fatherhood  of  God  as  the  true  relation  in  which 
God  stands  toward  every  believer  in  Christ  crucified,  but 
He  perfectly  revealed  the  Father.  "He  that  hath  seen  me 
hath  seen  the  Father."  (3)  He  rejoiced  in  being  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  believer  with  God.  The  seventeenth  of  John 
is  but  an  example  of  the  ceaseless  intercessory  work  of 
Christ  in  the  believer's  behalf.  He  had  represented  the 
Father  in  heaven  to  the  sons  on  earth,  now  He  was  rep- 
resenting the  sons  on  earth  before  the  Father  in  heaven.  (4) 
He  rejoiced  in  the  way  He  was  providing  for  the  perfect 
security  of  the  believer  amid  all  the  trials  and  temptations 
of  life.  He  was  depositing  them  for  safe-keeping  with  the 
Father.  Our  security  rests  on  the  Father's  fidelity  to  a  trust 
reposed  in  Him  by  His  Son.  (5)  He  rejoiced  in  the  sure 
sanctification  of  the  believers.  The  word  here  means  a 
gradual  separation  from  all  that  is  not  of  God — a  setting 
apart.  He  so  set  Himself  apart,  that  we  might  also,  through 
the  truth  be  set  apart.  (6)  He  rejoiced  in  that  all  believers 
were  to  be  glorified. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  217 

BEFORE  PILATE. 

(John  xviii :  28-40.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

The  present  lesson  does  not  fall  into  analytical  form.  The 
teaching  points  are  to  be  drawn  from  the  mutual  questions 
and  answers  of  Christ  and  of  Pilate.  The  great  lessons 
are:  (i)  the  nature  of  Chrisfs  kingdom  in  this  world, 
but  not  of  it;  (2)  the  true  royalty  identification  with  the 
truth;    (3)  a  lesson  on  substitution,  Christ  and  Barabbas. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  full  significance  of  the  lesson  topic  is  only  to  be 
comprehended  by  one  who  studies  the  parallel  accounts  of 
the  appearances  of  Christ  before  the  Roman  governor. 
With  the  whole  scene  and  all  the  events  thus  before  us  we 
may  ask  what  is  the  deepest  heart  of  it  all. 

Why  was  a  man  with  all  the  power  of  Rome  back  of  him, 
a  man  who  had  not  hesitated  to  send  soldiers  into  the  very 
temple  to  mingle  the  blood  of  the  worshippers  with  their 
sacrifices,  of  a  sudden  grown  afraid  of  the  sanhedrin?  Why 
should  a  man  with  absolute  power,  as  he  himself  boasted, 
over  life  and  death,  send  a  man  whom  he  confessed  to  be 
innocent  to  a  cruel  death? 

Our  interest  in  a  right  answer  to  these  questions  is  not  a 
mere  historical  interest.  Pilate  was  a  typical  man.  As  he 
reasoned  so  men,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  reason  to- 
day. The  underlying  motives  which  perverted  his  actions 
pervert  the  actions  of  man  now.  Jesus  Christ  is  always  on 
trial.  Physical  death,  indeed.  He  suffered  but  once;  but 
millions  are  every  day  crucifying  the  Son  of  God  afresh 
and  putting  Him  to  an  open  shame. 


2i8  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Some  one  has  said  that  in  the  deep  inner  sense  it  was 
Pilate  who  was  |on  trial  that  fateful  day.  In  truth  both 
Pilate  and  Jesus  Christ  were  on  trial ;  Jesus  for  the  moment ; 
Pilate  for  all  time  and  all  eternity.  The  Roman  governor 
had  his  assize  that  day.  The  future  judgment  will  be  but 
declarative  of  the  issues  determined  when  he  rejected  Jesus, 
and  released  Barabbas.    Of  whom,  then,  is  Pilate  a  type  ? 

First  of  all  of  the  man  who  has  either  sadly  or  cynically 
given  up  the  search  for  truth. 

When  Jesus  said :  "For  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world, 
that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth";  Pilate's  con- 
temptuous rejoinder  was,  'What  is  truth?" 

The  heathen  weariness  was  upon  him.  Pagan  learning 
and  philosophy  were  both  bankrupt.  Practical  men,  men 
of  affairs,  had  ceased  to  concern  themselves  with  the  barren 
controversies  of  Stoic  and  Epicurean.  Nothing  came  of  it. 
Millions  of  modern  men,  more  or  less  articulately,  stand 
just  there  now  in  respect  of  religious  truth — nay,  in  respect 
of  the  insistent  personal  claims  of  Christ.  *We  do  not 
know,"  they  say.  "Some  of  you  who  profess  His  name  say 
that  He  is  but  the  best  of  men  others  of  you  do  not  say 
that  quite  so  bluntly,  but  you  reduce  Him  with  your  kenotic 
theories,  and  what  not,  within  limits  which  after  all  are 
practically  those  of  mere  humanity.  Our  mothers  wor- 
shipped Him — they  were  good  and  happy — we  are  neither 
good  nor  happy." 

And,  next,  Pilate  stands  for  the  man  of  expediency. 
"What  is  popular?"  not  "What  is  right;    what  is  true?" 

The  most  contemptible  possible  attitude  of  the  human 
soul  is  the  attitude  of  the  opportunist.  Day  by  day  the  man 
who  allows  in  himself  that  posture  of  his  inner  man  is  con- 
tracting the  mean  deformity  of  soul-stoop.  The  Duchess 
in  the  play,  seeing  her  husband  fawning  upon  the  Borgia, 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  219 

asks,  "And  did  I  indeed  marry  a  man  with  so  pliant  a  back  ?" 
Doubtless  there  is  a  sense  of  what  is  prudent  which  is  not 
ignoble.  There  is  a  noble  fear — the  fear  of  the  Lord.  It  is 
one  of  the  Gospel  motives.  But  that  other  thing ;  that  mean 
and  politic  attitude  which  considers  the  interest  of  the  mo- 
ment— that  man  must  not  think  to  obtain  anything  from  the 
Lord.     But  the  Lord  demands  all,  and  unquestioningly. 

And,  again,  Pilate  stands  for  the  man  in  whom  the  spirit- 
ual faculty  is  all  but  extinguished  by  the  habit  of  unbelief. 

Before  him  stood  the  Truth,  and  he  had  Hed  to  his  soul  so 
long  that  he  could  not  discern  Him.  Two  things  quench 
the  flame  of  the  spirit  of  man,  that  sense  of  the  divine 
which  makes  the  Psalmist  call  the  human  spirit,  "The  candle 
of  the  Lord";  the  giving  over  of  all  the  powers  to  the 
things  of  the  world  and  the  habit  of  skepticism.  "Art  thou 
a  king?"  said  Pilate.  "Thou  sayest";  which  is  idiomatic 
for  an  affirmation  with  a  reserve.  "I  am  a  king;  but  not  in 
your  crass  sense.  You  think  of  a  kingdom  of  force;  my 
kingdom  is  the  reign  of  faith  and  love.  But  the  very  sug- 
gestion that  there  could  be  some  nobler,  sweeter  kingdom 
than  that  resting  upon  blood  and  oppression,  did  not  even 
stir  a  question  in  Pilate's  dead  soul. 


THE  CRUCIFIXION. 

(John  xix:  17-30.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  crucifixion.  Verse  18.  Simply  does  the  pen  of 
inspiration  record  the  most  stupendous  event  in  all  history, 
whether  of  heaven  or  of  earth.  Truly  this  is  not  the  manner 
of  man.  An  uninspired  pen  writing  of  the  crucifixion  would 
have  added  a  multitude  of  details. 


220  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

2.  The  title  written  by  Pilate.  Verses  19-22.  Pilate  little 
thought  of  the  deeper  meaning  of  his  words  in  verse  22. 
He  had  written  an  awful  record  against  himself  that  day. 

3.  The  fulfilled  prophecy.  Verses  23,  24.  This  was  the 
day  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  22d  Psalm.  The  student  should 
read  that  Psalm  very  carefully. 

4.  The  order  now  should  follow  the  cries  from  the  cross. 
The  first  three  were  uttered  in  the  light,  before  the  darkness 
and  the  forsaking ;  the  last  four,  out  of  the  darkness. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

How  shall  any  mortal  say  what  is  central  here?  Some- 
times I  think  we  shall  be  more  ashamed  in  the  glory  of  our 
theories  of  the  atonement  than  of  our  sins.  Perhaps  the 
highest  reach  of  impertinence,  the  final  touch  of  insolence, 
will  be  found  in  our  poor  efforts  to  compress  within  a 
definition  the  meaning  of  the  death  of  Christ.  Let  us,  at 
any  rate,  stand  unshod  before  the  cross.  If  Moses  were  com- 
manded to  take  the  shoes  from  off  his  feet  before  the  bush 
that  burned  with  fire,  and  yet  was  not  consumed,  surely  we, 
before  the  dying  agonies  of  the  Son  of  God,  should  have 
bowed  hearts. 

Much  of  the  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  the  cross  seems 
little  separated  from  a  mere  psychological  interest — a  cold, 
scientific  analysis  of  the  mind  of  Christ  in  His  sufferings. 
How  could  the  Holy  Spirit  interpret  aright  those  holy  mys- 
teries to  a  callous  curiosity? 

I  have  long  believed  that  the  Scriptures  are  absolutely 
self-interpreting,  and,  in  particular,  that  the  deeper  mys- 
teries of  the  person,  teachings  and  work  of  Christ  are 
accompanied  by  words  which  yield,  to  reverent  minds,  a 
clue  to  their  right  interpretation.  I  do  not  mean  that  such 
interpretative  words  are  the  exclusive  explanations,  for  I 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  221 

look  upon  the  Apostolic  writings  as  inspired  commentaries 
on  the  Gospels,  but  only  that  Christ  Himself  gives  the  au- 
thoritative first  clue. 

If  this  be  true,  we  are  to  find  the  deepest  meaning  of  the 
crucifixion  in  His  desolate  cry:  *'My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  The  other  six  utterances  from  the 
cross  present  no  difficulty.  Partly  Godward,  partly  man- 
ward,  they  are  simple.    But  what  shall  we  say  of  this? 

We  must  say,  first  of  all,  that  the  forsaking  was  real.  The 
notion  that  Christ  so  identified  Himself  with  the  woe  and 
sorrow  of  humanity  that  He  spoke  as  it  were  representa- 
tively: "Why  hast  thou  forsaken  usf'  is  inadequate 
because  Christ  knew  that  so  far  from  having  forsaken  hu- 
manity in  its  dire  need,  God  had  "so  loved  the  world  as  to 
give  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  The  words 
in  the  22d  Psalm  which  immediately  follow  those  quoted 
by  our  Lord  make  that  clear.  "Our  fathers  trusted  in  thee : 
they  trusted  and  thou  didst  deliver  them.  They  cried  unto 
thee  and  were  delivered;  they  trusted  in  thee,  and  were  not 
confounded."  Then  follows  that  which  also  was  in  our 
Lord's  mind:  "But  I  am  a  worm,  and  no  man."  No,  we 
are  face  to  face  with  the  fact  that  a  holy  God  forsook,  in  the 
hour  of  His  dire  extremity,  the  only  sinless  man  who  ever 
lived. 

And  our  reverence  for  that  infinite  Love  whom  we  call 
God,  and  adore  and  love,  requires  us  to  say  in  the  second 
place,  that  there  must  have  been  an  absolute  necessity  for 
that  forsaking.  Thrice  the  Father  had  spoken  from  heaven 
concerning  that  holy  forsaken  One:  "This  is  my  beloved 
Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Was  He  doing  some- 
thing now  with  which  the  Father  was  displeased?  Impos- 
sible ! 


222  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

And  the  Scriptures  require  us  to  say,  in  the  third  place, 
that  the  holy  sinless  one  was  there  on  the  cross,  identifying 
himself  in  some  sense  so  infinite  that  we  cannot  wholly 
understand  it,  with  the  sin  of  man.  "He  bore  our  sins  in 
his  own  body  on  the  tree."  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered 
for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to 
God.  '*A11  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray ;  we  have  turned 
every  one  to  his  own  way  and  Jehovah  hath  caused  the 
iniquities  of  us  all  to  meet  on  him."  Even  deeper  in  its 
awful  tragic  mystery  of  meaning  is  that  word:  *'He  hath 
made  him  to  be  sin  for  us — who  knew  no  sin." 

And  now  we  understand  a  little  why  the  sinless  One  was 
forsaken.  He  was  sufferng  in  our  stead.  The  penalty  of 
sin — separation  from  God,  was  being  borne  by  Him  that  it 
might  not  be  borne  by  us.  He  was  vindicating  that  primal 
law  of  the  moral  universe  which,  as  even  Plato  discovered, 
"rivets  together"  sin  and  suffering. 

THE  RESURRECTION. 

(John  XX :  11-23.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  weeping  woman.  Peter  and  the  others  could  be 
satisfied  to  know  the  truth ;  Mary  must  go  on  to  find  Him. 
The  same  contrast  is  often  seen  to  this  day.  Some  believers 
live  on  doctrines ;  others,  knowing  the  doctrines  too,  cannot 
be  satisfied  without  Himself. 

2.  The  unrecognized  Christ.  Mary  "supposed"  Him  to 
be  the  gardener.  Supposings  are  poor  things.  Christ's  own 
mother  went  a  day's  journey  "supposing  Him  to  be  in  the 
company,"  only  to  find  at  night  that  she  had  gone  a  whole 
day  without  Him. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  223 

3.  He  calleth  His  own  sheep  by  name,  "Mary." 

4.  Peace  through  the  shed  blood,  and  the  Spirit  out- 
breathed  and  inbreathed. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  doctrinal  heart  of  this  lesson  is,  of  course,  the  fact 
of  the  resurrection,  and  the  scriptural  implications  which  go 
with  that  fact.  Paul  makes  the  verity  of  the  Gospel  message 
to  depend  on  the  historicity  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
of  Jesus  Christ.  **And  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our 
preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain.  Yea,  and  we 
are  found  false  witnesses  of  God ;  because  we  have  testified 
of  God  that  He  raised  up  Christ:  whom  He  raised  not  up, 
if  so  be  that  the  dead  rise  not."  The  last  clause,  as  we  see, 
associating  with  the  resurrection  of  Christ  the  future  resur- 
rection of  the  believer. 

There  is  peculiar  need  in  our  day  of  the  reaffirmation  of 
this  fundamental  truth  of  the  Christian  faith.  Indeed,  from 
the  earliest  times  there  has  been  manifested  a  special  enmity 
of  Satan  toward  this  particular  doctrine.  *'How  say  some 
among  you  that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  the  dead  ?"  "But 
some  man  will  say,  How  are  the  dead  raised  up  ?" 

Hymenseus  and  Philetus  "erred,  saying  that  the  resurrec- 
tion had  passed  already,"  and  so  overthrew  the  faith  of 
some.  Paul  declared  that  error  to  be  a  "gangrene"  in  the 
Christian  faith. 

The  early  church  did  not  err,  but  there  were  erroneous 
teachings  on  this  most  vital  subject;  and  it  was  a  sense  of 
the  need  of  constant  restatement  of  the  basal  truths  of 
Christianity  which  led  to  the  establishment  of  what  is  called 
the  church  year.  This  expedient  is  open  to  the  grave  objec- 
tion that  it  establishes  "times  and  seasons,"  and  the  observ- 
ance of  "days,"  against  the  spirit  of  the  present  dispensation, 


224  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

but  some  such  repeated  testimony  to  the  pillar  truths  is 
necessary. 

But  Christ,  in  His  recorded  words  as  given  in  our  lesson 
does  not  make  the  fact  that  He  was  risen  the  central  thing. 
The  emphasis  of  His  words  falls  rather  on  the  missionary 
impulse.  It  is  not  that  He  did  not  at  once  give  every  proof 
of  the  fact  that  he  was  risen,  but  that  this  was  to  Him  self- 
evident,  and  he  sought  to  turn  at  once  the  newly  awakened 
hope  and  courage  and  zeal  of  His  disciples  toward  the  re- 
gions beyond. 

This  may  be  said  to  form  the  practical  heart  of  the  resur- 
rection lesson,  as  the  fact  forms  the  doctrinal  heart. 

The  emphatic  word  of  that  resurrection  morning  is,  "Go 
tell."  (Matt.  xxviii:7,  9,  10,  19;  Mark  xvi:i5;  Luke 
xxiv:  46-49;  John  XX :  21).  The  disciples'  understandings 
were  opened  that  they  might  understand  the  Scriptures,  but 
that  to  the  end  that  "repentance  and  remission  of  sins  might 
be  preached  in  His  name  among  all  nations."  The  dis- 
ciples were  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord,  but  He  said :  "As 
my  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you." 

In  Matthew's  account  the  missionary  impulse  comes  out 
with  special  emphasis.  "Go  quickly  and  tell  .  .  .  and 
as  they  went  to  tell  .  .  .  Jesus  met  them  .  .  .  then 
said  Jesus  unto  them,  Be  not  afraid :  go  tell." 

In  John's  account,  which  is  our  especial  lesson  for  to- 
day, the  missionary  impulse  is  enforced  by  that  saying  of 
our  Lord's  which  has  been  so  perverted  by  the  papacy: 
"Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them; 
and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained." 

On  these  words,  as  all  know,  have  been  built  the  tremen- 
dous pretensions  of  the  papacy  in  respect  of  sins.  This  is 
not  the  place  in  which  to  expose  those  pretensions.  Surely, 
the  words  mean  something,  and  that  meaning  must  be  inex- 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  225 

pressibly  solemn.  Is  it  not  this  :  that  Christ  has  put  into  our 
hands,  administratively,  the  only  possible  means  by  which 
men  may  receive  the  remission  of  their  sins — the  Gospel? 
"For  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall 
be  saved.  How  then  shall  they  call  on  him  in  whom  they 
have  not  believed?  and  how  shall  they  believe  in  him  of 
whom  they  have  not  heard  ?  and  how  shall  they  hear  without 
a  preacher  ?" 

No,  the  responsibility  for  the  remission  of  sins  is  not  on  a 
priestly  hierarchy,  but  on  us. 


THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  RISEN  CHRIST. 

(Rev.  i:  10-20.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

1.  The  command  to  write.    Verses  10,  11. 

2.  The  Patmos  vision.     Verses  12-20  (see  "Heart"). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  lesson  title  is  inexact.  What  we  have  in  this  lesson 
is  not  a  message  of  the  risen  Christ,  but  a  vision  of  the  risen 
Christ  himself.     The  message  follows  in  chapters  ii  to  xxii. 

It  is  significant  that  John,  the  beloved  disciple  whom  we 
count  to  have  been  most  intimate  with  Jesus,  who  reclined  on 
His  breast  at  the  last  supper,  who  had  walked  and  talked 
with  Him,  fell  at  His  feet  as  one  dead  when  he  saw  the  risen 
Christ  in  His  glory. 

It  should  provoke  inquiry.  It  is  not  the  heart  of  this  les- 
son and  so  I  pass  it  with  some  questions  for  our  further 
thought.  Is  He  not  the  unchanging  One,  "that  same  Jesus?" 
Undoubtedly.  Why,  then,  did  John  w^ho  knew  Him  so  well 
find  the  revelation  of  His  glory  so  overpowering  ?  Was  it  not 
IS 


226  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

because  John  then  for  absolutely  the  first  time  saw  Him  as 
He  essentially  isf  In  the  mount  of  transfiguration  John  had 
seen  Him  in  the  glory  of  the  millennial  kingdom;  a  glory 
subdued  to  the  capacity  of  man  to  behold  it;  now  he  saw 
''that  same  Jesus  in  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father 
before  the  world  was."  And,  ought  we  not  to  pray  and 
worship  in  the  full  sense  of  all  that  has  been  revealed  con- 
cerning our  adorable  Lord  ? 

In  the  gospels  we  have  His  glory  veiled  in  the  humanity  of 
the  Carpenter ;  in  the  Patmos  vision  we  have  His  glory  un- 
veiled, and  these  two  portraits  blend,  or  should  blend  in  our 
thought  of  Him.  Because  He  is  the  gentle  One  of  Galilee 
and  Judea  we  will  come  into  His  very  arms ;  but  because  He 
is  the  infinite  God  we  will  come  reverently.  There  was  no 
"dear  Jesus"  and  ''sweet  Jesus"  that  day  on  Patmos. 

But  we  are,  I  think,  to  find  the  heart  of  this  lesson  in  what 
John  saw  that  wonderful  Lord's  day  when  he  was  in  the 
Spirit.  He  saw  the  risen  Christ  in  the  plenitude  of  divine 
power  and  glory  in  the  midst  of  the  churches.  He  wore  His 
highpriestly  robes,  signifying  intercession  (Heb.  vii :  24,  25), 
and  a  girdle,  which  always  signifies  service.  Thus  clothed 
and  girded,  He  was  in  the  midst  of  His  churches  on  earth. 
As  such,  and  as  there,  we  are  to  conceive  Him  through  this 
whole  dispensation. 

And  He  gives  these  churches  on  earth  a  most  significant 
name.  He  calls  them  "golden  candlesticks,"  or  "lamp- 
stands."  It  is  at  once  a  definition  and  a  test.  A  lampstand 
is  something  which  exists  for  a  purpose — to  hold  up  a  light. 
It  does  not  exist  for  its  own  sake.  Christ  is  the  Light  of  the 
world,  and  the  business  of  His  lampstands  is  to  hold  Him 
up.  When  the  churches  become  self-conscious,  self-centred, 
they  are  sure  to  attract  attention  to  themselves,  not  to  the 
Light. 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  227 

Minot's  Ledge  Light  is  a  wonderful  triumph  of  engineer- 
ing skill,  but  its  business  is  to  hold  up  Boston  Light,  and  the 
storm-tossed  mariner  who  catches  its  beckoning  gleam 
through  the  darkness  of  the  tempest  and  makes  the  harbor 
which  he  had  despaired  of,  thinks  little  of  the  tower,  but 
much  of  the  light. 

When  the  eloquence  of  the  preacher,  or  the  magnificence 
of  the  architecture,  or  the  beauty  of  the  stained  glass  win- 
dows, or  the  attractiveness  of  the  choir  have  come  to  be  the 
things  for  which  a  church  is  most  remarked,  we  may  be  sure 
the  Light  is  lowered,  or  dimmed,  or  withdrawn. 

And  these  candlesticks  were  of  gold,  and  gold  is  the  sym- 
bol of  divine  righteousness.  The  Light  of  the  world  is  to  be 
held  aloft  in  no  compromise  with  the  world  which  is  at 
once  to  enlighten  and  rebuke.  It  admits  of  no  use  of  tainted 
money;  no  offering  of  that  which  is  unclean  on  the  altar 
of  the  Lord. 

But  how  blessed  that  the  risen  Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
candlesticks  even  though  they  are  very  faulty ;  even  though 
He  is  immediately  to  raise  many  a  searching  issue  with  them. 
Ephesus  had  left  first  love ;  Pergamos  had  settled  down  com- 
fortably in  the  world ;  Thyatira  was  married  to  the  heathen 
Jezebel;  Sardis  had  a  name  to  live  and  was  dead,  and 
Laodicea  was  a  disgust  to  His  holy  soul,  but  He  is  still  in  the 
midst  of  the  churches. 

In  these  churches  we  have  a  prophetic  foreview  of  the 
seven  phases  through  which  the  church  on  earth  is  to  pass ; 
and  it  is  most  solemn  that  in  the  last  or  present  phase  the 
risen  Christ  is  outside  the  door.  With  the  self-satisfaction 
and  self-glorification  of  Laodicea  He  has  no  part. 


228  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

THE  HEAVENLY  HOME. 

(Rev.  xxii:  i-ii.) 
I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  conditions  of  perfect  blessedness,  verses  1-5  (see 
"Heart").  2.  The  consummation  and  its  effect,  verses  6-9. 
The  imminency  of  His  coming,  verses  10,  11. 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

The  twenty-second  chapter  of  the  Revelation  does  not 
give,  as  the  lesson  title  would  indicate,  a  vision  of  our  heav- 
enly home,  but  of  the  glory  and  blessedness  of  the  millennial 
earth.  The  river  is  the  river  of  Ezekiel's  vision  (Ezekiel 
xlvii),  and  the  conditions  of  blessing  those  which  shall 
obtain  when  Messiah's  kingdom  is  set  up. 

But  heavenly  blessedness  is  not  a  matter  of  locality,  though 
doubtless  heaven  is  a  locality.  The  conditions  of  heavenly 
blessing  are  the  same  wherever  they  exist,  and  the  millen- 
nium is  but  "the  days  of  heaven  on  earth"  (Deut.  xi:2i). 
The  heart  of  the  lesson,  therefore,  I  judge  to  lie  in  those 
conditions  as  set  forth  therein.  These  are  seven,  two  nega- 
tive, five  positive.  That  is,  if  felicity  is  to  be  perfect  some 
things  must  not  be,  and  some  things  must  be. 

The  two  negative  conditions  are,  "no  more  curse";  "no 
night."  The  "curse"  of  God  is  His  sorrowful  assent  to  hu- 
manity's final  choice  of  the  things  which  carry  curses  in  their 
very  nature  and  being.  "As  he  loved  cursing,  so  let  it  come 
unto  him;  as  he  delighted  not  in  blessing,  so  let  it  be  far 
from  him"  (Psa.  cix:  17).  But  in  the  heavenly  home  no 
one  will  desire  the  things  which  are  accursed,  but  all  will 
delight  in  the  will  of  a  God  who  is  perfect  love. 

So  of  "night,"  or  darkness,  which  is  always  in  Scripture 


NEW  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  229 

associated  with  evil,  and  with  separation  from  God  and  from 
the  good.  To  say,  "there  shall  be  no  night  there,"  is  to  say, 
there  shall  be  no  evil  there.  Herbert  Spencer  has  defined 
heaven  (in  which,  by  the  way,  he  did  not  believe)  as  "A 
perfect  being,  in  a  perfect  environment."  That  is  what  our 
heaven  is  to  be :  a  perfect  environment.    No  curse,  no  night. 

Then,  on  the  positive  side,  which  is  the  great  matter,  after 
all,  five  wonderful  conditions  of  blessing  are  enumerated. 

"The  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it."  And 
that  means  the  perfect  reign  of  perfect  love.  Love  is  the 
only  ultimate  authority.  Of  love  only  could  it  be  said: 
"Love  never  faileth."  Everything  else  fails.  Power  has  a 
thousand  limitations — even  almighty  power.  The  almighti- 
ness  of  God  could,  indeed  crush  us  into  dust,  but  only  the 
almightiness  of  His  love  can  make  us  love  Him,  and,  till 
we  love  Him,  and  obey  because  we  love,  He  esteems  nothing 
as  done.  That  is  the  inner  reason  why  we  are  not  under 
the  law  but  under  grace.  That  the  throne  of  God  is  there 
means,  in  Paul's  great  phrase,  that  "Grace  reigns  through 
righteousness."  But  it  is  the  throne  of  the  Lamb,  too ;  that 
is,  the  regnancy  of  redeeming  love ;  the  love  that  "loved  nve, 
and  gave  himself  for  me." 

Again,  our  heavenly  home  is  a  sphere  of  service — the  ser- 
vice of  love.  Perfect  blessedness  there  could  not  be  in 
inactivity.  We  are  to  have  bodies  incorruptible,  glorious, 
powerful,  and  spirits  made  perfect  in  immortal  vigor ;  how 
could  perfect  felicity  for  such  things  be  without  service  in 
that  larger  sphere  of  life? 

We  are  to  "see  His  face."  Love  cannot  be  perfectly  con- 
tent, still  less  satisfied,  without  the  presence  of  the  beloved 
one.  The  face  which  we  shall  see  is  the  face  that  was  buf- 
feted for  us;   the  "visage  that  was  more  marred  than  any 


230  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

man."  It  will  express  His  love  for  us,  and  answer  the  love 
which  we  bestow  through  His  matchless  grace. 

His  name  will  be  in  our  foreheads.  That  speaks  of  perfect 
conformity  to  His  likeness.  It  is  the  blessing  which  logically 
follows  seeing  His  face.  "We  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we 
shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  To  be  with  Him  and  to  be  like 
Him — that  alone  would  seem  heaven. 

But  we  too  shall  reign.  Kings  by  the  new  birth,  we  are 
now  keeping  the  hour  of  His  patience  (Rev.  iii :  lo).  Then 
we  shall  be  associated  with  Him  in  authority.  Doubtless 
in  the  lesson  the  sphere  of  that  authority  is  the  millennial 
earth ;  but  the  essential  thing  in  royalty  is  not  the  sphere  of 
rule,  but  true  kingliness  of  being,  and  to  that  shall  we,  now 
so  easily  ruled  by  self  and  sin,  be  at  last  brought.  No  man 
is  truly  a  king  who  must  be  ruled  by  external  power. 


ABSTINENCE  FOR  THE  SAKE  OF  OTHERS. 

(i  Cor.  x:  23-33.) 

I.     The  Analysis. 

I.  The  principle  of  Gospel  liberty  (verses  23-33).  2. 
The  principle  of  governing  life  by  that  which  will  edify 
(verses  23-33).  3-  ^^^  principle  of  governing  life  by  the 
law  of  love  (verses  23-33). 

II.     The  Heart  of  the  Lesson. 

Perhaps  no  part  of  the  Pauline  message  has  been  more 
perverted  than  that  to  which  the  question  of  meats  gave 
rise.  It  cannot  be  necessary  to  explain  what  that  question 
was.  The  Corinthians  and  other  Greco-Roman  converts 
from  paganism  had  been  in  the  habit  both  of  feasting  in 
the  temples  on  meat  which  had  been  exposed  before  idols, 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  231 

and  of  purchasing  such  meat  in  the  markets.  In  their 
heathen  state  all  this  stood  connected  with  the  idolatrous 
worship.  After  conversion  the  question  of  continuing  to 
eat  such  meat  inevitably  arose.  Was  it  not  holding  on  to 
so  much  of  the  old  false  religion? 

Into  that  question  the  Holy  Spirit  by  Paul  entered  boldly. 
The  whole  answer  is  found,  not  in  our  lesson  alone,  but  in 
the  analogous  discussion  in  the  eighth  chapter.  Taking  the 
teaching  as  a  whole,  the  principles  laid  down  are  these : 

1.  There  is  a  peril  of  conceit,  of  arrogance,  in  judging 
concerning  such  matters;  a  danger  of  assuming  to  have 
"knowledge"  (i  Cor.  viii:  1-3). 

2.  The  idol  is  nothing,  and  the  meat  undefiled  by  being 
exposed  before  the  idol.  Here  the  principle  is  that  a  thing 
good  in  itself  is  not  to  be  rejected  because  some  people 
make  a  wrong  use  of  it.  In  parts  of  Europe  "blessed" 
candles  are  offered  for  sale.  The  apostle  would  say :  "The 
so-called  blessing  has  not  injured  the  candle:  it  will  give 
just  as  much  light  as  an  unblessed  candle." 

3.  Concerning  all  such  matters  no  Christian  may  judge 
his  brother,  or  despise  his  brother.  "Neither  if  we  eat 
are  we  the  better ;  neither  if  we  eat  not  are  we  the  worse." 
(i  Cor.  viii:  8).  "Let  not  him  that  eateth  despise  him 
that  eateth  not;  and  let  not  him  which  eateth  not  judge 
him  that  eateth :  for  God  hath  received  him.  Who  art 
thou  that  judgest  another  man's  servant?  To  his  own 
master  he  standeth  or  falleth"  (Rom.  xiv:3,  4).  "Let  no 
man,  therefore,  judge  you  (i.  e.,  be  your  conscience)  in 
meat,  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of  an  holy  day,  or  of  the 
new  moon,  or  of  the  sabbath"  (Col.  ii:  16). 

This  is  the  law  constantly  and  shamelessly  violated  by 
the   strict.     The   Christian   who   does  not  play   cards,   or 


232  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

attend  the  theater,  is  bitter,  outspoken,  and  condemnatory 
of  the  Christian  who  does. 

4.  The  law  of  prudence.  This  law  is  for  self-enforce- 
ment, in  the  forum  of  each  Christian's  own  conscience.  It 
is  not  a  law  by  which  Christian  may  judge  Christian,  for 
that  would  be  an  infraction  of  the  third  principle.  Paul 
states  this  law  of  prudence:  **A11  things  are  lawful  unto 
me,  but  all  things  are  not  expedient;  all  things  are  lawful 
for  me,  but  I  will  not  be  brought  under  the  power  of  any" 
(i  Cor.  vi:  12). 

The  law  of  prudence,  then,  is  self-applied  in  the  personal 
conscience ;  it  is  never  for  external  application.  And  it 
sets  up  a  two-fold  standard :  *ls  it  expedient  (profitable)  ; 
does  it  edify  (build  up)  ?"  And,  "Does  it  expose  me  to  the 
danger  of  being  brought  under  bondage  to  the  habit  of  it  ? 

As  to  the  first,  the  whole  man,  spirit,  soul,  body,  must 
be  taken  into  account.  "Does  it  enlarge  the  mental  capaci- 
ties? Does  it  develop  along  noble  lines  the  emotional  and 
volitional  part  of  me?  Does  it  contribute  to  bodily  well- 
being?"  If  it  does  not;  or  if  observation  and  experience 
show  that  along  the  line  of  the  proposed  indulgence  slavery 
to  habit  may  be  formed,  then  the  thing  is  to  be  summarily 
rejected. 

5.  The  law  of  love.  And  here  the  Christian  comes  out 
and  looks  about  him.  It  is  not  now  solely  a  question  for 
himself — a  question  to  be  settled  by  the  fourth  principles. 
He  now  takes  account  of  himself  as  a  member  of  the  body 
of  Christ;  as  his  brother's  keeper.  He  does  not  come  out 
to  judge  his  brother,  but  to  judge  himself  as  responsible  for 
his  brother's  edification. 

He  will  not  eat  meat  in  an  idol's  temple,  even  though 
he  knews  the  meat  to  be  good  and  nourishing,  and  the  idol 
but  a  block  of  stone,  because  a  weak  brother,  just  escaping 


OLD  TESTAMENT  STUDIES  233 

from  heathenism,  having  still  a  conscience  hurt  by  anything 
pertaining  to  idolatry,  might  be  led  back  to  do  what,  even 
mistakenly,  might  give  him  a  bad  conscience. 

In  other  words,  to  the  law  of  prudence,  with  its  ques- 
tions: "Will  it  profit  mef  May  it  enslave  meT  The 
Christian  adds  the  law  of  love  with  its  question:  "If  I  do 
this  thing,  may  I  injure  my  brother?" 

Two  cautionary  words  of  vital  importance : 

First. — The  law  of  love,  like  the  law  of  prudence,  is  for 
my  own  self-government;  it  is  not  a  club  in  the  hands  of 
a  fanatic  or  a  puritan  that  he  may  govern  me. 

Second. — I  am  to  judge  what,  in  my  conduct,  would  harm 
or  help  my  brother  by  the  Scriptures,  and  not  by  human 
standards,  which  may  be  strict  with  the  strictness  of  pharisa- 
ism,  and  far  from  the  large  wholesomeness  of  Jesus  Christ. 

In  other  words,  I  may  owe  a  duty  of  enlightenment  and 
of  enlargement  to  my  weak  brother.  Never  forget  that  in 
the  performance  of  that  duty  Christ  broke  with  the  strict( 
religionists  of  His  day,  and  incurred  the  reproach  of  being 
^'gluttonous  and  a  wine-bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners/^ 


Lectures  and  Addresses 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOB. 
By  C.  I.  Scofield. 

If  we  are  to  do  anything  with  such  a  book  as  Job  within 
the  compass  of  one  hour,  it  is  evident  that  we  must  accept 
certain  Hmitations.  Obviously  it  will  be  impossible  to  make 
a  close  study  of  its  forty-two  chapters  of  human  reasoning 
and  divine  revelation.  Evidently,  we  are  shut  up  to  a  pano- 
ramic view  of  the  book.  Our  study  must  bear  the  same  rela- 
tion to  the  book  that  an  artist's  sketch  does  to  the  finished 
landscape.  But  even  a  sketch  may  be  accurate;  may  indi- 
cate faithfully,  and  in  due  proportion,  the  greater  features 
of  the  landscape,  and  that  with  God's  help  we  may  hope  to 
do. 

The  critical  studies  of  the  day  have  raised  certain  ques- 
tions about  this  book  to  which  we  may  for  a  moment  give 
attention.  We  are  told  that  Job  is  a  work  of  the  imagina- 
tion, and  that  it  belongs  to  a  comparatively  late  period  in  the 
Hebrew  commonwealth.  Against  that  contention  it  is  only 
necessary  to  say  that  it  rests  upon  mere  literary  opinion, 
without  a  shred  of  proof.  But  a  conclusive  answer  is  found 
in  the  book  itself.  It  is  a  book,  as  you  know,  in  which  the 
whole  question  of  the  accountability  of  man  as  a  morally 
responsible  being  to  a  holy  God  is  elaborately  discussed. 
Now  in  that  discussion  the  ten  commandments,  the  Mosaic 
revelation  concerning  priesthood  and  sacrifice,  and  the 
mighty  writings  of  the  prophets  are  never  once  mentioned. 
And  not  only  so,  but  the  thoughts  of  the  speakers  have  no 
coloring  from  them.  Even  Jehovah  does  not  appeal  against 
Job  to  His  statutes.     We  say,  therefore,  that  the  book  is 

237 


238  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

what  it  assumes  to  be — it  goes  back  of  Moses  to  primitive, 
patriarchal  times.     It  may  even  antedate  the  flood. 

That  Job  is  an  historical  personage  we  know  from  the 
inspired  use  of  his  name  in  James  v :  ii,  and  Ezekiel  xiv :  14, 
20.  Indeed,  these  references  to  the  troubled  patriarch  show 
the  truth  of  the  principle  laid  down — that  if  the  law  existed 
as  a  divine  revelation  when  Job  was  written,  it  would  have 
been  impossible  to  keep  its  shadow  off  the  book. 

Turning  now  to  the  book  itself  we  ask  ourselves  as  to  its 
central  problem.  Here  we  have  no  difficulty.  The  central 
question  discussed  and  answered  in  Job  is,  why  do  the 
godly  suffer?  It  is  an  ever-living  question,  for  the  godly  still 
suffer — and  often,  as  in  Job's  case,  with  no  apparent  cause. 
Our  suffering  brothers  are  better  than  we,  and  yet  they  are 
bereaved  while  our  families  remain  unbroken,  are  ill  while 
we  are  well,  are  diminished  in  estate  while  we  prosper. 
Why? 

Incidentally,  almost  the  whole  sphere  of  man's  relation  to 
God  is  brought  into  the  discussion.  And  let  us  remember 
that  all  this  is  not  set  out  in  a  dogmatic  way,  essay  fashion. 
It  is  not  an  academic  discussion.  A  living  man,  bereft  of 
children,  estate,  and  health  is  the  subject  of  it. 

Next,  let  us  think  of  the  literary  form  of  the  book.  I 
need  not  remind  you  that  in  that  book  which  is  at  once  the 
only  divine  and  the  most  truly  human  of  writings,  the  Bible, 
the  Holy  Spirit  uses  every  form  of  literary  expression.  It 
has  history,  biography,  autobiography,  and  revelation,  and 
these  in  prose,  poetry  and  drama.  Job  is  a  drama.  I  do 
not  mean  that  the  story  of  Job  was  cast  into  that  form,  but 
that  it  all  occurred  in  that  form. 

There  are  two  scenes,  one  supra-mundane,  the  other  on 
the  earth.  Of  the  first  we  have  no  description;  the  second 
is  the  ash  heap  outside  an  Oriental  town. 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES    .  239 

In  the  first  scene  Jehovah  and  Satan  are  the  dramatis- 
personcE. 

Open  to  the  first  chapter,  sixth  verse :  *'Now  there  was  a 
day  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present  themselves  be- 
fore the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  also  among  them."  Oh !  the 
mystery  of  the  permitted  presence  of  Satan  in  the  presence 
of  God !  The  accuser  of  the  brethren  began  this  work  very 
early  in  the  history  of  the  race.  *'And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Satan,  whence  comest  thou  ?  Then  Satan  answered  the  Lord 
and  said,  From  going  to  and  from  in  the  earth,  and  from 
walking  up  and  down  in  it.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan, 
Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job  ?"  Here  is  the  charac- 
ter of  Job  as  described  by  the  Lord  Himself. 

"There  is  none  Hke  him  in  the  earth."  The  best  man  God 
had!  "A  perfect  and  an  upright  man."  Now  the  word 
"perfect"  here  is  the  same  word  we  have  in  the  seventeenth 
of  Genesis,  when  Abram  gets  that  marvelous  revelation  of 
El  Shaddai  when  He  says :  "Walk  before  Me  and  be  thou 
perfect."  "And  Abram  fell  on  his  face."  The  word  simply 
means  unmixed,  sincere.  It  does  not  mean  fully  sanctified, 
or  dead  to  sin,  but  it  means  not  double  minded.  It  is  the 
equivalent  of  what  the  Lord  said  of  Nathaniel,  "An  Israelite 
in  whom  there  is  no  guile."  And  this  is  Job.  "Hast  thou 
considered  my  servant  Job,  for  there  is  none  like  him  in  the 
earth,  a  perfect  and  an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God 
and  escheweth  evil." 

Do  not  imagine,  dear  friends,  that  in  the  last  chapter  of 
this  book  you  have  the  conversion  of  that  patriarch.  He  is 
God's  man  from  the  beginning  of  the  book,  and  the  best 
man  God  has  on  earth. 

"Then  Satan  answered  the  Lord  and  said,  Doth  Job  fear 
God  for  nought?  Hast  not  thou  made  a  hedge  about  him, 
and  about  his  house,  and  about  all  that  he  hath,  on  every 


240  .         THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

side?  Thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  hands,  and  his 
substance  is  increased  in  the  land.  But  put  forth  thine  hand 
now,  and  touch  all  that  he  hath,  and  he  will  renounce  thee 
to  thy  face." 

That  was  Satan's  theory  about  Job's  godliness.  Men  are 
good  because  it  pays  men  to  be  good.  Satan  would  perhaps 
resent  it,  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  is  the  author  of  that 
proverb  ''Honesty  is  the  best  policy."  I  think  it  came 
straight  out  of  the  pit.  I  hate  to  hear  Christians  talk  that 
kind  of  talk.  We  are  honest  to  please  Him  who  called  us 
out  of  darkness  into  His  marvelous  light;  because  it  is 
blessed,  not  because  it  is  politic — neither  is  it  always  politic. 

"And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Behold  all  that  he  hath  is 
in  thy  power;  only  upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  hand. 
So  Satan  went  forth  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  But 
this  gives  us  no  light,  we  say,  this  deepens  the  darkness  of 
the  problem.  Why  do  the  godly  suffer  ? 

Yes,  God  Himself  sometimes  puts  His  dearest  children 
into  Satan's  sieve.  ''Satan  hath  desired  to  have  thee,"  said 
Christ  to  Peter,  "That  he  might  sift  thee  like  wheat,  but  I 
have  prayed  for  thee  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  We  have 
here  the  same  thing.  Satan  is  suffered  to  have  the  same 
power  over  circumstances  of  our  lives.  That  is  one  fact 
of  revelation  and  it  is  terrible.  But  invariably,  along  with 
it  is  another  fact  of  revelation :  the  power  of  Satan  is  strictly 
and  absolutely  limited  by  the  power  of  God,  and  it  is  com- 
forting. And  another  fact  of  revelation  :  Satan  is  never  per- 
mitted to  work  destructively  upon  the  children  of  God. 
Christ  put  Peter  into  Satan's  sieve,  but  He  Himself  fixed 
the  time  and  way  of  Peter's  death.     (John  xxi :  i8,  19.) 

Then  you  know  what  happened.  Everything  went  but 
Job's  health.    Satan's  worst  enmity,  at  that  stage  of  things, 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  241 

could  not  have  touched  that  patriarch's  body,  but  only  what 
he  had. 

''Then  Job  arose,  and  rent  his  mantle,  and  fell  down  upon 
the  ground  and  worshipped ;  and  he  said,  Naked  came  I  out 
of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return  thither ;  the 
Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away;  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord." 

How  many  a  saint  of  God  has  found  those  words  helpful 
to  express  what  the  heart  wanted  to  say,  but  in  its  anguish, 
could  not  find  the  words.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  see  it  is  the 
Lord.  Job  does  not  say,  "Satan  hath  taken  away."  Instru- 
mentally,  he  did,  undoubtedly,  but  he  does  not  say  "Satan 
hath  taken."  When  Paul  was  in  the  prison  of  Nero  he  did 
not  call  himself  "the  prisoner  of  Nero,"  but  "the  prisoner  of 
the  Lord."  He  knew  that  Nero  could  have  no  power  over 
him  but  by  his  Lord's  will.  Then  we  have  another  of  these 
interviews  in  the  second  chapter. 

"Again  there  was  a  day  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to 
present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  also 
among  them  to  present  himself  before  the  Lord.  And  the 
Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Hast  thou  considered  my  servant 
Job?  for  there  is  none  Hke  him  in  the  earth,  a  perfect  and 
an  upright  man,  one  that  feareth  God  and  escheweth  evil; 
and  he  still  holdeth  fast  his  integrity  although  thou  movedst 
me  against  him  to  destroy  him  without  cause." 

"And  Satan  answered  the  Lord  and  said.  Skin  for  skin, 
yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."  What  a 
lie  that  is,  too !  See  the  martyrs  in  the  flames !  Will  they 
give  all  that  they  have,  their  trust  in  God,  to  save  their  lives 
when  by  burning  a  little  pinch  of  incense  on  the  flame  be- 
fore the  image  of  Caesar  they  could  go  free,  but  they  will 
not  burn  it !  they  burn  themselves  instead  ?  Yes,  that  is  the 
16 


242  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

devil's  lie.  "But  put  forth  thine  hand  now,  and  touch  his 
bone  and  his  flesh,  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  face." 

Satan  has  a  contemptible  opinion  of  humanity,  and  I  do 
not  wonder.  It  is,  only  God  who  says,  "I  will  make  a  man 
more  precious  than  gold."  Satan  despises  man  and  hates 
man  because  God  has  redeemed  him.  And  man  puts  such  a 
poor  estimate  upon  himself.  He  sells  out  so  cheaply.  Down 
South,  where  I  lived  before  the  war,  $800  to  $2,000  was  the 
price  of  a  man.  I  have  known  a  good  many  white  men  sell 
out  a  great  deal  cheaper  than  that. 

"And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Behold,  he  is  in  thine 
hand ;  only  spare  his  life."  You  see  the  two  things  involved  ? 
Satan  cannot  kill  that  man.  Do  you  suppose  anything  can 
kill  a  child  of  God  until  God  is  ready  to  take  Him?  He  is 
immortal  until  His  Father  says,  "Come  home."  There  is  a 
word  in  that  first  chapter  of  Revelation  concerning  Christ: 
"I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead,  and,  behold,  I  am  alive 
forevermore,  Amen;  and  have  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of 
death."  He  has  the  keys.  Satan  cannot  open  the  door  of 
death  for  you  or  for  me.  It  cannot  open  until  Christ  opens 
it.  Blessed  be  God,  we  are  not  subject  to  all  kinds  of  hap- 
penings. 

"And  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  Behold,  he  is  in  thine 
hand,  only  spare  his  life.  So  Satan  went  forth  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  smote  Job  with  sore  boils  from  the 
sole  of  his  foot  unto  his  crown.  And  he  took  him  a  potsherd 
to  scrape  himself  withal ;   and  he  sat  among  the  ashes." 

And  now  we  come  to  the  second  scene  in  this  drama. 
Wonderful  words  are  said  by,  and  above,  that  ash  heap. 
Five  persons  beside  Job  come  upon  the  scene  where  the 
afflicted  patriarch  sits  desolate  and  anguished. 

First  of  all  comes  his  wife.  Her  counsel  is  brief  :  "Curse 
God  and  die." 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  243 

Why  do  we  smile  at  that?  The  whole  world  does.  Why- 
do  we  never  think  of  a  broken-hearted  mother  bereaved  of 
her  children,  bereft  of  her  home,  and  sore  with  her  unavail- 
ing yearning  over  her  stricken  husband  ?  She  says  her  bitter 
word,  and  passes.  For  one  I  am  glad  that  motherhood  comes 
to  her  again;  that  once  more  she  holds  babes  to  her  heart. 
I  have  no  disposition  to  make  fun  of  Job's  wife. 

And  now  to  poor,  desolate  Job  enter  the  famous  three 
friends :  ''Now  when  Job's  three  friends  heard  all  this  evil 
that  was  come  upon  him,  they  came  every  one  from  his  own 
place ;  Eliphaz, .  . .  and  Bildad, .  . .  and  Zophar, . . .  and  they 
made  an  appointment  together  to  come  to  mourn  with  him, 
and  to  comfort  him."  No  wonder  they  are  called,  "Job's 
comforters."  ''And  when  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  afar  off, 
and  knew  him  not,  they  lifted  up  their  voice  and  wept ; . . . 
for  they  saw  that  his  grief  was  very  great." 

"After  this  Job  opened  his  mouth  and  cursed  his  day," 
but  not  his  God. 

It  is  impossible,  within  the  limitations  of  one  address,  to 
take  up  and  analyze  the  speehes  of  these  four  men,  Eliphaz, 
Bildad,  Zophar  and  Job.  All  that  we  may  hope  to  do  is  to 
summarize — to  describe  the  point  of  view  of  each  toward  the 
real  problem  of  Job's  sufferings.  Perhaps  even-  so  much 
would  not  be  worth  while,  if  it  were  not  that  these,  especially 
the  three  friends,  are  representative  men.  They  stand  for 
three  kinds  of  religious  people,  and  for  the  attitude  of  those 
three  kinds  of  people  toward  the  real  problems  of  human 
life. 

And  this  is  unspeakably  serious,  for  Eliphaz,  and  Bildad, 
and  Zophar,  stand  for  the  great  mass  of  formal  religionists, 
and  they  have  nothing  but  words  for  this  poor  old  world  on 
the  ash  heap,  and  so  the  world  never  dreams  of  looking  to 
the  church  for  any  real  help. 


244  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Some  characteristics  these  three  men  have  in  common. 
They  are  all  dogmatists.  Each  is  perfectly  sure  of  his  theory 
of  the  cause  and  cure  of  Job's  sufferings.  Each  is  so  pos- 
sessed by  his  theory  that  he  has  no  real  sympathy  for  Job. 
Like  all  mere  dogmatists,  their  hearts  are  as  hard  as  the 
nether  millstone,  and  of  arctic  coldness.  And  they  all  have 
a  conventional  God.  Their  God  is  a  bundle  of  attributes, 
not  a  living,  thinking,  loving  Being.  Like  all  religious  dog- 
matists they  are  cocksure  about  God.  They  know  what  He 
will  do,  and  why.  Furthermore,  they  are  at  one  in  the 
theory  that  Job  is  a  hypocrite;  that  his  fair  outward  life 
hides  some  secret  sin  for  which  he  is  under  the  terrible  flail 
of  God. 

Their  differences  lie  in  the  source  of  their  authority  as 
interpreters  of  the  providences  of  God. 

Eliphaz,  then,  stands  for  the  religious  dogmatist  who  has 
had  a  mysterious  experience,  and,  therefore,  what  he  says  is 
true. 

"Now  a  thing  was  secretly  brought  to  me,  and  mine  ear 
received  a  little  thereof.  In  thoughts  from  the  vision  of  the 
night,  when  deep  sleep  falleth  on  men,  fear  came  upon  me, 
and  trembling,  which  made  all  my  bones  to  shake.  Then  a 
spirit  passed  before  my  face ;  the  hair  of  my  flesh  stood  up," 
etc.  (iii:  13-15)- 

That  is  it!  Dared  Job,  who  had  never  had  an  ''experi- 
ence," contend  against  himf  His  theory  was  the  authorita- 
tive one  because  he  had  had  an  "experience."  We  know 
thee  well,  O  Eliphaz.  Thy  lineal  descendants  are  with  us 
still. 

Bildad  is  a  religious  dogmatist  of  an  even  more  intolerable 
type.  He  peddles  religious  platitudes ;  he  is  the  prophet  of 
the  obvious ;   a  passer  on  of  easy  cant.    No  wonder  Job,  an 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  245 

able  and  serious  man,  breaks  out,  "Who  does  not  know  these 
things?" 

It  is  Bildad  who  comes  to  you  when  death  has  emptied 
your  arms  of  one  dearer  to  you  than  Hfe,  and  tells  you  that 
God  is  good.  But,  somehow,  Bildad  is  always  held  in  much 
reputation  for  sanctity.  "Isn't  Bildad  a  good  man?"  they 
say.  He  says  an  undisputed  thing  in  such  an  unctuous  way 
that  he  carried  all  before  him,  while  souls  racked  with  an- 
guish, cry  out  upon  him  for  a  babbling  fool. 

Zophar  is  yet  another  kind  of  dogmatist — perhaps  the 
most  hopeless  of  all.  Zophar  is  a  traditionalist.  He  appeals 
to  the  fathers.  "Knowest  thou  not  this  of  old?"  All  this, 
of  course,  is  not  to  say  that  these  men  do  not  utter  many 
truths.  But  over  against  all  that  they  say  stands  Jehovah's 
sentence : 

"The  Lord  said  to  Eliphaz,  the  Temanite,  My  wrath  is 
kindled  against  thee,  and  against  thy  two  friends;  for  ye 
have  not  spoken  of  me  the  thing  that  is  right."  After  that, 
it  is  useless  to  pick  from  the  chaff  of  their  words  the  few 
grains  of  the  wheat  of  truth. 

Now  we  have  more  difficulty  with  Elihu.  I  will  say  quite 
frankly,  I  have  read  and  re-read  his  words.  There  is  a 
wonderful  unfolding  of  truth  in  a  certain  sense,  in  the  thirty- 
third  chapter,  for  example,  about  the  finding  of  the  ransom. 
He  says  a  great  many  things  which  are  true  and  paves  the 
way  for  Jehovah  to  come  upon  the  scene. 

Then  Jehovah  takes  up  the  case  Himself,  and  it  is  a  won- 
derful method.  He  brings  Job  into  a  consciousness  of  His 
power,  and  that  always  reaches  the  conscience.  What  was  it 
that  followed  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes  "Depart 
from  me  for  I  am  a  sinful  man."  Divine  power,  and  there 
is  more  than  that ;  the  folly  of  trying  to  solve  the  problems 
of  life  without  God.     When  Jehovah  is  done  He  has  a 


246  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

broken  man  before  Him.  God  was  after  the  death  of  self 
in  that  man ;  He  was  after  getting  Job  to  see  himself.  Those 
other  men  were  occupied  with  what  they  believed  Job's  sin- 
ful actions.  The  twenty-ninth  chapter  is  occupied  with  what 
Job  was ;  a  good  man,  but  too  conscious  of  it.  In  that  chap- 
ter the  personal  pronouns  "I"  and  "me"  occur  forty-five 
times,  God  is  mentioned  five  times.  He  was  a  sincere  man, 
but  too  well  aware  of  it. 

What  does  he  say  when  Jehovah  has  revealed  Himself  to 
him?  "I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear."  A 
real  faith  may  be  founded  on  testimony.  Job  had  a  testi- 
mony of  God.  He  believed  that  testimony,  and  upon  it  was 
based  a  faith  that  stood  all  the  shocks  of  suffering  and  loss. 
But  now  he  has  a  vision  of  God  Himself. 

What  is  a  vision  in  its  essential  meaning  You  will  find 
in  the  Old  Testament  that  no  two  visions  are  circumstanced 
alike,  but  the  effect  is  always  identical.  It  is  an  unseen 
thing  made  real.  You  believed  it  all  the  time;  now  it  is 
knowing  the  thing.  Job  says,  "I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the 
hearing  of  the  ear;  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee."  Did  he 
mean  that  his  mortal  eye  saw  the  uncreated  One?  Oh,  no. 
He  meant  that  God  had  become  the  actual  One  to  him. 

Now  what  happened  to  Job  after  the  dealing  had  done  its 
work,  and  he  had  seen  and  judged  himself  ?  His  f ruitfulness 
was  doubled.  Also  he  was  made  a  priest  to  stand  between 
God  and  his  three  friends,  and  they  had  to  come  to  God 
through  him.  Double  fruitfulness,  and  a  higher  form  of 
service.  And  now  we  see  the  divine  solution  of  the  problem 
of  the  book.  How  shall  I  state  that  solution  Let  me  use 
inspired  words. 

*'I  am  the  true  vine,  and  my  Father  is  the  husbandman. 
Every  branch  in  Me  that  beareth  not  fruit  He  taketh  away ; 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  24) 

and  every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  He  purgeth  it  that  it 
may  bring  forth  more  fruit." 

"Now,  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous, 
but  grievous ;  nevertheless,  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peace- 
able fruit  of  righteousness  to  them  who  are  exercised 
thereby." 

The  sufferings  of  the  godly  are  not  penal,  but  purifying, 
medicinal,  healing. 


THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

We  are  to  look  together  for  a  little  time  to-night  at  the 
Song  of  Solomon,  and  I  need  not  detain  you  for  one  mo- 
ment with  what  the  natural  man  has  said  about  this  most 
precious  book.  There  is  not  a  line  in  it  for  the  natural  man. 
It  is  a  profanation  for  him  to  look  into,  and  there  is  very 
little  in  it  for  a  carnal  saint.  If  we  can  be  satisfied  with  the 
world,  even  though  we  be  Christ's,  satisfied  with  a  kind  of 
formal  fellowship  with  Him,  going  on  in  a  kind  of  indiffer- 
ent way,  I  fear  this  book  will  have  very  little  to  say  to  us. 
But  if  we  have  entered  into  His  heart,  if  we  have  entered 
into  the  heart  and  purpose  of  Him  who  purchased  us  to  be 
His  Bride,  that  Bride  whom  He  is  now  cleansing  by  the 
washing  of  water  by  the  Word,  and  whom  He  is  to  present 
to  Himself  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  with  exceeding  joy, 
then  I  believe  our  souls  will  be  fed  with  this  book. 

The  key  of  this  song  we  have  in  the  expression  that  fell 
from  the  lips  of  John  the  Baptist.  In  the  third  chapter  of 
John,  the  twenty -ninth  verse,  he  says :  "He  that  hath  the 
bride  is  the  bridegroom ;  but  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom, 
which  standeth  and  heareth  him,  rejoiceth  greatly." 

The  bridegroom  and  the  Bride!     These  we  have  in  the 


248  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Song  of  Solomon.  Now  I  need  not  dwell  at  all  on  any  ex- 
planation of  which  might  seem  at  first  to  be  a  contradiction, 
namely,  that  we  do  not  find  the  church  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. Very  true.  We  do  not  find  the  church  described  in 
the  Old  Testament.  There  is  nothing  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment from  which,  apart  from  the  New,  one  would  have  any 
conception  whatever  of  the  church.  But  now  that  we  have 
the  New  Testament  revelation,  and  can  use  it  to  look  back  on 
the  Old  Testament,  we  see  two  things.  First,  that  allowance 
is  dispensationally  made  in  the  prophecies  for  the  Church  to 
come  in.  The  Old  Testament  saints  did  not  know  it;  but 
now  that  we  do  know  it,  we  can  see  that  there  was  a  place 
made  for  it.  Another  thing.  There  are,  specially  in  the 
Brides  of  the  Pentateuch,  wonderful  foreshadowings  of  this 
bride  relationship  to  Jesus  Christ.  Adam  and  Eve  pre- 
figured the  Church.  In  the  fifth  chapter  of  Ephesians  there 
is  a  direct  quotation  of  the  words  of  Adam  to  Eve.  I  need 
not  remind  you  of  Isaac's  bride,  and  of  Joseph's  bride. 
Wonderful  prefigurings,  and  sacred,  of  this  holy  relation- 
ship. "Bone  of  His  bone,  flesh  of  his  flesh,"  lifted  into  the 
very  highest  place,  made  one  with  Him.  It  is  marvelous! 
Not  merely  as  members  of  His  body  we  are  one;  we  are 
baptized  by  one  Spirit  into  this  body.  Just  as  there  was 
identification  between  Eve  and  the  body  of  Adam,  just  so 
there  is  identification  between  us  and  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is 
not  a  singular  belief  of  mine,  for  I  sit  at  the  feet  of  the  most 
spiritual  saints  down  through  all  the  ages,  when  I  find  in  the 
Song  of  Solomon  the  heart  of  the  Bridegroom  for  his  Bride, 
and  I  believe  we  may  trace  there  the  wonderful  deepening 
and  increase  and  growth  of  her  love  to  Him,  and  apprecia- 
tion for  Him. 

Chrysostom  called  it  the  holy  of  holies  of  the  Bible.    Dis- 
pensationally, the  book  of  John  is  that;   but  here  we  may 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  249 

say  we  are  in  the  very  heart  of  Christ ;  and  if  Moses  must 
put  off  the  shoes  from  his  feet  when  he  stood  on  holy 
ground,  how  unshod  must  we  be  in  soul  and  spirit. 

Bengel  said:  "It  is  a  very  touchstone  of  my  spiritual 
state.  When  I  come  to  it  cold  of  heart,  it  has  no  voice  for 
me;  but  when  I  come  to  it  from  my  knees,  and  with  com- 
munion for  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth,  then  it  breathes 
the  very  breath  of  divine  life  for  me  in  the  very  closest  and 
holiest  of  possible  relationships."  This  is  not  a  book  which 
gives  us  the  heavenly  side  of  the  relationship  between  the 
Lord  Jesus  and  His  Church.  The  bride  is  seen  here,  not 
in  her  perfected,  but  in  her  unperfected  state.  We  are  to 
learn  here  what  Jesus  is  thinking  of  His  Church  now,  when 
she  is  unperfected,  and  full  of  blemishes,  as  the  bride  in  the 
book  of  Canticles  was.  We  see  existing  a  real  love  by  her 
for  Him,  and  we  see  the  workings  of  His  love  for  her. 

The  book  shows  two  lapses  and  restorations  in  the  part  of 
the  bride  from  communion  with  the  bridegroom.  No  lapse 
from  salvation,  no  severing  of  relationship;  and  the  struc- 
ture of  the  book  hinges  very  largely  on  this.  There  are  two 
places  where  we  are  permitted  to  see  the  bride  out  of  com- 
munion with  Him. 

I  believe  the  book  to  fall  into  six  divisions.  In  the  first, 
the  bride  is  brought  to  the  bridegroom,  and  into  restful 
communion  with  Him.    Chapter  i :  i  to  ii :  7. 

Second  division.  The  bride  returns  to  her  former  home, 
a  lapse  from  communion;  a  separation,  not  of  divorce,  but 
a  separation  in  the  continuity  of  fellowship,  but  is  brought 
back  and  is  tenderly  admonished,     ii :  8  to  iii :  5. 

Third  division,  iii :  6  to  v :  i.  Happy  communion.  Then 
a  long  passage  of  communion  between  the  heavenly  bride- 
groom and  his  restored  bride. 

Fourth  division,    v.  2,  3,  discloses  a  separation  of  heart. 


250  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

She  does  not  go  away  from  Him,  but  she  for  a  time  has  no 
longing  in  her  heart,  while  the  purpose  of  His  heart  is  su- 
preme toward  her.  It  is  a  different  kind  of  lapse  from  com- 
munion, but  we  shall  see  that  later. 

Fifth  division,  v :  4  to  vi :  3.  The  bride  now  seeks  Him 
and  testifies  of  His  beauty. 

Sixth  division,  vi :  4  to  viii :  14.  Unbroken  fellowship. 
In  the  first  division  we  have  the  Bride  brought  into  relation- 
ship with  the  Bridegroom  and  entering  into  intercommunion 
with  Him.  It  is  not  on  the  highest  level.  We  get  something 
far  more  intimate  later  on;  she  has  learned  Him  better. 
I  will  take  a  few  passages  under  these  heads  or  divisions. 

The  book  opens  with  the  inscription,  ''The  Song  of  Solo- 
mon." Then  Solomon  is  the  author  and  the  penman.  We 
have  in  the  second,  third  and  fourth  verses  the  voice  of  the 
Bride  who  has  given  Him  her  heart  and  expresses  to  Him 
her  first  love,  so  to  speak.  "Let  Him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses 
of  His  mouth."  "Because  of  the  savour  of  thy  good  oint- 
ments thy  name  is  as  ointment  poured  forth."  You  see  what 
won  her.  What  won  you  to  Christ?  A  sense  of  our  needs 
brought  us  to  Him.  Many  of  us  came  to  Christ  with  very 
little  sense  of  His  loveliness  or  of  His  beauty.  We  came  not 
to  Him  with  love,  but  we  came  with  faith  and  trust,  and 
then  He  won  our  hearts.  Then  He  unveiled  His  beauty. 
We  saw  Him  there  on  the  Cross,  that  wonderful  spectacle, 
the  God-man  dying  for  us.  We  loved  Him  because  He  first 
loved  us,  and  then  there  came  into  our  hearts,  not  so  much  a 
sense  of  our  love  for  Him  as  of  the  beauty  of  Christ,  and  of 
His  great  love  for  us,  and  His  name  became  to  us  as  oint- 
ment poured  forth.  The  burden  of  sin  rolled  away,  and  His 
name  became  to  us  the  sweetest  of  all  names.  Remember, 
that  when  we  have  His  name  spoken  of  in  this  way,  we  are 
to  think  of  His  full  designation  in  the  New  Testament,  not 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  251 

in  shadow,  but  the  substance,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When 
we  say  it,  is  there  any  other  name  Hke  that  ?  "Draw  me,  we 
will  run  after  thee,"  and  then  next  "the  King  hath  brought 
me  into  His  chambers."  "The  upright  love  thee."  Now, 
it  is  a  love  relationship.  Remember  we  began  with  a  trust 
relationship. 

I  remember  when  I  was  an  unconverted  man  living  in  the 
West,  a  practicing  lawyer  there,  I  met  a  famous  evangelist 
who  said  to  me,  "Do  you  love  Jesus?"  I  said  no.  And  he 
replied,  "Well,  you  never  will  be  saved  until  you  love  Jesus." 
He  meant  well,  but  his  instruction  was  unwise.  Our  first 
touch  of  Him  is  a  despairing  touch,  and  we  love  Him  be- 
cause He  saves  us.    Thus  love  wins  our  love. 

Notice  in  the  first  stage  of  the  book,  the  bride  is  occupied 
with  herself.  "I  am  black,"  she  says.  How  quickly  He 
answers,  "but  comely."    She  is  beautiful  to  Him. 

"Oh  ye  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  as  the  tents  of  Kedar,  as 
the  curtains  of  Solomon.  Look  not  upon  me  because  I  am 
black,  because  the  sun  hath  looked  upon  me:  my  mother's 
children  were  angry  with  me;  they  made  me  the  keeper 
of  the  vineyards ;  but  mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept." 

This  is  apt  to  be  the  case  with  a  Christian  brought  into  a 
conscious  and  known  relationship  with  Jesus  Christ.  The 
first  thought,  and  properly  so,  is,  "I  am  black";  in  myself 
there  is  nothing  to  fit  me  for  this  place,  for  this  intimacy. 
It  is  not  good  to  be  occupied  all  the  time  with  ourselves. 
He  is  not  occupied  with  our  blackness.  It  is  possible  for 
a  saint  of  God  to  be  so  pre-occupied  with  what  he  is  in  the 
old  Adam  as  to  pass  his  whole  life  in  a  kind  of  perpetual 
discussion  of  a  dead  body.  Now  why  should  we  not  receive 
the  sentence  of  death  so  that  we  trust  not  in  ourselves  but  in 
Christ  who  raiseth  us  from  the  dead ;  and  why,  forever  and 
forever  be  occupied  with  the  old  man  who  is  all  vile,  and 


252  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

nothing  but  vile  Now  and  then,  when  the  Lord  wants  to 
show  us  ourselves,  it  may  be  well  to  take  one  look  at  that 
dead  body,  as  Paul  calls  it,  but  let  us  not  be  occupied  with  it. 
It  is  an  evidence  of  immaturity.  The  Bride  is  to  be  occu- 
pied with  Him;  she  is  not  talking  about  herself. 

There  are  some  very  sweet  things  in  this  preliminary 
stage  of  fellowship.  **Tell  me  oh  my  beloved,  where  thy 
flock  feeds?"  and  he  answers,  "Oh,  thou  fairest  among 
women."  Hear  that,  will  you?  Well,  it  is  just  love,  just 
love.  But  suppose  she  should  keep  on  all  the  time  by  say- 
ing, "Oh,  I  am  black,"  their  fellowship  would  not  progress 
very  much.  Let  us  think  His  thoughts.  The  old  man  is 
always  bad,  but  why  turn  aside  to  dig  it  up?  Remember 
this,  for  after  awhile  it  will  get  to  be  a  habit,  and  habit  is  a 
kind  of  cant.  There  was  a  gentleman  who  had  a  habit  of 
saying,  "Oh,  my  miserable  black  heart."  A  friend  of  his 
became  so  familiar  with  it  that  he  would  greet  him  with, 
"Well,  friend  George,  how  is  your  black  heart  now?"  Oh, 
no,  we  cannot  understand  it  when  He  says  "fairest  of 
women,"  but  let  us  be  glad  He  does  say  it. 

He  sees  us  in  His  own  perfection,  imparted  and  incorpor- 
ated into  His  bride,  so  that  to  His  love,  there  is  answering 
love.  We  are  going  to  be  like  Him,  just  as  beautiful  as 
Christ.  When  He  looks  at  His  bride  He  does  not  see  the 
blackness ;  His  blood  has  cleansed  her,  you  and  me. 

Then  she  speaks  in  the  ninth  verse,  "I  have  compared 
thee,  O  my  love,  to  a  company  of  horses  in  Pharaoh's  char- 
iots." The  best  comparison  she  can  make  now.  What  does 
He  say  "Thy  cheeks  are  comely  with  rows  of  jewels,  thy 
neck  with  chains  of  gold."  Then  comes  that  beautiful  pas- 
sage, and  He  unfolds  Himself  to  her.  You  know  it  is  only 
when  we  are  in  communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  when  we 
come  into  His  presence  to  rest  in  His  love,  to  commune  with 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  253 

Him,  not  about  our  blackness,  but  about  His  beauty,  to  tell 
out  in  our  poor  way  our  heart-growing  conception  of  His 
charms,  it  is  then  that  we  learn  things  about  Him,  it  is  then 
only  He  can  unfold  Himself. 

Now  look  at  the  second  chapter.  "I  am  the  rose  of 
Sharon,  and  the  lily  of  the  valleys,"  and  then  He  says  a 
wonderful  thing  to  her,  "As  the  lily  among  thorns,  so  is 
my  love  among  the  daughters."  Get  that  contrast.  The 
Spirit  of  God  is  very  fond  of  lilies.  Then  there  is  the 
thought  of  thorns.  His  Bride  is  like  a  lily.  She  answers 
back,  "As  the  apple  tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood,  so  is 
my  beloved  among  the  sons."  Pretty  good,  but  not  like 
the  other.  Trees  of  the  wood  are  very  beautiful,  and  some 
yield  fruit,  and  so  she  thinks  of  the  apple  tree.  You  see  she 
does  not  know  Him  when  He  says,  "I  am  the  rose  of  Sharon, 
and  the  lily  of  the  valley."  It  is  a  kind  of  figure  of  speech. 
He  loves  to  disclose  Himself.  You  know  that  "Beholding 
as  in  a  mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  are  changed  into 
the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord." 

Now  in  the  second  division,  I  see  the  Bride  returns  evi- 
dently to  her  former  home.  We  do  not  know  why.  The 
Lord  does  not  go  and  talk  with  His  neighbors  about  His 
domestic  affairs.  The  neighbors  may  see  that  something 
has  happened.    Let  me  read  the  eighth  verse. 

"The  voice  of  my  beloved,  behold,  he  cometh  leaping 
upon  the  mountains,  skipping  upon  the  hills.  My  beloved 
is  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart :  behold,  he  standeth  behind  our 
wall,  he  looketh  forth  at  the  windows,  shewing  himself 
through  the  lattice."  He  is  coming  for  her.  What  was  the 
house  we  lived  in?  When  we  lapse  back  into  the  world 
He  can  bring  us  out ;  He  can  bring  us  back  into  fellowship. 
Hear  her : 


254  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

"My  beloved  spake,  and  said  unto  me,  Rise  up,  my  love, 
my  fair  one,  and  come  away.  For  lo,  the  winter  is  past, 
the  rain  is  over  and  gone ;  the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth ; 
the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  come,  and  the  voice  of 
the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land."  Over  in  our  land  the  voice 
of  the  turtle  is  heard.  Come  back,  my  dear.  Arise,  my 
love,  come  away.  Oh,  are  you  in  the  world,  my  beloved? 
Hear  this,  "Arise  and  come  away."  There  are  better  things 
in  love's  land.  Newport  is  a  poor  place  compared  to  love's 
land.  Now  here  is  the  sweet  admonition,  "Oh,  my  dove." 
Fancy  calling  us  that.  That  is  the  new  nature.  Hawk,  bird 
of  prey,  by  the  old  nature;  dove  by  the  new  nature.  "Oh 
my  dove,  that  hideth  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock."  He  begins 
by  reminding  her  of  her  place,  safe  in  the  cleft  of  the  Rock. 
Bengel  said,  he  entered  into  the  heart  of  Christ  by  a  great 
spear  wound.  Now  that  is  where  she  is.  She  has  been  out 
of  communion,  but  in  a  safe  place,  "in  the  secret  places  of 
the  stairs."  "Places"  is  italicized,  showing  it  is  a  supplied 
word.  Would  the  bride  come  up  a  public  staircase  as  she 
comes  into  the  presence  of  her  dear  bridegroom?  Not  a  bit. 
A  secret  stair  for  her.  Now  the  next  thing  "Let  me  see  thy 
countenance."  Come  to  me.  Something  else.  "Let  me 
hear  thy  voice."  Oh,  He  wants  us  near,  after  we  have  lapsed 
from  our  fellowship  with  Him.  He  wants  us  to  come  to 
Him  by  the  secret  of  the  stairs,  having  access  by  the  Spirit. 
And  then  He  has  got  a  tender  little  word,  "Take  us  the 
foxes,  the  Httle  foxes,  that  spoil  the  vines."  The  little  foxes 
of  tempers,  faults,  made  much  of  and  accentuated,  and  that 
makes  a  perpetual  lot  of  little  issues  with  Him. 

Her  confession  here  is  very  beautiful,  down  to  the  fifth 
verse  of  the  third  chapter.  Then  she  breaks  out  in  a  beauti- 
ful song.  "Who  is  this  that  cometh  out  of  the  wilderness?" 
And  he  answers,  "Behold,  thou  art  fair." 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  255 

We  have  that  beautiful  passage  from  the  sixteenth  verse 
of  the  third  chapter  to  the  first  verse  of  the  sixth.  "I  am 
come  into  my  garden,  my  sister,  my  spouse."  Beautiful 
communion. 

Now  comes  that  second  lapse.  Here  is  the  bridegroom 
at  the  door.  "I  sleep,  but  my  heart  waketh :  it  is  the  voice 
of  my  beloved  that  knocketh,  saying,  Open  to  me,  my  sister, 
my  love,  my  dove,  my  undefiled :  for  my  head  is  filled  with 
dew,  and  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night." 

He  is  out  there  in  the  darkness  on  His  mission.  How 
does  she  answer  "I  have  put  off  my  coat ;  how  shall  I  put 
it  on?    I  have  washed  my  feet;  how  shall  I  defile  them?" 

This  washing  represents  the  washing  of  the  laver.  In  the 
beginning  she  was  occupied  with  her  blackness.  Now  she 
is  occupied  with  her  whiteness.  If  there  is  anything  worse 
than  to  be  occupied  with  your  bad  self,  it  is  to  be  occupied 
with  your  good  self.  It  represents  that  state  of  spirituality 
that  becomes  too  sublimated  to  think  of  that  world  out  in 
the  darkness.  There  is  a  danger  in  a  certain  attainment  of 
spirituality.  You  want  to  get  with  a  few  who  can  talk  just 
like  you,  and  who  have  wonderful  experiences  just  like  you. 

**My  beloved  put  in  his  hand  by  the  hole  of  the  door,  and 
my  bowels  were  moved  for  him.  I  rose  up  to  open  to  my 
beloved ;  and  my  hands  dropped  with  myrrh,  and  my  fingers 
with  sweet-smelling  myrrh,  upon  the  handles  of  the  lock." 

Oh,  so  occupied  with  her  own  spirituality,  and  yet  it  all 
came  from  him,  and  now  His  gifts  are  occupying  her,  not 
Himself.  "I  opened  to  my  beloved,  but  my  beloved  had 
withdrawn  himself  and  was  gone."  In  the  beginning  of 
your  fellowship  you  bore  all  sorts  of  things,  but  when  the 
feet  get  washed,  and  the  hands  drip  with  perfumery  and  all 
spiritual  graces,  He  will  teach  us  the  lesson.  He  went  on. 
He  could  not  wait,  and  now  she  seeks  Him,  poor  thing. 


256  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

You  know  the  mother  of  our  Lord  went  a  whole  day  sup- 
posing Him  to  be  in  the  company,  and  she  turned  back  and 
sought  Him  for  three  days  sorrowing.  It  does  not  do  to 
take  things  for  granted  in  our  fellowship  with  Jesus  Christ. 

''I  sought  him  but  I  could  not  find  him ;  I  called  him  but 
he  gave  me  no  answer.  The  watchman  that  went  about  the 
city  found  me,  they  smote  me,  they  wounded  me;  the 
keepers  of  the  walls  took  away  my  veil  from  me.  I  charge 
you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  if  ye  find  my  beloved,  that 
ye  tell  him  that  I  am  sick  of  love.  What  is  thy  beloved  more 
than  another  beloved,  O  thou  fairest  among  women?  what 
is  thy  beloved  more  than  another  beloved,  that  thou  dost  so 
charge  us?" 

What  is  your  Christ  more  than  Buddha?  What  is  your 
Christ  more  than  any  one  else?  Then  she  breaks  into  that 
marvelous  description  of  Him  : 

"My  beloved  is  white  and  ruddy,  the  chiefest  among  ten 
thousand His  mouth  is  most  sweet:  yea,  he  is  alto- 
gether lovely." 

Now  that  is  better  than  to  say  He  is  an  apple  tree  in  the 
trees  of  the  wood.  "He  is  altogether  lovely.  This  is  my  be- 
loved, O  daughters  of  Jerusalem." 

Then  suddenly  He  comes.  "Thou  art  beautiful  O  my 
love  as  Tirzah."  Communion  again.  He  can  now  take  her 
into  His  thoughts  for  Israel.  Then  from  the  tenth  verse 
to  the  fourteenth  the  bride  gives  a  closing  song.  She  is 
thinking  not  of  herself,  nor  of  herself,  but  of  the  great 
mission  they  two  have.  And  it  closes  very  beautifully, 
"Make  haste,  my  beloved"  like  that  refrain  at  the  end  of 
Revelation,  "Come  quickly.  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly." 

If  I  have  helped  any  of  you  to  a  better  understanding  of 
this  book,  then  I  may  add  one  thing :  Study  it  after  prayer 
when  you  are  sure  you  are  in  fellowship  with  Him.     Not 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  257 

when  there  is  a  cloud  between  you  and  Him;  get  restora- 
tion, and  then  when  it  is  all  sweet,  ask  Him  to  speak  to  you 
out  of  it. 


THE  CHURCH  AND  THE  CHURCHES.* 

I.     The  Church  Which  Is  His  Body. 

Whoever  reads  with  attention  the  Acts  and  the  Epistles 
observes  the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  word  church,  in 
both  the  plural  and  singular  forms  of  that  word.  Indeed, 
so  constantly  does  the  word  recur  that  it  is  evidently  of 
most  urgent  importance  to  the  student  of  Scripture  to  un- 
derstand its  meanings.  The  Epistles,  especially,  concern 
the  church  and  the  churches.  Very  little  is  said  about  Israel, 
very  little  about  the  kingdom.  It  is  the  church  which  is 
prominently  in  view  in  this  large  and  important  part  of  the 
Bible.  Evidently,  then,  it  is  impossible  to  read  those  writ- 
ings intelligently  unless  we  are  able  to  define  the  various 
senses  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  that  word. 

The  Greek  word,  ecclesia,  translated  "church,"  is  formed 
from  ek — "out"  or  "out  of,"  and  kalleo — "to  call,"  and  in 
itself,  therefore,  signifies  the  "outcalled."  But,  since  the 
word  is  never  used  of  a  single  individual,  but  always  of 
many  individuals  together,  it  takes  on  the  larger  meaning  of 
an  "outcalled  assembly."  It  is  thus  appropriately  used,  not 
only  of  the  New  Testament  church  and  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment churches,  but  also  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  (Acts 
vii :  38) ,  and  of  the  town  meeting  of  Ephesus  (Acts  xix :  32, 
39,  41,  "assembly"). 


*Addresses  given  at  the  Fourth   Mid-winter  Bible   Conference, 
Boston,  Mass.,  February  2-8,  1904. 
17 


258  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

The  word  means,  in  itself,  no  more  than  a  called  out 
assembly.  The  Israelites  were  called  out  of  Egypt  by  the 
words  of  Moses  and  Aaron;  the  town  meeting  of  Ephesus 
was  called  out  of  the  mass  of  Ephesians  by  the  guild  of 
silversmiths ;  the  New  Testament  church  is  called  out  of  the 
mass  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  by 
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Grace  of  God.  In  each 
use  of  the  word  the  distinctive  character,  privileges,  and 
responsibilities  of  the  called  out  assembly  must  be  deter- 
mined by  the  declarations  of  Scripture  concerning  each. 
But  the  mere  use  of  the  word  church  affords  no  more  war- 
rant for  making  the  assembly  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness 
identical  with,  or  a  part  of,  the  New  Testament  ecclesia,  than 
for  so  identifying  the  town  meeting  at  Ephesus.  As  a  mat- 
ter of  fact  Israel  in  the  wilderness  and  the  New  Testament 
church  have  but  one  thing  in  common — the  same  God. 

In  this,  and  the  addresses  which  are  to  follow^  we  are  to 
consider  the  word  only  as  applied  to  the  ''church  which  is 
his  body,  the  fullness  of  him  which  filleth  all  in  all"  (Eph. 
i:  22,  23),  and  to  the  local  assemblies  called  churches  in  the 
Acts,  Epistles,  and  in  the  Revelation;  and  we  are  first  of 
all  to  look  at  the  Scripture  teaching  concerning  "the  church 
which  is  his  body." 

The  Historic  Background. 

The  church  is  first  mentioned  in  Scripture  by  our  Lord 
Himself  in  the  words  recorded  in  Matthew  xyi:i8,  and 
that  in  a  setting  which  is  both  interesting  and  illuminative. 

Note,  first,  that  our  Lord  does  not  mention  the  church 
until  the  rejection  by  Israel  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and 
of  Himself  as  King  has  become  manifest.  In  Matt,  xi:  16- 
24,  Jesus  declares  the  national  rejection  both  of  John  the 
Baptist,  the  herald,  and  of  Himself,  the  King.     For  that 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  259 

generation  there  remained  but  judgment;  and  that  great 
discourse  closes  with  a  wholly  new  message.  It  is  no  more 
"repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,"  but :  "Come 
unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest" — a  very  diiferent  proclamation. 

In  Matt,  xii  our  Lord  puts  Himself  morally  outside  of 
Israel,  identifying  Himself  and  His  disciples  with  David 
and  his  followers  in  the  time  of  the  rejection  of  that  king 
by  Israel  (Matt,  xii:  1-4;  i  Sam.  xx,  xxi,  xxii),  and  again 
(Matt,  xii:  40-45)  declares  judgment  upon  that  generation. 

In  Matt,  xiii  Jesus  goes  "out  of  the  house"  (Israel)  and 
utters  the  "mysteries  of  the  kingdom": — i.  e.,  those  things 
which  are  to  be  fulfilled  between  His  first  and  second  ad- 
vents, and  which  have  already  found  their  fulfillment  in 
Christendom — the  so-called  "Christian  world."  Then,  in 
Matthew  xvi.  He  announces  a  purpose  hitherto  hidden  in 
God  (Eph.  iii:9,  10),  and  constituting  something  quite  dif- 
ferent from  either  the  Old  Testament  f oreview  of  the  king- 
dom, or  from  "the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom"  described  in 
Matt,  xiii;  but  which,  Hke  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom, 
must  be  fulfilled  between  the  first  and  second  advents,  name- 
ly, "I  will  build  my  church" — my  "called  out  assembly." 

In  other  words :  Israel  being  under  judicial  blindness  and 
rejection  (Matt,  xiii:  13-15),  two  things  are  announced  to 
go  on  contemporaneously — the  development  in  Christendom 
of  the  mixed  condition — wheat  and  tares,  good  and  bad 
fish — called  "mysteries  of  the  kingdom"  (Matt,  xiii:  11); 
and  also  that  other  "mystery"  (Rom.  xvi:  25;  Eph.  1:9; 
iii :  4,  5),  the  church,  which  He  purposed  through  the  procla- 
mation of  Himself  as  "the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God,"  to  build  upon  Himself  as  the  Rock  foundation — a 
called  out  assembly,  the  church. 


26o  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

How  the  Church  Is  Formed. 

Closely  connected  with  our  Lord's  announcement  of  His 
purpose  to  build  the  church  are  repeated  references  to  the 
baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  these  promises  concern- 
ing the  Spirit  are,  in  turn,  intimately  associated  with  instruc- 
tions for  a  world-wide  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  The 
disciples  were  bidden  to  tarry  at  Jerusalem  until  endued  with 
power  from  on  high,  before  beginning  the  testimony  to 
Christ,  the  effect  of  which  has  been  the  outcalling  of  the 
church  (Luke  xxiv:  46-49;  Acts  i:  4,  5,  8). 

These  two  ideas  are  inseparably  linked  in  the  final  instruc- 
tions of  Christ — the  world-wide  ministry,  and  the  baptism 
with  the  Spirit.  And  i  Cor.  xii:i2,  13  supplies  the  fact 
which  links  the  church  inseparably  to  the  baptism  and  the 
preaching: — "As  the  body  is  one,  and  hath  many  members, 
and  all  the  members  of  that  one  body,  being  many,  are  one 
body;  so  also  is  Christ.  For  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  bap- 
tized into  one  body,  whether  we  be  Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether 
we  be  bond  or  free;  and  have  been  all  made  to  drink  into 
one  Spirit." 

That,  then,  is  the  church,  of  which  Jesus  Christ,  crucified, 
risen,  ascended,  glorified,  seated,  is  the  Head  (Eph.  i :  22, 
23).  That  this  is  a  fact  of  immense  positional  importance  to 
the  individual  believer  is  evident.  Indeed,  the  whole  posi- 
tional doctrine  of  the  Epistles  is  based  upon  this  great  fact, 
that  every  believer  is  thus  positionally  identified  with  Christ 
Himself.  It  is  a  fact  which  explains  and  defines  the  im- 
portant expression,  "in  Christ  Jesus."  Baptized  into  Christ 
by  the  Spirit,  every  believer  is  "in  Christ,"  or  "in  Christ 
Jesus"  (Eph.  i:  I,  3,  4,  6-13;  ii:6,  10,  etc.).  This  exalted 
position  is  especially  the  theme  of  Ephesians.  But  it  is 
necessary  to  remember  that  our  union  to  Christ  as  members 
of  His  body  is  effected  by  that  same  baptism  with  the  Holy 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  261 

Spirit  which  our  Lord  connected  with  the  whole  world-wide 
service  of  preaching  the  Gospel. 

Evidently  the  truth  that  the  church  which  our  Lord  an- 
nounced His  intention  to  build  would  be  composed  of  be- 
lievers baptized  into  Himself  by  the  Spirit,  was  one  of  the 
"many  things"  which  the  disciples  were  not  "able  to  bear" 
until  after  they  should  be  illuminated  by  the  Spirit,  and 
which  were  reserved  for  the  great  ministry  of  Paul  (John 
xvi:i2,  13;  Eph.  iii:3-io). 

But,  now  that  the  revelation  through  Paul  has  been  made, 
we  may,  nay  we  must,  in  coming  to  an  understanding  of 
how  the  church  is  formed,  unite  the  three  facts — the  world- 
wide preaching,  the  baptism  with  the  Spirit,  and  the  build- 
ing of  the  church. 

In  other  words,  Christ  is  building  His  church  through  the 
church  itself,  by  means  of  the  baptism  with  the  Spirit.  An 
illustration  of  this  is  afforded  by  the  events  of  Pentecost. 
On  that  day  the  first  event  was  the  uniting,  by  the  baptism 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  of  the  gathered  disciples  to  Christ 
their  risen  Head.  But  those  disciples  were,  as  we  know 
from  I  Cor.  xii :  7-31,  united  to  Christ  as  living  members  of 
His  body  in  an  orderly  way  with  reference  to  the  activities 
of  that  body.  Some  were  made  apostles,  some  prophets, 
some  teachers,  some  miracle-workers,  some  healers,  some 
helpers,  some  rulers,  some  speakers  of  tongues  ( i  Cor.  xii : 
28,  etc.).  And  all  this  was  done  sovereignly,  in  God's  own 
wisdom  (i  Cor.  xii:  11,  18,  24). 

Furthermore,  these  members,  thus  united  to  Christ  and 
gifted  by  the  Spirit  for  the  various  activities  of  the  world- 
wide ministry  were,  like  the  members  of  the  human  body, 
subject  to  the  will  of  the  Head.  "There  are  differences  of 
administrations,  but  the  same  Lord"  (i  Cor.  xii:  5.)  And, 
in  ordering  as  Head  and  Lord  the  uses  of  His  members,  He 


262  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

distributes  the  gifted  members,  here  apostles,  to  do  apostolic 
work ;  there  prophets,  to  minister  that  gift ;  in  another  place 
evangelists;  and  elsewhere  pastors  and  teachers  (Eph.  iv: 
ii).  But  all  these  varied  gifts  ,exercised  here  and  there  as 
the  Head  directs,  are  to  one  definite  purpose :  "for  the  per- 
fecting of  saints,  unto  the  work  of  ministering,  unto  the 
building  up  of  the  body  of  Christ"  (Eph.  iv:  12,  R.  V.). 
And  this  "building  up"  looks  toward  a  definite  termination : 
"unto  a  full-grown  man,  even  the  measure  of  the  stature  of 
the  fullness  of  Christ"  (Eph.  iv:  13). 

In  other  words,  as  the  human  body,  having  received  all  of 
its  members,  and  having  developed  all  of  its  members,  be- 
comes complete,  so  it  will  be  with  the  church  which  is 
Christ's  body.  It  builds  itself  up,  through  the  gifts,  under 
the  Lordship  of  Christ  the  Head,  until  every  member  is 
there.  As  the  Spirit  father  says :  "All  the  body,  fitly 
framed  and  knit  together,  through  that  which  every  joint 
[member,  gift]  supplieth,  according  to  the  working  in  due 
measure  of  each  several  part,  maketh  the  increase  of  the 
body,  unto  the  building  up  of  itself  in  love"  (Eph.  iv:  16, 
R.  v.). 

We  now  have  a  complete  account  of  the  formation  of  the 
church  which  is  His  body,  and  may  return  to  our  pentecostal 
illustration.  Baptized  into  one  body  and  vitally  united  to 
Christ,  every  one  of  the  disciples  was  definitely  endued  with 
gift  for  some  particular  service.  Under  the  headship  of 
Christ,  Peter  stood  up  to  preach,  and  the  effect  of  the 
preaching  was  that  "the  same  day  there  were  added  to  them 
about  three  thousand  souls"  (Acts  ii:4i).  The  body, 
formed  by  the  baptism  with  the  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost, had  begun  the  building  of  itself  up,  through  the  testi- 
mony that  Jesus  was  "both  Christ  and  Lord"  (Acts  ii :  36). 

But  not  all  who  heard  the  testimony  were  converted  and 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  263 

joined  to  the  body  of  Christ — far  from  it.  The  disciples 
were  still  an  ecclesia — a  called  out  assembly,  the  church. 
And  so  it  will  be  until  the  body  is  complete. 

The  idea  that  in  building  His  church  Christ  is  converting 
the  world  is  not  only  negatived  by  the  very  word  ecclesia, 
since  "to  call  out  of"  implies  that  some  called  do  not  come 
out,  but  is  also  negatived  by  express  Scripture  {e.  g.,  Acts 
XV :  14),  and  by  all  experience.  Paul  found  that  while  unto 
some  he  was  the  savor  of  life  unto  life,  to  others  he  was  the 
savor  of  death  unto  death  (2  Cor.  ii:  15,  16).  His  gospel 
was  *'hid  to  them  that  are  lost"  (2  Cor.  iv:  3)  ;  and  He  was 
made  all  things  to  all  men  that  he  "might  by  all  means  save 
some"  (i  Cor.  ix:22). 

All  Jerusalem  was  not  converted  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
neither  subsequently.  Nor  was  Antioch  converted,  nor  Cor- 
inth, nor  Rome,  nor  Paris,  nor  London,  nor  New  York,  nor, 
it  may  be  added,  the  smallest  village  in  Christendom.  The 
church  is,  and  will  remain,  an  ecclesia.  The  world  is  to  be 
brought  back  to  God,  but  through  the  kingdom,  not  the 
church. 

The  Relationships   of  the  Church. 

The  church  is  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  is  not  the 
kingdom  of  God — of  it,  but  not  the  whole  of  it,  precisely,  as 
the  kingdom  of  Saxony  is  in  the  German  empire,  or  as 
Pennsylvania  is  in  the  United  States.  It  would  be  inexact 
to  speak  of  the  kingdom  of  Saxony  and  the  German  empire 
as  equivalent  expressions,  though  both  of  those  bodies  poli- 
tic have  much  in  common — language,  literature,  laws,  su- 
preme head,  etc.  So  the  church  is  in  the  kingdom  of  God, 
but  not  co-extensive  with  the  kingdom.  The  kingdom  of 
God  includes  all  moral  intelligences  in  every  age  and  every 
sphere  which  are  willingly  subject  to  the  divine  authority. 


264  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

This  appears  sufficiently  from  Heb.  xii :  22,  23  :  "But  ye  are 
come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God, 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of 
angels,  to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first-born, 
which  are  written  in  heaven,  and  to  God  the  judge  of  all, 
and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect." 

The  "church  which  is  His  body"  is  not  before  the  mind  of 
the  Spirit  in  the  parables  and  other  teachings  of  our  Lord 
concerning  "the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven"  (Matt. 
xiii:ii).  The  sphere  of  profession  in  the  widest  sense, 
during  the  present  age,  is  the  subject  of  those  parables. 
Doubtless  the  "children  of  the  kingdom"  (Matt,  xiii :  38) 
are  the  individuals  who,  by  baptism  with  the  Spirit,  are 
formed  into  the  body  of  Christ ;  but  the  body,  as  such,  is  in 
no  way  the  subject  of  the  "mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  For  the  body  is  itself  a  distinct  "mystery"  (Eph. 
iii:i-ii),  the  unfolding  of  which  was  committed  to  the 
Apostle  Paul.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  while  the  church  is 
mentioned  but  three  times  in  the  Gospels,  and  but  nineteen 
times  in  the  Acts,  the  word  occurs  sixty-two  times  in  Paul's 
Epistles. 

The  "church  which  is  His  body"  is  related  to  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  as  it  will  be  set  up  at  the  second  coming  of  Christ, 
as  the  present  Queen  of  Great  Britain  is  related  to  that  king- 
dom, namely,  as  being  the  bride  of  the  King  (Eph.  v :  29-32 ; 
2  Tim.  ii:  12;  Rev.  vi :  10),  and  so  associated  with  him  in 
rule.  It  cannot  be  too  clearly  held  that  the  work  of  God  in 
this  dispensation  is  not  the  gathering  of  subjects  of  the  com- 
ing kingdom,  but  the  outcalling  of  the  ekklcsia,  the  co-ruler 
with  Christ  of  the  coming  kingdom.  Individually  the  "many 
members"  are  by  birth  both  royal  and  priestly,  but  the  mil- 
lennial authority  is  corporate  rather  than  personal.  Eph. 
v:  30,  31  ("For  we  are  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh, 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  265 

and  of  His  bones.  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his 
father  and  mother  and  shall  be  joined  unto  his  wife,  and  they 
two  shall  be  one  flesh")  is  quoted  from  Gen.  ii:  23,  24,  and 
connects  therefore  with  Gen.  i :  26-28,  the  central  idea  of 
which  is  joint  dominion. 

But  the  church  is  related  to  the  coming  kingdom  in  that 
"the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,"  is  also  the  ''new"  or  "holy" 
Jerusalem  (Rev.  xxi:2,  3,  9-27).  The  distinctive  glory  of 
the  ancient  Jerusalem  was  that  it  was  "the  city  (or  capital) 
of  the  great  king"  (Matt,  v :  35  ;  Psa.  cxxxv :  21 ;  Isa.  ii :  3) , 
and  that  it  contained  the  Temple  (Psa.  Ixviii :  29;  cxxii :  6- 
9).  Both  these  distinctions  meet  in  the  church,  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem.  It  is  "the  tabernacle  of  God"  (Rev.  xxi :  2,  3), 
and  the  "Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple 
of  it." 

It  is  not  at  all  that  the  earthly  Jerusalem  is  done  away  dur- 
ing the  kingdom  age,  but  that  the  church,  the  Lamb's  wife, 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  is  over  it,  as  both  the  place  and  the 
means  of  the  manifestation  of  God  who  dwells  in  it. 

The  "church  which  is  His  body"  is  related  to  God  as 
temple  and  habitation  (Eph.  ii :  19-21 ;  i  Pet.  ii :  4-7;  2  Cor. 
vi :  16) .  Here  we  are  brought  into  the  most  intimate  connec- 
tion with  Old  Testament  type  and  prophecy  concerning 
Christ.  For,  while  the  Old  Testament  vision  does  not  see 
the  church,  it  does  see  Christ  as  the  f  ulfiller  of  all  the  great 
types — the  association  of  the  church  with  His  sufferings  and 
glories,  and  with  the  mystery  of  His  person,  being  reserved 
for  the  New  Testament  revelation. 

The  Tabernacle  (and  afterward  the  Temple,  which  was 
but  the  Tabernacle  made  permanent)  was  primarily  the 
place  of  Jehovah's  abode  among  His  people  (Ex.  xxv:8; 
xxix:  43-46;  Lev.  xxvi:  11,  12;  2  Kings  xi:  13;  Eph.  ii: 
22).    Secondly,  the  Tabernacle  or  Temple  was  a  house  of 


266  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

worship  (Eph.  11:21;  1  Pet.  ii:5;  Heb.  xiii:i5,  16). 
Here  the  figure  changes.  Seen  as  one  body  with  Christ,  the 
church  is  a  habitation  of  God,  and  also  His  temple,  or 
spiritual  house.  Seen  as  "many  members"  ( i  Cor.  xii :  20) , 
the  church  is  ''an  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacri- 
fices, acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ"  (i  Pet.  ii:  5).  In 
other  words,  the  "many  members"  of  the  one  body  are  an 
hierarchy  of  priests,  of  which  Jesus  Christ  is  the  High 
Priest.  The  stones  of  the  "spiritual  house"  are  "living 
stones"  and  utter  the  praises  of  the  God  who  abides  in  that 
house.  It  is  as  if  every  stone  of  Solomon's  Temple  had 
broken  out  with  praise  and  prayer.  The  manner  of  God's 
possession  of  the  "spiritual  house,"  which  is  His  temple  and 
habitation,  is  "through  the  Spirit."  The  Spirit  builds  the 
house  (i  Cor.  xii:  12,  13)  and  then  takes  up  His  abode  in 
it  (Eph.  ii:  22)  as  the  manifestation  of  God.  The  Spirit  is 
the  holy  cementer  of  the  living  stones  to  each  other  and  to 
the  "head  of  the  corner,"  Christ;  and  the  Spirit  animates 
each  stone  with  praise  and  prayer. 

The  relationhsips  of  the  church  to  Christ  have  already,  of 
necessity,  been  indicated,  but  may  be  briefly  repeated. 

(a)  Corporately  the  church  is  "His  body,  the  fulness  of 
Him  that  filleth  all  in  all"  (Eph.  i :  23).  A  body  is  for  ser- 
vice and  for  manifestation.  Every  "member"  is  united  to 
the  body  in  a  specific  and  not  in  an  indefinite  way  (i  Cor. 
xii:  12-27).  That  is  to  say,  each  "member"  is  assigned  in 
the  divine  will  to  the  exercise  of  a  specific  function  in  the 
service  of  the  Head  ( i  Cor.  xii :  4-1 1 ) .  These  functions  are 
called  "gifts" ;  and  with  such  designation  to  specific  function 
goes,  as  part  of  the  "gift,"  an  enablement  or  "manifestation 
of  the  Spirit"  (i  Cor.  xii:  7).  In  true  Christian  service, 
therefore,  nothing  is  left  to  self-pleasing  or  self-will.  We 
serve  the  Head,  whose  members  we  are,  when  we  take  joy- 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  267 

fully  the  place  assigned  us,  ministering  there  as  He  may 
direct.    The  foot  must  not  try  to  do  the  work  of  the  hand. 

The  body  is  also  for  manifestation.  By  His  incarnation 
the  Word,  who  had  previously  been  invisible  to  men,  became 
visible  by  His  human  body  (John  i:  14;  i  John  i:  i,  2). 
Precisely  so,  in  the  divine  will  and  intent,  ''the  church  which 
is  His  body"  is  charged  with  the  marvelous  privilege  of 
making  Him  still  visible  to  men  (2  Cor.  iv:  10,  11;  i  Pet. 
ii :  9,  R.  V. ;  Gal.  ii :  20 ;  Phil,  i :  21 ;  John  ix :  5,  with  Matt. 
v:i4). 

(b)  The  church  is  the  bride  of  Christ  (Eph.  v  129-32; 
2  Cor.  xi:2;  Rev.  xix:6-9).  Since  the  divine  thought  of 
marriage  is  absolute  identification,  absolute  oneness,  it  is 
obvious  that  the  eternal  position  of  the  church  is  to  be  that 
of  Christ  Himself  (Eph.  v:3o;  i:6;  John  xvii:io,  16, 
21-24). 

Upon  the  relation  of  "the  church  which  is  His  body"  to 
the  world,  Scripture  is  absolutely  silent.  It  may  therefore 
be  said  that  the  church,  corporately,  has  no  relation  to  the 
world.  It  should  be  needless  to  add  that  a  large  and  most 
important  body  of  teaching  has  to  do  with  the  individual 
Christian  and  the  world. 

Since  the  gift  of  evangelist  is  one  of  the  gifts  for  the  up- 
building of  the  body  of  Christ,  and  since  that  body  can  grow 
only  by  winning  "members"  from  the  world,  it  may  be  said 
inferentially  that  the  relation  of  "the  church  which  is  His 
body"  to  the  world  of  mankind  is  a  missionary  relation — to 
save  men  out  of  the  world.  But  this  mission  is,  in  a  purely 
Biblical  sense,  the  mission  not  of  the  body,  corporately  con- 
sidered, but  of  each  individual  Christian. 

The  relation  of  "the  church  which  is  His  body"  to  the 
heavenly  inhabitants  is,  in  grace,  so  exalted  as  almost  to  stag- 
ger faith.    Not  until  we  see  that  this  dispensation  is  distin- 


268  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

guished  from  all  past  and  all  future  dispensations  by  the 
reign  of  grace  (Rom.  v:2i)  is  it  possible  to  receive  this 
truth. 

(a)  The  church  is  related  to  the  Old  Testament  saints  as 
a  bride  is  related  to  the  "friends"  of  her  bridegroom.  This 
is  clearly  stated  by  John  the  Baptist,  the  last  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament saints :  "He  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  bridegroom ; 
but  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom,  which  standeth  and  hear- 
eth  him,  rejoiceth  greatly  because  of  the  brigegroom's  voice : 
this  my  joy  therefore  is  fulfilled"  (John  iii :  29).  Abraham 
was  called  "the  friend  of  God"  ( Jas.  ii :  23  ;  Isa.  xli :  8) . 

(b)  No  passage  speaks  of  the  relation  of  the  church  cor- 
porately  to  the  angels,  but  it  may  be  surely  derived  by  infer- 
ence from  Heb.  ii :  12,  where  ekklesia  is  the  inspired  rendering 
of  the  Hebrew  qahal  in  Psa.  xxii :  22.  This  quotation 
from  Psa  xxii  indicates  how  the  Old  Testament,  while  not 
mentioning  the  church,  yet  leaves  room  for  it.  For  certain- 
ly the  church,  and  not  Israel,  is  meant  in  Psa.  xxii :  22,  for 
this  part  of  the  Psalm  is  not  only  messianic,  but  unmistak- 
ably post-resurrectional.  Furthermore,  the  passage  is 
quoted  in  Heb.  ii :  12  to  show  Christ's  oneness  with  the 
church.  It  follows  that  not  only  individual  Christians,  but 
the  church  corporately  is  brought  into  the  position  of  the 
Son  Himself  as  described  in  the  first  and  second  chapters  of 
Hebrews.  These  chapters  have  been  called  by  Dr.  A.  T. 
Pierson  "the  inspired  philosophy  of  the  plan  of  salvation." 
Briefly,  the  doctrine  is  that  the  Son  of  God  was  better  than 
the  angels"  as  being  Himself  "God"  and  "Lord"  (i:8-io). 
In  incarnation  He  entered  humanity,  which  was  "made  a 
little  lower  than  the  angels"  (ii :  7),  that  He  might  save  men. 
Having  saved  them,  He  brings  them  into  His  own  primal 
position,  "for  both  he  that  sanctifieth  and  they  who  are 
sanctified  are  all  of  one"  (ii:  11)  ;   whereupon  follows  His 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  269 

triumph  "in  the  midst  of  the  church"  (ii:  12),  which  is  thus 
associated  with  Him  above  the  angels. 

(c)  The  relation  of  the  church  to  future  judgments  is  still 
measured  by  her  identification  with  Christ,  i  Cor.  vi :  2,  3  : 
**Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world?  and 
if  the  world  shall  be  judged  by  you,  are  ye  unworthy  to 
judge  the  smallest  matters?  Know  ye  not  that  ye  shall 
judge  angels?  How  much  more  things  that  pertain  to  this 
life?"  So  far,  then,  from  becoming  the  subjects  of  future 
judgments,  the  "many  members"  of  Christ's  body  are  asso- 
ciated with  Him  in  judgment. 

II.    THE  CHURCHES. 

In  a  preceding  address  we  have  been  looking  together  at 
the  word  church  in  its  larger  meaning  of  Christ's  "body,  the 
fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all."  We  have  seen  that  the 
church,  in  that  sense  of  the  word,  is  a  living  organism  in 
the  same  way  that  the  human  body  is  a  living  organism 
(i  Cor.  xii:  12)  ;  that  it  is  composed  of  a  Head,  Christ  in 
glory ;  and  of  living  members,  the  whole  number  of  the  re- 
generate between  the  two  advents  of  Christ;  that  these 
living  members  are,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  baptized  into  Christ 
and  into  each  other  (i  Cor.  xii:  13)  ;  and  that  these  mem- 
bers are  gathered  out  of  the  world,  and  edified  by  means  of 
believers  who,  endued  by  the  Holy  Spirit  with  diverse  gifts 
(i  Cor.  xii:  4-28),  are  themselves  gifts  of  the  risen  and 
glorified  Head  to  various  companies  and  localities  on  earth 
(Eph.  iv:8,  11-16).  This  church  not  only  as  to  its  Head, 
but  in  part  as  to  its  members  is  in  heaven.  It  is  obvious, 
therefore,  that  it  cannot  be  in  its  entirety  a  visible  church. 

We  come  now  to  consider  a  second  common  use  of  the 
word  church  in  the  New  Testament  Scriptures,  namely  as 


270  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

applied  to  local  assemblies  of  professed  believers.  Such  use 
is  found  in  such  passages  as,  "the  church  of  God  which  is  at 
Corinth"  (i  Cor.  i:2)  ;  "the  church  that  is  in  their  house" 
(Rom.  xvi:  5). 

Doubtless  both  meanings  were  in  the  mind  of  our  Lord 
in  His  twofold  use  of  the  word  (Matt,  xvi :  18),  "Upon  this 
rock  will  I  build  my  church;  and  the  gates  of  hades  shall 
not  prevail  against  it,"  and  (Matt,  xviii :  17),  "and  if  he  shall 
neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  church."  The  first  of 
the  passages  quoted  could  only  refer  to  that  body,  not  one 
member  of  which  shall  ever  perish ;  the  second  passage  im- 
plies a  visible  brotherhood  competent  to  deal  with  ques- 
tions of  discipline. 

The  First  Churches. 

As  a  result  of  the  first  preaching  of  the  Gospel  after  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  "about  three  thousand"  souls 
were  converted  and  "added  unto  them,"  i.  e.,  unto  the  group 
of  believers  upon  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  had  fallen.  This 
body  of  believers,  all  in  Jerusalem,  constituted  the  first  of 
the  local  churches.  For  a  moment,  as  one  may  say,  the 
church  which  is  his  body  was  identical  with  the  church  at 
Jerusalem.  Both  were  one.  But  when  the  Gospel  broke  its 
Jewish  limitations,  and  some  went  as  far  as  Antioch  "preach- 
ing the  Lord  Jesus,"  a  "great  number  believed,"  and  these 
believers  are  immediately  called  a  church  (Acts  xi  119-26; 
xiii:  I,  etc.).  From  Antioch,  in  turn,  preachers — this  time 
the  great  Apostle  Paul,  with  Barnabas — were  "sent  forth 
by  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Acts  xiii  14)  ;  and,  as  had  previously 
happened  at  Jerusalem  and  Antioch,  the  believers  called  out 
by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  in  every  place,  are,  collective- 
ly spoken  of  as  churches  in  those  places  (Acts  xv:4i; 
xvi:  5;  xviii:  22). 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  271 

The  Order  of  the  Apostolic  Churches. 

At  first  the  churches  seem  to  have  been  simple  assemblies 
of  the  Christians  of  a  place  or  city,  after  the  order  of  our 
Lord's  saying  (Matt.  xviii:2o),  "For  where  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst 
of  them."  It  will  be  remembered  that  these  words  are  in 
close  connection  with  verse  17,  in  which  a  local  church  is 
evidently  in  view.  It  is  as  if  our  Lord  answered  the  un- 
spoken question  in  the  disciples'  minds,  "But  what  is  this 
'church'  of  which  you  speak,  to  which  we  are  to  'tell'  the 
sin  of  an  unrepenting  brother?"  by  saying:  "It  is  where 
two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  (or  'into')  my  name" 
— the  local  assembly  of  Christ's  disciples.  The  words  imply 
more  than  mere  human  volition.  "Are  gathered"  intimates 
a  fellowship  induced  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  renewed  hearts. 

And  it  is  most  blessed  that  Matt,  xviii :  20  ever  remains 
the  resource  of  believers  in  a  time  of  confusion  and  apostasy. 
Such  a  gathering  is  a  church.  And  I  trust  I  may  be  par- 
doned by  any  whose  practices  I  may  cross,  if  I  add  that  no 
conceivable  good  purpose  is  subserved  by  calling  such  a 
gathering  anything  but  a  church.  It  is  true  that  "assembly" 
might,  lexically,  have  been  a  better  word  for  our  English 
translation  of  ecclesia,  but  this  is  true  of  many  other  words 
— among  them  atonement,  for  example — and  with  all  else 
which  unhappily  divides  Christians  to-day  it  raises  a  needless 
and  harmful  issue,  not  far  removed  from  that  "strife  about 
words  to  no  profit"  against  which  we  are  solemnly  warned 
for  these  last  days  (2  Tim.  ii:  14)  to  insist  on  the  words 
"assembly"  or  "gathering."  There  is  an  opprobrium  in- 
separable from  true  separation  (2  Tim.  iii :  12),  but  there  is 
a  needless  insistence  on  new  terms,  and  idle  peculiarities, 
which  brings  a  just  opprobrium.  A  local  gathering  of  be- 
lievers unto  His  Name  is  a  church.    Let  it  be  called  so. 


2^2  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

It  is  wholly  congruous  with  Acts  xx :  7  to  assume  that  the 
apostolic  churches  met  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  to  break 
bread  in  remembrance  of  the  Lord,  as  a  testimony  to  His 
death,  and  expression  of  the  unity  of  His  one  body,  and  a 
renewal  of  the  hope  of  His  coming  (Luke  xxiiiiQ,  20; 
Acts  ii:  42;   i  Cor.  xi :  23-26 ;  i  Cor.  x:  16,  17). 

It  is  only  when  the  one  passage  (Acts  xx:  7),  "And  upon 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the  disciples  came  together 
to  break  bread,"  is  hardened  into  a  new  Leviticus,  so  that 
the  heart  looks  for  blessing  to  the  table  instead  of  to  Him- 
self, and  would  be  disquieted  and  unblessed  if  the  table  were 
wanting  on  any  particular  Lord's  day,  though  He,  assuredly, 
would  be  there,  that  the  simple  and  beautiful  custom  be- 
comes a  snare.  Our  Lord  would  have  no  legality  with  His 
table,  but  left  a  gracious  liberty  in  His  "as  often." 

But,  while  such  was  the  simple  order  at  the  first,  the 
Acts  and  Epistles  note  as  of  great  importance,  and  that  at  a 
very  early  date,  the  designation  of  elders  or  bishops  (the 
office  is  identical,  Titus  i :  5  and  7). 

At  first  {e.  g.,  Acts  xiv:  23)  Paul,  an  Apostle,  with  Bar- 
nabas, an  apostolic  man,  ordained  or  appointed  the  elders. 
This  seems  never  to  have  been  done  at  the  first  evangelistic 
visit  to  a  place,  but  when  the  church,  outgathered  at  the  first 
visit,  was  revisited.  The  reason  is  obvious.  Time  was  nec- 
cessary  for  the  development  and  manifestation  of  the  gifts 
and  graces  necessary  to  the  elders'  office. 

Later,  it  became  necessary  for  the  Apostle  to  send  ex- 
perienced and  spiritual  fellow  laborers,  as  Titus  and  Timo- 
thy, to  ordain  (or  appoint)  elders.  But  when  this  stage  had 
been  reached,  and  the  peculiar  apostolic  discernment  could 
no  longer  be  available,  it  is  most  beautiful  to  see  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  defines  for  all  time  in  sacred  Scripture,  the  tests 
by  which  the  true  elders  may  be  known. 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  273 

As  in  so  many  other  things,  the  Scriptures  replace  the 
Apostolic  presence  and  authority. 

As  to  the  mode  of  ordination  of  elders,  it  is  indisputable 
that  the  word  in  Acts  xvi :  2^  translated  "ordained"  means 
to  elect  or  appoint  by  extending  the  hand.  Rotherham 
translates :  "Moreover  appointing  by  vote  for  them  in  each 
assembly,  elders."  The  Septuagint  denotes  those  who  as- 
sisted Moses  (Exodus  xviii:25)  by  the  same  Greek  word 
translated  elder  in  Titus  and  Timothy;  and  reference  to 
Deut.  i :  13  will  show  that  Moses  but  ratified  the  people's 
choice.  This,  it  need  scarcely  be  said,  is  not  referred  to  as 
authoritative  for  a  New  Testament  church,  but  as  illustrat- 
ing the  meaning  of  Acts  xiv :  23.  The  Holy  Spirit  alone 
qualifies  elders  (Acts  xx :  28)  but  the  Scriptures  guide  the 
saints  in  recognizing  and  appointing  them. 

Deacons  (the  word  means  servant)  are  also  described  and 
appointed.  It  is  questionable  whether  Acts  vi:  1-6  refers 
definitely  to  this  office,  nor  is  the  question  vital.  What  we 
do  know  is  that  a  New  Testament  local  church  as  fully 
developed  under  the  apostolic  authority  and  direction,  is 
defined  in  Phil,  i:  i,  "The  saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which  are 
at  Philippi,  with  the  bishops  and  deacons." 

It  has  been  contended  that  as  we  have  no  apostles  we  can 
have  no  appointment  of  elders  and  deacons,  though  we 
readily  discern  them.  But  in  face  of  the  Word  of  God  in 
Titus  i:  9  and  i  Timothy  iii:  1-13,  and  of  the  emphasis  con- 
stantly put  in  the  Acts  and  Epistles  upon  the  orderly  ap- 
pointment of  these  officers,  we  cannot  doubt  that  now,  as 
then,  our  Lord  would  have  His  churches  constituted  after 
His  own  divine  order. 

That  the  practice  of   ordination   has  been  monstrously 
abused  is  no  reason  for  its  abandonment,  but  only  for  a  re- 
turn to  its  right  use. 
18 


274  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Unbiblical  Perversions. 

In  Scripture,  ordination  (which  simply  means  appoint- 
ment) is  never  to  preach  or  to  administer  ordinances,  so 
called.  Ministry  of  the  word  is  wholly  by  gift  (Eph.  iv:  ii, 
12),  ordination  is  to  the  local  offices  of  elder  and  deacon.  It 
should  be  added  that  of  one  elder  over  a  local  church,  or  one 
bishop  over  many  churches  the  Scripture  knows  nothing. 
The  divine  order  is  many  bishops  over  one  church. 

Again,  the  Scripture  knows  nothing  of  a  church  composed 
of  churches — as  the  Methodist  church,  the  Presbyterian 
church,  etc.,  meaning  many  churches  united  into  one  church. 
It  is  wholly  a  Roman  Catholic  perversion  retained  in  Protest- 
ant use.  Any  such  "church"  must  be,  like  Romanism  itself, 
simply  a  sect.  In  every  such  "church"  there  survives  the 
papal  leaven  of  a  required  love  of  and  "loyalty"  to,  the  sect. 
Innumerable  are  the  evils  produced  by  this  utterly  unscrip- 
tural  practice.  The  multiplication  of  churches  in  every  vil- 
lage, when  one  true  apostolic  church  would  include  easily 
and  naturally  all  Christians  in  the  place;  the  reproduction 
on  heathen  ground  of  these  wholly  unnecessary  divisions — 
these  are  but  a  few  of  the  evils.  The  local  church  is  the 
beginning  and  end  of  divine  organisation  for  this  age. 
Whatever  is  less  than  "saints  with  the  bishops  and  deacons" 
is  to  wilfully  leave  the  divine  organization  incomplete  (Titus 
i :  5)  ;  whatever  is  more  than  the  local  church,  is  a  man-made 
addition  to  the  divine  organization. 

If  it  is  objected  that  Christian  fellowship  and  missionary 
effort  would  fail  if  local  churches  are  not  somehow  united 
organically,  the  sufficient  and  triumphant  answer  is  that 
neither  Christian  fellowship  nor  missionary  effort  suffered 
during  the  first  century,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  century 
remains  the  ideal  in  these  respects  never  even  approximated 
by  a  sect  divided  by  Protestantism;    still  less  by  Romish 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  275 

organic  solidarity.  May  the  Lord  give  us  grace  to  take  our 
place  about  Himself,  in  the  midst,  neither  deliberately  refus- 
ing to  perfect  the  divine  order,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  going 
beyond  it. 


THE     PERSONAL     RELATIONSHIPS     AND     IN- 
DWELLING OF   THE  SPIRIT. 

By  C.  I.  Scofield. 

I  am  to  speak  to  you,  during  this  conference,  if  God 
gives  strength,  upon  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  am  glad  to  be  per- 
mitted to  speak  on  this  very  important  subject,  but  I  do 
want,  at  the  outset,  to  say  that  I  think  we  can  very  easily  be 
too  much  occupied  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit 
in  this  dispensation  is  not  in  the  world  to  occupy  us  with  Him- 
self, but  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  I  believe  the  chief 
characteristic  of  the  Spirit-filled  life  is  the  heart  occupation 
and  exaltation  of  our  ever  blessed  Saviour-Lord.  Never- 
theless there  is  in  the  New  Testament  a  very  important  body 
of  revelation  concerning  the  Spirit,  and  surely  it  is  there  for 
our  learning,  and  therefore  we  may,  with  glad  hearts,  give 
attention  to  it. 

I  want  to  speak,  first  of  all,  as  clearing  the  ground,  upon 
the  personal  relationships  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  if  you 
will  turn  with  me  to  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  John  and  the 
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  verses  you  will  find  indicated  in 
two  short  words  from  our  Lord's  lips,  words  which  may 
easily  be  fixed  in  the  memory,  two  of  these  relationships. 

You  see  that  I  am  assuming  something.  I  am  assum- 
ing that  you  all  believe  that  when  we  speak  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  we  are  speaking  of  a  person,  just  as  really  as  when 
we  speak  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.    That 


276  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

we  are  not  speaking  of  an  emanation  from  God,  or  an 
influence  proceeding  from  God,  nor  a  state  of  being,  but 
we  are  speaking  of  the  third  person  of  the  adorable  and 
blessed  Trinity.  Our  relationships  with  Him,  therefore, 
are  personal  relationships.  He  is  a  real  person,  and  just  as 
we  enter  into  various  personal  relationships  here  in  the 
world,  so  is  it  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  is  a  person,  and 
His  relationships  with  us  are  personal. 

Now  I  ask  you  to  turn  with  me  to  the  fourteenth  chapter 
of  John,  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  verses,  which  I  will  read : 

"I  will  pray  the  Father  and  He  shall  give  you  another 
Comforter,  that  He  may  abide  with  you  forever.  Even 
the  Spirit  of  truth ;  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because 
it  seeth  Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him,  but  ye  know  Him; 
for  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you." 

Just  for  the  present  I  want  you  to  hold  in  your  minds 
those  two  little  words,  with  and  in.  "He  dwelleth  with 
you."  That  was  a  present  fact.  "He  shall  be  in  you." 
A  future  promise.     With  and  in. 

Now  stop  for  a  moment  and  ask  what  was  the  condition 
of  these  disciples  of  our  Lord  with  reference  to  eternal  life, 
regeneration,  relationship  to  God?  We  know  what  it  was. 
Answering  for  the  others  Peter  had  said,  you  know,  in  his 
great  confession,  "Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Liv- 
ing God."  And  our  Lord,  turning  to  Peter,  said,  "Blessed 
art  thou,  Simon  Barjona;  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  re- 
vealed it  unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which  is  heaven." 

They  had  real,  actual,  personal  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Son 
of  God,  and  they  were  receiving  Him  as  their  Saviour,  and 
therefore  they  were  born  again.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  not 
yet  in  them,  but  He  was  with  them,  and  they  were,  by  the 
new  birth,  children  of  God. 

Turn  now  for  a  moment  to  the  last  chapter  of  Luke,  the 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  2^^ 

49th  verse,  ''And  behold  I  send  the  promise  of  my  Father 
upon  you,  but  tarry  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  until  ye  be 
endued  with  power  from  on  high." 

And  now  you  have  the  third  of  the  little  words  which  in- 
dicate the  personal  relationships  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They 
are,  "with;'  ''in;'  and  ''upon!' 

The  Holy  Spirit  was  "with"  the  disciples  when  our  Lord 
was  speaking  to  them  in  the  upper  chamber  these  wonderful 
words  which  we  have  recorded  by  John  in  the  twelfth,  thir- 
teenth, fourteenth,  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  chapters. 

If  you  will  turn  with  me  to  the  twentieth  chapter  of 
John's  gospel,  nineteenth  verse,  you  will  see  the  fulfillment, 
for  those  disciples,  of  that  promise,  "He  shall  be  in  you." 

"Then  the  same  day  at  evening,  being  the  first  day  of  the 
week,  when  the  doors  were  shut  where  the  disciples  were 
assembled  for  fear  of  the  Jews,  came  Jesus  and  stood  in  the 
midst  and  saith  unto  them.  Peace  be  unto  you.  And  when 
He  had  so  said.  He  shewed  unto  them  His  hands  and  His 
side.  Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord. 
Then  said  Jesus  to  them  again.  Peace  be  unto  you;  as  my 
Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I  you.  And  when  He 
had  said  this  He  breathed  on  them,  and  saith  unto  them. 
Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost." 

I  know  very  well  there  are  brethren  whom  I  honor  and 
at  whose  feet  as  a  learner  I  am,  in  most  things,  glad  to  sit, 
who  teach  concerning  this  act  of  our  Lord's  that  it  was  sim- 
ply symbolical;  that  it  pre-figured  Pentecost;  that  nothing 
really  was  done.  When  He  breathed  on  them  and  said,  "Re- 
ceive ye  the  Holy  Ghost,"  He  did  not  impart  to  them  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  they  did  not  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  to  in- 
dwell them.  I  cannot  believe  it.  I  know  of  no  Scripture 
which  requires  me  to  believe  it. 

I  venture  in  all  tenderness  to  suggest  that  the  difficulty 


278  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

in  the  minds  of  the  brethren  who  so  teach,  which  compels 
them  to  make  a  mere  symbol  of  our  Lord's  words  and  action 
on  the  evening  of  His  resurrection  arise  from  their  failure 
to  distinguish  between  the  **in"  and  "upon"  relationships — 
between,  that  is  to  say,  the  Spirit  as  indwelling  the  believer 
and  the  Spirit  as  baptising  the  believer. 

The  great  passage,  John  vii :  37-39 :  *'In  the  last  day, 
that  great  day  of  the  feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried,  saying. 
If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink.  He 
that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  Scripture  hath  said,  out  of 
his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water.  But  this  spake 
He  of  the  Spirit  which  they  that  believe  on  Him  should  re- 
ceive :  for  the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet ;  because  that  Jesus 
was  not  yet  glorified,"  refers  exclusively  to  the  "upon,"  or 
Pentecostal  relationship.  In  John  iv :  14  our  Lord  spoke  of 
the  indwelling  Spirit  as  an  upspringing  fountain,  "The  wa- 
ter that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him,  a  fountain  of  water 
springing  up  into  everlasting  life" ;  in  John  vii :  38  He  spoke 
of  the  effect  of  the  baptism  with  the  Spirit  as  outflowing 
rivers.  One  is  inner,  and  stands  related  to  the  believer's 
inner  life,  as  we  shall  see  later;  the  other  has  to  do  with 
his  union  to  Christ  in  the  one  body,  and  to  his  outward  life 
of  service.  "Ye  shall  receive  power  after  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  come  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses,"  etc. 
(Acts  i:8). 

The  Bible  is  the  most  exquisitely  accurate  of  books,  be- 
cause it  is  verbally  inspired,  and  neither  in  Greek  nor  in 
English  do  the  words  "in"  and  "upon"  mean  the  same  thing. 
One  might  with  equal  propriety  contend  that  church  and 
kingdom  mean  the  same  thing. 

Certainly  the  baptism  with  the  Spirit  could  not  be  until 
the  Head  of  the  body  should  be  in  glory,  for  the  first  eflfect 
of  the  baptism  with  the  Spirit  was  to  unite  the  believers  to 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  ^?9 

Christ  in  the  body,  the  church,  and  Eph.  i :  22  expressly 
teaches  that  our  Lord  was  not  given  to  be  head  over  the 
body  till  He  had  been  raised  from  the  dead  and  seated  in 
glory.  The  word  used  of  our  Lord  in  the  impartation  of 
the  indwelling  Spirit  (John  xx:  22)  is  very  intense.  Darby 
renders :   "He  breathed  into  them." 

It  will  be  remembered,  also,  that  the  risen  Lord  had  be- 
fore Him  a  forty-days'  ministry  to  these  very  men  (Acts 
i:  3),  and  surely  it  was  of  necessity  that  they  should  be  able 
to  spiritually  discern  the  truth  "pertaining  to  the  kingdom 
of  God." 

Now  then  we  have  these  three  simple  ways  in  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  stands  related  to  the  believer ;  with  the  believer ; 
within  the  believer;  upon  the  believer.  And  you  observe 
that  in  the  case  of  these  personal  disciples  of  our  Lord  we 
see  these  relationships  assumed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  with  an 
interval  between.  That  is,  He  was  with  them  before  He  was 
within  them,  and  He  was  within  them  before  He  was  upon 
them. 

And  so  long  as  the  Gospel  was  preached  to  Jews  only — 
that  is  during  the  period  of  which  Acts  i :  9  gives  the  record 
— an  interval  of  time  elapsed  between  the  act  of  faith  and 
the  receiving  of  the  Spirit.  For  Israel  the  mediation  of  the 
Apostles  was  necessary,  but,  from  the  preaching  of  Peter 
in  the  house  of  the  Gentile  Cornelius  to  this  hour,  no  inter- 
val intervenes  between  the  moment  when  faith  is  exercised, 
and  the  receiving  of  the  Spirit  as  indwelling  and  baptising 
the  believer.  It  is  wholly  unscriptural  to  tell  believers  to 
"seek  the  baptism"  with  the  Spirit.  Not  one  such  injunc- 
tion or  exhortation  can  be  found  in  the  Apostolic  writings. 
On  the  contrary,  we  are  taught  that  "by  one  Spirit  are  we 
all  baptised  into  one  body."  (i  Cor.  xii:  13.) 


28o  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

Every  believer  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  the  Spirit 
with  him,  within  him,  and  upon  him. 

Now  I  am  afraid  that  I  shall  not  carry  you  all  with  me 
just  at  once  when  I  make  that  last  statement.  We  are  so 
constantly  exhorted,  all  over  the  country,  and  by  eminent 
brethren,  too,  and  brethren  greatly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  to 
seek  the  baptism  with  the  Spirit  (the  "upon"  relationship), 
that  the  notion  has  come  to  be  very  widespread  that  one  of 
the  first  duties  of  the  Christian  is  to  seek  the  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  believer  is,  indeed,  commanded  to  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit  (Eph.  v:  i8),  which  is  quite  another 
matter,  as  we  shall  see. 

The  first  thing  with  which  faith  has  to  deal  is  the  fact 
that  the  Spirit  does  indwell  the  believer.  I  remember  very 
well  a  dear  old  man  in  the  South,  a  very  sweet  and  lovely 
Christian,  who  was  manifesting  continually  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  and  yet  I  never  heard  him  pray  that  he  did  not  ask 
the  Father  to  give  him  the  Spirit,  and  I  finally  said  to  him : 
"Brother,  I  have  heard  you  pray  many  times  to  the  Father 
to  give  you  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  do  you  expect  your 
prayer  to  be  answered  ?    Why  is  it  not  answered  ?" 

"Well,"  he  said,  "that  is  a  great  puzzle  to  me ;  I  can't  un- 
derstand it.  I  have  been  praying  for  these  years  to  the 
Father  to  give  me  the  Spirit,  and  I  have  not  had  an  answer." 

"Well,"  I  said,  "brother,  you  have  been  praying  for  some- 
thing you  have  already,  and  instead  of  praying  the  Father 
to  give  you  the  Spirit  you  should  be  thanking  the  Father 
that  He  has  given  you  the  Spirit."  And  so  we  went  to  the 
Word  to  see  about  that. 

And  now  let  us,  you  and  I,  see  whether  the  Scripture 
justifies  my  statement  that  if  we  are  believers  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  the  Spirit  does  indwell  our  bodies. 

I  take  you,  first  of  all,  to  i  Corintliians,  the  sixth  chapter 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  281 

and  nineteenth  verse :  **What !  know  ye  not  that  your  body  is 
the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  in  you,  which  ye 
have  of  God,  and  ye  are  not  your  own?" 

But  you  will  say,  perhaps,  that  this  was  addressed  to 
believers  of  the  Apostolic  day,  to  a  superlative  kind  of  thor- 
oughly sanctified  believers.  No,  indeed.  The  Apostle 
blames  these  Corinthian  saints  for  everything  that  could  be 
faulty  in  the  life  of  a  Christian.  They  are  carnal,  and  walk 
as  men ;  they  are  running  after  human  leaders,  Paul,  Apol- 
los,  Cephas.  They  are  going  to  law  with  one  another  before 
the  world,  and  they  are  permitting  a  shocking  condition  of 
immorality  in  their  assembly.  And  yet  they  were  Christians. 
They  were  believers,  but  they  were  carnal  believers,  and 
to  these  the  Apostle  addressed  this  question :  "What !  know 
ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which 
is  in  you,  which  ye  have  of  God,  and  ye  are  not  our  own?" 

They  were  living  on  a  very  low  level  indeed,  but  they 
were  real  believers  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  therefore 
the  Spirit  of  God  dwelt  in  their  bodies,  making  them  tem- 
ples. 

That  is  a  tremendous  and  transforming  fact — the  Holy 
Spirit  indwells  us.  He  is  not  going  away.  He  is  there  to 
stay.  I  say  it  is  a  transforming  fact,  but  we  must  begin  by 
believing  it.  If,  upon  the  alone  testimony  of  the  wor'd  of 
God,  you  will  simply  believe  that  the  Spirit  has  already 
taken  up  His  abode  in  your  mortal  bodies,  you  will  find  a 
transformation  beginning,  and  very  possibly  some  things 
that  you  now  allow  will  no  longer  be  allowed  if  that  is  really 
believed. 

We  must  take  things  from  the  Word  of  God  first,  and  then 
when  we  believe  them  we  have  an  answering  experience. 
I  turn  again  to  the  eighth  of  Romans,  and  ninth  verse: 
"But  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit,  if  so  be  that 


282  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you.  Now  if  any  man  have  not 
the  Spirit  of  Christ's,  he  is  none  of  His." 

The  word  rendered  "have"  here  is  over  and  over  again 
rendered  "possess."  If  any  man  possesses  not  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  he  is  none  of  His.  The  words  "Spirit  of  Christ" 
do  not  mean  to  be  like-minded  with  Christ.  It  is  the  Holy 
Spirit  who  is  spoken  of  here.  Therefore,  if  we  are  believers 
at  all,  dear  friends,  I  repeat  it,  we  have  the  Spirit. 

But  what  a  difference  it  makes  when  we  come  really  to 
beHeve  that  within  this  wonderful  temple  of  the  body  the 
mighty  Spirit  of  God  dwells,  the  Holy  Spirit.  Did  you  ever 
think  why  He  is  so  constantly  called  holy?  Surely  He  is 
no  more  holy  than  the  Father  or  the  Son.  There  is  no  pre- 
eminence of  holiness  in  any  one  of  the  persons  of  the  ador- 
able Trinity.  I  have  thought  that  perhaps  it  is  because  He 
enters  so  intimately  into  relationships  with  us  as  indwelling 
us.  Perhaps  God  would  remind  us  that  He  who  dwells 
within  us  is,  first  of  all,  holy.  Well,  now  if  we  come  to  be- 
lieve that,  dear  friends,  I  repeat,  there  will  come  a  change 
of  life.    I  have  seen  it  again  and  again. 

I  remember  when  I  was  a  young  man  I  was  one  of  a 
house  party  at  a  country  house,  the  home  of  a  young  friend 
of  ours;  and  we  were  having  what  we  called  a  good  time, 
playing  cards,  and  dancing,  and  all  worldly  amusements 
of  that  kind,  when  at  dinner  one  evening  the  butler  handed 
our  host  a  telegram. 

The  face  of  our  host,  as  he  read  the  telegram,  was  a 
study.  He  appeared  glad  and  he  appeared  confused,  and 
presently  he  said,  "My  dear  old  mother  will  be  here  in  an 
hour,  on  the  next  train,  and  all  this  dancing  and  card  play- 
ing has  got  to  stop.  Why,"  he  said,  "I  would  not  have  her 
grieved  by  our  doing  any  of  these  things  in  this  house 
where  she  has  lived  for  so  many  years  for  anything."    And 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  283 

he  told  the  butler  to  get  every  card  in  the  house  and  bum 
it  up.  Presently  she  came;  a  dear,  sweet-faced  old  saint, 
and  we  all  fell  in  love  with  her  at  once,  and  as  the  evening 
drew  to  its  close  she  told  her  son  to  bring  the  family  Bible, 
and  she  said,  "You  read  and  I  will  pray."  I  noticed  it  took 
him  a  long  time  to  find  the  place,  but  at  last  he  did  find  it, 
and  then  she  knelt  down  and  prayed.  Well,  we  remained 
there  about  a  week  after  that,  and  the  whole  Hfe  of  that 
house  from  that  moment  was  keyed  to  the  fact  that  this 
Godly  old  saint  had  come  among  us.  Everything  took  color 
from  her  presence. 

My  friends,  if  we  really  believed  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
dwelt  within  these  bodies  of  ours,  how  long  do  you  think 
we  could  allow  many  things  about  which  we  are  so  careless 
to-day  ? 

Here  for  the  present  we  leave  this  most  important  sub- 
ject. The  Holy  Spirit  has  taken  up  His  abode  in  our  mor- 
tal bodies!  That  is  quite  enough  for  us  to  meditate  upon 
now.  Just  as  God  turned  the  house  which  Solomon  built 
into  a  temple  by  filling  it  with  the  shekinah  glory,  so  that 
it  became  sacred  for  Jehovah's  abode  in  the  midst  of  Israel, 
so  the  Spirit's  indwelling  should  make  unholiness  of  thought 
or  word  a  horror  and  a  shame  to  us. 


THE  WORK  OF  THE  INDWELLING  SPIRIT. 

We  continue  this  evening  the  subject  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
You  will  remember  that  we  saw  very  clearly  from  the  Word 
of  God  that  if  we  are  believers  on  the  Lord  Christ  the 
Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  our  mortal  bodies.  It  is  a  very 
beginning  of  days  when  a  Christian  really  accepts  that  fact. 
When,  instead  of  seeking  the  Spirit,  we  believe  that  He  is 
already  within. 


\ 


284  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

And  you  will  remember  that  we  had  begun  to  look  to- 
gether at  the  purposes  of  His  indwelling — the  work  He  seeks 
to  do,  and  that  we  found  as  a  primary  result  of  His  indwell- 
ing that  the  body  becames  a  temple.  We  speak  sometimes 
of  meeting  houses  as  sacred  places  because  they  have  been 
set  apart  for  holy  uses,  but,  ah,  how  infinitely  more  holy 
and  sacred  is  this  wonderful  temple  of  the  body  by  reason 
of  the  fact  that  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  it.  You  know  that 
when  Solomon's  temple  was  built  it  was  given  over  to  God. 
The  ark  was  brought  into  the  most  holy  place,  and  then 
the  priests  went  out,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the 
house,  and  from  that  moment  it  was  a  temple.  It  was  a 
temple  in  intent  and  purpose  all  the  while  Solomon  was 
building  it,  but  when  God  by  the  Shekinah  glory  took  pos- 
session of  it,  then  it  became  God's  temple. 

Well  that  is  just  true  of  us,  dear  friends,  of  these  bodies 
of  ours  only  in  a  far  more  wonderful  sense,  for  God  Him- 
self dwells  in  these  temples  by  His  Spirit.  It  is  a  serious 
fact. 

And  next  I  ask  you  to  note  that  the  Spirt  indwells  the  be- 
liever to  give  victory  over  the  flesh,  and  oh,  dear  friends, 
how  important  that  is.  The  old  self  life  is  there;  the  old 
Adam  nature  is  there.  In  a  very  real  sense  the  believer  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  been  born  of  the  Spirit  and 
made  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  is  two  persons.  More 
accurately  he  has  within  his  one  personality  two  natures. 
The  divine  nature  imparted  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  new 
birth  and  the  old  Adam  nature.  You  will  remember  how, 
in  an  experimental  way,  this  is  brought  out  by  the  seventh 
chapter  of  Romans.  There  you  have  a  renewed  man,  a 
believer  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  a  justified  believer,  and 
knowing  himself  to  be  such,  but  he  is  destitute  of  either  rest 
or  victory.     He  is  in  constant  inner  strife,  and  his  experi- 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  285 

ence  is  one  of  constant  defeat.  It  is  one  of  the  saddest  and 
most  tragic  passages  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  yet  one  is  con- 
strained to  beUeve  that  it  describes  an  average  Christian 
experience.  But  the  seventh  of  Romans  is  immediately  fol- 
lowed by  the  eighth,  and  there  the  same  man  gives  us  quite 
a  different  aspect  of  Christian  life  and  Christian  experience. 
Indeed,  the  great  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  illustrates  in  him- 
self the  only  three  possible  phases  of  religious  and  Christian 
experience.  First,  as  a  Jew,  he  was  a  very  religious  man, 
intensely  religious,  working  day  and  night  at  his  religion: 
far  more  zealous  in  the  religion  of  his  fathers  than  many  of 
his  equals  in  his  own  nation,  profiting  more  in  it  than  they, — 
intensely  religious,  perfectly  self-satisfied — but  lost. 

And  then  he  met  Jesus  on  the  way  to  Damascus  and  was 
saved,  and  then  he  was  miserable,  for,  as  we  discover  by  the 
seventh  of  Romans,  he  was  trying  to  go  on  as  a  Christian 
under  the  law,  and  that  is  always  misery,  and  always  defeat. 

And  then  Paul  passed  into  a  third  phase  of  experience,  of 
which  Romans . viii :  2  is  the  expression:  "The  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the 
law  of  sin  and  death."  The  conflict  of  the  seventh  of  Ro- 
mans had  passed  into  victory — not  by  the  method  of  law- 
works  and  self-determination,  but  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
indwelling  him. 

Now,  I  believe  that  the  professing  church  illustrates  con- 
tinually these  three  phases  of  experience.  Hosts  are  in 
Paul's  first  state;  religious  churchgoers,  church  members. 
They  are  very  diligent  in  the  outward  things  of  religion, 
and  they  are  quite  contented  with  themselves,  but  when  you 
speak  of  inward  struggles  or  any  vital  Christian  experience, 
they  wonder  what  you  are  talking  about. 

I  was  preaching  once  on  Romans  vii :  18,  where  the 
apostle,  going  back  in  his  experience,  tells  of  the  time  when 


286  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

to  will  was  present  with  him,  but  how  to  perform  that  which 
was  good  he  found  not. 

One  of  my  hearers  came  to  me  when  the  sermon  was 
ended  and  said,  "I  cannot  understand  what  was  the  matter 
with  Paul.  Why,  it  seems  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to 
be  good.  I  don't  have  any  difficulty  about  being  good."  I 
asked  my  friend — a  very  faithful  church  member — what  he 
thought  the  apostle  Paul  meant  by  being  good.  "Why," 
said  he,  "to  be  honest,  pay  your  debts,  be  kind  to  your 
family,  abstain  from  worldly  amusements,  stay  away  from 
theatres,  and  let  cards  alone,  and  that  kind  of  thing."  Said 
he,  "I  don't  find  any  difficulty  in  that." 

"Now,"  I  answered,  "let  me  give  you  my  idea  of  what 
Paul  meant,"  and  I  turned  to  some  of  the  exhortations  of 
the  epistles  concerning  the  Christian  walk.  I  turned  back  to 
the  beatitudes,  "Blessed  are  the  meek."  I  said,  "Did  you 
ever  try  to  be  meek?"  Well,  he  could  not  say  that  he  ever 
had.    Didn't  know  that  he  admired  meekness  especially. 

"Well,"  said  I,  "that  is  just  it.  You  try  to  be  meek  once, 
and  you  will  soon  come  upon  Paul's  difficulty.  You  can 
act  meekly,  of  course,  for  awhile,  until  somebody  angers 
you,  or  something  arouses  your  pride.  What  the  Apostle 
Paul  agonized  for  was  to  be  the  beatitudes,  and  he  could 
not  accomplish  it,  though  he  was  saved,  a  justified  man. 

Then,  other  multitudes,  like  Paul  in  the  seventh  of  Ro- 
mans, are  saved  but  without  victory  over  the  self-life,  striv- 
ing to  please  God  by  law-works,  and  to  get  peace  of  con- 
science by  religiousness.  They  are  like  Israel  in  the  wilder- 
ness, restless,  murmuring,  often  lusting  after  the  things  of 
Egypt,  and,  finally,  a  few,  knowing  the  blessed  purpose  and 
power  of  the  indwelling  Spirit,  quietly  reckon  upon  Him 
for  victory. 

Some  one  said,  "I  hear  a  great  deal  of  talk  about  the 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  287 

Pope  of  Rome,  but  the  pope  who  troubles  me  most  is  Pope 
Myself."  Oh,  dear  friends,  that  is  it,  the  real  enemy  is  in 
us.  When  conscience,  under  the  searchlight  of  Scripture, 
accuses  us  of  failure,  we  straightway  blame  Satan.  But 
read  Mark  vii  120-23,  and  remember  that  all  that  is  latent 
within. 

I  beg  you  to  note  the  apostle's  secret  of  victory.  He  opens 
the  secret  to  us  at  once:  "The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in 
Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and 
death."  The  law  of  sin  which  is  in  his  members,  the  law 
of  death  written  and  engraved  in  stones.  The  man  is  de- 
livered. He  is  made  free.  By  what  ?  By  new  resolutions  ? 
By  more  prayer  ?  By  getting  up  earlier  in  the  morning,  and 
keeping  the  morning  watch?  Oh,  he  had  gone  through  all 
that  kind  of  thing  when  he  was  a  Jew.  What  he  wants  is 
reality  now,  and  he  has  got  reality.  Now  a  new  law,  a  new 
power,  a  new  enablement  has  come  in  and  delivered  the  man ; 
that  is  what  he  is  telling  us.  And  then  he  was  working 
so  hard  in  the  seventh  of  Romans  to  perfect  a  character 
which  God  could  approve,  and  now  he  finds  the  wonderful 
truth — the  righteousness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  (not  by) 
those  who  walk  not  after  the  law  but  after  the  Spirit ;  and 
so  it  goes  on,  one  continuous  shout  of  victory  from  the  be- 
ginning to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  all  based  on  the  perfect 
work  of  Christ,  but  made  into  actual  experience  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  dwelling  in  the  believer. 

Turn  upon  that  point  to  one  other  passage,  the  fifth  of 
Galatians,  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  verses:  "This  I  say, 
then,  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfill  the  lusts  of 
the  flesh."  Why?  "For  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit, 
and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh."  The  omnipotent  Spirit  of 
God  dwelling  in  the  believer  and  the  flesh  in  the  believer  are 
contrary  the  one  to  the  other,  but  the  Spirit  has  power,  as 


288  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

we  walk  in  Him,  perfectly  to  keep  in  the  place  of  death  the 
deeds  of  the  body,  the  flesh  and  its  motions.  So  that  we 
are  utterly  without  excuse  if  we  are  saying:  ''Well,  I  was 
angry  this  morning,  but  I  am  naturally  high-tempered,  but 
it  is  just  a  flash,  and  it  is  all  over;  I  am  not  one  of  those 
who  hold  malice."  Oh,  yes,  it  is  just  a  flash,  as  you  turn 
on  your  doorstep  to  go  to  work  in  the  morning,  and  your 
wife  suffers  over  it  all  day  long,  and  you  let  yourself  off 
by  pleading  your  nature.     God  help  you ! 

Observe,  it  is  not  you  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  the 
Holy  Spirit.  He  does  not  ask  any  of  your  help  in  that.  He 
asks  only  one  thing,  that  you  shall  walk  in  Him.  Now  what 
is  it  to  walk  in  the  Spirit  ?  Why,  it  is  to  walk  in  yieldedness 
to  the  Spirit. 

You  read  that  Jesus  returned  in  the  Spirit  unto  Galilee. 
He  had,  so  far  as  we  know,  nothing  to  do  that  day  but  take 
a  walk;  but  He  was  "in  the  Spirit" — a  Spirit-guided  Man 
that  day.  All  His  whole  nature  and  being  were  consciously 
yielded  up  to  the  control  of  the  Spirit.  That  is  walking  in 
the  Spirit.  Now  here  is  an  imperative  promise:  "Walk 
in  the  Spirit  and  ye  shall  not  fulfill  the  lusts  of  the  flesh." 
It  is  one  of  the  divine  imperatives.  Ye  shall  not.  God 
means  that.  And  then  He  explains  why  ye  shall  not :  "For 
the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against 
the  flesh,  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other,  so  that 
ye  may  not  do  the  things  that  ye  would." 

Oh,  what  a  wonderful,  wonderful  office!  What  a  won- 
derful privilege!  The  strife  goes  on,  but  it  is  the  Spirit 
against  the  flesh.  Omnipotence  against  the  old  Adam  na- 
ture, and  you,  the  new  man,  are  out  of  the  conflict,  and  in 
peace,  and  you  are  asked  to  do  but  one  thing — walk  in 
yieldedness  to  Him.  What  a  privilege !  What  a  marvelous 
privilege  I 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  289 

I  would  say  again,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  the 
believer  to  produce  that  thing  that  we  hear  so  much — if 
you  will  allow  me  to  so  put  it — twaddle  about — Christian 
character.  It  is  the  great  talk  of  the  modern  preachers — 
character,  character,  character.  One  gets  tired  of  the  word. 
One  feels  some  sense  of  relief  that  the  word  is  not  in  the 
Bible.  We  are  to  be  saved  by  character,  we  are  to  make 
character,  and  to  build  character. 

I  suppose  the  idea  is  that  we  are  to  practice  sedulously  some 
grace  of  the  Christian  life  until  it  has  become  a  kind  of 
habit,  and  then  we  take  up  another,  and  build  up,  at  last, 
a  complete  character.     That  is  the  seventh  of  Romans  again. 

What  of  Christian  character?  How  does  it  come?  Let 
me  read  (Galatians  v  .'22,23 ). 

"The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness"  (ah,  it  is  possible 
then  to  be  meek!),  "temperance.  Against  such  there  is  no 
law." 

There  are  the  nine  beautiful  elements  of  real  Christian 
character,  and  how  are  they  produced?  "The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit."  It  carries  one  back  in  thought  to  our  Lord's  vital 
presentation,  that  intensely  vital  presentation  of  the  great 
truth  of  our  oneness  with  Him.  "I  am  the  vine,  ye  are 
the  branches."  "He  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the 
same  bringeth  forth  much  fruit."  How  does  the  branch 
bear  fruit?  It  has  no  roots  of  its  own,  but  because  it  is  in 
the  vine  the  life  energies  of  the  vine  fill  the  branch  and  it 
grows,  and  blossoms,  and  at  last  there  come  the  rich  clus- 
ters of  grapes,  and  the  energy  of  the  vine  in  the  branch 
has  produced  that.  The  branch  has  not  been  worried  over 
the  fruit  bearing.  The  branch  has  done  nothing  in  the 
world  but  just  abide  in  the  vine.    That  is  all. 

These  are  the  fruits ;  these  are  the  graces  which  are  not 
19 


290  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

possible  to  be  produced  by  any  manner  of  self-effort.  By 
no  manner  of  effort  can  you  make  yourself  loving,  by  no 
manner  of  effort  can  you  ever  have  peace;  no  mere  will 
power  will  ever  make  you  longsuffering.  Nothing  will  give 
you  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness,  temperance,  but 
the  Spirit  of  God. 

The  Spirit  of  God  by  His  own  power  and  energy  pro- 
duces these  things  in  the  believer  who  walks  in  the  Spirit, 
and  the  believer  who  walks  in  the  Spirit  rests  on  the  divine 
imperative  that  he  shall  not  fulfill  the  lusts  of  the  flesh. 

Then  the  Spirit  gives  discernment  of  truth.  I  will  read 
you  just  one  passage,  i  Corinthians,  second  chapter: 
"The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit 
of  God:  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him;  neither  can 
he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned,"  and 
therefore  I  do  not  care  how  learned  in  the  learning  of  man- 
kind any  theologian  or  critic  may  be,  if  he  without  renewal 
and  without  spirituality  is  examining  the  word  of  God  I 
will  just  ask  him  to  please  let  me  pass  on  and  not  take  my 
time,  because  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  help  me,  and  his 
authority  as  a  critic,  a  scholar,  I  thank  God,  does  not  awe 
me.  I  would  just  as  soon  think  of  reading  a  long  book 
about  the  color  of  a  rose,  written  by  a  blind  man  who 
had  never  seen  a  rose,  as  I  would  a  long  criticism  upon 
the  Bible  by  a  mere  professional  professor  in  some  theo- 
logical school;  but  now  observe,  "He  that  is  spiritual  dis- 
cerneth  all  things." 

Oh,  that  is  it.  It  is  by  the  Spirit  that  the  truth  of  God 
is  made  actual  to  us,  and  ceases  to  be  to  us  a  dead  word, 
and  becomes  to  us  the  living  word,  which  it  surely  is,  the 
Spirit  Himself  marvelously  interpreting  it. 

Now  I  beg  you  to  note  most  carefully  that  another  classi- 
fication comes  in  here:    "And  I,  brethren,  could  n.Qt  speak 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  291 

unto  you  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto  carnal,  even  as  unto 
babes  in  Christ"  ( i  Cor.  iii :  i ) . 

And  they  were  Christians,  and  the  Spirit  was  dwelling 
in  them!  But,  dear  friends,  the  Spirit  indwelling  is  not  a 
mechanical  thing.  Do  not  imagine  that  because  you  can  take 
by  faith  unhesitatingly  the  fact  that  the  Spirit  does  dwell 
in  you  that  therefore  you  are  of  necessity  spiritual.  You 
may  be  very  carnal.  You  may  be  grieving  the  Spirit  and 
quenching  the  Spirit  every  conscious  moment  of  your  lives ! 
It  is  the  fact  that  you  are  yielding  to  the  Spirit,  walking  in 
the  Spirit,  the  Spirit  having  His  sovereign  way  within,  that 
makes  the  believer  spiritual.  Then,  one  may  have  a  great 
deal  of  knowledge,  and  only  be  puffed  up  by  it,  and  one  may 
have  very  little  knowledge,  and  yet  be  very  spiritual,  and,  in 
the  sphere  of  his  capacity,  very  helpful  in  the  things  of  God. 
For  it  is  too  often  true  that  "knowledge  puffeth  up,  love 
buildeth  up." 

Then,  finally, — and  with  this  I  shall  release  you — that  it 
is  the  Spirit  who  renews  and  nourishes  the  spiritual  life. 

Look  at  our  Lord's  beautiful  figure  in  the  fourth  chapter 
of  John's  Gospel,  "Whosoever  shall  drink  of  the  water  that 
I  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst;  but  the  water  that  I 
shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  fountain  (not  a  well;  the 
contrast  is  between  Jacob's  well  and  a  fountain  of  water 
springing  up)  springing  up  into  everlasting  life." 

But  what  a  picture  of  renewal,  what  a  picture  of  vitality ; 
what  a  figure  of  vigor  and  freshness  in  the  inner  life.  I 
believe  that  the  great  trouble  with  Christian  people  to-day 
is  what  might  be  called  "low  vitality."  They  have  life,  but 
they  have  not  the  life  more  abundantly. 

I  remember  going  once  with  a  friend  to  speak  a  little  to 
some  poor  weak  ones  who  were  in  a  convalescent  home  near 
London.     And  this  friend  said,  "Won't  you  go  out  there 


292  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

and  speak  to  those  poor  ones?  They  are  very  weak,  and 
you  must  give  them  milk.  They  cannot  concentrate  their 
minds  very  well,  but  do  come  and  just  give  them  a  little 
simple  word ;  it  may  be  a  blessing  to  them." 

I  was  never  in  a  place  where  my  heart  was  more  touched, 
and  yet,  remember,  all  those  people  there  had  been  dis- 
charged by  the  doctor.  They  were  all  pronounced  cured, 
or  they  could  not  be  there,  but  there  was  something  so 
pathetic  in  the  weakness  and  irritability  and  lack  of  power 
of  those  poor  people. 

Why,  as  I  look  at  the  present  day  church  statistics,  it 
seems  to  me  that  many  of  them  are  little  more  than  con- 
valescent retreats.  They  have  life,  perhaps.  They  have 
had  the  touch  of  the  Great  Physician,  but  how  ineffective 
they  are.  How  unable  they  are  to  go  on  with  anything  in 
the  work  of  the  Lord.  How  little  they  apprehend  even 
the  possibilities  that  lie  latent  in  Christian  life.  What  do 
they  need?  They  need  to  be  drinking  at  the  fountain. 
They  need  to  be  filled.  What  a  picture  of  renewal  that  is. 
If  a  fountain  is  to  be  upspringing  it  must  continually  be 
fed  from  a  source  higher  than  itself,  and  the  inlet  must  be 
kept  open,  and  the  outlet  must  be  kept  open,  and  then  the 
fountain  sends  forth  its  crystal  waters,  and  in  its  way  sings 
a  song  of  praise  to  God. 

The  water  is  there,  but  the  difficulty  is  that  the  inlet  and 
the  outlet  are  both  very  much  obstructed.  We  are  obstruct- 
ing the  inlet  when  we  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  we 
certainly  obstruct  the  outlet  when  we  quench  the  Spirit  of 
God. 

But  there  He  is  with  all  these  possibilities  of  glorious 
and  abundant  life  within.  It  is  not  power  for  service  that 
I  am  speaking  of  now.  That  you  get  in  the  seventh  chapter 
of  John,  the  outflowing  rivers  of  living  water.     It  is  the 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  293 

inner  life  which  is  before  the  mind  of  the  Lord  Jesus  here 
when  He  speaks  of  the  upspringing  fountain  of  living  water ; 
or  in  Paul's  phrase,  "strengthened  with  might  by  His  Spirit 
in  the  inner  man." 

Oh,  there  is  the  great  arena  where  all  spiritual  victories 
must  be  gained.  We  hear  so  much  to-day  about  power  for 
service,  and  we  are  told  to  be  "seeking"  power  for  service. 

Why,  read  the  fourteen  Epistles  of  Paul,  and  note  that 
he  never  tells  the  believer  to  seek  power  for  service — a 
strange  omission,  if  these  brethren  are  right.  Not  one  single 
exhortation  or  command  to  seek  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit 
or  to  seek  power  in  all  these  Epistles.  The  power  is  wait- 
ing for  us,  but  what  we  have  here  is  not  power;  it  is  the 
inner  life, — strengthened  with  might  by  His  spirit  in  the 
inner  man. 

Now  let  us  think  of  it,  dear  friends,  just  a  little  personally. 
The  Spirt  of  God,  with  all  these  precious  possibilities, 
latent  in  the  fact,  dwells  in  you  and  me.  We  tnay  walk  in 
victory — are  we  walking  in  victory?  We  may  be  faithful 
— are  we  faithful  ? 

Have  you  noticed — and  this  is  the  last  word — that  in 
that  parable  of  the  vine  and  the  branches  there  are  three 
degrees  of  fruit-bearing?  "Fruit,"  "more  fruit,"  "much 
fruit,"  and  never  until  we  reach  much  fruit  do  we  glorify 
the  Father.  "Herein  is  my  Father  glorified  that  ye  bear 
much  fruit."  Oh,  the  religious  world  can  imitate  a  poor 
little  sort  of  fruit-bearing.  Anyone  can  do  the  convenient 
things.  There  are  a  great  many  nice  people  in  the  world, 
but  they  cannot  be  holy.  It  is  impossible.  The  world  can- 
not be  spiritual,  but  we  may,  and  we  may  produce  those 
lovely  graces  which  are  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  refreshing  to 
ourselves  and  a  testimony  unanswerable  to  all  who  know  us. 


294  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

BARABBAS  THEORY  OF  THE  ATONEMENT. 
By  C.  I.  Scofield. 

Barabbas  was  condemned  to  die.  No  one  has  ever  ques- 
tioned the  justice  of  his  sentence.  He  was  a  rebel  against 
the  law,  a  robber  and  a  murderer.  And  now  the  outraged 
law  had  laid  strong  hands  on  him,  and  he  lay  bound,  under 
sentence  of  death.  He  was  not  under  probation,  but  under 
doom.  He  was  not  awaiting  trial,  but  execution.  Just  be- 
fore him,  as  his  only  prospect,  was  the  awful  death  of 
crucifixion.  He  knew  what  that  meant :  long  hours  of  un- 
speakable agony,  the  hands  and  feet  torn  by  great  spikes, 
the  wrist  and  shoulder  joints  dislocated  by  the  dragging 
down  of  the  body,  each  quivering  nerve  a  separate  torture 
through  tension,  a  burning,  unquenchable  thirst,  and,  all 
around,  a  jeering,  taunting  mob.  All  the  horizon  of  his 
life  is  narrowed  to  that.     The  only  question  is,  wheyi? 

Even  this  begins  to  be  answered.  The  jailers  prepare 
three  crosses.  Ah!  he  well  knows  the  three  sockets  cut  in 
the  hard  rock  out  there  in  the  Place  of  the  Skull.  Is  one 
of  these  crosses  for  him?  The  very  thought  gives  him  a 
sense  of  suffocation,  and  of  something  clutching  at  his 
heart.  Then  he  is  told :  yes,  he  is  to  suffer  in  the  morning. 
Two  malefactors  are  to  die  with  him,  but  he,  as  the  greater 
criminal,  is  to  have  the  place  of  eminence,  is  to  have  the 
middle  cross. 

Then  the  night  falls.  But  it  is  a  disturbed  night.  Even 
in  the  prison  it  is  perceived  that  something  unusual  is  oc- 
curring. Confused  noises,  outcries,  the  tramping  of  feet, 
penetrate  the  thick  walls.  Barabbas  dumbly  wonders  what 
it  all  means.  Perhaps  it  is  another  insurrection  such  as 
that  he,  poor  fool,  raised  against  the  majestic,  inflexible 
Law.     But  the  night  wears  on,  and  at  last  it  is  daylight — 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  ^95 

the  light  of  his  last  day !  And  now  he  hears  footsteps,  the 
key  grinds  in  the  lock,  his  prison  door  swings  open,  but, 
just  as  he  is  summoning  all  his  brute's  fortitude  for  the 
ordeal  which  awaits  him,  he  hears  the  joyful  words:  "Go 
free!  Go  free!  Barabbas;  another  takes  your  place;  an- 
other is  to  die  between  the  two  malefactors." 

As  Barabbas  emerged  into  the  free,  glorious  sunshine, 
the  crowd  was  already  surging  out  toward  the  Place  of  the 
Skull.  And  then,  if  not  before,  the  desire  must  have  arisen 
to  know  who  had  been  condemned  to  die  in  his  place.  One 
can  easily  imagine  how  Barabbas  followed  the  throng,  striv- 
ing eagerly  to  see  the  Man  who  was  to  die  for  him.  Per- 
haps it  was  not  until  the  sound  of  the  hammer  driving  the 
nails  had  ceased,  and  the  cross — Barabbas'  cross — had  been 
upreared,  bearing  its  awful  burden,  that  Barabbas  saw  the 
Sufferer.  We  may  well  believe  that,  moved  by  a  strange, 
irresistible  drawing  (John  xii:32),  Barabbas  pressed  his 
way  through  the  howling  mob  until  he  stood  looking  up 
into  the  face  of  Jesus. 

Barabbas  knew  Him,  of  course.  His  substitute  in  agony 
there  was  the  new  Teacher  out  of  Galilee,  the  Man  who 
spake  as  never  man  spake,  the  Man  whose  life  had  been 
absolutely  without  sin.  Adam  sinned,  and  Abraham  and 
Moses,  and  all  the  prophets,  but  not  this  Man.  And,  be- 
sides. He  healed  even  leprosy  by  a  touch  or  a  word.  One 
day  when  the  crowd  got  hungry  he  manufactured  enough 
food  for  five  thousand  men,  not  to  mention  women  and 
children,  out  of  five  loaves  and  a  few  small  fishes.  Because 
of  these,  and  like  things,  Barabbas  perhaps  really  was  con- 
vinced that  He  was  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God.  But  he 
had  not  become  His  disciple  because  he  loved  sin. 

However  that  may  have  been,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  Barab- 


296  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

bas  had  no  need  to  be  a  theologian  to  form  a  good  working 
theory  of  the  atonement. 

first,  He  knew  that  he  was  a  guilty  wretch,  under  the 
righteous  condemnation  of  the  law  (Luke  xxiii:25).  And 
in  both  these  respects  Barabbas  was  a  representative  of  all 
men  (Rom.  iii :  10-20,  23  ;  Gal.  iii :  10) . 

Secondly,  Barabbas  knew  that  the  Sufferer  before  him 
had  done  no  sin  (John  viii :  46 ;  John  xix :  4 ;  i  Peter  ii :  22) . 

Thirdly,  He  knew  that  Jesus  was,  for  him,  a  true  substi- 
tute. He  was  verily  and  actually  dying  in  his  place  and 
stead ;  an  innocent  and  holy  being  bearing  the  very  penalty 
which  the  law  had  justly  decreed  to  him,  Barabbas.  Who- 
ever, in  the  coming  ages,  might  question  whether  Christ's 
death  was  vicarious  and  substitutional,  he  could  never  ques- 
tion it  (2  Cor.  V :  21 ;  Gal.  iii :  13 ;  i  Peter  ii :  22-24 ;  iii  •  18 ; 
Isa.  liii:  5,  6). 

Fourthly,  He  knew  that  he  had  done  nothing  whatever  to 
merit  the  marvelous  interposition  of  that  substitutional 
death.  Whatever  may  have  been  back  of  it,  it  reached  him 
as  an  act  of  pure  grace  (Ps.  Ixixiig,  20;  Eph.  ii:4-9;  2 
Tim.  i  19;  Tit.  ii:ii;  Rom.  iv:4,  5). 

Fifthly,  He  knew  that  Christ's  death  for  him  was  perfectly 
efficacious.  There  was,  therefore,  nothing  for  him  to  add 
to  it.  Just  because  Christ  was  dying,  he  was  living.  The 
only  question  before  Pilate  was  whether  Christ  should  die 
or  Barabbas.  When  it  was  decided  that  Christ  should  die, 
Barabbas  was  set  free.  His  assurance  was  complete  the 
instant  that  his  Substitute  said,  "It  is  finished,"  and  gave 
up  the  ghost  (John  xix:  30;  Eph.  i:y;  Col.  i:  14;  Rom. 
v:99;   i  John  i  17;  Col.  i:  20;  Heb.  x:  10,  14). 

John  McNeill,  the  great  Scotch  preacher,  well  says : 

'*My  brethren,  let  me  commend  to  you  Barabbas'  theory 
of  the  atonement.     It  is  a  good  theory  to  preach  on,  pray  on, 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  297 

sing  on,  die  on.     Do  you  know  any  other  theory  that  will 
stand  these  tests?" 


MAY  THE  LORD  COME  AT  ANY  TIME? 
C.  I.  Scofield. 

No  one  denies  that  the  Scriptures  teach  a  second  coming 
of  Christ  at  some  time ;  and  the  church,  even  in  her  worst 
estate,  has  never  ceased  to  bear  testimony  by  her  creeds, 
at  least  to  the  same  truth. 

But  upon  the  two  questions  of  the  manner  and  of  the 
time  of  His  return  wide  divergencies  of  teaching  have  lately 
arisen.  Into  the  question  of  the  manner  of  our  Lord's 
second  coming  it  is  not  my  purpose  to  enter,  but  only  to 
seek  light  from  Scripture  concerning  the  question  of  the 
time  of  that  coming.  And  even  here  I  shall  consider  only 
that  aspect  of  His  coming  revealed  through  the  Apostle 
Paul. 

Attentive  students  of  the  Word  are  aware  of  that,  to  the 
Apostles  to  the  Gentiles  was  committed  a  body  of  revela- 
tion concerning  the  church;  that  the  Old  Testament  knows 
nothing  of  the  church  (though  allowance  is  made  for  it)  ; 
and  that  our  Lord  did  no  more  than  to  announce  His 
purpose  to  build  it.  Apart  from  the  writings  of  the  Spirit 
by  Paul,  we  should  know  practically  nothing  of  the  mystery 
of  the  "church  which  is  His  body,  the  fullness  of  Him  that 
filleth  all  in  all." 

But  through  these  writings  we  are  blessed  with  a  full 
and  clear  revelation  concerning  the  church,  her  origin, 
method,  relationships,  calling  and  destniy.  Obviously,  any 
inspired  account  of  the  church  which  should  omit  to  tell 
what  the  end  should  be  of  her  earthly  pilgrimage,  would  be 


298  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

in  so  far  defective.  We  have,  therefore,  in  two  notable 
passages  in  the  Epistles,  written  through  Paul,  a  succinct 
but  satisfying  prophecy  of  that  ending. 

"For,  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be 
made  alive.  But  every  man  in  his  own  order — Christ  the 
first  fruits ;  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's,  at  His  coming 
....  Behold  I  show  you  a  mystery !  We  shall  not 
all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed  in  a  moment,  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump :  for  the  trumpet 
shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and 
we  shall  be  changed"  (i  Cor.  xv:22,  23,  51,  52).  "But 
I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  concerning 
them  which  are  asleep,  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others 
which  have  no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died 
and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will 
God  bring  with  Him.  For  this  we  say  unto  you,  by  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  which  are  alive,  and  remain 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  shall  not  prevent  (go  before) 
them  which  are  asleep.  For  the  Lord  Himself  shall  descend 
from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel, 
and  with  the  trump  of  God:  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall 
rise  first:  then  we,  which  are  alive  and  remain,  shall  be 
caught  up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air:  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord" 
(i  Thess.  iv:  13-17). 

It  is  this  event,  and  this  only,  which  is  before  us  in  this 
article.  That  there  is  a  vast  body  of  prophecy  which  has 
to  do  with  the  return  of  Christ  to  the  earth,  in  connection 
with  the  setting  up  of  the  Messianic  kingdom,  the  resump- 
tion of  the  divine  dealings  with  Israel,  and  the  blessing  of 
the  whole  world,  we  are  well  aware.  But  the  coming,  of 
which  the  quoted  passages  speak,  is  not  to  the  earth,  but  into 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  m 

"the  air";  it  does  not  establish  anything  on  the  earth,  but 
takes  a  people  away  from  the  earth. 

The  descent  of  the  Lord  into  the  air  for  the  church,  is 
not,  therefore,  that  aspect  of  the  second  coming  of  which 
the  Old  Testament  prophets  speak  (e.  g.,  Zech.  xiv:  1-9), 
nor  that  aspect  of  His  coming  of  which  our  Lord  spoke  in 
the  Olivet  discourse,  and  in  His  eschatalogical  parables. 
It  is  part  of  what  Paul  calls  "my  gospel" — part  of  the  truth 
concerning  the  church. 

I  now  ask :  May  the  coming  of  the  Lord  into  the  air  for 
the  church  occur  at  any  time?  I  answer,  yes:  and  for 
two  reasons. 

L  There  is  no  predicted  event  which  must  he  fulfilled 
before  that  coming. 

It  is  sometimes  said  that  our  Lord  indicated  an  interven- 
ing condition  when  He  said  (Matt.  xxiv:i4),  "And  this 
gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world  for 
a  witness  unto  all  nations :  and  then  shall  the  end  come" ; 
and  it  is  objected  this  has  not  yet  been  accomplished. 

To  which  I  answer  (i)  that  "the  end"  of  which  our  Lord 
speaks  is  not  His  descent  into  the  air  for  His  church,  but 
the  "end  of  the  age,"  concerning  which  the  disciples  had 
questioned  Him  (verse  3).  (2)  That  the  church  is  not  set 
to  preach  the  "gospel  of  the  kingdom,"  but  "the  gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God" ;  and  (3),  that  there  is  to  be  a  world-wide 
preaching  of  the  kingdom  by  the  Jewish  remnant  during 
the  tribulation.  (Rev.  viiQ-ii;  vii:i3,  14  R.  V.;  Zech. 
viii:  23,  etc.) 

Again,  it  is  said  that  the  Lord  does  not  return  until  after 
the  millennium.  As  to  this  objection,  it  is  sufficient  to  say 
that  the  parable  of  the  Wheat  and  the  Tares,  of  the  Noble- 
man and  the  Far  Country,  and  the  descriptions  of  the  course 
of  this  age,  alike  forbid  the  possibility  of  a  millennium  be- 


300  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

fore  the  return  of  the  Lord  in  glory  to  the  earth.  (Matt, 
xiii:  24-30,  36-43;  Luke  xix:ii-i4;  Matt,  xxiv  16-14;  2 
Thess.  ii:7,  8.) 

And,  since  the  descent  of  the  Lord  into  the  air  must  pre- 
cede His  return  in  glory  to  the  earth,  it  is  evident  that  no 
millennium  can  possibly  occur  before  the  latter  event. 

Others  aver  that  the  great  tribulation  must  run  its  course 
before  the  church  can  be  caught  up.  To  this  I  answer: 
(i)  there  is  an  express  promise  that  the  true  church  shall 
be  kept  "from  the  hour  of  temptation  which  shall  come 
upon  all  the  world,  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth." 
(Rev.  iii:io.)  (2)  That  the  church,  priestly  and  royal, 
is  seen  in  the  persons  of  the  elders  in  heaven  before  the 
events  which  constitute  the  great  tribulation  begin  to  occur 
on  the  earth.  These  elders  are  seen  in  Rev.  iv,  and  before 
the  first,  or  seal,  series  of  judgments  begin — and  these  but 
prepare — the  tribulation.  (3)  That  all  the  types  bear  out 
this  view.  Sodom  could  not  be  destroyed  till  Lot  was  taken 
out  of  it,  etc. 

n.  In  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  who  alone  tells  us  of  the 
rapture  of  the  church,  the  characteristic  attitude  of  the 
believer  is  "waiting'* — not  for  the  millennium,  nor  for  the 
great  tribulation,  but  for  "His  Son  from  heaven,  whom  He 
raised  from  the  dead,  Jesus" ;  and,  "looking  for  that  blessed 
hope." 

We,  therefore,  answer  the  question:  "May  the  Lord 
come  at  any  time  ?"  affirmatively — He  may. 

And  surely  when  we  look  about  us  we  are  constrained 
to  echo  the  last  prayer  of  Scripture :  "Even  so,  come.  Lord 
Jesus." 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  301 

THE  WALK  OF  FAITH. 
C.  I.  Scofield. 

Every  great  truth  of  the  Gospel  has  some  special  passage 
of  Scripture  devoted  to  its  definition  and  elucidation.  The 
thirteenth  of  i  Corinthians  is  the  love  chapter ;  the  fifteenth 
of  I  Corinthians  the  resurrection  chapter;  the  fourteenth 
of  Romans  the  justification  chapter ;  the  fourth  of  i  Thessa- 
lonians  the  hope  chapter,  the  eleventh  of  Hebrews  is  the 
faith  chapter.  Faith,  hope,  love,  and  justification,  and 
resurrection  are  everywhere  mentioned  or  implied,  but  in 
the  chapters  specified  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  those  words 
central.  We  are  to  look  together  this  afternoon  at  the  great 
faith  chapter. 

For  one  I  am  glad  that  faith  is  here  taken  up  experi- 
mentally rather  than  doctrinally.  Let  me  illustrate  for  a 
moment.  Romans  iii-iv  is  a  great  doctrinal  passage;  Ro- 
mans vii,  a  great  experimental  passage.  The  Apostle  in  the 
latter  does  not  give  an  essay  on  the  believer's  two  natures. 
He  does  something  far  more  vivid  and  intense :  he  tells  us 
his  own  experience  of  the  strife  between  the  new  man  and 
the  old  man  in  terms  of  pain  and  even  of  agony. 

So  here  we  have  not  a  disquisition  on  faith,  after  the 
manner  of  the  theologians,  but  we  have  a  succession  of  pic- 
tures showing  what  faith  has  done,  and  how  it  works  as  a 
dominant  principle  in  the  life  that  now  is.  Abel  and  Enoch 
and  Noah  and  Abraham  and  the  other  pattern  men  of  faith 
pass  before  us  as  living  illustrations  of  the  faith  principles. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  penetrate  the  writer's  motive.  He 
was  writing  to  Hebrews  who  had  at  least  professed  faith  in 
Christ,  but  who  were  in  danger  of  lapsing  back  into  Judaistic 
views  of  the  importance  of  works.  The  writer  meets  that 
tendency  indirectly  but  powerfully  by  showing  them  all  the 


302  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

great  men  of  the  Bible  had  been  great  not  through  works, 
but  through  faith — that  faith  was  no  new  principle  in  the 
Gospel,  but  an  old  principle  to  which,  in  the  Gospel,  a  uni- 
versal application  was  given. 

Let  us  then  take  up  our  chapter  and  learn  from  it  how 
faith  works  in  human  lives. 

First  of  all,  then,  note  carefully  that  verse  I  is  not  a  defi- 
nition of  faith,  but  a  most  precious  as  to  the  sphere  in  which 
faith  works,  and  as  to  what  it  accomplishes  in  that  sphere: 
"Now,  faith  is  the  giving  substance  to  things  hoped  for, 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen." 

Evidently  that  statement,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  does  not 
define  faith.  A  phrase  in  i  John  v:i4  gives  the  best  defi- 
nition of  faith  of  which  I  have  any  knowledge :  "and  this  is 
the  confidence  that  we  have  in  Him."  Faith  is  confidence  in 
God,  and  hence  in  God's  word. 

We  cannot  be  too  simple  here.  Faith  may  have  secondary 
effects  which  react  upon  our  feelings,  but  faith  is  not  believ- 
ing something  because  we  "feel"  that  it  is  true,  but  because 
God  says  it  is  true.  Let  me  be  understood :  I  do  not  question, 
but  rather  affirm,  that  concerning  matters  of  guidance  in 
the  daily  path  there  is  often  a  voice  in  the  soul,  but  it  is 
the  Bible  which  points  out  the  path,  and  the  principles  which 
must  govern  the  life  in  that  path.  Abraham's  faith  is  called 
"strong"  in  Romans  iv:20,  but  what,  after  all,  was  that 
strong  faith  ?  He  was  "fully  persuaded  that  what  God  had 
promised  He  was  able  also  to  perform."  Faith  demands  a 
promise,  a  revelation,  but  bases  upon  that  promise  a  "confi- 
dence in  Him"  which  instantly  makes  the  promised  thing 
real. 

When,  as  a  child,  my  earthly  father  promised  me  any- 
thing, so  sure  was  I  of  my  father's  integrity,  of  his  loyalty  to 
his  word,  that  the  thing  promised  had  "substance." 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  303 

Note  now  the  sphere  within  which  faith  lives  and  moves 
and  has  its  being:  "things  hoped  for";  "things  not  seen." 
The  contrast  is  between  things  "seen"  and  things  "unseen." 
And  this,  let  me  remind  you  very  exactly  defines  the  re- 
spective spheres  of  science  and  of  faith.  Science  has  to 
do  with  things  seen.  Within  that  sphere  science  has  wrought 
marvels,  and  deserves  all  honor.  But  in  the  sphere  of  the 
unseen,  in  the  arcanum  of  things  at  present  invisible,  science 
has  no  place  and  covers  herself  with  folly  when  she  intrudes 
there.  "Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  en- 
tered into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  pre- 
pared for  them  that  love  him"  ( i  Cor.  ii :  9) . 

It  is  in  this  sphere  that  faith  walks  erect,  triumphant  and 
with  assured  step.    See  how  true  this  is. 

The  first  use  of  faith,  logically,  is  to  get  a  sinner  right 
with  God,  and  that  is  the  order  here.  "By  faith  Abel  offered 
unto  God  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain,  by  which  he 
obtained  witness  that  he  was  righteous,  God  testifying  of  his 
gifts"  (Heb.  xi :  4) .  Here,  as  you  know,  were  the  only  two 
possible  forms  of  religion.  Cain  brought  an  offering  which 
stood  for  the  union  of  his  toil  and  God's  providence,  but  it 
expressed  neither  the  guilt  of  sin  nor  the  divine  condemna- 
tion of  that  guilt.  And  all  modern  perversions  of  Christian- 
ity have  that  fatal  defect;  they  are  unbloody.  They  may 
talk  beautifully  about  the  character  of  Christ,  and  poetically 
about  His  death,  but  they  have  no  answer  of  suffering  under 
the  divine  justice  to  the  guilt  of  sin. 

And  Abel  had  nothing  but  his  "gifts."  It  was  of  the  slain 
firstling  of  the  flock  that  God  testified,  not  of  Abel's  char- 
acter, when  He  declared  him  "righteous."  The  first  use  of 
faith,  then,  is  that  by  it  sinful  man  brings  to  holy  God  the 
offering  which  the  justice  of  God  demands,  and  which  His 


304  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

mercy  has  provided — "the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world." 

And  the  very  moment  that  is  done,  death,  even  physical 
death,  is  no  longer  a  necessity.  Enoch,  who  also  had  the 
testimony  that  he  pleased  God,  was  translated  that  he  should 
not  see  death.  'We  shall  not  all  sleep."  The  Lord  may 
come  at  any  moment,  and  if  he  does,  not  one  of  us  will  die. 
(i  Thess.  iv:  14-16;   i  Cor.  xv:  51,  52.) 

Let  us  remember,  too,  that  Enoch  found  faith  a  glorious 
thing  to  live  by,  as  well.  He  "walked  with  God  three  hun- 
dred years,"  and  only  faith  can  walk  with  the  Invisible. 

The  next  instance,  that  of  Noah,  shows  how  faith  con- 
cerning "things  not  seen  as  yet"  instantly  influences  conduct. 
Mark  the  seven  wonderful  things  in  the  old  patriarch's 
faith. 

1.  The  ground  of  his  faith:  "warned  of  God." 

2.  The  sphere  of  his  faith :   "things  not  seen  as  yet." 

3.  The  effect  of  his  faith :  "fear,"  that  prudence  which 
becomes  sinful  man  with  divine  warning. 

4.  The  activity  of  his  faith :  "he  prepared  an  ark." 

5.  The  result  of  his  faith :   "saved  his  house." 

6.  The  testimony  of  his  faith :  "he  condemned  the  world." 

7.  The  reward  of  his  faith :   "righteousness." 

There  is  a  song,  "  'Tis  old  time  religion,"  and  the  refrain, 
"  'Tis  good  enough  for  me."  Well,  friends,  there  is  old 
time  salvation,  which  is  better  than  religion,  and  I  heartily 
add,  "  'Tis  good  enough  for  me." 

Faith,  again,  is  the  only  principle  upon  which  practical 
separation  can  be  maintained.  "By  faith  Abraham  when  he 
was  called  to  go  out  into  a  place  which  he  should  after  re- 
ceive for  an  inheritance,  obeyed ;  and  he  went  out  not  know- 
ing whither  he  should  go."    That  call  came  to  him  in  Ur  of 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  305 

the  Chaldees,  and  it  demanded  separation  from  all  that  mere 
nature  holds  most  dear,  but  by  faith  he  "obeyed." 

In  Abraham,  as  you  know,  is  illustrated  the  twofold  sepa- 
ration demanded  of  the  obedient  beHever.  In  leaving  Ur  he 
illustrated  separation  from  the  world;  in  leaving  Lot  he 
illustrated  that  harder,  more  difficult  separation  from  carnal 
believers.  Lot  was  a  justified  man  (2  Pet.  ii :  7)  but  he  was 
sadly  a  vessel  unto  dishonor  (2  Tim.  ii :  19-21). 

It  is  faith,  again,  which  gives  character  to  the  walk.  "By 
faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of  promise  as  in  a  strange 
country,  dwelling  in  tents  with  Isaac  and  Jacob,  the  heirs 
with  him  of  the  same  promise:  for  he  looked  for  a  city 
which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God" 
(Heb.  xi:9,  10).  How  loose  he  sat  to  things  seen!  Even 
to  the  very  things  which  were  his  by  promise.  There  was 
promised  Abraham  a  twofold  seed :  "I  will  make  thy  seed 
as  the  dust  of  the  earth"  (Gen.  xiii:  16)  ;  and,  "Look  now 
toward  heaven  and  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  number 
them:  and  he  said  unto  him.  So  shall  thy  seed  be."  In- 
stantly, Abraham's  faith  laid  hold  on  the  star-seed,  the 
heavenly  promise,  and  thenceforth  a  tent  was  good  enough 
for  the  man  who  was  looking  for  a  city.  Faith  made  that 
city  more  real  to  Abraham  than  the  very  mountains  of 
Israel. 

Mark  once  more  that  faith  is  the  channel  through  which 
divine  power  enters  human  life.  It  was  "through  faith"  that 
Sara  received  "strength  to  conceive  seed."  Oh,  how  neces- 
sary to-day  is  that  faith  which  can  "receive  strength" ! 

Faith,  once  more,  undertakes  great  things  for  God. 
"What  should  I  more  say?  for  the  time  would  fail  me  to 
tell  of  Gideon,  and  of  Barak,  and  of  Samson,  and  of  Jeph- 
thah  and  of  David  also,  and  of  Samuel,  and  of  the  prophets  ; 
who  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  righteous- 
20 


3o6  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

ness,  obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions, 
quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword, 
out  of  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight, 
turned  to  fight  the  armies  of  the  aliens." 

And  here  I  challenge  the  hosts  of  doubt  and  of  unbelief. 
What  great  thing  for  God  or  man  was  ever  yet  wrought  by 
the  atheist  and  the  agnostic?  Come,  this  is  an  old  world; 
unbelief  has  had  its  innings  for  weary  centuries — where  is 
the  record  of  its  victories  ? 

And,  lastly,  it  is  faith  which  sustains  in  trial.  "Others 
were  tortured  not  accepting  deliverance."  "And  others  had 
trial  of  cruel  mockings  and  scourgings,  yea,  moreover  of 
bonds  and  imprisonment :  they  were  stoned,  they  were  sawn 
asunder,  were  tempted,  were  slain  with  the  sword:  they 
wandered  about  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins;  being  desti- 
tute, afflicted,  tormented,  of  whom  the  world  was  not 
worthy." 

History,  friends,  bears  no  such  record  of  every  conceiv- 
able form  of  heroism  as  that  which  the  heroes  of  faith  have 
manifested.  The  soldier  does  his  great  exploits  in  the  sight 
of  thousands;  at  the  most  a  soldier's  death  awaits  him. 
Read  the  acta  sanctorum,  if  you  would  know  to  what  sub- 
limities of  heroism  faith  can  inspire,  under  what  extremity 
of  suffering  faith  can  sustain. 

And  yet,  great  as  faith  is  in  what,  instrumentally,  it  effects, 
the  blessed  Object  of  faith,  our  adorable  Lord  is  infinitely 
greater.  There  should  be  no  chapter  division  at  verse  40; 
for  the  Spirit  could  never  leave  us  looking  at  mere  faith. 
"Wherefore  seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so 
great  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  let  us  lay  aside  every  weight,  and 
the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset  us,  and  let  us  run  with 
patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us  looking  unto  Jesus." 

After  all,  who  gives  faith  its  potency  ? — Jesus,  "the  author 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  307 

of  our  faith" ;  and  who  insures  the  continuance  of  faith  ? — 
Jesus,  the  "finisher  of  our  faith."  "Author  and  finisher!" 
Well,  then,  let  us  draw  our  faith  from  Him,  not  looking  at 
our  faith,  but  ever  and  only  "unto  Jesus." 

NOTES  ON  COLOSSIANS. 

About  one  hundred  miles  east  of  Ephesus,  in  the  pen- 
insula called  Asia  Minor,  the  "Asia"  of  the  Acts  and 
Epistles,  were  situated  the  three  towns  mentioned  in  this 
Epistle — Colosse  (i:  i),  Laodicea  (iv  :i3,  16),  and  Hiera- 
polis  (iv:  13).  In  these  places  in  the  year  64  churches  of 
Christ  had  been  established.  This  region  lay  outside  the 
sphere  of  Paul's  missionary  labors  in  Asia,  and  these 
churches  doubtless  represent  the  effect  of  that  secondary 
wave  of  missionary  effort  proceeding  from  Ephesus  during 
Paul's  residence  there  in  A.  D.  58  and  59,  of  which  mention 
is  made  Acts  xix :  10. 

Colosse  has  long  since  perished,  and  the  place  is  remem- 
bered among  men  only  because  of  what  God  wrought  in 
behalf  of  the  little  group  of  believers  gathered  there. 

The  occasion  of  the  Epistle  is  readily  gathered  from  its 
contents,  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Saints  in  Ephesus,  and 
that  to  Philemon. 

Paul  was  now  (A.  D.  64),  a  prisoner  at  Rome.  Among 
those  with  whom  he  came  into  contact  and  who  were  bom 
again  through  his  gospel  labors,  was  a  runaway  slave  from 
Colosse  named,  oddly  enough,  Onesimus  (i,  e.  "profitable"). 
Onesimus  was  the  slave  of  a  prominent  Christian,  Phile- 
mon of  Colosse.  It  was  a  first  demand  of  righteousness 
that  Onesimus  should  return  to  his  master,  and  in  his 
behalf  Paul  wrote  the  letter  to  Philemon,  "which  belongs, 


3o8  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

even  as  regards  its  Attic  refinement  and  gracefulness,  to  the 
epistolary  masterpieces  of  antiquity." — Meyer. 

But  other  matters  were  stirring  Paul  to  his  depths.  His 
fellow-prisoner,  Epaphras  had  been  "a  faithful  minister  of 
Christ"  to  the  church  at  Colosse,  and  he  had  communicated 
to  the  Apostle  his  own  deep  concern  for  the  saints  at  Colosse 
and  Laodicea  respecting  certain  errors  of  doctrine  which 
had  found  entrance  there. 

The  state  of  the  church  as  to  fundamentals  was  still  ex- 
cellent, but  subtle  errors  absolutely  subversive  of  true  Chris- 
tianity were  leavening  the  good  meal.  What  that  leaven 
was  we  gather  from  Paul's  refutation. 

Briefly,  it  was  legality  mingled  with  a  false  philosophic 
mysticism.  ''Beware,"  says  the  Apostle,  "lest  any  man 
spoil  you  through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit" — that  is  one 
part  of  the  danger.  "After  the  tradition  of  men,  after  the 
rudiments  of  the  world" — the  other  part  of  the  danger. 

"Rudiments  of  the  world"  is  Paul's  phrase  for  the  law, 
and  for  all  mere  formalism  and  externalism  in  religion.  But 
this  was  not  Judaic  legality,  emanating  from  Jerusalem,  as 
in  Galatia,  but  a  mystical  legality  emanating  probably  from 
Alexandria.  The  former  consisted  in  letter-bondage  to  the 
law — that  is  to  written  precept ;  the  philosophic  legality  con- 
sisted in  being  "wise  above  what  was  written"  a  strictness 
beyond  letter  of  Scripture — in  a  word,  asceticism :  "Touch 
not,  taste  not,"  etc.,  and  severities  inflicted  on  the  body. 

The  philosophy  was  that  which  came  later  to  be  called 
Gnosticism  (Greek  gnosis — "knowledge").  The  core  of  the 
Gnostic  heresy  was  its  doctrine  of  Christ,  "  to  whom 
they  did  not  leave  His  full  divine  dignity,  but  assigned  to 
Him  merely  the  first  rank  in  the  higher  order  of  spirits" — 
Heinrich  A.  W.  Meyer. 

The  effect  of  gnosticism  was  to  put  God  at  an  infinite 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  309 

distance  from  men;  to  fill  that  distance  with  orders  of  an- 
gelic beings;  and  to  give  Christ  only  the  highest  place 
among  these. 

Matter  was  conceived  of  as  evil,  and  the  material  crea- 
tion as  the  work  of  a  lower  spiritual  being  whom  they 
called  the  Demiurge. 

Gnosticism  has  passed  away  as  a  philosophy,  but  the  ef- 
forts to  degrade  Christ  from  His  full  and  proper  deity;  to 
make  a  merit  of  ascetic  practices  ("touch  not,  taste  not")  ; 
and  to  conceive  of  the  body  and  the  natural  physical  de- 
sires as  inherently  evil  and  degrading — these,  under  ever 
new  forms,  survive  and  are  abroad  to-day.  Against  them 
Colossians  is  a  perpetual  and  unanswerable  declaration  of 
the  Spirit  of  God. 

Between  a  false  legality  and  a  false  philosophy  of  Christ, 
His  person,  His  work,  and  His  universe,  the  true  Christian 
faith  ever  moves. 

Chapter  I. 

This  chapter  falls  naturally  into  three  parts:  I.  Intro- 
ductory, vs.  1-8.  n.  The  Apostolic  prayer,  vs.  9-14.  HI. 
The  supremacy  and  work  of  Christ,  vs.  15-29. 

The  Apostle  begins  with  the  usual  affirmation  of  the  di- 
vine origin  of  his  apostleship.  He  is  an  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ  by  the  will  of  God  (cf.  Gal.  i:i,  11,  12).  This  is  an 
affirmation  of  immense  importance.  If  Paul  is  a  theologian 
framing  a  system  of  doctrines  which  he  believes  to  embody 
Christian  truth,  that  is  one  thing;  if  he  is  God's  sent-one 
communicating  words  from  God,  that  is  another  thing.  He 
affirms  everywhere  and  always  that  he  is  the  latter. 

And  the  first  thing  the  Spirit  bids  him  write  to  the  Saints 
at  Colosse  is  a  message  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.     That  message  is,  "Grace  be  unto  you,  and 


310  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

peace";  a  message,  not  a  pious  wish.  Remember  that.  It 
is  always  grace,  and  it  is  always  peace.  The  Father  may 
have  a  controversy  with  us  about  some  of  our  ways,  but  the 
peace  made  by  the  blood  of  His  cross  ever  abides,  and  every 
motion  of  the  divine  heart  toward  us  is  grace. 

The  Apostle  is  thankful  to  God  for  three  things  concern- 
ing the  Colossians,  their  faith,  love,  and  hope.  This  is  the 
true  order.  The  object  of  faith  is  Christ  Jesus,  of  love,  the 
saints — all  Saints,  and  not  merely  the  lovable  Saints.  That 
is  the  real  test  of  faith,  ''love  towards  all  the  saints." 
'Xovest  thou  me?  Feed  my  sheep."  Faith  begins  with  a 
backward  look  to  Calvary;  love  looks  around  upon  the 
brethren ;  hope  looks  forward  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 

This  kind  of  fruit  is  what  Paul  expects.  The  gospel  is 
a  vitalizing  principle,  not  merely  a  "plan  of  salvation." 
Where  the  grace  of  God  is  known  in  truth  fruit  follows, 
the  nine-fold  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  And  love,  love  toward  all 
saints,  comes  first,  and  is  first. 

The  Colossians  learned  that  from  Epaphras,  now  Paul's 
fellow  prisoner.  He  is  called  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ. 
The  word  for  "minister"  is  diaconos — servant,  "deacon." 
In  our  fear  of  what  is  called  "one  man  ministry"  let  us  not 
pervert  the  Scriptures.  There  were  men  in  the  Apostolic 
churches  who  did  not  go  about.  The  churches  of  Jesus 
Christ  need  shepherding  as  well  as  teaching.  No  one  can 
do  that  who  does  not  know  the  sheep,  and  who  is  not  known 
to  the  sheep.  Epaphras,  says  Paul,  "is  one  of  you."  Men 
running  about  with  doctrines,  however  good,  zealous  and 
well-taught,  can  never  be  that  to  the  local  assemblies. 

And  this  brings  us  to  the  great  Apostolic  prayer.  There 
is  in  it  a  beautiful  seven-fold  moral  order. 

(i)  All  begins  with  the  will  of  God.  The  primary  ref- 
erence is  to  that  will  as  it  concerns  the  believer  of  this  dis- 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  3n 

pensation.  "According  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will" 
He  has  predestinated  us  to  the  adoption  of  sons.  Sonship 
is  more  than  childship.  The  Old  Testament  saints  were 
children,  but  were  kept  under  the  law  as  a  pedagogue,  and 
differed  nothing  from  servants.  But  Christ  has  changed  all 
that  by  redemption.  Now  we  are  no  more  servants,  but 
sons. 

(2)  And  this  gives  character  to  the  walk.  The  knowl- 
edge of  His  will  in  our  position  as  sons  is  essential  to  a 
walk  **unto  all  pleasing."  The  returning  prodigal  had  so 
lost  the  sense  of  what  was  suited  to  the  father's  heart  and 
mind  as  to  think  only  of  a  hired  servant's  place.  Too  many 
make  this  mistake,  supposing  it  to  be  true  humility,  when 
it  is  only  grieving  the  Father's  heart,  and  thwarting  the 
Father's  will. 

(3)  And  now  we  come  to  what  so  many  put  first — work. 
But  it  makes  all  the  difference  whether  we  work  as  sons 
or  as  servants.  It  makes  all  the  difference  whether  we 
work  in  the  place  where  His  will  has  put  us,  or  in  a  place 
and  way  of  self -choosing.  Before  the  Lord  speaks  of  fruit- 
bearing  He  puts  the  disciples  in  their  right  place.  "Hence- 
forth I  call  you  not  servants  .  .  .  but  I  have  chosen  you, 
and  ordained  you,  that  ye  shall  go  and  bring  forth  fruit." 

In  the  body  of  Christ  every  member  has  a  place  and  func- 
tion sovereignly  fixed  "as  it  hath  pleased  Him."  In  that 
place  and  fulfilling  that  function,  fruit  is  sure. 

(4)  "And  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God."  This 
goes  beyond  the  knowledge  of  His  will  to  an  ever  deeper 
knowledge  of  Him  who  wills.  This  order  may  not  be 
varied;  to  know  His  will;  to  walk  in  a  way  suited  to  the 
place  which  that  will  has  given  us;  to  be  diligent  in  our 
appointed  work — ^these  are  the  indispensable  steps  to  per- 
sonal and  first  hand  acquaintanceship  with  God. 


312  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

(5)  The  fifth  element  is  strength  in  view  of  the  inescap- 
able experiences,  which  await  the  believers.  And  how  ade- 
quate the  provision,  "all  might,  according  to  His  glorious 
power." 

(6)  And  this  again  is  not  an  end  but,  like  the  knowledge 
of  His  will,  a  means  to  an  end.  The  end  is  two-fold ;  the 
attainment  of  patience,  and  of  a  joy  so  fundamental  that 
suffering,  though  long  continued,  cannot  quench  it. 

(7)  But  the  crown  of  all  Christian  experience  is  "giving 
thanks."  The  Apostle  sets  forth  the  reasons  for  thank- 
fulness. They  are  found  in  the  permanent  results  of  the 
work  of  Christ.  Note  the  past  tense.  ''Hath  made  us 
meet" ;  ''Hath  delivered  us" ;  "Hath  translated  us" ;  "We 
have  redemption,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  Under- 
neath all  the  shifting  experiences  of  the  believer's  life,  and 
the  ebb  and  flow  of  his  feelings,  these  eternal  results  of  re- 
demption abide.    They  are  safe  in  the  changeless  past. 

"My  soul  looks  back  to  see 

The  burden  thou  did'st  bear, 
While  hanging  on  the  cursed  tree. 
And  knows  her  guilt  was  THERE." 

No  believer  may  know  abiding  peace  until  he  sees  that 
before  the  world  was  he  chosen  in  Christ,  and  that  cen- 
turies before  He  was  born  God  Himself  took  up  the  question 
of  His  guilt  and  forever  disposed  of  it  in  the  cross  of  Christ. 
It  can  never  be  brought  in  issue  again.  God  will  not  do  it, 
and  "if  God  be  for  us  who  can  be  against  us  ?"  "Who  shall 
lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?"  Our  shameful 
sin  is  res  adjiidicata — a  matter  already  and  forever  adjudi- 
cated. 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  313 

Chapter  II. 

The  Apostle  conies  now  to  the  core  of  the  Epistle,  the 
dangers  to  the  simple  and  pure  faith  of  the  Gospel,  which 
had  aroused  his  solicitude  in  behalf  of  the  saints  at  Colosse. 
If  these  had  been  local  and  transitory  they  might  well  be 
passed  over  with  slight  mention. 

But  so  it  was  in  the  divine  providence  that  the  perils  to 
the  faith  at  Colosse  were  the  ever  present  perils  in  the 
midst  of  which  the  saints  of  all  the  centuries  have  lived. 
Paul  prefaces  the  statement  of  them  with  an  exhortation 
(Col.  ii:  1-7).  In  two  things  the  Apostle  would  have  the 
saints  knit  together,  in  love  and  in  an  understanding  and 
acknowledgment  of  the  "mystery." 

A  "mystery"  in  Scripture  is  some  truth  which  has  been 
kept  back  but  is  now  revealed.  There  are  seven  such  mys- 
teries in  the  New  Testament,  and,  save  the  first,  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  each  is  mentioned  re- 
peatedly. Here  it  is  the  mystery  of  God,  that  is  Christ.* 
A  false  mysticism  was  abroad  at  Colosse;  the  Spirit  of 
God  will  meet  this  with  the  true  mysticism.  This  is  ever 
the  Bible  way.  Error  is  not  simply  denied;  it  is  also  con- 
fronted with  the  truth.  Already  one  great  mystery  had  been 
mentioned,  that  of  the  indwelling  Christ.  The  practical  side 
of  this  is  brought  out  in  Galatians  where  the  inliving  Christ 
is  shown  to  be  the  governing  fact  of  this  present  life  of  the 
believer.  The  whole  problem,  indeed,  of  the  new  life  in 
Christ  is  to  outlive  Him  who  inlives.  But  here  the  source 
of  all  the  Christian  mysteries  is  revealed — the  mystery  of 
God  Himself.  The  apostle  applies  this,  first  of  all  to  the  be- 
liever's walk.    Mysteries  belong  to  the  sphere  of  faith,  not 


*In  Him,  the  Christ  of  God,  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge  (gnosis)  Verse  3. 


314  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

sight.  We  received  Jesus  Christ  by  faith  on  the  alone 
authority  of  the  Word  of  God.  Very  well:  as  we  began 
so  we  must  go  on.  The  Christian  is  not  a  person  who,  hav- 
ing made  one  venture  into  the  sphere  of  faith  when  he  re- 
ceived the  Lord  Jesus,  may  now  live  by  sight  and  sound. 
He  is  a  citizen  of  an  unseen  heaven ;  served  by  the  unseen 
messengers  of  an  unseen  Father ;  preserved  unto  an  unseen 
inheritance;  loves  and  serves  an  unseen  Christ.  To  these 
great  verities  of  revelation  faith  gives  substance:  to  faith 
they  are  more  real  than  the  granite  hills. 

The  three  perils  are,  philosophy,  the  tradition  (or  cus- 
tom) of  men,  and  legality,  a  return  to  the  law. 

Against  philosophy  the  warning  is  absolute.  When  science 
is  in  question  the  warning  is  qualified,  for  there  is  a  true 
science.  But  there  is  no  true  philosophy.  Philosophy  is  an 
attempt  to  investigate  and  explain  the  phenomena  of  a  moral 
universe  inhabited  by  morally  accountable  human  beings, 
and  to  deduce  principles  for  the  wise  and  right  government 
of  life.  But  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  a  divine  and  infallible 
revelation  from  God  on  that  very  subject.  No  men  have 
ever  thought  so  profoundly  about  the  problems  of  life  as 
the  Greek  philosophers,  but  their  conclusions  were  summed 
up  by  inspiration  as  but  "the  wisdom  of  this  world"  which 
is  mere  ''foolishness"  with  God.  But  the  terrible  effect  of 
this  "wisdom  of  men,"  this  "philosophy,"  is  that  it  so  per- 
verts the  mind  of  man  that  the  true  wisdom,  the  "wisdom  of 
God"  seems  to  him  mere  "foolishness."  That  human 
philosophy  is  really  foolishness  is  completely  attested  by  the 
fact  that  after  thousands  of  years  it  has  reached  no  stable 
conclusion,  the  "philosophia  ultima"  is  still  an  unrealized 
dream.  One  of  the  greatest  of  modern  philosophers  has  said 
that  over  all  philosophic  speculation  must  be  written  the 
words,  "Ever  not  quite." 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  315 

In  no  sphere,  however,  has  philosophy  wrought  such  havoc 
as  in  the  sphere  of  revealed  religion.  Philosophies  of  the 
plan  of  salvation;  philosophies  of  the  atonement;  philoso- 
phies of  prayer — these  have  abounded,  and  it  is  they  which 
have  divided  Christians  into  warring  camps.  "Beware  lest 
any  man  make  a  spoil  of  you  through  philosophy,  and  vain 
deceit." 

The  particular  form  of  the  philosophic  peril  at  Colosse, 
Gnosticism,  has  passed  away.  Men  no  longer  conceive  of 
evil  as  lodged  in  matter,  or  seek  to  exonerate  God  from 
the  crime  of  having  created  matter  by  inventing  a  creative 
creature,  the  "Urge"  or  "Demi-urge."  But  "religious"  man 
is  still  wise  above  what  is  written,  "intruding  into  those 
things  which  he  hath  not  seen,  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly 
mind,"  as  so-called  Christian  Science,*  Theosophy,  and  a 
host  of  modem  cults  testify. 

The  third  peril  lay  in  what  the  Apostle  calls  "the  rudi- 
ments [or  "elements"]  of  the  world" — a  phrase  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  uses  here  and  elsewhere  for  the  law,  especially 
the  "law  contained  in  ordinances."  The  Spirit  in  the  New 
Testament  never,  it  should  be  needless  to  say,  makes  light 
of  the  law.  On  the  contrary  it  is  the  New  Testament  which 
especially  honors  the  law.  Not  the  law  but  the  human  per- 
version of  the  law  by  wresting  it  from  the  divine  purpose — 
the  using  of  the  law  "unlawfully,"  this  is  what  the  Spirit 
would  guard  against.  "The  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous 
man"  may  be  written  over  Romans  vi :  8,  and  over  the  whole 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  The  Holy  Spirit  does  not,  let  it 
be  repeated,  object  to  the  law  itself,  but  to  the  law  as  mis- 
applied. It  is,  in  the  divine  government  and  education  of 
man,  an  "elementary,"  or  "rudimentary"  discipline.     It  be- 


*Partially  a  revival  of  ancient  Gnosticism. 


3i6  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

longs  to  the  age  intermediate  between  Promise  and  Grace. 
It  is  a  pedagogue  for  children  who,  during  their  minority, 
differ  nothing  from  servants  though  heirs  of  all. 

In  beautiful  harmony  with  this  the  Apostle  constantly 
uses  the  law  as  an  "instruction  in  righteousness"  for  his 
Gentile  babes  in  Christ  who,  converted  out  of  heathenism, 
are  ignorant  of  these  very  ''elements,"  or  "rudiments"  of 
righteousness. 

The  second  peril  is  "the  tradition  of  men."  The  Apostle 
has  in  mind  here  that  which  men  have  superadded  to  revela- 
tion. In  Judaism  it  was  that  which  men  had  added  to  the 
law.  Upon  the  clear  revelations  of  Exodus  and  Leviticus 
the  rabbins  had  built  a  structure  of  intolerable  oppressive- 
ness. The  Sabbath  is  an  instance.  As  instituted  by  God  it 
was  simply  and  only  a  rest  day  for  man  and  beast.  Under 
the  traditions  of  men  it  became  a  hard,  ascetic  synagogue — 
keeping  religious  observance,  under  which  tender  con- 
sciences were  tortured.  To  the  Gospel  the  same  evil  work 
of  man  has  added  asceticism  in  all  its  myriad  forms,  all  of 
which  have  one  root — the  notion  that  the  stern  repression  of 
all  natural  joy  is  essential  to  the  pleasing  of  the  God  who 
implanted  in  man's  nature  the  capacities  for  those  very  joys. 
In  its  grosser  forms  Protestant  Christianity  has  cast  off  the 
"tradition"  which  made  it  holier  to  be  a  nun  than  a  mother ; 
to  be  a  monk  than  a  father ;  to  wear  sackcloth  than  silk ;  to 
fast  than  eat.  But  the  whole  spirit  of  man-made  "ordi- 
nances" abides,  and  so  absolutely  dominates  the  thinking 
and  judgments  of  thousands  of  earnest  souls  that  the  apos- 
tolic injunction :  Let,  therefore,  the  judgment  of  no  man 
govern  you  "in  meat,  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of  an  holy 
day  .  .  or  of  the  Sabbath,"  makes  a  demand  upon  Chris- 
tian manliness  beyond  the  courage  of  most. 

Jesus  Christ  was  no  ascetic.     He  was  as  far  from  Es- 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  317 

seneism  as  from  Pharisaism,  or  Herodianism,  and  the 
stricter  rehgious  opinion  of  His  day  condemned  Him  as 
a  Sabbath-breaker,  a  glutton  and  wine-bibber. 

Against  these  three  abiding  perils:  the  peril  from  philo- 
sophic intrusion  into  the  sphere  of  revelation;  of  ascetic 
and  pietistic  attempts  to  be  holy  by  works  of  which  Scripture 
says  nothing,  and  of  putting  the  objects  of  God's  free  grace 
back  under  the  elementary  system  of  law,  the  Apostle  rears 
great  divinely  revealed  principles. 

1.  The  believer  is  already  complete  in  Christ.  It  is 
obvious  that  neither  philosophy,  pietism,  nor  legality  can 
add  to  completeness.  Christ  "fulfilled  all  righteousness." 
Surely  in  behalf  of  the  new  creation,  and  then  went  to  a 
sacrificial  death  in  which  the  believer  also  died,  and  rose 
from  the  grave  into  a  life  which  the  believer  shares.  Is  it 
a  question  of  legal  ordinances?  They  are  nailed  to  the 
cross.  It  is  a  question  of  malefic  "angels,  principalities  and 
powers?"  Christ  triumphed  over  them  openly  in  the  be- 
liever's behalf. 

2.  The  second  great  principle  is  that  the  believer's  new 
life  is  not  truly  nourished  by  legal  observances  or  ascetic 
practices.  Just  as  the  branches  draw  all  life  and  growth 
from  the  true  Vine,  so  the  living  members  in  the  living 
body  of  Christ  grow  by  renewals  of  life  from  the  Head.  It 
is  a  total  misconception  of  Christianity  to  conceive  of  the 
believer  as  a  religionist  with  a  series  of  forms  and  observ- 
ances. He  is  a  worshipper,  but  his  place  of  worship  is 
known  only  to  faith,  and  accessible  only  through  the  Spirit. 
God  never  had  pleasure  in  religious  forms,  even  the  forms 
which  He  commanded;  they  were  mere  shadows  cast  by  a 
coming  One.  Now  He  is  come,  and  the  body  of  which  the 
believer  is  a  member  is  His  body.  How  childish  and  trivial 
to  suppose  that  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 


3i8  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

can  be  pleased,  or  the  believer  benefited,  by  "will  worship," 
ascetic  practices,  philosophical  mysticisms ! 

3.  The  Apostle  exposes  the  real  origin  of  these:  they 
have,  to  the  fleshly  mind  "a  shew  of  wisdom,"  but  they  but 
serve  to  exalt  the  flesh.  Their  deluded  votaries,  Romanist, 
Protestant — what  not,  fancy  themselves  holier  than  their 
brethren  who  seek  only  to  yield  all  to  the  sway  of  the  inliving 
One  that  He  may  live  out  in  them  the  life  of  simplicity, 
naturalness,  and  helpfulness  which  He  illustrated  when  on 
earth. 


Chapter  III. 

We  reach  now  the  preceptive  part  of  the  Epistle,  the 
principles  which  are  to  govern  the  walk  of  a  man  in  whom 
dwells  Christ,  who  is  complete  in  Him,  and  who  needs 
neither  ordinance,  nor  holy  days,  nor  ascetic  practices  for 
his  sanctification. 

At  this  point  many  would  send  us  back  to  the  law.  We 
are  told  on  every  hand  that,  while  the  law  is  not  a  means  of 
life  it  still  remains  the  rule,  or  as  some  say  the  standard  of 
life.  But  the  apostle  has  already  told  us  that  the  law  is  a 
rudimentary  discipline,  and  that  as  to  ordinances,  Christ 
nailed  them  to  His  cross.  It  should  be  a  very  serious  mat- 
ter to  tear  from  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  anything  which  He 
nailed  to  it.  To  man  in  and  of  the  earth,  having  earthly 
promises,  the  law  was  a  perfect  testing.  Moreover,  "the 
law  is  spiritual,"  and  searches  the  depths,  showing  man  not 
only  that  he  has  sinned,  but  that  he  is  sin ;  that  not  only  does 
he  need  forgiveness,  but  deliverance  also  from  a  law  in  his 
members  mightier  than  the  law  of  his  mind.  For  such  a 
state  nothing  but  death  and  resurrection  can  avail.     This, 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  319 

for  every  believer,  is  the  reckoning  of  God,  who  sees  him  in 
Christ  dying,  in  Christ  living  again  in  newness  of  life. 

Upon  that  ground,  therefore,  the  preceptive  portion  of 
this,  as  of  all  other  church  epistles  take  the  believer.  "If 
ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ."  That  is  a  word  which  it  be- 
hooves us  to  learn.  We  may  make  it  a  touchstone  by  which 
to  try  every  thought,  every  act,  every  motive,  every  plan.  Is 
it  suited  to  a  man  who  was  united  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
in  His  death  and  resurrection,  and  in  whom  Christ  lives, 
the  hope  of  glory  ? 

And  so  the  Spirit  develops  the  principle.  "If  therefore 
ye  have  been  raised  with  the  Christ,  seek  the  things  above 
where  the  Christ  is  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God;  have 
your  mind  on  things  above,  not  on  the  things  on  the  earth." 
(Darby's  Trans.) 

That  strikes  the  key-note  of  the  new  life  in  Christ  Jesus. 
All  of  the  life  is  to  be  harmonized  to  that.  Nothing  is  to  be 
allowed  which  would  make  a  discord  in  that  heavenly  music. 
The  ear  of  faith  catches  the  melody  of  the  bells  upon  the 
robe  of  our  High  Priest  who  has  passed  into  the  holiest, 
there  to  present  the  blood  of  our  atonement,  and  to  appear 
in  the  presence  of  God  for  us,  and  the  whole  life  is  to  be  the 
echo  on  earth  of  those  bells  in  heaven. 

So  the  Ephesians  has  it,  only  the  illustration  is  drawn 
from  the  sister  art,  poesy.  "For  we  are  his  poem  [Gk. 
poiema]  having  been  created  in  Christ  Jesus  for  good 
works."  And  Peter  tells  us  that  we  are  to  "chorus  to- 
gether" the  graces  of  virtue,  knowledge,  temperance,  broth- 
erly love  and  full  love. 

Humiliating  failure,  unspirituality,  unfruitfulness  result 
inevitably  from  our  failure  to  conceive  of  the  life  which 
we  now  live  in  the  flesh  as  the  very  life  of  the  risen  Christ, 
which  in  us  co-crucified  and  co-risen,  seeks  to  reproduce  in 


320  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

and  through  us  the  graces  which  are  in  Him.  So  long  as 
we  conceive  of  ourselves  as  men,  merely,  earthlings  and  of 
the  earth,  we  will  "walk  as  men."  When  we  really  take 
account  of  ourselves  as  "dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto 
God  in  Christ  Jesus,"  and  therefore  as  truly  "strangers  and 
pilgrims  on  the  earth,"  we  will  with  purpose  of  heart  "seek 
those  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  is  seated  at  the 
right  hand  of  God." 

The  Spirit  dwells  upon  this  great  principle,  that  the 
position  into  which  grace  has  brought  us  is  to  govern  the 
walk  on  earth.  "For  ye  have  died,  and  your  life  is  hid 
with  the  Christ  in  God."  "Hid,"  as  the  life  of  the  stream 
that  makes  music  and  brings  freshness  and  joy  in  the  valley 
is  hid  in  the  spring  away  yonder  on  the  mountain.  Our 
life  is  there  as  to  its  origin  and  its  renewal.  We  live  His 
life  as  the  members  of  our  bodies  live  our  life;  as  the 
branch  lives  the  life  of  the  Vine.  It  is  an  unsevered  life, 
one  life  in  Him  and  in  us. 

We  think  of  life  in  two  ways :  as  a  fact,  and  as  a  series 
of  thoughts  and  actions.  The  law  took  man  in  Adam  and 
gave  him  a  perfect  rule;  grace  takes  man  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins,  and  imparting  to  him  the  divine  nature, 
and  the  very  life  of  the  risen  Son  of  God,  puts  glory  before 
him  as  his  absolutely  sure  destiny,  and  exhorts  that  he  mani- 
fest this  new  Hfe  in  new  thoughts  and  deeds.  It  is  the  new 
principle  of  grace :  "Make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit  good." 

The  Spirit  now  applies  the  great  principle  of  death  and 
resurrection  to  the  practical  details  of  life. 

I.  The  man  who  walks  in  newness  of  life  will  "mortify" 
in  the  members  which  are  upon  the  earth,  i.  e.,  the  mortal 
body,  the  things  which,  in  an  unbeliever,  bring  judgment. 
Some  of  those  "things"  are  enumerated.    They  are  of  "the 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  321 

works  of  the  flesh"  described  in  Galatians,  and  are  the  very 
opposites  of  the  "fruit  of  the  Spirit." 

"Mortify"  is  an  unflinching  word.  It  means,  "make 
dead."  We  must  go  to  Romans  for  the  means  by  which 
we  are  to  "make  dead"  the  evils  most  deeply  rooted  in  fallen 
human  nature — perversions  of  the  sex  principle,  and  cove- 
tousness.  Is  is  "through  the  Spirit,"  and  only  so,  that  the 
believer  puts  these  things  in  the  place  of  death.  Self -effort 
is  utterly  vain.  The  Seventh  of  Romans  is  the  record  of  a 
converted  man,  and  that  man  no  less  a  personage  than  the 
Apostle  Paul,  seeking  self -victory  over  self,  only  to  be  ut- 
terly defeated.  But  the  same  man,  instructed  as  to  his  privi- 
lege in  the  Spirit,  finds  a  victory  over  self  so  quiet  and 
complete  that  he  can  state  it  in  three  lines :  "the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the 
law  of  sin  and  death." 

But  making  dead  the  deeds  of  the  body,  that  is  a  walk  in 
victory  over  known  and  specific  sin,  is  a  vastly  different 
thing  from  "the  entire  eradication  of  the  flesh,"  of  which 
some  speak.  It  is  a  phrase  never  found  in  Scripture.  Two 
facts  are  ever  present  to  the  believer — the  fact  of  "sin  that 
dwelleth  in  me,"  and  the  fact  that  the  body  is  the  temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  "which  is  in  you,  which  ye  have  of  God." 
And  "the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit 
against  the  flesh :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the 
other" — to  what  end?  "That  ye  may  not  do  the  [evil] 
things  that  [left  to  yourself]  ye  would." 

But  the  shameful  categories  of  "fornication,  uncleanness, 
evil  desire,  and  covetousness"  are  not  the  only  things  to  be 
"put  away"  in  the  Spirit's  power.  Let  us  give  heed  to  this. 
Vast  numbers  of  Christians  who  walk  in  victory  over  sex 
sins  make  little  of  "anger,  wrath,  malice,"  etc.  Evil  temper 
in  the  home,  the  outlash  of  anger,  or,  if  this  be  restrained, 


322  THINGS  NEW  AND  OLD 

the  indulgence  in  a  cold  cutting  sarcasm  toward  children  or 
servants — these  may  go  with  the  most  perfect  courtesy 
toward  strangers,  or  acquaintances.  Alas !  they  may  go, 
too,  with  very  high  doctrine,  and  great  scrupulosity  in  mat- 
ters of  Biblical  teaching. 

There  is  to  be,  therefore,  a  thorough  "putting  off,"  and 
"putting  on."  Christ  for  us  is  justification ;  Christ  in  us  is 
sanctification ;  Christ  upon  us  is  manifestation.  The  result 
will  be  the  blessed  life.  "And  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in 
your  hearts,  to  the  which  also  ye  are  called  in  one  body; 
and  be  ye  thankful.  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you 
richly;  in  all  wisdom  teaching  and  admonishing  one  an- 
other ;  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  singing  with 
grace  in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord." 

Lovely  picture !  And  now,  having  as  one  may  say  drawn 
the  landscape  of  the  blessed  life,  the  Spirit  fills  it  with  fig- 
ures :  "wives,"  "husbands,"  "children,"  "fathers,"  "serv- 
ants," "masters,"  "them  without."  Ah !  the  blessed  life  is 
not,  then,  a  vision,  a  fabled  Atalantis,  an  imaginary  Re- 
public, a  cloudy  ideal,  or,  at  most,  an  inward  state.  No. 
The  blessed  life  is  first  of  all  a  life  right  with  God,  and  then 
a  life  of  blessed  peace  and  song  within,  and  all  this  unto  a 
life  of  practical  righteousness,  kindliness,  helpfulness  and 
power. 

The  apostle  finds  time  to  call  Tychicus  "a  beloved  brother, 
and  a  faithful  minister  and  fellow-servant  in  the  Lord." 
One  supposes  that  Tychicus  was  at  many  points  imperfect ; 
that  Paul  might  have  backbitten  Tychicus  as  easily  as 
praised  him.  It  is  always  so.  Two  classes  of  facts  are  pat- 
ent in  the  life  of  every  servant  of  God:  his  shortcomings, 
imperfections,  and  failures,  equally  with  his  zeal,  his  prayer- 
fulness,  his  real  loyalty  to  Jesus  Christ.  We  may  dwell 
upon  either:   Paul  seems  to  have  rejoiced  in  the  good  which 


LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES  323 

he  saw  in  his  brethren.  One  does  not  think  that  any  one 
ever  left  a  private  interview  with  Paul  with  a  bad  taste  in 
his  mouth  about  Tychicus  and  Timothy — no,  nor  even  Bar- 
nabas and  John  Mark ! 

The  Epistle  closes  with,  perhaps,  the  loveliest  pictures  of 
all — Epaphras  on  his  knees  in  prison.  We  must  not  miss 
that.  Epaphras  had  labored  in  the  Word  at  Colosse.  He 
was,  probably,  a  "pastor  and  teacher"  there;  and  there  is, 
incidentally,  a  word  to  such  :  "Epaphras,  who  is  one  of  you/' 
He  was  not  "lording  it  over  God's  heritage,"  but  a  brother- 
man  amongst  those  Colossian  believers.  But  now  he  is  a 
prisoner  at  Rome,  and  can  no  longer  teach  and  exhort  at 
Colosse.  Modern  speech  would  describe  him  as,  "providen- 
tially laid  aside."  Evidently  he  did  not  think  so  of  himself, 
and  so  we  have  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  difference 
between  the  believer's  office  as  a  priest,  an  office  which  all 
believers  of  this  age  have  alike,  and  his  gift  as  a  servant. 
Epaphras  could  no  longer  minister  his  gift,  but  Nero's  walls 
could  not  shut  him  out  from  access  to  God  in  the  holiest, 
and  so,  laying  down  for  the  time  his  gift,  he  remembers 
that  he  is  a  priest,  and  Paul  could  say  of  him:  "Always 
laboring  fervently  for  you  in  prayers."  And  who  can  doubt 
that  Epaphras'  prayers  for  his  Colossian  flock  were,  after 
all,  his  mightiest  ministry  ? 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date;  May  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORtD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Dnw 
Cranbenv  T.iwn^ihip,  ha  iisoh'- 
(724) 77Q 


