THE  LIBRARY 

of 

VICTORIA  UNIVERSITY 
Toronto 


I  UNION 

THEOLOGICAL  COLLEGE 
TORONTO. 


THIRD   SERIES 


OF 


LECTURES    TO   MY   STUDENTS. 


rt  of  jttlusirntion: 


BEING 


ADDRESSES    DELIVERED    TO    THE    STUDENTS 


or 


Hastens'  College, 

METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE. 


BY 


C.     H.    SPURGEON, 


I'niidon: 

PASSMORE    &    AU&ASTER,    PATERNOSTEP    BUILDINGS. 


All  >W*  \*« 

THEOLOGICAL  COLLEGE  I 
TORONTO. 


Sim 


ALABASTER,   PASSMOEE  &   SOXS,   PRINTERS, 

\\IIFTECROSS  STREET, 

LONDON,    B.C. 


INTRODUCTORY    NOTES. 


MR.  SPURGEON,  in  his  preface  to  the  Second  Series  of  Lectures  to  my 
Students,  wrote: — "I  seize  the  present  opportunity  to  call  attention  to 
the  second  of  my  three  books  for  students,  for  this  is  properly  the  third. 
I  allude  to  the  volume  entitled,  Commenting  and  Commenturifs.  It 
embodies  the  experience  and  information  of  a  lifetime ;  but,  being  very 
much  occupied  with  a  Catalogue  of  Commentaries,  it  cannot  commend 
itself  to  popular  tastes,  and  must  he  confined  in  its  circulation  to  those 
who  wish  for  information  upon  expository  works.  To  my  own  surprise, 
it  is  in  the  tenth  thousand,*  but  numbers  of  readers  to  whom  it  might 
be  valuable  have  not  yet  seen  it.  As  almost  all  the  reviewers  speak  of 
it  with  much  praise,  I  think  it  will  be  worth  any  young  man's  while  to 
buy  it  before  he  gets  far  on  in  the  formation  of  a  library.  It  is  on 
my  heart,  if  life  is  spared,  to  issue  six  half-crown  books  for  preachers ; 
the  fourth,  which  is  much  of  it  prepared,  will  be  occupied  with  The 
Art  of  Illustration,  and  I  am  anxious  in  no  one  instance  to  waste  time 
and  labour  upon  books  which  will  not  be  read.  Hence  my  reason  fo« 
mentioning  the  Commenting  book  in  this  place.  Life  is  short,  and 
time  is  precious  to  a  busy  man.  Whatever  we  do,  we  wish  to  make  the 
most  of." 

Accordingly,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  thought  that,  after  the  publication  of  her 
dear  husband's  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  according  to  Matthew, — 
The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  that  pathetically-precious  volume  that 
memorializes  the  author's  transition  from  preaching  the  Gospel  on  earth 
to  entering  the  Kingdom  in  heaven, — the  first  of  his  unfinished  books 
to  be  completed  must  be  the  one  to  which  he  had  himself  given  til- 
title,  The  Art  of  Illustration,  and  for  which  he  had  so  long  I 
carefully  been  gathering  the  materials.  Hence  the  issue  of  the  present 
work. 

Of  the  seven  lectures  included  in  this  volume,  the  first  two  v, 
and  stereotyped  during  Mr.  Spurgeon's  lifetime.     Three  of  the  others 
were  partially  revised  by  him,  before  being  re-delivered  to  a  later  company 

•  Commenting  and  Commentaries  is  now  (l897),  in  the  fourteenth  thousand. 


[NTBODUCTOBY   NOTES. 


of  students  than  those  who  heard  them  for  the  first  time.  The  two  re 
maining  lectures  are  printed  substantially  as  they  appeared  in  the 
reporter's  transcripts  ;  only  such  verbal  corrections  have  been  made  as 
were  absolutely  necessary  to  ensure  accuracy  of  statement  so  far  as  it 
could  be  ascertained.  It  was  a  providential  arrangement  that,  just  as 
the  lecture  on  "  The  Science  of  Astronomy  as  a  Source  of  Illustration  " 
•was  being  prepared  for  the  press,  a  book  entitled,  The  Voices  of  the  Stars, 
by  J.  E.  WALKER,  M.A.  (Elliot  Stock),  was  received  for  review  in  The 
Sword  and  the  Trowel.  As  the  author  of  that  very  valuable  volume 
has  taken  great  pains  "  to  verify,  on  the  highest  authority,  the  facts 
which  are  the  basis  of  the  theological  and  spiritual  correspondences  " 
pointed  out  in  his  work,  we  have  been  glad  to  avail  ourselves  of  his 
figures,  in  certain  instances,  so  as  to  bring  the  lecture  down  to  date;  and 
we  gratefully  acknowledge  our  indebtedness  to  Mr.  Walker  for  this 
assistance. 

Of  course,  it  is  needless  to  say  that  this  volume  of  lectures  is  not 
what  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  have  made  it  had  he  been  spared  to  see 
it  published  ;  but,  fully  recognising  that  fact,  every  possible  effort  has 
been  exerted  to  make  the  work  as  helpful  as  possible  to  those  for 
whom  it  is  specially  intended. 

In  the  catalogue  of  books  of  anecdotes,  illustrations,  etc.,  the  "  etc." 
i  been  rather  widely  interpreted  so  as   to  include  the  Sword  and 
rmvel  reviews  of  all  works  of  the  kind  that  were  likely  to  be  useful  to 
>ters,    students,    local    preachers,     Sunday-school    teachers,    and 
stian  workers  generally.     The  notices  of  these  illustrative  volumes 
appeared  in  ••  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Magazine"  up  to  the  time  of  his 
ion  to  glory,  were  almost  (if  not  quite)  all  written  by  himself-  so 
iat,  w,th  Lectures  V.  and  VI.,  and  Appendix  A,  readers  will  be  able 
fhat  the  late  Pastor  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  judged  to  be 
books  of  this  nature  that  had  come  before  his  notice      He  was 
such  a  master  of  "The  Art  of  Illustration"  that  his  opinions 
subject  have  the  added  weight  of  long  practical  experience; 
is  will,  doubtless,  make  them  of  great  value  to  others 
•s  necessary  to  adopt  some  kind  of  order  for  the  reviews ;  and  as 
wy  other  arrangement  would  have  seemed  invidious,  it  was  decided 
u  the  nonces  should  be  printed  as  they  appeared,  chronologically,  in 
Magazme.      The  published  prices  of  the  books  are   given   I    a 

bu't to"  t0t  f  ^^  PUrChaSCrS  '  and  b  the  Case  <*  work?  reviewed 
«  now  out  of  prmt,  that  fact  is  stated,  to  prevent  disappointment  * 


IN  I  •:<  >i>!  C  i'  >B1     \-  fl  B8,  V 

readers,  and  useless  enquiries  of  publishers.  It  may  be  that  books 
which  are  out  of  print  can  still  be  obtained  of  second-hand  booksellers. 
Where  the  volumes  have  passed  out  of  the  hands  of  the  original  pub 
lishers,  the  names  of  the  present  publishers  have  been  inserted,  with  the 
prices  at  which  the  books  can  now  be  bought. 

The  issue  of  this  volume  will  awaken,  in  the  minds  of  the  mi: 
educated  in  the  Pastors'  College,   many  memories  of  their  "  , 
President."     The   happy   Friday  afternoons,   when   these  and 
lectures  were  delivered  to  them,  will  never  fade  from  tl  :ion  <>f 

the  highly-privileged  band  of  brethren  who  had  the  honour  of  sitting  at 
the  feet  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  Those  who  read  the  contents  of  this  book, 
and  the  three  previous  series  of  lectures,  will  understand,  in 
least,  how  it  is  that  "  Spurgeon's  men  "  increasingly  mourn  the  loss  of 
their  loved  leader  ;  but  they  can  never  fully  know  all  that,  under  God, 
he  was  to  his  sons  in  the  faith.  Oh,  that  everyone  who  came  under 
his  blessed  influence  might  be  more  like  him,  and  so  become,  as  he  was, 
"  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ "  ! 

For  the  information  of  friends  who  are  not  fully  aware  of  the 
character  and  purpose  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Lectures  to  my  SfuJtnts,  it  may 
be  well  to  reproduce  here  what  he,  almost  apologetically,  wrote  when 
submitting  former  specimens  of  .them  to  the  judgment  of  the  general 
public  : — "  My  College  lectures  are  colloquial,  familiar,  full  of  anecdote, 
and  often  humorous  :  they  are  purposely  made  so,  to  suit  the  occasion. 
At  the  end  of  the  week  I  meet  the  students,  and  find  them  weary  with 
sterner  studies,  and  I  judge  it  best  to  be  as  lively  and  interesting  in  my 
prelections  as  I  well  can  be.  They  have  had  their  fill  of  c! 
mathematics,  and  divinity,  and  are  only  in  a  condition  to  receive 
something  which  will  attract  and  secure  their  attention,  and  fire  their 
hearts.  Our  venerable  tutor,  Mr.  Rogers,  compares  my  Friday  work  to 
the  sharpening  of  the  pin  :  the  fashioning  of  the  head,  the  straightening, 
the  laying  on  of  the  metal,  and  the  polishing,  have  been  done  during  the 
week,  and  then  the  process  concludes  with  an  effort  to  give  point  and 
sharpness.  To  succeed  in  this,  the  lecturer  must  not  be  dull  himself, 
nor  demand  any  great  effort  from  his  audience.  I  am  as  much  at  home 
with  my  young  brethren  as  in  the  bosom  of  my  fam-ly,  and  tl 
speak  without  restraint.  ...  At  any  rate,  I  do  not  offer  that  which 
has  cost  me  nothing,  for  I  have  done  my  best,  and  taken  abundant 
pains.  Therefore,  with  clear  conscience  I  place  my  work  at  the  * 
of  my  brethren,  especially  hoping  to  have  a  careful  reading  from  young 


TVn:<>I>rrr<.RY    VOTES. 


prenrhers,  whose  profiting  has  been  my  principal  aim.  I  have  made 
my  addresses  entirely  for  students  and  beginners  in  preaching,  and 
I  beg  that  they  may  always  be  regarded  from  that  point  of  view,  for 
many  remarks  which  are  proper  enough  to  be  made  to  raw  recruits  it 
would  be  gross  impertinence  to  place  before  masters  in  Israel.  The 
intent  and  object  will  be  borne  in  mind  by  every  candid  reader." 

Some  time  before  he  was  called  home,  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  employed 

a  friend  to  select  from  his  published   sermons  all   the  Anecdotes  and 

Illustrations  he  had  used  in  preaching.     It  was  his  intention  to  issue 

these  in  a  number  of  small  volumes  which  he  hoped  would  prove  helpful 

to  other  preachers  and  speakers.     Possibly,  the  first  of  this  series  may 

*edily  follow  the  present  work,  as  it  would  be  an  appropriate  sequel  to 

The  Art  of  Illustration.     In  the  meantime,  as  a  second  Appendix  to  this 

book,  a  list  is  given  of  all  the  illustrative  works  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  already 

There  are  many  more  of  his  Lectures  to  my  Students  that 

have  not  yet  been  printed,  including  a  course  on  the  important  subject 

inning;  these  are  in  preparation  for  the  press,  and  will  be 

published  when  the  opportunity  occurs. 

Now,  having  finished  our  task-by  no  means  an  easy  one-with  the 

•esent  remembrance  of  the  beloved    President  and  Pastor  who 

have  done  the  work  immeasurably  better,  yet  with  devout  thankful- 

3ther  volume  of  his  gracious  and  happy  utterances  is  com- 

pleted,  we  close  our  '<  Introductory  Notes  "  with  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  words 

:hmg  the  previous  series  of  lectures :-«  Hoping  that  some  benefit 

may  accrue  to  the  rising  race  of  preachers,  and  through  them  to  the 

A««h  o    God,  this  book  is  offered  to  the  Lord's  service,  in  the  hope 

that  he  will  use  it  for  his  own  glory." 

J.  W.  H. 


CONTENTS. 


LECTURE    I. 

Illustrations  in  Preaching 

1 

LECTPKK    II. 

Anecdotes  from  the  Pulpit 

1  .'> 

LECTURE  rn. 
The  Uses  of  Anecdotes  and  Illustruh, 


""ls      •-•          ...          ...        31 

Whore  can  we  find  Anecdotes  and 


LECTt  •; 


i  I;KE  v 
Cyclopaedias  of  Anecdotes  and 


'""1S---          71 

LECTPKK    VI. 

Books  of  Fables,  Emblems,  and  Parables    ...  93 

LECTPKK    VII. 

The  Sciences  as  Sources  of  Illustration.     A  NJ 

AITKMUX    A. 

Supplemental  Liat  of  Book*  ,.,  A,,,, ,!„„,,  miration.,  etc.     1 7s 

1PPKVDU    H. 

List  of  Mr.  Spurgoon's  Jllustr.vivc  \Vnrkn  }^ 

General  Index  of  Authors,  Books,  «,„!  Illustrations  |M 

Textual  Index  .. 


The  following  Works  by  Mr.  STURGEON  belong  to  this  series:— 
LECTURES  TO   MY  STUDENTS;    A  Selection  from  Addresses  delivered  to  the 

:. '!        °eMetropolitan  Tabernacle- 


LECTdEcedTt°o2?Y  8TUDENTS-        '*«•**    &**    lJ°  Twenty-fifth    Thousand 

"Th 
and  sugg 

of  the   fir<;f          '       '* Tl    "  A'  v1""0 -»!»•*»•   ••*  pwitii.  «»iiu   puwcr  tu   me   auiest 

;  Two  Lectures  addressed  to  the  Students 


MY    SthcRM°tNN?TE8,;,A  8e!eCti,°n    fr°m  °UtMnes   of  Discourses  delivered  at 
tbe  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.     1'art  I.     C,enesi«  to  Proverbs      I    if>IXlv  7  1  1 

eM-te^toMalarhi.     LXV.  toCXX.X.     Reduced  to  «.  eac        Parul..;?  l"' 
,oKether,,,  nne  volume  Cloth,  reduced  to  4S.     Part  III.     Matthew  ,  ' 

°   ' 


LKCTUKI;  i. 
gllustntious  iii  $rf;tr[mi0. 

THE  topic  now  before  us  is  the  use  of  illustrations  in  our  lermons, 
Perhaps  we  shall  best  subserve  our  purpose   by  working 
illustration  in  the  present  address;  for  li 

teaching   the   art   of  pottery    than    by   making   a   pot.     Quaint 
Thomas   Fuller  says,  "reasons  are  the  pillars  of  the  fabri. 
sermon;  but    similitudes    are    the   windows   which    e.iVe  t|lL. 
lights."     The  comparison  is  happy  and   suggestive,  and   we  will 
build  up  our  discourse  under  its  direction. 

The  chief  reason  for  the  construction  of   window*  in  a  house  is, 
as  Fuller  says,  to  let  in  light.     Parables,    similes,    and  n. 
have  that  effect;  and  hence  we  use  them  to  illustrate  our 
or,   in  other  words,   to  "brighten  it   u-ith   //,//,/,"  for    that  is   Dr.' 
Johnson's  literal  rendering  of  the  word  il,  rnen 

didactic  speech  fails  to  enlighten  our   hearers  we   ma  them 

see  our  meaning  by  opening  a  window  and  letting  in'  the  . 
light  of  analogv./   Our  Saviour,  who  is  the   light  of  the  world, 
took  care  to  filThis  speech  with  similitudes,  so   that  the  common 
people  heard  him  gladly:  his  example  stamps  with  high  autli- 
the  practice  of  illuminating  heavenly  instruction  with 
and  similes.      To   every  preacher  of  righteoiisn,  .,   to 

Noah,  wisdom  gi .  mmand,  "A  window  shall  thou  : 

the  ark."  You  may  build  up  laborious  definition^  and  explana 
tions  and  yet  leave  your  hearers  in  the  dark  as  to  your  meaning; 
but  a  thoroughly  suitable  metaphor  will  Wonderfully  clear  the 
sense.  The  pictures  in  The  lUu*trat*-.i  i  ,e  us  a 

far  better  idea  of   the  scenery  which    they  repi  uKi 

be  conveyed  to  us  by  the  best  de  letter-prat;    and  it 

is     much     the     same     with    Scriptural    teaching:  ;     truth 

comes  before   us   so  much   more   vividly  when  a  <  example 

is  given,  or  the  doctrine   itself  is  clothed   in    tiinirati. 
There  should,  if  possible,  be  at   KM  ihe 


2  ILLUSTRATIONS    IN   PREACHING. 

shortest  address ;  as  Jv.ekiel,  in  his  vision  of  the  temple,  saw  that 
even  to  the  little  chambers  there  were  windows  suitable  to  their 
If  we  a iv  faithful  to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  we  labour  to 
make  tilings  plain  :  it  is  our  study  to  be  simple  and  to  be  under 
stood  hy  the  most  illiterate  of  our  hearers;  let  us,  then,  set  forth 
many  a  metaphor  and  parable  before  the  people.  He  wrote  wisely 
who  said,  '•  The  world  below  me  is  a  glass  in  which  I  may  see  the 
world  above.  The  works  of  God  are  the  shepherd's  calendar  and 
the  ploughman's  alphabet."  Having  nothing  to  conceal,  we  have 
no  ambition  to  be  obscure.  Lycophron  declared  that  he  would 
hang  himself  upon  a  tree  if  he  found  a  person  who  could  under 
stand  his  poem  entitled  "The  Prophecy  of  Cassandra."  Happily 
no  one  arose  to  drive  him  to  such  a  misuse  of  timber.  We  think 
we  could  find  brethren  in  the  ministry  who  might  safely  run  the 
same  risk  in  connection  with  their  sermons.  Still  have  we  among 
us  those  who  are  like  Heraclitus,  who  was  called  "the  Dark  Doctor" 
because  his  language  was  beyond  all  comprehension.  Certain 
mystical  discourses  are  so  dense  that  if  light  were  admitted  into 
them  it  would  be  extinguished  like  a  torch  in  the  Grotta  del  Cane: 
they  are  made  up  of  the  palpably  obscure  and  the  inexplicably 
involved,  and  all  hope  of  understanding  them  may  be  abar.dmed. 
This  style  of  oratory  we  do  not  cultivate.  We  are  of  the  same 
mind  as  Joshua  Shute,  who  said :  "  That  sermon  has  most  learning 
in  it  that  has  most  plainness.  Hence  it  is  that  a  great  scholar 
was  wont  to  say,  <  Lord,  give  me  learning  enough,  that  I  may 
pivai-h  plain  enough.'" 

Windows  greatly  add  to  the  pleasure  and  agreeableness  of  a 
habitation,  and  so  do  illustrations  make  a  sermon  pleasurable  and 
interesting.     A  building  without  windows  would  be  a  prison  rather 
than  a  house,  for  it  would  be  quite  dark,  and  no  one  would  care 
to  take  it  upon  lease ;  and,  in  the  same  way,  a  discourse  without  a 
parable  is  prosy  and  dull,  and  involves  a  grievous  weariness  of  the 
The  preacher  in  Solomon's  Ecclesiastes  "sought  to  find 
out  acceptable  words,"  or,  as  the  Hebrew  has  it,  "  words   of  de 
light":    surely,  figures    and    comparisons    are    delectable   to   our 
rs.     Let  us  not  deny  them  the  salt  of  parable  with  the  meat 
trine.     Our  congregations  hear  us  with  pleasure  when  we 
give  them  a  fair  measure  of  imagery:  when  an  anecdote  is  being 
rest,  take  breath,  and  give  play  to  their  imaginations^ 
and  thus  prepare  themselves  for  the  sterner  work  which  lies  before 
lem  in   listening   to   our   profounder   expositions.     Riding  in  a 
third-claw  carriage  some  years  ago  in   the  eastern  counties,  we 


li.i.r>Ti:.\TiM\<   IN   PBBA4  B  3 

had  been  for  a  long  time  without  a  lamp;  an«l  when  a  traveller 
lighted  a  candle,  it  was  pleasant  to  see  how  all   eyes  turned  that 
way,  and  rejoiced  in  the  light:    such  is  frequently  th 
an  apt  simile  in  the  midst  of  a  sermon,  it  lights  up  the  whole 
matter,  and  gladdens  every  heart.      Even   the  little  children 
their  eyes  and  ears,  and  a  smile  brightens  up   their  faces  as  we 
tell  a  story;  for  they,  too,  rejoice  in  the  light  which  streams  in 
through  our  windows.     We  dare   say   they   often    wi*li   that   the 
sermon  were  all   illustrations,  even  as   the   bov  de>ired  to   • 
cake  made  all  of  plums;  but  that  must  not  be:  tlu-iv  is  a  happy 
medium,  and  we  must  keep  to  it  by  making  our  discourse  pl«-a-ant 
hearing,  but   not   a   mere    pastime.     No    reason    < -\i>ts  whv  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  should  be  a    miserable   operation   either 
to  the  speaker  or  to  the  hearer.     Pleasantly  profitable   let  all  our 
sermons  be.     A  house  must  not  have  thick  walls  without  openings, 
neither  must  a  discourse  be  all  made  up  of  solid  slabs  of  doetrine 
without  a  window  of  comparison  or  a  lattice  of  poetrv ;  if  I 
hearers  will  gradually  forsake  us,  and   prefer  to  stay  at  home  and 
read  their  favourite  authors  whose  lively  tropes  and  vivid  in 
afford  more  pleasure  to  their  minds. 

Every  architect  will  tell  you  that  he  looks  upon  his  window-  as 
an  opportunity  for  introducing  ornament  into  his  <I> -xA/n.      A  pile 
may  be  massive,  but  it   cannot  be  pleasing  if   it   is   not  1 
up  with  windows  and  other  details.     The  palace  of  the  po; 
Avignon  is  an  immense  structure;  but  the  external  windows  . 
few  that   it   has  all  the  aspect  of  a  colossal  prison,  and  su. 
nothing  of   what  a  palace  should  be.     Sermons  n.-i-d  to  be  ! 
up,  varied,  decorated,  and  enlivened;  and   nothing  can   do  this  >o 
well  as  the   introduction  of  types,  emblems,  and  in-tanees.     ( )f 
course,  ornament  is  not  the  main  point  to  l>e  considered  ;  but  still, 
many  little  excellences  go  to  make  up  perfection,  and   this  H  <uie 
of  the  many,  and  therefore   it  should   not  be   overlooked.      "When 
wisdom  built  Jier  house  she  hewed  out  her  seven  pillars,  for 
and  for  beauty,  as  well  as  for  the  support  of  the  structure;  and 
shall  we  think  that  any  rough  hovel  is  good  enough  f..r  the  1. 
of  holiness  to  dwell  in  /     Certainly  a  gracious  d.  :ie  the 

better  for  being  bereft  of  every  grace  of    !  '  I 

ornament  we  deprecate,  but  an  appropriate    beauty  of    | 
cultivate.     Truth  is  a  king's  daughter,  and  her  raiment  >lumld  be 
of  wrought  gold  ;  her  house  is  a  palace,  and  it   should  be  adorned 
with  "  windows  of  agate  and  gal 

Illustrations  tend  to  enltrcn   a>t    aud 


ILLUSTRATIONS   IN   PREACHING. 


Windows,  when  they  will  open,  which,  alas,  is  not  often  the  case 
in    our    places    of   worship,  are   a   great    blessing  by  refreshing 
and  reviving  the  audience  with  a  little  pure  air,  and  arousing  the 
•  r  mortals  who  are  rendered  sleepy  by  the  stagnant  atmosphere. 
A  window  should,  according  to  its  name,  be  a  wind-door,  through 
which   a   breath   of    air   may   visit    the    audience;   even   so,   an 
original  figure,  a  noble  image,  a  quaint  comparison,  a  rich  alle- 
ry,  should  open  upon  our  hearers  a  breeze  of  happy  thought, 
which    will    pass    over   them   like    life-giving    breath,    arousincr 
them  from  their  apathy,  and  quickening  their  faculties  to  receive 
the  truth.     Those  who  are  accustomed  to  the  soporific  sermonizino-s 
of  certain  dignified  divines  would  marvel  greatly  if  they  could  see 
the  enthusiasm  and  lively  delight  with  which  congregations  listen 
to   speech  through  which  there   flows  a  quiet   current  of  happy, 
natural  illustration.    Arid  as  a  desert  are  many  volumes  of  dis 
courses   which  are   to   be   met  with  upon  the  booksellers'  dust- 
covered  shelves ;  but  if  in  the  course  of  a  thousand  paragraphs 
th«-y  contain  a  single  simile,  it  is  as  an  oasis  in  the  Sahara,  and 
serves  to  keep  the  reader's  soul  alive.     In  fashioning  a  discourse 
think  little  of  the  bookworm,  which  will  be  sure  of  its  portion  of 
meat  however  dry  your  doctrine,  but  have  pity  upon  those  hungering 
ones  immediately  around  you  who  must  find  life  through  your 
sermon  or  they  will  never  find  it  at  all.     If  some  of  your  hearers 
sleep  on  they  will  of  necessity  wake  up  in  eternal  perdition,  for 
they  hear  no  other  helpful  voice. 

While  we  thus  commend  illustrations  for  necessary  uses,  it  must 

be  remembered  that  they  are  not  the  strength  of  a  sermon  any 

more  than  a  window  is  the  strength  of  a  house;    and  for  this 

reason,  among  others,  they  should  not  be  too  numerous.     Too  many 

openings  fm-  light  may  seriously  detract  from  the  stability  of  a 

building.     \\Y  have  known  sermons  so  full  of  metaphors  that  they 

became  weak,  and  we  had  almost  said  crazy,  structures.     Sermons 

must  not  be  nosegays  of  flowers,  but  sheaves  of  wheat.     Very 

beautiful   sermons  are  generally  very   useless   ones.     To  aim  at 

moe  is  to  court  failure.     It  is  possible  to  have  too  much  of  a 

thing:  a  glass  house  is  not  the  most  comfortable  of  abodes 

a  other  objectionable  qualities  it  has  the  great  fault  of 

sadly  tempting  to stonethrowers.     When  a  critical  adversary 

U  our  metaphors  he  generally  makes  short  work  of  them      To 

Knds  images  are  arguments,  but  to  opponents   they  are 

opportunities  for  attack;  the  enemy  climbs  up  by  the  window. 

omparisons  are  swords   with  two  edges   which   cut  both  ways' 


ILLl>Ti:  \rio\s    iv    PBBAOHDTO.  5 

and   frequently  what  Beema    a  sharp  an, I  tolling  illustration    may 
be    wittily  turned    against  you,   so  as  to  cause   a  laugh  at   your 
expense:  therefore  do  not  rely  upon  your  met*]  bon  tnd  pa 
Even  a  second-rate  man  may  defend  himself  t  mind 

if  he  can  dexterously  turn  his  assailant's  gun  upon  him--  :.      11     < 
is  an  instance  which  concerns  myself,  ami  I  gi\  iat  reason, 

since  these  lectures  have  all  along  been  autobiographical*     1 
a  cutting  from  one  of  our  religious  papers.     "  M  T   has 

been  neatly  tripped  up  in   'The  Sic<»  'he   Trowel'     In   his 

*  Lectures  on  Preaching'  he  asserts  that  Mr.  Spurg<-on  has 
succeeded  '  in  spite  of  his  Calvinism;'  adding  the  remark  that 
'the  camel  does  not  travel  any  better,  imr  is  it  any  m 
because  of  the  hump  on  its  back/  The  illustration  is  not  a 
felicitous  one,  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  thus  retorts  : — 'Naturalist!  assure 
us  the  camel's  hump  is  of  great  importance  in  i  f  the 

Arabs,  who  judge  of  the  condition  of  their  bea>ts  by  the 
and  firmness  of  their  humps.     The    camel  feeds    upon  his  hump 
when   he    traverses   the    wilderness,    so    that    in    proportion   as 
the   animal  travels  over  the  sandy  wastes,  and  suffers  from  pri 
vation  and  fatigue,  the  mass  diminishes;  and   lie  is  not   til 
long    journey   till  the    hump   has  regained  its  proportion-, 
vinism,  then,  is  the  spiritual  meat  which  enables  a  man  to  labour 
on  in  the  ways  of  Christian  servi.-.-;    and,   though  ridicul- 
h ump  by  those  who  are  only  lookers-on,   those    who  traverse  the 
weary  paths  of  a  wilderness  experience  know  too  well  its  vain.-  to 
be  willing  to  part  with  it,  even  if  a  Beecher's  splendid  talents  could 
be  given  in  exchange.' " 

Illustrate,    by  all  means,  but  do  not  let  the   s.-rmon  be  all  illus 
trations,  or  it  will  be  only  suitable  for  an  assembly  of  Minpl.-tons. 
A    volume    is    all    the    better    for  engravings,    but    a    BCTR] 
which   is    all    woodcuts  is  usually  intended  for  the    use   ot    little 
children.       Our    house   should    be    built   up    with   the    .substantial 
masonry  of  doctrine,    upon   the   deep   foundation    of    inspiration; 
its  pillars  should   be  of  solid  Scriptural  argunu-nt,  and    • 
of  truth  should  be  carefully  laid  in  its  place;   and  then  t  In-  \\  i 
should  be  ranged  in  due  order,  "tin-  ill:  "light 

against  light,"  like  the  house  of  tin-  fmv-t   «.f   Lebanon, 
liou^e  is  not  erected  for  the  sake  of  the  windows,  DOT  may  a  i 
l>e  arranged  with  the  view  of  fitting  in  a  t'a\ouri;< 
window   is    merelv  a  convenience   subordinate  to  the   entire  d 
and  so  is  the  besl   illustration.      We    shall   be  foolish    in 

,  -ur.se   to   display   a  metaphor;    a*    t  il    au 


[LLU8TBATION8   IX  PREACHING. 


architect  should  build  a  cathedral  with  the  view  of  exhibiting  a 

In.-. 1  i:l.i^  window.     We  are  not  sent  into  the  world  to  build 

a  Ov-tul    Palace-    in    wliich    to   set  out   works    of   art   and  ele- 

of  fa-hion  ;  but  as  wise  master-builders  we  are  to  edify, 

>pi ritual  house  for  the  divine  inhabiting.     Our  building  is  intended 

!a<t,  and  is  meant  for   everyday  use,  and  hence  it  must  not  be 

all  crystal  and  colour.     We  miss  our  way  altogether,  as  gospel 

iniiii-trrs,  if  we  aim  at  flash  and  finery. 

It  is  impossible  to  lay  down  a  rule  as  to  how  much  adornment 
shall  be  found  in  cadi  discourse  :  every  man  must  judge  for  hiin- 
:   in   that  matter.      True  taste  in  dress  could  not  be  readily 
defined,  yet  everyone  knows  what  it  is;  and  there  is  a  literary 
and  spiritual  ta^te  wliich  should  be  displayed  in  the  measuring  out 
"f  tropes  and  figures  in  every  public  speech.    "Ne  quid  nimis  "  is 
a  good  caution  :  do  not  be  too  eager  to  garnish  and  adorn.     Some 
in- 'ii  semi  never  to  have  enough  of  metaphors:  each  one  of  their 
sentences  must  be  a  flower.      They  compass  sea  and  land  to  find  a 
f  roh  piece  of  coloured  glass  for  their  windows,  and  they  break  down 
the  walls  of  their  discourses  to  let  in  superfluous  ornaments,  till  their 
productions  rat  her  ivsemble  a  fantastic  grotto  than  a  house  to  dwell 
in.     They  are  grievously  in  error  if   they  think  that  thus  they 
manifest   their   own    wisdom,    or   benefit  their  hearers.     I  could 
almost  wi>h  for  a  return  of  the  window-tax  if  it  would  check  these 
ical  brethren.     The  law,  I  believe,  allowed  eight  windows  free 
ir..ni  duty,  and  we  might  also  exempt  "a  few,  that  is  eight"  meta- 
from  criticism;  but  more  than  that  ought  to  pay  heavily. 
flowers  upon   the    table  at  a  banquet  are   well   enough;  but   as 
nobody   can    live    upon   bouquets,    they   will   become °objects   of 
<-ntemptif  they  are  set    before  us  in  lieu  of  substantial  viands. 
fference  between   a   little  salt  with  your  meat  and  being 
spelled  to  empty  the  salt-cellar  is   clear  to  all;  and  we  could 
that  those  who  pour  out  so  many  symbols,  emblems,  fibres 
vould  remember  that  nausea  in  oratory  is  not  more 
than  in  food.     Enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast;  and  too 

things  may  be  a  greater  evil  than  none  at  all. 

:,  a  roggeative  tVt  that  the  tendency  to  abound  in  metaphor 

nitration  becomes  weaker  as  men  grow  older  and  wiser. 

this  may,  in  a  measure,  be  ascribed  to  the  decay  of  their 

•'"»  ;  but  it  also  occurs  at  the  same  time  as  the  ripening  Of 

"'"l-tundin,.      Some   may  have  to   use  fewer  figures  of 

"ause  they  do  not  come  to  them  as  aforetime;  but  this 

'  «»way-  the  case.     I  know  that  men   who  still  possess   great 


ILLUSTRATIONS    IN    n:r.\<  IMN,;.  7 

facility  in    ima-ery  find  it  le  J  to  employ  that  facult 

than  in  their   earlier  days    for    they  have   th- 

and  they  are  solemnly  resolved  to  ti'll  that  ear  with  insfa 

condensed  as  they  can  make  it.     When  you   begin  frith 

who   have   not  heard  the  gospel,  and  uh.  ;,„,  yon  1 

win,  you  can    hardly  go  too  far  in  the  u,t.  of  fi-uiv  and   mel 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  used  very  much  of  it;  ii.  .iih,,ut 

a    parable    spake  he  not  unto  thru, ;  "     because  thej 

rated   up  to  the   point  at  which    they  could    profital.lv   h.-ar  pure 

didactic  truth.     It   is  noticeable    that   after  the    IL.lv  < 

been  given,  fewer  parables   were   used,  and  the  saints  were  more 

plainly   taught   of    God.       When    Paul    sp-.ke    or    wrote   to    the 

churches    in  his   epistles    he   employed    few    parables,    1 

addressed  those  who  were  advanced  in  -race  and  willing  to  learn.  As 

Christian  minds  made  progress  the  style  of  their  teachers  b 

less  figurative,  and  more   plainly  doctrinal.     We   seldom   » 

gravings  in  the  classics  of  the  college;  these  are  i  for  the 

spelling-books  of  the  dame-school.     This  should  teach  us  wisdom, 

and  suggest  that  we   are  to  be  bound  by  no   hard   and   fast  rules, 

but  should  use  more  or  less  of  any  mode  of   teaching  according  to 

our  own  condition  and  that  of  our  people. 

Illustrations  should  really  cast  light  upon  the  subject  in  7mm 7, 
otherwise  they  are  sham  windows,  and  all  shams  are  an  abomina 
tion.  When  the  window-tax  was  still  in  fi>nv  manv  people  in 
country  houses  closed  half  their  lights  by  plastering  them  up,  and 
then  they  had  the  plaster  painted  to  look  like  panes  ;  so  that  there 
was  still  the  appearance  of  a  window,  though  no  sunlight  could 
enter.  Well  do  I  remember  the  dark  rooms  in  mv  grandfather's 
parsonage,  and  my  wonder  that  men  should  have  to  pay  for  the 
light  of  the  sun.  Blind  windows  are  lit  emblems  of  illuM  rat  ions 
which  illustrate  nothing,  and  ne.-d  them  •  be  explained. 

Grandiloquence  is  never  more  charartcriM  ie   than   in    its  figures ; 
there  it  disports  itself  in  a  very  carnival  of   bombast.      We  could 
tniote  several    fine  specimens  of  sublime  Spread-eagleism  and 
nificent  nonsense,  but  one  aloii--  may  suflice  as  a  favourable  >ample 
of  a  form  of  display  \\hich  is  rather  m. -re  common  acro>s  the 
than   in  these  old-fashioned    regions.      The   author's   nan. 
not  mention,  but  the  extract   is  given  verbatim,  an  ; 
a  sermon  upon  "To  die  is  gain."      L«-t  the  yomig  ; 
and  wonder,  but  let  him  not  imita:«-.      \Ve  ^i\e  the  whole  passage 
for  the   sake   of  the  Jri>j:itt  /'<></,   and    the  jr.miU'  ^>r^h  v/;v  _ 
stair  cote. 


8  ILLUSTRATIONS   IN   PREACHING. 

"  There    is   a  bird   that    mariners   call  the    '  frigate   bird/  ol 

habits  ami  of  stranger  power.    Men  see  him  in  all  climes, 

"but  i  has  human  eye  seen  him  near  the  earth.     With 

"wmir*  <>f  mighty  stretch,  high  borne,  he  sails  along.     Men  of  the 

lorth  see  him  at  midnight  moving  on  amid  auroral  fires,  sail- 
"iiiLr  along  with  set  wings  amid  those  awful  flames,  taking  the 

:ir  of  the  waves  of  light  which  swell  and  heave  around  him. 
"  M.  n  in  tin-  tropics  see  him  at  hottest  noon,  his  plumage  all  incar- 
44  na. lined  by  the  fierce  rays  that  smite  innocuous  upon  him.  Amid 
"  their  ardent  fervour,  he  bears  along,  majestic,  tireless.  Never  was 
"he  known  to  stoop  from  his  lofty  line  of  night,  never  to  swerve. 
"  To  many  he  is  a  myth,  to  all  a  mystery.  Where  is  his  perch  I 
"  [77*1*  isjine  indeed.  Let  us  add,  "  Who  shall  lay  salt  on  his  tail?"] 
*  Where  does  he  rest?  Where  was  he  brooded?  None  know. 
*'  They  only  know  that  above  cioud,  above  the  reach  of  tempest, 
14  above  the  tumult  of  transverse  currents,  this  bird  of  heaven  (so 
"  let  us  call  him)  on  self-supporting  vans  that  disdain  to  beat  the  air 
"on  which  they  rest,  moves  grandly  on.  [Grand  idea!  The 
"  critter  flies  without  moving  his  wings,  disdaining  to  beat  the  air,  as 
"  well  he  may,  for  he  beats  all  creation^]  So  shall  my  hope  be.  At 
"  either  pole  of  life,  above  the  clouds  of  sorrow,  superior  to  the  tem- 
"  pests  that  beat  upon  me,  on  lofty  and  tireless  wing,  scorning  the 
"  earth,  it  shall  move  along.  Never  shall  it  stoop,  never  swerve 
"  from  its  sublime  line  of  flight.  They  shall  see  it  in  the  morning 
"  of  my  life  ;  they  shall  see  it  in  its  hot  noon-day ;  and  when  the 
14  shadows  fall,  my  sun  having  set,  using  your  style  of  speech  ;  but, 
"  using  mine,  when  the  shadows  disappear,  my  sun  having  risen,  the 
"  last  they  see  of  me  shall  be  this  hope  of  gain  in  dying,  as  it  sails 
41  out  on  steady  wing,  and  disappears  amid  the  everlasting  light. 

"  I  feel,  friends,  that  no  exhortation  of  mine  will  lift  you  to  this 
"pedestal  of  hewn  granite,  on  which  it  is  given  to  monumental 
11  pi'-ty  to  stand.  [Quite  right:  an  exhortation  cannot  very  well  lift  a 
"  bo:! i/  on  to  a  pedestal;  it  needs  a  leg  or  an  arm  to  do  that.  But  what 

"inmental  piety  l]  Only  by  analysis,by  meditation,  by  thought 
44  that  ponders  in  the  night  time  the  majestic  utterances  of  Scripture, 
"  and  by  tin-  <»pen  lattice— or,  better  yet,  beneath  the  grand  dome- 
in  prayer,  and  holds  communion  with  the  possibilities  that 
"  stand  beyond  this  life,  like  unfilled  thrones  waiting  for  occupants. 
'  Only  in  this  way,  and  in  others  suggested  by  the  Spirit  to  minds 
11  fit  to  receive  them,  will  you  or  any  ever  rise  to  the  level   of  the 
"  '-motion  wh'u-h  dietated  the  text.    Where  is  Paul  to-day  ?    Where 

he  stand,  who,  from  his  prison  at  Rome,  sent  out  this  immortal 


ILLUSTi:  LTIONB    i\    PBE  LOB  tf 

*'  saving?      Is  there  one  of  us  that  has  verified  the  ,t  that 

"  to  die  is  gain  ?     Not  one."     [Pretty  so/-  among 

"  //x  Aas  fo<?n  ctau/?]    We  know  lie  walks  in  i,d<»ry.     II.-  D 

"  the  majestic  spaces  where  even  Deity  is  not  cramped.     [/•." 

"or  blasphemous,  whiohT\     After  all  his  struggles.  lie   b 

"  into  rest.     Yet  what  has  he  received  that  i>  not  in  ;0r  usf 

"  What  has  he  that  has  not  come  to  him  in  tin-  way  of  ^ift  }     And 

"is  not  his  God  mine  and   yours  f     Will   the  eternal  I1' 

"with   a   partial    hand?      Will    he    discriminate,    an  1    become    a 

"  respecter  of  persons,  even  at  his  own  table  t     1  ' 

"receive  into  its  mind  the  awful  suspicion.     Our  Father  feeds  his 

"children  alike;  and   the  garments  that  they  wear  are  cut 

"a  royal  fabric,  even  his  righteousness.     They  shim-   lik-- 

44  brought  by  the  action  of  a  sublime  movement  into  r«niju-. 

"Rise,  then,  my  friends,  ye  people  of  his  love;  rise  and  dim: 

"me  the  mighty  stairway  whose  steps  are  changed  fr«>m  granite  to 

"porphyry,  and  from  porphyry  to  jasper,  as  we  ascend,  until   our 

"feet,  pure  as  itself,  stand  on  the  sea  of  crystal  which  itr 

"  in  seamless  purity  before  the  throne."     [  Uj^tairs  to  the  sea  !    An-t 

up  three  pair  of  stairs  too  !      Sublime  idea,  or,  at  leatt,  within  a  strp 


This  piece  of  high-flown  oratory  sheds  light  upon  nothing,  and 
does  not  in  the  faintest  degree  enable  us  to  un  tin-  reason 

why  "to  die  is  gain."  The  object  of  language  of  this  kind  is  n,,t 
to  instruct  the  hearer,  but  to  da/./le  him,  and  if  possible  to  impiv-s 
him  with  the  idea  that  his  minister  is  a  wonderful  orator.  He 
who  condescends  to  use  clap-trap  of  any  kind  deserrei  to  be  de 
barred  the  pulpit  for  the  term  of  his  natural  life.  Let  your 
figures  of  speech  really  represent  and  explain  your  mean. 
else  they  are  dumb  idols,  which  ought  not  to  be  set  up  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord. 

It  may  be  well  to  note  that  illustration*  tlwll 
or,  to  pursue  our  figure,  they  should   not   I..-   ; 
tracting  attention  to  themselves  rather  than  letting   in  the  clear 
light  of  day.     I  am  not  pronouncing  any  jii.lgin.-nt    .. 
adorned  with  "glass  of  various  colours  which  shiiK 
decked  in  the  flowers  of  spring";   I  UU   looking  only  to  my  illus 
tration.      Our  figures  are   meant  Q<X    N  much    1"  U-   i 

seen  through.    If  you  take  the  hearer's  mind  awi 
ject  bv  exciting  his  admiration  of  your  own  >kill  in  in. 
are  doin«r  evil  rather  than  good.     1  MW  in  one  of  our  tthiU 


10  ILLUSTRATIONS    I\    PKEACHINO. 

portrait  of  a  king;  but  the  artist  had  surrounded  his  majesty  with  a 
bower  <>f  flowers  so  exquisitely  painted  that  everyone's  eye  was 
taken  away  from  the  royal  figure.  All  the  resources  of  the 
painter's  art  had  heen  lavished  upon  the  accessories,  and  the  result 
was  that  the  portrait,  which  should  have  been  all  in  all,  had  fallen 
into  a  secondary  place.  This  was  surely  an  error  in  portrait- 
painting,  even  though  it  might  be  a  success  in  art.  We  have 
;  forth  Christ  before  the  people,  "  evidently  crucified  among 
them,"  and  the  loveliest  emblem  or  the  most  charming  image 
which  calls  the  mind  away  from  our  divine  subject  is  to  be  con 
scientiously  foresworn.  Jesus  must  be  all  in  all :  his  gospel  must 
be  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  our  discoursing;  parable  and 
poesy  must  be  under  his  feet,  and  eloquence  must  wait  upon  him  as 
his  servant.  Never  by  any  possibility  must  the  minister's  speech 
become  a  rival  to  his  subject ;  that  were  to  dishonour  Christ,  and 
not  to  glorify  him.  Hence  the  caution  that  the  illustrations  be 
not  too  conspicuous. 

Out  of  this  last  observation  conies  the  further  remark  that  illus 
trations  are  best  when  they  are  natural,  and  grow  out  of  the  subject. 
They  should  be  like  those  well-arranged  windows  which  are  evi 
dently  part  of  the  plan  of  a  structure,  and  not  inserted  as  an 
afterthought,  or  for  mere  adornment.  The  cathedral  of  Milan 
inspires  my  mind  with  extreme  admiration ;  it  always  appears  to 
me  as  if  it  must  have  grown  out  of  the  earth  like  a  colossal  tree 
or  rather  like  a  forest  of  marble.  From  its  base  to  its  loftiest  pin 
nacle  every  detail  is  a  natural  outgrowth,  a  portion  of  a  well 
developed  whole,  essential  to  the  main  idea ;  indeed,  part  and  parcel 
of  it.  Such  should  a  sermon  be ;  its  exordium,  divisions,  argu 
ments,  appeals,  and  metaphors  should  all  spring  out  of  itself; 
n<»t  liing  should  be  out  of  living  relation  to  the  rest ;  it  should  seem 
as  if  nothing  could  be  added  without  being  an  excrescence,  and 
nothing  taken  away  without  inflicting  damage.  There  should  be 
H..WLTS  in  a  sermon,  but  the  bulk  of  them  should  be  the  flowers 
<>t  th«-  soil;  n.,t  dainty  exotics,  evidently  imported  with  much  care 
truui  a  distant  land,  but  the  natural  upspringincr  Of  a  life  natural 
to  the  holy  ground  on  which  the  preacher  stands.  Figures  of 
h  should  be  congruous  with  the  matter  of  the  discourse;  a 
•  l>on  an  oak  would  bo  out  of  place,  and  a  lily  springing  from 
a  poplar  would  be  unnatural:  everything  should  be  of  a  piece 
and  have  a  manifest  relationship  to  the  rest.  Occasionally  a 
ttle  barbaric  splendour  may  be  allowed  after  the  manner  of 
Thomas  Adams  and  Jeremy  Taylor  and  other  masters  in  Israel, 


ILLUSTRATIONS    IN    ri:r.  \<  B  11 

who  adorn  truth  with  rare  gems,  and  gold  of  Oj.hir. 
far.       Yet   I    would   have    you   note   what    Dr.    Hamilton  MJ 
Taylor,  for  it  is  a  warning  to  those  who  aim  at  winning  the 
the    multitude.       "Thoughts,    epithets    u  images 

trooping  round  with   irrepressible  profu-ion.  and  ti  all  so 

apt  and  beautiful,  that  it  was  hard  to  send  any  of  t  h--m  away.      And 
so  he  tried  to  find  a  place  and  use  for  all, — for  '  towers  and 
of  butterflies/  as  well  as  *  wheat ; ' — and  if  he  could  n<  : 
links  of  his  logical  chain  out  of  'the  little  rings  of  the  vine/  and 
'the   locks  of  a  new-weaned  hoy,'   he   could  at  KM  ite  his 

subject  with   exquisite  adornments.     The  from  hi- 

Austin  and  Chrysostom,  and  not  less  beloved  Seneca  and  IMir 
the  scholar    knows    how  to    pardon.     The    squinvl    is    not    more 
tempted  to  carry  nuts  to  his  hoard  than  the   bookish  author    is 
tempted   to    transfer   to    his    own    pages    fine   pa-  MI  his 

favourite  authors.     Alas  !  he  little  knows  how  ilat  and  mean'; 
they  are   to   those    who    have   not  traversed   tin-   saim-    walk-,   and 
shared  the   delight    with    which    he    found    great    -poil.     To   him 
each  polished  shell  recalls  its  autumnal  tale  of  woods,  and  g 
and    sunshine   showering  through    the   yellow   leaves;   but  to  the 
quaint  collection    'the  general  public'   very  much  prefer  a  pint  «>f 
filberts  from  a    huckster's   harrow."     No   illustrations  are   half   so 
telling  as  those  which  are  taken  from  familiar  objects.     Many  fan- 
flowers  grow  in  foreign  lands  ;   but  those  are  dear-  heart 
which  bloom  at  our  own  cottage  door. 

Elaboration   into  minute  points  is   not   comin.-ndable    when    we 
are  using  figures.     The  best  light  comes   in  through   the  c 
glass:  too  much  paint  keeps  out  the  sun.     God's  altar  of  old  was 
to  be  made  of  earth,  or  of  unhewn  .-tone,  -  for,"  said  tfo 
thou  lift  up  thy  tool  upon  it,  thou  hast  polluted  it :  "  I  - 
laboured,  artificial  style,   upon   which   th-  'l   tool   ha-        R 

abundant  marks,  is  more  consistent  with  human  pleading 
of  law,  or  in   the   forum,  or  in   the  :iian   with 

utterances  delivered  in  the  name  of  (i«.d  and  for  the    promo- 
his  glory.     Our  Lord's  paral.les  were  as  -imple  as  tales  for  children, 
and  as   naturally  beautiful    as   the  lilies  which   sprang  up  in  the 
valleys  where  he  taught  the  people.     He  borrowed  no  1,  -end  tr-.m 
the  Talmud,  nor  fairytale  from   IVr-ia,   neither   fetched 
emblems  from  beyond  the  ieftj  but  he  dwelt  an 
and  talked  of  common  things  in  homely  style,  as   never  mai, 
before,  and  yet  U   any  observant  man  should  speak.      Hi-  parables 
were  like  him-elf  and   his  .-in  ronndin-- ;   and  wen-  ae* 


1'2  II.I.OTKATIONS    IN    I'KK  \riIIXG. 

fantastic,  pedantic,  or  artificial.      Let  us  imitate  him,  for  we  shall 

never  find  a  model  more  complete,  or  more  suitable  for  the  present 

1  JjK'iiini:  our  eyes,  we  shall  discover  abundant  imagery  all 

•ind.      A-  it  is  written,  "The  word  is  nigh  thee,"  so  also  is  the 

analogy  of  that  word  near  at  hand  : — 

"  All  things  around  me  wbatc'er  they  be 
That  I  meet  as  the  chance  may  come, 
Have  a  voice  and  a  speech  in  them  all — 
Birds  that  hover,  and  bees  that  hum, 
The  beast  of  the  field  or  the  stall ; 
The  trees,  leaves,  rushes,  and  grasses ; 
The  rivulet  running  away  ; 
The  bird  of  the  air  as  it  passes  ; 
Or  the  mountains  that  motionless  stay  , 
And  yet  those  immovable  masses 
Keep  changing,  as  dreams  do,  all  day."* 

There  will  be  little  need  to  borrow  from  the  recondite  mysteries  of 
human  art,  nor  to  go  deep  into  the  theories  of  science  ;  for  in  nature 
golden  illustrations  lie  upon  the  surface,  and  the  purest  is  that 
which  is  uppermost  and  most  readily  discerned.  Of  natural 
history  in  all  its  branches  we  may  well  say,  "  the  gold  of  that  land 
is  good  ":  the  illustrations  furnished  by  everyday  phenomena  seen 
by  the  ploughman  and  the  waggoner  are  the  very  best  which 
earth  can  yield.  An  illustration  is  not  like  a  prophet,  for  it  has 
most  honour  in  its  own  country ;  and  those  who  have  oftenest  seen 
the  object  are  those  who  are  most  gratified  by  the  figure  drawn 
from  it. 

I  trust  that  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  illustrations  must 
never  be  low  or  mean.  They  may  not  be  high-flown,  but  they 
should  always  be  in  good  taste.  They  may  be  homely,  and  yet 
chastely  beautiful ;  but  rough  and  coarse  they  should  never  be.  A 
house  is  dishonoured  by  having  dirty  windows,  cobwebbed  and 
begrimed,  patched  with  brown  paper,  or  stuffed  up  with  rags: 
such  windows  are  the  insignia  of  a  hovel  rather  than  a  house. 
About  our  illustrations  there  must  never  be  even  the  slightest 
tra.v  of  anything  that  would  shock  the  most  delicate  modesty. 
We  like  not  that  window  out  of  which  Jezebel  is  looking.  Like 
the  hrlls  upon  the  horses,  our  lightest  expressions  must  be  holiness 
unto  the  Lord.  Of  that  which  suggests  the  grovelling  and  the 
3  we  may  say  with  the  apostle,  "  Let  it  not  be  once  named 

*  Slightly  altered  from  "Fables   in   Song."     By  Robert  Lord  Lytton.     William 
BLickwood  and  M,,US      1874.     •>  vola. 


ILLUSTi:  vi  i<>\s    IN    PBBAOB  13 


among  you,  as  becomoth  >aint>."     All  our  windows  >h«»ul«l 
towards  Jerusalem,  and  none  towards  Sodom.      We  will  gath' 
flowers  always  and  only  from  Kmmanners  land;  and  .Jr-ns  him-clf 
sliall  be  their  savour  and  swei-lne-s.  so  that  when  he  lingers  at  the 
lattice  to  hear  us  speak  of  himself  he  may  MV  -Thy  lips  O  my 
spouse,  drop  as  the  honeycomb:  honey  and   milk  r  thy 

tongue."    That  which  grow-  bryond  tin-  border  of  purity  and  good 
repute  must  never  be  bound  up  in  our  garland-,  nor  pla.v.l  among 
the     decorations    of    our    discour--<.      That    which     won! 
exceedingly  clever  and   telling  in  a  stump  ora:  r  in  a 

cheap-jack's  harangue,  would   be  disgusting    from  a  mini*- 
the  gospel.     Time  was  when  we  could   have  found   far  too  many 
specimens  of  censurable  coarseness,  but  it  w..uld  be  ong 
mention  them  now  that  such  things  are  on  all  hands  condemned. 

Gentlemen,    take    care    that    your   windows    are    not   bn 
or  even  cracked:  in  other   word-,   guard  ago*  ised  meta 

phors   and   limping    illustrations.     Sir    Boyle    K<»-i: 
credited  with  some   of  the  finest  specimens  of   metaphorical  eon- 
glomerate.     We  should  imagine  that  th.-   passage   is  mythical  iu 
which  he  is  represented  as  saying,  "  I  smell  a  rat  ;   I  tee  it  0 
in  the  air;  I'll  nip  it  in  the  bud."     Minor  blund.-rii.  -.nu-nt 

enough  in  the  speech  of  our  own  countrymen.  An 
temperance  advocate  exclaimed,  "Comrade,  Irt  us  be  up  and 
doing!  Let  us  take  our  axes  on  our  shoulders,  and  plough  the 
waste  places  till  the  good  ship  Temperance  >ails  gaily  over  the 
land."  We  well  remember,  years  ago.  h'-aring  a  fervent  Irish 
clergyman  exclaim,  "Garibaldi,  sir,  he  is  far  man  to 

play  second  fiddle  to  such  a  wretched  luminary   as   Viet., 
manuel."     It  was  at  a  public  meeting,   and    fchffl 
bound  to  be  proper;  but  it  would  have  been  I  lief  to  our 

soul  if  we  might  have  indulged  in  a  hearty  laugh 
of  Garibaldi  with  a  liddle,  playing  to  a  luminai 
nursery  rhyme  jingled  in  our  ears,  and  sor  OUT  gruvi 

poetic  friend  thus  encouragingly  add] 

"  .M;uvh  on,  howf\er  n-u-h  th. 

Though  foi-s  <.botru<-t  tli\ 
Deaf  to  the  l»irking  curs  that  would 

^nare  thy  feet  astray." 

The  other  evening  a  brother  exprcv,.d  his  desire  tin1 
"all  be  winners  of  souls,  and  bring  the  Lord's  blood-bougW 
to  cast  their  crowns  at  hi 
rin- about  them  that  the  audience  did  not  ob.^-rve  tli-   fractured 


]4  ILU'STKATIONS    IN    PREACHING. 

.  Of  the  expression.     One  of  your  own  number  hoped  "that 
ry  studi-nt  illicit  be  enabled  to  sound  the  gospel  trumpet  with 
such  a  clear  and  certain  sound  that  the  blind  might  see."     Per 
haps  lie  meant  that  they  should    open  their  eyes  with  astonish 
ment  at  the    terrific    blast;    but    the    figure    would    have   been 
m«re  congruous    if    he  had    said  "that    the    deaf    should  hear. 
Scotch  writer,  in  referring  to  a  proposal  to  use  an  organ  in  divine 
ice,  says: — "Nothing  will  stem  this  avalanche  of  will-worship 
and  gross  sin  but  the  falling  back  on  the  Word  of  God." 

The  Daily  News  in  reviewing  a  book  written  by  an  eminent 
Nonconformist  minister,  complained  that  his  metaphors  were  apt 
to  be  a  little  unmanageable,  as  when  he  spoke  of  something  which 
had  remained  a  secret  until  a  strangely  potent  key  was  inserted 
among  the  hidden  wards  of  the  parental  heart,  and  a  rude  wrench 
flung  wide  the  floodgates  and  set  free  the  imprisoned  stream. 
However,  there  is  no  wonder  that  ordinary  mortals  commit 
blunders  in  figurative  speech  when  even  his  late  Infallible  Holiness 
Pius  IX.  said  of  Mr.  Gladstone  that  he  "had  suddenly  come  for 
ward  like  a  viper  assailing  the  barque  of  St.  Peter."  A  viper 
assailing  a  barque  is  rather  too  much  for  the  most  accommodating 
imagination,  although  some  minds  are  ready  for  any  marvels. 

One  of  those  reviews  which  reckon  themselves  to  be  the  cream 
of  the  cream  took  pains  to  inform  us  that  the  Dean  of  Chichester, 
being  the  select  preacher  at  St.  Mary's,  Oxford,  "  seized  the  oppor 
tunity  to  smite  the  liitualists  hip  and  thigh,  with  great  volubility 
and  vivacity."  Samson  smote  his  foes  with  a  great  slaughter; 
but  language  is  flexible. 

These  blunders  are  to  be  quoted  by  the  page  :  I  have  given 
enough  to  let  you  see  how  readily  the  pitchers  of  metaphor  may  be 
cracked,  and  rendered  unfit  to  carry  our  meaning.  The  ablest 
speaker  may  occasionally  err  in  this  direction ;  it  is  not  a  very 
serious  matter,  and  yet  like  a  dead  fly  it  may  spoil  sweet  ointment. 
A  few  brethren  of  my  acquaintance  are  always  off  the  lines  ;  they 
muddle  up  every  figure  they  touch,  and  as  soon  as  they  approach 
a  metaphor  we  look  for  an  accident.  It  might  be  wisdom  on  their 
part  to  shun  all  figures  of  speech  till  they  know  how  to  use  them; 
for  it  is  a  great  pity  when  illustrations  are  so  confused  as  both  to 
darken  the  sense  and  create  diversion.  Muddled  metaphors  are 
muddles  indeed;  let  us  give  the  people  good  illustrations  or  none 
all. 

At  this  point  I  will  close  my  lecture,  which  is  only  meant  to  be 
an  introduction  to  my  subject,  and  not  a  full  treatment  of  it 


LECTURE  II 

from  llje 


IT   is   pretty   generally   admitted  that    sermons  may    widely   be 
adorned  with  a  fair  share  of  illustrations ;  but  am 
that  end  are  still  regarded  by  the  prudes  of  the  pulpit  with  a 
measure  of  suspicion.     They  will  come  down  low  enough  to  quote 
an  emblem,  they  will  deign  to  use  poetic  imagery  ;  but  they  cannot 
stoop  to  tell  a  simple,  homely  story.     They  would  probably  say  in 
confidence  to  their  younger  brethren,  "  Beware   how  you  lower 
yourselves  and  your  sacred  office  by  repeating  anecdotes,  which  are 
best  appreciated  by  the  vulgar  and  uneducated."     We  would  nut 
retort  by  exhorting  all  men  to  abound  in  stories,  for  there  ought 
to  be  discrimination.     It  is  freely  admitted  that  there  are  \. 
and  admirable  styles  of  oratory  which  would  be  disfigured  by  a 
rustic  tale;  and  there  are  honoured  brethren  whoM  genius  would 
never  allow  them  to  relate  a  story,  for  it  would  not  appear  suitable 
to  their  mode  of  thought.     Upon  these  we  would  not  even  by  im 
plication  hint  at  a  censure;  but  when  we  are  dealing  with  others 
who  seem  to  be  somewhat,  and  are  not  what  they  seem,  w 
no  tenderness;  nay,   we  are  even   moved  to  assail   their  stilted 
greatness.     If  they  sneer  at  anecdotes,  we  Miiile  at  them  and  their 
sneers,  and  wish  them  more   sense   and   leu    March. 
of  intellectual  superiority  and  love  of  rhetorical  splendour   have 
prevented  many  from  setting  forth  gospel   truth   in  the  easiest 
imaginable  manner,    namely,  by  analogies  drawn  from  common 
events.     Because  they  could  not  condescend  to  men  of  low 
they  have  refrained  from   repeating  incidents   which  would 
accurately    explained    their    meaning.       F.-aring    to    be    t;. 
vulgar,  they  have  lost  golden  opportunities.    As  well  might 
have  refused  to  sling  one  of  the  smooth  itonei  at  Goliath" 
because  he  found  it  in  a  common  brook. 

From  individuals  so  lofty  in  their  ideas  nothing  is  likely  to  11 
down  to  the  masses  of  the  people  but  a  glacial  clo.jucnce,— .. 


16  ANi:ri>mi:s  FROM  THE  PULPIT. 

of  ice.  Dignity  is  a  most  poor  and  despicable  consideration  unless 
it  be  tin'  dignity  of  turning  many  to  righteousness  ;  and  yet  divines 
who  have  had  scarcely  enough  of  real  dignity  to  save  themselves 
from  contempt,  have  swollen  "  huge  as  high  Olympus  "  through  the 
affectation  of  it.  A  young  gentleman,  after  delivering  an  elaborate 
discourse,  was  told  that  not  more  than  five  or  six  in  the  congrega 
tion  had  been  able  to  understand  him.  This  he  accepted  as  a 
tribute  to  his  genius ;  but  I  take  leave  to  place  him  in  the  same 
class  with  another  person  who  was  accustomed  to  shake  his  head  in 
the  most  profound  manner  that  he  might  make  his  prelections  the 
more  impressive,  and  this  had  some  effect  with  the  groundlings, 
tmtil  a  shrewd  Christian  woman  made  the  remark  that  he  did 
shake  his  head  certainly,  but  that  there  was  nothing  in  it.  Those 
who  are  too  refined  to  be  simple  need  to  be  refined  again.  Luther 
has  well  put  it  in  his  Table-Talk :  "  Cursed  are  all  preachers  that 
in  the  church  aim  at  high  and  hard  things ;  and  neglecting  the 
saving  health  of  the  poor  unlearned  people,  seek  their  own  honour 
and  praise,  and  therefore  try  to  please  one  or  two  great  persons. 
When  I  preach  I  sink  myself  deep  down"  It  may  be  superfluous 
to  remind  you  of  the  oft-quoted  passage  from  George  Herbert's 
"  Country  Parson,"  and  yet  I  cannot  omit  it,  because  it  is  so  much 
to  my  mind: — u  The  Parson  also  serves  himself  of  the  judgments 
of  God,  as  of  those  of  ancient  times,  so  especially  of  the  late  ones ; 
and  those  most  which  are  nearest  to  his  parish  ;  for  people  are  very 
attentive  at  such  discourses,  and  think  it  behoves  them  to  be  so 
when  God  is  so  near  them,  and  even  over  their  heads.  Sometimes 
he  tells  them  stories  and  sayings  of  others,  according  as  his  text 
invites  him ;  for  them  also  men  heed,  and  remember  better  than 
exhortations;  which,  though  earnest,  yet  often  die  with  the 
sermon,  especially  with  country  people,  which  are  thick,  and  heavy, 
and  hard  to  raise  to  a  point  of  zeal  and  fervency,  and  need  a 
mountain  of  fire  to  kindle  them,  but  stories  and  sayings  they  will 
well  remember." 

It  ought  never  to  be  forgotten  that  the  great  God  himself, 
when  he  would  instruct  men,  employs  histories  and  biographies. 
Our  Bible  contains  doctrines,  promises,  and  precepts ;  but  these 
are  not  left  alone,  the  whole  book  is  vivified  and  illustrated  by 
•Mous  records  of  things  said  and  done  by  God  and  by  men. 
He  who  is  taught  of  God  values  the  sacred  histories,  and  knows 
that  in  them  there  is  a  special  fulness  and  forcibleness  of  in 
struction.  Teachers  of  Scripture  cannot  do  better  than  instruct 
their  fellows  after  the  manner  of  the  Scriptures. 


ANKCDOTES    FUoM    TllK    IT  I. PIT.      .  1? 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  tin-  gv  i  not 

disdain  the  use  of  anecdotes.     To   inv  mind  it  s  C  that 

certain  of  his   parables  were  facts  and,  coM-.'.jiiently, 
May  not  the  story  of  the  Prodigal  Son  li.i  ;i  literal  truth  f 

Were  there  not  actual  instances  of  an  enemv  .inong 

the  wheat?     May  not  the  rich  fool  who  said — <4  Take  thine 
have  heen  a  photograph  taken  from  the  life?      Did  not   Div 
Lazarus  actually  figure  on  the  stage  of  hi>tory  *      Certainly  the 
story  of  those  who  were  crushed  by  the  fall  of  the  tower  of  Siloam, 
and   the  sad   tragedy  of   the  Galilaeans,  "  whose  blooil  Pila' 
mingled  with  their   sacrifices/'    wen-   matters   of    current   •  ' 
gossip,  and  our  Lord  turned  both  of  them  to  good  account. 
HE  did  we  need  not  be  ashamed   to  do.     That  we  may  do  it  with 
all  wisdom  and  prudence  let  us  seek  the  guidance  of  the  1 
Spirit  which  rested  upon  him  so  continually. 

I  shall  make  up  this  present  address  by  quoting  the  exani] 
great  preachers,  beginning  with  the  era  of  the   Reformation,  and 
following  on  without  any  very  rigid  chronological  order  down  to 
our  own  day.     Examples  are  more  powerful  than  precepts;  hence 
I  quote  them. 

First,  let  me  mention  that  grand  old  preacher,  II wilt    / 
the  most  English  of  all  our  divines  ;  and  one  whose  influenr 
our  land  was  undoubtedly  most  powerful.     Southey  -       .      Latimer 
more   than   any  other   man   promoted   the   Reformation    by  his 
preaching";  and  in  this  he  echoes  the  more  important  uti 
of  Ridley,  who  wrote  from  his  prison,  "I  do  think  that  th>- 
hath  placed  old  father  Latimer  to  be   his  standard-bearer  in  our 
age  and  country  against  his  mortal  foe,  Antichrist."      It  you  have 
read  any  of  his  sermons,  you  must  have   heen   struck   with   the 
number  of  his   quaint  stones,   seasoned   with   a   homely   humour 
which  smacks  of  that  Leicestershire  farmhouse  wherein   i. 
brought  up  bv  a  father  who  did  yeoman'  and  a  mother 

who°milked  thirty   kine.     No   doubt  we   may  attribute  to   these 
stories  the  breaking   down  of  pews   by  the  overwhelming  FO 
the  people  to  hear  him;  and  the  general  interest  which   hi 
mons  excited.     More  of  such  prea.-iiing,  and  we  should  ha. 
fear  of  the  return  of   Popery.     The   common   people   heard   him 
gladly,  and  his  lively  anecdotes  accounted  for  much  of  their 
attention.      A  few  of   these   nan  at  i. 
for  the  taste  of  our   age   has  happi! . 
others   are   most   admirable   and  Hlfl    iW    ''Tee  of 

thmn:- 


18  ANECDOTES  FROM  THE  PULPIT. 

THE  FRIAR'S  MAN  AND  THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS. 

"  I  will  tell  you  now  a  pretty  story  of  a  friar,  to  refresh  you  withal 
A  limiter  of  the  grey  friars  in  the  time  of  his  limitation  preached  many 
times,  and  had  but  one  sermon  at  all  times  ;  which  sermon  was  of  the 
ten  commandments.  And  because  this  friar  had  preached  this  sermon 
so  often,  one  that  heard  it  before  told  the  friar's  servant  that  his  master 
was  called  'Friar  John  Ten  Commandments':  wherefore  the  servant 
showed  the  friar  his  master  thereof,  and  advised  him  to  preach  of  some 
other  matters ;  for  it  grieved  the  servant  to  hear  his  master  derided. 
Now,  the  friar  made  answer  saying,  '  Belike,  then,  thou  canst  say  the 
ten  commandments  well,  seeing  thou  hast  heard  them  so  many  a  time.' 
said  the  servant, '  I  warrant  you.'  '  Let  me  hear  them/  saith  the 
master ;  then  he  began, — '  Pride,  covetousness,  lechery,'  and  so  num 
bered  the  deadly  sins  for  the  ten  commandments.  And  so  there  be 
many  at  this  time,  which  be  weary  of  the  old  gospel ;  they  would  fain 
hear  some  new  things:  they  think  themselves  so  perfect  in  the  old, 
when  they  be  no  more  skilful  than  this  servant  was  in  his  ten  com 
mandments." 

S.    ANTHONY   AND   THE    COBBLER, 

"  We  read  a  pretty  story  of  S.  Anthony,  which,  being  in  the  wilder 
ness,  led  there  a  very  hard  and  straight  life,  insomuch  as  none  at  that 
time  did  the  like.  To  whom  came  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying, 
1  Anthony,  thou  art  not  so  perfect  as  is  a  cobbler  that  dwelleth  at  Alex 
andria.'  Anthony,  hearing  this,  rose  up  forthwith,  and  took  his  staff 
and  went  till  he  came  to  Alexandria,  where  he  found  the  cobbler.  The 
cobbler  was  astonished  to  see  so  reverend  a  father  to  come  into  his 
house.  Then  Anthony  said  unto  him,  '  Come  and  tell  me  thy  whole 
conversation,  and  how  thou  spendest  thy  time.'  '  Sir,'  said  the  cobbler, 
'  as  for  me,  good  works  I  have  none,  for  my  life  is  but  simple  and 
slender  ;  I  am  but  a  poor  cobbler.  In  the  morning,  when  I  arise,  I  pray 
for  the  whole  city  wherein  I  dwell,  specially  for  all  such  neighbours  and 
poor  friends  as  I  have.  After,  I  set  me  at  my  labour,  where  I  spend  the 
whole  day  in  getting  of  my  living,  and  keep  me  from  all  falsehood ;  for 
I  hate  nothing  so  much  as  I  do  deceitfulness :  wherefore,  when  I  make 
to  any  man  a  promise,  I  keep  it  and  do  it  truly ;  and  so  spend  my  time 
poorly  with  my  wife  and  children,  whom  I  teach  and  instruct  as  far  as 
my  wit  will  serve  me,  to  fear  and  dread  God.  This  is  the  sum  of  my 
simple  life.' 

"  In  this  story  you  see  how  God  loveth  those  that  follow  their  voca 
tion,  and  live  uprightly  without  any  falsehood  in  their  dealing.  This 
Anthony  was  a  great  and  holy  man,  yet  this  cobbler  was  as  much 
esteemed  before  God  as  he." 

THE   DANGER    OF    PROSPERITY. 

"  I  read  once  a  story  of  a  good  bishop,  which  rode  by  the  way  and 
was  weary,  being  yet  far  off  from  any  town;  therefore  seeing  a  fair  house 
he  went  thither,  and  was  very  well  and  honourably  received  :  there  were 
great  preparations  made  for  him,  and  a  great  banquet;  all  things  were 
Then  the  man  of  the  house  set  out  his  prosperity,  and  told 
the  bishop  What  riches  he  had,  in  what  honours  and  dignities  he  was 


ANECDOTES    FROM     II  IK    IT  I. PIT.  1 '.» 

how  many  fair  children  he  had,  what  a  virtuous  wife  God  had  provided 
for  him,  so  that  he  had  no  lack  of  any  manner  of  thing,  he  had  no 
trouble  nor  vexations,  neither  outward  nor  inward.     Now  this  holy  man, 
hearing  the  good  estate  of  that  man,  called  one  of  his  servants,  and 
commanded  him  to  make  ready  the  horses :  for  the  bishop  thought  that 
God  was  not  in  that  house,  because  there  was  no  temptation  there  :  lie 
took  his  leave  and  wont  his  ways.     Now  when  he  came  a  two  or  three 
mile  off,  he  remembered  his  book  which  he  had  left  behind  him  ;  he 
sent  his  man  back  again  to  fetch  that  book,  and  when  the  servan: 
again  the  house  was  sunken  and  all  that  was  in  it      Here  it  aj-j 
that  it  is  a  good  thing  to  have  temptation.     This  man  thought  hi:, 
jolly  fellow,  because  all  things  went  well  with  him.     Hut  he  knew  not 
St  James's  lesson  :  Bcatus  qui  suffert  tenlationtm,  '  Blessed  is  he  that 
endureth  temptation.'     Let  us  therefore  learn  here,  not  to  '; 
when  God  layeth  his  cross  upon  us." 

Let  us  take   a  long  leap  of  about  a  century,  and  \ve  r.-me  to 
Jeremy  Taylor,  another  bishop,  whom  I  mention  immediately 
Latimer  because  lie  is  apparently  such  a  contrast  to  that  homely 
divine,  while  yet  in  very  truth  he  has  a  measure  <>f  likeness  to  him 
as  to  the  point  now  in  hand.     They  botli  rejoiced  in  ligu: 
metaphor,  and  equally  delighted  in  incident  and  narrative.     True, 
the  one  would  talk  of  John  and  William,  and  the  other  of  A 
agoras  and  Scipio;  but  actual  scenes  were  the  delight  of  each.     In 
this  respect  Jeremy  Taylor  may  be  said  to  be  Lutim* T  turned  into 
Latin.     Jeremy  Taylor  is  as  full  of  classical  allusions  as  a  kind's 
palace  is  full  of  rare   treasures,  and   his  language  is  of  the  lofty 
order  which  more  becomes  a  patrician  audience  than  a  popular 
assembly;  but  when  you  come   to  the  e>sence  of  things,  you  see 
that  if  Latimer  is  homely,  so  also  Taylor  narrates  incidents  \\hich 
are  homely  to  him;  but  his  home  is  among  philosophers  of  ( > 
and  senators  of  Koine.     This   being   underwood,  we 
sav   that    no   one    used   more   anecdotes   than    this    splendid    poet- 
preacher.      His    biographer   truly    Bays,— "It    would    be    hard    to 
point  out  a  branch  of  learning  or  of  >cieiiti!ic  j.ui-Miit  to  v^iich  lie 
does  not  occasionally  allude;   or  any  author  of  eminei 
ancient  or  modern,  with  whom  he  does  not  evince  himself  ac.nia' 
He  more  than  once  ref.-r  :  i^  in  ancient  writ 

if  they  were  of  necessity  as    familiar  to  all  hi  -  him 

self;  as  for  inMance,  he  talks  of  'poor  Attilliu 
of  'the  Libyan  lion  that  brake  loose  into  his  wilderness  and  killed 
two  Koman  boys.' "     In  all  this  he  is  eminently 
and  therefore  I  the  more  freely  introduce  him  hen  ;  f«»r  the: 
be  no  reason  why  our  an  :">uld  all  be   r 

rifle  the  treasures  of  antiquity,  and  make  the  lie 


'20  ANECDOTES    FIIOAI   THE   PULPIT. 

11  as  Hiram  of  Tyre  served  under  Solomon's  direction 
for  tin-  building  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord. 

I   am   no  admirer  of  Taylor's  style  in  other  respects,  and  his 

ing  semis  to  be  at  times  semi-popish  ;  but  in  this  place  I  have 

only  to  d"al  with  him  upon  one  particular,  and  of  that  matter  he 

is  an  admirable  example.     He  lavishes  classic  stories  even  as  an 

•  queen  bedecks  herself  with  countless   pearls.     Out  of  a 

singlr  sermon  I  extract  the  following,  which  may  suffice  for  our 

purpose : — 

STUDENTS    PROGRESSING    BACKWARDS. 

"  Menedemus  was  wont  to  say,  '  that  the  young  boys  that  went  to 
Athens,  the  first  year  were  wise  men,  the  second  year  philosophers,  the 
third  orators,  and  the  fourth  were  but  plebeians,  and  understood  nothing 
but  their  own  ignorance.'  And  just  so  it  happens  to  some  in  the  pro 
gresses  of  religion;  at  first  they  are  violent  and  active,  and  then  they 
satiate  all  the  appetites  of  religion ;  and  that  which  is  left  is,  that  they 
were  soon  weary,  and  sat  down  in  displeasure,  and  return  to  the  world, 
and  dwell  in  the  business  of  pride  or  money ;  and,  by  this  time,  they 
understand  that  their  religion  is  declined,  and  passed  from  the  heats  and 
lollies  of  youth  to  the  coldness  and  infirmities  of  old  age." 

THE   PROUD   MAN   WHO    BOASTED   OF    HIS   HUMILITY. 

"  He  was  noted  for  a  vain  person,  who,  being  overjoyed  for  the  cure 
(as  he  thought)  of  his  pride,  cried  out  to  his  wife,  '  Cernc,  Dionysia, 
dfposui  fastum  ; '  «  Behold,  I  have  laid  aside  all  my  pride.' " 

DIOGENES   AND   THE   YOUNG   MAN. 

"  Diogenes  once  spied  a  young  man  coming  out  of  a  tavern  or  place 
of  entertainment,  who,  perceiving  himself  observed  by  the  philosopher, 
with  some  ^  confusion  stepped  back  again,  that  he  might,  if  possible, 
preserve  his  fame  with  that  severe  person.  But  Diogenes  told  him, 
Quanta  magts  intraveris,  tanto  magis  eris  in  caupona  :  *  The  more  you 
go  back,  the  longer  you  are  in  the  place  where  you  are  ashamed  to  be 
seen.'  He  that  conceals  his  sin  still  retains  that  which  he  counts  his 
shame  and  burden." 


N<>  i -\amples  will   have  greater  weight  with  you  than   those 

taken  from  among  the  Puritans,  in  whose  steps  it  is  our  desire  to 

walk,  though,  alas!  we  follow  with  feeble  feet.     Certain  of  them 

abounded   in  anecdotes  and  stories:   TJiomas  Brooks  is   a   signal 

instance  of  the  wise  and  wealthy  use  of  holy  fancy.     I  put  him 

ise  1  reckon  him  to  be  the  first  in  the  special  art  which 

under  consideration.     lie  hath  dust  of  gold;  for  even  in 

the  mar- ins  of  his  books  there  are  sentences  of  exceeding  precious- 

and  hints  at  classic  stories.     His  style  is  clear  and  full;  he 

Mcu'r  ls   in  illustration  as  to   lose  sight  of  his  doctrine. 


AN!  M    TIM:   PULPIT,  '2\ 

His  floods  of  metaphor  never  drown  his  mramnj.  hut  fl«»at  it  u; 
their  surface.      If  you  have  n-  his  worl^  I 

you  the  joy  of  entering  for  the  first  tinu-  upon  hU  "  t 
Riches,"  frying  his  "Precious  K  •!<»  of 

Gold,"  communing  with  his  "Mut.-  Christian,"  and  en  joying  hia 
other  masterly  writings.    Let  in  u:ty  in 

the  way  of  anecdotes.     Here  are  a  f»-w  br'n-f  onei  which  li- 
upon  the  same  page;  but  he  so  abounds  with  them  that  you  i 
readily  cull  scores  of  better  ones  f..r  yourselves. 

MR.    WELCH    WEF.PIXG. 

"  A  soul  under  special  manifestations  of  love  weeps  that  it  can  love 
Christ  no  more.     Mr.  Welch,  a  Suffolk  minister,  weeping  at  table,  aj 
being  asked  the  reason  of  it,  answered,  it  was  because  he  cou' 
Christ  no  more.     The  true  lovers  of  Christ  can  never  rise  high  . 
in  their  love  to  Christ ;  they  count  a  little  love  to  be  no  love;  great  love 
to  be  but  little ;  strong  love  to  be  but  weak ;  and  the  highest  love  to  be 
infinitely  below  the  worth  of  Christ,  the  beauty  and  glory  of  Christ,  tl 
fulness,  sweetness,  and  goodness  of  Christ     The  top  of  their  misery  in 
this  life  is,  that  they  love  so  little,  though  they  are  so  much  beloved 

SUBMISSIVE   SILENCE. 

"  Such  was  the  silence  of  Philip  the  Second,  king  of  Spain,  that  when 
his  invincible  Armada,  that  had  been  three  years  a-fit 
gave  command  that  all  over  Spain  they  should  give  thanks  to  God  and 
the  saints  that  it  was  no  more  grievous." 

FAVOURITES    SUBMITTING   TO   THEIR    LORDS. 

"When  Tiribazus,  a  noble  Persian,  was  arrested,  at  first  he  drew  his 
sword  and  defended  himself;  but  when  they  charged  him  in  the  king  s 
name,  and  informed  him  that  they  came  from  the  km-,  and  were  com 
manded  to  bring  him  to  the  king,  he  yielded  willingly.  Seneca  persuaded 
his  friend  to  bear  his  affliction  quietly,  because  he  was  the  emperors 
favourite,  telling  him  that  it  was  not  lawful  tor  him  to  complain  w  nls 
Caesar  was  his  friend  So  saith  the  holy  Christian,  Oh,  my  soul!  be 
quiet,  be  still ;  all  is  in  love,  all  is  a  fruit  of  Divine  favour. 

SIR   PHILIP   SYI 

"A  religious  commander  being  shot  in  battle,  when  the  wound  was 
searched  a°nd  the  bullet  cutout,  some  standing  by,  pitying  his  ; 
replied,  'Though  I  groan,  yet  I  bless  God  I  do  not  grumble, 
allows  his  people  to  groan,  though  not  to  grui 

Tltomas  Adams,  the  Conforming  Puritan,  whose  srnn   - 
of  ru-med  force  and  profound  meaning,  MV8T  be  rt  a 

story   when    he    felt    that    it    would    enforce  I   inn-. 

starting-point  is  ever  some  Biblical  lenten  iptural  hi 

and  thfs  he  works  out  with  much  elaboration,  bringing  to  it  all  the 


:>;?  AM:<-!'"TI>    FROM    THE    PULPIT. 

treasures  of  his  mind.  As  Stowell  says,  "  Fables,  anecdotes, 
classical  pot-try,  gems  from  the  fathers  and  other  old  writers,  are 
scattered  over  almost  every  page."  His  anecdotes  are  usually 
rough-and-ready  ones,  and  might  be  compared  to  those  of  Latimer, 
only  they  are  not  so  genial;  their  humour  is  generally  grim  and 
caustic.  The  following  may  serve  as  fair  specimens  : — 

THE   HUSBAND    AND    HIS   WITTY"   WIFE. 

"  The  husband  told  his  wife,  that  he  had  one  ill  quality,  he  was  given 
to  be  angry  without  cause ;  she  wittily  replied,  that  she  would  keep  him 
from  that  fault,  for  she  would  give  him  cause  enough.  It  is  the  folly  of 
some  that  they  will  be  offended  without  cause,  to  whom  the  world 
promises  that  they  shall  have  causes  enough.  '  In  the  world  ye  shall 
have  tribulation.' " 

THE   SERVANT   AT   THE   SERMON. 

"  It  is  ordinary  with  many  to  commend  the  lecture  to  others'  ears,  but 
few  commend  it  to  their  own  hearts.  It  is  morally  true  what  the 
Christian  Tell-truth  relates :  A  servant  coming  from  church,  praiseth  the 
sermon  to  his  master.  He  asks  him  what  was  the  text.  Nay,  quoth  the 
servant,  it  was  begun  before  I  came  in.  What  then  was  his  conclusion  ? 
He  answered,  I  came  out  before  it  was  done.  But  what  said  he  in  the 
midst  ?  Indeed  I  was  asleep  in  the  midst.  Many  crowd  to  get  into 
the  church,  but  make  no  room  for  the  sermon  to  get  into  them." 

THE   PICTURE   OF   A    HORSE. 

"  One  charged  a  painter  to  draw  him  equiim  vjlitantem,  a  trotting  or 
prancing  horse;  and  he  (mistaking  the  word)  drew  him  equum 
•olutantem,  a  wallowing  or  tumbling  horse,  with  his  heels  upward. 
Being  brought  home,  and  the  bespeaker  blaming  his  error ;  I  would 
have  him  prancing,  and  you  have  made  him  tumbling.  If  that  be  all, 
quoth  the  painter,  it  is  but  turning  the  picture  wrong  side  uppermost,' 
and  you  have  your  desire.  Thus  in  their  quodlibetical  discourses  they 
can  but  turn  the  lineaments,  and  the  matter  is  as  they  would  have  it.  I 
k  not  this  to  disgrace  all  their  learning,  but  their  fruitless,  needless 
disputes  and  arguments,  who  find  themselves  a  tongue,  where  the 
Scripture  allows  them  none." 

THE   PIRATE. 

hen  the  desperate  pirate,  ransacking  and  rifling  a  bottom,  was 

by  the  master,  that  though  no  law  could  touch  him  for  the  present 

should  answer  it  at  the  day  of  judgment;  replied,  Nay,  if  I  mav  stav 

ere  I  come  to  it,  I  will  take  thee  and  thy  vessel  too.     A  conceit 

icrewith  too  many  land-thieves,  oppressors,  flatter  themselves  in  their 

hearts,  though  they  dare  not  utter  it  with  their  lips." 

'"<  GumaU,  the  author  of  "The  Christian  in  Complete 
QT,  must  surely  have  been  a  ivlater  of  pertinent  stories  in 
rinons,  since  even  in  his  set  and  solid  writings  they  occur. 


ANECDOTES    FROM     III!.    ITI.riT.  23 

Perhaps  I  need  not  have  made  the  distinction  between  his  wr. 
and  his  preaching,  for  it  appears  from  the  preface  that  his  "  < ' 
tian  in  Complete  Armour"  was   preached   before   it   was   printed* 
In   vivid   imagery  every   page  of  his   famous  book  abounds,    and 
whenever  this  is  the  case  we  are  sure  to  light  upon  short  narr 
and  striking  incidents.     He  is  as  profuse  in  illustration  as  eith'-r 
Brooks,  Watson,  or  Swinnock.     Happy  Lavenham  to  have  been 
served  by  such  a  pastor!     By  the  way,  this  "  C'«'mpl«-te  Armour" 
is  beyond  all  others  a  preacher's  book  :  I  should  think  that   in<>re 
discourses  have  been  suggested  by  it  than  by  any  other  uninspired 
volume.     I  have  often  resorted  to  it  when  my  own  tire  ha- 
burning  low,  and  I  have  seldom  failed  to  find  a  glowing  coal  upon 
Gurnall's  hearth.     John  Newton  said  that  if  he  might  read  only 
one  book  beside  the   Bible,  he  would  choose  "The  Christian  in 
Complete  Armour,"  and  Cecil  was   of   much  the   same  opinion. 
J.  C.  Ryle  has  said  of  it,  "  You  will  often   find   in  a  line   and  a 
half  some  great  truth,  put  so  concisely,  and  yet  so  fully,  that  you 
really  marvel  how  so  much  thought  could   be  got  into  s 
words."     One  or  two  stories  from  the  early  part  of  his  great  work 
must  suffice  for  our  purpose. 

BIRD    SAFE   IN    A    MAN'S    BOSOM. 

"  A  heathen  could  say,  when  a  bird  (feared  by  a  hawk)  flew  into  his 
bosom,  *  I  will  not  betray  thee  unto  thine  enemy,  seeing  thou  comest  for 
sanctuary  unto  me.'  How  much  less  will  God  yield  up  a  soul  unto  its 
enemy,  when  it  takes  sanctuary  in  his  Name,  savin.-,  '  Lord,  I  am 
hunted  with  such  a  temptation,  dogged  with  such  a  lust ;  cither  thou 
must  pardon  it,  or  I  am  damned ;  mortify  it,  or  I  shall  be  a  slave  to  it; 
take  me  into  the  bosom  of  thy  love  for  Christ's  sake;  castle  me  in  the 
arms  of  thy  everlasting  strength  ;  it  is  in  thy  power  to  save  me  from,  or 
give  me  up  into,  the  hands  of  my  enemy  :  I  have  no  confV: 
self  or  any  other  ;  into  thy  hands  I  commit  my  cause,  my  hie,  and  rely 
on  thee.'  This  dependence  of  a  soul  undoubtedly  will  awaken  the 
almighty  power  of  God  for  such  a  one's  defence:  he  hath  sworn  the 
greatest  oath  that  can  come  out  of  his  blessed  lips,  even  by  himself,  that 
such  as  '  flee  for  refuge  '  to  hope  in  him  shall  have  •  strong  consolation  ' : 
Hebrews  vl  17,  18." 

Till.    PRINCE   WITH    HIS    FAMILY    IN 

"Suppose  a  king's  son  should  get  out  of  a  besieged  <  ity, 
hath  left  his  wife  and  children  (whom  he  loves  a 
these  all  ready  to  die  by  sword  or  famine,  if  supply  come  not  : 
could  this  prince,  when  arrived  at  his  father's  house,  please  himself  with 
the  delights  of  the  court,  and  forget  the  distress  of  his  iamily  ?  or 
would  he  not  come  post  to  his  father  (having  their 
Always  in  his  ears),  and,  before  he  ate  or  drank,  do  his  , 
father,  and  entreat  him,  it  ever  he  loved  him,  that  he  would  send  all  the 


i>  1  ANECDOTES   FROM   THE   PULPIT. 

force  of  his  kingdom  to  raise  the  siege,  rather  than  any  of  his  dear 
relations  should  perish  ?  Surely,  sirs,  though  Christ  be  in  the  top  of  his 
preferment,  and  out  of  the  storm  in  regard  of  his  own  person,  yet  his 
children,  left  behind  in  the  midst  of  sin's,  Satan's,  and  the  world's 
batteries,  are  in  his  heart,  and  shall  not  be  forgotten  a  moment  by  him. 
The  care  he  takes  in  our  business  appeared  in  the  speedy  despatch  he 
made  of  his  Spirit  to  his  apostles'  supply,  which,  as  soon  almost  as 
he  was  warm  in  his  seat  at  his  Father's  right  hand,  he  sent,  to  the 
incomparable  comfort  of  his  apostles  and  us  that  to  this  day,  yea,  to  the 
end  of  the  world,  do  or  shall  believe  on  him." 

JOHN    CARELESS. 

"  When  God  honours  a  person  to  suffer  for  his  truth,  this  is  a  great 
privilege  :  *  Unto  you  it  is  given  not  only  to  believe,  but  to  suffer  for  his 
sake.'  God  doth  not  use  to  give  worthless  gifts  to  his  saints,  there  is 
some  preciousness  in  it  which  a  carnal  eye  cannot  see.  Faith,  you  will 
say,  is  a  great  gift  ;  but  perseverance  greater,  without  which  faith  would 
be  little  worth,  and  perseverance  in  suffering  is  above  both  honourable. 
This  made  /<?//«  Careless,  an  English  martyr  (who  though  he  died  not  at 
the  stake,  yet  in  prison  for  Christ),  say,  '  Such  an  honour  'tis  as  angels 
are  not  permitted  to  have;  therefore,  God  forgive  me  mine  unthank- 
fulness.'" 

MR.    BENBRIDGE. 

"Oh,  how  many  die  at  the  gallows  as  martyrs  in  the  devil's  cause  for 

elonies,  rapes,  and  murders  !     He  might  withdraw  his  grace,  and  leave 

thee  to  thy  own  cowardice  and  unbelief,  and  then  thou  wouldest  soon 

show  thyself  in  thy  colours.     The  stoutest  champions  for  Christ  have 

been  taught  how  weak  they  are  if  Christ  steps  aside.     Some  that  have 

given  great  testimony  of  their  faith  and  resolution  in  Christ's  cause  even 

:o  come  so  near  dying  for  his  name  as  to  give  themselves  to  be  bound 

stake,  and  fire  to  be  kindled  upon  them,  yet  their  hearts  have 

iled  ;    as  that  holy  man,  Mr.  Benbridge,  in  our  English  martyrologv 

who  thrust  the  faggots  from  him,  and  cried  out,  *  I  recant,  I  recant  r 

this  man,  when  reinforced  in  his  faith,  and  indued  with  power  from 

above  was  able  within  the  space  of  a  week  after  that  sad  foil,  to  die  at 

stake  cheerfully.     He  that  once  overcame  death  for  us,  'tis  he  that 

always  overcame  death  in  us." 


John  riwl  is  a  name  which  I  shall  have  to  quote  in  another 

re,  for  he  is  greatest  in  metaphor  and  allegory;    but  in  the 

mutt.T  of  anecdote  his  preaching  is  a  fine  example.     It  was  said 

his  i.nmstry  that  he  who  was  unaffected  by  it  must  either  have 

u  v,ry  soft  head  or  a  very  hard  heart.     He  had  a  fund  of 

;  incidents,  and  a  faculty  of  happy  illustration,  and  as  he 

a^man    m    whose   manner   cheerfulness    was    blended   with 

»t.v.  1»"  was  popular  in  the  highest  degree  both  at  home  and 

Bought  out  words  which  might  suit  the  sailors  of  Dart 

mouth  and  farmers  of  Devon,  and  therefore  he  has  left  behind  him 


ANECDOTES    PEOM    THE    PULPIT. 

his  "Navigation Spiritualize  l,''an  1  his  ••  llu>l>an<lry  Spiritm'. 

a  legacy  for  eacli  of  the   two  orders  of  mm  who  plough  the  sea 

and  the  land.      lie  wa-  a  man  worth  making  a  pilgr 

What  a  crime   it  was    to  silence   liis   h.-avni-tonrhed   lips   l»y  th»» 

abominable  Act  of  Uniformity!     In<i«-:id  <>f  tjuotii. 

sages  from  his  sermons,  t-aeh  one  containing:  an  a:  I  have 

thought  it  as  well  to  give-  a  ma-s  ,,f  stories  as  we  find  them  in  hU 

prelections  upon — 

PROVIDENCE   IN    CONVERSION. 

"A  scrap  of  paper  accidentally  coming  to  view  hath  been  used  as  an 
occasion  of  conversion.     This  was  the  case  of  a  minister  of  Wales,  who 
had  two  livings,  but  took  little  care  of  either.      He  beiivj 
bought  something  at  a  pedlar's  standing,  and  rent  off  a  leaf  - 
Perkins'  catechism  to  wrap  it  in  ;  and  reading  a  line  or  two  of  it,  God 
sent  it  home  so  as  it  did  the  work." 

"  The  marriage  of  a  godly  man  into  a  carnal  family  hath  been 
ordered  by  Providence  for  the  conversion  and  salvation  of  many  tl 
Thus  we  read,  in  the  life  of  that  renowned  Knglish  worthy,  Mr.  John 
Bruen,  that,  in  his  second  match,  it  was  agreed  that  he  should  have 
one  year's  diet  in  his  mother-in-law's  house.  During  his  abode  there 
that  year  (saith  Mr.  Clark)  the  Lord  was  pleased  by  his  means  graciously 
to  work  upon  her  soul,  as  also  upon  his  wife's  sister,  and  half-sister,  their 
brothers,  Mr.  William  and  Mr.  Thomas  Fox,  with  one  or  two  of  the 
servants  in  that  family." 

"  Not  only  the  reading  of  a  book,  or  hearing  of  a  minister,  but  (which 
is  most  remarkable)  the  very  mistake  or  forgetfulness  of  a  minister  hath 
been   improved  by  Providence  for  this  end  and  purpose.     Augustine, 
once  preaching  to  his  congregation,  forgot  the  argument  which  i 
proposed,  and  fell  upon  the  errors  of  the  Manichees,  beside  his  first  in 
tention  ;  by  which  discourse  he  converted  one  Firrnus,  his  auditor,  w 
fell  down  at  his  feet  weeping,  and  confessing  he  had  lived  a  Manichee 
many  years.     Another  I  knew,  who,  going  to  preach,  took  up  another 
Bible  than  that  he  had  designed,  in  which,  not  only  missing  his  notes, 
but  the  chapter  also  in  which  his  text  lay,  was  put  to  sou 
but  after  a  short  pause  he  resolved  to  speak  to  any  oil. 
might  be  presented  to  him,  and  accordingly  read  the  text,  4  1  he  Lord 
is  not  slack  concerning  his  promise'  (2  Pet.  IIL  9);  and  though  n< 
nothin^  prepared,  yet  the  Lord  helped  him  to  speak  Loth  metl 
and  pertinently  from  it ;   by  which  discourse  a  gracious  . 
wrought  upon  one  in  the  congregation,   who  hath   since  given  good 
evidence  of  a  sound  conversion,  and  acknowledged  this 
the  first  and  only  means  thereof." 

"  Goini£  to  hear  a  sermon  in  jest  hath  proved  some  men  s  <  < 
sion  in  earnest.      Mr.    Hrinin,   in   his   <  Real    Clm.uan,'  td 
notorious  drunkard,  whom  the  drunkards  called  ' 
would  needs  go  to  hear  what  Wilson  said,  out  of  no  other  design  n 
seems,  but  to  scoff  at  the  holy  man;  but  in  the  prayer  I 
heart  began  to  thaw,  and  when  he  read  his  text,  wlu  --.n  no 

more  lest  a  worse  thing  come  im:o  tb  f.  .4),  he  could  not 


ANECDOTES   FROM    THE   PULPIT. 

contain  ;  and  in  that  sermon  the  Lord  changed  his  heart,  though  for 
merly  so  bitter  an  enemy  that  the  minister  on  lecture-days  was  afraid  to 
go  to  church  before  his  shop  door.  '  Lo,  these  are  parts  of  his  ways ; 
but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him?"' 

George  Sioinnock,  for  some  years  chaplain  to  Hampden,  had  the 
irift  of  illustration  largely  developed,  as  his  works  prove.  Some  of 
his  similes  are  far-fetched,  and  the  growth  of  knowledge  has  ren 
dered  certain  of  them  obsolete  ;  but  they  served  his  purpose,  and 
made  his  teaching  attractive.  After  deducting  all  his  fancies, 
which  in  the  present  age  would  be  judged  to  be  strained,  there 
remains  "a  rare  amount  of  sanctified  wit  and  wisdom";  and 
sparkling  here  and  there  we  spy  out  a  few  telling  stories,  mostly  of 
classic  origin. 

THE    PRAYER    OF    PAULINUS. 

"  It  was  the  speech  of  Paulinus,  when  his  city  was  taken  by  the  bar 
barians,  Domine,  ne  excruder  ob  aurum  et  argentum  :  '  Lord,  let  me  not 
be  troubled  for  my  silver  and  gold  which  I  have  lost,  for  thou  art  all 
things.'  ^  As  Noah,  when  the  whole  world  was  overwhelmed  with  water, 
had  a  fair  epitome  of  it  in  the  ark,  having  all  sorts  of  beasts  and  fowls 
there ;  so  he  that  in  a  deluge  hath  God  to  be  his  God,  hath  the  original 
of  all  mercies.  He  who  enjoyeth  the  ocean  may  rejoice,  though  some 
drops  are  taken  from  him." 

QUEEN    ELIZABETH    AND   THE    MILKMAID. 

"  Queen  Elizabeth  envied  the  milkmaid  when  she  was  in  prison  ;  but 
had  she  known  the  glorious  reign  which  she  was  to  have  for  forty-four 
years,  she  would  not  have  repined  at  the  poor  happiness  of  so  mean  a 
person.  Christians  are  too  prone  to  envy  the  husks  which  wandering 
sinners  fill  themselves  with  here  below ;  but  would  they  set  before  them 
their  glorious  hopes  of  a  heaven,  how  they  must  reign  with  Christ  for 
«ver  and  ever,  they  would  see  little  reason  for  their  repining." 

THE    BELIEVING    CHILD. 

"  I  have  read  a  story  of  a  little  child  about  eight  or  nine  years  old, 

that  being  extremely  pinched  with  hunger,  looked  one    day  pitifully 

>itous  on  her  mother,  and  said,  •  Mother,  do  you  think  that  God 

starve  us?'     The  mother  answered,  '  No,  child,  he  will  not.'     The 

I  replied,   '  But  if  he  do,  yet  we  must  love  him  and  serve  him.' 

•e  was  language  that  spake  a  well-grown  Christian.     For  indeed  God 

to  want  and  misery,  to  try  us  whether  we  love  him  for  his  own 

our  own  sakes ;  for  those  excellencies  that  are  in  him,  or  for 

e  mercies  we  have  from  him  •  to  see  whether  we  will  say  with  the 

cynic  to  Antisthenes,  Nullus  tarn  dutus  erit  baculus,  etc.     '  There  should 

be  no  cudgel  so  crabbed  as  to  beat  me  from  thee.'  " 

FASHIONABLE   RELIGION. 

"I  have  read  of  a  popish  lady  in  Paris,  that  when  she  saw  a  glorious 
>ion  to  one  of  their  saints,  cried  out, «  Oh,  how  fine  is  our  religion 


4NECr>OTE<    KKMM    THE    1TLPIT.  27 

beyond  that  of  the  Huguenots! — they  have  a  mean  and  beggarly 
religion,  but  ours  is  full  of  bravery  and  solemnity.'  But  as  heralds  say 
of  a  coat  of  arms,  if  it  be  full  of  gays  and  devices,  it  speaks  a  mean 
descent ;  so  truly  that  manner  of  worship  which  is  mingled  with  men's 
inventions  speaks  its  descent  to  be  mean— namely,  from  man." 

THE   BUSY   DUKE. 

"  The  French  Due  d'Alva  could  say,  when  he  was  asked  by  Henry 
the  Fourth  whether  he  had  seen  the  eclipse  of  the  sun,  that  he  had  so 
much  business  to  do  upon  earth,  that  he  had  no  time  to  look  up  to 
heaven.  Sure  I  am,  the  Christian  may  say  with  more  truth  and  con 
science,  that  he  hath  so  much  business  to  do  for  heaven,  that  he  hath 
no  time  to  mind  vain  or  earthly  things." 

TJiomas  Watson  was  one  of  the  many  Puritan  preachers  who  won 
the   popular   ear  by  their   frequent  illustrations.     In    the 
flowing  stream  of  his  teaching  we  find  pearls  of  anecdote 
frequently.     No  one  ever  grew  weary  under  such   plea-ant    vet 
weighty  discourse  as  that  which  we  find  in  his  "Beatitudes."     Let 
two  quotations  serve  to  show  his  skill. 

THE   VESTAL   AND   THE   BRACELETS. 

"  Most  men  think  because  God  hath  blessed  them  with  an  estate, 
therefore  they  are  blessed.  Alas!  God  often  gives  these  thi: 
anger.  He  loads  his  enemies  with  gold  and  silver;  as  Plutarch  reports 
ol  Tarpeia,  a  Vestal  nun,  who  bargained  with  the  enemy  to  betray  the 
Capitol  of  Rome  to  them,  in  case  she  might  have  the  golden  bracelets 
on  their  left  hands,  which  they  promised  ;  and  being  entered  into  the 
Capitol,  they  threw  not  only  their  bracelets,  but  their  bucklers,  too, 
upon  her,  through  the  weight  whereof  she  was  pressed  to  death.  God 
often  lets  men  have  the  golden  bracelets  of  worldly  substance,  the 
weight  whereof  sinks  them  into  hell.  Oh,  let  us  suferna  anhcla 
our  eyes  'fixed'  and  our  hearts  'united'  to  God  the  supreme  good; 
this  is  to  pursue  blessedness  as  in  a  chase." 

HEDGEHOG   AND    CONIES. 

"The  Fabulist  tells  a  story  of  the  hedgehog  that  came  to  the  cony- 
burrows   in  stormy   weather,  and  desired  harbour,  pruini>in.^  that  he 
would  be  a  quiet  guest;  but  when  once  he  had  gotten  entertainment,  he 
did  set  up  his  prickles,  and  did  never  leave  till  he  had  thrust  tlu 
conies  out  of  their  burrows  :  so  covetousness,  though  it  hath  m.. 
pleas  to  insinuate  and  wind  itself  into  the  heart,  yet  as  soon  as  you 
have  let  it  in,  this  thorn  will  never  cease  pricking  till  it  hath  chofc 
good  beginnings,  and  thrust  all  religion  out  of  your  hearts." 

I  think  this  must  suffice  to  represent  the  men  ^  the  1'uritanic 
period,  who  added  to  their  profound  theulogy  and  I  irinug 

a  zeal  to  be  understood,  and  A  ikill  in  .setting  forth  truth  ; 
help  of  every-duy  occurrences.     The  age  which  fulluued  them 


28  ANF.rnoTKs  FROM  THE  PULPIT. 

barren  of  spiritual  life,  and  was  afflicted  by  a  race  of  rhetorical 
divines,  whose  words  had  little  connection  with  the  Word  of  life 
The  scanty  thought  of  the  Queen  Anne  dignitaries  needed  no  aid 
of  metaphor  or  parable:  there  was  nothing  to  explain  to  the 
people ;  the  utmost  endeavour  of  these  divines  was  to  hide  the 
nakedness  of  their  discourses  with  the  fig-leaves  of  Latinized 
verbiage.  Living  preaching  was  gone,  spiritual  life  was  gone,  and 
consequently  a  pulpit  was  set  up  which  had  no  voice  for  the  com- 
nn  »n  people ;  no  voice,  indeed,  for  anybody  except  the  mere  formalist, 
who  is  content  if  decorum  be  observed  and  respectability  main 
tained.  Of  course,  our  notion  of  making  truth  clear  by  stories 
did  not  suit  the  dignified  death  of  the  period,  and  it  was  only 
when  the  dry  bones  began  to  be  stirred  that  the  popular  method 
was  again  brought  to  the  front. 

The  illustrious  George  W/iitefield  stands,  with  Wesley,  at  the 
head  of  that  noble  army  who  led  the  Eevival  of  the  last  century. 
It  is  not  at  this  present  any  part  of  my  plan  to  speak  of  his 
matchless  eloquence,  unquenchable  earnestness,  and  incessant 
labour;  but  it  is  quite  according  to  the  run  of  my  lecture  to 
remind  you  of  his  own  saying, — uluse  market  language."  He 
employed  pure,  good,  flowing  English ;  but  he  was  as  simple  as  if 
he  spoke  to  children.  Although  by  no  means  abounding  in  illus- 
tration,  yet  he  always  employed  it  when  needed,  and  he  narrated 
incidents  with  great  power  of  action  and  emphasis.  His  stories 
were  so  told  that  they  thrilled  the  people  :  they  saw  as  well  as 
heard,  for  each  word  had  its  proper  gesture.  One  reason  why  he 
could  be  understood  at  so  great  a  distance  was  the  fact  that  the 
eye  helped  the  ear.  As  specimens  of  his  anecdotes  I  have  selected 
these  which  follow  : — 

THE   TWO    CHAPLAINS. 

"  You  cannot  do  without  the  grace  of  God  when  you  come  to  die. 

There  was  a  nobleman  that  kept  a  deistical  chaplain,  and  his  lady  a 

tian  one ;  when  he  was  dying,  he  says  to  his  chaplain,—'  I  liked 

you  very  well  when  I  was  in  health;  but  it  is  my  lady's  chaplain  I  must 

have  when  I  am  sick.'  " 

NEVER    SATISFIED. 

"  My  dear  hearers,  there  is  not  a  single  soul  of  you  all  that  are  satisfied 

u-y(^rSuatl0nSJ  !Sn0t  the  Iangua8e  of  your  hearts  when  apprentices, 

think  we  shall  do  very  well  when  journeymen;  when  journeymen, 

should  do  very  well  when  masters ;  when  single,  that  we  shall 

o  well  when  married  ;  and  to  be  sure  you  think  you  shall  do  well  when 

eep  a  carriage.     I  have  heard  of  one  who  began  low :   he  first 

wanted  a  house;  then,  says  he,  '  I  want  two,  then  four,  then  six' ;  and 


AN:  <\i    i  in:    rru-lT. 

when  he  had  them,  he  said,  '  I  think  I  want  nothing  else.'  '  Yes,1  says  his 
friend,  *  you  will  soon  want  another  thing,  that  is,  a  hearse-and- 
carry  you  to  your  grave ' ;  and  that  made  him  tremble." 

DR.  9    HEART. 

"A  good  woman,  who  was  charmed. with  Dr.  Manton,  said,  'Oh,  sir, 
you  have  made  an  excellent  sermon  to-day ;  I  wish  I  had  your 
*  Do  you  so  ? '  said  he,  *  good  woman  ;  you  had  better  not  wish  for  it ;  for 
if  you  had  it,  you  would  wish  for  your  own  again.'   The  best  of  n 
themselves  in  the  worst  light." 

Fearing  that  the  quotation  of   any  more  examples  might 
tedious,  I  would    only   remind  you  that  such   IU<-M   a 
Rowland  Hill,  Matthew   Wilks,  Christinas  Evans,  William 
and  others  who  have  but  lately  departed  from   us,  owed  m 
their  attractiveness  to  the  way  in  which  they  amused  their  audi 
ences,  and  flashed  truth  into  their  faee>  by  well-chosen 
Time  calls  upon  me  to  have  done,  ami  how  can  1  come  to  a 
close  than  by  mentioning  one  living  man,  who,  above  all  others, 
has  in  two  continents  stirred  the  masses  of  the  people  ( 
D.  L.  Moody.     This  admirable  brother  has  a  great  aversion  to  the 
printing  of  his  sermons ;  and  well  he  may  have,  for  ii<  antly 

preaching,  and  has   no  time  allowed  him  for  the   juvj.arat i.m  of 
fresh  discourses;  and  therefore  it  would  be  great  unwisdom  on  his 
part  to  print  at  once  those  addresses  with  which   he  is  working 
through  a  campaign.     We  hope,  however,  that  when  he  has  done 
with  a  sermon  he  will  never  suffer  it  to  die  out,  but  give  it  to  the 
church  and  to  the  world  through  th  •  pros.     Our  esteemed  brother 
has  a  lively,  telling  style,  and  he  thinks  it  wise  frnjiu-ntly  to 
a  nail  with  the   hammer   of   anecdote.      Here    are   four    or    live 
extracts  from  the  little  book  entitled  "  Arrows  and  An  cdol 
D.  L.  Moody.     By  John  Lobb  "  :— 

THE    IDIOT'S    MOTHER, 

"  I  know  a  mother  who  has  an  idiot  child.     For  it  she  gave  up  all 
society,  almost  everything,  and  devoted  her  whole  life  t<  now.' 

said  she,  'for  fourteen  years  I  have  tended  it  and  loved  it,  and  il 
not  even  know  me.     Oh  !  it  is  breaking  my  heart ! '     Oh  !  how  th 
must  say  this  of  hundreds  here!     Jesus  comes  here,  ami 
to  seat,  asking  if  there  is  a  place  for  him.     Oil!  will  i, 
take  him  into  your  hearts  ?  " 

SURGEON   AND   PAT1 

"  When  I  was  in  Belfast  I  knew  a  doctor  who  had  a  friend  a  k 
surgeon  there,  and  he  told  me  that  the  surgeon 
performing  any  operation,  to  say  to  the  p:itient :  '  i  look  at 

the  wound,  and  then  fix  your  eyes  on  me,  and  :!  till  I 


30  AM. (DOTES   PROM    THE    PULPIT. 

eet  through  the  operation.'  I  thought  at  the  time  that  was  a  good 
fllus  ration  Sinner,  take  a  good  look  at  the  wound  to-night,  and  then 
fix  pur  eyes  on  Christ,  and  don't  take  them  off.  It  is  better  to  look  at 
the  remedy  than  at  the  wound." 

THE  ORPHAN'S  PRAYER. 

"  A  little  child  whose  father  and  mother  had  died,  was  taken  into 
another  family.  The  first  night  she  asked  if  she  could  pray  as  she  used 
to  do.  They  said,  'Oh,  yes/  So  she  knelt  down  and  prayed  as  her 
mother  had  taught  her;  and,  when  that  was  ended,  she  added  a  little 
prayer  of  her  own:  'Oh,  God,  make  these  people  as  kind  to  me  as 
father  and  mother  were.'  Then  she  paused,  and  looked  up,  as  if 
expecting  the  answer,  and  added:  'Of  course  he  will.'  How  sweetly 
simple  was  that  little  one's  faith!  She  expected  God  to  'do,'  and,  of 
course,  she  got  her  request." 

THE   ROLL-CALL. 

"  A  soldier  lay  on  his  dying  couch  during  our  last  war,  and  they  heard 
him  say  '  Here  ! '  They  asked  him  what  he  wanted,  and  he  put  up  his 
hand  and  said :  '  Hush  !  they  are  calling  the  roll  of  heaven,  and  I  am 
answering  to  my  name ' ;  and  presently  he  whispered  :  '  Here  ! '  and  he 
was  gone." 

NO  HOME  BEYOND  THE  GRAVE. 

44 1  have  been  told  of  a  wealthy  man  who  died  recently.  Death  came 
unexpectedly  to  him,  as  it  almost  always  does ;  and  he  sent  out  for  his 
lawyer  to  draw  his  will  And  he  went  on  willing  away  his  property  ;  and 
when  he  came  to  his  wife  and  child,  he  said  he  wanted  them  to  have  the 
home.  But  the  little  child  didn't  understand  what  death  was.  She  was 
standing  near,  and  she  said,  *  Papa,  have  you  got  a  home  in  that  land 
you  are  going  to  ? '  The  arrow  reached  that  heart ;  but  it  was  too  late. 
He  saw  his  mistake.  He  had  got  no  home  beyond  the  grave." 

I  will  weary  you  no  longer.  You  may  safely  do  what  the  most 
useful  of  men  have  done  before  you.  Copy  them  not  only  in  their 
use  of  illustration,  but  in  their  wisely  keeping  it  in  subservience 
to  their  design.  They  were  not  story-tellers,  but  preachers  of  the 
frospel ;  they  did  not  aim  at  the  entertainment  of  the  people,  but 
at  their  conversion.  Never  did  they  go  out  of  their  way  to  drag 
in  a  telling  bit  which  they  had  been  saving  up  for  display,  and 
never  could  anyone  say  of  their  illustrations  that  they  were 

"  Windows  that  exclude  the  light, 
And  passages  that  lead  to  nothing." 

Iv<>ep  you  the  due  proportion  of  things  lest  I  do  worse  than  lose 
my  labour,  by  becoming  the  cause  of   your  presenting   to  the 
»ple  strings  of  anecdotes  instead  of  sound  doctrines,  for  that 
uKl  be  as  evil  a  thing  as  if  you  offered  to  hungry  men  flowers 
inst.-U'l  uf  l)p-a.l,  and  gave  to  the  uaked  gauze  of  gossamer  in 
stead  of  woollen  cloth. 


LECTURE  in. 

biCH  of  Anecdotes  and 


THE  uses  of  anecdotes  and  illustrations  are  manifold;  Imt  we 
may  reduce  them  to  seven,  so  far  as  our  present  purj-oM-N  are 
concerned,  not  for  a  moment  imagining  that  this  will  be  a 
complete  list. 

We  use  them,  first,  to  interest  the  mind  and  secure  the  attention 
of   our    hearers.     We    cannot    endure    a    sleepy    audience.     To 
us,  a   slumbering    man    is    no    man.      Sydney    Smith    < 
that,    although  Eve   was  taken  out  of  the  side   of  Adam    while 
he  was  asleep,  it  was  not   possible   to   remove   sin    from    in 
hearts    in    that   manner.     We    do   not    agree   with    II  tin- 

hedger  and  ditcher,  who  remarked  to  a  Christian  man  with  wl 
he  was   talking,   "I   loikes   Sunday,    I   does;  I  loikes  Sinui: 
"  And  what  makes  you  like  Sunday?"     "  'Cause,  you  *< 
day  of  rest ;  I  goes  down  to  the  old  church,  I  gets  into  a  pew,  and 
puts  my  legs  up,  and  I  thinks  o'  nothin'."     It  is  to  be  feared  that 
in  town  as  well  as  in  country  this  thinking  of  m.thi: 
usual  thing.    But  your  regard  for  the  sacred  day,  and  the  mini 
to  which  you  are  called,  and  the  worshipping  assembly,  wil'. 
allow  you  to  give  your  people  the  chance  of  thinking  of  nothing. 
You  want  to  arouse  every  faculty  in  them  to  receive  the  Word  of 
God,  that  it  may  be  a  blessing  to  them. 

We  want  to  win  attention  at  the  coininrmvmrnt  of  t': 
and  to  hold  it  till  the  close.     With  this  aim,  many  methods  may  be 
tried;   but  possibly  none  will  succeed  better  than  the  introduction 
of  an  interesting  story.     This  sets  II.,dgi-  listening,  and  alth- 
he  will  miss  the  fresh  air  of  the  fields  and  begin  to  feel  drowty  m 
your  stuffy  chapel,  another  tale  will  stir  him  to  ranei 
If  he  hears  some  narrative    in    connection    with    h. 
county,  you  will  have  him  "all  there",  and  you  may  then  hope 

do  him  good. 

The  anecdote  in  the  sermon  answers  the  purpose  of  an  engraving 


32  THK    1/SES    OF    ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

in  a  book.  Everybody  knows  that  people  are  attracted  by  volumes 
with  pictures  in  them;  and  that,  when  a  child  gets  a  book, 
although  it  may  pass  over  the  letterpress  without  observation,  it  is 
quite  sure  to  pause  over  the  woodcuts.  Let  us  not  be  too  great  to 
use  a  method  which  many  have  found  successful.  We  must  have 
attention.  In  some  audiences,  we  cannot  get  it  if  we  begin  with 
Milid  instruction  ;  they  are  not  desirous  of  being  taught,  and  con- 

.uently  they  are  not  in  a  condition  to  receive  the  truth  if  we  set 
it  before  them  nakedly.  Now  for  a  bunch  of  flowers  to  attract  these 
people  to  our  table,  for  afterwards  we  can  feed  them  with  the  food 
they  so  much  need.  Just  as  the  Salvation  Army  goes  trumpeting 
and  drumming  through  the  streets  to  draw  the  people  into  the 
barracks,  so  may  an  earnest  man  spend  the  first  few  minutes  with 
an  unprepared  congregation  in  waking  the  folks  up,  and  enticing 
them  to  enter  the  inner  chamber  of  the  truth.  Even  this  awaken 
ing  prelude  must  have  in  it  that  which  is  worthy  of  the  occasion  ; 
but  if  it  is  not  up  to  your  usual  average  in  weight  of  doctrine,  it 
may  not  only  be  excused,  but  commended,  if  it  prepares  the 
audience  to  receive  that  which  is  to  follow.  Ground-bait  may 
catch  no  fish ;  but  it  answers  its  purpose  if  it  brings  them  near 
the  bait  and  the  hook. 

A  congregation  which  has  been  well  instructed,  and  is  mainly 
made  up  of  established  believers,  will  not  need  to  be  addressed  in 
the  same  style  as  an  audience  gathered  fresh  from  the  world,  or  a 
meeting  of  dull,  formal  churchgoers.  Your  common-sense  will 
teach  you  to  suit  your  manner  to  your  audience.  It  is  possible  to 
maintain  profound  and  long-continued  attention  without  the  use 
of  an  illustration;  I  have  frequently  done  so  in  the  Tabernacle 
when  it  has  been  mainly  filled  with  church-members ;  but  when  my 
own  people  are  away,  and  strangers  fill  their  places,  I  bring  out  all 
my  store  of  stories,  similes,  and  parables. 

L  have  sometimes  told  anecdotes  in  the  pulpit,  and  very  delicate 

and  particular  people  have  expressed  their  regret  and  horror  that 

should  say  such  things;  but  when  I  have  found  that  God  has 

I  some  of  the  illustrations  I  have  used,  I  have  often  thought 

of  the  story  of  the  man  with  a  halbert,  who  was  attacked  by  a 

nobleman's  dog,  and,  of  course,  in  defending  himself,  he  killed  the 

The  nobleman  was  very  angry,  and  asked  the  man  how 

dared  to  kill  the  dog ;  and  the  man  replied  that,  if  he  had  not 

it,  the  dog  would  have  bitten  him,  and  torn  him  in  pieces. 

ell,    said  the  nobleman,  "  but  you  should  not  have  struck  it 

on  the  head  with  the  halbert;  why  did  you  not  hit  it  with  the 


THE    USES    OF    ANECDOTES    AM;    1 1.U  >Tl;.VTION8. 

handle?"  «My  lord,"  answered  tin-  man,  "so  I  would  if  it  had 
tried  to  bite  me  with  its  tail."  So,  when  I  have  to  deal  with  sin, 
some  j>eople  say,  "  \Vhy  don't  you  addiv>s  it  deliruu-lv  ?  \Vhy 
don't  you  speak  to  it  in  courtly  language  V'  And  I  an 
I  would  if  it  would  bite  me  with  its  tail  ;  but  as  long  as  e\.-r  I  tind 
that  it  duals  roughly  with  me,  I  will  deal  nm^hlv  with  it  ;  and  any 
kind  of  weapon  that  will  help  to  slay  the  monster,  I  shall  not  find 
unfitted  to  my  hand." 

We  cannot  afford,  in   these  days,  to  lose  any  opportunitv   of 
getting  hold  of  the  public  ear.     \Ve  must  use  every  occasioi. 
comes  in  our  way,  and  every  tool  that  is  likely  to  help  us  in  our 
work;  and  we  must  rouse  up  all   our  faculties,  and  put  forth  all 
our  energies,  if  that  by  any  means  we  may  get  the  people  to  h.-.-d 
that  which  they  are  so  slow  to  regard,  the  great  storv  of  rii:': 
ness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come.     \Ve  >hall  Ti 
nmen,  and  to  study  hard,  or  else  we  shall  not   he  able  to  influence 
our  day  and  generation  for  good.     I  believe   that  the  g:- 
industry  is  necessary  to  make  a  thoroughly  efficient  piva.-her,  and 
the  best  natural  ability,  too;  and  it  is  my  firm   conviction  that, 
when  you  have  the  best  natural  ability,  you  must  supplement   it 
with  the  greatest  imaginable  industry  if  you  are  really  to  do 
service  for  God  among  this  crooked  and  pen  lation. 

The  fool  in  Scotland,  who  got  into  the  pulpit  before  the  preacher 
arrived,  was  requested  by  the  minister  to  come   down. 
nay,"  answered  the  man,  "you  come  up,  too,  for   it  will  take  both 
of  us  to  move  this  stiff-necked  generation."     It  will  certainly  take 
all  the  wisdom  that  we  can   obtain  to  move   the  people  among 
whom  our  lot  is  cast ;  and  if  we  do  not  use  every  lawful  means  of 
interesting  the  minds  of  our  hearers,  we  shall  find  that  they  \\ill  be 
like  a  certain  other  congregation,  in  which!  the  people  were  all 
asleep  except  one  poor  idiot.     The  minister  woke  them  i 
tried  to  reprove  them  by  saying,  "Th«-iv,  you    wen  all 
except  poor  Jock  the  idiot;"  but  his  rebuke  was  cut  >hort  1. 
who  exclaimed,  "And  if  I  had  not  been  an  idiot,  I  should  have 
oeen  asleep,  too." 

I  will  leave  the  moral  of  that  well-known  story  to  I] 
and  will  pass  on  to  my  second  point,  which  is,  that  the 
and  illustrations  renders  our  preaching  life-like  ami  i-ivitt.     T 
most  important  matter.      Of  all  things  that  we  have  to  avoid,  one  of 

the  m  •  ;;il  is  that  of  giving  our  people  the  idea,  when  we  an 

preaching,  that  we  are  acting  a  p;.  iieatrical  in  the 


34  TIIK   USES   OF   ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

pulpit,  either  in  tone,  manner,  or  anything  else,  I  loathe  from  my 
very  soul.  Just  go  into  the  pulpit,  and  talk  to  the  people  as  you 
would  in  the  kitchen,  or  the  drawing-room,  and  say  what  you  have 
to  tell  them  in  your  ordinary  tone  of  voice.  Let  me  conjure  you, 
by  everything  that  is  good,  to  throw  away  all  stilted  styles  of 
speech,  and  anything  approaching  affectation.  Nothing  can  succeed 
with  the  masses  except  naturalness  and  simplicity.  Why,  some 
ministers  cannot  even  give  out  a  hymn  in  a  natural  manner  I 
"  Let  us  sing  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God,"  [spoken  in  the  tone 
that  is  sometimes  heard  in  churches  or  chapels] — who  would  ever 
think  of  speaking  like  that  at  the  tea-table  ?  "  I  shall  be  greatly 
obliged  if  you  will  kindly  give  me  another  cup  of  tea,"  [spoken  in 
the  same  unnatural  way] — you  would  never  think  of  giving  any  tea 
to  a  man  who  talked  like  that ;  and  if  we  preach  in  that  stupid 
style,  the  people  will  not  believe  what  we  say ;  they  will  think  it 
is  our  business,  our  occupation,  and  that  we  are  doing  the  whole  thing 
in  a  professional  manner.  We  must  shake  off  professionalism  of 
every  kind,  as  Paul  shook  off  the  viper  into  the  fire ;  and  we  must 
speak  as  God  has  ordained  that  we  should  speak,  and  not  by  any 
strange,  out-of-the-way,  new-fangled  method  of  pulpit  oratory. 

Our  Lord's  teaching  was  amazingly  life-like  and  vivid ;  it  was  the 
setting  out  of  truth  before  the  eye,  not  as  a  flat  picture,  but  as  in  a 
stereoscope,  making  it  stand  up,  with  all  its  lines  and  angles  of 
beauty  in  life-like  reality.  That  was  a  fine  living  sermon  when  he 
took  a  little  child,  and  set  him  in  the  midst  of  the  disciples  ;  and 
that  was  another  powerful  discourse  when  he  preached  about  ab 
staining  from  carking  cares,  and  stooped  down,  and  plucked  a  lily 
(as  I  suppose  he  did)  and  said,  "  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field, 
how  they  grow ;  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin."  I  can  readily 
suppose  that  some  ravens  were  flying  just  over  his  head,  and  that 
he  pointed  to  them,  and  said,  "  Consider  the  ravens ;  for  they 
neither  sow  nor  reap;  which  neither  have  storehouse  nor  barn  ;  and 
God  feedeth  them."  There  was  a  life-likeness,  you  see,  a  vividness, 
about  the  whole  thing.  We  cannot  always  literally  imitate  our 
Lord,  as  we  have  mostly  to  preach  in  places  of  worship.  It  is  a 
".g  that  we  have  so  many  houses  of  prayer,  and  I  thank  God 
that  there  are  so  many  of  them  springing  up  all  around  us  ;  yet  I 
sh.mld  praise  the  Lord  still  more  if  half  the  ministers,  who  preach 
in  our  various  buildings,  were  made  to  turn  out  of  them,  and  to 
tor  their  Master  in  the  highways,  and  byways,  and  anywhere 
that  the  people  would  go  to  listen  to  them.  We  are  to  go  out  into 
all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  not  to  stop 


THE   USES   OF   ANECDOTES   AM>    DLUJ8TBAT1  35 

in  our  chapels  waiting  for  every  cn-ature  to  coin.-  in  t-> 

we  have  to  say.  A  sportsman,  win.  should  sit  at  his  parlour  window, 

with    his   gun    loaded    all    ready    for   shooting    partrid^-,  would 

probably   not  make   up  a  very  heavy   bar;  of  game.     No,  he  must 

put  on  his  buskins,  and  tramp  off  over  the  fields,  and   then  i 

get  a  shot  at  the  birds  he  is   seeking.     So   must  we  do,   brethren, 

we  must  always  have  our  buskins  ready  for  field  work,  and  1 

on   the  watch   for  opportunities  of  going  out  ammn:  the  souls  of 

men,  that  we  may  bring  them  back  as  trophie-  wer  of  the 

gospel  we  have  to  proclaim. 

It  might  not  be  wise  for  us  to  try  to  make  our  sermons  life-like 
and  vivid   in  the   style  in  which  quaint  old  Matthew  Wilk- 
times  did  ;  as  when,  one  Sabbath  morning,  he  took  into  the  pulpit  a 
little  box,  and  after  a  while  opened  it,  and  displayed  to  i 
gation  a  small  pair  of  scales,  and  then,  turning  over  the  leaves  of  the 
Bible  with  great  deliberation,  held  up  the  balances,  and  aim 
as  his   text,   "Thou  art  weighed   in   the   balances,  and  art    found 
wanting."    I  think,  however,  that  was  puerile  rather  than  p<> 
I   like    Matthew    VVilks  better    when,    on    another    occasion,    his 
text  being,  "  See  that   ye  walk    circumspectly,"   he  c,.mm-  i. 
saying,  "  Did  you  ever  see  a  torn  cat  walking  on  the  top  of  a  high 
wall    that     was    covered     with     bits     of    broken    gla-s     1  . 
If  so,  you  had  just  then  an   accurate  illustration  of  what   i>  meant 
by  the  injunction,  'See  that  ye  walk  circumspectly*' M 
the   case,  too,   of  good  "Father  Taylor",  who,   preaching  in    the 
streets  in  one  of  the  towns  of  California,  stood  on  th 
whisky-barrel.     By  way  of  illustration,  he  stamped  his  foot  on  the 
cask,  and  said,  "This  barrel  is  like  man's  heart,  full  of  evil  stuff; 
and  there  are  some  people  who  say  that,  if  sin  is  within  y..u.  it  may 
just  as  well  come  out."     "  No,"  said   the   -peaker,   "it  is  not  so; 
now  here  is  this  whisky  that  is  in   the  barrel   under  my  foot  :  it  is 
a  bad   thing,  it  is  a  damnable  thing,  it  is  a  <lcvili>h  thing,   hut   a> 
long  as  it  is  kept  tightly  bunged  up  in  the  barrel,  it   certainly   will 
not  do  the  hurt  that  it  will  if  it  is  ta  'he   li<)ii 

and  sold  out  to  the  drunkards  of  tin-  neighbou:  nding  th--m 

home   to  beat   their  wives,  or  kill   their  children.      - 
your  sins  in  your  own  heart,  they  will  be  evil  and  d« 
will    damn  you  for  them:   but    they  \\ill    not  do  so   much    hurt   to 
other  people,  al  -.  as  if  they  are  Men  in  pub. 

his  foot  again  on  the  barrel,  the    preacher  Bald,    "  S 
to    pass    this    ca>k    over    the    l»ouiidari«->   of   the   count  r- 

custom-house  oilicer  comes,  u  i  •••••  duty  upon  iUcoi. 


TIIK    D8B8    <>F    ANECDOTES   AND   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

You  say  that  you  will  not  let  any  of  the  whisky  get  out ;  but  the 
otH.vr  'tells  vim  that,  he  cannot  allow  it  to  pass.  So,  if  it  were 
possible  for  us  to  abstain  from  outward  sin,  yet,  since  the  heart  is 
full  of  all  manner  of  evil,  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  pass  the 
frontiers  «>f  heaven,  and  to  be  found  in  that  holy  and  happy  place." 
That  I  thought  to  be  somewhat  of  a  life-like  illustration,  and  a 
capital  way  of  teaching  truth,  although  I  should  not  like  always 
to  have  a  whisky-barrel  for  a  pulpit,  for  fear  the  head  might 
fall  in,  and  I  might  fall  in,  too. 

I  >hould  not  recommend  any  of  you  to  be  so  life-like  in  your 
ministry  as  that  notable  French  priest,  who,  addressing  his  congre 
gation,  said,  "  As  to  the  Magdalenes,  and  those  who  commit  the 
sins  of  the  flesh,  such  persons  are  very  common  ;  they  abound  even 
in  this  church;  and  I  am  going  to  throw  this  mass-book  at  a 
woman  who  is  a  Magdalene,"  whereupon  all  the  women  in  the 
place  bent  down  their  heads.  So  the  priest  said,  "No.  surely,  you 
are  not  all  Magdalenes ;  I  hardly  thought  that  was  the  case ;  but 
you  see  how  your  sin  finds  you  outl"  Nor  should  I  even  recommend 
you  to  follow  the  example  of  the  clergyman,  who,  when  a  collection 
was  to  be  made  for  lighting  and  warming  the  church,  after  he  had 
preached  some  time,  blew  out  the  candles  on  both  sides  of  the 
pulpit,  saying  that  the  collection  was  for  the  lights  and  the  fires, 
and  he  did  not  require  any  light,  for  he  did  not  read  his  sermon, 
"  but,"  he  added,  "  when  Roger  gives  out  the  Psalm  presently,  you 
will  want  a  light  to  see  your  books ;  so  the  candles  are  for  your- 
sehvs.  And  as  for  the  stove,  I  do  not  need  its  heat,  for  my 
exercise  in  preaching  is  sufficient  to  keep  me  warm  ;  therefore  you 
see  that  the  collection  is  wholly  for  yourselves  on  this  occasion. 
Nobody  can  say  that  the  clergy  are  collecting  for  themselves  this 
time,  for  on  this  Sunday  it  is  wholly  for  your  own  selves."  I 
thought  the  man  was  a  fool  for  making  such  remarks,  though  I 
find  that  his  conduct  has  been  referred  to  as  being  a  very  excellent 
instance  of  boldness  in  preaching. 

There   is  a  story  told  about  myself,   which,  like  very  many  of 

ilei  told  about  me,   is  a  story  in  two  senses.      It    is     said 

that,    in    order    to    show  the    way  in  which    men    backslide,    I 

lid   down  the  banisters  of    the  pulpit.       I  only   mention 

in    i Kissing,    because  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that,    at    the 
time    the  story  was  told,  my  pulpit  was  fixed  in  the  wall,  and 

A  as  no  banister,  so  that  the  reverend  fool  (which  he  would 

been    if    he  had    done  what  people  said)    could  not  have 
the  antic,  if  he  had  been  inclined  to  attempt  it.     But 


THE   r>i-:s  (H    AM;CI>I  i'i  i>   AM*   n.i.r>  1 1:  \  i  \* 

the  anecdote,  although  it  is  n..t   tru--.  all   the  purposes  of 

the  life-likeness  I  have  tried  to  doeribe. 

You   probably   recollect  tin-    instance  of  Whiu-hYld  depicting 
the  blind  man,  with  his  dog,  walking  mi  the  brink  of   a 
and   his  foot  almost  slipping  over  t!i  .       I 

scription  was  so  graphic,  and  the  illu>t  ration  so  vivid  and  lik-like, 
that  Lord  Chesterfield  sprang  up,  and  exclaimed.  "  (  .  ;  he's 

gonel"  but  Whitefield  answered,  "No,  mv  lord,  \\<-  i-  u<>t  quite 
gone;  let  us  hope  that  he  may  yet  be  saved."  Thru  he  \\.-nt 
on  to  speak  of  the  blind  man  as  being  led  by  hi-  \hich 

is  only  like  a  dog,  showing  that  a  man  led  only  by  iva«,"ii  i-  ivady  to 
fall  into  hell.  How  vividly  one  would  set-  the  iion.-y 

set  forth  in  the  story  told  by  onr  venerable  friend.  Mr.    i; 
of  a  man  who,  when  he    lay  a-dying.  would  put  his  im.n'-y  in  his 
mouth   because   he  loved  it  so,  and   wanted  to    take 
with     him  I        How    strikingly    is     the     non-utility    of      worldly 
wealth,  as    a  comfort  to   us  in  our  last   days,  brought  hefoiv  us 
by  the  narrative   in  which  good  .Jeremiah  Burrmigh.-- 
a  miser  who  had  his  money  bags  laid  near  his  hand  on  his  dying 
bed  I       He   kept    taking   them    up,    and    saying.     "Mu-t    1  l'-ave 
you?     Must  I  leave  you?     Have   I  lived  all  these  years  for  you, 
and   now -must   I    leave   you?"     And  so  he  died.     TIu-iv  is  a  tale 
told  of  another,  who  had  many  pains  in  his  death,  and  especially 
the  great  pain  of    a    disturbed    Conscience.       H<-  also   had   his 
moneybags  brought,  one  by  one,  with  his  mortgages,  and  bonds, 
and   deeds,    and   putting  them    near  his  heart,    he    sighed,   and 
said,   "These  won't  do;  these  won't  do  ;    th<  -    take 

them  away  I     What  poor  things  they  all   are  when    I   m<^; 
comfort  in  my  dying  moments!" 

How  distinctly  love  to  Christ  is  brought  out   in  ti 
John  Lambert,  fastened  to  the  >tak.-.  and   burning  t<>  d«-ath.y«-t 
clapping  his  hands  as  he  was  burning,  and  crying  out,  "  None  hut 
Christ!     None    but   Christ!"    until    his   n.-th.-r    extivn. 
burned,  and  he  fell  from  the  chains  into  the  tire-,  still  exclaiming 
in    the   midst  of    the    flames,    "  None   but    Ohl 
ChristI"       How  clearly    the    truth  ^tands  nut    bd 
you   hear  such  stories   as  th.-s.-!       You   can   ivali/.e    it    aln 
well  as  if   the  incident  happem-d  before  yottl 
you  can    see   the    folly   of  misunderstanding   between    Obi 
in  Mr.  Jay's  storv  of  two  men   who   were  walking  from  opposite 
directions  on  a  foggy  night!      Kadi    Raw    what   he  thou- 
a  terrible  monster  moving  towanU   him,    and  making  bil 


NIK    I'SKS    OF    ANECDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

beat  with  terror;  as  they  came  nearer  to  each  other,  they 
found  that  the  dreadful  monsters  were  brothers.  So,  men  of 
different  denominations  are  often  afraid  of  one  another  ;  but  when 
_,'ct  close  to  each  other,  and  know  each  other's  hearts,  they 
find  out  that  they  are  brethren  after  all.  The  story  of  the  negro 
and  his  master  well  illustrates  the  need  of  beginning  at  the 
I H-ii'i lining  in  heavenly  things,  and  not  meddling  with  the  deeper 
points  of  our  holy  religion  till  we  have  learned  its  elements 
thoroughly.  A  poor  negro  was  labouring  hard  to  bring  his  master 
to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  was  urging  him  to  exercise  faith 
in  Christ,  when  he  excused  himself  because  he  could  not  under 
stand  the  doctrine  of  election.  "  Ah  !  Massa,"  said  the  negro, 
''don't  you  know  what  comes  before  de  Epistle  to  de  Romans'? 
You  must  read  de  Book  de  right  way ;  de  doctrine  ob  election  is 
in  Romans,  and  dere  is  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  first. 
You  are  only  in  Matthew  yet ;  dat  is  about  repentance ;  and  when 
you  get  to  John,  you  will  read  where  de  Lord  Jesus  Christ  said 
dat  God  so  loved  de  world,  dat  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son, 
dat  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  hab  ever- 
la^ting  life."  So,  brethren,  you  can  say  to  your  hearers,  "  You 
will  do  better  by  reading  the  four  Gospels  first  than  by  beginning 
to  read  in  Romans ;  first  study  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John, 
and  then  you  can  go  on  to  the  Epistles." 

But  I  must  not  keep  on  giving  you  illustrations,  because  so 
many  will  suggest  themselves.  I  have  given  you  sufficient  to  show 
that  they  do  make  our  preaching  vivid  and  life-like  ;  therefore, 
the  more  you  have  of  them,  the  better.  At  the  same  time, 
gentlemen,  I  must  warn  you  against  the  danger  of  having  too 
many  anecdotes  in  any  one  sermon.  You  ought,  perhaps,  to  have 
a  dish  of  salad  on  the  table  ;  but  if  you  ask  your  friends  to  dinner, 
and  give  them  nothing  but  salad,  they  will  not  fare  very  well, 
and  will  not  care  to  come  to  your  house  again. 

Thirdly,  anecdotes  and  illustrations  may  be  used  to  explain  either 

doctrines  or  duties  to  dull  understandings.    They  may,  in  fact,  be  the 

\\-ry  best  form  of  exposition.     A  preacher  should  instance,   and 

illustrate,  and  exemplify  his  subject,  so  that  his  hearers  may  have 

luaintauce  with  the  matter  he  is  bringing  before  them.     If 

a  man  attempted  to  give  me  a  description  of  a  piece  of  machinery, 

lu-  w.nild  possibly  fail  to  make  me  comprehend  what  it  was  like ;' 

he  will   have    the  goodness  to    let  me    see  a    drawing  of 

various  sections,  and  then  of  the  whole  machine,  I  will,  some- 


THE    USES   OF    ANECDoTKS    AND    I  I.I.I  >TK  \  1'IONS.  39 

how  or  other,  by  hook  or  by  crook,  make  out   how  it  works.     The 
pictorial  representation  of  a  thing  is  always  a  much  more-  powerful 
means  of  instruction  than  any  mere  verbal  description  ever  could 
be.     It  is  just  in  this  way  that  anecdotes  and  illustrations  are  so 
helpful  to  our  hearers.     For  instance,  take  this  anecdote  as  illus 
trating  the  text,  "Thou,  when  thou  praycst,  enter  into  th- 
aiul  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in 
secret."    A  little  boy  used  to  go  up  into  a  hay-loft  to  pray  ;  but  he 
found  that,  sometimes,  persons  came  up,  and  disturbed  him;  th 
fore,  the  next  time  he  climbed  into  the  loft,  he  pulled  the  ladder 
up  after  him.     Telling  this  story,  you  might  explain  how  the  boy 
thus  entered  into  his  closet,  and  shut  the  door.     The  meaning  is 
not  so  much  the  literal  entrance  into  a  closet,  or  the  shutting  of  the 
door,  as  the  getting  away  from  earthly  sources  of  distraction,  pull 
ing  up  the  ladder  after  us,  and  keeping  out  anything  that   might 
come  in  to  hinder  our  secret  devotions.     I  wish  we   could  al" 
pull  the  ladder  up  after  us  when   we  retire  for   private  prayer; 
but  many  things  try  to  climb  that  ladder.     The  devil  himself  will 
come  up  to  disturb  us  if  he  can  ;  and  li  into  the  hay-loft 

without  any  ladder. 

Whatacapitalexpositionof  thefifthcoinmandmentwM  that  whi 
was  given  by  Corporal  Trim,  when  he  was  asked,  "What  dost  thou 
mean  by  honouring  thy  father  and  thy  mother  !  "  and  he  answered, 
«  Please,  your  honour,  it  is  allowing  them  a  shilling  a  week  out  of  my 
pay  when  they  grow  old."    That  was  an  admirable  explanation  of  th- 
meaning  of  the  text.     Then,  if  you  are  trying  to  show  how  we 
are  to  be  doers  of  the  Word,  and  not  hearers  only,  there  is  a  story 
of  a  woman  who,  when  asked  by  the  minister  what  he  had  said  c 
Sunday,  replied  that  she  did  not  remember  the  sermon  ;  but  ] 
touched  her  conscience,  for  when  she  got  home  she  burned 
bushel,  which  was  short  measure.    There  is  another  story  *  Inch  als- 
goes  to  show  that  the  gospel  may  be  useful  even  to   heal 
forget    what   they  have    heard.      A  woman    is   called  upon  by  I 
minister  on  the  Mor.dav,  and  he  (imls   her  washing  wool  in  a  81 
holding  it  under  the  pump.      II-    asks    her,  "  ll,.w  dk 
lust  Sabbath's  discourses!"  and  •)  thai  khey  did  her  much 

<rood.        "Well,    what    was    the    text  V      She    does    QOl     I 

"  What  was  the  subject!  "     "  Ah  !  sir,  it  is  quite 

says  the  poor  woman.    Does  she  remember  any  ot  the  I 

were  made!     No,  they  are  all  gone.     "Well   th,n    M:,,,,    say. 

the  minister,  "it  could  not  ha  n  much  good. 

it  had  done  her  a  great  deal  of  good  ;  and   she   explained 


40  THE    USES   OF   ANECDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS, 

by  saying,  "  I  will  tell  you,  sir,  how  it  is;  I  put  this  wool  in  the 
sieve  under  the  pump,  I  pump  on  it,  and  all  the  water  runs  through 
the  sieve,  but  then  it  washes  the  wool.  So  it  is  with  your  sermon ; 
it  comes  into  my  heart,  and  then  it  runs  right  through  my  poor 
memory,  which  is  like  a  sieve,  but  it  washes  me  clean,  sir."  You 
might  talk  for  a  long  while  about  the  cleansing  and  sanctifying 
power  of  the  Word,  and  it  would  not  make  such  an  impression  upon 
your  hearers  as  that  simple  story  would. 

What  finer  exposition  of  the  text  "Weep  with  them  that  weep," 
can  you  have  than  this  pretty  anecdote  ?  "  Mother,"  said  little 
Annie,  "  I  cannot  make  out  why  poor  Widow  Brown  likes  me  to 
go  in  to  see  her ;  she  says  I  do  comfort  her  so  ;  but,  mother,  I 
cannot  say  anything  to  comfort  her,  and  as  soon  as  she  begins 
crying,  I  put  my  arms  round  her  neck,  and  I  cry,  too,  and  she  says 
that  that  comforts  her."  And  so  it  does  ;  that  is  the  very  essence 
of  the  comfort,  the  sympathy,  the  fellow-feeling  that  moved  the 
little  girl  to  weep  with  the  weeping  widow.  Mr.  Hervey  thus 
illustrates  the  great  truth  of  the  different  appearance  of  sin  to  the 
eye  of  God  and  the  eye  of  man.  He  says  that  you  may  take  a 
small  insect,  and  with  the  tiniest  needle  make  a  puncture  in  it  so 
minute  that  you  can  scarcely  see  it  with  the  naked  eye  ;  but  when 
you  look  at  it  through  a  microscope,  you  see  an  enormous  rent, 
out  of  which  there  flows  a  purple  stream,  making  the  creature 
seem  to  you  as  though  it  had  been  smitten  with  the  axe  that 
killeth  an  ox.  It  is  but  a  defect  of  our  vision  that  we  cannot  see 
things  correctly ;  but  the  microscope  reveals  them  as  they  really 
are.  Thus  you  may  explain  to  your  hearers  how  God's  microscopic 
eye  sees  sin  in  its  true  aspects.  Suppose  that  you  wanted  to  set 
forth  the  character  of  Caleb,  who  followed  the  Lord  fully;  it  would 
greatly  help  many  of  your  people  if  you  said  that  the  name  Caleb 
signifies  a  dog,  and  then  showed  how  a  dog  follows  his  master. 
There  is  his  owner  on  horseback,  riding  along  the  miry  roads; 
but  the  dog  keeps  as  close  to  him  as  he  can,  no  matter  how  much 
mud  and  dirt  are  splashed  upon  him,  and  not  heeding  the  kicks  he 
might  get  from  the  horse's  heels.  Even  so  should  we  follow  the 
Lord.  If  you  wish  to  exemplify  the  shortness  of  time,  you  might 
bring  in  the  poor  sempstress,  with  her  little  piece  of  candle, 
ling  away  to  get  her  work  done  before  the  light  went  out. 

Many  pivarhers  find  the  greatest  difficulty  in  getting  suitable 
metaphors  to  set  forth  simple  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
There  is  a  capital  anecdote  of  an  idiot,  who  was  asked  by  the 
minister,  who  was  trying  to  instruct  him,  whether  he  had  a  soul 


THK    USK>    UK    A\r.<    lH>n->     \M'     II. 1. 1- I  41 

To  the    utter  consternation  of   his  kind  teacher,  he  replied,  " 
I   have  no    soul."      The   pivach-T    said    lie    \\  .v   surpri- 

after  he  had  been  taught  for  years,  that   he  did  not  know  !»••: 
than  that  ;  but   the  poor  fellow  thus  explained  him-elt',  "  I    had  a 
soul  once,  hut  I  lost  it;  and  .Jesus  Christ   i-aiiu-  and  found  it,  and 
now  I  let  him  keep  it,  for  it  is  his,  it  does  not  belon. 
longer."      That  is    a  fine  picture    of    the   way   of    salvation 
simple  faith  iu    the   substitution  of  th«-   Lord  .1          < 
the  smallest  child  in  the  congregation  might  be  able  to  under-taml 
it  through  the  story  of  the  poor  idiot. 

Fourthly,  tliereis  a  kind  of  reason  in<i  in  anecdote  an<l  illustrations, 
which  is  very  clear  to  illogical  minds  ;  au«l  many  of  our 
unfortunately,   have  such   minds,  yet   they  can   underhand  illus 
trative    instances    and   stubborn    facts.      Truthful   auee. 
facts,  and  facts  are  stubborn  things.     Instances,  when  sutliciently 
multiplied,  as  we  know  by  the  inductive  philosophy,  prove  a  point. 
Two  instances  may  not  prove  it;  but  twenty  may  prove  it  to  a 
demonstration.     Take  the   very    important    matter  of   an 
prayer.     You   can    prove  that   God    answers   pray.-r    by  <|u  I 
anecdote  after  anecdote,  that  you  know  to  be  authentic,  of  instai 
in  which  God  has  really  heard  and  answered  pra     r      T  ,        :hat 
capital  little  book  by  Mr.  Prime  on  the  Power  of  Prayer;  ti. 
1  believe  you  have  the  truth  upon  this  subject   demonsfa 
clearly  as  you  could  have  it  in  any  proposition  in  Kndid.     I  think 
that,  if  such  a  number  of  facts  could  be  instanced  in  connection 
with   any  question   relating  to  geology  or  astronomy,   the   point 
would  be  regarded  as  settl'ed.     The  writer  brings  >uch  abundant 
proofs  of  God's  having    heard   prayer,  that    even  men   who    rcjec 
inspiration  ought,  at  least,  to  acknowledge  that  this  is  a  mar* 
phenomenon  for  which  they  cannot  account  by  any  other 
tion  than  the  one  which  proclaims  that  then  vho  i 

in  heaven,  and  who  hath  respect  unto  the  cry  of   bifl 
the  earth. 

I  have  heard  of  some  persons  who  havfl  had  objectlOM  1 
for  the  conversion  of  their  children  on  th-  ground  thai 
save  his  own  without  any  effort  on  our  part.      I  r- -m- 
one  man  wince  who  held  this  view,  by  telling  him  of  a  tati, 
would  never  teach  his  child    to  pray,  01  have    him  instructed   even 

as  to  the  meaning  of  prayer,     Bethought  it 

such  work  ou.ht  to  be  left  toGcxT-  Holy  B^ni     i       -v  fell 

down,  and  broke  his  leg,  and  had  to  b.  t  ;  and  all  the 


42  THE    USES   OF   ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

while  the  surgeon  was  amputating  it,  the  boy  was  cursing  and 
swearing  in  the  most  frightful  manner.  The  good  surgeon  said 
to  the  father,  "You  see,  you  would  not  teach  your  boy  to  pray, 
but  the  devil  evidently  had  no  objection  to  teach  him  to  swear." 
That  is  the  mischief  of  it ;  if  we  do  not  try  our  best  to  bring  our 
children  to  Christ,  there  is  another  who  will  do  his  worst  to  drag 
them  down  to  hell.  A  mother  once  said  to  her  sick  son,  who  was 
about  to  die,  and  was  in  a  dreadful  state  of  mind,  "My  boy,  I  am 
sorry  you  are  in  such  trouble ;  I  am  sure  I  never  taught  you  any 
hurt."  "  No,  mother,"  he  answered,  "  but  you  never  taught  me 
any  good ;  and  therefore  there  was  room  for  all  sorts  of  evil  to 
get  into  me."  All  these  stories  will  be  to  many  people  the 
>  erv  best  kind  of  argument  that  you  could  possibly  use  with  them. 
You  bring  to  them  facts,  and  these  facts  reach  their  conscience, 
even  though  it  is  imbedded  in  several  inches  of  callousness. 

I  do  not  know  of  any  reasoning  that  would  explain  the  need 
of  submission  to  the  will  of  God  better  than  the  telling  of  the 
story,  which  Mr.  Gilpin  gives  us  in  his  Life,  of  his  being  called 
in  to  pray  with  a  woman  whose  boy  was  very  ill.  The  good 
man  asked  that  God  would,  if  it  were  his  will,  restore  the  dear 
child  to  life  and  health,  when  the  mother  interrupted  him,  and 
said,  "  No,  I  cannot  agree  to  such  a  prayer  as  that ;  I  cannot  put 
it  in  that  shape,  it  must  be  God's  will  to  restore  him.  I  cannot 
bear  that  my  child  should  die ;  pray  that  he  may  live  whether  it 
is  God's  will  or  not."  He  answered,  "  Woman,  I  cannot  pray 
that  prayer,  but  it  is  answered;  your  child  will  recover,  but  you 
will  live  to  rue  the  day  that  you  made  such  a  request."  Twenty 
years  after,  there  was  a  woman  carried  away  in  a  fainting  fit  from 
under  a  drop  at  Tyburn,  for  her  son  had  lived  long  enough  to 
bring  himself  to  the  gallows  by  his  crimes.  The  mother's  wicked 
prayer  had  been  heard,  and  God  had  answered  it.  So,  if  you 
want  to  prove  the  power  of  the  gospel,  do  not  go  on  expending 
words  to  no  purpose,  but  tell  the  stories  of  cases  you  have  met 
with  that  illustrate  the  truth  you  are  enforcing,  for  such  anecdotes 
will  convince  your  hearers  as  no  other  kind  of  reasoning  can.  I 
think  that  is  clear  enough  to  every  one  of  you. 

Anecdotes  are  useful,  also,  because  they  often  appeal  very 
forcibly  to  human  nature.  In  order  to  rebuke  those  who  profane 
the  Sabbath,  tell  the  story  of  the  gentleman  who  had  seven 
sovereigns,  and  who  met  with  a  poor  fellow,  to  whom  he  gave 
«Lst  out  of  the  seven,  and  then  the  wicked  wretch  turned  round 
and  robbed  him  of  the  seventh.  How  clearly  that  sets  forth  the 


•11 11-;    i  .-i  •  n>   AM>    11. 1. 1  BTB  \  i : 

ingratitude  of  our  sinful  race  in   deprivii.  :'  that  on 

out  of  the  seven  which  lie  has  set  apart  for  his  own  >rrvi<v  ! 
storv  appeals  to  nature,  too.     Two  or  three  boys  come  round  one 
of  their  companions,  and  they  say  to  him.  k  L  t    u*  go  and  get 
some  cherries  out  of  your  father's  garden."     "  N  plies. 

"I  cannot  steal,  and  my  father  dors  not   wish   those  chen 
be  picked."     "  Oh  1  but  then  your  father  is  so  kind,  and  he 
beats  you."     "  Ah  I  I  know  that  is  true,"  ans\\ 
that  is  the  very  reason  why  I  would  not  steal  his  cherries."     This 
would  show  that  the  grace  and  goodness  of  (i«.d   do  not  lead  his 
children  to  licentiousness  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  restrain  them 
from  sin.      This  Story,  also,  appeal*   to   human   nature,  and   shows 
that  the  fathers  of  the  Church  are  not  always  to  be  depended  upon 
as  fountains  of  authority.     A  nobleman  had  heard  of   a  0 
very  old  man,  who  lived  in  a  villain-,  and  he  sought  out  and  found 
him,  and  ascertained  that   he  was  seventy  years  of  age.      lie  was 
talking  with  him,  supposing  him  to  he  the  oldest    inhabitant,  when 
the  man  said,  u  Oh  !  no,  sir,  I  am  not  the  oldest;  I  am  not  the 
father  of  the   village;  there   is  an   older  one,   my   father,  who   is 
still  alive."     So,  I   have  heard  of  some  who  have  said  that  they 
turned  away  from  "the  fathers  "of  the  Church  to  tb 
fathers,    that   is,    away    from    what    are    commonly    called   "the 
patristic    fathers  ",  back   to  the  apo>tk-,  who  are   the  true  fathers 
and  grandfathers  of  the  Christian  Church. 

Sometimes,  anecdotes  have  force  in  them  on  account  of  their 
appealing  to  the  sense  of   the    ludicrous.     Of  course,   1    mu>t   U> 
very  careful  here,  for  it  is  a  sort  of  tradition  of  the  fathers  that 
it  is  wrong  to  laugh  on  Sundays.      The  eleventh  commandment  is, 
that  we  are   to   love  one  another,  and   then,   according  to  some 
people,  the  twelfth  is    "  Thou  >halt    pull  a  long  face  ..n  Sui 
I  must  confess  that  1  would  rather  hear  people  laugh  than  1  would 
see  them  asleep  in  the  house  of  (Jod;   and  I  would  rath 
truth   into   them   through   the   medium  of   ridicule   than   1    would 
have  the  truth   neglected,  or  leave  the  people  to  perish   t: 
lack  of    reception  of    the  truth.      I    do  believe    in    my    heart 
there  may  be   as  much   holiness  in  a   laugh  AS  in  I  that. 

sometimes,   to    laugh  is   the  better  thing  of  the    two,    fof    i 
weep,  and   b-  munimriiii:,  and   repining,  and   thinking  all  sort 
bitter  thoughts   anainst   God;   while,  at  another  time.   1 

the  lau.'h  of  sarcasm  against  rin,  Ml  ranuM 

In  the  defence  of  the  truth.     1  do  not  know  why  ridicuteii  * 

niven    up    to    Satan   a 


44          mi:  i/sr:s  OF  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

be  employed  l>v  us  as  a  weapon  against  him.  I  will  venture  to  affirm 
that  the  Reformation  owed  almost  as  much  to  the  sense  of  the 
ridiculous  in  human  nature  as  to  anything  else,  and  that  those 
humorous  squibs  and  caricatures,  that  were  issued  by  the  friends 
of  Luther,  did  more  to  open  the  eyes  of  Germany  to  the  abomi 
nations  of  the  priesthood  than  the  more  solid  and  ponderous 
arguments  against  Romanism.  I  know  no  reason  why  we  should 
not,  on  suitable  occasions,  try  the  same  style  of  reasoning.  "  It 
is  a  dangerous  weapon,"  it  will  be  said,  "  and  many  men  will  cut 
their  fingers  with  it."  Well,  that  is  their  own  look-out;  but  I  do 
not  know  why  we  should  be  so  particular  about  their  cutting  their 
fingers  if  they  can,  at  the  same  time,  cut  the  throat  of  sin,  and 
do  serious  damage  to  the  great  adversary  of  souls. 

Here  is  a  story  that  I  should  not  mind  telling  on  a  Sunday  for 
the  benefit  of  certain  people,  who  are  good  at  hearing  sermons 
and  attending  prayer-meetings,  but  who  are  very  bad  hands  at 
business.  They  never  work  on  Sundays  because  they  never  work 
on  any  day  of  the  week ;  they  forget  that  part  of  the  command 
ment  which  says,  "Six  days  shalt  thou  labour,"  which  is  just  as 
binding  as  the  other  part,  "  The  seventh  day  is  the  sabbath  of 
the  Lord  thy  God  :  in  it  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work."  To  these 
people  who  never  labour  because  they  are  so  heavenly-minded/ 1 
would  tell  the  story  of  a  certain  monk,  who  entered  a  monastery, 
but  who  would  not  work  in  the  fields,  or  the  garden,  or  at  making 
clothes,  or  anything  else,  because,  as  he  told  the  superior,  he  was 
a  spiritually-minded  monk.  He  wondered,  when  the  dinner-hour 
approached,  that  there  came  to  him  no  summons  from  the  re- 
fee  tory.  So  he  went  down  to  the  prior,  and  said,  "  Don't  the 
brethren  eat  here?  Are  you  not  going  to  have  any  dinner?" 
The  prior  said,  " We  do,  because  we  are  carnal;  but  you  are  so 
spiritual  that  you  do  not  work,  and  therefore  you  do  not  require 
to  eat ;  that  is  why  we  did  not  call  you.  The  law  of  this  monastery 
is  that,  if  any  man  will  not  work,  neither  shall  he  eat." 

That  is  a  good  story  of  the  boy  in  Italy  who  had  his  Testament 

/'••I,  and   who  said  to   the  gendarme,  "  Why  do  you  seize  this 

Is  it  a  bad  book  f  "     «  Yes,"  was  the  answer.     «  Are  you 

sure  the  book  is  bad  ?  "  he  enquired  ;  and  again  the  reply  was, 

"Then,  why  do  you  not  seize  the  Author  of  it  if  it  is  a 

That  was  a  fine  piece  of  sarcasm  at  those  who  had 

a  hatred  of  the  Scriptures,  and  yet  professed  to   have   love  to 

Hiat  is  another  good  story  of  our  friend  the  Irishman 

who,  when  l,e  was  asked  by  the  priest  what  warrant  an  ignorant 


Tin:    UM>   01    AMBODOTXa    AM>    UXU8TRAT1 


man  such  as  he  was  had  for  ivading  the    Bii 

I  have  a  search-warrant  ;   for  ii  --arch    the  Scriptuivs;  for 

:n  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal    life!  and  they  are  they  which 
testify  of  me.'  " 

Tliis  story  would  not  be  amus,  1   thin'  t  of  ridienloui 

arsnunent  showing  what  power  the   g..xp«-l  ought    to  1.  tin- 

Inunan  mind.      Dr.  Moffat  tells  us  ,,f  a  certain  Ka:i':  ,  who  came  t 

him,  one  day,  saying  that  the  New  Testament,  which  the  mission! 

bad  given  him  a  week  before,  had  spoiled  his  dog.      The  man  • 
that  his  dog  had  been  a  very  good  hunting  dog,  but  that  he  had  torn 
the  Testament  to  pieces,  and  eaten   it  up.  and  now   he  v> 
spoiled.  "Never  mind,"  said  Dr.  Moffat,  "  I  will  give  you  another 
Testament."      "Oh!"  said  the  man,  "it  is  not   that   that  tn.ubU- 
me  I  do  not  mind  the  dog  spoiling  the  hook,  for  I  couldhnyanol 
but  the  book  has  spoiled  the  dog."      "  How  is  that  I  »  enquired  the 
missionary;  and  the  Kaffir  replied,  "  The  dog  will  be  -t  n 
me  now,  because  he  has  eaten  the  Word  of  <;.»!,  and  that 
make  him  love  his  enemies,  so  that  he  will  be  of  no  good  for  hunt 
ing."     The  man  supposed  that   not  even  a  dog  OOnl 
New  Testament  without  being  sweetened  in  temper  thereby  : 
ii  in  truth  what  ought  to  be  the  case  with  all  who  feed  upon 
gospel   Of   Christ.      I  should   not.   hesitate  to    tell   that    rtOI 
Dr   Moffat,  and  I  should,  of  course,  use  it  to  show  that,  VN 
man  has  received  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  there  ought   to  1 
great  change  in  him,  and  he  ought  never  to  be  of  any  use  t 
master  again.  e  ^  ... 

\Vhen  the  priests  were  trying  to  pervert  the  native 
to  Romanism,  they  had  a  line  picture  which  tip   hoped  won! 
convince  the  people  of  the  excellence  of  the  Church   . 
There  were  certain  dead  logs  of  wood:  who,,,  were  they  t 
sent?     They   were   the  heretics,  wl,,.   were  to  gomto 
And  who  were  these  small  l.ranches  of  1 

faithful.    Who  were  the  larger  ones!    They  were  the  pn. 

And  who  were  the  nextl     They  wew  .1 ardinata. 

was  the  trunk  of  the  tree  t     Oh,  that  mi 
root,  whom  did  that  set  forth  t     Oh,  the  root* 

So  the  poor  natives  said,  "Well,  we  do  not  know  a,, 
the    trunk,  or  the    branch*;  but  we    1 

«e«  to  .tick  to  that,  and  not  give  it  np.               '<— 
we  have  Christ,  we  may  laugh  to  acorn  aU  the  pwte 

delusions  of  m.  n. 

Tlu-  y  make  us  laugh,  but  they  i, 


4b  THE    USES    OF   ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


tliroiiirli  the  heart,  and  lay  it  dead  ;  and  they  may,  there 
fore,  lawfullv  be  used  as  weapons  with  which  we  may  go  forth  to 
fight  the  Lord's  battles. 

Fifthly,  another  use  of  anecdotes  and  illustrations  lies  in  the 
fact  that  they  help  the  memory  to  grasp  the  truth.  There  is  a  story 
told  —  though  I  will  not  vouch  for  the  truth  of  it  —  of  a  certain 
countryman,  who  had  been  persuaded  by  some  one  that  all 
Londoners  were  thieves  ;  and,  therefore,  on  coming  to  London  for 
the  first  time,  he  tried  to  secure  his  watch  by  putting  it  into  his 
waistcoat  pocket,  and  then  covering  it  all  over  with  fish-hooks. 
"  Now,"  he  thought,  "  if  any  gentleman  tries  to  get  my  watch,  he 
will  remember  it."  The  story  says  that,  as  he  was  walking  along, 
he  desired  to  know  the  time  himself,  and  put  his  own  hand  into 
his  pocket,  forgetting  all  about  the  fish-hooks.  The  effect  pro 
duced  upon  him  can  better  be  imagined  than  described.  Now,  it 
seems  to  me  that  a  sermon  should  always  be  like  that  country 
man's  pocket,  full  of  fish-hooks,  so  that,  if  anybody  comes  in  to 
listen  to  it,  he  will  get  some  forget-me-not,  some  remembrancer, 
fasti-lied  in  his  ear,  and  it  may  be,  in  his  heart  and  conscience. 
Let  him  drop  in  just  at  the  end  of  the  discourse,  there  should  be 
something  at  the  close  that  will  strike  and  stick.  As  when  we 
walk  in  our  farmer  friends'  fields,  there  are  certain  burrs  that  are 
sure  to  cling  to  our  clothes  ;  and  brush  as  we  may,  some  of  the 
relics  of  the  fields  remain  upon  our  garments,  so  there  ought  to  be 
some  burr  in  every  sermon  that  will  stick  to  those  who  hear  it. 

What  do  you  remember  best  in  the  discourses  you  heard  years 
ago  I  I  will  venture  to  say  that  it  is  some  anecdote  that  the 
preacher  related.  It  may  possibly  be  some  pithy  sentence  ;  but  it 
is  more  probable  that  it  is  some  striking  story  which  was  told  in 
the  course  of  the  sermon.  Rowland  Hill,  a  little  while  before  he 
died,  was  visiting  an  old  frien.l,  who  said  to  him,  "Mr.  Hill,  it  is 
now  sixty-five  years  since  I  first  heard  you  preach  ;  but  I  remember 
your  text,  and  a  part  of  your  sermon."  "Well,"  asked  the 
pn-arher,  "what  part  of  the  sermon  do  you  recollect?"  His 
frien.l  answered,  "  You  said  that,  some  people,  when  they  went  to 
hear  a  sermon,  were  very  squeamish  about  the  delivery  of  the 
preacher.  Then  you  said,  <  Supposing  you  went  to  hear  the  will 
of  one  of  your  relatives  read,  and  you  were  expecting  a  legacy 
from  him  ;  you  would  hardly  think  of  criticizing  the  manner  in 
which  the  lawyer  ivad  the  will  ;  but  you  would  be  all  attention  to 
hear  whether  anything  was  left  to  you,  and  if  so,  how  much  :  and 


THE   USES   OF   AMXODOTKB   AMD    IU.IMU.UI 

that  is  the  way  to  hear   the  goapeL'"     Now.  the   man   would 
have  recollected  that  for  sixty-five  yean  if  Mr.  Hill  had  not  mil 
the  matter  in    that  illustrative    form.      If  ]lc   ha,l    ,:l;  :,    u  ; 
friends,  you  must  listen  to  the  go-  :in<l   not 

merely  for  the  charms  of  the  preacher's  oratory,  <>r  th  .tful 

soaring  periods  which  gratify  your  ears,"  if   he   had   put  it  I: 
very  pretty  manner  in  which  some  people  can  do  the  thin-:,  I  will 
be  bouiv!  to  say  that  the  man  would  have  remembered  it  i 
a  duck  recollects   the  last  time  it  went  into  the   water,   ao 
longer  ;  for  it  would  have  been  so  common  to  h  :  Q  in  that 

way;   but  putting  the  truth  in  the  striking  manner  that  he  di 
was  remembered  for  sixty-five  years. 

An  American  gentleman  related  the  following  anecdote,  which 
just  answers  the  purpose  I  have  in  view,  so  I  will  pass  it  <  ; 
lie  said,  "When  I  was  a  boy,  I  used  to  hear  the  story  of 
who  lived  to  a  great  age,  and  became  very  wealihv,  so  that  h 
an  object  of  envy  to  all  who  knew  him.     His  life*  as  all  lives  will, 
drew  to  a  close ;  but  before  he  passed  away,  feelim:  some 
benefit  the  members   of  his   craft,  he  gave  out    word  that,  on  a 
certain  day,  he  would  be  happy  to  communicate  to  all  tin-  tailor* 
of  the   neighbourhood   the  secret    by   which   they   mi-Jit    become 
wealthy.     A  great  number  of   knights  of  the  thimble  came,   and 
while   they   waited    in    anxious    silence    to    hear    the    important 
revelation,    he    was   raised    ujJ  in  his  bed,  and  with  his  expiring 
breath  uttered  this  short  sentence,  "Always  put  a  knot 
thread."    That  is  why  I  recommend  yon,  brethren,  to 
and  illustrations,  because   they  put   knots   in  the   thread  of  your 
discourse.     What  is  the  use  of  pulling  the  end  of  your   th. 
through  the  material  on  which  you  are  working  1     Yet,  I 
been   the  case  with  very  many  of  the   sermons  to   which 
listened,  or  the    discourses    we    ha\ 

bulk  of  what  we   have   heard    has   JIM  rough  our  mind* 

without  leaving  any    lasting    impiv.^ion,   mid    all   w»-  t  i» 

some  anecdote  that  was  told  by  the  preacher. 

There  is  an  authenticated  case  of  a  man   bei:  by  a 

sermon   eighty-five  years   after  he   had    heard   it  i.      Mr. 

Flavel,  at   the  close  of   a   discourse,    instead  of  pronoun.-: 
usual    benediction,    stood  up,  and    said,    "How    can    I    dismiss  you 
with  a  blessing,  for   many  of  you   are    •  Anathi-ma 
because  you  love  not  the   L»rd  Jesoj  Christ  t"    A   lad  of  tin 
heard  that  remarkable  utterance;   and  eighty-live;. 
sitting  under  a  hedge,  I  think  in    Yirgii..  MC   came 


48  THH    D8B8    OF    ANECDOTES   AND   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

vividly  before  him  as  if  it  had  been  but  the  day  before;  and  it 
pleased  God  to  bless  Mr.  Fluvel's  words  to  his  conversion,  and  he 
lived  throe  years  longer  to  bear  good  testimony  that  he  had  felt 
the  power  of  the  truth  in  his  heart. 

Sixthly,  anecdotes  and  illustrations  are  useful  because  they 
'isntly  arouse  the  feelings.  They  will  not  do  this,  however,  if 
you  tell  the  same  stories  over  and  over  again  ever  so  many  times. 
I  recollect,  when  I  first  heard  that  wonderful  story  about  "  There 
is  another  man,"  I  cried  a  good  deal  over  it.  Poor  soul,  just 
rescued,  half-dead,  with  only  a  few  rags  on  him,  and  yet  he  said, 
"  There  is  another  man,"  needing  to  be  saved.  The  second  time  I 
heard  the  story,  I  liked  it,  but  I  did  not  think  it  was  quite  so  new 
as  at  first ;  and  the  third  time  I  heard  it,  I  thought  that  I  never 
wanted  to  hear  it  again.  I  do  not  know  how  many  times  I  have 
heard  it  since  ;  but  I  can  always  tell  when  it  is  coming  out.  The 

•her  draws  himself  up,  and  looks  wonderfully  solemn,  and  in  a 
sepulchral  tone  says,  "  There  is  another  man,"  and  I  think  to 
myself,  "  Yes,  and  I  wish  there  had  not  been,"  for  I  have  heard 
that  story  till  I  am  sick  and  tired  of  it.  Even  a  good  anecdote  may 
get  so  hackneyed  that  there  is  no  force  in  it,  and  no  use  in  retailing 
it  any  longer. 

Still,  a  live  illustration  is  better  for  appealing  to  the  feelings  of 
an  audience  than  any  amount  of  description  could  possibly  be. 
\Vh«-n  Mr.  Beecher  brought  a  beautiful  slave  girl,  with  her 
manacles  on,  into  his  pulpit,  he  did  more  for  the  anti-slavery 
cause  than  he  might  have  done  by  the  most  eloquent  harangue. 
What  we  want  in  these  times  is  not  to  listen  to  long  prelections 
upon  some  dry  subject,  but  to  hear  something  practical,  something 
matter-of-fact,  that  comes  home  to  our  every-day  reasoning;  and 
when  we  get  this,  then  our  hearts  are  soon  stirred. 

I  have  no  doubt  that  the  sight  of  a  death-bed  would  move  men 
much  more  than  that  admirable  work  called  Drelincourt  on 
Death,  a  book  which,  I  should  think,  nobody  has  ever  been  able  to 
read  through.  There  may  have  been  instances  of  persons  who 
have  att^pted  it ;  but  I  believe  that,  long  before  they  have 
reached  the  latter  end,  they  have  been  in  a  state  of  asphyxia  or 
coma,  and  have  been  obliged  to  be  rubbed  with  hot  flannels;  and 
the  book  has  had  to  be  removed  to  a  distance  before  they  could 
recover.  If  you  have  not  read  Drelincourt  on  Death,  I  believe 
I  know  \\-hat  you  have  read,  that  is,  the  ghost  story  that  is  stitched 
in  at  the  end  of  the  book.  The  work  would  not  sell,  the  whole 


Tin:    OSES   01    ANECDOTES    LND    ILLUSTRATIONS, 


impression  was  upon  the  shelve*  ,,f  the  bookseller,  when    ! 
wrote  the  fiction  entitled,   •'  A  True  Delation  of  the  App 
Mrs.  Veal  after  her  death  to  Mr<.  B  ."  iu  which  1>, 

on  Death  is   recommended  by  the  apparition  as  tin-  he>t   1 

the  subject.     This  story  had  not  a  vestige  or  shadow  of  truth  in  it. 

it  was  all  a  piece  of  imagination  ;  but  it  was  pur   in  at  tl. 

the  book,  and  then  tin-  whole  edition  vraa  speedily  cleared 

more  were  wanted.      It    may    be  something   like    thai 

with  your  sermons;  only  you  must  tell  t! 

actually   occurred,   and  so   you  will    retain    their    attention, 

reach  their  hearts. 

Many  have  been   moved   to   self-sacrifice   by  the   stoty    of    the 
Moravians,  in   South    Africa,   who   saw  a  largr   end 
ground,  in   which  there  were   persons  rotting  away   with    lepi 
some  without  arms  and  some  without  lcg>  ;  and  these   Mm-:. 
could  not  preach  to  the  poor  lepers  without  going    in   there  them 
selves  for  life  to  rot  with  them,  and  they  did  so.     Two  m..iv  ,,f  the 
same  noble  band  of  brethren  sold  themseh  lavery   ii. 

\Vest  Indies,  in  order  that  they  might  he  allowed  to  preach   to  the 
slaves.     When  you  can  give  such  instances  a^  tln--r  of  mi  — i. 
disinterestedness  and  devotedness,  it  will  do  more  to  an>n<e  a  >pirit 
of  enthusiasm  for  foreign  missions  than  all  your  clo~ 
arguments  could  possibly  do. 

Who  has  not  heard  and  felt  the  force  of  the  story  of  the  two 
miners,  when  the  fuse  was  burning,  and  only  one   coiil  : 
and  the  Christian  man  cried  out   to  his  unconverted  companion, 
"Escape  for  your  life,  because,  if  yon  die,  you  are   lost;  but  if 
I  die,  it  is  all  right  with  me ;  so  you  ^<" 

The  fool's  plan,  too,  I  have  sometimes  used  as  a  striking  illus 
tration.     There  was  a  little  boat  which  got  wrecked,  and  tin-  man 
in  it  was  trying  to  swim  to  shore,  but  the  current  was  too  strong 
for  him.     After  he   had   been  drowned  an  hour,  a   man  said,  ••  1 
could  have  saved  him,"  and  when   they  a>ked   him   how   he  could 
have  saved  him,  he  described  a  plan  that  seemed  t«-  !•••  m«-t  excel 
lent  and  feasible,  by  which   the   man   miudit,  no  donht,  have   I- 
saved;  but  then,  unfortunately,  by  that  time  In-  \\a^  drowned  !     5 
there  are  some  who  are  always  wi>e  ju-t  too  late,  some  who  i: 
have  to  say  to  themselves,  when  such  and  Midi  a  one  is  gone  the 
way  of  all  living,  "  What  might  I  not  In  for  him  if   1    had 

but  taken  him  in    time  I "      Uivthivn,  let    t  ...(«•  he  a 

minder  to  us  all    that  we   shon!  in  winning  souls 

before  it  is  too  late  to  rescue  them  from  everlasting  tiou. 


50  THE    USES    OF   ANECDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Seventhly,  and  lastly,  anecdotes  and  illustrations  are  exceedingly 
usefli  l,,,:u  se  they  catch  the  ear  of  the  utterly  careless.  Some- 
inted  in  every  sermon  for  this  class  of  people;  and  an 
SSiSS  calculated  to  catch  the  ear  of  the  thoughtless  and 
the  unoodly.  We  really  desire  their  sal vation  and  w«  would  bait 
our  trl;  i/anv  way  possible  by  which  we  might  catch  them  for 
Christ.  We  cannot  expect  our  young  people  to  come  and  listen  to 
timed  doctrinal  disquisitions  that  are  not  at  all  embellished  with 
anything  that  interests  their  immature  minds  Nay,  even  grown-up 
people  after  the  toils  of  the  week,  some  of  them  busy  till  early  on 
the  Sunday  morning,  cannot  be  expected  to  attend  to  long  prosaic 
discourses  which  are  not  broken  by  a  single  anecdote.  ^ 

Oh  dear,  dear,  dear !  How  I  do  pity  those  unpractical  brethren 
who  do  not  seem  to  know  to  whom  they  are  preaching  1  "Ah  I 
said  a  brother  once,  «  whenever  I  preach,  I  do  not  know  where  t 
look  and  so  I  look  up  at  the  ventilator."  Now,  there  is  not  anybody 
up  in  the  ventilator;  there  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  anybody 
there  unless  the  angels  of  heaven  are  listening  there  to  hear  the 
words  of  truth.  A  minister  should  not  preach  before  the  people, 
but  he  should  preach  right  at  them  ;  let  him  look  straight  at  them ; 
if  he  can,  let  him  search  them  through  and  through,  and  take  stock 
of  them,  as  it  were,  and  see  what  they  are  like,  and  then  suit  his 
message  to  them.  . 

I  have  often  seen  some  poor  fellow  standing  in  the  aisle  at ; th 
Tabernacle.     Why,  he  looks  just  like  a  sparrow  that  has  got  into 
a  church,  and  cannot  get  out  again  1     He  cannot  make  out  what 
sort  of  service  it  is ;  be  begins  to  count  how  many  people  sit 
the  front  row  in  the  gallery,  and  all  kinds  of  ideas  pass  through 
his  mind.     Now  I  want  to  attract  his  attention ;  how  shall  I  do 
it!     If  I  quote  a  text  of  Scripture,  he  may  not  know  what  it 
means,  and  may  not  be  interested  in  it.     Shall  I  put  a  bit  of 
Latin  into  the  sermon,  or  quote  the  original  Hebrew  or  Greek  of 
my  text  ?     That  will  not  do  for  such  a  man.     What  shall 
Ah  1  I  know  a  story  that  will,  I  believe,  just  fit  him.     Out  it  comes, 
and  the  man  does  not  look  up  at  the  gallery  any  more ;  but  he  i 
wondering  whatever  the  preacher  is  at.     Something  is  said  that  so 
exactly  suits  his  case  that  he  begins  to  ask  himself  who  has  been 
telling  the  minister  about  him,  and  he  thinks, "  Why,  I  know  ;  my 
wife  comes  to  hear  this  man  sometimes,  so  she  has  been  telling 
him  all  about  me  1  "     Then  he  feels  curious  to  hear  more,  and 
while  he  is  looking  up  at  the  preacher,  and  listening  to  the  truth 
that  is  being  proclaimed,  the  first  gleam  of  light  on  divine  things 


THE    USES    OF    ANECDOTES    AND    II.I.l  >  1  I;A  I  ;  51 

dawns   upon  him;  but  if   we  had  kept  <>n  with  our  regular  dis 
course,  and  had  not  gone  out  of  our  way,  what  might  h;, 
of  that  man,  I  cannot  tell.     "  They  say  I  ran,  ;    Rowland 

Hill,  in  a  sermon  I  have  been  reading  this  afternoon  ;  M  t !>«•;. 
ramble,  but  it  is  because  you  ramble,  and  I   am  ohli-r  I   to   ramble 
after  you.     They  say  I  do  not  stick  to  my   subject;  but,  thank 
God,  I  always  stick  to  my  object,  which  is,  the  winning  u! 
souls,  and  bringing  you  to  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  1  " 

Mr.  Bertram  aptly  illustrates  the  way  in  which  mm  are 
engrossed  in  worldly  cares  by  telling  the  story  of  the  captain  of  a 
whaling  ship,  whom  he  tried  to  interest  in  the  things  of  God,  and 
who  said,  "It  is  no  use,  sir;  your  conversation  will  not  ha 
effect  upon  me.  I  cannot  hear  what  you  are  saying,  or  understand 
the  subject  you  are  talking  about.  I  left  my  home  to  try  to  catch 
whales,  I  have  been  a  year  and  nine  months  looking  for  whales, 
sir,  and  I  have  not  caught  a  whale  yet.  I  have  been  ploughing 
the  deep  in  search  of  whales  ;  when  I  go  to  bed,  I  dream  of  whales  ; 
and  when  I  get  up  in  the  morning,  I  wonder  if  there  will  i 
whales  caught  that  day  ;  there  is  a  whale  in  my  In-art,  sir,  a  whale 
in  my  brain,  and  it  is  of  no  use  for  you  to  talk  to  me  about  any 
thing  else  but  whales."  So,  your  people  have  their  laziness  in 
their  heads,  and  in  their  hearts,  they  want  to  make  a  fortune,  and 
retire;  or  else  they  have  a  family  of  children  to  bring  up,  and 
Susan  must  be  married,  and  John  must  be  got  into  a  situation, 
and  it  is  no  use  for  you  to  talk  to  them  about  the  things  <  : 
unless  you  can  drive  away  the  whales  that  keep  floundering  and 
splashing  about. 

There  is  a  merchant,  perhaps,  who  has  just  thought  of  some  bad 
bill;  or  another  has  looked  across  the  building,  and  noticed  a  piece 
of  ribbon  of  a  particular  colour,  and  he  thinks,  "  Yes,  I  ought  to 
have  had  a  larger  stock  of  that  kind  of  thing,  1  see  that  it  isg.-tting 
fashionable!"  or  it  may  be  that  one  of  the  hea  -aught 

sight  of  his  neighbour,  and  he  thinks  he  must  pay  him  a  vUit  on 
the  morrow;  and  so  people's  thoughts  are  occupied  with  all  sorts 
of  subjects  beside  that  of  which  the  preach,  i  ting.  ITon 

ask  me  how  I  know  that  this  is  the  case.  Well,  I  know  !  . 
I  have  been  guilty  of  the  same  offence  my*  If  :  I  find  tin- 
when  I  un  listening  to  another  brother  piva.-hing.  1  'i 
think,  when  I  am  preaching,  that  1  ry  wrll  ;  hut 

times,  when  I  go  into  the  country,  and  take  th 

and    then    hear   tome    One   elftfl    in    th--    iften 
think,  "  Well,  really,  when    1   was   up   there,  i   thought   1   was  t 


52  THE    USES   OF   ANECDOTES   AND   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

stick  :  but  now  !  I  only  wish  I  had  my  turn  again  I  "  Now,  this 
is  \vrv  wrong,  to  let  such  thoughts. come  into  our  minds;  but  as 
we  are  all  very  apt  to  wander,  the  preacher  should  carry  anecdotes 
and  illustrations  into  the  pulpit,  and  use  them  as  nails  to  fasten 
the  people's  attention  to  the  subject  of  his  sermon. 

Mr.  Paxton  Hood  once  said,  in  a  lecture  that  I  heard  him 
de-liver,  "Some  preachers  expect  too  much  of  their  hearers  ;  they 
rake  a  number  of  truths  into  the  pulpit  as  a  man  might  carry  up  a 
!><>x  of  nails ;  and  then,  supposing  the  congregation  to  be  posts, 
i  hey  take  out  a  nail,  and  expect  it  to  get  into  the  post  by  itself. 
Now  that  is  not  the  way  to  do  it.  You  must  take  your  nail,  hold 
it  up  against  the  post,  hammer  it  in,  and  then  clinch  it  on  the 
other  side ;  and  then  it  is  that  you  may  expect  the  great  Master 
of  assemblies  to  fasten  the  nails  so  that  they  will  not  fall  out."  We 
must  try  thus  to  get  the  truth  into  the  people,  for  it  will  never 
get  in  of  itself ;  and  we  must  remember  that  the  hearts  of  our 
hearers  are  not  open,  like  a  church  door,  so  that  the  truth  may  go 
in,  and  take  its  place,  and  sit  upon  its  throne  to  be  worshipped 
there.  No,  we  have  often  to  break  open  the  doors  with  great 
effort,  and  to  thrust  the  truth  into  places  where  it  will  not  at  first 
l)e  a  welcome  guest,  but  where,  afterwards,  the  better  it  is  known, 
the  more  it  will  be  loved. 

Illustrations  and  anecdotes  will  greatly  help  to  make  a  way  for 
the  truth  to  enter ;  and  they  will  do  it  by  catching  the  ear  of  the 
careless  and  the  inattentive.  We  must  try  to  be  like  Mr. 
Whitefield,  of  whom  a  shipbuilder  said,  "  When  I  have  been  to 
hear  anybody  else  preach,  I  have  always  been  able  to  lay  down  a 
ship  from  stem  to  stern;  but  when  I  listen  to  Mr.  Whitefield,  I 
cannot  even  lay  the  keel."  And  another,  a  weaver,  said,  "I 
have  often,  when  I  have  been  in  church,  calculated  how  many 
looms  the  place  would  hoVl ;  but  when  I  listen  to  that  man,  I 
forget  my  weaving  altogether."  You  must  endeavour,  brethren, 
to  make  your  people  forget  matters  relating  to  this  world  by 
inU-rweaving  the  whole  of  divine  truth  with  the  passing  things 
of  every  day,  and  this  you  will  do  by  a  judicious  use  of  anecdotes 
and  illustrations. 

Now,  gentlemen,  these  seven  reasons— that  they  interest  the 
mind  and  secure  the  attention  of  our  hearers,  that  they  render  the 
•liing   vivid   and  life-like,  that  they  explain  some  difficult  pas 
sages  to  dull  understandings,  that  they  help  the  reasoning  faculties 
of  certain  minds,  that  they  aid  the  memory,  that  they  arouse  the 


TI1E    USES    OF   ANECDOTES    AND    I  I.I.I 'STU  \  1  I  53 

feelings,  and  that  they  catch  the  ••:ir  of  t:: 

ciled  me  for  many  a  day  to  the  use  of  an.-edotes  and  illustrations, 
and  I  think  it  is  very  likely  that  they  will  reconcile  you  to  the  use 
of  them,  too. 

At  the  same  time,  I  must  repeat  what  II 
take  care  that  we  do  not  let  our  anecdotes  and  illn^trati.  - 
like  empty  casks  that  carry  nothing.  We  inn>t  not  have  it  truth 
fully  said  of  our  sermons,  as  was  said  by  a  certain  lady,  who, 
after  having  heard  a  clergyman  preach,  was  asked  what  she 
thought  of  the  sermon,  and  whether  there  was  not  much  spirit  in 
it.  "  Oh,  yes  I "  she  replied,  "  it  was  all  spirit ;  there  was  no 
body  to  it  at  all."  There  must  be  some  "body"  in  every  dis 
course,  some  really  sound  doctrine,  some  suitable  instruction  for 
our  hearers  to  carry  home;  not  merely  stories  to  amuse  then:,  hut 
solid  truth  to  be  received  in  the  heart,  and  wrought  out  in  the  life. 
If  this  be  so  with  your  sermons,  my  dc?r  brethren,  I  shall  not 
have  spoken  to  you  this  afternoon  in  vain  upou  the  u  ; 
anecdotes  and  illustration* 


LECTURE  IV. 

«crc  ran  iuc  find  gwdotas  and  Jltaatratiana  ? 

DEAR  BRETHREN,  after  my  last  lecture  to  you,  upon  the  uses  of 
anecdotes  and  illustrations,  you  are  probably  quite  ready  to  employ 
them  in  your  discourses  ;  but  some  of  you  may  ask,  "  Where  can 
we  get  them  t  "     At  the  very  beginning  of  this  afternoon  s  talk, 
let  me  say  that  nobody  need  make  anecdotes  in  order  to  interest  a 
congregation.     I  have  heard  of  one,  who  called  to  see  a  minister 
on  a  Friday,  and  he  was  told  by  the  servant  that  her  master  could 
not  be  seen,  for  he  was  up  in  his  study  «  making  anecdotes."     That 
kind  of  work  will  not  do  for  a  Christian  minister.    I  would  also  bid 
you  beware  of  the  many  common  anecdotes,  which  are  often  re 
peated,  but  which  I  half  suspect  could  not  be  proved  to  be  matters 
of  fact.     Whenever  I  have  the  slightest  suspicion  about  the  truth 
of  a  story,  I  drop  it  at  once  ;  and  I  think  that  everyone  else  should 
do   the  same.      So  long   as  the  anecdotes  are  current,  and   are 
generally  believed,  and  provided  they  can  be  used  for  a  profitable 
purpose,  I  believe  they  may  be  told,  without  any  affirmation  as  to- 
their   truthfulness  being   made  in   a  court  of   justice;  but  the 
moment  any  doubt  comes  across  the  mind  of  the  preacher  as  to 
whether  the  tale  is  at  least  founded  on  fact,  I  think  he  had  better 
look  for  something  else,  for  he  has  the  whole  world  to  go  to  as  a 
storehouse  of  illustration. 

If  you  want  to  interest  your  congregation,  and  keep  up  their 
attention,  you  can  find  anecdotes  and  illustrations  in  many  chan 
nels,  like  golden  grains  glistening  amongst  the  mountain  streams. 
For  instance,  there  is  current  history.  You  may  take  up  the  daily 
ivwspjiprr,  and  find  iliustrations  there.  In  my  little  shilling  book, 
The  /iible  and  the  Newspaper,  I  have  given  specimens  of  how  this 
may  be  done ;  and  when  I  was  preparing  the  present  lecture,  I 
took  up  a  newspaper  to  see  if  I  could  find  an  illustration  in  it,  and 
I  soon  found  one.  There  was  an  account  of  a  man  at  Wandsworth, 


WHERE  CAN    WE   ll.Nh   AM,    DOTEfl    AM,    H.M,, 


who  was  discovered,  with   a  gun  and  a  dog,  on   some 

gentleman  s  preserves,   and   he  said  that  he  was  on!.  |  for 

mushrooms!     Can  you  imagine  what  the  gun  and  the  do,*  had  to 

0  with  mushrooms  ?    However,  the  keeper  felt  in  the  man' 

and   laying   hold   of  something   soft,    asked,    "What    is    thist" 
3hl"  said  the  poacher,   "it  is  only  a  rabbit  n  it  was 

suggested  to  him  that  the  creature'  ra  too  lon_  .hit, 

he  said  that  it  was  only  a  leveret,  whereas  it  proved  to  be  a  very 
fine  and  plump  hare.     The  man  then  said  that   lie   ha  1  found  the 
hare  lying  near  some  mushrooms,  but  his  intention  was  to  •: 
mushrooms  only  I     Now,  that  is  a  capital  illustration.     As  soon  as 
ever  you  by  hold  of  a  man,  an  1    h.-gin  to  accuse  him  of  sin,  he 
says,   «  Sin,  sir  I     Oh,  dear  no  I     I  was  only  doing  a  very  pn 
thing,  just  what  I  have  a  perfect  right  to  do  ;  I  was  looking  for 
mushrooms,  I  was  not  poaching  I  "     You  press  him  a  little  more 
closely,  and  try  to  bring  him  to  conviction  of  sin;  and  tlu-r. 
says,  "  Well,  perhaps  it  was  hardly  the  thing,  it  may  have 
little  amiss;  but  it  was  only  a  rabbit  I"     Wh.-n  t'hu  man  cannot 
any  longer  deny  that  he  is  guilty  of  sin,  he  says  that  it  was  only  a 
very  little  one  ;  and  it  is  long  before  you  can  get  him  to  admit  I 
sin  is  exceeding  sinful;  indeed,  no  human  power  can  ever  produce 
genuine  conviction  in  the  heart  of  a  single  sinner ;  it  must  be  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

1  also  read,  in  the  same  newspaper,  of  a  calamitous  shipu 
caused  through  the  lack  of  lights.     You  could  easilv  turn  that   in 
cident  to  account  by  using  it  to  illustrate  the  destruction  of  souls 
through  the  want  of  a  knowledge  of  Christ.     I  have  no  doubt,  if 
you  were  to  take  up  any  of  this  morning's  daily  papers,  you  would 
very  readily  find  an  abundance  of  illustrations.    M  Ui  Hall, 
in  addressing  us  once,  said  that  every  Christian  minister  .night  to 
read  regularly  his    Bible   and     The    Times  newspaper.     I    should 
imagine,  from  the  usual  mode  of   his  address,  that  he  does  so  him 
self.     Whether  you  read   that   particular  pap«-r,  «>r  an 

should    somehow    keep  y«  well    stored    with    illu>trat: 

taken  from  the  ordinary  transactions  going  on  round  about  you.    I 
pity  even  a  Sunday-school  teacher,  much   more  a  minister  of  the 
gospel,  who  could  not  make  use  of  such  incidents  as 
burning   of    the    church    at    Santiago,    the  great   fire  at  London 
Bridge,  the  entrance  into  London  of  the   I'i  !ra,  the 

taking  Of  the  census;  and,  indeed,  anything  that  attracts  public 
attention.  There  is  in  all  these  events  an  illustration,  a  simile,  an 
allegory,  which  may  point  a  moral,  and  adorn  a  tale. 


56        W11EKE  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  ? 

You  may  sometimes  adapt  local  history  to  the  illustration  of  your 
subject.  When  a  minister  is  preaching  in  any  particular  district, 
he  will  often  find  it  best  to  catch  the  ears  of  the  people,  and 
engross  their  attention,  by  relating  some  anecdote  that  relates  to 
the  place  where  they  live.  Whenever  I  can,  I  get  the  histories  of 
various  counties ;  for,  having  to  go  into  all  sorts  of  country  towns 
and  villages  to  preach,  I  find  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  useful 
material  to  be  dug  out  of  even  dull,  dry,  topographical  books.  They 
begin,  perhaps,  with  the  name  of  John  Smith,  labourer,  the  man 
who  keeps  the  parish  register,  and  winds  up  the  parish  clock,  and 
makes  mouse-traps,  and  catches  rats,  and  does  fifty  other  useful 
things ;  but  if  you  have  the  patience  to  read  on,  you  will  find  much 
information  that  you  could  get  nowhere  else,  and  you  will  probably 
meet  with  many  incidents  and  anecdotes  that  you  can  use  as  illus 
trations  of  the  truth  you  are  seeking  to  set  forth. 

Preaching  at  Winslow,  in  Buckinghamshire,  it  would  not  be  at 
all  amiss  to  introduce  the  incident  of  good  Benjamin  Keach,  the 
pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  that  town,  standing  in  the  pillory 
in  the  market-place  in  the  year  1664,  "for  writing,  printing,  and 
publishing  a  schismatical  book,  entitled,  The  Child's  Instructor ;  or, 
a  New  and  Easy  Primmer"  I  do  not  think,  however,  that,  if  I 
were  preaching  at  Wapping,  I  should  call  the  people  "  Wapping 
sinners",  as  Rowland  Hill  is  said  to  have  done,  when  he  told  them 
that  "  Christ  could  save  old  sinners,  great  sinners,  yea,  even 
Wapping  sinners!  "  At  Craven  Chapel,  it  would  be  most  appro 
priate  to  tell  the  story  of  Lord  Craven,  who  was  packing  up  his 
goods  to  go  into  the  country  at  the  time  of  the  Great  Plague  of 
London,  when  his  servant  said  to  him,  "  My  lord,  does  your  God 
live  only  in  the  country  1  "  "  No,"  replied  Lord  Craven,  "  he  is 
here  as  well  as  there."  "  Well,  then,"  said  the  servant,  "if  I  were 
your  lordship,  I  think  I  would  stop  here ;  you  will  be  as  safe  in  the 
city  as  in  the  country ; "  and  Lord  Craven  did  stop  there,  relying 
upon  the  good  providence  of  God. 

Beside  this,  brethren,  you  have  the  marvellous  storehouse  of 
ancient  and  modern  history — Roman,  Greek,  and  English — with 
which,  of  course,  you  are  seeking  to  become  well  acquainted.  Who 
can  possibly  read  the  old  classic  tales  without  feeling  his  soul  on 
fire  t  As  you  rise  from  their  perusal,  you  will  not  merely  be 
familiar  with  the  events  which  happened  in  "the  brave  days  of 
oki  ",  hut  you  will  have  learnt  many  lessons  that  may  be  of  service 
>u  your  pivjirhiiiif  to-day.  For  instance,  there  is  the  story  of 


WHERE  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AN,,  „,.<  ,  ,  ,  ?       57 

Phidias  and  the  statue  of  the  god  whir],  he  had  carved.     After  he 
had  finished  it  he  had  chiselled  in  the  corner,  in  .null  letter*  the 

word 1  «  Phidias   ,  and  it  was  objected  that  t • 

worshipped  as  a  god,  nor   considered    sacred,    while  it   bore 

sculptors  name.    It  was  even  seriously  questioned  whether  Phidias 

should   not  be  stoned   to  death  because  he  had  so  1  the 

statue.     How  could  he  dare,  they  asked,  to  put  his  own  name  on 

the  image  of  a  god?     So,  some  of  us  are  very  apt  to  want  to  put 

our  little  names  down  at  the  bottom  of  any  work  which 

done  for  God,  that  we  may  be  remembered,  when 

rather  to  upbraid  ourselves  for  wishing  to  have  any 

of  that  which  God  the  Holy  Ghost  enables  us  to  do. 

Then  there  is  that  other  story  of  an  ancient  sculptor,  wh 
about  to  put  the  image  of  a  god  into  a  heathen  tempi-,  ftlthong 
had  not  finished  tnat  portion  of  the  statue  which  was  to  biT  im 
bedded  in  the  wall.     The  priest  demurred,  and  declared  that  tin- 
statue  was  not  completed.     The  sculptor  said,  "  That  part  of  th- 
god  will  never  be  seen,  for  it  will  be  built  into  the  wall."     " 
gods  can  see  in   the  wall,"  answered  the  priest.     In  like  imn. 
the  most  private  parts  of  our  life,  those  secret  matters  that 
never  reach  the  human  eye,  are  still  under  the  ken  of  the  Almightv, 
and  ought   to  be   attended  to  with   the  great. ->i  care.      It   i^ 
sufficient   for  us  to  maintain  our   public   reputation  among  our 
fellow-creatures,  for  our  God  can  see  in  the  wall,  he  notice*  our 
coldness  in  the  closet  of  communion,  and  1.  .  es  our  fault* 

and  failures  in  the  family. 

Trying  once  to  set  forth  how  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  delight.,  in 
his  people  because  they  are  his  own   handiwork,  I  found  | 
story  of  Cyrus  extremely  useful.     When  shown  :-u  am 

bassador  round  his  garden,  Cyrus  said  to  him,  "  You  cannot  p.-sibly 
take  such  an  interest  in  these  flowers  and  tree!  U  I  do,  for  1  laid  out 
the  whole  garden  myself,  and  every  plant  here  I  planted  with  my 
own  hand.     I  have  watered   them,  and  1  have  ieen  them  ijruw,  I 
have  been  a  husbandman  to  them,  and  then-fun-  I  love  them 
better  than  you  can."      So,  the  Lord   .K-Mis  Christ   loves  the   ; 
garden  of  his  Church,  because  he  laid  it  all  out,  and  planted  it  with 
his  own  gracious  hand,  and  he  has  watched  0  :  y  plant,  and 

nourished  and  cherished  it. 

The  days  of  the  Crn>aders  are  a  peculiarly  rich  period  for  n«»hle 
stories  that  will  make  good  illustrations.    \Ve  n-ad  that  thes"!  i 
of  Godfrey  de  Bouillon,  when  they  came  within  sigh:  ity 

of  Jerusalem,  were   so   charmed    with   the   view   that    they   fell   on 


58        WHBBB  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  t 

their  faces,  and  then  rose  to  their  feet,  and  clapped  their  hands,  and 
ma!le  the  mountains  ring  with  their  shouts  of  joy.     Tl^us,  when  we 
,et  within  sight  of  the  New  Jerusalem  our  happy  home  on  high 
^ose  name  Is  ever  dear  to  us,  we  will  make  our  dying  chamber 
ri   .  'with  hallelujahs,  and  even  the  angels  shall  hear  our  songs  of 
praise  and  thanksgiving.     It  is  also  recorded,  concerning  this  same 
Godfrey,  that,  when  he  had  entered  Jerusalem  at  the  head  of  his 
notorious  army,  he  refused  to  wear  the  crown  with  which  h, 
soldiers  wanted  to  deck  his  brow,  "For,"  said  he,      why  should  I 
wear  a  crown  of  gold  in  the  city  where  my  Lord  wore  a  crown  o 
thorns  t  *    This  is  a  good  lesson  for  us  to  learn  for  ourselves,  and  t 
teach  to  our  people.     In  the  world  where  Christ  was  despised  anc 
rejected  of  men,  it  would  be  unseemly  for  a  Christian  to  be  seeking 
to  win  earthly  honours,  or  ambitiously  hunting  after  fame, 
disciple  must  not  think  of  being  above  his  Master,  nor  the  servant 

above  his  Lord. 

Then  you  might  easily  make  an  illustration  out  of  that  romantic 
story,  which  may  or  may  not  be  true,  of  Queen  Eleanor  sucking 
the  poison  out  of  her  husband's  wounded  arm.  Many  ot  us,  I 
trust  would  be  willing,  as  it  were,  to  suck  out  all  the  slander  and 
venom  from  the  arm  of  Christ's  Church,  and  to  bear  any  amount 
of  suffering  ourselves,  so  long  as  the  Church  itself  might  escape 
and  live.  Would  not  any  one  of  you,  my  brethren,  gladly  put  his 
lips  to  the  envenomed  wounds  of  the  Church  to-day,  and  suffer 
even  unto  death,  sooner  than  let  the  doctrines  of  Christ  be  im 
pugned,  and  the  cause  of  God  be  dishonoured1! 

What  a  fine  field  of  illustration  lies  open  to  you  in  religious 
history!  It  is  difficult  to  tell  where  to  begin  digging  in  this  mine 
of  precious  treasure.  The  story  of  Luther  and  the  Jew  might  be 
used  to  set  forth  the  evil  of  sin,  and  how  to  avoid  it.  A  Jew  was 
seeking  an  opportunity  of  stabbing  the  Reformer ;  but  Luther 
received  a  portrait  of  the  would-be  murderer,  so  that,  wherever  he 
went,  he  was  on  his  guard  against  the  assassin.  Using  this  fact 
himself  as  an  illustration,  Luther  said,  "  God  knows  that  there  are 
sins  that  would  destroy  us,  and  he  has  therefore  given  us  portraits 
of  them  in  his  Word,  so  that,  wherever  we  see  them,  we  may  say, 
4  That  is  a  sin  that  would  stab  me ;  I  must  beware  of  that  evil 
thing,  and  keep  out  of  its  way.'  " 

Stout  Hugh  Latimer,  in  that  famous  story  of  an  incident  in  his 
trial  before  several  bishops,  brings  out  very  clearly  the  omni 
presence  and  omniscience  of  God,  and  the  care  that  we  ought  to 


WHERE  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  1I.U'>  n:  XTL  ,.\s  :'        ;# 

exercise   in  the  presence  of   One  who  can    read  oar  most  « 
thoughts  and  imaginations.      He  says,   "I  wa 
tion  before  five  or  six  bishops,  where  I  had  much   trouble;  thrice 
every  week  I  came  to  examinations,  and   manv  tra  ,:ire» 

were  laid  to  get  something \t  last,  I  vraa  bra 

be  examined  in  a  chamber  hung  with  arras,  where   I 
be  examined ;  but   now  at  this  time  the  chamber  w 
altered.     For  whereas,  before,  there  was  wont  alw 
the  chimney,  now  the  fire  was  taken  away,  and  an  arras  h 
the  chimney,  and  the  table  stood  near  the  fire-place,     Then  was, 
amongst  the  bishops  who  examined  me,  one  with  whom  I  i 
very  familiar,  and  took  him  for  my  great  friend,  an  aged  man,  and 
he  sat  next  to  the  table's  end.     Then,  amount  all  oth  ons, 

he  put  forth  a  very  subtle  and  crafty  om-.  and  such  a  one.  in  ; 
as  I   could  not  think   so  great  danger  in.     And  when   I  should 
make  answer,  'I  pray  you,  Mr.  Latimer,'  said  one,  -speak  out ;    I 
am  very  thick  of  hearing,  and  there  may  be  many  that  sit  far  off.' 
I  marvelled  at  this,  that  I  was  bid  to  speak  out,  and   begun  to 
suspect,  and  give  an  ear  to  the  chimney;  and  there  I  heard  a  pen 
writing  in  the  chimney  behind  the  cloth.     They  had  appointed 
there  to  write  all  mine  answers,  for  they  made  sure  that  I  should 
not  start  from  them  ;  and  there  was  no  starting  from  them.    ( i 
was  my  good  Lord,  and  gave  me    answer,  else  I  could  never  1 
escaped."     Preaching,   some    years   afterwards     Latimer   him 
told  the  story,   and  applied  the  illustration.      "My   hearer,"  said 
he,  "there   is  a  recording  pen  always  at  work   behind  th 
taking  down  all   thou  sayest,  and    noting  all  thou  doest,   th.-r-- 
fore  be  thou  careful  that  thy  words  and  acts  are  worthy  <>t  record 
in  God's  Book  of  Remembrance." 

You  might  aptly  illustrate  the  doctrine  of  God's  special  provi 
dential  care   of  his  servants  by  relating  the  story  of  .John  Kn 
who,  one  evening,  refused  to  sit  in  his  u<nal  seat,  though  he  did 
not  know  any  particular  reason  for  so  acting.     No  one  was  allov, 
to  occupy  that  chair,  and    during   the  evening,   a   shot   came   in 
through   the  window,   and  struck    a    candlestick    that    stood    im 
mediately  opposite  where  John  Kimx  w.nild  have  been  lie 
had  taken   his  accustomed  place.     T\\>  •                   the  case  of  tin- 
godly  minister,  who,  in  escaping  from  his  persecutors,  went  into  a 
hay-loft,  and  hid  himself  in  the  hay.     The  soldi. T>  went  into  : 
place,  pricking  and  thrusting  with  their  swords  and  bayonets,  and 
the  good  man  even  felt  theeold  steel  touch  tli               :   his  foot,  and 
the  scratch  which  was   made  remained  for  \<                '    his 


6(1       WHERE  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS? 

did  not  discover  him.  Afterwards,  a  hen  came  and  laid  an  egg 
even-  day  hard  by  the  place  where  he  was  hidden,  and  so  he  was 
•attained  as  well  as  preserved  until  it  was  safe  for  him  to  leave 
his  hiding-place.  It  was  either  the  same  minister,  or  one  of  his 
persecuted  brethren,  who  was  providentially  protected  by  such  a 
humble  agent  as  a  spider.  This  is  the  story  as  I  have  read  it : — 
"  Receiving  friendly  warning  of  an  intended  attempt  to  apprehend 
him,  and  finding  men  were  on  his  track,  he  took  refuge  in  a  malt- 
house,  and  crept  into  the  empty  kiln,  where  he  lay  down.  Im 
mediately  after,  he  saw  a  spider  lower  itself  across  the  narrow 
entrance  by  which  he  had  got  in,  thus  fixing  the  first  line  of  what 
was  soon  wrought  into  a  large  and  beautiful  web.  The  weaver  and 
the  web,  placed  directly  between  him  and  the  light,  were  very 
conspicuous.  He  was  so  much  struck  with  the  skill  and  diligence 
of  the  spider,  and  so  much  absorbed  in  watching  her  work,  that  he 
forgot  his  own  danger.  By  the  time  the  network  was  completed, 
crossing  and  re-c'rossing  the  mouth  of  the  kiln  in  every  direction, 
his  pursuers  came  i^to  the  malt-house  to  search  for  him.  He  noted 
their  steps,  and  listened  to  their  cruel  words  while  they  looked 
about.  Then  they  came  close  to  the  kiln,  and  he  overheard  one 
say  to  another,  'It's  no  use  to  look  in  there;  the  old  villain  can 
never  be  there  :  look  at  that  spider's  web ;  he  could  never  have  got  in 
there  without  breaking  it?  Without  further  search  they  went  to 
•M-i-k  elsewhere,  and  he  escaped  safely  out  of  their  hands." 

There  :s  another  story,  I  have  somewhere  met  with,  of  a 
prisoner,  during  the  American  war,  who  was  put  into  a  cell  in 
which  there  was  a  little  slit  through  which  a  soldier's  eye  always 
watched  him  day  and  night.  Whatever  the  prisoner  did,  whether 
he  ate,  or  drank,  or  slept,  the  sentinel's  eye  was  perpetually  gazing 
at  him ;  and  the  thought  of  it,  he  said,  was  perfectly  dreadful  to 
him,  it  almost  drove  him  mad ;  he  could  not  bear  the  idea  of  having 
that  man's  eye  always  scrutinizing  him.  He  could  scarcely  sleep  ; 
his  very  breathing  became  a  misery,  because,  turn  which  way  he 
would,  he  could  never  escape  from  the  gaze  of  that  soldier's  eye. 
That  story  might  be  used  as  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that  God's 
omniscient  eye  is  always  looking  at  every  one  of  us. 

I  remember  making  two  or  three  of  my  congregation  speak  out 
pretty  loudly  by  telling  them  this  story,  which  I  read  in  an 
American  tract.  I  suppose  it  maybe  true;  I  receive  it  as  reliable, 
and  I  wish  I  could  tell  it  as  it  is  printed.  A  Christian  minister, 
:v>idini:  near  the  backwoods,  took  a  walk  one  evening  for  silent 
'  t  i.  m.  He  went  much  farther  than  he  intended,  and,  missing 


WIIKU.   <    \N    UK    FIN  |>    A.M. CI'M  I  |>    \N!>  II. I.!  61 

the  track,  wandered  away  into  the  wni..U.      He  kept  <>n  ei 

ing  to  find  the  road  to  his    lnum-  ;  l>ut  failed   to  do  so.      II 

afraid  that    In-  would   haw   t"   si.end  the    night   in  :   hut 

suddenly,  as  he  was  going  forward,  he   sa\v  the   glimm-T  ••!"  lights 

in  the  distance,  and  therefore  pressed  on,  hoping   to  t! 

in  a  friendly  cottage.     A  strange  sight  in  -t   his  ga/.e  ;  a  n:« 

was  being  held  in  a  clearing  in  the  middle  of   the  \v 

behiij  lit  up  with  bla/ing  pine-torches.      1I--  thought.  "  Well,  here 

are  some  Christian   people  met  to  worship  God  ;   I   am  glad  that 

what   I  thought  was   an  awkward    mUtake  in   li^inir  m;. 

brought  me  here  ;   1  may.  perhaps,  both  do  good  and  g   I 

To  his  horror,   however,  he  found   that   it   was  an   ath> 
gathering,  and  that  the  speakers  were  venting  their  Ma<pl. 
thoughts  against  God  with  very  great  Boldness  and  determination, 
The  minister  sat  down,  full  of  grief.     A  young  man  declare.}  that 
he  did  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  God,  and  dared  .Jehovah  t«> 
i.^troy  him  then  and  there  if  there  was  such   a  God.      1 
man's  heart  was  meditating  how  he  ought  to  reply,  hut  In-  • 
seemed  to  cleave  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth;  and  tin-  intidel 
sat  down  amidst  loud  acclamations  of  admiration    and  ap; 
Our  friend  did  not  wish  to  be  a  craven,  or  to  hold  hack  in  t: 
of  battle,  and  therefore  he  was  almost  inclined  to  ri<«-  an  1 
when  a  hale,  burly  man,  who  had  passed  the  meridian  «.f  1! 
who  was  still  exceedingly  vigorous,  and  seemed  a  strong,  im. 
clearer  of  the  backwoods,  rose  and  said,  "  I  should  like  • 
you  will  give  me  a  hearing.    I  am  not  going  to  say  any  thin.: 
the  topic  which  has  been  discussed  by  the  orator  who  has  j 
down;  I  am  only  going  to  tell  you  a  fact:  will  you   h.-ar 
"  Yes,  yes,"  they  shouted  ;  it  was  a  free  discussion,  so  they  would 
hear  him,  especially  as  he  was  not  going  to  contn-v.  r;.         \ 
ago,"  he  began,  "I  was  working  up  yonder,  on   the 
felling  trees.     You  know  the  raj. ids  down   IM-I..W.      \\V11,  v 
at  my  employment,  at  some  little  distance  fn»m  them,  1 
cries  and   shrieks,  mingled  with  prayers  to  God  UT  Ivlp. 
down   to  the  watffl  for   I   guessed   what   was   the   i. 

There  I  saw  a  young  man,  who  could  not  mana-      i  "\  the 

current  was  getting  the  mastery  of  him,  and  i.  if  ting  dowii 

the  stream,  and  ere  long,  onlcM  ^  ; 

mott   certainly  hav-  t   tlie    falls,  and    M 

to  a  dreadful  death,     I  law  that  youni:  man  km- 

boat,  and  pray  to  the  M,,>t  Higli  God,  by  the  love     I    <         t,  and 
by  his  precious  blood,  to  save  him.     1 1  •<*  l»(>  lia 


62        WHKIiE  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS? 

an  infidel ;  but  said  that,  if  he  might  but  be  delivered  this  once,  he 
would  declare  his  belief  in  God.  I  at  once  sprang  into  the  river. 
My  arms  are  not  very  weak,  I  think,  though  they  are  not  so  strong 
as  they  used  to  be.  I  managed  to  get  into  the  boat,  turned  her 
round,  brought  her  to  the  shore,  and  so  I  saved  that  young  man's 
life ;  and  that  young  man  is  the  one  who  has  just  sat  down,  and  who 
has  been  denying  the  existence  of  God,  and  daring  the  Most  High 
to  destroy  himl  "  Of  course,  I  used  that  story  to  show  that  it  was 
an  easy  thing  to  brag  and  boast  about  holding  infidel  sentiments 
in  a  place  of  safety ;  but  that,  when  men  come  into  peril  of  their 
lives,  then  they  talk  in  a  very  different  fashion. 

There  is  a  capital  story,  which  exemplifies  the  need  of  going  up 
to  the  house  of  God,  not  merely  to  listen  to  the  preacher,  but  to 
seek  the  Lord.  A  certain  lady  had  gone  to  the  communion  in  a 
Scotch  church,  and  had  greatly  enjoyed  the  service.  When  she 
reached  her  home,  she  enquired  who  the  preacher  was,  and  she  was 
informed  that  it  was  Mr.  Ebenezer  Erskine.  The  lady  said  that 
she  would  go  again,  the  next  Sabbath,  to  hear  him.  She  went, 
but  she  was  not  profited  in  the  least ;  the  sermon  did  not  seem 
to  have  any  unction  or  power  about  it.  She  went  to  Mr.  Erskine, 
and  told  him  of  her  experience  at  the  two  services.  "  Ah  !  madam," 
said  he,  "  the  first  Sabbath  you  came  to  meet  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  you  had  a  blessing  ;  but  the  second  Sabbath  you  came 
to  hear  Ebenezer  Erskine,  and  you  had  no  blessing,  and  you  had 
no  right  to  expect  any."  You  see,  brethren,  a  preacher  might 
talk  to  the  people,  in  general  terms,  about  coming  to  worship  God, 
and  not  merely  to  hear  the  minister,  yet  no  effect  might  be  pro 
duced  by  his  words,  for  there  might  not  be  anything  sufficiently 
.-triking  to  remain  in  the  memory ;  but  after  such  an  anecdote  as 
this  one  about  Mr.  Erskine  and  the  lady,  who  could  forget  the 
lesson  that  was  intended  to  be  taught  ? 

Well  now,  supposing  that  you  have  exhausted  all  the  illustra 
tions  to  be  found  in  current  history,  in  local  history,  in  ancient  and 
modern  history,  and  in  religious  history, — which  I  do  not  think  you 
will  <lo  unless  you  are  yourselves  exhausted, — you  may  then  turn  to 
natural  history }  where  you  will  find  illustrations  and  anecdotes  in 
grt-at  abundance  ;  and  you  need  never  feel  any  qualms  of  conscience 
about  using  the  facts  of  nature  to  illustrate  the  truths  of  Scripture, 
because  there  is  a  sound  philosophy  to  support  the  use  of  such 
illustrations.  It  is  a  fact  that  can  easily  be  accounted  for,  that 
people  will  more  readily  receive  the  truth  of  revelation  if  you  link 


\VK   KIND    \\!  \M>    1 1  I.I   M  K  M  I<  >\>  ? 

it  with  some  kindred  truth  in  natural  hi>;  'ivthing  that  is 

visible  to  the  eye,  than  if  you  give  them  a  liar.-  statement  ..f  the 
doctrine  itself.     Besides,  tin-re  is  this  important  fact  that  in;; 
l.i-  forgotten,  the  God  who  is  the  Author  of  revelation,  is  also  the 
Author  of  creation,  and  providence,  and  history,  u  ihini; 

else  from  which  you  ought  to  draw  your  illustrations.     When  you 
iiural  history  to  illustrate  the  Scriptures,  yon  are  only  ex 
plaining  one  of  God's  books  by  another  volume  that  he  h  . 

It  is  just  as  if  you  had  before  you  two  works  bv  one  author, 
who  had,  in  the  first  place,  written  a  book  for  children  ;  and 
in  the  second  place,  had  prepared  a  volume  of  more  profound  in 
struction  for  persons  of  riper  years,  and  higher  culture.  At  times, 
when  you  found  obscure  and  difficult  passages  in  the  work  i 
for  the  more  advanced  scholars,  you  would  refer  to  the  little  book 
which  was  intended  for  the  younger  folk,  and  you  would  say,  "  We 
know  that  this  means  so-and-so,  because  that  is  how  the  matter  is 
explained  in  the  book  for  beginners."  So  creation,  providence,  and 
history,  are  all  books  which  God  has  written  for  those  to  read  who 
have  eyes,  written  for  those  who  have  ears  to  hear  his  voice  in 
them,  written  even  for  carnal  men  to  read,  that  they  may  see 
something  of  God  therein.  But  the  other  glorious  Hook  is  written 
for  you  who  are  taught  of  God,  and  made  spiritual  and  holy. 
Oftentimes,  by  turning  to  the  primer,  you  will  get  something  out 
of  that  simple  narrative  which  will  elucidate  and  illustrate  the 
more  difficult  classic,  for  that  is  what  the  Word  of  God  is  t 

There  is  a  certain  type  of  thought  which  God  has  followed  in 
all  things.  What  he  made  with  his  Word  has  a  similarity  to  the 
Won  I  itself  by  which  he  made  it ;  and  the  visible  is  the  symbol  of 
the  invisible,  because  the  same  thought  of  (iod  runs  through  it 
all.  There  is  a  touch  of  the  divine  finger  in  all  that  (iod  has 
made;  so  that  the  things  which  are  apparent  to  our  senses  have 
certain  resemblances  to  the  things  which  do  not  appear  That 
which  can  be  seen,  and  tasted,  and  touched,  and  handled,  is  meant 
to  be  to  us  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  a  something  which  we 
find  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  in  our  spiritual  experience,  which  is 
the  inward  and  the  spiritual  grace;  so  that  there  is  noti. 
and  unnatural  in  bringing  nature  to  illuMra1  it  was  or 

dained  of  God  for  that  very  purpose.     Range  over  the  whole  of 
creation  for  your  similes;   do  not  confine  yourself  to  any  particular 
branch  of  natural  history.     The  congregation  of  01 
doctor  complained  that  he  gave  them  ipidefl  continuously  by   uay 
of   illustration.      It  would   be    better   to  give    the   peopk   *  spider 


tU        WHKUK  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS? 

or  two  occasionally,  and  then  to  vary  the  instruction  by  stories, 
ami  anecdotes,  and  similes,  and  metaphor  drawn  from  geology, 
astronomy,  botany,  or  any  of  the  other  sciences  which  will  help 
to  shed  a  side  light  upon  the  Scriptures. 

If  you  keep  your  eyes  open,  you  will  not  see  even  a  dog  follow 
ing  liis  muster,  nor  a  mouse  peeping  up  from  his  hole,  nor  will  you 
hear  even  a  gentle  scratching  behind  the  wainscot  without  getting 
something  to  weave  into  your  sermons  if  your  faculties  are  all  on 
the  alert.  When  you  go  home  to-night,  and  sit  by  your  fireside, 
you  ought  not  to  be  able  to  take  up  your  domestic  cat  without  find 
ing  that  which  will  furnish  you  with  an  illustration.  How  soft  are 
pussy's  pads,  and  yet,  in  a  moment,  if  she  is  angered,  how  sharp 
will  be  her  claws  I  How  like  to  temptation,  soft  and  gentle  when 
first  it  cometh  to  us,  but  how  deadly,  how  damnable  the  wounds  it 
causeth  ere  long  I 

I  recollect  using,  with  very  considerable  effect  in  a  sermon  in 
the  Tabernacle,  an  incident  that  occurred  in  my  own  garden. 
There  was  a  dog  which  was  in  the  habit  of  coming  through  the 
fence,  and  scratching  in  my  flower-beds,  to  the  manifest  spoiling 
of  the  gardener's  toil  and  temper.  Walking  in  the  garden,  one 
Saturday  afternoon,  and  preparing  my  sermon  for  the  following 
day,  I  saw  the  four-footed  creature, — rather  a  scurvy  specimen, 
by-the-by, — and  having  a  walking-stick  in  my  hand,  I  threw  it  at 
him  with  all  my  might,  at  the  same  thw  giving  him  some  good 
advice  about  going  home.  Now,  what  should  my  canine  friend  do 
but  turn  round,  pick  up  the  stick  in  his  mouth,  and  bring  it,  and 
lay  it  down  at  my  feet,  wagging  his  tail  all  ^e  while  in  expecta 
tion  of  my  thanks  and  kind  words?  Of  course,  y£f  do  not  suppose 
that  1  kicked  him,  or  threw  thi?  stick  at  him  any  more.  I  felt 
quite  ashamed  of  myself,  and  I  told  him  that  he  was  welcome  to 
stay  as  long  as  he  liked,  and  to  come  as  often  as  he  pleased.  There 
waa  an  instance  of  the  power  of  non-resistance,  submission,  patience, 
and  trust,  in  overcoming  even  rightoou?,  anger.  I  used  that  illus 
tration  in  preaching  the  next  day,  and  I  did  not  feel  that  I  had  at 
all  degraded  myself  by  telling  the  story. 

M"4  of  us  have  read  Alphonse  Karr's  book,  A  Tour  round  my 
Garden.  Why  does  not  somebody  write  A  Tour  round  my  Dining- 
table,  or,  A  Tour  round  my  Kitchen  ?  I  believe  a  most  interesting 
volume  of  the  kind  might  be  written  by  any  man  who  had  his 
eyes  open  to  see  the  analogies  of  nature.  I  remember  that,  one 
day,  when  I  lived  in  Cambridge,  I  wanted  a  sermon  very  badly; 
iiid  I  could  not  fix  upon  a  subject,  when,  all  at  once,  I  noticed 


WHERE  CAN  WE  1  INI)  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTK A 

a  number  of  birds  on  the  slates  of  the  opposite  Imuse.  As  I  ! 
closely  at  them,  I  saw  that  there,  was  u  canary,  which  had  escaped 
fr  an  somebody's  house,  and  a  lot  of  sjmmm-s  had  surrounded  it, 
and  kept  pecking  at  it.  There  was  my  text  at  OHM  :  "  Mine 
heritage  is  unto  me  as  a  speckled  bird,  the  birds  round  about  are 
against  her." 

Once  more,  brethren,  if  you  cannot  find  illustrations  in  natural 
history,  or  any  of  the  other  histories  I  have  mentioned,  find  tliem 
anywhere.  Anything  that  occurs  around  you,  if  you  have  but 
brains  in  your  head,  will  be  of  service  to  you  ;  but  if  you  are  really 
to  interest  and  profit  your  congregations,  you  will  need  to  keep 
your  eyes  open,  and  to  use  all  the  powers  with  which  the  Lord  has 
endowed  you.  If  you  do  so,  you  will  find  that,  in  simply  walking 
through  the  streets,  something  or  other  will  suggest  a  passa 
Scripture,  or  will  help  you,  when  you  have  chosen  your  text,  to 
open  it  up  to  the  people  so  as  really  to  arrest  their  attention,  and 
convey  the  truth  to  their  minds  and  hearts. 

For  instance,  the  snow  to-day  covered  all  the  ground,  and  the 
black  soil  looked  fair  and  white.  It  is  thus  with  some  men 
under  transient  reformations ;  they  look  as  holy,  and  as  heavenly, 
and  as  pure  as  though  they  were  saints  ;  but  when  the  sun  of  trial 
arises,  and  a  little  heat  of  temptation  cometh  upon  them,  how 
soon  do  they  reveal  their  true  blackness,  and  all  their  surface 
goodliness  melteth  away  I 

The  whole  world  is  hung  round  by  God  with  pictures;  and  tho 
preacher  has  only  to  take  them  down,  one  by  one,  and  hold  them 
up  before  his  congregation,  and  he  will  be  sure  to  enlist  their  in 
terest  in  the  subject  he  is  seeking  to  illustrate.  But  he  must  have 
his  own  eyes  open,  or  he  will  not  see  these  pictures.  Solomon 
said,  "The  wise  man's  eyes  are  in  his  head,"  and  addressing  such 
a  man,  he  wrote,  "  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on,  and  let  thine  eye 
lids  look  straight  before  thee."  Why  doea  he  >peak  of  serin.:  with 
the  eyelids  t  I  think  he  means  that  the  eyelids  an-  to  shut  in 
what  the  eyes  have  perceived.  You  know  that  tin-re  is  all  the 
difference  in  the  world  between  a  man  with  eyes  and  one  with  no 
One  sits  down  by  a  stream,  and  MM  much  to  interest  and 
instruct  him;  but  another,  at  the  same  place,  is  like  the  gentle 
man  of  whom  Wordsworth  wrote, — 

44  A  primrose  by  a  river's  brim 
A  yellow  primrose  was  to  him, 
it  was  nothing  . 


6<>        WHKIiK  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS? 

If  you  find  any  difficulty  in  illustrating  your  subject,  I  should 
strongly  recommend  you  to  try  to  teach  children  whenever  you  can 
get  an  opportunity  of  doing  so.  I  do  not  know  a  better  way  of 
schooling  your  own  mind  to  the  use  of  illustrations  than  frequently 
to  take  a  class  in  the  Sunday-school,  or  to  give  addresses  to 
the  scholars  as  often  as  you  can ;  because,  if  you  do  not  illustrate 
there,  you  will  have  your  lesson  or  your  address  illustrated  for  you 
very  strikingly.  You  will  find  that  the  children  will  do  it  by 
their  general  worry  and  inattention,  or  by  their  talk  and  play. 
I  used  to  have  a  class  of  boys  when  I  was  a  Sunday-school  teacher, 
and  if  I  was  ever  a  little  dull,  they  began  to  make  wheels  of  them 
selves,  twisting  round  on  the  forms  on  which  they  sat.  That  was 
a  very  plain  intimation  to  me  that  I  must  give  them  an  illustration 
or  an  anecdote  ;  and  I  learned  to  tell  stories  partly  by  being 
obliged  to  tell  them.  One  boy,  whom  I  had  in  the  class,  used  to 
say  to  me,  "  This  is  very  dull,  teacher ;  can't  you  pitch  us  a  yarn  ?  " 
Of  course  he  was  a  naughty  boy,  and  you  may  suppose  that  he 
went  to  the  bad  when  he  grew  up,  though  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that 
he  did  ;  but  I  used  to  try  and  pitch  him  the  yarn  that  he  wanted 
in  order  to  get  his  attention  again.  And  I  dare  say  that  some  of 
our  hearers,  if  they  were  allowed  to  speak  out  during  the  sermon, 
would  ask  us  to  pitch  them  a  yarn,  that  is,  to  give  them  something 
to  interest  them.  I  believe  that  one  of  the  best  things  you  can 
do  to  teach  either  the  old  or  the  young  is  to  give  them  plenty  of 
anecdotes  and  illustrations. 

I  think  it  would  be  very  useful  to  some  of  you  who  are  not  yet 
adepts  at  the  art  of  illustration  if  you  were  to  read  books  in  which 
there  is  an  abundance  of  metaphor,  simile,  and  emblem.  I  am  not 
going  fully  into  that  subject  on  this  occasion,  because  this 
lecture  is  only  preliminary  to  the  next  two  that  I  hope  to  deliver, 
in  which  I  will  try  to  give  you  a  list  of  cyclopedias  of  anecdotes 
and  illustrations,  and  books  of  fables,  emblems,  and  parables  ;  but  I 
advise  you  to  study  such  works  as  Gurnall's  Christian  in  Complete 
Armour,  or  Matthew  Henry's  Commentary,  with  the  distinct  view 
of  noticing  all  the  illustrations,  emblems,  metaphors,  and  similes 
that  you  can  find.  I  should  even  select  mm-comparisons ;  I  like 
Ketch's  Metaphors  where  he  points  out  the  disparity  between  the 
type  and  the  Anti-type.  Sometimes,  the  contrasts  between  different 
persons  or  objects  will  be  as  instructive  as  their  resemblances. 

\Vhen  you  have  read  the  book  once,  and  tried  to  mark  all  the 
figures,  go  through  it  again,  and  note  all  the  illustrations  you 


WHERE  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  ? 

missed  in  your  first  reading.    You  will  probably  have  mitted  many: 
and  you  will   be  surprised  to  find  that   there  an-   Mutt  men 

in  the  words  themselves.  How  frequentlv  a  word  is  itself  a 
picture!  Some  of  the  most  expressive  words  that  are  found  in 
human  language  are  like  rich  gems,  which  have  passed  before 
your  eye  very  often,  but  you  have  not  had  time  t<>  hand 
value  them.  In  your  second  examination  of  the  book,  vou  will 
notice,  perhaps,  what  eluded  you  the  first  time,  and  yon  will  find 
many  illustrations  which  are  merely  hinted  at,  in>tead  of  1 
given  at  length.  Do  as  I  have  recommended  with  a  great  many 
books.  Get  copies  that  you  can  afford  to  mark  with  a  coloured 
pencil,  so  that  you  will  be  sure  to  see  the  illustrations  readily  ;  or 
put  them  down  in  one  of  your  note-books. 

I  am  sure  that  those  brethren  who  begin  early  to  keep  a  : 
of  such  things  act  wisely.     The  commonplace-books  of   the   old 
Puritans  were  invaluable  to  them.     They  would  never  have  i 
able  to  have  compiled  such  marvellous  works  as  they  did  if   thev 
had   not  been  careful  in  collecting  and   arranging   their  matter 
under  different  heads;  and  thus,  all  that  they  had  ever  read  upon 
any  subject  was  embalmed   and   preserved,  and  thev  could  readilv 
refer   to  any   point   that    they    might  require,    and   refresh    their 
memories,  and  verify  their  quotations.      Some  of  us,  who  ar< 
busy,  may  be  excused  from  that  task;  we  must   do  the  he- 
can,  but  some  of  you,  who  go  to  smaller  charges,  in  the  country 
especially,  ought  to  keep  a  commonplace-book,  or  else  I  am  afraid 
you  will  get  to  be  very  commonplace  yourselves. 

Your  selection   of    similes,   metaphors,  parables,  and    em- 
will   not    be   complete    unless   you   also   search    the   Scriptures   to 
Jind  the  illustrations  that    are    recur*!,'*!  tlsr?.     Biblical    a' I  unions 
are  the  most  effective  methods  of  illustrating  and  enforcing 
trutbs  of  the  gospel;    and  the   preacher  who  is   familiar  with  his 
Bible  will  never  be  at  a  loss  for  an  instance  of  that  which 
profitable   for    doctrine,   for    reproof,    for   correction,    for   in-! ruc 
tion  in  righteousness."    The  Lord  must  have  meant  us  th:: 
his  Word,   otherwise   he  would    not    have    given   us,   in   the  Old 
Testament,  such  a  number   of  types  and   lymboll  «-f  truths  to  be 
afterwards  more  fully  revealed  under  the  gospel  di>p< 

Such  a  collection  of  illustrations  as  I  h .-,  ^ted  will 

very  handy  to  you  in  future  days,  and  you   will  be   reminded,  by 
the  comparisons  and  figures  used   by  others,  to   make  con, 
and  figures  for  your>elt'.      Familiarity  with  anything  mill. 
fait  at  it;  we  can  learn  to  do   alm<»t    anything  by  practice.     1 


68       WHERE  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  ? 

suppose  that  I  could,  by  degrees,  learn  to  make  a  tub  if  I  spent  my 
time  with  a  man  engaged  in  that  business.  I  should  know  how 
to  put  the  staves  and  the  hoops  if  I  stayed  long  enough  in  the 
cooper's  yard  ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  any  of  you  could  learn 
anything  you  desired  provided  you  had  sufficient  time  and  oppor 
tunity.  So,  if  you  search  for  illustrations,  you  will  learn  to  make 
them  for  yourselves. 

That  brings  me  to  my  last  point.  I  began  this  lecture  by 
warning  you  against  the  practice  of  making  anecdotes ;  I  close  it 
by  advising  you  often  to  set  your  self  the  task  of  making  illustrations. 
Try  to  make  comparisons  from  the  things  round  about  you.  I 
think  it  would  be  well,  sometimes,  to  shut  the  door  of  your  study, 
and  say  to  yourself,  "  I  will  not  go  out  of  this  room  until  I  have 
made  at  least  half-a-dozen  good  illustrations.''  The  Chinese  say 
that  the  intellect  lies  in  the  stomach,  and  that  the  affections  are 
there,  too.  I  think  they  are  right  on  the  latter  point,  because, 
you  know,  if  you  are  ever  very  fond  of  anybody, — your  wife,  for 
instance, — you  say  that  you  could  eat  her ;  and  you  also  say  that 
such  and  such  a  person  is  very  sweet.  So,  too,  the  intellect  may 
lie  in  the  stomach ;  and  consequently,  when  you  have  been  shut  in 
for  two  or  three  hours,  and  begin  to  want  your  dinner  or  tea,  you 
maybe  quickened  into  the  making  of  the  six  illustrations  I  have 
mentioned  as  a  minimum.  Your  study  would  be  a  veritable  prison 
if  you  could  not  make  as  many  useful  comparisons  as  that  from 
the  different  objects  in  the  room.  I  should  say  thkt  a  prison 
itself  would  furnish  suggestions  for  making  many  metaphors.  I 
do  not  wish  you  to  go  to  prison  for  that  purpose  ;  but  if  you  ever 
do  get  there,  you  ought  to  be  able  to  learn  how  to  preach  in  an 
interesting  manner  upon  such  a  passage  as  this, — "Bring  mv  soul 
out  of  prison  ; "  or  this,  "  He  was  there  in  the  prison.  But  the 
Lord  was  with  Joseph." 

If  you  cannot  get  your  brains  to  work  in  the  house,  you  might 

take  a  walk,  and  say  to  yourself,  "  I  will  wander  over  the  fields,  or 

11  get  into  the  garden,  or  I  will  stroll  in  the  wood,  and  see  if  I 

cannot  find  some  illustration  or  other.     You  might  even  go  and 

f  in  at  a  shop-window,  and  see  if  there  are  not  some  illustra 
tions  to  be  discovered  there.  Or  you  might  stand  still  a  little 

lie,  and  hear  what  people  say  as  they  go  by  ;  or  stop  where 
*  a  little  knot  cf  idlers,  and  try  to  hear  what  they  are 

<mg  about,  and  see  what  symbol  you  can  make  out  of  it  You 
also  spend  as  much  time  as  you  can  visiting  the  sick;  that 


<  AN  wi:  riM»  ACTDGDOTtt  AND  ILLI 

will  be  a  most  profitable  tiling  t..  .1...  for  in  that  sacred  M 
you  will  have  many  opportunities  of  getting  illustrations  from 
the  tried  children  of  God  as  you  hear  their  varied  experience^.  1: 
is  wonderful  what  pages  of  a  new  cyclopaedia  of  illustrative 
teaching  you  might  find  written  out  with  indelible  ink  if  you  went 
visiting  the  sick,  or  even  in  talking  with  children.  Many  of  them 
will  say  things  that  yon  will  be  able  to  quote  with 
your  sermons.  At  any  rate,  do  make  up  your  mind  that  you  will 
attract  and  interest  the  people  by  the  way  in  which  you  s,-t  the 
gospel  before  them.  Half  the  battle  lies  in  making  the  attempt, 
in  coming  to  this  determined  resolution,  "  God  helping  me,  1  will 
teach  the  people  by  parables,  by  similes,  l.y  illustrations,  by  any 
thing  that  will  be  helpful  to  them;  and  I  will  seek  to  be  % 
thoroughly  interesting  preacher  of  the  \Vord." 

I  earnestly  hope  you  will  practise  the  art  of  making  illustra 
tions.  I  will  try  to  prepare  a  little  set  of  e \i-r.-ises  for  you  to  do 
week  by  week.  I  shall  give  you  some  subject,  ami  some  object, 
between  which  there  is  a  likeness ;  and  I  shall  get  you  to  try 
to  see  the  resemblance,  and  to  tind  out  what  comparisons  can  be 
instituted  between  them.  I  shall  also,  if  I  can,  give  you  some 
subject  without  an  object,  and  then  say  to  you,  "  Illustrate  that  ; 
tell  us,  for  instance,  what  virtue  is  like."  Or,  s,,m,.tim«-s,  1  may 
give  you  the  object  without  the  subject,  thus, — "  A  diamond  ;  how 
will  you  use  that  as  an  illustration  t  "  Then,  sometimes,  I  may 
give  you  neither  the  subject  nor  the  object,  but  just  say,  "  Bring 
me  an  illustration."  I  think  we  might,  in  this  way,  make  a  I 
exercises  which  would  be  very  useful  to  you  all. 

The  wav  to  get  a  mind  worth  having  is  to  ur>-t  one  well  stored 
with  things  worth  keeping.     Of  course,  the  man  who  has  the  must 
illustrations  in  his  head,  will   be   the  one   who  will   use  the  most 
illustrations  in  his  discourses.    There  are  some  preachers  who  have 
the  bump  of  illustration  fully  developed  ;  they  are  sure  to  illus 
trate  their  subject,  they  cannot  help  it.     Ther  men  who 
always  see  'Mikes";  they  catch  a  comparison  long  before  others  see 
it.     If  any  of  you  say  that,  yon  an-  not  go..d  at  illustrating.  I  reply, 
"My  brother,  you  must  try  to  irrow  horns  if  yon  have   M,,t  an\  <>n 
your  head."      You  may   never   be   able  to  develop  ftl 
of  imagination  or   fancy   if  yon    do   n-.t    powesi    it    at    the  : 
just  as  it  is  hard  to  make  a  cheese  out  of  a  millstone*— bal  by 
diligent  attention  to  this  matter,  you  may   improve  upon  wl... 
now  are.     I  do  believe  that  some  fellow,  have  a  depression  in 

craniums  where   there  ought  to  be  a  bump.      I  knew  a  fOlUg  man, 


70        WHERE  CAN  WE  FIND  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  ? 

who  tried  hard  to  get  into  this  College ;  but  he  never  saw  how  to 
join  things  together  unless  he  tied  them  by  their  tails.  He  brought 
out  a  book ;  and  when  I  read  it,  I  found  at  once  that  it  was  full  of 
-..ries  and  illustrations ;  that  is  to  say,  every  illustration  or 
story  in  the  book  was  one  that  I  had  used,  but  there  was  not  one 
of  them  that  was  related  as  it  ought  to  have  been.  This  man  had 
so  told  the  story  that  it  was  not  there  at  all ;  the  very  point  which 
I  had  brought  out  he  had  carefully  omitted,  and  every  bit  of  it 
\\as  told  correctly  except  the  one  thing  that  was  the  essence  of  the 
whole.  Of  course,  I  was  glad  that  I  did  not  have  that  brother  in 
tin-  College;  he  might  have  been  an  ornament  to  us  by  his  de 
ficiencies,  but  we  can  do  without  such  ornaments,  indeed,  we  have 
had  enough  of  them  already. 

Finally,  dear  brethren,  do  try  with  all  your  might  to  get  the 
power  to  see  a  parable,  a  simile,  an  illustration,  wherever  it  is  to 
be  seen ;  for  to  a  great  extent  this  is  one  of  the  most  important 
qualifications  of  the  man  who  is  to  be  a  public  speaker,  and 
especially  of  the  man  who  is  to  be  an  efficient  preacher  of  the 
Sjospel  of  Christ.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  made  such  frequent  use  of 
parables,  it  must  be  right  for  us  to  do  the  same. 


LECTURE  V. 

%top;ntia<5  of  ^netdotcs  and  .Musfralions. 


IN  my  last  lecture,  I  promised  to  give  yen  a  list  of  cvdop.-edias  Of 
anecdotes  and  illustrations,  so  far  as  they  are  at  present  known  to 
me;  and  I  hope,  011  another  occasion,  to'tcll  you  about  books  that 
contain  fables,   emblems,   and   parables.     For  this  aften. 
must  confine  our  attention  to  collections  of  anecdotes  and  illus 
trations  which  have  been  compiled  specially  for  the  use  of  mini 
and  Christian  workers  in  general. 

I  do  not  know  what  book  of  illustrations  the  apostle  Paul   used 
He  had  some  books,  for  he  wrote  to  Timothy,  "The  cloke  that  I 
left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  when  thou  comot,  bring  with  th.v.  and 
the  books,  but  especially  the  parchments"      The  books  mav  ; 
been  various  Latin  and  Greek  works  that  Paul  needed  t 
ence,  and  the  parchments  were,  possibly,  the  original  manuscript* 
of  his  epistles;  but,  whatever  they  were,  he  did'  not   like  to   lose 
them,  so  he  asked  his  son  Timothy  to  bring  them  to  him.      i 
parchments  may  have  been  his  notes  of   illustrations   :hat   he  had 
jotted  down  in  his  journeying*,  or  his  commonplace- book,  such  as 
I  have   advised   you  all  to  make.     At  all   events,  whatever   the 
earliest  preachers  had,  we  know  that  books  of  illustrations,  mrta- 
phors,  and  similes,  have  been  issued  for  centuries.  Th«.M-«,f  vou  who 
can  read  Latin  easily,  may  find  a  great  More  of  such  work-.    While 
I  was  arranging  the  material  for  this  lectuiv.  1  received  acatal-- 
of  nearly  three   hundred   hooks  of  emblems,  and  similar  publ. 
tions,    printed    in    Latin,    French,    Italian,    Dutch,    Spanish,    and 
German;  but  any  man  who  wished    to  make  a  collection  of  such 
works   would   need    more    money   than    UMially  falls    to  the   lot   of 
Baptist  pastors. 

For  us  poor  English  people,  the  first  cyclopedia  that  I  li 
ivc-.minend  is  SPENCEli's  Thiny*  Nnc  ,tml  < >/<l.     This  i>  a  l.o..k.  vou 
kuow,  which  was  scarcely  purchasable  till  Mr.  Dickinson  ivjirii.: 


72          CYCLOPAEDIAS   OF   ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

it  (after  revision  by  Rev.  J.  G.  Pilkington,  M.A.),  bound  up  with 
C  \w  DRAY'S  Similes,  in  a  very  bulky  volume  of  1,112  pages.  The 
original  title-page  explains  the  character  of  the  work,  so  I  will 
read  the  description  in  full,  though  it  is  rather  long: — Things 
New  and  Old;  or,  a  Storehouse  of  Similes,  Sentences,  Allegories, 
Apophthegms,  Apologues,  Adages,  Divine,  Moral,  Political,  etc., 
— with  their  several  applications.  Collected  and  Observed  from  the 
Writings  and  Sayings  of  the  Learned  in  All  Ages  to  the  Present. 
By  John  Spencer,  a  Lover  of  Learning  and  Learned  Men.  With 
Preface  by  Thomas  Fuller.  This  book,  published  in  1658,  was 
compiled  by  a  man  who  was  librarian  at  Sion  College  more  than 
two  centuries  ago.  I  find  that  Spencer  was  elected  librarian 
September  2,  1634,  and  with  certain  interruptions,  during  which 
he  was  suspended  or  discharged,  and  then  re-appointed,  he  oc 
cupied  the  post  till  his  death  in  1680.  Being  for  such  a  long 
period  in  charge  of  that  very  remarkable  collection  of  valuable 
books,  he  made  extracts  from  them,  and  thus  prepared  this  volume. 
It  was  a  very  happy  circumstance  for  me  that  John  Spencer 
should  have  happened  to  be  the  librarian  of  that  institution,  and 
that  he  should  have  compiled  so  good  a  book;  for  I  have  always 
been  able  to  make  good  use  of  it. 

Years  ago,  I  recommended  this  volume  to  the  students,  and 
several  of  them  have  since  told  me  that  they  thought  I  made 
a  mistake  in  doing  so.  They  bought  the  book  on  my  recommenda 
tion,  but  they  did  not  care  for  it,  and  they  have  sold  it.  I  ought 
to  be  impressed  by  their  very  valuable  opinions;  but  I  am  not,  for 
I  like  Spencer  still.  Some  of  his  illustrations  are  very  queer, 
cramped,  and  antique  ;  and  if  a  man  does  not  take  the  trouble 
to  trim  and  shape  them  into  more  modern  form,  he  cai«not  use 
them.  They  require  labour  to  make  them  of  service  ;  but,  when  I 
praised  the  book,  I  thought  that,  if  a  sensible  man  could  get 
hold  of  even  the  tail  of  an  illustration  or  anecdote,  it  would  be 
CMinugh  for  him  to  make  something  out  of  it  for  himself;  and 

:<>re  I  recommended  Spencer.  On  looking  over  the  volume 
a-iain,  I  must  admit  that  there  are  many  things  in  it  that  are  not 
now  usable;  but  I  am  also  quite  certain  that,  to  me,  it  has  been  a 
great  thought-breeding  book.  It  has  often  started  me  with  an 
Utwtration  that  I  should  never  else  have  thought  of;  therefore 
[  have  good  reason  to  speak  well  of  it.  I  opened  my  volume 
a-rani  this  morning,  just  to  see  whether  I  was  mistaken  or  not, 

-e  I  have  great  faith  in  the  judgment  of  all  the  students 
who  go  out  of  this  College ;  and,  on   further   examination    and 


CTCLor.KDiAS   OF   AHBODOTBS    kHD    ICLUBTEAT*  73 

consideration,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  1  was  ri.'ht  in 
my  first  estimate  of  the  work. 
Let  me  read  to  you  No.  XL,  on  page  4  :— 

AFFLICTION    FROM    GOD    IS    FOR    HIS    CHILDREN'S    GOOD. 

•«  A  tender-hearted  father,  walking  with  his  little  son,  I  suppose  in  the 

aZC  U    a  '  and  wander  from 


thd  '  er  rom    ''»- 

withdraws  himself  behind  some  pillar,  or  hides  himself  in  some  corner 

of  the  street,  not  that  he  means  to  lose  him.  but  to  make  him  cry  and 
seek  after  him,  and  keep  closer  to  him  afterwards  ;  so  doth  our  heavenly 
Father  with  us.  He  correcteth  every  son  whom  he  loveth  ;  he  hides 
himself,  and,  as  it  were,  pulls  in  the  beams  of  his  gracious  favour  for  a 
time,  when  we  are  rambling  about  in  our  thoughts,  and  roving  in  our 
imaginations  ;  but  it  is  to  make  us  cry  after  him  the  louder,  and  keep 
closer  to  him  for  the  time  to  come,  and  walk  more  circumspectly  than 
ever  we  did  before." 

I  think  that  is  a  very  pretty  illustration.  You  have  often  seen 
a  parent  or  a  nurse  thus  act  with  the  children.  In  like  manner, 
God  sometimes  hides  himself  from  us  for  a  while  that  we  may  be 
made  to  cling  the  more  closely  to  him  afterwank 

Here  is  another  of  Spencer's  illustrations,  No.  xvii.,  ,>n  the 
next  page  to  the  one  I  just  gave  you  :  — 

THE    DIFFERENCE    BETWIXT    SPIRITUAL    AND    CARNAL    PRAVFKS,    IN 
RESPECT    OF    ANSWER. 

"  Children  shoot  arrows  on  purpose  to  lose  them,  and  never  so  much 
as  look  where  they  light  ;  but  men,  when  they  shoot,  aim  at  the  mark, 
and  go  after  the  arrow,  to  see  how  near  it  falls.  So,  wicked,  carnal 
men,  when  they  have  said,  not  made,  their  prayers  to  Almighty  God, 
it  is  but  opus  operatum  ;  they  have  no  more  regard  of  them.  But  God's 
children,  when  they,  upon  the  bended  knees  of  their  souls,  dart  out 
their  prayers,  when  they  pour  out  their  requests  unto  him,  they  look 
after  their  prayers,  eye  them  up  into  heaven,  observe  how  (loci  enter 
tains  them,  and  wait  for  a  happy  return  at  his  good  will  and  pleasure." 

Therein  you  have  a  true  idea  of  prayer,  as  the  psalmist  puts  it 
in  Psalm  v.  3:  '«  In  the  morning  will  I  .lireet  my  praver  unto 
thee,  and  will  look  up."  That  would  l.e  a  good  text  for  you  to 
preach  from  on  Sunday.  The  id.  -a  i<  that  the  suppliant  is  like  a 
rrian  with  a  bow  and  arrow,  taking  aim,  diivrtini:  his  |»raver  unto 
God,  and  then  looking  up  to  see  wlu-iv  it  goes,  ami  \\  also 

to  see  what  answer  is  coming  down  in  response  to  his  supplication 

Take  another  illustration  from  the  same  page  :  — 

GOD'S    KNOWLEDGE    AND    MAN'S    KNOWLKDGE,    THE    DIFFERENCE    IN 
VIEWING   THINGS. 

"  In  a  sheet  almanack,  a  man  may,  uno  intuitu  (at  one  view),  see  all 
the  months  in  the  year,  both  past  and  to  come  ;  but  in  a  book  almanack, 


74  CYCLOPAEDIAS    OF   ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

as  he  turneth  to  one  month  so  he  turneth  from  another,  and  can  but 
look  only  on  the  present.  This  is  the  true  difference  betwixt  the  know 
ledge  of  God  and  man.  He  looketh  in  one  instant  of  time  to  things 
past,  present,  and  future ;  but  the  knowledge  of  man  reacheth  only  to 
a  few  things  past  and  present,  but  knoweth  nothing  at  all  of  things  that 
are  to  come.  That  is  God's  prerogative  so  to  do,  and  a  piece  of 
learning  too  high  for  any  mortal  man  to  attain  unto." 

That  seems  to  me  to  be  a  beautiful  picture,  looking  on  the 
whole  year  at  once  as  on  a  sheet  almanack,  instead  of  seeing  only 
a  page  at  a  time  as  in  a  book  almanack.  Thus,  to  God's  all- 
si-eing  eye,  events,  past,  present,  and  to  come,  all  stand  out  clearly 
revealed,  while  our  restricted  vision  perceives  but  little  of  the 
past  and  present,  and  nothing  of  the  future. 

To  No.  xxiii.,  Spencer  prefixes  this  title,  "  The  Danger  of 
Trusting  to  Worldly  Greatness  in  Time  of  Distress!'  and  upon  this 
subject  he  says  : — 

"  As  a  traveller  in  a  storm  that,  for  shelter  against  the  weather, 
steppeth  out  of  the  way,  betaketh  him  to  a  fair  spread  oak,  standeth 
under  the  boughs,  with  his  back  close  to  the  body  of  it,  and  findeth 
good  relief  thereby  for  the  space  of  some  time,  till  at  length  cometh  a 
sudden  gust  of  wind,  that  teareth  down  a  main  arm  of  it,  which,  falling 
upon  the  poor  traveller,  either  maimeth  or  mischieveth  him  that  resorted 
to  it  for  succour  ;  thus  falleth  it  out  with  not  a  few,  meeting  in  the  world 
with  many  troubles,  and  with  manifold  vexations,  they  step  aside  out  of 
their  own  way,  and  too  often  out  of  God's,  to  get  under  the  wing  of 
some  great  one,  and  gain,  it  may  be,  some  aid  and  shelter  thereby  for 
a  season,  but  after  a  while  that  great  one  himself,  coming  down  head 
long,  and  falling  from  his  former  height  of  favour  and  honour,  they  are 
also  called  in  question,  and  so  fall  together  with  him,  that  might  other 
wise  have  stood  long  enough  on  their  own  legs,  if  they  had  not  trusted 
to  such  an  arm  of  flesh,  such  a  broken  staff  that  deceived  them." 

Well,  brethren,  you  need  not  use  that  metaphor  exactly  as 
Spencer  does  ;  though  I  think  he  turns  it  to  good  account.  Many 
a  man  does  go  under  a  tree  for  shelter  from  the  storm,  and  then 
a  l.i.uirh  of  that  tree  falls  on  him  to  his  injury.  This  would  be  a 
good  illustration  of  Isaiah  xxx.  1 — 3  :  "  Woe  to  the  rebellious 
children,  saith  the  Lord,  that  take  counsel,  but  not  of  me;  and 
that  cover  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  my  spirit,  that  they  may  add 
sin  to  sin  :  that  walk  to  go  rlown  into  Egypt,  and  have  not  asked 
at  my  mouth ;  to  strengthen  themselves  in  the  strength  of 
Pharaoh,  and  to  trust  in  the  shadow  of  Egypt !  Therefore  shall 
rength  of  Pharaoh  be  your  shame,  and  the  trust  in  the 
shadow  of  Egypt  your  confusion." 

This  book,   Things  New  and  Old,  is  almost  full  of  good  things 


CYCLOPEDIAS    OF    ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS.          Y3 

such  as  I  have  read  to  you.     I  have  taken  them   just  as  mv 
caught  them;  I  have  not  attempted  to  make  a  selection  fr.uV 
2,283  illustrations  that  are  liere  giv.-n.     Therefore,    I 
in  recommending  this  work  to  you ;  and  I  hope  it  will  prove  as 
helpful  to  you  as  it  has  long  been  to  me. 

CAWDRAT  is  not  so  good  as  Spencer  by  along  way  :  his  ill  . 
tive  extracts  are  of  a  very  different  class.   You  cann.  ; 
without  Cawdray,  as  the  two  aiv  hound  together;  an.l,   then-: 
though   he  is   not  so  useful  as  Spencer,  yon   must   take  him  as 
being  given  into  the  bargain.     His  hook  was  printed  in  l»;o'.»: 
full  title  is: — A  Treasury;  or,  Storehouse  of  Similes  both  Pleatnnt, 
Delightful,  and   Profitable,   for    all  Estates  of  Men    in    General. 
Newly -collected  into  Heads  and  Commonplaces.     By  Hubert   ( 
dray.     Here  is  a  sample  of  his  selections  : — 

ADVERSITY    BETTERETH    THE   GODLY,    BUT    MAKETH  THE  WICKED  WORSE. 

"  Even  as  full  wheat  in  the  ear  falleth  out  with  the  least  motion  of 
the  sheaf,  but  that  which  is  somewhat  shrunk  more  hardly  lea  vet  h  the 
husk,  while  that  which  is  altogether  shrunk  will  rather  go  to  the  chaff 
than  go  out  of  the  ear;  so,  a  sincere-hearted  Christian,  with  the 
affliction,  leaveth  his  sin,  and  flieth  to  God.  The  weaker  Christian 
more  hardly  doth  the  same  ;  but  the  apostate  will  rather  burn  with  un 
quenchable  fire  than  forsake  his  beloved  sin,  that  so  he  may  turn  to 
God." 

I  think  that  is  a  very  good  illustration,  because  everv  thresher 
must  know  that  there  is  this  difference  Let  ween  the  grains  of 
wheat,  and  there  certainly  is  such  a  contrast  as  Cawdray  points  out 
between  the  effect  of  aflliction  upon  believers  and  tin-  ungodly. 

Another  pretty  illustration  is  the  one  numbered  xn. : — 

AFFLICTION. 

"  As  a  piece  of  brass,  being  stricken  with  a  hammer  upon  the  anvil 
or  stithy,  breaketh,  and  withal  maketh  a  sharp  and  irksome  noise  ;  so, 
when  a  hypocrite  cometh  betwixt  the  anvil  and  the  hammer  of 
troubles  and  affliction,  he  breaketh  with  impatience,  he  murmureth, 
crieth  out,  and  lamenteth  in  blasphemies  against  God." 

Now,  if  I  am  examining  a  book,  I  do  not  mind  if  I  have  to 
twenty  pages  before  I  find  one  illustration  that    1  can  BfOJ    I  fe«-l 
rewarded  when  I  meet  with  that  one,  and  you  must  do  the  same, 
brethren.  Books  of  illu-J  ration  are  very  much  like  hymn-books,  and 
books  of   tunes.     There  is  not  a  hymn-hook  which  you  ever  think 
of  singing  through  from  beginning  to  end.     Then-  is  not  a  book 
tunes  extant  of  which  anvhodv  ever  sing.s  more  than  one  in  three; 


76          CYCI.(H'.KI>IAS   OF   ANECDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

even  in  a  collection  like  Mr.  Sankey's,  you  would  not  want  to  sing 
all  the  pieces.  Well,  so  is  it  with  books  of  illustrations.  Yet, 
though  you  do  not  sing  all  the  hymns  or  tunes  in  any  hook,  some 
body  else  prefers  those  which  you  do  not  sing,  and  so  the  whole  selec 
tion  may  be  useful  to  someone  or  other.  In  like  manner,  you  might 
say  of  any  cyclopaedia  of  illustrations,  "  I  could  only  use  twenty  of 
the  metaphors  here  ;  "  but  somebody  else,  who  was  less  wise  than 
you,  might  be  able  to  utilize  forty  ;  while  another  preacher,  who 
had  not  half  as  many  brains  as  you  had,  managed  to  secure  fifty; 
and  there  might  even  be  some  brethren  who  could  find  a  hundred 
illustrations  where  you  very  clever  gentlemen  only  saw  twenty. 
There  is  no  harm  in  having  a  rather  larger  supply  than  you 
yourself  need  ;  for  what  you  do  not  use  another  preacher  may. 
Here  is  another  of  Cawdray's  similes  : — 

A    REGENERATE   MAN    FALLETH    NOT    FINALLY. 

"As  with  a  man  in  travelling  from  Berwick  to  London,  it  may  be 
that,  now  and  then,  he  doth  go  amiss,  and  out  of  his  way,  but  he 
speedily  returns  to  the  way  again,  and  his  course  generally  shall  be  right; 
even  so,  it  is  the  property  of  the  regenerate  man  to  walk  according  to 
the  Spirit,  which  does  not  mean  now  and  then  to  make  a  step  forward, 
but  to  keep  his  ordinary  course  in  the  way  of  godliness." 

Well,  brethren,  we  have  probably  found  that  to  be  true  in  our 
own  case ;  if  we  have  ever  gone  aside  from  the  right  path,  I  trust 
that  we  have  speedily  returned  to  the  way  of  holiness. 

I  think  this  must  suffice  for  SPENCER'S  Things  New  and  Old, 
and  CAWDRAY'S  Similes,  published  by  Mr.  Dickinson. 

Before  Mr.  Dickinson  reprinted  this  book,  as  Spencer's  volume 
was  extremely  dear,  and  not  obtainable  by  the  general  public,  a 
MR.  SALTER  brought  out  a  sort  of  hash  of  Spencer,  with  some 
modern  illustrations  intermingled  with  the  older  extracts.  The 
title  that  he  gave  to  his  work  was,  The  Book  of  Illustrations ;  or, 
Scripture  Truths  Exhibited  by  the  Aid  of  Similes,  Original  and 
Selected.  By  the  Rev.  H.  G.  Salter,  A.M.,  Curate  and  Lecturer 
of  Glastonbury.  It  was  published  by  Messrs.  Hatchard  and  Son. 
1  see  that,  in  1858,  I  wrote  in  my  copy,  "  A  right  good  book,  but 
not  so  good  as  precious  old  Spencer."  This  worthy  clergyman,  in 
making  his  book,  imagined  himself  to  be  walking  in  an  untrodden 
path,  and  in  attempting  the  work  of  collecting  metaphors,  he 
thought  he  should  get  very  little  reward.  He  considered  that  it 
required  no  small  degree  of  moral  courage  to  undertake  such 
a  task,  because,  as  he  said  :— "  It  is  safer  to  follow  others.  The 


CYCLOPAEDIAS  OF    ANECDOTES    AMD    ELLU8TBAT*  77 

fact  that  the  public  are  not  in  po><es-ion  of  MOM  work   of  thi< 
nature,  would  discourage  most  men;  and  the  enquiry.  »/•/,»/  i' 
so,  would  present  an  obstacle  at  the  beginning.    Hut  t  he  ivijuest  of 
some,   eminent  in    judgment,   to   publish   on   the    sul.j.-.-t.    which 
originated  the  idea,  strengthened   by  the   unanimous   approval  of 
those  whom  I   consulted,  overcame  my    hesitation.       Indeed,   the 
desire  to  possess  a  full  collection  of  illustrations,  I  found,  was 
general  with  the  clergy  to  whom  it  was  mentioned. 

"But  another  and  a  greater  discouragement  will  he  found  in  the 
subject-matter.      Its    materials    cannot  be  subjected  to  the    ju-t 
decisions  of  Reason,  but  the  capricious  judge  to  be  appealed  to  is 
Taste.     Whether  any  particular  illustration   should  be   I 
or  rejected,  can  hardly  be  decided  by  Reason.     There  are  no  ; 
principles  to  try  it  by ;  it  will  be  liked  or  disliked  often  without 
any  assignable  grounds.     As  our  tastes  and  fancies   vary,  M  will 
be  our  approval  or  otherwise.     So  various  is  the  character  of  men's 
minds,  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  obtain  a  uniform  judgment. 
Some  illustrations,  of  singular    point  and    beauty,   might 
universal  approval;    but  this    excellence  cannot    be    expected   to 
belong  to  illustrations  in  general,  any  more  than  to  other  subj. 
Here,  1  hen,  we  must  surrender  at  discretion   to  the  taste  of  our 
judge.      In  general,  the  standard  of    Taste  has   been    tolerably 
adjusted.     Here  it  is  otherwise." 

Mr.  Salter  made  a  very  good  index  to  his  book,  and  he 
scarcely  anything  except  Spencer;  but  what  he  did  use  that  wrai 
not  Spencer's  was  well  chosen,  and  selected  from  writers  of 
considerable  repute.  There  are  many  good  stories  in  the  volume. 
Here  is  one  which  I  have  no  doubt  you  know,  hut  which,  possibly, 
you  may  never  have  seen  used  in  this  way : — 

SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

*'  Sir  James  Thornhill  was  the  person   who  painted  the  inside  of  the 
cupola  of  St.  Paul's,  London.     After  having  finished  one  of  the  compart 
ments,  he  stepped  back  gradually,  to  see  how  it  would  look  at  a  distai. 
He  receded  so  far  (still  keeping  his  eye  intently  fixed  on  the   paint: i 
that   he  had  gone  almost   to  the  very  edge  of  the  scaffolding  witi. 
perceiving  it;  had  he  continued  to  retire,  half  a  minute   mme  would 
have  completed  his  destruction,  and  he  must  have  fallen  to  the  pave 
ment  underneath.     A   person    present,  who  saw  the  danger  the  great 
arti  t  was  in,  had  the  happy  presence  of  mind  to  suddenly  snap  up  one 
of  the  brushes,  and  spoil  his  painting  by  rubbing  it  over.     Sir  James, 
transported    with   rage,   sprang  forward  to  save  the  remainder  of  the 
piece;  but  his  anger  was  soon   turned  into  thanks,  when  ^on 

said  to  him,  '  Sir,  by  spoiling  the  painting,  I  have  saved  the  life  of  the 
painter.     You  had  advanced  to  the  extremity  of  the  sea/Told  without 


78  CYCLOPAEDIAS   OF   ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

knowing  it.  Had  I  called  out  to  you  to  apprise  you  of  your  danger, 
you  would  naturally  have  turned  to  look  behind  you,  and  the  surprise 
of  finding  yourself  in  such  a  dreadful  situation  would  have  made  you 
fall  indeed.  I  had,  therefore,  no  other  method  of  saving  you  but  by 
acting  as  I  did.' 

"Similar,  if  I  may  so  speak,  is  the  method  of  God's  dealing  with 
his  people.  We  are  all  naturally  fond  of  our  own  legal  performances. 
We  admire  them  to  our  ruin  ;  unless  the  Holy  Spirit  retrieve  us  from 
our  folly.  This  he  does  by  marring,  as  it  were,  our  best  works ;  by 
showing  us  their  insufficiency  to  justify  us  before  God.  When  we  are 
truly  taught  of  God,  we  thank  him  for  his  grace  instead  of  being  angry 
at  having  our  idols  defaced.  The  only  way  by  which  we  are  saved  from 
everlasting  destruction,  is  by  being  made  to  see  that  'by  the  deeds  of 
the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight.'  " 

I  suppose  that  our  ministerial  fathers,  two  generations  ago,, 
used  to  be  very  well  satisfied  with  BUCK'S  Anecdotes.  The  full 
title  of  the  book  is,  Anecdotes,  Religious,  Moral,  and  Entertaining; 
Alphabetically  Arranged,  and  Interspersed  with  a  Variety  of  Useful 
Observations.  Selected  by  the  late  Rev.  Charles  Buck.  It  was 
published  by  Messrs.  Longman,  Brown,  Green,  and  Longmans. 
The  date  of  my  copy  is  1842,  and  the  work  had  at  that  time 
reached  the  tenth  edition  ;  so  I  judge  that  it  had  a  good  long 
run.  I  do  not  see  very  much  in  the  anecdotes  ;  and  I  expect  the 
reason  why  they  do  not  particularly  impress  me  now  is  that  I  know 
most  of  them  by  heart.  If  the  stories  were  just  a  little  older,, 
they  would  be  almost  as  useful  as  if  they  were  new;  but  they  have 
reached  that  period  in  which  they  are  apt  to  be  considered  stale. 
Still,  there  are  among  them  some  anecdotes  that  have  not  been 
used  more  than  once  a  week  lately,  and  therefore  can  be  brought 
out  again.  Here  is  an  old  story  which,  I  suppose,  you  have 
often  heard : — 


THE    WORLD    A    SEA. 


A  friend  of  the  famous  Mr.  J.  Dod  being  raised  from  a  mean  estate 

ich  worldly  greatness,  Mr.  Dod  sent  him  word  that  this  was  but 

:e  going  out  of  a  boat  into  a  ship  ;  and  he  should  remember  that,  while 

he  was  in  the  world  he  was  still  on  the  sea.    Let  us,  then,  wisely  prepare 

ifficulties,  and  learn  to  cast  all  our  cares  on  him  who  holds  the 

m  his  fists,  who  stills  the  waves  of  the  sea,  and  who  has  promised 

to  guide  his  people  safe  into  the  haven  of  rest." 

Here  is  an  anecdote,  rather  clumsily  told,  about— 


A    PRECOCIOUS    BOY. 


"A  child,  six  years  of  age,  being  introduced  into  company  for  his  ex- 
•dmary  abilities,  was  asked,  by  a  dignified  clergyman,  '  where  God 


CYCLOPAEDIAS   OF  ANECDOTES    AND    ILI.t  >Ii:All 

was?'  with  the  proffer  of  an  orange.    '  Tell  me,'  replied  the  boy,  •  where 
he  is  not,  and  I  will  give  you  two.' " 

Well,  there  are   many  stori,  s   M   good  as  these  two;  and  pos 
sibly  some  of  them  may  l.e  ,|uite  new  to  your  congl 
you  can  obtain  a  copy  of  this  book,  it  may  be  worth  your  while 
to  secure  it;  indeed,  you  should  make  it  'a  rule  that,'  « 
you  see  books  of  anecdotes  to  be  sold  cheaply,  you  ihould 
them  to  your  library  if  you  can  spare   the   ninney,  for 
among  the  things  that  are  indispensable  to  you. 

The  next   -rood   man  who   did  much   to  furnish  minister-;  with 
illustrations  was  Mu.  JOHN  WHITECKOSS.    Wlii 
are  always    to   be   had   at  a  reasonable  price.      There   are   t 
volumes  of  them  ;   their  full  titles  an-,  .  I  mcdotes  Hi.  .  \ 

Select  Passage  in  Each  Chapter  of  the  Old    . 
Illustrative  of  Select  Passages  in  each  Chapter  of 'the  Xew  TV 
and  Anecdotes   Illustrative   of  the  Assembly  8    Shorter  Cal>:<'/, 
They  were  published  in  Edinburgh  by  Messrs.  Oliphaiit  and  Co., 
and  in  London  by  Messrs.  Hamilton,  Adams,  and  ' 

The  plan  of  arrangement  in  Whitccro.xs's  Anecdotes  .11 
the  method  adopted  in  the  books  i  have  previously  mentioned,  for 
the  stories  are  put  under  selected  pa^a^cs  of  Scripture  m^cad  of 
under  subjects  or   topics.     In   the  Old  Testament,   for  metal 
Mr.  Whitecross  begins  with   (i  and   he  gives  one  anecdote 

illustrating  verse  sixteen  of  the  first  chapter  of  that  Honk,  another 
on  verse  three  of  the  second  chapter,  another  on  u •:  n  of 

the  third  chapter,  and  so  on,  some  of  the  anecdotes  beim:  appro 
priate  to  the  text,  and  some  of  them  not  so  suitable,  Here  u  an 
anecdote  that  is  given  as  an  illustration  of  Genesis  viii.  '2'2  : — 

"  While  the  earth  rcmaineth,  seedtime  and  harrfst,  and  ccld  and  heat, 
and  summer  and  winter,  and  day  and  night  shall  not  cease? 

"A   minister,  going  to  church  one  Lord's-day  morning,    when   the 
weather  was  extremely  cold  and  stormy,  was  overtaken  by  one  of  his 
neighbours,  who,  shivering,  said  to  him,  'It's  very  cold,  sir.'     'Oh!' 
replied  the  minister,  '  God  is  as  good  as  his  word  still.'     The  other 
started  at  his  remark,  not  apprehending  his  drift,  or  what  he 
and  asked  him  what  he  meant.     'Mean?'  replied  he,   'why,  he 
mised,  above  three  thousand  years  ago,  and  still   he   makes   his  word 
good,  that  while  the  earth  remaineih,  seedtime  and  harvest,  and  cold  and 
heat,  shall  not  cease." 

Well,  that  is  an  interesting  anecdote  to  t.-ll  on  a  wintry  Sai.l.ath 
morning;   but  there  is  not   much  in  it.      Neither  'he 

anecdotes  given  in  these  books  very  remarkable ;  but  many-t'  tiM-ui 


£0          CYCLOPAEDIAS   OF   ANECDOTES   AND   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

may  be  useful.  Do  not,  however,  say  that  the  incidents  happened 
t  .  vou,  as  I  have  known  some  preachers  do.  Why,  I  actually 
heard,  not  long  ago,  of  a  minister,  who  said  that  a  certain  thing 
occurred  to  him  the  other  day,  and  yet  I  told  the  original  story 
t  wiMity  years  ago  I  When  I  related  it,  I  said  that  it  had  been  my 
experience  the  other  day,  and  I  believed  it  was  so;  but  after 
hearing  that  this  man  says  it  happened  to  him,  it  makes  me 
question  whether  it  really  did  occur  to  me  at  all.  I  think  it  is  a 
great  pity  for  a  preacher,  or  any  speaker,  to  try  to  make  a  story 
appear  interesting  by  saying  that  the  incident  related  happened  to 
him,  when  it  really  did  not.  Scrupulous  truthfulness  should 
always  characterize  every  one  who  stands  up  to  proclaim  the  truth 
of  God. 

Here  is  a  good  story,  and  there  are  others  of  a  similar  character, 
which  are  both  valuable  and  usable.  This  is  intended  to  illustrate 
the  fourth  verse  of  the  one  hundred  and  thirtieth  Psalm : — 

"  There  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou  mayest  be  feared" 

"  One  Mr.  Davies,  a  young  man,  being  under  religious  impressions, 
opened  his  mind  to  Dr.  Owen.  In  the  course  of  conversation,  Dr.  Owen 
said,  '  Young  man,  pray,  in  what  manner  do  you  think  to  go  to  God?' 
Mr.  Davies  replied,  '  Through  the  Mediator,  sir.'  '  That  is  easily  said,' 
observed  Dr.  Owen ;  '  but  I  assure  you,  it  is  another  thing  to  go  to  God 
through  the  Mediator,  than  many  who  make  use  of  the  expression  are 
aware  of.  I  myself  preached  some  years,  while  I  had  but  very  little,  if 
any,  acquaintance  with  access  to  God  through  Christ,  until  the  Lord  was 
pleased  to  visit  me  with  a  sore  affliction,  by  which  I  was  brought  to  the 
brink  of  the  grave,  and  under  which  my  mind  was  filled  with  horror ; 
but  God  was  graciously  pleased  to  relieve  my  soul  by  a  powerful 
application  of  Psalm  cxxx.  4  "  But  there  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that 
thou  mayest  be  feared."  From  this  text  I  received  special  light,  peace, 
and  comfort,  in  drawing  near  to  God  through  the  Mediator ;  and  on 
this  text  I  preached  immediately  after  my  recovery.'  Perhaps  to  this 
exercise  of  mind  we  owe  his  excellent  exposition  of  this  Psalm." 

There  are  also,  in  Whitecross's  Anecdotes,  some  very  beautiful 
experimental  pieces  from  the  great  divines ;  and  therefore  I  recom 
mend  you  to  purchase  them  if  you  can. 

THK  RELIGIOUS  TRACT  SOCIETY  published  twelve  small  volumes 
of  anecdotes,  at  one  and'  fourpence  each.  I  suppose,  therefore, 
you  can  buy  them  for  one  shilling  each.  They  should  not  be 
reckoned  dear  at  that  price,  and  each  volume  ought  to  supply  you 
with  many  anecdotes.  If  you  only  pick  one  or  two  pearls  out  of 
each  of  1  hrse  oyster-shells,  it  will  be  worth  all  you  pay  for  it.  The 
anecdotes  in  these  books  are  arranged  according  to  topics,  each 


OTOLOPJBDUfl   <>F   ANEOD01  ES     HID    n.i.i  81    .  M  : 

volume    being   devoted   to   01  i  :— Adn 

Conduct,    Christian    Graer<,   Christian    Mini*;  M    . 

sions,  Holy  Scriptures.  MUe.-lhm.-mis  Pro-. 

Social  Life,  Sunday  Schools,  and  The  Young.     T 

have  in  my  hand  is  on    the    Holy  Scriptur--.      I    A  ill    «.n!v 

you  with  one  extract;  but  I  know  that  there  is  qnil 

tion  of  anecdotes  here,  so   that,  if  you    had   1  llil.k- 

Society  meeting  in  the  country,  this  hook  won!  |  .rnish 

you  with  most  of  the  materials  for  a  spe.-eh.     This  i  .  that 

I  had  noted  to  read  to  you  from  this  volume  :  — 

FATHER    FULGKNTIO. 

"  Father  Fulgentio,  the  friend  and  biographer  of  the  celebrated  Paul 
Sarpi,  both  of  them  secret   friends  of  religious  reformation.  \v.. 
preaching  upon  Pilate's  question,  «  What   is   truth  ?  '  when  he  told  the 
audience  that  he  had,  at  last,  after  many  searches,  found  it  out ;  and. 
holding  forth   a  New  Testament,  said,  '  Here   it  is,  my  friends  ; '  but 
added  sorrowfully,  as  he  returned  it  to  his  pocket, '  It  is  a  sealed 
It  has  since  been  the  glory  of  the  Reformation  to  break  the  seal  which 
priestcraft  had  imposed  upon  it,  and  to  lay  its  blessed  treasures  i» 
mankind." 

There  are  some  anecdotes  in   the  other  volume  whi<-h  are  well 
worth    telling;  here    is    one   from   the  collection   entitled    v 
Life:— 

MARSHAL    DE    RASSOMFTKE. 

"  The  Marshal  de  Bassomptre  said  to  one  of  his  officers,  '  How  old 
are  you?'  '  I  cannot  tell  exactly,'  said  the  captain  ;  '  but  I  am  either 
thirty-eight  or  forty-eight.'  '  How  is  it,'  asked  the  marshal,  '  that  you 
are  so  ignorant  in  a  concern  that  every  person  finds  pleasure  in  know 
ing?  '  '  Why,'  said  the  captain,  '  I  keep  an  exact  account  of  my  rents, 
and  what  is  owing  to  me,  for  fear  of  being  cheated ;  but  I  never  trouble 
my  head  about  my  years,  because  nobody  can  rob  me  of  th 

"  Poor  man  !  did  he  not  know  that  he  was  robbed  of  his  pit 
time  every   day  and  every  hour?     It  is  gone,  too,   beyonr 
If  a  thief  steals  our  money,  it  is  possible  we  may  get   it  again  ;  but 
time  that  is  past   never   returns :  life  that   is  wasted  is   gone  for  ever. 
Learn,  then,  to  turn  to  account  every  passing  hour." 

I  cannot  very  strongly  recommend  the   twelve    volumes,    as  a 
whole;  still,    a    shilling  is  not  much   to  pay   for  such    , 
stories  as  each  of  these  little  hooks  contains,  so  you  will  do  well  to 
add  them  to  your  library. 

The  book  of  all   1  ^a  of 

Moral    and    ReH'i'i,  "    of   nearly    Three 

Thousand   /«V/.«,  Incidents,  Narratives,  Examples,  a> 


?2  CYCL<>r .KDIAS    OF   ANECDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

1  took  in  my  copy  of  Arvine,  many  years  ago,  from  the  Primitive 
Mcthodi>ts,  who  brought  it  out  in  sixpenny  numbers.  The  edition 
<-., riveted  and  authorized  by  Mr.  Arvine  is  the  one  edited  by  REV. 
JOHN  FLKSIIEK,  and  published  by  Mr.  George  Lamb,  Button  Street, 
London,  E.  Arvine's  work  is  really  a  perfect  cyclopaedia.  After 
u>ini:  it  for  many  years,  I  am  still  of  opinion  that  scarcely  any 
thing  better  in  the  way  of  a  collection  of  anecdotes  has  come  out 
since.  The  arrangement  and  classification  of  the  subjects  are 
excellent,  and  the  copious  topical  and  textual  indexes  are  admirable. 
You,  gentlemen,  who  are  very  enthusiastic  teetotallers,  will  find 
this  book  exactly  to  your  taste ;  in  parts,  it  is  as  dry  as  a  furnace, 
and  some  of  the  anecdotes  are  sufficiently  strong  for  the  most 
ardent  abstainer.  It  is  a  capital  book  for  all  that;  and  I 
should  like,  for  once,  to  read  a  volume  in  which  the  evils  of 
intemperance  are  overdravsn.  There  is  a  book,  called  The  Devil's 
Chain,  written  by  Mr.  Edward  Jenkins,  M.P.,  the  author  of 
Ginafs  Baby ;  but  terrible  as  are  the  descriptions  in  that  book, 
the  dreadful  doings  of  drink  are  not  exaggerated.  When  I 
was  a  boy,  I  went  to  Madame  Tussaud's,  and  paid  sixpence 
extra  to  go  into  the  chamber  of  horrors ;  but  I  always  thought 
that  I  had  not  my  full  sixpennyworth  ;  but  when  I  read  The  Devil's 
Chain,  I  had  horrors  enough  there.  I  do  not  think  anyone  could 
pourtray  all  the  evils  of  intemperance,  or  of  the  drink  system. 
This  book  of  Arvine's  is  none  the  worse,  but  all  the  better,  for 
the  anecdotes  about  drunkenness,  for  those  of  you  who  do  not 
want  to  use  these  wonderful  stories  about  intemperance,  can  let 
them  alone  ;  and  you  who  do  need  them  for  your  temperance 
addresses,  can  find  plenty  of  them  here. 

I  suppose  that  most  of  you  are  well  acquainted  with  Arvine ; 
but  I  will  give  you  two  of  his  anecdotes,  one  showing  the  doctrinal 
position  of  the  editor,  and  the  other  giving  rather  an  amusing 
description  of  how  a  preacher  practically  "improved  the  oppor 
tunity  "  of  occupying  the  pulpit  of  a  brother  minister : — 

RIDDLE'S  DYING  TESTIMONY. 

"  Mr.  Edward  Riddle,  an  aged  Christian  in  Hull,  remarked,  a  few 
days  before  his  death,  to  one  who  was  present,  '  Some  may  suppose 
that  a  person  at  my  time  of  life,  and  after  so  long  making  a  profession  oi 
religion,  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  die  and  go  to  heaven ;  but  I  find  that 
I  have  as  much  need  to  go  to  God  through  Christ,  as  a  sinner,  at  the 
last  hour  as  at  the  beginning.  The  blood  of  Christ,  the  death  of  Christ, 
ais  victory  and  fulness,  are  my  only  ground  of  faith,  hope,  and  confidence ; 
there  is  the  same  need  of  him  to  be  the  Finisher  of  my  faith  as  there 
was  for  him  to  be  the  Author  of  it.'  " 


CYCLOPAEDIAS    OF    AXKCI>OTL>    AM'     I  l.I.t  -  1  UA  1  1"N>.  83 

The  editor  inserts  the  following    foot-note  to    tin-    ] 
about  going  to  God  as  :i  sinner  ;  but  you  and  I,  bivtluvn,  will  agree 
with  good  old  Mr.  Riddle  : — 

"  This  and  similar  views  are  not  ours :  we  believe  that  Christians 
may  live  without  sin  ;  still,  other  people  have  as  much  right  to  their 
belief  as  we  have  to  ours." 

THE    PULPIT   WINDOW    AND    CUSHION    REPAIRED. 

"  The  Rev.  Zabeliel  Adams  at  one  time  exchanged  with  a  neighbour 
ing  minister, — a  mild,  inoffensive  man, — who,  knowing  the 
bluntness  of  his  friend's  character,  said  to  him,  'You  will  find  some 
panes  of  glass  broken  in  the  pulpit  window,  and  possibly  you  may  suffer 
from  the  cold.  The  cushion,  too,  is  in  a  bad  condition  ;  but  I  beg  of 
you  not  to  say  anything  to  my  people  on  the  subject ;  they  are  poor/  etc 
'Oh,  no  1  Oh,  no  ! '  said  Mr.  Adams  ;  but  ere  he  left  home,  he  filled 
a  bag  with  rags,  and  took  it  with  him.  When  he  had  been  in  the  pulpit 
a  short  time,  feeling  somewhat  incommoded  by  the  too  free  circulation 
of  the  air,  he  deliberately  took  from  the  ba^  a  handful  of  rags,  and 
stuffed  them  into  the  window.  Towards  the  close  of  the  discourse, 
which  was  more  or  less  upon  the  duties  ot  a  people  towards  their 
minister,  he  became  very  animated,  and  purposely  brought  down  both 
fists  upon  the  pulpit  cushions,  with  a  tremendous  force.  The  feathers 
flew  in  all  directions,  and  the  cushion  became  nearly  feathtrless.  He 
instantly  checked  the  current  of  his  thoughts,  and  simply  exclaimed, 
'  Why,  how  these  feathers  fly  ! '  and  then  proceeded.  He  had  fulfilled 
his  promise  of  not  addressing  the  Society  on  the  subject ;  but  he  had 
taught  the  members  a  lesson  not  to  be  misunderstood.  On  the  next 
Sabbath,  the  window  and  cushion  were  found  in  excellent  repair." 

Messrs.  Gould  and  Lincoln,  Boston,  U.S.A.,  published  another 
cyclopaedia  of  Arvine's,  which  I  do  not  think  has  been  reprinted  in 
England.     It    contains    3,040    illustrations,    and    is    entitled:    .1 
Cyclopaedia  of  Anecdotes  of  Literature  and  the  Fine  Arts  ;  <  '<mtau+ 
ing  a  Copious  and  Choice  Selection  of  Anecdotes  of  the  \ 
of  Literature,  of  the  Arts,  of  Architecture  Am/m  <•//,'/>-,   ' 
Painting,  and  Sculpture,  and  of  the  Most  Celebrated  Literary  ( '/.,.• 
ters  and  Artists  of  Different  Countries  and  Ages,  etc.     By  Knziitt 
Arvine,  A.M.     You  should  get  it  if  you  can. 

DR.  CHEEVER  brought  out  a  book  of  anecdotes,  but  all. 
all  of  them,  were  taken  from  Arvine.     J).»  not  buy  ( 
have  Arvine,  because  Cheevei  i-  >iiiiply  u  hashing-up  «'*'  the 
cal.l.ain-  Of  Arvine.      What   a  good    thing  it   is  for   those  who 
preparing  hooks  of  anec-dotes  to-day  that  so  main  il  pub 

lished  before  1     This  save>   them   the  trouble  of  inakin 
tioiis,  and  they  have  only  to  pick  out  U 


f*  I  CYCLOPAEDIAS   OF   ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

the  books  that  have  been  already  issued.  That  is  the  wav  people 
do  when  they  are  making  collections  of  anecdotes ;  each  man  takes 
the  stories  of  other  people  who  came  before  him,  so  that,  if  you 
have  many  of  such  books,  you  get  some  of  the  illustrations  over, 
and  over,  and  over  again.  Cheever  borrowed  from  Arvine,  and 
Arvine  from  Whitecross,  or  Buck,  or  Spencer  ;  and  where  AVhite- 
cross  and  the  others  borrowed  theirs,  I  do  not  know;  but  there 
muse  have  been  some  primaeval  Whitecross,  or  Buck,  or  Spencer, 
or  Arvine,  or  someone  else,  from  whom  all  the  others  stole  their 
good  things. 

Another  large  collection  of  illustrations  is  BATE'S  Cyclopedia.-  It 
is  entitled :  A  Cyclopaedia  of  Illustrations  of  Moral  and  Religious 
Truths  (Alphabetically  Arranged)  ;  Consisting  of  Definitions,  Meta 
phors,  Similes,  Emblems,  Contrasts,  Analogies,  Statistics,  Synonyms, 
Anecdotes,  etc.,  etc.  By  John  Bate.  It  was  originally  published  by 
Messrs.  Tresidder  and  Co.,  but  is  now  in  the  hands  of  Messrs. 
Jarrold  and  Sons.  If  anybody  praises  Mr.  Bate's  cyclopaedia  very 
highly,  I  should  have  to  a-bate  his  praise  somewhat.  Still,  it  is 
not  a  bad  collection  of  anecdotes,  and  it  has  some  very  good  things 
in  it.  It  has  a  good  deal  of  Arvine  in  it,  and  some  Whitecross  in 
it,  and  some  Buck  in  it,  and  it  has  some  of  Reach's  Metaphors  in 
it  It  has  also  some  of  Dr.  Guthrie's  illustrations;  in  fact,  it 
contains  a  great  many  very  good  things,  but  there  is  also  a  con 
siderable  number  that  nobody  could  use,  or  would  ever  think  of 
using.  They  help  to  make  the  book  bigger,  and  increase  its  price  ; 
%and,  I  hope,  they  also  increase  the  pay  of  the  good  man  who  made 
the  book,  which  is  a  very  desirable  and  proper  result.  Our  friend 
Hate  is  a  Wesleyan,  and  there  is  just  the  slightest  Wesleyan  tinge 
in  his  volume.  Of  course,  you  who  are  not  Wesleyans  can  do 
with  this  book  what  I  advised  those  who  are  not  teetotallers  to  do 
with  Arvine ;  you  can  pass  by  anything  that  you  do  not  like. 
This  is  not  the  best  collection  of  illustrations  that  ever  was  made ; 
hut  it  is  very  good  in  its  way. 

Then  followed  a  book  by  the  REV.  ELON  FOSTER,  of  New  York 

rearing  the  title,  New   Cyclopedia  of  Illustrations,  which  Messrs. 

kmson  and  Higham  brought  out;  but  Mr.  Foster,  beincr  an 

nericaa,  had  appropriated  so  many  of  Mr.  Bate's  illustrations 

at,  when  the  volume  was  printed  here,  Mr.  Bate  expected  Mr 

kmson  to  pay  him   a   royalty  on   all   the  copies  he  sold.     I 

t  have  done  the  same  thing  in  several  instances,  for  I  am  a 


CYCLOPAEDIA.-    01  LND    ILLUSTRATIONS*          85 

considerable  sufferer  In  these  makers  of  m 
never  make  one  now  witli.mt  plucking  mv  • 
and  using  my  il  nrtratioas  without  stint  I  do  not  my  ora 

that  matter;  but   there   is   one    thing   wlii.-h.  t<,   me,  is   a  gP 

<ause   for   complaint.      I    mrati,    when    j pie    take    mv 

Without  even  giving  m,.  the  civ  lit  of  it. 

When  a  certain  gentleman   produced    },;.   6nl  volume  ol 
dotes  and  illustrations,  there  WM  a  man  of  the  ,, 
who   was  a  decent  fellow   in    very    fair    repute,    10     the 
took     a    number    of     that    man'.,     thoughts,    and     put     h 
"Spurgeon,"  upon   them.     Here  and  there  in  the  book  mfl  the' 
name,  "  Spurgeon,"  "Spurgeon."    It  was  very  kind  to  use  the 

man's  illustrations  like  that,  and  to   put  hi-  name  to  them;    it  was 
very  kind,  indeed;    1  ought  to  take  my  hat   off    to  the  gentleman, 
and  I  would,  only  it  is  not  on  my  head,      lint  during  the  time  that 
the  second  volume  was   being  compiled,  tin-  Aforesaid    man   r.,m- 
mitted  himself  in  a  most  disgraceful  manner,  thn>ni:h  speakinj 
mind    about    the    teaching    of    the  Church     of    Kngland. 
action,  in   some  people's  estimati  -n,  is  a   sin    unto  d.-atli.      T:. 
fore,   the   compiler  was  unahle   to    put    the   name  of   thi^ 
man   into   his   second    volume;    but   he   was  unwillini;   to    retrain 
from  taking  the  wicked  man's  illustrations,   so   he   took  them,  and 
inserted  them  without  the  author's  nam.-,  and    then-   i\  the   tirst 
volume  disgraced  and  degraded  with   my  horrible  name;   h.-iv  it  is 
in  my  hand;  but  the  second  volume  has  my  thoughts  and  illustra 
tions  without  my  name.      No  doubt   that    is   thought  to   he  a  very 
great  improvement;  but  I  do  not  quite  see  the  justice  of  it. 

It  is  of  a  piece  with  the  way  in  which   I  have   been   treated  by 
other  Church  of  England  writers.      Th.'iv  is  a  certain  magaxii, 
theirs  which,  month  by  month,   used  to  have  a  piece  of    mint-  JM  it, 
taken  word  for  word  out  of  my  Feather.*  for  .'  ind  they  put 

at   the  bottom   of   the  liy  an   itltl  Author.       1  am  the  -old 

author."  One  editor  of  a  C'hnrch  of  Kngland  maga/.ine  took  J,>hn 
Pioughmant  Almanack,  —  and  "John  Ploughman,"  vmi  know,  i^  ;l 
particular  friend  of  mine, — well,  thi.s  gentleman  t.-.k  thralmai.ai-k, 
and  put  ill  every  month  the  whole  of  the  proved  -! 
February,  March,  and  so  on,  a-  if  they  had  been  his  own  ;  and  i 
wondered  how  long  that  kind  of  tiling  \\a-  _:"inur  I  to 

the  editor  to  say  that  it  was  ;l  \(-rv  briglit   i«li-a  for   him    • 
all   my  friend    ".John    I'longhman's  "    jimM-rbs   in    that    \\:u.   and 
print  them   in   his   maga/ine  as  he  was  doing,    but    that  I  \\.i-    in 
structed  by  ".John    Ploughman "  to   say  that    lie  was    not    to   do   it 


86  CYCLor.KDIAS    OF    ANKCDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

any  longer.  The  editor  wrote  back  to  ask  what  he  should  do, 
I H'cau.se  lie  had  begun  printing  the  proverbs,  and  he  should  like  to 
publish  tin-in  in  his  magazine  right  through  the  year.  I  said, 
"  \\YI1,  if  you  do  so,  you  ought  to  *ay  that  I  am  the  author  of  the 
proverbs,  and  say  that  you  took  them  from  me.  If  you  do  that, 
you  will  be  a  gentleman  and  a  Christian,  and  I  will  say  nothing 
more  about  the  matter  ;  but  as  that  is,  perhaps,  too  much  to  expect 
from  you,  you  may  simply  put  the  names  of  the  publishers,  and 
say  that  the  proverbs  are  '  John  Ploughman's,'  and  then  my  name 
will  not  defile  your  pages."  And,  would  you  believe  it,  brethren, 
the  gentleman  actually  accepted  the  second  alternative  ? 

I  cannot  imagine  in  what  state  of  heart  I  should  be  myself,  if, 

sitting  here  amongst  you  this  afternoon,  I  were  to  say,  '«  Well, 

brethren,  I  should  have  commended  certain  works  to  you ;  but  I 

hear  that,  the  other  Sunday,  the  author  spoke  from  his'  pulpit 

against  believers'  baptism,  and  therefore  I  will  not  advise  you  to 

buy  his  books."     Why,  I  should  think  myself  as  mean  as  certain 

other  people  I  have  known,  if   I  were  to  act  in  such  a  fashion  as 

And  for  a  man  to  take  my  pieces,  and  put  them  into  his 

book  without  inserting  my  name  as  the  author  of    them,   simply 

had  said  what  I  believe    to  be  the   truth  about    the 

Church  of  England,  I  think  to  be  atrocious.     It  may  be,  however, 

:hat,  in  the  exercise  of  his  Christian  charity,  he  thought  I  should 

e  exalted  above  measure  if  my  name  was  allowed  to  appear  to 

o  many  extracts,  so  he  kindly  omitted  it;  therefore,  with  that 

interpretation  of  his  action,  we  will  leave  the  matter. 

The  result  of  Mr.  Bate's  complaint  of  Mr.  Foster  was  that  Mr 
Alison  employed  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Pilkington,  Incumbent  of   St 
v  8,  West  Hackney,  and  compiler  of   The  Spiritual  Garland 
»  produce  another  book,  which  is  called,  The  Dictionary  of  lllus 
ions,   Adapted   to    Christian   Teaching:   Embracing  Mythology 
nalogies,  Legends,  Parables,  Emblems,  Metaphors,  Similes    Alle 
gories,  Proverbs;  Classic,  Historic,  and  Religious  Anecdotes;  etc 
believe,  the  best  book  of  illustrations  that  exists  at 
have  looked  through  all  the  cyclopedias  which  I  know, 
think  I  may  fairly  say  that  this  is  far  better  than  anything 
Je  of  the  kind  that ^  has  yet  been  produced.     I  may  also  say 
the  familiar  quotation,   «  Quorum  pars  magna  fui" 
e  are  many  pages  on  which  you  will  see  my  namT  printed 
so      may  be  said  to  have  a  very  fair  finger  in  tit  pie  Tc*s 
audly  commend  it  to  you,  excepting  the  portion  that  is  mine  • 


CYCLOPEDIAS    OF   ANECDOTES    AM)    1I.I.I  -IK  A  IK  >N&  87 

that,  I  do  not  care  about  recommending  to  you.  you  can  f,,nn  your 
own  opinion   upon   that   part   of  the-  work.'     I   think   it   i>  :i  well- 
arranged   and   judiciously-made   colled  nlv 
anecdotes,    and    really  good    illustrations,   hut    proverbial 
pithy  pieces,  and   things  worth   knowing  worth   saying,  and  worth 
•your    people    hearing.      I   should    decidedly    say    that    yon    cftl 
d-»  better   than    buy  this   eyclop.-p.lia,   DlOKIK8OH*fl    l>     :  >nary  of 
lllusfration*.      You   will    not   regret^   I    :nn   sure,   that   you    ha* 
invested  your  money.     There    an-    \\,1\\    extracts   in  the  Toll 
and  that  number  ought  to  be  sufficient  to  la^t  you  for  a  ueek  or 
two  at  lea-t. 

Then,  Mr.  Elliot  Stock  issued  two  books  of  illustrations.     The 
first  was  entitled,  The  New  Il-iwihonk  of  Illiistrntiun ;  ur,  I'r,  usury 
of  Themes,  Meditations,  A necdotes,  A nalogies.  Parables,  Siinilit* 
Types,  Emblems,  Symbol*,  Apologues,  Allegories,  and  1.  .1  oj 

'ji'ure   Truth  and  Christian  Life;  and  the  second  was  called, 
Tlif  Xt'io  Cyclopedia  of  Illustrative  Anr*-.!,  '• ,  RtKgiotU  >m,l  M 
Original  and   Selected.     I   remember  reviewing  this   New   Cyclo- 
I'.edia   of  Illustrative   Anecdote,   and    I    said  that    it  was  a  new 
cyclopaedia  of  very  old  anecdotes,  and  I  cannot  alter  that  verdict. 
The  cyclopaedia  is  new,  but  the  anecdotes  certainly  are  not.     T 
are  Whitecross's,  and  Arvine's,  and  everybody  elV<,  toudu-d  up, 
and  put  in  new  order.     Still,  if  yon  have  not  any  other,  you  will 
find  this  to  be  a  capital   book  of   illustrations.      \Ye   live  in  an 
in  which  everything  is  better  than  it  used  to  be.  and  I  hop 
thing  is  going  to  be  better   than  it   now   is.     Dr.   Gnthric    liked 
this    Cyclopaedia    of   Anecdote,    and    wrote    commending    it     - 
highly;  and  he  was  a  man  who  ought  to  know  the  value  of  Mich 
works,  for  he  was  himself  a  gr.-at    niaMer  of    the  art  of  illuM ra 
tion.     These  two  volumes  of  Sir.  Elliot  Stock's  would  : 
handsome  present  for  any  minister.    I   -  to  your  O 

tions,  brethren,  that  they  should  give  them  to  you  when  you  are 
settled  in  the  ministry. 

Among  the  very  best  books  of  illustrations  are  the  two  volumes 
by  MR.  BOWES,  entitled,  Illustniti'  ,•  '  wr.<  and 

Teachers.  A  M.mnnt  of  Anecdotes,  Facts,  Figure*,  Proverbs,  Quota 
tions,  fyc.  By  the  Rev.  G.  S.  Bowes,  B.A.,  formerly  factor  of  Chillen- 
den,  Kent,  and  late  scholar  of  Corpus  Chris  •  ' 

They  are  published   by  Messrs.  Nisbet  ami  Co.      I   canno: 
them  too  highly  ;  they  are  a  perfect  min 


CYCLOP. KMIAS   OF  ANECDOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

any  number  of  sermons  out  of  them  ;  that  is  to  say,  if  you  have  any 
:nons  in  your  own  soul,  and  if  you  can  make  them  when  the 
matrrials  an-  supplied  to  you.  The  compiler  of  these  books  has 
put  the  matter  he  lias  gathered  into  such  a  handy  shape,  that  you 
cannot  help  getting  good  by  using  his  works.  I  heartily  recom 
mend  Mr.  Bowes'  books  ;  and  I  believe  that,  whoever  bnvs  them 
upon  my  recommendation,  will  think  that  I  have  done  him  a  good 
service.  They  contain  an  admirable  collection  of  all  sorts  of  good 
things,  well  arranged  under  proper  headings  so  as  to  be  exceed 
ingly  helpful  to  a  student  or  minister.  There  are  not  only  anec 
dotes  and  illustrations,  but  also  parables,  and  witty  and  pithy 
remarks  upon  texts  of  Scripture,  and  notes  upon  various  doctrines, 
so  that  a  man  who  has  these  two  volumes  will  have  something 
which  will  last  him,  as  I  said  just  now  about  another  book,  for  a 
week  or  two,  at  any  rate.  I  question  whether  he  will  be  able  to 
use  all  the  material  he  will  find  there  for  many  a  day  to  come  ; 
he  will,  at  all  events,  be  saved  from  the  necessity  of  making 
anecdotes,  for  he  will  have  plenty  here  all  ready  for  use. 

The  last  book  of  illustrations  that  I  recommend  you  to  buy, 
if  you  do  not  already  possess  it,  is,  Feathers  for  Arrows  ;  or  Illus 
tration*  for  Preachers  and  Teachers,  from  my  Note-book.  By  C.  H. 
SPUKGEON.  It  has  as  many  new  illustrations  in  it  as  any  book 
that  1  know;  they  are  nearly  all  new,  and  they  are  all  original. 
I  met  with  a  High  Churchman  once,  who  told  me  that  he  had 
purchased  Feathers  for  Arrow*;  "and,"  said  he,  "some  of  the 
illustrations  are  very  telling;  but  they  have  to  be  used  with  great 
discretion."  His  words  seemed  to  imply  that  my  expressions  were 
possibly  a  little  too  strong,  and  perhaps  somewhat  rough  and  un 
polished  here  and  there;  so  he  said,  "They  must  be  used  with 
great  discretion."  "  Well,"  I  replied,  "  that  is  how  I  wrote  them." 
lie  looked  at  me,  but  he  said  nothing;  probably  it  had  never 
occurred  to  him  that  the  same  kind  of  discretion  was  necessary  in 
making  the  illustrations  as  in  using  them. 

I  shall  have  to  make  another  list  of  books  of  anecdotes  and 
illustrations  by-and-by  when  I  prepare  this  lecture  for  the  press ;  * 

•  As  ME.  SruBOEON  was  not  spared  to  carry  out  this  intention,  it  has  been 
deemed  advisable  not  to  make  any  additions  to  the  list  of  books  given  in  this  lecture 
and  tho  following  one,  but,  in  an  Appendix,  to  reprint  reviews  from  The  Sword  and 
the  Trowel  of  any  volumes  of  anecdotes,  illustrations,  etc.,  that  hare  been  published 
eince  the  lectures  were  prepared.  In  another  Appendix  will  be  found  a  complete 
catalogue  of  MB.  SPUBOEON'B  own  illustrative  works. 


rvn,,,  -.,.;,  >IA<  OF    VNI,  ,,.,.,.,    XN 


[>ut  this   list   comprehend  all    that    I    know  of   in  the      .s, 
language    at    the    present    time.      If   anv    brother    h-,v    kn( 
another  book  of  anecdotes  or  illustration,  that   I   have  M,lt   , 
tinned,  I  should  be  very  glad  if  ho  would  Ml  me  of  it   u  I  ,hould 
like  to  make  the  list  c»mplete.     I  have  used  all  m  M,i  ()llt 

any  ether  h:,oks  of  the  kind,  but  have  not  h, 

Of  course,  brethren,  I  am   fully  aware    that  there   is  a    h 
books  of  anecdote,  ,n  addition  to  those  I   have 
they  are  not  religious  anecdotes,  nor  were  they  compiled  For  the 
use  of  ministers.    That  opens  up  quite  another  field  of  aio 

L  have  often  obtained  quite  as  much  help  fro,,,  B 

not  religious  as  I  have  from  these  that  are.     The   Percy  An^htet 

must   always  he  elated  as  «A1"  amongst  bookl  of  miso 

anecdotes.      Even  volumes  of  wit  and   humour  may  h,-   of 
if  used,  as  my  High  Church  fri.-nd  said,  "  with  great 

There  is  a  shilling  book  of   wit  and    limm-iir,  which  cam.-  out  a 
little  while  ago,  which  really  has  some  stories  in  it   that 
well  worth   turning  to  account.      They  an-  amusin-,  hut   they 
narrated  as  facts  of   history,  and  they  illustrate   human   * 
in   such  a  way  that  you   can  very  easily  use  them   to  M-t  f..rth 
folly  and  stupidity  of  sin.      I  remember  one  of   the.,,-  storii 
the  mayor  of  a  town  in  France.    His  daughter  had  a  canary  : 
and  it  escaped  from  its  cage,  so  he  issued  a  proclamation  that  all 
the  gates  of   the  town  were  to  be  shut,  so  that   the   little  creal 
might  not  get  away.      That   is  a  very  telling   illn>t  ratio., 
men  tried   to   prevent  the  spread  of  religious  truth  in  the  olden 
time.  The  Roman  Catholics  shut  the  gates  to  keep  the  truth  within 
hounds;   but  truth,  like  the  canary  bird,  had  win-s  an.  I  it  was  no 
use  to  shut  the  gates  to  try  to  confine  it  to  the  town.     That  M 
mayor,   when  the  King  of  France    went    thn.u-h  the  town,  with 
thousands  of   armed  men,  told  him  that,  about   four  mil- 
there  was  a  very  dangerous  wood,  with  thieves  lurking  in   it.  and 
if  his  majesty  would  not  mind,  he  would  send  the  headle  and  : 
men  to  protect  the  army  as  they  went  through  the  irood  !      That 
is   wonderfully    like    the    way    in    which    the    Church   of    Kn^land 
protects  our  liberties  a>   Nonconformists       You   know  that  we  are 
all  indebted  for  our  civil  and   religious  liberty  to   the  Church 
England;  we  should  never   have    been  a;lo.\ed   to  exist    if  it  i 
not  been    for   the  church   as   by   law   established  ;  —  au   «<>nn>  .M; 
They  have  preserved  us  from  the  Church  of  md  th«-»    . 

now  doing  the  best    they   can,    with   their   hcadl«    . 


90  CYCLOPAEDIAS    OF   ANECDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

great  army  of  dissenters  against  all  dangers,  imaginary  and  real  I 
Well,  well,  brethren,  such  a  harmless  joke  as  that  can  be  very 
ivadily  turned  to  good  practical  account. 

There  is  a  great  number  of  books  of  illustrations,  such  as  those 
which  Mr.  TIMES  has  compiled,  under  the  title  of  Anecdote  Lives 
»f  \Hls  and  Humorists,  containing  much  information  about 
people  and  things  not  generally  known ;  but  then,  if  I  get  into 
that  line  of  illustration,  I  shall  begin  an  endless  task.  I  am  now 
only  trying  to  give  you  a  list  of  anecdotes  compiled  for  the  use  of 
ministers.  I  remember,  in  reviewing  PAXTON  HOOD'S  World  of 
Anecdote,  I  said  that  it  was  a  cyclopedia  of  religious  anecdotes 
and  others.  They  certainly  are  a  queer  assortment  of  stories,  as 
curious  a  collection  as  I  ever  saw  put  together.  I  have  often 
wondered  why  they  were  printed  at  all,  except  for  the  real  geniality 
and  fun  of  the  thing ;  whether  Mr.  Hood  ever  asked  a  blessing 
on  that  volume,  I  do  not  know. 

Many  shilling  books  of  anecdotes  have  come  out  at  different 
times ;  they  are  generally  to  be  seen  on  the  railway  bookstalls. 
Some  of  the  anecdotes  are  just  suitable  for  travellers  on  the 
railway ;  and  some  of  the  older  ones  are  very  old.  Mr.  Joseph 
Miller,  whoever  he  may  have  been,  was  the  author  of  a  large 
number  of  them.  A  remarkable  man  was  that  Mr.  Joseph 
Miller ;  but  brethren,  beware  of  ever  using  any  of  his  anecdotes, 
or  telling  any  of  his  stories  I  The  mention  of  this  venerable 
gi'iitU'inan,  and  his  ancient  sayings,  reminds  me  of  a  newspaper 
article  that  I  read  the  other  day,  a  few  extracts  from  which  will 
appropriately  close  this  already  long  lecture.  The  heading  of  the 
article  was  "An  Asylum  of  Similes",  and  the  writer  said  : — 

"  Among  the  institutions  of  the  future  there  certainly  ought  to 
be  an  asylum  for  similes,  a  place  of  quiet  retreat,  where  the 
decayed  similitude,  the  decrepit  metaphor,  and  the  aged  and 
tortured  illustration  may  find  rest,  and  be  definitely  relieved  from 
further  active  service.  There  is  a  vast  number  of  these  poor 
beings  at  present  wandering  up  and  down  columns  of  papers, 
pages  of  books,  and  speakers'  addresses,  who  have  well  earned  their 
right  to  be  pensioned  off.  Your  heart  is  filled  with  compassion 
when  you  meet  these  old  friends  on  the  literary,  oratorical,  or 
hortatory  high  road,  all  travel-stained  and  toil-worn,  and  you  are 
led  to  wish  that  some  means  could  be  found  of  keeping  them 

comfortably  indoors There  is  our  friend,  'the  old 

man  of  the  sea',  who,  by  this  time,  must  be  heartily  sick  of 
riding  on  orators'  necks,  and  being  denounced  and  flung  off  amid 


rv<  I/MM.I.I  \>   OP    LNBI         :  Kfl    \M>    n.i.i  STRATI 

tumultuous  applause.  This  poor  fellow  has  had  to  do  an  awful 
amountof  duty  in  his  time,  lie  has  had  now  to  rep:  -hief 

of  the  opj)osito  party,  ami  now  the  rival  candid  i  ne  tiinr  lie 

has  I,,.,. 11   forced   to   illustrate-    the   income    •  lt    another  the 

landlords    or     the     parsons;     he    was    howled    at     for 
'Protection',    and    now,  In-    is   beginning    to    he   h.>.,t.-d   as 
Trade.'      Surely,    in    this    case,  humanity  sln,,ild    st.-p   i,,.   :i  ,1    the 
aged  one  should  he  allowed  to  ivtire  to  the  asylum,  and  peacefully- 
breathe  his  last,  at   last.      He  might  do  so  verv  j.r  le  In 

side  with  Queen  Anne,  for  it  is  really  quite  time  that  >: 
good  and  all,  and  was  released  from  the  drudgery  of  servini:  the 
small  beer  of  witlings.  There  are  plenty  of  other  worth v  candi 
dates.  *  Macaulay's  schoolboy'  would  he  verv  <dad  now,  no  doubt, 
if  he  were  only  asked  to  leave  off  knowing  everything,  and  being 
made  a  butt  of  for  it.  This  poor  youth  has  been  trotted  out  to  he 
sneered  at  ever  since  he  was  horn,  and  has  never  heen  allowed  the 
ghost  of  a  holiday.  It  is  time  he  was  released  from  dm 
allowed  to  go  and  play  lawn-tennis  in  the  asvlum  UT»UH  Is 
with  the  Spartan  hoy,  who  has  surely  had  his  inside  torn 
out  by  that  fox  quite  enough  in  twenty  centuries  to 

the    most     brutal    moralist    in    search     of     illustrations 

Columbus,  also,  might  at  any  time  claim  admission  by  right  of  his 
egg.  Nearly  everybody  who  has  wanted  to  he  smart  or  striking 
has  quoted  that  egg,  and  modestly  suggested  the  in:  at  he 

is  the  man  to  'show  you  how'  ;    and  the  egg  must  he  fairly  addled 
by  now.     He  would   he  quite  at   home   in   the  asylum   with  that 
King  of  Spain  who  was  grilled  to  death  because  tin-   proper  • 
was  not  at  hand  to  turn  him  over  or  baste  him.     We  h 
hurled  the   latter  at  the  heads  of  the  people   in  onVial  positions, 
and  he  must  be  longing  to  be   left  to  grill    in  tranquillity,      g 
of    other    candidates   will    occur  to    every   one's    mind.      And   the 
'humans'    would    by   no   means    lack    specimens    of    the    animal 
creation  to  keep  them  company  in  the  asylum.     There  is  Ne\\  ton's 
dog  Diamond,  for  instance,  who  has  heen   pointing  the  moral  of 
patience  in  calamity  for  erei  BO  many  gnu-rations.      I'.rtice's  spider, 
too,   is  another  deserving  candidate.      The  superior  narrator    has 
been  lugging  this  poor  creature  into  his  improving  ta! 
for  ages  now,  till  he  has  made  him  the  terror  of  81 
of  youth.      It  is  time  he  was  allowed  to   leave  off  persevering,  and 
to  eat  his  flies  in  peace.      The  whole   of    JEaOD9!   DM1  '""lll(l 

certainly  be  admitted.  The  sarcastic  uay  in  which  the.se  poor 
animals  have  been  treated  for  ages  is  a  reproach  to  the  human 


i>2  CY<  hol'.KIHAS    OF   ANECDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

race.  .  .  .  Our  asvlum  would  not  lack  external  adornment.  There 
aiv  many  objects  of  nature  from  which  literature  and  oratory  have 
had  a  good  innings,  with  which  they  ought  to  be  satisfied.  For 
instance,  there  are  Scvlla  and  Charybdis,  who  were  recruited  for 
short  service  by  Homer,  but  have  been  kept  hard  at  work  in  the 
ranks  ever  since  his  day.  They  should  go  to  adorn  the  grounds, 
toovther  with  Pelion  and  Ossa,  and  be  soothed  to  rest  there  by  the 
Pierian  spring.  Then  Goldsmith's  tall  cliff,  that  midway  cleaves 
the  storm,  should  also  decorate  the  landscape ;  and  a  niche  should 
be  cut  in  it  for  Mahomet's  coffin,  which  has  been  used  as  a  simile 
for  a  dozen  centuries  in  spite  of  all  the  laws  of  matter,  and  might 
well  be  released  from  its  state  of  suspense.  And  here,  again, 
hundreds  of  other  suitable  candidates  will  suggest  themselves  to 
the  patient  reader.  Somebody  really  ought  to  found  this  asylum 
as  soon  as  possible,  in  the  interests  of  literary  humanity." 
And  so  say  all  of  us,  do  we  not,  brethren  I 


LECTURE   vr 

of  Jablcs,  (Emblems,  and   fJarablrs. 


MY    purpose   this    afternoon,    brethren,    is   t,,   .rive    yon    a    little 
guidance  as  to  books  in  which  you  can  find  fables,  embUn 
We  desire  to  preach  in  the  best  possible  man,,,  : 

o  maintain  our  people's  attention  from  the  tirst  word  wi 
the   close   of   the  discourse.      We  shall,   therefore,   fin 

lelptul,  not  only  to   make  use  of  illustrations  and  anecdot 
which  I  have  spoken  to  you  before,  but  also  to  have  a  •:  .....  i 

r  language,  a  variety  of  tone,  and  as  much  aa  possible  of  excellent 
matter  that  will  tend  to  light  up  and  explain  the  subject  on  whirl, 
we  are  speaking.  To  that  end,  we  shall  be  *  introduce 

into  our   preaching  parables  and  emblems,  as  many  of  them  as 


we  can. 


I   may  again  remind  you,  as  I  have  done  in  previous  lectures, 
that  the  teaching  of  God  himself  was  always  mainlv  by 
Hie  whole  of  the  typical  ceremonies  and  sacrifices  of  the  ,1 
law  are  so  many  acted  parables.      It  is  all  parabolical,  symbolical, 
emblematic  teaching;    the  lamb  killed,  the  blood  sprinkled,   the 
first-born    slain,    the   scape-goat   sent    away,  the   brazen  serpent 
uplifted,  and  so  on;  yon  know  the  interpretation  of  it  all  ;  it 
a  long  series  of  parables,  and  symbols,  and   types,   bv  which  God 
iraa    speaking    to    men.     Most 'of    the    Old    Testam  .m^ 

seems  to  have  IK  en  parabolical.     Th«-  j.n.phets  constantly  < 
]• arables  and  emblems;  indeed,  thev  were  not  only  in  the  bah 
throwing  truth   into  the  parabolic  an. i  emblematic  form,   but 
into  the  histrionic.      Many  condemn  an_\  thing  like  the  histrionic 
in    preaching;     I   mean    by   that    term,    the   acting   visit,;.. 
signs  and  tokens  which  bring  the  truth  to  the  rye  as  well  as  to  the 
ear.      The  prophets  made  use  of  that  method  \<  We 

find  Jeremiah  commanded  by  the  Lord  to  make  bun-: 
and    to   put   them   upon    hi  .,,d  afterward*  to  M-nd  then 

the  kings   of    Edom,    Moab,    Ammon,    T\  re,    and    Xidon,    a- 
emblem  of  their  servitude  to  the  king  <  ;ilso 


94  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

was  hidden  to  take  a  tile,  and  pourtray  upon  it  the  city  of 
Jerusalem,  "  and  lay  siege  against  it,  and  build  a  fort  against  it, 
and  cast  a  mount  against  it ;  set  the  camp  also  against  it,  and  set 
battering  rams  against  it  round  about."  He  was  also  told  to  take 
an  in>n  pan,  or  plate,  and  set  it  up  between  himself  and  the  city, 
to  show  after  what  style  it  would  be  besieged.  All  this  was  to  be, 
"  a  sign  to  the  house  of  Israel."  I  need  not  stay  to  mention  the 
many  forms  in  which  the  prophets  were  continually  instructing 
God's  ancient  people  by  signs,  and  symbols,  and  emblems,  and 
parables.  If  you  were  to  take  a  flower  into  the  pulpit,  and 
especially  if  you  were  to  exhibit  a  pair  of  scales,  as  Matthew 
Wilks  did,  you  would  be  put  into  the  newspapers,  and  be  pilloried 
for  weeks ;  but  the  prophets  were  divinely  commanded  to  act  as 
they  did,  and  they  therefore  obeyed  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  what 
ever  men  might  think  or  say  of  their  action. 

Similes  were  also  largely  employed  by  our  Lord  himself.  He 
put  truth  into  such  a  form  as  would  be  most  likely  to  arrest  the 
attention  of  men,  and  touch  their  hard  hearts,  and  reach  their 
seared  consciences  ;  he  taught  scarcely  anything  to  the  great  mass 
of  the  people  except  by  this  method  of  instruction :  "  without  a 
parable  spake  he  not  unto  them."  After  the  close  of  his  open-air 
addresses  to  the  multitudes,  his  disciples  came  to  him,  and  he 
opened  up  to  them  the  inner  meaning  of  his  public  discourses,  and 
gave  them  deeper  spiritual  truth  than  his  ordinary  hearers  were 
able  or  willing  to  receive.  We  may  conclude,  therefore,  from  our 
Lord's  use  of  the  parable,  that  it  is  a  most  important  mode  of 
teaching,  and  we  cannot  do  better  than  employ  it  ourselves  wher 
ever  and  whenever  we  can. 

If  any  of  you  want  to  find  a  good  article  upon  emblematic 
teaching,  and  especially  upon  the  parables,  you  should  read 
TRENCH'S  "  Introductory  Essay  "  to  his  Notes  on  the  Parables  of  our 
Lord  (Jo!. n  W.  Parker  &  Son).  There  you  will  see  how  he  draws 
a  distinction  between  the  parable  and  the  fable,  the  parable  and 
the  mythusj  the  parable  and  the  proverb,  and  the  parable  and  the 
allegory  ;  and  he  draws  these  distinctions,  I  think,  with  very  great 
wisdom  and  sense.  Much  more  might  be  said  upon  the  matter; 
but  there  is  quite  sufficient  in  what  he  has  written  for  a  preface 
to  a  book  on  our  Saviour's  parables,  and  there  is  much  that  it  will 
be  well  for  all  students  of  the  various  modes  of  speech  thoroughly 
to  understand.  Trench's  conclusion  puts  the  whole  matter  in  such 
a  concise  form  that  I  venture  to  read  it  to  you : 

"To  sum   up  all,    then,    the   parable  differs   from    the    fable, 


BOOKS  or   PABLE6,    EMBLEMS,    AND    I-AKVKLES. 


moving  as  it  does  in  a  spiritual  worM.  an«l  ne\,  ag  the 

actual  order  of  things  natural;  —  from  the   tin/tlm*.   tin-: 
tlie  latter  an  unconscious  blending  of  the  deeper  in.-aiiiuj  with  the 
outward  symbol,   th  ••   two  remaining  i-id  separable  in  the 

parable;  —  from   the   proverb,  inasiinieli  as  it  i-  Imr  1   cut, 

and    not    merely    acci  lentally    and    occasionally,     hnt     : 
figurative;  —  from    the    allegory,    comparing  as   it    docs   one   thing 
with  another,  but,  at  the  same  time,  preserving  them  apart  as  an 
inner  and  an  outer,  and  not  transferring,  u  ry,  the 

properties  and  qualities  and  relations  of  one  to  the  oth 

These  distinctions  are  so  well  drawn  that  I  really  need  add  very 
little  to  them  by  way  of  introduction  to  our  subject  thi*  afternoon. 
You  know  that  the  i/n/thus,  or  myth,  works  the  parable  so  into 
itself  that,  while  the  more  learned  and  thoughtful  understand  tlie 
meaning,  the  common  people  ure:  erally  accept  the  outside  form  a.s 
being  matter  of  fact  For  instance,  the  old  heathens  believed  that 
1  'haeton  obtained  leave  from  his  father  I  lelios  to  drive  t  he  chariot  of 
the  sun,  and  that  lie  drove  it  in  such  an  exceedingly  ivckle>s  manner, 
that  he  lost  all  control  over  the  horses,  and  nearly  s.-t  tin-  world 
on  tire,  and  he  would  have  done  so  if  .Jupiter  had  not  hurled  his 
thunderbolts  at  him.  upset  his  chariot,  and  destroyed  the  furious 
driver  in  the  fiery  river  Eridanus  I  But  that  is  not  the 
intended  to  be  taught  by  the  mythical  stor\  ;  it  is  meant  to  show 
how  many  a  young  man,  without  skill,  has  attempted  to  | 
a  nation,  and  brought  it  into  inextricable  difficulties;  or  it  is 
an  illustration  of  how,  sometimes  a  men-  novice  has  become  the 
teacher  and  pastor  of  a  Christian  church,  and  before  lon^  he 
has  tried  to  drive  the  chariot  of  the  sun,  but  has  been  hurled 
from  it,  and,  if  God  has  not  mercifully  prevented  such  a  calamity, 
to  his  own  destruction,  and  also  to  the  ruin  of  the  little  community 
of  which  he  tried  to  be  the  chariote.  r. 

The  mythus,  you  see,  makes  the  outside  covering  appear  as  if  it 
were   a  fact   instead    of   a    fiction,   and    so   misleads  rather   than 
instructs  the  people,  except   it   be  the  initiated,  who  pi.-rce  th: 
the  shell,  and  get  at  the   kernel,  the  truth  that  is   • 
the  multitude. 

As  for  the  allegory,  which   is  another  form  of  the  same  kind  i.f 
emblematic  teaching,  that  explains   it^-If  a<  it   goes  on,      It   per 
sonifies  this  and   that,  and   makes  .jualitics   into  persons  : 
proceeds,,  it  gradually  opens  it  -elf  up  to  the   hear.-r  r,  the 


id!  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND   PARABLES. 

explanation  and  the  outside  garb  keeping  side  by  side.  Allegories 
.tended  parables;  sometimes  they  are  parables  developed  in 
tli"  more  minute  points.  They  are  the  branches  of  a  great  rail 
way,  while  the  parable  is  the  grand  trunk  line  of  metaphorical 
thought  and  teaching. 

You  can  use  allegories  sparingly  in  preaching ;  but  I  should  not 
ndvisf  you  to  give  your  hearers  all  of  those  that  have  been  de 
livered  even  in  the  pulpit  in  the  olden  times.  I  think  every  one 
of  you  should  read  EDMUND  SPENSER'S  Faerie  Queene,  and  you 
ought  to  be  able  to  quote  those  verses  in  which  he  allegorizes  all 
the  vices  of  mankind.  There  are  some  lines  there,  which,  if  you 
can  transform  them  from  their  somewhat  grotesque  shape,  will  be 
worth  repeating  as  long  as  you  live  ;  they  are  masterly  delinea 
tions  of  the  vices  of  which  men  have  been  guilty.  There  is  one  part 
where  the  chariot  of  sin  is  represented  as  being  dragged  along 
by  "  six  unequal  beasts  ",  u  a  slothful  ass  ",  "  a  filthy  swine  ",  "  a 
bearded  goat",  "  a  camel  loaden  all  with  gold",  "  a  ravenous  wolf", 
and  "  a  lion,  loth  for  to  be  led,"  on  which  ride  Idleness,  Gluttony, 
Lechery,  Avarice,  Envy,  and  Wrath.  Just  as  specimens,  let  me 
give  you  the  stanzas  concerning  Envy  and  Wrath,  and  the  descrip 
tion  of  the  diabolical  waggoner  whom  Spenser  represents  as  driving 
*his  dreadful  team  : — 

XXX. 

"  And  next  to  him  malicious  Envy  rode 
Upon  a  ravenous  wolf,  and  still  did  chaw 
Between  his  canker'd  teeth  a  venomous  toad, 
That  all  the  poison  ran  about  his  chaw ; l 
But  inwardly  he  chawed  his  own  maw 
At  neighbours'  wealth,  that  made  him  ever  sad ; 
For  death  it  was  when  any  good  he  saw  ; 
And  wept  that  cause  of  weeping  none  he  had 
But  when  he  heard  of  harm,  he  waxed  wondrous  glad. 

XXXI. 

"  All  in  a  kirtle  of  discolour'd  say a 
He  clothed  was,  ypainted  full  of  eyes  ; 
And  in  his  bosom  secretly  there  lay 
A  hateful  snake,  the  which  his  tail  uptyes  : 3 
In  many  folds,  and  mortal  sting  implyes  :  * 
Still  as  he  rode,  he  gnasht  his  teeth  to  see 
Those  heaps  of  gold  with 5  griple fl  Covetise ; 
And  grudged  at  the  great  felicity 
Of  proud  Lucifera,  and  his  own  company. 

1  Jaw.        »  Many-coloured  silk.        »  Twists.        *  Wraps  up.       6  In  possession  of. 

8  Grasping. 


BOOKS    OF  FABLES,    EMI.I.T  M<      \M>    I'VUABLES.  97 

XXXII. 

41  He  hated  all  good  works  and  virtuous  deeds, 
And  him  no  less,  that  any  like  did  use  ; 
And,  who  with  gracious  bread  the  hungry  feeds, 
His  alms  for  want  of  faith  he  doth  accuse  ; 
So  every  good  to  bad  he  doth  abuse : 
And  eke l  the  verse  of  famous  poets'  wit 
He  does  backbite,  and  spiteful  poison  spues 
From  leprous  mouth  on  all  that  ever  writ : 
Such  one  vile  Envy  was,  that  fifth  in  row  did  sit. 

XXXIII. 

"  And  him  beside  rides  fierce  revenging  Wrath, 
Upon  a  lion,  loth  for  to  be  led ; 
And  in  his  hand  a  burning  brand  he  hath, 
The  which  he  brandisheth  about  his  head  : 
His  eyes  did  hurl  forth  sparkles  fiery  red, 
And  stared  stern  on  all  that  him  beheld ; 
As  ashes  pale  of  hue,  and- seeming  dead  ; 
And  on  his  dagger  still  his  hand  he  held, 
Trembling  through  hasty  rage,  when  choler  in  him  swell'd. 

XXXIV. 

41  His  ruffin1  raiment  all  was  stained  with  blood 
Which  he  had  spilt,  and  all  to  rags  yrent ; 
Through  unadvised  rashness  waxen  wood  ;* 
For  of  his  hands  he  had  no  government, 
Ne  cared  for  blood  in  his  avengement : 
But  when  the  furious  fit  was  overpast, 
His  cruel  facts  he  often  would  repent ; 
Yet,  wilful  man,  he  never  would  forecast, 
How  many  mischiefs  should  ensue  his  heedless  haste. 
XXXV. 

"  Full  many  mischiefs  follow  cruel  WVath  ; 
Abhorred  Bloodshed,  and  tumultuous  Strife, 
Unmanly  Murder,  and  unthrifty  Scath, 4 
Bitter  Despite,  with  Rancour's  rusty  knife ; 
And  fretting  Grief,  the  enemy  of  life  : 
All  these,  and  many  evils  more  haunt  Ire, 
The  swelling  Spleen,  and  Frenzy  raging  rife, 
The  shaking  Palsy,  and  Saint  Francis' 
Such  one  was  Wrath,  the  last  of  this  ungpdly  tire.  • 

XXXVI. 

"  And,  after  all,  upon  the  waggon  ! 
Rode  Satan,  with  a  smarting  whip  in  hand, 
With  which  he  forward  lasht  the  la/y  team, 
So  oft  as  Sloth  still  in  the  mire  did  stand. 
Huge  routs  of  people  did  about  them  band, T 

Also         'Ruffian         »  Mad.         *  Mi»H.i.-f.        •  St  Antony's  flr«,  or  ery  Hi  polu, 
*  probably  maant.         6  Row. 


98  ROOKS    OF  FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES- 

Shouting  for  joy  ;  and  still  before  their  way 
A  foggy  mist  had  cover'd  all  the  land  ; 
And,  underneath  their  feet,  all  scatter'd  lay 
Dead  skulls  and  bones  of  men,  whose  life  had  gone  astray." 

I  do  not  think  it  is  very  easy  to  do  this  allegorizing,  and  all  who 
have  attempted  it  have  not  succeeded  at  it.  I  have  now  and  then 
tried  it  myself,  and  some  of  you  may  recollect  a  sermon  of  mine 
on  "  Things  that  Accompany  Salvation  "  (No.  152),  which  con 
sisted  of  an  allegory  under  the  form  of  a  procession.  You  can 
study  the  sermon  for  yourselves  ;  but  I  will  give  you  a  few  extracts 
from  it,  so  that  you  may  see  how  I  felt  moved  of  God  to  set  forth 
his  truth  on  that  particular  occasion  : — 

"  I  sat  myself  down,  and  I  meditated  on  this  subject, — '  Things  that 
accompany  Salvation.'  And  after  some  period  of  rumination,  my 
thoughts  assumed  the  form  of  an  allegory  ;  in  which  I  hope  to  present 
them  to  you  this  morning.  I  compared  Salvation  to  a  rich  and  costly 
treasure,  which  God,  in  his  infinite  love  and  mercy,  had  determined  to 
send  into  the  world  ;  and  I  remembered  that  our  Lord  Jesus  was  so 
much  interested  in  the  bringing  of  this  Salvation  to  this  earth,  that  he 
did  send  all  that  he  had,  and  came  himself  to  attend  and  to  accom 
pany  this  Salvation.  I  then  pictured  to  myself  a  great  march  of  bright 
ones  through  this  land,  carrying  in  their  midst  the  sacred  jewel  of 
Salvation.  I  looked  upward,  and  I  saw  a  mighty  vanguard,  who 
have  already  attained  the  shores  of  Eternity.  I  looked  around  Salvation, 
and  I  saw  it  always  attended  with  divers  graces  and  virtues,  which 
seemed  to  be  like  troops  of  soldiers  to  guard  it  in  the  van,  about  its 
flanks,  and  in  the  rear 

"  Picture  then  to  yourselves  the  march  of  some  ancient  monarch 
through  his  territory.  We  read  stories  of  Eastern  potentates,  in  the 
olden  time,  that  seem  more  like  romance  than  reality  ;  when  they 
marched  with  thousands  of  flying  banners  and  with  all  kinds  of  riches 
borne  in  their  train.  Now  you  are  to  take  that  as  the  basis  of  my  figure, 
and  suppose  Salvation  to  be  the  sacred  treasure  which  is  being  carried 
through  the  world,  with  guards  before,  and  guards  behind,  to  accom 
pany  it  on  its  journey. 

"  We  will  begin,  then,  with  the  advance-guard  that  has  accompanied 
Salvation,  or  rather,  gone  before  it.  We  shall  then  come  to  those  who 
immediately  precede  it,  and  then  we  shall  notice  those  who  accompany  it  by 
its  side,  and  conclude  by  noticing  the  rear  guard  attending  upon  this 
Salvation  of  our  God. 

"  I.     First,  then,  IN  THE  MARCHES  OF  TROOPS  AND  ARMIES,  THERE 

ARE   SOME  THAT    ARE   OUTRIDERS,    AND    GO    FAR    AHEAD    OF    THE  OTHER 

TROOPS.  So,  in  the  march  of  Salvation,  there  is  a  certain  body  of  great 
and  mighty  '  things  that  accompany  Salvation',  which  have  far  preceded 
it  to  clear  the  way.  I  will  tell  you  the  names  of  these  stupendous 
Titans  who  have  gone  before.  The  first  is  Election;  the  second  is 
Predestination  ;  and  the  third  is  Redemption ;  and  the  Covenant  is  the 
captain  of  them  all.  Before  Salvation  came  into  this  world,  Election 
marched  in  the  very  forefront,  and  it  had  for  its  work  the  billeting  of 


,-„• 


and 

should  be  deposited.  Electbn  'looked  Th  "?  '?,  W,hich  the  treasure 
from  Adam  down  to  the  last  nd  mvkcd  ^?h8  ^J*  ""*  of  man. 
whom  Salvation  was  designed  'He  i^L""*!1'""?  those  f°' 
said  Election;  and  Salvation  nu"  Ro  ,he"e.  Th8°  'hr°Ughn  Sa™ria-' 
tion.  Predestination  did  not  merely  m  ,  ht"  rai»e  ' 

road,  in  which  Salvation  shou  d  tLTto  hatZ^  "'  P  T^  the 
ordained  every  step  of  the  greit  armv  nf  Q  •  ;-  '  rc<:"""at.on 
time  when  the'sinne"  should  Gtoo3?to  SSfSi  m  "'"T11  '!!' 
should  be  saved,  the  means  that  s  m,lH  h  ',  I  manner  how  he 

™*- 


In  «he  everlasting          e  of   hs          g"  GoTthe  ?oo^c°Sr  ^v 


LTst  fevee;rrriounta.in',  ^  driedup  —  >•  ^^ss^ 

CVery  hlh  hl11'  and  flllc 


.',  >• 

the  ro       r  -  hlgh  hl11'  and  flllcd  "l>  ^1  the  valleys,  s0  th, 

the  road  of  Salvation  is  now  plain  and  simple      God  can    be   just 
yeUhe  Justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in  jisus. 

Covenam         S^  adva"ce:guard  carri^  for  their  banner  the  Kternal 
Covenant. 


Covenam  e      erna 

Covenant.      Election  Predestination,  and  Rcdcm,,tion,-the  things  that 

this  stfnH6  H         vf'  ^y°nd   thC   S'  J'U  arC  aU   ralli«d    lo   th^   ^tUe    by 
his  standard,-the  Covenant,  the  Kverlasti  ant,  ordered  in  aU 

hings  and  sure      We  know  and  believe  th.t.  before  tire 

h     i     M  Hdef  °f  darkness-  ('^j  h*d  covenanted  with  his  son  that 
he  should  die  and  pay  a  ransom  price,  and  that,  on  God  the  Fall 

PK  '  u6  WMUud  glVC  t0  JCSUS  <a  numbcr  whom  no  ™™  ccnild  numl 
who  should  be  purchased  by  bis  blood,  and  throuijl,  that  blo«,d  sh« 
be  most  securely  saved.  N  . 

carries   the  j  Covenant.     These  are  chosen  in   tl  (,u  of  gn 

When  Predestination  marcheth,  and   when  it  inarkcth  out   the  way  of 
Salvation  it  proclaims  the  Covenant.     'He  marked  out   tl  of 

the  people  according  to  the  tnh  ,(,\.'     And  Redem;  non  also 

pointing  to  the  precious  blood  of  «  Mon  fl,r  ( 

bouglu  ones,  because  the  Covenant  hath  dccicxd  u  tu  ( 


inn  HOOKS   OF    FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND   PARABLES. 

"But,  my  dear  hearers,  this  advance-guard  is  so  far  ahead  that  you 
and  I  cannot  see  them.  These  are  true  doctrines,  but  very  mysterious  ; 
they  are  beyond  our  sight ;  and  if  we  wish  to  see  Salvation,  we  must  not 
stop  until  we  see  the  vanguard,  because  they  are  so  far  off  that  only  the 
eye  of  faith  can  reach  them.  We  must  have  that  sacred  glass,  that 
divine  telescope  of  faith,  or  else  we  shall  never  have  '  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen.'  Let  us  rest  certain,  however,  that  if  we  have  Salvation, 
we  have  Election.  He  that  believeth  is  elected  ;  whoever  casts  himself 
on  Christ  as  a  guilty  sinner,  is  certainly  God's  chosen  child.  As  surely  as 
ever  you  believe  on  the  Saviour,  and  go  to  him,  you  were  predestinated 
to  do  so  from  all  eternity  ;  and  your  faith  is  the  great  mark  and  evidence 
that  you  are  chosen  of  God,  and  precious  in  his  esteem.  Dost  thou 
believe  ?  Then  Election  is  thine.  Dost  thou  believe  ?  Then  Predestina 
tion  is  as  surely  thine  as  thou  art  alive.  Dost  thou  trust  alone  in  Jesus  ? 
Then  fear  not;  Redemption  was  meant  for  thee.  So  then,  we  will  not 
be  struck  with  terror  at  that  grand  advance-guard  that  hath  already  gained 
the  celestial  hill,  and  hath  prepared  the  place  where  the  elect  shall  for 
ever  repose  upon  the  bosom  of  their  God. 


"  III.  And  now  comes  SALVATION  IN  ALL  ITS  FULNESS.  The  '  things 
that  accompany  Salvation '  make  a  glorious  march  in  the  forefront  of 
it, — from  Election  down  to  these  precious  opening  buds  of  virtue  in  the 
sinner's  heart.  What  a  goodly  army  !  Surely,  the  angels  do  sometimes 
fly  along  in  admiration,  to  see  this  bright  array  that  heralds  Salvation 
to  the  heart.  And  now  comes  the  precious  casket  set  with  gems  and 
jewels.  It  is  of  God-like  workmanship  ;  no  hammer  was  ever  lifted  on 
it ;  it  was  smitten  out  and  fashioned  upon  the  anvil  of  Eternal  Might, 
and  cast  in  the  mould  of  Everlasting  Wisdom ;  but  no  human  hand 
hath  ever  defiled  it,  and  it  is  set  with  jewels  so  unutterably  precious,  that 
if  heaven  and  earth  were  sold  they  could  never  buy  another  Salvation ! 

"  And  who  are  those  that  are  close  around  it?  There  are  three  sweet 
sisters  that  always  have  the  custody  of  the  treasure  ;  you  know  them, 
their  names  are  common  in  Scripture,— Faith,  Hope,  and  Love,  the  three 
divine  sisters  ;  these  have  Salvation  in  their  bowels,  and  do  carry  it 
about  with  them  in  their  loins.  Faith,  that  layeth  hold  on  Christ,  and 
trusteth  all  in  him  ;  that  ventureth  everything  upon  his  blood  and  sacrifice, 
and  hath  no  other  trust,  Hope,  that  with  beaming  eye  looks  up  to  Jesus 
Christ  in  glory,  and  expects  him  soon  to  come ;  looks  downward,  and 
when  she  sees  grim  Death  in  her  way,  expects  that  she  shall  pass  through 
with  victory.  And  thou  sweet  Love,  the  brightest  of  the  three ;  she, 
whose  words  are  music,  and  whose  eyes  are  stars ;  Love  also  looks  to 
Christ,  and  is  enamoured  of  him ;  loves  him  in  all  his  offices,  adores  his 
presence,  reverences  his  words  ;  and  is  prepared  to  bind  her  body  to  the 
stake,  and  die  for  him  who  bound  his  body  to  the  cross  to  die  for  her. 
Sweet  Love,  God  hath  well  chosen  to  commit  to  thee  the  custody  of 
the  sacred  work!  Faith,  Hope,  and  Love,— say,  sinner,  hast  thou 
these  three  ?  Dost  thou  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ?  Dost 
thou  hope  that  through  the  efficacy  of  his  merits  thou  shalt  see  thy  Maker's 
ith  joy  ?  Dost  thou  love  him  ?  Have  you  these  three  graces  ?  If 
so,  you  have  Salvation.  Having  that,  you  are  rich  to  all  intents  of  bliss  ; 


BOOK8OFF.M-.il>.    KMIU.KMv     \\1»    1'A  KA  I'.I  I>.  1<»1 

for  God  in  the  Covenant  is  yours.     Cast  your  eye  forward;  renu 

Election  is  yours,  Predestination  and  Si.'. 

Remember,  the  terrors  of  the  law  arc  past  ;  the  1  Broken  heart  is  healed  ; 

the  comforts  of  religion  you  have  already  received  ;  the  spiritual  . 

are  already  in  the  bud  ;  you  are  an  heir  of  immortality,  and  for  you  there 

is  a  glorious  future.     These  are  the  '  things  that  accomp 

"IV.     Now  you  must  have  patience  with  me  for   just  a  few  more 
minutes;  I  MUST  BRING  UP  THE  REAR  GUARD.     It  is  impossible  that, 
with  such  a  vanguard,  grace  should  be  unattended  from  behind.     Now 
see  those  that  follow  Salvation.      As  there  were  four  bright  cherubs 
that  walked  in  front  of  it,— you  remember  still  their  names,— Humility, 
Repentance,  Prayer,  and  a  tender  Conscience, — there  are  f  >ur  that  follow 
it,  and  march  in  solemn  pomp  into  the  sinner's  heart.     The  first  of  these 
is  Gratitude,  always  singing,  '  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul :  and  all  that  is 
within  me,  bless  his  holy  name.'     And  then  Gratitude  lays  hold  u; 
son's  hand;  the  name  of  that  son  is  Obedience.     'O  my  Master,'  saith 
the  heart,  '  thou  hast  done  so  much  for  me  ;  I  will  obey  thee.'     In  com 
pany  with  this  fair  grace  is  one  called  Consecration, — a  pure,  whr 
that  hath  no  earthliness ;  from  its  head  to  its  foot  it  is  all  ( 
all  gold.     Linked  to  this  bright  one,  is  one  called  Knowledge,  with  a 
face  serene  and  solemn    .... 

"  Now,  have  you  these  four?   They  are  rather  the  successors  of  Salva 
tion  than  the  heralds  of  it.     *  Oh,  yes,'  the  believer  can  say,  •  1  trust  I 
have  Gratitude,  Obedience,  Consecration,  and  Knowledge!'    I  will  not 
weary  you,  but  there  are  three  shining  ones  that  follow  after  these  four, 
and  I  must  not  forget  them,  for  they  are  the  flower  of  them  all.     There 
is  Zeal,  with  eyes  of  fire,  and  heart  of  flame,  a  tongue  that  burneth,  a 
hand  that  never  wearies,  and  limbs  that  never  tire  ;  Zeal,  that  flies  round 
the  world  with  wings  swifter  than  the  lightning's  flash,  and  finds  even  then 
her  flight  too  tardy  for  her  wish  ;  Zeal,  ever  ready  to  obey,  resig; 
herself  for  Christ,  zealously  affected  always  in  a  good  thing, 
always  dwells  near  one  that  is  called  Communion.     This,  surely,   U  the 
goodliest  of  all  the  train;  an  angel  spiritualized,  an  angel  ; 
made  yet  more  angelic,  is  Communion.     Communion  calls  u 
its  God  ;  its  God  in  secret  sees.     It  is  conformed  to  the  ima. 
walks  according  to  his  footsteps,  and  lays  its  head  perpetually  on  hil 
bosom.     And,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  on  the  other  side  of  Com 
munion,  which   with   one  hand  lays  hold  of  Zeal,   is    '  in  the 
Spirit;  Joy,  that  hath  an  eye  more  flashing  than  the  world's  merriment 
ever  gave  to  mortal  beauty,  with  light  foot  tripping  over  hills  of  I 
singing,  in   the  roughest  ways,  of  laithfulness  and  lo\. 
nightingale,  sings  in  the  dark,  and  can  praise  God  in  ; 
shout  his  high  praises  in  the  storm.     This   is  indeed  a  fitting  cherub  to 
be  in  the  rear  of  Salvation. 

"  1  have  almost  done.     Just  in  the  rear  is  Perseverar 
and   sure.     Then   there  follows   complete  Sanctificaiion,  v- 
soul  is  purged  from  every  sin,  and  made  as  white  and  j 
himself.      Now    we    have    come    to    the    verv    rear    of    I 
remember,  as  then:  was  an  advance  guard  so  far  ahead  thai  we  cot 
not  see  them,  so  there  is  a  rear  guard  so  far  behind  tint 
behold  them  yet.      Let  us  just  try  io  :-ec  them  with  the  eye  of  l.uth.   .  .  . 


1<)1>  HOOKS   OF  FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

Hark  I  hear  the  silver  trumpet  sound  ;  there  is  a  glorious  array  behind  ! 
A  guard,  far,  far  back,  is  coming,  following  the  steps  of  the  conquering 
heroes,  that  have  already  swept  our  sins  away.  Do  you  not  see,  in  the 
fore  part,  there  is  one,  whom  men  paint  as  a  skeleton  ?  Look  at  him  ; 
he  is  not  the  king  of  terrors.  I  know  thee,  Death,  I  know  thee  ; 
miserably  have  men  belied  thee.  Thou  art  no  spectre  ;  thine  hand 
bears  no  dart;  thou  art  not  gaunt  and  frightful.  I  know  thee,  thou 
bright  cherub :  thou  hast  not  in  thy  hand  a  dart,  but  a  golden  key  that" 
unlocks  the  gates  of  Paradise.  Thou  art  fair  to  look  upon,  thy  wings 
are  like  the  wings  of  doves,  covered  with  silver,  and  like  yellow  gold. 
Behold  this  angel  Death,  and  his  successor  Resurrection.  I  see  three 
bright  beings  coming  ;  one  is  called  Confidence,  see  it  1  It  looks  at 
Death  ;  no  fear  is  in  its  eye,  no  pallor  on  its  brow.  See,  holy  Confidence 
marches  with  steady  steps  ;  the  cold  chill  stream  of  Death  doth  not 
freeze  its  blood.  See,  behind  it,  its  brother,  Victory ;  hear  him,  as  he 
cries,  '  O  Death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  O  Grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? ' 
The  last  word,  *  victory ',  is  drowned  amidst  the  shouts  of  angels.  These 
bring  up  the  rear.  Angels  bear  the  spirits  of  the  redeemed  into  the 
bosom  of  the  Saviour, — 

"  '  Far  from  a  world  of  grief  and  sin, 
With  God  eternally  shut  in, 
They  are  for  ever  blest.'  '* 

JOHN  SPENCER,  in  his  Things  New  and  Old,  which  I  recom 
mended  to  you  in  my  last  lecture,  has  some  curious  allegories. 
There  is  one  which,  I  had  almost  said,  is  enough  to  make  a  cat 
laugh ;  and  therefore  1  should  hardly  recommend  you  to  use  it. 
Indeed,  the  common  handling  of  allegories  is  a  somewhat  delicate 
matter,  and  wants  more  sense  than  a  fool  has,  or  than  most  of  us 
are  ever  likely  to  have.  Here  are  two  of  Spencer's  allegories  : — 

HOW  IT  IS  THAT  TRUTH  DOTH  NOT  ALWAYS  APPEAR. 

11  Time  was  when  Truth  lived  in  great  honour  ;  but,  through  the  envy 
of  her  enemies,  she  was  disgraced,  and  at  last  banished  out  of  the  city, 
where,  sitting  upon  a  dunghill,  sad  and  discontented,  she  espied  a 
chariot,  attended  with  a  great  troop,  coming  towards  her.  She  presently 
perceived  who  it  was,  her  greatest  enemy,  the  Lady  Lie,  clad  in  change 
able-coloured  taffety,  her  coach  covered  with  clouds  of  all  the  colours  of 
the  rainbow.  Impudency  and  Hypocrisy  were  on  the  one  side.  Slander 
and  Detraction  on  the  other,  as  attendants  ;  Perjury  ushered  all  along  ; 
and  many  (more  than  a  good  many)  were  in  the  train.  When  she  came 
to  Truth,  she  commanded  her  to  be  carried  as  a  captive,  for  the  greater 
triumph.  At  night,  she  fared  well,  and  would  want  nothing ;  but  when 
morning  came,  she  would  be  gone,  and  pay  for  nothing,  affirming  she 
had  paid  the  reckoning  over-night.  The  attendants,  upon  examination 
of  the  matter,  justified  their  lady  ;  only  Truth  confessed  there  was 
nothing  paid,  and  was  therefore  compelled  to  pay  for  all.  The  next 
night,  the  lady  did  the  like;  but,  withal,  committed  a  great  outrage,  and 
being  for  the  same  brought  before  the  judge,  Impudency  and  Hypocrisy 
began  to  justify  their  lady,  Perjury  cleared  her,  Slander  and  Detraction 


BOOKS   OF    FABI.I>,    KM  I'.I.I.M-.     \M>     I'AH 

laid  all  the  fault  on  poor  Truth,  who  must  now  suffer  death  for  that  she 
never  did.  The  judge  demands  what  she  had  to  say  for  herself  ;  she  could 
say  nothing  but,  '  Not  guilty;'  neither  had  she  any  friend  that  would 
plead  for  her.  At  last,  up  steps  Time,  a  grave,  experienced  counsellor, 
and  an  eloquent  advocate,  and  desires  favour  of  the  court  to  sift  and 
search  out  the  matter  a  little  better,  lest  the  innocent  might  suffer  lor  the 
nocent.  The  motion  was  granted.  Then  Time  began  to  expel 
clouds  from  the  lady's  chariot,  unmasked  her  ugly  fa<  --d  all  her 

followers,  and  made  it  appear  at  last  that  the  i  was  guilty  of  all 

the  villany  ;    and  poor  Truth  was  thus,  by  the  help  of  Tune,  cleared,  and 
set  at  large. 

"And  thus  it  is  that,  though  Truth  is  great,  and  will  prevail  at  la* 
doth  not  always  appear,  but  may  fall  down  in  the  street  (Isa.  lix.  14),  and 
be  trampled  under  foot  for  a  time;  may  be  abused,  banished, and  made 
come  behind  lies  and  falsehood,— yea,  be  executed  and  buried.— when 
it  cannot  have  time  to  clear  itself  until  it  be  too  late  to  save  it 
it  is  that  the  apostle  doth  not  say, '  Now  remameth  Truth,'  because  1 
is  often   banished,    but,  '  Now    remaincth    Ruth,    //<»/*,  and  Chat 
(i  Cor.  xiii.  13,)  graces  which  give  a  being  to  every  Christian,  of  which 
sort  Truth  manifested  is  none  ;  for   I  can  believe  in  Christ,  hope  for 
heaven,  and  love  my  enemies,  though  I  be  belied ;  but  without  the* 
can  be  no  Christian." 

THE    HONOUR   AND   DIGNITY    OF   THE   MINISTRY. 

"  There  is  a  story  how  the  Castle  of  Truth  being,  by  the  King  of 
Jerusalem,  left  to  the  guard  and  keeping  of  his  best  servant,  Zeal,  the 
King  of  Arabia,  with  an  infinite  host,  came  against  it,  begirt 
with  an  irresistible  siege,  cut  off  all  passages,  all  reliefs  all 
friends,  meat,  or  ammunition  ;  which  Zeal  perceiving,  and  seeing  \ 
extremity  had  brought  him  almost  to  shake  hands  with  despair   he  calls 
his  council   of  war  about  him,  and  discovers  the  sadness  of  his  con 
dition,  the  strength  of  his  enemy,  the  violence  of  the  siege,  and  th 
possibility  of  conveying  either  messages  or  letters  to  the  Great  King,  his 
Master,  from  whom  they  might  receive  new  strength  and  encouragemei 
Whereupon,  the  necessity  of  the  occasion  being  so  great,  they  a 
elude  there  was  no  way  but  to  deliver  the  castle.-though  upon  very 
hard  terms,-into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.     But  Zeal  stagge 
resolution,  and  being  loth  to  lose  hope,  as  long  as  hope  had  any  th 
or  hair  to  hold  by,  he  told  them  he  had  one  friend  or  companion  in ,  ih 
castle   who  was  so  wise,  so  valiant,  and  so  fortunate,  that  to   urn  and  to 
hfc eiptoUs  alone  he  would  deliver  the  management  of  their  safety 
This  was  Prayer,  the  chaplain  to  the  Great  King,  and  the  pnert  to  that 
colony.     Hence   Prayer  was  called,  and  all  proceedings  del>a' 
presently  arms  himself  with  humility,  el 
and,  in  despite  of  the  enemy,  makes  his  way  toough,  come,  to  tl 
his  Master/and  with  such  moving  passions  enters  h,s 

s^sKsfctt* 
S^w£~«2^ 

righ7han7and  says,  for  Ins  uke,  divinity  shall  ever  march  m  the  I 
rank  of  honour. 


11)4  BOOKS   OF    FAIJLKS,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

"  And  certainly,  ministers  of  God's  Word,  such  as  apply  their  spirits 
most  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  public, — especially  such  divines  as  are 
Timothys  in  their  houses,  Chrysostoms  in  their  pulpits,  and  Augustines 
in  disputations  ;  such  as  are  just  in  their  words,  wise  in  their  counsels ; 
such  as  are  vigilant,  diligent,  and  faithful  in  the  execution  of  their 
plans, — who,  that  is  not  royal,  should  seek  in  honour  to  precede 
them?" 

If  you  want  some  capital  allegories,  that  will  do  you  good  to 
read,  buy  a  book  which  Messrs.  Jackson,  Walford,  and  Hodder 
have  brought  out  lately.  It  is  called  The  Angel  of  the  Water 
Brooks,  and  contains  a  very  admirable  set  of  allegories,  mostly  for 
children.  "  The  Angel  of  the  Water  Brooks  "  is  the  name  given 
to  the  book  because  that  is  the  title  of  the  first  parable  in  it. 

Insert  extract* : — 


It  shows  the  power  of  God's  grace,  like  a  mighty  Gulf  Stream, 
destroying  the  sinner's  evil  nature.  Many  of  the  parables  are 
equally  good,  and  bring  out  religious  truth  with  great  force. 

Coming  now  to  my  main  purpose,  and  beginning  my  list  of 
books  of  emblems,  etc.,  I  will  first  speak  of  fables.  In  my  opinion, 
the  fable  may  be  used  by  us  in  our  public  teaching.  The  object 
of  the  fable  is  earth-born ;  it  teaches  generally  some  earthly 
maxim,  some  piece  of  worldly  wisdom,  sometimes,  mere  low  cunning 
and  selfish  policy.  This  being  the  soul  of  the  fable,  the  body  of  it  is 
congruous  thereto,  for  it  is  generally  a  concoction  of  dialogues 
between  animals,  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  stones,  and  I  know  not  what 
besides.  The  pure  fable  hardly  does  for  use  in  the  pulpit ;  it  is  a 
distortion  of  nature,  which  is  all  very  well  as  a  guide  with  regard 
to  policy  among  men,  but  it  will  not  do  for  teaching  our  hearers 
th.-  truths  of  the  Bible.  I  do  not  say  that  the  fable  lies,  for  there 
is  no  intention  whatever  to  deceive  in  it.  I  should  suppose  that 
nobody  was  ever  deluded  into  the  belief  that  the  cock  in  the  fable 

•  We  have  printed  the  reference  to  this  book  just  as  it  appears  in  the  reporter's 
pt  of  Ma.  bPUKOUoN's  lecture;  but  we  cannot  give  the   extract  which  waa 
read  to  the  students,  for,  after  considerable  search,  at  the  British  Museum   and  else- 
lere,  we  have  been  unable  to  trace  the  volume.     If  any  reader  of  these  lectures 

itj  we  8ha11  be  glad  to  make  the 


HOOK-  OF   FABLES,   EMBLEMS,   ANI>   PARABLE* 

ever  did   speak   to   the    hull,  or    that    the  t'< 

sage  remarks  about  the  grapes.  Hut,  still,  the  form  of  the  fable 
is  not  that  of  strict  truth,  and  hence  it  is  not  as  a  rule  adapted  to 
the  use  of  the  Christian  minister,  who  soars  aloft  to  higher  themes 
than  those  which  the  fable  is  calculated  to  emud!  .plain. 

Yet  there  is,  I  believe,  a  book  published,  showing  ho\\  fables 

can  be  spiritualized;  and  there  are  several  in  which  the  m«r 
the  fables  are  applied   in  various  ways.     Dr.  Martin  Luther,  \vhn 
is  a  great  authority,  says  that  he  values  -/Esop'  .r\t   to  his 

Bible  ;  and  that  what  the  Bible  is  to  heavenly  thing-,  fables 

are  to  the  earthly.  That  is  what  he  thinks,  ami  his  opinion  ou^ht 
to  carry  great  weight,  for  he  was  no  mean  judge  of  what  was 
useful  to  a  preacher. 

^E8OP  was  the  earliest  writer  of  fables  of  whom  we  know;  he 
is  said  to  have  been  born   at  Sardis,  a  city  of  Lydia,  in  th 
620  B.C.,   though   it  is  alleged  by   some   writers  that  he 
Phrygian,  or  aThracian,  or  a  Samian,  while  others  deny  that  Mich 
a  person  ever  lived,  and  regard  him  as  only  a  mythological  charac 
ter.    There  are  a  great  many  of  his  fables  which  can  be  used   by 
us  because  they  are  not  fables  at  all ;  they  ace  only  fables  in  their 
form    and    shape,    and   a   very   little  alteration    turns    them    into 
parables  at  once.     Let  me   read  one   or  two  to    show    you    that 
it  is  so : — 

THE     BOWMAN     AND    THE     LION. 

"  A  very  skilful  Bowman  went  to  the  mountains  in  search  of  game. 
All  the  beasts  of  the  forest  fled  at  his  approach.  The  Lion  alone 
challenged  him  to  combat.  The  Bowman  immediately  let  fly  an  arrow, 
and  said  to  the  Lion :  '  I  send  thee  my  messenger,  that  from  him  thou 
mayest  learn  what  I  myself  shall  be  when  I  assail  thee.'  The  Lion, 
thus  wounded,  rushed  away  in  great  fear,  and  on  a  Fox  exhorting  him 
to  be  of  a  good  courage,  and  not  to  run  away  at  the  first  att.. 
replied  :  '  You  counsel  me  in  vain ;  for  if  he  sends  so  fearful  a 
messenger,  how  shall  I  abide  the  attack  of  the  man  himself?  " 

Well,  now,  there  is  a  truth  about  that  fable;  if  wr  cannot  stand 
against  the  arrows,  how  can  we  expect   to   overcome  the  battle- 
axe   of  the  warrior?     If  we   cannot   bear  sickness,    which 
as  the  arrow  from  the   bow  of  God,  we  cannot   possibly  ivsi^t    the 
might  of  God   himself.     If  an   affliction,   which   God   sends  as  a 
dart  from  his  hand,  pricks  and  wounds  the   heart  so  terribly. 
must  be  the  power  of  God  when  h«-   hiniM-lf  shall  C 
judgment  with  the  off  ending  tinner  1  IVrhapsyouh 
ceived  that  the  reason  why  this  fable  i  '<'d  to 

Scriptural  truth  is  that,  at  the  bftiU  of  it.  .t  u  not  really  a  hihle,  it 


!()(>  ROOKS   OF    FA15LKS.     KMHLEMS,  AND    PARABLES. 

is  a  matter  of  fact.  A  lion  might  feel,  when  shot  by  an  arrow, 
which  wounded  him  in  the  eye,  for  instance,  that  there  was  some 
very  powerful  enemy  attacking  him,  and  he  would  probably  make 
the  best  of  his  way  to  escape  from  so  great  a  foe.  There  is 
really  no  need  to  introduce  a  fox,  or  a  word  from  the  bowman, 
or  from  the  lion  himself.  At  the  basis  of  the  fable  there  lies 
a  general  fact,  and  hence  yon  get  it  formed  into  a  parable.  Others 
of  jEsop's  fables,  to  use  an  Irishism,  are  not  fables  at  all.  This  one 
is  no  fable : — 

THE     FLIES     AND     THE    HONEY-POT. 

"A  jar  of  Honey  having  been  upset  in  a  housekeeper's  room,  a 
number  of  Flies  were  attracted  by  its  sweetness,  and,  placing  their  feet 
in  it,  ate  it  greedily.  Their  feet,  however,  became  so  smeared  with  the 
honey,  that  they  could  not  use  their  wings,  nor  release  themselves,  and 
were  suffocated.  Just  as  they  were  expiring,  they  exclaimed,  '  O 
foolish  creatures  that  we  are,  for  the  sake  of  a  little  pleasure  we  have 
destroyed  ourselves! ' ' 

The  only  fable  in  that  is  that  the  flies  are  made  to  speak.  You 
have  only  to  divest  it  of  the  personification,  and  you  get  the  fact 
that  the  flies,  for  the  sake  of  a  few  moments'  pleasure  in  eating 
the  honey,  threw  away  their  lives,  and  you  have  there  a  parable 
which  you  can  easily  turn  to  good  account. 

I  have  found,  as  the  result  of  long  observation  in  looking  over 
books  of  fables,  that  when  you  read  a  fable  that  is  not  really  a 
fable,  you    have  a  parable  that   is  serviceable  in    the   Christian 
ministry.     Therefore,  study  ^Esop's  fables  thoroughly,  and  some 
times  work  them  into  your  discourses. 

This  one,  also,  is  not  a  fable : — 

THE    BOY     BATHING. 

II  A  Boy,  bathing  in  a  river,  was  in  danger  of  being  drowned.     He 
called  out  to  a  Traveller,  passing  by,  for  help.     The  traveller,  instead 
of  holding  out  a  helping  hand,  stood  by  unconcernedly,  and  scolded 
the  boy  for  his  imprudence.     '  Oh,  sir  ! '  the  youth  cried,  '  pray  help  me 
now,  and  scold  me  afterwards.'  " 

You  do  not  need  me  to  tell  you  that  there  are  some  preachers 
who  are  always  admonishing  the  sinner,  who  may  well  cry  out, 
4<  You  had  better  preach  Jesus  Christ  to  me,  and  scold  me  after- 
wan  Is."  What  a  scolding  a  truly  enlightened  conscience  gives  its 
possessor  concerning  the  sins  of  the  past  1 

*'  I  know  they  are  forgiven, 

But  still  their  pain  to  me 
Is  all  the  grief  and  anguish 
They  laid,  my  Lord,  on  thee." 


BOOK>    or   CABLES,    EKBLBM8,    LHD   I-AUAULRS. 


To  talk  about  doctrinal  difficulties,  or  to  up!,:  ,iniu.r  for 

is  mistakes,  will  be  out  of  sea*,,,,  when  he  i>  seeking  th    - 
but  to  give  him  the  plan  of  salvation,  to  exhort  him  to  lav  hold 
on  eternal  life,  that  is  your  present  work. 

Then  there  is  that   famous   paral.l,.   fcboc  North    Wind 

and  the  Sun  ",  which  is  no  fahh-  :_ 

"  The  North  Wind  and  the  Sun  disputed  which  was  the  more  power- 
ful,  and  agreed  that  he  should  be  declared  the  victor  who  cou! 
strip  a  wayfaring  man   of  his  clothes.     The  North  Wind  first  tried  his 
power  and  blew  with  all  his  might;  but  the  keener  his  blasts  b, 
UK   Closer  the    Traveller  wrapped  his  cloak  around  him  ;  till,  at  last 
'^ning  all  hope  of  victory,  he  called  upon  the  Sun  to  see  what  he 
OpUddo.     The  Sun  suddenly  shone  out  with  all  his  warmth;  and  the 
traveller  no  sooner  felt  his  genial  rays,  than  he  took  off  one  garment 
after  another,  and  at  last,  fairly  overcome  with  heat,  undressed,  and 
bathed  in  a  stream  that  lay  in  his  path." 

The  sun  was  the  conqueror,  showing  that  it  is  love  that  wins  the 
heart.     This  parable  can  readily  be  spiritual;/,-.!,  and  used  to  show 
that,  while   the   winds   and   tornadoes  of  the  Law   inav 
tear   away  a  traveller's    cloak,  far  often.-r  th.-v   make    him    hu.» 
his  sins,  and  bind  his  self-righteousness  more  ti-htly  around  him, 
while  the  gentleness  and  love  of  .Tesu<  Christ  disu-ni  the  man, 
make  him  cast  away  both  his  -ins  and  his  self-right 

"  Law  and  terrors  do  but  harden, 

All  the  while  they  work  alone; 
But  a  sense  of  blood-bought  pard-m 
Soon  dissolves  a  heart  of  stone." 

Here  is  another  of  JEsop's  parables  which  is  no  fable  :— 

THE    OAK     AND    THE     REEDS. 

"  A  very  large  Oak  was  uprooted  by  the  wind,  and  thrown  across  a 
stream.  It  fell  among  some  Reeds,  whLh  it  il  us  addr-ss,  :  :  'I 
wonder  how  you,  who  are  light  and'  weak,  are  not  entirel;  coishcd  by 
these  strong  winds.'  They  replied,  4You  fight  and  contend  with  the 
wind,  and  consequently  you  are  destroyed;  while  we  o  .  th*-  ront: 
bend  before  the  least  breath  of  air,  and  therefore  remain  unbroken,  and 
escape.'" 

There  is  no  fable  then-,  if  you  leave  oi-t  the  t.ilkim:  of  the  reeds 
and  the  oak  ;  it  is  a  matter  of  fact  th-t   tin  oik  dors  fal1  beca 
it  will  not  yield  to  the  storm,  while  the  reeds  bent     tr  tl.i     br 
and  are  not  broken.     \\Y  must,  either  rent'  or  break     an  i 
are  they  who  know  how  to  bend   in  Mih'ni  —  i-.n  to  the  will   of  God, 
singing  with  Faber,  — 

"  I  bow  me  to  thy  will,  O  God, 

And  all  t1 

Atid  every  day  I  live  I'll 
To  please  thee  more  and  more." 


108  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

This  also  is  a  parable  more  than  a  fable  : — 

THE     BOY    AND    THE     FILBERTS. 

"  A  Boy  put  his  hand  into  a  pitcher  full  of  Filberts.  He  grasped  as 
many  as  he  could  possibly  hold  ;  but  when  he  endeavoured  to  pull  out 
his  hand,  he  was  prevented  from  doing  so  by  the  neck  of  the  pitcher. 
Unwilling  to  lose  his  filberts,  and  yet  unable  to  withdraw  his  hand,  he 
burst  into  tears,  and  bitterly  lamented  his  disappointment  A  bystander 
said  to  him, '  Be  satisfied  with  half  the  quantity,  and  you  will  readily 
draw  out  your  hand.'  " 

This  is  a  fact  that  has  often  occurred,  and  it  shows  how  vain  is 
covetousness,  and  how  impossible  it  is  for  a  greedy  boy  or  a 
covetous  man  to  be  happy.  You  know  how  you  can  attempt  too 
much,  and  really  not  do  anything ;  or  grasp  too  much,  and  so  lose 
everything. 

Here  are  two  more  of  ^Esop's  fables  that  are  not  fables  : — 

THE    THIRSTY     PIGEON. 

"  A  Pigeon,  oppressed  by  excessive  thirst,  saw  a  goblet  of  water  painted 
on  a  sign-board.  Not  supposing  it  to  be  only  a  picture,  she  flew  towards  it 
with  a  loud  whirr,  and  unwittingly  dashed  against  the  sign-board,  and 
jarred  herself  terribly.  Having  broken  her  wings  by  the  blow,  she  fell 
to  the  ground,  and  was  caught  by  one  of  the  bystanders." 

THE    OXEN     AND    THE     AXLE-TREES. 

"  A  heavy  Waggon  was  being  dragged  along  a  country  lane  by  a 
team  of  Oxen.  The  Axle-trees  groaned  and  creaked  terribly  ;  when 
the  Oxen,  turning  round,  thus  addressed  the  wheels:  *  Hulloa  there  1 
why  do  you  make  so  much  noise  ?  We  bear  all  the  labour,  and  we, 
not  you,  ought  to  cry  out.'  " 

So  much,  then,  for  one  book,  ^Esop's  Fables,  which  will  be  a 
storehouse  of  illustration  to  you  if  you  use  it  discreetly. 

Amongst  modern  makers  of  fables, — fables  proper,  and  fables 
improper,  in  the  sense  of  not  being  fables,  but  parables, — you 
have  MRS.  PROSSER.  A  famous  woman  that  1  You  can  get  her 
book,  Original  Fables  and  Sketches,  of  the  Religious  Tract  Society. 
Her  little  fables  appeared,  week  by  week,  in  The  Leisure  Hour. 
Take  this  one,  which,  I  think,  is  a  very  beautiful  parable : — 

THE   COMPLAINT    OF    THE    EAST   WIND. 

'"Why  do  you  shrink  from  me?'  said  the  east  wind,  angrily,  to  the 
flowers. 

"  The  primrose,  for  answer,  crept  under  its  leaves ;  the  snowdrop, 
bending  lower,  laid  her  head  sadly  on  the  earth ;  the  opening  buds 
closed  again,  and  the  young  and  tender  green  leaves  curled  up,  looking  dry 
and  withered. 


BOOM   OF   FABLES,    EMBLKM8,    AM>    PA|UJ  m«J 

r1n"F<?r  T^V,^   ^^^    flUtterCd    int°a  bUSh'   the  ™rl'ler*   kept 

close  to  their  half-made   nests  ;  the  robin  hid  under  the  window-s.l 
and  the  sparrows  huddltd  into  their  holes. 

Ungrateful/  howled  the  east  wind.     <  Do   I  not  fill  the  sails  of 

e-ships,  that  bring  balmy  spices,  shining  merchandise,  and  all  the 

jrecious  gifts  of  far-off  lands  ?     The  gold  and  the  silver,  the  gems  of 

the  earth  and  of  the  ocean,  are  they  not  wafted  by  me  to  these  shores? 

Yet  love  never  greets  me.     I   find  a  barren  land  and  a  reproachful 

silence  wherever  I  come. 


thro»h|  7  Hern  u^  I,'  Feplied  thC  SUn'  strugSlin8  for  a  moment 
through  a  leaden  sky,  'read  aright  the  reason  of  your  reception  Who 

brings  the  piercing  blast  and  destructive  blight  ?  Who  hides  the 
azure  of  the  heavens,  and  dims  the  beauty  of  the  earth  ?  Who  tries  to 
veil  me  with  impenetrable  gloom,  so  that  I  can  no  longer  bid  the  world 
rejoice  ?  Is  not  this  your  work  ?  Riches  you  may  bring,  but  the  gifts 
oi  your  hand  cannot  atone  for  your  harsh  voice  and  unloving  nature 
Your  presence  inspires  terror,  while  it  spreads  desolation  :  and  where 
fear  is,  love  is  never  seen.' " 

There,  again,  as  in  the  case  of  Map,  tin-  onlv  faMe  is  in  the 
talking  of  the  east  wind  and  the  sun;  f,,r  it  is  a  well-known  I 
that  the  east  wind  is  highly  objectionable  l>..th  to  man  an.l  1, 
and  probably  also  to  flowers  and  birds.     A  spiritual  truth  u, 
well  be  brought  out  of  that  fable  or  parable,  showing  the  power  of 
love,  and  the  weakness  of  fear  and  terror,  even  when  coml 
with  the  most  substantial  excellences .  - 

That  is  a  very  simple  but  good  parade  of  Mr>   Proaaer's, 
she  illustrates  the  evil  of  quarrelling  in  Christian  clan  .!1V- 

\\liLTe  else: — 

THE  LEMONS  AND  THE  SODA. 

"  'We  could  soon  finish  you   up,'  said  some  lemons  to  a   bottle  of 
carbonate  of  soda 

"  •  I  could  soon  take  the  taste  out  of  you,'  answered  the  soda. 

"  '  Let  us  try  our  strength,'  said  the  lemons. 

"'With  all  my  heart,'  said  the  soda;  and  to  work  they  went,  trying 
with  all  their  might  to  extinguish  each  other;  fizz — went  the  1- : 
fizz — went  the  soda;  and  they  went  on  fizzing  till  there  was  notiun 
either  of  them  left,  and  only  a  nauseous  puddle  showed  where- 
had  been." 

You  observe  that,  lien-  also,  there  i-  really  no  faMe  ;  at  tl: 
it  is  a  matter  of  fact.     The  fable  is  only  in  tin-  o»n\. 
personification,  the  allegorizing  of  tin-  thin   .     8    ;a  and  K-nmn- 

K-ave  nothing  as  the  result  of   their  fix/in^;    and   In-:., 
take    off    the    win^s  of   tin-   faMe,   and    turn   it    to  ^.,,,,1    ; 
account  ill  Chri.-tim  instruction. 


110  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND   PARABLES. 

Among  the  books  of  emblems  which  ought  to  be  very  useful  to 
you,  is  AUSTEN  on  Fruit  Trees.  I  will  read  you  the  title-page  of 
the  original  edition: — The  Spiritual  Use  of  an  Orchard,  or  Garden 
of  Fruit  Trees,  IL'ld  Forth  in  Divers  Similitudes  between  Natural 
and  Spiritual  Fruit  frees,  according  to  Scripture  and  Experience; 
by  Ralph  Austen,  Practiser  in  the  Art  of  Planting.  Under  this 
long  title  is  rather  a  curious  illustration  of  a  garden,  and  various 
implements  used  in  husbandry,  surrounded  by  this  motto  :— 
"  A  o-arden  inclosed  is  my  sister,  my  spouse.  .  .  Thy  plants  are 
an  orchard  of  pomegranates,  with  pleasant  fruits."  Austen 
was  not  a  preacher;  but  a  gardener,  a  planter  of  fruit  trees. 
This  work  is  a  first-rate  book  upon  how  to  plant  fruit  trees,  how 
to  trim  them,  and  all  that  relates  to  such  employment ;  but  the 
part  we  have  to  do  with  is  the  portion  in  which  the  author 
spiritualizes  fruit  trees.  The  book  bears  the  imprimatur  of  Dr. 
John  Owen,  "Vice-Chancellor  of  Oxford  University,  August  2, 
1656  ; "  and  that  fact  alone  should  be  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  its 
quality.  Mr.  Austen  appears  to  have  been  a  good  man,  who  had 
passed  through  a  very  trying  spiritual  experience,  and  who  was 
therefore  all  the  better  qualified  to  be  a  teacher  of  others. 

In  the  "Address  to  the  Reader",  recommending  this  work, 
'•  Stephen  Ford,  Pastor  of  a  Church  of  Christ  in  Chippin-Norton," 
writes  as  follows  : — 

"  Concerning  the  author  of  the  following  observations,  and  similitudes, 
whatever  carnal  men,  or  the  pride  of  spiritual  men  may  object  (as  who 
that  is  zealous,  and  active  for  God,  can  escape  the  censures  of  some 
men),  it  evidently  appears  to  me  that  the  Spirit  of  God  hath  carried  him 
on  in  this  work.  Reject  not  the  work  because  it  is  not  done  by  a 
public  minister  of  the  gospel,  for  many  private  experienced  Christians 
have  been  (in  this  way)  very  profitable  to  the  Church  of  God  ;  these 
are  the  last  times,  wherein  God  fulfils  his  great  gospel  promise,  in 
pouring  out  his  Spirit  upon  all  flesh ;  and  those  whom  God  intends  for 
special  service  he  prepares  them  for  it  by  some  special  preparations.  I 
have  seen  a  large,  particular  relation,  composed  by  this  author,  of 
God's  dealings  with  him  for  many  years  together ;  wherein  it  appears 
that  God  began  betimes  with  him,  early,  even  the  first  hour  of  the  day  : 
and  he  hath  been  exercised  with  many  temptations  from  his  youth  up  ; 
having  passed  through  the  spirit  of  bondage  early  in  the  morning,  and 
by  degrees  came  to  close  with  Christ,  and  to  attain  a  comfortable 
assurance  of  his  interest  in  him  :  but  afterwards,  even  about  the  middle 
of  the  day  (upon  the  Spirit's  withdrawing,  and  God's  hiding  of  his  face 
for  some  gracious  ends),  he  fell  into  a  long  and  sad  desertion,  passing 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold 
upon  him,  and  that  in  an  extraordinary  way  and  measure ;  but  God  (by 
degrees)  lifted  him  up  out  of  the  deep  pit,  out  of  the  mire  and  clay,  and 
set  his  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  hath  put  a  new  song  into  his  mouth,  and 


BOOKS   OF   FA  I '  1. 1>.    EMBLEMS,     \M>    PARABU  111 

made  him  active  for  God  in  his  generation.  As  for  his  following  labours, 
I  doubt  not  but  God  will  make  them  very  useful  and  profitable  to  the 
people  of  God  :  what  is  more  helpful  to  the  understanding,  and  remem 
bering  of  spiritual  things,  than  plain  and  pregnant  similitudes  of  things 
which  we  are  daily  conversant  with  (all  these  being  also  enlarged  upon 
by  him,  and  improved  to  spiritual  ends  and  advantages)  ?" 

Austen's  own  Preface  is  so  exceedingly  goo  1,  and  contains  so 
many  metaphors  and  figurative  ex-  tl.at  1  mu>t  give  vmi 

a  few  extrarts  from  it : — 

"  When  we  have  gone  through  all  the  works  and  labours  to  be 
performed  in  the  orchard,  and  have  received  thereby  a  rich  recompense 
of  temporal  profits  and  pleasures  in  the  use  of  the  trees  and  fruits,  we 
(besides  all  that)  make  a  spiritual  use  of  them,  and  receive  more  and  pr«.  a»»:r 
profits  and  pleasures  thereby.  Men  are  not  wont  to  stint  themselves  at 
worldly  profits  ;  but  why  are  they  not  willing  to  receive  all  kinds  of 
profits,  or  why  are  they  not  willing  to  receive  the  greatest  and  best  ? 
Should  a  man  choose,  and  prefer  a  glass  bead  or  toy  before  some 
precious  and  rich  jewel,  would  he  not  be  censured  for  a  foolish  man? 
How  much  more  foolish  and  unwise  is  he  that  seeks  after  temporal 
profits,  and  neglects  spiritual  and  eternal  ?  Therefore,  be  careful  to  make 
a  spiritual  improvement  of  fruit  trees. 

"  The  world  is  a  great  library,  and  fruit  trees  are  some  of  the  books 
wherein  we  may  read  and  see  plainly  the  attributes  of  God,  his  power, 
wisdom,  goodness,  etc.,  and  be  instructed  and  taught  our  duty  towards 
him  in  many  things,  even  from  fruit  trees  :  for  as  trees  fin  a  metaphorical 
sense)  are  books,  so  likewise,  in  the  same  sense,  they  have  a  voice,  and 
speak  plainly  to  us,  and  teach  us  many  good  lessons. 

"  As  I  have  planted  many  thousands  of  natural  fruit  trees  for  the  good 
of  the  commonwealth,  so  also  I  have  taken  some  spiritual  scions  or  grafts 
from  them  (I  mean  several  oppositions  drawn  from  observations  in 
nature,  which  are  somewhat  branched  forth  into  boughs  and  twigs),  and 
bound  them  up,  and  sent  them  abroad  for  the  good  of  the  Church 
of  God  :  and  if  men  will  hut  accept  of  them,  and  be  content  to  have 
them  engrafted  in  their  own  gardens  (their  hearts  and  minds),  by  the 
Husbandman's  watering  of  them  by  his  Spirit,  they  will  grow,  and  !>..• 
and  bear  much  good  fruit,  here  and  for  ever  ,  fruits  of  faith,  love, 
peace,  and  other  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  bunches  of  grapes,  for  the  feeding 
and  refreshing  of  our  souls  as  we  travel  through  the  wilderness,  and  the- 
increase  of  our  glory  hereafter  in  Canaan  to  all  eternity. 

41  Which  improvement  the  Great  Husbandman  grant  unto  thee, 
together  with 

"Thy  servant  in  the  Lor.l, 

"KA.  AUST: 

Some  years  ago,  I  bought  a  considerable  numl.rr  of  the>.-  1.. 
and  sold  them  very  <-hraply  to  the  students;   l.ut  if  any  gentl.-m:m 
here  would  like  a  copy,  I  cannot   supj.lv  him,  f..r  I  have   nofl 
them  left  now.      You  are  as  likrly  to  meet  with   it  in  tin-  old  tWin 
as  in  the  n.-xv  :  and   if  you    get  it,  you  ought    to  j.ri/.r   it    f.-r  tin- 


112  BOOKS    OF    FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

abundant  parables  it  contains.  You  will  find  that  the  old  Puritan 
books  are  about  as  broad  as  they  are  long  ;  and  that  is  the  shape 
a  Christian  man  ought  to  be  in  his  character,  like  "  that  great  city, 
the  holy  Jerusalem,"  of  which  we  read,  "  the  city  lieth  foursquare, 
and  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth." 

Now  I  will  give  you  a  taste  of  what  this  book  of  Mr.  Austen's 
is  like.  It  is  all  about  fruit  trees ;  everything  that  can  be  turned 
into  a  metaphor  is  used.  The  volume  contain6  exactly  a  hundred 
Observations, — that  was  generally  the  number  the  Puritans  liked, 
— a  Century  of  Observations,  they  called  them.  This  is  the 
first:— 

"  The  Husbandman  m-\kes  choice  of  what  wild  plants  he  pleaseth,  to 
bring  into  his  Orchards  there  to  graft,  and  order  to  fruit-bearing  from 
year  to  year.  He  leaves  other  plants  in  the  woods  and  waste  grounds, 
he  lets  them  alone,  and  meddles  not  with  them ;  but  takes  and  leaves 
these,  or  those,  as  pleaseth  himselfc" 

That  is,  of  course,  the  doctrine  of  election.  Further  on,  the 
author  says, — 

"  The  Husbandman  doth  order  his  young  fruit  trees  with  more 
tenderness,  and  gentleness,  than  such  as  are  strong  and  well-grown  trees, 
because  such  (while  they  are  small  and  tender)  are  in  more  danger  of 
breaking,  and  bruising,  and  other  hurts,  than  they  are  afterwards.  So 
that,  besides  the  great  walk,  or  common  fence  about  the  Orchard,  he 
makes  a  more  special  fence  with  bushes,  stakes,  or  the  like,  about  each 
of  them,  and  gives  them  more  choice  nourishment,  by  oftener  watering 
them  with  good  water,  that  they  may  grow,  and  come  on  the 
faster." 

You  can  all  see  how  you  can  apply  that  illustration.  Here  is 
the  eleventh  Observation  : — 

"  We  find  by  experiencr  that,  after  a  plant  is  engrafted,  both  the 
graft  and  the  stock  will  shoot  forth,  and  if  the  graft  grow  vigorously  and 
strongly,  then  the  shoot?  of  the  stock  are  but  weak ;  but  if  the  shoots  of 
the  stock  break  out  strongly,  then  the  graft  grows  but  weakly,  therefore 
the  Husbandman  takes  pains  often  to  cut  off  the  shoots  that  grow  upon 
the  stock,  that  so  the  graft  may  grow  the  better." 

Austen  spiritualizes  this  Observation  thus  : — 

"  While  the  spiritual  part  in  us  acts  and  grows  strongly,  the  fleshly 
part  acts  but  weakly;  so  also,  if  the  flesh  be  strong,  the  spirit  is 
weak." 

He  gives  a  number  of  observations  of  this  kind ;  I  do  not  know 
that  I  can  do  better  than  give  you  some  more  of  them.  Here  is 
the  thirtieth  Observation  :— 

11  Fruit  trees  that  spread  much,  and  grow  low,  near  the  ground,  such 


BOOKS    -I     rABLBB,    EMBLEMS,    A.M.    PABABJ  113 

(most  commonly)  bring  forth  more  and  larger  fruits  than  high  tr< 
aspire  up  into  the  air. 

"  This  shadows  out  unto  us  that  humble  Christians  bring  forth  fai 
more  and  fairer  fruits  than  such  Christians  as  are  lifted  up." 

This  is  the  ninety-seventh  (  )!>MT\  ation  : — 

"  The  root  of  a  tree  communicates,   and  gives  up    sap  to  all   the 
branches,  one  as  well  as  another,   to  the  smallest  as  well  as  to   the 
greatest :  the  least  branch,  or  twig  upon  the  tree,  yea,  the  least  bud  upon 
the  least  branch,  hath  as  constant  and  real  a  supply  of  sap  from  i 
as  the  greatest  bough  or  branch  upon  the  tr« 

"  This  shadows  out  unto  us  that  Jesus  Christ  gives  forth  as  c« 
a  supply  of  all  grace  to  the  meanest  of  his  people  as  to  those  who  are 
most  eminent." 

Get  Austens  Garden  of  Fruit  Trees  if  you  can,  lnvthren,  ami 
be  not  yourselves  either  barren  or  unfruitful. 

The  next  book  I  shall  bring  before  you  is  M  \-n.i:  .!«>n\ 
FLAVEL'S  work  called,  Husbandry  Spiritualized;  or,  the  Heavenly 
Use  of  Earthly  Things.  The  character  of  Flavel's  writing  inav  In- 
guessed  from  his  introduction,  or,  as  he  calls  it,  "Tin-  I'I-'-MII  ",  to 
this  treatise.  Here  is  a  brief  summary  of  his  twi-nty  Proportions 
about  husbandmen,  and  the  typical  meaning  that  he  attaches  to 
their  occupation  and  surroundings;  I  do  not  think  I  ner  1  explain 
them,  the  mere  mention  of  them  will  be  sufhVient  for  you  to  see 
what  good  right  Flavel  has  to  an  honourable1  place  among  the 
makers  of  metaphors,  emblems,  etc.: — 

11  Ye  are  God's  Husbandry" — i  Corinthians  iii.  9. 

"  The  life  and  employment  of  an  husbandman  excellently  shadow 
forth  the  relation  betwixt  God  and  his  Church,  and  the  relative  duties 
betwixt  its  ministers  and  members;  or,  the  Church  is  God's  Husbandry, 
about  which  his  ministers  are  employed. 

"  i.  The  husbandman  purchases  his  fields,  and  gives  a  valuable  con 
sideration  for  them,  Jeremiah  xxxii.  9,  10. 

11  So  hath  God  purchased  his  Church  with  a  full  valuable  price, 
the  precious  blood  of  his  own  Son,  Acts  xx.  28. 

"2.  Husbandmen  divide  and  separate  their  own  lands  from  o- 
they  have  their  land-marks  and  boundaries,  by  which  property  ; 
served,  Deuteronomy  xxvii.  17;  Proverbs  xxii.  28. 

"So  are  the  people  of  God  wonderfully  separated  and  distingi 
from  all  the  people  of  the  earth.     'The  Lord  hath  set  apart  him  tnat  is 
godly  for  himself   (Psalm  iv.  3);  and,  'The  Lord  knoweth  them  that 
are  his'  (2  Timothy  ii.  19). 

"  3.  Corn-fields  are  carefully  fenced  by  the  husbandman  with  hedges, 
and  ditches,  to  preserve  their  fruits  from   beasts  that  would  ot:. 
over-run  and  destroy  them.      It  is  as  good  husbandry  t«>  keep  v 
have,  as  to  acquire  more  than  we  had. 

"  '  My  wellbeloved   hath  a  vineyard    in   a  very  fruitful  hill  :  and  he 


114  HOOKS    OF    FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

fenced  it'  (Isaiah  v.  i,  2).  No  inheritance  is  better  defended  and 
secured  than  the  Lord's  inheritance.  'As  the  mountains  are  round 
about  Jerusalem,  so  the  Lord  is  round  about  his  people  '  (Psalm  cxxv.  2). 
See  Isaiah  iv.  5.  There  is  not  a  single  saint  but  is  hedged  about  and 
enclosed  in  arms  of  power  and  love,  Job  i.  10. 

"4.  Husbandmen  carry  out  their  compost,  to  fertilize  their  arable 
ground  ;  they  dung  it,  dress  it,  and  keep  it  in  heart. 

" '  Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year  also,  till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung 
it :  and  if  it  bear  fruit,  well :  and  if  not,  then  after  that  thou  shall  cut  it 
down'  (Luke  xiii.  8,  9).  Oh,  the  rich  dressing  which  God  bestows 
upon  his  churches !  They  are  costly  fields  indeed,  dressed  and 
fertilized,  not  only  by  precious  ordinances  and  providences,  but  also  by 
the  sweat,  yea,  blood  of  the  dispensers  of  them. 

"  5.  The  husbandman  builds  his  house  where  he  makes  his  purchase, 
dwells  upon  his  land,  and  frequently  visits  it. 

"So  doth  God;  wherever  he  plants  a  church,  there  doth  he  fix  his 
habitation,  intending  there  to  dwell.  '  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her ' 
(Psalm  xlvi.  5). 

"  6.  Husbandmen  grudge  not  at  the  cost  they  are  at  for  their  tillage; 
but  as  they  lay  out  vast  sums  upon  it,  so  they  do  it  cheerfully. 

" '  And  now,  O  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and  men  of  Judah,  judge, 
I  pray  you,  betwixt  me  and  my  vineyard  !  What  could  have  been  done 
more  to  my  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done  in  it?'  (Isaiah  v.  3,  4.) 
And  as  he  bestows  upon  his  heritage  the  choicest  mercies,  so  he  doth 
it  with  the  greatest  cheerfulness,  Jeremiah  xxxii.  41. 

"  7.  When  husbandmen  have  been  at  cost  and  pains  about  their 
husbandry,  they  expect  fruit  from  it  answerable  to  their  pains  and 
expenses  about  it,  James  v.  7 ;  Isaiah  v.  2. 

"  This  heavenly  Husbandman  also  waits  for  the  fruits  of  his  fields  ; 
never  did  any  husbandman  long  for  the  desired  harvest  more  than  God 
doth  for  the  fruits  of  holiness  from  his  saints. 

"8.  Husbandmen  are  much  delighted  to  see  the  success  of  their 
labours,  it  comforts  them  over  all  their  hard  pains,  and  many  weary 
days,  to  see  a  good  increase. 

"  Much  more  is  God  delighted  in  beholding  the  flourishing  graces 
of  his  people ;  it  pleases  him  to  see  his  plants  laden  with  fruit,  and  his 
valleys  sing  with  corn,  Cant.  vi.  2  ;  iv.  16. 

"  9.  The  husbandman  is  exceedingly  grieved  when  he  sees  the  hopes 
of  a  good  crop  disappointed,  and  his  fields  prove  barren  or  blasted. 

"  So  the  Lord  expresses  his  grief  for  and  anger  against  his  people, 
when  they  bring  forth  no  fruits,  or  wild  fruits,  worse  than  none, 
Hosea  ix.  16. 

"  10.  Husbandmen  employ  many  labourers  to  work  in  their  fields ; 
there  is  need  of  many  hands  for  such  a  multiplicity  of  business. 

"  God  hath  diversity  of  workmen  also  in  the  churches,  whom  he  sends 
forth  to  labour  in  his  spiritual  fields.  '  He  gave  some,  apostles  ;  and 
some,  prophets ;  and  some,  evangelists ;  and  some,  pastors  and  teachers  ; 
for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry' 
(Ephesians  iv.  n,  12)." 

Do  not  read  that  verse  as  I  heard  a  brother  read  it  once  : — "  He 


BOOKS    OF    FABLES.     KMl'.I.KM-.     \\I>    PABABL1  1  1  ."• 

gave  some  apostles,  and  some  prophets,  and  some  fr,myeK*ts,  and 
some  pastors  and  teachers."  Put  the  emphasis  in  tin-  right  place. 
"  He  gave  some,  apostles  ;  and  some,  prophets  ;  and  some,  evangelists ; 
and  .some,  pastors  and  teachers." 

\Ve  are  only  half  way  through  Mr.  Fla\vl's  twenty  propositions, 
so  let  us  continue  reading  them  : — 

"n.  The  work  about  which  husbandmen  employ  their  servants  in 
the  field,  is  toilsome  and  spending.  You  see  them  come  home  at  night 
so  weary  that  they  can  hardly  draw  their  legs  after  them. 

"  But  God's  workmen  have  a  much  harder  task  than  they ;  hence 
they  are  set  forth  in  Scripture  by  the  laborious  ox  (i  Cor.  ix.  9  ; 
Rev.  iv.  7).  Some  derive  the  word  deacon  from  a  word  that  signifies 
dust,  to  show  the  laboriousness  of  their  employment,  labouring  till  even 
choked  with  dust  and  sweat.  The  apostle's  expression  is  very  em- 
phatical :  '  Whereunto  I  also  labour,  striving  according  to  his  working, 
which  worketh  in  me  mightily '  (Col.  i.  29)." 

What  a  grand  verse  that  is  I  That  will  do  for  the  brethren  who 
think  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  in  them,  so  they  may  go  t 
and  that  there  is  no  more  wrestling  with  the  flesh  because  they 
have  Christ  in  them,  the  hope  of  glory  ;  whereas  the  teaching  of 
this  text  is  that,  the  more  the  Lord  works  in  us,  the  more  conflict 
there  will  be  :  u  Whereunto  I  also  labour,  striving  according  to  \\\> 
working,  which  worketh  in  me  mightily."  When  the  Christian 
readies  that  height  of  experience,  there  will  be  no  contentment, 
but  a  great  deal  of  fighting ;  and  much  hard  toil,  like  that  of  the 
husbandman. 

Again  let  us  resume  our  reading  : — 

"  is.  The  immediate  end  of  the  husbandman's  labour,  and  his  ser 
vants'  labour,  is  for  the  improvement  of  his  land,  to  make  it  more 
flourishing  and  useful. 

"  The  scope  and  end  of  the  ministry  is  for  the  churches  benefit  and 
advantage.  God's  husbandmen  must  not  lord  it  over  God's  heritage, 
as  if  the  church  were  for  them,  and  not  they  for  the  chun  h. 

"  1 3.  The  workmen  that  labour  in  the  fields  are  accountable  for  their 
work  to  him  that  employed  them. 

"  Church-officers  are  also  accountable  to  God  for  all  the  souls  com 
mitted  to  them.  They  are  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God,  and 
stewards  are  accountable,  i  Cor.  iv.  i  ;  Heb.  xni.  7. 

11  14    Those  that  spend   their  time  and  strength,  all  tlu-ir  <:. 
manuring  and  ploughing  the  fields,  do  maintain  themselves  and  their 
families  by  their  labours. 

"  '  Even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained  that  they  which  preach  the  gospel 
should  live  of  the  gospel'  (i  Cor.  ix.  14). 

"15    It  is  a  great  trouble  to  husbandmen,  in  a  busy  time,  tc 
off  from  their  labours  by  stormy  weather,  which  dl  '  out  of  the 


Ill)  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

fields,  and  makes  them  let  all  lie,  till  it  clear  up  again  ;  yet,  meanwhile, 
they  are  not  idle,  but  employ  themselves  in  home-work. 

"  Even  so,  in  God's  husbandry,  it  is  an  unspeakable  affliction  to  God's 
workmen  to  be  rendered  useless  and  unserviceable  to  the  churches,  by 
those  storms  of  trouble  which  drive  them  from  their  public  ministerial 
work.  With  what  a  heavy  heart  did  Paul  go  off  from  his  work  at 
Ephesus !  Acts  xx.  It  spends  a  minister  to  preach  ;  but  it  costs  him 
more  to  be  silent. 

11  1 6.  There  is  a  vast  difference  betwixt  those  fields  which  have  been 
well  husbanded,  and  dressed  by  a  skilful  and  diligent  husbandman,  and 
those  that  have  been  long  out  of  husbandry.  How  fragrant  is  the  one  ! 
How  dry  and  barren  the  other! 

"Thus  stands  the  case  betwixt  those  places  which  God  hath  blest  with 
a  faithful,  painful  ministry,  and  such  as  have  none,  or  worse  than  none. 
Ministers'  pains  and  diligence  are  ordinarily  seen  in  the  heavenly  lives 
and  flourishing  graces  of  the  people. 

"  17.  The  husbandman  is  not  discouraged  though  the  seed  lie  long 
under  the  clods  ;  he  knows  it  will  spring  up  at  the  last,  and  reward  him, 
or  those  that  come  after  him,  for  their  pains  and  patience  in  waiting 
for  it. 

"  Ministers  should  not  be  presently  discouraged  in  their  work, 
because  they  see  but  little  or  no  appearance  of  all  the  seed  they  have 
sown  among  the  people. 

"  1 8.  Husbandmen  find  low  ground  and  valleys  most  fertile.  Hills, 
how  loftily  soever  they  overtop  the  lower  grounds,  yet  answer  not  the 
husbandman's  pains  as  the  valleys  do.  These  are  best  watered,  and 
secured  from  the  scorching  heat  of  the  sun. 

"  Experience  shows  us  that  the  humblest  saints  are  most  fruitful  under 
the  gospel.  These  are  they  who  '  receive  with  meekness  the  engrafted 
word  '  (James  i.  21 V 

"  19.  The  first  crop  is  usually  the  best;  and  the  longer  the  husband 
man  tills  his  ground,  the  less  it  produces.  After  a  few  years,  its  vigour 
and  strength  are  spent. 

"  The  first  entertainment  of  the  gospel  is  commonly  the  best ;  and 
what  good  is  done  by  the  ministry  is  often  done  at  its  first  entrance, 
John  v.  35  ;  Gal.  iv.  15. 

"  20.  Lastly,  When  fields  grow  barren,  and  will  not  quit  the  husband 
man's  cost,  nor  answer  the  seed  he  sows  in  them,  he  plucks  up  the 
hedges,  and  lays  them  waste. 

'  So,  when  churches  grow  formal  and  fruitless,  the  Lord  removes  his 
gospel-presence  from  them,  plucks  up  the  hedge  of  his  protection  from 
about  them,  and  lays  them  open  as  waste  ground,  to  be  over-run  by  their 
enemies,  Jer.  vii.  12;  Isaiah  v.  5." 

Flavel  also  wrote  a  treatise  entitled,  A  New  Compass  for  Seamen; 
or,  Navigation  Spiritualized.  I  am  going  to  give  you  two  speci 
mens  of  its  contents  : — 

"Ships  make  much  way  when  they  a  trade-wind  get . 
With  such  a  wind  the  saints  have  ever  mtt" 

OBSERVATION. 

"  Though  in  most  parts  of  the  world  the  winds  are  variable,  and 


"<>"KS  Or    FABLES,    EMBLEM*,    AMD    PAHAB1  117 


n,snH  °f  the  """I"5'-  by  ™s<>n   "hereof 

wi  h  f  rade  «a"ri    ft1"*'0"'  ;  >ct  at)ou<  ">,•  E'J-inoclial.  seamen   meet 
'         'm     f°r  the  m  • 


,  m°SI  '>art  one  "•'>•  :  ;lntl 

and  scarce  need  to  lowtr 

APPLICATION. 


------  0..  „..,.  rvw(/1<.  w,  vjuu  U1CCI  with  many  seeming  rubs  and  set 
backs  in  their  way  to  heaven,  whirh  are  like  contrary  v.  ,  shi,,. 
yet  they  are  from  the  day  of  their  converse  to  the  day  of  their  com. 
plete  salvation,  never  out  of  a  trade-wind's  way  to  heaven  •  We  know 
that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them' that  love  God,  to  them 
who  are  the  called  according  to  his  purpose '  (Romans  viii.  28)  This 
is  a  most  precious  Scripture,  pregnant  with  its  consolation,  to  all 
believers  m  all  conditions,  a  pillar  of  comfort  to  all  distressed  s  unts 
Let  us  look  a  little  nearer  to  it. 

" '  We  know.]     Mark  the  certainty  and  evidence  of  the  proposition 
which  1S  not  built  upon  a  guess  or  remote  probability,  but  upon  the  know' 
ledge  of  the  saints ;    we  know  it,  and  that  partly  by  divine  revelation 
,  £!  told  us  so;  and  I)artly  by  our  own  experience,  we  find  it  so 

That  all  things.'  Not  only  things  that  lie  in  a  natural  and  direct 
tendency  to  our  good  ;  as  ordinances,  promises,  blessings,  etc.,  but  even 
such  things  as  have  no  natural  fitness  and  tendency  to  such  an  end  • 
as  afflictions,  temptations,  corruptions,  desertions,  etc.,  all  these  helo 
onward.  They — 

4  Work  together:  Not  all  of  them  directly,  and  of  their  own  nature 
and  inclination ;  but  by  being  over-ruled  and  determined  to  such  an 
issue  by  the  gracious  hand  of  God  :  nor  yet  do  they  work  out  such  good 
to  the  saints  singly  and  apart,  but  as  adjuvant  causes  or  helps,  standing 
undei  and  working  in  subordination  to  the  supreme  and  principal  cause 
of  their  happiness. 

"  Now,  the  most  seeming  opposite  things,  yea,  sin  in  itself,  which  in 
its  own  nature  is  really  opposite  to  their  good,  yet  eventually  contributes 
to  it.     Afflictions  and  desertions  seem  to  work  against  us;  but   being 
once  put   into  the  rank  and  order  of  causes,  they  work  together  with 
such   blessed  instruments  as  the  Word  and  prayer  to  a  happy  i 
And  though  the  faces  of  these  things,  that  so  agree  and   work  together, 
look  contrary  ways  ;  yet  there  are,  as  it  were,  secret  chains  and  con 
nexions  of  providence    betwixt  them,    to   unite   them    in    tlu 
There  may  be  many  instruments  employed  about  one  work,  an.i 
not    communicate  counsels,    or    hold     intelligence   with  iier. 

Josephs  brethren,  the  Midianites,  Potiphar,  etc.,  knew  not  one  another's 
mind,  nor  aimed  at  one  end  (much  less  the  end  that  God  brought  about 
by  them);  one  acts  out  of  revenge,  another  for  gain,  a  third  out  of 
policy ;  yet  all  meet  together  at  last,  in  that  issue  God  had  designed  to 
bring  about  by  them,  even  Joseph's  advancement.  Kvi-n  so  it  is  here, 
Christian  ;  there  are  more  instruments  at  work  for  thine  eternal  good 
than  thou  art  aware  of. 

REFLECTION. 

"  Cheer  up,  then,  O  my  soul,  and  lean  upon  this  pillar  of  comfort  in 
all  distresses.  Here  is  a  promise  for  me,  if  1  am  a  called  one  ;  that,  like 
the  philosopher's  stone,  turns  into  gold  all  it  toucheth.  This  promise 


llo"  BOOKS    OF    FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

is  my  security ;  however  things  go  in  the  world,  '  My  God  will  do  me 
no  hurt'  (Jeremiah  xxv.  6).  Nay,  he  will  do  me  good  by  every 
dispensation.  Oh,  that  I  had  but  a  heart  to  make  all  things  work  for 
his  glory,  that  thus  causeth  everything  to  work  for  my  good  !  My 
God,  dost  thou  turn  everything  to  my  advantage  ?  O  let  me  return  all 
to  thy  praise  ;  and  if  by  everything  thou  workest  my  eternal  good,  then 
^et  me  in  everything  give  thanks  ! 

"  But,  ah !  how  foolish  and  ignorant  have  I  been,  even  as  a  beast 
oefore  thee !  How  hath  my  heart  been  disquieted,  and  apt  to  repine 
at  thy  dispensations,  when  they  have  crossed  my  will,  not  considering 
that  my  God  faithfully  pursues  my  good,  even  in  those  things  that  cross, 
as  well  as  in  that  which  pleases  me ! 

"  Blessed  Lord,  what  a  blessed  condition  are  all  thy  people  in,  who 
are  within  the  line  of  this  promise  !  All  things  are  friendly  and  beneficial 
to  them ;  friends  helpful ;  enemies  helpful ;  everything  conspiring  and 
conducing  to  their  happiness.  With  others  it  is  not  so ;  nothing  works 
for  their  good  ;  nay,  everything  works  against  it ;  their  very  mercies  are 
snaies,  and  their  prosperity  destroys  them  (Proverbs  i.  32).  Even  the 
blessed  gospel  itself  is  a  savour  of  death  to  them :  when  evil  befals 
them,  it  is  'an  only  evil '  (Ezekiel  vii.  5);  that  is,  not  turned  into  good 
to  them  ;  and  as  their  evils  are  not  turned  into  good,  so  all  their  good 
is  turned  into  evil.  As  this  promise  hath  an  influence  in  all  that 
concerns  the  people  of  God,  so  the  curse  hath  an  influence  in  all  the 
enjoyments  of  the  wicked.  O  my  soul,  bless  the  Lord,  who  hath  cast 
thy  lot  in  such  a  pleasant  place,  and  given  thee  such  a  glorious  heritage 
as  this  promise  is ! 

THE    POEM. 

"  When  once  the  dog-star  rises,  many  say, 
Corn  ripens  then  apace,  both  night  and  day. 
Souls  once  in  Christ,  that  Morning-star  lets  fall 
Such  influences  on  them,  that  all 
God's  dipensations  to  them,  sweet  or  sour, 
Ripen  their  souls  for  glory  every  hour. 
All  their  afflictions  rightly  understood, 
Are  blessings  ;  ev'ry  wind  will  blow  some  good. 
Sure  at  their  troubles  saints  would  never  grudge, 
Were  sense  deposed,  and  faith  made  the  judge. 
Falls  make  them  warier,  amend  their  pace  ; 
When  gifts  puff  up  their  hearts,  and  weaken  grace. 
Could  Satan  see  the  issue,  and  th'  event 
Of  his  temptations,  he  would  scarcely  tempt. 
Could  saints  but  see  what  fruits  their  troubles  bring, 
Amidst  those  troubles  they  would  shout  and  sing. 
O  sacred  wisdom  !   who  can  but  admire 
To  see  how  thou  dost  save  from  fire,  by  fire  ? 
No  doubt  but  saints  in  glory  wond'ring  stand 
At  those  strange  methods  few  now  understand." 
THE  CHRISTIAN'S  COMPASS 

is  a  very  ingenious  composition,  in  which  all  the  points  of  the 

mariner's  compass  are  mentioned : — 


BUOK>   "K    FABLES,    BMBLEM8,    AM»    r\i:.\r.LE8.  111J 

"  i.      N.      Never    steer     any    course,    but    by    light    from    God, 
Ps.  cxix.  105. 

"  2.     N.  by  E.     Never  Enter  upon  any  design,  but  such  as  tends 
towards  Christ's  glory,  i  Peter  iv.  1  1  . 

"3.     N.N.E.     Note  Nothing  Enviously,  which  thrives  without  God, 
Ps.  Ixxiii. 

"  4.     N.E.  by  N.     Never  Enter  on  Not-warrantable  courses,  even  to 
procure  the  most  coveted  advantages,  i  Tim.  vi.  9,  10. 

"  5.     N.E.     Now  Entertain  the  sacred  commands  of  God,  if  here 
after  thou  expect  the  sovereign  consolations  of  God.  1'v  cxix.  48. 

"  6.     N.E.  by  E.     Never  Esteem  Egypt's  treasures  so  much,  as  for 
them  to  forsake  the  people  of  God,  Hub.  xi.  26. 

"7.     E.N.E.     Err   Not,    Especially    in    soul-affairs,   James   i.    16; 
i  Tim.  i.  19,  20;  2  Tim.  ii.  18. 

"  8.     E.  by  N.    Eschew  Nothing  but  sin,  i  Peter  iii.  1  1  ;  Job  i   7,  8  ; 
xxxi.  34. 

"  9.     E.     Establish  thy  heart  with  grace,  Heb.  xiu.  9. 
"  10.  E.  by  S.   Eye  Sanctity  in  every  action,  i  Pet.  i.  15  ;  Zech.  xiv.  20. 
"n.     E.S.E.     Ever  Strive  Earnestly  to  live  under,  and  to  im; 
the  means  of  grace,  Heb.  x.  25. 

"  12.     S.E.  by  E.     Suffer  Every  Evil  of  punishment  or  sorrow,  rath 
than  leave  the  ways  of  Christ  and  grace. 

"  13.     S.E.     Sigh  Earnestly  for  more  enjoyments  of  Christ 
"  14.     S.E.  by  S.     Seek  Evermore  Some  evidences  of  Christ  in  you, 
the  hope  of  glory. 

"  15.     S.S.E.     Still  Set  Eternity  before  you,  in  regard  of  enjoying 
Jesus  Christ,  John  xvii.  24. 

"  1  6.     S.  by  E.     Settle  it  Ever  in  your  soul,  as  a  principle  whi 
will  never  depart  from,  that  holiness  and  true  happiness  are  in  Christ, 
and  by  Christ. 

"17.     S.     Set  thyself  always  as  before  the  Lord,   Psalm  xvi. 

C"Si8.     S.  by  W.     See  Weakness  hastening  thee  to  death,  even  when 
thou  art  at  the  highest  pitch,  or  point. 

"  19.     S.S.W.     See  Sin,  Which  is  the  sting  of  death,  as  take 
by  Christ,  i  Cor.  xv.  55,  56,  57. 

«  20.     S.W.  by  S.     Store  Wisely  Some  provisions  every  day  f( 


Set  Worldly  things  under  your  feet,  before  death  come 
W^Sdn  Weigh  and  Watch  with  loins  girded  and 

&$ffi&M  in  the  balance  of  the  m 
"  24.     W.  byS.     Walk  in  Sweet  communion  with  Christ  her. 

so  thou  mayest  die  in  peace,  Luke  ii.  29. 

»  25      W.     Whatsoever  thy  condition  be  in  this  world,  eye  God  as 

the  Disposer  of  it,  and  therein  be  contented,  I'hil. 

«  26      W.  by  N.     Walk  Not  according  to  the  course  of  the  r 

^£*tt?*JS*«**  men  speak  or   think  of  thee,  so 
God  approve  thee,  2  Chron.  x.  8  ;  Rom.  11.  28,  29. 


};>()  UOOKS    OF    FAJJLKS,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PAKABL?:S. 

"28.  N.W.  by  W.  Never  Wink  at,  but  Watch  against  small  sins; 
and  never  neglect  little  duties,  Eph.  v.  15,  16. 

"  29.  N.W.  Never  Wish  rashly  for  death,  nor  love  life  inordinately, 
i  Kings  xix.  4  ;  Job  ii.  4. 

"30.  N.W.  by  N.  Now  Work  Nimbly  ere  night  come,  Job  x. 
21,  22  ;  Eccles.  ix.  10. 

"  3  r.  N.N.W.  Name  Nothing  When  thou  pleadest  with  God  for 
thy  soul,  but  Christ  and  free-grace,  Dan.  ix.  17,  18. 

"  32.  N.  by  W.  Now  Welcome  Christ,  if  at  death  thou  wouldst  be 
welcomed  by  Christ. 

"  A  tender,  quick,  enlivened,  and  enlightened  conscience,  is  the  only 
point  upon  which  we  must  erect  these  practical  rules  of  our  Christian 
compass,  Heb.  xii.  i;  2  Cor.  i.  12.  Our  memory,  that  is  the  box  in 
which  this  compass  must  be  kept,  in  which  these  rules  must  be  treasured, 
that  we  may  be  as  ready  and  expert  in  using  them  as  the  mariner  is  in 
using  his  sea  compass." 

I  will  give  you  only  one  more  quotation  from  Flavel,  and  that 
shall  be  from  his  "  Occasional  Meditations  "  :  — 

UPON   THE   CATCHING   OF    A    HORSE    IN    A    FAT   PASTURE. 

"  When  this  horse  was  kept  in  poor  short  leas,  where  he  had  much 
scope,  but  little  grass,  how  gentle  and  tractable  was  he  then  !  He  would 
not  only  stand  quiet  to  be  taken,  but  came  to  hand  of  his  own  accord, 
and  followed  me  up  and  down  the  field  for  a  crust  of  bread,  or  a  handful 
of  oats ;  but  since  I  turned  him  into  this  fat  pasture,  he  comes  no  more 
to  me,  nor  will  he  suffer  me  to  come  near  him,  but  throws  up  his  heels 
wantonly  against  me,  and  flies  from  me,  as  if  I  were  rather  his  enemy 
than  benefactor.  In  this,  I  behold  the  carriage  of  my  own  heart  towards 
God,  who,  the  more  he  hath  done  for  me,  the  seldomer  doth  he  hear 
from  me.  In  a  low  and  afflicted  state,  how  tractable  is  my  heart  to 
duty  !  Then  it  comes  to  the  foot  of  God  voluntarily  ;  but  in  an  exalted 
condition,  how  wildly  doth  my  heart  run  from  God  and  duty  !  With 
this  ungrateful  requital  God  charged  his  own  people,  Jer.  ii.  31, 
teachable  and  tractable  in  the  wilderness,  but  when  fatted  in  that  rich 
pasture  Canaan,  then,  *  We  are  lords,  we  will  come  no  more  unto  thee.' 
How  soon  are  all  God's  former  benefits  forgotten  !  and  how  often  is  that 
ancient  observation  verified,  even  in  his  own  people, — 

"  '  No  sooner  do  we  gifts  on  some  bestow, 
But  presently  our  gifts  gray-headed  grow  '  I 

"  But  that's  a  bad  tenant  that  will  maintain  a  suit  at  law  against  his 
landlord  with  his  own  rent ;  and  a  bad  heart  that  will  fight  against  God 
with  his  own  mercies." 

These  extracts  will  show  you  what  Flavel  is  like. 

Now,  coming  to  parables  proper,  the  best  thing  I  can  do  for  you, 
brethren,  is  to  indicate  where  you  will  find  some  of  them.  And, 
first,  there  is  a  large  number,  as  you  all  know,  in  JOHN  BUNYAN'S 


\ 


BOOKS  OP  FABLES,    KMUM1MS    AN,,    taUM  ,  •>  [ 

'of'tf  TT"  Tll(lse  sco"es  wllich  <****  w*w  !»  *• 

some  of     "     "  C"'PrC'tel;  3nd  in  "'"  '"'law  ™IW  "«»""'•:• 

of  the   nchest  and   best  ,ara  .....  ,,!,,,  f,mna  in 

witl1  the 


f  -     ", 

of  the  man  sweeping  the  room,  :l,,,l  a|lnost  ,.,„,,.;„..  „ 

w,th  the  dust  until  the  „:„,,  «,„  ....-inku'l.v 


-™>»*°* 

..ence,  the  fire  burning  ap,lnrt  a  wall,  vet  ,,,,t  qnenehed  l,v 
water,  because  the  flame  was  s,cret!y  fed  b/oil;  tl,,  man  in  an 
jron  cage  ;  and  others  that  I  will  not  now  call  to  ^  rwnTbU 
but  which  you  ought  all  to  know  by  heart 

You  may  not,  however,  all  b,  aware  that  John  Banyan  wrote 
A  Book  for  Boy,  and  VvU,  Divine  K,,Mems,  or  T^.^l  Tin,,,. 
Sptrttualue<l  ,„  which  there  are  some  excellent  parSfcl  Tla-v 
are  really  emblems;  you  will  find  them  in  Offor's  »,PU(|M  edition 

Banyan's  works,  the  three  volumes  that  you  all  ou^l,,  tl)  ,,t  if 
you  can.  I  W1,l  not  tl  t  the  ^^  jn  ^  em|  ^ 

Mjltons,  or  even  nvals  Cowper's,  but  the  sense  is  ,mli.      Take 
this  one,  for  instance,  — 

UPON    THE    FLINT    IN    THE    WATER. 

"  This  flint,  time  out  of  mind  has  there  abode 
Where  crystal  streams  make  their  continual  road  • 
Yet  it  abides  a  flint  as  much  as  'twere, 
Before  it  touched  the  water,  or  came  there. 
It's  hardness  is  not  in  the  least  abated, 
'Tis  not  at  all  by  water  penetrated. 
Though  water  hath  a  soft'ning  virtue  in  't, 
It  can't  dissolve  the  stone,  for  'tis  a  Hint. 
Yea,  though  in  water  it  doth  still  remain, 
Its  fiery  nature  still  it  does  retain. 
If  you  oppose  it  with  its  opposite, 
Then  in  your  very  face  its  fire  'twill  spit. 

COMPARISON. 

"This  flint  an  emblem  is  of  those  that  lie, 
Under  the  Word,  like  stones,  until  they  die. 
Its  crystal  streams  have  not  their  natures  changed, 
They  are  not  from  their  lusts  by  grace  estranged"' 

Say  what  you  like  about  the  rhvmr,  but  the  nu-taj.hur  is  a  v, 
good  one.     The  next  I  will  give  you  is  — 

UPON    THE    WHIPPING    OF    A    TOP. 

"  'Tis  with  the  whip  the  boy  sets  up  th< 
The  whip  does  make  it  whirl  upon  its  i 
Hither  and  thither  make     it  skip  and  1 
'Tis  with  the  whip  the  u.p  i.-»  made  to  go. 


122  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

COMPARISON. 

"  Our  legalist  is  like  this  nimble  top, 
Without  a  whip  he  will  not  duty  do. 
Let  Moses  whip  him,  he  will  skip  and  hop  ; 
Forbear  to  whip,  he'll  neither  stand  nor  go." 

This  is  very  good,  too.  If  the  rhymes  are  not  first-rate,  the 
doctrine  13  all  right.  Here  is  another  of  Banyan's  emblems : — 

UPON    THE    BEGGAR. 

11  He  wants,  he  asks,  he  pleads  his  poverty, 
They  within  doors  do  him  an  alms  deny. 
He  doth  repeat  and  aggravate  his  grief  ; 
But  they  repulse  him,  give  him  no  relief. 
He  begs,  they  say,  '  Begone  ' :  he  will  not  hear, 
He  coughs  and  sighs,  to  show  he  still  is  there ; 
They  disregard  him,  he  repeats  his  groans  ; 
They  still  say,  '  Nay,'  and  he  himself  bemoans. 
They  call  him  '  Vagrant,'  and  more  rugged  grow ; 
He  cries  the  shriller  ;  trumpets  out  his  woe. 
At  last,  when  they  perceive  he'll  take  no  nay, 
An  alms  they  give  him  without  more  delay. 

COMPARISON. 

"  This  beggar  doth  resemble  them  that  pray 
To  God  for  mercy,  and  will  take  no  nay  : 
But  wait,  and  count  that  all  his  hard  gainsays 
Are  nothing  else  but  fatherly  delays  : 
Then  imitate  him,  praying  souls,  and  cry, 
There's  nothing  like  to  importunity." 

That  also  does  not  excel  in  poetry,  does  it,  brethren  ?  But  I  think 
we  can  put  up  with  the  lack  of  rhyme  when  we  can  get  teaching 
BO  good  as  that.  I  will  only  give  you  one  more  emblem : — 

THE    BOY   AND    THE    BUTTERFLY. 

"  Behold,  how  eager  this  our  little  boy 
Is  for  a  butterfly,  as  if  all  joy, 
All  profits,  honours,  yea,  and  lasting  pleasures, 
Were  wrapt  up  in  her,  or  the  richest  treasures 
Found  in  her  would  be  bundled  up  together, 
When  all  her  all  is  lighter  than  a  feather. 
He  halloos,  runs,  and  cries  out,  '  Here,  boys,  here  ! ' 
Nor  doth  he  brambles  or  the  nettles  fear  : 
He  stumbles  at  the  mole-hills,  up  he  gets, 
And  runs  again,  as  one  bereft  of  wits  ; 
And  all  his  labour  and  his  large  outcry 
Are  only  for  a  silly  butterfly. 

COMPARISON. 

"  This  little  boy  an  emblem  is  of  those 
Whose  hearts  are  wholly  at  the  world's  dispose. 
The  butterfly  doth  represent  to  me 
The  world's  best  things  at  best  but  fading  be. 


BOOKS    OF    FAP.M>.     KMP.vr.M-.     \M>    PARAB] 

All  are  but  painted  nothings  and  false  joys, 

Like  this  poor  butterfly  to  these  our  boys. 

His  running  through  nettles,  thorns,  and  briers, 

To  gratify  his  boyish  fond  dc 

His  tumbling  over  mole-hills  to  attain 

His  end,  namely,  his  butterfly  to  gain  ; 

Doth  plainly  show  what  hazards  some  men  run 

To  get  what  will  be  lost  as  soon  as  won. 

Men  seem  in  choice,  than  children  far  more  wise, 

Because  they  run  not  after  butterflies  : 

When  yet,  alas  !  for  what  are  empty  toys, 

r\  hey  follow  children,  like  to  beardless  boys." 

In  his  Preface,  Master  .John  Bunyan  tells  "The  Courteous 
Header"  what  his  reason  was  for  writing  this  book,  and  the  persons 
he  aimed  at  in  it;  this  shows  that  he  meant  it  for  children  : — 

"  The  title-page  will  show,  if  there  thou  look, 
Who  are  the  proper  subjects  of  this  book. 
They're  boys  and  girls,  of  all  sorts  and  degrees, 
From  those  of  age  to  children  on  the  knees. 
Thus  comprehensive  am   I  in  my  notions, 
They  tempt  me  to  it  by  their  childish  motions. 
We  now  have  boys  with  beards,  and  girls  that  be 
Huge  as  old  women,  wanting  gravity. 

Then  do  not  blame  me,  'cause  I  thus  describe  them. 
Flatter  I  may  not,  lest  thereby  I  bribe  them 
To  have  a  better  judgment  of  themselves, 
Than  wise  men  have  of  babies  on  their  shelves." 
The  word   "babies"  means  pictures,  "  babs  "  they  u<e.l  to  call 
them;  I  do   not  think  we  use  the  word  now.     They  were  called 
"  babs"  because  they  were  put  in  for  hahics  ;  and  so,  up  till  lately, 
old  dictionaries  had  the  word,  not  referring  to  babies,  hut  as  nn-an- 
ing  pictures.     The  word  "babies"  was  also  used  in  olden  tiim-*  as 
the    name    for   dolls ;  that   may  be  the  sense   here   intended   by 
*'  babies  on  their  shelves."      Buiiyan  continu- 

"  Their  antic  tricks,  fantastic  modes,  and  way, 
Show  they,  like  very  girls  and  boys  do  play 
With  all  the  frantic  fopperies  of  this  age, 
And  that  in  open  view,  as  on  a  stage  ; 
Our  bearded  men  do  act  like  beardless  bo 
Our  women  please  themselves  with  childish 
Our  ministers,  long  time  by  word  anil 
Dealt  with  them,  counting  them  not  boys,  but  men. 
They  shot  their  thunders  at  them  and  their  I 
But  hit  them  not,  'cause  they  were  girls  and 
The  better  charg'd,  the  wider  still  they 
Or  else  so  high,  that  dwarfs  they  touched  not 
Instead  of  men,  they  found  them  girls  and  ! 
To  nought  addicted  but  to  childish  toys. 


124  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND   PARABLES. 

Wherefore,  good  reader,  that  I  save  them  may, 
I  now  with  them  the  very  dotterel  play  ; 
And  since  at  gravity  they  make  a  tush, 
My  very  beard  I  cast  behind  a  bush  ; 
And,  like  a  fool,  stand  fing'ring  of  their  toys, 
And  all  to  show  them  they  are  girls  and  boys." 

Here  I  must  mention  my  favourite  poet,  FRANCIS  QUARLES, 
whom  I  would  not  exchange  even  for  John  Milton.  He  had  as 
much  poetry  in  him  as  could  possibly  be  compacted  into  one  little 
man's  body ;  but  he  has  been  forgotten,  and  is  now  ignored  by 
many.  His  Emblems,  Divine  and  Moral,  are  full  of  parables ; 
they  are  not  emblems  borrowed  from  nature,  but  emblems  invented 
by  himself  in  a  most  wonderful  way.  The  woodcuts  are  very 
extraordinary ;  he  must  have  stood  upon  his  head  to  have  thought 
of  them.  You  can  pick  out,  here  and  there,  a  little  parable  like 
this  one,  which  you  will  find  in  the  sixth  emblem  of  Book  III.  : — 

"  Lord,  if  the  peevish  infant  fights  and  flies, 
With  unpar'd  weapons,  at  his  mother's  eyes, 
Her  frowns  (half-mix'd  with  smiles)  may  chance  to  show 
An  angry  love-tick  on  his  arm,  or  so  ; 
Where,  if  the  babe  but  make  a  lip  and  cry, 
Her  heart  begins  to  melt,  and  by-and-by 
She  coaxes  his  dewy  cheeks ;  her  babe  she  blesses, 
And  chokes  her  language  with  a  thousand  kisses ; 
I  am  that  child  :  lo,  here  I  prostrate  lie, 
Pleading  for  mercy,  I  repeat,  and  cry 
For  gracious  pardon  :  let  thy  gentle  ears 
Hear  that  in  words,  what  mothers  judge  in  tears: 
See  not  my  frailties,  Lord,  but  through  my  fear, 
And  look  on  every  trespass  through  a  tear : 
Then  calm  thine  anger,  and  appear  more  mild ; 
Remember,  thou  art  a  Father,  I  a  child." 
This  is  another  of  Quarles'  emblems  : — 

"  Let  not  the  waterflood  overflow  me%  neither  let  the  deep  swallow  me 
up" — Psalm  Ixix.  15. 

"  The  world's  a  sea ;  my  flesh  a  ship  that's  mann'd 
With  lab'ring  thoughts,  and  steer'd  by  reason's  hand  : 
My  heart's  the  seaman's  card,  whereby  she  sails ; 
My  loose  affections  are  the  greater  sails  ; 
The  top-sail  is  my  fancy,  and  the  gusts 
That  fill  these  wanton  sheets,  are  worldly  lusts. 
Prayer  is  the  cable,  at  whose  end  appears 
The  anchor  Hope,  ne'er  slipp'd  but  in  our  fears  : 
My  will's  the  inconstant  pilot,  that  commands 
The  stagg'ring  keel ;  my  sins  are  like  the  sands : 
Repentance  is  the  bucket,  and  mine  eye 
The  pump  unused  (but  in  extremes)  and  dry  : 


HOOKS   OF   FAI;I.I>.    (EMBLEMS,     \M>    PABABLE8. 

My  conscience  is  the  plummet  that  does  \>: 

The  deeps,  but  seldom  cries,  O  fathom 

Smooth  calm's  security  ;  the  gulph,  despair  ; 

My  freight's  corruption,  and  this  life's  my  fare: 

My  soul's  the  passenger,  confus'dly  driven 

From  fear  to  fright  ;  her  landing  port  is  ll.-aven. 

My  seas  are  stormy,  and  my  ship  doth  leak  ; 

My  sailors  rude  ;  my  steersman  faint  and  weak  : 

My  canvas  torn,  it  flaps  from  side  to  s: 

My  cable's  crack'd,  my  anchor's  slightly  ty'd, 

My  pilot's  craz'd  ;  my  shipwreck  sands  are  cloak'd  ; 

My  bucket's  broken,  and  my  pump  is  chok'd; 

My  calm's  deceitful ;  and  my  gulph  too  near  ; 

My  wares  are  slubber'd,  and  my  fare's  too  dear: 

My  plummet's  light,  it  cannot  sink  nor  sound; 

Oh,  shall  my  rock-bethreaten'd  soul  be  drown'd  ? 

Lord,  still  the  seas,  and  shield  my  ship  from  harm  ; 

Instruct  my  sailors,  guide  my  steersman's  arm  : 

Touch  thou  my  compass,  and  renew  my  sails, 

Send  stifler  courage  or  send  milder  gales  ; 

Make  strong  my  cable,  bind  my  anchor  faster ; 

Direct  my  pilot,  and  be  thou  his  Master  ; 

Object  the  sands  to  my  most  serious  view, 

Make  sound  my  bucket,  bore  my  pump  anew  : 

New  cast  my  plummet,  make  it  apt  to  try 

Where  the  rocks  lurk,  and  where  the  quicksands  lie  ; 

Guard  thou  the  gulph  with  love,  my  calms  with  care ; 

Cleanse  thou  my  freight;  accept  my  slender  fare; 

Refresh  the  sea-sick  passenger  ;  cut  short 

His  voyage;  land  him  in  his  wish'd-for  port : 

Thou,  thou,  whom  winds  and  stormy  seas  obey, 

That  through  the  deep  gav'st  grumbling  Israel  way, 

Say  to  my  soul,  be  safe ;  and  then  mine  eye 

Shall  scorn  grim  death,  although  grim  death  stand  by  I 

O  thou,  whose  strength-reviving  arm  did  cherish 

Thy  sinking  Peter,  at  the  point  to  perish, 

Reach  forth  thy  hand,  or  bid  me  tread  the  wave, 

I'll  come,  I'll  come:  the  voice  that  calls  will 

You  will  find  many  good  things  in  Quarts  if  you  r.-a-l  can-fully. 
You  know  how  he   pictures   the   worldling  riding   <l"wn    hill  on  a 
stag,  which  he  is  spurring  on  as  hard  as  In-  can,  while  the  ri-y 
man,  on  a  donlrey,  is  riding  up  the  hill,  and   following  a  crawlmg 
snail.     This  is  the  emblem  he  gives  :— 

"  Men  love  darkness  rather  than  /£///,  because  their  deeds  are  «•//."— 
John  iii.  19. 

"  Lord,  when  we  leave  the  world,  and  come  to  thee, 

How  dull,  how  slug  are  we! 
How  backward  !     How  prepost'rous  is  the  moti 
Of  our  ungain  devotion  ! 


126  BOOKS    OF    FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

Our  thoughts  are  millstones,  and  our  souls  are  lead, 

And  our  desires  are  dead : 
Our  vows  are  fairly  promised,  faintly  paid ; 

Or  broken,  or  not  made  : 
Our  better  work  (if  any  good)  attends 

Upon  our  private  ends  : 
In  whose  performance  one  poor  worldly  scoff 

Foils  us,  or  beats  us  off. 
If  thy  sharp  scourge  find  out  some  secret  fault, 

We  grumble  or  revolt; 
And  if  thy  gentle  hand  forbear,  we  stray, 

-  Or  idly  lose  the  way. 
Is  the  road  fair,  we  loiter ;  clogged  with  mire, 

We  stick,  or  else  retire  : 
A  lamb  appears  a  lion  ;  and  we  fear, 

Each  bush  we  see  's  a  bear. 
When  our  dull  souls  direct  our  thoughts  to  thee, 

As  slow  as  snails  are  we  : 
But  at  the  earth  we  dart  our  wing'd  desire; 

We  burn,  we  burn  like  fire. 
Like  as  the  am'rous  needle  joys  to  bend 

To  her  magnetic  friend  : 
Or  as  the  greedy  lover's  eye-balls  fly 

At  his  fair  mistress's  eye : 
So,  so  we  cling  to  earth ;  we  fly  and  puff, 

Yet  fly  not  fast  enough. 
If  pleasure  beckon  with  her  balmy  hand, 

Her  beck's  a  strong  command : 
If  honour  calls  us  with  her  courtly  breath, 

An  hour's  delay  is  death  : 
If  profit's  golden  finger'd  charm  enveigles, 

We  clip  more  swift  than  eagles  : 
Let  Auster  weep,  or  blust'ring  Boreas  roar 

Till  eyes  or  lungs  be  sore : 
Let  Neptune  swell,  until  his  dropsy  sides 

Burst  into  broken  tides  : 
Nor  threat'ning  rocks,  nor  winds,  nor  waves,  nor  fire, 

Can  curb  our  fierce  desire  : 
Nor  fire,  nor  rocks,  can  stop  our  furious  minds, 

Nor  waves  nor  winds  : 

How  fast  and  fearless  do  our  footsteps  flee ! 
The  light-foot  roebuck's  not  so  swift  as  we." 

Quarles  has  a  curious  picture  of  a  man's  soul  riding  in  a  chariot 
drawn  by  a  goat  and  a  sheep,  driven  furiously  by  the  devil,  while 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  pulling  it  back  with  a  rope  or  chain. 
Upon  this  he  writes  :  — 

"  Ye  walked  according  to  the  course  of  this  world,  according  to  the 
prince  of  the  power  of  the  a/>."— Eph.  ii.  2. 

"  O  whither  will  this  mad-brain  world  at  last 

Be  driven  ?     Where  will  her  restless  wheels  arrive  ? 


BOOKS   OF  FABLES,   BKBLEMS,    AM.    I-M:M-.I.ES.  U'T 

Why  hurries  on  her  ill-matched  pair  so  fast  ? 

O  whither  means  her  furious  groom  to  drive  ? 
What,  will  her  rambling  fits  be  never  past  ? 
For  ever  ranging  ?    Never  once  retrieve  ? 
Will  earths  perpetual  progress  ne'er  expire  «• 
Her  team  continuing  in  their  fresh  career : 
And  yet  they  never  rest,  and  yet  they  never  tire. 
41  Sol's  hot-mouth'd  steeds,  whose  nostrils  vomit  flame, 

And  brazen  lungs  belch  forth  quotidian  fire. 
Their  twelve  hours'  task  performed,  grow  stiff  and  lame. 

And  their  immortal  spirits  faint  and  tire  ; 
At  th'  azure  mountain's  foot  their  labours  claim 
The  privilege  of  rest,  where  they  retire 

To  quench  their  burning  fetlocks,  and  go  steep 
Their  flaming  nostrils  in  the  Western  deep, 
And  'fresh  their  tired  souls  with  strength-restoring  sleep. 
"  But  these  prodigious  hackneys,  basely  got 

Twixt  men  and  devils,  made  for  race  or  flight, 
Can  drag  the  idle  world,  expecting  not 

The  bed  of  rest,  but  travel  with  delight ; 
Who  never  weighing  way  nor  weather,  trot 

Through  dust  and  dirt,  and  droil  both  night  and  day; 
Thus  droil  these  fiends  incarnate,  whose  free  pains 
Are  fed  with  dropsies  and  veneral  blains. 
No  need  to  use  the  whip ;    but  strength  to  rule  the  reins. 
"  Poor  captive  world  !    How  has  thy  lightness  given 

A  just  occasion  to   thy  foes  illusion  ! 
Oh,  how  art  thou  betray'd,  thus  fairly  driv'n 

In  seeming  triumph  to  thy  own  confusion  ! 
How  is  thy  empty  universe  bereav'n 

Of  all  true  joys,  by  one  false  joy's  delusion  I 
So  I  have  seen  an  unblown  virgin  fed 
With  sugar'd  words  so  full,  that  she  is  led 
A  fair  attended  bride  to  a  false  bankrupt's  bed. 

"  Pull,  gracious  Lord  !    Let  not  thine  arm  forsake 

The  world,  impounded  in  her  own  devices ; 
Think  of  that  pleasure  that  thou  once  did  take 
Amongst  the  lilies  and  sweet  beds  of  spices. 
Hale  (haul)  strongly,  thou,  whose  hand  has  power  to  slack 
The  swift-foot  fury  of  ten  thousand  vices ; 
Let  not  thy  dust-devouring  dragon  1< 
His  craft  has  won  what  Judah's  lion  lost; 
Remember  what  is  crav'd ;    recount  the  price  it  cost" 

You  cannot  look  through  Quarlr-s  without  timlin^  sonu-thi 
help  you  t.o  maki'  im-taphors  ami  illustr:iti«»i,s;   therefore,   1   recom 
mend  you  to  be  sure  to  get  his  AW/Av/o,  /Urine  and  Moral. 

There    is   also    his    little    hook,    Divine   Fancies:    /> 
Epigrammes,  Meditation*,  nm/  <>!>•  My  ropy  is   a  ijuurt«», 


128  HOOKS    OF    FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

dated  1033,  and,  as  you  see,  is  bound  in  vellum  ;  you  can  probably 
get  a  modern  reprint  of  it.  There  are  some  rare  things  in  it,  and 
^"ine  good  things,  too,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  parables  of  the 
waking  conscience  and  the  water-mill : — 

ON    A    WAKING    CONSCIENCE. 

"  There  is  a  kind  of  Conscience  some  men  keepe, 
Is  like  a  Member  that's  benum'd  with  sleepe  ; 
Which,  as  it  gathers  Blood,  and  wakes  agen, 
It  shoots,  and  pricks,  and/ee/es  as  big  as  ten" 

ON    A    WATER-MILL 

"  The  formall  Christian  's  like  a  Water-mill: 
Untill  the  Floodgates  open,  he  lyes  still  : 
He  cannot  work  at  all  ;  he  cannot  dreame 
Of  going:  till  his  wheeles  shall  finde  the  streamed 

There  are  plenty  of  good  things  like  these.  The  work  is  divided 
into  four  books ;  in  each  of  the  first  three,  there  are  just  a 
hundred  "  fancies  ",  but  the  fourth  book  contains  a  hundred  and 
seventeen.  The  author  penned  a  remarkable  dedication  of  his 
book,  u  To  the  Royall  Budde  of  Majestic,  and  Center  of  all  our 
Hopes  and  Happinesse,  CHARLES,  Prince  of  Great  Britaine, 
France,  and  Ireland,  Sonne  and  Heyre  Apparant  to  the  High  and 
Mighty  CHARLES,  by  the  Grace  of  GOD,  King  of  Great  Britaine, 
France,  and  Ireland,"  and  an  equally  extraordinary  address  to  the 
Countess  of  Dorset,  governess  to  the  royal  infant ;  but  Quarles' 
Preface  "  to  the  readers  "  is  more  in  our  line.  It  is  itself  meta 
phorical,  and  therefore  an  extract  from  it  will  be  appropriate  just 
now.  He  says : — "  I  heere  present  thee  with  a  Hive  of  ttees ; 
laden,  some  with  Waxe,  and  some  with  Honey.  Feare  not  to 
approach.  There  are  no  Waspes ;  there  are  no  Hornets,  here :  if 
some  wanton  Bee  should  chance  to  buzze  about  thine  eares,  stand 
thy  Ground,  and  hold  thy  hands :  there's  none  will  sting  thee,  if 
thou  strike  not  first.  If  any  doe,  she  hath  Honey  in  her  Bagge 
will  cure  thee,  too.  In  playner  tearmes,  I  present  thee  with  a 
Booke  of  Fancies ;  among  which,  as  I  have  none  to  boast  of,  so 
(I  hope)  I  shall  have  none  to  blush  at.  All  cannot  affect  all :  if 
some  please  all ;  or  all,  some,  'tis  more  than  I  expect." 

There  came  out,  in  these  more  modern  days,  a  book  of  which  I 
have  not  the  title-page  in  my  copy.  I  once  sent  it  to  the  printers ; 
and  you  know,  brethren,  that  there  are  some  curious  spirits  that 
have  their  abode  in  printing-offices.  This  book  was  brought  out  by 
Mr.  Tegg,  and  was,  I  believe,  the  work  of  a  MR.  BARBER,  of 


BOOKS   OF  FABLES,    EMBLEMS,     UTD    I'M:  MM 

America.     It  is  called.  ReKgitnu  Embl**  ,  and  All 

and  has  aPreface  by  Mr.  Jamea  Smith,  one  of  mv  prod 

New  Park  Street  Chapel,  and  afterwards   mini  :diam. 

The  work  is  not  worth  much ;  if  you  do  not  find  it,  do  i 
contains  some  of  the  most  hideous  woodcuts  that  ever  wer 
the  man  who  cut  them  ought  to  "cut  his  stick"  for  ever,  and 
cut  any  more.    There  is  an  illustration  of  a  young  man  lvin_ 
in  a  bed  of  tulips  and  roses,  with  a  hook  under  his  arm,  and  he  is 
fast  asleep  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice,  which  looks  to  me  as  if   it 
went  down  three  or  four  thousand  miles.     The  text  underneath  is 
"  Surely  thou  didst  set  them  in  slippery  places  :  thou  castedst  th.-m 
down  into  destruction"  (Ps.  Ixxiii.   IS).     There  is 
it,  here  it  is : — 

CARNAL    SECURITY. 

11  See  here  pourtrayed,  a  gently  rising  ground, 
With  tulips  gay,  and  blooming  roses  crowned, 
Where  flowers  of  various  hues,  or  gay  or  fair, 
Mingle  their  sweetness  with  the  balmy  air ; 
While  woodland  minstrels  stoop  upon  the  wing, 
Attune  their  notes,  and  softest  carols  sing  ; 
A  youth  lies  sleeping  on  the  roseate  bed, 
Heedless  of  dangers,  thus  to  ruin  led ; 
A  horrid  gulf  of  thickest  night  is  there, 
Where  hope  ne'er  comes,  but  darkness  and  despair ; 
A  turn— a  move — and  in  the  gulf  he'll  roll, 
Where  fiery  billows  prey  upon  the  soul." 

I  do  not  know  how  billows  prey  upon  the  soul,  but  I  suppose 
that  was  necessary  to  the  poetry.  Still,  there  is  the  illustration 
of  a  young  man  lying  upon  the  brink  of  a  precipice.  Th< 
many  more  very  curious  tilings  in  this  ho,  k.  There  i>  one  that  i* 
not  very  beautiful,  a  picture  of  a  man  chained  to  a  dead  body, 
illustrating  the  text,  "O  wretched  man  that  I  ami  who  >hall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  t  "  (Rom.  vii.  2-1.)  Canaries 
illustrated  the  same  passage  by  putting  the  livinj  in>ide 

the  ribs  of  a  skeleton.      In   the    picture    in    this  book,  a  bird   is 
represented  as  flying  out  of  a  cage,  and  this  is  the  ,  plain 

er  the  text  and  the  illustration  : — 

THE    SOUL    IN    BONDAGE. 

"  Horror  of  horrors  !  what  a  sight  i;>  here  1 
Life  linked  with  death,  in  terror  and  despair. 
Thus  cruel  tyrants,  when  they  won  the  field, 
Were  wont  to  punish  those  « 
The  wounded  captive,  writhing  still  with  pain, 
Was  made  to  wear  the  adamantine  chain, 

JO 


130  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND   PARABLES, 

That  round  the  limbs  of  one  new-slain  was  led, 
And  bound  the  living  to  the  putrid  dead. 
Till,  choked  with  stench,  the  lingering  victim  lay, 
And  breathed  in  agony  his  life  away. 

Tis  thus  the  soul,  enlighten'd  by  the  Word, 
Descries  the  path  that  upward  leads  to  God, 
And  fain  would  run,  but  feels  a  galling  chain 
That  quickly  drags  him  to  the  world  again ; 
Corruption's  body  opens  to  his  eye, 
He  sees  the  cause,  but  oh  !  he  cannot  fly. 
Who,  who  !  he  asks,  with  trembling,  struggling  breath, 
Will  save  me  from  this  fearful  mass  of  death  ? 
He  calls  on  Moses  now  to  break  his  chain, 
Moses  is  deaf, — he  calls  on  him  in  vain  ; 
He  calls  on  Jesus, — wondrous  name  ! — he  hears, 
And  breaks  his  chain,  and  scatters  all  his  fears. 
Now  like  the  bird  that  from  its  prison  flies, 
On  wings  of  love  soars  upward  to  the  skies." 

Another  grand  book  in  its  way  is  that  of  KRUMMACHER, — Tfie 
Parables  of  Frederic  Adolphus  Krummacher,  translated  from  the 
seventh  German  edition.  This  is  not  the  Krummacher  who  wrote 
Elijah  and  Elisha  ;  but  the  father  of  that  good  man.  Many  of 
the  pieces  in  this  book  are  not  such  as  you  could  use;  they 
are  imitations  of  the  inspired  records  of  Biblical  events,  and  I 
should  not  like  to  hear  them  repeated.  I  hardly  think  this  sort 
of  thing  is  allowable.  I  will  give  you  two  or  three  specimens 
that  you  may  know  what  they  are  like  : — 

JOHN    AND    PETER. 

"  John  and  Peter  were  once  talking  of  former  times  when  the  Lord  was 
yet  with  them,  and  they  began  also  to  speak  of  the  day  when  the  Lord 
was  anointed  at  Bethany.  Then  Peter  said  :  '  Dost  thou  remember 
how  seriously  Christ  looked  at  Judas,  when  he  said  :  "  Why  has  not  this 
ointment  been  sold  for  three  hundred  pence,  and  given  to  the  poor  ?  " 
And  at  us  he  looked  kindly  though  we  approved  of  the  saying  of  Judas.' 

"  Then  John  said  :  '  I  questioned  the  Master  concerning  it.  Then 
he  said  to  me  :  "  You  did  not  speak  rightly  ;  but  in  the  integrity  of 
your  heart  you  spoke  sincerely.  How  could  I  be  wroth  with  you,  and 
not  reprove  you  mildly  ?  But  Judas  lacked  the  chief  virtue— truthful 
ness."  Thus  he  said.'  And  John  added :  '  Did  he  not,  a  short  time 
after,  betray  the  Master  with  a  kiss  ?  ' 

"  Thus  said  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.  In  the  eyes  of  the  grave 
Peter  tears  were  glistening,  for  he  remembered  that  he  also  had  once 
been  a  traitor  to  truth." 

I  do  not  think,  brethren,  that  anyone  has  the  right  to  put  such 
a  story  as  that  into  the  mouth  of  any  man  mentioned  in  the 
Scriptures. 


BOOKS  OF   MLE8,    KM.-.l.r.Ms.   AND   PABAB,., 


].,, 

<- 

THE     WONDER. 


;  And  was  it  fulfilled  ?  •   asked  the  king's  son  hastily. 


, 


the 

1  hen  the  man  of  God  said  to  me  :  "  Give  heed! 

fr°m 


said  he    "  r 

*  ***-)         i.x,»»    v,i\^n.tiwiia     >^ni    UCliin 

he  took  water  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand  from  the  rivulet 
by  the  wayside,  and  sprinkled  the  branches  three  times;    and  lo  now 
he  branches   were  covered  with  green  leaves,  so  that 'a  cool  shade 
surrounded  us,  and  sweet  odours.      "From  whence,"  cried  I   «cc 
this  perfume,  and  this  reviving  shade?" 

'     "  Dost  thou  not  see,"  said  the  man  of  God,  •«  the  crimson  r! 
burs  ing  from  among  the  green  leaves,  and  hanging  in  clusu 

I  was  about  to  speak,  but   a  gentle  breeze  moved   the 
scattering  the  flowers  around  us,  like  as  when  snow  descended   : 
the  clouds.     Scarcely  had  the  falling  flowers  reached  the  ground,  when 
I   saw  the  ruddy  pomegranates  hanging    between    the  leaves,  like  the 
almonds  on  Aaron's  rod. 

'  Then  the  man  of  God  left  me  lost  in  amazement' 
"Nathan    was    silent,  and  Solomon  asked  hastily:     'Where  is   he? 
What  is  the  name  of  the  man  of  God  ?    Is  he  yet  alive  ?  ' 

"Then  Nathan  replied  :    'Son  of  David,  I  have  spoken  to  the, 
vision.      When  Solomon  heard  these  words,  he  was  grieved  in  h 
and  said  :    '  How  canst  thou  deceive  me  thus?' 

"  But  Nathan  replied  :    '  I  have  not  deceived  thee,  offspring  of  Jesse. 
tenold,  in  the  garden  of  thy  father  thou  mayest  see  in  reality  * 
told  thee.     Does  not  the  same  happen  to  the  pome^r.  C  and  all 

other  trees?' 

"  'Yes,'  said  Solomon,  'but  imperceptibly,  and  throughout  a  long 
time.'     Then  Nathan  answered  :    '  Is  it  less  by  divine  influence  ber., 
it  cometh  to  pass  in  silence  and  unheeded?    It  seemeth  to  me  all  the 
more  divine.     Learn  to  know  Nature  and  her  workings ;  then  wilt  thou 


132  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

gladly  believe  in  a  higher  power,  and  long  no  more  for  a  wondei 
performed  by  the  hand  of  man.' 

"  The  kingly  youth  stood  for  a  while  in  thought,  and  held  his  peace. 
Then  he  turned  to  the  prophet,  and  said  :  '  I  thought  upon  the  wonder 
whereof  the  book  of  the  law  beareth  witness,  the  budding  and  blooming 
almond-staff  of  Aaron.  Behold,  it  was  of  such  a  wonder  that  I  spoke. 
It  was  a  dry  stick,  like  unto  the  staves  of  the  other  tribes  of  Israel ;  and 
yet  it  bloomed  and  budded  in  a  single  night,  and  bore  almonds  in 
the  tabernacle.  Doth  it  still  bloom? 'asked  Solomon.  And  Nathan 
answered  and  said :  '  Of  a  truth,  in  the  priesthood  of  Aaron  and  his 
tribe,  and  in  due  season  it  will  bloom  and  bud  yet  more  beauteously. 
For  is  it  not  an  immortal  and  a  heavenly  thing,  ordained  of  Jehovah,  a 
token  of  his  mercy  and  of  his  covenant,  whereunto  the  almond  staff  bore 
witness?'  'I  understand  thy  saying,  man  of  God,'  said  the  youth, 
blushing.  '  If  the  heavenly,  the  immortal,  is  to  be  manifested,  then — 
then  the  dead  almond  branch,  though  it  hath  neither  root  nor  sap, 
must  bloom  as  in  the  days  of  spring.' 

"  'And  I,  too,  understand  thee,  Jedidiah,'  answered  Nathan;  and  he 
smiled  kindly  upon  the  king's  son,  and  grasped  his  hand." 

Now  that  would  have  been  a  very  pretty  parable  if  it  had  been 
given  without  the  introduction  of  a  dialogue  between  Nathan  and 
Solomon.  I  will  give  you  only  one  more  of  these  parables : — 

THE   DEATH    OF    ABRAHAM. 

"  When  the  days  of  Abraham,  the  godly  patriarch,  drew  towards  their 
close,  he  lay  down,  old,  and  weary  of  life,  on  his  bed,  and  called  to  him 
his  children  and  his  children's  children,  and  they  stood  in  a  circle 
around  him.  Then  the  patriarch  said,  with  a  cheerful  countenance : 
'  Children,  the  God  in  whom  I  have  believed  now  calls  me  ! ' — and  he 
blessed  them.  But  his  children  wept,  and  said:  'Ah,  would  that  the 
hour  might  pass  thee  by  once  more  ! ' 

"  But  he  answered  :  'Not  so,  my  beloved.  If  I  have  walked  all  the 
days  of  my  life  before  God  in  uprightness  and  love,  how  should  I 
hesitate  to  go  to  him  now  that  he  calleth  me  ? '  And  when  he  had  said 
this,  he  bent  his  head,  and  expired.  And  the  form  of  the  dead  man  was 
as  the  form  of  one  that  sleepeth." 

Well,  now,  to  my  mind,  that  sort  of  writing  is  not  permissible : 
some  might  admire  it,  but  I  have  a  very  grave  question  about  the 
propriety  of  it.  There  is  in  it  a  trenching  upon  holy  ground  which 
does  not  strike  me  as  being  right.  Yet  Krummacher's  parables, 
with  this  exception,  are  many  of  them  remarkably  beautiful. 
This  one  is  very  pretty  : — 

THE    ROBIN. 

"  A  robin  came  in  the  depth  of  winter  to  the  window  of  a  pious 
peasant,  as  if  it  would  like  to  come  in.  Then  the  peasant  opened  his 
window,  and  took  the  confiding  little  creature  kindly  into  his  house. 
So  it  picked  up  the  crumbs  that  fell  from  his  table,  and  his  children 


»«   <»   MI*,    (KBUm,    un   PAJ 

loved  and  cherished  the  little  hirr>      n  » 

bushes  and  trees  put  forth   eaves  ih          "*  returned'  and  th< 

the  little  guest  fleSinto    In     L       -^  his  win<1^ 

merrily.     And    behold   a     rJ^^  "'°°'1'  UliU  ils  nesl<  and 
the  house  of  the  nei^m  winter,  the  robin  ca 

children  were  very  glad  wh  "  %**  *?  'lt     Thc  man  a' 

at  then,  so  coiS^wiA^K^?18  lW°  ""le  hirds'  which  1(">ked 
'The  little    birds  looVa    us  tif^fv1  ^  ^  <** 

Then  their  father  answered    •  If  they  cou  1"° 

confidence  awakens  kind  confidence   ^  love'1!  ^' :   ] ' 

Now  that  is  a  churnmu:  little  parahl,.      H 

"I!-;    LIGHT    Of 

-ss,  and   its  glimmer  seeim-d    lnv».iv  ^  ),;..,   ...   .u..  darl<  ^ 

t  »ne 

has1 

the  m.ir 
the  stagnant   iv  ni  a;"ll|-°.-the-wlsP  n-sin"  rn>rn  a  fen,  and  : 

"luSiv  l  -;  ,us, 1C;  I1- n  drew  nigh :° the 

suddenly  a  voice  behind  him  exclaimed  :  'Stop  or  i 

his'boa;  an-dW,°k' ask""';"  '  ''  "!  1      ''  '          "' ^ 

'^t?     1    have  lost   my  way.'     '  'J'he  guiding  light,' said   the 

ito    danger    and    destruction?  '  Kvil    sul- 
:  .rum  the  noisome  bogs  the  nightly  vapour  winch  imitate 
glimmer  of  the  friendly  liuht.     Behold   I,,,  Mt  flutter 

the  evil  offspring  of  mght  and  dark,  ,  lhus  S(1 

deceptive  light  vanished.     After  i,    h.,1   expired,   the  weary   irau-ik-r 
thanked  the    .sherman   heartily  f,,  ^  him,      And  the  nsher: 

answered  and  said  :  'Should    one   mai 

help  him  into  the  right  way  ?    We  have  both  reason  to  thank  (Jod     I 
that   he   made    me    the    instrument   to  do  thee   K«,,,d  ;  th,,u,  th 
ordained  to  1  e  at  this  hour  in  my  boat  on  ti 

Then    the   good-natured    fisherm.m    1,-ft   his 
traveller  for  a  while;  and  brought   bun  on  the  r 
fathers  housr.     Now  he  walked  on  <  heerily,  and  soon 
?leained   through  the  trees  with  its  (ji. 
Him  doubly  welcome  aUer  the  troubles   and   dangers  he  had  Undergone. 


134  BOOKS    OF    FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND   PARABLES. 

He  knocked ;  the  door  was  opened,  and  his  father  and  mother,  brothers 
and  sSers  came  to  meet  him,  and  hung  on  his  neck  and  kissed  him, 
weeping  for  joy." 

It  is  rather  long  and  very  descriptive,  but  there  are  some 
beautiful  things  in  it,  and  useful  lessons,  loo. 

Here  is  another  of  Krummaclier's  parables: — 

THE   GUIDE. 

"A  wanderer  had  to  go  a  long  and  dangerous  journey  over  a  rugged 
and  rocky  mountain,  and  knew  not  the  way.  He  asked  a  traveller  for 
information,  of  whom  he  heard  that  he  had  come  this  same  path.  1  he 
traveller  pointed  out  the  road  to  him  clearly  and  distinctly,  together 
with  all  the  by-ways  and  precipices  of  which  he  must  beware,  and  the  , 
rocks  which  he  should  climb  ;  moreover,  he  gave  him  a  leaf  of  paper, 
on  which  all  these  things  were  described  skilfully  and  exactly, 
wanderer  observed  all  this  attentively,  and  at  each  turn  and  by-path 
he  considered  carefully  the  instructions  and  descriptions  of  his  friend. 
Vigorously  he  proceeded  ;  but  the  more  he  advanced,  the  steeper  the 
rocks  appeared,  and  the  way  seemed  to  lose  itself  in  the  lonely  dreary 
ravines.  Then  his  courage  failed  him  ;  anxiously  he  looked  up  to  the 
towering  gray  rocks,  and  cried :  '  It  is  impossible  for  man  to  ascend  so 
steep  a  path,  and  to  climb  these  rugged  rocks ;  the  wings  of  eagles  and 
the  feet  of  the  mountain-goat  alone  can  do  it.' 

"  He  turned  away,  thinking  to  return  by  the  way  he  had  come,  when 
suddenly  he  heard  a  voice  exclaiming  :  '  Take  courage,  and  follow  me  ! ' 
He  looked  round,  and  to  his  joyful  surprise  he  beheld  the  man  who 
had  pointed  out  the  way  to  him.  He  saw  him  walk  calmly  and  steadily 
between  the  ravines  and  precipices,  and  the  rushing  mountain-torrents. 
This  inspired  him  with  new  confidence,  and  he  followed  vigorously. 
Before  nightfall  they  had  ascended  the  mountain,  and  a  lovely  valley, 
where  blossomed  myrtle  and  pomegranate  trees,  received  them  at  the 
end  of  their  pilgrimage.  Then  the  cheerful  wanderer  thanked  his  friend, 
and  said:  'How  can  I  express  my  gratitude  to  thee?  Thou  hast  not 
only  guided  me  on  the  right  way,  but  hast  also  given  me  strength  and 
courage  to  persevere.'  The  other  answered  :  '  Not  so  ;  am  I  not  a 
wanderer  like  thyself,  and  art  thou  not  the  same  man  as  before  ?  Thou 
hast  only  seen  by  my  example  what  thou  art,  and  what  thou  art  able 
to  do.'  " 

How  beautifully  you  might  use  that  parable  to  show  how  Jesus 
Christ  gives  us  great  power,  not  merely  by  precept  but  by  example, 
not  only  guiding  us,  but  going  out  with  us  in  the  way,  and 
showing  us  where  we  ought  to  go,  and  what  we  ought  to  do. 

These  extracts  will  give  you  an  idea  of  Krummacher's  style; 
there  are  many  more  very  pretty  parables  in  his  book.  I  have 
marked  two  others  that  I  think  I  must  read  to  you : — 

THE    MAGNETIC    NEEDLE. 

"  A  Society  of  learned  men  caused  a  ship  to  be  built,  and  resolved  to 


BOOKS  OF  FABLES,    BKBUDU,    AM,    I-M;V!.I,ES. 


eachad        0  '  <°.and  fro-  '<>°ki"g  *  l  and 

fhe  needle  °PIIUO11  C°ncermn«  the  hidden  !»««  which  move, 

"Some  called  this  secret  power  a  stream,  others  a  breath,  others 

norh'nVP'r";-HS7e  aT'ed  tha'  "  m°Ved  lrom   «"••  «•»«•  to  t£ 
north,  others  said  from  the  north  to  the  south.     So  a  violent  contest 
arose  among  the  learned  men,  and  they  sailed  to  and  fro  on  the  o,' 
quarrelling  with  each  other.     Suddenly  they  felt  a  ru,! 
violent  crash  was  heard.     The  ship  had  struck  on  a  rock  and  split,  and 
the  waves  were  rushing  impetuously  in.     Then  the  learned  men'. 
seized  with   great  terror  and  confusion  ;  they  left  the  needle,  jumped 
overboard,  and  saved  themselves  on  the  rocks.     The  ship  was  buried  in 
the  waves. 

"  Now  as  they  sat  on  the  barren  rocks,  wet  through  with  salt  water, 
they  cried  out  to  one  another  that  there  was  no  dependence  to  be 
placed  in  the  magnetic  needle  !  " 

Krommacher  gives  no  explanation  of  this  parable  ;  hut,  taking 
religion  to  be  the  needle,  you  have  men  fighting  and  quarrelling 

about  it,   not   following    its    divine  guidance,    nor   yielding  th.-in- 
selves  to  it;  and  then,  when  things  g«,  amiss,  pcopl.-Vrv  OH 
that  is  your  religion."    No,  these  learned  men  did  not   mal 
proper  use  of  the  needle.     If  they  had  followed   it,  pointing 
so  discovered  whieh  way  they  were  sailing  and  omsultrd  a  j,r 
chart,  they  would  have  heen  right  enough.    It  \\a>  their  own  : 
that  led  them  into  mischief. 

That  is  a  high  class  of  parable,  mark  you,  and  ivquir-x-  a  Suj.rn..r 
mind  to  give  it  from  the  pulpit;  -sueh  a  superior  mind  as  all  of 
you,  brethren,  possess. 

Another  parable  of  a  similar  character  N  the  la>t  one  I  will 
give  you  from  Krummaeher:  — 

TIIK    COURSE   OF   THE    BROOK. 

"'  Behold  the  course  of  yonder  brook,'  said  a  teacher  to  his  dis(  •: 
4  Strongly  and  calmly  it  streams  through  the  valley  and  ; 
reflecting  the  image  of  the  blue  sky  in  the  mirror  of  i: 
waters  the  roots  of  the  trees  and  shrubs  that  ;  (  .  and  its 

cool  exhalations  refresh  the  flowers  and  grass-blades  round  about. 

"'Then  it  flows  through  a  barren  tract  of  land,  full  of  sand  and 
gravel  ;  there  its  blessings  end. 

"  '  Yet  it  continues  to  be  the  same  clear  brook,  fraught  with  blessings, 
though  no  one  enjoys  its  bounty. 

"  *  Behold,  a  wild  boar  rushes  in,  parting  the  sparkling  waves.  The 
animal  drinks  from  the  floods,  which  cool  his  burning  sides;  the  mud, 
raised  by  the  sudden  commotion,  sinks  again  to  th 


136  HOOKS    O*-    FAIJLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

"  '  Now  a  weary  wanderer  bends  over  the  limpid  crystal,  quenches  his 
thirst,  and  cools  his  glowing  brow;  then  hastens  on,  refreshed  and 
grateful. 

"  '  Where  is  the  source  and  origin  of  the  lovely  brook  ? 

"  «  Look  up  yonder  !  Dost  thou  see  the  towering  peak  of  the  moun 
tain,  and  the  cave  surrounded  by  rugged  rocks?  There,  in  the  deep 
bosom  of  the  earth,  is  the  hiddi  n  spring  of  the  brook. 

" '  But  from  whence  come  the  never-failing  source  and  the  inex 
haustible  supply  ? 

" '  Behold,  the  top  of  the  mountain  touches  the  vault  of  heaven, 
veiled  by  the  dewy  clouds. 

"  '  Where  is  the  end  of  the  brook  ? 

" '  Ever  increasing  as  it  rolls  onward,  it  falls  into  the  arms  of  the 
ocean  ;  from  thence  it  returns  to  the  clouds.' 

"  Thus  said  the  master ;  and  his  disciples  recognized  the  image  of 
heavenly  love  and  its  agency  on  earth." 

For  good  parables,  let  me  once  more  .  recommend  to  you 
SPENCER'S  Things  New  and  Old,  which  teems  with  them,  as  it 
abounds  also  in  the  allegories  and  illustrations  I  have  already 
introduced  to  you  from  its  pages.  Here  is  an  instructive  parable 
on  wasps  and  bees : — 

AN    IDLE   MAN    YIELDING   TO    THE    LEAST   TEMPTATION. 

"  Set  a  narrow-mouthed  glass  near  to  a  bee-hive,  and  you  shall  soon 
perceive  how  busily  the  wasps  resort  to  it,  being  drawn  thither  by  the 
smell  of  that  sweet  liquor  wherewith  it  is  baited  ;  and  how  eagerly  they 
creep  into  the  mouth  of  it,  and  fall  down  suddenly  from  that  slippery 
sleepiness  into  that  watery  trap,  from  which  they  can  never  rise,  but, 
after  some  vain  labour  and  weariness,  they  drown  and  die.  Now,  there 
are  none  of  the  bees  that  so  much  as  look  that  way  ;  they  pass  directly 
to  their  hive,  without  taking  any  notice  of  such  a  pleasing  bait.  Thus, 
idle  and  ill-disposed  persons  are  easily  drawn  away  with  every  tempta 
tion  ;  they  have  both  leisure  and  will  to  entertain  every  sweet  allure 
ment  to  sin,  and  wantonly  prosecute  their  own  wicked  lusts,  till  they 
fall  into  irrecoverable  damnation ;  whereas  the  diligent  and  laborious 
Christian,  that  follows  hard  and  conscionably  the  works  of  an  honest 
calling,  is  free  from  the  danger  of  those  deadly  enticements,  and  lays 
up  honey  of  comfort  against  the  winter  of  evil." 

Supposing  that  you  have  SPENCER'S  Things  New  and  Old,  and 
supposing  that  you  have  wit,  which  is  not  quite  the  same  thing,  I 
would  recommend  you  to  buy  GOTTIIOLD'S  Emblems:  or,  Invisible 
Things  Understood  by  Things  that  are  Made.  By  Christian  Scriver, 
Minister  of  Magdeburg  in  1671.  You  cannot  make  a  better  invest 
ment  than  that  even  if  you  get  married ;  in  fact,  that  may  be  a 
bad  investment  if  you  make  it  too  soon,  or  not  wisely.  This 
Kn.nl ish  translation  of  Gotthold  was  originally  issued  by  Messrs. 
T.  and  T.  Clark,  of  Edinburgh,  in  two  volumes ;  but  there  is  now 


"«<>KS   OF   FAIU.KS.    EMBLEM,    AND    PAHAW 

a  froo,l  ...liti,,,,  i,,  one  volume.      There    is   M   . 

medUatioD  ,  c  every  <!av  ,,f  the  year.     S,,m,  ,,f  <  ,„„,  ,,.,  ' 

emblem,  cannot  be  correctlv 

som,    hata,,i;ml,  ,,„..„„„,.. 

m^phon,    hut  the*  al,  a,so  manv  ,,„,,,. 

which  "delicate  stomach  is  put  as  the  rejOT^snt.! 

conscience. 


THE    WEAK    STOMACH. 
February  9. 

=^ 

f,  and  punish  me.'     GottMd  observed  :  M^k  the 
uhich  you  have  within  yourself,  of  pious  and  conscientious  men. 


__M,   .     •       ,     ,      .  .         .:    ,  ~  MMMWJ  uu  uicy  neanuy  repugn 

actual  sin,  but  sicken  if  they  have  been  guilty   of  the  least  ne 
Their  heart  beats,  their  conscience  stings  and  quails  them, 
through  Chris*  "        '    ^  ^  rei)entance'  lhey  are  reconciled  to  God 

If  I  read  you  one  or  two  more  of  Gnttlmld's  eml  ,  will 

understand  how  it  was  that  the  author,  CHKIM  IAN  SORIV] 
popular.   In  the  translator's  Preface,  we  are  told  that  "the  Queen  ,.f 
Sweden  fat  that  timethu  first  and  most  powerful  Protestant  k:i 
in  the  world)  invited  him  to  be  her  spiritual  iniide  and  court 
at  Stockholm,  and  wept,  and  was  inconsolable,  wl. 
firmities  of  age,  and,  prompted   by  modesty  and  attachment  t..  his 
flock    and  sorely-aiilicted    fatherland,   lie   declined   the   hon.-u: 
call."     No    book  ever  sold,    I    think,   so    much    in     the   Christian 
world  as  GOTTHOLD'S  Kwllnn*,  except  BOOATSF 
sury,   and  some   English    :  ;,-h   as   I).  !;,.,>  ,„,,/ 

Progress  of  IM',,/,,,,,  in  the  Sou/,  and    \\.\\\\ 
AV,/.      Here  is  another  of  Gotthold's  emblems  :— 

SUBSIDED    MUD. 
April  24. 

"In  a  vessel  filled  with   muddy  water,  the  thick:  .  subsided 

to  the  bottom,  and  left  the  water  purer  and  purer,  until  at  1 
perfectly  limpid.     The  slightest  motion,  however,  br 
again  to  the   top,  and  the  ime  thick  and   tur' 

Here,  said  Gotthold,  when  he  saw  it,  we  have  an  emblem  of  the  him. 
heart.     The  heart  is  full  of  the  mud  of  sinful  lusts  and  carnal  desires, 
and  the  consequence  is,  that  no  pure  water— that  is,  good  and  holy 
thoughts— can  flow  from  it.     It   is,  in  truth,  a  miry  pit  and  slough  of 
sin,  in  which  all  sorts  of  ugly  reptiles  are  bred  and  crawl.      M.mv  a  • 
however,  is  deceived  by  it,  and  never  ima^  art  half  so  wckcd 


i:;s          BOOKS  or  FABLES,  EMBLEMS,  AND  PARABLES. 

as  it  really  is,  because  sometimes  its  lusts  are  at  rest,  and  sink,  as  it 
were,  to  the  bottom.  On  such  occasions,  his  thoughts  are  apparently 
devout  and  holy,  his  desires  pure  and  temperate,  his  words  charitable 
and  edifying,  and  his  works  useful  and  Christian.  But  this  lasts  only  so 
long  as  he  is  not  moved ;  I  mean,  so  long  as  he  is  without  opportunity 
or  incitement  to  sin.  Let  that  occur,  and  worldly  lusts  rise  so  thick,  that 
his  whole  thoughts,  words,  and  works,  show  no  trace  of  anything  but 
slime  and  impurity.  One  is  meek  as  long  as  he  is  not  thwarted  ;  cross 
him,  and  he  is  like  powder,  ignited  by  the  smallest  spark,  and  blazing 
up  with  a  loud  report  and  destructive  effect.  Another  is  temperate  so 
long  as  he  has  no  jovial  companions ;  a  third  chaste  while  the  eyes  of 
men  are  upon  him. 

"  Alas,  my  God  !  How  often  have  I  fancied  that  the  world  and  all 
its  lusts  were  a  thousand  miles  away,  and  yet  afterwards  discovered  that, 
like  a  crafty  foe,  she  had  kept  quiet  only  to  attack  and  beguile  me  un 
awares.  Often,  in  my  communings  with  thee,  I  have  vowed  that  I  would 
be  courteous  and  friendly  to  the  man  by  whom  I  had  been  injured,  and 
would  show  it  by  my  deportment.  Nay,  if  required  at  the  time,  I  would 
have  confirmed  my  vows  with  any  number  of  oaths ;  and  yet  I  have 
afterwards  found  that  the  very  sight  of  him  so  violently  stirred  and 
agitated  my  heart,  that  nothing  was  visible  in  it  but  the  mire  of  enmity. 

0  my  God,  purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean ;  wash  me,  and 

1  shall  be  whiter  than  snow  !     Create  in  me  a  clean  heart  (Psalm  li.  10)." 

Now  that  is  a  very  gracious  thought,  beautifully  expressed. 
Gotthold's  emblems  are  all  sweet  like  that,  full  of  matter  and 
marrow.  Here  is  another : — 

THE      SPOILT      PEN. 

April  25. 

"  A  lady  of  rank,  having  occasion  to  write  a  letter,  took  up  a  pen, 
which  she  found  unfit  for  the  purpose,  and  attempted  to  mend.  In 
this  operation,  however,  she  happened  to  blot  the  paper,  which  provoked 
her  to  such  a  pitch  that  she  struck  the  pen  with  violence  upon  the 
table,  and  spoilt  it.  Gotthold  witnessed  the  scene,  and  said,  with  a 
smile :  Nothing  is  more  common  in  life  than  to  find  people  acting  in 
this  manner.  They  cast  away,  break,  and  destroy  their  instruments, 
when  these  do  not  serve  them  agreeably  to  their  wishes.  By  this, 
however,  they  only  show  how  just  and  right  it  would  be  in  the  Supreme 
Author  of  all  gord  things,  intending,  as  he  does,  that  we  should  be  the 
instruments  of  his  grace  and  will,  but  finding  us  unprofitable,  and  even 
obstinate  and  refractory,  were  he  to  reject  us  in  his  wrath,  and  dash  us 
in  piece .->  in  his  hot  displeasure.  Why  should  that  be  wrong  in  him, 
which  seems  to  be  right  in  us  ?  But  he  is  God  and  not  man,  and  so 
great  and  tender  is  his  mercy,  that  he  does  not  execute  the  fierceness 
of  his  wrath,  nor  turn  to  destroy  us  utterly.  (Hosea  xi.  8,  9.) 

"  Thou  God  of  mercy,  I  can  form  no  better  conception  of  thy  long- 
suffering  than  by  surveying  my  own  brief  life,  and  marking  the  rich 
display  of  it  towards  myself.  But  when  I  figure  the  vast  multitude  of 
unbelievers  who  daily  and  hourly  offend  thee,  but  nevertheless  con 
tinually  desire  and  continually  enjoy  thy  goodness,  mv  soul  sinks  as  in 


ROOKS  OF   IABLBB,    BMBLEV8,    \M>    FAftABU 


fovfth  ^^h'  and  I3"  l-  m°Um  f°r  is  that  there  is  one  who  does  not 
love  thee,  who  art  love  itself." 

I  hope  you  will  loam   from   these  extracts,  whirl,  are  fair 
mens,  that  GOTTHOLD'S  Km/.lems  will  he  invaluable  to  you. 

There  is  a  little  book,  called,   S  j,8j  Apologue* 

Allegories,  in  Prose  and   Verse,  l:,    E.   />'.,  published   in 
Messrs.  Reeves  and  Turner.     The  good  man  Wj10  wrote  it  haa  njt 
put  his  name  in  full,  he  has  given  only  his  initials,—  E.  H., 
happen  to  know  that  his  name  waa  Mhwi.v   BoWDBff,  and  t 
was   an   invalided  Congregational   minister   at    Heavit: 
His  work  is  a   book  of  fables,  but  the   fable,  good,  and 

those  that  are  not  fables  are  parables.      Hen-  is  one:— 

CAMOMII 

"'You  smell  delightfully  fragrant,'  said  the  Gravel-walk  to  a  bed  of 
Camomile  flowers  under  the  window.  'We  have  been  trodden  on1 
replied  the  Camomiles.  '  Does  that  cause  it  ?  '  asked  the  Gravel-walk. 
'  Treading  on  me  produces  no  sweetness.'  '  Our  natures  are  different  ' 
answered  the  Camomiles.  '  Gravel-walks  become  only  the  harder  by 
being  trodden  upon  ;  but  the  effect  on  our  own  selves  is,  if  pressed 
and  bruised  when  the  dew  is  upon  us,  to  give  forth  the  sweet  smell 
which  you  now  perceive.'  '  Very  delightful,'  replied  the  Gravel." 

That  is  no  fable,  you  see;  the  camomile  does  smell  when 
trodden  upon,  the  gravel  paths  do  not. 

This  is  another  of  Mr.  IWd.-n's  spiritual  tables  :— 

EBB    AND    FLOW. 

"'Mother,'  said  a  little  Limpet  sticking  to  the  rock,  'Mother, 
what  has  become  of  the  sea  ?  I  am  so  dry  here.'  •  Nothing  unusual 
has  taken  place,  dear,'  said  the  old  Limpet,  affectionately.  '  Oh,  it  was 
so  nice  to  be  in  the  deep  water,'  said  the  little  one.  •  Is  the  sea  all 
gone  ?  '  'It  will  come  again  by-and-by,  love,'  replied  the  kind  old 
Limpet,  who  had  had  long  experience  of  ebb  and  flow.  '  But  I  am  so 
thirsty,  and  almost  faint,  the  sea  has  been  away  so  long.'  'On!. 
awhile  in  hope,  little  one  ;  hold  fast  to  the  rock,  and  the  tide  will  soon 
come  back  to  us.'  And  it  <//</come,  it  sivn  came,  rolling  up  the  beach, 
and  humming  over  the  sands,  making  little  pools,  arid  formiii 
rivers  in  the  hollows  ;  and  then  it  rolled  up  against  the  rocks,  and  at 
last  it  came  to  the  Limpet,  bathed  it  with  its  reviv;  ,  and 

so  amply  supplied  its  wants  that  it  went  to  sleep  in  peace,  forgetting  its 
troubles. 

"  Religious  feeling  has  its  ebbings  and   flowings.     But  when  former 
sensible  comforts  are  departed,  still  to  hold  fast  unto  the  imm< 
unchangeable  rock,  Christ  Jesus,  is  the  soul's  support  and  safety. 
mourns  the  absence  of  spiritual  enjoyments.    '  Hath  God  forgotten  to  be 
gracious?     Hath  he  in  anger  shut  up  his  tender  men  ie  he  be 

favourable  no  more  ?   Is  his  mercy  clean  gone  for  ever  ?  '  (1's.  Ixxvii.  7-9.) 


140  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

It  is  then  that  Faith  checks  fears,  and  encourages  confidence  in  God. 
1  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul  ?  and  why  art  thou  disquieted 
within  me  ?  Hope  thou  in  God  :  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him,  who  is  the 
health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God.'  (Ps.  xlii.  u.)" 

Here  is  one  more  extract  from  E.  B.'s  book : — 

SOFTENING. 

"  '  Unaccountable  this! '  said  the  Wax,  as  from  the  flame  it  dropped 
melting  upon  the  paper  beneath.  '  Do  not  grieve,'  said  the  Taper,  '  I 
am  sure  it  is  all  right.'  'I  was  never  in  such  agony!'  exclaimed  the 
Wax,  still  dropping.  '  It  is  not  without  a  good  design,  and  will  end 
well,'  replied  the  Taper.  The  Wax  was  unable  to  reply  at  the  moment 
owing  to  a  strong  pressure ;  and  when  it  again  looked  up,  it  bore  a 
beautiful  impression,  the  counterpart  of  the  seal  which  had  been  applied 
to  it.  '  Ah  !  I  comprehend  now,'  said  the  Wax,  no  longer  in  suffering, 
'I  was  softened  in  order  to  receive  this  lovely,  durable  impress.  Yes,  I 
see  now  it  was  all  right,  because  it  has  given  to  me  the  beautiful 
likeness  which  I  could  not  otherwise  have  obtained.' 

"Afflictions  are  in  the  hand  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  effect  the  softening 
of  the  heart  in  order  to  receive  heavenly  impressions.  Job  said  :  *  God 
maketh  my  heart  soft '  (xxiii.  16).  As  the  Wax  in  its  naturally  hard 
state  cannot  take  the  impress  of  the  signet,  and  needs  to  be  melted  to 
render  it  susceptible,  so  the  believer  is  by  sanctified  trials  prepared  to 
receive  and  made  to  bear  the  divine  likeness.  '  In  whom  also  after 
that  ye  believed  (says  the  Apostle),  ye  were  sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit 
of  promise'  (Eph.  i.  13),  « Who  hath  also  sealed  us,  and  given  the 
earnest  of  the  Spirit  in  our  hearts  '  (2  Cor.  i.  22)." 

I  have  heard  WITHER'S  Emblems  strongly  recommended,  but  I 
cannot  join  in  the  recommendation.  The  title  of  the  book  is 
rather  curious:— A  Collection  of  Emblemes,  Ancient  and  Moderne: 
Quickened  with  Metricall  Illustrations,  both  Morall  fy  Divine :  and 
Disposed  into  Lotteries,  that  Instruction,  and  Good  Counse/l,  may  bee 
furthered  by  an  Honest  and  Pleasant  Recreation.  By  George  Wither. 
The  pictures  at  the  top  of  the  pages  are  some  of  them  remarkable  ; 
but  the  emblems  are,  to  my  mind,  very  poor  things.  I  looked 
through  the  book  to  see  if  there  was  anything  worth  readincr  to 
you,  and  I  found  this  parable : — 

THE   TRAVELLER    ON   THE    ICE. 

"A  traveller,  when  he  must  undertake 
To  seek  his  passage,  o'er  some  Frozen  Lake, 
With  leisure,  and  with  care,  he  will  assay 
The  glassy  smoothnesse  of  that  hie-way, 
Lest  he  may  slip,  by  walking  over-fast, 
Or,  breake  the  crackling  Pavement,  by  his  hast: 
And,  so  (for  want  of  better  taking  heed) 
Incurre  the  mischiefes  of  Unwarv-speed. 


BOOKS   OF  FABLB8,    i  -[  j  j 

We  are  all  Travellers;  and,  all  of  us 
Have  many  passages,  as  dmiierous. 
As  Frozen-lakes;  and,  Slipfo 
In  which  our  Lives  may  soon  he  : 
(With  all  our  hopes  of  Liftetfrnall,  too,) 
Unlesse  we  well  consider  what  we  doe. 
There  is  no  private  //'</>•,  or  publi. 
But  rubs,  or  holes,  or  slipp'rinesse  it  hath, 
Whereby,  wee  shall  with  Mischic- 
Wee  walke  it,  with  a  stedfast  warinesse. 

The  steps  to  Honour,  are  on  J'inacles 
Composed  of  melting  Snow,  and  Isicles; 
And,  they  who  tread  not  nicely  on  their  tops, 
Shall  on  a  suddaine  slip  from  all  their  hopes. 
Yea.  ev'n  that  way,  which  is  both  sure  and  holy. 
And  leades  the  Minde  from  Vanities  and  Folly, 
Is  with  so  many  other  Palh-wayes  crost, 
As,  that,  by  Rashnesse,  it  may  soon  be  lost  ; 
Unlesse  we  well  deliberate,  upon 
Those  Tracts,  in  which  our  Ancestours  have  gone. 

And,  they,  who  with  more  haste  than  heed  will  runne, 

May  lose  the  way,  in  which  they  well  begunne." 


Last   of   all,    there  is  a    book,  entitled,    .1/,,/W  ,. 

Aphorisms,  Adages,  and  Proverbs  of  All  Ayes  and  A" 
Jacob   Cats  and  Robert  Farlie,   published    by    M       :       Longman, 
Green,  and  Co      Farlie  wrote  a  book  on  Candles,  which  j_r 
assisted  me  in   the  preparation  of  ray  Lecture  on   ••  Sermons  in 
Candles";  Jacob  Cats,  a  Dutchman,  wn.tr  a  book  on  emblems; 
and    Mr.  Richard   Pigot  has  translated  them  into  Knglish.     The 
work    is    published,    with    splendid    engravings    and    magnificent 
letterpress,   in  a  very   handsome   binding,  for  about   twen- 
or  thirty  shillings;  therefore.  brethren,    1    do   not  suppose   it  will 
conic  in  the  way  of  most  of  you;  for  with   that  amount  \  ou  can 
purchase  many  books  that  will  he  more  useful   to  you.      It  has  a 
great  many  good  things  in  it,  very  Lr""'l  pmvn-bs  faM--.  and  so 
on,    though,    perhaps,   not  so  good  as  some  y.,u   have   heard   tin* 
afternoon.     They  are  in  poetry;   In-iv  is  one;  — 

HASTEN     AT     I.KISURB. 

"  The  Peach-tree,  with  too  eager  haste 

To  show  its  blossoms  to  the  sun, 
Gives  off  its  pretty  bloom  to  waste, 
Before  the  frosts  of  Spring  are  done. 

Much  wiser  is  the  Mulberry, 

Which  only  thinks  its  leaves  to  s! 
When  leaves  are  ^reen  on  e. 

And  roses  have  begun  to  bl 


142  BOOKS    OF   FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AND    PARABLES. 

11  They  most  ensure  success  and  praise, 
Who,  guided  by  the  rule  of  reason, 
Do  fitting  things  on  fitting  days, 

And  dress  as  most  becomes  the  season." 

Here  is  another  of  Jacob  Cats'  emblems  : — 

ONE    ROTTEN   APPLE    INFECTS   ALL    IN    THE    BASKET. 

"  Fair  maid  1  who  comes  so  oft  this  way, 

Your  fruit  of  me  to  buy, 
In  guerdon  of  your  kindness,  pray, 

Before  my  fruit  you  try, 
Give  ear  to  what  I  have  to  say, 

For  I  would  service  do 
To  such  as  buy  of  me  to-day, 

Good  customers  like  you. 
Full  many  years  have  I  sold  fruit, 

And  well  its  nature  know  ; 
As  that  of  every  herb  and  root 

That  in  the  garden  grow ; 
And  this  I've  found,  and  heard  it,  too, 

From  all  who  fruit  have  grown, 
However  fine  and  fresh  to  view, 

The  good,  keep  best  alone. 
No  rotten  pear,  however  slight 

The  token  of  decay, 
But  soon  as  e'er  it  meets  the  sight, 

It  should  be  thrown  away ; 
For  be  the  damage  e'er  so  small, 

In  little  time  I've  known, 
The  taint  will  often  spread  to  all, 

From  that  one  pear  alone. 
I've  had  of  Jargonels  a  lot, 

As  sound  as  fruit  could  be, 
All  from  one  apple  take  the  rot, 

And  prove  sad  loss  to  me. 
Nor  is  there  fruit  that  ever  grew, 

When  spoil'd  in  any  part, 
But  soon  spoils  all  that's  near  it,  too, 

So  take  these  truths  to  heart ! 
A  tainted  grape  the  bunch  may  spoil ; 

A  mildew'd  ear,  the  corn  in  shock ; 
A  scabby  sheep,  with  rot  and  boil, 

Infect  and  kill  the  finest  flock. 
Hence,  maiden,  I  would  have  you  know 
The  ill  that  evil  contact  brings 
To  all  the  finest  fruits  that  grow, 
And  fairest  maids,  like  other  things. 
Seek  only  all  that's  good  to  learn  ; 
Thine  ears  from  evil  counsel  turn  ; 
For  all  the  more  the  fruit  is  fair, 
The  greater  is  its  need  of  care." 


BOOKS   OF  FABLES,    EMBLEMS,    AN,.    PABAMJ 

The  final  emblem,  from  Cats,  is  hanllva  spiritual  one;  l.ut  it  will 
low  you  that  you  need  not  bo  afraid  ,,'f  public-  opinion,  Mid  it  will 
remind  you  of  '  something  ,,f  wllil.h  {  ,1!U,.   hs|i,          ful, 
which  may  fall  to  your  lot  in  due  season  :— 


THE    GOOSE    HISSES    WELL,    BUT    IT    DOK- 

"  When  first  these  Geese  I  saw,  and  h 

Them  hiss  so  fierce  at  m 
With  fear  o'erwhelm'd,  I  fled  the  bird, 

And  thought  therein  to  see 
Some  winged  beast,  or  dragon  fell, 

Whose  pestilential  breath 
Alone  sufficed,  as  I'd  heard  tell, 

To  spread  dismay  and  death. 
At  length,  their  snappish  noise  despite,. 

I  felt  within  my  breast 
A  strange  resolve  to  stay  my  flight, 

And  meet  them  at  my  best. 
So  looking  round  as  fiercely,  too, 

I  was  about  to  draw, 
And  pierce  the  hissing  monsters  through  ; 

^yhen  all  at  once  I  saw— 
And  said,  as  plain  as  I  could  speak  : 

'  Why,  I'm  a  fool  outright  ! 
The  beast's  a  flat  and  toothless  beak  ! 

With  that  he  cannot  bite  ; 
No  claws  upon  his  feet  has  he 

That  I  had  need  to  fear, 
No  crooked  talons  that  I  see 

With  which  my  flesh  to  tear. 
'Tis  all  mere  empty  wind,  e'en  though 

So  dread  to  th'  ear  and  sight  ; 
Fear  not,  my  mates  !  —  who  hiss  and  blow 
Are  seldom  fierce  to  bite.'  " 

Thus  I  have  mentioned  to  you  a  considerable  rariety  of  u. 
If  you  manage  to  get  some  of  them,  \.>u  will  prol.al.lv  have  to  be 
satisfied.  Gotthold'a  Emblems  an-  the  bett  of  all;  th.'  ally 

first-rate.  You  must  get  that  little  book  by  /•;.  /;..  If  pon     ,•      ./,,/m 
Bunyana  Em  blems  you  will  find  in  his  works  ;  an: 
Austen  you  may  not  v.-ry  iva.lily  get;   but  (></•/,,,   -  „«! 

jEsop,  you  can  and  ought  to   buy.     AVu/mm/,  •/„•/•'.<  rtyle 
pretty,  and  tasteful;  but  h.-  osefl  more  ffordl  than  1  ivli^h.      I 
Gotthold  most,  he  has  not  a  won!  too  many  ;   I  think  that 
will  be  pleased  when  you  Imv  <><>(  //,,/,/  of  him. 

I  will  not  keep  you  any  IcnpT  tln\  at't.-nioon  ;   I  onlv  hopi-  that 
I  have  been  able  to  dir-c-t  you  to  iome  1  .....  k>  that  irill   be 
helpful  to  you  in  finding  FuM.-s,  Kml.I.  m^,  and  P.. 


LECTURE  VII. 

§he  jldwc^  as  jlnums  of 

ASTRONOMY. 


I  PROPOSE,  brethren,  if  I  am  able  to  do  it, — and  I  am  somewhat 
dubious  upon  that  point, — to  give  you  a  set  of  lectures  at  intervals 
upon  THE  VARIOUS  SCIENCES  AS  SOURCES  OF  ILLUSTRATION. 
It  seems  to  me  that  every  student  for  the  Christian  ministry 
ought  to  know  at  least  something  of  every  science;  he  should 
intermeddle  with  every  form  of  knowledge  that  may  be  useful  in 
his  life's  work.  God  has  made  all  things  that  are  in  the  world 
to  be  our  teachers,  and  there  is  something  to  be  learned  from 
every  one  of  them ;  and  as  he  would  never  be  a  thorough  student 
who  did  not  attend  all  classes  at  which  he  was  expected  to  be 
present,  so  he  who  does  not  learn  from  all  things  that  God  has 
made  will  never  gather  all  the  food  that  his  soul  needs,  nor  will 
he  be  likely  to  attain  to  that  perfection  of  mental  manhood  which 
will  enable  him  to  be  a  fully-equipped  teacher  of  others. 

I  shall  commence  with  the  science  of  ASTRONOMY  ;  and  you  will, 

at  the  beginning,  understand  that  I  am  not  going  to  deliver  an 

agronomical  lecture,  nor  to  mention  all  the  grand  facts  and  details 

of  that  fascinating  science ;  but  I  intend  simply  to  use  astronomy  as 

one  of  the  many  fields  of  illustration  that  the  Lord  has  provided  for  us. 

Let  me  say,  however,  that  the  science  itself  is  one  which  ought  tc 

receive  much  attention  from  all  of  us.     It  relates  to  many  of  the 

greatest  wonders  in  nature,  and  its  effect  upon  the  mind  is  truly 

marvellous.     The  themes  on  which  astronomy  discourses  are  so 

grand,  the  wonders  disclosed  by  the  telescope  are  so  sublime  that, 

y  often,  minds  that  have  been  unable  to  receive  knowledge 

hn.ii.Ji  other  channels  have  become  remarkably  receptive  while 

key  have  been  studying  this  science.     There  is  an  instance  of  a 

>ther,  who  was  one  of  the  students   in  this  College,  and  who 


-AS   SO,,  s 


"|<"in,,,,,i,K:,at,,i     ,  ,,  ""  '"V  '"""-pi. 

and  he  aftenvardssai!,,,      ':;;;;.;;•'' 

thing  had  cracked  insi.le  hi/I,,,'     "•',' 

snapped.     He    had   ,ai,,    ,,„  ,      •"  '      L"?  ""?**«' 

believe  his  on,,,!,,,,,  did  „         ,       "'K   ""l!lrf!l"1  "" 

ought  to  have  undergone  i,       V  ,-    ,      T  ""  ",V|':'"si""  «*«*  it 

by  the  marvellous  force  of!     '  lM'7"l-i""1  «*»  it  did  un 

of  even  the  events  S^"^ 


mankind  the  g,,,ry  ,,f  %  w,,,,  '  n  ,. 

conceive    helr  mfin  tnde.     8||,mM   ,  |m|    /  I  d 

thmg  that  .unworthy  of  tl,,,,  „,  ,,„,„,,,  ,  IKIV|.  si,    r|  v 

fame   be  grac.ously  pleased  to  forgi,,  „„,-     A,,,|   Z  know  ]  .....  • 

.l.-,,,,hty  Newton,  a  very  prin,,  an  .....  ,  ,  ^ 

contmnallydriwn  to  hi.  knee.  «  he  looked  n 

and  discovered  fresh  wonder,  in  the  s,an-v   1,,,.,.,,.     T 

the  sconce  which  tends  ,„  bring  men  to  I  .....   i,,  I,,,,,,;,;,, 

the   Lord    should  always   be   a  favour!,,.   ,,,,,lv    with    ,/,    „!,„. 

' 


ourinfluence  U<'a"  reT*Wnce    "f  Ci'"1  '»  ""  «'h,, 

The  science  of  astronomy  would  never  hi 

us   u,    ,,K,uy   of  its   R.n.arkal.U-  d.-tails   if  it    had  „„,  .,„. 

discovery  or  invention  of  th.  flucope.    Truth  i,  .,vai.  l.,,t  it  d 

11 


14G  THE    SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES   OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

not  saviiu'ly  affect  us  till  we  become  personally  acquainted  with  it. 
The  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  as  it  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  Word 
of  Go.l,  makes  it  true  to  us;  and  oftentimes  the  Bible  is  to  us 
what  the  trlescope  is  to  the  astronomer.  The  Scriptures^  do  not 
make  the  truth ;  but  they  reveal  it  in  a  way  in  which  our 
poor,  feeble  intellect,  when  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  able 
to  behold  and  comprehend  it. 

From  a  book*  to  which  I  am  indebted  for  many  quotations  in 
this  lecture,  I  learn  that  the  telescope  was  discovered  in  this 
singular  manner  :— <«  A  maker  of  spectacles,  at  Middleburg,  stum 
bled  upon  the  discovery  owing  to  his  children  directing  his  attention 
to  the  enlarged  appearance  of  the  weathercock  of  a  church,  as 
accidentally  seen  through  two  spectacle-glasses,  held  between  the 
fingers  some  distance  apart.  This  was  one  of  childhood's  inadver 
tent  acts  ;  and  seldom  has  there  been  a  parallel  example  of  mighty 
results  springing  out  of  such  a  trivial  circumstance.  It  is  strange 
to  reflect  upon  the  playful  pranks  of  boyhood  being  connected  in 
their  issue,  and  at  no  distant  date,  with  enlarging  the  known 
bounds  of  the  planetary  system,  resolving  the  nebula  of  Orion, 
and  revealing  the  richness  of  the  firmament."  In  a  similar  way, 
a  simple  incident  has  often  been  the  means  of  revealing  to  men 
the  wonders  of  divine  grace.  What  a  certain  individual  only 
meant  to  be  trifling  with  divine  things,  God  has  overruled  for  his 
soul's  salvation.  He  stepped  in  to  hear  a  sermon  as  he  might  have 
gone  to  the  theatre  to  see  a  pla^  :  but  God's  Spirit  carried  the 
truth  to  his  heart,  and  revealed  U.  him  the  deep  things  of  the 
kingdom,  and  his  own  personal  interest  in  them. 

I  think  that  incident  of  the  discovery  of  the  telescope  might  be 
usefully  employed  as  an  illustration  of  the  connection  between 
little  causes  and  great  results,  showing  how  the  providence  of  God 
is  continually  making  small  things  to  be  the  means  of  bringing 
about  wonderful  and  important  revolutions.  It  may  often  happen 
that  what  seems  to  us  to  be  a  matter  of  pure  accident,  with  nothing 
MI  all  notable  about  it,  may  really  have  the  effect  of  changing  the 
entire  current  of  our  life,  and  it  may  be  influential  also  in  turning 
the  lives  of  many  others  in  quite  a  new  direction. 

When  once  the  telescope  had  been  discovered,  then  the  numbers 
and  portion  and  movements  of  the  stars  became  increasingly  visible> 
until  at  the  present  time  we  are  able  to  study  the  wonders  of  the 

•  The  Heavens  and  the  Earth.  A  Popular  Handbook  of  Astronomy.  By  Thomas 
Milner,  M.A.,  F.R.G.S.  Religious  Tract  Society.  (Now  out  of  print.) 


><-I.:NM>   u    BoUBOa8  ,„.   ,,.,.,  MI;  UJON. 


M7 


n 
bj  the  hmml  of  God.    Th,  t,l  .......  , 

us    muc      more  of    the   sun,   and   tl,    n  tll, 

stais,  than    we  could   ever  live  discovered   withonl    it,  aid 
Living^  on  accomit  of  bi.  f  wquently  iiamg  the  aerltnt  t 
he  was  travelling  in  Africa,  was  spoken  of  by  the 
white  man  who  could  bring  down  foe  sun,  ami  carry  it  under  Ids 
arm     That  is  what  the  telescope  has  done  for  us,  and  that  ii  uhat 
faith  in  the  gospel  has  done  for  us  in  the  spiritual  heavens  :  it  has 
>rought  down  to  us  the  Father,  the  Sou,  and  tin-  Boly  Spirit,  and 
given  us  the  high  eternal  things  to  be  our  present  possession, 
our  perpetual  joy. 

Thus,  you   see,  the  telescope  itself   may   ho  mad,*    to   fumM, 
us  with  many  valuahle  illustration,      \V,   mav  also  turn   to  .......  I 

account^e    lessons   to    be    learned    bv  the  'stu.lv   of    the    I 

p  the  purpose  of  navigation.    Th-  mariner,  crossing  the 
eea,  by  taking  astronomical  observations,  can  steer  him-df  with 
accuracy  to  his  desired  haven.    Captain  Hani  Hall  tell,  „,,  in  the 
book  I  have  previously  mentioned,  that  -he  once  sailed  from  5 
Bias,  on  the  West  Coast  of  Mexico  :  and,  after  a  703  _d,t 

thousand  miles,  occupying  eighty-nine  days,  he  arrived  «.ff  K; 
Janeiro,  having  in  this  interval  pa^ed  through  the  IViti,- 
rounded    Cape    Horn,  and  crossed   the   South    Atlai  ,,,,t 

makmg  land,  or  seeing  a  single  sail  except  an  Ai.i.-riran  whah-r. 
\\h-u  within  a  week's  s:lil  of  Rio,  he  set  seriously  al.out  deter 

mining,  by  lunar  observations,  the   position   of    his  ship,  and   then 
steered  his  course  by  those  cmninou  prim-ip!.--  :ati.,u  whieli 

may  be  safely  employed    for  short   ilistanc.-  D   one  kimwn 

station  and  another.      Having  arrived   within  what   h.-  considei 

from   his  computations,   fift.-eu  or  twenty  niil.-s  ,,f    the  , 
hove  to,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  t<»  await   tin-  bl  lay, 

and  then  bore  up,  prortvding  cautiou-ly  on  account  of  a  thick  : 
As  this  cleared  away,  the  crew  had    the  sati>fa.-ti,,n   of  the 

givat  Sugar-  Loaf  Rock,  which  stands  on  one  Bide  of   the  harh-    . 
mouth,   so    nearly  right   a-hcad    that    they    had    not    to  alter  their 
course   above   a    point    in   ordi-r   to    hit    tin-    entrance   of    th.-    p,,rt. 

This  was  the  first   land  they  had  seen  for  neariy  tin-.',-  moot 
aft.-r  crossing  SO  many  seas,  and  being  set  ba 

by  innumerable  ciinvnN  an<l  foul    win-N.      T  ,    all   mi 

board    was   electric;    and,    giving    way    to    th«-ir    admirati..n,    I 
sailors  greeted   the  commander  with  a  hearty  ch«  - 

In  a  similar  manner,  we  :tNo  -ail  by  guidance  from  .enlv 


MS  TilE   SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES   OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

hi  idles,  and  we  have  for  a  long  season  no  sight  of  land,  and  some 
times  do  not  even  see  a  passing  sail ;  and  yet,  if  we  take  our 
observations  correctly,  and  follow  the  track  which  they  point  out, 
we  shall  have  the  great  blessing,  when  we  are  about  to  finish  our 
vovage,  of  seeing,  not  the  great  Sugar-Loaf  Rock,  but  the  Fair 
I  Liven  of  Glory  right  straight  before  us.  We  shall  not  have  to 
alter  our  course  even  a  single  point ;  and,  as  we  sail  into  the 
heavenly  harbour,  what  songs  of  joy  will  we  raise,  not  in  glorification 
of  our  own  skill,  but  in  praise  of  the  wondrous  Captain  and  Pilot 
who  has  guided  us  over  life's  stormy  sea,  and  enabled  us  to  sail  in 
safety  even  where  we  could  not  see  our  way  I 

Kepler  makes  a  wise  remark,  when  speaking  about  the  mathe 
matical  system  by  which  the  course  of  a  star  could  be  predicted. 
After  describing  the  result  of  his  observations,  and  declaring  his 
firm  belief  that  the  will  of  the  Lord  is  the  supreme  power  in  the 
laws  of  nature,  he  says,  "  But  if  there  be  any  man  who  is  too  dull 
to  receive  this  science,  I  advise  that,  leaving  the  school  of  astronomy, 
he  follow  his  own  path,  and  desist  from  this  wandering  through 
the  universe  ;  and,  lifting  up  his  natural  eyes,  writh  which  he  alone 
can  see,  pour  himself  out  in  his  own  heart,  in  praise  of  God  the 
Creator  j  being  certain  that  he  gives  no  less  worship  to  God  than 
the  astronomer,  to  whom  God  has  given  to  see  more  clearly  with 
his  inward  eye,  and  who,  for  what  he  has  himself  discovered,  both 
can  and  will  glorify  God." 

That  is,  I  think,  a  very  beautiful  illustration  of  what  you  may 
say  to  any  poor  illiterate  man  in  your  congregation,  "  Well,  my 
friend,  if  you  cannot  comprehend  this  system  of  theology  which  I 
have  explained  to  you,  if  these  doctrines  seem  to  you  to  be  utterly 
incomprehensible,  if  you  cannot  follow  me  in  my  criticism  upon  the 
Greek  text,  if  you  cannot  quite  catch  the  poetical  idea  that  I  tried 
to  give  you  just  now,  which  is  so  charming  to  my  own  mind, 
nevertheless,  if  you  know  no  more  than  that  your  Bible  is  true, 
that  you  yourself  are  a  sinner,  and  that  Jesus  Christ  is  your 
Saviour,  go  on  your  way,  and  worship  and  adore,  and  think  of 
<  !<>d  as  you  are  able  to  do.  Never  mind  about  the  astronomers, 
and  the  telescopes,  and  the  stars,  and  the  sun,  and  the  moon ; 
worship  the  Lord  in  your  own  fashion.  Altogether  apart  from  my 
theological  knowledge,  and  my  explanation  of  the  doctrines  re 
vealed  in  the  Scriptures,  the  Bible  itself,  and  the  precious  truth 
you  have  received  into  your  own  soul,  through  the  teaching  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  will  be  quite  enough  to  make  you  an  acceptable 
worshipper  of  the  Most  High  God." 


TIIK  SCIENCES  x<  BOUBOES  OF  DLLUSTRATI  i  in 

T  suppose  yon  are  all  aware  that   among  the  old  8Vstcms  of 
wtronomywai,  one  wWch  placed  the  earth  in  the 

tne  sun.  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars  revolve  ar.,nn,l  it     «  Its  tl.nv 

fundamental  principles  were  the  immohiHtj  iarth,itsc 

posit.on.anatlHMlailvivvolutionofallthe;  UMli 

it  in  circular  orbil 

Now,  in  a  similar  fashion,  there  is  a  way  of  tera  of 

theology  of  wind,  man  is 'the  centre,  by  which  il  that 

Christ  and  his  atoning  sacrifice  are  only  made  for  m 

that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  merely  a  great  Worker  on  man's  ! 

and  that  even  the  great  :i,id  glorious  Father  is  to  In-  .  .n,,|v 

as  existing  for  the  Bake  of  making  man  happy.      Well,  that  mai 

the  system  of  theology  adopted  l,v  some;  hut,  brethren,  we  mart 

not  fall  into  that  error,  fur,  just  as  the  earth  is  ,,,,t  tlu-  cento 
the-  universe,  so  man   is   not  tlu-  grandest  of  all    beings.      (i,,,|  has 
been  pleased  highly  t.,  exalt  man  ;  hut  we  mn>t  remember  how 
the  psalmist  speaks  of  l,im  :  "When   I  consider  thy  heaven*,  the 

Work    of   thy    fillers,    the    moon    and    tin-  stars,    which    ;. 
ordained;   what  is  man,  that    tln.it   art    mindful   of   him:   and 
son  of  man,  that    thuu    visitest   him  V"      In   another  place,  David 
says,  "Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thoit  takest  knowledge  of  him  ' 
the  son  of  man,  that  thou  makest  account  of  him  !     Man  is  like 
to  vanity:  his  days  are  as  a  shadow  that  passeth  away."     Man 
cannot  be  the  centre  of  the  theological  universe,  he  is  altogether 
too  insignificant  a  la-ing  to  occupy  such  a  position,  and  the  st-h.-m- 
of  redemption  must  exist  for  some  other  end  than  t; 
making  man  happy,  or  even  of  making  him   holv.     The  >alvati..'n 
of  man  must  surely  he  first  of  all   for  the  glory 'of  (iod;   and 
have  discovered   the   right    form   of  rhri>tian    dortrine   when 
have    found    the    system    that    has   (l<n\  in    the   «vnt re,  rulin- 
controlling  according   t.)  the    good   pleasure   of    hi.  will.      Do 
dwarf  man  so  as  to  make  it  appear  that  <i«.d  ha>  no  care  for  hi 
for  if  you1  do  that,  you  slander  (iod.      Gro    t-   man  the  |n,Mti,,n 
that  God  has  assigned  to  him  ;   hy  doing  so,  you  will  bi  tem 

of  theology  in  which  all  the  truths, ,f  revelation  and  experience  will 
move  in  glorious  order  and  harmony  around   th.-  (  Tal  t.rh, 

the  Divine  Sovereign  Ixul.-r  ..f  the  nniv  :    all,  hi, 

for  ever. 

You  may,   however,  anyone  of  y..u,  make  anoth.-r  mi 
imagining  yourself  to  he  the  centre  «,t  a  sy.stfm.     That  fooli.Nh  n. M 
18  a  good  illustration,  I  think.      There  are  some  men  whose  funda 
mental  principle-,  are,  :ir-t  of  all,  their  own  immobility  :    what  t 


150  THE   SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES   OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

an-,  they  alwiivs  are  to  be,  and  they  are  right,  and  no  one  can  stir 
them ;  secondly,  their  position  is  central,  for  them  suns  rise 
and  set,  and  moons  do  wax  and  wane.  For  them,  their  wives 
exi-t  :  for  them,  their  children  are  born;  for  them,  everything  is 
placed  where  it  appears  in  God's  universe  ;  and  they  judge  all 
things  according  to  this  one  rule,  "How  will  it  benefit  me?" 
That  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  their  grand  system,  and  they 
expect  the  daily  revolution,  if  not  of  all  the  heavenly  bodies, 
certainly  of  all  the  earthly  bodies  around  them.  The  sun,  the 
moon,  and  the  eleven  stars  are  to  make  obeisance  to  them.  Well,, 
brethren,  that  is  an  exploded  theory  so  far  as  the  earth  is  con 
cerned,  and  there  is  no  truth  in  such  a  notion  with  reference  to- 
ourselves.  We  may  cherish  the  erroneous  idea ;  but  the  general 
public  will  not,  and  the  sooner  the  grace  of  God  expels  it  from  us, 
the  better,  so  that  we  may  take  our  proper  position  in  a  far  higher 
system  than  any  of  which  we  can  ever  be  the  centre. 

THE  SUN,  then,  not  the  earth,  is  the  centre  of  the  solar  system ; 
which  system,  mark  you,  is  probably  only  one  little  insignificant 
corner  of  the  universe,  although  it  includes  such  a  vast  space  that 
if  I  could  give  you  the  actual  figures  you  would  not  be  able  to 
form  the  slightest  idea  of  what  they  really  represented.  Yet  that 
tremendous  system,  compared  with  the  whole  of  God's  universe, 
may  be  only  like  a  single  grain  of  dust  on  the  sea-shore,  and  there 
may  be  myriads  upon  myriads  of  systems,  some  of  which  are  made 
up  of  innumerable  systems  as  large  as  ours,  and  the  great  sun  him 
self  may  only  be  a  planet  revolving  round  a  greater  sun,  and  this 
world  only  a  little  satellite  to  the  sun,  never  yet  observed  by  the 
astronomers  who,  it  may  be,  live  in  that  remoter  sun  still  farther 
off.  It  is  a  marvellous  universe  that  God  has  made  ;  and  however 
much  of  it  we  may  have  seen,  we  must  never  imagine  that  we 
have  discovered  more  than  a  very  small  portion  of  the  worlds  upon 
worlds  that  God  has  created. 

The  earth,  and  all  the  planets,  and  all  the  solid  matter  of  the 
universe,  are  controlled,  as  you  know,  by  the  force  of  attraction* 
We  are  kept  in  our  place  in  the  world,  in  going  round  the  sun, 
by  two  forces,  the  one  called  centripetal,  which  draws  us  towards 
the  sun,  and  the  other  called  centrifugal,  which  is  generally  illus 
trated  by  the  tendency  of  drops  of  water  on  a  trundled  mop  to  fly 
<>;T  at  a  tangent  from  the  circle  they  are  describing. 

Now,  1  believe  that,  in  like  manner,  there  are  two  forces  which 
are  ever  at  work  upon  all  of  us,  the  one  which  draws  us  towards 


THE  SCII:N«  -i>   A^  BOUBOEfl  01   i  i.i.r>  ri:  \  11  l."»l 

God,  and   tlk'   other  which   drives   us   away  from   him.   and  we  are 

thu-  kept  in  tin-  circle  «»t'  lit'.-  :   hut,  for  my  j.art,  I  shall 

when  I  can  pass  out  of  that  circle,  and  -M  away  from  the  influence 

of   the  centrifugal  force.      I  believe  that,  the  im-m'-nt   1  -as 

SMI. 11  as  ever  the  attraction  which  draw-  n 

—  I    shall  he  witli  him  in   heaven:  that    I   do  not  doubt.      D 

one  or  other  of  the  two  force*  which  influence  human  life  *}\:\\\  be 

exiiausted,  we  shall  have  either  to  drift  away  int. •  1 

thnmirh  t  he  cent  rifu-al  force,— which  ( lod  forhid  !—  or  •  :;all 

tlv  at  Once    into    the   central  orh,  l.y  the  centripetal  f«  the 

sooner  that  -lorious  end  of   life  comes,  the   1,,-tt.T  will 

With  Auii-uMiue,  L  would  sav,  "All  tiling  are  drawn  I 

Centre.      IV   th.m   the   Centre   of   my  heart,  u  G     •-  :    .     L  my 

only  Love  I " 

The  stin   himself   is  an  enormous  hody  :   he   has  l.een  : 
but  I   think  I  will    not    burden  y.»u  with  the   figures, 
will  convey  to  you  no  adequate   idea  of   his  actual   U16.      >ntli 
to  say  that,  if  'the  earth   and   the   moon  wen-   put    inside   the   ,,111, 
there  would  be  abundance  of  ro-.m  for  them  to  i:»  on  revolving  m 
their  orbits  just  as  they  are  now  d-.in^  :  aud  there  woiil-1  he 
of  their  knocking  against   that   external  enaK  of  the  lun  Whicl 
would  represent  to  them  tin-  beavena 

It  take,  about  ei^ht  minutes  for  li^ht  to  Peacb  us  from  tl 
\Ve  may  judge  of  the  pace  at  which  that  li-ht  comes  when  v 

that  a  caimo^ballrashmg  with  the  swif^;  possible  velocity 

take  seven    vea,-    to    gel    there,  and    that    a   train,   I 

rate  of   thirtvmile.au  hour,  and  oever  stopping  for  I 

would   require  more  than  three  hundred  and  fifty 

would  reach  the  terminus.    Voumaythu  ,ue  >h,l.t  , 

the  distance  Oiat  we  are  from  the  sun  j  wd  this,  I  think,  furins 

us  with  a  g 1  illustration  of  faith.     The w  »  no  man  wh< 

know  except  by  faith,  that  the  sun  That  he  d 

Sn^'lLow/forhereisaravoflight^^ 

from  him,  and  told  me  that;    hut  I  cannot  he  MM-,  that  he  : 

in,  at  this  moment.      There  ar i-  -f  t  h-  ..  v-1  -r,    hat  : 

snHM.va.td.tanc,  from  the  earth,  tha,  a  rav(1,b,ht 

^hundreds  of  year,  to  reach  us;  ano;  for  aiigk 

may  have  1 n  extinct  longap  .     5  "  l>Utf  """Vl  '  '    1  v 

on;  chart    of   the    h  -d  *  « ^  ^  H    T      Uwe^ 

faith  for  as  "through  faith  we  understand  thai 

-".n- •'r"f(-i;-.'  ''•,::' 

know  that  any  of  them  BOW 


l.VJ  Till-:    SCIENCES    AS    SOURCES    OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

mutter  closely,  we  find  that  our  eyesight,  and  all  our  faculties  and 
re  not  sufficient  to  give  us  positive  conviction  with  regard 
to  these  heavenly  bodies ;  and  therefore  we  still  have  to  exercise 
faith ;  so  is  it  to  a  high  degree  in  spiritual  affairs,  we  walk  by 
faith,  not  by  sight. 

Tlmt  the  sun  has  spots  upon  his  face,  is  a  fact  which  everybody 
notices.  Just  so ;  and  if  you  are  suns,  and  are  never  so  bright,  yet 
if  you  have  any  spots  upon  you,  you  will  find  that  people  will  be 
very  quick  to  notice  them,  and  to  call  attention  to  them.  There 
is  often  much  more  talk  about  the  sun's  spots  than  there  is  about 
his  luminous  surface;  and,  after  the  same  fashion,  more  will  be 
said  about  any  spots  and  imperfections  that  men  may  discover  in 
our  character  than  about  any  excellences  that  they  may  see  in  us. 
It  was  for  some  time  asserted  that  there  were  no  spots  or  specks 
whatever  on  the  sun.  Many  astronomers,  with  the  aid  of  the  tele 
scope,  as  well  as  without  it,  discovered  these  blemishes  and  patches 
on  the  face  of  the  sun  ;  but  they  were  assured  by  men  who  ought 
to  have  known,  namely,  by  the  reverend  fathers  of  the  church, 
that  it  was  impossible  that  there  could  be  any  tiling  of  the  kind. 
The  book  1  have  previously  quoted  says  : — "  Upon  Scheiner,  a 
German  Jesuit,  reporting  the  evidence  of  his  senses  to  his  pro 
vincial  superior,  the  latter  positively  refused  to  believe  him.  '  I 
have  read,'  said  he,  '  Aristotle's  writings  from  end  to  end  many 
times,  and  I  can  assure  you  that  I  have  nowhere  found  in  them 
anything  similar  to  what  you  mention.  Go,  my  son,  and  tran 
quillize  yourself :  be  assured  that  what  you  take  for  spots  in  the  sun 
are  the  faults  of  your  glasses,  or  of  your  eyes.'  "  So,  brethren,  we 
know  the  force  of  bigotry,  and  how  men  will  not  see  what  is  per 
fectly  plain  to  us,  and  how,  even  when  facts  are  brought  before 
them,  they  cannot  be  made  to  believe  in  them,  but  will  attribute 
them  to  anything  but  that  which  is  the  real  truth.  I  am  afraid 
that  the  Word  of  God  itself  has  often  been  treated  just  in  that 
way.  Truths  that  are  positively  and  plainly  revealed  there  are 
stmitly  denied,  because  they  do  not  happen  to  fit  in  with  the 
preconceived  theories  of  unbelievers. 

There  have  been  a  great  many  attempts  to  explain  what  the 
spots  upon  the  sun  really  are.  One  theory  is,  that  the  solar  orb  is 
surrounded  by  a  luminous  atmosphere,  and  that  the  spots  are  open 
spaces  in  that  atmosphere  through  which  we  see  the  solid  surface 
of  the  sun.  I  cannot  see  any  reason  why  that  theory  should  not  be 
tlu-  truth  ;  and,  if  it  be  so,  it  seems  to  me  to  explain  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis,  where  we  are  told  that  God  created  the  li»ht 


-:   sci  g   go!  ROES   01     11.1  i  -n:\nov. 

on  the  first  day,  though  lie  did  n.,t  make  the  sun  until  tl 

day.    Did  he  not  make  tin-  ligjlt  first,  and  til  m.  which 

Otherwise  might  have  been  a  dark  world,  and  put  the  lighl 

a  luminous  atmosphere  >    The  two  things  certainly  i 

lit   m  with   one  another;   and   if    these   spots   are'   real 

in  the  luminous  atmosphere  through  wliirh 

of   the  sun,  they  are  admirable  illustrations  ,,f    ; 

see  in  us.  \Vre  are  clothed  with  holi. 

but  every  now  and  then  there   is  a  rift    through  whir!'. 

can  see  down  into  the  dark  body  of   natural  depravity  that  still  is 

in  the  very  best  of  us. 

It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  look  at  the   sun   with   unpm< 
eyes.     Some  have  ventured  to  look  at  it  with  glasses  tha- 
colouring  in  them,  and  they  have  been  struck  'blind.     Ti, 
been  several  instances  of  persona  who  bave  ma.lv,  rtentty  IK 
to  use  a  proper  kind  of  glass  before  turning  th.-   t, 
sun,  and  so  have  been  blinded.     This  is  an  illustration  of  our  : 
of  a  Mediator,  and  of  how  necessary  it  is  t.          Gtod  thr..ui:! 
medium  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord;  else  might   th.-  e 
of  the  Deity  utterly  destroy  the  faculty  (2..d  at  all. 

The  effect  of   the   sun   upon  the  earth,  I    shall    not   dwell  up,,n 
now,  as  that  may  rather  concern   another  branch  of  -i,an 

astronomy.      It   will    suffice   to  say   that    living   j,lallts  wj|i   K 
times  grow  without  the  sun,  as  yon  may  have 'seen  them  in  a  dark 
cellar;  but  how  blanched  they  are  when  existing  under  such  cir 
cumstances!      What   must    have    been    the    pleasure    uith    which 
Humboldt  entered    into   the  great    subterranean    cave    railed    the 
Cueva  del  Guacharo,  in  the  district  of  Caraccw  !      [til  a 
inhabited  by  nocturnal,  fruit-eating   birds,  and    this  was   what    th- 
great  naturalist  saw: — "Seeds,  carried    in    by   the  birds   | 
young,    and    dropped,    had    sprung    up.    producing    tall,    b 
spectral  stalks,  covered  with   half-formed   leaves;   but   it   \\a^   im 
possible  to  reengnize  the  species  from   the  change  in  form, 
and    aspect,    which    the    absr-nce    of    light    had  occasioned.     T 
native  Indians  gazed  upon   these  trace!   "f   imperfect  or^'ani/at i«m 
with  mingled  curiosity  and  fear,  as  if  the\  were  pale  and  dJ 
phantoms  banished  from  the  face  of  the  i-arth." 

So,  brethren,  think  what  you  and  I  would  IK.  without  the  light 
of  God's  countenance.  Pkture  a  church  growing,  as  s,,,,,,.  ,-hun-hef 
do  grow,  without  any  light  from  In -a\en,  full  of  strange 

birds  and  blanched  vegetation.      \Vhat  a  terribh-  plac> 
to  visit  !     There  is  a  cave  of  that    sort   at   K'ome,  and   t; 


1,~>1  THE    SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES    OF    ILLUSTRATION. 

others  in  various  parts  of  the  earth ;  but  woe  unto  those  who  go 
to  live  in  such  dismal  dens! 

What  a  wonderful  effect  the  light  of  God's  countenance  has 
upon  men  who  have  the  divine  life  in  them,  but  who  have  been 
living  in  the  dark  I  Travellers  tell  us  that,  in  the  vast  forests  of 
the  Aina/on  and  the  Orinoco,  you  may  sometimes  see,  on  a  grand 
scale,  the  influence  of  light  in  the  colouring  of  the  plants  when 
the  leaf-buds  are  developing.  One  says  : — "  Clouds  and  rain  some 
times  obscure  the  atmosphere  for  several  days  together,  and  during 
this  time  the  buds  expand  themselves  into  leaves.  But  these 
leaves  have  a  pallid  hue  till  the  sun  appears,  when,  in  a  few  hours 
of  clear  sky  and  splendid  sunshine,  their  colour  is  changed  to  a 
vivid  green.  It  has  been  related  that,  during  twenty  days  of 
dark,  dull  weather,  the  sun  not  once  making  his  appearance,  the 
leaves  were  expanded  to  their  full  size,  but  were  almost  white. 
One  forenoon,  the  sun  began  to  shine  in  full  brightness,  when  the 
colour  of  the  forest  changed  so  rapidly  that  its  progress  might  be 
marked.  By  the  middle  of  the  afternoon,  the  whole,  for  many 
miles,  presented  the  usual  summer  dress." 

That  is  a  beautiful  illustration,  it  seems  to  me,  that  does  not 
want  any  opening  up ;  you  can  all  make  the  application  of  it  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  for  yourselves.  As  Dr.  Watts  sings, — 

"  In  darkest  shades  if  he  appear, 

My  dawning  is  begun  ; 
He  is  my  soul's  sweet  morning  star, 
And  he  my  rising  sun." 

Then  we  begin  to  put  on  all  sorts  of  beauty,  as  the  leaves  are 
painted  by  the  rays  of  the  sun.  We  owe  every  atom  of  colour 
that  there  is  in  any  of  our  virtues,  and  every  trace  of  flavour  that 
there  is  in  any  of  our  fruits,  to  those  bright  sunbeams  that  come 
streaming  down  to  us  from  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  who  carries 
many  other  blessings  besides  healing  beneath  his  wings. 

The  effect  of  the  sun  upon  vegetation  can  be  observed  among 
the  flowers  in  your  own  garden.  Notice  how  they  turn  to  him 
whenever  they  can;  the  sunflower,  for  instance,  follows  the  sun's 
course  as  if  he  were  himself  the  sun's  son,  and  lovingly  looked  up 
to  his  fatln-r's  face.  He  is  very  much  like  a  sun  in  appearance, 
and  I  think  that  is  because  he  is  so  fond  of  turning  to  the  sun. 
The  innumerable  leaves  of  a  clover  field  bend  towards  the  sun  ;  and 
all  plants,  more  or  less,  pay  deference  to  the  sunlight  to  which  they 
ure  so  deeply  indebted.  Even  the  plants  in  the  hothouse,  you 


TIIK   90IENOB8    \-   BOUBOKfl   OF   n.i.i  -  i  i:  \  I  :  155 

can  observe,  do  not  grow  in  that  direction  you  would  expect  them 
to    do    if   they   wanted    warmth,    tliat    is    towards   the  st«> 
whence  the  heat  come-<,  nor  even  to  the  sp;>t  whnv  most   a 
mitted;  but  they  will   always,  if  they  p<»s>ihlv  can.  --nd  out   their 
branches  and  their  flowers  toward^  tin-  sun.    That  is  how  wo  ought 
to  grow  towards  the  Sun  of  righteous,,.,.*  :  it  is  for  our  -onl'-  h.-alth 
that  we  should  turn  our  faces  toward*  the  Sun,  as    Dani» •'. 
with  his  windows  open  towards  Jerusalem.     \Vh- •:•    .'  ere 

is  our  Sun;  towards  him  let  us  constantly  incline  our  whole  h, -iuu. 
Not  very   long   ago,  1    met  with    tin-   following   remarkabl.-   in 
stance  of  the  power  of  rays  of  light  transmitted   from    the   sun. 
Some  divers  were  working  at    Plymouth    Puvak\\at«T  ;  ti. 
down  in  the  divine-hell,  thirtv  feet  In-low  the  -urt'a--,'  .,f  th«- 
but  a  convex  glass,  in  the  upper  part  of   the  hell,  concentrated  the 
sun's  rays  full  upon  them,  and    hurnt   their  cap-.      A  'his, 

storv,  1  thought  it  was  a  capital    illustration  of  the   power  the:- 
in  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Some  of  our  hear*  is  are 
fully  thirty  feet  under  the  waters  of  sin,  if  they  are  not  even  d« 
down   than    that;   but,    hy   the   grace    of  (lod.    we    \\ill   yet    n. 
them  feel  the  blessed  burning  j.ower  of  the  truth 
if  we  do  not  succeed  in  setting  them  all  on  tire  with  this  powerful 
glass.      Perhaps,  when  you  were  a   hoy,   \  on  had   a   burning-g 
and  when  you  were  out  with  a  friend  who  did  not  know  what  \«>u 
had  in  your  pocket,  while  he  wa>  Bitting  vt-ry  .piietly  by  your  >idi\ 
you  took  out  your  glass,  and    held    it    tor  a  few  secox  'he 

back  of  his   hand   until  he   felt   something    rather   hot    ju 
I  like   the  man   who,   in   preaching,  concentrate^  the    ra\-  ot    the 
gospel  on  a  sinner  till  he  burns  him.      Do  not  scatter  the  bean 
light;  you  can  turn  the  glass  BO  as  to  diffu-f  the  rays  instead  of 
concentrating  them;  but   the    best   way  of  preachin. 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Sun  of  right. -ousuex.  right    on  a  iinnei 
It  is  the  best  way  in   the  world  to  get  at    him  ;   and  if   he  i-  thirty 

t    under  the  water,  this  burning-gla->  uill   enable  you 
him;  only  mind  that,  you   do  not    use  your  own  candle   iiM- , 
the  Sun,  for  that  will  not  answer  the  >aiw  purp- 

Sometimes  the  sun   suffers   eclipse,  u   you    know.     Th«-  moon 
intrudes  between  u-  and  the  sun,  an. 1  then  W6  cannot  166  the  | 
orb  of  day.      I  suj'i.o-e  we    have  all   seen    one   total  6C 
may  see  another.      It  i-  a  very  interesting  >ight  ;  but  it  ft] 
me  that  people  take  a  great  deal   in-'r.-   notice  of  the  sun  N' 
is  eclipsed  than  they  do  when   he  is  shining   dearfj,      T 

stand  looking  at  him,  day  after  day,  when  he  ifl  pouring  tortli 


156  THE    SCIENCES    AS   SOURCES    OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

bright  beams  in  unclouded  glory ;  but  as  soon  as  ever  he  is  eclipsed, 
tlu'ii  they  are  out  in  their  thousands,  with  their  glasses,  and  every 
little  boy  in  the  street  has  a  fragment  of  smoked  glass  through 
which  lie  watches  the  eclipse  of  the  sun. 

Thus,  brethren,  I  do  not  believe  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
ever  receives  so  much  attention  from  men  as  when  he  is  set  forth  as 
the  suffering  Saviour,  evidently  crucified  among  them.  When 
the  great  eclipse  passed  over  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  then  all 
eyes  were  fixed  upon  him,  and  well  they  might  be.  Do  not  fail  to 
tell  your  hearers  continually  about  that  awful  eclipse  on  Calvary ; 
but  mind  that  you  also  tell  them  all  the  effects  of  that  eclipse, 
and  that  there  will  be  no  repetition  of  that  stupendous  event. 

"  Lo  !  the  sun's  eclipse  is  o'er ; 
Lo  !  he  sets  in  blood  no  more." 

Speaking  of  eclipses,  reminds  me  that  there  is,  in  the  book  I  have 
mentioned,  a  striking  description  of  one  given  by  a  correspondent 
who  wrote  to  the  astronomer  Halley.  He  took  his  stand  at 
Haradow  Hill,  close  to  the  east  end  of  the  avenue  of  Stonehenge, 
a  very  capital  place  for  observation,  and  there  he  watched  the 
eclipse.  He  says  of  it :— "  We  were  now  enveloped  in  a  total  and 
palpable  darkness,  if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression.  It  came 
on  rapidly,  but  I  watched  so  attentively  that  I  could  perceive  its 
progress.  It  came  upon  us  like  a  great  black  cloak  thrown  over 
us,  or  like  a  curtain  drawn  from  that  side.  The  horses  we  held 
by  the  bridle  seemed  deeply  struck  by  it,  and  pressed  closely  to 
us  with  marks  of  extreme  surprise.  As  well  as  I  could  perceive, 
the  countenances  of  my  friends  wore  a  horrible  aspect.  It  was 
not  without  an  involuntary  exclamation  of  wonder  that  I  looked 
around  me  at  this  moment.  It  was  the  most  awful  sight  I  had 
ever  beheld  in  my  life." 

So,  I  suppose,  it  must  be  in  the  spiritual  realm.  When  the 
Sun  of  this  great  world  suffered  eclipse,  then  were  all  men  in 
darkness ;  and  when  any  dishonour  comes  upon  the  cross  of  Christ, 
or  upon  Christ  himself,  then  is  each  Christian  himself  in  darkness 
of  a  horrible  kind.  He  cannot  be  in  the  light  if  his  Lord  and 
Master  is  in  the  shade. 

One  observer  describes  what  he  saw  in  Austria,  where,  it  appears, 

all  the  people  made  the  eclipse  a  time  for  keeping  holiday,  and 

turned  out  together  on  the  plain  with  various  modes  of  observing 

the  wonderful  sight.     This  writer  says:— "The  phenomenon,  in 

B  magnificence,  had  triumphed  over  the  petulance  of  youth,  over 


TH1  i:*  AS  S0n:r.>   OK   [LLU8TRATIOW. 

the  levity  whirl,  *„„,  ,,,.,,,„„  ;l.Mime  „  a  ^    (f  ^    (  ^  .. 


tile  noisy   Mfferenee  of  which   Soldi^   UMl«l|v   make  p, 

A  profound  stillness  aU,  reigned  in  the  air  :  the  birds  ha 
lh"  mow  cwiona  thin.  i.  ,!,:lt,  m   London, 
eclipse,  when  the  cocks  found  that  the  slm  .none  on- 
all  began  crowing  as  though   they  joyfully  thou. 
light  had  broken  through  tin-  gU.m  of  ni^ht. 

Yet  this  wonderful  phenomenon  doei  to  have  a' 

attracted  the  attention  of  all  person  who  might   hi 
it     History  saya  that,  at  one  time,  there  was  a  battle  hei,,      | 

think,  in  Greece,  and,  during  its  progress,  thej 

eclipse  of  the  sun  ;  l,,,t  the  warrion  went  on  nVhtm-r  all  t 

indeed,  they  never  noticed   the  extraordinary   occnrren 

shows  us  how   strong    passions   .nay    mak-   us   t 

circumstances,  and  it  also  teaches  us  how  a  man's  en. 

earth    may  make   him  oblivious  of   all    that    is   transpiring  in 

heavens.      \\Y   read,  J.IM    now,  of  how  the 

standing  idly  on  Salisbury  Plain,  trembled  .luring  tl,,-  l,ut 

another  writer  tells  us  that  the  horses  in  Italy,  that  ,,ily 

occupied  in  drawing  the  carriages,  do  not  appear  to  ha. 

the  slightest  notice  of  the  phenomenon,  but   to  have  gone  on 

way  the  same  as  usual.     Thus,  tin-  ei.M-ag,-ments  of  a  worldly  man 

are  often  so  engrossing  in  their  charact.-r  that   they  him 

from  feeling  those  emotion.-,  which  are  felt    by  other  men,  wb 

minds  are  more  at  liberty  to  meditate  upon  them. 

^1  met  with  a  very  pretty  story,  concerning  an  eclipse,  whi.-h  you 
will   probably   like  to   hear.     A  poor  little  girl,  belon-in-  to  'the 
commune  of  Sieyes,  in  the  Lower  Alp-,  was'  tending  her  floci 
the   mountain-side   at    MX    o'clock    on    a    bright   Mimm.-r   i. 
The  sun  had  ri.-rn.  and  wa>  dissipating  the  \apoursof  the  nii:ht.and 
everyone  thought  that  there  would  be  a   -lori..us,  unrloU,.: 
but   gradually  the   light   darkened  until   the   >un   had  uh:.!lv 
aj.peared,  and  a  black  orb  took  the  place  of  th«-  gl.A\in. 
the  air  became  chill,  and  a  my>terii.n>  gli«.m  pn-\ade.l  th--  \\ 
n-gion.       The    little    child    was   so    territii-d    by    the    cin-iim-tai 
which  was  certainly  unii-ual,  that  she  began   to  weep,  and  < 
loudly  for   help.      Her  pan-nt>.  and  other  friends,  win.  cam.-  at   her 
call,   did  not   know   anything  about    an   eclip>«-.   BO    th 
astounded   and   alarmed;   but  they    tried    to   nui 
they  could.     After  a  short  time,  the  darkness  passed 
the  face  of  the  sun,  and  it  shone  out  a-  before,  and   then    the   1.: 
girl  cried  aloud,  in  the  patois  of  th- 


158  THE    SCIENCES    AS    SOURCES    OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

and  well  she  might.  When  I  read  the  story,  I  thought  that,  when 
my  heart  had  suffered  eclipse,  and  the  presence  of  Christ  had  gone 
for  a  while,  and  then  had  come  back  again,  how  beautiful  the  Sun 
sivmed  to  me,  even  more  bright  and  fair  than  before  the  tem 
porary  darkness.  Jesus  seemed  to  shine  on  me  with  a  brighter 
light  than  ever  before,  and  my  soul  cried  out  in  an  ecstasy 
of  delight,  "  O  beautiful  Sun  of  righteousness  1 " 

That  story  must,  I  think,  close  our  illustrations  derived  from 
the  sun ;  for  we  want  also  to  learn  all  we  can  from  his  planets, 
and  if  we  intend  to  pay  a  visit  to  them  all,  we  shall  have  to  travel 
far,  and  to  travel  fast,  too. 

The  nearest  planet  that  revolves  around  the  sun  is  MERCURY, 
which  is  about  37,000,000  miles  from  the  great  luminary.  Mer 
cury,  therefore,  receives  a  far  greater  allowance  of  light  and  heat 
from  the  sun  than  comes  to  us  upon  the  earth.  It  is  believed  that, 
even  at  the  poles  of  Mercury,  water  would  always  boil ;  that  is  to 
say,  if  the  planet  is  constituted  at  all  as  this  world  is.  None  of  us 
could  possibly  live  there ;  but  that  is  no  reason  why  other  people 
should  not,  for  God  could  make  some  of  his  creatures  to  live  in  the 
fire  just  as  well  as  he  could  make  others  to  live  out  of  it.  I  have 
no  doubt  that,  if  there  are  inhabitants  there,  they  enjoy  the  heat. 
In  a  spiritual  sense,  at  any  rate,  we  know  that  men  who  live  near 
to  Jesus  dwell  in  the  divine  flame  of  love. 

Mercury  is  a  comparatively  small  planet;  its  diameter  is  about 
2,960  miles,  while  that  of  the  earth  is  7,975.  Mercury  rushes 
round  the  sun  in  eighty-eight  days,  travelling  at  the  rate  of  nearly 
110,000  miles  in  an  hour,  while  the  earth  traverses  only  65,000 
miles  in  the  same  time.  Fancy  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  about  two 
or  three  minutes !  It  is  an  instance  of  the  wisdom  of  God  that 
Mi -miry  appears  to  be  the  densest  of  the  planets.  You  see,  that 
part  of  a  machine  in  which  there  is  the  most  rapid  wrhirl,  and  the 
pvutest  wear  and  tear,  ought  to  be  made  of  the  strongest  material; 
and  Mercury  is  made  very  strong  in  order  to  bear  the  enormous 
strain  of  its  swift  motion,  and  the  great  heat  to  which  it  is 
subjected. 

This  is  an  illustration  of  how  God  fits  every  man  for  his  place; 
if  lie  means  me  to  be  Mercury, — the  messenger  of  the  gods, 
as  the  ancients  called  him, — and  to  travel  swiftly,  he  will  give  me 
a  strength  proportioned  to  my  day.  In  the  formation  of  every 
planet,  adapting  it  to  its  peculiar  position,  there  is  a  wonderful 
proof  of  the  power  and  forethought  of  God  ;  and  in  a  similar 


Tin:   >cii;\<  BB    kfl   BO1  i:«  B8    Of    [LUDSTRATI 

manner   does    lie  tit   human   beings   for  the   >pheiv  thev   are  each 
called  to  occupy. 

I  like  to  see   in    Mercury  a  picture  ,,f   the  child  of  (J.-d  \N  ho  is 
full  of  grace.     Mercury  is  always    near  tlie  Bon;   ind, 
that  it  is  itself  very  seldom  Been,      I  think  OopemiciU  >aid  that  he 
never  did  see  it,  although  he  had  long  watched  for  it  \\ith  nival  care, 
and  he  deeply  regretted  that  he  had  to  die  without  havin 
this  planet.    Others  have  observed  it,  and  it  has  been  quite  a  tivat 
for  them  to  be  able  to  watch  it*  revolutions.      Mercury 
lost  in  the  rays  of  the  sun;  and  that  is  when-  you  and  I  ought  to 
be,  so  close  to  Christ,  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  jn  ,„,,•  i;f,.  ;m,i  m 
our   preaching,  that   the    people   who   are    trying   to   observe    our 
movements  can  scarcely  see  us  at  all.     Paul's  motto  mii-t  l.e  ours: 
"  Not  I,  but  Christ." 

Mercury,  also,  in  consequence  of  being  so  near  the  sun,  is 
apparently  the  least  understood  of  any  of  the  planets.  It  has 
perhaps,  given  more  tronhle  to  the  astronomers  than  any  other 
member  of  the  heavenly  family ;  they  have  paid  great  attention 
to  it,  and  tried  to  find  out  all  about  it;  but  they  have  had  a  very 
difficult  task,  for  it  is  generally  lost  in  the  solar  glory,  and  never 
seen  in  a  dark  portion  of  the  heavens.  So,  I  believe,  bivthivu, 
that  the  nearer  we  live  to  Christ,  the  greater  mystery  shall  we 
be  to  all  mankind.  The  more  we  are  lost  in  his  brightness,  tha 
less  will  they  be  able  to  understand  us.  If  we  were  alwavs  \\hat 
we  should  be,  men  would  see  in  us  an  illustration  of  the  te\t,  ••  Ye 
are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  Cod."  Like  Meivurv, 
we  ought  also  to  be  so  active  in  our  appointed  orbit  that  we  should 
not  give  observers  time  to  watch  us  in  anyone  position;  and  next, 
we  should  be  so  absorbed  in  the  glorv  of  ('1;  tence,  that 

they  would  not  be  able  to  perceive  us. 

When  Mercury  is  seen   from  the  earth,  it    is  never  viable  in  its 
brightness,  for  its   face   is  always  turned   towards  the  MIU.      I  am 
afraid   that,  whenever  any  of   us  an-    Been  very  much,   \\e   usuallv 
appear  Only  as    black   spots;   when   the  preacher   is  very  prominent 
in  a  sermon,  there  is  always  a  darkness.     1  like  gn>pel  preaching 
to  be  all  Christ,  the   Sun  of    righteouHi, ->,  and   no    \>\.: 
all;  nothing  of  ourselves,  but  all  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     If  the 
any  inhabitants  of   Mercury,  the  MUI  must  appear  to  them  four  «.r 
five  times  as  large   as    he  does    t,,  us  ;   the   brightness  would    ! 
sufferable  to  our  eyes.      It  would   be   a    very  ^-pleii  !f  one 

could  gaze  upon   it;   and   thus,  the  Dearer   \<>u  ge4    t-  Christ,  the 
more  vou  see  of  him,  and  the  more  he  grow*  in  you 


160  T11E   SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES   OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

The  next  planet  to  Mercury  is  VENUS  ;  it  is  about  66,000,000 
miles  from  the  sun,  and  is  a  little  smaller  than  the   earth,    its 
diameter   being  7,510   miles,   compared  with  our  7,975.     Venus 
goes  round  the  sun  in  225  days,  travelling  at  the  rate  of  80,000 
miles  an  hour.     When  the  Copernican  system  of  astronomy  was 
fairly  launched  upon  the  world,  one  of   the  objections  to  it  was 
stated  thus  :— "  It  is  clear  that  Venus  does  not  go  round  the  sun, 
because,  if  it  does,  it  must  present  the  same  aspect  as  the  moon, 
namely,  it  must  sometimes  be  a  crescent,  at  other  times  a  half- 
moon,  or  it  must  assume  the  form  known  as  gibbous,  and  some 
times  it  must  appear  as  a  complete  circle.     But,"  said  the  objector, 
pointing  to  Venus,  "  she  is  always  the  same  size ;  look  at  her,  she 
is  not  at  all  like  the  moon."     This  was  a  difficulty  that  some  of 
the  earlier  astronomers  could  not  explain  ;  but  when  Galileo  was 
able  to  turn  his  newly-made  telescope  to  the  planet,  what  did  he 
discover?     Why,  that  Venus  does  pass  through  similar  phases  to 
those  of  the  moon  I     We   cannot  always  see  the  whole  of  it  en 
lightened,  yet  I  suppose  it  is  true  that  the  light  of  Venus  always 
appears  about  the  same  to  us.     You  will  perceive  in  a  moment 
why  that  is ;  when  the  planet's  face  is  turned  toward  us,  it  is  at 
the  greatest  distance  from  the  earth ;  consequently,  the  light  that 
reaches  us  is  no  more  than  when  it  is  closer,  but  has  its  face  at 
least  partly  turned  away  from  us.     To  my  mind,  the  two  facts  are 
perfectly  reconcilable;  and  so  is  it,  I  believe,  with  some  of  the 
doctrines  of  grace  that  perplex  certain  people.     They  say,  "  How 
do  you  make  these  two  things  agree1?  "     I  reply,  "I  do  not  know 
that  I  am  bound  to  prove  how  they  agree.     If  God  had  told  me,  I 
would  tell  you ;  but  as  he  has  not  done  so,  I  must  leave  the  matter 
where  the  Bible  leaves  it."     I  may  not  have  discovered  the  ex 
planation  of  any  apparent  difference  between  the  two  truths,  and 
yet,  for  all  that,  the  two  things  may  be  perfectly  consistent  with 
one  another. 

Venus  is  both  the  morning  star  and  "  the  star  of  the  evening, 
beautiful  star."  It  has  been  called  Lucifer,  and  Phosphorus,  the 
light-bringer,  and  also  Hesperus,  the  vesper  star.  You  perhaps 
remember  how  Milton,  in  Paradise  Lost,  refers  to  this  double 
character  and  office  of  Venus  : — 

"  Fairest  of  stars  !  last  in  the  train  of  night, 
If  better  thou  belong  not  to  the  dawn  ; 
Sure  pledge  of  day,  that  crown'st  the  smiling  morn 
With  thy  bright  circlet :  praise  him  in  thy  sphere, 
While  day  arises,  that  sweet  hour  of  prime." 


Tin-:   BOIRNOAS    18    BOT  ROES   OF    n.i.i  -i  i:  \  i  i  K.l 

OurJ.ord  Jrsus    Christ    calls   himself,  "the  bright    and   morning 
star."      Whenever  lie  COmefl  int..  tin-  >mil.  In-  is  the  MUV  liar 
cf   that   everlasting   light  which    shall   go   no   m-iv  down  for 
Now  that  Jesus,  tlie  Sun  of  right, -..ii-n. •-,  ha>  Lr»ne  from  the  gaze 
of  man,  you  and  I  must  he  like  evening   itars,  keeping  !ls  close  as 
we  can  to    the  great    central   Sun.    and  let  tin-  the    world   know 
what  Jesus  was  like  by  our  resemblance  t..  him.      Di.l   he  not  say 
to  his  disciples,  "  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  worl 

The  next  little  planet  that  goes  round  the  sun  is  Tin:  KMMH. 
Its  distance  from  the  sun  varies  from  about  ninety-two  to  n 
five  millions  of  miles.  Do  not  be  discouraged,  gentlemen,  in  your 
hopes  of  reaching  the  sun,  because  you  HIV  nothing  like  so  far 
away  as  the  inhabitants  of  Saturn;  if  there  are  any  residents 
there,  they  are  about  ten  times  as  far  from  the  sun  as  w 
Still,  I  do  not  suppose  you  will  ever  take  a  seat  in  Sol's  fiery  chariot  ; 
at  least,  not  in  your  present  embodied  state:  it  i>  tar  ton  warm  a 
place  for  you  to  be  at  home  there.  The  earth  is  somewhat  larger 
than  Venus,  and  it  takes  much  longer  to  go  round  the  sun.  it  is 
twelve  months  on  its  journey,  or,  speaking  exactly, 
6  hours,  '.»  minutes,  and  10  seconds.  Tuis  world  is  a  slow-goin^ 
concern;  and  I  am  afraid  it  is  less  to  the  glory  of  (lod  than  any 
other  world  that  he  has  made.  I  have  not  seen  it  from  a  distance  ; 
but  I  should  suspect  that  it  never  shines  anything  like  so  brightly  as 
Venus;  for,  through  sin,  a  cloud  of  darkness  has  enveloped  it.  I 
suppose  that,  in  the  millennial  days,  the  curtain  will  be  drawn 
back,  and  a  light  will  be  thrown  upon  the  earth,  ami  that  it  will 
then  shine  to  the  glory  of  God  like  its  sister  stars  that  have  never 
lost  their  pristine  brightness.  I  think  then-  have  been  -<>me 
curtains  drawn  up  already;  every  sermon,  full  of  Christ,  tint  we 
preach,  rolls  away  some  of  the  mists  and  fogs  from  the  surf  a 
the  planet;  at  any  rate,  morally  and  spiritually,  if  not  naturally. 

Still,  brethren,  though  the  earth  travels  slowly,  when  com 
with   Mercury  and  Venus,  yet,  as   Galileo   siid.it  docs  mov, 
at  a  pretty  good  rate,  too.     I  dare  siy,  if  yon  were   to  \\a!k  for 
twenty  minutes,  and   von   knew  nothing  about  the  sjn-ed  at  which 
the  earth  is  travelling,  you  would  be  snrpn  '  Q  that 

you  had  in  that  short  space  of  time  gone  more  than  *J<>," 
but  it  would  be  a  fact.     This   book,  which  has  ahva.lv  given   us 
much     useful     information,    says:  — "It    is    a     truly    utoni 
thoucrht    that,    'awake,    asleep,    at     home,   abnad/    we    are 
stantlv  carried    round   with   the  terrestrial    IIKUSS,   at  the    rate  of 


K.2  THE   SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES    OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

eleven  miles  a  minute,  and  are,  at  the  same  time,  travelling  with 
it  in  space  with  a  velocity  of  sixty-six  thousand  miles  an  hour. 
Thus,  during  the  twenty  minutes  consumed  in  walking  a  mile  from 
our  thresholds,  we  are  silently  conveyed  more  than  twenty  thousand 
miles  from  one  portion  of  space  to  another  ;  and,  during  a  night 
lit  hours'  rest,  or  tossing  to  and  fro,  we  are  unconsciously 
translated  through  an  extent  equal  to  twice  the  distance  of 
the  lunar  world." 

We  do  not  take  any  notice  of  this  movement,  and  so  it  is  that 
little  things,  which  are  near  and  tangible,  often  seem  more  notable 
than  great  things  which  are  more  remote.  This  world  impresses 
many  men  with  far  greater  force  than  the  world  to  come  has  ever 
done,  because  they  look  only  upon  the  things  that  are  seen  and 
temporal.  "But,"  perhaps  you  say,  "  we  do  not  feel  ourselves 
moving."  No,  but  you  are  moving,  although  you  are  not  conscious 
of  it.  So,  I  think  that,  sometimes,  when  a  believer  in  Christ  does 
not  feel  himself  advancing  in  divine  things,  he  need  not  fret  on 
that  account ;  I  am  not  certain  that  those  who  imagine  themselves 
to  be  growing  spiritually  are  really  doing  so.  Perhaps  they  are 
only  growing  a  cancer  somewhere ;  and  its  deadly  fibres  make 
them  fancy,  there  is  a  growth  within  them.  Alas !  so  there  is  ; 
but  it  is  a  growth  unto  destruction. 

When  a  man  thinks  that  he  is  a  full-grown  Christian,  he  reminds 
me  of  a  poor  boy  whom  I  used  to  see.  He  had  such  a  splendid 
head  for  his  body  that  he  had  often  to  lay  it  on  a  pillow,  for  it  was 
too  weighty  for  his  shoulders  to  carry,  and  his  mother  told  me  that, 
when  he  tried  to  stand  up,  he  often  tumbled  down,  overbalanced 
by  his  heavy  head.  There  are  some  people  who  appear  to  grow 
very  fast,  but  they  have  water  on  the  brain,  and  are  out  of  due 
proportion  ;  but  he  who  truly  grows  in  grace  does  not  say.  "  Dear 
me  I  I  can  feel  that  I  am  growing ;  bless  the  Lord  I  Let's  sing  a 
hymn,  '  I'm  a  growing  I  I'm  a  growing !  "  I  have  sometimes  felt 
that  I  was  growing  smaller,  brethren  ;  I  think  that  is  very  possible, 
and  a  good  thing,  too.  If  we  are  very  great  in  our  own  estima 
tion,  it  is  because  we  have  a  number  of  cancers,  or  foul  gatherings, 
that  need  to  be  lanced,  so  as  to  let  out  the  bad  matter  that  causes 
us  to  boast  of  our  bigness. 

It  is  a  good  thing  that  we  do  not  feel  ourselves  moving,  for,  as 
I  before  reminded  you,  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight.  Yet  I 
know  that  we  are  moving,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  I  shall  return, 
as  nearly  as  the  earth's  revolution  permits,  to  this  exact  spot  this 
day  twelvemonth.  If  they  are  looking  down  at  me  from  Saturn, 


TIIK   9OIBM4  H    UB    -MI  RCE8    Off    ii. 1. 1  8TRATIOH. 

they  will  spy  me  out  somewhere  near  this  same  place,  unle^  the 
Lord  should  come  in  the  meantime,  or  he  should  call  me  up  to 
be  with  him. 

If  we  did  feel  the  world  move,  it  would  probablyb'  then- 

was  some  obstruction  in  the  heavenlv  road  ;  but  we  go  on  so  softly. 
and  gently,  and  quietly,  that  we  do  not  perceive  ir.  I  believe  that 
growth  in  grace  is  very  much  after  the  same  fashion.  A  babe  g 
and  yet  does  not  know  that  he  grows;  the  seed  anconacioaaly 
grows  in  the  earth,  and  so  we  are  developing  in  the  divine  life 
until  we  come  to  the  fulness  of  the  stature  of  men  in  Christ  .' 

Waiting  upon  the  earth  is  TIIK  MoON.  In  addition  to  her  duty 
as  one  of  the  planets  revolving  round  the  sun,  she  has  the  ta>k  of 
attending  upon  the  earth,  doing  much  useful  s-Tvice  for  it,  and  at 
night  lighting  it  with  her  great  reflector-lamp,  according  to  the 
allowance  of  oil  she  has  available  for  shedding  her  beam<  upon 
us.  The  moon  also  operates  upon  the  earth  by  her  po\\ 
attraction;  and  as  the  water  is  the  more  mobile  part  of  our  planet, 
the  moon  draws  it  towards  herself,  so  making  the  tides  ;  and  those 
tides  help  to  keep  the  whole  world  in  healthful  motion  ;  they  are  a 
sort  of  life-blood  to  it. 

The  moon  undergoes  eclipse,  sometimes  very  frequently,  and  a 
great  deal  more  often  than  the  sun;  and  this  phenomenon  has 
occasioned  much  terror.  Among  some  tribes,  an  eclipse  of  the 
moon  is  an  occasion  for  the  greatest  po^ihle  griff.  Sir  R. 
Schomberg  thus  describes  a  total  lunar  eclipse  in  San  Domingo:— 
"  I  stood  alone  upon  the  flat  roof  of  the  house  which  I  inhabited, 
watching  the  progress  of  the  eclipse.  I  pictured  in  imagination 
the  lively  and  extraordinary  scene  which  I  once  v,  in  the 

interior  of  Guiana,  among  the  untutored  and  superstitious  Indians, 
how  they  rushed  out  of  their  huts  when  the  first  news  ot  the 
eclipse  came,  gibbered  in  their  tongue,  and,  with  violent  gesticula 
tions,  threw  up  their  clenched  fists  towards  the  moon.  \Vi. 
on  this  occasion,  the  disc  was  perfectly  eclipsed,  they  broke  out  in 
moanings,  and  sullenly  squatted  upon  the  ground,  hiding  their 
tar,  ,  between  their  liaiids.  The  females  remained,  during  this 
Strange  SOene,  within  their  huts.  When,  >hining  lik'"  a  sparkling 

diamond,  the   first    portion   of   the   m i.    that    had    diaeOCOmbere 

its.-lf    from    the    shadow,    became    visible,    all  tamed 

towards  it.  Thev  spokfl  to  each  other  with  subdued  voices;  but 
their  observations  became  louder  ami  louder,  and  they  quitted  their 
stoopini:  portion  as  the  light  inerea^-d.  \Yh-i.  the  bright  disc 


1C)  I  THE   SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES   OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

announced  that  the  monster  which  wanted  to  stifle  the  Queen  of 
Night  had  been  overcome,  the  great  joy  of  the  Indians  was 
expressed  in  that  peculiar  whoop,  which,  in  the  stillness  of  the 
night,  may  be  heard  for  a  great  distance." 

Want  of  faith  causes  the  most  extraordinary  fear,  and  produces 
the  most  ridiculous  action.  A  man  who  believes  that  the  moon, 
though  temporarily  hidden,  will  shine  forth  again,  looks  upon 
an  eclipse  as  a  curious  phenomenon  worthy  of  his  attention,  and 
full  of  interest ;  but  the  man  who  really  fears  that  God  is 
blowing  out  the  light  of  the  moon,  and  that  he  shall  never  see  its 
bright  rays  any  more,  feels  in  a  state  of  terrible  distress.  Per 
haps  he  will  act  as  the  Hindoos  and  some  of  the  Africans  do 
during  an  eclipse ;  they  beat  old  drums,  and  blow  bullocks'  horns, 
and  make  all  manner  of  frightful  noises,  to  cause  the  dragon  who 
is  supposed  to  have  swallowed  the  moon  to  vomit  it  up  again. 
That  is  their  theory  of  an  eclipse,  and  they  act  accordingly ;  but 
once  know  the  truth,  and  know  especially  the  glorious  truth  that 
"  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to 
them  that  are  the  called  according  to  his  purpose,"  and  we  shall 
not  be  afraid  of  any  dragon  swallowing  the  moon,  nor  of  anything 
else  that  the  fears  of  men  have  made  them  imagine.  If  we  are 
ignorant  of  the  truth,  every  event  that  occurs,  which  may  be 
readily  enough  accounted  for  from  God's  point  of  view,  may  cause 
the  utmost  terror,  and  drive  us,  perhaps,  into  the  wildest  follies. 

The  next  planet  to  the  earth  is  MARS  ;  fiery  Mars,  generally 
shining  with  a  ruddy  light.  It  used  to  be  thought  that  the  colour 
of  Mars'  "  blood-red  shield  "  was  caused  by  the  absorption  of  the 
solar  rays ;  but  this  idea  has  been  refuted,  and  it  is  now  believed 
to  be  due  to  the  colour  of  its  soil.  According  to  the  former  idea, 
an  angry  man,  who  is  like  Mars,  the  god  of  war,  must  be  one  who 
has  absorbed  all  other  colours  for  his  own  use,  and  only  shows  the 
red  rays  to  others;  while  the  more  modern  notion,  that  the  soil 
of  the  planet  gives  it  its  distinctive  colour,  teaches  us  that,  where 
there  is  a  fiery  nature,  there  will  be  a  warlike  exhibition  of  it  unless 
it  is  restrained  by  grace.  Mars  is  about  140,000,000  miles  from 
the  sun,  it  is  much  smaller  than  our  earth,  its  equatorial  diameter 
l»-ing  4,363  miles.  Travelling  at  the  rate  of  53,600  miles  an  hour, 
it  takes  687  days  to  complete  its  revolution  round  the  sun. 

Between  the  orbits  of  Mars  and  Jupiter,  there  is  a  wide  zone, 
in  which,  for  many  centuries,  no  planets  were  visible  ;  but  the 


THK    BCIWW    AS  SOURCES  OF    ILLUOTRATl 

astronomers  said  within  themselves,  "There  moti  surely  be 
thing  or  other  betweei,   Mara  and  Jupiter.-     Tl,v  ,„„',,. 


,. 

-Janets;  but  as  ,,,,,,,,,,,,  ,,,,allll.  lar#I(Ti  iM||  ,„,,,. 
ful   they  observed  that  there  was  number  of    fc 

or  PLANETOIDS,,  term  them.    I  do  not  know  how* 

a-  tor  they  are  like  some  of  our  brethren's  farnuT*       , 
daily  increa.mg.     Some  hund,  them  have  alw 

r£^Tth^/diteierapicphot° 

to  hear  of  the  finding  of   many  nmre.     The  I 
dentifieclonthefirstdayoftho,, 
Ceres.    Many  of  t>m  ha^  beeii  called  by  female  myth 

names,  I  suppose  because  they  are  the  smaller  planets,  an,  1  it  is 
considered  gallant  tc.  give  them  ladies  .....          ^ 

vaiyrom  about  20  to  200  miles  in  diameter;   and  manVl 
Bought  that  thev  arc  the  fragments  of  some  planet  that  - 

revolved  between  Mars  and  Jupiter,  but  that  has  been  blown  up 
and  none  to  pieces  in  a  general  wreck. 

Those  meteoric  stones,  which  sometimes  fall  to  the  earth  but 
which  much  more  frequently,  at  certain  seasons  of   the   year'  are 
seen  shooting  across  the  midnight  sky,  may  also  be  fragment 
the  aforesaid  world  which   has   perished.     At   all   eve:  the 

fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  have  not  continued  as  they 
there  have  been  changes  in  the  starry  world  to  let  men  know  that 
other  changes  will  yet  come.     These  blocks  of  meteoric  matter  are 
flying  through  space,  and  when  tlu-y  get  within  the  :  ,,ur 

atmosphere,  there  is  an  opposing  m,-dium,  they  have  to  drive 
through  it  at  an  enormous  rapidity,  and  so  they  become  burning  hot, 
and  thus  they  become  visible.  And,  in  like-  manner,  I  believe  that 
there  are  plenty  of  good  men  in  the  world  who  are  invisible  till 
they  get  to  he  opposed,  and  hnng  opposed,  and  having  tin- 

God  driving  them  on  with  tremendous  momentum,  they 

red-hot  with  holy  fervour,  they  overcome  all  oppositi. 

they  become  visible  to  the  eye  of  mankind.      For  mv  : 

like    to    pa>s    through  an    opposing  medium.      I    think   that    ire  all 

want  to  travel  in    that   kind   of   atmosphere  JIM    t<>  i  he 

Birred  friction   that  will  fully  develop  the   f> 

have  been  entrusted.      If   God  has  giv.-n  us  force,  it   il  QOi  at  all  a 

bad  thing  for  us  to  he  put  where  there  is  oppo>itioll< 

shall  not  he  stopped   by  it,  but    shall   by  that  very  prQCeM  be  ma 

to  shine  all  the  brighter  as  lights  in  the  world. 

li.-yond    the    space    uhieh    is   occupied   by   th<  ,,    i-,    «he 


166  THE   SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES    OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

magnificent  planet,  JUPITER,  the  brightest  star  which  we  see, 
except  Venus;  and  yet  he  is  very,  very  far  away.  His  mean 
distance  from  the  sun  is  about  475,000,000  miles ;  that  is,  more 
than  five  times  as  far  off  as  we  are.  Even  here,  we  are  so  far  away 
that  we  do  not  often  see  the  sun ;  but  Jupiter  is  five  times  as  far 
from  the  sun,  and  it  takes  him  4,333  days,  or  nearly  twelve 
of  our  years,  to  go  round  the  great  luminary,  travelling  at  a  speed 
of  27,180  miles  an  hour.  The  reason  why  Jupiter  is  so  bright  is, 
partly,  because  of  his  great  size,  for  he  is  nearly  90,000  miles  in 
diameter,  while  the  earth  is  less  than  8,000,  and  it  may  be  partly 
because  he  is  better  constituted  for  reflecting,  or  else,  at  that 
distance,  his  magnitude  would  not  avail  him.  And  brethren,  if 
you  and  I  are  put  in  difficult  positions,  where  we  seem  to  be 
unable  to  shine  to  the  glory  of  God,  we  must  ask  the  Lord  specially 
to  constitute  us  so  that  we  can  better  reflect  his  brightness,  and  so 
produce  as  good  an  effect  as  our  brethren  who  are  placed  in  more 
favourable  positions. 

Jupiter  is  attended  by  four  moons.*  These  satellites  were  dis 
covered  soon  after  the  invention  of  the  telescope  ;  yet  there  were 
several  persons  who  would  not  believe  in  their  existence,  and  one 
of  our  excellent  friends,  the  Jesuits,  of  course,  was  strongest 
in  his  determination  that  he  never  would,  by  any  process,  be 
convinced  of  that  which  others  knew  to  be  a  fact.  He  was  asked 
to  look  through  a  telescope  in  order  to  see  that  it  was  really  so ; 
but  he  declined  because  he  said  that,  perhaps,  if  he  did  so,  he  would 
be  obliged  to  believe  it ;  and  as  he  had "  no  desire  to  do  so, 
he  refused  to  look.  Are  there  not  some  who  act  thus  towards 
the  truths  of  revelation  ?  Some  time  after,  the  Jesuit  fell  under 
ihe  anger  of  good  Kepler,  and  being  convinced  that  he  was  in 
the  wrong,  he  went  to  the  astronomer,  and  begged  his  pardon. 
Kepler  told  him  that  he  would  forgive  him,  but  he  would  have  to  in 
flict  a  penance  upon  him.  **  What  will  it  be?  "  he  enquired.  "Why," 
said  Kepler,  "  you  must  look  through  that  telescope."  That  was 
the  direst  punishment  the  .Jesuit  could  possibly  receive;  for,  when 
he  looked  through  the  instrument,  he  was  obliged  to  say  that  he 
•  lid  see  what  he  had  formerly  denied,  and  he  was  obliged  to  express 
his  conviction  of  the  truth  of  the  astronomer's  teaching.  So, 
sometimes,  to  make  a  man  see  the  truth,  is  a  very  severe  penalty 


*  "In  September,  1892,  a  fifth  satellite  was  discovered  through  the  great  telescope 
at  the  Lick  Observatory  on  Mount  Hamilton,  California."— The  Voices  of  the  Star». 
By  J.  E.  Walker,  M.A.  Elliot  Stock. 


TIIK    -CII-.NCKS   AS   Snri:ci>    pf    [LLUBTBATIOH, 

to    him.     If    he    does  not  wunt    to  K€   it.   it   is  a  good   t! 
compel  him  to  look  at  it.     There  are  a  great  ,n:my  bretlnv 
are  not  Jesuits,  and  who  yet  are   n..t   anxious  to  know  th-  whole 
truth;  but  I  hope  that  you  and   1.  brethren,  will  ., 
learn  all  that  the  Lord  has  revealed  in  h 

This  was   the   argument  of   Sizzi.  :u,  note, 

who  tried  to  prove  that  .Jupiter's  moons  rould  not  «>.\i>t.  I  V 
whether  you  can  see  the  flaw  in  it  :—*•  There  are  seven  \\.- 
given  to  animals  in  the  domicile  of  the  head,  through  which  I 
is  admitted  to  the  tabernacle  of  the  body,  t<  M,  to  warm, 

and  to  nourish  it ;  which  windows  :»re  the  principal  parts  of  r 
crocosm,  or  little  world,  two  nostrils,  two  eyes,  two  ear-,  a 
month.  So,  in  the  heavens,  as  in  a  microcosm,  world, 

there  are  two   favourable  stars.  Jupiter   and  Yen  unj.ro- 

pitious.  Mal-  and  Saturn;  two  luminaries,  the  sun  and  the  moon  : 
and  Mercury  alone  undecided  and  indifferent,  from  which,  and 
from  many  other  phenomena  of  nature,  -ueh  as  the  seven  m<-tak 
etc.,  which  it  were  tedious  to  enumerate,  we  gath.-r  that  the  num 
ber  of  planets  is  necessarily  seven.  Moreover,  the  satellit 
invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  and  therefore  o  :-e  no  influence 

over  the  earth,  and  therefore  would  be  useless,  and   then  t 
not  exist.      Besides,  a-  well  the  Jews  and  other  ancient  nation-.  a- 
modern    Europeans,  have   adopted    the  division  of   the  w.-,-k    into 
seven  days,  and  have  named  them  from  the  seven   plan 
if  we  increase  the  number  of  the  planets,  this  wh  :il  fall> 

to  the  ground." 

I  think,  brethren,  that  I  have  heard  the  same  kind  of  nrjument 
advanced  many  times  with  reference  to  spiritual    matter-;    that  k 
an  argument  from  theory  against  fact  ;   hut  facts  will  a! 
turn   theories   all   the   world  over,  only  that,  sometimes,  it    t 
good  while  before  the  facts  can  be  absolutely  proved. 

It  is  a  singular  thing,  and  another  instance  of  the  p,-\v,-r  and 
wisdom  of  God,  that,  though  the  satellit.-  of  Jupiter  are  con 
stantly  being  eclip-ed.  as  i>  natural  enough  from  their  rapid 
revolutions  around  him,  yet  they  are  never  all  eelip*.  time. 

One  moon   may  be  eclipsed,  and   perhaps   another,  or  even  three 
out  of  the  four  ;   but  there  is  always  one  left  shining;  and,  in  like 
manner.    (Jod   never  take-  a\\a\    all   tho   comfort    «,f   hi- 
once,  there  is  always  some  ray  of  light  to  cheer  them. 

There  is  a  great  deal  more  to  be  learned  from  Jupiter;  but 
having  introduced  you  to  him,  I  will  leave  you  to  examine  him 
for  yourselves,  and  to  Lr«'t  all  von  can  out  of  him. 


11)8  THE  SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES   OF   ILLUSTRATION. 

Far,  far  beyond  Jupiter  is  SATURN.  That  respectable  planet 
has  been  very  much  slandered,  but  I  am  happy  to  inform  you 
that  he  does  not  deserve  such  treatment,  lie  is  nearly  900,000,000 
miles  from  the  sun.  I  wonder  whether  any  brother  here,  with  a 
large  mind,  has  any  idea  of  what  a  million  is;  I  do  not  suppose 
that  he  has,  and  I  am  sure  that  I  have  not.  It  takes  a  vast  deal 
of  thinking  to  comprehend  what  a  million  means ;  but  to  realize 
what  is  meant  by  a  million  miles,  is  altogether  beyond  one's  mental 
grasp.  A  million  pins  would  be  something  enormous ;  but  a 
million  miles!  And  here  we  are  talking  of  nine  hundred  millions 
of  miles ;  well,  I  give  up  all  thought  of  understanding  what  that 
is  so  long  as  I  am  in  this  finite  state.  Why,  when  you  speak  of 
nine  hundred  millions,  you  might  as  well  say  nine  hundred  billions 
at  once;  for  the  one  term  is  almost  as  incomprehensible  as  the 
other ;  and  yet,  please  to  recollect  that  this  vast  space  is  to  our 
great  God  only  a  mere  hand's-breadth  compared  with  the  im 
measurable  universe  that  he  has  created. 

I  said  that  Saturn  had  been  greatly  slandered,  and  so  he  has. 
You  know  that  we  have,  in  our  English  language,  the  word 
"  saturnine ",  as  a  very  uncomplimentary  description  of  certain 
individuals.  When  a  man  is  praised  for  being  very  hearty  and 
genial,  he  is  said  to  be  jovial,  in  allusion  to  Jove,  or  Jupiter,  the 
brightly-shining  planet ;  but  a  person  of  an  opposite  temperament  is 
called  saturnine,  because  it  is  supposed  that  Saturn  is  a  dull  planet, 
dreadfully  dreary,  and  that  his  influences  are  malignant  and  bane 
ful.  If  you  have  read  some  of  the  astrological  books  which  I  have 
had  the  pleasure  of  studying,  you  have  there  been  told  that,  if  you 
had  been  born  under  the  influence  of  Saturn,  you  might  almost  as 
well  have  been  born  under  the  influence  of  Satan,  for  it  will  come 
to  about  the  same  thing  in  the  end.  He  is  supposed  to  be  a  very 
slow  sort  of  individual,  his  symbol  is  the  hieroglyphic  of  lead ;  but 
he  is  ivally  a  Yery  light  and  buoyant  personage.  His  diameter  is 
almut  nine  times  as  great  as  that  of  the  earth,  and  while  in  volume 
he  is  ...nial  to  74G  worlds  as  large  as  ours,  his  weight  is  only  equal 
!  Mich  globes.  The  densities  of  the  planets  appear  to  diminish 
according  to  their  distance  from  the  sun,  not  in  regular  propor- 
:ion,  but  still  very  largely  so;  and  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  why 
'  winch  are  most  remote,  and  travel  slowly,  should  be  made  so 
tense  as  tho<c  which  are  nearer  the  central  orb,  and  revolve  more 
quickly  around  him. 

This   useful    volume,    from    which    I  have   already   given    you 
several  extracts,  says :-« Instead,  therefore,  of  sinking  like  lead  in 


Tin-:   BOIEMOB8    Ifl    »  -i  i:«  i>   Of    n.i.i  BTRA1 

the  mighty  waters,  he  would  Hoat  uj».in  tin-  liquid,  if  :m  0,-,-an  could 
be  found  sufficiently  capacious  to  receive  liim.  John  Goad,  the 
well-known  astro-meteorologist,  declared  tin-  planet  not  to  be  inch 

a  '  plumbeous  blue-nosed  fellow  '  us  all  antiquity  had    beli«-\ ed,  ami 
the  world  still  supposed.      Hut  it  was  tin-  work  of  other.-  to  pn.\v  it. 
For  six  thousand  years  or  so,  Saturn  concealed  his  prr-mal  I'.-atu: 
interesting    family,   and   strange   appurtenance^  --tin-  magnificent 
out-buildings  of  his  house, — from  the  knowledge  <,f  mankind.     Hut 
he    was    caught    at    last    by  a   little   tube,  pointed    at   him    f: 
a    slope    of     the    Apennines,    the     holder    of    which,    in    inva>, 
his  privacy,  cared    not  to  ask   leave,  and   deemed   it  no   intn, 
When  that  "little  tube"  was  turned   upon  him,  In-  was  found  to 
be  a  most  beautiful  planet,  one  of  the  im»>t  varied  and   n; 
vellous  of   all  the  planetary  worlds. 

Take  that  as  an   illustration  of   the  falseness  of  slander,  and  of 
how  some  persons  are  very  much  bemired  and  bespattered  becau-- 
people  do  not  know  them.     This  planet,  which  was  so   despil 
turned  out  to  be  a  very  beautiful  object    ind-'.-d  ;  and,  instead  «>t 
being  very  dull,  and  what  the  word  saturnine   usually  means,  lie  is 
bright  and  glorious.     Saturn  also  has  no  less  than  eight  sate!'. 
to  attend  him;  and,  in  addition,  he  has  three  magnificent  ring 
which  Tennyson  has  sung, — 

"  Still  as,  while  Saturn  whirls,  his  steadfast  shade 
Sleeps  on  his  luminous  rings." 

Saturn  has  only  about  a  hundredth  part  of  the  light  from  the 
sun  as  compared  with  what  we  receive;  and  yet,  1  suppose,  the 
atmosphere  might  be  so  arranged  that  he  might  have  as  much  solar 
light  as  we  have;  but  even  if  the  atmosphere  is  of  the  same  kind 
as  ours,  Saturn  would  still  have  as  much  light  as  we  have  in  an 
ordinary  London  fog.  I  am  speaking,  of  course,  of  the  light  from 
the  sun;  but  then  we  cannot  tell  what  illuminating  p 
Lord  may  have  put  in  the  planet  himself;  and  he-id.-  that,  he  has 
his  eight  moons,  and  his  three  fining  rings,  which  have  a  bril 
liance  that  we  cannot  either  imagine  or  describe,  \Vliat  mu 
be  to  see  a  marvellous  arch  of  light  ri-ing  to  a  h  87,570 

miles  above  the  planet,  and   having  the  enonnOM  >pau   ol    17»,n< 
miles!      If  you  were  at  the  equator  "f    Saturn,  you  would  only  see 
the   rinjrs  as   a  narrow  band  of    light;    but    if  yn  could  JOUT1 
towards  the  pol.-s,  you  would  see  above  yon  a  tremendous  arch, 
blazing  with   light,  like  iom6  of  thevasl   n  i  see 

hung  up  in   large  building>  whew    they  cannot  get   sutlici.-nt   >un- 


THE    SCIKXOKS    AS    SOURCES    OF    ILLUSTRATION. 

Tin-  ivhYrtor  helps  to  gather  up  the  rays  of  light,  and  throw 
tin-in  where  they  are  needed;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  these  rings 
act  like  reflectors  to  Saturn.  It  must  be  a  wonderful  world  to  live 
in  if  there  are  inhabitants  there;  they  get  compensations  which 
fully  make  up  for  their  disadvantages  in  being  so  far  away  from 
the  sun.  So  is  it  in  the  spiritual  world,  what  the  Lord  withholds 
in  one  direction  he  makes  up  in  another ;  and  those  who  are  far 
removed  from  the  means  of  grace,  and  Christian  privileges,  have 
an  inward  light  and  joy,  which  others,  with  greater  apparent 
advantages,  might  almost  envy. 

Journeying  again  in  the  heavens,  far,  far  beyond  Saturn,  we 
come  to  URANUS,  or  HERSCHEL,  as  it  is  sometimes  called,  after 
the  astronomer  who  discovered  it  in  1781.  The  mean  distance  of 
Uranus  from  the  sun  is  believed  to  be  about  1,754,000,000  miles ; 
I  give  you  the  figures,  but  neither  you  nor  I  can  have  the  slightest 
conception  of  the  distance  they  represent.  To  an  observer  standing 
on  Uranus,  the  sun  would  probably  appear  only  as  a  far-away 
speck  of  light ;  yet  the  planet  revolves  around  the  sun  at  about 
15,000  miles  an  hour,  and  occupies  about  eighty-four  of  our  years 
in  completing  one  journey.  Uranus  is  said  to  be  equal  in  volume 
to  seventy-three  or  seventy-four  earths,  and  to  be  attended  by  four 
moons.  I  do  not  know  much  about  Uranus,  therefore  I  do  not 
intend  to  say  much  about  him. 

That  may  serve  as  an  illustration  of  the  lesson  that  a  man  had 
better  say  as  little  as  possible  concerning  anything  of  which  he 
knows  only  a  little ;  and  that  is  a  lesson  which  many  people  need  to 
learn.  For  instance,  there  are  probably  more  works  on  the  Book 
of  Revelation  than  upon  any  other  part  of  the  Scriptures,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  just  a  few,  they  are  not  worth  the  paper  on 
which  they  are  printed.  Then,  next  to  the  Book  of  Revelation,  in 
this  respect,  is  the  Book  of  Daniel ;  and  because  it  is  so  difficult  to 
explain,  many  men  have  written  upon  it,  but  as  a  rule  the  result 
of  their  writing  has  been  that  they  have  only  confuted  and  contra 
dicted  one  another.  Let  us,  brethren,  preach  what  we  know  ;  and 
say  nothing  of  that  of  which  we  are  ignorant. 

We  have  gone  a  long  way,  in  imagination,  in  travelling  to  the 
planet  Uranus;  but  we  have  not  yet  completed  our  afternoon's 
journey.  It  was  observed  by  certain  astronomers  that  the  orbit  of 
Uranus  sometimes  deviated  from  the  course  they  had  marked  in 
their  chart  of  the  heavens;  and  this  convinced  them  that  there 


Tin:   SCIENCES    tfl   BOUBGBfl   <>F   [LLU8TRAT1  171 

\\a-    another    planetary    body,    not     then     di-  .    which    was 

exerting  an  unseen  !mt  powerful  influence  upon  lTranns. 

This    fact,   that    th»-M-    hu^c  worlds,    \\itl«    -o   many   milho< 
miles  of  space  between  tin-in,  <1»   retard  «>r  a 
movements,  is  to  me  a  beautiful  illustration  of  tin-  influence  that 
von   and    I    have    upon   our    fellow-men.      \Vh'-th«-r   con-ciou-!;, 
unconsciously,  we  either  impede  a  man'-  proLr)V>-  in  tin-  path  1 
leads  to  God,  or  else  we  quicken  hi*  maivh  alou^  the  heavenward 
way.     "None  of  us  liveth  to  him-elf." 

The  astronomers  came  to  the  conclusion  that  there  must  be 
another  planet,  previously  unknown  to  them,  tha*  WU  disturbing 
the  motion  of  Uranus.  Unknown  to  one  another,  an  KnMishman, 
Mr.  Adams,  of  Cambridge,  and  a  Frenchman,  M.  1.  t  to 

work  to  find  out  the  position  in  which  they  expected  the  heavenly 
body  to  be  discovered,  and  their  calculations  brought  them  t«> 
almost  identical  results.  When  the  to  >"t»-d  to 

that    part    of   the    heavens   where  .the    mathematical    a-trono!: 
believed   the   planet    would    be    found,    it    vraa   at   once  disc 
shining  with  a  pale  and  yellow  light,  and   we  now   know  it  by   the 
name  of  NEPTUNK. 

The  volume  before  me  thus  speaks  of  the  two  methods  of  finding 
a  planet,  the  one  worker  usin^  the   most   powerful   teloBOOpe,  and 
the     other     making    mathematii-al    calculation-:      "To    det 
planet  by  the  eye,  or  to  track  it  to  its  place  by  the  mind,  are 
as  incommensurable  as   those   of  muscular  and   intellectual    p.. 
Recumbent  on   his  easy  chair,  the  practical  astronomer  ha-  i. 
look  through  the  cleft  in   his   revolving  cuj.ola.  in   order 

•  pilgrim  star  in  its  course  ;   or,  by  the  application  of  ma^mt 
power,  to  expand  its  tiny  disc,  and  thu-  transfer  it  fr-m  aniMii. 
sidereal    compani<.ns    to     the     planetary    domain-.       T 
astronomer,  on  the  contrary,  has  no  such  auxiliary,  :    he  calcu 
at  noon,  when  the  -tars  disappear  under  a  meridian   >un  ;    he   com- 
j.ntes  at  midnight,  when  clouds  and  darkness  -lirnud   the  heavi 
and  from  within  that  cerebral  dome  which  ha-  DO  opening 
ward.-,  and  no  instrument  but    the  ev  tt,    he    B661    in 

di-tm-biniz  agencies  of  an  unseen  planet,  upon  a  planet  by  him 

equally  unseen,  the  existence  «-f  the  di-tni-hi*  and  from  the 

nature  an«!  amount   of    its  action    he  compute*  it-  magnitude,  and 
indicates  its  place." 

What  a  errand  thing  ii  teasfoJ     Far  above  the  ,,,• 
then   faith 'is  hi.Lrh   above   ,va-on  ;   only,  in    the  CIM  of   the  mathe 
matical  astronomer  of  whom  we  are  tlunkin-.  iva-on  VM  a  km 


17:.'  TIII:  SCIENCES  AS  SOURCES  OF  ILLUSTRATION. 

faith.  lie  argued,  "God's  laws  are  so-an  1-so  and  so-and-so.  This 
planet  1'ranus  is  being  disturbed,  some  other  planet  must  have 
disturbed  it,  so  I  will  search  and  find  out  where  he  is;  "  and  when 
his  intricate  calculations  were  completed,  he  put  his  finger  on 
Neptune  as  ivadily  as  a  detective  lays  his  hand  on  a  burglar,  and 
a  givat  deal  sooner  ;  indeed,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  is  often  easier 
to  Mini  a  star  than  to  catch  a  thief. 

Xt-ptiiiie  had  long  been  shining  before  he  was  discovered  and 
named  ;  and  you  and  I,  brethren,  may  remain  unknown  for  years, 
and  possibly  the  world  may  never  discover  us  ;  but  I  trust  that 
our  influence,  like  that  of  Neptune,  will  be  felt  and  recognized, 
whether  we  are  seen  of  men,  or  only  shine  in  solitary  splendour 
to  the  glory  of  God. 


l,  we  have  travelled  in  thought  as  far  as  Neptune,  which  is 
about  2.748,000,000  miles  from  the  sun;  and,  standing  there,  we 
look  over  into  space,  and  there  are  myriads,  and  myriads,  and 
myriads  of  miles  in  which  there  appear  to  be  no  more  planets 
belonging  to  the  solar  system.  There  may  be  others  that  have  not 
been  discovered  yet  ;  but,  as  far  as  we  know,  beyond  Neptune 
there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed. 

There  are,  however,  what  I  may  call  "  leapers  "  in  the  system, 
which,  without  the  use  of  a  pole,  are  able  to  cross  this  gulf;  they 
are  THE  COMETS.  These  comets  are,  as  a  rule,  so  thin,—  a  mere 
filmy  mass  of  vapour,—  that  when  they  come  flashing  into  our 
system,  and  rushing  out  again,  as  they  do,  they  never  disturb  the 
motion  of  a  planet.  And  there  are  some  terrestrial  comets  about, 
that  I  know,  that  go  to  various  towns,  and  blaze  away  for  a  time  ; 
but  they  have  no  power  to  disturb  the  planets  revolving  there  in 
their  regular  course.  The  power  of  a  man  does  not  consist  in 
rushing  to  and  fro,  like  a  comet,  but  in  steadily  shining  year  after 
year  like  a  fixed  star.  The  astronomer  Halley  says,  "  If  you  were 
to  condense  a  comet  down  to  the  thickness  of  the  ordinary  atmos- 
i'here,  it  would  not  fill  a  square  inch  of  space."  So  thin  is  a 
comet,  that  you  might  look  through  five  thousand  miles  of  it,  and 
just  as  easily  as  if  it  were  not  there.  It  is  well  to  be  trans 
parent,  brethren  ;  bur  i  hope  you  will  be  more  substantial  than 
most  of  the  comets  of  which  we  have  heard. 

Comets  come  with    great   regularity,  though  they  seem  to  be 

ery  irregular.     Halley  prophesied  that   the    comet   of    LG82,  of 

which  little  had  been  previously  known,  would  return  at  regular 

intervals  of  about  seventy-five  years.     lie  knew  that  he  would  not 


THE    SCIENCES    AS   SOURCES    OF    I  I.I 

live  to  see  its  reappearance;  but  h-  .••  the  Imp.-  tha- 

it   did    return,   his  prophecy  might   be  ivniemhered.      Various  as 
tronomers  were   looking  out  for  it.  and   they  IIO|MM!  it  mi-lit 
at    the  time   foretold,  because,   otherwise,   ignorant   peopl,-  would 
not  believe  in  astronomy.      Hut   tlic  comet  cam.-  Lark  all  riL' 
their  minds  \\viv  set  at  rest,  and  Halley's  prediction  wn 

Among  the  stories  concerning  comet-watching.  tJ,  that 

contains   an    illn>t  ration   and   a    lesson    al-o.      ••  M    -       ;,    \\ho    had 
acquired  the  name  of  'the  comet-hunter',  from  the  1111111!.. -r   In- 
discovered,  was  particularly  anxious  upon   t  he  ocea^im.      '' 
simplicity  of  character,  his  /eal  after  com 
in  the  oddest  manner.      While  attending  tin-  death-bed  , 
and  necessarily  absent  from   hi>  observatory,  the  di 
was  snatched  from  him  by  Montaigne  de   Lim»Lr«^.     Tin- 
grievous  blow.     A  visitor  began  to  offer  him  con-oiation  on  ac.-.nint 
of  his  recent  bereavement,   when    Mrssirr,    thinkin>:  oidy  of    the 
comet,  answered,  4  I    had    di>eo\vivd    twelvt- ;   alas.  t«»   he   robbt-.l  of 
the  thirteenth  by  that  Montaigne  ! '       lint   instantly  n-e.-llectin^ 
himself,  he  exclaimed,  4  Ah  !  cette   pauvre    feninie  1 '  and  went  on 
deploring  wife  and  comet  to<vther."      He  e\idently  lived  so  much 
in  the  heavens  that  he  forgot  his  wife;  and  if  science  can  tome- 
times  carry  a  man   away   from  all   the  triaU  of  this  mortal  life, 
surely   our  heavenly    life   ought  to   lift    us   nj.  above  all  the  dis 
tractions  and  cares  that  afflict  us. 

The    return    of    a  comet    is    frequently   announced   with 
Certainty.      This  paragraph   appeared  in  a  ni-w.s|.aji«-r:  —  •'  (  )n   the 
whole,  it  may  be  considered  as  tolerably  certain   that    the  comet 
will  become  visible  in  every  part  of  Kui'ope  about   the  latter  end  of 
August,    or    the    beginning    of    September    next.       It    will    nn^t 
probably  be  distinguishable  by  the  naked  eye.  like  a  star  of  the 
first  magnitude,  but  with   a  duller   light    than    that    of  a    planet, 
and  surrounded  with  a   pale  nebulosity,  which  will  .slightly  impair 
its  splendour.     On  the  night  of  the  7th  of  October,  the  c..m.-t  will 
approach    the   well-known    con-tellation    of   the    (ii 
between  that  and  the  llth,  it  will  pa->  directly  through  the 
conspicuous  stars  of  that  con>tellation.     TouanU  the  C!OM-  • 
vember,  the  comet    will    plunge  among  tin-   ra\ -^  of    the   ion,   and 
disappear,  and   not    issue    from    them,  on   tin-   other   MO!,-,  until    the 
end  of  December.     This   pro>pe<-tu->  of  the  movement.-,  of  a  body, 
invisible  at  the  time,  millions  of  miles  away,  is  nearly  as  drtii. 
the   early  ad\vrti>ements  of  coaching  bet\\e,-n    London  and    Kdin- 
burgh.     Let   us  now  place  the  0 


174  THE    SCIENCES   AS   SOURCES   OF    ILLUSTRATION. 

the  anticipations  of  science,  and  we  shall  find  that  science  has 
provrd  almost  absolutely  correct." 

Just  think  of  the  calculations,  gentlemen,  that  were  necessary, 
for,  though  a  comet  does  not  interfere  with  the  course  of  a  planet, 
a  planet  interferes  very  considerably  with  the  course  of  a  comet; 
so  that,  in  their  calculations,  the  astronomers  had  to  recollect  the 
track  in  which  the  comet  would  have  to  travel.  Thinking  of  him 
as  a  way-worn  traveller,  we  remember  that  he  will  have  to  go  by 
Neptune's  bright  abode,  and  Neptune  will  be  sure  to  give  him  a 
cup  of  tea ;  then  he  will  journey  on  as  far  as  Uranus,  and  put  up 
for  the  night  there ;  in  the  morning,  he  will  pay  an  early  visit  to 
Saturn,  and  he  will  stay  there  for  breakfast ;  he  will  dine  with 
Jupiter ;  by  and  by  he  will  reach  Mars,  and  there  will  be  sure  to 
6e  a  row  there ;  and  he  will  be  glad  when  he  gets  to  Venus,  and, 
of  course,  he  will  be  detained  by  her  charms.  You  will,  therefore, 
very  readily  see,  gentlemen,  that  the  calculations  as  to  the  return 
of  a  comet  are  extremely  difficult,  and  yet  the  astronomers  do 
estimate  the  time  to  a  nicety.  This  science  is  a  very  marvellous 
one,  not  only  for  what  it  reveals,  but  for  the  talent  which  it  brino-s 
out,  and  the  lessons  it  continually  teaches  us  about  the  wonderful 
works  of  our  great  Father. 

We  have  done  with  the  aolar  system,  and  even  with  those  inter 
lopers  which  come  to  us  every  now  and  then  from  far  remote 
systems,   for  a  comet,  I  suppose,  is  only  seen  for  a  month,  or  a 
week,  and  then  sometimes  does  not  reappear  for  hundreds  of  years 
Where   have  they  gone  all  that   while?     Well,  they  have  gone 
somewhere,  and  they  are  serving  the  purpose  of  the  God  who 
made  them,  I  dare  say ;  but,  for  my  own  part,  I  would  not  like  to 
be  a  comet  in  God's  system.     I  would  like  to  have  my  fixed  place, 
an.l  kcrj)  ..n  siiining  for  the  Lord  there.     I  have  lived  in  London 
for  a  good  many  years,  and  I  have  seen  many  c  mets  come  and  go 
during   that   time.     Oh,  the  great  lights  I    have  seen  rush  by! 
hey  have  gone  off  into  some  unknown  sphere,  as  comets  usually 
have  generally  noticed  that,  when  men  are  going  to  do  so 
much    more    than    everybody    else,    and    they   are    so  'amazingly 
>ous  over  it,  their  history  is  usually  pretty  accurately  described 

that  simple  simile  of  going  up  like  a  rocket,  and  coming  down 
like  a  stick. 

I  do  not  know  whether  yon  can,  in  imagination,  lean  over  the 

l|-'»<-nta  of  tins  little  solar  system,  and  see  what  there  is  beyond 

>  not  narrow  your  minds,  gentlemen,  to  a  few  hundred 


THE   SCIENCES    AS   SOURCES   OF   ILLUSTK  M  i 


millions  of  miles  I     If  you  look  out  f,,r  a  lo,,-  WAJ  indeed,  * 
begin  to  see  a  star.     I  should  only  IK-  uttering  meaningieM 

I  told  you  its  distance  from  us:  yet  there  an-  others,  of  those 
that  we  are  able  to  see,  that  are  nlm,,st  immeasurably  farther 
They  have  taken  a  deal  of  trouble  to  send  us  a  rav  of  liLrjlt 
vasl  distance,  to  inform  us  that  they  are  getti- 
that,  though  they  are  at  such  a  distance  from  us  ; 
themselves  as  best  they  can  in  our  ahse.. 

These  stars,  as  the  common  people  look  at   them,  to  be 

scattered  about  in  the  heavens  as  ire  Bay,  "anyhov  "  I  always 
admire  that  charming  variety;  and  I  am  'thankful  to  (Jod  that  he 
has  not  set  the  stars  in  straight  lines,  like  rows  .  fanns, 

Only  think,  brethren,  how  it  would  be  if  we  looked  up  at  night, 
and  >aw  the  stars  all  arranged  in  rows,  like  pins  on  a  paper  : 
the  Lord,  it  is  not  sol      He  just  took  a  handful  of  bright  worlds, 
and   scattered   them  about  the  sky,  and   they  dropped  into 
beautiful  positions,  so  that  people  say,  «  Then'  is  the  gn 
and,  "That  is  Charles's  Wain,"  and  every  countrvman  knows  the 
Reaping-hook.     Have  you  not  seen   it,   Brethren  1     Others  say, 
"That  is  the  Virgin,  and  that  is  the  Kam,  and  that  is  the  liull," 
and  so  on. 

I  think  that  naming  of  the  various  constellations  is  very  like  n 
good  deal  of  mystical  preaching  that  th.  re  is  nowadays.  Tin- 
preachers  say,  u  That  is  so-and-so,  and  that  is  so-and-so."  Well, 
perhaps  it  is  so  ;  but  I  do  not  see  it.  You  may  imagine  anything 
you  like  in  the  constellations  of  the  heavens.  I  have  pietim-d  a 
fortress  in  the  fire,  and  watched  it  being  built  up,  and  seen  little 
soldiers  come  and  pull  it  all  down.  Y..II  .-an  tee  anvthini:  in  the 
fire,  and  in  the  sky,  and  in'the  Hible,  if  you  like  to'  look  'for  it  in 
that  way;  you  do  not  see  it  in  reality,  it  is  onlv  a  freak  ot 
imagination.  There  are  no  bulls  and  bears  in  the  heavens.  , 
may  he  a  virgin,  but  >he  is  not  to  be  worshipped  :ls  the  IJ.Mnanists 
teach.  I  hope  you  all  know  the  pole-Mar  ;  you  on^ht  also  to  know 
the  pointers;  they  point  to  the  pole-star,  and  thai  is  jn-t  what  we 
ought  to  do,  to  direct  the  poor  slaves  of  sin  and  Satan  to  the  true 
Star  of  liberty,  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  .Jesus  Christ. 

Then    there    are    the    Pleiades;    almost  anybody   can   trl! 
where  they  are.     They  are  a  cluster  of  apparently  little 
they  are  intensely  bright.    They  teach  me  that,  it'  I  am  a  \vrv  little 
man,  I  must  try  to  be  very  bright  ;   it'  I  cannot  he  like  Aldebaran, 
or  sonie  of  the  brightest  g.-nis  of  the  -ky.  1  must  be  as  bright  as  I 
can  in  my  own   particular  sj.  here,  and    he  as   useful  th. 


ITi!  THE   SCIENCES   AS    SOURCES    OF   ILLUSTR \TION. 

were  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude.  Tlien,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
illobr,  they  look  up  to  the  Southern  Cross.  I  dare  say  one  of  our 
brethren  from  Australia  will  give  you  a  private  lecture  upon  that 
constellation.  It  is  very  beautiful  to  think  of  the  Cross  being  the 
guide  of  the  mariner ;  it  is  the  best  guide  anyone  can  have,  either 
this  side  of  the  tropics,  or  the  other. 

Beside  the  stars,  there  are  vast  luminous  bodies  which  are  called 
NEBULAE.  In  some  parts  of  the  heavens,  there  are  enormous 
masses  of  light-matter;  they  were  supposed  by  some  to  be  the 
material  out  of  which  worlds  were  made.  These  were  the 
lumps  of  mortar,  out  of  which,  according  to  the  old  atheistic 
theoiy,  worlds  grew  by  some  singular  process  of  evolution; 
but  when  Herschel  turned  his  telescope  upon  them,  he  very 
soon  put  the  nose  of  that  theory  out  of  joint,  for  he  discovered 
that  these  nebulae  were  simply  enormous  masses  of  stars,  such 
myriads  upon  myriads  of  miles  away,  that,  to  our  sight,  they 
looked  just  like  a  little  dust  of  light. 

There  are  many  wonderful  things  to  be  learned  about  the  stars, 
to  which  I  hope  you  will  give  your  earnest  attention  as  you  have 
the  opportunity.  Among  the  rest  is  this  fact,  that  some  stars  have 
ceased  to  be  visible  to  us.  Tycho  Brahe  said  that,  on  one  occasion 
he  found  a  number  of  villagers  looking  up  at  the  sky ;  and,  on 
asking  them  why  they  were  gazing  at  the  heavens,  they  told  him 
that  a  new  star  had  suddenly  appeared.  It  shone  brightly  for  a  few 
months,  and  then  vanished.  Many  times,  a  starry  world  has 
seemed  to  turn  red,  as  if  it  were  on  fire ;  it  has  apparently  burned, 
and  blazed  away,  and  then  disappeared.  Kepler,  writing  concern 
ing  such  a  phenomenon,  says  : — "  What  it  may  portend,  is  hard  to 
determine ;  and  thus  much  only  is  certain,  that  it  comes  to  tell 
mankind  either  nothing  at  all,  or  high  and  weighty  news,  quite 
beyond  human  sense  and  understanding."  In  allusion  to  the 
opinions  of  some,  who  explained  the  novel  object  bv  the  Epicurean 
doctrine  of  a  fortuitous  combination  of  atoms,  he  remarks,  with 
characteristic  oddity,  yet  good  sense,  "  I  will  tell  these  disputants, 
—my  opponents, — not  my  opinion,  but  my  wife's.  Yesterday, 
when  weary  with  writing,  and  my  rnind  quite  dusty  with  consider 
ing  these  atoms,  I  was  called  to  supper,  and  a  salad  that  I  had 
asked  for  was  set  before  me.  '  It  seems,  then/  said  I,  aloud, 
4  that  if  pe*t£f  dishes,  leaves  of  lettuce,  grains  of  salt,  drops  of 
water,  vinegar,  and  oil,  and  slices  of  egg,  had  been  flying  about  in 


Tin;    SCIENCES    40  SOURCES   <>K    [LLUBTBAT1  177 

the  air  from  all  eternity,  it  might  at   last    happen,  by  chan- 
there  would  come  a  Balad.1     •  res,1  savs  ,,1V  wife,  'but  a 
nice  or  well  dressed  as  this  which  I  bave  made  tW  you.1  " 

So  I  should  think  ;  and  if  the  fortuitous  combination  of  a- 
could  not  make  a  salad,  it  is  not  very  likely  that  tin  v  i 
a    world       I    once   asked    a    man.   who   said    that    the' world  was  a 

fortuitous  concourse  «,f  atoms,  «  Have  you  ever  chanced  to  have 
no  money,  and  to  be  away   where   you   knew  nobody  who  would 
give  you  a  dinner?"     lie  replied,  ••  Fes,  I   have,"     ••'  \V, -::.  t 
said  I,  "  did  it  ever  happen  t<>  you  that  a  fortuitous  CODCOO 
atoms  made  a  leg  of  mutton  for  you,  with  some  nice  hoiled  turnip-. 
and  caper  sauce,  for  your  dinner  !  "     "  No,"  he  said,  -  it  hat 
"Well,"  I  answered,  "a  leg  of  mutton,  at  any  rate,  even  with 
turnips  and  caper  sauce  included,  is  an  easier  thin-  to  mil 
one  of  these  worlds,  like  Jupiter  or  Venus." 

We  are  told,  in  the  Word  of  God,  that  one  star  diffnvth  fr..m 
another  star  in  glory;  yet  one  that  is  small  may  give  m«>re  li«rht 
to  us  than  a  larger  star  which  is  fart  her  away.  Somesl  A  hat  is 

called  variable,  they  appear  larger  at  one  time  than  anot  h>    .      \ 
in  the  head  of  Medusa,  is  of  this  kind.    \Vearetoldthat  ••  Th- 
at  the  brightest,  appears  of  the  second  magnitude,  and  remain- 
al.nut  two  days,  fourteen  hours.      Its  light  then  dimini-:      . 
rapidly,  that  in  three  and  a-half  hours  it  is  reduced  t«>  the  fourth 
magnitude.      It  wears  this  aspect  rather  more  than  fifteen  minutes, 
then    increases,  and  in  three  and  a-half  hum-   more  P6SUD 
former  appearance."     I  am   afraid   that    many  «.f   us   an-  variable 
stars  ;  if  we  do  sometimes  wax  dim,  it  will  be  well  if  we  regain  mir 
brightness  as  quickly  as  Algol  does.      Then  then-  are  thou-and-  of 
double  stars.     1  hope  that  you  will  each  get  ;i  wife  who  will  al\\av.s 
shine  with  you,  and  never  eclipse    v<>n,  for  a  double  star  ma\   bo 
very  bright  at  one    time,    and   sometime.-    be   eclipsed    alt"  — 
There  are  also  triple  -tai--,  or  sy-tem-.  and  <jiia<lrup 
there  are,  in  some  cases,  hundreds  or  thon-ands  all  spinning  round 
one    another,    and    ai'ound    their   central    Inminari.'-.       \V«'iiderful 
Combinations  <>f   glory  and    beauty  may  !•••  -.-en    in  t 
and    some   of   these  -tars   are    red,  -oiiie    hlu<\  some    \ell«iu,  all    t.i" 
Colours  of  the  rainbow  are  rej.n-seiiti-d   in  tlu-m.      It  would  If 
wonderful    to   live  in  one  «»f   them,   and   to    look    across    tin- 
and  -ee  all   the   gl.irii-s   «if   the    heavens    that    ('••>[    h  ,      <  >n 

the  whole,    however,  for    the  I     am  <piite   content  t«>  a'-idt- 

upon  this  little  planet,  e-pecially  as  I  am  nut  able   to  change 
another  horn,-,  until  (i«nl  so  wills  it. 

1.; 


APPENDIX   A. 


BOOKS  OF  ANECDOTES,  ILLUSTRATIONS,  &c.,  REVIEWED  IN  "THE 
SWORD  AND  THE  TROWEL",  AND  NOT  MENTIONED  IN  LECTURES 
V.  AND  VI.  {See  Introductory  Notes^  and  foot-note  on  page  88.) 


GRAY  (REV.  JAMES  COMPER),  and  CAREY  (REV.   C.  S.).     The    Class 
and  the  Desk.     Elliot  Stock.     4  vols.,  25.  each. 

An  established  favourite  with  Sunday-school  teachers.  The  busy 
teacher  will  find  here  plenty  of  terse  suggestions  that  will  expand  into 
lessons,  arid  references  to  other  books  that  will  help  in  their  exposition 
and  illumination. 

(.RAY    (REV.  JAMES    COMPER).     Topics  for  Preachers   and   Teachers. 
Elliot  Stock.     55. 

An  invaluable  book  for  all  teachers.  Full  of  illustrations,  and  abound 
ing  in  matter  for  explaining  and  enforcing  religious  truth.  We  are  glad 
to  find  the  author  of  that  capital  work,  The  Class  and  the  Desk,  using  his 
good  taste  and  extensive  knowledge  to  such  an  admirable  purpose  as  in 
the  book  before  us.  The  maps,  letterpress,  and  multitude  of  wood 
cuts  are  all  first-class.  No  words  of  ours  can  too  strongly  commend  it 
to  the  attention  of  our  readers. 

Rays  from  the  East ;  or,  Illustrations  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  derived 
principally  from  the  Manners  of  Eastern  Nations.  Religious  Tract 
Society.  6s.  (Out  of  print.)  Since  published  in  a  series  of  Books 
for  the  People,  id.  each. 

Beautifully  bound,  and  superabundantly  furnished  with  engravings,  this 
book  will  win  its  own  way.  It  is  growingly  difficult  to  find  anything 
new  in  the  form  of  illustrations  from  the  Bible,  seeing  that  so  many  have 
reaped  the  field  before ;  yet  the  author  of  this  volume  ....  has  been 
successful  in  bringing  forth  things  new  as  well  as  old.  We  owe  him 
thanks  for  a  most  attractive  and  instructive  compilation,  in  which  there 
is  no  affectation  of  language,  but  an  evident  aiming  at  simplicity. 
TJie  Note-Book,  a  Collection  of  Anecdotes  and  Illustrations  for  the  use 

of  Teachers.     Sunday  School  Union,     is.  6d.     (Out  of  print.) 
Not  a  very  good-looking  book  so  far  as  the  printer's  work  is  concerned, 

t  both  cheap  and  useful  ....     This  note-book  is  a  small  affair,  and 
lone  the  worse  for  that ;  it  contains  some  very  good  things,  and  is  well 
adapted  for  the  use  of  teachers  and  lay  preachers. 
The  Biblical  Treasury :  an  Illustrative  Companion  to  the  Bible,  for  the 

use  of  Sunday-school  Teachers,  Ministers,  and  Bible  Students.     Sunday 

bcnool  Union.     14  vols.,  2s.  each. 

Every  teacher,  without  a  single  exception,  should  possess  a  full  set  of 


v 


- 

Sunday  School  Union  has  ever  d.  "J,1^  :hi"8»  'he 

ad  file  of  the  great  army  of  Sunda>-  ^'S,r  luable  to 


- 

be  „  „ 
'" 


no 

will  amuse  and  interest  mo  t  r'ade       ?!"'  '"  *  h 
for    illustrations,    but    »S    il  '"^  "M"  *"'  '«  " 


res    mo  t  rade 

for    illustrations,    but    »S    il      £r  ^cn  7  ^'"V^  "M"  *"'  '«  " 
cyclopaedias  will  l.ave  no  need  of  t  h      o 
favoured  will  do  well  to  procure  it  '          1OSC  who  are  not  «> 


°' 

pages  are  encompassed  with  fflSrthl^SSi'lS1 

ce' 


passages   quoted   are   masses   of  krs,  ceP's,  and  many  of  the 

altogether  a  live  book,  and  a  very  Sifulone      "'   """  If   " 

BALFOUR  (THOMAS  A.  G 


^ 

5 


-     -s 

,,,, 

MOODY  (DwicHT  L.).     ^rnw,  and  AnecJota.     \V,th  a  sketch  of  his 
early  hfe,  by  JOHN  LOBB.     Nicholson  and  Co.     it^s£^19!)T 

from6  °n^eSe  Illustrations  are  0"Kinal,  and  Oth-  ,)rrowed 

from  well-known  sources  and  B  ?  fi™ 

Mr.  Moody  never  scrupled  to 

good  he  appropriated  ;  and  be  u,,  (jultc  right  r  « 

Mr.  hobb  has  picked  out  the  plums  from  the  puddmg,  we  sec  some  o 
our  own  among  them,  and  are  glad  th,  ,  ,vdl  u^  .  but  ^^ 


180  APPENDIX   A. 

great  many  of  Mr.  Moody's  own  growth,  which  ministers  of  the  gospel 
must  take  care  to  preserve  for  future  use.  This  is  a  wise  selection  of 
pithy  bits  and  live  stories,  such  as  wake  men  up,  and  keep  them 

,  too. 
BARDSLKY  (REV.  J.  W.,  M.A.).     Illustrative  Texts  and  Texts  Illustrated. 

Nisbet  and  Co.     53. 

Thtre  was  no  need  for  Mr.  Bardsley  to  apologise,  or  think  his  illustra 
tions  ephemeral ;  the  fact  is,  that  many  a  preacher  and  teacher  will 
rejoice  over  his  ninety-and-two  portions  as  one  that  findeth  great  spoil. 
The  more  of  such  suggestive  books,  the  better. 

PHILLIPS  (JOHN  RICHARDSON).  Remarkable  Providences  and  Proofs  of 
a  Divine  Relation;  with  Thoughts  and  Facts  for  the  Weak  in  Faith, 
the  Doubter,  and  the  Infidel.  Partridge  and  Co.  ys.  6d.  (Out  of 
print.) 

A   collection    of    most    remarkable    facts    gathered   from    all    sources. 
Readers  cannot  fail  to  be   borne  along  the  stream   of  interest  which 
flows  through  these  pages. 
Anecdotes  for  the  Family  and  Social  Circle.     Partridge  and  Co.     33.  6d- 

(Out  of  print.) 

The  book  is  tastefully  bound,  but  the  stories  are  too  much  worn.  We 
have  enough  collections  of  stale  anecdotes,  we  should  be  glad  of  a  few 
fresh  ones.  Still,  there  are  many  to  whom  the  incidents  will  be  quite 
novel,  and  such  will  have  their  money's  worth  if  they  purchase  this 
handsome  book. 

VAUX  (REV.  J.  E.,  M.A.).  The  Preachers  Storehouse;  a  Collection  of 
Pithv  Sayings  and  Choice  Passages  on  Religious  and  Moral  Subjects. 
G.  J.  Palmer,  32,  Little  Queen  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  ys.  6d. 
The  plan  of  this  "  Storehouse  "  is  good,  but  we  do  not  think  that  the  com 
piler  has  selected  the  stores  so  well  as  he  might  have  done.  They  are 
rather  a  mixed  medley,  and  there  is  not  enough  of  the  gracious  element 
in  them  to  please  us.  Still,  for  a  High  Churchman,  the  selection  of 
extracts  is  wonderfully  Catholic,  and  the  result  must  be  helpful  to  young 
beginners  in  the  ministry.  Upon  useful  theological  subjects,  pithy  quo 
tations  are  given,  consisting  of  proverbs,  metaphors,  and  expositions  : 
these  will  supply  the  preacher  with  many  a  fresh  thought  and  striking 
phrase. 

lir.RTRAM  (REV.  R.  A.).     A  Dictionary  of  Poetical  Illustrations.     R. 
1).  l)ickinson.     125.  6d. 

One  of  the  most  useful  books  a  minister  can  possess Even  if  a 

man  does  not  quote  poetry  in  his  sermons,  it  is  always  helpful  for  him 
to  know  what  the  great  bards  have  said  upon  his  subject.     There  are 
certainly  better  collections  than  this;  but  it  is  a  notable  addition  to 
those  which  have  gone  before. 
HI-.RTK  \M   (RKV.  R.  A.).     A  Homiletic  Encyclopedia  of  Illustrations  in 

Theology  and  Morals.     R.  D.  Dickinson.      125.  6d. 
Tliis  strikes  us  as  being  a  very  valuable  compilation,  such  as  might  take 
a  lifetime  for  a  man  to  form  for  himself.     It  will  be  a  golden  treasury  to 
M  who  know  how  to  use  it  discreetly  ;  but  it  will  be  of  still  more 


4PFBNDQ     v. 

value  to  those  who  are  led  by  its  example  to  attempt  the  production  of 
commonplace-books  for  themselves.  Mr.  Bertram  mus  have  token 
great  pains  and  exercised  much  holy  industry,  in  collecting  the  m 

LLa^Tadi       PharC  h,°re  carefull>— ,,-d  and  placed*  under 
separate  heads.      I  he  volume  is  an  important  addition  to  a  : 

NEIL  (REV.  JAMES  M.  A.).  Rays  from  the  R<ah, 

of  Plant  Life.     Lang  Neil  and  Co.,  Chum-cry  Lane,     2S.  6d. 
This  is  a  book  after  our  own  heart.     It  Bathers  from   trees  and  flowers 
facts  wherewith  to  set  forth  moral  and  spiritual  truth.     This  is  t! 
use  of  Nature.     It  is  reading  one  of  the  works  of  the  Great  Author  by 
the  light  of  another,  comparing  utterance  with  utterance. 
HOOD  (REV.  E.  PAXTON).     The  World  of  Moral  *„,/  Religion*  Ant, 

Hodder  and  Stoughton.     6s. 

This  is  a  new  and  cheap  edition  of  Mr.  Hood's  remarkable  collection  of 
incidents.  We  long  ago  perused  these  odd,  piquant,  and  notable 
stories,  and  we  were  greatly  amused  ;  but  we  cannot  say  that  wc 
thought  much  of  the  production  so  far  as  the  usefulness  or  even  the 
religiousness  of  some  of  the  stories  is  concerned ;  for  certain  of  the 
anecdotes  should  have  been  suppressed.  Our  friend  could  have  done 
much  better  than  collect  such  "  a  universe  of  undigested  and  unorganised 
anecdote."  Still,  having  growled  our  growl,  we 'are  bound  to  acid  that 
we  should  have  been  very  sorry  to  have  missed  either  The  World  of 
Anecdote,  or  The  World  of  Religious  Anecdote,  with  which  we  i. 
beguiled  many  a  pleasant  interval  of  leisure. 

LONG   (REV.  J.).     Eastern    Proverbs    and  Emblems   Illustrating    Old 
Truths.     Triibner  and  Co.     6s. 

This  book  contains  a  large  number  of  proverbs  which  have  not  hitherto 
entered   into  our  western   currency,   and  the  emblems  are  frequently 
beautiful  and  useful  ;  still,  it  is  badly  put  together,   and   the  matter  is 
not  always  appropriate  to  the  subject  which  it  is  intended  to  illust: 
Here  we  have  all  the  makings  of  a  good  book,  but,  for  want  of  a  little 
tact,  the  work  does  not  come  out  from  the  author's  hand  in  so  com] 
a  form  as  it  might  have  done.     We  feel  indebted  to  the  writer  for  n 
new  symbols  and  sayings,  and   if  he  will   use   the  pruning-knife  when 
bringing  out  a  new  edition,  his  book  will  become  a  standard  work. 

PIKE   (RICHARD).     Remarkable  Religious  Anecdotes.     Derby:  \Vi' 

and  Ellis,      i 

These  anecdotes  are  most  of  them  fresh  and  striking,  and  we  have  m- 
joyed  their  perusal.  The  little  book  is  really  no-  nh. 

HOYT  (J.  K.)  AND  WARD    (ANNA   L.).      The  Cychfiadia  of  Practical 
Quotation^  English  and  Latin,  with  an  A;  '  Proverb 

R.  D.  Dickinson,    izs.  6d. 

A  very  useful  book  for  a  literary  man,  to  whom  the  copious  index  will 
be  a  great  boon.  Its  production  has  cost  much  labour,  and  it  will,  in 
consequence,  save  labour  to  those  who  use  it.  I  v  called 

"practical",  since  it  is  not  for  show,  but  for  real  work.  In  this  'respect 
it  excels  all  other  quotation  books  wbiich  have  hitherto  come  under  our 


notice. 


1«2  APPENDIX   A. 

NYE  (J.  L.).    Anecaotes  on  Bible  Texts.     Sunday  School  Union.     9  vols. 

(New  Testament.)     is.  each. 

May  the  compiler  be  encouraged  to  illustrate  every  book  of  the  Bible  in 
this  fashion  !  Mr.  Nye  is  doing  great  service  to  all  teachers  and  preachers. 
Some  of  his  anecdotes  will  be  well  known  to  his  readers ;  but,  as  a 
whole,  they  are  as  fresh  as  they  are  useful.  Who  buys  these  shilling's- 
worths  gets  good  bargains. 
PROSSER  (ELEANOR  B.).  Fables  for  "  You"  With  Illustrations. 

"  Home  Words  "  Office,  Paternoster  Square.     25.  6d. 

We  feel  deeply  grateful  to  Mrs.  Prosser  for  these  fables.  She  has  not 
occupied  time  in  giving  the  moral  of  each  story,  but  has  made  every 
one  so  plain  that  it  tells  its  own  lesson.  (See  also  page  108). 

The  Voice  of  Wisdom.     A    Treasury  of  Moral   Truths  from  the  Best 

Authors.     Selected  by  J.  E.     Edinburgh  :   Nimmo  and  Co.     2s.  6d. 

(Out  of  print.) 

A  collection  of  extracts,  proverbs,  etc.,  arranged  alphabetically  under 
certain  subjects.  We  do  not  think  the  selection  is  either  the  best  or 
the  worst  that  could  be  made.  We  do  not  see  what  end  the  compiler 
had  in  view,  for  one  could  hardly  make  much  use  of  the  brief  passages 
which  he  has  arranged.  Yet  he  has  at  least  shown  that,  out  of  the  old 
fields  cometh  all  the  new  corn,  and  out  of  the  old  books  cometh  all  the 
new  matter  which  men  learn  ;  even  as  Chaucer  told  us  long  ago.  The 
quotations  are  many  of  them  quite  fresh,  though  others  are  as  old  as 
Egyptian  mummies.  Together,  they  make  up  a  treasury  which  many  a 
man  might  feel  rich  in  possessing,  though  there  are  far  better  volumes 
of  the  same  order. 
HOOD  (REV.  E.  PAXTON).  The  World  of  Proverb  and  Parable,  with 

Illustrations  from  History,  Biography,  and  the  Anecdotal  Table-talk  of 

all  Ages.     R.  D.  Dickinson.      55.  6d. 

This  huge  volume  contains  a  flowing  flood  of  stories  and  a  mass  of 
information  as  to  the  sources  where  more  of  the  same  sort  may  be 
found.  .  .  .  He  who  purchases  this  mountain  of  proverbs  and 
parables  will  have  a  mine  of  wealth  for  his  money.  .  .  .  We  are 
in  justice  forced  to  add  that  we  have  made  gallant  attempts  to  read  this 
book  through,  but  have  found  it  heavy  work.  It  is  a  wonderful  book ; 
but  the  author  does  not  take  pains  enough  with  his  materials  when  he 
has  collected  them.  After  having  said  so  much,  we,  with  unabated 
earnestness,  commend  this  voluminous  work  to  those  who  want  striking 
things,  and  know  how  to  use  them. 

MACLAREN  (REV.  ALEXANDER,   D.D.).      Pictures  and  Emblems,  being 

Illustrations  from  his  Sermons.     "  Christian  Commonwealth  "  Office, 

73,  Ludgate  Hill.     55. 

This  beloved  author  needs  no  letters  of  commendation  to  our  readers. 
He  hath  dust  of  gold.     Even  his  leaf  shall  not  wither.     Here  we  have 
a  wealth  of  symbol  and  emblem  which  cannot  be  surpassed. 
Scientific  Illustrations  and  Symbols;  Moral  Truths  Mirrored  in  Scientific 

Facts.     By  a   Barrister   of  the    Honourable   Society   of  the    Inner 

Temple.    R.  D.  Dickinson,     ys.  6d. 
The  idea  which  is  here  wrought  out  is  a  rich  one,  and  will  be  further 


APPEM'IX      A. 


taken  up  by  others.     The  scientific  facts  selected  are  many  of  .hem 
high  y   illustrative      The   man   who    could   not    find    metaphor,   and 
emblems  by  the  aid  of  this  book,  must  be  dull  indeed.     This  capiu 
volume  ought  to  have  a  large  sale. 

ADAMSON  (REV.  WILLIAM,  D.D.).     Thi  Religious  Anecdote,  of  Scotland. 
Glasgow:    T.  D.  Morison.     55. 

A  fine  collection  of  fine  old  stories,  such  as  could  only  have  been  told 
in    the    land    of    Calvinism    and    robust    manhood.      Wc    know 
of  the  narratives;  indeed,  they  must  be  numbered  with  thrice  told  t. 
....     But  many  of  them  will  be  new  to  southerners  though   familiar 
enough    to   our    northern    brethren.     Dr.    Adamson    has    comi.iU 
valuable  and  thoroughly  lively  book. 

THOMSON  (W.  M.,  D.D.)     The  Land  and  the  Book.     Nelson  and  Sons. 
3  vols.,  2  is.  each. 

This    is    far    ahead    of    all    other    publications    the    book    upon    the 
Holy   Land  and  its   surrounding   territories.     Our   obligator 
Thomson  can  never  be  fully  set  forth  ;  he  has  observed  carefully,  : 
wisely,   and  recorded  patiently.     You  feel  at  home  with  him,  he  r 
comes    the    learned    professor    over   you.     .     .     .     Messrs.    \ 
edition,  in   three  handsome  volumes,   is  a  prize  for  w  hit  h  a  UK.; 
slender  means  may  wisely  enter  upon  a  struggle  of  self  denial,  ccon< 
and  special  industry.     The  store  of  suggestion  and  illustration   h< 
laid  up  will  never  be  exhausted  in  any  one  life-time, 

(The  original  work  entitled,  The  Land  and  the  l^ook,  was  published 
in  one  volume  at  75.  6d.,  and  was  therefore  in  price  more  suitable 
"a  man  of  slender  means."    It  is  still  procurable,  both  new  and  second 
hand.     Some  booksellers  offer  the  three-volume  edition  for  315.  6d.) 
Anecdotes  Illustrative  of  Old  Testament  Texts.     Hodder  and  Stougl, 
Very  good.     We  have   here  a  very  fair  admixture  of  new  anecdotes, 
together  with  certain  old  ones  which  are   inevitable.     (  '.  .<>d  mm 
worth  at  six  shillings.  ...     Get  it.     There  is  a  companion   volume, 
entitled,  Anecdotes  Illustrative  of  New  Testament  '1 
MARSH  (  REV.  F.  E.).    Similes  of  the  Christian  Life.    J.  F.  Shaw  and  Co. 
A  preacher  or  teacher  would  think  of  a  series  of  sermons  or  addresses 
as  he  read  this   book.     It  is  not  so  much  what  it  contains  as  what  it 
suggests  which  makes  this  a  desirable  purchase  ;  yet  it  is  good  in  its 
own  way. 

Emblems  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Equally  gracious,  and  at  the  same   \  • 
namely,  is.  6d. 

Thirty  Thousand  Thoughts,  being  R.\tr  .  '  mprehensive  C: 

of  Religious  and  Allied  Topics.     Edited   by  the  \  H.  1  >.  M. 

SPENCE,  M.A.,  Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  KXH.I,   M..V,  and 
NEIL,   M.A.    Nisbet   and  Co.     6  vols.,  h.     v.\Ir.  i 

has  published  an  unabridged  reprint  at  255.,  carriage  \ 
Even  unto  this  last  we  are  unable  to  see  the  usefulness  of  the  plan  of 
this  work.     The  scheme  was  laid  down  at  the  commi  n<  cmcnt,  but  the 
result  is  that  the  extracts  are,  to  our  mind,  more  in  a  muddle  than  they 
would  have  been  had  there   been  no  plan  at  all.      M  do  not 


}  >  1  APPENDIX   A. 

judge  the  extracts  themselves  to  be  so  excessively  valuable  as  to  be 
worth  putting  into  huge  volumes.  Some  of  them  are  surpassingly 
precious ;  but  more  are  excellent  common-places,  and  nothing  beyond. 
MAC  KEY  (REV.  H.  O.)-  One  Thousand  New  Illustrations  for  the  Pulpit, 

Platform,  and  Class.     R.  D.  Dickinson.     35.  6d. 

Our  friend,  Mr.  Mackey,  has  collected  a  thousand  illustrations,  and  he 
justly  calls  them  "  new."  He  has  not  occupied  space  by  working  out 
the  moral  of  the  fact  which  he  quotes ;  but  he  indicates,  by  a  brief 
heading,  the  subject  which  he  intended  to  illuminate.  We  are  glad  to 
see  one  of  our  rising  ministry  addicting  himself  to  searching  out  striking 
things. 
UAXENDALE  (REV.  WALTER).  Dictionary  0/6,330  Anecdotes,  Incidents, 

and  Illustrative  Facts,  Selected  and  Arranged  for  the  Pulpit  and  the 

Platform.     R.  D.  Dickinson.     125.  6d. 

There  are  many  cyclopaedias  of  anecdote,  and  they  are  all  of  them 
useful.  Some  of  them  are  pre-eminently  serviceable,  and  we  would  not 
say  a  word  in  their  disparagement,  but  quite  the  reverse.  Of  course, 
each  compiler  has  the  advantage  of  his  predecessors,  because  he  can 
use  the  pick  of  their  stuff,  and  add  thereto  his  own  gatherings.  It  is 
not  surprising,  therefore,  that  Mr.  Baxendale  should  have,  in  some 
points,  surpassed  other  excellent  collectors  and  arrangers  of  illustra 
tions  ;  but  we  certainly  think  that  he  has  done  so.  Taking  this  book 
for  all  in  all,  it  is  the  best  of  its  kind.  The  price,  as  Mr.  Dickinson 
offers  it,  is  very  low  for  so  large  a  volume ;  and  as  for  the  quality,  it  is 
very  high  for  so  immense  a  mass  of  matter.  All  preachers,  speakers, 
and  teachers,  who  choose  to  avail  themselves  of  Mr.  Baxendale's 
services,  will  find  themselves  greatly  the  better  for  them. 

EXELL  (REV.  JOSEPH  S.).     The  Bible  Illustrator ;  or,  Anecdotes,  Similes, 

Emblems,  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  Historical, 

on   the    Verses   of  the   Bible.     (In   progress.     Intending   purchasers 

should  apply  to  Messrs.  Nisbet  and  Co.  for  list  of  volumes  issued.) 

Plenty  of  matter  for  your  money.     We  never  remember  to  have  seen 

such  solid  pages ;   and  in  small  type,   too !      .     .     .     The  books  are 

literally  crammed.     They  remind    us  of  trusses   of  compressed    hay. 

Portions  from  sermons,  commentaries,  and  all  sorts  of  books,  are  used 

as  expositions  on  the  various  verses     ....     and  they  have  been, 

upon  the  whole,  right  well  selected  and  arranged.     Mr.  Exell  has  a 

great  gift  in  that  direction,  and  he  uses  it  with   marvellous  diligence. 

This  begging,  borrowing,  and  stealing  of  the  thoughts  of  authors  has 

become  quite  an  art. 

CHRISTY  (ROBERT).  Proverbs,  Maxims,  and  Phrases  of  all  Ages. 
Classed  Subjectively,  and  Arranged  Alphabetically.  T.  Fisher  Unwin. 
These  are  two  splendid  volumes.  Students  of  proverbial  lore  will  bless 
the  laborious  compiler.  Chiefly  is  he  to  be  praised  for  his  system  of 
arrangement,  which  is  unique,  and  practically  useful.  .  .  .  We 
felt  half  sorry  to  see  these  volumes,  because  we- are  preparing  a  similar 
work*  ....  and  we  were  afraid  that  we  were  cut  out  of  our  market ; 

*  Th*  Salt- Cellar.    Being  a  Collection  of  Proverbs,  toother  with  Homely  Nctes  thereon. 
By  C.  11.  sptKGEuN.     i'as>bu»oie  and  Alabaster.     2  vols,,  33.  6d.  each. 


AI'IM.NhlX    A.  ]s;, 

but  OUTS  is  a  different  thing  altogether,  and  will  suit,  by  its  price,  a  , 
of  persons  who  could  not  afford  a  guinea  for  these  two  volumes   whic 
are,    nevertheless,    exceedingly    well    worth   the    money,     We  'hear  Hy 
recommend  this  publication,  and  wish  it  a  large  sale  ;  it  detcrra  it 


(  RKV   J    F.  B.,  B.A.).  Hundnd  Facts  and  Simile 

Sermons  and  Addresses.      1  1  odder  and  Stoughton.     6s. 
A  collection  of  illustrations  wh,<  h  will  be  useful  to  those  who  know 
how  to  weave  them   into  their  instructions.     .     .     .     Mr  Tinlinc  has 
made  a  fine  selection.     Many  of  the  similes   will  be  quite  new  to 
general  reader  ;  and  they  are  so  well  arranged  and  indexed,  that  their 
value  for  practical  purposes  will  be  greatly  enhanced.     This  is  a  good 
ministers  book. 

FULLER-TON  (VV.  Y.).     Gofs  Jewels:   Twelve  Chapters  on  the  . 

and  Glory  of  God's  People,  with    many  Illustrations  and  InaJents, 

Drawn  from  the  Science  «//,</  History  of  Precious  Stones  and  Pearls. 

Passmore  and  Alabaster,      is.  6d. 

There  are  several  books  upon  the  subject  of  precious  stones,  in  which 
these  choice  things  are  made  to  flash  with  the  light  of  holy  instri:, 
but  this  little  work   is  equal  to  any  one  of  them.     It   is   replete  iritl 
terest.     Everything  about  jewels  which  can  be  used  for  sacred 
turned  to  account.     Mr.  Kullerton  has  not  hammered  out  gold  leaf,  but 
he  has  given  solid  gold,—  nuggets  of  it.     He  has  so  many  illustrations 
that  he  does  not  linger  long  on  any  one,  but  passes  on  to  the  IK 
the  next.      Having  studied  this  subject  carefully,  and  having  U-, 
upon  it  at  considerable  length,  we  are  in  the  position   of  a  qualified 
judge,  and  we  award  a  first  prize  to  this  very  beautiful  bo< 
MILLIGAN    (REV.    JAMES,    D.I).).      Aphorisms,    J/,.  /    Short 

Sentences.     Edinburgh  :  Oliphant  and  Co.     35.  net. 
Collectors  of  aphorisms  should  add  this  to  their  treasures.     Among 
the  pithy  sayings  are  some  of  surpassing  excellence. 
GEIKIE  (REV.  CUNNINGHAM,   D.I).;.      The   Holy  t  and  and  the  Bible. 

A  Book  of  Scripture  Illustrations  Gathered  in  Palestine.     Cassell  and 

Co.     2  is. 

A  noble  addition  to  our  books  on  the  Holy  Land.     The  author  tells 
us  that  he  visited  Palestine  with  the  intention  of  gathering  illustrations 
of  the  Scriptures  from  the  land  which  is  "a  natural  commentary  on 
the    Sacred    Writings   which  it  has  given  to  us  ."     The  whole    of   the 
Palestine  of   the    Uible  ....  is  laid  under  contribution  in  ordei 
obtain   illustrations  of   the    Old  and    New   Testaments  .....     The 
volume  is  copiously  and  tastefully  illustrated. 
KNIGHT  (ALFRED  E.).     Gleanings  from  Bible  Lands:  Orer  500  Pas 

sages  of  Scripture  Illustrated.     Passmore  and  Ah.1  n,  6d. 

This  is  a  book   which  deserves  a  large  circulation.     A   minister  with 
small  means  would  get  the  gist  of  a  library  upon  the  East  in  this  ha: 
volume.     A  teacher  would  find  both  themes  and  illustrations.      A 
vout  reader  would  feel   himself  instructed  and  pleased.     The  author 
calls  his  book  "gleanings",  but  in  it  we  find  golden  sheaves. 

NFIL(REV.  JAMI-S,  M.A.).     Pictured  Palestine.     Nisbet  and  Co.    73.  6d. 
Mr.    Neil's     residence    in    Jerusalem,    where    he    was    In<  umbcnt   (4 


186  APPENDIX   A. 

Christ  Church,  enabled  him  to  gather  a  store  of  stories  illustrative  of 
Bible  incidents,  and  these  are  told  in  a  most  interesting  manner  in 
Pictured  Palestine;  while  Mr.  James  Clark,  Mr.  Henry  A.  Harper,  and 
other  artists,  have  enriched  the  volume  with  pictorial  illustrations  of  the 
scenes  described. 

The  Cyclopcedia  of  Nature  Teachings.  With  an  introduction  by  HUGH 
MACMILLAN,  LL.D.  Elliot  Stock.  75.  6d. 

A  valuable  book  for  lovers  of  the  work  of  grace  as  illustrated  in  nature. 
In  this  volume,  hill  and  dale,  mountain  and  valley,  air,  earth,  fire,  and 
water,  are  all  brought  into  requisition  to  illustrate  the  truths  of  the  Word 
of  God.  Students  and  ministers  will  delight  in  this  cyclopaedia,  and 
give  it  a  prominent  place  upon  their  book-shelves. 
BULLOCK  (REV.  CHARLES,  B.D.).  Matches  that  Strike.  "  Home 
Words  "  Office,  Paternoster  Square.  55. 

This  is  a  book  of  anecdotes,  and  a  capital  collection  it  is,  too.  We 
have  long  praised  Mr.  Bullock  as  an  excellent  book-maker,  but  we  did 
not  know  that  he  had  become  a  match-maker.  Some  of  the  wood  of 
which  the  "  matches  "  are  made  was  cut  from  what  Americans  call 
"chestnut"  trees,  but  they  will  "strike"  just  as  well  as  if  they  had 
never  been  used  before ;  and  they  will  help  to  light  up  many  a  dull 
discourse,  or  brighten  an  otherwise  gloomy  Temperance  address. 

PROCTOR  (REV.  F.  B.,  M.A.).  Classified  Gems  of  Thought.  Hodder 
and  Stoughton.  75.  6d. 

This  new  and  cheap  edition  of  an  apt  and  useful  treasury  of  exposition 
and  illustration  will  be  a  boon  to  many  a  preacher.  It  is  stimulative 
and  suggestive,  without  being  exhaustive.  The  best  and  greatest 
writers  are  quoted,  and  yet  the  usual  routine  passages  are  avoided. 

SPURGEON  (C.  H.).  What  the  Stones  Say ;  or,  Sermons  in  Stones. 
Fully  illustrated.  With  Notes  by  J.  L.  KEYS,  and  Introduction  by 
Pastor  THOMAS  SPURGEON.  London  :  "  Christian  Herald"  Publishing 
Co.,  Tudor  Street,  E.G.  is.  and  25. 

Mr.  Keys  was  the  privileged  possessor  of  a  verbatim  report  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  notable  lecture  on  Sermons  in  Stones,  and  he  wisely  decided 
to  publish  it.  In  very  copious  Notes,  he  has  inserted  extracts  from 
various  works  upon  stones  such  as  he  believes  the  beloved  lecturer  would 
have  been  likely  to  incorporate  into  his  work  if  he  had  been  spared  to 
see  it  printed.  All  Mr.  Spurgeon's  friends  should  purchase  this  little 
volume  ;  the  many  illustrations  with  which  it  is  adorned  add  greatly  to 
its  value. 

MARSHALL  (WILLIAM).  Nature  as  a  Book  of  Symbols.  Hodder  and 
Stoughton.  33.  6d. 

This  book  is  written  in  a  reverent  spirit,  and  with  distinct  regard  to 
literary  form.  We  hoped,  from  the  opening  pages,  to  find  it  more 
intensive  in  character  than  it  proved  to  be ;  the  thought  is  spread  out 
too  widely.  Perhaps  we  allowed  expectation  too  readily  to  soar ;  but 
certainly  there  was  the  early  promise  of  something  more  abstruse  than  is 
forthcoming.  Still,  no  exception  can  be  taken  to  the  general  quality  of 
the  work.  Revelation  is  honoured,  the  Incarnate  Word  exalted,  and 


I',. 


Nature  invariably  contemplated  through  a  spiritual  lens.     The  book  is 
one  for  the  heart,  and  deserves  a  large  circulation. 

MOODIE    (WILLIAM).     Tools  Jor   Teachers;    a  Collection   of  At: 

Illustrations,    Legends,    etc.,   for    Teachers    of  Sunday  -schools,    BibU 
Classes,  and  Boys'  Brigades.      Elliot  Stock.     55. 

Illustrations   are   indispensable   "tools   for  teachers"  who  would   be 
workmen   needing  not  to  be  ashamed,  rightly  dividing  the   Word  of 
Truth.     Mr.  Moodie,  in  his  Sunday-school  work,  found  the  nece 
such  tools;  and  having  collected  a  large  and  admirable  a- 
them,  he  has  now  made   them  available  for  other  workers.      V. 
the  anecdotes  here  published   have  already  appeared  in  one  or  other  of 
the  many  cyclopaedias  ;   but   there  are  sufficient  new  ones  to  give  this 
compilation  a  distinct  character  of  its  own. 


APPENDIX    B. 


C.  H.  SPURGEON'S  BOOKS  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  EXTRACTS,  FOR 
THE  USE  OF  PREACHERS,  SUNDAY-SCHOOL  TEACHERS,  AND  OTHIR 
CHRISTIAN  WORKERS. 

THE    FOLLOWING    VOLUMES  ARE  ALL    PUBLISHED    BY  MESSRS.    PA.- 

AND  ALABASTER,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  LONDON. 


The  Salt-Cellars.  Being  a  Collection  of  Proverbs,  toother  with  Homely 
Notes  thereon.  In  2  vols.,  35.  6d.  each,  or  beautifully  bound  in  1-  reach 
Morocco,  Limp,  75.  6d.  each. 

"The  'Salt-Cellars' might  be  safely  commended,  even  to  thai  vague 
and  not  very  earnest  personage,  the  general  reader.  Let  him  open  the 
books  where  he  may,  he  will  find  something  to  make  him  stop  and 
read." — Daily  Neivs. 

"This  is  a  book  to  be  kept  close  at  hand  for  a  spare  five  minutes; 
there  is  not  a  sentence  in  it  which  does  not  fulfil  the  requirement  of  the 
motto  on  the  title-page,  by  having  '  shortness,  sense,  and  salt.'  The 
arrangement  of  the  matter  is  masterly  ;  while  the  get-up  of  the  volume 
reflects  great  credit  on  the  publishers." — Christian  Leader. 

"  The  proverbs  are  excellent,  but  Mr.  Spurgeon's  comments  are 
perfect.  They  are  sententious,  show  a  profound  knowledge  of  human 
nature,  are  often  humorous,  always  on  the  side  of  right,  and  not 
uncommonly  more  proverbial  than  the  proverbs  themselves." — Church 
Review. 

"  Proverbial  wisdom  is  expounded  and  applied  with  remarkable  skill, 
and  the  work  may  help  some  preachers  to  season  their  discourses  out  of 
its  supplies." — The  Record. 

"These  proverbs  and  quaint  sayings  may  be  of  |  ice  in 

sermons  and  platform  addresses.  1'reat  hers  and  speakers  would  do 
well  to  make  a  judicious  use  of  them." — British  Weekly. 


188  APPENDIX   B. 

Feathers  for  Arrows  ;  or,  Illustrations  for  Preachers  and  Teachers,  from 

my  Note  Book.     Cloth,  25.  6d.     (See  Lecture  V.,  page  88.) 
11  The  work  covers  a  wide  range  of  subjects  ;  the  metaphors  are  always 
striking  and  frequently  brilliant,  while  the  truths  which  they  illustrate 
are  such  as  have  always  formed  the  staple  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  discourses. 
A  choicer  collection  of  illustrations  we  do  not  know." — Freeman. 

"  The  collection  is  very  varied,  but  all  bearing  on  the  highest  themes, 
and  fitted  to  help  the  highest  purpose  of  the  Christian  ministry.  There 
is  an  admirable  index  of  subjects,  and  another  of  texts." — Evangelical 
Magazine.  ^ 

Illustrations  and   Meditations ;    or,  Flowers  from  a  Puritan's   Garden. 
Distilled  and  Dispensed  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

"The  volume  before  us  is  full  of  helpful  suggestions  and  beautiful 
illustrations.  Nowhere  have  we  met  with  more  characteristics  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  mind  and  heart  than  in  these  illustrations.  The  book 
ought  to  be  immensely  popular,  as  it  doubtless  will  be." — Christian 
Commonwealth. 

"  It  is  a  Garden  full  of  beautiful  and  useful  things,  which  will  yield 
its  delights  to  many  classes  of  readers." — Christian  World. 


Sermons  in   Candles.     Illustrations    which    may   be  found  in    Common 
Candles.     Stiff  Covers,  is. ;  Cloth,  Gilt  Edges,  25. 

"  For  originality  and  quaintness,  for  some  smartly-stated  views  on 
religious  truth,  this  little  work  stands  unsurpassed.  The  Lectures  are 
unique." —  Freeman. 

"  It  is  needless  to  say  that  tine  Lectures  are  full  of  illuminating  grace 
and  wisdom,  and  are  quite  monumental  in  the  ingenuity  and  cleverness. 
Light  and  heat  break  out  on  every  page." — The  Christian. 

The  Bible    and    the    Newspaper ;   Spurgeon's    Shilling   Series.      (See 
Lecture  IV.,  page  54.) 

"  Our  hope  is  that  many  will  read  this  book,  and  find,  in  the  oyster- 
shell  of  a  parable,  the  pearl  of  great  price." — C.  H.  SPURGEON,  in  The 
Sword  and  the  Trowel. 

"If  anyone  wishes  to  know  how  Mr.  Spurgeon  can  write,  let  him  invest 
a  shilling  in  one  of  these  little  books, — Spurgeon's  Shilling  Series, — and 
he  will  readily  see  how  it  is  that  their  author  can  attract  both  readers 
and  hearers." — The  Bookseller. 


Spurgeon's  Birthday  Bock.  Containing  a  metaphor,  simile,  allegory,  or 
illustration  for  every  day  in  the  year,  compiled  from  the  works  of 
C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Cloth,  23.  6d. ;  Persian,  35.  6d.  ;  Morocco,  55. ; 
Russia,  with  Photograph,  IDS.  6d. 

"  For  thirty  pence,  our  readers  may  possess  a  book  which  is  as  useful  as 
it  is  handsomely  got-up.  The  records  of  dates  which  are  dear  to  the 
household,  or  the  signatures  of  belorsd  friends  and  visitors,  will  find 
here  the  happiest  method  of  preservation  and  reference."—  Christian 
Age. 


X     R.  189 

Afy    Sermon-Notes,     containing    264    Sermon    Outlines.     Illustra: 
numerous  Anecdotes,  Extracts,  etc.     Complete  in  2  v  ,  h  or 

may  be  had  in  four  parts,  23.  6d.  each.    A  complete  index  of  su: 
and  texts  in  each  volume. 

"  Preachers,  who  are  willing  to  learn  from  anyone  really  capable  of  ' 
ing  them,  might  do  many  a  worse  thing  than  buy  a  copy  of  this  work 
which,  we  believe,  will  prove  really  helpful."— Church  . 

'•  Many  of  the  sketches  have  a  peculiar  freshness  ;  at  the  end  of  each 
there  are  anecdotes  intended  to  illustrate  the  discourses.     The  '  Notes  * 
keep  clear  of  controversy,  and  we  feel  persuaded  that  most  of  the  clergy 
will    thank    us    for    recommending    'My    Serniu:      , 
Churchman. 

"  The  suggestive  character  of  these  Outline  Sermons  renders  them 
very  useful,  and  the  illustrative  gatherings  drawn  ,le  range  of 

writers  add  much  to  their  value.     The  preacher  who  uses  them  cannot 
fail  to  be  helped  wisely  and  well." — The  Rock. 

"  These  '  Notes  '  are  stimulating  in  a  rare  degree.  They  are  a  real  boon 
to  weary  pastors." — Tfie  Christian. 


Types  and  Emblems.     A   Collection  of  Sermons  preached  on  Sunday 
and  Thursday  evenings,  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.     Price  35. 

"To  characterize  these  discourses,  would  be  simply  superfluous, 
reader    of   Mr.   Spurgeon's   sermons   knows  the   worth    of   everything 
issuing   from   the   press  of  which  he  is  the  author.     The  volume  is 
very  tastefully  got-up." — Christian  Age. 


Flashes  of  Tlwught ;  Being  One  Thousand  CJioice  Extracts  from  tht 
Works  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Alphabetically  arranged,  and  with  a 
copious  Index.  Price  55. 

"The  idea  is  a  good  one;  and  Flashes  of  Thought,  the  volume  in 
question,  containing  one  thousand  choice  extr.u  is  from  the  works  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  is  sure  of  ready  acceptance  with  the  immense  body  by 
whom  he  is  admired  and  followed."— Daily  Telegraph. 


Spurgeon's  Gems:  Being  Brilliant  l\i^a^es  Selected  from  the  £>is 

of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Large  Type.    35.  Cd. 
"A  Selection  from  the  pages  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  cont.t 
of  his  happiest  thoughts,  gems  from  his  discourses,  etc."— Extract  Jrom 
Preface. 

Gleanings  among  the  Sheaves.     By  C.    II .  SPURGEON.     Cloth, 

"  These  extracts  are  quite  Spurgeonic,— racy,  rich,  and  rare, 

style  and  matter,— full  of  exquisite  consolation,  faitl  '  ,  clear 

analogies,  poetic  touches,  and  glorious  <> 

that  eight  thousand  copies  were  disposed  of  on  the  day  of  publ: 

and  we  trust   that  eiuht  times  eighty  thousand  will  find  their  way  to  the 

religious  public."—  Weekly  A\ 


GENEBAL    INDEX. 


A  little  man  must  try  to  be  bright  ...  175 
"A  primrose  by  a  river's  brim  "  ..  65 
A  regenerate  man  falleth  not  finally  76 

A  tour  round  my -Dining- table     64 

A    tour  round  my    Garden,  Alphonse 

Karr'sbook      .. ^ 

A  tour  round  my  Kitchen      64 

Abraham,    The    death     of,     Krum- 

macher' s  description  of 132 

Act  of  Uniformity,  The  abominable     25 

Adams  (astronomer) 171 

Adams,  Zabeliel 83 

Adams,  Thomas 10,  21 

Adumson's     Religious    Anecdotes    of 

•/and    183 

Adversity  bettereth    the  godly,  but 

maketh  the  wicked  worse       75 

Advertisements  of  coaching  between 

London  and  Edinburgh 173 

JEsop's  Fables     105—108 

^E.sop's  Fables  and  the  Bible     105 

^Esop's  menagerie       91 

Affections,  Intellect  in  the        68 

Affliction,  Effect  of,  upon  a  hypocrite  75 
Affliction  from  God,  for  his  children's 

good 73,  80,  118,  140 

Affliction,  God's  arrow       105 

"  Ah  !  cette  pauvre  femme  !  " 173 

Aldebaran,  The  star 175 

Algol,  The  star    177 

Allegories     96,  98,  102,  103,  104 

Allegory  and  the  parable,  The  ...  95 
Allegory  on  Hebrews  vi.  9,  by  C.  H. 

Spurgeon 98 

Almanack,  John    Ploughman's,   C.  H. 

Spurgeon's       85 

Almanacks,  Sheet  and  book      73 

Alpine  shepherd-girl,  The,  and  the 

eclipse  of  the  sun    157 

"  Always  put  a  knot  in  your  thread  "     47 

Ambassador,  Cyrus  and  the      57 

An  angry  man,  like  Mars 164 

"  An  Asylum  for  Similes  "         90 

"  An  old  Author"  C.  H.  Spurgeon  as  85 
Anecdote  remembered  for  sixty-five 

years,  An 46 

Anecdotes  and  illustrations.  Books  of, 

reviewed  in  Xiaarrl  and  Trowel  178—187 
Anecdotes  and    Illustrations,    Books 

of       71—92,  178—187 

Anecdotes  for  the  Family  and  Social 

Circle        180 

Anecdotes  from  the  Pulpit  ...  15—30 
Anecdotes  Illustrative  of  Old  and  New 

Tfstament  Texts       183 

Anecdotes,  Miscellaneous "     89 

Anecdotes,  Nobody  need  make...     ...     54 

Anecdotes  on  the  Scriptures     ...      79,  81 


PAOB 

Anecdotes,  The  uses  of     31—53 

Anecdotes  ?     Where  can  we  find     54—70 

Anaxagoras 19 

Angel  of  the  Water  Brooks,  The        ...   104 

Answers  to  prayer      41,  42,  73 

Anthony,  St.,  and  the  cobbler 18 

Antisthenes 26 

Appear,  How  it  is  that  Truth  doth 

not  always        102 

Apple,  One  rotten,  affects  all  in  the 

basket        142 

Argument  from  theory  against  fact  167 

Aristotle's  writings 152 

Armada,  The  invincible     21 

Arrows,  Children  shooting        73 

Arrows,   Feathers  for,   C.  H.    Spur 
geon's       85,  88 

Arvine's  Anecdotes      ...  81,  82,  83,  84,  87 

Asteroids      165 

Astronomer,  An  undevout,  is  mad  ...  145 

Astronomer,  The  physical 171 

Astronomer,  The  practical        171 

Astronomer,  The   Young,  Student  and  144 
Astronomy   as   a  source  of  illustra 
tion    144—177 

Astronomy,  its  effect  upon  the  mind  144 
Astronomy,  The  old  systems  of  ...  149 
Astronomy,  the  special  delight  of 

ministers  of  the  gospel 145,  174 

Atheists  in  council      61 

Atlantic,  Crossing  the,  in  two  or  three 

minutes! 158 

Attraction,  The  force  of     150 

Augustine     11,  25,  104,  151 

Austen's  Fruit  Trees 110 

Austria,  Sun's  eclipse  observed  in  ...  156 
Avignon,  Palace  of  the  popes  at  ...  3 

Aviola,  Attillius 19 

"Babies"   or   "  Babs "   (pictures  or 

dolls) 123 

Backwoods,  The  minister  in  the      ...     60 

Balfour's  God's  Jewels       179 

Barber's  Religious  Emblems        129 

Bardsley's  Illustrative  Texts  and  Texts 

Illustrated. 180 

Bassomptre,  Marshal  de     ... 81 

Bate's  Cyclopaedia  of  Illustrations  ...  84 
Battle  fought  during  Sun's  eclipse  ...  157 
Baxendale's  Dictionary  of  Anecdotes, 

Incidents,  and  Illustrative  Facts  ...   184 
Baxter's  Saint's  Everlasting  Re*t     ...   137 

Beadle  protecting  an  army        89 

Bear,  Great,  Constellation  of  the    173,175      • 
Beecher,    Henry    Ward,    and  C.    H. 

Spurgeon 5 

Beecher,  Henry  Ward,  and  slave  girl     48 

Bees  and  wasps  ...      136 

Beginning  at  the  beginning     38 


M:M:I:U.   i\i>r.\. 


Believing  child,  The  ............  :>.; 

Benbridge,  Thoma-  (  iinrtyr     .....  -  i 

Berridge,  John     ...............  i>;» 

Bertram,  Mr.,  and  whaling  captain  :.  1 
Bertram's   />,rtiunary  of  Poetical  II- 


iVi-tram's  Ilomiltiic  AV-y/oy,/-./,  \ 

Illustrations  in  Th(ol»jy  nn,l  Mural*  180 

Illustrator,  The  ...........  IM 

f,  'I  fir.  and  the  Newspaper,  C.  H. 
Spurgeon'  s        ............    51.  188 

Hi  1.1.:,  The.  like  a  telescope 
I'il.lic-ul  allusions,  the  most  effect  i 

Biblical  Treasury,  The         .........  17s 

Hiir-.try,  The  force  of  ............  l.Yj 

Bird  safe  in  a  man's  bosom.  The 
Birds  at  Cambridge,  C.  II.  Spurgeon 
and  the     ............... 

Birthday  /took,  C.  II  .  Spurgeon'  8    ...  1^ 

Blasphemer  answered,  The       ......  ill 

Blessed  in  bis  mother-in-law*  •  hotte  25 

J'.lind  man  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice  87 

Body,  The  tabernacle  of  the     ......  167 

Bogatsky's  Golden  Treasury      ......  137 

Boldness  in  preaching        .........  30 

Bondage,  The  soul  in         .........  !:.>'.» 

I'.'-'lo  and  parchment*,  Paul's  ......  71 

/'""/..  s  _/;,/•  thf   /'•  nt,lf       ...        .........     178 

Books  of  anecdotes,  illustrations,  &c., 

reviewed  in  Sword  and  Trowel  178  —  187 
P>""k.s     of     fables,     emblems,     and 

parables     ...............  93—143 

Bin  iks  of  illustrations  and  extracts,  by 

C.  H.  Spurgeon      ...54,  85,  88.  9s.  Ml, 
1M,  186,  187—189 
Books    of    illustrations    like    hymn- 

books  ...........     ........     75 

Books  on  Daniel  and  Revelation       ...    1  7i  > 
Bowden's  Spiritual  FuUes  ......   139,140 

Bowes'  Illustrative  Gatherings  ......     87 

Boy,  A  precocious       ...  ......     78 

Boy  praying  in  a  hay-loft,  A    ......     39 

Boy,  The  Spartan,  and  the  fox        ...     '.'1 

Boy's  burning-glass,  Truth  like  a 

Boy's  head  too  big  for  his  body  ......    !»'»•_' 

Bracelet*,  The  vestal  virgin  and  th« 
Hrooks,  Thomas  .........        20,  i.1!,;, 

Brothers  meeting  in  a  fog  ...... 

Bruce'  H  spider      ...............     91 

J'.rii.-n.  Mr.  John  ............ 

Buck's  Anerdotes          ............      7S 

Bull,  The  (constellation)    .........    175 

Bullock's  Matches  that  Shiks  ......    IM. 

Bump  of  illustration.  The       ... 
Bunyan's  rilyrim's  Progret*     ......    1  'J  1 

Buuyan's  Divine  Emlilems         ...  121,  lL':> 
Burning  of  the  church  at  Santiago 
Bunting  the  bubal    ............    39 

I'urroughoH,  .Tcn-iniali        .........     37 

Hurra  in  a  sermon       ......... 

Busy  duke,  The  ............ 

.................. 

Caleb,  The  character  of     .........     40 


CalTini«rn,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  ..  s.'uS 
Cambridge,  0.  H.  Spurgeon  at ...  64,  66 
Camel's  hump,  and  C.  U.  Spurir. 

Calyini«m.  The        .  .     ...       5 

uil«s.  The,  and  the  *rravel-witik   13» 

Canary  among  unarrow*, The  ...      ..     6& 

Canary  eacn;  ..8^ 

•    in  nulwtty  rarriair--  S 

Candle*,    Sennon-     ,    .     Q    H      x.,lir. 

geon's  .    i4ip  18g 

Candl.  .'\-man  blowing  out    36 

<isa  yarn?"       ...     66 
:n  and  £»il..t.  ( 'lin'-t  our 

Careless,  John  (martyr i 
C.ir.  ~.   I 

above 
Carey,    C     S.,    and    James    Comper 

Gray's  Class  and  the  Desk     178 

Carnal  Security 

Cat  used  an  an  il.  ..   134 

.kinir  "ii  H  wall 
Catch  a  thiei  And  a  star 

than  t->        ...       

Cat.  hinir  a  h«-r-r  in  a  fat  pa«tur.-    ...    TJO 
-in    Mr.  iVrkin*'     ... 

Cats  and  I-'arli.-'>  A'//,    emt        HI 

i  great  result*     ...   146 

iy'a  Simile*       

Cecil,   Richard     

Centre   of   the   theological   universe, 

Man  not  the     14J> 

Centre  of  the  universe,  The  ear 

the     . 

fVntrifuiral  and  centripetal  force*   . 

•••id)         

1 

••Charl.-'s  Wain  " 

rh:ir\l»lis  and  S.-ylla  .      92 

Cheev« :  .      83 

Chi'-h' 

C'liild  of  i',,x\  full   "t  iry 

an  illustration  of  th»  169 

Chililn-n  intcn-stc.l  l.y  anecdotes     ...     66 
Cliilih' 

Cfiri.-t  i-ro\vnt-<l  with  tli-.rns 
Chri.-t  crucified,  like  th«-  MIH  «M-liiM*ed    156 
<'hri-t  gives  grace  to  all  • 
Christ 

Cliri-t.  tli«-  K.  •  ]H  r  of  th««  soul 41 

Chri-t,  th«  M..ruiiiK'  Mar   ...   118,  154,  161 

... 

Chrijt,  • 
<  hri-  toouoneM 

i.'.i,  :  s,  160 

IliOM  who  are  nearest  to,  are 
a  mystery  to  the  worM  .   169 

.   169 

Chn.-fs  iiw  •  r 

in  darknoM  w)i- 


19:2 


GENERAL    INDKX. 


Christian  minor.  The 49 

Christians  like  evening  stars     161 

Christians,  "the  light  of  the  world "   161 
Christians'  imperfections  noticed  more 

than  their  excellences     152 

Christy's      Proverbs,      Maxims,     and 

•if*  of  all  Ages        184 

Gkrysoatom 11,  104 

Church  of  Knglund  editors,  and  C.H. 

Spurgeon 85,  86 

Church  of  England,  The,  protecting 

Nonconformists'  liherties       89 

Church  of  Rome,  The 45,  89,  153 

Churches  growing  without  any  light 

from  heaven     153 

Clark,  Mr 25 

Clergyman,  The,   and  the  collection 

for  lighting  and  warming     36 

Cocks  crowing  after  sun's  eclipse    ...   156 

Coffin,  Mahomet's       92 

Columbus  and  the  egg       91 

Comet,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  not  wishing 

to  be  a      174 

Comet-hunter,  The,  Messier     173 

Comets 172,  173,  174 

Comets,  Return  of,  announced       172,  173 

Comets,  Terrestrial     ..172 

Commandments,  The  Ten,  The  friar's 

man  and M     18 

Commonplace-books 67,  71 

Comparisons,  Exercises  in         69 

Compass  for  Seamen,  A  New     ...   116,118 
Comptmsations  for  disadvantages    ...   170 

Conies  and  hedgehog 27 

Conscience,  a  sensitive        137 

Conscience,  a  waking         128 

Conscience,  an  enlightened        106 

Conscience  touched  by  a  sermon      ...     39 
Constellations,  names  of  some  ...   175,  176 
CunstflLit  ions,  naming  the,  like  mysti 
cal  preaching ...    175 

Conversion,  Providence  in         ...     25,  146 

Cooper's  yard,  Working  in  a    68 

Copernicus 159 

Countryman  and  the  fish-hooks,  The     46 

Course  of  the  brook,  The 135 

Covetousness       27,  108 

Cowper,  William         121 

Craven  Chapel  and  Lord  Craven      ...     56 

The,  our  best  guide         176 

.  The  Southern  ...     ...     176 

Crown  of  thorns,  and  crown  of  gold. . .     68 

Crusaders,  The    57,  58 

Crystal  Palace,  The    6 

Cueva  del  Guacharo,  Caraccas '    153 

Cupola  of  St.  Paul's,  Sir  James  Thorn- 
hill  painting  the      77 

Cy<l"}>ccdia  of  Nature  Teachings,  The  186 
Cyclopaedia  of  Pnn-tirnl   Quotations, 
J.  K.  Hoyt  and  Anna  Ward's      ...   181 

Cyclopaedias  of  Anecdotes 71 92 

Cyrus  and  the  ambassador  .     67 

Daily  News,  The 14 


PA  OR 

Danger  of  prosperity,  The        18 

Danger  of  trusting  to  worldly  great 
ness,  The 74 

Daniel  and  Revelation,  Books  on     ...   170 

Dartmouth,  John  Flavel  at       24 

Davies,  Mr  ,  and  Dr.  John  Owen    ...     80 

Death,  Drelincourt  on 48 

Death,  Madame  Messier' s 171 

Death-bed,  The  sight  of  a 48 

Denton's  Anecdotes      179 

Deploring  wife  and  comet  together  ..   173 
Dickinson's  Dictionary  of  Illustrations     86 

Dinner  composed  only  of  salad 38 

Diogenes  and  the  young  man 20 

Divers  at  Plymouth  Breakwater      ...   155 

Doctrine  of  election,  The 38,112 

Doctrines  of  grace  reconcilable,  The  1 60 

Dod,  Mr.  J 78 

Doddridge's    Rise    and    Progress    of 

Religion  in  the  Soul 137 

Dog  Diamond,  Newton's 91 

Dog  following  his  master 40,  64 

Dog  in  Mr.  Spurgeon' s  garden         ...     64 
Dog,  Kaffir's,  and  the  Testament     ...     45 

Dog,  The  blind  man's        37 

Dog,  The  nobleman's,  and  the  man 

with  a  halbert 32 

Dog  star,  The      118 

Duke,  The  busy 27 

Dying  men  and  their  money     37 

Dying  nobleman,  The,  and  his  wife's 

chaplain 28 

Dying      testimony,      Mr.      Edward 

"Riddle's     82 

Earth,  The 161,  102,  163 

Earth,  The,   not  the  centre   of  the 

universe    149 

Earth,  The,  a  slow-going  concern  ...   161 
Earth,   The,    its    movement    imper 
ceptible     162 

Earth,  The,  speed  at  which  it  travels  161 
Earthly  cares,  Heavenly  life  lifting 

above ...   173 

Easier  to  find  a  star  than  to  catch  a 

thief 172 

Ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide    139 

Eclipses  of  the  moon 163,164 

Eclipses  of  the  sun      156,  156,  157 

Edge  of  a  precipice,  On  the      ...    37,  129 

Egg,  Columbus  and  the     91 

Egg,  Persecuted  minister  and  the  ...     60 

Eleanor,  Queen 58 

Election,  The  doctrine  of 38,  112 

Elizabeth,  Queen,  and  the  milkmaid     26 
Emblems,     fables,      and      parables, 

Books  of 93-143 

Emblems,  Types  and,  C.H.  Spurgeon's  189 
Empty  casks  that  carry  nothing      ...     63 

Eridanus,  The  fiery  river 95 

Erskine,  Ebenezer,  and  a  lady -hearer    62 

Evans,  Christmas        29 

Evening  star,  Venus  an     160 

Evening  stars,  Christians  like 161 


193 


Evil  of  quarrelling,  The 
Evolution,  Atheisti 
Extract!    and     illustrations,    C. 
Spurgwm'i  books  of  ; 

-.Seeing  with  the    ... 

tnd  no  eyes 

and  the  parable,  The 


H 


¥•    ,' 

109 


I! 
1J7 

81 

!:: 
85 

,.; 


...    <;•> 

...    i»r, 

*tt.u}ea io»— i  n«»,  i 

fables,  emblems,  and  parables,  Books 

v°*       -     • 98—148 

fables  may  be  used  in  preirhinir     ...    104 

-  that  are  not  fabl.-> ]<>6 

Facts  will  always  overturn  theories...   167 

raith  above  Reason    171 

Faith  illustrate. 1 

Faith  in  Christ's  substitution 

Faith  like  a  telescope " 

Fashionable  religion  

Father  Fulgent  io'>  N,  \\-  Testament 

Father  of  the  village 

Father  Taylor  and  the  whisky -barrel 
Father,  The  kind,  and  the  dutiful  ion 
Father  who  would  not  teach  his  son 

to  pray,  The     41 

Favourites  submitting  to  their  lords    21 
Feathers   for    Arrows,    0.    H.    Sj.ur- 

geon's        

fiery  nature  leads  to  a  war.ike  exhi 
bition,  A ],;.} 

lin's  Real  Christian     ...      .  25 

Fivmus 

Fish-hooks,  The  countryman  and  tno     46 

Fix.-d  stars i-j 

Flashes  of  Tlnmuht,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's   1  v.t 

.  J««hn 24.  47,  1  li; 

llavfl's     Hnnhandry    and    A'ur/y./ 

Spiritualized      -'"',113—116,118 

Flavel's  Occasional  Meditations  1  ju 

Fog,  Broth. TS  m.-.-tin^  in  a        ;;; 

Fool  in  tho  pulpit,  The      33 

Fool's  plan,  The '     ...      \\t 

Forces,  Centrifugal  and  centripetal. . .   1  ;,i i 

Ford,  Stephen      Ho 

Forgotten  sermons      39 

Fortuitous     combination     of     a! 

A         fa,  177 

•r's  New  Cyclopedia  of  Illustra 
tions   '. 84 

Fox,  Mr.  William  and  Mr.  Thonuis...      -., 

French  prii-.-t  and  Ma^lal.-n.  s  ... 

Friar's  man  and  Ten  Commandments     18 

Frigate-bird,  The        ...  « 7 

Fuller,  Thomas    1,  7i> 

Full,  rton's  God's  Jewels    

( Jalil'-u ! 

(!ari()iildi        

<;.  ikie's  The  ffdy  iMnd  and  //'• 

< !>  in-,  -  Ih'.t 

(ifndaiuiP,  and  Italian  hoy,  T!:»j 4-1 

Generous  gent  I< -man  roiii.,,1      ...  4^ 

(;iio>t  ,     4fl 

(lilj.in,  William 

14 


63 

149 
40 


/*   among  tht  Shears. 

Goad    John,  the  astro- 
God  fit*  every  »,-  ^^ 

-'•  'l  bM  good  u  bii  word1   .. 
Uod  is  to  be  approached  through  the 

Mediator 
God,  the  Divine  Sov. . 

the  universe     ... 

God,  the  Fa  ,„.;;  ; 

•*  arrow,  Alt' 

God's  books  explain  each 
God's  coun tenan 
God's    gl,,n 

God' s  goodness  rt- 
God's  knowledge  and  n. 

eye 
God's    omnipitwenoe    and    on, 

tence 

God's  people  always  have  son 
God's 

boli.- 

(*od  s  universe  immeasurable    ...   1 
God's  will,  Rebel  1;  m     42 

God's    wisdom    and    p. 

fested        

Godfrey  de  Bouill 
(ioiiiLT  to  meet  Chi 

ppeaehi-r 

Ciol(linvr'>  />'"" 

Colt Isi mil, •>  tall'.-liil   ... 

>od    m. -n     invi.-ii.lo    till     th.-v    are 

OH  »d   ... 

Goose  hisses,  Tin-,  but  d-.-n1- 
Gospel,  Illustration  of  the  pou 

155 

mil.  ii.  an.; 
Grave,   S  .80 



Gray's  (James  Comper) 

Grotta  «1-  1  «'an.-    

.. 
. 

( ; row tli  in  grace.  Unconscious 
Gurnall's   Christian 

. 
(Jutiiri 

Hall.    N 
Hall.'N. 

u  of  oomet'y  r  tu. 
Hamilton,   Dr.  n 

u 


194 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


IT-imjulen,  John  ...  .«  ...  26 

Happy  Lavenham  ...  ...  -3 

Ilarnidow  Hill,  near  Stonehenge  ...  156 

Hasten  at  leisure  HI 

Hearing  a  will  read  46 

Heart,  Dr.  Mantou's 29 

Heavenly  life  should  lift  above 

earthly  cares  173 

Heavens  and  the,  Earth,  The  146 

Hedgehog  and  conies  „  27 

Helios 95 

Hen,  The,  and  the  persecuted  minister  60 

Henry  IV.  (of  France)  27 

Henry's,  Matthew,  Commentary  ...  66 

Hrniditus  2 

Herbert's  Country  Parson 16 

Herschel,  Sir  John  170,176 

Hersohel  (the  planet)  ...  170 

Hervey,  James  40 

Hesperus,  the  vesper  star 160 

Hill,  Rowland  29,46,51,56 

Hodge's  Sunday 31 

Holy  laughter  43 

Home,  The  light  of  133 

Homer 92 

Honour  and  dignity  of  the  ministry  103 

Honouring  father  and  mother 39 

Hood,  E.  Paxton 52,90,181,182 

Hood's,  E.  Paxton,  World  of  Moral 

and  Religious  Anecdote 90,181 

Hood's,  E.  Paxton,  World  of  Proverb 

and  Parable  182 

Horse,  the  picture  of  a  22 

Horses  during  sun's  eclipse  ...  156,  157 

How  to  avoid  sin  58 

Humble  Christians,  the  most  fruitful  113 

Humboldt,  Baron  153 

Humility,  The  proud  man  boasting  of  20 
Hump,  The  camel's,  and  C.  H.  Spur- 

geon's  Calvinism  6 

Husband  and  his  witty  wife,  The  ...  22 
Husbandman  caring  most  for  the 

young  trees,  The  112 

Huwbandman  choosing  wild  plants  ...  112 

Hypocrite  afflicted  75 

Ice,  The  traveller  on  the 140 

Idiot  and  his  soul,  The  40 

Idiot,  Jock  the 33 

Idiot's  mother,  The  29 

Mir  man  yielding  to  temptation,  An  136 

Ifattrated  London  News,  The  1 

Illustration,  A  living 48 

Illustration,  The  bump  of 69 

Illustrations  and  Anecdotes,  Books 

(lt  71—92,  178—187 

Illustrations  and  Anecdotes,  The  uses 

°f  31—63 

Illustrations  and  Extracts,  0.  H. 

Spurgeon's  books  ot,  54,  85,  88,  98,  141, 
184,  186,  187—189 
Illustrations  and  Meditations,  C.  H. 

Sturgeon's  188 

"  I'm  a  growing?*  ^  ^  162 


Imaginary     conversations     between 

Nathan    and   Solomon,   and   Peter 

and  John 130,131 

Imagination,  Freaks  of  the       175- 

Indians  in  subterranean  cave    153- 

Indians  witnessing  moon's  eclipse  ...   163- 
Influence  of  planets  and  men  upon 

each  other        171,  172 

Intellect  in  the  affections,  The         ...     68 

Intellect  in  the  stomach,  The    68 

Irishman  and  the  priest,  The    44 

Italian  boy  and  gendarme,  The 44 

Jay,  William        29,  37 

Jenkins's     Ginx's     Baby    and     The 

Devil's  Chain 82 

Jesuits 152,166,167 

Jew,  Luther  and  the 58- 

Jock,  the  idiot     33 

John   Ploughman1  a  Almanack,    C.   H. 

Spurgeon's       85 

Johnson,  Dr 1 

Jovial  (from  Jove)      168 

Jupiter  ...        164,  165,  166,  167,  168,  177 

Jupiter's  moons 166,  167 

Jupiter's  thunderbolts        95 

Justification  not  by  the  works  of  the 

law     7& 

Keach,  Benjamin        56 

Reach's  Metaphors      66,  84 

Kepler,  John        148,  166,  176 

Kepler's  Harmonics     145 

Kepler's  wife  and  her  salad      176 

King  Henry  IV.  (of  France)    27 

King  in  a  bower  of  flowers,  A 10 

King  of  France,  The  mayor  and  the      89 

Kings  of  Spain    21,91 

Knight's  Gleanings  from  Bible  Lands    185 
Knowledge,    All,     not    essential    to 

worship     148 

Knox,  John,  Providential  escape  of...     59 

Krummacher's  Parables     130—135 

Lady  Lie  unmasked  by  Time 103 

Lambert,  John  (martyr)    .„• 37 

Latimer,  Bishop 17,  19,  22,  58 

Laughter,  Holy „.     ...     43 

Lavenham,  Happy     28- 

Leifchild's  Remarkable  Facts    179 

Leisure,  Hasten  at ...  141 

Leisure  Hour,  The       108 

Lepers,  Moravians  and      49 

Leverrier  (French  astronomer) 171 

Libyan  lion,  The 19 

Lick  Observatory,  The       166 

Light,  Churches  growing  without  ...   153 

Light  of  God's  countenance      154 

Light  in  the  forests  of  the  Amazon 

and  Orinoco     154 

Bight,  Velocity  of       151 

Lights,  God  the  Father   of      145 

Liviug   in    this   world,  C.  H.  Spur- 

geonon     151,162,177 

Living  without  sin,   C.  H.  Spurgeon 

on       ...     ,  .83- 


GENERAL    INDEX. 


Livingstone,  Dr..  and  the  nextant   ...   147 
London  Hridg-e,  Great  fire  at 
Loni:'-  J:''ts(em  Proverbs  and  Einl  . 
Lord  ( 'niv.-n  and  Craven  Chap.  1 
k01"1!  !                                                  ..      ...      U 
Lord  T.-nnyson,  and  Saturn's  "lumin- 
ou*  rings"        169 

-  love 

Love  to  Christ     

Love  wins  the  heart ]<>7,  ]o>. 

Lucifer,  the  morning  ctax '  ir,u 

LntheTj  Martin    -11    in.", 

Luth*  :  ;nd  the  Jew  .. 

Luth-r'>  1,1,1.  Talk     i,; 

. r. ,n  -  / 'r-.fthery  of  Cassandra.. .        J 
91 
Ma...  thousand  New  ~lllits- 

»•"<"»«       

Ma.-laren's  Pictures  and  Enbbm*     ...    \^ 

Mudai.-  }  death     171 

Madame    Tu>sau.r>,    C.    H.    Spur- 

-M;|^;  h  priest  and  th«- 

Mahon  

Maki:  9        

Makii  ,,ns 

Man,  not  the  centre  of  the  theological 
universe     

knowledge  and  God's     ... 



n's,  Dr..  heart 
Mariners    taking     astronomical'  ob- 

:MOJ1S M       147 

•  •-    ii;V,  i.i.V,  ; 

/•'nil,hms  of  flit    JI<,ly  S/,int 
and  Similn  <>f  the  ('/,• 
Mai->hall>      .N'r/  Book    of 

'">>*  186 



r,  The  dog  following  hii jo 

Mayor,  The,  and  the  cannrv       .  89 

Mayor,  The,  and  the  K  .Il5e     89 

Medttatiom   tout  fl&utratiou,   C.  H. 

Spurgeou's        . 

Men  and  planets,  Influence  of  ...  171 ,  17-' 

Menedemus 

Mercury       ir,8)  i^  1(;i    ,,".. 

Mercury,  a  picture  of  the  oil 

full  of  grace     

Messier,  the  comet-hunter 17;{ 

Metaphors,  Confused 13 



Uttropolitan  Tabemack /WpittC,  H. 

Spurgeon's        98 

Milan  Cathedral lo 

Milkmaid,  Queen  Klizubeth  and  the    26 

Miller,  Mr.  Joseph        ..  90 

MflUgan'i    AjAurisnu,   Maxims,    and 

Smart  -^tntencet Ig5 

Milton,  John        121,  i 

Miners,  The  two 49 

Minister,  A  handsome  present  for  a    87 
Miuinter.  Persecuted,  and  the  hen    ...     «;-i 


Mini.t.-r.  Penecuted,  and  the  spider    69 
Minister  i-n-.-i.-hing  to  the  rentflator    60 

M  u .  iHters  expecting  t- . 

. 

r    ... 

Money ,  The  lore 

Monk. 

4/oodfjr-fied  aneedoti 

.  •rundl.-d  ... 

Morn,: 
Momin 
Mot), 

••v  ho  neglected  to  . 

A  ho    \vouM    not 
'swill,  The 
Mull..-:-  in 

... 

Mutton, 

. 

in  tin-  i>\ilj 
. 

NVI.ula  uf  «  ' 
Ni-huht- 

N.-ptun,-        171,  1  ; 

-atiafied     28 

'-     81 
.     45 

/'fie  />'iMe  and  the,  <      II 
Spur-.-on's        M,188 

:          

.   1 1:, 

Newtxm  ..     :(1 

Nine  hundn-d  mil;. 

No  home  beyond  the  grave         80 

XoiK-onforini •••  protected  by 

the  Chun  i. 

• 

.. 
Nye's  Anecdote*  on  /„     -    /', it> 

"  O  beaut  i  ful  sun  !" 

Old  man  of  the  sea,  Th«- 

"Olympus'    !  _••}, "    16 

nipn-M-ncc  jin-l  ,  God's  68 
Old  Testament  teaching,  parabolical  93 
Orphan's  prayer,  The SO 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


PAGE 

Ossa,  Polion  and '•»- 

Owen,  l>r.  John 80,  110 

PHI.-.,-..  ,,f  the  popes,  The,  Avignon  ...  3 
Parable,  The.  and  the  allegory  ...  95 

Parable,  The,  and  the  fable  95 

Parable  The,  and  the  mythus 95 

,  The,  and  the  proverb...  ..  95 
Parable,.  <  'hi-Nt's  use  of  7.  17,  34.70,94 
Parables  emblems,  and  fables.  Books 

of  '.(3-143 

•lie  and  historic  teaching, 

Divine  16,93 

/'.//•</r//.«e  Lost  160 

Parlour  window,  Sportsman  at  his  ...  35 
Pastors'  College,  Applicant  for  ad 
mission  to  the 69 

Patient,  The  surgeon  and  his  ...  .  29 
Paul's  books  and  parchments  ...  .  71 

Paul irms,  The  prayer  of 26 

Peach-tree  and  the  mulberry  ...  .  141 

Pelion  and  Ossa 92 

Pen  scratching  behind  the  arras,  The  59 

Percy  Anecdotes,  The 89 

Perkins'  Catechism,  Mr. 25 

utors,  Escaping  from  ...  59  60 
Phaeton  driving  the  chariot  of  the  sun  95 

Pli id ias  and  the  statue  57 

Philip  II.  (of  Spain) 21 

Phillips'*  Remarkable  Providences  ...  180 

Phosphorus,  the  light-bringer 160 

Picture,  A  word,  a  67 

Picture  of  a  horse,  The  22 

Pictures,  The  world  hung  round  with  65 

Pierian  spring,  The  92 

Pike's  Remarkable  Religious  Anecdotes  181 

Pirate,  The '2* 

Pius  IX 14 

Plan,  The  fool's 49 

Planet,  Different  methods  of  finding  a  1 7 1 

Planetoids  165 

Planets 158—164,166—172 

Planets  and  comets  172,  174 

Planets  and  men,  Influence  of  171,  172 
Plants  growing  without  the  light  of 

the  sun  153 

Plants  in  a  hothouse  turning  to  the  sun  154 

Plutaivh  11,  27 

Plymouth  Breakwater,  Divers  at  ...  155 

Pleiades,  The  175 

Poacher  looking  for  mushrooms  ...  55 

Pole-star  and  the  pointers 175 

Prayer,  Answers  to  41,49,73 

Praying  in  a  hayloft,  A  boy  39 

Praying,  or  swearing 41 

her  concentrating  the  rays  of 

the  gospel  upon  a  sinner  155 

Preacher  looking  at  the  ventilator  50 
Preacher  must  not  be  prominent  in 

the  sermon,  The  159 

Preachers  expect  too  much  of  their 

hearers  52 

Preachers  not  understood  by  the 

people       16 


PA6B 

Preaching,  Boldness  in       36 

Preaching,  Fables  may  be  used  in  ...  104 
Preaching.  Mystical,  like  naming  the 

constellations 175 

Preaching,  The  histrionic  in      93 

Preaching,     The     use     of      allego 
ries   in       96,  98,  102 

Preaching,  The  uses  of  anecdotes  and 

illustrations  in         31 — 53 

Precipice,  On  the  edge  of  a       ...    37,  129 

Precocious  boy,  A       78- 

Predestination  perverted 41 

Priest  and  the  Magdalenes.  The  French    36 

Priest  and  the  Irishman,  The 44 

Priests  and  the  Tahitians,  The         ...     45 

Prime  on  the  power  of  prayer 41 

"  Primrose  by  a  river's  brim,  A  "  ...  65 
Prince's  family  in  danger,  The  ...  23 
Princess  Alexandra's  entry  into 

London     55 

Prison  as  an  illustration,  A      68 

Prisoner  always  watched 60 

Privacy  in  prayer       39 

Proctor's  Classified  Gems  of  Thought  186 

Prosperity,  the  danger  of ...     18 

Prosaer'8  (Mrs.)  Fable*  ...  108,  109,  182 
Proud  man  boasting  of  his  humility  20 
Proverb,  The,  and  the  parable  ...  95 
Proverbs  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  books  of, 

The  Salt-Cellars     184,  187 

Providences.  Divine  ...  25,  59,  GO,  146 
Public  opinion,  the  hissing  of  geese  143 

Pulpit,  Naturalness  in  the         34 

Pulpit,  Scales  in  the    35,94 

Pulpit,  The  fool  in  the        33 

Pulpit  window  and  cushion  repaired  83 
Puritans  and  their  books,  20,  21,  27,67,  112 

Quarles'  Divine  Fancies    127 

Quarles'  Emblems        ...         124—127,  129 

Quarrelling,  The  evil  of    109,  135 

Queen  Anne,  Death  of       ... 91 

Queen  Anne  dignitaries     28 

Queen  Eleanor    58 

Queen  Elizabeth  and  the  milkmaid...     26 

Queen  of  Sweden,  The       137 

"  Quorum  pars  magna  fui  "     86 

Ram,  The  (constellation) 175 

Ray t  from  the  East     178 

Reaping-hook,  The  (constellation)...   176 

Reason,  a  kind  of  faith      171 

Reason,  A  man  led  by       37 

Reason,  above  the  senses 171 

Reason,  below  faith    171 

Reason,  Illustrations  not  judged  by     77 

Rebellion  against  God's  will     42, 

Reformations,  Transient 65 

Religion,  Fashionable        26 

Religious  Tract  Society's  Anecdotes  80 
Results,  Great,  from  little  causes  ...  146 
Revelation  and  Daniel.  Books  on  ...  170 
Ridicule,  A  weapon  against  sin  ...  43 

Ridley,  Bishop     17 

Roche,  Sir  Boyle 18 


:\l. 


197 


man 
Rocket,  Going  up  like  a     .........   17  1 

:iripal  George  ......     —     ' 

U,  The       .............. 

hri>t  the  ......      ......      1 

!lyl«-,   Kishop         ............ 

Babbath,  r-reakinv  the       ...... 

Si/r-tW/«ir«,  C.  H.  Bpnrgeon's  ...  is 

/   '<ist  rut  ions      ..... 

Salvation  Army,  The  ..........  ~      '< 

Sarpi.  Paul   ..................      ' 

..r  Satuni  .............. 

S:iti-f.  .       -.         ...... 

K;  i,  H'.:;,  167—170,  1:1 

Saturn  LT.-.V  '1    .........     I''** 

Say  link-  when  y«>u  know  little  ......    17" 

Scales  in  thr  pulpit       ........       35,94 

:it   .....        ...     \->- 

di-M-ription    of 

eclipses  of  the  moon  ...  103 

Science     of     astronomy     should     be 
studied  by  ministers        ...... 

as  sources  of    illu- 
tra".   •  ..........  1-H  -177 

tic  //luxtnttioiis  unil  Symbols    ...    \^'2 
....................     19 

An.'t-dotes  on  the     ...      ...      81 

Scriver,  Christian  (Gottho  Id)    ...  136,13? 
Sculptor's  unfinished  statue,  The 

.  r.dis  ...........     92 

Sea,  The  world  a  ............    78,  1-1 

Search-  war  rant,  A      ......... 

Security,  Canuil  ...............    1-  ' 

:  -"with  the  eyelids      .........     66 

r  t!;.  <.  utre  of  a  system  ......   M'-^ 

...........     7  1 

..............     •*'•' 

.The  poor  ......     ... 

.........       11,  '-M 

:.<:e,    A      .........    1;1< 

:i,  all  spirit,  no  body         ......     53 

Bennon  f  orgotteiif  but  UK  lost  ......     • 

s.-riiK.n  full  i.f  tramaad  ti-h-  hooka...     46 

S.-r-niMii  tou.-hiiig  tli<-  001  •• 

Serniun  li.-iir.  r  blessed  after  eighty 

vears  .........     .........     47 

Sermons  in  Candle*,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's 

Ml. 

Sermons  in  titonf*,  C.  II.  Spurgeon'B 
Servant  at  the  wnnon,  The       ...... 

Seven    days,    seven     metula,    seven 
planetf  (?),  •orat  window!    ...... 

Sextant,    I)r    LiviniMonfl  and  the   ... 
uiM.-r  and  Mr.  Whit.-tii-ld,  The 
Shipwi"  li  tlin.uirh  la.  k  of  li^rhtu    ... 
Shop-  window,  Illustration*  in  a 
Shute   .lushna       ............... 

Sion  College  .................. 

Sin,  as  it  appears  to  God  and  man  ... 
Sin,  How  to  avoid       ............ 

Si//i     (astronomer),     and    Jupiter's 

IIIi.MUS  .................. 

Sl.-in.l-r    Th-  fal.-i.  ------  f    ....... 

Slave  girl    i  rd  Beeoher  and 


u 

LI 
U 

40 


[' 

48 


rt  .1 

Jlavee  and  the  Moravian-  49 

-atBervic*".  31,33,43 

•  l..wn  the  pulpit  banwtcw  (?), 

..     36 

<mith,  James  (of  Cheltenham; 120 

•Mnith.  8 

• 

,  m  imdgnificant  corner 
..f  thi-  univr.-.-  ...   150,168 

always  watching  a  prisoner...    60 

Spenc«i 

1 
• 

printing-offices...   128 

:.<ir "...     85 
1      . 

in:.!  88 

H.,    and 

...      85,  86 

Ward 

<  '.    11..    nn  i 

Spur;-"    i      l       H.,   and  the  birds  at 

ridp-         ...  6* 

md  the  dog  in  hi* 

Spurgeon,  C.  II.,  and  the  hinsing  of 
geese •  14S 

.  .    I!.,  a-  a   S  .-   i  iv-school 

H.,   ..n    living    in  this 
\v,,,.. 

11  ,   on    li.  In- 

t.-nip.-ram-c        .  ••     8* 

Spur-..  0,0,   II  ugh  an 

Spur-'-'ii,    C.    H.,  l^e 

Hull  ... 
Spur-.'.,,,   c.    II  *  «t  the 

' 

puh 

Spur  Bulling  by  rail 

without  a  l.irlit 

II,     aUegory     on 

r  .M 

Spurg.  '°*  "• 

Spur,,,,^'     II   ,/    "At- 0/7*.'' 

(;r,«  ... 


198 


GENERAL   INDEX. 


Burgeon's,  C.  H.,  Gleanings  among 
the  Sheaves  189 

Spurgeon's,  0.  H.,  Illustrations  and 
Meditations  188 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  John  Ploughman's 

<  Almanack ...     85 

Spurgeon's,      C.      H.,      Metropolitan 

Talx'rnacle  Pulpit 98 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  My  Sermon-Notes  189 
9 purc-eon'e,  C.  H..  Sermons  in  Candles 

141,  188 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  Sermons  in  Stones  186 
Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  Stories  told  by 

other  people     ...     70,80,85 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  The  Bible  and  the 

Newspaper        54,  188 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H.,  The  Salt-Cellars  184, 187 
Spurgeon's,  C.  11.,  The  Sword  and  the 

Trowel       5 

Spurgeon's,  C.  H. ,  Types  and  Emblems  189 
<se,  Granite-porphyry- jasper...       7 
Star,  Easier  to  find  a,  than  to  catch 

a  thief       172 

Star  dt'  liborty,  Christ  the 175 

Stai-s  ceasing  to  be  visible 176 

Stars,  o. .lours  of  the 177 

Double  and  triple    177 

Siui-s,  Fixed 151 

Stars  immeasurably  far  away 175 

Stars,  tfew 176 

Stars,  Quadruple  systems  of     177 

Stars  useful  to  mariners     147 

Stars,  Variable    177 

Stars,  The  Voices  of  the       166 

Stick,  Coming  down  like  a        174 

Stock's,   Elliot,   Ntw    Cyclopcedia   of 

Illustrative  Anecdote     "  87 

Stock's,    Elliot,    New    Handbook    of 

Illustration       87 

Stomach,  Intellect  in  the 68 

Stomach,  The  weak     ...     137 

Stowell 22 

Stranger  at  the  Tabernacle,  A 50 

St.n-.'t,- lamps,  Stars  notlike  rows  of...  175 
Student  and  The  Young  Astronomer  .„  144 
Students  for  the  ministry  should 

nt  udy  every  science 144 

Students  progressing  backwards      ...     20 

Submission  to  Gud's  will 42,  107 

Submissive  silence       21 

Substantial  as  well  as  transparent  ...  172 

Subterranean  cave,  Caraccas    153 

Sugar-Loaf  Rock,  The  great  ...  147,  148 
Sun,  Driving  the  chariot  of  the  ...  95 

Sun,  Eclipses  of  the 155 

Sun  of  righteousness,  Christ  the  154,  155, 
156,  158,  159 
Sim,  Plants  growing  without  the  light 

Sun,  Spots  on  the        ".  152 

Sun,  The       150—158,167 

Sun,  The,  the  centre  of  the  solar 
system  150 


Sunday,  Hodge's  31 

Sunday-school  teacher,  C.  H.  Spur- 

geon  as  a 66 

Sunflower  the  sun's  son  151 

Sun's  rays,  Power  of  the  155 

Sun's,  The,  influence  upon  vegetation  154 

Surgeon,  The,  and  his  patient 29 

Swinnock,  George  23, 26 

Sword,  The,  and  the  Trowel,  C.  H. 

Spurgeon's  5 

Sydney,  Sir  Philip  21 

Sympathy  40 

Tabernacle,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preach 
ing  at  the 32,50,64 

Tabernacle  of  the  body,  The  167 

Tahitians  and  the  priests,  The 45 

Tailor's  secret,  The  47 

Taste,  the  judge  of  illustrations  ...  77 
Taylor,  Father,  and  the  whisky - 

barrel  35 

Taylor,  Jeremy  10,  19 

Teaching  good  or  evil  42 

Teaching  to  pray  or  to  swear 42 

Telescope,  Faith  like  a  147 

Telescope,  Invention  or  discovery 

of  the 145,  146 

Telescope,  Kepler's,  The  Jesuit  and  166 

Telescope,  Sir  John  Herschel' s 176 

Telescope,  The  Bible  like  a  146 

Temptation,  An  idle  man  yielding 

to  136 

Terrestrial  comets  172 

"  That  is  how  I  wrote  them  " 88 

The  Newspaper,  The  Bible  and,  C.  H. 

Spurgeon's  54,  188 

The  Note- Book  178 

The  Spiritual  Garland  86 

The  Times,  The  Bible  and 55 

Theological  universe,  Man  is  not  the 

centreof  the  149 

"  There  is  another  man  " 48 

"These  won't  do"  37 

"They  must  be  used  with  great 

discretion"  88 

Thirty  Thousand  Thoughts  183 

Thomson's  Land  and  the  Book 183 

Thornhill,  Sir  James,  and  the  cupola 

of  St.  Paul's  77 

Thresher,  The,  and  grains  of  wheat  75 

Tides,  life-blood  to  the  world  163 

Timbs'  Anecdote  Lives  of  Wits  and 

Humorists  90 

Time  past,  never  returns 81 

Time,  Shortness  of  40 

Tinling's  Fifteen  Hundred  Facts  and 

Similes  185 

Tiribazus  21 

Trade -wind  spiritualized 116 

Traveller  injured  by  the  tree  that 

sheltered  him 74 

Traveller  on  the  ice,  The 140 

Travelling  by  rail  without  a  light, 

C.  H.  Spurgeon       2 


\l.    INDEX. 


's  Notes  on  the  Parables... 

Trim,  Corporal    39 

Truth  has  wings 89 

Truth  like  a  burning-glass        

Truth,  Making  a  man  stv  the 1G6 

Truthfulness     iudispensahlo     to      a 

minister     80 

Ty, 'ho  Brahe-         176 

:n<l  Emblems,  V.  11.  Spurgeon'a  189 
Undevout  astronomer  is  mad,  An  ...  145 
Universe,  The  earth  not  the  centre  of 

the      14U 

Universe,  The  theological,  Man  not 

the  centre  of     14'.« 

Uranus 170,171,172,174 

Vaux,  The  Preacher's  Storehouse        ...   180 
Vegetation,  The  sun's  influence  upon  164 

Venus     160,  101,  UJ7,  171,  177 

Vestal  virgin,  Tin  ,  and  the  bracelets    27 

Victor  Emmanuel        

Virgin,  The  (constellation)       17:. 

Visiting  the  sick Is 

Voice  of  Wiidum,  The 182 

Wall,  Cat  walking  on  a     35 

\V    -it   of   faith    product's    ridirulous 

action        ...      l(1't 

"Wapping"  sinners 66 

Wasps  and  bees 

Watson,  Thomas         

Watta,  Dr 164 


War-worn  traveller.  A  comet  u  a    . .   174 

Mr.,  weeping... 

Wealey,  Mr ...  28 

f  whale.,  A 

the  Stone*  Say,  C.  H.  Spurgeon'ii  186 

y  -barrel ,  Father  Taylor  and  the  35 

STOM'S  ^Mtxfetei       ...            ...  79 

-  -,   ;,  '•- 

,  how  thene  feathers  fly 

Wilkn,  Matthew "     29,85,94 

Window-tax  .  ...  ..  6,  7 

H 

mifested      168 

Wit  and  humour,  Vo'.unu-ti  of 89 

.Awn        ...      

Woman  \va-hing  wool.  The 
\V. -111:111  who  burned  1. 

W..rd.  ••      67 

;*•     63 
...     66- 
W..rld.  Th.-,  a  irr.-at  library      ... 

World,  Tl»,  ft  MM      "8,»24 

AVnrld,  Thr,  him::  n-und  witli  j.i.  tare*     < 
Worldling    and    right  oua  man.  The  12£ 

..ss,    The  dangi-r 
tru-tr 

Worlds  dwappearinu' ' 

Worship  of  the    illit«-rate  accepts 


TEXTUAL   INDEX.. 


GENESIS. 
Chap.  &  Verse 
1  3                    

Page 
168 

] 
\.\vii.   17       

W 

i.  14  —  19       
i.  16      

...     79 

JUDGES. 

xv.  8                    

14 

Li  3 

..     7'-' 

ii.  12     

...      1- 
70 

1  SAMUEL. 

xvii.  40  

16 

vi    10               .      ... 

i 

1    Kl 

viii    •">           

...     7'.' 

v.  8        

20 

xxxvii.  9       
xxxix.  20.  LM 
EXODUS. 

...     68 

vii.  4     
xix.  4    ... 

2    KIN03. 

ix    30 

6 

120 

12 

xii.  :',  —  10     
^ii    "!)             

2  CHBOWICXE8. 

__       0          11 

43    44 

x    8 

120 

xx   12           

JO1». 

xx  25 

11 

i  7   8 

119 

i    10      

114 

TV!       ft 

93 

ii    4 

120 

NUMBLBS. 

xiv.  24  
xxi.  8,  9        
xxxii.  23       

...     40 
...     93 
...     36 

ix.  9       ... 


xxvi.  14        

176 
120 
140 
26 

JOB. 

Chap.  A  Vene. 





;        .      •' 

iv.  3       ... 

viii.  :!,  4 
xlii.    H... 


IT. 


Ixix.  K. 

18      ... 
7-9... 

<-iii.  1 
cxix.  4- 

OXXT.  -2 

cxxx.  4 

1—12 

cxlir.  3.  4     ... 


113 

149 

110 

114 

119 
139 

119 
119 

60 
149 


200 


TEXTUAL    INDEX. 


PROVERBS. 
Chup.  & 

i     '{•' 

LUKB. 
Page    Chap,  i:  Verse. 
118     ii     •'-• 

Page 
119 

EPHESIAN3. 
Chap.  &  Verse. 
i.  13       

Page 
140 
126 
57 
114 
12 
35 
120 

7,9 
24 
119 

115 
159 

44 

119 
153 
95 
119 
37 
107 

119 
113 
67 
71 

57 
98 
23 
119 
100 
151 
119 
120 
82 
115 
119 

19 
119 
145 
116 
39 
114 

119 
119 
119 

113 

165 
25 

115 
99 
112 
118 

iii    1  '* 

73 

xii.  16—21   
\ii   24             

17 
34 

ii.  2        

iv    ''o 

65 

ii.  10     

IT       1 

3 

xii    35     37 

119 

iv.  11,  12      

\\ii   08 

113 

17 

v.  3        

vxx    4 

78 

xiii   8   9 

114 

v.  15      

ECCLESIASTES. 

ii.  14     65 

ix    10             .  .              --    120 

xv.  11-32  
xvi.  19—31  
xviii.  1  —  8    

17 
17 

m 

v.  15,  16       

PIIILIPPIANS. 

i  21 

x.  1 

14 

JOHN. 

iii.  11   

170 

i.  29 

xii.  10  

2 

iv.  11 

xii.  11    52 
SOLOMON'S  SONG. 
iv.  11    ...             13 

iii.  14,  15      
iii.  16     

93 
38 
125 
99 
25 
116 
45 
130 
43 

COLOSSIANS 

i   29 

iii.  1\)    

iii     3 

iv.  12,  13      

...  no 

iv.  4       

2  THHSSALONIANS. 

iii.  10    

1  TIMOTHY. 

i.  19,  20        
ii.  5        

iv.  16    

114 

v.  14      
v.  35                        .       ... 

vi   2 

114 

ISAIAH. 

iv.  5      ... 

114 

v.  39                      

xii.  5     

xiii   34 

v    1    2 

114 

v.  2        

...    1H 

XV.      1         

112 

iii.  6       

v.3,  4   
v   5 

...    1M 

116 

xvi.  33  
xvii.  24  
xviii.  38        

ACTS. 

ii.  25     

ii   33 

119 
81 

119 
24 
116 
113 

vi.  10    

xxx.  1—3     
liv.  12   

JEREMIAH. 

ii.  31 

.     74 
3 

190 

vi  12 

2  TIMOTHY. 

ii.  18     

ii.  19     

vii    12 

116 

iii.  16    

xii.  9             

...     65 

xx    28                   ...     . 

iv.  13     

118 

xxviii.  5        

ROMANS. 

ii.  28,  29       
iii.  20                    

34 

120 
78 
55 

HEBI.EWS. 

iv.  13     

vi.  9 

xxvii.  2  —  8   
xxxii.  9,  10  
xxxii.  41       

.  EZEKIEL. 

iv.  1—3        
vii.  5     
xl.  16    

...     93 

...   113 
...    114 

...     93 
...   118 

0 

vi.  17,  18      
x.  25 

vii.  13  

vii.  24    .. 

129 
164 
149 
12 
40 
153 
171 

113 
115 
115 
115 

103 
177 
102 
119 
47 

120 
140 
162 
162 
45 

159 
10 
116 
111 

xi    1 

viii.28  117, 
ix.  5 

xi.  3      

xi  26 

DANIBL. 
V.    27       

vi  10    
ix.  17,  18      

HOSEA. 

ix.  16    ... 

...     35 

...   155 
...   120 

114 

x.  8       

xii   1 

xii.  15  
xiii.  12  
xiv.  7    

xii.  2 

xiii.  7    

1  CORINTHIANS. 

iii.  9      
iv.  1  

JAMES. 

i.  12       

i     1  fi 

xi.  8,  9  

...  138 

ZECHARIAH. 

xiv.  20  

MALACHI. 

iv.  2       

MATTHEW. 

v.  14      

12,119 
154,  155 
161 

ix.  9      

i    17 

ix.  14    

i    91 

xiii.  13  100, 
xv.  41    

i.  22       

v   7 

xv.  55    

1  PETER. 

i.  15      

xv.  55—57  
xvi   22 

vi.  6       

vi  28 

...     39 

34. 

2  CORINTHIANS. 

i   12 

iii.  11    

x.  24 

58 

iv.  11     

xiii.  25  

...     17 

i.  22 

2  PETER. 
i.8  

xiii.  34   

7  94 

iv  18 

xviii.  2  ... 

34 

v  7                            152 

iii.  4      

xxvii.  2!)     

MARX. 

iv.  10—13     
iv.  16,  17      ... 
iv.  39     
»vi.  15  

...     58 

...     94 
...     66 
...     78 
...     84 

v.  17      

UALATIANS. 

ii.  20     

iii.  9      

REVELATION. 

iv.  7       

iii.  1      „ 
iv.  15     
T.  22 

vii.  9     

xxi.  10,  16  
xxii.  16... 

REDUCED   PRICES 

WORKS  BY  C.  H.  SPURGEON,  . 


PUBLISHED     BY  ^ 

CO 


Passmore  &  Alabaster, 

PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS.     LONDON.     E.C. 


C.    H.    SPURGEON  S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY,    compiled    1  -        >_ 

and    Private  Secretary,    handsomely    bound  and    profusely    illustrated,  con.  — 

vols.,  published  at  10s.  6d.  each.     The  set  of  4  vols    offered  at  3 On.,  <  arriage  paid  ^ 
Also  new  and  cheaper  edition,  4  Vols.,  cloth,    21*.   n«-t. 

"  Every    page    sparkles   with    good    things.     The    record    is    worthy   of    the    man  "     TNK  S£ 
METHODIST  TIMES. 

"  The  Autobiography  is  full  of  characteristic  touches.     Almost  every  page  containi  tom«-  ^ 

instance   of   Spurgeon's  ready   humour  and  h.i   faculty  for  apt  illustration."— THE   REVIEW  _ 

or  REVIEWS.  ^_ 

IZ.vposttoru.  o 

THE  GOSPEL  OF   THE    KINGDOM,    a    Popular    Exposition  2j 

Gospel    according    to    Matthew.    By    C.    H.     SPUROKOS.     1'reface    by    tin.    SPURGEON          ^ 
Published  at  6s.,  offered   at   3«.  6d.  ;   half-calf,   10s.;  calf.  15s. 
"  This    is    not   only    an   exposition    and    a   commentary— it   is  an    education    »n    the 
method    of   Bible    readings,    which    is   Bible    feeding.     .  ^ 

are  even    more  experimental   than    expository,    for  experience    is    th<-   brM    npositor.     . 
It  contains    numerous    terse  sentences   which    will    be  useful    for   quotation    when  they    have 
been  read,  marked,  learned,  and  inwardly  digested."— THE  CHRISTIAN. 
THE  TREASURY  OF  DAVID.     Containing  an  Original  Kxpos::  ^ 

the  Book  of  Psalms:  a  Collection  of  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  whole  range  of 
Literature;  a  Series  of  Homiletical  Hints  upon  almost  every  verse;  and  list  of 
Writers  upon  each  Psalm.  By  C.  H.  SPURCEON.  Complete  in  seven  volume*  Z 

lished  at   ;-s    ea.h.      The  set  of    7   vols.   offered  at   42«.,  »•!.     May  alto 

be  had  in  calf  and  half-call  bindings.     Of  thete  volume*    14-  thousand  have  ' 
"The  comments  and  expositions  abound  in  rich,   racy,  and  su.  .  UJ 

have  a  strong   flavour   of   the  hoiniletic  and   practical    exposition    wi- 

is  accustomed  t.«  accompany  his  public   le.idmu    «>'     H  ^ 

of  belief,  a  fulness  of  assent  to  the  great.  pom'-    <>l  Calvluistic  oitho.i  ^ 

would  not  be  true  to  himself  il  he  attempted  to  conceal.  _i 

well    done,   and   the  abundant   '  apparatus  criticus,'    the    list   of  hundreds  of  wntert  on    t!  Q. 

Psalms    whose  mc-ditatioiis  have  been  laid  under  contribution  to  enrich  the  work,  render   I 
commentary  one  of  the  most  voluminous  in   existence.     At  all   •  "ill   I*  «» 

encyclopaedia  of   reference."— BRITISH   QUARTERLY    RE.  CJ 

THE     INTERPRETER;     or,   Scripture     for    Family 

telected   passages    of   the    Word    of    God    for    every   morning    an  .  ^ 

the  year,  accompanied  by  running  comment  and  suitable  Hymns  By  C.  H.  SPURGEOW. 
Cloth  25s.,  Persian  Morocco  32s  I  .rocco  42s.  Hymn  Book  1».  <  leap  g 

Edition.  Cloth.   12s.  6d  .  Imitation   Morocco,   gilt  edges.  21*.  .. 

Heads  of  households  who  find   it  difficult   I 
God.  will   find  thit   to  be   th.>  very   help  they  need.     In    the  bett   binding   it  it  a  grai  ^ 

"  CalcuTjfteaMo^'be    of    grra-.    v.ilur     to    thr    m:m.     wlx.    rr,|inie    guidance    in    conducting          X 

family  worship." -THE  '  u        ,   MONTHLY  I'  -INB. 

THE    GOLDEN    ALPHABET    OF    THE    PRAISES    OF    HOLY       CO 
SCRIPTURE,   setting   forth  the  Helirver1* 

Devotional    Commentary    upon    the  One    Hmndred    »nd   Nine  teen  UiPtJ 
SPURGEON.     Crown  8vo.   Cloth.     Published  at  3v   6d..  offered  at  2«.   Bd. 
"  Our   hope  is  that  it  will    be    largely  used    by   devout    persons    for  private  rr»d'n«^  O 

thall  br   glad  if  our  t'ook,   and   alto   make  u   known  aaong         « 

their  friends."— C.  H.  SPURCEON. 

PICTURES    FROM    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS, 

SPURGl-.ciN.     A    '  ommentary  on    i  ^ 

IBStoly  Note  by  Tiioit**  SrrooEOK.    (Eighter  .  ^ 

at  3s.  6d  ,  offered  at  2»     6d. 

5l)oinilrtifal. 

THE   MEyROpOLR'J^NpuTu^Rr^  2 

calf   binding!. 


FAC-SIMILE  PULPIT  NOTES,  WITH  SERMONS  PREACHED 

FROM  THEM  By  u  tt.  SPURGEON.  'doth  extra.  Published  at  2s.  6d.,  offered 
at  28  This  volume  contains  12  fac-simile  reproductions  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  written 
Jotes  u'srd  by  him  when  preaching.  With  two  portraits,  and  view  of  interior  of 
Tabernacle  with  congregation. 


•'TWELVE    SERMONS"    SERIES. 

free  1».  2d.  each. 
Christmas  Sermons. 
New  Year's  Sermons. 
Popular  Sermons. 
Sermons  on  the  Passion  and  Death 

of  Christ. 

Sermons  on  the  Resurrection. 
Sermons  on  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Sermons  on  the  Second  Coming   of 

Christ. 

Sermons  on  Prayer. 
Sermons  on  the  Plan  of  Salvation. 
Sermons  on  Various   Subjects. 
Sermons  on  Vital  Questions. 
Memorable     Sermons    Preached    on 

Remarkable  Occasions. 
Sermons  with  Strange  Titles. 
Sermons  for  Christian  Workers. 
Sermons  on  Peace. 
Sermons  on  the  Love  of  Christ. 
Sermons  on   our  Lord's  Cries   from 

the  Cross. 

Sermons   on   Christian  Warfare. 
Sermons  on  Repentance. 
Sermons  on  Forgiveness. 
Sermons  for  the  Troubled  and  Tried. 
Sermons  to  Seekers. 


Limp    Cloth,    1s.    each.     Post 


Missionary  Sermons. 

Sermons  on  the  Prodigal  Son,  &c. 

Sermons  on  the  Bible. 

Sermons    on    Faith. 

Sermons  on  Unbelief. 

Sermons  on  Conversion. 

Sermons  on  Praise. 

Sermons  on  Joy. 

Revival  Sermons. 

Sermons  on  Holiness. 

Sermons  on  Hope. 

Sermons  on  the  Gospel  for  Sinners. 

Sermons  on  Thanksgiving. 

Sermons  on  Ritualism. 

Sermons  on  Temptation. 

Sermons  on  Death. 

Sermons  on  Heaven. 

Sermons  on  Backsliding. 

Sermons  to  Young  Men. 

Sermons  on  Grace  Abounding. 

Sermons  on  the  Atonement. 

Sermons  on  Obedience. 

Sermons  on  Sanctification. 

Sermons  on  Decision. 

Sermons  on  Humility. 

Sermons  on  Precious  Promises. 

Sermons  on  the  Doctrines  of  ©race. 

Messages  to  the  Multitude. 


Soul-winning    Sermons. 
Striking  Sermons. 

"GOOD    TIDINGS    OF   GREAT    JOY."     Christ's    Incarnation    the 

Foundation     of      Christianity.      "  Central     Truth    Series."      Vol.      I.      Cloth     Boardt. 

Published  at  Is.  6d.,  offered  at  la. 
"TILL     HE     COME."     Communion    Meditations    and    Addresses.     By 

C.  H.  SPURGEON.    Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at   2e.  6d. 
TYPES    AND    EMBLEMS:    A    Collection    of    Sermons   preached    on 

Sunday  and  Thursday  Evenings  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.     By  C.   H.  SPURGEON. 

Published  at  3s.,  offered  at  2s.   6d. 
TRUMPET  CALLS  TO  CHRISTIAN   ENERGY:   A  Second  Series 

of   Mr.    SPURGEON'S    Sunday    and    Thursday   Evening    Sermons.     Published    at  3s.    6d. 
offered  at  2s.  6d. 
THE  PRESENT  TRUTH:   A  Third  Series  of  Mr.  SPURGEON'S  Sunday 

and  Thursday  Evening  Sermons      Published  at  3s.   6d.,  offered  at   2s.  6d. 

STORM  SIGNALS:  A  Fourth  Series  of  Sermons  preached  on  Sunday 
and  Thursday  Evenings  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  By  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 
Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at  2s.  6d. 

FARM    SERMONS.     Discourses    on    Farming.     By    C.    H.    SPURGEON. 

Crown  8vo.   328    pages,   large   type.     Illustrated.     Published   at  3s.    6d.,    offered    at 

28.   6d. 
"  ONLY    A    PRAYER-MEETING  !  "     4O    Prayer-meeting  Addresses 

by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.    Cloth.    Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at  2s.  6d. 

THE  ROYAL  WEDDING.  The  Banquet  and  the  Guests.  By  C.  H. 
SPURGEON.  Paper  Covers,  6d.  ;  Cloth,  Is. 

THE  PASSION  AND  DEATH  OF  OUR  LORD.  Containing  63 
Sermons  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Cloth,  5s.  net. 

THE  MOST  HOLY  PLACE:  Sermons  on  the  Song  of  Solomon.  By 
C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Containing  52  Sermons  delivered  in  the  New  Park  Street  Chapel 
and  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  Cloth  gilt.  Published  at  7s.,  offered  at  SB.  net. 

CHRIST  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  Sermons  on  the  Fore- 
shadowings  of  Our  Lord  in  Old  Testament  History,  Ceremony  and  Prophecy.  By 
C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Cloth  gilt.  Published  at  7s.,  offered  at  6 a.  net. 


CHRIST'S  RELATION  TO  HIS  PEOPLE.  moru 

11     SPURCEON.     With    an    introduction    by     Rev.     ANDREW    MCHKAT      Cloth    (ill. 
hed    at  7s..   offorod    at    5«. 

THE  MESSIAH:  Our  Lori's  .:!es  and  AttntM:-  ni  by 

C.    II.    SIL-K  .1  ON.     Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  7s.,  offered    at    6«.  on. 

SERMONS  ON  OUR   LORD'S   PARABLES. 

Containing     sixty-five    Sermons    delivered    iu     the     Nrw    Park     S'treel     Chapel    * 
Metropolitan    Tabernacle,     Newington.     Cloth     gill.     Published    at    7»  .    offered    at 
5e.    uel. 

OUR   LORD'S  MIRACLES.     Containing  107  Sermons  delivered  in  tht 

New  Park  Stirt-t  Chapd  and  tli--  Metropolitan  Tabernatlr.  Newington.  Two  Volumes, 
Cloth  gilt.  Published  at  7s.  each,  offorod  at  5n. 

THE   GOSPEL    FOR   THE   PEOPLE. 

Sketch  of  Mr.  Spurgcon's  Life,  and  Fourteen  Portraits  and  Engraving*.  Cloth  gilt 
Published  at  5s.,  offered  at  4s. 

These  Short  Sermons  have  been   selected  from    the  Series   with    a    \     - 
used  in  Mission  Halls,  and  other  similar  places.     They  are  about  hall  the  length  of  the 
ordinary  sermons. 

MESSAGES    TO    THE    MULTITUDE.     Tw«l»t    Sole  -ermoru. 

By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Cloth    Is.  6d.  ;   Cl  >ih  limp,  1>.  ,   I  ••  W 

THE  EVERLASTING  GOSPEL  OF  THE  OLD  AND  NEW 

TESTAMENTS.     Cloth.  3s.  6d 

illustrator. 

THE  SALT-CELLARS.     Being  a  Collection  of  Proverbs,  togeth. 

Homrlv  Notes  thereon.  By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  "  These  three  things  go  to  the  making 
of  a  proverb:  Shortness,  Sense,  and  Salt."  In  2  vols  .  cloth  gilt,  published  at  3s.  6d. 
each,  offered  at  2a.  6d  each;  Morocco,  7s.  6d.  each. 

"For    many    years    I   have '  published  a    Sheet    Almanack,   intended    to    be    hung    up  in 
workshops  and  kitchens.     This    has    been  known  as   '  John   Ploughman's    Almanack.'    and 
has   had  a    large    sale.     It  has   promoted  temperance,    thrift,    kindness    to    animals,    and  a 
regard   for  religion,  among   working    people.     The  placing  of  a   proverb   for   ever)' 
twenty  years  has  cos;  me  great  labour,   and   I   feel   that   I   cannot  afford  to  lose   the  large 
collection    of   sentences  which    I    have   thus    brought    together;    yet    lost   thr. 
left   to   die   with    the  ephemeral   sheet.     Hence    these  two  volum- 

be  a  complete  collection  of  proverbs,    but   only  a   few  out   of  many  t).  I.XTTLACT 

FROM   PREFACE. 

THE    SOUL    WINNER;    Or,    M  Lead    -  nners   to    ; 

Cloth  gilt.     Published   at  3s.   6d.,   offered   at  2».    6d. 
SERMONS    IN    CANDLES,    containing    Illustrations    which    may   be 

found    in   Common   Candles.     Stiff  covers,   Is.  ;  cloth,  gilt  edges,  2s 

TEACHINGS    OF    NATURE    IN    THE    KINGDOM   OF   GRACE. 

Uniform    with    "  Till    He   Come."       Cloth    gilt.     Published   at    3»     6<1,    offered    at 

2s.    6d. 

FEATHERS      FOR      ARROWS;    (jr.    Illustrations    f  :s    and 

:i.-rs,    from    my    Note    Book.     !:•.  i  KGBON.     Cloth.     Published  at  2«    od  . 

offered  at  2s. 
BARBED  ARROWS,  from  the  Quiver  of  C.  II.  Spurgeon.     A  C,V: 

of    Anecdotes,    Illustrations   and    Similes.     With  '  «J*.     A 

Companion      Volume      to      "  Feathers      for     Arrows."     Clotti.     Published      at     2s.     6d., 
offered  at  2*. 
ILLUSTRATIONS     AND     MEDITATIONS; 

Puritan's  Garden.     Distilled   and   dispensed   by  C.    H.  SrunGKON.     (  hed  at 

2s.  6-1  ,  offered  at  2«. 
SMOOTH  STONES  TAKEN  FROM  ANCIENT  BROOKS. 

Selection    of    Sentences.     Illustrations    and    Quaint    Sayings   from    the    Works    ol 

renowned    Puritan,    I  IIOUAS    HKO..KS.     By  C.    H.  SrUKCBOM.     Cloth    gilt.     Published   at 

2s.  fed  .  offered  at  2». 
WORDS  OF  WISDOM  FOR  DAILY  LIFE.  C 

Pr.dc?     A    Drama   in    live  Acts.     Going   throu«h  the    i  'Is  of  Sloth. 

a    Gift    of   God.     Capital    Punishment.     Profit   and    I- 

Show  your  Colours,  etc.     Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  2*.,  offered  at  U.  6d. 

"WE    ENDEAVOUR."      r inform    with    "Words   of    Wisdom  (or 
Life."    Cloth'.     Published  ^1  2s  ,  offered  at   1«.  «d. 

"  COME,   YE    CHILDREN."     i  ra  for 

'     Cl'»th  Kilt      Published  at  2s  .  offered  at  1«.   8d. 
WORDS  OF  COUNSEL  FOR  CHRISTIAN  WORKERS      t 

with     "Words     of    Wisdom     for     Dairy    1  ^     •«     »• 

offered  at  Is.  6d. 


WORDS   OF   ADVICE    FOR   SEEKERS.     Uniform  with   "Words  of 

Wisdom  for   Daily   Life."     Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  2s.   each,    offered    at    Is.   6d. 
WORDS  OF  CHEER  FOR  DAILY  LIFE.     Uniform  with  "Words  of 

Wisdom  for  Daily  Life."     Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  2s.,  offered   at   Is.    6d. 
WORDS  OF  WARNING  FOR  DAILY  LIFE.     Uniform  with  "Words 

of  Wisdom   for  Daily  Life."     Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  2s.,   offered  at   Is.    6d. 
EVERYBODY'S   BOOK:    C.  H.   Spurgeon's  Pilgrim's  Guide.     A  word 

for  all   times  and  for  all  reasons.     Price   Is.,   paper  covers;    2s.,    handsomely  bound   in 

cloth. 
A   GOOD    START:    A   Book  for  Young   Men   and   Women.     By   C.    H. 

SPURGEON.     Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at  2s.  6d.    With  Introductory 

N0te  by  SIR  GEORGE  WILLIAMS. 
GLORIOUS  THEMES  FOR  SAINTS  AND  SINNERS.     By  C.  H. 

SPURGEON.  Crown  8vo.  Printed  in  Large  Type.  Cloth  Gilt.  Published  at  3s.  6d., 
offered  at  2s.  6d. 

lExtracts. 

FLASHES  OF  THOUGHT;  being  one  Thousand  Choice  Extracts  from 
the  works  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON  Alphabetically  arranged,  and  with  a  copious  Index. 
Published  at  5s.,  offered  at  3s.  6d. 

SPURGEON'S  GEMS:  being  Brilliant  Passages  Selected  from  the 

Discourses  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Large  Type.  Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at 
2s.  6d. 

GLEANINGS    AMONG     THE    SHEAVES.     By  C.    H.     SPURGEON. 

Cloth,   Is. 

SPURGEON'S  BIRTHDAY  BOOK.  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  ;  Roan,  3s.  6d.  ; 
Calf  or  Morocco,  5s.  ;  Russia,  with  Photograph,  10s.  6d.  One  of  the  most  attractive  of 
these  popular  little  books.  A  large  edition  has  been  sold. 

GOSPEL  EXTRACTS  FROM  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Price  Is. 

©ebottcmaL 

MORNING  AND  EVENING  DAILY  READINGS.     New  Edition  on 

India  paper,  in  one  volume.  Royal  32mo,  736  pages,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  3s.  6d.  ;  leather, 
5s.  ;  calf  or  morocco,  7s.  6d.  New  Edition,  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

The  Daily  Readings  are  also  published  in  two  large  type  crown  8vo  volumes, 
entitled  MORNING  BY  MORNING  and  EVENING  BY  EVENING  (3s.  6d.  each).  Over  two 
hundred  thousand  copies  hav  been  sold,  and  they  can  still  be  obtained. 

MORNING  BY  MORNING;   or,  Daily  Readings  for  the  Family  or  the 
Closet.     By    C.    H.    SPURGEON.     Cloth,    3s.    6d.     Leather,    5s.     Morocco,    red    and    gilt 
edges,  7s.   6d.     New  Edition,   cloth  2s.  6d.     One  hundred  and   thirty-sixth  thousand. 
"  Those  who   have  learnt    the    value  of   morning    devotion    will    highly    prize    these  helps. 

All  who  love  a  full-orbed  gospel,  vigorous,  varied  thought,  and  a  racy  style,  will  appreciate 

this  volume."— REV.   J.   ANGUS,  D.D.,   Regent's  Park   College. 

EVENING  BY  EVENING;  or,  Readings  at  Eventide  for  the  Family  or 
the  Closet.  By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Cloth,  3s.  6d.  Leather,  5s.  Morocco,  red  and  gilt 
edges,  7s.  6d.  New  Edition,  2s.  6d.  loznd  thousand. 

"  Ever  since  I  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Spurgeon's  '  Morning  by  Morning,'  I  have 
reckoned  it  altogether  priceless.  On  learning  that  '  Evening  by  Evening  '  was  published, 
how  gladly  I  bade  it  welcome !  And  I  can  humbly  commend  it  in  no  higher  terms  than  by 
•imply  saying  that  it  will  be  found  a  fit  companion,  every  way,  for  its  forerunner  of  the 
morning."— CHARLES  J.  BROWN,  D.D.,  Edinburgh. 

THE     CHEQUE    BOOK    OF    THE     BANK     OF     FAITH.     Being 

Precious  Promises  arranged  for  Daily  Use.  With  brief  Experimental  Comments. 
Cloth,  3s.  6d.  Leather,  5s.  Persian  morocco,  red  and  gilt  edges,  7s.  6d.  New 
Edition,  Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

SPURGEON'S    PRAYERS.     Cloth,  Gilt,  2s.  6d. 

OUR   OWN    HYMN    BOOK.     Compiled   by  C.  H.    SPURGEON.     Prices 

from  Is.  to  10s.  6d.     School  Edition,  6d. 

SUPPLEMENT   TO  OUR    OWN    HYMN    BOOK.     Price   6d  ,    Is., 

and  2s. 

JFor  gtufcents. 

LECTURES  TO  MY  STUDENTS.  A  Selection  frem  Addresses 
lehvered  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  By  C.  H. 
bPURGEON.  President.  First  Series.  Forty-second  Thousand.  Published  at  2s.  6d., 
offered  at  2s. 

Second  Series   of   LECTURES  TO   MY   STUDENTS.    With 

oni  of  Posture  and  Action.     Published  at  2s.  6d.,  offered   at  2e.     Twenty- 
nfth  Thousand. 


THE    ART   OF   ILLUSTRATION:    Third        :  : 

Students.1      A    selection     frcm    Addresses    delivered     i.  ;  4»,orv 

2s    6dr'o«orodatn2sr.alrrn"<!'      ""     '       "     Spt<*GE0*'     *«»««»•    pSUSST* 

COMMENTING  AND  COMMENTARIES.  1  wo  Lectures  a<! 

to    the   Students    of   the   Pastors'    College,    Metropolitan  Tabernacle.    toK- 

Catalogue   ol      libie  Commentaries  and    E-;  :ilh  Thou**    : 
at  2^.  6<1.  offered  at  2s. 

THCrGRE*TEST    FIGHT    IN    THE    WORLD-     Conference  Addre*. 

by  C.   H.   SruRGEON.     In  paper  covers,  price  6d.     Cloth 

SPEECHES  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON,  AT  HOME  AND  ABROAD. 

In    Paper  Covers,   Is   ;    Cloth  gilt,  published  at  2s.    6d.  offered  at    2». 

printed  uniformly  with  the  Series  of  Lectures,  and  contains  oghtceu  anulo.  limning 

with       The  Bible,      and  ending   with       Drive  on." 

MY    SERMON-NOTES.     A    Selection    from    Outlines    of    Discourse! 
delivered  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.     Part  I.     Gene»i»  to  Proverbs 
Part    II.     Ecclesiaste*    to    Malachi.     LXV.    to    CXXIX.     Publ.shed    at    2*.    fcL     each 
?fT?r,et^    at    2*'    ';uh      1>arts    1-    and    n  •    Uund    ^Kdb<-r    in    one    volume 
Published  at  5s..   offered   at  4..     Part  III.     Matthrw  to  Arts.     CXXX     to 
Part    IV.     Romans    to    Revelation.     CXCVI     to    CCLXIV      Published  at  2».    6»i 
Offered   at    2«.    each.     Parts    III.    and    IV..    bound    together    in    one   volume.     Pub 
lished  at  5s.,  offered  at  4s. 
When  a  preacher,  be  he  lay  or  regular,    finds   himself   severely   pressed    for   a   su 

will    find  here    an  outline    clearly  drawn,    a    good    deal    of    filling    up,    and   a  litt 

•  tones  or  pithy  bits  to  season  the  whole. 

AN  ALL-ROUND   MINISTRY.     Addresses  to  Ministers  and  Students. 
Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at    2«.    6d. 


THE  SWORD  AND  THE  TROWEL.    AM    othlj  If  agttiM     I  r.ce  3d. 

Yearly  vols.,  5s.     Cases    for  binding,  Is.  4d.     Records  the   movement    of   the  Tabernacle 
and    its    Institutions,    but   also   touches  upon  a   great   variety  of    interesting    t). 
It    commands    a    large    circulation    among    almost    all  .:<•,.    and    as    a 

religious   periodical    it    now  occupies  a  position    second    i  *orks  of 

faith  and   labours  of  love  which  are  the  honour  of   the  various  sections  of  the  <hur<h,  and 
it  contends  most  unsparingly  against  the  errors  of   the   times.     It  is  an 
the  religious  movements  which  emanate  from  the  Metropolitan  Taberu  .  Advocacy 

is   far  from   being  confined  within  that  area. 

Historical* 

A   NEW    LIFE    OF    C.    H.    SPURGEON      i  mfusely    Illnstrat, 

CHARLES     KAY.     With    an     Introduction  -,    SrURCKON.      Cloth     gill. 

Published  at  7s.  6d.,  offered  at  5«. 

A      MARVELLOUS      MINISTRY:     the    Storv    ol    (       11     Spurgeon's 

Sermons,   1856  to  1905  ^   RAY.     Illu 

MEMORIES  OF   STAMBOURNE,  U  Remarks,  k 

tions  and  Reflections,  by  C.   II.  SPURGEON  and  B.  BBDOOW.     Illustrated.     Paper  » 

Is.     Cloth,  gilt   edges,  2s 

THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE:  ,tory    and 

With  32    Illustrations.     1'      C     1>      ~'  '   P*pcr   covers.    It.     I). 

cloth,  2s. 

MEMORIAL  VOLUME,  containing  the  Sermons  and  Addresses  d< 

in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  in  connection  with  the  presentation  of  a  Testimonial 
to  Pastor  C.  H.  SPURCEON,  to  commemorate  the  completion  of  the  25th  year  of  hit 
pastorate.  9d. 

THE    SPURGEON    ALBUM, 

edges      Containing  a  brief  sketch  of  Mr.  SrtiRCKO.s'b  Life  and  bit  n  » 

with  Photographic  Views,  and  Portraits  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.   SPVRCK  6d 

MR.    SPURGEON'S    JUBILEE.     K-  port    of   the    proceedings    at   the 

.M.i    ipofil     .     I  .iberuacle,  June   18th   and   19th,    1884.     Paper   Covers,  6d.  ;    J<>tb.  I» 

SOUTHWARK.      \    Lecture    delivered   in    the    Metropolitan    Tabernacle 
Lectu  .i.Ler  26th.  I860-     1-  KOHON.     Stii   Covers,  6<L 

THE     TWO     WESLEYS      A     Lecture  'l»tan 

1  -rcrrabrr  6ih.  1861.     By  C.  H.  Sruacr. 

Popular. 

JOHN    PLOUGHMAN'S    TALK; 

.I:ON.     Illust:  .  It.     Cloth,   ,        •  I  Thousand. 

Cheap  Edition,  paper  covers,    6d.     Post  free,   8d. 


JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  PICTURES;  or,  More  of  his  Plain  Talk  for 
Plain  People.  Illustrated.  iSoth  Thousand.  Cloth,  Is.  Cloth,  gilt  edges,  2s.  Cheap 
Edition,  paper  covers,  6d.  Post  free,  8d. 

FAITH;  What  it  is,  and  What  it  Leads  to.  By  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 
Cloth,  Is.  Paper  cover,  6d. 

C.  H.  SPURGEON  ANECDOTES.  Containing  100  authentic  Anec 
dotes.  Clcth  gilt,  Is. 

SPURGEON'S     SHILLING     SERIES.      Bound     in     Cloth,    Is.     2d. 

post   free. 

Christ's  Glorious  Achievements.  The  Bible   and   the   Newspaper. 

Seven  Wonders  of  Grace.  Eccentric  Preachers. 

The   Spare   Half-Hour.  Good  Cheer. 

The  Mourner's  Comforter.  Gleanings   among  the   Sheaves. 

"  If  anyone  wishes  to  know  how  Mr.  Spurgeon  can  write,  let  him  invest  a  shilling  in  one 
of  these  little  books,  and  he  will  readily  see  how  it  is  that  their  author  can  attract  both 
readers  and  hearers."— BOOKSELLER. 

THE   CLUE  OF  THE   MAZE.     By  C.   H.   SPURGEON.     Price  Is.     It  is 

the  author's  desire  that  this  book  may  strengthen  the  faith  of  many,   and  recover  others 

out  of   the  snare   of  the   enemy. 

"  Heartily  do  we  thank  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  the  work,  and  commend  the  book  as  just  what 
is  often  required  for  a  present ;  it  will  be  found  to  be  acceptable  by  the  uncultured  and 
the  cultured  as  well."— THE  FREEMAN. 

THE  CLUE  OF  THE  MAZE:  A  Voice  Lifted  up  on  behalf  of  Honest 
Faith.  New  Enlarged  Edition,  uniform  with  "  All  ,of  Grace."  Cloth  gilt,  Is. 

ALL  OF  GRACE.     An  Earnest  Word  with  those  who  are  Seeking  Salva 
tion   by   the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Price   Is.     Morocco,   gilt    edges, 
2s.     Sixtieth  Thousand. 
"  Every  word  is  weighted  with  precious  truth,  and  truth  so  simply  and  convincingly  put 

that  none  can  fail  to  understand  God's  way  of  salvation.     Powerful  illustrations,   apt  and 

original   similes,   and  the  one  affectionate   desire   to   win  for  Christ   and  to   Christ,  make  it 

a  gospel   treasury   of  priceless  worth."— THE  CHRISTIAN. 

ACCORDING  TO  PROMISE;  or,  the  Method  of  the  Lord's  Dealing 
with  His  Chosen  People.  A  Companion  Volume  to  "  All  of  Grace."  Clotk,  Is 
Persian  morocco,  gilt  edges,  2s.  Thirty-seventh  Thousand. 

"  It  is  an  eminently  practical  volume,  the  fruit  of  a  ripe  experience  ;  as  simple  in  its 
form  as  it  is  searching  in  its  exposure  of  counterfeit  religion  ;  and  we  have  no  doubt  that 
many  will  have  reason  to  rejoice  that  they  made  its  acquaintance.  As  Mr.  Spurgeon 
remarks  in  one  of  his  homely  sentences,  '  he  who  looked  into  his  accounts  and  found 
that  his  business  was  a  losing  one  was  saved  from  bankruptcy.'  "—CHRISTIAN  LEADER. 

AROUND  THE  WICKET  GATE;  or,  A  Friendly  Talk  with  Seekers 
concerning  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Cloth,  Is.  ;  morocco, 
2s.  50th  thousand. 

THE  GREATEST  FIGHT  IN  THE  WORLD.  New  Edition.  Cloth 
gilt,  Is. 

11  A  MAN  IN  CHRIST."  An  Address  delivered  to  the  Members  of  the 
Stock  Exchange,  at  Cannon  Street  Hotel.  Price  2d. 

11  FAITH  IN  CHRIST."     An  Address  to  Men  of  Business.     Id. 

"  THE  CLAIMS  OF  GOD."     An  Address  to  Men  of  Business.     Id. 

"FIRST  THINGS  FIRST."  An  Address  delivered  at  the  monthly 
meeting  of  the  London  Banks'  Prayer  Union,  held  at  the  Egyptian  Hall,  Mansion 
House,  London.  Price  Id. 

A  CATECHISM  WITH  PROOFS,  compiled  by  the  Rev.  C.  H. 
SPURGEON  from  the  Assembly's  Shorter  Catechism  and  the  Baptist  Catechism.  Price  Id. 

RARE    JEWELS    FROM    SPURGEON. 

Tastily  Printed,  Gold  Corded,  suitable  -for  Birthday  Gifts. 
BREAKING   THE   LONG   SILENCE.     Mr.    SPURGEON'S  Last  Address 

at  Mentone,  New  Year's  Day,  1892.     Published  at  6d.,  offered   at   4d. 

PEACE,  PERFECT  PEACE.  An  address  suitable  for  the  New  Year 
on  the  Bishop  of  Exeter's  Hymn.  By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Published  at  6d.,  offered 
at  4d. 

MAY  I  ?     By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Published  at  6d.,  offered  at  4d. 

SWEET     EXPERIENCES     IN     1842     AND    1892.      By     C.     H. 

SPURGEON.     Published  at  6d.,  offered  at  4d. 


SUPPOSING   HIM  TO   BE  THE  GARDENER.   !< 

SiTur.i  ON.     Published  at  6d.,  offered  at  4d. 

THERE    GO    THE    SHIPS.     By  C  I'ublished   at   6d  , 

offered    at    4d. 

THE    NAME    OF   JESUS.     A    choice    Booklet.     By   C.    II     M  ritGEON. 

Published  at  6d..  offered  at  4cJ. 


THE   SERMON  OF  THE  SEASONS. 

Published  at  6d.,  offered  at  4d. 


H.     Si 


THE      SEARCH     AFTER      HAPPINESS.     By     C.      II. 

Published   at  6d.,  offered  at  4d. 

CHRIST    IS   ALL.      Hv    <:.    H.    SrUEGIOM.      Published   at   6.1..   offered 
at  4d. 

THE    TALKING    BOOK.     Hy    C     H.    SPURGEON  hed    at    6d., 

offered  at  4d. 

LOOKING  UNTO   JESUS.     Hv  C.    H.   SPURGK.  bed  at  6d., 

offered  at  4d. 

THE  GREAT  SHIELD  OF  FAITH.     Uy  C.   H.  Published 

at  6d.,  offered  at  4d. 

PICTURES    OF    LIFE    AND    BIRTHDAY    REFLECTIONS 

C.   H.  SPURGEON.     Published  at  6d.,  offered  at  4d. 

Any  Six  of  these  Booklets,  in  an  illuminated  envelope, 

One  Penny  Each.  By  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

Specially  adapted  for  gratuitous  distribution. 


A     Double     Knoi-k     at     the       Growing  on   the   Wall. 

"  Suop         .                     be   the 

Door  of  the  Young.                 Healing    by   the    Stripes    of 

A     Good    Soldier,  of    Jesus 

Jesus. 

The  Anxious  Enqu 

Christ. 

Helps  to  Full  Assurance. 

The    Believing  11. 

Anxious    Enquiry    for   a    Be 

High    Doctrine    and    Broad 

The     Children      and       their 

loved  Son. 

Doctrine. 

Hosannas. 
1  Mopping       Well       of 

Apostolic  Exhortation. 
A  Mediator. 

How  to  Obtain  1 

Knaresborough 

A  Silly  Dove. 

How  to  Raise  the  Dead. 

The  Essence   o(   Si;    , 

A  Spur  for  a   Free   Horse. 

Infant  Salvation. 

The  Heart  :   a  Gift  for  God. 

A  Sermon   on   a  Grand   Old 

In  the  Garden  with  Him. 

!  .ist. 

Text. 

Is  Conversion  Necessary? 

. 

A  Token   for  the   Bereaved. 

Is   it  Nothing  to  You? 

ture. 

A  Very  Early  Bible  Society. 
A  Word  for  the  Persecuted. 

Jesus    and    the    Children. 
Jesus    and    the  Lambs. 

tile    Dogs. 

Baptismal    Regeneration.              Landlord  and  Tenant. 
Bells  for  the  Horses.                  ;    Let  us  Pray. 

the    Law 

Best      Burden      for      Young       Lord       Jesus        Christ       as  1 
Shoulders.                                         Leader. 

of  God. 

Call    to   the    Unconverted.       i    Loving   Advice    for   Anxious 

. 

Chastisement. 

Seekers. 

Wide    ami    <>}„:,    Sea. 

Confession  of  Sin.                          Luther    Sermon     at     1  • 

Exeter      Hall      Sermon      to 

Hall. 

iod  th«i 

Young    Men. 

•uiev 

Faith:    What    is    it?      How 

but  Jesus. 

can  it   be   Obtained? 

Lilting        up       the       Brazen 

Fear  Not. 

Sen>. 

Way    Back. 

Feed  My   Lambs. 
Filling    with    the  Spirit. 
God's  Jewels. 
God    in    Heaven,    and    M'n 
on  the  Sea. 
God,     the     Children's 

Only        i  :   .    '         H.::. 

Trust    Hun 
Receiving    the    Kingdom    of 
God  as  a  Little  Child. 
Serrno  .                      Sody. 
S.S.  ;   or  the  Sinner  Saved. 

A*r   Horse 
Way  of  Salv.v 

an!  it  out? 
Young  Man,  it  ibis  for  you* 

Teacher. 

Sown   Among  Thorns. 

A    New    Scries    of   Little    Books 

Suitable   for   General   Distribution   or  for  put  tin, 
12  sorts,  i<l.  each  ;   25  for  Is. 

A  Cure  Cost  and  Profit.       !      Prepare  I 

«   \_urc.  _       .  ui*-j  I  I 


'      Cost  and   Profit.  ,'arel 

A   Spendthrift.  Food  for  All. 

A   Saviour  you  need.  Good   News.  The  Burn.ng  Ship 


True  Charily 


Sermons  in  Coloured  Wrappers,    Id.    each. 


1.  Jack  the  Huckster. 


2.    Tl: 

4.  Robinson    Ciu»oe's   Teit. 


.  . 


A     NUMBER     OF    C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     MOST     STRIKING 

SERMON'S.    Printi-d    with    attractive     coloured    covers.     Specially     prepared     for    wide 
circulation.     Price   One  Penny  each. 

BEWARE  OF  THE  DOG.     (From  John  Ploughman's  Pictures.)     Id. 
JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  HOMILIES.    Nos.  1.  to  8  in  Neat  Wrappers, 

Id.  each.     Suitable  for  distribution  in  the  Country. 

SPURGEON'S   NEW   4-pp.    ILLUSTRATED   TRACTS.     Is.   4d. 

per  100;  Is.  6d-   post  free. 

SPURGEON'S  ILLUSTRATED  TRACTS.     1st  and  2nd  Series.     6d. 
per  100;  8d.  post  free. 

SPURGEON'S  TRACTS  ON  GAMBLING.     Nos.  1  and  2.     Is.  per 

100;  Is.  2d.  post   free. 

SPURGEON'S    BREAD    OF    LIFE     LETTER    LEAFLETS.      4d. 

per  packet ;   5d.   post  free. 

MRS.  SPURGEON'S  WESTWOOD  LEAFLETS.     6d.  per  packet; 

7d.  post  free. 

Works   by  Mrs.   Spurgeon. 

THE  STANDARD  LIFE  OF  C.  H.   SPURGEON,  by  his  Wife  and 

his    Private  Secretary.    Complete  in  4  Demy  4to    Volumes,  10s.    6d.    each ;    or  about  32 
One   Shilling   Monthly   Parts.     The  4  vols.  30s.,  carriage  paid. 

WESTWOOD  LEAFLETS.     By  Mrs.  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Price  3d.  per 
set.     In  packets   of  50,  6d. 

6-  Pains  and   Pearls.  12-  The  Gobelins  Tapestriei. 

7.  Plenty    of   Shadows.  13.  How   to    Pray. 

8-  Songs  in  the  Night.  14.  The  Spot  of  Light. 

9.  The   Lark's  Nest.  15.  An  Angel   in   the  House. 

10.  The  Syringa.  16.  The   Night  Watcher. 


1.  Imprisoned  Music  (Prose) 

2.  Imprisoned  Music  (Poetry) 

3.  The  Empty  Fountain. 

4.  The   Dripping   Roses. 

5.  The      Place      where      the 

Ring's      Prisoners     were  I     11.  Cutting  down    the  Trees, 
bound. 

"  The  Westwood  Leaflets.  By  Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  (Passmore  and  Alabaster),  6d.  A 
packet  of  sweet  thoughts,  the  product  of  a  heart  not  strange  to  suffering,  but  full  of  the 
real  Christ-love  and  joy.  Send  for  them,  and  lose  no  time  in  posting  them  to  any  sick  or 
afflicted  ones,  whose  spirits  they  will  certainly  comfort." — Al,  Dec.,  1889. 

TEN  YEARS  AFTER  !  A  Sequel  to  "  Ten  Years  of  my  Life  in  the 
Service  of  the  Book  Fund.'  Cloth  gilt,  3s.  6d.  Special  Edition,  with  new  Photograph 
and  written  Autograph,  5s. 

A  BASKET  OF  SUMMER  FRUIT.  Uniform  with  "A  Cluster  of 
Camphire,"  and  "  A  Carillon  of  Bells."  Cloth  gilt,  Is.  6d. 

A  CARILLON  OF  BELLS  to  Ring  out  the  Old  Truths  of  "Free  Grace 
and  Dying  Love."  Cloth  gilt,  Is.  6d. 

A  CLUSTER  OF  CAMPHIRE;  or,  Words  of  Cheer  and  Comfort  for 
Sick  and  Sorrowful  Souls;  uniform  with  "A  Carillon  of  Bells."  Cloth  gilt,  Is.  6d. 

A  PROTEST  AGAINST  BAZAARS  (New  and  Enlarged  Edition). 
By  Mrs.  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Price  Id. 

LIFE  OF  MRS.  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     By  CHARLES  RAY.     Illustrated. 

Price  Is.    net.     Cloth  2s. 


Works   by   Thomas   Spurgeon. 

•  •GOD  SAVE   THE    KING!"     Addresses  concerning  King  Jesus  and 

His  Royal  Estate.     Cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d.  net.     Post  free,  2s.  9d. 

Tin.  METHODIST  TIMES  says  : — "  Fervour,  pathos  and  appeal  make  these  Sermons  modeli 
of  pulpit  eloquence." 

DOWN    TO    THE   SEA:    A    Collection    of    Sermons    (Illustrated),    with 
Photograph.     Cloth  gilt,  price  3s.  6d.  ;  bevelled  boards,  gilt  edges,  5s. 

SCARLET  THREADS  AND  BITS  OF  BLUE.     A  Selection  of  Short 

I'oi  ins.     Paper  covers,  Is.  ;  cloth,   Is.   6d. 

AND  WORK  says:—"  'Scarlet  Threads  and  Bits  of  Blue'  is  a  fine  collection  of 
flowing  verse,  and  much  besides.  There  is  unction,  pathos,  humour  of  the  keen  and 
pierc-.ng  sort.  The  '  Bits  of  Blue  '  are  almost  exclusively  upon  Temperance  themes,  but 
the  '  Scarlet  Threads  '  are  full  of  guspel  teaching  in  pleasant  poetic  form." 

THE  GOSPEL   OF   THE   GRACE  OF   GOD.     Sermons  delivered  at 
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  in  1884.     Bound  in  Cloth,  Is.  6d. 


IN  PERILS  IN  THE  SEA.     A  Poem.     Paper  Covers,  Id. 

LOST  AND  FOUND:  The  Lost  Sheep.     The  Lost  Coin.     The  Lout  Son. 

Addresses  on  Luke  XV.     Pric«  2d. 


New  and  Important   Contribution  to  Present   Day 
Theology. 

SIN  AND  THE   UNFOLDING  OF  SALVATION.— Being  the 

Years'  Course  of  Theological   Lectures  delivered   \>y   the   late  Professor   DAVID  GHACET 
^Principal   of  the  Pastors'   College,   London).     With  an  Introduction  by   Pastor 
SPURGEON,   and  a    Preface    by  Professor  A.    M'Cxic,    B  A.,   LL.B.   (Pastors'    College). 
Large  Octavo,   Cloth  gilt,  price  7s.  6d. 


Works  by  Rev.  Arthur  T.  Pierson.  D.D. 

"LIFE    POWER";    or,    Character,    Culture,   and    Conduct.     Cloth  gilt, 

2s.  6d. 
THE     HEART     OF     THE     GOSPEL.       Sermons     delivered     at    the 

Metropolitan  Tabernacle.    Second  Edition.    Cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d. 

THE   HEIGHTS  OF  THE  GOSPEL.     A  companion  volume  t« 

Heart  of  the  Gospel."       Cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d. 
THE     HOPES     OF     THE     GOSPEL.      Sermons     delivered    at     the 

Metropolitan    Tabernacle.     Cloth     gilt,    2s.    6d.     Uniform     with     '  The     Heart    of     the 
Gospel,"  etc. 

EVANGELISTIC     WORK     IN     PRINCIPLE     AND     PRACTICE. 

New  and  revised  edition.       Cloth  gilt,  2s.  6d. 
THE   DIVINE  ART    OF  PREACHING.     Lectures   on   Preaching,  &c. 

Cloth,   2s. 

PAPERS     FOR     THINKING     PEOPLE.       I        The     Fool's    Creed. 
II.    The   Ethics  of   the  Dance.       III.  The  Word  of  Ciod  Tried  and  Proved      1 
Great  Laws  of   the  Sermon.    V.   Why  and   How  shall   I  give?     Stiff   covers,  Is.  ;  cloth, 
Is.  6d. 

LOVE    IN    WRATH;     or,    The    Perfection    of   God's    Judgments.      An 
Address  delivered   before   the  Mildmay  Conference.     Embossed  cover.     Price  4d. 

THE    READING   OF   THE   WORD  OF  GOD   IN    PUBLIC,  AND 

HINTS  ON  BIlil.K  kl.AI  >l  N<  ,.v     Price  6d. 

IN    FULL  ARMOUR;    or,   The  Disciple   equipped  for  conflict  with  the 
Devil.    Price  6d. 

THE    COMING   OF   THE    LORD.     I'm    I.     The  Doctrinal   Centre  of 

the  Bible.        Part  II.  The   Practical  Centre  of  the   Bib!' 

Dr.   Pierson's  Sixpenny  Booklet. 

STUMBLING    STONES    REMOVED    FROM    THE    WORD    OF 

(iou.     Paper,  6d. 

THE  DOVE  IN  THE  HEART.  1   e  6d. 

THE  HAND  ON  THE  PLOUGH; 

Price  6d. 

HOPE:  THE  LAST  THING  IN  THE  WORLD.     Uniform  as  above. 

•    6.1. 

THE  GREATEST  WORK  IN   THE   WORLD.     64  pages.     At- 
covrr.     Price  6d.     Gilt  edges,  Is. 

THE     PILLAR     OF     FIRE.       A     Word    of     Witness     from     ' 

Experience.     Price  6d. 

ANSWERED   PRAYER.     A  i:     '•  l*rance  Written  before  C 

New   .,!;;.:..    ].-,...;   a  ,  ;  .::.], roved.     Cloth  6d.  ;    leather,  Is. 

Dr.  Pierson's  Lectures  and  Sermons. 

THE  PASTOR'S  TRUE   MONUMENT  AND   MEMORIAL,    and 

THK 

delivered  on  the   58th    Anniversary   of   the    Hirt.i  :l»«»t  < 

the  Preacher.    Price  3d. 


10 
IMMORTALITY      AND      RESURRECTION,      and      A     VOICE 

FROM  THE   DEAD.     Being   two   Sermons  delivered  on    the  anniversary   of  the   death 
of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.     Price  3d. 

THE    BIBLE:    GOD'S    ROCK    OF   AGES.     A  Lecture    delivered    at 
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  on  Thursday,   November  24th,   1892.       Price  2d. 

THE  CROWNING    BEATITUDE.     Price  2d. 


Works  by  Other  Authors. 

FROM     THE     USHER'S      DESK      TO      THE      TABERNACLE 

PULPIT.  Pastor  C.  H.  SPURGEON,  Prince  of  Preachers.  By  Rev.  ROBERT  SHINDLER, 
Author  of  "  Northeram  Hall,"  etc.  With  numerous  Portraits  and  Illustrations.  Cloth 
gilt,  2s.  6d.  Bevelled  boards,  gilt  edges,  3s.  6d.  Twenty-eighth  thousand. 

FROM   THE   PULPIT    TO    THE    PALM-BRANCH.     A    Memorial 

of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Sequel  to  the  Sketch  of  his  Life,  entitled  "  From  the  Usher's  Desk 
to  the  Tabernacle  Pulpit."  Including  the  Official  Report  of  the  Services  in  connection 
with  his  funeral.  With  Portraits  and  Illustrations.  Bound  in  cloth,  2s.  6d.  Bevelled 
boards,  silvered  edges,  3s.  6d. 

THE  ESSEX  LAD  who  became  England's  greatest  Preacher.  A  new 
Life  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON  for  Young  People.  By  J.  MANTON  SMITH.  With  Introduction 
by  Rev.  JOHN  SPURGEON,  Father  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
Stiff  covers,  Is.  Cloth,  gilt  edges,  2s. 

A  BODY  OF  DIVINITY,  contained  in  Sermons  upon  the  Assembly's 
Catechism.  By  the  Rev.  THOMAS  WATSON,  Rector  of  St.  Stephen's,  Walbrook.  A  new 
and  complete  edition,  revised  and  adapted  to  modern  readers,  by  the  Rev.  GEORGE 
ROGERS,  Camberwell.  With  a  Preface  and  Appendix  by  Pastor  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 
Price  6s. 

11  THEOPNEUSTIA;"  The  Plenary  Inspiration  of  the  Holy  Scriptures 
by  L.  C^USSEN,  D.D.  With  Prefatory  Note  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Price  2s.  6d". 

HENRY'S   OUTLINES   OF  CHURCH    HISTORY;    a  Brief  Sketch 

of  the  Christian  Church  from  the  First  Century.  By  JOSEPH  FERNANDEZ,  LL.D.  Cloth 
gilt,  2s.  6d.  New  Edition 

TALKS    ON    FREE    CHURCH     PRINCIPLES.      Addressed    to    the 

Young   People  of  Nonconformity.     By  J,  W.   EWING,   M.A.,   E.D.    Cloth,  Is.  6d.  Net. 

ELISKA  COLES  ON  DIVINE  SOVEREIGNTY.  With  Preface  by 
C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Price  2s.  6d. 

THE    GREATEST    PROBLEM,    MIRACLE,    WORK,   WONDER 

IN  THE  WORLD.    By  Rev.  T.  GREENWOOD.    Price  Is. 

ARE  YOU  A  CHRISTIAN  ?  The  Confession  of  Evelyn  Thornton. 
Price  6d.  ;  post  free,  7d. 

A  SOLDIER'S  CONFLICT  (a  true  Story).  By  one  of  the  57th 
Regiment  ("  Old  Die-Hards  ").  In  cloth,  Is.  nett ;  paper  covers,  6d.  nett. 

IS  JESUS'  CROSS  THE  WAY  OF  PEACE  ?  By  Rev.  W.  ALF. 
ALLEN.  8vo  Booklet.  Price  6d. 

THE  PREACHER  AND  HIS  WORK.     By  a  Preacher.     Price  6d. 

THE  REVIVAL  OF  RITUALISM:  With  some  Glimpses  Behind  the 
Scenes.  By  Rev.  W.  TOWNSEND.  Price  2d. 

THE  LAY    PREACHER'S   GUIDE.     Bright   Words  for  Soul   Winners. 

Containing  chapters  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON,  G.  E.  MORGAN,  W.  Y.  FULLERTON,  MARK  GUY 
PEARSE,  C.  RUSSELL  HURDITCH,  JOSIAH  Nix,  W.  HARDY  HARWOOD,  HENRY  THORNE, 
FRANK  COCKREM,  F.  B.  MEYER,  etc.,  etc.  Preface  by  SIR  GEORGE  WILLIAMS.  Cloth 
gilt,  price  3s.  6d.  nett. 

LIVING  LIGHTHOUSES.  The  Story  of  Two  Brothers:  William 
Henry  Angas,  First  Missionary  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Sailors'  Society ;  and  George 
Fife  Angas,  Founder  and  Father  of  South  Australia.  By  G.  HOLDEN  PIKE.  With  an 
introduction  by  E.  W.  MATTHEWS,  Secretary,  British  and  Foreign  Sailors'  Society. 
Price  Is. 

NONCONFORMITY  IN  SOUTHWARK.  The  Metropolitan 
Tabernacle ;  or,  an  Historical  Account  of  the  Society,  from  its  first  planting  in  the 
Puritan  era  to  the  present  time.  With  other  Sketches  relating  to  the  Rise,  Growth, 
and  Customs  of  Nonconformity  in  Southwark.  By  G.  H.  PIKE.  With  an  Introduction 
by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Price  2s.  6d. 


11 

GLIMPSES   OF  JESUS;  r.s   of   iii» 

People.     By  W.  P.  BALFERN.       Eighth  Thousand.     Fcap.  8*0.    Cloth  Js. 

EARLY    CONVERSION.  ung   People 

can  be  led  to  Christ.     By  the  Rev.  E.   PATSON  HAMMOND.     Price  Is 

THE   PATHOS  OF    LIFE;    or,     I        hmg    Incidents  Illustr 

Truth  of  the  Gospel.     B.  W.  POOLS  BALFERN.    Second  Edition.     Price  It.  6d. 

SKETCH    OF    THE    LIFE    OF    Rev.    C.    H.    SPURGEON. 

Thirteen  Portraits  and  Engravings.     2d. 

SEVEN  PORTRAITS   OF  C.    H.  SPURGEON,    irith    Rei      ;Iscence 

of  his  Life  at  Waterbeach  and  London.     By  (1.   H.   I'IKK      1': 

An    Introduction  to    the   Study    of   THE   ACTS    OF  THE 

APOSTLES.    By    J.    M.     STIFI  >  i'.    Dl>.    Professor    of    New    Testament 
Croiier  Theological  Seminary,   U.S.A.     12mo,  287  pages,  cloth  gilt,  3s.  6d 

ARCHIBALD    BROWN:    his   Life    and    Work    : 

Wedding  "    Memorial.     By    GODFREY    HOLDEN    PIKE.      With   an   introduction    I  y    SIR 
ARTHUR  BLACKWOOD,  K.C.B.     Price,  stiff  covers,  Is.  6d.  ;   cloth,  gilt  edges,  2s.  6d. 

THE     SOUL'S     AWAKENING.       Being     Twenty-four    Sermons     and 
Twenty  Addresses  to  Children.     By  Rev.  C.  SILVESTER  HOHNE,  M.A.     Price  2s.  6  •: 
Post  free,  2s.  9d. 

BOOKSELLERS  AND  BOOKBUYERS    m   Byewa  hways. 

By  C    H    SPURGEON    SAMUEL  MANNING,  LL.D.,  and  G.  HOLDEN  PIKE.     With  a  Preface 
by  the  Right  Hon.   the  EARL  OF  SHAFTESBURY,  K.G.     Cloth,  gilt  edges,  Is.  6d. 

THE  BOOK  OF  COMFORT.  Selected  Portions  from  the  Word  of 
God.  Cloth  Gilt,  Is.  nett. 

CONFERENCE     ADDRESSES:     Beint,-    a    Selection    from    A 

delivered  at    the    Annual    Conferences    of    the  Pastors'  College,   by    the    Rev.    Gto«c« 
ROGERS,  with  a  Recommendation  by  C.  H.  SFURGEON.    Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

FRONDED  PALMS:  A  Collection  of  Pointed  Papers  on  a  wide  range 
of  Subjects.  By  W.  Y.  FULLERTON.  With  over  one  hundred  Illustrations.  Cloth.  2* 

WAYMARKS  FOR  WANDERERS;  being  live  Addresses  delivered 
in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  and  re-delivered  in  Can's  Lane  Chapel.  Birmmgba», 
By  W.  Y.  FULLERTON,  Evangelist.  Cloth  gilt,  Is.  6d.  Third  Edu. 

GOD'S  JEWELS:  Twelve  Chapters  on  the  Privilege 

People,    with  many   illustrations  and  incidents  drawn  from   the    Science   and  1 
Precious  Stones  and  Pearls.     By  W.  Y.  FULLERTON.       Bound  in  cloth.  Is. 

GOSPEL  PICTURES   IN   BIBLE  STORIES.     Addresses  spoken  and 

unspoken.     By  W.   Y.   FULLERTOS.     Cloth  gilt,  1 
A    FINGER-MARK    IN     MY    BIBLE:     >even    Steps    into    Light  for 

enquirers  and  workers.       By  W.  Y.  FULLERTON*.     Price  Id. 

THE  TRACK  WITH  A  GOLDEN  BOLT. 

Price  Id. 
THE    KING'S    CHAMBERS:    u    Allegory         My   W.    ^ 

Price   Id. 

STRAY     LEAVES     FROM     MY     LIFE     STORY. 

SMITH.     Cloth.  2s.  6d. 

MORE   STRAY    LEAVES.     Uv  J     MAM 
STRIKING  STORIES   FROM  REAL  LIFE.      lh     Utt  B 

by  the  late  Rrv.   ].    MA-.  ;-..-;  >MIMI.     C  1-th   K'lt. 

THE     HIGHER     CRITICISM,     the    gn 

By  D   K    PATON.    24th  thousand.     Cloth  gilt,  Is.  6d.  net;  po»i 

:  : 

°F,THE  SABBATH: 

A  '1  s  ^ 


(1853;.     Second  Edition.     Price  it. 
FOUR         LETTERS        TO         THE         CHRISTIANS        CALLED 

HKMHkhN  ••  ON  HII.  SUBJK  !  01  Ml*  mm* 

Price  6d. 


THE   FLOWERS  AND   FRUITS   OF  SACRED   SONG.     Edited  by 

V.  J.  CHAFLKSWORTH  and  J.  MANTON  SMITH.     Prefatory  Note  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 
MUSIC  AND  WORDS  (Old  Notation  and  Tonic  Sol-fa). — Paper  Covers  Is.  ;   Limp  Cloth, 
Is.  6d.  ;   Cloth  Gilt,  2s.     WORDS  ONLY.— Paper  Covers,  Id.  ;  Cloth  Covers,  2d. 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN:  compiled  and  arranged  as  a  Service  of  Song. 
Price  4d. 

JOHN   PLOUGHMAN'S   PICTURES,   A  Service  of  Song.     Price  4d. 

THE  WALDENSIAN  EXILES.  Service  of  Song,  compiled  by  JOHN 
BURNHAM  (Metropolitan  'iabernacle  Evangelist)  and  the  Rev.  MONTAGUE  MATHER. 
Price  4d. 

Each  of  the  above  in  Old  Notation  and  Tonic  Sol-fa. 

EVANGEL  ECHOES.  A  Collection  of  Psalms,  Solos,  and  Songs. 
Compiled  and  used  by  Messrs.  FULLERTON  and  SMITH. 

WORDS  ONLY.— Paper  Covers,  Id.  ;  Cloth  Covers,  2d.  ;  Large  Type,  Paper  Covers,  6d. ; 
Large  Type,  Cloth  Covers,  Is. 

MUSIC,  OLD  AND  NEW  NOTATIONS.— Paper  Covers,  Is.  ;  Blocked  Cloth,  Is.  6d.  ; 
Cloth,  extra  gilt,  2s.  6d. 

HYMNS  FOR  HOMES.  Edited  by  W.  Y.  FULLERTON  and  J.  MANTON 
SMITH.  Containing  Music  for  social  occasions,  for  family  gatherings,  etc.  Leatherette, 
gilt  edges,  price  2s. 

BUNYAN'S  WATER  OF  LIFE.  Preface  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 
Cloth,  Is. 

BAPTIST     CONFESSION     OF     FAITH.      Thirty-two    Articles    on 

Christian  Faith  and  Practice,  with  Scripture  Proofs,  adopted  by  the  Ministers  and 
Messengers  of  the  General  Assembly,  which  met  in  London  in  1689.  Preface  by  C.  H. 
SPURGEON.  Paper  covers,  4d.  Post  free  5  stamps. 

A       CLERGYMAN'S          BAPTISM,          CONFESSION          AND 

TESTIMONY.     By  ARCHIBALD  E.  GLOVER,  M.A.    Cloth  gilt,  Is.  6d. 

LECTURES     ON      BAPTISM.       By     the     late    WILLIAM     SHIRREFF, 

Minister  of  the  Gospel,  Glasgow.     With  a  Preface  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.       Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

BAPTISM      DISCOVERED      PLAINLY      AND       FAITHFULLY 

ACCORDING  TO  THE  WORD  OF  GOD.  By  JOHN  NORCOTT.  A  New  Edition, 
corrected  and  somewhat  altered  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  In  large  type,  paper  covers,  6d.  ; 
cloth,  Is. 

A  PRIMER  ON  BAPTISM.  By  Rev.  ALFRED  NORTH.  With  an 
Introduction  by  Rev.  T.  SPURGEON.  Id.  net. 

CHRISTIAN  BAPTISM.  A  Sermon  by  the  Rev.  H.  STOWELL  BROWN, 
at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  Price  Id. 

CHRISTIAN  BAPTISM.  A  Reply  to  Rev.  S.  D.  SCAMMELL -by  Rev. 
GEORGE  DUNCAN,  D.D.  Price  2d. 

FOR  EVER  AND  EVER.  A  College  Lecture  upon  the  Duration  of 
Future  Punishment.  By  Rev.  GEORGE  ROGERS.  Price  2d. 

FUTURE  PUNISHMENT.  A  Lecture  Delivered  to  the  Students  of 
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  College,  in  reply  to  a  series  of  letters  in  "  Christian 
World  "  from  the  Rev.  Edward  White.  By  the  Rev.  GEORGE  ROGERS.  Price  Id. 

ENDLESS      PUNISHMENT      DEFENDED.          By     Rev.      S.      C. 

BARTLETT,  D.D.,  President  of  Dartmouth  College,  U.S.A.  With  Preface  by  C.  H 
SPURGEON.  Paper  covers,  2d. ;  cloth,  6d. 

MURSELL'S    LECTURES    TO    WORKING    MEN.      Delivered    at 

the  Lambeth  Baths,  Westminster  Bridge  Road,  Id.  each. 

Tempi,-  Bar.     The  Crystal  Palace.     Sugar-coated  Pills.     Colours  of  the  Rainbow.    Ripples 
i  the  River.    Faces  in  the  Fire.    Cries  from  the  Cradle.    Washed  Away. 

THE  LAST  PHOTOGRAPH  OF  MR.  C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

iken  at  Mentone,  January,  1888.     Carte-de-Visite,  Is. ;  Cabinet,  2s. 
NEW    PHOTOGRAPH    OF    MRS.    SPURGEON.     Cabinet,    2s 
NE1WanP2HOTOGRAPH    OF    PASTOR    THOMAS    SPURGEON. 


ILoaton : 

PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  4,  Paternoster  Buildings,  E.C. 


TEXTUAL    AND    SUBJECT    INDEXES 
2,863    SERMONS, 

C.      H.      SPURGEON. 

Published  by 

PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  4,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  LONDON,  E.G. 

Sermons  on  the  more  prominent  Pacts,  Doctrines.  Duties,  and  Characters  of  the  Bible, 

Selected  and  Arranged  for  facility  of  Reference  or  Study. 
Under  some  of  the  subjects  in  this  list  many  mure  Sermons  might  have  been  included; 

such  as  those  on  the  Divine  namea-God,  Jeaus,  Christ;  also  on  Go»pel,  Faith,  1'rayer  (,iac«, 

Love,  &c.     The  copious  INDEX  or  SUBJKCTS  (36  pp.)  to  be  had,  post  free,  oi  the  Publishers, 

will  be  found  very  helpful  in  making  further  selections.     The   amount*   quoted  in  the  last 

column  may,  in  a  few  instances,  appear  out  ol  proportion  to  the  nu; 

thrs  is  owing  to  the  necessity  of  including  several  double  numbers. 

J.  d. 

Abraham,  Lessons  from  the  Life  of  17  Sernn  .  •  e  1     7 

Adoption       9  ,,  ,,11 

Affliction    (See  also    Consolation)    24  ,,  26 

Aged,   The   God  of  the  4  05 

Angels,   and  the  Angelic    Life 7  09 

Assurance   of    Salvation    11  ,,  11 

Atonement  (See  also  Blood)   18  ,,  1  10 

Backsliders     Described     and      Exhorted     (See 

Declension)        18  ,,  ,,20 

Baptism,  Baptismal  Regeneration   7          ,,  ,,09 

Believers,    Names,   Titles,  Types,  &c.,  of    39          ,, 

Believing    Described   and    Illustrated    4  06 

Bible,   The  (See  Word  of  God) 

Blood    of    Christ,    The   13  ,,14 

Brazen  Serpent,  The  Gospel  of  the  3 

Burden     Bearing    5 

Calamities,    The   Voice  of   God    in    6 

Calling,     Effectual    9          „  0  11 

Centurion,  The,  his  Faith,  and   Humility  5          „ 

Charity   (Love)    

Chastisement   and    its    Lessons    9          ,,  ,, 

Children,    Conversion    of,    Parental    Duty    to 
wards,  &c.    10          „  12 

Christ,  Names,  Titles,  and  Types  of,  or  in  one 

vol.,    7s 62          „  66 

Christ,   Ascension   of    4          „  05 

Christ,  Birth  of  (See  Incarnation  of)  Ch: 

and   Suffering   of,    its   Reason   and    Kffcct-;     36          „ 

Christ,    Incarnation    of    »»   £  ^  ^ 

Christ,    Miracles    of,    two  volumes  107 

Christ,   Parables  of,   published  in  one  volume, 

containing    64  Sermons,  post  free,  7    0 

Christ,    Resurrection    of     17 

Christ,    Second  Coming   of    12 

Christ,  Substitute  for  Sinners  ...  14 

Christ,    Temptation   of    

Christ.   Transfiguration    of   4 


Christianity,    The    Triumph    of   

Christ::. .i-.  rk    for    ... 

Church  of  God,  The,  Various  Similitudes  of,  &c.    27 


0    6 
0  10 

2    5 

Comfort   (See   Consolation) 
Communion    with  Cl  10 

Concern  for  th.  7    , 

Confession     and     Ab-olut:sni     . 
Confession    of    S 
Conflict,    Spiritual     ... 
Conscience 

Consecration       

Consolation    in    Affliction  and  26  /     . 


Contentment       • 

Conversion,    Illustrations   of    

Conviction    of    Sin   

Covenant  of  Grace,  The,  and  its   Blessings  ... 

Cross,  The,   its  Teachings,    &c 

Danger  of  Delay  (See  Delay) 

Daniel,  Lessons  from  the  Life  of  

David,   Lessons  from  the  Life  of 

Death,    Discourses   on    

Death,  Blessed   State  of   the  Saints   after   

Death  of  the  Believer,  The  

Decision       

Declension   and    Restoration   

Delay,  The  Danger   of   

Depravity  (See  Human  Depravity) 

Despairing,   Consolation    for    the    

Despondency,   its  Cause   and    Cure   

Difficulties  in  the  Way  of  Salvation  Removed 
Divine      Sovereignty      (4)      and      Human     Re 
sponsibility    (5)    

Doctrine,    Sound,    Pleas   for 

Doctrines  of  Grace,  The  (See  also  Election)  ... 

Doubts,  Their  Danger   and   Cure  

"  Down-Grade  "  in  Religion,  The  

Duty  of  Relieving  the  Poor  and  Afflicted  

Effectual  Calling  (See  Calling) 

Election,    Effects  of   the   Doctrine,   &c.    

Encouragement  to    Sinners    to   Seek    Salvation 

Esther,  Lessons   from   the  Book  of   

Faith,  its  Character,  Object,  Warrqjat,  &c 

Faith,    Justification  by    

Faith,   The  Life    and    Walk  of   

False  Hopes  and  False  Peace  

False   Professors   Solemnly  Warned   

False  Systems  and  Teachers,   and  their  Victims 

Fears  of  the  Godly,  and  some  Fear-Nots  

Final  Perseverance  (See  Preservation) 

Flesh,   The,   and   the   Spirit,  the  War  between 

Flood,  and  its   Solemn  Lessons,   The   

Forgiveness  of  Sin  (See  also  Pardon,  Grace)   ... 

Forgiveness  of  Others  made  Easy  

Future   Punishment  a   Fearful   Thing   

God,   Attributes    and    Titles  of    

God,  His  Care  and  Esteem  of  His  People  

God,  "Our  Father"   

Godliness,   its    Profitableness    

Good  Works,  The  Source  and  Effects  of 

Gospel,  The,   Described  and  Illustrated  

Gospel,   The,    for  Sinners  of  the  Deepest   Dye 

Gospel,  Importance  of  Hearing  the  

Gospel    Invitations    

Grace  Abounding    and    All-Sufficient    

Grace,    Growth    in    

Grace   Illustrated    

Grace,    Salvation    by    '. 

Hagar   at  the  Well  

Harvest,  Sermons    suitable   for    

Hearers  of  the  Gospel,   Two  sorts  of  

Heart,   The,  Described   

Heart,   The,  Hardness  of  

Heart,  The   New,   God's  Gift   

Heathen,  The  (See  also  Missions)   

Heaven       

Heaven  and  Hell    

Heavenly  Race,  The   

Hell  (See  Future  Punishment) 

Holiness       

Holy  Spirit,  The  (See  Spirit,  The  Holy) 
Hope       


s.  d. 

4  Sermons,  post  free  0  5 
21  1  10 


9 

16 
14 

5 

23 
9 
2 
6 
9 
8 
11 

9 

5 

12 

9 
4 
3 
4 
5 
4 

15 

11 
2 

27 
7 

10 
5 
9 
5 

13 

3 
4 
13 
3 
6 

26 

17 

5 

4 

6 

13 

16 

6 

15 

12 

4 

9 

12 

2 

10 

12 

7 

4 

3 

2 

13 

5 

4 

13 
15 


1  0 
1  6 

1  4 

0  8 

2  2 
0  10 
0  4 
0  8 
0  11 

0  11 

1  4 

0  11 

0  6 

1  3 

0  11 


0  5 

1  5 

1  1 
0  3 

2  6 

0  9 

1  2 
0  6 
0  11 

0  9 

1  4 

0  6 

0  5 

1  4 
0  5 

0  8 

2  6 

1  7 
0  7 
0  6 

0  8 

1  6 
1  9 

0  9 

1  5 
1  3 
0  5 

0  10 

1  2 

0  4 

1  0 
1  3 
0  10 
0  5 
0  5 

0  3 

1  4 
0  7 
0  7 


1  2 
1  4 


Human  Depravity   (See  ah^  ,  pf,,t  fr(.e  Q    9 

Human    Inability    in    the    Matter    «,f    Salvation  5  08 

Humility  12  11 

Hypocrites    and     Fa!  5 
Idleness,  The  Sin  of  (See  Slugga: 

"acob,                    from   the  Life   oi  10  10 

ews,  the  Conversion  and  Restoration  of  the...  7  09 

ob,   Lessons  from  the  Kxperience  of  9  0  11 

ohn,  the  Disciple  whom  Jesus  love.l  2  04 

rfoseph,  Types  and  Illustrations  from  the  Life  of  10  12 

Joshua,  a  Type   and  an  Kxample   ..  4  07 

Joy        24  20 

Judgment,  The   Day  of   8  10 

Law,   The,   and   the*  Gospel  5  06 

Law,  The,    its   Designs,    Uses,  and    Perpetuity  6  08 

Lazarus,   The   Death  and    Raising    of  .,  5  06 

Life  Everlasting, The  Belie\                                         -.1   3  04 

Life   in   Christ    7  09 

Life,    Spiritual,  Its   Rise  and  Growth  7  08 

Life,  The  Uncertainty  of  3  04 

Love  Divine    9  10 

Love  of  Christ  19  1  10 

Love  of  God   8  0  10 

Love  to  God  6  09 

Love  to   Jesus    , 13  14 

Lovingkindness    of  the    Lord    ..  8  „                           09 

Ministers  and  their  Work   described   11  f                              11 

Ministers,  How  and  What  they  should   Preach  8  ,,                            09 
Miracles  (See  under  Christ) 

Missions  and    Missionaries   (See  also  Heathen)  9  „                            10 

Modern  Thought  and  its  Leaders  Described  ...  5  ,,    "                        06 

Moses,  Discourses  on  the  Lite  of  8  „                            0  10 

New    Year's    Meditations    7  „                            09 

Obedience — "  Love's  Law  and  Life  "   13  „                            14 

Parables  (See  under  Christ) 

Pardon  (See  also  Forgiveness)  10  „                            12 

Paul,  Lessons  from  the  Life  of  16  „                           18 

Peace,    Spiritual    13  .„                            1     6 

Perfection        6  „   .                        07 

Persecuted,   Words  for  the   4  „               M          0    6 

Persecution  and   Evangelization  2  „                            03 

Peter,  Discourses  from  the  Life  of  12  ,, 

Pilgrim,  The  Christian  a  5  ,f               „          0    8 

Poor  (See  Duty  of  Relieving). 

Praise       18  1     6 

Prayer       32  2  11 

Predestination    (See   Election). 

Presence  of  God  with   His  people,   Th>  6  ,»      .          ,.          07 

Preservation,  or  Final  Perseverance  of  the  Saints  14  o                            14 

Pride  Catechized  and  Condemned   ..  6  07 

Profession  of  our  Faith,  The,  its  N-  (See  Testimony). 

Profi 

Promises,   Preciousness,  &c.,  of  th«-  .ons  0    8 

Providence       ....  10 

Redemption   (See   also   Atonemt  7  0  10 

Regeneration       4  07 

;on,  its  Attainment,  Spirit,  &c.  1     5 
Repentance 

Rest  by    and   in  Christ    ....  9  0  11 

Resurrection  of  the  Dead,  Thr  11  11 
Resurrection  of  Christ   (Sff  C\\- 
Resurrection,    Spiritual    \See    also    Conversion)      6 

Revival,  Discourses  11 

Sabbath  School,  Thr                                                     5  07 
Sabbath  School  Teachers,  Words  for 

Salvation                                                                           '  2    9 

tion  for  the  Chief  of  Sinners  (Stf  under  Gospel). 
Samson — Lessons   from  hi 

Samuel — Lessons  from  hi«>  '                                         3  05 


Sunctification 


4 
6 
6 
4 
28 


16 

7  Sermons, 

SaTan!"hTs  Personality,  Wiles,    &c 17 

Seekers  for   Salvation  Directed   '  » 

Self-Delusion       

Self-Kxamination       

Self-Righteousness       • : 

Simeon — Lessons  from  his  Life  

Sin,  its  Character,  Wages,   Remedy  

Sinners,  A  Call  to  Unconverted  » 

Sinners  Encouraged   to   Seek   Salvation  jt> 

Sinners    Warned    *g 

Sluggards    and    Sleepers    Warned   » 

Soul-Winning  and    Soul-Neglecting    £ 

Spirit,  The  Holy,   and  His  Work 13 

Spirit,  The  Holy,  Compared  to  the  Wind  

Steadfastness,  Persuasives  to   ° 

Stephen's  Martyrdom  and  its  Lessons  & 

Substitution   (See  under  Christ). 
Sunday  School  (See  Sabbath  School). 
Supper  of  the  Lord,  The,  Discourses  thereon, 
or  Suitable  for  Communion   Services   .  . 
Temptation  (See  also  Christ,  Affliction,   &c.) 
Testimony,  The  Duty   of  Bearing   Personal 

Thanksgiving      

Thief,  The  Dying,   and  his  Saviour  2 

Trial,  A  Cheery  Word  for  Times  of  12 

Trust  in  the   Lord   ° 

Unbelief   Deplored   and  Denounced  12 

Unbelievers,   their  Unhappy   Condition   6 

Ungodly,  The  Way  and  the  End  of  the  9 

Waiting   on   God    j> 

Witness-bearing  for  the  Lord  (See  also  Testimony)  8 
Word  of  God,  The,  its  Authority,  Claims,  &c  31 
Work  (or  Service  for  God),  Illustrations  of,  &c.  18 

Workers,  Words  for  Christian  19 

Workers,  Cheer  for  Downcast  5 

World,  The,  its  Evil,  its  Conqueror,  and  its  End     10 

Worship  (See  also  Hearers)    4 

Young  Men,  Sermons  for  8 

Zeal  and  Zealots   4 

Zechariah's    Visions 3 


s.  d. 
post  free  0    9 


II 

07 


0  10 

1  6 


Ifi 

5 

14 
5 


0  7 

1  2 
0  9 
0  9 
0  4 


1    8 

0  6 

1  6 
0    7 

0  3 

1  1 

0  10 

1  1 
0    9 
0  11 
0    8 

0  9 

2  9 

1  11 
1  11 
0    7 
0  11 
0    6 
0  11 
0    8 
0    4 


SERMONS  ON  TEXTS  TAKEN  FROM  THE  DIFFERENT  BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE. 

"With  the  prices  at  which  they  can  be  purchased,  Post  Free. 


Sermons. 

Price. 

Sermons. 

Price. 

Sermons. 

Price. 

Genesis 

80 

8/1 

Isaiah  ... 

...  233 

22/9 

Romans 

128 

12/7 

Exodus 

51 

6/1      Jeremiah 

...     90 

8/4 

±  Corinthians 

72 

7/4 

Leviticus    ... 

15 

1/6    |  Lamentations    10 

1/0 

2 

60 

4/11 

Numbers 

25 

2/10  '  Ezekiel... 

...     47 

4/7 

Galatians    ... 

38 

3/11 

Deuteronomy 
Joshua  

40 
12 

3/9 
1/7 

Daniel  ... 
Hosea  ... 

...     20 
...     46 

2/2 
4/0 

Ephesians  ... 
Philippians... 

64 
34 

5/10 
3/8 

Judges  

15 

1/6 

Joel      ... 

5 

0/8 

Colossians  ... 

27 

2/6 

Ruth     

6 

0/8 

Amos    ... 

...     11 

1/1 

1  Thess.      ... 

13 

1/5 

1  Samuel    ... 

30 

3/0 

Obadiah 

1 

0/11 

2        „ 

9 

1/0 

2        „ 

27 

2/6 

Jonah  ... 

...       9 

1/0 

1  Timothy  ... 

17 

1/9 

1  Kings       ... 

26 

2/7 

Micah  ... 

...     14 

1/7 

2        „ 

20 

1/11 

2        „ 

23 

2/3 

Nahum... 

...       4 

0/5 

Titus     

7 

0/8 

1  Chronicles 

12 

Vi 

Habakkuk 

8 

0/9 

Philemon    ... 

1 

o/i* 

2 

21 

2/1 

Zephaniah 

...       4 

0/6 

Hebrews     ... 

127 

12/5 

Ezra     

2 

0/31 

Haggai... 

...       2 

0/2* 

James  

20 

1/11 

Nehemiah  ... 

9 

1/0      Zechariah 

...     30 

3/2 

1  Peter 

38 

3/10 

Esther  

2 

0/2i  '  Malachi 

...     10 

1/1 

2      „ 

12 

1/3 

Job       

78 

7/8* 

Matthew 

...  211 

?0/8 

1  John  

50 

5/1 

Psalms  

389 

37/4 

Mark    ... 

...     78 

7/8 

3    „      

1 

0/2* 

Proverbs     ... 

36 

3/11 

Luke    ... 

...  213 

20/0 

Jude     

10 

1/0 

Ecclcsiastes 

8 

0/9 

John     ... 

...  274 

26/7 

Revelation... 

71 

7/2 

Bong  of  Sol. 

68 

6/4       Acts      ... 

...'   84 

8/3 

PASSMOKE    & 

ALABASTER, 

4,    Paternoster    Buildings, 

London. 

