Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




600090706R 




^^oiXQ^ts on ^mmotlalitvi. 



THOUGHTS ON IMMORTALITY. 



WITH SOME REMARKS ON 



Canon fntxwfB ''Eternal tope" an& 
IkinDteD Subjects* 



BY THE RIGHT RBV. 

JOHN CHARLES RYLE, D.D., 

LORD BISHOP OP LIVERPOOL. 
Author of " Expository Thoughts on the Gospels/' etc. 



XonDon : 
WILLIAM HUNT AND COMPANY, 

12, PATERNOSTER ROW. 
IPSWICH : WILLIAM HUNT, TAVERN STREET. 

1883. 



^. • 



-.;( i7 



: i: FE^ 



UJ 



- ' ) 






- / 



^onUni5. 



•:o:- 



Introductory Note . . .7 

Thoughts on Immortality . . 11 

We Live in a World where 'all things are 

Temporal and Passing Away . 15 

We are all going towards a World where 

everything is eternal . . 20 

Our State in the Unseen World of Eternity 

depends whereby on what we are in Time 35 

The Lord Jesus Christ is the Great Friend to 
whom we must look for help, both for 
Time and Eternity . . 43 

Eternal Hope ... 52 

Conditional Immortality . 72 



Itttr0iitict0rB fLott. 



The following pages contain the sud- 
stance of a Sermon which I. preached, by 
invitation, in the Nave of Peterborough 
Cathedral, on the Fourth Sunday in 
Advent, 1877, — the substance and not 
the precise words. The plain truth is, 
that the Sermon was not intended for 
publication. It was preached from notes, 
and was one of those popular addresses 
which will not bear close reporting. A 
style of language which satisfies the ear 



8 Introductory Note, 

when listened to, will seldom satisfy 
the mind when read. On receiving a 
manuscript report from the publisher, 
I found that it would require far more 
labour to condense, correct, paragraph, 
punctuate, and prepare the Sermon for 
the press, than to write it out roughly 
from my own notes and recollection. 
From want of time I had no alternative 
but to adopt this course, or to decline 
publication altogether. The result is 
that the reader has before him the 
matter, order, heads, arrangement, and 
principal thoughts and sentences of my 
Sermon, but not, I repeat, the precise 
words. With this I hope he will be 
content. 

The postscript which follows the 



Introductory Note, 



Sermon is a brief attempt to throw 
light on a subject which is troubling 
the minds of some Christians in the 
present day. That subject is "the 
future state," or "state after death." 
Of course in a little book like this the 
reader must not expect to find this deep 
subject handled exhaustively. But I 
venture to think I have supplied some 
plain reasons why the "old paths" 
about the future state ought not to be 
lightly forsaken. I have also given the 
names of books in which fuller informa- 
tion can be obtained. 

Novelties in theology are always 
attractive. New views, such as those 
now-a-days propounded about the future 
state, are, at first sight, specious, 



lo Introductory Note, 

plausible, and very taking. But with 

all respect for the advocates of newer, 

broader, and more liberal teachings 

(so-called), I see nothing in them which 

stands the test of calm investigation in 

the light of the Bible. "The old is 

better." 

J. C. LIVERPOOL. 

Palace^ Liverpooly 

igth Aprils 1883, 



THOUGHTS ON IMMORTALITY. 



" The things which are seen are temporal ; but the 
things which are not seen are eternal." — 2 COR. iv. i8. 



A SUBJECT stands out on the face of 
this text, which is one of the most 
solemn and heart-searching in the Bible. 
That subject is eternity^ or immortality. 

The subject is one of which the 
wisest man can only take in a little. 
We have no eyes to see it fully, no line 
to fathom it, no mind to grasp it ; and 



12 JTunights on Immortality, 

yet we must not refuse to consider it. 
There are star-depths in the heavens 
above us which the most powerful 
telescope cannot pierce; yet it is well 
to look into them and learn something, 
if we cannot learn everything. There 
are heights and depths about the subject 
of eternity which mortal man can never 
comprehend ; but God has spoken of it, 
and we have no right to turn away from 
it altogether. 

The subject is one which we must 
never approach without the Bible in our 
hands. The moment we depart from 
"God's Word written," in considering 
eternity and the future state of man, we 
are likely to fall into error. In examin- 
ing points like these we have nothing to 
do with preconceived notions as to what 
is God's character, and what we think 
God ought to be, or ought to do with 



Thoughts on Immortality, 13 

man after death.* We have only to find 
out what is written. "What saith the 
Scripture .? What saith the Lord > " It 
is wild work to tell us that we ought to 
have "noble thoughts about God," in- 
dependent of, and over and above, 
Scripture. Natural religion soon comes 
to a standstill here. The noblest 
thoughts about God which we have a 
right to hold are the thoughts which He 
has been pleased to reveal to us in His 
" written Word." 

I ask the attention of all into whose 
hands this sermon may fall, while I offer 
a few suggestive thoughts about eternity. 



• ** What sentence can we expect from a judge, who 
•at the same time that he calls in witnesses and 
pretends to examine them, makes a declaration that, 
however, let them say what they will, the cause is so 
absurd, is so unjust, that no evidence will be sufficient 
to prove it^ "—Ifordery, vol. ii. p. 137* 



14 Thoughts on Immortality, 

As a mortal man I feel deeply my own 
insufHciency to handle this subject But 
I pray that God the Holy Ghost, whose 
strejngth is made perfect in weakness, 
may bless the words I have written, and 
make them seeds of eternal life in many 
minds. 



I. 

Wit libt in a toorib tohtre ali thtng^i 
art temp0ral anb pa^ijeing atoag* 

That man must be blind indeed who 
cannot realize this. Everything around 
us is decaying, dying, and coming to an 
end. There is a sense, no doubt, in 
which " matter" is eternal. Once created, 
it will never entirely perish. But in a 
popular practical sense, there is nothing 
undying about us except our souls. No 
wonder the poet says ; — 

** Change and decay in all around I see : 
O Thou that changest not, abide with me ! " 

We are all " going, going, going," whether 
high or low, gentle or simple, rich or 



i6 We live in a World where 

poor, old or young. We are all going, 
and shall soon be " gone." 

Beauty is only temporal. Sarah was 
once the fairest of women, and the 
admiration of the Court of Egypt ; yet 
a day came when even Abraham, her 
husband, said, " Let me bury my dead 
out of sight" (Gen. xxiii. 4.) — Strength 
of body is only temporal. David was 
once a mighty man of valour, the slayer 
of the lion and the bear, and the cham- 
pion of Israel against Goliath; yet a 
day came when even David had to be 
nursed and ministered to in his old age 
like a child. — Wisdom and power of 
brain are only temporal. Solomon was 
once a prodigy of knowledge, and all 
the kings of the earth came to hear his 
wisdom ; yet even Solomon in his latter 
days played the fool exceedingly, and 
allowed his wives to turn away his heart; 



eUl things are Temporal, 17 

Humbling and painful as these truths 
may sound, it is good for us to realize 
them and lay them to heart. The 
houses we live in, the homes we love> the 
riches we accumulate, the professions we 
follow, the plans we form, the relations 
we enter into, they are only for a time. 
" The things seen are temporal." " The 
fashion of this world passeth away." 
(i Cor. vii. 31.) 

The thought Is one which ought to 
rouse every one who is living only for 
this world. If his conscience is not 
utterly seared, it should stir in him great 
searchings of heart. Oh, take care what 
you are doing 1 Awake to see things in 
their true light before it be too late. 
The things you live for now are all 
temporal and passing away. The 
pleasures, the amusements, the recrea- 
tions, the merry-makings, the profits, 

B 



1 8 We live in a World where 

the earthly callings, which now absorb 
all your heart and drink up all your 
mind, will soon be over. They are poor 
ephemeral things which cannot last 
Oh, love them not too well ; grasp them 
not too tightly; make them not your 
idols ! You cannot keep them, and you 
must leave them. Seek first the king- 
dom of God, and then everything else 
shall be added to you. "Set your 
affections on things above, not on things 
on the earth." Oh, you that love the 
world, be wise in time! Never, never 
forget that it is written, ''The world 
passeth away, and the lust thereof; but 
he that doeth the will of God abideth 
for ever." (Col. iii. 2 ; i John ii. J/.) 

The same thought ought to cheer and 
comfort every true Christian. Your 
trials, crosses, and conflicts are all tem- 
poral. They will soon have an end; 



all things are Temporals 19 

and even now they are working for you 
"a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory." (2 Cor. iv. 17.) Take 
them patiently ; bear them quietly ; 
look upward, forward, onward, and far 
beyond them. Fight your daily fight 
under an abiding conviction that it is 
only for a little time, and that rest is not 
far off. Carry your daily cross with an 
abiding recollection that it is one of the 
*' things seen " which are temporal. The 
cross shall soon be exchanged for a 
crown, and you shall sit down with 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the king- 
dom of God. 



II. 



WBx wet all QoxxtQ t0b)arb0 n tomrib 
tohtvt zbttyMxtq te -eternal 

That great unseen state of existence 
which lies behind the grave, is for 
ever. Whether it be happy or miserable, 
whether it be a condition of joy or 
sorrow, in one respect it is utterly unlike 
this world, — ^it is for ever. TAere, at any 
rate, will be no change and decay, no 
end, no good-bye, no mornings and 
evenings, no alteration, no annihilation. 
Whatever there is beyond the tomb. 



We are going where everythifig is Eternal, 21 



when the last trumpet has sounded, and 
the dead are raised, will be endless, 
everlasting, and eternal. "The things 
unseen are eternal." 

We cannot fully realize this condition. 
The contrast between now and then, 
between this world and the next, is so 
enormously great that our feeble minds 
will not take it in. The consequences 
it entails are so tremendous, that they 
almost take away our breath, and we 
shrink from looking at them. But 
when the Bible speaks plainly we have 
no right to turn away from a subject, 
and with the Bible in our hands we 
shall do well to look at the "things 
which are eternal." 

{a) Let us settle it, then, in our minds, 
for one thing, that the future happiness 
of those who are saved is eternal. 
However little we may understand it, 



22 We are going towards a World 

it is something which will have no end : 
it will never cease, never grow old, never 
decay, never die. At God's " right hand 
are pleasures for evermore." (Ps. xvi. 
II.) Once landed in paradise, the 
saints of God shall go out no more. 
Their inheritance is "incorruptible, un- 
defiled, and fadeth not away." They 
shall "receive a crown of glory that 
fadeth not away." (i Pet. i. 4; v. 4.) 
Their warfare is accomplished; their 
fight is over ; their work is done. They 
shall hunger no more, neither thirst any 
more. They are travelling on towards 
an " eternal weight of glory," towards a 
home which shall never be broken up, a 
meeting without a parting, a family 
gathering without a separation, a day 
without night. Faith shall be swallowed 
up in sight, and hope in certainty. They 
shall see as they have been seen, and 



where everything is Eternal, 23 



know as they have been known, and " be 
for ever with the Lord." I do not 
wonder that the Apostle Paul adds, 
" Comfort one another with these words." 
(i Thess. iv. 17, 18.) 

{b) Let us settle it, for another thing, in 
our minds, that the future misery of 
those who are finally lost is eternal 
This is an awful truth, I am aware, and 
flesh and blood naturally shrink from 
the contemplation of it. But I am one 
of those who believe it to be plainly 
revealed in Scripture, and I dare not 
keep it back in the pulpit. To my eyes 
eternal future happiness and eternal 
future misery appear to stand side by 
side. I fail to see how you can dis- 
tinguish the duration of one from the 
duration of the other. If the joy of 
the believer is for ever, the sorrow of 
the unbeliever is sdso for ever. If 



24 We are going towards a World 

heaven is eternal, so likewise is hell. 
It may be my ignorance, but I 
know not how the conclusion can be 
avoided. 

I cannot reconcile the non-eternity of 
punishment with the language of the 
Bible. Its advocates talk loudly about 
love and charity, and say that it does 
not harmonize with the merciful and 
compassionate character of God. But 
what saith the Scripture.? Who ever 
spoke such loving and merciful words as 
our Lord Jesus Christ.? Yet His are 
the lips which three times over describe 
the consequence of impenitence and sin, 
as "the worm that never dies and the 
fire that is not quenched." He is the 
Person who speaks in one sentence of 
the wicked going away into " everlasting 
punishment " and the righteous into " life 
eternal." (Mark ix. 43 — 48 ; Matt. xxv. 



where everything is Eternal, 25 

46.)* — Who does not remember the 
Apostle Paul's words about charity ? 
Yet he is the very Apostle who says, 
the wicked "shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction." (2 Thess. i. 9.) 
— ^Who does not know the spirit of love 
which runs through all St John's Gospel 
and Epistles ? Yet the beloved Apostle 
is the very writer in the New Testament 
who dwells most strongly, in the book 
of Revelation, on the reality and eternity 



* "If God had intended to have told us that the 
punishment of wicked man shall have no end, the 
languages wherein the Scriptures are written do hardly 
afford fuller and more certain words than those that 
are used in this case, whereby to express a duration 
without end ; and likewise, which is almost a peremp- 
tory decision of the thing, the duration of the 
punishment of wicked men is in the very same 
sentence expressed by the very same word which is 
used for the duration of happiness of the righteous." — 
Archbishop Tillotson on Hell Torments, See Horbery^ 
vol. ii. p. 42. 



26 We are going towards a World 

of future woe. What shall we say to 
these things ? Shall we be wise above 
that which is written ? Shall we admit 
the dangerous principle that words in 
Scripture do not mean what they appear 
to mean ? Is it not far better to lay our 
hands on our mouths and say, " What- 
ever God has written must be true." 
'* Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and 
righteous are Thy judgments." (Rev. 
xvi. 7.) 

I cannot reconcile the non-eternity of 
punishment with the language of our 
Prayer-book, The very first petition in 
our matchless Litany contains this sen- 
tence, "From everlasting damnation, 
good Lord, deliver us." — The Catechism 
teaches every child who learns it, that 
whenever we repeat the Lord's Prayer 
we desire our Heavenly Father to " keep 
us from our ghostly enemy and from 



where everything is Eternal, 27 

everlasting death." — Even in our Burial 
Service we pray at the grave side, 
" Deliver us not into the bitter pains of 
eternal death." — Once more I ask, 
" What shall we say to these things } " 
Shall we teach our congregations that 
even when people live and die in sin we 
may hope for their happiness in a 
remote future } Surely the common 
sense of many of our worshippers 
would reply, that if this is the case 
Prayer-book, words mean nothing at all. 
I lay no claim to any peculiar 
knowledge of Scripture. I feel daily 
that I am no more infallible than the 
Bishop of Rome. But I must speak 
according to the light which God has 
given to me ; and I do not think I 
should do my duty if I did not raise a 
warning voice on this subject, and try 
to put Christians on their guard. Six 



a8 We are going towards a World 

thousand years ago sin entered into the 
world by the devil's daring falsehood, — 
" Ye shall not surely die." (Gen. iii. 4.) 
At the end of six thousand years the 
great enemy of mankind is still using 
his old weapon, and trying to persuade 
men that they may live and die in sin, 
and yet at some distant period may be 
finally saved. Let us not be ignorant of 
his devices. Let us walk steadily in the 
old paths. Let us hold fast the old 
truth, and believe that as the happiness 
of the saved is eternal, so also is the 
misery of the lost.* 



* '* There is nothing that Satan more desires than 
that we should believe that he does not exist, and 
that there is no such a place as hell, and no such 
things as eternal torments. He whispers all this into 
our ears, and he exults when he hears a layman, and 
much more when he hears a clergyman, deny these 
things, for then he hopes to make them and others his 
victims." — Bishop lVardsworth*s Sermons on Future 
Rewards and Punishments^ p. 36. 



where everything is Eternal, 29 

{a) Let us hold it fast in the interest 
of the whole system of revealed religion. 
What was the use of God's Son becom- 
ing incarnate, agonizing in Gethsemane, 
and dying on the cross to make atone- 
ment, if men can be finally saved 
without believing on Him ? Where is 
the slightest proof that saving faith in 
Christ's blood can ever begin after 
death ? Where is the need of the Holy 
Ghost, if sinners are at last to enter 
heaven without conversion and renewal 
of heart ? Where can we find the 
smallest evidence that any one can be 
born again, and have a new heart, if he 
dies in an unregenerate state? If a 
man may escape eternal punishment at 
last, without faith in the blood of Christ 
or sanctification of the Spirit, sin is no 
longer an infinite evil, and there was no 
need for Christ making an atonement. 



3© We are going towards a World 

{b) Let us hold it fast for the sake of 
holiness and morality. I can imagine 
nothing so pleasant to flesh and blood 
as the specious theory that we may live 
in sin, and yet escape eternal perdition ; 
and that although we " serve divers lusts 
and pleasures" while we are here, we 
shall somehow or other all get to heaven 
hereafter! Only tell the young man 
who is " wasting his substance in riotous 
living," that there is heaven at last, or, 
at any rate, no eternal punishment, even 
for those who live and die in sin, and he 
is never likely to turn from evil. Why 
should he repent and take up the cross, 
if he can get to heaven at last, or escape 
punishment, without trouble ? * 



* It is an awful fact that fallen women have been 
heard to say in the streets of London, "Come 
along t Who is afraid? The parsons say, after all^ 
there is no hell." 



where evety thing is Eternal, 31 

(c) Finally, let us hold it idiStyfor the 
sake of tJte common hopes of all God*s 
saints. Let us distinctly understand 
that every blow struck at the eternity of 
punishment is an equally heavy blow at 
the eternity of reward. It is impossible 
to separate the two things. No ingenious 
theological definition can divide them. 
They stand or fall together. The same 
language is used, the same figures of 
speech are employed, when the Bible 
speaks about either condition. Every 
attack on the duration of hell is also an 
attack on the duration of heaven.* It 

* " If the punishment of the wicked is only 
temporary, such will also be the happiness of the 
righteous, which is repugnant to the whole teaching 
of Scripture ; but if the happiness of the righteous 
will be everlasting (who will be equal to the angels, 
and their bodies will be like the body of Christ), 
such also will be the punishment of the wicked." — 
Bishop WofdswortKs Sermon on JPutun Rewards 
and Punishments, p, 31. 



32 We are going towards a World 

is a deep and true saying, "With the 
sinner's fear our hope departs." 

I turn from this part of my subject 
with a deep sense of its painfulness. I 
feel strongly with Robert M'Cheyne, 
that "it is a hard subject to handle 
lovingly." But I turn from it with an 
equally deep conviction that if we 
believe the Bible we must never give up 
anything which it contains. From hard, 
austere, and unmerciful theology, good 
Lord, deliver us ! If men are not saved 
it is because they "will not come to 
Christ." (John v. 40.) But we must 
not be wise above that which is written. 
No morbid love of liberality, so called, 
must induce us to reject anything which 
God has revealed about eternity. Men 
sometimes talk exclusively about God's 
mercy and love and compassion, as if 
He had no other attributes, and leave 



where everything is Eternal. 33 

out of sight entirely His holiness 
and His purity, His justice and His 
unchangeableness, and His hatred of 
sin. Let us beware of falling into this 
delusion. It is a growing evil in these 
latter days. Low and inadequate views 
of the unutterable vileness and filthiness 
of sin, and of the unutterable purity of 
the eternal God, are fertile sources of 
error about man's future state. Let us 
think of the mighty Being with whom 
we have to do, as He Himself declared 
His character to Moses, saying, "The 
Lord, the Lord God, merciful and 
gracious, longsufTering and abundant in 
goodness and truth, keeping mercy 
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and 
transgression, and sin." But let us not 
forget the solemn clause which concludes 
the sentence : " And that will by no means 
clear the guilty '\ (Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7.) 



34 ^ <*^^ going where everything is Eternal, 

Unrepented sin is an eternal evil, and 
can never cease to be sin ; and He with 
whom we have to do is an eternal God. 

The words of Psalm cxlv. are 
strikingly beautiful : " The Lord is 
gracious, and full of compassion; slow 
to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord 
is good to all : and His tender mercies are 
over all His works. — The Lord upholdeth 
all that fall, and raiseth up all those that 
be bowed down. — The Lord is righteous 
in all His ways, and holy in all His works. 
The Lord is nigh unto all them that call 
upon Him, to all that call upon Him in 
truth. — The Lord preserveth all them 
that love Him." Nothing can exceed 
the mercifulness of this language ! But 
what a striking fact it is that the passage 
goes on to add the following solemn con- 
clusion, " All the wicked will He destroy'^ 
(Psalm cxlv. 8 — 20.) 



in. 

®nx State in tht ^UBttn 

Saxrrtb ot (Ettrnitg litptitbB jentiulg 

on to hat tot wet in txmt. 

The life that we live upon earth is 
short at the very best, and soon gone. 
"We spend our days as a tale that is 
told."— "What is our life.? It is a 
vapour: so soon passeth it away, and 
we are gone." (Psalm xc. 9; James 
IV. 14.) The life that is before us when 
we leave this world is an endless 
eternity, a sea without a bottom, and 



36 Our State in the 

an ocean without a shore. " One day 
in Thy sight," eternal God, "is as a 
thousand years, and a thousand years as 
one day." (2 Pet. iii. 8.) In that world 
time shall be no more. — But short as 
our life is here, and endless as it will be 
hereafter, It is a tremendous thought 
that eternity hinges upon time. Our 
lot after death depends, humanly 
speaking, on what we are while we are 
alive. It is written, God "will render to 
every man according to his deeds: to 
them who by patient continuance in 
well-doing seek for glory and honour 
and immortality, eternal life: but to 
them that are contentious, and do not 
obey the truth, but obey unrighteous- 
ness, indignation, and wrath." (Rom. 
ii. 6, 7.) 

We ought never to forget that we are 
all, while we live, in a state of probation. 



Unseen World, 37 



We are constantly sowing seeds which 
will spring up and bear fruit, every day 
and hour in our lives. There are 
eternal consequences resulting from all 
our thoughts and words and actions, of 
which we take far too little account. 
"For every idle word that men speak 
they shall give account in the day of 
judgment." (Matt. xii. 36.) Our thoughts 
are all numbered, our actions are weighed. 
No wonder that St. Paul says, " He that 
soweth to the flesh shall of the flesh 
reap corruption ; but he that soweth to 
the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life 
everlasting." (Gal. vi. 8.) In a word, 
what we sow in life we shall reap after 
death, and reap to g,ll eternity. 

There is no greater delusion than the 
common idea that it is possible to live 
wickedly, and yet rise again gloriously ; 
to be without religion in this world, and 



38 Our State in the 

yet to be a saint in the next. When 
the famous Whitefield revived the 
doctrine of conversion last century, it is 
reported that one of his hearers came to 
him after a sermon and said, — "It is 
all quite true, sir. I hope I shall be 
converted and born again one day, but 
not till after I am dead." I fear there 
are many like him. I fear the false 
doctrine of the Romish purgatory has 
many secret friends even within the pale 
of the Church of England ! However 
carelessly men may go on while they 
live, they secretly cling to the hope that 
they shall be found among the saints 
when they die. They seem to hug the 
idea that there is some cleansing, 
purifying effect produced by death, and 
that, whatever they may be in this life, 
they shall be found "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints'' in the life 



Unseen World, 39 



to come. But it is all a delusion."*** 

** Life is the time to serve the Lord, 
The time to insure the great reward." 

The Bible teaches plainly, that as we 
die, whether converted or uncon- 
verted, whether believers or unbelievers, 
whether godly or ungodly, so shall we 
rise again when the last trumpet 
sounds. There is no repentance in the 
grave: there is no conversion after the 
last breath is drawn. Now is the time 
to believe on Christ, and to lay hold on 



* "The Scripture never represents the state of 
future misery, as a state of purgation and purification, 
or anything like analogous to a state of trial, where 
men may fit and qualify themselves for some better 
state of existence : but always as a state of retribution, 
punishment, and righteous vengeance, in which God's 
justice (a perfection of which some men seem to 
render no account) vindicates the power of His 
majesty. His government, and His love, by punishing 
those who have despised them." — Horbery^ vol. iL 
p. 183. 



4Q Out State in the 

eternal life. Now is the time to turn from 
darkness unto light, and to make our 
calling and election sure. The night 
Cometh when no man can work. As 
the tree falls, there it will lie. If 
we leave this world impenitent and 
unbelieving, we shall rise the same in 
the resurrection morning, and find it 
had been " good for us if we had never 
been born." (Mark xiv. 2i.)* 

I charge every reader of this paper 
to remember this, and to make a good 



* "This life is the time of our preparation for our 
future state. Our souls will continue for ever what 
we make them in this world. Such a taste and 
disposition of mind as a man carries with him out of 
this life, he shall retain in the next. It is true, 
indeed, heaven perfects those holy and virtuous 
dispositions which are begun here ; but the other 
world alters no man as to his main state. He that 
is filthy will be filthy still; and he that is un- 
righteous will be unrighteous still." — Archbishop 
TillotsorCs Sermon on Phil. iii. 20. (See Horhery^ 
vol. ii. p. 133.) 



Unseen World, 41 



use of time. Regard it as the stuff of 
which life is made, and never waste it 
or throw it away. Your hours and days 
and weeks and months and years have 
all something to say to an eternal 
condition beyond the grave. What you 
sow in life that now is you are sure to 
reap in a life to come. As holy Baxter 
says, it is "now or never." Whatever 
we do in religion must be done now. 

Remember this in your use of all the 
means of grace, from the least to the 
greatest. Never be careless about them. 
They are given to be your helps toward 
an eternal world, and not one of them 
ought to be thoughtlessly treated or 
lightly and irreverently handled. Your 
daily prayers and Bible-reading, your 
weekly behaviour on the Lord's day, 
your manner of going through public 
worship, — all, all these things are im- 



42 Our State in the Unseen World, 

c 

portant. Use them all as one who 
remembers eternity. 

Remember it, not least, whenever you 
are tempted to do evil. When sinners 
entice you, and say, " It is only a little 
one," — when Satan whispers in your 
heart, "Never mind: where is the mighty 
harm } Everybody does so/' — then look 
beyond time to a world unseen, and 
place in the face of the temptation the 
thought of eternity. There is a grand 
saying recorded of the martyred Re- 
former, Bishop Hooper, when one urged 
him to recant before he was burned, 
saying, "Life is sweet and death is 
bitter." "True," said the good bishop, 
"quite true! But eternal life is more 
sweet, and eternal death is more bitter." 



IV. 



great Jrienb to to horn toe muBt look 
far help, both far time anb eterratg* 

The purpose for which the eternal 
Son of God came into the world 
can never be declared too fully, or 
proclaimed too loudly. He came to 
give us hope and peace while we live 
among the "things seen, which are 
temporal," and glory and blessedness 
when we go into the "things unseen, 
which are eternal." He came to " bring 
life and immortality to light," and to 



44 The Lord Jesus Chtist ts 

''deliver those who, through fear of 
death, were all their life-time subject to 
bondage." (2 Tim. i. 10; Heb. ii. 15.) 
He saw our lost and bankrupt con- 
dition, and had compassion on us. 
And now, blessed be His name, a 
mortal man may pass through things 
temporal with comfort, and look forward 
to things eternal without fear. 

These mighty privileges our Lord 
Jesus Christ has purchased for us at 
the cost of His own precious blood. 
He became our Substitute, and bore 
our sins in His own body on the cross, 
and then rose again for our justification. 
He suffered for sins, the just for the 
unjust, that He might bring us unto 
God. He was made sin for us who 
knew no sin, that we poor sinful creatures 
might have pardon and justification 
while we live, and glory and blessedness 



the Great Friend. 45 



when we die. (i Pet ii. 24; iii. 18; 
2 Cor. V. 21.) 

And all that our Lord Jesus Christ 
has purchased for us He oflfers freely 
to every one who will turn from his 
sins, come to Him, and believe. " I am 
the light of the world," He says : " he 
that foUoweth Me shall not walk in 
darkness, but shall have the light of 
life." — "Come unto Me, all ye that labour 
and are heavy laden, and I will give 
you rest" — " If any man thirst, let him 
come unto Me and drink." — " Him that 
cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast 
out" — And the terms are as simple as 
the offer is free : " Believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved." 
" Whosoever belie veth on Him shall not 
perish but have eternal life." (John viii. 
12 ; Matt xi. 28; John viL 37; vi. 37 ; 
Acts xvi. 31 ; John iii. 16.) 



46 The Lord Jesus Christ is 

He that has Christ, has life. He can 
look round him on the " things temporal," 
and see change and decay on every side 
without dismay. He has got treasure 
in heaven, which neither rust nor 
moth can corrupt, nor thieves break 
through and steal. — He can look forward 
to the "things eternal," and feel calm 
and composed. His Saviour has risen, 
and gone to prepare a place for him. 
When he leaves this world he shall have 
a crown of glory, and be for ever with 
his Lord. — He can look down even into 
the grave, as the wisest Greeks and 
Romans could never do, and say, " Oh, 
death, where is thy sting.? oh, grave, 
where is thy victory.? oh, eternity, where 
are thy terrors } " (i Cor. xv. 55.) 

Let us all settle it firmly in our minds 
that the only way to pass through 
" things seen " with comfort, and look 



the Great Friend. 47 

forward to " things unseen " without 
fear, is to have Christ for our Saviour 
and Friend, to lay hold on Christ by 
faith, to become one with Christ and 
Christ in us, and while we live in the 
flesh to live the life of faith in the Son 
of God. (Gal. ii. 20.) How vast is the 
difference between the state of him who 
has faith in Christ, and the state of him 
who has none! Blessed indeed is that 
man or woman who can say, with truth, 
"I trust in Jesus: I believe." When 
Cardinal Beaufort lay upon his death- 
bed, our mighty poet, Shakspear, describes 
King Henry as saying," He dies,but gives 
no sign." When John Knox, the Scotch 
Reformer, was drawing to his end, and 
unable to speak, a faithful servant asked 
him to give some proof that the Gospel 
he had preached in life gave him 
comfort in death, by raising his hand. 



48 The Lord Jesus Christ is 

He heard ; and raised his hand toward 
heaven three times, and then departed. 
Blessed, I say again, is he that believes! 
He alone is rich, independent, and 
beyond the reach of harm. If you 
and I have no comfort amidst things 
temporal, and no hope for the things 
eternal, the fault is all our own. It is 
because we "will not come to Christ, 
that we may have life." Qohn v. 40.) 

I leave the subject of eternity here, 
and pray that God may bless it to many 
souls. You and I have looked each 
other in the face perhaps for the first 
time, and probably for the last time, in 
our lives. But when and where shall we 
meet again } Before we part, and per- 
haps for ever, I offer a word of friendly 
exhortation. I offer to every one within 
these old Cathedral walls to-night some 



the Great Friend, 49 



food for thought, and matter for self- 
examination. 

(i) First of all, how are you using 
your time ? Life is short and very 
uncertain. You never know what a day 
may bring forth. Business and pleasure, 
money-getting and money-spending, 
eating and drinking, marrying and 
giving in marriage, — all, all will soon be 
over and done with for ever. And you, 
what are you doing for your immortal 
soul > Are you wasting time, or turning 
it- to good account } Are you preparing 
to meet God ? 

(2) Secondly, where shall you be in 
eternity ? It is coming, coming, coming 
very fast upon us. You are going, 
going, going very fast into it. But 
where will you be } On the right hand 
or on the left in the day of judgment i 
Among the lost or among the saved ? 



50 The Lord Jesus Christ is 

Oh, rest not, rest not till your soul is 
insured ! Make sure work : leave nothing 
uncertain. It is a fearful thing to die 
unprepared, and fall into the hands of 
the living God, 

(3) Thirdly, would you be safe for 
time and eternity? Then seek Christ, 
and believe in Him, Come to Him 
just as you are. Seek Him while He 
may be found, call upon Him while He 
is near. There is still a throne of grace. 
It is not too late, Christ waits to be 
gracious: He invites you to come to 
Him. Before the door is shut and the 
judgment begins, repent, believe, and be 
saved. 

(4) l^^.st\j ^ would you be kappy? Cling 
to Christ, and live the life of faith in 
Him. Abide in Him, and live near to 
Him. Follow Him with heart and soul 
and mind and strength, and seek to 



the Great Friend. 51 

know Him better every day. So doing 
you shall have great peace while you 
pass through " things temporal," and in 
the midst of a dying world shall " never 
die." (John xi. 26.) So doing, you 
shall be able to look forward to " things 
eternal" with unfailing confidence, and 
to feel and *'know that if our earthly 
house of this tabernacle be dissolved we 
have a building of God, a house not 
made with hands, eternal in the heavens." 
(2 Cor. v. I.) 



P.S. 
h (Sternal ^oift. 

Since preaching the above Sermon 1 
have read Canon Farrar's volume, 
" Eternal Hope." With much that this 
book contains I cannot at all agree. 
Anything that comes from the pen of 
such a well-known writer of course 
deserves respectful consideration. But 
I must honestly confess, after reading 
" Eternal Hope," that I see no reason to 
withdraw anything I have said in my 
Sermon on " Eternity," and that I laid 
down the volume with regret and dis- 
satisfaction, unconvinced and unshaken 
in my opinions. 



Eternal Hope, 53 



I can find nothing new in Canon 
Farrar*s statements. He says hardly 
anything that has not been said before, 
and refuted before. To all who wish to 
examine fully the subject of the reality 
and eternity of future punishment I 
venture to recommend four works which 
are far less known than they ought 
to be, and which* appear to me far 
sounder, and more Scriptural, than 
"Eternal Hope." One is ^^ Horbery's 
Enquiry into the Scripture Doctrine of 
the Duration of Future Punishment^ 
The second is " Girdlestone's Dies Irce!^ 
The third is " Childe's Unsafe Anchor, ^^ 
The fourth is a volume of American 
Essays by various writers on the ** Future 
Life." No one of these books has ever 
been answered, and I venture to think 
they never will be. " Bishop Pearson on 
the Creedl' under the head " Resurrection,** 



54 Eternal Hope, 



and " Everlasting Life," will also repay 
a careful perusal." 

The plain truth is, that there are vast 
difficulties bound up with the subject of 
the future state of the wicked, which 
Canon Farrarseems tometo leaveentirely 
untouched. The amazing mercifulness 
of God, and the awfulness of supposing 
that many around us will be lost 
eternally, he has handled fully and with 
characteristic rhetoric. No doubt the 
compassions of God are unspeakable. 
He is not willing that any should perish. 
He would have all men to be saved. 
His love in sending Christ into the 
world to die for sinners is an inexhaus- 
tible subject. But this is only one side 
of God's character, as we have it revealed 
in Scripture. His character and attri- 
butes need to be looked at all round. 
The infinite holiness and justice of an 



Eternal Hope, 55 

eternal God, — His hatred of evil, mani- 
fested in Noah's flood and at Sodom, 
and in the destruction of the seven 
nations of Canaan, — ^the unspeakable 
vileness and guilt of sin in God's sight, 
— the wide gulf between natural man 
and his perfect Maker, — the enormous 
spiritual change which every child of 
Adam must go through, if he is to dwell 
for ever in God's presence, — and the 
utter absence of any intimation in the 
Bible that this change can take place 
after death, — all, all these are points 
which seem to me comparatively put on 
one side or left alone in Canon Farrar*s 
volume. My mind demands satisfaction 
on these points before I can accept the 
views advocated in " Eternal Hope," and 
that satisfaction I fail to And in the 
book. 

The position that Canon Farrar has 



56 Eternal Hope, 

taken up was first formally advocated 
by Origen, a Father who lived in the 
third century after Christ. He boldly 
broached the opinion that future punish- 
ment would be only temporary ; but his 
opinion was rejected by almost all his 
contemporaries. Bishop Wordsworth 
says, — "The Fathers of the Church in 
Origen's time and in the following 
centuries, among whom were many to 
whom the original language of the New 
Testament was their mother tongue, and 
who could not be misled by translations^ 
examined minutely the opinion and 
statements of Origen, and agreed for 
the most part in rejecting and condemn- 
ing them. Irenaeus, Cyril of Jerusalem, 
Chrysostom, Basil, Cyril of Alexandria, 
and others of the Eastern Church, and 
TertuUian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Augus- 
tine, Gregory the Great, Bede, and many 



Eternal Hope. 57 



more of the Western Church, were 
unanimous in teaching that the joys of 
the righteous and the punishments of 
the wicked will not be temporary, but 
everlasting." 

" Nor was this all. The Fifth General 
Council, held at Constantinople under 
the Emperor Justinian, in 553, examined 
the tenets of Origen, and passed a 
synodical decree condemnatory of them. 
And for a thousand years after that 
time there was an unanimous consent 
in Christendom in this sense." (Bishop 
Wordsworth's " Sermons on future 
rewards," etc., p. 34.) 

Let me add to this statement the fact 
that the eternity of future punishment 
has been held by almost all theologians 
from the time of the Reformation down 
to the present day. It is a point 
on which Lutherans, Calvinists, and 



58 Eternal Hope, 



Arminians, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, 
and Independents have always, with a 
few exceptions, been of one mind. 
Search the writings of the most eminent 
and learned Reformers, search the works 
of the Puritans, search the few literary 
remains of the men who revived English 
Christianity in the eighteenth century, 
and, as a rule, you will always get one 
harmonious answer. Within the last 
few years, no doubt, the " non-eternity " 
of future punishment has found several 
zealous advocates. But up to a 
comparatively modem date, I unhesi« 
tatingly assert, the supporters of Canon 
Farrar's views have always been an ex- 
tremely small minority among orthodox 
Christians. This fact is, at any rate, 
worth remembering. 

As to the difficulties besetting the old, 
or common, view of future punishment. 



Eternal Hdpe, 59 

I admit their existence, and I do not 
pretend to explain them. But I always 
expect to find many mysteries in 
revealed religion, and I am not 
stumbled by them. I see other 
difficulties in the world which I cannot 
solve, and I am content to wait for 
their solution. What a mighty divine 
has called, "The mystery of God, the 
great mystery of His suffering vice 
and confusion to prevail," — the origin 
of evil, — the permission of cruelty, 
oppression, poverty, and disease, — the 
allowed sickness and death of infants 
before they know good from evil, — the 
future prospects of the heathen who 
never heard the Gospel, — the state of 
China, Hindostan, and Central Africa, 
for the last 1800 years, — all these things 
are to my mind great knots which I am 
unable to untie, and depths which I 



6o Eternal Hope. 



have no line to fathom. But I wait for 
light, and I have no doubt all will be 
made plain. I rest in the thought that 
God is a Being of infinite wisdom, and 
IS doing all things well. " Shall not the 
Judge of all the earth do right } " (Gen. 
xviii. 25.) It is a wise sentence of 
Bishop Butler : " All shadow of injustice, 
and indeed all harsh appearances in the 
various economy of God, would be lost, 
if we would keep in mind that every 
merciful allowance shall be made, and 
no more shall be required of any one, 
than what might have been equitably 
expected of him from the circumstances 
in which he was placed, and not what 
might have been expected from him had 
he been placed in other circumstances." 
("Analogy," part ii. ch. vi. p. 425. 
Wilson's edition.) It is a grand saying 
of Elihu, in Job : " Touching the 



Eternal Hope, 6i 

Almighty, we cannot find Him otit: He 
is excellent in power, and in judgment, 
and in plenty of justice: He will not 
afflict" (Job xxxviL 23.) 

It may be perfectly true that 
many Romish divines, and even some 
Protestants, have made extravagant and 
offensive statements about the bodily 
sufferings of the lost in another world. 
It may be true that those who believe 
in eternal punishment have occasionally 
misunderstood or mistranslated texts, 
and have pressed figurative language 
too far. But it is hardly fair to 
make Christianity responsible for the 
mistakes of its advocates. It is an old 
saying that " Christian errors are infidel 
arguments." Thomas Aquinas, and 
Dante, and Milton, and Boston, and 
Jonathan Edwards were not inspired 
and infallible, and I decline to be 



6 2 Eternal Hope.. 



answerable for all they may have 
written about the state of the lost 
But after every allowance, admission, 
and deduction, there remains, in my 
humble opinion, a mass of Scripture 
evidence in support of the doctrine of 
eternal punishment, which can never be 
explained away, and which no revision 
or new translation of the English Bible 
will ever overthrow.* 

That there are degrees of misery as 
well as degrees of glory in the 
future state, that the condition of 
some who are lost will be far 
worse than that of others, all this is 
undeniable. But that the punishment 
of the wicked will ever have an end, or 
that length of time alone can ever 

* Horbery alone alleges and examines no less than 
one hundred and three texts, on his aide, in his reply 
to Whiston. 



Eternal Hope, 63 

change a heart, or that the Holy Spirit 
ever works on the dead, or that there is 
any purging, purifying process beyond 
the grave, by which the wicked will be 
finally fitted for heaven, these are 
positions which I maintain it is utterly 
impossible to prove by texts of 
Scripture. Nay, rather there are texts 
of Scripture which teach an utterly 
different doctrine. "It is surprising," 
says Horbery, " if hell be such a state 
of purification, that it should always be 
represented in Scripture as a place 
of punishment." (Vol. ii. p. 223.) 
" Nothing," says Girdlestone, " but clear 
statements of Scripture could justify us 
in holding, or preaching to ungodly 
men, the doctrine of repentance after 
death ; and not one clear statement on 
this subject is to be found," ("Dies 
Irae," p. 269.) If we once begin to 



64 Eternal Hope, 



invent doctrines which we cannot prove 
by texts, or to refuse the evidence of 
texts in Scripture because they land us 
in conclusions we do not like, we 
may as well throw aside the Bible 
altogether, and discard it as the judge 
of controversy ! 

The argument of some, that no 
religious doctrine can be true which is 
rejected by the "common opinion" and 
popular feeling of mankind, — that any 
texts which contradict this common 
popular feeling must be wrongly 
interpreted, — and that therefore eternal 
punishment cannot be true, because the 
inward feeling of the multitude revolts 
against it, — this argument appears to 
me alike dangerous and unsound. It is 
dangerouSy because it strikes a direct 
blow at the authority of Scripture as 
the only rule of faith. Where is the use 



Eternal Hope, 65 



of the Bible, if the " common opinion " 
of mortal man is to be regarded as of 
more weight than the declarations of 
God's Word ? — It is unsound^ because it 
ignores the great fundamental principle 
of Christianity, — that man is a fallen 
creature, with a corrupt heart and 
understanding, and that in spiritual 
things his judgment is worthless. There 
is a vail over our hearts. " The natural 
man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness 
to him." (i Cor. ii. 14.) To say, in the 
face of such a text, that any doctrine 
which the majority of men dislike, such 
as eternal punishment, must therefore be 
untrue, is simply absurd ! The " common 
opinion" is more likely to be wrong 
than right. No doubt Bishop Butler 
has said, *' If in revelation there . be 
found any passage the seeming meaning 



66 Eternal Hope. 

of which is contrary to natural religion, 
we may most certainly conclude such 
seeming meaning not to be the real 
one." But those who triumphantly 
quote these words would do well to 
observe the sentence which immediately 
follows : " But it is not any degree of a 
presumption against an interpretation 
of Scripture, that such an interpretation 
contains a doctrine which the light of 
nature cannot discover." ("Analogy," 
part i. chap. ii. p. 358. Wilson's 
edition.) 

After all, what the " common feeling " 
or opinion of the majority of mankind 
is about the duration of future punish- 
ment, is a question which admits of 
much doubt. Of course we have no 
means of ascertaining: and it signifies 
little either way. In such a matter the 
only point is, What saith the Scripture ? 



Eternal Hope, 67 



But I have a strong suspicion, if the 
world could be polled, that we should 
find the greater part of mankind believed 
in eternal punishment! About the 
opinion of the Greeks and Romans 
at any rate there can be little 
dispute. If anything is clearly taught 
in the stories of their mythology it is 
the endless nature of the sufferings 
of the wicked. Bishop Butler says, 
"Gentile writers, both moralist and 
poetic, speak of the future punishment 
of the wicked, both as to duration and 
degree, in a like manner of expression 
and description as the Scripture does." 
(" Analogy," part 1. ch. ii. p. 2 1 8.) The 
strange and weird legends of Tantalus, 
Sisyphus, Ixion, Prometheus, and the 
Danaides, have all one common feature 
about them. In each case the punish- 
ment is eternal! This is a fact worth 



68 Eternal Hope, 



noticing. It is worth what it is worth. 
But it shows, at all events, that the 
opponents of eternal punishment should 
not talk too confidently about the 
*' common opinion of mankind." 

The doctrine of the Annihilation of 
the Wicked as soon as they die, to which 
many adhere, appears to me so utterly 
irreconcilable with our Lord Jesus 
Christ's words about "the resurrection 
of damnation," and St. Paul's words, 
" There shall be a resurrection of the 
dead, both of the just and unjust" 
(John V. 29 ; Acts xxiv. 14), that until 
those words can be proved to form no 
part of inspired Scripture it seems to 
me mere waste of time to argue 
about it. 

The favourite argument of the ad- 
vocates of this doctrine, that " death, 
dying, perishing, destruction," and the 



Eternal Hope, 69 



like, are phrases which can only mean 
"cessation of existence," is scarcely 
worth noticing. Every Bible reader 
knows that God said to Adam, con- 
cerning the forbidden fruity "In the 
day thou eatest thereof thou shalt 
surely dieJ^ (Gen. li. 17.) But every 
well-taught Sunday Scholar knows that 
Adam did not " cease to exist," when 
he broke the commandment. He died 
spiritually, but he did not cease to 
be! — So also St. Peter says of the 
flood: "The world that then was, 
being overflowed with water, perished,*^ 
(2 Peter iii. 6.) Yet it certainly did not 
cease to be ; and when the water was 
dried up Noah lived on it again. 

The argument that the words " eternal 
and everlasting" in Scripture do not 
always mean "endless," and that con- 
sequently "everlasting punishment" does 



7© Eternal Hope. 



not mean " endless punishment," is one 
which will not bear calm investigation. 
No doubt such expressions as " everlast- 
ing," when applied to physical subjects, 
such as the hills, denote nothing more 
than the comparative stability and 
antiquity of mountains on the face of 
the globe. But it is equally certain 
that when God and His dealings with 
man's soul are the subject eternity 
always denotes a really endless eternity. 
The New Testament, at all events, 
supplies unanswerable evidence on the 
point. In our authorized version the 
same Greek word is forty-two times 
translated " eternal," and twenty-four 
times "everlasting." In forty-three 
places it is applied to the " endless " life 
of glory which is promised to believers. 
In six places it is applied to the future 
state of the impenitent and unbelieving. 



Eternal Hope, 71 



But in these six places there is not the 
slightest symptom of a proof that the 
word means anything else than what it 
means in every other passage in the 
New Testament where it occurs. In 
short, from the beginning of Matthew 
down to the end of Revelation, the word 
can only bear one meaning. Whether 
applied to " God," or to the " Spirit," or 
to redemption, or consolation, or 
glory, or punishment, or fire, it can only 
bear one interpretation. It always 
signifies that which has no end. 



2* Ccmbitimtal Imtmrrialitg. 

There is another doctrine, however, 
about the future state, which has lately 
found great favour in some quarters, and 
requires more attention because more 
specious and plausible than the doctrine 
of ultimate universal annihilation. The 
doctrine I have in view, if I understand 
it rightly, amounts to this. " Immortality, 
in its fullest sense, is the peculiar privilege 
of the believer. His happiness after death 
is really and literally eternal. But the 
misery of those who die in sin will not 
be eternal It will cease after a certain 



Conditional Immortality, 73 

period, though that period may be 

fearfully long, and then will come a 

state of non-existence, or unconscious- 
ness, like the future state of the 

Buddhist." The advocates of this modern 
theory contend that the endless exis- 
tence of beings in suffering is irrecon- 
cilable with the character of a loving 
and merciful God. 

Now, it would be easy to reply that 
mortal man is a very poor judge of 
what is suitable to the character of God, 
or what is inconsistent with it. Man's 
ideas of the enormous sinfulness of sin 
in the sight of God, and of the unutter- 
able holiness and purity of God, are 
sure to be thoroughly inadequate and 
defective. No duration of countless 
ages will ever make sin anything but an 
unspeakable evil before the Being with 
whom we have to do. Millions of years 



74 Conditional Immortality. 

of misery could never satisfy that breach 
of God's law for which the blood of 
Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, 
was needed to provide atonement. It 
is the blood, and not length of time 
that alone exhausts the sinfulness of 
sin. But I do not wish to dwell on 
this point. I prefer resting on God's 
Word. 

I say, then, unhesitatingly that the 
alleged distinction between the duration 
of the future blessedness of the godly, 
and the future misery of the ungodly, is 
a distinction which cannot be proved 
from the Bible. You cannot teach the 
distinction without striking a deadly 
blow at the prospects of the believer 
beyond the grave. The language of 
Scripture about the duration of the 
future state of both classes is one and 
the same. You cannot limit or shorten 



Conditional Immortality, 75 



one state without equally limiting or 
shortening the other. 

What says the prophet Daniel : "Many 
of them that sleep in the dust of the 
earth shall awake, some to everlasting 
life, and some to shame and everlasting 
contempt." (Dan. xii. 2.) 

What says our Lord Jesus Christ? 
"These shall go away into everlasting 
punishment ; but the righteous into life 
eternal." (Matt. xxv. 46.) 

These two texts alone seem to me 
conclusive and unanswerable. In each 
case the Hebrew and Greek words 
describing the two states are precisely 
the same. The future happiness of the 
saved, and the future misery of the lost 
are declared to be alike in point of 
duration. If o^e is to come to an end 
so also is the other; if the "life" is 
endless so also is the shame and the 



76 Conditional Immortality, 

punishment. To my eyes both appear 
equally interminable, everlasting, and 
eternal. 

Where is the Christian who would not 
be shocked at the idea of a life of 
blessedness after death which was one 
day to cease and come to an end } What 
Bible-reading believer does not cling to 
the idea, that after this world of change 
and decay there will be a world without 
change } What holy man or woman, in 
the midst of partings, crosses, separa- 
tions, sicknesses, and deaths, does not ' 
rejoice in the thought of a kingdom in- 
corruptible, a crown that fadeth not 
away, a meeting without a parting, a 
gathering without a separation, a life 
without death.? And why.? Simply 
because these are things which are 
promised a hundred times in God's 
written Word. 



Conditional Immortality, 77 

All this wealth of hope must be given 
up and thrown overboard if we once 
admit the modem theories of some 
about the world to come. The future 
crown is to fade away! The future 
meeting is to be broken up ! The 
future glory is to set ! The future life 
is to be exchanged for extinction or 
unconsciousness ! Most wretched and 
miserable prospect! But there is no 
alternative if words have any meaning 
at all, on the principle of some modern 
teachers. Once grant that everlasting 
punishment is to have an end, and by 
parity of reasoning you must grant that 
there is an end of everlasting life. Once 
overthrow the truth of an everlasting 
hell, and you cannot maintain the truth 
of an everlasting heaven. They stand 
or fall together. 

It is a deep saying of Gregory the 



78 Conditional Immortality, 

Great, quoted by Bishop Pearson, " If 
that which God has THREATENED is not 
true, then that which He has PROMISED 
is also not true." In short, to use the 
Bishop's own words, "The condition of the 
lost is unalterable, their condemnation is 
irreversible, their torments inevitable, 
their miseries eternal. As they shall 
not be taken from their punishment by 
annihilation of themselves, so the punish- 
ment shall not be taken off them by any 
compassion." 

" Their persons shall continue for ever 
in this remediless condition, under an 
everlasting pain of loss, because there is 
no hope of heaven, — and under an ever- 
lasting pain of sense, because there is 
no means to appease the wrath of God 
which abideth on them." (Pearson on 
the Creed, vol. i. p. 467.) 

The common reasoning of some advo- 



Conditional Immortality. 79 

cates of this view, that it is shocking to 
suppose God calls so many beings into 
existence, who shall finally come to ever- 
lasting misery, was long ago so wisely 
answered by Bishop Butler, that I shall 
content myself by quoting his words. 

In the fifth chapter of the first part of 
his analogy, the Bishop observes, — 

"That the present world does not 
actually become a state of moral dis- 
cipline to many, even to the generality, 
— i,e,y that they do not improve or grow 
better in it — cannot be urged as a proof 
that it was not intended for moral dis- 
cipline by any who at all observe the 
analogy of nature. For of the numer- 
ous seeds of vegetables, and bodies of 
animals, which are adapted, and put in 
the way to improve to such a point or 
state of natural maturity and perfection, 
we do not see perhaps that one in a 



8o Conditional Immortality, 

million actually does. For the greatest 
part of them decay before they are 
improved to it, and appear to be abso- 
lutely destroyed. Yet no one, who does 
not deny all final causes, will deny that 
those seeds and bodies which do attain 
to that point of maturity and perfection, 
answer the end for which they were 
really designed by nature; and, there- 
fore, that nature designed them for such 
perfection. 

" And I cannot forbear adding, though 
it is not to the present purpose, that the 
appearance of such an amazing waste 
in nature, with respect to these seeds 
and bodies, by foreign causes, is to us 
as unaccountable as — what is much more 
terrible — the present and future ruin of 
so many moral agents, by themselves, — 
i.e,y by vice." 

I will now conclude this lengthened 



Conditional Immortality, 8i 

postscript with a passage from a work I 

sent forth twenty-five years ago, which 

many readers of this paper have probably 

not seen. A quarter of a century has 

passed away since I wrote the passage, 

and many " times have passed over me." 

I hope I am wiser in many ways. I 

have stood by many graves, shed many 

tears, carried many crosses, spoken with 

many Christians, and read many books. 

But I see no reason to alter any of the 

opinions which the following paragraphs 

contain, or to withdraw from the position 

I took up. 

..." Let others hold their peace about 

hell if they will ; — I dare not do so. I 

see it plainly in Scripture, and I must 

speak of it. I fear that thousands are 

on the broad way that leads to it, and I 

would fain arouse them to a sense of the 

peril before them. What would you say 

F 



82 Conditional Immortality, 

of the man who saw his neighbour's 
house in danger of being burned down, 
and never raised the cry of 'Fire'? 
What ought to be said of us as ministers, 
if we call ourselves watchmen for souls, 
and yet see the fires of hell raging in the 
distance, and never give the alarm ? 
Call it bad taste, if you like, to speak of 
hell. Call it charity to make things 
pleasant, and speak smoothly, and 
soothe men with a constant lullaby of 
peace. From such notions of taste and 
charity may I ever be delivered! My 
notion of charity is to warn men plainly 
of danger. My notion of taste in the 
ministerial office is to declare all the 
counsel of God. If I never spoke of 
hell, I should think I had kept back 
something that was profitable, and 
should look on myself as an accomplice 
of the devil." 



Conditional Immortality, S3 

" Reader, I beseech you, in all tender 
affection, beware of false views of the 
subject on which I have been dwelling. 
Beware of new and strange doctrines 
about hell and the eternity of punish- 
ment. Beware of manufacturing a God 
of your own, — ^a God who is all mercy, 
but not just, — a God who is all love, but 
not holy, — a God who has a heaven for 
everybody, but a hell for none, — ^a God 
who can allow good and bad to be side 
by side in time, but will make no 
distinction between good and bad in 
eternity. Such a God is an idol of your 
own, as really as Jupiter or the monstrous 
image of Juggernaut, — as true an idol 
as any snake or crocodile in an Egyptian 
temple, — as true an idol as was ever 
moulded out of brass or clay. The 
hands of your own fancy and sentimen- 
tality have made him. He is not the 



84 Conditional Immortality. 

God of the Bible, and beside the God 
of the Bible there is no God at all. 
Your heaven would be no heaven at all. 
A heaven containing all sorts of charac- 
ters mixed together indiscriminately 
would be miserable discord indeed. 
Alas for the eternity of such a heaven ! 
There would be little difference between 
it and hell. Ah, reader, there is a hell ! 
There is a fire for the chaff as well 
as a garner for the wheat! Take 
heed lest you find it out to your cost 
too late." 

" Beware of being wise about that 
which is written. Beware of forming 
fanciful theories of your own, and then 
trying to make the Bible square in with 
them. Beware of making selections 
from your Bible to suit your taste, — 
refusing, like a spoilt child, whatever 
you think bitter, — seizing, like a spoilt 



Conditional Immortality. 85 

child, whatever you think sweet. What 
IS all this but taking Jehoiakim's pen- 
knife and cutting God's Word to pieces ? 
What does it amount to but telling God 
that you, a poor short-lived worm, know 
what is good for you better than He? 
It will not do: it will not do. You 
must take the Bible as it is. You must 
read it all, and believe it all. You must 
come to the reading of it in the spirit of 
a little child. Dare not to say, ' I believe 
this verse, for I like it. I reject that, for 
I do not like it. I receive this, for I can 
understand it. I refuse that, for I cannot 
reconcile it with my views.* ' Nay, but, 
O man, who art thou that repliest 
against God } ' By what right do you 
talk in this way } Surely it were better 
to say over every chapter in the Word, 
' Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth.' 
— Ah, reader, if men would do this, they 



86 Conditional Immortality, 

would never try to throw overboard the 
doctrine of the eternal punishment of 
the wicked." ("Wheat or Chaff?** 
Wm. Hunt and Co.) 



LONDON : WILLIAM HUNT AND COMPANY. 



SclccUom from tbe TmotYid 

OF THB 

LORD BISHOP OF LIVERPOOL. 



Expository Thoughts on the Gospels. 

Designed for Family and Private "Reading, with the 
Text oomplete, and oopioua Notes. Thirteentii edition. 

St. Matthbw. Extra doth. 68. 

St. Mabk. Uniform with the above. Ss. 

St. Lukb. Vol. I., 6s. 6d. Vol. n., 78. 

St. JoHV. Vol. I., 68. 6d. VoL II.| 6b. 6d. Vol. m., 8s. 

IN EXTBA BINDINGH3. The set complete, half moioooo, 
gilt edges, £3 12s. 6d. Whole Turkey morocco, 
£4s Ids. Or each yulume, half morocco, 48. ; Turkey 
morocco, 6s. 6d., in addition to the prices in doth. 

Short Expository Readings on the Gospel of 

St. John. A Selection designed for Families, Mathers' 
Meetings, District Visitors, etc. With the Text. Crowa. 
8yo, extra doth, 6s. 

Home Truths. 

A re-issue of the Miscellaneous Writings of Bishop Byle» 
D.D., revised and adapted to this work. Complete in 
Four vols. Extra doth, red edges, 18s. 

Also in Eight Series. Each volume, 3s. 6d. 

Hymns for the Church on Earth. 

By BishopByle, D.D. New and Enlarged Edition of 400 
Hymns. JBxtra doth, 4s. 6d., gilt, 6s., morocco, lOs. 

The original large type edition of aoo Hymxus. Tonth 
edition. 48. 



WILLIAM HUNT AITD COMPANY, 



tt v^vrnma ii Mmm iiv>» 



KNOTS UNTIED" BEBDEB. 

Facts and Men. 

Beinflr Padres from English Chorch Historyt some Bio- 
graphical and some Historical. Second edition. Laige 
post 8yo, extra doth, 78. 6d 

Holiness : 

Its Nature, Hindrances, Difficulties, and Boots. Being a 
Series of Papers on the Buhject. With Preface, Intro- 
ductory Essay, and Supplementary Extracts from Old 
Wxiten. Extra cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Practical Religion. 

Being Plain Papers on the daily duties, experiences, 
dangers, and priyileges of professing Ghristians. Extra 
doth, 7s. 6d. 

Old Paths. 

Being Plain Statements on some of the weightier 
matters of Christianity. Second edition. Extra doth, 
78. 6d. 

Knots Untied. 

Being Plain Statements on Disputed Points in Reliflion. 
Large Post 8to. 600pp. Fifth Enlarged Edition, fktra 
doth, 78. 6d. 



Simplicity in Preaching. 

A few Short Hints on a Great Subject. Extra doth, red 
edges, Is. 

Spiritual Songs. 

Colos. iii. 6. Beixig One Hundred Hymns, not to be 
found in the Hymn Books most commonly used. Selected 
by Bishop Byle. Fifteenth enlaived edition. Series I. 
Glased wrapper, 9d. : fancy doth, gut edges, It. Series U. 
Is. ; limp doth, Is. 4d. 



PATEBNOSTBB BOTF. 



Coming Events and Present Duties. 

8«rmon8 and Addresses on Prophetical Subjects. Second 
edition, enlarged. Crown 8yo. ds. 6d. 



Bishops and Clergy of Other Days. 

With, an Introduction on the Heal Merita of the 
Beformers and Puritans. Crown 8yo.| extra doth, 48. 

Boys and Girls Playing. 

And other Sermons for Children. With Six niustra- 
tions by Dalziel and others. Extra doth. 2b. 6d. 

Bible Inspiration: 

its Beality and Nature. Second editicm. Copious 
Notes. Is. 6d. 



Christ the True Altar. 

And other Sermons. With the Chai^ : the Christian 
Ministry not Sacerdotal, but Evanffehstic. By the late 
Samuel Walde^ve, D.D., Lord Bishop of Carlisle. 
With Introduction by Bishop Byle. Crown Svo, 8s. 



Assurance. 

(2 Tim. iy. 6, 7, a) With Notes and Extracts from 
Writers of the 17th century. Seventh edition, enlazged. 
Cloth, Is. 



Thoughts on Immortality. 

With some Bemarks on Canon Farrar's *' Eternal Hope," 
and Kindred Subjects. Is. 

Worldly Conformity. 

What it is not, and what it is. doth boards. Is. 

Young Men Exhorted. 

An Address to Young Men. Tenth edition. Fcap 8to, 
68pp., tinted wrapper, 6d. ; doth extra. Is. 



WILLIAM HX7KT Ain> COMPANT. 



Be not Slothful but Followers. 

A Fimeral Ben&on. Is. 

Faith's Choice. 

A Sermon on Heb. xii. 8^—26. 6d. 

How should a Child be Trained ? 

Being Thoughts on Proverbs xxii. 6. Neat wrapper. 7th 
edition. 8d. each, or 2s. 6d. per dozen. 

The Garden Inclosed. 

A Parable for all who love Plowers. Third edition. 
Small book foim, on tinted paper. 2d. 

Thoughts on the Supper of the Lord. 

For the Use of Present and Fatnre CommmiicantB. In 
paper cover, 8d.; limp doth, 6d. 

Church Principles and Church Comprehen- 

siv^iess. With Introduction and Appendix. Grown 8vo, 
68pp., quarter-bound, Is. 

Dogma. 

A Paper for the Times. BeingThoughts on the Import- 
ance of Distinct and Definite views of Beligious Ttuth. 
Grown 8vo. With tinted wrapper. 8d., or 2s. 6d. per doz. 

The Additional Hymn-Book. 

Being Three Hundred Hymns for Public Worship, most 
of them not to be found in the Collections commonly used. 
Ump doth, 6d. ; extra dotb^ thin boards, 8d. ; doth 
' boai^ Is. 



A daaH/Ud lAat of dU the Works of Bishop SyU may U obtained 
on application to the Ihtblishers, 



London : WMiam Sunt and Company ^ 12, Paternoster Bow, 



SBLBCnON FROM THE 

NEW PUBLICATIONS 



OF 



WILLIAM HUNT AND COMPANY, 

12, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON. 



The RoU-Call of Faith ; 

or, the Heroes of Hebrew Story. By Rev. Charles D. Bell, M.A., 
Rector of Gheltenham, and Hon. Canon of Carlisle. Crown 8vo, 5b. 

Home Duties for Wives and Mothers. 

Illustrated by Women of Soriptnre. ByJSCrs. Donaldson. With 
Introduction by the Rery. Dr. w alsham Howe, Bishop of Bedford. 
Small 8vo, extra doth, 2s. 

Simple Readings on the Gospels. 

Arranged in Daily Portions for the use of Families and Schools. 
Compiled from the Works of Bishop Ryle, D.D., Rev. Albert 
Barnes, and other Expository Writers. By A. S. F. One vol., 
extra doth, 7s. ; or vol. I., Sa. 6d. ; n., 4s. 

Hearts made Glad and Homes made Happy. 

Short Chapters on important Subjects, for Mothers* Meetings and 
Fathers' (Masses. Post 8to., extra doth. 8s. 6d. 

Delight in the Lord. 

A Manual of Devotion, adapted to the yarving Experience of the 
Christian life. By Henry Morris. S2mo,clot^, gilt edges. Is. 6d.; 
also in calf and morocco. 

Scriptural Marks of a True Believer. 

By the Rev. F. A. C. lillingston, M.A., Vicar of St. Barnabas, 
lEOington, and late Archdeacon of Yass, New South Wales. 
Fcap 8ro., extra doth, 28. 6d. 

The Unsafe Anchor; 

or, " Eternal Hope " a False Hope. A Reply to Canon Farrar's 
Westminster Abbey Sermons. By Charles F. Childe, M. A. , Rector 
of Holbrook, SufFolk ; formerly Frindpal of the Churdi Missionary 
College, IdiJQgton. Sixth Edition. Crown Syo., esctra doth, Ss, 
Small Paper Edition. Fcap, Is. 6d. 



WILLIAM HTJNT AND COMFAirr, 



The Three Heavens. 

The First Heaven, or World of Air. The Second Heaven, or 
World of Stars. The Third Heaven, or Heaven of Heavens. 
By the Rev. Josiah Crampton, M.A., Author of "The Lunar 
World." Larfre post 8vo. Wifli numerous Hlustrations. Third 
and cheaper Edition. 68. 

Christian Progress. 

By tiie Bey. F. A. C. lillingston, M.A. Small 8vo, extra doth, 2s. 

Chief Women ; 

or, Hiffber life in TTigh Places. By Mrs. Gordon, Author of 
" The Home life of Sir David Brewster." Grown 8vo., extra 
doth, Ss. 6d. Second Edition, enlai^^. 

Sir Evelyn's Charge ; 

or, A Child's Influence. By Margaret LsabellAxden. Sixth edition. 
Extra doth, Ss. 

Rachel Longford; 

or, Home and its Unoonsdous Influence. Grown 8vo. By the 
Author of and uniform with " Sir Evdyn'sGharge." Extradoth,68. 

Life in the Ghetto ; 

or, the Jewish Physician. By the Author of " Broad Shadows 
in Life's Patiiway," and uniform in size. Ss. 

Hubert's Two Anchors ; 

or, Service Ghosen. By E. A. W. Crown 8vo., extra doth, 6a. 

Mother's Nell. 

By E. B. G. Third Edition. With four flill-page Engravings. 
Extra doth, Is. 6d. 

Lottie's Silver Burden; 

or. the Heart not at Leisure from Itsdf. By the Author of 
"Mother's Nell." Small 8vo. , 8s. 6d. 

Hattie's Mistake ; 

or. Mothers and Mothers. By L E. S. Dedicated to the Bev. 
Canon Gairatt, M.A. With ftill-page engravings. Uniform with 
Mother's NelL Extra doth. Is. 6d. 



FATESNOSTEB BOW. 



Are you Happy : Really Happy ? 

The Gomparatiye EzperiezLce of Seven old Eriends. l6mo, Square. 
Gilt edges, Is. 

Agnes Grahame, Deaconess. 

A Btory of Woman's Work for Christ and His Chordi. By 
M. A. M. WiUi Introductory Paper by t^e very Bey. the Dean of 
Chester. Small 8vo., 8s. 6d. 

The Scarecrow in the Cherry Tree ; 

or, Of course I behave well in Church. Extra doth, Is. 6d. 

Always in a Muddle. 

A Simple Story. By Marianne Filleul, Author of " Marion ; the 
Smuggler's Wife," etc. Third edition. lamp doth, Is. 

Nancy Lambert. 

A story of Lancashire Tiife. Second edition Extra doth, 9b. 

Carrying Things to Extremes. 

Bythe Author of "Oopdey Annals." New edition. limp doth, Od. 

The Home of Poverty made Rich. 

A volume of Interest spedally adapted for Mothers' Meetings. 
By Mrs. Best, author ot " Tracts on the Parables," etc. Second 
Edition. F'capSvo., with Frontispiece. 2s. 6d. Limp doth, Is. 6d. 

The Christian Life. 

Viewed under some of its more Practioal Aspects. By the Rev. 
Sir Emilius Bayley, Bart, B.D., Vicar of St. John's, Paddington, 
and Bural Dean. Extra dotii, 8s. Be-issue, limp doth, 2s. 

Suggestive Readings on the Gospel of St. John. 

With Copious Notes and Beferences. By Mrs. Hamilton. With 
Introduction by the Bev. J. Stevenson, D.D. 2s. 6d. St, Luke, 2s. 

The Child's Acts of the Apostles. 

A Narrative and Commentary, written in simple language for 
the little ones. With Notes for the use of Teadiers. With 
Intzoduction by the Bight Bev. Bishop Anderson, doth. 8s. 



WILLIAM HUVT AND COICPANT, 



Sun-Glints in the Wilderness. 

Our Lord's Temptation, and other subjectB. By the Bey. Hugh 
Blacmillan, LL.D. Crown 8vo., 4s. 6d. 

Seed Scattered Broadcast ; 

or, Incidents in a Camp Hospital. By S. MoBeth. With an In- 
troduction, and Edited by the Author of " The Memorials of 
Captain Hedley Vicars." Second edition. Post 6vo. 8s. 6d. 
Cheap issue, limp cloth, 2s. 

Oil for Creaking Hinges ; 

or. Help and Comfort for Hard Times. Designed for Mothers* 
Meetings. By the Author of " Toiling in Bomog," etc. 2s. 

The Religion of Redemption ; 

or, the Doctrine of Man's Buin and Christ's Salyation, Defined 
and Defended. A Contribution to the Preliminariee of Christian 
Apology. By B. W. Monsell, B. A., late Pastor of the IVee Ohurdi, 
Neufchatel, Switzerland. Second edition. lyol.,8YO. 12s. 

Suggestive Thoughts ; 

or. Ten Minutes Daily with Christian Authors, T^i"gH«^ and 
French. Selected, traiuslated and arranged b^ Mrs. Money. With 
Introduction by Dr. Korman Madeod. Antique boards, da. 6d. 

Stories from Memel. 

Dedicated to the Young. By Mrs. Agnes de Havilland. With 
tax. Illustrations, from designs by Walter Crane. Extra doth. 
Is. 6d. 

Pleasant Sundays with my Children ; 

or, " Here a Little and There a Little." Familiar Conversations 
on the Animals, Birds, Insects, Beptiles, Fishes, Flowers, Trees, 
and Precious Stones^ of tiie Bible. Bt the Author of " Ethel 
Woodville," etc. With many Illustrations. New Edition. In 
Foap 8yo., eztira doth, gilt edges. 5b. 

A Selection of the Words and Works of our Lord 

Jesus Christ, from the Four ErangeUsts. With Introduction by 
the Bey. Q. H. Wilkinson, M.A., Vicar of St. Peter's, Eaton 
Square. ReautiAilly printed with carmine borders and headiugs, 
and puutugi-apliio frontispiece. With Introduction. 68. 



PATEKNOSTSB BOW. 



BY THE REV. GORDON CALTHROPj M.A., 

Viear of 8t, AugtuHnt^Sf Highbury New Parht London, 

Ne^w confirmation Manual. 



Discipleship ; 

or, The Second Door. Comisels to Young ChiistianB. limp 
cloth, 16mo, Is. Cloth boards, fsULt edges, Is. 6d. 

CONTENTS. 
Chapter 1.— Secret Disdplediip. 

„ 2. — ^Decision. 

„ 8.— A Higher Stage. 

„ 4.— The Source of our Strength. 

„ 6. — ^The Means of Ghraoe. 

„ 6.— The Lord's Supper. 

„ 7. — Excuses. 

„ 8.~Oaining a Loss. 

„ 9.— Temptation. 

„ 10.— "The Second Door.»» 

Words Spoken to my Friends. 

Sermons preached at St. Augustine's, Bighbnry New Park, 
London, by the Bey. Oordon Calthrop, H.A. Crown 8vo. 6s. 

The Twin Brothers, 

and other Addresses to Children. Uniform with " The Lost 
Sheep Found." Square 18mo. 8s. 

The Lost Sheep Found, 

And other Sermons. (Fourteen.) Preached to the Children of 
St. Augustine's Churdi, Highbury, London. Second edition. 
Square 18mo. 8s. 

Pulpit Recollections. 

Being Sermons preached during a Six Years* Ministry at Chelten- 
ham and Highbury New Park. Bevised and adapted for general 
reading. One Vol., post 8yo. Ss. 6d. 

Lectures on Homp Subjects. 

Addressed espeoially to the Worldxig Claases. F'eap 8to. Sb. 6d. 



BY THE LATE LORD BISHOP OF CARLISLE. 

The Way of Peace ; 

or, the Teaching of Smptture conoeming Jnstiflcation, Sanctdfica- 
tion, and ABsuraace. In Sermons, preached before tiie University 
of Oxford. Fourth edition. Grown Svo. 4s. 6d. 

Words of Eternal Life ; 

or, the First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ : set forth in 
Eighteen Sermons. Grown 8vo., doth. 7s. 

New Testament Millennarianism ; 

or, the Kingdom and Coming of Christ, as taught by TKm»^\f and 
HisApostii»3. 640 pp. Grown 8vo., extra olouL. 10b. 

Christ the True Altar. 

And other Sermons. By the late Samud Waldegrave, D.D. , Lord 
Bishop of Carlisle. With Introducftion by Bishop Byle, D.D. 3a. 

BY THE REV. SAMUEL GARRATT, M.A.j 

Hon, Canon of Norwich, and Vicar of St. MargareVs^ Ipswich. 

A Commentary on the Revelation of St. John, 

considered as tilie Divine Book of History; in which God has 
delineated what is now past, present, and to come ; and decided 
beforehand the great questions of each succeeding age,and especially 
of our own. Second Edition, greatly enlarged. Demy 8yo, 12s. 

Christian Chivalry; 

or, the Armour of Ood on the Soldier of the Cross. Small Svo., 8s. 

The Eastern Horizon ; 

or, The Present Crims in the Churdi and the World. Being the 
Third Edition, revised and enlarged, of Signs of ti&e Times. 
With Chart. Extra doth, 8s. 6d. 

Veins of Silver; 

or. Treasures hid beneath the Sur&oe. Post Svo. 4s. 6d. 

BY THE REV. W. 0. PURTON, B.A. 

Trust in Trial ; 

or. Lessons of Peace in the School of Affliction. Meditations, 
with Firayers and Hymns for the ffick and Sufferii^. Fourth 
edition. Lar^re type. Fcap Svo. doth, Is. 6d. ; extra doth, 28. 

Hymn Book for the Sick. 

InlBigetype,withtexts of Scripture. Limpdoth, Is. ; paper, 6d. 

Songs in Suffering. 

or, the Yoioe of Trust and Praise in Sickness sad Sorrow. Hymns 
for the Season of Affliction. Collected sad ananged. with 
Original Hymns. 8b. 



I 

I 



