School of Theology at Claremont 


100 


| 


1 


ili 








OFFICE LIBRARY 


The Board of Christian Education 
et OT 


TU OUT CeOEeU CCL CUP pes 


E Tn 


The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


ATTAIN 


oe 


SUUAAHNVAU UTA ETA ATAU EU A EUAU EFT ELOOETT LT ULGUOUALOCTUUESSUCODUEOEUOOOUCALSGOUUCQUUEOOUEOUEGOUUOGUONOEONRUEOUULEGEONOGOGEOOE 





We 


MSO. 











St. Pau At Rome. Philippians 1: 138, R. V- 


From Painting by FREDERIC SHIELDS. Modern British Artist. 


‘Through the Bible 


: Day by Day 


A Devotional Commentary 





BY 


REV. F. B. MEYER 





Arranged for Daily Reading, with Book Introductions, 
Outlines and Review Questions 





Illustrated from Paintings by Modern Artists 





VOLUME VII 
PHILIPPIANS TO REVELATION 


PHILADELPHIA 
AMERICAN SUNDAY-SCHOOL UNION 


1816 Chestnut Street 





Thasles . 1 ibrany i 


SEHOUE ee ptey. 
AT CLA: 2 iONT 
California 


baa ~ = at 


Copyright, 1918, by the 


AMERICAN SunbDAY-ScHoot UNION 


_ INTRODUCTION 


Tene is need everywhere for the cultivation of the habit 
of reading some portion of God’s Word each day. Such 
reading should be consecutive, for only thus can continuous 
interest be maintained. It may also be greatly helped by 
an interpreter, who will explain what is obscure as well as 
suggest applications of the message to the daily life. © 

To meet such need this series of six volumes provides an 
arrangement of the books of the Bible in daily portions, 
with concise devotional comments. It includes all portions 
of the Bible most suitable for daily reading, either in- 
dividually or in family groups. 

As a commentary on the whole Bible, these volumes will 
be found valuable because they omit points of merely 
scholarly interest and fix attention upon the central message 
of each passage and its application to daily needs. There 
are frequent references to other parts of Scripture, espe- 
cially from Old Testament truths to their New Testament 
fulfilment and interpretation. 

Mr. Meyer’s life-long experience in interpreting the Bible 
to the common people makes him pre-eminently fitted for 
- this service,—a crowning one in his world-wide ministry by 
voice and pen. 

Introductions and outlines are provided for eacli Bible 
book. Review questions have been added at appropriate 
points, to enable readers to sum up and better preserve in 
memory what they have learned. The illustrations, selected 
from paintings of Bible scenes by modern artists, aid in the 
interpretation of the passages which they portray. 

3 


4 INTRODUCTION 


It is hoped that these volumes will prove of much value 
to Sunday-school teachers and adult scholars; will promote 
profitable Bible reading in connection witn both family 
and private devotions; and will everywhere deepen a love 
for and an intelligent acquaintance with the one Book which 
can provide a fresh and helpful message for the needs of 
each new day. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
ENDER ODU CORIO Nuwetess aches 2 oak be ener Soeis AO a sae 3 
Dsiny READING OF. GOD?S WORD:)....20..00<c0cees ees 7 
LEW PLSTLD (FO! TARP -ALUTPPTA NG. © ys,./s,+ oro siehacs bo ars 9 


Outline, 11; Introduction, 13; Comments, 15; Re- 
view Questions, 22 : 

THE HPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS..........+.0+-0005 23 
Outline, 25; Introduction, 26; Comments, 27; Re- 
view Questions, 34. : 

THE First EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS........... 35 
Outline, 37; Introduction, 38; Comments, 39; Re- 
view Questions, 45. 

THE SECOND HPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS........ 47 
-Outline, 49; Introduction, 50; Comments, 51; Re- 
view Questions, 54. 

LEG ePInST a PISPL a LO UL LM OWEY « stot. <6 pin Dieveieele wha s 55 
Outline, 57; Introduction, 58; Comments, 59; Re- 
view Questions, 68. 

TRECSECOND LE PIStEmavO! 7TINODELY ly. ar. ss 2 artests 61 40 69 
Outline, 71; Introduction, 72; Comments, 73; Re- 
view Questions, 80. 

RPL S Vinal Ole DETOUR seeus ie tor-yaicta ciated sieusleleieualteaae is 6) efekere 81 
Outline, 83; Introduction, 84; Comments, 85; Re- 
view Questions, 90. 


Aer MPU SG Rel OMe EEL ESMOND. ole. ae cost oelsva) oa sels eles etoile. 91 
Outline, 93; Introduction, 94; Comments, 95. \ 
LHe MPISTLEL NO EE ELEBRE WS sca ioc Sead els, 2 vip, «lab ekelel ele 97 


Outline, 99; Introduction, 100; Comments, 101; Re- 
view Questions, 118. 


LEER B PIS ULE OMe AMM SY artes accatetnels leven yalieyehe Tel abale oe! oi che ois 121 
Outline, 123; Introduction, 124; Comments, 125; 
Review Questions, 132. 

133 


Tan BEST HPIstiE) OF, PETER. 0... eee ces eee ee 
Outline, 134; Introduction, 135; Comments, 136; 


Review Questions, 144. 
5 


6 CONTENTS 


PAGE 

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER............ fopstay Chepereuets 145 
Outline, 147; Introduction, 148; Comments, 149; 
Review Questions, 153. 

PEE -OPISTUMS HOR, OEUN . <releccuiees) sae s eyelet sieusie stetstocsters 155 
Outline, 157; Introduction, 158; Comments, 159; : 
Review Questions, 166. 

THE EPISTLM OF: JUD Me ats ctelelelcic takai paige le terns ial 167 
Outline, 169; Introduction, 170; Comments, 171; 
Review Questions, 173. 

THE BOOK OF REVELATION yas <= «ise e oidvaieiste lec elevaie helots 175 
Outline, 177; Introduction, 178; Comments, 179; 
Review Questions, 205. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


ARTIST 

ST. PAUL, AW ROME: « .c.ctscctae cee c Shields... FRont1sp1Ece 
FacinG Pace 
LEAD OF SST) PAULis csr. cee sole oe HGPRGEL 0h 2 oie ne 40 

Tur Youne TIMOTHY WITH THE 
BCRIPTURES Bahia soe cae SaNiws.ciecs een 74 
(PAUL WHE AGED 22m Saewcisicconaeic Rembrandt ....... 94 
St. JOHN AT PATMOS............ Meissonier ....... 180 


THE RIDER ON THE WHITE HorsE.. Watts ........... 200 


DAILY READING OF GOD’S WORD 


The Bible is full of God’s wisdom. It is the Word of 
God. We must read it not only with our head, but with 
our heart. An analysis of its contents is good and desir- 
able; but when all this is done, we need to allow time for 
the inner wisdom, power and grace which are stored in 
the Book, to soak into our inner consciousness. Therefore, 
for some reasons, it is better to have a shorter portion for 
daily study, to give us time to get all the juice and marrow 
out of what we read. 

This is the method followed in this system. Busy people, 
students, commercial men, Sunday-school workers and older 
scholars, soldiers and sailors, people on the hills and on 
the prairies, living on the edge of the great tides of human 
activity, will find these passages, selected for daily read- 
ing, ample to furnish a daily meal of truth, and yet deep 
and wide enough for profound inquiry and interest. 

It has always seemed to me that the true way to know 
the Bible is to read it through. It is only so that we can 
follow the unveiling of the divine purpose, from the Dawn 
of Genesis to the Perfect Day of the divine writings of 
John. It is only so that we can obtain a connected view 
of the wide scope of Revelation. To read in different, un- 
connected passages, now of Poetry, now of History, now of 
- Doctrine, prevents the mind from getting proper focus. 
We are apt by that method to concentrate on a few fa- 
miliar passages, instead of listening to all that God has 
spoken to men’s hearts. There is, probably, nothing more 
vital to an accurate knowledge of the Bible than the good 

7 


8 DAILY READING OF GOD’S WORD 


old practice of reading it thoughtfully and steadily through 
with such brief notes as this volume provides. 

But let it always be remembered that the profoundest 
knowledge of the Word comes from the illuminating grace 
of the Holy Spirit. Ask him to unlock and unfold its 
sacred mysteries. Ask him to reveal the glories of our 
Lord in every chapter. Ask him to enable you to “read, 
mark, learn and inwardly digest.” Ask him, finally, to 
enable you to become not a forgetful hearer or reader, but 
a doer of the Word. See to it that your reading is com- 
bined with the faith that claims of God the fulfilment, in 
your own experience, of all he has promised. No prayer, 
therefore, is more salutary, as you open your Bible, morn- 
ing by morning, than the familiar old words of the psalmist: 
“Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things 
out of thy law.” 

F. B. MEyeEr. 


| 
THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS 





OUTLINE OF THE-EPISTLE TO::THE 
PHILIPPIANS 


TO PRESENT EVERY MAN PERFECT IN CHRIST. 


SAITENINA PLOW se cee acne crete soceWar ters asttate: So ichaarers ded 2. 
I. A PASToOR’s REGARD AND CONCERN FOR 
PITS CUP BORLA eS Ss ae Shas cts Carats 123-11. 
1. Thanksgiving for Their Co-opera- 
LOW a eerie cnattye ey ss tee Seale Notre seee 1:35. 
2. Confidence That They Share the 
WOMLECOTACE Se cere ns oes ade ae 12637. 
3. Prayer for Their Spiritual Enrich- 
WCW ST ao ease Oe ole Stara tn oe 13811. 
II. THE COMPENSATIONS OF Pauv’s Im- 
PRISONMEN'T “f.ietegi-fuatacaet ae ae > 1212226; 
1. Testimony of His Bonds Through- 
out the Praetorian Guard ...... 1312, 13: 
2. Increased Boldness of the Brother- 
hood in Preaching Christ ...... 1:14-18. 
3. His Hope of Larger Usefulness 
upon His Release ............- 1219-26. 
Ill. THe Lire THat Is Wortuy oF THE 
GOSPEL OF CHRIST #005505 a2 08: 1:27—2:30. 
1. A Life of Courage in the Face Ze 
OKO: UPL: Se meed cin ib ba choir ae SSraealt 727-80. 
2. A Life of Good-Will and Sees 
MESS On eens cree et aed wee 2:1-6. 
3. A Life Determined by the Spirit 
Of ONTISE ar. oo ees ee niet 2:6—11: 
4. A Life Triumphant in an Evil 
Onde ae ates oy ers. tie tite san ge ee 2:12-18. 
(Illustrated by Paul’s Fellow-Workers 2:19-30. 
ee LaMOth yi Gace se we aa 2:19-24. 
2. Epaphroditus ......++.-+++:- 2:25-30.) 


12 


Iv. 


We 


VI. 


THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


HUMAN AND DIVINE RIGHTEOUSNESS 


GONTEASTED, 4 tse: teen oa Bi kciee? 3:1—4:3. 
1. Warning against Those Who Glory 
Li EWE CEL CSIS eave wime ais tha to eR Sip) ES 
2. Paul’s Personal Claim. to Legal 
Righteousness... a ae eee 346. 
3. His Repudiation of All Else for the 
Righteousness of Christ ....... Se (elt 
4. Warning against the Fleshly- 
Man dd Bs sa hohe ee eI 3:17—4:1. 
(Personal Message to Euodia and Syn- 
ORES et scat pote eee Ne 4:2, 3.) 
THE FINAL EXHORTATION ........-.- 4:49, 
1; + -Lhe- Place. of (Prayer cates. sects 4:47. 
22 BNE LN Cea Of cP Uretg—invtaei uses 4:8, 9. 
A PERSONAL MESSAGE ............-.- 4:10-19. 
1. The Gift from the Philippians ....4:10-14. 
2. Their Past Assistance ........... 4:15-17. 
3. The Divine Acceptance of This Ser- 
TACO Niza. Waist sites oe ere bento 4:18, 19. 


CONCLUSION 124. hee eee ee eee 4:20-23. 


THE EPISTLE TO: THE -PHILIPPIANS 


The Church at Philippi appears to have been one of the 
. purest of the Apostolic age, and beyond any other called out 
the Apostle’s thankfulness and commendation. 

The occasion of the Epistle seems to have been the re- 
turn of Epaphroditus, who had brought a gift from Paul’s 
friends in Philippi, but had been seized by a dangerous 
illness. Paul was a prisoner in his own hired house in 
Rome and was anticipating his trial before the emperor. 

There.is nothing controversial in this letter. The peace 
of God keeps the Apostle’s mind and heart, and out of it 
pours a tide of deep and tender love. The hope of being 
alive at Christ’s coming is still his guiding star. His 
citizenship is in heaven, and all that he has forfeited of 
earthly wealth and joy is more than compensated for by 
what he has found in Christ. 









16 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


with equanimity the envy and strife of some, if Jesus 
might be named to those who had never heard of him. 
He was prepared to live or to die, that Jesus might be 
magnified. He was willing to remain for a little longer 
outside of heaven, if that would better serve the cause 
he loved. His main argument for consistency of life on 
the part of his converts was that the success of the 
gospel might not be impeded. It seemed goo. to suffer, 
if only it were on the behalf of Christ. Oh that we 
might experience a similar absorption in the great in- 
terests of the gospel! 

It is clear from this paragraph that death is not an 
unconscious sleep. It is gain. It is a loosing from 
anchorage so that the soul may go forth on the broad 
ocean of God’s love. It does not interrupt our con- 
scious fellowship with the Lord. The moment of ab- 
sence here is the moment of presence there. To die is 
therefore gain. 


3. ‘Privileged To Suffer in Christ’s Behalf. 


Philippians 1:22-30. Our ‘‘manner of life’’ is all- 
important. _In the open day and in the hours of dark- 
ness it must be worthy of the gospel. We must show 
ourselves to be of a heavenly tone and temper, as 
citizens of that ‘‘city which hath foundations, whose 
builder and maker is God.’’ Lady Powerscourt used 
to say that she dwelt in heaven, but came down for a 
few hours each day to do her work on earth, returning 
home at night. Clearly, then, our dress, accent, and 
behavior should betray us as strangers and pilgrims 
who ean well endure the discomfort of the inn or the 
‘troublous experiences of the place of our sojourn. 

Notice that remarkable expression, For unto you it is 
given in the behalf of Christ . . . to suffer, v. 29. 
This is an added honor eonferred on us by our Lord. 
The King gives us the opportunity of lying in the 
stocks with him, of standing at the same pillory, and 
of being crucified on the same Calvary. But those who 
have drunk of his cup shall share his throne. When 


THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS uy 


earth and heaven shall pass away, his fellow-sufferers 
shall be his chosen body-guard and attendants in a 
world where all shall love and honor him. 


4. Following His Example of Self-Surrender. 


Philippians 2:1-11. In all Scripture—indeed, in all 
literature—there is no passage which combines such 
extraordinary extremes as this. The Apostle opens the 
golden compasses of his faith, placing one jeweled point 
on the throne of divine glory and the other at the edge 
of the pit, where the Cross stood; and then he asks us 
to measure the vast descent of the Son of God as he 
came down to help us. Mark the seven steps: He was 
in the form of God, that is, as much God as he was 
afterward a servant; being in the form of God . 
took the form of a servant. He was certainly the latter 
and equally so the former. He did not grasp at equal- 
ity with God, for it was already his. He emptied him- 
self, that is, refused to avail himself of the use of his 
divine aftributes, that he might teaeh the meaning of 
absolute dependence on the Father. He obeyed as a 
servant the laws which had their source in himself. 
He became man—a humble man, a dying man, a cruci- 
fied man. He lay in the grave. But the meaning of 
his descent was that of his ascent, and to all his illus- 
trous names is now added that of Jesus—Saviour. This 
must be our model. This mind must be in us. In pro- 
portion as we become humbled and crucified, we, in our 
small measure, shall attain the power of blessing and 
saving men. 

5. Eights in the World. 


Philippians 2:12-18. The sublime visions of the 
Apostle of the glory of the divine Redeemer are always 
linked with practical exhortation. Do nothing through 
pride and vainglory. Look on the things of others. 
Count others better than yourself. Work out what God 
is working in. Your heart is God’s workshop! His 
Spirit is there, striving against selfishness, pride, im- 


18 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


purity, and vanity, but yeu must consolidate each holy 
impulse in speech and act. Be careful of every such 
movement in your soul; it will become clearer and more 
definite as you yield te it, and it will be corroborated 
by outward circumstances, which God will open before 
you. But exercise fear and trembling, just as the 
young pupil of a great master will be nervously care- 
ful not to lose one thought or suggestion which he may 
impart. 

In this manner you will become as a lighthouse on a 
rockbound coast, shining with blameless and beneficent 
beauty among your companions. Light is silent, but it 
reveals. Light is gentle, but it is mighty in its effects. 
Light departs when the sun is down, but it may be 
maintained by various luminaries until dawn again 
breaks. As we shine, we shall be consumed, but the 
sacrifice will not be in vain. 


6. Honoring Christian Messengers. 


Philippians 2:19-30. The Apostle nobly honored the 
younger men who wrought with him. He speaks of 
Timothy as his son, and expatiates on the genuineness 
of his loving interest in each of his converts, He de- 
seribes Epaphroditus as his brother, fellow-worker, and 
fellow-soldier. How tenderly he refers to his sickness 
and recovery, as though God had conferred on himself 
special favor in giving back this beloved comrade in 
the great fight! 

It is well worth while to ponder the remark that God 
does not add sorrow to sorrow, v. 27. He tempers his 
wind to the shorn lamb. He cautions the accuser that 
he must not take Job’s life. With the trial he makes 
the way of escape. He keeps his finger on the wrist 
while the operation is in progress, and stays it as soon 
as the pulse flutters. Not sorrow upon sorrow! Note 
also that ‘‘hazarding’’ of life, v. 30, R.V. It was a 
commen experience in those great days of Christ’s suf- 
fering Church, Acts 15:26. How strange it is today 
to watch the sacrifices that men and women will make 


THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS 19 


in times of war, when a new spirit is stirring in the 
world and men adventure everything for liberty, righte- 
eusness, and fiatherland, and then compare this ex- 
travagant expenditure of blood and treasure with what 
we have done for Jesus. 


7. Losing All To Know Christ. 


Philippians 3:1-12. Precept must be on precept, line 

on line. The false teachers who dogged Paul’s steps 
insisted on rigid conformity to Judaism, with its rab- 
binical accretions, as the condition of being saved by 
Christ. Paul’s answer was that he had gone through 
all the requirements of Judaism, but had found it ab- 
solutely unsatisfactory and inefficient to subdue the 
sin of his soul. But in\Christ he had found every- 
thing he needed. What had been gain to him now’ 
seemed but dross. He had found the pearl of great 
price, and was only too glad to sacrifice all else to 
purchase and keep it, as the talisman of complete vic- 
tory. 
The essence of Judaism was not external but within. 
True circumcision was deliverance from the self-life, 
and that could only be gained by the Cross of Christ. 
The ‘‘Israelite indeed,’’ like Nathanael, had three 
traits of character—his worship was spiritual, he glor- 
ied in the Crucified, and he was delivered from reli- 
ance upon the self-life. Let us ask the Holy Spirit to 
teach us to know Jesus in the intimacy of personal 
fellowship, to feel the pulse of his resurrection life, to 
experience the power of his death, and to realize the 
whole of his divine program. For this we might be 
more than content to trample on our boasted pride. 


8. Pressing on “unto the Prize.” 


_ Philippians 3:13-21. The nearer the saint comes to 
the perfect life, the farther he feels from it. It is only 
when we have climbed the foothills that we realize how 
lofty the mountain summits are. But there is no need 
for discouragement. We have eternity before us, the. 


20 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


expanding landscape of truth is our inspiration, and 
the loving Spirit of God bears us upward on eagle’s 
wings. Our Saviour had a distinct purpose in view 
when he apprehended us. Its full scope was only 
known to him; let us strive that we may not fail to 
realize his ideal. We can do this best by forgetting 
past failures, past sins, and past successes, and press- 
ing on toward the goal. Will not the prize be the Lord 
himself? Let us always remember that God’s eall is 
upward. This will help us when there seems collision 
between two duties. 

Instead of judging another, let us walk together along 
the path of obedience. Those who leave the narrow 
track and still profess godliness are greater enemies 
to the Cross than avowed antagonists. We are citizens 
of the skies, who come forth to spend a few hours 
each day on earth. This is our inn, yonder is our true 
‘home. Thence Jesus will come to complete the work 
of salvation by giving us a body like his own. 


9. Inspiring Exhortations. 


Philippians-4:1-9. What a strong and faithful heart 
was Paul’s! Poor and despised though he was, he had 
both joys and crowns of which no hostile force could 
deprive him. He lived in the encompassing atmos- 
phere of eternity, as we may. Surely these two Chris- 
tian women could not have withstood this tender exhor- 
tation; and all his fellow-workers must have been heart- 
ened by the thought that their names were dear to 
Christ, and entered in the birthday book of the twice- 
born. 

Joy and peace are the subjects of the next para- 
graph. How wonderful that these struggling little 
churches were drinking of springs of which the princes 
and citizens of Greece and Rome knew nothing. Note 
the conditions. We must be moderate in our ambi- 
tions and gentle in our behavior. We must ever prac- 
tice the presence of our Lord—he is always at hand. 
(We must turn over all causes of anxiety to the Father’s 


THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS 21 


infinite care and leave them with him. We must thank 
him for the past, and count on him for the future. 
While we pray, the Angel of Peace will descend to 
stand as sentry at our heart’s door. But we must 
possess the God of peace as well as the peace of God— 
the one condition being that we must earnestly pursue 
all things that are true, just, pure, and lovely. 


10. “My God Shall Supply Every Need.” 


Philippians 4:10-23. The Apostle had been glad to 
receive the gifts of his friends, because these evidenced 
their earnest religious life. It was fruit that increased 
to their account. On his own part he had learned one 
of the greatest of lessons—econtentment with whatever 
state he found himself in. This is a secret that can 
only be acquired by our experience of life in the will 
of God. When once the soul lives in God and finds 
its highest ideal in the fulfillment of his will, it be- 
comes absolutely assured that all things which are 
necessary will be added. All things are possible to 
those who derive their daily strength from God. 

It is wonderful to hear Paul say that he abounded, 
v. 18. A prison, a chain, a meager existence! The 
great. ones of the world would have ridiculed the idea 
that any could be said to abound in such conditions. 
But they could not imagine the other hemisphere in 
which Paul lived; and out of his own blessed experi- 
‘ence of what Christ could do, he promised that one’s 
every need would be supplied. God’s measure is his 
riches in glory; and his channel is Jesus Christ. Let 
us learn from v. 18 that every gift to God’s children 
which is given from a pure motive is acceptable to him 
as a fragrant sacrifice. That reference in v. 22 shows 
that Paul was making good use of his stay in Rome! 


(For Review Questions see next page.) - 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE EPISTLE TO 
THE PHILIPPIANS 


OUTLINE. 


(a) . What is the chief thought which Paul develops in 
this Epistle? ; 
(b) What sort of life is worthy of the gospel of Christ? 


INTRODUCTION. 


(c) Where was this letter written? 

(d) What was its occasion? 

(e) What distinguishes it among the group of Pauline 
Epistles ? 


SECTIONS 1-10. CHAPTERS 1-4. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 
number in the Comments.) 


What great confidence did Paul have concerning the 
Philippian converts? . 

How had the Apostle’s imprisonment fallen out to 
the furtherance of the gospel? 

What news did he hope to hear regarding the Philip- 
pians? 

What is the great characteristic of the “mind of 
Christ”? 

What is the Christian’s relation to the world? 

How was Timothy distinguished from Paul’s other 
helpers? What is said about Epaphroditus? 

Why did Paul count as loss everything that had been 
gain to him? 

What should we ever seek to apprehend? 

What objects should engage our thoughts? 

What great lesson had Paul learned? With what 
promise does the Epistle close? 


_ 


Se ali Tt Lea age ose 


— 


22 


II 
HHEVEPISTLECTO- THE COLOSSIANS 


23 





II. 


OUTLINE OF THE EPISTLE TO THE 
COLOSSIANS 


“CHRIST IN YOU THE HOPE OF GLORY.” 
SATURATIONS Meee nh itel, mace Gece eral, 2s 


THE FAITH AND THE EXPERIENCE OF 


THE COMOSSTANS,, .. 0) 52% unseat 1:3—2:5, 
1. Thanksgiving for the Faith of the 

Oolossiams mares: cose: Cleo: crite lsat 
2. Prayer for Their Growth in Knowl- 

CAGE ONO GLACE oman - tiatn oe nciee' 1:8-11. 
3. The Pre-eminence of Christ...... 1:12-20. 


4. The Experience of Redemption....1:21-23. 
5. The Ministry of Redemption..... 1:24—2:5. 


THE CHARACTER AND CONDUCT OF THE 

CERIB PERN wera henge habs scucfee eo ahs 2:6—4:8. 
False Philosophies To Be Rejected 2:6-15. 
2. False Practices To Be Avoided...2:16-23. 
3. The Risen Life and the Old Life in 


i 


CONT US TI Raa sna es 3:1-4. 
4. The Scope of Christian Obligation .3:5—4:6. 
5. + Personal Matters” 2.0 teee.eee vent Atialit. 
GON CLUSION cra Pe ate Melia ie sce 08 panes 4:18. 2 


25 


THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS 


Colosse was an wmportant city in Asia Minor, not far 
from Laodicea and Hierapolis. The church there had been 
planted by Epaphras, perhaps during Paul’s residence at 
Ephesus. The Apostle, apparently, had not visited it him- 
self, 2:1, but was deeply interested in it through the re- 
port of his friend. 

This Epistle was written during Paul’s imprisonment at 
Rome, 1:24; 4:18, and apparently about the same time 
as those to the Ephesians and Philemon; for the three 
letters were sent by the hands of the same persons, Tychi- 
cus and Onesimus, 4:7, 9; Eph. 6:21, 22. The Church was 
suffering from the teaching of a false philosophy which 
combined Oriental mysticism with Jewish rituwalism, and 
turned the disciples from simple faith in Christ. The ob- 
ject of this Epistle, therefore, is to set forth the majesty 
and glory of owr Lord’s person and character. 


THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS 


1. The Gospei Bearing Fruit. 


Colossians 1:1-8. The saints are men of faith, for 
their holiness is derived from Christ, but they are also 
- faithful men, and will not betray their trust. Grace is 
the Greek and peace the Hebrew greeting. We can do 
a great deal with those whom we desire to correct or 
instruct, if we begin by commending all that is worthy 
of being praised. Thus the Apostle rejoices in the evi- 
dences of the trinity of Christian graces—Faith, Hope, 
and Love. His prayer-book was filled with interces- 
sion. One marvels at the accomplishment of this ex- 
traordinary man, who, in addition to his travels, labors, 
writings, and toil for his daily bread, had time for such 
abundant prayerfulness. 

There is a note of triumph in his reference to the 
reception given to the gospel in all the world. The 
handful of corn on the top of the mountains was al- 
ready beginning to shake like Lebanon. It seemed as 
though victory was assured; and if only the Church 
had possessed more men like him, the world would have 
been saved some sad experiences. Note the unaffected 
humility of the Apostle in classing Epaphras with him- 
self as his beloved fellow-servant in the household of 
God. 

2. Our Wondrous Privileges in Christ. 


Colossians 1:9-20. Here is a paragraph which may 
fitly form part of our daily intercession for ourselves 
and others. We all need a quicker insight into God’s 
will, and this is only acquired through the wisdom and 
understanding communicated by the Holy Spirit to our 
spirits. But that understanding is conditioned, as in 
vy. 10, by a daily behavior which pleases God and bears 
fruit. in every good work. It is as we slowly climb the 
ascent of consistent living that the landscape of God’s 


27 


28 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


nature expands around us. As character and knowl- 
edge grow, so will our spiritual strength; but notice 
that frequently such strength is needed not so much 
for great exploits, as for the patient bearing of the 
Cross, v. 11. 

In view of the fact that we are being qualified for 
an inheritance in light, there should be a song of per- 
ennial thanksgiving proceeding from us. What a won- 
der that the sons of ignorance and night ean dwell in © 
the Eternal Light, through the Eternal Love! It is not 
enough to receive the forgiveness of sins, we must be 
conformed to the image of the Son, who is himself the 
image of the Father, v. 15. Notice the pre-eminence 
of Jesus—in creation, v. 16; in the Church, v. 18; in 
resurrection, v. 18; and in the great enterprise of recon- 
ciliation and restoration, v. 20. Let him be pre-emin- 
ent for us also! 


3. Laboring To Perfect the Church. 


Colossians 1: 21-29. How wonderful is God! His 
scheme of grace embraces the world of men, but he can 
concentrate on individual souls as unworthy as ours. 
You ... hath he reconciled. And he will never aban- 
don his work until we arrive in his presence-chamber 
without spot or blemish or any such thing. But, of 
course, the putting forth of his power on our behalf is 
conditioned on our steadfast faith. 

Paul drank deeply of the Master’s cup. It seemed 
as if Jesus had trusted him with participation in the 
sorrows of Gethsemane and Calvary. And he was thus 
fitted for the stewardship of two great seerets, which it 
was his joy to unfold. In Eph. 3 he says that he was 
commissioned to show the Gentiles that they might be- 
come fellow-heirs; but here, v. 27, that they might ex- 
perience the indwelling of Christ. Those who are con- 
scious of that indwelling know its riches of power and 
joy and victory. Their hope of glory is dimmed by no 
fear, because they have the Christ in their hearts, and, 
therefore, heaven in their hearts, so it follows natur- 


THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS 29 


ally that their hearts will one day be with Christ in 
heaven. Christ in us is the hope of glory. Note the 
individual interest which the true pastor takes in his 
flock, as shown in the repeated use of every man. 


4. Established in Their Faith. | 


Colossians 2:1-12. If you know Christ, you ean lay 
your hand on the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 
You know them, not by the intellect but by the heart. 
They are matters of daily experience. The Apostle’s 
aim in this chapter is to put his converts on their 
guard against those who might divert them from their 
simple faith in Jesus, and their sufficiency in him, The 
keynotes are Take heed and Let no one, 

The first act of the Christian life is to receive Christ, 
_ and every moment afterward we must continue receiv- 
ing him. The act must become an attitude. Breathe in 
the love and power of Jesus. Take deep breaths. Then 
we shall be rooted in him in secret, and built up in 
him in our outward walk. and behavior. If we have 
Christ, we have all God’s fullness, and this is easily 
accessible. Like Jacob’s ladder, he links us with God. 
What need have we for celestial beings, like those in- 
vented by the Gnostics, or for the rite of cirecumcis- 
ion, as insisted on by the Jews? We have everything 
in Jesus. He has fulfilled the Law in all respects on 
our behalf. Let us put the waters of entire surrender 
and consecration between our past, our sins, and the 
world, and rise into his life, the life of resurrection 


glory and power. 
5. Avoiding Errors. 


Colossians 2:13-23. The reiteration of the preposi- 
tions in and with emphasizes our close identification 
with our Saviour. Such we are in the purpose of 
God, and so we should be in daily experience. In union 
with him we have once and forever put away the sins 
of the flesh, have lain in his grave, have passed to the 
heavenside of death, and are living under the blue sky 


30 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


of acceptance with God. Our Master’s victory is poten- 
tially ours. He won it, but we may share its fruits. 
Yet faith must apprehend and affirm these blessings. 
The land of Canaan is ours by right, but every inch 
has to be claimed by faith. ‘‘Faith is an affirmation 
and act, that bids eternal truth be fact.’’ 

We must not allow our religious life to become a 
piece of outward ritual, vs. 16, 17; nor permit the sup- 
posed mediation of angels to obscure the supreme 
majesty of our Lord, vs. 18, 19. We who have died 
with Christ must not be always regulating ourselves by 
the don’ts of the Law. Let us enter Christ’s more inti- 
mate fellowship and live on the positive side. Ours 
should be the freedom of a full life, and the ampler 
vision of the mountains. Nothing else really avails 
against the indulgence of the flesh. 


6. Seeking the “Things That Are Above.” 


Colossians 8: 1-11. Let us repeat the glorious truth, 
which was doubtless the heart of Paul’s teaching, that 
our old nature has been nailed in Christ to the Cross, 
and laid in the grave; and that our real self, the second 
Adam, has entered the new world of resurrection. We 
belong to the world on the threshold of which Jesus 
said, ‘‘Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended.’’ 
We must guard against the defiling touch of the world, 
of sin, and of the old self-life. We stand between two 
worlds, each solicits us: let us yield to the influences 
that pull us upward, and not to those that anchor us 
to this sinful and vain world. Our eternal blessed- 
ness has begun, let us walk in it. 

In Christ we profess to have put off the old man, 
i. e., the habits of our former life, v. 9; now let us 
actually do so, in the power of the Holy Spirit. We 
profess to have put on the risen Christ, v. 10; now 
let us don the attire and habits of the new man. Too 
many Christians resemble Lazarus, quickened from his 
death-sleep, but still arrayed in grave-clothes. Too 
few array themselves in the radiant beauty of the risen 


_THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS 31 


Lord, which is the common heritage of all who believe 
in him, whatever their rank or nationality. 


7. Love, Peace, and Praise. — 


Colossians 3:12-17. The articles of the Christian’s 

dress are enumerated here, and we need to refer to this 
list continually in order to be sure that none of them 
is missing from our spiritual wardrobe. We must 
not always live in the negative of avoiding wrong, the 
positive has a clear claim on us; and in each cireum- 
stance of trial or temptation we must advance to meet 
it, arrayed in Christ. As the Lord acted, so must we. 
We must partake of the family likeness. When a 
Christian friend manifests over the breakfast-table 
some ugly feature of the old life, we may fairly urge 
him to return to his room and complete his dressing, 
Love is the girdle of the Christian attire. 
. Let. the peace of Christ rule within. Let the word 
of Christ dwell in the innermost chambers of the soul. 
Let there be mutual love and wholesome glee, the song 
in the life, and the grace in the heart. Whatever is 
wrong will shiver to pieces like a glass when the name 
of Jesus is spoken over it. The thought of him is the 
touchstone of trial as well as the talisman of victory. 
A thankful heart makes a victorious and attractive 
character. 


8. Home and Business Relations. 


Colossians 3:18—4:1. From these high flights into 
the eternal and divine, Paul turns to the daily duties 
of the home, and demands that in the simplest domes- 
tie concerns the disciple should ever keep in mind the 
high claims of Christ. No act of life can be left out- 
side the sacred enclosure of his everlasting love. As 
the moon affects the tides around the world, even in the 
smallest indentations of the coast, so must the power 
of Christ’s resurrection make itself felt in the be- 
havior of the servant and the child. 


32 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


It is specially beautiful to notice the Apostle’s con- 
stant reference to the bond-slaves who formed so im- 
portant an element in the early Church. There they 
learned that in Christ all souls were free, and that in 
him also master and slave were brethren. Stealing 
out at night from the arduous labors of his lot, many 
a poor slave would return with new conceptions of his 
daily tasks, to be applied to the service rendered to 
his Lord. No angel in heaven’s high temple has more 
definite service to the King than any honest and in- 
dustrious servant may daily render to Jesus. Here 
is the dignity of labor indeed! And, masters, remem- 
ber your Master. 


9. Prayer and Daily Living. 


Colossians 4: 2-9. We must pray more. Our lives 
cannot maintain the Godward attitude without pro- 
longed seasons of communication with him through the 
Word. This is so important that we must be ever on 
the watch against whatever might mar the life of de- 
votion. Intercession will often unlock frost-bitten lips 
and make our souls glow. Withal praying also for us. 
If we are shut in and cannot perform active service, 
we can surely pray for those who are entrusted with 
the mystery of Christ; and let those who are ealled to 
active service be ready to step in when God opens the 
door, v. 3. The limitations of life are no excuse for 
idleness, v. 4. 

It is not easy to walk in wisdom towards those that 
are without. But God will teach us how to buy up 
opportunities and erowd each of them with good ser- 
vice. Our talk may sparkle like salt and purify as it 
does. Paul bound his fellow-workers to himself by the 
high estimate he placed on them. Love idealizes. Prob- 
ably we should have thought some of these men to be 
very ordinary, but the Apostle saw them in hues bor- 
rowed from his own heart. Onesimus, a runaway slave, 
recently converted, is described as a faithful and be- 
loved brother! 


_ THE EPISTLE TO THE COLOSSIANS 33 


10. Christian Greetings. 


Colossians 4:10-18. What a noble group had gath- 
ered round the Apostle in his enforced residence in 
Rome! That hired room of his must have been filled 
time after time with most interesting groups; and each 
friend was dear to the lion-heart, and intent on some 
act of loving devotion. Aristarchus had been with him 
in the Ephesian riot; Mark was endeavoring to make 
good his former lapse of courage; Epaphras, who had 
come from Colosse, was remarkable for his soul-agony 
and prayer-labor on his friends’ behalf; Luke, the be- 
loved physician, always on the alert to minister to the 
malaria or other malady that afflicted him; and Demas, 
of whom perhaps he had begun to have suspicions, 
2 Tim. 4:10. Archippus is believed to have been a son 
of Philemon, and chief presbyter of Laodicea. Does 
the injunction, v. 16, imply that already the church 
there had begun to grow cold, Rev. 3:15? The closing 
words were probably written in autograph. The clumsy 
handwriting was accounted for by the weight of the 
fetters on the poor wrists, yet his heart was full of 
love and joy. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE EPISTLE TO 
THE COLOSSIANS 


OUTLINE. 


(a) What does the Epistle teach about Christ’s pre- 
eminence? 
(b) What about the life of Christ’s followers? 


INTRODUCTION. 


(c) By whom had the church at Colosse been established? 

(d@) When was this Epistle written? What other Epistles 
were written about the same time? 

(e) What serious situation in the Colossian church did 
the Apostle seek to remedy? 


SECTIONS 1-10. CHAPTERS 1-4. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 
- number in the Comments.) 


—) 
. 


What report had Paul received concerning the church 
at Colosse? To whom was he indebted for this? 

In what ways is the pre-eminence of Christ mani- 
fested? 

How could Paul rejoice in his sufferings? 

Against what dangers does he warn the Colossians? 

How does the work of Christ free us from the re- 
proach of human judgment? 

What qualities are incompatible with the Christian 
life? 

What is the character of the new man in Christ 
Jesus? 

How does Christ determine all our social and family 
relations? 

What does Paul earnestly desire of the Colossians? 

From whom and to whom are Christian greetings ex- 
pressed in the closing section? 


ea eek isa Sas UN 


— 


34 


lll 


THE FIRST. EPISTLE TO THE 
THESSALONIANS 


35 





OUTLINE-OF THE FIRSF_EPISTLE.TO THE 


II. 


THESSALONIANS 
BUILDING UP ONE ANOTHER 
SADUPATTON ia 2.5 <5, Pupiatea feb aya eerie okt oi Wel 
I. FouNDING AND GROWTH OF THE THES- 

SALONIAN CHURCH ............ 1:2—3:18. 
l. Fruits of the Gospel in Thessalon- 
; CW Beer ete Te eae set oheee a5: Sete eee 1:2-10 
2. Paul’s Missionary Methods ...... PA Ie Weta 
3. * Results of His Labor ........... 2ala=c0: 
ASP V 48SEC Of MPUNOURY ecto e ee aio: dels ate bs 3:1-10. 
DEB CNCCICHON Fe wide a a-4 «slew i e\a aie Sliz13. 
THE WIALK OF THE CHRISTIAN ....... 4—5. 
1; The Need of Purity’ .o2.5..00.%:. 4:1-8. 
2. The Need of Love for the Breth- 

MONE ar Rete a ater ctete ache) arate eon ete suc 4:9-12, 
3. -The Return of Christ ......-..-.. 4:13-18. 
4, How Vo Be Prepared ...........- Sra Vetely 
5. The Will of God for the Chris- 

CATR Gi ee RIOD CAC ae OT oe 5:9-22. 
WONOUUSIO Nee acter eekelel ate el erstiet eels ares 5 :23-28. 


37 


THE FIRST EPISTEE TO THE 
THESSALONIANS 


Thessalonica stood on the seaboard, and was the center of 
@ large trade, which tt shared with Corinth and Ephesus. 
It is the Saloniki of today, to which the interest of the 
world has recently been directed. It contained a large 
colony of Jews and a synagogue. The Apostle visited it, as 
recorded in Acts 17:2-9. Probably he dispatched this Epis- 
tle from Corinth; compare 1 Thess. 1:1 and 8:1 with Acts 
18:15. It is the earliest of the Epistles and more ele- 
mentary than the later ones. An interesting study would be 
to trace the development of the Apostle’s thought to the 
fuller and deeper teachings of the Epistles to the churches 
at Rome and Ephesus. 


38 


THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS 


1. Imitators and Examples. 


1 Thessalonians 1:1-10. This chapter abounds in 
thanksgiving; and the Apostle recites the many beauti- 
ful and hopeful traits of character and behavior by 
which the members of this Christian community had 
endeared themselves to him. Notice his favorite group- 
ing of faith, hope, and love. We are taught to crave 
for these in our own soul-garden, and to rejoice to find 
them blossoming in others. Too often the gospel comes 
only in word; let us seek the other three accompani- 
ments of v. 5. What a blessed thing it would be if 
our church life were so full of the Spirit of Christ that 
the ministers would not need to say anything! ‘‘By 
whose preaching,’’ a lad was asked, ‘‘were you con- 
verted?’’ ‘‘By no one’s preaching,’’ was the reply, 
“but by my Aunt Mary’s living.’’ 

There are three memorable steps indicated in vs. 9 
and 10. Turn unto God: serve him as true and liv- 
ing: wait for the coming of the Son of man. The last 
phrase strikes the keynote of this Epistle. The Chureh 
is encouraged to stand expectant at the oriel window. 
Behind her is the night from which she has been de- 
livered, and on the bosom of the dawn shines the morn- 
ing star. 


2. The Fruit of Unsparing Labor. 


1 Thessalonians 2:1-12. Paul preached in great con- 
flict of soul because of his passionate desire for the sal- 
vation of men. In this, many of the notable servants 
of God have shared; and we shall not attain to the 
great end of our ministry unless the seeds we sow are 
steeped in prayers and tears. The Apostle viewed the 
gospel as a sacred deposit left with him by God on 
man’s behalf, v. 4. Do we sufficiently realize that as 


39 


40 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


Christ is our Trustee, entrusted with God’s gift for us, 
so we are executors of his bequests to our fellow-men, 
who will have serious charges to bring against us if we 
hoard for ourselves what was meant for them? The 
questions which should sustain and quicken us are: 
“What does God think of my service ?—Is he pleased ?”’ 
Combined with Paul’s strength of purpose there were 
the sweetness and tenderness of a nurse. Self-deny- 
ing labor for his own maintenance took from his eyes 
their needed sleep, and was another proof of his sin- 
cerity and devotion. There was no harm in receiving 
gifts, but Paul was most anxious to do nothing that 
would invalidate his testimony, or be unworthy of the 
Master he served. Admirable example for us all! 


3. The Apostle’s Glory and Joy. 


1 Thessalonians 2:13-20. The Christian worker al- 
ways should wait on God till he gets the word of the 
message. There is an essential difference between de- 
livering a sermon or an address and delivering a mes- 
sage. The latter is direct, eager; you wait to be sure 
it is understood; you expect an answer. A gospel mes- 
sage works in those who ‘believe. That its ulti- 
mate effect will be to bring us into collision with the 
world-spirit goes without saying. For this conflict the 
Christian must be prepared in advance. 

The separation between this true, strong, loving soul 
and his converts was a bereavement, though only for 
an hour, R.V. margin, and his heart longed to be with 
them again. He clung to them the more tenaciously 
because he had been cast out by his Jewish brethren, 
and also because he looked for a great revenue of joy 
and glory to accrue to the Saviour’s name. His one 
purpose seems to have been to accumulate garlands of 
saved souls, as children make garlands of flowers in 
spring, that he might lay them at the feet of the Re- 
deemer. Satan hinders, but Jesus helps and smiles his 
benediction. 





PAUL. 


HEAD oF ST. 


ist. 


ian Art 


Ital 


ing by RAPHAEL 


int 


From Pa: 





THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS 41 


4. Awakening Thanksgiving and Intercession. 


1 Thessalonians 3:1-13. At the outset observe that 
marginal reading by which Timothy is described as 
a fellow-worker with God. What a wonderful phrase, 
and yet it is applicable to all true workers for God! 
Think what it must have been for a young artist to be 
permitted to collaborate with Michelangelo! No 
thought of his own comfort interfered with Paul’s ef- 
forts for the young churches he had planted; he was 
only eager that they should be established and com- 
forted amid the storm of persecution that swept over 
them. There is only one path for the followers of 
Jesus, and it is lined with flints and flecked with blood. 

Though the waters surged up to Paul’s heart, he 
could bear anything, if only his work stood fast. What 
he suffered was as nothing compared with his-joy at 
the stability of his charges. As he wrought day and 
night at his handicraft, so he prayed day and 
night for them. The stitches put into the tent cloth 
were accompanied by the holy threads of prayerful 
intercession. He only longed that Christ would make 
a straight thoroughfare to them, and would keep them 
blameless and strong. 


5. Called to Sanctification. 


1 Thessalonians 4:1-8. The first paragraph of this 
chapter exhorts to purity, the second to industry, the 
third to expectation of the Second Advent. But the 
three are closely combined, because those who wait for 
the Lord will instinctively wear white robes. The body 
is compared to a vessel, and we must keep it clean for 
the Master’s use, walking day by day so as to please 
him. Before Enoch was translated, he had the testi- 
mony borne him that he had pleased God, Heb. 11:5. 
It is God’s will that we should be holy;—the whole ob- 
ject of our redemption has this for its purpose. There- 
fore we ought to be holy, and if we ought we can, and 


42 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


if we can we must; and if we must we will! If you 
cannot possess yourself of your own nature, be pos- 
sessed by the Holy Spirit. God giveth his Holy Spirit 
for this purpose. 

No one must come in between husband and wife to 
defraud either of the lawful love which each should 
receive from the other. The home has been rescued and 
exalted by Christ, and the Christian Church must stall 
be its custodian, not only inculeating the ideal, but 
revealing the sufficient power for its defense. 


6., United Now and Hereafter in the Lord. 


1 Thessalonians 4:9-18. It is suggested that God 
himself is the teacher of love. Others may teach the 
lower classes in the school of grace, but the highest 
is reserved for the Supreme Teacher. Note that reeur- 
ring more and more, 3:12; 4:1, 10. The distribution of 
goods in the early Church may have led to abuses, 
which the injunctions here given were intended to rec- 
tify. It is well to bring up every child to know one 
means of livelihood, and children are much more likely 
to grow up into noble and useful people, if they are 
encouraged to work for their living. Do something 
in the world! 

These disciples anticipated the speedy return of the 
Lord and feared lest. those who had died would be 
worse off than they. The Apostle bade them dismiss 
such fears, because they who remained alive until the 
eoming of the Lord would have no precedence over 
others who had died. Paul assures them that they 
who had fallen asleep were with Jesus, and that they 
would accompany him when he came again. To those 
who needed to be raised, Jesus would be ‘‘the Resur- 
rection’’; to those who were living, he would be ‘‘the 
Life.’’ They that believed in him, though’ they had 
died, yet would they live; and they who lived till he 
came would never die. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS 43 


7. Ready for “the Day of the Lord.” 


1 Thessalonians 5:1-11. To the Apostle ‘‘the day of 
the Lord’’ was near. He expected it in his lifetime, 
and if we remember that the Lord’s words with refer- 
ence to it were in part fulfilled when Jerusalem fell, 
it is clear that his expectation was not altogether vain. 

The suddenness of the Advent was the theme of 
Jesus’ reiterated assurances. See Matt. 24:38, 43; 
Luke 17: 29, 30. The world spends its days in careless 
indifference (sleep), or in sensual enjoyment (drunken- 
ness) ; but believers are bidden to be soldier-like in their 
attire and watchfulness. Ponder that wonderful word 
in v. 10. Together implies that Christians now living 
are closely united with those who have died. The state 
we call death, but which the Apostle calls sleep—be- 
cause our Lord’s resurrection has robbed it of its terror 
—is as full of vitality as the life which we live day 
by day in this world. We live together, animated by 
the same purposes—they on that side and we on this. 
Whether here or there, life is ‘‘in him.’’? The closer 
we live to him, the nearer we are to them. 


8. “Without Blame” at His Coming. 


1 Thessalonians 5:12-28. The remainder of the chap- 
ter is filled with brief sentences of exhortation, like 
eablegrams from our Heavenly Captain to his soldiers, 
who, in the previous section, are described as wearing 
the breastplate of faith and love. As we endeavor to 
put them into practice, we become conscious of a new 
and divine energy entering and quickening our nature. 
It is the God of peace who is at work, co-operating with 
our poor endeavors and sanctifying us wholly. 

Each soul has a ministry to othens, v. 14. A sketch 
is here given of the ideal believer, vs. 16-22; full of 
joy, constant in prayer, giving thanks in everything, 
loving with the unquenched fire of the Holy Spirit, wall- 
ing to listen to any voice that may bear a divine mes- 


44 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


sage, testing all events and utterances with a celestial 
solvent, steadfast in good, and persistent against evil. 
This is a high standard, and impossible of realization 
apart from the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. But 
when the inner shrine is truly surrendered to him, he 
will possess the whole temple, even to our physical well- 
being. God is faithful and will never fail the soul that 
dares to be all that he wills. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE FIRST EPISTLE 


(a) 
(b) 


(¢) 
(d) 
(e) 


TO THE THESSALONIANS 


OUTLINE. 


How had the church in Thessalonica been planted, 
and how had it prospered? 

What does the Christian need, and how is the return 
of Christ an incentive to it? 


INTRODUCTION. 


For what was the city of Thessalonica distinguished? 
By what name is it known today? 

When was the letter to the Thessalonians written? 
What is its position among the Pauline writings? 
How does the teaching of this Epistle compare with 

that of Romans and Ephesians? 


' SECTIONS 1-8. CHAPTERS 1-5. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 


se A a Le, 


number in the Comments.) 


How extensive was the influence of the Thessalonian 
Christians? 

What had been the character of Paul’s ministry in 
Thessalonica? 

How had the Thessalonians shared the experience of 
the Judean Christians? 

To what. does Paul refer as necessary to his very 
life? 

How is holiness possible to believers? 

What words of comfort does Paul give concerning 
those who are fallen asleep? 

Unto what has God appointed us? 

What are some of the practical commands with which 
the Epistle concludes? 


45 





IV 


THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE 
THESSALONIANS 


47 





OUTLINE OF THE SECOND EPISTLE TO 


THE THESSALONIANS 


THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST 


DAL UA RTO NM. garchs, sinscha tooled gloretaici stato sole shaiens Metz: 
1. The Integrity of the Faith and Life of the 
DRESSALONVONE aca afoiays|- cers eases eel Ze 

2. The Man of Sin and the Coming of Christ 2:1-12. 
3. Prayer for the Thessalonians ........... 2:13_-17. 
4, A Request for the Prayers of the Thessa- 

adn LOUMTAING «sh oes eohe th acted siaksvnoha) pte sieie ee /e'5, 0 3:15. 
5. The Christian’s Manner of Life ......... 3:6-15. 


CON CEUSIONG fag ei tectote tone eee co sie 6.0 s1sis eivieie 3:16, 17 


49 


THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE 
THESSALONIANS 


This second Epistle was probably written shortly after 
the first. The Apostle appears to have heard of some 
who claimed to be acting on his authority, and were an- 
nouncing the immediate coming of the Lord. This had so 
excited and unsettled the disciples of Thessalonica that they 
were neglecting their means of livelihood. Writing from 
Corinth, where he was staying at the time, Paul endeavored 
to allay that spirit of unrest and to call these disciples back 
to their everyday duties. 


THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS 


1. Faithful through Faith in a Righteous God. 


2 Thessalonians 1:1-12. Notice the remarkable coup- 
lets of this chapter. Grace and peace, v. 2; faith and 
love, v. 3; faith and patience, v. 4; tribulation for those 
who trouble, and rest for those who are troubled, vs. 
6, 7; know not, obey not, v. 8; the presence of the Lord, 
the glory of his power, v. 9; glorified and admired, v. 
10; the good pleasure of his goodness and the work of 
faith, v.11. Like mirrors that face each other, these 
words flash back and forth their depths of sacred sig- 
nificance. 

What marvelous scenes the future conceals for be- 
lievers!—such as rest for the weary, palms of victory 
for the defeated, glory for the name and cause of 
Christ, and, above all, the revelation of that dear Pres- 
ence with which we have been so constantly in touch. 
But how inexpressibly awful and terrible, on the other 
hand, the fate of the wilful rejecters of the love of 
God! 

The final prayer has always been highly prized by 
God’s people. If they shall ever be worthy of their 
high calling, it is for him to make them so. His being 
glorified and admired in his saints is not a far-off event; 
but one within the possibilities of the present hour; 
and the name of Jesus may be magnified here and now 
in us, as it will be finally and more perfectly. Compare 
vs. 10 and 12. 


2. Untroubled by Threatening Rumors. 


2 Thessalonians 2:1-12. The Apostle sets himself to 
correct certain erroneous’ impressions which had un- 
settled the church in Thessalonica. Notice how rever- 
ently he speaks of our Saviour. Once and again he al- 
ludes to him as the Lord Jesus Christ. He is surely 
coming, and as surely will his saints be gathered to him, 


51 


52 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


as the drops of moisture are drawn up from ponds and 
oceans, to cluster in the clouds in radiant beauty around 
the sun. 

But certain events must take place first. There must 
be a great apostasy and the unveiling of ‘‘the mystery 
of lawlessness,’’ which even at that time was already at 
work, First, the man of sin; then, the Son of man. 
First, he that set himself forth as Ged; then, God 
manifest in the flesh. First, the revelation of sin; then, 
the revelation of perfect salvation. Dan. 11:36 seems 
to have suggested Paul’s words, which have been ap- 
plied to Nero or Caligula, to Judaism or the Papal 
Church, and to some future manifestation of Satanic 
hatred toward the Chureh of God. But whatever form 
it may assume, the coming ef Jesus will absolutely de- 
stroy this power of Antichrist. Let us be warned by 
the doom ef those that are involved in this great apos- 
tasy, and ever cherish the love of the truth of Christ, 
that we may be saved. 


3. Held Firm and Guarded from Evil. 


2 Thessalonians 2:13—3:5. This closing section is 
full of comfort and inspiration. Believers in Christ 
are the beloved of God; their salvation dates from his 
eternal love and choice, and his purpose for us is being 
wrought out in our characters by the Holy Spirit, who 
ministers to us through the truth. Our comfort is 
eternal and our hepe is unfailing. 

Paul was now preaching at Corinth, and he asks 
that the gospel may run, 3:1, R.V. Oh, for a divine 
impatience, that we may be content with nothing short 
of this! When unreasonable and wicked men try you, 
turn to the Lord, who is faithful to his promises and to 
his ‘saints. The stronger the gales of opposition and 
hatred, the deeper should we become established and 
rooted in the truth. The word direct in v. 5 may be 
rendered, make a thoroughfare through; that is, we de- 
sire that our hearts should be a highway down which 


THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS 53 


the love of God and the patience of our Lord may pass 
to a world of sin and fret. Let us ever connect the 
patience and kingdom of our Lord, as in Rev. 1: 9. 


4. Separate; Industrious; Persevering. 


2 Thessalonians 3:6-18. From his high. expectations 
of the Advent, the Apostle turns to the prosaic com- 
monplaces of daily toil. There was need for this, be- 
cause the expectation of the speedy return of Christ 
was disarranging the ordinary course of life and duty. 
People were neglecting the common round of daily 
tasks, and idlers were imposing on Christian generos- 
ity. Against these the Apostle sets his own example 
of sitting far into the night at his tent-making. See 
1 Thess. 2:9. The best attitude for those that look for 
their Lord is not in pressing their faces against the 
oriel window, to behold the chariot of their returning 
Master, but in plying their toil with deft hands and 
consecrated hearts. 

Note that parting salutation, v. 16, and let us believe 
that the God of peace is causing peace for us at all 
times and in all ways. Even storms are forwarding our 
boat to its haven, and we shall be borne in with the 
flood tide of his merey. Every wind is a home wind to 
the child of God, setting in from the quarter of his love. 
Every messenger, however garbed, brings God’s salu- 
tation and benediction. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE SECOND 
EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS 


OUTLINE. 
(a) What further teaching have we here about the return 
of Christ? 
(6) How does the Epistle emphasize (1) prayer; (2) 
conduct? 
INTRODUCTION. 


(c) Where was Paul staying when he wrote this Epistle? 
(d) What conditions had developed which made it neces- 
sary for him to write again? 


SECTIONS 1-4. CHAPTERS 1-3. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 
number in the Comments.) 


What are the contrasted destinies of those who ac- 
cept and those who reject the gospel? 

What great event must precede the coming of Christ? 

Why did Paul desire the prayers of the Thessalon- 
ians? 

. What special command had Paul given them while 

with them? Why is it now repeated? What is the 

closing benediction? 


Pee 


54 


‘e. 


x 


> 
i 
ae 
© 
= 
be 
S 
2 
my 
| 
i 
a] 


a 


_ THE FIRST 


aa 








II. 


OUTLINE OF THE FIRST EPISTLE TO 
TIMOTHY 


THE CHURCH AND ITS MINISTRY. 


SALUTATION (h.teeeir: fon ria eee eos Wise 


. THE CHARGE CONCERNING THE CHURCH 1:3—3:16. 


Il. The Need of Love, Faith and a 
Good Conscience .............. 1:3_20. 


2. The Conduct of Public Prayer... .2:1-8. 
3. The Place of Women in the Church 2:9-15. 
4. The Appointment of Bishops ....3:1-7. 
5. The Appointment of Deacons..... 3:8-13. 
XU OR TATION el siecctovecsysrsere aoe siete we 3:14-16. 
“A Goop MINISTER OF JESUS CHRIST” 4—6. 
1. His Ministry and Teaching ..... 4, 
2. His Bearing toward Elders and 

WV AL OWS Me Pi adctyee cxeistsleNolit oxaya estes 5. 
3. His Attitude toward Slavery ..... 6:1, 2. 
4. Characteristics of False Teachers. .6:3-10. 
5. The Minister’s Personal Life..... 6:11-16. 
6. His Charge to the Rich ......... 6:17-19. 
CONOLUSION ea csicris, fs led ccc ere wanes 6:20, 21. 


57 


THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 


This Epistle was written not long after Paul had left 
Ephesus for Macedonia; but it is a matter of debate as to 
when this was, some holding that it must have been about 
the time of the great riot which drove the Apostle from 
the city; others that it was nearer the time of his second 
and last imprisonment at Rome. 

Timothy is first mentioned as living at Lystra, Acts 16:1. 
His mother, Hunice, was a Jewess, 2 Tim. 1:5; his father 
was a Greek. He was early the subject of pious influence, 
2 Tim. 3:14, 15. He was well spoken of by his fellovw- 
believers, and became the intimate friend and companion 
of the Apostle. 

The Epistle was designed to instruct him how to deal with 
false teachers, how to conduct public worship, and to urge 
him to cultivate all those qualities which would better 
equip him for the discharge of his important duties. 


58 


THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 


1, A Charge against “Vain Talking.” 


1 Timothy 1:1-11, The relation of Paul to Timothy 
is an example of one of those beautiful friendships be- 
tween an older and a younger man, in which each is 
the complement of the other, 1 Cor. 4:17; Phil. 2: 22. 
Timothy was a lad of fifteen when converted at Lystra, 
and was probably about thirty-five years of age when 
this Epistle was addressed to him. He was enthusiastic 
and devoted but at times showed signs of timidity, and 
the Apostle watched over him with tender interest. 

In this chapter the young minister is warned against 
the Gnostic heresy, i. e., the heresy of the knowing-ones, 
who pretended to give revelations about the angels and 
their ministry, and to bridge the gulf between man and 
God by a whole series of mysterious imaginary 
beings. Their teaching led from spiritual pride to sen- 
suality, for they accounted the body as inherently evil. 
All this was contrary to healthy doctrine. That word 
sound, or healthy, is peculiar to the Pastoral Epistles, 
1 Tim, 6: 33; 2 Tim. 1:13; 4:3; Titus 1:9; 2:1. It sug- 
gests a certain test of the various teachers who cross 
our paths. The question always is, Do these words of 
theirs promote the health of the soul, and above all, 
love out of a pure heart and a good conscience? 


2. An Example of Christ’s Long-Suffering. 


1 Timothy 1:12-20. The Apostle breaks off into ex- 
pressions of heartfelt thanks to God for the abounding 
grace which had overcome his former obstinacy and 
blindness. Only his ignorance could palliate his out- 
rage and insult toward Christ, who was now the beloved 
object of his entire surrender. He had been a blas- 
phemer against God, Acts 26:9-11; a persecutor to- 
wards his fellow-men, Gal. 1:13; injurious, insolent, 


59 


60 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


full of overweening pride. He felt that he had been 
the chief of sinners, because he had sinned against more 
knowledge and opportunity than others. It~is only 
when we see God, that we know ourselves and repent in 
dust and ashes. The Apostle, however, comforted him- 
self in this at least, that through coming time the most 
hopeless and abandoned sinners would take heart as 
they considered his case. He was a sample of mercy, a 
specimen of what Christ could do, an outline sketch to 
be filled in. Believe on Christ. Faith rests on Christ 
as foundation. Peter and John use another preposition, 
toward, or ito, 1. e., they conceive of union with him, 
to which all else is preliminary. War the good war- 
fare, that against sin. When men thrust away faith 
and a good conscience, they stab their pilot and make 
shipwreck. See 2 Tim. 2:17, 18; 4:14, 15. 


3. Prayer and Modest Adorning. 


1 Timothy 2:1-15. The Apostle especially urged in- 
tercessory prayer, because it meant so much to himself. 
Three different words are used of prayer, because there 
are so many ways of approaching God. It is our duty 
to pray for those in authority, and to seek after a 
calm and quiet life in all godliness and gravity. It 
was most important that Christians should not be sus- 
pected of revolutionary designs or civic turbulence. If 
they had to suffer, it must be only on account of their 
religious faith. The solidarity of our race is the rea- 
son for our wide-embracing supplications. The whole 
race is one in the creation of God and the ransom of 
Christ; we are therefore one with all men, and should 
express in prayer the common sins and sorrows of man- 
kind. 

The men were bidden to lead in public prayer, and to 
see that the hands they uplifted were clean, while the 
women joined quietly after the Eastern fashion. There 
was nothing revolutionary in Paul’s teaching. He was 
content, in minor matters, to conform to the usages 
of his age, though promulgating doctrines which would 


THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 61 


ultimately revolutionize the position of womanhood. A 
holy married life, with the bearing and training of chil- 
dren, is, as a rule, the appointed path for woman, and 
this will lead to their salvation through faith in the 
Holy One who was born in Bethlehem, 


4. Fitness for Christian Leadership. 


1 Timothy 3:1-7. One of Timothy’s most urgent 
duties was to take care that those who held office in 
the churches were beyond reproach. The tone of a 
Christian community is largely that of its leaders. As 
the margin suggests, the bishop of the early Church 
was an overseer or presbyter. See Acts 20: 28, R.V. 
God’s minister must not only be irreproachable as far 
as the outside world is concerned, but. exemplary in 
his domestic relations. Such was the facility of di- 
vorce among the Jews that it was a common thing for 
a man to have more than one woman living who had 
been his wife: but by Paul’s ruling this would debar 
him from holding office, unless his divorce be for cause 
as provided in Matt. 19:9. 

Notice how often those words grave, sober-minded, 
temperate occur in this chapter. The effect of a good 
sermon will be spoiled if a man yields to foolish levity 
or intemperate habits. Moderation, serenity of temper, 
freedom from love of money, a well-ordered household, 
an obedient and reverent family—these are signs that a 
man may aspire to the sacred work of. the ministry; 
and these are the qualities which people should look for 
in candidates for pulpits, more than those of rhetoric, 
brilliance, or outward attractiveness. 


5. Qualifications of Church Officials. 


1 Timothy 3:8-16. Younger men, referred to as 
deacons, were appointed to subordinate tasks, espec- 
ially the relief of the poor, Acts 6. Though their ser- 
vice was less important, their character must be of 
the highest quality. The strength of a church is as 
much in the godliness of those who fill subordinate 


62 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


offices, as in its acknowledged leaders. The caretaker 
of a church should be a man of as high ideals as 
its chief pastor. Nothing is common or unclean, noth- 
ing trivial and unimportant, where Christ’s honor and 
glory are concerned. In the prophet’s vision the very 
snuffers of the candlestick were of gold. 

The women mentioned here are deaconesses, Rom. 
16:1. Governor Bradford, deseribing the church of the 
Pilgrim Fathers, says of a deaconess: ‘‘She honored 
her place and was an ornament to the congregation. 
She did frequently visit the sick and weak, and would 
gather relief for them. She was obeyed as a mother in 
Israel.’’ 

The Church is the earthly dwelling-place of God. It 
lifts up and maintains the standard of truth in the 
midst of men, therefore it is hated. It is most neces- 
sary that Christians should bear witness to the truth, 
collectively as well as individually. The facts given us 
to witness to are enumerated here in the six clauses of 
an ancient antiphonal chant. 


6. Reject False and Foolish Teaching. 


1 Timothy 4:1-8. We have here the Apostle’s fore- 
east of the last times, z. e., the condition in which men 
will find themselves as the age draws to a close. Not- 
withstanding ‘all that Christ has done, the prevalence 
of evil will be enormous, not because of any failure in 
God but because the Chureh has failed to be the organ 
through which his saving help could reach mankind. 
The symptoms are set forth with great clearness, such 
as demon spirits dwelling and working in men, error 
taught under the specious guise of excessive religious 
devotion, consciences seared, natural instincts thwarted 
and outraged. On the contrary, let us believe that the 
whole body, and all gifts that are natural and inno- 
cent, are to be cherished and used under three sanc- 
tions: 1. They. must be accepted and enjoyed with 
thanksgiving to the Creator and Father. 2. They must 


THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 63 


be sanctioned by the Word of God. 3. Their use and 
enjoyment must not interfere with our prayer-life. 
The minister of Christ must be daily nourished by 
the words of Christian truth. If he is not fed on 
Christ’s body and blood, his teaching will soon deter- 
iorate, John 6. He must also exercise himself in god- 
liness with as much eare as the gymnast, who is con- 
tinually exercising his joints and muscles so as to 
keep supple and alert. This is also God’s purpose in 
the spiritual trials and discipline which he sends. 


7. “Take Heed to Thyself.” 


1 Timothy 4:9-16.. In all Christian service we must 
set our hope on the living God. Nothing counts apart 
from God. Prayer implies that all our gifts and ef- 
forts cover only a small part of our efficiency. There 
are infinite resources in God, which he is waiting to 
employ in human affairs, and of which we fail to make 
use. The Christian worker, therefore, must not oniy 
labor and strive, but must hope in the living God, 
whose saving grace is at the disposal of our faith. The 
faith exercised by the average man results in obtain- 
ing only natural things; the supernatural is secured by 
the faith of those who have made profounder discover- 
ies of God, and can therefore make demands on his 
resources, which are hidden from the princes of this 
world. 

In order to sueceed, we must give ourselves wholly 
to our work for God. In answer to prayer great gifts 
had been communicated to Timothy, but he had to give 
heed to them, use them, and stir up the slumbering em- 
bers of the fire, kindled at his ordination. It is worthy 
of notice that the Apostle’s injunctions do not include 
a single allusion to priestly or sacramental service, but 
urge to boldness of character, v. 12; diligent study, v. 
13; rigorous orthodoxy, v. 16; and the daily self-wateh 
of the soul, v. 16. Take to heart the blessed assur- 
ance of the closing sentence of the chapter. 


64 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


8. Wise Treatment of Young and Old. 


1 Fimothy 5:1-8. That minister of Jesus is hap- 
piest who introduces the tone and manner of family life 
into the church, vs. 1, 2. The attitude of son or 
brother to other men is peculiarly fitting. But he must 
always keep up the spiritual tone. It is so easy to 
descend to frivolity and familiarity. Remember that 
all intercourse with others must be governed by the 
words—in all purity. 

The special references to widows evidence the early 
practice of the Chureh. Provision was made for godly 
women who had lost husbands by death, and who in 
return for the weekly gift from church funds, gave 
themselves to Christian service. The Apostle indi- 
cates the age and characteristics of those who might be 
eligible. It was his clear judgment, however, that, 
wherever possible, it was becoming for children to 
make such provision as would place an aged mother 
or other relative beyond the reach of want or any 
need of claiming maintenance from church funds. Our 
nurses and deaconesses are the modern counterparts of 
the order of widows in the early Church; yet the 
standard of Christian living here emphasized may well 
be pondered and prayed over by all Christian women, 
who should, as far as possible without fee or reward, 
consider church service only second to the claims of 
home. 


9. Home-Keeping Industry Enjoined. 


1 Timothy 5:9-16. The sphere of the younger woman 
must be in the home. This is the noblest work of all, 
and wherever it exists, it has the prior claim; yet even 
during the years of early motherhood there may still 
be opportunities of offering hospitality to strangers, 
ministering to the children of God who need refresh- 
ment and comfort, and diligently assisting in good. 
work. These offices lovingly and humbly performed, 
will serve as a gracious opening for further minis- 
tries of the same description in the later period of life. 


THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 65 


The Apostle says nothing about remarriage in 
general, but simply refers to the fact that young 
women who have become widows are likely to‘ accept 
the offer of a second marriage, and so abjure that first 
faith, in which they had pledged themselves to the ser- 
vice of the church. Unless there is great watchful- 
ness, the practice of going from house to house, osten- 
sibly on church business, may degenerate into 2ossip- 
mongering, Therefore it was wiser not to put young 
women on the chureh service roll. If they did not 
marry a second time, they might at least work for the 
maintenance of others, widows like themselves, but less 
able to help themselves. There must be no idling. 


10. Impartial and Kindly Supervision. 


1 Timothy 5:17-25. A man of years was always to 
be honored, and if he were called to rule in the church, 
he was to be treated with double honor; but none 
should be appointed to that sacred office hastily or with 
partiality. Purity, gravity, and abstinence from alcohol 
were prime requisites in a Christian minister then, as 
they are now. It is clear from v. 23 that the Apostles 
and their helpers practiced total abstinence, or there 
had been no need for that special injunction to Tim- 
othy. 

Tt is clear also from vs. 17, 18 that the early 
Church was encouraged to support its ministers, The 
Apostle quotes the words of our Lord, to maintain this 
contention, Matt. 10: 10; Luke 10:7. The character 
of a minister might not be lightly aspersed. If any- 
thing had to be said, the informant must lodge his com- 
plaint in the presence of witnesses, who could be wit- 
nesses against him, if the charge were found to be 
baseless and frivolous. But public wrongs must be 
met by public rebuke, that any suspicion of favoritisra 
might be disarmed. No man, however, should be called 
to the sacred and responsible position of presbyter, un- 
less he had been tested and approved. In forming 
judgments of the fitness of men for office, we must 


- 


66 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


not judge wholly by appearance—good or bad, vs. 


4, 
11. Godliness Is True Gain. 


1 Timothy 6:1-10. The Apostle gives rules for the 
treatment of the slaves who rendered service in the 
households of that time. If the slave was in the 
household of a heathen master, he must honor and 
glorify Christ by being respectful and obedient; but 
if the master was a Christian, and therefore a brother 
in the Lord, he was still required to yield courteous 
and willing service. Service rendered for the love of 
God must not be inferior to that rendered from fear 
of man. 

There were many false teachers in the early Church, 
the chief aim of whom was to make money. They were 
proud and distempered, jealous and suspicious, juggling 
with words and given to splitting hairs. Godliness truly 
is great gain. It makes us content with what we have, 
and it opens to us stores of blessedness which the 
wealth of a Cresus could not buy. It is good to have 
just what is necessary. More than that breeds anxiety. 
Let us leave the provision for our needs with God. He 
is pledged to give food and covering, the latter includ- 
ing shelter. Not money, but the love of it opens the 
sluices and floodgates of the soul, through which wash 
the destroying waters of passion that drown men in 
destruction and perdition. Remember that you can 
carry nothing out of this world except your character. 


12. “Fight the Good Fight of the Faith.” 


1 Timothy 6:11-21. The poor need not envy the 
rich. Wealth makes no difference in the audit of etern- 
ity. A man cannot eat more than a certain amount 
of food, and wear more than a certain amount of eloth- 
ing. If we have enough why envy others? The true 
wealth of life is in self-renuneciation and beneficence. 
How different from the money-grabber is the man of 
God who flees such things, and follows after righteous- 


THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 67 


ness, who fights the good fight against the world, the 
flesh, and the devil, and who never flinches from wit- 
nessing the good witness. If we suffer here with Jesus, 
we shall share in the glory of his manifestation. Notice 
the wealth of the Apostle’s aseription to Jesus! Here 
are life in its spring, light at its source, power and 
authority in their original fountain. Let us claim 
these blessings and enthrone them in our lives. 

The charge to the rich is eminently sound. We must 
set our hope not on the attainment of fleeting things, 
but in God who loves to give and see his children happy. 
We hold all that we have, that we may be God’s chan- 
nels of communication to others. What we hoard we 
lose, what we give away we store. The life which is 
life indeed can be acquired only through death and 
self-giving. - 


(For Review Questions see neat page.) 


oe 
i=) 
_—~— 


b 


(¢) 


(d) 
(e) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE FIRST 
EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 


OUTLINE. 


What matters of church order does the Epistle treat? 
What does it set forth as guides for the conduct of 
a Christian minister? 


INTRODUCTION. 


What. information about Timothy may be gleaned 
from the book of Acts and the Epistles? 

When was this Epistle written? 

What was it designed to teach? 


SECTIONS 1-12. CHAPTERS 1-6. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 


BO ISD SEM rn 


= 


10. 


12, 


number in the Comments.) 


Why had Paul exhorted Timothy to tarry at Ephesus? 
What is the “end of the charge”? What words are 
peculiar to the Pastoral Epistles? 

What saying is “worthy of all acceptation”? 

After what manner should public worship be con- 
ducted ? 

What are the qualifications of a bishop? 

How is the fitness of deacons and deaconesses to be 
determined ? 

What does the Spirit testify regarding later times? 

Why was Timothy’s authority likely to be discounted? 
How was he to guard against this? 

What is said of those who provide not for their own 
households? 

What instructions are given regarding widows in the 
early Church? 

When are elders to be accounted worthy of double 
honor? 

What is named as a root of all kinds of evil? 

Why need the poor not envy the rich? What earnest 
plea concludes the Epistle? 


68 


VI 
THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 


69 





INE OF THE SECOND EPISTLE TO 
TIMOTHY 


THE APOSTLE’S FAREWELL MESSAGE. 


POR Big SERGI ag id yx alan Ee gs ett. 1: Lb Des 
1. Thanksgiving for Timothy’s Faith...... 133-6. 
2. The Glory of the Gospel ............... Teta. 
(False Friends and True .............. 1:15-18) 
3. “A Good Soldier of Christ Jesus”........ 231-13. 
4. “A Good Workman That Needeth Not To 
BETAS OD BAe Oot abe iy yp 2:14-26. 
5. Grievous Times in the Last Days wee ss 3. 
6. The Triumphant Close of a Great Career.4:1-8. 
7. Personal Instructions ...:.........+... 4:9_13. 
So Pinal Bopertences 922... 0.2 book 4:14-18. 
9. Greetings to Friends ................. 4:19-21. 
CONCLUSION fad. tive net bee yee ie ls 4:22, 


71 


THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 


This is the last Epistle of the great Apostle, who was 
apparently awaiting sentence. He had already had audi- 
ence with Caesar, and escaped, 2 Tim. 4:16, 17; but there 
could be no doubt as to the ultimate issue. When Paul in- 
dited these words he was imprisoned in the Mamertine 
dungeon, exposed to the chill ague of its damp walls, reek- 
ing with pestilence and recalling the miseries of generations 
of condemned criminals. There was one desire for the ful- 
fillment of which he yearned. He longed to see once more 
the dear friend of earlier years, whom he had led into this 
life of stern suffering, and whose spirit seems to have 
been somewhat overwhelmed by its severity. It was this 
that led Paul to dispatch this second letter, filled with ad- 
vice and exhortation in case Timothy could not come, but 
specially full of desire that he should come before winter 
set in and traveling became difficult, 2 Tim. 4:9, 21. There 
is no trace of despondency in this noble swan song. Though 
Paul had lost all things, he had gained Christ. “Glorious 
Apostle! Would that every leader’s voice could burst, as 
he falls, into such a trumpet-sound, thrilling the young 
hearts that pant in the good fight and must never despair 
of final victory!” 


72 


THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 


1. “Stir Up the Gift Which Is in Thee.” 


2 Timothy 1:1-11. Lonely and facing death the 
Apostle fell back on the bedrock of the will of God. If 
it were the divine plan that he should finish his life- 
work in that miserable plight, he was content that it 
should be so. But he longs to see his beloved son in 
the faith once more. He desires to stir up the dead 
coal of his ardor, in which there was fire and heat, but 
not enough flame. 

Apparently the young evangelist was becoming 
daunted by the gathering difficulties of the time and 
so Paul sets himself to encourage him. With this pur- 
pose in view he adduces his own example, vy. 3, his 
fervent affection, v. 4, the memory of the sainted dead, 
vy. 5, the solemn vows by which Timothy had bound 
himself at his ordination, v. 6, the divine donation of 
grace and power and love, v. 8, the eternal purpose 
which had received its fruition in the advent of Jesus, 
v. 9, the clear light which his resurrection had thrown 
on death and the hereafter, v.10. Surely such a chain 
of arguments must have proved irresistible! God’s 
soldiers must be brave and unflinching in meeting the 
opposition of the world. When once we realize that the 
stores which reside in God are at the disposal of our 
faith, we, too, shall be invulnerable and irresistible. 


2. “Hold the Pattern of Sound Words.” 


2 Timothy 1:12-18. How striking Paul’s reference 
to the double committal, as if there had been an agreed 
exchange between his Master and himself! Paul had 
handed over to Christ as a sacred deposit all that con- 
cerned his well-being in time and eternity, and Christ 
had handed over to him the interests of his Kingdom, 
which, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, he was re- 


73 


74 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


quired to maintain inviolate. It is a mutual exchange 
of which we all ought to know something, Give all to 
Christ and Christ becomes all to you. The proportion 
of your self-giving is the measure of your discovery of 
what Jesus will be to you. 
Some of Paul’s former friends shrank from identi- 
fying themselves with a suspect—the inmate of the 
condemned eell. It was no light matter to visit the 
bearer of a name which the world of that day detested, 
one who belonged to a sect accused of burning Rome. 
Demas, 2 Tim, 4:11, and others forsook him, but the 
good Ephesian, Onesiphorus, set about seeking him 
through all the prisons of Rome, and was not ashamed 
of his chain nor content with a single visit. He oft 
refreshed his friend. Paul sends a grateful message 
to his family, 4:19. Perhaps there is here a gentle 
hint to Timothy. Compare vs. 8 and 16. Never shrink 
from taking your place beside Christ’s prisoners! 


3. “A Good Soldier of Christ Jesus.” 


2 Timothy 2:1-9. Soldier, vs. 1-4: There is grace 
enough in Jesus for every need, but we must avail 
ourselves of it. We can expect nothing less than hard- 
ship, since life is a battlefield. Our one aim should 
be to please him who chose us to be soldiers. In order 
to be all that he would have us be, we must avoid en- 
tangling ourselves in the conditions around us. We 
must resemble a garrison in the town where it is quar- 
tered, and from which it may at any hour be summoned 
away. The less encumbered we are, the more easily 
shall we be able to execute the least command of our 
Great Captain. How high an honor it is to be en- 
rolled among his soldiers! 

Athlete, v. 5: Life is an amphitheater, filled with 
_ celestial spectators. Probably our worst antagonist is 
found in our own heart. If we win the crown, we must 
observe regulations as to diet, exercise, purity, 1 Cor. 
9:24-27. Husbandman, v. 6: We ought to be working 
for God in his vineyard or harvest-field; but we are 





THE YounG TIMOTHY WITH THE SCRIPTURES. 
2 Timothy 1: 1-5; 3:14, 15. 


From Painting by JAMES SANT. Modern British Artist. 





THE SECOND. EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 75 


allowed to partake of the fruits. It is imperative that 
we should be nourished while we labor. In all these 
positions we must remember Jesus Christ, risen from 
the dead. We must draw upon the power of his resur- 
rection, and to do this, we must live on the heaven- 
side of the Cross. ‘‘I am erucified with Christ: never- 
theless I live,’’ Gal. 2:20, 


4. “Approved unto God.” 


2 Timothy 2:10-18. The elect, vs. 10-13: The Apos- 
tle sketches the experiences of the elect soul. It must 
endure, suffer, and die with Christ, that out of its sur- 
render may come the truest, richest life, John 12: 25. 
There is no path to lasting success save that of the 
eross and grave of Christ. It has been allotted to the 
redeemed in the divine program; each must tread it 
separately and with resolute purpose. But there is no 
doubt as to the sequel of a true life. The world of 
men may count it a failure, but God pledges himself 
that as-the pendulum swings here in the dark, it shall 
swing equally in yonder world of light. Three things 
are impossible with God—to die, to lie, and to fail the 
soul that trusts him. Even when we cannot muster 
faith enough, his word of promise cannot be frustrated 
in the case of those whose faith is weak and trembling 
as the smoking flax. 

The workman, vs. 14-18: The one anxiety with us 
all should be to stand approved before God. As the 
R.V. margin suggests, we must hold a straight course 
in the word of truth. Our testimony should resemble 
an undeviating furrow. Let us construct in our life 
something which will be a permanent addition to the 
well-being of the world, so that at the last the Master 
may say that he is satisfied. 


5. “A Vessel unto Honor.” 


2 Timothy 2:19-26. Two men had been named whose 
teachings had overthrown the faith of some; but in 
eontradistinction to this lamentable defection, Paul 


76 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


turns with thankfulness to the firm foundations of 
faith on which the Church is built. They stand firm, 
because they rest on incontestable facts, and are au- 
thenticated by the Christian experience of centuries. 
Medallion inscriptions were often placed on foundation 
stones. Here are two affixed to those of the Church— 
one between God and the believer, the other between 
the believer and the world. What a privilege to be 
known by God! What a responsibility to work worth- 
ily of him before men! : ; 
From the house the Apostle proceeds to the vessels 
within. Each of us stands on one of those four shelves. 
But those to be honored and which are most often in 
the Master’s hands are not necessarily the gold vessels, 
but the clean ones, of whatever material.. Cleanli- 
ness counts more with God than cleverness. Do not 
be anxious about your service; be ready for the Mas- 
ter to use you. Lie like a silver cup in the trough of 
the fountain, v. 25. Repentance is God’s gift, but there 
is a peradventure in it. Men are drunk with the world’s 
drugs; they need to be recovered. Notice that we may 
rescue for God men whom the devil has entrapped. 


6 UALDatkPicturelof Evil Mes 


2 Timothy 3:1-9. The last days of the present age 
are to be black and sorrowful. Sinful rejection of 
Christ will come to a head. We must not be misled 
by the wide-spread profession of the forms of religion; 
this may co-exist with the rankest apostasy. When 
women are conscious of sins against God, society, and 

. themselves, they are very liable to the seduction of 
false teachers, who promise peace and condone impur- 
ity. 

Tares and wheat grow together unto the harvest. 
The devil has always set himself to counterfeit God’s 
handiwork: the Holy City by Babylon; the Son of man 
by the man of sin; blessedness by the worldling’s 
giddy merriment. Thus the Egyptian conjurers repeat- 
ed the miracles of Moses by resorting to sleight of hand. 


THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY ita 


So there is a pure gospel and a specious mimicry of 
it. Wait for the inevitable unfoldings of God’s pur- 
pose. Time will show what is true and what is false. 
In the meantime, examine yourselves whether ye be in 
the faith. 


7. Hold Fast to Inspired Scripture. 


& Timothy 3:10-17._ The world does not love Christ 
or Christians any better than of old; and all who are 
minded to live godly lives will come inevitably to the 
eross in one form or another. To be without persecu- 
tion should put us in serious doubt as to whether we 
are right. The spirit of the gospel is in absolute dis- 
agreement with the spirit of the world. But, whatever 
the losses and trials, let the children of God abide in 
the things which they have learned, and walk in blame- 
less purity and consistency. The conduct, purpose, 
and patience of this great and holy Apostle gleam in 
front of us for our inspiration and guidance ; and his 
experience will be ours—that there is no sorrow out 
of which we shall not be delivered, when we have 
learned the lesson it was sent to teach. 

In the stern experiences of human life there is no 
stay that is comparable to the Holy Seriptures. The 
infinite variety of Scripture adapts itself to different 
states of the soul. Whatever our need, we ean find its 
solace and remedy here. Thus we may live a complete 
life, finding in the Bible an equipment for all our | 
emergencies. In this armory is every weapon for of- 
fense and defense; in this pharmacopeia is a medi- 
cine and antidote for every wound. 


8. The Victor’s Final Charge. 


2 Timothy 4:1-12. To the end Paul held to the ap- 
pearing of Jesus, though he might not live to see it; 
and it was to precede and usher in the coming of the 
Kingdom. The world of that time was sad and sick, 
and Paul’s sole panacea was the preaching of the 
gospel. Verse 2, do not only take opportunities, but 


78 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


make them. Verse 3, make haste; such opportunities 
are closing in. Sound throughout these Pastoral Epis- 
tles means ‘‘healthy’’ and ‘‘health-giving.’’ Note that 
striking phrase of the itching ears, which turn in every 
direction where they may obtain momentary relief. 
Verse 5, be on the alert! Fulfil, that is, work to the 
edge of your pattern. 

With what pathetic words Paul refers to his ap- 
proaching death! He regarded his life-blood as about 
to be poured out as a libation, v. 6, R.V., margin. The | 
time had come for him to go on board the good ship 
which was waiting in the offing to sail at sunset for its 
port of glory. He was a veteran who had fought vali- 
antly and suecessfully—keeping the faith as in the old 
Roman story the heroes kept the bridge. But he was 
soon to be relieved. The crown at the end of the course 
was already in sight. He was lonely—only Luke is with 
me. He needed to be ministered unto—take Mark. But 
his courage was unabated. Demas might forsake, but 
Christ failed not. 


9. “The Lord Stood by Me.” 


2 Timothy 4:13-22, The winter was approaching, 
and the Apostle would be glad of his eloak amid the 
damp of the Mamertine prison. Evidently his ar- 
rest under Nero’s orders had been so sudden and per- 
emptory that he was not allowed to go into his lodg- 
ings for this and other possessions, such as the books: 
mentioned in y. 13. 

He had made his first appearance before Nero, and 
was expecting a further appearance to receive his sen- 
tence. But the Lord was with him, and his comfort 
was that he had proclaimed the gospel to the highest 
audience in the world of his time. His one thought 
always was that the gospel should be heard by men, 
whether they would hear or forbear. If that were se- 
cured, he did not count the cost to himself. The lion 
may stand for Nero or Satan. See Luke 22:31; 1 Pet. 


THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY 79 


5:8. From v. 20 we gather that miraculous gifts of 
healing, of which Paul was possessed, may not be used 
merely for friendship’s sake, but only where the 
progress of the gospel requires them. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE SECOND 
EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY — 


OUTLINE. 


What is the Apostle’s charge to Timothy? 
What is his testimony regarding his own career? 
What does he say about their Master and ours? 


INTRODUCTION. 


What place does this Epistle occupy among the 
Pauline writings? 

Where was it written? Under what conditions? 

What was the Apostle’s one desire at this time? 

What characteristics distinguish the Epistle? 


SECTIONS 1-9. CHAPTERS 1-4. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 


SS 


oP NaN Pw 


number in the Comments.) 


Why was Paul so desirous of seeing Timothy once 
more? 

Why had Paul been forsaken by many of his former 
friends? Whom does he mention in particular as 
standing loyally by him? 

In what ways is a Christian like a soldier? an 
athlete? 

How may one attain the position of “a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed’? 

What is the seal of “the firm foundation of Goa”? 

What will characterize the last days? 

What is still the lot of those who “would live godly 
in Christ Jesus”? 

In what terms does Paul sum up his career as an 
Apostle? 

What are some of the personal allusions with which 
the Epistle closes? 


80 





DN 
— 
S 
ad 
= 
a 
ee 

Nn 


I 


EP 


$ 


THE 





OUTLINE OF THE EPISTLE TO TITUS 


” THE WORK OF THE MINISTRY 


SAU EUA TONG ote, eed ona ste cheaters abit (eS oe kine 1:14, 
1. The Character of a Bishop ..........5-- 1:5-10. 
2 Those Who Need Reproof ........ 00. USL: 
3. Training the Church To Be Zealous of 

Good. Works agile es oOo fobs 2: 
4.: The Christian Motive ......ceceeeseaes 33111. 
Dep EV SOM MMGLLET SE \.crctei a hore oe oven elas 3:12-14. 
CWONCEUSIONG G:F ered ston cits Ae res or 3215, 


83 


THE EPISTLE TO TITUS 


We know very little of Titus. Though never mentioned 
in the Acts, he seems to have been one of the most trusted 
and best beloved members of the noble little band of Paul’s 
friends and disciples. As he was a Greek by birth, Paul 
took him to Jerusalem on that memorable visit referred to 
in Gal. 2:8. The bond between them was very close, Titus 
1:4. Titus was sent three times to Corinth on special em- 
bassies, during the troubles of that distracted church, 2 
Cor. 7 and 8. The last mention of him is in connection 
with the visit to Dalmatia, during Paul’s second imprison- 
ment, 2 Tim. 4:10. 

This Epistle guides Titus in the right ordering of the 
churches in Crete, which may have owed their foundation 
to the Cretan Jews, who are mentioned as having heard 
Peter’s pentecostal sermon. Paul had evidently visited 
the island himself, but had been obliged to leave the con- 
solidation of the work with his friend, Titus 1:5. The 
Epistle was warmly admired by Luther, who says: “This 
is a short Epistle, but it contains such a quintessence of 
Christian doctrine, and is composed in such a masterly 
manner, that it contains all that is needful for Christian 
knowledge and life,” 


84 


THE EPISTLE TO TITUS 


1. Appoint Fit Men over the Churches. 


Titus 1:1-9. God’s elect are known by their faith, 
and wherever they hear the voice of truth, which makes 
for godliness, they recognize and acknowledge it. They 
are also inspired by a great hope, and that hope can- 
not be disappointed, because it is founded on the 
promise and oath of the God who cannot lie, Heb. 6:19. 
God’s promise for us has been in his heart from all 
eternity, but it was hidden until the gospel was pro- 
claimed in the power of the Holy Spirit. The germ- 
thought of eternity has been realized in Jesus and is 
unfolded in the gospel. Note the frequent recurrence 
in this Epistle of the phrase, God our Saviour. 

The ordering of these early churches was very im- 
portant. The presiding officers must be godly and con- 
sistent men, and able to commend the gospel hy their 
lives. - These natural traits of a holy man should be 
pondered and appropriated by us all; and we must all 
hold fast to the Word of God, which has been found 
trustworthy by countless myriads. Many are the se- 
ducing voices in the present day that counsel slacken- 
ing faith and relaxing grasp. 

“Tf all the wiles that men devise beset our faith with 


treacherous art, 
We'll call them vanity and lies, and bind the gospel to 


our heart.” 


2. Reprove Those Whose Works Deny God. 


Titus 1:10-16. The Judaizing teachers, who insisted 
that men must become Jews before they could be 
Christians, were always on Paul’s heels, visiting his 
churches and diverting his converts from the simplicity 
of the faith. Their motive in many cases was very 
largely self-aggrandizement. Such men were to be re- 


85 


86 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


sisted to the uttermost and sharply rebuked. Where 
the work of grace is really commenced in the heart, a 
sharp rebuke will often turn the soul back to God. 
The gardener must not hesitate to use a pruning-knife, 
if the well-being of the tree is at stake. 

Note the marvelous power we possess of viewing 
things in the light or gloom east upon them from our 
own temperament. We see life and the world in a glass 
colored from within. Oh, that we might possess that 
pure and untarnished nature that passes through the 
world like a beam of sunshine, irradiating all but con- 
taminated by none! The true test of the knowledge 
of God is a holy life. These act and react. The better 
you know God, the more you will resemble him; com- 
pare Psalms 111 and 112. The more you are like God, 
the better you will know him. 


3. A Pattern for Old and Young. 


Titus 2:1-8. The supreme test of all Christian teach- 
ing and Christian work depends on whether they pro- 
duce healthy characters, which are not contaminated 
by the noisome and germ-laden atmosphere around. 
Our teaching must be healthy and also health-creating. 
There must be plenty of ozone in it. 

The Apostle’s strophes are few but fine. In the 
briefest sentences he seizes the salient features of Chris- 
tian character. The aged man—strong, ealm, patient, 
full of faith and love. The aged woman—holy, rever- 
ent, beloved, honored, and obeyed by the younger 
women of the same household or church. So also with 
the young men and women. What a life is sketched 
here against which the tongue of slander is dumb! 

But, after all, these results cannot be realized apart 
from the personal holiness of their minister and leader. 
He must furnish a pattern of good works. His atti- 
tude to things which are questionable and doubtful 
must be decided not by his own predilections or fan- 
cies, but by the consideration of the effect which his 


THE EPISTLE TO TITUS 87 


action is likely to have on the keen eyes that are care- 
fully watching him. 


4. How We May “Adorn the Doctrine.” 


Titus 2:9-15. The servants addressed in this tender 
and priceless paragraph were household slaves, em- 
ployed in the most menial drudgery, but they were 
taught that even they might adorn the Gospel as jewels 
adorn the brow of beauty. Their holy lives might dis- 
play and set forth its loveliness. To please one’s 
superiors, in all things so far as our loyalty to Christ 
permits, is to commend Christ to our households, and 
win his approval. The grace of God has ever offered 
salvation, but in Jesus it was brought to our doors. In 
its first appearance, it came to teach; in its second 
appearance, it will bring us glory. Have we sat suffici- 
ently long in the school of grace, that our gentle 
Teacher may instruct us how to live? It must be 
soberly in regard to ourselves, righteously toward others, 
and godly toward God. And we eannot realize any 
one of these unless we resolutely deny ungodliness and 
worldly lusts. This was the aim and purpose of Jesus 
- in coming to die for us. He wanted to redeem us from 
all iniquity, purify us as his own, and use us in all 
manner of good works. It is a solemn question whether 
that supreme purpose has been realized in our own ex- 
perience. If not, why not? 


5. Making Return to God’s Loving-Kindness. 


Titus 3:1-7, Throughout this Epistle, the Apostle in- 
sists on good works. See 2:7, 14; 3:8, 14. The word 
good might be rendered beautiful. We must not work 
to be saved, but being saved we must. be ready to every 
good work, and eareful to maintain good works. In 
this last phrase the Apostle apparently refers to the 
trades and eallings by which his converts were to earn 
their daily bread. 

What singular beauty there is in this allusion to 


88 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


the appearance of the kindness and love of God our 
Saviour! These appeared in the person of Jesus, whose 
human nature alternately veiled and revealed them. 
The full outshining of God’s love was eurtained by 
the veil of his humanity, but enough was shown to 
irradiate the life of humanity, if only men’s eyes had- 
not been blind. Paul speaks of the laver of regener- 
ation, v. 5, R.V., margin, because the new nature, which 
we receive when we are born again, is clean, and 
cleanses the entire life from within outward. This is 
the result of the daily renewing of the Holy Spirit, 

whom God is ever pouring richly into our hearts. Is 
this your experience? Will you not claim an ever- 
inereasing inflow? You have been born again; then, 
as an heir, enter upon the double portion. of the first- 
born, v. 7. 


6. Maintaining Good Works. 


Titus 3:8-15. It is wise advice that we should try 
to shun controversy and disputations. Small benefit ac- 
erues from such methods of advancing the truth. After 
all, the Lord’s test is the true one for all teachings 
which are in question—What is their fruit? ‘‘By their © 
fruits ye shall know them.’’ Let us, therefore, culti- 
vate the grace and beauty, the righteousness and 
purity, of a holy life. Let us yield ourselves to Jesus 
to be wholly possessed and used by him; and let our 
one aim be to get glory for him and success for his 
Kingdom. Then our views of truth will become clear 
-and sound, and the beauty of our lives will have the 
most convincing effect. on gainsayers. It is better to 
live a holy life than be a successful disputant. The 
best proof of orthodoxy is a Christlike life. 

Paul, having been liberated from his first imprison- 
ment, was itinerating in Asia Minor and Macedonia, 
accompanied by several friends. He was intending to 
winter at Nicopolis in Epirus, and was about to send 
Artemas or Tychicus to relieve Titus in Crete, so that 


THE EPISTLE TO TITUS 89 


Titus might join him in the winter sojourn. These 


plans were probably canceled by his own sudden ar- 
rest at Nero’s instigation. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE EPISTLE TO 


~~ 
—— 


a 
b 


(ce) 
(d) 
(e) 


TITUS 


OUTLINE. 


What is the theme of this Epistle? 
In which chapter is the theme most prominent? 


INTRODUCTION. 


What facts regarding Titus come to light in the 
Pauline Epistles? 

Where was Titus when he received this Epistle? 
With what purpose was it written? 

What is Luther’s testimony to this Epistle? 


SECTIONS 1-6. CHAPTERS. 1-3. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 


See Con 


number in the Comments.) 


Why had Paul left Titus in Crete? 

What is the true test of the knowledge of God? 

How may Christians disarm their enemies? 

What were the Apostle’s instructions to servants? 

What. is the one basis of salvation? 

What is the one fruit of salvation? What are some 
of the personal references in the concluding para- 
graph? 


90 


Tee eh ee Re i 








OUTLINE OF THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON 


A PLEA FOR A RUNAWAY SLAVE 


Sn MU PATIOND ce ade eit arate oro ae nee 1-3, 
1. Paul’s Prayer for His Friend .......... 4-7. 
2. The Return of Onesimus ..........:-+.-. 8-14, 
3. The Significance of His Absence ........ 15, 16. 
4. Paul's Offer of Security ............... 17-20. 
CONCLUSION ...... Piste lets oiecs shabtccn emis vies 21-25. 


93 


THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON 


The Epistle of Paul to Philemon is unique in that it is 
addressed to a personal friend regarding a private matter. 
No doubt Paul wrote many such personal letters but this 
one alone has been preserved. 

Philemon seems to have been a wealthy citizen of Colosse. 
He was a personal convert of the Apostles and there 
were strong bonds of friendship between them. 

Paul writes on behalf of a thief and a runaway. Phile- 
mon had suffered serious loss through the irregular conduct 
of his servant Onesimus, and might well be hesitant about 
trusting him again. Paul sees that it is the duty of the 
slave to return and of his master to receive him. By per- 
sonal persuasion he had won over Onesimus to return, and 
by this letter he seeks to insure for him a welcome in 
his master’s house. Onesimus goes back, not merely as a 
penitent but as a Christian. Paul pleads that he be re- 
ceived as a_brother. 

The Epistle was written from Rome, the natural center 
of attraction for all fugitives, and is associated with the 
Epistles to the Ephesians and the Colossians. 


94 





‘¢Paut THE AGED.’’ Philemon 9. 


From Painting by REMBRANDT. Dutch Artist. 





pe Bie oe 
aS a ae ee 


THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON 


1, A Plea for the Returning Slave. 


Philemon 1:1-14. Onesimus had known the Apostle 
well in the old days when Paul visited at the house 
of his master Philemon, who seems to have been a 
man of importance. His house was large enough to 
admit of a church assembling in it, and to accommo- 
date the Apostle and his traveling companions when 
they came to the city. Apphia, his wife, was also a 
Christian, and Archippus, their son, was engaged in 
some kind of Christian work in connection with the 
infant Christian community which they were nursing. 
Compare vs. 1 and 2 with Col. 4:17. It is beautiful 
to observe the Apostle’s humility in associating these 
obscure people with himself as fellow-workers. 

Onesimus had been a runaway slave, and fleeing to 
Rome, had been converted by the ministry of Paul— 
whom I have begotten in my bonds. The converted slave 
had become very dear and useful to his benefactor, 
vs. 12, 13. The Apostle now sends him back to his 
former owner with this letter, pleading that he be 
once more received into the household of Philemon, 


2. To Be Received as a Brother. 


Philemon 1:15-25. The Apostle’s pleas for the res- 
toration of Onesimus to his old trusted position in the 
household of Philemon are very touching. He sug- 
gests, first, that there may have been a divine pur- 
pose in it all, and that the former’s flight had been 
permitted as a step in the entire renovation of the 
slave’s nature. And, therefore, because Philemon and 
Onesimus were two Christians, their relationship had 
been transformed. ‘‘In the flesh, Philemon has the 
brother for his slave; in the Lord, Philemon has the 
slave for his brother.’’ Then in v. 17 Paul identifies 


95 


96 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


himself with Onesimus; and we are taught to think 
of our Lord identifying himself with us, because, as 
Luther says, ‘‘we are all Onesimuses.’’ Further, in 
v. 18 Paul offers to assume all the losses which Ones-. 
imus had brought on Philemon, and signs the bond 
with his autograph, as our Lord paid the great ransom 
price for us all. Finally, Paul delicately reminds his 
friend, in v. 19, that Philemon owed him a great deal 
more than a trifle of money, namely, his spiritual life. 
Does not our Lord address us in similar terms? We 
surely owe ourselves to him! 


(Owing to the brevity of this Epistle Review ucstions 
are omitted.) 


IX 


Py 


97 


we Pe ane 








ie 


HT. 


iY 


OUTLINE OF THE EPISTLE TO THE 
HEBREWS 


THE NEW AND BETTER COVENANT 


CHRIST THE SURETY OF THE NEw CoveE- 


RUNNION Sn aac IRIS OY deat HAs Rae tes 1:1—5:10. 
1. He Is a Divine Redeemer ....... es: 
2.. He Is Superior to Angels ........ 1:5_-14, 
3. He Has Accomplished Redemption 

through Suffering ............. 2. 
4. HeTIs Greater than Moses ....... 3:1—4:13. 
5. He Is a Great High Priest ...... 4:14—5:10. 
(Comment on the Argument and Direct 

Appedh 0 REGCEVS 4. sii ses a,<< 5:11—6:12.) 
THE RELATION OF THE Two CoveE- 

DUAN LS De Srono ages erates, a0 ed onagane Sa chee 6:13—10:39. 
lL? The Promise to. Abraham. ....... 6:13-15. 
2.. Its Realization by Us ........... 6: 16-20. 
3. The Unchanging Priesthood...... (ES 
4. The Covenants Contrasted ....... 7:18—8:13. 
5. The Institutions of the Old Cove- 


nant Fulfilled in the Person and 

WiorlesOfsONCIst ae oc sernctahis vcerst 9:1—10:18. 
6. The Greater Privileges and Respon- 

sibilities of the New Covenant. ..10:19-39. 


FAITH, THE COMMON FACTOR OF THE 


TWO \COVHNMANDS 77 cht sacs 6 5% 11—12. 
1. The Achievements of Faith under 

the: OlgSCovendnt™ ss. cose = Tels 
2. The Summons to Faith under the 

IN G10 OGVCNGUE © p06 is-ss0b «Seo se 12: 
PRACTICAL ADMONITIONS ........... GSO Ie 
GON GHUS TOM ss ers catera orajonsBerev el -sln2eieyoye «0s 13 :22-25, 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 


This Epistle was evidently written as the ancient He- 
brew economy was passing away in the growing glory of 
the Christian Church. Perhaps Jerusalem had already 
fallen under the arms of Titus. It was addressed to He- 
brew Christians, who were settled in a definite locality. 
See 13:23. The writer is not certainly known. Luther 
thought that it was written by Apollos, and this view has 
had several learned advocates. But many ascribe it to the 
Apostle Paul, which was the opinion of the early Fathers. 
The object of this noble treatise is to counsel those to 
whom it was addressed to bear their persecutions with 
equanimity, and to forego, with contentment, the external 
attractions of the Temple service, because of the transcend- 
ent glories of Christianity surpassing those of the Mosaic 
ritual. The penalties of apostasy would therefore be the 
more terrible as the claims of Christianity were the more 
compelling. 


100 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 


1. God’s Final and Supreme Messenger. 


Hebrews 1:1-14. Christianity is greater than the 
Mosaic dispensation because it has been given through 
the Son, whereas the Law came through angels. See 
Acts 7:53. The message of the Gospel is connected 
speech; that of the Law was broken syllables. 

The Son’s intrinsic glory, vs. 1-4. Jesus is the chan- 
nel of creation, providence and redemption. He is the 
far-traveled ray of Deity; but not one among many 
equals, for of him alone could it be said that his nature 
was co-extensive with God’s, as a seal with the die. 
He is on the throne, not merely because of his original 
nature, but as the reward of his obedience unto death, 
Phil. 2:9. 

His superiority to angels, vs. 5-14, These quotations 
should be carefully studied as showing the deep in- 
ner meaning of the Psalms. Their fulfillment must - 
be sought in Christ, and in them we overhear the voice 
of God. We must ever thank God for the ministry 
of angels. Note that their service to us is a liturgy 
of adoration to God;—such is the force of the Greek 
words. 


2. The Author of Our Salvation. 


Hebrews 2:1-9. Drifting away, vs. 1-4. The R.V. gives 
this solemn rendering. Unless we watch, the strong 
currents of the world will drift us away from God’s 
great harbor of Salvation; and sins against his offered 
love are even more to be dreaded than those under the 
ancient Law. To neglect is the equivalent of to reject. 
Notice in v. 4 how God co-operates with his messen- 
gers. See John 15:27; Acts 5: 32, 

Jesus crowned, vs. 5-9. How can Jesus be greater 
than angels? He did for man what they could not do. 
Tt is through his death that humanity may be lifted to 
a supreme position in the universe of being. Man 


101 


102 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


failed to realize his original magna charta in Gen. 1: 26; 
but the divine purpose could not be frustrated, and 
there was a needs-be for the manger, the Cross and 
the Ascension mount. As we look around, Psalm 8 
seems a mockery; as we look up, we discover in Jesus 
the psalmist’s dream more than realized. They who 
are one with him will share his glory and honor. 


3. “Made Like unto His Brethren.” 


Hebrews 2:10-18. Captain reminds us of Acts 3:15. 
Tt means file-leader. The Church follows its Leader, 
Jesus Christ, in single file through this world, the cross 
and the grave, to the glory. But notice that God him- 
self is engaged in bringing us through, and he cannot 
lose one. See John 10:29. But he is not only our 
Captain, he is our Brother. We also are born of God. 
He is sanctifying us and we are being sanctified for a 
marvelous future, John 17:19. How great is his love, 
that he is not ashamed of us! 

Our Elder Brother has encountered our foes, and 
won deliverance for all who believe. Death remains, 
but its teeth are drawn and its power is annulled. We 
need not fear what men eall death; to us it is only 
as falling asleep. He has taken hold of us with a 
grasp that will never let us go again, v. 16. He has 
been tempted that he might be able to succor us in our 
temptations. He has suffered that he might tread our 
darkened paths at our side. He has made reconcilia- 
tion for our sins, and as our merciful and faithful 
High Priest, pleads the cause of our souls, 


4. Superior to Moses. 


Hebrews 3:1-11. Dwell on those opening words :— 
holy, such is God’s ideal for us; brethren, by reason 
of our union with Christ, and with one another in him; 
partakers, ete., God is ever calling upward and heaven- 
ward. Jesus comes from God as Apostle and goes for 
us to God as Priest. In his human life, how humble 
and faithful; but he originally built the Jewish polity 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 103 


and commonwealth! He was and is as much greater 
than Moses as the architect than the foreman and the 
son than the servant. 

It is not enough to begin the Christian race; we 
must hold fast our confidence and hope to the end. 
That was the point specially to be emphasized among 
these harried people. These Hebrew Christians missed 
the splendid ceremonial of their ancient faith, and 
were suffering heavily from persecution and opposi- 
tion. But was it not worth while to persevere, if only 
to be recognized as belonging to the household of God? 
Surely for them and for us the experiences of Israel 
in the forty years of wandering are full of warning. 
Be admonished by that Wilderness cemetery! 


5. “Harden Not Your Hearts.” 


Hebrews 3:12-19, There is a peril lest familiarity 
with God’s words should beget indifference to them. 
The path may be trodden hard by the sower’s feet. 
That story of the Wilderness wanderings is for all 
time. Still men disbelieve and disobey; still they doubt 
that God is able; still they err in their hearts and 
therefore fail to understand with their heads; still 
they wander to and fro, with weary souls and restless 
feet. But if they who failed to believe in words given 
by Moses were wrapped around by the winding sheets 
of sand, what will not be the fate of those who refuse 
the words of Christ! 

How wonderful it is that by just trusting we may be 
partners with: our Lord of his rest, life, glory and 
resources, v. 14! But we must listen to the inner 
voice, soft and low speaking in the Horeb of our hearts, 
1 Kings 19:12. Obey it, and you will enter into the 
rest of God; refuse it, and you will be as certainly ex- 
eluded from the divine rest as they from Canaan, 


6. The Rest That Joshua Could Not Give. 


Hebrews 4:1-10. The good news of Canaan’s rest 
was preached to Israel but availed nothing, because the 


104 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


hearers were destitute of faith. They said, Can God? 
instead of, God can! They thought of their enemies as 
giants and themselves as grasshoppers, because they 
left God out of account. Take God into account and 
we are giants and our enemies grasshoppers. 

To all of us Christ offers rest, not in the other life 
only, but in this. See vs. 3 and 11. Rest from the 
weight of sin, from care and worry, from the load of 
daily anxiety and foreboding. The rest that arrives 
from handing all worries over to Christ, and receiving 
from Christ all we need. Have we entered into that 
experience? In vs. 6 and 11, where A.V. reads, ‘‘unbe- 
lief,’’ R.V.; reads, ‘‘disobedience.’’ If we disobey, we 
eannot believe; but when we believe we are sure to 
obey. In v. 10 we are directed to our risen Lord, who 
has finished the work of Redemption and rests, as God 
did when-he pronounced Creation to be ‘‘very good.’’ 
When we understand what he meant by. ‘‘It is finigh- 
ed,’’ we, too, shall rest. 


7. Entered by Faith and Prayer. 


Hebrews 4:11-16. There is no eseape for disobedi- 
ence and unbelief, because we have to do with the 
omniscience of God. The conception of vs. 12 and 13 
is of a victim appointed for sacrifice and thrown upon 
its back, that the keen edge of the knife may do its 
work more readily/ The divine serutiny is still sharper. 
There is so much of the soul in what we do, that is, of 
our opinions and activities. God distinguishes between 
these and those promptings of his Spirit which are 
really important and influential. Only what is born 
of the Spirit will stand the test of eternity! 

Shall we not fail in that serutiny? Will he not de 
tect in us that evil heart of unbelief? We need not 
fear; because our High Priest has passed the veil that 
hides the invisible and eternal and has entered the 
divine presence. ‘‘Merey-and grace to help in time 
‘of need!’’ These will meet our supreme needs—mercy 
for our sins, grace for our helplessness and frailty. 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 105 


8. Our Divinely Appointed High Priest. 


Hebrews 5:1-10. Having to act for men, our High 
Priest must be man, acquainted with human conditions; 
having to do with God, he must be appointed by God. 
Is there one of us that is not conscious of liability to 
ignorance and wandering? We all evermore need the 
high priesthood of Jesus. 

The Aaronie priests must needs make atonement for 
themselves, but our Lord was without sin. See Lev. 
4:3. Verse 5 has reference to his resurrection and as- 
cension. See Rom. 1:4; Acts 13:33. His priestly ser- 
vice dates from the completion of his mediatorial work 
on the Cross. No scene in our Lord’s life fulfills v. 
7 like that of the Garden, when it seemed impossible 
for the human body to hold out under the stress of 
his anguish. He feared that he would suecumb before 
he reached Calvary. He had to yield obedience unto 
death in order to learn what obedience really means. 
Thus as to his humanity he became perfected; and if 
only we believe and obey, he will effect a perfect de- 
liverance for us from all evil. There is no sin so 
strong, no need so intricate, that he cannot cope with it. 


9. “Press on unto Full Growth.” 


Hebrews 5:11—6:8. The teacher has to suit his 
pace to his scholars. How much we miss because we 
are such inapt pupils! Milk is food which has passed 
through another’s digestion. Many cannot get their 
spiritual nutrition direct from God’s Word, but have 
to live on what others have obtained and have passed 
on in speech or book. Seek a first-hand acquaintance 
with the things of God. We grow by feeding and exer- 
cise. 

We must leave the first principles, as a builder leaves 
the foundation; he is never so much on it as when 
farthest above it. The third and fourth principles, v. 
2, are the Jewish equivalents of the first and second, 
v. 1. Notice the R.V. marginal reading for seeing in 
v. 6—‘‘the while.’’ So long as men continue to tread 


106 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


the love of God under foot, they cannot repent and be 
restored. The failure, as with unproductive soil, is not 
on account of a failure of heaven, but because the 
soil is hard and obdurate. If we are unproductive, 
it is due to our own hard-heartedness, 


10. “The Hope Set before Us.” 


Hebrews 6:9-20. The keynote of this passage is 
patient continuance. We should seek not only faith 
but its accompaniments. It is not enough to manifest 
faith, hope and love, but to continue to do so unto 
the end. . Notice that the two conditions on which the 
promises are inherited are faith and patience. 

These truths are enforced by the example of Abra- 
ham. He believed God and patiently endured. Your 
prayers cannot be lost, as ships at sea; they will make 
harbor at last, laden with golden freight. God’s 
promise and oath are a double door, behind which they 
who have fled for refuge are safe—a double window 
beyond which all noise dies down. The allusion is 
either to the cities of refuge, or to a ship safely riding 
out the storm. Hope is sure, because the anchor has 
fastened in a sure ground; steadfast, because its cable 
will not snap in the strain; and entering, ete., because 
it unites us to the unseen. Jesus has taken our anchor 
into the inner harbor, and has dropped it down into 
the clear, still water there. 


11. A Priesthood Superior to Aaron’s. 


Hebrews 7:1-10. Melchizedek was probably a literal 
king and priest in Salem. The blue smoke of his sacri- 
fices rose morning and evening on the hill. Amid the 
turbulent lawlessness of those wild days, his realm was 
peace. Like him, Jesus meets us when flushed with 
suecess or wearied with some great effort, and there- 
fore peculiarly liable to temptation. Notice the order! 
It is invariable! First righteousness, then peace, 
Zech. 9:9. , 

The silences of Seripture are significant. In the 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 107 


ease of this ancient priesthood no mention is made 
of parenthood. This was a matter of comparative in- 
difference. So with our Lord. It is true that he did 
not come of the priestly family of Aaron, but this is 
quite unimportant. The one thing for us to notice is 
that Abraham paid tithes to Melchizedek, thus con- 
fessing him to be the greater. Levi was, so to speak, 
included in his orandfather’ s act, so that the Hebrew 
priesthood, which sprang from Levi, was confessedly 
inferior to Melchizedek’s. If, then, Melchizedek is a 
type of Christ, we are taught that Christ’s priesthood 
is evidently and eternally superior to all other priest- 
hoods whatsoever. 


12. Our Ever-Living and All-Sufficient Intercessor. 


Hebrews 7 :11-28. If, as we saw in our last reading, 
the Levitical priests have been superseded, clearly the 
whole order of things—that is, the Mosaic covenant 
under. which these priests were appointed—has been 
superseded also. The law of the carnal—that is, the 
outward ritual—has passed away in favor of a new 
dispensation which deals with the heart and character. 
It served a temporary purpose, but we are living in an 
eternal order which is steadfast and abiding. 

Our Lord’s priesthood is unchangeable and indis- 
soluble. His blood and righteousness, his mediation 
for us, his loving understanding of us, will be a joy 
and comfort in the unending ages. We shall always 
be specially associated with Him—the brethren of the 
King, the sheep of the Divine Shepherd. Each priest 
of Aaron’s line had to vacate his office; but our Lord’s 
priesthood will never pass to another; and therefore 
to the uttermost lapse of time and to the farthest de- 
mand of circumstance, he will save and help all that 
come to him. No infirmity weakens him, no stain or 
sin unfits him—above the heavens and from the throne 
he exercises his ministry. 


108 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


13. The Mediator of the New Covenant. 


Hebrews 8:1-13. Such a High Priest, vs. 1-6. He 
sits because his work is finished so far as his sacrifice 
is concerned. His place is at God’s right hand—the 
seat of power. By faith we, too, may serve in the 
inner sanctuary of the spirit. Before you start build- 
ing, and while engaged in building, your life-work, see 
that your eyes are fixed on the divine ideal and pat- 
tern. 

Such a new covenant, vs. 7-13. It is as superior to 
the former as Christ’s priesthood is to Aaron’s. A 
covenant is a promise, made on conditions to be ful- 
filled, and attested by an outward sign, like the rain- 
bow, or circumcision, or the Lord’s Supper. The cove- 
nant under which we live is between God and Christ 
on behalf of those who belong to him. We have a 
perfect right to put our hand on every one of these 
eight provisions, and claim that each be made good 
to us. We need not ask that God should do as he has 
said, but with lowly reverence expect that he will— 
especially when we drink of the cup of the New Cove- 
nant at the Lord’s table. 


14. The Imperfect Way of Approach to God. 


Hebrews 9:1-10. With careful enumeration each 
item of the Tabernacle furniture is specified, because 
of each there is a spiritual equivalent in the unseen, 
spiritual Temple to which we belong. The veil that 
sereened the Most Holy Place and forbade entrance, 
save once a year, taught that fellowship with God was 
not fully open. Ignorance, unbelief, unpreparedness of 
heart still weave a heavy veil which screens God from 
the soul’s gaze. 

The altar of incense is here associated with the inner 
shrine, because it stood so near the veil. Its analogue 
is Rev. 8:4. The Ark was an emblem of Christ: the 
wood, of his humanity; the gold, of his deity. He holds 
the manna of the world, and is the ever-budding plant 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 109 


of renown, beautiful and fruit-bearing through death. 
There is one gateway in St. Peter’s, Rome, through 
which the Pope passes only once a year; how glad we 
may be that our gates for prayer stand open day and 
night! Contrast the sadness of such passages as Ps. 
51: 3, 4 and Mic. 6:6 with the joy of Eph. 1: 3-10. 


15. The Blood Which Sealed the New Covenant. 


Hebrews 9:11-20. We are led to consider Christ’s 
high-priestly work. The scene for it is no edifice made 
with hands in this transitory world, but eternal and 
divine. His stay in the Holiest is not brief, hurried, 
and repeated year by year, but once for all he enters 
by virtue of his own blood. That blood cleanses not 
only from ceremonial guilt, but from moral and spirit- 
ual pollution, A will or testament comes into force 
when the testator dies; so the will of the eternal 
Father toward us has been made valid through the 
blood of Jesus. 

Consider, then, the Eternal or Timeless Spirit. What 
Jesus did on the Cross was the doing of God through 
his Spirit. The Atonement was not wrought by the 
dying Sufferer to appease God, but to express God as 
reconciling the world to himself. The Timeless Cross. 
It belongs to no one age, but ‘‘towers o’er the wrecks 
_of time,’’ and is as near us as to the early Church. 

The Timeless Christ. Cast yourself out of yourself and 
into him; out of the fret of the time-sphere into the 
freedom and ecstasy of the eternal! 


16. The One Sacrifice That Puts Away Sin. 


Hebrews 9:21-28. ere are the three appearances 
of Christ: (1) He appeared once, at the ridge or meet- 
ing-place of the ages—where the first Covenant and 
the second met—to put away the sin of the race; and 
he has done this for each of us. We are called on to 
believe this and to enter upon our inheritance without 
questioning or trying to feel it. Men are told clearly 
that God will not impute their transgressions unto 


110 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


them, unless they place themselves out of the at-one- 
ment by the deliberate repudiation of Christ. The one 
question for us all is not sin, but our attitude toward 
Christ, the Sin-Bearer. See 2 Cor. 5:19. 

(2.) He appears in heaven for us, as our Intercessor 
and Mediator, presenting our prayers mingled with the 
rich incense of his merit, and acting as the ground of 
our beseechings, Rev. 8:3. (3) He will appear the 
second time. There will be no sin-bearing then. His 
appearance will be ‘‘apart from sin.’’ But then sal- 
vation will be perfected, because creation itself will 
share in the liberty and glory of the sons of God, Rom. 
8: 21. 


17. “Lo, I Come To Do Thy Will.” 


Hebrews 10:1-10. When a heavenly body is in 
eclipse it can be examined with even greater precision 
than when the astronomer’s eye is directed toward its 
burning glory; so in Leviticus we ean discover details 
of our Lord’s atonement otherwise overlooked. This 
is notably the case in Lev. 1—4. 

The keywords of this chapter are year by year and 
‘day by day as contrasted with continually and forever, 
Repetition means imperfection. The ancient offerers 
of sacrifice could never be sure that they were finally 
accepted. Hach year they had to go over the old 
ground. How different from us, who have heard Jesus 
say, ‘‘It is finished’’! 

The spirit of inspiration offers to us the secret of 
our Saviour’s work in his voluntary identification with 
the divine purposes. It was not so much his outward | 
anguish and blood-shedding that made reconciliation 
possible, as his ery, ‘‘Not my will, my Father, but 
thine.’’ His attitude reminds us of the ancient custom 
of boring fast to the door the ear of the servant, who 
desired never again to leave his master’s service, 
**Mine ears hast thou bored.’’ See Ps. 40: 6, margin, 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 111 


18. The New and Living Way Open to Us. 


Hebrews 10:11-25. Note the contrast between the 
standing of the priests and the sitting of the Priest. 
The one indicated incompleteness, the other a finished 
work. All that needed to be done for our final and en- 
tire deliverance from sin was accomplished when Jesus 
returned to the Father. It is for us to pass in large 
demands and claims. The bank is full, but we must 
draw on it. 

It is a great help, in the study of the Old Testa- 
ment, to notice how explicitly the writer here attributes 
to the Holy Spirit the words spoken by one of the old 
prophets. What a comfort it is to know that God 
forgets our sins when we have confessed and forsaken 
them! 

The way of prayer and faith was new, for our Lord 
had just opened it; living, because only those alive in 
Christ can tread it. The rending of the Temple veil 
was emblematic of the open vision of God, given 
through Calvary. But we must be true, believing, 
reliant on his death and pure through his cleansing, 
John 13: 5-8. 

19. Beware of Backsliding. 


Hebrews 10:26-39. The wilful sin here referred to 
does not consist in isolated acts, but in a determined 
course of action, persisted in until the very desire for 
a better life wanes and dies out of the soul. 

These strong remonstrances were needed in those 
days of sore persecution. Three considerations are 
- adduced, urging steadfastness: (1.) The certain pun- 
ishment which must follow on the rejection of the 
greatest gifts that God can make, so much richer than 
anything presented under the Mosaic covenant. (2.) 
The sufferings already endured, the reward for which 
would be forfeited, if these harried souls were now to 
draw back. (3.) The near advent of the Christ, who 
would not fail to compensate his faithful servants. . 
Then we are reminded that the just—those who have 


112 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


been accepted in the Beloved—live; that is, may derive 
all the reinforcements of soul strength and patience 
that they require, from the unseen and eternal world 
where Jesus waits to succor and uphold. 


20. Faith’s Triumphs from Abel to Abraham. 


Hebrews 11:1-10. Faith is the sixth sense. It 
makes us as sure of unseen or future things, which 
we know about only through the divine Word, as we 
are of things which we can see and touch. When we 
are aware of the reality of these things, we naturally 
take them into account when we act. Rothschild laid 
the foundation of his fortune because he had news that 
the battle of Waterloo had been won, a day before any- 
one else in Britain. That fact enabled him to buy up 
all the depressed money-shares, which rose with mar- 
velous buoyancy as soon as the news was universally 
disseminated. Faith does this for us! 

Noah built the ark because he believed that the flood 
would befall. Abraham left his country because he 
realized that Canaan would. be his. The pilgrims and 
martyrs of all the ages have been derided by their com- 
panions, who would have acted similarly if only 
they had looked with faith into the unseen. And 
God never fails such. He always bears witness with 
his gifts. 

21. Seeking the Better Country. 


Hebrews 11:11-22. Faith has the twofold power, 
first, of making the unseen real; and second, of receiv- 
ing the grace and strength of God into the heart. . 
Sarah, through faith, received strength to bear Isaac. 
By faith may come physical as well as_ spiritual 
strength. 

The pilgrim life is possible only for those who have 
‘seen the city of God beckoning them from afar. Then 
they strike their tents and follow the gleam. By faith 
they so comport themselves that God is not ashamed 
to own them. They will discover, even in this life, that 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 113 


they have not trusted him in vain, and that the half 
has not been told. On the mere rumor that a new 
gold field is found, men sell off everything in their 
mad rush. How many are disappointed! But none of 
those that trust God shall be left desolate. 

Abraham was absolutely sure that Isaae would re- 
turn with him, even though the lad might die beneath 
the knife. When leaving the young men at Moriah’s 
foot, he said: “We will worship and come again.’’ Had 
Be ae voice definitely designated Isaac as his 

eir ? 

. 22. Making the Far-Seeing Choice. 

Hebrews 11:23-31. Faith—we cannot say it too often 
—is the direct vision of the soul. It doesn’t reason, 
it doesn’t ask for evidences, it doesn’t seek the cor- 
roboration of spies sent forward to explore the land. 
It is to the spiritual world what the five senses are to 
things around us. It is even more than this; it is our 
power of deriving the help of the Unseen to carry out 
and complete the work of our life. 

Moses saw him who is invisible, and drew on God 
with a mighty faith that reckoned on him as being 
more real than Pharaoh, and secured his divine co- 
operation. First, he ascertained God’s will at the place 
where the bush burned with fire; and then set about 
doing his part, depending upon God to do his. Of 
course, it brought him into collision with the whole 
might of Pharaoh and Egypt, but he didn’t even fear 
it. The destroying Angel had no terrors for the blood- 
sheltered people. The waters lined up on each side 
to let them pass. Strongly built walls fell to the 
ground. Let us be sure that we are on the line of God’s 
purposes, then trust him and fear naught. 


23. “The Noble Army of Martyrs.” 


Hebrews 11:32-40. Strong faith is consistent with 
very different views of religious truth. The conception 
that Abel, Enoch or Noah had of so-called Christian 
truth ‘was very slight; but the faith with which they 


114 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


grasped the scanty truth revealed to them was mighty, 
soul-transforming and world-moving. 

Walk through “this long corridor of statuary. These 
persons were of every age and temperament; shep- 
herds, statesmen, prime ministers, psalmists, poets, 
border chieftains, prophets, women martyrs—but they 
are all trophies of faith. The variety is extraordi- 
nary, but the unity is undeniable. The beads are many, 
but there is one golden thread uniting them all. Their 
circumstances and trials were widely different, but in 
all the talisman of victory was faith’s watchword— 
God is able, There is no kind of need, trial, persecu- 
tion, experience, for which faith is not the sufficient 
answer. It is the master key for every lock of diffi- 
culty. Fit your case into one of the clauses and what 
once was, shall be again. 


24. Persistently Press Forward. 


Hebrews 12:1-8. In one of Raphael’s pictures the 
clouds, when looked at minutely, are seen to be com- 
posed of little cherub-faces; and those who have al- 
ready witnessed and suffered for God gather around 
us as a great cloud, like the crowded amphitheaters in 
the old Olympian games. We are still in the arena; 
probably every blow and sigh are beheld and heard 
by the general assembly and church of the firstborn. 
What an incentive to lay aside all ‘‘cumbrances’’; that 
is, whatever in your life may be a hindrance, though 
hardly a sin! But above all, we must put away the 
sin of unbelief, which we can best do by looking unto 
Jesus. 

The word our should certainly be eliminated in v. 2. 
Jesus began and finished his life-career by the same 
faith—‘‘the faith of the Son of God’’—which each 
of his children has to exercise. The light beyond the 
Cross beckoned to him and so enamored him that he 
counted no cost too dear, if only he might realize the 
possibilities that gleamed before his vision, of an a elect 
church and a transformed world. 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 115 


25. Endure Chastening; Seek Holiness. 


Hebrews 12:9-17. If we are God’s children, we will 
not look on suffering as a punishment. Chastening it 
may be, but not the penalty of sin. It is administered 
by our Father. Don’t look at the intermediary links in 
the chain, but remember that Satan could not go be- 
yond the Father’s limit in the case of Balaam or Job. 
See Num. 22:31; Job 2:6. It is only for the present; 
it will soon be over; it is intended to free us of dross 
and is therefore to profit; it will yield peace, and 
righteousness, and true holiness. Look on and up— 
the harvest will repay. 

We are bidden, vs. 14-17, to watch each other’s in- 
terests and to stay the first speck of corruption in the 
fruit, lest it spread. The corrupt soul infects all in its 
neighborhood. There are irrevocable acts in life. We 
cannot undo them, but we may be forgiven. Esau re- 
ceived all that this world could give and became a 
prince, but he never got back his spiritual leadership. 


26. Hearken to God’s Latest Word. 


Hebrews 12:18-29. Sinai rocked with earthquake and 
burned with fire. None might touch it without incur- 
ring the death penalty. How much better our Chris- 
tian heritage! Not a lonely mountain, but a city and 
commonwealth of holy souls. Not bands of worship- 
ers gathered from the land of Canaan, but hosts of 
angels, the spirits of just men, and our blessed Lord 
himself. For the blood of animals, the blood of Jesus; 
for the Old Covenant, the New; for Abel’s death beside 
his altar, the Saviour’s death on the cross. 

Notice the writer does not say that we shall, but that 
we are come, v. 22. Already, in our holiest moments, 
we are part of that great throng to which so many of 
our beloved have gone. Around us the most stable 
structures are being tested and some are crumbling to 
‘the ground. As they fall they show that their service 


116 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


was transient. But as the seaffolding is taken down, 
the true building—the City of God—emerges. 


27. Sanctify Daily Life. 


Hebrews 18: 1-13. We may not like all the brethren, 
but there is something in each of them that Christ loves. 
Let us try to discover it, or love them for his sake. We 
can love people with our mind and think for them, or 
with our strength and serve them, even though the 
heart is somewhat reluctant. 

Strangers and captives must never be forgotten, 
either in our prayers or our ministry. The love within 
the marriage tie must be unsullied, and we must 
watch against the insidious lust of gold. Why should 
we always be thinking of money, when God has prom- 
ised, with two negatives, never to fail us, v.5? Thrice 
we are asked to remember those who bear office and 
rule in the church, vs. 7, 17, 24. 

We are called to a holy crusade. It is not for us 
to linger in circumstances of ease and self-indulgence 
-when our Master suffered without the gate! Let us 
go forth unto him, bearing his reproach! Has not 
the Church tarried in the city long enough, enervated 
by its fashions and flatteries? 


28. Praise, Prayer, and Peace. 


Hebrews 13:14-25. Notice that though the ancient 
sacrifices have been abolished, there is one which can 
never grow old—the sacrifice of praise. This in- 
cense must ever ascend from the heart-altar. And 
to this we must add the sacrifices of doing good and 
distributing oul goods. 

Perfection in the closing paragraph, v. 21, means 
adjustment, the setting of a dislocated bone. We may 
be in the body of which Jesus is the Head, and yet 
be out of touch with him. We need setting; and this 
is work which God will delegate to no angel, however 
exalted. He will do it himself as tenderly and gently 
as possible, because he is the God of peace. Do you 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS LG 


-doubt it? Did he not bring the Shepherd to glory, 
and is he not able to bring the sheep also? Never rest 
until you are in living organic union with Jesus, that 
he may be able to work his will through you to your 
own great joy and for the hastening of the Kingdom. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE EPISTLE TO 


(a) 


(b) 


(c) 
(d) 
(e) 


THE HEBREWS 


OUTLINE. 
What is the theme of this Epistle? 
What are the two parts of the third division? 
INTRODUCTION. 


When was this Epistle written? 
To whom was it addressed? 
What was the writer’s purpose? 


SECTIONS 1-28. CHAPTERS 1-13. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 


bo 


SP NS 


lil 
12. 
13. 


15, 


number m the Comments.) 


Who is God’s final and supreme messenger? 

For whom is Christ’s saving work intended? 

How is Christ able to help those who are tempted? 

Why is Christ counted worthy of more glory than 
Moses? 

Why were the children of Israel denied entrance to 
the Land of Promise? What is the application 
to us? 

What is the rest which Christ affords? 

What encouragement have we to come to the throne 
of grace? 

Of what order is Christ’s priesthood? How did He 
learn obedience? 

What are the stages of growth in Christian disciple- 
ship? What is the penalty of falling away? 

By what two immutable things have we strong conso- 
lation? 

Who was Melchizedek? How is he a type of Christ? 

How is Christ able to save to the uttermost? 

How did the New Covenant take the place of the Old? 

What was the furniture of the Tabernacle? 

How is the sacrifice of Christ related to the sacrifices 
under the Old Covenant? 


118 


THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS 119 


What is the present work of Christ? 

How is the Christian sanctified? 

To what does the blood of Christ secure an entrance 
for us? 

What will be the reward of patience and steadfast- 
ness? 

What is faith? How was it exemplified by Abel? by 
Enoch? by Noah? . 

What was the supreme trial of Abraham’s faith? 

How was the faith of Moses exhibited? 

In what does the victory of faith consist? 

How may the Christian life be compared to a race? 

What are the benefits of chastisement? 

What are the present privileges of the Christian? 

What is our duty toward strangers and captives? 

Give the benediction in the closing section of the 

Epistle. 





i Y 


\ 


Y 
jaa) 
= 
< 
| 6h 
ie) 
4 
asa 
a. 
Q 
x 
all 








OUTLINE OF THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


THE MEASURE OF A CHRISTIAN 


CATAMEARTROMAM RSE. 1. Seo Soca oo. Dal. 

1. Tested Character ..................... 1;2_18, 
2. Hearing and De de Rate Me oe oie 
3. The Hypocrisy of Class Distinctions ...2:1-13. 
4. The Evidence of True Faith ............ 2:14-26. 
5. The Unruly Tongue ................... 3. 

6. The Grace of VERTU? Gest GS Bae, olen 4, 

7. The Curse of Ill-Gotten Wealth......... 521-6; 
8. The Need of Patience and Prayer ......637-20. 


123 


THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


The author of this Epistle was probably the Lord’s 
brother, mentioned with Joses, Simon and Judah, and often 
in the Acts of the Apostles. See Mark 6:3; Acts 12:17; 
15:18; 21:18. He was bishop, or president, of the church 
at Jerusalem, and this letter was probably written from 
that city. The emphasis laid on the nearness of our Lord’s 
advent points to a date near A.D. 70. The Epistle may 
have been written in Hebrew, and was addressed to the 
Hebrew section of the Church. It lays great emphasis on 
the sublime ideal of character which Christianity had 
raised, and to maintain which demanded the constant dili- 
gence of all professing Christians. 


124 


THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 


1. Steadfast Faith. 


James 1:1-11. This Epistle is marked by the austere 
features of the Jerusalem church, which refused to be 
affected by that wider contact with the Gentile worid, 
by which the life and teachings of St. Paul were so 
powerfully influenced. ‘‘Brother to Jesus’’ was the 
designation that James might have used, but he pre- 
ferred the more modest title of bond-servant.. The 
slaves of such a king are nobles! The times were full 
of severe testing. Hach believer had to face ignominy, 
loss and death for his testimony to Jesus and his sav- 
ing power. But James encourages these harried souls 
by the immense revenues that would accrue, more es- 
pecially in the acquisition of patience. While patience 
is drawn out almost to the breaking-point, God is 
developing our characters with perfect beauty, so that 
no side -is incomplete. 

There are three urgent requirements for us all: (1) 
Wisdom to act and speak wisely in the hour of trial; 
(2) faith that refuses to respond to the surging bil- 
lows of doubt; (3) humility and contentment with 
God’s dealings. 


2. God Rewards, Not Tempts. 


James 1:12-18. The word temptation may stand for 
trial and testing, without implying that there is any 
necessary impulse toward evil; or it may stand for the 
direct impulse of the evil one. Here, however, it is 
used in this latter sense. But of whatever kind the 
temptation is, whether upward or downward, whether 
of pain and sorrow at the permission of God, or of 
direct solicitation to evil at the suggestion of Satan, 
those who: refuse to swerve from their high quest of 
nobility attain to higher levels of life. In the words 


125 


126 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


of this paragraph, they receive the crown of life 
‘‘here’’ and hereafter. 

Notice the genealogy of sin, v. 15. Lust is the par- 
ent of sin, and sin when matured is the parent of 
death. How different to the blackness of this dark 
picture is the light and glory of our Father’s home 
and realm! All the good things of our lives are from 
his good hand. He is not fickle and changeable. Even 
our sin cannot make him turn away. His sun still 
shines on the evil and the good, and his rain descends 
on the just and the unjust. See Matt. 5:45. We are 
his children; let us be sweet to the taste as the grapes 
of Eschol! 


3. Doers, Not Hearers Only. 


James 1:19-27. Keep your mouth closed when you 
are angry; the inner fire will die out of itself, if you 
keep the doors and windows shut. In v. 18 we are 
taught that God’s truth is the agent of regeneration; 
in v. 21 it is the means of deepening our consecration. 
It is a blessed thing, when not only the words, but the 
Word of God is engrafted on the wild stock of our 
nature. 

The one and only way of making holy impressions 
permanent is by translating them into Christian liv- 
ing. It is not enough to see ourselves reflected in the 
mirror of God’s Word; we must so continue, not as 
hearers who forget, but as doers that perform. Many 
appear to think that blessedness results from hearing, 
and are always on foot to attend new conventions. 
No; the true blessedness accrues from doing. The 
heart of our Christian faith is purity, the stainless 
garb of the soul, and thoughtful ministration to the 
widow and orphan—but these are possible only through 
the indwelling of Christ by the Holy Spirit. 


4. Avoid Servility to the Rich. 


James 2:1-13. This sin of making distinctions in 
God’s house is as rife today as ever; and wherever it 


THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 127 


is practiced the divine Spirit departs. God’s love ig 
impartial, so far as outward appearances might af- 
fect it; and in his Church the only real differences 
must be those of humility, purity and righteousness. 

‘‘Blessed are the poor in spirit,’’ whether they be 
rich in this world’s goods or not. But it is easier for 
a poor man to be rich in faith and an heir of the King- 
dom, because he can give more of his attention to 
the things of the Spirit. 

The law of love must be supreme with us; and we 
must love our fellows, whatever their position or prop- 
erty, as ourselves, for Christ’s sake. If we fail in 
this, we show that we have never entered into the 
heart of the Christian faith. A man may observe all 
the laws of health; but if he inhale one whiff of 
poison he may die; so we may be outwardly obedient 
to the entire Decalogue, but delinquency in love will 
invalidate everything. 


5. Deeds the Evidence of Faith. 


James 2:14-26. The Apostle is speaking here of a 
faith that does not result in a changed life. It is the 
faith which believes about Jesus Christ, as distin- 
guished from that which believes in him. We may 
believe about him as we do about Luther or Washing- 
ton, but such faith will not avail, either here or here- 
after. It can no more affect our condition than the 
pious wish that a shivering beggar may be warmed 
and fed will make him either one or the other. 

The presence or absence of results in life and con- 
duct is the real test of faith, as the green shoot of a 
living seed. James calls these results works, We are 
justified by works, because they prove our faith to 
be the real faith. Real faith binds the soul to the 
living Christ, produces deep penitence and humility, 
and brings about an absolutely new sort of behavior— 
as when Abraham was willing to offer Isaac, and Ra- 
hab received and assisted the spies. To reckon on 
God is to be a friend of God. 


128 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


6. -Bridle the Tongue. 


James 3:1-19. If is much easier to teach people what 
they should be and do than to obey our own precepts. 
Even the best of us stumble in many respects; but our 
most frequent failures are in speech. If we could con- 
trol our tongues, we should be masters of the whole 
inner economy of our natures. The refusal to express 
a thought will kill the thought. Let Christ bridle your 
mouth, and he ‘will be able to turn about your whole 
body. Let him have his hand on the tiller of your 
tongue, and he will guide your life as he desires. 

A single spark may burn down a city. The upset- 
ting of an oil lamp in a stable led to the burning of 
Chicago. Lighted at the flames of hell, the tongue 
can pass their vitriol on to earth. Man cannot tame 
the tongue, but Christ can. He goes straight for the 
heart, for, as he said long ago, the seat of the mischief 
is there. See Mark 7:14, 15; Ps. 51:10. 


7, Seek Wisdom from Above. 


James 3:13-18. The true wisdom is not the child of 
the intellect, but of the heart. It consists not only in 
what we know, but in what we are. It is in this sense 
that it is used in the earlier chapters of the book of 
Proverbs and in Job 28. Some who profess to be wise 
are jealous and factious, despising others and confident 
in their superiority. This spirit and temper are from 
beneath. 

Notice this exquisite string of qualities—lhke a 
thread of pearls—that characterize true wisdom: First, 
pure; then peaceable—this is God’s order, never peace 
at any price. First the holy heart, then the quiet and 
gentle one. Merey and good works follow, ‘¢free from 
favoritism and insincerity’’; and as the peace-loving 
soul goeth through the world, dropping the seeds of 
peace, those seeds produce harvests of righteousness. 
Those that in peace sow peace, shall reap a harvest of 
righteousness, the fruit of peace. Such a springtime! 
Such an autumn! ; 


THE EPISTLE OF JAMES 129 


8. “Draw Nigh to God.” 


James 4:1-10. The Apostle returns to ‘‘the jealousy 
and faction’’ of the previous chapter, 3:14, and says 
that these evils are traceable to lust, that is, to in- 
ordinate desire. The restless inward war is the prolifie 
parent of failure in speech and act. If we would pray. 
more and better, we should soon find the inner fires 
dying down. 

In v. 5, R.V., margin, we learn that God has placed 
his Spirit within us, and that he yearns for complete 
control over our hearts. He can best overcome inordi- 
nate desire and teach us how to pray. God wants more 
of us. His love is insatiable in its yearning for every 
room and cupboard of our inner life, and he is ever 
wishful to give more grace. 

There are four conditions which we must fulfill, if 
God is to have full possession: (1) We must be sub- 
ject to the will of God, v. 7; (2) we must draw nigh 
to God, v. 8; (3) we must cleanse our hands and purify 
our hearts, v. 8; (4) we must humble ourselves in his 
sight, v. 10. Then Cod will fill the soul, the sluice- 
gates of which are open to him. 


9. “If the Lord Will.” 


James 4:11-17. When we speak evil of another, we 
usurp the functions of the only lawgiver and judge. 
Tf that other is endeavoring to model his life by the 
law, to speak evil of him is to question not his action 
alone, but the law he is trying to observe. Let us 
turn the light in upon ourselves and be merciless in 
self-criticism, while merciful to all others. When you 
see another doing wrong, always ask yourself whether 
the same evil is not hiding in your own character. Do 
not speak of men, but to them, when their faults con- 
front you. 

We are prone to make plans without reference to 
God’s will. Life is so transient and brief that if we 


are to make the most of it, we should ask the divine 


130 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


Spirit to choose for and guide us. Our one endeavor 
must be to discover God’s will and do it. If we are not 
constantly saying, ‘‘If the Lord will,’’ the sentiment 
it expresses should always be uppermost with us. 
‘‘Thy will be done’’ in me as in heaven! 


10. Patiently Await the Lord’s Coming. 


James 5:1-11. There are many among the rich who 
are using money as a sacred trust. Not against these 
does the Apostle utter his terrible anathemas, but 
against those who make money by oppression and 
hoard it for their selfish ends. Riches, which have not 
been gotten righteously, ever bring a curse with them; 
and the rust of unused or misused wealth eats not only 
into the metal but into the miser’s flesh. In the light 
of this passage, it is as great a wrong to hoard up 
for selfish ends money entrusted as a stewardship, as it 
is to obtain it unrighteously. 

There is a sense in which the Lord is ever at. hand 
and present. But he shall come again at the end of 
this age. Then all wrongs shall be righted and the 
oppressed avenged. Everything comes to him who 
can wait for it; do not judge the Lord by his unfinished 
work. Be patient till he unveils the perfected pattern 
in glory. Await the end of the Lord! 


11, Effectual Prayer. 


James 5:12-20. In. view of the judgment-seat, at 
which we shall have to give an account of our words, 
we shall do well to employ the simplest, plainest speech, 
Matt. 5: 34; 12: 36, 37. 

How shall we act in any given situation? The Apostle 
says in effect, be perfectly natural. The suffering should 
pray, the glad sing, the sick confess his sins and eall 
for believing prayer. The oil is the symbol of the 
Holy Spirit. The body is the Holy Spirit’s temple, 
and he is asked to bring it to the level of that spiritual 
wholeness which is his ideal. Where he gives the 
prayer that can affirm and claim, there is no doubt that 


THE EPISTLE OF JAMES msl 


perfect health will result. But there is all the differ- 
ence between human telepathy and divine healing, 
which is God’s gift to faith. 

Elijah became what he was by faith and prayer. 
Naturally he was subject to the same fears and failings 
as ourselves. There are two reasons why we should 
endeavor to convert men: (1) for their salvation, (2) 
for the arrest of their baleful influence. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE EPISTLE 
OF JAMES 


OUTLINE. 


(a) What is the theme of the Epistle? 
(b) How is it developed? 


INTRODUCTION. 


(c) What information does the New Testament afford with 
regard to the author of this Epistle? 

(d) When was the Epistle written? 

(e) To whom was it addressed? 


SECTIONS 1-11. CHAPTERS 1-5. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 
number in the Comments.) 


How may our need of wisdom be supplied? 

What is the source of temptation? 

How does pure religion find expression? 

What is the royal law? : 

What is the relation between faith and works? 

Why is there special need of controlling the tongue? 

What is the character of heavenly wisdom? 

Why are our prayers often unanswered? 

To what extent are our lives under providential con- 
trol? 

Why are dishonest gains a curse? What is the reward 
of patience? 

What is recommended for the joyful? For the sick? 
What did Elijah accomplish through prayer? What 
a opportunity for service is open to the Chris- 

ian 


. 


OOM OR pom 


_ (ey 
— Oo 
° ° 


132 


XI 


4 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER 


. 








OUTLINE OF THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER 
THE FELLOWSHIP OF CHRIST’S SUFFERING AND 


ie 


III. 


IV. 


GLORY 

SALUDATION ear scetd eee me eS Wa Pe 
THE CONFLICT oF Hope AND SUFFER- 

DING Poise cs pega sate eRe eae he teas 2: 
1. The Living Hope Born of Christ’s 

ie CSUTTECLLONM. 2S. ctsic olshis gic soe Ls 3-5. 
2. Trials and Sufferings ............ Li Gaie 
3. The Triumph of Hope .......... 1:8-12. 
A Royat PRIESTHOOD AND A Hoty 

IN ATTON eter aa hisiteee Febrile otras 1:13—2:10. 
1. Phe Catt to Holiness 2.05. scsc) Tee} iar 
2. Christ’s Work of Redemption ....1:18-21. 
3. The Believers Regeneration ..... 1:22—2:3. 
4, The Stone Rejected by the Build- 

CNS sore) oe cette ee thane e-em 2:48. 
Dee ee PCOple 267 (GO. erates teeta 2:9, 10. 


CHRIST’S UNPARALLELED EXAMPLE ...2: 

1... The Obligations of the Christian 
Life 

2. The Example of Christ 
(His sinlessness.) 

3. The Obligations of the Christian 
Life 

(Mutual Forbearance of Wives and 

Husbands, Brotherly Love, Pity, 
Courtesy, Overcoming Evil with 
Good.) 

4. The Example of Christ 

(His suffering for sin.) 
5. The Obligations of the Christian 


DALE, Satan Te ey od anit toss) at cogs 4, 
(Living to God, Watching, Praying, 
Hospitality, Suffering as a 
Christian. ) 
THE DIRECTION OF THE CHURCH..... 5: 
Po Ductiesso7 Widerg Gres acn. on 4 5% 5; 
2. Duties of Young Men ........... 5: 
GOWN CHUSTONG “gists Bans s «piteies ahs oiele be a0 5: 


11—4: 


p20; 
321-25. 


3:1-17. 


: 18-22. 


- THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER 


This Epistle was addressed primarily to Christian He- 
brews, though it does not exclude Gentiles who, by adoption 
and faith, become members of the true Israel of God. The 
countries named are from northeast to southwest in Asia 
Minor. As might have .been expected, the. paragraphs glow . 
with Peter’s fervent. zeal.and ardent love. There is also 
a deep vein of patience and of desire to encourage those 
who were suffering. The fiery trial was the Neronian perse- 
cution, which the.emperor. instigated to divert from him- 
self the stigma of having set Rome on fire. The date, there- 
fore, is about 65 A.D. 


136 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER 


1. Our Imperishable Inheritance. 


1 Peter 1:1-12. Scattered strangers! The designa- 
tion is true of us all. Note the reference to the Trinity 
involved in the opening sentence. Our inheritance is 
prepared and kept for us, as we for it. We who be- 
lieve may count on the guarding power of God. Not 
till our spirit is joined to a perfected body in the 
presence of Christ will our salvation be complete. 

Trial is manifold. There is more or less of it in 
every true life. The best diamonds take longer in 
cutting and polishing. But, after all, compared to the 
eternity before us, it is but short-lived, and there is 
a needs-be for all. Hope in v. 3, faith in v. 7, love in 
v. 8, blend in the joy that is unspeakable and full of 
the glory which is as yet hidden. ; 

Notice that the prophets, angels and apostles are 
represented as deeply interested in that glorious sal- 
vation which God has declared unto mankind in the 
gospel, and by which we have been redeemed, 


2. Redeemed and Purified. 


1 Peter 1:13-25. The appeal for a holy life is en- 
forced by considering the great cost of our redemp- 
tion and the great hope which is opened before us. 
Ours must be the girded loins, lest our desires trail 
after forbidden things, or be sullied by the mud on 
the road. We must be holy, as God is: and this can 
be realized only when we allow God, by his Holy Spirit, 
to pour himself into our natures. 

There is no fear like that which love begets. We 
do not fear God with the fear of the slave or felon, 
but with the fear of the love that cannot endure the 
thought of giving pain to the loving and loved. Who 
can think of returning to Egypt, when such a Pass- 
over lamb has redeemed us! Our redemption was not 


137 


138 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


an after-thought with God. It is part of an eternal 
plan; let us not get entangled in the meshes of mere 
earthly ambition. Notice the familiar combination of 
faith, hope and love, vs. 21, 22. But these graces 
are only indigenous in those who have been twice born 
by the Spirit through the Word. 


3. Building on the Precious Corner-Stone. 


1 Peter 2:1-10. It is easy to lay aside malice, guile 
and evil speaking, when we are constantly feeding on 
the unadulterated milk of spiritual truth. If you have 
tasted of the grace of Jesus, you will not want to sip 
of the wine of Sodom. Drink, O beloved, eat and drink 
abundantly, that we may grow, casting aside sinful 
and childish things. 

The changing imagery of the next paragraph is re- 
markable. As we touch the Living Stone we live, and 
we touch others who are touching him, and so a tem- 
ple begins to grow up. Then we become a holy priest- 
hood in the temple, and finally the sacrifices which are 
offered within its precincts. If Christ is not that Liv- 
ing Stone for you, he will be your undoing. 

All that God said of his ancient people may be 
realized by us in and through Christ. Compare v. 9 
with Exod. 19:6. Thus songs of praise are ever ascende 
ing to him who has called us into his light. 


a 4, The Christian—Pitgrim’s-Walk.. 


t-Peter-2:41-17; Strong desires must be kept under 
the stronger hand of the Christian soul—not extirpated 
but turned into right directions as God’s providence 
points the way. Our desires ultimately rule our pray- 
ers and our life. We must therefore keep them above 
all else, for out of the heart are the issues of life. 
‘‘Cleanse thou the thoughts of our heart by the inspi- 
ration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love 
thee.’’ God does not wish the extirpation of any ele- 
ment of our nature, but its consecration. We must not 
allow wrong things; and we must not allow the abuse 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER 139 


or excess of right ones. The silent witness of a holy 
life or a well-ordered home is of incalculable worth. 
Oh that people in contact with us may turn from us 
to glorify God! See v. 12. 

Though we do not belong-to this world, but are pass- 
ing through it to our home, we should show ourselves 
willing to conform to the institutions and customs of 
the world around us, so far as we can do so without 
injury to conscience or betrayal of the rights of 
Christ. 


5. Following the Shepherd of Souls. 


1 Peter 2:18-25. The argument from this point 
seems to be: Since you have been redeemed, live 
worthily of your heavenly calling in relation to your 
fellow-believers, to God, and to the state, v. 17; to 
your employers, v. 18; to husbands, 3:1; to wives, v. 
7; to everyone, v. 8. 

Some of the tenderest words in the Epistles are ad- 
dressed to the household slaves, who constituted a very 
important part of the primitive Church. Masters and 
mistresses had absolute control over their chattels; 
and might put them to death without interference from 
the state. The Apostle endeavors to cheer them while 
bearing their nameless wrongs. They were to bear all 
their sorrows patiently and silently, following in the 
footsteps of their Lord, and certain that he would vin- 
dicate them. 

Let employees remember that they have been placed 
in worldly and ungodly homes as lamps on dark land- 
ings, in order to bear witness to Jesus by the sim- 
plicity and beauty of their conversation. And the 
way of the Cross is the only safe way for us all, if 
we would keep in touch with our Shepherd and Pro- 


tector. 





6. Christian Family-Life. 


1 Peter 3:1-12. In the previous chapter the Apostle 
had been urging the poor slaves of wealthy household- 
ers to submit quietly to wrongs, leaving God to vindi- 


140 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


cate. Here he turns to the wives of unbelieving hus- 
bands, showing that their chaste behavior, their meek 
and quiet spirit, their pleasant subordination of self, 
are the greatest arguments for our religion. What 
we are is more important than what we say. Our 
life is our best sermon. If we would expend as much 
eare on the hidden man of the heart as many do on 
the outer, what lovely characters would result! When 
Massillon had preached on this subject of the inner 
and outer man before Louis XIV, the king exclaimed 
as he left the church, ‘‘I know those two men!”’ 

The same temper becomes us all. Let us be com- 
passionate to the faults of others, even when they re- 
pay our good with evil and revile our blessing. God 
sends rain and sun irrespective of the character of the 
recipients. In this way we shall inherit the blessedness 
to which we have been called, and see good days. 


7. Following Christ in Bearing Injustice. 


1 Peter 3:18-22. It was said of Archbishop Cran- 
mer that the way to make him a life-long friend was 
to do him some dis-service, and surely these words of 
the Apostle have created many characters of the same 
type. The one aim and purpose of life should be to 
sanctify Christ as Lord; that is, to put him on the 
throne. Let all the powers of our nature stand around 
to do his bidding, as the courtiers of a royal sovereign. 

Keep a good conscience! Remember you have to live 
with yourself! A good conscience is the best bed- 
fellow! Paul exercised himself always to have a con- 
science void of offense toward God and man, Acts 
23:1; 24:16. This is especially necessary when we 
are called on to give our witness for our Lord. We 
must not keep silent when we ought to speak, and when 
we speak we should do so reverently, simply and with- 
out heat. 

Our Lord seems to have carried the news of redemp- 
tion through the world of disembodied spirits. The 
Apostle compares baptism to the deluge, because it 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER 141 


lies bétween the believer and his old worl i as 
Noah’s\fl betwe Bend the Tew 


which emerged frem its waters. 






ew Life i i ou eee 


1 Peter 4:1-11. The Apostle urges the disciples to 
make a clean break with sin. As our Lord’s grave lay 
between him and his earlier life, so there should be a 
clean break between our life as believers and the 
earth-bound life, which was dominated by lawless pas- 
sions. Sometimes God employs the acid of persecution 
or suffering to eat away the bonds that bind us to our 
past. Let us accept these with a willing mind. The 
one condition of reigning with the enthroned Christ 
is to submit to his cross. Of course, we must die to 
animal instinct, to the blandishments of the world, and 
to the temptations of the evil one; but it is quite as \ 
important to die to our self-life, whether it be clothed \ ‘ 
in white or black! Ls 
We are summoned to a life of prayer. But in order 
to promote fervency in prayer we must be sober- 
minded and self-controlled, v. 7; loving, v. 8; and 
faithful to our/Stewardship of all God’s~entrusted 
gifts, v. 10. Vet us cultivate the invariable habit of 
looking up from our service, of whatever kind, to claim 
the ability to do it for the glory of God, v. at 








9. Suffering as a Christian. 


1 Peter 4:19-19. We are called upon to share our 
Saviour’s sufferings—not those of his substitution, but 
his daily self-denial, the hatred of men, the anguish 
of his soul over the obstinacy and opposition of the 
world. The soldier who is nearest his leader, charg- 
ing through the mélée of the fight, is likely to get the 
same treatment as is meted out to his prince. It is 
not strange! It would be strange if it were not so, 
and if the traits in us that characterize our Lord did 
not win the same hatred as they won for him. 

The salvation of the righteous is a task of enormous 


142 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


difficulty. It requires the deadlift of Omnipotence. 
Nothing less will suffice than the infinite grace of the 
Father, the blood of the Son, and the patience of the 
Holy Spirit. What will be the fate of those who re- 
fuse these! Will they appear at the marriage-supper 
of the Lamb; and if not—where! What a beautiful 
closing verse! The committal of the soul, not only to 
the Saviour, but to the Creator. After all, he who made 
can best understand, adjust and satisfy the nature 
which he himself has given! 


10. Serving One Another. 


1 Peter 5:1-7. According to these words Peter, 
though he stood at a distance, must have been an eye- 
witness of the Saviour’s death. He is careful to speak 
of the glory in the same breath as the sufferings, be- 
cause if we endure the one, we shall share the other. 
Positions of influence in the Church in those days in- 
volved grave risks, but the Apostle believed that love 
to Christ would induce men to take the place of under- 
shepherds to the flock of God, and that they would 
use their power with gentleness, humility and holy con- 
sistency. 

The younger men may include the deacons, but the 
all, v. 5, refers to the entire membership. They were 
to. gird on humility, as a slave his towel, that they 
might serve one another, John 13:4. Those who hum- 
ble themselves in the profoundest loyalty toward God 
stand as rocks before their fellows. Remember 
Luther’s —‘‘Here I stand, I can do no other.’’ You 
cannot say, ‘‘Nobody cares what becomes of me.”’ 
God cares, and with an infinite tenderness. He cared 
before you cast your care on him! God is linked to 
your little life by his tender regard and care for 
you. 


11. Resisting the Devil. 


1 Peter 5:8-14. We hear of the adversary in Zech. 
8:1. The enemy of Christ desires to hurt the Shepherd 


THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER 143 


by injuring his flock. The hunger of a lion for his 
prey is an emblem of the insatiable desire of our spirit- 
ual foes for our undoing. Walketh about—tempta- 
tion never assails us long from the same quarter. Per- 
haps the figure of a roaring lion suggests an outburst 
of persecution, which made timid people tremble. See 
2 Tim. 4:17. 

All grace is in God for every hour and need, v. 10. 
We too are called to his eternal glory through Christ. 
The path of suffering, and that path alone, leads to 
the world where suffering is unknown. The suffering 
is only for a little while. Perfect, that nothing be lack- 
ing; stablish, that we may not waver; strengthen, that 
we may stand and withstand. 

Silvanus is Silas, v.12. He was a man to be trusted. 
Peter’s theme was grace. So he began, so he finishes; 
and from the church in the literal Babylon, or in 
Rome, Rev. 14:8, where he and Mark were living and 
working, he sends this message of grace, and love 
and peace. 


(For Review Questions see neat page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE FIRST EPISTLE 


(a) 
(¢c) 


(d) 
(e€) 


OF PETER 


OUTLINE. 


What is the theme of this Epistle? 

What are the main divisions? 

Why is the third division the heart of the Epistle? 
INTRODUCTION. 

To whom was this Epistle addressed? 

What was the fiery trial to which it refers? 


SECTIONS 1-11. CHAPTERS 1-5. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 


SS SI BSS SN Gai ibe 


—_ 
= 


number in the Comments.) 


Why is our faith subject to trials? 

What is the price of our redemption? 

What privileges are open to us through faith? 

What are the duties of a Christian? 

What is the distinguishing mark of the Christian 
character ? 

What are the qualities of Christian womanhood? 

How can we best silence our opponents? 

What is the evidence of being armed with the mind 
of Christ? 

Why should a Christian rejoice in suffering? 

What hae are incumbent upon leaders in Christian 
work? 

Who is the Christian’s great enemy? How may his 
efforts be defeated? 


144 


XII 
THE SECOND. EPISTLE OF PETER 


145 





OUTLINE OF THE SECOND EPISTLE 


OF PETER 


FAITH’S CONFLICT AND VICTORY 


SNC ENONN SocetcietouccSUOcUes somomoet dics de Z. 
Te, Papen IMPLANTED. | ease See soothe ete pies 25 
1. Partakers of the Divine Nature ........ Vat. 
2. The Christian’s Securtty, ... 2.2.22... 1:8-11. 
Ee ALC E COULGK BINED) ites octets vives fnsalonsie =e te 1:12-21. 
l. The Cultivation of Christian Memory...1:12-15. 
2. The Twofold Witness to Christ......... 1:16-21. 
Lil ATE ASSAULTED panne ors ape tele erin okey 2. 
1. The Invasion of Unbelievers ........... 2:1-3. 
2. Warnings from Past Judgments ........ 2:4-10. 
3. Bond-Servants of Corruption .......... 2:11-22. 
Vie WA TTE  V ICTORIOUS ® ce \ehsiese eieliie 6 2 ois. «fesieentotn in 3. 
1. - The Answer to Mochers . 2.0.05 osc nc nes Sgn ete 
2. The New Heavens and Larth .........- 3:10-13. 
(CONCEUSTON | circ mie ste tit clale o al> 6 = Walon cceinois 3:14-18. 


147 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER 


This Epistle was addressed to the same persons or 
churches as the former one, 3:1. But years separate the 
two, and the aged Apostle was expecting to be called 
upon to seal his witness with his blood, 1:14. His pur- 
pose in this dying charge is to caution the Christian com- 
munity against the dangers which were insidiously at 
work among them, and were more to be feared than perse- 
cution from without. His great argument to this end 
is the near advent of our Lord. 

The genuineness of this Epistle has been questioned; but 
it is contained in the list of canonical books put forth by 
the Council of Carthage in A.D. 397. There is so strong 
an identity in the use of words, between these two Hpis- 
tles, and the testimony of the writer as an eye-witness of 
the glory of the Transfiguration is so unmistakable, that 
we need entertain no doubt as to the justice of its position 
among the accepted Scriptures. Compare 1:16, 17 with 
DePet ocr 


148 


THE SECOND EPISTLE Of PETER 


1. The Rule of Christian Growth. 


2 Peter 1:1-11. The keynote of this paragraph is 
these things, vs. 8, 9,10. Precious faith, v. 1, answers 
to precious promises, v. 4. Notice that God has given 
us every provision for a godly life, through the knowl- 
edge of Jesus, but that we must avail ourselves of it. 
The promises are great and precious, but we must 
appropriate and absorb them, if we are through them 
to partake of the divine nature. Our redemption has 
been secured by our Saviour, but we must constantly 
advance and add to the golden links already securely 
stapled in faith. 

In vs. 5-7, a choir with linked hands passes before 
us, each member of which leads another; or we may 
use another similitude, and say that each grace, here 
mentioned, is contained in the next, as a series of 
Chinese boxes. To be deficient in these things is to be 
barren and unfruitful, v. 8, and to be shortsighted, 
v. 9. We may well desire the abundant entrance, v. 
11, not like waterlogged vessels, but with every sail 
unfurled—not landing on the celestial shore unex- 
pected and unwanted, but welcomed by those we have 
helped. 


2. “Eye-Witnesses of His Majesty.” 


2 Peter 1:12-21, Peter could never forget what the 
Master had predicted of his death. See John 21:18. 
Oh, that in our death, whatever be its mode, we may. 
glorify God! The fulfillment of those words was al- 
ready looming before Peter’s eyes, but he had no fear. 
He describes his home-going by the word used by Moses 
and Elijah when they spoke of the decease (lit., exo- 
dus) which the Lord would accomplish. Compare vy. 
15 with Luke 9: 31, R.V., margin. ; 

Then the whole scene of the Transfiguration rose 


149 


150 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


before his mind. It seemed as if he were again on 
that holy mount, beholding the majesty of the Lord 
and hearing the Father’s attesting voice. There are 
three infallible proofs of Christianity: (1) the witness 
of the Apostles; (2) the light of prophecy as fulfilled 
in Christ; (3) the testimony of the Holy Spirit. These 
‘three burn in the dark night of the present and we 
may count on them till we see the first glimmer of 
dawn. ‘Then we shall need no candle, for the Lord 
God will give us light. 


3. Doom and Deliverance. 


2 Peter 2:1-11. Already the early Church was threat- 
ened with destructive heresies introduced by men who 
desired only their self-aggrandizement. All the Apos- 
tles give warning against such, and point to character 
as the one supreme test of doctrine. The real drift 
of the heresies is to deny the Master, who bought us 
as slaves in the market of the world. Of all the bid- 
ders, there is none who has bidden so high as he. 

Many instances are quoted from the past to prove 
the fearful judgments which must overtake such false 
teachers. The angels who placed their self-will in an- 
tagonism to their Maker were east down to Tartarus 
—a Greek word used only here in the New Testament. 
The people who lived previous to the Flood, and they 
who afterward at Sodom disregarded the laws of purity 
and self-restraint, dictated alike by nature and con- 
science, were overwhelmed in destruction. But even 
amid such judgments, God discriminates his Noahs and 
his Lots, preserves and delivers them, and numbers 
them: among his jewels, Mal. 3:17. God has his eye on 
you and will succor you. 


4. The Dark Way of Animalism. 


2 Peter 2:12-22. The description of these false 
teachers is terrific! They are slaves to their brute in- 
stincts. They are as abusive as they are ignorant. 
They destroy and will be destroyed. They feast daint- 


THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER Ish 


ily in the broad daylight, instead of leading abstem- 
lous and sober lives. With them, the very church 
feasts were occasions for self-indulgence. Their eyes 
never ceased from the sin against which the Lord 
warns us in Matt. 5:28. Balaam is an awful example 
of such, torn, as he was, between the celestial vision 
of his spirit and the sensual appetite of his soul. 

The will of man, as in Balaam’s case, is always pois- 
ing itself between its knowledce of good and evil and 
_ its strong bias toward evil. Only the help of God ean 
correct this. Let us ‘‘who are just escaping,’’ v. 18, 
R.V., from the meshes of the world, beware lest we be 
caught in the guiles and nets of false teaching, which 
would drag us back into the evils of the worldly life. 
It is in our heart-felt union with the Lord Jesus Christ 
alone that we can be permanently secure, 


5. Longsuffering Delay. 


2 Peter 3:1-9, Peter does not hesitate to place the 
commandments of himself and the other Apostles of 
Jesus on a level wigh the words which were spoken 
before by the holy prophets, and he repeats his admoni- 
tions because of the urgency of the crisis then threaten- 
ing the Church. Apparently there was a well-grounded 
fear that she would relax her attitude of expectancy 
and give credence to the materialistic philosophy of 
the age. 

Men argued then from -the appearances of things, 
and especially from the regular routine of cause and 
effect. They did not realize that, from time to time, 
there had been the intrusion of the divine personal 
will into the course of history, introducing a higher 
set of laws and arresting the ordinary succession of 
events; as for instance, the Flood and the miracles of 
Old Testament history. Why, then, should not the 
ordinary course of nature be broken in upon by the 
Second Advent, when the Lord shall gather his saints 
about him and reign gloriously? What God has done 


152 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


he can do again! There is a person and a will behind 
the slight veil of the present life. 


6. “Holy Living and Godliness.” 


2 Peter 3:10-18. How quickly the great European 
convulsion broke upon the world in the summer of 1914! 
Who expected such a sudden burst of the great storm! 
We are evidently near some vast change in the history 
of mankind, which may fitly be compared to the com- 
ing of new heavens and a new earth, as mentioned in 
v. 13. The condition of the -world ealls on each of us 
to be holy, as the virgins in their pure dresses, with 
burning and well-filled lamps. See Matt. 25:1-13. This 
is the manner in which we may hasten the coming of 
the day of God. It is not enough to say, ‘‘Thy king- 
dom come.”’? Each day we should move some pebble 
from its pathway! 

In twenty-four hours God ean do as much as all his 
servants at home and abroad could not accomplish in 
a thousand years. According to God’s chronology, it 
was on the morning of yesterday that Jesus died. Be 
watchful. Christ’s coming is certain, but not the 
hour. If we‘are blameless now, we shall be faultless 
presently. See Jude 24, 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE SECOND 
EPISTLE OF PETER 


OUTLINE. 


(a) What is the theme of the Epistle? 
(b) What are its main divisions? 


INTRODUCTION.. 


(c) To whom was this Epistle addressed? 

(ad) What interval had elapsed since the first Epistle was 
written? 

(e) What was the writer’s purpose? 

(f) What is to be said regarding the genuineness of the 
Epistle? 


SECTIONS 1-6. CHAPTERS 1-3. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 
number in the Comments.) 


What elements enter into a fruitful Christian life? 

What special testimony had Peter received concerning 
Christ? : 

What evidence is there that judgment awaits evil- 
doers? 

Against what influences must the Christian contend? 

How do scoffers seek to overthrow the faith? 

What is the great expectation of the Christian? 


Gale FG pei 


153 











feet 


so 0 cutee 








“a >. 2 me on 
E . _ Ps 7 
ef ste ae 
. i Pe | J 5 " 
+ fe UNE vem es ae nats fy 9 
’ = ; 7 hes a 
> 6 ae Sgt Sie eee pee mea 
io vee ohn og Ry : Ce oa 
“We 7 te . y Rae! ei Prosites =a= - 
~ is Pe oo. © wos ~ _ 3 
P = as ran en "3 <a i a me Oe oad lett ¢ “a 
a i ws Ayre? Pa a att, .* ae ote Sara eae an ‘es 
BJ aye bts 7 4 5. aan . . 
: oi By yr BAe ae eee eit eee ieshes 2 
) a s » 
a ef \ f *. ae St a . a 
Pi yor ls wee reer fee Vo NRT a ° 
a * % 4 - , oT 
an * eee ae y 
ee J ae 
- a “ fd » ie 
5 ee Ke ee 


5 Car Sis sa te Poles oar vas ter". 
= wee = “if 





- 





oe, 





deb ot bo 


he Pinten tear ; teh ase 






: Bs fase oe 
(ng: tole ay weed ae a Niels Ed Sel ei 
re Nica bee x8 eae be nia I Ce ey 








2 


ZN Mere Wea 
THE EPISTLES OF JOHN 
fhu2 eee 5 ’ , 








OUTLINE, OF THE: FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN 


THE REDEEMING LOVE OF GOD IN CHRIST 


RI ERODUCETONME eit teictetniets ser et ota aires eos oe ee 1:1-4, 
1. The Character of God Revealed in 

) IRTP COE: boeeO pices 1:5—2:6. 
2. The New Commandment ...........-. 2:7-28. 
3. Divine Sonship Tested by Love ...... 2:29—3:18. 
4. The Ground of Assurance ........... 3:19—4:6. 
ame POULT S LODE Mey srenroupon asia chortle cot a) oke 4:7-21. 
-6.. The Threefold Witness ..........--. §:1-12. 
CONOLUSION reels «elec stele a ese se sere) 5§:13-21. 


157 


THE EPISTLES OF JOHN 


In addition to the Gospel, three Epistles have come to 
us from the pen of the beloved Apostle. Of these the First 
is the longest and most important. In form it is more like 
an essay or treatise than a letter; it bears no salutation 
nor signature. But if there were no other evidence, its 
similarity in phrase and thought to the Fourth Gospel 
would practically decide the question of authorship. Which- 
ever was written first, the relation between the two is per- 
fectly clear and has been aptly expressed by Bishop West- 
cott: “The theme of the Epistle is, the Christ is Jesus; 
the theme of the Gospel is, Jesus is the Christ.” The bear- 
ing of the Epistle upon practical living is also very plain. 
It shows that fellowship with the Father and the Son is 
realized in love of the brethren. 

The Second and Third Epistles are very brief, and are 
private and personal rather than doctrinal. They have 
been called by Jerome “twin sisters.” In style and spirit 
they markedly resemble the First Epistle. There is the 
same emphasis upon love, truth, and obedience. While we 
are without exact information as to their date, they rank 
unquestionably among the latest documents in the New 
Testament. 


158 


THE EPISTLES OF JOHN 


1, Fellowship in the Light. 


1 John 1:1-10. As the aged Apostle began to write 
he was living over again his first happy experiences 
with the Saviour. He heard the voice, saw the person, 
touched the very body in which Deity tabernacled. It 
was too great a bliss to be enjoyed alone, and John 
tells us that we may enter into the same close partner- 
ship with the Father and the Son. But no impurity 
or insincerity is permissible to those who enter that. 
fellowship. Our one aim should be to maintain such a 
walk with God that the union with God may be unim- 
paired. If there are still sins of ignorance, the blood 
of Jesus will continue to remove them. Sin differs from 
sins, as the root from the fruit. God does not only 
forgive, he cleanses. He is faithful to his promises 
and just to his Son. Notice the ifs of these verses and 
in 2:1; they are a compendium of the blessed life. 


2. Keeping His Commandment of Love. 


1 John 2:1-11. It is clearly possible to be kept from 
known and presumptuous sin. We shall be tempted, 
for that is an inevitable experience of life in this 
world; but we may be perfectly kept by the indwell- 
ing Spirit. Yet if we should be overtaken by some 
sudden gust of temptation, let us not despair; our Ad- 
vocate ever makes intercession for us. The evidence 
that we have a saving knowledge of our Saviour is 
obtained, not by the memory of a rapturous experi- 
ence, but because we are conscious of doing, for his 
sake, things which we should otherwise evade. Let 
us continue to do such things, because by the path of 
patient obedience we shall enter into the Paradise of 
perfect love. The outer walk is the best evidence to 
ourselves and others that there is an abiding union 
between us and Jesus. Light involves love; and love, 


159 


160 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


light. Love and you are in light. Indulge hatred or 
ill-will and you begin to grope in darkness. 


3. Transient Desires, Abiding Life. 


1 John 2:12-17. There are gradations in Christian 
experience—the child, the father, the young man. The 
note of the child is the glad sense of forgiveness; of 
the father, a deep knowledge of God; of the young 
man, victory over the power of evil. With all these is 
growth. The child, through forgiveness, also comes to 
know the Father; the fathers can only go on to know 
God more profoundly; and as the young men become 
stronger they are more aware of the indwelling spirit 
of power. ‘ 

Distinguish between the world of nature and the 
world of appearance, which is an illusion, the vain 
dream of human imaginings and boastings. It is 
the sphere of sense as contrasted with the sphere of 
spirit. It is the sum of all that the fiesh lusts after, 
the eyes feast on, and the soul takes pride in. The 
Preacher gathers the world into one phrase, ‘‘under 
the sun,’’ Eecles. 1:3. The world is passing as a mov- 
ing-picture film, and the power to enjoy it is vanishing 
also. Only that which is rooted in God abides. 


4. Loyalty to Truth. 


1 John 2:18-29. The Holy One is surely the risen 
Saviour, who has passed into the heavens, whence he 
bestows the Holy Spirit as a sacred chrism on meek 
and trustful souls. We can say with the psalmist, 
‘Thou anointest my head with oil.’’ Let us seek fresh 
anointings. ‘‘I shall be anointed with fresh oil,’’ Ps. 
92:10. Whenever we attempt to do God’s work, we 
should be able to say, ‘‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon 
me, and he hath anointed me.’’ The anointed soul 
understands things hidden from the wise and prudent, 
v. 27. 

We must hold the Word of Christ by perpetual 
reiteration and meditation; only so shall we be able to 


THE EPISTLES OF JOHN 161 


abide in him. This abiding life involves not merely 
that we shall work for God, but that God will work 
through us. The abiding branch bears much fruit, be- 
cause the energy of the vine is set free to work its 
will through its yielded channels. A life of abiding 
communion with Christ will never be ashamed in this 
or in any other world. 


5. The Marks of God’s Children. 


1 John 3:1-12. This chapter opens with one of the 
astounding announcements of Scripture. Why God 
should have made us his children is incomprehensible, 
except to show forth the riches of his grace. See Eph. 
2:7. That such we are is certain, but how marvelous! 
Yet even greater wonders await us, for we are to be 
like Jesus our Lord. He is the type to which we are 
being conformed, and on the other side we shall awake 
in his likeness. 

He is pure; such is the verdict of one who lived 
in the closest possible association with him. We can- 
not think of Christ, or of the future to be spent with 
him, without desiring purity above all. Ask him to 
become in thee the fountain of purity! If he is thy 
constant study, the quality of his character will become 
thine. Presumptuous sin is impossible under such con- 
ditions. He will destroy the works of the devil in the 
individual and in the universe. That we are God’s own 
children is proved by our integrity and love. They are 
the hallmark of God’s ownership. 


6. Loving in Deed and in Truth. 


1 John 3:13-24. Love to the brethren is a sien that 
we have been born into the family. We may not lke 
them all, yet we can love them. If we love, we live; and 
if we live in the deepest sense, we shall love; that is, 
we shall put others first, and our care for them will 
be tinged with the crimson of sacrifice. Love is not 
measured by the expressions of the lip or the emotion 


162 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


of the heart, but by the extent to which we will do or 
suffer. 

The believer dares not affirm too much about him- 
self, he is so unworthy and fickle; but God understands 
us and imputes to us what we would be. Mark in v. 
22 the double condition of prevailing prayer. It is 
also clear from v. 23 that men can believe, if they will. 
God is prepared to impart to those who are wishful 
all that he commands. Augustine prayed thus: ‘‘Give 
what thou commandest, and command what thou wilt.’’ 


7. The Token of God’s Love. 


1 John 4:1-11, In those, days the intense ferment 
of men’s minds wrought many delusions and heresies 
which were fraught with temptation to young converts, 
and the Apostle wished to give tests for determining 
which voice spake from God. The confession of Jesus 
Christ as the Incarnate Word, a spirit of love and 
gentleness, and the willingness to abide in the doctrine 
of the Apostles, were signs that the speaker was com- 
missioned by Christ. 

Wouldst thou overcome the world? Let Christ enter, 
and the world will have no charms for thee. There is 
only one source of pure, divine love, and wherever that 
love is present, you know that the possessor has found 
its source in God. God’s love is absolutely selfless. He 
loves the unloving to make them love, putting away 
their sin and perfecting their union with himself. 


8. The Test of Our Love. 


1 John 4:12-21. If we are willing to be channels 
through which God’s love flows to others, there need 
be no limit to the fullness of that holy current. In 
humility, selflessness, and gentleness, it will become per- 
fected. The vessel placed beneath the waterfall is 
filled to overflowing. 

Through our Saviour we know the Father who sent 
him, v. 14. See John 14: 9, 10. We first venture on 
God’s love by faith; afterward we know it. Dare to 


THE EPISTLES OF JOHN 163 


abit -lbatGod- is lose. Love is the wafted fragrance 
of Paradise. thou lovest, heaven and earth will 
answer thee in terms of love. By strong, patient, self- 
less love thou wilt abide in unbroken touch with all 
pure and loving souls—whoever and wherever. Where 
love was crucified there was a garden. Where there is 
love, lonely places blossom as the rose. Be not afraid! 
Love on! Love always! ‘‘This is the true God, and 
eternal life.’’ But one thought of hatred or ill-will 
will cause thy wholly happy experience to vanish, 


9. The Victorious Life. 


1 John 5:1-12. The ‘‘begotten”’ children of God are 
constantly referred to in this Epistle. The word indi- 
cates the communication, in regeneration, of the divine 
nature, of which the first evidence is love. This love 
is not a weak sentimentality, but a strong, vigorous 
response to the motions of the divine love. 

God’s life in the soul also manifests itself in our 
faith; and as faith is the substance of the unseen and 
_ eternal world, it overcomes the fascination and glamor 
of this transient scene. Let your faith entwine around 
the risen Lord and you will be weaned from all else. 
Jesus must become all-in-all to you, else you will miss 
the crown! 

We need not only the water of repentance, but 
also the blood of propitiation, When these two are 
admitted, the Holy Spirit will bear his secret witness 
to the soul. God is ever bearing witness to the Son 
by the eternal life that he gives to and maintains in 
those who believe. Eternity begins even here for those 
who have the Son as their indwelling guest. 


10. Ask According to His Will. 


1 John 5:13-21. We know that we have eternal life. 
The rope is in our hand bearing us onward, but its 
ends are hidden from view in the past and in the 
future. We also know that God hears us when we 
comply with the conditions of true prayer. We know, 


164 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


moreover, that we can become the medium through 
which the life of God passes to others. Thus the 
humblest child may have power with God and man. 

The Only-Begotten keeps the begotten. Evil can no 
more touch them than blight could reach the bush in 
the wilderness that was bathed in the celestial fire. 
Who would go back to the world? Enumerate and 
press to heart these four items of positive knowledge; 
but beware lest what is legitimate and natural in it- 
self may become an idol. Love, knowledge, abiding, 
conquering—these are the keynotes of this wonderful 
letter. 


(The following Sections deal respectively with the 
Second and Third Epistles of John.) 


11. Walking in Truth. 


2 John 1-18. This exquisite letter, a model of old- 
world correspondence, was probably written when the 
Apostle was the guest of the nephews of the lady ad- 
dressed. The Epistle revolves around the two words, 
love and truth, which were the poles of his life. When — 
Christ is in us, not only are we true in judgment and 
speech, but we recognize truth wherever it is to be 
found. No horizon bounds the vision of the true and 
truth-loving soul. Be true and loving, and you will 
have a rich heritage of grace, merey, and peace. Love 
is best shown by‘obedience. Verse 8 shows a pastor’s 
anxiety. Don’t go on without Christ or you will lose 
God, v. 9. Remember that love can be stern, v. 10. 

The letter reveals the strength, purity, and love of 
the primitive Church. Let us put into our letters 
thoughts which will make them worth receiving and 
keeping. 


12. The Apostle’s Joy. 


3 John 1-14. Again we meet the words love and 
truth. Transparency of speech and life is an essen- 
tial condition of soul health, It would not be desir- 


THE EPISTLES OF JOHN 165 


able to express the wish of vy. 2 to all our friends, 
because if their bodies were to correspond to the 
condition of their souls, they would suddenly fall into 
ill-health. In the old legend mirrors were blurred with 
mist when any approached who were out of harmony 
with truth, v. 4. 

The Christian must always act worthily of God, es- 
pecially toward strangers, vs. 5, 6. ‘‘For the sake of 
the Name,’’ v. 7, R.V.—as children we must main- 
tain the family honor. Such hospitality makes us 
fellow-workers with the truth. There is a Boanergic 
touch in v. 10. The threefold witness to Demetrius 
should stir our desire to emulate his character. What 
will it not be when the dimness of earthly converse is 
exchanged for the face-to-face intercourse of eternity! 
v. 14. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


(a) 
(b) 


(c) 
(d) 
(e) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE EPISTLES 
OF JOHN 


OUTLINE OF THE FIRST EPISTLE 


What is the theme of the first Epistle? 
What distinguishing feature of the Epistle appears in 
the outline? 


INTRODUCTION. 


How do these three Epistles compare as to length? 
What is their relation to the Gospel of John? 
What is the probable date of these Epistles ? 


SECTIONS’ 1-10. CHAPTERS 1-5. 


(Hach question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 


= 
. 


See Gos) 


-_ 


11. 
12. 


number in the Comments.) 


What was the nature of the fellowship which John 
wished to share with others? 

What is the best evidence of union with Christ? 

Why does the Apostle address those of various ages? 

What is the anointing of the Christian? 

With what announcement does the third chapter open? 

How may we know that we have “passed from death 
unto life”? 

How does the Christian overcome the world? 

What is the greatest affirmation of this Epistle? 

What is the threefold witness to our redemption? 

What four things is the Christian privileged to know! 


SECTIONS 11, 12. THE SECOND AND THIR 
EPISTLES. 
Around what two words does the second Epistle of 


John revolve? 
Why is hospitality a Christian grace? 


166 








LE OF JUDE 


ae 


THE EPIST 
— 





OUTLINE OF THE EPISTLE OF JUDE 


“CONTEND EARNESTLY FOR THE FAITH.” 


BA LUE TEONM et arcwert te fate ol as) Biers ove ovsie 8) st0fele ee) 6 1,2. 


1. Warning against Traitors ..........+4. 3, 4. 
2. Depravity and Doom of the Ungodly ...5-16. 
3. The Faith and Hope of the Christian... .17-22. 


WON CLUSION Geet nee rusrre sfartee clasts sienelos arsisied 24, 25. 


169 


THE EPISTLE OF JUDE 


The James mentioned in v. 1 is almost certainly the 
brother of our Lord, who was the well-known and uni- 
versally revered leader of the mother church at Jerusalem, 
and the writer of the Epistle that bears his name. Jude, 
therefore, was also related to our Lord as brother; see 
Matt. 13:55; Mark 6:3. These two were probably with the 
Apostles after the Ascension, and finally engaged in evan- 
gelistic efforts. See Acts 1:14; 1 Cor. 9:5. 

We have no certain information concerning him, but 
Eusebius states that when Domitian ordered all the -pos- 
terity of David to be slain, “some of the heretics accused 
the descendants of Jude, as the brother of our Saviour ac- 
cording to the flesh, because they were of the family of 
David, and as such were also related to Christ.” It ap- 
pears from the historian’s subsequent statement that these 
people made a good confession before their persecutors. 

The Epistle was probably addressed to churches east- 
ward of Judaea, among whom Jude had labored; and 
was probably written about A.D. 66. There are remark- 
able similarities between this Epistle and 2 Peter, indi- 
cating close communication between the two writers, as 
they looked out on the heretical teachers of the age and 
the low state of prevailing morals. 


170 


THE EPISTLE OF JUDE 


1. “Contend Earnestly for the Faith.” 


Jude 1-11. Kept is the keynote of this Epistle. It 
occurs in vs. 1, 6, 21, and in another form in v. 24. 
Many evil doctrines and practices were intruding into 
the Church. Certain persons had crept in, who quoted 
the merey of God as an excuse for immorality and 
practically disowned the teachings of the Lord Jesus. 

In contrast with these were the disciples whom Jude 
addresses and who owned the Lord Jesus as their 
beloved ‘‘Despot,’’ (the Greek for Master, v. 4, R.V.) 
They were kept for him, as the others were kept in 
chains. Let us also keep ourselves in the love of God, 
v. 21. It is much easier to live consistently in hours 
of storm than in hours of ease. 

Let us be warned against drifting back from our 
first faith. Let us take heed from the fate of fallen 
angels, of Sodom and Gomorrah, of Cain and Balaam, 
of Korah and others. Let us watch and pray and 
earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered 
unto the saints, v. 3, bearing it through the world as 
the pilgrim host bore the sacred vessels in the days 
of Ezra. See Ezra 8: 28. 


2. Beware of the Touch of the Ungodly. 


Jude 12-25. What traps and pitfalls beset us! How 
many have fallen who had as good or a better chance 
than we! The angels kept not their first estate; Adam, 
though created in innocency, fell; Cain was rejected; 
Balaam, who saw with.open eyes, was slain; Korah, 
who had earried a censer filled with holy fire, was 
hurled into the abyss! How can we expect to stand! 
Be of good cheer! He is able to keep you from falling, 
and to present you faultless, v. 24. 

In the succession of terrible metaphors in vs. 12 
and 13, notice that in each case there is promise with- 


171 


172 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


out fulfilment and appearance without reality. Such 
ig much of the Christian profession of the present day. 
And from time to time, as Enoch foretold, the day 
of the Lord comes, with its retribution for all such. 

The four exquisite admonitions of vs. 20 and 21 are 
worth pondering. Keep yourselves in the main cur- 
rent of God’s love. Build your character after the 
likeness of Christ. Pray in the Holy Spirit; keep at 
the oriel window of hope. Christ is able to keep, and 
when at last we are presented by him to the Father, 
we shall realize how much we owe him. 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON THE EPISTLE 
OF JUDE 


OUTLINE. 


(a) What is the theme of this Epistle? 
(b) How is it illustrated? 


INTRODUCTION. 


(c) What is known of the author of this Epistle? 
(d) To whom was it addressed? 
(e) What is its relation to 2 Peter? 


SECTIONS 1, 2. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 
number in the Comments.) 


1. What evidence is there that judgment awaits evil- 
doers? 

2. What pitfalls beset the Christian? How may we 
be completely safeguarded? Give the benediction 
‘with which the Epistle closes. 


173 





XV 
THE BOOK OF REVELATION 


175 





OUTLINE OF THE BOOK OF REVELATION 


Lge 


III. 


IDE 


THE FINAL CONSUMMATION. 


TINTRODUOTION 2a «chs sek sean ck... a 

THE MESSAGES TO THE SEVEN 

CB UECEEE Tee pec fe. sik. hace ue ode Yip, BX 

THE PERIOD OF STRUGGLE AND SurF- 

BL ERLN GW sre ts -stentiitone shotetete aie Sees 4—7. 
1. The Throne in Heaven...... 4, 


2. The Book with Seven Seals. .5. 
3. The Opening of the Seven 


SCALE ee cee meat. an 6. 
4, The Sealing of the 144,000..7. 
THE MESSIANIC CONFLICT.......... 8—14. 
1. The’ Seven Angels with 
LVUTRPCOUS O5) te hrecten chile see 8—11. 
2. The Woman and the Dragon. .12. 
BulRew LO DEGStS. ah aoe en oe 13. 
4, The Heavenly Proclamations. .14. 
THE MESSIANIC VICTORY .......... 15—20 
1. The Song of Moses and the 
IB AD sneak ugha tee 15. 
2. The Seven Bowls of Wrath. .16. 
3. The Fall of Babylon ...... 17: 1—19: 10. 
4. The Last Judgment........ 19: 11—20: 15. 
THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM.......... 21: 1—22: 5. 
CONCLUSIONS tecett aster emo aes o'e Seine 22: 6-21 


177 


_ THE BOOK OF REVELATION + 


The book of Revelation completes the sacred canon. It 
sets forth in vivid figures the struggles and sufferings that 
precede the manifestation of ‘‘new heavens and a new earth 
wherein dwelleth righteousness.’’ The unveilings of the 
future which it contains were given to the beloved Apostle 
on the island of Patmos, whither he had been banished by 
the Emperor Domitian, in A. D. 94 or 95. The followers 
of Christ in those days were exposed to severe sufferings, 
and nothing could be more appropriate to their circum- 
stances than this book, which is filled with consolation for 
those who are fighting the Lord’s battles. Victory may be 
delayed, but it is sure. 

To every believer this book is especially valuable, because 
it gives a view of our Lord’s life on the other side of 
death, where he acts as priest and is preparing to rule as 
king. His temporary subjection to death and his victory 
over it, his omnipotence and universal dominion, his recep- 
tion of the adoration which his holy apostles refuse—these 
are the thoughts that are conveyed in the richest and most 
striking imagery. 

Though many details of the book are difficult of inter- 
pretation its main teachings are perfectly clear, and some 
of its chapters rank among the greatest of all Scripture. 


178 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 


1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ. 


Revelation 1:1-8. In his capacity as mediator, our 
Lord receives from the Father and transmits to his 
servants, that they may in turn transmit to the world of 
men, the great panorama of the future, known to him 
from before the foundation of the world. Let us not 
miss the special benediction which is attached to the 
Ga oes reading and consideration of this wonderful 

ook. 

The seven churches represent the one Church under 
different phases and possibly in successive stages of its 
history; the letters addressed to them are therefore uni- 
versally applicable. Notice the august reference to the 
Holy Trinity—the eternal Father, the sevenfold Spirit, 
and our Lord. Our Lord bore a faithful witness even to 
death; that death was a birth into the risen life, as ours 
may be; all kings are his vassals. 

How wonderful it is to be told in the next verse that 
he loves us, and has not only washed, but loosed us, as 
though he had broken the terrible entail. ‘“He breaks 
the power of canceled sin.” Jesus often comes with 
clouds. We cannot understand his dealings with us, yet 
those clouds are gold with his light. So he shall come 
at last. As Alpha he begins, but he never begins with- 
out carrying into full effect his purpose as our Omega. 


2. From the Living Lord to the Churches. 


Revelation 1: 9-20. The tribulation and patience of 
Jesus are essential conditions of his Kingdom. We can- 
not exert the divine energies of the latter, unless we are 
willing to take our share of the former. There should 
be no Lord’s Day without our definite claim to be in the 
Spirit; and if we are in the Spirit, every day is a day 
of the Lord. The seven churches are distinct in their 
several characteristics, but one in their blended light. 


179 


180 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


Here is variety, but unity. Jesus was in the midst on 
the Cross; he is in the midst where two or three are 
gathered; he is the Lamb “in the midst of the throne”: 
but he is also in the midst of the collective life of the 
Church in her earthly ministry and warfare. 

The manifestation of his glory may overwhelm our 
mortality, but the touch of his pierced hand encourages 
the soul. His favorite assurance is, Fear not. Here is 
life in its threefold aspect! In its original source, first 
and last. In its triumph over death—I became dead. 
In its eternal reign—ZI am alive for evermore. The things 
which John had seen are probably comprehended in this 
chapter; “the things which are” in chapters 2 and 3 ; 
and the things which are to come to pass in the remainder 
of this book. 


3. Renew Thy First Love. 


Revelation 2: 1-7. Each of these letters consists of 
three parts: 1. The introduction, specifying some char- 
acteristic from the vision of the preceding chapter, which 
is appropriate to the need of the church addressed. 2. 
A description of the condition of the church. 3. A 
promise to the overcomer, following the successive revela- 
tions of God in the Old Testament, which begin with 
the tree of life and include the manna, the conquest of 
Canaan, the glory of the Temple, and the reign of ‘Sol- 
omon. 

We may go far in outward activity for the cause 
of the Redeemer and yet be threatened with the removal 
of our candlestick. Full of labor, opposed to wicked 
men and false teachers, persistently orthodox, not faint- 
ing in the day of trial; and yet, if love be wanting, noth- 
ing can compensate. Is the complaint true of us, that 
we have lost our first love? The exuberance of its emo- 
tion may have passed with the years, but has it been re- 
placed by a deep, all-constraining, and masterful devo- 
tion to our Lord? It is the Spirit’s prerogative to shed 
abroad his love in our hearts and to teach us to love him. 
But none of us can acquire that love without perpetually 





St. JOHN AT Patmos. Revelation 1: 9-11. 


From Painting by JEAN L. E. Metssonrer. Modern French Artist. 








THE BOOK OF REVELATION 181 


feeding on the Tree of Life, which is the emblem of 
himself, Gen. 2: 9; Rev. 22: 2, 14, 19. 


4. “Be Thou Faithful unto Death.” 


Revelation 2:8-11. This epistle has a new pathos and 
significance if we connect it with “the blessed Polycarp,” 
who almost certainly was the angel or chief minister 
of the church in Smyrna. He was the disciple of John. 
Irenzus who lived a generation later, tells how, in early 
boyhood, he had heard from the lips of Polyearp what 
John had told him of our Lord’s person, converse, and 
earthly ministry. 

How sweet the comfort of this epistle must have been 
to him in the closing scene of his life, when, at eighty- 
six, he was sentenced to be burned! Notice how every 
line of it had a message for him, as for all who are called 
to follow in his steps. The Saviour reminded him that 
beyond the suffering of this brief life a crown awaited 
him, which would abundantly reward his fidelity. 

What music there is in those inspiring words! Even 
Peter’s crown of glory and Paul’s crown of righteousness 
seem to fade in comparison with this “crown of life.” 
The thought of it enabled Polyearp to say at the stake, 
“T give thee hearty thanks that thou hast brought me to 
this hour, that I may have my part in the cup of thy 
Christ, unto the resurrection of eternal life, through 
the operation of thy Holy Spirit.” 


5. Beware of Evil Teachers. 


Revelation 2:12-17. Notice the Lord’s commendation 
of the church at Pergamos (from which we get our 
word parchment). He recognizes their peculiar dangers 
and their difficulties—where Satan’s seat is. It was an 
honorable thing to have held fast Christ’s name under 
such circumstances. To hold fast his name is to be loyal 
to him in all circumstances. Not to deny his faith is 
to hold fast to the essential facts and doctrines of primi- 
tive Christianity, undeterred by the blandishments or 
threats of the world. 


182 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


For the doctrine of Balaam, we must turn to Numbers, 
chapters 22-24, and then specially to 25:1 and 31: 16. 
Balaam had failed to curse, but though he had thereby 
forfeited his prestige and payment, he won them back 
by advising Balak to corrupt the morals of Israel and so 
break their union with Jehovah. The Nicolaitans appar- 
ently promulgated similar tenets, and in their proud and 
wealthy city were prepared to admit orthodoxy of doe- 
trine so long as it was combined with laxity of morals. 
But Christ cannot for a moment tolerate such a con- 
junction. His judgment sword must vindicate the purity 
of his Church. 


6. “Hold Fast Till I Come.” 


Revelation 2: 18-29. Note that Jesus does not hesitate 
to appropriate the sublime title—the Son of God. His 
eyes penetrate profoundest secrets, and his advent leaves 
a trail of purity like fire behind him. He recognizes the 
many good qualities of his church at Thyatira, but 
accuses her of having raised no protest against the 
woman Jezebel. She had actually permitted the promul- 
gation of soul-destroying error, with most disastrous 
results. 

This Jezebel apparently taught that there were deep 
philosophies in the heathen system around them, and the 
result was that the professing servants of Christ were 
led into complicity with the outward corruption of 
heathendom. An evident attempt was being made to 
graft on to Christianity the mysteries of darkness, which 
were in direct antagonism to the purity of the teach- 
ings of Christ. 

Notice the contrast between her works and my works, 
vs. 22 and 26. The saints who are true to Christ shall be 
associated with him in his Kingdom, but best of all they 
are made to possess the Morning Star, that is, they now 
stand with their Lord in the dawn of a new era. Al- 
ready the day has dawned and the Day Star has arisen 
in their hearts, 2 Pet. 1:19. 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 183 


7, “Establish the Things That Remain.” 


Revelation 3: 1-6. In other addresses to the churches 
our Lord began with commendation, but no such word is 
here. He is described in the fulness of his glorious 
nature, but this church is full of unfulfilled works. What 
a striking phrase and how true! We begin and do not 
finish, skirt the edges but do not penetrate to the heart, 
are superficial and fragmentary. How few can say 
’ with the Master, “I have finished the work”; and of how 
few it can be said, as by Paul of the Baptist, “He ful- 
filled his course”! Acts 13: 25. 

There are four evidences of spiritual life. In a living 
church there will be growth, compassion, unity, and love; 
and the Lord missed all these and bitterly lamented their 
absence. Of what use was the fig tree to abate his 
hunger, when it bore leaves but no fruit? Amid all 
this disappointing formalism, there were a few live 
souls who fulfilled their works and did not defile their 
robes. Does not this suggest the Transfiguration? On 
the holy mount, the homely garments of Jesus shone with 
light; and so the inner purity of the saint shines through 
and glorifies his simplest acts. The holiness we love in 
this life shall be rewarded by the white robes, Christ’s 
acknowledgment, and the deeds of heavenly citizenship. 


8. Let No One Take Thy Crown. 


Revelation 3:7-13. For those who have but a little 
strength, the Lord sets open a wide door. You may not 
be able to open the door, but you can enter it in his Name. 
Once he opens the door, all the opposition you may be 
called upon to encounter will not avail to shut it; and 
if he shuts the door against your adversaries, all their 
craft and strength will beat against its exterior in vain. 
Get Christ to shut the door against the tempting 
thoughts that would allure you from your allegiance. 
His beloved may be sorely beset, but he will keep them in 
the hour of trial. They shall not miss their crown, but 
shall become permanent and important constitutents in 


184 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


the eternal Temple. We have often stood to notice the 
strength and stability of a pillar in an old church. 
It has looked unmoved on generations that have grown 
from youth to age at its base, and so shall Christ’s 
saints endure. 

It is marvelous how much Christ ean make of our 
poor lives, if only we yield to him. It was said of a 
great statesman recently deceased, “He was a resounding 
example of what a great thing a great man may make 
of a life.” But how much greater can Christ make a 
life, once a mere block of stone, but now inscribed with 
. his own mystie handwriting and engraving ! 


9. “I Stand at the Door and Knock.” 


Revelation 3:14-22. It is better to be cold than luke- 
warm, for in the latter case all that God’s love ean do 
for the soul has only produced a moderate result, while 
if we are cold, our soul has yet to be tried. The 
Gospel has a better chance with the openly profane and 
godless than with those who have been brought up under 
its influence and are so far unaffected. The mischief 
with men generally is that they do not know themselves, 
and do not want to know; and they are equally ignorant 
of the rich stores of blessedness that Christ waits to be- 
stow. We think that we abound in gift and grace, when 
in Christ’s eyes we are most pitiable. Yet, at this mo- 
ment, he is standing at the door, laden with the gifts 
of heaven. Admit him, or at least lift the latch of the 
will, so that he may push the door back and enter. Do 
not attempt to deal with the squalor within; he will see 
to that, and cleanse, keep, and enrich. Do not try to 
provide supper; he will bring thee his own flesh and 

lood. 

Ponder that last beatitude, which promises to all be- 
lievers that if they share with him his age-long conflict 
against the evil of the world, they shall share his rule 
and power, which they shall use with him for the uplift 
and blessing of mankind. Complete and continually re- 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 185 


newed self-surrender to Christ will admit into our hearts 
the royalty and power of Christ. 


10. “A Throne Set in Heaven.” 


Revelation 4:1-11. The vision of the ascended Lord 
introduced the seven letters to the churches, so the visions 
of this and the next chapters introduce the seven seals. 
They resemble the frontispiece or illuminated capitals of 
the old missals. There is no form for the Divine Being. 
God is Spirit, and his glory can only be hinted at by 
appropriate imagery. His being should excite emotions 
in our spirit similar to those which these objects excite in 
our mind. The jasper with its transparent brilliance, 
the sardine or cornetian with its fiery red, the emerald 
with its refreshing beauty, are laid under contribution to 
describe what cannot be described. The throne bespeaks 
majestic authority and power. The worship of the elders 
reflects that of Israel and the Church, Rev. 21:12, 14; 
the thunder, God’s awful holiness; the seven lamps, the 
searching, cleansing purity of his Spirit; the glassy sea, 
the mystery of his ways; the four living creatures, the 
homage of creation. 

Here is the song of creation, v. 11. Originally all 
things did the will of God, and if creation is now subject 
to vanity, some day it will be delivered into the glorious 
liberty of the sons of God, and God’s will will be done 
on earth as it is in heaven. Notice that the will of 
God brought all things into existence, and that that will 
guarantees their ultimate redemption. 


11. The Book with Seven Seals. 


Revelation 5: 1-8. This “book” is a roll of papyrus 
or parchment, written on each side to prevent unauthor- 
ized additions. Probably it contains the history of the 
successive steps to be taken to win the empire of the 
world for Christ. In other words, it tells of the suc- 
cessive stages of the coming of the kingdom of God. As 
the seals are opened, certain phenomena occur which 
in part reveal the mysteries hidden in the book, but the 


186 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


whole is in the hand of the Lamb of God. He alone 
knows the contents; he alone presides over their de- 
velopment. We must not weep because the future is 
unknown. “Jesus we know, and he is on the throne.” 
We must trust our own future to Christ without fear 
or tears of foreboding. The Lamb who shed his blood 
to redeem may be trusted to order and perfect that 
which conecerneth us. 

What contrasts presented themselves! The Apostle 
looked for a lion, and behold, a lamb; for one who had 
overcome, and instead, one who had the appearance of 
having been slain; for one who had the majesty of a 
king, and instead, the emblem of humility. But in the 
lamb were the seven horns of perfect power, seven eyes 
of perfect wisdom, and seven spirits traversing the 
world, denoting omnipresence. What homage can be 
offered worthy of this combination of Redeemer and 
Creator? 


12. The One Worthy to Open It. 


Revelation 5:9-14. Jesus is worthy to unroll the 
mystic scroll of history, because he loved and loves our 
race as no other has ever done; and he is equally worthy 
to open each new phase of our lives. When he came 
into the world he said, “In the volume of the book it 
is written of me.’ We need not fear those pierced 
hands. If we are his purchased property, he will pro- 
vide for us. If we are priests and kings in his ideal, we 
may trust him so to arrange our life-plan as to secure 
the best exercise of those sacred functions. 

Notice how the out-circling song of the redeemed 
reaches out in further and yet further response. It be- 
gins with the little group around the throne; then it 
spreads to the angels in their myriads; and thence it is 
borne forward and outward in concentric rings until the 
utmost shores of space are struck by the billows of 
song and it reverberates back to the living creatures 
and the elders. Heaven is full of the sacrificial side of 
our Saviour’s death. The heavenly beings describe them- 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 187 


selves as his purchased chattels, and stand closer to 
Christ than the angels; but these bright ministers of 
God’s will have learned their deepest lessons of God 
from his redemptive dealings with men. 


13.. The Riders on the Four Horses. 


Revelation 6: 1-8. The seals signify those events 
which prepare the way for the coming of the Kingdom. 
The breaking of the first seals is accompanied by the 
summons of one of the living creatures to the glorified 
Lord to hasten his advent. Come, glorious Redeemer, 
and bring about the wondrous consummation for which 
thy bride is waiting. The white horse signifies the 
victorious progress of the gospel; the red, war with its 
bloodshed; the black, scarcity and want; the pale, or 
livid, pestilence and death. Compare with Ezek. 14: 21 
and Matt. 24: 6-14. “Thus good and bad their several 
warnings give of his approach, whom none ean see and 
live. Faith’s ear, with awful, still delight, counts them as 
minute bells at night.” 

Three lines of interpretation have been adopted for 
these and the following mysterious utterances of this 
book. We shall not go into these questions, but present — 
the main spiritual lessons which are generally accepted. 
That treasure is buried here none can deny; and the per- 
petual turning over of these sods to discover it, has 
greatly enriched the Church. 


14. “The Wrath of the Lamb.” 


Revelation 6: 9-17. This imagery is very majestic; 
but we cannot really think that the holy martyrs desire 
to be revenged, except in love and grace. That their 
persecutors should be forgiven in Pentecosts of revival 
must be the highest conception of vengeance that they 
permit themselves to have. The striking command that 
they should rest, each enclothed in a white robe of ac- 
ceptance and purity, until the full roll of martyrs is 
complete, suggests that every age must yield its tale of 
those who love not their lives unto the death, because 


188 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


they love the Master so much more. We, too, have our 
daily martyrdoms, for it may be harder to live for 
Jesus always against continued opposition and scorn 
than to die once for him. . 

Verses 9 and 10 answer to Matt. 24:6, 7. Verses 
12 and 17 to Matt. 24:29, 30. Probably the words 
here refer, not to the final judgment, but to those 
revolutionary changes which always accompany the clos- 
ing of one era and the opening of another; Heb. 22: 
26, 27. 


15, The Multitude before the Throne. 


Revelation 7: 1-10. Before times of unusual trial 
God prepares for the safety of his people. See Gen. 
7:1; 19:16; Exod. 12:13; Ezek. 9: 3-5; Matt. 24: 15, 
16. What a majestic conception this is and how com- 
forting the thought that the winds are controlled by 
angels, and that the storms which sweep earth and 
heaven must obey the mandate of eternal love! God’s 
people are not always saved from trial, but they are 
kept safe in it. We are sealed when the divine like- 
ness is stamped on our characters, Eph. 1:13. Those 
that have that likeness also enjoy the earnest of heaven 
in their hearts, 2 Cor. 1: 21, 22. 

The definiteness of the number sealed indicates the 
perfectness and greatness of this first fruit sheaf of 
souls. If the first sheaf be so full and heavy, what will 
not the harvest be! See 14:4. Beyond human count in 
number; representing every country under heaven; spot- 
less in character; victorious in their conflict with evil; 
ascribing all glory to the Lamb as the result of his 
travail of soul. The tribe of Dan is omitted but per- 
haps reappears in 21:12. Does this mean that some will 
be saved as by firebrands plucked from it by the 
grace of God? 


16. The Joyous Service of the White-robed Throng. 


Revelation 7: 11-17. No nation has a monopoly of 
saints. No tribe is unrepresented. No language is so 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 189 


rude that its children may not learn the speech of 
heaven. The theology of heaven attributes salvation 
to God as its source through Jesus as its medium. 
Palm branches symbolize victory and the white robes, 
transfiguring purity. “His raiment became white and 
dazzling,” Luke 9:29, R. V. Thus it was spoken of the 
transfigured Christ. Notice that sevenfold doxology! 
The visions of the saved shall awaken new joy in the 
angelic hosts, but how much more in the heart of 
Christ! 

When we stand face to face with an inexplicable mys- 
tery, how comforting it is to be able to say in perfect 
faith, Thou knowest! Tribulation, whether it stands 
for our private afflictions or for some great crisis of 
martyrdom, is left behind forever. It should never be 
forgotten, however, that we are not saved by our suf- 
ferings but by His. The blessedness of heaven consists 
in the unveiled presence of God, in unbroken service, 
and in safety because God will spread his tabernacle 
over us. This exquisite description of the future life 
consists largely of negatives, because the positive defies 
human speech. No scorching trial, no fear, no want, no 
finality, because the Lamb will conduct our eternal 
progress deeper and deeper into heaven. 


17. The Incense of the Prayers of Saints. 


Revelation 8: 1-13. The seventh seal includes the seven 
trumpets. What a contrast that pause must have been 
to the jubilant songs of the great multitude! In the 
Jewish temple, we are told, the musical instruments 
and chanting resounded during the offering of the sacri- 
fices, which occupied the first part of the service; but 
at the offering of the incense a solemn silence was ob- 
served, Ps. 62:1. The people prayed quietly without, at 
the time of incense. What a glimpse is here afforded 
of the intercession of our great High Priest! The 
smoke of the incense of his great merit arises with the 
prayers of the saints. Pray on, believer, though your 
voice be feeble, and so much imperfection mingles with 


190 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


your efforts to serve God. The incense of Christ’s inter- 
cession is fragrant enough to make even you acceptable. 

The four first trumpets include the devastation of 
natural objects. The dumb creation, and even the 
earth itself, suffers for man’s sin. Think of the horses 
wounded in battle, dying in long agony; of vast tracks 
of country once smiling, with harvest becoming a wilder- 
ness; of the soil compelled to produce the ingredients of 
poisoning and intoxication. Poor Mother Earth! Goethe 
said that he could hear her sighing as a captive for 
redemption. 


18. “Out of the Smoke of the Pit.” 


Revelation 9: 1-11. This chapter reminds us of the 
prophet Joel who, under the imagery of a swarm of 
locusts, depicted the coming invasion of hostile nations. 
Whether these warriors are intended for barbarian 
hordes which swept over the Roman Empire previous to 
its fall, or whether they represent the Saracens, between 
whose appearance and the details of this vision there is 
much in common, is not within our province to determine. 
The point which specially concerns us is that only 
those escaped who had received the imprint of God’s 
seal. Of old the destroying angel passed over the 
houses, on the lintels of which the blood was visible. 

But there are spiritual foes, against whose invasion 
-we must seek the sealing of God’s Spirit. “Grieve not 
the Holy Spirit of God, in whom ye were sealed unto 
the day of redemption,” Eph. 4:30. What is impressed 
with the royal seal is under special protection; and when 
temptation assails you, you may assuredly claim that 
divine protection, which shall surround you as an im- 
penetrable shield. “The angel of the Lord encampeth 
round about them that fear him, and delivereth them,” 
Ps. 34:7. We fight not against flesh and blood, but 
against wicked spirits in heavenly places, and only the 
gbintan can secure for us immunity against the spirit- 
ual. 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 191 


19. Impenitent in Spite of All. 


Revelation 9:12-21. The river Euphrates possibly 
stands for nations and hordes of men emanating from 
that region; and these verses are held by a large num- 
ber of expositors to foretell the invasion of Europe by 
the Turks, who have desolated and held the sacred places 
of the Jewish faith. The Church of that time was eaten 
through with idolatry. Image worship had become 
almost universal, and the invariable consequence of 
this relapse from the noble spiritual ideals of the Jewish 
and Christian dispensations was materialism, sensuality, 
and the greed of the priest. On the other hand, the 
Turks were fierce iconoclasts, and their progress every- 
where was marked by the demolition of Christian em- 
blems. 

Demons contrive to get themselves worshiped under the 
effigies of idolatry; and murders, sorceries, fornication, 
and theft infest their temples. There is perpetual con- 
troversy between the spirit of truth and these perversi- 
ties; and this conflict must continue, not only in the 
Chureh, but in the heart, until everything that opposes 
the reign of the Spirit is overthrown, and every thought 
is brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ, 
2 Cor. 10:5. Is this supremacy of the Spirit secured 
for thee, my reader? 


20. The Angel with the Little Book. 


.Revelation 10:1-11. If one of God’s angels is so 
strong and glorious, what must the Lord of angels be! 
From the splendor of his retinue, we may estimate the 
wealth of the Prince. How exactly does this descrip- 
tion of the little book suit the word of the Cross, that is, 
the message of the gospel! Things are spoken to the 
saints, which, as Paul says, no tongue can utter. They 
are sealed to the unbelieving but opened to the children 
of God. Notice that magnificent description of the 
ever-living God, the Creator, the Unfolder of the mys- 
tery of his dealings, vs. 6,7. See also 1 Cor. 2:12. 


192 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


The gospel is full of sweetness and delight in its 
first conception. The sense of peace with God, the con- 
sciousness of pardoned sin and acceptance in the be- 
loved, are like the music of heaven or the dew of 
paradise. But the cross cuts deep into the self-life, as 
we carry the sentence of death in ourselves. We learn 
the necessity of being crucified with Christ, if we would 
enter into his resurrection joys; and so the Word of 
God, which is sharper than any two-edged sword, pene- 
trates lower and lower, dividing soul and spirit, the 
joints and marrow. Our Lord never concealed this from 
those who sought to be enrolled as his followers; but 
there is blessedness in the bitterness, as springs of fresh 
water arising amid the brine of the sea. 


21. The “Two Witnesses.” 


Revelation 11:1-13. We cannot in this brief note 
indicate the various interpretations of this chapter, but 
certain great principles underlie it, which are true of 
every age. 

(1) During the darkest ages, men have been raised 
up to testify against the prevailing corruption of their 
time, and especially the corruption of the apostate Church. 
Their opponents have endeavored to silence their voice 
and blacken their character, but God has ever vindicated 
them and given life out of death. (2) Always when the 
enemies of the truth have deemed themselves triumphant, 
there has been a rekindling of gospel testimony. A few 
years before Luther appeared, a medal was struck to 
commemorate the extinction of so-called heresy. (3) 
Such witness-bearing as is suggested by the comparison 
with Zechariah’s vision, is fed from the heart of Christ. 
He is the root of the martyr line; his Spirit is the life- 
breath of his witnesses. All through the centuries, com- 
monly called Christian, though generally very un-Chris- 
tian, there has been an unbroken succession of pure and 
noble souls who have stood for Jesus Christ even unto 
death. Let us dare to stand with them and our Lord, 
that he may not be ashamed of us at his coming. 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 193 


22. “He Shall Reign For Ever and Ever.” 


Revelation 11:14—12:6. The kingdom is even now 
Christ’s, but it is hidden, even as he is. One day it 
will be manifested. For a long time David was the 
anointed king of Israel, but Saul sat on the throne until 
the predestined hour came when the tribes of Israel 
made David their chosen monarch. This surely is a 
type of that which will one day become apparent to the 
whole creation. The kingdom of the world will wholly 
and permanently become Christ’s. Suffering and sor- 
row will then flee away, as birds of ill omen at dawn. 
War will cease to the end of the world. The glad popu- 
lations of mankind will walk in the light of life, and the 
long night and travail of nature will be ended. It may 
be that each great era of human history ends with a 
scene of judgment; or that these series of visions are 
concurrent, viewing the earth-order from different stand- 
points. 

What comfort is derived from this vision of the Ark 
of God’s Covenant, which abides in the inner sanctuary! 
He is true to us. His word cannot alter, neither will he 
recede from his pledge to overthrow our enemies, to 
undo the devastation they have caused, and to realize 
his original purpose in man’s creation. 


23. Satan Cast Down from Heaven. 


Revelation 12:7-17. The spirit of evil waits to de- 
stroy each birth of good in our world. As soon as 
Mary had given birth to our Lord, Herod sought to 
destroy him, and this is characteristic of all the ages. 
But God’s care is always at hand to deliver his own. 
He has his prepared places, where he hides those who 
trust in him. He keeps them in the secret of his pavilion 
from the strife of men. 

Sin has brought conflict, not on our earth only, but 
throughout the universe; but from the heavenly places it 
has been driven, and the last stand is made on our earth. 
Is it not possible that the awful war which has desolated 


194 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


mankind may be one of the last phases of this age-long 
conflict? There is but one talisman of victory. We 
overcome only in so far as we take shelter in the blood 
of the Lamb and wield as our weapon the Word of 
God. As darkness cannot resist the light, so evil cannot 
exist before the witness of the Church and the child of 
God, if only we care more for the honor and glory of 
Christ than for our own lives. To the end there must be 
war between the seed of the woman and the dragon, and 
there must be bruising. But the final outcome is sure. 
As Satan was cast out of heaven, so he shall be cast out 
of earth, and Christ shall see of the travail of his soul 
and shall be satisfied. 


24. The Beast and His Worshipers. 


Revelation 13: 1-18. The horns symbolize power; the 
heads, intelligence; and the beast, an earthly kingdom. 
The dragon must stand for Satan, who has wrought his 
greatest achievements through earthly potentates and 
systems. It is through the world-power that the spleen 
and hatred of hell have been vented on the saints. What 
a comfort to know that the duration of such power is 
limited to 42 symbolic months, that is, 1,260 days (or 
years). If you are enduring hatred and persecution, be 
of good cheer, for your name is written in the Lamb’s 
book of life, v. 8. This may well compensate us amid 
the most violent opposition. 

The beast arising from the earth, vs. 11-18, may repre- 
sent the persecutions of papal Rome as contrasted with 
those of pagan Rome in the previous verses. Or this 
symbol may represent some of those modern devices by 
which men’s hearts are turned from God, such as the 
new semi-religious schools of thought that strive for the 
empire of men’s minds, or the customs of modern trade, 
v. 17. Be these as they may, the one outstanding lesson 
for us all is that the child of God is always in collision 
with the spirit of his age. 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 195 


25. The Lamb’s Chosen Worshipers. 


Revelation 14:1-8. The blessed ones with whom this 
chapter opens are only the first-fruit sheaf from the 
great harvest field. Think of it! If one sheaf consists 
of 144,000, what will be the entire number of the saved? 
The characteristics attributed to them may be realized 
by us all now and here. We must bear the name, that 
is, the nature and character of Jesus, in our faces; 
we must be pure in heart and life; and we must 
go wherever he goes. If to Gethsemane, we must fol- 
low him; if to Calvary, we must take up our cross and 
go thither; if to Heaven, we shall be with him there also. 
It is thought by some that this first-fruit sheaf repre- 
sents the dear children who have died in early life and 
have become the Saviour’s body-guard and close associ- 
ates. It may be so, but more likely it stands for the 
possessors of the child-heart. 

In majestic procession, one after another, strong angels 
are seen issuing from the heavenly portals, with their 
sublime announcements. Notice the phrase, the everlast- 
ing gospel, v. 6. In other words, the gospel of the 
grace of God is no expedient brought in to patch up a 
program which has been seriously spoiled; it is as old as 
eternity and brings to men eternal joy, and peace, and 
hope. 2 

26. The Winepress of God’s Wrath. 


Tevelation 14: 9-20. We cannot understand the tor- 
ment of those who are depicted in vs. 9-12, except it 
be the remorse at having refused the love of the Lam) 
of God. Even Christ himself cannot save a soul from 
its self-condemnation. Note the emphasis of v. 13. The 
voice which pronounces the blessedness of the departed 
is from heaven. The emphasis is on the word hence- 
forth. There is no pause in their onward progress, no 
dim and shadowy existence, no cessation in thought. 
From henceforth, that is, from the moment of death, 
they are blessed who die in the Lord; and this announce- 
ment is endorsed by the emphatic Yea of the Spirit. 


196 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


It is a great matter to have that affirmation to our words, 
whether we preach or teach. What could better au- 
thenticate them than that deep co-witness to God’s Word 
in the heart or in the Church? See Acts 5: 32 and Heb. 
2:4, 


This harvest scene surely stands for the blessed reviv- 
als which have from time to time visited the world, and 
may especially be reckoned on in the last days of the 
present dispensation. Only when the harvest is gathered 
in will the vintage of woe and wrath commence. To 
which ingathering do we belong? 


27. The Song of Moses and of the Lamb. 


Revelation 15:1-8. The imagery in the magnificent 
scene with which this chapter opens is perhaps borrowed 
from Pharaoh’s overthrow in the Red Sea, which, as the 
rich lines of an Eastern dawn illuminated its waters, 
seemed like a sea of glass mingled with fire. So, beside 
the crystal sea of Time, from whose surface all traces 
of storm will have been removed and on which the eternal 
morning will be breaking, we, who by grace have over- 
come, shall celebrate the final victory of God. We shall 
sing an anthem in which the Hebrew and the Christian, 
the children of the old dispensation and of the new, 
the souls who have seen through a glass darkly and 
those who have beheld face to face, shall rejoice together. 

One day we shall see the rightfulness of all that God 
has done, v. 4. All his ways are just and true, whether 
our poor human sense detects this or not. Let us dare to 
affirm it even now. Ponder that great name—King of 
the ages, v. 3, R.V. He only is holy; we need the 
perfect cleansing and righteousness which he gives us, 
that we may dare to stand in his’presence. From this 
radiant vision, we turn sadly to the fate of the godless, 
Christ-rejecting world. See vs. 5-8. 


28. Recompense for the Blood of Saints. 


Revelation 16: 1-9. It makes us pause to hear that 
angels, who rejoice over one sinner that repenteth, are 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 19% 


employed in these terrible judgments. It is very startling 
to hear their outspoken acquiescence in the plagues that 
vitiate the earth, sea, springs, and sun. The angel of 
the waters insists that God has judged righteously, and 
the altar, beneath which are the souls of the martyrs, as- 
sents. 

Our softer age shrinks from such conceptions of 
the divine judgments, but it is likely that our stand- 
ards are weakened and warped by our daily contact with 
what is earthly and human. God’s love is not soft 
and emasculated, but strong, vigorous, and righteous. 
Only when we reach the land of light and glory, shall we 
understand the true horror of sin and the inveteracy of 
human apostasy. Then we also shall be able to take up 
those solemn words of endorsement in v. 7, Even 80, 
Lord God, Almighty, true and_ righteous are thy judg- 
ments. 


29. “The War of the Great Day of God.” 


Revelation 16: 10-21. All these judgments apparently 
refer to the destruction of those great systems of false- 
hood and apostasy which set themselves against the truth 
and purity of God. The dragon, beast, and false prophet - 
are the devil’s mimicry of the divine Trinity. The dragon 
corresponds to God the Father in delegating his au- 
thority; the beast, like our Lord, is crowned with dia- 
dems, Rev. 13:1; 19:12; the false prophet directs at- 
tention to the beast, as does the Holy Spirit to Christ. 

The mystery of iniquity will make one last effort to 
obtain the empire of the world, seeking to effect its pur- 
pose through a human confederacy. When that con- 
federacy has reached its climax of effrontery, the com- 
ing of the Son of God is near; hence the need for wateh- 
fulness and purity, v. 15. Armageddon is the mountain 
of Megiddo, in the plain of Esdraelon, See Joel 3: 2, 
12, 14; also Zechariah 12:11. The great city symbolizes 
the apostate Church, or professing Christendom. The 
true Bride is away from these judgments, awaiting the 
manifestation of her Lord. 


198 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


30. The Great World City Overthrown. 


Revelation 17:1-18. This scarlet-attired woman is 
that miserable attempt made in every age to counter- 
feit the true Church of the living God. Man does not 
like the religion of the cross, of faith, of self-denial, and 
each age has witnessed some false system from which 
all these objectionable elements are eliminated. Surely 
a meretricious system has revealed itself successively in 
Babylon, Jerusalem, Rome, London, New York, and other 
great centers. Fashion smiles on it, wealth bedizens it, 
human power unites with it, and in every age it has 
been drunken with the blood of martyrs. 

Between this miserable travesty of the Church and 
the Church herself there has been perpetual conflict. But 
the ultimate victory has always remained with the Lamb, 
and if only we side with him, as the called, chosen, and 
faithful of v. 14, we also shall be more than conquerors. 
Human prestige and power shall not ultimately avail in 
the conflict against the all-conquering Saviour. And 
finally the very world-powers shall turn against the 
apostate and adulterous Church, v. 16. Come out from 
her and be separate! 


31. “Her Sins Have Reached unto Heaven.” 


Revelation 18:1-13. We have seen that the scarlet 
woman represents the false religion of human wit and 
fashion. It is found in every age. There is not a city, 
town, or village where it does not seek to allure men from 
Christ. The mischief is that so many really godly peo- 
ple are misled by it. In this they resemble Obadiah, who 
hid the prophets in a cave and fed them but. was hand 
and glove with Ahab. To all such, who are endeavor- 
ing to keep in touch with the true Bride and with the 
apostate Church, the summons of v. 4 has a very pro- 
found significance. 

It was the unanimous verdict of the reformers that 
the great city here described, v. 10, was intended to repre- 
sent Rome, as the seat of the great apostasy. If that be 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 199 


the case, the merchandise described here does not refer 
to literal commerce, but to the carnal delights which are 
often permitted and fostered by false religious systems 
to win the adhesion of the worldly and unclean. 


32. Fallen Like a Stone into the Sea. 


Revelation 18: 14-24. This section delineates the utter 
desolation which will ensue when the judgments of God 
have finished their mission against professing but un- 
faithful Christendom. How near we are at the present 
hour to their fulfilment, we dare not say. But it often 
seems as if we are living in the last days of “the times 
of the Gentiles,” and very near the fulfilment of all that 
is written in this book. It is the universal comment that 
all religious values are being altered. The church sys- 
tems, as such, give signs that they are losing their hold 
on the vast masses of the people, while the heart of man 
cries out as eagerly as ever for the living God. We can 
only heed the Lord’s command to watch, and see to it 
that we may be found of him in peace, and standing 
patiently at our post. In the meantime events in the 
distant East are symptomatic of the fig tree putting 
forth her leaves. See Matt. 24: 32. 


33. The Fourfold Hallelujah. 


Revelation 19: 1-10. One day we shall hear those four 
Alleluias, vs. 1, 3, 4, 6. They will reverberate to the 
farthest limits of the universe. They will not be inspired 
by vindictiveness or revenge, but will be jubilant with 
the conviction that God has vindicated himself and has 
proved that right can conquer wrong; truth, falsehood; 
and love, hate. One of our chief anticipations when we 
think of the future, is that God’s character and govern- 
ment of the universe will be amply vindicated. 

Contemporaneous with the fall of Babylon will be the 
marriage of the Lamb. Before he assumes, together with 
his saints, the task of governing the world, the union 
of supreme love will have been consummated, and the 


200 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


marriage supper will have been filled with guests. Note 
from v. 10 that the angels are our fellow-servants. They 
hail us as comrades on the condition that we never flinch 
from maintaining the testimony of Jesus. 


34. “King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.” 


Revelation 19:11-21. A sublime vision of Christ, as 
he comes to judge the beast, that is, the world-power, 
which has ever been in antagonism to the principles of 
his Kingdom. We must distinguish between it and the 
final judgment. This precedes, that follows, the millen- 
nial reign. Compare Matt. 24:27, 29, 37, 39. The 
blood in which his vesture is dipped is not his own, but 
that of his foes. See Isa. 63:2. Here at last is fulfilled 
Psa 59. 

Notice the attributes of Christ: He is Faithful, be- 
cause he will stand by us to the end. He is True, never 
doing less but always more than he has promised. Pure 
as flame. He is also in many realms; and the Word of 
God, that is, the final utterance and complete revelation 
of the Most High. Let us follow him! But if we do, 
we must resemble him. His robes are naturally white, 
but we must wash ours, that we may have the right 
to the tree of life and to enter the city of God. Com- 
pare Ps. 110. This will be the time, also, to which our 
Lord referred in Matt. 13:41. God’s whirlwind will 
seatter the chaff. 


35. The Millennial Reign. 


Revelation 20:1-6. In the preceding chapter the 
beast and the false prophet are depicted as meeting their 
punishment in the lake of fire. In this, the devil, death, 
and Hades are consigned to a similar fate. The imagery 
is apparently drawn from that fearful tragedy which 
left so deep an impression on the ancient world. See 
Gen. 14:10; 19:24; Jude 7. The last reference is 
especially interesting, because there the fate of the 
cities of the plain is quoted as an example of eternal 
fire. May it be ours to participate in the first resurrec- 





THE RIDER ON THE WHITE Horse. Revelation 19: 11-13. 
From Painting by GEORGE F. WATTS. Modern British Artist. 





THE BOOK OF REVELATION 201 


tion! Let our loins be girded and our lamps trimmed, 
that we may be found of Christ in peace, at our posts, 
and prepare to enter with him into the bridal feast. This 
is a more solemn and critical consideration than the ma- 
jority of Christians seem to suppose. In fellowship 
with their Lord, his people are to exert in a godly direc- 
tion the same kind of influence over the affairs of men, 
as the rulers of darkness in an wngodly sense now exer- 
cise. Thank God, every morning brings that. blessed 
day nearer. 


36. Before the Great White Throne. 


Revelation 20:7-15. Gog and Magog take us back 
to Gen. 10:2; see also Ezek. 38 and 39. It would seem 
that this great confederacy of the northern nations 
against the beloved city, Jerusalem, will be led by Satan, 
and overwhelmed once and for all by the direct judg- 
ment of God. 

The final judgment is depicted in vs. 11-15. God’s 
people will not appear at that bar. All the human 
family will be arraigned, save those whose names are in 
the book of life, John 5:24. See Exod. 32:32; Dan. 
12:1; Phil. 4:3; and Rev. 21:27. Death and Hades 
will surrender their contents. What a marvelous audi- 
ence! The throne is great, because of the destinies to 
be decided; and white, because of the immaculate purity 
of the Judge, who will be none other than our Lord. 
See John 5: 22; Acts 17:31. The books will surely in- 
clude conscience; Rom. 2:15, 16; God’s Word, John 
12:48; and the tablets of memory, Luke 16: 25. 


37. “A New Heaven and a New Earth.” 


Revelation 21: 1-8. Here is a vision of the new crea- 
tion. This is the “restitution of all things” to which Peter 
refers in Acts 3:21, and the deliverance of creation 
from the bondage of corruption which Paul anticipates 
in Rom. 8:21. No words can portray in positive de- 
scription what that universe will be, and even the in- 
spired writer has to confine himself to negatives. All 


202 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


he does is to name various elements of terror and dread, 
saying: This shall not be there, nor that, nor the other, 
all of which are the fell brood of human sin. The one 
great positive blessing will be that which was given to 
Israel in type, but then will be the perpetual experience 
of the human family. Compare v. 3 and Exod. 25:8. 
Let us see to it that here and now the Lord Jesus is the 
Alpha and Omega, the A and Z of our life. If so, we 
may even in this mortal life begin to experience the life 
of the redeemed. We may now inherit all these things, 
and know the intimacy of v. 7. But we must overcome. 
Note that the fearful, that is, the cowardly, who draw 
back in the face of opposition, are classed with the 
abominable and murderers. 


38. “The Holy City.” 


Revelation 21:9-27, The “new Jerusalem” is the re- 
deemed Church united with her Lord in the act of 
governing the whole world. A city is obviously the seat 
of imperial rule. In that blessed condition the saints 
will rule the earth as the powers of darkness rule it now. 
We shall enjoy the fellowship of the good and great of 
every age. In a literal sense we shall be fellow-citizens 
with the saints. All ages and dispensations will blend 
there. Angels at the gates; the names of the twelve 
tribes and twelve Apostles engraved in imperishable 
characters to indicate the blending of the dispensations; 
the differing stones, representing variety of character 
and function but all blending in the light of the Lamb 
on the throne. 

The happy throngs pour through the gates with 
never-ending rapture. Those gates, facing every quarter, 
stand always open; but none desire to go forth, except 
commissioned on some errand by the King. All the glory 
and honor of the world are gathered within those walls, 
because Jesus will be king over every department of 
human life. There will be room for all beauty, art, and 
culture in the city of eternal light and love. 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 203 


39. “The River of Water of Life.” 


Revelation 22:1-9. The first five verses of this chap- 
ter obviously belong to the preceding one, from which 
they should not be severed. The ever-flowing river of 
life proves that the whole life of the blessed depends 
on the life of God, resident in the enthroned Lamb and 
communicated through the Holy Spirit. In Eden there 
was one tree of life; in the New Jerusalem there is a 
grove with perennial fruit, not protected by a flaming 
sword, but standing freely in the main thoroughfare, that 
all who will may take. Observe the threefold description 
of the saints—they serve, they behold, and they re- 
semble vs. 3, 4. No night with its shadow; no rest is 
needed in the delightful service; no artificial, but un- 
derived and original light; no cessation of regnant 
power, for they shall reign for ever and ever. 

When the visions end, John is assured of the reality 
and truth of all that he has heard and seen. It ap- 
pears that the Master himself broke in with the assurance 
of his speedy advent; and who shall say that that as- 
surance has failed, when we measure the flight of time 
with the years of the right hand of the Most High? We 
should remember also that the fall of Jerusalem and the 
sack of Jerusalem marked stages in the Advent. 


40. “Come, Lord Jesus.” 


Revelation 22:10-21. Still, four times repeated, im- 
plies the erystallization and permanence of character. 
The rewards mentioned here are for the faithful serv- 
ice of Christ’s stewards, as in Matt. 25:21. For the 
fourth time, he who began the book and closes it, uses 
of himself the divine monogram of Alpha and Omega, 
Rev. 1: 8, 11; 21:6. In the Authorized Version the way 
to the tree of life was opened to those who kept the 
commandments, but it is very comforting to read in the 
Revised Version that this blessed privilege is for those 
“who wash their robes.” Notice the combination of vari- 
ous titles in Christ: David’s Lord and David’s Son; the 
Morning Star and the Sun of Heaven’s Day; the Com- 


204 THROUGH THE BIBLE DAY BY DAY 


ing One, for whose quick return the whole creation 
waits; and the Water of Life, of which whosoever will 
may drink. The appeal of vy. 17 is to our Lord, asking 
him to make haste to come, and it is answered in v. 
20. But who shall tell whether that cry may not, 
sooner than we think, be answered by a spiritual trans- 
formation of the things seen and temporal, so that with- 
out a break, in the twinkling of an eye, the veil of matter 
may be rent, and the whole imminent glory of the unseen 
and eternal swim into view! Let us be on the alert! 


(For Review Questions see next page.) 


REVIEW QUESTIONS ON 
THE BOOK OF REVELATION 


OUTLINE. 


(a) By what title may the book be described? 
(6) What are its main divisions? 
(c) How are these divisions related to each other? 


INTRODUCTION. 


(d) By whom was this book written? In what cireum- 


stances? 


(e) What is its value to believers today? 


SECTIONS 1-40. CHAPTERS 1-22. 


(Each question applies to the paragraph of corresponding 


Soe See Se RST a ES OOS BO Hat 


number in the Comments.) 


What do the seven churches represent? 

What is Jesus’? favorite assurance? 

What is the structure of each of the letters to the 
churches? 

With what disciple of John may we connect the prom- 
ises of the epistle to Smyrna? 

Why was the church warned against the Nicolaitans? 

Why did Thyatira need the counsel, ‘‘Hold fast till 
I come’’? 

For what was Sardis condemned and what was the 
message to her? ‘ 

What assurance of opportunity was given to a church 
of ‘‘little power’’? 

Why is lukewarmness more censured than coldness? 
What is the promise if we open the door when he 


knocks? 
What does the vison of ‘‘the throne set in heaven’’ 


mean? 
How may we interpret the seven horns and seven eyes 
of the Lamb? 
Why was the Lamb declared worthy to open the book? 
What do the riders on the four horses signify? 
What striking command was given to the martyrs of 
the faith? ; 
205 


38. 
39, 
40. 


THE BOOK OF REVELATION 


What was the song of the multitude before the throne? 

How is the blessedness of those ‘‘in white robes’’ 
deseribed ? 

What followed the opening of the seventh seal? 

What is our protection against spiritual foes? 

What may be meant by ‘‘the river Euphrates’’? 

What promise was given by the angel with the little 
book? 

How do the two witnesses suggest the history of re- 
form in the Church? 

How does the reign of David illustrate that of Christ? 

How extensive is the conflict between the forces of 
good and evil? pe 

What power is represented by the beast and who were 
his worshipers? 

What assurance may we find in the words ‘‘ everlasting 
gospel’’? : 

What is the promise for those who die in the Lord? 

What is suggested by ‘‘the sea of glass’’? 

How can God’s severity be reconciled with his good- 
ness? 

What warning is uttered about the coming of ‘‘the 
great day of God’’? 

Who is the scarlet woman and what is her fate? 

What great city is denoted by the name Babylon? 

How is her desolation to be interpreted? 

What is said of ‘‘the marriage of the Lamb’’? 

What attributes are ascribed to Jesus in the vision of 
the white horse? 

What is meant by the millennial reign of Jesus? 

How is the final judgment described? 

What was declared by him ‘‘that sitteth on the 
throne’’? 

What are some of the glories of the new Jerusalem? 

What is said of the tree of life? 

What is the final invitation of the book of Revelation? 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


Agaane 








ora 


x 
-. 








PTUVUUL LVR VIVE EVs, au 
“Through the Bible day by day : a devot if 








BS Meyer, Frederick Brotherton, 1847-1929. 
605 Through the Bible day by day : a devot. 
M47 commentary, arranged for daily reading w 
be ae introductions, outlines and review quest: 
“ ‘by F.B. Meyer ; illustrated from paintin; 

- modern artists. -- Philadelphia : Americ: 

School Union, c1914-18. 
Tene Saks. & A Tem. 


1. Bible--Study--Text-books. I. Title. 


)) 
ae bid b 
fi 7"aNgm ‘7 CCSC/mm 













Hei 
ie it ite NTE 


i| VHB EU EEE 

a i Hs HAHA 1} it H Hh i nil 

Hie AIR UTIT 
i Wiel 


Ht 4 
Hh abi Hi i Hint att Hi ih 
ii Alt TUE 


| aut Peat LE Ty 
Aah i} Ht AIRE a Mi He 












ie 


Wat 
a 





Wt 
i i : 


ae 
i a 







Am 
UH pyUaEaaTCERH A) 
HAAN 















ie ; adtay eth} 
i Wit in PS 
334 4 


mbes tl ni if iH st it 





eh shit 
Hil 7“ a i Ht a“ . i oF i 
Ni a fa i 
7 i a v i He i GR 
i | a Ht Hh a ne An 
ii i} | ‘ iH a alt A RA | wi i} | i i } 
a 7 . ae 
. Hi Huh Hi Hk 
: — 
‘| ih 


Seta 
ee ees 





ve 
















a 


= 
eS 
———— ae 
— —— 
= — ——— 
————— <= 
——_ 
SSS 
= 


en 
eee 


Nu 
Ni 


a nee ee 





— 


