ilii! 


iii ! ! 


iiiinllljl 


''liliii 


i  i|  H; 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 


Chap. Copyrio^ht  No. 


n^^s? 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


THY  WILL  BE  DONE 


THY  WILL  BE  DONE 

The  Blessedness  of  a  Life  in  the 
Will  of  God 


MEDITATIONS  FOR  A  MONTH 


BY 


ANDREW  MURRAY 


New  York  Chicago"  Toronto 

Fleming  H.   Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


1 


83730 


rn 


Library  of  Congress 

Twu  Ccwes  Received 
DEC    4  1900 

Copyright  entry 

SECOND  COPY 

0«iiv»fecl  to 
ORO£fi  DIVISION 


^ 


^f. 


Copyright  1900 
by 
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY 


•     •••*•• 


•  ••  •"• ' 


PREFACE 

IN  the  will  of  God  Creation  has  its  origin,  its  exist- 
ence, its  happiness,  its  power,  its  glory. 

In  the  will  of  God  Redemption,  too,  has  its  origin, 
its  maintenance,  its  blessedness,  its  power,  its  glory. 

To  the  will  of  God  even  so  the  life  of  grace  in  the 
heart  owts  its  origin,  its  maintenance,  its  blessedness, 
its  power,  and  its  glory. 

In  knowing  and  loving,  in  doing  and  bearing,  in 
fulfilling  all  that  will  the  spiritual  life  finds  its 
growth,  its  rest,  its  joy,  its  strength,  its  fruitfulness, 
its  everlasting  blessedness. 

The  one  thing  needful  for  a  Christian  is  that  he  live 
in  the  will  of  God. 

Whether  it  be  God's  will  in  His  Providence  in  time, 
or  His  Purpose  in  eternity,  God's  wuU  in  His  Pre- 
cepts or  His  Promises,  he  that  lives  in  the  will  of  God 
will  there  find  God  Himself  and  all  His  salvation. 

May  God  teach  us  that  as  Plis  will  is  the  one  cause 
and  the  power  of  all  that  He  does  in  the  showing 
forth  of  His  glory,  and  of  all  that  His  Son  did  and 
does  for  our  redemption,  so  the  one  thing  His  child 

5 


6  '  Preface 

needs  is  to  prove  that  his  whole  life  is  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  power  and  glory  of  God's  blessed  will. 

With  the  prayer  that  God,  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  may 
reveal  this  to  each  reader  of  this  little  book — Yours 

in  Christ  Jesus, 

ANDREW  MURRAY. 


CONTENTS 


CHAP. 
I. 

II. 

ni. 

IV. 
V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 
XIII. 
XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 


THE    WILL    OF    GOD,    THE    GLORY    OF    HEAVEN 

Matt.  vi.  10, 

DOING     god's     will,     THE     WAY     TO     HEAVEN 

Matt.   vii.   21, 

DOING    god's    will,    OUR    UNION    WITH    JESUS, 

Matt.  xii.  50, 

DOING  god's  will,  OUR  FOOD,      Johll  iv.   32,  34 
THE  WILL  OF  GOD,  THE  SALVATION  OF  THE  PER- 
ISHING.    Matt,    xviii.    14,    . 
NOT  MINE  OWN  WILL.     John  V.  30, 

DOING  THE  WAY  TO  KNOWING.      John  vil.   1 7 
EVEN    UNTO    THE    DEATH.       Luke    xxii.    42, 

lord!    what  wilt  THOU?    Acts  ix.  6,  . 

THE     MAN     AFTER     GOD's     OWN     HEART.      ActS 

xiii.    22, 

THE    WILL   OF   THE   LORD   BE    DONE.      ActS   Xxi, 

14, 

OF    KNOWING   god's    WILL.      ActS   Xxii.    1 4, 
KNOWING   AND   NOT   DOING.      Rom.    ii.    1 7-2 1, 
THE     RENEWED     MIND     PROVING     GOD'S     WILL 

Rom.  xii.  2, 

ACCORDING   TO   THE  WILL  OF  GOD.      Gal.    i.    4,    , 

GOD    WORKING    OUT    HIS    OWN    WILL.       Eph.    1, 

II, 

7 


PAGE 


II 


18 

24 
30 

36 
42 

48 

55 
61 

68 

74 

81 

87 

93 

99 

105 


Contents 


CHAP. 
XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 
XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 
XXIX. 

XXX. 


PAGE 


UNDERSTANDING   THE   WILL   OF   GOD.      Eph.   V. 

17, 

DOING    THE    WILL    OF    GOD    FROM    THE    HEART, 

Eph.   vi.   5-7, 

FILLED  WITH  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD'S  WILL, 
Col.    i.    9, 

STANDING  PERFECT  IN  ALL  THE  WILL  OF  GOD, 
Col.   iv.    12, 

THE   WILL   OF   GOD,   YOUR   SANCTIFICATION. 

Thess.  iv.  3, 

UNCEASING  THANKSGIVING  THE  WILL  OF  GOD. 

I  Thess.  V.  i8, 

THE   SALVATION  OF  ALL  THE   WILL  OF  GOD. 

Tim.  ii.  4, 

LO,  I  COME  TO  DO  THY  WILL.      Heb.   X.   7, 
DOING  THE  WILL  OF  GOD  OBTAINS   THE   PROM 

ISE.    Heb.  X.  36,  .... 

GOD     HIMSELF     WORKING     HIS     WILL     IN     US 

Heb.  xiii.  21, 

SUFFERING    ACCORDING    TO    THE    WILL    OF    GOD, 

I  Pet.  ii.  15, 

LI\aNG  TO  THE  WILL  OF  GOD.      I    Pet.    iv.   2, 
DOING    god's    will,    THE    SECRET    OF    ABIDING, 

I  John  ii.   17, 

PRAYING   ACCORDING   TO   GOD's    WILL.      I    John 


V.  14, 

XXXI.     THE   GLORY   OF   GOd's    WILL.      Rev.    iv.    10, 


Thou  sweet,  beloved  will  of  God, 

My  anchor  ground,  my  fortress  hill, 

My  spirit's  silent,  fair  abode, 
In  Thee  I  hide  me  and  am  still. 

O  Thou,  that  wiliest  good  alone, 

Lead  Thou  the  way — Thou  guidest  best; 

A  little  child,  I  follow  on, 
And  trusting,  lean  upon  Thy  breast. 

Thy  beautiful,  sweet  will,  my  God, 
Holds  fast  in  its  sublime  embrace 

My  captive  will,  a  gladsome  bird. 
Prisoned  in  such  a  realm  of  grace. 

Within  this  place  of  certain  good, 
Love  evermore  expands  her  wings, 

Or  nestling  in  Thy  perfect  choice, 
Abides  content  with  what  it  brings. 

Oh,  lightest  burden,  sweetest  yoke. 
It  lifts,  it  bears  my  happy  soul, 

It  giveth  wings  to  this  poor  heart; 
My  freedom  is  Thy  grand  control. 

Upon  God's  will  I  lay  me  down. 
As  child  upon  its  mother's  breast; 

No  silken  couch,  nor  softest  bed, 
Could  ever  give  me  such  deep  rest. 

Thy  wonderful,  grand  will,  my  God, 
With  triumph  now  I  make  it  mine; 

And  faith  shall  cry  a  joyous  Yes ! 
To  every  dear  command  of  Thine, 

9 


THY  WILL  BE  DONE 


THE  WILL  OF  GOD,  THE  GLORY  OF  HEAVEN 

"  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth." — Matt. 
vi.  10. 

THE  will  of  a  man  is  the  power  by  which  he  de- 
termines his  actions,  and  decides  what  he  is  to 
do  or  not  to  do.  In  it  is  manifested  his  hidden,  in- 
ward being,  proving  what  his  desires  and  dispositions 
are,  foolish  or  wise,  good  or  evil.  The  will  is  the  rev- 
elation of  character  and  life.  What  a  man  truly 
wills,  he  will  infallibly  seek  to  have  done,  either  by 
himself  or  through  others. 

In  the  will  of  God  we  have  the  perfect  expression 
of  His  Divine  perfection.  Because  He  is  a  fountain 
of  all  beauty  and  blessedness.  His  will  is  inconceiv- 
ably beautiful  and  blessed.  In  it  His  Divine  wis- 
dom and  goodness  make  themselves  known. 
Through  it  alone  the  creature  can  know  his  God ;  in 
accepting  and  doing  that  will  he  finds  the  only  and 
the  sure  way  to  fellowship  and  union  with  God. 

II 


12  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

The  glory  and  the  blessedness  of  heaven  consist  in 
nothing  but  this,  that  God's  will  is  done  there  in  and 
by  all.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  God's  working 
freely  and  fully  all  His  blessed  will  in  its  countless 
hosts.  To  all  that  He  wills  for  them  of  goodness  and 
blessedness  and  service  their  whole  being  is  surren- 
dered in  submission  and  adoration.  God  lives  in 
them  and  they  in  God.  They  are  filled  with  the  ful- 
ness of  God. 

In  the  Lord's  Prayer  our  Blessed  Master  teaches 
us  to  come  to  the  Father  with  the  wonderful  petition, 
that  His  will  may  be  done  on  earth,  even  as  in  heav- 
en! He  calls  us  to  open  our  hearts  to  think  and 
lift  them  heavenwards  in  real  desire  and  prayer. 
He  bids  us  count  upon  an  answer,  and  according  to 
the  power  that  worketh  in  us,  expect  the  experience 
in  such  measure  as  we  are  fitted  for ;  God's  will  done 
in  us  and  by  us,  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven.  The 
God  who  works  it  in  heaven — is  our  Father,  who 
delights  to  work  it  on  earth.  The  blessedness  of 
earth  cannot  possibly  be  other  than  that  of  heaven: 
let  our  hearts  desire  and  delight  to  have  the  will  of 
God  done. 

Thy  will  he  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth !  These 
chapters  invite  you  to  come  and  meditate  on  this 
petition,  if  so  be  the  Father  may,  by  His  Holy  Spirit, 


The  Will  of  God  13 

show  you  the  Divine  beauty  of  His  will,  and  the  al- 
together heavenly  blessedness  of  living  in  it.  Let 
us  begin  by  considering  what  God's  will  includes, 
that  we  may  know  aright  what  our  Lord  means 
and  what  w^e  are  to  expect  when  we  pray :  Thy  will 
be  done ! 

There  is,  first,  the  will  of  God's  holy  Provide^tce, 
Ever}lhing  that  happens  on  earth  comes  to  the  child 
of  God  as  the  will  of  His  Father.  In  His  infinite 
wisdom  God  so  overrules  all  the  evil  of  men  and 
devils,  that  in  permitting  it,  He  can  take  it  up  into 
His  will,  and  make  it  work  out  His  purposes.  Jos- 
eph says  of  the  sin  of  his  brethren :  ''Ye  thought 
evil  against  me,  but  God  meant  it  unto  good." 
Jesus  said  to  Pilate :  "  Thou  couldest  have  no  power 
against  Me,  except  it  were  given  thee  from  above.'' 
In  everything  that  came  on  Him,  He  saw  God's 
will:  it  was  all  the  cup  the  Father  gave  Him.  It 
is  when  the  Christian  learns  to  see  God's  will  in 
everything  that  comes  to  him,  grievous  or  pleasing, 
great  or  small,  that  the  prayer.  Thy  will  be  done, 
will  become  the  unceasing  expression  of  adoring 
submission  and  praise.  The  whole  world  with  its 
dark  mysteries  and  life,  with  all  its  difficulties,  will 
be  illumined  with  the  light  of  God's  presence  and 
rule.     And  the  soul  will  taste  the  rest  and  the  bliss 


14  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

of  knowing  that  it  is  every  moment  encircled  and 
watched  over  by  God's  will,  that  nothing  can  sepa- 
rate it  from  the  Love  of  which  the  will  is  the  ex- 
pression. Happy  the  Christian  who  receives  every- 
thing in  Providence  as  the  will  of  His  Father. 

There  is,  next,  the  will  of  God's  righteous  Pre- 
cepts.  Every  command  of  our  Father  in  heaven  is 
a  ray  of  the  Divine  will,  radiant,  to  the  eye  that  can 
see  it,  with  all  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature. 
It  comes  as  a  proof  of  the  Divine  condescension, 
tenderly  accommodating  itself  to  our  feebleness,  as 
it  puts  the  Divine  will  into  human  words,  suited  to 
our  special  capacity  and  circumstances.  We  all 
naturally  connect  the  rays  of  light  on  earth  with 
the  sun  from  which  they  come.  The  more  the 
Christian  learns  to  link  every  precept  with  the  In- 
finite Will  of  Love  whence  it  comes,  the  more  will 
he  see  the  nobility  and  the  joy  of  a  life  of  entire 
obedience,  the  privilege  and  the  honour  of  carrying 
out  in  human  forms  the  perfect  will  of  the  Father  in 
heaven.  He  then  learns  to  say  of  God's  precepts 
what  first  appeared  too  high :  They  are  the  rejoic- 
ing of  my  heart.  And,  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heav- 
en, becomes  the  secret  inspiration  of  a  glad  fulfil- 
ment of  all  God's  commands. 

Then  comes — the  will  of  God's  precious  Promises, 


The  Will  of  God  15 

We  often  fail  in  the  power  of  grasping  or  holding 
some  promise,  of  which  we  fain  would  have  the 
comfort,  because  we  deal  with  it  as  a  fragment,  and 
do  not  connect  it  with  the  great  whole  of  God's 
blessed  will  for  us.  Let  every  believer  seek  earnestly 
to  realise  what  God's  will  in  His  promises  is.  It  is 
His  determination  to  do  a  certain  thing,  His  engage- 
ment to  do  it  for  or  in  me,  if  I  will  trust  Him.  Behind 
the  promise  there  is  the  faithful  Almighty  God  wait- 
ing to  fulfil  it.  What  a  strength  it  would  give  in 
prayer,  what  a  confidence  in  expectation,  to  be  quiet, 
and  trace  the  promise  to  the  Living  Will,  the  Loving 
Heart,  that  wills  to  make  it  true  to  everyone  that 
yields  himself  in  trust  and  dependence.  As,  Thy 
will  be  done,  in  view  of  God's  Providence,  was  the 
language  of  a  glad  submission,  in  view  of  His  Pre- 
cepts, the  surrender  to  a  full  obedience,  so  here,  in 
relation  to  the  Promises,  it  becomes  the  song  of  an 
assured  hope.  Thy  will  will  be  done,  by  Thyself 
in  us,  O  our  Father  in  heaven. 

One  thought  more — there  is  the  will  of  God's 
Eternal  Purpose.  Our  view  of  God's  will  in  His 
Providence,  His  Precepts,  His  Promises,  is  often 
very  much  confined  to  ourselves.  The  believer,  who 
through  these  longs  to  enter  fully  into  all  the  will 
of  God,  will  be  led  on  into  a  wider  and  a  deeper  in- 


1 6  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

sight  into  the  glory  of  its  counsels.  He  will  learn 
something  of  that  Great  Purpose  which  filled  the 
heart  of  God  from  Eternity,  which  reveals  nothing 
less  than  the  triumph  of  God's  Redeeming  Love  in 
a  world  of  sin.  As  he  is  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
into  the  great  counsels  of  redemption,  into  the  mean- 
ing of  the  sacrifice  by  which  God  has  sought  to  ac- 
complish them,  of  the  patience  with  which  He  is 
working  out  His  plans,  and  the  final  triumph  which 
is  so  sure  and  so  glorious,  he  feels  how  little  he  has 
realised  his  position  or  the  meaning  of  this  prayer. 
Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth!  be- 
comes the  expression  of  his  fellowship  with  God  in 
His  wondrous  carrying  out  of  His  everlasting  coun- 
sel of  grace,  of  his  intercession  on  behalf  of  a  per- 
ishing world,  of  his  joyful  anticipation  of  all  flesh 
seeing  the  glory  of  God.  He  feels  himself  as  a 
mote  floating  in  the  sunlight  of  God's  presence.  He 
knows  himself  an  instrument^  a  vessel,  a  member  of 
the  body  of  Christ,  through  which  God's  glory  is 
working  out  His  perfect  will. 

Believer,  come  and  listen.  This  prayer  needs  your 
whole  heart.  It  needs  the  teaching,  yea,  the  in- 
dwelling of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  heart,  to  be  able  to 
pray  it  aright.  It  calls  for  a  heart,  a  will,  a  life, 
entirely  given  up  to  the  Father  in  heaven,  by  His 


The  Will  of  God  17 

Spirit  dwelling  in  us,  to  understand  it  aright.  Let 
the  glory  of  God  doing  His  will  in  us  and  through 
us  be  met  by  nothing  less  than  a  will  wholly  given 
up  to  do  His  will  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven. 
Study  how  God's  will  is  done  in  heaven.  Yield 
yourself  to  do  it  even  so  on  earth. 


II 

DOING  GOD'S  WILL,  THE  WAY  TO   HEAVEN 

"  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall 
enter  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  but  he  that  doeth  the 
will  of  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven." — Matt.  vii.  21. 

WE  have  seen  that  the  will  of  God  constitutes 
the  glory  of  heaven.  Heaven  is  nothing 
but  the  unhindered  manifestation  of  the  working  of 
God's  will,  the  outshining  of  His  hidden  glory  in 
what  He  does.  The  inhabitants  of  heaven  owe  all 
their  glory  to  God's  working  His  will  of  love  in 
them,  and  all  their  happiness  to  their  working  it 
out  in  His  service.  The  petition  in  the  Lord's 
Prayer  teaches  us  to  long  and  ask  that  earth  may 
becom.e  like  heaven,  and  that  His  will  may  be  done 
here  even  as  there.  From  this  truth  that  of  our 
text  follows  naturally.  The  only  way  to  be  fit  to 
enter  heaven  must  be,  to  do  the  will  of  God  here 
on  earth.  Every  thought  of  heaven  that  does  not 
lead  US  to  do  the  will  of  God  is  a  vain  imagination. 

There  are  multitudes  of  Christians  who  have  never 
seen   this.     They    think    that    the    way    to   heaven 

18 


The  Way  to  Heaven  19 

is  found  in  pious  desires  and  religious  duties,  in 
trusting  Christ  for  mercy,  and  seeking  to  be  kept 
from  gross  sin.  But  the  thought  that  Christ  puts 
here,  that  only  those  who  love  to  do  the  will  of  God 
can  enter  heaven — has  never  taken  possession  of 
their  mind  or  heart.  And  yet  our  Lord  makes  the  : 
difference  between  the  reUgion  of  prayer  and  pro- 
fession, and  the  religion  of  obedience  and  perform- 
ance, as  plain  as  words  can  make  it.  Not  every  one 
that  saith  tmto  ile,  Lord,  Lord — that  prays  to  ]\Ie 
and  professes  to  acknowledge  and  honour  'Me  as 
Saviour;  but  he  that  doeth  the  Vv'ill  of  2\Iy  Father 
in  heaven — he  alone  shall  enter  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  It  is  the  Father's  presence  and  the  Father's 
will  in  heaven  that  makes  heaven  what  it  is :  doing 
the  Father's  will  on  earth  is  the  onh'  conceivable 
way  of  entering  heaven ;  nothing  else  can  give  the 
capacity  for  enjoying  it.  There  must  always  be 
harmony  between  a  life  and  its  environment.  To 
enter  the  heaven  of  God's  will,  without  a  nature 
that  loves  and  does  God's  will,  is  an  impossibility. 

But  whence  then  comes  the  terrible  mistake  that 
so  many  make,  who  think  that  they  are  honestly 
longing  and  striving  to  get  to  heaven?  Let  us  try 
and  answer  this  question.  In  everything  that  exists 
there  is  an  outVv'ard  form  or  shape  in  which  it  m.ani- 


10  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

fests  itself  and  an  inward  power  or  life  which  con- 
stitutes its  true  nature  or  being.  It  is  thus  with 
heaven  and  our  thought  of  it.  Men  regard  it  as  a 
place  full  of  brightness  and  glory  and  happiness — 
free  from  all  sorrow  or  pain,  full  of  all  that  can 
give  rest  and  joy.  And  who  would  not  wish  to  enter 
there?  The  most  worldly  hope  to  find  a  place  in  it 
when  compelled  to  leave  the  present  life.  But  they 
never  think  that  what  attracts  them  is  only  an  ex- 
ternal image  they  form  of  heaven.  And  they  know 
not  that  what  constitutes  the  actual,  essential  glory 
of  heaven,  what  really  gives  heaven  and  its  inhabi- 
tants their  rest  and  joy  and  everlasting  song,  is — 
the  Presence  of  the  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  and  the 
undisturbed  supremacy  of  His  Holy  Will.  Because 
in  heaven  God's  will  does  everything,  and  is  done 
by  everyone,  God's  own  blessedness  fills  all.  Oh! 
the  folly  of  thinking  of  entering  heaven  while  they 
are  utterly  incapable  of  enjoying  heaven.  The 
Father  in  heaven,  and  His  will  on  earth  as  in  heaven, 
are  not  the  desire  or  joy  of  their  heart. 

The  same  error,  in  mistaking  the  outward  for 
the  inward,  is  made  in  regard  to  religion.  God's 
words  calls  us  to  seek  and  to  strive,  to  listen  to 
God's  truth,  to  pray  and  believe,  to  forsake  sin  and 
follow  after  that  which  is  good.     And  so  men  seek 


The  Way  to  Heaven  21 

to  put  their  trust  in  Christ,  to  confess  Him,  and 
do  many  things  in  His  name,  and  think  that  this 
is  rehgion.  And  all  the  while  they  forget  that 
the  inner  spiritual  reality  of  true  religion  is  this — 
the  knowing,  and  loving,  and  doing  of  the  Father's 
will  as  their  one  desire  and  delight.  They  know 
not  that  it  is  to  work  this  that  Jesus  is  a  Saviour 
from  sin;  that  this  is  the  only  proof  that  our  faith 
is  true;  that  by  this  path  alone  can  the  entrance  to 
heaven  be  found. 

When  this  is  preached^  many  a  one  comforts  him- 
self with  the  thought  of  God's  mercy.  Did  not 
Christ  just  come  for  those  \vho  had  sinned,  and  had 
not  done  God's  Will?  He  did  indeed,  blessed  be 
God !  But  not  for  those  who  continue  in  sin,  and 
do  not  make  the  will  of  God  the  object  of  their  life. 
Our  sin  and  misery  was  that  we  had  fallen  out  of 
the  will  of  God  into  our  own  will  and  the  will  of 
Satan.  Christ  came  with  the  one  object  of  redeem- 
ing lis  from  the  power  of  our  own  will,  and  giving 
us  a  new  nature  and  His  Holy  Spirit,  to  enable  us 
here  on  earth  to  love  and  do  God's  will.  Without 
this,  our  Lord  assures  us,  there  can  be  no  thought  of 
our  entering  heaven.  The  same  righteous  grace 
that  in  Justification  receives  the  ungodly  into  favour 
without  w^orks,  through   faith  alone,   for  the  sake 


22  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

of  Christ  and  His  work,  will  in  the  great  day  take 
the  works  and  the  life  into  account  as  the  proof  of 
the  reality  of  faith  and  r.n^^on  to  Christ,  and  of  the 
fitness  for  entering  heaven.  As  we  are  saved  zvith- 
out  works,  we  are  created  in  Christ  Jesus  for  good 
works,  which  God  afore  prepared  that  we  should 
walk  in  them.  Without  these  there  can  be  no  en- 
trance into  heaven;  they  are  indispensable.  The 
Master's  words  are  plain  and  decisive :  He  that  doeth 
the  will  of  My  Father  in  heaven,  shall  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  (Study  carefully  Matt.  xvi. 
2y,  XXV.  31-46;  Rom.  ii.  6-7;  2  Cor.  v.  10.) 

Christ  came  from  heaven  to  show  us  that  doing 
the  will  of  the  Father  is  the  one  mark  of  a  son  of 
God,  and  to  save  us  into  doing  that  will.  True  con- 
version is  turning  away  from  our  self-will  and  giving 
ourselves  to  the  will  of  God  as  our  duty  and  our 
only  blessedness.  I  ask  every  believer  who  reads 
this  to  inquire,  and  say  whether  he  thinks  that 
the  doing  of  the  Father's  will,  as  the  one  object  of 
Christ's  salvation,  and  the  one  preparation  for  enter- 
ing heaven,  has  taken  the  place  in  his  life  and  faith 
and  conduct,  that  it  had  in  the  life  and  conduct  and 
teaching  of  Jesus  Christ.  Read  the  question  over 
again,  and  pause ;  it  is  worth  while  giving  a  careful 
answer. 


The  Way  to  Heaven  23 

All  salvation  on  earth  or  in  heaven  is — doing 
the  will  of  God.  If  we  find  that  this  blessed  truth 
has  never  shone  with  its  full  heavenly  light  into  our 
souls,  let  us  at  once  turn  to  our  Lord  Jesus  and  ask 
Him  to  teach  us.  Let  us  give  ourselves  up  to  it, 
to  study,  to  believe,  to  practice,  to  rejoice  in  it.  Let 
us  each  day  choose  the  will  of  God,  His  whole  will, 
and  nothing  but  His  will,  to  have  rule  over  us  and 
dwell  within  us.  The  living  Father  whose  love  can 
make  it  our  blessedness,  through  the  living  Christ, 
who  loves  to  teach  it  us  and  work  it  in  us,  will  en- 
able us  to  do  His  will. 


Ill 

DOING  GOD'S  WILL,  OUR  UNION  WITH  JESUS. 

''  Whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  My  Father  which  is  in 
heaven,  the  same  is  My  brother,  and  sister,  and  mother." — 
Matt.  xii.  50. 

HOW  many  Christians  there  are  who  long  great- 
ly for  a  more  intimate  fellowship  with  the 
Lord  Jesus.  The  thought  of  a  fuller  experience  of 
His  love,  of  His  abiding  presence,  of  His  mighty 
power  to  save  from  sin  and  self,  greatly  attracts 
them.  They  often  wonder  that  the  longings  and 
the  prayers  of  years  appear  to  avail  so  little.  They 
are  ready  to  turn  to  anyone  who  they  think  can  help 
them  to  discover  the  secret  of  what  they  have  sought 
in  vain,  the  full  manifestation  in  their  heart  of  the 
love  and  the  power  of  Christ.  Come,  my  reader, 
turn  to-day  to  our  Blessed  Lord  Himself,  and  let 
Him  tell  you  His  open  secret.  The  way  into  the 
most  intimate  union  with  Christ  is  very  simple: 
doing  the  will  of  His  Father.  Of  one  who  does  this 
He  says:    the  same  is  My  brother,  and  sister,  and 

mother. 

24 


Our  Union  with  Jesus  25 

What  does  this  mean?  A  brother  or  a  sister  is 
one  who  is  born  of  the  same  father,  shares  the  same 
love,  and  home,  and  care;  bears  in  some  measure 
the  same  Hkeness  in  disposition  and  character;  is 
bound  to  his  other  brothers  and  sisters  by  these  ties 
in  a  common  love  and  intercourse.  When  Christ 
calls  one  of  us  a  brother  or  sister,  it  mieans  nothing 
less.  Like  Him  we  are  born  of  God;  the  Father's 
life,  and  love,  and  likeness  are  in  us,  as  in  Him.  As 
the  Elder  Brother,  He  gives  to  us  and  shares  with  us 
all  He  has ;  He  pours  out  on  us  all  the  love  with 
which  the  Father  loves  Him.  He  is  not  ashamed 
to  call  us  brethren.  He  delights  in  our  relationship 
to  Him,  in  our  welfare,  in  our  society.  He  only  lives 
to  find  His  happiness  in  us,  and  in  what  He  can  do 
for  us.  The  one  thing  He  longs  for  is  that  we 
should  knov/  and  claim  our  relationship,  should  come 
to  Him  and  be  free  with  Him  as  no  brother  or  sister 
ever  was. 

Let  us  pray  for  the  quickening  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  make  all  this  a  reality.  Just  think  of  what  a  joy 
would  come  into  the  believer's  life  if  he  truly  realised 
this :  Jesus  loves  me  as  a  brother,  yes  me,  just  as  I 
am,  all  unworthy  and  sinful.  He  loves  me  as  a 
brother.  No  elder  brother  ever  watched  over  a  weak 
younger  brother  so  tenderly  as  m^y  Elder  Brother 


26  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

watches  over  me.  He  v/ants  me  to  know  it.  He 
gives  the  command :  ''  Say  to  My  brethren,  I  ascend 
to  My  Father  and  your  Father/'  He  wants  me  to 
knovv^  it;  He  longs  that  I  should  live  with  Him  as 
a  brother  in  the  Father's  presence;  He  is  able  and 
willing  to  make  the  possibihty  a  reality.  He  in- 
vites us  to  come  and  say  in  tender  reverence,  O  my 
Holy  Elder  Brother — I  dare  scarce  say,  and  yet  I 
miay  and  I  will — I  am  Thy  brother;  Thou  art  my 
Brother.  He  can  enable  us  to  realise  it,  and  abide  in 
His  presence  all  the  day  and  every  day. 

And  what  is  the  disposition  of  heart  that  can  claim 
the  blessing  and  abide  in  it.  Read  again :  ''  Who- 
soever shall  do  the  will  of  My  Father  which  is  in 
heaven,  the  same  is  My  brother,  and  sister,  and 
mother/'  The  Lord  opens  here  to  us  the  deepest 
secret  of  His  own  Hfe  as  Son  of  God  on  earth.  He 
came  as  man  to  prove  the  blessedness  and  the  glory 
of  doing  the  will  of  the  Father,  In  His  human  life 
this  was  the  one  disposition  that  lay  at  the  root  of 
His  power  to  conquer  sin,  to  satisfy  God,  and  to 
save  us.  Doing  the  will  of  God  is  the  only  pos- 
sible way,  on  earth  or  in  heaven,  of  pleasing 
Him. 

Thinking  as  God  thinks,  loving  what  God  loves, 
willing  as  God  wills,  doing  what  God  says — how 


Our  Union  with  Jesus  27 

could  we  think  that  there  is  any  way  but  this  to 
the  fellowship  or  the  favour  of  God.  Of  Himself 
Jesus  said :  "  I  have  kept  the  commandments  of  My 
Father  and  abide  in  His  love."  The  law  for  the 
Elder  Brother  is  the  unchangeable  law  for  all  the 
children:  doing  the  Father's  will  is  the  only  true 
mark  of  being  a  child.  And  so  it  is  the  one  con- 
dition of  being  admitted  to  the  full  experience  of  a 
walk  in  all  the  joy  that  the  Brotherhood  of  Jesus 
can  bring.  Doing  the  will  of  the  Father  is  the  bond 
of  union  with  Jesus. 

The  converse  is  also  true.  Union  with  Jesus 
gives  the  power  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father.  We 
begin  with  ''  willing  to  do  His  will/'  and  do  it  as 
far  as  we  know  and  can.  When  this  is  really  done 
with  the  whole  hearty  we  come  and  claim  the  promise 
of  being  admitted  consciously  into  the  love  and  so- 
ciety of  the  Elder  Brother.  In  true  intercourse  with 
Him,  studying  His  example,  drinking  in  His  Spirit, 
receiving  His  strength,  we  get  larger  insight  and 
greater  love  of  God's  will,  and  begin  to  long  to  live 
in  it  wholly  even  as  Jesus  did.  And  so  we  go  from 
strength  to  strength,  the  doing  the  will  fitting  for 
the  brother-life,  and  the  brother-life  fitting  for  the 
doing  of  the  will.  In  ever  closer  union  with  Him, 
the  Elder  Brother  imparts  to  us,  in  ever  deeper  meas- 


28  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

ure,  the  secret  of  His  own  blessed  Hfe  in  the  will  of 
God. 

And  what  is  that  secret  ?  It  is  found  in  the  words 
our  Lord  so  frequently  uses — ''  the  will  of  My 
Father,  which  is  in  heaven.''  Christ  was  only  able 
to  do  and  suffer  as  He  did,  because  it  was  all  to  Him 
each  moment  the  will  of  a  loving  Father.  The  will 
of  the  Father  was  nothing  but  the  experience  of  the 
love  of  the  Father :  therefore  He  delighted,  therefore 
He  was  able,  to  do  it.  Many  Christians  never  learn 
to  understand  the  difference  between  the  Law  of 
God  and  the  Will  of  God.  The  law  is  given  by 
a  Ruler,  and  when  embodied  in  a  statute  book  may 
be  kept  or  broken,  with  very  little  thought  of  per- 
sonal relationship  to  the  Law-giver.  For  this 
reason  the  Law  has  no  power  to  secure  obedience. 
Christ  speaks  of  the  Will  as  the  Will  of  the  Father — 
the  expression  of  a  personal  living  comm.unication, 
in  which  the  Father's  voice  and  presence  is  ever 
known,  and  the  Will  never  for  a  moment  separated 
from  Him  whose  it  is.  It  was  the  ever-present  Love 
of  God  shovving  His  will,  and  the  ever-blessed  en- 
joyment of  that  Love,  that  enabled  Christ  to  be 
obedient  even  unto  death.  It  is  this  alone  can  enable 
us  to  do  the  Father's  will.  The  grace  once  for  all 
.  to  yield  ourselves  to  do  only  that  will ;  the  faith  to 


Our  Union  with  Jesus  29 

believe  that  in  the  fellowship  and  by  the  power  of 
Christ  such  a  life  is  possible;  the  joyful  devotion  to 
Him  to  walk  as  led  by  His  hand,  and  like  Him 
to  do  the  Father's  will;  these  all  come  as  a  believer 
seeks  to  know  the  life  of  a  brother  of  the  First  Be- 
gotten Son. 

It  is  indeed  a  change  in  the  life  of  a  believer,  vvhen 
he  fully  grasps  and  experiences  the  difference  be- 
tween the  Law  of  God  and  the  Will  of  the  Father. 
He  sees  how^  the  only  pozuer  to  do  the  will  is  the 
unceasing  experience  of  the  Father's  presence,  His 
loving  voice,  His  guiding  eye,  His  inspiring  love. 
He  sees  how  that  was  the  life  Jesus  lived,  how  noth- 
ing less  is  the  life  Christ  lives  in  us.  He  learns 
to  understand  how  doing  the  Father's  will  is  the  one 
blessing  into  which  faith  is  to  lead  us,  the  one  secret 
of  abiding  union  with  Christ  Jesus.  Go  out,  my 
soul,  into  thy  w^ork  this  day,  and  let  thy  life  be  trans- 
figured by  the  one  thought :  Like  Jesus,  with  Jesus, 
in  Jesus  I  live  to  do  the  Father's  will.  And  as  you 
fail,  or  fear  to  fail,  just  whisper:  '^  O  my  Lord,  my 
Elder  Brother,  Thou  and  I,  Thou  and  I,  are  we  not 
one  in  doing  the  Father's  will." 


IV 

DOING  GOD'S  WILL,  OUR  FOOD 

"  I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of.  My  meat  is  to 
do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  and  to  accomplish  His 
work." — John  iv.  32,  34. 

WHEN  tempted  in  the  wilderness  by  Satan  to 
satisfy  His  hunger  by  a  miracle  Christ  an- 
swered: Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by 
every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God. 
The  life  is  more  than  bread.  God's  word,  received 
and  obeyed,  is  the  true  nourishment  of  our  life. 
In  the  Beatitudes  Christ  spake :  Blessed  are  they  that 
hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  after  the 
doing  of  what  is  right ;  they  shall  be  satisfied.  And 
so  He  says  here  of  Himself  that  to  do  the  will  of 
Him  that  sent  Him,  and  to  accomplish  His  work, 
is  the  m^eat  that  He  eats,  the  food  by  which  He  lives. 
\,  The  hidden  manna  is  God's  will ;  to  do  it  is  to  eat  and 
'^  live.     Let  us  think  what  this  eating  teaches  us. 

Eating  means  the  maintenance  of  life. — All  cre- 
ated life  must  be  supported  by  nourishment  from 
without,  if  it  is  not  to  die.     And  the  food  must  ever 

30 


Our  Food  31 

be  in  correspondence  to  the  nature  of  the  life  it  sus- 
tains, and  the  organs  provided  for  receiving  it.  Our 
physical  life  is  fed  from  the  life  of  nature.  Our 
spiritual  life  can  only  be  maintained  out  of  the  eternal 
life  that  is  in  God.  There  is  no  zvay  for  oiir  re- 
ceiving that  life  day  by  day  but  by  doing  the  zinll  of 
God.  The  life  of  God  reveals  and  communicates 
itself  only  in  His  will.  In  its  first  beginning  life 
is  always  a  gift.  But  its  maintenance  is  always  con- 
nected with  action  and  growth.  It  is  doing  God's 
Zinll,  and  accomplishing  His  work  that  will  secure  to 
the  Christian  the  daily  continuance  in  the  Divine 
Hfe. 

Eating  means  appropriation. — Our  body  receives 
from  the  outer  world,  of  which  it  is  a  part,  that  by 
which  it  lives,  the  constituent  elements  by  which  its 
life  is  sustained.  These  can  nourish  us  in  no  other 
way  but  by  being  taken  up  into  our  system,  assimi- 
lated and  made  a  very  part  of  our  ovvm  selves.  Even 
so  in  the  spiritual  life.  As  we  have  said  already,  the 
life  of  God  acts  and  m.anifests  itself  through  the  Vv^ill 
of  God.  And  it  is  only  by  truly  and  fully  appropri- 
ating that  zvill,  taking  it  into  our  system,  wholly  as- 
similating it,  and  m.aking  it  a  part  of  our  own  being, 
by  doing  it,  that  the  life  can  be  m.aintained  in  us. 
The  life  is  a  hidden  spiritual  mystery ;  the  will  is  its 


32  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

concrete  expression,  capable  of  being  known,  and 
accepted  or  rejected.  And  because  the  will  is  the 
Divine  power  in  action,  so  there  is  no  possible  way 
of  assimilating  the  Divine  will  but  by  action  on  our 
/  part,  that  is,  by  our  doing  it.  It  is  not  the  knowl- 
edge, or  the  admiration,  or  the  approval  of  the  will 
of  God,  but  the  doing  of  it  that  alone  feeds  the  heav- 
enly life.  It  is  only  by  doing  that  I  really  make  it 
my  own.     ''  My  meat  is  to  do  His  will." 

Eating  means  the  renewal  and  increase  of  strength. 
— We  do  not  eat  just  enough  to  maintain  a  bare 
existence;  we  desire  to  have  food,  both  in  quantity 
and  quality,  sufficient  to  give  us  strength  and  vigour 
for  our  work.  Doing  God's  will  is  the  sure  way  to 
become  strong.  Many  Christians  seek  their  strength 
in  prayer,  in  faith,  in  the  promises,  in  fellowship. 
They  complain  of  their  feebleness.  They  have  never 
learnt  that  Christ  made  doing  the  will  of  the  Father 
His  meat;  it  was  this  that  was  rewarded  with  the 
Divine  strength  for  all  He  had  to  do.  He  felt  that 
He  had  but  one  thing  to  do  in  the  world — to  accom- 
plish the  work  for  which  God  had  sent  Him ;  as  He 
did  it  He  received  new  strength  for  what  He  still  had 
to  do.  It  is  this  His  disciples  need.  The  whole 
power  of  God  works  in  His  will.  As  I  appropriate 
that  will,  and  know  I  am  doing  the  very  thing  God 


Our  Food  23 

is  willing  for  me,  its  powers  work  in  me.     Doing 
the  will  of  God  brings  heavenly  strength. 

Eating  means  satisfaction. — God  has  so  created 
us  that  a  sense  of  need  of  hunger,  impels  us  to  seek 
food,  and  makes  our  partaking  of  it  an  enjoyment 
and  a  source  of  satisfaction.  ''  Bless  the  Lord,  who 
satisfieth  thy  mouth  with  good  things ;  so  that  thy 
youth  is  renewed  like  the  eagle's."  ''  He  satisfieth 
the^hungry  soul.''  It  is  feeding  on  the  will  of  God 
that  gives  this  Divine  satisfaction.  The  will  of  God 
is  His  glory  and  perfection ;  doing  that  will  leads 
up  into  a  wonderful  fellowship  and  partnership  with 
Himself.  But  that  means  more  than  just  doing 
what  is  right  or  keeping  the  law.  No,  the  right 
things  may  be  done  under  the  constraint  of  con- 
science or  duty  without  bringing  real  satisfaction. 
It  is  only  when  what  we  do  is  done  as  the  will  of  the 
Father,  in  the  sense  of  His  presence,  in  fellowship 
with  Himself,  and  the  loving  desire  to  please  Him, 
that  it  will  give  nourishment  and  strength  and  satis- 
faction to  the  soul. 

There  are  many  Christians  who  mourn  over  their 
leanness  and  their  feebleness.  They  study  Christ's 
image  and  example,  they  seek  in  some  things  to  be 
conformed  to  Him,  and  yet  find  so  little  either  of 
the  power  or  the  joy  of  living  as  He  lived.     The 


34  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

cause  is  simple.  They  do  not  feed  on  the  food  on 
which  Christ  fed.  Two  children,  or  two  men,  may 
be  equally  healthy,  but  the  difference  of  food  may 
make  all  the  difference  between  their  strength  and 
success  in  the  work  of  life.  The  believer  has  the 
same  eternal  life  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  it 
needs  the  same  daily  food  if  there  is  to  be  any  meas- 
ure of  that  conformity  which  God  expects  and  has 
provided  for.  Our  Lord  tells  us :  My  meat  is  that  I 
do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  He  that  eats  of 
this  meat  shall  have  the  life  more  abundant,  shall  be 
satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness. 

And  what  can  be  the  reason  of  so  much  failure 
in  feeding  on  this  heavenly  food?  It  m.ay  be  that 
the  Church  has  not  taught  it  as  clearly  as  was  need- 
ed. Or  that  we  heard  and  heeded  not.  Or  that 
when  we  did  heed,  we  were  deceived  by  the  lie  of 
Satan  that  this  was  too  hard  a  path.  And  yet  the 
Lord  has  said  it  so  plainly:  The  will  of  God  is  the 
glory  of  heaven ;  the  doing  of  God's  will  ought  to  be 
our  great  prayer  on  earth.  The  doing  of  God's  will 
is  the  only  pass  to  heaven,  the  only  mark  of  the 
family  likeness  in  the  home  of  Jesus.  The  doing  of 
God's  will  the  only  food  on  which  a  child  of  God 
can  thrive  and  be  able  to  accomplish  the  work  the 
Father  has  given  us  to  do.     The  doing  of  God's 


Our  Food  35 

will  our  daily  food ;  we  must  go  back  upon  our  past 
life  and  see  if  this  has  been  what  we  have  been  feed- 
ing on.  And  if  not,  we  must  believe  that  a  change 
of  diet,  a  return  to  the  simple,  heavenly  fare  on  which 
the  Son  of  God  lived  His  life  and  did  His  work,  will 
restore  us  to  health  and  make  the  work  of  God  our 
joy  and  our  Hfe. 

Soul !  pray  for  a  great  hunger  for  the  will  of  God, 
as  natural  and  as  continual  as  for  your  daily  bread. 
Beg,  even  if  it  were  at  first  but  for  a  crumb  of  this 
heavenly  bread  from  the  Father's  table,  God  showing 
you  His  will  for  you,  and  enabling  you  to  do  it  for 
Him.  It  may  be  the  beginning  of  such  a  change  in 
your  life.  The  work  you  have  done  for  God,  at 
your  choice  and  in  your  way,  and  the  commandments 
you  have  tried  to  obey,  may  all  become  to  you  the 
loving  will  of  the  living  Father,  living  fellowship  with 
the  living  God.  Instead  of  eating  the  bread  you 
had  to  find  yourself  you  will  say:  ''  I  have  meat  to 
eat  ye  know  not  of  " — the  will  of  the  Father  made 
known  and  performed  day  by  day. 


V 

THE  WILL  OF  GOD,  THE  SALVATION  OF  THE 
PERISHING 

"  Even  so  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in 
heaven,  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish." — Matt. 
xviii.  14. 

OUR  Lord  Jesus  here  uses  the  words,  little  ones, 
both  of  the  children  of  whom  He  spoke  in 
verses  2  and  3,  and  also  of  the  feeble  and  simple 
ones  among  His  people :  "  the  little  ones  who  believe 
in  Me  ''  (verse  6).  He  says  that  just  as  surely  as  a 
man  rejoices  over  one  lost  sheep,  that  he  has  found 
again,  so  the  Father  does  not  will  that  any  one,  even 
of  the  feeblest  and  most  despised,  should  perish. 
When  our  Lord  spoke  elsewhere  of  His  doing  the 
Father's  will,  it  was  specially  the  will  of  God  to  save 
the  lost  that  He  meant :  ''  I  am  come  down  from 
heaven,  not  to  do  Mine  own  will,  but  the  mil  of  Him 
that  sent  Me,  And  this  is  the  will  of  Him  that  sent 
Me^  that  of  all  that  which  He  giveth  Me  I  should 
lose  nothing.  For  this  is  the  will  of  My  Father,  that 
every  one  that  beholdeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on 

36 


Salvation  of  the  Perishing  37 

Him,  should  have  eternal  life/'  The  will  of  the 
Father  is  the  salvation  of  men.  x\ll  the  leadings  of 
God's  will,  down  to  the  minutest  details  of  the  life 
of  every  hour,  have  their  root  in  this  great  fountain 
of  redeeming  love :  that  not  even  one  of  the  little 
ones  should  perish.  Christ's  coming  dow^n  from 
heaven,  all  His  speaking  and  doing.  His  living  and 
suffering  and  dying,  it  all  had  its  unity  in  this — it 
was  the  revelation  of  God's  will  to  save,  and  of 
Christ's  surrender  of  Himself  to  do  that  will  in  sav- 
ing all  the  Father  had  given  Him. 

When  we  yield  ourselves  to  do  the  Father's  will, 
must  the  will  of  God  for  the  salvation  of  men  be  to 
us,  as  it  was  to  Christ,  the  main  object  of  our  Hfe, 
the  one  thing  we  do  ?  It  must  indeed.  The  life  that 
was  in  Christ  is  the  same  life  that  is  in  us.  The 
glory  of  the  Father;  the  blessedness  of  being  the 
channels  of  the  Father's  love ;  the  entire  surrender  to 
the  one  work  the  Father  wants  done  in  the  world ;  all 
these  claim  our  devotion  as  much  as  they  did  that  of 
Christ.  There  is  an  infinite  difference  in  the  part 
He  took  and  the  part  we  are  to  take  in  carrying  out 
that  will:  but  the  ivill  itself  is  to  be  as  much  the  joy 
and  the  aim  of  our  life  as  it  was  of  His.  The  larger 
our  apprehension  of  God's  will,  and  the  more  com- 
plete our  surrender  to  it  in  all  its  breadth,  to  be 


38  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

wholly  possessed  of  it^  the  more  surely  will  we  grow 
to  the  stature  of  the  perfect  man  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  reach  our  Christian  maturity. 

It  is  just  here  that  so  many  Christians  fail.  They 
seek  to  know  the  will  of  God  only  in  its  minute  de- 
tails concerning  themselves,  and  so  they  live  prac- 
tically under  a  law  consisting  in  commandments  and 
ordinances.  Their  own  personal  happiness  is  the 
first  thing;  obedience  and  sanctification  are  subordi- 
nate to  these,  as  means  to  an  end ;  the  selfish  element 
infects  and  enfeebles  all  their  religion.  They  have 
no  conception  of  the  nobility,  of  the  heavenly  ro3^alty 
of  spirit,  that  comes  to  the  man  who  forgets  and  loses 
himself,  as  he  gives  himself  away  to  that  will  of  God 
for  the  salvation  of  men.  It  was  that  will  sent 
Christ  into  the  world.  It  was  that  will  animated 
Him  during  His  whole  life.  It  was  for  the  breath- 
ing that  will  into  our  hearts  and  lives  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  came.  It  is  in  the  being  possessed  by  that 
will,  even  as  Christ  w^as  possessed  by  it,  yielding  our- 
selves to  the  mastery  of  Divine  Love,  that  the  image 
of  God  is  restored  in  us,  so  that  we  may  live  only 
to  love  and  to  bless,  even  as  God  does. 

''  It  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in 
heaven  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish." 
What  inspiration  these  words  have  given  to  God's 


Salvation  of  the  Perishing  39 

workers  on  behalf  of  orphans,  of  waifs  and  strays, 
of  children  in  India  perishing  from  famine,  or  in 
Africa  from  slavery.  What  courage  to  thousands 
of  teachers  for  the  little  ones  of  whom  they  had 
charge.  What  patience  and  strength  it  has  breathed 
into  the  hearts  of  those  who  have  had  to  deal  with 
the  neglected  and  the  outcast  in  every  land.  It 
w^as  their  joy  and  hope  that  they  knew  that  they 
were  doing  the  zvill  of  God.  Yea,  more,  they  knew 
that  the  mighty  will  of  God  was  working  itself  out 
through  them.  These  all  have  experienced  how 
blessed  it  was  at  times  to  look  away  from  their  own 
little  and  limited  interests  and  duties,  and  to  cast 
themselves  into  that  mighty  stream  of  God's  loving 
will,  which  is  slowdy  but  surely  working  out  His 
blessed  purpose.  There  they  found  themselves  in 
fellow^ship  with  God's  own  son,  and  with  the  saints 
of  all  ages,  whose  one  glory  it  had  been  that 
they  had  known  and  fulfilled  the  redeeming  will  of 
God. 

What  a  change  it  would  bring  into  the  life  of 
many  a  believer  to  know  and  love  this  will  of  the 
Father,  to  lose  self,  and  sacrifice  all  in  order  to  be 
mastered  and  consumed  by  its  blessed  fire.  If  you 
would  thus  know  it,  reader,  and  be  possessed  by  it, 
you  must  make  it  a  definite  object  of  study  and 


40  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

desire.  Seek  in  meditation  to  get  some  right  impres- 
sion of  its  glory.  Ask  for  the  Holy  Spirit's  teach- 
ing to  give  you  a  spiritual  vision  of  the  infinite 
energy^  of  the  Divine  Love,  as  it  wills  nothing  but 
good  to  every  one  of  its  creatures.  It  needs  time 
and  thought  and  prayer;  it  needs  the  giving  up  of 
all  our  self-satisfaction  with  our  limited  views  of 
God's  will ;  it  needs  an  opened,  thirsty  heart  longing 
to  be  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God  and  His  will,  if 
we  are  in  our  measure  to  have  this  will  of  love  dwell 
in  us  and  possess  us.  It  needs  above  all,  the  in- 
dwelling of  the  Christ,  in  whom  that  will  realised 
and  manifested  itself,  to  make  us  partakers  of  His 
own  Spirit  and  disposition.  We  then  can  know 
something  of  that  infinite  will  of  love  working  itself 
out  through  us,  filling  the  little  vessel  of  our  will 
out  of  its  own  living  stream,  and  making  the  will  of 
God  indeed  our  will. 

We  have  seen  that  it  is  doing  the  will  of  God 
that  is  the  glory  of  heaven,  the  way  to  heaven,  our 
likeness  to  the  Elder  Brother,  and  the  food  of  our 
spiritual  life.  Let  us  begin  doing  the  will  of  God 
in  this  aspect  too,  really  giving  ourselves  to  Him 
for  this  saving  of  the  lost.  It  will  waken  within 
us  the  capacity  of  apprehending  better  the  glory 
of   the   Divine   will   that   none   of   the   little   ones 


Salvation  of  the  Perishing  41 

should  perish,  and  the  Divine  privilege  of  our  being 
made  partakers  of  it.  There  is  no  other  way  for 
us  to  the  fellowship  of  God  but  to  have  one  will 
with  Him.  And  there  is  no  way  to  this  but  through 
Christ  and  the  participation  of  His  Spirit.  As  we 
apprehend  intelHgently  w^ho  and  what  the  Christ  is, 
and  His  true  life,  the  Son  come  and  given  up  to 
work  out  the  Father's  will  and  love,  and  accept  none 
other  but  this  Christ  as  our  Lord  and  our  hfe,  the 
hope  will  arise  that  this  redeeming  will  can  master 
us  too  as  its  vessels  and  channels^  that  we  too  can  go 
through  the  world  filled  with  a  Divine  life,  the  Divine 
will  inspiring  and  energising  our  will,  and  life 
passing  out  from  us  to  those  who  are  perishing. 


VI 

NOT  MINE  OWN  WILL 

"I  can  of  Myself  do  nothing:  as  I  hear,  I  judge;  and 
My  judgment  is  righteous;  because  I  seek  not  Mine  own 
will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me/* — John  v.  30. 

THE  Will  of  God  is  the  power  by  which  the 
universe  exists  from  moment  to  moment.  It 
is  by  the  unceasing  active  exercise  of  His  will  that 
the  sun  shines,  and  that  every  lily  is  clothed  with 
beauty.  There  is  no  goodness,  or  strength,  or 
beauty,  but  as  He  wills  it.  The  glory  and  blessed- 
ness of  heaven  are  nothing  but  the  working  of  His 
will.  The  hosts  of  heaven  live  with  their  wills 
turned  and  opened  to  Him,  and  find  their  happiness 
in  allowing  His  will  to  do  its  perfect  work  in  them. 
When  the  Blessed  Son  became  man  to  lead  us  in  the 
way  to  God,  He  told  us  that  the  whole  secret  of  His 
life  was,  not  doing  His  own  will,  but  yielding  Him- 
self so  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father,  that  His  will 
should  receive  and  work  out  that  which  the  will  of  the 
Father  worked  in  Him.  He  said  that  He  had  been  sent 
and  that  He  had  delighted  to  come,  for  the  one  pur- 

42 


Not  Mine  Own  Will  43 

pose,  with  His  human  will  and  His  human  body,  to 
do  not  His  own  will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father.  He 
set  us  the  example  of  a  man,  a  true  man,  finding 
His  blessedness  and  His  way  to  God's  glory  in  the 
absolute  surrender  to  God's  will.  He  thus  showed 
us  what  the  destiny  was  for  which  man  was  created, 
and  what  the  new  life  He  was  to  bring  His  people. 
In  such  entire  dependence  on  God,  as  to  do  nothing 
of  Himself,  and  to  judge  nothing  but  as  He  heard 
from  the  Father^  He  was  able  always  to  give  a  right- 
eous judgment.  He  could  count  upon  God  to 
give  Him  all  the  wisdom  and  the  strength  He  need- 
ed, to  work  out  His  own  will  perfectly  in  Him.  All 
for  the  one  simple  reason :  ''  Because  I  seek  not  Mine 
own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me." 

"  Not  Mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that 
sent  Me !  "  But  had  our  Lord  Jesus  an  own  will, 
a  will  different  from  the  Father's,  that  He  needed 
to  say:  Not  My  will?  Had  He  a  will  that  needed 
to  be  denied?  Undoubtedly.  But  was  not  such  a 
will  sin?  By  no  means.  Just  this  was  the  glory 
of  the  creation  of  man  that  he  had  a  self-hood,  an 
own  will,  a  power  of  self-determination,  by  which 
he  was  to  decide  what  he  should  be.  This  was  not 
sin,  that  man  had  his  own  desire  and  thought  and 
will.     Without  this  he  could  not  be  a  free  creature. 


44  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

He  had  a  will,  with  which  to  decide  whether  he 
should  act  according  to  the  will  of  God  or  not.  Sin 
only  came  when  man  held  to  his  own  will  as  creature 
in  opposition  to  the  will  of  God.  As  man,  made  like 
unto  us  in  all  things,  "  in  all  points  tempted  Hke  as 
we  are,  yet  without  sin,"  Christ  had  a  human  will; 
for  instance,  to  eat  when  He  was  hungry,  or  to 
shrink  from  sufifering  when  He  saw  it  coming.  We 
know  how  in  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness,  He 
kept  the  former,  in  the  prospect  of  His  death,  the 
latter,  in  perfect  subjection  to  the  Father's  will. 
(Matt.  iv.  4;  Luke  xii.  50;  John  xii.  2y,^  It  is  just 
this  that  gives  its  infinite  worth  to  His  sacrifice;  it 
was  the  unceasing  sacrifice  of  His  human  will  to  the 
Father.  ''  I  seek  not  Mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of 
Him  that  sent  Me." 

These  words  reveal  to  us  the  inmost  meaning  of 
Christ's  redemption.  They  teach  us  what  the  life 
is  for  which  we  were  created,  and  out  of  which  we 
fell  in  Paradise.  They  show  us  wherein  the  sinful- 
ness of  that  fallen  state  consists  out  of  which  Christ 
came  to  deliver  us:  He  seeks  to  free  us  from  our 
self-will.  They  reveal  to  us  the  true  creature-life 
and  the  true  Son-life,  perfect  oneness  of  will  with 
God's  will.  They  open  to  us  the  secret  power  of 
Christ's  redeeming  work — atoning  for  our  self-will 


Not  Mine  Own  Will  45 

by  His  loyalty  at  all  costs  to  God's  will;  and  the 
true  nature  of  the  salvation  and  the  Hfe  He  gives 
us — the  will  and  the  power  to  say:  I  delight  to 
do  Thy  will,  O  God.  Every  spirit  seeks  a  form  in 
which  to  embody  itself:  these  words  give  the 
highest  revelation  of  the  Hfe  in  which  the  Spirit 
that  was  in  Christ  embodied  itself  in  Him,  and 
embodies  itself  in  all  who  seek  truly  and  fully  to 
accept  His  salvation  to  the  uttermost.  I  seek  not 
My  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  is  the 
keynote  of  the  only  life  that  is  well-pleasing  to  the 
Father  on  earth,  and  fits  for  His  fellowship  in 
heaven. 

How  little  God's  children  know  the  Christ  He 
has  given  them.  And  how  little  the  true  nature  of 
the  salvation  Christ  came  to  bring.  How  many 
there  are  who  have  never  been  taught  that  salva- 
tion out  of  self-will  into  doing  God's  will  is  alone 
true  blessedness.  And  how  many  who,  if  they 
think  they  know  it  as  a  truth,  never  set  themselves 
to  seek  this  first  as  the  tiue  entrance  into  the  king- 
dom of  God  and  His  righteousness.  And  yet  this 
is  in  very  deed  what  Christ  revealed,  and  promised, 
what  He  secured  on  Calvary,  and  bestowed  from 
heaven  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  How  can  we  become 
possessed  of  this  blessed  life? 


46  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

I  have  pointed  out  previously  how  great  the  dif- 
ference is  between  the  idea  of  the  law  of  a  State,  as 
containeH  in  a  statute  book,  and  the  will  of  a  King  to 
whom  one  stands  in  a  personal  relationship.  If  we 
would  truly,  however  distantly,  follow,  in  Christ's 
footsteps,  we  must  stand  with  Him  in  the  same 
close  personal  relationship  to  the  Father.  Without 
this  the  most  earnest  efforts  to  do  the  Father's  will 
must  prove  a  failure.  When  our  Lord  'so  often 
spoke  of  "  The  will  of  My  Father,  which  is  in  heav- 
en," He  wanted  us  to  understand  that  it  was  the  liv- 
ing personality  and  love  that  was  at  once  motive  and 
power  for  the  obedience.  When  He  spoke  ''  of 
the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,''  He  showed  that  it  was 
not  only  the  consciousness  of  having  a  work,  but  the 
desire  of  pleasing  the  One  who  sent  Him,  that  was 
the  mainspring  of  all  He  did.  We  need  the  sense  of  * 
the  presence  and  nearness  of  the  God  whose  will  we 
are  to  do  as  much  as  our  Lord  did.  Separate  the 
thing  you  have  to  do  from  Him  whose  will  it  is,  and 
it  becomes  a  burden  and  an  impossibility.  Live  in 
the  faith  that  He  has  sent  you,  that  it  is  His  living 
loving  will,  over  which  He  watches,  which  He  Him- 
self even  works  out,  that  you  are  doing — instead  of 
its  being  a  burden  you  are  to  carry,  it  becomes  a 
power  that  carries  you.     The  will  of  the  Father  is 


Not  Mine  Own  Will  47 

such  a  beautiful,  wise,  gentle,  loving  will,  that  to 
know  it  as  the  breathing  out  of  the  heart  of  God, 
makes  it  an  infinite  attraction  and  delight. 

And  how  can  we  enter  into  this  experience  of  the 
Father's  nearness,  and  thus  be  able  to  do  everything 
as  His  will?     There  is  only  one  way.    Jesus  Christ 
must  work  it  in  us.     And  that  not  as  from  without, 
strengthening  our  faculties  or  assisting  our  efiforts. 
No,  this  blessed  doing  of  the  Father's  will  is  the 
mark  of  His  life  as  Son.     He  can  work  it  in  us,  as 
we  yield  ourselves  wholly  and  receive  Him  truly  to 
dwell  in  us.     It  is  right  and  needful  that  we  should 
set  ourselves  with  all  earnestness  and  m.ake  the  at- 
tempt.    It  is  only  by  its  failure  that  we  really  learn 
how  entirely  He  must  and  wall  do  all.     So  insepara- 
bly is  this  ''  seeking  not  Mine  own  w^ill,  but  the  will 
of  Him  that  sent  Me,''  connected  with  Jesus  Christ, 
that  it  is  only  when  He  comes  in  and  manifests  Him- 
self in  the  heart  and  dwells  there^  that  He  can  work 
this  full  salvation  in  us.     "  Blessed  are  they  that 
hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  for  they  shall 
be  filled/' 


VII 

DOING  THE  WAY  TO  KNOWING 

*'  If  any  man  willeth  to  do  His  will  he  shall  know  of  the 
teaching,  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of  My- 
self."— John  vii.  17. 

THERE  was  great  division  among  the  Jews  as 
to  who  Christ  really  was,  and  the  Divine  au- 
thority of  the  truth  He  taught.  They  wanted  some 
sign  as  a  clear  proof  that  He  was  really  come  from 
God.  Christ's  answer  tells  them  that  the  proof  de- 
pended upon  the  state  of  their  heart. 

A  man  who  wants  the  Divine  evidence  of  Christ's 

mission,  while  he  is  not  ready  to  do  God's  will,  seeks 

,  for  it  in  vain.     A  man  whose  will  is  set  upon  doing 

\  God's  will,  as  far  as  he  knows  it,  is  alone  in  the  fit 

state  for  receiving  further  Divine  illumination. 

Our  Lord  says :  ''  If  any  man  willeth  to  do  His 
will,  he  shall  know  of  the  teaching  whether  it  be  of 
God."  He  speaks  of  two  things:  the  will  of  God 
we  are  to  do,  and  the  teaching  about  God  we  are 
to  know.  He  tells  us  the  second  is  entirely  de- 
pendent upon  the  first.     As  we  will  to  do,  we  shall 

48 


Doing  the  Way  to  Knowing  49 

be  able  to  know.  It  is  the  contrast  and  the  connec- 
tion of  precept  and  promise.  Will,  that  is,  be  ready, 
be  determined  to  do  God's  will,  and  you  shall  have 
Divine  light  and  certainty  as  to  all  that  Jesus  has 
taught.  The  commands  are  simple  and  easy  to  be 
understood:  he  that  seeks  honestly  to  do  them  in 
the  fear  of  God  will  learn  to  know  the  mystery  of 
Christ.  A  will,  a  disposition  set  upon  doing  God's 
will,  is  the  only  organ  for  knowing  God's  truth. 

There  are  many  Christians  who  complain  of  their 
lack  of  spiritual  discernment.  The  promises  of 
Christ  in  this  very  Gospel  of  St.  John  appear  be- 
yond their  reach.  They  would  fain  know  that  "  the 
teaching  is  of  God  " ;  they  would  like  to  experience 
and  to  feel  that  it  is  of  Divine  origin,  and  in  Divine 
efficacy;  that  God  Himself  confirms  and  makes  the 
words  true  as  a  living  power.  Take  the  promise  of 
Christ  in  this  chapter,  of  streams  of  living  water 
flowing  out  of  the  believer.  Or,  later  on,  of  the  life 
more  abundantly;  of  his  followers  not  walking  in 
darkness,  but  having  the  light  of  life;  of  our  doing 
greater  works  than  He  had  done ;  of  His  manifesting 
Himself  to  us;  of  His  and  the  Father's  dwelling  in 
us ;  of  our  abiding  in  Him  and  He  in  us ;  of  our  ask- 
ing what  we  will,  and  having  it  given  to  us.  When 
a  man  really  knows  the  teaching  is  from  God,  has  the 


)^ 


50  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

truth  and  power  of  God  in  it,  it  becomes  easy  to  be- 
lieve it,  and  receives  its  fulfilment.  To  all  believers 
who  really  long  to  have  these  promises  shine  with 
Divine  light  in  their  hearts,  Christ's  message  comes 
to-day:  it  all  depends  upon  the  one  thing,  that  you 
really  will  to  do  the  will  of  God.  Let  us  try  and 
take  hold  of  the  lessons  we  need. 

Christ  teaches  us  that  in  the  growth  of  the  Chris- 
tian life  faith  depends  upon  character.  Just  as,  at 
conversion,  there  can  be  no  faith  without  repentance, 
so  on  through  life  faith  cannot  grow  or  inherit  the 
promises  without  a  life  given  up  to  the  doing  of 
God's  will.  "  Some  having  thrust  from  them  a 
good  conscience,  have  made  shipwreck  of  the  faith." 
The  great  reason  why  so  many  pray  for  an  increase 
of  faith  and  never  get  it,  is  that  "  the  will  to  do  God's 
will "  has  never  taken  the  place  it  must  have.  The 
will  rules  the  life ;  the  will  is  the  index  of  the  heart ; 
the  whole  man  is  to  be  judged  by  the  will;  unless 
there  be  a  fixed  resolve,  a  seeking  with  the  whole  will 
to  do  the  will  of  God,  there  can  be  no  growth  in  faith 
or  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  truth  to  which  it 
gives  access.  It  is  only  as  God's  will  is  truly  and 
fully  taken  up  into  my  willing  and  doing  that  God 
can  reveal  Himself  to  me. 

God  judges  of  our  conduct  by  the  will.     Our  Lord 


Doing  the  Way  to  Knowing  51 

says:  "  If  any  man  willeth  to  do  His  will/'  A  be- 
liever may  in  his  youth,  through  ignorance  or  feeble- 
ness, fail  in  doing  the  will;  if  He  who  searches  the 
heart  sees  that  he  indeed  wills,  longs,  and  thirsts  to 
do  it,  God  will  see  in  this  the  heart  that  is  ready  for 
spiritual  light.  ''  If  there  first  be  a  ready  mind,  it  is 
accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath,  and  not  ac- 
cording to  that  he  hath  not."  A  believer,  as  in  Rom. 
vii.,  may  be  able  to  say  before  God  that  he  delights 
in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man^  and  yet 
have  to  mourn  his  terrible  failure.  If  there  be  this 
will  really  to  do,  his  failure  will  lead  him  on  to  see 
how  Rom.  viii.  2-4  is  the  deliverance  from  the  law 
of  sin  in  the  members  by  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life 
in  Christ  Jesus,  so  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
is  fulfilled  in  them  that  walk  after  the  Spirit. 
Christ's  words  are  not  meant  for  those  who  content 
themselves  with  the  idea  that  they  will  to  do  the 
will  while  they  do  not  press  on  to  the  life  in  the 
Spirit  in  which  God  works  both  to  will  and  to  do. 
It  is  the  heart  where  the  will  is  needed,  with  its 
whole  strength,  set  upon  God's  will,  that  the  Divine 
truth  and  power  of  Christ's  teaching  will  be  known. 
To  do  the  will  of  God,  the  first  step  is  thus  to  take 
it  up  into  our  will.  The  will  of  God  is  the 
heavenly  treasure  in  the  earthen  vessel  of  our  will 


52  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

that  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  God 
and  not  of  us,  and  we  so  learn  to  trust  God  to  work 
His  own  will  in  us  and  through  us.  I  cannot  re- 
peat the  message  too  frequently  or  too  earnestly ;  the 
one  object  for  which  our  will  was  given  us,  its  true 
nobility  and  blessedness,  is  that  with  it  we  might 
take  in  and  make  our  own  the  very  will  that  God  has. 
Ere  ever  I  see  all  that  that  will  implies,  or  feel  that 
I  have  the  power  to  perform  it,  let  me  regard  it  as 
the  one  thing  God  asks  from  me,  the  one  thing  I  can 
do  to  please  Him  and  become  a  partaker  of  His 
blessedness — day  by  day  to  accept,  to  worship,  to 
will  His  blessed  will,  and  to  do  it.  He  works  in  us 
both  to  will  and  to  do. 

"  Willing  to  do  the  will ''  of  God  is  the  sure  way 
to  all  grozvth  in  spiritual  knowledge  and  experience. 
Actually  doing  all  that  is  within  the  reach  of  my 
spiritual  stature,  and  willing  with  the  whole  heart  to 
do  all  that  still  appears  beyond  me,  is  the  single  eye 
which  ensures  the  whole  body  being  full  of  Divine 
light.  The  great  reason  why  so  much  Bible  study 
and  prayer  for  Divine  guidance  is  so  fruitless  is  this 
— the  heart  is  not  in  the  right  state  for  receiving 
God's  teaching.  Peter  writes :  ''  Ye  have  purified 
your  souls  in  obedience  to  the  truth  '' :  it  is  the  actual 
doing  of  God's  will,  with  the  entire  surrender  to  God 


Doing  the  Way  to  Knowing  53 

to  do  it  wholly  and  unceasingly,  in  the  greatest  things 
and  in  the  least,  that  purifies  the  soul  and  inherits  the 
promise,  ^^  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they 
shall  see  God/'  There  is  in  the  will  of  God  such  a 
Divine  vitality  and  energy  that  to  the  heart  that  wills 
and  does  it,  not  merely  as  a  matter  of  duty  or  Chris- 
tian training,  but  because  God  has  willed  it,  and  even 
as  God  wills  it,  it  becomes  life  and  strength.  The 
spiritual  knowledge  of  God,  of  His  presence.  His 
power.  His  indwelling  is  given  to  the  obedient :  ''  If 
a  man  love  Me,  he  mill  keep  My  zvord,  and  My 
Father  will  love  him,  and  We  will  come  unto  him, 
and  make  Our  abode  with  him/' 

Here  is  the  way  to  a  strong  and  joyful  spiritual 
life.  Unite  thyself  to  the  will  of  God;  it  will  unite 
thee  to  Him,  it  \n\\  draw  Him  to  thee.  Will,  with 
all  thy  will,  what  God  wills;  make  this  the  chief 
exercise  of  thy  spiritual  life;  as  much  as  thou  truly 
hast  of  God's  will  thou  hast  of  God.  Our  Lord  said : 
*'  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  He  was 
this  because  He  came  not  to  do  His  own  will,  but 
the  will  of  the  Father.  This  is  the  one  way  in  which 
He  will  lead  thee,  the  new  and  living  way  He  opened 
up  in  His  blood  by  doing  God's  will.  This  is  the 
one  truth  He  will  be  to  thee,  that  in  the  doing  of  the 
Father's  will  is  the  union  with  Him  perfected.     This 


54  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

is  the  one  fife  He  will  give  thee,  the  life  of  God  given 
in  Christ,  revealed  and  perfected  by  the  will  of  God, 
as  it  is  willed  and  done  by  us. 


vm 

EVEN  UNTO  THE  DEATH 

"  Father,  if  Thou  be  willing,  remove  this  cup  from  Me ; 
nevertheless,  not  My  will,  but  Thine  be  done.'' — Luke  xxii. 
42. 

GETHSEMANE !  The  inmost  sanctuary  of 
the  life  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  great  re- 
demption. In  some  respects  more  mysterious  than 
even  Calvary.  Of  the  visible  suflfering  and  sacrifice 
on  the  Cross,  the  garden  opens  up  the  inner  meaning 
and  power.  And  of  all  the  suffering  of  Gethsemane, 
"  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done  "  w^as  the  key.  It 
shows  us  what  th,£__sin  was  that  made  the  great 
sacrifice  a  necessity,  ojur_self-will ;  what  the  dispo- 
sition was  that  gave  the  sacrifice  its  worth,  the  sur- 
r£nd€r~of-the_w:ill iQL receive  God's  will ;  what  the  re- 
demption was  that  it  effected,  the  conquest  and 
atonement  of  our  self-will;  and  what  the  salvation 
it  actually  brings,  the  impartation  of  a  wull  given 
up  to  God.  Come,  my  soul,  be  still,  and  worship  in 
holy  fear,  as  thou  seest  what  it  cost  thy  Lord  to 
speak  the  words  thou  so  easily  sayest.     Learn  from 

55 


56  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

Him  what  fulness  of  meaning  and  blessing  there  IS 
to  be  found  in  them. 

The  sin  Christ  dies  for. — Why  is  the  Son  of  God 
here  on  His  way  to  the  death  of  the  Cross  ?  What  is 
it  that  costs  Him  all  this  agony  and  suffering?  It 
is  sin  that  needs  this  sacrifice ;  it  is  to  take  away  sin 
that  He  is  here.  And  the  first  part  of  His  work  in 
taking  it  away  is  that  He  Himself  resist  and  conquer 
it.  It  is  this  death-struggle  with  sin  that  cost  Him  the 
agony.  All  through  His  life  He  had  been  ''  tempted 
in  all  things  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.''  In 
this  last  hour  of  the  powers  of  darkness  they  make 
one  great  assault  on  the  very  citadel  of  His  being, 
and  seek  to  tempt  Him  with  the  sorest  of  all  tempta- 
tions— following  His  own  will  as  His  nature  shrank 
back  from  the  awful  curse-bearing  that  was  set  be- 
fore Him.  The  scene  reveals  to  us  what  is  the  deep- 
est root  of  all  sin — the  assertion  of  our  self-will.  It 
was  this  was  the  sin  and  the  fall  of  Adam,  It  is  this- 
is  the  source  of  all  evil  on  earth.  It  is  this  is,  in 
the  believer,  the  hidden  cause  of  all  failure  and  dis- 
appointment. God's  wilHs  the  living  power  through 
whjch  His  love  communicates  itself  and  its  blessings 
to  the  creature.  Man's  will  was  meant  to  be  the 
power  by  which  he  was  intelligently  to  yield  himself 
and  co-operate  with  God  in  receiving  and  appropri- 


Even  Unto  the  Death  57 

ating  al!  the  Divine  nature  had  to  impart.  Self- 
will,  a  will  not  yielded  to  God,  is,  in  the  whole  uni- 
verse of  things,  the  only  thing  that  hinders  God  in 
revealing  and  communicating  His  blessedness  to  the 
creature.  The  cross  is  the  proof  of  man's  self-will 
in  the  refusal  to  bow  to  God's  Son.  Christ's  agony 
in  Gethsemane  is  the  proof  that  it  is  this  same  sin 
that  He  came  to  conquer  and  cast  out. 

The  victory  Christ  won. — We  often  look  upon  the 
suffering  of  Christ,  with  the  endurance  of  the  curse 
and  death  of  the  Cross,  as  the  cause  of  our  salvation. 
Scripture  teaches  us  to  look  to  what  gave  that  suf- 
fering and  death  its  inner  value — Christ's  obedience. 
It  was  not  merely  in  what  He  did  or  suffered,  but 
in  the  spirit  in  which  He  acted^  that  its  infinite  worth, 
its  atoning  merit,  is  to  be  found.  During  His  whole 
life  He  had  spoken  of  not  doing  His  own  will. 
Here  He  proves  that  He  will  do  the  will  of  the 
Father,  even  though  it  cost  Him  His  life.  Even  un- 
to death  He  says.  Not  My  will!  And  so  through 
death,  in  dying  to  His  own  will.  He  teaches  us  what 
God  claims  as  His  right,  and  what  alone  can  bring 
us  to  our  true  place  of  blessing — the  entire  losing 
and  giving  up  of  our  will  and  life  to  God's  will  as 
the  way  into  the  life  and  glory  of  God. 

The  atonement  Christ  accomplished. — And,  now 


58  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

tHe  victory  of  Christ  over  man's  self-will,  how  does 
it  profit  and  save  us?  In  two  ways,  as  we  regard 
Him  in  His  substitution  or  His  fellowship,  as  the 
Christ  for  us,  as  the  Christ  in  us.  In  the  former  of 
these  aspects.  His  victory  over  sin  as  self-will.  His 
obedience  unto  death  and  His  infinite  acceptableness 
in  the  Father's  sight,  become  ours  the  moment  we 
believe  in  Him.  As  those  who  are  united  to  Him  by 
faith.  His  righteousness  and  merit,  with  all  the 
Father's  delight  in  Him  on  account  of  them,  are 
made  our  very  own :  ''  We  are  made  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  Him."  The  sin  of  our  self-will  is 
blotted  out.  We  are  dealt  with  by  God  as  if  we 
never  had  sinned,  counted  righteous,  and  allowed  to 
look  up  to  God  in  His  Beloved  Son  as  altogether 
well-pleasing  to  Him.  Were  there  but  any  due  sense 
of  the  awfulness  of  the  sin  of  self-will,  especially 
in  God's  redeemed  children,  with  what  joy  would 
the  assurance  of  its  being  blotted  out  be  welcomed. 
And  how  fervent  would  be  the  longing  to  know  to 
the  full  the  fruit  of  the  victory  Christ  has  achieved 
for  us  in  freeing  us  from  its  power  as  well  as  its 
guilt. 

The  salvation  Christ  bestows. — This  is  the  second 
aspect  of  Christ's  victory — He  has  freed  us  from 
the  dominion  of  self-will.     The  very  nature  and  es- 


Even  Unto  the  Death  59 

sence  of  the  salvation  He  imparts  is,  what  was  the 
very  nature  and  essence  of  His  own  life,  a  delight 
and  power  f 0^0  God's  will  alone,  Gethsemane 
teaches  us  the  way  to  receive  the  full  experience  of 
the  deliverance.  Just  as  there  was  in  Christ,  in  His 
holy  sinless  nature,  a  learning  of  obedience  through 
what  He  suffered,  until  it  culminated  in  the  sur- 
render of  His  will  unto  the  death,  so  there  may  be 
in  the  believer,  who  seeks  to  follow  his  Lord  in  full 
conformity,  such  a  growth,  both  in  insight  into  the 
absolute  necessity  of  a  giving  up  of  all  self-will,  even 
in  the  least  things,  and  also  in  the  Divine  certainty 
of  God's  working  in  us,  what  Christ  has  won  for  us, 
that  he  is  led  to  know  experimentally  what  it  is  that 
he  is  crucified  with  Christ,  and  dead  to  self  and  its 
will.  But  there  can  be  no  thought  of  our  under- 
standing or  attaining  this,  unjdl  the  desire, ha,s  come 
to  give  up  all,  even  unto  death^to  live  in  the  will  of 
God  alone. 

Believer!  is  this  the  very  Christ  you  delight  in 
and  seek  to  be  conformed  to,  and  long  to  know  more 
fully  in  His  indwelling  power?  In  Gethsemane  He 
entered  into  the  very  deepest  and  nearest  fellowship 
with  you  in  surrendering  His  will  to  the  death  :  enter 
you  there  into  the  deepest  and  nearest  fellowship 
with   Him   in   surrendering  your  will  as   He   did. 


6o  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

;  Pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  show  you  how  self-will 
is  the  root  of  all  sin  and  temptation  and  darkness; 
how  the  will  of  God  can  come  in  and  cast  it  out  and 
live  in  you ;  how  faith  in  Christ  who  died  to  conquer 
our  self-will,  and  now  waits  to  dwell  in  us,  can  make 
you  partaker  of  His  death  and  victory.  Learn  the 
lesson  that  death  to  self-will  just  means  a  quiet  bow- 
ing before  God  in  utter  poverty  and  helplessness,  and^ 
a  simple  trusting  in  the  Blessed  Lamb  of  God,  who 
passed  through  death  as  the  only  way  to  the  perfect 
surrender  of  His  will  to  God's  will,  to  breathe 
His  own  Spirit,  and  with  it  the  very  will  of  God, 
into  us. 

To  a  soul  longing  to  live  only  and  wholly  in  the 
will  of  God,  death  to  all  self-will  is  the  one  inevit- 
able demand,  but  also,  in  the  faith  of  Christ  Jesus, 
the  one  sure  and  most  blessed  deliverance. 


IX 

LORD!    WHAT  WILT  THOU? 

"  And  Saul,  trembling  and  astonished,  said,  Lord !    what 
wilt  Thou  have  me  to  dof — Acts  ix.  6. 

ON  the  prayer,  Thy  will  be  done  in  heaven  so 
on  earth,  there  needs  to  follow  the  more 
special  one,  Lord !  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? 
Men  have  often  asked  what  was  the  secret  of  the 
wonderful  consecration  and  power  which  we  see  in 
the  life  of  Paul.  At  his  conversion,  his  first  act, 
after  he  knew  the  Lord  who  had  met  him,  was  the 
surrender  of  his  will.  Lord !  what  wilt  Thou  have 
me  to  do  ?  ^  That  word  was  the  beginning,  the  root, 
the  strength,  the  mark  of  his  whole  wonderful  life. 
His  work  was  so  blessed  and  fruitful,  because  he 
remained  faithful  to  the  one  thing:  he  only  lived 
for  the  will  of  his  Lord. 

There  are  many  lessons  which  these  words  sug- 
gest. .  .  .  The  Lord  has  a  will,  a  life-plan  for  each 


^The  R.  V.  omits  these  words.  We  have  their  substance 
in  PauFs  account  of  his  conversion  (Acts  xxii.  lo),  "And 
I  said,  What  shall  I  do,  Lord ! '' 

6i 


''KX   "  ■  ^^^^^ 


62  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

of  us,  according  to  which  He  wishes  us  to  live.  .  .  . 
To  each  of  us  the  Lord  will  unfold  this  will  or  life- 
plan.  .  .  .  He  expects  us  to  wait  on  Him  for  the 
discovery  of  His  will  both  in  that  which  is  universal, 
for  all  His  people,  as  in  that  which  He  wills  for  each 
one  individually.  .  .  .  When  this  prayer  is  honest 
and  true,  it  implies  the  whole-hearted  willingness  to 
yield  ourselves  and  our  life  to  the  doing  of  that  will. 
'j  .  .  .  We  may  count  upon  an  answer  to  such  prayer, 
because  God  does  not  ask  of  His  child  more  than 
He  makes  known  as  His  will. 

These  and  other  such-like  lessons  give  abundant 
occasion  for  meditation  and  prayer.  In  this  chapter 
I  desire  to  ask  your  attention  to  another  lesson,  ap- 
parently very  simple,  and  yet  of  deep  significance, 
including  all  the  others.  It  is  what  was  suggested 
in  the  opening  paragraph:  True  conversion  is  noth- 
ing but  a  surrender  to  live  only  to  do  the  will  of 
God. 

Do  not  say:  But  is  not  this  a  matter  of  course, 
that  everyone  admits?  Far  from  it.  Most  Chris- 
tians never  have  understood  it.  It  may  be  that  you 
have  never  yet  fully  grasped  it.  True  conversion  is 
the  turning  from  my  own  will,  so  as  never  to  seek  or 
do  it ;  the  surrender  of  my  will,  with  all  its  strength 
and  at  all  times  only  to  seek  and  do  what  God  wills. 


Lord  !  What  Wilt  Thou  ?  63 

But  am  I  then  to  have  no  will  of  my  own?  You 
are  indeed  to  have  a  will,  the  stronger  the  better,  and 
to  use  it  with  all  your  strength  for  the  one  great 
work  for  which  God  created  and  fitted  it.  That  one 
thing  was:  to  accept  and  to  will  what  God  wills. 
This  is  the  image  and  likeness  of  God  for  which 
man  was  created,  the  glory  and  the  blessedness  of  the 
life  of  a  child  of  God,  that  He  can  say:  the  holy, 
heavenly,  perfect  will  of  God  is  my  will.  I  have 
seen  it  and  accepted  it  and  m.ade  it  my  own.  To  will 
and  to  do  with  all  my  strength  what  Gk)d  wills  and 
does,  this  is  the  noblest  work  the  will  of  a  creature 
can  be  engaged  in.  In  this  is  the  very  image  and 
likeness  of  God :  to  will  ever  as  He  wills.  We  then 
learn  to  say:  How  wonderful,  what  an  honour;  I 
will  always  just  what  God  wills.  Or  as  an  old  saint 
expressed  it:  I  am  always  happy,  because  I  always 
have  my  own  way;  God's  will  and  mine  are  always 
one. 

This  surrender  to  the  will  of  God,  the  key  of 
Paul's  conversion  and  of  his  life,  is  the  secret  of 
all  true  conversion  and  true  Christian  living.  And 
it  is  because  so  many  have  entered  the  Christian 
course  without  any  apprehension  of  God's  demand 
that  they  should  now  cease  from  all  self-will,  and 
only  do  His  will,  that  they  make  so  little  progress, 


64  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

that  it  is  with  them  as  it  is  written :  '*  They  went 
backwards  and  not  forwards."  They  have  never 
understood  what  Scripture  says  of  God's  children: 
they  are  ''  born  not  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God  " ; 
''  it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth^  but  of  God  which 
showeth  mercy  " ;  "  of  His  own  will  begat  He  us,  by 
the  word  of  truth/'  The  whole  will  of  man,  as  his 
own  power,  however  good  and  religious  it  may  be, 
is  shut  out  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven;  it  has  to  be 
denied  and  crucified;  how  much  more  the  sinful 
self-will.  As  God's  will  alone  brought  forth  the 
Divine  life  in  us,  its  whole  growth  and  strength 
are  to  be  found  in  this  alone.  '*  My  meat  is  to  do 
the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me."  The  great  hin- 
drance in  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  is  this  one 
thing :  we  have  not  given  up  our  will.  When  once 
a  child  of  God  begins  to  see  that  here  lies  the  defect 
of  his  Christian  life,  there  is  no  deliverance  until  he 
go  back  upon  his  conversion  and  admit  and  confess 
the  one  cause  of  failure.  He  did  not  know  how  ut- 
terly evil  his  will  was,  and  how  entire  the  renunci- 
ation of  it  to  which  he  was  called.  When  the  Lord 
Jesus  said :  ''  If  any  man  will  be  My  disciple  let  him 
deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross,"  it  meant  first 
of  all,  let  him  deny  his  own  will,  and  crucify  it. 
The  will  of  God  is  our  salvation,  not  only  as  it  is 


Lord  !  What  Wilt  Thou  ?  65 

willed  by  Him,  but  as  it  is  received  into  our  inmost 
being,  submitted  to  and  wrought  out  in  our  life,  truly 
willed  by  us.  Because  our  salvation  rests  each  mo- 
ment in  the  saving  will  of  God,  we  can  have  only  as 
much  of  the  salvation  as  we  accept  the  will.  Until  this 
is  grasped,  the  true  reason  of  our  failure  is  not  un- 
derstood. As  the  error  and  the  sin  are  heartily  ac- 
knowledged, the  soul  is  prepared  to  make  a  new  be- 
ginning, and  in  the  redeeming  power  of  the  Glorified 
Lord  Jesus  to  say  to  God,  Lo,  I  come,  as  it  is  written 
in  the  volume  of  the  book,  not  only  for  Christ,  but 
for  each  of  His  disciples :  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will, 
O  my  God. 

If  I  am  to  turn  to  God  in  a  new  and  full  surrender 
to  His  will,  it  must  be  in  a  new  and  full  trust  in  what 
Christ  can  do  for  me.  Saul's  question.  Lord,  what 
wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  was  preceded  by  another, 
out  of  which  it  was  born:  Who  art  Thou,  Lord? 
It  was  the  vision  of  the  Son  of  God  in  His  glory,  it 
was  the  personal  revelation  ^^  I  am  Jesus,  whom 
thou  persecutest,"  that  wrought  the  mighty  change, 
and  made  him  yield  him.self  so  readily  and  so  entirely 
to  the  will  of  his  new-found  Lord.  We  need  some- 
thing of  the  same  kind.  Nothing  less  than  a  new 
revelation  of  the  Divine  authority,  and  the  tender 
love  of  Him  whom  we  have  grieved  so  long,  but  who 


66  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

now  comes  to  claim  and  to  make  us  the  faithful 
servants  of  His  will,  can  really  enable  us  to  say  in 
confidence:  Lord!  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do? 
Speak  Lord,  Thy  servant  will  do  it. 

Who  is  ready  to  enter  upon  this  path  of  entire 
devotion  to  the  will  of  God,  the  only  true  Christ- 
life?     The  steps  are  simple. 

Remember,  the  will  of  God  is  the  revelation  of 
His  hidden  Divine  love  and  blessedness,  and  that 
the  only  way  to  know  and  enjoy  God  and  His  love 
is  to  do  His  will.  Say  therefore  boldly:  I  may,  I 
will  do  nothing  but  God's  will. 

Believe  that  in  answer  to  the  prayer,  Lord !  what 
wilt  Thou?  Jesus  Christ  will  make  known  God's 
will  day  by  day;  and  that  where  He  teaches  me  to 
know  it  by  His  spirit,  He  gives  me  strength  to  do  it. 

And  when  I  have  said,  Lord!  here  am  I,  ready 
to  do  all  Thy  will,  let  me  wait  upon  Him  to  reveal 
Himself  as  my  Redeeming  Lord,  who  with  the  com- 
mand gives  the  power:  His  voice,  His  presence, 
His  love  compel  a  willing  obedience.  It  is  the  an- 
swer to  the  first  prayer,  Who  art  Thou,  Lord?  that 
prepares  for  the  answer  to  the  second,  Lord!  what 
wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  Paul  had  heard 
Stephen  speak  of  "  the  Son  of  Man  standing  at  the 
right  hand  of  God."     It  was  when,  in  "  a  light  from 


Lord  !  What  Wilt  Thou  ?  67 

heaven  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun/'  he  had  for 
himself  this  vision  of  the  Glorified  One,  that  his  eyes 
and  heart  were  for  ever  darkened  to  earth,  and  his 
life  was  given  up  to  do  the  will  of  his  Lord  alone.  It 
is  so  even  still.  The  faith  of  Christ  Triumphant 
looking  upon  us  and  conquering  us  for  Himself, 
compels  and  empowers  us  to  do  His  will  alone. 

Lord !  show  Thyself  to  me ;  then  I  can  do  what- 
ever Thou  biddest  me.  In  living  communion  with 
Thee,  I  can  do  all  things. 


X 

THE  MAN  AFTER  GOD'S  OWN  HEART 

"  I  have  found  David  the  son  of  Jesse,  a  man  after  Mine 
own  heart,  who  shall  do  all  My  will/' — Acts  xiii.  22;  i 
Sam.  xiii.  14. 

OF  the  two  expressions  God  uses  here  of  David, 
v^e  often  hear  the  former :  "  a  man  after 
Mine  own  heart."  The  use  of  the  latter :  "  who  shall 
do  all  My  will,"  is  much  less  frequent.  And  yet  it 
is  no  less  important  than  the  other.  A  man  after 
Mine  own  heart:  that  speaks  of  the  deep  unseen  mys- 
tery of  the  pleasure  a  man  can  give  to  God  in  heaven. 
Who  shall  do  all  My  will:  that  deals  with  the  life 
down  here  on  earth  which  can  be  seen  and  judged 
by  men.  Let  us  seek  and  get  full  hold  of  the  truth 
that  it  is  the  man  ii^lio  does  all  God's  will  who  is  the 
man  after  His  own  heart.  Such  men  God  seeks: 
when  He  finds  them  He  rejoices  over  them  with  great 
joy:  they  are  the  very  men  He  needs,  men  He  can 
trust  and  use.  His  heart,  with  its  hidden  Divine 
perfections,  reveals  itself  in  His  will;  he  that  seeks 
I  and  loves  and  does  all  His  will  is  a  man  altogether 

68 


The  Man  After  God's  Own  Heart       69 

after  His  own  Tieart :   the  man  of  absolute  surrender  . 
to  God's  will. 

Such  was  David  in  striking  contrast  with  Saul, 
the  type  of  the  half-hearted  and  sdf-pleasing  Chris- 
tian. We  know  what  remarkable  experiences  Saul 
had  at  the  outset  of  his  life.  The  Spirit  of  God  came 
upon  him,  and  another  heart  was  given  him,  and  he 
prophesied.  There  was  not  lacking  in  him  a  sense 
of  humility ;  when  he  was  to  be  presented  to  the  peo- 
ple, he  hid  himself.  And  speedily  God  began  to 
work  through  him  salvation  in  Israel.  But  it  was 
not  long  before  self-will  began  to  show  itself. 
When  God  sent  him  with  the  command  to  destroy 
Amalek  utterly,  he  did  God's  work  deceitfully,  and 
under  pretence  of  bringing  sacrifices  to  offer  to  God, 
did  his  own  will  in  the  matter  of  Agag  and  the  best 
of  the  spoil.  His  terrible  failure  was  used  of  God, 
by  the  contrast,  to  bring  out  more  strikingly  the 
great  truth,  that  the  man  whom  God  can  use  to  rule 
His  people  and  establish  His  kingdom,  that  the  man 
after  His  own  heart,  who  pleases  Him,  is  he  of  whom 
He  can  say :   he  shall  do  all  My  will. 

After  what  we  have  already  learnt  of  God's  will, 
with  the  place  it  has  in  the  Christian  life,  and  in 
preparation  for  a  spiritual  apprehension  of  the  fur- 
ther teaching  of  God's  Word,  it  may  be  well  to  use 


70  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

these  words  for  the  simplest  possible  instruction  to 
all  who  are  asking  the  question:  How  can  I  be- 
come such  a  one?  What  must  I  do  that  God  can 
say  of  me :  a  man  after  Mine  own  heart,  who  shall 
do  all  My  will  ? 

First  of  all,  remember,  you  cannot  attain  to  this  by 
anything  you  can  do.  No  resolution,  no  effort,  no 
help  you  seek  in  prayer  to  strengthen  your  weakness, 
will  effect  what  you  desire.  And  why  not?  Be- 
cause you  have  in  you  a  nature  wholly  ruled  by  self- 
will,  and  wholly  opposed  to  God's  will.  Nothing  can 
delight  in  God's  will  and  actually  do  it,  but  a  new 
and  Divine  nature,  born  and  daily  renewed  in  you 
by  a  Divine  power  from  above.  ""  The  carnal  mind 
is  enmity  against  God,''  and  averse  from  His  will. 
As  entire  as  has  been  the  perversion  of  the  old  nature 
from  God  and  His  will,  must  be  the  deliverance  of 
the  new  nature  from  self  and  its  will.  Here  is  our 
first  lesson.  No  desire,  however  honest,  no  purpose, 
however  fixed,  no  surrender,  however  absolute,  can 
make  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,  who  shall  do  all 
His  will.  Such  a  man  must  be  born  from  above, 
and  must  do  all  he  does  in  the  power  of  that  new 
Divine  life.  A  regenerate  man  may  indeed  in  some 
things  do  God's  will,  as  the  fruit  of  the  first  half- 
unconscious  workings  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  him. 


The  Man  After  God's  Own  Heart       71 

But  this  is  only  preparatory  to  what  God  really  aims 
at — that  His  child  of  his  own  free  will,  shall  intelli- 
gently and  heartily  choose  to  do  all  His  will.  That 
little  word  all  is  the  secret  of  true  consecration,  of  a 
life  ''  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  well-pleasing/'  of 
being  a  man  after  God's  own  heart. 

We  all  know  what  a  great  difference  there  is  be- 
tween a  feeble  child,  or  a  sickly  man,  and  one  in  full 
health.  And  so  it  is  not  enough  that  you  just  have 
a  beginning  or  small  measure  of  spiritual  life ; 
that  will  not  enable  you  to  do  all  God's  will.  The 
question  is  ix'hetJier  yon  are  living  only,  and  doing 
all,  under  the  pozver  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the 
strength  of  the  nezu  life.  It  is  only  the  Spirit  of  God 
Himself  that  can  do  the  will  of  God.  And  the  great 
reason  why  God's  children  do  not  claim,  do  not  yield 
themselves  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  work  all  His  will 
in  them,  is  that  they  do  not  know  how  foolish,  how 
helpless  it  is,  to  expect  even  the  regenerate  man  to 
do  God's  will,  Vv'ithout  the  direct  and  unceasing 
operation  of  God's  Spirit.  And  then  again,  because 
they  do  not  know  the  subtle  and  altogether  un- 
conquerable power  of  our  corrupt  nature,  except  as 
God  Himself  through  His  Son  and  Spirit  lives  and 
works  in  the  inmost  recesses  of  our  being,  and  in- 
spires all  its  powers.     If  you  learn  the  first  lesson 


72  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

well — the  secret  aversion  of  your  nature  to  God's 
will,  and  your  complete  inability  to  overcome  or  to 
change  it,  you  are  prepared  to  go  on  to  the  second. 

It  is  this.  Believe  that  you  have  a  new  and  Di- 
vine nature,  expressly  fitted  and  prepared  to  do  all 
God's  will,  on  the  one  condition^  that  you  hold  it  in 
close  and  continual  dependence  upon  the  Holy  Spirit, 
through  whom  God  in  Christ  works  in  you.  Jesus 
Christ  could  do  nothing  of  Himself,  though  He  was 
the  Son,  without  the  Father  working  in  Him.  Does 
it  displease  you  to  be  as  absolutely  dependent  up- 
on God  as  He  was  ?  As  part  of  your  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  believe  that  God  works  in  you  as  in  Him. 
Believe  this,  however  dark  and  feeble  you  feel,  just 
as  you  believe,  in  the  darkness  of  midnight,  that  the 
sun  is  shining  on  the  other  half  of  the  world,  and 
will  in  the  morning  rise  upon  you.  It  is  this  faith, 
with  the  humble,  patient,  dependent  surrender  to 
God  which  it  works,  that  will  bring  you  to  an  entirely 
nev/  position  and  power  in  the  doing  God's  will. 

In  this  faith,  here  is  our  third  lesson,  humbly 
but  confidently  give  yourself  up  to  God  to  do  all  His 
will.  Give  yourself  to  Him,  as  a  loving  Father,  so 
that  you  do  not  take  His  commands  as  a  mere  law, 
but  as  a  loving  will — the  will  of  the  Father,  made 
known  in  the  loving  fellowship  by  Himself  to  your- 


The  Man  After  God's  Own  Heart       73 

self.     Look  at  God's  will  as  one  great  whole — the 
revelation  of  His  loving  purpose  with  man  and  with 
you.     Set  yourself  resolutely,  now,  in  the  faith  of 
the  Holy  Spirit's  working  in  you,  to  count  it  your  one 
business  every  day  to  do  all  God's  will.    Then  again, 
bow  yourself  in  the  deepest  humility  and  impotence 
to  wait  on  God  to  work  in  you.     The  humility  that 
bows  in  deep  grief  at  the  enmity  of  the  evil  nature 
against  God's  will,  in  confession  of  the  impotence 
of  the  regenerate  nature  of  itself  to  do  that  will,  in 
the  dependence  of  a  childlike  waiting  on  God  for 
Him  to  work  His  will  in  you,  will  be  a  new  entrance 
into   the   kingdom    of   heaven.     The    Christian    life 
will  become  something  quite  new  to  you  under  the 
power  of  these  great  truths :    your  utter  and  ever- 
abiding  impotence  to  do  God's  will,  even  as  a  re- 
generate man,  without  the  unceasing  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit:    your  Divine  and  complete  sufficiency 
in  Christ  for  all  that  the  Father  asks  of  you  when 
He  calls  you  to  be  a  man  after  His  own  heart,  who 
shall  do  all  His  will. 


XI 

THE  WILL  OF  THE  LORD  BE  DONE 

"  And  when  Paul  would  not  be  persuaded,  we  ceased, 
saying:    The  will  of  the  Lord  he  done/' — Acts  xxi.  14. 

PAUL  was  at  Csesarea,  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem. 
Agabus,  a  prophet,  had  said  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  Paul  would  there  be  bound,  and  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  Paul's  friends  be- 
sought him  not  to  go.  In  his  answer  he  spoke  the 
noble  words :  I  am  ready  not  to  be  bound  only,  but 
also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  When  they  heard  this,  they  said :  The  will 
of  the  Lord  be  done.  It  w^as  no  longer  a  question  of 
Jews  or  Gentiles,  not  even  of  the  life  or  death  of 
Paul ;  if  it  was  to  be,  they  would  accept  it  as  the  will 
of  God.  The  story  teaches  us  the  wisdom,  the  duty, 
the  blessing  of  accepting  disappointment  or  trial  that 
cannot  be  averted,  as  God's  will,  and  so  turning 
what  naturally  would  cause  sorrow  or  anger,  into 
an  occasion  of  holy  resignation  and  humble  worship 
of  God  in  His  sovereign  wisdom  and  power. 

74 


The  Will  of  the  Lord  Be  Done         75 

There  is  a  twofold  will  of  God:  the  will  of  ap- 
proval and  the  will  of  peiTnission.  In  the  former  we 
see  what  He  desires  or  ordains  as  right  and  good. 
The  latter  includes  all  that  happens  in  the  world 
either  as  the  result  of  natural  law  and  second  causes, 
or  as  the  work  of  ungodly  men  and  evil  spirits.  To 
admit  that  what  God's  will  directly  appoints  is  good 
is  comparatively  easy.  But  to  recognise  His  will 
in  all  the  evil  that  comes  to  us  or  around  us  from 
evil  men,  is  a  truth  many  a  believer  never  accepts. 
It  is  one  of  the  most  blessed  lessons  anyone 
can  learn  to  see  that  no  possible  trouble  can  ever 
come  to  us,  that  is  not  for  us  in  very  deed  the 
will  of  our  Father.  Though  Judas,  and  Caiaphas, 
and  Pilate  sinned  against  God's  holy  and 
righteous  wull  in  the  death  of  Jesus,  the  suffer- 
ing and  death  they  caused  Him  He  accepted  as 
the  will  of  God,  the  cup  the  Father  gave  Him. 
The  sin  of  those  who  persecute  or  hurt  a  child 
of  God,  is  not  His  will,  and  yet  the  suffering  caused, 
with  all  its  consequences,  is  to  him  God's  will. 
As  this  is  seen  the  believer  turns  his  eyes  from  the 
human  cause  to  the  heavenly  Father's  will,  and  finds 
that  suffering  becomes  a  blessing,  and  that  no  power 
on  earth  or  in  hell  can  rob  the  soul  of  the  perfect 
rest  there  is  in  that  blessed  will.    The  place  of  trial 


76  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

becomes  the  place  of  blessing.     Let  us  see  what  is 
needed  to  secure  this. 

1.  In  time  of  trial  let  me  say  at  once :  Here  I  am 
by  the  will  of  God,  in  the  very  place  God  has  chosen 
for  me.  Whether  the  trial  comes  from  the  hatred  of 
an  enemy,  or  the  Vv^rong  of  a  friend,  through  my  own 
fault  or  in  the  course  of  God's  more  direct  Provi- 
dence, I  m^ay  be  sure,  and  ought  therefore  heartily  to 
consent  to  it,  that  the  difficulty  or  distress  in  which  I 
am  is  the  will  of  God  concerning  me.  Whether  it  be 
some  great  trial  or  some  petty  annoyance,  whether  a 
temporary  grief  or  some  long-continued  cause  of 
weariness  or  irritation,  be  sure  that  the  secret  of 
peace  and  rest  is  to  say :  This  trouble  is  what  God 
wills  for  me.  It  is  this  lifts  me  from  man  to  God 
and  His  will.  To  that  will  I  have  yielded  myself. 
In  that  will  I  rest.     The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done. 

2.  This  prepares  the  soul  to  say  with  confidence: 
God,  who  has  brought  me  into  this  trouble,  zvill  as- 
suredly give  me  the  grace  to  bear  it  aright.  The 
grace  that  is  needed  to  bear  suffering  as  God  would 
have  His  child  do  it,  so  as  to  glorify  Him  in  it,  must 
come  from  Him.  The  quiet  submission,  the  child- 
like trust,  the  living  entrance  into  and  union  with 
His  will.  He  will  work  in  the  soul  that  adoringly 
says:     The    will    of    the  Lord  be  done.     All  the 


The  Will  of  the  Lord  Be  Done         77 

promises  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  with  all  the  com- 
fort they  afford  in  the  assurance  of  God's  presence 
and  aid  in  trouble,  depend  for  their  fulfilment  on  this 
one  condition,  that  the  soul  gives  itself  up  to  the  will 
of  God.  Then  can  w^e  prove  that  God's  will  is  Love 
and  Blessing.  The  more  willingly  I  say,  God 
brought  me  here,  the  more  confidently  I  can  say, 
He  has  charge  and  cares  for  me. 

3.  We  shall  then  be  led  farther  on  to  the  assur- 
ance: God  Himself  zvill  teach  me  the  lessons  for 
which  He  sent  the  trial  This  is  something  more 
than  the  trust,  and  peace^  and  surrender  we  have 
just  been  speaking  of.  They  keep  us  from  grieving 
God  or  vexing  ourselves  in  the  school  of  affliction. 
But  beyond  these  graces  God  has  special  lessons  for 
every  child  whom  He  leads  aside  in  His  loving 
chastisement.  He  wants  to  cure  us  permanently 
of  our  self-will  and  of  our  worldliness,  to  waken  us 
into  the  true  imitation  of  the  humility  and  the 
self-sacrifice  of  His  Son,  to  draw  us  into  full  fel- 
lowship with  Him  who  made  us  for  His  Divine  in- 
dwelling and  operation  within  us,  to  fit  us  to  live 
lives  of  blessing  to  others.  These  lessons  are  often 
sadly  missed  by  those  who  suffer  much ;  and  those 
who  try  to  learn  them  often  feel  how  greatly  they 
have  failed.     It  is  because  we  do  not  believe:  the 


78  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

Father,  who  brought  me  into  this  place  of  trial,  will 
Himself  teach  the  lessons  He  would  have  me  learn 
and  work  all  the  grace  He  fain  would  see  in  me. 
The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done,  includes  not  only  the 
trial  itself,  but  all  that  God  meant  by  it,  and  has 
undertaken  Himself  to  work  out  in  the  willing,  wait- 
ing soul. 

4.  When  thus  we  have  entered  into  living  union 
with  the  Father  through  His  will,  we  shall  not  fear 
to  say:  God's  will,  which  brought  me  here,  can,  in 
His  way  and  time,  bring  me  out  again.  With  many 
children  of  God  the  desire  for  deliverance  from 
trouble  is  the  first,  if  not  even  the  only,  thought. 
This  should  not  be  so.  Suffering  is  not  natural  to 
us  ;  we  are  at  liberty  to  call  upon  God  for  deliverance 
in  the  day  of  trouble.  But  it  is  not  for  this  alone 
the  heart  must  turn  to  God.  The  first  desire  must 
be  that  God  may  be  glorified  in  loving  submission, 
and  childlike  teachableness;  that  His  will  in  all  it 
means  and  aims  at  with  the  trial  may  be  done.  It 
is  when,  in  this  its  true  and  full  meaning,  the  prayer : 
The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done,  rises  from  the  heart, 
that  the  burden  may  be  taken  away  without  our  being 
the  losers,  and  that  the  deliverance  may  bring  as 
much  glory  to  God  in  our  holy  devotion  as  the  suf- 
fering could  have  done.     The  union  with  God's  will 


The  Will  of  the  Lord  Be  Done         79 

will  teach  us  how  to  look  to  it  in  the  right  spirit  for 
help. 

What  a  privilege  that  the  darkest  trials,  the  bitter- 
est sorrows,  as  well  as  the  smaller  disappointments 
or  the  passing  fears  of  life,  can  all  help  to  unite  me 
more  perfectly  with  the  will  of  my  God.  By  His 
grace  1  will  seek  to  live  every  day,  amid  tears  of  sor- 
row and  songs  of  joy,  in  quiet  submission  or  in 
triumphant  faith,  as  they  do  in  heaven,  with  the  one 
word  in  the  heart :  The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done.  It 
is  this  gives  heaven  on  earth. 

I  worship  Thee,   sweet  Will  of  God, 

And  all  Thy  ways  adore, 
And  every  day  I  live  I  seem 

To  love  Thee  more  and  more. 

I  have  no  cares,  O  blessed  Will! 

For  all  my  cares  are  Thine; 
I  live  in  triumph,  Lord,  for  Thou 

Hast  made  Thy  triumphs  mine. 

Man's  weakness  waiting  upon  God, 

Its  ends  can  never  miss; 
For  man  on  earth  no  work  can  do, 

More  angel  like  than  this. 

He  always  wins  who  sides  with  God, 

To  him  no  chance  is  lost; 
God's  will  is  sweetest  to  him  when 

It  triumphs  at  his  cost. 


8o  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

111  that  He  blesses  is  our  good, 

And  unblest  good  is  ill. 
And  all  is  right  that  seems  most  wrong 

If  it  be  His  sweet  will. 


XII 

OF  KNOWING  GOD'S  WILL 

*'  And  Ananias  said,  The  God  of  our  fathers  hath  ap- 
pointed thee  to  know  His  will,  and  to  see  the  Righteous 
One,  for  thou  shalt  be  His  witness  to  all  men,  of  what  thou 
hast  seen  and  heard,  and  to  hear  a  voice  from  His  mouth." 
— Acts  xxii.  14,  15. 

WHEN  Saul  said,  Lord!  what  wilt  Thou  have 
me  to  do?  the  reference  was  to  personal 
immediate  duty.  When  Ananias,  after  three  days, 
spoke  of  his  call  from  God  ''  to  know  His  will,"  the 
thought  was  a  much  larger  one.  Saul  had  been 
prepared  of  God  as  His  chosen  vessel,  to  whom  he 
could  intrust  ''  the  mystery  of  His  will,"  "  the  mys- 
tery of  Christ,"  ''  which  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  had  been  hid  in  God,"  "  that  the  Gentiles  are 
fellow-heirs  and  fellow-members  of  the  body  and 
fellow-partakers  of  the  promise  in  Christ  Jesus, 
through  the  Gospel"  (Eph.  i.  9,  10,  iii.  3-9). 

I  have  previously  spoken  of  the  need  of  not  con- 
fining our  knowledge  of  God's  will  to  the  commands 
and  promises  which  have  special  reference  to  our- 

81 


82  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

selves.  All  God's  children  are  called  to  enlarge 
/  their  hearts,  to  take  a  personal  interest  in  the  great 
work  God  is  seeking  to  carry  out  in  the  world,  and  so 
to  be  ready  to  take  their  part  in  the  fulfilment  of  His 
purpose — the  winning  back  of  the  world  to  Him, 
to  be  the  kingdom  of  His  Son. 

In  studying  PauFs  surrender  to  Christ's  will  in 
conversion,  we  saw  how  closely  that  was  linked  to 
his  vision  of  the  Lord  in  heaven.  Here  we  find  the 
same  connection:  *  ^Appointed  to  know  His  will, 
and  to  see  the  Righteous  One."  The  mystery  of 
God's  will  is  the  mystery  of  Christ :  to  know  the  will 
is  inseparable  from  knowing  the  Righteous  One,  who 
put  away  sin,  and  is  to  rule  in  righteousness  on  the 
earth.  In  the  life  and  writings  of  Paul  we  see  how 
firmly  he  holds  the  two  truths  together.  It  is  ever 
"  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  through  whom  we  re- 
ceived grace  and  apostleship,  unto  obedience  of  the 
faith  among  all  nations,  for  His  name's  sake."  As 
one  who  had  seen  and  heard  him,  Paul's  Gospel  was 
ever  a  personal  witness.  He  never  preached  the  will 
of  God  as  a  doctrine,  or  a  decree,  or  even  as  a  reve- 
ilation,  apart  from  the  living  person  of  that  Lord 
Jesus  in  whom  that  will  had  revealed  all  its  riches 
and  blessings,  and  in  personal  contact  with  whom 
alone  its  salvation  could  be  realised.   To  know  the 


Of  Knowing  God's  Will  83 

will,  and  to  see  the  Righteous  One,  let  these  ever  be 
inseparable.  The  living  Christ  Himself  can  alone  fit 
us  to  know  and  do  the  will  of  God.  To  know  the  will 
and  not  see  the  Righteous  One  would  make  it  a  new 
law  of  Moses,  a  burden  heavy  to  be  borne.  To  see 
Him  is  to  know  the  will  in  the  light  of  God's  love, 
to  know  it  in  its  Divine  beauty  and  perfection,  and 
to  receive  the  power  to  do  it. 

All  that  God  did  in  Paul  v^as  ''  for  an  ensample 
unto  them  which  should  hereafter  believe.''  Like 
him,  and  through  him,  each  of  us  is  called,  in  our 
measure  to  know  this  larger  will  of  God,  His  purpose 
for  all  men,  that  the  Gospel  should  be  preached  to 
every  creature.  There  is  no  sadder  proof  of  how 
little  it  is  understood  or  preached  that,  jttst  as  Christ, 
so  His  Church,  is  only  in  the  world  to  carry  out  this 
Divine  will,  than  the  lack,  in  the  great  majority  of 
Christians,  of  anything  like  enthusiastic  devotion  to 
the  cause  of  Missions.  Even  among  those  who  do 
give  them  a  measure  of  support,  there  is  so  little 
sense  of  the  overwhelming  prominence  which  ought 
to  be  given  to  this  will  of  God.  It  is  not  one  com-  ^. 
mand  among  others.  It  is  the  one  thing  in  which  the  I  "" 
will  of  the  Father  includes  everything :  that  all  men 
should  know  and  honour  Christ.  It  is  the  one  thing 
for  which  Christ  died  and  lives.     It  is  the  one  thing 


84  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

for  which  the  Church  exists,  to  be  a  light  of  tfiem 
I  that  are  in  darkness.  It  is  the  one  thing  by  which  a 
child  of  God  can  prove  that  he  Hves  not  unto  himself 
but  unto  Him  that  died  for  him  and  rose  again.  It 
is  the  one  truth  that  above  all  else  needs  to  be  re- 
stored to  its  place  and  which  assuredly  will  bring  the 
revival  of  every  other  truth  of  the  spiritual  life  as 
its  necessary  condition.  This  is  in  very  deed  the 
very  will  of  God,  that  the  Church  as  the  body  of 
Christ,  and  every  believer  as  its  member,  is  to  seek 
first,  absolutely  first,  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  to 
labour  that  His  will  be  done  throughout  the  earth, 
as  in  heaven. 

And  what  can  be  the  reason,  if  this  be  the  will 
of  God,  that  the  Church  has  so  little  apprehended 
or  fulfilled  it?  If  Paul  was  divinely  illuminated 
to  know  that  will,  and  to  make  it  known  to  the 
Church,  how  comes  it  that  it  has  so  little  possessed 
the  Church  of  Christ?  The  answer  is  not  far  to 
seek.  Just  as  in  Paul  this  will  of  God  needed 
a  very  special  spiritual  revelation,  so  still.  It  is 
easy,  when  once  a  truth  has  been  seen  and  pointed 
out  by  spiritual  men,  for  other  Christians  to  see  and 
accept  it  too.  And  yet  it  may  be  an  article  of  men- 
tal belief,  that  does  not  really,  through  living  faith, 
master  and  possess  the  heart.     The  will  of  God  is 


Of  Knowing  God's  Will  85 

a  living  spiritual  energy;  we  do  not  know  that  will 
truly  until  it  has  entered  and  filled  our  will.  As  love 
alone  can  meet  love,  and  heart  alone  touch  heart,  so 
will  alone  can  apprehend  will.  Anything  less  is  but 
a  mental  image,  a  conception  of  the  truth,  not  the 
thing  itself  in  its  reality  and  power.  And  so  a  great 
deal  of  the  missionary  interest  of  our  day  proves, 
by  the  feeble  hold  it  has,  and  the  little  sacrifice  there 
is  made  for  it^  and  the  need  of  continual  appeal  to 
minor  motives,  that  the  knowledge  of  this  mystery 
of  God's  will  is  not  held  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit. 

Paul  speaks  of  ''  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this 
mystery  among  the  Gentiles,  which  is  Christ  in  you, 
the  hope  of  glory.'^  It  is  only  as  the  mystery  of 
Christ  in  us,  the  experience  of  an  indwelling  Christ 
is  truly  known,  that  the  glory  of  the  mystery  will  be 
seen  to  be  this,  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  for  all  the 
Gentiles.  The  more  truly  I  know  by  the  Spirit  what 
it  is  to  have  Christ  in  me,  the  more  I  shall  long  and 
labour  that  it  may  be  Christ  in  all. 

"  God  hath  appointed  thee  to  know  His  will,  and 
to  see  the  Righteous  One,  and  to  hear  a  voice  from 
His  mouth,  and  to  be  His  witness  of  what  thou  hast 
seen  and  heard.''  God  gave  Paul  as  an  ensample; 
in  thy  measure  this  word  is  for  thee  too,  my  reader. 
Do  believe  that  in  this  mystery  of  God's  will  for  the 


86  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

Gentiles  the  glory  of  God,  of  Christ,  of  the  Church, 
of  every  believer  is  centred.  All  God's  wisdom  and 
power,  His  holiness  and  love  and  faithfulness  meet 
in  it.  And  thou  art  appointed — what  a  privilege — to 
know  His  will,  and  have  it  possess  thee,  and  use 
thee  as  its  instrument  and  messenger  and  witness. 
Fear  not  to  yield  thyself  utterly  to  it,  a  living  sacri- 
fice. "  Appointed  to  know  His  will,  and ''  (here 
is  thy  strength)  ''to  see  the  Righteous  One," 
who  Himself  wrought  that  will  and  now  works 
mightily  in  all  who  see  Him,  and  receive  Him  as 
their  Lord  who  dwells  in  them.  Oh!  cast  thyself 
into  this  mighty  stream  of  Divine  love — the  will  of 
God  for  the  salvation  of  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Look 
up  and  see  and  worship  the  Righteous  One,  the  Lord 
our  Righteousness,  the  King  of  Righteousness,  whose 
rule  is  to  bring  peace  and  blessing  to  the  world ;  to  do 
all  God's  will  for  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom, 
will  become  thy  one  ambition. 


XIII 

KNOWING  AND  NOT  DOING 

*'  If  thou  bearest  the  name  of  a  Jew,  and  gloriest  in  God, 
and  knowest  His  will,  and  art  confident  that  thou  thyself 
art  a  guide  of  the  blind :  thou  therefore  that  teachest 
another,  teachest  thou  not  thyself!  thou  that  preachest  a 
man  should  not  steal,  dost  thou  steal." — Rom.  ii.  17-21. 

IN  chapter  i  of  this  Epistle  we  have  the  terrible 
unrighteousness  of  the  heathen,  with  its  con- 
sequent darkness,  portrayed.  In  chapter  ii  the  self- 
righteousness  of  the  Jews,  with  the  fatal  delusion 
that  rests  in  the  knowing  of  God's  will  without  doing 
it.  Men  gloried  in  God  and  made  their  boast  of 
Israel's  having  had  a  Divine  revelation^  and  being 
the  depository  of  God's  will,  and  yet  never  thought 
of  the  folly  of  not  doing  that  will.  It  is  the  same 
evil  against  which  Christ  warned,  when  He  said: 
''  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord, 
shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  he  that 
doeth  the  will  of  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven.^' 
Our  subject  to-day  is  the  terrible  possibility  of  glory- 
ing in  God  and  delighting  in  the  study  and  the 

87 


88  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

knowledge  of  His  will,  and  yet  not'  doing  it.  Let  us 
try  and  discover  the  cause  of  this  sad  phenomenon, 
as  frequent  in  the  Christian  Church  as  in  Israel. 
That  will  lead  us  to  see  what  its  cure  must  be.  Let 
us  bring  our  own  life  into  the  full  light  of  Scripture 
teaching,  and  find  out  whether  the  doing  of  God's 
will  has  really  that  supreme  place  in  our  thought 
and  conduct  which  it  has  in  the  mind  of  God  and  the 
teaching  of  Christ. 

One  would  say  that  from  the  very  nature  of  the 
thing  every  Christian  would  know  that  doing  God's 
will  is  the  very  essence  of  true  religion.  Whether 
we  regard  Him  as  Creator  or  Lawgiver,  as  Father 
or  Redeemer,  we  cannot  but  admit  that  we  cannot 
honour  or  please,  cannot  fulfil  our  relationship  to 
Him,  without  living  to  do  His  will.  Whether  we 
think  of  the  escape  from  the  power  of  sin,  or  the  walk 
in  His  fellowship  and  love,  or  the  participation  in  the 
happiness  of  His  service,  here  or  hereafter,  every- 
things  points  to  the  doing  of  God's  will  as  the  only 
possible  way  of  really  living  in  the  enjoyment  of  sal- 
vation. What  can  be  the  reason  that  so  many 
Christians  have  never  known  that  doing  God's  will 
is  the  very  first  duty  of  the  Christian's  life,  indis- 
pensable to  its  health  and  safety? 

With  many  the  cause  is  an  entire  misapprehen- 


Knowing  and  Not  Doing  89 

sion  of  the  nature  of  salvation.  They  have  misunder- 
stood God's  glorious  Gospel.  They  heard  that  God 
justifies  the  ungodly  of  free  grace  without  any 
works  of  righteousness  he  ever  had  done  or  needed 
to  do  to  secure  God's  favour.  They  heard  right. 
But  they  understood  wrong.  They  were  content  to 
believe  in  the  pardon  of  sin,  and  deliverance  from 
punishment,  and  never  saw  that  salvation  means 
restoration  to  the  love  and  fellowship  of  God,  to  the 
honour  and  blessedness  of  a  walk  in  obedience  to 
His  will.  Content  with  being  saved  from  guilt,  they 
never  thought  that  being  saved  from  the  doing  of 
sin  is  the  real  proof  of  the  power  of  salvation,  and 
the  real  entrance  upon  a  life  in  the  likeness  and  holi- 
ness of  God.  The  entire  reasonableness,  the  un- 
speakable blessedness,  the  indispensable  necessity,  the 
supreme  obligation  of  seeking  and  loving  to  do  God's 
will  as  it  is  done  in  heaven,  has  never  dawned  upon 
them.  Entirely  to  give  up  their  own  will  in  order 
to  follow  and  carry  out  God's  will  has  never  become 
an  article  of  their  creed.  They  are  content  with 
the  traditional,  conventional  view  of  Christian  duty, 
but  never  thought  that  all  that  is  known  of  God's 
will,  must  at  once  be  done. 

With  others  the  cause  of  failure  in  doing  God's 
will  is  a  misapprehension  as  to  the  power  of  salva- 


90  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

tion.  They  believe  that  God's  law  is  unchangeable 
in  its  demands,  and  that  it  is  their  bounden  duty 
to  obey  it  perfectly.  They  have  learnt  from  Scrip- 
ture and  experience  how  utterly  impotent  they  are 
to  fulfil  its  claims.  They  have  never  understood 
how  in  the  New  Testament,  the  law  of  God  with 
its  inexorable  demand  and  condemnation  becomes 
transformed  into  the  will  of  God,  which  does  not 
mean  mere  demand  but  actual  living  power.  They 
know  not  what  it  means:  Ye  are  not  under  the 
law,  with  its  impotence,  but  under  grace,  with  its 
omnipotence,  zvorking  in  you  all  that  it  asks.  They 
are  held  in  bondage  of  the  legal  spirit,  and  do  not 
believe  that  it  is  possible  to  live  a  life  in  the  will 
of  God.  They  admire  and  delight  in  a  promise  such 
as :  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee.  My  strength  is 
made  perfect  in  weakness ;  or  a  testimony :  I  can  do 
all  things  in  Christ  who  strengtheneth  Me,  but  dare 
not  expect  their  fulfilment  in  their  own  experience. 
They  do  not  think  it  possible  always  to  be  doing 
God's  will. 

There  are  still  others  who  believe  both  in  the  ob- 
ligation and  the  possibility,  and  yet  complain  of  con- 
tinual failure.  The  reason  is  with  them  very  much 
misapprehension  as  to  the  knowledge  of  God's  will. 
They  study  God's  Word  very  earnestly  to  find  out 


Knowing  and  Not  Doing  91 

God's  will,  and  yet  fail  of  finding  with  that  knowl- 
edge the  strength  to  perform.  They  know  not  that 
it  is  only  where  the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit  shows 
God's  willy  that  His  strength  will  work  it  in  us. 
The  will  of  God,  discovered  and  accepted  by  our 
human  wisdom,  must  be  obeyed  by  our  human 
strength.  The  humble,  childlike  spirit  that  believes 
that  the  Father  will  by  His  Spirit  show  us  what 
He  wants  us  to  do,  will  receive  grace  also  to  believe 
that  for  what  the  Father  wants  and  shows,  He  will 
give  the  needed  strength.  As  we  see  that  it  is  not 
enough  for  us  to  have  the  Word  and  out  of  that  take 
what  we  think  we  ought  to  do,  but  wait  on  God  for 
guidance^  to  know  what  He  would  have  us  to  do,  we 
shall  learn  that  to  be  taught  God's  will  by  His  Spirit, 
is  half  the  secret  of  being  strengthened  by  Him  to 
do  it. 

Believer!  Jesus  Christ  thy  Saviour  came  to  do 
the  will  of  God,  and  to  enable  thee  to  do  it  too. 
Dost  thou  know  Him  as  thy  Owner  who  claims  to 
have  thy  whole  being,  with  every  power  and  every 
moment?  Hast  thou  acknowledged  His  Owner- 
ship, and  yielded  thyself  wholly  to  live  only  as  He 
would  have  thee?  Hast  thou,  in  the  faith  of  His 
strength,  made  this  surrender,  and  believed  that  by 
His  Holy  Spirit  He  seals  and  maintains  it  ?  Oh  then, 


92  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

be  not  afraid  to  believe  that  He  will  show  thee  all 
God's  will  for  thee,  and  fit  thee  for  doing  it !  Believe 
that,  morning  by  morning,  He  will  open  thine  ear 
to  hear  His  voice,  and  that,  to  the  meek  and  lowly 
of  heart.  He  will  give  God's  light  and  God's  strength 
for  all  God's  will. 


XIV 

THE  RENEWED  MIND  PROVING  GOD'S  WILL 

"  Be  not  fashioned  according  to  this  world :  but  be  ye 
transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind,  that  ye  may 
prove  what  is  the  good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of 
God:' — Rom.  xii.  2. 

WITH  the  first  verse  of  Rom.  xii.  the  practical 
part  of  the  Epistle  begins  by  Paul's  implor- 
ing believers  to  present  their  bodies  a  living  sacrifice, 
holy,  acceptable  to  God.  In  verse  2  there  follows 
the  call  to  these  God-devoted  men,  if  their  sacrifice 
is  indeed  to  be  acceptable  to  God,  to  prove,  that  is, 
to  find  out  and  show,  what  is  the  acceptable  will  of 
God.  He  who  would  live  as  an  acceptable  sacrifice 
must  live  in  the  acceptable  will  of  God.  The  one  ac- 
ceptable sacrifice  is  the  doing  of  the  acceptable  will. 
To  live  in  the  will  of  God  is  the  one  only  thing  that 
can  make  us  well-pleasing  to  Him.  The  one  only 
object  and  proof  of  true  consecration  is — doing  the 
will  of  God. 

The  three  adjectives  Paul  uses,  the  good,  and  ac- 
ceptable, and  perfect  will  of  God,  indicate  three  stages 

93 


94  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

in  our  proving  and  knowing  the  will  of  God.  The 
first  refers  to  our  discerning  between  good  and  evil, 
and  our  accepting  what  we  know  of  God's  will  as 
indeed  good.  The  second  points  to  our  knowledge 
of  God's  will  in  special  relation  to  ourselves.  The 
will  of  God  is  not  the  same  for  all  His  children; 
as  we  find  out  what  is  specially  the  will  of  God  for 
ourselves,  we  know  that  what  we  do  is  actually  ac- 
ceptable, well-pleasing  to  Him.  The  third  word, 
perfect,  tells  us  that  we  may  not  rest  content  with 
what  we  already  know  and  do  of  God's  will ;  this  is 
only  a  beginning ;  we  must  press  on  to  stand  perfect 
in  all  the  will  of  God.  To  know  and  accept  the  will 
of  God  as  good,  is  the  first  step,  is  good.  To  know 
it  in  our  personal  relationship  to  Him  as 
well-pleasing,  is  better.  To  know  the  perfect 
will  of  God  is  best  of  all,  the  true  aim  of 
the  full  Christian  life.  So  we  can  prove  and  know 
for  ourselves,  so  we  can  prove  to  men,  what  is  the 
good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of  God.  So 
we  yield  our  bodies  an  acceptable  sacrifice.  On  the 
first  great  call  of  the  Epistle :  Live  wholly  as  sacri- 
fices to  God,  follows  at  once  the  second  as  its  com- 
plement:    Live  only  to  do  the  will  of  God. 

Between  these  two  commands  there  are  inserted 
a  warning  and  an  exhortation.     ''  Be  not  fashioned 


The  Renewed  Mind  Proving  God's  Will  95 

according  to  the  world/'  is  the  warning  that  reveals 
our  first  and  greatest  danger.  ''Be  ye  transformed 
by  the  renewing  of  your  mind  " ,  is  the  exhortation 
that  reveals  the  path  and  the  strength  in  which  it 
becomes  possible  to  overcome  the  danger  and  stand 
perfect  in  all  the  will  of  God. 

Would  you  indeed  know  and  do  God's  will,  listen 
to  the  warning :  ''  Be  not  conformed  to  this 
world.''  ''  The  friendship  of  this  world  is  enmity 
against  God."  Its  root  principle,  that  by  which  it  be- 
came a  ''  world  that  lieth  in  the  evil  one,"  was  the 
rejection  of  the  will  of  God.  The  world  may  ac-  | 
knowledge  a  God,  but  it  cannot  and  will  not  do  His 
will.  It  cannot  by  its  very  nature  do  anything  but 
its  own  will.  We  are  by  nature  of  the  world.  We 
are  still  in  it,  and  ever  in  danger  of  being  under  its 
influence.  After  our  regeneration  the  secret,  subtle 
atmosphere  with  which  it  surrounds  us,  and  with 
which  the  flesh  is  in  alliance,  hinders  thousands  of 
Christians  from  seeking  a  life  of  true  and  full  devo- 
tion to  the  will  of  God.  Unless  with  our  whole  heart 
we  reject  its  principles,  its  pleasures,  its  pursuits,  we 
gradually  lose  the  spiritual  capacity  of  delighting  in 
and  performing  God's  will.  Unless  we  come  out 
from  the  world,  where  self-will  and  self-pleasing 
rules,  we  never  can  live  the  life  in  which  the  believer 


^6  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

only  seeks  to  be  a  sacrifice  well-pleasing  to  God, 
and  to  prove  the  well-pleasing  will  of  God.  Do  let 
us  believe  it — the  great  cause  of  failure  in  doing  the 
will  of  God  is  simply  a  worldly  spirit.  Therefore 
beware :  ''  Be  not  fashioned  according  to  this  world." 

The  negative,  not  being  fashioned  according  to 
the  world,  must  be  accompanied  by  the  positive: 
"  But  be  ye  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your 
mind."  The  renewal  in  regeneration,  once  for  all, 
must  be  followed  up  by  the  continual,  the  daily,  re- 
newing of  the  Holy  Ghost.  ''  That  ye  be  renewed 
in  the  spirit  of  your  minds."  ''  He  saved  us,  through 
the  washing  of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  This  is  the  only  power  that  can  ena- 
ble us  to  live  as  living,  holy,  acceptable  sacrifices,  that 
can  fit  us  truly  to  delight  in  doing  the  will  of  God. 
The  attempt  to  do  the  will  of  God  with  a  heart  that 
does  not  daily  seek  and  find  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  spirit  of  the  mind,  must  end  in 
failure.  It  is  only  a  healthy  man  can  do  a  healthy 
man's  work.  It  is  only  a  spiritual  man  who  can 
walk  in  the  spiritual  path  of  obedience  to  all  God's 
will. 

I  ask  you,  beloved  believer,  to  pause  and  take  in 
the  lessons  we  have  been  taught.  To  prove  what  is 
the  good  and  acceptable  will  of  God  is  the  calling 


The  Renewed  Mind  Proving  God's  Will  97 

and  the  privilege  of  every  believer.  It  is  impossible 
to  fulfil  this  calling,  except  as  we  know  that  we  have 
definitely  yielded  ourselves  to  live  as  holy  sacrifices, 
well-pleasing  to  God  in  everything.  The  one  great 
hindrance  to  this  is  a  worldly  spirit  in  conformity 
to  the  dispositions  and  habits  of  the  men  of  the 
world.  The  only  power  that  can  overcome  this 
danger  is  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  to  he  daily  trans- 
formed in  the  renewing  of  our  mind  gives  the  spirit- 
ual capacity  to  know,  to  love,  to  do  all  God's  will. 

If  you  find  that  you  are  not  yet  living  this  life, 
rest  not  till  you  know  and  possess  it.  If  it  is  because 
you  have  never  definitely  and  finally  accepted  God's 
will  as  your  life,  oh,  do  so  now !  If  it  be  that  you 
have  never  presented  yourself  a  living  sacrifice — 
come  at  once,  and  yield  to  God's  claim  !  By  the  mer- 
cies of  God  I  beseech  you :  Give  up  yourself  to  the 
God  who  redeemed  you.  If  you  have  done  so  but 
failed,  because  you  never  knew  how  much  there  was 
of  the  world  in  you — begin  at  once  to  live  the  life  of 
not  being  fashioned  according  to  the  world,  but  being 
transformed  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Take  courage,  my  brother!  The  Eternal  Spirit 
through  whom  Christ  said,  ''  I  delight  to  do  Thy 
will,"  and  oflFered  Himself  a  sacrifice  unto  God, 
dwells  in  you.     Yield  yourself  as  a  sacrifice  for  Him 


98  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

to  consume.  Believe  and  receive  His  daily  renew- 
ing ;  He  will  fit  you  for  proving  all  the  perfect  will  of 
God. 


XV 

ACCORDING  TO  THE  WILL  OF  GOD 

"  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  Himself  for  our  sins, 
that  He  might  deliver  us  out  of  this  present  evil  world, 
according  to  the  will  of  our  God  and  Father." — Gal.  i.  4. 

PAUL  ever  carried  with  him  a  very  deep  sense 
of  the  will  of  God  as  the  source  and  the  rule 
of  all  things.  In  five  of  the  Epistles  he  speaks  of 
himself  as  an  apostle,  ''  through  the  will  of  God." 
The  thought  of  God's  will  dominated  his  whole 
ministry,  inspiring  at  once  devotion  and  obedience, 
dependence  and  perfect  confidence.  He  loved  to 
think  of  God's  will  working  out  its  purpose  through 
him.  Of  his  intention  to  visit  Rome  he  speaks  more 
than  once  as  coming  to  them  ''  by  the  will  of  God." 
Of  the  Macedonians  giving  themselves  first  to  the 
Lord  and  then  to  him,  he  says  too  that  it  was  '^  by 
the  will  of  God."  And  so  here,  in  speaking  of  the 
work  of  God's  Son  in  our  redemption,  he  shows 
how  its  chief  characteristic  is  that  it  was  ''  according 
to  the  will  of  God."  Whether  in  his  own  life^  or  in 
the  grace  manifested  in  his  converts,  or  in  the  work 


loo  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

of  our  Lord  Jesus,  salvation  is  to  him  the  will  of 
God  manifesting  itself  and  working  out  His  purpose. 

The  expression  he  uses  in  regard  to  Christ's  work 
is  a  somewhat  unusual  and  remarkable  one.  "  He 
gave  Himself  for  our  sins,  that  He  might  deliver 
us  out  of  this  present  evil  world,  according  to  the 
will  of  our  God  and  Father."  It  gives  us  a  new  as- 
pect of  the  Father's  will  as  revealed  in  Christ's 
death.  In  our  last  meditation  (Rom.  xii.  2)  we  saw 
how,  in  the  spiritual  life,  being  conformed  to  the 
world  was  the  first  great  danger  of  the  consecrated 
soul,  and  being  transformed  out  of  it  into  newness  of 
life  the  only  way  to  a  life  in  the  good  and  perfect 
will  of  God.  Here  we  discover  the  deepest  root  of 
that  teaching.  The  whole  will  of  God  in  Christ's 
death  had  this  one  object — to  deliver  us  from  this 
present  evil  world.  The  spirit  of  the  world  and  the 
will  of  God  are  diametrically  opposite;  the  will  of 
God  demands,  and  promises,  and  works  entire  de- 
liverance from  it.  If  we  would  know  the  will  of 
God  aright,  and  live  in  it  and  according  to  it,  we  must 
come  out  and  be  entirely  separate  from  all  that  is  of 
this  present  evil  world.  That  alone  is  true  and  full 
salvation. 

"  This  present  evil  world.''  And  was  not  this 
world  created  by  God  ?     And  is  it  all  so  entirely  evil 


According  to  the  Will  of  God         loi 

as  to  deserve  the  name  ''  this  evil  world/'  and  to 
need  the  Son  of  God  to  deliver  us  from  it?  Yes. 
Scripture  teaches  that  with  the  entrance  of  sin  into 
the  world  it  came  into  the  pozver  of  the  prince  of  evil. 
When,  in  Adam's  fall,  Satan  obtained  power  over 
him,  the  world,  over  which  he  was  to  have  been  king, 
fell  with  him,  and  Satan  became  the  god  of  this 
world,  and  all  men  born  into  it.  The  world  is  now 
an  organised  kingdom  of  evil,  ruled  by  the  god,  ani- 
mated by  the  spirit,  of  the  world.  ''  The  whole  world 
lieth  in  the  evil  one/'  The  development  of  evil,  now 
in  its  slow  growth,  then  again  in  its  sudden  outbreaks, 
is  no  blind  evolution,  but  the  result  of  a  deliberate 
systematic  war  of  an  intelligent  power  of  evil  against 
the  rule  of  God.  Whether  in  the  grossest  forms 
of  heathenism,  or  amid  the  refinement  of  art  and 
culture,  or  even  under  the  guise  of  a  nominal  Chris- 
tianity— everywhere  the  world  lieth  in  darkness,  and 
is  in  its  principles  and  aims  the  very  opposite  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  of  heaven.  The  pursuit  of  the 
visible,  the  assertion  of  man's  will  against  that  of 
God,  the  pride  of  man's  wisdom,  are  its  distinguish- 
ing characteristics,  in  contrast  with  the  will,  and  the 
love,  and  the  service  of  the  invisible  God. 

Jesus  Christ  came  to  deliver  us  out  of  this  present 
evil  world,  by  freeing  us  from  its  spirit,  and  making 


I02  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

us  partakers  of  the  life  and  the  powers  of  the  heav- 
enly world.  In  His  intercourse  with  the  rulers  of 
this  world,  both  among  the  Jews  and  before  Pilate, 
He  more  than  once  gave  expression  to  the  truth: 
**  Ye  are  of  this  world,  I  am  from  above ;  I  am  not 
of  this  world :  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world/' 
This  other-worldliness  He  claimed  for  his  disciples 
too :  "  Ye  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of 
the  world.  Because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  there- 
fore the  world  hateth  you.''  He  described  His  work 
as  an  overcoming  of  the  world,  and  a  casting  out  of 
the  prince  of  the  world.  He  encouraged  His  disci- 
ples to  expect  and,  in  the  power  of  His  victory,  to 
endure  the  enmity  of  the  world.  The  life  He 
brought  with  Him  from  heaven,  and  came  to  im- 
part to  us,  was  one  as  different  from  that  of  the 
world,  yea,  more  so,  than  heaven  is  higher  than  earth. 
The  great  object  of  His  work  was  to  deliver  us  from 
this  present  evil  world,  according  to  the  will  of  God. 
This  is  an  aspect  of  truth  that  enters  all  too  little 
into  the  preaching  or  the  practice  of  our  days.  We 
sometimes  hear  of  a  worldly  Christianity,  and  of  a 
religious  world,  but  there  appears  to  be  but  little 
conception  of  the  extent  to  which  a  worldly  spirit 
pervades  and  enfeebles  the  Christian  life.  We  are 
all  of  us  so  born  and  bred  under  the  power  of  the 


According  to  the  Will  of  God         103 

spirit  of  the  world,  it  is  so  difficult  exactly  to 
define  or  recognise  its  power  and  influence,  we  are 
so  little  warned  of  the  need  of  our  entire  deliver- 
ance from  that  spirit  by  the  Spirit  of  God  dispelling 
it  and  taking  its  place,  that  one  often  sees  an  earnest 
and  active  religious  life  with  but  little  of  the  truly 
unworldly  and  heavenly  spirit.  As  a  consequence 
of  this,  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  faith  in 
Him,  overcoming  the  world,  and  proving  that  we  are 
just  as  little  of  the  world  as  He  was,  is  little  sought 
or  known.  Our  Lord  gave  Himself  that  He  might 
deliver  us  from  this  present  evil  world,  according  to 
the  will  of  God :  is  it  any  wonder  that  His  full  reve- 
lation in  the  heart  is  so  little  enjoyed?  Only  He 
who  seeks  to  have  Jesus  do  His  perfect  work,  and  is 
ready  for  complete  separation  and  emancipation  from 
the  spirit  of  the  world,  can  expect  it. 

Let  each  one  of  us  who  would  prove^  who  would 
know  and  do,  the  perfect  will  of  God,  study  the 
lesson:  God  wills  complete  deliverance  from  this 
present  evil  world.  To  this  end  Jesus  Christ  gave 
Himself  for  us :  as  we  receive  Him  to  live  in  us, 
that  will  will  be  done  in  us.  We  are  surrounded 
on  every  side  by  the  powers  of  w^hich  the  spirit  of 
this  world  has  possession  and  are  unable  to  resist, 
or  even  to  recognise  them,  unless  they  are  revealed 


I04  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

to  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  the  Hterature  and 
the  newspaper  press  of  the  day,  in  all  the  interest 
and  attraction  of  politics  and  commerce,  of  culture 
and  pleasure,  we  are  carried  along  without  knowing 
it.  In  our  own  hearts^  the  love  of  self  with  its 
honour  and  pleasure,  the  desire  of  and  dependence 
on  the  visible,  the  lack  of  absolute  surrender  to  God 
and  His  will,  are  all  so  many  tokens  of  the  worldly 
spirit.  Not  until  we  allow  the  Spirit  of  God  to  con- 
vict us  of  all  this,  and  to  possess  us  with  all  that  is 
its  opposite,  can  we  fully  know  what  the  deliverance 
is  that  Christ  gives  according  to  the  will  of  God. 

May  God  help  us  to  connect  inseparably  the  three 
blessed  truths  set  before  us  here :  the  will  of  God,  as 
the  source;  Jesus  giving  Himself  for  us,  as  the 
means ;  deliverance  from  this  present  evil  world,  as 
the  mark  and  fruit  of  the  great  salvation.  May  He 
teach  that  we  are  just  as  little  of  this  world  as  Jesus 
was,  because  we  are  one  with  Him.  And  may  the 
presence  and  power  of  the  Son  of  God  from  heaven 
in  our  hearts,  with  its  complete  deliverance  from  a 
worldly  spirit,  be  known  as  in  very  deed  the  will  of 
God  for  us. 


XVI 

GOD  WORKING  OUT  HIS  OWN  WILL 

"  Having  been  foreordained  according  to  the  purpose  of 
Him  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  will.'' 
— Eph,  i.  II. 

IN  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  we  have  three 
passages  concerning  the  will  of  God.  The  first, 
in  chapter  i.,  points  us  back  to  the  eternal  mystery 
of  that  will  in  God,  and  tells  us  how,  as  God  purposed 
it  in  Himself,  so  He  Himself  works  it  all  out.  The 
second,  in  chapter  v.,  calls  us  to  seek  to  understand 
what  the  will  of  God  is.  The  third,  in  chapter  vi., 
brings  us  down  into  practical  life,  and  teaches  us  how 
the  most  common  drudgery  of  daily  duty  may  all  be 
done  as  the  will  of  God.  As  in  the  heights  of  heaven 
and  of  eternity,  so  down  into  the  conduct  and  the 
heart  of  the  humblest  Christian,  the  will  of  God 
claims  supreme  authority.  Let  us  begin  and  study  it 
in  its  origin  and  work  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world. 

Paul  writes — ^Eph.  i.  5 — of  God  having  "  predes- 
105 


io6  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

tinated  us  unto  adoption  as  sons  through  Jesus  Christ 
unto  Himself,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His 
zvill,  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace,  which  He 
made  to  abound  toward  us,  having  made  known  to  us 
the  mystery  of  His  will,  according  to  His  good  pleas- 
tire,  which  He  purposed  in  Him,  ...  in  whom  also 
we  were  made  an  heritage,  having  been  foreordained 
according  to  the  purpose  of  Him  who  worketh  all 
things  after  the  counsel  of  His  will/'  Each  expres- 
sion has  its  significance.  The  good  pleasure  of  His 
will — that  means  the  absolute  liberty  of  God,  the 
perfection  of  whose  will  knows  no  higher  reason  than 
that  it  so  pleased  Him.  In  Him  the  predestination, 
and  election,  and  foreordaining  of  God's  children  had 
its  origin.  The  mystery  of  His  will — that  suggests 
that  it  was  hidden  in  God,  that  we  can  only  know  as 
much  of  it  as  He  reveals,  and  that  even  what  He 
reveals  still  has  its  mystery  beyond  our  comprehen- 
sion. The  purpose  of  His  will — that  refers  to  the 
great  plan  or  scheme  to  be  carried  out  which  His  holy 
will  formed  for  itself.  And  the  counsel  of  His  will 
reminds  us  of  the  Divine  ''  wisdom  and  prudence  " 
(verse  8)  holding  counsel  with  itself,  and  ordering 
all  so  as  to  prove  that  His  good  pleasure  is  indeed 
all  that  is  most  right  and  good  and  perfect.  In  the 
secret  depths  of  God's  will  and  its  predestinating 


God  Working  Out  His  Own  Will     107 

purpose  lies  hidden  the  salvation  of  His  Church,  and 
of  every  member  of  it. 

"  Having  been  foreordained  according  to  the  pur- 
pose of  Him  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel 
of  His  will."  What  God  has  willed,  He  also  Himself 
works  out.  The  counsel  of  His  will  is  too  high 
and  holy ;  none  but  He  can  work  it  out.  The  will  is 
a  working  power,  a  determination  to  act ;  even  a  man 
who  really  wills  a  thing  seeks  to  overcome  every  ob- 
stacle to  that  will  being  realised.  We  need,  as  we 
study  and  worship  the  will  of  God,  to  give  full  scope 
to  the  conviction  that  God  Himself  works  out  all 
things  after  the  counsel  of  His  will.  The  eternal 
purpose  is  what  guides  all  His  work:  all  that  the 
eternal  purpose  fixed  must  and  will  be  wrought  by 
Himself.  This  faith  will  teach  us  some  most 
precious  lessons. 

It  inspires  the  assurance  that  God's  purpose  will 
he  performed.  We  are  so  apt  to  look  to  ourselves 
and  our  feebleness,  to  men  and  to  circumstances,  and 
by  these  to  measure  what  appears  possible.  We  need 
to  remember  that  God's  sovereign  will  is  a  Power  that 
will,  as  much  in  the  great  whole  as  in  the  minutest 
detail,  infallibly  secure  the  fulfilment  of  His  plans. 
Whether  in  our  own  heart  and  life,  or  in  the  service 
of  His  Kingdom  in  which  we  take  part,  we  need 


io8  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

definitely  to  know  Him  as  the  ''  God  who  worketh 
all  in  all."  We  speak  of  man's  relationship  to  God 
as  that  of  co-operation.  But  Divine  operation  ever 
precedes  human  co-operation — the  former  as  unceas- 
ing and  continuous  as  the  latter,  drawing  it  forth  and 
inspiring  it.  All  feebleness  in  the  Divine  Hfe,  all 
failure  in  spiritual  work,  is  owing  to  this  one  thing : 
we  do  not  make  room  for  and  wait  on  the  Divine 
operation.  We  seek  to  do  the  Divine  will  without 
the  living  faith  in  Him  who  Himself  worketh  all 
things  after  the  counsel  of  His  will. 

This  faith  will  teach  us  to  live  and  work  in  entire 
dependence  on  God's  working.  It  will  waken  and 
strengthen  us  in  that  root  of  all  true  Christian  virtue, 
Humility.  It  is  through  this  that  the  angels  kept 
their  first  estate — they  live  in  entire  dependence  upon 
God's  willing  and  working  in  them.  It  was  for  this 
that  the  Son  assumed  the  robe  of  creaturehood,  to 
teach  us  that  the  life  and  glory  of  the  creature  con- 
sists in  every  moment  receiving  from  God  what  we 
are  to  be,  to  will  or  to  do.  He  did  nothing  of  Him- 
self but  what  the  Father  showed  Him.  He  judged 
nothing  of  Himself^  but  as  He  heard  so  He  spake. 
The  connection  between  God  and  us  is  to  be  one  of 
never-ceasing  receptivity,  God  every  moment  im- 
parting the  life  and  strength  we  need.     As  we  learn 


God  Working  Out  His  Own  Will     109 

to  know  God  thus,  we  shall  fear  nothing  so  much  as 
taking  His  place,  by  our  work  hindering  His,  and 
so  under  the  guise  of  doing  His  will  making  it  im- 
possible for  Him  to  do  it.  Oh !  let  us  in  deep  hu- 
mility and  reverence  worship  and  wait  on  the  God 
who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  will. 
This  faith  will  lead  us  to  true  diligence  in  God's 
service  in  the  blessed  confidence  of  being  indeed  able 
to  do  all  His  will,  because  what  He  wills  He  works 
Himself.  At  first  sight  it  appears  as  if  this  entire 
unceasing  dependence  upon  God  will  hinder  us  in 
our  work.  That  is  only  as  long  as  we  do  not  under- 
stand or  believe  it  fully.  But  to  the  upright,  who  wait 
on  God,  light  will  arise.  It  will  be  with  this  even  as 
with  the  truth  of  faith  without  works  for  justifica- 
tion. At  first  it  appears  as  if  this  would  discourage 
good  works  in  the  believer.  But  as  we  indeed  give 
ourselves  away  to  the  blessed  truth  of  faith  without 
works  for  acceptance,  we  find  that  it  is  this  very  faith 
that  is  most  abundant  in  producing  good  works  as 
its  fruit.  Even  so,  as  we  accept  fully  the  truth  of 
which  we  were  afraid  at  first  sight,  that  we  can  do 
nothing  of  ourselves,  and  that  God  must  do  all,  we 
shall  experience  that  the  most  absolute  and  unceasing 
dependence  is  the  secret  of  the  most  eflfective  service. 
As  works  before  faith  only  hinder,  while  faith  with- 


no  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

i'  otit  works  is  most  fruitful  of  works,  so  the  attempt 
to  work  without  the  fullest  and  most  entire  depend- 
ence upon  God  leads  to  continual  failure,  until  ceas- 
^'ing  from  ourselves  and  our  works  has  brought  us 
to  yield  ourselves  unreservedly  to  God's  working, 
there  to  learn  what  it  means  to  say :  ''  I  labour,  striv- 
ing according  to  His  working,  which  worketh  in  me 
mightily/'  The  faith  of  our  entire  impotence  and 
dependence  upon  God  becomes  the  power  for  our 
highest  activity. 

''  Foreordained  according  to  the  purpose  of  Him 
who  works  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  will." 
Believer !  the  purpose  according  to  and  for  which  you 
have  been  foreordained,  is  that  of  a  God  who  works 
all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  will.  Let  every 
thought  of  the  will  of  God  be  accompanied  by  the 
faith  that  He  is  a  God  who  Himself  works  all  things 
that  He  wills.  All  goodness  and  power  are  His,  to 
be  received  direct  from  Him  alone  through  Christ 
I  Jesus.  Worship  Him  with  a  holy  fear,  lest,  like 
I  Martha  you  grieve  your  Lord  by  your  much  serving, 
instead  of  waiting,  like  Mary,  for  what  He  can  work 
in  you.  What  God  hath  joined  together  let  no  man 
put  asunder:  God  working  His  will  in  man  by  the 
Holy  Spirit;  man  working  out  the  will  of  God  has 
wrought  in  him  in  secret,  into  daily  life  and  duty. 


XVII 

UNDERSTANDING  THE  WILL  OF  GOD 

"  Be  not  foolish,  but   understand  what    the  will  of  the 
Lord  is/' — Eph.  v.  17. 

IN  the  preceding  chapter  I  spoke  of  the  three 
passages  in  this  Epistle  on  the  will  of  God.  The 
first  lifted  us  up  into  the  eternal  glory,  to  worship 
God,  of  whose  glory  that  will  is  the  revelation,  and 
who  Himself  works  it  out  in  time.  The  last  will  lead 
down  to  the  hut  and  the  burden  of  the  slave,  and 
show  us  how  even  there  in  the  most  commonplace 
everyday  life,  the  will  of  God  may  be  done  on  earth 
as  in  heaven.  Our  present  subject  stands  between 
the  two  as  the  indispensable  link.  It  is  only  as  I 
know  the  will  of  God,  both  in  the  place  it  has  in  His 
life,  and  is  to  have  in  mine,  that  I  can  appreciate  the 
blessedness  and  fulfil  the  duty  of  ever  only  doing  the 
will  of  the  Father.  It  is  the  danger  of  neglecting 
the  careful  study  to  know  all  that  God's  will  implies, 
that  makes  Paul  write,  "  Be  not  foolish,  but  under- 
stand what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is." 

''  Be  not  fooHsh/'     In  our  conceit  that,  with  our 
III 


112  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

Christian  education,  our  common  sense,  our  daily 
Bible  reading,  we  know  well  enough  what  God's  will 
must  be,  we  prove  that  we  are  as  fools,  without  the 
wisdom  of  God  guiding  us.  ''  Let  no  man  deceive 
himself.  If  any  man  thinketh  that  he  is  wise  in  this 
world,  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be  wise. 
If  any  man  thinketh  he  knoweth  anything,  he  know- 
eth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know."  Let  us  be- 
ware of  the  folly  of  thinking  we  know  the  will  of 
God.  Let  us  become  fools  indeed,  in  the  sense  of  our 
great  ignorance,  and  seek  the  Divine  teaching  which 
alone  can  rightly  reveal  the  Divine  will. 

"  Be  not  foolish,  but  understand  what  the  will  of 
the  Lord  is.''  To  understand  a  thing  means,  not  only 
to  know  its  outward  form,  but  something  of  its  true 
nature,  its  inner  meaning  and  working.  It  is  only  as 
the  believer  seeks  a  spiritual  insight  into  God's  will, 
that  the  doing  of  it  will  become  the  heavenly  joy  it 
is  meant  to  be.  Let  us  consider  what  are  some  of  the 
chief  elements  of  the  true  understanding  of  God's 
will. 

Think  of  it,  "first  of  all,  in  connection  with  God 
Himself.  His  will  is  the  power  by  which  He  deter- 
mines what  He  is  to  do^  and  what  is  to  be  done  by 
His  creatures.  In  that  will  all  His  goodness  and 
wisdom,  love  and  power  are  revealed ;  the  knowledge 


Understanding  the  Will  of  God        113 

of  that  will  opens  to  the  creature  the  very  heart  of 
God.  In  the  surrender  to  and  worship  of  that  will 
angels  and  men  rise  into  Hving  fellowship  w^ith  God. 
Over  the  carrying  out  of  that  will  God  Himself 
watches.  What  the  Divine  Wisdom  has  planned, 
Divine  Power  will  perform.  Never  for  a  moment 
can  the  will  of  God  be  separated  from  God  Himself ; 
if  you  would  understand  that  will,  never  think  of  it 
but  as  the  symbol  of  the  presence  of  the  Living  God 
Himself.     Always  seek  to  see  God  in  His  will. 

Think  of  it  then  as  made  known  in  His  Word, 
The  w^ords  of  Holy  Scripture  for  the  most  part  are 
plain  and  simple,  so  as  to  be  understood  of  all.  And 
yet  because  they  contain  the  mystery  of  Divine  wis- 
dom, the  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  the  words 
does  not  at  all  ensure  the  real  spiritual  understanding 
or  apprehension  of  God's  will.  The  words  need  to 
be  taken  into  the  heart,  into  the  faith  and  love  and 
obedience  of  man's  whole  being,  and  God's  Divine 
working  through  them  needs  to  be  waited  for,  before 
we  can  fully  understand  God's  will.  The  very  same 
Spirit  which,  having  searched  the  deep  things  of 
God,  inspired  the  Word,  must  give  His  light  and  life 
in  the  depths  of  our  heart  too,  if  the  will  of  God  is 
really  to  become  our  will.  Without  this  all  our 
knowledge  is  merely  intellectual  and  superficial.     It 


114  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

is  only  God  working  His  will  into  our  will,  and  our 
will  accepting  it  heartily,  that  can  fit  us  to  under- 
stand what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is.  The  will,  the  in- 
tense desire  and  determination  to  do  all  God's  will, 
is  the  secret  of  knowing  it. 

Think  of  that  will  specially  as  embodied  in  Christ 
Jesus,  He  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  visible  image  of 
the  hidden  glory  of  God's  will.  As  man,  He  came  to 
show  us  how  it  is  the  calling  and  the  blessedness  of 
the  creature  to  give  itself  up  wholly  to  the  will  of 
God,  and  do  nothing  of  itself,  and  how  it  may  count 
\  most  confidently  on  God  Himself  working  in  it  both 
'  to  will  and  to  do  all  His  will.  As  our  Redeemer, 
He  died  to  deliver  us  from  our  own  will,  and  now 
leads  us  in  the  path  of  dying  to  self,  to  live  and  do 
God's  will  alone.  Any  attempt  to  understand  the 
will  of  God,  apart  from  its  intimate  union  with  the 
Son  of  God  our  Saviour,  ends  in  foolishness.  It  is 
in  living  union  zmth  Jesus  alone,  that  either  light  or 
strength  for  knowing  and  doing  the  Father's  will 
can  come. 

Understand  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is.  Think 
of  its  claim  on  your  whole  life.  You  cannot  attempt 
fully  to  yield  to  or  rejoice  in  that  claim  until  you 
see  that  it  rests  in  the  New  Testament  upon  the  fact 
that  the  renewed  will  is  a  ray  of  the  Divine  will  itself, 


Understanding  the  Will  of  God        1 1 5 

taking  possession  of  you,  of  your  inner  being,  and 
from  within  enabling  you  to  love  God's  will  as 
wholly  and  as  naturally  as  you  formerly  loved  your 
self-will.  The  Three-One  God  has  begun  His  own 
life  in  you ;  His  will  and  the  power  that  works  it  out 
are  in  you;  in  the  faith  of  that  admit  heartily  the 
claim  of  God's  will  to  have  complete  dominion.  See, 
and  say,  that  there  is  to  be  nothing  in  your  life  that 
is  not  to  be  under  the  control,  or  rather,  the  inspira- 
tion of  God's  will.  In  the  faith  of  this  living  root  of 
God's  will  possessing  you,  your  will  and  His  inex- 
tricably intertwined,  look  upon  the  Word  with  its  ex- 
ceeding breadth  covering  every  possible  position,  and 
upon  your  daily  life  with  its  innumerable  needs  and 
duties,  and  understand  how  the  will  of  God  can  be 
carried  out  through  all.  ''  Created  in  Christ  Jesus 
unto  good  works  which  God  hath  foreordained  that 
you  should  walk  in  them,"  you  can  count  upon  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  lead  you  into  all  God's  perfect  will. 

Understand  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is.  To 
sum  up  all,  think  of  God's  will  not  only  as  having 
come  forth  from  an  Infinite  Love,  as  revealed  and 
embodied  in  the  written  and  the  Eternal  Word,  as 
claiming  your  whole  Hfe  down  to  its  minutest  details, 
but,  above  all,  as  the  promise  of  what  God  Himself 
mill  work  in  you.    Understand !  the  will  of  God  is  so 


ii6  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

Divine,  and  holy,  and  perfect,  only  God  Himsell 
can  work  it.  You  can  only  work  it  as  He  works  it 
in  you  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  The  stronger  and  more 
unceasing  and  more  joyfully  confident  your  faith  in 
God's  working  all  His  will  in  you  becomes,  the  more 
will  you  know  that  it  is  possible  for  you  to  do  that 
will.  "  According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you,"  will 
in  this  also  be  made  true  in  you.  Standing  in  the 
full  light  of  the  eternal  love  as  it  shines  on  you  from 
heaven,  you  will  find  that  light  is  cast  upon  the  whole 
of  the  Word  and  of  life.  And  you  will  then  begin  to 
understand  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is.  The  most 
wonderful,  beautiful,  blessed  thing  in  the  universe. 
The  one  thing  to  be  sought  and  loved,  to  be  done 
or  suffered.  The  one  thing  worth  living  and  dying 
for. 


XVIII 

DOING  THE  WILL  OF  GOD  FROM  THE  HEART 

"  Servants,  be  obedient  unto  your  masters,  in  singleness 
of  your  heart,  as  unto  Christ ;  not  in  the  way  of  eye  service^ 
as  men  pleasers,  but  as  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will  of 
God  from  the  heart;  with  goodwill  doing  service  as  unto 
the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men." — Eph.  vi.  5-7. 

THE  importance  of  the  teaching  these  wordi 
contain  can  hardly  be  overrated.  They  tell 
us  that  not  only  when  we  are  fulfilling  some  direct 
command,  but  equally  when  we  are  doing  our  com- 
mon daily  work,  all  is  to  be  done,  may  be  done,  as 
the  will  of  God.  They  tell  us  that  this  cannot  be 
done  except  as  it  is  done  in  singleness  of  heart,  and 
from,  the  heart,  with  the  joyful  and  loving  consent 
of  our  whole  being.  They  tell  us  that  the  strength 
thus  to  act  is  to  be  found  in  doing  all  in  Christ's 
presence  and  unto  Him.  They  teach  us,  too,  how 
the  most  common  daily  life,  with  its  drudgery,  or 
even  its  oppression,  may  be  transfigured  into  the 
work  of  Heaven — doing  the  will  of  God. 

The  passage  depves  special  force  from  the  fact 
117 


ii8  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

that  it  was  addressed  to  slaves.  At  that  time  almost 
all  servants  were  slaves,  entirely,  even  with  their  life, 
at  the  disposal  of  their  masters,  and  with  no  rights 
in  law.  Many  of  the  early  Christians  were  slaves, 
of  the  base  and  despised  whom  God  had  chosen. 
Their  servitude  was  often  harsh  and  thankless,  and 
the  very  liberty  and  brotherhood  which  the  Gospel 
preached  would  only  make  some  of  them  feel  all  the 
more  the  bondage  they  endured.  To  such  Paul 
writes  to  be  obedient  to  their  masters,  as  unto  Christ, 
and  to  perform  all  their  service  as  the  will  of  God 
from  the  heart.  If  this  was  expected  of  these  slaves, 
just  come  out  of  heathenism,  in  circumstances  of  such 
difficulty,  it  is  surely  time  that  our  Christianity  had 
learned  the  lesson  that  everything  we  do,  even  the 
compulsory  or  ill-requited  service  of  a  hard  master, 
is  to  be  done  as  the  will  of  God. 

And  how  can  this  disposition  be  attained?  Only 
in  one  way.  By  heartily  accepting  any  position  into 
which  Providence  brings  us  as  God's  will  for  us. 
Then  the  work  we  have  to  do  in  that  position  will  be 
God's  will  for  us.  In  our  opening  chapter  we  saw^ 
that  one  of  the  first  lessons  in  the  Christian  life  is  to 
accept  every  trouble  that  comes  to  us  from  the  mis- 
takes of  ourselves  or  others  or  the  trial  of  circum- 
stances as  God's  appointment.      His  Providence  is 


Doing  the  Will  of  God  from  the  Heart    119 

His  will  for  us.  This  alone  can  prevent  the  irritation 
and  anger  and  fretfulness  that  so  often  embitters  life, 
and  clouds  the  sense  of  God's  favour.  Nothing  un- 
der heaven  can  then  disturb  our  faith  or  peace :  to  see 
God  in  all  gives  rest  and  hope.  Every  work  we  have 
to  perform,  however  unpleasant,  however  unjust  or 
ill-rewarded,  becomes,  as  long  as  God  allows  it,  His 
will  for  us.  To  do  it  as  such  makes  it  easy  and 
makes  it  holy,  a  well-pleasing  sacrifice.  And  if  this 
be  true  of  the  work  of  a  slave,  much  more  does  it  hold 
good  of  all  the  duties  of  daily  life.  In  housekeeping 
and  business,  in  all  the  thousandfold  work  or  service 
in  earning  a  livelihood  or  fulfilling  a  calling — every- 
thing must,  may  be  done  as  the  will  of  God. 

The  thought  at  once  suggests  itself  of  this  demand 
being  too  high  and  hard.  Who  can  always  be  re- 
membering, with  so  much  to  occupy  and  disturb,  that 
this  common  work  is  all  God's  will?  There  is  only 
one  w^ay  to  succeed  in  doing  this,  and  that  is  to  do  the 
work  ''in  singleness  of  heart/'  ''from  the  heart/' 
The  heart  means  desire,  will,  love,  delight,  joy.  What 
we  do  from  the  heart  is  a  pleasure.  The  only  religion 
that  satisfies  God  is  that  of  the  heart ;  that  is  why  He 
asks  us  to  love  Him  with  the  whole  heart.  As  long 
as  we  only  take  God's  will  as  a  law  that  we  are 
obhged  to  obey  for  our  own  safety  and  happiness,  or 


I20  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

to  prove  our  faith  and  gratitude,  the  doing  of  it  is  a 
burden.  But  when  we  take  it  into  our  heart  as  a 
thing  we  delight  in,  and  cannot  have  too  much  of, 
as  what  we  have  given  our  life  up  to,  everything  is 
welcome  that  gives  us  an  opportunity  for  doing  more 
of  that  blessed  will,  for  keeping  our  devotion  to  it 
unbroken. 

''  Doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart.'*  God 
not  only  asks  the  heart ;  He  has  promised  to  put  His 
law  into  our  heart.  God  wants  the  heart,  and  noth- 
ing less  can  please  Him.  He  has  therefore  made 
provision  for  securing  it.  He  sends  forth  the  Spirit 
of  His  Son  into  our  heart.  Let  us  believe  in  the 
Holy  Spirit  dwelling  in  us,  and  imparting  the  love  of 
God.  Let  us  in  that  faith  worship  and  give  ourselves 
away  to  ''  the  beautiful,  sweet  will  of  God,"  and 
cherish  it  as  our  choicest  treasure  and  chief  desire. 
As  it  gets  possession  of  the  heart,  and  opens  itself 
in  it,  the  heart  that  has  learnt  to  adore  its  glory  in 
God  will  learn  to  welcome  every  trace  of  it  on  earth, 
and  we  shall  find  ourselves  doing  the  hardest  service 
in  singleness  of  heart,  with  the  heart  only  set  upon 
pleasing  God,  in  very  deed  doing  the  will  of  God 
from  the  heart. 

Our  text  tells  us  one  thing  more — how  the  doing 
the  will  of  God  will  always  be  connected  with  the 


Doing  the  Will  of  God  from  the  Heart    121 

presence  of  Christ.  The  will  of  God  and  the  Son  of 
God  are  inseparable.  Jesus  is  the  will  of  God.  He 
did  it.  He  works  that  will  from  heaven.  His  great 
work  as  Saviour  is  to  secure  our  doing  it.  And  so 
Paul  writes  to  the  slaves :  ''  Be  obedient  to  your 
masters  as  unto  Christ;  not  as  men-pleasers,  but  as 
servants  of  Christ;  with  goodwill  doing  service  as 
unto  the  Lord/'  Here  we  have  the  thrice-repeated 
thought  that  in  the  daily  drudgery  the  animating  mo- 
tive is  to  be  that  it  is  a  service  rendered  to  the  Lord 
we  love.  His  presence  and  His  pleasure  are  to  be  our 
inspiration.  The  poor  slave  could  understand  that. 
The  eye  of  the  slave-master,  with  the  fear  of  displeas- 
ing him,  spurred  on  to  continuous  effort.  The  pres- 
ence of  Jesus  Christ,  the  sense  of  being  His  servant, 
the  bond-slave  of  His  love,  the  glory  of  pleasing 
Him,  can  as  unceasingly  fill  the  heart  and  carry  you 
through  all  the  day,  doing  work  for  men,  as  servants 
of  Christ.  The  presence  of  Christ  fits  us  for  this. 
He  knows  what  the  difficulties  and  temptations  are  in 
the  way  of  always  doing  God's  will.  He  knows  how 
the  victory  can  be  obtained,  and  the  will  of  God 
always  be  done.  He  lives  to  secure  to  us  the  strength 
and  the  victory.  If  we  give  ourselves  to  nothing 
less  than  to  be  wholly  His  servants  in  ever  doing 
God's  will  alone,  if  we  trust  Him  to  maintain  His 


122  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

own  presence  in  us  all  the  day,  we  can  know  the  joy 
of  His  service  in  His  strength. 

''  Doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart."  Let 
God,  let  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  let  God's  love,  have 
the  heart,  the  whole  heart,  and  nothing  less,  and 
God's  will  will  be  done  by  us  on  earth,  as  it  is  in 
heaven.  God  Himself  will  work  it  in  us,  and  amid 
all  the  changing  circumstances  of  life  there  will  be 
one  thing  that  never  changes — our  place  of  rest  in 
the  centre  of  God's  will. 


XIX 
FILLED  WITH  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD'S  WILL 

"  We  do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you,  that  ye  may  be  filled 
with  the  knowledge  of  His  will  in  all  spiritual  wisdom  and 
understanding." — Col.  i.  9. 

TO  understand  the  place  of  this  prayer  in  the 
Christian  life,  and  to  realise  how  being  ''  filled 
with  the  knowledge  of  God's  will  in  all  spiritual  wis- 
dom  ''  lies  at  the  very  root  of  its  growth  and  health, 
just  notice  what  a  beautiful  description  of  the  walk 
of  a  believer  follows  on  this  prayer  as  the  blessing  it 
is  meant  to  bring.  The  result  of  being  filled  with 
the  knowledge  of  God's  will  will  be,  that  we  ''  walk 
worthily  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing ;  that  we  bear 
fruit  in  every  good  work;  that  we  increase  in  the 
knowledge  of  God ;  that  we  are  strengthened  with  all 
power  according  to  the  might  of  His  glory,  unto  all 
patience  and  long-suffering  with  joy,  giving  thanks 
unto  the  Father."  Walking  worthily  of  God  and 
pleasing  Him;  bearing  fruit;  increasing  in  the 
knowledge   of   God;    being   strengthened   with   all 

123 


124  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

might;  all  patience  and  long-suffering  with  joy  and 
thanksgiving — such  is  the  sure  portion  of  a  soul 
''  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God's  will  in  all  spirit- 
ual wisdom  and  understanding."  It  is  the  will  of 
God  that  all  these  things  should  be  in  us  and  abound. 
Where  the  heart  is  filled  and  possessed  with  the 
knowledge  of  all  this  indeed  being  God's  will,  the 
life  will  be  filled  with  its  fruits. 

We  have  before  spoken  of  the  knowledge  of  God's 
will.  The  great  truth  suggested  by  these  words  in 
regard  to  it  is  that  it  must  be  in  ''  all  spiritual  wisdom 
and  understanding.''  There  is  a  wisdom  and  an  un- 
derstanding of  the  truths  of  Scripture  which  is  not 
spiritual.  The  human  mind  can  study  and  apprehend 
the  doctrines  the  Bible  teaches  concerning  God  and 
the  Divine  life  in  man,  without  having  any  true  ap- 
prehension of  them  in  their  quickening  life  and  power. 
Christians,  to  a  very  large  extent,  study  their  Bible, 
listen  to  preaching,  read  religious  books,  in  the  confi- 
dence that  they  are  earnestly  desirous  of  knowing  the 
truth,  and  able  to  some  extent  to  grasp  it,  while  the 
real  spiritual  wisdom  and  understanding  to  make  it 
their  own,  to  prove  its  power  in  their  life,  is  not 
waited  for  from  God.  They  wonder  why  so  much 
Bible  knowledge  does  not  make  them  humble  and 
lowly  as  they  would  like  to  be.     They  never  know 


Filled  with  the  Knowledge  of  God's  Will    125 

that  it  is  simply  because  their  knowledge  of  God's 
will  is  in  the  power  of  human  wisdom  and  the  natural 
understanding.  And  such  knowledge  is  powerless  to 
work  effectually  what  God's  Word  is  promised  to 
work. 

In  His  farewell  discourse  our  Lord  said  to  His 
disciples,  "  The  Holy  Spirit  shall  teach  you  all  things, 
and  bring  to  your  remembrance  all  that  I  said  unto 
you.  The  Spirit  of  Truth  will  guide  you  into  all 
truth.''  To  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  was  thus  committed 
the  power  of  teaching  Divine  truth  and  leading  men 
into  it.  He  was  to  teach  all  things,  to  guide  into  all 
truth;  no  truth  could  be  known  truly  without  His 
teaching.  As  the  indwelling  Spirit,  possessing  and 
renewing  the  heart.  He  alone  could  so  impart  the 
truth,  that  it  became  part  of  our  very  nature,  giving 
both  the  will  and  the  power  to  obey  it.  Our  Lord 
had  taught  His  disciples  many  things  while  on  earth 
with  them.  But  how  little  had  they  understood? 
Still  less  were  they  able  to  obey  His  commands  of 
self-denial  and  meekness,  and  humility  and  love. 
With  the  Holy  Spirit  coming  down  from  heaven  into 
their  hearts  as  the  power  of  God,  and  the  Spirit  of 
His  Son,  the  words  of  God  would  come  to  them  in 
their  spiritual,  supernatural,  quickening  power. 

We  need  to  study  this.     As  no  one  can  worship 


126  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

God  in  spirit  and  in  truth  but  through  the  Holy 
Spirit,  so  no  one,  not  even  a  true  Christian,  can  have 
any  spiritual  understanding  of  God's  will  but  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  one  reason  that  our  knowledge  of 
God's  will  is  so  defective  in  its  extent  and  power,  that 
we  see  so  little  beauty  in  God's  will,  that  we  so  little 
delight,  or  ever  succeed  in  fulfilling  it,  is  simply  this : 
the  knowledge  is  not  in  all  spiritual  wisdom  and  un- 
derstanding. 

And  what  is  needed  to  get  this  spiritual  wisdom 
through  the  Holy  Spirit's  teaching?  One  great 
thing — we  must  be  spiritual  men.  Paul  says  to  the 
Corinthians,  "  I  could  not  speak  unto  you  as  unto 
spiritual,  but  as  unto  carnal."  They  were  unfit  for 
full  spiritual  teaching,  because  they  were  not  spirit- 
ually minded.  This  suggests  to  us  the  law  of  all  the 
Holy  Spirit's  teaching.  He  cannot  communicate 
spiritual  truths  to  those  whose  lives  are  worldly, 
selfish,  carnal.  He  asks  a  disposition  that  at  least 
longs  to  be  spiritual.  It  is  in  the  heart  He  gives 
His  teaching.  The  man  who  yields  his  life  to  be  led 
and  ruled  by  Him  will  be  taught  by  Him.  Such  a 
one  can  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God's  will. 

Mark  the  word  filled.  It  points  to  an  emptying 
out  and  putting  aside  of  all  else.  It  suggests  a  heart 
given  up  wholly  and  entirely  to  the  will  of  God.    It 


Filled  with  the  Knowledge  of  God's  Will    127 

promises  a  life  in  which  the  will  of  God  shall  spon- 
taneously enter  the  minutest  details  of  daily  life — the 
whole  heart  filled  with  ii  and  with  nothing  else.  It 
is  not  the  thought  of  a  multitude  of  commandments 
all  packed  together,  but  of  God's  grand  will,  as  the 
controlling  power  of  the  life,  inspiring  and  animating 
the  whole  being.  The  two  thoughts  accompany  and 
are  the  complement  of  each  other — the  whole  being 
surrendered  to  be  spiritual  and  receive  spiritual  wis- 
dom, and  the  whole  being  thus  filled  with  the  knowl- 
edge of  God's  will. 

For  this  Paul  did  not  cease  to  pray  and  make  re- 
quest for  the  Colossians.  Let  us  pray  for  God's 
Church  and  ourselves,  that  the  spiritual  filling  with 
the  knowledge  of  God's  will  may  be  given  us.  The 
blessing  is  waiting  for  us ;  the  Father  delights  to  give 
it.  It  is  our  birthright — a  Divine  birth  needs  and 
has  the  promise  of  a  Divine  education.  The  Spirit 
through  whom  we  received  the  Divine  life  can  alone, 
will  most  surely,  guide  us  unto  all  its  riches.  Let  us 
pray  unceasingly,  honestly,  believingly,  to  be  iiUed 
with  the  knowledge  of  God's  will  in  all  spiritual  wis- 
dom and  understanding. 

In  heaven  the  will  of  God  is  done.  Nothing  but 
the  heavenly  Hfe  can  do  it.  None  but  God's  Spirit 
can  do  God's  will.     Let  us  not  expect  to  know  or  do 


128  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

it  without  the  heavenly  life  working  in  us  by  the 
Spirit  come  from  heaven  into  our  heart.  The  heav- 
enly life  dehghts  in  God's  will.  This  is  one  of  the 
great  lessons  that  the  Church  needs  to  learn,  that  the 
universal  neglect  of  so  much  of  God's  will,  and  the 
universal  complaint  of  lack  of  power  to  perform,  has 
but  one  cause :  the  heavenly  life  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  so  little  known  or  sought. 

Brother,  learn  well  the  lesson  that  no  knowledge 
and  no  book  can  profit  thee  except  as  it  reminds  thee 
of  the  need  of  the  One  Only  Teacher,  the  Spirit  of 
Truth,  and  leads  thee  in  inward  adoration  and  teach- 
ableness to  wait  for  the  hidden  spiritual  wisdom 
which  He  gives  in  the  inward  part. 


XX 

STANDING  PERFECT  IN  ALL  THE  WILL  OF  GOD 

"  Epaphras,  who  is  one  of  you,  a  servant  of  Christ  Jesus, 
saluteth  you,  always  striving  for  you  in  his  prayers,  that  ye 
may  stand  perfect  and  fully  assured  in  all  the  will  of  God/' 
— CoL.  iv.  12. 

IN  the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle,  we  had  Paul 
praying,  here  we  have  Epaphras.  The  prayers 
of  both  had  reference  to  this  one  thing — of  such 
supreme  consequence  is  it  in  the  Christian  life — 
the  will  of  God.  Paul  prayed  that  their  hearts  might 
be  filled  with  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  God's  will; 
then  they  would  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  to  all  pleas- 
ing. Epaphras  prays  that  their  lives  may  be  so  filled 
with  that  will,  that  they  may  stand  complete  in  all 
the  will  of  God.  Paul  says  that  he  does  not  cease  to 
pray  thus.  Of  Epaphras,  he  says  that  he  always 
strives  for  them  in  his  prayers.  In  both  cases  the  re- 
lation to  God's  will  is  to  be  no  partial  or  divided  one 
— but  whole  and  entire,  as  expressed  by  the  word  all. 
Paul  asks  that  they  may  be  filled  with  the  knowledge 
of  His  will  in  all  spiritual  wisdom,  to  walk  worthy 

129 


130  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing.  Epaphras  strives  for 
them  in  his  prayers  that  they  may  stand  complete 
in  all  the  will  of  God.  Nothing  less  than  all  God's 
will  is  to  be  the  standard,  the  desire,  the  prayer,  the 
hope  of  the  believer. 

To  stand  perfect  in  all  the  mill  of  God — the  be- 
liever's only  standard.  How  can  it  be  otherwise? 
The  will  of  God  is  one  whole,  all  equally  Divine,  and 
beautiful,  and  blessed.  All,  all  of  equal  obligation, 
equally  needful  for  our  peace  and  perfection,  with 
equal  provision  made  for  its  performance  in  the  grace 
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  will  of  God  is  so  en- 
tirely one  with  the  nature,  the  perfection,  and  the 
love  of  God,  that  to  neglect  or  refuse  any  part  of  it 
is  making  it  impossible  for  God  fully  to  reveal  Him- 
self to  us  and  to  bless  us.  As  perfect  and  complete 
as  the  will  of  God  is  as  a  whole,  ought  to  be  the  be- 
liever's acceptance  of  and  surrender  to  it  as  his  only 
standard. 

Paul  and  Epaphras  regarded  this  as  an  attainable 
measure  of  perfection  among  the  Colossians.  There 
are  many  Christians  who  admit  that  the  words  ex- 
press the  Scripture  standard  of  duty,  but  rob  that 
admission  of  all  its  power  by  counting  it  impossible. 
The  standard  is  only  an  ideal  one,  not  really  prac- 
ticable or  practical.     They  regard  it  very  much  as 


Standing  Perfect  in  all  the  Will  of  God  131 

the  law  of  Moses,  with  its  demands  that  never  can 
be  fulfilled.  They  do  not  understand  the  words, 
''  Ye  are  not  under  law,"  which  demands  w^hat  you 
cannot  do,  and  gives  no  power  to  do,  ''  but  under 
grace,''  which  demands  only  what  it  will  give  and 
work  in  you,  and  so  enables  you  to  do  all  it  demands. 
All  His  will  is  God's  standard  for  us  actually  asked 
and  provided  for;  let  it  be  ours  too.  Your  Father 
asks  nothing  less ;  let  nothing  less  be  what  you  ask  of 
Him  and  offer  Him. 

To  stand  complete  in  all  the  will  of  God — the  be- 
liever's one  desire.  Desire  is  the  one  great  power  in  \ 
the  world  that  urges  and  enables  men  to  undertake  I 
and  accomplish  what  at  first  sight  appears  impossi-  ' 
ble.  When  a  man  has  set  his  heart  upon  a  thing,  dif- 
ficulties only  rouse  his  energy  and  increase  his  power. 
Oh  that  Christians  might  be  taught  and  trained  to 
set  their  heart  upon  ''  all  the  will  of  God  "  as  their 
highest  and  only  blessedness,  upon  ''  standing  perfect 
in  it "  as  the  one  hope  of  their  calling !  It  is  to  be 
feared  that  the  preaching  of  the  will  of  God  has  not 
had  the  same  place  as  the  preaching  of  the  grace  of 
God.  Men  have  not  seen  that  as  the  grace  is  nothing 
but  the  will  of  God  manifested,  and  as  it  came 
through  Christ  doing  that  will,  so  its  one  object  is 
to  unite  us  with  that  will,  and  have  it  done  In  us 


132  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

as  it  is  'done  in  heaven.  Doing  the  will  of  God  has 
been  something  additional,  a  supplement  to  what  the 
grace  of  God  has  done,  an  expression  of  gratitude, 
instead  of  being  the  very  door  into  all  the  love,  and 
salvation,  and  blessedness  out  of  which  the  grace 
came  and  into  which  it  leads.  If  we  understood 
this,  how  every  desire  for  help  from  God  for  salva- 
tion, and  happiness,  and  the  enjoyment  of  His  love, 
would  be  identified  with  the  standing  complete  in  all 
that  will  in  which  God  is  revealed  and  is  alone  to  be 
found.     Let  us  set  our  heart  upon  this. 

To  stand  perfect  in  all  the  zvill  of  God — the  be- 
liever's continual  prayer.  The  teaching  about  the 
knowledge  of  God's  will,  and  the  standing  complete 
in  God's  will,  comes  in  connection  with  the  telling  of 
Paul's  unceasing  prayer  and  Epaphras'  striving  al- 
ways. It  is  not  earnest  thought,  or  clear  apprehen- 
sion, or  strong  desire,  that  will  bring  us  what  we 
need — ^but  unceasing  prayer.  Doing  the  will  of  God 
is  the  life  of  heaven,  because  God  is  there,  and  works 
His  will  without  hindrance  in  ah  the  holy  spirits  who 
are  wholly  yielded  up  to  Him  and  ever  wait  upon 
Him.  It  is  from  God  in  heaven  that  this  heavenly 
life  of  doing  His  will  must  come  down.  And  it 
will  come  down  and  be  carried  on  and  maintained  in 
us  just  in  proportion  as  we  too  wait  upon  God,  yield 


Standing  Perfect  in  all  the  Will  of  God   133 

ourselves  to  Him,  and  continue  offered  up  to  His 
Holy  Spirit  to  work  in  us.  Whether  it  be  in  the 
quiet,  steady  perseverance  of  our  daily  prayer,  or  in 
the  fervent  striving  in  seasons  when  the  need  and 
the  desire  are  specially  felt,  or  in  the  inward  suppHca- 
tion  of  the  heart  that  prays  without  ceasing — it  is 
only  the  life  that  is  continually  looking  upward,  and 
depending  alone  upon  God's  working  His  own  will 
in  us,  that  will  feel  that  God's  standard  is  not  too 
high,  because  what  the  word  of  His  mouth  demands, 
the  power  of  His  hand  performs.  ''' 

To  stand  complete  in  all  the  will  of  God — the  be- 
liever's sure  hope.  Paul  and  Epaphras  were  praying 
out  of  their  blessed  experience.  We,  alas,  have 
grown  so  accustomed  to  use  words  in  prayer  for 
things  we  never  expect.  They  lived  so  under  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  saw,  notwithstanding 
so  much  to  grieve  and  disappoint  them,  some  whom 
they  could  call  spiritual  men,  and  they  knew^  that  in 
answer  to  their  prayer  it  would  be  given — men 
''  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God's  will,  in  all  spirit- 
ual wisdom,"  men  ''  standing  complete  in  all  the  will 
of  God."  Let  us  pray  without  ceasing,  let  us  strive 
always,  for  the  churches  or  the  saints  with  whom 
we  are  connected,  that  these  two  prayers  may  be 
fulfilled  in  them.     Let  us  to  that  end  ask  God  to  re- 


134  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

veal  in  ourselves  and  our  experience  their  full  truth 
and  meaning.  Amid  all  disappointment  let  us  say: 
My  soul,  hope  thou  in  God !  I  shall  yet  praise  Him 
for  the  help  of  His  countenance !  Let  us  set  our 
hope  upon  God,  who  worketh  all  things  after  the 
purpose  of  His  will.  "  God  must  ever  be  God  alone. 
Heaven  and  the  heavenly  nature  are  His,  and  must 
for  ever  be  received  only  from  Him,  and  for  ever 
be  only  preserved  by  an  entire  trust  in  Him.''  God 
alone  can  work  His  will  in  us.  In  a  heart  that  prays 
and  waits  without  ceasing  in  dependence  upon  Him, 
He  can  and  will  do  it.  Oh !  let  us  believe  that  these 
precious  words  of  Epaphras'  prayer  are  not  vain ;  in 
them  the  Holy  Spirit  reveals  the  sure  hope  of  every 
believer  who  will  trust  God.  Let  us  not  doubt,  but 
*'  stand  complete  and  fully  assured  in  all  the  will  of 
God." 


XXI 

THE  WILL  OF  GOD,  YOUR  SANCTIFICATION 

"  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification." — 
Thess.  iv.  3. 

THE  Apostle  had  closed  the  third  chapter  of  this 
Epistle  with  the  wondrous  prayer  for  the 
Thessalonian  believers  that  the  Lord  might  ''  estab- 
lish their  hearts  itnblameable  in  holiness  before  our 
God  and  Father/'  He  proceeds  in  chapter  iv.  to 
urge  them  to  a  walk  well-pleasing  to  God.  He  be- 
gins by  specially  warning  against  two  sins,  unclean- 
ness  and  fraud,  iv.  3-7.  And  then  just  as  he  had 
pleaded  with  God  to  establish  them  unblameable  in 
holiness,  so  he  pleads  with  them  to  remember  and 
yield  to  the  blessed  truth :  ^*  This  is  the  will  of  God, 
your  sanctification."  ''  God  hath  not  called  us  for 
uncleanness,  but  for  sanctification.'^  The  great  plea 
against  sin  is  that  we  are  called  to  be  holy.  And 
the  great  power  of  holiness  is  that  it  is  God's  will 
for  us. 

And  what  is  holiness?     God  alone  is  the  Holy 
One.     There  is  none  holy  but  the  Lord.     There  is 

135 


136  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

no  holiness  but  His.  And  nothing  can  be  holy  except 
as  He  makes  it  holy.  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy." 
''  I  am  the  Lord  which  sanctify  you."  Holiness  is 
the  very  nature  of  God,  inseparable  from  His  be- 
ing, and  can  only  be  communicated  by  His  commu- 
nicating Himself  and  His  own  life.  We  are  in 
Christ,  who  is  made  of  God  unto  us  sanctification. 
The  Spirit  of  God  is  the  Spirit  of  Holiness.  We 
are  God's  ''  elect  in  sanctification  of  the  Spirit," 
''  chosen  to  salvation  through  sanctification  of  the 
Spirit."  The  Three-One  God  is  the  Thrice  Holy 
One,  and  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  each  share  in  mak- 
ing us  holy.  Our  part  in  sanctification  consists  in 
our  recognising  how  God  makes  us  holy.  We  have 
been  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  new  nature  we 
have  derived  from  Him  has  been  created  in  true 
holiness.  Our  holy  calling  is  in  the  power  of  the 
new.  Divine,  holy  nature,  to  act  out  its  impulses  and 
principles.  Our  justification  and  our  sanctification 
are  equally  in  Christ,  by  union  with  Him,  and  there- 
fore equally  of  faith.  It  is  as  we  believe  in  God 
working  in  us,  through  Christ  and  the  Spirit,  that  the 
inflow  of  the  holy  life  from  above  is  renewed,  and 
that  we  have  the  courage  and  the  power  to  live  out 
the  precepts  that  reveal  the  way  in  which  it  is  to  act. 
Like  the  whole  of  salvation,  sanctification,  or  the 


The  Will  of  God,  Your  Sanctification   137 

life  of  holiness,  is  the  result  of  man's  co-operating 
with  God.  That  means  first  of  all  his  entire  depend- 
ence on,  and  surrender  to,  the  Divine  operation,  as 
the  only  source  of  goodness  or  strength.  And  then 
the  acting  out  in  life  and  conduct  all  that  God  has 
worked  within  us. 

And  what  is  now  the  help  we  can  get  from  the 
words — This  is  the  will  of  God,  your  sanctification? 
The  first  thought  is  that  of  the  Divine  obligation  of 
holiness,  God  wills  it.  It  is  enough  to  regard  it 
in  the  other  aspects  in  which  it  can  be  presented.  It 
is  indeed  an  essential  element  of  the  Christian  Hfe, 
the  great  proof  of  our  gratitude  for  our  deliverance 
from  the  guilt  of  sin,  indispensable  to  true  peace  and 
happiness,  our  only  preparation  for  heaven.  All  this 
is  of  great  importance.  But  at  the  back  of  all  this 
there  is  something  of  still  greater  force.  We  need  to 
realise  that  God  wills  it.  In  eternity  God  predes- 
tinated us  to  be  holy,  ''  we  are  elect  accordmg  to 
the  foreknowledge  of  God  in  sanctification  of  the 
Spirit.''  (Eph.  i.  4;  i  Pet.  i.  2.)  God's  whole 
purpose  as  a  holy  God,  was  to  make  us  holy,  as  He 
is  holy.  The  whole  of  redemption  was  ordered 
with  a  view  to  this.  It  is  not  only  one  of  His 
commands,  among  many,  it  is  the  command  which 
includes  all.    The  whole  being  and  character  of  God 


138  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

proclaim  it;  the  whole  nature  and  aim  of  redemp- 
tion insist  upon  it;  believers!  God  wills  your 
sanctification.  Worship  God  in  His  holiness,  until 
every  thought  of  God  in  His  glory  and  grace 
is  connected  with  the  deep  conviction:  This  blessed 
God  wills  my  holiness.  Rest  not  until  your  will 
has  surrendered  unconditionally  to  the  will  of  God, 
and  found  its  true  destiny  in  receiving  that  Divine 
will  and  working  it  out. 

A  second  thought  that  suggests  itself  is  that  of 
the  Divine  possibility  of  holiness.  We  have  learnt 
in  our  meditations  that  the  will  of  God  is  not  only 
a  Divine  purpose  of  what  God  is  to  do,  or  a  Divine 
precept  as  to  what  we  are  to  do,  but  a  Divine  power 
that  works  out  its  own  purpose.  All  that  God  wills 
He  works.  Not,  indeed,  in  those  who  refuse  to 
accept  or  submit  to  that  will.  They  have  the  power 
to  resist  it.  But  in  those  who  yield  their  consent, 
who  love  that  will  and  long  that  it  should  be  done 
'\  on  earth  as  in  heaven,  God  Himself  worketh  out  all 
things  after  the  purpose  of  His  will.  In  every  man 
with  a  sound,  strong  will,  it  seeks  at  once  to  embody 
itself  in  action,  and  to  effect  what  had  been  counted 
an  object  of  desire.  God  works  in  us  both  to  will 
and  to  do.  When  He  has  worked  the  willing.  He 
delights,  if  He  be  waited  on  and  yielded  to,  to  work 


The  Will  of  God,  Your  Sanctification  139 

the  doing.  When,  by  His  grace;  the  believer  wills 
as  God  wills,  when  he  has  accepted  God's  will  for 
sanctification  as  his  own  will,  he  can  count  upon 
God's  working  it.  God  wills  it  with  all  the  energy 
of  His  Divine  being.  God  can  as  little  cease  work- 
ing holiness  as  He  can  cease  being  holy  or  be- 
ing God.  He  wills  our  sanctification;  and  if  we 
will  but  will  it  too,  in  the  faith  of  the  new  nature 
in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  works,  and  yield  our- 
selves to  the  will  of  Omnipotent  Love  in  the  assur- 
ance of  His  working  in  us,  we  shall  experience  how 
true  and  blessed  the  message  is.  God  wills,  and 
therefore  most  certainly  works  your  sanctification. 

The  third  lesson  suggested  by  our  text  is — the 
Divine  means  of  holiness.  The  will  of  God  is  your 
sanctification — that  is,  all  that  God  wills  has  this 
one  object,  will  secure  this  one  result.  Whether  it 
be  His  will  in  the  eternal  counsel,  or  here  in  time 
in  Providence,  whether  in  mercy  or  in  judgment, 
whether  in  precept  or  promise,  all  that  God  wills 
concerning  us  is  our  sanctification.  This  gives  a 
new  meaning,  and  its  true  glory,  to  every  command 
of  Scripture.  The  commands  of  God  have  unspeak- 
able value,  as  marking  out  for  us  the  path  of  safety 
and  of  life,  as  guiding  us  to  all  that  is  lovely  and 
of  good  report.     But  here  is  their  highest  glory: 


140  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

through  them  the  Holy  One  seeks  to  make  us 
partakers  of  His  own  hoHness.  Do  let  us  learn  to 
regard  every  indication  of  God's  will,  in  Scripture 
or  in  Nature,  in  things  great  or  little,  as  the  will  of 
the  Holy  One  coming  to  make  us  holy.  Let  every 
thought  of  God's  will  fill  us  with  the  longing  and 
the  hope  to  be  holy.  And  let  every  thought  of 
holiness  lead  us  to  the  study  of,  and  the  delight  in, 
and  the  faithful  doing  of,  God's  will.  Let  every  sin 
that  God's  Word  forbids,  such  as  those  Paul  men- 
tions of  uncleanness  and  fraud,  be  put  far  from  us. 
Let  everything  that  is  of  the  earthly,  carnal,  selfish 
nature  be  put  oflf,  that  the  whole  spirit,  soul,  and 
body  may  be  sanctified.  Let  every  command  that 
points  to  the  true  Christ-like  life — humility,  and 
love,  and  self-sacrifice — be  welcomed  as  the  channel 
of  God's  holiness.  The  desire  after,  and  delight  and 
faith  in,  God's  holiness  and  God's  will  become 
inseparably  one.  Let  all  who  would  experience  this 
remember  one  thing.  It  is  because  it  is  God's  will 
and  God's  holiness  that  there  is  power,  and  life  and 
blessing  in  it.  Everything  depends  upon  our  know- 
ing God  and  waiting  on  Him,  coming  under  the 
operation  of  His  Holy  Presence  and  Power.  As 
we  know  Him  as  the  Living  God,  and  have  inter- 
course with  Him  as  the  Holy,  Loving,  Almighty, 


The  Will  of  God,  Your  Sanctification  141 

ever-present  and  ever-working  One,  His  will  and 
His  holiness  will  become  to  us  heavenly  realities, 
and  we  shall  know  how  certainly,  how  blessedly,  His 
will  is  our  sanctification. 


XXII 

UNCEASING  THANKSGIVING  THE  WILL  OF  GOD 

"  In  everything  give  thanks :   for  this  is  the  will  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus  to  youward." — i  Thess.  v.  i8. 

IN  everything  give  thanks — that  means  a  life 
of  unceasing  joy.  The  bestowment  of  a  gift 
makes  me  glad.  Giving  thanks  is  the  expression 
of  that  gladness  to  the  giver.  For  what  in  the  gift 
he  has  bestowed  on  me,  for  what  he  has  proved 
himself  to  be  as  a  friend,  my  happiness  offers  him 
all  it  has  to  give,  all  he  desires — the  acknowledg- 
ment of  indebtedness  and  obligation  and  grateful 
love.  Every  father  does  his  utmost  to  make  his 
children  happy ;  he  loves  not  only  to  see  them  happy, 
but  to  see  them  connect  their  happiness  with  him- 
/  self  and  his  love.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  in 
everything,  m  every  circumstance  and  condition, 
the  whole  life  of  His  child  should  be  one  of  un- 
ceasing praise  and  thanksgiving.  If  it  be  not  al- 
ways so  with  us,  let  us  set  ourselves  to  learn  the 
lesson:  In  everything  give  thanks:  for  this  is  the 
will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  to  youward. 

142 


Unceasing  Thanksgiving  143 

In  everything  give  thanks — there  is  good  rea- 
son for  it.  God  is  not  a  hard  master,  who  reaps 
where  He  has  not  sown.  He  never  commands 
joy  without  giving  abundant  cause  for  it.  He  does 
not  expect  thanks  where  there  is  nothing  to  thank 
for.  He  would  have  us  remember  that,  in  the 
most  trying  circumstances  and  the  deepest  sorrow, 
there  is  cause  for  thanksgiving  infinitely  out- 
weighing the  reason  for  mourning.  Whatever 
we  lose,  God  and  His  love  are  still  left  us.  The 
very  loss  is  meant  to  make  the  love  more  precious; 
the  trial  is  love  seeking  to  give  itself  more  completely 
to  us.  Whatever  we  lose,  there  is  always  the  un- 
speakable gift — ^God's  own  Son  to  be  our  portion 
and  our  friend.  Whatever  we  lose,  there  is  always 
a  peace  that  cannot  be  taken  away,  a  joy  that  is/ 
unspeakable,  a  riches  of  glory  that  will  supply  every 
need,  an  abounding  grace  that  perfects  Christ's 
strength  in  our  weakness.  There  are  always  the 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,  and  the 
heavenly  treasures  that  can  never  pass  away.  God 
is  educating  us,  through  loss  and  trial,  into  the  full 
enjoyment  of  our  heavenly  heritage  and  the  per- 
fect fitness  for  His  own  fellowship.  So  let  us  believe 
that  the  command  is  most  reasonable,  and  say  that  this 
will  of  God,  in  everything  give  thanks,  is  our  will  too. 


144  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

In  everything  give  thanks — this  is  both  the  mark 
and  the  means  of  a  vigorous  Christian  life.  It 
draws  us  off  from  ourselves,  and  fixes  the  heart 
upon  God.  It  lifts  us  above  the  world,  and  makes 
us  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  who  loved 
us.  It  places  our  peace,  our  happiness,  our  life, 
beyond  the  reach  of  circumstances.  So  far  from 
rendering  us  indifferent  to  the  suffering  of  our 
fellow-men,  it  fills  us  with  hope  in  seeking  to  re- 
lieve them,  it  teaches  us  what  joy  there  is  in  the 
kindness  and  love  of  God,  and  makes  that  the  key- 
note of  our  life.  It  gives  wings  to  our  prayer, 
our  faith,  our  love,  to  live  the  true  heavenly  life  in 
God's  presence  and  worship.  It  enables  us  to  con- 
quer every  temptation  with  the  hallelujah  of  victory. 
In  everything  give  thanks.  God  Himself  will 
work  it  in  you.  This  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ 
^lesus  to  youward.  We  have  seen  more  than  once 
f  that  the  will  of  God  is  a  living,  almighty  power, 

I  working  out  its  own  purpose  with  our  intelligent 

I 
consent.    We  are  co-workers  with  God — that  means, 

not  that  He  does  part  and  we  do  part,  but  that  He 

does  all  in  us,  and  we  do  all  through  Him.     It 

means   that   He   works   in  us   to   will   and  to   do, 

and  that  we,  through  faith  in  His  working,  in  the 

power  that  worketh  in  us,  work  out  His  will.    Just 


Unceasing  Thanksgiving  145 

because  it  is  the  will  of  God,  the  believing  soul  is 
sure  that  it  can  be.  It  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ, 
This  expression  is  so  frequent  that  its  meaning  is 
passed  over.  All  that  God  is  and  does  to  us,  He  is 
and  does  through  our  Lord  Jesus.  The  Father  does 
nothing  in  us  but  through  the  Son.  The  Son  does 
nothing  but  as  the  Father  does  it  through  Him.  Our 
experience  of  God's  work  in  us  depends  upon  our 
abiding  in  Christ,  our  drawing  and  remaining  near 
to  God  in  and  through  Christ.  To  a  soul  seeking 
its  life  in  Christ  alone,  the  will  of  God  ensures  a  life 
of  unceasing  praise  and  thanks. 

In  everything  give  thanks.     It  needs  a  life  of 
entire  consecration.     Many  of  God's  commands  be- 
come an  unbearable  burden,  an  impossible  strain, 
because   we   look   to   the   feeble,   sickly   life   to   do 
what   only   the    strength    of   vigorous    health    can 
perform.     We  cannot  take  up  one  part  of  God's   J 
will,  and  do   it  when  we  please.     A  life  of  un- 
divided and  absolute   surrender  to  all   God's  will   j 
is    the   condition    of    being    able    to    perform    any  1 
part  of  it  effectively.     Every  command  to  perform 
some  special   part  of   God's .  will   is   a  call   to   in- 
quire whether   we  have   accepted  all   His   will  as 
the  law  of  our  life.     The  soul  that  has  done  this, 
that  is  learning  the  lesson  of  daily  guidance  for 


146  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

daily  duty,  and  is  prepared  to  meet  every  new  de- 
mand with  the  question  as  to  its  implicit  submission 
to  that  will,  and  its  unquestioning  confidence  in 
the  provision  of  sufficient  strength,  all  settled,  has 
found  the  secret  of  obedience  to  this  command  too. 
When  God  is  known  as  our  exceeding  joy,  when 
a  walk  in  the  light  of  His  countenance  all  the  day  is 
counted  equally  a  privilege  and  an  indispensable 
necessity,  the  giving  of  thanks  in  everything  is  not 
looked  upon  as  a  hopeless  attainment.  Because  it  is 
the  will  of  a  loving  and  Almighty  Father,  that 
will  can  be  done. 

In  everything  give  thanks.  These  are  indeed  the 
Christians  the  world  stands  in  need  of.  It  is  the 
happy  Christian — not  the  happy  man  who  happens 
also  to  be  a  Christian,  but  the  Christian  who  proves 
that  his  happiness  is  in  God,  and  who  lives  the  life 
of  joy  and  praise  because  he  lives  in  God's  presence, 
— who  will  find  the  joy  of  the  Lord  his  strength 
in  God's  service,  and  who  will  be  the  best  witness  to 
what  the  grace  of  God  can  do  to  give  true  joy  and 
blessing.  It  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  to  usward 
that  this  unceasing  thanksgiving  should  be  our  life 
— let  us  rest  content  with  nothing  less. 


XXIII 
THE   SALVATION    OF  ALL  THE    WILL  OF  GOD 

"  I  exhort  therefore  that  supplications,  prayers,  interces- 
sions, thanksgivings  be  made  for  all  men.  This  is  good 
and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  Saviour,  who  willeth 
that  all  men  should  be  saved." — i  Tim.  ii.  1-4. 

"  The  Lord  is  long  suffering  to  youward,  not  wishing  that 
any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance.'' 
— 2  Pet.  iii.  9. 

AFTER  Paul  had  urged  that  supplications, 
prayers,  and  intercessions  should  be  made 
for  all  men,  he  reminds  us  that  we  may  do  so  in 
confident  assurance  that  it  is  good  and  acceptable 
to  God,  because  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be 
saved.  The  knowledge  and  faith  of  God's  will  for 
all  is  to  be  the  motive  and  the  measure  of  our 
prayer  for  all.  What  God  in  heaven  wills  and 
works  for  His  children  on  earth  we  are  to  will 
and  work  for  too.  As  we  enter  into  His  will  for 
all,  we  shall  know  what  we  are  to  do  to  fulfil  that 
will.  And  as  we  pray  and  labour  for  all,  the  faith 
in  His  will  for  all  will  inspire  us  with  confidence 

and  love. 

147 


148  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

Perhaps  the  question  arises — If  God  wills  the 
salvation  of  all,  how  is  it  that  it  is  not  effected? 
What  of  the  doctrine  of  election,  asi  Scripture 
teaches  it  us?  And  what  of  the  Omnipotence  of 
God,  which  is  surely  equal  to  the  Love  that  wills 
the  salvation  of  all?  As  to  election,  let  us  re- 
member that  there  are  mysteries  in  God  and  in 
Scripture  which  are  beyond  our  reach.  If  there 
are  apparently  conflicting  truths  which  we  cannot 
reconcile,  we  know  that  Scripture  was  not  written, 
like  a  book  of  science,  to  satisfy  the  intellect,  but 
as  the  revelation  of  the  hidden  wisdom  of  God,  to 
test  and  strengthen  faith  and  submission,  to  waken 
love  and  childlike  teachableness.  If  we  cannot 
understand  why  His  power  does  not  work  what 
His  will  has  purposed,  we  shall  find  that,  as  the 
endowment  of  the  creature  with  a  free  will,  is  an 
act  by  which  the  will  of  God  has  limited  itself, 
all  that  God  does  or  does  not  do  is  decided  by 
conditions  far  beyond  our  ken,  and  which  it  needs 
a  Divine  wisdom  to  grasp  and  to  order.  We  shall 
learn  that  God's  will  is  as  much  beyond  our  com- 
prehension as  God's  being,  and  that  it  is  our  wis- 
dom and  safety  and  happiness  to  accept  every 
revealed  truth  with  the  simplicity  and  the  faith  of 
little  children,  and  yield  ourselves  to  it  to  prove  its 


The  Salvation  of  All  149 

living  power  within  our  hearts.  Let  us  not  fear  to 
yield  ourselves  to  the  uttermost  to  this  blessed  word : 
God  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved. 

God  is  love.  His  will  is  love.  As  He  makes 
His  sun  to  shine  on  the  good  and  the  evil,  so  His 
love  rests  upon  all.  However  httle  we  can  under- 
stand why  His  love  is  so  long-suffering  and  patient, 
and  does  not  take  its  power  and  reign,  we  believe 
and  know  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us — a  love 
whose  measure  in  heaven  is  the  gift  of  His  Son, 
and  on  earth  every  child  of  man.  His  love  is 
nothing  but  His  will  in  its  Divine  energy  doing 
its  very  utmost,  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  law 
by  which  His  relation  to  His  creature  is  regulated, 
to  make  men  partakers  of  its  blessedness.  His  will 
is  nothing  but  His  love  in  its  infinite  patience  and 
tenderness  delighting  to  win  and  bless  every  heart 
into  which  it  can  gain  access.  If  we  only  knew 
God  and  His  love,  how  we  should  look  upon  every 
man  we  see  as  one  upon  whom  that  love  rests  and 
for  whom  it  longs.  We  should  begin  to  wonder 
at  the  mystery  of  grace  that  has  taken  up  the 
Church,  as  the  body  of  Christ,  as  a  partner  in  the 
great  work  of  making  that  love  known,  and  rendered 
itself  dependent  upon  its  faithfulness.  And  we 
should  see  that  all  living  to  do  God's  will  must  lead 


150  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

up  to  this  as  its  central  glory:  our  doing  the  will 
\    that  wills  that  all  should  be  saved. 

God  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved.  This 
truth  is  a  supernatural  mystery,  not  to  be  appre- 
hended but  by  a  spiritual  mind  through  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  in  itself  so  Divine 
and  beyond  our  apprehension,  the  difficulties  that 
surround  it  are  so  many  and  so  real,  it  needs  so 
much  of  time  and  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  humble 
loving  heart  to  master  its  teaching,  that  to  very 
many  the  words  carry  but  little  meaning.  To  the 
believer,  who  in  very  deed  seeks  to  know  and  to  do 
all  God's  will,  they  give  a  new  meaning  to  life.  He 
begins  to  see  that  this  call  to  love  and  to  save  his 
fellow-men  is  not  something  accidental  or  additional 
that,  along  with  other  things,  goes  to  make  up  his 
life,  and  to  which  he  can  devote  as  much  of  time 
and  thought  as  he  sees  fit.  He  learns  that  just  as 
this  loving,  saving  will  of  God  is  the  secret  source 
of  all  His  will,  and  rules  it  all,  so  this  loving,  saving 
will  is  to  be  the  chief  thing  he  lives  for  too.  I  have 
been  redeemed  and  organically  united  to  and  made 
a  member  of  the  saving  Christ,  who  came  to  do  this 
will  of  the  Father.  /  have  been  chosen  and  set  apart 
and  -fitted  for  this  as  the  one  object  of  my  being  in 
the  world.     I  begin  to  see  faintly  that  the  prayer. 


The  Salvation  of  All  151 

Thy  will  be  done!  means  above  everything  that  I 
give  myself  for  this  loving,  saving  will  of  God  to 
possess,  to  inspire,  to  use,  if  need  be  to  consume  me. 
And  I  feel  the  need  of  spelling  out  the  words  of  the 
sentence  till  my  heart  can  call  them  its  own:  God 
— my  God,  who  liveth  in  me — willeth^  with  His 
whole  heart,  in  that  will  which  He  has  revealed 
to  His  people  that  they  may  carry  it  into  effect 
— that  all  m£n,  here  around  me,  and  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth — should  be  saved,  should  have  everlast- 
ing life. 

Paul  wrote  these  words  in  connection  with  a  call 
to  prayer  for  all  men.  Our  faith  in  the  truth  of 
God's  loving,  saving  will  must  be  put  into  practice. 
It  must  stir  us  to  prayer.  And  prayer  will  most 
certainly  stir  us  to  work.  We  must  not  only  seek 
to  believe  and  feel  the  truth  of  these  words,  but 
must  act.  This  will  of  God  must  be  done.  Let  us 
look  upon  those  around  us  as  the  objects  of  God's 
love,  whom  His  saving  will  is  seeking  to  reach. 
Let  us,  as  we  yield  ourselves  to  this  will,  go  and 
speak  to  those  around  us  of  God's  love  in  Christ. 
It  is  possible  that  we  are  not  succeeding  in  doing 
God's  will  in  our  personal  life  because  we  neglect 
the  chief  thing.  As  we  pray  to  be  possessed  and 
filled  with  the  knowledge  of  this  will  of  God,  let 


152  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

us  in  our  Sunday-school  class,  or  Gospel  work,  in 
our  efforts  for  young  or  old,  for  poor  or  rich,  seek 
to  have  hearts  filled  with  this  love,  tongues  that 
speak  of  Jesus  and  His  salvation,  and  a  will  that 
finds  its  strength  in  God's  own  will — that  all  men 
should  be  saved.  So  will  our  life,  and  our  love, 
and  our  work,  and  our  will  in  some  measure  be 
like  that  of  Jesus  Christ — a  doing  of  the  Father's 
will,  that  none  of  these  little  ones  should  perish. 


XXIV 

LO,  I  COME  TO  DO  THY  WILL 

*'  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  am  come  to  do  Thy  will,  O  God.  In 
which  will  we  have  been  sanctified  through  the  offering  of 
the  body  of  Jesus  Christ,  once  for  all." — Heb.  x.  7-10. 

"  Lo,  I  come.  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  O  my  God." — 
Ps.  xl.  7,  8. 

DAVID  had  said:  Sacrifices  and  offerings  Thou 
wouldest  not,  neither  hadst  pleasure  therein. 
They  had  been  appointed  for  a  time,  as  a  shadow 
or  picture ;  they  were  not  what  God  sought  or  what 
could  please  Him;  they  were  not  really  the  will  of 
God.  David  understood  that  what  God  wanted 
was  the  doing  of  His  will,  and  said:  I  delight  to 
do  Thy  will,  O  my  God.  While  saying  this  of 
himself,  he  spake  it  of  Christ,  in  whom  alone  its 
true  fulfilment  could  be  found.  They  are  the  great 
words  with  which  Christ  coming  into  the  world 
announces  His  work:  Lo,  I  am  come  to  do  Thy 
will,  O  God.  If  we  are  really  to  penetrate  to  the 
very  heart  of  what  Christ  is,  and  means,  of  what 
He  did  for  us  and  does  in  us,  we  must  seek  to 

153 


154  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

know  Him  as  come  from  heaven  to  earth  to  do  the 
will  of  God,  and  so  to  restore  the  doing  of  God's 
will  on  earth  to  the  place  it  has  in  heaven. 

His  doing  of  God's  will  is  first  contrasted  with 
the  sacrifices  and  ofiFerings  of  the  Old  Testament 
worship,  and  then  specially  connected  with  the 
offering  of  His  own  body  once  for  all.  Of  this 
will  of  God,  as  thus  done  by  Him,  even  unto  death, 
we  are  taught  that  in  it  we  have  been  sanctified, 
because  by  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever 
them  that  are  sanctified.  Let  us  try  and  learn  the 
great  lessons  that  there  are  to  be  found  here  in 
connection  with  our  study  of  the  will  of  God 

The  doing  of  God's  will  is  the  only  worship 
that  is  pleasing  to  God, — It  was  this  alone  that 
gave  their  value  to  the  Old  Testament  sacrifices. 
Not  in  the  costliness  or  the  multitude  of  the  offer- 
ings lay  their  value,  but  in  the  disposition;  in 
the  contrition,  or  the  faith,  or  the  consecration  of 
which  they  were  the  expression.  Not  even  in  these 
however,  except  as  they  were  a  Divine  appointment, 
and  were  brought  in  accordance  with  God's  own 
command.  If  not  accompanied  by  obedience  they 
were  worse  than  useless.  "  Obedience  is  better 
than  sacrifice."  "  Thou  desirest  not  sacrifice ;  Thou 
delightest  not  in  burnt-offering ;   the    sacrifices  of 


Lo,  I  Come  to  Do  Thy  Will         155 

God  are  a  broken  heart."  It  is  as  far  as  they  were 
the  doing  of  God's  will  that  they  were  well-pleasing. 
And  so  they  became  the  symbols  of  a  life  given  up 
in  devotion  to  God,  wholly  yielded  to  His  will  and 
service.  The  doing  of  God's  will  is  the  secret  of 
acceptable  worship. 

Christ  came  to  this  world  to  do  the  will  of  God. 
— He  came  and  lived  as  man  to  show  us  that 
the  one  thing  God  asks  of  the  creature,  that  the 
one  thing  that  can  bring  the  creature  life  and 
blessedness,  is  the  doing  of  the  will  of  God.  With 
this  view  He  not  only  submitted  Himself  to  all  the 
commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  law;  in  all 
His  life  and  work,  in  His  eating  and  speaking,  in 
His  travels  and  miracles,  He  lived  a  life  of  absolute 
dependence  upon  God's  guidance — in  everything  He 
did  only  God's  will.  He  did  all  God's  will.  He 
knew  that  it  was  God's  will  that  He  should  die  as 
a  propitiation  for  our  sins.  As  the  time  came  near^ 
and  all  that  that  would  imply  opened  up  before 
His  human  nature,  He  had  more  than  once  occasion 
to  say:  How  am  I  straitened!  How  is  My  Soul 
troubled!  My  Soul  is  sorrowful  even  unto  death! 
But  through  it  all  He  thought  of  God's  will;  the 
surrender  to  God's  will  sustained  Him.  And  He 
gave  Himself  to  be  what  the  sin-offering  and  burnt- 


156  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

offering  had  only  typified,  a  sacrifice  unto  God, 
obedient  even  unto  death.  It  was  this  gave  His 
inconceivable  suffering  its  inconceivable  value;  it 
was  borne  as  the  will  of  God,  laying  God's  just 
judgment  upon  Him  that  the  guilty  might  go  free. 

It  is  Christ's  doing  the  will  of  God  even  unto 
death  that  has  effected  our  salvation  — "  In  which 
will  we  have  been  sanctified  through  the  offering 
of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all.''  The 
word  sanctified  is  used  here  in  its  larger  sense,  as  it 
includes  justification  and  regeneration,  and  the  whole 
of  redemption — our  being  restored  to  the  fellow- 
ship of  God,  and  taken  possession  of  by  Him.  The 
great  sin  of  Adam  and  of  mankind  was  doing 
their  own  will  instead  of  God's  will.  The  great, 
the  only  root,  of  all  sin  and  misery  was  self-will. 
Jesus  Christ  came  to  take  away  sin.  He  did  so  by 
a  life  and  a  death  of  the  most  perfect  sacrifice  of 
His  will  to  the  will  of  God.  He  bore  the  con- 
sequence, the  punishment,  the  curse  that  our  selt- 
will  had  brought.  Through  His  perfect  obedience  to 
God's  will  He  made  a  perfect  atonement  for  our  sin, 
and  won  for  the  will  of  God  its  place  of  supremacy 
in  this  sinful  world.  He  did  this  by  the  offering  of 
His  body,  once  for  all,  and  so  perfected  for  ever 
them  that  are   sanctified.     "  By   the  obedience  of 


Lo,  I  Come  to  Do  Thy  Will  157 

one,  many  are  made  righteous/'  As  the  partakers 
of  a  complete  and  perfect  righteousness,  won  by 
obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  as  ''  created  after  the 
image  of  God  in  righteousness,"  their  entrance  into 
the  perfect  love  and  Ufe  of  God  is  complete  and  for 
ever. 

The  doing  of  God's  will  by  which  Christ  wrought 
out  our  salvation  is  now  and  ever  the  power  of  the 
salvation  He  imparts. — Doing  God's  will  is  not  only, 
as  many  think,  the  price  by  which  salvation  was  won. 
Doing  God's  will  is  salvation  itself.  In  Christ  it 
was  the  power  that  conquered  every  temptation  to 
self-will,  that  proved  what  human  life  ought  really  to 
be,  that  brought  a  perfect  human  life  and  laid  it  a 
sacrifice  at  God's  feet,  that  broke  for  ever  the  power 
of  self-will  in  its  dominion  over  us.  In  Christ  it 
proved  that  sacrificing  self-will  to  the  very  utmost, 
doing  the  will  of  God  even  unto  death,  is  the  path  to 
the  fulness  of  the  life  and  glory  of  God.  In  Christ 
doing  the  will  of  God  is  seen  to  be  the  life  and  joy 
of  heaven  brought  down  to  earth,  and  the  power  to 
rise  from  earth  to  heaven.  Doing  God's  will  is  at 
once  the  cause,  the  object^  the  power,  the  blessed- 
ness of  salvation. 

It  is  only  by  Christ  in  us  that  we  can  in  any 
measure  do  the  will  of  God  on  earth  as  it  is  done 


158  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

in  Heaven — The  prayer  that  Christ  taught  us  was 
meant  to  be  heard ;  God  answers  it  in  many  various 
degrees.  To  pray  it  daily  means  to  aim  at  it  in  the 
faith  of  God's  answer.  And  yet  how  many  earnest 
Christians  who  are  utterly  hopeless  in  regard  to  it. 
Their  surrender  to  do  God's  will  is  ever  failing.  Is 
not  the  great  reason  that  they  are  attempting  it  in  the 
power  of  a  life  that  is  not  wholly  possessed  by  Jesus 
Christ?  Listen  to  His  Word :  '*  Lo,  I  am  come  to  do 
Thy  will."  All  power  to  do  God's  will  is  in  Him. 
As  we  can  truly  say,  Christ  liveth  in  me,  we  shall 
find  His  strength  is  perfected  in  our  weakness.  The 
call  comes  to  each  believer,  as  one  sanctified  in  the 
will  of  God,  by  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus 
Christ  once  for  all,  and  perfected  for  evermore,  to 
accept  the  will  of  God  as  done  by  Christ  for  us, 
as  still  being  done  in  us  by  Him,  as  God's  free  gift 
in  Christ  Jesus.  The  one  thing  needed,  when  the 
heart  sees  and  accepts  and  loves  and  vows  this  do- 
ing of  God's  will  as  its  one  desire,  is  the  faith  that 
Jesus  does  take  charge  of  a  surrendered  will,  and 
that  in  the  power  of  Him  who  lives  in  heaven  and 
lives  in  us,  the  doing  of  God's  will  can  become  our 
daily  life. 


XXV 

DOING  THE  WILL  OF  GOD  OBTAINS  THE 
PROMISE 

"  Ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  having  done  the  will  of 
God,  ye  may  receive  the  promise.'' — Heb.  x.  36. 

IT  was  in  a  time  of  very  severe  trial  that  this 
Epistle  was  addressed  to  the  Hebrews.  It  had 
been  to  them  a  bitter  disappointment  to  see  the 
nation  rejecting  their  Messiah,  and  for  that  rejected 
of  God.  To  have  the  temple,  too,  with  its  Divine 
ordinances  of  circumcision  and  sacrifice,  set  aside, 
was  to  many  a  mysterj^  and  a  cause  of  deep  sorrow. 
In  reproach  and  the  spoiling  of  their  goods  they 
had  had  personally  to  endure  the  pain  of  persecu- 
tion. The  Epistle  was  written  to  comfort  them  by 
revealing  the  spiritual  glory  of  Christ's  priesthood 
and  the  salvation  He  bestowed.  And  it  pointed 
them  to  the  Father,  to  prove  that  suffering  had 
been  the  path  of  all  God's  saints,  and  had  always 
brought  a  great  recompense  of  reward.  It  is  in 
this  connection  that  the  words  come:  Ye  have 
need  of  patience,  that,  having  done  the  will  of  God, 

159 


i6o  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

ye  may  receive  the  promise.  The  promise  was 
sure  and  very  precious;  the  suffering  was  needful, 
and  would  be  very  blessed.  The  one  thing  they 
needed  was  patience  in  bearing  what  God  sent,  and 
waiting  what  God  had  promised.  And  in  that  time 
of  patient  waiting  they  needed  just  one  thing — to  see 
that  they  did  the  will  of  God.  In  a  world  of  sorrow 
and  trial  the  Christian  has  but  this  one  thing  to 
strive  after:  not  only  to  bear,  but  to  do  the  will  of 
God;  that,  having  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  may 
receive  the  promise. 

Doing  the  will  of  God  is  the  path  to  the  inheri- 
tance. The  inheritance  owes  its  Divine  glory  and 
blessedness  to  God  having  willed  it.  God's  will 
working  in  us  can  alone  fit  us  for  receiving  and  en- 
joying it.  And  God's  will  can  work  in  no  other  way 
in  us  as  creatures  endowed  with  intelligence  and  will 
and  moral  powers,  than  by  our  doing  it.  Not  in  any 
way  as  a  matter  of  work  or  merit,  but  in  the  very 
nature  and  necessity  of  things  the  only  way  of  our 
receiving  the  promise,  which  has  been  bestowed  of 
grace,  is  by  our  doing  the  will.  We  have  been  look- 
ing at  the  will  of  God  in  various  aspects — let  us 
once  again  turn  to  this,  one  of  the  most  elementary, 
and  yet  one  of  the  deepest,  truths  connected  with  it. 

Having  done  the  will  of  God.     It  has  been  said 


Doing  the  Will  Obtains  the  Promise   i6r 

the  highest  form  of  existence  is  the  power  of  work- 
ing. It  is  so  in  God.  All  His  attributes  could  not 
make  Him  the  glorious  God  He  is,  if  they  were  all 
dormant,  inactive  powers.  His  love,  for  instance, 
would  be  a  mere  thought  or  sentiment,  not  in  deed 
and  truth.  The  highest  form  of  human  existence 
is  even  so  the  power  of  working ;  and,  as  a  creature, 
the  highest  form  of  that  power  can  be  nothing  than 
working  out  the  perfect  will  of  God.  God  works 
to  will  and  to  do  in  us,  and  what  He  works  in  us  we 
work  out,  doing  what  He  wills  and  does  in  us.  Such 
doing  the  will  of  God  is  the  proof  of  our  entire 
surrender  to  it,  our  being  truly  mastered  and  pos- 
sessed by  it.  Such  doing  the  will  of  God  is  what 
gives  its  strength  to  our  inner  man,  refines  and 
spiritualises  our  whole  being,  and  fits  us  for  being 
here,  the  abode  of  the  Three-One  God  (John  xiv. 
15,  21,  23),  and  entering  His  abode  hereafter  (Matt, 
vii.  21).  Such  doing  the  will  of  God  fits  a  Chris- 
tian for  receiving  ever}^  promise. 

It  was  in  the  time  of  suflFering  and  trial  that 
these  believers  were  thus  to  do  the  will  of  God. 
The  first  concern  of  most  Christians  in  trouble  is 
to  be  delivered  from  it.  This  may  not  be  the  chief 
thing.  The  one  great  desire  ought  to  be — in  noth- 
ing to  fail  of  knowing  or  doing  the  will  of  God. 


1 62  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

This  is  the  secret  of  strength  and  true  nobility  in 
the  Christian  life.  Some  think  that  if  under  reproach 
or  persecution  or  injustice,  evil  feelings  are  roused 
and  given  way  to,  there  is  some  excuse  for  it — 
it  cannot  be  judged  too  severely — the  temptation 
was  so  great.  God's  word  teaches  us  differently. 
It  regards  the  Christian  so  entirely  as  a  man  who 
has  given  up  his  own  will  to  live  wholly  for  God's 
will,  that  it  says  to  him,  of  all  trial  and  temptation 
of  whatever  nature,  seek  one  thing:  not  to  sin 
against  God.  Be  patient,  and  see  that  you  do  the 
will  of  God. 

But  is  not  this  something  beyond  human  power 
— in  every  trial  ever  to  think  first  of  God's  will, 
and  do  that?  It  is  indeed  something  beyond 
human  power,  but  not  beyond  the  power  of  grace. 
It  is  just  for  this  that  our  Lord  Jesus  came  to 
earth,  saying:  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  O  God! 
and  went  to  the  Cross  with  the  cry:  Not  My  will, 
but  Thine  be  done.  He  lived  as  an  example  of 
how  we  ought  to  live.  He  died  to  set  us  free  from 
the  power  of  sin,  and  open  the  path,  through  death 
to  sin  and  self,  to  a  life  for  God  and  His  will.  He 
ascended  to  heaven  to  give  His  own  Holy  Spirit, 
that  in  His  power  we  might,  like  Him,  do  the  will 
of  the  Father, 


Doing  the  Will  Obtains  the  Promise   163 

Alas!  that  in  the  Church  of  Christ  the  truth 
should  be  so  little  known  that  to  do  the  will  of 
God  is  the  first  duty  of  the  believer;  and,  as  a 
consequence  of  this,  that  there  is  so  little  desire 
of  the  promise  and  the  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  teach  us  God's  will  in  daily  life.  And  still 
further,  so  little  faith  in  the  power  of  the  grace 
of  Christ  and  His  Spirit  to  fit  us  for  the  life  of  do- 
ing the  will  of  God.  Men  have  lost  sight  of  the 
supernatural  light  that  can  reveal  the  will  of  God  in 
its  beauty  and  attractiveness,  and  make  it  a  joy  to  do 
it ;  and  of  the  supernatural  obligation  to  live  wholly 
and  entirely  for  the  will  of  that  God  who  created  us, 
and  to  whom  Christ  has  brought  us  back ;  and  of  the 
supernatural  power,  corresponding  to  the  light  and 
the  obligation,  which  brings  a  life  in  the  will  of  God 
within  our  reach,  because  Christ's  strength  is  made 
perfect  in  our  weakness. 

Believer!  whatever  others  say  or  do,  take  you 
the  word  in  its  simple  Divine  meaning:  ''You 
have  need  of  patience,  that,  having  done  the  will 
of  God,  you  may  receive  the  promise.''  Beseech 
God,  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  renewing  of  the 
spirit  of  your  mind,  to  show  you  how  He  would 
have  you  live  wholly  in  His  will.  Yield  your- 
self to  that  will  in  everything  you  know,  and  do  it. 


1 64  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

Yield  yourself  to  that  will  in  all  its  Divine  love  and 
quickening  power  as  it  works  in  you  and  makes 
you  partaker  of  its  inmost  nature.  Pray,  pray,  pray, 
until  you  see  increasingly  how  what  Christ  re- 
vealed in  His  life  and  death  is  the  promise  and 
pledge  of  what  God  will  work  in  you,  and  how  your 
abiding  in  Him  and  your  oneness  with  Him,  means 
nothing  less  than  your  being  called  to  do  the  will 
of  God  as  He  did  it. 


XXVI 

GOD  HIMSELF  WORKING  HIS  WILL  IN  US 

"  Now  the  God  of  peace,  make  you  perfect  in  every  good 
thing  to  do  His  will,  working  in  us  that  which  is  well  pleas- 
ing in  His  sight,  through  Jesus  Christ;  to  whom  be  the 
glory  for  ever  and  ever." — Heb.  xiii.  20,  21. 

IN  Hebrews  we  have  three  passages  on  the  will 
of  God.  The  first,  x.  7-10,  spoke  of  that  will, 
and  Christ's  doing  of  it,  as  the  cause  of  our  re- 
demption— the  deep  root  in  which  our  life  stands. 
The  second,  10-36,  spoke  of  that  will  as  done 
patiently  by  us,  amid  the  trials  of  this  earth.  The 
third,  our  present  text,  shows  us  the  wondrous 
bond  of  union  between  the  two  former:  the  same 
God  who  wrought  out  His  will  in  Christ  for  our 
redemption,  is  working  out  that  will  in  us  too. 
What  God  did  in  Christ  is  the  pledge  of  what  He 
will  do  in  us  too.  That  Christ  did  the  will  of  God 
secures  our  doing  that  will  too.  Listen  to  the  won- 
drous teaching. 

Now,  the  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again  from 
the  dead  the  Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  in  the 

165 


1 66  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  even  our  Lord 
Jesus,  make  you  perfect  to  do  His  will.  All  that  is 
said  about  the  Lord  Jesus  refers  to  the  previous 
teaching  of  the  Epistle.  It  has  taught  us  what  the 
covenant  was,  what  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  what 
the  exaltation  to  the  throne  of  Christ  as  the  Priest 
King,  the  Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep.  And  now 
it  says  that  the  God  of  peace,  who  did  it  all,  who 
gave  Christ  to  do  His  will  and  die  on  the  Cross, 
and  then  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  that  the  same 
God  will  perfect  us  to  do  His  will.  As  much  as  it 
was  God  who  sent  and  enabled  Christ  to  do  His 
will,  and  through  that  perfected  Him  and  perfected 
our  salvation,  it  is  God  too  who  will  perfect  us  in 
every  good  thing  to  do  His  will.  God's  will  being 
done  in  us  is  to  God  of  the  same  interest  as  His 
will  done  in  Christ;  He  cares  for  the  one  as  much 
as  the  other.  The  same  Omnipotence  which  created 
for  Christ  a  body  through  the  Virgin  Mary,  and 
empowered  Christ — who  could  do  nothing  of  Him- 
self— to  do  that  will,  even  to  the  agony  of  Geth- 
semane,  and  the  surrender  of  His  Spirit  into  His 
Father's  hand  on  Calvary,  and  then  raised  Him  from 
the  grave  to  His  own  right  hand,  the  same  Omnipo- 
tent God  is  working  in  you  that  you  may  do  His 


God  Himself  Working  His  Will  in  Us    167 

will.  Oh,  for  grace  to  believe  this — the  God  who 
worked  all  in  Christ,  even  to  raising  Him  from  the 
very  dead,  is  working  all  in  us! 

You  do  not  catch  it  yet.  It  looks  altogether 
too  impossible.  The  difference  is  too  great.  The 
difficulties  in  our  sinful  nature  are  too  insuperable. 
Come  and  listen  once  again.  Now,  the  God  of  peace, 
who  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ — what  now — do  pause,  and  take  in  every 
word — make  you  perfect — in  every  good  thing — to 
do  His  will!    What  more  could  one  wish?^ 

And  yet,  to  remove  all  doubt,  there  is  more. 
There  follows :  working  in  us  that  which  is  pleasing 
in  His  sight,  through  Jesus  Christ.  The  centre 
words,  to  do  His  zvill,  are  welded  fast  between  what 
precedes:  God  Himself  make  you  perfect  in  every 
good  thing,  and  what  follows — working  Himself  in 
you  that  which  is  pleasing  in  His  sight.  How  won- 
derful the  connection  between  our  doing  and  God's 
working.  He  fits  us  in  every  good  thing  to  do  His 
will,  so  that  the  doing  of  it  is  really  our  work,  and 
yet  at  the  same  time  it  is  His  ozvn  working  in  us. 


^  The  word  perfect  here  means  to  repair,  to  equip,  to  Ht; 
God  fits  us  for  every  good  thing,  and  so  enables  us  to  do  His 
will. 


1 68  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

God  fits  us  for  the  work,  and  then  works  it  through 
us.    And  so  all  is  of  God! 

The  lessons  for  which  we  want  to  take  these 
words  into  our  heart,  and  which  we  want  to  ask 
God  to  teach  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  three. 
The  first  is:  The  one  object  of  the  great  redemp- 
tion is,  to  fit  us  to  do  God's  will  here  on  earth.  For 
that  we  were  created;  that  was  God's  image  and 
likeness  in  us;  that  was  our  fi.tness  for  fellowship 
with  God,  and  the  participation  in  His  rule  of  the 
world  to  which  we  were  destined.  To  redeem  and 
bring  us  back  to  this,  God  worked  that  stupendous 
miracle  of  power  and  of  love;  His  Son  becoming 
man,  that  as  man  He  might  show  us  how  to  do 
God's  will,  and  how  by  doing  it  sin  could  be  atoned 
and  conquered.  For  this  Christ  lives  in  heaven 
and  in  our  hearts,  that  through  Him  God  may  work 
in  us  that  which  is  well  pleasing  in  His  heart.  What 
the  sinner  needs  to  know  when  he  is  called  to  re- 
pentance, what  the  believer  needs  to  be  contin- 
ually reminded  of  and  encouraged  in,  is  this :  to  do 
God's  will  is  what  I  have  been  redeemed  for.  The 
entire  failure  of  so  much  Christian  life  is  simply 
owing  to  this,  that  the  Church  has  not  clearly  and 
persistently  preached  the  great  message,  that  all 
God's  wondrous  grace  has  this  one  object,  to  restore 


God  Himself  Working  His  Will  in  Us    169 

us  to  the  original  glory  of  our  creation,  and  make 
it  our  life  to  do  His  will. 

The  second  lesson  is  of  no  less  importance — we 
can  do  God's  will  because  God  Himself  fits  us  for 
it,  working  in  us  that  which  is  pleasing  in  His 
sight. 

Alas!  how  little  this  is  known  or  believed  by 
believers.  The  call  to  do  all  God's  will  is  made 
of  none  eflfect  by  the  terrible  unbelief  that  says: 
It  cannot  be;  I  cannot  do  it.  Men  say  that  they 
believe  that  all  the  mysteries  of  redemption,  up 
to  Christ's  resurrection  and  exaltation  to  heaven 
were  wrought  ''  by  the  working  of  the  strength  of 
God's  might"  (Eph.  i.  20).  But  they  do  not  be- 
lieve, what  Scripture  affirms  as  distinctly  (Eph. 
i.  19),  that  the  same  exceeding  greatness  of  His 
power  works  in  them  that  believe.  Let  me  implore 
every  child  of  God  who  would  live  to  do  His  will, 
to  remember :  the  will  of  God  is  so  holy  and  Divine  ; 
no  one  can  do  it  but  God  Himself.  God  has  given 
thee  a  renewed  will,  capable  of  knowing  and  de- 
siring, and  even  delighting  in,  His  will,  but  not  of 
doing  it  in  thine  own  strength.  The  work  of  our  will 
is  to  accept  of  His  will  as  being  indeed  what  He  will 
work  in  thee.  This  is  indeed  our  highest  glory,  that 
God,  who,  according  to  His  very  nature,  must  work 


lyo  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

all  in  all,  will  work  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do. 
He  Himself  fits  us  in  every  good  thing  to  do  His 
will,  working  Himself  in  us  that  which  is  pleasing 
in  His  sight. 

The  last  lesson  follows  naturally:  Our  great 
need  and  our  great  duty,  when  we  have  accepted 
our  calling  to  live  only  to  do  His  will,  is  to  bow 
before  God  in  continual  humility  and  dependence, 
asking  to  know  fully  our  utter  impotence,  and  seek- 
ing to  trust  confidently  in  His  power  working  in 
us.  And  with  this,  to  understand  that  His  power 
cannot  work  freely  and  fully  in  us^  except  as  He 
dwells  in  us.  Jesus  said:  The  Father  abiding  in 
Me  doeth  the  works.  It  is  "  through  Jesus  Christ  " 
God  works  in  us  what  is  pleasing  in  His  sight. 
That  is,  through  Jesus  Christ  dwelling  in  the  heart, 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  God  by  a  con- 
tinual secret,  almighty  operation,  works  out  His  will 
in  us,  by  fitting  us  to  do  it.  The  one  thing  needful 
is:  a  simple,  but  unceasing  and  unlimited,  faith  in 
the  indwelling  Jesus.  Lo,  I  come,  He  said.  I  de- 
light to  do  Thy  will.  That  is  not  only  for  us,  but  in 
us.  He  is  the  Executor  of  the  Father's  will,  through 
whom  it  is  all  carried  out.  Oh !  let  us  turn  with  a 
new  consecration  to  do  all  God's  will,  with  a  new 
faith  to  God  who  will  work  in  us  the  fitness  to  do  it, 


God  Himself  Working  His  Will  in  Us    171 

with  a  new  devotion  to  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom 
we  the  sinful,  we  the  impotent,  can  indeed  have 
grace  to  say  too:  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  O  my 
God. 


XXVII 
SUFFERING  ACCORDING  TO  THE  WILL  OF  GOD 

"  For  so  is  the  will  of  God,  that  by  well-doing  ye  should 
put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men.  If,  when  ye  do 
well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  shall  take  it  patiently,  this  is 
acceptable  with  God.  Because  Christ  also  suffered  for  you, 
leaving  you  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  His  steps." — 
I  Pet.  ii.  15,  20,  21. 

"  It  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God  so  will,  that  ye  suffer  for 
well-doing,  than  for  evil-doing.  Because  Christ  also  suf- 
fered for  sins  once." — i  Pet.  iii.  17,  18. 

"  Inasmuch  as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings,  re- 
joice. Wherefore,  let  them  also  that  suffer  according  to 
the  will  of  God  commit  their  souls  in  well-doing  unto  a 
faithful  Creator." — i  Pet.  iv.  13,  19. 

BEFORE  Peter  had  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  he 
could  not  understand  that  suffering  had  to 
be  borne  as  God's  will.  When  Christ  spoke  of  His 
suffering,  he  reproved  Him,  and  had  to  bear  the 
rebuke:  Get  thee  behind  Me,  Satan.  When  his 
discipleship  brought  him  into  danger  and  suffering, 
he  denied  his  Lord.     He  could  not  see  that  sufifer- 

172 


Suffering  According  to  the  Will  of  God    1 73 

ing  was  God's  will.  With  Pentecost  everything 
was  changed.  He  knew  no  fear.  He  rejoiced  that 
he  was  counted  worthy  to  suffer  for  His  name.  In 
his  Epistle  he  ever  connects  Christ's  suffering  for 
our  sins  with  his  example,  calling  us  to  suffer  like 
Him.  Through  suft'ering  to  glory  is  the  keynote  of 
his  exhortation  to  the  saints.  Let  us  listen  to  what 
he  teaches  us  of  the  will  of  God  in  suffering. 

The  first  lesson  is :  To  regard  all  suffering  as  the 
will  of  God  for  us,  ''  If  the  will  of  God  will^  that 
ye  suffer  for  well-doing."  "  They  that  suffer  accord- 
ing to  the  will  of  God.''  He  is  speaking  of  the  suf- 
fering of  injustice  at  the  hands  of  our  fellow-men. 
Very  many,  who  think  they  are  ready  to  endure  trial 
that  comes  direct  from  God,  find  it  very  hard  to 
bear  unkind,  or  hard,  or  unjust  treatment  from  men. 
And  yet  it  is  just  here  that  Christ's  teaching  and 
example,  and  all  Scripture  instruction,  call  upon  us 
to  accept  and  bow  to  the  will  of  God.  Whether  it 
be  in  the  most  flagrant  injustice,  and  the  most  ter- 
rible suffering — such  as  our  Lord  endured  at  the 
hands  of  Caiaphas  and  Pilate — or  the  smaller  vexa- 
tions that  we  meet  with  in  daily  life  from  enemies 
or  friends,  all  suffering  must  be  to  us  the  will  of 
God.  Nothing  can  come  to  us  without  the  will  of 
God.     What  is  done  may  be  most  contrary  to  the 


174  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

will  of  God,  and  the  doer  most  guilty  in  His  sight 
— that  it  is  done  to  us,  that  we  suffer  by  it,  is  God's 
will.  And  the  first  duty  of  the  child  of  God  is — 
not  to  look  at  the  man  who  does  it,  to  seek  to  be 
avenged  of  him,  or  delivered  from  his  hands,  but — 
to  recognise  and  bow  beneath  it  as  the  Father's  will. 
That  one  thought — it  is  the  Father's  will — changes 
our  feelings  towards  it,  enables  us  to  accept  it  as 
a  blessing,  changes  it  from  an  evil  into  a  good.  In 
all  suffering  let  the  first  thought  be,  to  see  the 
Father's  hand,  and  count  on  the  Father's  help.  Then 
no  circumstance  whatever  can  for  one  moment  take 
us  out  of  the  blessed  will  of  God. 

The  second  lesson  is:  Ever  to  suifer  with  well- 
doing. In  all  the  three  texts  the  word  "  well-doing  " 
occurs.  If  we  suffer  when  we  do  wrong,  and  take 
it  patiently,  this  is  no  glory.  The  one  thing  we  are 
to  care  for  is  that,  if  we  suffer,  it  is  not  to  be  for 
wrong-doing,  but  for  well-doing.  For  it  is  better, 
if  the  will  of  God  so  will,  that  ye  suffer  for  well- 
doing than  for  evil-doing.  And  also  with  well-do- 
ing, not  allowing  the  suffering  to  call  forth  anything 
that  is  sinful.  That  must  be  our  one  desire  in  suf- 
fering. It  is  caused  by  sin,  it  is  meant  to  take  away 
sin — how  terrible  if  I  make  it  the  occasion  of  more 
sin,  and  turn  it  to  the  very  opposite  of  what  God 


Suffering  According  to  the  Will  of  God    175 

means  it  to  be.  But  if  we  suffer  when  we  do  well, 
and  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God — 
that  so  by  well-doing  we  put  to  silence  the  ignorance 
of  foolish  men.  Men  may  learn  from  us  what  the 
power  of  Grace  is,  to  soften  and  to  strengthen; 
what  the  reality  is  of  the  heavenly  life  and  joy  that 
enables  us  to  bear  all  loss;  and  what  the  blessing 
is  of  the  service  of  the  Divine  Master,  who  can 
make  His  own  path  of  suffering  so  attractive  and  so 
blessed  to  His  followers.  And  it  is  in  well-doing 
we  can  commit  our  souls  unto  a  faithful  Creator. 

Here  is  the  third  lesson:  In  suffering  to  commit 
our  souls  to  God's  faithful  keeping.  What  a 
precious  privilege!  Amid  all  the  temptation  suf- 
fering brings,  God  Himself  offers  to  take  charge 
of  the  keeping  of  our  souls.  Going  down  into  the 
darkness  of  death,  our  Lord  Jesus  said :  ''  Father, 
into  Thy  hands  I  commit  My  Spirit.''  Into  every 
dark  cloud  of  suffering  into  which  we  enter,  we  may 
say  this  too.  From  all  the  strife  of  tongues  and  the 
pride  of  man,  from  all  that  there  is  in  ourselves  of  the 
tendency  to  impatience  or  anger,  to  quick  judgments 
or  unloving  dispositions,  the  faithful  Creator  can 
keep  the  soul  committed  to  Him.  He  who  sends 
the  suffering  as  His  will,  has  beforehand  provided 
a  place  of  safety,  where  the  blessing  of  the  suffering 


176  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

will  assuredly  be  given.  Let  us  say :  "  I  know  in 
whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He 
is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto 
Him." 

Then  comes  the  last  lesson:  In  all  our  suffering 
according  to  the  will  of  God,  Christ  is  our  pattern 
and  our  strength.  In  all  the  three  chapters  Christ 
suffering  for  our  sake  is  connected  with  our  suf- 
fering for  His  sake.  "  Christ  also  suffered  for 
you,  leaving  you  an  example — that  ye  should  fol- 
low His  steps  ''  (ii.  2).  "  It  is  better  that  ye  suffer 
for  well-doing,  because  Christ  also  suffered  for  sins 
once,  the  righteous  for  the  unrighteous"  (iii.  17, 
18).  '^Forasmuch  as  Christ  suffered  in  the  flesh, 
arm  ye  yourselves  with  the  same  mind.  Insomuch 
as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings,  rejoice 
ye  .  .  .  because  the  Spirit  of  Glory  and  the  Spirit 
of  God  resteth  on  you"  (iv.  I,  13,  14).  The  suf- 
ferings of  believers  are  as  indispensable  as  are 
those  of  Christ.  They  are  to  be  borne  in  the  same 
spirit.  They  are  the  means  of  fellowship  with 
Him,  and  conformity  to  His  image.  Christ  Jesus 
accepted  and  bore  all  suffering,  of  whatever  nature, 
great  or  small,  whether  coming  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  events  or  specially  devised  against  Him- 
self, as  the  will  of  God.     He  endured  all,  as  the 


Suffering  According  to  the  Will  of  God    177 

necessary  result  of  sin,  in  submission  to  the  will 
of  the  Father  who  sent  it,  as  the  school  in  which  He 
was  to  prove  that  His  will  was  one  with  the  Father's, 
and  that  the  Father's  will  was  over  all. 

Christ  is  our  pattern,  because  He  is  our  life.  In 
time  of  suffering  proof  is  given  that  the  Spirit  of 
Glory  and  the  Spirit  oi  God  rests  upon  us.  Oh, 
that  all  believers,  who  desire  to  live  wholly  to  the 
will  of  God,  might  understand  how  much  depends 
upon  their  recognising  God's  will  in  all  suffering, 
and  bearing  all  according  to  the  will  of  God !  And 
might  understand,  too,  how  impossible  it  is  to  dis- 
connect Christ's  sufferings  for  us  from  our's  for 
Him.  He  suffered  for  us  as  our  Head,  in  whom 
we  are  made  alive.  We  can  only  suffer  for  Him 
as  He  lives  in  us.  The  attempt  to  do  or  bear  the 
will  of  God  aright,  as  long  as  we  are  living  on  a 
different  level  from  that  on  which  Christ  lived,  must 
be  failure.  It  is  only  where  the  whole-hearted  sur- 
render to  live  and  die  for  the  will  of  God  as  He  did, 
possesses  the  soul  that  the  mighty  power  of  His 
Love,  and  Grace,  and  Spirit  can  do  their  wonders 
in  the  life. 


XXVIII 

LIVING  TO  THE  WILL  OF  GOD 

"  That  ye  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of  your  time  in 
the  flesh  to  the  lusts  (desires)  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of 
God/' — I  Pet.  iv.  2. 

THE  believers  to  whom  Peter  writes  needed  to 
be  reminded  that  there  is  a  twofold  possi- 
bility in  the  Christian  life.  It  is  possible — alas,  how 
often  it  is  done ! — even  after  conversion,  still  to  live 
to  the  lusts  of  men,  desiring  and  seeking  what  men 
in  the  world  seek.  It  is  possible,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  turn  entirely  away  from  the  living  to  the  de- 
sires of  men,  and  wholly  live  to  the  will  of  God,  even 
as  Christ  had  done.  He  had  written :  ''  Foras- 
much then  as  Christ  suffered  in  the  flesh,  arm  ye 
yourselves  also  with  the  same  mind;  for  he  that 
hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin,'' 
and  then  continues,  as  the  fruit  of  being  armed 
with  the  same  mind  as  Christ,  and  having,  through 
suflfering  in  the  flesh,  been  brought  to  cease  from 
sin,  ''  Live  no  longer  to  the  desires  of  men,  but  to 

178 


Living  to  the  Will  of  God  179 

the  will  of  God."  Every  Christian  stands  between 
the  two  contending  forces.  The  unceasing  influence 
of  human  nature  and  its  desires,  the  example  of  the 
men  of  the  world,  the  whole  current  of  human 
society,  draws  him  to  live  to  the  desires  of  men. 
Blessed  the  man  who  has  yielded  to  the  power  of 
Christ  and  His  Cross,  who  has  armed  himself  with 
the  same  mind,  at  any  cost  rather  to  sufifer  than  to 
sin,  and  now  lives  even  as  Christ,  not  to  the  will  of 
man,  but  to  the  will  of  God.  Blessed,  thrice  blessed, 
the  life  in  which  the  purpose  of  Christ's  coming 
is  being  realised,  and  which  is  now  wholly  yielded 
to,  wholly  inspired  and  controlled  by  the  will  of 
God. 

We  are  approaching  the  close  of  our  study  of 
the  will  of  God.  We  have  had  occasion  to  look 
at  it  from  almost  every  possible  side.  The  desire, 
the  hope,  the  purpose,  to  live  only  to  the  will  of 
God,  may  have  been  wakened  or  strengthened  in 
many  a  heart.  And  yet  there  is  the  painful  sense 
of  failure,  and  a  consciousness  that  there  is  some 
hidden  trouble  that  hinders  the  possession  of  what 
appears  so  clearly  promised  in  God's  Word.  Let 
me  try  to  gather  up  all  the  teaching  we  have 
had,  and  to  point  out,  in  the  simplest  way  possible, 
what  appear  to  be  the  steps  that  lead  up  to  the  life 


i8o  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

Scripture  teaches  us  to  pray  for  and  expect — per- 
fect and  complete  in  all  the  will  of  God. 

1.  I  must  mention  first  what  often  comes  last  in 
experience :  To  live  to  God's  will  is  impossible  except 
as  we  live  in  close  and  abiding  fellowship  with  Jesus 
Christ,  It  is  He  who  proclaimed :  ''  Lo,  I  am  come 
to  do  Thy  will,  O  God/'  He  not  only  had  to  do  it 
alone  on  Calvary:  the  work  He  began  there  He 
carries  on  in  heaven.  To-day,  still,  it  is  "through 
Him ''  alone  that  God  works  His  will  in  us  (Heb. 
xiii.  21 ).  It  is  impossible  to  bear  or  do  God's  will 
as  Christ  did,  except  as  we  have  the  same  mind  that 
was  in  Him.  And  we  cannot  have  the  same  mind, 
except  as  we  are  wholly  given  up  to  Him^  have  Him 
living  in  us,  and  seek  to  live  in  His  fellowship.  It 
is  the  living  presence  and  power  of  Christ  in  the 
heart  that  enables  us  to  do  God's  will  from  the  heart. 
You  cannot  demand  of  a  sickly  life  that  it  shall  do 
the  work  of  a  healthy  man.  It  is  where  the  suffi- 
ciency of  Christ's  grace  is  known,  and  our  strength 
is  made  perfect  in  weakness,  because  His  power 
rests  upon  us,  that  we  can  truly  live  to  God. 

2.  To  live  to  God's  zvill  demands  that  there  he  a 
clear  and  full  surrender  of  every  movement  of  our 
life  to  that  will. — It  is  in  the  little  things,  in  the 
natural,   innocent  things  in  which  we  do  not  see 


Living  to  the  Will  of  God  1 8 1 

how  God's  will  comes  in,  that  failure  takes  its  rise. 
We  need  to  pray  very  earnestly  for  a  spiritual  in- 
sight into  the  blessed  truth,  that  every  power,  and 
every  moment,  and  every  movement  of  our  life 
must  be  in  harmony  with  that  will.  We  are  so 
slow  of  apprehending  what  this  means,  that,  unless 
there  be  patient,  persevering  prayer,  and  a  very 
docile  waiting  for  the  Spirit's  teaching,  we  may 
struggle  on  for  years  without  grasping  what  ought 
to  be  an  elementary  truth — that  God's  will  must  rule 
our  life,  as  it  ruled  the  life  of  Christ  Jesus — that  it 
must  all  be  according  to  the  will  of  God. 

3.  To  live  to  God's  zuill  it  is  essential  that  what- 
ever we  know  to  be  according  to  that  will  must  be 
done  at  once. — Very  often  there  comes  to  us  a  subtle 
temptation  that,  until  we  have  power  to  do  all  God's 
will,  a  small  failure,  additional  to  those  which  ap- 
pear a  necessity,  is  not  of  such  consequence.  Or 
that,  as  long  as  we  have  not  received  some  special 
endov/ment  of  power,  it  is  needless  and  vain  to  at- 
tempt a  perfect  obedience.  Let  us  beware  of  giving 
way  to  such  thoughts.  xA.ll  increase  of  grace  and 
strength  in  the  Christian  life  stands  under  the  law 
of  faithfulness  in  little  things.  Whatever  you  know 
to  be  the  will  of  God,  little  or  great,  do  it  at  once. 
If  you  are  not  sure,  do  the  nearest  to  what  you 


i82  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

know  to  be  right.  It  is  in  doing  what  we  know 
that  we  give  proof  of  our  integrity,  and  are  pre- 
pared to  receive  more  grace. 

4.  Learn  also  to  do  all  your  ordinary  works  as  the 
will  of  God. — There  is  such  a  vast  range  of  ordinary 
everyday  duty  or  drudgery  that  appears  to  have  little 
direct  connection  with  the  will  of  God,  and  uncon- 
sciously separated  from  it.  Beware  of  giving  way 
to  this.  Study  Paul  and  Peter's  wonderful  teaching 
to  the  ill-used  slaves  of  their  day  (see  chaps,  xix. 
and  xxvii.) .  They  call  upon  them  to  perform  all  their 
service,  and  bear  all  their  sufferings  from  hard 
masters,  as  God's  will!  And  this  to  be  done  from 
the  heart  as  unto  the  Lord!  When  once  all  the 
work  of  our  daily  calling  is  seen  to  be  God's  will, 
and  is  done  heartily  for  His  sake,  it  need  no  longer 
be  a  hindrance;  it  will  become  a  great  help  in  en- 
abling us  to  live  wholly  to  the  will  of  God. 

5.  Let  no  secret  misapprehension  in  regard  to  the 
doctrine  of  our  entire  impotence,  and  the  impossi- 
bility of  a  life  truly  well  pleasing  to  God,  hinder  you, 
— Jesus  Christ  has  said :  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
you,  for  all  I  ask  of  you,  for  all  you  have  to  do." 
Our  nature  is  utterly  corrupt  and  impotent;  in 
our  flesh  dwelleth  no  good  thing.  Living  to  God's 
will  is  only  possible,  is  truly  possible,  by  the  power 


Living  to  the  Will  of  God  183 

of  Jesus  Christ  resting  on  us  and  working  in  us 
through  the  Holy  Spirit.  Do  get  firm  hold  of  the 
truth  that  God's  Spirit  dwells  in  you  as  the  power 
for  you  to  do  God's  will.  The  grace  of  the  Spirit 
is  only  known  as  you  act  it  out,  that  is,  as  in  faith 
you  try  and  do  what  appears  too  great  to  your  weak- 
ness. Only  believe,  is  the  law  too  for  living  to  the 
will  of  God. 

6.  To  live  to  God's  will  you  need  to  wait  daily  for 
the  Divine  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  that 
will  known  to  you. — Many  pray  for  Divine  strength 
to  do  God's  will,  but  do  not  think  of  a  Divine  light 
first  to  know  God's  will.  God's  will  as  taught  by 
men  or  books  has  not  the  power  to  influence.  A 
supernatuial  teaching  wakens  the  need,  and  gives 
the  promise,  of  a  supernatural  power.  The  will  of 
God  is  not  a  number  of  laws  and  rules.  It  is  a  liv- 
ing light  and  power,  revealed  in  fellowship  with 
Him.  The  believer  who  would  truly  live  to  the 
will  of  God  in  all  things,  will  deeply  feel  the  need 
of  a  Divine  guidance,  leading  him  day  by  day  in  the 
path  and  the  steps  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  Oh,  let  us 
no  longer  live  to  the  will  of  man,  but  to  the  will  of 
God! 


XXIX 
DOING  GOD'S  WILL,  THE  SECRET  OF  ABIDING 

'*  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is 
not  in  him.  And  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust 
thereof :  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever.'' 
—I  John  ii.  15,  17. 

HERE  w^e  have  once  again  the  contrast  betv^een 
the  tv^o  great  powers  that  contend  for  mas- 
tery over  man.  We  saw,  in  Rom.  xii.  2,  how  the 
great  danger  that  threatens  the  consecrated  man, 
and  makes  a  Hfe  in  God's  will  impossible,  comes 
from  the  side  of  worldly  conformity.  And,  in  Gal. 
i.  4,  how  the  one  great  aim  of  God's  will  in  the 
death  of  Christ  was  to  deliver  us  from  this  present 
evil  wm-ld.  The  irreconcilable  hostility  of  the  two 
principles  is  brought  out  here  with  equal  force.  "  If 
any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  riot 
in  him."  Freedom  from  the  love  of  the  world  by 
the  love  of  the  Father,  utterly  expelling  it,  is  the 
law  of  the  normal  Christian  life.  And  the  exercise 
and  discipline  by  which  the  true  position  is  to  be 
maintained,  with  the  love  of  the  Father  and  not  the 

184 


The  Secret  of  Abiding  185 

love  of  the  world  filling  the  heart  and  life,  is  the 
doing  the  will  of  God :  ''  He  that  doeth  the  will  of 
God  abideth  for  ever '' — abideth  unchangeably  in 
God  and  an  unchangeable  love. 

What  sacred  associations  there  are  connected  with 
that  word  abiding!  Abiding  in  Christ  and  in  His 
love  (John  xv.)  ;  abiding  in  the  Son  and  in  the 
Father  (i  John  ii.  24,  28);  God  and  Christ,  the 
truth  and  the  anointing  abiding  in  us  (i  John  ii. 
14,  2^',  iii.  24).  The  chief  thought  is  permanent, 
steadfast,  immovable  continuance  in  the  place  and 
the  blessing  secured  to  us  in  Christ  and  God.  The 
great  secret  of  the  world  is  its  transitoriness — it 
passeth  away  with  all  its  glory.  And  all  who  are  of 
it  partake  of  its  vanity  and  uncertainty.  And  just 
as  far  as  the  Christian  breathes  its  spirit,  and  allows 
its.  love  a  place  in  his  heart,  he  loses  the  power  of 
abiding.  All  failure  in  abiding,  all  lack  of  perma- 
nence and  perseverance  in  the  Christian  life,  can 
have  no  other  cause  than  that  the  spirit  and  life 
of  the  world  are  robbing  the  soul  of  its  real  and  only 
strength.  The  Word  and  Will  of  God  are  unchange- 
able and  eternal:  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God 
abideth  for  ever.  As  a  man  does  the  will  of  God, 
and  in  doing  appropriates  it,  feeds  upon  and  assim- 
ilates it,  its  very  essence  enters  into  his  being,  and 


1 86  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

he  becomes  partaker  of  its  Divine  strength  and  un- 
changeableness.  As  the  life  of  God  is,  so  is  His 
will,  without  variableness  and  shadow  of  turning. 
And  as  the  will  of  God  is  taken  up  into  the  life  of 
the  behever^,  it  too  is  changed  into  the  likeness  of  the 
Divine  life,  and  becomes  freed  from  all  the  variable- 
ness and  every  shadow  of  turning  which  is  the  mark 
of  this  world.  "  This  world  passeth  away ;  he  that 
doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 

"  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God."  It  is  by  doing 
that  the  will  of  God  enters  into  us,  and  communi- 
cates its  own  Divine  unchangeableness.  The  revela- 
tion by  the  Spirit,  the  knowledge  and  contempla- 
tion of  the  love  and  adoration  of  the  will  of  God — 
all  these  have  their  place  and  value.  But  it  is  not 
until  we  have  really  done,  and  are  continually  doing, 
the  will  of  God,  that  it  has  really  mastered  us,  con- 
quered every  enemy,  and  transformed  us  into  the 
perfect  likeness  to  itself.  It  is  as  the  doing  of  the 
Father's  will  becomes  our  meat,  that  is,  the  satisfac- 
tion of  our  soul's  hunger,  and  our  nourishment, 
that  God  Himself  becomes  the  strength  of  our  life. 
It  is  only  then  that  man  is  brought  back  to  his 
original  glory.  He  was  created  with  a  will,  that 
into  it  he  might  receive  the  will  of  God,  that  God 
might  work  His  will  into  him,  and  so  man,  in  work- 


The  Secret  of  Abiding  187 

ing  that  will  out  again,  might  become  the  partner 
and  fellow-worker  with  God  in  all  His  works.  Jesus 
Christ,  as  man,  restored  human  nature  to  its  ideal 
destiny,  and  proved  what  blessedness  and  glory  it  is 
to  live  only  to  do  the  will  of  God.  And  redeemed 
men  receive  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ  that  they, 
even  as  He,  might  find  their  life  in  accepting  and 
living  and  doing  nothing  but  the  will  of  God.  As 
God's  will  is  the  only  power  that  upholds  and  se- 
cures the  existence  of  the  universe,  so  that  will, 
done  by  the  believer,  is  the  one  security  that  he  never 
shall  be  moved.  The  whole  of  redemption,  all  that 
it  reveals  of  pardoning  and  sanctifying  and  preserv- 
ing grace,  has  this  as  its  aim  and  its  crown — that 
man  should  find  his  blessedness  and  his  fellowship 
with  God,  his  likeness  to  Him,  in  doing  His  will. 
"  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 
Blessed  abiding!  How  often  believers  have 
mourned  and  wondered  that  there  was  so  little  abid- 
ing peace  and  joy  in  their  life — that  the  abiding 
in  Christ  and  His  love  was  so  fluctuating  and  uncer- 
tain. They  knew  not  how  near  the  answer  lay  as 
to  the  cause :  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God 
abideth  for  ever.'^  They  never  noticed  how  dis- 
tinctly our  Lord  had  laid  down  this  as  the  one  con- 
dition of  abiding  in  Him :  "  If  ye  keep  My  command- 


1 88  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

ments,  ye  shall  abide  in  My  love,  even  as  I  kept  the 

commandments  of   My   Father,   and  abide  in   His 

love/'    Could  words  make  it  plainer  that  obedience, 

doing  His  will,  is  the  secret  of  abiding?    And  that  if, 

instead  of  occupying  ourselves  with  the  abiding  as 

?the  object  of  direct  desire  and  faith  and  prayer,  and 

i  effort,  we  were  to  give  up  ourselves  wholly  to  keep 

,  the  commandments   and   do  the   will,   the   abiding 

would  come  of  itself,  because  it  would  be  given  us 

by  a  secret  power  from  on  High.    "  He  that  doeth 

the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever,''  and  will  always 

and  unceasingly  abide. 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  in  the  teaching  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  and  in  the  life  of  the  great  ma- 
jority of  believers,  the  doing  of  the  will  of  the  Father 
has  not  that  overwhelming  prominence  which  it 
had  in  the  life  and  teaching  of  Christ,  as  in  the 
purpose  of  the  Father.  Any  revival  that  is  really  to 
affect  the  spiritual  life  and  elevate  the  standard  of 
Christian  living,  must  be  a  revival  of  holy  living, 
with  the  vindication  of  God's  claim  that  every  child 
of  His  should  give  Himself  to  do  God's  will  on  earth 
as  it  is  done  in  heaven.  When  once  God's  claim  is 
fully  admitted,  and,  without  any  reservation,  uncon- 
ditionally accepted,  light  will  be  given  as  to  the 
Divine  guidance  that  will  lead  us  to  it,  the  Divine 


The  Secret  of  Abiding  189 

power  which  makes  it  possible,  the  Divine  certainty 
that  it  shall  be  done.  Everything  depends  upon  the 
simple  and  whole-hearted  acceptance  of  the  great 
truth,  that  to  be  brought  back  to  do  the  will  of 
God  is  the  one  thing  we  have  been  redeemed  for, 
and  that  doing  that  will  is,  on  earth  as  in  heaven, 
with  us,  as  with  our  Lord  Jesus,  the  one  secret  of 
abiding  in  the  love  of  God. 


XXX 

PRAYING  ACCORDING  TO  GOD'S  WILL 

"  And  this  is  the  boldness  which  we  have  toward  Him, 
that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will,  He  heareth 
us.  And  if  we  know  that  He  heareth  us,  whatsoever  we 
ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions  which  we  have 
asked  of  Him." — i  John  v.  14-15. 

GOD  works  out  His  will  through  the  willing  and 
doing  of  His  people.  He  works  in  them,  all 
unconsciously  to  them,  to  will  and  to  do.  While 
they  study  His  will  in  His  Word,  and  take  it  up 
into  their  wills  and  lives  and  work  it  out,  He  is  all 
the  while  working  it  out  through  them.  It  is  a 
heart  and  life  filled  with  the  love  of  God's  will  that 
becomes  the  prepared  instrument  through  which 
God  can  do  His  work. 

It  is  with  prayer  as  with  work.  As  God  has 
taken  up  into  His  eternal  purpose  the  co-operation 
and  the  labour  of  His  people,  so  their  prayers  too. 
These  have  their  human  origin  in  our  desires  as 
wakened  by  our  need  or  by  God's  promises,  and  are 
yet  God's  own  working  in  us.     They  cannot  effect 

190 


Praying  According  to  God's  Will      191 

any  change  in  the  will  of  God,  for  they  are  God's 
will  realising  itself  through  us,  and  their  first  con- 
dition is  that  they  must  be  according  to  God's  will. 
They  may  indeed,  and  do,  effect  a  change  to  what 
appears  to  be  God's  will,  in  what  is  His  will  for  a 
time,  or  as  a  preliminary  to  something  higher ;  their 
real  power  consists  in  their  being  according  to  God's 
will,  because  God  works  out  His  will  as  much 
through  our  prayers  as  our  works. 

The  question  has  often  caused  much  difficulty: 
How  can  I  know  that  my  prayers  are  according  to 
the  will  of  God?  The  question  lies  at  the  very 
root  of  our  prayer  life,  as  well  as  of  a  life  in  the 
will  of  God.  It  is  not  easy  to  give  an  exhaustive 
answer.  And  yet  it  may  be  possible  to  give  sug- 
gestions that  will  enable  thoughtful  Christians  to 
find  the  answer  that  meets  their  own  case.  The 
Holy  Spirit,  where  He  is  to  reveal  the  will  of  God, 
where  He  is  too  to  help  us  in  prayer,  must  be  our 
Teacher. 

Let  us,  first  of  all,  see  that  we  understand  the 
words,  "  According  to  His  will,"  correctly.  Many 
connect  them  exclusively  with  ''  anything " :  the 
thing  asked  must  be  according  to  His  will.  But 
there  is  something  more  important  than  this — not 
only  the  thing  asked  for.  but  the  disposition  and 


192  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

character  of  the  asker  must  be  according  to  God's 
will.  In  this  last  lies  the  real  secret  of  power  in 
prayer.  Two  Christians  both  ask  for  something 
according  to  the  will  of  God.  He  gives  it  to  one 
and  not  to  another.  And  why?  Because  the  ask- 
ing of  the  one  was  different  from  the  other.  We 
must  connect  the  words,  "  According  to  His  will," 
with  asking.  That  will  include  both  that  the  thing 
asked  and  the  spirit  of  the  asking  be  in  harmony 
with  God's  will. 

That  the  latter  is  of  primary  importance  is  evi- 
dent from  our  Lord's  teaching  of  His  disciples.  He 
continually  connected  the  answer  to  prayer  with 
their  state.  They  must  forgive,  they  must  be  merci- 
ful, they  must  be  humble,  they  must  be  believing, 
they  must  ask  in  His  name,  they  must  abide  in  Him 
in  keeping  His  commandments,  and  His  words 
abide  in  them ;  their  life  must  be  according  to  God's 
will.  If  they  loved  Him,  and  kept  His  command- 
ments, He  would  pray  the  Father  for  them.  Only 
the  man  whose  life  and  conduct,  whose  heart  and 
disposition,  is  according  to  God's  will,  can  ask 
according  to  His  will.  So  James  speaks  of  the 
fervent,  effectual  prayer  of  the  righteous  man.  And 
John  says,  "  Whatever  we  ask  we  receive,  because 
we  kept  His  commandment."    It  is  the  life  that 


Praying  According  to  God's  Will      193 

prays;  the  prayer  has  power  according  to  the  life; 
a  life  according  to  God^s  will  can  ask  according  to 
God's  will. 

One  great  reason  of  this  is  that  the  man  who 
lives  according  to  God's  will  is  able  spiritually  to 
discern,  what  he  may  ask  for.  A  Christian  may 
take  some  promise  of  God's  word,  say,  for  the  con- 
version of  sinners,  and  begin  and  pray  for  some 
one  in  the  mere  power  of  human  love,  and  without 
seeking  at  all  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the  faith 
that  enables  him  to  pray  successfully.  It  is  simply 
a  matter  of  human  will;  I  would  like  the  con- 
version of  this  friend.  God  wills  that  all  should 
be  saved;  I  will  ask  it.  While  there  is  no  thought 
of  that  abiding  in  Christ  through  obedience  to  which 
the  promise  of  an  answer  has  been  given.  This 
is  not  asking  according  to  the  will  of  God,  in  the 
deep  consciousness  of  dependence  on  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  that  true  obedient  abiding  in  Christ  Jesus,  which 
alone  is  truly  asking  in  His  Name.  Doing  is  the 
only  way  to  knowing  the  will  of  God,  and  there- 
fore the  only  way  of  asking  according  to  His  will. 
As  long  as  I  only  desire  to  know  God's  will  with 
regard  to  certain  things  I  desire  or  need,  I  may  find 
it  difficult  to  know  it.  A  life  yielded  to  and  moulded 
by  the  will  of  God  will  know  what  and  how  to  pray. 


194  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

A  heart  seeking  to  be  ''  filled  with  the  knowledge 
of  His  will  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understand- 
ing," and  striving  fervently  ''  to  stand  perfect  and 
complete  in  all  the  will  of  God/'  will  be  able  joy- 
fully to  appropriate  the  promise,  ''  This  is  the  bold- 
ness we  have  toward  Him,  that  if  we  ask  anything 
according  to  His  will,  He  heareth  us." 

Let  us  try  and  learn  the  lessons.  Boldness  in 
prayer  comes  from  the  assurance  that  both  the  spirit 
of  asking  and  the  thing  we  ask  are  according  to  the 
will  of  God.  ...  In  all  our  prayers  that  we  have 
learnt  from  His  Word,  let  us  take  time  to  realise 
that  they  are  indeed  according  to  God's  loving, 
mighty  will,  and  therefore  sure  to  be  heard.  .  .  . 
Let  us  remember  how  essentially  one  our  lives  and 
our  prayers  are,  and  live  wholly  to  God's  will — that 
will  ensure  our  praying  according  to  His  will.  .  .  . 
Let  us  pray  first  and  wait  for  the  things  that  God 
has  clearly  revealed  to  be  His  will,  things  that 
concern  His  love  and  kingdom  and  glory — that  will 
give  us  liberty  with  the  lesser  things  that  concern 
our  interests.  .  .  .  Only  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
spirit  of  prayer  can  lead  us  into  the  will  of  God, — 
as  we  wait  on  Him  even  in  the  things  we  know  to 
be  according  to  God's  will.  He  can  give  us  Divine 
assurance  in  regard  to  things  that  no  human  reason 


Praying  According  to  God's  Will       195 

could  believe  beforehand  to  be  God's  will.  .  .  . 
Let  our  first  desire  in  regard  to  every  petition  ever 
be:  Lord,  teach  me  how  to  pray  only  according  to 
Thy  will. 

God's  will  is  at  first  a  deep  hidden  mystery.  He 
that  lives  to  that  will  as  far  as  he  knows  it,  may 
count  upon  being  led  deeper  into  it  as  the  manifesta- 
tion of  a  holy,  mighty,  infinite  goodness.  Let  me 
give  myself  to  it  as  to  Infinite  Love.  God  works 
out  His  will  equally  by  the  works  and  the  prayers  of 
His  people.  Yield  yourself  equally  without  reserve 
to  that  will  in  working  as  in  praying,  in  praying 
as  in  working.  The  absolute  joyful  surrender  of 
our  life  to  that  will,  in  full  obedience  and  in  perfect 
truth,  gives  boldness  in  doing  and  in  asking.  And 
this  text,  instead  of  being  a  stumbling-block,  will 
give  us  new  joy  and  confidence  in  prayer,  because 
the  prayer  according  to  the  will  of  God  must  pre- 
vail. 


XXXI 

THE  GLORY  OF  GOD'S  WILL 

''They  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne,  saying, 
"  Worthy  art  Thou,  our  Lord  and  our  God,  to  receive  the 
glory ^  and  the  honour,  and  the  power ;  for  Thou  didst  create 
all  things,  and  because  of  Thy  will  they  were,  and  were 
created." — Rev.  iv.  lo-ii. 

IN  chapter  four  of  the  Book  of  Revelation  we 
have  the  glory  of  God  as  Creator.  The  living 
creatures  that  are  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and 
round  about  the  throne  have  no  rest^  day  nor  night, 
as  they  sing,  ''  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  God, 
the  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come/' 
As  they  show  forth  the  glory  of  the  Divine  Person 
as  Him  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  the  four  and 
twenty  elders  fall  down  and  worship  Him  in  His 
works,  and,  casting  their  crowns  before  the  throne, 
cry  out,  "  Worthy  art  Thou  to  receive  the  glory 
and  honour,  for  Thou  didst  create  all  things,  and, 
because  of  Thy  will  they  were,  and  were  created." 
Then  follows  in  chapter  five  the  glory  of  God  as 
Redeemer,     where    the    song    of    the    ransomed, 

196 


The  Glory  of  God's  Will  197 

''  Worthy  art  Thou,"  and  of  the  angel  hosts, 
"  Worthy  is  the  Lamb,"  is  followed  by  the  adora- 
tion of  all  creatures,  ''  Blessing,  honour,  glory,  be  to 
Him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb, 
for  ever."  Midway  between  the  worship  of  God  in 
the  glory  of  His  Divine  Being  as  the  Thrice  Holy 
and  Everliving  One,  and  His  glory  of  redemption 
with  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  comes 
the  glory  of  His  Divine  will  as  the  Creator  of  all. 
''  Worthy  art  Thou  to  receive  the  glory,  for  Thou 
hast  created  all  things,  and,  because  of  Thy  will, 
they  were  created."  Our  study  of  the  will  of  God 
would  be  incomplete  if  we  did  not  learn  the  place 
its  worship  has  in  heaven,  and,  from  that,  the  place 
its  worship  ought  to  have  in  our  hearts. 

In  heaven,  where  all  veils  are  taken  aw^ay,  where 
everything  is  seen  in  the  light  of  God,  and  God  is 
known,  the  elders,  at  the  thought  that  God  has 
been  pleased  to  will  creation  into  existence,  fall 
down  on  their  faces  in  worship,  cast  their  crowns 
before  the  throne,  and  give  Him  glory  because  of 
His  will.  God's  glory  shines  out  in  His  works. 
The  connecting  link  between  the  glory  of  His 
Divine  Person  and  of  the  works  He  has  made  is  His 
will.  This  is  the  highest  glory  of  creation,  that  the 
God  of  all  glory  has  w^iiled  it,  that  it  is  the  ex- 


198  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

pression  and  embodiment  of  His  all-perfect  and 
almighty  will,  and  so  bears  on  it  the  stamp  of  His 
Divine  glory.  The  glory  of  the  Creator  and  the 
glory  of  the  creature  unite  in  the  glory  of  the 
Divine  will,  the  connecting  link  between  the  two. 
In  heaven,  creation  is  seen  to  be  nothing  but  in 
every  detail  the  manifestation  of  the  presence,  and 
power,  and  goodness  of  God.  And  the  heavenly 
beings,  as  the  mouthpiece  and  interpreter  of  crea- 
tion, cease  not  to  give  glory  to  this  All-creating  Will. 
And  it  is  because  they  see  the  glory  of  God's  will, 
and  adore  it,  that  they  delight  in  doing  it  as  it  is 
done  in  heaven. 

If  we  are  to  do  God's  will  on  earth  as  it  is  done 
in  heaven,  we  need  the  same  spirit  of  adoration  and 
worship.  Each  of  us  needs  to  have  our  heart  opened 
to  the  inconceivably  wondrous  thought,  ''  Because 
of  God's  will  I  have,  and  am  what  I  am.  God  has 
willed  me  into  existence.  That  will  maintains  me 
every  moment.  In  virtue  of  that  will  I  am  His  re- 
deemed child.  On  that  will  I  can  count  to  carry 
out  its  purpose  and  effect  its  object  in  me.  Here 
I  am,  the  workmanship  of  the  glorious  will  of  the 
Thrice  Holy  and  Everliving  God,  as  His  handi- 
work partaking  of  and  manifesting  His  glory. 
Every  moment  of  my  existence,  every  power  of 


The  Glory  of  God*s  Will  199 

my  being,  may  be  the  embodiment,  the  manifesta- 
tion of  God's  will.  Surely  if  our  eyes  and  hearts 
are  opened  to  see  this,  we  too  would  fall  prostrate 
and  worship.  ''  Thou  art  worthy  to  receive  the 
glory,  for  because  of  Thy  will  we  were  created,  and 
are  what  we  are.''  And  if  we  have  as  yet  no  crowns 
to  cast  before  the  throne,  each  of  us  has  that  which 
is  as  the  crown  of  his  being — his  w^ill,  his  heart, 
his  life,  his  love,  to  offer  to  Him  who  sits  upon  the 
throne,  as  we  ever  say  again.  Thou  art  worthy  to 
receive  the  glory,  whose  will  has  made  us  the  ob- 
jects of  Thy  creating  and  redeeming  love. 

It  is  to  show  forth  in  us  the  glory  of  His  will 
that  God  created  us.  Does  not  this  thought  at  the 
close  of  our  meditations  give  new  urgency  to  the 
call  to  live  to  the  will  of  God?  You  remember 
how  in  our  opening  chapter  we  saw  what  the  four 
great  aspects  are  under  which  God's  will  is  revealed 
to  us.  In  regard  to  each  of  these,  this  adoring  ac- 
knowledgment that  we  owe  our  being  to  God's 
will,  will  enable  us  all  the  better  to  give  that  will 
the  place  and  the  honour  to  which  it  has  a  claim. 
There  is  God's  will  in  Providence.  As  I  worship 
the  will  that  brought  me  forth,  and  never  for  a 
moment  ceases  its  work  in  me,  and  connect  every 
trial  that  in  Providence  it  allows  to  come  to  me,  I 


200  Thy  Will  Be  Done 

shall  be  enabled  to  rejoice  even  in  tribulation,  and 
to  bear  all  as  part  of  that  blessed  will  whose  I  am, 
and  whom  I  serve.  There  is  God's  will  in  His 
Precepts,  As  I  see  how  these  have  their  origin  in 
the  will  of  Creating  Love,  and  are  the  guides  to  that 
co-operation  with  Him  which  will  ensure  His  per- 
fecting His  work  in  me,  my  whole  heart  welcomes 
every  command  with  the  same  prostrate  worship  as 
that  with  which  it  gives  glory  to  Him  who  sits  on 
the  throne.  There  is  God's  will  in  His  Promises. 
These,  too,  acquire  new  preciousness,  and  certainty, 
and  power,  as  so  many  assurances  to  an  intelligent 
faith  that  the  will  that  created  and  upholds  all, 
cares  in  the  minutest  detail  for  our  feebleness  and 
need,  and  provides  sufficient  grace  for  a  perfect 
correspondence  on  our  part  to  what  it  is  working  in 
us.  And  then  there  is  God's  will  in  His  eternal 
world-wide  Purpose.  The  vision  of  the  will  that 
embraces  all  creation,  has  made  me  part  of  it,  has 
made  His  own  glory  dependent  on  its  and  my  own 
destiny,  enlarges  my  heart  to  feel  that  my  true  and 
only  glory  is  to  yield  myself  a  willing  instrument 
to  its  service,  and  to  live  only  that  that  will  may  tri- 
umph throughout  the  whole  earth. 

Oh,  the  glory  of  the  will  of  God!     In  Him  who 
sits  upon  the  throne!     In  the  Universe  which  He 


The  Glory  of  God's  Will  aoi 

created  to  shew  forth  that  will !  In  the  heavenly 
hosts  who  worship  before  the  throne,  where  that 
will  is  enthroned  in  glory!  In  the  Beloved  Son, 
who  came  as  man  to  do  that  will  upon  earth !  In 
the  heart  of  the  believer,  who  has  yielded  his  life 
to  be  conformed  to  it!  In  the  Church,  through 
which  that  will  is  working  out  its  eternal  purpose 
in  the  world!  Oh,  the  glory  of  the  will  of  God! 
Let  us  gaze,  and  worship,  and  give  glory  to  God, 
until  the  will  of  God  rule  on  the  throne  of  our  heart 
as  on  the  throne  of  heaven,  and  be  done  in  our  life 
on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven. 

Lord  Jesus,  who  taught  us  to  pray  "  Thy  will  be 
done,  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth,"  we  look  to  Thee! 
Oh,  teach  us  to  live  thus! 


Mar-ie  l©oi 


DEC   4   1900 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Nov.  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
<724)  779-21 11 


