'  LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 


+ 


Shelf  ....rB,!  S 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


iZHLUHBLG    BOOKS 

—FOR— 

Stiidents,  Christians  and  Inquirers 

By  JAMES  H.  BROOKES. 


Did  Jesus  Rise?    Paper  30  cts.;  cloth  60  cts. 

Is  the  Bible  Inspired?  The  verbal  inspiration  of  the  word 
of  God  established  by  a  careful  study  of  its  own  testimony. 
128  pages.     Paper  25  cts.;  cloth  50  cts. 

Israel  and  the  Church.  The  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
upon  the  strange  problem  of  Jewish  history  and  destiny. 
199  pages.    Paper  40  cts. ;  cloth  75  cts. 

Outline  of  the  Books  of  the  Bible.  A  synopsis  of  the 
principal  teachings  of  the  inspired  writings.  Paper  25 
cts. ;  cloth  50  cts. 

From  Death  unto  Life  ;  or  the  Sinner  Saved.  Paper  25  cts  ; 
cloth  50  cts. 

The  Holy  Spirit.  An  exposition  of  ScripUiral  teaching  con- 
cerning the  Holy  Spirit.     Paper  15  cts.;  cloth  40  cts. 

Gospel  Tracts.  A  series  of  144  Tracts.  Sample  package  25 
cts. ;  40  cents  per  pound. 

***  Any  of  the  above  sent  by  mail,  postpaid,  to  any  i)art 
of  the  United  States  or  Canada  on  receipt  of  price. 

GOSPEL  PUBLISHING  CO., 

Arcadk  Court, 

CHICAGO,   ILL. 


ii 


TILL  HE  COME." 


BY 


JAMES  H.i'''BROOKES. 


Author  of  Is  the  Bible  True?    Is  the  Bible  Inspired?    Did  Jesus  Rist? 

Maranatha;  From  Death   Unto  Life;   The  Holy  Spirit; 

Mystery  o/  Sufferings  etc. 


GOSPKL  PUBLISHING  COMPANY, 
Arcade  Court,  Chicago,   111, 


\ 


Copyright,   189', 


GOSPEL   PUBLISHING  COMPANY. 


11      9F  COKC!  :.^s' 


PREFACE. 

It  is  the  aim  of  tliis  little  book  to  set  forth  the 
truth  of  Cxod  concerning  the  second  com ino;  of  His 
Son.  No  doul)t  there  are  a  thousand  who  to-chxy 
accept  the  truth,  and  are  ''looking  for  that  blessed 
hope  "  where  there  was  one  twenty-five  years  ago. 
But  there  are  thousands  more  who  probably  have 
never  heard  it  mentioned.  It  has  dropped  out  of 
the  preaching  and  teaching  of  most  men  as  com- 
pletely as  if  it  had  no  place  in  the  inspired 
Scriptures. 

It  may  be  that  the  Holy  Spirit  will  own  the 
testimony  here  borne  to  awaken  some  of  God's 
deal-  children  to  the  study  of  a  subject  of  vast 
practical  importance.  At  all  events,  if  they  will 
read  these  few  pages,  they  can  see  an  outline  of 
the  faith  held  by  those  who  heed  the  Master's 
command,  "What  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all, 
AVatch; "  and  they  can  also  see  "a  reason  of  the 
hope"  that  sliines  more  .brightly  and  beautifully, 
as  we  move  on  throuorhincreasi  no;  darkness  and  tem- 
pest  and  temptation  "  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air." 

St.  Louis,  June,  1891. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE. 


The  Apostles'  Teaching,        -         .         ,         .  y 

Our  Lord's  Teaching, 19 

His  Coming   May  be  Near,             -         -         -  29 

The  Present  Age,     -         -         -   '      -         -  -   38 

The  End  of  the  Age,           -         -         .         -  46 

Parables  of  Matthew  XIII             -         -  53 

Antichrist,           -.,...  61 

ISkAEL,                 -  75 

The  Rapture,     -         -         -         -          -         -  87 

That   Blessed   Hope,       -----  97 

The  Only   Hope,         .         .         _         .         _  106 

A   Practical    Hope,         -         -         -         -         -  124 

\ViTN esses    to    the   Hoi^e,              -         -         -  134 

The  Order   of   Even  is,         -         -          -         -  149 


TILL  HE  COME. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE    apostles'    TEACHING. 

OUR  risen  Lord  had  appeared  on  many  occa- 
sions to  His  disciples,  ''  to  whom  He  pre- 
sented Himself  living  after  his  suffering,  by  many 
infallible  proofs,  being  seen  of  them  forty  days, 
and  speaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  King- 
dom of  God."  This  naturally  led  them  to  ask  of 
Him,  "  Lord,  wilt  Thou  at  this  time  restore  again 
the  Kindom  to  LsraeL!;  And  he  said  unto  them, 
It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons, 
which  the  Father  hath  placed  in  Llis  own  author- 
ity." As  Jews,  familiar  with  their  prophets,  they 
expected  the  cessation  of  Gentile  dominion,  and 
the  restoration  of  the  Kingdom  to  Israel;  and  the 
Lord  gave  them  no  hint  that  their  expectation  was 
vain,  but  only  that  it  was  not  for  them  to  know 
the  times  or  seasons,  which,  in  the  oftice  work  of 
re;lemption  undertaken  l)y  the  persons  of  the  God- 
head, specially  fell  under  the  authority  of  the 
Father. 

Then  followed  the  promise  of  the  gift  and  power 
of  the  IIolv  Ghost,  and  the  great  commission,  ''Ye 


8  TILL    HE    COME. 


shall  be  witnesses  unto  me,  hotli  in  Jerusalem,  and 
in  all  Jndea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  nnto  the  utter- 
most part  of  the  earth.  And  when  he  had  spoken 
these  things,  while  they  beheld.  He  was  taken  up; 
and  a  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight.  And 
while  they  looked  steadfastly  toward  heaven,  as  He 
went  np,  behold,  two  men  stood  by  them  in  w^hite 
apparel;  which  also  said.  Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why 
stand  ye  gazing  np  into  heaven?  This  same  Jesus, 
which  is  taken  up  from  yon  iiito  heaven,  shall  so 
come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  IHm  go  into 
heaven.  Then  returned  they  nnto  elerusalem  from 
the  mount  called  Olivet,  which  is  from  Jerusalem 
a  Sabbath  day's  journey."  Luke  adds  in  his 
Gospel,  ''They  worshipped  Him,  and  returned  to 
Jerusalem  wdtli  great  joy."     Lu.,  xxiv:52. 

We  are  not  told  who  these  two  men  were,  but  it 
is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  same  inspired  writer 
mentions  the  appearing  of  two  men  in  white  at 
two  other  momentous  periods  in  the  earthly  history 
of  our  Lord.  On  the  mount  of  transfiguration, 
"as  He  prayed,  the  fashion  of  His  countenance 
was  altered,  and  His  raiment  was  white  and 
glistening.  And,  behold,  there  talked  with  Him 
two  men,  which  were  Moses  and  Elias;  who  ap- 
peared in  glory,  and  spake  of  IHs  exodus  which 
He  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem."  Lu.,  ix:29- 
31.  On  the  morning  of  the  resurrection,  when  the 
women  w^ent  to  the  sepulchre  to  anoint  the  body 
of  their  crucified  Lriend,  "  they  found  the  stone 
rolled  away  from  the  sepulchre.  And  they  entered 
in,  and  found  not  the  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
And  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  were  much  perplexed 
thereabout,   beliold.  two    men    stood   by   them   in 


shilling  garments:  and  as  tliey  were  afraid,  and 
bowed  down  tlieir  faces  to  tlie  earth,  they  said  nnto 
them,  "  A¥hy  seek  ye  the  living  One  among  the 
dead?"     Ln.,  xxiv:2-5. 

It  is  not  an  improbal)le  conjectnre,  tlierefore, 
tliat  tlie  same  t-wo  men  in  wliite  or  histrons  cloth- 
ing who  spake  of  His  exodus  at  Jernsalem,  and 
who  heralded  His  exodus  from  the  tomb,  were  also 
sent  to  proclaim  Ilis  second  coming.  Nor  is  it 
improbable  that  the  same  two  men  in  wliite  are  the 
two  witnesses  who  shall  appear  during  the  dreadful 
raign  of  the  Antichrist;  "and  they  shall  prophesy 
a  thousand  two  hundred  and  three  score  days, 
clotlied  in  sackcloth."  Rev.  xi:3.  But  whoever 
the  messengers  niay  have  been,  whether  Moses  and 
Elias,  or  angels  in  human  form,  the  message  itself 
was  of  sufHcient  importance  to  summon  them  from 
heaven,  and  it  forms  one  of  the  three  great  an- 
nouncements— the  death,  the  resurrection,  and  the 
return  of  the  Lord  to  the  earth.  Nor  is  it  possible 
to  mistake  its  meaning.  This  same  Jesus  wdio 
bore  the  marks  of  the  nails  in  His  hands  and  of 
the  spear  wound  in  His  side;  this  same  Jesus  who 
said  to  IHs  disciples,  "•  Handle  me,  and  see;  for  a 
spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have;" 
this  same  Jesus  who  ate  and  talked  with  them; 
this  same  Jesus  who  ascended  from  tlieir  midst 
bodily,  and  personally  and  visibly,  "  this  same 
Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven, 
shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him 
go  into  heaven." 

Bengel  has  well  said,  "Between  His  ascension 
and  His  coming  in  glory,  no  event  intervenes  equal 
in  importance  to  each  of  these  two  events.     There- 


10  TILL    HE    COME. 


lore  these  two  are  joined  togetlier,  and  it  accords 
with  the  majesty  of  Christ  that  during  the  whole 
period  between  His  ascension  and  His  advent  He 
should  without  intermission  be  expected."  Rev. 
A.  Maclaren,  D.  D.,  of  Manchester,  England,  one 
of  the  ablest  and  most  accomplished  among  living 
expositors,  truly  remarks,  "  He  Avill  '  so  come  in 
like  manner  as  '  He  has  crone.  We  are  not  to  water 
down  such  words  as  these  with  anything  short  of 
a  return  precisely  corresponding  in  its  method  to 
the  departure;  and  as  the  departure  was  visible, 
corporeal,  literal,  personal  and  local,  so,  too,  will 
be  His  return  from  heaven  to  earth.  And  He 
will  come  as  He  went,  a  visible  manhood,  only 
thronged,  amidst  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  powder 
and  great  gh)ry.  This  is  tlie  aim  that  He  sets 
before  IHm  in  His  departure;  He  goes  in  order 
that  He  may  come  back  again." 

Hence  we    are   not  surprised  to  find    that    the 
prediction  and  promise  of  the  two  men  in  white 


became  a  prominent  theme  in  the  preaching  of  the 
apostles.  Thus  a  few^  days  after  the  ascension, 
Peter  said  to  the  people,  "  Repent  ye,  therefore, 
and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted 
out,  so  that  tlie  times  of  refresliinor  shall  come  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord;  and  He  shall  send  Jesus 
Christ,  which  before  was  preached  unto  you:  whom 
the  heaven  must  receive  until  tlie  times  of  restitu- 
tion of  all  things,  which  God  hath  spoken  by  the 
mouth  of  all  His  holy  prophets  since  the  world 
beoan."  Acts,  iii:19-2i.  The  heaven,  then,  must 
give  back  Jesus  at  the  times  of  the  restitution  of 
all  things,  and  this  has  been  the  subject  of  divine 
revelation  tlirough   the  prophets  since  the  world 


TEACHING.  11 


began.  It  is  wild  exegesis  whicli  imagines  tliat 
the  heaven  must  receive  Him  until  the  end  of  the 
times  of  the  restitution  of  all  thiiigs.  If  a  friend 
writes  to  another  that  he  Avill  stay  where  he  is  until 
Spring,  it  would  be  foolish  to  fancy  that  lie  means 
until  the  end  of  Spring.  But  the  exegesis  proves 
too  much,  for  if  Christ  will  not  come  until  the  end 
of  the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all  things,  he  will 
not  come  at  all,  since  the  times  of  tlie  restitution 
of  all  things  include  the  final  judgment,  and  the 
new  heavens  and  new  earth.  It  is  obvious  to  every 
unprejudiced  reader  that  Christ  comes  from  heaven 
to  inauD-urate  and  introduce  these  times. 

The  possil)le  nearness  of  this  personal  return 
from  heaven  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in  the  first 
epistle  Paul  was  directed  l)y  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
write,  he  does  not  hesitate  to  describe  the  Thessa- 
lonians  as  those  who  had  ^'  turned  to  God  from 
idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God ;  and  to  wait 
for  His  Son  from  heaven,  whom  He  raised  from 
the  dead,  even  Jesus,  which  delivered  us  from  the 
wrath  to  come."  1  Tliess.,  i:9,  10.  That  this  is  a 
personal  return  cannot  1)e  doubted,  for  neither  the 
Holy  Spirit,  nor  death,  nor  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  nor  any  other  providential  event  is  ever 
called  Jesus,  nor  were  they  raised  from  the  dead, 
nor  did  they  deliver  us  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  believers  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago  were  taught  by  inspiration  to 
wait  for  God's  Son  from  heaven. 

Then  comes  another  statement  in  the  next  chap- 
ter: ''What  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of  re- 
joicing? Are  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His  coming  ?"    1  Thess.,  ii  :19. 


12  TILL    HE    COME. 


Then  comes  another  statement  in  the  next  chapter: 
"The  Lord  make  yon  to  increase  and  ahonnd  in 
love  one  toward  another,  and  toward  all  men,  even 
as  we  do  toward  yon:  to  the  end  He  may  stablish 
yonr  hearts  nid)lamable  in  lioliness  before  God, 
even  onr  Father,  at  tlie  cominor  of  the  Lord  Jesns 
Christ  with  all  His  saints."  I  Tliess.,  iii:12- 
13.  Then  comes  another  statement  in  the 
next  chapter:  "The  Lord  Himself  shall  de- 
scend from  heaven  with  a  shont."  1  Tliess.,  iv:16. 
No  one  pretends  to  make  ont  of  these  passages 
anything  except  a  literal  and  personal  retnrn  of 
Jesus,  and  the  ingenuity  of  the  keenest  criticism 
fails  to  discover  a  reference  in  them  to  any  other 
event  whatsoever. 

Then  comes  another  statement  in  the  next  chap- 
ter: "Of  the  times  and  tlie  seasons,  brethren,  ye 
have  no  need  that  I  write  unto  you.  For  your- 
selves know  perfectly  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so 
Cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  1  Thess.,  v:l, 
2.  How  did  the  Thessalonians,  who  had  but  re- 
cently turned  to  God  from  idols,  know  this  so 
perfectly?  Plainly  because  the  Apostle  during  his 
brief  visit  had  taught  it  to  them.  It  was  .not, 
then,  a  subject  of  no  practical  value  in  his  estima- 
tion, as  so  often  affirmed  now,  and  it  cannot  be 
right  to  dismiss  it  from  the  field  of  contemplation 
and  discussion,  as  preachers  and  people  generally 
do  at  present.  No  matter  whether  he  is  a  pre- 
millenialist  or  post-millenialist,  every  ambassa- 
dor for  Christ  is  bound  to  testify  of  the  Lord's 
personal  return  from  heaven;  and  to  substitute 
tor  it  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit's  power,  the 
progress  of  the  church,  or  the  advance  of  Christian 


THE    apostles'    TEACHINa.  13 

civilization,  is  a  dangerous  and  deplorable  depart- 
ure from  the  truth  of  God.  Well  may  we  join 
in  the  apostle's  prayer,  "  The  very  God  of  peace 
sanctify  you  wholly;  and  I  pray  God  your  whole 
spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  blameless  at 
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1  Thess., 
v:23. 

Turning  now  to  the  second  epistle  to  the  Thessa- 
lonians,  and  the  second  the  apostle  was  inspired  to 
write,  we  find  the  same  great  truth  prominently 
brought  forth.  Thus  to  tlie  persecuted  Christians 
it  is  said  in  the  first  chapter,  "To  you  who  are 
troubled  rest  with  us  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be 
revealed  from  heaven  witli  His  miglity  angels,  in 
flaming  Are  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know 
not  God,  and  that  obey  not  tlie  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  be  punished  with  everlast- 
ing destruction  from  tlie  presence  of  the  Lord,  and 
from  the  glory  of  His  power,  when  He  shall  come 
to  be  glorifled  in  His  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in 
all  them  that  believe  (because  our  testimony  among 
you  was  believed)  in  that  day." 

In  the  second  chapter  he  says,  '^  jS  ow  we  beseech 
you,  brethren,  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  by  our  gathering  together  unto  Him, 
that  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be  troubled, 
neither  by  spirit,  noi-  l)y  woi'd,  nor  l)y  letter  as 
from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand," 
or  ''  is  now  present,"  as  the  lievised  Version 
renders  it;  or  '^hath  arrived,"  as  Dr.  Young  trans- 
lates it;  or  "  is  come,"  as  Alford  gives  it;  or  "  has 
set  in,"  according  -to  liotherham.  Our  post-mill- 
ennial lirethren  tell  us  we  are  solemnly  forbidden 
to  believe  that  *'  tlie  Lord  is  at  hand";  but  surely 


14  TILL    HE    COME. 


they  forget  that  the  same  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  same 
apostle,  elsewhere  declares  that  "the  Lord  is  at 
hand."  Phil.,  iv:5.  Would  they  make  the  in- 
spired writer  contradict  himself  in  this  fashion? 
l5r.  John  Lillie  in  his  admirable  lectures  on  tlie 
epistle  truly  says,  "The  phrase  is  at  hand  occurs 
twenty  times  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament, 
and  not  once  does  it  stand  for  the  Greek  word  so 
rendered  here.  The  word  translated  is  at  hand 
occurs  seven  times,  and  is  always  rendered  '  is 
present '  but  once."  It  is  simply  impossible  that 
tliose  who  w^ere  taught  in  the  iirst  epistle  to  look 
with  delight  for  the  coming  of  Christ,  could  be 
violently  agitated  by  the  thought  that  he  might  be 
at  hand.  Their  trouble  arose  from  a  rumor  that 
He  had  returned  to  the  earth,  and  if  this  was 
true  they  knew  that  tliey  liad  not  l)een  caught  up 
in  clouds  to  meet  Him  in  the  air,  and  hence  their 
distress  was    extreme,  as  the  Greek  implies. 

In  the  third  chapter  the  apostle  writes,  ^^The 
Lord  direct  your  hearts  into  the  love  of  God,  and 
into  the  patient  waiting  for  Christ,"  or  "  into  the 
patience  of  Clirist,"  wlio  is  patiently  waiting  the 
times  and  seasons  which  the  Father  hatli  put 
under  His  own  authority.  So  overshadowing  is 
the  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  second  coming  in  the 
two  epistles,  it  is  not  strange  that  the  translators 
of  our  common  version  speak  of  "  the  patient 
waiting  for  Christ."  It  is  the  theme  of  every 
chapter,  and  no  one  pretends  that  the  passages 
(juoted  refer  to  anytliiug  l)ut  His  personal  advent. 
It  is  impossible  that  any  one  of  them  was  designed 
to  teach  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  or  the  de- 
scent of  the  Spirit,  or  the  death  of  the  believer. 


THE    Ar(3STLp:s'    TEACHING.  15 

It  is  surely  also  His  personal  coming  that  is  in 
view  when  the  same  apostle  writes  to  the  Corinth- 
ians, ''Ye  come  behind  in  no  gift,  waiting  for  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Cor.  i:7; 
"Therefore  iudge  nothincr  before  the  time,  until 
the  Lord  come,"  1  Cor.  iv:5;  "As  often  as  ye  eat 
this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the 
Lord's  death  till  He  come."  1  Cor.  xi:26.  All 
expositors  no  doubt  w^ould  fully  agree  with  Dr. 
Charles  Hodge  on  the  first  of  these  passages:  "The 
second  advent  of  Christ,  so  clearly  predicted  by 
Himself  and  by  His  apostles,  connected  as  it  is 
with  the  promise  of  the  resurrection  of  His  people 
and  the  consumation  of  His  kingdom,  was  the 
object  of  longing  expectation  to  all  the  early 
Clu-istia,ns.  So  great  is  the  glory  connected  with 
that  event  that  Paul  in  Rom.  viii:18-23,  not  only 
represents  all  present  afttictions  as  trifling  in  com- 
parison, but  describes  the  whole  creation  as  looking 
forward  to  it  with  earnest  expectation.  Comp. 
Pliil.  iii:20;  Tit.  ii:13.  So  general  was  this  ex- 
pectation that  Christians  were  characterized  as  those 
'  who  love  His  appearing,'  2  Tim.  iv:8,  and  as  those 
'who  wait  for  Him.'     Heb.  ix:28." 

Mr.  Barnes,  too,  certainly  expresses  the  views  of 
all  kinds  and  classes  of  commentators,  when  he 
says  on  the  same  verse,  "  The  earnest  expectation 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  became  one  of  the  marks  of  early 
Christian  piety.  This  return  was  promised  by  the 
"Saviour  to  His  anxious  disciples  when  He  w^as  about 
to  leave  them.  Jno.  xiv:3.  The  promise  was  re- 
newed when  he  ascended  to  lieaven.  Acts  i:ll. 
It  became  the  settled  hope  and  expectation  of 
Christians    that   He  would    return.      Tit.    ii:13;  2 


16  TILL    HE    COME. 


Pet.  iii:12;  Heb.  ix:28.  And  with  earnest  prayer 
that  He  would  quickly  come,  John  closes  the 
volume  of  inspiration.  Rev.  xxii:20."  Both  of 
these  eminent  expositors  were  post-millenialists, 
as  is  Prof.  Beet  who  says  of  the  words  here  ex- 
pounded, "  The  Corinthians  already  possessed 
spiritual  gifts  which  were  a  proof  of  God's  favor; 
while  at  the  same  time  they  were  eagerly  looking 
forward  to  that  day  when  Jesus  will  visibly  appear 
to  bring  in  the  linal  glory."  Upon  the  next  verse 
he  remarks,  ''  To  the  clay  of  Christ's  return  the 
early  Christians  looked  forward,  as  Israel  did  ages 
before  to  the  day  of  Jehovah." 

But  leaving  for  the  present  the  inspired  writings 
of  Paul,  it  will  be  found  that  each  of  the  apostles 
dwells  upon  the  great  subject  of  our  Lord's  per- 
sonal return.  Thus  James  says,  "Be  patient  there- 
fore, brethren,  unto  the  comino-  of  the  Lord."  Jas. 
iv:7.  Peter  writes  to  his  brethren,  '^that  the  trial 
of  your  faitlj  being  much  more  precious  than  of 
gold  that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  lire, 
might  be  found  unto  praise  and  honor  and  glory 
at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Pet.  i:7; 
"looking  for  and  hastening  the  coming  of  the  day 
of  God,  or  as  the  Revised  renders  it,  "  earnestly 
desiring  the  coming."  2  Pet.  iii:12.  John  says, 
"And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  Him;  that, 
when  he  shall  appear,  we  may  have  conhdence,  and 
not  be  ashamed  before  Him  at  His  coming."  1 
John  ii  :28.  J  ude  says,  '*  Enoch  also,  the  seventh 
from  Adam,  prophesied  of  these,  saying,  behold 
the  Lord  conieth  with  ten  thousands  of  His  saints," 
Jude  14;  and  John  opens  the  Apocalypse  with  the 
announcement,  "  IJehold,  lie  cometh  with  clouds, 


THE    AroSTLES'    TEACHING.  17 

and  every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and  they  also  which 
pierced  Him,  and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall 
wail  because  of  Him.    Even  so.  Amen."    Rev.  i:7. 

Not  a  text  thus  far  quoted  can  be  forced  to  refer, 
even  by  the  wildest  license  of  the  most  audacious 
criticism,  to  any  event  whatever  except  the  literal 
and  personal  return  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The 
thoughtless  habit  of  skimming  over  such  testimony 
with  a  passing  impression  that  it  may  relate  to 
death,  or  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  or  the  out- 
pouring of  the  Spirit,  or  some  striking  providential 
event,  is  little  less  than  triHing  with  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  and  betokens  a  state  of  mind  far  from 
intelligent,  and  a  condition  of  heart  far  from  re\'- 
erential.  If  Christians  will  ask  themselves  why 
they  believe  that  Jesus  was  born,  that  He  per- 
formed miracles  and  uttered  the  sayings  ascribed 
to  Him,  that  He  died  upon  the  cross  and  rose 
from  the  grave,  they  can  easily  see  that  they  have 
precisely  the  same  evidence,  only  multiplied  ten- 
fold, to  convince  them  of  His  coming  again. 

It  is  the  one  object  set  before  us,  the  "  one  hope 
of  your  calling."  Eph.  iv:4.  As  Graham  on  Eplies- 
ians,  a  capital  book  issued  by  the  Presbyterian 
Board  of  Publication,  well  says  on  these  words,  all 
other  hopes  are  "united  in  the  one  great  hope 
which  has  animated  tlie  church  from  the  beginning 
— the  hope  of  the  coming  and  kingdom  of  Jesns 
Christ,  which  is  therefore  called,  by  way  of  emi- 
nence, 'that  blessed  hope.'  Tit.  ii:13.  I  think, 
therefore,  that  this  is  the  one  hope  of  our  callirig, 
and  includes  all  the  others.  The  Jews  had  the 
coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  as  their  great  nation- 
al hope,  and  w^e  Christians  look  for  His  coming  in 


18  TILL    HE    COME. 


glory  as  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for.  This 
is  the  hope  of  the  New  Testament  as  distinguished 
from  that  of  the  Old,  and  the  Gospels  and  Epistles 
are  full  of  it.  It  animated  the  early  Christians  in 
their  contendings,  it  is  embodied  in  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  it  is  the  cry  of  the  widowed  church  and 
the  groaning  creation:  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come 
quickly.  .  .  .  The  cross  and  the  crown,  the 
coming  of  Christ  in  tlie  flesh  and  His  coming  in 
glory,  being  the  historical  and  the  prophetical,  and 
so  the  proper  food  for  memory  and  hope,  are  the 
two  centres  of  the  divine  word  and  the  divine  ad- 
ministration around  which  all  the  systems  of  grace 
and  providence  revolve.  There  is  one  faith  in  the 
dying  Lamb,  and  one  hope  in  the  coming  King." 

"  For  the  vision  of  the  Bridegoom 
Waits  the  well-beloved  Bride, 
Severed  only  for  a  season 
From  her  well-beloved's  side. 
For  the  hour  when  morn  ascendetb 
And  the  shadows  disappear, 
For  the  signs  of  heavenly  glory, 
She  is  waiting,  waiting  here. 

For  the  coming  of  the  Bridegroom, 
Whom,  though  yet  unseen,  we  love; 
For  the  King  of  Saints,  returning 
In  His  glory  from  above; 
For  the  shout  that  shakes  the  prison 
For  the  trumpet  loud  and  clear, 
For  the  voice  of  the  archangel, 
She  is  waiting,  waiting  here. 

For  the  light  beyond  the  darkness, 
When  the  reign  of  sin  is  done; 
When  the  storm  has  ceased  its  raging, 
And  the  haven  Jias  been  won; 
For  the  joy  beyond  the  sorrow, 
Joy  of  the  eternal  year, 
For  the  resurrection  splendor, 
She  is  waiting,  waiting  here!" 


OUR    LORDS    TEACHING. 


19 


CHAPTER  II. 


OUR    LORD  S    TEACHING. 


IT  is  wortliy  of  notice  tliat  the  chapter  in  which 
our  Lord  hrst  announces  His  purpose  to  build 
His  church  also  contains  His  first  distinct  promise 
to  return  to  earth.  ''The  Son  of  man  shall  come 
in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  with  His  angels;  and 
then  He  shall  reward  every  man  according  to  his 
works."  Matt.  xvi:27.  Not  even  by  the  wildest 
flicrht  of  the  imao-ination  can  these  words  be  made 
to  refer  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  to  the 
descent  of  the  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  to 
death,  or  to  any,  providential  event  whatever,  be- 
cause at  none  of  these  times  has  He  come  in  the 
glory  of  His  Father,  with  His  angels,  to  rew^ard 
every  man  according  to  his  works.  Whatever 
meaning,  therefore,  may  be  attached  to  His  second 
coming  in  certain  other  passages,  no  one  will  pre- 
tend that  in  His  earliest  testimony  upon  this  great 
subject  He  taught  other  than  His  literal  and 
personal  advent. 

The  same  thing  is  true  of  His  next  positive 
teaching  with  regard  to  His  second  advent.  The 
apostles,  who  had  forsaken  all  to  follow  Him, 
wished  to  know  what  reward  they  should  receive; 
"  and  Jesus  said  unto  them,  Yerily  I  say  unto  you, 
That  ye  which  have  followed  me,  in  the  regenera- 
tion, when  the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  the  throne 


20 


TILL    HE    COME. 


of  His  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones 
judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."  Matt.  xix:28. 
Surely  no  one  will  claim  that  this  promise  was 
fulfilled  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  or  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  or  at  the  death  of  the  apostles, 
or  at  any  time  in  the  past,  because  the  apostles 
have  not  yet  sat  on  twelve  thrones,  judging  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  nor  has  the  regeneration, 
the  renovation  of  the  world,  yet  occurred.  It  looks 
forward  to  a  glorious  change  on  the  earth,  for  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel  are  found  only  on  the  earth, 
a  change  so  splendid  it  is  called  the  regeneration, 
or  new  birth,  which  occurs  at  "the  times  of  resti- 
tution of  all  things,"  when  the  Son  of  man  shall 
sit  in  the  throne  of  his  glory,  and  associate  the 
apostles  as  princes  with  Himself  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  His  Kingdom. 

Nov  can  his  next  allusion  to  His  coming  be  per- 
verted to  mean  anything  else  than  His  literal  and 
personal  return.  He  answers  the  question  of  His 
disciples  concerning  the  sign  of  His  coming,  and 
of  the  end  of  the  age,  by  telling  them  that  during 
the  interval  of  His  absence,  "nation  shall  rise 
against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom ;  and 
there  shall  be  famines,  and  pestilences,  and  earth- 
quakes, in  divers  places.  All  these  are  the  be- 
ginning of  sorrows."  There  is  the  most  striking 
parallel  between  the  testimony  of  our  Lord  in  His 
Olivet  discourse  and  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  at 
the  opening  of  the  seals.  (1).  '-  Many  shall  come 
in  my  name,  saying,  I  am  Christ;  and  shall  deceive 
many."  Matt.  xxiv:5.  "And  I  saw,  and  beheld 
a  white  horse:  and  he  that  sat  on  him  had  a  bow, 
and  a  crown  was  given   unto  him   [the  stej)hanos 


21 

of  man,  not  the  dladetus  of  Christ  in  Rev.  xix:12]: 
and  he  went  forth  conqnering  and  to  conquer,"  the 
Antichrist.  Rev.  vi:2.  (2).  ^' And  ye  shall  hear 
of  wars,  and  rumors  of  wars:  see  that  ye  be  not 
troubled:  for  all  these  things  must  come  to  pass, 
but  the  end  is  not  yet."  Matt.  xxiv:6.  "And 
there  went  out  another  horse  that  was  red:  and 
power  was  given  to  him  that  sat  thereon  to  taken 
peace  from  the  earth,  and  that  they  should  kill  one 
another:  and  there  was  given  unto  him  a  great 
sword."  Rev.  vi:4.  (3).  "And  there  shall  be 
famines."  Matt.  xxiv:7.  "And  I  beheld,  and  lo, 
a  black  horse;  and  he  that  sat  on  liim  had  a  pair  of 
balances  in  his  hand,  and  I  heard  a  voice  in  the 
midst  of  the  four  living  creatures,  saying,  A  mea- 
sure of  wheat  for  a  penny,  and  three  measures  of 
barley  for  a  penny."  Rev.  vi:6.  (4).  "And  pesti- 
lences and  earthquakes  in  divers  places."  Matt. 
xxiv:7.  Of  the  rider  on  the  ghastly  horse,  whose 
name  is  Death,  followed  by  Hell,  it  is  said,  "  Pow- 
er was  given  unto  them  over  the  fourth  part  of  the 
earth  to  kill  wdth  the  sw^ord,  and  with  hunger,  and 
wdth  death,  and  with  the  beasts  of  the  earth." 
Rev.  vi:8.  (5).  "  Then  they  shall  deliver  you  up 
to  be  aitiicted,  and  shall  kill  you."  Matt.  xxiv:9. 
"  And  when  He  had  opened  the  Fifth  Seal,  I  saw 
under  the  altar  the  souls  of  them  that  were  slain 
foi  the  Word  of  God,  and  for  the  testimony  which 
they  held."  Rev.  vi:9,  (6).  "Immediately  after 
the  tribulation  of  those  days  shall  the  sun  be  dark- 
ened, and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and 
the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven."  Matt.  xxiv:29. 
And  I  beheld  when  He  had  opened  the  Sixth  Seal, 
and  lo,  there  was  a  great  earthquake;  and  the  sun 


22 


TILL    HE    COME. 


became  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair,  and  the  moon 
became  as  blood ;  and  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto 
the  earth."  Rev.  vi:12.  (7).  "And  He  shall  send 
His  angels  with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet;  and 
they  shall  gather  together  His  elect  from  the  four 
winds,  from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other." 
Matt.  xxiv:31.  "  And  He  cried  with  a  loud  voice 
to  the  four  angels,  to  whom  it  was  given  to  hurt 
the  earth  and  the  sea,  saying,  Hurt  not  the  earth, 
neither  the  sea,  nor  the  trees,  till  we  have  sealed 
the  servants  of  our  God  in  their  foreheads.  And 
I  heard  the  number  of  them  that  were  sealed:  and 
there  were  sealed  an  hundred  and  forty  and  four 
thousand  of  all  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel." 
Rev.  vii:2-8.  Truly,  "all  these  are  the  beginning 
of  sorrows."  The  word  for  sorrows  here  means 
travailing  pangs ^  issuing  at  last  in  the  regenera- 
tion or  new  birth,  but  meanwhile  going  on  to  a 
"  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  since  the  be- 
ginning of  the  world  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever 
shall  be." 

"Immediately  after  the  tribulation  of  those 
days  " — not  two  thousand  nor  one  thousand  years 
after,  but  immediately  after — "  shall  the  sun  be 
darkened,  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light, 
and  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the 
powders  of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken,  and  then 
shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven; 
and  then  shall  all  the  tril)es  of  the  earth  mourn, 
and  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory.  And 
He  shall  send  His  angels  with  a  great  sound  of  a 
trumpet;  and  they  shall  gather  together  His  elect 
from  the  four  winds,  from  cue   end  of  heaven  to 


OUR  lord's  teaching.  23 

tlie  otlier."  Matt.  xxiv:29  31.  Since  it  is  certain 
that  none  of  these  events  occnrred  at  the  clestrnc- 
tion  of  Jernsaleni  by  Titns,  nor  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  nor  at  the  death  of  Christians,  it  is 
equally  certain  that  when,  onr  Lord  says  all  the 
tribes  of   the  earth   shall    see   Ilini  coniintr  in  the 

o 

clouds  of  heaven.  He  refers  to  His  literal,  per- 
sonal and  visible  advent. 

In  like  nianner  He  says,  "  When  the  Son  of  man 
shall  come  in  His  glory,  and  all.  the  holy  angels* 
with  Him,  then  shall  He  sit  upon  the  throne  of 
His  glory:  and  before  Him  shall  be  gathered  all 
nations."  Matt.  xxv:31.  It  may  be  objected  that 
it  is  a  ^vaste  of  time  to  quote  passages,  that  are  so 
obvious  in  their  bearing  upon  His  literal  coming 
no  one  disputes  their  teaching  for  a  moment.  But 
the  question  is,  wdiy  accept  these  as  literal,  and  put 
a  figurative  meaning  upon  passages  that  are  equal- 
ly explicit  in  teaching  His  personal  advent?  For 
example,  we  constantly  hear  at  funerals,  or  read  in 
funeral  discourses,  the  admonition  of  our  Saviour, 
''  Be  ye  therefore  ready  also:  for  the  Son  of  man 
Cometh  at  an  hour  when  ye  think  not."  Luk. 
xii:40.  Kine  Christians  out  of  ten  have  no  thought 
connected  with  tliese  words  beyond  the  necessity 
of  readiness  for  death,  because  they  have  been  so 
instructed.  But  why  associate  them  with  death 
any  more  than  in  other  passages  that,  confessedly, 
contain  no  allusion  to  death?  The  Lord  is  not 
here  referring  to  death,  even  in  the  most  distant 
way,  but  to  His  personal  return,  which  formed 
the  most  prominent  theme  of  His  meditation  and 
discourse.  If  the  verses  that  contain  allusion  to  it 
in  the  four  gospels  are  counted,  it  will  be  found 


24 


TILL    HE    COME. 


that  it  occupied  His  attention  more  than  any  other 
one  subject;  and  surely  Ave  should  give  to  His 
language  its  natural  and  obvious  meaning. 

It  would  be  well  to  remember  this  Avhen  we  read 
the  familiar  words,  ' '  If  I  go  and  pi-epare  a  place 
for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto 
myself;  that  wdiere  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also." 
Jno.  xiv:3.  In  the  first  place,  Jesus  frequently 
mentions  his  own  death,  and  distinctly  speaks  of 
the  death  of  Peter;  and  hence  if  death  had  been 
the  thought  in  his  mind.  He  would  liave  men- 
tioned it  here.  In  the  second  place,  it  was  as  easy 
for  Him  to  say,  "  you  shall  die,"  as  it  was  to  say, 
"  I  will  come  again";  and  hence  the  latter,  not  the 
former,  was  the  subject  of  His  promise.  In  the 
third  place,  it  was  a  deception  if  He  said  "  I  will 
com.e  again,"  and  meant^  ''you  must  die."  If  a 
beloved  friend  makes  us  sad  by  the  announcement 
of  his  departure,  and  then  cheers  our  sorrowful 
hearts  with  the  promise,  "  I  Avill  come  again," 
leaving  us  to  discover  after  his  departure  that  he 
took  that  method  of  informing  us  that  Ave  must 
die,  we  could  not  think  well  of  his  candor.  In  the 
fourth  place,  Jesus  does  not  come  again  at  our 
death,  but  the  uniform  mode  of  the  Ncaa^"  Testa- 
ment in  describing  the  death  of  the  belicA^er  is  to 
say  A\^e  go  to  be  Avitli  Him.  In  the  fifth  place  He 
is  spiritually  present  w^ith  His  people  all  the  time, 
and  hence  does  not  come  to  them  spiritually  at 
death.  In  the  sixth  place.  His  coming  after  the 
resurrection,  or  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  or  at  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  did  not  fullill  the  prom- 
ise, "  I  Avill  receive  unto  myself."  In  the  seA^enth 
place,  He  no  Avhere  else  speaks  of  His  coming  as 


OUR  lord's  teaching.  25 


death,  but  the  opposite  of  death.  The  Saviour  was 
in  heaven,  not  on  earth,  when  Stephen  died,  and 
the  martyr  looked  up  steadfastly  with  the  joyful 
cry,  ''Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  Acts  viii:59. 
"  Willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body,  and 
to  be  present  with  the  Lord,"  by  going  to  Him, 
not  by  His  coming  to  us.  2  Cor.  v:8.  "Having 
a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  be  wdth  Christ,"  not  by 
His  coming  but  by  our  departure.  Peter  speaks 
of  putting  off  his  tabernacle,  and  of  his  "  exodus" 
out  of  the  world,  but  neither  he  nor  any  other  New 
Testament  writer  represents  death  as  the  coming 
of  Christ.  It  is  strange,  therefore,  that  a  vast 
majority  of  Christians,  without  much  thought,  it 
is  presumed,  regard  the  promise  of  the  Lord,  "If 
I  go,  I  will  come,"  as  only  meaning,  now  that  He 
has  gone  they  must  die.  If  it  be  said  that  the 
promise,  taken  literally,  has  not  been  fulfilied  to 
the  apostles,  it  is  true.  Their  bodies  are  still 
waiting  in  Hope  for  His  Coming. 

Dr.  I)avid  Brown,  who  is  accepted  by  the  post- 
millenial  brethren  as  the  highest  authority,  quotes 
the  promise,  and  then  devotes  five  pages  of  his 
book  to  a  very  successful  attempt  at  proving  that 
it  can  not  refer  to  death  except  by  way  of  analogy. 
"  It  can  never  be  warrantable,  and  is  often  danger- 
ous, to  make  that  the  primary  and  proper  interjpre 
tation  of  a  passage  which  is  but  a  secondary, 
though  it  may  be  a  very  legitimate  and  even  irre- 
sistible ajpjylication  of  it.  .  .  .  '  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled  (said  Jesus  to  His  sorrowing 
disciples).  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  man- 
sions; I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  and  if  I  go 
away' — what  then?     'Ye  shall  follow  me?     Death 


26 


TILL    HE    COMK. 


shall  shortly  l)riiio-  us  together'?'  Nay,  hut  '  if  I  go 
away  /  lolll  coDie  again  and  receive  yoic  unto  my- 
self; that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also.' 
And  how  know  we  that,  by  putting  this  event  ont 
of  its  scriptural  place  in  the  expectations  of  the 
church,  we  are  not,  in  a  great  degree,  destroying 
its  character  and  power  as  a  practical  principle? 
Can  we  not  believe,  though  unable  to  trace  it,  that 
God's  methods  are  ever  the  best;  and  that  as  in 
nature,  so  perhaps  in  revelation,  a  modiiication  by 
us  of  the  divine  arrangements,  apparently  slight, 
and  attended  even  with  some  seemino;  advantao-es, 
may  be  followed  by  a  total  and  unexpected  change 
of  results,  the  opposite  of  what  is  anticipated  and 
desired?     So  we  fear  it  to  be  here." 

But  our  Lord  Himself  leaves  no  possible  room 
for  the  idle  conjecture  that  in  llis  frequent  pre- 
dictions of  His  coming  lie  meant  the  death  of 
Christians.  He  plaiidy  told  Peter  "by  what  death 
he  should  glorify  God.  And  when  he  had  spoken 
this.  He  saith  unto  him,  follow  me.  Then  Peter, 
turning  around,  seeth  the  disciple  whom  Jesus 
loved  following,"  unbidden,  but  followino;  because 
he  loved  to  be  with  Jesus.  "  Peter,  seeing  him, 
saith  to  Jesus,  Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do? 
Jesus  saith  unto  him,  if  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I 
come,  what  is  that  to  thee?  Follow  thou  me. 
Then  went  this  saying  abroad  among  the  brethren, 
that  that  disciple  should  not  die:  yet  Jesus  said  not 
unto  him,  he  shall  not  die ;  but,  if  I  will  that  he  tarry 
till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee?"     John  xxi:19-23e 

From  this  it  is  as  plain  as  the  shining  of  the  sun 
that  the  disciples  did  not  understand  the  coming 
of  Christ  and  death   to  mean  one  and    the  same 


OUR    LORD  S    TEACHING. 


27 


thing-.  Tliey  understood  tlieni  to  mean  ju^^t  tlu' 
opposite  of  each  other,  believing  that  the  coming 
of  Christ  would  prevent  the  death  of  John,  a  con- 
viction ''  into  Avhicli  they  more  easily  fell,"  as  Dr. 
David  Brown  informs  us,  ^'froni  the  prevalent 
belief  that  Christ's  second  coming  was  then  near  at 
hand."  Owing  to  this  saying  of  our  Lord  a  rumor 
prevailed  for  a  long  time  in  the  church  that  John 
had  not  died,  and  could  not  die;  and  Theophylact 
speaks  of  a  tradition  that  he  is  kept  alive  some- 
where, to  be  slain  with  Elias  by  the  Antichrist.  It 
is  certain,  therefore,  that  the  early  Christians  did 
not  regard  the  promise,  "  I  will  come  again,"  as 
fulfilled  in  their  death.  It  was  not  death,  hateful 
and  hideous  death,  lie  set  before  them  as  their 
hope,  nor  Avas  it  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
which  Gerhard  truly  says  "is  never  in  one  instance 
in  Scripture  called  the  coming  of  Christ,"  nor  is  it 
even  the  abiding  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  sweet 
and  comfortable  as  it  is  to  know  that  He  dwells 
with  us  and  in  us  forever;  but  it  was  the  return  of 
the  Lord  Himself.  Although  death  is  a  common 
theme  of  thought  and  discourse  among  Christians 
now,  it  is  seldom  mentioned  in  the  Kew  Testa- 
ment, and  in  the  passages  that  contain  allusions  to 
it,  generally  the  word  sleep  is  employed.  "  The 
grave  is  not  the  goal "  placed  before  the  believer, 
nor  the  repose  of  the  disembodied  state,  nor  happy 
experiences  alon^  the  way,  l)ut  the  Saviour's  ad- 
vent to  take  body  and  soul  home.  "  Never  do  we 
please  Christ  so  much,"  says  Dr.  David  Brown, 
"  as  when  we  '  refuse  to  be  comforted,'  even  with 
His  own  consolations,  sa\-e  in  the  prospect  of  His 
Personal  Heturny     Tiie  italics  are  his  own. 


28  TIM-    UK    COME. 


Let  not  my  eyos  with  tears  be  dim, 
Let  joy  their  upward  glance  illume; 
Look  up,  and  watch,  and  w^ait  for  Him- 
8oon,  soon  the  Lord  will  come. 

Soon  w^ill  that  star-paved  milky  way, 
Soon  will  that  beauteous  azure  dome, 
Glories,  ne'er  yet  conceived,  display — 
Soon,  soon  the  Lord  will  come. 

Changed  in  the  twinkling  ot  an  eye, 
Invested  with  immortal  bloom, 
I  shall  behold  Him  throned  on  high, 
And  sing.  -The  Lord  is  come!' 

One  beam  from  His  all-glorious  face 
These  mortal  garments  will  consume, 
Each  sinful  blemish  will  efface— 
Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come! 

What  will  it  be  with  Thee  to  dwell, 
Thyself  my  everlasting  Home! 
Oh.  bliss — Oh,  joy  ineffable! 
Lord  Jesus,  quickly  cornel" 


HIS    COMINCr    MAY    IJE    NP:AR.  29 

CHAPTER  III.  , 

HIS    COMING    MAY    BE    NEAR. 

ALL  who  read  the  New  Testament  carefully 
must  perceive  that  our  Lord,  and  then  the 
Holy  Ghost  by  the  apostles,  represent  His  second 
advent  as  possible  at  any  time.  "  Watch,  there- 
fore; for  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth 
come.  But  know  this,  that  if  the  goodman  of  the 
house  had  known  in  what  watch  the  thief  would 
come,  he  would  have  watched,  and  would  not  have 
suffered  his  house  to  be  broken  up.  Therefore  be 
ye  also  ready:  for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not, 
the  Son  of  man  cometh."  Matt  xxiv:42-tt4.  This 
sounds  like  IHs  admonition  to  the  unfaithful 
Church  of  Sardis:  "I  know  thy  works,  that  thou 
hast  a  name,  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead.  Be 
watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things  which  remain, 
tliat  are  ready  to  die:  for  I  have  not  found  thy 
works  perfect  before  God.  liemember  therefore 
liow  thou  hast  received  and  heard;  and  hold  fast, 
and  repent.  If  therefore  thou  shalt  not  watch,  I 
will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief,  and  thou  shalt  not 
know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee  "  Kev. 
ii;:l-3. 

''Take  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray:  for  ye  know 
not  when  the  time  is.  For  the  JSon  of  man  is  as  a 
man  taking  a  far  journey,  who  left  his  house,  and 
gave  authority  to  his  servants,  and  to  every  man 
his  work,  and   commanded  the   porter  to  watch. 


30  TILL    HE    COME. 


Watch  ye,  therefore;  for  ye  know  not  when  the 
master  of  the  honse  cometh,  at  even,  or  at  mid- 
night, or  at  the  cockcrowing,  or  in  the  morning; 
lest  coming  suddenly,  he  find  yon  sleeping.  And 
what  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all,  Watch." 
Mark,  xiii:33-37.  Here  the  word  for  vmtch  in  the 
first  verse  means  "  to  lie  awake,  to  be  sleepless," 
and  in  the  three  other  places  it  means  to  '^  awaken, 
wake  up,  rouse,  stir,"  as  if  the  Lord  would  say,  at 
even  "  lie  awake,"  at  midnight,  at  the  cockcrow- 
ing, in  the  morning,  "  wake  up."  He  seems  to 
anticipate  the  discoveries  of  modern  science,  for  if 
He  should  descend  at  this  moment  from  heaven, 
and  call  His  scattered  saints  to  meet  IHm  in  the 
air,  to  some  it  would  be  at  even,  to  others  at  mid- 
night, to  others  at  the  cockcrowing,  and  to  otliers 
when  the  morning  had  further  advanced.  But  it 
is  obvious  that  He  wishes  us  to  be  on  the  look-out 
for  Him  every  hour. 

'^  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lights 
burning :  and  ye  yourselves  like  unto  men  that  Avait 
for  their  Lord,  when  He  will  return  from  the 
wedding;  tliat,  when  he  cometh  and  knocketh,  they 
may  open  unto  Him  immediately.  Blessed  ai-e 
tliose  servants,  whom  the  Lord,  when  He  cometh, 
shall  find  Avatching:  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  tliat 
He  shall  gird  Himself,  and  make  them  to  sit  down 
to  meat,  and  will  come  forth  aiul  serve  them.  And  if 
He  shall  come  in  the  second  Avatch,  or  come  in  the 
third  Avatcli,  and  find  them  so,  blessed  are  those 
servants.  .  .  .  Be  ye  therefore  ready  also:  for 
the  Son  of  man  cometh  at  an  hour  when  ye  think 
not."  This  is  folloAved  by  a  A'ery  solemn  Avarning 
against  the  present  common  habit  of  saying  that 


HIS    COMING    MAY    BE    NEAK.  31 

he  cannot  come  for  a  thousand  years,  or,  as  some 
assert,  for  one  hundred  thousand  years.  "  If  that 
servant  say  in  his  heart,  My  Lord  delayeth  Plis 
coming;  and  shall  begin  to  heat  tlie  men  servants 
and  maidens,  and  to  eat  and  drink,  and  be  drunk- 
en; the  Lord  of  that  servant  will  come  in  a  day 
when  he  looketh  not  for  Him,  and  at  an  hour  when 
he  is  not  aware,  and  will  cut  him  in  sunder,  and 
will  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the  unbelievers." 
Luk.,  xii -.35-46. 

The  epistles  also  are  full  of  the  thought  that  the 
coming  of  Christ  may  be  at  hand.  "  Even  we  our- 
selves groan  witliin  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adop- 
tion, the  redemption  of  our  body,"  and  the  redemp- 
tion, we  know,  can  occur  only  at  the  second  advent. 
Horn.  viii:23.  "Waiting  for  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  I'Cor.  i:7.  "Let  your 
gentleness  be  known  unto  all  men.  The  Lord  is 
at  hand."  Phil.  iv:5.  "Ye  turned  to  God  from 
idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God;  and  to  wait 
for  His  Son  from  heaven,  whom  He  raised  from 
the  dead,  Jesus,  who  delivered  us  from  the  wratli 
to  come."  IThess.  i:9,  10.  "The  Lord  Himself 
shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout;  . 
and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first:  then  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  to- 
gether witli  them  in  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in 
the  air.''  1  Thess.  iv:16,  17.  It  is  evident  that 
the  apostle  lioped  to  be  alive  at  the  descent  of  the 
Lord  Himself  from  heaven  to  summon  His  waiting 
ones  to  meet  liim  in  the  air. 

We  are  not  surprised,  therefore,  to  find  him 
describing  the  proper  attitude  of  tlie  l)eliever  as 
"  looking  for  that  blessed  hope   and  appearing  of 


32 


TILL    HE    COME. 


the  glory  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ."  Tit.,  ii:13.  "  Unto  them  that  look  for 
Him  shall  He  appear  the  second  time  without  sin 
unto  salvation."  Heb.  ix:28.  "For  yet  a  little 
while,  and  He  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will 
not  tarry."  Heb.  x:37.  "Be  ye  also  patient; 
stablish  your  liearts:  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
draweth  nicrh,"  Jas.,  v:8.  "The  end  all  thino-s 
is  at  hand:  be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto 
prayer,"  1  Pet.  iv:7;  upon  which  Calvin  remarks, 
'^  The  end  he  speaks  of  is  not  merely  that  of  each 
several  individual,  but  the  entire  renovation  of  the 
world;  as  if  he  said,  that  Christ  will  shortly  come, 
and  put  an  end  to  all  things.  .  .  .  I)id  the 
trump  of  Christ  sound  in  our  ears,  it  would  keenly 
smite  all  our  senses,  nor  suffer  them  to  lie  thus 
torpid.  It  might  be  objected,  however,  that  a  long 
series  of  ages  lias  elapsed  since  Peter  wrote  this, 
and  still  the  end  is  not  yet  seen.  I  answer,  that 
to  us  time  seems  long  for  this  reason,  that  we 
measure  its  length  by  the  spaces  of  the  present  life, 
but  that,  could  we  have  respect  to  the  perpetuity 
of  the  life  to  come,  many  generations  would  be  for 
us  as  it  were  a  moment  (2  Pet.  iii:8).  Moreover^ 
it  )iiust  he  held  as  a  first  jprincijple^  that^  ever  since 
the  appearance  of  Christy  there  is  nothing  left  to 
the  faithful,  hut  with  yyil'eful  minds  to  he  a'hoays 
intent  on  His  second  advent ^ 

"  Little  chiklren,  it  is  til e  hist  time;  and  as  ye 
have  heard  that  Antichrist  shall  come,  even  now 
are  there  many  Antichrists;  whereby  we  know  that 
it  is  the  last' time."  1  J  no.  ii:18.  ^^  IMiold,  I 
come  quickly:  hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that 
no  man  take  thy  crown."     Rev.  iii:ll.      ^'Behold, 


HIS    COMTXO    MAY    V,K    NKAIJ 


I  come  as  a  tliief.  Blessed  is  lie  that  watclieth, 
and  keepetli  his  garments,  lest  he  ^^'alk  naked,  and 
they  see  his  shame."  Rev.  xvi:15.  '^  ]]ehold,  I 
come  qnickly:  blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  say- 
ings of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."  Kev.  xxii:7. 
"Behold,  I  come  qnickly;  and  my  reward  is  with 
me,  to  give  every  man  according  as  his  work  shall 
be."  Kev.  xxii:12.  "Snrely  I  come  qnickly; 
amen.     Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesns."    Bev.  xxii:20. 

From  this  it  is  plain  to  the  nnprejndiced  reader 
of  the  Bible,  that  Christ,  and  after  Him  the  Holy 
Spirit,  songht  to  make  the  impression  that  the 
second  advent  might  occnr  during  the  generation 
which  immediately  followed  the  death  and  resnr- 
rection  of  the  Savionr.  It  is  needless  to  say  that 
no  deception  was  intended  or  practiced,  for  apart 
from  the  fact  that  sncli  a  tlionght  wonld  be  blas- 
phemy, we  mnst  remember  that  Jesns  Himself 
tells  ns,  "  Of  that  day  and  honr  knoweth  no  man, 
no,  not  the  angels  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the 
Son,  but  the  Father"  Mark,  xiii:32.  As  Dr. 
Joseph  Addison  Alexander  trnly  remarks,  "That 
sncli  a  declaration  shonld  l)e  made  at  all,  is  wonder- 
ful enough,  l)nt  scarcely  credible  on  any  supposi- 
tion, or  in  any  sense,  if  made  in  reference  to  the 
date  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem." 

To  this  it  may  be  added  that  such  a  declaration 
could  not  be  made  in  any  other  than  the  gospel 
according  to  Mark,  wdiere  the  purpose  of  the  Spirit 
is  to  descril)e  the  Son  of  God  as  tlie  obedient  serv- 
ant; and  "the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  Lord 
doeth."  Jno.  xv:13.  It  is  not  a  denial  of  our 
Lord's  divine  ominiscience,  but  simply  an  assertion 
that  in  the  economy  of  human  redemption  it  was 


b4  TILL    HE    COME. 


not  for  Him  "to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons, 
which  the  Father  hath  appointed  by  His  own  au- 
thority." Acts  i:7.  Jesus  knew  that  He  will  come 
again,  and  often  spoke  of  His  second  advent,  but  it 
did  not  fail  to  His  office  as  Son  to  determine  the 
date  of  His  return,  and  hence  He  could  hold  it  up 
before  His  followers  as  the  object  of  constant  ex- 
pectation and  desire. 

In  the  second  place  we  are  not  competent  to 
understand  what  is  meant  by  "quickly"  from  the 
heavenly  standpoint  of  view.  There  is  "no  night 
there,"  Rev.  xxii:5;  no  revolution  of  the  earth  upon 
its  axis,  no  dragging  of  wearisome  hours,  but  ever- 
lasting bliss  and  glory  in  the  presence  of  Him 
with  whom  "  a  thousand  years  as  one  day  "  pass  in 
perfect  peace.  2  Pet.  iii:8.  Hence  as  time  is  counted 
in  the  bright  skies,  two  days  have  not  yet  gone  by 
since  Jesus  ascended  from  the  mount  of  Olives. 

In  tlie  third  place,  the  church  is  presented  in  the 
New  Testament,  not  as  detached  particles  of  sand, 
but  as  a  unit,  "  and  every  one  members  one  of  an- 
other." Rom.  xii:b.  When  it  is  a  question  of 
life  she  is  called  the  body  of  Christ,  when  it  is  a 
question  of  love  she  is  the  bride  of  Christ.  Con- 
sidered as  an  organism  or  person,  the  measure  of 
tlie  nearness  which  the  second  advent  has  to  one 
meml)er  is  the  measure  of  its  nearness  to  all  the 
meml)ers,  and  the  first  believers  are  no  less  con- 
cerned than  the  last  in  tlie  blessedness  of  His  per- 
sonal return.  The  body  will  not  be  complete,  nor 
will  the  bride  be  perfectly  builded  from  the 
wounded  side  of  the  second  Adam,  nor  will  the 
deep  slumber  of  the  grave  be  broken,  until  He 
comes  agaiJi 


HIS    COMING    MAY    BE    NEAR.  35 

In  the  fourth  place,  the  Redeemer's  second  ap- 
pearing is  "  z^A^^  hope  set  before  iis,"  Ileb.  vi:18; 
in  the  language  of  Dr.  David  Brown,  ''THE 
YERY  POLE-STAR  OF  THE  CHURCH." 
The  object  of  hope  to  one  is  the  object  of  hope  to 
all,  or  the  unity  of  the  church  is  destroyed,  and  it 
could  no  longer  be  true  that  "  there  is  one  body, 
and  one  spirit,  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of 
your  calling,  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  one 
God  and  Father  of  alb"  Eph.  iv:4-6.  Hence  it 
was  unavoidable,  from  this  unity,  that  the  early 
Christians  also  should  be  incited  to  fidelity  by  a 
hope  that  is  common  to  tlie  entire  church. 

In  the  fifth  place,  if  our  Lord  referred  to  His 
second  coming  at  all,  it  may  be  said  reverently  that 
He  could  not  have  spoken  of  it  otherwise  than  He 
did  without  defeating  the  end  for  which  He  pro- 
claimed it  to  the  apostles.  Archbishop  Trench 
has  well  remarked,  "It  is  not  that  He  desires  each 
succeeding  generation  to  believe  that  He  will  cer- 
tainly return  in  their  time,  for  He  does  not  desire 
our  faith  and  our  practice  to  be  founded  on  an 
error,  as,  in  that  case,  the  faith  and  practice  of  all 
generations  except  the  last  would  be.  But  it  is  a 
necessary  element  of  the  doctrine  concerning  the 
second  coming  of  Christy  that  it  should  he  jpossible 
at  any  time^  that  no  generation  should  consider  it 
improhahle  in  theirsP  Rev.  John  Ker,  D.  D., 
also  says,  "It  is  in  the  New  Testament  the  great 
event  that  towers  above  every  other.  The  heaven 
that  gives  back  Christ  gives  back  all  that  we 
have  loved  and  lost,  solves  all  doul)ts,  and  ends  all 
■^oiTOws.  His  coming  hjoks  in  u])on  tlie  wliole 
life  of  the  church,  as  a  lofty  mountain  peak  looks 


86  TILL    HE   COME. 


in  upon  every  little  valley  and  sequestered  house 
around  its  base,  and  belongs  to  them  all  alike. 
Every  generation  lies  under  the  shadow  of  it." 

It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  to  find  Jesus  Christ 
and  the  Spirit  teaching  the  early  disciples  to  look 
for  the  second  advent  of  our  Lord,  nor  is  it  strange 
to  find  the  apostles  in  their  inspired  writings  ex- 
pressing the  hope  that  He  might  return  in  their 
day.  The  fact  is  that  there  is  no  predicted  event 
between  this  passing  moment  and  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  for  His  saints,  although  prophecies  re- 
main to  be  fulfilled  between  the  present  hour  and 
the  appearing  of  the  Lord  with  His  saints.  The 
first  Christians  were  precisely  right,  as  we  are,  in 
maintaining  an  attitude  of  constant  looking  for 
Him,  without  having  their  minds  diverted  by  cur- 
rent events.  On  the  first  day  of  the  week  they 
met  to  ''show  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come."  1 
Cor.  xi:26.  It  was  not  revealed  to  them  when  He 
will  come  back,  but  it  was  revealed  that  He  desired 
them  to  be  in  a  posture  of  constant  waiting  and 
watching  for  Himself.  Wlietlier  Ave  can  under- 
stand the  reasonableness  of  His  will  or  not,  it  is 
wise  to  heed  His  commancL  "Behold,  to  obey  is 
better  than  to  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken,  tlmn  the 
fat  of  rams."  1  Sam.  xv:22.  An  order  of  godly 
monks,  known  as  Sleepless  Ones,  was  founded  on 
the  Bosphorus  A.  D.  430.  They  numbered  300, 
and  were  divided  into  six  choirs,  so  that  day  and 
night  tlieir  liymns  ascended  to  our  risen  Lord. 
They  sang  and  watched  continually  for  the  coming 
of  the  Bridegroom.  But  at  last  silence  and  sleep 
succeeded  souo^  and  vi^i lance,  and  spiritual  life  was 
dwarfed  in  Europe  for  a  thousand  years. 


HIS    COMING    MAY    BE    NEAR.  37 


'  How  long,  Oh  Lord  our  Saviour, 
Wilt  thou  remain  away? 
Some  hearts  are  growing  weary, 
For  Thy  so  long  delay. 
Oh,  when  shall  come  the  moment, 
When,  brighter  far  than  morn, 
The  sunlight  of  thy  glory 
Shall  on  Thy  people  dawn? 

How  long.  Oh  heavenly  BridegrooiD 

How  long  dost  thou  delay? 

And  yet,  how  few  are  grieving, 

That  Thou  dost  absent'stay! 

Thy  very  bride  her  portion 

And  calling  hath  forgot. 

And  seeks  for  ease  and  pleasure, 

AVhere  Thou,  her  Lord,  art  not. 

Awake  Thy  slumbering  virgins. 
Send  forth  the  solemn  cry. 
Let  all  Thy  saints  repeat  it — 
The  Bridegroom  draweth  nigh. 
Let  all  our  lamps  be  burning. 
Our  loins  well-girded  be. 
Each  eager  heart  expecting 
With  joy  Thy  face  to  see." 


38  TILL    HE    (^OME. 


CHAPTER  lY. 

THE    PEESENT   AGE. 

THE  word  for  age  is  usually  and  improperly 
translated  world  in  our  authorized  version. 
The  following  are  examples  "  The  harvest  is  the 
end  of  the  age,"  Matt.  xiii:39;  "  Lo,  I  am  with 
you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  age,"  Matt. 
xxviii:20;  "Be  not  conformed  to  this  age,"  Rom. 
xii:2:     "The   srod  of   this  asre  hath   blinded  the 


g^ 


minds  of  them  which  believe  not,"  2  Cor.  iv:4; 
Christ  "  gave  Himself  for  our  sins,  that  He  might 
deliver  us  from  this  present  evil  age,"  Gal.  i:4. 
God  "  set  Him  at  His  own  right  hand  in  the 
heavenlies,  far  above  all  principality,  and  power, 
and  might,  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is 
named,  not  only  in  this  age,  but  also  in  that  which 
is  to  come."  Eph.  i:20,  21;  "The  rulers  of  the 
darkness  of  this  age,"  Eph.  vi:12;  "Having  loved 
this  present  age,"  2  Tim.  iv:10;  "The  powers  of 
the  age  to  come,"  Heb   vi:5. 

Bagster's  Analytical  Lexicon  gives  as  the  defini- 
tion of  the  word,  "  a  period  of  time  of  significant 
character;  life,  an  era;  an  age;  hence,  a  state  of 
things  marking  an  age  or  era;  the  present  order  of 
nature;  the  natural  condition  of  man,  the  world." 
It  stands,  of  course,  in  contrast  with  the  age  to 
co:;ie,  and  in  the  New  Testament  the  present 
period  of  time  has  a  significant  character  of  evil, 
of  self  denial,  sorrow,  suffering,  trial  for  the  people 


THE    PRESENT    A(;E.  81) 


of  God,  until  that  age^  to  come  shall  burst  upon 
their  gladdened  view.  There  is  not  even  a  hint 
from  the  tirst  of  Matthew  to  the  last  of  Revelation 
that  this  significant  character  will  be  changed  dur- 
ing the  entire  age  in  which  we  live,  or  until  the 
second  advent  of  Christ. 

Jesus  tells  us  that  the  tares  and  the  wheat 
"grow^  together  until  the  harvest,"  and  as  already 
seen,  "  the  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  age."  Matt. 
xiii:30,  39.  "  He  said  to  them  all.  If  any  man 
will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take 
up  his  cross  daily,  and  follow  me."  Lu.  ix:23. 
"  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  hated  me 
before  it  hated  you.  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the 
world  would  love  his  own;  but  because  ye  are  not 
of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the 
world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you.  Kemember 
the  word  that  I  said  unto  you.  The  servant  is  not 
greater  than  his  Lord.  If  they  have  persecuted 
me,  they  will  also  persecute  you ;  if  they  have  kept 
my  saying,  they  will  keep  your's  also."  Jno.  xv: 
18-20.  ''  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation." 
Jno.  xvi:33.  "The  world  hath  hated  them,  be- 
cause they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not 
of  the  world."  Jno.  xvii:14.  Where  is  there  an 
intimation  in  the  teachings  of  our  Lord  that  this 
state  of  things  will  be  changed,  and  that  His  fol- 
lowers will  become  so  numerous  and  victorious, 
they  shall  no  longer  bear  the  cross,  nor  feel  the 
hard  pressure  of  adverse  circumstances? 

But  do  the  apostles  cheer  us  with  the  hope  of  a 
better  time  during  the  present  age?  Nay,  they 
remind  us  "  that  we  must  throuorh  much  tribula- 
tion  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  Acts  xiv:22; 


40  TILL    HE    f'OME. 


that  we  are  "heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with 
Christ;  if  so  be  that  we  snffer  with  Him,  that  we 
may  be  also  glorihed  together,"  Rom.  viii:17;  that 
"  unto  you  it  is  given  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not 
only  to  believe  on  Him,  but  also  to  suffer  for  His 
sake,"  Phil.  i:29;  that  "if  we  suffer,  we  shall  also 
reign  with  Him,"  2  Tim.  ii:12;  "Yea,  and  all  that 
will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  perse- 
cution; but  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse 
and  worse,  deceiving,  and  being  deceived,"  2  Tim. 
iii:12,  13;  "and  the  whole  world  lietli  in  the 
wicked  one,"  1  Jno.  v:19.  Can  a  line  be  pointed 
out  in  any  of  the  epistles  which  gives  promise  of  a 
day  when  the  saints  must  no  more  through  much 
tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  when 
the  godly  are  no  mare  to  suffer  persecution,  when 
the  world  is  no  more  to  lie  in  the  wicked  one?  It 
may  be  said  that  the  church  does  not  suffer  perse- 
cution now — but  why?  Alas!  because  the  church 
has  been  converted  to  the  world,  and  the  world 
does  not  persecute  its  own.  But  let  the  church  be 
separate  from  the  world,  according  to  our  Lord's 
command  and  prayer,  and  it  would  soon  be  seen 
that  the  offence  of  the  cross  has  not  ceased.  - 

Even  if  it  be  true  that  the  church  will  extend 
her  influence,  and  establish  institutions  of  learn- 
ing, and  uplift  the  race  to  a  loftier  plane  of  liberty 
aiul  intelligence  and  morality  by  the  power  of 
Christian  civilization,  what  sort  of  a  millenium 
would  it  be?  *  Out  of  the  present  population  of  the 
earth  a  babe  is  born  into  the  world  every  second, 
nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  times  in  a  thousand 
amid  the  fi'itrhtful  a":onies  of  the  mothers;  and  at 
evei-y  swing  of  the  pendulum  a  human  being  dies, 


THE    l*RKSp]Nr    AUK 


41 


nine  linndred  and  ninety-nine  times  in  a  tlionsand 
amid  pain  and  snffering  nnntterable.  It  is  esti- 
mated that  8(3,400  babes,  little  children,  youth, 
persons  in  the  midst  of  their  brief  existence,  and 
in  old  age,  liave  tlie  life  choked  out  of  them  every 
day  by  the  ruffian  hand  of  violence,  or  by  some  hor- 
rible malady,  32,000,000  being  tortured  and  slaught- 
ered every  year;  and  no  increase  of  the  church  can 
avert  the  (h'eadful  ravages  of  physical  disorder  and 
mental  distress.  Nay,  since  the  time'Jesus  was  nailed 
to  the  cross,  millions  of  His  followers  have  been 
called  to  face  death  in  its  most  horrible  form,  and 
to-day  tens  of  thousands  of  the  most  saintly  women 
are  quiveriug  in  the  ruffian  grasp  of  disease,  or 
weeping  in  desolated  homes  over  the  burial  of  all 
earthly  Joy. 

Even  those  who  argue  most  earnestly,  that  Christ 
took  our  sicknesses  in  the  same  sense  in  which  He 
took  our  sins,  and  who  assert  most  confidently  that 
sickness  may  be  healed  in  answer  to  faith,  sicken 
and  die  like  the  rest,  and  find  out  that  during  the 
present  age  "it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to 
die."  Heb.  ix:28.  It  would  be  amusing,  if  it  were 
not  so  sad,  to  see  blear-eyed,  cadaverous,  lop-sided 
men  and  women  running  around  the  country, 
and  talking  of  the  blessedness  of  being  kept  by 
Faith  in  perfect  soundness  of  body.  They  too 
become  bald,  and  gray  headed,  and  wrinkled,  and 
infirm,  and  lose  their  teeth,  and  have  headaches 
and  heartaches,  and  go  on  tottering  feet  to  the 
grave,  and  breathe  the  prayer  of  Moses,  the  man  of 
God,  "Our  years  we  pass  off  like  a  sigh.  Three- 
score and  ten  are  the  years  of  our  life,  or,  if  our 
strength  endure,  they  may  be  fourscore  years;    yet 


42  TILL    HE    COME. 

at  their  best  they  are  toil  and  emptiness;    for  they 
pass  swiftly,  and  we  fly  away."  Ps.  xc:10. 

More  than  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  the  Holy 
Ghost  testified,  "the  whole  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  together  in  pain  until  now."  Rom. 
viii:22,  and  it  is  so  still.  According  to  the  report 
of  the  Signal  Service  Department  of  the  Govern- 
ment, during  the  eighteen  years  preceding  1891, 
there  were  2,000  cyclones  or  tornadoes  in  the 
United  States,  killing  1,826  men,  women  and  chil- 
dren, and  destroying  property  to  the  amount  of 
$34,894,700,  and  it  is  admitted  tliat  many  similar 
storms  were  not  reported.  The  air  is  heavy 
with  the  germs  of  pestilence.  Each  continent, 
nay,  each  state,  is  an  Aceldema,  a  field  of 
blood,  covered  with  human  bodies  slain  in  battle. 
Crime  and  cruelty  and  vice  that  might  shame  the 
wild  beasts,  blacken  all  pages  of  the  world's  history. 
The  sea  roars  in  rebellion  and  wrath  ao-ainst  tlie 
wickedness  of  man.  The  earth  trembles  and  quakes 
at  his  audacity.  The  soil  yields  a  reluctant  return 
to  his  unceasincT  toil  The  lower  animals  wao-e 
ferocious  war  with  one  another;  and  look  where  we 
may,  we  behold  confusion,  disorder  and  unrest, 
every  note  of  nature  sounding  forth  in  the  *  minor 
key,  as  the  musicians  tell  us,  its  sad  complaint. 

"  Six  thousand  years  of  sorrow  have  welhiigh 
Fultilled  their  tardy  and  disastrous  course 
Over  a  sinful  world;  and  what  remains 
Of  this  tempestuous  state  of  human  things 
Is  merely  as  the  working  of  the  sea 
Before  a  calm  that  rocks  itself  to  rest. 

The   world  appears 

To  toll  the  death-bell  of  its  own  decease, 
And  by  the  voice  of  all  its  elements 
To  preach  the  general  doom!" 


THE   i'KKsi;.\'i'   A(;i': 


|:^ 


Contrast  this  Avitli  the  time  when  ''they  shall 
beat  their  swords  into  plowshares,  and  their  spears 
into  priming-hooks;  nation  shall  not  lift  np  sword 
against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any 
more."  Isa.  ii:4;  when  the  wolf  also  shall  dwell 
with  the  laml),  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  Avith 
the  kid ;  and  the  calf  and  the  young  lion,  and  the 
fatlinor  tOD-ether;  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them." 
Isa.  xi:6;  when  "the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I 
am  sick,"  Isa.  xxxiii:24;  when ''the  desert  shall  re- 
joice and  blossom  as  the  rose,"  Isa.  xxxv:l;  when 
God  shall  say,  "as  the  days  of  a  tree  are  the  days 
of  my  people,  and  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  the 
work  of  their  hands;  they  shall  not  labor  in  vain, 
nor  bring  forth  for  trouble."  Isa.  lxv:22,  23.  It 
is  obvious  that  the  present  age  is  under  "  the  age 
rulers  of  this  darkness."  Eph.  vi:12. 

But   may    not    the   glowing   predictions,    just 

quoted,    be  fulfilled  in   the   gradual    enlargement 

and  extension  of  the  church?     Impossible,  because 

of  the  reply  our  Lord  gave  to  the  inquiry   of    His 

apostles,  "  what  shall  be  the  sign  of   thy   coming, 

and  of  the  end  of   the   age?"     Matt.  xxiv:3.     He 

ishows  that  the  entire  interval,  up  to    the    time    of 

His  comincr,  will  be  filled  with  wars,   and    rumors 

^.         .  .  .  . 

of  wars,  nation  rising  against  nation,  and  kingdom 

against  kingdom;  "and  there  shall  be  famines, 
and  pestilences,  and  earthquakes  in  divers  places. 
All  these  are  the  beginning  of  travailing  pangs," 
which  grow  more  and  more  severe,  until  immedi- 
ately after  an  unparalelled  tribulation,  "  such  as 
was  not  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,"  they 
shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  comincr  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory.  Matt.  xxiv:4-30. 


44  TILL    HE    (  OME. 


Impossible  again,  because  the  Holy  Ghost,  in 
correcting  the  error  of  the  Thessalonians  who 
feared  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  had  already  come, 
distinctly  says  "  It  will  not  be,  except  the  falling 
aAvay  come  first,  and  the  man  of  sin  be  revealed, 
the  son  of  perdition,  he  that  opposeth  and  exalteth 
himself  against  all  that  is  called  God  or  that  is 
worshipped;  so  that  he  sittethinthe  temple  of  God, 
setting  himself  forth  as  God.  Eemember  ye  not 
that  when  I  was  yet  with  yon,  I  told  you  these 
things?  And  now  ye  know  that  which  restraineth, 
to  the  end  that  he  may  l)e  revealed  in  his  own 
season?  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth 
already  work;  only  there  is  one  that  restraineth 
now,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  And  then 
shall  be  revealed  the  lawless  one,  whom  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  slay  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth,  and 
bring  to  naught  by  the  manifestation  of  His  com- 
ing "  or  presence,  as  the  word  is  always  rendered 
when  it  refers  to  a  person.     2  Thess.  ii:3-8. 

The  mystery  of  lawlessness  was  working  in 
-Paul's  day,  only  there  was  some  power  hindering 
or  restraining  its  outward  display.  But  when  that 
hindering  or  restraining  power,  whatever  it  may 
be,  is  taken  out  of  the  way,  what  then?  Shall  the 
church  enter  upon  its  career  of  peace  and  purity 
and  prosperity,  and  the  gospel  lead  the  nations  to 
bow  to  its  beneficent  sway?  ^ay,  there  shall  be 
revealed  the  lawless  one,  who  is  to  be  destroyed  by 
the  appearing,  as  the  word  is  always  rendered 
elsewhere,  of  our  Lord'c  personal  presence.  It  is 
evident,  therefore,  that  between  the  departure  and 
return  of  Christ  there  is  no  place  for  a  spiritual  mil- 
lennium, or  for  the  universal  reign  of  righteousness. 


THE    TRESENT    A(;E.  45 

"  Thou  who  from  Olive's  brow  did'st  rise 
In  glorious  triumph  to  the  skies, 
Before  the  rapt  disciples'  eyes — 

Lord  Jesus,  ([uickly  come! 
For  Thy  appearance  all  things  pray, 
All  nature  sighs  at  Thy  delay, 
Thy  people  cry,    no  longer  stay. 
Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come! 

Hear  Thou  the  whole  creation's  groan, 
The  burdened  creatures'   plaintive  moan, 
The  cry  of  deserts  wild  and  lone — 

Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come! 
See  signals  of  distress  imfurled, 
By  states  on  stormy  billows  hurled, 
Thou  Pole-star  of  a  shipwrecked  world. 

Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come! 

Hush  the  fierce  blast  of  war's  alarms. 
The  tocsin's  toll,  the  clash  of  arms. 
Incarnate  Love,  exert  Thy  charms. 

Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come! 
Walk  once  again  upon  the  face 
Of  this  sad  earth's  tempestuous  seas. 
And  still  the  waves,  O  Prince  of  Peace, 

Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come ! 

Lo,  Thy  fair  Bride,  with  garments  torn. 
Of  hej  ce^lestial  radiance  shorn, 
Upturns  her  face  with  watching  w^orn — 

Lord  Jesus  quickly  come! 
Her  trickling  tears,  her  piteous  cries, 
Her  struggles,  fears  and  agonies 
Appeal  to  Thy  deep  sympathies — 

Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come ! 

Come,  with  Thy  beauteous  diadem. 
Come,  with  embattled  Cherubim, 
Come,  with  the  shout  of  Seraphim, 

Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come! 
Come,  on  Thy  seat  of  radiant  cloud, 
Come,  with  the  Archangel's  trumpet  loud, 
Come,  Saviour,  let  the  hea^'ens  be  bowed. 

Lord  Jesus,  quickly  come!  " 


46 


TILL    HE    COME. 


CHAPTER  Y. 

THE  END  OF  THE  AGE. 

IF  righteousness  is  to  prevail  during  the  present 
age,  or  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  it  is  re- 
markable that  He  said  nothing  ribout  it  in  the 
long  Olivet  discourse,  containing  97  verses,  Matt, 
xxiv,  XXV.  On  the  other  hand  He  plainly  says, 
"  Then  shall  many  stumble,  and  sliall  betray  one 
another,  and  shall  hate  one  another.  And  many 
false  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shall  deceive  many. 
And  because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of 
many  shall  wax  cold.  But  he  that  shall  endure 
unto  the  end,  the  same  sliall  be  saved.  And  this 
gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the 
world  for  a  witness  unto  all  nations;  and  then 
shall  the  end  come."  There  is  not  a  line  in  the 
New  Testament  which  shows  that  the  gospel  is  to 
be  preached  for  the  conversion  of  all  nations;  and 
although  a  large  ecclesiastical  body  recently  re- 
ceived with  cheers  a  sneer  at  the  doctrine  tliat  it  is 
to  be  proclaimed  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness 
unto  all  nations,  it  was  a  sneer  at  the  words  of  oui* 
Lord. 

So  far  as  it  is  from  being  true  that  light  breaks 
in  amid  the  stumbling,  the  betrayal  of  one  another, 
the  mutual  hatred,  tlie  rise  of  false  prophets,  the 
deception  of  many,  tlie  abounding  ot  iniquity,  the 
waxing  cold  of  love,  tilings  go  from  bad  to  worse 
until  ''  there  shall  be   great   tribulation,    such    as 


THE    END    OF    THE    AGE.  47 

was,  not  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this 
time,  nor  ever  shall  he."  What  then?  A  period 
of  great  spiritual  power  and  progress  and  prosper- 
ity? ''IMMEDIATELY  after  the  tribulation  of 
those  days  shall  the  Son  be  darkened,  and  the  moon 
shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars  shall  fall 
from  heaven,  and  the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall 
be  shaken;  and  then  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the 
Son  of  Man  in  heaven;  and  then  shall  all  the  tribes 
of  the  earth  mourn,  and  they  tliall  see  the  Son  of 
Man  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power 
and  great  glory.  And  He  shall  send  His  angels 
with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  they  shall 
gather  together  His  elect  from  the  four  winds,  from 
oue  end  of  heaven  to  the  other."  The  word  trans- 
lated immediately  is  so  rendered  thirty  three  times, 
straighhray  thirty  two  times,  and  forthwith  seven 
times.  The  end  of  the  age  shall  be  reached,  there- 
fore, through  terrible  judgments,  not  through  the 
triumphs  of  the  church. 

''  As  the  days  of  JN"oe  were,  so  shall  also  the 
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  be.  For  as  in  the  days 
that  were  before  the  flood,  they  were  eating  and 
drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  until 
the  day  that  Xoe  entered  into  the  ark,  and  knew 
not  until  the  flood  came,  and  took  them  all  away ; 
so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  be. 
Then  shall  two  be  in  the  fleld;  the  one  shall  be 
taken,  and  the  other  left.  Two  women  shall  be 
grinding  at  the  mill;  the  one  shall  l)e  taken,  and 
the  other  left.  Watch  therefore:  for  ye  know  not 
what  hour  your  Lord  doth  come.  Matt.  xxiv:37-42. 
The  one  shall  be  taken  to  live  forever  with  the 
Lord,  and  the  other  left  to  judgment. 


48 


TILL    HE    COME. 


"  There  shall  come  a  night  of  such  wild  affright, 

As  none  beside  shall  know; 
When  the  heaven  shall  shake,  and  the  wide  earth  quake 

In  its  last  and  deepest  woe. 

What  horrors  shall  roll  over  the  godless  soul, 

Waked  from  its  death-like  sleep; 
Of  all  hope  bereft,  and  to  Judgment  left, 

Forever  to  wail  and  weep. 

O  worldling,  give  ear,  while  the  saints  are  near! 

Soon  must  the  tie  be  riven; 
And  men,  side  by  side,  God's  hand  shall  divide; 

As  far  as  hell's  depths  from  heaven. 

Some  husband,  whose  head  was  laid  on  his  bed, 

Throbbing  with  mad  excess, 
Awakes  from  that  dream,  b}'  the  lightning'  gleam, 

Alone  in  his  last  distress. 

For  the  patient  wife,  who  through  each  day's  life 

Watched  and  wept  for  his  soul, 
Is  taken  awa}^  and  no  more  shall  pray — 

For  the  judgment  thunders  roll. 

The  children  of  day  are  summoned  away; 

Left  are  the  children  of  night — 
Sealed  is  their  doom,  for  there's  no  more  room; 

Filled  are  the  mansions  of  light." 

'^Then,"^ — emphatic,  as  Dean  Alford  says,  ''viz, 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  His  personal  reign  " — 
"  Then  shall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  nnto 
ten  virgins,  which  took  their  lamps,  and  went  forth 
to  meet  the  bridegroom."  Dr.  David  Brown  says, 
"  2'heu — at  the  time  referred  to  at  the  close  of  tlie 
preceding  chapter,  the  time  of  the  Lord's  Second 
Coming  to  reward  His  faithful  servants  and  to 
take  vengeance  on  the  faithless;"  and  ''  so  essential 
a  featnre  of  the  Christian  character,  according  to 
the  New  Testament,  is  looking  for  Christ's  Second 
Appearing,  that  both  real  and  apparent  disciples 
are  here  described  as  going  forth  to   meet   Him.'' 


THE    END    OF    THE    AGE.  49 

No  doubt  all  expositors  and  Cliristians  agree  tliat 
the  ten  virgins  represent  the  professed  followers  of 
Christ:  and  hence  it  is  important  to  notice  that 
«^  while  the  Bridegroom  tarried  they  all  nodded 
and  slept."  It  is  only  when  the  midnight  cry  is 
heard,  "Behold  the  Bridegroom  cometh,"  they 
awake.  The  end,  therefore  will  not  find  the  pro- 
fessing church  watching  and  working. 

On  another  occasion  our  Lord  said,  "As  it  w^as 
in  the  days  of  Noe,  so  shall  it  be  also  in  the  days 
of  the  Son  of  Man.  Tliey  did  eat,  they  drank, 
they  married  wives,  they  were  given  in  marriage, 
until  the  day  Noe  entered  into  the  ark,  and  the 
flood  came,  and  destroyed  them  all.  Likewise  also 
as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot;  they  did  eat,  they 
drank,  they  bought,  they  sold,  they  planted,  they 
builded;  but  the  same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of 
Sodom,  it  rained  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven, 
and  destroyed  them  all.  Even  thus  shall  it  be  in 
the  day  when  the  Son  of  Man  is  revealed."  There 
is  no  harm,  in  itself  considered,  in  that  which  the 
people  at  large  are  represented  as  doing,  nothing 
inconsistent  with  culture,  the  advance  of  art,  the 
march  of  civilization,  or  the  accumulation  of 
wealth.  But  there  may  be  utter  ungodliness. 
Look  at  Berlin,  Paris  and  all  the  cities  of  Christen- 
dom. "  Nevertheless,  when  the  Son  of  Man  com- 
eth, shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth?"  Of  course 
He  will  find  faitli  on  the  earth,  when  He  calls  His 
waiting  ones  to  meet  Him  in  the  air;  but  when  He 
comes  with  them,  "  shall  He  find  faith  on  the 
earth  T'  La.  xviii:8. 

It  is  the  popular  belief,  even  in  the  church,  that 
the  world  is  moving  on  to  a  splendid  future,    and 


50  TILL    HE    COME. 


that  knowiedge,  freedom  and  social  order  will  mark 
the  close  of  the  present  age.  Bnt  Jesns  says  that 
at  the  winding  np  there  shall  be  "npon  the  earth 
distress  of  nations,  with  perplexity;  the  sea  and 
the  waves  roaring;  men's  hearts  failing  them  for 
fear,  and  for  looking  after  those  things  which  are 
coming  on  the  earth ;  for  the  powers  of  heaven 
shall  be  shaken.  And  then  shall  they  see  the  Son 
of  Man  coming  in  a  clond  with  power  and  great 
glory."  Hence  He  adds  the  admonition,  "Take 
heed  to  yonrselves,  lest  at  any  time  yonr  hearts  be 
overcharged  with  snrfeiting,  and  drnnkenness,  and 
cares  of  this  life,  and  so  that  day  come  npon  yon 
unawares.  For  as  ^  snare  |  like  that  which  catches 
the  unwary  bird]  shall  it  come  on  all  them  that 
dwell  [sitting,  settled  down]  on  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth.  Watch  ye  therefore,  and  pray  always, 
that  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  all 
these  things  that  shall  come  to  pass,  and  to  stand 
before  the  Son  of  Man."  Ln.  xxi:25-36.  What 
He  said  in  the  same  connection  about  Jeruselem 
being  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  has  been  lit- 
erally f uliilled,  despite  the  efforts  of  Julian  the 
Apostate,  and  of  the  Crusaders;  why  should  not 
His  prediction  concerning  the  condition  of  the 
world  at  the  second  advent  be  also  literally  ful- 
filled? It  would  be  an  insult  to  the  understanding 
of  the  reader  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  here  refers 
to  anything  but  His  personal  coming  at  the  end  of 
the  age. 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  there  is  nothing  in  the 
epistles  to  contradict  this  plain  testimony.  "  This 
know  also,  that  in  the  last  days  perilous  [or  diffi- 
cult I  times  sli:dl  come.     For  men    shall   be    lovers 


THE    END    OF    THE    AGE.  51 

of  their  own  selves,  covetous,  boasters,  proud,  blas- 
phemers, disobedient  to  parents,  unthankful,  unho- 
ly, without  natural  affection,  truce-breakers,  false- 
accusers,  incontinent,  tierce,  despisers  of  those  that 
are  good,  traitors,  heady,  high-minded,  lovers  of 
pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God ;  having  a  form 
of  godliness,  but  denying  tlie  power  thereof,"  2 
Tim.  iii:l-5.  If  such  will  be  the  condition  of 
those  wlio  profess  godliness,  what  must  be  the  state 
of  those  who  make  no  profession?  Remember 
that  this  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  description  of  the  last 
days.  "  Knowing  this  tirst,"  for  it  is  important 
to  know  it,  "  that  there  sliall  come  in  the  last  days 
scoffers,  walking  after  tlieir  own  lusts,  and  saying, 
where  is  the  promise  of  His  coming?  for  since  the 
fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were 
from  the  beg-innino;  of  the  creation,"  2  Pet.  iii:3, 
4.  The  argument  of  the  scoffers  is  based  upon 
the  stability  of  nature's  laws;  and  it  is  a  suggestive 
fact  that  in  our  own  day  more  and  more  is  nature, 
an  inanimate  and  unconscious  tiling,  pushed  to 
the  foreground,  and  more  and  more  is  God  pushed 
to  the  background,  of  man's  contemplation,^.  "As 
the  lio-htninor  cometh  out  of  the  east,  and  shineth 
even  unto  the  west;  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  Man  be,"  Matt.  xxiv:27;  and  when  that 
lightning's  flash  is  seen,  causing  the  solid  pillars 
of  the  globe  to  shake  and  tremble,  the  scoffs  of  the 
scientists  shall  suddenly  be  changed  into  shrieks 
of  terror;  but  this  shall  l)e  in  the  last  days. 

"Though  not  quite  a  millenarian/'  wrote  Dr. 
James  W.  Alexander  of  Xew  York,  '•  I  was  struck 
with  these  words  of  Chalmers  to  Eickersteth: 
"  Without  slackino;  in  the    least  onr    obligation  to 


52  TILL    HE    COME. 


keep  forward  this  great  [missionary]  cause,  I  look 
for  its  conclusive  establishment  through  a  widen- 
ing passage  of  desolating  judgments,  with  the  utter 
demolition  of  our  present  civil  and  ecclesiastical 
structures."  Just  as  the  Holy  Ghost  testifies  of 
Israel,  ''  the  end  thereof  shall  be  with  a  flood,  and 
unto  the  end  of  the  war  desolations  are  deter- 
mined," or  as  it  is  in  the  margin,  "it  shall  De  cut 
off  by  desolations,"  Dan.  ix:26,  even  so  the  same 
Spirit  witnesses  to  the  ruin  of  Christendom. 
"Behold  therfore  the  goodness  and  severity  of 
God ;  on  them  which  fell,  severity ;  but  toward  thee, 
goodness,  if  thou  continue  in  His  goodness;  other- 
wise tliou  shalt  be  cut  off."  Rom.  xi:22.  That  the 
professing  chureli  has  not  continued  in  the  good- 
ness of  God,  alas !  the  most  cursory  glance  will 
show,  and  hence  she  is  to  be  set  aside  as  Israel 
was,  and  disowned  for  her  unfaithfulness. 

"Yet  once  again  Thy  sign  sliall  be  upon  the  heavens 

displayed, 
And  earth  and  it's  inhabitants  be  horribly  afraid; 
For  not  in  weakness  clad,  Thou  com'st,  our  woes,  our 

sins,  to  bear, 
But  girt  with  all  Thy  Father's  might,  His  vengeance  to 

declare. 

The  terrors  of  that  awful  day.  Oh,  who  can  understand? 
Or  who  abide  when  Thou  in  wrath  shall  lift  Thy  holy 

hand? 
The  earth  shall  quake,  the  sea  shall  roar,  the   sun   in 

heaven  grow  pale; 
But  Thou  hast  sworn,  and  wilt  not  change,  Thy  faithful 

shall  not  fail. 

Then  grant  us.  Saviour,  so  to  pass  our  time  in  watching 

here, 
That  when  upon  the  clouds  of  heaven  Thy  glory  shall 

appear, 
Uplifting  high  our  joyful  heads,  in  triumph  we  may  rise, 
And  enter,  with  Thine  angel  train,   Tliy  palace  in  the 

skies." 


PARABLES  OF  MATTHEW  XIII.  53 


CIIArTEli  YI. 

PARABLES  OF  MATTHEW  XIII. 

OUR  post-millennial  brethren  very  properly  in- 
sist that  these  parables  were  designed  to  set 
forth  the  state  of  things  during  the  present  age, 
or  up  to  the  time  of  Christ's  second  advent.  This 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  they  tell  us  the  parable 
of  the  Mustard  seed  exhibits  the  growth  of  the 
church  from  a  small  beginning,  "  the  least  of  all 
seeds,"  into  its  branching  glories  that  will  in  due 
time  afford  shade  and  shelter  for  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth.  They  also  inform  us  that  the  parable  of 
the  Leaven  indicates  the  spread  of  the  gospel  or  of 
Christianity  until  the  whole  world  shall  be  perme- 
ated with  the  benign  iniiuences  of  religion,  as  it 
is  called. 

But  surely  they  will  admit  that  no  interpreta- 
tion of  the  two  parables,  which  the  Saviour  did  not 
explain,  can  be  correct,  if  forced  to  teach  a  doctrine 
directly  opposed  to  the  two  that  Pie  did  expound. 
Thus  He  announces  in  the  parable  of  the  Sower 
that  ''the  seed  is  the  word  of  God."  One  part 
falls  upon  the  hard,  beaten  pathway  skirtino-  the 
field,  "  and  the  fowls  came  and  devoured  them  up," 
"the  wicked  one,"  Matt.  xiii:19,  "Satan,"  Mark 
iv:15,  "the  devil,"  Lu.  viii:12.  Another  part  falls 
on  a  thin  layer  of  soil  covering  a  rock,  and  being 
quickly  heated  the  seed  springs  up  immediately, 
but  having  no  depth  of  root,  it  as  soon  withers. 


54  TILL    HE    COME. 


Another  part  falls  among  thorns,  and  the  thorns 
spring  np,  and  choke  the  seed.  Another  part  falls 
into  good  gronnd,  but  brings  forth  variously,  some 
an  hundred  fold,  some  sixty  fold,  some  thirty  fold. 
Thus  does  onr  Lord  describe  the  different  effects 
of  scattering  the  word  of  God,  and  where  is  the 
intimation  that  the  time  is  coming  when  all  the 
seed,  or  the  larger  portion  of  it,  will  iind  good 
soil  and  bring  forth  an  abundant  harvest?  But  if 
the  parable  of  the  Mustard  Seed  and  of  the  Leaven 
denotes  the  outward  and  inward  expansion  of  the 
church  and  Christianity  until  universal  supremacy 
is  attained,  it  is  obvious  that  their  meaning  is  in 
flat  contradiction  of  the  testimony  given  in  the 
parable  of  the  Sower.  But  history  for  1,850  years 
confirms  the  truth  of  the  Lord's  statement  and 
gives  no  support  to  the  other  view.  Only  a  small 
part  of  the  seed  sown  has  become  fruitful.  There 
has  been  no  country,  no  county,  no  city,  no  com- 
munity, all  of  whose  inhabitants  have  received 
Christ  as  their  Saviour;  and  to-day  not  a  fourth 
even  of  those  who  belong  to  any  denomination  or 
particular  congregation  give  the  slightest  evidence 
of  possessing  real  spiritual  life.  Not  a  fourth  can 
be  found  to  attend  regularly  the  services  of 'God's 
house,  to  be  present  at  the  prayer-meeting,  to 
teach  in  the  Sunday  school,  to  be  separate  from 
the  world,  to  speak  a  word  for  Christ,  really  to  live 


The  second  parable  our  Lord  explained  is  that  of 
the  Tares  and  Wheat.  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
likened  unto  a  man  which  sowed  good  seed  in  his 
field;  but  while  men  slept,  his  enemy  came  and 
sowed  tares  among  the  wheat,"  the  tares  being  a 


PARABLES    OF    MATTHEW    XTII.  55 

bastard  wheat,  so  like  the  true  that  they  cannot  be 
distinguished  from  the  latter  except  by  their  emp- 
tiness. ''  He  tliat  soweth  the  aood  seed  is  the  Son 
of  Man;  the  field  is  the  world;  tlie  good  seed  are 
the  children  oi  the  kingrdom,  but  the  tares  are  the 
children  of  the  wicked  one;  the  enemy  that  sowed 
them  is  the  devil ;  the  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  age ; 
and  the  reapers  are  the  angels."  Dr.  David  Brown 
declares  that  the  design  of  the  parable  was  ''  to  set 
forth  the  mixed  character  of  the  visible  church  till 
Christ  come.  All  are  agreed  in  this.  But  the 
millennium  is  as  truly^  though  not  in  the  same 
degree^  a  mixed  state  of  the  visible  church  as  this 
is.  .  .  The  millennium  differs  in  nothing  worthy 
of  mention  in  the  pai :  ble  from  the  present  state  of 
the  church."     The  italics  are  his  own. 

Bub  how  does  this  comport  with  the  theory  that 
the  leaven  is  the  symbol  of  the  gospel  or  of  Chris- 
tianity, which  must  work  its  way  "  till  the  whole 
was  leavened"?  How  does  it  agree  with  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Holy  Ghost,  celebrating  the  reign  of 
the  coming  King,  "  that  in  His  days  shall  tlie 
righteous  nourish;  and  abundance  of  peace  so  long 
as  the  moon  endureth."  Ps.  lxxii:7;  "  they  shall  not 
hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain;  for  the 
earth  shall  be  full  of  the  kno^\  ledge  of  the  Lord,  as 
the  waters  cover  the  sea."  Isa.  xl:9;  "thy  people 
also  shall  be  all  righteous."  Isa.  lx:21;  "they  shall 
teach  no  more  every  man  his  neighbor,  and  every 
man  his  brother,  saying,  know  the  Lord;  for  they 
shall  all  know  me,  from  the  least  of  them  unto  the 
greatest  of  them,  saith  the  Lord."  Jer.  xxxi:34; 
"  for  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto  the 
going  down  of  the  same,  my  name  shall  be  great 


56  TILL    HE    COME. 


among  the  Gentiles;  and  in  every  place  incense 
shall  be  offered  nnto  my  name,  and  a  pnre  offer- 
ing; for  my  nameshall  be  great  among  the  heathen, 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts?"  Mai.  i:ll.  How  this 
state  of  things  can  be  made  to  harmonize  with  the 
present  state  of  things,  does  not  appear  clear  to  the 
ordinary  reader;  and  if  the  millenninm  differs  in 
nothing  w^orthy  of  mention  from  the  present  state 
of  the  church,  the  Lord  have  mercy  on  us,  and 
bring  the  millennium  to  a  speedy  end. 

Jesus  likens  the  growth  of  the  church  to  a 
mustard  seed  that  shoots  up  and  widens  out,  and 
'^  when  it  is  grown,  it  is  the  greatest  among  herbs, 
and  becometh  a  tree,  so  that  the  birds  of  the  air 
come  and  lodge  in  the  branches  thereof."  The 
word  for  hirds  is  the  same  that  is  translated  fowls 
in  the  parable  of  the  sow^er;  and  inasmuch  as  He 
explains  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  one  parable, 
and  does  not  explain  it  in  the  other,  it  is  singular 
exegesis  which  supposes  that  He  means  by  the 
second  use  of  the  word  in  the  same  discourse, 
something  entirely  unlike,  and  even  opposed  to,  the 
meaning  He  gives  to  it  in  His  first  use  of  the  word. 
If  the  fowls  or  the  birds  represent  the  wicked  one, 
Satan,  the  devil,  in  one  place,  they  represelit  the 
same  in  the  other  place;  and  the  Saviour  teaches 
that  "  the  prince  of  tlie  power  of  the  air"  will  find 
lodgment  m  the  branches  of  the  great  tree. 

As  to  the  parable  of  the  Leaven,  it  is  strange  tliat 
our  Lord  made  use  of  sour  dough,  or  incipient 
putrefaction,  as  a  symbol  of  the  gospel  and  Chris- 
tianity. It  is  still  stranger  that  He  used  as  a  sym- 
bol of  good  that  which  He  Himself,  and  the 
apostles,  and  all  the  writers  of  the  Bible,  without  a 


parablp:s  of  matthew  xttt.  57 

single  exception,  employ  as  the  symbol  of  evil.  Dr. 
Joseph  Addison  Alexander  says,  "  the  usage  is 
indeed  so  uniform  and  easily  accounted  for  from 
rational  considerations,  that  nothing  can  outweigh 
it  but  tlie  equally  uniform  judgment  of  interpre- 
ters and  readers  in  all  ages  that  this  is  an  exception 
to  the  general  rule,  and  that  leaven,  in  this  one  place 
and  its  parallel  (Luke  xiii:21),  denotes  the  spread- 
ing or  (liifusi\'e  quality  of  truth  and  the  true  relig- 
ion." It  is  not  correct  to  say  that  such  has  been 
the  uniform  Judgment  of  interpreters  and  readers 
in  all  ages;  but  even  if  it  were,  whether  the  uniform 
judgment  of  ignorant  interpreters  and  mistaken 
readers  should  outweigh  the  uniform  testimony  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  each  must  decide  for  himself. 

The  leaven  represents  what  it  always  represents  in 
Scripture,  that  which  is  evil  in  doctrine  or  practice, 
insiduously  working  its  way,  until  the  whole  pro- 
fessing mass  is  leavened,  and  the  Son  of  God  in 
righteous  judgment  exclaims, ''  I  will  spue  thee  out 
of  my  mouth."  llev.  iii:16.  Leaven  first  appears 
in  connection  with  Sodom,  and  then  in  Egypt,  and 
it  was  rigidly  excluded  from  the  houses  of  the 
Israelites  during  the  feast  that  followed  the  pass- 
over,  two  different  words  being  employed  to  denote 
inherent  evil  and  that  which  is  evil  in  outward 
life.  Ex.  xii:15.  It  was  also  forbidden  in  any 
offering  to  the  Lord,  that  set  forth  Christ.  Lev.  i:ll. 
It  was  allowed  in  the  offerings  presented  at  Pente- 
cost, the  admitted  type  of  tlie  gathering  of  the 
Church,  because  evil  was  there,  as  we  well  know. 
Lev.  xxiii:17;  Acts  v:l-10.  Our  Lord  said  to  His 
disciples,  ''  Take  heed,  and  bew^are  of  the  leaven  of 
the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees,"  Matt/xvi:6; 


PARABLES    OF    MATTHEW    XITI. 


"  and  of  the  leaveii  of  Herod,"  Mark  viii:15.  The 
Pharisees  were  the  ancient  legalists;  the  Sadducees 
were  the  ancient  rationalists;  the  Herodians  were 
the  ancient  time-servers,  determined  to  keep  in 
,with  both  parties,  God  and  the  devil,  Christ  and 
I  the  world.  Into  these  three  sects  nearly  the  whole 
'of  the  professing  church  may  now  be  divided,  for 
'the  woman  has  succeeded  well  in  hiding:  the  leaven 
in  the  meal.  The  Holy  Ghost,  writing  to  the 
Corintliians  about  evil  practice,  says,  "  Know  ye 
not  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump?" 
1  Cor.  v:6.  The  Holy  Ghost,  writing  to  the  Gala- 
tians  about  evil  doctrine,  says,  "  A  little  leaven 
leaveneth  the  whole  lump."  Gal.  v:9. 

If  the  objection  is  raised  that  Christ  would  not 
liken  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  that  which  is  evil, 
it  is  sufiicioat  to  reply  that  He  likens  the  kingdom 
to  that  which  includes  both  tares  and  wheat,  which 
encloses  both  good  and  bad  hsh,  which  extends 
over  a  wicked  servant,  Matt.  xviii:23-32,  which 
admits  into  it  a  man  who  had  not  on  a  wedding 
garment,  and  who  was  lost,  Matt.  xxii:l-13.  The 
phrase  which  occurs  thirty- two  times  in  the  gospel 
of  Matthew,  and  only  there,  does  not  mean  heaven, 
nor  even  the  church,  although  there  is  enough  of 
evil  in  the  latter  to  justify  the  use  of  any  term  that 
would  express  its  rottenness,  but  it  signifies  the 
rule  of  Christ  from  the  heavens  over  that  sphere 
in  which  He  specially  manifests  His  grace.  The 
kingdom  meanwhile  exists  in  mystery,  or  conceal- 
ment, or  it  is  not  yet  made  manifest ;  and  the  seven 
parables  were  spoken  to  show  the  state  of  things, 
during  the  time  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom, 
or  "  till  He  come." 


TILL    TIE    COME.  59 


Having  uttered  four  of  the  parables  in  the 
presence  of  "great  multitudes,"  He  went  into  a 
house;  and  when  the  disciples  came  to  Him,  and 
Pie  had  expounded  unto  tliem  the  parable  of  the 
Tares,  which  must  have  been  a  sore  discouragement 
of  their  faith,  and  a  sad  clouding  of  their  hope.  He 
cheered  their  hearts  with  a  brighter  view.  After 
all  the  wretched  failure  of  man.  He  has  treasure 
hid  in  a  field,  which  is  the  world,  and  for  the  sake 
of  the  treasure  He  buys  the  field,  so  that  he  will 
yet  make  good  to  Israel,  now  scattered  and  hid  in 
the  world.  His  promise  long  since  forfeited,  "  Ye 
shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all  people, 
for  all  the  earth  is  mine."  Ex.  xix:5o  Nay,  there 
is  something  more  precious  to  Him  still,  even  "  one 
pearl  of  great  price.  His  blood-bought  and  true 
church,  for  which  He  sold  all  that  He  had,  that  He 
might  wear  it  as  a  jewel  on  His  heart  forever. 

Once  more,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened 
unto  a  drag-net  cast  into  the  sea,  the  entire  circle 
of  the  agencies  and  means  now  employed  in  gather- 
ing men  into  a  profession  of  Christ's  name.  But 
a  net  does  not  catch  all  the  fish  in  the  sea,  and 
even  of  those  caught,  some  are  described  as  good 
and  some  as  bad.  Hence  there  is  to  be  a  judgment 
of  those  professing  Christianity,  and  a  casting 
away  of  the  bad,  at  the  coming  of  Christ.  Until 
that  time,  however,  the  two  continue  together. 
There  is  positively  not  a  hint  in  the  seven  prophetic 
parables  of  the  conversion  of  the  world,  but  rather 
only  partial  success,  and  a  mixed  state,  growing 
worse  and  worse  to  tlie  end  of  the  age.  Is  it  bet- 
ter to  consult  our  own  views  as  to  the  future,  or 
to  submit  to  the  testimony  of  God's  word? 


00  PARABLES    OF    MATTHEW    XIII. 

Saviour,  come !  Thy  friends  are  waiting, 
Waiting  for  the  final  day; 

Thence  the  promised  glory  dating: 
Come  and  bear  Thy  saints  away. 

Come,  Lord  Jesus, 
Thus  Thy  waiting  people  pray. 

Base  the  wish,  and  vain  th'  endeavour, 
While  on  earth  to  find  our  rest; 

Till  we  see  Thy  face,  we  never 
Shall  or  can  be  fully  blest. 

In  Thy  presence 
Nothing  shall  our  peace  molest. 

Lord,  we  Avait  for  Thine  appearing; 

Tarry  not,  Thy  people  sa}^; 
Bright  the  prospect  is,  and  cheering, 

Of  beholding  Thee  that  day; 
When  our  sorrows 

Shall  for  ever  pass  away. 

Till  it  comes,  O  keep  us  steady. 
Keep  us  walking  in  Thy  ways; 

At  Thy  call  may  we  be  ready, 
And  our  heads  with  triumph  rais^. 

Then  with  angels 
Sing  Thine  everlasting  praise. 


ANTICHRIST.  61 


CHAPTER  YII. 


ANTICHRIST. 


THE  Scriptures  frequently  refer  to  the  appear- 
ing in  the  last  days  of  a  person,  or  succes- 
sion of  persons,  or  a  system,  known  as  the  Anti- 
christ. Thus  the  Spirit  writes  by  the  Apostle 
John:  "  Little  children,  it  is  the  last  time,  and  as 
ye  have  heard  that  tlie  Anticlirist  shall  come,  even 
now  are  there  many  antichrists;  wdiereby  we  know 
that  it  is  tlie  last  time."  1  Jiio.  ii:18.  Again, 
"  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  come  in  the  flesli  is  not  of  God;  and  this  is  that 
spirit  of  tiie  Antichrist,  whereof  ye  have  heard 
that  it  sliouhl  come ;  and  even  now  already  is  it  in 
the  world."  1  Jno  ix:3.  Again,  "  Many  deceivers 
are  entered  into  the  workl,  even  they  that  confess 
not  that  Jesus  Christ  cometh  [co7nm(/,  present  par- 
ticiple] in  the  Hesh.  Tliis  is  tiie  deceiver  and  the 
Antichrist."  2  Jno.  7,  R  v. 

The  early  church,  perliaps  without  an  exception, 
believed  that  tlie  predicted  antichrist  is  to  be  a 
person,  the  embodiment  of  human  blasphemy  and 
wickedness.  The  learned  Greswell  says,  "The 
fathers  are  likewise  agreed  in  considering  Anti- 
christ liimself  to  l)e  a  real  person;  and  no  merely 
figurative  or  syml)olical  character.  AVhatever  he 
may  be,  and  whatever  the  part  which  he  is  destined 
to  act,  it  was  the  unanimous  persuasion  of  the 
elders  of  the  church  that  he  will  be  a  literal  char- 


62  TILL    HE    COME. 


acter,  and  his  part  will  be  the  part  of  a  literal  bod- 
ily agent." 

Jerome,  for  example,  writes  in  his  Commentary 
on  Dan.  vii,  "  Therefore  let  ns  say,  what  all  the 
ecclesiastical  writers  have  handed  down,  that,  in 
the  consummation  of  the  world,  when  the  kingdom 
of  the  Romans  is  to  be  destroyed,  there  shall  be 
ten  kino-s  who  will  divide  the  Roman  world  between 
them:  and  that  an  eleventh  will  arise, — a  little 
king,  etc.  Let  ns  not  suppose  him  to  be,  accord- 
ing to  the  opinion  of  some,  either  Devil  or  Demon, 
but  one  of  the  human  race,  in  whom  the  whole  of 
Satan  shall  dwell  bodily ;  .  .  .  for  he  is  '  the  Man 
of  Sin,'  '  the  Son  of  perdition,'  so  that  he  dares  to 
sit  in  the  Temple  of  God,  jnaking  Himself  out  God." 

Since  the  Reformation  the  great  majority  of 
Protestant  expositors  regard  the  prophecy  concern- 
ing him  as  fulfilled  in  the  cliaracter  and  career  of 
the  Popes  and  Popery.  The  arguments  in  favor 
of  the  latter  view  are  ingenious  and  plausible,  but 
if  the  question  is  submitted  to  tlie  decision  of  the 
inspired  writings,  it  will  be  difficult  for  an  unpre- 
judiced mind,  searching  after  truth,  to  avoid  the 
conclusion  that  the  Cliristians  nearest  the  apostles 
were  correct  in  their  opinion. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  written,  "  Who  is  a  liar, 
but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ?  He 
is  the  Antichrist  that  denieth  the  Father  and  the 
Son."  1  Jno.  ii:22.  Can  it  be  truthfully  said  of 
Popery,  even  in  its  worst  days,  that  it  denieth  the 
Father  and  tlie  Son?  Has  it  not  always  maintained 
in  its  councils,  creeds,  symbols  of  faith  and  wor- 
ship that  there  are  three  persons  in  the  Godhead? 
Whatever  may  have  been  its    departures  from  the 


ANTICHRIST.  63 


Bible  in  other  respects,  in  The  Canons  and  Decrees 
of  the  Council  of  Trent,  it  was  made  obligatory 
upon  every  Roman  Catholic  to  say,  "  I  believe  in 
one  God,  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth,  of  whom  are  all  things  visible  and  invis- 
ible; and  in  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  begot- 
ten Son  of  God,  and  born  of  the  Father  before  all 
ages:  God  of  God,  light  of  light,  true  God  of  true 
God;  begotten,  not  made,  consubstantial  with  the 
Father,  by  whom  all  things  were  made ;  . . . .  and 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Lord  and  the  giver  of  life, 
wdio  proceedeth  from  the  Father  and  the  Son." 
The  Roman  church  has  never  wavered  in  its  adhe- 
rence to  this  creed,  and  how  can  it  be  said  that  it 
denies  the  Father  and  the  Son? 

In  the  second  place,  all  Protestant  coriimentators 
insist  that  Popery  is  described  under  the  figure  of 
a  woman  "  arrayed  in  purple  and  scarlet  color,  and 
decked  with  gold  and  precious  stones  and  pearls, 
having  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of  abomina- 
tions and  tilthiness  of  her  fornications."  Rev.  xvii: 
4.  But  this  woman,  "  the  mother  of  harlots,"  is 
represented  as  riding  upon  a  l)east  which  hath 
seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  universally  admitted  to 
be  the  Antichrist.  "And  the  ten  horns  which 
thou  sawest  upon  the  beast,  these  shall  hate  the 
whore,  and  shall  make  her  desolate  and  naked,  and 
shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with  Are."  If  the 
mother  of  harlots  is  Popery,  it  is  impossible  that 
the  beast,  which  is  conceded  to  l)e  the  Antichrist, 
that  hates  and  destroys  the  whore,  should  also  be 
Popery. 

In  the  third  place,  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  Apos- 
tle Paul  tells  us  tliat  before  the  day  of  the  Lord 


64 


TILL    HE    COME. 


sets  in,  ^'  there  comes  the  apostasy  first,  and  that 
man  of  sin  sliall  he  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition; 
who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  above  all  that 
is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped;  so  that  he,  as 
God,  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  him- 
self that  he  is  God."  2  Thess.  ii:4.  The  temple  of 
God  is  an  expression  applied  in  the  Bible  to  but 
three  things:  the  temple  in  Jerusalem,  the  church 
or  the  body  of  the  believer.  1  Cor.  iii:17;  vi:19. 
If  the  Pope  or  Popery  is  meant  by  the  man  of  sin, 
the  son  of  perdition,  the  Antichrist,  then  the  Pope 
must  be  sitting  in  the  church  of  God,  and  Popery 
must  be  the  Christian  church,  a  conclusion  against 
which  tliose  who  liold  this  view  would  be  the  first 
to  protest  witli  vehement  earnestness.  Besides,  it 
is  not  true  that  the  Pope  has  exalted  himself 
above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped. 
However  false  and  impious  his  claims,  he  sends 
forth  his  decrees  and  proclamations  as  the  vicege- 
rent of  God,  as  the  vicar  of  Christ,  always  recog- 
nizing his  subordination  to  a  power  higher  than 
his  own.  (3f  tlie  Lawless  one,  or  Antichrist,  it  is 
said,  "whose  coming  |wliose  ^^^/v^?^^/^!^,  the  same 
word  tliat  is  used  to  describe  our  Lord's  personal 
return]  is  after  the  working  of  Satan,  with  all 
power,  and  signs,  and  lying  wonders,  and  with  all 
deceivableness  of  unrighteousness  in  them  that 
perish;  because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the 
truth,  that  they  might  be  saved.  And  for  this  cause 
God  sliall  send  them  a  strong  delusion,  that  tliey 
should  believe  a  lie:  that  they  all  might  be  damned 
who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in 
unrighteousne.^..,"  2  Thess.  ii:9-12.  All  that  is  in 
Popery  or    Protestanism,  which    accepts    not    the 


AN'riClIKTST.  05 


truth,  or  the  word  of  God,  leads  on  to  the  Anti- 
christ; but  we  should  distinguish  between  the  cause 
and  the  effect,  and  expect  at  the  end  a  personal 
embodiment  of  Satan,  with  Satan's  power  to  work 
miracles.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  man  of  sin, 
the  son  of  perdition,  exalts  hlniself  above  all  that 
is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped,  and  surely 
this  cannot  be  said  of  a  system  or  of  a  succession 
of  persons.  Nor  is  he  a  worshipper,  as  Popes  and 
Popery  are,  but  worshipped,  reminding  us  of  the 
words  addressed  to  him  by  the  Holy  Ghost  of  old: 
''  llow  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  Lucifer 
[Daystar,  a  title  stolen  from  Christ],  son  of  the 
mornincr!  For  tliou  hast  said  in  thine  heart,  I  will 
ascend  into  heaven,  I  will  exalt  my  throne  al)Ove 
the  stars  of  God:  I  will  sit  also  upon  the  mount 
of  the  congregation,  in  the  sides  of  the  north  [Ps. 
xlviii:2]  :  I  will  ascend  above  the  heights  of  the 
clouds:  I  will  be  like  the  Most  High,"  Isa.  xiv:12- 
14.  Bishop  Horsley  has  well  described  him  as 
"that  son  of  perdition,  who  shall  be  neither  a 
Protestant  nor  a  Papist,  neither  Christian,  nor 
Jew,  nor  Heathen;  who  shall  worship  neither  God, 
Angel,  nor  Saint;  who  will  neither  supplicate  the 
invisil)le  majesty  of  Heaven,  nor  fall  down  before 
an  idol.  He  will  magnify  HIMSELF  against 
everything  that  is  called  God,  or  is  worshipped : 
and  with  a  bold  flight  of  impiety,  soaring  far 
above  his  precursors  and  typ-:s  in  the  time  of  Pagan- 
ism— the  Sennacheribs,  the  Nebuchadnezzars,  the 
Antiochuses,  and  the  Heathen  Emperors,  will 
claim  divine  honors  to  himself  exclusively,  and 
consecrate  an  imaoe  of  Jiimself." 

In  tlie  fourth  j)hxce,    "  x\ll  tlie   world   wondered 


66  TILL    HE    COME. 


after  the  beast  [the  Antichrist],  and  they  worshipped 
the  dragon  [the  devil],  which  gave  power  unto  a 
beast."  The  Pope  and  Popery  may  worship  the 
Virgin  and  saints,  but  it  is  not  true  that  they  wor- 
ship the  devil,  as  men  are  openly  beginning  to  do 
in  France,  and  Italy,  and  other  atheistic  communi- 
ties. ''  All  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  worship 
him,  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book  of 
life  of  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world."  Rev.  xiii:4-8.  That  is  to  say,  if  the  Pope 
or  Popery  is  the  Antichrist,  the  hosts  of  Antichrist 
are  found  wholly  among  those  who  Avorship  the 
Pope;  and  the  unavoidable  result  stares  us  in  the 
face  that  all  who  do  not  worship  him  have  their 
names  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life,  including  such 
names  as  Yoltaire,  Thomas  Paine,  John  Stuart 
Mill,  Darwin,  Huxley,  Herbert  Spencer,  John 
Morley,  Bradlaugh,  IngersoU  and  other  arrogant 
blasphemers.  To  such  absurdities  are  men  led 
when  tlieir  minds  are  pre-occupied  with  a  theory 
which  they  are  determined  to  maintain. 

In  the  fifth  place,  "  If  any  man  worship  the  beast 
and  his  image,  and  receive  his  mark  in  his  fore- 
head, or  in  his  hand,  the  same  shall  drink  of  the 
wine  of  the  wratli  of  God,  wliich  is  poured  out 
without  measure  into  the  cup  of  His  indignation; 
and  he  sliall  be  tormented  with  hre  and  brimstone 
in  the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and  in  the 
presence  of  the  Land);  aiul  the  smoke  of  their  tor- 
ment ascendeth  up  forever  and  ever;  and  they  have 
no  rest  day  nor  night,  vrho  worsliip  the  beast  and 
his  image,  and  whosoever  receiveth  the  mark  of 
his  name."  Rev.  xiv:9-ll.  Hence  if  tlie  Pope  or 
Popery  is  the  Antichrist,  not  only  all  who  worship 


ANTICHRIST.  67 


the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  but  all  who  in  any- 
wise recognize  its  authority,  are  doomed  to  a  fright- 
ful and  everlasting  punishment,  although  it  will 
scarcely  be  denied  that  there  have  been,  and  are 
still,  numbers  of  really  godly  men  and  women  in 
that  communion,  notmthstanding  the  monstrous 
errors  of  the  system. 

In  the  sixth  place,  those  who  see  nothing  but 
the  Pope  or  Popery  in  the  Antichrist  are  com- 
pelled to  put  loose  and  fanciful  interpretations 
upon  the  Scriptures,  thus  creating  and  fostering 
the  wi-etched  habit  of  reading  the  word  of  God  as 
if  it  does  not  mean  what  it  says.  In  the  plainest 
and  most  explicit  manner  it  is  repeatedly  stated 
that  the  duration  of  the  Antichrist's  dreadful  power 
is  limited  to  "  1260  days,"  or  ''  forty  and  two 
months,"  or  ''  a  time,  times,  and  the  dividing  of 
time,"  commencing  his  persecutions  in  the  midst 
of  the  last  heptad,  Dan.  ix:27,  and  continuing 
them  for  three  and  one-half  years.  But  in  order 
to  make  them  fit  the  Poman  Catholic  Church  these 
days,  so  carefully  defined  and  guarded,  are  stretched 
out  into  years,  whose  beginning  and  end  are  sub- 
jects of  the  wildest  conjecture. 

In  the  seventh  place,  the  Antichrist  shall  sud- 
denly be  destroyed  "  in  the  latter  days."  A  stone 
not  in  hands  falls  upon  the  ten  confederated  king- 
doms of  which  he  is  the  head,  and  grinds  them  to 
powder,  and  makes  tliem  as  the  chaff  of  the  sum- 
mer threshing  floors.  Dan.  ii:28-45.  "He  shall 
plant  the  tabernacles  of  his  palace  between  the 
seas  [the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Mediterranean]  in  the 
glorious  holy  mountain  [Mount  Zion];  yet  he  shall 
come  to  his  end,  and  none  shall  help  him."  Dan. 


68  TILL    HE    COME. 


xi:45.  Immediately  after  the  tribulation,  which 
occurs  under  his  reign,  Christ  appears  for  his  over- 
throw. Matt.  xxiv:29-31,  "  Then  shall  be  revealed 
the  Lawless  one,  whom  the  Lord  Jesns  shall  con- 
sume with  the  breath  of  his  mouth,  and  destroy 
by  the  epiphany  of  his  presence."  2  Thess.  ii:8. 
At  the  descent  of  Christ  from  heaven,  the  Anti- 
christ and  his  false  prophet  are  "  cast  alive  into  a 
lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone."  Rev.  xix:20. 
All  of  this  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of 
a  gradual  extinction,  or  even  a  violent  ending,  of 
a  system  or  succession  of  persons. 

Indeed  the  personality  of  the  Antichrist  is  so 
distinctly  and  variously  marked  that  no  other 
thought  could  have  ever  been  entertained,  if  it  had 
not  been  for  the  dream  that  we  are  to  lind  him  in 
the  Pope  or  Popery.  Iren?eus,  A.  D.  180;  Tertul- 
lian,  A.  D.  200;  Hippolytus,  A.  D.  220;  Origen, 
A.  D.  225;  Lactantius,  A.  D.  300;  Athanasius, 
A.  D.  340;  Hilary,  A.  D.  350;  Cyril  of  Jerusa- 
lem, A.  D.  360;  Ambrose,  K.  D."  370;  Jerome, 
A.  D.  390;  Chrysostom,  A.  D.  400,  and  many 
others  of  the  so-called  Fathers  speak  of  him  as  a 
person,  an  incarnate  devil,  sitting  in  the  rebuilt 
temple  at  Jerusalem  when  the  Lord  shall  appear. 
In  "The  Teaching  of  the  Apostles,"  a  most  valu- 
able manuscript,  reaching  back  to  A.  D.  80  or  90, 
it  is  said,  "wlien  lawlessness  increases,  they  shall 
hate  and  persecute  and  deliver  up  one  another; 
and  then  shall  appear  the  World-deceiver  as  Son 
of  God,  and  shall  do  signs  and  wonders,  and  the 
earth  shall  be  delivered  into  liis  hands,  and  lie 
sliall  do  lawless  deeds  such  as  liave  never  yet  l>een 
(lone  since  the  beginning  of  the   world."     Bad   as 


ANTICHRIST.  69 


Popery  is,  and  frightful  as  its  persecution  of  Grocl's 
saints  in  the  past  has  been,  somethino;  worse  awaits 
an  infidel  world.  Popery  is  an  Antichrist,  and 
much  of  Protestantism  also,  for  it  must  he  remem- 
bered that  if  she  is  "  the  mother  of  harlots,"  she 
has  daughters,  but  she  is  not  the  Antichrist. 

Hoppolytus  tells  us  that  "  the  ten  states,  mean- 
incT  tlie  ten  toes  of  Daniel's  imagre,  wdiich  will  at 
lengtli  appear,  will  be  Deinocracies;"  and  Irenseus 
declares  tliat  ''  the  adversary  will  sit  in  a  temple 
built  in  Jerusalem,  endeavoring;  to  show  himself 
to  be  Christ."  lie  is  a  counterfeit  Christ,  and 
Greswell  endeavors  to  prove  that  his  title  means 
another  Christ,  a  pro  Christ,  a  ^/e^-Christ.  But 
the  contrasts  between  the  believer's  Christ  and  the 
world's  Antichrist  are  very  great  and  striking. 
The  former  came  down  from  heaven;  the  latter 
ascends  out  of  the  abyss.  Jno.  vi:38;  Kev.  xi:7. 
The  former  came  in  His  Father's  name;  the  latter 
comes  in  his  own  name.  Jno.  \'A?>.  The  former 
humbled  Himself;  the  latter  exalts  himself.  Phil. 
ii:8;  2  Thess.  ii:4.  The  former  was  despised  and 
rejected  of  men;  the  latter  has  all  the  world  say- 
ing, "Who  is  like  the  beast?"  Isa.  liii:3;  Pev. 
xiii:3-4.  The  former  received  a  commandment 
from  the  Father  what  he  should  say,  and  what  he 
should  speak;  the  latter  will  receive  his  power,  and 
his  seat,  and  his  great  authority  from  the  devil, 
Jno.  12:49;  Pev.  xiii:4.  The  former  came  to  do 
His  Father's  will;  the  latter  comes  to  do  his  own 
will,  Jno.  v:30;  Dan.  xi:36.  The  former  glorified 
God  on  tlie  earth ;  the  latter  blasphemes  the  name 
of  God.  Jno.  xvii:4;  Pev.  xiii:6.  The  former  is 
the  good  shepherd,  Avho    giveth    his    life   for    the 


70  TILL    HE    COME. 


slieep;  the  latter  is  the  idol  shepherd,  who  teareth 
the  nock.  Jiio.  x:14;  Zech.  xi:16,  17.  The  former 
was  a  man  of  sorrows ;  the  latter  is  a  king  of  fierce 
countenance.  Isa.  liii:8;  Dan.  viii:23.  The  former 
came  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them; 
the  latter  shall  destroy  wonderfully,  and  shall  pros- 
per and  practice,  and  shall  destroy  the  mighty  and 
the  holy  people.  Ln.  ix:56;  Dan.  viii:24.  The 
former  was  meek  and  lowly  in  heart;  the  latter 
shall  magnify  himself  in  liis  heart.  Matt.  xi:29; 
Dan.  viii:25.  The  former  is  the  Prince  of  peace; 
the  latter  is  the  prince  that  shall  come  as  a  deso- 
lator.  Isa.  ix:6;  Dan.  ix:26,  27.  The  former  is 
the  Lord  from  heaven;  the  latter  is  the  man  of 
the  earth.  1  Cor.  xv:47;  Ps.  x:18.  The  former  is 
the  true  vine;  the  latter  is  the  vine  of  the  earth. 
Jno.  v:l;  Rev.  xiv:18.  The  former  was  received 
up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God; 
the  latter  goeth  into  perdition.  Mark  xvi:19;  Rev. 
xvii  :8,  11. 

These  contrasts  might  be  continued  at  consider- 
able length,  but  perhaps  enough  has  been  said  to 
show  that  the  Antichrist  is  to  be  a  real  person. 
He  will  not  appear  until  tlie  ancient  Roman  em- 
pire reappears  in  the  form  of  ten  independent  but 
confederated  kingdoms,  Dan.  vii:21-24:;  but  the 
Popes  and  Popery  have  already  existed  for  centu- 
ries. He  is  to  personify  the  Godless  culture  of 
these  last  days,  possessing  rare  intelligence,  indi- 
cated by  the  fact  that  the  horn  of  power  which 
symbolized  him  "had  eyes  and  a  mouth  that 
spake  very  great  things."  Dan.  vii:20.  He  is  to 
be  a  scholar  of  fine  attainments,  "■  understanding 
dark  sentences."  Dan.  viii:23.     He  is  to  exult  in 


ANTICHRIST.  71 


the  streiiotli  of  his  intellect,  for  ''  lie  shall  exalt 
himself,  and  magnify  himself  above  every  God, 
and  shall  speak  marvellons  things  against  the  God 
of  gods."  Dan.  xi:36.  He  is  to  be  a  warrior  of 
renown,  for  '"•  in  his  office  shall  he  honor  the  God 
of  fortresses."  Dan.  xi:38;  and  the  Avondering 
Avorld  will  exclaim,  "  Who  is  able  to  make  war 
with  him?"  Rev.  xiii:4.  As  a  man  of  transcendent 
genius,  as  a  statesman  of  marvellous  ability,  as  a 
politician  of  matchless  skill,  as  a  soldier  born  to 
command,  it  will  be  easy  enough  for  the  ten  king- 
doms to  elect  him  their  Imperator  or  Umpire  for 
the  decision  of  civil  questions,  their  Generalissimo 
in  the  event  of  war,  without  disturbing  their  au- 
tonomy. These  ten  kingdoms,  the  Scriptures  inti- 
mate, will  largely  manifest  the  character  of  a 
democracy,  which  without  the  fear  of  God,  tends 
to  lawlessness.  Well,  therefore,  is  the  Antichrist 
called  "  the  Lawless  one,"  for  he  will  give  tri- 
umphant expression  for  a  time  to  the  lawlessness 
that  already  pervades  all  classes  of  society,  chil- 
dren becoming  more  and  more  restless  under  pa- 
rental authority,  servants  hating  their  masters, 
workingmen  plotting  against  their  employers, 
subjects  rebelling  against  their  rulers,  citizens 
seeking  the  overthrow  of  their  governments,  and 
the  criminal,  and  licentious,  and  infidel  classes  in- 
creasing with  appalling  rapidity. 

An  eminent  statistician  has  announced  in  one  of 
our  lead inor  mao-azines  that  "in  1850  there  was 
one  criminal  in  3,442  of  the  population  of  this 
country;  in  1860  there  was  one  in  1,647;  in  1870 
there  was  one  in  1,172;  and  in  1880  one  in  860." 
That  there  has  been  no  improvement  since  1880 


72  TILT.    HE    COME. 


may  be  inferi-ecl  from  the  fact  that  the  leading 
newspaper  in  one  of  our  large  cities  recently  said, 
"  An  examination  of  the  jail  calendar  is  appalling, 
and  the  situation  grows  worse  day  by  day.  Here 
are  some  figures  that  cannot  even  be  suspected  of 
lying.  Tliey  were  obtained  from  Deputy  Warden 
Soffel.  .  .  For  the  even  year  of  1889  there  were 
4,198  commitments  to  jail,  or  nearly  one  fifth  of 
the  total  for  seven  years  and  six  months.  For 
eight  months  and  a  half  of  tlie  present  year  [1890], 
there  liave  been  4,238,  forty  more  than  all  of  last 
year,  and  Mr.  Soffel  says  tlie  condition  grows  worse 
day  by  day."  Even  in  sober,  staid  Philadelphia, 
according  to  the  Record  of  that  city  there  were 
237  arrests  of  boys  under  15  years  of  age  in  the 
month  of  January,  1891,  for  burglary,  larceny  and 
other  crimes. 

Meanwhile  the  Church,  not  only  the  Fapal  but 
the  Protestant,  is  approaching  the  Laodicean  state, 
which  also  implies  Lawlessness,  the  word  meaning 
"  the  right,  custom,  usage,  manner  or  fashion  of 
the  people."  Boastful,  proud  and  insolent,  they 
do  as  they  please,  and  to  a  lamentable  extent  vie 
with  the  world  in  their  contempt  of  authority, 
human  or  divine. 

Prominent  professors  in  colleges  and  even  in 
Theological  Seminaries  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder 
with  open  infidels  in  their  assaults  upon  the  Avord 
of  God.  They  deny  its  inspiration,  authority  and 
authenticity.  They  sneer  at  the  story  of  man's  fall ; 
they  reject  miracles;  they  ridicule  prophecy;  they 
scout  the  doctrine  of  future  punishment;  and  in 
no  respect  do  tliey  differ  from  avowed  skeptics 
except  in  the  hollow  and    hypocritical   profession 


ANTK^IIRTST.  73 


of  a  name.  Outside  of  professing  Cliristianity,  so 
profound  a  thinker  as  John  Stuart  Mill  deliber- 
ately declared  that  ''  the  God  of  the  Bible  should 
at  least  never  extort  fi"oni  him  the  homaoe  of  love, 
to  Avhatever  else  Jle  miglit  compel  him;''  and  so 
influential  a  member  of  Parliament  as  John  Mor- 
ley  descril)es  God  as  '^  a  Beintr  no  more  entitled  to 
our  homage  oi*  worship  than  Francesco  (^enci  was 
entitled  to  the  filial  piety  of  liis  unhappy  children;" 
while  one  of  the  gi'eatest  of  EnglandV  living  poets 
crowns  tlie  hoi'rible  l)laspliemy  with  the  words: 

"Thou  art  smitten,  O  (irod,  Tlioii  nrt   smitteu;   Thy   curse  is 

upon  Tliee,  O  Lord! 
And  the  h)ve  song-  of  earth,  as  Thou  diest,  resounds  through 

the  wind  of  its  wini^s, 
Glory  to  man  in  the  his2:]iest,  for  man  is  the  master  of  things." 

The  people  have  I)een  educated  to  reject  with 
scorn  the  truth  that  '^  God  Avas  manifest  in  the 
Hesh,"  and  the  next  logical  and  unavoidable  step 
is  that  ''  Man  is  God."  The  son  of  one  of  the 
most  eminent  preachers  in  America,  himself  a  few 
years  ago  an  apparently  earnest  and  intelligent 
Christian,  is  now  lecturing  every  Sunday  in  a  hall 
to  a  crowd  of  renegade  Christians,  who  have 
adopted  as  their  motto,  "Down  with  God;  up 
with  man;"  and  this  beyond  vuestion  is  the 
popular  demand.  Inside  of  professing  Christ- 
ianity there  are  comparatively  few  who  are  not 
"traitors,  heady,  high-minded,  lovers  of  pleasures 
more  than  lovers  of  God ;  having  a  form  of  godli- 
ness, but  denying  the  power  thereof."  2  Tim.  iii: 
4,  5;  so  that  both  a  God-defying  world  and  an 
apostate  church,  Papal  and  Protestant,  are  busily 
engaged  in  preparing  the  way  for  the  advent  of 
the  Antichrist. 


74:  TILL    HE    COME. 


Wliat  is  our  sweetest  joy? 

Beloved  companion,  say; 
What  our  delightful,  best  employ, 
Untiring,  free  from  all  alloy, 

In  this  dark,  cloudy  day? 
To  speak  together  of  our  home, 
Looking  for  Him  who  soon  will  come. 

Where  do  our  spirits  find 

Refreshment  and  repose? 
When  heart  to  heart,  and  mind  to  mind, 
We  search  those  records  God  designed, 

To  medicine  all  our  woes; 
And  feel  as  bright,  its  pages  shine. 
Each  line  was  traced  by  Love  divine. 

We  look  on  all  around 

As  soon  to  disappear; 
We  listen  to  the  tempest's  sound. 
As  wildly  now  it  sweeps  around, 

Without  an  anxious  fear; 
We  hear  a  voice  amidst  its  swell 
Which  whispers,  "All  will  soon  be  well!' 

Yes,  soon  the  Lord  will  come; 

Then  will  all  trouble  cease; 
Earth's  kingdoms  will  His  own  become; 
Proud  Antichrist  will  meet  his  doom; 

All  will  be  joy  and  peace: 
These  very  storms  prepare  His  way. 
And  usher  in  that  glorious  day. 


;kaiol.  75 


CHAPTER  YIIL 


israp:l. 

THE  story  is  told  of  Erederick  tlie  Great  that  lie 
abruptly  said  to  liis  Court  Chaplain,  '^give 
me  an  argument  for  the  trnth  of  the  Bible  in  a 
sinoie  word."  The  man  without  a  moment's  hesi- 
tation  replied,  "  Israel."  The  same  word  is  the 
key  that  unlocks  the  meaning  of  the  prophetic 
Scriptures,  and  those  who  do  not  see  the  place 
Israel  occupies  in  God's  word  and  in  his  purposes 
for  the  future,  must  at  best  go  in  a  blundering 
way  through  the  inspired  writings.  They  are  like 
the  unbelieving  Jews  of  whom  the  apostle  speaks: 
"  Their  minds  were  blinded,  for  until  this  day 
remaineth  the  same  vail  untaken  away  in  the 
reading;  of  the  Old  Testament."  2  Cor.  iii:14. 

From  Moses  to  Malachi,  and  from  Matthew  to 
Revelation,  there  is  abundant  and  unvarying  testi- 
mony that  the  literal  descendants  of  the  literal 
Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob,  shall  be  litei-ally 
scattered  among  all  nations,  as  a  punishment  for 
their  sins,  and  in  the  last  days  shall  be  literally 
restored  to  their  own  land,  and  rejoice  once  more 
in  their  covenant  relations  to  Jehovah,  as  the  head  of 
the  millennial  nations.  The  passages  affirming  this 
are  so  numerous  it  would  require  a  book  of  consid- 
erable size  to  reproduce  them,  nor  can  they  be  set 
aside  by  tlie  idle  fancy  tliat  they  refer  to  the  return 
of  a  few  thousand  Jews  from  the   Babylonian   cap- 


76  TILT.    UK    rOME. 


tivity  or  that  they  are  fulfilled  spiritually  to  tlie 
churcli. 

Long-  after  the  return  from  Babylon,  the  Lord 
Jesus  said  to  the  efews,  '*  Heliold,  your  house  is 
left  unto  you  desolate.  For  I  say  uuto  you,  ye 
shall  not  see  lue  henceforth,  till  ye  shall  say, 
Blessed  is  lie  that  conieth  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  Matt.  xxiii:B8,  39.  If  tliis  does  not  mean 
that  they  shall  see  Ilim  again,  and  then  they  shall 
say.  Blessed  is  lie  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  language  has  no  meaning.  The  prediction 
did  not  rehite  to  ILis  appearance  after  Ills  resur- 
rection nor  to  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost,  for  in  the  first  ])lace  they  did  not  see 
Him  hut  only  His  disciples;  in  the  second  place 
they  did  not  say,  Blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord ;  and  in  the  third  place  their 
house  was  left  unto  them  more  desolate  than 
before.  It  remains  therefore  to  be  fulfilled  at 
Christ's  second  coming. 

On  another  occasion  our  Lord  said:  "Jerusalem 
shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled."  Luke  xxi:24. 
[N^otwithstanding  the  malicious  attempt  of  Julian, 
the  apostate,  and  the  tremendous  efforts  of  the 
crusaders  to  defeat  the  prediction,  Jerusalem  'con- 
tinues to  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles.  But 
words  have  no  significance  if  the  word  until  does 
not  point  to  a  day  when  Jerusalem  shall  cease  to 
be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  and  handed  back 
to  the  Jews,  or  become  uninhabited. 

Li  the  only  council  of  the  Apostles  of  which 
there  is  any  record,  James  voiced  the  opinion  of 
the  others  when  he  said,  "  Simeon  [that  is,  BeterJ 


ISRAEL.  77 


liatli  declared  how  God  at  the  hrst  did  visit  the 
Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  His 
name/'  or,  as  we  Avonld  say,  the  church,  the  called- 
out  ones,  the  ecclesla^  "  a  Greek  word,''  as  J)r. 
Josepli  Addison  Alexander  tells  us,  "  which  accord- 
ing to  its  etyniology  means  something  called  out^ 
or  evoked,  and  by  implication  called  tocjethei\  or 
convoked,  as  a  separate  assembly  or  society,  selected 
from  a  greater  7iuraher.^^  God  never  had  any 
other  purpose  through  the  preaching  of  the  gospel 
in  the  present  age,  or  if  He  had.  His  purpose  lias 
been  dreadftilly  baffled.  "  And  to  this  agree  the 
words  of  the  prophets,"  all  of  tlie  prophets,  although 
but  one  is  quoted;  '^  as  it  is  written.  After  tliis  I 
will  return."  After  what?  After  He  has  taken 
out  of  the  Gentiles  a  people  for  His  name.  "  After 
this  I  will  return,"  and  Avlien  He  says,  I  will 
return,  He  means,  I  will  return.  When  He 
returns,  what  will  He  do?  "And  will  build  again 
the  tabernacle  of  David,  which  is  fallen  down;  and 
I  will  build  again  the  ruins  thereof,  and  I  will  set 
it  up."  Once  more,  then.  He  will  take  poor  Israel 
into  covenant  relationship  with  Himself,  and  with 
what  object  and  result?  "  That  the  residue  of  men 
might  seek  after  the  Lord,  and  ALL  the  Gentiles, 
upon  whom  my  name  is  called,  saith  the  Lord, 
who  doetli  all  these  thingrs."  Acts,  xv:14-17. 

We  are  not  surprised,  therefore,  to  find  the  Holy 
Ghost  Avriting  by  the  pen  of  Paul  concerning 
Israel,  ''  If  the  fall  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the 
world,  and  the  diminishing  [decay  or  loss]  of  them 
the  riclies  of  the  Gentiles,  how  much  more  their 
fulness?" ....  For  if  tlie  casting  away  of  them  be 
the  reconciling  of  tlie  world,  what  shall  the  receiv- 


78  TILL    HE    COME. 


ing  of  them  be,  but  life  from  the  dead  ? .  .  .  .  For  I 
"svonkl  not,  brethren,  that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of 
this  mystery,  lest  ye  should  be  Arise  in  your  own 


conceits;  that  blindness 
happened  to  Israel,  unti 


:)r  hardness]   in  part  has 
the  fulness  of  the  Gen- 


tiles be  come  in.  And  so  all  Isrr/cl  shall  be  saved ; 
as  it  is  written,  There  shall  COME  out  of  Sion  the 
Deliverer,  and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from 
Jacob. ''Kom.  xi:12-26. 

The  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  means,  of  course, 
the  complete  number  God  takes  out  of  the  Gen- 
tiles to  be  "  a  people  for  His  name,"  answering  to 
"the  times  of  ihe  Gentiles,"  of  which  our  Lord 
speaks.  So  the  divine  procedure  is  as  follows: 
First,  the  call  of  Israel;  second,  the  call  of  tlie 
church ;  third,  the  setting  aside  of  both  for  unfaith- 
fulness; fourth,  the  personal  return  of  the  Lord; 
fifth,  the  salvation  of  all  Israel;  sixth,  the  salva- 
tion of  all  Gentiles,  at  least  in  outward  confession; 
seventh,  the  millennial  kino;dom  of  a  tliousand 
years.  Or,  as  the  late  Dr.  Hugh  McNeil  well  put 
it:  "There  are  four  steps  in  the  conversion  of  the 
world :  some  flews,  some  Gentiles,  the  nation  of 
Israel,  and  the  nations  of  the  Gentiles.  Some 
Jews,  called  'a  remnant  according  to  the  election 
of  grace;' some  Gentiles,  called  'a  people  taken 
out  for  His  name' — these  are  both  one  in  Christ, 
and  form  the  church.  Tlien  the  nation  of  Israel, 
on  tlie  return  of  tlie  Lord;  tluMi  tlie  Gentile 
nations." 

Hence  we  might  expect  to  discover  in  the  Old 
Testament  the  plainest  and  most  explicit  promises 
of  Tsraers  restoration  to  tlicir  own  laii<l,  and  of 
their  return   into  covenant   relation   and   privilege 


ISKAEL.  79 


and  obligation  as  the  peculiar  people  of  Jeliovali. 
Tlie  threat  to  scatter  them  aniong;  the  Gentiles  Avas 
literally  executed;  the  promise  to  restore  them  will 
be  as  literally  accomplished.  ''  And  yet  for  all 
that,  when  they  be  in  the  land  of  their  enemies,  I 
will  not  cast  them  away,  neither  will  I  abhor  them, 
to  destroy  them  utterly,  and  to  break  my  covenant 
with  them;  for  I  am  the  Lord  their  God.'"  Lev. 
xxvi:33,  44.  This  unconditional  covenant,  which 
was  confirmed  by  oath  and  is  therefore  unchange- 
able, guarantees  to  them  a  specific  body  of  land, 
mentioned  again  and  again,  that  stretches  from 
the  river  Kile,  up  the  Mediterranean  coast,  and 
eastward  to  the  Euphrates,  600  miles  from  north 
to  south,  and  about  1,200  miles  in  its  widest 
breadth,  containing  at  least  300,000  square  miles, 
and  capable  of  supplying  the  wants  of  many  mil- 
lions of  people.  The  Israelites  have  never  yet 
possessed  tliis  vast  territory,  and  as  God  is  true 
they  shall  possess  it  hereafter. 

In  another  passage,  after  a  long  chapter  crowded 
with  frightful  woes,  it  was  said  to  Israel,  ''  If  any 
of  thine  be  driven  out  unto  the  utmost  parts  of 
heaven,  from  tlience  Avill  the  Lord  thy  God  gather 
thee,  and  from  tlience  will  lie  fetch  thee;  and  the 
Lord  thy  God  will  bring  thee  into  the  land  which 
thy  fathers  possessed,  and  thou  slialt  possess  it; 
and  He  will  do  thee  good,  and  multiply  thee  above 
thy  fathers."  Dent.  xxx:4,  5.  "Thy  people  also 
shall  ])e  all  righteous;  tliey  shall  inlierit  the  land 
forever."  Isa.  lx;21.  Of  Jerusalem  God  says,  "it 
shall  not  be  plucked  up,  nor  tlirown  down,  any 
more  forever."  Jer.  xxxi:31-4().  ^-In  those  days 
shall  Judah  be  saved,  and  Jerusalem    shall   dwell 


80  TILL    HE    COME, 


safely;  and  tliis  is  the  name  whereby  she  shall  l)e 
called,  The  Lord  onr  liigliteoiisness.'  Jer.  xxxiii: 
15-26.  ^'Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  even 
gather  you  from  the  people,  and  assemble  you  out 
of  the  countries  where  ye  ha\e  l)een  scattered,  and 
I  Avill  give  you  the  land  of  Israel."  Ezek.  xi:16-20. 
"  The  chiklren  of  Israel  shall  abide  many  days 
without  a  king,  and  without  a  prince,  and  without 
a  sacrifice,  and  without  an  image  [margin,  stand- 
ing], and  without  an  ephod,  and  without  teraphim. 
Afterv/ard  shall  the  children  of  Israel  reticrn,  and 
seek  the  Lord  tlieir  God,  and  David  their  King, 
and  shall  fear  the  Lord  and  His  goodness  iti  the 
latter  daysy  Hos.  iii:4,  5.  The  Jewish  Rabbi 
Kimchi  strikingly  says,  "  These  are  the  days  of 
the  captivity  in  which  we  now  are  at  this  day;  Ave 
have  no  king  nor  prince  out  of  Israel,  for  we  are 
in  the  power  of  tlie  nations  and  of  their  kings  and 
princes;  and  have  no  sacrifice  for  God,  nor  image 
for  idols;  no  ephod  for  God  tliat  declares  future 
things  by  IJrim  and  Thummim,  and  no  teraphim  for 
idols,  which  show  thingrs  to  come,  accordino;  to 
the  mind  of  those  that  believe  in  them." 

"  Ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  midst  of  Israel, 
and  that  I  am  the  Lord  your  God,  and  none  else, 
and  my  people  shall  never  ,be  ashamed.  And  it 
shall  come  to  pass  afterxoard  that  I  will  pour  out 
my  Spirit  upon  all  fiesli."  Joel  iii:26-32.  "  I  will 
bring  again  the  captivity  of  my  people  of  Israel, 
and  they  shall  build  the  waste  cities,  and  inhabit 
them;  and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  drink 
the  wine  thereof;  they  shall  make  gardens,  and  eat 
the  fruit  of  tliem.  And  I  will  plant  them  upon 
their  land,  and  they  shall  no  more    be    pulled    \\\\ 


ISRAEL.  SI 


out  of  their  land,  which  I  have  given  them,  saith 
the  Lord  God."  Amos  ix:8-15.  "  Behold,  the  days 
come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  sow  the  house  of 
Israel,  and  tlie  house  of  Judali,  with  the  seed  of 
man,  and  with  tlie  seed  of  beast.  And  it  sliall 
come  to  pass,  that  like  as  I  have  watched  over 
them,  to  pluck  up,  and  to  break  down,  and  to 
tlirow  down,  and  to  destroy,  and  to  afflict ;  so  will 
I  Avatch  over  them,  to  build  and  to  plant,  saith 
the  Lord."  Jer.  xxxi:23-40. 

There  are  scores  upon  scores  of  similar  state- 
ments, equally  plain  and  positive  in  the  promise 
that  the  literal  seed  of  Jacob  shall  in  the  latter 
days  be  returned  to  the  lan,d  which  God  gave  to 
their  fathers.  But  how  do  we  know  that  the 
promises  do  not  refer  to  the  return  from  Babylon? 
Because  they  look  to  a  second  restoration,  and 
because  since  that  time  Israel  has  been  plucked  up 
out  of  the  land.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  in  that 
day,  that  the  Lord  shall  set  His  hand  again  the 
second  time  to  recover  the  remnant  of  His  people; 
....  and  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations, 
and  shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel  and  gather 
together  the  dispersed  of  Judah  from  the  foiir 
corners  of  the  earth.  The  envy  also  of  Ephraim 
shall  depart,  and  the  adversaries  of  Judah  shall  be 
cut  off;  Ephraim  shall  not  envy  Judali,  and  Judah 
shall  not  vex  Ephraim."  Isa,  xi:ll-16.  "Thus 
saith  the  Lord  God,  behold,  I  will  take  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  from  among  the  heathen,  Avhither 
tliey  be  gone,  and  will  gather  them  on  every  side, 
and  l)ring  them  into  their  own  land:  and  I  will 
make  them  one  nation  in  the  land  upon  the  moun- 
tains of  Israel,  and  one    King    shall    be    King    to 


82  TILL    HE    COME. 


tliem  all,  and  they  sliall  be  no  more  two  nations 
[Jndali  and  the  ten  tribes],  neitlier  shall  they  be 
divided  into  two  kingdoms  any  more  at  all."  Ezek. 
xxxvii:15-28. 

There  are  many  similar  statements  which  tlie 
reader  is  entreated  to  look  up  for  himself;  and,  if 
the  subject  is  new  to  him,  he  will  be  amazed  at 
the  number  of  clear,  explicit,  unconditional  pre- 
dictions of  Israel's  restoration  to  the  land,  and  to 
the  favor  of  Jehovah,  which  has  been  utterly  for- 
feited. "  I  will  take  you  from  among  the  heathen, 
and  gather  you  out  of  all  countries,  and  will  bring 
you  into  your  own  land ....  Ye  sliall  dwell  in  the 
land  that  I  gave  to  your,  fathers ;  and  ye  shall  be 
my  people,  and  I  will  be  your  God ....  Not  for 
your  sakes  do  I  this,  saith  the  Lord  God,  be  it 
known  unto  you:  be  ashamed  and  confounded  for 
your  own  ways,  O  house  of  Israel."  Ezek.  xxxvi: 
24-28,  32.  It  is  grace  all  the  way  through,  and 
therefore  "  He  that  scattered  Israel  will  gather 
him,  and  keep  him,  as  a  shepherd  doth  liis  flock." 
Jer.  xxxiilO.  If  the  scattering  is  literal,  so  is  the 
gathering.  Israel  and  Jerusalem  are  mentioned 
hundreds  of  times  in  the  Bible,  and  in  every 
instance  they  mean  the  natural  posterity  of  Jacob 
and  the  capital  of  Judah,  except  in  tlie  two  or 
three  verses  where  we  read  "  Above,"  "  Heavenly," 
''  Kew,"  as  descriptive  of  a  spiritual  city. 

Israel,  however,  will  be  brouglit  to  God,  only 
throuo^li  terrible  iudo;ments.  "Thus  saith  the 
Lord  God,  because  ye  are  all  become  dross,  behold, 
therefore,  I  will  gather  you  into  the  midst  of  Jern- 
salem.  As  they  gathei"  silver,  and  lu'ass,  andiron, 
and  lead,  and  tin,  into    tlit^    midst    of    the    lire    to 


ISKAEL.  83 


blow  upon  it,  to  melt  it;  so  will  I  gather  you  in 
my  anger  and  in  my  fury,  and  I  will  leave  you 
tliere,  and  melt  you."  Ezek.  xxii:19,  20.  "Alas!" 
for  that  day  is  great,  so  that  none  is  like  it;  it  is 
even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble;  but  he  shall  be 
saved  out  of  it."  Jer,  xxx:7.  ''And  at  that  time 
shall  Michael  stand  up,  the  great  prince  that 
standeth  for  the  children  of  thy  people;  and  there 
shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  sucli  as  never  was  since 
there  was  a  nation  even  to  that  same  time;  and  at 
that  time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered,  every  one 
that  shall  be  found  written  in  the  book."  Dan- 
xii:l.  '*  I  will  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalem 
to  battle;  and  tlie  city  shall  be  taken,  and  the 
houses  rifled,  and  the  women  ravished ;  and  half 
the  city  shall  go  forth  in  captivity,  and  the  residue 
of  the  people  sliall  not  be  cut  off  from  the  city. 
Then  shall  the  Lord  go  fortli,  and  fight  against 
those  nations,  as  when  He  fought  in  the  day  of 
battle.  And  His  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon 
the  mount  of  Olives,  wdiich  is  before  Jerusalem  on 
the  east; ...  .and  tlie  Lord  my  God  sliall  come, 
and  all  the  saints  witli  Him....  And  tlie  Lord 
shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth:  in  that  day  shall 
there  be  one  Lord,  and  His  name  one."  Zech.  xi  v  :l-9. 
In. the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble  Antichrist  will 
play  a  conspicuous  part.  ''  He  shall  speak  great 
words  against  the  Most  High,  and  shall  wear  out 
the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  and  thiuk  to  change 
times  and  laws:  and  they  shall  be  given  into  his 
hand,  until  a  time,  and  times,  and  the  dividincr  of 

111  o 

time."  Han.  vii  :2b.  "  He  shall  confirm  a  covenant 
with  many  for  one  heptad,  aiul  in  the  midst  of  the 
heptad  [leaving  3^  years,  1,200  days,  forty  and  tv\"0 


84  TILL    HE    COME. 


montlis,  a  time,  times,  and  the  dividing  of  time] 
lie  shall  canse  the  sacrifice  and  oblation  to  cease, 
and  upon  the  battlements  shall  be  the  idols  of  the 
desolator,  even  until  the  consmnmation,  and  that 
determined  shall  be  poured  upon  the  desolator." 
Dan.  ix:27.  He  will  invade  the  land  at  the  head 
of  an  immense  host;  but  it  is  said  to  him,  "  Thou 
shalt  fall  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel,  thou,  and 
all  thy  bands,  and  the  people  that  is  with  thee:  I 
will  give  thee  unto  the  ra\enous  birds  of  every 
sort,  and  to  the  beasts  of  the  field;  to  be  devoured." 
Ezek.  xxxix:4.  At  the  appearing  of  the  KING 
OF  KINGS,  AND  LOED  OF  LOKDS,  a  call  is 
made  to  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of 
heaven,  "  Come  and  gather  yoursehes  together 
unto  the  supper  of  the  great  God;  that  ye  may 
eat  the  flesh  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains, 
and  the  flesh  of  mighty  men,  and  the  flesh  of 
horses."  Rev.  xix:16-18.  The  name  of  Jerusa- 
lem ''from  that  day  shall  be  The  Lord  is  there." 
Ezek.  xlviii:35.  Then,  too,  "  He  shall  cause  them 
that  come  of  Jacob  to  take  root :  Israel  shall  blos- 
som and  bud,  and  fill  the  face  of  the  earth  with 
fruit."  Isa.  xxvii:6. 

No  one  can  read  the  word  of  God  with  an  un- 
prejudiced mind,  and  with  a  sincere  desire  to  know^ 
the  truth,  without  seeing  that  the  salvation  of 
Israel  has  a  direct  bearing  upon  the  salvation  of 
the  world.  We  hear  the  cry  of  Israel,  "  God  be 
merciful  unto  US,  and  bless  T'S;  and  cause  His 
face  to  shine  upon  US,"  and  what  then?  "That 
Thy  way  may  be  known    upon    earth,  Thy  saving 

health  among  all  ])eoph^ God   sliall  bless   l^S; 

and  all  the  ends  of  the  eartli  sliall  fear    Ilim."'  Fs. 


ISRAEL  85 


Ixvii.  So  we  are  plainly  told  that  *'  when  the  Lord 
shall  build  up  Zion,  He  shall  APPEAK  in  His 
glory;"  But  for  what  purpose?  "  To  declare  the 
name  of  the  Lord  in  Zion,  and  llis  praise  in  Jeru- 
salem; when  the  people  are  gatliered  together,  and 
the  kingdoms,  to  serve  the  Lord."  Ps.  cii:16-22. 
He  therefore  is  doing  most  to  hasten  the  universal 
triumph  of  the  cross,  who  most  literally  obeys  the 
injunction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "Pray  for  the 
peace  of  eJerusalem:  they  shall  prosper  that  love 
thee."  Ps.  cxxii:(3.  Tlie  promise  shall  surely  be 
fulfilled  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  "  unto  thee  shall  it 
come,  even  the  first  dominion;  tlie  kinmlom  shall 
come  to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem."  Mic.  iv:6-8. 
It  is  strange  that  brethren  wdio  deny  the  literal 
restoration  of  Israel  do  not  see  that  God  must  have 
preserved  this  extraordinary  people  for  some  won- 
derful purpose.  For  2500  years  the  four  great 
world  empires,  and  the  kingdoms  of  Christendom, 
have  sought  to  crush  them,  and  at  this  day  the 
most  gigantic  despotism  of  earth  is  trying  to 
grind  them  to  powder.  But  all  of  this  is  but  the 
outworking  of  Jehovah's  plans,  "till  He  make 
Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth."  Isa.  lxii:7,  when 
"  ten  men  shall  take  liold,  out  of  all  lano-uao-es  of 
the  nations,  even  shall  take  hold  of  the  skirt  of 
him  that  is  a  Jew^,  saying.  We  will  go  with  you; 
for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you."  Zech. 
viii:23.  "Then  the  moon  shall  be  confounded, 
and  the  sun  ashamed,  wdien  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall 
reign  in  mount  Zion,  and  in  Jerusalem,  and  before 
His  ancients,  gloriously."  Isa.  xxiv:23.  Even  now 
the  God  of  Abraham  and  of  Isaac  and  of  Jacob, 
the  covenant  keeping  God,  is  preparing   the    way 


86  TILL    HE    COME. 


for  the  return  of  tlieir  pobteritj  to  tlie  land  of  their 
Fathers.  From  twenty  to  fifty  Jewish  families 
are  landed  every  week  at  Jaffa,  and  the  four  lines 
of  steamers  from  Constantinople  and  Russian  ports 
are  crowded  witli  refugees  w^lio  have  already  taken 
possession  of  Jerusalem.  In  the  increasing  fer- 
tility of  the  soil,  and  in  the  remarkable  return  of 
the  chosen  people,  God  is  beginning  to  give  back 
to  them,  although  still  blind,  ^' the  City  of  the 
great  King."  Matt.  v:35. 

"Rejoice  ye  with  ^Jerusalem! 

Tier  iiigiit  of  tears  is  o'er; 
Now  comes  her  hour  of  glorious  power, 

And  splendor  evermore. 
Rejoice  ye  with  Jerusalem! 

City  of  peace  and  light; 
Her  morn  at  last  is  breaking  fast, 

And  ended  is  her  night. 

Her  widow's  weeds  are  gone, 
Her  royal  robes  put  on. 

Ye  who  have  read  upon  her  walls 

The  guilt,  the  curse,  the  shame, 
Now  full  in  view  see  fair  and  new 

Her  everlasting  name. 
Ye  who  have  read  upon  her  towers 

The  vengeance  from  above. 
Read  now  in  light  the  sentence  bright 

Of  pardon  and  of  love. 

Forgiven  and  comforted, 
She  lifts  her  joyful  head. 

The  sun  of  earth  she  needeth  not, 

Nor  asks  his  light  again; 
Jehovah  is  her  Sun  of  bliss 

Her  God  her  glory  then. 
Her  moon  again  shall  never  wane, 

Nor  shall  her  sun  descend, 
Her  storms  are  done,  her  calm  begun, 

Her  mourning  is  at  end. 

Her  long,  long  fast  is  done, 
Her  long,  long  feast  begun." 


THE    RAPTUHK.  ^1 


CHAPTER  IX. 


THE    RAPTURE. 


THE  question  now  to  be  discussed  touches  vitally 
the  entire  subject  of  our  Lord's  second 
ad\'ent.  Many  beloved  and  excellent  brethren 
hold  that  there  is  no  perceptible  interval  between 
His  coming  f}rr  His  people  and  His  appearing 
with  them.  They  believe,  therefore,  that  the 
church,  the  true  church,  the  regenerated  ones  who 
are  seeking  to  walk  in  fellowship  with  Christ,  and 
in  separation  from  evil,  must  pass  through  the  ter- 
rible tribulation  under  the  Antichrist  in  the  last 
days,  before  they  are  caught  up  in  clouds  to  meet 
the  Lord  in  the  air.  But  there  is  strong  ground 
for  very  serious  objections  to  this  theory,  wdiatever 
affection  and  respect  may  be  due  to  those  by  whom 
it  is  advanced. 

In  the  first  place,  it  renders  null  and  void  all 
the  commands  of  the  Saviour,  and  of  His  Apos- 
tles, to  look  for  His  coming  as  possible  any  day. 
It  can  not  be  denied  that  we  are  to  be  watching 
for  His  return  at  even,  at  midnight,  at  the  cock 
crowing,  in  the  morning,  Mark  xiii:36,  37.  It 
can  not  be  denied  that  every  real  believer  is  to  be 
like  a  faithful  servant  standing  at  the  hall  door 
with  girded  loins  and  burning  lights,  peering 
through  the  outer  darkness  for  the  iirst  gleam  of 
His  advancing  glory,  and  listening  with  attentive 
ear  for  the  faintest  echo  of  His  approaching  steps. 


88 


TILL    HE    COME. 


Lii.  xii:35,  36.  It  can  not  be  denied  that  the 
Christians  of  the  apostles'  times  were  taught  to 
wait  for  (irod's  Son  from  heaven.  1  Thess.  i:lQ,  and 
were  found  "  waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  1  Cor.  i:7.  But  if  He  can  not 
come  until  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  in  large 
numbers  to  Jerusalem,  until  the  division  of  the 
old  Roman  empire  into  ten  kingdoms,  to  be  fol- 
lowed by  the  appearing  of  the  Antichrist,  it  is 
useless  to  be  looking  for  Him  now.  Beyond  ques- 
tion, accordintr  to  the  teacliinps  of  the  New  Testa- 
ihent  from  Mattliew  to  tlie  close  of  Revelation,  it 
is  the  proper  posture  of  the  soul  to  be  expecting 
Him  every  hour,  as  we  need  Him  "  every  hour," 
and  that  can  not  be  a  true  doctrine  which  disturbs 
this  beautiful  posture,  and  makes  it  impossible. 
In  the  second  place,  it  will  not  be  denied  that 
when  our  Lord  appears  on  this  earth,  His  saints 
shall  appear  with  Him.  "  The  Lord  my  God  shall 
come,  and  all  the  saints  with  Him."  Zech.  xiv:5. 
"  When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then 
shall  ye  also  appear  with  Him  in  glory."  Col.  iii:4. 
''At  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all 
His  saints."  1  Thess.  iii:13.  "If  we  believe  that 
Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which 
sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him."  1  Thess. 
iv:14.  "Behold,  the  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thou- 
sands of  His  saints."  Jude  14.  '^  The  armies 
which  were  in  heaven  followed  Him  upon  white 
horses,  clothed  in  line  linen,  white  and  clean,"  and 
"the  line  linen  is  the  righteousness  of  saints,"  and 
"  they  that  ai'e  with  Him  are  called,  and  chosen, 
and  faithful,"  identifying  them  with  saved  men 
from    the    earth,     Rev.   xix:14,  8;  x\ii:14.     Such 


THE    RAPTURE.  89 


passages  teach  beyond  doubt  tliat  those  who  are 
manifested  with  Him  at  His  advent  must  have 
been  previously  caught  up  unto  Hiiu;  and  a  sufH- 
cient  k^igth  ot*  time  must  iiave  ehipsed  to  reckon 
witli  His  servants,  according  to  their  faithfuhiess, 
Matt.  xxv:14-24;  Lu.  xix:12-19,  and  to  be  jndged 
according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  2  Cor.  v: 
10;  because  when  lie  finally  appears  they  shall  be 
associated  Avith  Him  in  the  administration  of  His 
kingdom.     "  Do  ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall 


VI 


9 


judge  the  world?"  1  Cor. 

In  the  third  place,  our  Lord  plainly  promises  to 
keep  IHs  watchful  ones  out  of  the  tribulation. 
Speaking  of  that  tribulation,  when  there  shall  be 
"  upon  the  earth  distress  of  nations,  with  perplex- 
ity; the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring,  men's  hearts 
failing  them  for  fear,  and  for  looking  after  those 
things  which  are  coming  on  the  earth,"  He  says  to 
His  disciples,  "  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  lest  AT 
AXY  TIME  your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  sur- 
feiting, and  drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this  life, 
and  so  that  day  come  upon  you  unawares.  For  as 
a  snare  shall  it  come  on  all  them  that  dw^ell  [are 
settled  down]  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth. 
Watch  ye,  therefore,  and  pray  always,  that  ye  may 
be  accounted  tvorthy  to  escape  all  these  things  that 
shall  come  to  pass,  and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of 
man."Lu.  xxi:26-36.  Again  He  promises  still 
more  explicitly,  ''  Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word 
of  my  patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee  from  [out  of] 
the  hour  of  temptation,  which  shall  come  upon  all 
the  world,  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth." 
Kev.  iii:10.  Here,  then,  is  the  positive  assurance 
tliat  the  faithful  shall  be  kept,  not  by    His    power 


90 


TILL    HE    rOME. 


til  rough  tlie  tribulation,  but  out  of  the.  hour,  else- 
where rendered  ••  time  *'  and  -  season,"  of  the  trib- 
ulation, that  shall  burst  like  a  storm  upon  all  the 
woi'ld. 

In  the  fourth  place,  after  the  Laodicean  or  last 
state  of  professing  Christendom,  when  lukewarm 
indifference  and  pride  and  boasting  prevail,  and 
Christ  is  excluded  from  His  own  house.  Rev  iii, 
the  church  is  seen  no  more  upon  the  earth,  until 
she  appears  in  the  19th  chapter,  following  her 
Bridegroom  from  heaven.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
representatives  of  the  redeemed,  are  in  heaven.  The 
entire  interval  between  the  close  of  the  church  age 
and  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  is  filled  with 
appalling  j  udgments,  and  the  whole  scene  is  in- 
tensely Jewish,  as  shown  in  the  sealing  of  '*an 
hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  of  all  the 
children  of  Israel,"  the  temple,  the  court  of  the 
Gentiles,  the  testimony  of  the  two  witnesses,  who 
like  the  Old  Testament  prophets,  devour  their  ene- 
mies with  fire,  and  have  power  to  shut  heaven,  that 
it  rain  not,  and  have  power  over  waters  to  turn 
them  to  blood,  and  to  smite  the  earth  with  all 
plagues.  There  is  not  a  hint  that  the  church  is 
here  during  the  period  of  awful  tribulation ;  and 
even  tlie  Holy  Spirit  is  not  viewed  as  officially 
upon  the  earth,  but  takes  His  place  before  the 
throne,  Eev.  i:4;  iv:5;  v:6. 

In  the  fifth  place,  we  are  distinctly  taught  that 
when  our  Lord  leaves  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  God,  He  pauses  long  enough  in  the  air  to  gather 
His  risen  and  translated  saints  around  Himself. 
"  The  Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven 
with  a  shout, ....  aiul  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise 


TUK    RAriURK.  01 


first;  then  Ave  Avliich  are  alive  and  remain,  shall  be 
caught  up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to 
meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.''  1  Thess.  iv:16,  17. 
Apart  from  the  fact  that  the  word  ''  sliout "  is,  as 
Canon  Fausset  renders  it,  '•  a  signal  shout,"  a  mili- 
tary call  and  command  to  His  own,  with  which 
others  have  no  concern ;  and  apart  from  the  fact 
that  the  word  "meet,"  wherever  else  it  occurs  in 
the  New  Testament,  implies  a  meeting  so  as  to 
return  with  tlie  person  met,  it  is  certain  that  there 
are  two  stacres  in  our  Lord's  second  advent.  He 
comes  into  tlie  air,  and  there  summons  His  own  to 
meet  Llim,  and  then  He  comes  with  them  to  the 
earth.  There  are  not  two  comings,  but  two  steps 
of  one  coming,  as  there  were  two  steps  of  LHs  first 
coming,  the  one  at  Bethlehem  and  the  other  at 
Calvary.  It  is  not  stated  in  so  many  w^ords  how 
long  the  pause  in  the  air  will  be,  nor  wdiy  it  occurs, 
but  it  may  be  inferred  from  many  Scriptures  that 
it  will  continue  for  seven  years,  during  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Anticlirist's  power. 

In  the  sixth  place,  the  analogy  of  Scriptures 
favors  the  two-fold  aspect  in  which  the  second 
advent  is  to  be  viewed.  There  is  a  personal  and 
invisible  relation  of  truth  to  God,  and  an  open  and 
outward  manifestation  of  it  to  the  world.  We  are 
justified  before  God  without  works  of  any  kind, 
Rom.  iY:5;  but  we  are  justified  before  men  by  our 
works,  Jas.  ii:24.  AVe  are  sanctified  before  God 
now",  1  Cor.  vi:ll;  but  we  are  sanctified  before  men 
progressively,  1  Thess.  iv:3;  v:23.  The  Holy 
Spirit  always  dwells  in  the  believer  as  he  stands 
before  God,  Jno.  xiv:17;  but  the  Lloly  Spirit 
comes  upon  him  for  service  and  testimony  before 


92  TILL    HE    COME. 


men,  Acts  i:8.  The  believer  sliall  not  come  into 
judgment  as  to  liis  sins,  Jno.  v:24;  but  the  believer 
murst  appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  as 
to  his  works,  2  C^or.  v:10.  There  is  to  be  a  resur- 
rection of  the  iust  in  glorified  bodies,  and  hence 
Paul's  earnest  desire,  "if  by  any  means  I  might 
attain  unto  the  outresurrection,  that  one  from 
among  the  dead."  Phil,  iiirll;  but  there  is  to  be  a 
resurrection  of  tlie  unjust  a  thousand  years  after- 
wards, Pev.  XX  :5.  We  might  expect,  therefore,  to 
find  that  tliere  is  to  l)e  a  coming  of  the  Lord  for 
His  people,  and  then,  whether  the  delay  is  long  or 
short,  His  appearing  with  them,  thus  bringing  the 
two  phases  of  tlie  second  advent  into  harmony  with 
other  great  doctrines. 

In  the  seventh  place.  He  has  shown  us  that  the 
rapture  or  translation  is  to  be  secret  and  unknown 
to  the  world,  and  that  His  summons  to  His  own 
will  not  be  heard,  or  at  least  not  understood,  by 
the  unbelieving  mass.  "Enoch  walked  with  God; 
and  he  was  not,  for  God  took  him."  Gen.  v:24, 
and  no  man  saw  him  ascend ;  but  he  was  kept  out 
of  the  hour  of  temptation,  while  Noah  passed 
safely  through  the  tribulation.  When  Elijah  was 
caught  away  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  only  Elisha  saw 
it,  and  the  sons  of  the  prophets  searched  in  'vain 
for  the  missing  messenger  of  Jehovah.  Jesus  on 
His  way  to  the  cross  cried,  "  Father,  glorify  Tliy 
name.  Then  came  there  a  voice  from  heaven, 
saying,  I  have  both  glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it 
again."  This  was  distinct  enough  to  His  ear,  but 
the  people  that  stood  by  said  "  that  it  thundered." 
Jno.  XX  ii:28.  Paul  on  liis  way  to  Damascus 
heard  the  words  of  oi  v  risen  and  ascenck^d  l^ord, 


THE    RAPTrRE.  93 


"  I  am  Jesus,  whom  tliou  persecntest Arise, 

and  go  into  the  city,  and  it  shall  be  told  thee  what 
thou  must  do.  And  the  men  which  journeyed 
with  him  stood  speechless,  hearing  a  voice,  but 
seeing  no  man."  Acts  ix:4-7.  Afterward  Paul 
said,  ''  They  that  were  witli  me  saw  indeed  the 
light,  and  were  afraid;  but  they  heard  not  the 
voice  of  Him  that  spake  to  me.''  Actsxxii:9. 

Is  there  then  a  contradiction  here,  as  infidels  in 
and  out  of  the  church  have  been  saying  for  centu- 
ries? ^'o  greater  contradiction  that  when  persons, 
listening  to  a  speaker  in  a  large  audience,  assert 
that  they  do  not  hear  him,  although  his  voice  fills 
the  building.  It  needs  a  circumcised  ear  and  a 
circumcised  heart  to  hear  the  words  of  the  Lord, 
since  "the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things 
of  the  Spirit  of  God:  for  they  are  foolishness  unto 
him;  neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are 
spiritually  discerned."  1  Cor.  ii:14.  Even  if  the 
shout  of  our  descending  Lord  is  heard  by  the 
unbelievinor  world,  it  will  not  be  heard  in  the 
scriptural  sense  of  the  word;  and  no  doubt  many 
a  jest  and  scientific  guess  will  appear  in  the  news- 
papers about  the  strange  sound  in  the  sky,  none 
but  the  elect  knowing  that  it  called  His  waiting 
and  watching  ones  to  meet  LLim  in  the  air. 

He  comes  into  the  air  as  the  Bridegroom,  Matt. 
xxv-6;  He  comes  to  the  earth  as  the  Xobleman 
who  "  went  into  a  far  country  to  receive  for  Him- 
self a  Kiucrdom,  and  to  return."  Lu.  xix:12.  He 
comes  into  the  air  as  ''The  Morning  Star,"  Rev. 
xxii:16;  He  comes  to  the  earth  as  ''The  Sun  of 
Righteousness.''  Mai.  iv:2.  He  comes  into  the 
air  to  present  tlie  cliurcli  to  Himslf,  all  glorious, 


94  TILL    HE    COME. 


Eph.  v:27;  He  comes  to  the  earth  to  overthrow  the 
armies  of  all  nations  gathered  against  Jerusalem 
to  battle.  Zech.  xiv;2,  3.  He  comes  into  the  air  in 
blessed  fuliillment  of  the  promise,  I  will  "  receive 
yon  nnto  Myself,"  Jno.  xiv:3;  He  comes  to  the 
earth  as  KING  OF  KINGS,  AND  LORD  OF 
LOKDS.  Kev.  xix:16.  He  comes  into  the  air  to 
celebrate  "the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb," 
Hev.  xix:9;  He  comes  to  tlie  earth  to  prepare  "the 
supper  of  the  great  God."  Kev.  xix:17.  He  comes 
into  the  air  to  bring  His  faithful  ones  to  the  ban- 
queting house,  where  His  banner  over  them  is 
love.  Song  ii  :4 ;  He  comes  to  the  earth  to  give 
them  power  over  the  nations,  and  they  shall  rule 
them  with  a  rod  of  iron ;  as  the  vessels  of  a  potter 
shall  they  be  broken  to  shivers.  Kev.  iii:26.  He 
comes  into  the  air  for  the  joy  of  His  followers, 
Jno.  xvi:22;  He  comes  to  the  earth  to  judge  the 
nations.  Matt.  xvi:31;  Acts  xvii:31. 

There  is  no  predicted  event  between  this  passing 
moment  and  His  comino;  into  the  air,  but  much 
remains  to  be  fiiliilled  before  He  comes  to  the 
eartli.  It  would  be  scriptural  to  say,  the  Lord 
7ncf(/  come  to-day,  or  tomorrow,  or  next  week,  or 
next  month,  or  next  year;  it  would  be  unscriptural 
to  say,  the  Lord  ^vill  not  come  to-day,  nor  tomor- 
row, nor  next  week,  nor  next  month,  nor  next 
year.  If  to  the  statement  it  is  objected  that  He 
Himself  tells  us,  "This  gospel  oip  the  kingdom 
shall  be  preached  in  all  tlie  world  for  a  witness  unto 
all  nations,  and  then  shall  the  end  come,"  Matt. 
xxiv:14,  it  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  reply  that  the 
Farther  alone  has  authority  to  determine  when  this 
testimony  to  His  Son  sliall  have    heon    sntHciently 


THE    RAPTURE.  95 


borne,  Acts  i:7;  and  since  it  is  revealed  that  after 
our  Lord's  coming^  to  the  earth,  the  saved  of  Israel 
shall  rush  as  His  ambassadors  to  the  isles  that  are 
afar  off,  that  have  not  heard  His  fame,  nor  seen 
His  glory,  Isa.  lxvi:19,  it  is  certain  that  the  gospel 
will  not  have  been  preached  to  every  creature 
before  His  coming  into  the  air. 

The  fact  is  that  we  of  this  cliurch  dispensation 
have  nothino-  to  do  with  siorns  and  dates,  and  it  is 
dangerous  and  delusive  to  get  our  thoughts  fixed 
upon  tliese.  It  is  most  important  to  remember 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  takes  notice  of  ^'  times  and 
seasons  "  only  with  respect  to  Israel.  Those  who 
form  the  body  of  the  risen  Christ,  and  are  ''par- 
takers of  the  heavenly  calling,"  are  timeless  peo- 
ple, and  need  not  study  history.  AYe  are  like  an 
army  when  the  General  issues  his  orders,  "  Be  ready 
to  move  at  a  moment's  notice.''  Every  inferior 
officer,  and  every  soldier  must  be  instantly  prepared, 
and  continue  in  a  state  of  preparation,  no  matter 
how  long  the  notice  may  be  deferred,  until  the  order 
to  march  is  received.  The  Captain  of  our  salvation 
has  commanded  us  to  wait  and  to  watch,  and  it  is 
not  for  us  to  be  interposing  certain  events,  nor  to 
be  looking  around  for  fulfilled  prophecy,  before 
expecting  to  hear  His  order  bidding  us  mount  np 
in  clouds  to  meet  Him  in  the  air.  ^  ay,  our  rapture 
may  be  quicker  than  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  1 
Cor.  xv:22,  for  that  means  the  closing  and  uplift- 
ing of  tlie  eyelid,  but  tlie  Greek  word  may  imply 
a  single  movement.  O  sweet  thought!  here  one 
moment,  and  the  next,  like  a  flash,  with  the  Lord. 
"Be  y-^.  therefore  ready  also:  for  the  Son  of  man 
cometh  at  an  liour  when  ye  think  not.''  Lu.  xiiilO. 


Of)  TILL    HE    rOME. 


I'm  waiting  for  Thee,  Lord, 
Thy  beauty  to  see,  Lord, 
I'm  waiting  for  Thee, 
For  Thy  coming  again. 
Thou'rt  gone  over  there,  Lord, 
A  place  lo  prepare,  Lord; 
Thy  home  I  shall  share. 
At  Thy  coming  again. 

Mid  danger  and  fear,  Lord, 
I'm  oft  weary  here.  Lord; 
The  day  must  be  near 
Of  Thy  coming  again. 
'Tis  all  sunshine  there.  Lord, 
No  sighing  nor  care,  Lord, 
Biit  glory  so  fair 

At  Thy  coming  again. 

Whilst  Thou  art  awaj^,  Lord, 
I  stumble  and  stray,  Lord; 
Oh,  hasten  the  day 
Of  Thy  coming  again. 
This  is  not  my  rest.  Lord, 
A  pilgrim  confest.  Lord, 
I  wait  to  be  blest 

At  Thy  coming  again. 

Our  loved  ones  before,  Lord, 
Their  troubles  are  o'er.  Lord; 
I'll  meet  them  once  more 
At  Thy  coming  again. 
The  blood  was  the  sign,  Lord, 
That  marked  them  as  Thine,  Lord, 
And  brightly  they'll  shine 
At  Thy  coming  again. 

E'en  now  let  my  ways,  Lord, 
Be  bright  with  Thy  praise,  Lord, 
For  brief  are  the  days 
Ere  Thy  coming  again. 
I'm  waiting  for  Thee,  Lord, 
Thy  beauty  to  see.  Lord, 
No  triumph  for  me 

Like  Thy  coining  again. 


THAT     lU.KSSKI)     HOl'K. 


97 


CHAPTER  X. 


THAT    BLESSED    HOPE. 


THERE  are  three  things  which  grace  does  for  the 
believer.  It  saves,  it  teaches,  and  it  holds 
ont  "  a  sure  and  certain  hope "  to  animate  the 
redeemed  and  instructed  pilgrim  on  liis  way  to 
meet  the  Lord  in  tlie  air.  ''  The  grace  of  God  that 
bringeth  salvation  hath  appeared  to  all  men,  teach- 
ing ns,  that,  denying  nngodliness  and  worldly 
lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously  and  godly, 
in  this  present  world,  looking  for  that  blessed  hope, 
even  the  glorious  appearing  of  our  great  God  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  Himself  for  us, 
that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and 
purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of 
good  works.  ''These  things  speak,"  adds  the 
apostle,  including,  among  the  things  the  faithful 
minister  is  to  speak,  ''  that  blessed  hope."  Tit. 
ii:ll-15. 

A  glance  at  the  Scriptures  will  be  sufficient  to 
show  why  it  is  called  that  blessed  hope,  and  why 
Christians  are  represented  as  looking  or  waiting 
for  it  with  eager  expectation.  Grace  shines  in  our 
salvation,  but  there  will  be  a  forthshining  of  glory 
at  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  while  between  the 
first  and  the  last  step  we  are  kept  by  the  power  of 
God,  fullilling  the  promise  of  the  Word,  "T1k3 
Lord  God  is  a  sun  and  shield;  the  Lord  will  give 
grace  and  glory.''  Fs.  lxxxiv:ll.      U  the  return  of 


98  TILL    HE    COME. 


our  Saviour  from  the  lieaveus  could  be  seen  as  a 
liappy  hope,  not  as  a  terrible  trial,  no  doubt  many 
who  now  shrink  from  all  mention  of  the  subject 
would  speak  of  it  wdth  exultant  hearts  and  longing 
desire. 

First,  consider  the  bearing  of  the  second  advent 
upon  the  creation  around  us.  ^'The  earnest  ex- 
pectation of  the  creature  |or  creation]  waiteth  [to 
watch  with  the  head  stretched  out]  for  the  mani- 
festation of  the  sons  of  God.  For  the  creation  was 
made  subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly,  but  by  reason 
of  him  who  hath  subjected  the  same  in  hope; 
because  the  creation  itself  also  shall  be  delivered 
from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  For  we  know  that 
the  wliole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  together 
in  pain  until  now.  And  not  only  they,  but  our- 
selves also,  which  have  the  lirst-fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
even  we  ourselves  groan  within  ourselves,  Avaiting 
for  the  adoption,  the  redemption  of  our  body." 
Kom.  viii:19-23. 

Prof.  Beet  says:  "The  Creation  is  especially 
distinguished  from  the  children  of  -God,  and  there- 
fore does  not  include  them.  The  words  'subject' 
and  'groan'  exclude  the  happy  spirits  of  other 
worlds.  The  coming  liberation  excludes  bad  an- 
gels, and  those  Avho  finally  reject  the  gospel.  For 
to  the  latter  the  coming  of  Christ  vi'iW  bring  wrath, 
ii:8,  and  we  cannot  conceive  it  to  bring  liberty  to 
the  former.  It  remains  therefore  that  the  word 
denotes  the  entire  world  around  us,  living  and 
without  life,  man  alone  excepted.  It  is  what  we 
call  nature,  but  reminds  us  tliat  nature  is  theAVork 


of    God.''      \)v.    Cliarles     Iloclge    takes    the    same 


THAT    BLESSPJD    HOl'E.  09 

view,  and  tells  us,  '^  The  manifestion  of  the  sons 
of  God  is  a  definite  Scriptural  event,  just  as  much 
as  the  second  advent  of  Christ,"  and  "  the  time  of 
the  resurrection  of  tlie  body  or  the  manifestation  of 
the  sons  of  God,  is  the  time  of  the  second  advent 
of  Jesus  Christ."  With  this  all  expositors  of  all 
schools  cordially  agree. 

It  follows,  therefore,  that  creation  or  nature  can 
not  cease  from  its  groans  and  travailing  throes 
until  the  second  advent  of  Jesus  Christ.  Then, 
however,  "  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place 
shall  be  glad  for  tliem;  and  the  desert  shall  rejoice 
and  blossom  as  the  rose."  Isa.  xxxv:l.  Then 
"the  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break  forth 
before  you  into  singing,  and  all  the  trees  of  the 
field  shall  clap  their  hands."  Isa.  lv:12.  There 
are  many  similar  statements  in  the  Scriptures, 
that  lose  all  their  signihcance  and  beauty  for  mul- 
titudes, because  they  are  dismissed  from  the  mind 
Avith  the  liippant  remark  that  they  are  figurative 
and  poetical.  Suppose  they  are  figurative  and  poet- 
ical; they  are  not  lies,  for  the  word  of  God  con- 
tains no  lie,  and  hence  a  glorious  change  awaits 
the  now  suffering  creation  at  the  second  advent  of 
Christ.  If  the  figure  or  poetry  is  so  enchanting, 
what  must  be  the  reality! 

Second,  consider  the  bearing  of  the  second  advent 
upon  the  lov/er  animals.  ''  The  wolf  also  shall 
dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down 
with  the  kid ;  and  the  calf,  and  the  young  lion  and 
tlie  fatling  together;  and  a  little  child  shall  lead 
them.  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed;  their 
young  ones  shall  lie  down  together,  and  the  lion 
shall    eat  straw   like    the    ox.     And    the    suckina 


100  TILL    HE    COME. 


cliilcl  shall  play  on  tlie  liole  of  the  asp,  and  the 
weaned  child  shall  put  his  hand  in  the  cockatrice 
den.  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my 
holy  mountain,  for  the  earth  shall  he  full  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the 
sea."  Isa.  xi:6-9.  The  same  truth  is  set  forth, 
among  other  places,  in  Isa.  lxv:25;  Ezek.  xxxiv:25; 
Hos.  ii:18.  That  this  lovely  scene  cannot  be  wit- 
nessed before  the  personal  return  of  the  Lord,  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  it  is  introduced  with  the 
statement,  "He  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod 
of  His  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  His  lips  shall 
He  slay  the  wicked  one,"  precisely  the  phraseology 
that  describes  His  visible  comingrin  2Thess.  ii:8. 

Here  again  we  are  met  with  the  objection  that 
the  language  is  figurative  and  poetical,  and  cannot 
mean  Avhat  it  says,  the  scientific  ones  among  the 
brethren  arguing  that  a  lion's  teeth  are  not  adapted 
to  grass  eating.  True,  nor  is  a  man's,  and  yet 
"  the  same  hour  was  the  thing  fulfilled  upon 
l^ebuchadnezzar,  and  he  was  driven  from  men  and 
did  eat  grass  as  oxen."  Dan.iv:38.  He  who  made 
the  teeth  can  adapt  the  teeth  to  any  purpose  He 
pleases,  and  He  who  said  to  fallen  Adam,  "  Cursed 
is  the  ground  for  thy  sake,"  Gen.  iii:17,  can 
remove  the  curse,  as  He  will  do  at  the  second  com- 
ing of  Christ,  when  the  poor  dumb  beasts,  so  long 
the  helpless  victims  of  inhuman  brutality  and 
ruthless  murder,  will  have  tlie  cruel  yoke  broken 
from  their  necks,  and  cease  to  tight  with  their 
tyrant  and  with  one  another. 

Third,  consider  the  bearintr  of  tlie  second  advent 
upon  civil  governments.  ^'  He  shall  judge  among 
the  nations,  and  sliall    rebidce    many  people;  and 


THAT    BLESSED    HOPE.  101 


they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plowshares  and 
their  spears  into  pruninghooks;  nation  sliall  not 
lift  np  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall  they 
learn  war  any  more."  Isa.  ii:-!:.  This  testimony 
is  so  important  that  it  is  reproduced  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  anotlier  prophet,  Mic-  iv":3;  and  a  pious 
Iloman  Catholic,  who  wrote  over  the  signature 
of  Ben  Ezra,  in  a  remarkable  work  called  the 
^'  Coming  of  Messiah  in  Glory  and  Majesty,"  trans- 
lated from  the  Spanish  by  Edward  Ir\ing,  Avell 
says,  "In  the  first  ])lace  I  sincerely  agree  with  all 
the  doctors,  both  Christian  and  Jewish,  that  the 
times  of  Messiah  are  manifestly  the  times  spoken 
of  in  this  prophecy.  '  It  shall  come  to  pass  in  the 
last  days,'  that  is,  in  the  time  of  Messiah,  or  of 
Christ.  Therefore  the  prophecy,  and  many  others 
like  it,  which  have  not  been  verified,  nor  could 
possibly  have  been,  in  the  tii'st  advent  of  the  Mes- 
siah, may  very  well  and  must  needs  be  verified  in 
the  second,  which  time  is  not  less  of  divine  faith 
than  the  first ....  Wlien  then  the  second  advent, 
which  we  all  religiously  believe  and  expect,  is  ar- 
rived, there  shall  be,  among  other  things,  primary 
or  principal,  the  elevation  of  Mount  Zion  above  all 
the  mountains  and  hills,  a  manifestly  figurative 
expression,  yet  admirably  proper  to  explain  the 
dignity,  honor  and  glory  to  which  the  city  of 
David  shall  then  be  lifted  up;  after  that  the  throne 
or  tabernacle  of  David,  which  is  fallen  down,  sliall 
have  been  set  up  and  re-established  therein,  '  as  in 
thedaysof  old;'.,  .in  which  time  consequently  shall 
the  nation  s  and  peoples  flow  toward  the  top  of  Mount 
Zion.  What  nation  and  peoples?  Without  doubt 
those  who  shall  be  left  after  the  coming  of  the  Lord." 


102  TILL    HE    eOME. 


Fourth,  consider  the  bearing  of  the  second  ad- 
vent npon  scattered  IsraeL  To  the  daughter  of 
Zion  and  to  the  daughter  of  Jeruselem  it  is  said, 
"  The  King  of  Israel,  even  the  Lord,  is  in  tlie 
midst  of  thee;  thou  shalt  not  see  evil  any  more. 
In  that  day  it  shall  he  said  to  Jerusalem,  Fear  thou 
not;  and  to  Zion,  Let  not  thine  hands  he  slack. 
The  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty; 
He  will  save,  He  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy; 
He  will  rest  in  His  love;  He  will  joy  over  thee 
Avith  singing.  I  w^ill  gather  them  that  are  sorrow- 
ful for  tlie  solemn  assembly,  who  are  of  thee,  to 
whom  the  reproach  of  it  was  a  l)urden  Behold, 
at  that  time  I  will  undo  all  that  afhict  thee;  and  I 
will  save  her  that  halteth,  and  gather  her  that  was 
driven  out;  and  I  will  get  them  praise  and  fame 
in  every  land  where  they  have  been  put  to  shame. 
At  that  time  [at  the  time  when  the  King  of  Israel 
even  the  Lord,  is  seen  in  the  midst  of  the  Jews], 
will  I  bring  you  again,  even  in  the  time  that  I 
gather  you,  for  I  will  make  you  a  name  and  a 
praise  among  all  people  of  the  earth,  when  I  turn 
l)ack  your  captivity  before  your  eyes,  saith  the 
Lord."    Zeph.  iii:15-20. 

Fifth,  consider  the  bearing  of  the  second  advent 
upon  sickness.  "  The  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I 
am  sick,"  Isa.  xxxiii:24;  and  the  context  shows 
that  this  shall  be  a  time  when  "thine  eyes  shall 
see  the  King  in  His  beauty;  they  shall  behold  a 
far  stretching  land,"  as  the  Eevised  has  it.  "  There 
shall  be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  days,  nor  an 
old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his  days :  for  the  child 
shall  die  an  hundred  years  old;  but  the  sinner,  be- 
ing an  hundred  years  old,  shall  be  accursed.     And 


THAT    r.LKSSKO    IIOPK.  103 

they  shall  build  houset^  and  inhabit  them;  and  they 
shall  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them. 
They  shall  not  build  and  another  inhabit;  they 
shall  not  plant  and  another  eat ;  for  as  tlie  days  of 
a  tree  are  the  days  of  my  people,  and  mine  elect 
shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of  their  hands."  Isa. 
lxv:20-22.  This  is  an  earthly,  not  a  lieavenly 
scene,  for  death  is  not  wholly  extinct,  but  it  is 
exceptional,  appearing  only  as  a  judicial  inflic- 
tion. Man  will  then  All  liis  days,  whicli  he  never 
yet  has  done,  nor  even  Methusaleh  before  the 
deluge.  But  tlien  the  righteous  will  live  upon  the 
earth  for  a  thousand  years,  when  the  Lord  reigns 
for  a  thousand  years,  and  so  long  will  be  human 
life  that  one  dying  a  hundred  years  old  will  be  but 
a  child,  dying  too,  under  some  special  curse. 

Sixth,  consider  the  bearing  of  the  second  advent 
upon  the  state  of  our  dead.  "  I  would  not  have 
you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  concerning  them 
which  are  asleep,  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others 
that  have  no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which  sleep 
in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him.  For  this  we 
say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
whicli  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the 
Lord,  shall  not  precede  them  which  are  asleep. 
For  the  Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven 
with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and 
with  the  trump  of  God;  and  tlie  dead  in  Christ 
shall  rise  lirst;  then  we  which  are  alive  and  remain 
shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  in  the 
clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  And  so  shall 
we  ever  be  with  tlie  Lord.  Wherefore  comfort 
one  another  with  tliese  words."    1  Thess.  iv:13-18. 


104 


TILL    UK    COME. 


Where  eke  sliall  we  Unci  comfort  when  our  hearts 
are  bursting  over  the  graves  of  our  darlings,  whom 
we  sliall  see  no  more  in  the  l)ody  'Mill  Ilecomef 
Oh,  it  is  then  and  there  a  new  meaning  is  given 
to  the  precious  promise,  *'  Surely  I  come  quickly. 
Amen."  And  the  sorrowingr  soul  calls  hack  with 
irrepressible  longing,  "  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus." 

Seventh,  consider  the  bearing  of  the  second  ad- 
vent upon  the  conversion  of  tlie  Avorld.  It  is  when 
Israel  are  ])ack  in  their  own  land,  and  know  that 
the  Messiah  Lord  is  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  they 
shall  never  be  ashamed,  the  promise  is  fulfilled, 
"  It  shall  come  to  pass  AFTERWARD,  that  I  will 
pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  iiesh."  Joel  ii:28.  It 
is  when  He  returns,  and  builds  again  the  taber- 
nacle of  David,  which  is  fallen  down,  the  residue 
of  men  seek  after  the  Lord,  "  and  all  the  Gentiles." 
Acts  xv:14-17.  It  is  after  the  sealing  of  the  hun- 
dred and  forty  and  four  thousand  of  all  the  tribes 
of  the  children  of  Israel,  the  apostle  beheld,  and, 
lo,  a  great  inultitude,  which  no  man  could  num- 
ber, came  out  of  the  tribulation,  the  great  one,  un- 
der Antichrist,  having  washed  their  robes  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Rev. 
vii.  They  ai-e  not  the  church,  for  Christ  has 
already  come  to  call  the  real  church  to  heaven  as 
His  bride,  and  she  shall  descend  with  Him.  "  Do 
ye  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the 
world?"  1  Cor.  vi:2. 

It  is  not  strange,  therefore,  that  the  glorious 
epiphany  of  the  great  God,  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  is  called  "  that  blessed  hope,"  But  it  is 
strange  and  sad  beyond  expression  that  evei-y  true 
Christian  does  not  cry  out  for    His    comiiio-    with 


THAT    BLESSED    HOPE.  105 

continual  desire,  when  we  Und  tliat  such  a  flood 
tide  ot*  honor  and  glory  and  praise  shall  flash 
before  Ilis  throne  at  llis  advent,  that  such  heiohts 
of  blessedness  sliall  tlien  l)e  attained  by  ourselves, 
and  that  we  are  so  hopeless  without  it. 

The  Church  lias  waited  long 
Her  absent  Lord  to  see; 
And  still  in  loneliness  she  waits; 
A  friendless  stranger  she. 
Age  after  age  has  gone, 
Sun  after  sun  has  set, 
And  still  in  weeds  of  widowhood 
She  weeps  a  mourner  yet. 
Come,  then.  Lord  Jesus,  come. 

Saint  after  saint  on  earth 
Has  lived,  and  loved,  and  died; 
And  as  they  left  us  one  by  one, 
We  laid  them  side  by  side; 
We  laid  them  down  to  sleep, 
But  not  in  hope  forlorn; 
We  laid  them  but  to  ripen  there. 
Till  the  last  glorious  morn. 
Come,  then.  Lord  Jesus,  come. 

We  long  to  hear  Thy  voice. 
To  see  Thee  face  to  face. 
To  share  Thy  crown  and  glory  then. 
As  now  we  share  Thy  grace. 
Should  not  the  loving  bride 
The  absent  Bridegroom  mourn? 
Should  she  not  wear  the  weeds  of  grief 
Until  the  Lord  return? 
Come,  then,  Lord  Jesus,  come. 

The  whole  creation  groans, 
And  waits  to  hear  that  voice. 
That  shall  restore  her  comeliness, 
And  make  her  wastes  rejoice. 
Come,  Lord,  and  wipe  away 
The  curse,  the  sin,  the  stain, 
And  make  this  blighted  world  of  ours 
Thine  own  fair  world  again. 
Come,  then,  Lord  Jesus,  come. 


lOG  TILL    HK    COME. 


CIIAPTEK  XI. 


THE    ONLY    HOPE. 


WHENEVER  and  wherever  man  has  been 
placed  in  a  position  of  responsibility  he 
lias  failed.  Thns  Ave  find  him  in  the  garden  of 
Eden,  radiant  Avith  l)eanty,  surrounded  by  every- 
thing that  could  make  him  perfectly  happy,  and 
subjected  to  a  simple  test  of  obedience.  But  he 
believed  the  devil's  lie,  rather  than  God's  truth, 
and  Avas  sent  forth  to  till  a  sin-cursed  earth  in  the 
SAA^eat  of  his  face,  and  to  moulder  back  to  dust. 
"Through  one  man  sin  entered  into  thcAvorld,  and 
death  throuo-h  sin."  Rom,  a^:12.  I^even  ao^ain  can 
he  be  tried  nnder  circumstances  so  faA'orable;  and 
the  first  trial,  the  dispensation  of  Innocence,  ended 
in  utter  disaster  and  ruin. 

This  Avas  followed  by  the  dispensation  of  Con- 
science. There  Avas  no  pronounced  or  written  law, 
but  he  was  left  to  his  own  sense  of  right  and  AATong 
to  govern  and  judge  his  conduct.  The  result  of 
the  experiment  is  stated  in  the  Avords,  "  God  saAV 
that  the  Avickedness  of  man  AA^as  great  in  the  earth, 
and  that  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his 
lieart  Avas  only  evil  continually."  Gen.  vi:5. 
'^  Ever}^,"  "  only,"  "  eAdl,"  "  continually  "  tell  the 
sad  story  of  deep-seated  depravity  and  Avide-spread 
departure  from  their  Creator.  There  must  have 
been  millions  of  people  on  the  earth  at  the  time  the 
wrath  of  God  Avas  let  loose  in  a  fiood  to  destroy  the 


THE    ONI.Y    HOPE.  107 


race;  but  out  of  all  this  vast  multitude  there  was 
but  one  righteous  man,  who,  with  his  houseliohl, 
was  saved.  So  the  second  trial  ended  in  utter 
disaeter  and  ruin. 

Then  came  the  dispensation  of  the  Family. 
Scarcely  had  the  w^aters  of  the  deluge  subsided, 
before  man  in  his  defiance  of  God  determined  to 
build  a  tower  that  might  reach  unto  heaven.  Al- 
thougli  confounded  in  liis  folly,  lie  soon  forgot  the 
destruction  of  the  world  and  the  overthrow  of 
Babel,  and  relapsed  into  the  former  iniquity,  until 
universal  idolatry  covered  the  earth.  Terah,  the 
father  of  Abraham,  was  an  idolater  when  his  son 
was  called  out  from  his  country  and  kindred,  to 
train  his  household  in  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
God.  The  most  intimate  and  precious  relations 
were  established  between  Jeho^'ah  and  one  who  it 
three  times  called  His  friend,  l)ut  we  find  the  pos- 
terity of  this  friend  in  the  lime  kilns  of  Egyps, 
groaning  in  the  degradation  of  their  slavery,  and 
steeped  in  ignorance  and  unbelief.  So  the  third 
trial  ended  in  utter  disaster  and  ruin. 

Xext  we  have  the  dispensation  of  the  Law,  when 
an  entire  nation  was  separated  from  all  other  na- 
tions, and  told  how  to  dress,  and  Avhat  to  eat,  and 
when  to  observe  their  religious  rites,  and  where  to 
worship,  the  utmost  pains  being  taken  to  guard 
them  from  the  defilement  of  contact  with  the  world. 
Yet  their  national  annals,  written  by  their  own 
historians  and  prophets,  contain  an  almost  un- 
broken record  of  deliberate  disobedience,  of  per- 
sistent and  willful  disregard  of  known  commands, 
and  of  determined  rebellion  aorainst  divine  author- 
ity,  until  they  were  cast  out  of  the  land.     When 


108  TILL    HE    COME. 


Christ  came,  an  aged  Simeon  and  Anna  waited  for 
the  consolation  of  Israel,  bnt  with  hardly  an  ex- 
ception the  people  had  wholly  departed  from  God. 
So  the  fourth  trial  ended  in  utter  disaster  and  ruin. 
The  dispensation  of  our  Lord's  personal  ministry 
succeeded.  The  result  of  the  new  experiment  may 
be  described  in  the  words,  "  He  was  in  the  world, 
and  the  world  was  made  by  Him,  and  the  w^orld 
knew  Him  not.  He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His 
own  received  Him  not."  Jno.  i:9,  10.  He  per- 
formed the  most  mighty  and  the  most  convincing 
miracles  almost  Avithout  num])er;  He  spake  as 
never  man  did  to  thousands,  and  tens  of  thou- 
sands, but  He  won  only  a  few  followers,  princi- 
pally among  the  poor  and  illiterate  and  debased; 
and  when  He  was  nailed   to  the  cross  a  mockinor 

o 

inscription  was  placed  above  His  head  in  Hebrew, 
Greek,  and  Latin,  the  language  of  religion,  the 
language  of  culture,  and  the  language  of  power. 
All  that  Jew,  Greek  and  Roman  did  for  God's 
dear  Son  was  to  give  Him  a  inp^nger  for  a  cradle, 
an  instrument  of  torture  on  which  to  die,  and  a 
borrowed  tomb  to  hold  His  mangled  body.  "He 
is  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  So  the  fifth 
trial  ended  in  utter  disaster  and  ruin. 

This  brings  us  to  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit, 
so  called  because  the  Lloly  Spirit  has  come  to  bear 
witness  to  Christ's  ascension,  to  reprove  the  world, 
to  help  believers  as  their  abiding  Comforter,  to 
baptize  all  true  saints  into  one  body,  of  which  our 
exalted  Lord  is  the  head.  But  so  far  as  salvation 
is  concerned,  it  is  no  more  the  dispensation  of  the 
Spirit  than  any  former  age,  for  every  child  of  man 
who  has  been  redeemed  since  Adam's  day,  lias  been 


THE    ONLY    IIOI'P:.  109 


saved  by  the  Spirit  tliroiigli  faith.  Human  nature 
and  human  need  are  precisely  the  same  they  have 
been  from  the  fall  of  our  first  parents  to  this  pres- 
ent time.  It  is  clearly,  therefore,  not  a  question 
of  the  competency  of  the  Spirit  to  save  all  men,  nor 
of  the  adaptation  of  the  Gospel  to  all  men,  but  of 
the  divine  purpose  as  revealed  in  the  inspired 
Scriptures. 

If  any  one  can  show  a  line  in  these  Scriptures 
from  the  first  of  Genesis  to  the  last  of  Revelation, 
which  promises  the  conversion  of  the  world  by  the 
agencies  now  employed,  it  becometh  pre-millenial- 
iots  to  retire  at  once  into  silence  and  into  seclusion 
from  the  field  of  controversy.  Many  a  prominent 
preacher  and  professor  boldly  asserts  that  this  dis- 
pensation of  the  Spirit  has  been  appointed  to  bring 
the  whole  world  to  Christ.  He  is  challenged  to 
make  good  the  assertion  by  the  living  word  of 
God.  "  Let  him  now  speak,  or  else  hereafter  for- 
ever hold  his  peace."  Even  he  Avill  admit  that  if 
such  is  the  purpose  of  God,  it  has  been  terribly 
defeated  for  more  than  eighteen  liundred  and  fifty 
years;  if  such  was  tlie  design  of  the  dispensation, 
it  has  miserably  failed. 

In  the  first  place,  although  Christianity  for  the 
first  three  hundred  years  of  our  era  rolled  like  a 
wave  of  blessing  across  tlie  known  and  habitable 
globe,  scarcely  a  trace  of  it  is  left  wliere  it  was 
originally  victorious.  Churches  by  hundreds  and 
thousands  througliout  Southern  Europe,  Northern 
Africa  and  AVestern  Asia,  were  planted  l)y  the 
hands  of  the  Apostles  or  their  immediate  successors, 
and  enriched  with  the  blood  of  martyrs;  but  they 
have  entirely  disappeared   from    the    face    of   the 


110  TILL    HE    COME. 


earth.  The  ground  they  occupied  is  as  barren  as 
lieathenism.  Remember  that  this  occurred  in  the 
dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  as  did  the  utter  corrup- 
tion of  the  church,  cuhninating  under  Constantine, 
and  spreading  over  Christendom  like  a  black  cloud, 
that  for  more  than  a  thousand  years  was  broken 
here  and  there  by  only  a  single  ray  of  light. 

In  the  second  place,  the  Reformation  was  speed- 
ily followed  by  rationalism,  and  the  country  that 
gave  birth  to  the  former  is  now  the  home  of  the 
latter.  Within  an  incredibly  short  period  after 
Luther's  departure  Jesus  could  have  said  to  the 
most  of  Protestantism,  as  He  said  to  the  church  at 
Sardis,  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name, 
that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead."  It  took  three 
hundred  years  to  arouse  the  cold,  formal,  lifeless 
mass  to  any  sense  of  obligation  to  carry  the  gospel 
to  the  perishing  millions  of  our  race,  and  although 
the  century  now  closing  has  been  signalized  by  an 
enormous  expenditure  of  money  and  of  tlie  lives  of 
men  on  the  foreign  field,  and  altliough,  blessed  be 
God,  about  3,000,000  have  professed  the  Christian 
faith,  there  are  200,000,000  more  to  be  converted 
than  at  the  beginning  of  the  century.  The  churcli 
in  heathen  lands  does  not  begin  to  keep  pace  with 
the  natural  increase  by  birtli  of  the  Pagan  and 
Mohammedan  population.  Tlie  Rev.  James  John- 
ston, a  devoted  English  missionary,  tells  us  that 
"the  actual  increase  of  the  population  is  much 
more  than  the  200,000,000;"  and  ''we  rejoice  in 
the  work  accomplished  by  modern  Christian  mis- 
sions, wliile  we  mourn  over  tlie  sad  fact,  tliat  the 
increase  of  tlie  heathen  is  numerically  more  than 
f^tventij  t'nnes  greater    than    that   of   the    converts 


THE    ONLY    HOPE. 


Ill 


during  the  century  of  missions."  ^^J,  worse 
still;  ^' the  great  heathen  and  Mohammedan  systems 
of  religion  are  not  only  increasing  their  adlierents 
by  the  ordinary  birth-rate,  but  are  yearly  making 
far  more  converts  than  our  Christian  missions." 
In  the  third  place  the  outlook  at  home  is  not 
much  more  encouraging.  The  bright-eyed  opti- 
mists boast  that  there  are  12,000,000  of  Protestant 
church  members.  Granted ;  but  there  are  50,000,- 
000  more  souls  to  be  converted  than  when  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  was  adopted. 
Their  figures  perplex  a  plain  man  who  is  not  good 
in  mathematics,  when  he  knows  upon  undoubted 
authority  that  not  one  in  ten,  at  least  of  our  city 
people,  can  be  induced  to  listen  to  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel.  In  ^ew  York  City,  for  example, 
with  its  1,500,000  inhabitants,  but  85,000  were 
found  on  a  fair  day  in  its  various  places  of  worship; 
and  if  every  seat  in  every  church,  chapel,  hall  and 
other  preaching  station  was  occupied  every  Sunday, 
there  Avould  still  be  1,250,000  persons  who  could 
not  hear  tlie  gospel  if  tliey  so  desired.  An  item 
whicli  has  just  appeared  in  a  sunny  New  York 
religious  paper  tells  the  story.  It  is  as  follows: 
"  Churches  and  population  below  Fourteenth  street: 
1850,  36  churches,  400,000  population;  1890,  24 
churches,  (300,000  population."  London  with  a 
population  of  6,000,000,  the  most  thoroughly 
evangelized  city  of  tlie  world,  with  the  ablest 
i)reachers  and  tlie  lart/est  charities,  furnishes  church 
accommodations  for  only  1,500,000;  and  very  few 
of  its  houses  of  worship  are  half  filled.  Let  any 
one  read  Gen.  Booth's  '^  Li  Darkest  Enoland,"  and 
see  what  is  the  dreadful  condition  of  thincrft  in  the 


112 


TILL    HE    COME. 


heart  of  Christendom.  A  similar  proportion  of 
the  neglected  and  of  non-church  goers  is  found  in 
all  of  our  principal  cities. 

In  the  fourth  place,  our  leading  professors  in 
college  and  theological  seminary,  at  least  the  pro- 
fessors who  have  the  ear  of  the  public  and  are 
most  admired  and  applauded,  seem  to  he  deter- 
mined to  destroy  the  foundation  of  faith  in  the 
authority  and  certainty  of  God's  word.  A  power- 
fully written  article  which  recently  appeared  in  a 
Chicago  secular  newspaper,  well  presents  the  case: 

The  sum  of  all  is  that  the  Bible  is  "  a  fallible  book,"  con- 
sisting of  "idyls,  myths,  poems,  fiction,  dreams,  predictions, 
histories,novels,morals  and  theology,"  full  of  "human  inven- 
tions and  impefections,"  with  traces  of  the  divine  in  it,  but, 
of  itself,  "'no  absolute  criterion  of  faith,  morals  or  wor- 
ship."  The  impertinent  assault  (f  Dr.  Schaff,   Professor 

Briggs'  colleague,  upon  the  Westminster  Confession,  sent  a 

shock  through  all  the  ch.irches  two  years  ago And,  more 

recently,  the  so-called  "American  Institute  of  Sacred  Liter- 
ature," with  Professors  Briggs  and  Harper  in  the  lead,  teach- 
ing that  the  authority  of'  Jesus  Christ  and  His  apostles 
amounts  to  nothing  in  questions  of  "  higher  criticism,"  since 
they  did  not  profess  to  bs'  critics,  and  had  another  mission — 
and  teaching  this  in  Chicago  and  Boston  under  the  auspices 
of  the  Young  IVlen's  Christian  Association^ — has  given  inten- 
sity to  the  situation This  is  not  a  Presbyterian,  or  a  Bap- 
tist, or  a  Congregational  fight.  It  is  an  open  apostasy  in  the 
bosom  of  professing  Christendom,  Not  one  solitary  Assem- 
bly or  Association  or  Conference  has  taken  action  on  the 
subject.  The  poison  is  deep  in  the  veins  of  the  denomina- 
tions. An  eminent  Professor  in  Berlin,  another  in  Neu- 
chatel,  another  in  Vienna,  and  another  in  Dorpat  have 
recently  written  that  "nothing  now  can  stay  the  tide  of  defec- 
tion froja  the  faith  which  is  rising  in  the  bosom  of  Christen- 
dom," and  "the  church  can  only  expect  the  divine  judgments 
her  sins  have  provoked."  "  A  higher  critic,  enthroned  above 
all  earthly  critics,  will  avenge  the  wrongs  done  to  His  own 
AVord  and  to  Himself." 

The  sudden  outburst  of  infidelity  among  able, 

and  learned,  and  eloquent  and   inthiential    Profes- 


Till-:    ONLY     IIOTK.  118 

sors,  who  are  connected  with  scliools  for  the  train- 
ing of  yonng  men,  soon  to  become  pastors,  is  one 
of  tlie  most  sio;nilicant  sio^ns  of  the  times.  T>esi(les 
Professor  Briggs  and  Professor  Harper  v/ith  their 
destructive  "  Higher  Criticism,''  l)orrowed  of 
conrse  from  the  Germans,  we  liave  Professor  Schnr- 
man  in  the  Cono-recyational  clmrcli,  Professor  Allen 
in  the  Episcopal,  Professor  Workman  in  the  Meth- 
odist, publishing  statements  about  the  Bible  that 
miorht  make  Mr.  Ingersoll  blush.  On  the  other 
side  of  the  Atlantic  we  have  Professor  Dods,  IVofes- 
sor  Drummond,  Professor  Smyth,  Professor  David- 
son assailing  the  inspiration  of  God's  word,  deny- 
ing the  fall  of  man,  the  atonement  of  Christ,  and 
every  essential  truth.  Professor  Momerie  of  the 
theological  department  in  King's  College  is  just 
out  in  a  book  in  which  he  tells  us  that  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  Scripture  does  not  differ  in  quality 
from  that  of  Shakespeare  or  Newton. 

Let  the  following  suffice  to  show  liis  teachings 
that  are  gladly  accepted  by  many  theological  Pro- 
fessors of  our  day: 

Between  the  covers  of  this  little  volume  (the  Bible)  we 
find  opinions  as  diverse  and  contradictory  as  have  ever  existed 
in  the  world.  And  in  particular  we  can  trace  it  in  the  devel- 
opment of  the  idea  of  God  from  barbarism  up  to  Hegel 

The  modern  priest  talks  about  miracles — Gadarene  pigs,  and 
whatnot — as  he  might  have  done  at  a. time  when  natural 
laws  had  never  been  heard  of,  when  every  one  believed,  not 
in  the  uniformity,  but  in  the  irregularity  of  Nature. . .  .He 
speaks  about  inspiration  and  revelation,  as  if  he  did  not  know 
that  much  of  the  teacliing  of  the  Bible  had  been  equaled, 
and  even  surpassed,  in  other  sacred  literatures,  and  that  some 
of  the  sayings  of  Christ  Himself — including  even  the  golden 
rule — had  been  anticipated  by  ''pagans"  liundreds  of  ^^'ars 

before  the  Christian  era There   is   a   jn-actically   inlinite 

difference  between  the  God  of  the  patriarchs,  avIio  is  always 
repenting,  and  the  God  of-the  apostles It  is  strangle  tlut 


114  TILL    HE    COME. 


persons  who  have  read  the  25th  chapter  of  Matthew  should 
still  believe. in  the  doctrine  of  Justification  by  Faith. 

Tlie  Rev.  Minot  J.  Savage  13.  D.,  a  Unitarian 
preacher  of  Boston,  no  doubt  tells  the  truth  in  a 
recently  published  discourse,  when  he  says,  "  There 
are  any  number  of  places  in  America  where  there 
w^ould  be  Unitarian  churches  within  three  months, 
were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  the  nominally  orthodox 
ministers  of  those  places  have  taken  the  wind  com- 
pletely out  of  the  Unitarian  sails.  The  people  say, 
'What  is  the  use  of  a  Unitarian  Church?  Our 
minister  is  as  broad  as  your's ;  he  no  longer  preaches 
an  infallible  Bible,  or  hell,  or  the  Trinity.'"  He 
is  ]io  doubt  truthful  also  in  the  statement  that  a 
prominent  minister,  orthodox  in  name,  declared  to 
him  he  did  not  know  one  preacher  in  his  large 
circle  of  acquaintance  whc  now  believes  these  doc- 
trines. Can  any  one  fail  to  see  that  there  has  been 
a  departure  from  the  Bible,  as  Avide  as  intidelity, 
by  numbers  Avho  give  instruction  from  the  pulpit? 

In  the  lifth  place,  the  pew  is  in  a  still  more 
deplorable  condition,  if  this  were  possible.  The 
atmosphere  is  laden  with  the  malaria  of  skepticism, 
as  it  is  said  to  be  charged  with  the  microbes  of 
deadly  disease,  and  the  members  of  the  church 
inhale  it,  like  others.  The  germs  of  unbelief  cling 
to  nearly  all  of  our  current  literature,  being  found 
not  only  in  the  works  of  scientists,  who  are  almost 
to  man  asseverating  acrnostics  or  avowed  atheists, 
but  also  in  magazines,  newspapers,  good-for-noth- 
ing novels,  and  even  in  volumes  of  popular  ser- 
mons. The  British  Weel'hj,  which  is  any  thing 
but  a  pessimistic  periodical,  declares  it  to  be  '^a 
fact  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  younger  nu^n. 


THE    ONLY    HOPE.  115 


who  are  providino;  the  best  journalism  of  tlie  day, 
are  unbelievers.  They  do  not  even  accept  the 
idea  of  a  GOD/' 

It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  professing 
christians  who  read  much  are  carried  away  from 
the  truth.  It  is  one  of  the  many  evidences  of  the 
supernatural  origin  of  the  Scriptures  that  they 
come  into  sharp  conflict  with  human  nature,  and 
if  human  natui'e  is  given  a  chance,  even  the  human 
nature  of  a  professing  Christian,  it  will  take  sides 
every  time  against  God  and  His  word.  This  is 
the  secret  of  the  excessive  popularity  of  such  relig- 
ious writers  as  Professor  Drummond.  "  He  adapts 
Christianity  to  its  present  environment,"  as  one  of 
his  admirers  has  said,  and  throws  down  the  reins 
upon  tlie  neck  of  man's  natural  desires  and  self- 
sufticiency.  The  educational  process  of  substi- 
tuting human  opinion  for  the  authority  of  the 
inspired  writings  has  gone  to  such  extent,  that  a 
vast  majority  of  those  who  have  confessed  the 
name  of  Christ  are  almost  as  ignorant  of  the  Bible, 
as  if  no  such  book  had  been  written.  They  prefer 
to  travel  on  His  day  for  business  or  pleasure,  or  if 
they  stay  at  home,  their  minds  are  stuffed  with  the 
crime  and  gossip,  the  scandal  and  politics  of  the 
Sunday  newspaper  before  they  observe  the  empty 
form  of  public  worship.  The  most  startling  thing 
about  it  is  the  utter  deadness  of  conscience  to  any 
claim  of  God.  Numbers  of  them  are  living  in 
open  and  notorious  sin,  and  yet  their  names  are 
enrolled  on  the  church  registers,  and  they  come  to 
the  Lord's  table  under  the  fatal  delusion  that  they 
are  Christians.  Scarcely  a  day  passes  without  the 
mention  in  the  newpapers  or  the  names  even  of 


116 


TILL    HE    COME. 


ministers  of  the  gospel  in  connection  with  licen- 
tiousness; and  so  numerous  are  defaulters  and 
thieves  who  are  Sunday  School  teachers  and  church 
officers,  they  have  ceased  to  excite  surprise 

Even  among  the  others  who  maintain  a  decent  out- 
ward deportment,  how  few  manifest  any  real  spiritual 
life!  Wliat  a  mere  handful  of  any  considerable 
congregation  in  the  land  can  be  found  in  the 
prayer-meeting,  or  Sunday-school,  or  kneeling  in 
family  worship,  or  speaking  a  Avord  for  Christ,  so 
far  as  can  be  ascertained!  The  most  of  those  who 
appear  before  the  world  as  tlie  representatives  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  attend  the  theatre,  or  send  their 
children  to  the  dancing  school,  or  whirl  in  the 
lustful  waltz,  or  carry  on  gambling  in  their  own 
houses  under  the  name  of  progressive  euchre,  or 
they  are  tricky  in  trade,  or  covetous  and  stingy,  or 
mean  and  untruthful,  ungodly  in  their  amuse- 
ments, conversation,  fashions,  habits,  maxims, 
principles,  purposes,  and  reading,  no  one  being 
able  to  discover  the  faintest  line  of  separation 
between  them  and  the  world.  Dear  Dr.  Bonor 
truly  said,  "I  look  for  the  church,  and  find 
it  in  the  world ;  I  look  for  the  world,  and  find 
it  in  the  church."  A  few  years  ago  a  somewhat 
notorious  Catholico-Episcopal  or  Episcopo-*Cfttholic 
clergyman  of  New  York  city  caused  quite  a 
hubbub  by  declaring  that  Protestantism  is  a  fail- 
ure. But  if  judged  by  the  standard  of  doctrine 
and  duty  revealed  in  the  New  Testament,  the  man 
was  right.  Or,  if  it  is  expected  to  convert  the 
world,  he  was  right.  In  this  respect  both  Protest- 
antism and  Popery  are  wretched  failures.  The 
world  has  converted  them. 


THE    ONLY    HOPE.  117 

111  the  t^ixtli  place,  society  is   leprous   all   o\ei\ 

Upon  this  siil)ject  it  is  enough   perhaps,  to  quote 

Elizaheth    Stuart  Phelps,   one  of  the    purest    and 

most  popular  of  our  writers: 

A  promineut  literary  mau,  himself  used  to  the  world  and 
the  ways  thereof,  urged  earnestly  upon  the  author  1he  publi- 
cation of  this  paper,  saying,  "  In  my  humble  opinion,  the 
ideal  of  propriety  held  by  what  is  called  society,  has  abso- 
lutely no  relation  to  the  moral  sense.  To  take  a  point;  when 
I  seethe  ease,  nay,  the  eagerness  with  which  our  young  girls 
attend  and  seem  to  prefer  those  plays  where  the  ballet  is 
enough  to  make  any  gentleman  unc(mifortable,  I  am  con- 
fused.    AVhat  does  it  mean?" Our  stage   exhibits   moral 

monstrosity  to  the  edge  of  abomination,. . .  .while  the  fathers 
of  our  girl's  pay  two  dollars  and  a  half  a  seat  for  the  privilege 
of  exposing  their  daughters  to  sights  which  ought  to  be  sup- 
jiressed  under  the  law  prohibiting  the  exhibition  of  obscene 
pictures. 

Of  course  her  noble  indignation  will  be  sneered 
at  as  prudery,  as  her  denounciations  of  the  dance 
will  be;  and  the  young  girls  will  continue  to  swarm 
to  the  obscene  exhibitions  of  the  theatre,  and  to  be 
clasped  in  the  embrace  of  men. 

Any  fashion  which  gives  to  a  roue  the  right  to  clasp  a 
pure  woman  in  his  arms,  and  hold  her  for  the  length  of  an 
intoxicating  piece  of  music,  is  below  moral  defense.  I 
lirmly  believe  that  the  time  will  come  when  our  present  li- 
cense in  this  respect  will  be  regarded  as  we  now  regard  the 
practices  attending  the  worship  of  Aphrodite.  It  might  be 
said  that  nautch  dance  [a   dance  performed  by  prostitutes] 

is  modesty  beside  our  waltz One  need  not  be  a  fanatic  in 

the  temperance  movement  to  discern  one  cause  for  the  de- 
crease of  modesty  in  the  increase  of  drinking  habits  among 
a  certain  class  of  our  ladies.  "  Certainly,"  testifies  the  first 
young  man  I  happen  to  ask,  himself  a  person  of  so-called 
good  morals;  "certainly  I  have  often  danced  with  young 
ladies  who  were  intoxicated.  It  is  not  an  uncommon  thing 
to  meet  them  •  too  far  gone  '  to  converse."  If  the  deliacy  of  a 
sober  girl  cannot  protect  her  from  the  taint  in  the  social  at- 
mosphere, what  is  to  be  expected  from  the  modesty  of  a 
drunken  one? In  the  old  times  a  modest  wife  hardly  con- 
versed ^^ith  her  own  husband   as   young  women   do  to-day 


118  TILL    HE    COME. 


Avitli  yoimg  men  of  their  acquaintance  ....  It  is  a  fact,  gloss 
it  an}' flow  as  we  may,  that  decent  women  have  never  dressed 
so  indecenth''  in  our  country  and  centur}^  as  they  do  in  fash- 
ionable life  to-day. 

Perhaps  it  is  well  to  add  the  opening  of  last 
New  Year's  address  by  Dr.  Tahnage,  the  most 
popular  preaclier  in  America,  and  tlie  most  hope- 
ful optimist,  who  always  looks  on  the  "  bright  side," 
and  who  calls  npon  the  cliurch  for  a  forward 
movement. 

That  there  is  need  for  such  a  religious  movement  is  evi- 
dent from  the  fact  that  never  since  our  world  was  swung  out 
among  the  planets  has  there  been  such  an  organized  and  de- 
termined effort  to  overthrow  righteousness,  and  make  the 
ten  commandments  obsolete  and  the  whole  Bible  a  derision. 
Meanwhile  alcoholism  is  taking  down  its  victims  by  the 
hundreds  of  thousands,  and  the  political  parties  get  down  on 
their  knees  practically  saying,  "  O  thou  Rum  Jug,  we  bow 
down  before  thee.  Give  us  the  offices,  city,  state  and  national. 
(Jh,  give  us  the  offices  and  we  will  worship  thee  forever  and 
ever,  Amen."  The  Christian  Sabbath,  meanwhile,  appointed 
for  physical,  mental  and  spiritual  rest,  is  being  secularized 
and  abolished.  As  if  the  bad  publishing  houses  of  our  own 
country  had  exhaisted  their  literary  filth,  the  French  and 
Russian  sewers  have  been  invited  to  pour  their  scurrility  and 
moral  slush  into  the  trough,  where  our  American  swine  are 
now  wallowing.  Meanwhile,  there  are  enough  marts  of  im- 
famy  in  all  our  city,  open  and  unmolested  of  the  law,  to  in- 
voke the  Omnipotent  wrath,  which  buried  Sodom  under  a 
deluge  of  brimstone.  The  pandemoniac  world,  I  think,  has 
massed  its  troops,  and  they  are  this  moment  playing  their 
batteries  upon  family  circles,  church  circles,  social  circles 
and  national  circles.  Apollyon  is  in  the  saddle  and,  riding 
at  the  head  of  his  myrmidons,  would  capture  this  world  for 
darkness  and  woe. 

In  the  seventh  place,  neither  the  government 
of  the  United  States  nor  of  any  other  nation  in 
Christendom,  posssesses  the  elements  of  stability. 
The  vile  immoralities  of  men  in  public  life,  both 
in  Great  Britain  and  in  America,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  determined  and  desperate  socialism  pervading 
the  working    classes,  and    the    rapid    increase   of 


THE    (^M.Y    HOPE.  119 


crime  and  (Irunkeiiuef^s  and  licentiousness  and  vice 
in  every  form  are  snreh^  rotting  away  the  founda- 
tions on  wliicli  alone  empires  and  republics  stand. 
A  friend,  wlio  lias  carefully  looked  over  the  col 
umns  of  a  daily  city  newspaper  for  a  single  month 
of  the  year  1891,  reports  that  he  read  accounts  of 
404  murders  and  586  other  crimes,  such  as  adul- 
tery, burglary,  robbery  and  rape,  some  of  which 
wei'e  worse  than  brutal,  for  they  were  devilish. 
Add  to  this  the  statisiics  brought  out  in  a  paper 
read  befoie  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association 
Convention  of  Illinois,  in  1890,  telling  us  "  that 
we  have  about  7,000,000  of  young  men  between 
eighteen  and  thirty,  and  that  6,000,000  of  these 
never  attend  a  church;  that  only  about  350,000  are 
members  of  any  churcli;  while  there  aie  over 
700,000  young  men  between  those  ages  in  our 
public  prisons  at  some  time  during  each  year." 
In  this  country  for  the  past  fifteen  years  the  most 
earnest  and  persistent  efforts  have  been  made  by 
good  men,  and  by  organized  bands  of  women,  to 
put  an  end  to  the  drink  traffic,  and  to  arrest  the 
fi'ightful  evils  of  intemperance.  How  far  these 
efforts  have  succeeded  may  be  learned  from  the 
following  table  just  received  directly  from  the 
Revenue  Office  in  Washington  City.  Under  the 
head,  ''  Distilled  Spirits  Consumed,"  it  appears 
that  in  1875  there  were  66,120,588  gallons  used; 
in  1890,  87,829,562  gallons.  Under  the  head, 
'•  Wine  Consumed,"  in  1875  there  were  19,991,330 
gallons;  in  1889,  these  had  increased  to  34,144,477 
gallons.  Under  the  head,  "Malt  Liquors  Con- 
sumed," the  people  in  1875  drank  294,953,157 
gallons;  and  in  1890  they  swallowed  856,792,335 


120  TILL    HE    CO^rE. 


gallons.  When  we  add  to  tliese  figures  the  appall- 
ing fact  that  there  is  an  annual  expenditure  in 
this  so-called  (liristion  land  of  $900,000,000  for 
liquor,  and  1600,000,000  for  tobacco,  while  the 
paltry  sum  of  |5, 500,000  is  given  to  Home  and 
Foreign  Missions,  it  is  evident  that  the  millen- 
nium has  not  yet  dawned,  but  it  is  growing  darker 
every  day. 

Senator  Ingalls,  of  Kansas,  perhaps  the  keenest 
intellect  in  the  United  States  Senate,  whatever 
may  be  thought  of  him  as  a  man  or  politician, 
recently  delivered  before  the  Senate  a  carefully 
prepared  oration,  which  open  as  follows: 

Mr.  President,  two  portentous  perils  threaten  the  safety, 
if  they  do  not  e,  danger,  the  existence  of  the  republic.  The 
Jirst  of  these  is  ignorant,  debased,  degraded,  spurious,  and 
sophisticated  suffrage,  contaminated  by  the  sewage  of  decay- 
ing nations;  suffrage  intimidated  and  suppressed  in  the 
South;  suffrage  impure  and  corrupt,  apathetic  and  indiffer- 
ent, in  the  great  cities  of  the  North;  so  that  it  is  doubtful 
whether  there  has  been  for  half  a  century  a  presidential  elec- 
tion in  this  country  that  expressed  the  deliberate  and  intelli- 
gent judgment  of  the  whole  body  of  the  American  people. . 
The  second  evil  Mr.  President,  to  which  I  adverted  as  threat- 
ening the  safety,  if  it  does  not  endanger  the  existence,  of  the 
republic,  is  the  tyranny  of  combined,  concentrated,  centra- 
lized, and  incorporated  capital.  [He  then  shows  that  of  the 
enormous  wealth  of  the  country,  $(35,000,000,000,  considerably 
more  than  one-half  is  in  the  hands  of  31,100  persons.]  Mr. 
President,  it  is  the  most  appalling  statement  that  ever  fell 
upon  mortal  ears.  It  is,  so  far  as  the  results  of  democracy 
as  a  social  and  political  experiment  are  C(mcerned  the  most 
terrible  commentary  that  ever  was  recorded  in  the  book  of 
time — and  Nero  fiddles  whi  e  Rome  burns.  It  is  thrown  off 
with  a  laugh  and  a  sneer,  "as  the  froth  upon  the  beer"  of  our 
])()litical  and  social  system.  . .  .Nor  is  this  all, ]\Ir.  President; 
tlie  hostility  between  the  employers  and  the  employed  in  this 
country  is  becoming  vindictive  and  permanently  malevolent. 
Labor  and  capitol  are  in  two  hostile  camps  to-day.  Lock- 
outs and  strikes  and  libor  difficulties  have  become  practic- 
ally the  normal  condition  of  our  system,  and  it  is  estimated 
that  during  the  year  that  has  just  closed,  in  conseriuence  of 


THE    ONLY    TIOTK 


121 


these  disorders,  in  consequence  of  this  hostility  and  this  war- 
fare, the  actual  loss  to  the  country  has  not  been  less  than 
$300,000,000. 

The  saddest  feature  a1)oiit  it  all  is  the  fact  that 
the  laboring  men,  or  wage-workei's,  or  bread- 
winners, as  they  are  foolishly  called,  hate  the 
cliiirch  Avitli  the  bitterest  hatred.  They  regard  it 
as  part  of  the  fashionable  and  wealthy  society 
which,  they  complain,  deprives  them  of  their 
rights.  Upon  this  laige  and  important  class  of  the 
commnnity  the  Protestant  church,  at  least,  has 
almost  entirely  lost  its  hold.  Not  one  in  ten 
thousand  of  them  ever  goes  near  a  building  in 
which  religions  services  are  observed,  and  it  must 
be  confessed,  that  the  appearance  of  the  congrega- 
tion, and  the  intellectual  preaching,  on  the  inside 
are  not  calculated  to  draw  them.  When  we  find 
our  great  scientific  authorities  announcing  that 
there  is  no  God,  and  our  leading  professors  declar- 
ing that  the  Bible  is  not  true,  and  our  most  popu- 
lar preachers  proclaiming  that  there  is  no  future 
punishment,  even  one  who  is  not  the  son  of  a 
prophet  can  safely  predict  that  the  sources  of  mor- 
ality Avill  soon  be  dried,  and  the  barriers  to  uni- 
versal lawlessness  speedily  removed.  No  wonder 
tliat  at  the  close  of  the  present  age  the  vial  of 
divine  wrath  is  poured  out  upon  the  sea;  "and  it 
became  as  the  blood  of  a  dead  man."  Hev.  xvi:3. 

Only  a  glance  has  been  given  to  some  of  the 
difficulties  and  evils  that  lie  upon  the  very  surface 
of  things.  Yery  much  more  could  have  been 
truthfully  written  under  each  of  the  topics  here 
presented;  but  perhaps  enough  has  been  said  to 
convince  any  fair-minded  reader  of  the  utter  fail- 
ure of  man  under  the  best    circumstances.     It    is 


122  TILL    HE    COME. 


distasteful,  however,  to'  most  persons  to  face 
unpleasant  facts,  and  hence  the  actual  facts,  now 
presented  in  the  mildest  manner,  will  be  scouted, 
just  as  the  few  who  predicted  the  late  civil  war, 
arguing  from  the  inevitable  logic  of  cui-rcnt  events 
and  from  the  una\'oidable  relation  of  cause  to 
effect,  were  ridiculed  as  cranks  and  pessimists.  So 
the  mass  of  the  people  and  the  preachers  will  con- 
tinue to  laugh,  claiming  that  the  church  has  never 
been  in  so  flourishing  a  condition,  declaring  that 
the  world  is  l)ecoming  l)etter  every  day,  until  the 
storm  of  God's  wrath  shall  burst  upon  them,  as 
the  rain  of  fire  and  brimstone  swept  the  cities  of 
the  plain. 

There  is  an  absolute  necessity  for  the  personal 
coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  save  an  apos- 
tate church  and  a  godless,  undone  world.  Never 
has  any  former  age  terminated  in  more  complete 
disaster  and  ruin  tlian  that  which  confronts  the 
professing  Christian  body  in  the  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit.  Nay,  in  proportion  to  the  height  of 
privilege  to  which  the  gospel  has  exalted  those  who 
have  heard  its  glad  tidings,  will  be  the  depth  of 
their  fall;  and  the  ruin  of  the  house,  built  not  upon 
the  impregnable  rock  of  Scripture  but  upon  the 
sand,  shall  be  great.  Even  at  the  end  'of  the 
millennial  period,  the  seventh  dispensation,  there 
will  be  a  final  attempt  of  the  liberated  Satan  and 
the  confederated  nations  to  destroy  the  authority 
of  Jehovah.  It  will  be  amply  demonstrated  to 
angels  and  men  and  demons  that,  however  culti- 
vated and  wherever  placed,  ^'  the  mind  of  the  flesh 
is  enmity  against  God.''     Rom.  viii:7. 


THE    ONI.V     HOTK. 

The  day  of  the  Lord  it  coiiieth, 

It  eometh  like  a  thief  in  ihe  night, 
It  comes  when  the  workl  is  dreaming 

Of  safety  and  of  peace  and  light; 
It  Cometh,  the  day  of  sackcloth, 

With  darkness,  and  storm,  and  tire, 
The  day  of  the  Great  Avenger, 

The  day  of  the  burning  ire. 

The  day  of  the  Lord  it  eometh, 
When  tlie  virgins  are  all  asleep, 

And  the  drunken  world  is  lying- 
in  a  slumber  yet  more  deep; 

Like  a  sudden  lurch  of  the  vessel, 
By  night  on  the  sunken  rock. 

All  earth  in  a  moment  reeleth. 
And  goeth  down  with  the  shock. 

The  flash  of  the  sword  of  havoc 

Foretelleth  the  day  of  blood, 
Revealing  the  Judge's  progress. 

The  downward  march  of  God; 
The  fire  which  no  mortal  kindles, 

Quick  seizes  the  (piaking  earth, 
And  labors  the  groaning  creation 

In  the  pangs  of  its  second  birth. 

Then  the  day  of  the  evil  endeth. 

And  the  righteous  reign  comes  in, 
Like  a  cloud  of  sorrow  evanish. 

The  ages  of  human  sin; 
The  light  of  the  morning  gleameth 

Adown,  without  cloud  or  gloom. 
In  chains  lies  the  ruler  of  darkness, 

And  the  Prince  of  Liuht  has  come! 


128 


124  TILL    II K    COME. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


A    PRACTICAL    HOPE. 


BEYOXD  question  tlie  doctrine  of  onr  Lord's 
second  coining  is  the  comanding  motive  of 
the  New  Testament.  Not  even  the  love  of 
Christ  is  so  frequently  mentioned  as  an  incentive. 
It  is  connected  by  the  Holy  Ghost  with  every 
doctrine  and  duty,  with  every  precept  and  practice 
of  Christain  faith  and  conduct.  It  arms  admoni- 
tions, it  points  appeals,  it  strengthens  arguments, 
it  enforces  commands,  it  intensifies  entreaties,  it 
arouses  courage,  it  rebukes  fear,  it  quickens  affec- 
tion, it  kindles  hope,  it  inflames  zeal,  it  separates 
from  the  world,  it  consecrates  to  God,  it  dries  tears, 
it  conquers  death.  'No  one  will  deny  that  it  is 
found  everywhere  through  gospels  and  epistles,  al- 
though many  will  aflirm  that  the  passages  contain- 
ing it  do  not  mean  what  they  declare. 

A  dear  old  ex-pastor  of  Brooklyn,celebrated  for 
the  number  of  his  charmiiio;  contributions  to  re- 
ligious  periodicals,  and  still  more  noted  for  his 
enormous  egotism,  has  recently  informed  the  pub- 
lic that  one  hundred  printed  texts  on  tlie  second 
advent  have  no  more  to  do  with  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  than  witli  the  McKinley  tariff  bilk  This 
shows,  not  only  the  density  of  the  dear  old  Doctors 
ignorance,  but  the  weakness  of  the  silly  subterfuge 
by  which  some  of  the  beloved  post-millennial 
l>ivthren  seek  to  evade  the  truth  concei'iiing  oui* 
Saviour's  personal  return.      Every  one  of  the  one 


A    I'JBACTICAL    HOPE.  125 

huiidrel  texts  touches  directly  upon  that  personal 
return,  as  do  the  texts  now  presented  in  the  form 
of  a  Second  Advent  Alphabet,  and  these  by  no 
means  exhaust  the  subject. 

ABIDING  in  Christ.  ''And  now,  little  cliil- 
(hen,  abide  in  llim;  that  when  lie  shall  appear, 
we  may  have  contidence,  and  not  be  ashamed  be- 
foi'e  Ilim  at  His  coming."     1  Jno.  ii:28. 

BROTHERLY  LOVE.  -The  Lord  make  you 
to  increase  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another, 
and  toAvard  all  men,  even  as  Ave  do  toward  you;  to 
the  end  He  may  establish  your  hearts  unblamable 
in  holiness  before  God,  even  our  Father,  at  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Avith  all  His 
saints."      1  Thess,  ii:12,  13. 

CONSOLATION.  "I  Avould  not  have  you  to 
be  ignorant,  brethren,  concerning  them  Avhich  are 
asleep,  that  ye  sorroAv  not,  even  as  others  Avhich 
ha\^e  no  hope.  For  if  Ave  belie A^e  that  Jesus  died 
and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in 
Jesus  Avill  (lod  bring  Avith  Him."  1  Thess.  iv:13, 14. 

DEADNESS  TO  SIN.  -  When  Christ,  Avho  is 
our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear 
Avitli  Him  in  glory.  Mortify  therefore  your  mem- 
bers Avhicli  are  upon  the  earth."     Col.  iii:4,  5. 

ENDURANCE.  "B^liold,  I  come  quickly: 
hold  that  fast  Avhich  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take 
thy  croAvn."  Rev.  iiiill.  "  WhosoeA^r,  there- 
fore, shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and  of  my  Avords  in 
this  adulterous  and  sinful  creneration,  of  him,  shall 
the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  Avlien  He  cometh  in 
the  glory  of  His  father  Avith  the  holy  angels." 
Mark  viii:38. 

FAITHFULNESS.    "■  A  certain  nobleman  went 


126  TILL    HE    COME. 


into  a  far  country  to  receive  for  himself  a  kingdom, 
and  to  return.  And  he  called  his  ten  servants,and 
delivered  them  ten  pounds,  and  said  unto  them, 
Occupy  until  I  come.''     Lu.  xix:12,  13. 

GODLINESS.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come 
as  a  thief  in  the  niglit ....  Seeing  then  tliat  all 
these  things  shall  he  dissolved,  what  manner  of 
persons  ought  ye  to  he  in  all  holy  conversation  and 
godliness,  looking  for  and  hasting  the  coming  of 
the  day  of  God!"     2  Pet.  iii:10,  12. 

HEAYENLY-MINDEDNESS.  "  Our  citizen- 
ship is  in  heaven ;  from  whence  also  we  look  for 
the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Phil.  iii:20. 
'' Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God;  and  it  doth 
not  yet  appear  what  Ave  shall  he;  hut  we  know  that 
when  Pie  shall  appear,  we  shall  he  like  him,  for  we 
shall  see  Llim  as  He  is.  And  every  man  that  hath 
this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is 
pure."     1  Jno.  iii:2,  3. 

INSTATANEOUS.  "As  the  lightning  come^h 
out  of  the  east,  and  shineth  even  unto  the  west; 
so  also  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  he." 
Matt.  xxiv:27. 

JUDGMENT.  "Behold,  the  Lord  cometh 
with  ten  thousands  of  His  saints,  to  execute  judg- 
ment upon  all."  Jude  14.  '^AVlien  the  Son  of 
Man  shall  come  in  His  glory,  and  all  the  holy 
angels  with  Him,  then  shall  He  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  His  glory,  and  hefore  Him  shall  be  gath- 
ered all  nations."     Matt.  xxv:31,  22. 

KEEPING  THE  GARMENTS.  "Behold,  I 
come  as  a  thief.  Blessed  is  lie  that  wateheth,  and 
keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they 
see  his  shame,"     Ilev.  xvi:15. 


A    PRACTICAL    HOPE.  127 

LORD'S  SUPPER.  -As  oft  as  ye  eat  this 
bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's 
death  till  He  come."  1  Cor.  xi:26.  '•  If  I  go  and 
prepare  a  place  for  yon,  I  will  come  again,  and 
receive  yon  nnto  myself."  Jno.  xiv:3.  "  Unto 
them  that  look  for  llini  shall  He  appear  a  second 
time,  withont  sin  nnto  salvation."  Heb.  ix:28. 
*  MODERATION.  "  Let  yonr  moderation  be 
known  unto  all  men.  The  Lord  is  at  hand."  Phil. 
iv:5,  "  Therefore  judge  nothing  before  the  time, 
nntil  the  Lord  come."     1  Cor.  iv:5. 

NEARNESS.  "  Yet  a  little  Avhile  and  He  that 
shall  come  will  come,  and  will  not  ta-ry."  Heb. 
x:38.  -  Stablisli  yonr  hearts:  for  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  draweth  nigh."     Jas.  v:8. 

OBEDIENCE.  -  The  Lord  Jesns  shall  be  re- 
vealed from  heaven  with  His  mighty  angels,  in 
liaming  lire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  knoAv 
not  God,  and  that  obey  not  tlie  gospel  of  our  Lord 
Jesns  Christ."     2  Thess.  i:7,8. 

PATIENCE.  "  Be  patient,  therefore,  brethren 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord."  Jas.  v:7.  "The 
Lord  direct  your  hearts  into  the  love  of  God,  and 
into  thepaitent  waiting  for  Christ."  2  Thess.  iii:5. 

QUICKLY.  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly."  Rev. 
xxii:7.  "  He  which  testifieth  these  things  saith, 
surely  I  come  quickly;  Amen.  Even  so,  come. 
Lord  Jesus."     Rev.  xxii:20. 

REAVARD.  "The  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  the 
glory  of  His  Father  with  His  angels;  and  then  He 
shall  reward  every  man  according  to  liis  works." 
Matt.  xvi:27«  "Behold,  I  come  quickly;  and  my 
j-eward  is  witli  me,  to  give  every  man  as  his  work 
shall  be,"     Rev.  xxii:12. 


128 


TILL    HE    COME. 


SANTIFICATIO]N\  "The  God  of  peace  Him- 
self sanctify  you  wliolly;  and  may  yonr  spirit  and 
soul  and  body  be  perserved  entire,  without  blame, 
at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1  Thess. 
v:23,  R  Y. 

TRIALS.  -That  the  trial  of  your  faith,  being 
much  more  precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth, 
though  it  be  tried  with  lire,  might  be  found  unto 
praise  and  honor  and  glory  at  the  appearing  of 
Jesus  Christ."     1  Pet.  1:7. 

UlS'EEBUKABLE.  -  I  give  thee  charge  in  the 
sight  of  God,  who  quickeneth  all  things,  and  of 
Christ  Jesus,  who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed 
a  good  confession ;  that  thou  keep  this  command- 
ment without  spot,  unrebukable,  until  the  appear- 
ing of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."     I  Tim.  vi:13,  14. 

VIGILANCE.  "Let  your  loins  be  girded 
about,  and  your  lights  burning;  and  ye  yourselves 
like  unto  men  that  wait  for  the  Lord,"  Lu.  xii:35. 
"  Watch  ye  therefore;  for  ye  know  not  when  the 
Master  of  the  liouse  cometh,  at  even,  or  at  mid- 
night, or  at  the  cockcrowing,  or  in  the  morning: 
lest  coming  suddenly  He  iind  you  sleeping.  Ana 
what  I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all,  AVatch."  Mark 
xiii:35,  37. 

WAITING.  "  Ye  turned  to  God  from  idols,  to 
serve  the  living  and  true  God,  and  to  wait  for  His 
Son  from  Heaven,  whom  He  raised  from  tlie  dead, 
Jesus  who  delivered  us  from  tlie  wratli  to  come." 
1  Thess.  i:9,  10.  "  Ye  come  beliind  in  no  gift; 
waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
1  Cor.  1:7. 

'XC^ELLENT.  "That  ye  may  approve  things 
that    are    excellent;   that  ye  may  be    sincere  and 


A    PRKCTICAL     IlOl'K.  129 

without  offence  until  the  day  of  Christ."  Phil. 
1:9,  10. 

YEARN IXG.  "  Looking  for  \j)-ros(hJio?nai^  ex- 
pecting, waiting  for]  that  blessed  hope,  and  ap- 
pearing of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.''  Tit.  ii:13.  '^  Even  we  ourselves 
groan  within  ourselves,  waiting  for  the  adoption, 
the  redemption  of  our  body."  Ivoni.  viii:23. 
"Christ  the  iirst-fruits;  afterward  they  that  are 
Christ's  at  His  coming."     1  Cor.  xv:23. 

ZEAL.  "  I  have  fought  a  good  tight,  I  have 
finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith;  hence- 
forth there  is  laid  up  forme  a  crown  of  righteous- 
ness, which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  will 
give  me  at  that  day;  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto 
ail  them  also  that  love  His  appearing."  2  Tim. 
iv:7,  8.  "Blessed  are  those  servants  whom  the 
Lord,  when  He  cometh,  shall  iind  watching."  Lu. 
xii:37.  "That  which  ye  have  already,  hold  fast 
till  I  come."  Rev.  ii:25.  "Behold  I  come  quickly; 
hold  that  fast  Avhich  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take 
tliy  crown."     Rev.  iii:2. 

Any  one  can  easily  see  that  if  the  doctrine  is  prac- 
tically received,  it  must  become  a  practical  power 
in  the  life.  For  example,  the  pre-millennialist 
reads  the  words  of  his  Lord,  "  This  gospel  of  the 
kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a 
witness  unto  all  nations ;  and  then  shall  the  end 
come;"  and  animated  by  the  hope  of  hastening  the 
end,  and  the  coming  of  tlie  King,  and  tlie  over- 
tlirow  of  tlie  "  world  rulers  of  this  darkness,"  he 
joyfully  embarks  in  foreign  missionary  enterprises. 
Scores  and  hundreds  of  faithful  ambassadors  for 
Christ  in  heathen  lands  testify  that  they  caught  a 


130  TILL    HE    COME. 


mighty  and  abiding  impulse  to  labor  on,  in  the 
face  of  sore  discouragements,  when  they  embraced 
the  hope  of  His  coming  as  their  governing  principle. 
J.  Hudson  Taylor,  at  the  head  of  the  China  In- 
land Mission,  and  his  more  than  300  devoted  mis- 
sionaries, are  all  earnest  pre-millennialists.  Dr.  H. 
Grattan  Guinness,  founder  of  the  Congo  Mission, 
who  annually  sends  a  number  of  hispre-millennial 
students  to  the  heathen  Avorld,  is  an  earnest  pre- 
millennialist.  Kev  John  Wilkinson,  with  singu- 
lar self-denial  conducting  missions  among  the  Jews 
of  Europe,  and  all  his  assistants,  are  earnest  pre  mil- 
lenialists.  Ileo;inald  Had  cliff  e,  Esq.,  travelling  for 
years  from  place  to  place  in  the  interests  of  foreign 
missions,  is  an  earnest  pre-millennialist.  George 
MuUer,  a  missionary  nearly  ninety  years  of  age, 
and  supporting  anumberof  pre-millennial  mission- 
aries, is  an  earnest  pre-millennialist.  Dr.  A.  T. 
Pierson,  editor  of  the  best  missionary  revicAv  ever 
printed,  who  has  done  more  than  any  other  man 
in  American  to  arouse  the  churches  from  their 
guilty  indiiference  to  the  perishing  millions  of 
earth,  is  an  earnest  pre-millennialist.  Dr.  A.  J. 
Gordon,  at  the  head  of  the  training  school  for  for- 
eign missions  among  the  Baptists,  is  an  earnest 
pre-millennialst.  W.  E.  Blackstone,  Esq.,  at  the 
head  of  a  training  school  for  foreign  missions 
among  the  Methodists,  is  an  earnest  pre-millen- 
nialist. Rev.  I.  C.  Scofield,  at  the  head  of  a  train- 
ing school  for  foreign  missions  among  tlie  Con- 
g;i'egationalists,  is  an  earnest  pre-millennialist. 
The  young  men  and  Avomen  who  went  from  Kan- 
sas to  tlie  Soudan,  glad  to  lay  down  their  lives  for 
Jesus,  were  all  earnest  pre-millennialists;   so  easy 


A    PRACTICAL    HOPE. 


181 


is  it  to  cut  the  nerve  of  the  stale  slander  that  faitli 
in  the  pre-millennial  coming  of  the  Lord  cuts  the 
nerve  of  missionary  effort, 

In  Christian  lands,  as  they  are  called,  Christian 
in  profession  and  heathen  in  practice,  the  same 
stimulatincr  effect  of  the  truth  is  seen  in  the  lives 
of  Evangelists  all  of  whom  in  Great  Britian,  pei*- 
liaps  witliout  exception,  and  all  of  wlioni  in  the 
United  States,  with  only  one  exception  that  is 
known,  are  earnest  pre-millennialists.  The  secret 
of  their  untiring  activity  and  fervor  was  happily  ex- 
pressed hy  poor  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  Avhen  he 
described  them  as  men  engaged  in  saving  as  many 
as  possible  from  a  wrecked  and  sinking  ship. 
They  believe  that  "the  time  is  short,"  1  Cor.  vii: 
29,  or  as  the  Greek  word  implies,  that  the  time  for 
furling  in  sail  has  come;  and  they  are  anxious  to 
take  with  them  as  many  as  tliey  can  lay  hands 
upon  into  the  harbor  of  eternal  rest. 

To  the  believer  engaged  in  ordinary  occupations, 
the  hope  of  the  Lord's  return  comes  as  a  divine 
power  to  separate  him  from  tlie  world.  He  is  like 
a  young  Christian,  who,  after  his  conversion  to 
the  pre-millennial  faith,  was  asked  by  a  friend  to 
accompany  him  to  a  theatre.  "]Xo,"  was  the  reply; 
"  the  Lord  may  come  to-night,  and  I  do  not  wish 
him  to  find  me  in  a  place  where  He  Himself  would 
not  be  welcome."  It  is  impossible  for  a  man  who 
is  walking  in  tlie  golden  beams  of  that  liope  to 
live  like  the  ungodly  around  him.  He  knows  that 
he  is  a  stranger  and  pilgrim  amid  these  vanishing 
scenes,  and  he  is  careful  not  to  fasten  his  tent  pins 
too  deep  in  the  eartli.  His  aims  and  aspirations, 
his  purposes  and  pursuits,his  tastes  and  tendencies 


132  TILL    HE    COME. 


are  all  different  from  tlie  ambitions,  and  customs, 
and  objects  of  the  social  and  political  circles^ 
tlirough  which  he  moves  as  a  citizen  of  another 
country.  Dr.  David  Brown  bears  the  following 
true  testimony  to  the  premillennial  doctrine: 

It  is  a  school  of  scripture  interpretation:  It  impinges 
upon  and  effects  some  of  the  most  commanding  points  of 
the  Christian  faith;  and,  when  suffered  to  work  its  unimped- 
ed way,  it  stops  not  till  it  has  prevaded  with  its  own  genius 
the  entire  system  of  one's  theology,  and  the  whole  tone  of 
his  spiritual  character,  constructing,  I  had  almost  said,  a 
world  of  its  own;  so  that,  holding  the  same  faith,  and  cherish- 
ing the  same  fundamental  hopes  as  other  Christians,  he  yet 
sees  things  through  a  medium  of  his  own,  and  finds  every- 
thing instinct  with  the  life  which  this  doctrine  has  generated 
within  him. 

Especially  do  these  remarks  apply  to  the  view 
which  the  pre-millennialist  takes  of  death.  He 
hopes  that  he  will  not  die  at  all,  for  he  knows  that 
"we  shall  not  all  sleep,"  1  Cor.  xv:51;  he  would  not 
be  '^  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon  that  mortality 
might  be  swallowed  up  of  life,"  2  Cor.  v:4;  andlie 
desires  to  be  among  those  of  whom  it  is  written, 
"  we  which  are  alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught 
up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air."  1  Tliess.  iv:17.  Hence,  he  is 
amazed  to  hear  Christians  say  that  the  coming  of 
the  lord  and  death  are  one  and  the  same,  or  that 
there  is  no  difference  between  them,  l^o  differ- 
ence! One  is  all  gladness,  and  the  other  is  all 
sadness.  One  is  all  glory  and  the  other  is  all 
gloom.  One  is  all  morning  and  the  other  is  all 
mid-night.  Out  upon  the  base  suggestion!  It 
makes  one  indignant  to  hear  that  any  dare  put  the 
hateful  and  loathsome  monster  death,  that  with 
rnffianly  violence  has  torn  away  our  darlings,  that 
with  black  wing,  as  of  a  cyclone,  has  darkened  our 


A    PRACTrCAL    HOPE.  183 

homes,  in  the  place  of  the  sweet  and  most  precious 
coming  of  our  Lord,  which  will  prevent  death. 
The  pre-millennialist  reads  with  joy  that  death  is 
to  be  cast  into  the  hike  of  fire  at  tlie  judgment  of 
the  great  white  Throne.     Kev.  xx:14. 

"  Waiting  we  standi 

And   watching  till  our  Saviour  shal?  appear, 

Joyful  to  cry,  as  eastern  skies  grow  clear, 

'The  Lord's  at  hand!' 

But  now  the  night 
Presses  around  us,  sullenly  and  chill; 
Pain,  doubt,  and  sorrow  seem  to  have  their  will: 
Lord,  send  the  light! 

One  after  one. 
Thou  hast  called  up  our  loved  ones  from  our  sight; 
For  them  we  know  that  there  is  no  more  night 
But  we  are  a  lone. 

Weary  we  wait. 
Lifting  our  heavy  eyes,  bedimmed  with  tears. 
To  skies  where  yet  no  trace  of  dawn  appears: — 
Lord,  it  is  late ! 

But  yet  thy  word 
Sait]i,with  sweet  prophecy  that  cannot  fail. 
That  light  o'er  darkness  shall  at  length  prevail: — 
We  trust  thee  Lord! 

O  Morning  Star 
Of  heavenly  promise!  light  our  darkened  way, 
Till  the  first  beams  of  the  expected  day 

Shine  from  afar. 

So  will  we  take 

Fresh  hope  and  courage  to  our  fainting  hearts, 

And  patient    wait,  though  every  joy  departs, 

'  Till  the  day  break.'  " 


134 


TILL    HE    COMK. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


WITNESSES    TO    THE    HOPE. 


IT  IS  needless,  perhaps,  to  affirm  that  the  early 
Christians  were  pre-niillennialists.  That  is, 
they  looked  for  the  speedy  personal  return  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  did  not  dream  of  a  spirtual  mil- 
lennium, or  the  conversion  of  the  world  by  the 
church.  This  is  freely  admitted  by  Dr.  Charles. 
Hodge,  Mr.  Albert  Barnes,  Prof.  Hackett  and  all 
other  post-millennial  expositors  without  exception, 
so  far  as  known.  All  no  doubt  would  heartily 
agree  with  the  remarks  of  Mr.  Barnes  on  the  words 
to  wait  for  His  Son  from  Heaven.     1  Thess.  i:10. 

It  is  clear  from  this  and  from  other  parts  of  these  two 
epistles,  that  the  return  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  this  world  was 
a  prominent  subject  of  the  preaching  of  Paul  at  Thessalonica. 
In  the  passage  before  us,  he  saj^s  that  the  return  of  the  Son 
of  God  from  heaven  was  an  important  point  which  had  been 
insisted  on  when  he  was  there;  and  that  their  conduct,  as 
borne  witness  to  by  all,  had  shown  with  what  power  it  had 
seized     upon    them,  and  what  a  practical  influence  it  had 

exerted  in  their  lives It  is  eminently  adapted  to  comfort 

the  hearts  of  true  Christians  in  the  sorrows,  bereavements, 
and  sicknesses  of  life  (John  xiv:l-3;  Acts  i:ll;  1  Thess-.  iv:13- 
18;  2  Pet.  iii:8,  9);  to  lead  us  to  watchfulness  and  to  an 
earnest  inquiry  into  the  question  whether  we  are  prepared 
to  meetHim(Matt.  xxiv:37-44;  xxv:13);  to  make  us  dead  to  the 
world,  and  to  lead  us  to  act  as  becomes  the  children  of  light 
(I  Thess.  v:5-9);  to  awaken  and  arouse  impenitent  and  care- 
less sinners  (i  Thess.  v:2-3;  2  Pet.  iii:3-7),  and  to  excite 
Cliristians  to  self-denying  efforts  to  spread  the  gospel  in 
distant  lands,  as  w^as  the  case  at  Thessalonica.  Every  doc- 
trine of  the  gospel  is  adapted  to  produce  some  happy  practi- 
cal effects  in  mankind,  but  there  are  few  that  are  more  full  of 
elevated  and  holy  influences  than  that  which  teaches  that  the 


WITNESSES    TO    THE    tlOPE. 


135 


Lord  Jesus  will  retiiru  to  the   earth,   and   which   leads  the 
soul  to  wait  for  his  appearing. 

If  the  objection  is  raised  tliat  Mr.  Barnes,  and 
the  otlier  commentators  named,  were  tliemselves 
post-millennialists,  the  answer  is  at  hand.  Tlie 
testimony  of  an  nnwilling  witness  is  always  and 
properly  considered  more  conclusive  than  the  testi- 
mony of  a  witness,  whose  prejudices  or  interests  in- 
cline him  to  the  evidence  he  gives.  If  these  gen- 
tleman had  found  any  way  to  escape  the  conclu- 
sion tliat  the  early  christians  stood  in  an  attitude 
of  expecting  the  personal  coming  of  Christ,  they 
would  certainly  have  availed  themselves  most 
gladly  of  an  opportunity,  at  least,  to  keep  silent 
upon  the  subject.  We  have  nothing  to  do  with 
their  opinions,  but  only  with  their  testimony  con- 
cerning the  universal  belief  of  the  first   disciples. 

Thus  we  are  iiot  compelled  to  accept  the  rational- 
istic tendencies  of  Prof.  Harnack,  although  forced 
to  bow  to  his  testimony  as  a  historian,  because  he 
is  everywhere  recognized  as  the  ablest  patristic 
scholar  now  living.  Evidently  he  is  not  in  sym- 
pathy with  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  pre-millennial 
coming,  but  he  is  obliged  as  an  honest  witness  to 
place  upon  record  what  he  has  discovered  by  a 
thorough  search  into  the  Christian  literature  of  the 
first  centuries.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that 
inillennium  is  a  Latin  word,  and  chiliad  is  a 
Greek  word,  both  referring  to  the  thousand  years 
when  Satan  shall  be  bound,  when  the  righteous 
dead  shall  be  raised,  and  when  shall  be  fulfilled 
the  sweet  benediction,  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he 
that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection ;  on  such  the 
second   death   hath  no  power,  l)ut  they    shall    be 


136  TILL    11 K    ("OMK. 


priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  shall   reigii  with 

Ilim  a  thousand  years."     Rev.  x\:(l 

lu  the  history  of  Christianity  three  main  forces  are 
found  to  have  acted  as  auxiliaries  of  the  gospel.  They  have 
elicited  the  ardent  enthusiasm  of  many  whom  the  bare 
preaching  of  the  gospel  would  never  have  made  decided 
converts.  These  are  (1)  a  belief  in  the  speedy  return  of 
Christ  and  in  His  glorious  reign  on  earth. . .  .First  in  point  of 
time  came  the  faith  in  the  nearness  of  Christ's  second  advent 
and  the  establishing  of  His  reign  of  glory  on  the  earth.  In- 
deed it  appears  so  early  that  it  migh"  be  questioned  whether 
it  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  an  essential  part  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion. 

He  then   quotes    from   a  nunil)er  of   men  who 

labored  with  the  apostles,  or  were  their  immediate 

successors  in    the  ofhce  of  preaching  the  gospel, 

all  going  to  show  that  it  may  still  he  questioned 

whether    the    Lord's  personal   and    pre-millennial 

return  to  the  earth  may  not  be  regarded  as  an  es- 

sent'al  part  of  the  Christian  religion. 

That  a  philosopher  like  Justin,  with  a  bias  towards  an 
Hellenic  construction  of  the  Christian  religion,  should  iiever- 
theless  have  accepted  its  chiliastic  elements,  is  the  strongest 
proof  that  these  enthusiastic  expectations  were  inseparably 
bound  up  with  the  Christain  faith  down  to  the  middle  of  the 
2d  century.  And  another  proof  is  found  in  the  fact  that 
even  a  speculative  Jewish  Christian  like  Cerinthus  not  only 
did  not  renounce  the  chiliastic  hope,  but  pictured  the  future 
kingdom  of  Christ  as  a  kingdom  of  sensual  pleasures,  of 
eating  and  drinking  and  marriage  festivities. 

After  the  middle  of  the  2d  century  these  expectations 
were  gradually  thrust  into  the  background.  They  would 
never  have  died  out,  however,  had  not  circumstances  altered, 
and  a  new  mental  attitude  been  taken  up.  The  spirit  of 
philosophical  and  theological  speculation  and  of  ethical  re- 
flection, which  began  to  spread  through  the  churches,  did 
not  know  what  to  make  of  the  old  hopes  of  the  future.  So 
early  as  the  year  170,  a  church  partv  in  Asia  Minor — the  so- 
called  Alogi  —  rejected  the  whole  body  of  apocalyptic  writ- 
ings and  denounced  the  Apocalypse  of  John  as  a  book  of 
fables.  All  the  more  ])Owerful  was  the  reaction.  In  the  so- 
called   Montanistic  controversy  (A.  I).  100-220),  one  of  the 


WITNESSES    TO    THE    HOT»R.  137 

principal  issues  involved  was  the  continuance  of  the  chilias- 
tic  expectations  in  the  churches. ..  .After  the  INIontanistic 
controversy,  chiliastic  views  were  more  and  more  discredited 
in  the  Greek  Church;  they  were,  in  fact,  stigmatized  as 
"Jewish"  and  consequently  "lieretical."  It  was  the  Alex- 
andrian theology  that  superseded  them;  that  is  to  say,  Neo- 
Platonic  mysticism  triumphed  over  the  early  Christian  hope 
of  the  future,  first  among  the  "  cultured,"  and  then,  when 
thetheology  of  the  "cultured"  had  taken  the  faith  of  the 
"  uncultured  "  under  its  protection,  amongst  the  latter  also. 

Just  SO.  Tlie  spirit  of  pliilosopliical  and  tlieo- 
logical  speculation  and  of  ethical  reflection,  and 
Neo-Platonic  niysticisiu  patronized  l)y  the  cultured, 
are  enougli  to  kill  all  faith,  not  ouly  in  the  com- 
ing of  Christ,  Init  in  Christ  Himself.  This  is  the 
trouble  with  the  church  of  the  present  day,  and 
unless  it  gives  up  the  folly,  it  will  drift,  as  the 
church  did  after  surrendering  the  hope  of  the  Lord's 
coming,  into  the  dark  ages.  Philosophical  and 
theological  speculation,  and  ethical  reflection,  and 
Neo-Platonic  mysticism  and  culture  are  choking 
the  life  out  of  the  professing  people  of  God;  and 
the  devil  stands  by  laughing. 

But  the  AVestern  Church  w^as  also  more  conservative  than 
the  Greek.  Her  theologians  had,  to  begin  with,  little  tu-  n 
for  mystical  speculation;  their  tendency  was  rather  to  reduce 
the  gospel  to  a  system  of  morals.  Now  for  the  morality 
chiliasm  had  a  special  significance  as  the  one  distinguishing 
feature  of  the  gospel,  and  the  only  thing  that  gave  a  specifi- 
cally Christian  character  to  their  system.  This,  however, 
holds  good  of  the  Western  theologians  only  after  the  middle 
of  the  3d  cen.ury.  The  earlier  fathers,  Irena^us,  Hipollytus, 
Tertullian,  believed  in  chiliasm  simply  because  it  was  a  part 
of  the  tradition  of  the  church,  and  because  Marcion  and  the 
Gnostics  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Hipollytus,  al- 
though an  opponent  to  Montanism,  v^as  nevertheless  a 
thorough-going  millennarian.  Tertullian  aimed  at  a  more 
spirtual  conception  of  the  millennial  blessings  than  Papias 
had,  but  he  still  adhered,  especially  in  the  Montanistic  per- 
iod, to  all  the  acient  anticipations.  It  is  the  same  all  through 
the  3d  and  4th  centuries  with  those  Latin  theologians  who 


138 


TiT.L  UK  ro]\rK. 


escaped  the  iufluence  of  Greek  speculation.  CommodiaD, 
Victorinus  Pattavensis,  Lactantius  and  Sulpicius  iSeverus, 
were  all  pronounced  millennarians, the  clearest  evi- 
dence that  in  the  West  miilennarianism  was  still  a  point  of 
"  orthodoxy  "  in  the  4th  century. 

Prof.  Ilariiack  attributes  the  ovei'tlirow  of  the 
early  faith  to  the  great  influence  of  Augustine, 
who  at  one  time  hekl  it. 

But  the  signs  of  the  times  pointed  to  a  different  prospect. 
Without  any  miraculous  interposition  of  God,  not  only  was 
Christianity  victorious  on  earth,  but  the  church  had  attained 
a  position  of  supremacy.  The  old  Roman  empire  was  totter- 
ing to  its  fall;  the  church  stood  fast,  ready  to  step  into  the 
inheritance.  It  was  not  simply  that  the  world-power,  the 
enemy  of  Christ,  had  been  vanquishec' ;  the  fact  as  that  it  had 
gradually  abdicated  its  political  functions  in  favor  of  the 
church.  [Alas!  how  true.]. . . . How  milh  nnarianism  never- 
theless found  its  way,  with  the  help  of  apocalyptic  mystic- 
isms and  Anabaptist  influences,  into  tlie  churches  of  the 
Reformation,  chiefly  among  the  Reformed  sects,  but  after- 
ward, also  in  the  Lutheran  church,  how  it  became  incorpor- 
ated with  Pietism,  how  in  recent  time  an  exceeding  mild 
type  of  "academic  "  chiliasm  7i«s  been  developed  from  a  be- 
lief in  the  verbal  inspiration  of  the  Bible^  how  finally  new 
sects  are  springing  up  here  and  there  with  apocalyptic  and 
chiliastic  expectations, —  these  are  matters  which  cannot  be 
entered  upon  here.  Bi.t  one  remark  ought  to  be  made  in 
conclusion.  A  genuine  and  living  revival  of  chiliastic  hopes 
is  always  a  sign  that  the  church  at  large  has  become  secular 
ized  to  such  a  degree  that  tender  consciences  can  no  longer 

feel  sure  of  their  faith  within  her The  claims  of  chiliasm 

are  sufficiently  met  by  the  acknowledgment  that  in  former 
times  it  was,  associated  —  to  all  appearance  inseparably  asso- 
ciated—  with  the  gospel  itself. 

After  this  testimony  of  Prof.  Harnack  it  scarcely 
seems  necessary  to  cite  other  witnesses.  He  says 
of  the  early  faith  in  the  nearness  of  Christ's  second 
advent,  and  the  estahlishingof  His  reign  of  glory  on 
the  earth,  ^'  it  might  be  questioned  whetlier  it  ouglit 
not  to  be  regarded  as  an  essential  part  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion,"  and  "it  was  associated — to  all  ajv 
pearance  inseparably   associated — with  the  gospel 


WITNESSES    TO    THE    IIOTE,  139 

itself."  He  would  make  no  siicli  statement  unless 
compelled  to  do  so  by  the  facts,  and  no  man  will 
dispute  his  authority. 

Neaiuler,  referring  to  the  faith  of  the  early 
Christians  that  the  church  would  come  forth  tri- 
umphant out  of  its  conflicts,  says,  "They  could  at 
first,  as  we  have  before  remarked,  conceive  of  it  no 
otherwise  than  this,  that  the  struggle  between  the 
church  and  the  pagan  state  would  endure  till  the 
triumph  l^rought  about  from  ^NiXliowiJ) y  the  return 
of  Christ  to  Jiidg7)ienty     Vol.  I,  p.  650. 

Mosheim,  referring  to  the  controversies  in  the 
time  of  Origen,  says,  "Long  before  this  period  an 
opinion  had  prevailed  that  Christ  was  to  come  and 
reign  a  thousand  years  among  men,  before  the  en- 
tire and  final  dissolution  of  this  world.  This  opin- 
ion, which  had  hitherto  met  with  no  opposition,''^ 
etc.     Yol.  I,  p.  89. 

Hagenbach,  says,  "  The  disciples  of  Christ,  hav- 
ing received  from  their  Master  the  promise  of  His 
second  coming  (parousia),  the  first  Christians 
looked  upon  this  event  as  near  at  hand,  in  connec- 
tion with  the  general  resurrection  of  the  dead  and 
the  final  Judgment." 

Dorner  says,  as  quoted  in  Hagenbach's  History 
of  Doctrines,  "  The  Christian  hope  in  the  Christ 
that  was  to  come  grew  out  of  faith  in  the  Christ, 
who  had  already  come,"  and  adds,  "Justin,  writing 
at  the  time  of  Papis,  says  that  it  was  the  general 
faith  of  all.  orthodox  Christians,  and  that  only 
^Gnostics  did  not  share  it." 

Giesler,  also  quoted  by  Hagenbach,  says  of  the 
first  tvo  centuries,  "  In  all  the  works  of  this  period 
iiiillennarianism  is  so  prominent,  we  cannot  Jiesi- 


140  TILL    HE    COME. 


tate  to  consider  it  as  universal  in  an  age  when 
snch  sensuous  motives  were  certainly  not  unneces- 
sary to  animate  men  to  suffer  for  Christianity." 
Yol.  I,  p.   215. 

Dr.  Schaff  says,  in  his  llistoi-y  of  the  Christian 
Church,  "  The  most  striking  point  in  the  eschatol- 
ogy  of  the  ancient  church  is  the  widely  current  and 
very  prevalent  chiliasm,  or  the  doctrine  of  a  visible 
reign  of  Christ  in  glory  on  the  earth  with  the 
risen  saints  for  a  thousand  years."    Yol.  I,  p.  299. 

Bishop  Renshaw  says,  "The  commonly  received 
opinion  of  a  spiritual  millennium,  consisting  in  a 
universal  triumph  of  the  gospel,  and  the  conver- 
sion of  all  nations  for  a  thousand  years  before  the 
coming  of  Christ,  is  a  novel  doctrine,  unknown  to 
the  church  for  the  space  of  sixteen  hundred  years." 

Prof.  Fisher,  in  The  Beginnings  of  Cliristianity, 
says,  "  We  call  attention  to  the  liopes  and  expecta- 
tions of  the  apostles  respecting  the  Second  Ad- 
vent of  Christ,  as  they  are  disclosed  in  the  New 
Testament  writings This  expectation  is  ex- 
pressed by  all  apostles  in  terms  which  fairly  ad- 
mit of  no  other  interpretation.  It  is  found  in 
Paul  (Rom.  xiiiill,  12;  1  Cor.  vii:29,  31;  x:ii; 
Phil.  iv:5;  1  Tim.  vi:14) .  .  .  .The same  expectation 
is  expressed  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  (Heb.  x: 
25,  37);  in  the  Epistle  of  James,  (v:3,  8);  in  the 
Epistles  of  Peter,  (1  Pet.  iv:7;  2  Pet.  iii:3);  in 
the  Epistle  of  Jude,  (vs.  8);  in  tlie  first  Epistle  of 
John,  (ii:16);  and  in  the  Apocalypse,  (i;l;  iii: 
2;  xxii;7,  12,  20).  To  put  any  other  construction 
on  these  passages,  as  if  the  Parousia  to  which  they 
refer,  were  anything  else  than  the  Second  Advent 
oftlie  Lord  to  Judoinent, would  inti-odiici^  a  danger- 


WITNESSES    TO    THE    HOPE.  141 

ous  license  in  interpretation,  and  one  wliicli  might 
l^e  employed  to  snbvert  the  principal  doctrines  of 
tlie  Christian  System." 

But  surely  it  is  useless  to  qnote  further.  If 
anything  can  be  established  by  human  testimony, 
it  is  tlie  fact  that  tliosewho  are  looking  for  the  per- 
sonal comino^  of  the  Lord,  not  for  theconversion  of 
the  world  l)y  the  church,  are  in  sympathy  with  the 
belief  and  teaching  of  the  apostles  and  early 
Christians.  No  one  probably  Avould  be  bold 
enough  to  deny  that  such  was  the  faith  of  the  dis- 
ciples, who  were  considered  ''Orthodox,"  for  three 
hundred  years,  a  period  that  has  never  been 
equalled  in  the  endurance  of  suffering  for  Christ's 
sake,  and  in  the  activity  of  missionary  zeal. 

Coming  to  a  later  period,  we  find  Prof.  Briggs, 
utterly  and  fatally  M'rong  about  the  word  of  God, 
but  able  and  scholarly,  instructing  the  Presbyter- 
ians with  reo-ard  to  the  doctrine  of  their  Confes- 
sion  of  Faith. 

The  current  doctrine  of  a  millennium  in  the  future  before 
the  advent  of  Chris',  is  another  extra-confessional  doctrine, 
for  which  there  is  no  basis  in  the  AVestminister  Standards. . 
The  Standards  express  the  faith  of  the  universal  catholic 
church  in  looking  forward  to  the  advent  of  Christ  for  the 
judgment  of  the  risen  (?)  world  as  imminent. .  .  .The  current 
doctrine  is  one  for  which  Daniel  Whitby,  the  Arminian  [he 
should  have  added,  the  Arian],  and  the  great  revival  of 
]\Iethodism  are  chiefly  responsible. ..  .When  recent  Presby- 
terian divines  go  further,  and  adopt  the  scheme  of  the 
Aiminian  Wliitbv,  they  take  a  position  which  suits  quite 
well  with  evangelical  ]\iethodism,  but  which  is  not  in  accord 
with  Cah'iiiisni.  They  moreover  go  against  the  Scriptures, 
which  do  not  recognize  any  such  future  millennium  as  this 
theory  professes. 

The  doctrine  of  a  future  millennium  is  not  so  innocent  as 
it  appears  to  be  on  the  surface.  It  changes  the  faith  of 
the  cliurch  in  the  imminency  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ. 
It  makes  the  millennium  the  great  hope  of  the  future,  in- 


14:2  TILL  hp:  come. 


stead  of  the  presence  of  the  Redeemer  Himself.  The  Mes- 
siah is  the  great  hope  of  the  church,  the  supreme  object  of 
oar  living  and  striving,  the  Bridegroom  for  whose  presence 
the  affian  ed  bride  prays  and  agonizes.  But  the  current 
theo'ogy  pushes  the  Messiah  behind  the  millennium,  and 
fixes  the  hope  of  men  upon  an  illusion  and  a  delusion  of 
human  conceit  and  folly. 

But  as  many  are  consciously  or  unconsciously 
influenced  by  the  prevailing  sentiment  about  them, 
it  may  be  well  to  name  some  prominent  men  who 
are  prominent  pre-millennialists,  although  one 
who  is  not  brave  and  independent  enough  to  do 
his  own  thinking,  apart  from  the  prevailing  senti- 
ment of  the  time  a:id  country  in  which  he  lives,  is 
hardly  worth  the  trouble  to  help  him  into  the 
light.  He  will  l)e  of  little  account,  no  matter  on 
which  side  he  at  last  elects  to  cast  his  lot.  It  was 
considered  an  unanswerable  argument  by  the 
Pliarisees,  when  Christ  came  theflrst  time,  to  ask, 
"Have  any  of  the  rulers  of  the  Pliarisees  be- 
lieved on  Him?"  Jno.  vii:47.  So  several  post- 
millennialists  have  recently  asked  concerning  His 
second  coming,  either  in  stupid  ignorance  or  wil- 
ful prevarication,  and  it  is  of  importance  to  show 
that  the  pre-millennialists  are  not  wanting  in 
scholars,  expositors  and  preachers  of  the  linest 
ability,  as  the  world  would  say. 

A  brother,  who  is  thoroughly  familiar  with 
modern  German  literature,  asserts  tliat  "there  is 
scarcely  an  expositor  of  any  note  on  the  Continent 
of  Europe,  who  is  not  an  avowed  pre-millennialist," 
and  adds,  '^  let  us  rejoice  tliat  the  best  criticism, 
and  Biblical  as  well  as  ecclesiastical  and  theologi- 
cal scholars  such  as  Yan  Oosterzee,Christlieb,  Yolck, 
Martensen,  Weiss,  Philippi,  Koch,  Grau,  Olshau- 
sen,  Christiani,  Godet,  have  put   post-millennial- 


WITNESSES    TO    THE    HOPE. 


143 


ism  and  lignrativism  under  their  feet."  He  fol- 
lows tills  Avitli  a  long^list  of  names  as  Bengel,  Roos, 
Crusius,  Hofman,  IDelitzseh,  Auberlen,  Lange, 
Luthardt,  Ivoslin,  Stier,  DaCosta,  Cappadose, 
Gaiissen  and  many  others,  eminent  for  their  learn- 
ing, who  utterly  reject  the  post-millennial  heresy, 
and  maintain  the  pre-millennial  coming  of  our 
Lord.  This  is  sometimes  called  the  "  continental 
view,"  but  no  matter  whether  it  is  continental  or 
insular  so  it  is  the  truth  of  God. 

In  Great  Britain  we  have  such  expositors  as 
Alford,  Ellicott,  Fausset,  Tregelles,  Greswell,  the 
Bishop  of  Liverpool;  such  preachers  as  0.  H. 
Spurgeon,  IL  Grattan  Guinness,  Archibald  Brown, 
Frank  AVhite,  Henry  Yarley,  Baptists;  Dr.  Hora- 
tius  Bonar,  Dr.  Andrew  Bonar,  Dr.  W.  P. 
Mackay,  Dr.  Adolph  Sapliir,  Dr.  Sinclair  Patter- 
son, Dr.  Donald  Frazer,  John  Wilkinson,  Presby- 
terians; Pev.  Prebendary  Auriol,  Yery  Pev.  Dean 
Fremantle,  Pev.  Marcus  Painsford,  Pev.  Canon 
Hoare,  Pev.  II.  E.  Brooke,  Pev.  II.  W.  Webb- 
Peploe,  Pev.  C.  Skrine,  Pev.  C.  J.  Goodhart,  Pev. 
Burlington  AVale,  Pev.  J.  Stevenson,  Church  of 
England;  the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  the  Earl  of 
Cavan,  Lord  Padstock,  Sir  Arthur  Black  wood,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  entire  number  of  "  Brethren  " 
like  J.  :N'.  Darby,  William  Kelly,  C.  H.  Mcin- 
tosh, William  Lincoln,  J.  Denham  Smith,  J. 
Hudson  Taylor,  T.  Shuldham  Henry,  B.W.  Newton, 
I.  B.  Baines,  Arthur  Pridham,  embracing  some  of 
the  most  thorough  scholars  and  some  of  the  pro- 
foundest  students  of  tlie  Bible  in  tlie  world.  All 
of  these,  and  scores  of  others  who  might  be  named 


^ 


144  TILL    HE    Cl^ME. 

have  spoken  and  written  niucli  in  defence  of  our 
Lord's  pre-millennial  coming. 

In  the  United  States  it  is  sufficient  to  remind 
the  reader  that  a  pre-millennial  conference  was 
recently  held  in  Brooklyn,  called  hy  one  hundred 
and  tifty  Baptist  ministers.  Or  it  may  he  suffici- 
ent to  mention  the  names  of  some  who  spoke  at 
the  pre-millennial  Conferences  in  Kew^  York  and 
Chicago,  or  expressed  hearty  sympathy  with  the 
doctrine.  Bishop  Yail,  of  Kansas,  Bishop  Bald- 
win, of  Cauda,  Bishop  ]N"icholson,  of  Philadelphia, 
Dr.  S.  H.  Tyng,  \)y.  L.  W.  Bancroft,  Dr.  R.  IS'ew- 
ton,  Dr.  J.  F.  Grammer,  Episcopal;  Prof.  J.  D, 
Cooper,  Prof.  D.  C.  Marquis,  Prof.  W.  G.  Moore- 
head,  Prof.  J.  T.  Duil^eld,  Prof.  S.  11. 
Kellogg,  Dr.  ^\  West,  Dr.  E.  E.  Cra- 
ven, Dr.  H.  M.  Parsons,  Dr.  William  DiuAviddle, 
Dr.  W.  Erdman,  Dr.  Albert  Erdman,  Dr.  J. 
F.  Kendall,  Dr.  C.  K.  Imhrie,  Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson, 
Presbyterian;  Prof.  II.  Lummis,  Prof.  E.  F. 
Stroeter,  Dr.  James  S.  Kennedy,  Wm.  E.  Black- 
stone,  Methodist;  Dr.  A.  J.  Gordon,  Dr.  A.  J. 
Frost,  Dr.  F.  L.  Chapell,  Dr.  II.  M.  Saunders, 
liobert  Cameron,  Baptist;  Dr.  E.  P.  Goodwin,  Dr. 
H.  D.  Burton,  Dr.  Geo.  F.  Pentecost,  Congrega- 
tional; Dr.  W.  P.  Gordon,  Dr  Geo.  S.  Bishop,  Dr. 
Euf us  W.  Clark,  Reformed  Dutch;  Dr.  Joseph  A. 
Seiss,  Dr.  Geo.  N.  II.  Peters,  Lutlierans;  Moody, 
Munhall,  Needham  Whittle,  Evangelists;  while 
hundreds  more  coukl  ])e  mentioned,  if  necessary. 
It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  pre-mil- 
lenists  are  but  an  insigniticant  company  of  cranks. 
They  may  be  cranks,  and  it  is  well  that  they  are  in 
these  days  of  infidelity  among  the  ]u*ofe.^sors  and 


WITNESSES    TO    THE    HOl'E.  145 

preachers,  but  they  are  loyal  to  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  true  to  His  word.  There  are  thousands 
and  tens  of  thousands  of  them  in  Europe  and 
America,  including  the  first  men  of  the  church  in 
intellectual  endowments,  scholastic  attainments, 
fervent  piety,  faitliful  service  and  intimate  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Scriptures.  Indeed  it  is  the  study 
of  the  Scriptures,  which  has  led  to  such  a  remark- 
ble  revival  of  the  old  and  true  faith  in  the  pre- 
millennial  comino;  of  our  Lord.  Just  as  this  is 
written  a  letter  is  received  from  a  pastor  in  North 
Dakota,  who  says,  "For  some  time  it  has  been  my 
purpose  to  procure  a  lot  of  suitable  books,  and  in- 
vestigate the  subject  of  the  Second  Advent  of 
Christ.  But,  my  dear  brother,  I  had  the  book  I 
needed  at  hand.  It  was  the  BIBLE.  Taking  that 
as  '  the  Supreme  Judge,  by  which  all  controversies 
of  religion  are  to  be  determined,'  I  went  at  it 
with  an  honest  desire  to  know  the  truth.  ]N"eed  I 
say  more?  You  know  where  such  work  must  end.'' 
Pre-millennialists,  however  misrepresented  or 
misunderstood,  can  always  sing  the  song  of  Moses, 
when  brought  to  face  those  who  reject  the  truth; 
*'Their  rock  is  not  as  our  Rock,even  our  enemies  them 
selves  being  judges,"  Dent.  xxxii:31.  By  far  the  ablest 
book  that  has  ever  appeared  against  the  truth  was 
written  by  Dr.  David  Brown,  already  frequently 
mentioned  in  these  pages.  To  a  pre-millennialist 
the  admissions  he  makes  are  very  remarkable  from 
his  stand  point,  and  would  have  been  all  that  can 
be  demanded,  if  he  had  not  spoiled  them  by  con- 
tradictory statements. 

Pre-milleDnialists  have  done  the  church  a  real  service,  by 
calling  attention  to  the  place  Avhich  the  second  advent  holds 


146  TILL    HE    COME. 


in  the  word  of  God  and  tlie  scheme  of  divine  truth.  If  the 
controversy  which  they  have  raised  should  issue  in  a  fresh 
and  impartial  inquiry  into  this  branch  of  it,  I  for  one,  instead 
of  regretting,  shall  rejoice  in  the  agitation  of  it.  When  they 
dilate  upon  the  prominence  given  to  this  doctrine  in  scrip- 
ture, and  the  practical  uses  which  are  made  of  it,  they  touch 
a  chord  in  the  heart  of  every  simple  lover  of  his  Lord,  and 
carry  conviction  to  all  who  tremble  at  His  word.  .  .  With 
them  we  affirm  that  the  REDEEMER'S  SECOND  APPEAR- 
ING IS  THE  VERY  POLE-STAR  OF  THE  CHURCH. 
[The  capitals  are  his  own].  That  it  is  so  held  forth  in  the 
New  Testament  is  beyond  dispute. 

He  tells  us  "there  are  certain  minds  which, 
either  from  constitutional  temperament,  or  the 
particular  school  of  theology  to  which  they  are  at- 
tached, have  tendencies  in  the  direction  of  pre-mil- 
lennialism  so  strong  that  they  are  ready  to  embrace 
it  almost  immediately  con  mnorey  But  w^hat  sort 
ot  minds  are  they?  Cranky,  curious,  credulous? 
Nay,  verily. 

Souls  that  burn  with  love  to  Christ,  who  with  the  mother 
of  Sisera,  cry  through  the  lattice,  "  Why  is  his  chariot  so  long 
in  coming?  Why  tarry  the  wheels  of  His  chariots?  "  and  with 
the  spouse,  "  Make  haste,  my  Beloved,  and  be  Thou  like  to  a 
roe,  or  a  young  hart  upon  the  mountains  of  spices" — such 
souls  are  ready  to  catch  at  a  doctrine  which  eeems  to  promise 
a  much  earlier  appearing  of  their  beloved  Lord  than  the  or- 
dinary view  .  .  .  But  are  there  no  a?^^!^■-pre-millennial 
tendencies  which  require  to  be  guarded  against?  I  think 
there  are.  Under  the  influence  of  such  tendencies,  the  in- 
spired text,  as  such  presents  no  rich  and  exhaustless  field  of 
prayerful  and  delighted  investigation;  exegetical  inquiries 
and  discoveries  are  an  uncongenial  element;  and  whatever 
scripture  intimations  regarding  the  future  destinies  of  the 
church  and  of  the  world  involve  events  out  of  the  usual 
range  of  human  occurrences,  or  exceeding  the  anticipations 
of  enlightened  Christian  sagacity,  are  almost  instinctively 
overlooked  or  softened  down. 

One  would  tliink  it  well  to  be  found  in  the  first 
of  those  two  companies,  not  in  the  second,  espec- 
ially since  Dr.   Brown   assures   us  tliat  we   should 


WITNESSES    TO    THE    HOPE.  147 

never  be  satisfied  with  anything  less  than  the   per- 
sonal comincr  of  our  Lord. 

o 
Would  it  be  incongruous  in  the  church  to  mourn  and  feel 
desolate  in  the  presence  of  her  Lord?  Not  less  incongruous, 
it  seems,  is  it  not  to  cherish  the  feeling  of  desolation  in  His 
absence.  And  both  are  such  incongruities  as  confounding  the 
seasons  of  fasting  and  feasting,  as  putting  a  piece  of  new 
garment  upon  an  old,  as  putting  new  wine  into  old  bottles, 
and  preferring  new  wine  to  o  d.  .  .  .  Jesus  will  think  it 
an  abuse  of  His  consolations  if  we  have  learned  from  them 
to  do  without  him.  Written  communications  and  tokens  of 
affection  from  the  absent  One  are  dear  to  affection — but  onl}^ 
when  Himself  cannot  be  had.  Christ's  word,  and  the  seals 
of  His  love  conveyed  to  our  hearts  by  the  blessed  Spirit,  are 
inexpressibly  dear  to  His  loving  people — but  only  in  the  ab- 
sence of  Himself.  And  never  do  we  please  Christ  so  much 
as  when  we  "  refuse  to  be  comforted,"  even  with  His  own 
consolations,  save  in  the  prospect  of  His  Personal  Return. 
[The  italics  are  his]. 

But  let  it  not  l)e  imagined  that  the  truth,  al- 
thougli  supported  hy  divine  authority  and  sus- 
tained by  liuuiau  authority,  will  prevail  "till  He 
come."  Oidy  a  line  of  witnesses  to  tlie  blessed 
hope  will  be  kept  up,  and  this  is  all.  Tlie  apostasy  has 
set  ill,  and  has  come  to  stay.  Of  course  God  could 
revive  His  "work  in  tlie  midst  of  the  years,  in  the 
midst  of  the  years  make  known,  in  wrath  remem- 
ber mercy,"  and  if  it  please  the  Lord  still  to  tarry, 
this  He  must  do,  or  "  all  will  come  to  desolation." 
Quite  a  number  of  godly  men,  who  are  post-mil- 
leimialiftts,  clearly  see  and  deeply  deplore  tlio 
wretched  condition  of  the  professing  Christian 
body,  and  frankly  confess  that  the  extraordinary 
manifestation  of  divine  grace  and  power  is  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  save  from  impending  ruin,  and 
to  call  the  chureli  back  to  the  gospel.  But  the  prolv 
ability  i?^  very  great  that  we  are  hemmed  in  by 
the    pei'ils  of   the   last  davs,    and  hence  the    wit- 


148  TILL    HE    COME. 


nesses  can  do  nothing  more  in  the  midnight  dark- 
ness than  to  cry,  "Beiiold  the  Bridegroom  coni- 
eth."  Matt.  XXX  :t>. 

"Bride  of  the  Lamb,  awake!  awake! 

Why  sleep  for  sorrow  now? 
The  hope  of  glory,  Christ,  is  thine, 

An  heir  of  glory  thou. 
Thy  spirit,  through  the  Icnely  night, 

From  earthly  joy  apart, 
Hath  sigh'd  for  one  that's  far  away — 

The  Bridegroom  of  thy  heart. 

But  see,  the  night  is  waning  fast. 

The  breaking  morn  is  near; 
And  Jesus  comes,  with  voice  of  love. 

Thy  drooping  heart  to  cheer. 
He  comes — for,  oh !  His  yearning  heart 

No  more  can  bear  delay — 
To  scenes  of  full  unmingled  Joy 

To  call  His  Bride  away. 

Thou,  too,  Shalt  reign — He  will  not  wear 

His  crown  of  joy  alone! 
And  earth  His  royal  Bride  shall  see 

Beside  Him  on  the  throne. 
Then  weep  no  more — 'tis  all  thine  own— = 

His  crown,  His  joy  divine, 
And,  sweeter  far  than  all  beSide, 


THE    ORDER    OF    EVENTS.  149 


CHAPTER  XIY. 

THE    OKDER    OF    EVENTS. 

^^TTTHEIS"  the  Most  High  divided  to  the 
V  V  nations  their  inlieritance,  when  lie 
separated  the  sons  of  Adam,  He  set  the  bounds 
of  the  people  according  to  the  number  of  the 
children  of  Israel."  Deut.  xxxii:8.  Perhaps  most 
professing  Christians  would  hear  with  a  smile  of 
derision  or  incredulity,  that,  in  the  distribution  of 
the  earth's  surface  among  various  nationalities.  He 
had  special  reference  to  a  people  so  few  and  des- 
pised as  the  Jews,  and  not  to  the  great  powers, 
like  the  Grecian,  Ttoman,  Russian,  Gerirmn,  and 
British  empires,  and  the  proud  Republic  of  the 
United  States.  Nevertheless  it  is  a  fact,  and  a 
fact  we  will  do  well  to  keep  in  mind  when  we  search 
the  Scriptures  of  truth. 

It  was  to  the  Jews  He  said,  "Ye  have  seen  what 
I  did  unto  the  Egyptians,  and  how  I  bare  you  on 
eagles'  wings,  and  brought  you  unto  myself.  ISTow 
therefore,  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep 
my  covenant,  then  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure 
unto  me  above  all  people:  for  all  the  earth  is 
mine,  and  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests, 
and  an  holy  nation."  Ex.  xix:4-6.  Alas!  Scarcely 
had  "  alL  the  people  answered  with  one  voice,  and 
said,  All  the  words  which  the  Lord  hath  said  will 
we  do,"  ratifying  the  covenant  wdth  blood,  before 
they  sneered  at  Moses,  and  made  them    a  molten 


150  TILL    HE    COME. 


calf  to  worship.  Ex.  xxir:3-8;  xxxii:l-4.  From 
that  time  and  onward,  their  history  was  stained 
with  disobedience,  idolatry,  unbelief  and  worldli- 
ness,  until  infinite  patience  could  endure  no  longer, 
and  they  were  disowned  and  rejected,  and  scattered 
among  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

In  the  year  722  before  Christ  the  ten  tribes, 
that  had  revolted  from  the  house  of  David  under 
Solomon's  successor,  were  carried  away  to  Assyria, 
and  the  land  was  possessed  by  other  people.  In 
the  year  586  before  Clirist  Jerusalem  was  destroyed 
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  to  this  day  remains  under 
the  hand  of  its  Gentile  masters.  Hence,  for  2500 
years  Israel  has  been  tlie  nation  without  a  home, 
the  nation  of  weary  foot  like  the  Wandering  Jew, 
the  nation  wdiich  even  professedly  Christian  nations 
have  delighted  to  persecute  and  torture.  For 
nearly  eighteen  hundred  years  after  the  Son  of  God 
came  into  the  world,  kings  and  cabinets,  pretend- 
ing at  least  to  have  some  regard  for  His  teachings, 
have  inflicted  upon  the  hated  decendants  of  Abra- 
ham, and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  banishment,  extortion, 
oppression,  outrage,  murder,  and  all  manner  of 
cruelty.  Even  now,  at  the  close  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  with  its  boasted  civilization  and  progress, 
Kussia,  Roumania,  Bulgaria,  Germany,  and  many 
other  peoples  think  it  right  to  molest  and  rob,  and 
exile,  and  kill  a  Jew. 

"  The  wild  dove  hath  its  nest,  the  fox  its  cave, 
Mankind  its  country,  Israel  but  the  grave." 

The  same  inspired  and  infallible  v^ord,  how- 
ever, which  plainly  and  frequently  predicts  their 
dispersion    and    ])unishment,  just    as   plainly  and 


TiiK  ori)p:u  of  events.  151 

much  more  frequently  predicts  their  restoration  to 
their  own  land,  when  and  where  they  shall  looh 
upon  Him  whom  they  pierced,  and  at  last  accept 
Him  as  their  long-promised  Messiah.  Zech.  xii:10. 
No  Christian  wlio  helieves  that  "the  prophecy 
came  not  in  old  time  [or  at  any  time]  hy  the  will 
of  man;  but  holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  2  Pet.  i:21,  can  have 
a  shadow  of  doubt  concerning  the  future  gather- 
ing of  the  now  scattered  Israelites  into  their  own 
country,  if  he  also  believes  tliat  the  Holy  Ghost 
said  what  he  meant,  and  meant  what  He  said. 

Meanwhile  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  set  in 
when  Israel  was  set  aside,  and  Babylon  was  the 
head  of  the  new  order  of  thino;s  described  in  the 
prophecy  through  Daniel.  It  is  remarkable  that 
from  near  the  beginning  of  the  second  chapter  to 
the  close  of  the  seventh,  the  Holy  Ghost  writes '  in 
the  Chaldee  language,  as  if  He  would  say  to  the 
Gentiles,  read  in  your  own  venacular  the  charac- 
teristic features  of  your  times  and  your  fearful 
fall.  Chapter  ii  shows  us  Gentile  estimate  of 
governmental  power,  as  seen  in  the  stately  image  of 
l^ebuchadnezzer's  dream.  Chapter  iii  shows  us 
Gentile  ambition,  as  seen  in  the  golden  image, 
reared  nineteen  years  later  by  the  king  of  Babylon. 
Chapter  iv  shows  us  Gentile  pride  saying,  "Is  not 
this  great  Babylon  that  I  have  built?"  and  then 
degraded  to  the  level  of  the  beasts  in  the  person  of 
the  boastful  king.  Chapter  v  shows  us  Gentile  im- 
piety and  revelry  and  sensuality,  profaning  the 
sacred  vessels  of  God's  house,  until  the  fingers  of  a 
man's  hand  wrote  its  doom  over  against  the  can- 
dlestick  upon  tlie  wall  of  the  king's  palace.     Chap- 


152  TILL    HE    COME. 


ter  vi  shows  iis  Gentile  ])lasplieniy,  making  man 
an  object  of  worship,  as  in  the  days  of  the  Anti- 
christ. Cliapter  vii  shows  ns  Gentile  persecntion 
of  the  saints,  nnder  the  Antichrist,  until  Jesus 
comes. 

In  other  words,  dominion  or  government  in  the 
hands  of  Gentiles  Avill  prove  as  complete  a  failure 
as  it  did  in  the  hands  of  the  Israelites;  and  if  it 
he  said  that  we  liave  in  this  age  the  word  of  God, 
and  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  to  restrain  men  from 
evil,  let  us  not  forget  what  was  written  concerning 
His  people  in  former  times;  "Yea,  they  made 
their  hearts  as  an  adamant  stone,  lest  they  should 
hear  the  law,  and  tlie  words  which  the  Lord  of 
hosts  sent  by  His  Spirit  tlirough  the  former  pro- 
phets :  therefore  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  Zech.  vii:12.  Men  sin  against  more 
light  and  mercy  in  our  day,  and,  therefore  will  be 
held  to  a  stricter  accountability  and  overtaken  by 
a  sorer  punishment. 

It  has  been  previously  shown  by  the  sure  testi- 
mony of  God  that  the  present  age  must  close  in 
universal  apostasy  and  lawlessness.  It  shall  be  as 
when  the  flood  came  and  destroyed  them  all.  It 
shall  be  as  when  Lot  was  hurried  out  of  Sodom. 
Antichrist  shall  be  manifested  in  all  his  blasphemy 
and  malignant  hatred  ot  the  true  Christ.  "  In  the 
last  days  perilous  times  shall  come."  Perhaps  no 
religious  book  printed  during  the  present  genera- 
tion has  received  more  universal  approval  than 
Bernard's  "  Progress  of  Doctrine  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment." 

Di\  Alvah  Llovey,  of  the  Newton  Theological 
Institution,  who  introduced    it  to    the    American 


THE    ORDER    OF    EVENTS.  153 

public,  said,  "  The  Baiiiptoii  Lectures  of  Mr.  Ber- 
nard on  tlie  Progress  of  Doctrine  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament, deserve  nnqualitied  commendation,  for 
they  are  as  nearly  perfect,  botli  in  substance  and 
form,  as  any  human  production  can  well  be  made." 

This,  no  doubt,  expresses  the  view  of  intelligent 
ministers  and  Christians  of  all  denominations;  for 
no  one,  so  far  as  known,  has  been  found  to  dissent 
from  its  statements.  It  is  well,  therefore,  to  read 
attentively  what  this  remarkable  expositor  has  to 
say  concerning  the  end  of  onr  dispensation. 

I  know  not  liow  any  man,  in  closini^  the  Epistles,  ccild 
expect  to  find  the  subsequent  history  of  the  Church  essen- 
tially ditfereut  from  wliat  it  is.  In  those  writings  we  seem,  as 
it  were,  not  to  witness  some  passing  storms  which  clear  the  air, 
but  to  feel  the  whole  atmosphere  charged  with  the  elements 
of  future  tempest  and  death.  Every  moment  the  forces  of 
evil  show  themselves  more  plainly.  They  are  encountered, 
but  not  dissipated.  Or,  to  cliange  the  figure,  we  see  battles 
fought  by  the  leaders  of  our  band,  but  no  security  is  promis- 
ed by  their  victories.  New  assaults  are  being  prepared; 
new  tactics  will  be  tried;  new  enemies  pour  on;  the  distant 
hills  are  black  with  gathering  multitudes,  and  the  last  ex- 
hortations of  those  wiio  fall  at  their  posts  call  on  their  suc- 
cessors to  "endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  and  "  earnestly  to  contend  for  the  faith  which  was 
once  delivered  to  the  saints." 

The  fact  which  I  observe  is  not  merely  that  these  indica- 
tions of  the  future  are  in  the  Epistles,  but  that  they  increase 
as  we  approach  the  close,  and  after  the  doctrines  of  the  Gos- 
pel have  been  fully  wrought  out,  and  the  fulness  of  personal 
salvation  and  the  ideal  character  of  the  church  has  been 
placed  in  the  clearest  light,  the  shadows  gather  and  deepen 
on  the  external  history.  The  last  words  of  St,  Paul  in 
the  second  Epistle  to  Timothy,  and  those  of  St.  Peter  in  his 
second  Epistle,  with  the  Epistles  of  St.  John  and  St,  Jude, 
breathe  the  language  of  a  time  in  which  the  tendencies  of 
that  history  had  distinctly  shown  themselves;  and  in  this 
respect  these  writings  form  a  prelude  and  a  passage  to  the 
Apocalypse. 

Of  the  general  meaning  of  the  Apocalypse  he 
writes  truly  as  follows,  the  italics  being  his  own: 


I5ti:  TILL    HE    COME. 


The  book  is  a  doctrine  of  the  power  and  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "  Behold  he  cometh  with  clouds,  and 
every  eve  shall  see  him."  That  is  the  first  voice,  and  the 
keynote  of  the  whole.  The  Epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches 
(symbolical  representatives  of  the  whole  Church  in  it^  vari- 
ous conditions)  all  take  their  tone  from  this  thought,  and  are 
the  voice  of  a  Lord  who  will  "  come  quickly."  The  visions 
which  follow^  draw^  to  the  same  end,  and  the  last  voices  of 
the  book  respond  to  the  first,  and  attest  its  subject  and  its 
purpose.  "  He  which  testifieth  these  things  saith,  surely  I 
come  quickly.  Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus."  What- 
ever else  the  Christian  desires  is  bound  up  in  this  prospect. 
The  deliverance  of  the  creation  from  its  present  groans  and 
travail,  the  redemption  of  our  body,  the  perfection  of  man  in 
a  holy  community,  and  the  realization  in  outward  things  of 
the  tendencies  o+'  the  renewed  nature,  all  these  hopes  w^ait  on 
the  one  hope  of  Hia  appearing. 

If  this  is  so,  and  perhaps  none  will  dispute  it, 
how  strange  it  seems  that  the  hope  of  His  ap- 
pearing has  no  place  in  the  thought  or  discourse  of 
a  vast  niajority  of  Christians!  Men  speak  of  dy- 
ino-  and  going  to  heaven,  but  how  few  of  the  com- 
ing of  the  Lord  ?  Such  indifference  is  no  doubt 
due  to  the  artifice  of  Satan,  who,  as  Calvin  says,  ''in 
plucking  up  the  faith  of  Christ's  coming,  aims  di- 
rectly at  the  throat  of  the  church."  It  is  not 
death  that  is  set  before  us,  horrible  death,  loath- 
some death,  with  its  frequent  preliminary  agonies 
and  pangs  and  tortures,  that  make  the  suffering  of 
a  martyr  by  fire  as  nothing  in  comparison,  but  it  is 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  destroy  death.  Dr. 
James  Culross,  the  author  of  many  valuable  books, 
and  one  of  the  ablest  of  Eno-lish  writers,  has  well 
expressed  the  truth  on  this  subject 

No  reflecting  man  can  think  lightly  of  death  or  drive  it 
from  his  contemplation.  But  in  our  religious  speech  we 
have  too  often  placed  it  where  the  Bible  does  not  place  it, 
and  have  caused  it  to  intercept  and  in  a  measure  hide  from 
view  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Taking  what  we  find  in  the 
New  Testament,  the  true  Christian  attitude  is  that  of  wait- 


THE    ORDER    OF    E\ENTS, 


ing  for  the  Lord  from  lieaveii.  ...  He  is  to  return  iu 
power  and  great  glory,  having  received  the  Kingdom.  Tiiere 
is  nothing  that  meets  us  more  distinctly  and  largel}'  iu  the 
New  Tes.ameut  than  this.  We  cannot  "spiritualize  "'  it.  We 
may  as  well  "  spiritualize  "  His  resureftion  and  ascension. 

It  is  not  merely  that  i)rophets  and  apostles  have  told  us 

of  His  return;  He  has  done  so  Himself,  and  that  not  merely 
by  way  of  bare  prediction  or  intimation  of  his  purpose,  but 
by  way  of  promise.  Were  He  not  to  return  He  would  break 
liis  word.  The  promise  meets  us  again  and  again,  and  in 
the  greatest  variety  of  form. 

First,  He  will  come  in  person.  ''  This  same  Jesus, 
wliicli  is  taken  up  from  you  into  lieaven,  shall  so 
come  in  like  manner,  as  ye  liave  seen  11  im  go  into 
lieaven."  Acts  i:ll.  "The  Lord  Himself  shall  de- 
scend from  heaven  with  a  sliout."  1  Thess.  iv:16. 
This  does  not  mean  an  angel,  nor  the  Holy  Spirit, 
nor  deatli,  nor  any  providential  event  whatever, 
but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  wlio  summons 
His  o\vn  believino;  and  saved  ones  to  meet  Him,  "that 
every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  through  his 
body."  2  Cor.  v:  10;  that  He  may  "know  how 
much  every  man  had  gained  by  trading."  Luk. 
xix:15;  that  He  may  "  give  every  man  according 
as  his  work  shall  be."  Rev.  xxii:12.  With  this 
judgment  scene  tlie  unbelieving  world  has  nothing 
to  do,  but  only  the  saints  who  are  assigned  their 
position  in  tlie  kingdom  according  to  their  faithful- 
ness, and  of  whom  it  is  said,  "Do  ye  not  know  that 
the  saints  shall  judge  the  world?"  1  Cor.  vi:2. 

Second,  He  may  come  at  any  day,  for  there  is 
no  predicted  event  that  awaits  fulfillment  between 
this  passing  moment,  and  His  coming  for  His 
people  to  gather  them  about  Himself  in  the  air. 
The  popular  view  that  the  world  is  first  to  be  con- 
verted is  a  most  delusive  dream,  for  which  tlie re  is 
not  the  slightest  warrant  in  tlie  word  of    God,  in 


15G  TILL    HE    COME. 


the  history  of  the  church,  or  in  the  present  outlook. 
The  view  probably  arose  from  the  hideous  lie  of 
evolution,  it  being  assumed  that  there  is  an  in- 
herent tendency  in  human  nature  to  reach  a  higher 
development,  or,  as  poor  Beecher  used  to  say,  after 
he  became  an  evolutionist  and  infidel,  "  man  has 
been  failing  upward  ever  since  his  creation."  If 
this  is  true,  and  the  evil  and  vulo-ar  beast  has 
made  no  nobler  attainment  than  that  which  we  see 
at  the  close  of  the  nineteenth  century,  he  must 
have  had  a  mighty  low  start.  His  tendency  is  not 
toward  a  higher  development  in  religion  and  mor- 
als, but  he  w411  gravitate  towards  the  devil,  so  that 
the  last  days  will  be  the  worst  days,  as  the  Scrip- 
tures plainly  teach. 

Third,  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord  for  His  saints 
there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  all  who  "  sleep  in 
Jesus,"  and  of  none  others.  "Blessed  and  holy  is 
he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection ;  on  such 
the  second  death  hath  no  power,  l^ut  they  shall  be 
priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with 
Him  a  thousand  years."  Rev.  xx:6.  The  common 
interpretation,  that  this  refers  to  the  revival  of 
martyr  principles,  is  a  self-evident  absurdity,  for 
while  we  may  think,  in  a  figure  of  speech,  of  prin- 
ciples being  kings,  or  reigning,  it  is  impossible  to 
conceive  of  principles  as  priests  of  God.  Alford 
well  says  on' these  words,  "  Those  who  lived  next 
to  the  apostles,  and  the  whole  church  for  300 
years,  understood  them  in  the  plain,  literal  sense," 
and  he  adds,  that  unless  so  accepted,  "  there  is  an 
end  of  all  significance  in  language,  and  Scripture 
is  wij:>ed  out  as  a  definite  testimony  to  anything." 

Even  if  there  is  a   simultaneous   resurrection  of 


THE    ORDER    OF    EVENTS.  157 

the  righteous  and  iiiiriDrhteous  at  the  comingr  of 
the  Lord,  there  is  the  most  marked  difference  be- 
tween them,  for  only  the  former  liave  bodies  that 
are  glorilied,  incorruptible,  and  shining  in  the 
likeness  of  the  Redeemer.  This  is  the  resurrec- 
tion for  which  Paul  panted  and  strove,  "  the  out- 
resurrection,  the  one  from  among  the  dead,"  Phil. 
iii:ll;  and  it  is  unaccountable  that  the  apostle 
earnestly  desired,  if  by  any  means  he  might  attain 
unto  a  resurrection  common  to  all,  and  unavoid- 
able. So  our  Lord  tells  us  about  "the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  just,"  Lu.  xiv:14;  and  speaks  of  those 
who  '^t?hall  be  accounted  woi'thy  to  obtainthat  world, 
and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,"  or  "the  res- 
urrection which  is  from  amoiig  the  dead,"  as 
Rotherham  properly  renders  it,  Lii.  xx:36.  Even 
the  Old  Testament  teaches  this  elective  resurrec- 
tion, peculiar  to  the  saints,  when  it  says,  "Many 
of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  sliaJl 
awake,  these  [that  awake]  to  everlasting  life,  and 
those  [that  awake  not]  to  shame  and  everlasting 
contempt,"  Dan.  xii:2.  In  the  great  Xew  Testa- 
ment chapters  wliich  treat -of  the  resurrection,  not 
a  word  is  said  concerning  the  resurrection  of  the 
unbelievers,  but  only  of  the  saints,  1  Cor.  xv;  1 
Thess,  iv:13-18.  Surely  "there  shall  be  a  resur- 
rection of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  the  un- 
just," Actsxx:15;  but  only  of  the  just  at  the 
coming  of  Christ.  "But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived 
not  again  until  the  thousand  years  were  finished." 
Rev.  XX  :5. 

Fourth,  the  true  church,  the  regenerated  ones,  hav- 
ing been  caught  away,  a  foul  and  apostate  religious 
system  Avill  b'^  left,  associated  with  the  Antichrist, 


158 


TILL    HE    COME. 


Avhose  rise  and  progress  are  symbolized  in  the  Seal 
judgments  of  the  Apocalypse,  the  first  three  and  a 
half  years  of  his  reign  in  the  Trumpet  judgments, 
and  the  last  three  and  a  lialf  years  in  the  Yial 
judgments,  the  overthrow  of  Babylon,  or  all  that 
exalts  itself  against  Clod,  both  in  its  ecclesiastical 
and  political  aspect,  being  depicted  in  the  seven  - 
teenth  and  eighteenth  chapters  of  that  marvelous 
book.  Tlie  Jews  shall  have  been  partially  restored 
to  their  own  land  in  unbelief,  and  there  pass 
through  the  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not 
since  the  beginning  of  tlie  world,  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  will  suddenly  appear  with  all  His 
saints,  to  deliver  His  people  from  their  distress, 
to  cast  the  Antichrist  and  the  false  prophet  alive 
into  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone,  and 
to  establish  His  millennial  kingdom.  Zech.  xiv:l- 
5;  Rev.  xix:16-21. 

Fifth,  when  He  appears  again  in  the  midst  of 
Israel,  when  He  buikls  again  the  tabernacle  of 
David,  which  is  fallen  down,  Joel  ii:  27-32;  Acts 
XV.  16,  17,  then  shall  He  pour  out  His  Spirit  up- 
on all  flesh,  and  the  knowledge  of  His  glory  shall 
flood  the  earth,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,  Hab. 
ii.  14.  In  that  day,  and  not  before,  "  the  inhabi- 
tant shall  not  say,  I  am  sick;  the  people  that 
dwell  therein  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity," 
Isa  xxxiii.  24;  "  Thy  people  also  shall  be  all  right- 
eous: they  shall  inherit  the  land  forever,  the 
branch  of  my  planting,  the  Avork  of  my  hands, 
that  I  maybe  glorified,"  Isalx.  21;  ''and  they 
shall  teach  no  more  every  man  his  neighbor,  and 
every  man  his  brother,  saying,  Know  the  Lord; 
for  they  shall  all  know  me,  from  the  least  of  theiu 


THE    ORDER    OF    EVENTS.  159 

unto  the  greatest  of  them,  saith  the  Lord ;  for  I 
will  forgive  their  iniquity,  and  I  will  remember 
their  sin  no  more,"  Jer.  xxxi.  34.  "  And  the 
Lord  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth:  in  that  day 
shall  there  be  one  Lord,  and  His  name  one." 
Zech.  xiv.  9. 

Sixth,  "  When  the  thousand  years  are  expired, 
Satan  shall  be  loosed  outof  his  prison,  the  bottom- 
less abyss  in  which  he  has  been  bound  during  the 
Millennium,  and  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the 
nations,  in  a  last  desperate  effort  to  thwart  the 
counsels  of  God.  But  he  shall  not  succeed,  for 
he  shall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  tire  and  brimstone, 
wliere  the  Antichrist  and  false  prophet  are,  his 
seventh  and  final  defeat  and  fall.  After  the  jndg- 
ment  of  the  great  wliite  throne,  death  and  hades, 
thank  God,  sliall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  But 
what  a  picture  does  this  give  to  us  of  the  mind  of 
-the  flesh,  that,  even  after  the  blessedness  and  the 
glory  of  the  Millennial  reign,  it  can  be  corrupted, 
and  lift  itself  again  in  insolent  defiance. of  divine 
authority  and  infinite  love. 

Seventh,  eternity  begins.  "  And  God  shall 
wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes;  and  there 
shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying, 
neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain:  for  the  for- 
mer things  are  passed  away ....  And  there  shall  be 
no  more  curse:  but  the  throne  of  God  and  the 
Lamb  shall  be  in  it;  and  His  servants  shall  serve 
Him:  and  they  shall  see  His  face;  and  His  name 
shall  be  in  their  foreheads.  And  there  shall  be  no 
night  there:  and  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light 
of  the  sun;  for  the  Lord  God  givetli  them  light: 
and  they  shall  reign    for   ever   and    ever ....  He 


160 


TILL    HE    ClOME. 


which  testifieth  these  things  saith,  Surely  I  come 
quickly.  Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus." 
Rev.  xxi.  4;  xxii.  3-5,  20. 

"  I  am  waiting  for  the  dawning 
Of  the  bright  and  blessed  day; 
When  the  darksome  night  of  sorrow 
Shall  have  vanished  far  away : 
When  for  ever  with  the  Saviour, 
Far  beyond  this  vale  of  tears, 
I  shall  swell  the  song  of  worship 
Through  the  everlasting  years. 

I  am  looking  at  the  brightness, 
(See,  it  shineth  from  afar,) 
Of  the  clear  and  joyous  beaming,  ^ 

Of  the  "Bright  and  Morning  Star  "; 
Through  the  dark  grey  mist  of  morning 
Do  I  see  its  glorious  light; 
Then  away  with  every  shadow 
Of  this  sad  and  weary  night. 

I  am  waiting  for  the  coming 

Of  the  Lord  who  died  for  me: 

Oh!  His  words  have  thrilled  my  spirit, 

"I  will  come  again  for  thee." 

I  can  almost  hear  His  footfall 

On  the  threshold  of  the  door. 

And  my  heart,  my  heart  is  longing 

To  be  His  for  evermore." 


A1 


