* 





WEST FOO 





i ‘ 
a 
a i 


HN 
Eat 
BN tT 





Edited by LOUIS T. TALBOT 








Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


A FRESH APPRECIATION OF A 
GREAT MAN AND TEACHER 


Edited by 
LOUIS T. TALBOT, D.D. 
Pastor Church of the Open Door 
President Bible Institute 


of Los Angeles 


PRICE FIFTY CENTS 


Published by 


The Bible Institute of Los Angeles 
558 South Hope Street 
Los Angeles, California 


Theol u | tbrary 


SCHOOL OF THEO OGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


ee 
The Ghareh Press 
FARSON & SONS 


Orawomre, Caroneia 


CONTENTS 
I. THE TRAITS OF TORREY__.._. ) 
Torrey as a Man, Evangelist and Teacher 


By Herbert Lockyer 


II. THE TRACTS OF TORREY 


Whe-second-Coming #272) es ete 21 
The Deity. of Jesus). aoe 49 
How to Become a Christian__...._.._______ 72 
How to Grow in Grace________-_--__-_-_--.. 75 
How to Make a Success of the 

Christiana bate os a2 Se le 94 
How Can I Know that I am Led 

by: thetjoly spirited toe eee 102 
Christian Lite Card 2-2 2 he ee 107 
‘The: Shepherd. Psalm. 113 


School of Theology 
at Claremont 


IS A/o302 


PREFACE 


A word of explanation is necessary regarding 
the presentation of some of Dr. R. A. Torrey’s 
Bible tracts. Quite recently, we had a spring 
cleaning at the Bible Institute of Los Angeles, 
and in some of the cupboards we came across 
hundreds of plates, which were used by the 
printing press the Institute possessed in Dr. 
Torrey’s time. 


Finding a few of Dr. Torrey’s tracts, which 
the Institute issued during this famous teacher’s 
association with it, we thought that it would 
be a good thing to reproduce them for another 
generation of Bible lovers. 


The difference in style is accounted for by 
the fact that we have used the original plates, 
making possible thereby a cheaper book. 


The added appreciation of Dr. Torrey’s life 
and work by Dr. Herbert Lockyer will, I feel 
sure, prepare the reader for the Tracts of Dr. 
Torrey. 


May God continue to bless the work of one 
of America’s greatest Bible teachers! ‘He being 
dead yet speaketh.” 

Louis T. Talbot. 


I. THE TRAITS OF TORREY 
By Dr. Herbert Lockyer 


TORREY, THE MAN 


That movements ever revolve around men is 
the evident testimony of Scripture. ““A man ap- 
peared, sent by God, whose name was John.” A 
force implies a figure—a program, a personal- 
ity. The Dispensations of Scripture are asso- 
ciated with conspicuous individuals. God com- 
menced the human family with Adam. Noah 
headed another covenant. In Abraham we have 
the fountain head of the Jewish race. John the 
Baptist, the man sent by God, was the figure 
head in a crusade of repentance and preparation 
for the coming Messiah. In the Man Christ Je- 
sus, we have the Federal Head of the Church. 

And men sent by God explain the expansion 
of the cause of Christ. Paul, for example, is 
conspicuous as the promoter of evangelism and 
a founder of churches. For the deliverance of 
Christianity from the shackles of Papal sover- 
eignty, a man appeared, sent by God, whose 
name was Martin Luther. God shook this Ger- 
man monk and in turn the monk shook the 
world. 

England, J. R. Green in his History of the 
English People, tells us, was saved from a 
bloody revolution through the monumental la- 
bours of John Wesley. Scotland threw off the 
yoke of a dead formalism as the result of John 
Knox’s dynamic preaching. Two continents ex- 
perienced a remarkable spiritual quickening as 


6 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


D. L. Moody, the man of one Book, journeyed 
over them, preaching the glorious gospel of re- 
deeming love. And, without doubt, Reuben Ar- 
cher Torrey, the divinely ordained successor of 
D. L. Moody, was a man called of God to exer- 
cise a much needed ministry in a time ripe for 
instruction in the deep things of the Word. 

It is a distinct loss that no official biography 
of Dr. R. A. Torrey exists. His dear widow, 
still happily with us, writes me that her gifted 
husband did not desire any account of his 
labours recorded. The only sketch of his 
life extant is the revealing volume, Reuben Ar- 
cher Torrey: The Man And His Message, by his 
friend Robert Harkness, who was so closely 
identified with Dr. Torrey in his great evangel- 
istic campaigns. And it is upon this valuable 
biography we must depend for much of our 
material. 

For a generation that knew not R. A. Tor- 
rey, the man who appeared, sent by God to ex- 
pound the Scriptures, the following facts can 
be restated. 

He was born of Reuben Slayton Torrey and 
Elizabeth Torrey on January 28, 1856, in the 
city of Hoboken, N. J. 

As a student he had a distinguished career, 
having taken degrees at Yale University. Post 
graduate study in Germany further helped to 
equip this intellectual giant for his life’s work. 

His marriage to Clara B. Smith of Garretts- 
ville, Ohio, in 1879 brought into his life one 
who was to be his devoted companion for 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 4 


about fifty years. Mrs. Torrey is still actively 
interested in the work of the Lord. 

Of the five children born to Dr. and Mrs. 
Torrey, two are living and are in positions 
in which they perpetuate their father’s in- 
fluence and ministry; namely, Reuben A. Tor- 
rey, the well-known missionary to China, and 
Edith Clare Torrey, teacher of English Bible 
in Wheaton College, with whom Mrs. Torrey 
makes her home. 

Ordained to the Congregational ministry in 
1878, Dr. Torrey, thereafter, spent several years 
superintending the City Mission in Minneap- 
olis. From 1889 to 1908 he was associated in 
the work of the Moody Bible Institute of Chi- 
cago. Endowed, as few men of his day were, 
with a keen insight into the character of men, 
Mr. Moody knew that in R. A. Torrey he had 
the man who by training and testing was well 
fitted to develop the God-given idea of a train- 
ing center for consecrated young people. 


For twelve years he acted as Pastor of the old 
Moody Church. Extensive world tours during 
1902-1905, and evangelistic campaigns all over 
America from 1906 to 1912 were followed by 
visits to Europe and, in 1919 and 1921, to the 
Orient. 

Then for twelve years, 1912-1924, Dr. Tor- 
rey acted as Dean of the Bible Institute of Los 
Angeles, and also for the best part of this per- 
iod as Pastor of the historic Church of the 
Open Door. 

Relinquishing his work in California, Dr. 


8 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Torrey next engaged in evangelistic work all 
over the States. 

Then came two years as Special Lecturer at 
the Moody Bible Institute. Dr. Torrey died at 
Asheville, N. C., October 26, 1928, and his 
body rests on the hilltop of the Montrose he 
dearly loved. 

Such, then, are a few brief facts concerning 
a man sent by God whose memory and work 
are ever worth recalling. 


Those who knew this valiant defender of the 
Faith pay tribute to his uprightness and sin- 
cerity. Although he was only a man, yet he 
ever sought to be a true man, sent and used by 
God. He was clear and transparent. For exam- 
ple, he lived above the praises and plaudits of 
men. Bricks and bouquets often came his way 
and he took them all without apparent concern. 
He believed that he was not responsible for the 
way men reacted to his message. His responsi- 
bility, he believed, was to preach a God-given 
message, and then leave the Holy Spirit to pro- 
duce results. 

We are also told that Dr. Torrey was ever 
thorough and exact. He never did things by 
halves. And what he gave he expected. With 
his hours and life fully disciplined, he was stern 
when it came to discipline among students. 
Laziness he abhorred. 


Again, R. A. Torrey was not a man of 
moods. Often eminent men mar their influence 
because they are fitful, spasmodic and erratic. 
Torrey, however, had unusual balance and 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 9 


poise, that played a large part in making him 
the success he was. His manner radiated con- 
fidence. 

Endowed with an iron will, Dr. Torrey 
was firm and unbending in his attitude to sin 
and in his defence of the truth. Some, there 
were, who thought him somewhat severe. But 
as he could not tolerate sham, pretense or mere 
make-believe, Dr. Torrey thundered out against 
all hypocrisy. 

This man of God was likewise blessedly saved 
from mercenary motives. While ample reward 
came to him, greed for money never limited his 
influence or beclouded his vision. 

Punctuality was another conspicuous trait of 
his. His watch kept accurate time. Jeremy Tay- 
lor reminds us that one evidence of a holy life is 
the strict economy of time. Well, Dr. Torrey 
knew how to redeem his hours! 

Yes, and in an age cursed with superficiality, 
it is well to remember that Dr. Torrey was the 
enemy of anything mean or cheap. He was nev- 
er a showman. A commanding dignity, born of 
prolonged meditation upon the transcendent at- 
tributes of God enabled him to commend the 
Gospel. 

What contrasts and opposites are suggested 
by John’s phrase ‘‘a man sent by God.” A man! 
God! Humanity and Infinity. Yet both met 
and ever harmonized in Dr. R. A. Torrey. 

Particularizing, we can say that Dr. Torrey 
was: 


1. A Man of Undaunted Faith. 


10 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Once young Torrey emerged from his night 
of doubt he had no hesitancy about trusting 
God implicitly for all his needs. While in Min- 
neapolis, he determined to trust God, believing 
that the One he had come to know through a 
close study of the Scriptures, was well able to 
care for him and his work. Thus, like George 
Muller, that Apostle of Faith, whose work in 
Bristol is known the world over, R. A. Torrey, 
the Mission Superintendent, took all require- 
ments to the Lord. Faith, of course, received 
many a severe testing but temporal and spirit- 
ual needs were all met. 

And faith in God’s ability to care for His 
own dominated Dr. Torrey’s life. In all the im- 
portant decisions he had to make, faith devel- 
oped for him a healthy, spiritual ambition. And 
it was his utter dependence upon his unfailing 
Lord, fortressed, as his faith was, with a clean, 
yielded life, that enabled him to inspire faith in 
others. He could preach about faith, seeing that 
he practiced it. In his counsel to converts, he 
ever sought to impress upon them the necessity 
of thrusting themselves and all their cares 
wholly upon the Lord. 


2. A Man of Unceasing Intercession. 


Perhaps one of the most enlightening books 
dealing with the believer’s prayer life is the vol- 
ume by Dr. Torrey on “How to Pray.” But he 
not only preached and wrote about “Prayer.” It 
was the atmosphere of his own life, and satur- 
ated as his mind was with the truth of God’s 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey NE 


Word, his prayers were ever Biblical in expres- 
sion. 

In the world-wide ministry this spiritual 
giant was called upon to exercise, he had need 
of frequent access to the Throne. And no mat- 
ter how pressing his work, seasons of commun- 
ion were never neglected. Prayer to him was 
more important than work. 

And his prayers were always practical and di- 
rect. He knew the difference between saying 
prayers and praying in the Spirit. A favorite 
theme of his was, “The Prayer Life of our 
Lord.” Doubtless it was from his Master that 
he learned the necessity of spending many a day 
in prayer and fasting. And his knowledge of 
how to “pray through” accounts for his pow- 
erful ministry in different parts of the world. 


3. A Man of Deep Convictions. 

After his triumph over doubt, while a stu- 
dent at Yale and in Germany, Dr. Torrey never 
swerved from his faith in the infallibility of 
the Word of God. Intellectual and spiritual 
battles successfully fought brought him to a 
divine dogmatism regarding the Truth. And it 
was this unshaken confidence of his that helped 
to make him a rich blessing to so many of his 
day who were swayed by the “faiths” and 
“isms” of that time. 

We sometimes say that nothing convicts like 
conviction. Well, Dr. Torrey’s convictions were 
certainly contagious as hundreds can still testi- 
fy. One is constantly meeting with those who 
were brought out of their doubt into the clear 


12 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


sunlight of faith through the positive utter- 
ances of R. A. Torrey. He was not of the num- 
ber who doubt their beliefs and believe their 
doubts. May God raise up more men with like 
convictions! 


TORREY, THE EVANGELIST 


While Dr. R. A. Torrey will go down to pos- 
terity as a Christian-educator, yet the fact re- 
mains that he was essentially an evangelist, and 
his methods of evangelism were ideal. Records 
prove that he made full proof of his ministry 
as an evangelist. 

Robert Harkness reminds us that Dr. Torrey 
was “regarded by some as being unsuited for a 
specific evangelistic ministry.” Yet it cannot be 
denied that he was raised up for a great work. 
That he was called of God is evidenced not 
only in his messages, but in the abundant bless- 
ing attendant upon his ministry. He was not 
suddenly thrust into evangelistic work. His ad- 
vent was prepared and his spiritual power was a 
matter of gradual development. His success as 
an evangelist, therefore, was not due to any 
mere chance, but rather the result of years of 
preparation and experience. 

It will be worth our while to examine the 
underlying causes of his success as a soul-win- 
ner: causes, be it known that must ever be evi- 
dent if one would do the work of an evangelist. 

1. Torrey experienced the Grace of God with 
a deep heart experience of regeneration. Dr. 
Torrey knew what the Lord was able to do for 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 13 


others. The foundation of his stirring evangel- 
ism was his own personal salvation. A preach- 
er, merely religious, can never function as a 
soul-winner. When Jesus has found us, then, 
and only then, can we tell others the story. 

And in true apostolic fashion, once saved, Dr. 
Torrey sought to win those of his own imme- 
diate circle for Christ. In his message on ‘‘Soul- 
winning,” he often told of the way in which 
he led his own brother to the Saviour after 
years of pleading. And what joy was his as his 
own dear children accepted Christ. 


2. Torrey shared Christ’s passion for souls. 


Living near to the heart of his Lord, Dr. Torrey 
manifested his Master’s concern over lost men 
and women. In Christ’s stead, he was ever be- 
seeching the unsaved to be reconciled to God. 
Although somewhat cold, austere, emotionless, 
R. A. Torrey was yet impelled by Heaven’s love 
for the lost. 

And like his Lord, this divinely equipped 
evangelist believed in personal dealing. While 
he had power to sway masses, he loved the indi- 
vidual. He did not content himself with the 
preaching of those masterly evangelistic ser- 
mons of his in great campaigns. He was ever 
alert, snatching every opportunity of witness- 
ing for his Lord. Mr. Robert Harkness tells of a 
visit to Australia and of a rough crossing they 
had when most of the party had to remain in 
their staterooms. A stormy sea caused them to 
be deeply concerned about their safety. Dr. 
Torrey, however, could be found on deck deal- 


14 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


ing with the Captain of the ship about his soul. 
Evidently self-righteous, the Captain came to 
realize that he was a lost sinner and ere the voy- 
age was over, the seafaring man accepted the 
Saviour. 


3. Torrey relied upon the work of the Spirit. 
Eminently gifted, Dr. Torrey knew how peril- 
ous it was to depend upon his natural talents, 
even upon his unique knowledge of the Scrip- 
tures. Of course, he believed that the Holy 
Spirit ever rides triumphantly in His own char- 
iot and therefore his messages were saturated 
with the Bible. He knew, however, that even 
the letter can kill and that it is the Spirit alone 
who can give life. 

As a true soul-winner he knew how to trust 
the Holy Spirit to produce conviction. Torrey 
believed that if he preached the Gospel faith- 
fully and fully that the Holy Spirit would see 
to the results. He never tried to coax people 
into the Kingdom. False incentive, superficial 
appeals, or mere sensationalism were not in his 
line of things as an evangelist. 

With the Spirit-anointed heralds of the Early 
Church, Dr. Torrey respected the Lordship of 
the Holy Spirit with the result that sinners 
were regenerated and mere religious professors 
brought into a living experience and lukewarm 
believers were transformed into ardent wit- 
nesses for Christ. 


4. Torrey preached a Saving Message. An 
evangelist implies an evangel, and Dr. Torrey 
had a full Gospel to proclaim. And his was a 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 15 


Gospel he never apologized for. Knowing the 
Christ of the Gospel, this mighty soul-winner 
kept his ministry Christo-centric. He first 
brought Christ to men, then men to Christ. 
As with John Wesley, Charles Finney, Dwight 
L. Moody, Christ was the focal point of R. A. 
Torrey’s preaching. 

Realizing that the heart of man was deceit- 
ful above all things and desperately wicked, this 
teacher-evangelist bent all his energies in a two 
fold direction, namely, the utter depravity of 
the human heart, and a Crucified Christ as the 
only hope of sinners. 


One of Dr. Torrey’s favorite passages was 
John 1:12. And relationship with God, only 
through Christ, was a constant theme of his, 
while the lines of his favorite hymn indicated 
his personal devotion to the Lord he dearly 
loved: 

“Oh, could I speak the matchless worth, 
Oh, could I sound the glories forth, 
Which in my Saviour shine! 
I’d soar and touch the heavenly strings, 
And vie with Gabriel while he sings 
In notes almost divine.” 

And in his evangelistic sermons he covered 
all the fundamental truths of Holy Writ. A 
striking text and half a dozen sob stories never 
satisfied this passionate evangelist who knew 
how to teach, teach, mark you, transgressors 
their ways. Believing that the whole Bible was 
the inspired Word of God, with masterly clar- 
ity and conciseness he discoursed upon all the 


16 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


aspects of the divine character, trusting the 
Spirit to produce conviction as he preached. 


5. Torrey declared the Eternal Destiny of 
Souls. With the lost condition of men ever be- 
fore him, Dr. Torrey was frank in his rebuttal 
of sin—brutally frank, some thought. Few men 
have been able to expose sin in all its terrible- 
ness as did R. A. Torrey. A friend of mine who 
listened to Dr. Torrey preach on “Prepare to 
meet thy God,” told me that such a piercing 
message made one tremble, yet in the delivery 
of the message the preacher seemed to be some- 
what cold, unemotional. At times it would 
seem as if he were too hard or brusque. Such 
however, was not his real nature. In his inmost 
heart, the perilous condition of souls ever con- 
strained him to warn sinners in the plainest of 
language. 

Believing that souls dying without Christ 
are lost forevermore, he never trimmed his mes- 
sage. He gathered constant incentive from the 
solemn exhortation of James 5:20. And no one 
can read Torrey’s sermons containing his an- 
swers to problems of a perplexed, seeking soul 
without realizing that he knew how to apply 
his Biblical bait. Whether it was the difficulties 
of a sincere seeker, or the excuses of one whose 
problems were moral rather than mental, or 
the hackneyed arguments of the infidel, Dr. 
Torrey knew how to apply the very Scripture 
needed. He had power, as few others of his 
time, to bear the truth of salvation to a lost 
and dying world. Years of preparation and ex- 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 17 


perience contributed to his success as an evan- 
gelist. He was ever a sworn foe of a mere pro- 
fessional evangelism. He hated surface work. 
He never condescended to tricks to secure re- 
sults. 

Other conspicuous traits marking him out as 
an Evangelist of high order can be briefly men- 
tioned: 

He carried the evident marks of Separation. 

He cultivated holy intimacy with Heaven. 

He was saved from ulterior motives. 

He labored in the light of Eternity. 


TORREY, THE TEACHER 


Dr. R. A. Torrey will ever remain one of 
the world’s outstanding Bible teachers. En- 
dowed with a brilliant lawyer-like mind, com- 
bined as it was with an undying passion for 
truth, he was an eminent teacher. Ever precise 
and calculative, he knew how to divide the 
Word of God rightly. 

Emotional decisions were not his. Hard rea- 
soning and stern logic formed his approach to 
the Scriptures. While a student he faced a per- 
iod of doubt when it seemed as if faith would 
be shipwrecked by the rationalistic theology of 
Germany. A praying mother, however, sensing 
something of her boy’s perils, laid hold on God 
for her son who was in the way of being ru- 
ined for the ministry he was preparing for. In 
after years, Dr. Torrey was forever attributing 
his victory over doubts to the prayers of his 
saintly mother. 

When the crisis came, and faith triumphed, 


18 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


young Torrey found a new Bible and a more 
wonderful Christ. From that time on, he never 
had a doubt regarding the veracity of Scrip- 
ture. Through the years he gave unwavering 
loyalty to the great verities of the Book and 
was widely used to lead a multitude of doubt- 
ers into the certainty of faith. 

1. Torrey was Simple. Dr. Torrey practiced 
the art of simplicity. His forceful messages 
were clothed in language people could under- 
stand. Having a mind saturated with the 
simple language of the Bible, he knew how to 
express his statements in a simple style. 

2. Torrey was Dignified. This master teacher 
likewise scorned anything that was light, flip- 
pant or undignified in the presentation of the 
Truth. He was ever a stranger to irreverence. 
Like John Bunyan’s “very grave person,” R. A. 
Torrey bore his great commission in his look. 

3. Torrey was Systematic. Believing God to 
be the God of order and not of confusion, Dr. 
Torrey also held that his declarations of God’s 
Word should be orderly and systematic. Like 
Dr. Dinsdale Young of London, Dr. Torrey was 
fond of the three-decker sermon. His famous 
propositions, too, in What the Bible Teaches, 
reveal him as a master of division and analysis. 
He knew the force of logic and utilized it. — 

4. Torrey was a Disciplinarian. Those who 
studied under him both in Chicago and Los An- 
geles knew him to be strict. Having a mind and 
a body well under control and the hours of his 
day carefully mapped out, he could enforce dis- 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 19 


cipline when it came to the training of stu- 
dents. 

Idleness he loathed. Like many another fa- 
mous preacher, Dr. Torrey commenced his min- 
istry in a small sphere, laboring and studying 
unceasingly and disciplining himself for future 
and greater tasks. 

5. Torrey was Direct. As a teacher, Dr. Tor- 
rey was definite. He knew what he had to say 
and he could say it in uncompromising terms. 
His volume, What the Bible Teaches, perhaps 
one of the finest and most comprehensive com- 
pendiums of orthodox theology we have, re- 
veals the clarity with which he could express 
his views. As Robert Harkness puts it, “Sim- 
plicity marked his teaching—conviction quali- 
fied his utterance—blessing accompanied his ef- 
fort.” 

6. Torrey advocated the value of memoriz- 
ing. We have several good books on the memo- 
rizing of Scripture, many of which owe their 
inception, more or less, to Dr. Torrey’s labors in 
this direction. His own cultivated memory was 
remarkable, adding greatly to his effectiveness 
as he expounded the Scriptures. He affirmed, 
and rightly so, that a memory if rightly trained 
was ever to be trusted. 

7. Torrey had a Full Mind. While essentially 
a man of one Book, Dr. Torrey read widely. He 
was ever abreast of current literature. Every- 
thing, however, he read was closely scrutinized 
and only passed on to others as it conformed to 
the structure of the spiritual truth he firmly 


20 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


believed. He would never attack a dangerous 
“ism” until he had endeavored to read all that 
was ever printed about it. Take, for example, 
his booklet on ‘Seventh-day Adventism.” 

8. Torrey was a Builder. While it is perfectly 
true to say that Bible Institute work in Amer- 
ica owes its existence to D. L. Moody, it is like- 
wise true to assert that Bible Institutes owe 
their development to Dr. Torrey. Throwing 
himself heartily into the work which Mr. 
Moody commenced in Chicago, Dr. Torrey 
came to regard the function of a Bible Insti- 
tute as an avenue of preparation for soul-win- 
ning service either at home or abroad. Essential 
subjects only, therefore, were handled. 

The curriculum of the Chicago Institute, 
which is largely the basis of Bible Institutes 
the land over, was conceived chiefly by Dr. 
Torrey. And some of the ablest Bible teachers 
around the world owe their inspiration to the 
studies this renowned teacher made possible. 

Happily, much of Dr. Torrey’s work is in 
print, and any Christian worker having a 
“Torrey Library” is well equipped. To assimi- 
late his masterly works thoroughly is to have 
ample material for many a sermon. To study 
How to Work for Christ is to discover how 
successful soul-winners are made. To read 
prayerfully How to Pray results in a quickened 
and dynamic prayer-life. To ponder How to 
Promote and Conduct a Successful Revival is to 
stir one’s heart to be wholly dedicated to the 
Lord for the accomplishment of Christ’s re- 
demptive purpose. 


Il. THE TRACTS OF TORREY 


The 
Second Coming 
of Christ 


Sloe truth of the Second Coming of 
Christ in the past few months has 

come into a new prominence. For 
several years this great truth seems to 
have fallen into the background. About 
two years ago I was asked to write a 
book on the Second Coming of Christ. 
I had long wished to write a book on 
that subject, but I wondered if it was 
timely, so little was being said about the 
Second Coming of Our Lord, but I 
decided to write the book. There was 
considerable delay in publishing it, but 
about a year ago it was given to the pub- 
lic. *Almost simultaneously with the 
appearing of that book many other books 
on the same subject began to appear on 
both sides of the Atlantic. Then there 
came a great series of Prophetic Con- 
ferences, extending from Chicago to the 
Coast, until it may be said that the truth 


22 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


of our Lord’s coming again has become 
the most prominent truth in the thought 
of the Church in the past few months. 
To many the doctrine of our Lord’s 
Return appears like a visionary and 
impractical doctrine. If any of you think 
so, I will not blame you; for I recall the 
time when it seemed so to me. Early 
in my first pastorate, the first Premillen- 
nial Conference was held in New York 
City. It so happened that the chorister 
of my church was also the editor of a 
secular paper and he became greatly 
interested in the reports in the New 
York papers of the Premillennial Con- 
ference. He came to me and asked me 
if I would not preach on the Second 
Coming of Christ. I put him off, but 
thought to myself, “You will be a great 
deal older than you are now before you 
hear me preaching on so impractical and 
visionary a subject as that.” At the close 
of my first pastorate I went to Germany 
for further study. In Erlangen I pur- 
sued my studies under the immediate 
direction of the greatest thinker along 
theological lines there was in Germany 
at that time, Dr. Fr. H. R. Frank, at that 
time rector of the University of Erlan- 
gen. He gave me the free run of his 
own library and directed my studies. 
Among other books that he recom- 
mended me to read was Martensen’s 
“Dogmatik.” This great Danish theolo- 


4 


+. 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 23 


gian was a Premillennarian, and, as I 
read his book, I became convinced intel- 
lectually of the truth of the Premillen- 
nial Return of our Lord, but I was not 
at all interested in it. On my return from 
Germany, I took a pastorate in Minne- 
apolis. In our Minneapolis ministers’ 
meeting one Monday morning there was 
a debate between Rev. Dr. Sample, at 
that time pastor of the Westminster 
Church, Minneapolis, and Rev. M. D. 
Shudder, pastor of one of the Baptist 
churches of Minneapolis, on the subject 
of our Lord’s Return. Dr. Sample, who 
afterward became pastor of a church in 
New York, maintained the premillennial 
view; Mr. Shudder, who afterwards 
became a Unitarian, maintained the post- 
millennial view. Dr. Sample simply 
wiped the earth with Mr. Shudder and 
I went away from the meeting more 
fully convinced than ever of the truth of 
the Premillennial view, but still I was 
not greatly interested in it. It did not 
seem to me to matter much which view 
was correct. Some time after I went to 
Chicago to the First International Con- 
vention of Christian Workers. Being 
elected President of the Association, I 
came in very close contact with a Rescue 
Mission worker from New York and 
became greatly interested in him and his 
mission. Returning to Minneapolis, we 
took this worker back with us for a visit. 


5 


24 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Upon his return to New York he wrote 
me a letter and enclosed a tract on the 
Second Coming of Christ. This tract 
made the imminent return of our Lord 
a very vivid and practical reality in my 
life. Now I not only got hold of the 
truth of our Lord’s Return, but that 
truth got hold of me, and it transformed 
my life and ministry. 

There have been four great epochs in 
my Christian experience: 

First, When I was led to accept Jesus 
Christ as my personal Saviour and to 
surrender my life to Him as my Lord 
and Master and in consequence of that 
surrender decided to enter the Christian 
ministry. The second was when I was 
led to see that beyond a question the 
entire Bible, from the first chapter of 
Genesis to the last verse of the last chap- 
ter of Revelation, was the inerrant Word 
of God, and, in consequence of seeing 
that, was led to resolve to take my stand 
upon every promise I found in the Bible 
that properly applied to me and to obey 
every commandment that applied to me. 
Up to that time, I had held very 
“advanced” views regarding the inspira- 
tion of the Bible and its inerrancy and 
authority. I was a “new theologian” of 
the new theologians, when new theology 
was not as popular nor as common as it 
is to-day. I say I had entertained very 
“advanced” views; to be more accurate, 


6 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 25 


I had entertained very loose and unwar- 
ranted views, but now I knew for a cer- 
tainty that the entire Bible was the very 
Word of God. The third great epoch in 
my life was when I was led to see, from 
a study of the Word of God, that there 
was a definite baptism with the Holy 
Spirit for every child of God in this dis- 
pensation as well as in the days of the 
Apostles, and when I was led to seek and 
claim and obtain this baptism for myself. 
The fourth great epoch was when I was 
led, not merely to believe theoretically in 
the Premillennial Return of our Lord, 
but when that great truth got possession 
of me. The world and its ambitions lost 
their power. What did I care whether I 
was rich or poor, whether I had good 
report or evil report from the world, 
whether I had plenty or whether I had 
hardship in this present age, the Lord 
Himself was soon coming and might 
come any time and all I cared for was 
to be well-pleasing in His sight when 
He should appear. 

That every Christian should be inter- 
ested in the doctrine of our Lord’s return 
is evident from the fact that it is so fre- 
quently referred to in the Word of God; 
the Second Coming of Christ is men- 
tioned 318 times in the 260 chapters of 
the New Testament and is said to occupy 
one in every 25 verses from Matthew to 
Revelation, i. e., it is mentioned far more 


7 


26 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


frequently than there are chapters in the 
New Testament. Ought not then this 
great truth to occupy a more prominent 
position in our thought than it does in 
the thought of the average believer or 
average preacher of the Gospel? Further 
than this, by far the greater number of 
the definite predictions concerning Christ 
in the Old Testament are connected with 
His Second Coming. We sometimes 
wonder how it is that the Jews of our 
Lord’s time did not see the truth so 
clearly revealed in some of the prophe- 
cies of the Old Testament (for example, 
Isa. 53) that He was to come as a suffer- 
ing Messiah, as an atoning sacrifice for 
sin. It is indeed surprising as this truth 
is so clearly revealed in the Old Testa- 
ment; but it is far more surprising that 
Christians of today do not see the truth 
of His coming again to reign as King; 
for there are far more predictions con- 
cerning this in the Bible than there are 
predictions concerning His Coming to 
suffer as an atoning sacrifice for sin. The 
fact of the coming again of Jesus Christ 
is the great Bible argument for a life of 
watchfulness, fidelity, wisdom, activity, 
simplicity, self-restraint, energetic soul 
winning, prayer and abiding in Christ 
(e. g. Matt. 24:44-46; Luke 21 :34-36; 
1 John 2:28; Matt. 25 entire chapter). 
The truth of our Lord’s return is the one 
truth with which we are urged to com- 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 27 


fort sorrowing saints (1 Thess. 4:16-18, 
cf. Isa. 40:1, 9, 10). 

What we have to say to-night on the 
Return of our Lord will come under two 
heads, First, The Fact of His Coming 
Again; Second, The Manner of His 
Coming Again. 


I. The Fact of His Coming Again. 


In John 14 our Lord Himself says, 
“And if I go and prepare a place for 
you, I will come again and receive you 
unto myself; that where I am, there ye 
may be also.” In Heb. 9:28, R. V., we 
read, “So Christ also, having been once 
offered to bear the sins of many, shall 
appear the second time, apart from sin, 
to them that wait for Him, unto salva- 
tion.” In Philippians 3:20, 21, R. V., 
Paul says, “For our citizenship is in 
heaven; from whence also we wait for 
a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who 
shall fashion anew the body of our 
humiliation, that it may be conformed to 
the body of His glory, according to the 
working whereby He is able even to sub- 
ject all things unto Himself.” In 1 
Thessalonians 4:16, 17, R. V., Paul says 
again, “For the Lord Himself shall 
descend from heaven, with a shout, with 
the voice of the archangel, and with the 
trump of God: and the dead in Christ 
shall rise first: then we that are alive 


9 


28 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


that are left, shall together with,them 
be caught up in the clouds, to meet the 
Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be 
with the Lord.” In Acts 1:11, we read 
that the two heavenly messengers who 
stood by the disciples as they saw the 
Lord ascending to the Father said, “This 
Jesus, who was received up from you 
into heaven, shall so come in like manner 
as ye beheld Him going into heaven.” 
And in Acts 3:19, 20, R. V., we read, 
“Repent ye therefore, and turn again, 
that your sins may be blotted out, that so 
there may come seasons of refreshing 
from the presence of the Lord; and that 
He may send the Christ who hath been 
appointed for you, even Jesus, whom 
the heaven must receive until the times 
of restoration of all things, whereof God 
spake by the mouth of His holy prophets 
which have been from of old.” If these 
passages of the Word of God mean any- 
thing they certainly state in the clearest 
and most definite way possible that our 
Lord Jesus Christ is coming again. 

The coming again of our Lord spoken 
of im these passages is not His coming 
at death. In whatever sense our Lord 
may come to any believer at his death, 
that coming is certainly not the coming 
described in the passages quoted. Almost 
none of the things mentioned in these 
verses occur at the death of the believer. 
At the death of the believer, our bodies 


10 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 29 


are not changed into the likeness of His 
glorious body; rather they crumble into 
corruption and decay. At the death of 
the individual believer, those who have 
already departed and are dead in Christ 
are not raised nor are we caught up 
together with them to meet the Lord in 
the air. By no twisting that any honest 
searcher after truth will consent to can 
these passages be made to describe what 
occurs at the death of the believer. Fur- 
thermore, our Lord Himself draws a 
very careful and clear-cut distinction 
between death and His own coming. As 
Peter followed Him down the shore of 
Galilee after he had been told of the 
manner of death by which He Himself 
should glorify God, he saw John the 
beloved disciple following, and he asked 
his Lord, What shall come to John? and 
our Lord replied, “If I will that he tarry 
till I come, what is that to thee?” (John 
20:18-22). “Tarry” evidently means 
“remain alive.” If the coming to which 
our Lord referred is His coming at 
death, then what our Lord Jesus said 
put in other words would be this, “If I 
will that he remain alive till he die, what 
is that to thee?” Of course, this would 
be nonsense and our Lord never spoke 
nonsense. He made it clear as day that 
the death of the believer was one thing; 
that His coming was something entirely 
different and apart. 


11 


30 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


» Neither do these passages describe the 
coming again of our Lord Jesus at Pen- 
tecost, nor at the coming of the Holy 
Spirit to the individual believer. Pente- 
cost was in a very real sense a coming 
of Christ and the coming of the Holy 
Spirit to the individual believer is in a 
very real sense a coming of Christ: it is 
the work of the Holy Spirit when He 
comes to the believer to form within us 
the indwelling Christ, and so our Lord 
Jesus when He gave the promise of the 
Holy Spirit said, “I will come to you” 
(John 14:18. Note context, read whole 
passage from vs. 15-23). But while the 
coming of the Holy Spirit is in a very 
real sense a coming of Christ, it is not 
the coming of Christ described in the 
verses quoted above. The things 
described so accurately and so vividly in 
these passages do not occur at the com- 
ing of the Holy Spirit. At the coming 
of the Holy Spirit, the Lord Himself 
does not descend from heaven “with a 
shout, with the voice of the archangel 
and with the trump of God,’ the dead in 
Christ are not raised, living believers are 
not caught up together with the dead 
who have just been raised to meet the 
Lord in the air. At the coming of the 
Holy Spirit we are not taken up to be 
with Christ; He comes to be with us. 
Furthermore, all these promises but one 
were made after the coming of the Holy 


12 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 31 


Spirit and pointed to a coming of Christ 
still future. 

Further still, the coming again of our 
Lord described in the passages quoted 
is not His coming again at the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem. What little I was 
taught in the theological seminary on 
this subject was to the effect that the 
destruction of Jerusalem was the Sec- 
ond Coming of Christ. Now the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem was undoubtedly in a 
sense a precursor, prophecy and type of 
the judgment at the end of this age in 
connection with our Lord’s return, and, 
therefore, in Matthew 24 and Mark 13 
the two events are described in close con- 
nection with each other, but God’s judg- 
ment on Jerusalem in A. D. 70 is mani- 
festly not the event referred to in the 
passages given above, the things so min- 
utely described in these passages did not 
occur at the destruction of Jerusalem. 
On that occasion the Lord Himself did 
not descend from heaven with a shout, 
with the voice of the archangel and the 
trump of God; it is certain that on that 
occasion those who sleep in Jesus were 
not raised and living believers were not 
transformed and clothed upon with a 
body like unto the glorious body of our 
risen Lord, they were not caught up to 
meet the Lord in the air. All things 
were not restored at that time. Besides 
this, years after the destruction of Jerus- 


13 


32 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


alem, we find John sti!l looking forward 
to the Lord’s coming (Rev. 22:20). And 
it was long after the destruction of 
Jerusalem that John himself wrote the 
record of the Lord’s words to Peter at 
Galilee concerning himself: “If I will 
that he tarry till I come, what is that to 
thee? follow thou me. Then went this 
saying abroad among the brethren that 
that disciple should not die; yet Jesus 
said not unto him, He shall not die; but, 
If I will that he tarry tll I come, what 
is that to thee?” 

It is clearly evident then that the very 
plain, explicit and definite predictions of 
Christ Himself and the Apostles regard- 
ing our Lord’s Return which were 
quoted above have not yet been fulfilled 
in any historic event that has yet occur- 
red nor in any series of events. The 
coming again of our Lord Jesus so fre- 
quently mentioned in the New Testa- 
ment as the great hope of the Church 
lies still in the future. 


Il. The Manner of His Coming. 


Now let us turn to the manner of our 
Lord’s Coming Again. 

First of all, it meeds to be said that 
there will be different stages in our 
Lord’s Return. He is to come first in 
the air whither His believing people are 
caught up to meet Him. After a period 


14 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 33 


of dealing with His people in the air, 
judging them and rewarding them 
according to their works, He will come 
with His believing people to the earth, 
then there will follow a long succession 
of events connected with His coming. 
Second, The Bible makes it very plain 
that the Coming of the Lord Jesus will 
be a personal coming. In Acts 1:11 we 
read, “This same Jesus which is taken 
up from you into heaven shall so come 
in like manner as ye have seen Him go 
into heaven.” And Paul said, “The Lord 
himself shall descend from heaven.” And 
Jesus Himself said, “J will come again 
(John 14:3). The Second Coming of 
Christ then is not merely the coming of 
some great moral reformation or spirit- 
ual uplift; it is the coming of Jesus Him- 
self. We have a way of speaking of a 
revival of religion as the coming of 
Christ. In a sense it is a coming of 
Christ, but there is to be a personal 
return of our Lord, a coming of this 
very same Jesus in His own person. 
Nothing else will satisfy the heart of the 
believer. When I was a pastor in Min- 
neapolis, a godly minister of the Gospel, 
a man who I believe really loved his 
Lord, for he had made sacrifices for 
Him, wrote an essay on The Second 
Coming of Christ in which he said, “We 
must not look for the personal return 
of our Lord, but must learn to see Him 


15 


34 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


and be satished with Him as coming 
more and more in all the wonders and 
glories of this closing 19th century.” In 
other words, we were not to expect the 
Lord Himself to come but should see 
the fulfilment of His promise of coming 
again in the electric telegraph, in the 
telephone, in the improvement of our 
steam railways, in the advance of social 
conditions and civilization; this, accord- 
ing to this minister, was the coming 
promised in the Bible. I have said that 
I believe this minister really loved his 
Lord, but I could never understand how 
any one who really loved the Lord could 
write these words. It is not merely social 
improvements that we need and long for, 
it is not even the messages and gifts of 
grace of our Lord that we long for; the 
one who really loves his Lord longs for 
the Lord Himself. Suppose when I go 
East in a few weeks I should say to my 
wife, “I am coming back again and I 
wish you to be watching for my return.” 
She certainly would be watching for it 
and longing for it without my telling her 
to. Every day during my absence I 
write her a letter full of expressions of 
my love to her. Now and then I send 
her some beautiful gift as a token of my 
remembrance, but all the while she is 
watching for me. Some day a friend 
comes in and says to her, “Is your hus- 
band coming back again?’ “Yes, cer- 


16 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 35 


tainly.” “When is he coming back?” 
“I do not know but I trust soon.” “Why 
do you believe he is coming back?” “Oh, 
he said he would.” Then suppose this 
friend should say “He did not mean he 
was coming back personally. You must 
not expect him to return personally. Is 
he not writing you frequent letters, and 
sending you gifts as tokens of his love 
now and then?” “Yes.” “Well, what 
he meant was that you must ‘see him and 
be satisfied with him as coming more 
and more’ in these letters which he is 
writing you and these gifts which he is 
sending you.” What do you think my 
wife would say? I know well what she 
would say. Her eyes would flash with 
indignation and she would say, “I do not 
want his letters and his gifts. I want 
himself.” And the true believer wants 
the Lord Himself and it is the Lord 
Jesus Himself we are going to have. 
“The Lord Himself” shall come; “this 
very Jesus” will come. The late Dr. 
James H. Brooks of St. Louis, once 
united in marriage a beautiful girl in 
his church to an officer in the United 
States army. Very soon after the mar- 
riage this officer was sent to a new post 
where he was not permitted to take his 
bride with him. As he left her in obed- 
ience to the government, he said to com- 
fort her, “I will come back soon. I do 
not know how soon. These appoint- 


17 


36 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


ments are often brief. It may be for a 
day ; it may be for a longer time, but not 
for a very long time.” During his 
absence, he wrote her many letters tell- 
ing her of his love. He sent her beauti- 
ful gifts as tokens of his love. One day 
she sat in the parlor with a letter in her 
hand that she had just received from him 
and looking through the box of beautiful 
gifts he had sent her. Suddenly, she 
heard a sound at the door, she heard a 
familiar footstep; looking up, there he 
stood in the door; she threw down the 
letter, stumbled over the box, scattered 
the gifts, ran to him and was clasped to 
his heart. What did she care for letters 
and gifts, she had himself. And the day 
is not very far away when we shall have, 
not merely those treasured messages 
from Christ that we find in the Bible and 
when we shall have not merely the many 
wondrous gifts of His grace, but when 
we shall have the Lord Himself. 

Third, Our Lord’s coming again will 
be bodily and visible. We read in Acts 
1:11, “This same Jesus which is taken 
up from you into heaven shall so come 
in like manner as ye have seen him go 
into heaven.” Now our Lord went up 
into heaven before their eyes, visibly and 
bodily, and so He will come again. I 
was once on the Council examining a 
brother minister for installation. The 
man was thoroughly orthodox on all the 


18 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 37 


fundamental doctrines. In the course of 
the examination I put to him the ques- 
tion, “Do you believe in the personal 
return of our Lord?” He replied, “No, 
I do not.” Then I asked him, “What do 
you do with Acts 1:11, “This same 
Jesus shall so come in like manner as 
ye have seen Him go into heaven’?” He 
replied, “This simply sets forth a cer- 
tainty that He will come but not that He 
will come personally and bodily.” But 
the Greek words do not admit of any 
such interpretation. The words trans- 
lated “So come in like manner” have 
and can have but one meaning, literally 
translated they mean “‘Thus in the man- 
ner which.” They never describe mere 
certainty; they always and necessarily 
describe manner, they cannot mean any- 
thing else, and God sent His own heav- 
enly messengers to tell us that as Jesus 
was seen going up bodily and visibly that 
He would come again in the very man- 
ner in which He was seen going. Again 
in Hebrews 9:28, R. V., we read, “So 
Christ having been once offered to bear 
the sins of many, shall appear the sec- 
ond time.” Now the Greek word trans- 
lated “shall appear” in this passage 
means “shall be seen.” The first mean- 
ing given in the best Greek Lexicon of 
the New Testament to the word is “to 
see with the eyes,” and that is what this 
passage means, that Jesus “shall be seen 


19 


38 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


with the eyes’ the second time,” that He 
shall come visibly and bodily. 

We read again in Revelation 1:7, 
“Behold, He cometh with clouds; and 
every eye shall see Him; and they also 
which pierced Him: and all kindreds of 
the earth shall wail because of Him.” 
Some years ago I was preaching one 
morning in the Moody Church in Chi- 
cago on the Second Coming of Christ. 
One, who was not merely a disciple, but 
an apostle of Pastor Russell and his 
Millennial Dawn vagaries was in the 
audience. He came to me at the close 
of the address and said, “Mr. Torrey, 
you don’t believe, do you, that the Lord 
Jesus will come in a way that He shall 
be seen with our physical eye?’ I 
replied, “It does not make a particle of 
difference what I believe, the only ques- 
tion is what God says, and God says, 
‘Every eye shall see Him’.” The com- 
ing of Christ plainly predicted in the 
Scriptures is an entirely different sort 
of coming from that which Pastor Rus- 
sell assures us took place in October, 
1874. 

Fourth. In the next place, Jesus Christ 
is coming again with great publicity. We 
read in Matthew 24:26, 27, R. V., “If 
therefore they shall say unto you, 
Behold, He is in the wilderness; go not 
forth: Behold, He is in the inner cham- 
bers; believe it not. For as the lightning 


20 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 39 


cometh forth from the east; and is seen 
even unto the west; so shall be the com- 
ing of the Son of man.” Every little 
while some one appears in some obscure 
corner of the earth and sets himself 
forth as the Christ come again. Now it 
is Schweinfurth; again it is Dora 
Beekman in Minnesota, and then it is 
Prince Michael in Detroit, Michigan; 
then it is Tead in Chicago; still again 
Mary Baker Glover Patterson Eddy in 
Concord; again the Bab in Persia; still 
again Mrs. Annie Besant’s pet boy, “The 
Star of the East.” But all of these “inner 
chamber” Christs and obscure corner 
Christs are a humbug long since pre- 
dicted and exploded. They would have 
no power over any one if people were 
not ignorant of their Bibles. Some years 
ago a young friend of mine who was 
assisting B. Fay Mills in his work, came 
to me and asked me if it might not be 
possible that the Christ had already come 
and was here and waiting to manifest 
Himself. I knew what he meant: at that 
time B. Fay Mills was much carried 
away with Prof. Herron. I knew that 
this young man was wondering if Prof. 
Herron might not be the Christ come 
back again. I pointed him to the pas- 
sage given above, which, of course, 
utterly exploded that nonsense. When 
Mr. Moody was holding his last meet- 
ings in Detroit I assisted him in the 


21 


40 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


work. One day a long-haired disciple of 
Prince Michael, who was at that time 
in the Jackson State’s Prison for a statu- 
tory offense, came to Mr. Moody to 
explain to him his opinions and to get 
Mr. Moody to accept them. Mr. Moody 
turned him over to me, as he usually did 
cranks of various kinds. I took this 
disciple of Prince Michael to my room 
and let him expound his views. Then 
I said to him, “Do you really think that 
Prince Michael is Christ come back 
again?” He said that he did. Then I 
asked him what he did with Matthew 
24:26, 27, “As the lightning cometh 
forth from the east, and is seen even 
unto the west; so shall be the coming of 
the Son of man.” He gave me this very 
illuminating answer, “When Christ 
appeared first, did He not come in Pales- 
tine?” “Yes.” “Ts that not in the East?” 
“Yes.” “And is not Michigan in the 
West?” “Yes.” “Well, then, in the 
coming of Prince Michael is He not com- 
ing from the East to the West?” This 
apostle of Prince Michael afterwards 
deserted Prince Michael and came to me 
and wanted me to put him into Christian 
work, but I fear that his grasp of truth 
was not very strong, for he was soon 
involved with Ann O’Delia Dis de Bar. 
A very enthusiastic disciple of Mrs. 
Eddy invited my youngest sister a num- 
ber of times to go with her to the Chris- 


22 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 41 


tian Science meeting in the leading 
Christian Science church in New York. 
Finally my sister yielded to her impor- 
tunities and went. As they came home 
from the meeting this ardent Christian 
Scientist said to my sister, “How did 
you like it?” “I did not like it at all.” 
“Why not?” “First of all, you had no 
sermon.” “What do you mean,” said 
the Christian Scientist, “by a sermon?” 
My sister replied, “An exposition of the 
Scripture.” “Oh,” said this woman, “we 
would not have that, that would be 
human and we have nothing human in 
our gatherings.” “But,” my _ sister 
replied, “they read Mrs. Eddy’s ‘Science 
and Health’ for half an hour.” “Oh, 
yes, but that is not human, that is the 
second coming of Christ.” If she had 
said it was a coming of the anti-christ 
there would have been more reason in 
it. All of these inner chamber Christs 
and obscure corner Christs are, as we 
have said, a long since predicted and 
-exploded humbug. One does not need 
to go to hear them or see them. Christ 
Himself has told us all about them and 
exposed them centuries before they 
appeared. Pastor Russell’s Christ who 
came in October, 1874, belongs with the 
rest; certainly His coming was not the 
coming described by our Lord Himself 
in Matthew 24:26, 27; on the contrary, 
it was a kind of coming against which 


23 


42 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


our Lord Himself warned us. You may 
be able to see Pastor Russell’s moving 
picture shows for nothing but none the 
less you are being humbugged if you go. 
Fifth, When the Lord Jesus comes 
again, He is “coming on the clouds of 
heaven with power and great glory.’ In 
Matthew 24:30 He says, “They shall 
see the Son of man coming on the clouds 
of heaven with power and great glory.” 
Some one may ask, “What does it mean 
by saying, He is coming on the clouds? 
If you will look up with your concord- 
ance all the passages in the Bible in 
which any one is said to come with 
clouds, you will find that there is but one 
person who came in the clouds, or on 
the clouds, and that person was Jehovah 
(see Ex. 91:9; 34:5; Ps. 91:1, 2; Matt. 
17:53) Ps. 104-3 < Isa. 19°12 For our 
Lord to say that He was coming in the 
clouds was as much as for Him to say 
that when He came again, He was com- 
- ing as Jehovah. Before His incarnation 
our Lord existed in the form of God 
(Phil. 2:6), that is to say, as the Heav- 
enly world beheld Him they beheld Him 
in a visible form of such infinite glory 
that it told at once that He was God. 
When He came to this earth, He came 
as a man, wrapped in swaddling clothes © 
and laid in a manger. They did what 
they pleased with Him; they despised 
and rejected Him; they spat upon Him, 


24 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 43 


they slapped Him in the face, they 
scourged Him, they nailed Him to the 
cross of Calvary, they killed Him, but 
when He comes again, He will come as 
Jehovah, when every knee must bow 
and every tongue confess that Jesus 
Christ is Lord (Jehovah) to the glory 
of God the Father (Phil. 2:9-11). The 
glory of His coming is beyond descrip- 
tion, No earthly pageant that this world 
ever saw can, for a moment, be com- 
pared with it. Some years ago, I was 
speaking in the auditorium at Northfield 
on the Second Coming of Christ. It 
was a hot, sultry day. As I spoke the 
clouds gathered and it became very dark, 
black clouds gathered right above the 
auditorium. I had just read Matthew 
24 :30 and said “The Son of man is com- 
ing in the clouds of heaven with power 
and great glory.’ The word “glory” had 
scarcely fallen from my lips when there 
was a sudden flash and an awful crash, 
the whole auditorium was a blaze of 
light—the lightning had struck the build- 
ing where we were gathered! Some 
sprang to their feet and screamed. I sim- 
ply said, “This is nothing to what it will 
be when the Lord really comes.” I looked 
down in front of me and Mr. Moody’s 
eldest sister, Mrs. Walker, was sitting 
there. Her face was a study. It was 
radiant with joy and peace unspeakable. 
After the lecture I went down to speak 


25 


44 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


to her, “Oh,” she said as she took my 
hand, “Mr. Torrey, it was the gladdest 
moment of my life. I thought the Lord 
had really come.” Suppose He should 
come at this moment, suppose right now 
there should be the shout and we should 
hear the voice of the archangel and the 
trump of God and the Lord Himself 
should descend with power and great 
glory, would it be the gladdest moment 
of your life? 

Sixth, When our Lord Jesus comes 
again, He is coming in the glory of His 
Father with the holy angels. In Matt- 
hew 16:27, R. V., He is recorded as say- 
ing, “For the Son of man shall come in 
the glory of the Father with His angels; 
and then shall He reward every man 
according to His deeds.” All heaven will 
empty itself to follow in His train when 
He comes again. How many angels there 
may be I do not know, myriads and 
myriads of them. Men of our day have 
a way of thinking that the human race 
are the only persons there are in the 
universe; how stupid and unreasonable, 
to say nothing about how unscriptural 
the thought. Are we to believe that all 
these countless worlds of light that dot 
the heavens by night are not inhabited? 
Some one will say, “Astronomy teaches 
us that many of them could not be 
inhabited for they have no atmosphere 
that a human being could breathe.” Yes, 


26 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 45 


but are there no beings but human 
beings? Are there no beings that can 
live under other conditions than those 
under which we can live? This earth 
that man inhabits is a very small portion 
of the universe. It is so small a speck 
in space that compared with one of the 
heavenly bodies, and that by no means 
the largest, the sun, that if the sun were 
hollow and a hole were bored into it, you 
could pour into it 1,200,000 earths like 
ours and still there would be room for 
them to rattle around, and there are mil- 
lions of these worlds. If every member 
of the human race were lost, the number 
of holy and blessed beings would 
immeasurably surpass the number of the 
lost. And not only may some of these 
wondrous worlds of light be inhabited 
by countless angelic beings but the aerial 
spaces themselves are inhabited by spirits 
good and evil, demons and angels, “prin- 
cipalities, powers, world rulers,” and in 
the train of our returning King shall 
come these wonderful angels of light. 
Seventh, When Jesus Christ comes 
again, He will come as a thief, 1. e. 
unannounced, without warning, unex- 
pectedly. suddenly. In Revelation 16: 
15, the Lord Jesus says, “Behold, I come 
as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, 
and keepeth his garments lest he walk 
naked, and they see his shame.” In 1 
Thessalonians 5:2, 3, the Apostle Paul 


27 


46 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


tells us, “Yourselves know perfectly that 
the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief 
in the night.” There will be no previous 
announcement of the coming of our 
Lord. The world will not be expecting 
Him. He Himself says in Matthew 24: 
44, “Therefore be ye also ready: for in 
an hour that ye think not, the Son of 
man cometh.” He will take every one 
unawares. Men will not be standing out 
on the hilltops in white robes waiting for 
Him. The world will be taken up with 
its usual occupations. Our Lord says, 
“As were the days of Noah, so shall be 
the coming of the Son of man. For as 
in those days which were before the 
flood, they were eating and drinking, 
marrying and giving in marriage, unto 
the day that Noah entered into the ark 
and they knew not until the flood came 
and took them all away, so shall be the 
coming of the Son of man” (Matt. 24: 
37-39). Everything will be going on as 
usual; women will be in the stores buy- 
ing dress cloth for dresses and all man- 
ner of finery; they will be in the jewelry 
stores buying diamonds and pearls and 
rubies and emeralds; the theatres will 
be in full blast, crowded with the eager 
seekers after pleasure; throngs will be 
going up and down the streets; the dance 
halls will be crowded; society people will 
be tangoing, maxixing, hesitating, waltz- 
ing, bunny-hugging, grizzly bearing, 


28 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 47 


Texas Tommying; there will be wild 
hilarity with no thought of judgment 
near at hand. Wedding parties will be 
in full swing, when suddenly without a 
moment’s warning there will be the shout, 
the voice of the archangel will ring out, 
the trump of God will reverberate, the 
sleeping saints will be raised, and true 
believers will be caught up together with 
them to meet the Lord in the air, and the 
worldlings and worldly professors of 
religion will be left behind to meet the 
tribulation and the judgment. 


Ill. The Results of His Coming Again. 


We have no time left to speak of the 
results of our Lord’s Return; they will 
be glorious; they can be summed up 
under seven heads: 

1. The results of His coming as 
regards God. 

2. The results of His coming as 
regards the Church. 

3. The results of His coming as 
regards Israel. 

4. The results of His coming as 
regards the nations and wunregenerate 
individuals. 

5. The results of His coming as 
regards the human society as a whole. 

6. The results of His coming as 
regards the Antichrist and the Devil. 

7. The results of His coming as 
regards the physical universe. 


29 


48 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


To sum it all up, every loftiest dream 
of social philosopher and enthusiast for 
humanity will be more than realized; 
there will be a new and glorious man, in 
a new and glorious body, in a new and 
glorious society in a new and glorious 
universe. The coming again of Christ 
will realize more for this world in a day 
than all the peace conferences and peace 
palaces at the Hague could realize in 
10,000 years and well may we cry, 
“Amen, come Lord Jesus.” 

Jesus is coming again! How those 
words ought to thrill our hearts! How 
they do thrill our hearts! Jesus is com- 
ing again. It may be in a year; it may 
be in a month; it may be in a day; it 
may be tonight! Would you be glad if 
right now we should hear the shout and 
the voice of the archangel and the trump 
of God and all true believers should this 
moment begin to rise and pass right up 
to meet our Lord Jesus to be forever 
with Him? 


30 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 49 


Ohe Deity 
of Jesus 
aay 


By R. A. TORREY | 





5° 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


The Deity of Jesus Christ 


“Now while the Pharisees were gathered 
together, Jesus asked them a question, say- 
ing, What think ye of Christ? whose son 
is He?”—Matt. 22:41, 42. 


The question that our Lord Jesus 
here puts to the Pharisees is the 
most fundamental question concerning 
Christian thought and faith that can be put 
to anybody in any age. Jesus Christ Him- 
self is the center of Christianity, so the 
most fundamental questions of faith are 
those that concern the person of Christ. If 
a man really holds to right views concern- 
ing the person of Jesus Christ he will 


‘sooner or later get right views on every 


other question. If he holds a wrong view 
concerning the person of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, he is pretty sure to go wrong on 
everything else sooner or later. What think 
ye of Christ? That is the great central 
question, that is the vital question. 

And the most fundamental question con- 
cerning the person of Christ is, is Jesus 
Christ really God? Not merely is He Divine, 
but is He actually God? When I was a 
boy, to say you believed in the Divinity of 


3 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Christ, meant that you believed in the real 
Deity of Christ, that you believed that 
Jesus was actually a Divine person, that 
He was God. It no longer means that. The 
Devil is wise, shrewd, subtle, and he knows 
that the most effectual way to instill error 
into the minds of the inexpert and unwary 
is to use old and precious words and put 
a new meaning into them. So when his 
messengers masquerading as “ministers of 
righteousness” seek to lead, if possible, the 
elect astray, they use the old precious words 
but with an entirely new and entirely dif- 
ferent and entirely false meaning. They 
talk about the Divinity of Christ, but they 
do not mean at all what intelligent Chris- 
tians in former days meant by it. Just so 
they talk of the atonement, but they do not 
mean at all by the atonement the substitu- 
tionary death of Jesus Christ in our place, 
by which eternal life is secured for us. And 
oftentimes when they talk about Christ they 
do not mean at all our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, the actual historic Jesus of 
the four gospels, they mean an ideal Christ, 
or a Christ principle. So our subject this 
morning is not the Divinity of Christ, but 
the Deity of Christ, and our question is not 
is Jesus Christ Divine, but is Jesus Christ 
God? Was that person who was born at 
Bethlehem nineteen hundred and twenty- 
one years ago, and who lived thirty-three 
or thirty-four years here upon earth as 
recorded in the four gospels of Matthew, 
Mark, Luke and John, who was crucified on 


4 


51 


52 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Calvary’s cross, who rose from the dead 
the third day, and was exalted from earth 
to heaven, to the right hand of the Father, 
was He God manifested in the flesh, was 
He God embodied in a human being? Was 
He and is He a being worthy of our abso- 
lute faith, and supreme love, and our unhes- 
itating obedience, and our whole-hearted 
worship, just as God the Father is worthy 
of our absolute faith and supreme love 
and unhesitating obedience and our whole- 
hearted worship? Should all men honor 
Jesus Christ even as they honor God the 
Father (John 5:23)? Not merely is He an 
example that we can wisely follow, or a 
Master whom we can wisely serve, but is 
He a God Whom we can rightly worship? 

I presume that most of us do believe that 
He was God manifested in the flesh, and 
that He is God today at the right hand 
of the Father, but why do you believe so? 
Are you so intelligent in your faith, and 
therefore so well grounded in your faith 
that no glib talker or reasoner, no Unitar- 
ian or Russellite or Christian Scientist or 
Theosophist, or other errorist can confuse 
you and upset you and lead you astray? 
It is important that we be thoroughly sound 
in our faith at this point, and thoroughly 
well-informed, wherever else we may be in 
ignorance or error, for we are distinctly 
told in John 20:31 that “These are writ- 
ten, that ye may believe that Jesus is the 
Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, 
ye may have life in His name.” It is evi- 


5 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


dent from these words of the inspired 
Apostle John that this question is not 
merely a matter of theoretical opinion, that 
it is a matter that concerns our salvation. 
It is to confirm and instruct you in your 
blessed faith, your saving faith in Jesus 
Christ as a Divine person, that I speak this 
morning. When I studied the subject of 
the Divinity of Christ in the theological 
seminary I got the impression that there 
were a few texts in the Bible that con- 
clusively proved that He was Divine. Years 
later I found that there were not merely a 
few proof texts that proved this, but that 
the Bible in many ways and in countless 
passages clearly taught that Jesus Christ 
was God manifest in the flesh. Indeed I 
found that the Doctrine of the Deity of 
Jesus Christ formed the very warp and 
woof of the Bible. 


I. Divine Names. 


The first line of proof of the absolute 
Deity of our Lord Jesus is that many names 
and titles clearly tmplying Detty are used 
of Jesus Christ in the Bible, some of them 
over and over again, the total number of 
passages reaching far into the hundreds. 
Of course, this morning I can only give 
you a few illustrations. Turn with me 
first of all to Rev. 1:17, “AND WHEN I 
SAW HIM, I FELL AT HIS FEET AS 
ONE DEAD. AND HE LAID HIS 
RIGHT HAND UPON ME SAYING, 


6 


53 


54 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


FEAR NOT; I AM THE FIRST AND 
THE LAST.” The text shows clearly that 
our Lord Jesus was the speaker, and here 
our Lord Jesus distinctly calls Himself 
“the First and the Last.” Now this beyond 
a question is a Divine name, for in Isa. 
44:6 we read, “THUS SAYETH JEHO- 
VAH, THE KING OF ISRAEL, AND 
HIS REDEEMER, JEHOVAH OF 
HOSTS: I AM THE FIRST, AND I AM 
THE LAST; AND BESIDES ME 
THERE IS NO GOD.” In Rey. 22:12, 13, 
our Lord Jesus says that He is the Alpha 
and Omega. His words are, “BEHOLD, 
I COME QUICKLY; AND MY RE- 
WARD IS WITH ME, TO RENDER 
TO EACH MAN ACCORDING AS HIS 
WORK IS. IAM ALPHA AND OMEGA, 
THE FIRST AND THE LAST, THE 
BEGINNING AND THE END.” Now in 
this same book in the first chapter and the 
eighth verse the Lord God declares that 
He is the Alpha and the Omega. His 
words are, “I AM THE ALPHA, AND 
THE OMEGA, SAITH THE LORD 
GOD, WHICH IS AND WHICH WAS 
AND WHICH IS TO COME, THE AL- 
MIGHTY.” In 1 Cor. 2:8, the Apostle 
Paul speaks of our crucified Lord Jesus 
as “the Lord of glory.” His exact words 
are, “WHICH NONE OF THE PRINCES 
OF THIS WORLD KNEW: FOR HAD 
THEY KNOWN IT, THEY WOULD 
NOT HAVE CRUCIFIED THE LORD 
OF GLORY.” There can be no question 


a 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 55 


that “the Lord of glory” is Jehovah God, 
for we read in Ps. 24:8-10, “WHO IS 
THIS KING OF GLORY? JEHOVAH 
STRONG AND MIGHTY, JEHOVAH 
MIGHTY IN BATTLE. LIFT UP YOUR 
HEADS, O YE GATES; YEA LIFT 
THEM UP, YE EVERLASTING 
DOORS, AND THE KING OF GLORY 
WILL COME IN. WHO IS THE KING 
OF GLORY? JEHOVAH OF HOSTS, 
HE IS THE KING OF GLORY.” And 
we are told in the passage already referred 
to that our crucified Lord Jesus was the 
King of Glory, therefore He must be 
Jehovah. In John 20:28 Thomas addressed 
the Lord Jesus as his Lord and his God, 
“AND THOMAS ANSWERED AND 
SAID UNTO HIM, MY LORD AND MY 
GOD.” Unitarians have endeavored to get 
around the force of this utterance of 
Thomas’s by saying that Thomas was 
excited and that he was not addressing the 
Lord Jesus, but was saying “my Lord and 
my God” as an ejaculation of astonishment, 
just in the way that profane people some- 
times use these exclamations today, but 
this interpretation is impossible, and shows 
to what desperate straits the Unitarians are 
driven; for Jesus Himself commended 
Thomas for seeing it and saying it. Our 
Lord Jesus’ words immediately following 
those of Thomas are, “BECAUSE THOU 
HAST SEEN ME, THOU HAST BE- 
LIEVED: BLESSED ARE THEY THAT 
HAVE NOT SEEN, AND YET HAVE 


56 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


BELIEVED” (John 20:29). In the cor- 
rect translation of Titus 2:13, the tranc- 
lation given in the English revision, not 
in the American Standard Revision, our 
Lord Jesus is spoken of as, “our great 
God and Saviour Jesus Christ.” In Rom. 
9:5, Paul tells us that “CHRIST IS OVER 
ALL, GOD BLESSED FOREVER.” The 
Unitarians have made desperate efforts to 
overcome the force of these words, but 
the only fair translation and interpreta- 
tion of the words that Paul wrote in Greek 
are the translation and interpretation found 
in both our Authorized and Revised Ver- 
sions. There can be no honest doubt to one 
who goes to the Bible to find out what it 
actually teaches, and not to read his own 
thought into it, that Jesus is spoken of by 
various names and titles that beyond a ques- 
tion imply Deity, and that He in so many 
words is called God. In Heb. 1:8 it is said in 
so many words, of the Son, “BUT UNTO 
THE SON HE SAITH, THY THRONE, 
O GOD, IS FOR EVER AND EVER; A 
SCEPTRE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS IS 
THE SCEPTRE OF THY KINGDOM.” 
If we should go no further it is evidently 
the clear and often repeated teaching of 
the Bible that Jesus Christ was really God. 


II. Divine Attributes. 


But there is a second line of proof that 
Jesus Christ was God, a proof equally con- 
vincing, and that is, all the five distinctively 


9 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Divine attributes are ascribed to Jesus 
Christ, and “all the fulness of the God- 
head” is said to dwell in Him. There are 
five distinctively Divine attributes, that is 
five attributes that God alone possesses. 
These are Omnipotence, Omniscience, 
Omnipresence, Eternity, and Immutability. 
Each one of these distinctively Divine 
attributes are ascribed to Jesus Christ. First 
of all, omnipotence is ascribed to Jesus 
Christ. Not only are we taught that Jesus 
had power over diseases and death and 
winds and sea and demons, that they were 
all subject to His word, and that He is 
far above all principality, and power, and 
might, and dominion, and every name that 
is named, not only in this world but also 
in the world to come (Eph. 1:20-23), but 
in Heb, 1:3 it is said in so many words 
that He “UPHOLDS ALL THINGS BY 
THE WORD OF HIS POWER.” Omnis- 
cience is also ascribed to Him. We are 
taught in the Bible that Jesus knew men’s 
lives, even their secret history (John 4:16, 
19), that He knew the secret thoughts of 
men, knew all men, knew what was in man 
(Mark 2:8; Luke 5:22; John 2:24, 25), 
which knowledge we are distinctly told in 
2 Chron. 6:30 and Jer. 17:9, 10, God only 
possesses, but we are told in so many 
words in John 16:30 that Jesus knew “all 
things,” and in Col. 2:3 we are told that 
in Him “are hid all the treasures of wis- 
dom and knowledge.” Omnipresence is 
also ascribed to Him. We are told in 


10 


57 


58 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Matt. 18:20 that where two or three are 
gathered together in His name, that He is 
in the midst of them, and in Matt. 28:20 
that wherever His obedient disciples should 
go He would be with them, even unto the 
end of the age, and in John 14:20 and 2 
Cor. 13:5 we are told that He dwells in 
each believer, in all the millions of believers 
scattered over the earth. In Eph. 1:23 we 
are told in so many words that He “filleth 
all in all.” Eternity is also ascribed to Him. 
We are told in John 1:1 that “in the begin- 
ning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God.” In John 
8:57 Jesus Himself said, “VERILY, VER- 
ILY, I SAY UNTO YOU, BEFORE 
ABRAHAM WAS, I AM.” Note that the 
Lord Jesus did not merely say that “before 
Abraham was I was,’ but that “before 
Abraham was, I am,” thus declaring Him- 
self to be the eternal “I am.” Even in the 
Old Testament we have a declaration of the 
eternity of the Christ who was to be born 
in Bethlehem. In Micah 5:2 we read, “BUT 
THOU, BETHLEHEM, EPHRATAH, 
THOUGH THOU BE LITTLE AMONG 
THE THOUSANDS OF JUDAH, YET 
OUT OF THEE SHALL HE COME 
FORTH UNTO ME THAT IS TO BE 
RULER IN ISRAEL; WHOSE GOINGS 
FORTH HAVE BEEN FROM OF OLD, 
FROM EVERLASTING.” And in Isa. 
9:6 we are told of the child that is to be 
born, “FOR UNTO US A CHILD IS 
BORN, UNTO US A SON IS GIVEN; 


zt] 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 59 


AND THE GOVERNMENT SHALL BE 
UPON HIS SHOULDER; AND HIS 
NAME SHALL BE CALLED WONDER- 
FUL, COUNSELLOR, THE MIGHTY 
GOD, THE EVERLASTING FATHER, 
THE PRINCE OF PEACE.” And in 
Heb. 13:8 we are told that “JESUS 
CHRIST IS THE SAME YESTERDAY, 
AND TODAY, AND FOR EVER.” His 
immutability is also taught in the passage 
just quoted from Hebrews, and in the first 
chapter of the same book, the twelfth verse 
we are told that while even the heavens 
change, the Lord Jesus does not change. 
The exact words are, “THEY SHALL 
PERISH, BUT THOU REMAINEST: 
THEY ALL SHALL WAX OLD AS 
DOTH A GARMENT; AND AS A 
MANTLE SHALT THOU ROLL THEM 
UP, AS A GARMENT, AND THEY 
SHALL BE CHANGED: BUT THOU 
ART THE SAME, AND THY YEARS 
SHALL NOT FAIL.” So we see that 
each one of the five distinctively Divine 
attributes were ascribed to our Lord Jesus 
Christ. And in Col. 2:9 we are told in so 
many words, “IN HIM DWELLETH ALL 
THE FULNESS OF THE GODHEAD 
BODILY (I. E. IN A BODILY FORM).” 
Here again we might rest our case, for 
what has been said under this head, even 
if taken alone, clearly proves the absolute 
Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ. It shows 
that He possessed every perfection of 


5] 


60 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


nature and character that God the Father 
passesses. 


Ill. Divine Offices. 


But we do not need to rest the case 
here. There is a third unanswerable line 
of proof that Jesus Christ is God, namely, 
all the distinctively Divine offices are predi- 
cated of Jesus Christ. There are seven dis- 
tinctively Divine offices. That is to say, 
there are seven things that God alone can 
do, and each one of these seven distinc- 
tively Divine offices is ascribed to Jesus 
Christ. The seven distinctively Divine 
offices are: Creation, Preservation, For- 
giveness of Sin, the Raising of the Dead, 
the Transformation of Bodies, Judgment, 
and the Bestowal of Eternal Life, and each 
of these is ascribed to Jesus Christ. Cre- 
ation is ascribed to Him. In Heb. 1:10 
these words are spoken to our Lord: “AND 
THOU, LORD, IN THE BEGINNING 
HAST LAID THE FOUNDATION OF 
THE EARTH; AND THE HEAVENS 
ARE THE WORKS OF THY HANDS.” 
The context clearly 


1:3 we are told that “ALL THINGS 
WERE MADE THROUGH HIM; AND 
WITHOUT HIM WAS NOT ANY- 
THING MADE THAT WAS MADE.” 
Preservation of the universe and of every- 
thing is also ascribed to Him in Heb. 1:3 
where it is said of the Lord Jesus, “WHO, 


32 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


BEING THE BRIGHTNESS OF HIS 
GLORY, AND THE EXPRESS IMAGE 
OF HIS*{I. E. GOD’S) SUBSTANCE 
AND UPHOLDING ALL THINGS BY 
THE WORD OF HIS POWER, WHEN 
HE HAD BY HIMSELF PURGED OUR 
SINS, SAT DOWN ONS THE RIGHS 
HAND OF THE MAJESTY ON HIGH.” 
The forgiveness of sin is ascribed to Him. 
He Himself says in Mark 2:5-10 when His 
power to forgive sins was questioned, 
because that was recognized as a Divine 
power, “THAT YE MAY KNOW THAT 
THE SON OF MAN HATH POWER 
ON EARTH TO FORGIVE SINS.” The 
future raising of the dead is distinctly 
ascribed to Him in John 6:39, 44, “AND 
DAISe IS DHE ee bATHERS= (WIE 
WHICH HATH SENT ME, THAT OF 
ALL WHICH HE HATH GIVEN MEI 
SHOULEDE, LOSER NOUEINGS BUR 
SHOULD RAISE IT UP AT THE LAST 
DAY. NO MAN CAN COME TO ME, 
EXCEPT THE FATHER WHICH 
HATH SENT ME DRAW HIM: AND 
I WILL ‘RAISE HIM. UP AT THE 
LAST DAY.” The transformation of our 
bodies is ascribed to Him in Phil. 3:21, 
R. V. In 2 Tim. 4:1 judgment is ascribed 
to Him. We are told that He shall “judge 
the quick and the dead.” Jesus Himself 
declared that He would be the judge of 
all mankind, and emphasized the fact of 
the Divine character of that office. In 
John 5:22, 23 He said, “FOR NEITHER 


14 


61 


62 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


DOTH THE FATHER JUDGE ANY 
MAN, BUT HE HATH GIVEN ALL 
JUDGMENT UNTO THE SON, THAT 
ALL MEN MAY HONOR THE SON, 
EVEN AS THEY HONOR THE 
FATHER.” The bestowal of eternal life 
is ascribed to Him time and time again. 
In John 10:28 He Himself says, “AND I 
GIVE UNTO THEM ETERNAL LIFE, 
AND THEY SHALL NEVER PERISH, 
NEITHER SHALL ANY MAN PLUCK 
THEM OUT OF MY HAND.” And in 


‘John 17:1, 2, He says, FATHER, THE 


HOUR IS COME; GLORIFY THY SON, 
THAT THE SON MAY GLORIFY 
THEE: EVEN AS THOU GAVEST 
HIM AUTHORITY OVER ALL FLESH, 
THAT TO ALL WHOM THOU HAST 
GIVEN HIM, HE SHOULD GIVE 
ETERNAL LIFE.” Here then we have 
the seven distinctively Divine offices all 
predicated of Jesus Christ. This alone 
would prove that He is God, and we might 
rest the case here, but there are still other 
proofs of His absolute Deity. 


IV. Statements which in the Old Testa- 
ment Are MIiade Distinctly of 
Jehovah, God, Taken in the New 
Testament to Refer to Jesus Christ. 


The fourth line of proof of the absolute 
Deity of Jesus Christ is found in the fact 
that over and over again statements which 
in the Old Testament are made distinctly of 


15 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Jehovah, God, are taken in the New Testa- 
ment to refer to Jesus Christ. We have 
not time to illustrate this at length, but will 
give but one illustration where many might 
be given. In Jer. 11:20 the prophet says, 
(BU OO LORDEOLSHOSTS ashe As 
JUDGEST RIGHTEOUSLY, THAT 
TRIEST THE REINS AND THE 
HEART, LET ME SEE THY VEN- 
GEANCE ON THEM: FOR UNTO 
THEE HAVE I REVEALED MY 
CAUSE.” Here the prophet distinctly says 
that it is Jehovah of Hosts who judgest 
and triest the reins and the heart. And 
in the 17th chapter and the tenth verse 
Jeremiah represents Jehovah Himself as 
saying the same thing in these words, “I, 
JEHOVAH, SEARCH THE MIND, I 
TRY THE HEART, EVEN TO GIVE 
EVERY MAN ACCORDING TO HIS 
WAYS, ACCORDING TO THE FRUIT 
OF HIS DOINGS.” But in the New Tes- 
tament in Rev. 2:23 the Lord Jesus says, 
“I AM HE WHICH SEARCHETH THE 
REINS AND THE HEARTS: AND I 
WILL GIVE UNTO EVERY ONE OF 
YOU ACCORDING TO YOUR WORKS.” 
We are distinctly told in the context that 
it is “THE SON OF GOD” who is speak- 
ing here. So Jesus claims for Himself in 
the N. T. what Jehovah in the O. T. says 
is true of Himself and of Himself alone, 
and in very many other instances state- 
ments which in the Old Testament are 
made distinctly of Jehovah, God, are taken 


16 


63 


64 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


to refer to Jesus Christ. That is to say, 
in New Testament thought and doctrine 
Jesus Christ occupies the place that Jeho- 
vah occupies in Old Testament thought and 
doctrine. 


V. The Way in which the Name of God 
the Father and Jesus Christ the Son 
Are Coupled Together. 


The fifth line of proof of the absolute 
Deity of our Lord is found im the way in 
which the name of Jesus Christ ts coupled 
with that of God the Father. In numerous 
passages His name is coupled with the 
name of God the Father in a way in which 
it would be impossible to couple the name 
of any finite being with that of the Deity. 
We have time for but a few of the many 
illustrations that might be given. A strik- 
ing instance is in the words of our Lord 
Himself in John 14:23 where we read, 
“JESUS ANSWERED AND _ SAID 
UNTO HIM, IF A MAN LOVE ME, HE 
WILL KEEP MY WORDS: AND MY 
FATHER WILL LOVE HIM, AND WE 
WILL COME UNTO HIM, AND MAKE 
OUR ABODE WITH HIM.” Here our 
Lord Jesus does not hesitate to couple Him- 
self with the Father in such a way as to 
say “we,” i.e, God the Father and I will 
come and make our abode with him. In 
John 14:1 He said, “LET NOT YOUR 
HEART BE TROUBLED: BELIEVE IN 
GOD, BELIEVE ALSO IN ME,’ If 


7 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Jesus Christ was not God this is shocking 
blasphemy. There is absolutely no middle 
ground between admitting the Deity of 
Jesus Christ and charging Christ with the 
most daring and appalling blasphemy of 
which any man in all history was ever 
guilty. 


VI. Divine Worship to be Given to Jesus 
Christ. 


There is a sixth line of proof of the 
absolute Deity of our Lord Jesus. Those 
already given have been decisive, each 
one of the five has been decisive, but this, 
if possible, is the most decisive of them 
all, and that is that we are taught in so 
many words that Jesus Christ should be 
worshipped as God, both by angels and 
men. In numerous places in the gospels we 
see Jesus Christ accepting without hesita- 
tion a worship which good men and angels 
declined with fear, and which He Himself 
taught should be rendered only to God 
(Matt. 28:9; Luke 24:52; Mark 14:33; cf. 
Acts 10:25, 26; Rev. 22:8, 9, R. V.; Matt. 
4:9, 10). A curious and very misleading 
comment is made in the margin of the 
American Standard Revision upon the 
meaning of the word translated “worship” 
in these passages, and that is that “the 
Greek word translated worship denotes an 
act of reverence, whether paid to a creature, 
or to the Creator.” Now this is true, but 
it is utterly misleading; for while this word 


18 


65 


66 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


is used to denote “an act of reverence paid 
to a creature” by idolators, our Lord Jesus 
Himself distinctly says, using exactly the 
same Greek word, “THOU SHALT WOR- 
SHIPALHEV LORD Si HhyYe GODS AND 
HIM ONLY SHALT THOU SERVE,” 
and on the other hand He says in John 
5:23 that “ALL MEN SHOULD HONOR 
THE SON EVEN AS THEY HONOR 
THE FATHER.” And in Rev. 5:8, 9, 12, 
13 the four living creatures and the four 
and twenty elders are represented as fall- 
ing down before the Lamb and offering 
worship to Him just as worship is offered 
to Him that sitteth upon the throne, i.e., 
God the Father. In Heb. 1:6 we are told 
in so many words, “AND AGAIN, WHEN 
HE BRINGETH IN THE FIRST BE- 
GOTTEN INTO THE WORLD, HE 
SAITH, AND LET ALL THE ANGELS 
OF GOD WORSHIP HIM.” One night 
in the inquiry room in Chicago I stepped 
up to an intelligent looking man at the 
back of the room and said to him, “Are 
you a Christian?” He replied, “I do not 
suppose you would consider me a Chris- 
tian.” I said, “Why not?” He said, “I 
am a Unitarian.” I said, “What you mean 
then is that you do not think that Jesus 
Christ is a person that should be wor- 
shipped.” He replied, “That is exactly 
what I think,” and added, “the Bible 
nowhere says we ought to worship Him.” 
I said, “Who told you that?” He replied, 
“My pastor,” mentioning a prominent Uni- 


19 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 67 


tarian minister in the City of Boston. I 
said, “Let me show you something,” and 
I opened my Bible to Heb. 1:6 and read, 
“AND AGAIN, WHEN HE BRINGETH 
IN THE FIRST BEGOTTEN INTO THE 
WORLD, HE SAITH, AND LET ALL 
THE ANGELS OF GOD WORSHIP 
HIM,” and he said, “Does it say that?” I 
handed him the Bible and said, “Read it 
for yourself,” and he read it and said, “I 
did not know that was in the Bible.” I 
said, “Well it is there, isn’t it?” “Yes it is 
there.” Language could not make it 
plainer. The Bible clearly teaches that 
Jesus the Son of God is to be worshipped 
as God by angels and men, even as God 
the Father is worshipped. 


VII. Incidental Proofs of the Deity of 
Jesus Christ. 


The six lines of proof of the Deity of 
Jesus Christ which I have given you leave 
no possibility of doubting that Jesus 
Christ is God, that Jesus of Nazareth is 
God manifest in a human person, that He 
is a being to be worshipped, even as God 
the Father is worshipped, but there are 
also incidental proofs of His absolute Deity 
which, if possible, are in some ways even 
more convincing than the direct assertions 
of His Deity. 


1. Our Lord Jesus says in Matt. 11:28, 
“COME UNTO ME, ALL YE THAT 


20 


68 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


LABOR AND ARE HEAVY LADEN, 
AND I WILL GIVE YOU REST.” Now 
any one that makes a promise like that 
must either be God, or a lunatic, or an 
impostor. No one can give rest to all 
who labor and are heavy laden who come 
to him unless he is God, and yet Jesus 
Christ offers to do it. If He offers to do it 
and fails to do it when men come to Him, 
then He is either a lunatic or an impostor. If 
He actually does it, then beyond a question 
He is God. And thousands can testify 
that He really does it. Thousands and tens 
of thousands who have labored and were 
heavy laden and crushed, and for whom 
there was no help in man, have come to 
Jesus Christ and He actually has given 
them rest. Surely then He is not merely a 
great man, He is God. 


2. Again in John 14:1 Jesus Christ 
demands that we put the same faith in Him 
that we put in God the Father, and prom- 
ises that in such faith we will find a cure 
for all trouble and anxiety of heart. His 
words are, “LET NOT YOUR HEART 
BE TROUBLED; BELIEVE IN GOD, 
BELIEVE ALSO IN ME,’ It is clear that 
He demands the same absolute faith to 
be put in Himself that is to be put in God 
Almighty. Now in Jer. 17:5, scripture with 
which our Lord Jesus was perfectly famil- 
iar, we read, “THUS SAITH JEHOVAH: 
CURSED IS THE MAN THAT TRUST- 
ETH IN MAN,’ and yet with this clear 


21 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


curse pronounced upon all who trust in 
man, Jesus Christ demands that we put 
trust in Him just as we put trust in God. 
It is the strongest possible assertion of 
Deity on His part. No one but God has 
a right to make such a demand, and Jesus 
Christ, when He makes this demand, must 
either be God or an impostor, but thousands 
and tens of thousands have found that when 
they did believe in Him just as they believe 
in God, their hearts were delivered from 
trouble no matter what their bereavement 
or circumstances might be. 


3. Again, the Lord Jesus demanded 
supreme and absolute love for Himself. It 
is clear as day that no one but God has a 
right to demand such a love, but there can 
be no question that Jesus did demand it. 
In Matt. 10:37 He said to His disciples, “HE 
THAT LOVETH FATHER OR 
MOTHER MORE THAN ME IS NOT 
WORTHY OF ME; AND HE THAT 
LOVETH SON OR DAUGHTER MORE 
THAN ME IS NOT WORTHY OF ME.” 
And in Luke 14:26, 33, He says, “IF ANY 
MAN COMETH UNTO ME, AND 
HATETH NOT HIS OWN FATHER, 
AND MOTHER, AND WIFE, AND 
CHILDREN, AND BRETHREN, AND 
SISTERS, YEA, AND HIS OWN LIFE 
ALSO, HE CANNOT BE MY DISCIPLE 
Miwa Nah SO THEREFORE WHOSO- 
EVER HE BE. OF YOU THAT 
RENOUNCETH: NOT ALL THAT HE 


69 


742) 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


HATH, HE CANNOT BE My DIS- 
CIPLE.” There can be no question that 
this is a demand on Jesus’ part of supreme 
and absolute love to Himself, a love that 
puts even the dearest relations of life in 
an entirely secondary place. No one but 
God has a right to make any such demand, 
but our Lord Jesus made it, and, therefore, 
He must be God. 


4. In John 10:30 the Lord Jesus claimed 
absolute equality with the Father. He said, 
“IT AND THE FATHER ARE ONE.” 


5. In John 14:9 our Lord Jesus went so 
far as to say, “HE THAT HATH SEEN 
ME, HATH SEEN THE FATHER.” He 
claims here to be so absolutely God that to 
see Him is to see the Father Who dwell- 
eth in Him. 


6. In John 17:3 He says, “AND THIS 
IS ETERNAL LIFE, TO KNOW THEE, 
THE ONLY TRUE GOD, AND HIM 
WHOM THOU DIDST SEND, EVEN 
JESUS CHRIST.” In other words, he 
claims that the knowledge of Himself is 
as essential a part of eternal life as knowl- 
edge of God the Father. 


CONCLUSION: There is no room left 
to doubt the absolute Deity of Jesus Christ. 
It is a glorious truth. The Saviour in 
whom we believe is God, a Saviour for 
whom nothing is too hard, a Saviour who 
can save from the uttermost and save to 


2B 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


the uttermost. Oh, how we should rejoice 
that we have no merely human Saviour, but 
a Saviour that is absolutely God. On the 
other hand, how black is the guilt of reject- 
ing such a Saviour as this! Whoever refuses 
to accept Jesus as his Divine Saviour and 
Lord is guilty of the enormous sin of 
rejecting a Saviour Who is God. Many 
a man thinks he is good because he never 
stole, or committed murder, or cheated. 
“Of what great sin am I guilty?” he com- 
placently asks. Have you ever accepted 
Jesus Christ? “No.” Well, then, you are 
guilty of the awful and damning sin of 
rejecting a Saviour Who is God. “But,” 
you answer, “I do not believe that He is 
God.” That does not change the fact nor 
lessen your guilt. Questioning a fact or 
denying a fact never changes it, regardless 
of what Mary Baker Eddy may say to the 
contrary. Suppose a man had a wife 
who was one of the noblest, purest, truest 
women that ever lived, would her husband’s 
questioning her purity and nobility change 
the fact? It would not. It would simply 
make that husband guilty of awful slander, 
it would simply prove that man to be an 
outrageous scoundrel. So denying the Deity 
of Jesus Christ does not make His Deity 
any less a fact, but it does make the 
denier of His Deity guilty of awful, incred- 
ible blasphemous slander. It does prove 
you who deny His deity to be — — I 
leave your own conscience to finish the 
sentence. 


a 


72 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


How to 
Become a Christian 


O one can be saved unless he is born 

again by the power of God’s Holy 
Spirit. “Ye must be born again” (John 3: 
3, 7), says Jesus. The necessity is absolute, 
not merely ye may be born again—though 
that is true—but ye must be born again. 
Nothing will take the place of the new birth. 
Baptism will not take the place of the new 
birth. Confirmation will not take the place 
of the new birth. Simon Magus (Acts 8: 
13) was baptized ; but when Peter and John 
came down and perceived his character, 
Peter said unto him, “Thou hast neither 
part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is 
not right in the sight of God. Thou art in 
the gall of bitterness and the bond of in- 
iquity”—a baptized, lost sinner. 

No performance of religious rites will 
take the place of the new birth. A great 
many people are depending upon the fact 
that they say their prayers, read their 
Bibles, go to church, partake of the sacra- 
ment, and perform other duties, but all that 

2 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 73 


How to Become a Christian. 


will not take the place of the new birth. 
Orthodoxy of faith will not take the place 
of the new birth. A great many people are 
saying, “I believe the Apostles’ Creed, I be- 
lieve in the Athanasian Creed, I believe in 
the Nicene Creed, I say the Catechism; I 
am orthodox; I hold right views about 
Christ, right views about the Bible, right 
views about the Atonement.” You can be 
orthodox upon every doctrine, and be lost 
for ever. 

Culture, and refinement, and outward 
correctness of life will not take the place of 
the new birth. The trouble with us is not 
merely with our outward life; the trouble is 
in the heart, in the very deepest depths of 
our inward life, and merely to reform your 
outward life will not save you. Suppose I 
had a rotten apple. I could take that apple 
to an artist, have him put a coating of wax 
on its surface, and then paint it till it was 
the most beautiful looking apple you ever 
saw, but it would be just as rotten at heart 
as ever, and one bite into it would be a bite 
into decay. The trouble is that out of Christ 
you are rotten in the heart, and mere cul- 
ture, mere refinement, mere respectability, 

3 


74 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


How to Become a Christian. 


mere morality, is simply putting a coating 
of wax on the outside and painting it up. 
You must be changed, down to the deepest 
depths of your being. “Verily, verily, I say 
unto thee, Except a man be born again, he 
cannot see the Kingdom of God.” 

Are you born again? Now, I think a 
good many of you will say, “No, I am not. 
Can you tell me just what I must do right 
now to be born again?” I can. You will 
find it in John 1:12: “As many as received 
Him, to them gave He power to become the 
sons of God, even to them that believe on 
His Name.” We are born again by God’s 
Holy Spirit ,through His Word, the mo- 
ment we receive Christ. When you take 
Christ into your heart, Christ transforms 
you through and through, in a moment. I 
care not how worldly you are, I care not 
how sinful you are, I care not how hard you 
are—any one to-day that will throw his 
heart open and let Jesus come in to rule 
and reign, God will make that one a new 
creature in a moment. 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 75 


How to Grow 
in Grace 


“But grow in grace, and in the 
knowledge of our Lord, and Sa- 
viour Jesus Christ.” - 2 Pet. 3-18. 





COPYRIGHT 1917, R. A. TORREY 


76 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


HOW TO GROW IN GRACE 


“But grow in grace, and tn the knowl- 
edge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ.”,—2 Pet. 3:18. 


EXT to being born again, the most 

important thing in our earthly life 
is growing in the life into which we have 
been born. A dwarf is an unfortunate 
being, and usually a hideous being. An 
intellectual dwarf is, however, a more 
unfortunate being than a physical dwarf. 
There have been physical dwarfs who were 
intellectual giants, and there have been 
physical giants who were intellectual 
dwarfs. Every one forgot the physical 
limitations of the intellectual giant. 

In the days immediately preceding the 
Civil War there was a great division of 
sentiment in Georgia as to whether Georgia 
should secede or not. Col. Robt. Toombs, or 
ashewas familiarly known, Bob Toombs, 
was a manofcommanding physical pres- 
ence and by no means an intellectual dwarf, 
but Alexander Stephens, who afterwards 
became Vice President of the Southern 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Confederacy, was a man of great physical 
limitations. He never weighed more than 
seventy-eight pounds, but he had one of 
the finest minds of any man in the United 
States. Bob Toombs was in favor of 
seceding. Alexander Stephens, though he 
afterwards became Vice President of the 
Southern Confederacy, was opposed to 
secession. These two men stumped the 
State of Georgia in joint debate. One night 
Bob Toombs was speaking, and Alexander 
Stephens sat almost sunken out of sight in 
his big overcoat. Bob Toombs looked at 
him and pointed at him in contempt, say- 
ing, “There sits Alexander Stephens. I 
could eat him up.” Alexander Stephens in 
his piping voice called back, “Well, if you 
did you would have more brains in your 
belly than you ever had in your head.” He 
was a physical dwarf but an intellectual 
giant. 


One of the saddest sights in the world 
is a man or woman who is_intellectu- 
ally dwarfed. One of the most painful 
recollections of my childhood is a young 
woman whom I knew, whose father was 
one of the brainiest men I ever knew, but 
his daughter for some reason or other 
never grew intellectually after she was 
seven years of age. She lived to be over 
fifty but was an intellectual dwarf all her 
days, the sorrow and burden of her family. 

But sadder still than the intellectual 


77 


78 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


dwarf is the moral and spiritual dwarf. 
There have been men who were both phys- 
ical giants and intellectual giants who were 
moral and spiritual dwarfs. We see a 
striking example of this in Germany today. 
It has been quite generally admitted that 
many of the greatest thinkers in all 
branches of science and philosophy were 
to be found among the Germans, but many 
of these German intellectual giants are the 
defenders of the most appalling atrocities 
of which the Germans have been guilty. I 
would rather be both a physical and intel- 
lectual dwarf and a moral giant than to be 
a physical and intellectual giant and a 
moral dwarf. Many of those of very small 
stature intellectually have been moral and 
spiritual giants. Paul says in 1 Cor. 1:26- 
29, “For ye see your calling, brethren, how 
that not many wise men after the flesh, 
not many mighty, not many noble, are 
called: But God hath chosen the foolish 
things of the world to confound the wise; 
and God hath chosen the weak things of 
the world to confound the things which are 
mighty; and base things of the world, and 
things which are despised, hath God chosen, 
yea, and things which are not, to bring to 
nought things that are: That no flesh 
should glory in his presence.” 


The church today is fullof dwarfs, men 
and women who were converted five, ten, 
twenty years ago, and who have never ad- 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


vanced beyond their starting point. A great 
multitude are being born again in these days 
in the Sunday meetings, and the grave 
question confronts us, will they stay just 
where they are, spiritual babes, or will they 
grow? It is. for them to say, and it is for 
us to say by helping them or hindering 
them, so we come to the subject, How to 
Grow. The Bible makes this very plain. 
It makes it so simple that any one can 
understand it. If we will take the steps 
to promote the growth which the Bible 
clearly sets forth, then we shall grow. If 
we do not take those steps we shall not 
grow, we shall remain spiritual dwarfs and 
monstrosities, and there will be no one to 
blame but ourselves. 


I. To Grow in Grace We Must First of 
All Be in Grace. 


First of all, to grow in grace we must 
be in grace. One of the greatest mistakes 
men and women are making is in trying 
to grow in grace before they are in grace. 
One of the greatest mistakes we preachers 
are making is trying to build people up in 
the Christian life before they are in it. If 
a baby is to grow satisfactorily it must be 
well born, and if we are to grow in grace 
we must be born again. There was a baby 
in New York that was fed on elephant’s milk 
and it grew one hundred pounds in a few 


79 


80 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


weeks, but then it was a baby elephant to 
begin with. A human baby would not 
have grown the same even if it were fed 
on elephant’s milk, and just so you can 
feed a man, woman, or child on the best 
food for a child of God, but he will not 
grow like a child of God unless he is a child 
of God to begin with. So to grow in grace 
we must first be in grace, we must be 
born again to start with. 


That brings us to the question, how is 
one born again, or how do we come into 
grace. John 1:12 answers the question, “As 
many as received him, to them gave he 
power to become the sons of God, even to 
them that believe on his name.” To become 
a child of God we must simply receive 
Jesus. It is not enough to turn over a 
new leaf; it is not enough to merely quit 
our meanness, it is not enough to “hit the 
trail;” it is not enough to join the church: 
we must RECEIVE JESUS. What does 
it mean to receive Jesus? It means to take 
the Lord Jesus to be to ourselves what 
God offers Him to be to everybody. What 
does God offer Jesus to be? First of all 
He offers Him to be our sin bearer, the one 
who bore our sins in His own body on the 
cross, Isa. 53:6: “All we like sheep have 
gone astray; we have turned every one to 
his own way; and the Lord hath laid on 
him the iniquity of us all.” 1 Peter 2:24: 
“Who his own self bare our sins in his 


q 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


body on the tree, that we, being dead to 
sins, should live unto righteousness: by 
whose stripes ye are healed.” To receive 
Jesus then means to take Him to be our 
sin bearer, the One who died in our place, 
and to trust God to forgive our sins because 
the Lord Jesus died in our place. 


In the second place, God offers Jesus to be 
our risen Saviour who has power to save us 
to the uttermost, to deliver us from the 
power of sin day by day. As we read in 
Hebrews 7:25, “He is able to save to the 
uttermost them that draw near unto God 
through him, seeing he ever liveth to make 
intercession for them.” To: receive Jesus 
then means to take Him to be our risen 
Saviour, who has‘all power in heaven and 
on earth, and therefore has power to give 
us victory over sin day by day, and just 
to trust Him to do it. In the third place 
God offers Jesus to be to us our Lord and 
King, as Peter puts it in Acts 2:36, “There- 
fore let all the house of Israel know 
assuredly, that God hath made that same 
Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord 
and Christ.” To receive Jesus then means 
to take Him as our Lord and our Christ, 
that is, as our Divine Master, to whom we 
surrender the entire control of our 
thoughts, and our King, to whom we sur- 
render the entire control of our lives. 
When one does thus receive Jesus he is 
born again and he has entered into grace, 


81 


82 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


and therefore has taken his first step, the 
all-essential step, toward growing in grace. 


Il. To Grow in Grace We Must Openly 
Confess Christ Before the World. 


In the second place, in order to grow in 
grace we must make an open confession 
before the world of Jesus, whom we have 
received as our Lord. He Himself says in 
Matt. 10:32, 33, “Whosoever therefore shall 
confess me before men, him will I confess 
also before my Father which is in heaven. 
But whosoever shall deny me before men, 
him will I also deny before my Father 
which is in heaven.” There is no possibil- 
ity of growth in grace without the open 
confession of Christ before the world. If 
we really accept Him we will confess Him. 
As God says in Rom. 10:9, 10, “If thou 
shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as 
Lord, and shalt believe in thy heart that 
God raised Him from the dead, thou shalt 
be saved; for with the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness; and with the mouth 
confession is made unto salvation.” Out of 
the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh, and if we believe in Him with 
the heart we shall confess Him with the 
mouth. If we are to grow in grace it is 
necessary not merely that we confess the 
Lord Jesus when we join the church, we 
must constantly confess Him, every oppor- 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


tunity we have. There are few things that 
Promote growth in grace more than the 
frequent confession of Christ. I once heard 
a very wise old minister say to some young 
converts, “If you make a good deal of 
Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ will make a good 
deal of you, but if you do not make much 
of Jesus Christ, He will not make much of 
you.” Here is where many are stunted, just 
little spiritual “sawed-offs”: they do not 
make a practice of confessing Christ. And 
here is where many young converts go for- 
ward by leaps and bounds, because they are 
making a constant practice of the con- 
fession of Christ. 


III. Must Eat the Right Kind of Food. 


In the third place, if we are to grow in 
grace there must be the right kind of food. 
We grow by what we eat. You might have 
a baby physically the best born in the 
world, but if you did not feed it the right 
kind of food, and plenty of it, it would 
not grow. The baby of John Sullivan 
would not grow as fast as the baby of Tom 
Thumb, if we gave the baby of Tom 
Thumb plenty of good, nourishing milk, 
and did not give the baby of John Sullivan 
any food at all; so a man or woman or boy 
or girl may be born again, but if you do 
not give them the right food regularly they 
won’t grow. What the right kind of food 


10 


83 


84 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


fs the Bible tells us in 1 Peter 2:2: “As 
newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of 
the word, that ye may grow thereby.” 


The Word of God is the food of the 
mighty. Nothing will take the place of Bible 
study to promote growth. No amount of lis- 
tening to Sunday or any other preacher 
will take the place of personal Bible study. 
No amount of reading good books, even 
the very best books, the books of Andrew 
Murray or any other devotional writer, will 
take the place of direct, personal Bible 
study. Fenerbach, the German materialist, 
said, “Mann isst was er ist,” or to put it 
into English, omitting the pun, which is not 
translatable, “a man is what he eats.’ This 
is certainly emphatically true in the spir- 
itual life. Jeremiah said, “Thy words were 
found, and J did eat them; and thy words 
were unto me a joy and the rejoicing of 
mine heart: for I am called by thy name, 
O LORD God of hosts,” (Jer. 15:16), and 
the Psalmist says, “Blessed is the man that 
walketh not in the counsel of the wicked, 
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor 
sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But 
his delight is the law of the LORD; and 
in his law doth he meditate day and night. 
And he shall be like a tree planted by the 
streams of water, that bringeth forth its 
fruit in its season, whose leaf also doth not 
wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall 
prosper.” (Ps. 1:1-3), 


11 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


But it is not enough that we feed 


on the Word of God, although that 
is the right kind of food, we should 
feed regularly. Many study the Bible and 
do not grow much because they study so 
irregularly and so unsystematically. We 
should study the Bible every day, never 
letting a single day pass by under any cir- 
cumstances, that we do not give some time 
to Bible study. We read of the believers 
of Berea that “These were more noble than 
those in Thessalonica, in that they received 
the word with all readiness of mind, exam- 
ining the scriptures daily, whether these 
things were so.” (Acts 17:11). We should 
have a regular time each day set apart and 
kept sacredly for Bible study. I was once 
calling upon a member of our church in 
Minneapolis, one of the most intelligent 
women in the church. I put to her the 
question, “How are you getting on in your 
Christian life?” She replied, “I am not get- 
ting on at all. My life is a disgrace to me, 
a disgrace to the church, and a disgrace to 
Jesus Christ.” I asked her why that was. 
She replied she did not know. Then I put 
to her another question, “Are you studying 
your Bible every day?” She answered, “No, 
not every day, some days I put a great deal 
of time into Bible study, and then I go 
days without studying it at all.’ Her lit- 
tle babe lay in the baby carriage near her. 
I turned to the baby and said: “Mrs. N,, 


12 


85 


86 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


suppose you should feed that baby every 
two hours today, every four hours the next 
day, then two or three times in the whole 
day the next day, then let it go two or three 
days without feeding it at all, then feed 
it every two hours the next day, and then 
let it go two or three days without feeding 
it at all, how do you think the baby would 
grow?” She replied, “Why the baby would 
not grow at all, the baby would die.” I 
said, “That is just the way you are treat- 
ing your soul: some days you spend a good 
deal of time in Bible study, then you go 
days without studying it at at all.” She 
was like many. They wonder at their not 
growing in the Christian life, but there is 
no mystery about it. The Bible must not 
only be studied, but it must be studied reg- 
ularly, it must be studied daily, and there 
must be a regular time and system of Bible 
study. 


IV. Must Be Plenty of Good Air. 


In the next place if we are to grow we 
must have plenty of good air. Good birth 
and good food are not enough, we must 
have good air to breathe. During the last 
ten years there has been a great awakening 
among physicians and all intelligent people, 
to the importance of plenty of good air for 
health and growth. A woman who was 
at the head of a home for defective chil- 


13 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


dren in Scotland, once told me that almost 
all the children in that institution owed 
their physical weakness to breathing the 
air in their homes that had been contami- 
nated by the tobacco smoke of their fathers. 
How pale and puny are the children who 
are cooped up in stuffy houses. One reason 
why Californians are so healthy is because 
they live in the open. People come to Cal- 
ifornia sickly and puny and grow strong 
because they sleep out doors and live out 
doors, and then many of them are foolish 
enough to attribute it to the Christian Sci- 
ence they learned in Los Angeles. No, it 
was the good air you got in Los Angeles. 
So in the spiritual life, to grow we must 
have plenty of good spiritual air. 


WHERE DO WE GET GOOD SPIRIT- 
UAL AIR? 


1. Above all else in prayer. If we really 
pray we go up into the mountain where 
the air is fresh and pure and plenty of it. 
The air of the world is stuffy and foul, it 
stunts our growth, unless we often go alone 
into the mountain. “They that wait upon 
the Lord shall renew their strength.” (Isa. 
40:31). Even the Lord Jesus, when He 
lived in this world, found it necessary to 
go off into the mountains to pray. We read 
in Mark 1:35, “And in the morning, a great 
while before day, he rose up and went out, 


u 


87 


88 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


and departed into a desert place, and there 
prayed.” And in Luke 6:12, “And it came 
to pass in those days, that He went out 
into a mountain to pray, and continued all 
night in prayer to God.” If the Lord Jesus 
needed thus to go alone with God to pray 
and breathe the air of heaven, how much 
more do we need to do so. 


2. Another place where we get good air 
is in Christian fellowship. In Heb. 10:25 
God warns us against “forsaking the assem- 
bling of ourselves together, as the manner 
of some is.” No one can grow well with- 
out Christian fellowship. . What a change 
in the atmosphere there is when we leave 
the society of the worldly, even worldly 
Christians, and get among really godly peo- 
ple. Join the church. It is necessary for 
your growth. Some people get converted 
and then go into a hole and pull the hole 
in after them. They keep aloof from 
Christian fellowship; they join no church. 
Such people never become strong, full 
grown Christians. But not only join the 
church, but join a church where the fel- 
lowship really is helpful, a church where 
they preach the Bible and lots of it. Avoid 
the churches where they pull the Bible to 
pieces. They will hurt you, not help you. 
And avoid the churches where they neglect 
the Bible. Join the church that makes 
much of prayer. Join the church where 


15 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


the conversation and tone is high spirit- 
ually. 


But it is not enough just to join the 
church, cultivate the society of Christians. 
Many people join the church and then keep 
aloof from fellowship with their fellow 
members. Little good comes from that. Go 
to the prayer meeting regularly. The prayer 
meeting Christian is the growing Chris- 
tian. One of the noblest Christian men we 
ever had in the American army was Major 
General O. O. Howard. He was emphat- 
ically a prayer meeting Christian. Some 
years ago when he came to the coast to 
take charge of the forces out here the peo- 
ple of San Francisco proposed to make a 
reception for him. They chose for the 
night of the reception the prayer meeting 
night. On informing General Howard of 
the reception he thanked them for their 
kindness but told them that he could not 
go to a reception on that night, that that 
was prayer meeting night and he always 
made a practice of attending the prayer 
meeting and would not put the prayer 
meeting aside for any other consideration. 
If you wish to be a growing Christian be 
a prayer meeting Christian. 


V. Exercise. 


One more thing is necessary for growth 
and that is exercise. Our muscles will not 


16 


89 


90 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


grow strong unless we use them, and our 
moral and spiritual muscles will be flabby 
unless we give them good, stiff exercise. 
I took a pair of Sandow’s dumb bells 
around the world with me to keep in phys- 
ical trim. I knew that unless my body was 
kept in physical health and strength I 
could not do the work. When we began 
our five months campaign in the City of 
London, with the enormous buildings in 
three different parts of the city, the com- 
mittee who had the matter in charge, feel- 
ing that there was so much money involved 
in my being able to go through with the 
campaign, and that there would be so much 
lost if I should break down, went to Lloyd’s 
to get them to insure me against a physical 
break down. Lloyd’s thought the risk was 
too great and refused to take it, but I 
never missed a single meeting. Of course, 
I know it was due to God’s grace primarily 
that I kept in physical trim through the 
five long, heavy months of work; but it 
was due also to my taking care of my body, 
by taking plenty of regular, systematic exer- 
cise, and if we are to keep in trim spirit- 
ually it is absolutely necessary to exercise. 
We cannot be spiritual loafers and expect 
God’s grace to make up for our own neglect 
of sense and of duty. 


v7 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


WHAT IS THE BEST EXERCISE? 


1. Bringing others to Christ. 


The Lord Jesus said to His first disciples, 
“Follow me, and I will make you fishers 
of men.” (Matt. 4:19). The best way to 
keep from going back into the world is 
to keep bringing others out of it. The 
soul-winning Christian is the best growing 
Christian. Go to work to win souls. Speak 
to.at least one person daily. Mr. Moody 
made it a rule in his Christian life to never 
let a day go by without speaking to at 
least one person about his soul, and oh 
how he grew. He came on by leaps and 
bounds in the Christian life, and from a 
most unpromising beginning became the 
most prominent man in Christian life and 
work in the whole country. 


2. But there is another form of spiritual 
exercise which is necessary for growth, 
that is, generous giving. One cannot grow 
spiritually if he is stingy. God’s word is 
plain. We read in 2 Cor. 9:6-8, “He which 
soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; 
and he which soweth bountifully shall reap 
also bountifully (Paul is talking about giv- 
ing). Every man according as he pur- 
poseth in his heart, so let him give; not 
grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth 
a cheerful giver. And God is able to make 
all grace abound toward you (i.e., toward 
cheerful givers); that ye, always having 


18 


92 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


all sufficiency in all things, may abound to 
every good work.” It is the “liberal soul” 
that is “made fat.” In Luke 6:38 we read, 
“Give, and it shall be given unto you; good 
measure, pressed down, and _ shaken 
together, and running over, shall men give 
into your bosom. For with the same meas- 
ure that ye mete withal it shall be measured 
to you again.’ The man who gives gen- 
erously will grow greatly. The man who 
does not give, or who gives in a niggardly 
way, will shrink. Become at once a syste- 
matic giver. 


CONCLUSION. God commands us to 
grcw; every consideration of reason and 
self-interest and noble purpose, and of the 
interests of God’s kingdom urges us to 
grow. Will you grow? It remains with 
you to say whether you will or not. All 
that is necessary for you to grow is that 
you follow the teaching of the Word of 
God as we have studied it today. First, 
that you be sure that you are in grace, that 
you are born again; second, that you con- 
stantly confess Jesus Christ before the 
world; third, that you study the Word of 
God regularly; fourth, that you take plenty 
of time for prayer, and cultivate Christian 
fellowship; fifth, that you take plenty of 
spiritual exercise by bringing others to 
Christ and by giving regularly, systematic- 
ally, and generously as God has prospered 


19 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


you. Will you resolve today with all your 
heart that you will do these things? If 
you do, then each year of your Christian life 
will find you farther on in the attainment 
of the measure of the stature of the 
fullness of Christ. Every year of your 
Christian life will be better than the year 
that went before. 





93 


94 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


HOW TO MAKE A SUCCESS OF THE 
CHRISTIAN LIFE 





By R. A. Torrey 





There are two classes of persons who start 
out in the Christian life: those who make a 
complete or partial failure of it and those who 
make a complete success of it. The question 
at once suggests itself: ‘Is it possible to point 
out a plain pathway, in which, any one who will 
can walk, and following which will make suc- 
cess absolutely sure?” I believe it is. I believe 
that God’s Word gives a few simple instruc- 
tions, which, if followed, will make success in 
the Christian life a certainty. 

There are seven steps in the path marked out 
in the Bible. 


1. Begin Right. What a right beginning is 
we see in John 1:12, “But as many as received 
Him, to them gave He power to become the 
sons of God, even to them that believe on his 
name.” Receive Christ. Take Him as your 
Saviour who died for your sin. Trust the whole 
matter of your forgiveness to him. Rest upon 
the fact that He has paid the full penalty of 
your sin. 2 Cor. v:21, “For He hath made Him 
to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we 
might be made the righteousness of God in 
him.” Gal. iii:13, “Christ hath redeemed us 
from the curse of the law, being made a curse 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 95 


for us, for it is written, Cursed is every on® 
that hangeth on a tree.” It is in this first step 
that many make a mistake. They try to mix 
in their good works as a ground of salvation. 
They think if they are good God will forgive 
them, because of Christ’s death and their good- 
ness. Take Him as your deliverer, the one who 
will save you from the power of sin, who will 
quicken you when dead in trespasses and sins. 
Don’t try to save yourself from the power of 
sin. Trust Him to do it. Take Him as your 
Master. Don’t seek to guide your own life. 
Surrender unconditionally to His lordship over 
you. Say, “All for Jesus.” Many fail, because 
they shrink back from this entire surrender. 
They wish to serve Jesus with half their heart, 
and part of themselves, and part of their pos- 
sessions. It is a wretched life of stumbling and 
failure, this life of half-hearted surrender. It 
is a joyous life, all along the way, the life of 
entire surrender. If you have never done it 
before and wish “to make a success of the 
Christian life,” go alone with God; get down 
on your knees, and say, “All for Jesus.” Say 
it very earnestly; say it from the bottom of 
your heart. Stay there until you realize what 
it means and what you are doing. It is a 
wondrous step forward when one really takes 
it. If you have taken it already, take it again. 
Take it often. It always has fresh meaning 
and brings fresh blessedness. 


Taking Christ as your Master involves obedi- 
ence to His will as far as you know it in each 
smallest detail of life. This is one of the most 


2 


96 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


essential conditions of receiving “the Holy 
Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey 
him,” (Acts v:32). 


2. Confess Christ Openly Before Men. Matt. 
x:32, “Whosoever, therefore, shall confess me 
before men, him will I confess also before my 
Father which is in heaven.” Rom. x:10, “For 
with the heart man believeth unto righteous- 
ness; and with the mouth confession is made 
unto salvation.” The life of confession is the 
life of full salvation. It is when we confess 
Christ before men that He confesses us before 
“my Father in heaven,” and the fulness of His 
blessing comes. It does not mean that we are 
to confess Christ just once, as for example, 
when we unite with the church, but constantly. 
The one who would make the largest success 
of the Christian life should seize every oppor: 
tunity of confessing Christ before men—in the 
home, in shopping, at work, in the church, 
everywhere. I once heard a wise old preacher 
say, “If we make a good deal of Christ, He will 
make a great deal of us.’ How many back- 
sliders fell away from Christ at this point! They 
went to a new city, or a new place of work, 
and neglected to confess Christ, and now they 
are back in the world. 


38. Study the Word. 1 Pet. ii:2, “As new- 
born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, 
that you may grow thereby.” The Word of 
God is the soul’s food. It is the nourishment 
of the new life. One who neglects the Word 
cannot make much of a success of the Chris- 


3 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 97 


tian life. All who get on in the Christian lffe 
are great feeders on the Word of God. Here 
many fail. Ask any backslider, “Have you fed 
on the Word daily?” I have never found one 
that could say that he had. 


Two points on Bible reading are: First, read 
for food for your own soul; second, read a 
great deal on your knees. The Bible has become 
in some measure a new book to me since I 
have taken to reading it on my knees. 


4. “Pray Without Ceasing,” 1 Thess. v:17. 
The one who would succeed in the Christian life 
must lead a life of prayer. That is easy enough 
if you only set about it. Have set times for 
prayer. The rule of David and Daniel, three 
times a day, is a good rule. Ps. lv:17, “Evening 
and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry 
aloud: and He shall hear my voice.” Dan. vi:10, 
“Now when Daniel knew that the writing was 
signed, he went into his house; and, his win- 
dows being open in his chamber toward Jeru- 
salem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a 
day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his 
God, as he did aforetime.” Begin the day with 
thanksgiving and prayer—thanksgiving for the 
definite mercies of the past, prayer for the 
definite needs of the present day. Stop in the 
midst of the bustle and worry and temptation 
of the day for thanksgiving and prayer. Close 
the day with thanksgiving and prayer. 


Then there should be the special prayer in 
special temptation—when we see the tempta- 
tion approaching. Keep looking to God. “Pray 


4 


98 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


without ceasing.” It is not needful to be on 
your knees all the time. But the heart should 
be on its knees all the time. If “Satan trem- 
bles when he sees the weakest saint upon his 
knees,” let us keep him trembling all the time. 
We should be often on our knees, on our faces, 
literally. This is a joyous life, tree from 
worry and care. Here is the point, neglect of 
. prayer, where many fail. 


There are three things for which the one 
who would make a success of the Christian life 
must especially pray: First, for wisdom, “If 
any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God,” 
Jas. 1:5; second, for strength, “They that wait 
upon the Lord shall renew their strength,” Isa. 
x1:31; third, for the Holy Spirit, “Your heavenly 
Father shall give the Holy Spirit to them that 
ask Him.” If you have not yet received the 
baptism of the Holy Spirit you should offer 
definite prayer for this definite blessing and 
definitely expect to receive it. If you have 
already received the baptism of the Holy Spirit 
you should with each new emergency of Chris- 
tian work pray to God for a new filling with the 
Holy Spirit, Acts iv:31. 


5. Go to Work for Christ. Matt. xxv:29, 
“For unto every one that hath shall be given, 
and he shall have abundance; but from him that 
hath not shall be taken away even that which 
he hath.” Note the context, and you will see 
that this means, those who use what they have 
will get more, and those who let what they have 
lie idle will lose even that. The working Chris- 


5 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 99 


tian, the one who uses his talents, whether few 
or many, in Christ’s service, is the one who 
gets on in the Christian life here, and who will 
hereafter hear the “Well done, thou good and 
faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord.” 
Find some work to do for Christ and do it. 
Seek for work. If it is nothing more than dis- 
tributing tracts, or invitations to meetings, do 
it. Always be looking for something more to 
do for Christ, and you will always be receiving 
something more from Christ. 


6. Give Largely. Prov. xi:25, “The liberal 
soul shall be made fat.” 2 Cor. ix:6, 8, “He which 
soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; 
and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also 
bountifully. And God is able to make all grace 
abound toward you; that ye, always having all 
sufficiency in all things, may abound to every 
good work.” Success and growth in Christian 
life depend on few things more than liberal 
giving. A stingy Christian cannot be a growing 
Christian. It is wonderful how a Christian man 
begins to grow when he begins to give. Give 
systematically. Set aside for Christ a fixed 
proportion of all the money or goods you get. 
Be exact, and honest about it. Don’t use it for 
yourself under any circumstances. A tenth is 
a good proportion to begin with. Don’t let it 
be less than that. After you have given your 
tenth you will probably soon learn the joy of 
giving free-will offerings in addition to the 
tenth. 


7. Keep Pushing On. Phil. 3:13-14, “Breth- 
¢ 


100 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


ren, I count not myself to have apprehended; 
but this one thing I do, forgetting those things 
which are behind, and reaching forth unto 
these things which are before, I press toward 
the mark for the prize of the high calling of 
God in Christ Jesus.’ Forget that which lies 
behind; press on to the better things that lie 
before—“Press on toward the goal unto the 
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,” 
(R. V.) Forget the sins which lie behind. If 
you fail anywhere, if you fail, don't be discour- 
aged, don’t give up; don’t brood over the sin. 
Confess it instantly. Believe God’s Word. 1 
John i:9, “If we confess our sins, he is faithful 
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse 
us from all unrighteousness.” Believe the sin 
is forgiven; forget it; press on. Satan beguiles 
many a poor soul here. He keeps us brooding 
over our failures and sins. He even makes us 
think this is humility, as if it were humility to 
doubt God’s Word and make Him a liar by not 
believing the sin is forgiven and put away, 
when He says it is. 

Forget the achievements and victories of the 
past and press on to greater. Here Satan 
cheats many of us out of the larger life. He 
keeps us thinking so much of what we have 
already obtained, and makes us so contented 
with it, and so puffed up over it, that we come 
to a standstill, or even backslide. I have seen 
this in many individuals and many churches. 
“How well we have done!” they think. Our 
only safety is in forgetting those things which 
are behind, and pressing on. ‘“Excelsior!” 


7 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 101 


Aligher!” should be the soul’s persistent cry. 
Press on! There is always something better 
ahead. You may have received a second bless 
ing, or a twenty-second, but there is still some- 
thing better until we “come .. . unto a per 
cect Man, unto the measure of the stature ot 
the fulness of Christ,” Eph. iv:13. 


Young Christian friends and older Christians, 
the road to certain success in the Christian life 
is plain enough. Shall we take it? The truths 
of this tract are familiar; but are you prac 
ticing them? Read the tract over often and 
see if there is not some point at which you fail. 
If you find there is, correct your mistake at 
once. 


102 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


How 

can I know 
that 

I am led 
by the 
Holy Spirit 


Answered by 


Dr. R. A. TORREY 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 103 


How can one distingulsh between the 
leading of the Holy Spirit and a mere 
Impulse of our own heart? 


The most important condition of being 
able to distinguish the true leading of the 
Holy Spirit is that we be absolutely sur- 
rendered to the will of God. There are 
many people doing the things that they 
themselves wish to do and calling it the 
guidance of the Holy Spirit, simply be- 
cause there has not been a real and abso- 
lute surrender to the will of God. Often- 
times these people fancy that there has 
been a surrender of the will to God but 
afterwards discover that the supposed sur- 
render has not been real. It is the privi- 
lege of every child of God to have the 
guidance of the Holy Spirit at every turn 
of life. The conditions upon which that 
guidance is obtained are clearly stated, or 
implied, in James 1:5-7, “If any of you 
lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giv- 
eth to all men liberally, and upbraideth 
not; and it shall be given him. But let 
him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For 
he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea 
driven with the wind and tossed. For let 
not that man think that he shall receive 
anything of the Lord.” The conditions 
here stated, or implied, are: 


First. That the one seeking God’s guid- 
ance shall fully realize his own lack of 
wisdom, i. e., his inability to decide for 
himself. 


Second. That he really desire to know 
and do the will of God. 5 eh: 


104 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Third. That he definitely ask God to 
show him what to do. 


Fourth. That without wavering or 
doubting he confidently expect God to show 
him. 


Fifth. That he go step by step as the 
Lord leads. 


The one who meets these conditions 
will be guided. Many of us make the mis- 
take of wishing God to show us the whole 
way before we take the first step, but God 
leads a step at a time, and when we take 
the first step He will make the next step 
clear. But if we wait for remote steps to 
be made clear before we take the first step 
they will not be made clear. There are 
many who tell us that they are seeking 
God’s guidance but can get no light, but 
when you question them it becomes clear 
that they have sufficient light for the next 
step and what they are really seeking is 
light for a step which they do not have to 
take as yet. Take the next step: that God 
makes clear before you. You do not need 
to see beyond that. 


Another thing that needs to be said upon 
the subject of guidance is that God’s guid- 
ance is clear guidance. “God is light, and 
in Him is no darkness at all” (1 John 1:5). 
Oftentimes when one makes a full sur- 
render to God, the Devil seeks to defeat 
him by suggesting all manner of difficult ot 
even ridiculous things as the will of God, 
thus getting him into perplexity and not 
seldom into spiritual agony. When he does 
not do these absurd things then the Devil 
aid ite to him that he has not obeyed 
God, and thus timid souls get into all man- 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 105 


ner of self-condemnation, and are some- 
times even led to doubt their salvation, or 
to wonder whether they have not commit- 
ted the unpardonable sin. When any sug- 
gestion as to duty comes to us if our wills 
are fully surrendered to God and we 
really are willing to do His will, we have 
a right to approach our Father as His 
children without fear (Rom. 8:15) and say, 
“Father, I wish to do Thy will and will do 
it if Thou wilt only make it perfectly clear. 
Now make what Thou dost want me to do 
as clear as day,” and we have a right to 
expect that our Father will make it as 
clear as day if we really desire to do His 
will. And we are under no obligation to 
take a step until He does make it as clear 
as day. We ought to avoid all undue haste 
in doing what we imagine to be the will of 
God just as much as we should avoid delay- 
ing when that will is made perfectly clear. 
“He that believeth shall not make haste” 
(Isa. 26:16). Many an honest soul in its 
eagerness to obey God hurries on ahead 
of God because he does not fully trust God 
and thus wait for God to make the way 
perfectly clear. When one does thus hurry 
on before God he gets into difficulties and 
oftentimes has to come back and he finds 
that the thing that he did at great sacri- 
fice he was not called upon to do. 

A Christian should live without worry 
and anxiety (Phil. 4:6) He should not 
even be anxious lest he may have diso- 
beyed God in some uncertain thing that he 
thinks perhaps God wanted him to do but 
concerning which he is not quite sure that 
God wanted him to do. We are not slaves 
but children. We have not received the 
spirit of bondage again to fear, but the 
spirit of placing as sons whereby we cry, 
“Abba, Father” (Rom. 8:15). The life of 


106 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


mental torture and_ self-condemnation 
that some conscientious souls suffer for 
fear they may have disobeyed God in not 
doing something that it was not at all 
clear that they should do, is not a life 
of intelligent faith. We should simply 
trust God absolutely, surrender to Him 
absolutely, look to Him to guide us day 
by day, trust Him to guide us and go on 
gently and trustfully just so fast as He 
fees the way perfectly clear, and no 
aster. 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 107 


Christian Life 
Card 


ay 


By R. A. TORREY 


THE BIOLA BOOK ROOM 
Bible Institute of Los Angeles 


536-558 South Hope St., Los Angeles, Cal. 
15c per dozen, $1.00 per 100 





108 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


1 
HOW TO BEGIN A CHRISTIAN LIFE 





GOD’S COMMAND, “Repent and believe the 
Gospel’’—Mark i:15. 


THE GOSPEL, “I declare unto you the Gos- 
pel, which I preached unto you . . that Christ 
died for our sins, according to the Scriptures, 
and that he was buried, and that he rose again 
the third day, according to the Scriptures.”— 
1 Cor. xv:1-4. 


GOD’S ASSURANCE, “By him all that pees 
are justified from all things (Acts xiii:39), ‘ 
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting lite 
—John iii:36. 

WHAT IS IT TO BELIEVE ON THE SON, 
“As many as received Him, to them gave He 
power to become the Sons, of God, even to them 
that believe on His name’”—John i:12. 





In obedience to God’s command, I do here 


and now turn from every known sin and believe 
the Gospel that Christ died for my sins, was 
buried and rose again. I receive Jesus as my 
redeemer, who bore my sins in His own body 
on the cross (2 Cor. v:21; Gal. iii:13; 1 Pet. ii:24), 
and who has power to forgive my sins (Mark 
11:10; v:31), as my teacher to whom I will sub- 
mit all my thoughts (John vi:68), as my guide 
to whom I will commit the direction of my life 
(Acts ix:6), as my risen Saviour whom I will 
trust to keep me from falling (Jude 24) and save 
me to the uttermost (Heb. vii:25); and resting 
upon God’s assurance, I believe all my sins are 
forgiven and I have eternal life. 


Signed. 225 en ere ee ee 


PTR Sines 5) I 3) E Vol Ses ey Cha at AO 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 109 


2 
GROWTH IN GRACE 


GOD’S COMMAND, “Grow in Grace and ia 
the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus 
Christ”—2 Peter iii:18. 


HOW TO GROW IN GRACE 


1. Confess Christ with the mouth before men 
over opportunity you get—Matt. x:32; Rom. 
x:9. 


2. Be baptized and partake regularly of the 
Lord’s Supper—Acts ii:11-42; Luke xxii:19; 1 
Cor. xi:26, 

3. Study the Word daily—1 Peter ii:2; Acts 
xx:32; Acts xvit:11. 


4. Pray daily and every time you are tempted 
—Luke xi:9-13; Luke xxii:40; 1 Thess. v:17. 


5. Put away out of your life every sin and 
everything that you have doubts about and obey 
every word of Christ—i John i:7; Rom. xvi:23; 
John xiv:23. 

6. Seek the society of Christians—Eph. iv:11- 
16; Acts 11:42-47; Heb. x:24, 25. 

7. Go to work for Christ—Matt. xxv:14-29, 


8. When you fall into sin don’t be discour- 
aged, but confess it at once, believe it forgiven 
and get up and go on—1 John i:9; Phil. iii:13, 14. 


Earnestly desiring to grow in grace, according 
to God’s command, I purpose to openly confess 
Christ, to observe all His words, to study a por- 
tion of His Word daily, to pray regularly, to 
seek the society of His people, and to seek each 
day some work that I can do for His sake. 


Signed oo eee eae 


110 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


3 


HOW TO USE THE BIBLE 


1. Own a good print, well bound Bible, a Con- 
ee dance and the “Treasury of Scripture Knowl- 
edge. 


2. Set a portion of each day sacredly apart 
for Bible study. Let your body go unfed rather 
than your immortal soul—Acts xvii:1l. 


3. Choose an hour for study when your mind 
is clearest. 


4. Study with a humble, teachable mind, not 
to see what you can make it teach, but what 
God meant it to teach—Matt. xi:25. 


5. Pray for the guidance of the Author of the 
book—Ps. cxix:18; John xiv:26; 1 John ii:27. 


6. Read the whole Bible through consecutively, 
again and again—Luke xxiv:27. 


7. Study, not skim; weigh each word; look up 
all references and read them carefully; search 
the Scriptures with Text Book and Concordance 
to see how God handles such words and sub- 
jects as “Sin,” “Salvation,’”? ‘“‘The Cross,” “The 
Blood,” “Repentance,” “Faith,” etc. Analyze 
books of the Bible verse by verse, writing down 
all the teachings of each verse—Jos. i:8. 


8 Read it as the Word of God (1 Thess. ii:13), 
submit your judgment unhesitatingly to its 
teachings, believe all its promises, heed all its 
warnings, obey all its commands, always and 
at once. Remember, it is GOD’S message to 


YOU. 


9. Study and accept not only what you like, 
but all God has to say—John vii:17. 

10.” Commit to memory at least one verse each 
day—Ps. cxix:11. 


ll. Carry a Bible or Testament with you for 
the improvement of spare minutes—Eph. v:16; 
Acts viii:28, 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey III 


4 
HINTS ON TRUE CHRISTIAN LIVING 





TO BE Bae eae READ AND CON- 
STANTLY FOLLOWED 


1. All promptings of duty are leadings of the 
Spirit. Follow them always and at any cost— 
Eph. iv:30; 1 Thess. v:19. 

2. Never go where you cannot take Christ 
with you—Matt. xxvili:20; Ps. cxxxix:7. 

3. Never go where you would not be glad to 
have Christ find you if He should come; never 
do what you would not be glad to have Christ 
find you doing—Matt. xxiv:44-51; Luke xxiii:34, 
35; 1 Thess. v:2, 4. 

4. Do nothing that you are not confident that 
you can do to the glory of God—Col. iii:17; 1 
Cor. x:31. 

5. When in doubt as to any proposed act, do 
not do it, if it is clear that loyalty to Christ 
does not positively demand it—Rom. xiv:22, 23; 
1 John xxx:21. 

6. Seek the blessing of God upon all you do— 
Ps. cxxvii:l1; Phil. iv:6, 7. 

- Do not try to discover how little Christ 
will peers of you, but how_much you can do 
for him—2 Cor. v: 14, 15; 1 Chron. iv:10. 

8 The best man is an unsafe example, so fol- 
low oe only—Jer. xvii:5; Gal. ii:11-13; John 
viii: 

9, Seek at once and continually an enduement 
of “power from on high’—Luke xxiv:49; Acts 
11:39; iv:31. 

10. Take all your doubts and troubles and 
burdens to Jesus and leave them with him.— 
Matt. xi:28; Ps. iv:22; Isa. 50:10. 

11. Trust’ your salvation _wholly to God—Eph. 


ii:8; 2 Cor. ii:9-11 1 Pet. i:5; Jude 24. 


112 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


5 


ADDRESS—MEMORANDUM 

The blanks below should be filled in with the 
name and address of the one signing at the bot- 
tom of pages 1 and 2, and this page 5) may then 
be detached on dotted or perforated line and 
retained by the one presenting the card, or, if 
the card is sent through the mail or signed 
later by the one to whom it s presented, the 
page (5) should be separated and sent to the 
one from whom the card was obtained. Pages 
1-4 should be retained by the one who signs. 
The name and address filled in the blanks on 
this page enable the one who sends or presents 
the card to have an accurate memorandum of 
the name of the person to whom it was presented 
and thus to pray for or to give such a one 
friendly Christian watch-care. 


Bo tie easier Ha nese see hype ena ean ae 
Street and number (if city)... 
City, town or village........... 

State 





*Ladies will write “Miss,” or “Mrs.” 





Returh.te:% eee 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 113 


Che 
Shepherd 
alin 


R. A. TORREY 


Copyrighted 1915 by 
R. A. Torrey 


114 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


Jehovah ig My Shepherd 


The Twenty-third Psalm is a great deep. 
It is an unfathomable ocean of truth. It is 
the first Scripture that most of us ever learned, 
but no one of us in a lifetime has ever 
exhausted it, or gotten to the bottom of it. 
Volumes have been devoted to the exposition 
of this Psalm, but who that has ever studied 
it would dream of saying, “I now have all 
that there is in the twenty-third Psalm.” It 
is a short Psalm, but there is material in it 
for the meditation of a lifetime. How comes 
it that there are such treasures and such depths 
of truth in so small a space? There can be 
but one reasonable answer to that question, 
viz., God is its Author. It is often contended 
by the critics that David could not have writ- 
ten it because it is so far beyond him and so 
far beyond his time. Doubtless it is beyond 
David, far, far beyond him, and far beyond 
his time, but can the critics tell us what man 
of any time that any one has ever dreamed of 
assigning the Psalm to, the Psalm is not be- 
yond? But the Psalm is not beyond God, and 
its inexhaustible depth and matchless beauty 
and perennial power are clear proof that God 
is the Author of the Psalm. 

There are two methods of dividing the 
Psalm that suggest themselves from a study 
of the Psalm itself. According to the first 
method we divide it into two parts: the first 
part, verses 1-4, Jehovah, my Mighty and Ten- 
der Shepherd; the second part, verses 5, 6, 
Jehovah, my Bountiful Host. According to 
the second method of dividing the Psalm, we 
divide it into three parts: Part 1, verses 1-3, 
Every Want Met; Part 2, verse 4, Every Fear 
Banished; Part 3, Every Longing Satisfied. 


I, EVERY WANT MET. 


1, The foundation thought of this part of 
the Psalm, as well as the next, is found in the 
opening words, “Jehovah ts my Shepherd.” 


two 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 115 


The figure of the Shepherd is one of frequent 
occurrence in the Bible. It was a favorite 
illustration with our Lord Himself. The fig- 
ure stands for love and care and protection 
and provision on God’s part, and for trust 
and obedience and following on man’s part 
(John 10:1, 18, 26-29; Gen. 33:13; Luke 2:8; 

4:5, 6; Acts 20 :29; Isa. 53 O15 Matt. 9 :36). 
To say Jehovah is my Shepherd i is to say that 
He loves me with the tenderest love. How an 
eastern shepherd loves his sheep is brought 
out in Luke 15:4-6. How the Lord loves His 
sheep is brought out in John 10:11, “I am the 
good Shepherd, the good Shepherd layeth 
down His life for the sheep,” and in John 
10:3, 4, “To him the porter openeth; and the 
sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own 
sheep by name, and leadeth them out. When 
he hath put forth all his own sheep, he goeth 
before them, and the sheep follow him: for 
they know his voice.” Because “Jehovah is 
my Shepherd” He loves me, He will secure 
my safety and my welfare even if it takes 
the sacrifice of Himself, as indeed it did. To 
say “Jehovah is my Shepherd” is to say that 
I am the subject of His ever-watchful and 
tender care. When Jacob was a shepherd he 
took wonderful care of his flock. He care- 
fully guarded the length and swiftness of a 
day’s march lest he overdrive the flock and 
some of the feeble ones die (Gen. 33:13), and 
in the same way our infinitely wise Shepherd, 
who never makes mistakes, shapes all His 
dealings with us with regard to our weak- 
nesses. He never overdrives us. Since 
“Jehovah is my Shepherd” He will protect 
me and therefore I need not fear the lion, or 
the bear, or the wolf, or the devil and all his 
hosts; for my Shepherd is ever at hand and 
is ever mighty and will deliver me out of their 
mouth and their paw (cf. 1 Sam. 17 :34-37). 
All I need to see to is that I am one of His 
sheep, and therefore can rightly say, “Jehovah 
is my Shepherd.” To say “Jehovah is my 
Shepherd” is also to say, Jehovah will pro- 


three 


116 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


vide for me, that he will find me good 
and sufficient pasturage. It is a shepherd’s 
business to feed the sheep and the lambs, and 
by making Himself my Shepherd Jehovah has 
undertaken to make it His business to pro- 
vide me pasture and He will do it; so no won- 
der the Psalmist continues, “J shall not want.” 
Who has a right to say “Jehovah is my Shep- 
herd?” Everybody? Most assuredly not. 
There are certain well defined and clearly 
stated conditions of being one of Jehovah’s 
sheep, and only those who meet the condi- 
tions have a right to say, “Jehovah is my 
Shepherd.” But all can meet the conditions. 
What these conditions are we find in John 
10:3, 4, 5, 27, “To him the porter openeth; 
and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth 
his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. 
When he hath put forth all his own, he goeth 
before them, and the sheep follow him: for 
they know his voice. And a stranger will they 
not follow, but will flee from him: for they 
know not the voice of strangers. My sheep 
hear my voice, and I know them, and they 
follow me.’ We see here that the conditions 
of being Jehovah's Sheep are, first, that we 
“hear Hts voice,’ i. e., that we listen and 
attend to what Jehovah "has to say. The man 
who is neglecting the voice of Jehovah as it 
speaks in the Bible and through His Spirit, 
and the man who refuses to attend to that 
voice, has no right to repeat the 23rd Psalm 
and say “Jehovah is my Shepherd.” Second, 
that we “follow Him.’ The one who is not 
following the Lord has no right to say “Jeho- 
vah 1s my Shepherd.” Third, that we heed 
not the voice of strangers, but flee from them. 
The man or woman who is willing to go after 
and listen to every “new gospel” spinner that 
comes along, has no right to say, “Jehovah is 
my Shepherd.” The Lord’s sheep will not 
follow a stranger, but flee from him. Two 
persons were once looking over the Bible 
together as the 23rd Psalm was read. One 
took out a pencil and drew a mark under the 


four 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 117 


third word, “my.” At the close of the service 
the other said, “Why did you draw that line 
under ‘my?’” The other replied, “The Lord is 
MY Shepherd, and I wondered if He were 
yours. 

2. “I shall not want.’ These words are the 
logical outcome of those which precede. If 
Jehovah is my Shepherd, of course, “I shall 
not want.” How can I? There will be no 
lack of any kind in the life of the one who 
makes Jehovah his Shepherd. But what shall 
I not want? The Bible is full of answers to 
this question (Ps. 84:11; 34:9, 10; Phil. 4:19; 
Matt. 6:33; Rom. 8:32; Heb. 13:5, 6). Not 
one of Jehovah’s sheep will ever lack any- 
thing that it is for his real good to have. Is 
not that a comforting thought? I would rather 
have that sure promise of God than all the 
money and lands and friends and honors in 
America. “Jehovah, God, is a sun and shield: 
Jehovah will give grace and glory: no good 
thing will He withhold from them that walk 
uprightly.” (Ps. 84:11). “And my God shall 
supply every need of yours, according to His 
riches in glory, in Christ Jesus” (Phil. 4:19). 
We may seem sometimes to “want”: there are 
things we desire and do not get, but the rea- 
son we do not get them is because it is not 
good for us to get them under the existing 
conditions. Perhaps it would be good for us 
to get them if we would ask for them in God’s 
way. It is often true of us that we have not 
because we ask not (Jas. 4:2, 3). 

3. Now the Psalmist leads on from the 
general statement that we shall not want, to 
specific wants supplied. In verse 2 we have 
four wants supplied: rest, and food, and drink, 
and leading, are provided, “He maketh me to 
lie down in green pastures; He leadeth me 
beside the still waters.” Literally translated, 
this verse would read, “He maketh me to lie 
down in pastures of tender grass; He leadeth 
me beside the waters of rest.’ We find a 
two-fold rest in this verse, that passive rest 
of the sheep lying down on the soft, young 


five 


118 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


spring grass; the active rest, walking beside 
the waters of rest. And just so there is a 
two-fold rest in the Christian life, passive rest, 
just lying on Jesus’ bosom; active rest, in 
serving the Lord, “without fear, in holiness 
and righteousness. before Him all the days of 
our life’ (Luke 1:74, 75). This two-fold rest 
comes out also in Matt. 11:28, 29, “Come unto 
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon 
you, and learn of me; for I am meek and 
lowly of heart: and ye shall find rest unto 
your souls.” The Shepherd himself it is who 
best knows when we would better lie down in 
tender grass, and when we would better be 
led on beside the waters of rest, and it is He 
who makes us lie down, and it is He who 
leads. 

But there is food as well as rest, “tender 
grass,” the sweet, juicy grass of springtime, 
such as the sheep love. Where do we find it? 
Is there any food so easy to eat, so juicy, so 
delicious, so nutritious as that which we find 
in the Word of God? Surely there is nothing 
that one of the Lord’s sheep enjoys like this. 
Perhaps a goat enjoys tin cans and bill-posters 
and old boots better than tender grass, and 
so there are worldlings who enjoy the latest 
novel or the daily paper better than the Bible, 
but the sheep prefer the tender grass of God’s 
Word. 

But there is drink as well as food, Jehovah 
leads His sheep right beside “the waters of 
rest.” . There is always water at hand for 
Jehovah’s sheep to drink, refreshing, tranquil 
waters, not turbulent, turbid waters, “the 
waters of rest.” What are these waters of 
rest that our Shepherd gives us to drink? We 
are not left to speculate. Our Lord Himself 
has interpreted it; from John 4:14 compared 
with John 7 :37-39 we find that the Holy Spirit 
is the water that we drink. How sweet and 
delicious these waters are some of you know 
from the experiences of your own life. But 
why is this water called “waters of rest?” 


six 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 119 


The answer is found in Gal. 5:22, 23, “The 
fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long- 
suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, meekness, 
self-control.” 

But there is guidance too, “He leadeth me.” 
Not only are the still waters there, but it is 
Jehovah Himself who leads us along the bank. 
To me the thought of Jehovah’s leading is 
one of the most precious thoughts of the 
Psalm, or indeed, of the whole Bible. 

“He leadeth me, O precious thought, 

O words with heavenly comfort fraught! 
Whate’er I do, where’er I be, 

Still ’tis God’s hand that leadeth me.” 
And He leads constantly by the “waters of 
rest,” i. e., the supply of the Spirit is always 
at hand for a fresh drink. Some years ago 
He led me right up to the waters of rest and 
what a drink I took, it seemed then as if I 
would never need another, but this past week 
or two He has been leading me along the 
same bank again and I have found the waters 
deeper than I thought. It is to be noted that 
Jehovah leads, not drives, His sheep. It is 
to be noted also in this and the following 
verses that there are four experiences into 
which and in which He leads: first by waters 
of rest; second, in paths of righteousness, 
i. e., a holy walk; third, into and through 
darkness and peril and testing; fourth, into 
His own house forever. 

In verse 3 we have a fifth want supplied, 
i. e., healing in reviving, or invigorating: “He 
restoreth (or reviveth) my soul.’ Sheep grow 
weary and weak and so do we; but we do not 
need to remain weary or weak or sickly, there 
is a Reviver or Invigorator, and this Revivor 
or Invigorator is Jehovah Himself. As the 
shepherd kneels beside the weary sheep and 
nurses it back to life and strength, so Jehovah 
does with us. Most of us can look back to 
times when we grew cold, and our spiritual 
life waned, and then the gentle Shepherd 
came and revived us, restored our souls. Many 
of us can say with David, “Thy gentleness 


seven 


120 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


hath made me great” (2 Sam. 22:26). There 
may be some sheep who reads these words 
who needs reviving today. Well, the Lord is 
ready to revive. You need not drag your- 
self along half dead. There is not only life 
for us, but fullness of life. Jesus our Shep- 
herd says, “I came that they may have life, 
and that they may have it abundantly” (John 
10:10). It is by His Word especially that 
Jehovah restores the soul (Ps. 19:7, R. V.). 

And now we have a sixth want supplied, 
guidance, “He guideth me in the aths of 
righteousness for His name’s sake.” e have 
already had guidance in verse 2, but this is a 
different guidance; there it was guidance by 
the “waters of rest,” here it is guidance in a 
holy walk. 

“Paths of righteousness” literally ross 
would be “paths of, straightness.” We will 
never walk in straight paths without His 
guidance. Left to ourselves we make very 
crooked paths, but He guides us straight on 
from the pit of sin to the glory of God. 
“What shall I do, what shall I do,” many are 
asking, “that I may be sure that I walk in the 
right path?” Let Him guide you, no need of 
care, no need of anxiety lest you are going the 
wrong way, no need of reproaching of a mor- 
bid conscience, just put your whole life into 
His hands for Him to lead (cf. Rom. 8:15). 
“He guideth,’ just rest there, poor, troubled, 
tempest-tossed soul. He leads a step at a 
time; it is far better to have His daily, hourly, 
momentary guidance than to have the way all 
mapped out. Personal guidance is better than 
a charted course, for we might misread the 
chart; but He guides, no mistakes now. These 
paths’ of righteousness in which He guides 
are pleasant paths. Some fancy that the 
paths of selfishness and sin and worldly plea- 
sure in which a silly sheep might wander are 
pleasanter, but it is not so. No paths so 
beautiful, no paths so bright, no paths so de- 
cata as the paths of righteousness (Prov. 


° 


eight 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 121 


»It is well to notice the order of God’s sup- 
ply of our wants as given in this Psalm: 

irst, rest, then food, then life-giving water, 
then the invigorating of our lives. These all 
precede the holy walk. This is the order of 
experience; the Lord first gives us rest, then 
He feeds us, then we walk beside the living 
waters and drink often and deep, then the 
life is revived or invigorated, and then comes 
the holy walk before men. There are many 
who are trying to walk in paths of righteous- 
ness before they get the strength for it that 
comes from finding rest in the Lord and then 
feeding on the tender grass of the Word and 
drinking the life-giving waters of the Spirit, 
and being invigorated by the Lord Himself. 

Before we leave this verse let us note why 
it is that Jehovah does all this, “for Hts 
name’s sake.’ Not because of any merit of 
ours, not because of any claims the sheep have 
upon Him, but just because of what He Him- 
self is, just because of His own sovereign love 
and His covenant with His people does 
Jehovah do these things. Iam glad the Psalm- 
ist added these words, “for His name’s sake,” 
and that Jehovah’s care of me, and provision 
for me, and love to me, rests not on what I 
am, but on what He is. I am so changeable, 
He is so changeless. I am not the same for 
two consecutive minutes, He is the same yes- 
terday, today, and forever (Heb. 13:8). And 
He gives rest and food and drink and guidance 
and reviving, and leads me in paths of right- 
eousness for His name’s sake, because of His 
own eternal unchangeable love. 


II. EVERY FEAR BANISHED. 


There is but one verse in this division of 
the Psalms, but oh what a verse. 

1. “Yea, though I walk through the valley 
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil.” 
The Lord’s sheep is now taken into new 
experiences, having been made to “lie down 
in pastures of tender grass,” and led “beside 
the waters of rest,” and “led in paths of right- 


nine 


122 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


eousness,” he is now led into “the valley of 
the shadow of death.” The Hebrew word 
translated “shadow of death” is of frequent 
occurrence in the Old Testament, and is used 
to express the deepest darkness. ‘The Psalmist 
did not have merely the experience of literal 
death in mind, but all experiences where the 
darkness is thick and profound. God’s sheep 
do not always walk in bright paths, the way 
the wise and tender Shepherd leads may lie 
through very dark valleys; the path may be 
so dark that we cannot see ahead at all, we 
can scarcely see the Shepherd Himself, though 
we can hear His voice. It does not prove at 
all that because we are in some dark valley 
we are not His sheep, nor does it prove that 
He is not leading. Dark valleys may lie 
between one green and fat pasture and another 
more green and rich and peaceful. I know 
that in my own past life the way into the 
most rich and peaceful pastures has led some- 
times through the darkest valley, a valley - 
whose darkness was like “the shadow of 
death,” “the valley of the shadow of death.” 

2. But even in this dark valley Jehovah's 
sheep have no fears. “I will fear no evil,” 
sings the Psalmist in the dark. It is not only 
while resting in the “pastures of tender grass,” 
and walking “beside the waters of rest,’ and 
“in the paths of righteousness” that Jehovah’s 
sheep fears no evil, but in the valley of deepest 
darkness as well. Every fear is banished on 
all occasions. A true trust in God banishes 
all fear, under all circumstances, for all time. 
Over and over again do we come upon this 
thought in the Bible (Isa. 12:2; 26:3; Ps. 
3:5, Os-2/sl<3> 40c1=3> 118 6 oisan 4110) 13% 
Phil. 4:6, 7; Rom. 8:28, 31, 32, 34). Jehovah’s 
sheep need never fear. They are as safe in 
the valley of the shadow of death as in the 
“pastures of tender grass,” or “beside the 
waters of rest.” 

3. But note well the reason the Psalmist 
gives why he will not fear, “for Thou art with 
me,’ not because there is no enemy and no 


ten 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 123 


danger there, but because there is with us One 
who is mightier than any possible enemy; not 
because we are able to cope with any dangers 
we may meet, but because there is One with 
us who is able to cope with them (cf. Isa. 
43:2; Rom. 8:31; Heb. 13:5, 6). In these 
words we have the one thought that banishes 
all fear from the Christian’s heart, “Thou art 
with me.’ If we could get that truth firmly 
rooted in our minds and keep it in our 
thoughts, it would banish all fears and loneli- 
ness and overwhelming sorrow forever. “Thou 
art with me.’ Learn to say it today in a real 
way and not merely by rote. When you walk 
the streets by night and are in terror regarding 
what may befall you, look up into the Shep- 
herd’s face and say, “Thou art with me.” 
When you are out on the storm-tossed ocean 
in shipwreck say again, “Thou art with me.” 
When lying on a bed of sickness, perhaps nigh 
unto death, say again, “Thou art with me.” 
When out of work and turned from door 
after door as you seek employment, and all 
men seem against you, say again, “Thou art 
with me.’ When you see every dollar of 
your hard-earned money swept away and you 
are forced to face an unsympathizing world 
penniless, say again, “Thou art with me.” 
When friends misunderstand you and turn 
their back upon you, and separate you from 
their company, say again, “Thou art with me.” 
When you sit alone with your dead, and not 
only your home is lonely, but your heart is in- 
finitely lonelier, say again, “Thou art with 
me.” I am not sure but this is the sweetest 
word in the whole Biblee “THOU ART 
WITH ME.” It is not only a cure for all 
fears, it is a cure for all sorrows, all disap- 
pointments, all bereavements. What difference 
does it make whether it is in the “pastures of 
tender grass,” or in “the valley of the shadow 
of death,” if He is there? Rutherford once 
exclaimed, “Lord Jesus, I would rather be in 
hell with Thee than in heaven without Thee; 
for if I were in hell with Thee, that would 


eleven 


124 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


be heaven to me, and if I were in heaven with- 
out Thee that would be hell to me.” Note 
also that it is not until the Psalmist gets into 
the “valley of the shadow of death” that he 
speaks of the Shepherd’s personal presence. 
He speaks of His grace and His feeding, and 
His guidance, etc., before this, but when he 
gets into the dark valley, it is Himself. This 
is true of the experience of most of us. It 
is in the valley of deepest darkness that we 
come to know His personal fellowship, and 
it is no longer what the Lord does, but 
“THOU art with me.” Praise God for the 
dark valley where we have what we could not 
have in “the pastures of tender grass.” 

4. “Thy rod and thy staff they comfort 
me.’ The rod and the staff are the shepherd’s 
implements for guiding and guarding the 
sheep. It is the thought of the shepherd him- 
self near at hand to guide and guard in the 
dark valley that banishes fear and comforts 
the sheep. The Hebrew word translated “rod” 
means most frequently in Bible usage, “A rod 
of correction”; and our Shepherd’s correction 
is most comforting to us, if we are wise. Some- 
times it means “a sceptre,” and nothing is more 
comforting to the Christian than Christ’s 
sceptre, and every true Christian is longing for 
the time when it shall bear sway throughout 
the earth. But. sometimes the Hebrew word 
translated “rod” means “a shepherd’s crook,” 
which is doubtless the primary meaning here. 
The Hebrew word translated “staff” means 
primarily that in which one depends, or upon 
which he leans, and is used of the staff David 
carried when he went to meet Goliath. Both 
the crook and staff with which Christ guides 
His sheep and wards off the enemy is “the 
Word of God.” How efficient and sufficient 
it is to ward off the wolf, lion and _ bear, 
appears from the history of our Lord Himself 
where Christ met and overcame the three- 
fold assault of Satan with the thrice repeated, 
“Tt is written.” Nothing comforts the Lord’s 
sheep like the Word (Rom. 15:4.). 


twelve 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 125 


III. EVERY LONGING SATISFIED. 


In the third division of the Psalm the figure 
changes, Jehovah Jesus appears no longer as 
a Shepherd, but as a Bountiful Host. 


1. “Thou preparest a table before me.” 
These words taken alone would furnish a 
sufficient text for a long sermon. If there 
were time, it would be well to study all that 
Jesus has spread before us on this table, no 
banquet on earth like that. The millionaire’s 
sumptuous feast for his friends sinks into 
utter nothingness in comparison. As to the 
general character of the feast read Psalm 63:5, 
“My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow 
and fatness; and my mouth shall praise Thee 
with joyful lips.’ And Psalm 81:16, “He 
should feed them also with the finest of the 
wheat, and with honey out of the rock should 
I satisfy thee.” Have you ever sat down 
at the table Jehovah spreads for His own? 
If not, you do not know what richness is. 
Some of the best things on the table are: 
(1) His Word (Jer. 15:16), that of itself 
constitutes a good many courses, “Sweeter 
than the honey and the honeycomb” (Ps. 
19:10). (2) But there is something better 
than the written Word to feed upon, ie, the 
Incarnate Word, Jesus Himself (John 6:55, 
56). Did you ever feed on Jesus Himself? 


2. Now notice where we are feasted, “in 
the presence of mine enemies.” Even Christ’s 
own have enemies, any man who will follow 
Jesus will be hated (John 15:19; 2 Tim. 3:12), 
but our wonderful Host will spread us a 
banquet in their very presence. He is doing 
so constantly. That is one thing that makes 
the world so angry at the church, they see 
what a banquet the church has, and at the 
bottom of their heart they know that they 
themselves only have husks. This is one of 
the things that makes infidels so mad and so 
violent. 

But there is something besides a feast, 
there is an anointing, “Thou anointest my head 


thirteen 


126 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


with oil”? Do you know what that means? 
From Acts 10:38 and Heb. 1:9 we find that 
the anointing is the anointing with the Holy 
Ghost, the anointing with “the oil of gladness,” 
the Holy Spirit (cf. 1 John 2:20, R.V.). If 
you have received this anointing you will under- 
stand why it is that the Bible speaks of it as 
“the oil of gladness” (Heb. 1:9; cf. Gal. 
§:22, 23). Jehovah Jesus just pours the oil 
over the head and it flows all over the whole 
person. In olden times the anointing was con- 
sidered a necessary preparation for a great 
feast, and the anointing with the Holy Spirit 
is a necessary preparation for the Lord’s feast. 
But we should remember that it is He Him- 
self who does the anointing. “Thou anointest 
my head with oil,” and if He has not anointed 
your head with oil, let Him anoint you today. 
He longs to do it. The chief condition of 
that anointing is absolute surrender to Him 
to do it and simple trust in Him (Acts 5:32; 
Luke 11:13; Mark 11:24). 


4. The next step follows naturally, inevi- 
tably, “my cup runneth over.’ Of course it 
does. When you sit down at Jehovah’s table 
and He breaks the alabaster box over you 
and the oil flows over your head and suffuses 
your whole person, your cup will run over, it 
will run over and run out to others to bless 
them (John 7 :37-39). When our Lord Jesus 
anointed the one hundred and twenty with oil 
on the Day of Pentecost, their cups so ran over 
that worldly onlookers thought they were 
drunk or hysterical or something of that sort; 
and very likely people will think that about 
you when you are anointed with “the oil of 
gladness.” But at Pentecost also people found 
that it was real and the cup of the disciples 
so overflowed that three thousand drank that 
day, and if your anointing is real your cup is 
going to overflow to some one else. I have 
known people to get very happy, but there 
was no overflow, and I have wondered if it 
was really the Lord who had anointed them. 


fourteen 


Traits and Tracts of Torrey 127 


If it had been really the Lord who had 
anointed them there would have been an over- 
flow to some one else. 

; Now we leave the feast for our earthly 
pilgrimage, but we are not unguarded. “Surely 
goodness and mercy shall follow me.’ We 
need no better rearguard nor foreguard than 
that. There are no better shepherd dogs than 
“goodness and mercy,” and God’s goodness 
and mercy follow us every step. The Hebrew 
word translated “mercy” is the word so often 
translated “loving kindness,” and it is so 
translated in the American Standard Version 
of this verse. The Psalmist had no question 
about it—“surely.’ How well protected and 
perfectly secure we are: the Shepherd picking 
out the path and leading the way, the Shep- 
herd Himself close with us as we pass through 
the dark valley, and His own goodness and 
mercy following us. There is no real peril 
for Christ’s sheep. And notice how long this 
will continue, “all the days of my life.” David 
took little stock in a salvation or blessing or 
security that lasted a few days, or a few years, 
“All the days of my life.” The goodness and 
mercy of Jehovah have followed me many 
years now, and I thank Him for it, but sup- 
pose they were to leave me tomorrow, next 
year, or even ten years from now, it would 
be unspeakably dreadful: but they will not. 

6. Now we come to the end of our pilgrim- 
age and pass out of time into eternity, “J 
shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever.” 
The Psalmist could hardly have understood 
the full meaning of His own words. Like 
many another prophet, he must have won- 
dered and searched what the Spirit of Christ 
that was in “im did signify when he thus 
testified beforehand of the sufferings of 
Christ (see preceding Psalm, Psalm 22), and 
the glory that should follow (1 Pet. 1:11). 
These words tell us that in God’s house are 
many mansions (or abiding places), and else- 
where we are told that our Shepherd has gone 
to prepare a place there for us, and that 


fifteen 


128 Traits and Tracts of Torrey 


when the place is prepared for us, and we are 
prepared for the place He will come again and 
receive us unto Himself, and that where He 
is, there we shall be also, forever with 
Jehovah Jesus (John 14:1-3; 1 Thess. 4:17). 
What a proof we have here, and indeed in 
the whole Psalm of David’s inspiration. No 
one can deeply and honestly ponder this 
Psalm and ever have a doubt again of its 
Divine origin. “IN THE HOUSE OF THE 
LORD FOREVER.” Will that be joy? Will 
that be every longing satisfied? Listen to 
David again, “Thou wilt show me the path of 
life: in Thy presence is fulness of joy; in Thy 
right hand there are pleasures for evermore” 
(Ps. 16:11). And still gain, “As for me, I 
shall behold Thy face in righteousness; J shall 
be satisfied, when I awake, with beholding Thy 
form” (Ps. 17:15). Listen to Him still again. 
“One thing have I asked of Jehovah, that will 
I seek after: that I may dwell in the house 
of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold 
the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire in His 
temple’ (Ps. 27:4). And listen to another 
Psalmist, “Whom have I in heaven but Thee? 
and there is none upon earth that I desire 
beside Thee. My flesh and my heart faileth; 
but God is the strength of my heart, and 
my portion for ever’ (Ps. 73:25, 26). Listen 
also to Paul, “We are willing to be absent 
from the body, and to be at home with the 
Lord’ (2 Cor. 5:8). Listen to Paul once 
more, “To depart and be with Christ... is 
very far better” (Phil. 1:23). “In the house 
of the Lord forever’—everlasting fellowship 
and communion and companionship with God. 
We say even now, “My cup runneth over,” 
but what shall it be then? 


School of Theology 


i 
at Claremont 


LO nb a 


Ox, B02 





Torrey, Reuben Archer, 1856-1928. 

Traits and tracts of Torrey; a fresh 
appreciation of a great man and teacher. 
Edited by Louis T. Talbot. Los Angeles, 
Bible Institute of Los Angeles [19287] . 

128p. 19cm. 


1. Torrey, Reuben Archer, 1856-1928. I. 
Talbot, Louis Thompson, pes it; 


© CCSC/mmb 








eos 
20 





<2 
Se 


ate 


(ily 





