tihvaxy  of  ^he  theological  ^tmimxy 

PRINCETON  •  NEW  JERSEY 

.tAL,\Z 


i^j-  vA-ou^^  Krt<ja!<e\j  ^:^Uja(JUL 


"TRIED    BY   FIRE." 


WORKS  BY  REV.  F.  B.  MEYER 

''''Few  books  of  recent  years  are  letter  adapted  to  instruct 
and  help  Christians  than  those  of  this  author.^'' — D.  L.  Moody. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  HEROES. 

i2mo,  cloth.     Each $i.oo 

Joshua,  and  the  Land  of  Promise. 
Moses  :  The  Servant  of  God. 
Abraham  ;  or,  The  Obedience  of  Faith. 
Elijah,  and  the  Secret  of  His  Power. 
Israel :  A  Prince  with  God. 
Joseph:  Beloved,  Hated,  Exalted. 

THE  EXPOSITORY  SERIES. 

The  Way  into  the  Holiest :  Expositions  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.      i2mo,  cloth,  i.oo 

The  Life  and  Light  of  Men :  Expositions  of 
John  i:  xii.     i2mo,  cloth I.oo 

Tried  by  Fire :  Expositions  of  the  First  Epis- 
tle of  Peter.     i2mo,  cloth i.oo 

The  Psalms :  Notes  and  Readings.  i8mo, 
cloth 60 

THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  SERIES. 

i8mo,  cloth.     Each 50 

White  vellum  cloth,  silver  tops.     Each 60 

The  Future  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

Christian  Living. 

The  Present  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

The  Shepherd  Psalm. 

Envelope  Series  of  Booklets. 

No.  I.     12  Tracts  assorted net.     .20 

No.  2.     12  Tracts  assorted 7tet.     .20 

Choice  Extracts  from  "  The  First  Steps"  and     » 
other  Writings  of  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  selected 

by  Rev.  B.  Fay  Mills.     24mo,  paper 05 

Per  dozen net.     .35 

6mo,  large  paper  edition 15 


Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

New  York  Chicago  Toronto 


MAR  JO  1964 


'TRIED  BY  FIRE: 


EXPOSITIONS    OF    THE    FIRST 
EPISTLE    OF    PETER. 


BY 


F.   B.   MEYER,   B.  A. 

Author  of  ^'^ Abraham  :   or,   the   Obedience  of  Faith;*' 

^^ Elijah:   and  the   Secret  of  His  Power;" 

^^ Israel :  a  Prince  with  God;"  etc.y  etc. 


FLEMING   H.   REVELL   COMPANY 
New  York  Chicago         Toronto 

Publishers  o/  Evangelical  Literature 


Author's  Edition 


t.%t  Carton  tpxt&i 
iji,  173  Macdougal  Street,  New  York 


PREFACE 


j^jTj^/HESE   Expositions  do  not  attempt  to  be  critical 
in   fe     ^^  exhaustive;  but  the  aim  has  been  to  deduce 
\^^^     such  spiritual  exhortations  and  consolations  from 
'''^VlA       ^^^  glowing  words  of  the   Apostle  as  will  most 
^      readily  help  Christian  people  in  the  varied  circum- 
stances of  daily  life 

Delivered  first  as  Expositions  in  the  course  of  my 
stated  ministry,  they  were  afterwards  published  week  by 
week  in  the  pages  of  *'  %)jt  (lljristian  ";  and  in  response 
to  very  many  requests  are  here  preserved  in  a  permanent 
form. 

It  has  never  been  my  plan  in  regular  exposition  to 
burden  the  minds  of  my  hearers  with  all  the  different 
opinions  of  commentators  on  the  varied  points  arising 
for  discussion  in  almost  every  paragraph.  It  has  been 
my  habit  rather  to  read  everything  within  my  reach,  and 


then  to  state  my  own  general  conclusions  as  simply  and 
clearly  as  possible.  This  method  has  been  followed  in 
the  present  case. 

Leighton's  admirable  Commentary  has  been  of  con- 
siderable use,  and  I  have  enriched  my  chapters  with 
several  extracts  from  this  nikie  of  spiritual  wealth. 
Indeed,  wherever  quotation  marks  occur  without  reference 
to  the  name  of  the  author,  the  reader  may  conclude 
that  they  indicate  passages  culled  from  this  source.  I 
trust  that  I  have  acknowledged  all  my  indebtednesses 
where  the  ipsissima  verba  have  been  used  :  but  who  of 
us  can  trace  the  source  of  ten  thousand  thoughts  which 
by  use  we  have  come  to  appropriate  as  our  own  ! 

Written  amid  the  multiplied  engagements  of  a  busy 
life,  it  would  be  impossible  to  estimate  the  benefit  to 
heart  and  thought  by  bending  over  these  translucent 
depths  of  sacred  truth — so  calm,  so  still,  so  profound,  so 
counteractive  of  life's  feverish  haste ;  and  it  is  my  earnest 
hope  that  these  Expositions  may  pass  on  to  others  some 
of  the  blessedness  which  their  preparation  has  brought  to 
myself. 

F.  B.  MEYER. 


CONTENTS 


The  Prelude 

The  Inheritance    

"Kept" 

IV. 

For  Those  in  Heaviness... 
Christ  Unseen,  but  Loved 

;■/. 

The  Sufferings  and  Glories  of  Christ 

VII. 

"Ye  shall  be  Holy"        

vin. 
Redeemed  by  Blood         

IX. 

Christian  Love       

X. 

God's  New-Born  Babes  and  their  Food 

XI. 

The  Precious  Corner-Stone    

xn. 
The  Plea  for  a  Blameless  Life 

XIII. 

God's  Slaves 

XIV. 

Taking  Things  Patiently         


PACE 

9 
lb 
24 
31 
38 
45 
52 
59 
65 
71 
78 
84 
91 
98 


Vlll 


Cotttcttla. 


The  Footprints  of  the  Flock 

XP7. 

Woman's  Place  in  the  Home 

XVII. 

The  Christian  Temper 

xrtrr. 
Suffering  for  Righteousness'  Sake... 

.via: 
The  Substitutionary  Work  of  Christ 

Ji'X. 


loS 


The  Days  of  Noah... 


XXI. 


One  with  Him  in  Death... 


The  Breath  of  Eternity 


Love  Covering  Sins 

XXIK 

The  Motive  of  our  Lives 


Not  so  Strange 


Unanswerable  Questions 

xxyii. 

God's  Flock  and  its  Shepherds 

XXVIII. 

The  Garb  of  the  Holy  Soul  ... 

XXIX. 

Care,  and  What  to  Do  with  it 


127 

135 
141 

147 
154 
161 
167 
172 
178 
184 
190 
iq8 


Conflict    

XXXI. 

The  Call  to  Eternal  Glory  .., 


205 
213 


"TRIED    BY    FIREr 

EXPOSITIONS 

OF 

THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  PETER. 


"  Peter,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  strangers  scattered  throughout 
Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia  ;  elect  according  to  the 
foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father,  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  unto 
obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ :  Grace  unto  you,  and 
peace,  be  multiplied." — i  Peter  i.  i,  2. 

3^^^^/ HIS    Epistle  was   the  child  of   many  tears   and  of 
^^^tj^'     much   sorrow.      It  was  written  probably  about  the 
tvt,  Ml^     year    A.D.    65,    when    the    followers    of    Jesus     of 
x^^l'      Nazareth    were     regarded    with    growing    dislike, 
^^  Jf'       whilst   clouds    of  suffering  and    persecution    were 
^Ji'->       passing  over  the  house  of  God  (iv.  17).     The  dis- 
ciples had  already  begun  to  learn   by   bitter  experience  that 
they  were    to    follow    their    Master's    steps    by    way    of  the 
Via  Do/orosa  to  the   light   of  the   Resurrection   morn  ;    and 
that  they  must  not  expect  softer  names   or  usage  than   had 
been  accorded  to  Him.     They  needed  comfort ;  a  stimulus  to 
patience  ;   a  recital  of  the  arguments  for  heroic  endurance — 
all  of  which  the  Spirit  of  God  supplied  through  these  fervid 
and  persuasive  paragraphs. 

And  thus  there  is  hardly  any  portion  in  the  Word  of  God 
which  has  been  more  eagerly  read  than  this  Epistle,  by  those 
who  were  pressed  with  many  trials  and  weaknesses.  By  exiles 
in  distant  lands,  shut  out  from  all  human  tendernesses  ;  by 
travellers  and  voyagers  ;    by  persecuted  and  suffering  saints, 


lo  %\jz  f  relu&e. 

hunted  into  the  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  or  immured  in  the 
living  rock  and  beneath  the  boom  of  the  ocean  wave  ;  by  those 
whom  sore  sickness  or  venerable  age  may  have  incapacitated 
from  meeting  with  the  visible  church — these  words  have  been 
lovingly  pondered  and  treasured,  as  a  priceless  heritage. 

To  a  student  of  the  earlier  life  of  the  Apostle  Peter  it  would 
have  seemed  in  the  highest  degree  unlikely  that  one  so  impulsive, 
so  rough-handed,  so  fond  of  action,  should  have  been  selected 
to  write  some  of  the  tenderest  and  most  consolatory  words  that 
have  ever  fallen  on  the  ears  of  suffering  and  persecuted  saints. 
Yet  so  it  befel.  And  we  are  left  to  infer  how  keenly  this  strong 
nature  must  have  suffered  before  it  could  have  become  so 
sweetened  and  softened,  so  humble  and  tender,  as  to  afford  a 
tropic  soil  for  the  luxuriant  growth  of  the  balsam  and  spicery 
of  Divine  comfort.  Very  different  was  this  Apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ,  when  he  wrote  this  Epistle,  from  the  fisherman  who 
girded  himself  in  early  life  to  his  toils— from  the  disciple  who 
abandoned  all  to  follow  the  Master  with  enthusiastic  ardour. 
Frost  and  fire  had  disintegrated  the  rock.  Age  had  diminished 
the  writer's  strength,  taken  the  sparkle  from  his  eye,  sown  his 
head  with  grey,  and  bowed  his  frame.  His  self-reliance  had 
learnt  to  cling  to  a  stronger  than  himself ;  his  wisdom  to  defer  to 
a  wiser.  The  asperities  and  ruggedness  of  his  character  had 
been  toned  and  mellowed  by  suffering  and  sorrow,  as  the  tints 
of  a  picture  are  softened  by  the  breath  of  the  years.  In  the 
deepest  sense  he  was  "converted"  at  last,  that  he  might  set 
himself  to  strengthen  his  brethren  (Luke  xxii.  32). 

We  cannot  now  recover  his  hidden  history,  lost  in  the  gulf 
which  separates  this  Epistle  from  the  moment  when  last  we 
caught  sight  of  him  emerging  from  the  prison  at  Jerusalem 
(Acts  xii.  19),  or  exciting  the  indignation  of  St.  Paul  at  Antioch 
(Gal.  ii.  1 1 ).  We  have  no  certain  record  of  how  those  years 
were  spent.  Though,  since  he  speaks  so  familiarly  to  these 
saints  scattered  throughout  Asia  Minor,  many  of  whom  may 
have  received  their  first  impressions  from  his  lips  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost  {comp.  first  verse  with  Acts  ii.  9),  we  should  judge 
that  he  travelled  with  his  wife  (i  Cor.  ix.  5)  for  some  time 
throughout  those  regions,  settling  for  a  longer  time  in  the  new 


"  ^frattcjers/*  ii 

city,  which  was  rising  on  the  ancient  site  of  Babylon  (v.  13). 
This  Epistle  was  written  there  ;  and  the  countries  mentioned 
are  enumerated  in  the  order  which  would  naturally  have 
suggested  itself  to  one  looking  out  on  them  from  a  command- 
ing central  position. 

I.  The  Inscription.— "To  the  Strangers  of  the  Dispersion." 
These  words  clearly  designate  Jews  as  principally  addressed. 
While  as  yet  the  site  which  was  to  be  occupied  by  Rome  was 
aovered  by  but  a  few  straggling  huts  within  a  rude  enclosure, 
the  King  of  Assyria  was  already  engaged  in  carrying  into  exile 
the  ten  tribes  of  Israel  (2  Kings  xvii.  6,  &c.).  They  were  captives 
quite  a  century  and  a  half  before  Judah  and  Benjamin  were 
transplanted  to  Babylon  ;  and  it  does  not  appear  that  they,  to 
any  great  extent,  participated  in  the  restoration  decreed  by 
Cyrus.  They  remained  in  the  land  of  their  adoption,  whence 
many  travelled  in  various  directions  until,  at  the  time  of  the 
writing  of  the  New  Testament,  they  were  found  in  all  the 
principal  cities  of  the  world.  These  were  the  "  Strangers  of  the 
Dispersion."  Their  speech,  their  garb,  their  physiognomy,  their 
religious  rites — marked  them  out  as  perfectly  different  from  those 
around  them,  and  identified  them  with  the  holy  city  and  with 
that  peculiar  people  whose  name  they  bore. 

Many  of  them  had  become  Christians,  not  only  through  the 
influences  experienced  when  visiting  their  national  metropolis, 
the  very  atmosphere  of  which  must  have  been  impregnated  with 
Christian  thought  ;  but  also  through  the  labours  of  the  Apostle 
Paul,  whose  first  efforts  were  always  directed  to  his  own  people, 
and  whose  name  must  be  for  ever  associated  with  the  infant 
churches  which  he  founded  in  the  regions  where  so  many  of  the 
Jews  of  the  dispersion  had  settled. 

But  we  must  not  limit  the  scope  of  these  words  to  Christian 
Jews.  There  are  phrases  which  demand  a  wider  interpretation. 
That,  for  instance,  which  alludes  to  "  former  lusts "  of  those 
addressed  (i.  14) ;  and  that  also  which  speaks  of  them  as  not 
having  been  "  a  people  "  in  time  past  (ii.  10).  Besides  which, 
the  term  strangers  "is,  distinctly  employed  in  a  spiritual  sense 
(ii.  11),  and  so  applies  equally  to  all  who  go  out  to  Christ 


12 


®lje  f  relutre. 


without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach,  and  who  confess  that 
they  have  here  no  continuing  city,  but  seek  one  to  come. 

Do  we  cultivate  enough  the  spirit  of  the  stranger}  We  know 
what  it  is  to  turn  from  the  attractions  of  a  foreign  city,  with  its 
wealth  of  art,  its  churches  and  its  picture  galleries,  its  antique 
buildings,  and  the  glitter  of  its  modern  boulevards,  towards  a 
tiny  box  of  brick  in  a  grimy  street,  which  is  endeared  to  us  as 
home.  We  may  not  linger  longer  ;  we  are  going  home.  Or  if 
we  stay  on  from  day  to  day,  we  hardly  unpack  our  portmanteaus, 
and  certainly  do  not  secure  a  settled  abode,  because  it  is  not 
our  home.  Nor  are  we  too  much  troubled  by  the  discomforts 
and  annoyances  of  our  hotel,  or  by  the  risings  of  popular  excite- 
ment around.  Of  what  consequence  are  such  things  to  those 
who  may  indeed  bestow  a  passing  interest  on  events  transpiring 
around  them,  but  whose  interests  are  elsewhere,  in  the  place 
which,  however  humble,  differs  from  all  the  world  beside  in 
being  home  ? 

Oh  for  more  of  the  tent  life  amongst  God's  people  !  But 
it  is  only  possible,  when  they  catch  sight,  and  keep  sight,  of 
"  the  city  which  hath  foundations."  When  that  city  is  a  city 
of  tradition  or  dream,  men  will  begin  to  dig  the  foundations 
of  permanent  homes  and  ample  fortunes.  But  when  it  is  realized 
as  the  object  of  passionate  persuasion,  descried  by  faith  rising 
above  the  mists  and  plains  of  time,  and  embraced  by  out- 
stretched eager  arms,  they  dwell  in  te"nts,  and  confess  them- 
selves strangers  and  pilgrims. 

It  is  said  that  when,  in  a  strange  land,  the  Swiss  soldier  hears 
the  rude  melody  which  gathers  the  cows  back  from  the  pastures, 
he  is  so  filled  with  longings  for  home  that  he  will  cast  down  his 
sword,  tear  off  his  foreign  livery,  renounce  his  claims  for  wage, 
in  order  to  hurry  back  to  his  mountain  home.  Would  that  such 
an  effect  might  be  experienced,  after  a  spiritual  sort,  by  many 
readers  of  these  lines  ;  who,  as  we  speak  of  the  inheritance, 
shall  also  array  their  spirits  in  the  pilgrim  garb,  and  sta^t,  not 
as  they  did  in  the  Middle  Ages  for  the  holy  sepulchre,  or  in 
quest  of  the  holy  grail,  but  for  the  New  Jerusalem,  on  which  the 
hand  of  invasion  has  never  fallen,  nor  sin  left  its  blight ! 


II.  The  Spiritual  Designation. — "Scattered  in  the 
countries,  and  yet  gathered  in  God's  election,  chosen  or  picked 
out ;  strangers  to  men  amongst  whom  they  dwelt,  but  knoze/n 
and  foreknown  to  God  ;  removed  from  their  own  country,  to 
which  men  have  naturally  an  unalterable  affection,  but  made 
heirs  of  a  better." 

Elect. — Before  all  worlds  God  chose  us  in  Christ  (Eph.  i.  4). 
There  is  no  election  outside  of  Christ.  He  was  chosen,  and  all 
who  were  one  with  Him,  in  a  union  which  was  before  time,  but 
which  is  manifested  in  the  process  of  time.  We  know  little  or 
nothing  of  the  secret  transactions  of  Eternity ;  but  we  can  tell 
if  we  were  included  in  them  by  a  very  simple  test.  All  whom 
the  Father  gave  to  Christ  come  unto  Him  (John  vi.  37).  If, 
therefore,  we  have  come  to  Christ,  attracted  to  Him,  as  steel 
filings  to  the  magnet,  we  may  assure  our  hearts,  and  dare  to 
lay  claim  to  the  blessings  and  responsibilities  included  within 
that  mystic  circle. 

But  notice  to  what  we  are  elect!— \Nq.  are  elect  to  OBEDIENCE. 
Not  merely  that  we  should  escape  the  penalty  due  to  sin,  or 
that  we  should  pass  into  a  region  where  storms  do  not  rave  and 
sin  does  not  molest.  No,  this  is  but  a  small  thing  in  the  history 
of  our  souls.  We  are  elect  to  obey  ;  elect  to  suffer,  that  through 
suffering  we  may  become  strong  ;  elect  to  be  the  saviours,  and 
helpers,  and  priests,  of  other  men,  through  a  very  baptism  of 
blood  and  tears  ;  elect  to  be  nearest  Christ,  because  resembling 
Him  most  closely  in  ministry,  and  devotion,  and  love. 

Election  is  no  selfish  thing. — Those  who  think  it  is,  and  who 
lay  flattering  unction  to  their  hearts  that  they  at  least  are  right, 
and  may  therefore  leave  the  world  to  its  fate,  are  probably 
utterly  deceived  ;  or  have  only  beheld  the  faintest  glimmer  of 
what  God  means  by  his  high  calling  and  choice.  We  are 
chosen  to  obey ;  to  serve  ;  to  learn  ;  to  suffer  ;  to  die  daily — 
that  others  may  be  blessed  and  saved.  Elect  stars  shine— to 
illumine  the  night.  Elect  nations— to  lead  the  van  of  the 
world's  progress.  Elect  spirits,  like  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Paul, 
Luther,  and  Knox — to  be  the  channels  down  which,  at  much 
cost  to  them,  the  grace  of  God  may  better  reach  the  world 
beneath  their  feet. 


14  ®Irc  tPrclutre. 

According  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father. — From  all 
eternity  He  knew  those  who  would  accept  the  overtures  of 
mercy.  Shall  we  say  that  He  foresaw  the  certain  affinity 
between  the  elect  One  and  those  who  would  cleave  to  Him  by 
faith?  And  concerning  all  these,  whom  He  foreknew,  He  also 
predestinated,  determined,  resolved,  that  they  should  be  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  his  Son.  To  those  who  are  really  saved 
by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  there  is  an  infinite  source  of  comfort 
here,  in  knowing  that — beneath  all  the  changes  of  our  moral 
and  spiritual  condition— outlasting  time,  strong  as  Omnipotence, 
tender  and  true  as  the  heart  of  God,  there  is  a  Divine  purpose 
which  is  pledged  to  carry  us  onwards  to  beauty  of  moral  char- 
acter, and  an  obedience  which  is  fashioned  after  the  pattern  of 
Christ's  (Rom.  viii.  29). 

Through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit. — The  election  of  the 
Father  in  eternity  is  made  effectual  through  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  time.  That  which  is  election  in  the  Father, 
appears  as  sanctification  in  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  Sanctifica- 
tion is  setting  apart.  The  root  idea  of  the  word  is  just  separa- 
tion from  common  uses  to  the  service  of  God.  The  saint  is  one 
who  has  separated  himself  from  known  evil  in  an  act  of  conse- 
cration, which  is  prolonged  through  all  his  after-life  ;  and  who 
is  animated  by  but  one  aim  and. purpose — to  be  only  for  Jesus. 
We  cannot  do  more  than  this  ;  nay,  we  cannot  do  this  without 
the  Holy  Spirit.  From  Him  comes  the  first  conviction  that  we 
are  wrong ;  and  the  indication  of  the  infirmity,  or  weight,  or  evil, 
from  which  we  must  get  free.  From  Him  also  comes  the  grace 
by  which  we  are  set  free.  From  Him  comes  the  in-filling  with 
the  love  and  life  of  God,  which  is  inseparably  connected  with 
each  act  of  consecration.  And  thus  there  is  evolved  at  last  the 
obedience  which  pleases  God  ;  and  which  is  thus  wrought 
through— and  in — sanctification  of  the  Spirit. 

Yield  to  the  Spirit.  Recognize  his  indwelling.  Do  what  He 
cornmands,  and  forbear  from  doing  aught  that  his  still  small 
voice  forbids.  Every  such  act  of  consecration  to  his  will  must 
lead  to  the  fuller  light,  and  love,  and  power  which  make  up 
hohness.  And  out  of  all  this  there  will  unfold  the  fair  life  of 
obedience,  which  is  the  perfected  blossom  of  the  hidden  subsoil 


root  of  election.  Election,  the  root ;  the  grace  of  the  Spirit,  the 
atmosphere  ;  obedience,  the  flower. 

Utito  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ. — Here,  then,  is 
the  Trinity — Father,  Son,  and  Spirit— all  engaged  in  the  work 
of  lifting  us  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  mto  a  life  wherein 
we  shall  as  much  love  to  do  right  as  now  to  do  wrong. 

Very  fitly  does  this  mention  of  the  blood  follow  that  of 
obedience,  as  if  to  remind  us  that  the  best  obedience  could 
not  avail  to  save  us  apart  from  the  precious  blood,  and  that 
our  best  acts  need  sprinkling.  "  The  very  tears  of  the  purest 
repentance,  unless  they  be  sprinkled  with  this  blood,  are 
impure.  All  our  washings  without  this  are  but  washings  of 
the  blackamoor — labour  in  vain"  (Jer.  ii.  22  ;  Job  ix.  30,  31). 

How  necessary  that  the  prayer  of  the  contrite  Psalmist  should 
not  be  far  from  our  lips  on  our  holiest  days  and  after  our  best 
services  !  "  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean  ;  wash 
me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow"  (Psa.  li.). 

III.  The  Salutation,  "Grace  and  peace  be  multiplied." — 
The  Apostle  here  blends  the  Western  and  Eastern  modes  of  salu- 
tation. The  Greek  used ^rar^,  the  Yi^\ixt\\' peace  ;  and  whatever 
each  meant  was  intended  to  be  conveyed  in  this  salutation. 

Grace  is  the  unmerited  love  of  God,  stooping  to  save  and 
bless  ;  the  source  of  all  those  bright  and  holy  gifts  which  come 
from  his  infinite  heart.  As  one  beam  of  light  will  break  into 
many  colours,  so  does  the  grace  of  God  decompose  into  the 
several  priceless  gifts  of  his  grace ;  "  grace  upon  grace,"  like 
ripples  breaking  in  music  on  a  silver  strand. 

Peace  follows  upon  grace.  There  is  first  peace  with  God, 
and  then  the  peace  of  God.  We  lay  down  our  arms  of  rebellion, 
and  are  welcomed  into  the  family,  so  that  there  is  no  longer 
discord  or  dispute.  And  then  the  very  peace  which  dwelt  in 
the  heart  of  Jesus  begins  to  float  like  a  sweet  odour  through 
our  inmost  being  ;  and  it  garrisons  our  heart  and  mind. 

Such  is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord.  And  there 
is  no  higher  wish  to  be  entertained  for  them,  than  that  this 
grace  and  peace  should  be  in  them,  and  increase  in  geometrical 
progression,  and  so  be  multiplied. 


II. — W)jt  fnbmtana. 

"  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  accord- 
ing to  his  abundant  mercy  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible, 
and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  you." 

I  Peter  i.  3,  4. 

Y7<jyjK0W  little  does  the  wailing  infant,  over  whose  cradle 
'^  glistens  the  coronet  first  won  by  the  stout  arm  of  a 
soldier-ancestor,  understand  of  the  inheritance  to 
which  he  has  been  born  !  The  ancestral  home,  the 
far-spread  lands,  the  noble  rank,  the  prestige  of  an 
'  ^  ancient  and  lofty  lineage— all  these  things  are  his  ; 
but  years  must  pass  ere  they  can  be  truly  realized  or  appreciated. 
And  how  much  less  do  the  most  saintly  and  heaven-taught  spirits 
conceive  of  that  inheritance  which  is  ours  so  soon  as  we  become 
the  children  of  God  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  !*  See  how 
this  fervent  Apostle,  though  he  would  fain  find  words  to  tell  us 
in  what  its  bhss  consists,  is  obliged  to  content  himself  with 
negatives.  It  is  so  much  easier  to  say  what  the  inheritance 
is  not,  than  to  set  down  the  elements  of  its  exceeding  weight 
of  glory.  It  were  easier  far  to  enumerate  all  the  ills  of  this 
mortal  life,  and  to  say  of  each,  T/tz's  is  not  there,  than  to  give 
an  inventory  of  all  that  awaits  the  saints,  as  one  by  one  they 
pass  through  the  vail,  and  find  themselves  in  the  land  of  their 
choice. 

But  surely,  in  dealing  with  the  ungodly,  it  were  well  not 
only  to  dwell  on  the  woes  they  must  incur,  but  to  insist  on  the 
glories  they  must  miss  unless  they  bethink  themselves  and 
repent.  Ah  !  if  only  we  could  speak  in  terms  glowing  enough, 
tinged  with  the  certainty  and  rapture  of  our  own  glad  hopes 

*  These  opening  sentences  were  suggested  by  one  of  Dr.  Guthrie's 
sermons  on  Tlie  Inheritance  of  the  Saints. 


2fts  l^aturfi.  17 

concerning  the  fair  land  to  which  we  are  going,  we  should 
induce  many  a  dweller  in  the  City  of  Destruction  to  start 
with  us  on  pilgrimage.  But  how  can  we  talk  with  vivid  con- 
viction of  that  which  occupies  so  small  a  space  in  our  own 
inner  life  ? 

The  Nature  of  our  Inheritance.  — Many  and  varied 
descriptions  might  be  given  of  it  :  Salvation^  in  its  fulness  and 
perfectness,  which  is  ours  in  germ,  but  which  waits  for 
its  hidden  glories  of  colour  and  form  to  be  revealed  in  the 
summer  that  is  coming  (5,  9  ;  Mark  xiii.  28).  The  City  of  God^ 
the  vision  of  which,  as  its  walls  and  pinnacles  rose  above  the 
mists  of  time,  allured  the  patriarchs  forward,  and  made  them 
content  to  dwell  in  frail  and  shifting  tents.  Heaven,  with  its 
cloudless  light  and  sweet  societies.  Glory,  as  we  shall  see  it 
on  the  face  of  our  Emmanuel,  and  as  it  shall  flood  our  own 
happy  spirits. 

But  there  is  a  deeper  and  more  comprehensive  view  than  any 
of  these  :  one  which  includes  them  all ;  as  the  ocean  includes 
seas,  and  bays,  and  straits,  which,  though  known  by  separate 
names,  are  parts  of  its  majestic  and  all-embracing  fulness.  In 
the  law  of  the  Jewish  priesthood,  "  the  Lord  spake  unto  Aaron, 
Thou  shalt  have  no  inheritance  in  theii  land,  neither  shall  thou 
have  any  part  among  them.  I  am  thy  part,  and  thine  inheri- 
tance, among  the  children  of  Israel"  (Num.  xviii.  20).  It  was 
a  very  satisfactory  arrangement  for  the  pious  priest.  He  could 
well  dispense  with  the  oliveyards  and  vineyards,  the  cornfields 
and  homesteads  of  Palestine,  if  he  might  have  God  to  be  the 
strength  of  his  heart,  and  his  portion  for  ever.  And  the 
Psalmist  eagerly  caught  at  the  thought,  gladly  surrendering 
all  portion  in  this  life,  if  only  he  might  be  "satisfied"  with 
God  (Psa.  xvii.  15).  "The  Lord  is  the  portion  of  mine  inheri- 
tance and  of  my  cup  :  Thou  maintainest  my  lot.  The  lines 
are  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant  places  ;  yea,  I  have  a  goodly 
heritage"  (Psa.  xvi.  5,  6). 

Our  inheritance  is  God  Himself . — Not  the  golden  harps.  Not 
the  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire.  Not  rest  from  pain  and 
immunity  from  sorrow.     Not  the  blessed  society  of  heaven. 

B 


1 8  Slje  'Bnijmtanzt. 

From  all  these,  apart  from  God,  we  should  at  last  turn  away 
dissatisfied.  They  are  but  the  accessories  and  embodiments  of 
something  deeper,  more  inward  and  rapturous — the  possession 
of  God.  Heirs  of  God,  i.e.,  of  all  the  communicable  glories  of 
the  Divine  nature.  The  Psalmist  expressed  the  literal  truth 
when  he  said,  "Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee?"  (Ixxiii.) 
To  know  Him,  to  explore  his  being,  to  live  on  his  fulness,  to 
discover  new  tracts  and  continents  in  the  terra  incognita  of 
Godhead,  to  see  his  glory,  to  be  changed  into  his  image — this 
is  "  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord." 

Our  inheritance  begins  here. — As  a  matter  of  right  all  God's 
nature  is  ours  directly  we  are  born  into  his  family ;  as  a  vast 
tract  of  country,  filled  with  woods  and  rivers  and  ore,  belongs 
to  the  heir  at  the  moment  of  birth.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
we  shall  never  occupy  all,  even  when  eternity  is  passing  over 
us  ;  the  finite  can  never  fully  grasp  the  infinite.  Yet,  from  the 
first  moment  of  conversion,  we  may  begin  to  enter  on  our 
inheritance.  We  commence  by  studying  the  inspired  chart,  which 
maps  out  that  inheritance,  and  tells  us  what  God  is,  and  what 
He  is  prepared  to  be  to  us.  Next  we  proceed  to  appropriate 
and  make  use  of  his  attributes  and  properties  for  daily  need. 
Then  we  become  possessed  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God,  who 
brings  his  very  nature  into  ours.  And  so  we  come  to  possess 
God  just  in  proportion  as  He  possesses  us.  We  inherit  Him 
as  our  portion  up  to  the  measure  in  which  He  inherits  us. 
"  The  Lord  is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul."  "  The  Lord's  portion 
is  his  people." 

Up  !  friends  ;  you  are  living  on  a  vast  estate.  Around  you 
on  all  hands  are  God's  love,  and  grace,  and  power,  and  wisdom, 
awaiting  your  use.  Set  yourselves  to  know,  and  then  to  appro- 
priate and  enjoy.  "  There  is  much  land  yet  to  be  possessed." 
Do  not  be  content  to  be  circumscribed  and  limited,  as  were  the 
Danes  by  our  great  Alfred.  Be  rather  like  the  early  squatters 
in  the  Western  States,  who  roll  back  their  fences,  taking  in 
evermore  of  the  rich  virgin  soil,  so  adding  field  to  field. 

But  our  inheritance  can  only  be  perfected  hereafter. — It  is 
"reserved  in  heaven."  We  tire  and  faint  amid  our  most 
rapturous  experiences.     The  body  refuses  to  sustain  the  weight 


Its  djualittcs.  19 

of  glory.  The  machinery  of  mortality  breaks  down  beneath  the 
pressure  of  the  loftiest  spiritual  emotion.  "  I  fell  at  his  feet  as 
dead."  "  Thou  canst  not  see  my  face  ;  for  no  man  can  see  my 
face  and  live."  And  it  may  be  that  just  as  there  are  qualities 
in  the  universe  which  we  cannot  perceive  because  we  have  only 
five  senses,  so  there  are  properties  in  God  which  we  know  not 
of  because  our  powers  of  perception  are  limited.  It  is  therefore 
quite  conceivable  that  when  clothed  upon  with  our  house  which 
is  from  heaven,  which  will  have  a  great  many  more  windows  in 
it  than  the  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  which  is  built  for 
stormy  weather,  there  will  be  sides  and  aspects  of  the  Divine 
nature  that  we  know  nothing  about  to-day,  but  which  shall  be 
communicable  and  communicated  to  us.*  Ah,  fair  inheritance  ! 
If  earth  and  heaven,  which  are  but  as  his  vesture,  are  so  lovely, 
what  will  He  be  ! 

The  Qualities  of  this  Inheritance.— /«(r^rr//^/z(5i/^  i.e.^ 
as  to  its  substance.  It  is  not  liable  to  decay.  Nature  looks 
her  best  in  the  days  of  early  autumn.  The  golden  corn-sheaves  ; 
the  gorgeous  tints  of  the  fading  leaves  ;  the  berries  of  the  wild 
rose  and  the  rowan  ;  the  undiminished  foliage  of  the  forest 
trees  ;  the  ruddy  wealth  of  the  orchard  :  but,  amid  all,  our  enjoy- 
ment is  tinged  with  sadness,  for  we  knov/  that  decay  lies  beneath, 
eagerly  at  work  ;  and  that  ere  long  the  woodland  glade  will  be 
strewn  with  the  dying  leaves,  falling  in  myriads  before  the  gale, 
and  rotting  in  drenched  heaps.  So,  too,  amid  our  happiest  con- 
verse with  beloved  ones,  a  sad  foreboding  sometimes  invades 
our  hearts,  suggesting  that  it  will  not  last  :  the  artless  child 
must  leave  the  mother's  embrace  ;  the  brother  will  choose 
another  confidante  than  the  sister  whom  he  dearly  loved.  But 
the  knowledge  of  God,  like  our  treasure  in  heaven,  cannot 
corrupt,  nor  can  it  be  stolen  from  us  by  any  thieving  hand.  It 
cannot  pass  from  us  ;  nor  we  from  it.  It  cannot  share  the  fate 
of  any  earthly  possession.  Nay,  when  we  are  stripped  of  all 
things  else,  and  sit  like  another  Job  amid  the  wreck  of  former 
wealth,  then  we  begin  as  never  before  to  take  measure  of  our 
eternal  treasure  ;  and  there  arises  before  us  such  a  conception 

*  Suggested  by  Dr.  Maclaren. 


20  i^ljc  Kttljentattre. 

of  the  magnificence  of  our  inheritance  in  God  that  we  cry, 
"  Give  what  Thou  wilt !  without  Thee  I  am  poor ;  and  with 
Thee  rich  ;  take  what  Thou  wilt  away  !  " 

Undefiled,  i.e.,  as  to  its  purity. — "All  possessions  here  are 
defiled  and  stained  with  many  defects  and  failings."  No  marble 
without  its  flaw.  No  flower  without  its  freckle.  No  fruit  with- 
out its  blight.  No  face  without  its  blemish.  No  joy  without 
its  taint.  No  day  without  its  regret.  No  heart,  except  one, 
without  sin.  The  leprosy  of  human  sin  has  so  spread  itself 
throughout  the  whole  creation  that,  as  in  Israel  of  old,  garments 
and  houses  are  alike  infected  (Lev.  xiii.,  xiv.).  And  even  in  the 
purest  earthly  friendships,  a  love  which  in  its  inception  is  inno- 
cent and  natural  too  often  becomes  tainted  with  jealousy  and 
selfishness,  if  not  with  pollution. 

But  to  know  God  is  to  come  into  contact  with  the  source  of 
Purity  itself  "  He  that  is  near  Me  is  near  to  the  fire "  is  a 
saying  which  an  ancient  writer  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Christ. 
A  wisp  of  straw  might  sooner  survive  the  flame  than  defile- 
ment outlive  contact  with  God.  "  Neither  shall  evil  dwell 
with  thee."  So  far  from  our  heritage  becoming  defiled,  we 
cannot  enjoy  it  unless  we  love  Purity.  The  pure  in  heart 
alone  see  God  :  and  the  more  they  see  of  Him,  the  more 
pure  they  become. 

Unfading,  i.e.,  as  to  its  beauty. — Here  grows  the  amaranth, 
the  flower  that  fades  not.  One  never  tires  of  what  is  really 
beautiful.  There  is  always  some  fresh  expression  on  a  beautiful 
face,  some  new  witchery  of  colour  on  a  beautiful  landscape. 
We  can  easily  understand  how  a  great  preacher  of  this 
century,  after  some  masterly  effort,  would  quiet  his  mind  by 
taking  from  his  pocket  a  handful  of  precious  stones  which 
he  always  carried  there  ;  handling  them,  rolling  them  to  and 
fro,  holding  them  up  to  the  light,  and  never  tiring  of  their 
ever-changing  beauty. 

There  is  all  this  in  fellowship  with  God.  To  know  Him  is 
a  fountain  of  ever  fresh  delight.  He  never  palls  on  the  satiated 
appetite.  We  never  feel  that  there  is  monotony,  sameness, 
weariness,  in  his  love.  "All  the  happiness  of  this  life,"  said 
William  Law,  "  is  but  trying  to  quench  thirst  out  of  golden 


©ur  title  to  it.  21 

etnpfy  cups."  But  who  shall  speak  thus  of  the  river  of  God's 
pleasure,  which,  as  it  gratifies  the  thirst,  increases  it  ;  which  is 
ever  more  and  better  than  we  could  conceive  ;  and  which 
allures  us  on  to  deeper  and  yet  deeper  draughts,  to  desires 
which  grow  in  being  satisfied  ? 

Our  Title  to  this  Inheritance. — "  Begotten  again." 
It  is  not  ours  by  merit ;  or  by  conquest ;  or  by  natural  birth. 
We  may  be  the  children  of  parents  who  have  passed  into  the 
skies ;  and  yet  we  may  miss  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 
"  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of 
God";  so  said  One  who  could  not  err.  "  If  children,  then 
heirs,"  is  the  indispensable  order. 

Nor  is  it  difficult  to  see  why  it  must  be  so.  The  inheritance 
is  spiritual ;  and  it  requires  spiritual  faculties  to  apprehend  and 
enjoy  it.  But  in  such  as  have  not  been  born  again  those 
spiritual  faculties  are  wanting.  A  blind  man  may  stand  amid 
the  fairest  landscape  unconcerned,  because  the  one  organ  by 
which  he  could  enjoy  it  is  wanting.  A  lunatic  may  live  in  a 
house  stored  with  treasures  of  art  and  literature  unaffected, 
because  his  mind  is  blank  to  all  its  attractions.  And  the 
unregenerate  man  might  stand  in  heaven  itself,  and  miss  God, 
for  want  of  those  powers  of  spiritual  perception  of  which  he  is 
deficient.  Sin  blinds  the  eye,  stops  the  ear,  and  hardens  the 
heart.  The  prime  necessity  is  life  ;  and  life  can  only  begin  in 
the  new  birth. 

We  cannot  possess  God  unless  we  love  Him.  We  cannot  love 
Him,  unless  there  is  a  kinship  and  reciprocity  of  nature.  But 
this  nature  is  not  ours  by  the  first  birth  ;  and  if  it  is  to  be  ours 
at  all,  it  can  only  be  by  the  impartation  of  a  new  nature  and  life, 
which  are  the  gift  of  God,  through  his  Word  {ver.  23). 

Hast  thou  been  born  again  ?  The  certain  sign  is  the  faith 
which  receives  Christ.  "As  many  as  received  Him,  to  them 
gave  He  the  right  to  become  children  of  God,  even  to  them 
that  believe  on  his  name  ;  which  were  born  ...  of  God  " 
(John  i.  12,  13,  R.V.). 

The  Link  between  our  Present  and  Future. — "A 
living  hope."     We  already  have  something  of  our  inheritance, 


22  ^\jt  ^nhtvitanct. 

but  at  the  best  it  is  only  the  earnest — what  the  half  crown  of 
the  labourer  in  the  feeing  market  is  to  the  year's  wage,  or  the 
sod  of  tlie  estate  to  the  broad  acres.  "  Now  through  a  glass 
darkly  " — glimpses  soon  shadowed  ;  outlines  not  filled  up  ;  dark 
sayings  we  cannot  interpret. 

But  the  time  is  coming  when  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are 
known,  and  see  face  to  face  ;  when  our  communion  with  God 
shall  be  as  unfettered  as  our  service  ;  when  we  shall  love  Him 
better,  and  possess  Him  more  fully.  Towards  this  blessed 
consummation,  as  yet  reserved,  our  hope  stretches  out  both 
her  hands  ;  meanwhile,  it  is  an  inspiration  and  stimulus  for 
every  moment  of  our  life.     It  is,  indeed,  "a  living  hope." 

Hope  is  said  sometimes  to  die  :  this  never  can.  Sometimes, 
though  it  hngers  in  the  breast,  it  is  inoperative  :  this  is  always 
quick  and  powerful.  "  Worldly  hopes  often  mock  men  ;  they 
are  not  living,  but  lying  and  dying  ones.  We  live  to  bury 
them.  But  this  hope  answers  our  expectations  to  the  full,  and 
deceives  in  no  way,  but  far  exceeds  them." 

//s  basis  is  "  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead." — 
The  man  who  was  once  so  hard  to  convince  as  he  ran  to  the 
empty  tomb,  now  realizes  the  full  meaning  of  that  marvellous 
fact.  Our  Brother,  Representative,  and  Lord,  not  only  identi- 
fied Himself  with  us  in  life  and  death,  but  has  made  us  one 
with  Himself  in  the  Resurrection,  which  is  also  God's  seal  and 
Amen  to  all  He  said  and  did  ;  and  is,  therefore,  a  Divine  cor- 
roboration not  only  of  his  words,  but  of  all  the  structure  of 
hope  and  expectancy  which  we  have  built  on  them. 

The  Ascription  of  Praise,  with  which  this  paragraph 
begins  is  most  befitting  :  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ! " 

W^ho  shall  compute  the  full  measure  of  his  abundant  mercy  ? 
Mercy  that  He  gave  his  Son  to  die  and  to  rise  again  !  Mercy 
that  He  has  adopted  us  to  a  position  which  angels  might  envy  ; 
because  we  are  children,  and  therefore  heirs  !  Mercy  that  He 
is  willing  to  be  the  inheritance  of  such  as  we  are  !  Mercy  that 
He  has  given  us  such  strong  consolation,  and  an  anchor  so 
sure  and  steadfast !     Wliat  multitudinous,  infinite,  inexpressible 


praise  s^im!  23 

mercy  !     Let  us  bless  Him  for  it,  the  Father  of  Jesus,  and  our 
Father  in  Him  !     Praise  Him  !  praise  Him  ! 

"  It  is  a  cold,  lifeless  thing  to  speak  of  spiritual  things  on 
mere  report  ;  but  they  that  speak  of  them  as  their  own,  and  as 
having  some  experience  of  their  sweetness,  cannot  mention 
them,  but  their  hearts  are  straight  taken  with  such  gladness 
as  they  are  forced  to  vent  in  praises.  This  is  such  an  in- 
heritance that  the  very  hopes  and  thoughts  of  it  are  able  to 
sweeten  the  greatest  griefs.  What,  then,  shall  the  full  fruition 
of  it  be  !  " 


iiL-'m^iJt;' 


"Kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation." — i  Peter  i.  5. 

W^ip^l  O  have  been  told,  as  in  the  preceding  verse,  thai  our 
*y^  :;rv.l  inheritance  was  "reserved  in  heaven"  could  have 
yielded  us  little  comfort,  unless  that  assurance  had 
been  followed  and  capped  by  this,  that  the  heirs 
also  are  being  kept  for  its  full  enjoyment.  The 
sailor's  most  pressing  question  is  not  so  much  as 
to  the  welcome  which  awaits  him  in  his  home,  but  whether  he 
can  ride  out  the  storm,  and  safely  pass  the  jagged  edges  of  the 
rocks,  on  which  the  waves  are  dashing  angrily.  You  must 
assure  him  of  safety  for  himself,  as  well  as  of  welcome  to  his 
home,  if  you  would  put  him  perfectly  at  rest.  So  it  were  vain 
for  the  Apostle  to  talk  of  that  "  long  eternity  which  shall  greet 
our  bliss  with  an  individual  kiss,"  unless  he  could  also  assure 
us  that  we  shall  be  kept  from  making  shipwreck,  and  becoming 
castaways.     What  comfort  there  is  in  that  word  "kept"! 

The  Greek  word  translated  "kept"  is  borrowed  from  the 
camp.  It  is  used  in  2  Cor.  xi.  32  ;  Gal.  iii.  23  ;  Phil.  iv.  7  ; 
and,  in  each  case,  conveys  the  conception  of  an  armed  force, 
employed  in  sentry  or  escort  duty,  surrounding  their  ward,  and 
interposing  a  wall  of  enclosure  and  defence.  Thus  does  the 
Divine  power  surround  the  saints  as  a  body-guard  during 
their  sojourn  in  this  perilous  work!  God  is  not  only  our 
exceeding  great  reward,  but  our  shield.  The  purged  eye  sees 
the  mountains  round  about  us  filled  with  horses  and  chariots 
of  protection.  We  are  hidden  in  the  secret  of  his  presence 
from  the  pride  of  man,  kept  secretly  in  a  pavilion  from  the 
strife  of  tongues.  God  hath  sent  out  his  light  and  truth  to 
lead  us,  and  bring  us  to  his  holy  hill,  and  to  his  tabernacles. 
"  Ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste,  nor  go  by  flight :  for  the 


®Ije  Itceping  ^oiazv  of  (Bab.  25 

Lord  will  go  before  you  ;  and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your 
rearward." 

It  may  be  that  many  readers  of  these  lines  have  come  almost 
to  despair.  They  know  and  approve  the  better,  but  do  the 
worse.  Notwithstanding  bitter  tears,  and  cries,  and  soul- 
anguish,  they  are  constantly  being  brought  into  captivity  to 
some  besetting  sin.  How  often  have  their  tears  been  their 
meat  day  and  night,  as  they  have  poured  out  their  soul  in  the 
words  of  the  fifty-first  Psalm,  or  cried  with  the  Apostle,  "  Oh, 
wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  ? "  For  all 
such  there  is  infinite  comfort  in  the  announcement  that  those 
who  have  been  begotten  again,  and  are  therefore  sons,  may 
claim  to  be  "  kept "  by  their  Father's  power  unto  full  and  con- 
summated salvation.  Oh  that  from  this  moment  all  such  may 
realize  to  the  full  the  keeping  power  of  God  ! 

I.  What  this  keeping  involves.— It  does  not  mean  that 
we  shall  lose  our  sinful  nature ;  which  consists  in  a  perpetual 
tendency  and  liability  to  sin.  Nor  does  it  mean  that  we  shall 
become  sinless  beings,  who  need  not  the  daily  cry  for  forgive- 
ness ;  because  in  the  best  of  us  there  must  ever  be  much  which 
is  grievous  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God.  Nor  does  it  mean  that 
we  shall  cease  to  be  tempted  ;  that  alas  !  cannot  be  our  lot,  as 
long  as  we  are  passing  through  an  enemy's  land  to  our  in- 
heritance. But  it  does  mean  that — though  within  us  there  is 
a  strong  predisposition  toward  sin,  partly  inherited  and  partly 
built  up  by  long  indulgence  in  evil  habit,  and  though  without 
us  there  is  a  hell  full  of  wicked  spirits,  each  of  which  is  pledged 
to  do  his  worst  to  make  us  fall— yet  we  may  be  kept  from 
yielding  to  known  and  presumptuous  sins,  and  conducted  safely 
through  the  "proud  waters,"  so  as  to  stand  at  last  with  the 
OVERCOMERS  on  the  shore  of  the  sea  of  glass,  having  the 
harps  of  God.  Not  taken  out  of  the  world,  but  kept  from  the 
evil  (Rev.  xv.  2  ;  John  xvii.  15). 

Many  are  the  images  which  suggest  themselves  to  set  forth 
the  keepitig  power  of  God.  What  the  framework  of  bone  and 
the  eyelid  veil  are  to  the  delicate  organism  of  the  eye  ;  what  the 
shepherd's  watchful  care  is  to  the  flock,  which  dwells  safely  in 


26  "  fept." 

the  wilderness,  and  sleeps  in  the  woods,  though  young  Hons 
are  roaring  around  for  their  prey  ;  what  the  lofty  walls  are  to 
the  tender  grapes,  guarding  them  from  rifling  hands  and  little 
foxes ;  what  the  wing  of  the  mother-bird  is  to  the  brood 
menaced  by  the  hovering  kestrel  ;  what  the  valiant  of  Israel 
were  to  Solomon's  bed  ;  what  the  iron  safe  is  to  its  valuable 
contents,  defying  the  robber's  hand  and  the  forked  tongue  of 
flame — all  that  is  the  environing  presence  of  God  to  his  saints. 
Though  dogs  compass  us,  and  the  assembly  of  the  wicked 
inclose  us,  yet  there  is  an  inner  circle  of  defence  through 
which  they  dare  not  and  cannot  penetrate. 

That  there  will  be  strife  and  war  and  temptation  without, 
and  cowering  weakness  within,  seems  implied  in  every  one 
of  these  images,  and  specially  in  the  metaphor  we  are  con- 
sidering. Of  what  need  were  keeping,  unless  there  were 
danger  without  and  frailty  within  ?  But  amid  all,  it  is 
evidently  possible  that  we  should  be  kept  from  stumbling  ; 
and  spirit,  soul,  and  body  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  Faithful  is  He  that  calleth 
you,  who  also  will  do  it."  This  KEEPING  extends  to  the  issues 
of  life,  and  to  the  steps  or  goings  of  the  saints  ;  but  it  touches 
these,  because  it  deals  so  completely  with  the  inner  man. 
There  the  power  of  God  is  exerted  on  the  soul,  on  the  heart, 
and  on  the  mind  :  unseen,  but  all-pervasive  ;  and  strong 
enough  to  quell  the  uprising  of  the  wildest  passion  that  ever 
swept  down  on  the  inner  nature  (Prov.  iv.  23  ;  i  Sam.  ii.  9 ; 
Phil.  iv.  7  ;  I  Pet.  iv.  19). 

II.  Why  this  keeping  may  be  confidently  expected. — 
//  is  demanded  by  the  purpose  of  God. — We  are  "  elect  unto 
obedience,"  as  the  first  verses  of  this  chapter  tell  us  ;  but 
surely  He  who  has  called  us  with  so  high  a  calling  will  not 
fail  to  deal  effectually  with  all  that  would  prevent  it  from 
being  realized. 

It  is  demanded  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. — The  expenditure 
of  Calvary  was  gladly  borne  by  our  Saviour — not  to  deliver  us 
from  hell  so  much  as  "  to  purify  unto  Himself  a  people  for 
his  own  possession,  zealous  of  good  works."    But  is  it  possible 


C1t£  3fntitocUin0  spirit.  27 

to  suppose  that  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption  is  to  be 
rendered  abortive  because,  though  He  was  able  to  purchase, 
He  is  not  able  to  keep  that  which  He  has  acquired  ?  During 
his  earthly  Ufe  He  kept  those  whom  the  Father  had  given  Him, 
and  none  of  them  was  lost,  save  the  son  of  perdition,  that  the 
Scripture  might  be  fulfilled  ;  surely,  then,  since  all  power  is 
now  his.  He  is  equally  able  to  keep  those  who  bear  his 
name  ! 

//  IS  dema7ided  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit. — He  is  most 
certainly  in  the  heart  of  each  believer ;  curtained,  as  of  old 
was  the  Shekinah  by  the  heavy  veil,  but  still  burning  as  a 
spark  of  fire  in  the  most  holy  place.  Above  all  things,  He 
desires  that  the  entire  being,  which  is  his  temple,  should  be 
kept  clean  and  holy.  And  if  He  only  is  permitted  to  have  his 
way.  He  will  most  certainly  reduce  the  inward  chaos  to  order, 
and  keep  the  inner  empire  undisturbed.  Would  it  not  be  in 
the  highest  degree  at  variance  with  his  loving  holy  nature  to 
excite  desires  after  holiness  in  the  breast  which  He  would  not, 
or  could  not,  meet  ?  The  ver>'  intensity  of  the  passion  for 
holiness  which  He  instils  is  a  pledge  and  harbinger  of  perfect 
satisfaction. 

TJte  credit  of  God  demands  it. — If  sin  must  always  master 
us,  so  long  as  we  remain  in  this  world,  it  would  seem  as  if  the 
remedy  were  not  equal  to  the  emergency.  Here  were  indeed  a 
subject  for  hellish  merriment,  if  God  were  not  able  to  counter- 
work the  baleful  influences  which  devils  exert  over  human 
spirits.  "  Aha,"  methinks  they  would  cry  :  "  Thou  canst  make 
thy  saints  obedient  only  by  taking  them  beyond  the  range  of 
our  power ;  but  leave  them  here  within  our  reach,  and  Thou 
canst  not  keep  them  from  yielding  to  the  temptations  which  we 
present." 

Take  heart,  O  tempted  child  of  God  ;  thou  hast  abundant 
reason  to  reckon  confidently  on  being  "  kept "  from  known 
transgression. 

HI.  How  THIS  KEEPING  IS  EFFECTED. — "By  the  power  of 
God." 

Consider  that  power  in  creation. — Stand  with  the  exiles  in 


28  "Ifipt." 

Babylon,  and  lift  up  your  eyes  on  high  to  the  starry  hosts, 
spread  out  like  a  flock  resting  in  the  midnight  sky  :  "  He  calleth 
them  all  by  names,  by  the  greatness  of  his  might ;  for  that  He 
is  strong  in  power  :  not  one  faileth."  And  if  He  can  keep  the 
heavenly  bodies,  revolving  through  orbits  of  measureless  im- 
mensity, so  exact  to  their  hours  that  astronomers  can  calculate 
their  return  with  unerring  precision,  surely  He  can  keep  one 
poor  soul  in  its  appointed  orbit,  especially  when  it  is  so  eager 
to  be  kept  (Isa.  xl.  26). 

Consider  that  power  i?i  history. — Notwithstanding  the  free 
action  of  human  wills,  warped  and  rebellious,  He  has  been  able 
to  carry  out  his  plans,  and  secure  results  on  which  He  had 
set  his  mind  from  all  eternity.  And  as  a  standing  marvel  the 
Israelite  race  remains  to-day  scattered  among  all  peoples,  but 
absorbed  by  none  ;  isolated  and  alone,  almost  in  spite  of  itself. 
But  surely  it  must  be  as  easy  to  preserve  his  Church,  consisting 
as  it  does  of  those  who  are  exceedingly  desirous  of  knowing  and 
doing  his  will  (Jer.  xxxiii.  25,  26). 

Consider  that  power  in  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord. — It  raised 
Him  from  the  dead,  past  all  created  excellence,  above  princi- 
palities and  powers,  until  the  glorified  but  human  body  of  Christ 
passed  to  the  very  throne  of  the  Eternal,  where  no  created  thing 
had  ever  come  before.  Nay,  but  more— in  raising  Him,  the 
Father  also  raised  us  in  Him.  And  the  Apostle  tells  us  that 
the  very  same  power  which  bore  Christ  from  the  grave  to  the 
throne  is  extended  towards  the  weakest  believer,  to  lift  him  also 
to  a  similar  level  of  resurrection-being.  Surely  such  a  power 
as  this  is  adequate  to  our  direst  necessity  (Eph.  i.  19,  20). 

Consider  this  power  in  the  human  life  of  Jesus. — He  met  the 
devil  in  the  wilderness  and  in  Gethsemane.  The  prince  of  this 
world  measured  himself  in  mortal  conflict  with  the  Son  of  God, 
not  once  only,  but  many  times.  But  he  was  always  defeated. 
His  legions  were  driven  forth  from  haunted  lives.  He  himself 
fell  as  lightning  from  heaven.  His  head  was  bruised.  His 
chief  allurement  and  bait,  the  world,  was  overcome.  His 
attempt  to  hold  the  Saviour  in  the  tomb  was  defeated,  as  when 
a  man  brushes  through  the  cobweb  that  stretches  across  his 
path.     And  what  Jesus  did  for  Himself,  He  waits  to  do  on  the 


"^ctorbmg  to  gour  Jaitfj."  29 

behalf  of  each  of  his  own,  and  to  repeat  in  each  of  us  the  con- 
quests and  triumphs  of  his  own  Hfe  on  earth. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the  power  of  God  is  put  forth 
by  the  Holy  Spirit. — He  Hves  in  our  inner  man,  and  exerts  there 
his  marvellous  energy.  He  keeps  Himself  unseen,  and  focusses 
all  our  thought  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  light  is  sometimes  made 
to  fall  on  some  beautiful  face  whicli  attracts  the  observer's  entire 
attention.  Thus  it  happens  that  though  the  brunt  of  the  inner 
war  is  borne  by  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  17),  yet  the  believer  is  occu- 
pied with  Jesus,  appealing  to  Him  in  the  conflict,  and  softly 
breathing  his  name  as  a  talisman  of  victory.  Yet  why  do  we 
need  to  distinguish  thus,  when  They  are  One  ? 

The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  works  through  our  faith. — God 
will  do  all  that  we  can  trust  Him  to  do  ;  but  He  does  not  pledge 
Himself  to  work  independently  of  our  faith.  When  faith  is  in 
strong  and  blessed  exercise,  there  is  no  limit  to  its  possibilities, 
because  it  taps  the  reservoirs  of  Omnipotence,  and  opens  the 
sluice-gates,  so  that  all  God's  power  begins  to  flow  into  the 
soul.  Our  faith  is  the  means  of  our  receptivity  ;  the  straits 
through  which  the  ocean  of  Divine  fulness  pours  its  tides. 

But  if  our  faith  be  meagre  and  struggling,  we  cannot  expect 
mighty  deliverances.  Smite  but  thrice  upon  the  ground,  and 
Syria  will  still  defy  you  (2  Kings  xiii.  19).  If  you  do  not  expect 
that  God  is  able  to  keep  you,  do  not  be  surprised  if  you  are  not 
kept.  According  to  your  faith,  or  unbelief,  so  will  it  be  done 
to  you. 

Would  you  realize  God's  keeping  grace?  Give  yourself 
entirely  up  to  Him,  renouncing  all  trust  in  yourself,  and  all 
connection  with  evil.  Choose  definitely  and  for  ever  the  lot  of 
the  cross  of  Jesus.  And  then  trust  Jesus  to  keep  you.  When- 
ever temptation  approaches,  look  up,  and  say,  "  Jesus,  I  trust 
thy  keeping  power."  Ask  the  Holy  Spirit  to  keep  you  so  con- 
stantly in  this  attitude  that  it  may  become  the  habit  of  your  soul 
to  look  to  Jesus  when  temptation  assails.  Trust  Him  to  keep 
you  trusting.  Nourish  your  faith  by  devout  meditation  on  the 
promises  of  God.  Do  not  look  at  your  weakness  or  your  foes, 
but  at  the  mighty  bulwarks  of  God's  salvation,  which  He  has 
appointed.     "The   Lord   is  thy   Keeper."     Hear  his  gracious 


3°  "Icpt." 

words,  and  hide  them  in  your  heart :  "  I  the  Lord  do  keep  it  ; 
I  will  water  it  every  moment :  lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it 
night  and  day."  Surely  it  were  the  height  of  blasphemy  to 
affirm  that  the  Almighty  is  not  able,  or  willing,  to  keep  the  soul 
that  trusts  Him.  Only  man  would  shake  the  fugitive  dove  out 
of  his  bosom  to  the  hawk  ! 

Thus  will  you  await  the  consummation  of  your  salvation, 
which  shall  be  yours  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Already  it  is 
finished  and  prepared  ;  but  it  waits  to  be  revealed.  And  when, 
amid  the  breaking  light  and  exuberant  gladness  of  perfect 
deliverance,  you  review  the  pathway  by  which  you  have  come, 
you  will  better  realize  your  indebtedness  to  his  wondrous  grace, 
in  keeping  that  which  you  committed  to  Him  against  that 
dsiy. 


IV.— 3F0r  Wha^t  in  l^airtmss, 

"  In  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations  :  that  the  trial  of  your  faith, 
being  much  more  precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried 
with  fire,  might  be  found  unto  praise  and  honour  and  glory  at  the  appearing 
of  Jesus  Christ." — i  Peter  i.  6,  7. 

*r|Jr^EAVINESS  !  "He  began  to  be  sorrowful,  and 
i  r=  ■  A  very  heavy."  It  was  only  through  the  darkness  of 
^rlfJAl  that  garden  that  He  could  pass  upward  to  the 
glory  of  the  Resurrection  morn.  And  it  is  im- 
possible to  depict  the  condition  of  deep  human 
suffering  more  accurately  than  by  the  words,  "in 
heaviness."  As  the  leaves  of  the  laurel  are  pressed  to  the 
earth  by  the  weight  of  a  thunder  shower,  so  are  souls  made 
heavy  "  by  manifold  temptations." 

Temptation  here  is  equivalent  to  trial.  In  other  days  the 
same  word  was  used  indiscriminately  of  the  testittgs,  which 
befal  the  saints,  on  the  part  of  God  and  of  the  devil.  The 
one,  that  we  may  know  ourselves  as  He  knows  us,  and  that 
the  first  small  germs  of  good  which  He  has  implanted  may 
develop  by  use  into  strong  and  beautiful  maturity.  The  other, 
that  the  evil  within  us  may  be  made  manifest,  and  hurried  into 
such  action  as  will  cast  down  our  hopes,  and  sow  the  seeds  of 
future  indulgence.  The  motive  of  God's  testings  is  benevo- 
lence, that  we  may  be  nobler,  sweeter,  riper.  The  motive  of 
Satan's  is  malignity,  that  we  may  be  hastened  down  the 
sliding-scale  of  sin.  Thus  God  is  said  in  the  Scriptures  to 
tempt  men,  and  yet  not  to  tempt  them  (Gen.  xxii.  i  ;  James 
i.  13).  He  tests  and  tries  them,  but  never  allures  them  into 
evil. 

In  our  desire  to  distinguish  between  these  two  methods  of 
testing,  we  for  the  most  part  employ  different  words,  using 
trial  of  the  divinely-ordered  discipline  of  life,  and  temptation 


32  JFor  %)jazt  in  '^eahittesa. 

of  the  attacks  of  the  great  enemy  of  our  souls.  And,  therefore, 
it  is  more  appropriate  to  modern  usage  to  speak  of  being  in 
heaviness  "  through  manifold  trials."  This  is  also  suggested 
by  the  Revised  Version.     {See  also  James  i.  2.) 

"  Manifold  trials." — In  this  Epistle,  as  in  a  mirror,  we  can 
see  reflected  the  dark  shadows  which  were  gathering  over 
these  scattered  saints.  Buffeted  for  doing  well  ;  reviled  and 
suffering  ;  exposed  to  railing  and  terror  ;  evil  spoken  of;  tried 
in  a  fiery  trial  ;  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings  ;  reproached 
for  the  name  of  Christ ;  judgment  beginning  at  the  house  of 
God ;  experiencing  the  same  afflictions  as  fell  to  the  lot 
of  brethren  throughout  the  world  :  such  are  some  of  the  hints 
given  throughout  this  Epistle  of  the  sources  of  their  manifold 
trials.  To  "suffer  as  a  Christian"  (iv.  16),  meant  the  loss  of 
business,  repute,  and  home  ;  desertion  by  parents,  children, 
and  friends  ;  misrepresentation,  hatred,  and  even  death.  The 
new  convert  became  the  target  for  every  weapon,  hurled  from 
any  quarter. 

For  ourselves,  trials  come  generally  from  three  sources  : 
those  brought  on  us  by  others  ;  those  caused  by  our  own  sins, 
mistakes,  and  indiscretions  ;  and  those  sent  to  us  directly  from 
God,  our  Father.  And  beneath  this  various  pressure,  what 
wonder  that  the  heart  is  bowed  down  !  How  apt  was  the 
summons  of  Jesus  to  the  heavy-laden  ;  and  how  incessant  the 
great  procession  of  such  passing  down  into  the  Vale  of  Tears, 
at  the  end  of  which  stands  his  cross,  behind  which  the  light  of 
morning  is  breaking  I 

The  Apostle  does  not  blame  this  heaviness. — The  Stoic  scorns 
to  shed  a  tear :  the  Christian  is  not  forbidden  to  weep  ;  yea, 
he  follows  the  best  example  in  letting  his  tears  have  free 
course.  We  must  not  despise  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,  any 
more  than  we  should  faint  under  it.  Strong  crying  and  tears  befit 
sons  who  are  learning  obedience  by  suffering.  The  soul  may 
be  dumb  with  excessive  grief,  as  the  shearer's  scissors  pass 
over  the  quivering  flesh  ;  or,  when  the  heart  is  on  the  point  of 
breaking  beneath  the  meeting  surges  of  trial,  the  sufferer  may 
seek  relief  by  crying  out  with  a  loud  voice. 

But  there  is  something  even  better.     They  say  that  springs 


••^anifoltt  ©rials."  33 

of  sweet  fresh  water  well  up  amid  the  brine  of  salt  seas  ;  that 
the  fairest  Alpine  flowers  bloom  in  the  wildest  and  most 
rugged  mountain  passes  ;  that  the  noblest  psalms  were  the 
outcome  of  the  profoundest  agony  of  soul.  Be  it  so.  And 
thus  amid  manifold  trials  souls  which  love  God  will  find 
reasons  for  bounding,  leaping  joy.  Though  deep  call  to  deep, 
yet  the  Lord's  song  will  be  heard  in  silver  cadence  through  the 
night.  And  it  is  possible  in  the  darkest  hour  that  ever  swept 
a  human  life  to  bless  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Have  you  learnt  this  lesson  yet  ?  Not  simply  to  endure 
God's  will ;  nor  only  to  choose  it  ;  nor  only  to  trust  it — but  to 
rejoice  in  it  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

Of  such  joy  there  are  two  sources  :  first,  the  understanding 
of  the  nature  and  meaning  of  trial  ;  second,  the  soul's  love 
and  faith  in  its  unseen  Lord.  There  is  enough  in  these  two 
for  unsullied  and  transcendent  joy  ;  in  fact,  we  may  question 
whether  we  ever  truly  drink  of  Christ's  joy,  till  all  other  sources 
of  joy  are  eliminated  by  earthly  sorrow,  and  we  are  driven  to 
seek  that  joyous  blessedness  which  no  earthly  sun  can  wither 
and  no  winter  freeze  (Hab.  iii.  17-19). 

L  The  Nature  and  Meaning  of  Trial. —  Trial  is  here 
compared  to  fire  ;  that  subtle  element,  which  is  capable  of  in- 
flicting such  exquisite  torture  on  our  seared  and  agonized 
flesh  ;  which  cannot  endure  the  least  taint  or  remnant  of  im- 
purity, but  wraps  its  arms  around  objects  committed  to  it  with 
eager  intensity  to  set  them  free  and  make  them  pure  ;  which  is 
careless  of  agony,  if  only  its  passionate  yearning  may  be  satis- 
fied ;  which  lays  hold  of  things  more  material  than  itself, 
loosening  their  texture,  snapping  their  fetters,  and  bearing 
them  upwards  in  its  heaven-aspiring  energy.  What  better 
emblem  could  there  be  for  God,  and  for  those  trials  which  He 
permits  or  sends,  and  in  the  heart  of  which  He  is  to  be  found? 
Ah,  the  agony  of  suff'ering  is  keen  to  bear — when  friends  for- 
sake, and  enemies  reproach,  and  the  work  of  years  is  suddenly 
shattered,  and  the  soul  is  stung  with  pain  and  shame  and 
ingratitude,  with  disappointment  and  bereavement  :  such  suf- 
fering is  to  the  soul  what  fire  is  to  the  flesh. 

C 


34  Wot  %ha5t  in  Heabtttcais. 

(i)  But  this  fire  is  a  refiner's  fire. — The  reference  is  evident. 
And  we  are  taken  back  to  an  olden  prophecy,  from  which  we 
learn  that  when  the  Lord  comes  to  his  temple,  He  sits  as  a 
refiner  beside  the  crucible  (Mai.  iii.  3).  We  may  well  take  the 
shoes  from  off  our  feet,  when  we  enter  the  chamber  of  some 
tried  Christian,  for  certainly  the  Lord  is  there. 

//  is  He  who  pci'mits  the  trial. — The  evil  thing  may  originate 
in  the  malignity  of  a  Judas  ;  but  by  the  time  it  reaches  us  it 
has  become  the  cup  which  our  Father  has  given  us  to  drink. 
The  waster  may  purpose  his  own  lawless  and  destructive 
work ;  but  he  cannot  go  an  inch  beyond  the  determinate 
counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God.  Satan  himself  must  ask 
permission  ere  he  touches  a  hair  of  the  patriarch's  head 
(Job  i.  8-12).  The  point  up  to  which  we  may  be  tested  is 
fixed  by  consummate  wisdom.  The  weapon  may  hurt  and  the 
fire  sting ;  but  they  are  in  the  hands  which  redeemed  us. 
Nothing  can  befal  us  without  God's  permission,  and  his  per- 
missions are  his  appointments.  We  cannot  be  the  sport  of 
blind  fate  or  chance  ;  for  in  trial  we  are  still  in  the  hands  of 
the  living  Saviour. 

//  is  He  who  superintends  the  trial. — No  earthly  friend  may 
be  near  ;  but  in  every  furnace  there  is  One  like  the  Son  of 
Man.  In  every  flood  of  high  waters  He  stands  beside  us — 
staying  the  heart  with  promises,  instilling  words  of  fa-ith  and 
hope,  recalling  the  blessed  past,  pointing  to  the  radiant  future, 
hushing  fear,  as  once  He  stilled  the  dismay  of  his  disciples  on 
the  lake  :  such  is  the  ministry  of  Jesus.  And  as  the  sufiferer 
looks  back  on  the  trial,  he  says,  "  I  never  felt  Him  so  near 
before  ;  and  if  it  had. not  been  for  what  He  was  to  me,  I  could 
never  have  lived  through  it." 

//  is  He  who  watches  the  progress  of  the  trial— ^0  mother 
bending  over  her  suffering  child  is  more  solicitous  than  is  He- 
suiting  the  trial  to  your  strength— keeping  his  finger  on  your 
pulse  so  as  to  stay  the  flame  when  the  heart  begins  to  flutter- 
only  too  eager  to  see  the  scum  pass  off,  and  his  own  face 
reflected  from  the  face  of  the  molten  metal. 

Happy  would  it  be  for  us  if,  instead  of  looking  at  our  trials, 
we  would  look  away  to  his  face,  only  eager  to  understand  his 


^  purpose  in  (Ebcrj  t^rial.  35 

meaning,  and  to  learn  his  intended  lesson,  so  that  as  the 
outward  man  perishes,  the  inward  man  may  be  renewed  day 
after  day.  Whilst  the  marble  wastes  beneath  the  sculptor's 
hand,  the  image  grows  ;  so  should  each  loss  in  our  estate  or 
circumstance  have  a  corresponding  gain  in  spiritual  conformity 
to  Christ. 

(2)  Trial  is  only  for  a  season. — "  Now  for  a  season,  ye  are 
in  heaviness  "  {ver.  6).  The  great  Husbandman  is  not  always 
threshing.  The  showers  soon  pass.  Weeping  may  only  tarry 
for  the  few  hours  of  the  short  summer  night  :  it  must  be  gone 
at  daybreak.     Our  light  affliction  is  but  for  a  moment. 

There  is  a  subtle  distinction  here  between  the  most  precious 
and  endurmg  of  material  substances  and  the  faith  of  the 
Christian  soul.  "  Gold  that  perisheth  "  {ver.  7).  Gold  outlasts 
carved  wood,  and  the  potter's  art,  and  most  things  else.  It 
may  be  attenuated  and  worn  by  long  use,  yet  will  it  survive  the 
gentle  hand  on  which  it  has  spoken  of  unending  love  for  half  a 
century.  Yet  gold  will  eventually  wear  out.  But  there  is  that 
in  each  of  us  which  cannot  perish.  The  mere  accident  of 
death  cannot  affect  it,  nor  the  flight  of  time,  nor  the  descent 
of  all  created  things  into  the  gulf  of  oblivion.  It  is  eternal 
as  the  God  who  inspired  it.  And  compared  to  that  boundless 
existence  which  is  its  birthright,  how  paltry  and  insignificant 
do  the  longest  trials  appear,  though  they  have  lain  for  many 
years  on  the  soul  and  life  !  Judged  by  the  measureless  span 
of  eternity,  they  are  but  for  a  season,  and  will  pass  as  com- 
pletely from  memory  as  the  clouds  of  early  morning  before 
the  meridian  glory  of  a  long  summer  day. 

(3)  Trial  is  for  a  purpose. — "  It  needs  be."  There  is  nothing 
harder  to  bear  than  the  apparent  aimlessness  of  sorrow.  A 
new  mterest  comes  into  the  monotony  of  prison-discipline  as 
soon  as  the  convicts  feel  that  their  toils  are  achieving  some 
positive  result.  And  when  no  purpose  seems  secured  by  our 
sufferings  or  toils,  hope  dies. 

With  the  Christian  there  is  no  fear  of  this.  There  is  a 
utility  in  every  trial.  It  is  intended  to  reveal  the  secrets  of 
our  hearts  ;  to  humble  us  and  prove  us  ;  to  winnow  us  as  corn 
is  shaken  in  a  sieve  ;  to  detach  us  from  the  earthly  and  visible  ; 


36  For  ©Ijose  in  HcabxttEss. 

to  create  in  us  an  eager  desire  for  the  realities  which  can  alone 
quench  our  cravings  and  endure  for  ever.  We  must  nOt  look 
on  trial  as  punishment  for  the  past  ;  because  all  penalty  has 
been  borne  for  us  by  our  Redeemer.  But  each  trial  points  to 
the  future,  and  is  intended  to  make  us  partakers  of  his  holiness, 
and  to  work  in  us  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness.  The 
very  fact  of  trial  proves  that  there  is  something  in  us  very 
precious  to  our  Lord  :  else  He  would  not  spend  so  much  pains 
and  time  on  us.  "  We  do  not  prune  brambles,  or  cast  stones 
into  the  crucible,  or  plough  the  sea-sands."  *  And  Christ  would 
not  test  us  if  He  did  not  see  the  precious  ore  of  faith  mingled 
in  the  rocky  matrix  of  our  nature  ;  and  it  is  to  bring  this  out 
into  purity  and  beauty  that  He  forces  us  through  the  fiery 
ordeal.  Be  patient,  O  sufferer  :  He  must  love  you,  or  He 
would  not  chasten  you  ;  you  must  be  his,  or  He  would  not 
take  such  pains  with  you  ;  you  must  be  capable  of  some  high 
service  which  can  only  be  secured  through  pain,  or  He  would 
not  plunge  you  into  the  refining  fires.  You  must  be  able  to 
bear  the  fire,  or  He  would  not  pass  you  through  it  (Num. 
xxxi.  23). 

The  result  will  more  than  co7npensate  us. — "  Found  unto 
praise,  and  honour,  and  glory,  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus 
Christ."  The  gold  is  well  repaid  for  the  fires  when  it  encircles 
the  monarch's  brow  ;  the  diamond  for  the  lapidary's  wheel 
when  it  glistens  on  the  neck  of  beauty.  And  we  shall  be  more 
than  recompensed  for  all  our  trials,  when  we  see  how  they 
wrought  out  the  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory.  To  have  one  word  of  God's  commendation  ;  to  be 
honoured  before  the  holy  angels  ;  to  be  glorified  in  Christ,  so 
as  to  be  better  able  to  flash  back  his  glory  on  Himself — ah  ! 
this  will  more  than  repay  for  all.  Let  us  live  more  constantly 
in  that  future,  under  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  ! — as 
soldiers  solace  themselves  in  the  arduous  campaign  by  talking 
over  their  watch-fires  of  the  welcome  and  rewards  which  will 
greet  them  on  their  return.  "  Now  they  do  it  to  receive  a  cor- 
ruptible crown,  but  we  an  incorruptible"  (i  Cor.  ix.  25).     All 

*  Charles  Stanford. 


IFattlj  is  l^rccious.  37 

the  blessings  which  accrue  throuj^h  trial  are  only  possible  to 
us,  however,  when  the  heart  meekly  accepts  it  from  the  hand 
of  God,  and  opens  to  the  operaiioti  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Trial 
alone  may  harden,  as  the  fire  which  softens  wax  hardens  clay 
to  bricks.  But  when  trial  is  accompanied  with  the  gracious 
influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  as  a  precious  oil  that  does 
not  break  the  head  (Psa.  cxli.  5). 

See  how  7mich  God  thinks  of  faith. — It  is  priceless  in  his 
esteem.  What  gold  is  to  the  miser,  faith  is  to  God.  It  is  the 
root  of  all  other  grace,  the  germ  of  the  saintly  life,  the  key  to 
the  Divine  storehouse,  the  foot  of  the  heavenly  ladder,  the 
earthward  pier  of  the  arch  that  bridges  the  abyss  between 
the  unseen  and  the  seen.  To  make  it  strong  in  one  poor  heart 
is  a  matter  of  extreme  value  in  his  sight.  And  since  it  can  only 
grow  strong  by  use,  and  exercise,  and  strain,  be  not  surprised 
if  He  expose  you  to  discipline,  graduated  according  to  your 
power,  but  becoming  ever  severer,  until  beneath  his  gracious 
tuition  the  faith,  which  once  shivered  at  sight  of  the  shallows, 
will  plunge  fearlessly  into  the  deep,  and  do  business  in  mighty 
waters. 


V.-Crirrist  mnsiiit,  but  tabth. 

••Whom,  having  not  seen,  ye  love ;  in  whom,  though  now  ye  see  Him  not, 
yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  :  receiving  the 
end  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls." — i  Peter  i.  8,  9. 

^V^'^rvy/HE  sixth  verse  begins,  and  the  eighth  ends,  with  a 
Greek  word  expressive  of  leaping,  bounding  joy.* 
It  is  strange  that  such  a  word  should  be  used  of 
the  feelings  experienced  by  handfuls  of  scattered 
saints  over  whom  the  dark  thunder-clouds  of  per- 
secution were  beginning  to  gather  heavily.  And 
yet  it  is  not  strange  when  we  study  the  sources  of  that  joy, 
which  are  included  within  these  golden  brackets,  the  first  of 
which  we  considered  in  our  previous  chapter.  Is  there  not 
joy  in  the  thought  that  trial  is  the  refiner's  fire,  sharp  but 
salutary — the  necessary  preparation  for  results  of  immeasurable 
blessedness .''  And  is  ihere  not  yet  deeper  cause  for  joy, 
triumphant  and  exulting,  in  the  relation  into  which  we  have 
been  brought  with  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ? 

Yes,  the  iron  may  hiss,  and  the  fire  sting  ;  friends  may 
desert,  and  foes  may  threaten ;  the  cold  waters  may  creep  up 
around  our  person,  and  the  shadows  of  the  dark  valley  fling 
themselves  between  us  and  the  sunshine ;  nevertheless,  what- 
ever be  the  nature  or  severity  of  our  manifold  trials,  it  shall  be 
enough  for  us  to  know  that  they  are  working  out  the  results  of 
untold  glory,  and  that  nothing  can  break  that  holy  and  blessed 
personal  relationship  into  which  we  have  entered  with  Him 
whom  Bernard  never  tired  of  addressing  as  Jesus  Master. 

Jesus,  then,  is  the  Heart  and  Centre  of  these  burning 
words ;  words  which  recal  the  thrice-repeated  question  of  the 

*  dyoXXtao) — to  rejoice  exceedingly. 


*'  ®Ije  fact  oi  Iffiaua  (Klrdsf."  39 

Lake  of  Galilee,  Lovest  thou  Me?  and  the  never-to-be-for- 
gotten beatitude  of  the  upper  chamber,  Blessed  are  they  that 
have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed!  (John  xx.  29).  And  is 
not  this  text  an  epitome  of  Christianity  ?  What  makes  us 
Christians  except  that  we  believe  in  and  love  Him  whose 
receding  form  was  veiled  by  the  chariot-cloud  that  swept  be- 
neath Him  as  He  passed  home  to  heaven?  We  may  accept 
and  appreciate  the  words  of  many  of  the  world's  great  thinkers, 
whilst  we  concern  ourselves  but  little  with  the  men  themselves  ; 
but  we  may  not  do  this  with  the  words  of  Christ,  and  still 
be  Christians.  We  cannot  take  his  words,  and  ignore  Him. 
Christianity  is  the  personal  relationship  of  the  soul  to  Christ. 
Begin,  not  with  his  words,  but  with  Himself;  and  when  you 
possess  Him,  you  cannot  fail  of  having  all  He  said,  and  did, 
a\id  is,  and  will  be,  world  without  end. 

I.  An  Unseen  Christ— a  Possible  Hindrance  to  Exult- 
ing Joy. — "  Not  having  seen";  "  Now  ye  see  Him  not."  To  a 
superficial  thinker  this  privation  of  a  personal  vision  of  Jesus 
might  be  deemed  sufficient  to  put  all  after-ages  on  a  lower 
platform  than  that  glad  first  one  which  looked  upon  his  face — 
the  face  which  reflected  the  moods  of  his  tranquil  and  h©ly 
nature  ;  which  lit  up  homes  of  sorrow  and  lives  of  despair 
with  the  radiance  of  hope  ;  which  attracted  little  children  to 
his  embrace  ;  and  which  often  shone  with  the  gleam  of  celestial 
communications,  glancing  between  Him  and  God.  Surely  not 
to  have  seen  it  might  count  as  an  irreparable  los6  ! 

An  old  divine  said  that  he  wished  he  could  have  seen  three 
things — Rome  in  her  glory ;  Paul  preaching  at  Athens  ;  and 
Christ  in  the  body.  And  it  was  because  of  their  desire  to 
satisfy  themselves,  and  to  meet  this  great  longing,  that  the 
great  painters  of  Christendom  covered  the  walls  of  picture 
galleries  with  conceptions  of  the  face  of  Jesus.  Crowds  have 
stood  transfixed  and  touched  before  these  masterpieces  of  art. 
But  who  has  not  turned  from  the  very  noblest  of  them  with  a 
sigh  of  dissatisfaction,  and  a  secret  conviction  that  even  if  the 
sublimest  feature  were  to  be  taken  out  of  each  separate  picture 
and  all  combined  into  one,  the  face  so  composed  must  still 


40  (Kljriat  Mnscctt,  but  l^ohcir. 

fall  infinitely  short  of  that  in  which  Deity  and  humanity  met, 
and  shone,  and  wept,  and  loved.  We  shall  never  see  anything 
worthy  of  that  face  till  we  see  Him  as  He  is.  "  They  shall  see 
his  face,"  and  "the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ" 
(Rev.  xxii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  6). 

But  is  there  not  hardship  and  irreparable  loss  in  this  ?  Not 
so.  He  can  be  nearer,  dearer  to  us  to-day,  than  if  those  old 
blessed  days  in  which  He  walked  with  his  disciples  over  the 
hills  of  Galilee,  or  fell  asleep  in  the  stern  of  Peter's  boat,  had 
been  drawn  out  like  a  golden  thread  throughout  the  centuries. 
We  could  not  have  always  had  Him  then.  Domestic  duties  ; 
the  needs  of  the  world  ;  the  requirements  of  food,  or  business, 
or  sleep — must  have  taken  us  from  his  side.  Or,  at  the  best, 
we  could  only  have  known  Him  as  part  of  a  great  multitude, 
all  of  whom  would  have  been  equally  eager  to  possess  Him  for 
themselves.  In  the  press  of  saints  and  apostles  we  must  have 
necessarily  occupied  the  outer  rim  of  the  vast  crowd,  and  been 
satisfied  with  a  transient  glimpse,  or  with  such  beams  as  those 
which  travel  from  our  sun  to  Uranus,  on  the  extreme  limits  of 
our  system.  And  amid  it  all,  there  might  have  been  a  strong 
temptation  to  such  earthly,  sensuous  love  as  made  the  woman 
of  the  crowd  exclaim,  "  Blessed  is  she  that  bare  thee,  and  the 
breasts  which  thou  hast  sucked;"  expressions  which  He 
corrected  by  immediately  recalling  the  thoughts  of  the  crowd 
to  the  greater  blessedness  of  those  who  "hear  the  word  of 
God,  and  keep  it"  (Luke  xi.  28). 

If  we  had  seen  Him  once,  or  might  see  Him  still,  our  joy 
would  have  been  dashed  with  the  pain  of  losing  Him  ;  of  inter- 
mittent fellowship  ;  or  of  the  necessity  of  sharing  Him  with 
others.  It  would  have  been  too  deeply-rooted  in  the  outward 
and  physical.  It  would  have  languished  when  manifold  trials 
intercepted  its  vi-sion.  It  could  never  have  possessed  that 
vigour  ;  that  independence  of  circumstances  ;  that  power  to 
defy  imprisonment,  solitude,  and  desertion  ;  that  buoyant  and 
heavenward  ardour — which  indicate  that  its  temper  is  celestial, 
its  nature  Spirit-given.  Therefore  the  invisibility  of  Jesus, 
which  might  have  seemed  inimical  to  our  joy,  so  far  from 
being  so,  is  rather  a  condition  of  its   existence  in   the  soul ; 


^iaa  f  inks.  41 

and  for  this  reason,  that  as  a  spiritual  presence  our  dear  Lord 
can  be  more  to  us  and  more  with  us,  than  if  He  had  lingered 
ever  on  our  earth.  Did  He  not  therefore  say  Himself,  "  It  is 
expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away  "  ?  Christ  dwelling  in  our 
heart  by  the  Spirit,  with  us,  around  us,  in  us,  is  infinitely  more 
than  He  could  have  been  to  us,  though,  like  Peter,  James,  and 
John,  we  had  been  the  chosen  companions  of  His  earthly  life. 

n.  Two  Links  unite  us  to  the  Unseen  Lord. — "Ye 
love."  "  Believing  "  (8).  It  is  hard  to  say  which  is  first  or 
chief  We  cannot  love  without  believing,  nor  can  we  believe 
without  loving.  Faith  is  light ;  and  love  is  heat.  Where  one 
enters,  the  other  follows.  Woven  in  the  texture  of  each  of 
heaven's  sunbeams,  we  cannot  have  one  without  the  other  ; 
and  our  joy  will  be  in  direct  proportion  to  the  presence  of 
these  twin  celestial  sisters  in  our  souls. 

(i)  As  to  Love. — No  man  is  a  Christian  who  does  not  love 
the  Lord  Jesus.  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
ht  him  be  anathema"  (i  Cor.  xvi.  22).  This  is  the  touchstone 
of  trial  for  each  one  of  us  ;  not  what  we  profess  or  say,  but 
whether  we  love,  and  how  much.  But  let  us  remember  that 
/ove  reveals  itself  differe7itly  according  to  that  aspect  of  Christ's 
person  or  work  on  which  the  Spirit  has  fixed  the  beholder's  eye. 
In  some,  conscious  of  a  great  deliverance,  it  takes  the  form  of 
gratitude.  In  others,  smitten  with  the  beauty  of  his  character, 
oi  complacency.  In  others,  again,  pre-occupied  with  his  claims, 
of  reverential  devotion  to  his  service.  The  symptoms  of  its 
presence  are  manifold.  Sometimes  adoring  silence  ;  at  others 
irrepressible  tears  ;  or  the  sudden  burning  of  the  cheek  ;  or 
unostentatious  acts  of  mercy  ;  or  steadfastness  in  confessing 
Him  at  all  costs.  Love  betrays  itself,  whether  it  fetches  water 
from  the  well  of  Bethlehem  at  peril  of  life,  or  comes  with 
precious  spikenard  to  anoint  the  dear  body  of  the  dead. 

Those  that  love  Christ  most,  often  accuse  themselves  of  not 
loving  Him.  Their  love  so  conceives  of  Him  that  He  seems 
deserving  of  something  infinitely  better  than  they  can  give. 
They  love  Him  so  much,  that  they  would  be  almost  prepared 
to  make  way  for  any  who  could  love  Him  better  ;  and  yet  to 


42  Cbrist  Wimtm,  but  IFobetr. 

stand  aside  would  be  agony.  Let  such  take  heart !  He  who 
knows  all  things,  knows  how  much  they  love.  And,  after  all, 
love  is  measured,  not  by  feelings,  or  sighs,  or  tears,  but  by  acts. 
You  love  Christ  by  just  as  much  as  you  are  prepared  to  do,  or 
suffer,  or  give  up  for  Him. 

I/o2c/  may  we  love  Christ  7iiore? — Spend  much  time  alone  in 
contemplating  what  He  has  done  for  you  ;  and  what  He  is,  as 
the  "  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  "  and  the  "  altogether  lovely." 
Stir  the  inner  fire  by  means  of  memory  ;  and  let  hope  pile  on 
it  the  fuel  of  promise  till  it  begin  to  blaze.  Cultivate  the  habit 
of  speaking  aloud  to  Him,  in  an  empty  chamber,  or  a  lonely 
walk,  until  He  be  interlaced  in  the  tiniest  episodes  of  existence. 
Open  your  heart  to  the  entrance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  shedding 
abroad  the  love  of  God  in  the  heart,  and  gathering  the  rays  of 
that  love  into  a  burning  focus,  so  that  you  may  love  God  back 
with  love  which  has  come  from  his  heart  into  yours.  And,  very 
specially,  accustom  yourself  to  do,  for  the  sake  of  his  dear  love, 
many  things  which  cost  you  self-sacrifice  and  effort.  As  we 
show  love  to  others  we  understand  his  love  to  ourselves. 
''Every  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God. 
He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God  ;  for  God  is  love"  (i  John 
iv.  7,  8). 

The  key  to  the  knowledge  of  the  love  of  Jesus  is  not  in  sing- 
ing rapturous  hymns,  nor  in  seeking  to  arouse  intense  emotion  ; 
but  in  quietly  doing  daily  deeds  of  self-denial  for  His  sake. 
And  surely  this  is  the  way  to  sow  ourselves  as  corns  of  wheat  in 
the  ground  (John  xii.  24) ;  whilst  He  measures  the  least  act  of 
love,  not  by  the  magnitude  of  the  deed  itself,  but  by  the  strength 
of  the  love  which  prompts  it.  It  is  astonishing  how  quickly  we 
graduate  in  the  school  of  love,  when  we  begin  to  put  in  practice 
all  we  know. 

(2)  As  TO  Faith.— Who  is  there  of  us  that  does  not  often 
cry  with  the  disciples  :  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith  ! "  t  Certain 
it  is  that  increased  faith  would  mean  increased  joy.  But  are 
we  all  prepared  to  use  the  means  within  our  reach  for  obtaining 
this  increased  faith  ?  The  germ  of  faith  is  the  creative  gift  of 
God  ;  but  its  nurture  and  culture  lie  with  us,  by  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Spirit. 


$0^.  43 

T/ie  conditions  of  its  growth  are  these : — There  must  h&,  first  y 
the  putting  away  from  the  heart  and  life  of  all  known  evil  and 
inconsistency.  The  reason  for  much  of  the  weak  faith  around 
is  to  be  found  in  the  permission  of  forbidden  and  questionable 
things,  which  clog  and  oppress  the  soul.  These  are  the  bird- 
lime on  the  soul's  wings — the  hood  on  the  inner  vision.  Next, 
there  must  be  time  given  for  cjuiet  musing  over  the  statements 
and  promises  of  the  Word  of  God,  till  they  assume  a  definite 
shape  as  eternal  facts.  Lastly,  there  must  be  habitual  obedience 
to  every  known  duty  ;  so  that,  as  the  will  of  God  is  revealed,  it 
shall  be  instantly  embodied  in  action  ;  and  this,  notwithstand- 
ing any  difficulty  that  may  line  the  path.  Where  these  rules 
are  observed,  faith  will  grow  exceedingly,  and  will  make  the 
unseen  Savi  ur  "a  living  bright  reality"  to  the  soul  which 
yearns  for  a  hand  that  can  never  fail,  a  heart  that  can  never 
cease  to  throb. 

III.  The  Resulting  Joy.— /r  there  jiot  joy  in  love  when  a 
barrier  is  broken  down  which  had  estranged  for  years ; 
when  confession  is  made  and  forgiveness  is  granted  ;  when 
heart  flows  to  heart  ;  when  the  golden  key  of  love  unlocks  the 
choicest  and  most  sacred  treasures  ?  To  know  that  since  we 
love  Christ,  we  must  have  been  loved  ;  that  we  are  loved  with 
a  love  which  will  never  let  us  go,  but  which  will  cling  to  us 
through  life  and  death  and  eternal  ages,  not  for  anything  good 
or  worthy  in  us,  but  because  of  its  own  sweet  will  and  choice  ; 
to  be  persuaded  that  nothing,  not  even  our  failures  and  incon- 
sistencies, can  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ— this,  surely, 
must  thrill  us  with  joy,  however  great  and  manifold  may  be  the 
trials  through  which  we  are  called  to  pass. 

Is  tJiere  not  joy  in  faith  ? — "Think  with  what  joy  the  long- 
imprisoned  debtor,  drowned  in  debt,  receives  a  full  discharge 
and  his  liberty  ;  or  a  condemned  malefactor  the  news  of  his 
pardon — and  this  will  somewhat  resemble  it,  and  yet  fall  far 
short  of  the  joy  which  faith  imparts,  by  bringing  Christ  into  the 
soul  and  forgiveness  of  sins  in  Him.  Nor  is  this  all,  for  the 
believing  soul  is  not  only  a  debtor  acquitted,  but  enriched 
besides  with  a  new  and  great  estate,  having  a  right  to  the 


44  ®ljnst  Wimnrt,  but  f  obei. 

unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  to  the  favour  of  God,  and  to  the 
dignity  of  his  child." 

Such  joy  is  unspeakable. — There  are  times  of  high  tide  in  the 
believer's  soul,  when  he  dare  not  speak.  Words  seem  super- 
fluous and  empty.  The  tides  overflow  their  banks,  and  pour 
their  volume  in  unspoken  admiration  into  the  heart  of  God. 

And  full  of  glory. — It  is  of  the  same  substance,  if  not  of  the 
same  bulk  and  weight,  as  the  glory  which  awaits  us  on  the 
other  side.  There  are  moments  of  heaven  upon  earth  ;  preliba- 
tions  of  the  river  of  life  ;  stray  notes  of  the  angel  choruses  ; 
Eshcol  grapes  from  the  vineyards  of  the  land  of  promise  ; 
flowers  from  the  parterres  of  Paradise.  Oh  for  more  of  heaven 
on  the  way  to  heaven  !  A  prayer  which  we  may  almost  answer 
for  ourselves  by  seeking  more  of  Him  who  is  Himself  the  heaven 
of  heaven  ;  and  so  adopting  Bengel's  motto  :  "  Christ  in  the 
heart ;  heaven  in  the  heart ;  the  heart  in  heaven.' 


VI.— OI^lj^  ^uffmitgs  antr  (Blovitz  of  Cljrisi 

"  Concerning  which  salvation  the  prophets  sought  and  searched  diligently, 
who  prophesied  of  the  grace  that  should  come  unto  you :  searching  what 
time  or  what  manner  of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did 
point  unto  when  it  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the 
glories  that  should  follow  them.  To  whom  it  was  revealed,  that  not  unto 
themselves,  but  unto  you,  did  they  minister  these  things,  which  now  have 
been  announced  unto  you  through  them  that  preached  the  gospel  unto  you 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  forth  from  heaven  ;  which  things  angels  desire  to 
look  into."— I  Peter  i.  10-12  (k.v.). 

HIRTY  years,  full  of  varied  and  absorbing  interest, 
had  well-nigh  passed  away  since  Peter — amid  the 
gloom  of  Gethsemane  ;  or  as  one  of  the  little  crowd 
of  servants  in  the  high  priest's  hall ;  or  as  a  heart- 
broken spectator  on  the  outer  rim  of  the  crowd — had 
been  an  eye-witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ ; 
sufferings  from  the  endurance  of  which  he  had  done  his  utmost 
to  dissuade  his  Master.  But  they  were  as  fresh  as  though  they 
had  been  borne  but  yesterday,  like  the  blood-red  of  the  sand- 
stone rocks,  which  remains  as  vivid  as  on  the  morning  of 
creation,  though  thousands  of  autumns  have  strewn  them  with 
the  fading  hues  of  nature's  many-coloured  dress.  Through- 
out the  Epistle  there  is  repeated  reference  to  the  sufferings 
which  culminated  at  Calvary.  But  how  different  is  the  tone  in 
which  the  Apostle  alludes  to  them  !  A  vast  change  has  passed 
over  him  since,  on  the  eve  of  the  Transfiguration,  he  said  : 
"This  shall  not  be  unto  Thee."  That  which  had  aroused  his 
strongest  protestation  is  now  better  understood,  and  has  become 
the  theme  of  his  tenderest  love  {comp.  Matt.  xvi.  22  with  i  Pet. 
i.  11;  ii.  21,  23;  iii.  18;  iv.  i,  13;  v.  i). 

By    those    sufferings^    our   salvation    has    been    achieved. — ■ 
Salvation  is  a  great  word.     And  some  glimpses  of  the  width 


46         ^Ijt  ^ufferinga  ant  Glories  ai  ©Ijriat. 

of  its  contents  are  discovered  in  the  Apostle's  threefold  use  of 
it  here  (verses  5,  9,  10).  It  is  so  great  and  glorious  that  the 
saintliest  souls  cannot  in  this  world  fully  realize  all  its  blessed- 
ness. It  will  only  be  revealed  "in  the  last  time"  (5),  because 
it  includes  the  deliverance  of  our  bodies  from  the  bondage  of 
corruption,  and  their  transfiguration  into  the  likeness  of  the 
body  of  Christ's  glory  ;  a  result  which  cannot  be  attained  till 
the  second  coming  of  the  Lord.  Moreover,  "  salvation  "  includes 
something  more  than  deliverance  from  the  penalty  due  to  sin, 
to  which  its  meaning  is  so  often  limited.  It  is  SALVATION  for 
SOULS  (ver.  9) — that  is  :  it  not  only  makes  them  safe — but  also 
sound,  healthy,  wholesome,  and  whole  ;  breathing  into  them  the 
very  nature  of  God  ;  and  replacing  corruption  with  the  life  of 
the  eternal  world.  Well  may  the  Apostle  find  an  equivalent  for 
such  a  salvation,  covering  as  it  does  our  entire  nature,  in  the 
sweet  old  word  GRACE.  Who  shall  estimate  the  "grace"  that 
has  come  to  us  in  the  coming  of  such  a  salvation  as  this  ? 
(ver.  10). 

On  this  "  salvation  "  we  must  not  linger  longer  now,  fascinat- 
ing though  the  theme  must  be  to  those  who  owe  all  to  it,  both 
in  this  life  and  the  next.  But,  as  we  pass  from  it,  we  ask  our 
readers  to  inquire  whether  they  have  experienced  it,  not  only 
as  ?ipast  act,  breaking  the  entail  qf  a  deserved  penalty  ;  or  as 
a  future  act,  uniting  spotless  soul  and  stainless  body  in  the 
presence  of  the  King  ;  but  as  a  living  present  enjoyment, 
securing  for  them  daily,  hourly,  victory  over  known  sin, 
whether  suggested  from  within  or  by  the  malevolence  of 
our  great  spiritual  foe. 

The  sufferings  of  Christ,  then,  must  engage  our  thought,  and 
tender  a  peculiar  aspect. — In  a  picture,  of  the  crucifixion,  by  a 
great  modern  painter,  we  stand  behind  the  cross,  not  seeing  the 
sufiferer,  but  only  the  shadows  of  three  crosses  falling  down  the 
hill-slope,  the  central  one  being  the  deepest  and  broadest  of  the 
three.  But  the  faces  of  those  passing  by,  or  standing  near,  are 
toward  us,  and  are  filled  with  looks  which  tell  the  story  of  the 
tragedy  in  a  way  which  the  minutest  delineation  of  horrors 
could  never  have  done.  So  we  are  studying  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  in  their  efifect  on  the  witness  of  the  Spirit ;  the  testimony 


arijc  spirit's  Etstmonn.  47 

of  the  prophets  ;  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles  ;  and  the  rapt 
gaze  of  the  angels. 

I.  The  Witness  of  the  Spirit.—"  It  testified  beforehand 
the  sufferings  of  Christ."  The  name  here  given  to  the  Holy- 
Spirit  is  very  significant.  He  is  called  i/ie  Spirit  of  Christ 
One  as  He  is  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  the  mystery  of  the 
Holy  Trinity,  and  proceeding  as  a  stream  of  holy  influence  from 
their  common  throne,  yet  He  bends  all  his  influence  to  reveal 
and  glorify  our  blessed  Lord.  In  Himself  He  is  ineffably  holy, 
loving,  mighty — whom  to  know  is  everlasting  blessedness.  And 
yet,  with  marvellous  and  divine  unobtrusiveness,  He  withdraws 
Himself  from  our  notice,  only  anxious  to  focus  all  attention  and 
interest  on  the  Christ  (John  xvi.  13-15). 

Until  Jesus  was  glorified,  the  Spirit  was  not  fully  given 
(John  vii.  39)— not  poured  out  freely  upon  all,  as  afterwards 
at  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  17),  but  in  measure,  and  occasionally 
{^comp.  Judges  xiii.  25).  Even  before  the  Incarnation,  He 
broke  out  in  witness  to  the  coming  Saviour,  and  with  irrepres- 
sible love  gave  testimony  of  Jesus  ;  as  when  the  voice  of  the 
Father  refused  to  be  longer  bound  by  the  restraints  of  a  self- 
imposed  silence,  but  broke  out  in  benediction  after  the  baptism 
of  the  Son  in  the  waters  of  Jordan. 

Nor  is  it  wonderful  that  the  Spirit's  testimony  pointed  in  the 
direction  of  Christ's  sufferings.  The  offering  up  of  Christ  in 
death  is  said  to  have  been  through  the  "Eternal  Spirit" 
(Heb.  ix.  14).  It  was  an  act,  in  which  the  Trinity  as  a  whole 
participated.  It  was  the  crystallization  in  the  concrete  of  an 
eternal  thought  in  the  counsel  and  purpose  of  God  (Rev.  xiii.  8). 
It  was  probably  the  most  stupendous  event  in  the  existence  of 
the  Blessed  God.  How,  then,  can  we  wonder  at  the  Holy 
Spirit  anticipating  the  discoveries  of  time,  and  giving  pre- 
monitory hints  and  signs,  and  anticipations  of  the  sufferings 
of  the  cross  ?  It  is  surely  a  mistake,  then,  for  us  to  make 
so  little,  in  meditation  and  in  ministry,  of  that  which  is 
the  supreme  point  of  interest  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  the 
work  of  the  Saviour  upon  our  world !  The  emphasis  that 
He  lays  on  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  like    the  word  search 


48  ^Itc  ^u&rittss  antr  ©lories  of  dljrist. 

on    a    cairn,    might  indicate  what    inestimable  treasures   he 
beneath. 

And  if  the  Blessed  Spirit  dwell  so  lovingly  and  gladly  on  the 
sufferings,  how  much  more  on  the  glories  of  the  Lord  !  The 
Apostle  laid  the  emphasis  there  when  he  said,  "Yea,  rather,  that 
was  raised  from  the  dead"  (Rom.  viii.  34,  R.V.).  And  deservedly, 
because  the  glories  are  the  crown  and  flower  and  fruit  of  the 
sufferings  ;  the  attestation  of  his  Deity  ;  the  Divine  imprimatur 
on  his  work  ;  the  reward  for  the  travail  of  his  soul.  Stay,  my 
soul,  to  recount  the  glories,  one  by  one,  of  the  Resurrection 
morning ;  the  Ascension  mount  ;  the  triumphal  procession 
through  all  ranks  of  being  ;  the  session  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  ;  the  Second  Advent ;  and  the  Millennial  Reign. 

II.  The  Burden  of  the  goodly  Fellowship  of  Pro- 
phets.— From  the  age  of  Samuel  these  men  appear.  Very 
zealous  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  full  of  the  loftiest  patriotism, 
they  fulfilled  a  great  ministry  to  their  times,  serving  the  same 
purpose  as  the  Tribunes  of  the  People  in  ancient  Rome,  and 
the  public  press  to-day.  They  stood  up  before  kings  for  the 
rights  of  the  people,  as  they  stood  up  before  the  people  for 
the  rights  of  God.  Nathan  before  David;  Elijah  before  Ahab  ; 
Isaiah  before  Ahaz  ;  Jeremiah  before  Zedekiah  ;  John  before 
Herod. 

With  us,  tlie  word  "  Prophet "  looks  out  on  the  future,  pene- 
trating its  veil  ;  but  in  the  original  it  means  "  bubbling  up,"  as 
when  the  Psalmist  said  that  his  heart  was  bubbling  up  with 
good  matter  (Psa.  xlv.  i),  like  springs  forcing  their  way  out  into 
the  desert  waste,  making  it  smile  and  bloom.  Nevertheless,  in 
their  public  utterances,  which  were  primarily  addressed  to  men 
of  their  time,  there  were  depths  of  meaning,  references,  and 
anticipations,  which  demanded  a  fuller  realization  than  could 
be  found  in  a  series  of  national  events,  however  momentous. 

It  was  the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  Jews,  that,  unlike  other 
nations,  their  golden  age  lay  before  them  as  a  radiant  goal, 
and  that  their  greatest  Hero  was  not  their  father,  but  his 
remote  Descendant.  Expectation  stooped  forward,  intent  on 
catching  the  first   foot-fall   of  the   coming  King,  who  should 


Wht  ipropljeis.  49 

gather  up  and  satisfy  the  loftiest  hopes.  Of  these  expecta- 
tions and  hopes  the  prophets  were  the  chief  exponents.  But 
this  would  not  have  sufficed  to  explain  the  fulness  and  minute- 
ness of  detail  which  characterize  their  words.  There  was  an 
element  present  which  can  be  accounted  for  by  no  earthly  or 
human  prescience.  These  holy  men  spake  from  God,  being 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Peter  i.  21,  r.v.). 

T/ie  Spirit  of  Christ  was  in  them. — First,  He  was  in  them 
as  the  Spirit  of  Revelation,  communicating  truths  which  they 
could  not  have  foreseen  or  discovered ;  truths  which  even  baffled 
their  understanding  after  they  had  received  them.  Next,  He 
was  in  them  as  the  Spirit  of  inspiration,  affording  spiritual  aid 
in  promulgating  truth  ;  so  that  the  Bible  contains  God's  truth 
stated  in  human  words,  which  nevertheless  give  an  adequate  and 
sufficient  statement  of  the  Divine  intention  and  purpose. 

And  it  is  easy,  therefore,  to  understand  that  the  burden  of 
their  words  would  be  the  same  as  that  which  engrossed  the 
blessed  Spirit.  Through  them  He  testified  of  the  sufferings 
and  the  glory.  The  crimson  cord  of  Calvary  surrounds  every 
window  in  the  sacred  book.  In  each  voice  there  is  the  wail 
of  the  cross  and  the  hallelujah  of  resurrection.  Moses  and 
Elias  speak  of  the  decease  {the  exode)  to  be  accomplished. 
And  thus,  as  the  Master  talked  with  the  two  disciples  on  the 
road  to  Emmaus,  He  was  able  to  expound  to  them  in  all  the 
Scriptures  that  Christ  ought  to  suffer  and  to  enter  into  his 
glory  (Luke  xxiv.  26,  27,  46).  Well,  too,  might  Paul  reason  at 
Thessalonica  for  three  whole  Sabbath  days,  opening  and 
alleging  that  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered,  and  risen  again 
from  the  dead  (Acts  xvii.  3). 

But  though  the  prophets  spake  of  these  things,  they  but 
imperfectly  understood  them.  They  searched  into  the  very 
matters  of  which  they  were  made  the  organs  and  channels. 
Like  Daniel,  they  "heard,  but  understood  not"  (Dan.  xii.  8). 
They  could  not  interpret  the  hieroglyphs  of  the  dates,  nor 
foresee  the  mystery  and  glory  of  the  coming  days.  And  often 
were  the  saintliest  Jews  puzzled  at  the  marvellous  conjunction 
of  death  with  life  ;  of  travail  with  triumph  ;  of  darkness  with 
light — on  the  pages  of  their  prophetic  books. 

D 


so         Wht  ^ufcrittga  antr  Clloriea  of  Cbriat. 

They  had  to  content  themselves  with  ministering  to  us  ;  and 
they  have  performed  a  very  efficient  service  :  because  the 
simplest  believer  has  now  an  irrefragable  testimony  to  the 
Divine  truthfulness  of  Scripture,  in  being  able  to  compare  the 
predictions  of  the  Old  Testament  with  their  fulfilment  in  the 
New,  fitting  each  other  as  the  two  sides  of  a  tally,  or  as  a  key 
and  lock.  There  is  no  proof  of  the  Divine  authority  of  the 
Bible  greater  than  this. 

III.  The  Preaching  of  the  Apostles  was  full  of  the 
same  theme  (ver.  12).  The  Gospel  which  they  announced  was 
the  tidings  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  their  Lord.  They 
preached  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified.  They  gloried  above 
all  things  in  the  cross.  It  was  a  matter  of  perfect  indifference 
that  to  the  Jews  it  was  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks 
foolishness  :  the  Apostles  persisted  in  declaring  that  God  had 
made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  men  had  crucified,  both  Lord 
and  Christ  (Acts  ii.  36 ;  iv.  10). 

And  with  such  preaching  the  Holy  Ghost  was  able  to  co- 
operate.— The  Apostles  preached  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit. 
The  Spirit  is  said  in  this  verse  to  have  announced  these 
things  through  them.  It  was  a  theme  which  attracted  all  his 
tenderest,  mightiest  interest.  He  who  spake  in  the  Prophets, 
spake  in  and  with  the  Apostles,  working  powerfully  on  human 
hearts  by  their  ministry.  And  so  their  preaching,  if  not  with 
enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,  was  in  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit  and  of  power.  Yes,  and  if  only  men  will  still  dare  to 
preach  the  doctrine  of  the  cross,  they  will  find  again,  other 
things  being  equal,  that  results  will  accrue  which  bear  the 
Divine  hall-mark. 

IV.  The  Theme  of  the  Angels  is  the  same  blessed  topic. 
They  desire  to  "  look  into  "  these  things.  They  bend  aside,  as 
did  the  cherubim  over  the  mercy-seat,  where  these  truths  were 
set  forth  in  the  sprinkled  blood.  They  may  have  held  high 
debate  about  the  full  import  of  the  Saviour's  death  ;  but  though 
they  cannot  penetrate  all  its  mysterious  depths,  yet  they  set 
to  music  all  they  know,  crying,  "  Worthy  the  Lamb  that  was 


%}jz  gcaire  of  tire  ^ngels.  51 

slain!"  The  cross  attracts  the  keenest  interest  of  bright 
celestial  spirits. 

It  may  be  that  those  sufferings  have  brought  angels  nearer 
God  ;  but  in  any  case,  they  have  given  deep  and  marvellous 
glimpses  into  his  heart ;  such  as  else  could  never  have  come 
to  them.     Rightly  they  are  lost  in  admiration  and  praise. 

If  the  angels,  with  their  opportunities  of  knowledge,  find 
ever  fresh  fields  of  interest  and  investigation  in  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  and  the  glories  that  are  to  follow,  how  little  do 
the  wisest  of  us  know  of  them  !  We  are  but  ankle-deep  at 
the  furthest  in  this  fathomless  ocean.  We  are  still  at  the 
alphabet — the  primer  of  knowledge. 

But  surely  enough  has  been  said  to  invest  the  Saviour's 
sufferings  with  new  interest,  as  we  turn  to  them  again  to  find 
heights,  depths,  lengths,  and  breadths  of  meaning,  which  have 
engaged  and  baffled  prophets  and  kings,  angels  and  saints. 


VII.-"  |e  sWl  ht  %ohr 

"  Wherefore  girding  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober  and  set  your 
hope  perfectly  on  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  revelation 
of  Jesus  Christ ;  as  children  of  obedience,  not  fashioning  yourselves  accord- 
ing to  your  former  lusts  in  the  time  of  your  ignorance  :  but  like  as  He  which 
called  you  is  holy,  be  ye  yourselves  also  holy  in  all  manner  of  living ; 
because  it  is  written,  Ye  shall  be  holy  ;  for  I  am  holy.  And  if  ye  call  on 
Him  as  Father,  who  without  respect  of  persons  judgeth  according  to  each 
man's  work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  in  fear." 

I  Peter  i.  13-17  (r.v.  ). 

3y«^jjW/HE  "  wherefore "  with  which  this  paragraph  opens 
A  \\k}  gathers  up  the  premises  of  the  preceding  verses, 
and  uses  them  as  a  massive  platform  of  soHd 
masonry  on  which  to  erect  the  battery  of  appeal 
to  which  the  Apostle  now  addresses  himself. 
Because  our  destiny  is  what  it  is  ;  because  Jesus 
Christ  is  what  He  is  :  because  our  salvation  has  been  the 
theme  of  prophets,  apostles,  martyrs,  angels  ;  therefore... 

And  the  aim  of  his  appeal  is  Holiness. — "  Be  ye  yourselves 
also  holy  in  all  manner  of  living."  The  cry  for  HOLINESS 
rings  through  the  Bible.  It  is  the  keynote  of  Leviticus,  from 
which  this  quotation  is  made  {comp.  ver.  16  with  Lev.  xi.  44  ; 
xix.  2  ;  XX.  7  and  26,  &c.)  :  and  it  is  equally  the  supreme 
demand  of  the  New  Testament.  In  point  of  fact,  all  the 
wondrous  machinery  of  redemption,  from  the  distant  choice 
of  eternity  to  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Day  of 
Pentecost,  has  had  this  for  its  purpose,  that  we,  who  have  been 
the  subjects  of  the  grace  of  the  Persons  of  the  Eternal  Trinity, 
should  resemble  them  in  the  holiness  which  is  the  perpetual 
burden  of  heaven's  rapturous  minstrelsy — that  song  which 
was  heard  by  the  evangelic  prophet  Isaiah  from  the  Temple 
courts,  in  the  year  that  King  Uzziah  died  ;  but  which  was  still 


€alhb  to  'holiness.  53 

unfinished  when  the  beloved  Apostle  John  detected  it  amid  the 
break  of  the  yEgean  Sea  aioiind  the  lone  island  of  his  banish- 
ment ;  and  which  will  never  cease,  world  without  end : 
"Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  God  the  Almighty"  (Isa.  vi.  3; 
Rev.  iv.  8). 

Holiness  is  the  property  of  God  alone. — It  is  the  totality  of 
the  Divine  attributes  ;  the  sum  of  the  Eternal  and  Infinite 
Being  of  Godhead  ;  the  essence  of  Ueity  ;  the  chord  made  by 
the  harmonious  blending  of  Divine  equalities ;  the  beam  woven 
from  the  many  colours  of  Divine  perfections  ;  the  expression 
in  a  single  term  of  all  that  goes  to  make  up  the  moral  nature 
of  the  great  Spirit  whom  we  call  God.  It  is  underived  in  its 
source  ;  unlimited  in  its  measure  ;  insupportable  in  its  naked 
and  unveiled  splendour  by  the  eye  of  any  creature  which  He 
has  made  "  Who  is  like  unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  glorious  in 
holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing  wonders?"  (Exod.  xv.  11). 
No  tongue  then  shall  dare  to  challenge  God's  right  to  declare 
Himself  as  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  or  to  say  in  the  words 
before  us,  "  I  am  holy." 

Such  holiness  is  evidently  possible  to  us. — See,  the  holy  God 
has  "called"  us  to  it  {v.  15).  "God  hath  not  called  us  to 
uncleanness,  but  to  holiness"  (i  Thess.  iv.  7).  He  "hath 
called  us  with  a  holy  calling"  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  All  partakers 
of  the  heavenly  calling  are  called  "holy  brethren"  (Heb.  iii.  i). 
But  God  would  not  summon  us  to  heights  we  could  not  scale, 
or  to  tasks  we  could  not  perform.  His  CALL  involves  two 
facts — first,  that  his  holiness  is  within  our  reach  ;  secondly, 
that  He  is  prepared  to  supply  all  that  is  necessary  to  effect  in 
us  that  to  which  He  calls  us.  God  is  pledged  to  make  us 
holy  ;  or  He  will  expose  Himself  to  the  mockery  of  his  foes. 
But  we  need  not  fear  for  Him.  He  counted  the  cost  before 
He  issued  his  proclamation  ;  and  He  is  well  able  to  finish  that 
of  which  He  laid  the  foundation  in  the  great  depths  of  Calvary 
(Luke  xiv.  2q,  30). 

Nor  is  such  holiness  for  saints  and  apostles  alone  ;  or  on\y 
for  the  special  golden  days  which  visit  most  lives — days  of 
feast  and  song  and  transfiguration.  The  Divine  ideal  is  more 
comprehensive  far.     "  Holy  in  all  manner  of  living  "  {v.  1 5,  R.V.). 


54  **  |e  sljaU  be  I0I5." 

Zechariah  foretold  the  time  when  the  inscription  on  the  high 
priest's  mitre  should  be  written  even  on  the  bells  of  the  horses  : 
"  Holiness  to  the  Lord."  And  it  is  God's  will  that  that 
motto  should  be  engraved  on  house  bells,  and  office  bells,  and 
shop  bells  ;  on  dinner  bells  and  factory  bells  ;  so  that  in  every 
department  of  our  lives  there  may  be  sweet  music  made  to 
life's  great  Lord.  Holiness  at  every  turn,  and  in  every  incident 
of  our  daily  walk,  like  the  golden  tinkle  which  betrayed  each 
movement  of  Israel's  high  priest  (Exod.  xxviii.  33-33  ;  Zech. 
xiv.  20,  21). 

There  is  ojily  one  way  of  becoming  Jtoly,  as  God  is :  and  it  is 
the  obvious  one  of  opening  the  entire  being  to  the  all-pervading 
presence  of  the  Holy  One.  None  of  us  can  acquire  holiness 
apart  from  God.  It  dwells  in  God  alone.  Holiness  is  only 
possible  as  the  soul's  possession  of  God  ;  nay,  better  still,  as 
God's  possession  of  the  soul.  It  never  can  be  inherent,  or 
possessed  apart  from  the  Divine  fulness,  any  more  than  a 
river  can  flow  on  if  it  is  cut  off  from  its  fountain  head.  We 
are  holy  up  to  the  measure  in  which  we  are  God-possessed. 
The  least  holy  man  is  he  who  shuts  God  up  to  the  strictest 
confinement,  and  to  the  narrowest  limits  of  his  inner  being ; 
partitioning  Him  off  from  daily  hfe  by  heavy  curtains  of 
neglect  and  unbelief  He  is  holier  who  more  carefully  denies 
self,  and  who  seeks  a  larger  measure  of  Divine  indwelling. 
The  hoHest  is  the  man  who  yields  himself  most  completely 
to  be  influenced,  swayed,  possessed,  inspired,  by  that  Spirit 
who  longs  to  make  us  to  the  fullest  extent  partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature. 

Wouldst  thou  be  holier  f—T\\&xe  is  but  one  way.  Thou 
must  have  more  of  God  in  thee.  Holiness  is  the  beauty  of 
the  Lord  God  of  hosts.  Thou  canst  not  separate  the  one  from 
the  other.  To  have  it  thou  must  have  Him.  Nor  will  it  be 
hard  to  obtain  either  ;  for  He  longs  to  enter  into  thy  being. 
Thy  longing  is  the  faint  response  of  thy  heart  to  his  call. 
The  power  that  works  within  is  matched  by  the  grace  which 
can  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or 
think.  Man  never  desired  so  much  of  God  as  God  desired 
of  man.     God's  holiness  has  revealed  itself  in  a  human  form 


%hc  f  ilgrim  ^ttituk.  55 

in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ;  and  so  it  is  as  able  as 
it  is  eager  to  enter  human  lives  through  that  blessed  Spirit  who 
is  pre-eminently  the  channel  and  medium  by  which  we  are 
filled  up  unto  all  the  fulness  of  God.  Ask  thy  heavenly  Father 
for  this  Spirit.  He  is  more  eager  to  give  Him  than  a  father 
to  give  food  to  his  hungry  child.  And,  having  asked,  dare  to 
believe  that  thou  hast  received,  and  "go  in  this  thy  might" 
(Jud.  vi.  14). 
And  this  holiness  will  reveal  itself  in  many  ways. 

I.  There  will  be  the  Pilgrlm  Attitude  and  Temper. — 
Eastern  fashions  suggest  the  figure  of  t/ie  gh't  loins.  There 
the  loose  and  flowing  robes  suit  well  the  deliberate  movements 
which  the  climate  begets  ;  but  they  would  grievously  hamper 
pilgrim,  wrestler,  or  warrior.  When  the  Israelites  were  mo- 
mentarily expecting  the  summons  for  the  Exodus,  they  stood 
with  their  loins  girt  around  the  tables  on  which  the  paschal 
lamb  was  smoking.  Thus  too  did  the  prophet  of  fire  gird 
himself  for  the  swift  courier-run  before  Ahab's  chariot,  from 
Carmel  to  Jezreel  (i  Kings  xviii.  46). 

Our  souls  are  clad  with  the  flowing  garments  of  various 
tastes,  appetites,  affections,  and  propensities,  which  hang 
loosely  around  us,  constantly  catching  in  the  things  of  the 
world,  and  hindering  us  in  the  Christian  race.  We  must  not 
let  them  stream  as  they  will — or  we  do  so  at  our  peril. 
AlDsalom  rued  the  day  when  his  luxuriant  tresses  floated  behind 
him  in  the  breeze.  We  must  "gird  up"  the  habits  of  our 
souls,  and  trim  ourselves,  so  as  to  pass  as  quickly  and  easily 
as  possible  through  the  thorny  jungle  of  the  world. 

Hold  your  spirit  in  a  tight  hand.  Put  a  curb  on  appetite. 
Say  "No"  to  luxurious  pleasure-seeking.  Curtail  your 
expenditure  on  yourself  Do  not  spread  yourself  too  widely. 
Watch  eye  and  lip,  thought  and  wish,  lest  any  break  from  the 
containing  cords  of  self-control.  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all 
diligence."  Give  Vanity  Fair  as  little  chance  as  possible,  by 
passing  swiftly  and  unostentatiously  through. 

Be  sober/ — Sobriety  is  a  great  word.  It  is  constantly  incul- 
cated in  the  New  Testament  on  elders,  deacons,  women,  aged 


56  *'  |e  sball  bt  #015." 

men,  young  men,  and  maidens.  It  means  temperance,  self- 
control,  and  a  just  estimate  of  one's  self  in  the  world.  There  are 
some  who  counterfeit  it  by  assuming  an  austere  and  forbidding 
attitude,  denouncing  much  that  is  innocent  and  natural,  and 
looking  severely  on  some  who  do  not  yield  to  their  scruples.  The 
truly  sober  man,  on  the  other  hand,  moves  freely  through  the 
world,  strewn  with  beautiful  and  innocent  things  :  using  them 
without  abuse,  rejoicing  in  every  good  thing  which  the  Lord 
God  gives  ;  but  never  allowing  any  of  them  to  usurp  too  grer^t 
an  influence  on  his  affections,  or  to  tyrannize  over  his  will. 

Wlien  the  heart  is  fully  engaged  with  the  Lord,  his  service, 
and  love,  and  rewards,  and  welcome  home  at  last,  it  can  afford 
to  look  undazzled  on  many  a  captivating  spectacle,  and  to  turn 
from  many  a  fascinating  cup.  The  holy  heart,  filled  to  brimming 
with  the  presence  of  God,  is  like  a  man  who  has  been  well 
banqueted,  and  who  is  therefore  able  to  look  calmly  on  the 
passionate  heat  with  which  starving  men  will  fight  with  each 
other  over  ofifal. 

Hope  to  the  end. — "  Set  your  hope  perfectly  "  (r.v.).  Go  fear- 
lessly as  far  as  hope  can  go.  Let  her  sit  at  her  easel,  painting 
her  fairest  pictures,  or  sing  rapturously  her  most  ecstatic  lay : 
she  cannot  be  disappointed.  The  "grace  which  is  to  be  brought 
unto  us"  when  the  veiling  clouds  are  rent,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
is  revealed  from  heaven,  will  far  surpass  all  her  imaginings. 
Hope  is  the  lamp  of  the  soul,  passed  down  from  saint  to  saint, 
as  in  the  old  Greek  race,  but  destined  to  be  eclipsed  in  the  light 
which  is  to  break  ere  long  upon  our  spirits— the  day  of  perfected 
redemption,  of  glorified  creation,  of  a  perfected  church.  The 
Revised  Version  reminds  us  that  that  grace  is  being  brought — 
it  has  started,  and  is  already  on  its  way. 

H.  There  will  be  the  Obedience  of  Children  (14). — 
Once  the  children  of  disobedience,  we  have  been  born  again, 
and  become  children  of  obedience — a  fair  mother  with  noble 
offspring.  Such,  at  least,  is  the  literal  rendering  of  the  Greek. 
And  what  a  marvellous  difference  at  once  comes  over  the  lives 
of  those  who  have  passed  through  this  change  !  They  "  no 
longer  fashion  themselves  according  to  the  former  lusts." 


(^bzhtmce,  -57 

Lust  is  natural  inclination  run  wild,  overleaping  all  restraint, 
and  asserting  its  own  imperious  will.  When  we  are  yet  in  the 
darkness  of  nature,  unillumined  by  the  grace  of  God,  these 
lusts  fashion  us.  Beneath  their  touch  we  are  moulded  or 
fashio7ied,  as  clay  by  the  potter's  hand.  Ignorant  of  the 
abominableness  of  sin,  of  its  disastrous  results,  of  its  in- 
sidious growth,  we  yield  to  it  until  it  becomes  our  tyrant 
and  our  ruin.  Oh,  the  horror  of  the  awaking,  should  we 
see  the  depths  of  this  beetling  precipice  descending  sheer 
beneath  us  to  hell !  When  we  no  longer  fashion  ourselves 
according  to  the  former  lusts,  but  according  to  the  will  of 
God — that  is  obedience. 

It  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  this  truth. 
Obedience  is  not  holiness  ;  holiness  is  the  possession  of  the 
soul  by  God.  But  holiness  always  leads  to  obedience.  And 
each  time  we  obey,  we  receive  into  our  natures  a  little  more  of 
the  Divine  nature.  "  If  ye  shall  indeed  obey  my  voice,  ye  shall 
be  a  holy  nation  unto  Me."  Do,  then,  whatever  it  is  right  to  do. 
Forsake  all  which  begins  and  ends  with  self.  Be  not  satisfied 
with  prayer  and  desire,  but  DO.  And  thus  there  will  come 
over  your  face  and  life  more  likeness  to  the  Father  of  your 
spirits  ;  and  you  will  be  holy. 

How  few  Christian  people  seem  to  realize  that  obedience  in 
trifles,  in  all  things,  to  the  will  and  law  of  Jesus,  is  the  indis- 
pensable condition  of  life  and  joy  and  power.  The  obedient 
soul  is  the  holy  soul,  penetrated  and  filled  by  the  presence  of 
God,  and  all  aglow  with  light  and  love.  Dear  reader,  resolve 
from  this  moment  to  live  up  to  the  margin  of  your  light.  Let 
this  be  your  motto  :  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  said  will  we  do, 
and  be  obedient."  Israel  said  this  and  failed  utterly  and  shame- 
fully ;  do  you  say  it  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  He 
shall  make  it  gloriously  possible. 

III.  There  will  be  a  reverent  Anticipation  of  the 
Father's  Award  (17). — God's  children  are  to  be  judged,  not 
at  the  great  white  throne,  but  at  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ 
(2  Cor.  V.  10).  That  judgment  will  not  decide  our  eternal 
destiny,  because  that  has  been  settled  before  ;  but  it  will  settle 


58  "  |e  aball  be  I0I5." 

the  rewards  of  our  faithfulness  or  otherwise  (Matt.  xxv.  19  ; 
I  Cor.  iii.  14). 

There  is  a  sense  in  which  that  judgment  is  already  in  process, 
and  we  are  ever  standing  before  the  judgment  bar.  "  The 
Father  -who  jiidgeth."  The  Divine  verdict  is  being  pronounced 
perpetually  on  our  actions,  and  hourly  is  manifesting  itself  in 
light  or  shadow. 

But  it  is  a  Father^s  judgment.  We  call  on  Him  as  Father. 
Notice  this  reciprocity  of  calling.  He  called  us  ;  we  call  Him  ; 
His  address  to  us  as  children  begets  our  address  to  Him  as 
Father.  We  need  not  dread  his  scrutiny — it  is  tender.  He 
pities  us  as  a  father  pities  his  children,  knowing  our  frame, 
allowing  for  our  weaknesses,  and  bearing  with  us  with  an 
infinite  patience. 

But  for  all  that  it  is  impartial.  "Without  respect  of 
persons."  Many  years  before,  this  had  been  revealed  to  the 
Apostle  from  heaven  in  a  memorable  vision,  which  affected 
his  whole  after-ministry  (Acts  x.  35).  Not  according  to  pro- 
fession, or  appearance,  or  any  self-constituted  importance,  but 
according  to  what  we  do,  are  we  being  judged. 

The  holy  soul  realizes  this  ;  and  a  great  awe  falls  upon  it  and 
overshadows  it — an  awe  not  born  of  the  fear  which  hath 
torment,  but  of  love.  It  passes  the  time  of  its  sojourning  in 
fear.  Not  the  fear  of  evil  consequences  to  itself,  but  the 
fear  of  grieving  the  Father ;  of  bringing  a  shadow  over 
his  face  ;  of  missing  any  manifestation  of  his  love  and  near- 
ness to  Himself,  which  may  be  granted  to  the  obedient  child. 
Love  casts  out  fear  ;  but  it  also  begets  it.  There  is  nothing 
craven,  or  fretful,  or  depressing ;  but  a  tenderness  of  con- 
science which  dreads  the  tiniest  cloud  on  the  inner  sky, 
such  as  might  overshadow  for  a  single  moment  the  clear 
shining  of  the  Father's  face.  So  the  brief  days  of  sojourn- 
ing pass  quickly  on,  and  the  vision  of  the  Homeland  beckons 
to  us,  and  bids  us  mend  our  pace. 


VIII.— Hebiem^tr  b^  ll00tr. 

"Forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible 
things,  as  sih'er  and  gold,  from  your  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition 
from  your  fathers ;  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb 
without  blemish  and  without  spot :  who,  verily,  was  foreordained  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  but  was  manifest  in  these  last  times  for  you, 
who  by  Him  do  believe  in  God  that  raised  Him  up  from  the  dead,  and 
gave  Him  glory  ;  that  your  faith  and  hope  might  be  in  God." 

I  Peter  i.  18-21. 

;E  belong  to  a  redeemed  race  (i  Tim.  ii.  6).  The 
majority  of  men  do  not  know  this.  Others, 
knowing  it,  do  not  allow  their  knowledge  to 
influence  their  life  or  conduct,  but  sell  their 
birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  Happy  are 
they  who  not  only  hold  the  fact  of  redemption 
as  an  intellectual  acquisition,  but  permit  it  to  become  the 
moulding  principle  of  their  entire  life.  To  such  the  words  of 
the  Apostle  come  with  marvellous  directness  and  force  •  "  Ye 
knew  that  ye  were  redeemed." 

Probably  the  most  momentous  truth  about  us  is — that  we 
have  been  redeemed.  It  is  much  to  have  been  created — called 
into  being  by  the  distinct  fiat  of  the  Creator's  will.  It  is  tnuch 
to  be  eftdowed  ivith  life  in  a  world  so  full  of  marvellous  possi- 
bilities as  ours.  //  is  much  to  Jiave  a  soul,  which  can  call  up 
the  past,  or  interrogate  the  present,  or  anticipate  and  prepare 
for  the  future.  But  it  is  more  that  lue  have  been  redeemed. 
Redeemed,  as  Israel  from  the  bondage  and  tyranny  of  Egypt ; 
or  as  a  slave,  by  his  "goel" — his  kinsman-redeemer — from 
captivity  to  some  rich  creditor  ;  or  as  the  captive  of  some 
hideous  vice  emancipated  from  its  thrall.  Redeemed!  Bought! 
Ransomed  !     Not  that  heaven  is  bought  for  us,  but  we  bought 


6o  HetreEtneii  h^  ^lootr. 

for  heaven.      This   will   perhaps  distinguish  us  for  evermore 
among  all  other  created  intelligences. 

I.  The  Cost  of  our  Redemption  has  been  Immense. 

(i)  Negatively. — "Not  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and 
gold."  A  moneyed  man,  who  has  been  accustomed  to  look  on 
his  wealth  as  the  key  to  every  treasure-chest,  is  sometimes 
startled  to  find  how  little  it  can  really  do.  It  touches  the  rim 
and  circumference  of  life  ;  but  it  fails  utterly  in  questions  that 
affect  the  heart  of  human  existence.  Money  cannot  compen- 
sate for  broken  vows  ;  or  unsay  cruel  words  which  eat  into 
the  soul  like  acid  ;  or  bring  back  colour  to  the  pallid  cheek  of 
the  darling,  cold  and  still  in  death  ;  or  atone  for  the  lack 
of  love.  "  If  a  man  would  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house 
for  love,  it  would  utterly  be  contemned."  Money  can  only 
purchase  things  which  are  as  corruptible  as  itself;  but  when 
it  enters  or  seeks  to  enter  into  the  sphere  of  souls,  the  eternal 
and  incorruptible,  its  way  is  barred  ;  its  currency  will  not 
pass  ;  its  claims  to  be  heard  are  nonsuited. 

You  cannot  dissect  an  argument  with  a  knife,  or  measure 
love  by  the  yard  measure,  or  weigh  souls  by  avoirdupois.  And 
it  is  equally  impossible  to  ransom  them  from  sin  by  "corruptible 
things,  as  silver  and  gold."  There  is  nothing  in  common 
between  the  gold  and  silver,  which,  however  long  they  endure, 
must  perish  in  the  end,  and  the  soul,  which  is  of  ethereal 
temper,  impervious  to  destruction  and  decay,  and  destined  to 
survive  the  crash  of  matter  and  the  wreck  of  worlds. 

God  could  have  given  suns  of  gold,  and  stars  of  silver,  con- 
stellations glowing  with  precious  metals  ;  but  none  of  these 
would  have  been  sufficient  to  free  one  soul  from  the  curse  or 
penalty  of  sin,  or  to  change  it  into  a  loyal  and  loving  subject  of 
his  reign.  Though  the  scales  of  the  universe  groaned  on  the  one 
side  with  the  heaped  treasures  of  heaven,  the  jewels  of  its  walls, 
the  gold  of  its  pavements — yet  one  soul  placed  on  the  other 
would  outweigh  them  all.  Matter  accounts  for  nothing  in  the 
weighing-chamber'  of  eternity.  And  therefore  the  Creator 
must  give  not  things^  but  life— not  his  gifts,  but  Himself — ere 
He  could  redeem. 


®ljE  (Kost  of  0«r  Hcticmptiott.  6i 

(2)  Positively. ^^'■ViWi  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  The 
blood  is  the  life  of  all  flesh.  Life  is  man's  supreme  possession, 
and  God's  supreme  gift.  To  give  up  anything  less  than  life  is  to 
fall  short  of  the  completest  self-sacrifice  for  another.  But  when 
a  man  has  given  that,  he  has  given  all  he  can.  And,  in  addition, 
when  blood  is  mentioned  with  the  laying  down  of  life,  there  is 
the  further  thought  of  suddenness,  of  intense  suffering,  of 
violence  ;  yea,  more,  no  one  familiar  with  Leviticus,  and  with 
that  whole  system  in  which  the  Apostle  Peter  was  educated 
from  boyhood,  could  ever  encounter  such  a  reference  as  this 
without  being  instantly  reminded  of  that  sacrificial  system,  in 
which  lambs  were  offered  up  day  by  day  for  the  sins  of  the 
people. 

When  the  Apostle  speaks  of  being  redeemed  by  the  blood 
of  Christ,  "  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot,"  he 
not  only  refers  to  the  agony,  and  violence,  and  circumstances 
of  his  death,  but  gives  renewed  utterance  to  that  first  con- 
ception about  the  Lord  which  had  fallen  upon  his  ear  from 
the  lips  of  the  great  forerunner,  whose  disciple  he  had  been 
in  the  earliest  days  of  his  religious  history  (John  i.  35-42). 
And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  desires  clearly  to  connect 
the  sufferer  of  Calvary  with  the  lambs  daily  offered  in  the 
morning  and  evening  Temple  worship  ;  with  those  slain  at 
the  great  annual  feast  of  Passover  ;  and  with  others,  whose 
blood  was  constantly  flowing  to  make  an  atonement  for  sin 
and  sins. 

In  considering  the  number  of  lambs  sacrificed  in  the  Jewish 
temple,  we  must  always  remember  that  a  large  proportion  of 
their  flesh  was  eaten,  whether  by  the  priests  or  the  offerers  ; 
and  that  ever)'  method  was  adopted  to  keep  the  sacred  structure 
pure,  and  sweet,  and  clean.  And  when  we  once  admit  that  it 
is  the  office  of  the  lower  orders  of  creation  to  subserve  the  neces- 
sary interests  of  man,  there  is  not  much  difference  between 
their  dying  to  set  forth  in  type  great  spiritual  truths,  which  are 
the  life  of  the  soul,  or  to  provide  suitable  nutriment  for  the 
sustenance  of  the  body.  But,  let  me  repeat,  in  the  Jewish 
sacrifices  these  two  objects  were  most  freqtiently  combined. 

It  is  most  important  to  give  due  weight  to  the  suggestion  of 


62  ftcttBemciJ  bj  §lootr. 

this  passage,  which  is  corroborated  by  many  similar  ones 
throughout  the  Bible,  that  the  death  of  Christ  ivas  no  after- 
thought consequent  on  man's  fall,  but  was  determined  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  Before  the  mountains  were 
brought  forth,  or  the  stars  were  rolled  on  their  wondrous  paths, 
or  the  first  ray  of  light  shot  through  the  gloom,  in  the  thought 
and  purpose  of  God,  our  Lord  was  already  the  Lamb  slain. 
"  He  was  foreordained  (designated  or  set  apart)  from  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world  "  (ver.  20  ;  Rev.  xiii.  8). 

And  so  the  sacrifices  of  the  Jewish  ritual  were  in  fact  "the 
copies  of  things  in  the  heavens."  When  Moses  went  up  into 
the  Mount,  it  is  probable  that  he  was  permitted  to  behold  the 
Divine  purpose  and  plan  of  man's  redemption  ;  which,  as  it 
passed  before  his  thought,  took  shape  in  that  symbolism  of 
priest,  and  sacrifice,  and  rite,  which  was  God's  method  of 
tuition  to  the  chosen  people,  affording  a  rudimentary  and 
material  outline  of  eternal  realities. 

We  must  not  think  that  Calvary  was  moulded  on  Leviticus, 
but  that  Leviticus  was  moulded  on  Calvary,  as  it  stood  out  from 
all  eternity  before  the  mind  of  God.  Yet  it  is  unmistakeable 
that  Leviticus  furnishes  the  true  key  to  the  understanding  of 
the  death  of  the  cross.  In  those  earlier  books  the  Holy  Spirit 
supplies  us  with  the  nomenclature  and  terms  which  He  was 
afterwards  going  to  employ.  And  just  as  it  would  be  absurd 
to  try  to  understand  the  deductions  of  Euclid,  without  first 
studying  his  definitions,  so  it  is  in  vain  to  attempt  the  solution 
of  the  marvels  of  the  cross,  without  entering  into  the  force  and 
meaning  of  the  rites  and  sacrifices  of  the  ancient  Hebrew 
system. 

Now,  if  there  is  one  thing  more  clear  than  another  in  the 
Levitical  sacrifices,  it  is  the  substitution  of  the  innocent  for  the 
guilty  ;  and  it  is  under  this  aspect  that  we  must  consider  the 
death  of  our  Redeemer.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  He  gave  Him- 
self for  us.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  the  Apostle  lays  such 
emphasis  on  the  preciousncss  of  the  sacrifice.  Anything  less 
than  the  costliest  blood  would  not  have  availed  ;  because  it 
must  not  be  simply  the  blood  of  an  individual  sufferer,  but  of 
One  who  could  suffer  for  a  race  of  sinners. 


%\je  (Bbjzct  oi  our  flcticmption.  6^ 

The  blood  of  Christ  was  precious,  because  of  the  dignity  of 
his  nature,  and  because  of  his  perfect  character.  "  Without 
blemish" — that  is,  without  personal  sin.  "Without  spot" — 
that  is,  not  defiled  by  contact  with  sinners  (ver.  19).  Lamblike 
in  meekness,  gentleness,  purity,  and  uncomplaining  suffering. 
And  thus  it  was  adequate  for  the  work  of  cleansing  away  the 
terrible  aggregate  of  sin.  Oh,  precious  blood  !  Oh,  sacred 
heart  of  Jesus,  from  which  it  flowed,  holy,  loving,  tender,  broken 
with  grief!  Oh,  snowy  whiteness  of  robes  washed  in  that 
fountain,  and  purer  than  tlie  snow ! 

II.  The  Object  of  our  Redemption. — "  From  your  vain 
conversation  received  by  tradition  from  your  fathers."  Do  we 
sufficiently  realize  the  position  into  which  the  shedding  of  the 
blood  of  Jesus  has  brought  us  who  believe  ?  It  is  our  ransom 
price,  the  purchase-money  of  our  entire  being  to  be  Christ's. 
The  Apostles  lived  in  the  days  of  a  merciless  form  of  slavery  ; 
but  they  never  hesitated  to  borrow  from  it  the  imagery  by  which 
to  set  forth  our  relationship  to  our  Saviour.  "  Not  your  own, 
but  bought  with  a  price."  "  Denying  the  Lord  who  bought 
them"  (i  Cor.  vi.  19,  20 ;  vii.  23  ;  2  Pet.  ii,  i). 

The  purchaser  of  any  slave  regarded  him  as  his  chattel,  his 
goods.  He  could,  if  he  chose,  fling  him  to  feed  his  lampreys, 
and  none  might  remonstrate  or  punish.  He  looked  on  all  his 
belongings,  and  earnings,  and  talents,  as  so  much  emolument 
for  himself  His  word  and  will  were  absolute  law.  Such  are 
the  rights  which  our  glorious  Master  has  over  us.  He  has 
redeemed  us  from  the  curse  and  penalty  of  sin  to  be  a  people 
for  possession — His  very  own. 

Who  then  of  us  can  live  as  we  have  been  wont,  following 
after  vanity,  treading  in  the  footsteps  of  our  forefathers,  content 
to  do  as  others  before  us  ?  New  claims  have  come  in.  Our 
Redeemer  is  Lord.  As  He  has  set  us  free  from  the  curse  and 
penalty  of  sin,  so  now  He  demands  of  us  to  come  out  and  be 
separate  for  Himself;  leaving  the  husks  for  bread  ;  the  bubble 
for  the  substance  ;  the  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition, 
for  purity,  holiness,  and  devotion  to  Himself. 

What  a  marvellous  exchange  there  is  for  us  in  Jesus  Christ ! 


64  HetrccmEtr  Ibj  ^looh. 

Our  "vain  manner  of  life"  (r.v.)  exchanged  for  "holiness  in 
all  manner  of  living"  (ver.  15,  R.v.);  our  imitation  of  our 
"  fathers  "  for  the  upward  following  of  Him  who  was  raised 
from  the  dead  to  glory  ;  our  reliance  on  "  tradition "  for  vital 
contact  with  Christ  Himself. 

Have  yoii  assumed  this  attitude?  If  not,  without  delay 
confess  with  tears  that  you  have  robbed  your  rightful  Master  ; 
recognize  his  claims  ;  give  up  yourself  entirely  to  his  service  ; 
and  let  the  time  past  more  than  "  suffice"  you  to  have  followed 
the  tradition  of  the  fathers,  with  their  vanities  and  sins.  The 
blood  of  Jesus,  like  that  of  Asahel  shed  on  the  pathway  of  the 
warriors,  shall  make  us  halt  in  our  career,  and  turn  us  to  a 
better  mind. 

HI.  The  Characteristic  of  the  Redeemed.— "  Who  by 
Him  do  believe  in  God."  Our  faith  and  hope,  which  at  the 
beginning  of  our  Christian  life  are  mainly  occupied  with 
Christ,  so  that  we  find  ourselves  most  often  addressing  Him 
in  prayer,  pass  through  Him,  who  is  God,  to  the  Eternal  God. 
The  Son  reveals  the  Father  as  He  promised  (John  xiv.  7-9). 
The  Father  is  known  and  loved  through  the  Son.  God  becomes 
All  in  all  ;  and  the  soul  is  satisfied  to  repose  its  entire  weight 
on  Him  who  has  raised  and  glorified  our  Blessed  Lord. 

It  becomes  us  to  ponder  well  this  important  passage,  attesting 
as  it  does  a  momentous  truth.  Let  us  not  forget  that  the  true 
and  ultimate  object  of  our  faith  must  be  tlie  God  of  the  Resur- 
rection ;  the  Father  of  our  Lord  ;  Jehovah,  in  whom  the  elders 
believed.  And  let  it  be  also  borne  in  mind  that  one  primary 
object  of  the  wondrous  revelation  of  the  Father  in  the  person 
and  work  of  Jesus  has  been  to  make  it  a  little  more  easy  for  our 
trembling  and  sin-stricken  souls  to  believe  in  Him.  "  He  raised 
Him  up  and  gave  Him  glory,  that  our  faith  and  hope  might  be 
in  God." 


ix.-Cii;i7rxstian  tobt, 

"Seeing  ye  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying  the  truth  through  the 
Spirit  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren,  see  that  ye  love  one  another  with 
a  pure  heart  fervently :  being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of 
incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever. " 

1  Peter  i.  22,  23. 

love  the  Lord  whom  we  have  not  seen  (8). 
We  must  also  love  our  brethren  whom  we 
have  seen.  The  latter  indeed  is  the  test  of 
the  former.  "  He  that  loveth  not  his  brother 
whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God, 
whom  he  hath  not  seen?"  (i  John  iv.  20). 
"  See  that  ye  love  one  another." 

But  such  love  is  not  an  easy  thing.  We  are  inclined  to  read 
such  an  exhortation  as  this,  and  go  our  way,  saying,  "  Oh  yes, 
this  is  all  we  need  do.  We  must  love  every  one,  and  especially 
those  who  belong  to  the  same  Christian  church  as  ourselves — 
our  brethretir  And  what  is  the  love  to  which  we  set  ourselves? 
Is  it  not  too  often  an  easy  sentimentality?  To  give  things 
away  :  to  indulge  every  wish  and  whim  :  to  make  things  easy 
and  pleasant  all  round  :  to  wear  a  gracious  smile — this  is  too 
often  the  life  which  we  propose  to  ourselves,  as  the  carrying 
out  of  the  precepts  of  universal  love.  And  for  some  tempera- 
ments this  is  the  easiest  life  possible.  They  are  naturally 
affable,  pleasant,  genial,  and  generous.  But  does  this  fulfil 
the  repeated  injunction  of  the  New  Testament,  that  we  should 
love  one  another  "  as  Christ  has  loved  us  "  ?  For,  after  all, 
there  is  often  a  species  of  refined  selfishness  in  our  apparent 
courtesy,  which  desires  to  stand  well  with  all,  or  shrinks  from 
taking  too  much  trouble. 

What  is  that  love  of  which  our  Lord  and  his  Apostles  speak? 
Not  only,  or  primarily,  kind  feelings,  or  generous  impulses. 
Not  certainly  the  sentimentality  which  breathes  itself  out  in 


'56  Clrriattan  f  oirc. 

sighs  and  raptures.  Not  merely  the  fond  attachment  which 
clings  as  the  rose  against  the  trellis.  But,  above  all  things, 
service — ministry — self-denial  and  self-giving.  To  put  another's 
well-being  before  our  own — not  because  it  is  pleasant  to  do  it, 
but  because  it  is  right.  To  make  another  the  pivot  around 
which  the  wheel  of  activity  revolves.  To  give  oneself  to 
death  a  hundred  times  a  day  in  unobtrusive,  trifling  acts  of 
self-denial.  To  check  the  hasty  word,  the  unkind  speech, 
the  damaging  criticism.  To  vacate  a  comfortable  seat  in  a 
railway  carriage  for  the  sake  of  the  love  of  God.  To  lead 
a  little  child  home,  when  lost  in  the  street,  or  in  an  agony  of 
terror  from  a  thunder-storm,  to  win  the  "  inasinuchP  To  show 
to  the  inmates  of  one's  home,  in  the  most  trifling  incidents,  the 
same  behaviour  as  is  prompted  in  men  of  the  world  by  mere 
politeness  ;  and  to  do  it  for  the  sake  of  Jesus.  All  these  things 
are  traits  of  a  love  which  has  no  native  origin  in  human  hearts, 
but  emanates  from  the  being  of  God,  descending  into  the 
hearts  of  his  own,  and  passing  back  through  them  to  Him 
again.  And  this  is  what  God  asks  of  us.  Let  us  examine  the 
marks  of  such  love  ;  its  efficient  cause  ;  its  Divine  origin.  And 
may  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  firstfruit  is  "  love "  (Gal.  v.  22), 
shed  it  abroad  abundantly  within  our  hearts. 

I.  The  Marks  of  such  Love. 

(i)  Unfeigned. — Dissimulation  is  a  disease  very  antagonistic 
to  Christian  love.  More  than  once  we  are  warned  against  it  in 
the  Apostolic  writings  (Rom.  xii.  9  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  6).  We  are  all 
tempted  to  profess  more  than  we  feel  ;  to  kiss  those  whom  we 
are  betraying  ;  to  cover  with  soft  words  crevasses  which  are 
yawning  deeper  eveiy  day.  How  much  more  effusive  we  are 
to  our  friends  than  our  thoughts  of  them  sometimes  warrant ! 
How  often  we  are  one  thing  to  their  face  and  another  to  their 
back  !  How  subtly  we  are  tempted  to  maintain  appearances, 
because  of  some  ulterior  gain  ! 

Our  politeness  is  often  but  skin-deep.  Our  smiles  assumed 
for  a  purpose.  Our  words  smoother  than  butter,  whilst  our 
hearts  are  drawn  swords.  Our  acceptance  of  apologies,  as 
superficial  as  Joseph's  brethren  thought  that  his  would  prove  to 


2fts  Clraraxtenatka.  67 

be  after  old  Jacob's  death.     Our  love  is  not  altogether  "un- 
feigned." 

(2)  Pure. — "  Hearts  may  be  cemented  by  impurity,  by  un- 
godly conversation  and  society  in  sin,  as  in  uncleanness  or 
drunkenness.  The  mutual  love  of  Christians  must  be  pure, 
from  such  causes  as  are  pure  and  spiritual,  arising  out  of  the 
Saviour's  command  or  example."  The  eye  of  the  heart  must 
be  single  ;  its  habit  stainless  ;  its  motives  "  white  as  the  light." 
There  must  be  no  thought  or  suspicion  of  the  passions  of  the 
flesh,  which  lie  so  near  to  the  springs  of  intense  spirituality  in 
men  and  women.  The  love  of  the  world  so  often  ends  in  lust ; 
lofty  ideals  are  shattered  ;  cloudless  mornings  become  overcast. 
And  our  temptation  lies  in  the  same  direction.  It  is  a  mistake 
to  think  that,  because  we  meet  in  religious  assemblies,  and  talk 
of  hymns,  and  sermons,  and  sacred  themes,  there  is  no  danger 
of  the  taint  of  impurity  destroying  the  delicate  sensitive  bloom 
of  our  spirits.     Too  often  our  love  is  not  pure. 

(3)  Fervently. — "On  the  stretch."  Not  with  the  loose  string 
of  the  unstrung  bow,  but  with  the  tension  of  the  strings  of  the 
violin  drawn  out  to  their  full.  This  is  a  model  which  almost 
seems  to  mock  us.  It  is  so  much  easier  to  be  on  the  stretch 
for  ourselves  than  to  seek  the  good  of  others  with  the  same 
eager  energy.  Our  love  seldom  gets  beyond  "  temperate,"  and 
never  to  boiling  point.  We  have  not  learnt  the  secret  of  the 
heart  bubbling  over.  We  are  not  fervent  in  our  love.  We  do 
not  weep  over  our  brethren's  faults  ;  or  rejoice  in  their  success 
as  much  as  in  our  own  ;  or  love  them  with  a  passion  which 
should  act  as  an  alembic  for  the  evil  that  is  in  them. 

It  was  the  Master's  last  prayer  that  we  should  love  like  this. 
He  meant  that  we  should  put  off  anger,  wrath,  malice,  and  evil 
speaking  ;  and  that  we  should  put  on  bowels  of  mercies, 
kindness,  longsuffering,  and  forbearance.  So  would  the  world 
believe  (John  xvii.  21). 

II.  The  Efficient  Cause  of  such  Love.— It  will  come 
through  "  obeying  the  truth."  This  is  very  marvellous.  We 
should  have  thought  that  our  love  to  each  other  would  have 
been  promoted  best  by  meeting  for  social  enjoyment,  by  knowing 


68  Christian  f  ohc. 

each  other  better,  by  constant  association  in  Christian  work. 
But  this  is  not  God's  way.  The  true  lens  by  which  hearts  are 
made  to  glow  is  the  Truth. 

We  must  know  the  truth. — Put  two  burnished  mirrors  opposite 
each  other,  and  there  will  be  no  glow  of  light  on  either ;  but  if 
a  candle  stand  between,  the  beams  of  light  are  flung  to  and 
fro,  to  an  extent  impossible  to  either  or  both  alone.  So  the 
mere  contact  of  Christian  with  Christian  will  not  necessarily 
produce  the  burning  heart,  unless  there  be  also  between  them 
the  Truth  of  God. 

Study  the  lives  of  the  saintliest  men  ;  and  you  will  find  it  to 
have  been  their  invariable  experience,  that  their  love  to  God 
and  men  grew  in  the  precise  proportion  in  which  they  explored 
the  treasures  of  Divine  truth.  It  was  when  their  intellects  were 
most  engaged  in  discovering  the  depths  of  the  riches  both  of 
the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God,  that  their  hearts  seemed 
in  a  rapture  of  irrepressible  and  inexpressible  ecstasy.  "  Did 
not  our  heart  burn  within  us  while  He  opened  to  ns  the 
Scriptures?" 

We  micst  also  obey  the  truth. — Do,  and  you  shall  know. 
Obey,  and  you  will  love.  Some  try  to  promote  love  by  the 
use  of  endearing  epithets  ;  or  by  the  endless  repetition  of 
experience  ;  or  by  reading  rapturous  expressions,  like  those 
which  were  so  natural  to  a  Bernard  or  a  Rutherford.  But 
such  endeavours  will  soon  wear  themselves  out. 

A  thousand  times  better  shall  we  find  it  to  set  ourselves  to 
"  obey  the  truth."  Let  no  command  lie  unfulfilled  in  some  dusty 
corner  of  the  soul.  Let  no  margin  intervene  between  your  feet 
and  the  limit  of  your  light.  Let  the  life  follow  the  Divine  Word 
as  closely  as  the  great  Lawgiver  followed  the  cloud  sailing 
majestically  through  the  heavens.  Translate  all  precepts  into 
the  vernacular  of  daily  duty ;  and  you  will  verify,  in  a  yet 
deeper  sense  than  ever,  the  Master's  words  :  "  He  that  hath 
my  commandments  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  Me" 
(John  xiv.  2i). 

As  we  obey  the  truth.,  we  shall  be  purified  by  it. — Young  men 
cleanse  their  way  by  taking  heed  thereto  according  to  the 
Divine   Word.      The   Bridegroom  purifies   his  bride    by  the 


washing  of  water  through  the  Word.  Oh,  all  ye  who  groan 
under  the  sense  of  a  defiled  heart— here  is  one  secret  of 
cleanliness,  Obey  the  truth .' 

Many  will  read  these  lines  who  are  athirst  for  purity  and 
love.  Innocence  can  never  be  theirs — the  innocence  that 
consists  in  ignorance  of  evil  and  unconsciousness  of  tempta- 
tion. But  they  desire  that  purity  which  passes  through  evil 
untainted,  as  sunbeams  through  a  foetid  atmosphere,  and  for 
that  love  which  floods  cannot  drown,  like  the  old  Greek  fire 
which  burnt  under  water. 

The  atheist  does  not  think  that  these  things  are  possible. 
He  has  no  hope  in  God,  and  no  belief  in  man.  He  looks  darkly 
on  all  profession,  and  sadly  suspects  every  motive.  Oh,  do  not 
let  your  high  hopes  be  dashed  or  your  ambitions  lowered  by  his 
suggestions.  Undaunted,  still  seek  for  the  holy  grail  of  a  pure  and 
burning  heart.     It  shall  certainly  reward  your  search  at  last. 

There  is  no  need  to  seek  this  blessed  gift  in  the  wilder- 
ness, like  St.  Anthony  ;  on  the  pillar,  like  Simon  Stylites  ;  in 
the  recesses  of  the  forest,  like  Gaudama.  "  The  word  is  nigh 
thee,  in  thy  mouth  and  in  thy  heart"  (Rom.  x.  8).  Purify  your 
heart  in  obeying  the  truth  imto  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren. 

Nor  will  it  be  difficult  to  understand  how  it  is  that  so  simple 
a  method  will  achieve  so  great  a  result,  when  we  have  given  the 
next  consideration  its  true  weight. 

III.  The  Divine  Origin  of  the  Life  within.— "Having 
been  begotten  again"  (23,  R.V.).  Our  spiritual  life  is  "not 
of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God" 
(John  i.  13).  We  have  been  twice  born.  Born  once  by  nature 
into  the  stock  of  the  first  Adam  ;  and  born  a  second  time  by 
grace  into  the  stock  of  the  second  Adam,  the  Lord  from  heaven. 
"Of  his  own  will  God  begat  us  by  the  word  of  truth,  that  we 
should  be  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of  his  creatures"  (James  i.  18). 
One  chief  evidence  of  this  life  is  simple  trust  in  the  Saviour. 
As  many  as  believe  in  his  name  were  born  (John  i.  13). 

And  the  life  that  has  been  implanted  within  us  is  like  the 
inheritance  which  awaits  us  (4)  and  the  blood  which  purchased 
us  (18)— incorruptible.     It  cannot,  therefore,  be  limited  by 


70  (KJrriatiatt  ftobe. 

the  narrow  landmarks  of  time,  or  sense,  or  this  fleeting  world. 
It  overleaps  and  defies  them  all.  It  partakes  of  the  nature  of 
the  Infinite  and  Eternal.  Thus  it  follows  that  the  piety  it  affects 
is  of  celestial  temper,  and  the  love  it  manifests  is  the  true  un- 
feigned love  of  Deity.  The  best  guarantee  of  the  permanence 
and  reality  of  Christian  Purity  and  Love  is  to  look  at  the  life 
from  which  they  emanate,  and  which  is  implanted  by  the  second 
birth— a  life  which  in  turn  is  best  considered  in  the  seed  from 
which  it  has  come,  and  by  which  it  has  been  communicated  to 
the  believer's  heart. 

That  seed  is  here  contrasted  with  the  outward  life  of  men. 
All  flesh  is  as  grass  :  men  and  women  pass  away  as  the  succes- 
sive crops  on  the  meadows.  And  the  glory  ofjnan  as  the  flower 
of  grass.  The  king-cups  and  daisies  share  the  fate  of  the  lowly 
blades  around  them,  emblems  of  the  impotence  of  wealth  or 
strength  or  beauty  to  resist  the  ravages  of  the  sickle  of  Time. 
But  in  contrast  to  this  stands  out  the  eternal  Truth  of  God, 
which  is  enshrined  in  the  holy  words  of  God.  It  is  living  and 
life-giving.     It  remaineth  and  "  abideth  for  ever." 

That  the  Bible  is  amongst  us  to-day — in  spite  of  all  that  has 
been  done  to  destroy  it,  by  fire,  and  search,  and  sword — attests 
the  fact  that  there  are  properties  in  it  which  divide  it  by  an  im- 
passable chasm  from  all  books  beside.  It  is  clearly  true  of  all 
Scripture  words,  that  they  "  are  spirit  and  life,"  and  can  never 
pass  away  ;  and  that  not  one  jot  or  tittle  shall  fail.  And  this 
fact  that  the  Bible  lives  and  abides,  notwithstanding  all  that  has 
been  done  against  it,  proves  that  it  possesses  something  of  the 
life  of  the  eternal  and  infinite  God.  God  is  manifestly  in  this 
Book,  as  of  old  in  the  acacia  bush  of  the  desert ;  or  as  natural 
life  burns  like  a  tiny  spark  within  each  seed  falling  adown  the 
bank.  The  persistence  of  the  Book  proves  God  to  be  in  it. 
And  therefore  it  is  God's  life  which  enters  dead  human  souls 
through  the  Word  and  makes  them  live.  The  life  which  is  thus 
begotten  in  them  is  infinite  and  eternal  as  Himself.  And,  being 
so,  it  lifts  its  possessors  above  the  time-sphere  into  the  very 
realm  of  heaven,  and  enables  them  to  love,  not  with  the  poor 
faltering  love  of  man,  but  with  the  royal,  pure,  unfeigned,  blessed 
love,  which  is  the  very  soul  of  the  life  of  God  Himself. 


"  Wherefore  laying  aside  all  malice,  and  all  guile,  and  hypocrisies,  and 
envies,  and  all  evil  speakings,  as  newborn  babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk  of 
the  Word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby  ;  if  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord 
is  gracious.  "—I  Peter  ii.  1-3. 

^^HIS  paragraph  is  closely  connected  with  the  preced- 
ing one.  In  that  we  learnt  how  we  had  been  born 
again,  and  entered  by  the  new  birth  into  the  family 
of  God.  Here  the  same  thought  is  resumed.  We 
are  addressed  as  the  babes  of  the  Divine  family, 
and  bidden  to  cultivate  the  temper  and  seek  the 

nourishment  suitable  to  a  relationship  at  once  so  blessed  and 

hallowed. 

I.  Our  Condition  as  God's  Little  Ones.— "  New-born 
babes."  The  metaphor  is  a  ver>'  touching  one.  This  world  is 
but  the  nursery  in  which  the  heirs  of  God  are  spending  the  first 
lisping  years  of  their  existence,  preparatory  to  the  opening  of 
life  to  full  maturity  yonder  in  the  light  of  God.  The  most 
advanced  among  us,  in  knowledge  and  attainment,  are,  in  com- 
parison with  what  they  shall  be,  only  as  babes.  The  furthest 
stretch  of  vision,  the  most  perfect  conceptions  of  the  intellect, 
the  fittest  expressions  of  truth,  are  but  as  the  untutored  thoughts 
and  babblings  of  babyhood,  compared  with  what  is  to  be  in  the 
mature  life  which  beckons  us  yonder. 

The  same  idea  is  expressed  by  the  Apostle  Paul  in  his  exquisite 
idyll  on  Christian  love.  He  is  endeavouring  to  show  that  this 
fairest  of  the  whole  band  of  Christian  graces  is  eternal  in  its 
nature,  budding  here,  defying  the  frosts  of  death,  and  blooming 
in  heaven's  everlasting  summer.  And,  to  make  his  conception 
more  emphatic,  he  contrasts  love  with  knowledge,  affirming  that 


72       (Bah'm  ^ehi-^orn  ^abes  antu  tlreir  JFootr. 

our  profoundest  knowledge  must  vanish  away,  because  in  this 
life  we  are  but  children.  "  When  I  was  a  child  I  spake  as  a 
child,  I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  child  ;  but  when 
I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  childish  things."  And,  similarly, 
in  the  next  life,  while  we  retain  the  love  which  we  have  had  in 
this,  we  shall  put  away  the  knowledge  as  partial  and  immature, 
because  from  being  children  we  shall  have  become  men  in 
Christ.  We  need  not  concern  ourselves  now  with  all  the 
majestic  conceptions  which  cluster  around  those  words  :  it  is 
enough  to  notice  the  thought,  that  the  Apostle  Paul  considered 
himself  a  little  child,  compared  with  the  coming  maturity  of 
eternity. 

This  word  should  teach  us  Humility.  "  Our  best  pace  and 
strongest  walking  in  obedience  here  is  but  as  the  stepping  of 
children  when  they  begin  to  go  by  hold,  in  comparison  with 
the  perfect  obedience  of  glory,  when  we  shall  follow  the  Lamb 
whithersoever  He  goeth.  All  our  knowledge  here  is  but  as  the 
ignorance  of  infants,  and  all  our  expressions  of  God  and  of  his 
praises  but  as  the  first  stammerings  of  children,  in  comparison 
with  the  knowledge  we  shall  have  of  Him  hereafter,  when  we  shall 
know  as  we  are  known,  and  with  the  praises  we  shall  offer  to 
Him,  when  that  '  new  song '  shall  be  taught  us."  It  becomes  us, 
therefore,  not  to  exercise  ourselves  in  great  matters,  or  in  things 
too  high  for  us,  but  to  quiet  ourselves  as  a  child  that  is  weaned 
of  its  mother,  so  that  our  souls  may  be  even  as  a  weaned  child. 
Not  surprised,  if  unnoticed  or  unknown  ;  not  angry,  if  treated 
with  small  respect ;  not  discouraged,  if  face  to  face  with  incom- 
prehensible mysteries.  Our  intellect  is  only  in  its  dawn,  our 
powers  undeveloped,  our  mental  grasp  limited.  Far  be  from 
us  the  haughty  heart,  the  proud  look,  the  conceited  opinion,  the 
sweeping  assertion  of  self-satisfaction.  Ours  is  the  lisp  of  in- 
fancy :  "  Abba." 

This  word  should  also  teach  us  Hope.  There  is  no  young 
thing  so  helpless  as  a  babe,  or  for  so  long  dependent  on  its 
parents'  care.  But  He  who  has  appointed  the  long  months  of 
babyhood  has  also  provided  the  love  and  patience  with  which 
mother  and  father  welcome  and  tend  the  strange  wee  thing 
which  has  come  into  their  home.     It  is  not  often  that  a  woman 


^ht  Wtntitv  Care  of  d^ob*  73 

can  forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have  compas- 
sion on  her  son.  Through  ailments  and  sicknesses,  days  of 
anxiety,  and  nights  of  watching  ;  with  love  which  never  considers 
cost,  or  pain,  or  self-denial — two  fond  guardian  angels  care  for 
the  babe.  Its  least  cry  will  compel  the  service  of  a  man  dreaded 
by  all  his  comrades,  and  noted  for  the  strength  and  independence 
of  his  character.  And  shall  God  have  put  into  others  qualities 
in  which  He  is  Himself  deficient?  Shall  He  have  provided  so 
carefully  for  us  in  our  first  birth,  and  have  provided  nought  in 
our  second  ?  Is  not  the  very  love  of  the  human  parent  a  parable 
of  that  of  the  Divine.''     Is  He  not  Mother  and  Father  both? 

It  must  be  so.  Since  He  has  begotten  us  into  his  family,  He 
must  have  to  us  the  love  of  a  parent  to  a  babe  ;  and  we  must 
have  a  claim  on  Him,  as  the  babe  on  its  parent.  The  more 
utterly  helpless,  and  ignorant,  and  dependent  the  babe  is,  the 
stronger  is  its  claim.  Yes,  and  the  more  puny  and  sickly  it  is, 
the  more  urgent  are  its  demands  for  tender  solicitude  and  atten- 
tion, till  the  spark  of  life,  shaded  by  loving  hands  from  the  least 
unkindly  breath,  grows  strong  within  the  tiny  lanthorn.  Who 
is  angry  with  a  child  because  it  is  weakly,  sick,  and  dull  of  brain  ? 
Who  does  not  find  in  these  thmgs  the  reason  for  greater  tender- 
ness, so  that  mothers  are  said  to  love  most  the  children  who  have 
cost  them  most  ?  And  is  it  not  so  with  God  ?  Your  weakness, 
and  ailments,  and  nervouS  dread,  and  besetting  sins,  and  heredi- 
tary taint  of  evil  habit,  and  dulness  of  vision,  will  not  drive  God 
from  you,  but  will  bring  Him  nearer.  These  things  will  draw 
down  his  choicest  love  to  your  poor-cradled  being.  He  will  sit 
beside  you  as  a  nurse.  He  will  watch  your  every  change.  He 
will  care  for  you  with  unslumbering  thoughtfulness.  He  will 
supply  your  every  need.  He  will  make  you  know  things  hidden 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  but  revealed  to  babes,  in  words  which 
even  they  can  understand.  He  will  never  leave  you  until  you 
are  reared  to  the  perfect  beauty  of  maturity  in  Christ. 

This  word  should  also  teach  us  our  true  attitude  towards  God. 
Throw  yourself  on  Him  with  the  abandonment  of  a  babe.  Roll 
on  Him  the  responsibility  of  choosing  for  you — directing,  pro- 
tecting, and  delivering  you.  If  you  cannot  understand  his  will, 
expect  Him  to  make  it  plain.     If  you  cannot  feel  as  you  would, 


believe  that  his  feeHng  towards  you  is  unalterable  as  a  father's. 
If  you  are  overcome  by  sin,  be  sure  that  it  cannot  alienate  his 
love,  any  more  than  can  the  small-pox,  which  has  marred  some 
dear  tiny  face,  prevent  the  mother  from  kissing  the  little  parched 
lips.  Oh,  strong  men  and  women,  never  get  so  strong  as  to 
cease  to  remember  that  you  are  the  babes  of  God,  and  that  you 
may  carry  out  this  winsome  similitude  to  the  full !  Listen  to  his 
declaration  :  "  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children." 

II.  Our  Food. — "Long  for  the  spiritual  milk  which  is  with- 
out guile  "  (r.v.).  At  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter  the  Word 
of  God  was  compared  with  seed ;  here,  with  milk.  But  it  is  the 
same  principle  under  different  aspects.  The  new  life  is  nourished 
by  that  through  which  it  was  first  imparted.  There  are  deep 
analogies  between  the  worlds  of  nature  and  of  grace,  attesting 
the  unity  of  design  which  pervades  the  universe,  making  the 
seen  and  the  unseen  one  great  whole. 

There  is  nothing  which  so  proves  the  inspiration  of  the 
Scriptures  as  their  suitableness  to  the  nurture  of  the  new  life  in 
the  soul.  As  long  as  that  life  is  absent,  there  is  no  special  charm 
in  the  sacred  Word  :  it  lies  unnoticed  on  the  shelf.  But  directly 
the  new  life  has  been  implanted,  and  whilst  yet  in  itsearliest  stages, 
it  seeks  after  the  Word  of  God  as  a  babe  after  its  mother's  milk ; 
and  instantly  it  begins  to  grow.  This  afifinity  between  the  Divine 
life  in  the  soul  and  the  sacred  Scriptures  establishes  their  emana- 
tion from  the  same  source  as  gave  it  birth.  Human  life  in  in- 
fancy is  most  naturally  nourished  by  the  products  of  the  life  from 
which  it  originated ;  and  since  the  Divine  life  in  man  is  nourished 
by  the  words  of  the  Bible,  surely  zV  also  is  proved  to  be  Divine 
in  its  origin,  supernatural  in  its  qualities,  heavenly  in  its  temper 
— as  far  removed  from  the  earthly  and  human  as  is  the  life  to  which 
it  ministers. 

Oh,  well  would  it  be  if  we  were  to  minister  to  the  regenerated 
spirits  around  us  more  of  the  pure  and  unadulterated  Word  of 
God  !  It  is  this  which  they  really  need.  They  may  be  attracted 
and  pleased  for  a  time  by  flowers  of  rhetoric  and  the  dazzling 
glow  of  eloquence  ;  but  they  will  not  be  satt's/ied  by  these  things. 
Underneath  all  there  will  be  a  great  hunger  for  the  sincere  milk 


^tuttteir  Cljriatians.  75 

of  the  Word.  And  when  that  word  is  presented  in  all  its  fulness 
and  simplicity,  eager  appetites  will  gather  around,  as  bees 
attracted  by  the  flower-gardens,  or  the  fragrant  breath  of  the 
heather.  "Before  conversion,  wit  or  eloquence  may  draw  a 
man  to  the  Word,  and  possibly  prove  a  happy  bait  to  catch 
him  ;  but  when  once  he  is  born  again  then  it  is  the  milk  itself 
that  he  desires." 

And  here  surely  we  are  taught  the  reason  why  so  many 
Christians  around  us  are  so  puny  and  stunted  in  their  growth. 
They  are  always  needing  attention,  nursing,  wheeling  about  in 
perambulators,  because  their  teachers  have  not  provided  them 
with  the  nutriment  which  they  really  need.  As  unsuitable  food, 
however  abundant,  will  soon  tell  its  own  tale  on  the  pinched 
face  of  a  babe,  so  the  sickly  condition  of  so  many  Christians 
sets  forth  a  lamentable  complaint  of  the  food  with  which  they 
are  supplied.  To  say  nothing  of  strong  meat,  they  do  not  even 
get  milk.  Hence  the  Church  of  God  too  much  resembles  the 
wards  of  a  children's  hospital. 

III.  How  TO  CREATE  AN  APPETITE  FOR  THE  WORD. — 
"  Desire."  One  of  the  most  dangerous  symptoms  is  the  loss  of 
appetite.  It  is  the  danger-signal  warning  that  evil  lurks  un- 
seen within.  And  there  is  no  surer  indication  of  religious  declen- 
sion and  ill-health  than  the  cessation  of  desire  for  the  Word  of 
God.  How  can  that  appetite  be  created  where  lacking,  and 
stimulated  where  declining?  The  answer  is  given  in  the 
context. 

(i)  Put  off  the  evil  that  clings  to  you. — The  word  translated 
"  putting  away "  is  the  same  as  in  Col.  iii.  8.  The  idea  is  the 
change  of  dress  which  is  often  used  as  a  Scriptural  figure  for 
the  change  of  the  habit  of  the  soul.  The  habiliments  which  we 
must  doff  are  enumerated,  and  a  terrible  catalogue  it  is.  Alas 
that  it  should  ever  have  been  necessary,  or  that  it  should  still 
be,  to  urge  Christians  to  surrender  such  obvious  evils  as 
these ! 

Malice.,  which  is  anger  cooled  down  into  "double-distilled 
malignity,"  rejoicing  in  the  misfortunes  which  come  to  others. 
Gtiile^  which  savours  of  trick  and  craft.    Hypocrisy,  the  J  udas-act 


76        (Bat's  ^tia-'^ovn  ^abea  anh  t\jtit  JFonir. 

of  concealing  treachery  beneath  the  garb  of  friendship.  Envy, 
which  repines  at  another's  good.  Both  mahce  and  envy  vent 
themselves  in  evil  speaking.  These  things  spoil  the  appetite 
for  God's  Word,  as  surely  as  sweetmeats  clog  the  physical 
appetite  and  taste.  Many  cannot  enjoy  the  Word  of  God,  be- 
cause their  minds  are  so  occupied  with  these  poisoned  dainties, 
or  with  the  sugar-coated  sweetmeats  of  exciting  or  questionable 
literature,  of  worldly  amusements,  and  of  evil  imaginings.  These 
things  must  be  at  once  and  for  ever  put  away.  You  must  elect 
the  cross.  There  must  be  a  casting  aside  of  the  shameful  works 
of  darkness,  so  only  can  the  appetite  for  God's  Word  become 
vigorous  and  eager.  Clear  away  the  rubbish,  and  the  spring 
will  burst  up  naturally  from  the  ground. 

(2)  Remember  that  your  growth  depends  on  your  feeding  oft 
the  Word.  —Who  is  there  amongst  us  that  is  not  anxious  to 
grow  ;  to  become  more  Christlike,  and  holy,  and  devoted  ;  to 
increase  in  knowledge  and  in  grace  ?  But  we  appear  often  to 
imagine  that  we  shall  grow  by  attending  meetings  or  doing 
Christian  work.  It  is  a  disastrous  mistake.  And  until  we  come 
to  see  that  growth  is  proportionate  to  Bible-study,  it  will  be 
impossible  to  rise  up  to  the  perfect  beauty  of  the  stature  of 
Christ.  We  shall  always  be  children,  carried  about  by  every 
wind  of  doctrine. 

Do  not  always  read  your  Bible  because  you  like  to  do  so,  or 
desire  it,  but  because  it  is  right  to  do  it,  and  as  a  matter  of 
simple  duty  to  your  own  life.  Study  the  Word  under  the  light 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  ancient  saint,  when  blindness  was 
setting  in,  was  wont  to  carry  his  Bible  to  the  window,  and  place 
the  open  page  in  the  full  beams  of  the  western  sun.  And  slowly 
the  appetite  will  re-assert  itself,  and  you  will  come  to  esteem 
the  Word  of  God  more  than  your  necessary  food. 

(3)  Stimulate  your  desire  by  the  memory  of  past  enjoyment. — 
"If  so  be  that  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  We 
seek  food,  not  only  because  our  body  requires  it,  but  because 
we  remember  the  past  sweetness  of  it  to  our  taste.  We  often 
take  more  than  is  necessary  to  appease  hunger,  because  the 
food  is  toothsome. 

How  sweet  to  the  taste  is  the  precious  Lord  !     For  none 


appetite  for  tijc  IStorif.  77 

among  the  sons  and  daughters  of  men  can  be  compared  to 
Him.  His  love  has  sometimes  filled  our  souls  with  inexpres- 
sible delight  and  bliss — grapes  of  Eshcol,  prelibations  of  the 
river  of  life,  branches  laden  with  fruit  reaching  over  the  wall. 
And  those  who  have  once  tasted  of  that  love  have  contracted 
a  passion  which  grows  in  being  fed.  Because  they  have  tasted 
they  must  come  again  and  again  to  stay  an  appetite  which, 
though  always  being  met,  is  always  on  the  increase. 

Do  you  not  remember  days  like  these,  of  feasting  and  song, 
when  you  were  led  into  his  banqueting-house,  or  sat  under  his 
shadow  with  great  delight?  If  so,  surely  the  memory  of  them 
will  sharpen  the  jaded  desire,  until  it  cries  with  the  spouse : 
"  Stay  me  with  flagons,  comfort  me  with  apples  ;  for  I  am  sick 
of  love."  Ah,  how  vapid  and  insipid  do  the  joys  of  the  world 
appear  when  once  the  soul  has  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious. 
"  Taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good  :  blessed  is  the  man  that 
trusteth  in  Him." 


Xl.—W\jt  frmous  €oxntx-3tant, 

"To  whom  coming,  as  unto  a  living  stone,  disallowed  indeed  of  men, 
but  chosen  of  God,  and  precious,  ye  also  as  lively  stones  are  built  up  a 
spiritual  house,  an  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable 
to  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  Wherefore  also  it  is  contained  in  the  Scripture, 
Behold,  I  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner-stone,  elect,  precious :  and  he  that 
believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be  confounded.  Unto  you  therefore  which 
believe  He  is  precious :  but  unto  them  which  be  disobedient,  the  stone 
which  the  builders  disallowed,  the  same  is  made  the  head  of  the  comer, 
and  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of  offence,  even  to  them  which  stumble 
at  the  Word,  being  disobedient :  whereunto  also  they  were  appointed. 
But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a 
peculiar  people  :  that  ye  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath 
called  you  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light :  which  in  time  past 
were  not  a  people,  but  are  now  the  people  of  God  ;  which  had  not  obtained 
mercy,  but  now  have  obtained  mercy. " — i  Peter  ii.  4-10. 

ETER,  "surnamed  Cephas,  which  is  by  interpretation 
a  stone,"  has  much  to  say  about  his  Master  as  the 
stone  ;  and  weaves  together  into  a  beautifiil  mosaic 
c/i^f^l,       the  many  allusions  which  convey  this  aspect  of  his 
/^v^V       character  and  work,  sparkling  as  jewels  on  the  page 
\j  of  Scripture. 

In  the  hieroglyphed  chamber  in  Egypt,  where  Jacob  lay 
a-dying,  his  mind  reverted  to  the  massive  stones  which  were 
strewn  over  his  native  land,  and  which  on  one  occasion  had 
figured  so  strangely  in  his  dreams ;  and  he  spake  of  the  coming 
Shepherd  as  being  the  "  Stone  of  Israel."  Moses  in  his  swan- 
song,  when  bidding  the  people  ascribe  greatness  to  God,  alleged 
as  the  reason,  "  He  is  the  Rock."  And  David,  in  the  last  of  his 
Psalms,  opened  his  exquisite  delineation  of  the  true  King  by 
saying,  "The  Rock  of  Israel  spake  to  me." 

New  interest  was  given  to  the  same  thought  by  an  incident 
which  is  said  to  have  occurred  in  the  building  of  Solomon's 
Temple.  The  stones  were  shaped  at  a  distance  from  the  sacred 
site,  that  no  sound  of  chisel  or  stone-saw  might  be  heard  during 
the  building  of  that  house  for  God. 
As  the  palm  of  the  desert,  or  the  oak  of  the  forest,  grows 


^  ^fottc  of  Stumbling.  79 

noiselessly  into  perfect  maturity  and  beauty,  so  did  that  noble 
pile  crown  the  summit  of  Zion.  But  on  one  occasion  a  stone 
was  brought  up  by  the  straining  oxen,  which  refused  to  fit  into 
any  of  the  rising  walls.  And,  after  repeated  attempts  to  dispose 
of  it,  it  was  placed  by  itself  in  a  retired  spot,  and  was  soon  for- 
gotten, perhaps  even  covered  by  a  luxuriant  growth  of  weeds. 
At  last,  as  the  building  neared  completion,  it  was  discovered 
that  a  stone  of  special  form  would  be  required  to  knit  two  walls, 
and  fill  a  particular  corner.  The  need  suggested  the  forgotten 
and  rejected  bit  of  masonry,  which  was  lying  still  where  it  had 
been  discarded.  "  The  stone  which  the  builders  refused  became 
the  head-stone  of  the  corner."  This  incident  is  said  to  have 
suggested  that  reference  of  the  venerable  Psalm,  which  is  quoted 
by  the  Lord  as  applying  to  Himself,  and  is  referred  to  in  at  least 
two  other  places  in  the  New  Testament  besides  this  (Psa.  cxviii. 
22;  Matt.  xxi.  42;  Mark  xii.  10;  Luke  xx.  17;  Acts  iv.  ii; 
Eph.  ii.  20). 

In  a  slightly  different  form,  the  same  thought  re-appears  in 
Isaiah.  The  men  of  his  time  were  full  of  the  project  of  a  foreign 
alliance  as  the  best  means  of  bolstering  up  the  kingdom,  just 
then  in  dire  peril  of  dissolution,  through  internal  dissension  and 
threatening  invasion.  God,  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophet,  com- 
pared the  attempt,  and  the  peace  it  gave,  to  making  a  covenant 
with  death,  and  a  hiding-place  of  lies,  and  foretold  the  breaking 
of  a  storm,  in  which  none  of  these  devices  should  avail  to  shield 
their  inventors.  And  then,  in  answer  to  the  dread  with  which  his 
own  people  foreboded  the  fury  of  that  hail,  and  the  overflowing 
of  those  waters,  He  said  that  He  would  lay  in  Zion,  for  a  founda- 
tion, "a  stone  — a  tried  stone — a  precious  corner  stone,  a  sure 
foundation  ";  and  that  He  who  believed  should  not  make  haste. 

Daniel  adds  one  further  link  to  the  chain  of  holy  thought, 
when  he  likens  the  kingdom  of  God  to  the  quarrjnng  of  a  mighty 
stone  in  some  lone  mountain  rent.  Though  no  hands  are  en- 
gaged upon  it,  it  assumes  shape,  disintegrates  itself  from  its 
rocky  home,  and  begins  to  roll  down  the  mountain  side  crushing 
everything  obstructing  its  path.  If  that  stone  is  for  a  moment 
still,  and  a  man  falls  over  it,  he  is  broken  and  maimed.  It  is 
"a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of  offence."  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  falls  on  some  passer-by  it  grinds  him  to  powder.     In 


8o  Cijc  ^rerioua  ©oritEr-^tonc. 

many  a  highland  valley,  standing  out  amid  the  green  grass,  on 
which  the  sheep  peacefully  browse  in  summer,  there  are  mighty 
masses  of  rock  which  have  leapt  from  the  face  of  the  overhang- 
ing cliffs.  Woe  to  any  man  who  had  been  standing  beneath  at  the 
moment  of  their  fall !  Battered — demolished — ground  to  powder. 
These  are  solemn  words.  But  they  are  adapted  from  the  prophecies 
of  Daniel  by  the  Master  hims'elf  (Dan.  ii.  34  ;  Matt.  xxi.  44). 

I.  Let  us  try  to  Understand  the  Conception  of 
THE  Paragraph. — It  is  full  of  changing  metaphor  ;  image 
piled  on  image  ;  thought  sliding  into  thought,  and  rising  in 
noble  sequence  to  a  pitch  of  sublime  magnificence.  On  a 
massive  bed  of  Rock,  there  lies  a  Stone,  which  is  fitted  to  be  a 
bond  of  union,  joining  lines  of  building,  which  had  run  in  opposite 
directions,  making  "both  one."  It  is  not  only  a  stone,  it  is  a 
cortier  sto7ie  (Eph.  ii.  20). 

Behold  that  stone  !  God  looks  on  it  with  his  sevenfold  omni- 
science ;  and  his  hands  have  engraved  on  it  rare  symbols  of 
mystery  and  beauty,  such  as  no  skilled  human  hand  could  design 
(Zech.  iii.  9).  The  carved  lily  work  of  Jachin  and  Boaz  even 
could  not  vie  with  that  heavenly  workmanship.  How  manifestly 
is  this  stone  both  elect  ?iX\^  precious.  Jesus  was  elect  before  all 
worlds,  as  the  organ  of  creation,  the  channel  of  redemption,  the 
head  of  the  new  race,  the  foundation-stone  of  the  Church.  And 
as  to  his  dignity  and  worth,  He  is  beyond  all  price,  the  pearl  of 
inestimable  value,  the  Koh-i-noor  of  heaven,  the  fairest  among 
ten  thousand,  the  altogether  lovely,  the  jewel  of  God's  heart. 

Next  :  there  might  be  imagined  an  altercation  among  the 
builders.  Though  the  stone  lies  there  ready  to  their  hand,  they 
deliberately  reject  God's  prepared  foundation.  Some  are  inclined 
to  admire  the  carving,  or  to  praise  the  situation  selected  for  it. 
But  more  criticise  it,  or  deride  it,  or  account  it  as  only  suitable 
to  carry  part  of  their  scaffolding.  And  so  after  some  discussion, 
the  builders,  wise  in  their  own  judgment,  pass  away.  "  Dis- 
allowed indeed  of  men  "  !  And  then,  without  foundations,  they 
begin  an  erection,  which  is  built  on  a  seam  of  sand,  and  is  des- 
tined to  stand  as  an  unfinished  monument  of  their  folly. 

But  God's  purpose  cannot  be  foiled.  If  men  will  not  build 
on  his  foundation,  yet  there  shall  still  stand  on  it  a  structure  to 


^  spiritual  '^onzt,  8i 

his  eternal  praise.  Here  is  a  marvel  indeed  !  For,  lo  !  the 
stone  h'ves.  "A  living  stone."  "  It  is  full  of  eyes."  Nay,  more, 
it  is  attractive  as  magnetized  iron  :  it  draws  to  itself  other  stones, 
dead,  heavy,  hard,  which  are  lying  all  around  ;  and  as  one  after 
another  they  slowly  approach  it,  they  also  begin  to  live.  "  To 
whom  coming,  a  living  stone,  ye  also,  as  living  sfones."  But 
even  here  the  marvel  does  not  stay.  As  in  the  prophet's  vision, 
bone  after  bone  disentangled  itself  from  the  heaps  of  the  slain, 
and  built  itself  up  into  the  order  and  symmetry  of  the  human 
frame,  so  here  stone  follows  stone,  as  if  gathered  by  unseen  hands, 
and  together  they  build  up  a  house,  the  fabric  of  which  is  not 
material,  but  spiritual ;  because,  as  the  stones  have  passed  into 
life,  they  have  dropped  their  grosser  nature,  and  have  become 
etherealized  into  a  spirituality  of  essence,  befitting  the  con- 
stituent parts  of  "  a  spiritual  house."  God's  home  is  not  in  the 
high  and  lofty  place  of  the  heavens,  nor  in  any  house  built  by 
man,  but  in  the  structure  composed  of  saved  and  saintly  spirits, 
once  gross,  material,  dead  as  stones,  but  now,  by  contact  with 
Jesus  Christ,  made  pure,  holy,  and,  in  the  deepest  sense,  spiriiu- 
ally-minded.  "  This  is  my  rest  for  ever  :  here  will  I  dwell ;  for 
I  have  desired  it." 

But  in  such  a  temple  there  must  be  priests;  and  in  this  also 
the  Divine  purpose  cannot  fail.  Those  who  were  once  but  as 
the  rubble  of  the  hillside,  are  not  only  constituted  part  of  a 
spiritual  fabric,  but  by  a  rapid  change  in  the  thought,  they  are 
represented  as  performing  priestly  functions,  an  Jioly  priesthood, 
clad  in  the  appointed  garments  for  holiness  and  beauty.  And 
since  a  priesthood  must  have  somewhat  to  offer,  and  these  occu- 
pants of  the  true  temple  cannot  appear  before  the  altar  or  tread 
the  inner  shrine,  with  empty  hands,  there  are  sac7-ijices  prepaj-ed : 
yet  (and  the  thought  changes  once  more)  these  sacrifices  are 
not  material  any  more  than  they  need  to  be  propitiatory,  since 
the  one  all-sufficient  sacrifice  for  sin  has  been  offered  once  for  all ; 
but  they  are  spiritual,  and  consist  in  the  consecrated  lives  and 
jubilant  praises  of  those  who  have  been  raised  from  the  dust  to 
offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God,  by  Jesus  Christ. 

Nor  is  that  all  :  those  who  are  thus  associated  with  Christ  are 
identified  with  Him  in  the  esteem  and  love  of  God.     In  the  one 

F 


82  CItc  prcnoMs  (K0rttEr-^tottc. 

verse,  we  are  told  that  our  Lord  is  precious  in  the  esteem  of  the 
Father — his  beloved  ;  his  darling  ;  his  only  one.  But  in  the 
original  Greek  of  a  following  verse,  correctly  rendered  in  the 
R.V.,  this  preciousness  is  assigned  to  us  ;  for  you  therefore  which 
believe  is  the  preciousness.  Not  only  is  Jesus  precious  to  us,  as 
our  beloved  and  our  friend,  but  his  worth  and  beauty  in  the  mind 
of  God  are  passed  on  to  us  who  believe  ;  so  that  our  dull  common 
natures  flash  in  the  excellence  of  his  loveliness.  Yes,  and  we 
are  changed  into  his  likeness  from  glory  to  glory.  Thus  the 
fishermen  of  Galilee  are  discovered  in  the  lowest  tier  of  the 
foundations  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  as  precious  stones.  And 
what  is  true  of  them  is  in  a  measure  true  of  us  all.  Iron  touches 
magnetized  iron  and  becomes  magnetic.  Stones  touch  the  Stone 
and  become  jewels.  Thus  God  manufactures  his  stores  of  pre- 
cious stones,  the  facets  of  which,  cut  here  in  pain,  shall  flash  for 
ever  in  the  light  of  his  own  glory  yonder, 

And  now,  ere  we  turn  away,  let  us  look  once  more  at  the 
disobedient  and  disbelieving  builders.  Some  of  them  have 
stumbled  over  the  Divine  preparation,  and  are  hopelessly 
maimed  ;  others  wander  out  on  to  the  dark  mountains,  where 
they  will  meet  with  many  a  disaster,  falling  down  precipices, 
or  being  otherwise  overtaken  with  death.  And  their  proud 
building  shall  stand  as  a  second  Babel,  for  the  laughter  of  the 
world.  They  are  "  confounded  "  indeed :  a  fate  which  is  impos- 
sible for  those  who  build  on  God's  elect  foundation.  Alas  that 
men  should  abuse  the  very  means  which  God  had  prepared  for 
their  salvation  and  blessedness  ! 

II.  The  Personal  Application.  Ye  arc  an  elect  race 
(r.v.).— There  are  elect  races  in  the  world,  standing  in  the 
sunlit  circle  of  civilization,  not  for  themselves  only,  but  for 
others.  The  larger  the  privilege,  the  greater  the  responsibility. 
This  is  the  Divine  method  of  government  through  the  selection 
of  nations  or  races,  which  are  specially  gifted  and  endowed,  that 
they  may  be  better  qualified  to  help  and  save  their  fellows.  And 
the  position  of  the  Israelite  nation,  to  whom  pertained  "  the 
adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,"  was  expressly 
entrusted  to  them,  that  through  them  God  might  bless  all  the 


"  |l  I0I5  Ration."  83 

nations  of  the  earth.  But  during  the  present  period  of  rejection 
the  Christian  Church  has  been  summoned  to  this  glorious  work 
of  becoming  the  channel  for  the  Divine  blessing  to  mankind. 

A  royal  priesthood. — These  two  offices  were  jealously  kept 
apart  in  Israel,  and  when  Uzziah  attempted  to  combine  them  he 
was  driven  from  the  Temple  with  the  brand  of  leprosy  on  his 
brow.  But  in  Christ  they  blend.  "  He  is  a  priest  upon  his 
throne"  (Zech.  vi.  13).  And  aJl  his  followers  are  constituted 
kings  and  priests  (Rev.  i.  6).  As  priests  we  worship  in  near 
proximity  to  God  ;  as  kings  we  rule  over  men  with  a  rule  born 
of  love,  which  blesses  and  saves. 

An  holy  nallon.— This  expression,  like  the  former,  comes  from 
the  ancient  covenant  into  which  God  entered  with  Israel  at 
Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  6).  Israel  failed  in  keeping  it,  and,  as  a 
nation,  they  have  been  temporarily  cast  aside  ;  but  the  indi- 
viduals, whether  Jews  or  Greeks,  who  have  accepted  Christ, 
constitute  in  their  hosts  another  nation,  which,  as  an  innumer- 
able multitude,  lives  throughout  the  world,  obeying  a  higher 
morality,  citizens  of  the  city  which  can  never  pass  away. 

A  people  for  God's  own  possession. — Love  yearns  for  pro- 
prietorship ;  nor  can  the  heart  of  God  be  satisfied  unless  it  can 
speak  of  some  as  its  own.  Oh,  happy  they  who  have  obeyed 
his  summons,  and  have  made  a  complete  surrender  of  themselves 
to  Him  !  He  has  already  taken  them  for  his  own  possession. 
Enclosed  as  a  garden  ;  tilled  as  a  field  ;  inhabited  as  a  home  ; 
guarded,  kept,  used,  loved,  with  an  emphasis  none  others  know. 
Nor  is  there  anything  in  God  Himself  which  is  not  at  the  dis- 
posal of  those  who  hold  nothing  back  from  Him. 

How  can  we  repay  Him  for  all  that  He  has  done  for  us — 
when  we  compare  what  we  are,  with  what  we  were  .'*  Once  in 
darkness,  now  in  marvellous  light.  Once  not  included  among 
the  people  of  God,  now  accounted  as  part  of  them.  Once  with- 
out hope  of  mercy,  now  the  happy  recipients  of  untold  mercy. 
What  shall  we  say?  Is  it  not  our  duty  to  praise  Him,  not  only 
with  our  lips,  but  in  our  lives,  casting  our  crowns  at  his  feet,  and 
bearing  our  part  in  the  song  of  adoration,  which  from  all  creation 
breaks  around  his  throne.     Let  us  show  forth  his  praise  ! 


Xli.-f  bi  ^Ua  fax  a  llattukss  life, 

"Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you  as  strangers  and  pilgrims,  abstain  from 
fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the  soul ;  having  your  conversation  honest 
among  the  Gentiles  :  that  whereas  they  speak  against  you  as  evildoers,  they 
may  by  your  good  works,  which  they  shall  behold,  glorify  God  in  the  day 
of  visitation. " — i  Peter  ii.  ii,  12. 

PT^?^*  ^  now  pass  from  the  more  purely  doctnnal  to  the 
practical.     All  the  Apostles  begin  their  Epistles 

,^/(VVlf^iT  by  laying  adamant  foundations  of  Gospel  truth, 
"^^^/^f^      o"  which  they  erect  a  superstructure  of  exhorta- 

C^\'^  tions  to  practical  Godliness.  Perhaps  this  divi- 
x>  sion   is   less   noticeable   in   the  writings  of  the 

Apostle  Peter  than  in  those  of  his  "beloved  brother  Paul."  Still 
there  is  clearly  a  transition  at  this  point.  The  sermon  that  has 
no  personal  application  is  a  failure.  Doctrine  without  precept 
tends  to  dry  speculation.  Precept  without  doctrine  tends  to  a 
sapless  formalism,  destitute  of  power. 

How  tenderly  these  exhortations  are  expressed  !  It  is  not 
easy  to  realize  that  Peter,  the  strong  rock-man,  is  speaking 
here.  But  years  of  sorrow  have  done  their  work,  in  mellowing 
and  toning  the  roughness  of  his  character.  And  there  is  a 
gentleness  in  his  voice,  as  he  beseeches  his  dearly  beloved ve?ideYs, 
which  must  have  been  one  of  the  strongest  persuasives  to  the 
life  for  which  he  pleaded.  This  plea  for  a  blameless  life  must 
have  gone  home  with  double  effect,  because  the  shaft  was  winged 
with  feathers  drawn  from  love's  gentle  breast.  The  force  of  the 
expression  is  the  greater,  because  it  is  not  often  that  we  find 
Peter  pleading  thus.  Christian  love  does  not  always  require  the 
use  of  tender  and  effusive  expressions.  There  is  always  a  danger 
of  their  losing  their  meaning  and  power  through  incessant  repe- 
tition ;  but  there  are  occasions,  especially  when  we  yearn  for 


^E  on  jour  ©uarir!  85 

the  welfare  of  others,  at  which,  though  we  might  be  bold  enough 
to  enjoin  them  that  which  is  convenient,  yet,  for  love's  sake,  we 
rather  beseech  them. 

Fleshly  lusts  are  enumerated  in  detail  in  several  passages  of 
the  Word  of  God  (Gal.  v.  19-21).  Lust  is  inordinate  desire — 
the  desire  for  too  much  of  a  good  thing,  or  for  any  of  a  bad 
one.  Fleshly  lusts  are  those  which  seek  their  gratification 
through  the  avenues  of  the  physical  nature  with  which  God 
has  endowed  us.  We  are  all  provided  with  certain  natural 
instincts  and  desires,  which  have  been  implanted  for  right  and 
useful  purposes,  and  are  innocent  and  right  when  regulated  by 
the  will  of  God.  But  these  natural  appetites  are  constantly 
fretting  against  restraint,  yearning^  for  unlawful  gratification, 
seething  and  foaming  as  the  sea-waves  against  a  harbour  bar. 
If  you  yield  to  them  ;  if  you  love  anything  outside  the  circle  of 
God's  will ;  if  you  follow  your  own  wild  instincts,  irrespective  of 
the  self-restraint  demanded  by  conscience  ;  if  you  indulge  any 
on^  side  of  your  nature  out  of  the  due  balance  and  equilibrium 
of  the  whole  ;  if  you  allow  an  undue  monopoly  of  taste  or 
thought  in  one  direction — then  beware  !  You  need  especially  to 
be  on  your  guard  against  the  fleshly  lusts  of  which  the  Apostle 
speaks. 

They  war  against  the  soul. — That  word  "war"  is  full  of 
meaning.  It  gives  the  idea  of  the  march  of  an  army  against  a 
city,  as  of  the  Greeks  to  surround  and  capture  Troy — an 
assault  which  began  with  open  war  and  ended  by  the  stratagem 
of  the  wooden  horse,  from  which  the  armed  warriors  descended 
into  the  heart  of  the  city  at  dead  of  night.  Of  course  we 
should  all  admit  that  excessive  indulgence  in  any  appetite 
injures  the  body,  and  especially  the  organs  through  which  the 
sin  against  the  whole  fabric  has  been  committed.  But  we  may 
not  all  realize  how  destructive  these  fleshly  lusts  are  to  the  inner 
life.  They  attack  and  conquer  it,  and  lead  it  into  captivity, 
impairing  its  energies  sullying  its  purity,  lowering  its  tone,  and 
cutting  off  the  locks  of  moral  strength.  Remember  then,  when 
tempted  to  yield  to  some  unholy  prompting,  even  though  you 
only  indulge  the  thought  or  wish,  that  you  are  exposing  yourself 
to  a  certain  diminution  of  spiritual  force,  which  will  inevitably 


S6  fjjc  flea  for  a  giamdesa  fife. 

cripple  your  endeavours,  and  show  itself  in  failure  and  defeat. 
No  act  of  sensual  indulgence  is  possible  without  inevitable 
injury  to  our  true  selves.  It  may  be  forgiven,  and  put  away, 
through  the  forgiveness  of  God,  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  ;  but  the 
soul  can  never  be  quite  what  it  would  have  been  had  the 
temptation  been  overcome,  and  the  grace  of  self-restraint 
exercised. 

How  many  there  are  around  us,  eminently  fitted  by  their 
gifts,  to  lead  the  hosts  of  God,  who,  like  Samson,  grind  in  the 
prison-house,  making  pastime  for  their  foes,  because  they  have 
been  mastered  by  appetites  which  they  should  have  controlled, 
as  the  horseman  his  fiery  steed  !  Is  theie  not  a  deep  spiritual 
truth  in  the  notion  of  the  savage  warrior,  that  the  strength  of  a 
fallen  foe  enters  the  arm  which  has  smitten  him  to  the  dust  ? 
Indulge  the  flesh — and  you  are  weak.  Curb  it  by  self  restraint — 
and  you  are  strong. 

We  need,  however,  to  notice  how  this  abstmence  from  unholy 
indulgence  may  be  realised.  And  it  may  be  helpful  to  remem- 
ber the  following  points  : — 

(i)  Let  us  u?iderstand  that  self-restraint  is  possible.— \\.  is 
quite  true  that  we  are  children  of  a  sinning  race,  and  come  into 
life  with  the  taint  of  evil  in  us.  This  is  not  a  matter  for  argu- 
ment, but  of  each  man's  individual  experience.  Though  the 
third  chapter  of  Genesis  and  the  first  chapter  of  Romans  had 
never  been  penned,  we  must  have  felt  that  somewhere  there 
had  been  an  awful  lapse  in  the  story  of  our  race,  or  that  it 
had  been  the  sport  of  some  malign  fate.  From  the  first  there 
is  in  us  all  an  hereditary  tendency  to  gratify  to  excess  the 
promptings  of  the  natural  appetite.  Besides  this  we  have 
deepened  and  intensified  these  inherited  tendencies  by  our 
actual  transgressions.  There  have  been  repeated  yieldings, 
each  one  of  which  has  nourished  and  fostered  their  strength. 
And  we  resemble  an  athlete,  who  has  permitted  himself  to  be 
bound  around  with  threads  of  cotton,  any  of  which  could  be 
snapt  in  a  moment,  but  all  of  which  together  hold  him  like  an 
iron  chain. 

But,  notwithstanding  this,  it  is  true  that  no  temptation  can 
happen  to  us  but  such  as  is  common  to  man — none  with  which 


"  ^orc  than  (Konquerora."  87 

God  cannot  deal.  It  would  be  impious  to  say  that  God  has 
permitted  evil  to  arrive  at  such  a  pitch  that  He  cannot  cope 
with  it ;  or  that  there  is  any  sin,  usurping  his  throne  in  the  inner 
realm,  which  He  cannot  quell. 

It  is  immaterial  how  strong  may  be  your  inherited  tendencies 
towards  evil,  or  the  habits  which  you  have  formed  by  successive 
acts  of  sin  — God  is  able  to  give  you  deliverance,  and  to  keep  you 
from  being  overcome.  It  is  possible  even  for  yo2i  to  abstain 
from  the  fleshly  lusts  which  have  been  subjugating  your  soul, 
as  Moabites  and  Philistines  did  the  fair  land  of  Israel  in  the 
days  when  the  Judges  ruled.  Every  command  carries  a 
promise  at  its  heart  ;  and  this  loving  entreaty  for  a  better, 
purer  life  hides  a  Divine  undertaking  that  you  shall  yet  be 
more  than  conqueror,  putting  your  foot  on  flesh  and  self,  and 
reigning  where  now  you  groan  in  slavery.  Take  heart  !  it  is 
possible  even  for  }'ou  to  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  because  God 
is  able  to  keep. 

(2)  CJioose  death. — There  is  a  sense  in  which  we  all  died  in 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  when  on  the  cross  He  yielded  up  his 
spirit  to  his  Father.  There  is  also  another  sense  in  which  we 
must  die  daily,  in  the  constant  denial  of  self  But,  besides  this, 
there  must  be  one  definite  moment  in  each  Christian's  life  when 
death  is  definitely  chosen  for  all  that  is  selfish,  worldly,  fleshly, 
and  of  the  devil.  This  is  surely  the  meaning  of  the  Apostle, 
when  he  says,  using  a  tense  which  signifies  a  definite  past  act : 
"  They  that  are  of  Christ  Jesus  crucified  the  flesh  with  the 
passions  and  the  lusts  thereof"  (Gal.  v.  24). 

Too  many  of  us  never  come  to  that  point.  We  accept  the 
incursions  and  reign  of  evil  things  too  much  as  an  inevitable 
experience  to  which  we  must  ever  be  liable  in  this  world. 
We  yield,  and  repent,  and  curse  ourselves,  and  yield  again. 
Christians  often  speak  of  their  besetting  sins  as  natural 
infirmities  which  they  cannot  help,  but  which  must  be  borne 
as  the  diseases  incident  to  childhood.  There  is  too  little  of  the 
rising  up  of  a  holy  and  almost  fierce  determination  to  be  free. 

Or  if  there  be  such  a  resolve,  it  often  lacks  completeness.  It 
shuts  the  front  door  but  not  the  back  door  of  the  nature, 
against  the  thought  of  possible  indulgence.     It  leaves  an  almost 


88  Whz  iUa  for  a  §lam£l£sa  fife. 

invisible  thread  of  communication  between  the  soul  and  the 
evils  of  which  it  would  fain  be  rid,  and  along  it  the  contagion 
is  still  free  to  pass.  And  as  long  as  there  is  the  smallest 
flaw  in  the  integrity  of  the  soul's  purpose,  there  is  no  hope  of 
deliverance.  We  must  cut  all  connection,  close  every  aperture, 
and  abandon  all  thought  of  fleshly  indulgence  in  every  shape 
and  form.     In  short,  we  must  choose  death. 

Is  not  this  the  secret  of  your  repeated  failure?  You  have 
heard  about  the  keeping  power  of  Christ,  and  have  appealed 
for  it.  But  you  have  not  been  kept.  You  have  been  overcome 
in  spite  of  your  cries  for  help.  And  you  will  never  get  right 
until  you  go  down  into  the  grave  where  Jesus  lay,  and  place 
yourself  on  that  rough  rocky  niche,  whilst  the  heavy  stone  shuts 
you  away  from  all  that  you  held  dear.  And  when  you  count  all 
things  dross  for  his  sake,  you  will  win  Christ.  Through  the 
grave  you  will  come  to  the  Easter  dawn.  Death  will  be  the 
gate  of  life.  Having  been  crucified  with  Christ,  you  will  dis- 
cover that  his  life  will  flow  into  you- triumphantly. 

With  much  earnestness  do  the  pages  of  the  New  Testament 
appeal  to  us  to  come  to  this  definite  resolution.  But  especially 
is  it  the  keynote  of  that  marvellous  sz'xf/i  chapter  of  Romans^ 
which  appeals  to  us  as  having  died  with  Christ,  and  as  there- 
fore being  free  from  sin.  Expressions  are  employed,  from 
which  we  would  have  shrunk,  as  being  too  forcible,  too 
extreme,  in  order  to  show  how  complete  the  deliverance  is  for 
those  who  have  been  with  Christ  in  the  likeness  of  his  death. 
There  is  not  the  least  doubt  that  our  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  all  fleshly  lusts  is  in  the  precise  measure  in  which  we 
have  embraced  that  idea  of  complete  severance  from  them, 
which  is  suggested  in  the  one  final,  all-severing,  awful  word 
— Death. 

(3)  Walk  in  the  Spirit. — There  are  Christians  who  live  in 
the  Spirit,  but  who  do  not  walk  in  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  25). 
The  distinction  is  an  obvious  one.  We  live  in  the  Spirit, 
because  only  in  Him  we  share  at  all  in  the  life  of  Christ,  a 
life  which  is  everlasting  and  Divine.  But  how  few  of  us  walk 
in  the  Spirit  from  hour  to  hour ;  pausing  at  each  step,  so 
that    He  may  work  or  speak  ;   looking  to  Him  for  guidance 


ung  in  tljc  spirit."  89 

at  each  turn  of  the  path  ;  and  adopting  the  track  which  He 
indicates,  as  by  the  cloud  in  old  tinie,  while  moving  over  the 
desert  sands  ! 

But  nothing  less  than  this  will  suffice.  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit," 
says  the  Apostle,  "  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh." 
It  is  not  enough  to  resolve  to  abstain  :  the  mere  resolution  will 
not  be  sufficient  to  keep  the  door  shut  against  the  pressure  of 
temptation.  We  must  have  something  positive.  Not  the  water 
of  a  negation,  but  the  fire  of  a  possession.  The  indwelling  and 
pre-occupation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  fulness  can  alone  suffice 
for  our  need.  And  this  can  only  be  had  by  a  reverent  and 
perpetual  communication  being  maintained  between  the  soul 
and  Him ;  as  air  must  be  pumped  into  the  diver's  helmet  at 
every  movement  he  makes  on  the  ocean  floor. 

But  when  the  soul  is  pervaded  perpetually  by  the  presence 
and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  easy  to  abstain.  The  soul 
loses  its  very  taste  for  things  in  which  it  formerly  delighted.  It 
detects  them  when  yet  far  distant,  and  shudders  at  their  approach. 
Satisfied  with  the  provision  of  the  Father's  house,  it  turns  v;ith 
disgust  from  the  husks  of  the  swine-trough. 

TJie  motives  for  this  abstinence  are  more  than  sufficient, 
(i)  We  are  sfratigets  and  pilgrims. — "Consider  what  you  are. 
If  you  were  citizens  of  this  world,  then  you  might  drive  the  same 
trade  with  them,  and  follow  the  same  lusts  ;  but  seeing  you  are 
chosen  and  called  out  of  this  world,  and  invested  into  a  new 
society,  made  free  of  another  country,  it  is  very  reasonable  that 
there  be  this  difference  betwixt  you  and  the  world,  that  while 
they  live  as  at  home,  your  carriage  be  such  as  becomes  strangers; 
not  glutting  yourselves  with  their  pleasures,  not  surfeiting  upon 
their  delicious  fruits,  but  living  warily  and  soberly." 

However  gay  or  comfortable  the  hostelry  may  be,  the  traveller 
hastens  homewards.  It  is  not  for  him  to  entangle  himself  with 
the  fascinations  and  allurements  of  the  towns  through  which  he 
goes.  Indeed,  he  has  no  time  to  be  allured  ;  before  the  meshes 
of  the  net  enwrap  him  he  is  gone.  And  the  attractions  of  the 
beloved  circle  which  await  him  so  engage  and  monopolize  his 
heart  that  he  has  no  desire  for  the  unholy  baits  which  are  offered 
to  him.      What  then  have  we  in  common  with  fleshly  lusts, 


90  ®lre  ipica  for  a  blameless  fifs. 

when  our  citizenship  is  in  heaven,  whence  we  are  looking  for 
the  Saviour? 

(2)  We  must  consider  our  influence  on  the  %vorld. — Our  be- 
haviour among  the  Gentiles  must  be  hofiest,  i.e.,  fair  or  beautiful, 
not  only  for  our  sake,  but  for  theirs.  Followers  of  Jesus  must 
never  be  surprised  to  find  themselves  spoken  of  as  evil  doers. 
They  called  the  Master  "  Beelzebub";  how  much  more  will  they 
malign  the  slaves  of  Christ's  household  !  The  most  monstrous 
stories  were  circulated  throughout  the  Roman  Empire  of  the  rites 
which  Christians  were  said  to  perpetrate  in  their  secret  meet- 
ings ;  and  on  the  ground  of  those  stories  they  were  punished 
with  torture  and  death. 

Such  baseless  charges  are  sometimes  made  still,  and  we  must 
take  care  not  to  give  any  occasion  for  them  in  our  behaviour. 
Nay,  we  must  so  live,  that,  in  the  day  of  crisis  and  trial,  men 
may  be  compelled  to  acknowledge  the  worth  of  our  religion,  and 
to  glorify  God  for  having  enabled  us  so  to  bear  and  suffer  and 
endure. 

There  are  arguments  being  built  up  in  sick-chambers,  and 
in  the  furnaces  of  trial  through  which  Christians  are  called  to 
pass,  which  silence  detractors,  and  compel  them  to  admit  the 
presence  of  a  strength,  a  patience,  and  a  fortitude,  for  which 
their  philosophy  cannot  account.  And  in  many  such  cases  has 
blasphemy  been  turned  to  adoration,  and  railing  to  praise. 

With  such  motives  to  animate  us,  let  us  give  a  favourable 
response  to  this  touching  and  earnest  plea  for  a  stainless  and 
blameless  life. 


Xiii.-0lo5'si  ^late. 

"  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake : 
whether  it  be  to  the  king,  as  supreme  ;  or  unto  governors,  as  unto  them  that 
are  sent  by  Him  for  the  punishment  of  evildoers,  and  for  the  praise  of  them 
that  do  well.  For  so  is  the  will  of  God,  that  with  well-doing  ye  may  put  to 
silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men  :  as  free,  and  not  using  your  liberty  for 
a  cloke  of  maliciousness,  but  as  the  servants  of  God." — i  Peter  ii.  13-16. 


Lyrr^T  is  very  remarkable  to  notice  the  frequency  and  earnest- 

■'i     \^       ness  with  which  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament 

*DiAv^     insist  on  the  use  of  that  word  "slave,"  as  describing 

*Lr^    c5     their  true  relationship  to  God.     It  is  the  favourite 

^:\<t        designation  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  "  apostle  and  slave," 

T  and  he  even  gloried  in  wearing  the  brandmarks  of 

the  slavery  of  Jesus.     Not  only  here,  but  in  the  first  line  of  his 

Second  Epistle,  the  Apostle  Peter  describes  himself  in  the  very 

same  terms.     And  the  Apocalyptic  vision  of  the  Apostle  John 

rings  with  the  word,  touched  with  heavenly  light,  transfigured, 

glorified.     That  wondrous  book  is  prepared  for  slaves  ;  they  are 

the  sealed  ;  they  receive  the  rewards  ;  they  see  God's  face  and 

bear  his  name  upon  their  brows.    Heaven  takes  our  most  dreaded 

terms,  and  makes  them  sparkle  in  its  own  light,  till  what  had 

seemed  the  synonym  of  terror  becomes  the  target  of  our  noblest 

aims.     The  servants  of  the  royal  household  are  nobles. 

All  this  is  very  singular.  For  the  slavery  which  throve  in  the 
poisoned  atmosphere  of  the  pagan  world  was  the  most  cruel  and 
wicked  thing^  that  society  has  ever  seen.  The  slavery  of  the 
Roman  Empire  was  slavery  at  its  worst.  The  slave  was  the 
absolute  chattel  of  his  owner,  for  purposes  of  crushing  labour, 
bitter  torture,  degrading  crime.  There  was  no  appeal,  no  hope 
of  redress,  no  escape,  e.xcept  by  the  dread  door  of  death.  And 
yet  it  is  this  system  which  the  sacred  writers  never  weary  of 
applying  to  our  relationship  to  Jesus  Christ.  It  presents  them 
with  an  ideal  which  stirs  their  intensest  enthusiasm. 

It  might  have  been  expected  that  they  would  have  attacked 


92  dob's  ^latrca. 

and  denounced  it,  and  grasped  this  thistle  by  the  hand,  to  up- 
root it  from  the  harvest  field  of  the  world.  But  this  is  not  the 
Divine  method.  God  does  not  deal  with  society  as  a  whole, 
but  with  individuals  one  by  one  ;  not  with  the  abuses,  but  with 
the  spirit  out  of  which  they  arise  ;  not  with  politics,  but  with 
principles.  It  may  be  that  the  Apostles  did  not  realize  the 
certain  effect  of  the  work  which  they  did.  They  went  quietly 
forward,  telling  out  the  message  of  God's  love,  reminding  men 
that  in  Christ  there  was  neither  slave  nor  master,  insisting  that 
their  true  position  was  determined,  not  by  their  outward  con- 
dition, but  by  their  inward  temper.  And  in  doing  this  they  were 
creating  a  world  in  which  slavery  could  not  live.  And  perhaps 
some  among  us,  who  do  not  join  in  crusades  against  existing 
abuses,  but  concentrate  all  their  energy  to  bringing  individual 
souls  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  to 
God,  are  really  doing  as  much  as  others  to  purify  and  elevate 
society  as  a  whole.  You  will  best  save  the  world  by  saving  the 
individuals  who  go  to  make  it  up. 

Instead  of  denouncing  slavery  they  borrowed  from  it  to  indi- 
cate the  disposition  of  their  lives,  and  interwove  it  into  the  fabric 
of  their  discourses.  And  so  it  shone  with  a  heavenly  radiance,  as 
clouds,  drenched  in  the  glow  of  the  setting  sun,  he  along  the 
horizon  as  bars  of  gold.  It  is  on  this  fact,  then,  that  we  are  God's 
slaves,  that  the  Apostle  founds  the  exhortations  of  this  paragraph. 

I.  The  Divine  Despotism.— This  may  seem  a  strong 
phrase.  But  it  is  exactly  Scriptural.  In  the  next  Epistle, 
the  word  used  of  our  Master  is  that  from  which  our  word 
"despot"  was  coined  (2  Pet.  ii.  i).*  And  it  will  well  serve  our 
purpose,  if  it  startles  us  into  a  recognition  of  the  absoluteness 
of  Christ's  authority  over  his  own. 

We  are  too  easy  in  our  treatment  of  our  Lord.  We  call  Him 
Master  and  Lord,  and  we  say  well,  for  so  He  is  :  but  we  do 
not  realize  how  much  the  term  involves  ;  nor  do  we  do  the 
things  that  He  says.  He  is  our  Captain,  and  we  have  to  go, 
or  come,  or  do,  not  because  we  see  the  reasonableness  of  his 


bea-TTOTTiv — "  Lord  "  (Master  in  R.v. ).     See  also  2  Tim.  ii.  21  ;  Jude  4  ; 
Rev.  vi.  10. 


commands,  but  because  He  utters  them.  He  is  our  Owner, 
who  has  purchased  us  for  a  specific  purpose,  and  whose 
intentions  will  be  frustrated  unless  He  receive  from  us  absolute 
and  exact  obedience.  He  is  the  Founder  of  our  order,  and 
surely  has  a  right  to  look  for  as  much  from  us  as  the  Jesuit 
demands  of  his  "  black-robed  militia,"  each  of  whom  must  be 
"  as  a  staff  in  a  blind  man's  hand."  * 

God  hath  exalted  Him  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour.  We  are  too 
prone  to  reverse  the  order,  and  make  Him  a  Saviour  and  a  Prince. 
And  we  are  apt  to  think  much  more  of  being  saved  by  Him,  than 
of  doing  as  He  bids.  And  it  is  because  we  know  so  little  of  Jesus 
as  King  that  we  experience  so  Httle  of  Him  as  Saviour. 

It  would  do  us  good  to  again  take  the  Gospels  in  hand,  and 
carefully  study  them  with  the  one  object  of  noticing  their  inces- 
sant appeals  for  obedience.  Everything  in  Christian  life  hinges 
on  doing  as  we  are  told. 

"Ours  not  to  reason  why, 
Ours  not  to  make  reply, 
Ours  but  to  do  and  die." 

The  rights  of  Jesus  Christ  to  exercise  this  despotic  authority 
are  founded  on  many  considerations,  on  which  just  now  we 
may  not  dwell  at  length.  He  gave  Himself  for  us  ;  and  his 
supreme  gift  of  Himself  for  us  demands  the  absolute  surrender 
of  ourselves  to  Him.  The  blood  which  He  shed  on  Cahary 
is  the  price  by  which  we  have  been  bought ;  and  we  cannot  be 
other  than  the  property  of  our  purchaser.  His  rights  over  us 
are  also  founded  on  the  gift  made  by  the  Father  to  the  Son, 
before  all  worlds,  of  those  who,  in  the  process  of  time,  should 
come  to  Him.  Besides  all  which,  we  have  ourselves  knelt 
at  his  feet  professing  our  desire  to  be,  ever,  only,  always  his ; 
not  in  part,  but  in  the  entire  range  of  spirit,  soul,  and  body. 
Who  then  can  challenge  his  right  to  be  despotic  ?  Because 
He  is  what  He  is,  in  dignity,  in  character,  in  infinite  grace,  in 
superior  knowledge,  we  may  gladly  and  safely  put  the  entire 
control  of  our  lives  into  his  hands,  yielding  an  obedience 
which  we  dare  not  give  to  any  creature  living,  and  obeying 
absolutely,  blindly,  dumbly. 

*  Dr.  Maclaren. 


94  (loir's  ^lafcres. 

II.  The  Effect  of  this  Conception.— "  Submit,."  See 
how  absolutely  the  Apostle  rivets  the  collar  of  obedience  on 
the  necks  of  these  scattered  saints.  They  might  be  disposed 
to  hesitate  in  their  submission  to  every  ordinance  of  man  ; 
but  he  silences  their  remonstrances,  and  makes  their  yoke 
easy,  by  whispering,  Submit^  for  the  Lord^s  sake.  They  might 
demand  why  they  should  go  on  in  patient  well-doing  amid  the 
detraction  and  ignorant  opposition  of  foolish  men  ;  but  he 
forecloses  every  objection,  by  saying.  So  is  the  will  of  God. 
They  might  vaunt  their  freedom,  as  having  been  introduced 
into  a  new  realm,  the  tidings  of  which  were  beginning  to 
steal  through  the  world,  as  the  first  faint  breath  of  spring 
through  the  woods  :  but  he  met  their  argument  by  reminding 
them  that,  though  they  were  free,  they  must  not  use  their 
liberty  as  a  veil  for  evil  living,  because  they  were  the  servants 
(lit.  the  slaves)  of  God. 

There  are  wonderful  contrasts  in  these  words.  Those  who 
stand  erect  as  the  brothers  of  Christ  in  the  presence  of  God, 
are  bidden  to  submit  to  every  ordinance  of  men.  Those  who 
avow  their  determination  to  live  only  in  the  will  of  God  dis- 
cover that  will  working  through  the  appointments  of  foolish 
and  ignorant  men.  The  freemen  of  God  are  his  slaves  ;  and 
therefore  the  servants  of  men.  So  great,  and  full,  and  rich  is 
that  real  life  which  we  may  live  in  communion  with  God,  that 
we  can  afford  to  be  very  liberal  in  complying  with  the  demands 
of  the  human  institutions  by  which  we  are  surrounded,  so  far  as 
they  do  not  clash  with  our  allegiance  to  our  Master  and  Lord. 

There  is  great  helpfulness  in  these  words.  Often,  when  sub- 
mission is  required  of  us  to  some  arbitrary  and  imperious 
command,  we  are  inclined  to  resent  it  :  the  blood  flushes  our 
face,  lightning  flashes  in  our  eyes,  and  we  are  disposed  to  go 
off  in  a  rage,  saying,  "  Why  should  I  do  this  thing  ? "  Then 
the  Master  approaches  us,  saying,  "  Submit  for  my  sake ;  do  it 
because  I  wish  it  :  gently  remonstrate  against  the  injustice  if 
you  will,  and  if  your  remonstrances  are  likely  to  avail ;  but  if 
you  cannot  alter  or  amend  it,  be  content  to  submit  :  I  wish 
it  to  be  so."  This  makes  the  sullen  iron  swim ;  changes 
Marah  into  Elim  ;  and  fills  the  lion  with  the  sweetness  of  the 


"  JFor  the  l^orb's  ^akc."  95 

honey-comb.  Oh,  do  not  complain,  and  fret,  and  chafe  against 
men  .'  Tell  your  griefs  to  your  King.  Wait  patiently  for  Him  ; 
and  He  will  set  you  free.  Or,  if  not,  then  believe  that  his  per- 
missions are  his  appointments  ;  and  in  bending  your  meek  neck 
to  the  unwelcome  yoke  of  human  ordinances,  be  sure  that  you 
are  performing  his  good  pleasure.  The  talisman  of  victory  in 
all  such  cases — the  key  to  earth's  best  peace  as  it  is  to  heaven's 
choicest  boons—  is  found  in  the  little  words,  "/^r  t/ie  Lord's 
sake." 

There  is  great  reasonablefiess  in  these  words.  The  world 
from  the  first  hated  the  religion  of  Jesus,  and  professed  to 
suspect  it,  as  inimical  to  itself  It  was  a  favourite  charge 
against  the  early  Christians  that  they  were  plotting  the  over- 
throw of  the  Empire,  and  the  dethronement  of  Caesar,  in  favour 
of  "one  Jesus."  Their  private  meetings  were  supposed  to  be 
convened  for  unlawful  political  purposes.  It  was  therefore 
necessary  that  men's  minds  should  be  disabused  of  the  im- 
pression that  any  violence  subversive  of  existing  society  was 
contemplated. 

For  this  purpose  the  early  Christians  were  specially  exhorted 
to  conform,  so  far  as  they  could,  to  the  demands  and  usages  of 
the  people  amongst  whom  they  sojourned  as  pilgrims  and 
strangers.  They  were  to  render  to  Caesar  the  things  that  were 
Caesar's.  If  they  accepted  the  order,  and  safety,  and  privileges 
of  a  settled  national  and  corporate  life,  they  were  to  bear  their 
quota  of  its  cost,  and  yield  homage  to  the  form  of  government 
which  they  found  in  vogue,  agreeing  to  modify  or  alter  it  only 
by  orderly  and  constitutional  methods.  They  were  therefore 
called  upon  to  render  to  all  their  dues,  tribute  to  whom  tribute, 
custom  to  whom  custom,  fear  to  whom  fear,  honour  to  whom 
honour.  A  quiet  and  peaceable  life  was  to  be  their  model ; 
submission  their  law  ;  well-doing  their  purpose.  Thus,  in  the 
process  of  time,  they  would  disarm  prejudice,  and  conciliate 
their  foes,  by  the  exhibition  of  the  graces  of  an  inoffensive, 
tender,  and  beneficent  life. 

It  is  very  beautiful  to  remark  how  literally  these  precepts 
were  obeyed.  Tertullian  contrasts  the  early  Christians  with 
the  heathen.     These  delighted  in  the  bloody  gladiatorial  shows 


96  doit's  ^lahca. 

of  the  amphitheatre,  whereas  a  Christian  was  excommunicated 
if  he  went  to  it  at  all.  When  the  pagans  deserted  their  nearest 
relatives  in  the  plague,  Christians  .ministered  to  the  sick. 
When  Gentiles  left  their  dead  unburied  on  the  field  of  battle, 
and  cast  their  wounded  into  the  streets,  the  disciples  hastened 
to  relieve  their  sufferings.  Thus  they  muzzled  the  ignorance  of 
foolish  men.  The  tide  began  to  turn.  The  more  microscopic 
(ver.  12)  was  the  inspection  of  the  world,  the  more  evident  was 
it  that  a  new  and  blameless  character  was  abroad.  Pliny 
admitted  in  his  letter  to  the  Emperor  Trajan  that  there  was  no 
cause  of  blame  in  the  followers  of  the  new  religion,  "save  a 
perverse  and  extravagant  superstition."  And  the  holy  example 
of  the  primitive  believers  is  cited  by  Merivale  as  one  of  the  four 
causes  of  the  conversion  of  the  Roman  empire. 

Bid,  of  course,  there  are  limits  to  the  application  of  these 
words. — Our  first  service  must  always  be  to  God.  And  when 
the  demands  of  the  king  or  his  governors  clash  with  the  com- 
mands of  the  Supreme,  there  is  no  longer  place  for  submission, 
but  for  refusal.  Instantly  the  soul  recognizes  that  there  is  no 
room  for  vacillation.  Indecision  is  not  to  be  thought  of.  The 
Apostles,  who  were  the  first  to  advocate  obedience  to  existing 
authority,  were  also  the  very  first  to  exclaim,  when  that 
authority  was  intruding  into  the  realm  of  conscience  :  "  We 
must  obey  God  rather  than  men."  And  they  accepted  the 
consequences  to  the  bitter  dregs. 

The  two  kingdoms  need  not  clash.  We  may  obey  God  in 
submitting  to  the  ordinances  of  men.  We  may  do  well  in 
Caesar's  empire,  without  contravening  our  allegiance  to  Christ. 
Nay,  more,  we  shall  be  better  citizens  to  Caesar,  because  we  are 
citizens  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  when  Caesar  steps  over 
the  line  of  the  material  and  outward  into  the  spiritual  and 
eternal,  there  must  be  persistent  refusal,  though  we  rot  in  gaol 
as  a  consequence.  But  even  then  we  are  God's  freemen,  because 
his  slaves. 

III.  The  Fourfold  Application.  Hojiour  all  men. 
Perha.ps  value  or  esteem  would  better  render  the  force  of  the 
original  word.     They  were  to  manifest  such  a  kindly  interest 


€mt  f  obg.  97 

in  all  men  as  would  arise  from  a  recognition  of  the  worth  of 
each.  There  is  some  worth  in  the  most  worthless.  In  each 
human  being  there  is  something  which,  in  the  eye  of  God,  is  of 
infinite  value  :  a  lost  money-piece  which  has  rolled  away  into 
the  dust,  but  is  worth  sweeping  the  house  to  find.  Put  the  most 
degraded  in  one  scale,  and  the  weight  of  a  world  of  gold  in  the 
other,  and  the  world  would  kick  the  beam.  The  blood  of  the 
Son  of  God  is  its  only  equivalent.  Let  us  try  to  view  men  as 
God  does,  so  shall  we  fulfil  this  injunction. 

Love  the  brothe7'hood.  —  Love  is  not  sentiment,  but  self- 
sacrifice  ;  not  liking  every  one  necessarily,  but  making  others, 
instead  of  self,  the  pivot  of  our  living.  And  this  is  the  spirit 
which  we  should  show  to  all  who  own  the  same  Fatherhood, 
and  therefore  belong  to  the  same  Brotherhood. 

Fear  God. — True  love  expels  the  fear  that  hath  torment,  and 
begets  godly  fear  that  dreads  to  cause  Him  pain.  And  every 
step  of  growth  in  hohness  is  measured  by  the  increase  of  this 
fear,  as  the  rise  of  the  Nile  is  measured  by  the  breadth  of 
territory  over  which  it  spreads  itself  "  Love  persuades  a  man," 
says  Leighton,  "  purely  for  the  goodness  and  loveliness  of  God, 
to  fear  to  offend  Him,  though  there  were  no  interest  at  all  in 
it  of  a  man's  own  personal  misery  or  happiness." 

Honour  the  kifig. — Respect  human  institutions.  That  lesson 
lay  at  the  beginning  of  this  paragraph,  and  it  is  repeated  at 
its  close  ;  and,  surely,  if  so  much  is  said  of  honour  for  an 
earthly  monarch,  much  more  might  be  urged  on  the  behalf  of 
the  claims  of  the  King  of  kings.  Oh  that  men  would  honour 
Him,  with  the  honour  they  give  to  the  Father  !  He  is  worthy 
to  receive  the  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  might,  and 
honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing  ;  for  He  was  slain,  and  has 
redeemed  us  to  God  by  his  blood.  Let  us  honour  Him  with  no 
stinting  love. 

Those  who  give  themselves  most  absolutely  to  God,  are 
given  back  by  Him  most  completely  to  live  for  others.  Christ 
does  make  us  members  of  another  sphere  ;  but  at  the  same  time 
He  bids  us,  for  His  sake,  to  take  a  warm  and  living  interest 
in  all  that  touches  human  life  around. 


XlV.-faktng  ^Ijittgs  f atwtttl^. 

"What  glory  is  it,  if,  when  ye  be  buffeted  for  your  faults,  ye  shall  take 
it  patiently  ?  but  if,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently, 
this  is  acceptable  with  God." — i  Peter  ii.  20. 


HE  servants  here  addressed  were  the  household 
servants  and  slaves,  so  largely  employed  in  the 
great  establishments  of  that  age.  Wealth  and 
position  made  special  boast  of  the  vast  number  of 
dependents  that  were  maintained.  Life  was  held 
cheaply  enough  ;  and  when  a  slave  was  once  pur- 
chased, he  cost  little  to  keep.  The  Roman  empire  swarmed 
with  bondmen  ;  and  they  became  her  ruin. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  large  numbers  of  these  poor  creatures 
fled  to  the  shelter  of  the  Christian  Church,  as  the  outcast  seeks 
fire  and  food.  There  at  least  was  liberty  for  the  captives,  and 
love  and  equality  between  slave  and  owner,  master  and  serf. 
The  purchase  of  the  soul  of  the  slave  had  cost  the  Son  of  God 
an  equal  amount  of  suffering  with  that  He  had  endured  for  the 
wealthiest.  The  love  that  bent  over  the  hut  where  an  Onesimus 
sheltered,  was  as  strong  and  tender  as  that  which  pleaded  with 
a  Philemon.  The  heaven  which  awaited  the  dying  Lazarus, 
was  as  fair  as  that  which  beckoned  a  martyr  Apostle.  And 
so  there  was  in  the  Gospel  a  marvellous  fascination  for  the 
slave ;  and  if  we  may  found  any  conclusion  on  the  fact  that 
large  portions  of  the  Epistles  are  addressed  to  them,  and  that 
some  of  the  noblest  passages  are  written  for  their  special 
benefit,  we  must  admit  not  only  that  they  were  to  be  found  on 
the  church  rolls,  but  that  the  sacred  writers  entertained  towards 
them  a  strong  and  tender  sympathy. 

The  one  message  which  the  Spirit  of  God  had  for  them,  and 


which  is  so  often  repeated  on  these  pages,  may  be  gathered  up 
in  the  words  :  Submit;  endure;  be  subject;  take  it patiettily. 

We  must  remember  that  they  were  not  able  to  give  notice 
and  leave  at  their  will.  Wherever  they  could  do  this,  without 
blame,  and  without  detriment  to  the  trust  committed  to  them 
by  God  or  man,  they  were  at  perfect  liberty  to  do  so.  "  If 
thou  iuayest  be  made  free^  use  it  rather''''  (i  Cor.  vii.  21).  But 
this  was  seldom  possible.  For  the  most  part  they  had  no 
alternative  but  to  stay  where  they  were  till  death  released 
them.     It  was  to  such  that  these  special  exhortations  came. 

There  is  a  great  restlessness  among  employes  throughout 
society.  Servants  giving  notice.  Young  people  trying  to 
better  themselves.  Men  changing  from  situation  to  situation. 
As  a  rule,  there  is  not  much  gained,  even  in  a  worldly  point  of 
view,  from  successive  changes.  It  is  the  steady  plodding  life 
which  most  quickly  leads  to  success  and  comfort.  Still,  there 
is  no  sin  in  making  a  change,  if  it  be  not  made  simply  from 
selfish  moti\es,  or  with  an  eye  to  worldly  advantage.  When 
the  Christian  testimony  has  been  clearly  given,  and  perhaps 
clearly  rejected  ;  when  our  presence  is  rather  an  irritant  to 
ungodliness  than  a  persuasive  to  Christ  ;  when  we  feel  able 
to  ask  God  clearly  to  open  another  door  for  us,  and  He  has 
done  as  we  request  ;  when  it  is  possible  to  take  another 
position  without  compromising  the  interests  committed  to  our 
care  ;  when  we  can  do  better  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ  by  a 
change — tJien  there  is  assuredly  no  reason  against  it. 

But  in  many  cases,  as  with  these  household  servants,  there 
is  no  honourable  way  out  of  a  position  in  which  God  seems  to 
have  wedged  us.  We  may  be  in  daily  contact  with  grinding 
tyranny  ;  with  almost  unbearable  cruelty  ;  with  an  envenomed 
tongue ;  with  an  irritating,  captious,  trying  temper,  never 
satisfied,  never  pleased — a  child  with  the  mother ;  a  nurse 
with  an  invalid  ;  an  apprentice  with  an  employer  ;  a  woman 
with  her  husband — in  some  position  which  cannot  be  altered, 
and  where  the  obligation,  once  entered  upon,  must  be  borne 
to  the  end.  Here  then  is  the  unfailing  Divine  recipe  :  when 
reviled,  do  not  revile  again  ;  when  buffeted  though  doing 
well,  do   not  retaliate  ;    when   unjustly   accused   or  punished, 


loo  i^ahitt0  Cljittga  fpaticnllu. 

be  still  and  take  it  patiently.  And  out  of  all  this  will  come 
a  life  which  shall  not  only  be  like  His  life  who  hath  set  us  an 
example,  but  which  shall  also  exert  a  remedial  and  saving  in- 
fluence on  the  most  violent  opposers  of  his  Gospel,  while  it 
mounts  up  to  God  as  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  eliciting  his 
smile  of  loving  approbation. 

Two  lines  of  action  are  here  referred  to. 

I.  Buffeted  for  Faults.— We  have  all  made  mistakes, 
and  know  what  it  is  to  be  reprimanded  or  punished.  But 
under  such  circumstances  we  have  had  no  just  ground  for 
complaint :  and  our  true  policy  when  so  situated  must  be  not  to 
excuse  ourselves,  nor  to  cast  the  blame  on  others  or  on  our 
circumstances  ;  not  to  flash  forth  with  indignant  words  ;  but 
to  take  it  patiently — or  if  speaking,  to  confess  our  wrong,  and 
ask  to  be  forgiven. 

In  this  the  royal  Psalmist  has  set  us  a  memorable  example. 
When  he  was  slowly  descending  the  long  slope  of  Olivet 
towards  the  Jordan,  there  came  out  a  man  of  the  house  of 
Saul,  whose  name  was  Shimei,  "  and  as  David  and  his  men 
went  by  the  way,  he  went  along  on  the  hill's  side  over 
against  them,  and  cursed  as  he  went,  and  threw  stones  at 
him,  and  cast  dust."  And  Abishai  chafed  at  it,  and  asked 
permission  to  quench  his  abuse  in  blood.  "  No,"  said  the 
king,  "  let  him  curse ;  because  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  him, 
Curse  David." 

It  was  as  though  he  felt  that  his  sin  demanded  public 
reprimand,  and  he  meekly  accepted  the  permission  of  God 
as  his  appointment.  In  such  a  spirit  as  this  should  we  bear 
all  buffeting  which  comes  to  us  for  our  faults.  Be  still.  Sit 
alone  and  keep  silence.  Put  your  mouth  in  the  dust.  Give 
your  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  you.  The  Lord  will  not  cast 
you  off  for  ever  ;  He  will  take  you  again  to  Himself  Only 
remember  there  is  nothing  to  glory  over  in  this.  It  is  your 
common  duty.  "  Let  patience  have  her  perfect  work,  that 
ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  nothing." 

II.  Buffeted,  though  doing  Well.— Our  superiors,  or 


"^  .^oft  ^nstoer."  loi 

employers,  may  be  froward,  difficult  to  please,  always  finding 
fault  ;  and,  though  we  do  our  very  best,  we  may  meet  with 
nothing  but  buffeting  and  rebuke.  Still,  we  are  to  take  it 
patiently. 

There  is  no  Jiarm  m  quietly  and  temperately  explaining  the 
ujitriith  or  the  um-easonableness  of  the  accusation;  or  in 
showing  how  we  have  striven  to  do  our  best.  When  our 
Master  was  accused  of  casting  out  devils  by  collusion  with 
their  prince.  He  showed  how  unreasonable  the  charge  was  ; 
and  when  smitten  with  the  palm  of  the  hand.  He  said  :  "  If  I 
have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil ;  but  if  well,  why 
smitest  thou  Me?"  It  is  open  for  us  to  give  a  soft  answer  like 
this  ;  but  if  it  do  not  turn  away  wrath,  we  must  "  take  it 
patiently." 

Be  sure  that  your  patience  is  not  mean-spirited  cowardice. — 
There  is  no  virtue  in  that.  But  let  it  arise  from  conscience 
toward  God.  Offer  your  soul's  patient  endurance  to  God  upon 
that  altar  which  sanctifies  the  gift  ;  and  the  motive  which 
prompts  the  sacrifice  will  be  precious  in  his  sight.  "  This  is 
thankworthy."  "This  is  acceptable  with  God."  And  the 
Greek  might  bear  such  a  rendering  as  this  :  God  says,  Thank 
you.  Yes,  so  it  is.  If  in  some  great  house  some  poor  servant, 
or  if  in  a  school  some  persecuted  child,  will  dare,  for  God's 
sake,  to  choke  back  the  passionate  outburst  of  indignation,  and 
to  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully,  there  is  a  thrill  of  delight 
started  through  the  very  heart  of  God,  and  from  the  throne  God 
stoops  to  say.  Thank  you.  The  hero-explorer  maybe  thanked 
by  his  country  and  his  Queen  ;  but  the  weakest  and  obscurest 
saint  may  receive  the  thanks  of  the  Almighty. 

We  may  cultivate  this  grace  of  patience  by  many  considera- 
tions.— Though  that  particular  allegation  may  be  wrong,  yet 
there  have  been  many  occasions  in  our  lives  when  we  have 
receiv-ed  more  praise  or  thanks  than  were  our  due.  Balance 
one  against  the  other.  And  such  is  the  evil  of  our  hearts,  that 
the  germs  of  sins,  which  have  been  wrongly  imputed  to  us,  are 
latent,  and  only  await  the  opportunity  of  breaking  out ;  they 
would  have  broken  out  before,  but  for  the  grace  of  God. 
Besides,  does  not  this  desire  to  receive  the  praise  and  esteem 


I02 


Safeitt0  §^Ijitt0s  patiently. 


of  all  betoken  a  very  worldly  heart  ?  Why  should  we  want 
human  applause  ?  If  we  had  our  deserts,  instead  of  one  buffet 
in  a  life  of  caresses,  we  should  have  but  one  caress  in  a  storm 
of  buffetings.  If  the  sinless,  guileless  Saviour  was  dumb  as  a 
sheep  before  its  shearers  amid  the  torrents  of  abuse  that  beset 
Him,  surely  it  becomes  its  to  be  still,  for  there  are  plenty  of 
causes  for  rebuke  in  us,  to  justify  the  worst  things  ever  said 
against  us,  and  many  worse  than  these.  Our  case  is  like  that 
of  a  criminal  who  had  better  bear  quietly  a  sentence  for  a  crime 
he  has  not  committed,  lest  by  too  much  outcry  he  induce  investi- 
gation into  a  list  of  offences,  which  are  not  charged  against  him, 
because  not  known. 

Andin  addition,  let  us  tliiiik  tenderly  of  the  cotiditioji  of  our 
persecutors. — Alas,  for  them  !  How  sad,  how  pitiable  are  they. 
Surely  they  need  pity  rather  than  wrath,  mercy  more  than 
vehemence.  Perhaps  our  uncomplaining  meekness  may  touch 
them  as  no  words  of  indignation  would ;  as  the  sighs  and 
agonies  of  the  early  martyrs  were  pricks  and  goads  in 
the  consciences  of  their  persecutors,  driving  them  to  the 
Lord. 

Moreover,  it  is  after  all  but  a  small  thitig  to  be  judged  by 
man. — If  he  praise,  what  does  it  amount  to?  If  he  blame, 
what  is  it  but  a  puff  of  smoke,  a  blank  cartridge,  a  meteor 
exploding  in  the  air?  Life  at  the  longest  is  short.  Eternity 
is  near,  even  at  the  doors.  And  the  kiss  of  God,  as  we  step 
across  the  threshold  of  his  presence-chamber,  will  make  us 
even  thankful  to  have  been  put  into  such  circumstances  of 
rebuke  as  enabled  us  to  win  so  large  a  reward. 

And  is  it  for  a  moment  to  be  supposed  that  God  will  not 
vindicate  us  ?  Of  course  He  will.  "  Shall  not  God  avenge  his 
own  elect,  which  cry  day  and  night  unto  Him  ?  I  tell  you  that 
He  will  avenge  them  speedily."  "  He  will  bring  to  light  the 
hidden  things  of  darkness."  "  He  shall  bring  forth  thy  righteous- 
ness as  the  light,  and  thy  judgment  as  the  noonday."  We  can 
afford,  then,  to  give  place  unto  wrath,  since  He  has  said, 
"  Vengeance  belongeth  unto  me  ;  I  will  recompense."  Let  us 
commit  ourselves,  as  Jesus  did,  to  Him  who  judgeth  righteously, 
and  we  shall  find  that  He  will  clear  us  and  cause  our  enemies 


Cfic  (Bjcampk  of  Cljriat.  103 

to   bite  the  dust,  as  when  Haman  led  Mordecai  in  triumph 
through  the  streets  of  Shushan. 

III.  The  Inducements  to  Patient  Endurance. 

(i)  As  we  have  already  seen,  God  says,  Thank  you. — And 
those  thanks  will  be  heard  one  day  by  the  raptured  soul,  as  it 
stands  almost  dazed  in  his  presence.  "  When  did  I  augnt  to 
deserve  all  this  ? "  And  in  answer,  many  a  trivial  and  forgotten 
incident  of  Christian  gentleness  and  meekness  under  misrepre- 
sentation and  rebuke,  will  be  recalled.  "  This,  soul,  I  beheld  in 
thee  ;  and  it  made  Me  glad.     Welcome  !  and  well  done  ! " 

(2)  For  this  we  were  called. — Not  to  be  happy,  or  saved,  or 
glorified,  but  to  suffer  as  Jesus  suffered.  He  was  the  Master 
of  the  house,  but  they  spat  on  Him,  smote  Him,  derided  and 
crucified  Him  ;  yet  He  threatened  not.  And  we  have  been 
called  to  live  His  life.  To  make  his  meaning  clear,  the  Apostle 
uses  words  which  children  could  follow.  When  the  Greek 
schoolmaster  taught  writing,  he  made  his  letters  faintly,  and 
the  scholar  wrote  over  his  outlines.  This  is  the  Apostle's 
thought,  and  we  have  been  called  to  repeat  each  line  and 
turn  and  curve  of  the  Master's  life,  so  that  the  world  may 
ever  have  a  living  copy  of  His  life  before  its  eyes.  "  Leaving 
an  example." 

(3)  We  know  we  are  on  the  right  way  for  our  home. — Our 
Master  has  gone  through  the  world,  leaving  traces  of  his  path 
behind  Him  ;  as  in  the  dense  bush  of  Australia  a  man  will  blaze 
the  trunks  or  snap  the  twigs,  that  those  who  follow  may  find 
the  way.  So,  as  we  encounter  hatred  and  rebuke— not  for  our 
misdeeds  but  because  we  belong  to  Christ — and  are  able  to 
bear  it  patiently,  we  are  sure  that  we  are  on  His  track  ;  which 
leads  down  into  the  grave,  and  through  it  to  the  Resurrection 
lawns,  and  up  the  Ascension  steeps,  to  the  banks  of  the  river 
of  water  of  life,  where  they  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever 
He  goeth. 

And  is  this  patience  possible  ?  Not  to  your  unaided  efforts  ; 
but  as  the  gift  of  the  God  of  Patience  through  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Thrice  we  are  told  of  the  patience  of  Jesus,  who  bore  threat 
and  wrong  without  a  word  of  rctaliator}-  threat.    Oh,  marvellous 


I04  Caking  ©tjinga  ^atientlj. 

grace  !  And  it  was  wrought  out  by  Him,  not  for  Himself 
alone,  but  for  all  who  believe.  It  awaits  our  appropriation. 
Let  us  claim  it  in  all  moments  of  irritation  and  calumny,  saying 
with  Robert  Hall,  "  Calm  me.  Lamb  of  God,  calm  me  !"  or 
whispering  softly,  "  Thy  patience.  Lord  !"  So  may  God  the 
Holy  Spirit  direct  you  into  the  patience  of  Jesus  Christ ! 


xv.~mjt  ^Footprints  of  iht  f  lorli, 

"  For  even  hereunto  were  ye  called  :  because  Christ  also  suffered  for  us, 
leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps  :  who  did  no  sin, 
neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth  :  who,  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled 
not  again  ;  when  He  suffered,  He  threatened  not ;  but  committed  Himself 
to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously  :  who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own 
body  on  the  tree,  that  we  being  dead  to  sins  should  live  unto  righteousness  : 
by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed.  For  ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray  ;  but 
are  now  returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  your  souls. " 

I  Peter  ii.  21-25. 

'^^^[ITRAY  sheep!  Can  you  not  see  them?  They  have 
broken  through  some  narrow  opening  in  the  fence  ; 
have  wandered  afar  to  browse  on  the  sweet  grass 
that  enticed  them  forth  ;  have  been  scared  and 
driven  by  dogs,  broken  into  smaller  and  ever  smaller 
companies,  till  at  last  they  wander  alone,  or  fall  into 
pits,  or  lie  feebly  bleating  with  exposure  and  fatigue,  the  easy 
prey  of  lion  or  wolf  Far  from  the  fold  ;  torn,  wounded,  driven  ; 
panting  with  alarm  ;  splashed  and  draggled  with  filth  ;  certain 
to  perish,  unless  rescued  by  the  shepherd.  Such  were  all  of  us. 
"  We  were  as  sheep  going  astray." 

How  shall  we  ever  sufficiently  adore  the  Good,  Great,  and 
Chief  Shepherd  of  souls,  that  He  did  not  leave  us  to  our  hapless 
fate,  but  came  after  us— down  mountain  rent,  through  thorny 
brake,  over  jagged  flints,  seeking  until  He  found  us,  and,  laying 
us  upon  his  shoulders,  brought  us  back.  We  "  are  now  returned." 
Safe  sheltered  in  his  fold.  Listening  for  Him  to  call  us  by  our 
name.  Bearing  his  name  branded  on  us.  Not  dreading  to  be 
put  forth  to  new  duties,  trials,  or  temptations,  because  so  sure 
that  "when  He  puttcth  forth  his  own  sheep,  He  goeth  before 
them;  and  his  sheep  follow  Him."  But  this  following  of  the 
Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  our  souls  involves  suffering.     "  Christ 


io6  ®Ij£  jFootprittta  of  tljE  JFlorh. 

also  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  we  should  follow 
his  steps."  It  becomes  us  to  mark  well  those  footprints,  as  they 
lead  down  into  the  dark  valley,  ere  they  climb  upward  to  the 
Resurrection  and  Ascension  heights. 

(i)  The  sufferhigs  incident  to  the  co}ii7no?t  lot  ofuien. — "  Man 
is  born  to  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward."  "  Work  is  but  one 
half  of  life  ;  suffering  is  the  other.  There  is  a  hemisphere  of 
the  wcrl.d  in  the  sunshine  of  work;  but  there  is  another  in  the 
shadow  of  suffering."  All  suffer,  either  in  body  or  soul;  in 
themselves  or  their  families ;  from  what  they  have  or  have  not ; 
through  the  malice  of  their  fellows  ;  the  malevolence  of  wicked 
spirits  ;  or  their  own  follies  and  mistakes. 

In  all  such  sufferings,  except  the  last,  Jesus  suffered.  What- 
ever is  meant  by  hunger,  thirst,  weariness,  poverty,  and  toil, 
physical  weakness  and  suffering,  bereavement  with  its  pros- 
trating anguish.  He  knew.  These  things  are  common  to 
man.  Enduring  these  he  earns  his  bread.  Through  these 
his  character  is  formed.  By  these  he  acquires  the  mastery  of 
nature.  And  because  the  Lord  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man, 
He  bowed  his  royal  head  to  endure  them.  Though  Maker  and 
Monarch  of  all.  He  chose  the  mendicant's  empty  purse,  the 
outcast's  fare,  the  exile's  bed,  that  no  child  of  Adam  should  be 
able  to  boast  of  an  excess  or  peculiarity  of  suffering,  in  the 
feeling  of  which  He  could  not  be  touched.  "  He  was  made 
like  unto  his  brethren." 

(2)  There  are  also  siifferittgs  peculiar  to  Christ  as  Mediator 
and  Saviour; — The  Apostle  lays  stress  on  these  as  the  necessary 
foundation  of  our  relationship  to  God.  He  "  suffered ybr  us"; 
and  the  preposition  unmistakeably  denotes  that  He  took  upon 
Himself  the  curse  and  consequence  of  our  sin,  relieving  us  of  it 
for  evermore.  And  then  as  if  to  emphasize  the  work  of  media- 
tion and  substitution  more  emphatically,  the  Apostle  quotes 
again  from  that  great  evangelic  prophecy  of  Isaiah  in  which  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  testified  so  clearly  beforehand  of  the  sacrificial 
aspect  of  the  Redeemer's  sufferings  (Isa.  liii.). 

He  bore  our  sins. — It  is  a  sacrificial  word.  As  of  old  the 
Jew  "leaned  hard"  on  the  head  of  the  victim  destined  to  die  for 
him,  and  the  innocent  lamb  bare  the  burden,  dying  beneath  its 


^\jt  (great  ^arrifice.  107 

load,  so  did  Jesus  bear  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree. 
It  was  not  the  anticipation  of  approaching  physical  torture 
which  bowed  Him  so  low  in  Gethsemane,  or  pressed  the  bloody 
sweat  from  Him,  as  the  feet  of  the  peasant  press  the  grapes 
in  the  autumn  vintage.  It  was  the  foreboding  of  the  pressure 
of  our  sins,  which  already  began  to  crush  his  heart,  and  which 
broke  it  on  the  cross.  No  sufferer  has  ever  experienced  sorrow 
like  this.  There  has  been  nothing  like  it  in  the  history  of  the 
ages  ;  nor  will  it  admit  of  repetition.  "  Once  in  the  end  of  the 
world  hath  He  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Him- 
self"  In  one  of  Adam's  race  alone  has  this  tragedy  of  love  been 
possible  :  that  the  sins  of  untold  myriads  should  "meet  on  Him," 
and  so  be  expiated  and  put  away  for  evermore  (Isa.  liii.  6, 
mar^.). 

We  must  not  linger  long  over  the  phrase  which  emphasizes 
the  gift  of  /it's  own  body  to  the  work  of  our  redemption.  That 
body  so  purely  born,  which  must  have  been  a  fair  casket  for  the 
holy  jewel  it  contained;  which  in  the  Jordan  waters  was  first 
identified  in  outward  seeming  with  the  weight  of  human  sin, 
though  in  itself  without  sin  ;  which  was  the  very  shrine  and 
home  of  God,  who  had  prepared  it  for  Him  ;•  which  was  the 
vehicle  for  so  many  blessed  words  and  deeds  of  ministry — that 
body  was  made  a  sin-offering,  and,  so  to  speak,  was  burnt  in  fire 
without  the  camp,  as  the  bodies  of  the  bulls  and  goats  under 
the  Levitical  law.  Nor  must  we  stay  to  compare  that  tree  with 
the  wood  which  Isaac  carried  on  his  strong  young  shoulders 
to  Moriah's  brow.  It  is  enough  to  know  that  it  has  taken  deep 
root  in  our  world,  and  is  filling  it  with  its  spreading  branches, 
beneath  which  even  the  fowls  of  the  air  are  finding  shelter — the 
true  tree  of  life,  whose  fruits  drop  on  all  lands,  and  whose  leaves 
are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations. 

But  there  is  y^\.  one  consideration  which  claims  our  attention 
ere  we  pass  on.  Those  sufferings,  utterly  unique  and  unapproach- 
able by  us,  which  rear  themselves  amid  all  compeers,  in  lonely 
and  unapproachable  grandeur,  have  for  ever  absolved  us  from 
having  to  bear  the  righteous  penalty  of  the  broken  moral  laws 
of  God's  government.  We  may  have  to  bear  the  natural  con- 
sequences and  penalties  of  our  wrong-doings.     The  converted 


io8  ®{je  JF0otpnnta  of  tire  flock. 

drunkard,  though  forgiven  and  dehvered  from  the  penalty  of 
God's  wrath,  will  yet  carry  to  his  grave  the  marks  and  traces  of 
his  excess  ;  though  even  these  may  be  transmuted  into  blessings 
by  the  near  presence  of  our  Lord.  Out  of  the  eater  will  come 
forth  meat,  and  out  of  the  strong  sweetness  ;  but,  as  for  the 
eternal,  governmental,  and  judicial  consequences  of  our  sins, 
these  have  been  borne  for  us,  and  have  been  exhausted  in  the 
sufferings  of  our  blessed  Lord.  In  the  person  of  Jesus,  the  great 
God  took  them  home  to  Himself,  and  put  them  away  for  ever. 
Because  He  has  suffered  them,  we  need  not  suffer  them  ; 
because  He  has  borne  them,  we  need  not  bear  them  ;  because 
the  stripes  fell  thick  and  heavily  on  Him,  they  need  never  fall 
on  us.     "  By  his  stripes  ye  were  healed." 

The  slaves  whom  the  Apostle  was  addressing  understood  full 
well  the  meaning  of  "  stripes."  The  Greek  word  means  f/ie 
weal  left  by  a  stripe.  From  the  grave  the  Saviour  came, 
bearing  the  weals  of  many  stripes,  wound-marks  in  hands 
and  feet  and  side ;  but  those  bruises  and  wounds  tell  a  story 
which  makes  our  hearts  leap  with  joy.  When  the  Great 
Shepherd,  raised  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting 
covenant,  met  his  timid  followers  in  the  upper  room.  He 
bade  them  behold  the  print  of  the  nails,  and  the  scar  in  his 
side.  "  Then  were  the  disciples  glad."  And  as  we  consider 
the  Lamb,  "  as  it  had  been  slain,"  and  discern  those  precious 
memorials  of  his  finished  work  on  our  behalf,  we  too  may  break 
forth  into  new  songs,  like  those  in  heaven.  Those  stripes  are 
the  price  of  our  redemption,  the  evidence  of  our  purchase, 
the  sign- manual  of  pardon.  Let  us  then  appropriate  these 
triumphant  words,  and  the  whole  verse  of  which  they  form 
the  appropriate  close  ;  and  let  each  of  us  dare  to  say,  not 
because  we  feel  it,  but  because  we  accept  it  as  the  word  of 
God,  which  cannot  be  broken  :  "  He  was  wounded  for  my 
transgressions  ;  He  was  bruised  for  my  iniquities  ;  the  chas- 
tisement of  my  peace  was  upon  Him;  and  with  his  stripes  \ 
am  healed." 

But  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  has  a  double  aspect. — 
It  looks  first  towards  the  justice  of  God,  to  which  it  rendered 
an  adequate  equivalent  for  our  many  sins.     This  was  altogether 


|ftlj:n0  uttto  lligljtcousttcss.  109 

independent  of  us,  for  whom  it  was  given.  But  it  also  looks 
towards  man  in  the  effect  it  produces  on  those  who  rightly 
apprehend  it.  "  That  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live 
unto  righteousness."  There  is  a  remarkable  coincidence  of 
testimony  between  this  statement  and  that  in  Rom.  vi. 
Indeed,  in  these  words  we  strike  one  of  the  main  seams 
of  Scripture  teaching.  In  the  sight  of  God,  we  are  reckoned 
as  being  so  identified  with  our  Lord  that  what  is  predicated 
of  Him  is  also  true  of  us.  Dead  in  his  death.  Raised  in  his 
resurrection.  Seated  with  Him  in  his  glory.  And  it  should  be 
the  purpose  and  aim  of  our  life  to  realize  by  faith  in  actual 
practice  and  experience  all  that  is  ours  in  the  mind  and  purpose 
of  God.  Ye  died  :  reckon  yourselves  dead.  Ye  are  risen  :  set 
your  affection  on  things  above.  Ye  are  seated  in  heavenly 
places  :  walk  worthy  of  your  high  calling.  By  the  grace  of 
God,  there  should  be  a  perpetual  deadness  to  every  appeal 
that  comes  from  the  flesh,  the  world,  or  the  devil  ;  and  an 
ever  fuller  response  to  the  inspirations  and  appeals  which 
come  from  the  Spirit  of  God  to  a  life  of  righteousness. 

The  mediatorial  sufferings  of  Christ  do  thus  involve  some 
suffering  to  us.  Because  we  must  submit  to  daily  death  ;  we 
must  take  up  our  cross  and  follow  Him  ;  we  must  sow  our- 
selves, falling  into  the  ground  to  die.  A  perpetual  self-denial  ; 
a  setting  up  of  the  cross  in  our  lives  ;  a  conformity  to  his  death  ; 
a  drinking  of  his  cup  ;  a  baptism  into  his  sufferings — all  these 
are  the  indispensable  conditions  of  that  salvation  from  the  love 
and  power  of  sin  which  He  has  wrought  out  for  us.  But  in  no 
deeper  sense  can  we  follow  in  his  steps  as  the  Substitute, 
Mediator,  Reconciler,  and  High  Priest  of  men. 

(3)  The  sufferings  of  the  sinless  Man. — That  He  was  sinless 
was  universally  attested.  No  lamb  or  heifer  was  ever  so 
searched  for  blemishes  as  was  He.  Judas,  who  knew  Christ's 
innermost  history,  declared  that  he  had  "betrayed  innocent 
blood."  Pilate  repeatedly  insisted  that  he  could  find  no  fault 
in  Him  at  all;  And  the  only  charge  that  the  priests  could 
substantiate  against  Him  was  his  assumption  of  Deity.  "  He 
did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth."  He  did  not 
say.  Yea  and  Nay  ;  but  all  the  promises  of  God  in  Him  were 


no  i;ije  ^ootprtttta  of  tlje  Jlork. 

yea,  and,  through  Him,  amen.  He  was  the  true  and  faithful 
Witness. 

And  how  lovely  was  his  silence  before  his  accusers.  Silent 
before  the  Sanhedrim,  whilst  the  false  witnesses  hopelessly  in- 
volved themselves.  Silent  before  Herod,  so  that  from  entering 
his  halls  to  leaving  them,  no  word  escaped  his  lips — emblem  of 
the  silence  of  God  to  those  whose  natures  are  closed  to  Him. 
Silent  before  Pilate,  except  when  that  poor  craven  soul  gave 
expression  to  thoughts  and  questionings  which  surged  up  from  its 
very  depths.  Silent  in  the  Palace-hall.  Silent  in  the  Praetorium. 
Silent  on  the  cross,  save  in  words  of  blessing  and  prayer. 

But  how  inevitable  it  was  that  holiness  like  His,  even  though 
so  still  and  uncomplaining,  which  did  not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor 
lift  up,  nor  cause  its  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets,  should 
come  into  collision  with  the  spirit  of  his  time  ;  and  in  that 
collision  suffer  bitterly  !  As  the  shining  of  the  sun  brings  out 
the  poisonous  fumes  of  the  stagnant  pool,  so  did  the  presence 
of  Jesus  among  men  stir  up  the  evil  of  human  hearts  ;  and  that 
evil  must  in  itself  have  been  a  cause  of  awful  sufifering  to  one 
so  sensitive,  so  delicate,  so  holy  as  He  was.  The  keener  the 
appreciation  of  musical  harmonies,  the  intenser  must  ever  be 
the  agony  of  a  discordant  note. 

Sum  up,  if  you  can,  the  ingredients  of  suffering  in  Christ's 
cup.  That  the  race  with  which  He  stood  in  such  close  identifi- 
cation was  so  steeped  in  sin  that  He  was  compelled  to  breathe 
our  polluted  atmosphere,  all  the  more  terrible,  in  contrast  with 
that  of  the  world  from  which  He  had  come,  as  the  foul  miasma 
of  a  foetid  court  or  room  is  the  more  distressing  to  those  who 
have  just  entered  it  from  the  fresh  outer  air ;  that  He  was 
misrepresented  and  misunderstood  and  held  guilty  of  sins 
against  the  divinest  traditions  of  his  people  ;  that  He  was 
treated  as  a  madman,  and  as  possessed  of  weakened  intellect  ; 
that  He  was  obliged  to  endure  the  contradiction  of  sinners 
against  Himself;  that  He  was  opposed  and  hated  by  those 
whom  He  yearned  to  save  ;  that  He  was  exposed  to  the 
temptations  of  men  and  devils— are  not  all  these  footprints  of 
suffering  flecked  with  blood,  which  substantiate  the  frequent 
references  of  this  eye-witness  to  the  sufferings  of  Christ  ? 


In  all  this  He  has  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  in 
his  steps.  It  is  inevitable  that  we  should  pass  through  many  of 
the  same  experiences.  The  Christ-life  in  us  must  pass  through 
the  same  stages  of  development,  and  meet  with  the  same  treat- 
ment, as  it  did  in  Him.  The  world  is  not  more  friendly  than 
in  the  long  past  to  the  Master's  spirit ;  and  in  proportion  as  we 
are  animated  by  it  shall  we  be  brought  into  the  same  collision 
with  the  spirit  of  human  society,  and  suffer  from  its  incongruity 
to  the  holiest  instincts  of  the  soul. 

Expect  to  be  reviled  and  buffeted,  misunderstood  and  misre- 
presented, cast  out  and  crucified,  as  He  was.  The  sheep  cannot 
expect  to  fare  better  than  the  Shepherd  ;  nay,  they  know  that 
they  are  on  his  track,  when  constrained  to  follow  in  his  foot- 
prints of  suffering  and  sorrow.  But  the  end  will  be  glorious, 
when  the  whole  flock  are  gathered  on  the  hills  of  eternity.  If 
we  died,  we  shall  also  live,  with  Him.  If  we  suffer,  we  shall 
also  reign,  with  Him.  *'  Ye  are  they  which  have  continued  with 
Me  in  my  temptations  ;  and  I  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom  as 
my  Father  hath  appointed  unto  Me." 


XVl.-moman's  f  lar^  in  tire  ^amt. 

"  Likewise,  ye  wives,  be  in  subjection  to  your  own  husbands  ;  tliat  if  any 
obey  not  the  word,  they  also  may  without  the  word  be  won  by  the  conversa- 
tion of  the  wives  :  while  they  behold  your  chaste  conversation  coupled  with 
fear.  Whose  adorning  let  it  not  be  that  outward  adorning  of  plaiting  the 
hair,  and  of  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  of  apparel ;  but  let  it  be  the 
hidden  man  of  the  heart,  in  that  which  is  not  corruptible,  even  the  ornament 
of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price.  For 
after  this  manner  in  the  old  time  the  holy  women  also,  who  trusted  in  God, 
adorned  them.selves,  being  in  subjection  unto  their  own  husbands  :  even  as 
Sara  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  lord ;  whose  daughters  ye  are,  as  long 
as  ye  do  well,  and  are  not  afraid  with  any  amazement.  Likewise,  ye  husbands, 
dwell  with  them  according  to  knowledge,  giving  honour  unto  the  wife,  as 
unto  the  weaker  vessel,  and  as  being  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life  ;  that 
your  prayers  be  not  hindered. " — i  Peter  iii.  1-7. 

'HERE  were  pure  and  virtuous  homes  in  the  old 
[!?'  classic  world,  of  which  the  fragrant  memory  lingers 
to  this  day.  Who  can  forget  Panthea,  who,  as  her 
husband  left  her  to  fight  under  the  renowned  Cyrus, 
said? — "If  ever  there  was  a  woman  that  regarded 
her  husband  more  than  her  own  soul,  I  am  that 
woman."  Who  can  forget  the  refusal  of  Cornelia  to  accept  one 
of  her  many  and  even  loyal  suitors,  because  she  insisted  that 
her  inarriage  with  her  noble  husband,  Titus  Gracchus,  was  not 
annulled  by  his  death?  Who  will  be  untouched  by  that  ex- 
quisite description  from  the  hand  of  the  great  Pliny,  who, 
speaking  of  his  wife,  said  ? — "  She  loves  me,  the  surest  pledge 
of  her  virtue  ;  and  adds  to  this  a  wonderful  disposition  to 
learning,  which  she  has  acquired  from  her  love  to  me.  She 
reads  my  writings,  studies  them,  and  even  gets  theip.  by  heart. 
You  would  smile  to  see  the  concern  she  is  in  when  I  have  a 
cause  to  plead  ;  and  her  joy  when  it  is  over.  She  finds  means 
to  have  the  first  news  brought  her  of  the  success  I  meet  with  in 


Wljt  ^arrctrttcss  of  IHarriagc.  113 

court.  She  accompanies  my  verses  with  the  kite,  with  no 
master  but  love,  the  best  of  instructors.  Her  affection  is  not 
founded  on  my  worth  or  person ;  but  she  is  in  love  with  the 
immortal  part  of  me." 

But  these  were  isolated  instances,  canonized  in  history  be- 
cause so  exceptionally  rare.  The  poets  and  historians  of  the 
Roman  Empire  paint  in  the  blackest  colours  the  utter  disre- 
gard of  the  marriage  tie  ;  the  abominable  and  shameless  im- 
morality which  sapped  the  foundations  of  the  State,  and  led 
with  inevitable  exactness  to  its  fall.  These  descriptions  are 
more  than  substantiated  by  the  revelations  of  the  walls  of 
Pompeii.  Into  such  a  world  of  stygian  darkness,  lit  by  a  few 
stars,  came  the  religion  of  our  Lord,  and  among  its  very  first 
creations  was  that  of  the  family  and  the  home.  For  these,  its 
earliest  and  most  precious  gifts  to  the  age  of  its  inception, 
and  to  all  ages,  mankind  must  ever  own  itself  indebted  to  the 
Gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Even  the  Jewish  people  had  become  grossly  lax  in  their 
notions  of  the  obligations  of  wedded  love.  The  rabbis  per- 
mitted divorce  on  the  most  trivial  pretexts.  If  the  husband 
were  not  pleased  with  his  wife's  behaviour,  or  if  she  spoilt  his 
food  in  cooking,  or  were  stricken  with  a  grievous  bodily  afflic- 
tion, he  might  put  her  away.  It  was  held  indeed  that  this 
facility  was  a  special  privilege  granted  to  Israel,  but  not  to 
other  nations.  That  such  was  the  state  of  society  brings  into 
startling  emphasis  the  words  of  Christ,  who  repeatedly  went 
back  to  the  primeval  institution  of  marriage,  one  woman  for 
one  man,  and  insisted  that  these  two  must  live  together  in  the 
home,  in  a  relationship  which  could  only  be  dissolved  by  death 
or  by  unfaithfulness. 

It  is  necessary  that  these  words  of  Christ  and  his  Church 
should  again  speak  in  the  ears  of  the  world.  The  growing 
revolt  of  the  classes  and  the  masses  from  the  simplicities  of 
Christianity  is  being  followed  closely  by  an  increasing  disre- 
gard of  the  ties  of  marriage  and  the  bonds  of  home.  How 
rapidly  the  business  of  the  divorce  courts  is  increasing.  We 
must  have,  forsooth,  looser  divorce  laws.  We  must  not  be 
too  puritanic.     We   must   admit   with   Strauss  that  the  New 


114  Woman's  piare  ttt  tire  Wonte. 

Testament  contains  "ascetic"  notions  concerning  marriage: 
that  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  deficient  in  the  knowledge  of 
human  nature  ;  that  the  scientific  method  is  in  colHsion  with  the 
Bibhcal  ideal.  And  we  are  asked  to  condone  the  offences  of 
certain  great  thinkers  and  brilliant  writers  of  our  time  against 
the  sacrament  of  marriage,  as  if  their  genius  relieved  them  of 
moral  obligation,  or  put  them  under  some  special  regivie. 

From  such  lamentable  laxity,  which  is  doing  so  much  to 
dislodge  from  its  position  the  key-stone  of  our  national 
greatness,  little  heeding  the  lessons  of  the  past,  or  realizing 
the  full  measure  of  disaster  which  must  crown  the  success 
of  its  endeavour,  we  turn  with  relief  to  the  high,  pure,  and 
divine  conception  of  the  place  of  woman  in  the  Christian 
home,  her  adorning,  and  her  treatment. 

I,  Her  Position.— It  is  true  that  she  is  bidden  to  be  in 
subjection.  But  then  we  must  also  remember  the  peculiar 
circumstances  under  which  these  Epistles  were  written,  and 
the  revolution  which  was  afoot. 

Women  had  been  degraded  for  centuries,  as  they  are  de- 
graded now  throughout  the  Orient,  and  where  Christianity 
has  not  come — supposed  to  be  destitute  of  souls  ;  the  drudge 
and  slave,  or  toy  ;  a  piece  of  property,  valuable  or  not,  as  the 
case  might  be.  But,  like  a  ray  of  dawn,  there  came  the 
teaching  of  the  Gospel.  Woman  was  declared  to  be  the  help- 
mate of  man,  taken  not  from  his  head  or  feet,  but  from  his  side, 
to  be  his  companion.  In  Christ  was  neither  male  nor  female. 
The  Holy  Spirit  showed  no  partiality  in  his  operations,  but 
endowed  the  women  of  the  early  Church  equally  with  the 
men.  The  Lord  Himself  had  admitted  women  to  the  inner 
circle  of  his  blessed  friendship,  and  had  called  out  their  noblest 
attributes.  Before  the  eyes  of  the  world  there  hung  the  memory 
of  the  Virgin  Mother  ;  of  the  women  who  ministered  to  Him  ;  of 
those  who  broke  their  alabaster  boxes  on  his  person  ;  of  those 
who  were  last  at  his  cross,  first  at  his  grave.  The  miracle  at  the 
peasants'  marriage  was  a  sign  of  the  Master's  smile  on  this  holy 
rite.  And,  as  these  visions  passed  before  the  retina  of  woman's 
heart,  she   responded  to  the  call  of  Jesus  with  glad  delight ; 


Icr  iftitttsfrj  of  folic.  115 

she  flung  herself  at  his  feet  with  the  rapturous  cry,  "  Rabboni"  ; 
she  pressed  into  his  Church,  where  she  was  welcome  ;  and 
there  was  a  danger  lest  in  the  new-found  ecstasy  she  might 
break  loose  from  those  sacred  obligations  which  were  as  old 
as  Paradise,  and  which  no  Gospel  could  sever  or  relax.  Christ 
had  not  come  to  destroy  the  primeval  rite,  but  to  fulfil,  and  to 
show  that  it  was  a  pattern  of  that  eternal  and  indissoluble 
union  into  which  He  enters  with  his  Church. 

This  was  the  origin  of  the  command  to  be  in  subjection. 
It  was,  primarily,  addressed  to  those  who  since  their  marriage 
had  become  Christians.  There  was  considerable  hesitancy 
in  the  early  Church,  as  to  their  duty  under  such  circum- 
stances. "  Should  they  leave  their  husbands  ? "  "  Should 
they  alter  their  behaviour  to  them  ? "  "  Should  they  assume 
any  superiority  ? "  "  No,"  said  the  Apostles,  "  stay  where 
you  are,  however  painful  your  position,  and  uncongenial  your 
surroundings,  and  trying  your  husband's  conduct.  Be  chaste, 
gentle,  loving,  submissive,  winsome,  so  that  hearts  may  be 
softened,  which  have  never  heard  a  word  of  Gospel  preaching, 
and  may  be  won  by  the  beauty  of  your  holy  and  unselfish 
lives." 

Of  course,  where  true  love  subsists  between  husband  and  wife, 
and  where  both  are  Christians,  such  a  command  as  this  is  hardly 
needed.  There  is  no  room  for  subjection,  where  there  are  no 
masterful  commands  ;  no  standing  up  for  rights  ;  no  jealous  strife 
for  independence.  The  sensitive  instincts  of  love  define  exactly, 
as  no  words  could  do,  the  respective  position  of  husband  and 
wife  ;  and,  altogether  apart  from  such  an  injunction  as  this,  it 
is  perhaps  rather  the  nature  of  woman's  love  to  yield,  to  lean 
on  one  stronger  than  itself,  and  to  give  itself  away  in  deeds  of 
loving  ministr)'. 

If  all  Christian  women  would  live  like  this,  there  would  be  less 
need  of  preaching  to  their  unconverted  husbands.  "Without  a 
v\ord,  they  would  be  won  by  the  conversation  of  their  wives." 
Won!  "A  soul  converted  is  gained  to  itself,  gained  to  the 
pastor  or  friend  or  wife  or  husband  who  sought  it,  and  gained 
to  Jesus  Christ  ;  added  to  his  treasury,  who  thought  not  his  own 
precious  blood  too  dear  to  lay  out  for  this  gain."     And  what  more 


ii6  Wioman's  ^lact  in  tire  %amt, 

precious  guerdon  could  reward  a  wife's  chaste  and  God-fearing 
behaviour  than  to  know  that  her  husband  was  to  be  a  jewel  in 
her  crown,  won  for  her  Lord  ! 

There  is  nothing  here  for  those  who  desire  to  marry  out  of  the 
Lord.  They  are  clearly  forbidden  to  be  unequally  yoked  with 
unbelievers  ;  and  they  will  find,  to  their  cost,  how  bitter  a  thing 
it  is  to  disobey  a  distinct  command.  No  hope  is  held  out  of 
either  winning  the  other,  where  from  the  first  God's  Word  has 
been  set  at  nought.  But  where  conversion  has  taken  place  after 
marriage  in  the  case  of  one  partner,  there  is  every  reason  to 
cherish  hope  for  the  other. 

Oh,  brokenhearted  women,  disappointed  and  of  sorrowful 
spirit,  ready  to  despair,  disposed  to  abandon  heart  and  hope,  be 
not  weary  in  well-doing  ;  be  yours  the  love  that  never  faileth  ; 
remember  that,  in  dark  places,  you  are  to  exemplify  that  love  for 
the  sake  of  the  dear  Master,  who  is  looking  on  and  will  not  let 
you  be  tempted  beyond  what  you  are  able  to  bear  ;  dare  to  trust 
Him  for  the  future,  and  believe  that  God  will  yet  give  you  your 
dearest  who  sail  in  the  ship  with  you  over  the  stormy  waves. 

What  a  lesson  is  here  for  all  !  We  cannot  all  preach  by  lip  ; 
but  we  can  by  life.  And  such  preaching  is  mighty  in  results  ; 
whilst  the  effect  of  it  abides  long  after  the  life  has  passed  from 
view  into  the  ministries  of  the  upper  sanctuary. 

IL  Her  Adorning.— It  does  not  seem  that  the  Apostle 
forbids  plaiting  the  hair,  or  wearing  of  gold,  any  more  than  he 
does  the  putting-on  of  apparel.  Religion  does  not  consist  in 
the  presence  or  absence  of  these  things.  If  we  wear  them,  we 
are  not  better  ;  if  we  abjure  them,  we  are  not  worse.  It  makes 
surely  very  little  difference  to  the  Saviour  whether  we  dress  in 
silk  or  calico,  in  colours  or  drab.  The  one  law  is — to  dress  as 
becomes  the  station  in  which  He  has  placed  us,  and  in  such  a 
way  as  not  to  attract  notice  to  ourselves. 

Of  course  if  a  certain  style  of  dress  is  associated  only  with  the 
worldly  and  irreligious  ;  or  if  it  exercises  an  injurious  eftect  on 
those  who  minutely  watch  and  exaggerate  what  they  see  in  us  ; 
or  if  it  attracts  excessive  remark,  and  makes  us  self-conscious — 
we  do  well  to  discard  it,  and  lay  it  aside.     But  where  this  is  not 


^cr  JliJorttment.  117 

the  case,  it  is  well  to  keep  moderately  in  the  wake  of  custom 
and  usage,  lest  we  attract  as  much  attention  by  our  prudery  as 
our  pride,  and  so  minister  to  our  accursed  love  of  singularity. 
But  it  is  very  pitiful  when  the  Christian  conscience  becomes 
morbid  on  these  points.  Some  are  so  constantly  questioning 
what  dress  their  Lord  would  have  them  wear,  that  they  miss 
much  of  his  company.  Of  course,  we  ought  to  select  our  attire 
under  his  eye,  asking  for  his  guidance  in  our  choice,  and  his 
grace  to  indicate  his  taste  for  us.  Surely  the  Master  has  a  right 
to  say  what  his  slaves  should  wear,  and  how  they  should  spend 
his  money  !  And  He  will  indicate  his  will  in  the  gentlest  and 
most  delicate  manner.  Cast  the  responsibility  more  utterly  on 
Him,  and  then  occupy  yourselves  much  more  with  Himself  than 
with  your  attire,  so  occupied  with  Him  as  to  be  almost  oblivious 
of  it. 

The  great  point  with  each  of  us  should  be  :  Where  is  my  adorn- 
ing? If  it  be  without,  then  indeed  we  are  in  evil  case.  But  if 
it  be  within — in  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart,  in  the  cultivation 
of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit — we  may  leave  outward  matters  to 
shape  themselves  very  much  as  they  may  ;  and  they  will  cease 
to  attract  an  undue  share  of  our  attention  or  thought.  Great  is 
he,  says  Seneca,  who  enjoys  his  earthenware  as  if  it  were  plate  ; 
and  not  less  great  is  the  man  to  whom  all  his  plate  is  no  more 
than  earthenware.  Plenty  are  there  whose  outward  body  is 
richly  decked,  but  whose  inner  being  is  clothed  in  rags  ;  whilst 
others,  whose  garments  are  worn  and  threadbare,  are  all  glorious 
within.  It  is  a  solemn  question  :  What  are  our  garments  in 
the  sight  of  God?  Do  we  know  anything  of  this  meek  and 
quiet  spirit,  so  precious  in  his  esteem,  so  restful  and  blessed 
amid  the  tumult  of  the  world? 

The  clue  to  its  possession  seems  hidden  m  the  suggestion 
that  the  holy  women  in  the  old  time  trusted  in  God.  Turn  your 
heart  towards  God  ;  and  the  result  will  show  itself  in  such  whole- 
someness  of  behaviour,  such  consistency  in  well-doing,  such 
freedom  from  sudden  fear,  as  will  commend  the  Gospel,  and 
attract  the  smile  of  God. 

III.  Her  Treatment.— These  words  to  husbands  may  well 


ii8  '^toman's  ^lacc  in  tljc  %amt. 

be  extended  by  the  addition  of  the  words  spoken  to  them  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  in  which  they  are  bidden  to  love  their 
wives  as  Christ  has  loved  the  Church,  nourishing  and  cherishing 
them  as  their  own  body. 

But  three  striking  and  beautiful  suggestions  are  made  here 
which  will  suffice  : — 

(i)  Give  honour  to  the  wife  as  the  weaker  vessel. — All  bear 
on  their  nature  the  touch  of  the  great  Potter's  moulding  hand  ; 
but  some  are  stronger  than  others,  and  in  Christ's  code  the  obliga- 
tion to  consider  the  other  always  rests  with  the  stronger.  Polite- 
ness, high-breeding,  chivalry,  courtesy — these  are  mimicked  in 
society ;  but  their  original  types  are  found  only  where  Christi- 
anity has  wrought  her  perfect  work.  No  man  can  fully  acquire 
them  until  this  Gospel  is  written  in  his  heart ;  they  pass  from 
within  outwards,  not  from  without  inwards.  And  many  who 
have  never  been  admitted  to  so-called  good  society  are  God's 
own  gentlepeople. 

(2)  Remember  that  you  are  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of  life. — 
There  is  no  such  union  as  that  of  those  who  are  wedded  in  the 
love  of  God,  and  to  whose  love  his  love  gives  depth  and  mean- 
ing and  a  touch  of  infinitude.  Of  a  relationship  like  this  we  may 
well  repeat  the  motto  on  Charles  Kingsley's  grave,  summing  up 
a  life  of  exquisite  married  bliss  :  we  love;  we  loved;  7ve  will 
love.  Let  thoughts  of  the  common  grace  of  life  attemper  and 
ennoble  your  relations. 

(3)  See  that  your  prayers  be  not  hindered. — There  is  no  test 
so  subtle  as  a  good  man's  prayers.  When  he  kneels  before  his 
God,  He  will  know  in  a  moment  whether  or  not  he  has  contracted 
defilement  during  the  preceding  hours  ;  and,  if  so,  where.  And 
he  is  bidden  to  leave  his  gift  at  the  altar,  and  go  to  seek  recon- 
ciliation, ere  he  returns  to  offer  it.  Whatever  then  arises  in  the 
hour  of  prayer,  and  breathes  on  the  mirror  of  the  heart,  is  there- 
by proved  to  be  injurious  and  wrong,  and  must  be  put  away. 
Whatever  makes  husband  and  wife  unable  to  pray  together  alone, 
or  at  the  family  altar,  must  be  dealt  with  mercilessly  as  a  hin- 
drance. And  if  only  we  are  faithful  and  true  in  these  daily 
particulars  of  conduct,  our  prayers  will  not  only  be  unhindered 
but  helped,  and  we  shall  gain  such  conceptions  of  the  love  of 


Winlfintitvtti  ^prayers.  119 

Christ  to  us,  amid  all  our  failures  and  imperfections,  as  will  make 
the  wedding  bells  ring  out  a  perpetual  chime  of  love  within  our 
hearts,  and  we  shall  understand  another  phase  of  his  love  which 
passeth  knowledge. 

There  is  nothing  which  tests  us  so  much  as  the  daily  discipline 
of  the  home  life.  It  is  much  easier  to  stand  amid  a  crowded 
asseinbly  caUing  Christians  to  entire  consecration,  than,  on  the 
following  morning,  to  bring  those  lofty  principles  to  bear  on  the 
small  details  of  the  breakfast-table,  when  the  radiant  light  of 
the  Transfiguration  Mount  has  been  exchanged  for  the  grey  of 
an  autumn  day-break,  and  the  excitement  of  the  crowds  for  the 
simple  presence  of  wife  and  child.  It  is  not  so  difficult  to  live 
like  saints  where  we  are  set  free  from  the  ordinary  friction  and 
responsibilities  of  daily  life,  and  surrounded  by  those  who  inter- 
pose as  many  pillows  of  loving  consideration  as  possible  between 
us  and  anything  which  would  fret  and  annoy  us.  At  the  same 
time,  if  our  religion  breaks  down  here  it  breaks  down  utterly. 
If  we  are  not  right,  so  far  as  in  us  lies,  with  our  nearest,  it  is 
very  questionable  if  we  are  right  with  God.  Love  to  God  in- 
volves love  to  man.  And  if  we  do  not  love  with  a  warm,  sunny, 
attractive,  and  unselfish  love  those  who  live  within  our  home 
circle,  we  may  gravely  question  whether  we  have  tasted  of  the 
love  of  God.  For  even  if  we  have  come  to  the  end  of  our  love 
we  may  become  the  channels  through  which  His  love  may  flow 
down  to  bless  and  save. 


XVir.-fIji  Cljristtatt  Wmptt. 

"Finally,  be  ye  all  of  one  mind,  having  compassion  one  of  another; 
love  as  brethren  ;  be  pitiful ;  be  courteous  :  not  rendering  evil  for  evil,  or 
railing  for  railing  ;  but  contrariwise  blessing;  knowing  that  ye  are  thereunto 
called,  that  ye  should  inherit  a  blessing.  For  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see 
good  days,  let  him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and  his  lips  that  they  speak 
no  guile  :  Let  him  eschew  evil,  and  do  good  ;  let  him  seek  peace,  and  ensue 
it.  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  are  open 
unto  their  prayers  :  but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil. " 

I  Peter  iii.  8-12. 

^^Ppj)'  N  his  Life  of  Frederick  the  Great,  Carlyle  describes 
in  a  few  graphic  touches  the  Moravian  town  of 
Herrnhut  ;  and,  after  remarking  on  the  religious 
atmosphere  which  brooded  over  the  place,  he  says, 
"  Herrnhut  is  a  Sabbath  petrified ;  a  Calvinistic 
Sabbath  done  into  stone."  It  is  a  high  eulogium. 
But  every  visitor  to  that  unique  settlement  has  been  arrested 
by  the  careful  accuracy  with  which  the  principles  of  their 
religion  and  theology  have  been  exemplified  to  the  minutest 
details  in  the  lives  of  its  inhabitants. 

But  it  were  a  still  greater  marvel  to  find  in  any  community 
under  heaven  a  complete  embodiment  of  these  marvellous 
injunctions.  All  of  one  mind  ;  cemented  into  a  holy  unity  by 
a  common  sympathy.  Ministering  to  the  saints.  Pitiful  to 
the  weak,  erring,  and  poor.  Courteous  to  equals.  Calm  and 
forgiving  under  abuse  and  injury.  Seeking  peace.  Living 
under  the  smile  of  God.  Where  in  all  the  world  can  we  dis- 
cover such  a  community  of  Christians?  It  were  a  fair  vision, 
worth  going  far  to  see.  A  temple  to  Love.  An  abode  of 
heavenly  bliss.  An  oasis  in  the  desert.  A  snatch  of  celestial 
harmony  amid  the  jarring  discords  of  human  selfishness.  The 
New  Jerusalem  descending   from   God  out  of  heaven.     Yet 


''§£  |c  Mi  of  ©ttc  ^tinb."  121 

nothing  less  than  this  is  the  Christian  ideal,  as  it  is  also  that 
which  our  Lord  died  to  secure.  And  it  would  well  become  us, 
if,  without  waiting  for  others,  each  one  would  adopt  the  in- 
junctions of  these  verses  as  the  binding  rule  and  regulation  of 
daily  life.  This  would  be  our  worthiest  contribution  to  the 
convincing  of  the  world,  and  to  the  coming  of  the  kingdom  of 
our  Lord.     And  it  would  spread. 

And  does  not  the  Apostles'  use  of  the  word  finally  teach  us 
that  all  Christian  doctrine  is  intended  to  lead  up  to  and  in- 
augurate that  life  of  love,  the  bold  outlines  of  which  are 
sketched  in  these  words?  Let  us  not  be  content  with  con- 
sidering the  mighty  stones  of  truth  laid  by  this  wise  Master 
Builder  in  the  foundations  ;  but  let  us  pass  up,  and  into  the 
temple  based  upon  them,  where  the  shekinah  dwells  above  the 
mercy-seat,  so  that  we  may  catch  its  glow  upon  our  faces,  and 
bear  it  forth  into  the  world. 

L  The  General  Principle.— "  Be  ye  all  of  one  mind, 
/laving  compassion  one  of  another."  This  oneness  of  mind 
does  not  demand  the  monotony  of  similarity,  but  unity  in 
variety.  Not  the  oneness  of  a  hop-pole,  or  of  a  pile  of  hop- 
poles  ;  but  of  the  plant  which,  with  tendril,  leaf,  and  fruit,  rears 
itself  aloft  in  the  summer  air.  Not  the  oneness  of  a  brick,  or 
of  a  pile  of  bricks  ;  but  of  the  house,  in  which  so  many  different 
materials  and  contrivances  combine  to  shelter  human  life.  Not 
the  oneness  of  a  child  ;  but  of  a  family  of  children  who  differ 
in  age,  character,  temperament,  and  chosen  pursuits,  but  are 
one  in  love  and  tender  sympathy. 

We  shall  never  be  of  one  mind  in  the  sense  of  all  holding 
the  same  opinions  ;  but  we  may  be  all  of  one  mind  when,  be- 
neath diversities  of  opinion,  expression,  and  view,  we  are 
animated  by  a  common  devotion  to  Christ ;  a  common  loyalty 
to  the  great  underpinning  facts  of  Redemption ;  and  a  common 
love  to  all  who  hold  the  Head,  though  they  may  differ  from  us 
in  an  infinite  variety  of  minor  considerations. 

.The  Church  of  Rome  never  caught  this  idea.  Its  only  con- 
ception of  the  oneness  of  Christ's  disciples  was  a  vast  uni- 
formity, a  system  in  which  every  one  should  utter  the  same 


122  ®:ije  Cljriatian  Ccntper. 

formularies,  worship  in  the  same  postures,  and  belong  to  the 
same  ecclesiastical  order.  And  its  leaders  did  their  best  to 
realize  their  dream.  They  sought  to  exterminate  divergence 
of  view  by  fire,  and  sword,  and  torture.  They  spread  their 
network  through  the  world.  And  just  before  the  dawn  of  the 
Reformation  they  seemed  to  have  succeeded.  At  the  beginning 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  Europe  reposed  in  the  monotony  of 
almost  universal  uniformity  under  the  almost  universal  supremacy 
of  the  Papacy.  Rome  might  almost  have  adopted  the  insolent 
boast  of  the  Assyrian  of  prophecy  :  "  As  one  gathereth  eggs,  so 
have  I  gathered  all  the  earth  ;  and  there  was  none  that  moved 
the  wing,  or  opened  the  mouth,  or  peeped."  And  what  was 
the  result  ?  There  is  but  one  answer  possible.  TJie  deep  sleep 
of  death.  And  it  must  always  be  so.  Life  abhors  uniformity. 
And  whenever  you  force  this  marvellous  being  into  your  cast- 
iron  mould,  you  not  only  destroy  its  grace  and  beauty,  but  you 
kill  it. 

There  is  variety  in  the  human  body.,  from  eyelash  to  foot, 
from  heart  to  blood  disc,  from  brain  to  quivering  nerve  fibre  ; 
yet  in  all  this  variety  each  one  is  conscious  of  an  indivisible 
unity.  There  is  variety  in  the  tree  :  the  giant  arms  that  wrestle 
with  the  storm,  the  far-spreading  roots  that  moor  it  to  the  soil, 
the  myriad  leaves  through  which  the  winds  make  music,  the 
cones  or  nuts  which  it  flings  on  the  forest  floor ;  yet  in  all  this 
it  is  one.  There  is  variety  in  the  Bible — variety  of  authorship, 
of  style,  of  age,  from  the  bulrush  ark  to  the  break  of  the 
sapphire  waves  of  the  yEgean  about  Patmos  ;  yet  for  all  this  the 
sixty-six  tractlets  which  compose  the  Bible  are  always  bound 
up  in  one  cover,  because  composing  one  book.  So  with 
Christians.  There  may  be,  and  must  be,  infinite  varieties, 
and  shades  of  thought  and  work  ;  but,  notwithstanding  all, 
there  is  a  oneness  which  needs  not  to  be  created,  for  it  is 
already  consummated,  but  which  must  be  recognized  and  kept. 
"Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of 
peace."  Many  folds,  but  one  flock.  Many  stones,  but  one 
breastplate.  Many  temperaments,  but  one  family.  Many 
minds,  but  one  mind. 

Much  of  the  controversy  of  the  present  day  arises  from 


"fohe  as  §retljrcn."  123 

failure  to  recognize  the  almost  infinite  variety  of  the  human 
mind.  No  two  persons  look  at  the  same  thing  in  the  same 
way,  or  give  the  same  version  of  an  incident  or  a  tale.  Each 
colours  it  with  the  tint  of  personal  idiosyncrasy,  just  as  each 
object  in  nature  borrows  from  sunlight  its  especial  hue.  Start 
a  dozen  devout,  deeply-taught  men  to  formulate  any  doctrine 
of  the  faith ;  whilst  each  holds  the  fact,  no  two  will  express 
it  in  precisely  the  same  way.  We  must  distinguish  between 
facts  and  views  of  facts.  Men  may  not  think  alike,  and  yet 
be  of  the  same  mind. 

If  we  would  obey  this  injunction  of  being  "  all  of  one  mind," 
let  us  think  more  often  of  the  things  in  which  we  agree  than 
of  those  in  which  we  differ.  All  are  loved  with  the  same  love  ; 
bought  by  the  same  blood  ;  born  of  the  same  Spirit ;  members 
of  the  same  body  ;  animated  by  the  same  life  ;  subject  to  the 
same  hopes  and  fears,  af^ictions  and  vicissitudes  ;  drawing  our 
daily  sustenance  from  the  same  supplies  ;  destined  for  the  same 
home.  How  many  and  close  are  the  bonds  of  our  relationship  ! 
Surely  it  becomes  us  to  have  great  compassion  one  toward 
another  :  correcting  each  other,  if  need  be,  privately,  or  before 
the  Church,  with  no  desire  for  self-exaltation,  but  with  eager 
loyalty  for  the  glory  of  God  ;  putting  the  best  construction  on 
points  of  difference  ;  viewing  everything  in  the  light  of  the 
Master's  glory  ;  and  trying  to  be  more  animated  by  that  loving, 
tender,  compassionate  spirit,  which  enabled  Him  to  bear  so 
long  with  the  misunderstanding,  strife,  and  stupidity,  of  the 
men  whom  He  had  chosen  to  form  the  inner  circle  of  his 
earthly  life. 

II.  Four  Specific  Applications.— (i)  To  fellow-Christians. 
Love  as  brethren. — "  Love  "  is  not  identical  with  "  like."  Provi- 
dence does  not  ask  us  whom  we  would  like  to  be  our  brethren 
— that  is  settled  for  us  ;  but  we  are  bidden  to  love  them,  irre- 
spective of  our  natural  predilections  and  tastes.  You  say — That 
is  impossible.  But  remember  that  true  love  does  not  necessarily 
originate  in  the  emotions,  but  in  the  will  ;  it  consists  not  in 
feeling,  but  in  doing  ;  not  in  sentiment,  but  in  action  ;  not  in 
soft  words,  but  in  noble  and  unselfish  deeds. 


124  W\jt  Clrristtan  ©cntpcr. 

Love  changes  the  pivot  and  centre  of  life  from  self  to 
another.  Before  she  flings  her  magic  spell  upon  us,  we  are 
self-contained  and  self-centred,  bending  all  our  energies  to  our 
self-aggrandisement,  compelling  all  streams  to  flow  into  the 
Dead  Sea  of  our  own  interest.  But  when  we  love,  a  marvellous 
transformation  passes  over  us.  We  think  more  often  of  the 
beloved  than  of  ourselves.  We  firid  our  plans,  contrivings, 
activities,  all  ennobled  and  transfigured  by  our  one  considera- 
tion of  what  will  please  and  help  and  bless  that  choice  spirit 
which  has  gathered  to  itself  the  threads  of  our  life,  weaving 
them  after  its  own  sweet  will,  and  threading  them  with  blessed- 
ness, as  black-lettered  pages  may  be  illumined  by  scrolls  of 
gold  and  colour.  With  such  love  should  we  love  our  fellow- 
Christians. 

Do  not  begm  with  trying  to  love  every  one  at  once.  We  do 
not  best  descend  from  generals  to  particulars  ;  but  ascend  from 
particulars  to  generals.  Begin  with  those  nearest  to  you  in  the 
church  and  the  home,  or  in  the  little  religious  coterie  with  which 
you  are  wont  to  mix.  It  is  through  the  love  of  individuals  that 
we  come  to  love  the  whole. 

You  say  that  this  is  your  difficulty,  and  that  there  are 
Christians  in  your  immediate  circle,  whom  you  cannot  get 
on  with.  Here,  then,  is  my  advice.  Do  not  try  to  feel  love, 
but  will  to  love.  Tell  the  dear  Master  that  you  are  willing 
to  love,  or  willing  to  be  made  willing  to  love,  but  that  He  must 
create  the  grace  of  love  within  your  breast.  Ask  Him  to  pour 
the  tides  of  his  love  through  your  heart,  that  He  may  love 
through  you  ;  and  you  shall  finally  catch  the  glow  and  grace  of 
his  tenderness.  Offer  Him  your  lips,  that  by  them  He  may 
speak  the  words  you  cannot  utter ;  and  your  hand,  that  by  it 
He  may  do  the  gentle  deeds  of  ministry  which  you  cannot 
bring  yourself  to  perform.  Your  confessions  of  inability  will 
bring  out  the  assurances  of  his  all-sufficiency.  What  you 
cannot  do,  He  can  and  will  do  through  you.  All  things  are 
possible  to  Him,  and  will  be  to  you  if  you  believe  in  Him. 
Begin,  then,  to  do  what  you  know  you  ought  to  do,  and  would 
do,  if  you  felt  love.  Do  it  because  it  is  right  ;  do  it  for  Christ's 
sake  ;  do  it  expecting  the  Lord  to  work  in  and  through  you — 


"§c  llttiful.    ic  (KourtEous."  125 

and  you  will  find  ere  long  that  streams  of  Divine  tenderness 
have  commenced  to.  flow  through  the  channels  of  your  being, 
long  choked  with  silt  and  debris.  And  love  thus  practically 
learnt  to  one  fellow-believer,  will  open  your  heart  to  all. 

(2)  To  the  weak  and  erring.  Be  pitiful! — Oh  for  the  com- 
passion of  our  blessed  Lord  !  How  often  it  breaks  out  in  the 
Gospel  narrative  to  the  unshepherded  sheep,  to  the  hungry 
multitudes,  and  to  the  afflicted  who  sought  his  aid  !  It  is  so 
much  easier  to  scourge,  rebuke,  criticise,  and  condemn,  than  to 
pity  and  heal.  We  must  not  condone  sin,  or  allow  ourselves  to 
think  lightly  of  that  which  has  cost  God  so  much,  and  which  is 
the  object  of  his  wrath.  But  we  may  discriminate  between  sin 
and  the  sinner,  between  disease  and  the  sufferer ;  and,  whilst 
we  give  no  quarter  to  the  one,  we  may  be  very  merciful  to  the 
other. 

Think  of  thine  own  sins.  How  near  thou  hast  been  to  the 
precipice,  how  much  thou  owest  to  the  grace  of  God  !  The 
measure  of  thy  debt  was  ten  thousand  talents  ;  but  it  has  been 
freely  forgiven.  And  thy  provocation  to  sin  may  have  been  less 
urgent,  thy  passions  less  fiery,  thy  opportunities  less  frequent, 
thy  temper  less  persistent.  And  who  can  estimate  the  blackness 
of  darkness  in  which  the  transgressor  is  tossed,  despair  at  the 
helm,  whilst  the  waves  rush  past  to  break  in  thunder  on  the 
rocks  close  by  !  Such  may  be  the  lot  of  one  near  thee  !  Be 
pitiful !  Consider  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted.  Refrain 
speech  and  action  till  thou  knowest  all. 

(3)  To  equals.  ^^Cip^r/^^z^j.^— The  courtesies  of  Christianity 
should  be  more  inward  and  constant  than  those  of  the  world. 
Be  ready  to  take  the  least  comfortable  seat,  to  move  up  to  the 
end  of  the  pew,  or  to  give  up  your  comfortable  corner.  Do  not 
sit  down  at  the  extreme  end  of  a  meeting-room,  compelling  late- 
comers to  hav.e  the  discomfort  of  passing  to  the  front  before  the 
eyes  of  all,  much  to  the  distraction  of  the  leader.  Let  others 
sit  while  you  stand.  Do  not  push  and  crowd  as  you  come  in  or 
go  out.  Step  back  to  let  women  and  children  and  invalids  pass 
by.  Let  the  manners  of  your  Father's  court  be  always  evident 
in  your  deportment,  that  men  may  feel  that  you  come  of  a  noble 
line,  and  learn  that  Christianity  produces  not  simply  the  heroism 


126  Clje  ©Ijrtstian  QTcmper. 

of  a  great  occasion,  but  the  thousand  minute  courtesies  of  daily 
Hving. 

(4)  To  enemies.  Do  7iot  retaliate  ! — "Not  rendering  evil  for 
evil,  but  contrariwise  blessing."  The  old  law  of  "an  eye  for  an 
eye  "  is  repealed,  in  favour  of  that  nobler  legislation  which  bids 
us  do  good  to  those  that  hate  us,  and  pray  for  them  who  despite- 
fully  use  and  persecute  us.  Let  us  be  like  the  rock  on  the  wilder- 
ness march,  which  when  smitten  yielded  water  to  the  thirsty 
hosts. 

We  can  afford  to  do  this  ;  for  we  have  been  called  to  inherit 
such  a  blessing  that,  though  we  give  it  away  with  both  hands, 
in  spendthrift  prodigality,  we  can  never  exhaust  it.  Besides, 
this  is  the  policy  of  living  a  calm,  good,  and  blessed  life.  He 
that  loves  life,  and  would  see  good  days,  must  keep  his  tongue 
from  evil,  and  his  lips  from  guile.  The  man  who  is  always  vindi- 
cating himself  and  standing  up  for  his  rights,  will  be  perpetually 
in  a  ferment,  and  will  miss  the  cream  of  life,  which  rises  when 
all  is  still.  But,  better  than  all,  our  God  will  see  to  us,  protect- 
ing and  delivering  us.  Not  a  blow  reaches  us  which  He  does 
not  notice.  Not  a  threat  which  He  does  not  hear.  He  will  not 
let  us  be  tempted  beyond  what  we  can  bear.  He  will  put  an 
arrest  on  the  enemy  when  his  purpose  is  accomplished.  And 
then,  from  out  the  cloud.  He  will  look  upon  the  armies  of  our 
foes,  and  discomfit  them,  and  overthrow  them  in  the  heart  of 
the  sea.     "  His  face  is  against  them  that  do  evil." 


XVIII.— .^ufi?rtitg  for  lltgljtiouamss'  ^ak. 

"Who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good? 
But  and  if  ye  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake,  happy  are  ye  :  and  be  not  afraid 
of  their  terror,  neither  be  troubled  ;  but  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts: 
and  be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh  you  a  reason 
of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear :  having  a  good  conscience ; 
that  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you,  as  of  evil-doers,  they  may  be  ashamed 
that  falsely  accuse  your  good  conversation  in  Christ.  For  it  is  better,  if  the 
will  of  God  be  so,  that  ye  suffer  for  well-doing  than  for  evil-doing." 

I  Peter  iii.  13-17. 

WICE  in  this  paragraph  we  meet  the  word  suff'er; 
and  in  each  case  it  is  associated  with  that  special 
kind  of  suffering  which  is  inflicted  on  the  innocent 
and  holy  by  those  who  hate  the  light  flung  in  on 
their  own  darkness,  and  who  desire  to  extinguish  it 
if  they  may. 

The  Incarnation  led  inevitably  to  the  cross.  Any  attentive 
student  of  human  nature  who  stood  with  Jesus  on  the  threshold 
of  his  life,  and  heard  Him  speak  or  saw  Him  act,  must  have 
been  convinced  that  there  was  but  one  fate  reserved  for  such  a 
one  as  He  was.  And  though  the  acts  of  love  and  power  which 
marked  his  busy  days — as  the  silver  bells  which  made  music  at 
every  movement  of  Israel's  high  priest — averted  the  crisis  for 
some  few  months,  it  came  ;  as  from  the  first  it  was  evident  that 
it  must  come.  Amid  every  sign  of  vehement  hatred,  the  Lamb 
of  God  was  led  to  his  death  ;  hurried  out  of  the  world  as  millions 
of  his  followers  have  been  since.  From  Bethlehem  the  road  lay 
straight  to  Calvary 

And  what  was  true  of  the  Son  of  God  in  his  human  flesh  is 
true  of  each  incarnation  of  Him  in  our  hearts  and  lives.  Where, 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  He  enters  into  the  nature  of  those  who  con- 
secrate themselves  wholly  to  Him,  and  begins  to  live  freely  and 


128  ^ufcritt0  for  flitjbtcousttESs*  ^afee. 

mightily  within  them,  He  will  not  only  manifest  much  of  the 
grace  and  power  of  his  own  human  life,  but  He  will  also  come 
into  collision  with  the  prejudices  and  interests  of  worldly  and 
evil  men,  incurring  as  of  old  their  most  virulent  dislike,  and  pro- 
bably their  violent  resistance. 

The  Origin  of  Persecution. — We  cannot  analyze  at 
length  all  the  causes  of  the  inevitable  dislike  which  the  world 
feels  towards  the  Christian.  They  are  many,  and  obvious.  For 
instance  :  The  man  of  God  should  be  att  embodied  conscience. 
The  one  endeavour  of  ungodly  men  is  to  drown  the  remon- 
strances of  conscience.  For  this  they  plunge  into  gaiety,  or 
business,  or  exploration  ;  for  this  they  hurry  from  scene  to 
scene  ;  for  this  they  studiously  avoid  all  that  savours  of  God 
or  his  claims.  But  in  a  holy  life  they  meet  with  a  devout  and 
constant  recognition  of  those  claims,  coupled  with  a  faithful 
endeavour  to. fulfil  them.  There  is  an  embodiment  of  righteous- 
ness without  them,  which  arouses  into  instant  and  unwelcome 
activity  those  convictions  of  their  duty  which  they  have  done 
their  best  to  quell.  There  is  the  pride  of  heart  which  resents 
superiority  in  another.  There  is  the  envy  which  grudges  the  in- 
fluence that  goodness  always  attracts.  There  is  the  malice  which 
broods  over  the  contrast  that  purity  presents  to  impurity,  until 
the  fact  of  its  doing  so  bulks  as  a  positive  injury.  All  these  strong 
passions  of  the  unrenewed  heart,  like  Pilate  and  Herod  of  old, 
become  friends  in  their  common  antagonism  to  the  saintliness 
which  intrudes  upon  their  privacy  and  menaces  their  peace. 

Besides,  there  is  always  an  aggressivefiess  i7i  tme  Christianity 
which  arouses  strong  resistance.  We  readily  admit  that,  in  one 
aspect,  it  does  not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  its  voice 
to  be  heard.  Soft  as  the  zephyr  which  scarcely  stirs  the  bearded 
wheat ;  light  as  the  tread  of  the  morning  ;  gentle  as  distilling 
dew-drops — does  the  religion  of  Jesus  spread  onwards  over  the 
world.  And  yet  it  endangers  crafts  ;  undermines  profitable  but 
nefarious  trades  ;  steals  away  customers  from  the  devil's  shrines ; 
attacks  vested  interests  ;  and  turns  the  world  upside  down.  A 
tiresome,  annoying,  gain-sapping  thing  is  pure  and  undefiled 
religion  ;  and  the  devil's  servants  have  a  bad  time  of  it  when  the 


CIjc  MorliJ's  JIattcrg.  129 

Puritan  reigns,  or  the  Revival  sweeps  as  a  prairie  fire  through 
the  community.  "  If  we  let  Him  alone,  all  men  will  believe  on 
Him  ;  and  the  Romans  will  come  and  take  away  both  our  place 
and  nation." 

Have  we  not  here  the  clue  to  the  subsidence  of  persecution  in 
our  days  ?  True,  each  age  has  its  peculiar  discipline  ;  and  ours 
is  cursed  by  a  soft,  luxurious  worldliness,  which  is  most  hostile 
to  the  manifestation  of  strong  and  heroic  principle.  But  is  not 
there  too  great  a  contrast  between  our  lives  and  those  of  our 
forefathers  ?  Where  is  the  saintliness  of  living,  the  zeal  for  souls, 
the  uncompromising  rebuke  of  evil,  the  sturdy  adherence  to 
principle  at  all  costs,  which  littered  the  Alpine  summits  with 
the  bones  of  slaughtered  saints,  and  lit  the  fires  of  Smithfield  ? 
If  these  virtues  were  more  generally  embodied  in  the  daily  prac- 
tice of  the  majority,  as  they  are  in  that  of  a  small  minority  of 
professing  Christians,  can  there  be  much  doubt  as  to  the  issue  ? 
Men  might  not  adopt  the  barbarous  expedients  of  former  days, 
for  even  in  this  they  unconsciously  do  homage  to  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  ;  but  they  would  find  some  other  method  of  ridding 
themselves  of  the  unwelcome  protests  of  holy  lives  against  the 
selfishness  and  evil  of  their  own  condition. 

Ah,  it  is  one  of  the  most  terrible  rebukes  that  Incarnate  Love 
can  administer,  when  it  says  of  any  now,  as  it  did  of  some  in  the 
days  of  his  flesh:  "The  world  cannot  hate  you."  Not  to  be 
hated  by  the  world  ;  to  be  loved  and  flattered  and  caressed  by 
the  world — is  one  of  the  most  terrible  positions  in  which  a  Chris- 
tian can  find  himself  "  What  bad  thing  have  I  done,"  asked 
the  ancient  sage,  "that  he  should  speak  well  of  me?"  The 
absence  of  the  world's  hate  proves  that  we  do  not  testify  against 
it  that  its  works  are  evil.  The  warmth  of  the  world's  love  proves 
that  we  are  of  its  own.  The  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity 
with  God.  Whosoever  therefore  will  be  a  friend  of  the  world 
is  the  enemy  of  God  (John  vii.  7  ;  xv.  19  ;  James  iv.  4). 

The  Blessedness  of  the  Persecuted. — "Blessed  are 
ye,"  A  beatitude  caught  from  the  lips  of  Jesus,  and  ringing 
but  again  in  our  next  chapter  (Matt.  v.  10  and  i  Pet.  iv.  14). 
Blessedness  is  a  higher  thing  than  happiness,  and  is  consistent 


130  buffering  for  Ili^btenuanEas'  ^ake. 

with  the  most  trying  circumstances.  But  what  a  universal 
testimony  has  been  given  to  that  blessedness  shining  from  the 
faces  and  breathing  from  the  lips  of  those  who  have  suffered  for 
righteousness'  sake  ! 

A  recent  writer  has  culled  the  words  from  dying  martyr- 
testimonies  ;  and  they  testify  to  this  inner  blessedness.  *'  I  was 
glad  when  they  said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord,"  said  one  martyr,  as  he  was  condemned  to  die. 

"  This  prison  very  sweet  to  me 
Hath  been  since  I  came  here  ; 
And  so  would  also  hanging  be, 
If  Thou  didst  then  appear," 

sang  Bunyan  in  Bedford  Gaol,  his  eyes  dazzled  with  frescoes 
painted  by  angel  hands  on  the  damp  walls.  "  Methinks  they 
strew  roses  at  my  feet,"  said  another,  as  the  faggots  were  lighted 
about  him. 

And  wherein  does  this  blessedness  consist  ?  It  comes  through 
the  inner  possession  by  the  spirit  of  that  heavenly  temper,  which 
is  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  is  close  akin  to  Him,  and 
is  in  itself  blessedness.  It  comes  through  the  enforced  constraint 
laid  upon  the  soul  to  seek  its  delight  and  rapture  in  the  love  and 
friendship  of  Christ,  the  Friend  of  the  persecuted,  who  is  always 
nearest  to  those  who  are  most  like  Him  in  suffering,  because  most 
like  in  character  and  life.  It  comes  through  the  glad  conscious- 
ness of  being  on  the  path  trodden  already  by  prophets  and 
righteous  men,  who  have  gone  through  flood  and  flame,  but  who 
have  overcome,  and  are  set  down  with  Christ  on  his  throne.  It 
comes  because  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  rests  brooding 
in  the  heart.  It  comes  because  the  exceeding  great  reward 
beckons  from  on  high. 

There  are  many  gates  into  blessedness.  It  stands  four-square  ; 
and,  judging  from  our  Lord's  words,  it  has  two  gateways  on  each 
side,  so  that  no  life  is  so  far  away  or  obscure,  but  it  may  enter 
in  and  dwell  there.  Choose  you  which  gate  you  will  !  And  if 
you  are  not  able  to  lay  claim  to  poverty  of  spirit,  or  mercifulness, 
or  purity  in  heart,  then  dare  to  do  well  at  all  costs  ;  pursue 
patiently  the  path  of  lofty  integrity  and  blameless  purity ;  bear  the 
suffering  which  will  inevitably  (all  to  your  lot  with  uncomplaining 


**  (KipEl  JFcar  bj  ^car."  131 

patience  and  fortitude— and  there  will  be  administered  to 
you  a  blessed  and  abundant  entrance  into  that  kingdom  of 
blessedness  which  is  already  established  on  earth,  standing  with 
its  sapphire  walls  and  gates  amid  the  erections  of  men,  unstained 
by  their  pollutions,  as  it  is  unseen  by  any  but  purged  eyes.  "  If 
ye  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake,  blessed  are  ye." 

The  Behaviour  of  the  Persecuted. — (i)  Be  not  afraid. 
There  seems  here  a  reminiscence  on  Peter's  part  of  words  heard 
long  before  :  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body ;  and  after 
that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do."  "  Let  not  your  heart  be 
troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid."  No  pallor  on  your  face.  No 
clammy  sweat  on  your  brow.     No  quiver  through  your  frame. 

How  may  we  obtain  this  lion-heart,  which  knows  no  fear  in 
the  presence  of  our  foes  ?  There  is  but  one  answer  possible. 
Expel  fear  by  fear.  Drive  out  the  fear  of  man  by  the  fear  of 
God.  '■^Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts."  These  words 
come  back  to  us  from  a  very  stormy  era  in  Jewish  history.  "It 
was  told  the  house  of  David,  saying,  Syria  is  confederate  with 
Ephraim.  And  his  heart  was  moved,  and  the  heart  of  his 
people,  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  are  moved  with  the  wind." 
And  the  Lord  spake  to  Isaiah  his  servant,  "  with  a  strong  hand," 
saying,  Do  not  join  in  this  panic-stricken  cry,  or  seek  to  meet 
confederacy  by  confederacy  ;  fear  ye  not  their  fear,  nor  be  afraid. 
Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts  Himself;  and  let  Him  be  your  fear, 
and  let  Him  be  your  dread.  And  He  shall  be  for  a  sanctuary 
(Isa.  vii.,  viii.). 

How  often  we  see  fear  expel  fear  !  The  fear  of  being  burnt 
will  nerve  a  woman  to  let  herself  down  by  a  water-pipe  from 
the  upper  storeys  of  a  house  in  flames.  The  fear  of  losing  her 
young  will  inspire  the  timid  bird  to  throw  herself  before  the  steps 
of  man,  attracting  his  notice  from  them  to  herself  The  fear  of 
the  whip  will  expel  the  horse's  dread  of  the  object  at  which  it 
has  taken  fright.  Oh  for  that  Divine  habit  of  soul  which  so 
conceives  of  the  majesty,  and  power,  and  love  of  God,  that  it 
dares  not  sin  against  Him,  but  would  rather  brave  a  world  in 
arms  than  bring  a  shadow  over  his  face  !  "So  did  not  I,"  said 
a  sincere  and  noble  man,  "  because  of  the  fear  of  God." 


132  buffering  for  Hi^bicousncsa'  ^akz. 

And  when  a  man  so  fears  God  as  that  he  fears  to  sin  against 
Him,  he  will  find  God  to  be  a  sanctuary  into  which  he  may 
retreat,  and  enjoy  an  inviolable  defence.  "Though  an  host 
should  encamp  against  me,  my  heart  shall  not  fear.  For  in 
the  time  of  trouble  He  shall  hide  me  in  his  pavilion.  And 
now  shall  mine  head  be  lifted  up  above  mine  enemies  round 
about  me." 

(2)  Be  ready  always  with  a  reason  for  your  hope. — We  are 
not  always  to  be  talking  about  our  faith,  but  proving  it  by 
divine  deeds.  But  when  men,  seeing  the  fruits  of  our  faith, 
begin  to  inquire  as  to  its  ground  and  reason,  we  should  always 
be  ready  to  give  them  a  satisfactory  reply. 

How  remarkable  it  is,  in  opposition  to  many  of  the  contra- 
dictory voices  of  our  time,  to  meet  with  this  clear  insistance  on 
the  sweet  reasonableness  of  the  Christian's  hope !  The  Bible 
does  not  appeal  to  a  blind  credulity.  Many  of  its  statements 
are  above  reason  ;  but  none  of  them  are  against  it.  God's  con- 
tinuous appeal  is  contained  in  the  inspired  summons,  "  Come, 
let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord."  The  reasonings  of 
pride  will  be  assuredly  puzzled  and  non-plussed  ;  but  those  of 
meekness  will  find  abundant  scope  for  adoring  wonder  and 
assured  conviction,  in  the  mighty  depths  of  the  thoughts  of 
God. 

Young  people,  the  Bible  has  nothing  to  fear  from  the  exercise 
of  your  reason  !  It  is  not  possible  that  the  God  who  built  up 
your  brains  and  endowed  you  with  that  marvellous  faculty  of 
reason  will  ever  do  violence  to  on©  of  his  noblest  gifts. 
Reasoning  was  a  favourite  pursuit  with  the  greatest  of  the 
Apostles.  But  reason  must  ever  hold  the  torch  to  faith :  she  must 
be  the  handmaid  to  collect  materials  for  the  sanctified  judg- 
ment ;  the  analyst  to  test  and  separate  and  re-combine  and  think 
over  again,  as  Kepler  said,  the  first  thoughts  of  God.  Where 
reason  is  the  servant  of  a  reverent  and  holy  spirit,  as  in  Newton 
or  Faraday,  or  the  Magi  who  knelt  before  the  infant  Saviour, 
it  is  the  glory  and  boast  of  man.  The  mistake  of  so  many  is 
not  in  the  exercise  of  reason,  but  in  putting  reason  in  its  wrong 
place.  If  you  put  reason  on  the  throne  of  your -inner  life,  you 
may  profess  to  see  ;  but  you  will  be  blind.     But  if  you  enthrone 


"^  (Sioo&  (Konaruncc.*'  133 

faith  and  hope,  wnilst  reason  waits  their  bidding  and  obeys 
their  behest,  you  vvill  be  wiser  than  foe,  or  teacher,  or  grey- 
haired  sage  (Psa.  cxix.  98-100). 

Let  us  have  a  reason  for  our  faith,  based  on  personal 
experience,  or  observation,  or  the  study  of  evidence,  or  of 
fulfilled  prophecy  ;  or,  above  all,  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
our  hearts  ;  and,  though  we  need  not  be  ever  obtruding  it,  let 
us  never  flinch  from  stating  it  when  asked.  And  let  us  give 
our  "easons,  or  conduct  our  arguments,  in  a  temper  which  shall 
be  t  e  best  evidence  of  the  divine  character  of  our  faith.  Let 
theri  be  meekness  toward  the  face  of  man,  and  revercjitial  fear 
towa.  I  the  face  of  God — the  temper  of  those  who  confess  that, 
at  tht  best,  they  are  but  children,  gathering  a  few  shells  on  the 
shore^  of  the  boundless  ocean  of  truth,  which  sweeps  far  away 
to  the  horizon  where  eternity  and  infinity  blend. 

(3)  Have  a  good  conscience. — The  Apostle  Paul  also  speaks 
much  of  conscience,  and  of  the  necessity  of  perpetually  exer- 
cising ourselves  to  have  a  conscience  void  of  offence  toward 
God  and  man.  It  is  well  to  obey  these  repeated  commands. 
The  Christian,  who  faithfully  follows  the  inner  voice,  and  con- 
forms in  all  things  to  its  behests,  will  not  be  far  wrong.  A 
"good  conscience"  imphes  a  "good  conversation"  in  Christ. 

There  are  many  kinds  of  conscience  spoken  of  in  Scripture, 
but  this  epithet  good  is  very  comprehensive.  Do  my  readers 
know  what  a  good  conscience  is?  It  is  a  conscience  which  is 
purged  from  dead  works  (Heb.  ix.  4)  ;  sprinkled  with  the  blood 
of  Christ  (Heb.  x.  22),  borne  witness  to  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
(Rom.  ix.  i)  :  whilst  a  joy,  which  is  full  of  glory,  wells  up  within 
it  (2  Cor.  i.  12) ;  and  as  a  calm,  unruffled  lake  of  peace  it  reflects 
the  cloudless  heaven  of  God's  good  pleasure  above.  Such  a 
conscience  is  a  good  companion  for  our  days,  and  a  good  bed- 
fellow for  our  nights.  Every  eflbrt  should  be  made  to  preserve 
its  integrity.  And  when  life  is  moulded  by  such  an  inward 
influence,  it  will  live  down  all  misrepresentation  and  slander ; 
it  will  outshine  all  the  mists  of  envy  and  malice  which  have 
obscured  its  earliest  beams  ;  it  will  falsify  false  reports.  De- 
tractors shall  be  ashamed  at  the  triumphant  answer  made  to 
their  accusations  by  the  unblemished  beauty  of  a  holy  Christian 


134  ^u&ring  for  WtQhttaxisnt&z'  ^akc. 

life;  whilst  those  that  love  God  shall  take  heart.  "The 
righteous  shall  see  it,  and  rejoice  ;  and  all  iniquity  shall  stop 
her  mouth." 

Let  all  who  are  persecuted  possess  their  souls  in  patience. 
Suffering  comes  to  all  men  ;  but  if  we  must  suffer,  it  is  a 
thousand  times  better  to  suffer  for  well-doing  than  for  evil- 
doing.  Even  here  and  now  it  is  fraught  with  blessedness  : 
but  who  can  estimate  the  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory  which  awaits  each  member  of  the  noble  army  of  martyrs 
— from  Jesus  Christ,  who,  before  Pontius  Pilate,  witnessed  the 
good  confession,  to  the  least  in  his  kingdom  who  has  stood 
up  for  Him  unmoved,  amid  the  mockery  of  schoolfellows,  or 
the  taunts  of  a  group  of  shopmates : 


Xix.-i;iji  Substitutionary  maxk  of  Cbriai 

"For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that 
He  might  bring  us  to  God." — i  Peter  iii.  i8. 

'HRIST  suffered!"  That  is  the  key-note.  These 
believers  were  suffering  —  suffering  for  well-doing. 
Suffering  for  conscience'  sake.  And  they  were  in 
heaviness  through  manifold  trials.  So  the  Apostle 
reminds  them  that  Christ  also  suffered.  How  sweet 
is  that  little  word  also  !  Ceesar  was  wont  to  cheer 
his  troops  by  addressing  them  as  /^//icw- soldiers.  Such  is  the 
force  of  this  word.  Are  you  homeless  ?  Christ  a/so  had  not 
where  to  lay  his  head.  Are  you  poor  ?  Christ  a/so  for  our 
sakes  became  poor.  Are  you  tempted  ?  Christ  a/so  hath 
suffered,  being  tempted. 

But  Christ's  sufferings  are  unique !  Though  He  was 
righteous,  He  suffered  as  no  other  one  has  for  sins ;  for  it  is 
clearly  taught  here  that  He  suffered  as  a  substitute,  "  the  Just 
for  the  unjust." 

It  is  quite  true,  as  we  are  so  often  told,  that  the  death  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  has  had  a  great  raoral  effect  upon  men,  revealing 
the  love  of  God,  teaching  the  law  of  self-sacrifice,  showing  how 
keenly  sin  makes  itself  felt  in  the  holy  sensitive  nature  of 
eternal  love.  But,  besides  this  subjective  side  of  our  Saviour's 
death,  there  is  another,  an  objective  one.  He  has  not  only 
done  something  towards  men,  softening  and  moving  them  to 
thoughts  of  unselfishness,  and  deeds  of  heroism,  to  which 
otherwise  they  must  have  been  for  ever  strangers  ;  but  He 
has  done  something  also  toward  the  satisfaction  of  the  great 
laws  of  the  Divine  nature,  which  make  for  righteousness. 
And  if  He  had  not  done  the  latter,  his  work  in  the  former 
had  been  in  vain.     It  was  not  enough  to  touch  men,  there 


136        f^IjE  Sxibstiiutiottarg  Wiovk  nf  (Klrnat. 

must  be  a  public  reparation  made  to  that  violated  law,  of  which 
both  Scripture  and  conscience  speak.  So  only  could  penitent 
sinners  be  accepted. 

It  is  not  necessary  that  men  should  understand  the  philo- 
sophy of  the  Atonement  in  order  to  be  saved  by  it.  No  doubt, 
thousands  have  been  saved  by  it  who  had  an  erroneous  con- 
ception of  its  true  significance,  in  some  or  even  many  of  its 
aspects.  Certainly  our  comfort  and  assurance  become  stronger 
in  proportion  to  the  clearness  and  Scripturalness  of  our  views 
about  the  death  of  our  Saviour.  Still,  our  salvation  does  not 
depend  on  the  accuracy  of  our  intellectual  conceptions  ;  but 
on  our  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Saviour,  who  through 
death  and  resurrection  has  acquired  the  power  to  save  unto 
the  uttermost  all  that  come  unto  God  by  Him,  their  great  High 
Priest. 

The  substitutionary  character  of  the  death  of  Christ  is  woven 
into  the  texture  of  Scripture,  as  the  cross  into  a  venerable 
minster.  You  cannot  eradicate  it  without  destroying  the 
edifice  which  it  underlies.  Men  must  distort  the  plain  mean- 
ing of  words,  ere  they  can  succeed  in  its  elimination  from  the 
sacred  page. 

As  we  study  the  Levitical  law,  we  find  substitution  in  every 
sacrifice.  What  else  is  implied  in  the  care  to  have  a  stainless 
victim ;  in  the  imposition  of  hands  ;  in  the  confession  of  guilt 
on  the  innocent  head  ;  in  the  death  of  the  guiltless,  while  the 
guilty  goes  to  his  home  free  ?  What  other  truth  is  taught  in 
the  constant  reiteration  of  phrases  like  that  which  accosts  us 
in  these  words — phrases  caught  from  the  lips  of  the  Master 
Himself,  who  spoke  of  his  life  being  given  a  ransom  for  majiy  1 
What  else  can  explain  the  marvellous  arguments  of  the  Epistles 
to  the  Romans  and  Galatians  ?  If  only  the  masses  of  Christian 
people  would  read  the  Bible  for  themselves,  instead  of  reading 
so  many  books  about  the  Bible,  they  would  be  compelled  to 
admit  that  the  Scriptures  are  unanimous  in  attesting  the 
substitutionary  character  of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus.  He  died 
for  us.  He  bore  our  guilt  and  shame,  our  curse  and  penalty. 
He  took  to  Himself  the  penal  consequences  of  human  sin,  and 
put  them  away  for  ever. 


®|je  Cross  an  S-Eprcssion  of  ^obc.  137 

But,  in  proclaiming  this  doctrine,  let  us  avoid  certain  mis- 
statements. 

(i)  Let  us  beware  of  representing  God  as  loving  men  only  in 
consequence  of  Chrisfs  death. — This  is  as  illogical  as  it  is 
unscriptural.  For  it  is  one  of  the  postulates  of  all  true  think- 
ing— that  God  is  ;  that  God  is  the  same  ;  that  God  is  the  same 
Infinite  Being,  the  I  AM,  the  same  in  the  yesterday  of  the 
past,  and  in  the  to-morrow  of  the  future,  as  in  the  to-day  of 
the  present.  But  if  the  death  of  Christ  be  represented  as 
having  pacified  an  inexorable  and  avenging  Deity,  causing 
Him  to  love  those  who  else  must  have  withered  under  his 
relentless  hate,  it  makes  Him  other  than  He  was,  and  the 
Divine  nature  must  have  suffered  a  change,  which  is  unthink- 
able and  inadmissible. 

The  death  of  Christ  is  due  to  the  love  of  God.  God  gave 
his  Son  because  He  so  loved  the  world.  The  cross  is  the 
expression  of  a  love  which  is  older  than  the  oldest  star ;  more 
ancient  than  the  most  venerable  elder  who  stands  in  the  zenith 
light  of  heaven  ;  long  as  eternity,  vast  as  infinity,  deep  as  the 
being  of  God.  In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God,  that 
the  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 

(2)  Let  us  also  beware  of  making  too  great  a  division  in  the 
Divine govern)ne?it  between  God^s  righteousness  and  his  love. — 
There  is  no  collision  in  God.  The  nature  of  God  is  not  defined 
as  righteousness,  but  as  love.  If  it  had  been  defined  as 
righteousness,  it  is  doubtful  if  love  could  have  been  included. 
But  being  defined  as  love,  righteousness  is  of  course  included. 
And  there  is  no  collision  in  God  between  the  two,  for  his 
righteousness  is  a  fruit  and  offspring  of  his  love.  He  must  be 
righteous,  because  He  is  love.  He  loves  ;  and,  therefore,  as 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth.  He  must  do  right. 

It  would  not  be  consistent  with  love  if  He  were  to  let  sin  go 
unnoticed  or  unpunished  ;  or  if  He  were  to  allow  the  moral 
law  to  fall  into  disuse  ;  or  if  He  were  to  permit  us  to  set  at 
defiance  those  promptings  of  our  conscience  which  even  we 
approve.  Is  it  love,  which  with  easy  good  nature  suffers 
children  to  do  as  they  list,  unrebuked  and  unrestrained?     Is 


138        ^ht  ^ubstitutionarg  Wiaxh  of  Clrrxat. 

it  love  to  allow  murder  and  lust  and  rapine  to  curse  a  nation  of 
unoffending  subjects  without  an  attempt  to  bring  the  wrong- 
doers to  justice?  Is  it  love  to  a  man  himself  to  permit  him 
to  go  on  unchecked  in  a  course  of  ceaseless  evil  ?  To  ask 
these  questions  is  to  answer  them.  Love  involves  Righteous- 
ness, and  the  insistence  on  the  maintenance  of  right.  And  in 
the  cross  of  Jesus  there  is  no  variance  between  the  attributes 
of  God.  Mercy  and  truth  met  together ;  righteousness  and 
peace  kissed  each  other 

But  when  men  demand  that  we  should  refuse  to  believe  in 
substitution  because  God  is  love,  and  therefore  as  not  requiring 
an  answer  to  the  demands  of  his  justice,  we  reply  that,  because 
He  is  love,  therefore  He  must  be  just ;  He  must  maintain  his 
law ;  He  must  exact  penalty  in  respect  of  the  violation  of  the 
demands  of  his  righteousness ;  He  must  act  in  the  moral 
sphere  as  He  ever  acts  in  the  natural,  in  allowing  law  to  secure 
its  requisitions  and  demands  when  it  has  been  set  at  nought. 

(3)  Let  us  beware  of  dissociating  the  persons  of  the  blessed 
Trinity  in  the  worh  of  atonement. — The  death  of  Christ  is 
sometimes  so  stated  as  if  He  stepped  in  between  God  and 
man,  and  did  something  on  the  prompting  of  his  own  heart, 
apart  altogether  from  the  Father.  And  then,  of  course,  the 
objection  arises,  Why  did  God  make  or  permit  the  innocent 
One  to  suffer? 

But  it  must  never  be  forgotten  that  the  death  of  the  cross 
was  the  act  of  the  whole  Deity.  "God  was  in  Christ  recon- 
cihng  the  world  unto  Himself."  "Christ,  through  the  eternal 
Spirit,  offered  Himself  to  God."  "  My  Father,  which  dwelleth  in 
Me,  He  doeth  the  works."  The  Son  did  nothing  of  Himself:  and 
how  much  less  could  He  have  wrought  his  greatest  work  apart 
from  his  Father  !  He  was  only  translating  into  human  guise  and 
language  acts  and  deeds  which  He  saw  his  Father  do. 

And  so  in  the  cross  we  find  the  eternal  God  taking  to  Him- 
self the  consequences  of  human  sin ;  Himself  becoming 
the  propitiation  for  the  sin  of  the  world  ;  bearing  it  Himself; 
pressed  under  it  as  a  cart  is  pressed  under  sheaves  ;  and  putting 
it  away. 


(Bnt  iaith  Cfrrtat.  139 

This  cannot  be  unjust.  It  would  be  unjust  to  take  a  good 
boy  and  make  him  suffer  for  a  naughty  one  ;  but  it  cannot  be 
unjust  for  Bronson  Alcott  to  suffer  himself  the  penalty  which 
should  be  borne  by  the  boys  who  have  broken  the  regulations 
of  his  school.  It  cannot  be  unjust  for  one  to  substitute  his  life 
for  another — else  some  of  the  noblest  deeds  of  human  history 
miist  be  expunged. 

Yes,  reader,  you  may  take  this  home  as  yours,  and  say, 
thankfully  :  God  has  suffered  for  me  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  the 
Just  for  the  unjust.  You  may  never  have  thanked  Him,  or 
availed  yourself  of  the  benefits  of  his  death,  as  a  man  might 
leave  bank-stock  to  accumulate  unclaimed ;  you  may  even 
secure  for  yourself  eternal  condemnation  by  shutting  out  the 
love  and  light  of  God,  and  electing  to  live  in  the  darkness  of 
selfishness  and  godlessness.  And  yet  it  is  true  that  out  of  his 
great  love  the  eternal  God  has  done  something  for  you  which 
He  never  did  for  angels,  and  which  might  make  you  blessed 
for  ever. 

(4)  Lc/  us  beware  of  suggesting  thai  Christ  has  ceased  to 
suffer. — There  is  a  sense,  of  course,  in  which  our  Saviour 
suffered  for  sins  once.  The  direct  work  of  substitution  was 
accomplished  on  the  cross,  and  was  definitely  concluded  when 
Jesus  cried,  "It  is  finished!"  The  Resurrection  proves  that 
the  work  of  propitiation  is  an  accomplished  fact. 

But  we  must  not  suppose  that  Jesus  has  passed  into  an 
unsuffering  heaven.  He  still  suffers  in  each  of  his  members. 
He  is  crucified  afresh  when  we  yield  to  wilful  sins.  He  travails 
in  birth  until  his  kingdom  come.  He  is  touched  with  the 
feeling  of  our  infirmities.  How  can  He  be  at  rest,  whilst  his 
beloved  are  tossing  in  the  storm,  and  the  members  of  his  bride 
are  not  complete  ?  And  through  his  sufferings  blessing  is 
accruing ;  they  cannot  be  in  vain  :  we  shall  see  all  soon  ;  mean- 
while let  us  bear  fellowship  with  Him  in  his  anguish,  drinking 
of  his  cup,  that  we  may  share  his  glory. 

We  stand  now  on  the  verge  of  a  mysterious  and  difficult 
passage ;  but  this  much  is  true  and  clear,  that  Christ  suffered 
for  us  to  bring  us  to  God.     Let  us  understand  that,  through 


I40        ®bc  o^ubstitutinnarf  Mork  of  dljrist. 

faith  in  Him,  we  are  made  one  with  Him,  and  stand  where  He 
does  in  the  very  presence  of  God.  "  Made  nigh  by  the  blood 
of  the  cross."  Let  us  in  private  prayer,  or  at  the  Lord's  table, 
remember  that  nothing  brings  us  so  near  as  those  precious 
sufferings.  And,  whenever  we  feel  estranged  and  distant,  let 
us  betake  ourselves  to  the  cross  ;  and,  sitting  there,  meditate 
on  those  wounds,  till  we  are  brought  again  into  rapturous 
fellowship  with  our  God,  our  Light,  our  Love,  our  exceeding 
Joy.  And  then  from  our  sure  fellowship  with  God  we  may 
dare  to  look  out  on  all  mysteries,  not  trying  to  explain  God  by 
the  mystery,  but  the  mystery  by  what  we,  in  our  own  happy 
fellowship,  know  God  to  be.    To  whom  be  glory  for  ever  ! 


xx.-Wht  lap  of  l^oalr. 

"  Put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  in  the  spirit,  in  which  also  He 
went  and  preached  unto  the  spirits  in  prison,  which  aforetime  were  dis- 
obedient, when  the  longsuffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah,  while 
the  ark  was  a-preparing,  wherein  few — that  is,  eight— souls  were  saved 
through  water  :  which  also  after  a  true  likeness  doth  now  save  you,  even 
baptism  ;  not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  interrogation 
of  a  good  conscience  toward  God  through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ : 
who  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  having  gone  into  heaven ;  angels  and 
authorities  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  Him." 

I  Peter  iii.  18-22  (r.  v.). 

Cj^5^  T  would  be  unwise  to  load  these  pages  with  laboured 
'ifim  references  to  the  various  and  conflicting  interpreta- 
tions which  have  been  put  upon  this  difficult  and 
much-debated  passage.  It  appears  better,  after 
much  studying  of  them,  to  take  the  words  as  they 
stand,  and  seek  to  set  forth  in  clear  outline  the 
thought  which  seems  to  have  been  in  the  Apostle's  mind  ; 
so  far  at  least  as  the  present  writer  conceives  of  it. 

The  main  idea  is  of  course  a  comparison  between  the 
experiences  of  our  Lord  and  those  of  his  suffering  followers. 
TTie  sacred  writer  was  striving  to  the  utmost  to  sustain  and 
comfort  them  under  the  severe  stress  of  persecution  through 
which  they  were  passing.  "  Take  heart,"  he  seems  to  say, 
"  your  sufferings  are  not  exceptional ;  they  run  in  the  Divine 
family  ;  even  our  Master  was  not  exempt  from  them  :  He  also 
suffered  in  the  flesh  ;  but' his  sufferings  did  not  stay  his  blessed 
ministry  ;  nay,  they  even  augmented  his  sphere  of  usefulness  ; 
"  He  was  quickened  in  spirit,"  in  which  also  He  went  forth  to 
herald  his  accomplished  work  in  regions  to  which,  but  for 
death,  He  had  not  obtained  access.  So  shall  it  also  be  with 
you.  Your  sufferings  shall  not  clip  your  wings,  but  add  to  your 
powers  of  flight.     The  things  which  happen  to  you  shall  fall 


142  ^ht  lap  0f  lioalr. 

out  rather  to  the  furtherance  of  the  Gospel ;  and  it  is  through 
death  that  you  must  pass  up  to  share  his  glorious  resurrection 
and  imperial  power. 

I.  An  Historical  Fact.— "Put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but 
quickened  in  the  spirit,  in  which  also  He  went  and  preached 
unto  the  spirits  in  prison,  which  aforetime  were  disobedient, 
when  the  longsufifering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah." 

In  one  of  Isaiah's  most  splendid  passages,  the  king  of 
Babylon,  having  fallen  at  last  before  that  mightier  Monarch 
who  comes  with  equal  foot  to  the  hut  of  the  peasant  and  the 
palace  of  the  king,  is  depicted  as  a  thin,  pale  ghost  entering 
the  abodes  of  the  departed.  And  as  he  comes,  the  shades  of 
the  kings  of  the  nations  and  chiefs  of  the  peoples  stir  them- 
selves, and  with  thin  voices  accost  him  in  tones  of  withering 
sarcasm  :  "  Art  thou  also  become  weak  as  we  ?  Art  thou 
become  like  unto  us  ?  Is  this  the  man  that  made  the  earth  to 
tremble  ? — that  did  shake  kingdoms  ? " 

But  surely  the  abodes  of  the  departed  were  stirred  after 
another  fashion  when  the  Son  of  God,  having  welcomed  the 
dying  thief  to  Paradise,  refused  to  rest  there  after  the  strain 
of  his  long  conflict  and  agony,  but  started  forth  to  spend  the 
brief  interval  until  his  resurrection  in  proclaiming  with  herald 
voice  the  wondrous  news  of  accomplished  redemption.  This 
is  surely  the  emphatic  teaching,  not  of  this  passage  only,  but 
also  of  that  marvellous  announcement  of  the  Apostle  Paul  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  :  "  He  descended  into  the  lower 
parts  of  the  earth,"  a  phrase  which  was  constantly  used  among 
the  Jews  for  the  nethermost  abyss,  the  unseen  Hadean  world, 
the  abode  of  the  departed.  On  such  testimony  as  this,  the 
Church  in  all  ages  has  affirmed.  He  descended  into  Hell  (the 
word  Hell,  of  course,  standing,  as  it  does  so  often  on  the  page 
of  Scripture,  for  Hades).  We  do  not  know  the  full  burden  of 
our  Master's  message  there.  It  is  not  declared  ;  and  all  our 
surmisings  must  fall  short  of  the  reahty.  All  that  .we  need  to 
notice  is  that  the  word  employed  of  his  ministry  is  carefully 
chosen,  and  only  includes  the  work  of  a  herald^  as  distinguished 
from  that  of  an  evangelist. 


f  eaaotts  for  ant  ntott  lags.  i43 

It  may  be  asked  why  He  preached  only  to  those  who  were 
disobedient  in  the  days  of  Noah?  Why  were  his  messages 
confined  to  these  ?  Were  there  not  many  more  who  had  been 
disobedient  at  other  periods  of  the  world's  sad  story  ?  But 
none  of  these  are  excluded.  The  sacred  writer  does  not  say 
that  the  Lord  addressed  no  others,  but  that  He  certainly 
addressed  these.  And  our  attention  is  thus  focussed  on  ^/lem, 
because  it  was  his  desire  to  guide  our  thoughts  to  a  com- 
parison, already  forming  in  his  mind,  and  casting  its  shadow 
over  his  words,  and  which  would  draw  lessons  from  the  days  of 
Noah  for  our  own. 

Are  we  then  to  think  that  these  spirits  had  another  chance, 
and  swarmed,  as  the  mediaeval  artists  loved  to  depict,  in 
rejoicing  crowds  after  Christ  into  Paradise  ?  There  is  nothing 
of  this  sort  in  these  words.  And  it  is  a  mistake  to  trust  to 
inference  in  a  case  so  utterly  removed  from  human  cognizance 
and  experience.  The  Bible  turns  our  thought  from  speculation 
about  the  future  to  life  in  the  living  present.  "  What  is  that 
to  thee  ?  follow  thou  Me  !  " 

All  that  we  need  to  concern  ourselves  with  now  is  this  frag- 
ment which  Peter  has  handed  down  to  us  from  the  posthumous 
sayings  of  Christ,  when  He  taught  them  for  forty  days,  and 
"spoke  to  them  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of 
God."  We  must  clearly  understand  that  Christ's  death  did  not 
stop  his  usefulness,  but  that  He  ministered  still ;  just  as  Joseph, 
when  cut  off  from  his  duties  in  the  palace,  ministered  to  his 
fellow-prisoners,  proclaiming  to  one  his  deliverance  and  to 
another  his  doom. 

II.  A  Confession. — The  story  of  the  Flood  seems  to  have 
made  a  great  impression  on  the  mind  and  heart  of  the  Apostle  ; 
and  the  event  is  constantly  on  his  lips  (2  Peter  ii.  5  ;  iii.  5,  6). 
And  here  he  follows  closely  on  the  words  of  his  Master, 
who  compared  the  days  of  Noah  with  those  of  the  Son 
of  Man. 

We  need  not  stay  to  describe  in  detail  the  days  which  were 
before  the  Flood,  or  ///c  condition  of  the  old  world.  Its  course 
was  precisely  similar  to  that   of  the   world  around  us  still. 


144  Q^Irc  §ap  0f  ^onif, 

"  They  ate  ;  they  drank ;  they  married,  and  were  given  in 
marriage."  The  arts  and  sciences  were  richly  cultivated. 
Gigantic  engineering  and  architectural  works  must  have 
abounded,  or  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  construct  such 
a  marvellous  vessel  as  the  ark.  Refinement  and  civilization, 
side  by  side  with  abnormal  and  horrid  crimes.  The  giddy 
pursuit  of  pleasure  ;  the  eager  search  for  wealth  ;  the  lawless 
gratification  of  evil  propensity ;  the  reckless  disregard  of  the 
claims  of  God  ;  the  rush  of  the  torrent  of  evil  and  unholiness, 
in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  and  pleadings  of  the  grey-headed 
preacher  for  a  hundred  years.  All  these  are  what  we  see  to- 
day around  us  in  confused  and  grievous  manifestation. 

And  there  is  as  little  need  to  describe  t/ie  new  world  into 
which  Noah  and  his  children  stepped  down  from  the  mountain 
slopes  on  which  their  ark  grounded.  How  delicious  the  balmy 
air,  the  green  grass  carpeting  the  earth,  the  luxuriant  growth 
of  vegetation  from  the  soil  enriched  and  fructified  by  the 
alluvial  deposit  of  the  waters  !  It  was  a  world  from  which  sin, 
and  crime,  and  evil,  had  been  purged,  and  Creation  seemed 
already  to  anticipate  the  vision  of  the  seer:  "And  I  saw  a 
new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  ;  for  the  first  heaven  and  the 
first  earth  were  passed  away,  and  there  was  no  more  sea." 

But  surely  that  old  world  is  very  significant  of  the  old  life 
into  which  we  are  born  by  nature  ;  and  that  new  world  of  the 
new  life  mto  which  we  enter  in  regeneration.  And  the  Flood 
of  water,  through  which  Noah  passed  from  the  old  into  the 
new,  bearing  him  onwards  on  its  broad  and  swelling  bosom, 
from  evil  and  familiar  scenes  into  new  and  ecstatic  surround- 
ings, is  a  type  of  the  blessed  experience  of  which  the  Epistles 
so  often  speak  ;  when  believers  through  faith  in  Jesus  pass  out 
of  the  old  life  of  selfishness  and  death,  into  the  glorious  new 
life  of  resurrection  blessedness  ;  when  they  sit  with  Christ  in 
the  Heavenlies  ;  when  they  reckon  themselves  to  be  dead  in- 
deed unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God  ;  sharing  the  spirit  of  the 
Saviour's  death,  and  of  his  resurrection  :  at  such  times  they 
may  be  said  to  repeat  the  experience  of  the  patriarch,  when  he 
passed  from  the  old  world  into  the  new. 

The  early  Church  was  accustomed  to  set  forth  this  spiritual 


Jrnm  tljc  ODliJ  Maxih  into  tire  Hcto.         145 

experience  by  the  outward  act  of  immersion  in  water.  Be- 
lievers, in  confession  that  they  had  passed  from  their  previous 
Hfe  of  sin  into  the  blessed  life  of  fellowship  with  the  risen 
Saviour,  were  buried  under  water  in  the  likeness  of  his  death, 
and  were  lifted  again  above  the  water  in  the  likeness  of  his 
resurrection.  The  water  in  the  pool  or  river  might  thus  be 
compared  to  the  waters  of  Noah's  Flood,  because  through  each 
there  was  a  passage  from  the  old  to  the  new,  just  as  in  the 
grave  of  Jesus  there  was  a  passage  from  the  more  limited  life 
of  the  flesh  into  the  freer  Hfe  of  the  spirit.  "Though  we  have 
known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet  now  henceforth  know  we  Him 
no  more.  Therefore  if  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new 
creature  :  old  things  are  passed  away ;  behold,  all  things  are 
become  new."  Baptism,  indeed,  has  no  sacramental  efficacy ; 
but  there  are  no  trifles  in  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and  obedience 
to  a  mere  outward  rite  may  make  a  world  of  difference  between 
the  uneasiness  of  an  evil  conscience  and  the  answer  of  a  good 
one. 

III.  An  Analogy. — We  have  now  seen  three  facts.  First, 
that  Christ's  suffering  did  not  hinder  his  heralding  his  finished 
work.  Second,  that  He  heralded  it  to  the  spirits  who  in 
Noah's  day  were  disobedient.  Third,  that  we  are  like  Noah, 
and  Christ,  too,  in  having  passed  through  the  waters  of  death  : 
not  the  death  of  the  body ;  but  the  death  of  the  spirit  to  its 
fonner  tastes  and  delights,  because  it  has  entered  so  fully  into 
the  meaning  of  Christ's  death,  and  into  participation  with  his 
new  life. 

What  then  ?  Since  we  have  entered  into  this  new  and 
blessed  life,  are  we  to  be  indifferent  to  those  who  belong  to 
the  old  world  and  life  from  which  we  profess  to  have  passed 
away  ?  Nay,  that  cannot  be  ;  the  very  metaphors  on  which  we 
have  been  dwelling  exclude  such  a  thought,  and  banish  it  from 
our  serious  consideration.  In  the  hght  of  these  analogies  it 
cannot  be  tolerated  for  a  moment. 

Of  course  it  would  have  made  the  analogy  more  complete  if 
it  could  have  been  said  that  Noah,  after  the  Flood,  had  con- 
tinued preaching  to  his  old  companions.     But  that  could  not 


14^  ^ht  iap  of  ^oab. 

have  happened.  Yet  the  same  purpose  was  served,  though 
with  a  slight  change  in  the  person  of  the  herald.  For  Jesus, 
whose  death  and  burial  were  symbolized  in  the  Flood,  of  whom 
Noah  was  a  type,  and  with  whose  death  we  are  identified,  went 
to  these  self-same  spirits,  and  spake  with  them.  It  was  equiva- 
lent to  Noah  going  ;  nay,  it  was  better.  Certainly  the  spirit 
of  Noah's  ministry  was  fully  realized  in  that  of  his  great 
Antitype. 

In  my  opinion,  then,  the  drift  of  this  passage  is  to  show  that 
it  becomes  us  to  herald  the  tidings  of  the  cross  to  the  old  com- 
panions of  our  former  life  ;  we  are,- as  it  were,  to  go  back  to 
them  across  the  waters  of  the  death-flood,  not  to  live  again  in 
that  world  which  we  have  abjured,  but  to  declare  the  glad  tidings 
of  salvation. 

Yes,  and  even  their  persecution  of  us  should  not  hinder  our 
efforts  for  their  salvation.  Indeed,  we  shall  probably  discover 
that  our  very  sufferings  will  loose  our  tongues  and  enlarge  our 
opportunities.  In  the  stocks  we  may  so  sing  praise  that  the 
prisoners  may  hear.  In  Caesar's  house,  our  bonds  for  Christ 
will  be  manifest  in  all  the  palace.  In  our  martyrdoms  we  shall 
light  fires  which  shall  flame  up  over  the  world,  and  shall  never 
be  put  out. 

Noah's  Flood  makes  us  think,  not  only  of  that  symbolic 
death  which  is  as  much  the  theme  of  Rom.  vi.  as  of  this 
passage,  but  of  that  literal  death,  which  these  believers  had  to 
face  in  the  form  of  martyrdom,  and  which,  unless  the  Lord 
come  first,  we  too  must  experience.  But  in  whatever  form 
death  comes  to  the  believer,  whether  in  the  acts  of  daily  self- 
denial,  or  in  the  definite  abjuring  of  some  form  of  evil,  or  in  the 
dissolution  of  this  natural  body,  it  may  be  met  calmly  and  joy- 
fully, because  it  is  always  followed  by  resurrection. 

Through  death  we  follow  our  Master's  steps,  which  lead  to 
the  upland  lawns  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death. 
Let  us  fix  our  constant  gaze  on  his  resurrection,  which  is  a  type 
of  ours  also,  as  He  takes  his  place  on  the  right  hand  of  God, 
"  having  gone  into  heaven,  angels  and  authorities  and  powers 
being  made  subject  unto  Him."  We  shall  share  that  power 
only  in  proportion  as  we  are  willing  to  share  his  death. 


XXl.-(©nr  tottlj  lim  in  ^teAlj. 

"Forasmuch  then  as  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh,  arm  your- 
selves likewise  with  the  same  mind :  for  he  that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh 
hath  ceased  from  sin  ;  that  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of  his  time  in 
the  flesh  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of  God."— i  Peter  iv.  i,  2. 

"ibPifSl/  ^^  ^^^^  °^  ^^'^  ^''^^ '"  ^^^  ^^^^  '■"  ^^°  ^^"  ^^'^  '^°^ 

"^1  ^l'       long  that  may  be  for  any  one  of  us?     Shorter  to 
'ifJIi^      some  of  us  than  we  think  ;  but,  in  a  sense,  short  to 
\^^^  t       all.    The  sands  run  swiftly  through  life's  hour-glass. 
/^^.'S        The  shadow  hastens   to   go   down  upon   the  dial. 
V!Sh        The  waves  eat  away  so  quickly  the  dwindling  shoal 
of  land  which  crumbles  beneath  us.     And  the  years,  with  in- 
exorable pressure,  lay  their  hands  on  us,  and  urge  us  to  flee 
towards  the  goal.     Such  thoughts  were  much  in  the  Apostle's 
mind.     In  the  next  Epistle,  he  says,  "the  putting  off  of  my 
tabernacle  cometh  swiftly"  (R.V.). 

The  Christian  finds  nothing  in  such  thoughts  to  make  him 
sad.  Every  milestone  marks  the  growing  nearness  of  his 
home.  The  waves  cannot  be  crossed  too  swiftly  by  the  eager 
traveller  who  impatiently  counts  the  hours  that  interpose 
between  him  and  the  embrace  of  wife  or  child.  Before  us  lie 
the  ages  of  eternity.  Hark  to  the  murmur  of  their  waves,  as 
the  trained  ear  catches  the  beat  of  the  ocean's  music,  borne  on 
the  night  breeze  !  Ages  filled  with  a  blessedness  of  personal 
enjoyment  and  rapturous  ministry  \yhich  defy  tongue  to  tell  or 
heart  to  picture.  The  dim  outlines  already  sketched  stir  the 
heart  with  ecstasy  ;  but  what  will  the  completed  picture  be, 
when  God  fills  in  the  details  with  his  own' hand  !  Take  heart, 
fellow-sufferers  and  fellow-workers,  our  redemption  draweth 
nigh.  Day  is  breaking.  "  Now  is  our  salvation  nearer  than 
when  we  believed." 


148  One  tnitlr  lint  in  leatly. 

But  the  blessed  future  must  not  divert  our  thoughts  from  the 
duties  to  be  discharged  during  the  rest  of  the  time  which  we 
are  to  spend  in  the  flesh.  We  must  not  be  dreamers,  but 
warriors.  We  must  fill  our  shortening  days  with  strenuous 
endeavour ;  like  the  weary  toiler  who  hastens  with  redoubled 
energy  to  finish  the  garment  at  which  she  has  been  working 
with  sore  fir^jzro,  iDecause  ths  only  candle  she  can  afford  is 
burning  low,  and  must  soon  flicker  out.  There  is  therefore  a 
noise  of  war  in  this  verse.  To  arms  !  to  arms  !  Arm  your- 
selves with  the  same  mind;  and  when  we  ask  What  viind? 
we  are  told  to  arm  ourselves  with  the  mind  that  took  Jesus  to 
his  death. 

In  a  venerable  old  church  at  Innsbruck,  famous  for  con- 
taining the  tomb  of  the  great  Emperor  Maximilian,  there  is 
a  magnificent  bronze  statue  of  Godfrey  of  Boulogne,  the 
illustrious  crusader.  His  head  is  covered  with  a  helmet,  and 
on  the  helmet  rests  a  crown  of  thorns.  Of  course,  there  was 
a  meaning  in  the  mind  of  the  artist  other  than  that  with  which 
we  now  invest  the  strange  conjunction.  He  doubtless  designed 
to  represent  the  sacred  cause  for  which  that  helmet  was 
donned.  But  we  may  discover  an  apt  symbol  of  the  teaching 
of  our  Apostle,  who  unites  in  these  verses  the  armour  of  the 
Christian  soldier,  and  the  recollection  of  Christ's  suffering  in 
the  flesh. 

This  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  first  takes  us  to  the 
cross  ;  and  after  gazing  reverently  on  that  spectacle  of  love, 
we  are  brought  to  a  point  where  two  ways  diverge.  And  the 
only  way  of  discovering  and  maintaining  the  right  path  is  to 
imbibe  the  spirit  of  that  wondrous  death  ;  and  to  glory 
in  the  cross  of  Christ.  In  hoc  signo  vinces.  And  thus 
we  shall  "no  longer  live  the  rest  of  our  time  in  the  flesh, 
to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of  God." 

I.  Divergent  Paths.— (i)  On  the  one  side  the  broad  way, 
trodden  by  so  many  feet,  of  indulgence  of  the  flesh.  "  The 
lusts  of  men."  Lust  is  appetite  run  wild.  There  is  no  harm 
in  any  natural  appetite,  considered  in  itself.  Each  is  implanted 
in  us  for  wise  and  necessary  purposes.      Man  is  made  as  a 


t;ije  Ifainlcasttcaa  of  tlje  JFkalj.  149 

self-acting  machine  ;  and  he  is  not  only  reminded  of  necessary 
duties  by  the  whirr  of  the  alarum,  but  is  driven  to  perform 
them  by  the  goad  of  hungry  appetites  on  the  one  hand,  and 
by  the  attraction  of  satisfied  appetites  on  the  other. 

But  appetite  has  been  spoilt  by  the  Fall.  It  has  become 
disturbed  in  its  action,  so  that  it  does  not  now  work  as  God 
intended  it  to  do,  when  He  made  man,  and  pronounced  his  nature 
very  good.  When  man  fell,  appetite  broke  from  the  enfeebled 
grasp  of  the  will,  and  began  to  seek  after  its  own  gratification, 
irrespective  of  those  necessary  uses  and  legitimate  bounds 
which  had  been  assigned  by  the  Creator's  love  and  wisdom. 
And  so  all  down  the  ages,  the  appetites  of  man's  nature  have 
treated  the  Imperial  will  as  the  barons  of  the  middle  ages  often 
treated  their  Liege  Sovereign,  whom  they  practically  set  at 
nought,  following  their  own  wild  and  lawless  ways,  Aod  the 
mischief  of  this  revolt  has  been  manifested  by  the  way  in  which 
the  lawlessness  of  the  flesh  has  infected  the  mind  ;  so  that 
mind  and  heart  have  followed  its  leadings  towards  unnatural 
and  excessive  indulgence,  and  men  have  "fulfilled  the  desires 
(or  lusts)  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind." 

These  habits  have  descended  to  us  from  the  generations 
which  have  preceded  us.  Each  one  of  us  is  therefore  born 
into  the  world,  subject  to  the  action  of  appetites  which  are  no 
longer  in  the  same  pure  and  holy  state  in  which  they  came 
from  the  Creator's  hand,  but  are  biassed  strongly  in  the  direction 
of  lawless  and  unholy  manifestation.  And  if  we  obey  their 
promptings,  as  so  many  do,  we  become  their  slaves ;  sink  to 
the  level  of  the  brute  creation,  which  know  no  law  but  that  of 
appetite  ;  and  come  under  the  wrath  of  God  (Eph.  ii.  3). 

Now,  what  we  need  is,  not  that  these  appetites  should  be 
eradicated— but  that  they  should  be  controlled  ;  kept  only  for 
necessary  uses  ;  deprived  of  all  those  evil  gratifications  which 
have  become  to  them  a  second  nature.  Never  in  this  life  will 
they  lose  the  capability  of  desiring  unholy  gratification  ;  but 
those  desires,  passing  as  a  momentary  thrill  through  our  being, 
and  failing  to  attract  or  master  the  will,  are  not  necessarily 
sins  ;  and  it  is  clearly  possible  to  live  in  the  flesh,  which  is 
very  sensitive  and  susceptible  to  evil  suggestion,  and  yet  not 


150  ®ne  toitlr  Hint  in  §£atl). 

to  gratify  its  demands  in  a  single  iota  Ijeyond  the  limits  of  the 
will  and  law  of  God. 

This  is  what  the  Gospel  promises.  Not  that  we  should  be 
deprived  of  any  part  of  our  nature.  Not  that  we  should  never 
feel  the  thrill  of  temptation,  and  the  tendency  on  the  part  of 
our  flesh  to  respond.  Not  that  we  should  even  reach  a  con- 
dition in  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  sin.  But  that  the 
unholy  confederacy  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  should  be 
broken,  so  that  whatever  may  be  the  passing  spasms  of  the 
flesh  in  the  direction  of  unlawful  gratification,  they  may  not 
be  accepted  or  permitted  by  the  moral  nature — the  will — the 
regal  individuality  of  man. 

(2)  What  a  glorious  contrast  to  the  will  of  the  flesh  is  "the  will 
of  God  !"  To  do  this  will  Jesus  came  to  earth.  To  do  this  was, 
as  He  said,  his  "meat."  It  was  the  fire-cloud  that  lit  his 
pathway  ;  the  yoke  in  carrying  which  He  found  rest ;  the  Urim 
and  Thummim,  which  dimmed  or  shone  with  heavenly  guidance. 
There  is  no  course  more  safe  or  blessed  than  to  live  in  the  will 
of  God.  God's  will  is  good  will.  Where  the  will  of  God  lies 
across  the  wilderness  pathway,  there  flowers  bloom,  and  waters 
gush  from  rocks  of  flint.  Sometimes  the  flesh  rebels  against 
it,  because  it  means  crucifixion  and  self-denial :  but  under  the 
rugged  shell  the  sweetest  kernel  nestles  ;  and  none  know  the 
ecstasy  of  living  save  those  who  refuse  the  broad,  easy  road 
of  the  lusts  of  men,  to  climb  the  steep,  upward  path  of  doing 
the  will  of  God  from  the  heart. 

II.  The  Secret  and  Power  of  Self-Denial. — It  is  not 
easy  to  refuse  that  broad,  easy  road.  No  effort  is  required  to 
take  it.  Life  tends  to  roll  easily  and  luxuriously  down  its  gentle 
slopes.  The  stream  insensibly  bears  the  boat,  gaily  decked  with 
flags,  and  filled  with  careless  or  idle  pleasure-seekers,  toward 
the  fatal  rapids.  What  is  the  secret  which  shall  lead  a  man  to 
say  "  No"  to  self;  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  its  solicitations  ;  and  to 
face  the  steep  ascent  ?  And,  supposing  he  has  the  desire  to 
resist,  what  power  is  there  strong  enough  to  enable  him  to 
stem  the  torrent,  beating  and  seething  against  him  at  every 
stroke  ? 


©Ire  iettial  of  ^elf.  151 

77?^  answer  t's  found  in  the  cross  of  our  blessed  Lord. — 
"Christ  suffered  in  the  flesh."  "The  pious  contemplation  of 
his  death  will  most  powerfully  kill  the  love  of  sin  in  the  soul, 
and  kindle  an  ardent  hatred  to  it.  The  believer— looking  on 
Jesus  as  crucified  for  him,  and  wounded  for  his  transgressions  ; 
and  taking  in  deep  thoughts  of  his  spotless  innocency,  which 
deserved  no  such  thing,  and  of  his  matchless  love,  which  yet 
endured  it  all  for  him— will  then  naturally  think  :  Shall  I  be  a 
friend  to  that  which  was  his  deadly  enemy  ?  Shall  sin  be  sweet 
to  me,  which  was  so  bitter  to  Him  ;  and  that  for  my  sake  ?  Shall 
I  ever  lend  it  a  good  look,  or  entertain  a  favourable  thought  of 
that  which  shed  my  Lord's  blood  ?  Shall  live  in  that  for  which 
He  died,  and  died  to  kill  in  me  ?     Oh,  let  it  not  be  ! " 

All  this  is  true  ;  and  yet  there  is  a  truth  beneath.  It  must 
never  be  forgotten  that  Christ  died  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh."  He  died,  not  only  for  sin,  but  to  condemn  sin  in  the  flesh. 
In  his  death  an  entire  break  was  made  between  the  life  which 
He  had  lived  in  contact  with  sin,  though  Himself  sinless,  and  that 
other  life  which  He  spends  on  the  resurrection  side  of  death. 
And  since  we  are  viewed  in  the  mind  and  purpose  of  God,  as 
having  died  with  Him  in  his  death,  and  being  raised  in  his 
resurrection,  we  must  also  regard  ourselves  as  having  passed 
out  of  the  life  in  which  flesh  and  sense  reign  supreme,  into  that 
other  life  where  they  are  for  ever  left  behind,  and  have  no  foot- 
h  Id  or  abode.  "In  that  He  died.  He  died  unto  sin  once;  in 
that  He  liveth,  He  liveth  unto  God.  Likewise  reckon  ye  also 
yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 

Let  us  take  high  ground  in  dealing  with  the  solicitations  and 
promptings  of  the  flesh.  Let  us  meet  every  thrill  of  passion 
with  the  complete  indifference,  the  stony  silence,  of  death.  Let 
us  say,  as  fashionable  people  are  wont  to  say  of  acquaintances 
whom  they  do  not  wish  to  see,  /  am  not  at  home  to  them.  Let 
us  treat  them,  as  Peter  treated  his  Lord,  whom  for  many  months 
he  had  known  as  his  bosom  friend,  and  yet  denied  him,  saying, 
/  know  not  the  man. 

And  so,  when  strong  desires  come  through  our  bodies,  and 
strive  to  send  evil  thoughts  and  passions  through  the  heart  and 


-52  ©n£  toitlj  Him  in  ieatlj. 

will,  they  will  find  the  fire-proof  iron  door  slammed  suddenly  in 
their  face,  so  that  the  dread  contagion  may  not  spread.  The 
flesh  may  have  its  desires  ;  but  the  cleansed  heart  will  refuse  to 
yield  to  them.  And  thus  the  flesh  will  be  crucified  and  mortified 
with  its  affections  and  lusts,  and  the  conscience  kept  void  of 
ofifence. 

This  power  of  refusing  to  harbour  or  consider  the  unholy 
promptings  of  the  flesh  is  a  very  blessed  one.  But  it  is  not  of 
man,  nor  to  be  built  up  by  holy  resolution  or  endeavour.  It  is 
the  power  of  God  in  man  ;  the  life  of  the  risen  Jesus  ;  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  strives  against  the  flesh,  so  that  we  may 
not  do  the  things  that  otherwise  we  would  (Gal.  v.  17,  R.v.). 
Realize  that  as  one  with  Christ  you  have,  in  the  mind  of  God, 
died.  Deliberately  choose  that  death  at  once  and  for  evermore 
as  your  portion  and  lot.  Then  look  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  put 
the  sentence  of  death  into  daily  and  hourly  execution.  And  you 
will  find  that^  though  the  flesh  still  lives,  it  will  no  longer  govern 
you  ;  but  the  Spirit  of  God  will  govern  it  through  you,  robbing  it 
of  power,  and  keeping  it  so  utterly  in  subjection  that  you  may 
be  tempted  to  think  that  it  is  changed  in  nature.  This,  however, 
will  be  a  mistake,  for  if  the  Spirit's  power  is  relaxed  for  only  an 
instant,  the  old  fatal  habits  will  re-assert  themselves,  and  if  per- 
sisted in  will  work  with  more  than  their  former  force. 

Ill,  A  Stirring  Injunction. — "Arm  yourselves  with  the 
same  mind."  Drink  into  the  spirit  of  Christ's  death  till  it  be 
repeated  in  you,  and  you  die  to  the  flesh  as  He  died  to  it. 
Thus  shall  be  repeated  the  ancient  legend  of  the  stigmata^ 
which  grew  in  the  flesh  of  the  saint  engaged  perpetually  in 
meditating  on  the  wounds  of  Christ.  And  every  time  you  dare 
to  refuse  the  lawless  strivings  of  self,  you  will  enter  more  into 
the  meaning  of  his  death  and  of  his  resurrection.  Let  us 
resolutely  put  this  piece  of  celestial  armour  on.  It  will  need 
resolution  and  determination,  as  the  first  shocks  of  battle  will 
be  trying  and  terrible.  But  victory  is  sure.  And  though  there 
will  be  no  cessation  in  the  temptation,  there  will  be  cessation  in 
the  yielding  to  it,  which  is  sin  :  "  For  he  that  has  died  is  freed 
from  sin"  (Rom.  vi.  7,  R.v.).     And  in  time  the  bodily  desires, 


CljK  Secret  of  ^otner.  153 

long  thwarted,  will  give  less  and  less  trouble,  as  if  they  were 
weary  of  the  incessant  defeat. 

"  Wouldst  thou  then  have  much  power  against  sin,  and  much 
increase  of  holiness,  let  thine  eye  be  much  on  Christ  ;  set  thine 
heart  on  Him  ;  let  it  dwell  in  Him,  and  be  still  with  Him. 
When  sin  is  likely  to  prevail,  go  to  Him,  tell  Him  of  the 
insurrection  of  his  enemies,  and  thy  inability  to  resist,  and 
desire  Him  to  suppress  them,  that  they  may  gain  nothing  by 
their  stirring  but  some  new  wound.  If  thy  heart  begin  to 
move  towards  sin,  lay  it  before  Him  :  the  beams  of  his  love 
shall  eat  out  that  fire  of  those  sinful  lusts.  Wouldst  thou  have 
thy  pride,  and  passions,  and  love  of  the  world  killed,  go  sue  for 
the  virtue  of  his  death,  and  that  shall  do  it.  Seek  his  spirit — 
the  spirit  of  meekness,  humility,  and  Divine  love.  Look  on 
Him,  and  He  shall  draw  thy  heart  heavenwards,  and  unite  it 
to  Himself,  and  ma!:c  it  like  Himself.  And  is  not  that  the 
thing  thou  desirest?" 


XXII.- fiji  Ir^atb  of  mttnit^. 

"  For  the  time  past  of  our  life  may  sufSce  us  to  have  wrought  the  will 
of  the  Gentiles,  when  we  walked  in  lasciviousness,  lusts,  excess  of  wine, 
revellings,  banquetings,  and  abominable  idolatries :  wherein  they  think  it 
strange  that  ye  run  not  with  them  to  the  same  excess  of  riot,  speaking  evil 
of  you  :  who  shall  give  account  to  Him  that  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and 
the  dead.  For  this  cause  was  the  gospel  preached  also  to  them  that  are 
dead,  that  they  might  be  judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh,  but  live 
according  to  God  in  the  spirit.  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand :  be 
ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer." — i  Peter  iv.  3-7. 

w 


^^pY^/HERE  is  a  great  contrast  between  the  believers  of 
^sM  ^ly  the  Apostohc  age  and  ourselves.  And  this  contrast 
•1^/111^  is  shown,  not  so  much  in  the  truths  held  and 
JO^  i      believed,  or  in  devotion  towards  the  Lord  Jesus,  as 

in  the  different  attitude  taken  up  and  maintained 

towards  the  great  future. 
With  them  eternity  had  already  begun.  It  dated  from  the 
moment  in  which  they  received  Christ  into  their  hearts.  The 
fact  of  their  being  in  the  body  did  not  obscure  their  perception 
of  the  union  subsisting  between  them  and  their  risen  Lord,  so 
close  and  intimate  that  where  He  was  ^/lere  they  also  were. 
His  death  had  cut  them  also  off  from  the  world  which  had 
crucified  Him.  His  grave  lay  as  an  impassable  barrier 
between  them  and  the  course  of  human  society,  which  had 
refused  and  rejected  Him.  In  his  resurrection  and  ascension 
they  had  participated.  Where  their  treasure  was,  there  their 
hearts  were  also.  In  Him  they  had  already  become  denizens 
and  citizens  of  the  world  where  He  was  King,  sitting  in  the 
Heavenlies.  True,  they  had  their  dwelling  in  the  world  to  do 
their  necessary  business  according  to  the  will  of  God,  to  learn 
lessons  that  could  only  be  learnt  under  the  conditions  of  our 
present   mortal  life,  and  to  act  as  an  antiseptic  to  the  evil 


^  §lack  ipaat.  155 

around.  But  this  was  compatible  with  their  dwelling  in  spirit 
in  their  true  home  and  rest,  confessing  that  they  were  -;trangers 
and  pilgrims  on  the  earth. 

The  voyager  detects  the  near  proximity  of  land  by  the  fresh 
land-breeze  which  breathes  in  his  face,  wafting  the  sounds  and 
scents  of  forest,  or  prairie,  or  heather-covered  hill.  So,  through 
these  Epistles,  we  inhale  another  atmosphere  than  that  with 
which  we  are  so  familiar  in  modern  Christian  societies.  We 
live  in  the  world  and  pay  occasional  visits  into  the  unseen  and 
eternal  ;  those  early  Christians  lived  in  the  unseen  and  eternal, 
and  paid  periodic  necessary  visits  into  the  world.  We  conform 
to  the  world  ;  they  were  transformed  by  the  daily  renewing  of 
their  minds.  We  read  the  society  papers,  discuss  society  gossip; 
send  our  children  into  society,  and  strive  to  hold  our  own  in 
dress  and  appointments  with  the  cream  of  society  around  us  ; 
they,  on  the  other  hand,  were  thought  strange  and  ridiculous, 
because  they  lived  amongst  men  as  "the  children  of  the 
resurrection."  Surely  the  contrast  is  not  to  our  credit,  although 
we  vaunt  our  fancied  superiority. 

There  are  many  symptoms  of  this  state  of  mind  in  the  pas- 
sage before  us.  The  limited  time  or  duration  of  our  life  as 
contrasted  with  the  infinite  stretch  of  future  existence  ;  the 
reference  to  Him  who  is  ready  to  judge,  as  if  the  great  white 
throne  were  already  erected  in  mid-heaven,  and  men  were 
being  arraigned  before  it,  preparatory  to  the  solemn  session 
of  the  Judge  ;  the  piercing  cry  as  of  the  last  herald  angel,  that 
the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand— all  these  indicate  the  mood 
of  the  Apostle's  soul.  He  stood  in  the  light  of  eternity.  Its 
breath  was  upon  his  face.  Its  spirit  was  in  his  heart.  And 
it  was  under  the  deep  impression  of  these  momentous  realities 
that  he  exhorted  those  whom  he  addressed,  as  pilgrims  and 
strangers,  to  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts.  And  what  stronger 
motive  could  he  have  employed  ? 

I.  A  Black  Enumeration.— "Lasciviousness,  lusts,  excess 
of  wine,  revellings,  banquetings,  and  abominable  idolatries." 
It  is  a  dark  picture,  reminding  us  of  i  Cor.  vi.  g-ii.  But  it 
is  a  faithful  delineation  of  the  state  of  the  world,  in  spite  of  the 


iS6  ®Ite  ireatlj  oi  (Bttxnit^. 

loftiest  teachings  of  philosophy  and  morals.  Ordinary  readers 
can  form  but  a  very  inadequate  conception  of  the  grois  evils 
before  which  the  ancient  world  was  simply  rotting  away  at  the 
time  of  the  Advent.  The  extent  of  the  evil  is  veiled  by  the 
dead  languages  which  contain  the  record  for  all  time.  Suffice 
it  to  say  that  the  dialogues  of  Plato,  containing  some  of  the 
noblest  speculations  of  heathendom,  are  disgraced  by  the  un- 
blushing discussion  and  approval  of  sins  which  are  condemned 
by  the  police-courts  of  every  nation  in  Christendom.  There 
is,  therefore,  abundant  corroboration  of  this  inspired  picture  of 
the  state  of  the  society  of  that  day.  And  perhaps  its  very 
vileness  had  a  salutary  effect  upon  the  Christians  of  that  age, 
in  compelling  them  to  come  out  and  be  separate.  The  curse 
of  our  time  is  that  Satan  has  counterfeited  so  much  of 
Christianity,  and  has  sought  to  hide  a  Godless  civilization 
under  the  veneer  of  Christian  terms. 

We  need  not  dwell  on  the  various  evils  enumerated,  except 
to  note  how  closely  excess  of  wine  is  connected  with  abomin- 
able idolatries  ;  and  to  ask  whether  any  use  of  wine  is  not 
excessive,  unless  it  be  taken  for  some  very  distinct  purpose  of 
health,  prescribed  by  medical  authority — and,  even  then,  often 
mistakenly.  We  desire  rather  to  call  attention  to  the  strong 
phraseology  employed  to  describe  these  sins,  when  the  Apostle 
calls  them,  as  the  Greek  word  indicates,  "  stagnant  pools  of 
havoc-making  sin." 

Men  are  tormented  by  thirst.  That  thirst  was  meant  to 
bring  them  to  the  river  of  water  of  life,  which  flows  from  the 
throne  of  God.  But  as  they  refuse  to  follow  it  thither,  they 
are  given  up  to  follow  it  to  the  brackish  stagnant  pools  of  the 
desert,  at  which  the  very  beasts  would  refuse  to  drink.  The 
music-hall,  the  gambling  den,  the  casino,  the  public-house,  the 
abode  of  shame,  are  so  many  foetid  pools,  at  which  men  seek  to 
quench  a  thirst  which  can  be  slaked  with  nothing  short  of  the 
living  God.  Oh,  when  will  they  learn  their  fatal  error  !  How 
shall  they  be  warned  !  Can  we  not  get  one  draught  of  throne- 
water  into  their  tortured  throats,  to  give  them  an  abhorrence 
of  all  other  beverage  beside  !  "Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth, 
come  ye  to  the  waters." 


®Ije  ^afroc  torougbt  bj  ^itt.  157 

And  as  to  havoc  !  What  a  tale  is  being  told  by  every  news- 
paper of  the  havoc  being  wrought  in  the  votaries  of  sin.  Havoc 
in  estate,  fortune,  health,  happiness,  reputation,  and  usefulness. 
Wretched  bodies,  beneath  whose  weig»ht  of  corruption  the  spirit 
seems  almost  to  have  expired.  Wretched  lives,  like  the  frigate 
which  so  gaily  leaves  the  harbour  to-day,  but  is  torn  by  the 
jagged  fang  of  the  rock  to-morrow,  and  goes  down  in  deep 
water.  Wretched  souls,  without  God,  or  hope,  or  love,  or  any 
trace  of  their  high  origin  and  Divine  equipment.  Well  may 
the  Lamb  of  God  still  wear  the  guise  of  the  Sufferer,  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne  of  God,  while  sin  still  works  such  havoc 
among  a  race  which  He  loves  more  than  Himself. 

Men  of  the  world  think  it  strange  that  we  do  not  run  with 
them  to  the  same  excess  of  riot.  They  know  what  we  re- 
nounce, but  not  what  we  receive.  They  see  us  flinging  away 
the  rank  water  from  the  stinking  bottle-skins,  but  they  do  not 
see  us  drinking  down  long  draughts  of  everlasting  life.  They 
cannot  understand  that  what  we  have  in  Christ  makes  all 
things  else  taste  insipid  and  forbidding.  If  they  only  knew, 
they  would  see  that  THEY  are  acting  strangely,  and  not 
we.  For,  as  we  see  what  they  miss,  and  how  hard  their 
service  is,  and  how  many  bitters  mingle  with  their  sweets,  we 
often  think  it  strange  that  they  prefer  husks  to  bread,  paste 
diamonds  to  jewels,  and  Marah  to  Elim. 

Any  time  spent  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  is  too  long.  The  time 
past  may  well  suffice.  Oh  the  bitter  regrets  which  the  memory 
of  past  sins  breeds  in  the  saved  soul !  What  would  it  not  give 
to  be  able  to  obliterate  the  record,  and  to  look  back  on  an  un- 
sullied page  !  But  this  may  not  be.  Our  only  comfort  is  that 
He  who  says  that  the  time  for  watching  is  over,  also  says  that 
there  is  yet  opportunity  to  retrieve  the  past,  and  promises  to 
•restore  the  years  which  the  cankerworm  and  caterpillar  have 
eaten. 

II.  An  Arresting  Consideration,— "  Who  shall  give 
account  to  Him  that  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  {i.e.,  the  living) 
and  the  dead."  It  is  related  of  Latimer  that,  when  summoned 
to  take  his  last  trial  before  vindiotive  foes,  he  was  somewhat 


158  W\jt  frcaflj  of  (Btcrnitj. 

loose  and  careless  in  his  replies,  till,  in  a  pause,  he  caught  the 
sound  of  a  pen  behind  the  arras,  transcribing  every  word  he 
spoke  ;  and  immediately  he  began  to  weigh  his  words  with 
minute  and  exacting  care.  Thus  we  are  urged  to  withdraw 
ourselves  from  the  ways  of  those  who  speak  evil  of  us  and 
blaspheme  God,  and  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  in 
this  present  evil  world,  because  the  Judge  standeth  at  the 
door. 

There  is  a  sense,  in  which,  of  course,  the  judgment  awaits 
men  on  the  other  side  of  death — the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  for 
his  servants,  to  adjust  their  rewards,  and  the  final  judgment  for 
the  unsaved  and  ungodly,  into  which  we  who  are  one  with  Him 
can  never  come  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  we  are  now  in  the 
presence  of  our  Judge.  He  is  ready  ;  He  is  at  the  door.  The 
time  is  come  that  judgment  must  begin ;  and  it  begins  at  the 
house  of  God. 

"  Soldiers,"  said  Napoleon  to  his  army,  as  it  passed  under  the 
shadow  of  the  pyramids,  "  forty  centuries  look  down  upon  you." 
But  if  there  be  an  inspiration  to  valour  in  the  thought  of  the 
venerable  past,  surely  there  must  be  a  stimulus  to  holy  living 
in  the  thought  that  all  our  life  is  naked  and  opened  to  the  eyes 
of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  whose  decisions  are  even  now 
beginning  to  register  themselves  in  our  history. 

From  the  living  the  Apostle  turns  to  the  dead,  to  those  who 
had  died  lately  as  sufferers  and  martyrs  in  the  persecutions, 
which  were  already  beginning  to  thin  the  ranks  of  the  Church. 
He  grants,  without  hesitation,  that  they  had  been  adjudged  to 
suffer  as  much  as  human  nature  could,  and  as  if  they  had  been 
the  greatest  sinners  among  their  fellows.  But  after  all,  it  was 
only  "according  to  men,"  and  "in  the  flesh";  and  from  their 
sufferings  he  passes  to  their  great  reward,  and  sums  it  up  in 
saying,  they  "live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit."  Against  the» 
agonies  and  tears  and  adverse  judgment  of  their  age,  through 
which  the  martyr  host  wa.s  called  to  pass,  we  must  ever  set  the 
glories  of  their  reward,  as  they  live  in  the  front  ranks  of  the 
redeemed,  and  sun  themselves  in  the  light  of  God's  face.  And 
if  we  are  called  to  share  their  fate  "according  to  the  flesh,"  let 
us  cheer  our  hearts  by  remembering  that  we  shall  also  share 


*' match  itnta  fra^cr."  159 

their  life  "according  to  God  in  the  spirit,"  in  that  world  where 
human  judgments  are  passed  under  the  scrutiny  of  eternity,  and 
human  verdicts  are  liable  to  be  reversed,  with  no  option  of 
appeal. 

How  tender  the  thought  of  eternity  makes  us  of  other  men  ! 
Would  that  it  were  graven  on  our  hearts,  as  on  the  pavement 
before  Robert  Annan's  door,  that  we  might  bear  their  rebuffs, 
and  testify  against  their  sins,  as  those  who  are  already  treading 
the  streets  of  the  Holy  City,  and  are  carrying  in  their  hearts  the 
music  of  the  everlasting  song. 

III.  A  Clarion  Call.— "The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand  : 
be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer."  The  end  of  the 
Jewish  State  was  impending.  The  throes  of  dissolution  were 
already  being  felt.  Soon  the  venerated  system  in  the  heart  of 
which  the  Church  had  beeji  nurtured  was  to  split,  as  the  shell 
of  the  acorn  bursts  before  the  opening  of  life. 

The  end  of  the  age  of  prophets  and  kings  ;  of  a  material  city 
of  God  ;  of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  a  typical  religion — had 
come.  There  was  anguish  and  foreboding  in  pious  hearts  as 
they  saw  the  destruction  of  a  system  in  which  they  had  been 
wont  to  shelter.  The  birds  are  scared  when  they  see  the  tree 
where  many  generations  have  had  their  nests,  swaying  to  its  fall 
beneath  the  woodman's  axe.  The  air  is  full  of  dust  and  pother 
as  the  scaffolding  is  taken  down,  which  has  come  by  long  usage 
to  be  considered  part  of  the  true  temple,  though  in  reality  it 
obscures  its  proportions  and  beauty.  But  the  Apostles  were 
able  to  look  on  without  dismay,  knowing  that  the  things  which 
were  being  shaken  and  removed  were  only  the  things  which 
were  made,  and  that  they  were  being  put  out  of  the  way  of 
those  things  which  cannot  be  shaken  and  shall  remain. 

The  {ime  in  which  we  are  living  is  remarkably  similar.  This 
also  is  the  end  of  the  age.  "The  old  order  changeth,  giving 
place  to  new."  God  is  beginning  to  wrap  it  together  as  a  worn- 
out  vesture.  Institutions,  expressions,  long-cherished  methods — 
are  being  put  into  the  crucible  ;  with  the  sure  result  that  only  ihe 
transient  and  material  shall  be  dissolved,  and  there  shall  emerge 
the  new  heavens  and  earth  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness. 


i6o  fijc  grcalKr  oi  ^tcrttitg. 

Otir  duty  in  this  crisis  is  twofold:  {\)  Be  sober. — Let  there 
be  a  noble  self-restraint  in  respect  to  even  lawful  appetite,  and 
in  the  use  of  all  the  acquisitions  and  possessions  of  life.  Let 
the  flowing  habits,  the  vestments  of  the  soul,  be  girt  up  around 
the  loins.  Let  there  be  no  entanglement  on  the  part  of  Christ's 
soldiers  in  the  affairs  of  this  life,  that  we  may  please  Him  who 
has  chosen  us  to  be  his  soldiers,  and  that  we  may  be  ready 
to  be  up  and  away  whenever  the  trumpet  shall  ring  out  the 
summons  for  the  exodus,  or  the  voice  shall  be  heard  pro- 
claiming the  Bridegroom's  advent. 

(2)  Watch  unto  prayer. — The  Lord  depicts  the  faithful 
servant  on  the  watch  for  his  master's  coming,  though  the 
long  hours  of  the  night  have  begun  to  yield  to  the  summons 
of  the  dawn,  and  all  around  him  his  fellow- servants  are 
wrapped  in  slumber. 

"Oh,  happy  servant  he 
In  such  a  posture  found  !  " 

Be  that  posture  ours,  standing  at  the  oriel  window  which 
looks  out  towards  the  eastern  sky,  filling  the  hours  with  prayer 
for  his  speedy  advent,  so  that  before  ever  He  comes  and 
knocks,  we  may  be  down  to  greet  Him  on  the  doorstep,  and 
receive  his  salutation  of  peace,  his  word  of  "  Well  done  1 " 


XXiiL-l0fr^  €obmnQ  ^tns. 

"  Above   all   things,  being   fervent  in   your  love  among  yourselves :    fot 
love  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins." — i  Peter  iv.  8  (r.v.). 

^^(^  T  need  not  surprise  us  to  find  the  Apostle  Peter 
jipju,  insisting  so  strenuously  on  love.  At  a  never- 
to-be-forgotten  interview,  the  Master  thrice  reminded 
him  that  the  supreme  qualification  for  ministry  was 
love.  And  now  he  takes  care  to  insist  upon  the 
possession  of  love  by  those  who  essay  to  do  aught 
for  God  in  the  use  of  the  gifts  with  which  they  have  been 
entrusted. 

Above  all  things. — It  were  better  to  dispense  with  all  else 
in  the  Christian's  character  and  work  than  to  miss  love  ; 
though,  in  point  of  fact,  where  this  is  in  operation,  all  that  is 
likely  to  impress  and  touch  men  must  be  present  also.  This 
love  must,  of  course,  go  forth  in  its  sympathies  and  activities  to 
all  the  world  ;  but  it  should  begin  at  home.  We  must  have  love 
amotig  ourselves  as  believers  in  the  same  Lord,  before  we  can 
presume  to  speak  of  our  love  to  the  great  world  of  men  around. 
Nor  must  it  be  a  Platonic  love,  a  love  of  the  cold  light  of 
reason  ;  it  must  be  fervenf.,  at  boiling  point,  on  full  stretch, 
going  to  the  furthest  extents  of  love,  and  in  doing  so,  learning" 
the  breadths  and  lengths  of  the  unsearchable  love  of  God. 

But  we  have  now  rather  to  consider  the  way  in  which  this 
love  will  act  ;  for  it  is  remarkably  practical.  The  state  of 
heart  which  weeps  tender  tears  and  expresses  itself  in  rhapsody 
or  sentiment,  but  at  the  same  time  does  nothing  to  relieve 
distress  or  to  sacrifice  itself  for  others,  is  the  shadowy  ghost  of 
love,  its  imitation  and  counterfeit.  Love  gives  itself;  pours 
itself  forth  as  a  libation  ;  counts  all  things  loss  in  comparison 
with   the  benefit  of  the  one   on  whom   it  has  centred   itself, 

L 


i62  i^otrc  ^abtvinv^  ^ins. 

It  imperils  its  life  to  fetch  water  from  the  well  of  Bethlehem  ; 
breaks  alabaster  boxes  of  very  precious  ointment  on  the  person 
of  its  beloved  ;  and  braves  the  reproaches  of  a  world  in  arms — 
surprised  to  find  any  one  considering  the  pain  or  hardship 
great.     Oh  for  love  like  this  ! 

I.  Love  covers  a  Multitude  of  Sins  (8).— These  sins 
are,  of  course,  not  those  of  the  man  who  loves,  but  the  sins  of 
those  with  whom  he  is  brought  in  contact.  The  thought  is,  in 
fact,  quoted  from  Proverbs  x.  12.  And  the  whole  conception 
may  have  been  based  on  the  filial  act  of  Noah's  sons,  of  whom 
it  is  recorded  that  they  took  a  garment,  and  laid  it  upon  both 
their  shoulders,  and  went  backward,  and  covered  their  father's 
drunken  sin. 

How  few  men  there  are  without  grave  faults  !  "  Even  in 
the  most  highly  cultivated  countries  there  are  tracts  of  land 
which  have  never  been  brought  under  the  plough  ;  so  it  is  with 
the  characters  of  some  men — perhaps  of  most  men  ;  there  are 
patches  of  waste  ground  lying  here  and  there  utterly  useless, 
offensive  to  the  eye,  and  covered,  not  with  wholesome  com, 
but  with  briars  and  nettles  and  weeds  of  poisonous  quality." 
We  need  not  now  enter  into  the  question  of  how  these  faults 
come  to  be  permitted  by  devout  and  saintly  souls  ;  but,  if  it  be 
so  with  respect  to  these,  how  much  more  must  it  be  the  case  in 
respect  to  those  who  do  not  avow  allegiance  to  the  holy 
Gospel. 

Men  are  constantly  sinning  against  one  another.  They  take 
unfair  advantage  ;  they  deceive  with  lying  words  ;  they  lose 
their  temper  to  each  other's  face,  and  slander  behind  each  other's 
back  ;  they  grasp  at  their  own  pleasure  or  gain,  irrespective  of 
what  it  may  cost  to  those  whom  they  were  bound  to  consider ; 
they  snarl,  and  bite,  and  devour,  as  the  wild  beasts  of  the 
forest.  Ah,  what  wrongs  man  has  endured  at  the  hands  of 
his  fellow  ! 

There  are  some  imperfections  in  men  which,  though  not  to 
be  classed  in  the  front  rank  of  sins,  are  yet  very  trying  and 
hard  to  bear.  The  vanity  which  is  so  self-conscious,  and  is 
always  expecting  flattery  or  extorting  it,     The  discontent  which 


^ift  ^atnxz  of  (Kljnstian  |?ohe.  163 

is  ever  repining.  The  restlessness  which  betrays  the  irritable 
brain  and  the  overstrained  nervous  system.  The  petulance  of 
the  suliferer  ;  and  the  growing  penuriousness  of  the  aged.  The 
cynical  temper  of  those  who  feel  that  they  have  not  received 
their  dues  in  life,  and  depreciate  others.  The  recklessness 
which  is  courage  exaggerated.  All  these  are  irksome  and 
fretting,  and  produce  almost  as  much  revulsion  as  blacker 
kinds  of  sin. 

Now  we  are  not  requii-ed  to  form  a  false  judgment  of  these 
people,  and  to  think  or  say  that  they  are  not  offenders.  If  they 
are  doing  wrong,  it  is  not  our  duty  to  whitewash  their  fault 
and  to  call  evil  good.  There  is  rather  a  temptation  to  do  so ; 
because,  if  we  are  not  too  strict  with  others,  we  can  venture  to 
be  lenient  to  ourselves.  Thus  our  moral  sense  will  become 
warped  and  deteriorated.  To  gloss  over  the  faults  of  other 
men  is  often  the  first  step  to  making  light  of  our  own.  We 
must  be  very  careful,  therefore,  not  to  look  at  these  faults 
with  that  easy  good-nature  which  is  careless  of  the  distinction 
between  white  and  black. 

And,  again,  we  are  not  required  to  abjure  all  words  of 
reproach  or  methods  of  puftishment. — There  is  a  soft,  weak, 
reckless  kind  of  feeling  abroad  in  society,  which  is  always 
saying  pretty  nothings,  and  sprinkling  rose  water  on  open 
sewers,  but  which  does  not  dare  to  be  stern  and  severe,  and 
true  to  righteousness.  This  is  not  Christian  love ;  though  it  is  often 
mistaken  for  it.  The  love  which  God  inspires  will  withhold  ; 
will  leave  the  results  of  sins  to  work  themselves  out  in  the  life  ; 
will  dare  to  linger  for  three  days  at  a  distance,  rather  than 
go  at  once  in  answer  to  the  appeal  for  aid.  There  is  nothing 
so  wholesome,  so  salutary,  so  strong— as  Christian  love. 

But  with  all  these  limitations,  love  does  cover  a  multitude  of 
sins. 

(i)  //  forgives. — This  is  a  mar\-ellous  prerogative  placed 
within  our  reach,  in  the  exercise  of  which  we  are  most  like 
God.  Probably  in  this  world  only  shall  we  have  opportunity  to 
put  it  into  exercise.  When  once  we  have  entered  the  world 
where  there  is  no  sin,  then  will  the  need  of  mercy  stay ;  other 
graces  finding  full  development,  but   this   out  of  date.      The 


164  lEohe  Cotrering  ^ins. 

Christian  heart  does  not  wait  for  confession  or  explanation, 
but  so  soon  as  it  is  sensible  of  having  been  wronged,  it  looks 
to  heaven  asking  the  Father  to  forgive  ;  and  it  cherishes  the 
svveet  sense  of  forgivingness,  until  it  has  an  opportunity  of  pro- 
nouncing its  absolution  to  the  contrite  offender.  We  are  to  be 
imitators  of  God  in  the  swiftness  and  completeness  of  his 
forgiveness. 

(2)  //  avoids  giving  occasion  for  sin.  -  It  has  been  said  that 
if  you  have  a  favourite  horse,  which  always  takes  fright  and 
shies  at  a  certain  point  in  the  road,  you  are  careful  to  pass 
along  another  road,  if  possible  ;  or,  by  speaking  to  him  kindly, 
to  coax  him  to  go  by  without  fear.  So  if  you  are  aware  that 
a  certain  subject  will  always  invoke  an  outburst  of  hot  temper 
in  your  friend,  true  love  will  lead  you  to  avoid  it.  You  will 
not  needlessly  incite  to  sin  if  you  know  how  to  avoid  giving 
the  first  inducement. 

(3)  /^  is  quick  to  discern  some  generous  construction  to  put 
upon  the  fault.,  or  to  quote  sonic  consideration  to  weigh  in  the 
opposite  scale. — "  True,  he  was  excessively  dull  and  slow ; 
but  then  how  trustworthy  and  reliable  ! "  "  Yes,  he  was  very 
irritable  and  abrupt ;  but,  then,  remember  what  a  strain  he  has 
been  under  lately  in  his  business,  not  leaving  the  factory  or 
counting-house  till  late  at  night,  and  going  back  early  in  the 
morning,  with  no  recreation  or  respite."  "  Granted,  that  he  is 
now  becoming  soured  and  crabbed  ;  but,  then,  what  a  glorious 
man  he  was  in  those  earlier  days,  when  he  stood  in  the  breach  !  ^ 
"Are  you  sure  that  there  is  not  some  other  explanation  pos- 
sible for  his  action?"  In  some  such  ways  as  these,  Christian 
love  argues  with  itself  and  others  ;  and,  as  the  result,  many  a 
sin  is  hindered  on  its  way,  and  many  a  fault  condoned. 

(4)  //  rebukes  with  great  tenderness. — There  are  cases  where 
duty  demands  public  censure.  The  sore  must  not  lie  covered 
up,  lest  it  prove  to  be  deadly.  It  must  be  lanced  or  it  cannot 
be  cured.  But  the  lancing  is  done  with  exquisite  tenderness. 
The  wrong-doer  is  reproved,  rebuked,  and  exhorted,  but  with 
all  long-suffering  (i  Tim.  iv.  2).  The  man  overtaken  with  a 
fault  is  restored  in  the  spirit  of  meekness  (Gal.  yi-  O- 

"  There  is  a  great  deal  of  spiritual  art  and  skill  required  for 


dealing  with  another's  sins  ;  it  requires  much  spirituahty  of 
mind,  much  prudence,  and  a  mmd  clear  from  passion,  for  that 
bhnds  the  eye  and  makes  the  hand  rough,  so  that  a  man 
neither  rightly  sees  nor  rightly  handles  the  sore  he  goes  about 
to  cure  ;  and  many  are  lost  through  the  ignorance  and  neglect 
of  that  due  temper  which  should  be  brought  to  this  work." 
But  love  gives  the  delicacy  and  tact  required. 

II.  Love  affords  ungrudging  Hospitality  (9).— This 
does  not  mean  the  giving  of  extravagant  feasts,  but  rather  the  call- 
ing in  of  the  poor,  the  lame,  the  halt,  and  the  blind,  who  cannot 
recompense.  It  is  right  to  look  on  the  home  as  a  talent  for 
God's  service,  and  to  use  its  guest-chamber,  not  only  for  our 
friends,  but  for  his  servants.  Those  who  live  at  the  sea-side, 
or  in  salubrious  neighbourhoods,  should  consider  whether 
they  cannot  refresh  and  re-invigorate  some  jaded  worker. 
And  those  who  live  in  large  towns  might  throw  open  their 
rooms  to  young  people  fresh  from  the  country,  and  sorely 
tempted  to  go  wrong  for  want  of  a  friendly  welcome  into  a 
circle  like  that  left  far  away.  "  Be  not  forgetful  to  entertain 
strangers."  In  the  person  of  his  children  the  Master  still  often 
asks  the  cjuestion,  "Where  is  the  guest-chamber?" 

Without  griidgirig. — To  God  the  intention  of  the  heart  is  all 
important.  He  loveth  a  cheerful  giver.  He  takes  such  delight 
in  doing  good  that  He  has  no  sympathy  with  anything  like 
reluctance.  Not  that  hospitality  should  necessarily  be  profuse : 
for,  if  it  be,  it  is  difficult  to  maintain  ;  besides  reminding  the 
guest  that  he  is  regarded  as  a  stranger  :  only  that  which  is 
done  should  be  done  freely,  gladly,  with  the  whole  heart. 
There  is  no  hospitality  so  grateful  as  that  which  makes  the 
stranger  feel  at  home,  because  there  is  nothing  forced  or 
restrained,  and  he  is  permitted  to  feel  completely  at  his  case. 

III.  Love  ministers  (10,  11).— The  Apostle  speaks  here, 
not  so  much  of  the  extraordinary  gifts  with  which  the  early 
Church  was  endowed,  but  of  those  which  are  possessed  by  us 
to-day.  The  gifts  of  speech,  of  wealth,  of  administrative  ability, 
of  song.     All  these  things  are  gifts  from  the  hand  of  God. 


1 66  |foii£  Cohering  ^ins. 

There  is  nothing  to  be  proud  of;  for  we  have  nothing  that  we 
have  not  received.  And  instead  of  envying  another,  let  us 
thank  God  for  what  he  also  has  received,  asking  that  we  may 
benefit  by  it,  and  win  as  much  of  its  grace  as  possible. 

Each  member  of  the  Church  is  a  steward,  entrusted  with 
somethiftg. — No  note  without  significance.  No  wheel  without 
its  function.  No  pin  or  axle  without  importance.  "  Each 
man  hath  received  a  gift."  Oh,  you  who  are  doing  nothing 
to  make  the  world  better,  it  is  not  for  want  of  a  talent,  but 
because  you  are  not  using  the  talent  which  you  have.  You  have 
buried  it  somewhere  in  a  napkin.  Go  and  unearth  it,  and  put 
it  out  to  usury.  It  may  not  be  brilliant ;  but,  so  surely  as  it 
has  been  given  you  will  be  held  accountable  for  its  use.  The 
ability  to  give  is  a  great  talent,  and  is  as  much  a  sacred  trust 
as  the  power  to  teach  or  preach.  Let  us  never  forget  that  we 
are  not  owners,  but  stewards  who  must  render  an  account 
of  our  stewardship  to  the  Master ;  and  He  may  even  now  be 
at  the  door.  It  matters  not  what  our  fellow-servants  think 
or  say,  so  long  as  we  are  right  with  Him,  and  are  developing 
and  administering  to  our  utmost  the  precious  talents  with 
which  we  are  endowed.  The  main  object  with  each  of  us 
should  be,  to  act  up  to  the  aTsility  which  God  hath  given. 

Alamfold  grace  is  many-coloured  grace.  As  when  a  ray  of 
light  breaks  into  a  spray  of  many  hues,  so  each  of  us  receives 
God's  grace  at  a  different  angle,  and  flashes  it  back  broken  up 
into  some  fresh  colour.  In  some  it  is  speech ;  in  others  service; 
in  others  giving.  But  all  are  called  to  bear  their  several  parts 
in  the  great  household  of  the  Church,  the  management  of  which 
may  be  thoroughly  disorganized  by  the  sloth  or  refusal  of  one. 

hi  all  the  motive  should  be  the  same.  The  service  may  be 
great  or  small,  conspicuous  or  obscure  ;  but  the  glory  of  God 
must  be  the  supreme  passion.  If  we  work  from  any  other 
motive,  we  are  doomed  to  disappointment.  But  none  can 
work  for  this  in  vain.  In  our  failure  and  death,  if  He  wills 
it.  He  can  be  glorified.  Let  us  bring  Him  glory  through 
Jesus  Christ,  our  Mediator  and  Priest  ;  and  may  it  flow  in 
towards  Him  from  us,  and  from  all  created  beings  for  ever 
and  ever.     Amen. 


XXIV.— flji  jEotiiri  0f  0ur  litres. 

"  If  any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God ;  if  any  man 
minister,  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability  which  God  giveth  :  that  God  in  all 
things  may  be  glorified  through  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  be  praise  and 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever." — i  Peter  iv.  ii. 

r^r\EFORE  passing  on  to  consider  the  fiery  trial  which 
is  to  try  us,  it  seems  wise  to  stay  very  briefly  to 
consider  the  master-motive  which  should  inspire 
our  lives — namely,  "  that  God  in  all  things  may  be 
glorified." 

T/ii's  was  the  motive  which  actuated  our  blessed 
Lord. — When  He  took  upon  Himself  the  form  of  a  servant, 
and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men,  He  set  before  Him, 
as  the  ideal  and  purpose  of  his  life,  to  make  God  his  Father 
more  glorious.  He  speaks  of  Himself  as  seeking  not  his 
own  glory,  but  the  glory  of  Him  that  sent  Him  (John  vii.  i8). 
On  the  review  of  his  life  from  the  vantage  ground  of  death  He 
rejoiced  that  He  glorified  his  Father  on  the  earth,  and  had 
finished  the  work  given  Him  to  do  (John  xvii.  4-).  He  asked 
for  glory  only  as  the  condition  of  glorifying  his  Father  the 
more  (2).  And  He  promised  to  answer  prayer,  with  the 
avowed  intention  that  God  the  Father  should  be  glorified  in 
the  Son  (John  xiv.  13). 

We  learn  from  the  Lord's  own  words  that  the  Spirit  would 
glorify  Him,  after  He  had  passed  away  to  the  Father  ;  and 
what  the  Spirit  does  for  the  Son,  through  the  ages,  that  the 
Son  also  does,  and  did,  for  the  Father.  So  that  from  the 
perpetual  ministry  of  the  Spirit  we  may  form  some  conception 
of  the  mftiistry  of  the  Son,  during  his  earthly  life,  and  through- 
out thai  blessed  life  which  He  is  spending  within  the  vail, 
intense,  earnest,  and  blessed  ;   and  which  is  inspired  by  the 


t68  ^\jt  IHotthE  of  our  f  iirca. 

same  passion  for  his  Father's  glory  as  animated  Him  in  the 
days  of  his  flesh  (John  xvii.  4,  5). 

But  what  is  glory,  and  how  can  God  be  glorified  ?  Glory  is 
the  manifestation  of  the  hidden  attributes  of  the  ever-blessed 
God.  He  dwells  in  light  which  is  so  transcendent  in  its  burn- 
ing purity  that  no  mortal  eye  could  bear  the  blaze  which 
enwraps  his  Being.  But,  if  unknown.  He  would  be  for  ever 
unappreciated  and  unloved.  How  could  men  or  angels  wor- 
ship an  inaccessible  and  unknown  God?  But  Jesus  Christ, 
who  has  dwelt  for  ever  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  has 
declared  Him  :  has  brought  out  his  attributes  from  their  dark 
obscurity,  and  has  displayed  them.  He  has  been  the  organ 
through  which  the  Divine  nature  has  manifested  itself ;  and  as 
it  has  been  manifested,  God  has  been  known  and  loved  and 
adored  by  countless  myriads  who  have  seen  his  glory  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  have  fallen  down  in  ecstasies  of 
devotion,  ascribing  glory  to  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne, 
and  to  the  Lamb. 

The  prism,  which  shows  the  exquisite  tints  that  hide  in 
sunbeams,  glorifies  the  sun  and  its  Maker.  The  artist  who 
reads  nature's  secrets,  and  catches  bewitching  smiles  which 
are  only  seen  by  her  lovers,  glorifies  Him  who  lives  behind  all 
nature.  The  student  who  shows  some  unsuspected  beauty  in 
our  favourite  author,  adds  to  that  author's  glory  in  our  esteem. 
So,  though  in  an  infinitely  superior  sense,  as  the  Son  has  been 
the  medium  through  which  the  Father  has  shone  forth,  and 
has  attracted  the  admiration  and  homage  of  all  intelligent 
creatures,  we  may  rightly  say  that  in  Him  He  has  been 
glorified. 

This  was  so  in  creation,  when  the  creative  qualities  of  the 
Almighty  passed  through  the  Son  into  efflorescent  beauty.  It 
has  been  so  in  providence,  wherein  the  sustaining  grace  of  God 
has  been  revealing  itself  through  successive  ages  of  activity. 
It  was  especially  so  in  the  life  and  words  and  death  of  the 
Redeemer.  These  were  windows  into  the  heart  of  God.  Never 
had  He  been  known,  unless  in  contact  with  human  sin  His 
Being  had  broken  into  the  prismatic  band  of  colour  which 
makes  the  Gospels  the  priceless  possession  of  mankind.     And 


W\jt  (Slonj  0f  (Boh.  169 

possibly  in  those  events  which  are  yet  to  transpire,  we  shall 
see  how  the  Lord  Jesus  will  contrive  at  every  turn  to  bring 
into  ever  clearer  prominence  attributes  of  the  Divine  Being,  of 
which  we  know  little  or  nothing,  or  which  only  glimmer  on  our 
sight,  like  some  distant  star  on  the  very  confines  of  creation. 

T/it's  was  equally  the  motive  of  the  Apostles. — Not  for  emolu- 
ment, or  human  praise  ;  not  for  power  or  love  of  place  ;  not  for 
the  souls  of  men  only  ;  but  for  the  glory  of  God,  did  they 
reckon  not  their  lives  dear,  but  endured  hardships  and  perse- 
cutions even  to  martyrdom  itself.  They  yearned  to  show  meu 
how  good  and  glorious  He  was  ;  or  to  open  the  cavern  of  some 
heart  to  receive  into  its  depths  his  light — that  so  the  extent  of 
his  empire  might  be  increased  by  one  more  being  brought 
from  darkness  into  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto 
God. 

And  this  should  be  our  motive. 

(i)  //  would  never  disappoint. — If  we  work  for  any  lower 
motive,  we  are  always  liable  to  disappointment.  Either  the 
desire  of  our  hearts  is  not  realized,  or,  when  we  have  attained 
it,  we  are  oppressed  with  a  vague  sense  of  dissatisfaction  and 
depression.  But  here  is  a  motive  which  can  never  mislead  us. 
It  is  always  in  front  of  us.  It  is  an  ever-fresh  inspiration, 
ennobling,  and  inspiring,  and  elevating.  When  we  have  done 
our  best,  it  is  still  in  front  of  us,  beckoning  us  to  loftier  ascents, 
to  more  strenuous  endeavours.  And  the  impression  produced 
on  us  is  one  of  adoration  and  devotion,  which  make  all  our 
life  and  work  a  means  of  grace. 

If  we  are  sensible  of  working  from  a  wrong  or  inferior 
motive,  let  us  bring  our  being  to  God,  and  tell  Him  that  we 
desire  and  will  nothing  so  eagerly  as  to  live  and  work  from  this 
loftiest  of  motives.  Ask  Him  to  create  the  clean  heart,  and  to 
renew  the  right  spirit.  E.xpect  that  by  his  Spirit  He  will 
replace  the  worse  by  the  better,  till  your  soul  is  on  fire  for  the 
glory  of  God. 

Many  need  this  word.  They  are  working  for  the  salvation 
of  others  ;  to  increase  their  congregation  ;  to  stop  the  ravages  of 
sin  ;  or  to  alleviate  the  distress  of  those  immediately  dependent 
on  some  sad  case  of  dissolute  and  shameful  behaviour.     We 


170  SItc  IttotihE  of  onv  fibea. 

cannot  wonder  at  these  motives  :  but  they  are  not  the  best ;  and 
their  presence  will  go  far  to  explain  the  failure  under  which 
many  devoted  workers  groan.  Whether  you  work  for  God,  or 
pray  for  the  coming  of  the  Spirit,  or  engage  in  philanthropic 
enterprise,  be  sure  to  do  all  for  the  glory  of  God. 

(2)  //  w///  dig7iify  all  life. — We  make  distinctions  which  do 
not  hold  beyond  the  low  ceiling  of  this  world.  We  speak  of 
some  things  as  sacred,  and  others  as  secular ;  of  great  and 
little  ;  of  religious  and  the  reverse.  We  judge  things  by  their 
appearances  and  the  space  they  take  among  men.  We  forget 
that  with  God  the  difference  is  entirely  one  of  motives.  A 
sacred  motive  makes  everything  sacred  ;  a  secular  one  drags 
down  the  most  holy  office  to  its  own  Godless  level.  Little 
things  become  great  when  wrought  from  a  great  motive  of 
love  and  consecration  ;  but  a  mean  motive  will  make  the  gift 
of  a  millionaire  shrink  into  a  nutshell  as  small  as  itself  A 
religious  man  will  tie  everything  with  a  double  knot  of  faith 
and  prayer  to  God  ;  an  irreligious  man  makes  the  table  of  the 
Lord  to  become  a  table  of  demons. 

Men  often  chafe  at  being  confined  to  the  secularities  of  daily 
life,  and  long  to  be  set  free  to  follow  the  work  of  the  minister 
or  missionary.  If  any  such  read  these  lines,  let  them  ask  their 
hearts  if  they  are  entirely  yielded  up  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  so, 
let  them  understand  that  He  has  put  them  where  they  are  for 
a  specific  purpose.  And  then  let  them  fill  that  position  for 
Him  and  in  his  strength,  so  that  many  a  gleam  of  his  love- 
liness may  be  emitted  through  their  behaviour  ;  and  men  may 
think  better  of  Him  for  their  sake.  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ"  ; 
that  Christ  may  be  magnified.  Whatever  be  our  daily  occupa- 
tion, we  should  engage  in  it  for  the  same  high  motive  which 
should  animate  the  chosen  Apostle,  or  the  burning  seraph  ; 
inscribing  on  the  threshold  of  each  new  day,  "  Glory  to  God  in 
the  highest."  "  Whether  therefore  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  what- 
soever ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God"  (i  Cor.  x.  31). 

But,  after  all,  let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  no  motive, 
however  pure  and  lofty,  can  make  our  service  perfectly  accept- 
able to  God.  No  glory  can  accrue  to  Him  save  through  the 
merit  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     And,  therefore,  the  Apostle  takes 


C^nlg  <K)nE  Wia^  to  (Sotr.  171 

care  to  add,  "  glorified  through  Jesus  Christ "  (i  i).  There  is  only 
one  way  to  God  ;  and  our  incense  must  be  scattered  on  coals 
taken  from  the  true  altar,  or  it  can  never  rise  up  acceptable 
and  pleasing  to  Him. 

Oh  to  be  animated  with  absorbing  desires  for  the  glory  of 
God  !  For  this  to  live,  and,  if  need  be,  di^  '.  For  this  to  do 
the  tiniest  acts  of  self-sacrifice  and  ser\'ice  ;  and  to  forget  hard- 
ship and  difficulty  in  the  all-absorbing  passion  !  Let  this  be 
our  life-motive.  Not  content  to  wait  for  distant  ages,  let  us 
now  ascribe  to  Him  "praise  and  dominion.''  Let  our  hps  be 
full  of  his  praise,  and  our  lives  obey  his  dominion,  and  let 
there  arise  from  each  moment  of  our  poor  lives  the  glad,  and 
heartfelt,  and  devout  Ainen. 


XXV.— Ilot  S0  ^txanp. 

"  Beloved,  think  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  try 
you,  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened  unto  you :  but  rejoice,  inas- 
much as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings  ;  that,  when  his  glory  shall 
be  revealed,  ye  may  be  glad  also  with  exceeding  joy.  If  ye  be  reproached 
for  the  name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye ;  for  the  spirit  of  glory  and  of  God 
resteth  upon  you  :  on  their  part  He  is  evil  spoken  of,  but  on  your  part  He 
is  glorified." — i  Peter  iv.  12-14. 

NCE  it  seemed  strange  to  the  Apostle  Peter  that  his 
Master  should  think  of  suffering.  Now  he  thinks 
it  strange  that  He  could  have  imagined  anything 
else  ;  and  he  writes  to  the  scattered  Christians,  bid- 
ding them  not  to  count  it  strange  if  their  path  lies 
through  fiery  trial  and  bitter  pain. 
"  Think  it  not  strange  ! "  But  it  does  seem  strange—  strange 
that  the  waters  of  a  full  cup  should  be  wrung  out  to  the  saints, 
whilst  sinners  walk  on  the  sunny  side  of  the  hedge  !  Strange 
that  the  wicked  should  be  permitted  to  plot  so  much  and  so 
successfully  against  the  righteous !  Strange  that  the  profane 
sit  on  the  judgment  seats  at  which  the  godly  and  devoted  are 
arraigned  for  no  other  fault  than  their  endeavours  for  the  good 
of  men  !  Strange  to  find  some  of  the  sweetest  and  noblest  of 
God's  children  racked  with  agony,  dying  of  cancer,  beset  with 
poverty,  misunderstanding,  and  hatred. 

To  the  eye  of  natural  reason  it  was  strange  that  thousands 
of  martyrs  should  die  in  the  amphitheatres  of  Rome,  and 
illumine  the  public  gardens,  whilst  Nero  revelled  in  his 
splendid  palace-halls  !  Strange  that  the  saints  of  the  Lord 
should  suffer  in  dungeon  and  at  stake,  whilst  a  Bonner,  a 
Jeffries,  a  Claverhouse,  gained  place  and  pelf  by  their  destruc- 
tion !  Strange  that  the  progress  of  the  Church  has  always 
been  marked  by  the  thin  trail  of  blood !     It  is  hard  not  to 


®^frc  Man  Itotne.  173 

think  it  strange.  And  yet  it  would  be  stranger  still  if  it  were 
not  so.  Let  us  now  look  into  The  Considerations  which 
ROB  Suffering  of  its  Strangeness  : — 

(i)  This  world  is  in  revolt. — Marvellous  to  relate,  it  has,  like 
ancient  Israel,'  rejected  God  from  its  throne,  and  has  chosen 
another  god,  who  is  repeatedly  referred  to  by  our  Lord  as 
"  the  prince  of  this  world."  Saul  rules  the  visible  world  ;  while 
David,  the  rightful  king,  is  keeping  himself  hid  amid  the 
growing  numbers  of  those  who  love  him.  Is  it  to  be  wondered 
at  that  the  servants  of  the  Divinely  designated  Prince  should 
experience  rough  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  rebel  forces 
who  disown  his  sway?     It  could  not  be  otherwise. 

(2)  Along  this  way  the  Master  went. — From  the  moment  of 
his  birth,  when  Herod  sought  to  slay  Him,  to  the  last  moment 
of  his  life,  He  was  a  lily  among  thorns,  a  silent  lamb  among 
strangers.  His  brethren  hated  Him,  and  could  not  speak 
peaceably  to  Him.  Those  whom  He  came  to  gather,  as  a  hen 
gathers  her  chickens  under  her  wing,  refused  Him  with  con- 
tumely and  reproach,  and  finally  wounded  Him  to  the  death. 
There  never  was  such  a  union  in  hatred  as  that  which  en- 
circled Jesus  as  with  a  ring  of  forked  flame,  when  He  went  to 
the  cross.  Ah,  blessed  One,  Prince  in  the  realm  of  misery,  as 
in  all  other  spheres,  Thou  hast  endured  the  contradiction  of 
sinners  against  Thyself,  till  reproach  broke  Thy  heart ;  and  it 
is  not  for  us  to  choose  a  happier  pathway,  or  an  easier  lot, 
lest  we  should  seem  not  to  belong  to  Thee  or  to  bear  Thy 
name. 

(3)  This  is  the  way  home. — When  Samuel  bade  adieu  to  the 
young  king-elect,  on  whose  life  the  eyes  of  all  Israel  were  about 
to  turn,  he  told  him  of  certain  signs  which  should  befal  him  on 
his  way  (i  Sam.  x.).  And  the  prophet  probably  did  this  to 
give  hiiVi  materials  for  forming  a  true  estimate  of  the  Divine 
authority  of  the  communication  which  he  had  just  received. 
He  must  have  felt  more  and  more  convinced  at  every  step  that 
Samuel  was  a  true  prophet,  and  that  he  was  on  his  predestined 
way.      So  when  we   see   or  experience  the  hate  entertained 


174  ^ot  so  ^trait0E. 

towards  Christianity  and  Christians  by  those  whom  they 
mean  to  benefit,  and  reahze  that  it  exactly  fulfils  the  repeated 
predictions  of  our  blessed  Lord,  we,  too,  are  persuaded  that  we 

are  on 

"  the  way  the  prophets  went, 
The  road  that  leads  from  banishment." 

If  we  were  universally  beloved,  and  no  voice  were 
ever  raised  in  hatred  or  calumny,  we  might  truly  question 
whether  we  were  at  all  on  the  heavenward  track.  It  is  stated 
so  emphatically  that  if  we  are  without  chastisement,  whereof 
all  are  partakers,  then  we  are  bastards  and  not  sons.  And, 
again,  it  is  said,  through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.  As  mountain-climbers  after  a  snow- 
storm can  tell  the  path  by  the  line  of  posts  placed  at  intervals 
along  the  mountain  side,  so  may  Christians  tell  that  they  are 
on  the  track  of  the  Church  by  the  antagonism  manifested 
against  their  religion  in  Jesus  Christ. 

It  must  be  so  just  in  proportion  to  the  sincerity  and  con- 
sistency of  our  religious  life.  If  we  are  living  as  we  should,  we 
condemn  the  world  around  us.  "There  is  in  the  life  of  the 
Christian  a  convincing  light  which  shows  the  deformity  of  the 
works  of  darkness,  and  a  piercing  heat  which  scorches  the 
ungodly  and  troubles  their  consciences.  This  they  cannot 
endure,  and  hence  rises  in  them  a  contrary  fire  of  wicked 
hatred,  and  out  of  this  the  fiery  trials  of  the  godly." 

(4)  There  is  an  object  in  such  suffering.  —  Though  it  may 
seem  to  spring  causeless  from  the  ground,  yet  in  point  of  fact 
it  is  carefully  designed  by  the  skill  of  the  great  Artificer. 
There  may  have  been  many  a  previous  secret  prayer  for 
growth  in  grace  and  usefulness  ;  and  the  answer  has  come 
in  the  use  of  fire,  file,  and  hammer,  wielded  by  God,  though 
furnished  by  the  hatred  of  the  sons  of  men.  The  malignant 
deed  of  cruelty  may  proceed  from  the  treachery  of  a  Judas  ; 
but  the  cup  must  be  taken  as  from  the  Father's  hand.  Though 
the  missile  may  be  hurled  by  malice  and  illwill,  yet  if  it  is 
permitted  to  pass  through  the  environing  presence  of  God,  it 
has  become  his  appointment  for  the  refining  and  maturing  of 
the  sufferer's  character.     In  this  sense  his  permissions  become 


®Ite  jEaftljIcss  ^ufcdtt^s  of  Cljrisf.         175 

his  appointments.  We  cannot  become  new  sharp  threshing 
instruments,  without  fire  ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  strange  when 
we  are  plied  by  it  to  the  uttermost.  But  One  sits  beside  who 
holds  our  pulse  between  his  fingers,  and  will  not  let  the  heat  be 
too  searching,  or  the  discipline  too  severe.  There  is  no  other 
way  of  eliminating  much  of  the  selfish  dross  of  our  natures. 

(5)  Herein  we  partake  of  Chrisfs  stifferings.  —  Of  course 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  Christ's  sufferings  are  unapproachable. 
They  stand  as  a  solitary  obelisk  on  the  sands  of  time.  He 
trod  the  winepress  alone.  There  is  no  sorrow  like  unto  his 
sorrow,  in  the  day  in  which  the  Lord  afflicted  Him.  And  yet 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  we  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the 
sufferings  of  Christ.  His  life  in  us  meets  the  same  treatment 
as  it  did  in  Him.  Knowing  that  we  cannot  partake  of  his 
sacrificial  and  substitutionary  sufferings,  yet  we  may  all  know 
something  of  his  other  sufferings  when  He  was  tempted  ;  when 
He  foresaw  the  doom  of  men,  and  wept  ;  when  He  endured 
the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself;  when  He  sur- 
rendered Himself  to  do  and  suffer  the  holy  will  of  God  !  Ah, 
it  is  good  to  share  anything  with  Him.  Sweet  things  are  bitter 
when  He  is  absent,  and  bitter  things  sweet  if  He  is  near. 
Would  that  we  were  closer  drawn  into  his  most  intimate 
friendship,  though  the  connecting  links  were  clamps  of  iron, 
forged  in  the  fiery  furnace  ! 

As  St.  Bernard  said.  He  always  f^ed  when  they  wanted  to 
make  Him  King,  and  presented  Himself  when  they  wanted  to 
crucify  Him.  With  this  clearly  in  mind  let  us  not  hesitate  to 
adopt  the  noble  words  of  Ittai  the  Gittite  :  "As  the  Lord  liveth, 
and  as  my  lord  the  king  liveth,  surely  in  what  place  my  lord  the 
king  shall  be,  whether  in  death  or  life,  even  there  also  will  thy 
servant  be"  (2  Sam.  xv.  21).  And  He  will  surely  answer,  as 
that  same  David  did  to  another  fugitive  who  came  to  identify 
himself  with  his  cause  :  "Abide  thou  with  me,  fear  not  ;  for  he 
that  seeketh  my  life  seeketh  thy  life,  but  with  me  thou  shalt  be 
in  safeguard."  We  partake  of  his  sufferings,  and  He  of  ours. 
If  anything  is  too  small  to  tell  Him  about,  it  is  too  small  to 
worry  over  ;  but  if  things  worry  and  fret  you,  remember  that  m 


176  lint  so  Strange. 

all  your  affliction  He  was  afflicted,  and  that  when  the  Sauls 
persecute  the  Church  they  in  reality  touch  the  apple  of  his 
eye. 

Is  it  not  fit  that  we  should  follow  our  Captain  ?  Would  it  be 
right  for  Him  to  sink  fainting  beneath  his  cross,  whilst  we  are 
carried  to  heaven  on  beds  of  down  ?  Shall  He  go  through  seas 
of  anguish,  and  we  pass  round  them  by  a  safer  and  easier  path  ? 
Shall  He  be  beset  by  enemies,  whom  we  skilfully  elude  and 
avoid,  leaving  Him  to  his  fate?  It  must  not  be.  If  in  the 
days  of  his  flesh  each  member  of  his  natural  body  shared  in 
the  suffering  of  the  whole,  feet  and  hands  and  head  con- 
tributing their  quota,  but  none  exempted,  so  each  member  of 
his  mystical  body  may  expect  to  share  still  in  his  sufferings, 
rejection,  and  crucifixion,  throughout  the  course  of  the  ages  as 
they  pass. 

(6)  Look  on  to  the  end. — His  glory  shall  be  revealed  !  His 
sufferings  quicken  our  anticipations  of  that  blessed  day.  Too 
much  comfort  might  make  us  forget  ourselves  and  think  our- 
selves at  home,  so  that  we  might  not  so  ardently  reach  out  our 
hands  towards  our  coming  glories.  Hence  it  is  good  to  have 
been  afflicted,  because  we  have  been  taught  to  consider  more 
fixedly  the  certainty  and  glory  of  the  revelation  of  our  hidden 
Lord.  That  is  the  reality  ;  all  things  else  are  the  baubles  and 
gewgaws  of  an  hour.  And  when  He  appears,  we  shall  appear 
with  Him  in  glory.  Those  who  have  been  nearest  the  cross 
shall  be  next  the  throne.  The  light  of  his  glory  shall  also 
irradiate  us.  We  shall  be  like  Him,  and  with  Him,  and  in  Him, 
for  ever.  In  proportion  to  our  sufferings  shall  be  the  rewards 
and  honours  of  his  kingdom.  Ah,  what  bounding  and  leaping 
joy  will  be  ours  then,  in  comparison  with  which  the  sufferings 
of  the  present  will  seem  unfit  to  be  remembered  ! 

(7)  We  are  compensated  for  such  suffering  by  the  presence  of 
the  Spirit  of  glory. — When  such  suffering  lies  heavily  on  the 
soul,  God  sees  to  it  that  it  is  no  loser.  What  is  lost  from  with- 
out is  replenished  from  within.  As  water  is  thrown  on  the  fire 
from  the  one  side  of  the  wall,  a  bright  angel  on  the  other 
pours  in  oil  through  a  tiny  aperture,  till  the  flame  breaks  out  as 


IPrcparc  to  buffer.  177 

coals  of  juniper.  Ah,  what  compensations  are  ours !  The 
Jews  who  walk  the  streets  of  Tangier  and  other  Moorish 
towns,  the  hated  of  all  the  people,  are  said  to  have  exquisitely 
furnished  rooms  within  their  ordinary-looking  dwellings,  where 
they  surround  themselves  with  every  luxury,  and  comfort  them- 
selves. So,  as  the  spiritual  man  turns  from  the  hatred  of  men 
to  the  special  bestowments  of  God  :  he  is  compensated  a 
hundred-told.  When  we  have  least  of  human  love,  we  have  most 
of  God's.  When  father  and  mother  forsake,  He  gathers  us. 
When  the  sun  of  earthly  prosperity  sets,  we  are  sensible  of  the 
glowing  fire  in  the  heart  of  the  pillar  of  cloud,  which  otherwise 
we  had  never  beheld,  and  which  bespeaks  his  presence  and 
care.  Men  can  never  understand  this.  They  only  see  the 
prickly  shell,  not  the  kernel.  They  only  handle  the  rough  ex- 
terior case  ;  they  know  not  the  spices  and  balm  hidden  within. 
They  can  measure  what  we  renounce,  but  they  cannot  gauge 
the  wealth  of  the  Divine  compensations.  You  will  never  know 
so  much  of  God's  converse  as  when  men  "send  you  to 
Coventry."  You  will  never  have  so  much  of  the  Spirit  of  glory 
and  of  God  as  when  familiar  faces  are  averted,  and  hands  are 
raised  in  scorn.  Methinks  we  are  more  than  repaid  for  all 
our  losses  by  this  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory. 

Let  us  brace  ourselves  then  to  suffer  whatever  may  befal, 
only  .inxious  that  our  sufferings  are  due,  not  to  our  want  of 
Christianity  but  to  our  possession  of  it ;  not  because  of  temper, 
or  evil-speaking,  or  misbehaviour,  but  because  we  are  so  like 
the  Master,  and  so  near  Him.  So  like  Him  that  we  are  mis- 
taken for  Him.  So  near  Him  that  we  are  bespattered  by  mud 
flimg  at  Him. 

Not  as  a  murderer,  or  as  a  thief,  or  as  an  evil  doer,  but  as 
a  Christian,  It  would  be  well  indeed  if  we  never  suffered 
save  as  Christians  ;  and  whenever  such  suffering  comes  to 
us,  let  us  count  it  all  joy,  and  take  it  as  the  theme  for  a 
psalm  ;  as  the  signal  for  a  fresh  outburst  of  "  Glory  to  God  in 
the  Highest  1" 


XXVI— Eitattsto^rabk  Ctutsttons* 

"  For  the  time  is  come  that  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of"  God  : 
and  if  it  first  begin  at  us,  what  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  God?  And  if  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the 
ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear?  " — i  Peter  iv.  17,  18. 

^^^^[|  TORMY  times  were  already  breaking  on  the  Church 

^^^^^     as  the  Apostle  penned  these  words.     Such  times 

l^^^p'     had   been   repeatedly  predicted  by  the   Lord,  but 

.jy^^     until  now  they  had  not  been  allowed  to  break  forth 

**1^C^       in  all  their  terror.     A  Divine  restraint  had  been  laid 

on  the  antagonistic  influences  which  lay  in  wait  for 

the  moment  in  which  they  should  be  slipped  from  their  leash. 

But  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  further  respite  would 

be  very  brief — "  The  time  is  come  when  judgment  must  begin 

at  the  house  of  God." 

Bitter  as  they  are,  such  times  are  needed— needed  as  the 
north-east  wind  to  break  off  the  dead  and  useless  timber  in 
the  spring  ;  needed  as  the  winnower's  fan  to  separate  the  chaff 
from  the  wheat.  Without  these  searching  times  of  judgment, 
the  Church  becomes  filled  with  those  who  make  a  profession  of 
godliness,  but  deny  its  power ;  whilst  without  them  even  the 
godly  and  genuine  are  apt  to  become  too  luxurious  and  self- 
indulgent,  wrapt  in  slumber,  and  indifferent  to  the  needs  of  the 
world.  So  from  time  to  time  it  is  needful  for  God  to  set  Him- 
self to  the  work  of  discrimination,  of  crisis,  of  judgment. 

But  the  sufferings  of  this  life,  at  their  worst,  are  only  part  of 
a  great  mystery  of  pain  and  judgment  which  exists,  not  here 
only,  but  hereafter.  The  believer  in  Jesus  has  nothing  to  fear 
from  that.  Whatever  may  be  his  present  sufferings,  they 
cannot  pass  the  limit  of  this  mortal  life  ;  they  have  no  power  to 
send  one  single  stab  or  thrill  over  the  barrier  which  separates 


Committing  tljc  ^onl  to  (^oh.  179 

the  two  worlds.  With  the  ungodly  it  is  not  so.  The  tempest 
which  breaks  on  their  heads  in  this  life  is  but  the  beginning  of 
their  sorrows.  Through  death  they  pass  to  greater  misery. 
They  depart  accursed  into  fire.  They  are  cast  into  outer 
darkness.  They  are  reserved  unto  a  further  day  of  judgment 
to  be  punished.  Moreover,  the  sufferings  of  such  as  refuse  the 
Gospel  are  of  a  very  different  description,  both  here  and  here- 
after, to  those  of  God's  children.  There  is  the  sting  of  remorse, 
the  reproach  of  conscience,  the  bitter  sense  of  severance  from 
God,  and  love,  and  hope,  and  blessedness.  Though  the 
believer  may  suffer,  his  heart  brims  with  hope ;  but  the 
heart  of  the  worldling  is  filled  with  darkness,  the  midnight 
of  the  soul. 

His  main  end  in  adverting  to  the  matter  at  all  is  with  the 
view  of  comforting  these  troubled  saints.  If,  says  he,  you 
suffer  in  time,  remember  that  you  will  have  an  eternity  of 
respite.  If  you  suffer  as  children,  rejoice  that  you  will  never 
have  to  suffer  as  enemies.  If  you  pass  through  the  deep  dark 
waters  of  judgment,  be  sure  that  your  lot  is  very  different  from 
what  it  would  be  if  you  were  ungodly  and  profane.  Great 
though  your  sufferings  may  be,  they  are  not  to  be  compared 
with  those  of  such  as  reject  the  Gospel.  And,  standing  on  the 
edge  of  your  own  sorrows,  you  may  peer  into  the  seething 
abyss  of  theirs,  which  is  indeed  a  bottomless  pit,  swathed  in 
mist.  And  then  he  concludes  this  paragraph  of  suffering  with 
sweet  and  helpful  words  about  the  committal  of  the  soul  to 
God. 

I.  The  lot  from  which  we  have  been  saved.— There 
are  three  gradations  or  phases  of  rebellion  mentioned  here  : 
the  disobedient,  the  ungodly,  the  sinful.  Thus  does  the  spirit 
pass  from  the  negative  condition  of  carelessness  to  the  positive 
position  of  rejection.  And  in  its  course  it  treasures  up  for 
itself  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God.  If  you  obey  not  the  Gospel,  you 
are  classed  with  the  ungodly  and  the  profane. 

And  if  such  shall  read  these  words,  let  them  consider  how 
certain  and  awful  must  be  their  doom.     We  are  not  speaking 


i8o  l^ttanatocrahk  ^ucafions. 

now  of  idiots  or  heathen,  or  of  those  who  knew  not,  and  yet 
did  commit  things  worthy  of  stripes.  An  infalHble  authority 
has  told  us  that  they  shall  be  beaten  with  but  few  stripes. 
Our  address  is  to  those  who  have  heard  the  dying  words  of 
Jesus,  but  have  turned  away  from  them  unmoved,  not  because 
they  cantiot  believe,  but  because  they  will  not,  preferring 
darkness  to  light,  sin  to  goodness,  self  to  God. 

You  have  seen  the  righteous  suffer,  and  how  difficult  they 
have  found  it  to  endure.  Though  sustained  by  the  presence 
of  God,  and  the  promises  of  the  Gospel ;  though  assured  of 
the  certainty  and  glory  of  their  reward  ;  though  able  to  read 
love's  message  in  each  stroke,  and  to  see  the  speedy  end  of 
all  discipline  in  heaven's  azure  calm— yet  they  have  only  just 
been  able  to  keep  heart  and  flesh  from  despair.  But  how  will 
it  be  with  you  when  the  hour  of  your  sorrow  comes,  as  it  will 
come,  here  or  hereafter?  You  will  have  no  presence  of  God  to 
cheer  you,  no  promises  on  which  to  lean,  no  certainty  of  a 
speedy  termination,  no  testimony  of  a  good  conscience,  no 
prospect  of  release.  Before  you  only  the  certain  fearful  looking 
for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  devour  the 
adversaries.  "  Can  thine  heart  endure,  or  can  thine  hands  be 
strong,  in  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  with  thee  ?  " 

If  the  children  suffer  so,  with  all  the  alleviations  of  a 
Father's  love,  what  will  not  the  rebels  suffer  !  If  the  sufferings 
of  saints  be  so  heavy,  what  of  those  of  sinners?  If  the 
sufferings  of  this  life  are  often  so  terrible,  what  will  those 
of  the  next  be  ?  If  the  beginning  be  fraught  with  so  much 
anguish,  how  about  the  end  ? 

It  was  the  earnest  wish  of  a  holy  man  that  his  death  might 
be  so  triumphant  that  his  unconverted  sons  might  be  convinced 
and  attracted  by  the  evident  power  of  the  Gospel  to  sustain 
and  cheer  in  the  dark  passage  of  the  valley.  Instead  of  this, 
to  his  deep  regret,  his  spirit  lay  under  a  cloud  ;  he  was  oppressed 
with  fear  and  misgiving  ;  and  the  enemy  was  permitted  to 
torment  him  to  the  uttermost.  But  these  very  facts  were  the 
ones  which  most  profoundly  impressed  his  children.  "  For," 
said  the  eldest,  "  we  all  know  what  a  good  man  our  father  was  ; 
and  yet  see  how  deep  his  spiritual  suffering's  were.     What  then 


€)ji  dost  of  our  ^aHiation.  i8i 

may  we  not  expect,  who  have  given  no  thought  to  the  concerns 
of  our  souls?" 

Besides,  consider  all  that  required  to  be  done  before  the 
righteous  could  be  saved.  Expenditure,  such  as  taxed  the 
resources  of  Divine  Omnipotence.  An  atonement,  which  could 
only  be  achieved  by  the  death  in  a  human  body  of  the  infinite 
God.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself,  to  enter  and  possess 
corrupt  and  wayward  hearts,  winning  them  to  Himself  All 
the  marvellous  interpositions  of  Providence  ;  the  teachings  of 
Scripture  ;  the  strivings  of  conscience.  And  yet,  notwith- 
standing all,  how  little  is  effected  in  many  of  God's  children ! 
Christian  character  seems  to  resemble  Chat  Moss,  which 
swallowed  tons  on  tons  of  earth  apparently  in  vain,  till  the 
contractors  began  to  despair  of  ever  making  even  a  thin  rail- 
way embankment  across  the  treacherous  bog. 

In  nature  we  see  glowing  worlds,  gigantic  orbits,  vast  moun- 
tains, noble  oceans  in  their  gleaming  expanse,  cataracts, 
forests,  waterfalls— all  worthy  of  God.  But  when  we  come  to 
the  moral  and  spiritual  side  of  his  people's  character,  in  spite 
of  all  that  He  has  done,  we  are  astonished  at  the  meagre 
result.  They  are  saved  at  tremendous  cost,  and  they  certainly 
hardly  seem  to  repay  the  outlay  to  which  the  ever-blessed  God 
has  gone. 

But  if,  after  all  that  has  been  done  in  them  and  for  them., 
they  are  no  further  forward  than  they  are,  what  will  be  the 
condition  of  those  who  remain  where  the  righteous  were  once, 
and  who  have  rejected  the  gracious  operations  of  the  Most 
High?  They  are  charged  with  sin,  with  no  part  or  lot  in  the 
redemption  which  the  Saviour  wrought.  They  are  subject  to 
the  abominable  pollution  of  inbred  corruption,  without  the 
counteracting  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  They  are  in- 
different to  those  blessed  provisions  which  have  engaged  the 
attention  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity  from  all  eternity,  and  rush 
heedless  into  the  other  world.     "Where  will  they  appear?" 

There  are  several  of  these  dread  unanswered  questions  in 
the  Bible.  "  What  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  visitation,  and  in 
the  desolation  which  shall  come  from  far?"  Again:  "Who 
can  stand  before  his  indignation,  and  who  can  abide  in  the 


i82  ^ttattsteeraMc  (!|ucstiona. 

fierceness  of  his  anger?"  And  again  :  "How  shall  we  escape, 
if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ? "  But  amongst  them  all  there 
is  not  one  more  terrible  and  unanswerable  than  this  :  "  Where 
shall  the  ungodly  and  sinner  appear?" 

We  can  only  answer  the  question  in  the  negative.  They  will 
not  appear  in  the  clouds  when  Jesus  comes  again  :  only  his 
saints  will  come  with  Him.  They  will  not  appear  at  the 
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  :  only  the  blood-washed  can  enter 
there.  They  will  not  appear  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Judge  : 
only  the  righteous  are  found  there.  They  will  not  appear 
among  the  blessed  throngs  of  the  golden  city  :  for  thither 
entereth  nothing  that  defileth.  But  when  we  have  ransacked 
all  these  places  in  vain,  we  have  not  answered  the  inquiry  as  to 
their  abiding  place.  We  must  leave  this  for  the  solemn  light 
of  eternity  to  disclose. 

Oh  for  tears  of  blood  to  weep  over  their  fate  !  But  let  us 
mingle  notes  of  thanksgiving,  that  we  shall  never,  never  know 
it.  We  cannot  perish.  We  are  the  objects,  as  they  might  be, 
of  an  unchangeable  love  which  cannot  be  thwarted.  Bought 
by  the  blood,  taught  by  the  Spirit,  the  subjects  of  the  mighty 
power  of  God,  we  shall  yet  be  more  than  conquerors.  Troubled, 
but  not  distressed  ;  perplexed,  but  not  in  despair  ;  cast  down, 
but  not  destroyed  ;  staggering,  but  not  falling  to  our  eternal 
destruction  ;  on  the  edge  of  destruction,  but  brought  safe  home 
on  the  shoulders  of  the  Good  Shepherd.  Well  might  Dr. 
Caesar  Malan  say  to  Dr.  Gray,  turning  suddenly  on  him,  when 
walking  with  him  at  Geneva  :  "  Brother,  you  would  not  go  to 
heaven  if  you  could  help  it "  ;  and  then,  in  answer  to  a  look  of 
surprise,  added  :  "  But,  brother,  you  must  go,  for  Jesus  will  not 
let  you  go  elsewhere." 

II.  The  Method  Suffering  Saints  should  adopt.— 
First,  Be  sure  that  you  keep  in  the  current  of  the  will  of  God.  — 
"  Suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God."  Do  not  go  out  of  your 
way  to  incur  trouble.  Refuse  to  fling  yourselves  from  the 
mountain  brow  at  the  suggestion  of  the  tempter.  Dare  not 
to  go  far  afield  from  under  the  canopy  of  the  stately  pillar- 
cloud.     Accept  all  that  comes  in  the  natural  course  of  things, 


f  lire  to  f  lease  (Bob.  183 

but  do  not  sow  harvests  of  pain  by  presumption  or  wrong- 
headedness,  or  any  form  of  evil-doing. 

(2)  Secondly,  Go  on  doing  well. — "In  well-doing."  Do  the 
next  thing.  Even  if  maligned,  traduced,  or  misunderstood, 
persevere  in  doing  well.  It  does  not  matter  how  your  good 
deeds  are  received  by  men.  If  you  are  like  God,  you  will  find 
them  recei\'ed  with  contempt  and  ing^ratitude.  But  your  sun 
must  still  shine  and  your  showers  fall  on  the  evil  and  the  good, 
on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust.  You  serve  the  Lord  Christ. 
Live  to  please  Him. 

(3)  Thirdly,  Commit  tJie  keeping  of  your  souls  to  God.—  Our 
dying  Lord  committed  Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously. 
"  Father,"  he  cried,  "  into  thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit."  And 
God  has  vindicated  Him.  Let  us,  in  life  and  death,  place  our 
souls,  our  honour,  our  good  name  and  standing,  our  prospects 
and  future,  without  reserve  or  question,  in  the  hands  of  God. 
He  is  faithful.  Creation  is  witness  to  his  faithfulness.  The 
stars  return  with  unerring  punctuality.  Seed-time  and  harvest, 
suinmer  and  winter,  do  not  cease.  He  satisfies  all  instincts 
which  He  has  implanted.  He  hearkens  to  every  cry  which 
He  has  instilled.  And,  therefore,  with  unerring  love  and  power 
He  will  respond  to  every  appeal  made  to  Him  by  his  suffering 
ones.  He  who  created  is  faithful  to  keep  those  who  commit 
themselves  to  Him  ;  as  He  who  provided  the  Atonement  is 
faithful  and  just  to  forgive  those  who  confess  their  sins.  "  He 
will  redeem  their  soul  from  deceit  and  violence  ;  and  precious 
shall  their  blood  be  in  his  sight." 

Safe  and  strong,  tender  and  true,  are  the  hands  of  our  faith- 
ful God.  Drop  down  into  them,  they  will  catch  you,  a-iad 
sustain  your  burdens  and  yourselves.  They  can  hold  the 
oceans  in  their  hollow  ;  but  they  are  scarred  with  Calvary's 
nails.  Weary,  tired,  suffering  ones,  lie  still  !  none  shall  pluck 
you  out  of  the  Father's  hands.  Without  anxiety  or  alarm  you 
may  look  out  from  them  on  the  wreck  of  matter  and  the  crash 
of  worlds.  Those  hands  shall  ultimately  bear  you,  a-s  they  did 
your  Lord,  through  all  the  heavens,  and  set  you  down  at  his 
own  right  hand  in  glory. 


XXVil.-dot's  fkrk  antr  its  ^\jt^\}txH, 

"  The  elders  therefore  among  you  I  exhort,  who  am  a  fellow-elder,  and  a 
witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  who  am  also  a  partaker  of  the  glory  that 
shall  be  revealed :  Tend  the  flock  of  God  which  is  among  you,  exercising 
the  oversight,  not  of  constraint,  but  willingly,  according  unto  God  ;  nor  yet 
for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind;  neither  as  lording  it  over  the  charge 
allotted  to  you,  but  making  yourselves  ensamples  to  the  flock.  And  when 
the  Chief  Shepherd  shall  be  manifested,  ye  shall  receive  the  crown  of  glory 
that  fadeth  not  away." — i  PETER  v.  1-4  (R.V.). 

VETERAN  shepherd  is  speaking  here  !     As  he  feels 
his  own  strength  waning,  his  heart  is  away  in  his 
loved   work,   and   he   is   deeply   concerned  lest   it 
T^C.*^     should  suffer.     The  ruling  passion  is  strong  even 
<^^^5^       unto  death  ! 

?^*^  Imagine  a  shepherd's  hut  far  away  among  the 

northern  hills  ;  stretched  on  his  hard  mattress  an  old  shepherd 
is  dying ;  the  strong  frame  racked  with  bronchitis ;  every 
breath  laboured  and  drawn  with  pain ;  fever  rapidly  con- 
suming his  life.  Around  him  stand  his  sons,  inured  to  peril 
and  hardship.  The  night  which  hangs  over  hill  and  vale  shall 
not  break  up  under  the  silver  touch  of  dawn,  ere  that  strong 
and  noble  spirit  has  passed  forth  to  the  home  for  which  it  has 
long  pined.  Bend  low  and  catch  his  whispered  words  ;  mark 
how  they  concern  the  sheep  of  his  care,  as  he  commends  them 
to  his  boys  :  "  Lads,"  says  he,  "  mind  the  flock." 

I.  We  get  a  vivid  Glimpse  of  the  Simplicity  of  the 
Constitution  of  the  Early  Church. — Wherever  God's 
people  gathered,  there  was  part  of  his  flock.  The  flock  itself 
was  scattered  throughout  the  whole  world,  and  according  to  our 
Master's  prayer  was  one,  even  as  it  is  to-day.  For  though 
there  are  many  folds,  there  is  but  one  flock  (John  x.  i6,  R.V.). 


CIte  ©ttE  flock.  185 

Though  some  of  the  sheep  are  being  led  by  the  living  fountains 
of  waters  beyond  the  river ;  and  others  are  treading  the  stony 
defiles  of  this  side — yet  it  is  the  same  flock,  bought  at  the  same 
time,  marked  with  the  same  initials,  belonging  to  the  same 
Owner.  And  wherever  any  believers  gather,  there  is  a  portion 
of  the  one  flock,  and  its  officers,  teachers,  and  spiritual  guides 
are  just  shepherds,  pastors. 

How  eloquent  is  this  silence  as  to  priestly  functions  !  Not  a 
word  is  said  as  to  the  necessity  of  having  properly  appointed 
priests,  who  should  offer  a  regular  sacrifice,  and  perform  holy 
rites.  In  the  Apostle's  judgment  there  was  no  need  to  add 
aught  to  the  precious  blood  of  the  unblemished  and  spotless 
Lamb  ;  or  to  undertake  an  office  which  is  being  performed 
through  all  the  ages  at  the  throne  by  the  great  High  Priest. 
This  would  have  been  the  moment  for  such  a  reference,  had  it 
been  in  his  mind  ;  but  surely  it  did  not  so  much  as  enter  his 
thought.  He  was  more  than  satisfied  to  call  himself  an  "elder," 
and  to  address  these  simple-hearted  men  as  being  on  an 
equality  with  himself,  with  the  single  exception  of  their  not 
having,  like  him,  witnessed  the  sufferings  of  the  Chief  Shep- 
herd, by  which  the  flock  was  purchased  (Acts  xx.  28). 

Does  not  that  reference  to  the  sufferings  of  Christ  cast  a 
side-light  on  one  of  the  darkest  hours  of  Peter's  history  ?  From 
the  fact  that  he  ran  in  the  company  of  the  beloved  John  to 
search  the  empty  grave,  we  may  infer  that  he  went  to  his  home, 
when  he  left  the  Hall  of  Judgment  with  bitter  agony  of  soul. 
It  was  too  much,  however,  to  stay  there  alone,  while  all 
Jerusalem  was  astir  with  the  trial  and  crucifixion  of  his  dearest 
Friend  ;  and  so,  when  the  concourse  at  Golgotha  had  emptied 
the  streets,  he  seems  to  have  stolen  forth,  making  his  way  by 
devious  by-lanes,  till  he  came  on  the  scene  of  blood,  and, 
standing  afar,  was  a  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ. 

This  is  the  one  qualification  for  tending  the  flock  of  God  : 
not  to  have  received  a  learned  education  ;  not  to  be  able  to 
talk  glibly  or  eloquently  of  spiritual  things  ;  not  to  have  been 
in  the  imaginary  line  of  apostolic  succession— a  man  may  lay 
claim  to  all  these  things,  and  yet  not  be  competent  to  feed  the 
flock  of  God.     We  must  behold,  each  for  himself,  the  sufferings 


1 86  (Soil's  JTlock  antr  its  ^Ijcpljcrtta. 

of  Christ  •,  not  necessarily  with  the  eye  of  the  flesh,  but  with 
the  eye  of  the  soul ;  not  with  the  curious  glance  of  the  fickle 
crowd,  but  with  the  fixed  loving  gaze,  which  finds  in  them 
cleansing  for  sins  and  balm  for  wounds. 

And  to  see  those  sufferings  is  not  only  a  qualification  for 
shepherdship,  but  for  glory.  As  surely  as  a  man  beholds  those 
sufferings  sympathetically  and  believingly,  so  surely  shall  he 
behold  the  glory  yet  to  be  revealed.  The  one  is  the  prelude  to 
the  other.  No  cross,  no  crown.  But  where  there  is  the  true 
cross,  crown  there  must  be.  It  may  seem  to  tarry  long.  The 
heart  may  turn  sick  at  the  long  delay.  But  that  glory  which 
shines  now  and  again  as  we  climb  the  Transfiguration  Mount 
shall  ere  long  make  a  perpetual  heaven  for  us  when  it  is 
revealed. 

II.  The  Conditions  of  Shepherdly  CKKE.~Feed  is 
better  rendered  iefid,  which  includes  in  one  word  all  the  various 
offices  of  a  shepherd,  the  leading,  feeding,  watching,  defending. 
It  is  not  enough  to  preach  to  the  flock  once  or  twice  each  week. 
There  must  be  personal  supervision  ;  watching  for  souls  as  by 
those  who  must  give  account  ;  seeking  them  if  they  go  astray  ; 
tracking  them  to  the  precipice  down  which  they  have  fallen  ; 
and  never  resting  till  the  straying  sheep  is  brought  again  to  the 
fold.  All  this  is  included  in  the  word  ;  and  we  need  to  do  all . 
this  if  we  are  to  tend  the  flock  of  God. 

The  work  Jiiust  be  done  from  love. — If  it  is  undertaken  as  the 
result  of  the  strong  pressure  brought  to  bear  on  him,  or  for  any 
reward  which  may  be  offered,  the  shepherd  does  not  fulfil  the 
ideal  of  this  passage.  "  Not  by  constraint,  but  wiUingly  ;  not 
for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind."  None  of  God's  soldiers 
are  mercenaries  or  pressed  men  :  they  are  all  volunteers.  We 
must  have  a  shepherd's  heart,  if  we  would  do  a  shepherd's 
work.  Nor  is  this  love  merely  the  liking  which  may  come 
from  the  flesh,  or  be  dictated  by  the  inclination  of  the  soul. 
There  must  be  the  love  which  is  akin  to  the  love  of  the  Chief 
Shepherd  Himself.  A  love  which  can  endure  without  return  or 
thanks  ;  which  can  grow  where  there  is  scarcely  any  soil  ;  and 
which  clings  to  the  least  lovely  and  thankful.     That  love  is  only 


**^crorirm0  unto  ®otr."  187 

shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  take  the  cure 
of  souls  only  because  there  is  a  good  living  in  the  family,  or  for 
a  livehhood,  or  because  it  gives  position  and  influence,  is  a 
sacrilege  which  will  entail  a  terrible  reckoning  for  the  hirehng 
shepherd. 

There  is  a  remarkable  addition  in  the  Revised  Version — 
according  unfo  God ;  which  serves  to  accentuate  positively  what 
has  already  been  insisted  on  negatively.  God  must  call  to  the 
work  ;  sustain  us  in  it ;  and  give  us  all  the  guidance  and  grace 
needed  for  its  efficient  performance. 

It  is  hard  to  give  up  the  familiar  reading  about  God^s  heritage 
in  favour  of  the  new  rendering,  jtiz^r  allotted  portiojt.  And  yet 
the  two  expressions  are  nearly  equivalent.  For  God  could  not 
allot  that  which  was  not  his  own.  "  We  are  his  people,  and  the 
sheep  of  his  pasture."  My  flock  is  the  appellation  by  which 
He  constantly  addresses  us.  And  it  is  He  who  allots  souls  to 
certain  shepherds.  Let  not  those  who  have  small  and  unin- 
viting charges  think  lightly  of  them,  since  God  has  entrusted 
them  to  their  care,  and  is  carefully  marking  the  faithfulness 
with  which  the  work  is  done,  prepared  to  reward  the  true 
shepherd  with  a  larger  charge. 

The  sphere  and  people  of  our  ministry  should  be  taken 
straight  from  the  hands  of  the  Chief  Shepherd.  We  are  only 
accountable  to  Him.  Our  work  must  be  done  to  please  Him, 
and  at  his  direction.  We  must  consult  Him  about  all  our 
plans.  We  must  take  his  directions  as  to  what  part  of  the 
green  pastures  our  portion  of  the  flock  is  to  be  led  into,  and 
by  what  waters  it  shall  rest.  If  anything  goes  wrong  we  must 
consider  that  it  should  be  instantly  reported  to  Him,  as  the 
fret  and  care  and  burden  of  direction  must  certainly  be  his.  If 
we  make  mistakes,  and  the  flock  suffer  through  our  ignorance, 
the  brunt  of  the  loss  must  fall  on  Him.  There  is  no  one  so 
interested  in  the  pastor's  charge  as  the  Chief  Pastor  is.  He 
shares  all  the  anxieties,  hardships,  watchings,  and  perils  of  the 
work.  Not  to  please  the  flock,  not  to  attract  the  applause  of 
men,  not  to  gain  name  and  fame,  but  to  do  the  will  of  the 
Chief  Shepherd,  must  be  the  aim  of  each  true  servant  of 
Christ. 


t88  (Boti'z  Jlork  atttt  its  ^hcphtvhs. 

And  there  is  to  be  no  imperious  overlordiftg.  We  must  not 
abuse  our  position.  The  shepherd  must  win  reverence,  not 
compel  it.  No  servant  of  God  must  strive,  but  be  gentle  unto 
all,  in  meekness  instructing  those  that  oppose  themselves.  And 
since  the  shepherd,  in  Eastern  mode,  must  always  go  before 
the  flock,  he  must  be  its  example.  "  Be  thou  an  example  of 
the  believers,"  said  Paul  to  the  young  Timothy,  "in  word,  in 
conversation,  in  love,  in  spirit,  in  faith,  in  purity."  Those 
who  assume  to  lead  others  must  be  very  careful  of  their  be- 
haviour, that  they  may  not  be  a  stumbling-block  to  any,  but 
that  others  may  be  heartened  and  stimulated  by  the  beauty 
and  consistency  of  their  walk. 

Surely,  in  this  conception  of  the  Chief  Shepherd  there  is 
comfort  for  those  who  constitute  the  flock.  When  the  under- 
shepherd  fails,  the  Chief  Shepherd  may  be  expected  to  step  in 
to  supply  his  vacated  place,  or  to  do  his  neglected  work.  Do 
not  grumble  to  man,  but  take  your  complaints  to  headquarters. 
And  if  He  does  not  replace  the  worthless  under-shepherd  by 
another.  He  will  undertake  the  office  of  caring  for  you  with  his 
own  hands  ;  and  you  shall  cry,  "  The  Lord  is  my  shepherd,  I 
shall  not  want."    He  will  see  the  work  done,  or  do  it  Himself. 

If  these  words  should  meet  the  eyes  of  any  who  are  away 
from  the  tendance  of  under-shepherds,  let  me  congratulate 
them  on  being  superintended  by  the  Chief  Shepherd  Himself. 
What  could  be  better?  The  true  description  of  his  care  is 
given  in  his  own  words,  which  deserve  careful  heed.  Ezekiel 
xxxiv.  1 2- 1 6  might  almost  excite  to  envy. 

III.  The  Reward  of  the  Faithful  Shepherd. — Not 
the  crown  of  Nemean  parsley,  destined  soon  to  wither — but 
of  unfading  amaranth.  A  reward  for  faithful  service,  which 
will  never  grow  old,  never  shrivel,  never  decay.  And  thus  the 
memory  of  the  Master's  appreciation  of  the  poor  service  we 
have  rendered  will  be  perpetual.  Nor  is  this  all ;  but  some 
additional  strands  of  glory  shall  be  entwined  with  the  im- 
mortelles— "  the  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away." 

Oh,  liberal  recompense  !  oh,  marvellous  condescension  !  oh, 
rapture  of  delight  !     The  work  itself  were  reward  enough,  to 


'€)jt  ^Ijcpljcriis'  llctoarlr.  189 

say  nothing  of  such  a  compensation  as  this.  Yet  let  us  strive 
to  win  each  of  the  three  crowns  held  out  to  us.  The  crown  of 
life  to  those  who  endure  temptation  !  The  crown  of  righteous- 
ness to  those  who  love  his  appearing  !  The  crown  of  glory  to 
those  who  tend  his  flock  !  And  in  the  meanwhile  let  us  ask 
that  He  should  quickly  appear,  casting  aside  the  veil  which 
hides  Him,  and  manifesting  Himself  to  eyes  that  long,  and 
hearts  that  wait  for,  his  appearing.  "Even  so,  come,  Lord 
Jesus  1 " 


xxvin.-f  IjB  (^Evh  0f  tht  Inl^  3anl 

"Likewise,  ye  younger,  submit  yourselves  unto  the  elder.  Yea,  all  ot 
you  be  subject  one  to  another,  and  be  clothed  with  humility ;  for  God 
resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble.  Humble  yourselves 
therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  He  may  exalt  you  in  due 
time."— I  Peter  v.  5,  6. 

NE  of  the  chief  signs  of  the  unrenewed  spirit  is  the 
haughty  self-complacency  with  which  it  bears  itself 
To  resent  an  insult  ;  to  stand  upon  fancied  rights  ; 
V^T/l^^  to  vaunt  superiority  ;  to  show  "  the  silver,  and  gold, 
C_^'^  and  spices,  and  precious  ointment,"  in  the  ostenta- 
tious and  vainglorious  way  which  brought  reproof 
and  chastisement  on  Hezekiah — this  is  the  manner  of  the 
world. 

And  this  insidious  sin  oi  pride  dies  hard  in  the  child  of  God  ; 
nay,  it  may  be  questioned  if  ever  we  shall  be  perfectly  quit  of 
it  on  this  side  the  gates  of  pearl.  It  is  Protean  in  its  form, 
changing  with  every  temperament,  suiting  itself  to  every  mood, 
clinging  as  a  Nessus  cloak  even  around  the  flesh  of  the 
converted  man.  Christian  men  are  proud  of  their  houses, 
and  carriages,  and  wealth,  and  position.  Christian  women 
are  proud  of  their  person,  and  dress,  and  rank,  and  children. 
Christian  ministers  are  proud  of  their  influence,  and  sermons, 
and  the  admiration  they  receive.  A  bit  of  flattery,  a  newspaper 
notice,  a  conscious  success,  are  food  enough  for  pride  to  grow 
fat  upon,  till  it  begins  to  fancy  that  all  the  world  is  thinking  of 
it,  and  feels  that  the  most  extravagant  praise  is  but  a  grudging 
tribute  to  its  worth. 

May  I  not  press  this  upon  my  readers  further,  urging  each  to 
consider  his  own  character  and  behaviour  in  the  light  of  these 
words.      We  must  be  convicted  of  pride  before  we  seek  the 


grace  of  true  humility.  Pride  is  one  of  the  most  detestable  of 
sins  ;  yet  does  it  find  lodgment  in  earnest  souls,  though  we 
often  speak  of  it  by  some  lighter  name.  We  call  it — in- 
dependence, self-reliance.  We  do  not  always  discern  it  in 
the  hurt  feeling,  which  retires  into  itself,  and  nurses  its  sorrows 
in  a  sulk.  We  do  not  realize  how  much  it  has  to  do  with  our 
withdrawing  from  positions  where  we  feel  ourselves  outshone 
by  some  one  who  excels  us,  and  with  whom  we  do  not  care 
to  enter  into  comparison  with  the  certainty  of  being  second 
best.  It  would  not  be  at  all  easy  for  us  to  be  silent ;  to  take 
the  lowest  place  ;  to  learn — where  now  we  count  it  our  pre- 
rogative to  teach. 

And  sometimes,  when  we  are  clearly  worsted,  and  obliged  to 
step  down,  we  begin  to  pride  ourselves  en  the  sweetness  of 
our  disposition  in  taking  the  affront  so  pleasantly.  We  are 
proud  of  our  humility,  vain  of  our  meekness  ;  and,  putting 
on  the  saintliest  look,  we  wonder  whether  all  around  are  not 
admiring  us  for  our  lowliness.  I  fear  me  that  Bunyan's 
shepherd-boy,  sitting  in  the  lowland  glade,  and  singing,  would 
have  become  proud  of  being  so  low,  had  he  known  that 
his  lowliness  was  to  render  him  immortal.  There  is  at  least 
one  preacher  whom  I  know,  who  has  been  proud  of  his 
sermons  on  humility,  and  ostentatious  of  his  efforts  to  be 
meek.  And  thus,  even  if  the  soul  should  array  itself  in  the 
garb  of  humility,  however  simple  and  plain  it  be,  there  is 
imminent  risk  of  its  becoming  vain. 

"  Of  all  the  evils  of  our  corrupt  nature,  there  is  none  more 
connatural  and  universal  than  pride,  the  grand  wickedness, 
self-exalting  in  our  own  and  others'  opinion.  St.  Augustine 
says  truly,  that  which  first  oi'ercaine  man  is  the  last  thing  he 
overcomes.  Some  sins,  comparatively,  may  die  before  us  ;  but 
this  hath  life  in  it,  sensibly,  as  long  as  we.  It  is  as  the  heart  of 
all,  the  first  living,  the  last  dying  ;  and  it  hath  this  advantage, 
that  whereas  other  sins  are  fomented  by  one  another,  this 
feeds  even  on  virtues  and  graces  as  a  moth  that  breeds  in 
them,  and  consumes  them,  even  in  the  finest  of  them,  if  it  be 
not  carefully  looked  to.  As  one  head  of  this  hydra  is  cut  off, 
another  rises  up.     It  will  secretly  cleave  to  the  best  actions, 


192  ®Itc  Ciarb  of  i\jt  ^olg  ^oul. 

and  prey  upon  them.  And  therefore  there  is  so  much  need 
that  we  continually  watch,  and  fight,  and  pray  against  it,  and 
be  restless  in  the  pursuit  of  real  and  deep  humiliation,  daily 
seeking  to  advance  further  in  it." 

The  metaphor  used  in  this  passage  is  surely  derived  from 
that  most  touching  incident  on  the  eve  of  the  crucifixion,  when, 
though  having  present  to  his  mind  his  origin  and  destiny,  our 
Lord  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant.  "Jesus,  knowing 
that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  his  hands,  and  that 
He  was  come  from  God,  and  went  to  God ;  He  riseth  from 
supper,  and  laid  aside  his  garments,  and  took  a  towel  and 
girded  Hunself.  After  that  He  poureth  water  into  a  basin,  and 
began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe  them  with  the 
towel  wherewith  He  was  girded."  What  a  lovely  vesture  did 
that  stripping,  that  towel,  that  lowly  attitude,  between  them 
make  !  Not  even  when  He  stood  radiant  on  the  Mount  of 
Transfiguration  did  He  seem  to  be  dressed  so  fair.  Surely 
Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  as  He.  And  so  the 
injunction  comes  to  us  all,  that  we  should  adopt  the  same 
livery,  and  each  one  don  his  garb.  "  Yea,  all  of  you  be  subject 
one  to  another,  and  be  clothed  with  humility."  The  question  is 
— how  to  be  humble. 

I.  Recognize  the  Claims  of  those  older  than  and 
SUPERIOR  TO  Yourself. — "  Likewise,  ye  younger,  submit 
yourselves  unto  the  elder."  In  Athens  it  was  held  to  be  a 
matter  of  first  importance  that  the  young  should  pay  deferential 
respect  to  their  seniors.  And  even  among  the  precepts  of  the 
New  Testament,  it  would  be  hard  to  find  one  more  salutary 
and  beautiful  than  that  of  the  old  law  :  "  Thou  shalt  rise  up 
before  the  hoary  head,  and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man,  and 
fear  thy  God  :  I  am  the  Lord  "  (Lev.  xix  32.). 

We  neer'i  to  repeat  these  maxims  of  wisdom  and  grace  in  the 
ears  of  each  new  generation.  It  is  impossible  not  to  notice  the 
great  laxity  in  such  matters  which  is  spreading  through  modem 
society,  loosening  its  bands,  and  affecting  its  stability.  Perhaps 
it  is  that  children  are  too  early  taught  habits  of  self-reliance,  or 
are  too  precocious  in  their  studies.     But  certain  it  is  that  they 


^ubmissiott.  i93 

are  more  apt  to  dictate  than  to  submit.  Young  shoulders  are 
disinclined  for  the  yoke.  And  yet  how  many  bitter  memories 
are  being  stored  up  for  coming  days  !  We  remember  how 
Dr.  Johnson,  in  late  life,  stood  bareheaded  in  the  rain,  in 
the  market-place  at  Lichfield,  in  remorseful  remembrance 
of  boyish  disobedience  to  his  dead  father.  "  Ye  younger, 
submit." 

Of  course  there  are  occasions  when  conscience  forbids  us  to 
submit  ;  and  then  we  must  respectfully  state  the  reasons  of  our 
refusal,  at  whatever  cost.  But  these  occasions  are  compara- 
tively rare.  And  in  all  doubtful  cases — in  all  cases  where  a 
good  conscience  is  not  directly  infringed — we  should  submit. 
Where  young  Christians  have  asked  my  advice  as  to  the  way 
they  should  behave,  when  their  parents  urge  them  to  go  to 
places  which,  if  left  to  themselves,  they  would  not  choose,  I 
invariably  answer  that,  if  their  conscience  absolutely  prohibits 
them,  as  to  the  theatre,  music-hall,  or  ball,  they  have  no  alterna- 
tive but  to  refuse  ;  but,  where  the  question  is  as  to  indifferent 
things,  so  long  as  they  are  under  parental  control  they  should 
yield,  if  it  be  insisted  on,  after  they  have  stated  their  scruples 
or  objections. 

There  are,  however,  other  relationships  in  life  besides  that  of 
parent  and  child.  We  are  constantly  thrown  with  those  who 
have  seen  more  of  life  ;  have  lived  more  years ;  and  acquired 
more  experience  than  ourselves  :  and  who  have  claims  upon  us. 
To  all  such — unless  where  their  character  has  absolutely  for- 
feited all  their  claims  on  our  respect — there  should  be  service 
without  servility  ;  meekness  without  meanness  ;  consideration 
without  cringing  ;  politeness  without  a  thought  of  policy. 

And  the  cultivation  of  this  habit  of  deference  to  those  who 
are  older  and  better  than  ourselves,  with  a  distinct  intention  to 
acquire  thereby  some  new  tinge  of  humility,  is  to  take  a  con- 
siderable step  in  that  direction. 

II.  Take  all  the  Occasions  which  Life  affords  of 
SERVING  Others. — "All  of  you  be  subject  one  to  another." 
Of  course  there  must  always  be  a  diversity  of  function  in 
society  ;   but  the  very  positions  in  it  which  we  have  inherited 

N 


194  ®Ire  (^sith  oi  tfjt  '§al^  ^anl. 

or  acquired  give  us  opportunities  of  exercising  this  constant  life 
of  self-denial  for  those  around  us. 

To  submit  to  discomfort,  that  we  may  promote  their  comfort. 
To  submit  to  inconvenience,  that  we  may  make  life  easier  for 
them.  To  submit  to  the  cross,  that  we  may  save  them,  though 
at  the  cost  of  our  blood.  It  is  the  same  teaching  as  came  out 
before  in  the  injunction  to  "  submit  to  every  ordinance  of  man 
for  the  Lord's  sake." 

Yield  before  wrong.  Hold  your  mouth  in  subjection,  choking 
back  the  proud,  resentful  words  leaping  up  there  for  expression 
and  chafing  for  utterance.  Give  up  even  your  rights,  rather 
than  go  to  law  to  keep  them.  "  If  any  man  will  sue  thee  at  the 
law,  and  take  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy  cloak  also." 
And  submit  in  such  matters,  not  from  mean-spiritedness  or 
cowardice,  but  because  you  will  accept  each  opportunity  which 
is  put  into  your  way  of  acquiring  the  grace  of  humility. 

Let  the  servant  take  the  rebuke  of  the  master  meekly,  not 
careful  to  vindicate  himself,  save  where  the  cause  of  God  may 
be  jeopardized  by  his  fault.  Let  the  employe  receive  the 
remonstrance  of  his  employer  quietly,  eager  to  comply  with 
any  righteous  demand,  and  to  learn  in  silence.  Let  the  be- 
liever who  has  said  or  done  anything  unkind  and  unjust  to  a 
fellow-believer  confess  it  with  shame,  and  put  the  scourge  into 
his  brother's  hands,  while  he  stands  meekly  to  bear  the' inflicted 
strokes.  Let  us  not  shrink  from  humbling  ourselves  before  our 
servants  and  children,  if  we  have  sinned  against  them.  Strong 
as  rocks  and  lions  in  our  advocacy  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus, 
let  us  be  as  the  reed  swept  by  the  storm  when  it  is  merely  a 
question  of  our  good  name,  and  prestige,  and  well-being.  And 
let  our  single  purpose  be  in  all  to  learn  the  grace  of  humility, 
in  all  the  occasions  for  its  practice  which  our  God  throws  in 
our  way. 

III.  Accept  all  the  Divine  Discipline  of  Life, — 
"Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  Ah, 
what  infinite  sorrow  men  lay  up  for  themselves  in  resisting  the 
Divine  will  !  If  you  fret  and  chafe  against  his  appointments, 
finding  fault  with  Him  because  He  has  not  given  you  another 


^clf-^i:am:nattott.  195 

lot,  some  other  partner  for  your  life,  some  more  congenial 
occupation,  you  cannot  but  be  wretched.  For  at  the  bottom 
of  all  such  dispositions,  which  fume  as  the  waves  of  the  sea, 
there  lurks  a  feeling  of  disappointed  pride,  which  thinks  that 
it  deserved  some  better  treatment  from  God,  and  considers 
itself  ill-used. 

But  who  are  we  that  we  demand  so  fair  and  comfortable  a 
lot — we  whose  first  father  was  a  gardener  who  stole  his  Master's 
fruit;  who  have  sprung  from  the  dust  but  yesterday ;  and  who 
have  piled  Alps  on  Andes  of  repeated  sin  ?  Let  us  accept  what 
God  sends.  The  worst  is  ten  thousand  times  better  than  we 
deserve.  The  hardest  is  the  better  evidence  of  a  love  which 
dares  not  spoil  us.  The  whole  is  dictated  and  arranged  by 
such  wisdom  as  cannot  for  a  single  instant  err. 

The  shadow  cast  by  that  mighty  hand  is  dense  and  dark  ; 
its  pressure  is  almost  overwhelming.  David  cried,  as  he  felt 
it,  "  Day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon  me ;  my  moisture 
was  turned  into  the  drought  of  summer."  But  bend  beneath 
it.  Its  pressure  may  be  felt  in  personal  suffering,  in  rebuke,  or 
shame,  or  persecution,  or  in  loss  of  property,  or  in  some  other 
form  of  chastisement,  yet  take  each  as  another  opportunity  of 
putting  into  practice  this  injunction  to  humility. 

"  Lie  still  my  soul  !  whatever  God  ordains  is  right  and  good  ; 
thou  deservest  nothing  better  ;  what  right  hast  thou  to  be  sitting 
at  the  royal  table  at  all,  when  thou  hadst  forfeited  it  for  the 
swine's  fare?  If  thou  hadst  thy  rights,  thou  wouldst  be  now  in 
the  outer  gloom." 

IV.  Other  Methods  may  be  Suggested.— Let  us  try  to 
get  a  true  estimate  of  ourselves.  Let  us  judge  ourselves  now 
that  we  be  not  judged  at  the  last  : — 

(i)  Look  into  thyself  in  earnest. — "And  truly,  whosoever  thou 
be  that  hast  the  highest  conceit  of  thyself,  and  the  highest 
causes  of  it,  a  real  sight  of  thyself  will  lay  thy  crest.  Men  look 
on  any  good,  or  fancy  of  it,  in  themselves,  with  both  eyes,  and 
skip  over  as  unpleasant  their  real  defects  and  deformities. 
Every  man  is  his  own  flatterer.  But  let  any  man  see  his 
ignorance,  and  lay  what  he  knows  not  over  against  what  he 


196  ^)jt  ^avh  of  iljt  %al^  ,^oul. 

knows  ;  the  disorders  in  his  heart  over  against  any  right  motion 
of  them  ;  his  secret  follies  against  his  outwardly  blameless 
carriage — and  it  shall  be  impossible  for  him  not  to  abase  and 
abhor  himself" 

(2)  Acaislom  yourself  to  look  at  the  good  in  others. — Many 
of  us  compare  ourselves  at  the  best  with  others  at  their  worst, 
and  of  course  we  come  off  with  advantage,  at  least  in  our  own 
esteem.  We  are  so  much  keener  to  see  the  defects  than  the 
excellences  of  our  companions.  We  look  at  the  one  with  the 
magnifying  glass,  and  at  the  other  with  the  reversed  telescope. 
But  if  we  were  to  be  as  keen  on  their  virtues  as  now  on  their 
vices,  always  looking  for  the  compensating  grace,  always  making 
such  allowances  as  we  can  find,  always  magnifying  what  is 
lovely  and  of  good  report,  and  thinking  of  these  things,  then 
we  should  find  the  bubbles  of  our  self-congratulation  pricked 
and  burst. 

(3)  Accept  all  kind  good  things  from  whatever  source  as  the 
gift  of  God.,  and  tune  your  heart  in  praise  to  Him. — It  is  very 
pleasant  to  be  thanked  and  kindly  spoken  of ;  to  be  surrounded 
by  dear  friends  with  their  honeyed  words  :  and  we  may  be 
thankful  when  such  hours  shine  on  us  ;  as  it  is  impossible  for 
them  to  last,  if  only  we  are  true  to  our  Master.  And  whilst 
they  tarry  they  will  not  hurt  us,  if  only  we  pass  on  all  kind 
speeches  in  thanksgiving  and  praise  to  God.  When  we  can 
transmute  all  praises  into  Praise,  all  speeches  into  Speech,  and 
gifts  into  Sacrifices,  falling  down  to  worship  Him  who  is 
the  giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift,  we  shall  emerge  from 
the  ordeal,  without  having  contracted  guilt. 

(4)  Claim  the  hiwiility  of  Jesus. — As  you  go  through  the 
world,  not  only  set  yourself  to  resist  pride,  but  make  every 
temptation  towards  it  an  occasion  for  lifting  your  heart  to 
Christ  to  receive  from  Him  something  more  of  his  own  sweet 
and  humble  spirit.     "Thy  humility,  Lord  !" 

There  are  many  incitements  to  this  : — 

God  resisteth  the  proud. — The  Greek  word  here  is  very  ex- 
pressive. He  sets  Himself  in  battle  array.  Ah,  miserable 
attempt  to  withstand  God.  Pharaoh  perishing  in  the  Red  Sea 
is  the  perpetual  evidence  of  the  futility  of  the   conflict.      All 


(^vace.  197 

things  may  seem  to  prosper  for  a  time  ;  but  discomfiture  is 
certain,  and  will  be  final. 

He  giveth  grace  to  the  humble. — "  His  sweet  dews  and 
showers  of  grace  slide  off  the  mountains  of  pride,  and  fall  on 
the  low  valleys  of  humble  hearts,  making  them  pleasant  and 
fertile.  The  swelling  heart,  puffed  up  with  a  fancy  of  fulness, 
hath  no  room  for  grace.  The  humble  heart  is  most  capacious, 
and,  as  being  emptied  and  hollowed,  can  hold  most."  The 
vessels  which  are  most  heavily  laden  sink  lowest  in  the  water ; 
and  those  which  can  sink  lowest,  without  danger,  are  they 
which  are  most  heavily  freighted.  Oh  for  the  humble  heart 
which  can  hold  most  grace  ;  and,  as  it  obtains  more,  sinks  still 
lower  in  its  own  esteem  ! 

He  will  exalt  in  due  time. — "The  lame  take  the  prey."  The 
meek  inherit  the  earth.  The  master  of  the  feast  bids  those  who 
take  the  lowest  rooms  to  go  up  higher.  Moses,  the  meekest 
man,  has  taught  the  principles  of  jurisprudence  to  half  the 
world,  and  sits  on  the  judgment  seat.  The  martyr's  stake  has 
ever  been  a  throne  from  which  the  sufferer  has  ruled  after-ages. 
The  men  and  women  of  gracious,  retiring  spirit  wield  the  truest 
authority  in  town  or  village.  Those  who  can  die  on  the  cross, 
pass  through  the  grave  to  the  Ascension  Mount.  Be  humble, 
not  only  in  outward  mien,  but  in  the  inner  shrine  of  thy  spirit ; 
and  in  due  time,  not  to-day  or  to-morrow,  but  in  his  own  time 
the  Lord  will  exalt  thee  to  inherit  the  earth. 


XXlX.~(tavt.  anh  lEM  t0  B0  toitlj  it 

"  Casting  all  your  care  upon  Him  ;  for  He  careth  for  you." 
(i  Peter  v.  7.) 

"^^v^lVERY  word  of  this  precious  verse  is  golden.  And 
~^\  ^  the  fact  of  its  standing  here  as  a  Divine  command 
-^^      is  a  proof,  not  only  of  what  is  possible  for  us  to  do, 


^^«x^^       but  of  what  God  is  prepared  to  enable  us  to  do. 

r-^^f^      His  commands  are  enablings  ;  his  words  are  power- 
V  words  ;    his  light  is  life.      If  only  you  are  willing 

to  live  this  glad,  free,  uncareful  life,  and  dare  to  step  out 
on  the  waves  of  his  carefulness,  you  will  find  that,  with  the 
resolve  to  obey,  there  will  come  from  Him  the  wondrous 
power  that  makes  obedience  possible. 

And  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  necessar}'  to  obey  this 
precept.  So  only  can  we  be  peaceful  and  strong.  We  cannot 
stand  the  strain  of  both  work  and  worr}'.  Two  things  come 
between  our  souls  and  unshadowed  fellowship  with  God,  st'n 
and  care.  And  we  must  be  as  resolute  to  cast  our  care  on 
the  Lord  as  to  confess  our  sins  to  Him,  if  we  would  walk  in 
the  light  as  He  is  in  the  light.  One  yelping  dog  may  break 
our  slumber  on  the  stillest  night.  One  grain  of  dust  in  the 
eye  will  render  it  incapable  of  enjoying  the  fairest  prospect. 
One  care  may  break  our  peace  and  hide  the  face  of  God,  and 
bring  a  funeral  pall  over  our  souls.  We  must  cast  a/l  our  care 
on  Him,  if  we  would  know  the  blessedness  of  unshadowed 
fellowship. 

But,  besides  the  blessedness  we  lose  in  giving  way  to  care, 
we  must  remember  that  such  behaviour  sorely  grieves  and  dis- 
honours God.  It  grieves  Him,  as  love  must  grieve  when 
suspected  of  insincerity.  And  it  also  sorely  dishonours  Him. 
We  judge  a  parent  by  the  report  given  of  him  in  the  words 


Wljat  is  Care?  199 

and  behaviour  of  his  children.  If  they  seem  half-starved  and 
miserable,  or  look  wistfully  to  us  for  a  dole  of  help,  or  complain 
bitterly  of  the  hardships  of  their  lot,  we  conclude — however 
wealthy  he  may  be  as  to  his  income,  or  munificent  as  to  his 
gifts — that  he  is  hard  and  cruel  :  and  we  withdraw  from  him 
as  far  as  possible.  So,  if  the  world  judges  of  God  by  the 
looks  and  words  of  many  of  his  professed  children,  is  it 
■wonderful  that  it  is  less  attracted  than  repelled  ?  Either 
there  is  no  God,  or  He  is  powerless  to  help,  or  He  does  not 
really  love,  or  He  is  careless  of  the  needs  of  his  children — 
such  must  be  the  reflections  of  many,  as  they  look  on  the 
weary,  careworn,  anxious  faces  of  God's  professed  people, 
and  remark  in  them  the  same  long  deeply-ploughed  furrows 
as  the  years  have  made  for  themselves. 

We  are  either  libels  or  Bibles ;  either  harbour-lights  or 
warning  signals  ;  either  attractions  or  detractors  ;  and  which 
we  shall  be  depends  very  much  on  what  we  do  with  CARE. 

Of  course  there  must  ever  be  the  discipline  and  chastisement 
of  life.  Our  Father  deals  with  us  as  with  sons  :  and  what  son 
is  he  whom  the  Father  chasteneth  not  ?  And  these  strokes 
of  his  rod,  these  cups  mingled  by  his  hand,  must  be  bitter 
to  the  flesh.  But  all  this  is  very  different  from  "  care."  There 
may  be  pain — but  no  doubt  of  the  Father's  love,  no  worry 
about  the  issues,  no  foreboding  as  to  the  long  future,  which 
\o  the  eye  of  faith  shines  like  the  horizon-rim  of  the  sea  on 
which  the  sun  is  shining  in  its  utmost  splendour,  while  dark 
clouds  brood  overhead. 

Care,  according  to  the  Greek  word,  is  that  which  divides  and 
distracts  the  soul,  which  diverts  us  from  present  duty  to  weary 
calculations  of  how  to  meet  conditions  which  may  never  arrive. 
Fret ;  worry  ;  anxiety  ;  the  habit  of  anticipating  evil  ;  crossing 
bridges  before  we  reach  them ;  the  permission  of  foreboding 
fears  about  the  future  ;  all  that  attitude  of  mind  which  broods 
over  the  mistakes  of  the  past  and  dwells  on  the  shadows  which 
coming  events  may  cast,  rather  than  on  the  love  and  will  of 
God — //ii's  is  Care. 

I.  Our  Treatment  of  Care. — Casting  all  your  care  upon 


200  (Karc,  antt  toljat  to  §o  initir  it. 

///w. — The  Greek  verb  indicates  not  that  we  must  keep  doing 
it,  but  do  it  once  for  all. 

Who  does  not  know  what  it  is  to  awake  in  the  morning  with 
a  sense  of  heaviness  and  depression,  and,  before  one  is  well 
aroused,  to  be  conscious  of  a  voice  whispering  a  long  tale  of 
burdens  to  be  carried,  and  difficulties  to  be  met,  as  the  hours 
pass  on  ! 

"  Ah,"  says  the  voice,  "  a  miserable  day  will  this  be." 

"  How  so  ?"  we  inquire,  fearfully. 

"Remember,  there  is  that  creditor  to  meet,  that  skein  to 
disentangle,  that  irritation  to  soothe,  those  violent  tempers  to 
confront.  It  is  no  use  praying,  better  linger  longer  where  you 
are,  and  drag  through  the  day  as  you  may.  You  are  like  a 
victim  in  the  tumbril  going  to  be  guillotined." 

And  too  often  we  have  yielded  to  the  suggestion.  If  we 
have  prayed,  it  has  been  in  a  kind  of  hopeless  way,  asking 
God  to  help,  but  not  daring  to  think  He  would.  There  has 
been  no  assurance,  no  confidence,  no  calm  within,  no  tran- 
quillity without.  Alas  for  some  !  They  always  spend  their 
lives  thus.  One  long,  weary  monotone  of  anxiety — strugg- 
ling against  winds  and  waves,  instead  of  walking  over  the 
crests  of  the  billows  ;  treading  a  difficult,  stony  pass,  instead 
of  being  borne  along  in  one  of  the  twenty  thousand  chariots 
of  God. 

How  infinitely  better  to  cast  our  care  upon  the  strong,  broad 
shoulders  of  Christ  !  Treat  cares  as  you  treat  sins.  Hand 
them  over  to  Jesus  one  by  one  as  they  occur.  Commit  them  to 
Him.  Roll  them  upon  Him.  Make  them  his.  By  an  act  of 
faith  look  to  Him,  saying,  "This,  Lord,  and  this,  and  this,  I 
cannot  bear.  Thou  hast  taken  my  sins  ;  take  my  cares  :  I  lay 
them  upon  Thee,  and  trust  Thee  to  do  for  me  all,  and  more 
than  all,  I  need.  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid."  As  George 
Herbert  says  so  quaintly  in  his  sonnet,  a.  ut  care  into  Christ's 
bag.  There  is  no  surer  path  to  rest  than  to  pass  on  to  Jesus  all 
the  anxieties  of  life,  believing  that  He  takes  what  we  give  at  the 
moment  of  our  giving  it ;  that  it  instantly  becomes  a  matter  of 
honour  with  Him  to  do  his  best  for  us  :  and  surely  it  is  a  sacri- 
lege to  take  back  any  gift  which  we  have  put  into  his  hands. 


§iffcrcnf  ^tntra  of  Care.  201 

"Blessed  be  the  Lord,  who  daily  beareth  our  biBrden" 
(Psa.  Ixviii.  19,  R.V.). 

There  are  two  or  three  preliminaries  before  this  committal  of 
care  is  possible.  We  must  have  cast  our  sins  before  we  can 
cast  our  cares ;  in  other  words,  we  must  be  children  in  the 
Father's  home.  Then  also  we  must  be  living  in  God's  plan, 
sure  that  we  are  where  He  would  have  us  be,  camped  under 
his  brooding  pillar-cloud.  And,  in  addition,  we  must  have 
yielded  up  our  lives  to  Him,  for  Him  to  have  his  way  in  them. 
Nor  must  we  neglect  to  feed  our  faith  with  promise.  Without 
her  natural  food  she  pines.  But  when  these  conditions  are 
fulfilled,  it  is  not  difficult  to 

"...kneel,  and  cast  our  load, 
E'en  while  we  pray,  upon  our  God, 
Then  rise  with  lightened  cheer." 

The  cup  may  still  have  to  be  drunk,  the  discipline  borne,  the 
work  done  ;  but  the  weary  ache  of  care  will  have  yielded  to  the 
anodyne  of  a  child's  trust  in  One  who  cannot  fail. 

II.  Different  Kinds  of  Ckr^e.— There  is  care  about  our 
growth  in  grace. — It  is  very  unreasonable  ;  and  yet  how  com- 
mon !  We  fret  because  we  fear  that  we  are  not  getting  on  fast 
enough,  and  run  to  and  fro  in  our  anxiety  to  pick  up  some- 
thing from  other  people.  As  well  might  a  lad  in  an  infant 
class  fret  because  he  may  not  enter  the  higher  classes  of  the 
school.  But  surely  his  one  business  is  to  acquire  the  lessons  set 
before  him  by  the  teacher.  When  those  are  learnt,  it  will  be 
for  the  teacher  to  give  him  other  and  harder  ones,  and  to 
advance  him  to  positions  where  quicker  progress  may  be  made. 
And  it  is  for  us  to  learn  each  day  the  lessons  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  sets  us,  and  to  leave  to  Him  the  responsibility  of  leading 
us  forward  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God.  Cast  the  care 
of  your  growth  and  attainments  on  the  great  Leader  of  souls, 
and  be  content  to  sit  at  his  feet,  learning  the  lessons  He 
assigns. 

There  is  care  about  our  Christian  work. — How  to  maintain 
our  congregations  ?  How  to  hold  our  own  amid  the  competi- 
tion of  neighbouring  workers  ?    How  to  maintain  the  efficiency 


202  Care,  atttr  foljat  to  §o  tnitlr  it. 

and  vigour  of  our  machinery?  How  to  adjust  differences 
between  our  fellow  or  subordinate  workers?  How  to  find 
material  enough  to  supply  the  incessant  demand  for  sermons 
and  addresses  ?  How  to  shepherd  a  large  flock  of  souls  ?  What 
elements  of  care  are  hidden  in  each  of  these  !  And  in  what 
numberless  cases  the  look  of  weary  anxiety  betrays  the  heart- 
ache within  ! 

But  one  is  inclined  to  ask  sometimes,  Whose  work  is  it? 
If  it  is  yours,  resting  on  your  shoulders  only,  there  may  be 
some  reasonableness  in  the  carrying  of  care.  But  if,  as  is  surely 
the  case,  the  work  is  your  Master's,  the  burden  should  be  his 
also.  The  prime  worker  is  not  you,  but  Christ.  He  is  working 
through  you.  You  are  but  his  servant.  All  that  you  are 
responsible  for  is  to  do  what  He  bids  to  the  uttermost  of  your 
power ;  and  He  must  bear  all  the  cost  and  responsibility 
beside.  If  things  are  not  going  smoothly,  go  and  tell  Him, 
and  cast  all  the  anxiety  of  it  back  on  Him,  leaving  it  to  Him  to 
extricate  or  reinforce  you. 

There  is  care  about  the  ebb  and  JIow  of  feeling. — Our  feelings 
are  very  changeable.  They  are  affected  by  changes  in  the 
weather  and  temperature,  by  the  state  of  our  digestion  and 
liver,  by  over-weariness,  by  want  of  sleep,  by  a  thousand  name- 
less causes.  No  stringed  instrument  is  more  affected  by  minute 
changes  than  we  are  ;  and  we  are  apt  to  worry  when  the  tide  of 
emotion  is  running  fast  out,  defying  our  efforts  to  retain  it. 
But,  if  we  are  not  conscious  of  any  sin  or  negligence  to  which 
this  subsidence  of  emotion  may  be  attributed,  we  may  cast  the 
care  of  such  an  experience  on  our  Saviour.  He  knows  our 
frame  ;  and,  as  we  pass  down  the  dark  staircase,  let  us  hold 
fast  to  the  hand-rail  of  his  will,  willing  still  to  do  his  will, 
though  in  the  dark.  "  I  am  as  much  thine,  and  devoted  to 
Thee,  in  the  depths  of  my  being  now,  as  when  my  heart  was 
happiest  in  thy  love." 

There  is  care  about  household  and  commercial  matters. — 
Servants,  with  their  frequent  changes  ;  employers,  with  un- 
reasonable demands ;  customers  and  clerks ;  creditors  and 
debtors  ;  children,  with  the  ailments  of  childhood,  and  the 
waywardness  of  youth.     To  mention  any  one  of  these  is  to 


"Be  Caretlr  for  ^ou."  203 

touch  a  bitter  spring  of  care.  There  are  some  whose  businesses 
are  specially  hable  to  cause  anxious,  worrying  thoughts.  Many 
Christians  ahvays  think  that  they  must  come  to  beggary ;  they 
refuse  to  enjoy  the  good  things  within  their  reach,  because 
of  certain  dreaded  possibiHties,  Alas  !  for  that  phantom 
workhouse  which  bounds  the  pathway  of  so  many  lives,  but 
which  is  never  reached  !  But  each  of  these  sources  of 
worry  may  become  a  means  of  grace,  a  bond  between  Jesus 
and  the  soul,  if  placed  at  his  feet,  and  definitely  entrusted 
to  his  care. 

Do  not  be  satisfied  with  rolling  yourself  on  God,  roll  your 
burden  also.  He  who  can  carry  the  one  can  carry  the  other. 
When  a  tiny  boy,  trying  to  help  his  father  move  his  books,  fell 
on  the  staircase  beneath  the  weight  of  a  heavy  volume,  his 
father  ran  to  his  aid  and  caught  up  in  his  arms  boy  and  burden 
both,  and  carried  them  in  his  arms  to  his  room.  And  will  God 
deal  worse  with  us  ?  He  cannot  fail  or  forsake.  He  can  smite 
rocks,  and  open  seas,  and  unlock  the  treasuries  of  the  air,  and 
ransack  the  stores  of  the  earth.  Birds  will  bring  meat,  and  fish 
coins,  if  He  bid  them.  He  takes  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little 
thing — how  easily,  then,  your  heaviest  load  :  while  there  is 
nothing  so  trivial  but  that  you  may  make  it  a  matter  of  prayer 
and  faith. 

So  Leighton  sweetly  says  : — "  When  thou  art  either  to  do  or 
suffer  anything,  when  thou  art  about  any  purpose  of  business, 
go,  tell  God  of  it,  and  acquaint  Him  with  it — yea,  burthen  Him 
with  it — and  thou  hast  done  for  matter  of  caring.  No  more 
care,  but  sweet,  quiet  diligence  in  thy  duty,  and  dependence  on 
Him  for  the  carriage  of  thy  matters.  Roll  over  on  God,  make 
one  bundle  of  all  ;  roll  thy  cares,  and  thyself  with  them,  as  one 
burden,  all  on  thy  God"  (I'sa.  xxxvi.  5). 

HI.  The  Reason.\bleness  of  this  Method  of  Life. — 
"For  He  careth  for  you."  Of  course,  if  we  persist  in  acting 
only  for  ourselves,  we  must  do  the  best  we  can  for  ourselves ; 
but  if  we  can  hand  over  all  matters  to  God,  we  shall  find  that 
He  will  do  infinitely  better  for  us  than  we  had  dared  to  hqce 
Such  is  God's  love  to  us  that  He  always  goes  far  beyond  cm 


204  €avt,  anb  inljat  to  ^o  toitlj  if. 

farthest  anticipations.  "Exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that 
wf  ask  or  think." 

If  the  father  is  providing  for  to-morrow's  needs,  why  should 
his  little  boy  leave  his  play,  and  lean  pensively  against  the 
wall,  wondering  what  had  better  be  done  ?  If  the  pilot  has 
come  on  board,  why  should  the  captain  also  pace  the  deck  with 
weary  foot  ?  If  some  wise,  strong  friend,  thoroughly  com- 
petent, has  undertaken  to  adjust  some  difficult  piece  of  per- 
plexity for  me,  and  if  I  have  perfect  confidence  in  him,  and  he 
assures  me  that  he  is  well  able  to  accomplish  it,  why  should  I 
fret  longer  ?  The  thing  is  as  good  as  done,  since  he  has  taken 
it  in  hand. 

Doubtless  there  seems  a  marvellous  chasm  between  H/z/i 
and  you.  But  it  is  bridged  by  the  silver  arch  of  Divine  care. 
God  cares  for  you  so  much  that  He  came  Himself  in  the  person 
of  his  Son  to  redeem  you  ;  there  was  never  a  time  He  did  not 
love  you,  brood  over  you,  and  care  for  you.  He  cares  for  you 
so  much  as  to  listen  to  your  least  sigh  or  cry  amid  the  beat  of 
heavenly  music  and  the  acclamations  of  the  blessed.  The 
mighty  heart  of  Deity  itself  is  full  of  a  fathomless  carefulness 
for  all  that  concerns  you.  No  mother  cares  over  her  sick  child 
as  He  over  you.  Each  movement  and  need  and  desire  is  read 
long  before  expressed  or  even  felt. 

Let  us  trust  Him.  Tongue  cannot  tell  the  completeness,  the 
delicacy,  the  tender  thoughtfulness  of  the  care  that  will  gather 
and  shelter  us,  as  the  nervous,  careful  hen  gathers  her  brood 
under  her  wing.     "  I  would  have  you  without  carefulness." 


XXX.— Cottflirt. 

"  Be  sober,  be  vigilant ;  because  your  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring 
lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour  :  whom  resist  stedfast 
in  the  faith,  knowing  that  the  same  afflictions  are  accomplished  in  your 
brethren  that  are  in  the  world." — i  Peter  v.  8,  9. 

""^fy*  ^  would  appear  that  the  image  of  the  flock  is  still  in 
\.        the  Apostle's  thought;     and   that   he  recals  some 


such  incident  as  that  narrated  by  David,  when  as 
a  stripling  he  stood  before  Saul  and  related  how, 
as  he  kept  his  father's  sheep,  there  came  a  lion 
and  took  a  lamb  out  of  the  flock  ;  and  that  he  went 
after  him,  and  smote  him,  and  delivered  it  out  of  his  mouth, 
and  caught  him  by  the  beard,  and  slew  him.  However  safely 
folded  and  watched,  no  flock  is  secure  against  the  attempt  of 
the  beasts  of  prey  which  infest  the  wilderness.  Especially  at 
night  they  will  prowl  around,  seeking  for  the  unguarded  spot, 
or  the  unwary  sheep,  and  filling  the  night  with  their  terrible 
roarings. 

The  figure  of  the  lion  roaring  around  the  flock  reminds 
us  of  a  rendering  given  by  some  to  one  of  God's  earliest 
words  to  men,  when  He  warned  Cain  that  sin,  like  a  wild 
beast,  was  crouching  at  the  door  of  his  heart,  waiting  to 
spring  in.  And  we  may  not  forget  how  our  Lord  described 
the  coming  of  the  wolf  to  the  flock  entrusted  to  the  hireling 
shepherd,  filling  him  with  panic,  and  resulting  in  the  catching 
and  scattering  of  the  sheep.  Satan  is  evidently  no  myth,  no 
imaginary  being,  to  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament. 
From  the  distinct  references  made  to  him  by  our  Lord, 
to  the  last  great  conflict  described  in  the  Apocalypse,  when 
he  is  finally  vanquished,  there  is  abundant  and  emphatic 
evidence  that,  behind  the  veil  of  the  visible,  he  is  heading  a 


2o6  Conflict. 

great  revolt  against  the  rule  of  God,  and  is  pledged  to  do  his 
worst  by  stratagem  or  skill  against  his  dominion  and  his  saints. 
It  is  a  subtle  manoeuvre  of  his  to  lead  men  to  suppose  that 
there  is  no  devil  at  all.  A  gang  of  thieves  is  never  so 
dangerous  as  when  they  have  it  widely  rumoured  that  they 
have  left  the  neighbourhood.  Any  artifice  succeeds  which 
throws  us  off  our  guard. 

There  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  all  God's  people  are 
watched  and  attacked  by  the  devil  himself;  for  this  would 
almost  invest  him  with  the  attributes  of  omniscience  and 
omnipresence.  But  he  is  supported  and  abetted  by  myriads 
of  wicked  spirits  in  the  heavenly  places,  any  one  of  which 
waits  to  do  his  will  and  to  execute  his  plans  ;  and  the  entire 
host,  with  long  experiences  of  the  frailties  of  human  nature, 
with  desperate  malice  against  God,  with  unwearied  watchful- 
ness to  do  us  harm,  rests  not  day  or  night,  but  goes  to  make 
up  that  one  malign  and  terrible  adversary  of  which  the  Apostle 
speaks.  And,  indeed,  we  might  relinquish  all  hope  of  being 
able  to  withstand  his  onsets,  did  we  not  know  that  he  has  been 
vanquished  by  our  Leader,  who  is  prepared  to  overcome  him 
again,  in  and  through  and  for  each  of  those  who  put  their  trust 
in  Him.  O  Victor  of  the  Garden,  the  Cross,  and  the  Resur- 
rection morning,  as  Thou  didst  overcome  Satan  in  thine  earthly 
sojourn,  so  overcome  him  again  in  each  of  us  that  we  may  be 
more  than  conquerors,  because  He  that  is  in  us  is  greater  than 
he  that  is  in  the  world  ! 

I.  The  Description  here  given  of  the  Tempter.—//"^ 
is  our  adversary. — The  prophet  Zechariah  was  not  mistaken 
when  he  beheld  Satan,  standing  as  an  adversary  beside  the 
high  priest  clothed  in  his  dishevelled  robes,  and  standing  there 
to  resist  him.  For,  when  the  veil  is  drawn  aside,  in  the 
majestic  prologue  to  the  Book  of  Job,  Satan  is  discovered 
suggesting  an  evil  and  mercenary  motive  for  the  uprightness  of 
the  patriarch.  "  Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought  ?  Put  forth 
thine  hand  now,  and  touch  all  that  he  hath,  and  he  will  curse 
Thee  to  thy  face."  And  thus,  when  he  was  cast  out  of  the 
Heavenlies,   as   a  prelude   to  his    being   cast   down    into   the 


Oitr  ^trircrsar^.  207 

bottomless  pit,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  loud  voices  were 
heard  rejoicing  that  the  accuser,  who  accused  the  saints  night 
and  day  before  God,  had  been  cast  out.  But  the  defeats  which 
he  has  met  with  already  have  only  exasperated  his  hatred  the 
more,  and  he  now  roams  the  earth  in  all  the  greater  wrath, 
because  he  knows  that  a  limit  has  been  put  upon  his  power,  and 
that  he  hath  but  a  short  time. 

He  roars  as  a  lion. — There  is  terror  in  his  threatenings, 
which  may  well  strike  panic  into  timid  hearts.  But  we  must 
remember  that  it  is  the  expending  of  ineffectual  rage.  He 
makes  up  in  noise  what  he  has  lost  in  power.  He  hates  our 
Shepherd,  though  he  cannot  now  hurt  Him.  He  did  his  worst 
against  Him,  and  failed.  He  must  content  himself  with  bellow- 
ing out  his  hate  ;  though  this,  too,  shall  be  stayed.  So  Ruther- 
ford used  to  say  that  he  preferred  dealing  with  a  roaring  devil. 
It  fills  Satan  with  redoubled  chagrin  and  malignity  to  know  that 
the  weakest  saint  is  more  than  a  match  for  him,  if  he  dares  to 
resist  him,  steadfast  in  the  faith,  and  armed  in  the  panoply  of 
God.  "My  sheep,"  said  the  Chief  Shepherd,  "shall  never 
perish." 

He  walketh  about  seeking. — There  is  no  church-fold  M'hich 
he  does  not  eagerly  visit  ;  bent  on  injuring  its  usefulness,  or 
snatching  away  its  careless  professors.  No  bishop  so  busy  in 
his  diocese  as  he.  If  only  he  can  vitiate  Christian  teaching  by 
false  doctrine,  so  that  every  sermon  may  carry  with  it  error 
enough  to  cancel  its  truth  and  power ;  if  he  can  involve  the 
leading  professors  in  inconsistencies  which  shall  neutralize  the 
effect  of  their  testimony  ;  if  he  can  entrap  the  weaklings  into 
pride,  or  jealousy,  or  sensual  pleasure,  or  backsliding  ;  if  he  can 
scatter  the  flock  by  persecution,  or  bury  it  in  a  snowstorm  of 
formalism,  or  drown  it  in  a  spate  of  worldliness,  then  he  is  full 
of  glee.  And  he  is  always  on  the  watch  for  such  a  chance. 
"  Going  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and  walking  up  and  down 
in  it." 

Satan  considers  the  saints.  "  Hast  thou  considered  my 
servant  Job?"  No  neglect  of  the  morning  watch,  no  permis- 
sion of  the  first  faint  thoughts  of  evil,  no  unwatchfulness,  no 
tampering   with  wrong,   escapes  his  attentive   scrutiny.      He 


2o8  CottfltCl. 

never  yet  missed  an  opportunity  of  following  up  any  clue,  or 
making  the  most  of  any  advantage.  We  are  engaged  in 
conflict  with  an  accomplished  and  merciless  opponent,  who  is 
quick  to  plunge  in  his  sword  wherever  the  joints  of  the  armour 
open,  and  whenever  we  give  him  the  chance.  What  need,  then, 
for  constant  vigilance  on  our  part  to  meet  and  parry  his 
attacks  !  "  Be  sober !  be  vigilant !"  And  what  need  also  for  the 
ceaseless  intercession  of  Him  who  sees  the  approach  of  tempta- 
tion, and  anticipates  it  by  his  prayers  !  "  Simon,  Simon, 
behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you,  that  he  may  sift  you 
as  wheat :  but  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not." 

II.  The  Aim  of  Satanic  Temptation. — When  the  devil 
tempted  our  Saviour,  He  could  truthfully  say,  "The  prince  of 
this  world  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  Me."  But  only  He. 
could  say  this.  In  all  else  there  is  a  certain  proneness  to  go 
wrong,  to  which  the  great  adversary  makes  his  appeal.  And 
before  we  can  hope  to  vanquish  assaults  from  without,  we  must 
be  careful  to  have  taken  up  that  attitude  with  respect  to  the 
inner  realm  which  is  ours  in  the  holy  arrangements  of  God. 
We  cannot  successfully  vanquish  assaults  from  without,  whilst 
there  is  revolt  or  anarchy  within.  And  for  this  reason  the 
Apostle  has  been  careful,  at  the  commencement  of  the  previous 
chapter,  to  deal  with  the  question  of  the  flesh.  For  only  when 
we  have  truly  experienced  what  God  is  prepared  to  do  in 
relation  to  the  flesh,  shall  we  be  able  to  stand  in  his  grace 
against  our  terrible  adversary,  or  maintain  the  attitude  of 
uncompromising  vigilance  and  unremitting  watchfulness.  Per- 
haps there  is,  as  Bengel  suggests,  a  hint  of  this  in  the  admoni- 
tion, Be  sober  ! 

When  man  first  came  from  his  Maker's  hand,  all  his  natural 
appetites  and  desires,  which  in  themselves  were  pure  and 
necessary,  were  under  the  control  of  the  will,  which  itself  was 
true  to  God,  willing  only  what  God  willed,  and  obeying  each 
prompting  of  his  Spirit.  But  man  swerved  from  that  blessed 
condition,  substituting  self  for  God,  and  his  own  pleasure  for 
obedience  to  the  Divine  law  and  will.  And  ever  since  that  one 
fatal  act  there  has  been  transmitted  to  all  after-generations  a 


**  t\)t  iotig  of  ^m."  209 

bias  towards  evil,  a  tendency  to  repeat  that  first  sin  in  aggra- 
vated forms,  a  predisposition  to  the  gratification  of  natural 
instincts,  irrespective  of  the  Divine  requirements.  This  in- 
herited tendency  is  due  to  the  operation  of  that  great  principle 
which  scientific  men  know  as  the  law  of  heredity,  and  which 
operates  through  all  races  of  the  creatures  with  which  we  are 
familiar  in  our  world-home. 

The  sphere  in  which  this  inherited  tendency  mostly  manifests 
itself  is  in  relation  to  the  appetites  and  desires  of  the  body,  the 
natural  action  of  which  has  been  much  interfered  with  through 
successive  generations,  and  which,  as  they  come  to  us,  bear 
evidence  of  the  abuses  to  which  they  have  been  subjected  by 
our  progenitors.  Now,  of  course,  these  natural  impulses, 
though  vitiated  in  their  operation,  cannot  constitute  sin  until 
they  have  inflamed  the  imagination,  captured  the  heart,  and 
conquered  the  will.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is  not  one 
of  us  in  whom  they  have  not  done  all  these  things  again  and 
again,  and  in  doing  so  have  increased  and  accentuated  our 
susceptibility  to  evil.  This  perverted  tendency  of  our  appetites, 
coupled  with  its  inevitable  influence  on  the  inner  life,  is  what 
the  Word  of  God  calls  t/ie  Jlesh.  "  The  flesh,  with  the  passions 
and  lusts "  (Gal.  v.  24).  "  We  all  had  our  conversation  in 
times  past,  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind" 
(Eph.  ii.  3). 

God  has  judged  this  flesh  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  made  in  the 
likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  has  assigned  it  to  the  cross.  There, 
on  Calvary,  is  God's  verdict  and  doom  for  the  flesh.  And  in 
his  thought  and  purpose  our  flesh  has  been  crucified  there. 
"Our  old  man  was  crucified  with  Him,  that  the  body  of  sin 
might  be  done  away"  (Rom.  vi.  6,  R.v).  Also,  "They  that  are 
of  Christ  Jesus  have  crucified  the  flesh  "  (Gal.  v.  24,  R.v.) — state- 
ments which  cannot  be  appropriated  by  one  or  two,  but  are 
made  generally  of  all  the  saints,  as  they  are  considered  in  the 
person  of  their  Representative  and  Head.  Oh  that  there  were 
viot,  through  our  failure  in  faith  and  obedience,  so  great  a 
gap  between  what  all  the  saints  are  in  the  purpose  and  thought 
of  God,  and  what  they  are  in  their  practical  realization  ! 

But  God  has  done  more  than  assign  "flesh"  to  the  cross.    He 


2IO  (Knnflirt. 

has  given  us  his  Holy  Spirit,  whose  special  office  it  is  to  restore 
to  the  inner  life,  and  to  the  body  also,  a  right-ordered  and 
natural  existence.  There  are  some  who  seem  to  suppose  that 
He  takes  the  evil  bias  entirely  away,  so  that  they  are  as  Adam 
before  he  fell.  In  our  judgment  this  is  contrary  to  the  teaching 
of  Scripture,  which  recognizes  the  presence  of  the  flesh  in 
believers,  though  it  expressly  teaches  that  they  are  "  not  in  the 
flesh."  But  the  Holy  Spirit  is  eager  to  dwell  in  each  believer 
mightily,  as  a  counteractive  agency,  lusting  against  the  flesh, 
restraining  its  every  manifestation,  keeping  it  utterly  in  the 
place  of  death  ;  and  this  so  calmly  and  quietly,  that  the  happy 
subject  of  his  grace  may  begin  to  suppose  that  the  flesh  is 
extirpated  or  eradicated,  when  in  point  of  fact  it  is  present  still, 
and  would  reveal  itself,  if  the  gracious  operation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  were  restricted  for  a  single  moment  (Gal.  v.  17,  R.V.). 

It  is  not  a  question  of  what  Christ  can  do,  but  of  what  He 
has  undertaken  to  do.  Of  course,  a  moment  is  coming  when 
we  shall  put  off  this  body,  and  when  the  redemption  of  our 
entire  bemg  will  be  completed  in  the  acquisition  of  a  body 
fashioned  in  the  likeness  of  our  Lord's.  But  till  then  we  are 
doomed  to  carry  about  a  body  which  is  apt,  through  inclina- 
tions excited  in  the  mind,  to  hurry  us  into  sin  (i  Cor.  ix.  27) 
Yet  surely  it  is  more  blessed  to  have  the  constant  indwelling 
restraining,  sanctifying  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  source 
of  our  deliverance  from  the  flesh,  than  to  have  back  again  the 
nature  of  unfallen  Adam,  which  might  at  least  fall  again  before 
the  onset  of  the  tempter. 

We  once  lived  in  a  house,  the  cellar  kitchen  of  which  was  so 
damp  that  the  servant  was  able  sometimes  to  sweep  up  the 
white  mould  from  the  tiles  ;  but  as  long  as  we  kept  up  a  roar- 
ing fire,  the  damp  was  undiscernible,  and  the  kitchen  was 
warm  and  pleasant.  Indeed,  no  stranger  would  have  realized 
how  strong  the  tendency  to  damp  was.  But  if  there  was 
no  fire  for  weeks,  or  even  for  days,  the  damp  revealed 
itself.  So,  when  the  Spirit  works  mightily  in  the  soul.  He  is 
like  the  ruddy  glow  of  a  furnace,  and  the  evil  tendencies  of 
our  nature  are  as  if  they  were  not. 

We  were  informed  that  the  workmen  employed  in  making 


Consolation  for  t\jz  Stemptett.  211 

the  subterranean  tunnel  through  London  came  on  a  bed 
of  sand,  through  which  water  was  flowing  freely,  but  they  were 
kept  perfectly  dry  so  long  as  the  parts  excavated  were  filled  by 
a  strong  blast  of  compressed  air.  So  is  the  heart  kept  pure  and 
sweet  as  long  as  the  Spirit  dwells  in  it  in  power.  It  is  of  the 
utmost  importance,  then,  to  live  in  the  Spirit  and  walk  in  the 
Spirit,  that  we  may  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh. 

Temptation  does  not  only  come  from  without,  as  some 
say.  The  spark  may  be  flung  in  from  without  ;  but  there  is 
a  magazine  of  gunpowder  within.  The  match  would  be  struck 
on  the  lid  in  vain  if  there  were  not  a  prepared  surface  on  which 
it  would  ignite.  "  Every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn 
away  of  his  own  lust  and  enticed"  (James  i.  14).  And  it  is 
because  of  the  known  presence  of  these  evil  tendencies  within 
that  the  devil  watches  us  so  closely. 

As  long  as  we  are  kept  by  the  mighty  power  of  God,  we 
are  safe.  The  conflict  is  no  longer  within,  but  without.  And 
all  hell  shall  expend  itself  in  vain  on  the  nature  which  is  ex- 
periencing the  blessed  reign  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  makes 
us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  Yield  yourselves  to  God  ; 
receive  the  filling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  faith  ;  and  then  march 
to  assured  victory  through  the  power  of  the  Son  of  God. 

III.  Consolation  TO  THE  Tempted.— (i)  Your teinptations 
are  twt  an  tincotnmoti  experic7ice. — We  have  all  the  same  con- 
stitution ;  and  there  is  much  more  similarity  in  our  temptations 
than  we  suppose.  "There  hath  no  temptation  taken  you  but 
such  as  is  common  to  man."  "The  same  afflictions  are 
accomplished  in  your  brethren  that  are*  in  the  world." 

(2)  All  temptation  is  imdcr  the  restraint  of  God.— As  in  the 
case  of  Job,  Satan  cannot  tempt  us  without  God  being  first 
acquainted  with  his  designs.  And,  as  in  the  case  of  Peter, 
there  seems  to  be  almost  a  seeking  and  receiving  of  permission 
to  tempt  before  Satan  assails.  In  any  case,  no  temptation 
befals  us  greater  than  our  power  to  combat  and  overcome. 
And  we  are  permitted  to  be  tempted,  that  we  may  learn  to 
avail  ourselves  of  the  resources  of  which  we  might  otherwise 
be  unaware. 


212  Conflict. 

(3)  Snian  can  be  conquered. — Watch  and  pray.  Be  sober  in 
your  tastes  and  habits,  in  your  words  and  deeds.  Never 
neglect  to  abide  in  your  strong  fortress,  Christ.  Keep  with  the 
flock  of  God.  Nourish  your  souls  with  the  Word,  that  you  may 
be  healthy  and  strong.  Gird  on  the  whole  armour  of  God. 
Resist  the  first  insignificant  advances  of  the  foe.  Be  steadfast 
in  the  faith.  Look  instantly  to  Jesus  to  cast  the  panoply  of  his 
protection  around  you  ;  and  to  stand  between  you  and  your 
assailant,  as  a  shield  before  the  body  of  the  warrior.  Resist 
the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you.  Go  into  battle  assured  of 
success  :  this  your  talisman.  They  overcame  by  the  blood  of  ike 
Lamb  ;  this  your  battle-cry,  Jesus  saves.,  Jesus  saves. 


xxxi.-fb^  (Kail  to  mtxmi  (Blorvi^ 

"The  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  his  eternal  glory  by 
Christ  Jesus,  after  that  ye  have  suffered  awhile,  make  you  perfect,  stablish, 
strengthen,  settle  you." — i  Peter  v.  io. 

vv  [  TTJ^x  HAT  a  contrast  is  presented  between  the  attacks 


4, 


^V/f 


i 


'(AVAV/v      referred  to  in  the  previous  verses,  and  the  all- 
sufficient  grace,   which  lies   as   a  great   depth 

"K^f^ff^  *      beneath  this  ! 
(^\'\^  Why  should  we  fear  the  attacks  of  the  great 

Tj  adversary  of  souls,  so  long  as  the  God  of  all 

grace  is  ours  ?  There  is  no  kind  of  grace  we  can  need,  which 
does  not  reside  in  Him  ;  yea,  grace  on  grace,  so  that  when  one 
supply  is  exhausted  there  is  always  more  to  follow.  And  the 
attacks  of  Satan  are,  perhaps,  permitted  that  we  may  be  con- 
strained to  realize  and  avail  ourselves  of  the  stores  of  grace 
which  are  treasured  up  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  "  In  Him 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  ;  and  in  Him 
ye  are  made  full"  (Col.  ii.  9,  10,  R.V.). 

Edinburgh  Castle,  perched  on  its  grey  crags,  is  said  to  have 
been  captured  only  once  ;  and  then  through  a  shepherd  leading 
a  siTiall  storming  party  up  the  precipitous  western  cliffs,  which 
had  been  left  undefended  because  deemed  to  be  inaccessible. 
And  yet  there  was  benefit  even  in  that  apparent  disaster,  because 
it  indicated  a  weak  spot  in  the  defences  for  all  after-time,  and 
led  to  a  more  perfect  line  of  fortification.  So  we  may  be 
thankful  when  temptation  assails  us,  indicating  some  point 
of  our  character  which  needs  immediate  attention,  and  sum- 
moning us  to  look  into  the  Divine  storehouse  for  some  special 
and  unrealized  form  of  grace,  which  from  that  moment  is 
claimed  and  appropriated  by  the  exercise  of  faith. 

It  is  an  exceedingly  beautiful  title  :  "The  God  of  «//  grace!" 


214  ®lje  Call  to  (Bterttal  (Blorg. 

Illuminating  grace  for  the  seeker ;  justifying  grace  for  the 
believer ;  comforting  grace  for  the  bereaved  and  sorrowful ; 
strengthening  grace  for  the  weak  and  downtrodden  ;  sanctifying 
grace  for  the  unholy ;  living  grace,  and  dying  grace.  Bring 
hither  the  pitchers  of  your  need.  The  grace  of  God,  which  is 
his  unmerited  love,  will  conform  itself  to  their  special  shape, 
and  will  seem  to  be  just  fitted  to  your  exigencies  and  require- 
ments. The  ocean  is  known  by  several  names,  according  to 
the  shores  it  washes,  and  its  very  tints  vary  with  the  shades 
of  the  rocks  that  line  the  margin  of  its  bed  ;  but  it  is  the  same 
ocean,  and  its  waters  are  identical  in  every  place.  So  is  it  ever 
the  same  love  of  God,  though  each  needy  one  discovers  and 
admires  its  special  adaptation  to  his  need.  "The  God  of  all 
grace." 

(i)  Our  Destiny.  —  It  is  almost  too  marvellous  to  credit, 
and  yet  it  must  be  so,  that  He  has  called  us  imto  his  eternal 
glory.  He  is  the  giver  of  all  grace  ;  and  He  calls  us  to  all  his 
glory.  We  therefore  stand  in  his  grace,  and  rejoice  in  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God  (Rom.  v.  2). 

We  shall  ere  long  behold  that  glory  which  is  just  the  shining . 
forth,  in  all  their  loveliness,  of  the  manifested  attributes  of  the 
ever-blessed  God.  This  was  our  Saviour's  request,  which 
carried  with  it  the  certainty  of  realization.  "  Father,"  He 
said,  "  I  will  that  they  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me,  be  with 
Me  where  I  am,  that  they  may  behold  my  glory."  Not  on  his 
back  parts  only  shall  we  look,  as  Moses  did,  as  the  procession 
swept  down  the  mountain  pass  ;  nor  for  so  transient  a  moment 
as  the  disciples  beheld  his  glory  when  they  were  with  Him  on 
the  Holy  Mount  ;  but  face  to  face,  in  prolonged  and  steadfast 
fellowship.  The  Queen  of  Sheba,  contrasting  her  brief  visit 
to  Solomon's  court  with  the  lot  of  his  servants  who  lived  there, 
broke  into  exclamations  of  envy  at  their  lot.  "  Happy  are  thy 
men,  happy  are  these  thy  servants  which  stand  continually 
before  thee."  Conceive,  then,  what  our  lot  is  to  be  through 
endless  ages  ! 

Nor  shall  we  behold  it  only :  we  shall  share  it. — "The  glory 
which  Thou  gavest  Me  I  have  given  them."      Co-heirs  with 


"(Bilorg  in  tbc  iuir."  215 

Jesus  in  all  that  He  has  won  through  his  humihation  and 
death.  Sharers  in  his  unsearchable  riches  ;  participators  in 
his  unspeakable  and  triumphant  joy  ;  one  with  him  in  a  unity, 
which  in  its  mystic  circle  weaves  the  Deity  itself  into  oneness 
with  redeemed  men.  "  That  they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are 
one  :  I  in  them,  and  Thou  in  Me  ;  that  they  may  be  made 
perfect  in  one." 

And  this  glory  is  eternal,  not  as  to  the  length,  but  as  to  the 
quality  of  it.  For  it  is  difficult  to  speak  of  the  successions  of 
time,  when  considering  that  state  of  being  from  which  time 
is  expressly  eliminated.  The  word  certainly  means  more  than 
never-ending  being.  It  involves  conceptions  of  the  imperish- 
able, the  untainted,  the  altogether  satisfying,  the  Divine. 
Bread,  of  which  if  a  man  eats,  the  vast  appetite  of  his  spirit 
is  sufficed.  Joy,  of  which  he  can  never  tire.  Knowledge, 
which  is  beclouded  by  no  limiting  mystery.  Life,  which 
reaches  to  all  the  lengths  and  breadths  and  depths  and  heights 
of  that  spirit  which  God  has  made  in  the  image  of  his  own. 
Glory,  which  will  meet  and  far  surpass  the  loftiest  desires  and 
anticipations  which  have  ever  extorted  from  any  of  the  elect 
spirits  of  our  race  the  cry,  "  I  beseech  Thee,  show  me  thy 
glory." 

Tell  us  not,  then,  of  jasper  walls,  or  golden  streets,  or  flashing 
jewels.  These  will  no  more  suffice  us  than  jewels  will  com- 
pensate the  bride  for  the  absence  of  her  lord.  We  are  set  on 
attaining  the  glory  to  which  God  has  called  us  in  Jesus.  And 
by  his  dear  grace  we  shall  attain  it,  too  ;  for  we  have  already 
received  his  grace,  which  is  glory  in  the  bud.  Nor  would  our 
God  mock  us  with  the  foretaste  and  earnest  unless  he  were  pre- 
pared to  consummate  all  his  grace  with  all  his  glory. 

Oh,  who  will  heed  this  call,  which  is  yet  sounding  through 
the  world,  but  which  may  soon  cease  ?  Surely  the  sons  of  men 
cannot  realize  what  obedience  to  it  involves.  They  think  more 
of  what  they  must  give  up  than  of  what  they  are  to  receive. 
But  if  they  would  reverse  this  process,  and  think  more  of  what 
they  are  certain  to  receive  in  Jesus  Christ,  methinks  they  would 
leave  all  else,  without  one  anxious  thought,  in  order  to  follow 
whither  such  delights  entice. 


2i6  %ljt  (Kail  to  (BUvml  (Slor^. 

II.  Our  Pathway  Thither.— "After  that  ye  have  sufifered 
a  little  while."  Sufferi7ig  is  inevitable.  Through  much  tribu- 
lation we  must  pass  to  our  reward  on  high.  No  cross,  no 
crown  ;  no  Gethsemane,  no  emptied  grave  ;  no  cup  of  sorrow,  no 
chalice  of  joy ;  no  cry  of  forsakenness,  no  portion  with  the 
great,  or  spoil  with  the  strong.  All  who  suffer  are  not  neces- 
sarily glorified  ;  but  none  are  glorified  who  have  not  somehow 
suffered.  We  must  drink  of  his  cup,  and  be  baptized  with  his 
baptism,  if  we  would  sit  right  and  left  of  the  King.  The  comet 
that  stands  longest  nearest  to  the  sun  must  have  plunged 
furthest  into  the  abyss. 

Let  sufferers  take  heart  !  If  only  their  sufferings  are  not 
self-inflicted  ;  if  t^ey  do  not  result  from  their  own  mistakes 
and  sins  ;  if  they  arise  from  that  necessary  antagonism  to  sin 
and  the  present  world  into  which  close  following  of  the 
Crucified  must  necessarily  bring  any  one  of  us  ;  if  they  are 
borne,  not  only  submissively,  but  with  the  heart's  choice,  as  of 
those  that  delight  to  do  the  will  of  God — then  each  pang  is  a 
milestone  marking  their  way  onwards  to  the  goal  of  light  and 
glory. 

Suffering  is  necessary  to  our  characters. — The  Apostle  does 
not  for  a  moment  wish  his  converts  spared  from  the  ordeal. 
Nothing  short  of  necessity  would  ever  lead  God  to  expose  us 
to  the  fire.  But  in  no  other  way  can  our  truest  bliss  be  achieved. 
In  no  other  school-house  are  the  lessons  of  obedience  so 
acquired  as  in  that  kept  by  Sorrow.  The  Lord  Himself  was 
once  a  scholar  there,  and  carved  his  name  on  the  hard  and 
comfortless  boards.  In  no  other  ordeal  can  we  lose  so  much 
dross  ;  drop  so  much  chaff,  learn  so  much  of  our  own  nothing- 
ness ;  be  drawn  so  close  to  his  companionship  ;  or  be  taught 
such  true  estimates  of  the  comparative  values  of  things,  weigh- 
ing the  present  against  the  future,  till  we  feel  that  it  is  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  to  be  revealed. 

Suffering  is  limited. — At  the  most,  it  is  for  but  a  little  while. 
Remember  how  often  the  Lord  Jesus  repeated  the  words,  it  is 
only  "a  little  while"  (John  xvi.  16-19).  It  was  a  note  on  which 
his  fingers  lingered,  as  if  loth  to  leave  it.  Compared  with  all 
the  future,  the  longest  life  of  suffering  is  only  for  a  moment ; 


®ur  llurfttrc  ttt  tht  libiitc  |fifc.  217 

and,  contrasted  with  the  weight  of  glory,  the  heaviest  trials  are 
light.  Let  us  not  look  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at 
those  which  are  not  seen.  The  hills  which  would  daunt  the 
traveller  seem  diminutive  when  they  are  seen  lying  about  the 
feet  of  some  soaring  Alp.  Weeping  can  only  stay  for  the  brief 
summer  night,  and  in  the  early  twilight  must  hasten  veiled 
away  ;  because  joy  cometh  in  the  morning,  bringing  the  herald- 
beam  of  the  long,  happy  summer  day,  on  which  night  can  never 
fall  or  draw  her  dusky  veil. 

When  once  that  glory  breaks  upon  us,  the  separations  and 
misunderstandings  and  agonies  of  time  will  be  no  more 
remembered  than  a  pin's  prick  is  recalled  by  the  soldier  on  the 
day  of  his  public  welcome  and  decoration. 

"  And  when  we  gain  the  shore  at  last, 
We  shall  not  count  the  billows  past. " 

III.  Our  Nurture  in  the  Divine  Life.— All  our  hope 
must  be  in  God.  We  are  not  to  concern  ourselves  to  cope  with 
the  difficulties  of  our  growth  in  grace,  or  to  fret  about  what 
seems  to  be  our  slow  progress.  If  only  we  are  willing,  trustful, 
and  obedient,  God  will  make  Himself  responsible  for  all  the 
rest.     "  God  shall  Hi7melf  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen  you " 

(R.V.). 

He  shall  perfect — z>..  He  shall  put  you  in  joint,  so  that  his 
will  may  work  through  you,  without  let  or  hindrance  ;  as  the 
will  of  each  human  being  operates  consciously  through  any 
part  of  our  marvellous  nature. 

He  shall  stablish  — i.e.,  He  shall  found  you  so  massively  on 
the  Rock  of  the  person  and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  when 
the  rain  descends,  and  the  floods  come,  and  the  winds  blow, 
and  beat  upon  you,  you  may  not  fall,  because  rooted  and 
grounded  in  Him. 

He  shall  stretjgthen — i.e.,  He  may  not  take  away  the  suffer- 
ing or  the  temptation,  but  He  will  give  more  grace,  com- 
municating his  own  strength  ;  so  that  the  soul  may  even  glorify 
God  for  infirmity  and  trial,  and  say  gladly  :  "  The  Lord  is  my 
light  and  my  salvation  ;  whom  shall  I  fear  ?  the  Lord  is  the 
strength  of  my  life  ;  of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid  ? " 


2i8  ^\ft  Call  to  (Bhvmi  d^lax^. 

How  safe  and  strong  then  may  we  be,  if  only  we  will  go 
again  and  again  to  the  God  of  all  grace,  claiming,  with  holy 
boldness,  grace  to  help  us  in  time  of  need  ;  and  believing  that 
it  is  to  us  not  according  to  our  feeling  but  our  faith  !  It  is  not 
probable  that  Elisha  felt  any  different  as  he  turned  back  from 
the  chariot  of  fire,  which  had  swept  in  between  him  and  Elijah. 
He  looked  and  felt  as  in  the  morning  of  that  day  ;  but  a  vast 
change  had  passed  over  him,  which  only  awaited  the  River 
Jordan  to  call  it  forth  into  marvellous  manifestation.  So  we 
may  not  be  always  conscious  of  the  vast  changes  which  are 
being  gradually  effected  within  us  in  answer  to  our  faith  ;  but 
when  we  approach  the  bank  of  some  foaming  river  of  difficulty 
or  temptation,  our  behaviour  and  victory  will  open  the  lips  of 
onlookers  to  exclaim,  "  Lo,  God  is  here." 

Let  us  give  Him  glory  !  Do  not  hesitate  to  tell  Him  what 
you  think  of  Him.  Amid  all  the  hatred,  and  blasphemy,  and 
misunderstanding  of  his  foes,  let  us  blend  voice  and  heart  in 
ascribing  to  Him  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever  !  Let 
the  notes  rise  higher  and  higher  as  life  climbs  up  towards  its 
goal ;  until  they  are  merged  in  the  ocean  of  praise,  the  billows 
of  which  smite  against  his  throne,  breaking  into  the  spray  of  a 
thousand  songs  !  Thus  may  it  be  "for  ever  and  ever."    Amen. 


a  selection  from 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company's 

catalogue 


WORKS  BY  DR.  A.  J.  GORDON. 


Dr.  Gotdo7i  is  a  writer  with  whom  to  differ  is  better  and  muf* 
suggestive  than  to  agree  with  some  others.  He  loves  the  truth, 
he  gives  his  readers  much  that  is  trueand  deeply  of  theessence  oj 
Christianty.—TuE  Independent. 

The  Holy  Spirit  in  Missions.  lamo.,  cloth,  gilt 
top |r.25 

A  new  volume  by  this  author  is  always  welcowed.  The 
theme  of  this  new  work,  as  treated  by  Dr.  Gordon,  is  s>ire  to  b« 
full  of  deepest  interest. 

Ecce  Venit;  Behold  He  Cometh.  Paper,  nei,  50c.; 
cloth. I1.25 

It  is  impossible  to  read  this  book  without  being  stimulated 
by  it  and  getting  higher  and  fresher  views  ot  some  aspects  ol 
Christianity  which  are  perhaps  dwelt  on  less  than  they  should 
be." — Independent. 

In  Christ;  or,  The  Believer's  Union  V^ith  His  Lord, 

Seventh  Edition.    Paper,  «^^,  35c.;  cloth Iioc 

"We  do  not  remember  since  Thomas  a  Kempis  a  book  sc 
thoroughly  imbued  with  a  great  personal  love  to  Christ.  It  is 
evidently  the  happy  result  of  hours  of  high  communion  with 
Him." — Boston  Courier. 

The  Ministry  of  Healing;  or,  Miracles  of  Cure  in 
All  Ages.  Third  Edition.  Paper,  net,  50c. ;  cloth  $1.2$ 
"An  interesting  and  thoughtful  work.  Dr.  Gordon  mar- 
shals together  witnesses  from  all  ages  and  all  classes  in  favor  ol 
hisbelief  that  cures  may  still  be  wrought  through  prayer."— 
British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

The  Two=Fold  Life;  or,  Christ's  Work  for  Us,  and 

Christ's  Work  in  Us.  Paper,  «^/,  50c.;   cloth..  $1.25 

"Distinguished    by  exquisite  purity  of  thought,  by  deep 

spiritual  insight,  and  by  great  strength  of  practical  argument 

The  work  is  one  of  great  spiritual  beauty  and  helpfulness." — 

Baptist  Magazine. 

Grace  and  Glory;  Sermons  for  the  Life  That  Now 
Is  and  That  Which  Is  to  Come.  Paper,  net,  50c.; 
cloth .|i.5o 

"Here  we  have  power  without  sensationalism;  calm  thought, 
living  and  earnest,  expressed  in  forcible  language;  the  doctrine 
orthodox,  evangelical,  practical.  We  shall  be  surprised  if  these 
discourses  are  not  reprinted  by  an  English  house." — C.  H, 
Sptirgeon. 

The  First  Thing  in  the  World;  or,  The  Primacy 

of  Faith.     Vellum  paper  covers $  .20 

Cheaper  edition,  popular  vellum  series 10 

"There  was  a  fear  lest  theprominence  given  the  exceeding 
beauty  and  umbrageousness  of  "Love"  should  overshadow  the 
sister  grace  of  "Faith,"  but  Dr.  Gordon  has  rescued  us  from  the 
danger  of  forgetting  that  faith  in  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  our 
Christian  \i[e."— Christian  at  IVork. 

CBMAM.    Fleming  H.  Revell  Company.    MawmM. 


Books  of  Illustration. 


For  Pulpit  and  Platform;  for  Preachers  and  Teacher*. 

Seed  Corn  for  the  Sower;  or,  rhoughts,  Themes 
and  Illustrations,  for  Pulpit  and  Platform  and  for 
Home  Readings,  by  Rev.  C.  Perrin,  Ph.  D.     i2mo., 

cloth I1.50 

Although  «o  less  than  two  hundred  aui/iors  have  heen  drawn 
upon  to  supply  the  material  for  this  work,  it  is  believ  d  that  the 
great  mass  of  illustrative  matter  will  be  found  entirely  new  and 
fresh — embracing  nearly  400  pages  of  original  and  carefully 
selected  illustrative  excerpts  covering  a  wide  range  of  subjects. 
"To  teachers  and  all  engaged  in  Bible  instruction,  it  will 
prove  a  volume  of  great  help  and  usefulness  and  furnish  ready 
to  their  hand  many  a  nail  with  which  to  fasten  in  a  sure  place 
the  truths  they  may  desire  to  drive  home." — The  Christian  at 
IVork. 

Feathers  for  Arrows;  or,  Illustrations  for  Preachers 
and   Teachers,    by    Rev.     Charles    H.    Spurgeon. 

i2mo.,  cloth c |i.oo 

"The  work  covers  a  wide  range  of  subjects.  The  metaphors 
are  always  striking  and  frequently  brilliant,  while  the  truths 
that  they  illustrate  are  such  as  have  always  formed  the  staple 
of  Mr.  Spurgeou's  discourses.  A  choicer  collection  of  illustra- 
tions we  do  not  know." — The  Freeman. 

Spurgeon's  Gems.   Being  Brilliant  Passages  from 

his  Discourses.     i2mo.,  cloth $r.oo 

A  series  of  earnest  thoughts  and  graphic  pictures,  all  of 
them  revealing  the  true  greatness  of  the  preacher's  concep- 
tions, his  individuality  and  strength.  Gems  of  great  brilliancy, 
which  will  make  a  permanent  impression  upon  the  mind  of  the 
reader. 

Gleanings  Among    the  'Sheaves »  by  Rev.  C.   H. 

Spurgeou.     Cloth,  gilt  top I  .60 

"These  extracts  are  quite  Spurgeonic— racy,  rich  and  rare, 
both  as  to  style  and  matter;  full  of  exquisite  consolation,  faith- 
ful advice,  clear  analogies,  poetic  touches,  and  glorious  old 
gospel.  We  do  not  wonder  that  eight  thousand  copies  were 
solcl  on  the  day  of  publication  and  trust  that  eight  times  eighty 
thousand  will  find  their  way  to  the  religious  p»blic."—;F<f«X:/jt 
Review. 

Scripture  Itself  the  Illustrator:  A  manual  of  illus- 

♦    trations  gathered  from  scriptural   figures,  phrases, 

types,  derivations,  chronology,  texts,  etc.,  by  Rev. 

G.  S.  Bowes.     i2mo.,  cioth I1.25 

Information  and  Illustrations  for  Preachers  and 
Teachers.  Helps  gathered  from  facts,  figures,  anec- 
dotes and  books,  for  sermons,  lectures  and  ad- 
dresses, by  Rev.  G.  S.  Bowes.     i2mo.,  cloth.. |i. 25 

oaaoAWx    Fleming  H.  Rsvell  Company,    ssm  »w% 


Books  of  Travel  and  Research 

Ten  Years'  Digging  in  Egypt,   1881-1891,  by  "W. 

M.  Flinders  Petrie.     With  a  map  and   116  illustra- 
tions.    i2mo.,  cloth Si. 50 

"The  book  has  a  special  interest  in  the  confirmation  and  the 
illustration  it  affords  as  to  the  high  condition  of  civilization 
existing  in  a  land  so  intimatelj;  interwoven  with  Biblical  history. 
The  narrative  is  pleasantly  written,  and  the  illustrations  are  not 
only  admirably  executed,  but  greatly  help  us  ia  realizing  what 
they  represent." — N.  Y.  Observer. 

"Mr.  W.  M.  F.  Petrie,  the  well-known  Egyptologist,  has  pre- 
pared a  concise  popularization  of  the  results  of  his  scholarly 
labors— its  clear  and  compact  pages  are  those  ot  a  trustworthy 
authority — the  story  told  is  really  fascinating." — S.  S.  Times. 

The  Ainu  of  Japan.  The  Religion,  Superstitions., 
and  General  History  of  the  Hairy  Aborigines  of 
Japan,  by  Rev.  John  Batchelor.  With  80  illustra- 
tions.    8vo.,  cloth ....I1.50 

"The  author  has  a  subject  seldom  treated  in  our  literature  and 
he  communicates  his  rather  exclusive  information  in  fascinating 
and  instructive  fashion.  His  style  is  very  vivid." — Golden  Rule. 
"The  Ainu  are  the  aborigines  of  Japan,  and  now  number 
only  some  sixteen  or  seventeen  thousand.  This  record  of  their 
character  and  customs  is  effectively  given,  and  the  text  is  sup- 
plemented by  numerous  engravings," — N.  IV.  Christian  AdvQ- 
cati. 

A  Winter  in  North  China,  by  Rev.  T.  M.  Morris. 
With  introduction  by  Rev.  R.  Glover,  D.  D.,  and  a 

map.    i2mo.,  cloth $1.50 

"Contains  much  matter  of  general  interest,  and  many 
pleasant  sketches  of  China  and  the  Chinese.  An  intelligent, 
recent  and  grandly  encouraging  report." — The  Independent. 

The  Story  of  Uganda,  and  the  Victoria  Nyanza 
Mission.  By  S.  G.  Stock.  With  a  map  and  illus- 
trations.    i2mo.,  cloth  $1-25 

"The  Story  of  Mackay  is  given  with  fulness  and  power; 
there  are  added  also  the  stories  of  the  martyr  Bishop  Hanning- 
toa  and  his  fateful  journey,  and  of  Bishops  Parker  and  Tucker, 
»f  the  other  mission,  together  with  a  sketch  of  these  missions 
under  the  brutal  King  Mwanga  since  Mackay's  untimely 
death."— 7%e  Golden  Rule. 

The  Fifth  Gospel.  The  Land  where  Jesus  Lived. 
By  Rev.  J.  M.  P.  Otts,  LL.  D.  With  4  maps.  i2mo., 
cloth $1. 25 

"Whatever  other  books  one  may  have  read  on  Palestine,  he 
will  find  new  pleasure  and  instruction  from  the  perusal  of  thl» 
one." — Central  Presbyterian. 

For  list  of  "By-Paths  of  Bible  Knowleds^e,"  sea  cpedal 
catalogue. 

Complete  list  of  Ilissionary  Books  <ent  free  on  appHcatlMk 
">i  — 

AoeAoo.    Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,    mw  toss. 


BOOKS  FOR  YOUNG  HEN 

Moral  Muscle  and  How  to  Use  It,  by  Frederick 
Atkins.  A  Brotherly  Chat  with  Young  Men.  ...j^  .50 
"This  is  positively  the  best  book  for  youu^  men  that  we 
have  seen.  It  looks  the  facts  of  young  men's  lives  full  in  the 
face,  and  proclaims  the  gospel  of  industrj',  perseverance,  self- 
control,  and  manly  Christianity.  We  can  certify  that  no  one 
will  find  it  stupid." — Si.  Andrew's  Cross. 

First  Battles  and  How  to  Fight  Them,  by  F.  A. 

Atkins.    Friendly  Chats  with   Young    Men... 1,50 
"It  is  true  in  its  substance,  attractive   in    its  style,   and   ad- 
mirable in  its  spirit.     I  heartily  commend  this  little  volume." — 
Rev.  John  Hall,  D.D. 

The  Spiritual  Athlete  and  How  He  Trains,  by  W. 

A,  Bodell.     Introduction  by  Rev.B,  Fay  Mills.. I  .50 
A  work  for  young  men,  pithy,  pointed  and  practical. 
"Its  power  and  value  lie  in  the  consistent  carrying  out  of 

the  comparison  between  physical  and  spiritual  training." — The 

Independent. 

Brave  and  True,  by  J.  Thain    Davidson.        Talks 

to  Young  Men f  -So 

"This  is  one  of  the  books  the  wide  distribution  of  whirl, 
can  not  be  too  greatly  desired." — Ptesbyterian  Journal, 

Thoroughness,  by  Dr.  J.  Thain  Davidson.  Talks 
to  Young  Men.    i2mo.,  cloth %  ,•,(> 

"Dr.  Davidson  knows  young  men  and  how  to  talk  to  them. 
He  is  ever  racy,  fresh  and  practical  and  in  this,  his  latest  issue, 
no  less  so.  We  warmlj'  commend  the  book  to  workers  among 
young  men." — The  Christian. 

The  Secret  of  Success;  or  Finger  Posts  on  the 
Highway  of  Life,  by  John  T.  Dale.    Introductio* 

by  Hon.  John  V.  F^arwell.      8vo.,  cloth Ir.50 

"This  volume  is  a  perfect  thesaurus  of  maxims  and  ot 
inspiriting  incidents  relating  to  attainment.  It  is  a  book  of 
counsels  to  young  men  and  women  who  desire  to  achieve  what 
their  generation  has  a  right  to  expect  of  them." — Golden  Rule. 

Turn  Over  a  New  Leaf,  and  Other  Words  to  Young 

People    at  School,     by   B.    B.  Comegys f  .50 

•These  talks  are  on  a  great  many  every-day  topics  of  great 
importance.  They  are  treated  so  sensibly  and  so  practically 
and  with  such  a  kindly  spirit,  that  it  would  be  well  if  a  copy 
might  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  every  one  of  the  young  people 
of  the  land."— //(';  aid  and  Pieshyter. 

The  Fall  of  the  Staincliffes.  Prize  Story  on  the 
Evils  of  Gambling,  by  A.  Colbeck.  Paper, 
25  cents;    cloth 75 

"It  depicts  in  a  clear,  forcible  way  the  terrible  evils  of  intem- 
perance and  of  gambling  in  all  its  forms.  It  is  not  a  'goody 
goody'  book  but  a  good  book." — Public  Opinion. 

OHicAoo.     Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,     nkw  tobx. 


NEIV  AND   IMPROVED   EDITION. 

Bible  History 

BY 

Rev.  ALFRED  EDERSHEIM,  D.D.,  Ph.D. 

12M0.  CLOTH. 

7  Volnmes        Each,  $1.00        The  Set,  Boxed,  $6.00 


1  The  World  Before  the  Flood,  and  History  of  the 

Patriarchs. 

2  The  Exodus  and  Wanderings  in  the  Wilderness. 

3  Israel  in  Canaan  Under  Joshua  and  the  Judges. 

4  Israel  Under  Samuel,  Saul  and  David,  to  the  Birth 

OF  Solomon. 

5  Israel  and  Judah  from  the  Birth  of  Solomon  to 

the  Reign  of  Ahab. 

6  Israel  and  Judah  from  Ahab  to  the  Decline  of 

the  Two  Kingdoms. 

7  Israel  and  Judah  from  the  Decline  of  the  Two 

Kingdoms  to  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian 
Captivity.  Containing  Full  Scripture  Refer- 
ences and  Subject  Indexes  to  the  Whole  Series. 


They  are  pre-eminently  suggestive  books.  They  excite  in- 
terest, they  stimjtlate  inquiry ,  and  they  point  the  "way  to  fields 
of  thought  that  are  entirely  re7u.  or  to  old  fields  that  shitte  in 
neiv  richness  and  beauty  firotn  the  light  that  is  thrown  upon 
than.  There  is  abundance  ofi  material  fior  attractive  and 
profitable  sermons  in  the  histories  and  the  personal  sketches 
in  the  Old  Testa7nent.  To  ministers  and  teachers  they  vjill  be 
found  to  be  a  real  Biblical  treasury. 


PRESS  NOTICES. 
The  Presbyterian. 

"  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  author  was  qualified  in  a  very- 
remarkable  way  to  prepare  such  a  history  as  this.  .  .  . 
Dr.  Edersheim's  intimate  familiarity  with  Jewish  life  and 
modes  of  thought,  and  his  ability  to  say  so  well  what  he 
knows,  enable  him  to  paint  with  great  vividness  and  dis- 
tinctness the  scenes  he  describes  and  the  events  which  he 
narrates.  ,  .  We  heartily  recommend  it  to  our  readers." 
The  Clergyman's  Magazine. 

"  In  the  easiest,  simplest  way  imaginable,  in  unostenta- 
tious, popular  language,  he  embodies  the  results  of  a  large 
literature." 
The  Literary  World. 

"  These  books  will  be  a  great  help  to  many  readers  of 
the  Bible." 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

New  York  Chicago  Toronto 


DATE  DUE 


MftMUMitftl''^^^'^*^ 


