BX  6333  .S6  T78  1875 
Spurgeon,  C.  H.  1834-1892. 
Trumpet  calls  to  Christian 
energy 


TRUMPET     CALLS 


CHRISTIAN     ENERGY. 


TRUMPET    CALLS 


CHRISTIAN    ENERGY 


^  (^Mniwn  oi  ^ttmoxx^ 


PREACHED 


ON  SUNDAY  AND  THUESDAY  EVENINGS 


METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE, 


C.    H.   SPURGEilK    .. 

/  x;     ■  ■    •  --     '>  X 


PASSMORE  AND  ALABASTER  4,  PATERNOSTER  BITILDINGS. 

187-5. 


LONDOX : 

PASSMORE   AND   ALABASTER,    STEAM   PRINTERS, 

LITTLE  BRITAIN,   E.C. 


ADVERTISEMEN 


This  volume  is  issued  as  a  sequel  to  '*  Types  and 
Emblems."  It  is  the  second  of  the  series,  and  contains  a 
selection  of  Sermons  all  addressed  with  one  particular  aim, 
to  arouse  the  energy  and  direct  the  efforts  of  Christian 
ivorJcers.  The  fact  that  months,  and  eyen  years  in  some 
cases,  intervened  between  their  delivery,  may  tend  rather 
to  enhance  than  to  detract  from  their  present  interest.  By 
such  persistent  endeavours  to  stimulate  the  cntei-prise  and 
develop  the  talents  of  Church  members,  the  Pastor  of  the 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  has  enlisted  a  noble  army  of 
valiant  labourers,  and  banded  them  together  in  various 
societies  ;  training  them  to  handle  the  Sword  and  to  use 
the  Troivel  for  the  defence  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  building  up 
of  the  Church.  Our  readers  will  find  here  a  fair  sample 
of  the  appeals  and  persuasives  by  which  a  continuous  succes- 
sion of  fi-esh  volunteers  has  been  recruited  into  the  Home 
Mission  service.  Although  no  special  order  has  been 
observed  in  the  arrangement  of  these  Sermons,  the  first  and 
the  last  each  tells  its  own  story.  The  one  was  a  cnj  for 
Revival,  before  the  manifold  agencies  now  so  vigorously 
carried  forward  had  been  brought  into  operation  ;  the  other 
was  a  solemn  reflection  prompted  by  the  closing  Sabbath  of 
the  past  year,  when  the  visit  of  the  American  Evangelists  to 
our  Metropolis  was  in  prospect. 

That  the  blessing  which  attended  the  preaching  may 
continue  to  follow  the  circulation  of  these  Sermons  is  the 
earnest  hope  of-  ^^^    PUBLISHERS. 


CONTENTS, 


PAGE 

An  Exciting  Enquiry         -         -         -        -         -         -         -         -.1 

Election  no  Discouragement  -___--  22 

The  Churcli  the  World's  Hope   -------42 

Silken  Cords         ---------  64  C 

The  True  Aim  of  Preaching      -------80 

A  Vision  of  the  Field   --------  97 

The  Joy  of  Harvest  -         -         -         -         -        -        -        -113 

God's  Glory  in  the  Building  up  of  Zion  -        -         -        -  128 

Lukewannness  ---------     146 

Restraining  Prayer       --------  165 

Holiness  Demanded  »_------     185 

John  Mark ;  or,  Haste  in  Religion  -----  205 

To  the  Recreant  of  our  Ranks  -------     225 

Good  Conversation        --------  240 

Dumb  Singers  ___-_----     256 

The  New  Song  and  the  Old  Story  ------  279 

Lame  Sheep     ----------    300 

Brief  Life  is  here  our  Portion        -        -        -   .     -        -        -  325 


?J 


l^n  %t(iim  %i\ti\m^ 


*'And  when  he  was  come  into  Jerusalem,  all  the  city  was  iiiovod^ 
saying,  Who  is  this  ?" — ]\Iatthew  xxi.  10. 


H,  that  something  would  move  this  great  city 
of  ours  !  I  am  afraid  that  at  least  one-third 
of  our  popukition  is  setthng  down  in  stolid 
indifference  to  all  religion.  It  is  not  that 
there  are  thousands  of  professed  infidels, 
but  without  making  the  profession  of  being 
so,  infidels  they  really  are.  It  is  not  that  they 
Late  the  gospel — they  do  not  care  to  hear  it,  or  to  know 
what  it  teaches.  They  have  not  enough  interest  in  it 
to  enter  the  sanctuary  even  for  once  in  their  lives, 
unless  influenced  by  fashion  or  by  fear  they  may  attend 
some  ceremonial  observance.  I  think  we  can  hardly 
form  a  conception  of  the  fearful  heathenism  of  this  great 
metropolis.  You  might  go  down  street  after  street 
and  find  that  the  larger  proportion  of  the  peo],)le, 
so  far  from  making  any  profession  of  religion,  did  not 
even  enter  a  place  of  worship,  and  knew  nothing  more 
than  what  the  city  missionary  or  the  Bible-woman  may 
have  been  helped  to  teach  them!  We  are  getting 
into  a  very,  very,  very  sad  state  of  things ;  we  want 


Christian  Energy. 

sometliiiig  or  other  that  ^vill  get  at  the  masses,  and  con- 
strain the  city  to  be  moved.  The  theatre  services 
which  have  been  lately  attempted  have  no  doubt  proved 
a  great  blessing ;  the  opening  of  cathedrals  was  a  step 
in  the  right  direction;  but  ever^^body  can  see  that  the 
effect  of  such  departure  from  the  ordinary  routine  is 
naturally  transient.  There  w^ill  be  no  greater  attrac- 
tion in  a  theatre  than  there  will  be  in  a  chapel  or 
church,  if  the  same  gospel  is  preached,  after  the  novelty 
of  its  having  been  preached  there  shall  have  worn  off. 
We  can  no  more  expect  to  see  cathedrals  crowded  long 
together  now  than  we  might  have  expected  it  twenty 
years  ago.  Tlie  thing  is  good  as  an  expedient,  but  it 
must  be  temporary  in  its  results.  We  shall  want  some- 
thing greater  than  this  before  we  shall  get  at  the  masses 
of  London.  This  is  only,  as  it  were,  a  little  hammer; 
we  want  a  hammer  more  massive  than  that  of  Thor 
to  strike  this  island,  to  make  it  shake  from  end  to 
end.  When  you  have  three  millions  of  people  herded 
together  you  are  not  to  move  them  by  simply  opening 
half-a-dozen  theatres,  or  by  crowding  a  cathedral,  or  by 
filling  some  large  place  of  worship.  What  a  hopeful 
sign  it  w^ould  be,  even  if  people  were  excited  against 
religion !  Really  I  would  sooner  that  they  intelligently 
hated  it  than  that  they  were  stolidly  indifferent  to  it. 
A  man  who  has  got  enough  thought  about  him  to 
oppose  the  truth  of  God  fs  a  more  hopeful  subject 
for  ministry  than  the  man  who  does  not  think  at  all. 
We  cannot  get  on  with  logs ;  we  feel  that  we  could 
brace  up  our  nerves  to  the  charge  amidst  men  possessed 
with  devils,  while  we  have  the  gospel  to  cast  the  devils  out. 
It  is  when  men  have  no  spirit  at  all,  but  are  simply  dull, 


An  Exciting  Enquiry,  3 

lumplsli,  thoughtless  logs,  we  cannot  get  on  with  them. 
For  my  part,  I  do  not  regret  the  activity  of  Puseyism 
and  of  Popery  just  now.  Though  I  dread  it  as  an 
awful  evil  in  itself,  I  am  thankful  for  everything  that 
will  relieve  the  awful  stillness  of  religious  stagnation. 
If  it  will  only  stir  us  up  to  oppose  it,  if  it  will  only 
make  the  true  Protestant  spirit  of  England  come  out,  I 
shall  be  grateful  for  the  sanitary  results,  however  much 
I  deplore  the  devastating  pestilence.  We  want  some- 
thing that  shall  again  rouse  this  city,  and  move  it  from 
end  to  end.  The  text  seems  to  me  to  tell  us  what  will 
do  it.  Question  ! — What  is  that  which  will  stir  the 
whole  of  London,  as  it  stirred  Jerusalem f  Answer! — 
A  reigning  Saviour  riding  in  triumph.  Jesus  Christ 
never  moved  Jerusalem  till  he  mounted  on  that  ass, 
till  they  cast  their  garments  in  the  pathway,  and  strewed 
the  branches,  and  cried,  *'  Hosannah  !  "  Then  it  was, 
as  he  rode  in  triumph  King  of  the  Jews,  that  the  city 
was  stirred.  O  that  we  had  a  reigning  Saviour  more 
distinctly  recognised  in  all  our  churches  !  There  is  no 
use  in  mincing  matters  or  hiding  our  shame.  The 
shout  of  a  King  is  not  in  the  midst  of  tl\Q  church  at 
large.  The  ancient  glory  which  rested  upon  the  Lord's 
chosen  has  in  a  great  measui'e  departed.  "  Write  ye 
Ichabod,  for  the  glory  is  departed."  We  have  not  now 
the  lighting  down  of  the  mighty  arm,  nor  the  strength 
of  a  present  God,  as  once  we  had.  The  world  knows 
very  little  about  the  church,  and  cares  very  little  about 
her,  so  long  as  Christ  does  not  reign  in  her  palaces. 
Unfurl  the  flag,  proclaim  his  entry,  make  known  his 
residence,  and  forthwith  "the  kings  of  the  earth  set 
themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel  too;ether  ao-ainst 


4  Christian  Energy/, 

the  Lord  and  against  his  anointed,  saying,  Let  us  break 
their  bands  asunder  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us.'' 
What  was  that  church  which  disturbed  the  dark  ages  ? 
Why,  a  church  made  up  of  men  who  hazarded  their  Kves 
unto  the  death — men  who  stood  up  and  preached  in  the 
dead  of  night  to  the  few  who  w^ere  bokl  enough  to 
gather  to  hear  them — men  who  at  other  times  coukl 
beard  the  tyrant,  and  stand  face  to  face  with  cardinal 
or  pope,  and  speak  the  truth,  come  what  would.  These 
were  men  who  had  a  reigning  Saviour  in  their  midst ; 
yet,  few  and  feeble,  that  gallant  host  subdued  the 
world;  the  ^tican  trembled;  the  words  they  spake, 
sustained  by  tbe  character  they  bore,  fell  like  thunder- 
bolts about  it.  Would  you  enquire,  my  brethren,  for 
the  simple  but  saintly  servants  of  God  who  brought  a 
Hef  ormation  into  England^  They  were  men  wdio  recog- 
nised a  reigning  Saviour.  The  church  was  represented 
by  those  in  whose  hearts  Jesus  Christ  really  did  dwell — 
such  men  as  Wycliffe  and  his  successors.  From 
market-place  to  market-place  they  went,  with  but  half 
pages  or  whole  pages  of  the  Word  of  God,  as  fast  as 
they  could  be  printed ;  they  read  them  at  the  market- 
cross  ;  they  went  on  from  place  to  place,  preaching  the 
pure,  unadulterated  gospel,  in  homely  language,  with 
fiery  tongues,  and  soon  they  set  all  England  in  a  blaze. 
And  w^ho  w^ere  they  in  later  days,  in  the  last  century, 
who  awoke  the  slumbering  chui'ch  ?  They  were  men 
who  had  Christ  reigning  in  them ;  such  men  as  Whit- 
field and  the  Wesleys — men  who  bowed  before  the 
dignity  of  Jesus,  and  said — 

*'  Shall  we,  for  fear  of  feeble  men, 
The  Spirit's  course  in  us  restrain  ?  " 


An  JEd'citing  Enquiry,  5 

Awed  by  no  mortal's  frown,  would  tliey  smooth  their 
toncrues  and  fashion  their  words  to  win  human  esteem  ? 
On  the  hill-tops,  in  the  churchyards,  by  the  road-sides, 
anywhere,  everywhere,  they  unfurled  the  banner  of  a 
reigning  Saviour,  and  straightway  the  darkness  of 
England  gave  place  to  glorious  light.  And  now,  could 
we  only  get  the  church  of  God  to  awake,  we  should 
soon  have  the  whole  city  moved.  Let  our  ministers 
preach  the  gospel,  or  let  them  preach  it  with  something 
like  force ;  instead  of  treating  us  to  moral  essa}- s  and 
elaborately-prepared  discom'ses,  let  them  speak  their 
hearts  out  in  such  words  as  God  would  give  them  on  the 
occasion :  let  the  members  of  the  churclf  back  them  up 
by  vehement  zeal,  earnest  prayer,  and  incessant  labours  ; 
we  should  want  nothing  else  to  stir  this  city  from  end 
to  end.  Oh !  to  see  the  Saviour  riding  in  the  midst, 
;and  to  hear  the  acclamations,  while  joyous  converts 
shout,  like  the  young  children  of  old,  "  Hosannah. 
Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  !  " 
The  old  attractions  of  the  cross  have  not  departed. 
You  cannot  preach  Christ  and  not  get  a  congregation. 
Be  it  "the  Christ"  whom  ye  preach  honestly  and  preach, 
fully,  the  people  must  come  to  hear.  Though  they 
hate  it  and  loathe  it,  they  will  come  again ;  they  will 
turn  on  their  heel,  and  say,  *'  We  cannot  bear  it;  "  but 
the  next  time  the  doors  are  opened  they  will  be  there. 
The  gospel  gets  them  by  the  ear  and  holds  them.  It 
has  a  secret  mysterious  influence  even  over  the  hearts 
that  do  not  receive  it,  to  compel  them  at  least  to  lend 
their  ear  to  the  hearing  of  it.  Let  the  church,  then, 
awake ;  and  that  influence  shall  be  had  whereby  the 
city  shall  be  moved. 


6  Christian  Energy, 

But  when  we  speak  of  the  church,  I  am  afraid  we- 
often  hide  our  own  sins  under  a  declaration  against  the 
church.  Why,  we  are  the  church.  Christian  men 
and  women,  you  are  the  church.  You  must  not  tie  the 
church  up  like  a  quivering  victim,  and  lash  her ;  tie 
yourself  up,  and  let  the  lash  fall  on  your  own  shoulders. 
If  you  and  I  had  a  reigning  Christ  in  our  hearts,  we 
should  help  to  move  the  city.  Do  you  ask  what  I 
mean  by  that  ?  I  do  not  mean  the  way  in  which  some 
of  you  show  the  quality  of  your  faith  by  the  quantity 
of  its  fruits.  Your  convictions  and  your  conversion 
assume  a  very  mild  form.  You  keep  them  well  in 
check ;  you  ha^e  got  a  tight  rein  on  the  motions  of  the 
heart ;  your  religion  never  runs  wild — never !  you  are 
such  a  prudent  brother ;  you  will  never  be  guilty  of 
anything  like  enthusiasm :  no  one  will  ever  chalk  the 
word  "  Fanatic  "  on  your  back.  You  will  never  move 
the  city,  my  friend — no  fear  of  it.  While  appeals 
which  ought  to  make  your  heart  burn  freeze  on  your 
ears,  you  will  never  move  the  city.  While  themes^ 
which  ought  to  bow  you  to  the  earth  in  humility  of 
spirit,  and  then  lift  you  up  as  on  eagles'  wings  in 
rapture  of  delight,  affect  you  not  at  all ; — unimpressible 
as  stone,  you  will  never  move  the  city.  But  if  you  and 
I  felt  that  the  things,  we  believed  were  of  the  first  and 
last  importance,  that  they  were  worth  living  for,  and 
worth  dying  for,  that  there  was  nothing  else,  in  fact, 
in  all  the  world  that  was  w^orth  any  care  or  thought 
except  these  things,  then,  beloved,  we  should  soon  see 
the  city  moved.  One  earnest  Christian  fully  given  up 
to  his  Master,  one  soul  perfectly  devoted  to  Christ,  is 
of  more  worth  in  soul-winning  and  in  world-conquering 


An   E.vciting  Enquiry.  7 

than  fifty  thousand  of  the  mere  professors.  You  know 
how  it  used  to  be  in  the  olden  wars.  The  rank  and 
file  all  did  service  in  their  way;  but  it  was  the  one 
man — the  one  man  who  made  the  corner  of  the  triangle 
to  break  the  enemy's  ranks,  and  gathered  all  the  spears 
into  his  own  bosom — it  was  he  that  won  the  victory. 
The  man  who  dashed  foremost  with  his  battle-axe  and 
slew  the  foe,  and  gave  courage  to  all  the  trembling  ones 
behind — the  man  who  told  them  that  victory  was  sure 
to  w^ait  on  coura ere,  and  who  dashed  on  against  fearful 
odds — he  was  the  man  who  made  his  country  famous. 
And  such  Christians  we  want  now-a-days,  who  know 
not  fear,  do  not  believe  in  defeat,  and  are  animated  with 
the  assurance  that  the  Most  High  God  is  with  us.  Go 
on,  and  on,  and  on,  conquering  and  to  conquer. 

You  see  it  is  a  reigning  Christ  that  moves  the  city — 
Christ  riding  in  the  heart  in  glorious  possession  of 
gladsome  acclamation — it  is  this  that  will  be  the  great 
thing  to  stir  even  London's  stolid  masses. 

The  great  multitude,  when  stirred,  will  ask  the  ques- 
tion, "  Who  is  this  ?  "  and  it  will  be  an  unfortunate 
thing  if  you  that  are  with  Christ  should  not  be  able  to 
give  an  answer.  Some  of  you  whose  hearts  are,  I 
hope,  right,  are  scarcely  attentive  enough  to  that  pre- 
cept, '^Be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every 
man  that  asketh  you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in 
you  with  meekness  and  with  fear."  I  do  deprecate 
above  all  thino-s  your  o-ettinfr  your  creed  from  me 
— your  building  your  creed  upon  the  fact  that  the 
preacher  has  said  so  and  so.  We  want  Bible  stu- 
dents as  Christians — men  who  not  only  believe  the 
truth  but  have  good  reason  for  belie\  ing  it,  who  can 


8  Christian  Energy.  ' 

meet  error  with  the  argument  of  "  It  is  written,"  and 
can  maintain  the  truth  at  all  hazards,  using  weapons 
taken  from  the  araioury  of  God's  inspired  book.  O 
that  we  had  among  us  more  who  were  fit  to  be  teachers ; 
but,  alas !  I  am  afraid  we  shall  have  to  say  of  many 
amongst  you,  as  Paul  said  of  the  weak  ones  in  his 
day,  that  when  they  ought  to  be  teachers  they  were 
still  only  learners ;  and  when  they  should  be  breaking 
the  bread  of  life  to  others,  they  were  still  needing  to  be 
fed  upon  milk.  I  hope  that  will  not  be  the  case  with 
us.  May  we  grow  in  grace ;  so  that  when  the  question 
is  asked,  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  we  may  be  able  to  answer  it. 
Beloved,  is  it  your  desire  to  do  good  to  your  fellow- 
men?  Have  you  a  longing  in  your  soul  to  be  the 
means  of  bringing  others  to  Christ  ?  In  order  to  ac- 
complish this,  it  is  imperatively  necessary  that  you 
should  have  a  knowled^-e  of  Jesus.  Let  it  be  a  heart 
knowledge.  You  tell  your  children  sometimes  to  learn 
their  lessons  by  heart.  You  cannot  learn  Christ  in  any 
other  way.  Christ  cannot  be  learned  in  the  head. 
Love  only  can  learn  love  ;  and  Christ  is  love  incarnate. 
It  is  by  loving  him,  and  communing  with  him,  that  you 
will  get  to  understand  him.  You  must  learn  him  by 
heart.  Theti  you  must  learn  him  experimentally.  I  would 
not  give  ought  for  an  answer  to  my  anxious  enquiries 
from  a  mere  theoretical  person.  Could  I  not  read  the 
book  and  get  at  the  theory  myself?  I  want  to  be 
taught  by  one  who  has  tasted  and  handled  of  the  things 
of  which  he  speaks.  Dear  brethren  in  Christ,  seek  to 
know  Jesus  by  living  upon  him.  Drink  ye  of  his  blood ; 
eat  ye  of  his  flesh ;  be  you  in  constant  communion  with 
him,  till  your  vital  union  w^ith  his  person  shall  transcend 


All  Exciting  Enquiry.  9 

your  faith  by  a  constant  joyful  experience.  Know 
Christ  experimentally.  Endeavour  also  to  know  Christ, 
beloved,  by  being  taught  of  his  Spirit.  Tliat  learning 
of  Christ  that  we  get  from  human  wit  is  of  little  worth ; 
it  is  the  revelation  of  Christ  in  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
which  alone  is  true  knowledge.  John  Bunyan  used  to 
say  that  he  preached  only  such  truths  as  the  Lord  had 
burnt  into  him.  Oh,  may  he  burn  these  truths  into 
you !  ^lay  he  be  pleased  to  write  upon  the  tablets  of 
your  heart  the  story  of  your  Master,  so  that  when  any 
shall  say,  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  you  may  not  need  to  pause 
for  a  single  moment,  or  to  ask  any  divine  to  assist  you 
in  the  answer, 

"  But  gladly  tell  to  sinners  round 
AVhat  a  dear  Saviour  you  have  found." 

This  enquiry  about  Christ  should  always  be  met  with 
a  clear  and  distinct  answer.  If  I  had  only  one  more 
sermon  to  preach  before  I  died,  I  know  what  it  should 
be  about :  it  should  be  about  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
iind  Ithink  that  when  we  get  to  the  end  of  our  ministry, 
one  of  our  regi-ets  will  be,  that  we  did  not  preach  more 
of  him.  I  am  sure  no  minister  will  ever  repent  of 
having  preached  him  too  much.  You  that  are  with 
Jesus,  talk  much  about  him,  and  let  that  talk  be  very 
plain.  Tell  sinners  that  ^'  God  was  made  flesh,  and 
dwelt  among  us,  and  his  disciples  beheld  his  glory,  the 
glory  as  of  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of 
grace  and  truth."  Tell  them  that  he  came  on  earth  as 
a  substitute  for  his  people ;  that  his  holy  life  is  their 
rio-hteousness ;  that  his  sufferino;s  and  death  constitute 
an  atonement,  and  appease  the  wrath  of  God  for  all 
their  sins.     Never  let  an  opportunity  be  lost  of  telling 


10  Christian  Energy. 

out  the  doctrine  of  substitution.  That  is  the  core  of 
the  gospel ;  Christ  for  sinners — the  sinner  in  Christ's 
place,  and  Christ  in  the  sinner's  place ;  debts  paid  by 
proxy;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  laid  upon  him, 
that  we  may  have  the  peace  through  liis  chastisement. 
I  wish  to  put  this  matter  very  earnestly  to  my  dear 
brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  especially  to 
you  who  are  in  church-fellowship  here.  Do  on  every 
occasion,  and  especially  when  you  get  but  half  an  invi- 
tation so  to  do — do  speak  out  concerning  the  person  of 
Christ  as  God  and  man,  concerning  the  work  of  Christ 
as  taking  human  guilt  and  suffering  for  it,  concerning 
the  worth  of  that  work  as  being  able  to  take  away  all 
manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy.  Tell  it  to  the  very 
chief  of  sinners,  that  the  blood  of  Christ  can  make 
them  clean ;  tell  it  to  the  drunkard,  the  harlot,  the 
thief,  the  murderer.  Tell  them  all  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  is  not  condemned;  and  never,  from 
fear  or  through  shame,  refuse  to  give  an  answer  to  so 
hopeful  an  enquiry  as  this — "  Who  is  this  ?  " 

And  what  shall  I  say  to  you  who  are  moved  by 
curiosity  to  ask  this  question — "  Who  is  this  ?  "  I 
dare  say  there  were  some  in  Jerusalem  who  were  so  busy 
with  their  shops  that  they  did  not  enquire,  "  Who  is 
this'?"  "  Oh!"  they  would  say,  *'I  need  not  go  across 
the  threshold  to  attend  to  what  a  mob  may  be  doing  in 
the  street — a  lot  of  children  calling  out  ^  Hosannah,' 
and  a  number  of  idle  gossips  following  a  silly  fellow  as 
he  rides  upon  an  ass  through  the  street ;  that  is  all  it 
is."  Other  people  doubtless  had  a  little  of  the  bump 
of  curiosity;  they  could  not  help  enquiring,  so  they 
come  into  the  street,  they  stand  in  the  crowd,  and  they 


All  Exciting  Enqimy,  11 

say  to  one,  "  AVho  is  tliis ?  "  "I  don't  know,"  says 
one ;  ^'  I  am  come  to  see  myself."  *'  But  who  is  this?  " 
They  repeat  the  question  again  and  again ;  and  they 
very  likely  get  six  wrong  answers  before  they  get  the 
right.  They  push  on,  and  at  last  they  get  a  good 
standing-place — perhaps  climb  up  into  a  tree,  as  Zac- 
cheus  did ;  and  there  they  are,  all  wide  awake,  trying 
to  get  an  answer  to  the  question,  '^  Who  is  this  ? " 
Well,  I  hope  some  such  sort  of  curiosity  as  this  may  be 
in  your  mind ;  at  any  rate,  I  had  it  in  my  mind  once, 
and  I  believe  there  are  many  that  have  it.  1  will  tell 
you  the  occasions  upon  which  this  curiosity  is  often 
excited.  A  labouring  man  has  been  in  the  habit  of 
working  with  another  who  was  often  intoxicated,  an 
habitual  swearer,  and  perhaps  even  prone  at  times  to 
blaspheme.  On  a  sudden  he  sees  him  a  changed 
character,  steady  in  all  his  conduct,  affectionate,  and 
thoughtful  of  his  wife  and  children,  industrious,  and 
withal  he  is  religious.  What  an  alteration !  Can  it 
fail  to  cause  enquiry  ?  Or  he  calls  in  at  the  house  of  a 
neighbour,  and  finds  that  neighbour  very  sick  and  ill ; 
he  is  a  working  man  witli  a  large  family,  and  it  would 
be  a  very  serious  thing  for  him  to  die  and  leave  those  little 
ones ;  but  he  sits  up  in  the  bed,  and  he  tells  his  friend 
that  he  has  not  any  care  at  all  about  these  matters ;  he 
has  left  them  all  with  God ;  he  says,  "  I  used  to  fret 
and  worry  myself,  but  now,  whether  I  live  or  die,  I 
leave  it  with  God ;  I  am  perfectly  resigned  to  his  will ; 
Christ  is  with  me  here  ;  I  find  it 

" '  Sweet  to  lie  passive  in  his  hands, 
And  know  no  will  but  his.'  " 

"  Oh,"  says  the  man,  "  who  is  this  ?"     What  can  be  the 


12  Clinstian  Energy, 

cause  ?  What  can  be  the  reason  of  this  ?  He  watches 
another ;  he  persecutes  him,  laughs  at  him,  jeers,  casts 
all  manner  of  threats  and  insinuations  at  him.  He  sees 
him  bear  it  all  very  quietly ;  he  knows  that  he  cannot 
tempt  him  to  do  what  is  wrong,  though  he  tries  hard  to 
do  it ;  the  path  of  integrity  is  trodden  year  after  year, 
and  the  worldly  man  looking  on  cannot  make  it  out. 
He  says,  "Who  is  this?"  He  sees  another — a  very 
happy,  lively,  earnest,  joyful  Christian.  "  Well," 
thinks  this  man,  "  I  have  to  go  to  the  theatre  to  get 
any  fun ;  I  must  be  in  company,  and  I  must  drink  a 
certain  quantity  before  I  can  get  my  spirits  up ;  but 
here  is  a  man  cheerful  and  bright.  He  is  poor,  but  he 
is  happy ;  he  has  got  a  fustian  jacket,  but  he  has  not 
got  a  fustian  heart ;  he's  '  as  happy  as  a  king ;'  his 
soul  is  merry  within  him ;  I  can't  make  it  out — *  Who 
is  this?'"  These  kind  of  things  stir  men's  curiosity. 
I  hope,  dear  friends,  you  will  try  to  make  people  more 
and  more  curious  by  this  plan.  And  how  often  a  holy 
dying  bed  stirs  that  curiosity !  As  the  ex^^iring  believer 
shouts  victory,  or  sinks  to  his  rest  with  perfect  joy,  the 
worldling  looks  on  and  says,  "  Who  is  this  ?  I  can't 
comprehend  it,  I  can't  make  it  out."  Now,  it  is  little 
wonder,  my  dear  friends,  that  there  should  be  some 
curiosity  to  know  about  Christ.  There  ought  to  be  a 
great  deal  more.  Consider  that  God  himself  speaks 
to  you  by  Christ.  Shall  God  speak,  and  shall  mortal 
man  not  care  to  hear  what  God  says  ?  Shall  God  speak 
to  me  by  his  dear  Son,  and  shall  I  have  no  ear  to  hear 
the  Divine  Word  ?  I  ought  to  be  anxious  to  know  it. 
Christ  was  spoken  of  by  prophets  — Moses,  David, 
Isaiah,  Jeremiah — all  of  them  spoke  of  Christ.     Were 


All  Exciting  Enquiry.  13 

there  all  those  testimonies  about  him,  and  shall  not  I 
care  to  know  of  him  ?  When  he  came  upon  earth,  it 
was  with  song  of  ang-els,  and  a  new  star  was  launched 
forth  to  welcome  his  birth — have  I  no  curiosity  to  know 
of  him  ?  I  understand  that  his  person  is  complex,  that 
he  is  at  once  God  and  man — strange,  strange  person 
this  !  do  I  not  wish  to  know  more  of  him  %  I  find  that 
he  died,  and  that  he  rose  again,  and  that  there  is  a 
connection  between  his  dying  and  rising  again,  and  the 
forgiveness  of  our  sins  and  the  justification  of  our  souls 
— do  I  not  want  to  know  about  that  ?  Christ  has  come 
to  solve  the  most  tremendous  problem,  come  to  tell  us 
of  love  beyond  the  grave,  of  immortality  when  corrup- 
tion shall  have  done  its  work — have  I  no  curiosity  about 
this  ?  The  bleedinc^  Saviour,  hanmnir  on  the  cross  with 
streaming  wounds,  says  to  every  man  here  who  has  any 
curiosity  in  his  nature — '^  Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye 
that  pass  by  ?  behold,  and  see  if  there  was  ever  sorrow 
like  unto  my  sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  me."  I 
commend  the  curiosity  that  would  make  you  know  more 
of  Jesus.  Study  this  book  much.  Here  you  shall  see 
the  Saviour's  face  almost  in  every  page.  Frequent 
those  mysteries  which  speak  much  of  him,  and  do,  oh 
do  press  forward  till  you  have  got  an  answer  to  that 
question,  ''  Who  is  this  ?  " 

There  may  be  in  this  house  of  prayer  some  who 
are  in  positive  ignorance,  asking  the  question,  "Who 
is  this  ?"  I  think  we  ouo-ht  not  to  take  it  for  m-anted 
that  all  our  congregation  understand  the  gospel,  for 
they  do  not.  The  simple  *^  Believe  and  live"  which 
God  has  written  so  plainly  in  the  Bible,  is  not  under- 
stood by  a  great  many.     I  sometimes  get  letters  from 


14  Christian  Energy. 

those  who  have  heard  the  gospel  preached  here  which 
astound  me.  The  way  in  which  my  correspondents 
look  at  things  seems  conclusive  that  they  have  never 
read  the  Bible;  they  imagine  that  my  preaching  and 
everybody  else's  should  be  altered,  in  order  to  suit  some 
whim  and  fancy  of  theirs.  The  ignorance  pointed  at 
in  the  text  was  strange ;  for  Christ  had  lived  in  Jeru- 
salem, and  had  been  there  working  miracles,  yet  the 
people  said,  *'  Who  is  this?"  And  Jesus  Christ  is  but 
the  next  door  to  where  you  live — preached  in  the  very 
street ;  you  can  hear  him  out  of  doors  if  you  like,  in 
the  ministry  of  some  open-air  preacher ;  the  city  mis- 
sionary will  tell  you  about  him ;  there  is  a  Testament 
to  be  had  for  twopence;  everybody  may  know  about 
Jesus  Christ ;  and  yet  there  are  a  great  many  who  do 
not  know  about  him.  But  say,  is  not  ignorance  of 
Jesus  Christ  in  this  age  wilful?  Those  who  do  not 
know  of  Jesus  Christ  now  have  nobody  but  themselves 
to  blame.  Let  me  remind  you  that  this  is  very  damag- 
ing ;  you  lose  by  it  much  joy  and  comfort  here  below, 
besides  the  risks  of  the  hereafter.  Ignorance  of  Jesus 
Christ  will  be  fatal  to  your  soul's  welfare.  You  may 
not  know  how  to  read,  but  if  you  know  Christ  you  shall 
"  read  your  title  clear  to  mansions  in  the  skies."  It  is 
a  bad  thing  for  a  man  not  to  know  a  little  of  all 
sciences,  but  a  man  may  go  to  heaven  well  enough  if  he 
knows  only  the  science  of  Christ  crucified.  Not  to 
know  Jesus  will  shut  you  out  of  heaA^en,  though  you 
had  all  the  degrees  of  all  the  universities  in  the  world 
appended  to  your  name.  Ignorance  of  him  who  is  the 
Saviour  of  sinners  is  ignorance  of  the  remedy  for  your 
soul's    disease — ignorance   of   the   key   which   unlocks 


An  Exciting  Enquiry.  15 

lieavcn's  gate — ignorance  of  him  who  can  kindle  the 
lamp  of  life  in  the  sepulchres  of  death.  Oh,  I  pray 
you,  if  you  have  been  hitherto  ignorant  of  the  Saviour, 
be  not  satisfied  till  you  know  him.  And  when  I  speak 
of  ignorance  of  Christ,  I  do  not  mean  ignorance  of  his 
name,  and  of  the  fact  that  there  is  such  a  person  ; — I 
refer  more  especially  to  that  spiritual  ignorance  w^hich 
is  so  common  among  the  best  informed.  Nine  persons 
out  of  ten  who  go  to  a  place  of  worship  do  not 
know  the  meaning  of  the  Saviour  shedding  his  blood 
for  the  remission  of  sin.  If  you  press  them  to  tell 
you  how  it  is  that  Christ  saves,  they  will  tell  you 
that  he  did  something  or  other  by  which  God  is  able 
to  forgive.  Though  the  grand  fact  that  Christ  ac- 
tually was  punished  in  the  room,  place,  and  stead 
of  his  chosen  people,  is  a  fact  as  clear  in  the 
Scripture  as  noonday,  they  do  not  see  it.  The  doc- 
trine of  general  redemption — that  Christ  died  for  the 
damned  in  hell,  and  suffered  the  torments  of  those 
who  afterwards  are  tormented  for  ever — seems  to  me 
to  be  detestable,  subversive  of  the  whole  gospel,  and 
destructive  of  the  only  pillar  upon  which  our  hopes  can 
be  built.  Christ  stood  in  the  stead  of  his  elect ;  for 
them  he  made  a  full  atonement ;  for  them  he  so  suf- 
fered that  not  a  sin  of  theirs  shall  ever  be  laid  at  their 
door.  As  the  Father's  love  embraced  them,  so  the 
death  of  his  Son  reconciled  them.  And  who  are  these 
that  are  thus  redeemed  from  among  men  ?  They  are 
those  who  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  This  definition  is 
not  more  simple  than  conclusive  to  those  to  whom  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  intelligible.  If  you  do 
put  your  trust  in  him,  it  is  evident  that  Christ  died  for 


16  Christian  Energy, 

you  in  a  way  and  manner  that  he  never  died  for  Judas; 
he  died  for  you  so  vicariously,  that  the  offences  you 
have  committed  were  imputed  to  him  and  not  to  you, 
therefore  your  sins  are  forgiven  you.  If  you  trust  him 
you  cannot  be  punished  for  yom'  sins,  for  Christ  was 
punished  for  them.  How  can  debts  be  demanded  of 
you  that  were  paid  originally  by  your  Saviour  ?  You 
are  clear.  The  Master  said,  "  If  ye  seek  me,  let  these 
go  their  way ;"  and  when  they  seized  Jesus  they  let  his 
chosen  people  go.  You  are  clear,  before  God's  bar  you 
are  clear.  Nobody  can  lay  anything  to  your  charge 
if  you  trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  for  he  suffered  in  your 
stead.  Ignorance  of  that  great  fundamental  truth  of  the 
whole  gospel  keeps  thousands  in  darkness.  It  is  the 
great  ball  and  chain  upon  the  leg  of  many  spiritual 
prisoners ;  and  if  they  did  but  know  that,  and  could 
spell  "  substitution"  without  a  mistake,  they  would  very 
soon  come  into  perfect  joy  and  liberty. 

This  once  more.*  It  is  thought  that  the  expression, 
"  Who  is  this  ?"'  was  a  contemptuous  one  on  the  part  of 
many.  They  said,  ''  What  next,  eh  ?  We  have  heard 
of  all  sorts  of  excitements  and  noises — what  next  f 
Here  is  a  man  that  has  not  where  to  lay  his  head ;  he  i& 
ridins:  like  a  kinaj.  Here  is  a  man  who  wears  the 
common  smock-frock  of  a  Galilean  peasant,  and  there 
are  people  spreading  their  garments  in  the  way,  and 
strewing  branches  of  trees  before  him!  What  next, 
and  what  next  ?  "  Peradventure  with  scornful  tone 
some  said,  "  Well,  what  shall  we  live  to  see  ?  The 
King  of  the  Jews !  Ah !  King  of  the  Jews  !  Yes,  very 
likely !  His  father  and  mother  are  with  us ;  is  this  the 
poor  carpenter's  son?     King  of  the  Jews,  forsooth  I" 


All  Exciting  Enquiry.  17 

And  so  tliey  just  sneered,  and  turned  away.  Yes  ;  but, 
friends,  stop  a  bit.  Some  persons  that  sneer  deserve  to 
be  sneered  at ;  but  we  will  not  treat  you  so.  It  cannot 
be,  after  all,  such  a  very  fine  and  wise  thing  to  sneer 
at  the  Saviour,  when  you  recollect  that  the  angels  do 
not  sneer,  and  never  did  sneer  at  him.  They  came 
with  him  when  first  he  descended  into  Bethlehem's 
manger;  they  came  with  Christmas  carols  on  that 
memorable  night  when  he  was  born  of  the  Vir^jin.  Did 
they  not  sing  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on 
earth  peace,  goodwill  toward  men"  ?  Do  not  sneer  where 
angels  sing.  When  he  afterwards  retired  in  an  hour 
of  sorrow  to  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  where  drops 
of  blood  fell  on  the  ground,  the  angels  came  and 
strengthened  him.  Hound  the  bloody  tree  they  watched, 
and  w^ondered  how  the  Lord  of  Glory  thus  could  die ; 
and,  when  he  went  into  the  gi*ave,  methinks  they  hung 
their  harps  awhile  in  silence.  This  we  know,  that  when, 
on  the  third  day,  he  burst  the  bands  of  death,  one  of 
them  came  to  roll  away  the  stone,  and  two  others  sat — 
the  one  at  the  foot,  the  other  at  the  head — where  Jesus 
had  lain;  and  when  the  forty  days  had  been  accomplished, 
and  he  went  up  to  his  abode, 

"  They  bring  his  chariot  fi-om  on  high 

To  bear  him  to  his  throne, 
Clap  their  triumphant  wings,  and  cry. 

The  glorious  work  is  done." 

In  heaven  they  cast  their  crowns  before  his  throne. 
*'All  hail,"  they  cry,  ^'worthy  is  he  that  was  slain." 
The  mightiest  archangel  in  gloiy  counts  it  his  honour  to 
fly  on  Jesus  Christ's  errands.  Oh !  sneer  not,  then. 
What  is  there  to  sneer  at?     These  spirits  are,  at  least, 

2 


18  Christian  Energy, 

as  \A'ise  as  you.  Pause  awhile,  and  **  kiss  the  Son,  lest 
he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way."  Do  you  not 
care  for  angels  ?  Then  listen  %  do  not  sneer,  for  there 
are  as  wise  men  as  you  who  have  not  sneered.  You 
mention  some  great  man  who  was  a  scoffer.  Ah,  well, 
so  it  may  be,  for  great  men  are  not  always  wise;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  wdiat  Newton  believed  in,  what  Locke 
trusted  in,  what  Milton  sang  of,  what  a  Bunyan  could 
dream  of  in  Bedford  Gaol,  cannot  be  quite  such  a  con- 
temptible thing  after  all.  I  might  quote  some  names  at 
which  you  could  not  sneer,  and  would  not.  You  w^ould 
think  yourself  unknown  and  base  indeed,  if  you  called 
them  unknown  and  ignoble.  The  name  which  these 
men,  gi'eat  even  in  your  esteem,  thought  worthy  of  their 
highest  reverence,  surely  you  need  not  be  so  fast  to 
reproach.  Come,  search  thou  also  into  this  problem. 
Give  thy  wit  a  little  exercise  upon  this  question  :  *'Who 
is  this  ?"  and  seek  to  know  what  Christ  is,  and  w^hether 
he  is  not  a  suitable  Saviour  to  thee.  Do  not  affect  to 
be  contemptuous,  for,  after  all,  if  you  look  at  it,  there  is 
nothing  to  despise.  What  is  the  story?  It  is  this,  that 
though  you  are  the  enemy  of  Christ,  Christ  is  no  enemy 
of  youi's.  Here  is  the  story,  that,  Avhile  we  were  yet  his 
enemies,  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly.  I 
could  never  despise  a  man  who  loved  his  enemy,  and  if 
I  saw  him  come  to  die  to  save  another,  and  that  other  his 
foe,  I  could  not  despise  him.  I  might  think  him  unwise, 
and  think  the  price  of  his  fair  life  too  dear  to  buy  the 
wretch  for  whom  he  died,  but  I  could  not  despise  his 
love.  Oh,  there  is  something  so  majestic  in  love,  that 
you  cannot  sneer  at  it.  Uncurl  that  lip  now.  He  dies 
not  for  himself  in  any  sense ;  he  bleeds  for  his  friends 


An  .Exciting  Enquirij,  19 

— more,  for  his  foes.  His  dying  prayer  is,  "Father 
forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do;"  and 
when  his  friends  forsook  him,  yet  his  last  thoughts  were 
all  for  them.  "  Though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes 
he  became  poor,  that  we,  through  his  poverty,  might  be 
made  rich."  There  is  nothing  to  sneer  at  here.  He 
casts  aside  his  glory,  hangs  his  azure  mantle  on  the 
sky,  and  takes  the  rings  from  off  his  fingers  to  hang  them 
up  for  stars,  and  down  he  comes.  He  comes,  and  is 
made  a  feeble  child.  In  his  mother's  lap  he  lies.  He 
lives  so  poverty-stricken,  that  he  has  not  where  to  lay 
his  head;  and  when  the  fox  went  to  its  buiTow,  and  the 
bird  to  its  nest,  he  went  to  the  lone  mountain,  and  his 
locks  were  wet  with  the  dews  of  night.  He  had  no 
friend,  no  helper ;  "  Give  me  to  drink,"  he  ?=oys,  as  he 
sits  upon  the  well  of  Samaria.  He  is  forsaken,  despised, 
and  rejected  of  men;  and,  when  he  dies,  even  God 
himself  leaves  him.  Jesus  cries,  "Why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me?"  And  all  this  out  of  strong,  all-conquer- 
ing love  for  the  sons  of  men.  You  cannot  despise  this. 
I  would  love  the  Saviour,  even  if  he  did  not  die  for  me. 
I  could  not  help  it.  Such  love  as  this  must  have  my 
heart !  such  disinterested  giving  up  of  all  for  the  sake  of 
those  who  hated  him,  must  claim  our  heart's  affections. 
Do  not  despise  him,  let  me  say  to  you,  for  you  do  not 
know  but  what  one  day  you  may  be  where  he  is.  Oh, 
if  you  knew  that  he  would  wash  you  in  his  precious 
blood,  and  make  you  clean;  if  you  knew  that  he  would 
cast  his  robe  of  righteousness  about  3^ou ;  if  you  knew 
that  he  would  take  you  up  and  put  the  palm-branch  in 
your  hand,  and  make  you  sing  for  ever  of  victor}'  through 
his  precious  blood,  you  would  not  despise  him.     And 


20  Christian  Energy. 

yet  that  shall  be  the  portion  of  all  of  }'0U  if  you  believe- 
on  him,  if  you  cast  yourselves  on  his  finished  work. 
Where  he  is,  there  you  shall  be,  and  you  shall  see  his 
face.  Do  not  despise  him,  the  sinner's  friend.  Can  you 
dislike  him,  the  lover  of  your  soul  ?  How  can  you  but 
be  lover  of  him  ?  Shedding  his  tears  over  you,  shedding 
his  blood  for  you,  how  can  you  but  cast  yourselves  at 
his  feet  ? 

Despise  him  not,  for  he  is  coming  again  in  pomp  and 
glory.  Speak  not  lightly  of  him  that  is  at  the  door. 
He  is  coming,  perhaps,  while  I  talk  of  these  great  match- 
less things.  Soon  may  he  come  into  our  midst,  but  he 
will  come  with  rainbow  wreath  and  clouds  of  storm.. 
He  will  come  sitting  on  the  great  white  throne,  and 
every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also  that  pierced  him. 
Don't  despise  him  now,  for  you  will  not  be  able  to 
despise  him  then.  Will  ye  do  now  what  you  can- 
not do  then  ?  Oh,  what  a  different  tale  will  some  men 
sing  when  Christ  comes!  How  those  who  called  him 
foul  names  will  hide  their  fouler  faces.  Come  up  now ; 
do  not  play  the  coward;  come  up  now,  and  spit  in  his  face 
again,  ye  villains,  thkt  once  did  it  in  his  lifetime.  Now, 
come  and  nail  him  to  the  tree  again  ;  Judas,  come  and 
give  him  a  kiss,  as  once  thou  didst !  Do  you  see  them  ? 
Why,  they  fly.  They, hide  their  heads.  The  tale  is 
not  any  longer  that  they  despise  and  reject  him,  but  it 
is,  *^Eocks,  fall  on  and  hide  us."  *^Ye  mountains, 
open  your  bowels,  and  give  us  a  concealment."  But 
it  must  not  be ;  the  Lamb's  eyes  of  love  have  become 
the  lion's  eyes  of  fiire,  and  he  that  was  meek  and  gentle 
has  now  become  fiery  and  terrible.  The  voice  that  once 
was  sweet  as  music,  is  now  loud  and  terrible  as  the 


An  Exciting  Enquiry.  21 

crash  of  thunder,  and  he  that  dealt  out  mercy,  now  deals 
out  bolts  of  vengeance.  Oh,  despise  not  him  who  shall 
so  soon  come.  Bow  ye  now,  and  "  kiss  the  Son,  lest  he 
be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath 
is  kindled  but  a  little."  Ask  who  is  he?  and  when  ye 
hear  the  question,  answer  it  3'ourself,  '^This  is  my 
Beloved,  and  this  is  my  Friend,  O  daughters  of  Jeru- 
salem." Trust  Jesus  Christ,  sinner,  and  you  shall 
know  who  he  is,  and  he,  knowing  who  you  are,  will  save 
you  with  a  great  salvation.     Amen. 


^li^tim  ^0  ^'mmtiii^m\ml 


*'  Knowing,  brethren  beloved,  your  election  of  God.  For  our  gospel 
came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance.  And  ye  became  followers  of  us,  and  of 
the  Lord,  having  received  the  word  in  much  affliction,  with  joy  of  th& 
Holy  Ghost."— 1  Thess.  i.  4-6. 


T  the  very  announcement  of  the  text  some 
will  be  ready  to  say,  "  Why  preach  upon  so 
profound  a  doctrine  as  election  '^ "  I  answer^ 
because  it  is  in  God's  word,  and  whatever 
is  in  the  Word  of  God  is  to  be  preached.. 
"  But  some  truths  ought  to  be  kept  back 
from  the  people/'  say  some  persons,  ^'lest- 
they  should  make  an  ill  use  thereof."  Popish  doctrine! 
I  reply,  for  it  was  upon  this  theory  that  the  priests  kept 
back  the  Bible  from  the  people,  lest  they  should  misuse 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  ^'  But  are  not  some  doctrines 
dangerous?"  No,  I  answer,  not  if  they  be  true.  Truth  is 
never  dangerous,  it  is  error  and  reticence  that  are  fraught 
with  peril.  "  But  do  not  men  misuse  the  doctrines  of 
grace?  "  I  grant  you  they  do;  but  if  we  should  destroy 
everything  that  men  misuse,  we  should  have  nothing 
left.  Are  there  to  be  no  ropes  because  some  fools  will 
hang  themselves  ?  and  must  cutlery  be  for  ever  driven 
from  the  earth  because  there  are  some  who  will  use 


Election  no  Discouragement.  23 

dangerous  weapons  for  the  destruction  of  their  adver- 
saries ?  Decidedly  not.  Besides,  let  me  reply  to  you, 
men  do  read  the  Scriptures  and  think  about  these 
doctrines,  and  therefore  often  make  mistakes  about 
them ;  who  then  shall  set  them  right  if  we,  who  preach 
the  Word  hold  our  tongues  about  the  matter  ?  I  know 
that  some  men  have  embraced  the  doctrine  of  elec- 
tion and  become  Antinomians;  such  men  would  pro- 
bably have  found  other  excuses  for  their  misdeeds  if 
they  had  not  sheltered  themselves  under  the  shadow 
of  this  doctrine.  The  sun,  of  course,  will  ripen  weeds  as 
well  as  fruitful  plants,  but  that  is  no  fault  of  the  sun, 
but  of  the  nature  of  the  weed  itself.  We  believe, 
however,  that  more  persons  are  made  Antinomians 
through  those  who  deny  the  doctrine  than  through 
those  who  preach  it.  We  give  for  our  evidence  this — 
that  in  Scotland  you  will  scarcely  find  a  congregation  of 
Hyper-Calvinists,  for  this  simple  reason,  that  the  Church 
of  Scotland  holds  Entire  the  whole  doctrine  upon  this 
matter,  and  her  ministers,  as  a  rule,  are  not  ashamed  to 
preach  it  fearlessly  and  boldly,  and  in  connection  with 
the  rest  of  the  faith.  Take  this  one  doctrine,  or  any 
other,  and  preach  upon  it  exclusively,  and  you  distort  it. 
The  fairest  face  in  the  world,  with  the  most  comely 
features,  would  soon  become  unseemly  if  one  feature  were 
permitted  to  expand  while  the  rest  were  kept  in  their 
usual  form.  Proportion,  I  take  it,  is  beauty,  and  to 
preach  every  truth  in  its  fair  proportion,  neither  keeping 
back  any  nor  giving  undue  prominence  to  any,  is  to 
preach  the  whole  truth  as  Christ  would  have  it  preached; 
and  on  a  Gospel  thus  entire  and  harmonious  we  may 
expect  to  have  the  blessing  of  the  Most  Pligh.     So  much 


24  Christian  Energy. 

by  way  of  preface,  not  by  way  of  apology.    It  is  not  my 
wont  to  offer  any  apology  for  speaking  the  truth. 

Now  what  is  this  doctrine  of  election  as  spoken  of  in 
the  text  ?  "  Knowing,  brethren  beloved,  your  election 
of  God."  There  is  such  a  thing  as  election.  Man  is  a 
free  agent.  Any  man  who  should  deny  that,  might 
well  be  thought  unreasonable.  Free-will  is  another 
thing  from  free-agency.  Luther  denounced  free-will 
when  he  said,  "  Liberum  arbitrium  nomen  est  sine  re.'' 
Free-will  is  the  name  for  nothing;  and  President 
Edwards  demolished  it  in  his  masterly  treatise.  God  is 
a  universal  agent  and  doeth  as  he  wills,  but  his  will  is 
supremely  good.  He  is  the  superlative  agent,  and  man, 
while  acting  according  to  the  device  of  his  own  heart,  is 
overruled  by  that  sovereign  and  wise  legislation  which 
causeth  the  wrath  of  man  (that  agency  in  which  the 
creature  cannot  govern  himself)  to  praise  him ;  and  the 
remainder  thereof  he  restrains.  How  these  two  things 
are  true  I  cannot  tell.  It  is  not  necessary  for  our  good, 
either  in  this  life  or  the  next,  that  we  should  have  the  skill 
to  solve  such  problems.  I  am  not  sure  that  in  heaven  we 
shall  be  able  to  know  where  the  free  agency  of  man  and 
the  sovereignty  of  God  meet,  but  they  are  both  great 
truths.  God  has  predestinated  everything,  yet  man  is 
responsible,  for  he  acts  freely,  and  no  constraint  is  put 
upon  him  when  he  sinneth  and  disobeyeth  wantonly  and 
wickedly  the  will  of  God.  Now,  so  many  as  are  saved, 
are  saved,  you  will  say,  because  they  believe.  I  grant 
it  you.  This  is  most  true — God  forbid  I  should  deny 
it — but  wherefore  do  they  believe?  They  believe  as 
the  result  of  the  working  of  the  grace  of  God  in  their 
hearts,  and  since  ever}^  man  who  is  saved  confesses  this, 


Election  no  Discouragement.  25 

since  every  true  believer  in  the  world  acknowledges  that 
something  special  has  been  done  for  him  more  than  for 
the  impenitent,  the  fact  is  established  that  God  does 
make  a  difference;  and  if  no  one  ever  heard  it  laid  as  an 
impeachment  against  the  Lord  that  he  did  make  a  dif- 
ference, I  cannot  see  why  he  should  be  impeached  for 
intending  to  make  that  difference,  which  is  just  the 
doctrine  of  election.  If  I  am  saved,  I  know  it  will  not 
be  because  of  any  goodness  in  me.  If  you  be  saved  to- 
nio;ht  you  will  freelv  confess  that  it  is  the  distinojuishinjr 
love  of  God  that  has  made  you  to  differ.  The  doctrine  of 
election  is  simply  God's  intention  to  make  that  difference 
— while  he  gives  mercy  to  all,  to  give  more  mercy  to 
some — whereby  the  mercy  received  should  be  made 
effectual  to  their  eternal  salvation.  Now  this  election 
of  God  is  sovereign.  He  chooseth  as  he  will.  Who 
shall  call  him  to  account  ?  "  Can  I  not  do  as  I  will 
with  my  own  ?"  is  his  answer  to  every  caviller.  "  Nay, 
but,  O  man,  who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God  ?" 
is  the  solemn  utterance  that  silences  every  one  who 
would  impugn  the  justice  of  the  Most  High.  He  has 
a  right,  seeing  we  are  all  criminals,  to  punish  whom  he 
will.  As  king  of  the  universe  he  doubtless,  acts  with 
discretion,  but  still  according  to  his  sovereignty,  wisely 
and  not  wantonly,  ever  according  to  the  counsel  of  his 
own  will.  Election,  then,  is  sovereign.  Again,  election 
is  free.  Whatever  may  be  God's  reason  for  choosing  a 
man,  certainly  it  is  not  because  of  any  good  thing  in 
that  man.  He  is  chosen  because  God  will  do  so.  We 
can  get  no  further.  We  get  as  far  as  those  words  of 
Christ,  *^  Even  so.  Father :  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy 
sight,"  and  there  we  stop,  for  beyond  that  no  philosophy 


26  Christian  Eiiergy. 

and  no  Scripture  can  take  us.  As  election  is  sovereign 
and  free,  so  it  is  iiTeversible.  Having  chosen  his  people, 
he  doth  not  cast  them  away  nor  call  back  the  word  that 
is  gone  out  of  his  lips,  for  it  is  written,  "  He  hateth 
putting  aw^ay."  He  is  of  one  mind,  and  who  can  turn 
him?  Election  is  effectual.  For  "whom  he  did  pre- 
destinate, them  he  also  called :  and  whom  he  called, 
them  he  also  justified  :  and  whom  he  justified,  them  he 
also  glorified."  And  this  election  is  personal,  for  he 
calleth  out  his  children  one  by  one  by  their  names.  He 
calleth  them  even  as  he  leadeth  out  the  stars,  and  so  he 
bringeth  them  every  one  to  the  Father's  house  above. 

We  have  thus  given  a  statement  as  to  what  this 
doctrine  is.  There  we  wall  leave  it.  Our  present  object 
is  not  so  much  to  expound  the  doctrine,  as  to  strike 
a  blow  or  two  at  certain  errors  which  are  very  common 
and  which  spring  out  of  it.  I  know,  dear  friends,  there 
are  some  who  are  so  afraid  of  this  doctrine  that  the 
mention  of  it  produces  alarm.  If  they  w^ere  to  meet  a 
lion  in  their  way  they  would  not  be  more  terrified  than 
they  are  when  they  see  this  doctrine  in  Scripture  or 
hear  it  from  the  pulpit.  Let  us  try,  if  we  can,  should 
you  be  labouring  under  any  distress  of  mind  about  it,  to 
remove  your  difficulties.  Will  you  please  remember 
that  this  is  not  a  point  Avhich  you  can  understand  at  the 
commencement  of  spiritual  and  religious  life?  You 
would  not  teach  your  children,  I  suppose,  to  say  their 
prayers  backwards,  and  begin  at  "Amen;'*  and  you  are 
beginning  at  the  wrong  end  when  you  w^ant  first  of  all  to 
know  your  election  instead  of  commencing  with  repent- 
ance towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Election   is  a  lesson  for  the  more  advanced  students. 


Election  no  Dlscourarjement.  27 

Faith  and  hope  must  be  learnt,  first  of  all,  in  the 
infant  class,  to  which  we  all  must  go  if  we  would  be  wise 
unto  salvation.  Now,  if  a  child  should  have  a  book  of 
algebra  put  into  his  hand,  and  should  puzzle  himself  and 
say,  "I  shall  never  get  an  education,  for  I  cannot  under- 
stand this;"  and  then  take  down  some  ancient  classic,  and 
say,  *^I  cannot  comprehend  this;"  you  would  say,  ^'  Dear 
child,  you  have  nothing  to  do  with  this  yet.  Here  is  a 
simpler  book — a  primer  for  you.  Here  you  have  A,  B, 
C  ;  get  this  first,  and  then,  step  by  step,  you  shall  attain 
to  the  rest."  Believe  in  Christ.  Simple  trust  in  him 
is  the  first  thing  you  have  to  do  with,  and  after  that  you 
shall  know  the  high,  the  sublime,  and  the  glorious  doc- 
trine of  God's  decree;  but  do  not  begin  here.  You  will 
mystify  and  ruin  yourself ;  you  will  lose  your  way  in  a 
fog  and  get  no  good  thereby.  Again  there  is  one  thing 
very  certain,  that  whatever  this  doctrine  may  be — and 
we  will  have  no  dispute  about  it  just  now — there  are 
certain  plain  promises  in  God's  Word  which  must  be 
true,  and  this  doctrine,  if  it  be  true,  cannot  possibly  be 
inconsistent  with  them.  Such  promises  are  these — "  Come 
unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
will  give  you  rest.'*  "Whosoever  will,  let  him  take 
the  water  of  life  freely."  "He  is  able  to  save  them 
to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him."  Why, 
I  might  quote  by  the  hour  together  some  of  these 
promises  which  are  as  wide  as  the  poles ;  invitations  that 
must  not  be  narrowed — which  we  dare  not  narrow — it 
were  more  than  our  lives  were  worth — invitations  which 
are  addressed  to  every  creature  under  hc-aven,  in  which 
every  creature  is  bidden  to  hear  and  live,  '*  Ho !  every 
one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."     You  know 


28  Christian  Energy. 

the  class  of  promises  to  which  I  allude.  Now,  I  say 
again,  you  have  to  deal  with  them — get  hold  of  them, 
come  to  Jesus  Christ  with  them  in  your  hand ;  and  rest 
assured  the  doctrine  of  election,  instead  of  pushing  you 
back,  shall  stand  like  the  servants  about  your  father's 
table  to  make  music,  and  that  your  whole  soul  shall 
dance  to  the  glorious  tune ;  or  it  shall  be  like  a  dish  upon 
the  table  at  the  feast  of  the  returning  prodigal,  of  which 
you  shall  eat  to  the  very  full,  for  it  shall  by  no  means 
repulse  you  or  show  anything  to  you  which  may  keep 
you  from  hoping  in  Christ. 

Once  more,  this  glorious  doctrine  of  election,  it  is  quite 
certain,  cannot,  whatever  it  may  be,  deliver  you  from 
your  duty — and  what  is  your  duty  ?  ^'  This  is  the  com- 
mandment, that  ye  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  whom  God  hath 
sent."  So  much  is  this  your  absolute  duty  that,  *'  He 
that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath 
not  believed."  More  on  this  account  than  for  anything 
else  Scripture  says  this  is  the  one  great  sin — ^' When  he, 
the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  shall  convince  the  world 
of  sin — of  sin  because  ye  believe  not  on  me."  You  see 
this.  Very  well,  then  ;  inasmuch  as  God  has  so  put  it, 
that  he  commands  vou  this  nio^ht  to  tinist  Christ  and  to 
believe  on  him,  that  is  what  you  have  to  see  to,  and 
you  may  rest  perfectly  sure  that  any  quotation  of  the 
doctrine  of  election  by  you  to  exonerate  you  from  what 
God  commands  you  to  perform  is  but  a  pitiful  pretence. 
You  are  commanded  to  believe,  and  what  God  com- 
mands no  doctrine  can  teach  that  it  is  unfit  for  you  to 
do.  May  God  help  you  to  believe,  for  here  the  doctrine 
i  comes  not  to  excuse  you.  The  gospel  commands  you. 
Election  through  the  Holy  Ghost  enables  you.     It  is 


Election  no  Discouragement.  29 

your  duty  to  believe,  but  no  man  ever  was  saved  as  a 
matter  of  duty,  for  that  which  saves  is  the  gift  of  Grt)d, 
and  your  business  now  is  with  Christ  only,  and  not  with 
the  decrees  of  the  Father,  which  are  all  in  the  keeping 
of  Christ,  and  shall  presently  be  revealed  to  you.  You 
have  to  go  to  Christ  first,  and  to  his  Father  afterwards, 
for  saith  he,  ''No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by 
me."  You  must  go  round  the  cross  to  get  to  the  decree; 
you  must  go  round  by  redemption  to  get  to  election,  for 
there  is  no  other  way. 

Our  text  says,  very  plainly  too,  that  the  apostle  knew 
the  election  of  the  Thessalonians.  How  did  he  know 
it  ?  The  way  by  which  the  apostle  knew  it  must  be  the 
method  by  which  you  and  I  are  to  know  our  election 
of  God  too?  We  have  known  in  our  day  of  some 
men  who  pretended  to  know  their  election  by  their 
impudence.  They  had  got  into  their  head  the  pre- 
simiption  that  they  were  elected,  and  though  they  lived 
on  in  sin,  and  still  did  as  they  liked,  they  imagined  they 
were  God's  chosen.  This  is  what  I  call  presuming  upon 
election  by  sheer  impudence.  \Ye  know  others  who 
have  imagined  themselves  to  be  elect,  because  of  the 
visions  that  they  have  seen  when  they  have  been  asleep 
or  when  they  have  been  aw^ake — for  men  have  waking- 
dreams — and  they  have  brought  these  as  evidences  of 
their  election.  They  are  of  as  much  value  as  cobwebs 
would  be  for  a  garment,  and  they  will  be  of  as  much 
service  to  you  at  the  day  of  judgment  as  a  thief's  con- 
victions would  be  to  him  if  he  were  in  need  of  a 
character  to  commend  him  to  mercy.  You  may  dream 
long  enough  before  you  dream  yourself  into  heaven,  and 
you  may  have  as  many  stupid  notions  in  your  head  as  there 


30  Christian  Energy, 

are  romances  in  your  circulating  libraries,  but  because 
they  are  in  your  head  they  are  not  therefore  in  God's 
book.  We  want  a  more  sure  word  of  testimony  than 
this,  and  if  we  have  it  not,  God  forbid  that  we  should 
indulge  our  vain  conceits  with  the  dainty  thought  that 
we  are  chosen  of  God.  I  have  heard  of  one  who  said 
in  an  ale-house  that  he  could  say  more  than  the  rest, 
namely,  that  he  was  one  of  God's  children;  meanwhile 
he  drank  deeper  into  intoxication  than  the  rest.  Surely 
he  might  have  said  he  was  one  of  the  devil's  children 
with  an  emphasis,  and  he  would  have  been  correct. 
When  immoral  men,  and  men  who  live  constantly  in  sin, 
prate  about  being  God's  children,  we  discern  them  at 
once.  Just  as  we  know  a  crab-tree  when  we  see  the  fruit 
hanging  upon  it,  so  we  understand  what  spirit  they  are 
of  when  we  see  their  walk  and  conversation.  O !  it  is 
detestable,  loathsome  above  all  loathsomeness,  to  hear 
men,  whose  characters  in  secret  are  infamous,  and 
Avhose  lives  are  destitute  of  every  Christian  virtue, 
boasting  as  though  they  had  the  keys  of  heaven,  as 
though  they  could  set  up  who  they  would,  and  pull 
down  whomsoever  they  might  please.  Blessed  b^  God, 
we  are  not  under  their  domination,  for  a  more  terrific 
set  of  tyrants  than  they  are  the  world  has  never  known, 
and  a  more  frightful  reign  of  vice  than  they  would 
inaugurate,  if  they  had  their  way,  I  am  sure  villainy 
itself  cannot  conceive.  *'  Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not 
mocked."  '^Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord."  And  if  grace  does  not  make  us  holy,  teaching 
us  to  deny  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  it  is  not  worth 
the  having.  O  brethren  if  we  are  God's  elect  we  must 
have  some  substantial  evidence  to  attest  it. 


Election  no  Discouragement.  31 

Now  to  our  text.  What  are  these  evidences  ?  They 
seem  to  be  four.  The  first  evidence  appears  to  be  the 
Word  of  God  coming  home  with  power.  If  you  will  turn 
to  the  text  you  will  soon  see  how  the  apostle  says  the 
Gospel  came — "  Not  to  you  in  word  only  but  also  in 
power  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  Gospel  is  preached 
in  the  ears  of  all;  it  only  comes  with  power  to  some. 
The  power  that  is  in  the  Gospel  does  not  lie  in  the 
eloquence  of  the  preacher,  otherwise  men  would  be  the 
converters  of  souls.  Nor  does  it  lie  in  the  preacher's 
learning,  otherwise  it  would  consist  in  the  wisdom  of 
man.  The  power  which  converts  souls  does  not  even  lie 
in  the  preacher's  simplicity  or  adaptation  to  his  work ; 
that  is  a  secondary  agent,  but  not  the  cause.  Again, 
the  power  which  converts  souls  does  not  even  lie  in  the 
pathos  which  the  speaker  may  employ.  Men  may  weep 
to  the  tragic  muse  in  a  theatre  as  well  as  to  prophetic 
strains  in  a  chapel.  Their  creature  passions  may  be  im- 
pressed through  the  acting  of  the  stage  as  well  as  by  the 
utterance  of  God's  own  servants.  No;  there  is  something 
more  than  this  wanted,  and  where  that  is  absent  all 
preaching  is  a  nullity.  We  might  preach  till  our 
tongues  rotted,  till  we  should  exhaust  our  lungs  and  die, 
but  never  a  soul  would  be  converted  unless  there  were 
mysterious  power  going  with  it — the  Holy  Ghost, 
changing  the  will  of  man.  O  sirs !  we  might  as  well 
preach  to  stone  walls  as  preach  to  humanity  unless  the 
Holy  Ghost  be  with  the  Word,  to  give  it  power  to  con- 
vert the  soul.  We  are  reminded  of  Mr.  Eowland  Hill, 
who  once  met  a  man  in  the  street  at  night,  not  quite 
drunk,  but  almost  so,  who  said,  '^  Well,  Mr.  Hill,  I  am 
one  of  your  converts."     "Yes,"  said  he,  "I  dare  say  you 


32  Christian  Energy, 

are  one  of  mine;  but  if  you  were  one  of  God's  you  would 
not  be  in  tlie  state  in  which  you  are  now."  Our  converts 
are  worth  nothing.  If  they  are  converted  by  man  they 
can  be  unconverted  by  man.  If  some  charm  or  power  of 
one  preacher  can  bring  them  to  Christ,  some  charm  or 
power  of  another  preacher  can  take  them  from  Christ. 
True  conversion  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  alone.  Well,  then,  my  hearers,  did 
you  ever — never  mind  where  you  were,  whether  in 
Westminster  Abbey,  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  in  this 
Tabernacle,  or  at  some  special  service  at  one  of  the 
theatres ;  it  matters  not  the  place — did  you  ever,  when 
listening  to  the  Word,  feel  a  divine  power  coming  with  itt 
"  Well,"  perhaps  you  will  say,  ^'  I  have  felt  some  im- 
pression." No,  no ;  that  may  be  wiped  away.  Have  you 
felt  a  something  coming  with  it  which  you  could  not  un- 
derstand ;  which,  while  it  wooed  you  and  won  your  hearty 
smote  you  as  though  a  sword  had  gone  through  you, 
and  that  not  with  a  flesh  wound,  but  with  a  wound  that 
divideth  between  soul  and  spirit,  between  joint  and 
marrow,  and  was  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents 
of  the  heart?  Why,  those  who  are  really  God's  elect 
can  tell  a  tale  something  like  this.  They  can  sa}- 
— "  There  was  a  time  when  the  Word  was  to  me  like  a 
great  ten  thonged-whip ;  my  shoulders  were  stripped 
bare,  and  every  time  the  Word  was  preached  it  seemed 
to  make  a  gushing  within  my  soul.  I  trembled  ;  I  saw 
God  in  arms  against  me  ;  I  understood  that  I  was  in  debt 
to  justice  and  could  not  pay ;  that  I  was  involved  in  a 
controversy  against  my  ^laker,  and  could  not  cany  it 
out.  I  saw  myself  stripped  naked  to  my  shame,  leprous 
from  head  to  foot,  a  bankrupt  and  a  felon  ready  to  be 


Election  no  Discouragement,  33 

given  over  to  a  traitor's  doom."  Tlien  the  Word  came 
with  power  to  your  soul.  "  And  O,"  says  such  an  one, 
''  I  remember  too  when  it  came  home  to  my  heart,  and 
made  me  leap  for  very  joy,  for  that  Word  took  all  mv 
load  away;  it  showed  me  Christ's  power  to  save.  I  had 
known  that  before,  but  now  I  felt  it.  I  had  understood 
that  he  could  save,  but  now  that  fact  came  home  to  me. 
I  went  to  Jesus  just  as  I  was;  I  touched  the  hem 
of  his  garment ;  I  was  made  whole.  I  found  now  thut 
tlie  Word  was  not  a  fiction— that  there  was  a  reality  in 
it.  I  had  listened  scores  of  times,  and  he  that  spake  was 
as  one  that  played  a  tune  upon  an  instrument;  but  now 
he  seemed  to  be  dealing  with  me,  putting  his  hand  right 
into  my  heart,  and  getting  hold  of  me.  He  brought  me 
first  to  God's  judgment-seat,  and  there  I  stood  and  Jieard 
the  thunders  roll;  and  then  he  brought  me  to  the 
mercy-seat,  and  I  saw  the  blood  sprinlded  on  it,  and 
I  went  home  triumphing  because  sin  was  washed  away." 
Did  the  Word  ever  come  home  with  this  power 
to  your  souls  ?  And  since  that  has  the  Word  rebuked 
you?  Has  it  sometimes  cut  down  your  hopes?  Do 
you  sometimes,  after  hearing  a  sermon,  feel  as  if  it  had 
been  like  a  great  hurricane  tearing  right  through  the 
forest  of  your  thoughts,  and  cutting  its  own  course,  and 
leaving  many  a  thing  that  you  thought  alive,  dead, 
swept  down  to  the  ground?  Do  you  feel,  too,  when  you 
go  home  from  God's  house,  as  if  God  himself  had  been 
there,  as  if  you  did  not  know  what  it  was;  it  could  not 
liave  been  the  speaker  nor  the  words  he  uttered,  but  the 
A  cry  God  did  come  and  look  into  your  eyes,  and  see  the 
thoughts  of  your  heart,  and  turn  your  heart  upside 
down,  and  then  fill  it  full  again  with  his  love,  and  with 

3 


34  Christian  Energy, 

his  llglit,  and  witli  his  truth  and  with  his  joy,  with  his 
peace,  and  with  his  desire  after  holiness  ?  Is  it  so  with 
you?  for  where  the  Word  is  not  with  power  to  your  souls 
you  lack  the  proof  of  election.  I  do  not  say  that  it 
will  be  so  every  time.  You  must  not  expect  every  time 
that  God  will  speak  with  you;  in  fact,  the  preacher 
himself  fails  often,  and  is  painfully  conscious  of  it. 
How  shall  one  man  always  speak  without  sometimes 
feeling  that  he  himself  is  not  in  a  fit  frame  to  be  God's 
mouth-piece?  But  yet  let  it  be  a  clown  from  the 
country,  if  he  preach  God's  Word ;  it  is  not  the  clown, 
nor  yet  the  archbishop ;  it  is  the  Word  that  is  quick  and 
powerful  when  the  Spirit  is  with  it ;  and  your  evidence 
of  election  is  blotted,  it  is  blurred,  unless  the  Word  has 
come  to  you  with  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  with 
power.  People  come  and  hear  sermons  in  this  place, 
and  then  they  go  out  and  say,  "How  did  you  like  it?" — 
as  if  that  signified  to  anybody — "  How  did  you  like  it?" 
and  one  says,  '^  O,  very  w^ell; "  and  another  says,  ^'  O,  not 
at  all."  And  do  you  think  we  live  on  the  breath  of 
your  nostrils  ?  Do  you  believe  that  God's  servants,  if 
they  be  so,  can  care  for  what  you  think  of  them  ?  Nay, 
verily  I  think  they  are  inclined  to  say,  if  you  should 
reply,  "I  enjoyed  the  sermon,"  "Then  w^e  must  have  been 
unfaithful  or  else  you  would  have  been  angry.  Then 
we  must  have  slurred  over  something,  or  else  it  would 
have  so  cut  your  conscience  as  with  the  jagged  edges  of 
a  knife,  that  jovl  would  say,  '  Well,  I  did  not  think  how 
I  liked  it ;  I  was  thinking  how  I  liked  myself,  and  what 
about  my  own  state  before  God ;  that  was  the  matter 
that  exercised  me.  Not  whether  he  preached  well,  but 
w^hether  I  stood  accepted  in  Christ,  or  whether  I  was  a 


Election  no  Discouragement.  35 

castaway.'  "  My  dear  hearers,  do  you  learn  to  hear  like 
that  ?  If  you  do  not ;  if  going  to  church  and  to  chapel 
be  to  you  like  going  to  an  oratorio,  or  like  listening  to 
some  orator  who  speaks  upon  temporal  matters,  then 
you  lack  the  evidence  of  election ;  the  Word  has  not 
come  to  your  souls  with  power. 

But  there  is  yet  a  second  evidence  of  election  to  which 
we  will  refer  briefly,  "  And  in  much  assurance."  It 
seems,  then,  that  those  whom  God  has  chosen  do  receive 
the  word  with  much  assurance — not  all  of  them  with  full 
assurance;  that  is  a  grace  they  get  afterwards — but 
with  much  assurance.  Sometimes,  you  know,  there  are 
men  who  go  upon  very  strange  principles.  It  is  some- 
what difficult  to  know  w^hat  principles  are  enforced  and 
acknowledged  in  this  age,  for  there  are  some  persons  whose 
principles  allow  them  to  say  black  and  white  at  the 
same  time,  and  there  are  certain  persons  whose  religious 
principles  are  not  much  unlike  this.  They  put  a  hymn 
book  in  their  pockets  when  they  are  going  to  meeting ; 
they  put  a  comic  song  book  in  their  pockets  when  they 
are  going  somewhere  else ;  they  can  hold  with  the  hare 
and  run  with  the  hounds,  and  such  people  as  these  never 
have  any  very  great  confidence  in  their  religion ;  and  it 
is  very  proper  that  they  should  not,  for  their  religion  is 
not  worth  the  time  they  spend  in  making  a  profession  of 
it.  But  the  true  Christian,  when  he  gets  holds  of  prin- 
ciples, keeps  them,  and  there  is  no  mistake  about  the  grip 
with  which  he  maintains  his  hold  of  them.  "Ah!" 
saith  he,  "  that  Word  which  I  have  heard  in  my  ears  is 
the  very  truth  of  God,  and  it  is  true  to  me,  and  real 
and  substantial  to  me,  and  here  I  clasp  it  with  both  my 
hands,  with  a  clasp  that  neither  time,  nor  tribulation, 


36  Christian  Eitenjii, 

nor  death,  shall  ever  cause  me  to  let  go."  To  a  Chrlstiair 
man  his  religion  is  a  part  of  himself  ;  he  believes 
the  truth,  not  because  he  has  been  told  it  or  taught  it 
by  his  mother,  or  his  f  riend^  but  because  it  is  true  to  him, 
like  the  servant  girl  who,  when  she  could  not  answer 
her  infidel  master,  said,  ^'  Sir,  I  cannot  answer  you,  but 
I  have  a  something  in  here  that  would  if  it  could  speak." 
There  is  "  much  assurance."  Sinners  who  have  once 
felt  their  need  of  a  Saviour  feel  very  much  assurance 
about  his  preciousness,  and  saints  that  have  once  found 
him  precious  have  very  much  assurance  about  his  divi- 
nity, about  his  atonement,  about  his  everlasting  love, 
about  his  immortal  dignity,  as  a  prophet,  a  priest,  and  a 
king.  They  are  sure  of  it.  I  know  some  persons  will 
say  if  a  man  speaks  positivel}'  he  is  dogmatical.  Glorious 
old  dogmatism,  when  wilt  thou  come  back  again  to 
earth?  It  is  these  ^' ifs,"  and  "buts,"  and  qualifica- 
tions, these  "  perhapses  "  and  "  may  be  so's  "  that  have 
ruined  our  pulpits.  Look  at  Luther,  when  he  stood 
up  for  the  glory  of  his  God,  was  there  ever  such  a  dog- 
matist ?  "I  believe  it,"  he  said,  '^  and  therefore  I 
speak  it."  From  that  day  when  on  Pilate's  staircase  he 
was  trpng  to  creep  up  and  down  the  stairs  to  win 
heaven,  when  the  sentence  out  of  the  musty  folio  came 
before  him,  "Justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with 
God,"  that  man  was  as  sure  that  works  could  not  save 
him  as  he  w^as  of  his  own  existence.  Now,  if  he  had 
come  out  and  said,  "  Gentlemen,  I  have  a  theory  to 
propound  that  may  be  correct ;  excuse  my  doing  so,  and 
so  on,"  the  Papacy  had  been  dominant  to  this  day^ 
The  man  knew  God  had  said  it,  and  he  felt  that  that 
was  God's  own  way  to  his  own  soul,  and  he  could  not 


Election  no  Discouragement.  37 

help  dogmatising  with  that  glorious  force  of  secession 
which  soon  laid  his  foes  prostrate  at  his  feet.  Now 
have  you  received  the  gospel  "  with  much  assurance  1" 
If  you  have,  and  you  can  say,  "  Christ  is  mine ;  I  trust 
in  him,  and  though  I  have  sometimes  doubts  about  my 
own  interest  in  him,  yet  I  do  know  by  experience  in 
my  own  soul  that  he  is  a  precious  Christ — I  know  not 
by  ^'  Paley's  Evidences"  nor  by  "Butler's  Analogy,"  but 
I  know  by  my  heart's  inward  evidence,  I  know  by  the 
analogy  of  my  own  soul's  experience,  that  the  book 
which  I  have  received  is  no  cunningly  devised  fable,  but 
something  that  came  from  God  to  di'aw  my  soul  up  to 
God" — that  is  another  evidence  of  election.  If  you 
have  that,  never  mind  ;  I  hardly  care  whether  you  be- 
lieve the  doctrine  of  election  or  not ;  you  are  elect.  As 
I  have  sometimes  told  a  brother  who  has  denied  the 
doctrine  of  final  perseverance,  when  I  have  seen  his 
holy  life,  "  Never  mind,  my  brother,  you  ivill  persevere 
to  the  end,  and  3^ou  will  prove  the  doctrine  that  you 
don't  believe.  You  may  not  be  able  to  receive  this,  but 
when  you  get  to  heaven,  if  such  has  been  your  expe- 
rience, you  will  wake  up  and  say,  "  Well,  I  am  one  of 
the  elect.  I  made  a  deal  of  fuss  about  it  while  on 
earth,  and  I  will  make  a  deal  of  music  about  it  now  that 
I  have  got  to  heaven,  and  I  will  sing  more  sweetly  and 
loudly  than  all  the  rest,  ^Unto  him  that  hath  loved  me 
and  washed  me  from  my  sins  in  his  own  blood,  unto  him 
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.' " 

But  there  is  a  third  evidence,  and  about  that  we  will 
be  even  more  brief,  for  time  flies.  "  Ye  became  fol- 
lowers of  us  and  of  the  Lord."  That  is  the  third  ;  by 
which  the  apostle  does  not  mean  that  they  said,  "  I  am 


38  Christian  Energy, 

of  Paul,  I  am  of  Silas,  I  am  of  Timothy."  No,  no,  they 
imitated  Paul  so  fai-  as  he  imitated  Christ.  Thomas 
a'Kempis  wrote  a  book  about  the  imitation  of  Christy 
and  a  blessed  book  in  some  respects  it  is ;  but  I  would 
like  the  Holy  Sj^irit  to  write  in  your  hearts  the  imitation 
of  Christ,  and  that  shall  be  your  sweet  proof  that  you 
are  chosen  of  God.  Are  you  Christ-like  or  do  you 
want  to  be?  Can  you  forgive  your  enemy?  ay!  and 
can  you  love  him,  and  do  him  good  ?  Could  you  say 
to-night,  "  I  am  no  more  any  man's  enemy  than  is  the 
babe  that  is  new  born  ?"  and  do  you  desire  not  to  live 
unselfishly,  to  live  for  others,  to  live  for  God?  Are  you 
prayerful?  Do  you  come  to  God  in  prayer  as  Jesus 
did  ?  Are  you  careful  of  your  words  and  of  your  acts 
as  Christ  was  ?  I  do  not  ask  you  if  you  are  perfect, 
but  I  do  ask  whether  you  follow  the  Perfect  One? 
We  are  to  be  followers  of  Christ,  and  if  not  with 
equal  steps,  still  with  steps  that  would  be  equal  if 
they  could.  If  we  follow  Christ,  that  will  be  one 
of  the  surest  proofs  of  our  election  to  others,  though 
perhaps  to  ourselves,  if  we  be  humble-minded,  it  will 
be  no  proof,  since  we  shall  rather  see  our  blemishes 
than  our  virtues,  and  mourn  over  our  sins  rather  than 
rejoice  in  our  gi'aces.  If  a  man  follow  not  Christ,  those 
w^ho  look  on  may  be  safe  enough  in  concluding  that, 
whatever  he  may  say  about  election,  and  however  much 
he  may  speak,  he  is  not  the  Lord's.  On  that  point  I 
shall  not  stop,  because  I  have  already  enlarged  upon  it 
in  a  former  part  of  the  discourse ;  but  the  last  point,  as 
time  fails  us,  is  this. 

It  seems  that  those  of  whose  election  the  apostle  was 
sure,  received  the  Word  of  God  (if  you  look  further) 


Election  no  Discouragement.  39 

*'  in  mucli  affliction,"  but  "  with  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Wliat  say  you  to  this,  you  whose  rehgion  consists  of  a 
slavish  attendance  upon  forms  that  you  detest?  See  how 
many  there  are  who  go  to  a  place  of  worship  just  because 
it  is  not  respectable  to  stop  away,  but  who  often  wish  it 
were.  And  when  they  get  on  the  Continent, — what 
about  many  of  your  Christians?  Where  is  the  Sabbath 
with  them  then?  Where  is  their  care  for  Grod's  house? 
With  what  misery  do  some  people  go  up  to  the  house 
of  the  Lord.  Why  ?  Because  they  regard  it  as  a  place 
where  they  ought  to  be  very  solemn.  It  is  not  a  home 
to  them ;  it  is  a  prison.  Your  children,  I  suppose,  are 
just  about  coming  home  for  their  holidays.  How  do  they 
come  into  their  father's  house?  Dull,  demure,  as  if 
they  could  not  speak?  No,  bless  their  little  hearts, 
they  come  running  up  to  their  father's  knees,  so  glad  to 
be  there,  and  home  from  school.  That  is  how  a  man 
whose  religion  is  his  delight  comes  up  to  the  house  of 
the  Lord.  He  feels  that  it  is  his  Father's  house.  He 
would  be  reverent,  for  his  Father  is  God,  but  he  must 
be  happy,  for  God  is  his  Father.  See  again  the  Chris- 
tian when  he  goes  to  his  closet.  Ungodly  persons  will 
not  go  there  at  all ;  or,  if  they  do,  it  is  because  they  want 
to  win  heaven  by  it ;  so  they  go  through  their  dreary 
prayers ;  and  what  a  dreary  thing  it  must  be  for  a  man 
to  pray  when  he  never  expects  to  be  heard,  and  when 
he  has  no  spirit  of  prayer  I  It  is  like  a  horse  going 
round  a  mill  grinding  for  somebody  else,  and  never 
getting  any  farther,  the  same  to  be  done  to-morrow,  and 
the  same  the  day  after,  and  so  on.  Sometimes  as  the 
little  church  bells  go  of  a  morning  in  certain  churches, 
to  fetch  people   out,   Monday,   Tuesday,   Wednesday 


40  Christian  Energy. 

Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  there  are  some  persons 
to  be  found  there  to  early  pra^^ers,  and  they  go  to  even- 
ing prayers  too,  and  a  very  good  thing  this  would  be,  if 
those  who  attend  went  there  with  holy  joy;  but  there  is 
the  sexton,  and  he  says  it  is  a  great  trouble  to  be  always 
opening  the  doors  like  that  when  nobody  comes  except 
three  old  women  that  have  got  alms-houses,  and  two  that 
expect  them,  and  therefore  are  there,  and  they  think  that 
an  acceptable  service  to  God.  But  they  who  go  because 
they  would  not  stop  away  if  they  could,  they  who 
worship  God  because  it  is  a  delight,  and  a  pleasure,  and 
a  holy  thing,  and  honourable — these  are  men  who 
delight  in  God's  Word,  who  give  the  best  evidence  of 
being  chosen  of  God.  Woe  unto  you.  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,  who  make  your  faces  miserable  that  ye  may 
appear  unto  men  to  fast.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
he  that  reads  the  heart  asketh  not  that  your  head  may 
hang  down  like  a  bulrush,  but  that  ye  may  do  deeds  of 
mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  your  God,  and  ye  who 
can  delight  yourselves  in  your  God,  shall  have  the 
desires  of  your  heart.  Ye  that  can  rejoice  in  the  Lord 
always,  and  triumph  in  his  name,  shall  go  from  strength 
to  strength,  and  going  at  last  to  glory,  you  shall  find  that 
you  came  there  as  the  result  of  his  divine  purpose  and 
decree,  and  you  shall  give  him  all  the  praise. 

But  now,  lastly,  I  hear  some  say,  "But  I  want  to 
know  whether  /  am  elect.  I  cannot  say  that  the  Word 
ever  came  to  me  with  power — ^I  cannot  say  I  received 
it  in  much  assurance — I  cannot  say  I  am  a  follower 
of  Christ — I  cannot  say  I  have  received  the  Word 
with  joy."  Well,  dear  brother,  then  leave  that 
question  alone.     Instead  of  that,  let  me  propound  this, 


Election  no  Ducourafjement.  41 

^'Dost  tliou  bL'licve  in  the  Lord  Jcsiis  Christ?  Will 
you  now  trust  Christ  to  save  your  soul?"  He  will  doit, 
if,  just  as  thou  art,  whoever  thou  niayst  be,  thou  wilt 
come  to  Christ,  and  give  thyself  up  to  him  to  save  thee, 
to  have  thee,  to  hold  thee  for  better  for  worse  in  life  and 
throuo-h  death.  The  moment  thou  believest  thou  art 
saved,  that  act  of  faith,  through  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ  will  put  away  your  every  sin.  You  will  not  begin 
to  be  saved ;  you  are  saved.  You  will  not  be  put  into  a 
salvable  condition,  but  saved  the  moment  you  believe 
— completely  and  perfectly  saved.  ^*  O,"  saith  one,  *^  I 
would  I  could  trust  Christ."  Saycst  thou  so,  man? 
^'  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come  ;"  let  him  trust  Christ. 
God  help  thee  now  to  do  it.  Trust  Jesus,  and  you  are 
saved.  And  this  is  addressed  to  every  one  of  you  with- 
out exception,  "Whosoever  believeth  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  hath  everlasting  life."  The  Lord  help  you  to 
trust  Jesus,  and  then  you  may  go  on  your  way  with  joy, 
*'  knowing,  brethren  beloved,  your  election  of  God." 


%\\t  tl^nv^tfi  i^  "^iftW^  %fp, 


Lo,  God  hath,  given  thee  all  them  that  sail  with  thee." 

— Acts  xxYii.  24. 


UR  Apostle  Paul  had  given  some  very  good 
advice  to  the  mariners  of  this  ship.  They 
had  thought  fit  to  reject  it.  What  then? 
Now  some  of  us  are  of  such  short  temper 
that  if  our  good  advice  should  be  rejected 
we  should  be  in  a  huff,  and  never  offer  any 
more,  and  we  should  feel  some  sort  of  plea- 
sure in  seeing  those  persons  get  into  mischief,  who  were 
so  foolish  as  not  to  take  our  sage  counsel.  Not  so  the 
Apostle  Paul.  After  he  had  prudently  abstained  for 
some  time  from  saying  anything — for  there  is  a  time  to 
be  silent — he  at  length  gave  proof  of  his  unabated 
affection  to  them  by  the  good  advice  which  he  offered. 
Let  us  take  a  lesson  from  him,  and  let  us  forgive  our 
brethren  even  to  seventy  times  seven;  and  if,  after 
having  done  our  very  best,  we  still  find  our  advice 
rejected,  let  us  persevere  in  our  work  of  love.  One 
other  remark.  Note  the  comfort  that  was  given  to 
our  apostle.  He  had  been  long  out  at  sea,  and  with 
the  rest  had  suffered  much.  The  comfort  given  him 
was,  *^Fear  not,  Paul,  for  thou  must  stand  before 
Csesar."     No   very   great   comfort,   you   will  say.     It 


The  Cliiirch  the   WorlcVs  Hope.  43 

seems  no  more  comfort  than  if  tlie  angel  had  said, 
**  You  can't  be  drowned,  for  you  are  to  be  devoured  by 
a  lion."  Some  such  comfort  Bishop  Ridley  took  to 
himself  when,  being  rowed  up  the  river  to  the  burning, 
a  little  storm  coming  on,  and  the  watermen  being  much 
afraid,  he  said,  "  Fear  not,  boatmen,  the  bishop  that  is 
doomed  to  be  burned  cannot  be  drowned."  Yet  there 
is  real  comfort  in  the  words  of  the  angel,  for  it  was  the 
apostle's  intense  desire  to  preach  Christ  before  Nero. 
He  wished  to  proclaim  the  gospel  at  Rome;  he  had  had 
great  trouble  of  heart  for  those  that  had  not  seen  his 
face  in  the  flesh ;  and  therefore  whether  Nero  be  a  lion  or 
not,  he  was  but  too  glad  to  beard  him  for  Christ's  sake. 
And  when  a  man  has  no  self  remaining,  but  has  given 
himself  up  as  a  living  sacrifice  for  Christ,  that  which 
Avould  be  a  terror  to  another  man  becomes  a  comfort  to 
him.  '^I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered  up,"  said  the 
apostle ;  and  it  was  given  to  him  even  as  a  comfort 
that  he  must  be  offered  up  by  some  bloody  death,  and 
not  escape  by  the  milder  method  of  a  passage  to  heaven 
by  sea.  Now  our  apostle  found  a  comfort  in  the  fact 
that  those  with  him  would  be  preserved.  It  had  been 
the  subject  of  his  prayer,  so  that  he  was  cheered  not 
only  with  the  prospect  of  himself  prophesying  at  Rome, 
but  with  the  hope  of  seeing  all  his  comrades  safe  on 
shore. 

Now  I  have  two  or  three  things  to  talk  of  to-night ; 
so  let  me  proceed  with  them  at  once. 

I.  The  first  practical  observation  founded  upon  my 
text  is  this — a  godly  man  may  often  be  thrown  into  an 
ill  position  for  the  good  of  others.  Paul  was  put  into  a 
ship — into  a  ship  among  thieves  and  criminals — into  a 


44  Christian  Energy, 

ship  among  sailors  and  soldiers,  who  were  none  of  the 
best  in  those  days,  but  he  was  put  there  for  their  good. 
This,  then,  I  would  lay  down  as  a  general  theory — 
there  are  multitudes  of  Christians  who  are  in  places 
very  uncomfortable,  and,  perhaps,  very  unsuitable  for 
them,  who  are  put  there  for  the  good  of  others. 

If  they  were  not  so  placed  they  would  not  be  like 
their  Tjord.  Why  was  Christ  on  eartli  at  all  but  for 
the  good  of  sinners  ?  Why  does  he  sit  there  at  a  pub- 
lican's table?  Why  eats  he  bread  with  a  harlot?  Why 
does  he  permit  an  unclean  woman  to  come  and  wash  his 
feet  ?  As  for  himself,  'tis  pain  to  him,  pain  to  his  holy 
nature,  to  come  into  contact  with  evil.  But  our  Lord 
was  the  Physician,  and  where  should  a  physician  be 
but  among  the  sick?  Now  as  you  and  I  are  to  be 
made  like  our  Lord,  we  must  not  marvel  if  sometimes 
we  are  thrown,  as  he  was,  into  company  which  we 
would  not  choose  for  its  own  sake,  but  into  which  Pro- 
vidence puts  us  that  we  may  do  good. 

Moreover,  is  not  this  just  the  reason  why  the  saints 
of  God  are  on  earth  at  all  ?  Why  does  he  not  send  an 
express  chariot  to  take  them  at  once  to  heaven?  There 
is  no  necessity  for  saints  being  on  earth  that  I  know  of, 
except  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-men.  Sanctification 
might  be  completed  in  a  moment :  as  for  all  the  rest,  it 
is  done.  He  hath  made  us  "  meet  to  be  partakers  of 
the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  Why  stay  we 
here,  then,  at  all,  but  that  we  may  be  salt  in  the  midst 
of  putrefaction — light  in  the  midst  of  darkness — life  in 
the  midst  of  death  ?  The  Church  is  the  world's  hope. 
As  Christ  is  the  hope  of  the  Church,  so  the  Churcli  is 
the   hope   of   the   world.     The    saints  become,    under 


The   Church  the   TlortJ'^'  Hope.  45 

Christ,  the  world's  saviours.  Then  wc  must  not  marvel, 
beino-  here  for  this  very  purpose,  if  Christ  does  throw  us 
like  a  handful  of  salt  just  where  the  putrefaction  is  the 
worst;  or  if  he  should  cast  us,  as  he  hath  often  done  with 
his  saints  aForetime,  where  our  influence  is  most  needed. 
And  will  you  please  to  recollect,  dear  friends,  that 
there  have  been  special  cases  in  Scripture  where  the 
putting  a  person  into  an  unpleasant  condition  has  been 
ii  great  boon  to  his  fellow  men?  There  is  Joseph  in  the 
dungeon.  What  is  he  there  for?  Why,  with  his  hag- 
gard look  and  shaggy  beard,  is  he  sitting  down  in  the 
round  dun<2;eon  tower  of  the  chief  of  the  slau£jhtermen? 
He  is  put  there  that  he  may  relieve  the  baker  and  the 
butler  of  their  distress,  and  yet  more  fully,  that  he  may 
provide  food  for  his  ungrateful  brethren  who  had  sold 
him  for  a  slave.  The  salvation  of  Israel's  offspring 
depends  upon  Joseph  being  put  into  prison.  Look  at  a 
more  majestic  case.  There,  upon  the  ruins  of  a  once 
glorious  temple,  sits  a  grand  old  man,  weeping  as  though 
he  had  been  a  masculine  Niobe ;  tears  flow  down  both 
his  cheeks,  and  these  are  the  words  he  cries  : — ^'  O  that 
my  head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  were  a  fountain  of 
tears,  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the  slain  of 
the  daughter  of  my  people !"  It  is  old  Jeremy.  Why 
is  he  there?  why  is  he  not  in  Babylon  ?  why  is  he  not  in 
some  place  where  he  could  be  comfortably  cared  for? 
Israel  wants  him.  The  women  that  flock  around  him 
like  stricken  deer  need  his  comfort,  and  the  sinners  in 
Zion,  that  hide  their  faces  from  his  weeping  eyes,  need 
him  to  pour  out  those  burning  syllables  which  make 
their  consciences  start,  seared  though  they  be.  If  you 
should  say  that  these  are  two  instances  which  are  above 


46  Christian  Energy, 

your  level,  let  me  ask  you  why  was  that  little  maid 
taken  prisoner  by  the  Syi'ians  and  carried  away  from 
her  country  ?  Not  a  pleasant  thing,  for  a  child  to  be 
torn  away  from  her  family  and  become  a  slave,  even 
though  it  be  in  the  house  of  the  good  Naaman.  Why 
is  she  there?  Naaman  the  leper  must  be  healed ;  the 
Syrian  king  must  know  that  the  Lord  of  Israel  can 
work  wonders;  and  therefore  that  little  maid  must 
be  carried  away,  and  she  must  be  where  otherwise 
she  would  not  wish  to  be  placed. 

I  need  not  give  any  more  proofs  that  such  has  been 
often  the  case.  Instead  of  that,  let  me  give  instances. 
There  is  a  young  man  here — he  is  hardly  a  man  yet — 
whose  father  in  binding  him  an  apprentice  made  a 
mistake.  Parents  should  be  very  careful  whom  they 
choose  to  be  instructors  of  their  sons.  They  should  not 
wantonly  put  a  youth,  who  has  been  trained  under  pious 
influences,  under  subjection  to  an  ungodly  man,  how- 
ever business-like  he  may  be.  Well,  evidently  your 
parent  made  a  mistake,  and  now  you  are  in  a  family 
where  religion  is  lightly  spoken  of.  You  get  out  on  the 
Sabbath  ;  you  don't  get  out  at  other  times ;  and  if  you 
mention  religion  you  are  either  met  with  a  sneer  or, 
perhaps,  with  something  worse.  Well,  young  believer, 
this  is  a  hard  trial  for  you.  We  do  not  generally  send 
our  lads  to  battle,  but  our  Master  knows  how  sometimes 
to  do  the  greatest  feats  by  the  feeblest  instrumentality. 
What  if  God  should  intend  to  bless  your  master's 
family  through  you  ?  Wliat  if  he  has  ordained  to  send 
you  to  that  house  on  purpose,  that  in  the  garb  of  an 
apprentice  you  may  be  a  missionary  of  the  cross  ?  It 
may  be  so.     Opportunities  will  occur  to  you ;  there  will 


The  Cliurcli  the   World's  Hope.  47 

be  fitting  occasions  for  the  use  of  them;  and  you  will  see 
God's  wisdom  even  in  your  father's  mistake.  Another 
of  you  happens  to  be  one  of  a  family,  not  by  mistake, 
but  in  the  common  course  of  providence.  Electing  love 
has  lit  on  you  and  left  an  ungodly  parent  behind,  and 
brothers  and  sisters  run  the  downward  road.  Don't  be 
too  sad  over  this.  I  don't  know  whether  this  may  not 
be  a  cause  for  joy  to  you.  God  has  this  day  lighted  a  lamp 
in  your  father's  house.  It  may  never  go  out.  Inas- 
much as  you  are  converted,  salvation  has  come  to 
your  house.  O !  watch  for  your  brother's  soul ;  pray 
for  your  sister's  conversion ;  take  your  parents  in  the 
arms  of  faith  before  God ;  and  who  can  tell  but  that 
it  shall  prove  to  be  the  best  thing  in  your  life  that 
you  were  thus  placed  in  a  family  were  Christ  was  not 
feared?  Or  you  are  a  w^orkman — I  know  a  great  many 
instances — and  perhaps  you  have  come  up  from  the 
country  for  the  sake  of  better  w^ork.  It  may  be  that  in 
the  country  you  w'orked  in  some  little  shop  w^here  there 
was  a  godly  man  wdth  you,  and  now  you  have  come  into 
one  of  our  large  shops  in  London  and  got  some  work. 
There  is  a  deal  of  swearing  on  both  sides  of  you,  and  if 
you  are  known  to  go  to  a  house  of  prayer,  the  other  men 
mark  you  out  and  call  you  some  odd  name  or  other.  I 
know  you  say,  ''  I  wish  I  could  get  into  another  place  ; 
I  w^ill  throw  up  my  work :  I  must — I  will  throw  up  my 
work,  and  I  wdll  go  somewhere  else."  Don't — don't  do 
so.  It  is  very  likely  God  has  sent  you  there  just  as  he 
sent  Paul  into  the  ship.  Instead  of  leaving,  gird  up 
your  loins  like  a  man  and  cry  to  God  that  he  would  give 
you  all  them  that  sail  with  you,  that  they  may  yet  be 
saved.     Your  advent  into  that  workshop  may  be  as  if  an 


48  Christian  Energy, 

angel  had  come  straight  from  heaven  and  gone  down  tc 
the  vilest  place  to  make  it  ring  with  the  songs  of  joy. 
Possibly,  dear  friends,  to  multiply  instances — some  of 
you  may  happen  to  live  in  a  very  low  locality.  In  such 
a  crowded  place  as  London,  and  especially  now  that  the 
railways  make  the  houses  of  artisans  so  scarce,  you  may 
have  to  live  where  you  do  not  like  to  live.  On  both, 
sides  of  you,  you  know,  the  houses  are  not  what  you 
would  wish  tliem  to  be;  and  down  in  the  court  on 
►Sunday  what  a  scene  there  is !  You  went  home  this 
morning,  and  you  saw  people  in  their  shirt-sleeves  lolling 
about,  and  waiting  at  the  corner  till  the  public-house 
was  opened  that  they  might  go  in  and  drink.  And  you 
will  go  home  to-night  and  see  what  you  do  not  like  ta 
see.  Now,  I  do  not  know  that  you  should  be  in  a  hurry 
to  get  out  of  that  place.  It  is  Just  possible  that  you  are 
put  there  for  some  end  or  design.  Who  can  tell  the 
benefit  your  good  example  may  be?  And  if  you  are 
bold  enough  to  speak  a  word  for  Christ,  there  may  be  a 
neighbour  in  that  court,  or  in  that  alley,  who,  though 
he  never  did  go  up  to  the  house  of  God  before,  will  go 
with  you.  It  may  have  been  written  in  the  book  of 
God's  predestination  that  you  must  needs  pass  through 
that  Samaria  that  you  might  find  that  fallen  woman^ 
and  that  she  might  be  brought  to  Christ — who  knows  ? 
And  there  are  some  of  you  going  to  emigrate.  Some 
dear  friends  who  have  been  among  us  for  years,  find  it 
best  to  cross  the  seas.  I  would  not  weep,  my  brethren 
— I  would  not  sorrow  at  your  departure,  for  who  knows, 
unpleasant  though  it  be  to  rend  oneself  from  one's  con- 
nections, and  to  leave  one's  native  land,  you  may  go 
forth  to  carry  seed  that  shall  be  wafted  over  a  continent^ 


The  Church  the   WorlcCs  Hope.  49 

and  bring  forth  fruit  in  years  to  come?  Put  a 
Christian  where  you  may,  however  unpleasant  to 
himself,  he  cannot  be  out  of  place.  If  Providence 
thrusts  him  there  it  is  well.  Ay,  and  if  what  some  of 
you  dread  so  much  should  come  to  pass — if  in  3^our  old 
age  the  workhouse  should  be  the  only  place  that  is  to 
receive  you — ah  !  it  is  not  pleasant  to  look  forward  to 
it ;  but  I  can  conceive  a  Christian  pauper  doing  more 
good  for  God  in  the  house  of  poverty  than  many  a  peer 
has  been  able  to  do  in  Parliament.  I  can  conceive  you 
shedding  a  light  and  lustre  along  those  walls  which  shall 
rebuke  the  harshness  of  those  that  are  masters,  and 
kindle  light,  and  love,  and  hope  in  some  bosoms  that 
had  grown  strangers  to  all  those  heavenly  things. 
Good  Master!  if  thou  cast  us  into  a  ship  we  will  ask 
thee  to  give  us  all  that  sail  with  us,  and  if  thou  put  us 
anywhere  we  will  look  about  us  to  see  what  we  can  do 
that  we  may  honour  thee ! 

I  must  not  leave  this  point,  even  though  time  should 
fly,  until  I  have  just  made  one  or  two  remarks  rapidly. 

Do  not  get  into  these  places  of  your  own  choice. 
^'  Put  your  finger  in  the  fire,"  said  one  to  a  martyr  once, 
*'and  see  whether  you  can  burn."  "No,"  said  he,  "I 
don't  see  the  use  of  that.  If  I  put  my  own  finger  into 
the  fire  I  have  no  promise  from  God;  but  if  he  calls  me 
to  burn  for  his  sake  I  have  no  doubt  he  will  give  me 
strength  to  do  it."  You  have  no  business  to  pick  bad 
places  to  live  in ;  you  have  no  right  to  expose  yourself 
to  danger.  That  is  a  foolish  thing ;  but  if  God  shall  do 
it — take  this  for  my  next  remark — do  not  be  in  a  hurry 
to  undo  it.  You  may  leap  out  of  the  frying-pan  into  the 
fire.    You  may  go  from  bad  to  worse.    It  is  just  possible 


50  Christian  Energij. 

that  if  the  present  place  has  one  temptation,  the  next  maj 
have  another  set.  For  my  part  I  do  not  like  changing 
temptations.  I  know  my  old  temptations — not  as  well 
as  I  would  like  to  know  them,  but  still  if  the  Devil 
could  change  the  whole  set  of  my  temptations  I  do  not 
know  what  would  become  of  me.  Better  keep  the  old 
ones,  I  think.  You  have  been  tned  in  one  point,  you 
have  got  used  to  it,  and  are  gi'owing  stronger  in  that 
point.  No  need  to  run  after  a  fresh  ordeal,  but  if  God 
has  placed  you  there,  be  like  Paul — be  very  prudent.  Do 
not  talk  very  much.  There  is  wisdom  in  holding  your 
tongue.  Paul  gave  his  advice,  but  he  abstained  a  long 
time  before  he  gave  it  again.  He  timed  himself ;  and 
there  is  nothing  like  watching  opportunities.  You 
young  persons  especially,  if  you  live  in  families,  and 
w^ant  to  do  them  good,  take  care  that  you  are  willing  to 
do  good  in  temporal  things.  Lend  a  hand  when  they 
want  your  help.  Paul  and  Luke  helped  to  throw  the 
tackling  into  the  sea,  so  the  chapter  tells  us — ay,  and 
the  sailors  liked  them  all  the  better  for  it.  They  said, 
'^ There  is  Luke,  a  passenger,  and  here  is  Paul  a  prisoner; 
they  are  neither  of  them  bound  to  work,  but  they  have 
buckled  to  and  helped  us  :  we  will  listen  to  them,  for  they 
are  very  handy  fellows."  Young  man,  just  try  and  make 
the  best  use  of  yourself.  If  you  are  placed  in  a  family 
that  is  irreligious,  make  them  value  you ;  just  show 
them  that  you  will  do  anything  you  can  to  serve  them. 
They  will  not  believe  the  reality  of  your  spiritual  affec- 
tion unless  you  show  a  temporal  affection  too.  And 
when  the  time  comes,  do  not  hesitate  to  speak,  but  let 
your  speaking  be  mainly  by youractions.  The  best  sermon 
Paul  preached  was  when  he  took  bread  and  gave  thanks. 


The   Church  the    World's  Hope.  51 

He  did  not  do  that  for  show.  It  was  just  in  the  daily 
course  of  his  habitual  godliness  that  the  man  of  God 
came  forth  boldly  before  their  eyes.  Do  not  conceal 
your  godliness  from  those  around  you.  Though  at  first 
they  may  laugh  at  you  and  despise  you,  who  can  tell  but 
that  like  Paul  you  may  gain  influence  till  they  will  do 
anything  you  tell  them,  and  like  Paul,  by  means  of  that 
influence  you  may  save  all  that  are  in  the  house,  and  so 
the  text  may  come  true  of  you,  "  I  have  given  thee  all 
them  that  sail  with  thee." 

II.  A  second  lesson  suggested  to  us  is  this.  Where- 
ever  we  are  cast  we  should  anxiously  ask  of  God  all  the 
souls  that  sail  with  us. 

God  says  he  gave  the  souls  to  Paul ;  therefore  I 
conclude  Paul  had  asked  him.  How  many  were  they  ? 
Some  two  hundred  and  seventy ;  and  yet  he  gave  them 
all.  Father,  some  seven  or  eight  make  up  your  family; 
or  if  it  be  of  larger  dimensions,  at  least  you  have  not  in 
all  your  kinsfolk,  I  should  think,  so  many  as  the  two 
hundred  and  seventy.  Do  not  therefore  in  your  prayers 
leave  out  one  child,  nor  one  connection,  nor  one  friend. 
Pray  to  God  for  them  all.  Now,  they  w^U  be  of  all 
sorts.  Let  me  describe  those  that  sailed  with  Paul. 
There  was  one  good  one  :  that  was  Luke.  Well,  Luke 
was  saved.  You  have  got  one  pious  son — you  have  one 
converted  daughter.  Continue  in  your  prayer  till  you 
see  that  child  safely  landed  with  you  in  heaven. 
Perhaps  you  have  one  courteous  passenger  Avith  you  in 
the  ship,  like  Julius  the  centurion,  of  whom  we  read  in 
the  third  verse  of  the  chapter,  that  he  entreated  Paul 
courteously.  Ee  very  earnest  in  prayer,  for  those  who 
are  willing  to  hear  the  AVord,     O,  how  good  it  is  if  wq 


52  Christian  Energy. 

liave  in  our  families  brothers  and  sisters,  or  servants,  or 
masters,  who  treat  the  Word  of  God  with  deference  and 
respect.  Let  not  these  be  omitted  in  our  supplication 
Anxiously  pray  for  them.  Perhaps  you  have  among 
your  connections  some  knowing  ones.  Paul  had.  There 
was  the  master  of  the  ship  ;  he  knew  better  than  Paul, 
or  at  least  he  preferred  his  own  conceit  to  Paul's  counsel. 
Do  not  give  up  the  self-conceited,  the  suspicious,  the 
cavilling,  the  sceptical,  pray  for  them  till  you  have  all  in 
the  ship.  Possibly,  nay  certainly,  you  have  some 
worldly  friends.  You  have  a  son,  perhaps,  that  is 
exceedingly  careful  about  tliis  world,  but  careless  of  the 
next.  Do  not  give  him  up.  There  was  the  owner  of 
the  ship  on  board.  All  he  cared  about  was  getting  his 
corn  to  Pome  in  time  to  catch  the  next  market.  He 
did  not  care  what  became  of  the  sailors  or  what  became 
of  Paul.  So  pray  for  Avorldly  relatives ;  do  not  be 
satisfied  to  leave  any  of  them  out.  And  then  it  may  be 
you  have  on  board,  in  connection  with  you,  some  that 
are  very  careless,  and  some  who  add  to  this  carelessness 
even  craelty  and  a  want  of  gratitude  ;  such  were  the 
soldiers.  They  counselled  to  kill  Paul — Paul  who  had 
preserv^ed  them ;  but  nevertheless  Paul  prayed  for  the 
soldiers.  Do  not,  I  pray  you,  leave  out  the  most  unkind, 
the  most  flinty-hearted  of  your  friends  and  neighbours. 
Or  it  may  be  you  have  a  cunning  and  selfish  friend. 
Do  not  forget  him.  Such  were  the  sailors.  Under 
pretence  of  casting  anchors  out  of  the  foreship,  they 
were  attempting  to  get  into  a  boat  and  escape,  and  so 
leave  the  ship,  and  its  hundreds  of  passengers,  to  perish 
in  the  storm.  He  prayed  for  the  sailors.  Do  you  the 
same.     Now  there  were  many  of  them  that  could  not 


The   Church  the   Worlds  Hope.  53 

swim,  but  he  still  prayed  tliat  those  that  could  not  swim 
might  be  saved ;  and  there  were  some  that  could  swim, 
but  he  prayed  for  them  quite  as  much  as  for  those  who 
could  not.  So  you  have  some  that  are  converted  and 
some  that  are  not ;  you  have  some  that  are  moral  and 
some  that  are  not;  but  yet  plead  for  all,  and  let  not  the 
Lord  curtail  his  word  till  he  has  given  you  all  them 
that  sail  with  you. 

Now  I  want  you  to  notice — especially  you  that  are 
parents — something  that  the  apostle  did  not  pray  for. 
I  do  not  read  that  he  ever  prayed  "Lord  save  the  ship." 
No.  Now,  the  ship  is  like  your  family  name — like  your 
family  dignity.  Do  not  be  praying  about  that.  "  Lord, 
give  me  my  children's  souls,  and  let  my  name  be  blotted 
out,  if  thou  wilt,  as  long  as  their  souls  be  saved."  And 
I  do  not  find  that  the  apostle  ever  prayed  about  the 
cargo.  He  let  them  fling  the  wheat  out,  and  never 
cared  for  that.  So  you  need  not  pray  about  your 
wealth.  Put  that  into  God's  hand,  and  say,  "Lord, 
do  as  thou  wilt  with  my  sons  and  daughters — save  their 
souls.  I  don't  ask  fortunes  for  them ;  I  ask  grace.  I 
would,  if  it  were  thy  will,  that  tliey  might  have  food 
convenient  always,  and  never  need  bread;  but  still.  Lord, 
I  would  rather  see  their  souls  saved  and  see  them  in 
poverty,  than  see  them  rich  and  be  lost."  Moreover,  I 
do  not  find  that  Paul  made  any  condition  about  it.  He 
did  not  tell  the  Lord  when  he  wanted  these  people  saved; 
so  you  are  not  to  expect  that  God  will  save  your  children 
just  when  you  please.  You  may  never  live  to  see  it ;  it 
may  be  when  you  are  dead  and  gone ;  but  still,  do  be 
earnest  that  God  will  give  you  all  of  them.  And  Paul 
did  not  make  a  stipulation  as  to  how  it  should  be  done. 


54  Christian  Energy. 

I  recollect  my  mother  saying,  "I  prayed  that  you  might 
be  saved,  but  I  never  prayed  that  you  might  be  a 
Baptist ;"  but,  nevertheless,  I  became  a  Baptist,  for,  as 
I  reminded  her,  the  Lord  was  able  to  do  for  her 
"exceeding  abundantly  above  what  she  could  ask  or 
think,"  and  he  did  it.  She  expected,  of  course,  that 
the  child  would  be  an  Independent.  Well,  as  long  as 
your  children  are  saved,  you  need  not  put  in  any  con- 
ditions as  to  the  mode.  Sooner  see  your  son  and 
daughter  go  to  the  Established  Church  saved,  than  see 
them  go  to  your  own  place  of  worship  and  be  lost.  We 
like  to  see  them  go  with  us  to  our  place  of  worship.  I 
think  it  is  right  they  should;  and  it  is  a  great  joy  to  a 
Christian's  heart  to  see  all  his  children  walking  with  him 
to  the  same  sanctuary ;  but  O  !  that  is  a  mere  trifle 
compared  with  the  solemn  matter  of  seeing  them  saved. 
And,  once  more,  though  Paul  did  get  them  all  saved, 
yet  he  did  not  ask  God  to  save  them  without  means ; 
nor  did  it  please  God  to  do  so  either,  for  though  the 
means  were  contemptible,  yet  they  were  means — ' '  Some 
on  boards,  and  some  on  broken  pieces ;  and  so  it  came  to 
pass  that  they  escaped  all  safe  to  land."  O,  we  must 
try  to  put  the  "  boards  and  broken  pieces  of  the  ship" 
in  the  way  of  those  we  wish  to  be  saved.  We  must  try 
to  give  them  a  plank  to  swim  to  shore  on  in  our  earnest 
instructions,  and  our  indefatigable  exertions  to  bring 
them  to  know  the  Lord. 

Now,  dear  friends,  having  pointed  the  arrow,  I 
will  try  to  shoot  it.  Surely  you,  who  love  the  Lord 
yourselves,  will  take  up  this  matter  from  this  time 
forth,  and  ask  the  Lord  to  give  you  all  them  that  sail 
with  you. 


The  Cliurch  the   Woi-IiFs  Hope,  55 

III.  As  we  shoakl  ask  for  all,  so  we  should  labour  for 
the  conversion  of  all  that  sail  with  us. 

There  were  two  Athenians  who  were  to  be  employed 
by  the  republic  in  some  great  work.  The  first  one  had 
great  gifts  of  speech ;  he  stood  up  before  the  Athenian 
populace  and  addressed  them,  describing  the  style  in 
which  the  work  should  be  done  and  depicting  his  own 
qualifications  and  the  congratulations  with  which  they 
would  receive  him  when  they  saw  how  beautifully  he 
had  finished  all  their  designs.  The  next  workman  had 
no  powers  of  speech,  so,  standing  up  before  the  Athenian 
assembly,  he  said,  "  I  cannot  speak,  but  all  that  So-and- 
so  has  said,  I  will  do."  They  chose  him— wisely  chose 
liini — believing  he  would  be  a  man  of  deeds,  while  the 
other  might  probably  be  a  man  of  words.  Now  if  you 
are  men  of  deeds  you  will  be  the  best  men.  He  tliat 
only  prays  for  a  thing,  but  does  not  work  for  it,  is  like 
the"^  workman  that  could  talk  well.  He  that  can  work 
as  well  as  pray  is  the  best  workman  to  be  employed  in 
the  Master's  service. 

It  may  be  you  will  say,  "But  what  am  I  to  do? 
How  can  I  be  the  means  of  saving  all  them  that  sail 
with  me  f '  AVell,  the  first  thing  you  can  do  is  to  begin 
early  with  good  advice.  Paul  gave  his  advice  before 
they  set  sail.  As  soon  as  ever  your  children  can  under- 
stand anything,  let  them  know  about  Christ.  Begin 
early.  A  certain  minister  called  some  time  ago  to  see 
a  mother,  having  heard  that  a  child  about  twelve  years 
old  was  dead.  The  mother  was  in  very  deep  distress, 
and  the  pastor  was  not  at  all  surprised  at  that.  He  talked 
to  her  about  the  Lord's  giving  and  the  Lord's  taking 
away,  when  she  suddenly  stopped  him  and  said,  '*  Yes, 


56  Chmstian  Energy, 

sir,  I  know  tlie  consolations  which  may  be  offered  to  a 
mother  who  has  lost  her  child,  and  I  appreciate  them 
all !  but  I  have  a  sting  that  you  cannot  remove.  There 
is  a  venom  in  my  gi'ief  that  you  cannot  cure."  He  asked 
her  what  thatw^as.  Said  she,  "I  have  had  it  on  my  con- 
science to  speak  to  my  boy  solemnly  and  privately  about 
his  soul  for  this  last  year  past,  but  my  deceitful  heart 
has  always  said,  '  Do  it  to-morrow  ;'  and  I  thought" — 
(here  she  burst  into  tears, — the  pastor  had  to  wait 
awhile  till  she  could  resume  her  story) — "I  thought 
that,  as  his  mind  was  opening,  and  he  was  twelve  years 
of  age,  I  w^ould  now  do  it.  Yesterday  morning  I  meant 
to  do  it — the  veiy  morning  he  took  ill  I  thought  I 
would  do  it,  and  w^hen  I  heard  him  say  that  he  had  a 
headache  I  was  glad  of  it,  thinking  that  while  I  was 
soothing  him  he  would  be  more  ready  to  hear  a  mother's 
w^ords;  but,  oh,  sir,  before  I  had  an  opportunity  of 
speaking  to  him  he  was  much  worse,  and  I  had  to  take 
him  to  bed ;  and  w^hen  he  was  in  bed  he  fell  asleep.  I 
sent  for  the  physician,  but  my  child  had  soon  fallen  into 
unconsciousness,  and  he  was  shortly  after  removed  from 
me ;  he  has  gone  before  God,  and  I  never  solemnly  and 
privately  talked  to  him  about  his  soul.  That  is  a  grief 
you  cannot  remove."  Oh,  mothers  and  fathers,  never 
have  that  sting !  Your  children  may  die :  begin  with 
them  now,  that  they  may  not  die  before  you  have  had 
an  opportunity  of  telling  them  the  way  of  salvation.. 
But  after  having  given  this  early  advice  you  must  not 
think  the  work  is  done.  Yom'  boy  may  forget  it.  He 
may  turn  out  a  wild  youth,  and  run  quite  away  from 
you;  but  do  continue  in  prayer.  And  let  me  say  to 
you,  do  continue  in  family  prayer.     I  do  think,  if  we 


The  Churcli  the    WorltCs  Hope.  57 

should  look  into  those  cases  -where  the  sous  aud 
daughters  of  Christian  people  turn  out  badly,  it  would 
be  found  to  be  usually  the  parents'  own  fault.  I  think 
you  would  find  they  neglect  to  pray  with  their  children. 
Oh,  dear  friends,  there  can  be  no  ordinance  more  likely 
to  be  blest  than  that  heavenly  institution  of  family 
prayer,  when  you  can  gather  together,  and,  in  the 
presence  of  the  child,  pray  for  his  soul,  and  mother  and 
father  can  unite  hearts  together  in  the  desire  that  their 
offspring  may  live  before  God.  Paul  continued  to  pray. 
Take  you  Paul's  example,  and  you  may  hope  to  see 
God  give  you  all  them  that  sail  with  you. 

And  then  remember,  dear  friends,  if  you  would  have 
your  children  saved,  there  is  something  you  must  not  do. 
If  Paul  had  prayed  for  these  people,  and  then  had  gone 
down  below  into  the  hold  with  an  auger,  and  had  begun 
boring  holes  in  the  ship,  you  would  have  said,  "Oh,  it  is 
no  use  that  scoundrel  praying,  for  see,  he  is  scuttling 
the  ship ;  he  is  praying  to  God  to  save  them,  and  then 
going  straight  and  doing  the  mischief."  You  parents 
that  are  inconsistent — you  mothers  that  don't  keep  your 
promises — you  fathers  that  talk  as  you  ought  not  to  talk 
— especially  careless,  prayerless  parents,  I  do  not  ask 
you  to  pray  for  your  children.  Pray  for  yourselves  first. 
It  were  an  awful  mockery  to  talk  about  seeini^  your 
children  go  to  heaven.  You  are  dragging  them  to  hell 
— you  are  dragging  them  to  hell  now.  You  may  think 
that  your  son  will  not  swear.  Why  not  swear,  if  the 
father  does?  Do  you  think  the  young  cubs  will  not 
roar  if  the  old  lion  sets  the  example  ?  Of  course  they 
will.  You  will  see  your  children  multiplied  images  of 
your  own  iniquity.     Let  our  conduct  be  consistent ;   let. 


58  Christian  Energy, 

our  every-day  life  be  pure  and  holy:  so  sliall  we  hope  to 
see  our  children  and  our  connections  saved.  And  I  do 
think,  dear  friends,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  was  very- 
anxious  to  point  them  the  way  in  which  they  might  be 
sayed,  telling  them  that  the  sailors  must  abide  in  the 
ship,  and  they  must  do  this  and  that,  so  we  should  be 
very  careful  to  explain  to  our  children,  neighbours,  and 
connections,  the  way  of  salvation ;  and  I  think  we 
ought  to  do  this,  as  much  as  possible,  in  private  ways. 
I  will  tell  you  an  anecdote : — A  good  bishop  of  the 
^lethodist  Church,  Bishop  Arsbury,  in  travelling  on 
horseback  through  South  Carolina,  about  a  hundred 
years  ago,  saw  a  negro  sitting  quite  close  by  the  edge  of 
a  forest,  fishinoj  with  a  line.  This  netjro  was  an  old 
man,  called  Punch,  well  known  for  his  dissolute  conduct 
and  his  filthy  speech.  The  bishop,  as  soon  as  he  saw 
him,  proceeded  deliberately  to  dismount,  tied  his  horse 
up  to  a  tree,  and  went  and  sat  down  by  the  bank,  letting 
his  feet  hang  over  the  edge,  like  Punch.  Finding  that 
the  negro  was  willing  to  talk,  and  pleased  with  his  affa- 
bility, he  began  to  talk  to  him  about  his  soul's  concern. 
He  told  him  about  the  ruin  of  the  fall,  about  the  result 
of  sin,  about  the  Redeemer,  about  faith,  and  about  the 
sweet  invitations  of  Christ  to  the  sinner  to  come  to  him 
and  live.  Punch  had  never  heard  anything  like  it ;  and 
when  the  bishop  had  done,  he  said,  '^  Now  I  will  sing 
you  a  song,"  for  Punch  was  mightily  fond  of  songs,  and 
he  sang  with  him  that  hymn  beginning : — 

"  Plunged  in  a  gulf  of  dark  despair, 
We  helpless  sinners  lay, 
Without  one  struggling  beam  of  hope, 
Or  spark  of  gleaming  daj. 


The   Church  the    World's  Hope.  59 

AA^ith  pitying  eyes  the  Prince  of  Peace 

Beheld  our  helpless  grief", 
He  saw — and,  oh,  amazing  love  ! — 

He  ran  to  our  relief. 

Down  from  the  shining  seats  above, 

With  joyful  haste  he  fled, 
Entered  the  grave  in  mortal  flesh, 

And  dwelt  among  the  dead." 

When  lie  had  sung  through  the  hymn,  he  went  on  his 
liorse  and  resumed  his  journey  as  a  bishop  shoukl  do 
liaving  done  his  work.  The  negro  went  home  and 
masticated  and  digested  this,  and  if  you  had  been  on 
the  plantation  some  months  after,  you  woukl  have  seen 
the  poor  old  hut  where  the  negro  lived  crowded  full  of 
the  poor  neglected  sons  of  Africa ;  and  who  was  preach- 
ing? Why,  the  negro  that  was  fishing  by  the  river's 
bank,  had  now  become  a  fisher  of  souls.  Months  w^ent 
on;  the  holy  flame  had  begun  to  spread ;  the  overseer 
was  alarmed;  and  he  went  down  to  Punch's  cabin  to 
put  a  stop  to  it.  Punch  was  preaching.  He  stopped 
outside  to  listen  to  what  was  said  :  conviction  pierced  his 
heart.  He  w^ent  in  ;  he  fell  on  his  knees,  and  joined  in 
prayer;  and  throughout  that  province  the  gospel 
mightily  spread  and  prevailed.  O,  what  you  might 
do,  dear  friends,  if  you  would  talk  like  this  !  You  men 
and  women  —you  do  not  need  to  be  preachers  in  order 
to  do  good.  I  don't  know — but  I  can  think — why  the 
devil  ever  invented  pulpit  gowns  and  bibs,  and  all  that 
sort  of  distinction  between  clergymen  and  laymen.  I 
am  no  clergyman.  I  know  of  nothing  of  the  kind. 
There  is  no  such  distinction  in  the  New  Testament. 
We  are  all  Christians  if  we  are  converted,  and  there  is 


60  Christian  Energy. 

no  distinction  in  them.  We  are  either  brethren  in 
Christ,  or  else  "aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel."  It  is  sometimes  asked,  *'  Ought  laymen  to 
preach  ?"  Nonsense !  any  man  may  preach  if  he  has 
the  ability.  There  are  no  such  things — I  do  believe 
in  my  soul  that  there  is  no  such  thing  intended  as 
saying,  "There,  these  people  are  to  preach — these 
people  are  to  talk  of  Christ ;  and  all  the  rest  of  you 
are  to  hold  your  tongues  and  listen."  No,  no,  no! 
Let  every  man  of  you  preach  ;  let  every  woman 
among  you  in  her  own  sphere,  talk,  and  tell  of  what 
the  Lord  has  done  for  her  soul !  I  do  believe  it  is  the 
invention  of  Satan — I  repeat  it — to  lift  up  some  few 
above  the  rest,  and  say,  "Only  some  of  you  are  to  fight 
the  Lord's  battles."  Up,  guards,  and  at  them!  not  your 
colonels  only,  but  every  man  in  the  ranks — not  here 
and  there  a  lieutenant,  but  every  man !  "  England 
expects  every  man " — not  the  captains  merely,  but 
every  man — ^'  to  do  his  duty ;"  and  Christ  expects 
every  man — not  here  and  there  one  that  is  paid  for 
doing  it — the  minister—  but  every  man — to  tell  what 
God  has  done  for  his  soul.  Do  you  this,  and  who  can 
tell  what  good  may  come  of  it  ? 

Still — and  here  I  shall  conclude — never  be  satisfied 
without  clinching  the  whole  work  with  prayer.  You 
see,  Paul  did  not  get  those  that  were  in  the  ship  by  his 
works.  God  gave  them  to  him.  Everything  is  of 
grace.  Paul  may  pray,  and  Paul  may  preach,  but 
Paul  does  not  purchase.  That  is  Christ's  work.  God 
gives — gi^  es  freely  ;  and  if  you  see  friends  and  connec- 
tions saved  it  must  be  the  gift  of  God's  grace  to  you. 
Just  as  much  as  your  own  salvation  was  God's  gift  to 


The  CJiurcli  the   WoMs  Hope.  61 

3'ou,  so  the  salvation  of  friends  and  dependents  must  be 
a  gift  from  God  to  you.  What  then?  Be  much  in 
prayer.  I  wisli  some  of  you  motliers  Avould  meet 
together  sometimes  and  pray  for  your  chihlren.  I 
think  it  would  be  a  noble  thing  for  a  dozen  of  you, 
perhaps,  to  come  together  only  for  prayer,  if  any  of  you 
have  got  unconverted  children.  And  you  fathers 
sometimes,  when  you  meet,  if  you  have  children  who 
have  not  yielded  to  divine  grace,  couldn't  you  say, 
"Come,  friend  So-and-so,  you  and  I  have  got  the  same 
burden  ;  let  us  bear  it  together"  ?  Just  at  the  back  of 
that  hoarding  there,  while  this  place  was  in  building, 
there  w^as  a  prayer  breathed  one  night  by  two  souls, 
that  God  w^ould  bless  this  place.  There  were  only  two, 
and  nobody  knew  that  that  supplication  went  up  to 
heaven ;  and  I,  for  one,  have  felt  strengthened  by  their 
prayer  ever  since.  It  w^as  but  a  ^'  chance"  meetmg,  as 
we  say.  It  was  night,  and  they  both  looked  in  at  the 
same  time,  and  met  each  other.  "Ah,  friend  So-and- 
so,"  said  one,  "  let  us  go  up  yonder,  in  a  quiet  nook, 
and  pray,  *  God  bless  the  Tabernacle.' ''  And  God  has 
blessed  it,  and  w^ill  bless  it  still.  Now,  you  may  all 
of  you  do  something  like  that.  I  was  walking  down 
the  Old  Kent-road  one  day,  and  I  w^as  met  by  an 
excellent  clergyman  not  now  in  this  neighbourhood. 
He  said  to  me,  "  Our  places  are  close  to  one  another, 
but  w^e  don't  often  meet;  come  in  and  pray."  We 
entered  his  house,  walked  across  the  hall  into  the 
library,  and  there  down  w^ent  the  two  ministers.  One 
prayed,  and  then  the  other  prayed.  We  then  rose, 
shook  hands,  and  parted.  It  took  us  but  ten  minutes, 
but  it  was  worth  I  know  not  how  much  to  us  both. 


62  Christian  Energy. 

We  went  to  our  work  refreshed,  for  we  had  been  with 
God.  When  we  meet  for  this  purpose  God  w^ill  be 
with  us,  and  he  will  give  us  all  that  are  in  the  ship  if 
we  will  but  ask  him ;  for  it  is  by  prayer,  prayer,  prayer, 
that  we  shall  prevail.  Let  us  wrestle  and  agonise  until 
he  gives  us  our  desire. 

Ah !  there  may  be  some  of  you  that  are  praying  for 
yourselves,  but  have  not  got  the  answer  yet.  There 
was  a  mother  who  went  to  hear  George  AVhitefield 
preach — that  mighty  man  of  God.  After  the  sermon 
w^as  over  the  mother  was  convinced  of  sin.  In  deep 
anguish  of  spirit  she  went  home.  Her  husband  was 
dead,  and  she  had  only  a  little  girl,  and  having  no  one 
else  to  talk  to,  she  told  the  girl  about  her  convictions. 
The  little  girl — you  will  think  it  strange  perhaps — under 
the  recital  was  made  to  feel  the  same.  Mother  and  child 
wept  together  under  the  same  sense  of  sin.  Upstairs 
they  went  and  prayed.  They  neither  of  them  found 
peace  for  some  months ;  but  it  pleased  God  at  last  to, 
give  mother  and  child,  who  had  prayed  together,  peace 
at  the  same  time.  While  the  mother  was  rejoicing,  the 
child,  just  like  a  babe  in  grace,  said,  "Mother,  O  what 
a  joyful  thing  it  is  to  be  pardoned !  What  a  blessed 
thing  it  is  to  be  saved !  I  would  like  to  run  and  tell 
our  neighbours."  '^No,"  said  the  mother,  "that  would 
not  be  wise,  child :  they  don't  care  about  these  things ; 
they  would  not  understand ;  they  would  laugh  at  you  ; 
and  we  must  not  cast  pearls  before  swine.  We  will  do 
it  by-and-by."  '*  But,  mother,"  said  the  child,  "I  can't 
leave  it :  I  do  feel  so  happy,  mother,  I  must  tell  some- 
body; so  I  will  just  run  across  the  street  to  the 
shoemaker,    and   tell   him."      The   shoemaker   was   at 


Tlie  Church  the   World's  Hope*  63 


work  with  Ills  lapstone,  and  the  Httlc  one  hegan  with 
saying,  "Do  you  know  you  are  a  sinner?  I  am  a 
sinner,  but  I  am  a  pardoned  sinner.  I  liave  been  seek- 
inor  Christ  and  I  have  found  him."  She  then  set  forth 
the  tale  Avith  tears  in  her  eyes,  till  the  shoemaker  set 
down  his  hammer  to  listen,  and  stopped  his  work  awhile. 
lie  became  converted,  and  the  story  was  told  abroad, 
and  through  the  conversion  of  that  man  the  work 
spread,  a  meeting  was  established,  and  the  means  of 
gi'ace  were  soon  set  up,  and  there  arose  a  flourishing 
church  in  that  town,  where  not  a  believer  in  Christ  had 
been  known  to  live  before.  Ah  !  you  young  converts, 
you  may  tell  the  tale ;  even  you  that  are  under  convic- 
tion of  sin — you  may  tell  it  to  your  children.  Do  not 
hesitate  to  let  the  light  shine,  I  pray  you — any  of  you ; 
but  I  do  conjure  you  by  the  blood  and  by  the  wounds 
of  him  who  was  crucified  for  our  sins — by  him  that 
lived  and  died  for  us,  never  to  cease  praying  till  God 
gives  you  all  them  that  sail  with  you.  O  !  my  dear 
friends,  pray  for  the  congregations  that  come  to  the 
Tabernacle.  Make  this  to  be  the  burden  of  your  never- 
ceasing  cry — "Give  us  all  them  that  sail  with  us!'' 
The  Lord  hear  our  prayers,  and  add  his  blessing  on 
our  labours,  for  Christ's  sake  I     Amen. 


l\\tn  ^mh, 


^  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  -with  bands  of  love." — 

HosEA  xi.  4. 


O  man  ever  does  come  to  God  unless  he  is 
drawn.  There  is  no  better  proof  that  man 
is  totally  depraved,  than  that  he  needs  to  be 
effectually  called.  Man  is  so  utterly  *^  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins,"  that  the  same  divine 
power  which  provided  a  Saviour  must  make 
him  w^illing  to  accept  a  Saviour,  or  else 
sared  he  never  will  be.  You  see  a  ship  upon  the  stocks. 
She  is  finished  and  complete.  She  cannot  move  herself, 
however,  into  the  water.  You  see  a  tree ;  it  is  growing ; 
it  brings  forth  branch,  leaf,  and  fruit,  but  it  cannot 
fashion  itself  into  a  ship.  Now  if  the  finished  ship  can 
do  nothing,  much  less  the  untouched  log ;  and  if  the 
tree,  w^hich  hath  life,  can  do  nothing,  much  less  that 
piece  of  timber  out  of  which  the  sap  has  long  since  gone. 
"  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,"  is  true  of  believers, 
but  it  is  just  as  true,  and  with  a  profounder  emphasis,  of 
those  who  have  not  believed  in  Jesus.  They  must  be 
drawn,  or  else  to  God  they  never  will  come.  But  many 
make  a  mistake  about  Divine  drawings.  They  seem  to 
fancy  that  God  takes  men  by  the  hair  of  their  heads, 


Silken  Cords,  65 

and  drags  tliem  to  heaven,  whether  they  will  or  not ;  and 
that  when  the  time  comes  they  will,  by  some  irresistible 
power,  without  any  exercise  of  thought  or  reasoning,  be 
compelled  to  be  saved.  Such  people  understand  neither 
man  nor  God ;  for  man  is  not  to  be  compelled  in  this 
way.     He  is  not  a  being  so  controlled. 

"  Convince  a  man  against  bis  will,  ^ 

He's  of  the  same  opinion  still." 

As  the  old  proverb  says,  one  man  may  bring  a  horse 
to  the  water,  but  twenty  men  cannot  make  him  drink ; 
so  a  man  may  be  brought  to  know  what  repentance  is, 
and  to  understand  what  Christ  is,  but  no  man  can  make 
another  man  lay  hold  upon  Christ.  Nay,  God  himself 
doth  not  do  it  by  compulsion^  He  hath  respect  unto 
niAi  as  a  reasoning  creature.  God  never  acteth  with 
men  as  though  they  were  blocks  of  wood,  or  senseless 
stones.  Having  made  them  men,  he  doth  not  violate 
their  manhood.  Having  determined  by  man  to  glorify 
himself,  he  uses  means  to  show  forth  his  glory — not 
such  as  are  fit  for  beasts,  or  for  inanimate  nature,  but 
such  as  are  adapted  to  the  constitution  of  man.  My 
text  says  as  much  as  this — -'^I  drew  them  with  cords;  " 
not  the  cords  that  are  fit  for  bullocks,  but  "  with  the 
cords  of  a  man."  Not  the  cart-ropes  with  which  men 
would  draw  a  cart,  but  the  cords  wdth  which  a  man 
would  draw  a  man;  and,  as  if  to  explain  himself,  he 
puts  it — '^I  drew  them  with  bands  of  love."  Love 
is  that  power  which  acts  upon  man.  There  must  be 
loving  appeals  to  the  different  parts  of  his  nature,  and 
so  he  shall  be  constrained  by  sovereign  grace.  Under- 
stand, then,  it  is  true  that  no  man  comes  to  God  except 
he  is  di'awn ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  God  di-aweth  no 

5 


^Q  Christian  Energy, 

man  contrary  to  the  constitution  of  man,  but  liis  methods 
of  drawing  are  in  strict  accordance  with  mental  opera- 
tions. He  finds  the  human  mind  what  it  is,  and  he  acts 
upon  it,  not  as  upon  matter,  but  as  upon  mind.  The 
compulsions,  the  constraints,  the  cords  that  he  uses,  are 
cords  of  a  man.  The  bands  he  employs  are  bands  of 
love. 

This  is  clear  enough.  Now  I  am  about  to  try — and 
may  the  Lord  enable  me — to  show  you  some  of  these 
cords,  these  bands,  which  the  Lord  fastens  round  the 
sinners'  hearts.  I  may  be  the  means  in  his  hands  of 
putting  these  cords  round  you,  but  I  cannot  pull  them 
after  they  are  on.  It  is  one  thing  to  put  the  rope  on,  but 
another  thing  to  draw  with  all  one's  might  at  that  rope. 
So  it  may  be  we  shall  introduce  the  arguments,  and^by 
the  prayers  of  the  faithful  now  present,  God  will  be 
pleased,  in  his  infinite  mercy,  to  pull  these  cords,  and 
then  your  soul  will  be  sweetly  drawn,  with  full  consent, 
with  the  blessed  yielding  of  your  will,  to  come  and  lay 
hold  upon  eternal  Hfe. 

Some  are  drawn  to  Christ  by  seeing  the  happiness  of 
true  believers. 

A  believer  is  the  happiest  being  out  of  heaven.  In 
some  respects  he  is  superior  to  an  angel,  for  he  hath  a 
brighter  hope  and  a  grander  destiny  than  even  cherubim 
and  seraphim  can  know.  He  is  one  with  Christ,  which 
an  angel  never  was.  He  is  a  son,  and  has  the  spirit  of 
adoption  in  him,  which  a  cherub  never  had.  There 
are  some  Christians  who  show  this  happiness  in  their 
lives.  Watch  them,  and  you  will  always  find  them 
cheerful.  If  for  a  moment  a  cloud  should  pass  over 
their  brow,  it  Is  but  for  a  moment,  and  soon  they  rejoice 


Silken  Cords.  67 

iigain.  I  know  such  people,  and  glad  am  I  to  think 
that  I  ever  came  across  their  pathway.  Wherever  they 
go  they  make  sunshine.  Into  whatever  company  they 
come,  it  is  as  if  an  angel  shook  his  wings.  Let  them 
talk  when  they  may,  it  is  always  for  the  comfort  of 
others,  with  kindness  upon  their  lips,  and  the  law  of 
love  upon  their  hearts.  Some  young  persons,  watching 
such  Christians  as  these,  are  led  to  say,  "  I  wish  I  were 
as  happy,  I  wish  I  were  as  joyful,  as  they  are ;  they 
.always  have  a  smile  upon  their  face."  And  I  do  not 
doubt  that  many  have  been  brought  to  lay  hold  on 
Jesus,  being  drawn  by  that  cord  of  love.  And,  oh  !  let 
me  say  to  you,  dear  friend,  it  is  a  most  fitting  cord  with 
which  to  draw  you ;  for  if  you  would  know  the  sweets 
of  life,  if  you  would  have  peace  like  a  river,  if  you 
would  have  a  peace  that  shall  be  with  you  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  go  with  you  into  your  business — that  shall  be 
with  you  at  night,  and  close  your  eyes  in  tranquil 
slumber;  a  peace  that  shall  enable  you  to  live,  and  shall 
strengthen  you  in  the  prospect  of  death — nay,  that  shall 
make  you  sing  in  the  midst  of  the  black  and  chill  stream 
— be  a  Christian.  My  testimony  is,  that  if  I  had  to  die 
like  a  dog ;  if  this  life  were  all,  and  there  were  no  here- 
after, I  would  prefer  to  be  a  Christian  for  the  joy  and 
peace  which,  in  this  present  life,  godliness  will  afford. 
Godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain.  It  hath  the 
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which 
is  to  come.  Thou  wouldst  be  happy,  young  man  ;  then 
do  not  kill  thy  happiness.  Thou  wouldst  have  a  bright 
eye;  then  do  not  put  it  out.  Thou  wouldst  rejoice 
with  joy  unspeakable  ;  then  do  not  go  into  those  places 
where  sorrow  is  sure  to  follow  thine  every  act.    Wouldst 


68  Christian  Energy. 

tliou  be  happy,  come  to  Jesus,  Let  this  cord  of  love- 
sweetly  draw  thee. 

Another  cord  of  love — it  was  the  one  which  brought 
me  to  the  Saviour — is  the  sense  of  the  security  of  God's 
people,  and  a  desire  to  be  as  secure  as  they.  I  do  not 
know  w^hat  may  be  the  peculiarity  of  my  constitution,, 
but  safe  things  always  have  I  loved.  I  have  not,  that  I 
know  of,  one  grain  of  speculation  in  my  nature.  Safe 
things — things  that  I  can  see  to  be  made  of  rock,  and 
that  will  bear  the  test  of  time,  1  lay  hold  on  with 
a\ddity.  I  was  reasoning  thus  in  my  boyish  spirit: 
— Scripture  tells  me  that  he  that  believeth  in  Christ 
shall  never  perish.  Then,  if  I  believe  in  Jesus,  I  shall 
be  safe  for  time  and  for  eternity  too.  There  will  be  no 
fear  of  my  ever  being  in  hell ;  I  shall  run  no  risk  as  to 
my  eternal  state ;  that  will  be  secure  for  ever.  I  shall 
have  the  certainty  that  when  my  eyes  are  closed  in 
death,  I  shall  see  the  face  of  Christ,  and  behold  him  in 
glory.  Whenever  I  heard  the  doctrine  of  the  final 
preservation  of  the  saints  preached,  my  mouth  used  to 
water  to  be  a  child  of  God.  When  I  heard  the  old 
saints  sing  that  hymn — 

"  My  name  from  the  palms  of  his  hands 

Eternity  cannot  erase ; 
Impressed  on  his  heart  it  remains, 

In  marks  of  indelible  grace. 
Yes,  I  to  the  end  shall  endure, 

As  sure  as  the  earnest  is  given  ; 
More  happy,  but  not  more  secure, 

Are  the  glorified  spirits  in  heaven." — 

my  heart  was  as  if  it  would  leap  out  of  this  body,  and  I 
would  cry  to  God,  ^'  O  that  I  had  a  part  and  lot  in  such 
a  salvation  as  that !"     Now,  young  man,  what  do  you 


Silken  Cords,  69 

ihink  of  this  band  of  love  ?  Do  you  not  think  there  is 
something  reasonable  and  something  powerful  in  it — to 
secure  yourself  against  all  risk  of  eternal  ruin,  and  that, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  in  a  moment?  '^He  that 
believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."  "  Believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  "•  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved."  "  I  give 
unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish, 
neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hands."  What 
say  you  to  this  ?  doth  not  this  attract  you  ?  doth  not 
this  band  draw  you?  Lord,  draw  the  sinner — draw  the 
sinner  by  the  sweet  allurement  of  security,  and  let  him 
say,  '^  I  wdll  lay  hold  on  Christ  to-night." 

Certain  Christians  will  tell  you  that  they  were  first 
drawn  to  Christ  by  the  holiness  of  godly  relatives,  not 
so  much  by  their  happiness  as  by  their  holiness.  There 
is  an  Eastern  fable,  that  a  man,  wishing  to  attract  all 
the  doves  from  the  neighbouring  dove-cotes  into  his  o^vn, 
took  a  dove  and  smeared  her  wrings  with  sweet  perfume. 
Away  she  flew,  and  all  her  fellow^  doves  observed  her, 
and,  attracted  by  the  sweet  incense,  they  flew  after  her, 
and  the  dove-cote  was  soon  full.  There  are  some 
Christians  of  that  sort.  They  have  had  their  wings 
smeared  with  the  precious  ointment  of  likeness  to  Jesus, 
and  wherever  they  go — such  is  their  kindness  and  their 
consistency;  their  gentleness  and  yet  their  honesty; 
their  lovely  spirit  and  yet  their  boldness  for  Jesus,  that 
others  take  knowledge  of  them  that  they  have  been 
with  Jesus,  and  they  say,  '*  Where  does  he  dwell,  for  I 
would  fain  see  him  and  love  him. too?  "  I  am  afraid  I 
cannot  attract  you,  sinner,  in  such  a  charming  way  as 
that,  but  I  would  have  you  read  the  lives  of  godly  men. 


70  Christian  Energy, 

Study  the  actions,  perhaps,  of  your  own  mother.  Is  she- 
dead  ?  Then  remember  ^Yhat  she  used  to  be — what  her 
life  of  devotedness  to  God  was ;  and  I  charge  you  by 
the  love  of  God,  by  her  many  prayers  and  tears,  by  the 
pity  of  her  soul,  and  the  yearning  of  her  bowels  towards 
you,  let  your  mother's  example  be  one  of  the  cords  of  a 
man  to  draw  you  towards  God.  Lord,  pull  at  that 
cord !  Lord,  pull  at  that  cord !  If  the  cord  be  round 
about  you,  and  the  Lord  pull  at  it,  I  will  have  good 
hope  that  you  will  close  with  Christ  to-night. 

You  see,  we  only  show  the  cord,  and  then  we  leave  it, 
hoping  that  perhaps  one  or  another  may  be  taken  by  its 
power.  But  now  for  another.  We  believe  that  not  a 
few  are  brought  to  Christ  by  gratitude  for  mercies 
received.  The  sailor  has  escaped  from  shipwreck,  or, 
perhaps  even  in  the  Eiver  Thames  he  has  had  many  a 
narrow  escape  for  his  life.  The  sportsman  has  had  his 
gun  burst  in  his  hand,  and  yet  he  has  been  himself  un- 
harmed. The  traveller  has  escaped  from  a  terrific 
railway  accident,  himself  picked  out  of  the  debris  of  the 
broken  carriages  unhurt.  The  parent  has  seen  his 
children,  one  after  another,  laid  upon  a  bed  of  sickness 
with  fever,  but  yet  they  have  all  been  spared;  or  he 
himself  has  had  loss  upon  loss  in  business,  till  at  last  it 
seemed  as  if  a  crash  must  come ;  but  just  then  God 
interposed  in  a  gracious  Providence,  and  forthwith  a 
strong  tide  of  prosperity  set  in.  Some  have  thought  over 
these  things  and  said,  ^'Is  God  so  good  to  me,  and  shall 
I  not  love  him  ?  Shall  I  live  every  day  despising  him 
who  thus  tenderly  watches  over  me,  and  graciously 
provides  for  my  wants  ?  "  O  I  sirs,  methinks  this  cord 
of  love  ought  to  fall  about  some  of  you.     How  good  haS' 


Silken  Cords.  71 

God  been  to  you,  dear  hearer.  I  will  not  tell  your  case 
out  in  public ;  but  when  you  have  sometimes  talked  with 
a  friend,  you  have  said,  '^  How  graciously  has  Provi- 
dence dealt  wdth  me !"  Give  the  Lord  thy  heart,  young 
man.  Thou  canst  do  no  less  for  such  favour  as  he  has 
shown  thee.  Mother,  give  Jesus  thy  heart;  he  well 
deserves  it,  for  he  has  spared  it  from  being  broken. 
Woman,  consecrate — may  the  Lord  help  thee  to  do  it ! — 
consecrate  thy  heart's  warmest  affections  to  him  who 
hath  thus  generously  dealt  with  thee  in  Providence. 
He  deserves  it,  doth  he  not  ?  Wilt  thou  be  guilty  of 
ingratitude  ?  Is  there  not  something  in  thee  that  says 
— *^  Stay  no  longer  an  enemy  to  so  kind  a  friend ;  be 
reconciled ;  be  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his 
Son "  ?  May  that  cord  lay  hold  of  some  of  you,  and 
may  God  draw  it,  and  so  attract  you  to  himself. 

Persons  whose  characteristic  is  thinking  rather  than 
loving  are  often  caught  by  another  cord.  I  do  not 
know  what  may  be  your  mode  of  thinking  of  things, 
but  it  strikes  me,  if  I  had  not  laid  hold  of  Christ  now, 
if  anybody  should  meet  me  and  say, — "  The  religion  of 
Christ  is  the  most  reasonable  religion  in  the  world,"  I 
should  lend  him  my  ear  for  a  little  time,  and  ask  him  to 
show^  it  me.  I  have  frequently  caught  the  ears  of 
travellers,  and  held  them  fast  bound,  when  I  have  tried 
to  show  the  entire  reasonableness  of  the  plan  of  salvation. 
God  is  ju5t.  That  is  granted.  If  God  be  just,  sin  must 
be  punished.  That  is  clear.  How  can  God  be  just, 
and  yet  not  punish  the  sinner  ?  There  is  the  question. 
The  gospel  answers  that  question.  It  declares  that 
Christ  the  Son  of  God  became  a  man ;  that  he  stood  in 
the  room,  place,  and  stead  of  such  men  as  were  chosen 


*^  Christian  Energy. 

of  God  to  be  saved.     These  men  may  be  known  by  their 
believing  in  Christ.     Christ  stood,  then,  in  the  place  and 
stead  of   those  whom  I  will  now  call  believers.     He 
suffered  at  God's  hand  everything  that  was  due  to  God 
from   them.     Nay,    he  did  more.     Inasmuch  as  they 
were  bound  to  keep  God's  law,  but  could  not  do  it, 
Christ  kept  it  for  them;   and  now,  what  Christ  did 
becomes  theirs  by  an  act  of  faith.     They  trust  Christ 
to  save  them.     Christ's  sufferings  are  put  in  the  stead 
of  their  being  sent  to  hell,  and  they  are  justly  delivered 
from  their  sins.     Christ's  righteousness  is  put  in  the 
stead  of  their  keeping  the  law  of  God,  and  they  are  justly 
rewarded  with  a  place  in  Paradise,  as  if  they  had  them- 
selves been  perfectly  holy.     Now,  it  strikes  me  that 
that  looks  reasonable  enough.     In  everyday  life  we  see 
the  same  thing  done.     A  man  is  drawn  for  the  mihtia; 
he  pays  for  a  substitute,  and  he  himself  goes  free.     A 
man  owes  a  debt ;  some  friend  comes  in  and  discharo-es 
the  bill  for  him,  and  he  himself  is  clear.     The  ends'^of 
justice  are  answered  through  substitution.     Now,  there 
seems  to  me   to   be   something   so   unique   about   the 
whole  affair  of  God  taking  the  place  of  man,  and  God's 
suffering  in  man's  form  for  man  that  justice  may  by  no 
means  be  marred,  that  my  reason  falls  dovm  at  the  feet 
of  this  great  mystery  and  cries,    "  I  would  have  an 
interest  in  it;  Lord,  let  me  be  one  of  those  for  whom 
Jesus  died;  let  me  have  the  peace  which  springs  from  a 
complete  atonement  wrought  out  by  Jesus  Christ."     My 
brother,  I  wish  I  could  draw  thee  with  this ;  but  I  can-, 
not.     I  can  only  show  thee  this  cord  and  tell  thee  how 
well  it  would  draw  thee.   If  thou  rejectest  it,  thy  blood 
shall  be  upon  thine  own  head.     I  know  too  well  thou 


silken  Cords,  73 

wilt  reject  it,  unless  the  miglity  hand  of  God  shall  begin 
to  tug  at  that  band  of  love  and  draw  thee  to  Jesus. 

A  far  larger  number,  however,  are  doubtless  attracted 
to  Jesus  by  a  sense  of  his  exceeding  great  love.  It  is 
not  so  much  the  reasonableness  of  the  atonement  as  the 
love  of  God  which  shines  in  it  which  seems  to  attract 
many  souls.  There  once  lived  in  the  city  of  London, 
in  the  days  of  Queen  Mary,  a  rich  merchant,  a  man 
of  generous  spirit,  a  Lollard,  one  of  those  who  were 
subjected  to  fine,  and  imprisonment,  and  death  for  the 
truth's  sake.  Near  him  there  lived  a  miserable  cobbler 
— a  poor,  mean,  despicable  creature.  The  merchant,  for 
some  reason  unknown,  had  taken  a  very  great  liking  to 
the  poor  cobbler,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  giving  him  all 
his  work  to  do,  and  recommending  him  to  many  friends. 
And  as  this  man  would  not  always  work  as  he  should, 
when  the  merchant  saw  his  family  in  any  need,  he 
would  send  them  meat  from  his  own  table,  and  fre- 
quently he  clothed  his  children.  Well,  notwith- 
standing that  he  had  acted  thus,  had  often  advanced 
him  sums  of  money,  and  had  acted  with  great  kind- 
ness, a  reward  was  offered  to  any  one  who  would 
betray  a  Lollard,  or  would  discover  such  person  or 
persons  as  read  the  Bible,  to  the  magistrates.  The 
cobbler,  to  obtain  this  reward,  went  to  the  magis- 
trates and  betrayed  the  merchant.  As  God  would  have 
it,  how^ever,  through  some  skilful  advocate,  the  merchant 
escaped.  He  forgave — freely  forgave — the  cobbler,  and 
never  said  a  word  to  him  about  it;  but  in  the  streets  the 
cobbler  would  always  turn  his  head  the  other  way,  and 
try  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  the  man  whom  he  felt  he 
had  so  grievously  ill-treated.     Still  the  merchant  never 


i^ 


7'^  Clinstian  Energy, 

altered   his  treatment  of  him,  but  sent  him  meat  as 
usual,  and  attended  to  his  wife  and  children  if  they 
were  sick,  the  same  as  before ;  but  he  never  could  get 
the  cobbler  to  give  him  a  good  word.     If  he  did  speak, 
It  was  to  abuse  him.     One  day,  in  a  very,  very  narrow 
lane  in  the  city— for   the   streets   were   narrow,    and 
narrower  still  were  the  lanes— the  merchant  saw  the 
cobbler  coming,  and  he  thought,  "Now  is  my  time;  he 
cannot  pass  me  now  without  facing  me."     Of  course 
the  cobbler  gi-ew  very  red  in  the  face,  and  made  up  his 
mind  that  if  the  merchant  should  begin  to  upbraid  him 
he  would  answer  him  in  as  saucy  a  manner  as  possible. 
But  when  the  merchant  came  close  to  him,  he  said,  "  I 
am  very  sorry  that  you  shun  me ;  I  have  no  ill-will 
towards  you ;  I  would  do  anything  for  you  or  for  your 
family,  and  nothing  would  give  me  greater  pleasure 
than  to  be  friends  with  you."     The  cobbler  stopped, 
and  presently  a  moisture  suffused  his  eyes ;  and  anon 
a  flood  of  tears  poured  down  his  cheeks,  and  he  said,— 
*a  have  been  such  a  base  wretch  to  you  that  I  hated  you, 
for  I  thought  that  you  never  would  forgive  me  ;   I  have 
always  shunned  you,  but  when  you  talk  to  me  like  this,  I 
cannot  be  your  enemy  any  longer.     Pray,  sir,  assure 
me  of  your  forgiveness."     Forthwith  he  began  to  fall 
upon  his  knees.  That  was  the  way  to  draw  him  with  the 
cords  of  love,  and  w^ith  the  bands  of  a  man.     And  in  a 
nobler  sense,  this  is  just  what  Jesus  Christ  has  done  for 
sinners.     He  has  offered  you  mercy;  he  has  proclaimed 
to  you  eternal  life,  and  you  reject  it.     Every  day  he 
gives  you  of  his  bounties,  makes  you  to  feed  at  the  table 
of  his  Providence,  and  clothes  you  with  the  livery  of  his 
generosity.     And  yet,  after  all  this,  some  of  you  curse 


Silken  Cords,  75 

him ;  you  break  lils  Sabbaths ;  you  despise  his  name ; 
you  are  his  enemies.  And  yet,  what  does  he  say  to 
you  ?  He  loves  you  still ;  he  follows  you,  not  to 
rebuke  you,  but  to  woo,  and  to  entreat  you  to  come 
to  him,  and  have  him  for  a  friend.  Can  you  hold 
out  against  my  Master's  wounds  ?  Can  you  stand  out 
against  his  bloody  sweat  ?  Can  you  resist  his  passion  ? 
O  !  can  you  ?  By  the  name  of  him  who  bowed  his  head 
upon  the  tree — who  cried,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " — can  you  hold  out  against 
him  ?  If  he  had  not  died  for  me,  I  think  I  must  love 
him  for  dying  for  other  people.  But  he  has  died  for 
you;  you  may  know  this  if  you  trust  him  now  with 
your  soul,  just  as  you  are.  This  is  the  evidence  that  he 
died  for  you.  Oh !  may  God  enable  you  to  trust  Jesus 
now,  di'awing  you  with  this  band  of  love,  this  cord  of  a 
man. 

There  are  many  more  cords,  but  my  strength  fails 
me,  and  therefore  I  will  mention  but  one  more. 

The  privileges  which  a  Christian  enjoys  ought  to  di'aw 
some  of  you  to  Christ.  Do  you  know  what  will  take 
place  in  these  aisles  to-night  if  the  Holy  Spirit  should 
lead  a  sinner  to  Christ  ?  I  will  tell  you.  I  will  tell 
you.  There  he  stands.  He  is  as  vile  a  sinner  as  walks 
this  earth.  He  knows  it;  he  is  wretched;  he  has  a 
burden  on  his  back.  If  that  man  is  led  to  look  to 
Christ  to-night,  his  sins  will  roll  off  from  him  at  once ; 
they  will  roll  into  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus,  and  be  buried, 
and  never  have  a  resurrection.  In  a  moment  he  will 
be  clothed  from  head  to  foot  with  white  raiment.  The 
kiss  of  a  Father's  love  shall  be  upon  his  cheek,  and  the 
seal  of  the  Spirit's  witness  shall  be  fixed  upon  his  brow. 


76  Christian  Energy, 

He  shall  be  made,  to-night,  a  child  of  God,  a  joint-heir 
with  Christ.  He  shall  be  shod  with  the  preparation  of 
the  gospel  of  peace.  He  shall  be  clothed  with  the 
righteousness  of  Jesus.  He  shall  go  to  his  house,  not 
wretched,  but  as  though  he  could  dance  for  joy  the 
whole  way  home.  And  when  he  gets  home,  it  may 
be  never  so  poor  a  cottage,  but  it  will  look  brighter 
than  it  ever  did  before.  His  children  he  will  look 
upon  as  jewels  entrusted  to  his  care,  instead  of  being 
burdens,  as  he  once  said  they  were.  His  very  trials 
he  will  come  to  thank  God  for ;  while  his  ordinary 
mercies  will  be  sweetened  and  made  very  dear  to  him. 
The  man,  instead  of  leading  a  life  like  a  hell  upon 
earth,  will  live  a  life  like  heaven  begun  below;  and 
all  this  shall  take  place  in  an  instant.  Nay,  that  is 
not  all.  The  effect  of  this  night's  work  shall  tell 
throughout  his  entire  life.  He  shall  be  a  new  creature 
in  Christ  Jesus ;  so  that  when  the  time  shall  come  that 
his  hair  is  grey,  and  he  must  lay  stretched  upon  his 
bed  and  breathe  out  his  last,  he  shall  in  his  last 
moments  look  back  upon  a  path  that  has  been  lit  with 
the  grace  of  God,  and  look  forward  across  the  black 
river  to  an  eternity  in  which  the  glory  of  God  shall 
shine  forth  with  as  great  a  fulness  as  a  creature  can 
endure.  This  is  enough,  surely,  to  tempt  a  sinner  to 
come  to  Jesus.  This  must  be  a  strong  cord  to  draw 
him.  O  man !  Jesus  will  accept  you ;  he  will  accept 
you  now,  just  as  you  are.  Thousands  he  has  received 
like  you  ;  let  heaven's  music  witness  to  the  fact.  Thou- 
sands like  you  he  receiveth  still.  Some  of  us  can  bear 
our  testimony  to  that.  Come  and  welcome,  then  ;  come 
and  welcome.    Never  mind  thy  rags,  prodigal ;  a  Father^s 


Silken  Cords,  77 

hand  will  take  them  off ;  never  mind  thy  filth ;  never 
mind  thy  having  fed  the  swine.  Come  as  thou  art;  come 
just  now. 

I  hear  somebody  saying,  '^Well!  I  am  inclined  to 
come,  but  I  do  not  know  what  it  means.''  To  come, 
then,  is  to  trust.  You  have  been  trying  to  save  your- 
self. Do  not  try  any  more.  You  have  been  going  to 
church,  or  going  to  chapel,  and  you  have  been  trying  to 
keep  the  commandments ;  but  you  cannot  keep  them. 
No  man  ever  did  keep  them,  and  no  man  ever  will  keep 
them.  You  have  been,  in  fact,  like  a  prisoner  who  has 
hard  labour.  You  have  been  walking  upon  the  tread- 
mill in  order  to  get  to  the  stars,  and  you  are  not  an 
inch  higher.  After  all  you  have  done,  you  are  just 
where  you  were.  Now,  leave  this  off ;  have  done  with 
it.  Christ  did  keep  the  law  ;  let  his  keeping  it  stand  in 
the  stead  of  your  keeping  it.  Christ  did  suffer  the 
anger  of  God;  let  his  sufferings  stand  to  you  in  the 
stead  of  your  sufferings.  Take  him  now,  just  as  you 
are,  and  believe  that  he  can  save  you — nay,  that  he  will 
save  you — and  trust  him  to  do  it.  It  is  all  the  gospel  I 
have  to  preach.  Very  seldom  do  I  finish  a  sermon 
without  going  over  this  simple  matter  of  trusting  Christ. 
There  are  some,  perhaps,  who  inquire  for  something  new. 
I  cannot  give  it  to  you ;  I  have  not  got  anything  new, 
but  only  the  same  old  tale  over  and  over  again.  Trust 
Christ  and  you  are  saved.  We  have  heard  in  our  church- 
meetings,  that,  on  several  occasions,  when  at  the  close 
of  the  sermon  I  have  merely  said  as  much  as  that,  it  has 
been  enough  to  lead  sinners  into  life  and  peace ;  and, 
therefore,  we  will  keep  on  at  it.  My  heart  yearns  to 
bring  some  of  you  to  Christ  to-night,  but  I  know  not 


78  Christian  Energy, 

what  arguments  to  use  with  you.  You  surely  do  not 
wish  to  be  damned.  Surely  you  cannot  make  the  cal- 
culation that  the  short  pleasures  of  this  world  are  worth 
an  eternity  of  torment.  But  damned  you  must  be 
except  you  lay  hold  on  Christ.  Doth  not  this  cord 
draw  you?  Surely  you  want  to  be  in  heaven.  You 
have  some  desire  toward  that  better  land  in  the  realms 
of  the  hereafter.  But  you  cannot  be  there  except  you 
lay  hold  on  Christ.  Will  not  this  cord  of  love  draw 
you?  Surely  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  get  rid  of 
fears,  and  suspense,  and  doubt,  and  anxiety.  It  would 
be  a  good  thing  to  be  able  to  lay  your  head  on  your 
pillow,  and  say,  "I  do  not  care  whether  I  wake  or 
not ; "  to  go  to  sea,  and  reckon  it  a  matter  of  perfect 
indifference  whether  you  reach  land  or  no.  Nay, 
sometimes  the  wish  with  us  to  depart  preponderates 
over  that  of  remaining  here.  Do  you  not  wish  for 
that?  But  you  can  never  have  it  except  by  laying 
hold  on  Christ.  Will  not  this  draw  you  ?  My  dear 
hearers,  you  whose  faces  I  look  upon  every  Sunday, 
and  into  whose  ears  this  poor,  diy  voice  has  spoken  so 
many  hundreds  of  times,  we  do  not  wish  to  be  parted. 
I  know  that  to  some  of  you  this  is  the  very  happiest,  as 
well  as  the  holiest  spot  you  ever  occupied.  You  love  to 
be  here.  I  am  glad  you  do,  and  I  am  glad  to  see  you. 
I  do  not  like  to  be  separated  from  you.  When  any  of 
you  remove  to  other  towns,  it  gives  me  pain  to  lose  your 
faces.  I  hope  we  shall  not  be  separated  in  the  world  to 
come.  My  beloved  friends  around  me,  who  have  been 
in  Christ  these  many  years — you  also  love  them.  We 
do  not  wish  to  be  divided.  I  would  like  that  all  this 
ship's  company  should  meet  on  the  other  side  of  the 


Silken  Cords,  79 

sea.  I  do  not  know  one  among  you  that  I  could  spare. 
I  would  not  like  to  miss  you  who  sit  yonder,  nor  any  of 
you  who  sit  near ;  neither  the  youngest  nor  the  oldest 
of  you.  Well,  but  we  cannot  meet  in  heaven  unless  we 
meet  in  Jesus  Christ.  We  cannot  meet  father,  and 
mother,  and  pastor,  and  friends,  unless  we  have  a  good 
hope  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Will  not  that 
cord  of  love  draw  you  ?  Mother,  from  the  battlements 
of  heaven  a  little  angel  is  looking  down  to-night,  beckon- 
ing with  his  finger.  He  is  looking  out  for  you,  and 
he  is  saying,  "  Mother,  follow  your  babe  to  heaven." 
Father,  your  daughter  charged  you  as  she  died,  to  give 
your  heart  to  Christ,  and  from  her  seat  in  heaven  her 
charge  comes  down  to  you  with  as  great  force  as  it 
came  from  her  sick  bed,  I  trust,  "  Follow  me,  follow  me 
to  heaven."  Friends  who  have  gone  before — godly  ones 
who  have  fallen  asleep  in  Jesus — in  one  chorus,  say  to 
you,  ''  Come  up  hither ;  come  up  hither,  for  we  without 
you  cannot  be  made  perfect."  Will  not  this  band  of 
love  draw  you  ?  O !  will  not  this  cord  of  a  man  lay 
hold  upon  you,  and  bring  you  to  the  Saviour's  feet? 
The  Lord  grant  it  may ;  but  as  I  have  said,  I  can 
only  show  the  cords.  It  is  his  to  pull  them;  and 
they  will  be  pulled  if  the  saints  will  join  in  earnest 
prayer,  invoking  a  blessing  upon  sinners.  The  Lord 
do  it,  for  his  love's  sake.     Amen. 


^Ip  ^i|tt4  ^l«t  tfl  f  «a#%. 


"  Be  it  known  unto  you,  therefore,  men  and  brethren,  that  through 
this  man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins." — Acts  xiii.  38. 

K^^^^  AXIL'S  mode  of  preaching,  as  illustrated  by 
this  chapter,  was  first  of  all  to  appeal  to  the 
understanding  with  a  clear  exposition  of 
doctrinal  truth,  and  then  to  impress  that 
truth  upon  the  emotions  of  his  hearers  with 
earnest  and  forcible  exhortations.  This  is  an 
excellent  model  for  revivalists.  They  must 
not  give  exhortation  without  doctrine,  for  if  so,  they 
will  be  like  men  who  are  content  with  burning  powder 
in  their  guns,  but  have  omitted  the  shot.  It  is  the 
doctrine  we  preach,  the  truth  we  deliver,  which  God 
will  make  a  power  to  bless  men.  However  earnest  and 
zealous  we  may  be  in  speaking,  if  we  have  not  some- 
thing weighty  and  solid  to  say,  we  shall  appear  to  be 
earnest  about  nothing,  and  shall  not  be  at  all  likely  to 
create  a  lasting  impression.  Paul,  if  you  notice,  through 
this  chapter,  first  of  all  gives  the  history  of  redemption, 
tells  the  story  of  the  cross,  insists  upon  the  resun'ection 
of  the  Saviour,  and  then  he  comes  to  close  and  personal 
dealings  with  the  souls  of  men,  and  warns  them  not  to 
neglect  this  great  salvation. 


The  True  Aim  of  Preaching.  81 

At  the  same  time  it  was  not  all  doctrine  and  no  ex- 
hortation, but  or  ever  Paul  wound  up  his  discourse  and 
left  the  synagogue,  he  made  a  strenuous,  pointed,  per- 
sonal appeal  to  those  who  had  listened  to  him.  Let 
such  of  our  brethren  as  are  passionately  fond  of  mere 
doctrine,  but  having  little  of  the  marrow  of  divine 
mercy  or  the  milk  of  human  kindness  in  their  souls,  do 
not  care  to  have  the  Word  pressed  upon  the  consciences 
of  men,  stand  rebuked  by  the  example  of  the  Apostle 
Paul.  He  knew  well  that  even  truth  itself  must  be 
powerless  unless  applied.  Like  the  wheat  in  the  basket, 
it  can  produce  no  harvest  till  it  be  sown  broadcast  in 
the  furrows.  We  cannot  expect  that  men  will  come 
and  make  an  application  of  the  truth  to  themselves. 
Wq  must,  having  our  hearts  glowing  and  our  souls  on 
iire  with  love  to  them,  seek  to  bring  the  truth  to  bear 
upon  them  personally,  to  impress  it  upon  their  hearts 
and  consciences,  as  in  the  sight  of  God  and  in  the 
stead  of  Christ. 

The  subject  to  which  Paul  drew  attention,  the  target 
at  which  he  was  shooting  all  his  arrows,  was  forgiveness 
of  sins  through  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  That  is  the  subject 
to  which  I  now  want  to  address  your  attention,  and 
when  I  have  spoken  upon  it  as  my  leading  theme,  I 
shall  have  a  few  words  to  add  about  his  audience,  and 
ichat  became  of  them. 

Paul's  Subject  was  superlative — the  subject  of 
subjects — the  great  master-doctrine  of  the  Christian 
ministry — "  Be  it  known  unto  you,  therefore,  men  and 
brethren,  that  through  this  man  is  preached  unto  you 
forgiveness  of  sins.'^  The  "forgiveness  of  sins"  is  a 
topic  which  will  be  more  or  less  interesting  to  every 

6 


S2  Christian  Energy. 

one  of  my  liearers,  in  proportion  as  he  feels  that  he  has 
committed  sins,  the  guilt  of  which  appals  his 
conscience.  To  those  good  people  among  you  who 
fold  your  arms  and  say,  "  I  have  done  no  ^vi*ong  either 
to  God  or  man,"  I  have  nothing  to  say.  You  need  no 
physician,  for  you  are  not  sick.  You  e\adently  would 
not  be  thankful  for  the  heavenly  eye-salve,  for  you  are 
not  blind.  The  wealth  that  Christ  can  bring  you  will 
not  induce  you  to  bow  the  knee  to  him,  for  already  you 
think  yourselves  to  be  rich  and  increased  in  goods.  But 
I  shall  be  quite  sure  of  the  ear  of  the  man  whose  sins 
have  been  a  burden  to  him.  If  there  be  one  here  who 
wants  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  who  says  with  the 
prodigal,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  unto  my  Father,"  I  shall 
not  need  to  study  how  to  fit  my  words  ;  let  them  come 
out  as  they  may,  the  theme  itself  will  be  sure  to  enlist 
the  attention  of  such  an  one,  who  says — 
"  How  can  I  get  my  sins  forgiven  ? 
How  can  I  find  my  way  to  heaven  ?  " 

While  we  attempt  to  tell  him  that,  we  shall  ensure  his 
attention. 

This  is  our  aim ;  and  this  will  we  do  if  God  permit. 
The  Christian  minister  tells  men  the  ground  of  pardon ; 
the  exclusive  method  (for  there  is  a  monopoly  in  this 
matter),  the  exclusive  method  by  which  God  will 
pardon  sin.  "  Through  this  marif*  says  the  text ;  that 
is  to  say,  God  will  pardon,  but  he  wall  only  pardon  in 
one  way — through  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  The  Lord 
Jesus  has  a  monopoly  of  mercy.  If  you  will  depend 
upon  the  uncovenanted  mercy  of  God,  the  mercy  of 
God  apart  from  Christ,  you  shall  find  that  you  have 
depended  upon  a  reed,  and  built  youi'  house  upon  the 


TJie   True  Aim  of  Preacliing.  83 

«and.  Into  the  one  silver  pipe  of  the  atoning  sacrifice 
God  has  made  to  flow  the  full  current  of  pardoning 
grace.  If  you  will  not  go  to  that,  you  may  be  tempted 
by  the  mirage,  you  may  think  that  you  can  drink  to 
the  full,  but  you  shall  die  disappointed.  You  must  die, 
unless  you  come  for  salvation  to  Christ.  What  does  he 
say  himself  ?  "I  am  the  door,  by  me  if  any  man  enter 
in,  he  shall  go  in  and  out  and  find  pasture."  "  He  that 
believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  is  not  condemned,  but  he 
that  believeth  not " — may  he  go  right  too  %  No,  he 
*'is  condemned  already,  because  he  believeth  not." 
*^  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved." 
These  are  Christ's  own  words,  not  mine.  He  that 
believeth  shall  be  saved,  "  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall 
be  " — what  ?  Pardoned  for  his  unbelief  ?  No  ;  "  shall 
he  damned  !  "  There  is  no  alternative.  The  expression 
might  seem  harsh  if  I  were  the  inventor  of  it,  but  as 
it  came  from  the  lips  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who 
was  the  gentlest,  meekest,  and  most  tender  of  men,  God 
forbid  that  I  should  affect  a  charity  of  which  the  Lord 
himself  made  no  profession.  "  He  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned."  God  presents  mercy  to  the  sons  of 
men,  but  he  has  chosen  to  present  it  in  one  channel — 
through  that  man  who  died  for  sinners,  the  just  for  the 
unjust,  that  he  might  bring  them  to  God. 

Wherefore  is  it  that  forgiveness  comes  to  us  alone 
through  Jesus  Christ?  The  whole  economy  of  re- 
demption supplies  us  with  an  answer.  The  man 
Christ  Jesus  is  a  divine  person.  He  is  the  Son  of  God. 
You  will  never  doubt  that  reconciliation  is  an  effect 
of  infinite  wisdom,  if  you  once  clearly  understand  the 
condition  that  made  it  requisite.     Though  his  people 


84  Christian  Energy* 

were  objects  of  God's  everlasting  love,  their  sins  had 
kindled  his  fierce  anger,  as  it  were  an  unquenchable 
fire.  Inasmuch  as  God  is  just,  he  must  from  the 
necessity  of  his  nature  punish  sin.  Yet  he  willed  to 
have  mercy  upon  the  fallen  sons  of  men.  Therefore  it 
was  that  Christ  came  into  this  world.  Being  God,  he 
was  made  man  for  our  sakes.  He  suffered  from  the- 
wrath  of  God  that  which  we,  the  offending  sinners, 
ought  to  have  suffered.  God  exacted  from  the  man 
Christ  Jesus  that  which  he  must  otherwise  have- 
exacted  from  us.  Upon  his  dear  devoted  head  was 
laid  the  curse  ;  upon  his  bare  back  fell  the  scourge 
that  must  have  tortured  our  souls  throughout  eternity^ 
Those  hands  of  his,  when  nailed  to  the  tree,  smarted 
with  our  smart.  That  heart  bled  with  our  bleeding.. 
"The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and 
with  his  stripes  we  are  healed ;  surely  he  hath  borne 
our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows."  Substitution, 
then,  is  the  cause  of  it  all.  God  will  forgive  sin,, 
because  the  sin  which  he  forgives  has  been  already 
atoned  for  by  the  sufferings  of  his  dear  Son.  You 
know,  many  of  you,  the  story  in  old  Roman  history^ 
of  the  young  man  who  had  violated  discipline,  and  was 
condemned  to  die.  But  his  elder  brother,  a  grand  old 
soldier,  who  had  often  been  to  the  front  in  the  battles 
of  the  Republic,  came  and  exposed  his  breast  and 
showed  his  many  scars,  and  exhibited  his  body  covered 
with  the  orders  and  insignia  and  honours  of  his 
countiT,  and  he  said,  "  I  cannot  ask  life  for  my  brother 
on  account  of  anything  that  he  has  ever  done  for  the 
Republic;  he  deserves  to  die,  I  know,  but  I  set  my 
scars  and  my  wounds  before  you  as  the  price  of  his 


21ie  True  Aim  of  PreacJdng.  85 

life,  and  I  ask  you  whether  you  will  not  spare  him  for 
his  brother's  sake ; "  and  with  acclamation  it  was 
carried  that  for  his  brother's  sake  he  should  live. 
Sinner,  this  is  what  Christ  does  for  you.  He  points  to 
his  scars,  he  pleads  before  the  throne  of  God.  "  I 
have  suffered  the  vengeance  due  to  sin;  I  have 
honoured  thy  righteous  law ;  for  my  sake  have  mercy 
upon  that  unworthy  brother  of  mine  ! "  In  this  way, 
in  no  other  way,  is  forgiveness  of  sins  preached  to  you 
through  this  man  Christ  Jesus. 

It  is  our  business  also  to  preach  to  you  the  instrument 
through  which  you  may  obtain  this  pardon.  We  read  the 
question  in  your  anxious  eyes — ^'  Now  I  can  understand 
that  Christ,  having  stood  a  substitute,  has  received  from 
Ood  power  to  pardon  human  souls,  but  how  can  I  obtain 
the  benefit ;  how  can  I  draw  near  to  him  ?  "  Didst  thou 
never  read  how  Moses  described  the  righteousness  of 
faith  ?  and  Paul  has  endorsed  his  description.  "  Say  not 
in  thine  heart,  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven,  or  who  shall 
descend  into  the  deep  ?  "  Thou  hast  no  call  to  climb  so 
high  or  dive  so  low.  "  The  word  is  nigh  thee,  in  thy 
mouth  and  in  thy  heart.  That  is  the  word  of  faith 
w^hich  we  preach."  Thou  hast  no  need  to  go  home  to 
^et  at  Christ.  Thou  hast  no  need  even  to  come  here 
to  find  him.  He  is  accessible  at  all  hours,  and  in  all 
places — the  ever-present  Son  of  God.  "But  where- 
withal shall  I  come  to  him?"  says  one.  Oh!  thou 
needest  not  torture  thy  body ;  thou  needest  not  afilict 
thy  soul ;  thou  needest  not  bring  thy  gold  and  silver ; 
thou  needest  not  bring  even  thy  tears.  All  that  thou 
hast  to  do  is  to  come  to  him  as  thou  art,  and  trust  in 
him  where  thou  art.     Oh!  if  thou  wilt  believe  that  he 


86  Christian  Energy. 

is  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  he  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  and  if  thou  wilt  cast  thyself  upon  him  with 
thy  whole  weight — falling  upon  him,  leaning  upon  him, 
resting  upon  him  with  that  simple  recumbency  which 
needs  and  lacks  no  other  support,  thou  shalt  be  saved. 
Now  cling  to  the  cross,  thou  ship^\Tecked  sinner,  and 
thou  shalt  never  go  down  while  clinging  to  that.  Here 
is  the  life-belt,  and  if  thou  art  enabled  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  put  thy  sole  and  simple  reliance  upon  Christy 
earth's  pillars  may  totter,  and  the  lamps  of  heaven  be 
extinguished,  but  thou  shalt  never  perish,  neither  shall 
any  pluck  thee  out  of  Christ's  hand.  Trust  Jesus  ; 
that  is  the  way  of  salvation.  "  What !  "  says  one,  "  if 
I  trust  Christ  at  this  moment,  shall  I  have  my  sins  for- 
given %  "  Ay,  forgiven  now.  "  What !  if  I  just  rest 
in  Christ,  and  look  to  him  ?  "  Even  so.  "  Thy  faith 
hath  saved  thee  ;  go  in  peace." 

"  There  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  crucified  one. 
There  is  life  at  this  moment  for  thee  ; 
Then  look,  sinner,  look  unto  him  and  be  saved, 
To  him  who  was  nailed  to  the  tree  !  " 

You  will  be  saved,  not  by  repentings  and  tears  ;  not  by 
wailings  or  w^orkings  ;  not  by  doings  or  prayings  ; 
but  coming,  believing,  simply  depending  upon  what 
Jesus  Christ  has  done.  When  thy  soul  saith  by  faith 
what  Christ  said  in  fact — "  It  is  finished,"  thou  art 
saved,  and  thou  may  est  go  thy  way  rejoicing. 

We  have  thus  preached  God's  way  of  pardon,  and 
man's  way  of  getting  at  God's  pardon ;  but  we  are  also 
enjoined  to  preach  about  the  character  of  this  forgiveness 
of  sin.  Never  had  messengers  such  happy  tidings  to 
deliver.     When  God  pardons  a  man's  sins,  he  pardons. 


The   True  Aim  of  Preacliing.  87 

them  all.  He  makes  a  clean  sweep  of  the  whole.  God 
never  pardons  half  a  man's  sins,  and  leaves  the  rest  in 
his  book.  He  has  pardon  for  all  sin  at  once.  I  believe 
that  virtually  before  God  all  the  sins  of  the  believer 
were  so  laid  to  the  account  of  Christ,  that  no  sins  ever 
can  be  laid  to  the  believer's  door.  The  apostle  does 
not  say  ^'  Who  does  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's 
elect?"  but  "Who  shall?"  as  though  nobody  ever 
could.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  John  Kent's  words 
are  literally  true — 

"  Here's  pardon  for  transgressions  past ; 
It  matters  not  how  black  their  caste  ; 
And,  O  my  soul !  with  wonder  view, 
For  sins  to  come  there's  pardon  too  !  " 

It  is  a  full  pardon.  God  takes  his  pen,  and  writes  a 
receipt.  Though  the  debt  may  be  a  hundi'ed  talents, 
he  can  write  it  off;  or  be  it  ten  thousand,  the  same 
hand  can  receipt  it.  Luther  tells  us  of  the  devil 
appearing  to  him  in  a  dream,  and  bringing  before  him 
the  long  roll  of  his  sins,  and  when  he  recited  them, 
Luther  said — "NowwTite  at  the  bottom,  ^The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin '  " — 
Oh,  that  blessed  word  "  all"  ! — "  from  all  sin  " — ^great 
sins  and  little  sins ;  sins  of  our  youth,  and  sins  of  our 
grey  hairs ;  sins  by  night  and  sins  by  day ;  sins  of 
action  and  passion,  sins  of  deed  and  thought — all  gone  I 
Blessed  Saviour  !  Precious  blood  !  Omnipotent  Re- 
deemer I  Mighty  Eed  Sea  that  thus  drow^ns  every- 
Egyptian  !  It  is  a  full  pardon  and  it  is  a  free  pardon 
likewise.  God  never  pardons  any  sinner  from  any 
other  motive  than  his  own  pure  grace.  It  is  all  gratis. 
It  cost  the  Saviour  much  ;  but  it  costs  us  nothing.     It 


88  Christian  Energy. 

is  a  pardon  freely  given  by  a  God  of  gi-ace,  because  he 
delighteth  in  mercy.     There  is  too  this  furtlier  blessing 
about  it,  that  while  it  is  full  and  free,  it  is  also  irre- 
versible.   Whom  God  pardons  he  never  condemns.    Let 
him  once  say,  ^^Ahsolvo  te'' — "I  absolve  thee," — and 
none  can  lay  anything  to  our  charge.     We  have  heard 
of   men   who,    after    having    been    pardoned   for   one 
offence,  have  committed  another,   and   therefore  they 
have  had  to  die ;  but  when  the  Lord  pardons  us,  he 
prevents  our  going  away  to  our  old  corruption.     He 
puts  his  Spirit  in  us,  and  makes  new  men  of  us,  so  that 
we  find  we  cannot  do  what  we  used  to  do.    That  mighty 
grace    of    God   is   without    repentance.      God   never 
repents  of  having  bestowed  his  grace.     Do  not  believe 
those  who  tell  you  that  he  loves  you  to-day  and  hates 
you    to-morrow.      Oh,    beloved!    once   in    Christ,   in 
Christ  for  ever ;   the  devil  cannot  get  you  out  of  him. 
Get  into  the  sacred   clefts,  sinner,    of   that   Eock   of 
Ages  which   was   cleft   for   you,    and   out   of    it   the 
fiends  of   hell   can   never   drag   you.      You   are   safe 
when  once   you  get  into   that  harbour.     Get   Christ, 
and    you   have    got   heaven.      All    things   are   yours 
when   Christ    is    yours.     Full    pardon,   free    pardon, 
and  everlasting  pardon,  and  let  me  tell   you  present 
pardon.     It  is  a  notion  still  current  that   you  cannot 
know  you  are  forgiven  till  you  come  to  die.     When 
people  talk  thus,  it  shows  how  little  they   know,    or 
rather,  Iiow  much  they  do  not  know  about  it.     There 
be  some   here   who   can   bear  witness;  nay,    there   be 
millions    of   God's   people   who,    if   they   could   speak 
from    heaven,   would   tell  you   that  they   knew   their 
pardon  long   years  before  they  entered  into  rest.     If 


Tlie  True  Aim  of  Preaching.  89 

you  had  ever  been  shut  up  in  prison,  as  some  of  us 
were — five  long  years  it  was  with  me  a  bitter  agony 
of  soul,  when  nothing  but  hell  stared  me  in  the  face, 
when  neither  night  nor  day  had  I  peace — oh,  what  joy 
when  I  heard  that  precious  truth,  "  Look  unto  me  and 
be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  I "  I  felt  the 
pardon  really  announced  to  me  !  I  was  as  conscious  of 
pardon  as  this  hand  is  conscious  of  being  clean  after  I 
have  washed  it ;  as  conscious  of  being  accepted  in  Christ 
at  that  moment  as  I  am  now  sure  that  I  am  able  to 
stand  here  and  say  as  much  with  my  mouth.  A  man 
may  have  this  infallible  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I 
know  that  to  some  stolid  minds  it  will  always  seem 
fanaticism,  but  what  do  I  care  whether  it  seems 
fanaticism  to  them  or  not,  as  long  as  it  is  real  to  my 
heart.  We  count  ourselves  as  honest  as  others,  and 
have  as  much  right  to  be  believed ;  whether  they 
credit  oui'  sanity  and  our  sincerity  or  not  does  not 
affect  us  a  straw,  so  long  as  we  know  that  we 
have  received  the  grace.  If  you  reckoned  a  clear 
profit  of  ten  thousand  pounds  upon  some  specula- 
tion, and  somebody  said  to  you,  "It's  all  foolery!" 
the  proof  would  be  unanswerable  if  you  had 
received  the  amount  and  had  the  bank  notes  in  your 
house ;  then  you  would  say,  "  Ah  !  you  may  think  as 
you  like  about  it,  but  I  have  got  the  cash."  So  the 
Christian  can  say.  Being  justified  by  faith  we  have 
peace  with  God — "  And  not  only  so,  but  we  also  joy  in 
God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  we  have 
now  received  the  atonement."  A'^Tien  some  tell  him 
that  he  is  not  forgiven,  he  says,  "  Oh  !  you  may  say 
what  you  like  about  it ;  but  I  have  got  the  witness 


90  Christian  Energy. 

witliln  that  I  am  born  of  God.  I  am  not  what  I  used 
to  be  ;  if  I  were  to  meet  myself  in  the  street  I  should 
hardly  know  myself;  I  mean  my  spiritual  self — my 
inner  self,  for  I  am  so  changed,  so  renewed,  so  turned 
upside  down,  that  I  am  not  what  I  was ;  I  am  a  new 
man  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  man  who  can  say  this  can 
bear  to  be  laughed  at.  He  knows  what  he  is  about, 
and  at  the  coolest  and  most  sober  moment  of  his  life, 
even  when  lying  on  his  sick  bed  and  ready  to  die,  he 
can  look  into  eternity,  soberly  judge  of  Christ,  and  find 
him  to  be  worthy  of  his  confidence,  and,  thinking  of  the 
blood-washing,  find  it  to  be  a  real  fact.  There  are  a 
thousand  things  in  this  world  that  look  well  enough  till 
you  come  to  look  upon  them  in  the  prospect  of  the 
grave  ;  but  this  is  a  thing  that  looks  better  the  nearer 
we  get  to  eternity ;  the  more  solemnly  and  deliberately 
we  take  our  account  of  it  in  the  sight  of  God,  the 
more  substantial  it  appears.  Oh,  yes !  there  is  a 
present  pardon;  but  what  I  want  to  say  most  em- 
phatically is,  that  there  is  a  present  pardon  for  you. 
"  Who  is  that  ?  "  say  you.  Oh !  I  am  not  going  to 
pick  and  choose  from  the  midst  of  you.  Whosoever 
among  you  will  come  to  Christ,  believe  his  word,  and 
put  your  trust  in  himself,  there  is  instant  pardon  for 
you.  What  !  that  grey-headed  man  there,  seventy 
years  old  in  sin  ?  Yes,  blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord!  If  he  should  now  rest  in  Christ,  there  is  in- 
stantaneous pardon  for  him.  And  is  there  a  harlot 
here  ?  Is  there  a  drunkard  here  ?  Is  there  one  here 
who  has  cursed  God  ?  Is  there  one  hei*e  who  has  been 
dishonest  ?  Is  there  one  here  over  whom  all  these  sins 
have  rolled!     Why,  if  thou  believest,  thy  sins,  which 


The  True  Aim  of  Preaching.  91 

are  many,  are  all  forgiven  thee.  And  tliougli  there 
should  be  brought  before  us  one  so  guilty  that  we 
might  well  start  away  from  approaching  him,  yet  if  he 
can  but  trust  Christ,  Christ  will  not  start  away  from 
him,  but  will  receive  him.  Oh !  was  not  that  a  wonderful 
moment  when  the  Saviour  wrote  on  the  ground,  while 
the  w^oman  taken  in  adultery  stood  before  him,  as  all 
her  accusers,  being  convicted  by  their  own  consciences, 
went  out,  leaving  the  sinner  and  the  Saviour  alone 
together,  and  when  Jesus  Christ,  who  hated  all  kinds 
of  sin,  but  who  loved  all  kinds  of  sinners,  lifted  himself 
up  and  said,  "  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee  :  go,  and  sin 
no  more"?  Ah,  poor  sinner!  Jesus  Christ  does  not 
condemn  you.  If  you  condemn  yourselves,  he  never 
w^ill  condemn  you.  He  will  only  condemn  your  sin,  for 
that  is  what  he  hates ;  but  he  does  not  hate  you.  If 
you  and  your  sins  part,  Christ  and  you  shall  never  part. 
If  you  will  but  trust  him  now,  you  shall  find  him  able 
to  save  you  even  to  the  very  uttermost  from  all  these 
sins  of  yours,  which  have  become  your  plague  and  your 
burden.  God  help  you,  then,  at  once  to  trust  him,  and 
to  find  this  present  pardon — this  pardon  which  will  last 
you  for  ever,  and  which  you  may  have  now. 

Let  me  repeat  it  again,  though  I  said  it  before,  all 
this  will  be  good  news  only  to  those  who  want  pardon, 
and  not  for  those  who  do  not  require  it.  I  have 
nothing  to  say  to  those  who  do  not  want  it.  Why 
should  I  ?  "  The  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician, 
but  those  that  are  sick."  God  will  have  somethinir  to 
say  to  you  one  of  these  days.  I  recollect,  and  I  hope 
you  have  not  forgotten,  the  story  of  the  rich  man.  It 
is  more  than  allegory,  it  is  fact.     You  all  Imow  that 


^2  Christian  Energy, 

while  he  was  in  this  world  he  had  fared  sumptuously 
eveiy  day.  He  was  covered  with  purple  and  fine  linen, 
or  at  least  he  thought  so.  As  for  God's  child,  Lazarus, 
he  thought  he  was  a  poor  miserable  beggar,  only  fit  to 
be  with  the  dogs,  and  he  despised  him.  He  looked  at 
him,  and  said,  "  Oh  !  I  am  a  gentleman  ;  I  am  dressed 
in  purple  and  fine  linen ;  I  am  none  of  your  beggarly 
saints  lying  on  the  dunghill,  though  they  call  themselves 
saints,  and  much  beside ;  I  am  rich."  Now,  it  so  hap- 
pened that  he  did  not  see  himself ;  he  had  got  scales 
over  his  eyes.  But  he  found  it  out  one  day.  You 
remember  Christ's  words,  "In  hell  he  lifted  up  his 
eyes."  Ah!  and  he  saw  then  what  he  had  never 
seen  before.  All  that  he  had  ever  seen  went  for 
naught,  there  had  been  a  glamour  over  his  eyes;  he 
had  been  dazed  and  benighted.  He  had  been  the 
beggar  all  the  while,  if  he  had  but  known  it,  while 
Lazarus,  who  had  worn  the  beggar's  garb,  is  waited 
on  like  a  prince,  and  carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's 
bosom.  So  the  poor  beggar  covered  with  wounds  and 
sores,  who  thinks  he  is  only  fit  for  the  dunghill,  he 
is  the  man  Christ  will  have ;  he  is  the  man  Christ  will 
take  up  to  heaven  at  last.  As  for  your  self-righteous 
men,  who  think  themselves  so  good  and  excellent,  they 
will  be  like  the  tinsel  and  the  gilt,  and  will  all  be 
burned  up  in  the  fire ;  the  varnish  and  paint  will  all 
come  off ;  God  wdll  knock  the  masks  off  their  faces,  and 
let  the  leprosy  that  was  on  their  brow  be  seen  by  all 
men.  But,  sinner,  you  who  are  such,  and  who  know 
it — unto  you  is  preached  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
through  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 
Let  the  coNaKEGATiON  TO  WHICH  Paul  addressed 


The  True  Aim  of  Preacliing.  93 

HIMSELF,    AND    AVHAT    BECAME    OF    THEM,   nOW  engage 

our  attention  for  a  few  minutes. 

The  text  says,  "  Unto  you  is  preached  forgiveness  of 
sins."  Never  mind  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  whom 
Paul  preached.  The  verse  is  quite  as  applicable  here  as 
it  was  there.  "  Unto  you  is  preached  the  forgiveness 
of  sins."  My  dear  friend,  it  is  no  small  privilege  to 
be  where  the  message  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins  can 
yet  be  heard.  Unto  you  is  preached  the  forgiveness 
of  sins,  but  not  to  the  tens  of  thousands  who  have 
gone  the  way  of  all  flesh,  unpardoned  and  unsaved. 
How  is  it  that  you  are  spared?  Your  brother  is 
dead;  your  children  have,  some  of  them,  died;  but 
you  are  spared.  You  have  been  at  sea.  You  have 
been  in  peril.  You  have  had  the  fever.  You  have 
been  near  death ;  and  yet  here  you  are  kept  alive.  Is 
not  this  a  privilege,  that  unto  you  is  preached  the  for- 
giveness of  sins?  What  would  they  give  to  hear  it 
once  more?  What  would  they  give  to  have  another- 
opportunity  ?     But  it  has  been  said  of  them — 

"  Too  late,  too  late !  ye  cannot  enter  now." 

*^  Unto  you  is  preached  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  I  said 
that  this  was  a  privilege !  but  it  is  a  privilege  which 
some  of  you  have  despised.  Those  who  heard  Paul 
had  never  heard  it  before.  Many  of  you  have  heard  it 
from  your  youth  up.  Alas !  I  cannot  help  saying  of 
some  of  you — that  I  am  almost  ready  to  despair  of  your 
conversion.  You  do  not  improve.  All  the  exhortations 
in  the  world  are  to  you  as  if  they  were  spoken  to  an 
iron  column  or  a  brazen  wall!  Why  will  ye  die? 
W^hat  shall  be  done  unto  you  ?     What  shall  be   said 


^4  Chnstian  Energy. 

you?  Unto  you  ispreaclied  tlie  forgiveness  of  sins.  When 
you  die,  careless,  Christless,  unsaved  one— when  we 
throw  that  handf  al  of  dirt  upon  your  coffin-lid,  we  shall 
have  to  think,  "Ah!  that  man  is  lost,  and  yet  unto 
him  was  preached  the  forgiveness  of  sins  !  " 

Well,  but  it  is  still  preached  unto  you.  Notwith- 
standing that  you  have  neglected  the  privilege,  it  is 
still  preached  unto  you.  Fain  would  I  point  with 
my  finger  to  some  of  you,  and  say,  "Well,  now,  we 
really  do  mean  you  personally.  You  people  under  the 
gallery  whom  I  cannot  see,  and  you  upstairs  here— 
every  one  of  you— unto  you  is  preached  the  forgiveness 
of  sins.  God  has  not  sent  us  to  preach  to  your 
neighbours,  but  to  you— you,  Mary,  Thomas,  George, 
John,  Sarah — you,  you  personally — unto  you  is 
preached  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  it  rests  with  you 
now  to  consider  what  reception  shall  be  given  to 
the  message  of  mercy.  Shall  a  hard  heart  be  the  only 
answer  ?  Oh,  may  the  Spirit  of  God  come  upon  you, 
and  give  instead  thereof  a  quickened  conscience  and  a 
tender  heart,  that  you  may  be  led  to  say,  "  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner  !  " 

"  And  WHAT  BECAME  OF  THEM,"  do  you  ask,  "  TO 

WHOM    THE  WOED  W^AS   PREACHED  WITH   SUCH  THRIL- 
LING EARNESTNESS?" 

Some  of  them  raved  at  a  very  great  rate.  If  you 
read  through  the  chapter  you  will  find  that  they  were 
fdled  with  env;y^,  and  they  spoke  against  those  things 
that  were  declared  to  them  by  Paul,  contradicting  and 
blaspheming,  and  so  on,  until  Paul  shook  off  the  dust  of 
his  feet  against  them,  and  went  his  way. 

But  there  was  another  class.     The  48th  verse  says, 


The  True  Aim  of  Preacldng,  95 

that  "  When  the  Gentiles  heard,  they  were  glad,  and 
they  glorified  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  as  many  as 
were  ordained  unto  eternal  life  believed."  Ah,  that  is 
the  comfort ;  albeit  there  are  some  who,  whenever  the 
gospel  is  preached,  dislike  and  reject  it.  A  person  was 
once  very  angry  with  me,  because,  in  preaching  on  the 
natural  depravity  of  man,  I  had  charged  man  with  being 
depraved;  I  had  said  that  man  was  proud.  This 
man  would  not  confess  it.  Thereby  he  was  proving 
the  truth  of  the  assertion  as  regarded  himself  all  the 
w^hile.  So  proud  was  he  that  he  could  not  bear  to  hear 
the  truth  told  him  about  it.  If  he  had  said  he  was 
proud,  I  should  have  thought  I  had  made  a  mistake ; 
but  when  he  bridled  up,  and  got  into  an  angry  temper, 
I  knew  that  God  had  sent  me  to  tell  him  the  truth. 
Outspoken  truth  makes  half  the  world  angr)\  The 
light  distracts  their  eyes.  When  the  Jews  kicked 
against  Paul's  preaching,  did  Paul  feel  disappointed? 
Oh,  no  !  If  he  did  feel  depressed  for  a  moment,  there 
was  a  strong  cordial  at  hand — that  very  cordial  by 
reason  of  which  Jesus  rejoiced  in  spirit  as  he  saw  the 
good-will  of  the  Father,  in  revealing  unto  babes  those 
things  that  are  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent.  Here 
was  his  comfort — there  were  some  upon  whom  there  had 
been  a  blessed  work;  there  were  some  whose  names 
were  written  in  the  book  of  God;  some  concerning 
whom  there  had  been  covenant  transactions;  some 
w^hom  God  had  chosen  from  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world ;  some  whom  Christ  had  bought  with  blood, 
and  whom  the  Spirit,  therefore,  came  to  claim  as  God's 
own  property,  because  Christ  had  bought  them  upon 
the  bloody  tree,  and  those  "  some  "  believed.    Naturally 


96  Christian  Energy. 

they  were  like  otliers,  but  grace  made  the  distinction,  and 
their  faith  was  the  sign  and  evidence  of  that  distinction. 
Now,  yon  need  not  ask  the  question  whether  you  are 
God's  elect.  I  ask  another  question — Do  you  believe  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  If  you  do,  you  are  his  elect :  if 
you  do  not,  the  question  is  not  to  be  decided  yet  by  us. 
If  you  are  God's  chosen  ones,  you  will  know  it  by  your 
trusting  in  Jesus.  Simple  as  that  trust  is,  it  is  the  in- 
fallible proof  of  election.  God  never  sets  the  brand  of 
faith  upon  a  soul  whom  Christ  has  not  bought  with  his 
blood,  and  if  thou  believest,  all  the  treasure  of  eternity 
is  thine ;  thy  name  is  in  God's  book  ;  thou  art  a  fa- 
voured one  of  heaven ;  the  divine  decrees  all  point  to 
thee  ;  go  thy  way  and  rejoice. 

But  if  thou  believest  not,  thou  art  in  the  gall  of 
bitterness  and  the  bonds  of  iniquity.  May  eternal 
mercy  bring  thee  out  of  that  state,  yea,  bring  thee  out 
of  it  at  once.  Oh  that  I  had  time  and  power  to  plead 
with  some  here  who  know  that  Christ  died,  who  know 
that  he  can  save,  who  know  the  gospel,  but  who  still  da 
not  trust  in  that  gospel  for  their  salvation !  Oh,  may 
you  be  led  to  do  it,  and  to  do  it  now,  before  this  day  is 
over !  We  want  to  be  made  a  blessing  among  you. 
At  the  commencement  of  our  prayers  we  besought  the 
Lord  for  the  conversion  of  many  more  beside  you.  If 
we  had  these  souls  given  to  us,  what  a  token  Avould  it 
be,  and  what  a  comfort !  May  the  Lord  bring  you  in, 
and  bring  you  in  without  delay  !  Oh,  trust  him,  soul — 
trust  him  !  May  God  help  you  to  trust  him,  and  his 
shall  be  the  praise,  world  without  end  I 


^  ''^hmi  Hi  t^  ^ii}Ii 


"  For,  behold,  I  am  for  you,  and  I  will  turn  unto  you,  and  ye  shall 
be  tilled  and  sown." — Ezekiel  xxxvi.  9. 


HESE  words  were  addressed  to  the  mountains 
of  Palestine.  Albeit  that  they  are  now 
waste  and  barren,  they  are  yet  to  be  as 
fruitful  and  luxuriant  as  in  the  days  of 
Israel's  gi'andeur.  God  will  turn  to  them, 
and  the  vines  shall  then  crown  the  summits, 
and  there  shall  be  harvests  again  upon  the 
mountain  tops.  The  mountains  of  Israel  were  a  soil  of 
glass,  in  which  you  could  see  reflected  at  a  single 
glimpse,  the  condition  and  character  of  the  people. 
While  the  Israelites  were  obedient  to  God,  the 
mountains  dropped  with  new  wine,  and  the  little 
hills  seemed  to  melt  with  fertility.  Honey  dropped 
from  the  rock,  and  \^ane  appeared  to  be  distilled  of 
the  very  flint.  As  soon  as  ever  the  people  sinned, 
God  gave  them  over  to  their  enemies,  and  straightway, 
irrigation  being  neglected,  and  the  culture  of  the  soil  no 
longer  profitable,  the  mountains  became  as  blank  and 
barren  as  though  they  were  a  howling  w^ilderness.  And 
again,  when  the  people  repented  and  turned  to  God, 
then  the  soil  began  to  cover  the  mountains,  carried  uji 
there  by  the  industry  of   the  people,  the  sides  of  the 

7 


98  Christian  Energjj, 

hills  were  teri'aced,  the  waste  places  began  to  blossom, 
and  the  vines  were  once  more  filled  with  clusters.  You 
could  thus  read  the  history  of  the  people  in  the  aspect 
of  their  hills. 

I  intend  to  take  the  hills  of  Israel  as  a  representa- 
tion of  our  own  state — the  state  of  our  own  heart.  As  they 
really  did  mirror  forth  the  condition  of  the  people 
of  old,  the  metaphor  becomes  peculiarly  attractive. 
Man's  heart  by  nature  is  like  a  waste  field ;  there  is  no 
hope  for  that  field  unless  God  turn  to  it  in  mercy  ;  and 
when  he  doth  tuni  to  it  he  will  have  to  till  it ;  for 
not  until  after  tillage  can  it  be  sown  with  any  hope  of 
success. 

I.  Mails  heart  hi  nature  is  lihe  a  waste  field.  A- 
waste  field  produces  no  harvest.  Keaper,  thou  shalt 
never  fill  thine  arms  with  sheaves,  the  axle  of  the  wain 
shall  never  creak  beneath  the  load  of  harvest,  and  the 
swains  shall  never  dance  with  the  maidens  at  the  har- 
vest home.  There  let  the  field  abide,  and  the  fruit  it 
will  yield  in  a  whole  century  will  not  be  sufficient  to 
feed  a  single  individual.  Such  is  man,  we  say,  by 
nature.  He  brings  forth  no  fruit  unto  God.  Leave 
him  alone  and  he  will  live  unto  himself.  Perhaps  he 
will  be  a  respectable  sinner,  and,  if  so,  he  will  selfishly 
spend  all  his  life  in  trying  to  provide  for  himself  alone, 
or  for  his  family,  which  is  but  a  part  of  himself.  He 
will  go  through  the  world  from  his  birth  to  his  sepulchre 
without  a  thought  of  God.  He  will  never  do  anything 
for  God.  His  heart  will  never  beat  with  love  to  him. 
He  may  sometimes,  out  of  sheer  selfishness,  go  with 
others  to  worship,  but  he  will  not  worship  God,  what- 
ever deference  he  may  show  to  the  outward  form.     His 


A    Vistoji  of  the  Field.  99 

heart  will  be  in  perfect  alienation  from  the  God  that 
made  him.  lie  will  live  and  he  will  die  a  strange 
monstrosity  in  the  workl — a  creature  that  has  lived 
without  his  Creator.  Perhaps,  however,  he  will  be  a 
disreputable  sinner.  He  will  live  in  sin,  find  his 
comfort  in  drunkenness,  perhaps  in  lust,  possibly  in 
dishonesty  ;  but  anyhow,  he  will  bring  forth  nothing 
that  God  can  accept.  Methinks  I  see  the  great  Go<l 
coming  to  look  at  the  man,  even  as  a  farmer  might 
come  to  look  upon  his  fallow  field.  What  can  God 
see  ?  Is  there  a  prayer  ?  Yes,  he  says  a  few  forms  of 
prayer,  but  they  are  dead,  lifeless  things,  and  God 
cannot  accept  them.  Does  he  see  any  praise  ?  Perhaps 
a  shrivelled  hymn  growing  up  in  the  corner  of  the  field, 
but  since  there  is  no  heart  in  it,  that  rots  and  dies,  and 
God  abhors  it.  He  looks  the  whole  field  throucrh. 
There  is  no  thought  for  God,  no  consecration  of  time 
to  God,  no  desire  to  honour  God,  no  longing  to  pro- 
duce in  the  world  fresh  glory  to  God,  no  effort  to  raise 
up  to  him  fresh  voices  that  shall  praise  his  name.  He 
lives  unto  himself  or  to  his  fellow-men,  and  havincr  so 
lived,  he  so  dies.  Now  you  know  that  there  are  a  great 
many  people  who  say  to  themselves,  "  Well,  if  I  do  good 
to  my  neighbour,  and  if  I  am  kind  to  others,  that  is 
enough;"  and  they  expect  to  have  some  reward.  But 
mark  you,  every  servant  expects  his  master  to  pay  his 
wages ;  surely  then,  if  you  serve  your  fellow-men,  they 
ought  to  reward  you.  Let  them  give  you  a  statue,  or  let 
them  emblazon  your  name  on  some  one  of  the  rolls  of 
fame.  Let  them  sound  down  your  exploits  to  future  gene- 
rations. Still  let  your  debtor  and  creditor  account  be  fair. 
If  you  have  not  done  anything  distinctly  and  avowedly 


100  Chrutian  Energy, 

in  the  service  of  God,  there  is  no  remuneration  that 
you  can  reasonably  expect  God  to  give  you.  What  have 
you  brought  forth  unto  him  ?  Nothing  whatever  ;  and 
we  say  it  sincerely,  for  we  know  how  sadly  true  it  is, 
the  natural  heart  of  man  never  does  and  never  can  pro- 
duce so  much  as  one  single  grain  that  God  can  receive 
as  being  honourable  to  him.  As  for  the  children  of 
men  in  all  their  generations, 

"Like  brutes  they  live,  like  brutes  they  die; 
Like  grass  they  flourish,  till  thy  breath 
Blasts  them  in  everlasting  death." 

Alas  for  them  !  Unto  thee,  great  God,  they  render 
no  prayer  nor  praise,  no  heart-felt  love  nor  reverent 
adoration.  They  pass  through  this  w^orld  as  though 
there  w^as  no  God. 

Worse  than  this;  the  field  that  has  never  been 
ploughed  or  sown  does  produce  something.  There  is 
an  activity  about  human  nature  that  will  not  let  us  live 
without  doing.  Unless  you  should  shut  yourselves  up 
in  a  cell  like  a  monk,  or  live  on  the  top  of  a  pillar,  like 
Simon  Stylites,  you  cannot  very  well  pass  through  life 
utterly  inert  without  any  purpose  of  mind,  without  any 
movement  of  the  limbs,  w^ithout  any  stir  of  the  passions ; 
and  I  suppose  that  even  Simon  Stylites  did  exert  some 
influence,  for  he  led  other  people  to  be  as  great  fools  as 
himself.  And  even  monks  do  some  mischief  by  losing 
the  interest  on  talents  for  which  they  ought  to  have  ren- 
dered a  good  account,  and  spending  their  time  in  laziness 
which  they  ought  to  have  employed  in  useful  service. 
""  No  man  liveth  to  himself."  Is  there  no  wheat  growing 
on  that  soil  %  no  barley  ?  no  rye  ?  Very  well,  then,  there 
will  be  darnel,  and  cockle,  and  twitch,  and  all  sorts  of  weed. 


A   Vision  of  the  FielJ.  101 

So  it  IS  with  the  unrenewed  heart.  It  produces  hard 
thoughts  of  God,  enmity  against  the  Most  High.  It 
is  proHfic  of  evil  imaginations,  wrong  desires,  and  bitter 
envyings.  As  these  ripen  they  bring  forth  ill  words — 
idle,  or,  it  may  be,  lascivious  words,  and  perhaps  atheistic, 
blasphemous  words  ;  and  as  .  these  ripen  they  come  to 
actions,  and  the  man  becomes  an  offender  in  his  deeds, 
perhaps  against  man,  certainly  against  God.  He  lives 
to  produce  sour  grapes.  The  apples  of  Gomorrah  hang 
plentifully  upon  him. 

I  know  I  am  describing  some  here  present.  There 
are  many  such  persons  to  be  found  in  all  our  assemblies. 
They  have  done  no  good  in  their  lives.  Measuring  their 
lives  by  the  standard  of  God,  they  have  done  nothing]:. 
On  the  other  hand,  they  liave  been  guilty  of  much  evil, 
they  have  brought  forth  fruit  unto  sin.  Nor  is  this  the 
worst  of  it.  The  bad  farmer,  who  lets  his  field  all  run 
to  weeds,  does  mischief  to  the  neighbouring  farm. 
Here  comes  the  w^ind,  willing  to  waft  seed — good  seed 
if  it  can  find  it — into  other  soil.  It  will  take  the  down 
of  the  flower  seed,  and  bear  it  into  a  garden  where  it 
will  be  wanted  ;  or,  if  it  must,  it  will  carry  the  seeds 
of  the  thistle ;  and  so,  when  it  comes  sweeping  by  the 
farmer's  neMected  field  it  does  damao;e  to  all  the  fields 
in  the  neighbourhood.  It  is  so  with  the  sinner.  "  One 
sinner  destroyeth  much  good.'*  Is  he  a  father?  His 
children  grow  up  to  be  as  ungodly  as  himself.  Is  he  a 
master?  Then  his  men,  like  him,  break  the  Sabbath, 
and  neglect  the  ways  of  God.  Is  he  a  workman  ?  Then 
his  fellow  workmen  who  are  younger  than  himself  take 
umbrage  at  his  example;  they  are  led  into  sin  while  they 
blindly  follow  in   his  wake.     Whatever  station  of  life 


102  Christian  Energy, 

you  put  him  into,  he  does  mischief ;  the  more  eminent  he 
is,  the  more  eminently  mischievous.  I  do  not  allude 
now  to  those  who  are  grave  offenders  against  the  laws 
of  society.  I  mean  those  good  decent  people  wdio  have 
no  fear  of  God.  I  do  think  they  do  very  much  mis- 
chief, for  the  devil's  cause  gets  respectable  through 
having  them  on  its  side.  Those  who  persistently  live 
in  violation  of  divine  law,  and  who  do  not  bend  their 
necks  to  the  yoke  of  Christ,  may  be  very  amiable, 
very  moral,  and  very  excellent.  If  so,  in  a  certain 
sense,  the  more  is  the  pity,  because  they  get  an  increase 
of  power  to  do  evil,  for  others  say,  "  If  such  good  men 
as  these  can  live  without  religion,  and  live  despising  it, 
why  should  not  we  ?  *'  Thus  a  bad  cause,  which  would 
be  hissed  off  the  stage  if  there  were  none  but  rascals 
to  side  with  it,  still  walks  respectably  in  the  light  of 
day  because  of  these  persons  who  back  it  up.  God 
deliver  you,  my  dear  hearers,  from  being  like  a  field 
that  does  mischief  unto  others  !  Beware,  thou  upas 
tree,  lest  thy  poison  get  the  reward  of  hell  fire! 
Beware,  thou  cumberer  of  the  ground,  standing  there, 
and  sucking  nutriment  out  of  the  soil,  and  cursing  the 
other  trees  of  the  vineyard,  lest  the  sharp  axe  should 
soon  feel  thy  core,  and  lay  thee  level  with  the  gi'ound. 

A  barren  field  resembles  the  heart  of  man  in  that 
all  the  good  influences  that  fall  upon  it  are  wasted. 
Comes  there  sunshine :  it  produces  no  harvest  on  the 
fallow  land.  Here  are  the  precious  drops  of  dew  glis- 
tening in  the  morning;  but  they  cannot  produce  an 
ear  of  corn.  And  here  fall  the  sweet  smiling  show^ers 
of  rain,  that  make  the  new-mown  fields  all  fragrant,  but 
this  field  gets  no  good  from  it.     It  is  even  so  w4th  you 


A    Visio7i  of  the  Field,  103 

by  nature.  You  have  the  blessings  of  Providence,  but 
they  do  not  make  you  grateful.  You  have  even  the 
blessings  of  the  outward  means  of  grace,  but  they  ex- 
cite no  longings  in  you  towards  God.  Surely,  my  dear 
friends,  if  this  has  been  the  case  long  with  you,  you 
must  be  nigh  unto  cursing.  And  yet  the  waste  field 
does  produce  something  pleasant  to  the  eye — something 
worth  looking  at ;  for  have  you  not  seen  the  gorgeous 
poppy,  and  the  finest  specimens  of  the  ranunculus  grow- 
ing in  the  field  that  was  never  ploughed  and  sown? 
And  there  is  the  dog-rose  yonder,  and  the  foxglove,  and 
the  forget-me-not,  all  springing  up,  and  flourishing  where 
there  should  have  been  furrows.  And  so  a  man  may 
have  a  comely  appearance  and  make  a  fair  show  in  the 
flesh,  although  he  does  not  live  near  to  God.  In  his 
character  and  reputation  there  may  be  many  a  gaudy 
flower — ay,  as  red  and  as  conspicuous  as  the  poppy. 
lie  may  shine  among  men,  and  men  may  talk  much 
about  him.  But,  as  the  Lord  liveth,  if  the  Lord's 
plough  has  never  gone  over  him,  the  bright  blushing 
weed  is  but  a  weed  still ;  a  bane  and  a  pest,  not  a  boon 
or  a  balm,  as  the  farmer  knoweth  right  well.  Let  those 
of  you  who  are  in  such  a  state  see  an  apt  emblem  of 
themselves  every  time  they  pass  a  piece  of  waste  ground. 
Let  them  look,  and  say,  "  That  is  just  what  I  am,  and 
what  I  shall  be  to  the  end  of  my  life,  except  the  grace 
of  God  shall  interfere  to  retrieve  me  from  endless  ruin." 
11.  There  is  710  hope  for  this  field,  unless  God  turn  to 
it  in  mercy.  Even  so,  unless  the  Lord  turn  to  men,  no 
good  will  ever  come  of  them.  The  text  says,  "  I  am 
for  you,  and  I  will  turn  unto  you."  Man  never  does  of 
himself  turn   unto  God,   and  that  for  obvious  reasons. 


104  Christian  Energy, 

We  are  sure  he  never  can,  for  he  is  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins.  We  are  certain  he  never  will,  for  by  nature 
he  hates  anything  like  a  new  birth  ;  and  if  he  could 
make  himself  a  new  creature  he  would  not,  for  Christ 
has  expressly  said,  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me  that  ye 
might  have  life."  Man  is  unwilling  to  give  up  sin, 
he  loves  it  too  well ;  unwilling  to  be  made  holy,  for  he 
has  no  taste  for  spiritual  things.  God,  then,  must  come 
to  man  ;  for  how  can  man,  being  naturally  dead,  and 
naturally  unwilling,  ever  come  to  God  ?  Experience 
tells  us  that  he  will  not.  When  did  you  ever  find  a  man 
who  had  come  to  God  who  would  say  that  he  came 
of  his  own  natural  inclination?  All  the  saints  on 
earth  will  tell  you  that  it  was  mighty  grace  that  made 
them  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power.  If  there  be 
any  man  that  came  to  God  of  himself,  I  can  only  say 
that  I  know  I  am  not  he. 

"  Jesus  sought  me  when  a  stranger, 
AVandering  from  the  fold  of  God." 

If  any  unconverted  person  here  will  tell  me  that  he  can 
turn  to  God  when  he  likes,  I  ask  him  why  he  does  not 
turn  now.  What  measure  of  damnation  must  be  his  due, 
when,  according  to  his  own  confession,  he  has  a  power 
which  he  will  not  use  !  Sinner,  talk  not  vainly  of  what 
thou  canst  do  !  Man !  thou  canst  burn  in  hell,  and  thou 
canst  fit  thyself  for  the  flames,  but  this  is  about  all  thou 
canst  do  for  thyself.  Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself.  For 
that  inglorious  deed  thy  will  was  free  and  thine  agency 
free  likewise.  But  only  in  God  is  thy  help  found.  For 
this,  be  sure,  thou  hast  neither  might  nor  skill.  If  ever 
thou  art  saved  it  must  be  by  another  power  than  thine 
own,  and  by  another  faculty  than   that  which   dwells 


A    Vision  of  the  Field,  105 

in  tliy  puny,  wicked  heart.  God  must  do  it.  If  you 
wait  till  your  waste  field  ploughs  itself,  or  brings  forth 
a  harvest,  you  shall  wait  till  doomsday.  And  if  I  wait 
until  my  hearers  save  their  own  souls,  and  turn  unto  God 
themselves,  with  full  purpose  of  heart,  I  may  wait  till 
these  hairs  are  grey,  or  till  their  bones  are  carried  to  the 
tomb.  If  you  have  turned,  my  dear  hearers,  you  know 
that  the  Lord  has  done  it.  Give  unto  him  the  glory. 
If  you  have  not  been  converted,  God  help  you  to  cry 
unto  him  instantly  and  earnestly,  "Turn  us,  and  we 
shall  be  turned."  Look  unto  him  who  is  exalted  on  high 
to  "  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.''  Seek  ye 
unto  him,  and  ye  shall  live.  Oh,  that  ye  could  now  see 
your  wretched  plight,  that  ye  could  feel  your  imminent 
peril,  that  ye  could  believe  in  the  sovereign  operations 
of  God's  grace !  Then  would  I  venture  to  prophesy 
that  salvation  had  this  day  come  to  your  house — ay,  to 
your  very  heart. 

III.  When  the  field  is  to  he  put  under  cultivation  it 
must  he  tilled.  So  when  God  turns  to  any  man  in  his 
mercy  there  has  to  be  an  operation,  a  tillage,  performed 
upon  his  heart.  The  farmer,  unless  he  is  a  fool,  would 
never  think  of  sowing  his  corn  upon  a  field  that  remains 
just  as  it  was  when  it  lay  fallow.  He  ploughs  it  first. 
Although  we  are  to  scatter  the  seed  everywhere,  upon 
the  wayside  as  well  as  upon  the  good  ground,  God 
never  does.  Common  calling  is  addressed  to  every  man, 
but  effectual  calling  comes  only  to  prepared  men,  to 
those  whom  God  makes  "willing  in  the  day  of  his 
power." 

Now,  what  is  the  plough  wanted  for  ?  Why,  it  is 
wanted,  first  of  all,  to  break  up  the  soil,  and  make  it 


106  Christian  Energy, 

crumbb.  It  has  got  hard  ;  perhaps  it  is  a  heavy  clay, 
and  then  it  is  all  stuck  together  by  the  wet,  and  all 
baked  and  caked  together  by  the  sun  that  shines  on  it. 
Or  perhaps  it  is  a  light  soil.  Well,  this  may  not  need 
much  ploughing,  but  still  it  will  cake  over,  as  we  all 
see  even  in  our  little  gardens.  After  the  rain  has 
gone,  the  sun  comes,  the  whole  cakes  over,  and  there 
will  be  no  place  for  the  seeds  to  thrust  in  their  tender 
roots.  The  corn  will  not  sink  down  into  the  soil  unless 
the  soil  is  broken,  and  the  more  thoroughly  pulverised 
the  soil  becomes,  the  more  like  dust  you  get  it,  the 
more  hope  there  is  that  the  seed  will  take  good  root. 

In  sucli  like  manner  must  human  hearts  be  broken. 
"  A  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not 
despise."  The  more  thoroughly  pulverised  the  heart 
becomes,  the  better.  Hence  there  needs  to  be  the 
sharp  plough  of  the  law  driven  right  through  the  heart, 
to  break  up  its  crust  and  split  the  clods ;  and  then 
must  come  that  blessed  plough  of  the  cross,  which  is 
the  best  plough  that  ever  w^ent  across  a  field  yet — that 
blessed  plough  of  the  cross,  which,  as  it  goes  over  it, 
turns  up  the  soil,  even  the  very  heart  of  it,  and  makes 
the  sinner  feel  his  sin,  and  hate  it  too,  because  of  the 
love  of  God  which  is  shed  abroad  by  Christ  Jesus  the 
Lord.  Thus  you  must  be  tilled  then,  that  the  heart 
may  be  broken,  for  the  seed  will  never  get  into  an 
unbroken  heart.  And  the  plough  is  also  wanted  to 
destroy  the  weeds,  for  they  must  be  killed.  We  cannot 
have  them  growing.  To  spare  the  weeds  would  be  to 
kill  the  w^heat.  The  plough  comes,  and  cuts  some 
weeds  in  two ;  others  it  turns  over,  and  throws  the 
heavy  clods  on,  and  leaves  them  to  lie  there  and  be 


A   Vision  of  the  FiekL  107 

buried ;  it  turns  the  roots  of  otliers  up  to  the  sun,  and 
the  sun  by  the  brightness  of  its  shining  scorches  them, 
and  thej  die.     Some  soils  need  cross-ploughing;  they 
need  to  be  plouglied  this  -way  and  the  otlier  way,  and 
then  they  need  some  one  to  go  through  the  furrows 
afterwards,  and  pull  up  the  weeds,  or  else  they  will  not 
be  all  rooted  out  of  the  soil.     And  I  am  afraid  that 
many  of  us  who  have  been  ploughed  have  divers  w^eeds 
left  in  us  yet.     The  field  must  not  only  be  ploughed, 
but  the  weeds  must  be  killed ;  and  so  it  must  be  witli 
you,  my  dear  hearers.     If  the  Lord  save  you,  he  must 
kill  your  drunkenness,  he  must  kill  your  swearing,  he 
must  kill  your  whoredom,  he  must  kill  your  lying,  he 
must  kill  your  dishonesty.     These  must  all  go ;  every 
single  weed  must  be  torn  up  ;  there  is  no  hope  for  you 
while  there  is  a  weed  livincp.     True,   I  mean  not  those 
weeds  which  still  exist  even  in  the   regenerate ;    but 
even  they  must  be   doomed   now.     John  Wellman,  a 
member  of  "  the  Society  of  Friends,"  tells  a  strange 
story  of  himself.     One  night,  after  he  had  been  read- 
ing the  Scripture,  as  he  lay  awake,  he  heard  a  voice, 
saying,  "John  Wellman  is  dead ;"  and,  being  a  Quaker, 
he  was  greatly  struck  therewith,  and  wondered  how  it 
was  that  he  could  be  dead.     He  asked  his  wife  what 
liis  name  was,  and  she  said,  "  John  Wellman ;  "  where- 
upon he  perceived  that  he  must  be  alive.      At  last, 
he  understood  it  to  mean  that  he  was  dead  to  the  world  ; 
that  he  was  henceforth  no  longer  what  he  w^as,  but  a 
new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.     Oh  !  it  will  be  a  blessed 
thing  for  you,  my  dear  hearers,   when  the  like  thing 
may  be  said  of  you  in  the  like  sense — "  He  is  dead." 
Tiiere  is  a  man  I  used  to  know — I  wish  I  did  not  know 


108  Christian  Energif, 

him  so  well ;  I  used  to  meet  him  every  day  some  years 
ago.  But  we  parted  company.  He  would  not  go  with 
me  to  Christ,  and  so  I  went  without  him.  I  became 
a  new  man,  and  he  is  dead.  Oh,  how  often  I  wish 
he  were  buried,  for  sometimes  I  have  to  drag  his  dead 
body  about  with  me,  and,  as  it  putrifies  in  my  nostrils, 
I  have  to  cry,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  That  rascally 
old  man  bears  my  own  name ;  and  once  he  was  iden- 
tical with  my  own  self.  I  could  fain  wish  he  were 
buried.  In  like  manner  may  it  come  to  pass  with  you 
that  you  may  die  to  the  flesh,  that  henceforth  you  may 
live  in  the  spirit  unto  God.  And  though  the  old  man 
be  still  prone  to  corruption,  wdiat  a  blessed  stroke  is 
that  which  takes  the  life  out  of  him,  so  that  he  can  no 
longer  reign  over  you,  but  the  new  man  reigns  supreme. 

Ploughmen  tell  us  that  when  they  are  ploughing, 
if  the  plough  jumps,  the  work  is  done  badly.  They 
must  plough  it  all  alike,  from  end  to  end,  from  head- 
land to  headland.  If  the  plough  jumps,  it  has  gone 
over  some  weeds  or  knots,  and  not  torn  tliem  up.  Oh  ! 
I  would  like  always  so  to  preach  that  my  plough  may 
never  jump.  I  sometimes  say  a  hard  word  because  I 
do  not  want  my  plough  to  jump.  I  want  to  tear  up  all 
the  knots,  and  not  leave  one  in  the  ground.  If  one 
sin  be  tolerated,  or  one  malicious  desire  be  spared,  the 
life  of  God  can  never  be  in  us.  The  Lord  make  a  clean 
sweep  of  the  weeds,  and  burn  them  all ! 

Well,  now,  mark  you,  in  this  tilling  there  are  diffe- 
rent soils.  There  is  the  light  soil  and  the  heavy  soil ; 
and  so  there  are  different  sorts  of  constitutions.  There 
are  some  men  who  are  naturally  tender  and  sensitive. 


A    Vision  of  the  Field.  109 

Many,  too,  of  our  sisters  are  like  Lydia ;  tliey  soon 
receive  the  "Word.  There  are  others  that  are  like  the 
heavy  clay  soil  ;  and  you  know  the  farmer  does  not 
plough  both  soils  alike,  or  else  he  would  make  a  sad 
mess  of  it.  And  so  God  does  not  deal  with  all  men 
alike.  Some  have,  as  it  were,  first  a  little  ploughing, 
and  then  the  seed  is  put  in,  and  all  is  done  ;  bujt  some 
have  to  be  ploughed  and  cross-ploughed ;  and  then 
there  is  the  scarifier  and  the  clod-cruslier,  and  I  know 
not  what,  which  have  to  be  rolled  over  tliem  before  they 
are  good  for  anything ;  and  perhaps,  after  all,  they  pro- 
duce very  little  fruit.  Different  constitutions  need 
different  modes  of  action.  Let  this  comfort  some  of 
you  who  have  not  been  so  much  alarmed  as  others  have 
been.  Different  soils  must  have  different  methods. 
Christ  does  not  deal  with  all  men  precisely  in  the 
same  way  in  his  heavenly  tillage.  A  farmer  has  a  large 
variety  of  implements.  Go  into  the  shed  of  a  man 
who  is  a  high  farmer,  and  what  a  number  of  imple- 
ments you  may  see.  I  mentioned  some  of  them  just 
now,  but  there  are  far  more  than  I  can  talk  about.  So 
it  is  with  our  heavenly  Father ;  he  has  all  kinds  of 
implements.  Sometimes  it  is  a  providential  trial.  One 
man  loses  a  child ;  another  has  to  bury  his  father ;  and 
yonder  one  has  had  to  follow  his  wife  to  the  grave. 
Some  have  temporal  losses ;  business  becomes  bad ; 
perhaps  they  are  out  of  work  and  half  starving ;  others 
are  stretched  upon  a  bed  of  sickness,  and  others  are 
brought  near  to  the  grave.  These  circumstances  are 
all  so  many  different  sorts  of  ploughs  with  which  God 
ploughs  the  soil  of  our  hearts.  The  labourers  whom 
the  Lord  employs  are  dissimilar  likewise  by  the  diversity 


110  Christian  Energif* 

of  their  gifts.  Ministers  are  some  of  one  sort,  and 
some  of  another ;  even  the  same  minister  is  not  always 
engaged  in  the  same  sort  of  operation.  There  are  some 
Sundays  when  I  know  some  of  you  find  me  a  terrible 
scarifier,  for  I  have  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  in  my  con- 
science, and  there  is  very  little  comfort  in  the  solemn 
warnings  I  am  constrained  to  utter.  But  if  sometimes 
I  come  down  upon  you  like  a  clod-crusher,  it  is  needful, 
that,  with  true  grace  and  good  hope,  I  may  at  other  times 
drill  in  the  seed,  and  nourish  your  hearts  with  the  very 
essence  of  the  gospel.  The  faithful  evangelist  has  to 
become  all  things  to  all  men  to  accomplish  his  Master's 
work.  But  ye  must  be  tilled,  for  there  is  no  sowing 
the  ground  until  it  has  been  first  stirred  about. 

And,  you  know,  the  farmer  has  his  time  for  plough- 
ing. Some  soils  will  do  better  at  one  season,  and  some 
at  another.  There  are  some  soils  that  break  up  best 
after  a  shower  of  rain,  and  some  do  best  when  they 
are  dryest.  So  there  are  some  hearts — ay,  and  I  think 
almost  all  hearts— that  are  best  ploughed  after  a 
shower  of  heavenly  love  has  fallen  upon  them.  They 
are  in  a  grateful  frame  of  mind  for  mercies  received, 
and  then  the  story  of  a  dying  Saviour  comes  to  them 
as  just  that  which  will  touch  the  springs  of  their  hearts. 
Anyhow,  dear  friends,  I  would  like  to  put  the  ques- 
tion round.  Have  you  been  tilled  ?  has  your  heart 
been  tilled  ?  has  your  heart  been  turned  up  ?  have  the 
secret  things  of  your  heart  been  discovered  and  brought 
to  light,  just  as  the  plough  turns  up  the  ant's  nest  ? 
have  you  been  brought  to  know  your  own  corruptions  ? 
are  there  straight  furrows  right  through  you,  so  that 
you  can  cry  out,   "  0    God,   thou   hast  broken  me  in 


A    Vision  of  the  Field.  Ill 

pfeccs,  be  pleased  to  come  to  my  help  "  ?  Then  I  am 
glad  of  it.  You  are  ready  to  despair  of  yourself, 
but  I  am  not  ready  to  despair  for  you.  You  tremble, 
but  I  am  encouraged.  I  rejoice,  not  that  ye  are  made 
sorry,  but  that  ye  sorrow  to  repentance  after  a  godly 
manner.  God  has  broken  your  heart,  and  I  know 
that  he  will  bind  it  up.  If  he  has  plouglied  you 
he  will  sow.  "  I  will  turn  to  ycu,  and  ye  shall  be 
tilled  and  sown." 

IV.  Unless  God  has  tilled  the  heart,  it  cannot  he  sown 
with  any  hope  of  success.  After  ploughing  there  comes 
the  sowing.  When  the  heart  is  ready  God  sows  it — 
sows  it  with  the  best  of  wlieat.  The  wise  farmer  does 
not  sow  tail  corn,  but,  as  Isaiah  says,  he  casts  in  "the 
principal  wheat."  The  seed  which  God  sows  is  living 
seed.  If  a  farmer  were  to  sow  boiled  seed  that  has  lost 
its  vitality,  what  would  be  the  good  of  it  ?  But  he  sows 
living  seed ;  and  so  the  truth  which  Jesus  Christ 
preaches,  and  bids  us  to  scatter,  is  living  wheat — living 
seed  ;  and  when  that  drops  into  the  soil  God  watches 
ov^er  it.  The  worm  may  come,  and  the  crow  may  come, 
but  none  of  these  shall  get  the  seed ; 

"  For  grace  insures  the  crop," 

and  up  it  shall  spring — ^^  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear, 
after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  It  shall  gfow,  for 
God  has  prepared  the  soil  for  it. 

Now,  I  want  to  drop  a  seed  or  two.  Let  me  scatter 
a  handful.  "Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved."  Trust  Christ,  and  you  are  saved. 
There — I  saw  a  handful  of  that  go  on  the  way-side ; 
and  another  handful  went  upon  some  of  you  that  are 


112  Christian  Energy, 

choked  with  tlionis ;  but  if  there  be  a  broken  heart 
here,  it  has  fallen  upon  good  gi'ound,  for  that  broken 
heart  says,  "  What !  if  I  trust  Christ  shall  I  be  saved  ?  " 
Yes,  you  will — saved  in  a  moment — every  sin  forgiven 
you  in  a  moment,  for  Jesus  Christ  took  your  place  and 
stead,  and  suffered  all  the  punishment  of  your  sins; 
and  therefore  God,  having  been  just  in  punishing  Christ 
instead  of  you,  can  let  you  go  free,  and  yet  be  as  just 
as  though  he  had  sent  you  to  hell.  If  you  trust  Christ, 
the  merit  of  his  suffering  and  the  virtue  of  his  right- 
eousness shall  be  yours  now.  You  shall  go  your  way 
rejoicing,  because  you  have  peace  with  God  through 
Jesus  Christ.  Wilt  thou  believe  or  not,  sinner  %  God 
give  thee  to  trust  Christ !  Trust  him  now.  And  if 
thou  dost,  then  I  shall  know  that  God  hath  ploughed 
thee,  that  God  hath  prepared  thee,  ere  he  bade  me 
scatter  in  the  seed.  Let  those  of  us  who  know  the 
power  of  prayer  drag  the  harrow  across  the  field,  for 
when  the  seed  is  once  in,  it  wants  harrowing.  Thus 
let  us  preach  the  Word,  and  thus  let  us  pray  that  the 
seed  may  take  root,  spring  up,  grow,  and  bring  forth  a 
hundredfold.  So  we  shall  be  saved,  and  so  God  shall 
be  glorified. 


^^  ^flg  ifi  "^mpl 


"They  joy  before  thee  according  to  the  joy  in  harvest." — Tsf 


ARVEST  crowns  the  year  with  God's  good- 
ness. When  the  harvest  is  abundant  there 
is  universal  joy.  Everybody  rejoices.  The 
owner  of  the  land  is  glad,  because  he  sees 
the  recompense  of  reward ;  the  labourers  are 
glad,  for  they  see  the  fruit  of  their  toil ;  even 
those  to  whom  not  a  single  ear  may  belong 
nc\-ertheless  sympathise  in  the  common  joy,  because  a 
rich  harvest  is  a  boon  to  all  the  nation.  It  is  a  joyous 
sight  to  see  the  last  loaded  wain  come  creaking  doA\  n 
the  village  road,  to  note  the  youngsters  who  shout  so 
loudly,  yet  kno^v  so  little  wdiat  they  are  shouting  about, 
to  mark  the  peasant  on  the  top  of  the  wain  as  he  weaves 
Ills  hat  and  gives  vent  to  some  gleeful  exclamation,  and 
to  see  them  taking  it  all  into  the  stack  or  barn.  There 
is  joy  throughout  the  village,  there  is  joy  throughout 
the  land,  when  the  harvest  time  is  come. 

A  better  joy  than  this,  however,  gi'eets  the  more 
auspicious  season  when  a  sinner  finds  his  Saviour,  when 
tlie  prayers  that  he  has  sown  like  handfuls  of  seed 
coiuc  up,  and  the  good  yellow  ears  of  confidence  in  his 

8 


114  Christian  Energy, 

Saviour  are  brought  to  maturity.  They  that  diride 
the  spoil  shout  loudly,  their  joyous  clamour  reaches  the 
heavens,  but  the  joy  of  those  who  have  found  the 
Saviour  is  greater  than  all  this  ;  they  can  say,  *'  Thou 
art  more  glorious  than  all  the  mountains  of  prey." 
Burst,  ye  barns  !  overflow,  ye  wine  vats  !  but  ye  cannot 
give  such  joy  to  your  possessors  as  Christ,  really  grasped 
and  laid  hold  upon,  can  give  to  a  soul  that  feels  its 
need  of  him.  The  joy  of  harvest  is  far  exceeded  in  the 
joy  of  simple  faith. 

We,  as  a  church,  like  Christian  churches  in  all  ages, 
have  had  times  of  ingathering,  when  we  have  rejoiced 
before  God,  as  with  the  joy  of  harvest.  And  there 
Cometh  a  brighter  day  than  has  ever  da^^med  upon  this 
poor  misty  earth,  the  day  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of 
Man,  when  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shall  rise,  when 
he  shall  thrust  in  his  golden  sickle  and  shall  reap  the 
harvest  of  this  world,  and  then  they  shall  rejoice  before 
him  with  a  greater  joy  than  ten  thousand  harvest  years 
have  ever  known. 

Let  us  talk,  then,  of  our  own  joy  at  the  present  time 
as  the  joy  of  harvest.  The  joy  of  receiving  as  members 
of  the  church  these  converts  from  the  world  is  the  joy 
of  realisation,  and  therefore  is  like  the  joy  of  harvest. 
Faith  realises  what  she  sought  and  expected.  It  is  an 
act  of  faith,  in  some  sort,  when  the  husbandman 
casts  his  good  seed  into  the  earth  to  die.  He  loses 
sight  of  it  for  a  long  time  :  it  must  rot  and  decay  under 
the  clods.  It  is  not  quickened  except  it  die.  But  he 
believes,  he  anticipates  it  will  be  ultimately  to  his  gain 
to  sustain  a  loss  of  those  golden  handfuls.  When  he 
sees  the  harvest,  his  faith  is  honoured  and  proved  to  be 


TJie  Joy  of  Harvest,  115 

f;ound  sense.  Thus,  too,  his  cherished  hopes  are  ful- 
hlled.  When  he  first  saw  the  green  blade  appearing 
above  the  soil,  he  had  hope  of  golden  ears ;  when  the 
whole  field  grew  green,  and  looked  like  his  own  pastures, 
then  he  thought  full  sure  that  harvest  time  would 
come  ;  and  each  day,  as  he  has  walked  across  his  field,  or 
round  about  it,  as  he  has  seen  first  the  blade  and  then 
the  ear,  he  has  hoped  to  see  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  ;  and 
now  his  hopes  are  all  fulfilled  in  the  harvest  before 
him ;  his  labour  is  all  repaid.  Many  a  time  have  his 
workmen  plodded  to  and  fro  over  that  ground ;  it  was 
toilsome  drudgery — to  plough,  to  han'ow,  to  sow ;  there 
was  much  weeding,  the  hoe  had  to  be  in  frequent  use, 
but  now  he  grudges  no  labour  that  has  been  spent ;  he 
has  a  good  return  for  all  his  outgoing  in  the  incoming 
of  his  harvests.  Harvest  is  the  realisation  of  faith,  of 
hope,  and  of  labour.  So  with  the  conversion  of  souls  : 
^'e  sow  the  word  in  faith.  How  often  have  I  preached 
the  gospel  here,  and  I  have  felt  there  was  no  power 
Tvdiatever  in  it,  of  itself,  to  convert  souls,  and  no  power 
Tvhatever  in  souls  to  meet  with  that  word  and  make  it 
converting  to  them  ;  but  yet  I  felt  and  knew  that  God 
would  honour  his  good  truth,  and  make  it  quickening 
to  those  whom  he  had  ordained  unto  eternal  life.  And 
you,  sitting  in  these  pews  and  offering  your  silent 
prayers,  you  have  hoped  it  would  be  so,  you  have  an- 
ticipated it ;  your  faith  has  been  exercised  with  my  faith, 
expecting  that  God's  word  would  not  return  unto  him 
void.  And  I  know  many  of  you,  anxious  men  and 
women,  have  looked  out  for  results ;  you  have  had  a 
quick  ear  to  catch  a  hopeful  word  from  your  own  chil- 
dren ;  you  ha^e  had  a  quick  eye  to  notice  the  eye  filled 


116  Chnstian  Energy, 

with  tears  of  any  that  sat  in  the  same  pew  with  yoiu 
and  3^our  hope  sometimes  rose  very  high  and  sometimes 
sank  very  low ;  but  now  that  you  have  seen  many  of 
them  brought  in  and  added  to  the  Church,  you  seem 
to  cease  to  hope,  and  you  bless  God  that  his  word  han 
been  honoured,  that  souls  have  been  saved  and  hope 
has  been  fulfilled,  for  these  are  brought  to  Christ^ 
I  cannot  tell  how  many  of  you  have  laboured  for 
those  particular  persons  who  are  to  be  added  to  us.  I 
know  some  of  you  have,  but  I  ventui'e  to  say  this,  that 
you  that  have  prayed  most  shall  rejoice  most  ;  you  that 
have  spoken  most  to  souls,  who  have  laboured  most  to 
bring  them  to  Christ,  you  shall  have  the  sweetest  part 
in  the  present  joy  of  harvest.  As  for  you  loiterers, 
that  do  nothing  but  look  on — as  for  you  who  are  ready 
at  meal-time  to  come  in  and  dip  your  bread  into  our 
vinegar,  but  have  nothing  to  do  in  the  matter,  who 
have  not  toiled  with  us  side  by  side — you  will  have 
little  joy.  You  will  perhaps  stand  by  and  be  suspicious 
at  the  results.  Like  the  elder  brother,  you  will  be 
angry  and  not  come  in  while  we  ha^'e  music  and 
dancing  over  the  brother  who  was  lost  and  is  now 
found,  who  was  dead  and  is  alive ;  but  you  that  have 
believed  most,  you  that  have  hoped  most,  you  that  have 
worked  most,  you  shall  keep  the  feast  and  rejoice  before 
God  with  the  joy  of  harvest.  Glory  be  unto  God  !  he 
has  not  failed  us,  his  word  has  not  returned  unto  him 
void ;  he  has  heard  the  cry  of  his  children,  he  has  given 
to  us  to  sow  in  tears  and  to  reap  in  joy.  It  is  the 
joy  of  realisation. 

Change  the  note   a  moment,  and  observe  that  it  is 
the  joy  of  congratulatiou.     I  think  I  may  congratulate 


The  Joy  of  Harvest,  117 

you,  my  brethren  and  sisters.     There   is   a   time  for 
rebuke,  and  there  is  a  time  for  expressing  our  mutual 
comfort    in    one    another.       Let   us   congratulate    one 
another  that  the   Spirit  of  God  is  with  us  as  a  people, 
and  with  us  in  no  mean  measure.      Oh,  what  would 
other  churches  give  to  have  such  an  increase  as  we  have 
had  year  by  year  !     God  has  been  pleased  to  add  to  us, 
year  by   year,    pretty  nearly   after   the   rate   of   four 
hundred  members   in   a  year,  till   it  has  swollen  our 
numbers  beyond  our  most  sanguine  hopes.     Oh,  liow 
greatly  has  he  multiplied  the  people  and  increased  our 
joy !     Surely  the   Spirit  of   God  is  with  us  !     Every 
month  we  have  testimony  that  the  word  has  been  made 
useful.     I    do   not   think   there   has   been    a    sermon 
preached  here  which  God  has  not  blessed.     Ought  we 
to  restrain  the  expression  of  our  gratitude  through  any 
fear  of  trespassing  on  humility,  when  we  can  say  from 
positive  facts   that  there   have  been   those  who  have 
come  to  us  and  professed,  either  that  they  have  found 
the   Saviour,  or  were    led   to    tremble   under    a  sense 
of    sin    through   the    word    every   time    it   has    been 
preached?     Surely   the    Spirit   of    God   is    manifestly 
with  us;  shall  we  not  recognise  his  presence?     Must 
we  not  now  adoringly  bless  him,  that,  though  we  are 
not  worthy  that  he  should  com^e  under  our  roof,   he 
does  deio-ii  to  abide  with  us  and  make  the  place  of  his 
feet  glorious. 

Let  us  congratulate  one  another  that,  our  prayers, 
notwithstanding  all  the  faults  that  mar  them,  and  the 
infirmities  that  cleave  to  them,  are  being  heard.  They 
are  penetrating  heaven,  they  are  entering  the  pearly 
gate,  they  are  going  up  before  the  throne  of  the  Most 


118  Christian  Energy. 

High.  Througli  Jesus'  blood,  which  they  use  as  their 
great  prevaiHng  weapon,  they  are  moving  the  arm 
which  moves  the  world;  blessings  are  coming  down 
upon  our  sons  and  daughters,  and  upon  our  kinsfolk 
and  acquaintance,  in  answer  to  our  wrestling,  believing 
prayer.  Let  us  congratulate  one  another.  If  we  were 
depressed,  if  we  were  like  a  wilderness,  we  would  con- 
dole with  one  another.  Let  us  now  felicitate  one  ano- 
ther, interchange  our  cheerful  smiles  and  our  thankful 
greetings ;  let  us  take  the  right  hand  of  fellowship 
over  again,  and,  looking  back  upon  the  past,  vow 
for  the  future,  in  God's  name,  that,  if  he  will  but 
strengthen  us,  nothing  shall  daunt  our  courage,  nothing 
restrain  our  zeal.  What  he  has  done  shall  make  us 
aspire  to  more ;  what  has  been  accomplished  by  us  as  a 
people  shall  be  but  a  stepping-stone  to  more  daring 
attempts,  to  more  zealous  adventures,  to  more  arduous 
labours  for  the  promotion  of  his  kingdom  and  the  ex- 
tension of  his  sway.  Let  us,  then,  have  the  joy  of 
congratulation.  As  the  farmer  congratulates  the  men, 
and  as  the  men  congratulate  the  master,  as  the  one 
says,  "  Blessed  be  ye  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  and 
the  others  reply,  "  We  wish  you  a  blessing  in  God's 
name,"  so  now  let  us  give  mutual  blessings,  let  us 
congratulate  each  other  for  God's  mercy. 

And  is  it  not  particularly  a  joy  of  gratitude  ?  I  envy 
not  the  man  who  can  see  the  church  increased  and  yet 
not  feel  a  sacred  home-felt  joy.  I  know  some  little 
narrow  souls,  so  compressed  within  their  own  selfishness, 
that  to  feed  their  souls  and  cherish  their  feelings  seems 
to  them  the  sole  aim  and  end  of  gospel  ministry. 
Whether  souls  are  lost  or  saved  other  than  their  own,. 


Tlie  Joy  of  Harvest.  119 

they  reck  not.  It  has  been  the  lot  of  some  of  us  to 
be  cast  among  a  narrow-minded  class  of  people  at 
times,  who  say,  with  a  supine  satisfaction,  "  There 
are  very  few  that  shall  be  saved;"  and  the  fewer 
the  number  in  their  fellowship,  the  more  confident 
they  grow  of  their  own  election.  The  appearance  of 
a  candidate  for  baptism  or  church-membership  is  the 
signal  for  all  of  them  to  put  on  their  spectacles,  and 
look  him  through  and  through  to  see  if  he  be  not  a 
hypocrite.  I  do  not  know  that  their  churches  are  so 
particularly  pure,  but  I  do  know  that  it  is  particularly 
difficult  to  get  into  them.  I  do  not  know  that  they 
are  worth  getting  into,  but  I  do  know  that  they  ought 
to  be  worth  it,  considering  the  time  it  takes  before 
one  can  possibly  be  received  into  their  enclosure.  You 
must  be  summered  and  wintered,  and  tried  this  way 
and  that,  before  you  can  be  received ;  and  when  you 
are  received,  the  members  are  sure  to  rub  their  hands 
together,  and  say,  "  Well,  it's  a  serious  thing  to  receive 
members ; "  and  they  are  about  as  glad  as  I  suppose 
a  poor  man  would  be  who  had  nineteen  children,  when 
there  is  another  coming  to  eat  of  the  scanty  loaf.  They 
seem  to  think  that  the  addition  of  so  many  new  mem- 
bers would  make  the  whole  of  the  old  members  so  much 
the  poorer.  For  my  part — and  I  think  I  can  speak  for 
all  here — we  feel  greatly  rejoiced,  and  the  more  there 
are  brought  into  the  Christian  family  the  more  joyful 
we  shall  be.  We  will  bless  our  God — without  ceasing 
will  Ave  bless  his  name,  that  he  does  add  to  us,  for  this 
is  his  work.  Jesus  sees  of  the  fruit  of  his  passion,  the 
Spirit  sees  the  result  of  his  operation,  the  Divine  Father 
sees  his  own  children  returning  to  his  own  board,  and 


120  Ch  ris  t  la  n     Energy . 

herein  we  do  rejoice — ^yea,  and  we  will  rejoice  with  the 
joy  of  gratitude. 

I  have  been  trying  to  think  over  the  various  causes 
for  joy  we  may  have  concerning  those  who  are  just  now 
added  to  us,  but  I  do  not  think  I  can  sum  them  up. 
The  joy  of  sympathy,  however,  cannot  be  wanting. 
In  many  cases  you  may  not  know  the  persons  admitted, 
and  yet  you  may  enter  into  the  fellowship  of  their 
circumstances.  A  parent's  joy  may  kindle  some  fellow- 
feeling.  There  are  fathers  here,  and  mothers,  who  feel 
the  tears  rising  in  their  eyes  because  a  dear  boy  or  a 
dear  girl  has  been  before  the  church,  and  borne  witness 
of  faith  in  Jesus,  and  is  now  to  be  publicly  received  with 
the  right  hand  of  fellowship  into  communion  with  that 
church  of  which  his  parents  have  long  been  members. 
Estimate  the  prayers  uttered  or  unexpressed,  the  sighs 
that  have  gone  up  to  heaven,  the  many  fears,  the 
motherly  pangs,  the  fatherly  cares,  and  now  share  the 
joy  of  the  parents,  while  they  say  to  you,  "  Magnify 
the  Lord  with  me,  and  let  us  exalt  his  name  too-ether." 

XT  •  ""^ 

Here,  too,  are  wives  who  see  their  husbands  saved,  and 
there  is  much  joy  occasioned  thereby.  There  will  be 
a  happy  household  now.  Here  are  sisters  and  brothers 
that  have  watched  over  brothers  and  sisters  with  the 
most  sedulous  attention  and  importunate  prayer,  and  at 
last  they  see  them  relent  the  obduracy  they  once  in- 
dulged, and  confess  the  Saviour  whom  once  they  de- 
spised. But,  oh,  pardon  me  when  I  do  entreat  you  to 
sympathise  and  to  share  my  joy,  for  it  is  a  joy  that 
overflows  just  now,  and  would  fain  call  kinsfolk  and 
friends  to  rejoice  with  me.  What  a  mercy  to  save  a 
soul  from  death,  and  to  hide  a  multitude  of  sins  I    How 


The  Joy  of  Harvest.  121 

precious  is  that  promise,  tliat  tliey  that  turn  many  to 
righteousness  shall  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever. 
As  I  sight  that  constellation  my  heart  beats  with  emo- 
tion. Not  indeed  that  I  ask  you  to  share  my  joy  alone, 
but  to  share  now  the  joy  of  earnest  teachers  in  this 
•church.  Need  I  mention  names  ?  You  know  the  persons 
without  my  breathing  their  names.  The  men,  the 
women,  that  love  the  souls  of  sinners,  and  have  been 
blessed  in  our  midst  in  bringing  them  to  Jesus,  are  en- 
titled to  your  greetings.  Kejoice  with  them ;  they  have 
found  their  Master's  sheep,  and  they  are  rejoicing  with 
the  joy  of  harvest ;  I  pray  you  aid  their  joy  and  share 
their  joy.  Sunday-school  teachers,  God  blesses  you: 
out  of  your  school  there  come  additions.  You  that 
conduct  our  catechumen  classes,  God  blesses  you :  we 
have  additions  from  your  midst.  Young  men  that 
preach  in  the  street,  ye  missionaries  that  toil  in  your 
little  rooms,  and  serve  God  by  speaking  a  word  of 
exhortation,  ye  have  all  been  honoured;  this  month 
there  has  been  some  fruit  from  every  department  of 
service;  therefore  let  us  join  in  sympathy  with  the 
labourers  whom  God  has  honoured  in  thanking  God  for 
their  success  in  souls  saved. 

And  may  I  not  ask  you  to  rejoice  because  there  is 
One  who  loves  souls  better  than  I  do,  better  than  you 
do,  who  rejoices  more  than  any  of  us  ?  It  is  the  Man 
that  bought  them  with  the  wounds  in  his  hands  and 
his  feet.  He  looks  down  upon  those  who  have  come 
up  to  him  from  the  wilderness,  and  are  looking  to  him 
alone  for  salvation.  Their  eyes  that  were  red  with 
weeping  flash  with  hallowed  joy.  His  eyes  that  were 
full   of    pity   beam   with    satisfaction,    and   unfeigned 


122  Christian  Energy, 

delight  sits  upon  the  Saviour's  brow.  I  cannot  see  him 
with  these  dim  mortal  eyes,  but  I  know  that  he  is  here 
by  an  inward  consciousness.  Each  soul  that  has  trusted 
him  has  been  another  jewel  to  his  crown,  another  flush 
of  pleasm'e  in  return  for  his  pangs  of  grief.  Come, 
let  us  rejoice  with  him.  Jesu,  companion  of  our  sorrow, 
Captain  of  our  Salvation,  when  thou  art  glad  we  are 
exceedingly  refreshed.  Nor  is  this  all,  for  in  yonder 
skies  there  are  those  that  wait  upon  our  Master,  who 
once  waited  on  him  on  earth,  and  are  now  glad  to  hymn 
his  praise  before  his  throne.  Oh,  could  you  hear  their 
songs,  they  are  just  now  louder  and  sweeter  than  is 
their  wont.  "  Hallelujah  !  hallelujah  !  hallelujah !  " 
ever  rolleth  up  to  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb ; 
but  now  it  is  deeper,  and  its  volume  is  more  mighty, 
and  its  note  more  sweet,  as  they  sing  over  the  in- 
gathering of  souls  into  God's  church.  "  I  say  unto 
you,  that  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of 
God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  How  much 
more  when  by  scores,  and  even  by  hundi'eds,  repenting 
sinners  find  the  Saviour  ! 

Think  what  might  have  been  the  lot  of  those  who 
profess  now  to  have  been  saved.  Ye  had  need  of  a 
prophet  to  tell  you.  Some  of  them  might  have  been 
— where  they  once  were — upon  the  ale-house  bench, 
with  the  drunkard ;  aye,  and  where  some  of  them  were 
who  have  been  washed  and  cleansed — with  the  harlot 
in  her  midnight  sin.  There  are  young  ones  to  be  added 
to  this  church,  who  have  never  gone  into  open  sin,  but 
if  they  had  not  been  called  by  grace,  little  do  we  know 
what  might  have  been  the  career  of  vice  before  them. 
Temptation  might   have   led   to    sin,  sin   might   have 


The  Joy  of  Harvest.  123 

ripened  into  habit,  habit  might  have  gathered  force, 
until  they  became  ringleaders  in  mischief ;  but  they  are 
washed,  but  they  are  cleansed.  O  Satan,  what  a  har- 
vest hast  thou  lost !  What  soldiers  have  been  taken 
from  thy  ranks !  how  much  mischief  might  they  have 
done,  which  now  they  shall  scrupulously  avoid,  for  grace 
has  turned  them  in  another  road,  and  filled  their  mouths 
with  another  song. 

Think,  too,  of  what  they  now  shall  be  through  divine 
grace.  I  cannot  depict  to  you  each  case.  I  know 
there  are  some  here  whom  we  look  upon  with  hope 
that  they  shall  be  teachers  of  others.  We  have,  espe- 
cially, holy  mothers  bringing  up  their  children  in  God's 
fear,  and  holy  fathers  seeking  the  conversion  of  their 
little  ones.  Their  seed,  as  a  generation  which  the  Lord 
hath  blessed,  shall  become  in  after  years,  some  of  them, 
pillars  of  the  church,  honoured  and  honourable ;  they 
shall  serve  their  Master  in  this  life,  they  shall  bear 
testimony  to  his  faithfulness  in  death;  they  shall  sino- 
his  praise  for  ever. 

Still,  with  all  this  joy  of  harvest,  there  is  one  mor- 
tifying reflection.  I  w^ould  not  say  much  of  it  to  damp 
your  joy.  It  is  this.  Out  of  those  added  to  the  church 
there  are  ahvays  some  who  are  not  saved.  Let  us 
judge  carefully  and  watch  earnestly.  Some  come  like 
Judas,  with  a  lie  in  their  right  hand,  and  put  on  Christ 
by  profession,  who  are  not  followers  of  Christ  in  spirit 
and  in  truth.  Search  yourselves,  brethren  and  sisters, 
and  if  ye  be  not  Christ's,  do  not  dishonour  his  name 
by  venturing  to  be  called  by  it. 

And  there  is  another  grievous  thought.  While  so 
many  are  ingathered,  many  there  be  who  are  left  out. 


124  Christian  Energij. 

Oil,  some  of  you  have  been  with  us  in  our  best  days, 
and  I  am  afraid  I  shall  have  to  ring  that  text  again 
in  your  ears,  as  I  have  done  aforetime :  *'  The  harvest 
is  past,  and  the  summer  is  ended,  but  ye  are  not  saved, 
ye  are  not  saved."  Your  sister  is  saved,  but  you  are  not 
saved ;  your  wife  is  saved,  but  you  are  not.  Two  of 
you  sleep  in  one  bed,  one  has  been  taken  and  the  other 
left.  Two  of  you  grind  at  one  mill  in  your  daily  work, 
one  has  been  taken  and  the  other  left.  You  are  not 
saved,  you  are  not  saved !  and  when  the  time  comes  for 
you  to  die,  this  will  be  a  bitter  w^ord  to  ring  in  your 
ears  w^ith  more  doleful  sound  than  death-knell  ever 
knew — "  Not  saved  !  not  saved  !  "  Amidst  the  joy  of 
harvest,  let  us  not  forget  to  pray  for  those  who  are 
still  w^andering  in  the  paths  of  sin,  or  pandering  to  the 
vanities  of  the  world. 

Another  harvest  is  coming,  w^hen  Christ  shall  gather 
together  his  people.  There  will  be  first  of  all  the  in- 
gathering of  the  righteous.  Do  not  make  a  mistake 
about  the  day  of  judgment,  as  though  the  righteous 
and  the  wicked  were  to  be  judged  together,  for  remem- 
ber tliat  fu'st  of  all  there  will  come  the  day  when  the 
righteous  shall  be  gathered.  If  you  read  the  Book  of 
Kevelation,  you  will  find  that  the  harvest  precedes  the 
vintage.  The  righteous  are  gathered  as  the  harvest  of 
the  earth,  and  afterwards  the  vintage  of  the  w-orld  is 
gathered — that  is,  the  wicked.  The  harvest  is  gathered 
into  the  garner,  the  vintage  into  the  wine-press,  and 
then  the  grapes  are  trodden  under  foot  till  the  blood 
thereof  floweth  out,  even  up  to  the  horses'  bridles. 
Well,  there  is  to  come  a  harvest  of  the  righteous,  and 
what  joy  there  will  be  when  you  witness  the  number. 


The  Joy  of  Harvest.  12'> 

the  countless  number  that  SAvells  the  ranks  of  the  blessed. 
O  ye  angels,  ye  had  need  to  be  twice  ten  thousand 
times  ten  thousand,  when,  at  the  ingathering  of  sheaves 
that  no  man  can  number,  ye  welcome  the  multitudes 
of  the  redeemed!  What  shoutings  when  millions  upon 
millions  mount  to  the  upper  skies  !  It  Avas  great  joy 
when  all  Israel  passed  through  the  Red  KSea,  but 
how  much  greater  joy  w  hen  ten  thousand  times  ten 
tliousand,  even  myriads  upon  myriads,  shall  enter  into 
their  eternal  rest !  There  will  be  joy  in  the  persons 
saved  ;  each  one  Avill  have  a  separate  song,  or  make  a 
distinct  note  in  the  one  song.  What  joy  over  Magda- 
lene and  the  dying  thief !  What  joy  over  Manasseh 
and  Saul  of  Tarsus !  Each  separate  case  shall  stand 
out  clear  and  bright,  as  though  it  were  better  than 
another,  and  yet  each  one  shall  claim  that  his  is  the 
choicest  exhibition  of  divine  love  and  faithfulness. 
What  joy  when  altogether  the  jewels  shall  be  put  into 
the  casket !  Think  of  what  they  shall  be  gathered  from  I 
From  poverty,  from  sickness,  from  beds  of  dust  and 
silent  clay  they  shall  be  gathered ;  from  slander  and 
rebuke,  from  persecution  and  from  suffering,  from  the 
lion's  jaws,  and  from  the  flames  they  shall  be  gathered, 
ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  of  them,  from  sin  and 
suffering,  to  sin  and  to  suffer  no  more. 

Where  will  they  be  gathered  to  ?  Gathered  to  their 
Saviour,  to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the 
first-born,  whose  names  are  wa'itten  in  heaven.  Re- 
member that  they  all  will  be  gathered,  not  one  wdll  be 
absent ;  and  every  one  will  be  gathered  in  a  perfect 
state,  not  one  unripe  for  heaven,  not  one  gi-een  eai% 
not  one  child  unfit  for  his  heritage,  but  all  ready  and 


126  Chnstian  Energy, 

prepared  througli  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Oh,  that  mine  eyes  could  see  the  day !  The 
pearly  gates  stand  wide  open,  and  first  comes  the 
Saviour  up  the  eternal  hills,  leading  the  van  fresh  from 
the  battle-fields  of  Armageddon,  where,  for  the  last  time, 
he  has  fought  and  triumphed  over  all  his  foes.  And 
here  come  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  waving  the  palm, 
and  then  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets,  the 
great  assembly  of  the  ministers  and  preachers  of  the 
Word,  and  the  multitude  and  hosts  of  those  who  through 
great  tribulation,  have  washed  their  robes  and  made 
them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Hark,  how 
hell  gnashes  her  teeth!  how  the  infernal  lake  is  stirred 
to  envious  burning,  while  they  see  these  brands  plucked 
from  the  fire  as  they  ascend  to  heaven !  Listen  to  the 
symphonious  harpings  of  the  m}Tiads  of  spirits,  as  from, 
the  battlements  of  heaven  they  look  on  with  wonder, 
and  gaze  upon  the  new  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  who 
are  coming  to  people  it  and  make  it  glorious,  more  glo- 
rious than  it  w^as  before  !  Hark,  how  they  begin  the 
song,  '-'Who  is  the  King  of  Glory?  The  Lord  of 
Hosts  ; "  and  hark  how  the  multitude  outside  the  walls 
echo  the  strain,  "  Unto  him  that  hath  loved  us,  and 
washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood,  unto  him  shall 
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever ; "  and  yet  again,  "  Halle- 
lujah !  hallelujah !  hallelujah !  for  the  Lord  God  om- 
nipotent reigneth."  May  you  and  I  be  partakers  of  the 
joy  of  harvest,  and  not  be  yonder,  with  those  among 
whom  there  is  weeping  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of 
teeth,  because  they  would  not  trust  the  Lamb  ;  because 
they  would  not  come  to  him  that  they  might  have  life, 
but  chose  their  own   delusion,  and  followed  out  their 


The  Joy  of  Harvest. 


127 


own  coiTuptions,  till  tliey  met  with  tlie  due  desert  of 
their  deeds.  God  bless  you,  dear  friends,  every  one 
of  you,  and  make  you  partakers  of  the  present  joy  and 
the  everlasting  felicity  of  the  saints,  for  Jesus  Christ's 
sake !     Amen. 


^ml'$  ^\m  m  i(i^  '^ttiWiitg  wp  ai  '^m\. 


*'  When  the  Lord  shall  build  up  Zion,  he  shall  appear  in  his  glory." 
-Psalm  cii.  16. 


~^  ^^-^HE  Lord  himself  must  "  build  up  Zion,"  or  it 
\<^  never  will  be  built.  He  first  planned  it ;  he- 
is  the  architect  of  his  o^\'n  church  ;  he  digged 
the  foundations;  he  has  supplied  the  great 
§|3^j  corner-stone  ;  he  himself,  by  his  o^vn  power, 
^^ii'  creates  each  living  stone,  polishes  it,  and  fits 
it  into  its  place.  He  cements  the  whole 
structure,  and  as  he  first  sketched  the  plan,  so  will  he 
complete  it  in  every  iota  to  the  praise  and  the  glory  of 
Ms  wisdom,  his  grace,  and  his  love.  It  shall  be  said  to 
Zion,  when  all  her  walls  are  builded,  and  all  her  palaces 
completed,  and  when  all  her  happy  inhabitants  have 
their  mouths  filled  with  song  as  they  walk  in  white — 
"  The  Lord  hath  built  it,  from  the  foundation  even  to 
the  top-stone."  I  remember  to  have  seen,  close  by  the 
side  of  the  Alps,  a  house  which  had  upon  its  front 
words  to  this  effect :  "  This  house  was  built  entirely  by 
the  skill,  wealth,  and  industry  of  its  inhabitants."  It 
struck  me  as  not  being  a  very  modest  thing  to  put  in 
front  of  one's  house,  for  after  all  the  structure  was  not 
Yery  mai'vellous;   but  when   we   look  at  the  glorious 


GocPs  Glory  in  the  Building  up  of  Zion.         120 

architecture  of  tlie  church  of  God,  it  would  be  no  mean 
part  of  its  lustre  that  it  may  fittingly  bear  such  an 
inscription  as  this — "  This  house  was  built  entirely  by 
the  wisdom,  the  munificence,  and  the  power  of  the 
infinite  Jehovah." 

But  while  the  text  reminds  us  of  this  truth,  wdiich  I 
hope  we  never  can  forget,  it  also  brings  to  our  minds 
three  or  four  other  truths ;  and  the  first  point  of  our 
discourse  shall  be  ZiON  built  up. 

I.  I  suppose  we  shall  all  consider  that  one  essential 
to  the  building  up  of  Zion  Avould  be  pi'actical  conversion. 
It  is  of  small  avail  for  a  man  to  say  he  is  building  up 
a  church  where  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not 
seen  in  calling  sinners  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous 
light.  There  may  be  periods  in  which  conversions 
are  few,  but  if,  instead  of  their  being  exceptional,  this 
should  come  to  be  the  rule  w^ith  one's  ministry,  there 
would  be  grave  cause  to  suspect  that  God  was  not 
working  with  the  minister,  certainly  not  in  the 
sense  of  building  up.  We  find  not  nnfrequently  in 
Holy  Scripture,  that  the  fathers  of  households  are 
called  "  builders,"  and  that  the  term  is  used  continually, 
"the  building  a  house,"  in  respect  to  the  birth  and 
training  up  of  a  family.  Now,  in  the  great  Christian 
family  our  converts  are  the  new-born  children,  and  a 
family  is  not  built  up  for  God  except  with  these  sons 
and  daughters,  who  are  like  stones  polished  after 
the  similitude  of  a  palace.  AYe  little  know  the  bless- 
ing which  young  converts  bring  to  us.  They  quicken 
the  pulse  of  old  Christians ;  they  strengthen  and  con- 
firm the  faith  of  those  who  have  long  been  walking  in 
the  truth,  and  they  do,  as  it  were,  infuse  new  blood 


130  Christian  Energy. 

into  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.  They  come  to  us  as 
God's  message  from  on  high.  They  are  tokens  for 
good,  and  whereas  we  might  have  thought,  perhaps, 
that  the  triumphs  of  the  cross  were  confined  to  the 
heroic  age,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  was  poured  out 
in  Pentecostal  measure,  yet  as  we  see  our  sons  con- 
verted, and  the  great  miracle  of  regeneration  still  being 
performed,  we  take  lieart  and  are  of  good  courage  to 
go  on  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Conversions  we  must 
liave,  for  there  is  no  building  up  of  Zion  without  them. 
And  then  there  must  follow  conversions,  a  puhlic 
confession  of  faith.  Though  the  invisible  church  of 
God  is  built  up  by  conversions,  the  outward  church  is 
only  built  up  as  men  and  women  associate  together  in 
the  holy  society  which  we  call  "  the  church."  It  is  the 
duty  of  every  Christian — nay,  it  is  the  instinct  of  his 
spiritual  life — to  avow  the  faith  which  he  has  received, 
and  avowing  it,  he  finds  himself  associated  with  others 
who  have  made  the  same  profession,  and  he  assists  them 
in  holy  labour.  When  he  is  strong  he  ministers  of  his 
strensth  to  the  weak,  and  when  he  is  himself  weak,  he 
borrows  strength  from  those  who  just  then  may  happen 
to  be  strong  in  the  faith.  AVhere  were  our  institu- 
tions if  church  fellowship  were  broken  up  ?  Plainly, 
if  it  be  right  for  one  Christian  to  remain  out  of  church 
fellowship,  it  is  right  for  all ;  and  then  if  there  were 
no  churches  there  would  be  no  institutions,  and  where 
would  the  gospel  itself  be  ?  I  would  not  lay  too  much 
stress  on  the  church  of  God,  but  I  venture  to  ask  you, 
is  it  not  written  that  she  is  "  the  pillar  and  ground 
of  the  truth"?  If,  then,  I  withhold  my  confession  of 
faith,    and   my  personal   communion  with  the   visible 


Goc[s  Glory  in  the  Building  up  of  Zlon.        131 

church,  I  to  that  extent  weaken  the  pillar  and  ground 
of  the  faith.  We  need  confessions  of  faith  as  well 
as  conversions. 

By  a  church  being  thus  formed  In  order  to  Its  being 
built  up,  something  more  is  wanted.  We  cannot  build 
without  union,  A  house  is  not  a  load  of  bricks,  neither 
is  the  church  a  mere  conorlomeration  of  human  beino-s. 
A  house  must  have  its  doors,  and  its  windows,  its  foun- 
dation, its  mfters,  and  its  ceiling.  So,  a  church  must 
be  organised;  it  must  have  its  distinct  offices  and 
officers;  it  must  have  its  departments  of  labour,  and 
proper  men  must  be  found,  according  to  Christ's  own 
appointment,  to  preside  over  those  departments. 

Our  Saviour  was  raised  up  on  high  to  receive  gifts 
for  men,  and  to  give  gifts  to  men,  and  those  gifts  are, 
first  apostles,  then  pastors,  and  teachers,  and  evangelists, 
and  so  on ;  "  for  the  building  up  of  the  saints,  and  for 
edifying."  So  we  read,  but  you  all  know  that  in  plain 
English  it  means,  "-for  the  building  up  of  the  saints, 
and  the  perfecting  of  the  body  of  Christ."  Some  of 
the  okl  Roman  walls  are  compacted  with  such  excellent 
cement,  that  it  would  be  almost  impossible  to  separate 
one  stone  from  another;  in  fact,  the  whole  mass  has 
become  consohdated  like  a  solid  rock,  so  embedded  in 
cement  that  you  cannot  distinguish  one  stone  from 
another*  Happy  the  church  thus  built  up,  where  each 
cares  not  only  for  his  own  prosperity,  but  for  the  pro- 
sperity of  all — where,  if  there  be  any  joy  in  one  mem- 
ber, all  the  members  rejoice,  and  if  there  be  sorrow  in 
any  one  part  of  the  body,  all  the  rest  of  the  body  is  in 
sorrow  too,  "  remembering  those  that  are  in  bonds  as 
bound  with  them,  and  those  that  are  in  adversity  as 


132  Chnstian  Energy 

being  yourselves  also  in  the  body."  And  yet,  what  are 
some  churches  but  semi-religious  clubs,  mere  conven- 
tions of  people  gathered  together  ?  They  have  not  in 
them  that  holy  soul  which  is  the  essence  of  unity ;  there 
is  no  life  to  keep  them  in  entirety.  Why,  the  body 
would  soon  become  disjointed,  and  a  mass  of  rottenness, 
if  the  soul  were  not  in  it ;  and  if  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
be  absent,  the  whole  fabric  of  the  outward  church 
begins  to  fall  to  pieces ;  for  where  there  is  no  life  there 
can  be  no  true  union. 

More  than  this,  to  build  up  a  church  there  needs 
to  be  edification  and  instruction  in  the  faith.  It  is,  I 
think,  a  matter  for  deep  regret  that  this  is  not  an  age 
in  wdiich  Christian  people  desire  to  be  edified.  It  is 
an  age  in  which  they  like  to  have  their  ears  tickled, 
and  delight  to  have  a  multiplicity  of  anecdotes  and  of 
exciting  metaphors ;  but  they  little  care  to  be  w^ell  in- 
structed in  the  sound  and  solid  doctrines  of  the  grace 
of  God.  In  the  old  Puritanic  times  sermons  must  have 
been  tiresome  to  the  thoughtless,  but  now-a-days  I 
should  think  they  are  more  tiresome  to  the  thoughtful. 
The  Christian  of  those  days  w^anted  to  know  a  great  deal 
of  the  things  of  God ;  and  provided  that  the  preacher 
could  open  up  some  mystery  to  him,  or  explain 
some  point  of  Christian  practice  to  make  him  holier 
and  wiser,  he  w^as  well  satisfied,  though  the  man 
might  be  no  orator,  and  might  lead  him  into  no  fields 
of  novel  speculation.  Christians  then  did  not  want 
a  new  faith ;  but,  having  received  the  old  faith,  they 
wished  to  be  well  rooted  and  grounded  'in  it,  and 
therefore  th^y  sought  daily  for  illumination  as  well  as 
for  quickening;    they  desired,    not  only  to  have  the 


GocTs  Glory  in  the  Building  iqj  of  Zion,         133 

emotions  excited,  but  also  to  have  the  intellect  richly 
stored  with  divine  truth ;  and  there  must  be  much  of 
this  in  every  church,  if  it  is  to  be  built  up.  No  neglect 
of  an  appeal  to  the  passions,  certainly ;  no  forc^etfulness 
as  to  what  is  popular  and  exciting ;  but  with  this  we 
must  have  the  solid  bread-corn  of  the  kingdom,  without 
which  God's  children  will  faint  in  the  weary  way  of 
this  wilderness. 

It  does  not  strike  me,  however,  that  I  have  yet  given 
a  full  picture  of  the  building  up  of  a  church,  for  a 
church  such  as  I  have  described  would  not  yet  answer 
the  end  for  which  Christ  ordained  it.  Christ  ordained 
his  church  to  be  his  great  aggressive  agency  in  combat- 
ing with  sin,  and  with  the  world  that  lleth  in  the 
wicked  one.  It  is  to  be  a  light,  not  to  itself,  as  a  candle 
in  a  dark  lantern,  but  a  light  unto  that  which  is  with- 
out. Albeit  we  are  not  saved  by  works,  yet  the  ulti- 
mate result  of  salvation  must  always  be  work.  The 
cause  of  salvation  lies  in  grace,  but  the  effect  of  salva- 
tion appears  in  working.  As  sure  as  ever  the  grace  of 
God  fills  a  soul,  that  soul  desires  to  see  others  brought 
in.  That  respectable  church,  that  wealthy  church, 
which  is  quite  satisfied  to  have  no  debt  upon  its  own 
building,  content  if  its  minister  be  as  sparsely  remu- 
nerated as  possible — without  enthusiasm,  without  zeal, 
always  harping  on  the  string  of  prudence,  conservatism, 
and  orthodoxy,  having  no  care  whatever  to  be  aggres- 
sive— such  a  church  needs  to  be  built  on  other 
foundations,  to  get  rid  of  its  wood,  hay,  and  stubble, 
and  to  be  built  on  gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones, 
or  otherwise  it  will  not  honour  Christ.  It  strikes  me 
that  it  is  necessary  for  the  edification  of  every  Chris- 


134  Christian  Energy, 

tian  man  that  he  should  have  something  to  do.  We 
learn  to  be  soldiers  by  being  drilled ;  nay,  the  veteran 
is  taught  to  fight  by  fighting.  I  think  most  ministers 
know  that  one  of  the  best  methods  of  learning  to  preach 
is  to  preach,  and  the  best  way  of  learning  Christianity 
is  to  be  a  Christian  practically.  Said  one,  "  If  thou 
wouldst  do  good,  be  good."  And  I  have  sometimes 
thought,  if  we  would  be  good,  we  must  do  good,  not  to 
make  us  so,  but  as  the  best  discipline  to  keep  us  in 
good  health  and  good  training.  Do  not  let  us  hope 
that  we  ourselves  can  be  devoted  to  God,  except  by 
Christian  service  ;  and  let  us  not  hope  that  the  church 
can  ever  be  so  devoted,  except  by  casting  about  in  the 
world  to  do  for  Christ  whatever  cometh  to  its  hands. 

But  I  must  go  yet  a  step  further.  After  a  church 
has  become  all  that  I  have  been  describing,  the  next 
thing  it  ought  to  do  should  be  to  think  of  the  formation 
of  other  churches.  The  building  up  of  an  empire  must 
often  be  by  colonisation.  Her  Majesty's  dominions, 
upon  which  we  proudly  say,  "  the  sun  never  sets,"  have 
been  greatly  enlarged  by  the  sons  and  daughters  of 
Britain  who  have  gone  to  other  lands.  The  true  pro- 
cess of  increasing  the  church  must  be  by  her  forming 
colonies.  Who  dares  to  deny  that  in  the  building  of 
many  of  the  places  of  worship  in  England  and  else- 
where, the  devil  has  not  had  as  much  to  do  as  Christ 
has  had,  I  mean  in  our  denomination,  if  not  in  any 
other  ?  A  great  number  of  chapels  have  been  the  result 
of  schism,  bad  spirit,  bickering,  jealousy,  and  I  know  not 
what — quarrelling  and  contending  perhaps  about  some 
points  of  truth  which,  if  important,  could  not  be  so 
important  as  the  spirit  of  love  and  of  unity.     Many 


GoiTs  Glory  in  tJie  Building  up  of  Zlon.        135 

and  many  a  time  a  house  lias  been  dedicated  to  God, 
when  the  first  thought  that  led  to  it,  and  the  last 
act  that  finished  it,  were  simply  a  thought  and  an  act 
of  pride,  or  envy,  or  pure  sectarian  bigotry,  and 
nothing  more.  Now,  I  do  not  think,  although  he  has 
no  doubt  overruled  it  for  good,  that  this  is  legiti- 
mate ;  but  for  a  number  of  Christian  people  associated 
together  in  a  church,  and  finding  that  the  church  has 
grown  strong  enough  to  be  able  to  afford  to  lose  them, 
for  these  to  swarm  off  and  form  another  church,  and 
give  of  their  substance  to  build  another  house,  seems  to 
me  to  be  a  legitimate  and  proper  method  in  which 
Zion  may  be  built  up  in  these  our  realms. 
II.  The  building  up  of  Zion  is,  according  to 

THE  TEXT,  CONNECTED   WITH   JeHOVAH's    BEING  GLO- 
RIFIED. 

"  When  the  Lord  shall  build  up  Zion,  he  shall  appear 
in  his  glory."  Ah  !  brethren  and  sisters,  it  would  need 
a  seraph  to  tell  of  all  the  glory  which  has  come  to  God 
through  the  building  up  of  his  church.  Heaven  rang 
with  acclamations  when  the  angels  first  learned  that 
God  designed  to  have  a  church.  When  they  perceived, 
by  the  glimmering  light  of  the  first  promise,  that  there 
was  to  be  a  seed  of  the  woman  as  w^ell  as  a  seed  of  the 
serpent,  they  began  to  hymn  Jehovah's  praise,  and, 
when  Christ  was  given,  and  so  the  foundation  of  the 
church  was  actually  laid,  the  glory  of  creation  was 
eclipsed,  and  even  the  splendour  of  Providence  might 
almost  have  been  forgotten  in  the  more  transcendent 
glory  of  grace.  God  had  done  marvellously  before, 
but  never  did  he  seem  so  divine  as  when  he  gave  his 
dear  Son,  and  when,  in  the  holy  life  and  dying  pangs 


136  Christian  Energy. 

of  the  Son  of  his  love,  the  foundation  of  the  church 
\yas  laid.  So  too  God  is  glorified  in  every  single  part 
of  the  building  of  his  church.  There  is  not  a  stone 
quarried  from  the  dark  pit  of  nature,  or  polished  by 
the  tools  of  grace,  or  put  into  its  position,  without  fresh 
honour  to  God  and  new  glory  to  his  name.  He  cannot 
he  more  glorious,  but  he  appears  more  richly  glorious  in 
the  building  up  of  his  church.  And  what  will  be  the 
glory  when  the  top-stone  is  brought  out — w^hen  the  last 
elect  one  shall  be  cemented  to  the  visible  whole !  What 
shall  be  the  undying  melody,  the  unceasing  song  of 
ages,  as  to  principalities  and  powers  shall  be  made 
known,  by  the  church,  the  unspeakable  riches  of  the 
grace  of  God ! 

Sometimes,  however,  a  suspicion  has  arisen  in  the 
minds  of  God's  people  that  God  was  not  glorified  in  his 
church ;  and  the  text  almost  seems  to  hint,  not  that 
God  is  not  glorified,  but,  at  any  rate,  that  he  is  not 
so  much  glorified  in  the  church  at  one  time  as  another, 
for  it  says,  "  When  the  Lord  shall  build  up  Zion,"  as 
if  he  were  not  always  building  up  Zion,  at  least  not  to 
the  same  extent.  We  know  from  painful  experience, 
that  there  are  lulls,  seasons  when  a  dead  calm  comes 
over  the  church,  and  then,  to  the  minds  of  many,  God's 
gloiy  is  not  revealed.  In  consequence  tliereof  the 
inhabitants  of  Zion  hang  their  harps  upon  the  willows 
and  go  a-mourning ;  and  yet,  had  we  more  faith,  and 
put  sense  more  in  the  background,  we  might  sing  to 
our  Well- Beloved  a  song  touching  his  vineyard,  even 
when  the  wild  boar  out  of  the  wood  is  wasting  her,  and 
her  hedcres  are  beinor  broken  down.  The  wave  recedes, 
but  the  tide  advances ;  the  day  may  seem  to  be  dark,  but 


Gotfs  Glory  in  the  Building  up  of  Zlon,        137 

every  hour  is  bringing  on  the  noon.  God  advances 
not  by  little  steps,  but  in  the  work  of  his  grace  we  may 
say  of  him — 

"  On  cherub  and  on  cherubim 
Full  royally  he  rode  ; 
And  on  the  win;;s  of  mighty  wind 
Came  flying  all  abroad." 

^Ve  must  not  judge  him  by  inches  wlio  is  not  even  to 
be  measured  by  leagues,  nor  by  handful s  when  the 
mountains  are  too  small  for  his  hands,  and  he  taketh 
up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing.  Our  belief  is  that 
the  whole  way  through  God  is  building  vip  his  church, 
and  that  he  does  appear  in  his  glory. 

Perhaps  one  or  two  thoughts  may  make  this  more 
clear  to  us.  God  often  appears  in  glory  to  me  as  one 
of  his  builders,  and  I  will  tell  you  in  what  respect. 
When  I  have  been  sitting  to  see  inquirers,  I  have 
sometimes  found  that  God  has  blessed  to  the  conver- 
sion of  souls  some  of  my  worst  sermons — those  which 
I  thought  I  could  weep  over,  which  seemed  more  than 
ordinarily  weak,  and  lacking  in  all  the  elements  likely 
to  make  them  blessed,  except  that  they  were  sincerely 
spoken.  When  I  have  seen  that  the  work  was  done, 
though  the  workman,  naturally  weak,  was  on  that  occa- 
sion more  than  usually  depressed  with  infirmity,  I  have 
only  been  able  to  lift  up  my  hands  and  say,  "Now, 
Lord,  thou  appearest  in  thy  glory,  since  thou  dost  build 
up  Zion  and  convert  sinners  by  the  most  unlikely 
means,  and  the  truth,  apparently  when  most  feebly 
spoken,  works  the  mightiest  results  ;  this  is  to  make  thy 
name  glorious  indeed  !  " 

Another  thin^r  has  sometimes  made  one  see  God  in 


138  Christian  Energy, 

his  glory.  Persons  have  been  brought  up  and  educated 
under  sermons  that  are  as  hostile  to  spiritual  life  as 
the  plague  is  to  natural  life.  They  have  from  tiieir 
youth  up  seen  religion  in  all  its  gaudy  show  of  symbol- 
ism, and  yet  one  hearing  of  the  simple  gospel  has  been 
sufficient  for  their  conversion.  Perhaps  the  mere  read- 
ing of  a  single  text  has  untwisted  the  knots  of  forty 
years,  and  the  despotism  of  the  priesthood  over  the 
mind  has  fallen  at  the  touch  of  a  single  passage  of 
God's  Word.  The  case  of  Luther  is  one  instance  of 
this,  and  in  all  such  cases  God  appears  in  his  glory. 
If  you  will  look  at  each  conversion,  and  especially  at 
the  sudden  conversion  of  those  who  for  long  years  have 
been  inured  to  the  very  reverse  of  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
you  will  see  God  appearing  in  his  glory. 

Think,  too,  of  the  agencies  which  are  abroad  hostile 
to  the  church  of  God.  The  Jews  were  glad  to  see  the 
walls  of  Jerusalem  rise,  because  they  remembered 
Geshem,  and  Tobiah,  and  Sanballat,  and  all  the  rest 
that  laughed  and  jeered  at  them.  Up  went  the  walls 
though  these  laughed,  and  the  foxes  did  not  break 
down  the  wall,  though  Sanballat  so  ventured  to  pro- 
phesy. In  this  age  the  church  is  not  without  her 
adversaries  too,  and  they  are  of  a  very  dangerous  sort. 
They  are  not  always  outspoken  adversaries.  Some  of 
them  teach  us  how  to  doubt — not  because  they  doubt 
themselves,  they  say,  but  because  it  is  so  healthy 
a  thing  for  our  minds  to  be  rid  of  the  bondage  of 
old-fashioned  dogmas.  They  are  not  themselves  un- 
sound, but  still  if  a  brother  should  happen  to  be  so 
they  will  defend  him,  thereby  providing  a  defence 
for  themselves  when  they  should  more  fully  need  it. 


GoiTs  Glory  in  the  Buildwg  up  of  Zion.        139 

If  they  would  only  state  what  they  do  believe,  or 
what  they  do  not  believe,  it  were  easy  to  deal  with 
these  foes;  but  inasmuch  as  the  whole  thing  is  too 
shadowy,  and  too  vague,  we  feel  as  if  we  were  under 
the  plague  of  flies  which  were  in  Egypt  when  we  have 
to  deal  with  these  minute  adversaries.  But  let  us 
reflect  that  with  all  this  God  is  still  building  up  his 
church.  Looking  back  at  the  last  ten  or  twenty 
years,  am  I  too  sanguine  if  I  say  that  the  age  is,  after 
all,  better  than  it  was?  I  do  not  mean  that  the  world 
is  better,  but  I  do  mean  that,  as  a  whole,  there  is 
more  evangelical  preaching  and  more  earnest  pleading 
with  God  now  than  there  were  ten  years  ago.  I  am  not 
given  to  complimenting,  but  I  do  feel  that  we  have 
made  an  advance,  and  that  the  Christian  church  is  more 
awake  than  it  was.  I  grant  you  that  the  foes  ai'e  more 
vociferous.  So  let  them  be.  I  suppose  the  nearer  the 
moon  gets  to  its  full  the  more  the  dogs  bark,  and  the 
nearer  the  harvest  is  to  getting  ripe,  the  more  nume- 
rous is  the  horde  of  birds  who  come  to  feed  upon  the 
grain.  It  must  be  expected ;  but  God  appears  in  his 
glory  the  more  that  his  enemies  surround  his  church. 

Putting  all  these  things  together — poor  instruments, 
poor  materials,  and  numerous  foes — let  us  say  that 
when  God  builds  up  Zion  under  such  circumstances  as 
these,  he  does  appear  in  his  glory. 

What  a  splendid  thing  was  that — may  we  see  it 
repeated  in  our  own  day  ! — when  the  twelve  fishermen 
first  attacked  Roman  idolatry.  The  prestige  of  ages 
made  the  idolatry  of  Rome  venerable ;  it  had  an  im- 
perial Caesar  and  all  his  legions  at  its  back,  and  every 
favourable  auspice  to  defend  it.     Those  twelve  men, 


140  Christian  Energy, 

with  no  patronage  but  the  patronaf^e  of  the  King  of 
kings,  with  no  learning  except  that  which  they  had 
learned  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  with  w^eapons  as  simple  as 
David's  sling  and  stone,  went  forth  to  the  fight ;  and 
you  know  how  the  grisly  head  of  the  monstrous 
idolatry  was  by-and-by  in  the  hands  of  the  Christian 
champion  as  he  returned  rejoicing  from  the  fray.  So 
shall  it  be  yet  again,  and  then,  amidst  the  acclamation 
of  myriad  witnesses,  shall  God  appear  in  his  glory. 
III.  With   great   brevity   let   us  now  observe  the 

HOPE   EXCITED. 

If  God  be  glorified  by  the  building  up  of  Zion,  then 
most  certainly  Zion  will  be  built.  If  he  is  glorified  by 
the  conversion,  and  by  the  banding  together  of  con- 
verted men  and  women,  then  it  seems  but  natural  to 
hope,  yea,  w^ith  certainty  we  may  conclude  that  the 
zeal  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  will  perform  it. 

Let  me  suppose  that  you  had  been  created  as  a  soli- 
tary creature,  and  that  it  had  been  made  known  to  you, 
by  the  mouth  of  God  himself,  that  it  would  be  to  God's 
glory,  to  create  unnumbered  worlds,  would  you  be  un- 
reasonable in  looking  for  the  first  day  in  which  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  should  be  created?  You  would 
soon  come  to  an  absolute  certainty,  putting  faith  in  the 
prophecy,  that  since  God  would  be  glorified  in  creating, 
he  would  create  ;  and  supposing  when  you  saw  the  world 
created  you  knew,  from  God's  own  mouth,  that  it  would 
be  to  his  glory  for  him  to  take  the  reins  of  human 
affairs,  and  manage  everything  according  to  the  counsel 
of  his  own  will,  you  would  feel  persuaded  that  he  would 
do  it.  Well,  you  are  clearly  informed  here  that  it  is 
for  God's  glory  to  build  up  his  church ;  then  draw  the 


Goers  Glory  in  the  Building  up  of  Zion,         141 

inference,  draw  it  boldly,  nay,  draw  it  confidently,  and 
say,  "  If  it  be  for  God's  glory,  then  it  must  and  shall  be 
done." 

I  like  the  spirit  in  which  Luther  used  to  say,  that 
when  he  could  get  God  into  his  quarrels  he  felt  safe. 
When  it  was  Luther  alone,  he  did  not  know  which  way 
it  would  go ;  but  when  he  felt  that  his  God  would  be 
compromised  and  dishonoured  if  such  a  thing  were  not 
done,  and  would  be  glorified  if  it  were  done,  then  he 
felt  safe  enough.  So,  dear  friends,  in  the  great  crusade 
of  truth  is  not  God  with  us  beyond  a  doubt?  The  ship 
of  the  church  carries  Christ  and  all  his  fortunes,  and 
how  can  she  be  wrecked  ?  The  honour  of  the  church 
is  intertwisted  with  the  honour  and  glory  of  Christ ; 
if  she  shall  pass  away,  if  she  be  deserted,  then  where  is 
her  Captain,  her  Head,  her  Husband?  But  as  his 
honour  must  be  safe,  so  should  hers  be.  Zion  shall  be 
lifted  up,  that  God  may  appear  in  his  glory. 

IV.  Our  whole  subject  suggests  an  inquiry. 

Have  I  any  part  or  lot  in  this  work  which  is  to 
bring  glory  to  God  ?  I  may  have  to  do  with  it  in  two 
ways,  as  a  builded  one,  or  as  a  builder.  I  can  have 
nothing  to  do  with  it  in  the  latter  capacity,  unless  I 
have  had  to  do  with  it  in  the  former.  God  will  be 
glorified  in  the  building  up  of  Zion  :  shall  I  minister  to 
his  glory  by  being  part  of  the  Zion  that  is  to  be  built  up  ? 
I  remember  to  have  heard  one  who  half-solaced  himself 
in  the  prospect  of  his  eternal  ruin.  He  was  a  hardened 
sinner,  but  he  was  trying  to  draw  some  sort  of  comfort 
from  the  thought  that  if  he  were  lost  for  ever  he  should 
glorify  Christ.  I  was  startled,  horror  seized  me  when 
he  put  it  in  that  light.     A  truth  in  some  sense,  I  could 


142  Christian  Energy » 

not  bear  to  see  it  so  handled  by  him  as  to  clothe  it  in 
the  vestments  of  a  lie.  I  was  obliged  to  quote  the 
other  text,  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no 
pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth."  You  do  not 
find  God  ever  speaking  of  deriving  glory  from  the 
death  of  him  that  dieth ;  you  do  not  find  that  it  ad- 
ministers anything  of  gratification  to  the  Eternal  Mind 
that  a  soul  should  perish.  There  is  a  glory  to  his  justice, 
doubtless — an  awful  splendour  wrapped  about  the  exe- 
cutioner's axe ;  but  it  is  a  glory  of  which  God  says  but 
little,  and  of  which  my  text  says  nothing  at  all.  The 
true  glory  of  God  is  like  the  glory  of  the  king  who  will 
not  glory  in  the  numbers  executed  upon  the  hill  of 
death,  but  who  glories  in  his  subjects  who  are  happy 
and  blessed.  God  glories,  not  in  the  soul  whom  there 
is  a  dire  necessity  to  cast  away,  but  in  the  soul  whom 
almighty  grace  has  chosen,  redeemed,  and  saved. 

I  should  think,  friend,  if  thy  reason  be  in  a  right 
state,  that  thou  wilt  have  some  wish  to  glorify  the  God 
that  made  thee.  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the 
ass  his  master's  crib.  Dost  thou  not  know  ?  Wilt  not 
thou  consider?  If  thou  baildest  a  house,  thou  ex- 
pectest  some  comfort  from  it;  if  thou  sowest  a  field, 
thou  expectest  to  gather  some  grain  therefrom;  and 
shall  God  who  has  made  thee,  put  breath  into  thy 
nostrils,  and  who  feeds  thee  every  day — shall  he  then 
have  no  honour  out  of  thee,  no  glory  at  thy  hands  ? 
Shalt  thou  be  a  waif  and  a  stray  drifting  along  on  the 
tides  of  time  valueless,  with  none  to  care  for  thee 
because  thou  hast  lost  thy  compass  and  livest  not 
for  the  true  object  of  human  life  ?  ^lay  I  ask  you  to 
put  this  question  to  yourselves.     The  inquiry  whether 


GocCs  Glory  in  the  Building  up  of  Zlon.        143 

you  have  anything  to  do  or  not  with  glorifying  God 
in  the  building  up  of  his  church  may  be  very  serviceable 
to  you.  If  you  find  that  you  have  no  interest  at  all  in 
the  matter,  may  not  that  thought  be  blessed  of  God 
to  make  you  start  ?  Oh,  that  men  would  start !  They 
sleep  when  everlasting  wrath  impends ;  oh,  that  they 
would  feel  the  shock  and  avert  the  stroke  I 

A  startling  preacher  is  wanted  by  a  slumbering  age. 
lie  startling  preachers  to  yourselves  just  now.  Oh,  men 
and  women,  there  are  some  of  you — it  w^ere  hopeless  to 
expect  it  were  not  so— in  whom  God  will  have  no  glory 
from  your  being  built  into  his  church ;  for  you  are  like 
the  stones  of  the  valley,  which  are  not  built  up,  but  lie, 
to  be  broken  at  last  by  the  hammer,  when  the  breaker 
shall  come  forth  to  the  work  of  destruction.  Wouldst 
thou  glorify  God,  sinner?  Hast  thou  never  heard  the 
question  asked  by  the  Jews,  "  What  shall  we  do  that 
we  might  work  the  works  of  God  ?  "  And  this  was  the 
answer — "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  the  chief  work  of 
all,  that  ye  believe  on  Jesus  Christ  whom  he  hath 
sent."  If  thou  wouldst  glorify  God,  humble  thyself, 
bow  the  knee,  and  kiss  the  Son,  and  receive  salvation 
from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  then,  being  built  upon 
this  foundation,  thou  shalt  glorify  God. 

The  inquiry  shapes  itself  afresh.  Hast  thou  anything 
to  do  with  glorifying  God  in  respect  of  being  thyself  a 
builder  up  of  Zion  ?  It  is  a  shame  that  these  lips  should 
have  to  say  it,  but  we  must  speak  out — that  there  are 
some  who  profess  to  be  built,  but  who  are  not  building; 
who  say  that  they  are  servants,  but  are  not  serving; 
who  profess  to  be  in  the  vineyard,  but  are  not  work- 
ing ;  who  say  they  are  soldiers,  but  are  not  fighting  I 


144  ChrMan  Energy. 

My  bretliren,  I  count  it  to  be  one  of  the  most  precious 
parts  of  my  spiritual  heritage  that  I  am  permitted  to 
serve  Christ ;  and  let  me  say  that  if  my  Lord  Jesus 
gave  me  nothing  else  on  earth  but  the  privilege  of 
serving  him,  I  would  bless  him  for  it  to  all  eternity.  It 
is  no  mean  honour  to  be  a  servant  of  the  King  of  kings ; 
and  there  is  such  pleasure  in  honouring  Christ,  and  in 
winning  souls,  that  I  can  scarcely  believe  that  any  of 
you  have  ever  tasted  it,  or  else  you  would  be  hunger- 
ing after  more  of  it.  Did  you  ever  win  a  soul  to 
Christ  ?  Did  you  ever  get  a  grip  of  the  hand  of 
spiritual  gratitude  %  Did  you  ever  see  the  tear  starting 
from  the  eye  when  the  convert  said,  "  Bless  you !  I 
shall  remember  you  in  heaven,  for  you  have  brought  me 
to  Christ"?  Ah,  my  dear  friend,  you  will  not  be  satis- 
fied merely  with  this.  This  is  a  kind  of  food  that 
makes  men  hungry.  Oh  that  you  had  a  rich  banquet 
of  it,  and  yet  wanted  more  still.  The  church  shall 
and  must  be  built.  If  you  and  I  sit  still,  it  will  be 
built.  This  is  a  glorious  truth,  though  it  is  often  per- 
verted to  a  mischievous  end — the  church  will  be  built, 
even  without  us.  But  oh,  we  shall  miss  the  satisfaction 
of  helping  in  its  building.  Yes,  it  will  grow ;  every 
stone  will  be  put  in  its  place,  and  the  pinnacle  will  soar 
to  its  predestinated  elevation,  but  every  stone  from 
foundation  to  pinnacle,  will  seem  to  say  to  you,  "  Thou 
hadst  nothing  to  do  with  this !  Thou  hadst  no  hand 
in  this!"  When  Cyrus  took  one  of  his  guests  round 
his  garden,  the  guest  admired  it  greatly,  and  said  he 
had  much  pleasure  in  it.  "  Ah,"  said  Cyrus,  "  but  you 
have  not  so  much  pleasure  in  this  garden  as  I  have,  for 
I  planted  every  tree  in  it  myself."     One  reason  why 


God^s  Glory  in  the  Building  up  of  Zlon.        145 

Christ  has  so  much  pleasure  in  his  church  is  because 
he  did  so  much  for  it ;  and  one  reason  why  some  saints 
will  have  a  greater  fulness  of  heaven  than  others  to 
rejoice  in  will  be  because  they  did  more  for  heaven 
than  others.  By  God's  grace  they  were  enabled  to 
bring  more  souls  there ;  and  as  they  look  upon  the 
church  they  may,  without  self-reliance  or  self-conceit, 
ascribing  it  all  to  grace,  remember  what  they  were 
enabled  to  do,  as  instruments  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord, 
towards  its  building  up.  When  the  Lord  shall  build 
up  Zion,  he  shall  appear  in  his  glory. 


10 


^^W3ttnw$$* 


"I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot:  I  would 
thou  wert  cold  or  hot.  So  then  because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and 
neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth." — Rev.  iii. 
15,  16. 


^  F  this  had  been  an  utterance  of  mine,  it  would 
have  been  accounted  vulgar.  As  a  sentence 
of  Scripture,  I  suppose  it  may  be  permitted 
to  escape  the  elegant  censure  of  modem 
critics.  The  vernacular  tongue  and  the 
homely  figure  may  be  decried  as  vulgarities ; 
but  it  is  by  those  whose  tastes  have  been 
ill-schooled.  A  vicious  refinement  has  come  into 
vogue.  If  men  call  things  by  their  names,  and  use 
old  Saxon  words,  they  are  perpetually  brought  under 
the  lash  for  havino;  indulo^ed  in  vulcrarities.  A  return 
to  the  vulgar  tongue  in  the  pulpit  would  be  a  return 
to  power.  I  would  infinitely  rather  see  back  the 
homely  language  of  Hugh  Latimer,  with  all  its  angu- 
larity— and  I  must  confess  with  some  of  its  grossness — 
than  have  the  namby-pamby  style  of  modern  times, — 
suggesting  ideas  as  if  they  were  only  meant  to  be 
whispered  in  drawing-rooms,  instead  of  stating  facts 
which  concern  men  in  every-day  life.     The  fact  is,  the 


Lukewarmness.  147 

JBible  is  a  book  wliicli  deals  with  things  as  they  are — a 
book  which,  just  Hke  all  God's  works,  is  grand  and 
glorious,  because  it  is  natural  and  simple.  God  has 
not  polished  the  rocks,  he  has  not  shaped  the  moun- 
tains in  uniform  order,  nor  has  he  yet  been  pleased  to 
jnake  all  parts  of  the  earth  just  as  fair  and  lovely  as 
if  they  had  been  a  landscape ;  but  he  has  roughly  hewn 
them,  and  left  them  rugged  as  they  were,  and  there 
they  stand,  nature's  monuments  in  ridgy  stone.  And 
so  is  it  with  this  book  of  God.  There  are  found  sayings 
in  it  at  which  the  too  polite  shrug  their  shoulders — 
not  so  many  in  the  original,  certainly,  as  in  our 
translation — but  still  enough  to  shock  a  prudish  taste. 
The  Bible  is  none  the  less  chaste  because  it  scorns  to 
-call  foul  things  by  fair  names.  I  love  the  Word  of 
God,  because  it  is  a  manlike  book  Avhile  it  is  a  Godlike 
book.  In  all  the  glory  of  his  infinite  wisdom  he  hath 
written  to  us  in  the  simplicity  and  the  rugged  grandeur 
of  language  which  follows  no  fashion,  belongs  to  all 
time,  and  appeals  to  common  understanding. 

The  Lord  here  uses  a  plain,  homely  metaphor.  As 
tepid  water  makes  a  man's  stomach  heave,  so  lukewarm 
profession  is  nauseous  to  the  Almighty.  The  coldness 
of  apathy  or  the  warmth  of  enthusiasm  were  either 
one  or  the  other  to  be  borne  with ;  but  the  man  wdio 
is  lukewarm  in  religion  moves  him  to  the  deepest  loath- 
ing. He  vomits  him  forth  from  his  mouth.  His  name 
shall  be  dismissed  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord  with  an 
abhorrence  the  most  sickening  that  fancy  can  paint. 
It  is  an  utterance  so  strong  that  no  sentence  of  the  most 
impassioned  and  vehement  orator  would  rival  it.  There 
is  such  a  depth  of  solemn  disgust  in  this  warning  against 


148  Christian  Energy, 

lukewarmness  that  I  know  of  no  figure  in  the  compass 
of  imagination,  and  of  no  language  in  the  entire 
vocabulaiy  of  words,  which  could  have  conveyed  the 
meaning  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  the  faithful  and  true  wit- 
ness," so  fully,  or  with  so  much  terrible  force. 

My  business,  however,  with  the  text  is,  first,  to 
show  some  reasons  why  lukewarmness  in  religion  is  so 
distasteful  to  Christ,  and  then  to  use  some  dissuasives 
to  urge  you  no  more  to  be  lukewarm,  but  to  be  fervent 
in  your  Master's  cause. 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  attempt  an  exposure  of  some  of 
the  disgustful  things  which  are  found  in  lukewarm 
religion. 

A  lukewarm  religion  is  a  direct  insult  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  If  I  boldly  say  I  do  not  believe  what  he 
teaches,  I  have  given  him  the  lie.  But  if  I  say  to  him^ 
"  I  believe  what  thou  teachest,  but  I  do  not  think  it 
of  sufficient  importance  for  me  to  disturb  myself  about 
it,"  I  do  in  fact  more  wilfully  resist  his  word;  I  as 
much  as  say  to  him,  "If  it  be  true,  yet  is  it  a  thing 
which  I  so  despise  and  think  so  contemptible  that  I  will 
not  give  my  heart  to  it."  Did  Jesus  Christ  think 
salvation  of  such  importance  that  he  must  needs  come 
from  heaven  to  earth  to  work  it  out  ?  Did  he  think 
the  gospel  which  he  preached  so  worthy  to  be  known 
that  he  must  spend  his  life  in  scattering  it  ?  Did  he  think 
the  redemption  which  he  came  to  accomplish  so  invalu- 
able that  he  must  needs  shed  his  own  precious  blood 
for  it  %  Then  surely  he  was  in  earnest.  Now,  when  I 
profess  to  believe  the  things  "v^'hich  he  teaches,  and  yet 
am  indifferent,  do  I  not  insult  Christ  by  an  insinuation 
that  there  was  no  need  for  his  being  in  earnest — that  in 


Lukewarmness,  149 

fact  he  laid  these  things  too  much  to  heart?  His 
intense  zeal  was  not  on  his  own  account,  but  for 
iinother,  and  certainly,  by  all  reason,  the  interested 
party,  for  whom  his  solemn  engagements  were  under- 
taken, should  be  far  more  earnest.  And  yet,  instead 
of  that,  here  is  Christ  in  earnest,  and  we — too  many  of 
as — lukewarm,  neither  cold  nor  hot.  I  say  it  doth 
not  merely  seem  to  give  God  the  lie;  it  doth  not 
merely  censure  Christ:  but  it  doth,  as  it  were,  tell  him 
that  the  things  which  he  thoucrht  were  so  valuable  were 
of  no  worth  in  our  esteem,  and  so  it  doth  insult  him  to 
his  face. 

Oh !  my  brethren  and  sisters,  have  you  ever  really 
thought  what  an  insult  it  is  wdien  we  come  before  God 
with  lukewarm  prayers  %  Here  is  a  mercy-seat.  The 
road  to  it  must  be  cleared  with  blood,  and  yet  we  come 
to  it  with  a  heart  that  is  cold,  or  leave  our  hearts  behind. 
We  kneel  in  the  attitude  of  prayer ;  but  we  do  not  pray. 
We  prattle  out  words,  we  express  things  which  are  not 
<lesires.  We  feign  wants  that  we  do  not  feel.  Do  we 
not  thus  degrade  the  mercy-seat?  We  make  it,  as  it 
were,  a  common  lounging-place,  rather  than  an  awful 
wrestling-place,  once  besprinkled  with  blood,  and  often 
to  be  besprinkled  with  the  sweat  of  our  own  earnestness. 
When  we  come  to  the  house  of  God,  to  which  Jesus 
Christ  hath  invited  us,  as  the  banquet-house  of  rich 
provisions,  do  we  not  come  up  here,  too  often,  as  we  would 
go  to  our  shops — nay,  not  with  so  much  earnestness 
as  we  take  with  us  to  the  Exchange  or  to  the  count- 
ing-house ?  And  what  do  Ave  seem  to  say  but  that  God's 
house  is  a  common  place,  and  that  the  food  thereof  is 
but  ordinary  food,  and  the  solemn  engagements  of  God's 


150  Christian  Energy. 

sanctuary  but  everyday  things,  not  worthy  of  the  zeaT 
and  energy  of  a  sensible  man,  but  only  fit  to  be  passed 
through  with  mere  lukewarmness  of  spirit  ?  I  think  if 
I  were  to  pause  longer  here  I  should  show  you  I  went 
not  too  far  when  I  said  lukewarmness  is  an  insult  to 
God.  It  insults  him  in  all  that  is  dear  to  him  by  cast- 
ing a  disparagement  upon  everything  which  he  would 
have  us  believe  to  be  precious. 

Bethink  you,  again,  does  the  Lord  Jesus  deserve  such 
treatment  at  our  hands  ?  and  may  he  not  well  say  of 
such  hearts  as  ours,  he  would  that  we  were  "  either 
cold  or  hot  "  ?  O  Jesus  !  thy  heart  was  full  of  love  to 
those  in  whom  there  was  nothing  lovely,  thou  didst  leave 
the  glories  of  thy  Father's  house,  though  there  was  no 
necessity  that  thou  shouldst  do  so,  except  the  Divine 
necessity,  which  was  found  in  thine  own  heart ;  thou 
didst  love  thy  Church  so  much  that  thou  wouldst  come 
down,  and  be  bone  of  her  bone  and  flesh  of  her  flesh ! 
With  her  thou  wouldst  endure  poverty — with  her 
contempt  and  shame  and  spitting.  Thou  didst  fight 
her  enemies ;  thou  didst  rescue  her  out  of  the  hand 
of  him  that  was  stronger  than  she ;  thou  didst  count 
down  the  cost  in  drops  of  thy  blood  to  buy  her,  to  pay 
her  debts,  to  redeem  her  from  her  thraldom.  Thy 
pangs  were  grievous,  thy  sufferings  were  bitter,  thine 
anguish  was  extreme.  I  look  into  thy  dear  face;  I 
look  on  thy  thorn-crowned  head,  on  those  emaciated 
cheeks,  on  those  eyes  red  with  weeping,  and  I  say,  O 
Jesus,  thou  art  worthy  of  the  best  place  in  the  human 
heart !  Thou  oughtest  to  be  loved  as  never  one  was 
loved  before.  If  there  be  flames,  oh,  let  them  be 
fanned  to  a  vehement  heat,  and  let  those  flames  bui-n 


Lukewarmness.  151 

up  like  coals  of  juniper!  Let  the  flame  be  love  to 
Christ.  Oh,  if  it  be  possible  for  us  to  have  a  warm 
emotion,  we  ought  to  feel  it  here  ! 

And  is  it  not  a  sad  thing  that,  after  all  his  love  to 
us,  our  return  should  be  but  a  lukewarm  love  ?  Indeed, 
wdiich  would  you  rather  have,  a  lukewarm  love  or 
an  acknowledged  aversion?  Perhaps  you  have  but 
little  choice  with  regard  to  most  men  ;  but  were  it  one 
dear  to  you — the  partner  of  your  life,  for  instance — 
w^hy,  methinks,  lukewarm  love  would  be  no  love  at  all. 
What  but  misery  could  there  be  in  a  family  where 
there  was  a  lukewarm  affection  ?  Is  a  father  contented 
with  half-hearted  affection  from  his  childi'en?  In 
those  relationships  w^e  devote  all  the  heart :  but  with 
Christ,  who  has  far  more  claim  on  us  than  husband, 
or  father,  or  mother,  or  brother,  how  is  it  that  we  dare 
to  offer  him  a  distant  bow,  a  cool  recognition,  a  chill, 
inconstant  w^avering  heart?  Let  it  be  so  no  more. 
Oh,  my  brethren,  I  conjure  you  by  his  agony  and  bloody 
sweat,  by  his  cross  and  passion,  by  his  precious  death 
and  bm-ial,  by  his  wounds,  by  every  drop  of  his  blood, 
by  his  deep-fetched  groans,  by  all  the  pangs  that  went 
through  every  nerve  of  his  body,  and  by  the  deeper 
anguish  of  his  inmost  soul — I  beseech  you,  either  love 
or  hate  him ;  either  drive  him  from  the  door,  and  let 
him  know  that  you  are  not  his  friend,  or  else  give  him 
a  whole  heart  that  is  full  of  affection,  and  bursting  with 
divine  love  to  Jesus. 

But,  though  these  two  things  might  be  enough  to 
justify  the  strong  expressions  of  the  text — lukewarm- 
ness being  both  an  insult  to  God  and  ingratitude 
to  Christ — let  me  remind  you,  further,  that  the  luke- 


152  Christian  Energy o 

warm  Christian  compromises  God  before  the  eyes  of  the 
world  in  all  he  does  and  says.  If  a  man  be  an  infidel, 
openly  profane,  known  to  have  no  connection  with 
Christ  and  his  cause,  let  him  do  as  he  will,  he  brings  no 
scandal  on  the  Saviour's  name.  He  hath  no  God  be- 
fore his  eyes,  he  is  in  open  alienship  and  enmity : 
therefore,  his  sins,  though  they  be  wicked  and  re- 
bellious, full  of  sedition  and  defiance,  yet  do  not 
before  men  compromise  the  dignity  of  the  Most  High, 
But  when  the  lukewarm  Christian  goeth  forth,  men 
say,  "  This  man  professes  to  be  a  child  of  God ;  he 
professes  to  have  been  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ ; 
he  stands  before  us  and  challeno-es  observation  as  beincf 
a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  tells  us  that  he  is  the 
workmanship  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he  has  been  ^  be- 
gotten again  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.' "  Now,  whatever  that  man 
does,  the  world  conceives  his  acts  to  be  the  acts  of  a  new 
creature  in  Christ  Jesus — to  be,  in  fact,  acts  caused  by 
God's  Spirit  in  him.  The  world  doth  not  make  distinc- 
tions, as  we  do,  between  the  old  Adam  and  the  new. 
Their  reason  does  not  endorse  our  theories,  true  though 
they  be,  about  the  old  and  the  new  nature ;  it  looks  at  it 
as  a  whole,  and  if  it  seeth  anything  ■v\T.'ong  in  our  prin- 
ciple and  practice,  it  layeth  it  down  at  once,  and  puts 
the  inconsistency  to  the  account  of  our  religion.  Now, 
mark  ye  this,  ye  lukewarm  ones,  what  does  the  world 
see  in  you  ?  They  see  a  man  who  professes  to  be  going 
to  heaven,  but  he  is  travelling  there  at  a  snail's  pace. 
He  professes  to  believe  there  is  a  hell,  and  yet  he  has 
tearless  eyes  and  never  seeks  to  snatch  souls  from  going 
into  the  fire.     It  sees  before  it  one  who  has  to  deal  with 


Lukewmminess,  153 

eternal  realities,  and  yet  he  is  but  half  awake ;  one  who 
professes  to  have  passed  through  a  transformation  so 
mysterious  and  w^onderful,  that  there  must  be,  if  it 
be  true,  a  vast  change  in  the  outward  life  as  the  result 
of  it ;  and  yet  they  see  him  as  much  like  themselves  as 
may  be — he  may  be  morally  consistent  in  conduct,  but 
they  see  no  energy  in  his  religious  character.  Do  they 
hear  a  stirring  sermon  concerning  the  wrath  of  God, 
*'0h,"  they  say,  "it  is  very  well  for  the  minister  to 
appeal  to  our  passions,  but  it  is  no  great  matter ;  the 
people  who  hear  him  are  not  in  earnest,  the  saints  who 
profess  to  believe  this  trifle  with  it,  and  no  doubt  are  as 
incredulous  as  ourselves."  Let  the  minister  be  as  earnest 
as  ever  he  will  about  the  things  of  God,  the  lukewarm 
Christian  neutralises  any  effect  the  minister  can  pro-  __ 
duce,  because  the  world  will  judge  the  church  not  by  the 
standard  of  the  pulpit  so  much  as  by  the  level  of  the  pew.  f 
And  thus  they  say,  "  There  is  no  need  for  us  to  make  '' 
so  much  stir  about  it ;  these  peculiar  people,  these  saints, 
take  it  remarkably  easy ;  they  think  it  will  all  be  well ; 
no  doubt  we  do  as  much  as  they  do,  for  they  do  very- 
little.  They  seem  to  think  that  after  all  it  would  be 
fanaticism  to  look  upon  these  things  as  facts ;  they 
don't  act  as  if  they  w^ere  realities ;  and  so,"  saith  the 
world,  "doubtless  they  are  not  realities,  and  as  one 
religion  is  as  good  as  the  other,  there  is  no  great  reason 
for  us  to  have  any  religion  at  all."  The  careless  world- 
ling is  lulled  to  sleep  by  the  lukewarm  Christian,  who 
in  this  respect  acts  the  siren  to  the  sinner,  plays  music 
in  his  ears,  and  even  helps  to  entice  him  to  the  rocks 
w^here  he  shall  be  destroyed.  It  is  a  solemn  matter  in 
this  respect.     Here  is  damage  done.     Here  God's  name. 


154  Christian  Energy. 

God's  promise,  and  God's  honour  are  compromised. 
Either  lay  down  your  profession  or  be  honest  to  it.  If 
ye  do  profess  to  be  God's  people,  serve  him;  if  Baal 
be  your  confidence,  serve  Baal.  If  the  flesh  be  worth 
pleasing,  serve  the  flesh ;  but  if  God  be  Lord  para- 
mount, cleave  to  him.  Oh,  I  beseech  you  and  entreat 
you,  as  you  love  your  own  souls,  don't  play  fast  and 
loose  with  godliness.  Either  let  it  alone,  or  else  let  it 
saturate  you  through  and  through.  Either  possess  it 
or  cease  to  profess  it.  The  great  curse  of  the  church — 
that  which  bringeth  more  dishonour  on  God  than  all  the 
ribald  jests  of  scofling  atheists — the  great  curse  has  been 
the  lukewarmness  of  its  members,  the  being  neither  cold 
nor  hot.  Well  may  the  Lord  speak  as  he  doth  in  this 
text,  "  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth." 

But  yet,  again,  please  to  notice  that  the  Lord  hateth 
lukewarmness,  because  wherever  it  is  found  it  is  out  of 
place.  There  is  no  spot  near  to  the  throne  of  God 
where  lukewarmness  could  stand  in  a  seemly  position. 
Take  the  pulpit.  Ah,  my  brethren,  of  all  spots  in  the 
world,  if  lukewarmness  cometh  here,  then  is  the  man 
undone  indeed.  He  should  be  in  earnest  that  undertakes 
the  charge  of  souls,  with  that  solemn  text  ringing  in 
his  ears,  '*  If  the  watchman  warn  them  not,  they  shall 
perish,  but  their  blood  will  I  require  at  the  watchman's 
hands."  They  who  have  to  deal  with  hard-hearted 
sinners — they  who  have  to  preach  unpalatable  truths — 
surely  they  should  not  make  men's  hearts  harder,  and 
the  truth  yet  more  unpalatable  by  uttering  it  in  a 
half-hearted  manner.  It  shall  go  hard  with  the  man 
who  has  exercised  the  ministry  with  indifference.  "  If," 
saith  one  of  old,  "  there  be  a  man  who  finds  the  ministry 


Liiheicarmncss,  '  155 

an  easy  place,  he  shall  find  it  a  hard  matter  at  last  to 
give  in  his  account  before  God."  If,  my  brethen,  there 
should  be  some  professed  ministers  of  Christ  who  never 
know  what  it  is  to  travail  in  birth  for  souls ;  if  there 
be  men  who  take  it  up  as  a  mere  profession  and  exer- 
cise it  as  they  would  any  other  literary  matter ;  if  they 
merely  preach  just  because  they  consider  it  to  be  an 
excellent  thing  to  do  so,  and  pass  through  the  duty  as 
a  matter  of  routine,  it  were  better  for  them  that  they 
had  never  been  born.  It  had  been  better  for  them  to 
have  broken  stones  on  the  road-side  all  their  lives  than 
to  have  been  preaching  the  gospel,  but  leaving  their 
hearts  out  of  their  sermons ;  yea,  I  know  not  but  it 
were  better  to  have  been  a  devil  in  hell  than  to  have 
been  a  minister  in  the  pulpit  who  has  not  put  his  heart 
into  his  work.  One  thing  of  which  Satan  cannot  be 
accused  is,  that  he  ever  preached  the  gospel  hypo- 
critically ;  he  never  stooped  to  speak  of  flaming  things 
with  a  cold  tongue;  he  never  addressed  an  audience 
upon  solemn  subjects  when  his  heart  was  not  in  the 
matter.  Baxter's  "  Reformed  Pastor  "  often  stirs  my 
soul  as  I  read  over  the  glowing  periods  there,  those 
fiery  thunder-bolts  w^hlch  he  dashes  upon  the  heads  of 
idle  shepherds  and  lazy  pastors.  I  have  read  nearly  the 
wdiole  book  through  to  those  who  are  studying  for  the 
ministry  in  connection  w^ith  this  church,  and  often  have 
I  seen  the  tear  start  from  their  eye  ;  and  every  time  I 
have  read  a  chapter,  I  have  felt  that  the  next  Sabbath 
I  could  preach — I  must  preach  with  greater  earnest- 
ness, when  I  read  the  solemn  words  of  that  mightiest 
of  ministers,  Richard  Baxter.  Ah  !  we  need  to  have 
more    of   that   earnestness  in  the  pulpit.     What,  my 


/ 


156  Christian  Energy. 

brethren,  tliougli  ye  should  stady  less,  only  be  more 
earnest.  Rather  let  them  study  as  much  as  ever  they 
can ;  but  oh  !  if  they  could  but  kindle  fire  upon  the 
dry  fuel  of  their  studies,  how  much  more  might  be 
accomplished  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ  than  is  done 
now !  Here  you  see,  then,  lukewarmness  is  out  of 
place.  So  is  it,  my  brethren,  in  the  Sabbath-school, 
with  the  tract-distributor,  and  even  with  the  humble 
attendant  or  private  Christian.  Everywhere  lukewarm- 
ness is  to  be  scorned,  for  it  is  a  gross  and  glaring  incon- 
sistency. I  would  not  have  you  distribute  a  tract  with 
a  lukewarm  heart.  I  would  not  have  you  dare  to  visit 
the  sick  unless  your  heart  is  filled  with  love  to  Christ. 
Either  do  the  thing  well,  or  do  not  do  it  at  all.  Either  put 
heart  into  the  work,  or  let  some  one  else  do  it.  We 
have  had  too  many  men  of  straw  to  fill  up  our  ranks ; 
we  have  had  automatons  to  go  out  to  our  battles, 
and  we  have  counted  our  hosts,  and  said,  "  A  brave 
host  they  will  be  " — because  we  have  filled  up  our  ranks 
with  men  that  could  be  gathered  out  of  any  hedge,  and 
then  we  have  thought  our  regiments  complete.  If  the 
ranks  were  sifted  —  if  the  army  were  divided,  with 
fewer  workers  we  should  accomplish  more.  But,  alas ! 
those  few  workers  are  held  back  and  impeded  in  their 
onward  march  by  the  mixed  multitude  of  those  who  pre- 
tend to  join  with  the  army  of  the  living  God !  Perhaps 
here  in  this  church  of  all  places  you  will  find  yourselves 
out  of  place,  for  I  do  not  think  a  lukewarm  Christian 
could  be  long  happy  amongst  us.  There  are  so  many 
brethren  here  with  a  red-hot  spirit  that  they  would 
soon  get  burned  ;  they  would  say,  "  This  is  not  my  spot ; 
I  cannot  get  much  here."     You  would  be  asked  to  do 


Lukeioarmness.  157 

fifty  things — you  would  be  teased  till  you  did  them  ; 
for  the  good  people  here  would  not  let  you  sit  still 
unless  you  did  all  that  you  could,  and  they  would  want 
you  to  do  more  than  you  could  by  three  or  four  times, 
iior  would  they  be  satisfied  with  you  unless  you  were 
at  least  trying  to  do  more  than  you  were  well  able.  I 
am  sure  in  all  places  I  have  ever  known,  where  God  has 
sent  warm-hearted  men  to  preach  in  the  church,  you 
will  find  yourself  extremely  uncomfortable,  if  you  want 
to  be  lukewarm.  I  certainly  could  tell  you  of  a  few 
chapels  where  you  could  take  a  seat,  and  where  you 
would  be  greatly  needed  for  the  support  of  the  minis- 
try ;  the  minister  would  never  wake  you ;  I  dare  say  he 
would  let  you  sleep,  and  if  you  paid  an  extra  half- 
crown  a  quarter,  he  would  never  disturb  you ;  if  you 
did  not  join  the  church,  nobody  would  ever  think  of 
asking  you  whether  you  were  a  member  or  not.  In 
our  fashionable  chui'clies,  of  course,  people  don't 
speak  to  one  another — that  would  be  quite  beneath 
their  assumed  dignity ;  no  man  would  dare  to  turn  to 
his  neighbour  in  the  pew,  and  say,  "Are  you  a  child  of 
God  ?  "  Well,  if  you  would  like  to  be  lukewarm,  you  can 
go  to  those  places;  stay  not  here,  for  we  \d\\  tease  you  out 
of  your  life ;  stay  not,  lest  we  should  worry  you  with 
importunities.  I  question  whether  any  person  would 
come  here  for  a  few  Sundays  without  some  brother 
walking  up  to  him,  and  asking  him  whether  he  was  a 
follower  of  Christ  or  not.  And  it  would  be  repeated 
until  he  would  think  the  impertinence  wore  him  out, 
and  so  it  would,  doubtless,  unless  he  came  to  some 
decision  about  his  soul. 

II.  But  now  I  shall  turn  to  my  second  point,  in  which 


158  Christian  Energy. 

I  am  to  attempt  some  dissuasives  against  lukewarmness. 
Having  exposed  its  evils,  let  me  endeavour  to  dissuade 
you  from  it.  As  Christians,  you  liave  to  do  with 
solemn  realities;  you  have  to  do  with  eternity,  with 
death,  with  heaven,  with  hell,  with  Christ,  with  Satan, 
with  souls,  and  can  you  deal  with  these  things  with 
a  cold  spirit  ?  Suppose  you  can,  there  certainly  never 
was  a  greater  marvel  in  the  world,  if  you  should  be  able 
to  deal  with  them  successfully.  These  things  demand 
the  whole  man.  If  but  to  praise  God  require  that  w^e 
call  up  all  our  soul  and  bless  him  with  all  our  powers, 
how  much  more  to  serve  God,  and  to  serve  him  not  in 
hewing  of  wood  or  drawing  of  water,  but  in  winning  of 
souls,  in  dealing  with  gospel  truth,  in  propagating  his 
cause,  and  in  spreading  his  kingdom.  Here,  my 
brethren,  there  are  stern  and  solemn  things  to  deal 
with,  and  they  must  not  be  touched  by  any  but  those 
who  come  warm-heartedly  to  deal  with  them.  Remem- 
ber, too,  that  these  were  very  solemn  things  with  you 
once.  Perhaps  you  have  been  converted  ten  or  twenty 
years,  and  can  it  be  that  these  things  fall  lightly  now 
upon  your  ear,  and  excite  little  emotion  ?  There  was  a 
time  when  it  needed  little  to  make  you  earnest ;  you 
were  then  laden  with  guilt  and  full  of  fears;  your 
groans  were  deep ;  you  could  not  rest  at  nights ;  you 
were  labouring  under  a  burden  so  heavy  that  it  seemed 
to  crush  your  soul  all  but  into  the  lowest  hell.  Then 
you  prayed  in  earnest ;  then  you  sought  God  in  earnest. 
Oh,  how  you  used  to  long  even  to  stand  in  the  aisle !  it 
did  not  matter  though  the  distance  were  great,  or  the 
pressure  to  enter  into  the  house  of  God  was  incon- 
venient; though  you  were   ready  to   faint   sometimes 


Lukewarmness,  159 

iluring  the  sermon,  you  bore  up  through  an  unsatiable 
desire  to  hear  the  Word  which  might  be  the  means  of 
your  salvation.  Do  you  not  remember  that  you  thought 
at  that  time  every  man  a  fool,  and  especially  yourself 
a  fool,  for  having  left  so  long  these  great  realities  un- 
touched, unthought  of,  unrealised,  while  the  trifles  of 
a  day  were  engrossing  all  your  thoughts  ?  Oh,  then, 
I  conjure  you  by  those  days  gone  by,  think  as  ear- 
nestly of  these  things  now  as  you  did  then !  Let  the 
past  experience  be  the  standard  of  your  present  zeal. 
You  ought  to  have  advanced,  but  if  you  have  not, 
be  content  to  go  back  again  and  begin  where  you 
were  at  that  time ;  be  humble  enough  to  ask  God  to 
revive  the  sincerity  of  your  penitence,  the  reality  of 
your  grace,  the  eagerness  of  your  desires,  the  flaming 
passion  of  your  heart.  And  remember,  again,  there 
have  been  times  when  these  things  did  seem  to  be 
worthy  of  a  warm  heart.  You  remember  when  your 
Sunday-school  child  died,  and  then  you  thought,  "  Oh, 
that  I  had  taught  that  child  more  earnestly,  and  prayed 
over  it  with  all  my  heart !  "  Do  you  remember  when 
you  buried  your  own  child,  how  you  seemed  to  cry  over 
it,  "  O  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son ! "  and  the  thought 
wounded  you  to  the  quick,  that  you  had  not  taught  that 
child  as  you  would — that  you  had  not  wrestled  with 
God  in  prayer  for  that  child's  soul  as  you  could  well 
desire  ?  And  have  not  I  had  to  think  of  this  when  I 
have  buried  some  of  your  kinsfolk  or  acquaintance? 
As  I  have  looked  down  into  the  grave  of  some  uncon- 
verted hearer,  the  tears  have  fallen  from  my  eye ;  and 
have  I  not  awoke  at  night  with  some  solemn  and  awful 
dream,  embodying  that  black  thought  before  my  eyes — 


160  Christian  Energy. 

"Have  I  been  faithful  to  that  soul?  Have  I  dealt 
-with  that  spirit  as  I  ^Yould  deal  with  it  if  I  were  called 
once  more  to  preach  the  gospel  to  it  ?"  Sometimes 
we  can  say,  "We  hope  we  have  not  shunned  to  de- 
clare the  whole  counsel  of  God,  and  if  men  perish 
their  blood  lieth  not  at  our  door ;"  but  yet  there  are 
seasons  of  awful  questioning,  lest  one  out  of  a  nume- 
rous flock  should  have  been  so  neglected  as  that  his 
perdition  should  be  charged  to  the  shepherd's  neglect. 
Oh,  do  you  not  remember  when  the  cholera  was  abroad 
how  solemn  you  thought  the  things  of  God  to  be? 
And  when  the  fever  came  into  your  house,  and  one 
died  after  another,  you  thought  there  was  nothing 
worth  living  for  but  to  be  prepared  to  die,  and  that 
your  whole  business  should  now  be  to  seek  to  warn 
others,  lest  they  perish,  and  come  into  the  place  of 
torment.  And  the  day  is  coming  when  you  will  think 
these  things  worthy  of  your  whole  heart.  When  you 
and  I  shall  lie  stretched  upon  our  dying  beds,  I  think 
we  shall  have  to  regret,  above  all  other  things,  our 
coldness  of  heart.  Among  the  many  sins  which  we 
must  then  confess,  and  which  I  trust  we  shall  then 
know  were  pardoned,  and  laid  upon  the  scapegoat's 
head  of  old,  perhaps  that  will  lie  the  heaviest,  like  a 
lump  of  ice  upon  our  hearts — "  I  did  not  live  as  I 
would ;  I  was  not  in  earnest  in  my  Lord's  cause  as  I 
should  have  been."  Then  shall  our  cold  sermons  march 
like  sheeted  ghosts  before  our  eyes  in  di-ead  array. 
Then  shall  our  neglected  days  start  up,  and  each  day 
shall  seem  to  wave  its  hair  as  though  it  were  a  fury, 
and  look  into  our  hearts,  and  make  our  blood  curdle 
in  our  veins.       Then  shall   our   Sunday-school  come 


Lulcficarmness.  161 

before  us.  Then  shall  those  who  taught  us  to  teach 
others  come  and  reprove  us  for  having  despised  their 
trainings,  for  not  having  improved  those  holy  teach- 
ings which  we  had  when  we  were  set  apart  for  God's  cause, 
or  when  we  were  first  trained  to  serve  in  his  army. 
We  may  count  these  things  of  little  importance  now, 
but  when  we  lie  on  the  borders  of  eternity  we  shall 
think  them  worth  living  for,  and  account  them  worth 
dying  a  thousand  deaths  for.  I  do  think  that  some  of 
those  truths  we  have  kept  back,  some  of  those  ordi- 
nances we  have  despised,  some  of  those  precepts  we 
have  neglected,  shall  then  seem  to  grow  as  sometimes 
in  a  drfam  you  have  seen  a  mountain  rise  from  a 
grain,  and  swell,  and  swell,  and  swell,  till  its  stupen- 
dous weight  appeared  to  crush  your  brain — an  awful 
mass,  too  heavy  for  your  soul.  And  so  it  will  be  then 
if  you  have  lived  lukewarmlv ;  the  things  of  God  will 
then,  even  though  you  be  a  child  of  God,  darken  your 
dying  hour,  and  crush  down  your  spirit  with  a  fearful 
weight  of  sad  reflection. 

Ay,  and  there  will  be  a  time  when  the  things  of  God 
will  seem  yet  more  real  even  than  on  the  dying  bed. 
I  refer  to  the  day  when  we  shall  stand  at  the  bar  of 
God.  Am  I  prepared  to  stand  there  with  a  ministry 
half  discharged?  What  shall  I  do  if  I  have  to  give 
account  before  God  for  sermons  preached  without  my 
heart?  How  shall  I  stand  before  my  Maker,  if  I 
have  ever  kept  back  anything  which  I  thought  might 
be  useful  to  you,  if  I  have  shunned  to  rebuke  any  of 
you,  if  I  have  not  w^arned  you  faithfully,  and  loved 
you  tenderly  as  my  own  soul,  and  sought  to  woo 
vou   to  the   Saviour?      Where  must  I  stand?     Can 

11 


162  Christian  Energy, 

I  give  in  my  account  as  a  steward  of  the  Lord,  if  I 
have  only  served  him  half-heartedly  ?  O  God  !  grant, 
I  beseech  thee,  that,  notwithstanding  a  thousand  in- 
firmities, thy  servant  may  ever  be  free  from  that 
grand  sin,  that  great  transgression,  of  being  lukewarm 
in  thy  cause  !  And  what  think  you,  sirs,  shall  you  do, 
as  professors  of  Christ,  if  you  have?  been  lukew^arm  pro- 
fessors, if  you  have  had  a  name  to  live  and  were  dead, 
or  if  you  were  but  half  alive  with  every  energy  para- 
lysed ?  Ah,  sirs  !  ah,  sirs  !  I  would  not  stand  in  your 
places  who  are  living  as  some  of  you  do; — -just  observing 
the  decencies  of  godliness  without  the  vital  life  thereof, 
giving  Christ  a  little  of  your  substance  for  mere  show, 
giving  Christ  a  little  of  your  time  to  pacify  your  con- 
science, taking  his  name  upon  you  that  you  may  hide 
your  defects;  but  still  a  real  stranger  to  his  work, 
not  giving  yourself  up  to  him — unconsecrated,  unde- 
voted — living  to  the  flesh  still,  while  pretending  to  be 
quickened  by  the  Spirit — with  your  heart  in  your  busi- 
ness, but  no  heart  in  your  religion — pursuing  the  world 
rapidly,  but  following  afar  off  your  Master — putting 
both  your  hands  to  this  world's  plough,  and  only  one 
hand  to  Christ's  plough,  and  looking  back  while  you 
do  that.  Oh,  sirs,  I  tell  you,  when  the  earth  begins 
to  reel,  when  the  heavens  begin  to  shake,  when  the 
stars  lose  their  places,  and  begin  to  dash  abroad  bewil- 
dered— you  will  be  bewildered  too.  Your  heart  too 
shall  shake,  and  your  grand  hopes  totter  to  destruc- 
tion, if  you  have  only  served  Jesus  with  a  lukew^arm 
heart.  God  give  us  grace  to  make  our  religion  allj 
to  give  our  wdiole  heart  to  it,  to  live  in  it,  to  live  it 
out,  and  then  to  be  prepared  to  die  for  it,  if  God  so 


Liikewarmness.  163 

please,  that  we  may  live  to  enjoy  the  results  of  it  in 
glory  everlasting ! 

I  am  fearful,  full  often,  that  in  addressing  you,  the 
same  congregation,  Sabbath  after  Sabbath,  and  week 
after  week,  by  the  space  of  all  these  accumulating 
years,  my  voice  should  grow  old  and  stale  to  you. 
This  I  can  truly  say,  I  had  rather  cease  to  preach 
than  preach  to  people  to  whom  my  voice  has  become 
so  familiar  that  it  is  but  the  ringing  of  an  old  bell 
to  which  they  give  no  heed.  No,  there  must  be  feeling 
in  the  congregation,  with  earnestness  in  the  preacher ; 
elsewise  let  me  resign  my  commission.  Oh,  I  pray 
God,  if  I  be  spared  to  labour  with  you,  year  after  year, 
and  you  to  sit  in  the  pew  to  listen  to  the  Word,  that 
it  may  be  with  earnestness  in  you,  and  earnestness  in 
me  ;  that  we  may  never  come  down  to  the  dead  level 
of  some  of  the  churches  I  alluded  to  just  now — as  you 
may  think,  in  a  spirit  of  censure,  but  God  knows  in  a 
spirit  of  loving  faithfulness ;  old  churches  that  have 
come  to  be  as  pools  without  outlets,  covered  over  with 
the  sickly  duckweed  of  respectability.  Stagnation  in 
a  church  is  the  devil's  delight.  I  do  not  think  he  cares 
how  many  Baptist  chapels  you  build,  or  how  many 
churches  you  open,  if  you  will  but  keep  them  stagnant ; 
he  cares  not  for  your  armies  if  the  soldiers  will  but 
sleep ;  he  cares  not  for  your  guns  if  they  be  none  of 
them  loaded.  "  Oh,  let  them  build,  let  them  build," 
says  he,  "  for  such  buildings  are  not  the  batteries  that 
shake  the  gates  of  hell."  New  zeal,  new  fire,  new 
energy !  ^his  is  what  we  want.  Our  old  Baptist 
cause  has  ^ot  very  slack.  We  are,  the  great  mass  of 
us  Baptists,  ignoring  our  convictions.     We  say  so  little 


164  Christian  Energi/. 

about  them  that  people  forget  that  there  is  an  institu- 
tion of  Christ  to  defend  which  has  been  wilfully  and 
wofully  perverted  from  its  original  intent  as  well  as  its 
primitive  form.  If  we  have  held  our  tongues  about 
baptism,  we  have  sin  lying  at  our  door.  We  shall  have 
to  give  account  to  God,  not  only  for  our  obedience  but 
also  for  our  testimony  ;  and  I  would  that  in  this  matter 
we  began  to  wake  up.  As  baptism  is  an  ordinance  of 
Christ  we  ought  to  speak  out  about  it.  Do  we  know 
our  cause  to  be  just  ?  then  why  should  we  fear  to  de- 
fend it?  Let  truth  prevail  in  every  article  of  our 
doctrine.  Let  wrong  be  assailed  in  every  tittle  of  our 
conduct.  Suffer  no  spurious  charity  to  betray  you 
into  graceless  laxness.  To  arms,  to  arms,  if  so  it  must 
be.  We  would  not  shrink  or  skulk  when  the  occasion 
demands  it.  Controversy  has  its  advantages ;  for 
thereby  falsehood  is  unmasked,  and  therein  truth  is 
made  manifest.  Amidst  the  tumult  of  those  who  cling 
to  traditions,  we  make  our  appeal  to  heaven.  By 
terrible  things  in  righteousness,  answer  thou,  O  God ! 
Bring  on  the  battle  once  again,  the  clash  of  arms  once 
more ;  and  let  thy  church  win  the  victory.  Give  the 
victory  to  the  right  and  to  the  true ;  and  let  error  be 
trampled  under  foot ;  and  with  those  errors,  the  errors 
ice  hold,  let  them  be  first  trampled  on  and  slain.  So 
be  it,  O  Lord,  and  unto  thy  name  shall  be  the  glory  I 


ll^sti^ainiHg  %m^* 


"Thou  restrainest  prayer  before  God." — Job  xv.  4. 


CHAEGE  brought  by  Ellphaz  the  Temanite 
against  Job,  ^^  Yea,  thou  castest  off  fear, 
and  restrainest  prayer  before  God!"  I 
shall  not  use  this  sentence  as  an  accusation 
against  those  who  never  pray,  though  there 
may  be  some  in  this  house  of  prayer  whose 
heads  are  unaccustomed  to  bow  down, 
whose  knees  are  unaccustomed  to  kneel  before  the 
Lord  their  Maker.  You  have  been  fed  by  God's 
bounty,  you  owe  all  the  breath  in  your  nostrils  to  him, 
and  yet  you  have  never  done  homage  to  his  name. 
The  ox  knoweth  its  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's 
crib,  but  these  know  not,  neither  do  they  consider  the 
Most  High.  The  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  low  forth 
their  gratitude,  and  every  sheep  praiseth  God  in  its 
bleatings ;  but  these  beings,  worse  than  natural  brute 
beasts,  still  continue  to  receive  from  the  lavish  hand  of 
divine  benevolence,  but  they  return  no  thanks  whatso- 
ever to  their  Benefactor.  Let  such  remember,  that  the 
ground  which  has  long  been  rained  upon,  and  ploughed 
and  sown,  which  yet  bringeth  forth  no  fruit,  is  nigh 
unto  cursing,  whose  end  is  to  be  burned.     Prayerless 


166  Christian  Energy. 

souls  are  Christless  souls,  Christless  souls  are  graceless 
souls,  and  graceless  souls  shall  soon  be  damned  souls. 
See  your  peril,  ye  that  neglect  altogether  the  blessed 
privilege  of  prayer.  You  are  in  the  bonds  of  iniquity, 
you  are  in  the  gall  of  bitterness.  God  deliver  you  for 
his  name's  sake. 

Nor  do  I  intend  to  use  this  text  in  an  address 
to  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  formal  prayer, 
though  there  are  many  such.  Taught  from  their 
childhood  to  utter  certain  sacred  words,  they  have 
carried  through  youth,  and  even  up  to  manhood,  the 
same  practice.  I  will  not  discuss  that  question  just 
now,  whether  the  practice  of  teaching  children  a  form 
of  prayer  is  proper  or  not.  I  would  not  do  it.  Children 
should  be  instructed  in  the  meaning  of  prayer,  and 
their  little  minds  should  be  taught  to  pray;  but  it 
should  be  rather  the  matter  of  prayer  than  the  words 
of  prayer  that  should  be  suggested ;  and  I  think  they 
should  be  taught  to  use  then'  own  words,  and  to  speak 
unto  God  in  such  phrases  and  terms  as  their  own  child- 
like capacities,  assisted  by  a  mother's  love,  may  be  able 
to  suo-CTest.  Full  manv  there  are  who  from  early 
education  grow^  up  habituated  to  some  form  of  words, 
which  either  stands  in  lieu  of  the  heart's  devotion,  or 
cripples  its  free  exercise.  No  doubt  there  may  be  true 
prayer  linked  with  a  form,  and  the  soul  of  many  a 
saint  has  gone  up  to  heaven  in  some  holy  collect,  or  in 
the  words  of  some  beautiful  liturgy ;  but  for  all  that, 
we  are  absolutely  certain  that  tens  of  thousands  use  the 
mere  language  without  heart  or  soul,  under  the  im- 
pression that  they  are  praying.  I  consider  the  form  of 
prayer  to  be  no  more  prayer  than  a  coach  may  be  called 


Hestraining  Prayer.  1G7 

a  horse;  the  horse  will  be  better  without  the  coach, 
travel  much  more  rapidly,  and  find  himself  much  more 
at  ease ;  he  may  drag  the  coach,  it  is  true,  and  still 
travel  well.  Without  the  heart  of  prayer,  the  form  is 
no  prayer;  it  will  not  stir  or  move,  it  is  simply  a 
vehicle  that  may  have  wheels  that  might  move ;  but  it 
has  no  inner  force  or  power  within  itself  to  propel  it. 
Flatter  not  yourselves  that  your  devotion  has  been 
acceptable  to  God,  you  that  have  been  merely  saluting 
the  ears  of  the  Most  High  with  forms.  They  liave  been 
only  mockeries,  when  your  heart  has  been  absent.  What 
though  a  parliament  of  bishops  should  have  composed 
the  words  you  use !  what  though  they  should  be  abso- 
lutely faultless !  ay,  what  if  they  should  even  be  in- 
spired, or  though  you  have  used  them  a  thousand  times, 
yet  have  you  never  prayed  if  you  consider  that  the 
repetition  of  the  form  be  prayer.  No  !  there  is  more 
than  the  chatter  of  the  tongue  in  genuine  supplication ; 
more  than  the  repetition  of  words  in  truly  drawing 
near  to  God.  Take  care  lest  with  the  form  of  godliness 
you  neglect  the  power,  and  go  down  to  the  pit,  having 
a  lie  in  your  right  hand,  but  not  the  truth  in  your  heart. 
What  I  do  intend,  however,  is  to  address  this  text  to 
the  true  people  of  God,  who  understand  the  sacred 
art  of  prayer  and  are  prevalent  therein ;  but  who,  to 
their  own  sorrow  and  shame,  must  confess  that  they 
have  restrained  prayer.  If  there  be  no  other  person 
in  this  congregation  to  whom  the  preacher  will  speak 
personally,  he  feels  shamefully  conscious  that  he  will 
have  to  speak  very  plainly  to  himself.  We  know  that 
our  prayers  are  heard ;  we  are  certain — it  is  not  a 
question  with  us — that  there  is  an  efficacy  in  the  divine 


168  Christian  Energy. 

office  of  intercession;  and  yet  (oh,  how  we  should 
blush  when  we  make  the  confession  !)  we  must  ac- 
knowledge that  we  do  restrain  prayer.  Now,  inasmuch 
as  we  speak  to  those  who  grieve  and  repent  that  they 
should  so  have  done,  we  shall  use  but  little  sharpness ; 
but  we  shall  try  to  use  much  plainness  of  speech.  Let 
us  see  how  and  in  what  respect  we  have  restrained 
prayer. 

Do  you  not  think,  dear  friends,  that  we  often  restrain 
prayer  in  the  fewness  of  the  occasions  that  we  set  apart 
for  supplication?  From  hoary  tradition  and  modern 
precedents  we  have  come  to  believe  that  the  morning 
should  be  opened  with  the  offering  of  prayer,  and  that 
the  day  should  be  shut  in  with  the  nightly  sacrifice. 
We  do  ill  if  we  neglect  those  two  seasons  of  prayer. 
Do  you  not  think  that  often  in  the  morning  we  rise  so 
near  to  the  time  of  labour,  when  duty  calls  us  to  our 
daily  avocation,  that  we  hurry  through  the  wonted  exer- 
cises with  unseemly  haste,  instead  of  diligently  seeking 
the  Lord  and  earnestly  calling  upon  his  name  ?  And 
even  at  night,  when  we  are  very  weary  and  jaded,  it 
is  just  possible  that  our  prayer  is  uttered  somewhere 
between  sleeping  and  waking.  Is  not  this  restraining 
prayer?  And  throughout  the  three  hundred  and  sixty- 
five  days  of  the  year,  if  we  continue  thus  to  pray,  and 
this  be  all,  how  small  an  amount  of  true  supplication 
will  have  gone  up  to  heaven !  I  trust  there  are  none 
here  present  who  profess  to  be  followers  of  Christ,  who 
do  not  also  practise  prayer  in  their  families.  We  may 
have  no  positive  commandment  for  it,  but  we  believe 
that  it  is  so  much  in  accord  with  the  genius  and  spirit 
of   the  gospel,   and  that   it  is  so   commended   by  the 


Restraining  Prayer.  IGO 

example  of  the  saints,  that  the  neglect  thereof  is  a 
strange  inconsistency.  Now,  how  often  this  family 
worship  is  conducted  in  a  slovenly  manner !  An  incon- 
venient hour  is  fixed ;  and  a  knock  at  the  door,  a  ring 
at  the  bell,  the  call  of  a  customer,  may  hurry  the 
believer  from  his  knees  to  go  and  attend  to  his  worldly 
concerns.  Of  course,  many  excuses  might  be  offered, 
but  the  fact  would  still  remain,  that  in  this  way  we 
often  restrain  prayer.  And  then,  when  you  come  up 
to  the  house  of  God — I  hope  you  do  not  come  up  to 
this  Tabernacle  without  prayer — but  yet  I  fear  we  do 
not  all  pray  as  we  should,  even  when  in  the  place  dedi- 
cated to  it.  There  should  always  be  a  devout  prayer 
lifted  up  to  heaven,  as  soon  as  you  enter  the  place  where 
you  would  meet  with  God.  What  a  preparation  is  often 
made  to  appear  in  the  assembly !  some  of  you  get  here 
half  an  hour  before  the  service  commences;  if  there 
were  no  talking,  if  each  one  of  you  looked  into  the 
Bible,  or  if  the  time  was  spent  in  silent  ejaculation,  what 
a  cloud  of  holy  incense  would  go  smoking  up  to  heaven  I 
I  think  it  would  be  comely  for  you  and  profitable 
for  us  if,  as  soon  as  the  minister  enters  the  pulpit, 
you  engaged  yourselves  to  plead  with  God  for  him. 
For  me  I  may  especially  say  it  is  desirable.  I  claim 
it  at  your  hands  above  every  other  man.  With  this 
overwhelming  congregation,  and  with  the  terrible 
responsibility  of  so  numerous  a  church,  and  with 
the  word  spoken  here  published  within  a  few  hours, 
and  disseminated  over  the  country,  scattered  through- 
out all  Europe,  nay,  throughout  the  length  and 
breadth  and  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  I  may  well 
ask  you   to  lift   up   your  hearts  in   supplication   that 


170  Christian  Energy. 

the  words  spoken  may  be  those  of  truth  and  sober- 
ness, directed  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  made  mighty 
through  God,  like  arrows  shot  from  his  own  bow,  to 
find  a  target  in  the  hearts  that  he  means  to  bless. 
That  shoukl  be  certainly  a  time  of  prayer.  And  on 
going  home,  w^ith  what  earnestness  should  we  ask  the 
Master  to  let  what  we  have  heard  live  in  our  hearts. 
We  lose  very  much  of  the  effects  of  our  Sabbaths 
through  not  pleading  with  God  on  the  Saturday  night 
for  a  blessing  upon  the  day  of  rest,  and  through  not  also 
pleading  at  the  end  of  the  Sunday,  beseeching  him  to 
make  that  which  we  have  heard  abide  in  our  memories, 
and  appear  in  our  actions.  We  have  restrained  prayer, 
I  fear,  in  the  fewness  of  the  occasions.  Indeed,  brethren, 
every  part  of  the  day  and  every  day  of  the  week  should 
be  an  occasion  for  prayer.  Ejaculations  such  as  these, 
*'  Oh,  would  that !  "  "  Lord,  save  me !  "  "  Help  me  !  " 
'^More  liMit,  Lord!"  "Teach  me!"  "Guide  me!" 
and  a  thousand  such,  should  be  constantly  going  up 
from  our  hearts  to  the  throne  of  God.  You  may  enjoy 
a  refreshing  solitude,  if  you  please,  in  the  midst  of 
crowded  Cheapside,  or  contrariwise  you  may  have  your 
head  in  the  whirl  of  a  busy  crowd  when  you  have 
retired  to  your  closet.  It  is  not  so  much  where  wx  are 
as  in  what  state  our  heart  is.  Let  the  regular  seasons 
for  devotion  be  constantly  attended  to.  These  things 
ought  ye  to  have  done  ;  but  let  your  heart  be  habitually 
in  a  state  of  prayer;  ye  must  not  leave  this  undone. 
Oh  that  we  prayed  more,  that  we  set  apart  more  time 
for  it !  Good  Bishop  Farrar  had  an  idea  in  his  head 
which  he  carried  out.  Being  a  man  of  some  substance, 
and  having  some  twenty-four  persons  in  his  household, 


Restraining  Prayer,  171 

he  divided  the  day,  and  there  was  always  some  person 
engaged  either  in  holy  song  or  else  in  devout  supplica- 
tion through  the  whole  of  the  twenty-four  hours ;  never 
Avas  there  a  moment  when  the  censer  ceased  to  smoke 
or  the  altar  was  without  its  sacrifice.  Happy  shall  it 
be  for  us  when,  day  without  night,  we  shall  circle  the 
throne  of  God  rejoicing ;  but  till  then  let  us  emulate 
the  ceaseless  praise  of  seraphs  before  the  throne,  con- 
tinually drawing  near  unto  God,  and  making  supplica- 
tion and  thanksgiving. 

But  to  proceed  to  a  second  remark.  Dear  friends,  I 
think  it  will  be  very  clear,  upon  a  little  reflection,  that 
we  constantly  restrain  prayer  by  not  having  our  hearts 
in  a  proper  state  when  we  come  to  its  exercise.  We 
rush  into  prayer  too  often;  we  would  think  it  necessary 
if  we  were  to  address  the  Queen  that  our  petition  should 
be  prepared ;  but  often  we  dash  before  the  throne  of 
God  as  though  it  were  but  some  common  house  of  call, 
without  even  having  a  thought  in  our  minds  of  what  we 
are  going  for.  Now  just  let  me  suggest  some  few  things 
which  I  think  should  always  be  subjects  of  meditation 
before  our  season  of  prayer,  and  I  think,  if  you  confess 
that  you  have  not  thought  of  this,  you  will  also  be 
obliged  to  acknowledge  that  you  have  restrained 
prayer. 

We  should,  before  prayer,  meditate  upon  him  to  whom 
it  is  to  be  addressed.  Let  our  thoughts  be  directed  to 
the  living  and  true  God.  Let  me  remember  that  he 
is  omnipotent,  then  I  shall  ask  large  things.  Let  me 
remember  that  he  is  very  tender,  and  full  of  com- 
passion, then  I  shall  ask  little  things  and  be  minute  in 
my  supplication.     Let  me  remember  the  greatness  of 


172  Christian  Energy. 

his  covenant,  then  I  shall  come  very  boldly.  Let  me 
remember,  also,  that  his  faithfulness  is  like  the  great 
mountains,  that  his  promises  are  sure  to  all  the  seed, 
then  I  shall  ask  very  confidently,  for  I  shall  be  per- 
suaded that  he  will  do  as  he  has  said.  Let  me  fill  my 
soul  with  the  reflection  of  the  greatness  of  his  majesty, 
then  I  shall  be  struck  with  awe ;  with  the  equal  great- 
ness of  his  love,  then  I  shall  be  filled  with  delight. 
We  could  not  but  pray  better  than  we  do  if  we  medi- 
tated more  before  prayer  upon  the  God  whom  we 
address. 

Then,  let  me  meditate  also  upon  the  way  through 
which  my  prayer  is  offered ;  let  my  soul  behold  the 
blood  sprinkled  on  the  mercy-seat ;  before  I  venture  to 
draw  near  to  God,  let  me  go  to  Gethsemane  and  see 
the  Saviour  as  he  prays.  Let  me  stand  in  holy  vision 
at  the  foot  of  Calvary  and  see  his  body  rent,  that  the 
veil  which  parted  my  soul  from  all  access  to  God  might 
be  rent  too,  that  I  might  come  close  to  my  Father, 
even  to  his  feet.  Oh,  dear  friends,  I  am  sure  if  we 
thought  about  the  way  of  access  in  prayer,  we  should 
be  more  mighty  in  it,  and  our  neglect  of  so  doing  has 
led  us  to  restrain  prayer. 

And  yet,  again,  ought  I  not  before  prayer  to  be  duly 
conscious  of  my  many  sins  ?  Oh !  when  I  hear  men 
pray  cold,  careless  prayers,  surely  they  forget  that  they 
are  sinners,  or  else,  abjuring  gaudy  words  and  flowing 
periods,  they  w^ould  smite  upon  their  breast  with  the  cry, 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner ; "  they  would  come 
to  the  point  at  once,  with  force  and  fervency.  ^'  I, 
black,  unclean,  defiled,  condemned  by  the  law,  mako 
my  appeal  unto  thee,  O  God !  "     What  prostration  of 


Restraining  Prayer.  173 

spirit,  what  zeal,  what  fervour,  what  earnestness,  and 
tlien,  consequently,  what  prevalence  would  there  be 
if  we  were  duly  sensible  of  our  sin ! 

If  we  can  add  to  this  a  little  meditation  upon  what 
our  needs  are,  how  much  better  we  should  pray  !  We 
often  fail  in  prayer  because  we  come  without  an 
errand,  not  having  thought  of  what  our  necessities  are ; 
but  if  w^e  have  reckoned  up  that  w^e  need  pardon,  justi- 
fication, sanctification,  preservation  ;  that  besides  the 
blessings  of  this  life  we  need  that  our  decaying  gi'aces 
should  be  revived,  that  such  and  such  a  temptation  should 
be  removed,  and  that  through  such  and  such  a  trial 
we  should  be  carried,  and  prove  more  than  conquerors ; 
then,  coming  with  an  errand,  w^e  should  speed  before 
the  Most  High.  But  we  bring  bowls  to  the  altar  that 
have  no  bottom,  and  if  the  treasure  should  be  put  in 
them  it  would  fall  through.  We  do  not  know  what  we 
want,  and  therefore  we  ask  not  for  what  we  really  need  ; 
we  affect  to  lay  our  necessities  before  the  Lord,  without 
having  duly  considered  how  great  our  necessities  are. 
See  thyself  as  an  abject  bankrupt ;  weak,  sick,  dying, 
and  this  will  make  thee  plead.  See  thy  necessities 
deep  as  the  ocean,  broad  as  the  expanse  of  heav^en — this 
will  make  thee  cry.  There  will  be  no  restraining  of 
prayer,  beloved,  when  we  have  got  a  due  sense  of  our 
soul's  poverty ;  but  because  we  think  w^e  are  rich  and 
increased  in  goods,  and  we  have  need  of  nothing,  there- 
fore it  is  that  we  restrain  prayer  before  God. 

How  well  it  would  be  for  us  if  before  prayer  we 
would  meditate  upon  the  past  with  regard  to  all  the 
mercies  we  have  had  during  the  day — what  courage 
that  would  give  us  to  ask  for  more !  the  deliverances  we 


174  Christian  Energy. 

have  experienced  through  our  life — how  boldly  should 
we  plead  to  be  delivered  yet  again  !  He  that  hath  been 
with  me  in  six  troubles  will  not  forsake  me  in  the 
seventh.  Do  but  remember  how  thou  didst  pass 
through  the  fires,  and  wast  not  burnt,  and  thou  shouldst 
be  confident  that  the  flame  will  not  kindle  upon  thee 
now.  Christian,  remember  how  when  thou  passedst 
through  the  rivers  aforetime  he  was  with  thee ;  and 
surely  thou  mayst  plead  with  him  to  deliver  thee  from 
the  flood  that  now  threatens  to  inundate  thee.  Think 
of  the  past  ages  too,  of  what  he  did  of  old,  when  he 
brought  forth  his  people  out  of  Egypt,  and  of  all  the 
mighty  deeds  which  he  has  done — are  they  not  written 
in  the  book  of  the  wars  of  the  Lord  ?  Plead  all  these, 
and  say  unto  him  in  thy  supplications  : — "  Oh  !  thou 
that  art  a  God  that  heareth  prayer,  hear  me,  and  now 
send  me  an  answer  of  peace  !  "  I  think,  without  need- 
ing to  point  that  arrow,  you  can  see  which  way  I  would 
shoot.  Because  we  do  not  come  to  the  throne  of  grace 
in  a  proper  state  of  supplication,  therefore  it  is  that  too 
often  we  restrain  prayer  before  God. 

Now,  thirdly,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  by  a  man  who  is 
conscious  of  his  own  error,  that  in  the  duty  of  prayer 
itself  we  are  too  often  straitened  in  our  own  bowels  and 
do  restrain  prayer.  Prayer  has  been  differently  divided 
by  different  authors.  We  might  roughly  say  of  it, 
prayer  consists,  first,  of  invocation,  "Our  Fathei',  which 
art  in  heaven."  We  begin  by  stating  the  title  and  our 
own  apprehension  of  the  glory  and  majesty  of  the  Per- 
son whom  we  address.  Do  you  not  think,  dear  friends, 
that  we  fail  here,  restrain  prayer  here  ?  Oh  !  how  we 
ought   to  sound  forth  his   praises !      I  think   on   the 


Restraining  Pt-aijer,  175 

Sabbath  it  is  always  the  minister's  special  duty  to  bring 
out  the  titles  of  the  Mighty  One — ''  King  of  kings, 
and  Lord  of  lords  I "  He  is  not  to  be  addressed  in 
common  terms.  How  should  we  endeavour,  as  we 
search  the  Scripture  through,  to  find  those  mighty 
phrases  which  the  ancient  saints  were  wont  to  apply 
to  Jehovah  !  And  how  should  we  make  his  temple 
ring  with  his  glory,  and  make  our  closet  full  of  that 
holy  adoration  with  which  prayer  must  always  be  linked. 
*'  Oh  1  good  heaven,"  I  think  the  rebuking  angel  might 
say,  "  thou  thinkest  that  he  is  even  such  a  one  as  thy- 
self, and  thou  talkest  not  to  him  as  to  the  God  of  the 
whole  earth,  but,  as  though  he  were  a  man,  thou  dost 
address  him  in  slighting  and  unseemly  terms."  Let 
all  our  invocations  come  more  deeply  from  our  souls' 
reverence  to  the  Most  High,  and  let  us  address  him  not 
in  high-sounding  words  of  fleshly  homage,  but  still  in 
words  which  set  forth  our  awe  and  our  reverence  while 
they  express  his  majesty  and  the  glory  of  his  holiness. 

From  invocation  we  usually  go  to  confession,  and 
how  often  do  we  fail  here !  Li  your  closet,  are  you 
in  the  habit  of  confessing  your  real  sins  to  God  ?  Do 
you  not  find,  brethren,  a  t-endency  to  acknowledge  that 
sin  which  is  common  to  all  men,  but  not  that  which  is 
certainly  peculiar  to  you  ?  We  are  all  Sauls  in  our 
way,  we  want  to  spare  the  best  of  the  cattle  and  the 
sheep ;  those  favourite  sins,  those  Agag  sins,  it  is  not 
so  easy  to  hew  them  in  pieces  before  the  Lord.  The 
right  eye  sin !  happy  is  that  Christian  who  has 
learned  to  pluck  it  out  by  confession.  The  right  hand 
sin  !  he  is  blessed  and  well  taught  who  aims  the  axe 
at  that  sin,  and  cuts  it  from    him.     But  no,   we  say 


176  Christian  Energy. 

we  have  sinned — we  are  willing  to  use  the  terms  of 
any  general  confession  that  any  church  may  publish ; 
but  to  say,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  I  love  the  world  and 
the  things  of  the  world;  I  am  covetous;"  or  to  say, 
"  Lord,  thou  knowest  I  was  envious  of  So-and-so,  be- 
cause he  shone  brighter  than  1  did  at  such-and-such  a 
public  meeting ;  Lord,  I  was  jealous  of  such-and-such 
a  member  of  the  church,  because  I  evidently  saw  that 
he  was  preferred  before  me  ;  "  and  for  the  husband  also 
to  confess  before  God  that  he  has  been  overbearing, 
that  he  has  spoken  rashly  to  a  child ;  for  a  wife  to 
acknowledge  that  she  has  been  wilful,  that  she  has  had 
a  fault — this  would  be  letting  out  prayer ;  but  the 
hiding  of  these  things  is  restraining  prayer,  and  w^e 
shall  surely  come  under  that  charge  of  having  re- 
strained prayer,  unless  we  make  our  private  confessions 
of  sin  very  explicit,  coming  to  the  point.  I  have 
thought,  in  teaching  children  in  the  Sabbath-school,  we 
should  not  so  much  talk  about  sin  as  the  sins  in  which 
children  most  commonly  indulge,  such  as  little  thefts, 
naughty  tempers,  disobedience  to  parents ;  these  are 
the  things  that  children  should  confess.  Men  in  the 
dawn  of  their  manhood  should  confess  those  ripening 
evil  imaginations,  those  lustful  things  that  rise  in  the 
heart ;  while  the  man  in  business  should  ever  make  this 
a  point,  to  see  most  to  the  sins  which  attack  business 
men.  I  have  no  doubt  that  I  might  be  very  easily  led 
in  my  confession  to  look  to  all  the  offences  I  may  have 
committed  against  the  laws  of  business,  because  I 
should  not  need  to  deal  very  hardly  with  myself  there, 
for  I  do  not  have  the  temptations  of  these  men ;  and 
I  should  not  wonder  if  some  of  you  merchants  will 


Restraining  Prayer.  177 

find  It  very  easy  to  examine  yourselves  according  to  a 
code  that  is  proper  to  me,  but  not  to  you.  Let  the 
workman  pray  to  God  as  a  workman,  and  confess  the 
sins  common  to  his  craft.  Let  the  trader  examine  him- 
self according  to  his  standing,  and  let  each  man  make 
his  confession  like  the  confessions  of  old,  when  every 
one  confessed  apart — the  mother  apart  and  thu  daughter 
apart,  the  father  apart  and  the  son  apart.  Let  each 
one  thus  make  a  clean  breast  of  the  matter,  and  I  am 
sure  there  will  not  be  so  much  need  to  say  we  have 
restrained  prayer  before  God. 

As  to  the  next  part  of  prayer,  which  is  petition, 
lamentably  indeed  do  we  all  fail.  We  have  not,  be- 
cause we  ask  not,  or  because  we  ask  amiss.  We  are 
ready  enough  to  ask  for  deliverance  from  trial,  but  how 
often  we  forget  to  ask  that  it  may  be  sanctified  to  us. 
We  are  quite  ready  to  say,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 
bread;"  how  often,  however,  do  we  fail  to  ask  that  he 
would  give  us  the  bread  which  cometh  down  from 
heaven,  and  enable  us  to  feed  blessedly — to  feed  upon 
his  flesh  and  his  blood  !  Brethren,  we  come  before  God 
with  such  little  desires,  and  the  desires  we  get  have 
such  little  fervency  in  them,  and  when  we  get  the  fer- 
vency we  so  often  fail  to  get  the  faith  which  grasps  the 
promise  and  believes  that  God  will  give,  that  in  all 
these  points,  when  we  come  to  the  matter  of  spreading 
our  wants  before  God,  we  restrain  prayer. 

Oh,  for  the  Luthers  that  can  shake  the  gates  of  heaven 
by  supplication  !  Oh,  for  men  that  can  lay  hold  upon  the 
golden  knocker  of  heaven's  gate,  and  make  it  ring  and 
ring  again  as  if  they  meant  it  to  be  heard !  Cold 
prayers  court  a  denial.     God  hears  by  fire,  and  the  God 


178  Christian  Energy. 

that  answers  by  fire  let  him  be  Gocl.  But  there  must 
be  prayer  in  Elijah's  heart  first — fire  in  Elijah's  heart 
first — before  the  fire  will  come  down  in  answer  to  the 
prayer.  Our  fervency  goeth  up  to  heaven,  and  then 
God's  gi'ace,  which  gave  us  the  fervency,  cometh  down 
and  giveth  it  the  answer. 

But  you  know,  too,  that  prayer  has  in  it — all  true 
prayer  has  in  it — thanksgiving.  "  Thine  is  the  kingdom 
and  the  power  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever."  What 
prayer  is  complete  without  the  doxology  ?  And  here, 
too,  we  restrain  prayer.  We  don't  praise,  and  bless, 
and  magnify  the  Lord  as  we  should.  If  our  hearts  were 
more  full  of  gratitude,  our  expressions  would  be  far 
more  noble  and  comprehensive  when  w^e  speak  forth  his 
praise.  I  wish  I  could  put  this  so  plainly  that  every 
Christian  might  mourn  on  account  of  his  sin,  and  mend 
his  ways.  But,  indeed,  it  is  only  mine  to  speak  ;  it  is 
my  Master's  to  open  your  eyes,  to  let  you  see,  and  to 
set  you  upon  the  solemnly  important  duty  of  self- 
examination.  In  this  respect  I  am  sure  even  the 
prayers  that  you  and  I  have  offered  to-day  may  well  cry 
out  against  us  and  say,  ''  Thou  hast  restrained  prayer." 

Yet,  again,  I  fear  also  we  must  all  join  in  acknow- 
ledging a  serious  fault  with  regard  to  the  after-part  of 
our  prayers.  When  prayer  is  done,  do  you  not  think 
we  very  much  restrain  it  ?  For  after  prayer  we  often 
go  into  the  world  immediatL4y — that  may  be  absolutely 
necessary — but  we  go  there,  and  leave  behind  us  what 
we  ought  to  carry  with  us.  When  we  have  got  into  a 
good  frame  in  prayer,  we  should  consider  that  this  is  like 
the  meat  which  the  angel  gave  to  Elijah  that  he  might 
go  on  his  journey — on  the  forty  days'  journey — in  its 


Restraining  Prayer,  179 

strength.  Have  we  felt  heavenly  minded?  yet  the 
moment  we  cross  the  threshold  and  get  into  the  family 
or  business,  where  is  the  heavenly  mind  ?  Oh,  to  get 
prayer,  inwrought  prayer — not  the  surface  prayer,  as 
though  it  were  a  sort  of  sacred  masquerading  after  all — 
to  have  it  inside,  in  the  warp  and  woof  of  our  being,  till 
prayer  becomes  a  part  of  ourselves ;  then,  brethren,  we 
have  not  restrained  it.  We  get  hot  in  our  closets — 
when  I  say  "  we,"  oh,  how  few  can  say  so  much  as  that  I 
— but  still  we  gQi  hot  in  our  closets,  and  go  out  into  the 
world,  into  the  draughts  of  its  temptations,  without 
wrapping  ourselves  about  with  promises,  and  we  catch 
well  nigh  our  death  of  cold.  Oh,  to  carry  that  heat  and 
fervour  with  us  I  You  know  as  you  carry  a  piece  of  hot 
iron  along,  how  it  begins  soon  to  return  to  its  common 
ordinary  appearance  and  the  heat  is  gone.  How  hot, 
then,  we  ought  to  make  ourselves  in  prayer,  that  we 
may  burn  the  longer ;  and  how  all  day  long  we  ought 
to  keep  thrusting  the  iron  into  the  fire  again,  so  that 
when  it  ceases  to  glow,  it  may  go  into  the  hot  embers 
once  more  and  the  flame  may  glow  upon  it,  and  we  may 
once  again  be  brought  into  a  vehement  heat.  But  we 
are  not  careful  enough  to  keep  up  the  grace  and  seek  to 
nurture  and  to  cherish  the  young  child,  which  God 
seems  to  give  in  the  morning  into  our  hands  that  we 
may  nurse  it  for  him. 

Old  Master  Dyer  speaks  of  locking  up  his  heart  by 
prayer  in  the  morning  and  giving  Christ  the  key.  I 
am  afraid  we  do  the  opposite — we  lock  up  our  hearts 
in  the  morning  and  give  the  devil  the  key,  and  think 
that  he  will  be  honest  enough  not  to  rob  us.  Ah !  it 
is  in  bad  hands  when  it  is  trusted  with  him ;  and  he 


180  Christian  Energy, 

keeps  filching  all  day  long  the  precious  things  that  were 
in  the  casket,  until  at  night  it's  all  empty,  and  needs 
to  be  filled  over  again.  Would  God  we  put  the  key  in 
Christ's  hands,  by  looking  up  to  him  all  the  day ! 

I  think,  too,  that  after  prayer  we  often  fail  in  un- 
belief. We  don't  expect  God  to  hear  us.  If  God  were 
to  hear  some  of  you,  you  would  be  more  surprised  than 
with  the  greatest  novelty  that  could  occur.  We  ask 
blessings,  but  do  not  think  of  having  them.  When  you 
and  I  were  children,  and  had  a  little  piece  of  garden, 
we  sowed  some  seed  one  day,  and  the  next  morning, 
before  breakfast,  we  went  to  see  if  it  was  up ;  and  the 
next  day,  seeing  that  no  appearance  of  the  green  blade 
could  be  discovered,  we  began  to  move  the  mould  to 
look  after  our  seeds.  Ah !  we  were  children  then.  I 
wish  we  were  children  now,  with  regard  to  our  prayers. 
We  should  go  out  the  next  morning  to  look  and  see  if 
they  had  begun  to  sprout,  and  disturb  the  ground  a  bit 
to  look  after  our  prayers,  for  fear  they  should  have 
miscarried.  Do  you  believe  God  hears  prayer?  I  saw 
the  other  day  in  a  newspaper,  a  little  sketch  concerning 
myself,  in  which  the  author,  who  is  evidently  very 
friendly,  gives  a  much  better  description  of  me  than  I 
deserve;  but  he  offers  me  one  rather  pointed  rebuke. 
It  would  appear  I  was  preaching  at  the  time  in  a  tent. 
Only  part  of  the  people  were  covered.  It  began  to  rain 
just  before  prayer,  and  one  petition  was,  "  O  Lord,  be 
pleased  to  grant  us  favourable  weather  for  this  service, 
and  command  the  clouds  that  they  rain  not  upon  this 
assembly."  Now  he  thought  this  very  preposterous. 
To  say  the  least,  it  was  rash,  if  not  blasphemous.  He 
admits  it  did  not  rain  a  drop  after  it.     Still,  of  course, 


Reitraining  Prayer.  181 

lie  did  not  infer  that  God  heard  and  answered  the 
]) raver.  If  I  had  asked  for  a  rain  of  grace,  it  had  been 
([uite  credible  that  God  would  send  that ;  but  when 
you  ask  him  not  to  send  you  a  temporal  rain,  that  is 
fanaticism.  To  think  that  God  meddles  with  the  clouds 
at  the  wish  of  a  man,  or  that  he  may  answer  us  in  tem- 
poral things,  is  pronounced  absurd.  I  bless  God,  how- 
ever, that  I  fully  believe  the  absurdity,  preposterous  as 
it  may  appear.  I  know  that  God  hears  prayer  in  tem- 
poral things.  I  know  it  by  as  clear  a  demonstration 
as  ever  proposition  in  Euclid  was  solved.  I  know  it 
l)y  abundant  facts  and  incidents  which  my  own  life  has 
revealed.  God  does  hear  prayer.  The  majority  of 
people  do  not  think  that  he  does.  At  least,  if  he  does, 
they  suppose  that  it  is  in  some  high,  clerical,  mysterious, 
unknown  sense.  As  to  ordinary  things  ever  happening 
as  the  result  of  prayer,  they  account  it  a  delusion. 
^'The  bank  of  faith!"  How  many  have  said  it  is  a 
bank  of  nonsense ;  and  yet  there  are  many  who  have 
been  able  to  say,  "  We  could  write  as  good  a  book  as 
Huntington's  '  Bank  of  Faith,'  that  would  be  no  more 
believed  than  Huntington's  Bank  was,  though  it  might 
be  even  more  true." 

We  restrain  prayer,  I  am  sure,  by  not  believing  our 
God.  We  ask  a  favour,  wdiich,  if  gi'anted,  we  should 
attribute  to  accident  rather  than  ascribe  it  to  grace, 
and  we  do  not  receive  it ;  then  the  next  time  we  come 
of  course  we  cannot  pray,  because  unbelief  has  cut  the 
sinews  of  prayer,  and  left  us  powerless  before  the  throne. 

My  dear  friends,  is  it  not  very  clear  that  in  many 
of  our  daily  actions  we  do  that  which  necessitates 
restrained  prayer  ? 


182  Christian  Energy, 

You  are  a  professor  of  religion.  After  you  have 
been  to  a  party  of  ungodly  people,  can  you  pray^^ 
You  are  a  merchant,  and  profess  to  be  a  follower  of 
Christ;  when  you  engage  in  a  hazardous  speculation, 
and  you  know  you  ought  not,  can  you  pray  ?  Or  when 
you  have  had  a  heavy  loss  in  business,  and  will  repine 
against  God,  and  will  not  say,  "  The  Lord  gave  and  the 
Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord" — can  you  pray?  Pity  the  man  that  can  sin 
and  pray  too.  In  a  certain  sense,  Brooks  was  right  when 
he  said,  "  Praying  will  make  you  leave  off  sinning,  or 
else  sin  will  make  you  leave  off  praying."  Of  course  that 
is  not  meant  in  the  absolute  sense  of  the  term ;  but  as 
to  certain  sins,  especially  gross  sins — and  some  of  the 
sins  to  which  God's  people  are  liable  are  gross  sins — I 
am  certain  they  cannot  come  before  their  Father's  face 
with  the  confidence  they  had  before,  after  having  been 
rolling  in  the  mire,  or  wandering  in  the  By-path 
Meadow.  Look  at  your  own  child ;  he  meets  you  in 
the  morning  with  a  smiling  face,  so  pleased ;  he  asks 
what  he  likes  of  you,  and  you  give  it  him.  He  has 
been  doing  wrong,  he  knows  he  has ;  and  you  frowned 
on  him ;  you  have  chastened  him.  How  does  he  come  ? 
He  may  come  because  he  is  a  child,  and  with  tears  in 
his  eyes  because  he  is  a  penitent ;  but  he  cannot  ask 
with  the  power  he  once  had.  Look  at  a  king's  favour- 
ite ;  as  long  as  he  feels  he  is  in  the  king's  favour,  he 
\fi\\  take  up  your  suit  and  plead  for  you.  Ask  him  to- 
morrow wliether  he  will  do  you  a  good  turn,  he  says, 
"  No,  I  am  out  of  favour ;  I  don't  feel  as  if  I  could 
speak  now."  A  Christian  is  not  out  of  covenant  favour, 
but  he  may  be  experimentally  under  a  cloud ;  he  loses 


Restraining  Prayer,  183 

the  light  of  God's  countenance ;  and  then  he  feels  he 
cannot   plead,    his   prayers   hecome  weak  and   feeble. 
Take  heed  unto   yourselves,   and  consider  your  ways. 
The  path  of  declension  is  very  abrupt  in  some  parts. 
We  may  go  on  gradually  declining  in  prayer  till  faith 
grows  weak,  and  love  cold,  and  patience  is  exhausted. 
We   may  go  on  for  years,  and  maintain  a  consistent 
profession,   but  all  of   a  sudden  the  road  which    had 
long  been  descending  at  a  gradual  incline  may  come 
to  a  precipice,    and  we  may  fall,  and  that  when  we 
little  think  of  it;  we   ma/ have   ruined   our   reputa- 
tion,   blasted  our   comfort,    destroyed  our   usefulness, 
and  we  may  have  to  go  to  our  graves  with  a  sword 
in   our   bones   because   of  sin.     Stop   while  you  may 
—stop,  believer.     Now   stop,    and   guard   against  the 
temptation.      I    charge   you   by   the   trials   you   must 
meet  with,   by  the  temptations  that  surround  you,  by 
the  corniptions  that  are  within,  by  the  assaults  that 
come  from    hell,   and  by  the  trials    that   come   from 
heaven,  watch  in  this  matter—"  Watch  and  pray,  lest 
ye  enter   into  temptation."     To  this  church  I    speak 
especially.     What  hath  God  wrought  for  us  !     When 
we  were  a  few  people,  what  intense  agony  of  prayer 
we  had !    We  have  had  prayer-meetings  in  Park  Street 
that  have  moved  our  souls.     Every  man  seemed  like  a 
crusader  besieging  Jerusalem,  each  man  determined  to 
storm  the  Celestial  City  by  the  might  of  intercession  ; 
and  the  blessing  came  upon  us,  such  that  we  had  not 
room  to  receive  it.     The   hallowed  cloud  rests  o'er  us 
still ;  the  holy  drops  still  fall.    Will  ye  now  cease  from 
intercession  ?    At  the  borders  of  the  promised  land  will 
ye  turn  back  to  the   wilderness,  when  God  is  with  us, 


184  Cluistian  Energy/. 

and  the  standard  of  a  King  is  in  the  midst  of  our 
armies  ?  Will  ye  now  fail  in  the  day  of  trial  ?  Who 
knoweth  but  ye  have  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a 
time  as  this  ?  Who  knoweth  but  that  he  will  preserve 
in  the  land  a  small  company  of  poor  people  who  fear 
God  intensely,  hold  the  faith  earnestly,  and  love  God 
vehemently ;  that  infidelity  may  be  driven  from  the  high 
places  of  the  earth ;  that  Naphtali  again  may  be  a 
people  made  triumphant  in  the  high  places  of  the  field? 
God  of  heaven,  grant  this !  Oh,  let  us  restrain  prayer 
no  longer !  You  that  have  never  prayed,  may  you  be 
taught  to  pray.  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner," 
uttered  from  your  heart,  with,  your  eye  upon  the  cross, 
will  bring  you  a  gracious  answer,  and  ye  shall  go  on 
your  way  rejoicing. 


'^ifliwm  ^i^wmikl 


"  Holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord," — 

Hebrews  xii.  14. 

NE  feels  most  happy  when  blowing  the  trumpet 
of  jubilee,  proclaiming  peace  to  broken  hearts, 
freedom  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of 
the  prisons  to  them  that  are  bound.  But 
God's  watchman  has  another  trumpet,  which 
he  must  sometimes  blow  ;  for  thus  saith  the 
Lord  unto  him : — "  Sound  an  alarm  in 
Zion,  sound  an  alarm  in  my  holy  mountain."  Times 
there  are  when  we  must  ring  the  tocsin;  men  must  be 
startled  from  their  sleep ;  they  must  be  roused  up  to 
inquire  : — "  What  are  we  ?  Where  are  we  ?  Whither 
are  we  going  ?  "  Nor  is  it  altogether  amiss  for  the 
wisest  virgins  to  look  to  the  oil  in  their  vessels,  and  for 
the  soundest  Christians  to  be  sometimes  constrained  to 
examine  the  foundations  of  their  hope,  to  trace  back 
their  evidences  to  the  beginning,  and  make  an  impartial 
sun-ey  of  their  state  before  God.  Partly  for  this 
reason,  but  with  a  further  view  to  the  awakening  and 
stirring  up  of  tliose  who  are  destitute  of  all  holiness, 
1  have  selected  for  our  topic,  "  Holiness,  without  which 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 


186  Christian  Energy, 

There  lias  been  a  desperate  attempt  made  by  certain 
Antinomians  to  get  rid  of  the  injunction  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  here  means  to  enforce.  They  have  said 
this  is  the  imputed  holiness  of  Christ.  Do  they  not 
know,  when  they  so  speak,  that,  by  an  open  perversion, 
they  utter  that  which  is  false  ?  I  do  not  suppose  that 
any  man  in  his  senses  can  apply  that  interpretation  to 
the  verse,  "  Follow  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness." 
Now,  the  holiness  meant  is  evidently  one  that  can  be 
followed  like  peace ;  and  it  must  be  transparent  to  any 
ingenuous  man  that  it  is  something  which  is  the  act 
and  duty  of  the  person  who  foUow^s  it.  We  are  to 
follow  peace ;  this  is  practical  peace,  not  the  peace  made 
for  us,  but  "  the  fruit  of  righteousness  which  is  sown 
in  peace  of  them  that  make  peace."  We  are  to  follow 
holiness — this  must  be  practical  holiness  too ;  the  oppo- 
site of  impurity,  a^  it  is  written,  "  God  hath  not  called 
us  to  uncleanness,  but  to  holiness."  The  holiness  of 
Christ  is  not  a  thing  to  follow  ;  I  mean  if  we  look  at  it 
imputatively.  That  we  have  at  once ;  it  is  given  to  us 
the  moment  we  believe.  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is 
not  to  be  followed ;  it  is  bestowed  upon  the  soul  in  the 
instant  when  it  lays  hold  of  Christ  Jesus.  This  is 
another  kind  of  holiness.  It  is,  in  fact,  as  every  one 
can  see  who  chooses  to  read  the  connection,  practical, 
vital  holiness  which  is  the  purport  of  this  admonition. 
It  is  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  and  obedience  to 
the  Lord's  command.  It  is,  in  fine,  the  Spirit's  work  in 
the  soul,  by  which  a  man  is  made  like  God,  and  be- 
comes a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  being  delivered 
from  the  corruption  which  is  in  the  world  through  lust. 
No  straining,   no   hacking   at   the   text  can   alter   it. 


Holiness  Demanded,  187 

There  it  stands,  whether  men  like  it  or  not.  There  are 
some  who,  for  especial  reasons  best  known  to  themselves, 
do  not  like  it ;  just  as  no  thieves  ever  like  policemen  or 
gaols — yet  there  it  stands,  and  it  means  no  other  than 
what  it  says  :  "  Without  holiness  " — practical,  personal, 
active,  vital  holiness — *'  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 
Dealing  with  this  solemn  assertion,  fearfully  exclusive 
as  it  is,  shutting  out  as  it  does  so  many  professors  from 
all  communion  with  God  on  earth  and  all  enjoyment  of 
Christ  in  heaven,  I  shall  endeavour,  first,  to  give  some 
marks  and  signs  whereby  a  man  may  know  wdiether  he 
hath  this  holiness  or  not ;  secondly,  to  give  sundry 
reasons  by  way  of  improvement  of  the  solemn  fact, 
"  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord ; "  and 
then,  thirdly,  to  plead  hard  in  Christ's  stead  with  those 
who  are  lovers  of  gain,  that  they  may  bethink  them- 
selves ere  time  be  over  and  opportunity  past. 

I.  First,  then,  brethren,  ye  are  anxious  to  know 
whether  ye  have  holiness  or  not.  Now,  if  our  text  said 
that  without  perfection  of  holiness  no  man  could  have 
any  communion  with  Christ,  it  would  shut  every  one  of 
us  out,  for  no  one,  who  knows  his  own  heart,  ever  pre- 
tends to  be  perfectly  conformed  to  God's  will.  It  does 
not  say,  "  Perfection  of  holiness,"  mark ;  but  "  holiness." 
This  holiness  is  a  thing  of  growth.  It  may  be  in  the 
soul  as  the  grain  of  mustard-seed,  and  yet  not  developed ; 
it  may  be  in  the  heart  as  a  wish  and  a  desire,  rather 
than  anything  that  has  been  fully  realised — a  groaning, 
a  panting,  a  longing,  a  striving.  As  the  Spirit  of  God 
waters  it,  it  will  grow  till  the  mustard-seed  shall  become 
a  tree.  Holiness,  in  a  regenerate  heart,  is  but  an 
infant ;  it  is  not  matured — perfect  it  is  in  all  its  parts, 


188  Christian   Energy. 

but  not  perfect  in  its  development.  Hence,  when  we 
find  many  imperfections  and  many  failings  in  ourseh'ts, 
we  are  not  to  conclude  that,  therefore,  we  have  no 
interest  in  the  grace  of  God.  This  would  be  altogether 
apart  from  the  meaning  of  the  text.  As  it  is  not  so 
much  my  present  purpose  to  show  wdiat  this  holiness  is 
as  what  it  is  not,  I  think,  while  I  am  endeavouring  to 
undeceive  those  who  have  not  this  holiness,  those  who 
are  not  condemned  may  reasonably  draw  some  comfort- 
able inferences  as  to  their  own  pursuit  of  this  inesti- 
mable grace. 

Well,  now,  let  us  note  four  sorts  of  people  who  try 
to  get  on  without  holiness.  First,  there  is  the  Pharisee, 
The  Pharisee  goes  to  work  with  outward  ceremonies. 
He  pays  tithes  of  all  that  he  possesses — his  anise,  his 
mint,  his  cummin — everything,  even  to  the  tithe  of  his 
parsley-bed,  he  gives.  He  gives  alms  to  the  poor,  he 
wears  his  phylacteries,  and  makes  broad  the  borders  of 
his  garment — in  fact,  anything  and  everything  that  is 
commanded  ceremonially  he  most  pnnctiliously  attends 
to ;  but  all  the  while  he  is  devouring  widows'  houses,  he 
is  living  in  the  practice  of  secret  sin,  and  he  thinks  that 
by  ceremonies  he  shall  be  able  to  propitiate  God  and 
be  accepted.  Sinner,  pharisaic  sinner,  hear  the  death- 
knell  of  thy  hopes  tolled  out  by  this  verse—"  Without 
holiness" — and  that  is  a  thing  thou  knowest  nothing 
of — "no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Thy  ceremonies 
are  vain  and  frivolous;  even  if  God  ordained  them, 
seeing  thou  puttest  thy  trust  in  them,  they  shall  utterly 
deceive  and  fail  thee,  for  they  do  not  constitute  even  a 
part  of  holiness.  Thou  canst  not  see  God  till  thy  heart 
be    changed,    till   thy   nature    be   renewed,   till   thine 


Holiness  Demanded,  189 

actions,  in  the  tenor  of  them,  shall  become  such  as 
God  would  have  them  to  be.  Mere  ceremonialists 
think  they  can  get  on  without  holiness.  Fell  delusion ! 
Do  I  speak  to  any  Ritualist  who  finds  himself  awkwardly 
situated  here  ?  Do  I  speak  to  any  Romanist  who 
has  entered  into  a  place  where  not  the  works  of  the 
law,  but  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  preached  '^ 
Let  me  remind  you  again,  very  solemnly,  my  hearer, 
that  those  fine  hopes  of  yours,  built  upon  the  manoeuvres 
of  the  priests,  and  upon  your  own  performances,  shall 
utterly  fail  you  in  that  day  when  most  you  shall  need 
them.  Your  soul  shall  then  stand  in  shivering  naked- 
ness when  most  you  need  to  be  well  equipped  before 
the  eyes  of  God.     These  men  know  not  true  holiness. 

Then  there  is  the  moralist.  He  has  never  done  any- 
thing wrong  in  his  life.  He  is  not  very  observant  of 
ceremonies,  it  is  true ;  perhaps  he  even  despises  them  ; 
but  he  treats  his  neighbour  with  integrity,  he  believes 
that,  so  far  as  he  knows,  if  his  ledger  be  examined  it 
bears  no  evidence  of  a  sino-le  dishonest  deed.  As 
touching  the  law  he  is  blameless  :  no  one  ever  doubted 
the  purity  of  his  manner ;  from  his  youth  up  his  car- 
riage has  been  amiable,  his  temperament  what  every 
one  could  desire,  and  the  whole  tenor  of  his  life  is  such 
that  we  may  hold  him  up  as  an  example  of  moral  pro- 
priety. Ah,  but  this  is  not  holiness  before  God.  Holi- 
ness excludes  immorality,  but  morality  does  not  amount 
to  holiness  ;  for  morality  may  be  but  the  cleaning  of  the 
outside  of  the  cup  and  the  platter,  while  the  heart  may 
be  full  of  wickedness.  Holiness  deals  with  the  thoughts 
and  intents,  the  purposes,  the  aims,  the  objects,  the 
motives  of  men.     Morality  doth  but  skim  the  surface, 


190  Christian  Energy. 

holiness  goes  into  the  veiy  caverns  of  the  great  deep ; 
hoUness  requires  that  the  heart  be  set  on  God,  and  that 
it  beat  with  love  to  him.  The  moral  man  may  be  complete 
in  his  morality  without  that.  Methinks  I  might  di-aw 
such  a  parallel  as  this.  Morality  is  a  sweet,  fair  corpse, 
well  washed  and  robed,  and  even  embalmed  with  spices ; 
but  holiness  is  the  living  man,  as  fair  and  as  lovely  as  the 
other,  but  having  life.  Morality  lies  there,  of  the 
earth,  earthy,  soon  to  be  food  for  corruption  and 
worms ;  holiness  waits  and  pants  with  heavenly  aspira- 
tions, prepared  to  mount  and  dwell  in  immortality 
beyond  the  stars.  These  twain  are  of  opposite  nature : 
the  one  belongs  to  this  world,  the  other  belongs  to  that 
world  beyond  the  skies.  It  is  not  said  in  heaven, 
"  Moral,  moral,  moral  ai't  thou,  O  God !  "  but  "  Holy, 
holy,  holy  art  thou,  O  Lord ! "  You  note  the  difference 
between  the  two  words  at  once.  The  one  how  icy 
cold!  the  other,  oh,  how  animated!  Such  is  mere 
morality,  and  such  is  holiness !  Moralist  I — I  know  I 
speak  to  many  such — remember  that  your  best  morality 
will  not  save  you ;  you  must  have  more  than  this,  for 
without  holiness — and  that  not  of  yourself,  it  must  be 
given  you  of  the  Spirit  of  God — without  holiness  no 
man  shall  see  the  Lord. 

Another  individual  who  thinks  to  get  on  without 
holiness,  and  who  does  win  a  fair  reputation  in  certain 
circles,  is  the  experimentalist.  You  must  be  aware  that 
there  are  some  professed  followers  of  Christ  whose 
whole  religious  life  is  inward;  to  tell  you  the  truth, 
there  is  no  life  at  all ;  but  their  own  profession  is  that 
it  is  all  inward.  I  have  had  the  misery  to  be  .-acquainted 
with  one  or  two  such.     They  are  voluble  talkers,  dis- 


Holiness  Demanded,  101 

coursing  with  much  satisfaction  of  themselves,  but 
bitter  critics  of  all  who  differ  from  them  in  the 
slightest  degree ;  having  an  ordained  standard  as  to 
the  proper  length  to  which  Christian  experience  shoukl 
go ;  cutting  off  everybody's  head  who  was  taller  than 
they  were,  and  stretching  every  man  out  by  the  neck 
who  happened  to  be  a  little  too  short.  I  have  known 
some  of  these  persons.  If  a  minister  should  say  "  duty  " 
in  the  sermon,  they  would  look  as  if  they  would  never 
hear  him  again.  He  must  be  a  dead  legalist — a  "  letter 
man,"  I  think  they  call  him.  Or,  if  they  are  exhorted 
to  holiness,  why,  they  tell  you  they  are  perfect  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  therefore  there  is  no  reason  why  they  should 
liave  any  thought  of  perfection  in  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  within.  Groaning,  grunting,  quarrelling,  de- 
nouncing— not  "  following  peace  with  all,"  but  stirring 
up  strife  against  all — this  is  the  practice  of  their 
reh'gion.  This  is  the  summit  to  which  they  climb,  and 
from  which  they  look  down  with  undisguised  contempt 
upon  all  those  worms  beneath  who  are  striving  to  serve 
God  and  to  do  good  in  their  day  and  generation.  Now 
I  pray  you  to  remember  that  against  such  men  as  these 
there  are  many  passages  of  Scripture  most  distinctly 
levelled  ;  1  think  this  is  one  among  many  others.  Sirs, 
you  may  say  what  you  will  about  what  you  dream  you 
have  felt,  you  may  write  what  you  please  about  what  you 
iancy  you  have  experienced ;  but  if  your  own  outward 
life  be  unjust,  unholy,  ungenerous,  and  unloving,  you 
shall  find  no  credit  among  us  as  to  your  being  in  Christ. 
*'  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  The 
moment  you  know  a  man  that  is  drunk  on  a  Saturday 
night,   and  then    enjoys    So-and-so's    preaching   on   a 


192  Christian  Energy. 

Sunday;  the  moment  you  know  certain  parties  who 
can  tell  you  what  a  child  of  God  should  be,  and  then 
appears  himself  exactly  what  he  should  not  be,  just 
quit  his  company  and  let  him  go  to  his  own  place,  and 
where  that  is  Judas  can  tell  you.  Oh,  beware  of  such 
high-fliers,  with  their  waxen  wings,  mounting  up  to  the 
very  sun — how  great  shall  be  their  fall,  when  he  that 
searches  all  hearts  shall  open  the  book  and  say,  "  I  was 
an  hungred,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat ;  I  was  thirsty, 
and  ye  gave  me  no  drink.  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not 
unto  one  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  not  to  me." 

There  is  another  class  of  persons,  happily  fewer  than 
they  once  were,  but  still  there  are  some  among  us  still — 
opi7iionists,  who  think  they  can  do  without  holiness. 
These,  too,  it  has  sometimes  been  my  misfortune  to 
know.  They  have  learned  a  sound  creed,  or  perhaps 
an  unsound  one,  for  there  are  as  many  Arminians  as 
Calvinists  in  this  line — they  think  they  have  got  hold 
of  the  truth,  that  they  are  the  men,  and  that  when  they 
die  the  faithful  will  fail  from  among  men.  They 
understand  theology  very  accurately.  They  are  wiser 
than  their  teachers.     They  can 

"  A  hair  divide 
Betwixt  the  west  and  north-west  side." 

There  is  no  question  about  their  being  masters  in 
divinity.  If  degrees  went  according  to  merit,  they 
would  have  been  dubbed  "  D.D."  years  ago,  for  they 
know  everything,  and  are  not  a  little  proud  that  they 
do.  And  yet  these  men  live  a  life  that  is  a  stench  even 
in  the  nostrils  of  men  who  make  no  profession  of 
rehgion.  We  have  some  of  this  kind  in  all  congi'ega- 
tions.     I  wish  you  would  not  come  here.    If  one  could 


Holiness  Demanded.  193 

do  you  good  we  might  be  glad  to  see  you,  but  then  you 
do  so  much  hurt  to  the  rest,  and  bring  so  much  discredit 
upon  the  cause  at  large  that  your  room  would  be  better 
than  your  company.  You  listen  to  the  sermon,  and 
sometimes  perhaps  have  the  condescension  to  speak  well 
of  the  preacher,  who  wishes  you  would  not.  Yet  after 
the  sermon  is  done,  on  the  road  home,  there  may  be  a 
public-house  door  just  opened  at  one  o'clock,  and  the 
brother  refreshes  himself,  and  perhaps  does  so  many 
times.  Even  if  it  be  the  holy  day  it  is  all  the  same,  and 
yet  he  is  a  dear  and  precious  child  of  God.  No  doubt 
he  is  in  his  own  estimation.  And  then  during  the 
week  he  lives  as  others  live,  and  acts  as  others  act,  and 
yet  congratulates  himself  that  he  knows  the  tmth, 
and  understands  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  there- 
fore he  will  surely  be  saved!  Out  with  thee,  man! 
out  with  thee!  Down  with  thy  hopes!  '^AVithout 
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 

"  No  big  words  of  ready  talkers, 

No  mere  doctrines  will  suffice  ; 

Broken  hearts,  and  humble  walkers — 

These  are  dear  in  Jesus'  eyes.'' 

Heart-work,  carried  out  afterwards  into  life-work,  this 
is  what  the  Lord  wants.  You  may  perish  as  well  with 
true  doctrines  as  with  false,  if  you  pervert  the  true 
doctrine  into  licentiousness.  You  may  go  to  hell  by  the 
cross  as  surely  as  you  may  by  the  theatre,  or  by  the 
vilest  of  sin.  You  may  perish  with  the  name  of  Jesus 
on  your  lips,  and  with  a  sound  creed  sealed  on  your 
very  bosom,  for,  "  except  a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God."  "  Be  not  deceived  ;  God  is 
not  mocked;  whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he 

13 


194  Christian  Energy, 

also  reap."  Now  if  any  of  you  belong  to  eitlier  of  these 
four  classes,  I  think  you  cannot  help  knowmg  it,  and, 
being  destitute  of  gospel  holiness,  you  have  good  cause 
to  bewail  your  character  and  tremble  for  your  destiny. 
But  to  help  you  still  further,  brethren,  that  man  is 
destitute  of  true  holiness  ivho  can  look  hack  upon  his  own 
past  sin  ivithout  sorrow.  Oh,  to  think  of  our  past  lives  ! 
There  were  some  of  us  who  knew  the  Lord  at  fifteen 
years  of  age,  but  those  fifteen  years  of  unregeneracy — 
we  can  never  forget  them  I  Others  may  say,  "  \Ye  did 
not  know  him  till  we  were  fifty  or  sixty."  Ah !  my 
dear  brethren,  you  have  much  to  weep  over,  but  so 
have  those  of  us  who  knew  tlie  Lord  in  early  life.  I 
can  look  back  upon  God's  mercy  with  delight,  but  I 
hope  I  shall  never  be  able  to  look  back  upon  my  sins 
with  complacency.  Whenever  a  man  looks  to  any  of 
his  past  faults  and  shortcomings,  it  ought  to  be  through 
his  tears.  Some  men  recall  their  past  lives  and  talk  of 
their  old  sins,  and  seem  to  roll  them  under  their  tongues 
as  a  sweet  morsel.  They  live  their  sins  over  again.  As 
it  was  said  of  Alexander — 

*'  He  fought  his  battles  o'er  again, 
And  twice  he  slew  the  slain." 

There  are  those  who  revel  in  the  memory  of  their 
iniquities.  They  live  their  life  in  imagination  over 
again.  They  recollect  some  deed  of  lewdness  or  some 
act  of  infamy,  and  as  they  think  it  over  they  dare 
not  repeat  it,  for  their  profession  would  be  spoiled ; 
but  they  love  the  thought  and  cultivate  it  ^vith  a 
vicious  partiality.  Thou  art  no  friend  to  true  holi- 
ness, but  an  utter  stranger  to  it  unless  the  past  causes 


Holiness  DemandetL  195 

tliee  profound  sorrow  and  sends  thee  to  tliy  knees  to 
weep  and  hope  that  God  for  Christ's  sake  has  blotted 
it  out. 

And  I  am  quite  sure  that  you  know  nothing  of  true 
holiness  if  you  can  look  forward  to  any  future  indulgence 
of  sensual  appetites  loith  a  certain  degree  of  delightful 
witicipafion.  Have  I  a  man  here,  a  professed  Christian, 
who  has  formed  some  desimi  in  his  mind  to  indulofe  the 
flesh  and  to  enjoy  forbidden  dainties  when  an  oppor- 
tunity occurs  ?  Ah!  sir,  if  thou  canst  think  of  those 
things  that  may  come  in  thy  way  without  tremor,  I 
suspect  thee:  I  would  thou  wouldst  suspect  thyself. 
Since  the  day  that  some  of  us  knew  Christ  w^e  have 
always  woke  up  in  the  morning  with  a  fear  lest  we 
should  that  day  disown  our  Master.  And  there  is  one 
fear  which  sometimes  haunts  me,  and  I  must  confess  it, 
and  were  it  not  for  faith  in  God  it  would  be  too  much 
for  me.  I  cannot  read  the  life  of  ]3avid  without  some 
painful  emotions.  All  the  time  he  was  a  young  man 
his  life  was  pure  before  God,  and  in  the  light  of  the 
living  it  shone  with  a  glorious  lustre  ;  but  when  grey 
hairs  began  to  be  scattered  on  his  head,  the  man  after 
God's  heart  sinned.  I  have  sometimes  felt  inclined  to 
pray  that  my  life  may  come  to  a  speedy  end,  lest  haply 
in  some  evil  hour  some  temptation  should  come  upon 
me  and  I  should  fall.  And  do  you  not  feel  the  same  ? 
Can  you  look  forward  to  the  future  without  any  fear  ? 
Does  not  the  thought  ever  cross  your  mind — "  He  that 
thinketh  he  standeth  may  yet  fall"?  and  the  very 
possibility  of  such  a  thing — does  it  not  drive  you  to 
God's  mercy-seat,  and  do  you  not  cry,  "  Hold  thou 
me  up  and  I  shall  be  safe"?     There  is  no  doxology 


196  Christian  Energy, 

in  Scripture  which  I  enjoy  more  than  that — '*  Now 
unto  him  who  is  able  to  keep  you  from  falhng,  and 
to  present  you  faultless  before  his  presence  with  ex- 
ceeding joy,  to  him  be  glory."  I  say  you  are  a  stranger 
to  holiness  of  heart  if  you  can  look  forward  to  a  future 
fall  without  great  alarm. 

Again,  methinks  you  have  gi-eat  cause  for  question- 
ing, unless  your  lioliness  is   imiform;  I  mean,  if  your 
life  is  angelic  abroad  and  devilish  at  home.     You  must 
suspect  that  it  is  at  home  that  you  are  what  you  are, 
I  question  whether  any  man  is  much  better  than  he  is 
thought  to  be  by  his  wife  and  family,  for  they,  after  all, 
see  the  most  of  us,  and  know  the  tnith  about  us ;  and 
if,  sir,  though  you  seem  in  the  pulpit,  or  on  the  plat- 
form, or  in  the  shop,  to  be  amiable.  Christian,  and  God- 
like to   the   passer-by,    your  children    should  have  to 
mark  your  unkindness,  your  want  of  fatherly  affection 
for  their  souls ;  and  your  wife  has  to  complain  of  your 
domineering,  of  the  absence  of  ever}^thing  that  is  Christ- 
like, you  may  shrewdly  suspect  that  there  is  something 
wrong  in  the  state  of  your  heart.     O  sirs,  true  holiness 
is  a  thing  that  will  keep  by  night  and  by  day,  at  home 
and  abroad,  on  the  land  and  on  the  sea.     That  man  is 
not  right  ^^^[th  God  who  would  not  do  the  same  in  the 
dark  that  he  would  do  in  the  light ;  who  does  not  feel, 
"  If  every  eye  should  look  upon  me  I   would  not  be 
different  from  what  I  am  when  no  eye  gazes  upon  me ; 
that  which  keeps  me  right  is  not  the  judgment  and 
opinions  of  men,  but  the  eye  of  the  Omnipresent  and 
the  heart   of  the  Supreme   that  loves   me."     Is   your 
obedience   uniform?      Some   farmers    I    know    in   the 
country  maintain  a  creditable  profession  in  the  village 


Holiness  Demanded,  197 

where  they  live ;  they  go  to  a  place  of  worship,  and 
very   good   people  they  are  :   but  there  is  a  farmers' 
dinner  once  a-year ;  it  is  only  once  a-year — we  will  not 
sav  anything  about  how  they  get  home — the  less  that 
is  said  the  better  for  their  reputation.    "  It  is  only  once 
a-year,"  they  tell  us ;  but  holiness   does  not  allow  of 
dissipation  even   "once  a-year."     And  we  know  some 
who,  when  they  go  on  the  Continent,  for  instance,  say, 
"  Well,  we  need  not  be  quite  so  exact  there  ; "  and 
therefore  the   Sabbath  is  utterly  disregarded,  and  the 
sanctities  of  daily  life  are  neglected,  so  reckless  are  they 
in  their  recreations.     Well,  sirs,  if  your  religion  is  not 
warranted  to  keep  in  any  climate  it  is  good  for  nothing. 
I  like  the  remark  which  I  heard  from  one  of  the  sailors 
on  board  ship  in  crossing  the  Irish  Channel.     A  pas- 
senger said,  to  try  him,  *'  Wouldn't  you  like  to  attend 
a  certain  place  of  amusement  ? "  which  he  mentioned. 
"Well,  sir,"  said  the  sailor,  "I  go  there  as  often  as 
ever  I  like ;  I  have  a  religion  that  lets  me  go  as  often 
as  I  think  proper."     "  Oh,  how  is  that?"  he  inquired. 
"  Because  I  never  like  to  go  at  all,"  was  the  reply ;  "  I 
do  not  keep  away  because  of  any  law,  for  it  is  no  trial 
to  me  ;  but  I  should  be  unhappy  to  go  there."     Surely 
the  fish,  were  it  asked  if  it  did  not  wish  to  fly,  would 
reply,  *'  I  am  not  unhappy  because  I  am  not  allowed 
to  fly ;  it  is  not  my  element."     So  the  Christian  can 
say,  "  I  am  not  unhappy  because  I  do  not  spend  my 
nights  in  worldly  society — because  I  do  not  mingle  with 
their  revelry  and  wantonness  ;  it  is  not  my  element,  and 
I  could  not  enjoy  it.     Should  you  drag  me  into  it,  it 
would  be  a  martyrdom  which  to  my  spirit  would  be  alike 
repulsive  and  painful."     You  are  a  stranger  to  holiness 


198  Christian  Energy, 

if  your  heart  does  not  feel  that  it  revolts  at  the  thought 
of  sin. 

Then,  let  me  further  remark,  that  those  who  can  look 
with  delight  or  any  degree  of  pleasure  upon  the  sins  of 
others  are  not  holy.  We  know  of  some  who  will  not 
lend  themselves  to  perpetrate  an  unseemly  jest,  yet  if 
another  does  so,  and  there  is  a  laugh  excited  upon 
some  not  over-decent  remark,  tliey  laugh,  and  thus  give 
sanction  to  the  impropriety.  If  there  is  a  low  song 
sung  in  their  hearing,  which  others  applaud,  though 
they  cannot  quite  go  the  length  of  joining  in  the 
plaudits,  still  they  secretly  enjoy  it ;  they  betray  a  sort 
of  gratification  that  they  cannot  disguise ;  they  confess 
to  a  gusto  that  admires  the  wit  while  it  cannot  endorse 
the  sentiment.  They  are  glad  the  minister  was  not 
there ;  they  are  glad  to  think  the  deacon  did  not  happen 
to  see  them  just  at  that  moment;  yet  still,  if  there  could 
be  a  law  established  to  make  the  thing  pretty  respect- 
able, they  would  not  mind.  Some  of  you  know  people 
who  fall  into  this  snare.  There  are  professing  Christians 
who  go  where  you  at  one  time  could  not  go,  but  seeing 
that  they  do  it,  you  go  too,  and  there  you  see  others 
engaged  in  sin,  and  it  becomes  respectable  because  you 
give  it  countenance.  There  are  many  things  in  this 
world  that  would  be  execrated  if  it  were  not  that 
Christian  men  go  to  them,  and  the  ungodly  men  say, 
*'  Well,  if  it  is  not  righteous,  there  is  not  much  harm 
in  it  after  all ;  it  is  innocent  enough  if  we  keep  within 
bounds."  Mind  !  mind  !  mind,  professor,  if  your  heart 
begins  to  suck  in  the  sweets  of  another  man's  sin  it  is 
unsound  in  the  sight  of  God  :  if  thou  canst  even  wink 
at  another  man's  lust,  depend  upon  it  thou  wilt  soon 


Holiness  Demanded.  10^ 

shut  thine  eye  on  thine  own,  for  we  are  always  more 
severe  with  other  men  than  we  are  with  ourselves. 
There  must  be  an  absence  of  the  vital  principle  of  £]^od- 
liness  when  we  can  become  partakers  of  other  men's 
sins  by  applauding  or  joining  with  them  in  the  approval 
of  them.  Let  us  examine  ourselves  scrupulously,  then, 
whether  we  be  among  those  who  have  no  evidences  of 
that  holiness  without  which  no  man  can  see  God. 

But,  beloved,  w^e  hope  better  things  of  you,  and 
things  which  accompany  salvation.  If  you  and  I,  as  in 
the  sight  of  God,  can  feel  to-night  that  we  would  be 
holy  if  we  could ;  that  there  is  not  a  sin  we  wish  to 
spare ;  that  we  would  be  like  Jesus — O  that  we  could  I 
— that  we  would  sooner  suffer  affliction  than  ever  run 
into  sin  and  displease  our  God ;  if  our  heart  be  really 
right  in  God's  statutes,  then,  despite  all  the  imperfec- 
tions we  bemoan,  we  have  holiness,  wherein  we  may 
rejoice,  and  we  may  see  the  Lord. 

II.  Now,  then,  for  the  second  point  ver}^  briefly  in- 
deed:  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord;" 
that  is  to  say,  no  man  can  have  communion  with  God 
in  this  life,  and  no  man  can  have  enjoyment  with  God 
in  the  life  to  come  without  holiness.  "  Can  two  walk 
together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  If  thou  goest  with 
Belial  dost  thou  think  Christ  will  go  with  thee?  \yill 
Christ  be  a  pot  companion  for  thee  ?  Dost  thou  expect 
to  take  the  Lord  of  love  and  mercy  with  thee  to  the 
liaunts  of  sin  ?  Professor,  dost  thou  think  the  just  and 
holy  One  will  stand  at  thy  counter  to  be  co-trader  with 
thee  in  thy  tricks?  What  thinkest  thou,  O  man! 
wouldst  thou  make  Christ  a  sharer  of  thy  guilt  ?  and 
yet  he  would  be  so  if  he  had  fellowsliip  Avith  thee  in  it. 


200  Christian  Energy, 

Kay,  if  tliou  wilt  go  on  in  acts  of  unrigliteousness  and 
unholiness,  Christ  parts  company  with  thee,  or  rather 
thou  never  didst  have  any  fellowship  with  him.  Thou 
hast  gone  out  from  us  because  thou  wert  not  of  us, 
for  if  thou  hadst  been  of  us  doubtless  thou  w^ouldst 
have  continued  with  us.  And  as  to  heaven,  dost  thou 
think  to  go  there  with  thine  unholiness  %  God  smote 
an  angel  dow^n  from  heaven  for  sin,  and  will  he  let 
man  in  with  sin  in  his  right  hand  ?  God  would  sooner 
extinguish  heaven  than  see  sin  despoil  it.  It  is  enough 
for  him  to  bear  with  thine  hypocrisies  on  earth ; 
shall  he  have  them  flung  in  his  own  face  in  heaven  % 
What,  shall  an  unholy  life  utter  its  licentiousness  in  the 
golden  streets  ?  Shall  there  be  sin  in  that  higher  and 
better  paradise  ?  No,  no,  God  has  sworn  by  his  holi- 
ness— and  he  will  not,  he  cannot  lie — that  those  who 
are  not  holy,  whom  his  Spirit  has  not  renewed,  who 
have  not  been  by  the  regenerating  power  of  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  made  to  love  that  which  is  good  and 
hate  that  which  is  evil,  shall  never  stand  in  the  congre- 
gation of  the  righteous.  Sinner,  it  is  a  settled  matter 
Avith  God  that  no  man  shall  see  God  without  holiness. 

III.  I  come  to  my  last  point,  which  is,  pleading  with 
you.  Doubtless  there  are  some  in  this  vast  crowd  who 
have  some  sort  of  lonmncrs  after  salvation  and  after 
heaven.  ]My  eye  looks  round;  yes,  sometimes  it  has 
been  my  w^ont  to  gaze  with  sorrow  upon  some  few  here 
whose  case  I  know.  Do  I  not  remember  one  %  he  has 
been  very  often  impressed,  and  so  impressed  too  that 
he  has  not  been  able  to  sleep.  Night  after  night  he  has 
prayed,  he  has  wrestled  with  God,  and  there  is  only 
one  thing  in  his  way — and  that  is  drink  !  strong  drink  I 


Holiness  Demanded.  201 

Cy  tlie  time  that  AYedncsday  or  Thursday  comes  round 
he  begins  to  forget  what  he  heard  on  Sunday.  Some- 
times lie  has  taken  the  pledge  and  stood  to  it  three 
montlis,  but  the  passion  has  been  too  strong  on  him,  and 
then  he  has  given  all  resolutions  and  vows  up,  and  has 
plunged  into  his  besetting  sin  worse  than  before. 
Others  I  know  in  whom  it  is  another  sin.  You  are 
here  now,  are  you  ?  You  do  not  come  of  a  morning, 
and  yet  when  you  come  at  night  you  feel  it  very 
severely;  but  why  not  come  here  in  the  morning? 
Because  your  shop  is  open,  and  that  shop  seems  to  stand 
between  you  and  any  hope  of  salvation.  There  are 
others  who  say,  "AYell,  now,  if  I  go  to  hear  that  man, 
I  must  give  up  the  vice  that  disquiets  my  conscience  ; 
but  I  cannot  yet,  I  cannot  yet."  And  you  are  willing 
to  be  damned  for  the  sake  of  some  paltry  joy?  Well, 
if  you  will  be  damned,  it  shall  not  be  for  want  of 
reasoning  with  you  and  weeping  over  you.  Let  me 
]Hit  it  to  you — do  you  say  you  cannot  give  up  the  sin 
because  of  the  profit  ?  Profit !  Profit,  forsooth ! 
''  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole 
world  and  lose  his  ow^n  soul  ?  "  What  profit  have  you 
obtained  hitherto?  You  have  put  it  all  into  a  bag  full 
of  holes ;  what  you  have  earned  one  way  you  have  spent 
another,  and  you  know  that  if  this  were  all  you  surely 
have  not  been  any  the  better  for  it.  Besides,  what  is 
profit  when  compared  w^ith  your  immortal  soul  ?  Oh, 
I  adjure  you,  lose  not  gold  for  dross ;  lose  not  sub- 
stance for  shadows!  Lose  not  your  immortal  soul  for 
the  sake  of  some  temporary  gain  !  But  it  is  not  profit 
with  some  of  you,  it  is  pleasure,  it  is  a  morbid  passion. 
You  feel,  perhaps,  for  some  particular  sin  which  happens 


202  Christian  Energy. 

to  beset  you,  such  an  intense  longing,  and  in  looking 
back  upon  it  afterwards  you  think  you  could  give  up 
everything  but  that.  Young  man,  is  it  some  secret  sin 
which  we  must  not  mention,  or  is  it  some  private  guilt 
which  is  hidden  from  all  hearts  but  thine  own  ?  O  soul, 
what  is  this  pleasure  after  all  %  Weigh  it,  weigh  it ; 
what  does  it  come  to  ?  Is  it  equal  to  the  pain  it  costs 
thee  now,  to  the  pangs  of  conscience,  to  the  agonies  of 
remorse  ?  When  an  American  doctor  who  had  led  a 
loose  life  came  to  die  he  seemed  to  wake  up  from  a  sort 
of  stupor,  and  he  said,  "  Find  that  word,  find  that  word." 
*'  What  w^ord?"  they  said.  ''  Why,"  he  said, ''  that  awful 
word — remorse !  "  He  said  it  again — *'  Remorse  I  "  and 
then,  gathering  up  his  full  strength  he  fairly  seemed  to 
shriek  it  out — '^  Remorse  !  "  "  Write  it,"  said  he,  '^  write 
it.*'  It  was  written.  *^  Write  it  with  larger  letters  and 
let  me  gaze  at  it;  underline  it.  And  now,"  said  he, 
*'  none  of  you  know  the  meaning  of  that  word,  and  may 
you  never  know  it ;  it  has  an  awful  meaning  in  it,  and 
I  feel  it  now — Remorse!  liemorse!!  Bemorse!  I  !" 
What,  I  say,  is  this  pleasure  contrasted  with  the  results 
it  brings  in  this  life  ?  and  what,  I  ask,  is  this  pleasure 
compared  with  the  joys  of  godliness?  Little  as  you 
may  think  I  know  of  the  joys  of  the  world,  yet  so  far 
as  I  can  form  a  judgment,  I  can  say  that  I  would  not 
take  all  the  joys  that  earth  can  ever  afford  in  a  hun- 
dred years  for  one  half -hour  of  what  m}'  soul  has 
known  in  fellowship  with  Christ.  We  do  have  our 
sorrows,  but,  blessed  be  God,  we  do  have  our  joys,  and 
they  are  such  joys — oh,  such  joys,  such  substance  in 
them,  and  such  reality  and  certainty,  that  we  could  not 
and   would  not  exchange    them   for   anything   except 


Holiness  Demanded,  203 

licaven  in  its  fruition.  And  then,  bethink  thee^  sinner, 
what  are  all  these  pleasures  when  compared  with  the 
loss  of  thy  soul !  There  is  a  gentleman,  hi^h  in  posi- 
tion in  this  world,  with  fair  lands  and  a  large  estate, 
who,  when  he  took  me  by  the  button-hole  after  a  sermon 
— and  he  never  hears  me  preach  without  tears — said  to 
me,  '^  O,  sir,  it  does  seem  such  an  awful  thing  that  I 
should  be  such  a  fool."  ^'And  what  forT'  said  I. 
^'Why,"  he  said,  '-for  the  sake  of  that  court  and  of 
those  gaieties  of  life,  and  of  mere  honour  and  dress  and 
fashion,  I  am  squandering  away  my  soul.  I  know,"  he 
said,  ''  I  know  the  truth,  but  I  do  not  follow  it.  I  have 
been  stirred  in  my  heart  to  do  it,  but  I  shall  go  on 
as  I  have  done  before ;  I  fear  I  shall  sink  back  into 
the  same  state  as  before.  Oh,  what  a  fool  I  am,"  said 
he,  "to  choose  pleasures  that  only  last  a  little  while, 
and  then  to  be  lost  for  ever  and  for  ever."  I  pleaded 
hard  with  him,  but  I  pleaded  in  vain ;  there  was  such 
intoxication  in  the  gaiety  of  life  that  he  could  not 
leave  it.  Alas  !  alas  !  if  we  had  to  deal  with  sane  men 
our  preaching  would  be  easy,  but  sin  is  a  madness,  such 
a  madness  that  when  men  are  bitten  with  it  they  will 
not  be  persuaded,  though  one  should  rise  from  the  dead. 
*'  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.*'  But 
I  hear  one  say,  "  It  is  impossible ;  I  have  tried  it  and  I 
have  broken  down  :  I  did  try  to  get  better,  but  I  did  not 
succeed ;  it  is  of  no  use,  it  cannot  be  done."  You  are 
right,  my  dear  friend,  and  you  are  wrong.  You  are  right, 
it  is  of  no  use  going  about  it  as  you  did ;  if  you  went  in 
your  own  strength,  holiness  is  a  thing  you  cannot  get ; 
it  is  beyond  you.  The  depth  says,  "  It  is  not  in  me  ;" 
and  the  height  saith,  "  It  is  not  in  me."     Tou  can  no 


204  Christian  Energy. 

more  make  yourself  holy  than  you  could  create  a 
world.  But  you  are  wrong  to  despair,  for  Christ  can 
do  it ;  he  can  do  it  for  you,  and  he  can  begin  it  now. 
Believe  on  him  and  he  will  begin  with  you ;  in  fact, 
that  believino;  will  be  the  fruit  of  his  havino;  beo-un  with 
you.  Trust  him,  and  he  that  has  overcome  thy  sins, 
the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  shall  come  in  and  put 
to  rout  the  Lion  of  the  pit.  He  will  bruise  Satan 
under  thy  feet  shortly.  There  is  no  corruption  too  strong 
for  him  to  overcome,  there  is  no  habit  too  firm  for  him 
to  break  it.  He  can  turn  a  lion  to  a  lamb,  and  a 
raven  to  a  dove.  Trust  him  to  save  thee  and  he  will 
do  it,  whatsoever  thou  mayst  be,  whatever  thy  past  life 
may  have  been.  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptised 
shall  be  saved  " — that  is,  he  shall  be  saved  from  his  sins 
and  delivered  from  his  evil  practices ;  he  shall  be  made 
a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
received  tlirough  the  medium  of  his  faith.  Believe, 
poor  soul,  that  Christ  is  able  to  save  thee  and  he  will 
do  it.  He  will  be  as  good  as  thy  faith  and  as  good  as 
his  own  word.  May  he  now  add  his  own  blessing  to 
the  word  we  have  spoken,  and  to  the  people  who  have 
heard  it,  for  bis  o^ti  sake.     Amen. 


}^^yLr^^ 


wm 


©^^ 


"  And  they  all  forsook  him,  and  fled.  And  there  followed  him  a 
certain  young  man,  having  a  linen  cloth  cast  about  his  naked  body  , 
and  the  young  men  laid  hold  on  him  :  and  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  ami 
fled  from  them  naked." — Markxiv.  50 — 52. 


HIS  little  episode  in  the  narrative  of  the 
evangelist  is  very  singular.  One  wonders 
why  it  is  introduced  ;  but  a  moment's  re- 
flection will,  I  think,  suggest  a  plausible 
reason.  It  strikes  me  that  this  "certain 
young  man"  was  none  other  than  Mark 
himself.  He  was  probably  asleep ;  and, 
aroused  by  a  great  clamour,  he  asked  what  it  was  about. 
The  information  was  speedily  given — "  The  guards  have 
come  to  arrest  Jesus  of  Nazaretli."  Moved  by  sudden 
impulse,  not  thinking  of  what  he  was  doing,  he  rises 
from  his  bed,  rushes  down,  pursues  the  troopers,  dashes 
into  the  midst  of  their  rank,  as  though  he  alone  would 
attempt  the  rescue,  when  all  the  disciples  had  fled. 
The  moment  they  lay  hold  upon  him  his  heroic  spasm  is 
over;  his  enthusiasm  evaporates;  he  runs  away,  leaves 
the  cloth  that  was  loosely  wrapped  about  his  body 
behind,  and  makes  his  escape.  There  have  been  many 
who  acted  like  Mark  since  then.  It  seems  to  me  that 
this  digression  from  the  main  narrative  is  intended  to 
point  a  moral.     First,  however,  you  will   say,  "  Why 


206  Christian  Energy, 

suppose  It  to  be  Mark?"  I  grant  you  it  is  merely  a 
supposition,  but  yet  it  is  supported  by  the  strongest 
chain  of  probabilities,  and  will  sufficiently  account  for 
the  manner  in  which  he  has  inserted  it.  Calvin,  follow- 
ing Ambrose  and  Chrysostom,  thinks  it  was  John,  albeit 
few  modern  critics  attach  much  weight  to  that  conjec- 
ture. I  find  that  the  more  recondite  critics  of  the 
modern  school  ascribe  this  transaction  to  Mark  for  these 
reasons ; — It  was  common  among  the  evangelists  to 
relate  transactions  in  which  they  themselves  took  part 
without  mentioning  their  own  names.  This  commonly 
occurs  in  the  case  of  John,  for  instance.  He  bashfully 
keeps  back  his  name  when  there  is  anything  to  his 
credit,  and  he  does  the  same  when  it  is  to  the  reverse.  I 
could  quote  one  or  two  instances  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke, 
and  it  is  not  at  all  remarkable  that  such  a  thing  should 
have  occurred  in  the  case  of  Mark,  Whoever  it  was, 
the  only  person  likely  to  know  it  was  the  man  himself. 
I  cannot  think  that  any  one  else  would  have  been  likely 
to  tell  it  to  Mark,  and,  therefore,  I  conceive  it  to  have 
been  himself  ;  for  he  might  scarcely  have  thought  it 
worthy  of  recording  if  it  had  been  told  him  by  some 
one  else ;  and  it  is  not  likely  that  any  one  to  whom  it 
had  occurred  would  have  felt  it  was  much  to  his  credit, 
and  been  likely  to  relate  it  to  Mark  with  a  view  to  its 
being  recorded.  Again,  we  know  that  such  a  transac- 
tion as  this  was  quite  in  keeping  with  Mark's  common 
character.  We  gather  his  character  partly  from  the 
book  which  he  has  written  :  the  evangel  of  Mark  is  the 
most  impulsive  of  all  the  evangels.  You  are  aware, 
and  I  have  frequently  mentioned  it  to  you,  that  the 
word  eutheosy  translated  "  straightaway,"  "  forthwith," 


John  Mark ;  or,  Haste  in  Religion.  207 

"  Immediately,"  is  used  a  very  great  numLer  of  times 
by  this  evangelist  in  his  book.  He  is  a  man  who  does 
everything  straightway;  full  of  impulse,  dash,  fire, 
flash;  the  thing  must  be  done,  and  done  forthwith. 
His  gospel  is  of  that  description.  You  do  not  find 
many  of  Christ's  sermons  in  Mark.  He  gives  you  a 
sketch,  an  outline.  He  had  not  perseverance  enough 
to  take  the  whole  down ;  and  he  scarcely  finishes  the 
narration  of  the  death  of  Christ.  His  book  seems  to 
break  off  abruptly,  yet  he  is  the  most  picturesque  of 
all.  There  are  pieces  of  imagination,  and  there  are 
Hogarthian  touches,  in  the  sacred  biogi'aphy  he  writes, 
that  are  not  to  be  found  In  Matthew,  or  Luke,  or  John. 
The  man  is  a  man  of  fire.  He  is  all  enthusiasm. 
Poetry  has  filled  his  soul,  and,  therefore,  he  dashes  at 
the  thing.  Ble  lacks  in  perseverance,  and  will  hardly 
finish  what  he  takes  in  hand  ;  but  yet  there  is  a  genius 
about  him  not  altogether  uncommon  to  Christian  men 
in  this  age,  and  there  are  faults  in  him  exceedingly 
common.  Once  more :  the  known  life  of  John  Mark 
tends  to  make  it  very  probable  that  he  w^ould  do  such  a 
thing  as  is  referred  to  in  the  text.  As  soon  as  ever  Paul 
and  Barnabas  set  out  on  their  missionary  enterprise  they 
w^ere  attended  by  Mark.  As  long  as  they  were  sailing 
across  the  blue  waters,  and  as  long  as  they  were  in  the 
island  of  Cyprus,  Mark  stuck  to  them.  Nay,  while 
they  travelled  along  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor,  we  find 
they  had  John  Mark  to  be  their  minister ;  but  the 
moment  they  went  up  Into  the  inland  countries,  among 
tlie  robbers  and  the  mountain  streams — as  soon  as  ever 
the  road  began  to  be  a  little  too  rough,  John  [Mark  left 
them.     His  missionary  zeal  had  oozed  out.     After  a 


,203  Christian  Energy. 

short  time  tliere  was  a  hot  contention  between  Panl  and 
Barnabas.  Paul  would  not  have  Mark  with  him  any 
longer.  He  could  not  trust  him ;  he  did  not  believe  in 
these  impulsive  people,  who  could  not  hold  on  under 
difficulties;  but  Barnabas  knowing  him  better — for 
Mark  is  sister's  son  to  Barnabas — and  feehng  a  kins- 
man's lenity  to  his  faults,  insists  upon  it  that  they  should 
take  John  Mark ;  and  the  altercation  grew  so  violent 
between  Paul  and  Barnabas,  that  they  separated  on  this 
iaccount,  and  would  not  proceed  together  on  their  divine 
mission.  Yet  Barnabas  was  right.  Paul  was  not 
wrong  either.  I  think  Barnabas  w  as  right  in  his  mild 
judgment  of  Mark,  for  he  w^as  a  sound  behever  at 
bottom,  and,  notwithstanding  this  fault,  he  was  a  real, 
true-hearted  disciple.  We  find  him  afterwards  recon- 
ciled entirely  to  the  Apostle  Paul.  Paul  says,  *^  Send 
Mark,  for  he  is  profitable  unto  me  for  the  ministiy ; " 
and  w^e  find  Paul  mentioning,  with  affection  and  love, 
^'Mark  as  sister's  son  to  Barnabas,"  wdiich  shows  on 
the  one  hand  the  apostle's  Christian  candour  and  kind- 
ness, and  on  the  other  hand  that  Mark  had  retrieved 
his  character  by  perseverance.  Tradition  says  that 
Mark  became  the  Bishop  of  Alexandria.  We  do  not 
know  whether  it  is  correct  or  not,  but  it  is  likely 
enough  that  he  was.  Certainly  he  w^as  w^ith  Paul  at 
Eome,  and  the  latter  part  of  his  life  w^as  spent  with 
Peter  at  Babylon.  See  what  a  man  he  is.  He  goes  to 
Rome,  but  he  cannot  stop  there  long.  He  has  done  his 
work  in  Rome.  He  is  one  of  your  fidgety  people  that' 
do  things  all  of  a  sudden  ;  and  away  he  is  to  Alexandria. 
But  methinks  he  must  have  found  a  very  congenial 
friend  in  Peter.     He  would  be  a  blessing  to  Peter,  and 


John  Mark;  or,  Haste  in  Belifjion.  209 

Peter  would  be  a  blessing  to  liim ;  for  Peter's  dispo- 
sition was  cast  in  sometliing  of  the  same  mould.  You 
will  notice  that  Mark  gives  the  most  explicit  account  of 
Peter's  fall.  He  enters  very  fully  into  it.  I  believe 
he  received  it  from  Peter  viva  voce,  and  Peter  bade 
him  write  it  down ;  and  I  think  the  modest  spirit 
of  Mark  seemed  to  say,  "Friend  Peter,  while  the 
Holy  Ghost  moves  me  to  tell  thy  fault  and  let  it 
stand  on  record,  he  also  constrains  me  to  write  mine 
as  a  sort  of  preface  to  it,  for  I,  too,  in  my  mad, 
hair-brain  folly,  would  have  run,  unclothed  as  I  was, 
upon  the  guard  to  rescue  my  Lord  and  Master,  yet 
at  the  first  sight  of  the  rough  legionaries,  at  the 
first  gleam  of  their  swords,  away  I  fled,  timid,  faint- 
hearted, and  afraid  that  I  should  be  too  roughly 
handled." 

For  these  reasons,  the  supposition  that  it  was  John 
Mark  appears  to  me  not  to  be  utterly  baseless.  There 
is  no  hypothesis  in  favour  of  any  other  supported  by 
equal  probabilities.  Very  well,  then.  We  will  assume 
that  he  was  the  man,  and  use  the  incident  as  the 
irroundwork  of  our  discourse.  We  have  some  counter- 
parts  of  him  here  to-night,  and  we  shall  try  to  find 
them  out  and  make  use  of  Mark's  blunder  for  their 
correction,  in  respect  both  to  hasty  following  and  hasty 
rimning  away. 

Here  is  hasty  following.  John  ^lark  does  not  wait  to 
robe  himself,  but  just  as  he  is,  he  dashes  out  for  the 
defence  of  his  Lord.  Without  a  moment's  thought, 
taking  no  sort  of  consideration,  down  he  goes  into  the 
cold  night  air  to  try  and  deliver  his  Master.  Feiwent 
zeal  waited  not  for  charv  prudence.     There  was  some- 

14 


210  Christian  Energy, 

tiling  good   and  something  bad  in  this,   something  to 
admire  as  well  as  somethino;  to  censure. 

Beloved,  it  is  a  p'ood  and  rio-ht  thino;  for  us  to  follow 
Christ,  and  to  follow  him  at  once ;  and  it  is  a  brave 
thing  to  follow  him  when  his  other  disciples  forsake  him 
and  flee.  It  is  a  bold  and  worthy  courage  to  take  deadly 
odds  for  Christ,  and  to  rush,  one  against  a  thousand, 
for  the  honour  of  his  dear  hallowed  name.  Would  that 
all  professors  of  religion  had  the  intrepidity  of  Mark ! 
Would  that  all  who  have  been  careless  about  religion 
might  emulate  his  haste,  and  be  as  precipitate  in  flying 
to  Christ  by  faith  as  he  was  in  running  to  the  rescue  in 
that  hour  of  assault !  The  most  of  men  are  too  slow  ; 
fast  enough  in  the  world,  but,  ah!  how  slow  in  the 
things  of  God!  I  protest  that,  if  corporations  and 
companies  were  half  as  dilatory  about  worldly  things  as 
the  Church  of  God  is  about  spiritual  things,  instead  of 
a  railway  accident  every  three  or  four  months,  we  should 
have  one  every  hour ;  and  instead  of  a  revolution  eveiy 
one  or  two  centuries,  it  would  be  well  if  we  did  not  have 
one  every  year,  for  of  all  indolent  things  the  Church  of 
God  is  the  most  sluggish.  Of  all  people  that  dilly-dally 
in  this  world,  I  think  professed  servants  of  God  are  the 
most  drony  and  faddling.  How  slothful  are  the  un- 
godly, too,  in  divine  things ;  tell  them  they  are  sick, 
they  hasten  to  a  surgeon ;  tell  them  that  their  title- 
deeds  are  about  to  be  attacked,  and  they  will  defend 
them  with  legal  power ;  but  tell  them,  in  God's  name, 
that  their  soul  is  in  danger,  and  they  think  it  matters 
so  little,  and  is  of  so  small  import,  that  they  will  wait 
on,  and  wait  on,  and  wait  on,  and  doubtless  continue  to 
wait  on  till  they  find  themselves  lost  for  ever. 


John  Mark;  or,  Haste  in  Bellglon.  211 

Let  me  stir  up  those  who  liave  not  believed  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  look  dihgently  to  their  eternal 
state.  You  have  tarried  long  enough.  The  time  that 
you  have  been  out  of  Christ  is  surely  long  enougli  for 
the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  What  fruit  have  you  gathered 
in  your  impenitence  and  sin  ?  How  much  have  you 
bettered  by  neglecting  Christ  and  minding  worldly 
things?  Has  it  not  been  all  a  dreary  toil?  It  may 
have  been  decked  out  with  a  few  transient  pleasures, 
but,  putting  the  ungodly  life  into  the  scale,  what  does 
it  come  to  ?  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  Do 
you  not  confess  this?  Why,  then,  tarry  any  longer? 
Have  you  got  any  happiness  in  being  an  enemy  to  God? 
Why  not  be  reconciled  ?  Oh  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
w^ould  make  you  see  that  the  time  past  may  suffice  you 
to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  flesh !  Besides,  how 
little  time  you  have  to  spare,  and,  if  you  have  much, 
Jesus  demands  of  you  to  repent  now.  "  The  Holy 
Ghost  saith.  To-day,  to-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
harden  not  your  heart."  The  gospel  invitation  is  not 
for  to-morrow,  but  for  to-day.  The  warnings  of  the 
gospel  all  bid  you  shun  procrastination.  Is  not  this 
Satan's  great  net  in  which  men,  like  the  silly  fishes  of 
the  deep,  are  taken  to  their  eternal  destruction  ?  O 
thou  dove  pursued  by  the  hawk,  wait  not,  but  Ry  at 
once  to  the  dove-cot— to  the  wounds  of  Jesus,  and  be 
sheltered !  Jesus  calls  thee.  Come  to  him  while  he 
calleth  thee.  Why  wilt  thou  tarry  ?  His  cause  wants 
you.  Young  men,  there  are  some  of  you  who  will 
spend  the  best  of  your  days  in  Satan's  cause,  and  when 
we  get  you,  as  we  hope  we  shall,  we  shall  have  to 
baptise  into  Christ  your  shrivelled  age,  your   palsied 


212  Christian  Energy, 

weakness.  Let  it  not  be  so.  In  these  days  of  error^ 
Christ  needs  for  his  kingdom  men  strong  and  vigorous, 
who  are  strong,  as  John  saith,  and  have  overcome  the 
wicked  one.  Fain  I  would  enlist  you,  and  would  turn 
recruiting-sergeant  for  my  Master.  Oh  that  you  were 
on  his  side  now !  You  cannot  be  too  hasty  here.  If 
now  the  weapons  of  your  rebellion  are  thrown  down^ 
if  now  you  "  kiss  the  rod,  ere  he  is  angry,"  you  will 
have  waited  already  too  long;  you  will  not,  nor  can 
you,  come  too  soon.  Hark !  hark !  I  hear  the  chariot 
wheels  of  death.  He  comes  !  he  comes !  and  the  axles 
of  his  chariot  are  hot  with  speed.  He  stands  aloft 
driving  his  white  horse.  The  skeleton  rider  brandishes 
his  awful  spear,  and  you  are  the  victim.  God  has 
spared  you  up  till  now,  but  he  may  not  bid  you  spend 
another  Sabbath-day.  I  hear  the  mower's  scythe 
everywhere,  as  I  pass  along,  making  ready  to  cut  do\Mi 
the  grass  and  the  flower  thereof.  Ah !  death's  scythe 
is  being  sharpened  now.  He  proceeds  to  reap  his  har- 
vest every  day,  and,  whether  prepared  or  not,  you  must 
be  cut  down  when  God's  time  shall  come.  Fly,  then, 
I  pray  you,  and  though  you  be,  like  John  Mark,  unfit 
and  unprepared,  remember  you  may  come  naked  to 
Christ,  for  he  can  clothe  you ;  you  may  come  filthy  ta 
Christ,  for  he  can  wash  you ;  you  may  come  all  unholy 
and  defiled  to  Jesus,  for  he  can  put  away  your  sin. 
Come!  The  Spirit  of  God  seems  to-night  to  say, 
"  Come."  I  pray  that  he  may  bid  you  come  and  lay 
hold  upon  eternal  life.  I  do  not  know  how  it  is — I  some- 
times feel  for  many  of  my  hearers,  especially  for  those 
of  you  whose  faces  I  have  seen  for  these  years,  an  a^vf ul 
earnestness  when  I  am  not  in  this  pulpit,  and  I  think 


John  Mark;  or,  Haste  in  Belijion.  213 

ilien  if  I  could  get  your  ear  I  would  labour  with  you. 
Bethink  you  how  many  have  been  buried.  How  often 
do  I  stand  at  the  grave's  mouth,  till  sometimes,  when, 
week  after  wxek,  and  twice  each  week,  I  stand  there,  I 
fancy  myself  but  yet  talking  to  dying  men,  and  not  to 
living  men  at  all,  talking  to  a  company  of  shadows  that 
come  and  go  before  me,  and  I  stand  still,  myself  a  shadow, 
soon  to  flit  like  the  rest.  Oh  that  I  could  talk  to  you 
as  I  then  feel,  and  pour  out  my  soul  to  you !  We  want 
a  Baxter  to  bring  men  to  immediate  decision — Baxter 
with  weeping  eyes  and  burning  heart — Baxter,  who 
says,  ^'  I  will  go  down  on  my  knees  to  entreat  you  to 
think  upon  eternal  things;"  Baxter  who  cries  and 
groans  for  men  till  they  cry  and  groan  for  themselves. 
Why  will  ye  die  ?  wliy  will  ye  let  procrastination  kill 
you  ?  Wherefore  will  ye  put  off  till  your  day  is  over? 
AYhy  will  ye  still  waste  the  candle  which  is  so  short  ? 
Why  will  ye  let  the  day  go  when  the  sun  dips  already 
beneath  the  horizon  ?  By  the  shortness  of  time,  by  the 
sureness  of  death,  by  the  certainty  of  eternal  judgment, 
I  do  beseech  you  fly  to  Jesus,  and  fly  to  Jesus  now, 
though  even  it  should  be  in  the  hurry  of  John  ]Mark. 

I  change  my  note.  There  is  a  haste  that  we  must 
reprove.  The  precipitate  running  of  Mark  suggests  an 
admonition  that  should  put  you  on  your  guard.  He 
came  on  a  sudden  by  his  religion,  and  there  are  some 
people  who  do  this  who  might  as  well  have  no  religion. 
That,  however,  was  not  the  case  with  Mark.  He  was  a 
genuine  character,  yet  with  nine  out  of  ten  of  these 
people  I  am  afraid  it  is  far  otherwise.  Let  me  address 
some  here  who  have  all  of  a  sudden  come  to  Christ.  1 
do  not  want  to  throw  doubts  in  their  way  as  to  their 


214  Christian  Energy. 

sincerity,  but  I  do  want  to  incite  them  to  examine 
themselves.  I  am  afraid  some  people  make  a  hasty 
profession  through  the  persuasion  of  friends.  You 
walk  with  your  friend,  and  he  says,  "  I  have  joined  the 
church  ?  why  don't  you  do  so  ? "  He  is  not  wise 
enough  to  put  to  you  pointed  questions  which  would 
let  him  see  whether  you  are  converted  or  not,  but  he 
unwisely  presses  you  to  make  a  profession  when  there  is 
no  grace  in  your  heart.  I  pray  you  as  soon  as  ever  you 
know  Christ,  speak  out  for  him,  and  go  out  and  show 
your  colours ;  but  I  also  beseech  you  never  profess  to- 
follow  Christ  through  the  persuasion  of  friends.  I 
trust  no  pious  mother  would  ever  recommend  you  to  da 
so.  I  am  sure  no  wise  father  would  ever  urge  it  upon 
you.  They  would  bid  you  fly  to  Christ  at  once,  but  as 
to  making  the  profession,  they  would  have  you  see 
whether,  indeed,  the  root  of  the  matter  be  in  you,  and 
when  they  are  persuaded,  and  you  are  persuaded  of  ity 
they  will  throw  no  stumbling  blocks  in  your  way. 
Young  people,  I  pray  you  don't  be  deceived  in  this 
matter.  How  many  have  we  seen  in  the  revival  times 
who  have  been  induced  to  come  forward  to  the  '^  peni^ 
tent  stool,"  as  it  is  called.  That  night,  oh  how  much 
they  felt,  because  their  natural  sensibilities  were  wrought 
upon ;  but  the  next  morning,  oh  how  little  have  they 
felt!  When  the  agencies  that  stimulated  them  have 
been  withdrawn,  and  when  the  meetings  that  stirred 
the  embers,  and  the  preacher  that  fanned  the  flame  no- 
longer  exert  any  transient  spell  on  them,  their  disen- 
chanted souls  sink  down  into  a  profound  stupor.  In 
many  churches  there  are  so  few  making  profession  of 
religion  that  there  is  not  much  clanger  ;  but  here,  where 


John  Mark;  or,  Haste  in  Religion.  215 

we  receive  so  many  every  week,  there  is  need  for  wise 
discrimination.  I  do  beseech  you  never  to  sit  down 
with  a  rehgion  that  comes  to  you  merely  through  your 
being  talked  to  by  yoiu'  acquaintances. 

"True  religion's  more  than  notion  : 
Something  must  be  known  and  felt :  " 

Nor  arc  there  a  mere  few  who  get  their  religion  through 
excitement.  This  furnishes  another  example  of  in- 
judicious haste.  They  hear  religion  painted  as  being 
very  beautiful ;  they  see  the  beauty  of  it ;  they  admire 
it ;  they  think  what  a  lovely  thing  it  must  be  to  be  a 
Christian.  Feeling  this,  and  misled  by  a  sort  of  ex- 
citement in  their  minds,  they  conclude  that  this 
is  repentance.  A  false  confidence  they  Avrite  down  as 
faith !  They  eagerly  infer  that  they  are  the  children 
of  God,  whereas,  alas  1  they  are  but  the  dupes  of  their 
own  emotion,  and  still  "  heirs  of  wrath,  even  as  others." 
Beware,  I  pray  you,  of  a  religion  which  lives  upon 
excitement.  We  ought  to  be  filled  with  enthusiasm. 
A  fervent  love  should  make  our  hearts  always  glow. 
The  zeal  of  God's  house  should  be  our  master-passion. 
Men  never  do  much  in  politics  till  they  grow  warm  upon 
a  question ;  and  in  religion  the  very  highest  degree  of 
excitement  is  not  only  pardonable,  but  praiseworthy. 
What,  then,  is  it,  which  we  deprecate?  Not  the 
emotions  of  spiritual  life,  but  an  exclusive  dependence 
upon  impulse.  If  you  try  to  live  upon  the  spell  of  a 
man's  words,  upon  the  imposing  grandeur  of  a  multitude 
assembled  together,  upon  the  fascination  of  congrega- 
tional singing,  or  even  upon  the  heart-thrilling  fervour 
of  prayer-meetings,  you  will  find  the  lack  of  substantial 
food,  and  the  danger  of  an  intoxicated  brain.     As  the 


216  Christian  Energy. 

quails  whicli  the  children  of  Israel  did  eat  in  the  wilder- 
ness, God's  bounties  may  be  fed  upon  to  your  injury. 
No,  dear  friends,  there  must  be  the  real  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  the  soul,  or  else  the  repentance  we  get 
will  be  a  repentance  which  needs  to  be  repented  of. 
I  well  know  a  town  where  there  was  a  certain  eminent 
revivalist,  whom  I  greatly  respect.  It  was  said  that 
half  the  population  were  converted  under  him  ;  but  I  do 
not  think  that  if  the  numbers  were  told  at  the  present 
moment  there  would  be  found  a  dozen  of  his  converts. 
This  revival  work,  where  it  is  real  and  good,  is  God's 
best  blessing,  but  where  it  is  flimsy  and  unreal,  it  is 
Satan's  worst  curse.  Eevivalists  are  often  like  the 
locusts.  Before  them  it  may  not  be  quite  an  Eden,  but 
certainly  behind  them  it  is  a  desert  when  the  excitement 
is  over.  I  like  rather  to  see  the  Word  so  preached  that 
men  are  brought  under  its  power  by  the  force  of  the 
truth  itself,  and  not  by  excitement — by  the  truth  of 
God  being  laid  down  in  so  clear  a  manner  as  to  en- 
lighten the  judgment,  rather  than  by  perpetual  appeals 
to  the  passions,  which  ultimately  wear  out  the  sinews  of 
mental  vigour,  and  make  men  more  dull  in  religion  than 
they  were  before.  Beware,  I  pray  you,  of  getting  the 
mere  religion  of  poetry,  enthusiasm,  and  rhapsody.  Many 
profess  Christ  and  think  to  follow  him  without  counting 
the  cost.  They  fancy  it  is  all  sweet,  forgetting  that 
the  way  is  rough,  and  that  there  are  many  foes.  They 
set  out  like  Mr.  Pliable,  for  the  Celestial  City ;  but  they 
stumble  into  the  first  bog,  and  they  say  if  they  can  but 
get  out  on  the  side  nearest  to  their  own  house.  Christian 
may  have  the  brave  country  all  to  himself  for  them. 
Oh !  the  many  we  have  seen  at  divers  times  that  did 


John  Mark;  oi\  Haste  in  Religion.  217 

seem  to  run  well,  but  they  ran  in  the  strength  of  the 
ilesh,  and  in  the  mists  of  ignorance.  They  had  never 
sought  God's  strength  ;  they  had  never  been  emptied  of 
their  own  works  and  their  own  conceits ;  consequently, 
in  their  best  estate  they  were  vanity ;  they  were  like  the 
snail  that  melts  as  it  crawls,  and  not  like  the  snow-flake 
upon  the  Alps,  which  gathers  strength  in  its  descent, 
till  it  becomes  a  ponderous  avalanche.  God  make  you 
not  meteors  or  shooting  stars,  but  stars  fixed  in  their 
places.  I  want  you  to  resemble,  not  the  ignis  fatuus  of 
the  morass,  but  the  steady  beacon  of  the  rock.  There 
is  a  phosphorescence  that  creeps  over  the  summer  sea, 
but  who  is  ever  lighted  by  it  to  the  port  of  peace  ?  and 
there  is  a  phosphorescence  which  comes  over  some  men's 
minds.  Very  bright  it  seems,  but  it  is  of  no  value  ;  it 
brings  no  man  to  heaven.  Be  as  hasty  as  John  Mark, 
if  it  be  a  sound  haste ;  but  take  care  that  it  be  not  a 
spasm  of  excitement — a  mere  fit.  Otherwise,  when  the 
fit  is  over,  you  will  go  back  to  your  old  haunts  and  your 
old  habits  with  shame.  You  will  be  like  Saul  among 
the  prophets  one  day,  and  hating  the  prophet  king  the 
next.  So  much,  so  earnestly  would  I  warn  you  against 
hasty  followings  of  Christ. 

It  remains  for  me  to  notice  the  hasty  running  away. 
I  do  not  know  that  the  persons  who  are  readiest  to  run 
away  are  always  those  who  were  the  fastest  to  speed 
their  profession.  I  am  inclined  to  think  not.  But  some 
who  do  run  well  at  first  have  hardly  breath  enough  to 
keep  the  pace  up,  and  so  turn  aside  for  a  little  com- 
fortable ease,  and  do  not  get  into  the  road  again. 
Such  are  not  genuine  Christians  ;  they  are  only 
men-made,  self-made  Christians ;  and  these  self-made 


218  Christiayi  Energy. 

Christians  never  hold  on,  and  never  can  hold  on, 
because  time  wears  them  out,  and  they  turn  back  to 
their  former  state. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  desertion  which  we  denounce 
as  hasty  running  away  :  the  one  temporary,  the  other 
final.  To  the  members  of  the  church  let  me  speak 
upon  the  former.  My  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  espe- 
cially you  that  are  young  in  years  and  have  lately  been 
added  to  our  number,  I  pray  you  watch  against  tem- 
porary runnings  away  from  the  truth  of  Christ.  Think 
w^hat  a  fool  Mark  made  of  himself.  Here  he  comes  ; 
here  is  your  hero.  What  wonders  he  is  going  to  do ! 
Here  is  a  Samson  for  you.  Perhaps  he  will  slay  his 
thousand  men.  But,  no ;  he  runs  aw^ay  before  he 
strikes  a  single  blow.  He  has  not  even  courage  enough 
to  be  taken  prisoner,  and  to  be  di'agged  away  with 
Christ  to  the  judgment-seat,  and  bear  a  patient  witness 
there ;  but  he  turns  tail  at  once,  and  away  he  flies. 
How  simple  he  looked  !  How  everybody  in  the  crowd 
must  have  lauo;hed  at  the  venturesome  coward — at 
the  dastardly  bravo !  And  what  a  fool  will  you  seem 
if,  after  uniting  yourself  with  the  church,  and  seeming 
to  be  a  servant  of  God,  you  shall  give  way  under 
temptation.  Some  young  man  in  the  same  shop 
laughs  at  you — "Aha,  aha,  you  are  baptised,  I  hear"; 
and  you  tremble,  like  Peter,  under  the  questioning 
of  the  little  maid;  or  your  master  sees  something 
wrong,  and  he  makes  some  rough  remark  to  you,  "  Welt, 
this  is  a  fine  thing  for  a  Christian  soldier ! "  Cannot 
you  face  the  enemy  for  the  first  time  ?  '^If  thou  hast 
run  with  the  footmen  and  they  have  wearied  thee,  then 
how  canst  thou  contend  with  horses  1  and  if  in  the  land 


John  Mark;  or,  liable  in  Jiclifjion,  219 

of  peace,  Avliereiii  tlioutrustedst,  tliey  ^veilrie(.l  thee,  then 
liow  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  Jordan  '^ "  A  reli- 
gion that  cannot  stand  a  little  laughter  must  be  a  very 
rotten  one.  We  know  some  people  whose  religion  is  on 
so  unsound  a  basis,  their  profession  so  hollow,  and  their 
position  so  shaky,  that  they  make  all  sorts  of  noises 
about  our  touching  them.  Their  system  is  of  human 
construction,  and  rotten,  and  they  know  it,  therefore  are 
they  angry  if  we  do  but  allude  to  it.  Were  it  sound  and 
good,  then  whatever  we  could  say  would  never  frighten 
them.  But,  sirs,  how  many  who  have  made  a  fair  show 
in  the  flesh  have  been  personally  and  individually  tried 
and  found  wanting !  "Mene,  mene,  tekel"  has  been 
written  on  the  wall  concerning  them.  Their  first 
setting  out  was  hasty,  and  they  have  been  turned  aside 
through  a  little  laughter.  Do  you  not  see,  dear 
friends,  that  this  will  always  render  you  very  untrust- 
worthy ?  If  you  shrink  in  this  way,  the  church  will 
never  trust  you.  I  hope  you  will  be  a  leader  in 
God's  Israel  one  day,  young  man.  We  are  looking  to 
you,  if  not  to  be  a  preacher,  yet  to  be  a  church  officer 
one  day;  but  who  will  ever  ask  you  to  do  anything 
wdien  you  cannot  keep  steadfast  and  hold  your  own 
position  ?  He  w^ho  has  not  grace  enough  to  prevent  his 
running  away  in  the  time  of  tribulation  is  not  at  all 
likely  to  be  made  a  leader  of  God's  host.  The  church 
will  retain  you  as  it  retained  Mark,  but  it  will  always 
look  upon  you  with  a  sort  of  suspicion.  We  shall 
always  say,  ^'  Where  is  So-and-so  ?  We  know  where  he 
was  yesterday ;  where  is  he  to-day  ?  "  Therefore  abstain 
from  these  inconsistencies  for  your  own  character's  sake. 
Besides,  how  much  damage  you  do  the  church !     All 


220  Christian  Energy, 

the  persecutors  and  infidels  outside  the  church's  walls 
can  never  harm  us  so  much  as  inconsistent  people  inside. 
"  Ah !  there  is  one  of  the  people  who  go  to  the  meeting," 
they  say,  when  they  see  a  man  in  the  pot-house  who  sits 
at  the  communion  table,  '^Ah!  there  is  one  of  your 
religious  people !  He  can  cheat  as  well  as  anybody 
else.  He  knows  how  to  thumb  the  yard  measure.  He 
knows  how  to  give  short  weight.  He  knows  how  to 
promise  on  a  certain  day,  and  then  run  through  the 
Bankruptcy  Court  according  to  the  law  of  England, 
which  is  that  nobody  need  pay  his  debts ; "  and  a  glo- 
rious honest  law  it  is.  ^'  Ah  !  "  it  is  said,  "  the  servants 
■of  Christ  are  not  a  bit  better  than  other  people.  They 
make  a  great  fuss  about  their  purity,  but  see  what  they 
will  do."  And  then  see  what  harm  this  will  do  to 
Christ's  church  itself.  How  many  who  love  God  will 
sit  down  and  weep  when  they  see  such  inconsistencies. 
Good  captains  can  stand  a  wound,  they  will  even  bear 
defeat,  but  they  cannot  bear  to  see  cowardice  on  the  part 
of  their  troops ;  they  cannot  bear  to  see  the  men  run- 
ning away.  If  "  the  men  of  Ephraim,  being  anned, 
and  carrying  bows,  turn  back  in  the  day  of  battle," 
then  their  leader  weeps,  for  the  glorious  cross  of  Christ 
is  dishonoured,  the  escutcheon  is  sullied,  and  the  banner 
is  trailed  in  the  mud.  The  Lord  so  keep  us  that  our 
garments  may  be  always  white,  that  though  before  God 
we  may  have  many  sins  to  confess,  w^e  may  stand  like 
Job,  and  say,  "Lord,  thou  knowest  that  I  am  not 
wicked."  May  your  testimony  be  so  clear  towards  the 
religion  of  Christ  that  those  who  watch  you  for  your 
halting,  and  hate  you  with  a  perfect  hatred,  may  never- 
theless find  nothing  against  you,  but  may  be  constrained 


Joliii  Mark;  or,  Ila^te  in  Religion.  221 

to  say,  ^'  These  are  servants  of  God,  and  serve  him  in 
deed  and  of  a  truth."     I  would  ui'ge  you  not  to  flee  or 
to  flinch.     Some  of  us  have  had  enouoh  of  lying  and 
slander  to  bear  in   our  time,  and  are  we   a  whit  the 
worse?     Nay,  and  if  we  had  the  choice  to  bear  itagahi, 
would  we  not  do  so  ?     We  may  have  had  to  be  laughed 
at  and  caricatured,  but  it  breaks  no  bone,  and  should 
not   make   a   brave    man   wince.     AYho   ought   to   be 
alarmed  when  the  war  cry  is  "  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  and 
when  the  banner  of  God's  own  truth  waves  over  his 
head  ?     Courage,  my  brethren,  and  you  shall  have  the 
victory.     "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but 
in  Christ  ye  shall  have  peace."     Value  above  all  things 
the  Holy  Spirit.     Kealise  your  entire  dependence  upon 
him.     Pray  for   fresh   grace.     Venture   not   into   the 
world  without  a  fresh  store  of  his  hallowed  influence. 
Live  in  the  Divine  love.     Seek  to  be  filled  with  that 
blessed   Spirit;  and  then,  my  brethren,  if  the  armed 
man  take  hold  of  you,  you  will  not  flee  away ;  shame 
shall  not  overtake  you,  dismay  shall  not  affright  your 
souls,  but  ye  shall  stand  in  unblemished  integrity  to 
the  end  as  the  true  servants  of  Jesus  Christ. 

And  now,  in  concluding,  what  am  I  to  say  of  a  final 
apostasy?  None  of  God's  people  ever  pursue  their 
wanderings  to  this  terrible  issue.  No  vessel  of  mercy 
was  ever  cast  away.  No  elect  souls  can  run  this  fatal 
length  of  wickedness.  But  there  are  many  in  the 
Church  who  draw  back  to  perdition.  Many  who  profess 
Christ  are  branches  bearing  no  fruit,  and  are  cut  off 
and  cast  into  the  fire.  Such  may  be  the  condition  of 
some  here  present.  Such  may  be  the  lot  of  some  of 
you  who  '^  have  a  name  to  live,  and  are  dead."    Let  me 


222  Christian  Energy, 

plead  with  you.  Oil,  what  a  dreadful  thiug  it  will  be 
if  you  apostatise  at  all!  Shall  I  live  to  see  you  go 
back  into  the  world  ?  I  would  sooner  bury  you.  Shall 
I  live  to  see  some  of  you  who  have  professed  to  know 
the  Lord  under  our  ministry  at  last  sinning  with  a  high 
hand  and  an  outstretched  arm,  worse  than  you  were 
before  ?  God  spare  us  this  evil  thing !  Let  him  chas- 
tise his  servant  in  any  way  he  thinks  fit,  but,  O  Lord, 
let  not  this  be  the  rod — to  see  professors  become  false. 
Remember,  if  you  do  apostatise,  you  have  accumulated 
guilt  by  the  profession  you  made,  and  impressed  your 
character  with  a  more  uneradicable  defilement.  When 
the  unclean  spirit  went  out  of  the  man,  and  afterwards 
returned,  he  brought  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked 
than  himself,  and  they  entered  in,  and  dwelt  there,  and 
the  last  state  of  that  man  was  worse  than  the  first. 
Better  for  you  never  to  have  known  the  way  of 
righteousness,  than  having  known  it,  to  turn  aside  to 
those  crooked  paths.  Think  what  must  be  the  dying 
bed  of  an  apostate.  Did  you  ever  read  of  "The 
Groans  of  Spira"  ?  That  was  a  book  circulated  about 
the  time  of  the  Reformation — a  book  so  terrible  that 
even  a  man  of  iron  could  scarcely  read  it.  Spira  knew 
the  gospel,  but  yet  went  back  to  the  Church  of  Rome. 
His  conscience  woke  on  his  dying  bed,  and  his  cries  and 
shrieks  were  too  terrible  to  be  endured  by  his  nurses ; 
and  as  to  his  language,  it  was  despair  written  out  at 
full  length  in  capital  letters.  My  eminent  predecessor, 
Mr.  Benjamin  Keach,  published  a  like  narrative  of 
the  death  of  John  Child,  who  became  a  minister  of  the 
gospel,  but  afterwards  went  back  to  the  church  from 
which  he  had  seceded,  and  died  in  the  most  frightful 


John  Mark;  or^  Haste  in  Religion.  223 

despair.     May  God  deliver  you  from  the  death-bed  of 
any  man  who  has  lived  a  professed  Christian,  and  dies 
an  apostate  from  the  faith !     But  what  must  be  the 
apostate's  doom  when  his  naked  soul  goes  before  God  ? 
How  must  he  hear  that  voice,  '^  Depart,   ye  cursed ; 
thou  hast  rejected  me,  and  I  reject  thee ;  thou  hast 
played  the  harlot,  and  departed  from  me  ;  I  also  have 
divorced  thee  for  ever,  and  will  not  have  mercy  upon 
thee."     What  will  be  this  wretch's   shame   at  the  last 
great  day,  when  before  assembled  multitudes  the  apos- 
tate shall  be  unmasked?     I  think  I  see  the  profane 
and  sinners  wdio  never  professed  religion  lifting  them- 
selves  up   from  their   beds  of   fire   to   point   at   him. 
*^  There  he  is,"  says  one ;  "  will  he  preach  the  gospel  in 
liell?"     "There   he  is,"   says    another;  "he   rebuked 
me  for  cursing,  and  was  a  hypocrite  himself."     "  Aha !" 
says  another,  "  here  comes  a  psalm-singing  Methodist — 
one  that  was  always  at  his  meeting ;  he  is  the  man  who 
boasted  of  his  being  sure  of  everlasting  life ;  and  here 
he  is."     No  greater  eagerness  will  ever  be  seen  among 
Satanic  tormentors  than  in  that  day  w^hen  devils  drag 
the  hypocrite's  soul  and  the  apostate's  spirit  down  to 
perdition.       Bunyan    pictures   this    with   massive   but 
awful  grandeur  of  poetry  when  he  speaks  of  the  back 
way  to  hell.     The  devils  were  binding  a  man  with  nine 
cords,  and  were  taking  him  from  the  road  to  heaven,  in 
which  he  had  professed  to  walk,  and  thrust  him  through 
the  back  door  of  hell.     Mind  that  back  way  to  hell, 
professors  !     You  professors  of  religion  who  have  been 
in  the  church  for  years,  "  examine  yourselves  whether 
ye  be  in  the  faith."     Examine  yourselves  whether  you 
be  deceived.     liOok  well  to  vour  state,  see  whether  you 


224  Christian  Energy, 

be  in  Christ  or  not.  It  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world 
to  give  a  lenient  verdict  when  oneself  is  to  be  tried ;. 
but  oh,  be  just  and  true  here.  Bo  just  to  all,  but  be 
rigorous  to  yourself.  Kemember,  if  it  be  not  a  rock 
on  which  you  build,  the  house  will  fall,  and  great 
will  be  the  fall  of  it.  Oh,  may  the  Lord  give  you  sin- 
cerity, constancy,  and  firmness ;  and  in  no  day,  how- 
ever evil,  may  you  be  tempted  to  turn  aside ;  rather 
may  you  hold  fast  by  God  and  by  his  truth — by  Christ 
and  by  his  word,  come  what  may. 

My  soul  longeth,  however  many  years  God  may  spare 
me,  to  walk  in  and  out  among  you,  and  find  you  as 
earnest  for  God  and  as  loving  towards  Christ  as  you 
are  this  day.  I  glory  in  you  among  all  the  churches. 
God  has  given  you  the  spirit  of  faith  and  prayer,  of 
earnest  zeal,  and  a  sound  mind.  Unto  him  be  the 
glory.  But,  as  a  church,  do  not  backslide.  Let  not 
our  fervour  diminish,  let  not  our  zeal  die  out.  Let  us 
love  one  another  more  tenderly  than  ever ;  let  us  cling 
fast  to  one  another ;  let  us  not  be  divided,  '^  let  no  root 
of  bitterness  springing  up  trouble  ns";  firm  and  stead- 
fast, shoulder  to  shoulder,  like  a  phalanx  of  old,  let  us 
stand  and  repel  the  foe,  and  win  the  kingdom  for  Christ 
our  Lord!  "Kownnto  him  that  is  able  to  keep  us 
from  falling,  and  to  present  ns  faultless  before  his 
presence  with  exceeding  joy,  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen," 


^(f  tl(4  "Ifu^ruatit  iff  mt  %^\%. 


**  Shake  thyself  from  the  dust ;  arise,  and  sit  down,  0  Jerusalem 
loose  thyself  from  the  bands  of  thy  neck,  0  captive  daughter  of  Zion.' 
— Isaiah  lii.  2. 


SHALL  not  attempt  now  to  decipher  the 
history  of  the  prophecy  with  which  these 
words  are  associated.  To  the  Hebrew  nation 
they  were  big  with  counsel,  and  bright  with 
hope.  Apart,  however,  from  the  connection  in 
which  it  stands,  this  verse  supplies  a  pointed 
practical  address  of  sterling  value  not  to  be 
limited  by  any  private  interpretation.  Such  a  charge 
was  well  fitted  for  Israel  of  old ;  such  counsel  would  be 
suitable  to  any  church  in  a  low  condition ;  such  advice 
is  equally  adapted  to  any  Christian  who  has  fallen  into 
a  low  state,  who  is  grovelling  in  the  dust,  or  among  the 
ashes  of  Sodom.  He  is  bidden  to  rise  from  the  ground, 
and  sit  down  upon  a  throne,  for  Christ  hath  made  him 
a  king  and  a  priest.  He  is  admonished  to  unbind  all 
the  cords  that  are  upon  him,  that  he  may  be  free  and 
happy  in  the  Lord.  To  those  of  you,  then,  who  have 
sunk  into  this  distressing  plight,  my  text  contains  a 
vigorous  appeal.     Let  me  try  to  interpret  it. 

First  of  all,  I  notice  the  obvious  fact.     There   are 

15 


226  Chnstian  Energy, 

some  of  God's  true  people  who  are  in  a  very  sad 
condition. 

This  is  an  important  consideration  to  us  just  now. 
If  just  on  the  eve  of  battle  a  commander  should  dis- 
cover that  an  epidemic  has  broken  out  among  his  troops, 
he  will  be  extremely  anxious  that  any  available  remedy 
shall  be  tried ;  for  if  the  soldiers  be  sick,  how  can  they 
be  expected  to  behave  well  on  the  morrow  ?  So  it  will 
sometimes  happen  that  when  we  mean  to  serve  our 
Master  most,  we  are  impeded  in  church  action  by  the 
prevalence  of  some  spiritual  disease  among  the  mem- 
bers of  the  church.  Perhaps  I  may  be  the  means  of 
finding  out  the  sick  ones,  and  indicating  their  symptoms, 
and — who  can  tell? — perhaps  this  very  night,  ere  you 
come  to  the  Table,  the  blessed  remedy  may  be  applied, 
and  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  while  you  are  feasting  with 
Christ,  your  souls  may  become  perfectly  restored. 

Sometimes  the  children  of  God  fall  into  a  grievous 
state  as  to  their  faith,  and  then-  assurance  of  their  own 
interest  in  Christ.  They  doubt  whether  they  are 
Christians  at  all ;  whether  their  experience  is  genuine ; 
wdiether  they  ever  did  really  repent  with  a  truly  broken 
heart ;  whether  they  have  received  the  precious  faith, 
the  faith  of  God's  elect.  At  such  times  they  question 
all  their  graces,  and  they  are  not  able  to  get  a  satisfac- 
tory answer  from  one.  It  is  quite  possible  these  people 
of  God  may  be  so  walking  in  outward  consistency  that 
everybody  else  thinks  well  of  them.  No  one  has  any 
suspicion  of  them ;  but  they  suspect  themselves 
grievously,  and  are  tormented  with  the  fear  that  they 
have  a  name  to  live,  and  are  dead.  I  have  known  at 
such  times  that  there  will  come  at  the  back  of  all  this 


To  the  Recreant  of  our  Ranks,  227 

some  terrible  doubts  about  the  substantial  verities  of 
our  faith.  "  What,"  say  you,  '*  doubts  about  the  God- 
head, doubts  about  the  Saviour,  doubts  about  the  world 
to  come  % "  Ah,  yes  !  the  true  people  of  God  are  as- 
sailed with  them.  They  will  hate  these  doubts,  and, 
in  their  hearts,  they  will  still  believe  all  the  great 
fundamental  and  cardinal  truths ;  but  yet  will  they  be 
sore  put  to  it,  and  be  frequently  distressed.  Thoughtful 
minds,  and  men  of  reading,  will  have  philosophical 
doubts  buzzing  about  them  like  mosquitoes  on  a  sum- 
mer's day.  Others  who  are  ignorant  of  philosophy, 
and  perhaps  it  is  well  that  they  are,  will  be  troubled 
with  doubts  of  a  rougher,  coarser  quality.  Although 
they  will  not  permit  them  so  to  dwell  in  their  hearts, 
that  they  actually  become  unbelievers,  yet  they  will  be 
sore  distressed  with  questions  which  they  cannot  answer, 
with  enigmas  which  they  know  not  how  to  solve,  and 
with  strange  intertwistings  of  difficulty  which  they 
know  not  how  to  untie.  Perhaps,  too,  at  such  a  time 
as  this  there  will  be  over  all,  and  worse  than  all,  a 
state  of  dreadful  indifference  creeping  over  them. 
They  want  to  feel,  but  cannot  feel.  They  would  fain 
wring  teare  of  blood  out  of  their  eyes,  but  not  an  ordi- 
nary tear  will  drop.  They  want  to  be  cut  to  pieces, 
they  would  welcome  the  most  poignant  sorrow,  but  they 
can  only  say — 

"  If  ought  is  felt  'tis  only  pain 
To  feel  I  cannot  feel." 

In  such  cases  true  believers  are  sure  to  resort  to  the 
extraordinary  use  of  the  means  of  grace.  I  mean  they 
will  add  to  their  ordinary  use  something  more.  Have 
you   never   been   in  such  a  state  that  the  Bible   has 


2'2S  Christian  Energy, 

become  uninteresting,  or  the  on\j  passages  of  Scripture 
that  seemed  to  strike  you  were  dreadful  threatenings 
concerning  your  own  coming  doom,  as  you  thought ; 
not  a  word  of  comfort,  not  a  syllable  that  made  glad 
your  spirit?  You  have  resorted  to  prayer,  and  the 
heavens  have  seemed  to  be  brass,  and,  worse  still,  your 
own  heart  seemed  to  be  brass  too,  and  you  could  not 
stir  it  up  to  anything  like  an  intensity  of  desire.  You 
did  not  wonder  that  you  got  no  answer.  You  would 
have  wondered  if  such  a  prayer  as  yours  could  be  heard 
at  all.  Ah  !  and  then  you  have  gone  up  to  the  assem- 
bly of  God's  people,  where,  at  other  times,  your  heart 
has  danced  within  you  with  holy  joy.  The  minister 
was  not  changed  ;  perhaps  at  first  you  thought  he  was ; 
but  on  more  attentive  hearing  you  noticed  that  there 
was  the  same  truth,  and  spoken  in  the  same  honest 
fashion;  but  you  could  not  hear  it  as  you  once  did. 
Clouds  without  rain,  and  wells  without  water,  all  the  or- 
dinances seemed  to  be  to  you,  and  all  the  while,  though 
you  felt  that  you  could  not  live  like  this,  and  said — 
"  Dear  Lord,  and  shall  I  ever  live 
At  this  poor  dying  rate?" 

Yet  somehow  or  other  you  could  not  get  out  of  it.  You 
felt  like  one  manacled,  as  though  a  nightmare  were 
upon  you.  You  were  distressed.  You  could  not  stir 
to  break  the  spell.  Your  spirit  cried  out  as  best  it 
could,  "  O,  wretched  man  that  I  am !  Who  shall  de- 
liver me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  But  the  worst 
of  it  was  that  you  did  not  feel  that  you  were  wretched 
enough,  and  you  did  not  seem  to  cry  enough.  You 
w^ere  afraid  you  would  sink  into  a  terrible  lethargy, 
which  would  forerun  a  spiritual  death. 


To  the  Recreant  of  our  Ranks.  229 

Well,  my  dear  friends,  I  should  not  wonder  but  you 
brought  this  very  much  upon  yourselves.    If  you  are  in 
this  state,  I  would  exhort  you  to  question  yourselves 
whether  this  is  not  the  result  of  what  you  have  often  been 
warned  of.     Perhaps  you  restrained  prayer ;  perhaps  in 
your  happier  days  you  grieved  the  Holy  Spirit  just  when 
you  were  most  joyful  and  happy  in  his  love.     It  may 
be  that  you  grew  worldly,  or,  perhaps,  a  long  succession 
of  little  things,  none  of  which  you  noticed  at  the  time, 
have  contributed  to  swell  the  stream  of  your  present 
distress.     At  any  rate,  whatever  may  be  the  cause  of 
this  state,  I  grieve  that   you  are  in  it — grieve  for  my 
own  sake,  for  your  sake,  for  the  sake  of  this  church, 
and  for  the  sake  of  the  world  around  you ;  for,  my 
brethren,  your  testimony  is,  to  a  great  extent,  silenced, 
and  vour  strength  to  bear  it  enervated.     That  face  of 
vours,  once  so  happy,  w^as  a  living  advertisement  of  the 
gospel.     Your  cheerful  temperament  under  trial  was  an 
invitation  to  sinners  to  come  and  find  a  like  joy.     But 
now  you  are  distressed,  and  you  go  mourning  without 
the  light  of  the  sun.     What  can  you  do  while  you  abide 
in  such  a  state  as  that  ?     You  are  like  the  bruised  reed, 
out  of  which  no  music  can  come,  or  like  the  smoking 
flax  that  yields  no  light,  but  only  a  dolorous  and  nauseous 
smoke.      I   am  grieved  that  it  should  be  so,   because 
were  you  now  to  attempt  a  verbal  testimony  for  Christ, 
it  would  be  feeble,  and  could  not  produce  any  great 
result.     I  remember  when   I   began   to  teach  in   the 
Sunday-school,   and  I  was  very  young  in  grace  then, 
having  said  to  the  class  of  boys  whom  I  was  teaching 
that  Jesus  Christ  saved  all  those  who  believed  in  him. 
One  of  the  boys  asked  me  the  question,  *'  Teacher,  do 


230  Christian  Energy, 

you  believe  in  him  ?  "  I  replied,  "Yes,  I  hope  I  do." 
And  he  enquired  again,  "  But  are  you  not  sure  ?  "  I 
had  to  look  to  myself  to  know  what  answer  I  should  give. 
The  lad  was  not  content  with  my  repeating,  '^  I  hope  so." 
He  would  have  it,  "  If  you  have  believed  in  Christ  you 
are  saved."  And  I  felt  at  that  time  that  I  could  not 
teach  effectually  until  I  could  say  positively,  "  I  know 
that  it  is  so.  I  must  be  able  to  speak  of  what  I  had  tasted 
and  handled  of  the  good  Word  of  Life."  So,  brethren, 
you  will  find  that  you  only  perplex  those  whom  you  fain 
would  persuade  if  by  your  doubts  you  provoke  them  to 
say,  "  How  can  you  expect  us  to  believe  at  your  mouth 
what  you  hesitate  to  seal  with  the  witness  of  your  own 
heart  ?  "  Unless  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength, 
your  soul  will  breathe  a  heavy  atmosphere,  and  your 
utterance  will  be  checked,  if  it  is  not  choked  by  your 
misgivings.  It  is  your  confidence  in  Christ,  and  the 
peace  it  brings  you,  that  helps  you  to  speak  to  others  as 
a  true  witness,  because  you  are  an  experimental  witness 
of  the  power  of  true  religion.  Your  verbal  testimony, 
I  say,  is  weakened — I  fear  to  a  very  great  extent — by 
the  fog  and  vapour  of  your  scruples,  the  scruples  of  a 
conscience  that  droops  and  flags.  It  is  sad  to  think  that 
while  you  are  looking  to  your  own  soul,  in  doubt  whether 
you  are  saved  or  not,  you  have  but  little  energy  to  spare 
in  caring  for  the  souls  of  others.  Indeed,  it  is  your  first 
concern  to  see  that  you  yourselves  be  saved.  Till  that 
all-important  matter  is  resolved,  your  zeal  for  your 
neighbour's  welfare  is  ill-timed.  Why  busy  yourselves  to 
keep  other  men's  vineyards,  while  your  own  is  left  to  be 
overgrown  with  weeds  ?  And  then,  my  dear  friends, 
another  melancholy  aspect  of  this  disability  is,  that  all 


To  the  Recreant  of  our  Ranks.  231 

tins  while  you  are  a  detriment  to  your  fellow  Christians. 
It  is  hard  enough  to  fight  with  Satan  ;  but  it  is  all  the 
harder  work  for  the  army  to  have  to  carry  so  many  sick 
folk  with  it,  for  it  involves  much  more  toil.    You,  whose 
faith  is  all  but  gone,  are  like  the  baggage  of  an  army  ; 
you  hinder  the  rapid  march  of  the  brave  soldiers  of  the 
Cross.     How  you  depress  others  that  are  round  about 
vou !     Once  your  voice  was  that  of  a  brave  hero,  and 
you  inspirited  the  troops  ;  but  now  you  pine,  and  cry, 
and  make  others  hang  their  harps  upon  the  wdlows, 
and  learn  the  same  doleful  tune  as  your  own.     It  is  a 
sad  thing.     I  do  not  condemn  you,  but  I  greatly  pity 
you,  and  I  also  greatly  pity  the  Church  of  God,  and 
the  cause  of  God  that  it  loses  so  much  by  you  who 
ought  in  gratitude  to  Christ,  to  do  so  much  for  him. 
Alas,   that  the  people  of  God  should  be   sunk  into  so 
mournful  a  condition!     ISIuch  reason  is  there  surely 
wdiy  the  exhortation  should  be  pressed  in  all  earnest. 
Hear  it,  oh,   ailing  Christian!     ^' Shake  thyself  from 
the  dust;  arise,  and  sit  down,  O  Jerusalem:  loose  thy- 
self from  the  bands  of  thy  neck,  O  captive  daughter  of 

Zion."  ^^       ^, 

I  charge  you,  my  brother,  content  not  thyself  any 
longer  with  the  state  into  which  you  have  fallen.  May 
the'^Holy  Spirit  come  to  you,  and  prompt  you  to  strike. 
Do  strive  to  get  out  of  this  condition  into  one  of  happi- 
ness and  strength.  Let  me  try  to  encourage  you  a 
little,  and  may  God  enable  you  to  the  utmost. 

Kemember,  my  dear  friend— suppose  I  am  now  talk- 
incT  to  vou  alone— I  almost  wish  I  could  grip  your  hand 
ami  look  vou  close  in  the  face— remember  from  whence 
you  have  fallen.     Think  of  the  peaceful  hours  you  once 


232  Christian  Energy. 

enjoyed.  Oh  !  thy  stony  heart  was  not  always  so  cold  ; 
the  Word  of  God  was  not  always  so  dry  ;  the  sanctuary 
was  not  always  so  unprofitable.  You  have  wrestled  and 
prevailed,  you  know  you  have.  You  have  pleaded 
with  God,  and  you  have  had  the  desire  of  your  heart. 
You  have  communed  with  Christ,  and  your  soul  has 
been  like  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib.  Can  you  bear  to 
think  of  this,  and  not  cry — 

".Eeturn,  O  Holy  Dove,  return, 
Sweet  messenger  of  rest !  "  ? 

Can  you  who  once  have  known  these  things,  and  had 
the  flavour  of  them  in  your  mouth,  refrain  from  hun- 
gering and  thirsting  after  them  again  ?  Think  of  them, 
and  perhaps,  while  you  are  musing  upon  the  past,  you 
may  be  helped  by  strong  desires  to  return  like  Abra- 
ham unto  the  place  of  the  altar,  unto  that  place  hard 
by  Bethel,  where  at  the  first  he  had  built  an  altar  unto 
the  Lord. 

Think  of  the  danger  you  are  in  at  present.  Who  are 
they  that  are  most  likely  to  fall  into  open  sin  ?  Are 
they  not  those  who  walk  at  a  distance  from  Christ? 
If  you  live  in  close  communion  with  Jesus,  you  shall 
have  such  share  of  your  Shepherd's  company  that,  though 
you  may  hear  the  wolf's  howl,  you  shall  not  be  likely 
to  feel  his  fang.  I  believe  that  when  any  professor 
falls  into  a  filthy  sin  it  is  not  the  inception,  but  the 
culmination  of  a  process  and  growth  in  iniquity.  The 
open  sin  comes  at  the  heels  of  a  long  succession  of 
neglected  prayers,  of  neglected  worship  of  God  in  the 
family,  negligence  of  communion  with  Christ,  and  neg- 
ligence of  every  good  thing.  It  is  the  fruit,  not  the 
seed  of  the  evil  which  poisons  the  air  and  excites  the 


To  the  Recreant  of  our  Ranks,  233 

public  odium.  Beware,  then,  O  professor ! — thou  who 
Iiast  lost  the  light  of  God's  countenance — beware, 
beware !  I  pray  thee,  of  that  ill  condition  of  soul  which 
is  the  prolific  parent  of  all  distempers. 

Remember,  too,  that  there  is  real  cause  for  apprehen- 
sion, lest  you  never  were  safe.  It  is  just  possible  that 
those  doubts  you  feel  are  no  insinuations  of  Satan,  but 
the  suggestions  of  an  enlightened  conscience,  or  even 
the  whispers  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Unless  you  are 
indeed  a  Christian,  unless  you  now  prove  yourself  to 
be  such  by  your  return  to  God,  you  w^ill,  in  all  proba- 
bility, become  the  willing  servitor  of  the  devil.  Unless 
you  now,  with  full  purpose  of  heart,  seek  to  Christ, 
perhaps  the  time  has  come  wdien  you  wdll  turn  aside, 
like  Balaam,  for  reward,  or  perish  in  the  gainsaying  of 
Korah.  In  some  of  those  shapes  in  which  wicked  men 
have  perished,  you  may  despondingly  or  presumptuously 
rush  on  to  destruction,  and  precipitate  your  final  doom. 
Beware  again,  I  say,  O  cold  professor  ! — in  God's  name, 
beware  of  trifling  when  you  have  so  much  reason  to 
tremble. 

My  dear  friend,  I  would  put  another  thought  into 
your  mind  which  may  help  you.  Perhaps  you  may 
think  it  is  rather  hampering  than  helping  you,  and 
tends  more  to  depress  than  to  deliver  you.  Remember 
how  justly  you  might  now  he  left  to  your  own  devices. 
You  became  carnally  secure;  you  sinned  against  the 
light  of  God's  countenance ;  you  grieved  his  Spirit. 
What  if  he  were  now  to  say,  '^  He  is  given  unto  idols  ; 
let  him  alone  ?  "  What  if  from  this  day  the  Spirit 
should  no  more  strive  with  you  ?  What  if,  after  all, 
though  you  have  talked  and  preached   to  others,  you 


234  Christian  Energy, 

yourself  should  be  a  castaway  ?  I  do  but  mention  this 
to  arouse  you,  my  brother,  if  you  are  insensible.  You 
know  how  sometimes  the  siu'geon  fears  lest  a  man 
should  sleep  himself  to  death ;  and  he  wall  even  drive 
pins  into  him,  or  make  him  w^alk,  and  drag  him  about 
the  chamber,  so  as  to  arouse  him.  I  would  say  any- 
thing, however  sharp,  if  I  might  but  wake  you  out  of 
your  lethargy.  I  know  you  would  welcome  it,  and  in 
due  time  thank  me  for  the  severity  of  the  operation. 

But  I  shall  refrain,  for  methinks  there  is  a  better  way 
than  this.  I  want  you  to  arise  and  shake  yourself  from  the 
dust,  my  poor  desponding  friend ;  because  if  the  worst 
be  the  case,  and  you  be  no  Christian,  no  true  believer, 
yet,  ^'  Come  now,  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord; 
though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  wool ; 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  white  as 
snow.''  What  if  it  has  been  all  a  mistake,  and  you 
never  ought  to  have  made  a  profession;  yet  Jesus 
Christ  receiveth  sinners :  come  to  him  now.  I  always 
find  this  the  short  way  out  of  a  long  dreary  road,  a 
quick  relief  for  acute  maladies,  a  ready  antidote  for 
doubts  and  fears.  The  devil  has  been  arguing  with 
Christians  for  so  many  years,  that  he  understands  the 
case  against  them  a  great  deal  better  than  any  of  us 
do ;  and  if  we  begin  to  controvert  with  him,  we  shall 
soon  find  that  that  old  hater  of  man  will  soon  get  the 
mastery  over  us.  But  if  we  say,  '^  I  give  it  in,  Satan, 
I  give  it  in ;  I  am  a  sinner,  the  chief  of  sinners ;  hast 
thou  anything  more  to  say  ?  I  give  it  all  in ;  but  I 
answer  thee  with  this — '  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  His 
Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin ;  I  believe  in  him,  and 
my  sins  are  therefore  washed  away,'  " — this  is  the  high 


To  the  Recreant  of  our  Ranhs.  235 

road  to  perfect  comfort.  I  beg  thee,  my  clear  brotlier, 
to  take  it  at  once.  Hear  the  word  of  the  Spirit,  which 
saith,  "  Repent,  and  do  thy  first  works."  The  very  first 
works  were  repentance  and  faitli ;  and  so  even  begin 
again.  Away  to  the  fountain  filled  with  blood  !  Away 
to  the  cross,  and  give  that  life-look  once  more !  Away 
to  the  finished  substitutionary  sacrifice,  and  beneath 
the  crimson  canopy  of  the  atonement  hide  thy  guilty 
head.  Oh !  if  thou  doest  this,  thy  light  shall  break 
forth  as  the  morning,  and  thy  glory  as  the  noonday. 
The  Lord  help  thee  to  do  this  now,  and  end  the  strife ! 
Let  me  also  remind  any  Christian  here  full  of  doubt, 
and  with  the  bands  of  his  neck  tight  upon  him,  that  the 
atoning  blood  has  not  changed  its  poiver  to  cleanse.  If  it 
cleansed  you  twenty  years  ago,  it  can  cleanse  you  still. 
Remember,  Jesus  has  not  lost  his  power  to  save,  nor 
has  he  changed  his  character  for  willingness  to  save  to 
the  uttermost. 

"  Jesus  sits  on  Zion's  hill, 
He  receives  poor  sinners  still." 

Come,  then,  to  the  unchanging  Saviour.  Thou  who 
hast  been  treacherous — thou  whose  heart  has  played 
the  harlot  to  Christ — come  back  ;  for  his  love  to  thee 
has  not  waned.  '^  Return  unto  me,  O  backsliding 
daughter,  saith  the  Lord ;  for  I  am  married  unto  thee.^* 
The  prodigal's  heart  may  change  towards  his  Father, 
but  his  Father's  heart  never  changes  towards  him. 
Return,  then,  for  mercy  waits  thee,  and  not  judgment. 
He  is  God,  and  not  man,  else  thou  hadst  been  con- 
sumed long  ago.  Return  now,  for  he  wall  put  away  thy 
sin  like  a  cloud,  and  thy  transgressions  like  a  thick 
cloud.     Duly  acknowledge  thy  wandering,  humble  thy- 


236  Christian  Energy, 

self  because  of  thy  treachery,  and  say,  "  My  Father, 
thou  shalt  be  the  guide  of  my  youth,"  so  shalt  thou 
be  restored  perfectly,  and  thy  former  joy  shall  come 
back  to  thee. 

Do  I  hear  thee  say,  "  But  I  am  not  fit  to  come  back 
to  Christ,  and  have  joy  in  him  at  once."  Oh,  sir  I 
wert  thou  fit  at  first  ?  No ;  and  thou  art  not  fit  now, 
but  come  and  welcome.  Christ  wants  nought  from 
thee.  Come  and  trust  him,  and  perfect  salvation  is 
thine.  ^*  Oh !  but  I  cannot  bear  to  look  him  in  the 
face,  for  I  have  lived  so  long  without  walking  in  his 
counsel."  So  much  the  more  reason  that  thou  shouldest 
not  live  another  hour  without  him.  I  charge  thee,  my 
poor  distressed  brother — I  charge  thee,  my  troubled 
sister — by  the  love  that  Christ  hath  to  thee,  come  to 
him  now.  Behold  he  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks ;  if 
thou  wilt  open  to  him,  though  the  house  be  not  fur- 
nished, nor  the  table  covered  with  a  festival  for  him  as 
it  should  be,  yet  will  he  come  in  and  sup  with  thee,  even 
with  thee,  and  thou  shalt  sup  with  him  to-night.  I  see 
no  reason  why  the  most  desponding  Christian  here 
should  not  rejoice  before  he  comes  to  the  Table  of  the 
Lord.  I  do  not  know  why  the  most  barren  among  us 
should  not  be  made  fruitful.  This  I  do  know,  that  we 
are  not  straitened  in  him ;  we  are  not  straitened  in  his 
willingness  to  bless,  nor  in  his  ability  to  comfort.  Oh ! 
believe  him,  Christian ;  believe  him.  If  thou  be  not  a 
Christian,  cast  thyself  at  his  feet.  He  will  not  let  thee 
perish.  Lay  hold,  if  it  be  but  of  the  skirts  of  his  garment, 
and  do  not  let  him  go.  Do  thou  even  now  shake  thy- 
self from  the  dust,  and  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments. 

A  momentous  obligation  will  henceforth  rest  upon 


To  the  Recreant  of  our  Ranks.  237 

you.  I  must  close  with  this  remark.  I  know  there  are 
many  of  God's  people  in  the  state  I  have  been  describing. 
I  have  the  pain  sometimes  of  trying  to  clieer  them.  I 
only  hope  that  what  I  have  said  may  be  blessed  of  God 
to  them.  I  fully  anticipate  it.  Here,  then,  is  the 
practical  point.  When  thou  art  converted  strengthen 
thy  brethren. 

Look  out  for  those  who  are  in  the  same  state  as  you 
have  been  in,  and  be  very  tender  over  them.  As  you 
know  their  case,  and  have  traversed  that  howling  desert, 
you  will  be  able  to  direct  them.  I  have  described  your 
case,  because  I  fear  that  I  have  sometimes  been  on  the 
verge  of  it  myself.  I  have  found  recovery  by  a  fresh 
resoi-tto  the  love  of  Christ,  and  a  simple  renewal  of  my 
trust  in  him.  I  can,  therefore,' enter  into  your  feelings, 
and  ask  you  to  try  the  same  remedy.  After  you  have 
found  the  remedy  to  be  a  good  one,  it  is  but  a  small 
return,  and  certainly  it  is  due  from  you,  to  tell  others 
how  you  have  been  restored. 

Some  of  you,  beloved,  have  never  been  thus  carried 
into  captivity.  I  pray  God  you  never  may  be.  There 
is  no  necessity  for  it ;  but  let  me  entreat  you  to  w^alk 
very  tenderly  with  your  God.  We  serve  a  jealous  God. 
He  will  wink  at  many  an  act  of  insubordination  done 
by  his  enemies ;  the  one  tithe  of  which,  if  done  by  his 
favourite  ones,  his  elect,  his  darlings,  would  cause  him 
to  hide  his  face  from  them  at  once.  "  You  only  have 
I  known  of  all  the  people  of  the  earth,  therefore  I  will 
punish  you  for  your  iniquities."  Saith  he  not,  "As 
many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten"  ?  A  sinner  may 
go  on  wantonly  unrebuked  ;  he  may  add  house  to  house, 
and  field  to  field,   and   he  may  think  himself  secure ; 


238  Christian  Energy. 

God  will  deal  with  him  in  the  next  w^orld.  But  the 
heir  of  heaven  is  under  a  discipline  of  divine  love, 
and  God  will  deal  with  him  in  this  world ;  and  among 
the  chastisements  of  departure  from  Christ  will  be  the 
loss  of  comfort,  the  loss  of  power  to  do  good,  and  I  know 
not  wdiat  other  affliction  added  thereunto  in  his  soul  or 
in  his  circumstances.  Dear  brother,  walk  carefully, 
then ;  while  you  have  light,  walk  in  the  light.  Oh ! 
prize  the  sweet  love  of  Christ ;  never,  never  let  it  go. 
Say  unto  your  soul,  when  Christ  is  in  your  heart,  "  I 
charge  you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  by  the  roes  and 
by  the  hinds  of  the  field,  that  ye  stir  not  up  nor  wake 
my  love  until  he  please.  Introduce  no  rival's  love,  and 
no  worldliness ;  fall  into  no  inconsistencies,  but  pray 
for  grace  that  with  holy  jealousy  you  may  still  dwell 
in  the  light  and  find  favour  in  his  eyes. 

And  being  thus  kept  near  to  God,  and  being  strong 
in  the  power  of  his  might,  come  and  give  hack  the  strength 
to  him  from  ivhom  you  derived  it.  Stand  up  for  Christ. 
I  believe  w^e  are  never  happier  than  when  we  have  plenty 
to  do.  Idleness  is  the  mother  of  vexation.  A  Christian 
who  does  but  little  for  Christ,  unless  he  is  prevented 
from  doing  it  by  suffering,  wdll,  as  a  rule,  be  a  miserable 
man.  You  active  Christians,  active  in  body  and  nimble 
in  spirit, — you  joyous  Christians,  who  w^alk  in  the  light 
of  God's  countenance, — '^  work  while  it  is  day ;  for  the 
night  Cometh  when  no  man  can  work."  Let  us  pledge 
each  other  that  we  will  now  seek  the  good  of  Zion. 
Members  of  this  church,  let  none  of  you  be  recreant  to 
the  loyalty  which  you  owe  to  Christ  in  this  the  hour 
when  we  seek  to  press  forward  as  one  man  in  the  battle 
of  our  Great  Captain  and  Lord.     I  would  stand  side« 


To  the  Recreant  of  our  Ranks,  239 

by-slde  with  you  to  take  my  sliare ;  but  what  can  one 
do  if  he  abide  alone  ?  My  brethren  in  office  will  not  be 
backward,  I  know;  but  what  can  we  do?  Keep  stej) 
with  us,  my  brethren,  in  pleading  for  souls,  in  proclaim- 
ing the  gospel,  in  seeking  to  win  the  many  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Saviour ;  and  the  Lord  will  bless  us,  even 
our  own  God  will  bless  us.  Shaking  ourselves  from  the 
dust,  and  breaking  off  the  bands  of  our  own  sloth,  God 
will  come  with  his  crown  of  benediction,  and  place  it 
on  his  church's  head;  and  when  we  get  that  coveted 
prize,  let  us  hold  it  fast,  that  no  man  take  it  from  us. 
Let  us  go  forward  as  a  church  in  indissoluble  union, 
and  in  unwearied  service,  until  he  shall  come  whose 
"  Well  done  !"  shall  be  our  best  reward. 


^(fd  ^ifmtimikt{^ 


"Talk  ye  of  all  his  wondrous  woiks." — 1  Chronicles  xvi.  9. 


HIS  sentence  stands  in  connection  with  ex- 
hortations to  offer  thanksgiving  unto  the 
Lord  and  to  make  known  his  deeds  among 
the  people.  Thus  it  runs,  "  Sing  unto  him; 
sing  psalms  unto  him;  talk  ye  of  all  his 
wondrous  works." 

The  old  typical  religion  of  the  Jews,  and 
the  perverse  superstition  of  the  heathen,  made  some 
places  sacred  and  other  places  unclean ;  some  actions 
holy,  and  other  actions,  performed  however  well  they 
might  be,  common,  and  not  to  be  connected  in  any 
degree  with  holiness.  But  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ 
has  once  for  all  swept  away  all  distinction  of  holy 
places.  Every  place  is  hallowed  where  man  is  holy. 
Jesus  Christ  has  consecrated  the  world  by  his  presence. 
Now  wherever  man  chooses  to  worship  there  is  a  house 
for  God.  The  place  must  be  right,  if  the  purpose  be  good. 
The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  has  also  swept  away  those 
distinctions  which  men  make  as  to  actions  being  neces- 
sarily religious  or  irreligious.  Some  will  have  it  that  to 
sing  a  psalm  is  to  worship  God — a  sacred  thing,  but  to 


Good  Conversation.  241 

feed  the  sparrows  is  according  to  them  a  secular  matter. 
To  come  up  to  a  place  that  shall  be  set  apart  for  wor- 
ship, and  there  to  bow  the  knee  in  prayer,  is  adoration 
of  the  Most  High,  but,  according  to  them,  to  perform 
acts  of  mercy  and   righteousness  is  not  a  tribute   of 
homao-e  to  God.   Now,  the  very  essence  of  the  Christian 
religion  is  just  this-that  it  is  not  a  thing  confined  to 
hours  and  times,  to  places  and  edifices,  but  it  is  a  thing 
of  spirit.     It  lieth  not  in  outward  garbs  or  in  specious 
words,  but  it  pervades  the  whole  spirit  of  man,  and 
makes  him  turn  his  entire  life  into  worship ;  then  every 
action  that  he  performs  in  its  spirit  and  under  its  m- 
fluence,  is  holiness  unto  the  Lord.     God  is  worshipped 
by  servants  who  fulfil  the  duties  of  their  station,  by 
judges  who  decree  righteousness,  by  merchants  who  deal 
justly,  by  children   who  obey  their  parents,    and  by 
parents  who  train  up  their  children  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,  provided  always  that  they  do  it  in  faith,  without 
which  nothing  is  pleasing   to  God.     There   is   not   a 
material  line  to  be  drawn  anywhere,  so  that  you  can 
say,  ''  Outside  of  that  you  go  beyond  the  sanctuary  of 
religion,  and  get  into  the  outer  courts  frequented  by 
the  multitude."     This  has  been  the  great  mistake  which 
some  Christians   have  made   with   regard  to   politics. 
They  have  supposed  that  a  Christian  could  not   be  a 
Politician.     Hence   much   injustice  has  been  done   to 
leading  minds  and  noble  characters.     The  fact  is  when 
a  man  feels  that  there  is  nothing  belongs  to  man  but 
what  may  be  consecrated  to  God,  and  when  he  says, 
^'  I,  being  God's  servant,  may  take  all  that  belongs  to 
man,   and   devote   it  as  holiness   unto   the  Lord,'*  he 
reaches  the  highest  order  of  manhood,  and  illustrates 

lb 


212  Chisiian  Energy, 

the  highest  style  of  Christianity.  We  cannot  fullj 
exhibit  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ  till  we  have  learned 
that  we  must  carry  out  in  every  place  and  in  every 
sphere  the  spirit  of  his  religion. 

I  make  these  remarks  because,  while  we  are  first 
bidden  to  sing  unto  God's  praise,  we  are  next  told  to  talk 
about  his  wondrous  works.  There  is  a  praising  for  the 
assembly  ;  there  is  a  talking  for  the  fireside ;  and  both 
are  to  be  holy.  The  praise  is  to  be  hearty,  sincere, 
unanimous,  full  of  animation  ;  the  talk  is  to  be  equally 
sincere,  equally  earnest,  equally  sacred.  You  are  not 
to  say  "I  have  done  Avith  praising  God"  when  the 
hymn  is  over,  and  you  begin  to  open  your  mouths 
upon  ordinary  topics;  but  throughout  your  ordinary 
conversation,  in  the  fields,  by  the  wayside,  in  the  streets, 
and  in  your  chambers,  you  are  still  to  go  on  praising 
God,  and  talking  of  all  his  wondrous  works. 

Shall  there  be  a  connection  established  then  between 
such  a  common  word  as  '^  talk,"  and  such  grand  swelling 
words  as  "  the  wondrous  Avorks  of  God"  ?  We  wonder 
to  find  the  little  monosyllable  in  such  a  place.  "  Preach 
ve  of  all  his  wondrous  works,"  would  seem  well  enouo-h ; 
"  Show  them,"  would  seem  sound  theology ;  but  talk 
ye,  talk  ye ;  in  your  ordinary,  common,  every-day  con- 
versation, make  the  wondrous  works  of  God  to  be  your 
trite  converse,  your  familiar  talk.  We  must  talk ;  we 
we  seem  born  to  talk ;  we  were  wretched  indeed  if  we 
were  forbidden  to  speak  to  our  fellow -creatures.  Why, 
the  world  seems  to  be  enlivened  by  continuous,  not  to  say 
incessant  talking,  from  the  first  blush  of  morning,  on 
still  through  all  the  bustling  day,  and  far  into  the  shades 
of  drowsy  night.   How  our  tongues  are  occupied  !  They 


Good  Conversation,  243 

run  more  quickly  than  our  feet,  and  carry  less,  though 
much  mischief  sometimes  comes  from  their  babble. 
They  are  sharper  than  razors  some  of  them,  and  cut 
deeper  than  swords,  and  kindle  fire  enough  to  set  the 
world  in  a  blaze.  Now,  this  talking  to  which  women 
are  proverbially  disposed,  and  in  which  men  indulge  as 
freely  as  inclination  prompts  them ;  such  talking  to  be 
heard  in  every  street,  in  every  house,  and  in  every 
workshop  ;  this  it  is  which  is  to  be  consecrated  unto  God. 
The  streams  of  conversation  are  everywhere  to  be  drawn 
off  from  the  gutters  and  channels  in  which  they  gather 
defilement ;  to  be  strained,  cleansed,  and  purified,  till 
they  become  fresh,  clear,  and  sparkling.  Then  the 
speech  of  human  intercourse,  man  with  man,  saint  with 
saint,  being  redeemed  from  the  beggarly  elements  of 
common  slander  and  envy,  foolishness  and  vanity,  shall 
be  lifted  up  as  on  eagles'  wings,  till  it  is  like  the 
fellowship  of  the  angels ;  realising  the  prediction  of  the 
psalmist,  in  its  tribute  to  the  praise  of  the  Lord,  "  They 
shall  speak  of  the  glory  of  thy  kingdom  and  talk  of  thy 
power." 

I.  Now,  first,  THE  SUBJECT  HERE  SUGGESTED  FOR 
OUR   COMMON-PL  A.CE   TALK — HIS   WONDROUS  WORKS — 

invites  notice. 

Brethren,  we  ouorht  to  talk  more  about  God's  won- 
drous  works  as  we  find  them  in  Holy  Scripture.  Do  you 
read  them  1  Alas  !  in  how  many  a  case  the  Bible  is  the 
least-read  book  in  the  house  !  I  am  incUned  to  think 
that  though  there  may  be  more  Bibles  in  England  than 
any  other  book,  there  is  less  of  Bible-reading  than 
anything  else  in  literature.  The  sacred  volume  seems 
to  be  scarcely  known  to  many,  except  from  chapters 


244  Christian  Energy, 

read  in  the  public  services,  and  the  quotations  of  the 
minister ;  while  alas,  alas  for  us  !  our  conversation  has 
very  httle  in  it  of  the  records  of  the  mighty  acts  of  the 
Lord.  But  the  old  saints  were  wont  to  speak  to  one 
another  about  the  historical  parts  of  Scripture.  They 
dwelt  full  often,  and  never  seemed  happier  than  when 
they  were  dwelling  upon  it,  on  that  story  of  the  Red 
Sea,  when  the  Lord  smote  Rahab,  and  brake  the  head 
of  the  dragon.  How  they  would  stand  together  and 
speak  of  the  books  of  the  wars  of  the  Lord,  of  what  he 
did  by  the  brook  Arnon,  and  how  he  led  his  servants 
through  Jordan,  and  brought  them  into  the  promised 
land,  cast  out  the  Canaanites,  and  slew  their  kings. 
They  talked  of  these  things,  not  merely  as  historical 
events,  but  as  seeing  the  Lord  in  them  all,  and  they  so 
spoke  and  so  read  of  them  as  to  see  in  them  subjects 
worthy  of  their  study.  I  do  not  know  how  it  is,  but 
we  do  not  get  at  the  history  of  our  own  country  in  any- 
thing hke  the  way  in  which  one  might  desire,  for  really 
the  w^ondrous  works  of  God  wdiich  he  has  done  here  in 
this  land  are  such  as  we  ought  to  speak  of  at  our  fire- 
sides. We  should  look  upon  the  events  of  history,  and 
the  chronicles  of  each  day  in  this  light ;  and  if,  as  we 
scanned  the  ample  page  of  history,  rich  with  the  spoils 
of  time,  we  saw  God's  hand  fashioning  its  contingen- 
cies and  moulding  them  into  destiny,  and  the  impress 
of  his  footsteps  upon  all  its  stupendous  revolutions,  we 
should  not  lack  for  topics  of  conversation,  but  our 
memories  would  be  stored,  our  interest  excited,  our  minds 
elevated  with  noble  passions,  and  our  social  intercourse 
ennobled  by  the  inexhaustible  resources  of  wisdom,  as 
we  talked  of  all  the  wondrous  works  of  the  Lord. 


Good  Conversation.  245 

But,  brethren,  OUR  OWN  individual  history  will 
enable  us  to  relate  such  a  multitude  of  tender  mercies 
as  may  well  become  incentives  to  gratitude  and  praise. 
How  much  might  we  tell  of  what  the  Lord  has  done  for 
us  personally!  Here  is  a  subject  that  shall  n3ver  be 
exhausted.  Talk  to  one  another,  especially  to  those  who 
can  understand  you  because  they  have  felt  the  same, 
of  the  longsuffering  of  God  when  you  were  in  your 
ungodly  state ;  the  wonders  of  that  love  which  tracked 
you  with  its  many  warnings  while  you  were  still 
strangers  to  yourselves  and  to  God.  Talk  of  that 
Almighty  power  which,  when  the  predestinated  hour 
had  come,  laid  hold  upon  you  and  made  you  yield.  Speak 
of  what  the  Lord  did  for  you  when  you  were  in  the  low 
dungeon  of  your  self -abhorrence  ;  how  he  met  with  you 
when  you  were  brought  to  death's  door ;  how  Jesus  ap- 
peared for  you,  and  clothed  you  with  his  righteousness, 
and  your  spirit  revived,  and  your  heart  was  glad.  Shall 
the  slave  ever  forget  the  music  of  his  chains  when  they 
dropped  from  his  wrists,  and  will  you  ever  cease  to 
tpeak  of  that  happy  day,  the  happiest  of  all  days,  when 
all  the  chains  of  your  transgression  were  for  ever 
broken  off  at  the  love-touch  of  your  Redeemer  ?  Oh 
no !  talk  ye  still  of  the  wondrous  works  of  God  as  con- 
nected with  your  conversion.  And,  since  that  time, 
however  quiet  your  life  may  have  been,  I  am  sure  there 
has  been  much  in  it  that  has  tenderly  illustrated  the 
Lord's  providence,  the  Lord's  guidance,  the  Lord's  de- 
liverance, the  Lord's  upholding  and  sustaining  you. 
You  have  been,  perhaps,  in  poverty,  and  just  when  the 
barrel  of  meal  was  empty  then  were  you  supplied. 
Talk  ye  of  his  wondrous  works.     You  have  been   in 


246  Christian  Energy. 

great  temptation,  and  when  you  were  reeling  under  it, 
or  when  you  w^ere  slandered,  and  no  name  was  thought 
bad  enough  for  you,  his  sweet  love  hath  appeared 
to  you,  and  helped  you  to  rejoice  in  this  also  for 
Christ's  name  sake.  Talk  ye  of  this.  You  have 
gone,  perhaps,  Christian,  through  fire  and  through 
water ;  yours  has  been  a  very  chequered  life ;  you  have 
fought  with  lions  or  have  stood  in  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  but  in  it  all  God's  aid  has  been  very 
wonderful.  There  have  been  miracles  heaped  upon 
miracles  along  your  pathway.  Perhaps  you  are  like  the 
Welsh  woman,  who  said  that  the  Ebenezers  which  she 
had  set  up  at  the  places  where  God  had  helped  her 
were  so  thick  that  they  made  a  wall  from  the  very  spot 
she  began  with  Christ  to  that  she  had  then  reached. 
Is  it  so  with  you?  Then  talk  ye,  talk  ye  of  all  his 
wondrous  works.  I  am  sure  you  would  find  such  talk 
most  interesting,  most  impressive,  and  most  instructive, 
for  the  things  we  have  seen  and  experienced  ourselves 
generally  wear  a  novelty,  and  abound  in  interest  be- 
yond any  narrative  we  get  from  books,  or  any  un- 
authenticated  story  we  pick  up  at  second-hand.  Tell, 
then,  how  God  has  led  you,  fed  you,  and  brought  you 
to  this  day,  and  would  not  let  you  go. 

There  is  a  topic  for  you,  and  you  never  shall  know 
how  large  it  is. 

II.  The  excellency  of  this   subject   is  both 

NEGATIVE   AND   POSITIVE. 

Were  we  to  talk  more  of  God's  wondrous  works 
there  would  be  this  negative  good,  that  we  should  talk 
less  about  our  own  works,  A  man  never  lowers  himself 
more  than  when  he  tries  to  lift  himself  up.     There  are 


Good  Conversation.  247 

some  wliose  propensity  is  to  use  vain  swelling  words 
about  their  own  doings,  and  they  seem  to  be  never 
better  pleased  than  when  they  are  bragging  and  saying, 
*'/ did  this;  /did  that;  /did  the  other."  *' Talk  ye 
of  all  his  wondrous  works."  As  for  your  puny  actions, 
if  you  judge  and  estimate  them  properly,  you  will  find 
more  to  mourn  over  than  to  boast  of.  Give  to  the 
Lord  the  glory  that  is  due  unto  his  name,  and  your 
discretion  shall  not  be  perilled. 

If  we  talked  more  of  God's  wondrous  works  we  sJioidd 
he  free  from  talking  of  other  peoples  works.  It  is  easy 
to  criticise  those  we  could  not  rival,  and  carp  at  those 
we  could  not  emulate.  He  who  could  not  carve  a  statue, 
or  make  a  single  stroke  of  the  chisel  correctly,  affects 
to  point  out  where  the  handicraft  of  the  greatest 
sculptor  might  have  been  improved.  It  is  a  poor  pitiful 
occupation,  that  of  picking  holes  in  other  people's  coats, 
and  yet  some  people  seem  so  pleased  when  they  can 
perceive  a  fault,  that  they  roll  it  under  their  tongue  as 
a  sweet  morsel.  Why  should  this  be?  Why  should 
you  find  fault  with  God's  servants  in  this  way?  They 
are  not  your  servants,  but  his  servants  ;  he  will  call 
them  to  account  himself.  He  does  not  ask  you  to  be 
thus  officious.  Talk  ye  of  his  wondrous  w^orks,  and 
you  will  not  speak  so  unkindly  of  his  servants. 

Did  we  talk  more  of  God's  wondrous  works  it  woidd 
keep  us  from  the  ordinary  frivolities  of  conversation.  In 
the  olden  times  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often 
one  to  another,  and  the  Lord  hearkened  and  heard,  and 
a  book  of  remembrance  was  written  before  him  for  them 
that  feared  tlie  Lord  and  that  thought  upon  his  name. 
Suppose  for  a  moment  that  our  ordinary  conversation 


248  Christian  Energy, 

Avere  taken  down  by  an  eaves-dropper,  as  in  the  case 
mentioned  by  Malaclii.  I  do  not  know  what  your  con- 
versation was  about  at  tea-time  this  evening,  but 
supposing  that  somebody  had  been  liearkening  and 
hearing,  and  that  you  knew  for  certain  that  it  was 
going  to  be  put  into  a  book  and  printed,  would  you  feel 
quite  easy  ?  Supposing  we  could  have  put  down  in  a  book 
the  talk  of  all  our  people  during  the  day,  and  could 
have  it  all  read  out,  I  am  afraid  we  should  find  that 
our  talk  is  not  always  such  as  edifieth,  and  not  always 
seasoned  with  salt.  In  fact,  some  Christian  people 
never  talk  thoroughly  good  Gospel  talk  unless  some- 
body is  present  in  whose  esteem  it  is  likely  to  raise 
them,  or  until  they  get  into  such  company  as  they  sup- 
pose will  relish  it,  and  then  they  feel  compelled  to 
accommodate  themselves  to  the  occasion.  The  habit 
of  thoroughly  good  godly  talk  is  not  common  among 
professors.  I  wish  it  were.  I  wish  that  not  only 
sometimes  our  talk  were  what  God  would  have  it  to 
be,  but  that  it  were  always  so,  that  our  common  con- 
versation were  like  salt  ministering  grace  unto  the 
hearers. 

As  there  is  a  negative  excellence  about  this  subject 
of  conversation,  so  there  is  also  a  positive  excellence. 
Supposing  we  were  to  talk  more  of  God's  wondrous 
works ;  when  the  habit  was  acquired,  it  would  necessi- 
tate stricter  habits  of  observation,  and  of  discrimination 
in  ivatching  the  providence  of  God.  Memory,  the 
treasure  house  of  the  mind,  must  have  its  goods 
assorted  and  its  records  indexed,  so  that  the  things  of 
which  we  hear  and  read  might  not  only  be  well  retained, 
but  easily  referred  to.     As  Cowper  says — 


Good  Conversation.  249 

*♦  But  conversation,  choose  what  theme  we  may, 
And  chiefly  when  religion  leads  the  way, 
Should  flow,  like  waters  after  summer  showers, 
Not  as  if  raised  by  mere  mechanic  powers," 

Alas !  the  mercies  of  God  flow  by  us  like  a  river ;  we 
forget  to  count  its  multitudinous  waves.  We  receive 
the  mercies  fresh  every  day,  and  take  but  slight  account 
of  them ;  too  often  they  are 

*'  Forgotten  in  unthankfulness, 
And  without  praises  die." 

The  spirit  of  observing  God  in  all  things  was  prevalent 
amongst  our  Puritan  ancestors.  They  saw  God  in 
every  single  drop  of  rain,  and  in  every  ray  of  sunlight. 
They  were  wont  to  talk  about  the  commonest  changes 
of  the  atmosphere  as  coming  from  the  hand  of  God,  to 
speak  of  incidents  which  we  might  account  trivial,  as 
connected  with  the  decrees  of  him  who  ordereth  all 
things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will.  Oh,  that  we 
too  amidst  the  various  mazes  of  life  could  thus  learn  to 
track  the  course  ^'  of  boundless  wisdom  and  of  boundless 
love!"  Such  conversation,  brethren,  would  he  very 
ennobling.  Why,  it  would  liken  us  to  the  ancient  saints 
and  the  spirits  before  the  throne.  What  is  their  con- 
versation there?  How  they  talk  of  God's  wondrous 
works,  God's  works  in  creation,  God's  works  in  provi- 
dence, God's  works  in  grace.  They  are  too  taken  up 
with  the  splendour  of  the  Divine  presence  to  suffer 
their  pure  intercourse  to  degenerate  into  any  meaner 
theme.  Yes,  and  living  as  we  do  in  the  presence  of 
God,  professing  to  have  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  us, 
and  to  have  been  lifted  up  from  the  world  into  commu- 
nion with  Jesus  Christ,  it  ought  to  be  our  holy  ambition 


250  Christian  Energy, 

to  let  our  conversation  be  of  things  that  are  like  our 
standing,  things  that  are  worthy  of  our  high  calling 
and  profession,  things  that  have  to  do  with  our  election, 
and  will  help  us  onward  to  our  eternal  portion.  We 
should  not  be  so  grovelling  as  we  are  did  we  talk  more 
of  the  wondrous  things  of  God. 

And  beloved,  while  holding  this  lofty  fellowship  of 
heart  and  tongue,  how  would  our  gratitude  glow,  and 
ivhat  an  impulse  would  be  given  to  our  entire  life  I  I  do 
not  know  how  you  find  it,  but  with  me  it  is  no  easy 
matter  to  maintain  spiritual  life  in  the  fulness  of  its 
vigour.  To  go  week  after  week,  month  after  month, 
and  year  after  year,  plodding  on  in  the  pilgrimage,  is 
hard  work;  it  needs  no  small  degree  of  strength,  resolve, 
and  skill.  If  it  were  one  tremendous  leap  we  could 
soon  perform  it ;  if  it  were  but  a  spurt  in  the  race  we 
might  soon  win  the  prize ;  but  to  go  on,  on,  on,  and  still 
to  keep  up  our  zeal,  still  to  be  awake,  still  to  be  earnest, 
here  it  is  one  feels  the  need  of  the  mercies  of  God  to  be 
a  means  of  grace  to  us,  to  refresh  our  gratitude,  and  put 
fresh  fuel  upon  the  altar.  Oh  !  brethren,  we  have  not 
lived  yet.  We  do  not  seem  to  recognise  what  the 
Christian  life  really  means.  When  I  instanced  our 
conversation  just  now  as  being  poor  and  mean,  and 
barren,  I  did  but  cull  one  mildewed  leaf  out  of  the 
whole  field,  for  our  whole  life  is  much  alike,  I  fear. 
The  Lord  revive  us.  What  means  is  he  so  likely  to  use, 
except  he  employ  the  rod  of  chastisement,  as  the 
renewal  of  our  memory  of  his  great  loving-kindness, 
that  we  may  be  constrained  to  dedicate  ourselves  more 
fully  unto  him  ? 

III.  But  time  flies  ;  let  me  proceed  therefore  to  URGE 


Good  Conversation,  251 

THIS   TALKING,    ORDINAPvILY   AND    C0M:\I0NLT,   A130UT 

God's  wondrous  works. 

I  have  already  said  that  it  would  prevent  mi-ich  evil 
jind  do  us  much  good;  may  I  not  safely  add  that  it 
would  be  the  means  of  doing  much  good  to  others.     If 
we  spake  often  of  God's  wondrous  works  we  might  im- 
press the  sinner,  we  might   enlighten  the  ignorant,  we 
might  comfort  the   desponding.     You  say,  "But  how 
are  we  do  it?"    I  reply,  "  How  is  it  you  have  not  done  it 
before  ?"     If  we  began  early  in  our  Christian  course  to 
make  Jesus   Christ  our  companion  in  the  family,  and 
everywhere  wherever  we  went,  and  to  take  him  always 
with  us,  we  should  never  leave  off ;  it  would  become 
the  business  of   our  life.     I  have  noticed  that  many 
Christian  people  delay  in  this  matter  for  years.     They 
cultivate  habits  of  retirement  and  reticence  more  upon 
this  subject  than  upon  any  other.     Perhaps  it  is  a  long 
time  after  they  have  believed  that  they  come  forward 
to  obey  the  second  great  command  of  baptism,  and  the 
same  shyness  happens  with  regard  to  their  talking  about 
Christ  in  all  companies.     They  do  love  him ;  at  least 
we  trust  they  do  in    the    judgment    of    charity;    we 
acknowledge   them,    but   having   never   began    at   the 
first   to    acknowledge   him  openly  they   cannot   break 
the   ice   now.     If  they  had  then  had  the  courage  to 
say — "  I  have  given  Christ  my  tongue,   and  mean  to 
use  it  for  him  ;  I  am  his  servant,  and  I  mean  to  serve 
him    wherever    I    go,"    they    would    have    continued 
the  profession  and  the  practice  still.     Brethren,  Is  it 
diffidence  that  restrains  you?     Take    care   it  is  diffi- 
dence, and  not  cowardice  ;  say  to  yourselves,  each  one 
of  you — 


252  Christian  Energy, 

"  Am  I  a  soldier  of  the  Cross, 
A  follower  of  the  Lamb? 
And  shall  I  fear  to  own  his  cause, 
Or  blush  to  speak  his  name.'' 

What,  in  the  presence  of  the  noble  army  of  martyrs 
who  feared  not  to  die,  do  you  fear  to  speak?  What, 
if  they  stood  on  the  burning  faggots  for  Christ,  cannot 
you  bear,  if  so  it  must  be,  a  jeer  or  a  sarcasm  ?  Must 
you  be  wickedly  dumb  when  you  might  do  so  much  for 
Christ  in  the  circle  where  his  providence  has  cast  you  ? 
Oh  I  be  ashamed  of  haying  been  ashamed.  Do  ask  the 
Master  that,  whatever  fear  you  have,  you  may  be 
delivered  from  the  fear  of  man,  which  bringeth  a  snare. 
*'  Talk  ye  of  all  his  wondrous  works." 

But  some  will  object,  "  I  have  not  gifts  or  ability." 
Kay,  my  brother;  my  sister;  it  does  not  want  any 
ability  to  talk,  or  else  there  would  not  be  so  much 
loquacity  in  the  world  as  there  is.  Talk  in  the  ordinary 
strain,  the  common-place  prattle  which  breaks  the  silence 
of  the  world  ; — it  is  what  everybody  is  at.  There  is  no 
gifted  tongue  requisite,  there  are  no  powers  of  eloquence 
invoked ;  neither  laws  of  rhetoric  or  rules  of  grammar 
are  pronounced  indispensable  in  the  simple  talk  that 
my  text  inculcates — "  Talk  ye  of  all  liis  wondrous 
works."  I  beg  your  pardon  when  you  say  you  cannot 
do  this.  You  cannot,  because  you  will  not.  If  you 
would  you  could  speak  well  of  his  name.  Because 
there  is  no  want  of  ability  in  any  one  of  us  to  say 
something  for  Jesus  after  an  ordinary  sort,  I  press  it 
upon  you. 

Are  you  a  nursemaid  ?  Talk  of  his  name  to  the  little 
prattlers  with  whom  you  are  intrusted.     Or  are  you  a 


Good  Conversation,  253 

crossinor-sweeper  ?     Friend,  there  are  some  you  can  get 
at  that  I  could  not.  I  will  be  bound  to  say  the  crossing- 
sweeper  has  a  friend  who  would  be  frightened  if  I  were 
to  speak  to  him.     "  But  I  am  so  poor,"  you  reply  ;  **  I 
work  in  the  midst  of  such  a  ribald,  blaspheming  set." 
Ah  !  friend,  but  you  can  talk  ;  I  know  you  can  ;  there 
are  times  when  you  can  talk  even  to  these  blasphemers. 
It  is  little  use  talking  to  a  drunken  man ;  it  is  like  cast- 
ing pearls  before  swine.     But  he  is  not  always  drunk ; 
there  is  a  time  of   sobriety,  and  then  it  is  that  you  are 
to  ffo  to  work.     You  are  not  so  to  talk  of  Christ  as  to 
stop  the  mill,  or  to  interpose  your  religion  in  the  way 
of  business.  That  were  indiscreet ;  but  there  are  leisure 
times,  there  are  hours  for  dinner,  there  are  times  when 
they  talk  to  you,  and  then  is  your  time  to  talk  to  them. 
As  the  profane  take  the  liberty  to  force  their  irreligiou 
upon  you,  so  may  you  take  the  liberty  to  force  your 
religion  upon  them.    Use  your  wits,  find  out  the  proper 
times,  and  then  turn  them  to  the  best  account.     "  In 
the  morning  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  evening  withhold 
not  thy  hand,  for  thou  knowest  not  which  shall  prosper, 
this  or  that." 

I  have  only  one  aim  ;  if  I  can  succeed  in  it  I  shall 
be  very  thankful — that  Christian  people  shall  talk  more 
of  the  love  of  God  at  the  table,  at  the  breakfast  table, 
at  the  tea  table,  at  the  dinner  table;  that  domestic 
companionship  and  social  hospitalities  may  be  hallowed, 
and  this  without  depriving  them  of  their  genial  con- 
viviality; rather  infusing  into  them  a  higher  enter- 
tainment ;  that  we  who  are  masters  shall  talk  of  the 
things  of  God,  so  that  our  servants  shall  hear  of  them, 
and  that  servants  shall  so  speak  of  Christ  that  their 


254  Christian  Energy. 

fellows  shall  hear  about  him.  The  great  weapon  of 
the  Christian  religion  has  been  the  public  preaching 
of  the  Word,  nor  would  I  disparage  it,  but  it  will 
never  evan2:elise  the  nations  unless  there  be  attendant 
with  it  a  constant  reiteration  of  the  truth  preached,  till 
it  flows  through  innumerable  little  conduits  into  every 
circle  of  society.  Wycliffe  was  but  one  man,  but  he 
taught  others  to  read.  One  page  of  Matthew's  Gospel 
and  the  Epistle  to  the  Komans  was  given  to  each. 
They  went  out  and  read  it  in  the  streets.  So  w^as 
the  truth  spread  until  it  was  said  that  you  could  not 
meet  two  men  on  the  roadside  but  one  of  them  would 
be  a  Lollard.  In  Luther's  day  it  was  not  merely  the 
preaching  of  Luther,  it  was  the  singing  of  the  hymns 
and  the  psalms  at  the  spinning-wheel ;  it  was  the  occu- 
pation of  the  solitary  colporteur;  it  w^as  the  general 
chit-chatting  with  everybody,  at  the  smithy  fire,  in  the 
farm-yard,  on  the  Exchange ;  curiosity  was  excited, 
inquiry  was  prompted,  the  popular  conversation  was  in- 
oculated ;  the  fever  of  that  healthful  sickness,  repent- 
ance toward  God,  w^as  spread  abroad,  and  communicated 
from  one  to  another.  "  Have  you  heard  the  news  ? 
Have  you  heard  that  Luther  has  proclaimed  that  men 
are  justified  by  faith,  and  not  by  w^orks  %  "  It  w^as  this 
that  shook  Rome ;  it  is  this  which  will  shake  her  yet 
again.  The  Avaking  up  of  Christian  life  throughout 
the  entire  body  of  the  Church  of  God,  and  the  enlisting 
of  the  entire  life  of  the  Christian  Church  in  the  cause 
of  Christ,  is  an  enterprise  to  be  consummated  by  the 
individual  agency  of  each  and  the  general  action  of  all 
who  seek  the  glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  man. 
Talk  ye,  therefore,  of  all  his  wondrous  works. 


Good  Conversation.  255 

Oh!  that  there  slioulcl  be  any  here  who  never 
thought  of  God,  much  less  talked  of  his  wondrous 
works.  Wondrous  indeed  is  God's  patience  that  he 
has  kept  you  alive !  Marvellous  his  longsuffering  that 
after  having  neglected  him  all  these  years  he  has  not 
cut  you  down!  The  ox  knoweth  its  owner,  and  the 
ass  its  master's  crib,  but  you  have  not  known  God. 
You  would  not  keep  a  dog  that  would  not  follow  you. 
You  would  soon  dispose  of  an  ox  that  was  of  no  ser- 
vice to  you.  Oh  I  why  has  God  kept  you?  It  is  a 
wonder.  Here  is  another  wonder,  he  bids  us  entreat 
you,  allure  you,  encoui-age  you  with  a  saving  promise— 
*'  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved." 
Take  heed  to  this  gospel.  May  the  Holy  Ghost  make 
you  yield  to  it.  Trust  Christ ;  obey  him  by  avowing 
your  faith  in  him,  and  you  shall  be  saved. 


mmh  $mtp* 


**Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the 
dumb  sing :  for  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break  out,  and  streams 
in  the  desert." — Isaiah  xxxv.  6. 


HAT  a  difference  grace  makes  whenever 
it  enters  the  heart !  We  find  here  the 
blind,  but  they  are  not  bhnd  in  one 
sense ;  grace  has  touched  their  eyes,  and 
the  eyes  of  the  blind  are  opened.  Men 
are  said  to  be  deaf;  but  they  are  not 
deaf  after  grace  has  operated  upon  them : 
the  ears  of  the  deaf  are  unstopped.  They  have  been 
lame  before ;  but  when  once  the  Omnipotent  influence 
has  come  upon  them,  they  leap  like  a  hart.  And  the 
dumb,  so  far  from  being  dumb,  have  a  change  that  must 
be  radical,  for  its  effects  are  surprising.  The  tongue 
of  the  dumb  not  simply  speaks,  but  it  sings.  Grace 
makes  a  great  difference  in  a  man  when  it  enters  into 
him.  How  vain,  then,  are  the  boasts  and  professions 
of  some  persons  who  assert  themselves  to  be  the  children 
of  God,  and  yet  live  in  sin !  There  is  no  perceivable 
difference  in  their  conduct ;  they  are  just  what  they 
used  to  be  before  their  pretended  conversion  ;  they  are 
not  changed  in  their  acts,  even  in  the  least  degree,  and 


Dumb  Singers.  257 

yet  they  do   most  positively    affirm  that  they  are  the 
called  and  living  children  of  God.     Let  such  know  that 
their  professions   are    lies,  that   falsehood  is  the  only 
ground^York  that  they  have  for  their  hopes ;  for,  wher- 
ever the  grace  of  God  is,  it  makes  a  difference.     A 
graceless  man    is   not    like    a    gracious    man ;  and    a 
gracious  man  is  not  like  a  graceless  one ;  we  are  "  new 
creatures  in  Christ  Jesus."     When  God  looks  upon  us 
with  the  eye  of  love,  in  conversion  and  regeneration,  he 
makes  us  as  opposite  from    what  we  were  before  as 
light  is  from  darkness— as  heaven  itself  is  from  hell.  God 
works  in  man  a  change  so  great  that  no  reformation  can 
even  so  much  as  thoroughly  imitate  it.     It  is  an  entire 
cliange— a   change  of  the   will,  of   the  being,   of  the 
desires,    of   the   hates,    of   the    dislikings,    and  of   the 
likings.     In  every  respect  the  man  becomes  new  when 
divine  grace  enters  into  his  heart.     And  yet  thou  sayest 
of  thyself,  ^'  I  am  converted,"  and  remainest  what  thou 
wast !     I  tell  thee  once  again  to  thy  face,  thou  sayest 
an  empty  thing ;    thou  hast  no  ground  for  saying  it. 
If  grace  permits  thee  to  sin  as  thou  wast  wont  to  do, 
then  that  grace  is  no  grace  at  all.     That  grace  were 
not  worth  the  having  which  permits  a  man  to  be,  after 
he  receives  it,  what  he  was  before.     No,  we  must  ever 
hold  fast  to  the  great  doctrine  of  sanctification.     Where 
God  really  just^ifies  he  really  sanctifies  too ;  and  where 
there  is  a  remission  of  sin,  there  is  also  the  forsaking  of 
it.     Where  God  hath  blotted  out  transgression,  he  also 
removeth  the  love  of  it,  and  maketh  us  seek  after  holi- 
ness, and  walk  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.     We  think  we 
might  fairly  infer  this  from  the  text  as  a  prelude  to  the 
observations  we  have  to  make  concerning  it. 

17 


258  Christian  Energy. 

And  now  we  shall  want  youj  first  of  all,  to  notice  the 
sort  of  people  God  has  chosen  to  sing  his  praises,  and 
to  sing  them  eternally.  Then,  in  the  second  place,  I 
shall  enter  into  a  more  full  description  of  the  dumb 
people  here  described.  Then  shall  I  try  to  notice  cer- 
tain special  times  and  seasons  when  those  dumb  people 
sing  more  sweetly  than  at  others. 

I.  First,  then,  '^  The  tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing." 
We  make  this  the  first  point. 

Note  the  persons  whom  God  has  chosen  to  sing  his 
songs  for  ever.  There  is  no  difference,  by  nature, 
between  the  elect  and  others ;  those  who  are  now 
glorified  in  heaven,  and  walk  the  golden  streets  clad 
with  robes  of  purity,  were  by  nature  as  unholy  and 
defiled,  and  as  far  from  original  righteousness,  as  those 
who,  by  their  own  rejection  of  Christ,  and  by  their  love 
of  sin,  have  brought  themselves  into  the  pit  of  eternal 
torment,  as  a  punishment  for  their  crimes.  The  only 
reason  why  there  is  a  difference  between  those  who  are 
in  heaven  and  those  w^ho  are  in  hell,  rests  with  divine 
grace.  It  is  of  divine  grace  alone.  Those  in  heaven 
must  inevitably  have  been  cast  away  had  not  everlasting 
mercy  stretched  out  its  hand  and  redeemed  them. 
They  were  by  nature  not  one  whit  superior  to  others. 
They  would  as  certainly  have  rejected  Christ,  and  have 
trodden  under  foot  the  blood  of  Jesus  as  did  those  that 
were  cast  away,  if  grace,  free  grace,  had  not  prevented 
them  from  committing  this  sin.  The  reason  why  they 
are  Christians  is  not  because  they  did  naturally  will  to 
be  so,  nor  because  they  did  by  nature  desire  to  know 
Christ,  or  to  be  found  of  him :  but  they  are  now  saints 
simply  because  Christ  made  them  so.     He  gave  them 


Dumb  Singers.  259 

-the  desire  to  be  saved ;  he  put  into  them  the  will  to 
seek  after  God  :  he  helped  them  in  their  seekings,  and 
afterwards  brought  them  to  feel  the  peace  of  God,  which 
is  the  fruit  of  justification.  But,  by  nature,  they  were 
just  the  same  as  others ;  and  if  there  is  any  difference, 
we  are  obliged  to  say  that  the  difference  lies  on  the 
wrong  side  of  the  question.  In  very  many  cases,  we 
who  now  "  rejoice  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God," 
were  the  w^orst  of  men. 

There  are  some  here  that  now  bless  God  for  their 
redemption,    who  once   cursed  him;  who  implored,   as 
frequently  as  they  dared  to  do,  with  oaths  and  swearing, 
that  the  curse  of  God  might  rest  upon  their  fellows  and 
upon  themselves.  Many  of  the  Lord's  anointed  were  once 
the  very  castaways  of  Satan  ;  the  sweepings  of  society ; 
tlie  refuse  of  the  earth ;  those  whom  no  man  cared  for. 
Thev  were  called  outcasts,  whom  God  hath  now  called 
desired  ones,  seeing  he  hath  loved  them.     I  am  led  to 
these  thoughts  from  the  fact  that  we  are  told  here  that 
those  who   sing  were   dumb.     Their  singing  does  not 
come  naturally  from  themselves ;  they  were  not  born 
sono-sters.     No,  thev  were  dumb  ones,  these  whom  God 
would  have  to   sing  his  praises.     It  does  not  say  the 
tongue  of  the  stammerer,  or  the  tongue  of  the  blas- 
phemer, or  the  tongue  of  the  slanderer,  but  the  tongue 
of  the   dumb,  of  those  who  have  gone  farthest  from 
any  thought  of  singing  ;  of  those  wdio  have  no  power 
or   wdll  to   sino-:  the   toncrue   of   such   as   these  shall 
yet  be   made  to    sing  God's  praises.     Strange    choice 
that    God   has   made ;    strange,    for   its   graciousness ; 
strangely  manifesting  the  sovereignty  of  his  will!     God 
would  build  for  himself  a  palace  in  heaven  of  living 


260  Christian  Energy, 

stones.  Where  did  he  get  them  ?  Did  he  go  to  the 
quarries  of  Paros  ?  Hath  he  brought  forth  the  richest 
and  the  purest  marble  from  the  quarries  of  perfection  ? 
No,  ye  saints,  look  to  "  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye 
were  digged,"  and  to  the  quarry  whence  ye  were  hewn ! 
Ye  were  full  of  sin  ;  so  far  from  being  stones  that  were 
white  with  purity,  ye  were  black  with  defilement,  to  all 
appearance  utterly  unfit  to  be  made  stones  in  the  spiritual 
temple,  which  should  be  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Most 
High.  And  yet  he  chose  you  to  be  trophies  of  his 
grace  and  of  his  power  to  save.  When  Solomon  built 
for  himself  a  palace,  he  built  it  of  cedar ;  but  when 
God  would  build  for  himself  a  dwelling  for  ever,  he  cut 
not  down  the  goodly  cedars,  but  he  dwelt  in  a  bush,, 
and  hath  preserved  it  as  his  memorial  for  ever,  ^'  The 
God  that  dwelt  in  the  bush.''  Goldsmiths  make  ex- 
quisite forms  from  precious  material ;  they  fashion  the 
bracelet  and  the  ring  from  gold;  God  maketh  his 
precious  things  out  of  base  material ;  and  from  the 
black  pebbles  of  the  defiling  brooks  he  hath  taken  up 
stones,  which  he  hath  set  in  the  golden  ring  of  his  im~ 
mutable  love,  to  make  them  gems  to  sparkle  on  his 
finger  for  ever.  He  hath  not  selected  the  best,  but, 
apparently,  the  worst  of  men  to  be  the  monuments  of 
his  grace ;  and  when  he  would  have  a  choir  in  heaven 
that  should  with  tongues  harmonious  sing  his  praises — 
when  he  would  have  a  chorus  that  should  for  ever  chant 
the  hallelujahs  louder  than  the  noise  of  many  waters, 
and  like  great  thunders,  he  did  not  send  mercy  down  to 
seek  earth's  sono;sters  and  cull  from  us  those  who  have 
the  sweetest  voices ;  he  said,  "  Go,  Mercy,  and  find  out 
the  dumb,  and  touch  their  lips,  and  make  them  sing." 


Dumb  Slnrjers.  2(U 

The  virgin  tongues  that  never  sang  my  praise  before, 
that  have  been  silent  erst  till  now,  shall  break  forth  in 
rhapsodies  sublime,  and  they  shall  lead  the  song ;  even 
angels  shall  but  attend  behind,  and  catch  the  notes  from 
the  lips  of  those  who  once  were  dumb.  The  tongue  of 
the  dumb  shall  sing  his  praises  hereafter  in  strains  of 
purity  hitherto  unknown. 

Oh !  what  a  fountain  of  consolation  this  opens  for 
you  and  for  me  !  Ay,  beloved,  if  God  did  not  choose  the 
base  things  of  this  world,  he  would  never  have  chosen 
us ;  if  he  had  respect  unto  the  countenance  of  men,  if 
God  were  a  respecter  of  persons,  where  had  you  and  I 
been  this  day?  AVe  had  never  been  instances  of  his 
love  and  mercy.  No,  as  we  look  upon  ourselves  now, 
and  remember  what  we  once  were,  we  are  often  obliged 

io  say  : — 

"  Depths  of  mercy,  can  there  be 
Mercy  still  reserved  for  me  ?" 

How  many  times  we  have  sung  at  the  Lord's  table — 
the  sacramental  supper  of  our  Master : — 

"  Why  was  I  made  to  hear  thy  voice, 
And  ent€r  while  there's  room, 
While  others  make  a  wretched  choice, 
And  rather  starve  than  come  ?  " 

And  we  have  joined  in  singing : — 

"  'Twas  the  same  love  that  spread  the  feast, 
That  sweetly  forced  us  in ; 
Else  we  had  still  refused  to  taste, 
And  perished  in  our  sin." 

Grace  is  always  grace,  but  it  never  seems  so  gracious 
as  when  we  see  it  brought  to  our  unworthy  selves.  You 
are  obliged  to  confess  that  it  is  of  grace  then,  and  cast 


262  Chnstian  Energy. 

away  the  thoughts  that  it  was  of  your  foreseen  faith,  or 
of  your  foreseen  good  works,  that  the  Lord  chose  you. 
We  are  oHio;ed  to  come  to  this.  We  feel  and  know  that 
it  must  have  been  of  mercy,  free  mercy,  sweet  mercy 
alone.  We  were  not  capable  of  doing  good  works 
without  his  grace  preventing  us  before  good  works,  and 
without  his  grace  also  in  good  works  enabling  us  to  do 
them  ;  and  therefore  they  never  could  have  been  the 
motive  to  divine  love,  nor  the  reason  why  it  flowed 
towards  us.  O  ye  unworthy  ones !  ye  saints  that  feel 
your  deep  natural  depravity,  and  mourn  over  your  ruin 
by  the  fall  of  Adam,  lift  up  your  hearts  to  God !  He 
hath  delivered  you  from  all  impediments  which  Adam 
cast  upon  you;  your  tongue  is  loosed,  it  is  loose  now;. 
Adam  made  it  dumb,  but  God  hath  loosed  it;  your 
eyes  that  were  blinded  by  Adam's  fall  are  opened  now ;; 
he  hath  lifted  you  from  the  miry  clay.  What  Adam 
lost  for  us  Christ  hath  regained  for  us ;  he  hath  plucked 
us  out  of  the  pit,  and  "  set  us  upon  a  rock,  and  estab- 
lished our  goings,  and  hath  put  a  new  song  in  our 
mouth,  even  praise  for  evermore."  Yes,  '*  the  tongue 
of  the  dumb  shall  sing." 

Just  another  liint  here  before  I  leave  this  point. 
How  this  ought  to  give  you  encouragement  in  seeking 
to  do  good  to  others  !  Why,  my  brethren,  I  can  never 
think  any  naan  too  far  gone  for  divine  mercy  since  I  know 
that  God  saved  me.  Whenever  I  have  felt  despond- 
ing about  any  of  my  hearers  who  have  for  a  long  time 
persevered  in  guilt,  I  have  only  had  to  reach  down  my 
ow^n  biography  from  the  shelves  of  my  memory,  and 
just  think  what  I  too  was  till  grace  redeemed  me,  and 
brouo:ht  me  to  mv  SaA'iour's  feet;  and  then   I  have 


Diunh  Singers.  2 Go 


sau 


It  Avill  be  no  wonder  if  that  man  is  saved ;  after 
what  he  hath   done  for  me  I  can  believe   anything  of 
my  Master.     If  he  hath  blotted  out  my  transgressions, 
if 'he  hath  clean  melted  away  my  sin,  then  I  can  never 
despair  of  any  of  my  fellow  creatures.     I  may  despair 
for  myself,  bat  I  cannot  for  them."     Eemember,  they 
may  be  dumb  now,  but  he  can  make  them  sing.     Your 
son  John  is  a  sad  reprobate  ;  keep  on  praying  for  him, 
mother;  God  can  change  his  heart.     Your  daughter's 
heart  seems  hard  as  adamant ;  he  who  makes  the  dumb 
siniT  can  make  rocks  melt.     Believe  in  God  for  your 
chitdren  as  well  as  for  yourselves— trust  him  ;  take  their 
cases  before  the  throne  ;  rely  upon  him  that  he  can  do 
it,  and  believe  that  in  answer  to  earnest  prayer  he  also 
will  do  it.     And  if  you  have  neighbours  that  are  full  of 
the  pestilence  of  sin,  whose  vices  come  up  before  you  as 
a  stench  in  your  nostrils,  yet  fear  not  to  carry  the  gospel 
to  them ;  though  they  be  harlots,  drunkai'ds,  swearers, 
be  not  afraid  to  tell  them  of  the  Saviour's  dying  love. 
He  makes  the  dumb  sing;  he  does  not  ask  even  a  voice 
of  them  to  begin  with  ;  they  are  dumb,  and  he  does  not 
ask  of   them  even  the  power  of  speech,  but  he  gives 
them  the  power.    Oh  if  you  have  neighbours  who  are  pro- 
faners  of  the  Sabbath,  haters  of  God,  unwilling  to  come 
to  the  house  of  God,  despising  Christ;  if  you  find  them 
as  far  gone  as  you  can  find  them,  recollect  he  maketh 
the  dumb  sing,  and  therefore  he  can  make  them  live. 
He  wants  no  goodness  in  them  to  begin  with  ;  all  he 
wants  is  just  the  rough,  raw  material— unhewn,  uncut, 
unpolished.     And  he  does  not  want  even  good  material ; 
bad  as  the  material  may  be,  he  can  make  it  into  some- 
thing inestimably  precious,  something  that  is  worthy  of 


264  Christian  Energy. 

the  Saviours  blood.  Go  on — fear  not;  if  the  dumb 
can  sing,  then  surely  you  can  never  say  that  any  man 
need  be  a  castaway. 

II.  Now  I  am  to  enter  into  some  rather  more  lucid 
description  of  these  dumb  people.     Who  are  they  ? 

Well,  sometimes  I  get  a  good  thought  out  of  Cruden's 
Concordance.  I  believe  that  it  is  about  the  best  com- 
mentary on  the  Bible  for  ordinary  uses,  and  I  like  to 
study  it.  As  I  opened  it  at  this  passage,  I  found 
Master  Cruden  describing  different  kinds  of  dumb 
people.  He  says  there  are  four  or  five  different  sorts, 
but  I  shall  name  only  four  of  them.  The  first  sort  of 
dumb  people  he  mentions  are  those  that  cannot  speak ; 
the  second  sort  are  those  that  will  not  speak ;  the  third 
sort  are  those  that  dare  not  speak ;  and  the  fourth  sort 
are  those  that  have  nothing  to  say,  and  therefore  are 
dumb. 

The  first  sort  of  people  who  shall  sing  are  those  who 
cannot  speak — that  is  the  usual  acceptation  of  the  word 
dumb — the  others  are,  of  course,  only  figurative  appli- 
cations of  the  term.  We  call  a  man  dumb  when  through 
physical  infirmity  he  cannot  speak.  Now,  spiritually, 
the  man  who  is  still  in  his  trespasses  and  sins  is  dumb, 
and  I  will  prove  that.  He  is  dead,  and  tliere  is  none  so 
dumb  as  a  dead  man.  "  Shall  the  dead  arise  and  praise 
thee?  Shall  thy  lovingkindness  be  declared  in  the 
grave,  or  thy  faithfulness  in  destruction?  "  The  word 
of  God  assures  us  that  men  are  spiritually  dead:  it 
follows  then  that  they  must  be  spiritually  dumb. 
They  cannot  sing  God's  praises ;  they  know  him  not, 
and  therefore  they  cannot  exalt  his  glorious  name. 
They  cannot  confess  their  sins.    Though  they  may  utter 


Dumb  Singers. 


265 


the  mere  words  of  confession,  they  cannot  really  con- 
fess, for  they  do  not  know  the  evil  of  sin,  nor  have 
they  been  taught  to  feol  what  a  bitter  thing  it  is,  nor  do 
they  know  themselves  as  sinners.     And  as  "  no  man  can 
call  Jesus  Lord,    except  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  these 
people  cannot  do  so  truly.     Perhaps,  it  may  be,  they 
can  talk  well  of  the  doctrines,  but  they  cannot  converse 
about  them  out  of  the  fulness  of  their  hearts,  as  livmg 
and  vital  principles  which  they  know  by  any  kind  ot 
spiritual  instinct  or  experience.     They  cannot  jomiu 
the  songs,  nor  can  they  take  part  in  the  conversation 
of  a  Christian.     If  they  sit  down  with  the  saints  per- 
haps they  have  culled  a  few  phrases  from  the  garden  ot 
the  Lord,  which  they  use  and  apply  to  certain  things 
which  they  do  not  know  anything  about.     They  talk  a 
lan.niage  the  meaning  of  which  they  do  not  compre- 
heml-like  Milton's  daughters  reading  a  language  to 
their  father  which  tliev  did  not  understand.     So  far  as 
the  essence  of  the  matter  is  concerned,  they  are  dumb. 
But,  all  hail  sovereign  grace !  "The  tongue  of  the  dumb 
shall   sing."     God   will  have   his   darlings  made  what 
they  should  be.     They  are  dumb  by  nature,  but  he  wi.l 
not  leave  thorn  so ;  they  cannot  now  sing  his  praises, 
but  they  shall  do  it;  they  will  not  now  confess  then- 
sins,  but  he  will  bring  them  on  their  knees  yet,  and 
make  them  pour  out  their  hearts  before  him.     They 
cannot  now  talk  the  brogue  of  Canaan,  or  speak  the 
language  of  Zion,  but  they  shall  do  it  soon.     Grace, 
omnipotent  grace,  will  have  its  way  with  them.     They 
shall  be  taught  to  pray;  their  eyes  slia  1  be  made  to 
flow  with  tears  of  penitence;  and  then,  after  that,  their 
lips  shall  be  made  to  sing  to  the  i)raise  of  sovereign  grace. 


266  Christian  Energy. 

I  need  not  dwell  upon  this  point,  because  I  address 
many  here  that  were  dumb  once,  who  can  bless  God 
that  they  can  now  sing.  And  does  it  not  sometimes 
seem  to  you,  beloved,  a  very  strange  thing  that  you  are 
what  you  are  ?  I  should  think  it  must  be  the  strangest 
thing  in  the  world  for  a  dumb  man  to  speak,  because  he 
has  no  idea  how  a  man  feels  when  he  is  speaking — he  has 
no  notion  of  the  thing  at  all.  Like  a  man  blind  from 
his  birth,  he  has  no  idea  what  kind  of  a  thing  sight 
can  be.  We  have  heard  of  a  blind  man  who  supposed 
that  the  colour  of  scarlet  must  be  very  much  like  the 
sound  of  a  trumpet — he  had  no  other  w^ay  of  com- 
paring it.  So  the  dumb  man  has  no  notion  of  the 
way  to  talk.  Do  you  not  think  that  it  is  a  strange 
thing  that  you  are  what  you  are  ?  You  said  once,  *'  I 
will  never  be  one  of  those  canting  Methodists.  Do 
you  think  I  shall  ever  make  a  profession  of  religion  ? 
What!  I  attend  a  prayer-meeting?  No."  And  ye 
went  along  the  streets  in  all  your  gaiety  of  mirth,  and 
said,  ''  What !  I  become  a  little  child,  and  give  up  my 
mind  to  simple  faith,  and  not  reason  at  all !  What  \ 
am  I  to  give  up  all  argument  about  things  that  pertain 
to  the  life  to  come,  and  simply  take  them  for  granted 
because  God  has  said  them  ?  Nay,  that  never  can  be ! '' 
I  will  be  bound  to  say  it  will  be  a  wonder  to  you  as 
long  as  you  are  here  on  earth  that  you  are  the  children 
of  God ;  and  even  in  heaven  itself  the  greatest  wonder 
to  your  mind  will  be,  that  you  were  brought  to  know 
and  taught  to  love  the  Saviour  ere  you  saw  the  goodly 
land  or  walked  the  golden  streets. 

But  there  is  a  sort  of  dumb  people  that  will  not  speak. 
They  are  mentioned  by  Isaiah.     He  said  of  preachers  in 


Dumb  Singers.  2Cu 

his  day,  tliey  were  "  dumb  dogs  that  Avould  not  Lark." 
Bless  God,  we  arc  not  now  quite  so  mucli  inundated  by 
this  kind  of  dumb  folk  as  we  used  to  be.     We  have 
had  to  mourn,  in  years  gone  by,  that  we  could  look  from 
parish  to  parish  and  find  nobody  but  a  dumb  dog  in  the 
parish  church,  and  in  the  pulpits  of  dissenters  there  was 
full  often  a  painful  lack  of  positive  gospel.     Full  many 
who  might  have  spoken  with  a  little  earnestness  let  the 
people  slumber  under  them,  instead  of  preaching  the 
word  with  true  fidelity,  as  those  who  would  have  to  give 
account  to  God.     My  grandfather  used  to  tell  a  story 
of  a  person  who  once  resided  near  him,  and  called  him- 
self a  preacher  of  the  gospel.    He  was  visited  by  a  poor 
woman,  who  asked  him  what  was  the  meaning  of  the 
*'  new  birth  ?  "  To  which  he  replied,  "  My  good  woman, 
what  do  you  come  to  me  about  that  for  ?     Nicodemus, 
a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  did  not  know ;  he  was  a  wise  man, 
and  hpw  do  you  think  I  should ?"     So  she  had  to  go 
away  with  only  that  answer.     Time  was  when  such  an 
answer  might  have  been  given  by  a  great  many  who  were 
reckoned  to  be  the  authorised  teachers  of  religion,  but 
knew  nothing  at  all  about  the  matter.     They  under- 
stood a  great  deal  more  about  foxhunting  than  about 
preaching,  and  more  about    farming   their  land  than 
about  the  spii'itual  husbandry  of  God's  church.     Bless 
God,  there  are  not  so  many  of  that  sort  now  ;  God  grant 
the   race   may  become   thoroughly   extinct.     Oh  that 
every   pulpit  and   every    place    of   worship   might   be 
filled  with  a  man  who  has  got  a  tongue  of  fire  and  a 
heart  of  flame,   and  shuns  not  to   declare   the   whole 
council  of  God,  neither  seeking  the  smile  of  men,  nor 
dreadino;  their  frown.     AVo  have  this  promise  that  it 


2(jS  Christian  Energy. 


sliall  be  so — ^' The  tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing." 
And,  ah  !  they  do  sing  well,  too,  when  God  makes  them 
sing.  You  remember  Rowland  Hill's  story  in  ^'The 
Village  Dialoo-ues,"  about  ]\Ir.  Merriman.  Mr.  Merri- 
man  was  a  sad  scapegrace  of  a  preacher ;  he  was  to  be 
always  seen  at  fair  and  revel,  but  seldom  to  be  found 
in  his  pulpit  when  he  should  have  been  there,  until  he 
was  converted,  and  then  he  began  to  preach  with  tears 
running  down  his  face,  and  it  was  not  long  before  the 
church  began  to  be  crowded !  The  squire  would  not  go 
and  hear  any  of  that  stuff,  and  locked  up  his  pew ;  and 
]Mr.  Merriman  had  a  little  ladder  made  outside  the 
door,  as  he  did  not  wish  to  break  the  door  open,  and 
the  people  used  to  sit  on  the  steps,  up  one  side  and 
down  the  other,  so  that  it  made  twice  as  much  room 
as  there  was  before.  No  preachers  are  more  thoroughly 
pronounced  than  those  who  were  once  dumb.  If  the 
Lord  opens  their  mouths  they  will  think  they  cannot 
preach  often  enough  and  earnestly  enough  to  make  up 
for  wasted  time  and  the  mischief  they  did  before. 
Chalmers  himself  might  never  have  been  so  eloquent 
a  preacher  had  he  not  been  for  a  long  time  a  dumb  dog. 
He  preached  morality,  he  said,  till  he  made  all  his  parish 
immoral ;  he  kept  on  urging  the  people  to  keep  God's 
law,  till  he  made  them  break  it ;  but  when  he  turned 
round  and  began  to  preach  God's  gospel,  then  the  dumb 
began  to  sing.  Oh,  may  God  bring  this  about  in  every 
one  of  us  !  If  we  are  dumb  as  professed  ministers,  may 
he  open  our  mouths,  and  force  us  to  speak  forth  his 
word,  lest  at  the  last  day  the  blood  of  our  hearers'  souls 
should  be  found  upon  our  skirts,  and  we  should  be  cast 
away  as  unfaithful  stewards  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 


Dumb  Slnrjers.  269 

I  will  now  introduce  you  to  a  third  sort  of  dumb 
people.     They  arc  dumb  because  they  dare  not  speak; 
and  they  are  good  people,  blessed  souls.     Here  is  one 
of  them  :  '*  I  was  dumb  with  silence  ;  I  opened  not  my 
mouth,  because  thou  didst  it."     And  it  is  so  blessed  to 
be  dumb  in  that  fashion.     The  Lord's  servant  will  often 
have  to  be  dumb  under  trials  and  troubles.    When  Satan 
tempts  him  to  repine,  he  will  put  his  finger  to  his  lip 
and  say,  "  Hush  murmuring,  be  still ;  shall  a  living  man 
complain  of  the  punishment  of  his  sins?"     Even  the 
child  of  God  will  imitate  or  emulate  Job  when  he  sat 
down  for  seven  days  and  nights  and  said  not  a  word, 
for  he  felt  that  his  trouble  was  heavy,  and  his  w^ofds 
were   light,  therefore  he  could   say  nothing.     It   had 
been  as  well  if  Job  had  kept  his  mouth  shut  for  the 
next  few  days ;  he  w^ould  not  have  said  so  much  amiss 
as  he  did  in  many  things  that  he  uttered.     Oh  !  there 
are  times  when  you  and  I,  beloved,  are  obliged  to  keep 
the   bridle   on   our    tongue,    lest   we    should   murmur 
against  God.     We  are  in  evil  company,  perhaps  ;  our 
spirits  are  hot  wdthin  us,  and  we  want  to  take  vengeance 
for  the  Lord ;  we  are  like  the  friends  of  David,  who 
wanted  to  give  Shimei   a   taste  of   summary  justice. 
'*  Let  us  take  off  this  dead  dog's  head,"  we  say :  and 
then  our  Jesus  tells  us  to  put  our  sword  into  its  scab- 
bard, ''  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive."     How 
often  have  we  been  dumb.    And  sometimes  when  there 
have  been  slanders  against  our  character,  and  men  have 
calumniated  us,   oh,   how  our  fingers   have   itched  to 
retort  upon  them.     We  have  wanted  to  see  who  was 
the  stronger  of  the  two.     But  we  have  said,  "  No  :  our 
Master  did  not  answer,  and  he  left  us  an  example  that 


270  CliHstian  Energy. 

we  should  follow  his  steps."  The  chief  priests  accused 
him  of  many  tliiiio-s,  but  he  "answered  them  not  a  word." 
"Well,  we  have  found  it  hard  sometimes  to  be  dumb, 
like  the  sheep  when  it  is  brought  to  the  shearer,  or  the 
lamb  when  it  is  in  the  slaughter-house.  Upon  our  beds 
in  sickness  we  have  tried  to  quench  every  murmuring 
word ;  we  have  not  let  a  sentence  of  repining  or  an  im- 
patient expression  escape  our  lips  which  we  could  possibly 
avoid,  but,  notwithstanding  all  our  resolution,  we  have 
found  it  no  easy  matter  to  restrain  ourselves,  and  to 
keep  silence.  It  is  blessed  work  when  we  are  enabled 
to  do  it.  Now,  ye  Avho  have  been  dumb  under  great 
weights  of  sorrow ;  ye  whose  songs  have  been  sus- 
pended, because  ye  durst  not  open  your  lips  lest  sighs 
should  usurp  the  place  of  praise, — come,  listen  to  this 
promise :  "  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing."  You 
are,  it  may  be,  in  the  deepest  trouble  now,  and  obliged 
to  be  silent;  well,  you  shall  sing  yet  for  all  that. 
Though  like  Jonah,  you  are  in  the  whale's  belly,  carried 
down,  as  he  called  it,  to  the  lowest  hell ;  though  the 
weeds  are  wrapped  about  yoiu'  head,  and  the  earth  with 
her  bars  is  about  you  for  ever,  yet  you  "shall  look 
again  towards  his  holy  temple."  Though  you  have 
hung  your  harp  upon  the  willows — bless  God  you  have 
not  broken  it — ^you  will  have  use  for  it  by-and-by — you 
shall  take  it  from  its  resting-place,  and 

*'  Loud  to  the  praise  of  sovereign  grace 
Bid  every  string  awake," 

If  you  cannot  cheer  the  darkness  with  "  songs  in  the 
night,"  yet  he  shall  "  compass  you  about  with  songs  of 
deliverance ;"  if  you  cannot  sing  his  praises  now,  yet  ye 


Dumb  Singers,  271 

shall  do  so  by-and-by,  when  ^-ace  shall  fill  your  hearts, 
or  when  delivering  mercy  shall  fire  your  tongues.    Your 
better  days  are  yet  to  come.     But,  blessed  be  God,  we 
are  not  always  to  be  silent  with  affliction.     The  saints 
have  known  joy  unspeakably  great  in  the  midst  of  trial 
intolerably  hot.     Their  murmuring  has  been   silenced, 
and   their   thanksgiving   has   become   vocal.     An   old 
Puritan  said,  "•  God's  people  are  like  birds ;  they  sing 
best  in  cages."     Another  observes  that  "  God's  people 
sing  sweetest  when  in  the  deepest  trouble."     Said  old 
Master  Brooks,  "  The  deeper  the  flood  w^as  on  earth  the 
higher  the  ark  went  up  towards  heaven."     So  it  is  with 
the  child  of  God  if  he  lives  close  to  his  Master.     Trou- 
bles are  called  w^eights.    A  weight,  you  know,  generally 
cloggeth  and  kcepeth  down  to  the  earth  ;  but  there  are 
conditions  according  to  the  laws  of  mechanics,  by  w^hich 
you  can  make  a  weight  lift  you ;  and  so  it  is  possible  to 
make  your  troubles  lift  you  above  the  wwld  instead  of 
making  them  sink  you  beneath  your  level.     Ah!  we 
thank  our  God,  he  has  sometimes  opened  our  mouth 
when  we  were  dumb  through  ingratitude,  and  did  not 
praise  liim.     He  has  opened  our  mouth  by  a  trial ;  for 
a  thousand  mercies  we  did  not  bless  him,  till  a  sharp 
affliction  has  quickened  our  memory. 

We  have  one  more  kind  of  dumb  people.  There  are 
those  who  have  nothing  to  say,  therefore  they  are  dumb. 
I  will  give  you  an  instance  ;  Solomon  says  in  the  Pro- 
verbs—^' Open  thy  mouth  for  the  dumb ;"  and  he 
shows  by  the  context  that  he  means  those  who  in  the 
court  of  judgment  have  nothing  to  plead  for  them- 
selves, and  have  to  stand  dumb  before  the  bar.  Like 
that  man  of  old,  who,  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the 


272  Christian  Energy, 

guests,  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment ;  and  when  the 
king  said,  ^'  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither?"  he 
stood  speechless ;  speechless,  not  because  he  could  not 
speak,  but  because  he  had  nothing  to  say.  Have  not 
3'ou  and  I  been  dumb,  and  are  we  not  now,  when  we 
attempt  to  stand  on  law  terms  with  God,  when  we 
forget  that  Jesus  Chiist  and  his  blood  and  righteousness 
are  our  full  acquittal  ?  W  hat  answer  can  we  give  when 
the  commandments  are  laid  bare  before  us,  and  the  de- 
mands of  God's  law  are  brouo-ht  home  to  our  conscience? 
There  was  a  time  wdth  each  of  us,  it  was  not  long  ago 
with  some  here  present,  when  we  stood  before  Moses' 
seat  and  heard  the  commandments  read,  and  we  were 
asked — "Sinner,  canst  thou  claim  to  have  kept  those 
commandments?"  and  we  were  dumb.  Then  w^e  w^ere 
asked — **  Sinner,  canst  thou  give  any  atonement  for  the 
breach  of  those  commandments  ? "  and  we  were  dumb. 
We  were  asked — "  Sinner,  canst  thou,  by  a  future 
obedience,  wipe  out  thy  past  sin  ? "  We  knew  it  was 
impossible,  and  w^e  were  dumb.  We  were  asked — 
"  Canst  thou  endure  the  penalty  ?  canst  thou  bear  to 
swelter  for  ever  in  the  flames  of  hell ;  canst  thou  suffer 
everlastino;  torments ;  canst  thou  dwell  with  everlasting^ 
burnings,  and  abide  with  eternal  fires  ? "  and  we  were 
dumb.  We  were  asked  the  question — "  Prisoner  at  the 
bar,  hast  thou  any  reason  to  plead  why  thou  shouldst 
not  be  condemned  ? "  and  we  were  dumb  with  convic- 
tions of  our  deserts  and  terror  at  our  doom.  And  we 
were  asked — "  Prisoner,  hast  thou  any  helper ;  hast  thou 
anyone  that  can  deliver  thee  ?  "  and  we  were  dumb,  for 
we  had  no  wisdom  or  device,  nor  did  an  answer  rise  to 
our  lips.     Ay,  but  blessed  be  God,  *'  the  tongue  of  the 


Dumb  SliKjers.  273 

dumb  shall  sing."  And  shall  I  tell  you  what  we  can 
smo-?  Why,  we  can  sing  this  anthem:  ''Who  shall 
lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  electa'  "  not  God, 
for  he'^hath Vstified."  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  " 
not  Christ,  "  He  hath  died,  yea  rather,  hath  risen  again, 
who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  maketh  in- 
tercession for  us."  We  who  had  not  a  word  to  say  for 
ourselves,  can  now  speak  fluently,  having  received 
knowledge  of  salvation  through  the  remission  of  our 
sins. 

Has  God  made  you  dumb?  has  he  taken  away  all 
your  self-righteousness  ?  Then,  as  truly  as  ever  he  has 
shut  your  mouth,  he  will  open  it.  If  God  has  killed 
vour  self-righteousness,  he  will  give  you  a  better 
righteousness.  If  he  has  knocked  doAvn  all  your  refuges 
of  lies,  he  will  build  you  up  a  good  refuge.  He  has  not 
come  to  destroy  you ;  he  has  shut  your  mouth  for  a 
season  to  fill  it  with  his  praise  hereafter.  Be  of  good 
cheer  :  look  to  Jesus  ;  cast  thine  eye  to  the  cross ;  put 
thy  confidence  in  him  :  and  then  thou  who  thinkest 
thyself  a  castaway,  even  thou,  poor  weeping  Mary,  shall 
yet  sing  of  redeeming  mercy  and  undying  love. 

IV.  To  conclude,  let  me  just  notice  the  occasions 
\'hen  the  tongue  of  these  dumb  people  sings  the  best. 
When  does  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing?  Why,  I 
tlnnk  it  sings  always,  little  or  much.  If  it  is  once  set 
at  liberty,  it  will  never  leave  off  singing.  Some  people 
say  this  world  is  a  howling  wilderness;  well,  they  make 
it  so.  If  you  choose  to  distress  yourselves  and  disturb 
other  people,  I  cannot  help  it.  I  shall  prefer  the 
matter  of  my  text— '' Then  shall  the  tongue  of  the 
dumb,"   not   howl,   but   ''sing."      Yes,   they   do   sing 

18 


274  Chistian  Energy. 

always,  little  or  much ;  sometimes  it  is  in  a  low  hush- 
note ;  sometimes  they  have  to  go  rather  deep  in  the 
bass,  but  there  are  other  times  when  they  can  mount 
to  the  highest  notes  of  all.  They  have  special  times  of 
singing.  They  first  begin  to  sing,  when  they  lose 
their  burden  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  ;  that  is  a  time  of 
singing.  You  know  how  John  Bunyan  describes  it. 
He  says  when  poor  Pilgrim  lost  his  burden  at  the  cross, 
he  gave  three  great  leaps;  and  went  on  his  way 
singing.  We  have  not  forgotten  those  three  great 
leaps ;  we  have  leaped  many  times  since  then 
with  joy  and  gratitude,  but  we  think  -sve  never 
leaped  so  high  as  we  did  at  the  time  wdien  we  saw 
our  sins  all  gone,  and  our  transgressions  covered  up  in 
the  tomb  of  the  Saviour.  By  the  way,  let  me  tell  you 
a  little  story  about  John  Bunyan's  allegory.  I  am  a 
great  lover  of  John  Bunyan,  but  I  do  not  believe  that 
his  teaching  is  always  infallible ;  for  I  met  w4th  a  story 
the  other  day  which  I  think  a  very  good  one.  There 
was  a  young  man  in  Edinburgh  who  wished  to  be  a 
missionary.  He  was  a  sensible  young  man  ;  he  thought 
— "  Well,  if  I  am  to  be  a  missionary,  there  is  no  need 
for  me  to  transport  myself  far  away  from  home  ;  I 
may  as  w^ell  be  a  missionary  in  Edinburgh."  There's 
a  hint  to  some  of  jom  ladies  who  give  away  tracts 
in  your  district,  and  never  give  your  servant  Mary 
one.  Well,  this  young  man  started,  and  determined 
to  speak  to  the  first  person  he  met.  He  met  one  of  the 
old  fishwives :  those  of  us  wdio  have  seen  them  can 
never  forget  them;  they  are  extraordinary  women 
indeed.  So,  stepping  up  to  her,  he  said,  *'  Here  you 
are,  coming  with  your  burden  on  your  back ;  let  me  ask 


Dumb  Singers,  275 

you  if  you  have  got  another  burden,  a  spiritual 
burden  ?  "  "  What !  "  she  said  ;  "  do  you  mean  that 
burden  in  John  Bunyan's  '  Pilgrim's  Progress  ?  '  Be- 
cause if  you  do,  young  man,  I  have  got  rid  of  tliat 
many  years  ago,  before  you  were  born.  But  I  went  a 
better  way  to  work  than  the  pilgrim  did.  The  evan- 
trelist  that  John  Bunyan  talks  about  was  one  of  your 
parsons  that  do  not  preach  the  gospel ;  for  he  said, 
•^  keep  that  light  in  thine  eye  and  run  to  the  wicket- 
o;ate.'  Why  man  alive  !  that  was  not  the  place  for 
him  to  run  to.  He  should  have  said,  '  Do  you  see  that 
cross  ?  Run  there  at  once  ! '  But  instead  of  that,  he 
sent  the  poor  pilgrim  to  the  wicket-gate  first ;  and  much 
good  he  got  by  going  there  ! — he  got  tumbling  into  the 
slough,  and  was  like  to  have  been  killed  by  it."  "  But 
did  you,"  he  asked,  "go  through  any  slough  of 
despond  ?  "  "  Yes,  young  man,  I  did  ;  but  I  found  it 
41  crreat  deal  easier  going  through  with  my  burden  off 
than  with  it  on  my  back."  The  old  woman  was  quite 
right.  We  must  not  say  to  the  sinner,  "  Now,  sinner, 
if  thou  wilt  be  saved  go  to  the  baptismal  pool — go  to  the 
wicket-gate — go  to  the  church — do  this  or  that."  No, 
the  cross  should  be  right  in  front  of  the  wicket-gate, 
and  we  should  say  to  the  sinner,  "  Throw^  thyself 
there,  and  thou  art  safe.  But  thou  art  not  safe  till 
thou  canst  cast  off  thy  burden,  and  lie  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross,  and  find  peace  in  Jesus."  Well,  that  is  a  singing 
time  with  God's  children  ! 

And  after  that,  do  God's  people  sing?  Yes,  they 
have  sweet  singing  times  in  their  hours  of  commu- 
nion. Oh!  the  music  of  that  word  "communion," 
when  it  is  heard  in  the  soul,  communion  with  Jesus, 


276  Christian  Energy. 

fellowship  with  Jesus,  whether  in  his  sufferings  or  in 
his  glories  !  These  are  singing  times,  when  the  heart  is- 
lifted  up  to  feel  its  oneness  to  Christ,  and  its  vital 
union  with  him,  and  is  enabled  to  "  rejoice  in  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God." 

Have  you  not  had  some  precious  singing  times,  too,, 
at  the  Lord's  table  %  Ah !  when  the  bread  has  been 
broken,  and  the  wine  poured  out,  how  often  have  I  had 
sweet  refreshment  when  the  people  have  all  joined  in 
singing — 

"  Gethsemane,  can  I  forget, 
Or  there  the  conflict  see, 
Thine  agony  and  bloody  sweat. 
And  not  remember  thee  ? 

"  When  to  the  cross  I  turn  my  eyes, 
And  rest  on  Calvary, 
Oh !  Lamb  of  God,  my  sacrifice, 
I  must  remember  thee." 

But  lastly,  my  dear  friends,  the  best  singing  time  w^e 
shall  have  wdll  be  when  you  and  I  come  to  die.  Ah ! 
there  are  some  of  you  that  shall  prove  this  as  it  is- 
fabled  of  the  swan.  The  ancients  said  the  swan  never 
sang  in  his  life-time,  but  always  sang  just  when  he  died. 
Now,  there  are  many  of  God's  desponding  children  wdio 
seem  to  go  all  their  life  under  a  cloud,  but  they  get  a 
swan's  song  before  they  die.  The  river  of  your  life 
comes  running  down  perhaps  black  and  miry  wath 
troubles,  and  when  it  begins  to  touch  the  w'hite  foam 
of  the  sea,  there  comes  a  Kttle  glistening  in  its  w^aters. 
So,  beloved,  though  w^e  may  have  been  very  much  dis- 
spirited  by  reason  of  the  burden  of  the  way,  when  we 
get  to  the  last,  we  shall  find  sweet  songs.     Are  you 


Dumb  S'uKjers.  277 

afraid  of   dying  ?     Oli !    never  be  afraid    of  that ;  be 
afraid  of  living.     Living  is  the  only  thing  that  can  do 
you  any  mischief  ;  dying  never  can  hurt  a  Christian. 
Afraid  "of  the  grave?     It  is  like  the  bath  of  Esther, 
in  which  she   lay  for  a  time,  to    purify  herself  with 
spices,  that  she 'might  be  fit  for  her  lord.     You  are 
afraid  of  dying,  you  say,  because  of  the  pains  of  death. 
Nay,  they  are  the  pains  of  life— of  life   struggling  to 
continue.     Death  has  no  pain ;  death  itself  is  \mi  one 
o-entle  sigh— the  fetter  is  broken,  and  the  spirit  fled. 
The  best  moment  of  a  Christian's  life  is  his  last  one, 
because  it  is  the  one  that  is  nearest  heaven ;  and  then 
it  is  that  he  begins  to  strike  the  key-note  of  the  song 
which  he  shall^sing  to  all  eternity.     Oh!  what  a  song 
will  that  be !     It  is  poor  music  we  make  now,  when  we 
join  the  song— perhaps  we  are  almost  ashamed  to  sing ; 
but  up  there  our  voices  shall  be  clear  and  good ;  and 

there 

"  Loudest  of  the  crowd  we'll  sing, 
While  heaven's  resounding  mansions  ring 
With  shouts  of  sovereign  grace." 

The  thought  stmck  me  the  other  day,  that  the  Lord 
Avill  have  in  heaven  some  of  these  very  big  sinners 
ihat  have  gone  further  astray  than  anybody  that  ever 
lived,  the  most  extraordinary  extravaganzas  of  vice, 
just  to  make  the  melody  complete  by  singing  some  of 
those  soprano  notes  which  you  and  I,  because  we  have 
not  o;one  so  far  astray,  will  never  be  able  to  utter.  I 
-xvonder  whether  one  has  stepped  in  hither,  whom  God 
has  selected  to  take  some  of  those  alto  notes  in  the 
«cale  of  praise?  Perhaps  there  is  one  such  here. 
Oh !  how  will  such  a  one  sing,  if  grace— free  grace— 


278  Cliristicm  Energy. 

shall  rescue  him,  deliver  him  from  o-oincr  down  into  the 
pit,  and  in  redeeming  mercy  change  his  heart,  renew  a 
right  spirit  within  him,  and  so  completely  mould  his 
character  anew  that  he  shall  become  a  proof,  an 
evidence,  an  illustration  of  the  Father's  personal  love 
to  his  soul,  of  the  power  of  Christ's  blood  to  cleanse, 
of  the  sanctifying  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Such- 
an  one  will  sing  because  he  must.  The  spiritual  in- 
stinct wdthin  him  will  be  impatient  of  all  restraints^ 
For  such  fruits  of  ministry  I  labour  and  strive  accord- 
ing to  his  worldng  which  worketh  in  me  mightily.  For 
what  is  our  liope  or  joy  or  crown  of  rejoicing'^  Are  not 
even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his 
coming'^ 


A , 


tkt  nm  iifm  a«^  ^M  <*W  Sim- 


"  O  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song  :  sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  the 
earth.  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  bless  his  name  ;  shew  forth  his  salvation 
from  day  to  day.  Declare  his  glory  among  the  heathen,  his  wonders 
among  all  people." — Psalm  xcvi.  1 — 3. 


HERE  are  mighty  passions  of  the  human 
soul  which  seek  vent,  and  can  get  no  relief 
until  they  find  it  in  expression.  Grief, 
acute,  but  silent,  has  often  destroyed  the 
mind,  because  it  has  not  been  able  to  weep 
itself  away  in  tears.  The  glow  of  passion, 
fond  of  enterprise  and  full  of  enthusiasm 
has  often  seemed  to  rend  the  very  fabric  of  manhood 
when  unable  either  to  attain  its  end  or  to  utter  its 
strong  desires.  So  it  is  in  true  religion.  It  not  only 
lays  hold  upon  our  intellectual  nature  with  appeals  to 
our  judgment  and  our  understanding,  but  at  the  same 
time  it  engages  our  affections,  brings  our  passions  into 
play,  and  fires  them  with  a  holy  zeal,  producing  a 
mighty  furor ;  so  that  when  this  spell  is  on  a  man,  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  thoroughly  possesses  him,  he  must 
express  his  vehement  emotions.  Some  yu'ofessors  of 
relioion  are  ino-enious  enoucrh  to  conceal  whatever  crrace 

DO  ~ 

they  possess.     Little  enough  they  have,  I  warrant  you, 
or  it  would  soon  be  discovered.     Have  you  never  seen 


280  Christian  Energy. 

the  brooks  that  were  wont  to  come  down  the  hill  sides 
filled  up  with  stones  through  greater  part  of  the  sum- 
mer? You  wonder  whether  there  is  any  streamlet 
there  at  all.  You  may  go  and  search  among  the 
rounded  stones,  and  scarcely  find  a  trace  of  water. 
How  different  after  the  snows  have  been  melted,  or  the 
mists  upon  the  mountain's  brow  have  turned  to  showers. 
Then  the  water  comes  rushing  down  like  a  mighty 
torrent,  nor  is  there  any  question  about  its  being  a 
genuine  stream.  It  shows  itself  as  it  rolls  the  great 
stones  along,  peradventure  breaking  down  the  banks, 
and  overflowing  the  country.  So  there  is  a  religion — 
a  poor,  miserable,  ordinary  Christianity — which  is  not 
worth  the  name  it  bears,  that  can  hide  itself ;  but  vital 
godliness  must  assert  itself,  it  must  speak  plainly,  it 
must  act  vigorously,  it  must  appear  conspicuously.  The 
cross  reveals  the  hearts  of  men,  it  unveils  their  true 
character.  Till  the  cross  was  set  up,  Joseph  of  Ari- 
mathea  was  scarcely  known  to  be  a  disciple,  and  Xico- 
demus  continued  to  do  habitually  what  he  once  did 
literally — resort  to  Jesus  by  night.  Openly  he  remained 
in  the  sanhedrim,  though  secretly  he  was  a  profound 
admirer  of  the  great  Redeemer.  But  when  the  cross 
was  lifted  up,  Joseph  went  boldly  in  with  senatorial 
authority  and  obtained  the  body  of  Jesus  for  burial, 
and  Nicodemus  came  out  with  well-timed  liberality  to 
provide  his  hundredweight  of  spices,  and  his  fair  wliite 
linen.  Thus  the  cross  reveals  the  thoughts  of  many 
hearts.  If  you  have  real  grace  and  true  love  to  Jesus 
in  your  soul,  you  will  want  some  modes  of  expressing 
yourselves.  Our  purpose  therefore  now  is,  to  suggest 
to  you  two  modes  of  expressing  your  consecration  to 


The  new  Song  and  the  old  Stori/,  281 

Ood  and  your  devotion  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
These  two  methods  are  to  sing  about  and  to  talk  about 
the  good  things  the  Lord  has  done  for  you,  and  the 
great  things  he  has  made  known  to  you.  Let  song 
take  the  lead — "  O  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song : 
sincj  unto  the  Lord  all  the  earth.  Sinrr  unto  the  Lord, 
bless  his  name."  Then  let  discourse  engage  you ;  he  it 
in  public  sermons  or  in  private  conversations — ^'  Shew 
forth  his  salvation  from  day  to  day.  Declare  his  glory 
among  the  heathen,  his  wonders  among  all  people." 

We  begin  with  the  voice  of  melody.  All  yo.  that  love 
the  Lord,  give  vent  to  your  heart's  emotion  by  song, 
and  take  care  that  it  be  sung  to  the  Lord  alone.  The 
human  voice,  what  a  noble  instrument  it  is !  what  a 
compass  it  has !  its  low  soft  whispers,  how  they  can 
hold  us  spell-bound  ;  its  full  volume  as  it  peals  forth 
like  thunder,  how  it  can  startle  and  produce  dismay. 
What  profanity,  then,  to  use  such  an  instrument  in  the 
service  of  sin !  Is  not  our  tongue  the  glory  of  our 
frame?  Had  I  no  conscientious  objection  to  instru- 
mental music  in  worship,  I  should  still,  I  think,  be  com- 
pelled to  admit  that  all  the  instruments  that  were  ever 
devised  by  men,  however  sweetly  attuned,  are  harsh 
and  grating  compared  with  the  unparalleled  sweetness 
of  the  human  voice.  When  it  is  naturally  melodious 
and  skilfully  trained  ("and  every  true  worshipper  should 
be  zealous  to  dedicate  his  richest  talent  and  his  highest 
acquirement  to  this  sacred  service),  there  can  be  no 
music  under  heaven  that  can  equal  the  combination  of 
voices  which  belong  to  men,  women,  and  children  whose 
liearts  really  love  the  Saviour.  So  sweet,  so  enchanting 
the  melody  of  song,  surely  its  best  efforts   should  not 


282  Christian  Energy. 

be  put  forth  to  celebrate  martial  vdctorles  or  national 
celebrations,  much  less  should  it  lend  its  potent  charm 
to  aught  that  is  trivial  or  lascivious.  Bj  sacred  right 
its  highest  beauties  should  be  consecrated  to  Jehovah* 
If  thou  canst  sing,  sing  the  songs  of  Zion.  If  God 
has  gifted  thee  with  a  sweet,  liquid  voice,  be  sure  and 
use  it  to  render  homage  unto  him  who  cried  out  for 
thee  upon  the  cross,  "  It  is  finished !"  ^'  Sing  unto  the 
Lord." 

How  much  public  singing,  even  in  the  house  of  God, 
is  of  no  account !  How  little  of  it  is  singing  to  the 
Lord !  Does  not  the  conscience  of  full  many  among 
you  bear  witness  that  you  sing  a  hymn  because  others 
are  singing  it  ?  You  go  right  straight  through  with  it 
by  a  kind  of  mechanical  action.  You  cannot  pretend 
that  you  are  singing  to  the  Lord.  He  is  not  in  all  your 
thoughts.  Have  you  not  been  at  places  of  worship 
where  there  is  a  trained  choir  evidently  singing  to  the 
congregation  ?  Tunes  and  tones  are  alike  arranged  for 
populai'  effect.  There  is  an  artistic  appeal  to  human 
passions.  Harmony  is  attended  to ;  homage  is  neglected. 
That  is  not  what  God  approves  of.  1  recollect  a  criti- 
cism upon  a  certain  minister's  prayers.  It  was  reported 
in  the  newspaper  that  he  uttered  the  finest  prayer  that 
had  ever  been  offered  to  a  Boston  audience.  I  am 
afraid  there  is  a  good  deal  of  vocal  and  instrumental 
music  of  the  same  species.  It  may  be  the  finest  j)raise 
ever  offered  to  a  congregation.  Surely  that  is  not  what 
we  come  together  for.  If  you  want  the  sensual  gratifi- 
cation of  music's  melting,  mystic  lay,  let  me  commend 
you  to  the  concert-room,  there  you  will  get  the  en- 
chanting ravishment,  but  when  ye  come  here  let  it  be 


The  new  Song  and  the  old  Story.  283 

to  sing  unto  the  Lord.  As  ye  stand  up  to  sing,  there 
shouhl  be  a  fixed  intent  of  the  soul,  a  positive  voUtion 
of  the  mind,  an  absolute  determination  of  the  heart, 
that  all  the  flame  which  kindles  in  thy  breast,  and  all  the 
melody  that  breaks  from  thy  tongue,  and  all  the  sacred 
swell  of  grateful  song  shall  be  unto  the  Lord,  and  unto 
the  Lord  alone. 

And  if  you  would  sing  unto  the  Lord,  let  me  re- 
commend you  to  flavour  your  mouth  with  the  gospel 
doctrines  which  savour  most  of  grace  unmerited  and 
free.  Any  other  form  of  theology  would  tempt  us 
more  or  less  to  chant  the  praise  of  men.  Gratitude 
has  full  play  when  we  come  to  know  that  salvation  is  of 
the  Lord  alone,  and  that  mercy  is  divinely  free.  He 
that  hath  once  heard  the  echo  of  that  awful  thunder, 
"  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy ;  I  will 
have  compassion  on  whom  I  will  have  compassion,"  will 
learn  to  rejoice  with  trembling,  to  sing  with  deep  feel- 
ing, and  to  adore  with  prostrate  reverence  the  great 
Supreme,  to  whom  might  and  majesty  belong,  and  from 
whom  f^race  and  goodness  flow.  Human  counsels  and 
conceits' sink  into  insignificance,  for  thoughts  of  loving- 
kindness  and  deeds  of  renown  belong  unto  the  Lord 

alone. 

Kindly  glance  your  eye  down  the  psalm,  and  note 
how  the  exhortation  to  sing  is  repeated  three  times. 
Though  I  lay  a  stress,  I  draw  no  absolute  inference 
from  this  pecuhar  construction.  To  say  the  least,  it  is 
remarkable  that  the  number  three  is  so  continually  em- 
ployed. Farther  down  in  the  same  psalm  it  is  written, 
''  Give  unto  the  Lord,"  "  Give  unto  the  Lord,"  "  Give 
unto  the  Lord,"— three  times.     Is  there  not  here  some 


284  Christian  Energy. 

kind  of  allusion  to  the  wondrous  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  ? 
At  any  rate  I  make  bold  to  use  the  threefold  cord  to 
express  the  homage  with  which  it  behoves  us  to  adore 
the  Father,  the  Son,  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  for  Unit- 
arianism,  it  is  a  religion  of  units,  and  I  suppose  it 
always  will  be.  There  is  no  danger  of  its  ever  spread- 
ing very  widely.  It  is  cold  as  a  moonlight  night,  though 
scarcely  as  clear.  It  has  not  enough  of  power  in  it  to 
fire  men's  hearts  to  laud  and  magnify  the  Lord.  It 
produces  now  and  then  a  hymn,  but  it  cannot  kindle 
the  passions  of  men  to  sing  it  with  fervour  and  devout 
enthusiasm.  Certainly  it  cannot  gather  a  crowd  of 
joyous  people  who  will  make  a  joyful  noise  to  the  Lord, 
and  •v\dth  all  their  heart  and  voice  shout  the  chorus  of 
gratitude.  Oh,  beloved,  I  beseech  you  let  your  souls 
have  vent  in  praise. 

"  Bless'd  be  the  Father  and  his  love, 
To  whose  celestial  source  we  owe 
Rivers  of  endless  joy  above, 
And  rills  of  comfort  here  below." 

Praise  the  God  of  glory  who  loved  you  before  the  foun- 
dation of  the  world.  Praise  the  God  of  grace  who 
called  you  when  you  sought  him  not.  Praise  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  be- 
gotten us  again  unto  a  lively  hope,  our  Heavenly  Father 
who  provides  for  us,  educates  us,  instructs  us,  leads  and 
guides  us,  and  will  bring  us  by-and-by  to  the  many 
mansions  in  his  own  house. 

Sing  ye  also  unto  the  Son.  Never  fail  to  adore  the 
Son  of  God,  who  left  the  royalties  of  heaven  to  bear 
the  indifmities  of  earth.    Adore  the  Lamb  slain.   Kneel 


TJie  new  Song  and  tlie  old  Stonj.  285 

at  the  cross  foot,  and  praise  eacli  wound,  and  magnify 
the  immortal  who  became  mortal  for  our  sakes. 

"  Glory  to  thee,  great  Son  of  God ! 
From  whose  dear  wounded  body  rolls 
A  precious  stream  of  vital  blood, 
Pardon  and  life  for  dying  souls." 

And,  then,  sing  ye  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  Let  us  never 
fail  in  praising  him.  1  am  afraid  we  do.  AVe  forget 
him  too  much  in  our  sermons,  our  prayers,  and  our 
hymns,  or  we  mention  him,  perhaps,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  with  formal  expressions  rather  than  with  spon- 
taneous feelings.  Oh,  how  our  hearts  are  bound  reve- 
rently to  worship  the  divine  indweller  who,  accordinir  to 
his  abundant  mercy,  hath  made  our  bodies  to  be  his 
temples  wherein  he  deigns  to  dwell. 

"  We  give  thee,  sacred  Spirit,  praise. 
Who  in  our  hearts  of  sin  and  woe, 
Makes  living  springs  of  grace  arise, 
And  into  boundless  glory  flow.'' 

Praise  ye,  with  your  songs,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost — the  triune  God  of  Israel.  Have  you 
understood  this?  To  Jehovah  let  your  song  be  ad- 
dressed. Thrice  be  his  holy  name  repeated.  Now 
then  be  careful  of  the  instructions ;  let  the  song  that 
you  sing  be  a  new  song — O  "  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new 
song ! "  not  the  song  of  your  old  legal  bondage  which 
you  used  to  sing  so  tremblingly,  with  the  dread  of  a 
slave ;  a  new  and  nobler  song  becomes  you  who  are  his 
childi'en,  his  sons  and  daughters.  '^O  sing  unto  the 
Lord  a  new  song ! "  To  some  of  you  the  song  of 
redemption  is  quite  new.     Once  you  sang  the  songs  of 


286  Christian  Energy, 

Bacchus  or  of  Venus,  or  else  you  hummed  over  some 
light  an-,  without  meaning  or  motive,  unless  to  while 
away  youi'  time  and  drive  away  all  serious  thoughts. 
O  you  who  used  so  readily  to  sing  the  songs  of  Babylon, 
sing  now  the  songs  of  Zion  quite  as  freely  and  earnestly. 
SiniT  unto  the  Lord  a  new  son  or. 

By  a  '^new  "  song  is  meant  the  best  song.  It  is  put 
for  that  which  is  most  elegant,  most  exquisite,  and  best 
composed.  Pindar  says,  '^  Give  me  old  wdne,  but  give 
me  a  new  song."  So  may  we  say,  "  Give  us  the  old 
wines  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  let  us  sing  unto  the 
Lord  a  new  song," — the  best  that  we  can  find,  no 
borrowed  air,  no  hackneyed  lyric ;  and  let  our  spirits 
sing  unto  the  Lord  that  wdiich  w^ells  up  afresh  out  of 
the  quickened  heart.  A  new^  song — always  new !  keep 
up  the  freshness  of  your  praise.  Do  not  drivel  down 
into  dull  routine.  The  drowsy  old  clerks  in  the  dreary 
old  churches  used  always  to  say,  "Let  us  sing  to  the 
praise  and  glory  of  God  such  and  such  a  psalm,"  till  I 
should  think  the  poor  old  Tate  and  Brady  version  was 
pretty  w^ell  used  up.  We  have  new  mercies  to  cele- 
brate, therefore  we  must  have  new  songs. 

"  Blest  be  his  love  who  now  hath  set 
New  time  upon  the  score." 

With  "new  time  upon  the  score,"  let  there  be  new 
notes  for  him  who  renews  the  face  of  nature.  And 
have  not  we,  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  new  graces? 
Then  let  us  sing  with  our  new-  faith,  and  our  new 
love,  and  our  new  hope.  Some  of  you  have  very 
lately  been  made  new  creatures  ;  sing  ye  unto  the 
Lord  a  new  song,  surely  he  hath  done  gi-eat  things 
whereof    ye    are    glad.     Others    of    you   have    been 


The  neio  Song  and  the  old  Stonj.  287 

converted  for  years ;  yet  if  your  inward  man  be  re- 
newed day  by  day,  your  praises  shall  be  always  new. 
Luther  used  to  say  that  the  wounds  of  Christ  seemed 
to  him  to  bleed  to-day  as  if  they  had  never  bled  before, 
for  he  found  such  freshness  in  his  Master.  You  pluck 
a  flower,  and  it  soon  loses  its  scent  and  begins  to 
wither ;  but  our  sweet  Lord  Jesus  has  a  savour  about 
liis  name  that  never  departs.  We  take  his  name  to 
be  like  a  bundle  of  camphire  all  night  betwixt  our 
breasts,  and  in  the  morning  it  smells  as  sweet  as  when 
■we  laid  us  down  to  sleep ;  and  when  we  come  to  die, 
that  lily  of  the  valley  will  drop  with  the  same  pro- 
fusion as  it  did  w^hen  with  our  youthful  hand  we  first 
plucked  it  and  came  to  him  and  gave  him  all  our  trust. 
**  Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new^  song."  Let  the  freshness 
of  yom*  joy  and  the  fulness  of  your  thanks  be  perennial 
as  the  days  of  heaven. 

This  song,  according  to  our  text,  is  designed  to  be 
universal.  *^  Sing  unto  the  Lord  all  the  earth."  Let 
sires  and  sons  mingle  in  its  strains.  Let  not  the  aged 
among  you  say.  Our  voices  are  cracked,  but  sing  to  the 
Lord  with  all  the  voice  you  have,  and  all  the  compass 
you  can.  And  you  young  people,  give  the  Lord  the 
highest  notes  you  are  able  to  reach.  Still  sing  unto  the 
Lord  ye  that  are  rich,  sing  unto  the  Lord  who  has 
saved  you,  for  it  is  not  many  that  he  saves  of  your 
sort. 

"  Gold  and  gospel  seem  to  ill  agree  : 
Religion  always  sides  with  poverty," 

said  John  Bunyan,  and  he  spoke  the  truth.  Sing  unto 
the  Lord  ye  poor  ones  whom  the  Lord  has  favoured, 
for  so  does  it   happen  still  that   "the  poor  have   the 


288  Christian  Energy, 

gospel  preached  unto  them."  Sing  unto  him,  ye  that 
are  learned  in  many  matters.  Let  your  talents  make 
your  song  more  full  of  understanding  And  you  that 
are  unlearned,  if  ye  cannot  put  so  much  of  understand- 
ing into  the  song,  put  more  of  the  spirit,  and  sing 
with  all  the  more  heartiness.  All  the  earth  should 
sing.  There  is  not  one  of  us  but  lias  cause  for  song, 
and  certainly  not  one  saint  but  ought  especially  to 
praise  him.  You  remember  that  passage  in  the 
hundred  and  seventh  Psalm  (it  is  worth  noticing), 
where  the  psalmist  says,  "Let  the  redeemed  of  the 
Lord  say  so,  whom  he  hath  redeemed  out  of  the  hand 
of  their  enemies,"  as  if  surely  they,  above  all  others, 
ought  to  say,  "  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  is 
good." 

In  addition  to  its  being  a  new  song  and  a  universal 
one,  it  is  to  be  a  very  inspiration  of  gratitude.  "  Sing 
unto  the  Lord :  bless  his  name.^^  How  apt  you  are  in 
speaking  of  any  one  who  has  been  kind  to  you  to  say, 
"  God  bless  him!"  The  expression  comes  right  up  from 
your  heart.  And  although  you  cannot  invoke  any  bless- 
ing on  God,  you  can  desire  for  his  name  every  blessing 
and  every  tribute  of  homage.  You  can  desire  for  his 
cause  that  it  maybe  established,  and  may  be  triumphant^ 
You  may  desire  for  his  people  that  they  may  be  helped^ 
made  holy,  and  guided  to  their  eternal  rest.  You  may 
desire  for  mankind  that  they  may  hallow  God's  holy 
name,  and  all  because  you  feel  you  owe  so  much  to  the 
Lord  that  you  cannot  help  praising,  and  cannot  help 
wishing  that  your  praise  should  be  fruitful  on  earth 
and  acceptable  in  heaven. 

Li  three  ways,  methinks,  it  becomes  us  to  sing  God's 


The  new  Song  and  the  old  Story.  289 

praises.  We  ouglit  to  sino;  with  the  voice.  I  do  not 
consider  we  sing  enough  to  God.  Angel  harp  and 
human  voice  !  If  the  angel  harp  be  more  skilful,  surely 
the  human  voice  is  more  grateful.  For  my  part,  I  like 
to  hear  sacred  songs  in  all  sorts  of  places.  The  maid- 
servant can  sing  at  her  work,  and  the  carter  as  he 
drives  his  team.  The  occupations  are  few  which  could 
not  be  enlivened  by  repeating  the  words  and  running 
over  the  tune  of  a  hymn.  If  it  were  only  in  a  faint 
whisper,  the  habit  might  be  cultivated.  You  might 
expose  yourselves,  it  is  tnie,  to  a  taunt,  and  be  up- 
braided as  "  a  psalm-singing  Methodist,"  but  it  would 
not  do  you  much  hurt.  Better  that  than  make  a  ribald 
jest  or  utter  an  impious  blasphemy.  Those  who  lend 
their  tongues  to  such  vile  uses  have  something  to  be 
ashamed  of.  Lovers  of  pleasure  sing  their  songs  ;  and 
poor  trash,  for  the  most  part,  they  are.  If  the  snatches 
we  catch  in  the  streets  are  the  echoes  of  the  saloon  and 
the  music-hall,  little  credit  is  due  to  those  who  cater  for 
public  amusement.  Lacking  alike  in  sense  and  senti- 
ment, they  betray  the  degeneracy  of  the  times,  and  the 
depravity  of  popular  taste.  There  is  a  literature  of 
song  in  which  peasants  may  rejoice,  of  which  patriots 
may  be  proud,  and  to  which  poets  may  turn  with  envi- 
ous eyes.  Why  wed  your  pretty  tunes  to  paltry 
words  ?  The  higher  the  art,  the  more  the  pity  to 
debase  it.  If  you  cull  over  oui'  hymn-books  for  samples 
of  bad  poetry,  loose  rhyme,  and  puerile  thoughts,  that 
reviewers  like  to  revile,  and  libertines  like  to  laugh  at, 
we  can  only  say,  Well,  we  cannot  always  vindicate  the 
culture  of  those  whose  sincerity  we  hold  in  the  highest 
esteem;  but   we  will  dare  to   confront  you  on  equal 

ly 


290  Christian  Energy. 

terms — the  sanctuary  versus  the  saloon — our  vocalists 
against  your  vocalists  from  the  sacred  oratorios  of  Handel 
to  the  choicest  of  your  operas — from  the  cant  of  our 
revival  hymns  to  the  catch  of  your  last  sensational 
songs.  Yes,  indeed,  the  people  of  God  should  sing 
more.  Were  we  to  try  the  exercise,  we  should  find  no 
small  degree  of  pleasure  in  the  practice.  It  would  do 
us  good  to  praise  God  more  day  by  day.  When  w^e 
get  together,  two  or  three  of  us,  we  are  in  the  habit  of 
saying  ^'  Let  us  pray."  Might  not  we  sometimes  say, 
''  Let  us  sing."  We  have  our  regular  prayer-meetings, 
why  do  not  we  have  praise  meetings  about  as  often  I 

"  Prayer  and  praise  for  sins  forgiven 
Make  up  on  earth  the  bliss  of  heaven." 

We  are  like  a  bird  that  has  only  one  wing.  There  is 
much  prayer,  but  there  is  little  praise.  "  Sing  unto  the 
Lord.     Sing  unto  the  Lord." 

To  sing  with  the  heart  is  the  very  essence  of  song. 

*'In  the  heavenly  Lamb  thrice  happy  I  am, 
And  my  heart  it  doth  leap  at  the  sound  of  his  name." 

Though  the  tongue  may  not  be  able  to  express  the  lan- 
guage of  the  soul,  the  heart  is  glad.  Some  persons 
seem  never  to  sing  with  their  heart.  Their  lips  move, 
but  their  heart  does  not  beat.  In  their  common  daily 
life  they  move  about  as  if  they  had  been  born  on  a 
dark  winter's  night,  and  carried  the  cold  chill  into  all 
their  concerns.  The  lamentation  they  constantly  utter 
is  this — "  All  these  things  are  against  me."  Their  ex- 
perience is  comprised  in  half  a  sentence — '^  In  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."     They  never  get  into 


The  new  Song  and  the  old  Stori/,  291 

the  harbour.  "  In  me  ye  shall  have  peace  "  is  a  secret 
they  have  never  realised.  They  are  fond  of  calling 
this  world  a  howling  wilderness  ;  and  they  are  utterly 
oblivious  of  its  orchards  and  vineyards.  Were  God  to 
put  them  in  the  garden  of  Eden  they  would  not  take 
any  notice  of  the  fruit  or  the  flowers.  They  would  go 
straight  away  to  the  serpent  and  begin  saying,  '^  Ah, 
there's  a  snake  here.''  Their  hai*p  is  hung  on  the  wil- 
lows, they  never  can  sing.  Their  heart  is  unstrung. 
Sing  they  cannot. 

Well,  dear  friends,  a  Christian  man  ought  to  be  like 
a  horse  that  has  bells  on  his  head,  so  that  he  cannot  go 
an}^vhere  without  ringing  them  and  making  music. 
His  whole  life  should  be  a  psalm ;  every  step  should 
be  in  harmony;  eveiy  thought  should  constitute  a 
note;  every  word  he  utters  should  be  a  component 
part  of  the  joyful  strain.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  see  a 
Christian  going  about  his  business  like  the  high  priest 
of  old  who,  wherever  he  went,  made  music  with  the 
golden  bells.  Oh,  to  have  a  cheerful  spirit — not  the 
levity  of  the  thoughtless,  nor  the  gaiety  of  the  foolish, 
nor  even  the  mirth  of  the  healthy — there  is  a  cheerful 
spirit  which  is  the  gift  of  grace,  that  can  and  does  re- 
joice evermore.  Then  when  troubles  come  we  bear 
them  cheerfully ;  let  fortune  smile,  we  receive  it  with 
equanimity ;  or  let  losses  befall  us,  we  endure  them  with 
resignation,  being  willing,  so  long  as  God  is  glorified,  to 
accept  anything  at  his  hands.  These  are  the  people  to 
recommend  Christianity.  Their  cheerful  conversation 
attracts  others  to  Christ.  As  for  those  people  who  are 
morose  or  morbid,  sullen  or  severe,  harsh  in  their 
judgment  of  their  fellow  men,  or  rebellious  against  tiie 


292  Christian  Energy. 

will  of  God — people  of  a  covetous  disposition,  a  peevish 
temper,  and  a  quarrelsome  character — unto  them  it  is 
of  no  use  to  say,  *'  O  sing  unto  the  Lord,"  for  they 
will  never  do  it.  They  have  not  any  bells  in  the  tower 
of  their  heart;  what  chimes  can  they  ring?  Their 
harps  have  lost  their  strings ;  how  can  they  magnify 
the  Most  High  ?  But  genuine  piety  finds  expression 
in  jubilant  song ;  this  is  the  initiative,  though  it  is  far 
from  exhausting  its  resources. 

In  the  second  place,  then,  let  me  stir  you  up,  espe- 
cially my  dear  friends  those  of  you  who  are  members  of 
this  church,  to  such  daily  conversation  and  such  habitual 
discourse  as  shall  be  fitted  to  spread  the  gospel  which 
you  love.  Our  text  admonishes  you  to  "  show  forth  his 
salvation."  You  believe  in  the  salvation  of  God — 
a  salvation  of  gi'ace  from  first  to  last.  You  have  seen 
it ;  you  have  received  it ;  you  have  experienced  it. 
Well,  now,  show  it  forth.  Explain  it  to  others,  and 
with  the  explanation  let  there  be  an  illustration ;  ex- 
emplify it  by  your  lives.  God  has  shone  upon  you 
with  the  light  of  his  countenance,  that  you  may  reflect 
his  brightness  and  irradiate  others.  Every  Christian 
here  is  like  the  moon,  which  shines  with  borrowed  light. 
But  the  sun  lends  not  his  bright  rays  to  be  hoarded 
up.  It  is  that  they  may  scatter  beams  of  brightness 
over  this  world  of  night.  Take  care,  then,  that 
you  are  faithful  to  your  trust.  Show  forth  his  salva- 
tion. God  knows,  I  try  to  do  so  from  the  pulpit. 
Would  God  you  could  try  and  do  so  from  the  pews. 
Are  you  lacking  in  opportunities  ?  I  trow  not. 
Before  and  after  service,  especially  to  strangers  and 
such  as  may  have   been    induced   to    come    and  hear 


The  new  Song  and  the  old  Story.  293 

the   gospel,    speak   a   word  in    season ;    thoughtfully, 
prayerfully,  softly,  talk  with   them.     Show  forth  this 
salvation  too  in  your  own  houses,  or  on  your  visits,  or 
wherever  your  lot  may  happen  in  God's  providence  to 
he  cast.     It  is  wonderful  how  God  blesses  little  efforts, 
very  little  efforts.     I  have  sometimes — I  am  sorry  to  say 
not  as  often  as  I  ought — scattered  seed  by  the  wayside. 
Only  a  few  nights  ago  I  had  been  driven  by  a  cab- 
man, and  after  I  had  alighted  and  given  him  the  fare, 
he  took  a  little  Testament  out  of  his  pocket,  and  said, 
*^  It  is  about  fifteen  years  ago  since  you  gave  me  that, 
and  said  a  word  to  me  about  my  soul,  and  it  has  stuck 
by  me,  and  I  have  not  let  a  day  pass  since  without 
reading  it."     I   felt  glad.     I  know  that  if    Christian 
people  would  try  and  show  forth  God's  salvation  they 
would  often    be  surprised  to    find    how  many    hearts 
would  gladly  receive  it.     Beloved,  show  forth  this  sal- 
vation from  day  to  day.  Let  it  not  be  merely  on  a  Sun- 
day.    While  ye  hold  that  day  sacred,  let  no  other  day 
he   common   or   unclean.      We  are  thankful   for   the 
kindly  efforts  in  the  school  and  elsewhere  on  our  Sab- 
baths, but  we  want  Christian  activity  to  be  put  forth 
from  day  to  day.     Let  your  zeal  for  the  conversion  of 
your  fellow  creatures  be  continuous,     '*In  the  morning 
sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thine 
hand :  for  thou  knowest  not  whether  shall  prosper,  either 
this  or  that,  or  whether  they  both  shall  be  alike  good." 
The  result  of  the  Sabbath  work  may,  perhaps,  not  be 
seen  by  you,  when  the  result  of  Monday's  work  may 
very  speedily  appear.     Show  forth    his  salvation  from 
day  to  day.      This  admonition    is    enforced  in   three 
clauses ;    so  let  us  notice  the  second.     ^'  Declare  his 


294  Christian  En 


ergy. 


glory  among  the  heathen."  It  is  the  same  thing  in 
another  form.  When  you  are  telling  out  the  gospel, 
point  especially  to  the  glory  of  it.  Show  them  the 
justice  of  the  gi-eat  substitution,  and  the  mercy  of  it. 
Show  them  the  wisdom  which  devised  the  plan  whereby, 
without  a  violation  of  the  law,  God  could  yet  pardon 
rebellious  sinners.  Impress  upon  those  that  you  talk 
with  that  the  gospel  you  have  to  tell  them  of  is  na 
common-place  system  of  expediency,  but  really  it  is  a 
glorious  revelation  of  divinity.  You  know  men  are  very 
much  attracted  by  aught  of  glory  and  renown.  They 
will  even  rush  to  the  cannon's  mouth  for  glory.  Now, 
be  sure,  when  you  are  talking  to  others  about  the  sal- 
vation you  have  received  at  the  hands  of  your  dear 
Lord  and  Master,  that  you  tell  them  about  the  glory 
thereof, — what  a  glory  it  brings  to  Christ,  and  to  what 
a  glory  it  will  bring  every  sinner  by-and-by.  Tell  them 
of  the  glory  of  being  pardoned,  the  glory  of  being  ac- 
cepted, the  glory  of  being  justified,  the  glory  of  being 
sanctified.  Is  it  not  all  "  according  to  his  riches  in  glory 
by  Christ  Jesus  ?"  Methinks  ye  might  relate  some 
scenes  from  the  death-beds  of  the  saints  ye  have  known 
on  which  rays  of  glory  have  fallen  ;  but  I  am  sure  ye 
might  anticipate  a  glory  which  words  cannot  picture  or 
imagination  realize,  in  the  second  advent  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  the  resurrection  of  the  just  and  the  establishment  of 
the  everlasting  kingdom.  Dwell  upon  these  things.  De- 
clare his  glory.  And  do  not  be  ashamed  in  the  presence 
of  people  of  a  disreputable  character,  though  their  igno- 
rance and  degradation  be  never  so  palpable.  "  Declare 
his  glory  among  the  heathen.'"  "  I  am  going  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  heathen,"  said  a  minister  once  to  his  people. 


The  new  Soikj  and  the  old  Story,  295 

^Mistaking  his  meaning  they  went  home  deploring  the 
loss  of  their  pastor.  On  the  following  Sunday  when 
they  found  him  in  the  pulpit  they  discovered  that  he 
had  not  been  out  of  the  city  all  the  week,  and  when 
they  wanted  to  know  what  parts  he  had  visited  and 
what  people  he  had  seen,  he  reminded  them  that  he  had 
heathens  close  at  home,  and  they  were  to  be  found  even 
in  his  own  congregation.  Ah,  and  there  may  be  some 
heathens  here.  At  any  rate,  there  are  plenty  of  heathens 
in  this  great  city  of  London.  I  have  no  doubt  there 
are  parts  of  this  metropolis  in  which  hundreds,  and 
even  thousands,  of  people  reside  who  are  as  ignorant  of 
the  plan  of  salvation  as  the  inhabitants  of  Coomassie. 
They  know  nothing  of  Jesus,  even  though  the  light  is 
so  bright  around  them.  *^  Declare  his  glory  among  the 
heathen,"  ye  lovers  of  Christ.  Penetrate  into  these 
dark  places  :  break  up  fresh  ground.  Christian  men  and 
women.  I  am  persuaded,  and  this  is  a  matter  I  have 
often  spoken  of,  that  many  of  you  who  sit  and  hear 
sermons  on  the  Sunday  ought  rather  to  turn  out  and 
preach  the  gospel.  While  we  are  glad  to  see  you  occu- 
pying pews,  it  will  be  a  greater  joy  to  miss  you  from  your 
wonted  seats,  if  we  only  know  that  you  are  declaring 
God's  glory  among  the  heathen.  I  am  not  sure  that 
we  are  all  of  us  right  to  be  living  cooped  up  in  this 
little  island  of  ours.  There  are  in  England  enough 
disciples  of  Jesus  to  bear  the  gospel  to  the  uttermost 
ends  of  the  earth ;  but  perhaps  there  is  not  one  Chris- 
tian in  five  or  ten  thousand  who  ever  deliberately  thinks 
about  going  to  the  heathen  to  make  known  to  them  the 
way  of  salvation,  and  to  declare  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
among  those  who  have  never  heard  his  name.     Pray 


296  Christian  Energy. 

God  there  may  yet  come  a  wonderful  wave  of  God's 
Spirit  over  our  churches  which  shall  bear  upon  its  crest 
hundreds  of  ardent  spirits  resolved  to  caiTy  the  tidings 
of  redemption  to  the  jungle  and  the  fever  swamp,  to 
the  high  latitudes  and  the  southern  islands.  O  that  the 
love  of  Christ  may  constrain  them.  Know  ye  not 
that  Christ  has  determined  to  save  men  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  ?  Has  he  not  charged  his  disciples  to 
go  into  all  the  world?  How  poorly  has  the  church 
carried  out  the  commission.  If  you  do  love  Christ 
here  is  room  to  show  your  love;  go  and  declare  his 
gloiy  among  the  heathen. 

A  third  expression  is  used  here.  "  Declare  his  won- 
ders among  all  people."  Our  gospel  is  a  gospel  of 
wonders.  It  deals  with  wonderful  sin  in  a  wonderful 
way.  It  presents  to  us  a  wonderful  Sa^dour,  and  tells 
us  of  his  wonderful  complex  person.  It  points  us  to 
his  wonderful  atonement,  and  it  takes  the  blackest 
sinner  and  makes  him  wonderfully  clean.  It  makes 
him  a  new  creature,  and  works  a  wonderful  change  in 
him.  It  conducts  him  to  wonders  of  happiness  and 
wonders  of  strength,  and  yet  onward  to  greater  won- 
ders of  light  and  life ;  for  it  opens  up  to  him  the  won- 
ders of  the  covenant.  It  gives  him  wonderful  provisions, 
wonderful  deliverances,  and  leads  him  right  up  by  the 
name  of  him  that  is  called  Wonderful,  to  the  gates  of 
that  wonder-land  where  we  shall  for  ever 

"  Sing,  with  wonder  and  surprise, 
His  lovingkiudness  in  the  skies." 

Surely,  dear  Christian  friends,  we  ought  to  talk  about 
the  wonders  of  the  Lord  our  God,  and  especially  should 


The  new  Song  and  the  old  Story.  297 

we  dwell  upon  those  wonders  which  we  have  seen  our- 
selves. Of  every  Christian  man  'ft  might  be  said  that 
he  is  a  wonder.  Will  you  think  a  minute,  Christian,  of 
the  wonder  that  God  has  made  of  you,  and  the  wonders 
that  he  has  done  for  you.  "  That  ever  I  should  be" — 
will  you  not  say  that  ? — ''  that  ever  I  should  be  saved 
is  a  wonder  of  wonders."  That  you  should  have  been 
kept  till  now,  that  you  should  not  have  been  suffered  to 
go  back,  that  you  should  have  been  preserved  under  so 
many  troubles,  that  your  prayers  should  have  been 
heard  so  continuously,  that,  notwithstanding  your  ill 
manners,  the  love  of  Christ  should  still  have  remained 
the  same.  Oh,  but  I  cannot  recite  the  tale  of  marvels : 
it  is  a  loner  series  of  wonders.  The  Christian  man's 
life,  if  the  worldling  could  understand  it,  would  seem 
to  him  like  a  romance.  The  wonders  of  m-ace  far 
exceed  the  wonders  of  nature ;  and  of  all  the  miracles 
God  himself  has  ever  wrought  there  are  no  miracles  so 
matchless  in  wonder  as  the  miracles  of  grace  in  the 
heart  of  man.  Beloved,  declare  these  miracles,  these 
wonders.  Tell  them  to  others  ;  men  like  to  hear  a  tale 
of  wonder.  They  will  gather  round  the  fire  at  even- 
tide when  the  logs  are  burning,  and  delightedly  listen 
to  the  story  of  wonder.  When  you  go  home,  young 
man,  for  your  next  holiday,  if  God  has  converted  you, 
tell  what  great  things  the  Lord  has  done  for  you.  And 
when  you  go  home,  Mary,  and  see  your  mother,  if  the 
Lord  has  met  with  you,  tell  her  what  the  Lord  has 
done.  Declare  his  wonders  among  all  people.  Do  not 
be  afraid  of  speaking  about  the  gospel  to  anybody  or 
in  any  company.  Whoever  they  may  be,  whether  they 
be  rich  or  poor,  high  or  low,  if  you  get  an  opportunity 


298  Christian  Energy. 

of  declaring  the  wonders  of  God's  grace,  do  not  let  the 
gospel  be  unknown  for  want  of  a  tongue  to  tell  it. 

See  you,  then,  I  have  put  before  you  these  two  out- 
lets for  your  love.  There  is  song,  and  here  is  discourse. 
Go  and  use  them  both,  and  if  any  bid  you  hold  your 
peace,  shall  I  tell  you  the  answer?  Use  the  same 
answer  which  your  Master  did  to  the  Pharisees  when 
they  complained  of  the  shouts  of  the  little  children : 
<^  If  these  should  hold  their  peace  the  very  stones  would 
cry  out."  Ordinary  Christians  may  be  quiet  because 
God  has  done  nothing  very  wonderful  for  them.  They 
go  through  the  world  in  a  very  ordinary  kind  of  way. 
Their  religion  is  about  skin  deep,  and  no  more.  But 
those  that  know  they  deserve  the  deepest  hell,  and  have 
been  saved  by  a  mighty  effort  of  infinite  mercy,  must 
tell  what  God  has  done  for  them.  They  must  come 
out  from  the  world,  and  be  separate.  They  must  be 
decided,  zealous,  and  even  enthusiastic.  Necessity  is 
laid  upon  them  to  be  earnest  and  intense  in  all  they  do 
and  in  all  they  say.  They  cannot  help  it,  for  the  love 
of  Jesus  will  fire  their  souls  with  a  passion  that  cannot 
be  quenched.  ''  We  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died  for 
all,  then  were  all  dead :  and  that  he  died  for  all,  that 
they  which  live  should  not  live  henceforth  to  them- 
selves, but  unto  him  which  died  for  them,  and  rose 
again."     God  help  you,  beloved,  thus  to  live. 

As  for  those  of  you  who  have  never  found  the  Saviour, 
you  cannot  tell  of  his  excellence  or  pubhsh  his  worth, 
but  I  do  trust  that  you  will  not  forget  that  Jesus  is  to 
be  found  by  those  who  seek  him,  and  whosoever  be- 
lieveth  on  him  shall  be  saved.  Take  him  at  his  word. 
Rely  on  his  promise.     Trust  him.     Commit  your  soul 


The  new  Song  and  the  old  Story. 


299 


to  him.  Cast  yourself  unfelgnedly  and  unreservedly 
on  his  mercy.  He  will  not  spurn  you;  but  he  will 
receive  you  graciously  and  you  shall  yet  praise  him, 
and  he  will  be  the  health  of  your  countenance  and 
your  God. 


t^m  ^\m^ 


"Make   straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lest  that  which  is  lame  he 
turned  out  of  the  way  ;  but  let  it  rather  he  healed."— Hebrews  xii.  13. 


HERE  are  some  believers  of  strong  and 
vigorous  faith.  Soaring  high,  they  mount 
up  with  wings  as  eagles.  Fleet  of  foot, 
they  can  run  and  not  be  weary,  or  with 
steady  progress  they  can  walk,  and  not 
faint.  But  all  are  not  so  highly  privileged. 
I  suppose  there  is  seldom  a  family  which 
has  no  sickly  member.  However  hale  and  hearty 
most  of  the  sons  and  daughters  may  be,  there  is 
likely  to  be  some  weakly  one  amongst  them.  So  it 
certainly  is  in  the  spiritual  household ;  and  it  w^ill  be, 
therefore,  my  business  just  now  to  look  after  the  weakly 
ones.  I  do  trust  that  the  word  which  I  shall  be  enabled 
to  speak  may  lead  their  companions  to  look  after  them, 
and  may  God  grant  that  by  these  means  many  troubled 
ones  may  be  conducted  into  peace  and  safety. 

In  God's  flock  there  are  always  some  lame 

SHEEP. 

There  is  a  peril  intimated  here ;  "  lest  that  which  is 
lame  be  turned  out  of  the  way."  This  is  only  too 
likely  to  happen.     The  caution  is  applicable  to  every 


Lame  Sheep.  301 

cliurcli,  however  small  the  community  of  Christians 
may  be.  Lame  sheep  will  commonly  be  found  even  in 
the  tiniest  flock.  It  will  be  necessary,  then,  to  be 
tender  of  their  infirmity.  Some  of  these  people  of 
God  who  are  compared  to  lame  sheep,  seem  to  have 
been  so  from  their  birth.  It  is  in  their  constitution. 
Do  you  not  know  some  friends  of  yours  who  naturally 
incline  to  despondency?  They  always  take  the  dark 
view  of  everything,  and  if  there  be  no  dark  side  at  all, 
they  have  a  very  fine  imagination,  and  they  very  soon 
conjure  up  some  difficulty  or  trouble.  They  appear  to 
have  been  born  with  a  propensity  to  read  black-letter 
literature  and  nothing  else.  Illuminated  missals  are 
not  for  them.  They  cannot  bear  the  fine  colours, 
which  delight  our  eyes.  They  like  the  dark  points. 
If  they  turn  to  the  Bible  they  seem  naturally  to  fall 
upon  the  thre^tenings,  or  if  they  read  the  promises, 
they  shake  their  heads,  and  say,  "  Ah,  these  are  not 
for  us."  They  make  heavy  troubles  out  of  the  common 
cares  of  life,  and  it  is  only  carrying  out  the  same 
spirit  which  causes  them  to  grieve  and  fret  over  the 
whole  course  of  their  Christian  pilgrimage.  For  them 
the  road  is  always  rugged,  the  pastures  unsavoury,  and 
the  waters  turbid.  You  will  find  such  unhappy  souls 
in  all  our  churches ;  people  who  seem  from  their  very 
conformation  to  be  lame  as  to  the  matters  of  faith, 
timorous,  trembling,  and  full  of  doubts  and  fears. 

Besides,  have  you  never  noticed  a  constitutional 
tendency  in  some  professors  to  stumble,  and  get  lame  ? 
If  there  is  a  slough,  they  will  fall  into  it :  if  there  is  a 
thicket,  they  will  get  entangled  by  it :  if  there  is  an 
error,  they  will  run  foul  of  it.     Good  people  we  trust 


302  Christian  Energy, 

they  are,  and  tliey  do  believe  in  Jesus,  but  somehow  or 
other  they  do  not  see  things  clearly.  Men  to  them  are 
like  walldng  trees.  Such  persons  go  off  at  a  tangent 
if  anybody  makes  noise  enough  to  attract  their  ear. 
"  Lo  here  and  lo  there  "  are  cries  at  the  sound  of  which 
they  go  off  directly.  Let  a  new  divine  discover  a  new 
doctrine,  and  they  are  on  the  new  track  at  once,  never 
mind  where  it  leads  to.  Let  a  would-be  philosopher 
suggest  some  fresh  theory  about  matter  which  clashes 
with  the  word  of  God  and  the  things  of  the  Spirit, 
their  eager  appetite  is  whetted,  and  they  will  leave  the 
old  fields  of  truth  to  wander  in  the  barren  wastes  of 
science,  so  called.  When  you  go  to  market,  if  you  are 
a  sensible  person,  you  do  not  turn  aside  from  all  the 
wares  and  produce  of  fair  merchandise  to  waste  your 
time  and  your  money  over  the  quack  vendor  of  nostrums 
that  he  advertises  ^^-ith  large  pictures  and  loud  talk. 
Your  common  sense  directs  you  to  seek  wholesome  food 
and  useful  articles.  You  would  more  than  suspect  the 
threadbare  doctor.  But  there  are  credulous  people  just 
ready  to  be  taken  with  any  bait.  So,  too,  there  is  no 
lack  of  simpletons  in  all  our  congregations,  good 
thoughtless  people,  lame  and  limping  in  all  their  walk, 
troubled  with  scepticism,  and  plagued  with  curiosity, 
till  they  take  best  with  that  which  is  most  pernicious. 
Unstable  as  water,  they  shall  not  excel. 

Can  you  not  detect,  too,  some  who  are  lame  in 
point  of  character  ?  They  seem  to  have  been  so  from 
their  very  birth.  There  is  a  something  about  their 
gait  that  is  unsteady.  As  you  look  at  them  you  are 
ready  to  say,  ^'  Yes,  good  people  they  may  be,  but  they 
are  of  a  queer  sort."     We  hope  they  are  sincere,  but 


Lame  Sheep,  303 

they  are  like  Mepliiboslietli,  who  was  dropped  by  his 
nurse,  and  was  lame  in  both  his  feet.  If  they  walk  at 
all  it  is  a  dreadful  hobble.  They  do  their  best,  and  we 
cannot  condemn  them,  but  there  is  an  awkwardness 
about  their  deportment.  They  are  lame  sheep  at  the 
best.  With  some  it  is  a  cross  temper ;  with  others  it 
is  a  general  moroseness,  which  it  does  not  seem  as  if  the 
grace  of  God  itself  would  ever  cure  in  them ;  or  it  may 
be  a  natural  indolence  oppresses  them ;  or  it  is  quite 
possible  that  habitual  impatience  harasses  them.  Now, 
the  grace  of  God  should  eradicate  these  vices  ;  it  can 
and  will,  if  you  yield  to  its  influence ;  for  the  grace  of 
God,  which  bringeth  salvation,  teacheth  us  to  deny  all 
ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts.  With  some  of  us  the 
conquest  over  such  evil  propensities  has  been  already 
gained.  Still  there  are  among  us  those  sheep  who  are 
lame  in  this  particular  respect :  they  are,  if  I  may  so  say, 
constitutionally  unsound  from  their  very  first  entrance 
into  the  fold.  Moreover,  they  betray  their  lameness 
when  there  is  anything  you  give  them  to  do.  If  they 
are  Sunday-school  teachers,  they  cannot  w^alk  regularly 
or  keep  step  with  their  fellows ;  or  they  fail  to  help  the 
young  scholar  on.  Ask  them  to  visit  in  any  district, 
the  steps  they  take  are  marked  by  indiscretion.  Ap- 
point them  to  preach  at  any  of  your  stations,  their 
speech  is  not  straightforward ;  they  go  over  the  plainest 
ground  of  gospel  statement  with  a  lack  of  consistency 
like  the  walk  of  a  man  whose  legs  are  not  equal. 
Whatever  they  attempt,  they  do  it  just  as  a  lame  man 
would  go  on  an  errand.  They  are  slow  in  their  move- 
ments and  slovenly  in  their  performances.  Aptly  are 
they  compared  to  lame  sheep.     Well,  you  know  such. 


304  Christian  Energy. 

I  wonder  wlietlier  you  are  one  yourself  ;  at  least  there 
are  such  about,  lame  from  their  birth. 

Other  sheep  of  Christ's  flock  are  halt  and  lame  be- 
cause they  have  been  ill-fed.  Bad  food  is  the  cause  of 
a  thousand  disorders.  Many  a  sickly  man,  instead  of 
being  dosed  with  drugs  needs  to  be  nourished  with 
wholesome  meat.  Had  he  something  better  to  feed 
upon,  he  might  conquer  his  diseases.  Sheep  cannot 
thrive  well  on  bad  food.  It  is  true  many  really  good 
Christians  have  been  badly  fed.  The  preaching  they 
have  heard  has,  perhaps,  been  altogether  false  doctrine. 
The  poor  souls  have  sat  and  listened  to  moral  essays, 
maudlin  sentiments,  or  manifold  subtleties  that  could 
not  nourish  their  faith  or  in\igorate  their  spiritual  con- 
stitution. If  they  sometimes  suspected  that  it  was  not 
all  right,  they  did  not  like  to  desert  the  place  they  had 
long  been  wont  to  attend,  or  to  forsake  the  minister  they 
had  long  been  wont  to  hear.  They  are  afraid  of  being 
thought  too  critical,  so  they  have  gone  on  with  ill  fare 
to  the  prejudice  of  their  health  and  strength,  their 
comfort,  and  usefulness.  It  is  more  than  probable  that 
poisonous  doctrine  has  got  into  their  constitution,  and 
done  them  real  mischief,  hence  they  are  lame.  In 
hundreds,  not  to  say  thousands,  of  cases  that  I  know, 
Christians  are  lame  through  a  kind  of  hazy  teaching,  in 
which,  if  there  is  not  anything  positively  bad,  there  is 
nothing  positively  good.  I  have  read  the  remark  that 
if  you  were  to  hear  thirteen  lectui'es  on  geology  from 
any  decent  lecturer  you  would  probably  get  a  pretty 
clear  idea  of  his  system,  but  that  you  might  hear  thirteen 
hundred  sermons  from  many  a  minister  mthout  know- 
ing what  he  did  believe.     There  is  a  systematic  habit 


Lame  Sheep,  305 

now-a-davs  of  keeping  back  tlie  positive  doctrines  and 
the  essential  truths  of  the  gospel;  or  of  referring  to 
them  so  vaguely  that  the  sound  of  words  gives  no 
clue  to  the  sense.  The  whole  atmosphere  is  so  full  of 
fog  that  people  cannot  see  where  they  are.  The 
preacher  would  appear  to  be  profoundly  deep ;  but  he 
is  not  clear.  He  stirs  the  mud,  and  makes  himself  and 
his  subject  alike  obscure.  Or,  perhaps,  he  is  so  super- 
ficial that  he  does  not  touch  upon  those  truths  which 
lie  at  the  foundation  of  the  blessed  hope  of  eternal 
life.  Those  that  sit  under  such  a  ministry  need  not 
wonder  how  it  is  that  they  do  not  grow  in  grace.  Ay, 
and  how  much  ministry  there  is  that  has  nothing  but 
chaff  in  it.  What  else  can  we  say  of  those  exquisite 
preparations  for  the  pulpit  in  which  cuttings  from  the 
reviewers,  cullings  from  the  poets,  and  choice  scraps 
from  Scripture  writers  are  woven  together  with  a  fine 
overtiu'e  to  begin,  and  a  flowing  peroration  to  finish  ? 
What  can  we  say  of  it  but  chaff,  chaff,  without  a  grain 
of  pure  wheat  from  first  to  last!  I  should  like  to 
chain  eloquence  down  to  a  post ;  there  let  it  be  bound 
for  ever  in  the  land  of  for^jetf ulness  ;  never  a™n  let 
it  lift  its  brazen  face  in  this  world.  Aiming  at  orator}^, 
cultivating  rhetoric,  the  gospel,  which  eschews  the 
words  of  man's  wisdom  and  demands  great  plainness  of 
speech,  has  been  disparaged  and  displaced.  We  shall 
not  c'et  back  a  strono;  race  of  Christians  till  we  get 
back  such  a  sturdy  band  of  outspoken  men  as  dare 
their  reputation,  if  not  their  lives,  upon  the  unvarnished 
testimony  they  give  to  the  truth  they  know,  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus ;  the  truth  as  it  burns  in  their  own 
hearts,  and  fires  their  tongues  ;  the  tnith  as  it  conunends 

20 


306  Christian  Energy. 

itself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  tlie  siglit  of  God ; 
bearing  thus  Avitness  to  this  book  with  the  Holy- 
Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  But,  undoubtedly, 
there  are  thousands  of  Christians  at  this  good  hour 
who  are  lamed  for  hfe  through  unqualified,  unhallowed 
teaching.  God  save  us  from  its  hateful  witcheries  and 
its  baneful  influences.  If  we  have  got  to  preach,  let 
us  preach ;  but  for  heaven's  sake  let  us  know  wdiat  we 
have  got  to  say,  and  let  us  say  it  as  though  we  meant 
it,  or  for  ever  hold  our  tongues.  There  be  some 
who  seem  to  speak  as  if  they  meant  to  say  nothing, 
and  they  succeed  to  their  heart's  content,  if  that 
is  their  intention ;  notliing  comes  of  it.  The  children 
of  God  trained  under  their  auspices  do  not  know 
whether  God  has  an  elect  people  or  not — whether 
the  saints  will  persevere  or  whether  they  will  fall  away 
and  perish — they  do  not  know  whether  Christ  redeemed 
everybody,  or  somebody.  They  have  no  clear  notion 
whatsoever  of  the  things  which  make  for  their  peace. 
]May  we  be  preserved  from  all  wdlful  ignorance  and 
Avoef ul  infatuation.  JNIay  God  supply  us  constantly  with 
strong  meat  and  sound  health  to  digest  it.  Full  many 
of  the  Lord's  sheep  are  lame  because  they  have  been 
w^orried.  Sheep  often  get  worried  by  a  dog,  and  so 
they  get  lamed.  It  may  be  I  am  addressing  some  poor 
child  of  God  who  has  been  beset  by  Satan,  the  accuser 
of  the  brethren,  and  frightfully  tormented.  Oh  what 
trouble  and  what  terror  he  can  inflict  upon  us  !  He 
can  suo-o'est  the  most  infernal  insinuations.  He  can 
inject  into  our  minds  such  blasphemous  thoughts  as 
make  us  sta2:2;er  and  reel :  he  can  make  us  breathe  as  it 
were  the  very  atmosphere  of  the  infernal  lake.     Those 


Lame  Sheep.  307 

that  have  passed  through  this  bitter  experience  will 
know  how  they  carry  the  marks  of  a  conflict  with  Satan 
npon  them,  after  they  have  once  been  assailed  by  him ; 
wounds  and  scars  that  they  will  bear  upon  them  to  their 
grave.  He  is  such  a  cruel  adversary  that  even  when 
we  overcome  him  our  strength  is  impaired  by  the  battle. 
The  fatigues  and  perils  of  our  pilgrimage  are  light  in 
comparison  with  our  temptations.  We  had  easier  go  a 
thousand  miles  over  hedge  and  ditch  than  have  to  stand 
foot  to  foot  with  that  dread  adversary  of  souls  for  an 
liour.  Full  many  a  child  of  God  has  been  lamed  in 
that  fray.  Others,  too,  have  been  harassed  by  perse- 
cutors. Many  a  poor  woman  has  lost  her  cheerful 
spirits  through  a  harsh,  ungodly  husband,  who  has 
excited  her  fears  or  vexed  her  with  sneers  ;  and  not  a 
few  dear  young  children  have  been  broken  down  for  life 
through  the  hard  treatment  they  have  had  for  conscience 
sake  to  endure  at  home.  True,  there  may  be  instances 
in  which  sufferers  of  this  sort  out  of  weakness  have 
been  made  strong,  but  for  the  most  part  when  from 
day  to  day,  from  hour  to  hour,  one  is  insulted  and 
assaulted  the  trial  is  heavier  than  any  ordinary  forti- 
tude can  bear,  insomuch  that  those  who  have  en- 
countered it  have  gone  halting  like  lame  sheep  all  their 
days. 

Some  precious  saints  I  have  kiiOA\^i  have  grown  lame 
through  a  rough  and  weary  way,  just  as  sheep  can  be 
lamed  if  they  are  driven  too  fast,  or  too  far,  or  over 
too  strong  a  ground.  To  what  an  excess  of  trouble 
some  children  of  God  have  been  exposed !  The  Lord 
has  graciously  helped  them  through  all  their  adversi- 
ties.    Still  the  trouble  they  have  had  to  endure  has 


308  Christian  Energy. 

told  upon  their  liearts.  They  seem  as  if  they  never 
could  quite  recover  from  the  sudden  shock,  or  the  pro- 
tracted anxiety  that  has  once  impaired  their  strength, 
wrinkled  their  face,  and  dried  up  their  moisture.  If 
they  had  more  grace  no  doubt  they  would  recover  their 
health  and  renew  their  youth,  but  there  are  some 
gentle  spirits  which  when  once  crushed  are  unable  to- 
rally,  therefore  they  remain  lame. 

Perhaps  more  still  are  lamed  through  the  rough  road 
of  controversy.  If  you  are  a  child  of  God,  and  you, 
know  your  bearings,  keep  always  as  much  as  ever  yort 
can  out  of  the  jingle- jangle  of  controversy.  Little 
good  ever  comes  of  your  subtle  disputations,  but  they  do- 
gender  much  strife.  Do  you  tell  me  that  we  are  told 
to  "  prove  all  things."  Yes,  so  we  are ;  and  it  is  well 
to  give  heed  to  the  admonition,  but  we  are  told  also  to- 
"  hold  fast  that  which  is  good  ;  "  and  we  must  not  forget 
the  latter  half  of  the  precept,  while  we  give  our  whole 
attention  to  the  former  half.  Some  people  seem  to- 
think  that,  in  order  to  prove  all  things,  they  have  to 
analyse  and  define  every  particular  and  every  particle 
with  scrupulous  nicety.  To  prove  the  quality  of  the 
meat  that  is  brought  to  your  table  there  is  no  occasion 
for  you  to  eat  the  whole  joint.  A  small  sample  will  en- 
able you  to  pronounce  a  sound  opinion.  Apply  the  same 
rule  to  books,  and  it  will  save  you  a  world  of  trouble. 
They  may  dish  up  old  dogmas,  or  they  may  throw  off  new 
theories ;  they  may  contain  the  reveries  of  the  thought- 
ful, or  the  ramblings  of  the  idler ;  they  may  be  con- 
ceived mtli  a  purpose,  or  composed  for  a  price.  In  any 
case  you  must  have  a  voracious  appetite  if  you  would 
read  them  all  through.     But  it  is  quite  unnecessary. 


Lame  Sheep.  309 

Take  the  paper  knife  and  just  cut  open  a  page  in  the 
centre.  One  tasting  will  generally  suffice  for  a  fair 
iesting.  You  can  see  within  a  little  what  tack  their 
authors  take.  If  they  accord  not  with  the  Word  of 
God,  away  with  them !  You  have  proved  them  quite 
enough.  You'll  get  small  thanks  for  great  pains  if  you 
worry  your  poor  mind  to  solve  afresh  the  points  which 
are  settled  among  us.  We  have  believed  and  rejoiced 
in  the  truth  these  many  years.  Yes,  believed  on  con- 
clusive evidence  where  we  once  stood  in  doubt;  re- 
joiced with  joy  unspeakable  where  we  once  looked  with 
dreary  misgiving.  What  more  can  you  require  ?  But 
many  have  been  lamed  through  choosing  rough  places, 
and  adventurino'  amonii;  thorns  and  briers,  and  leavincp 
the  beaten  tracks,  without  experience  enough  to  avoid 
injury  to  themselves,  or  skill  enough  to  clear  a  path  in 
which  others  may  safely  follow. 

Full  many  of  the  Lord's  sheep  have  become  lame 
through  negligence,  faintness,  and  the  gradual  declen- 
sion of  spiritual  health.  They  have  backslidden  ;  they 
have  been  remiss  in  prayer,  omitted  reading  the  Word, 
and  forsaken  communion  with  God,  so  it  is  no  marvel 
that  their  walk  betrays  their  weakness.  A  bad  cold 
is  the  parent  of  many  bad  ailments.  Beware  of  catch- 
ing a  chill  in  religion.  Lameness  is  not  unf  requently 
the  result  of  a  fall.  A  broken  bone,  or  a  compound 
fracture,  or  a  serious  dislocation  of  the  joints  is  not 
easily  healed.  Those  who  have  such  injm'ies  can  tell 
you  how  helpless  it  makes  them ;  how  long  it  is  before 
they  can  walk  without  crutches ;  and  how  often  a 
change  of  weather  will  remind  them,  by  ache  and 
twinge,  that  cures   leave   scars  belimd.     Certainly  it  is 


310  Christian  Energy, 

so  with  any  man  who  has  fallen  into  gross  sin  after 
making  a  profession  of  faith  in  Christ.  However 
heartily  he  may  be  restored  by  divine  grace,  he  will 
feel  its  effects  as  long  as  he  lives.  Like  one  who  halts  on 
his  thigh,  he  will  be  more  or  less  lame  ever  afterwards. 
That  is  a  terrible  text  for  backshders— will  you  please 
all  turn  to  it,  open  your  Bibles,  and  make  a  mark 
against  it  (Isaiah  xxii.  14):  ''It  teas  revealed  in  mine 
ears  by  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  surely  this  iniquity  shall 
not  he  purged  from  you  till  ye  die,  saith  the  Lord  God  of 
Hosts:'  Saddest,  most  sorrowful,  of  all  the  causes  of 
lameness  this  which  comes  through  a  fall  into  any  sin. 
Heaven  spare  us  from  turning  aside  to  folly ! 

There  are,  and  I  suppose  we  may  expect  there 
always  will  be,  lame  ones  in  God's  flock ;  so  I  proceed 
to  show  that  the  rest  of  the  floch  should  seek  their 
healing.  "Make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lest  that 
which  is  lame  be  turned  out  of  the  v/ay ;  but  let  it 
rather  be  healed." 

Some  Christian  people  seem  to  be  so  inconsiderate 
and  unsjTupathising,  that  they  treat  all  the  lame  of  the 
flock  with  harshness.  You  may  be  strong  and  vigorous 
in  your  physical  constitution,  strangers  to  nervousness 
and  depression  of  spirits.  Be  thanldFul,  then,  but  do 
not  be  presumptuous.  Despise  not  those  who  suffer 
from  infirmities  that  have  never  come  upon  you.  Your 
turn  may  come  ere  long.  You  are  yet  in  the  body,  and 
exempt  from  no  ailment  to  which  your  fellow-crea- 
tures are  prone.  I  have  known  hectoring  spirits  whose 
contumely  it  was  hard  to  quiet,  so  did  they  jeer  at  the 
weakhngs;  and  presently  their  own  complaints  have 
been  hard  to  pacify,  so  did  they  moan  over  their  own 


Lame  Sheep.  311 

grievances.  The  more  arrogant  tliey  have  been,  when 
all  was  well  with  them,  the  more  crestfallen  and 
desponding  have  tliey  been  in  the  gloom,  when  things 
have  gone  ill  vdXh  them.  Those  fellows  who  crow  most 
croak  worst.  There  is  a  passage  in  the  thirty-fourth 
chapter  of  Ezekiel  which  I  should  recommend  every 
strong,  rough  man  to  read  and  diligently  consider: 
*'Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  them;  Behold,  I, 
even  I,  will  judge  between  the  fat  cattle  and  between 
the  lean  cattle.  Because  ye  have  thrust  with  side  and 
with  shoulder,  and  pushed  all  the  diseased  with  your 
horns,  till  ye  have  scattered  them  abroad;  therefore 
will  I  save  my  flock,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  a  prey ; 
and  I  will  judge  between  cattle  and  cattle."  Jehovah 
is  our  Shepherd,  and  he  is  very  tender  of  his  little 
lambs  and  his  weak  sheep :  and  if  we  are  not  tender  of 
them  too  we  shall  soon  be  made  to  smart  for  our  hard- 
heartedness.  It  sometimes  happens  that  those  persons 
who  have  seldom  or  never  had  an  illness  in  their  lives 
feel  little  sympathy  for  those  who  have  to  bear  much 
pain  and  sickness.  Others  who  have  never  suffered 
from  poverty  themselves  will  sometimes  shut  up  their 
bowels  of  compassion  against  those  who  are  in  neces- 
sitous circumstances.  Or  if  they  dole  out  a  charity  they 
w411  too  often  spoil  a  good  deed  with  a  harsh  word. 
"Ye  that  are  stroncr  ouo;ht  to  bear  the  infirmities  of 
the  weak ; "  and  if  that  is  too  much  to  expect  of 
you,  the  least  that  I  can  ask  is  that  you  Avill  bear  with 
them.  I  do  beseech  you  by  the  gentleness  of  Christ 
that  ye  tread  lightly  the  sick  chamber,  and  speak  softly 
to  such  as  are  crushed  by  adversity.  There  are  diseases 
that  provoke  irritability.     Peevishness,  or  despondency, 


312  Christian  Energy. 

may  be  symptoms  of  the  particular  ailment  that 
prostrates  one's  energies  and  enervates  one's  entire 
being.  Do  not  be  censorious,  that  were  cruel.  Let 
those  of  you  who  are  blessed  with  health,  and  walk  in 
the  sunshine,  be  considerate  of  their  brethren  and 
sisters  wdio  are  blighted  with  a  malady  they  cannot 
shake  off  or  enveloped  in  a  cloud  that  darkens  all 
their  prospects.  Do  learn  to  make  another's  case  thine 
own.  Be  kind.  Let  every  tone  of  your  voice,  every 
gesture  of  your  limbs,  ever}"  look  of  your  face  show  the 
kindness  of  your  heart.  God  will  surely  requite  it. 
Are  his  children  in  the  furnace,  he  watches  them.  If 
you  aggrieve  them  in  their  trouble,  he  will  vex  you  in 
his  sore  displeasure.  And  there  are  spiritual  ailments 
which,  like  bodily  ones,  require  tender  care  and  gentle 
treatment.  Do  not  a^orravate  the  sorrows  of  those  who 
are  harassed  with  doubts,  tempted  with  evils,  and  dis- 
tracted with  anxious  cares.  Their  tale  may  appear 
simple  enough  to  you,  but  it  is  very  serious  to  them. 
What  troubles  them  might  not  give  you  an  instant's 
concern.  Pass  it  not  over,  therefore,  as  nonsense. 
Your  Lord  and  Master  knew  how  to  condescend  to  men 
of  low  estate ;  and  his  condescension  was  always  pure, 
never  arrogant.  He  is  far  more  gentle  than  the  ten- 
derest  among  us.     Oh,  how  desirable  to  learn  his  way ! 

Do  YE  ASK,  THEX,  AVHAT  HE  SAYS  W^E  AEE  TO  DO 
FOR   THESE    LAME    ONES? 

Evidently,  we  ought  to  comfort  them.  Lift  up  the 
hands  that  hang  down,  and  strengthen  the  feeble  knees. 
Cheer  the  hearts  wdien  the  limbs  are  weak.  Tell  the 
doubtincr  that  God  is  faithful.      Tell  those  that  feel 

o 

the  burden  of  sin  that  it  was  for  sinners  Christ  died. 


Lame  Sheep.  313 

Tell  the  backsliders  that  God  never  does  cast  away  his 
people.  Tell  the  desponding  that  the  Lord  delighteth 
in  mercy.  Tell  the  distracted  the  Lord  doth  devise 
means  to  brins;  back  his  banished.  Covet  the  character 
of  Barnabas.  He  was  a  son  of  consolation.  Study  the 
sacred  art  of  speaking  a  word  in  season.  Apprentice 
yourself  to  the  Great  ^Master.  Learn  the  secrets  of 
the  trade.  Acquaint  yourself  with  the  mystery  of 
the  guild.  Let  your  own  troubles  and  trials  qualify 
you  to  sympathise  and  succour.  You  will  be  of  great 
value  in  the  church  of  God  if  you  acquire  the  art  of 
compassion,  and  are  able  to  help  those  that  are  bowed 
down. 

But  will  you  please  give  heed  to  the  special  in- 
struction. We  are  to  make  straight  paths  because  of 
lame  people.  You  cannot  heal  the  man's  bad  foot,  but 
you  can  pick  all  the  stones  out  of  the  path  that  he  has 
to  pass  over.  You  cannot  give  him  a  new  leg,  but  you 
can  make  the  road  as  smooth  as  possible.  Let  there 
be  no  unnecessary  stumbling-blocks  to  cause  him  pain. 
Do  you  ask  me  how  you  can  observe  this  precept  ?  If 
you  have  to  preach  the  gospel,  preach  it  plainly.  Poor 
sinners  are  dull  enough  of  understanding ;  they  can 
puzzle  themselves,  without  your  puzzling  them.  Had 
you  to  feed  a  child  it  would  be  folly  to  put  a  quartern 
loaf  down  before  it  and  account  your  duty  done.  Nor 
will  it  profit  the  mass  of  the  people  to  preach  the  gospel 
to  them  in  the  abstract,  giving  them  a  great  lump  of 
truth,  to  decipher  and  digest  as  best  they  can.  No; 
but  you  should  divide  a  child's  bread  into  small  pieces 
— crumble  it  up,  and  then  pour  the  milk  on  it,  that  he 
mav  be  able  to  feed  on  it.     So  must  we  cater  for  God's 


314  Christian  Energy. 

tried  and  troubled  people.  We  must  speak  simply,  use 
homely  illustrations,  and  quote  precious  promises. 
What  though  somebody  may  be  offended.  Well, 
let  him  take  umbrage.  We  need  not  be  particular  to 
pacify  any  of  those  critical  people,  and  God  forbid  that 
we  should  offend  any  of  his  little  ones ;  for  he  is  jealous 
of  them.  If  one  feeble  soul  gets  a  hold  of  the  truth 
through  its  being  made  plain  to  him,  he  will  be  grateful 
to  you  ;  nor  is  "  God  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work 
and  labour  of  love." 

Would  you  make  straight  paths,  then  take  care  that 
your  teaching  is  always  according  to  the  Bible.  Many 
lame  people  have  been  injured  by  a  mixture  of  heathenish 
philosophy  and  Christian  doctrine.  What  is  it  that 
leads  now-a-day  to  the  spread  of  popery  in  this  country? 
Whence  this  dogma  of  baptismal  regeneration  ?  Had 
every  minister  preached  that  believers  only  ought  to  be 
baptized,  there  would  have  been  no  pretext  for  infant 
sprinkling,  and  certainly  no  baptismal  regeneration.  If 
you  go  a  little  to  the  right,  or  a  little  to  the  left,  and 
so  diverge  from  the  high  road,  you  do  not  know  where 
it  will  take  you.  Have  you  ever  tried  that  in  a  Surrey 
lane  ?  Perhaps  you  have  been  beguiled  by  some  pleasant 
looking  path  to  leave  the  main  road,  fully  expecting  to 
come  back  into  it  again  a  little  further  on,  not  for  a 
moment  supposing  that  you  had  changed  your  course 
altogether  till  you  have  found  yom'self  two  or  three 
miles  off  the  place  that  you  wanted  to  get  to.  It  is 
better  for  you  always  to  keep  to  the  Scriptures,  friends, 
for  if  you  go  a  little  away  from  them  you  do  not  know 
where  you  may  wander;  and  in  teaching  others  you 
may  lead  them  astray.     Errors  that  seem  slight  and 


Lame  Sheep.  315 

frivolous  at  first  become  sad  and  serious  in  a  little  while. 
A  little  deviation  from  the  Word  of  God  will  presently 
lead  to  a  total  dissent  from  its  teaching.  Heaven  only 
knows  how  far  you  may  go  astray  when  you  once  begin 
to  turn  your  feet  aside.  Make  straight  paths  for  your 
feet  then,  because  there  are  lame  ones  that  otherwise 
will  be  turned  out  of  the  way. 

And,  in  all  our  walk  and  conversation  let  us  make 
straight  paths  to  our  feet  as  those  who  aim  at  holiness 
of  life.  Unholy  Christians  are  the  plague  of  the 
church.  They  are  spots  in  your  feasts  of  charity* 
Like  hidden  rocks,  they  are  the  terror  of  navigators* 
It  is  hard  to  steer  clear  of  them  :  and  there  is  no  telling 
what  wrecks  they  may  cause.  The  inconsistencies  of 
professors  spread  dismay  among  weak,  desponding  be- 
lievers. It  is  not  merely  the  mischief  you  Avill  do  to 
yourself,  church-member,  if  you  grow  wanton  and 
worldly,  or  the  grief  you  will  bring  to  the  stronger 
brethren  ;  but  it  is  the  pain  and  peril  to  which  you 
will  expose  the  young,  the  weak,  the  tender  ones  of  the 
flock.  That  poor  little  girl  in  yonder  cottage  will  have 
your  character  thrown  in  her  teeth ;  that  poor  struggling 
woman,  whose  godless  husband  she  has  sought  to 
reclaim,  will  be  sure  to  hear  his  cruel  taunt,  "  Ah,  there 
is  one  of  your  crew :  that  is  how  they  live."  The  un- 
clean life  of  anyone  that  happens  to  stand  in  an  eminent 
place,  does  a  damage  which  it  is  impossible  for  us  to 
estimate.  The  jeer  does  not  alight  only  upon  the 
transgressor  himself,  but  upon  the  whole  company  of 
God's  people  with  whom  he  was  associated;  they  all 
have  to  bear  the  taunt  and  feel  the  smart.  Many  a 
lame  one  is  staggered.     Were  he  a  strong  Christian,  of 


316  Christian  Energy. 

course  he  would  say  to  himself,  "  Well,  there  was  a 
Saul  among  the  prophets  and  a  Judas  among  the 
apostles,  and  there  will  be  false  professors  among  our- 
selves ;  so  we  must  not  pin  our  creed  to  any  creature  in 
the  world."  The  less  confidence  he  could  repose  in  the 
disciples,  the  more  closely  he  would  cleave  to  the  Lord. 
But  timid,  trembling  Christians  are  put  out  of  counte- 
nance and  out  of  heart  too  by  the  delinquencies  of  those 
they  were  wont  to  look  up  to.  They  say,  "  What,  and 
if  a  Christian  man  acts  like  this,  can  there  be  anything 
in  Christianity  worth  seeking  for  and  living  for  after 
all?"  So  the  lame  are  put  out  of  the  way.  Oh,  do 
walk  carefully !  When  you  try  to  teach  others,  do 
make  your  walk  an  example  to  those  you  wish  to  teach. 
I  would  say  this  to  myself  especially.  Let  your  life  be 
so  pure  that  it  excites  no  suspicion ;  let  your  conduct 
be  so  upright  that  it  needs  no  explanation  or  apology  ; 
let  your  character  speak  for  itself,  a  light  that  shines, 
an  example  that  you  need  not  be  ashamed  of  yourself, 
and  such  as  others  may  wish  to  emulate.  And  beware, 
I  pray  you,  of  any  secret  sin ;  of  any  evil  habits  such 
as  you  would  only  tolerate  when  screened  from  observa- 
tion ;  for,  as  sure  as  you  Hve,  if  you  are  a  child  of  God, 
it  will  come  out  one  of  these  days,  to  your  shame.  The 
openly  profane  may  enjoy  a  measui-e  of  impunity,  but 
the  professed  follower  of  Christ  never  can  play  the  h}^30- 
crite  Avithout  provoking  speedy  retribution.  Ah,  David 
thought  he  had  smuggled  up  his  sin  with  Bathsheba, 
did  he  not  ?  When  he  had  compassed  Uriah's  death, 
he  seems  to  have  imagined  that  nobody  would  ever  know 
anything  about  it.  But  how  soon  it  was  discovered,  and 
that,  too,  without  its  being  divulged  by  anyone  who 


Lame  Sheep.  oil 

connived  at  his  guilt.  The  Lord  saw  it,  and  he  would 
not  hide  it.  Never  let  a  child  of  God  think  that  his 
Heavenly  Father  will  overlook  his  wilful  misdeeds. 
There  is  no  special  providence  to  shield  you  from  eating 
the  fruit  of  your  o^^^l  ways.  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find 
you  out.  "  Make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lest  that 
which  is  lame  be  turned  out  of  the  way." 

Once  more  let  me  admonish  you.  Do  not  be  negligent 
when  your  Lord  is  so  vigilant.  Do  not  even  be  careless 
when  you  see  him  so  cautious.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
the  great  shepherd  of  the  sheep,  evidently  cares  for  the 
lame  ones.  The  charge  he  gives  is  a  proof  of  the  con- 
cern he  feels.  He  bids  us  to  be  considerate  of  them, 
because  he  himself  takes  a  warm  interest  in  their 
welfare. 

What  now  shall  I  say  to  you  who  feel  your 
OW^  WEAKNESS  AND  INFIRMITY  1     You  lame  ones  who 
cannot  walk  without  limping,  I  know  how  you  complain. 
"Ah,"  say  you,  ''I  am  no  credit  to  Christianity.  Though 
in  all  sincerity  I  do  beheve  in  Jesus,  yet,   alas,  I  can 
scarcely  think  I  am  one  of  his  true  disciples,  called  and 
chosen   and   faithful!     I  fear   that  after   all  he  will 
disown  me."     Ah,  beloved,  that  he  never  will.     If  you 
really  are  trusting  to  him,  and  hanging  upon  him,  or  even 
touching  the  hem  of  his  garment,  he  cannot  and  he 
will  not  leave  or  forsake  you.     True,  it  would  be  likely 
enough  if   his  ways  were   like   our  w^ays,  for   it   will 
cause'him  no  little  care  to  get  you  safe  home.     When 
Mr.  Greatheart  went  with  Muchafraid  and  Feeblemind 
on   the   road   to  the  celestial  city,   he  had  his  hands 
full.     He  says  of  poor  Mr.  Feeblemind,  that  when  he 
came  to  the  lions,  he  said,  "  Oh,  the  lions  will  have  me." 


318  Christian  Energy. 

And  lie  was  afraid  of  the  giants,  and  afraid  of  every- 
thing on  the  road.  It  caused  Greatheart  much  trouble 
to  get  him  on  the  road.  It  is  so  with  you.  Well,  you 
must  know  that  you  are  very  troublesome  and  hard  to 
manage.  But  then  our  good  Lord  is  very  patient ;  he 
does  not  mind  taking  trouble.  He  has  laid  down  his 
life  for  you,  and  he  is  prepared  to  exercise  all  his  divine 
power  and  wisdom  to  bring  you  home  to  his  Father's 
house,  If  he  were  to  desert  you,  there  would  be  no  eye 
to  pity,  no  hand  to  lead  you ;  but  there  is  no  fear  of  his 
changing  the  purpose  of  his  heart.  Having  loved  his 
own  he  loveth  them  to  the  end.  Were  the  good 
Shepherd  ever  to  neglect  one  of  the  flock,  it  would  not 
be  a  lamb  or  a  lame  sheep.  Were  the  dear  Saviour  to 
leave  any  one  of  his  disciples,  it  would  not  be  one  of  the 
little  ones.  I  have  heard  say — I  do  not  know  how  true 
it  is — that  when  one  of  her  family  is  a  little  weak-headed, 
the  mother  is  sure  to  love  that  one  best  and  show  it  the 
most  attention.  Her  tenderest  thoughts  will  always 
turn  toward  her  helpless  babe,  and  her  keenest  anxieties 
will  hover  over  the  child  who  is  ill.  She  may  forget 
awhile  the  strong  and  hale,  but  those  who  need  her 
succour  most  are  quite  certain  to  be  never  out  of  her 
mind.  Be  of  good  cheer,  then.  As  one  whom  his 
mother  comforteth,  so  will  the  Lord  comfort  you. 
Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth 
them  that  fear  him. 

Thou  may  est  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd,  I 
shall  not  want."  Thou  may  est  gratefully  sing,  "  He 
shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his  arm  and  carry  them  in 
his  bosom,  and  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with 
young."      In   the   divine  economy  the  more  care  you 


Lame  Sheep.  319 

require  tlie  more  care  you  shall  have.  Besides,  you 
know  somewhat  of  our  blessed  Kcdeemer's  covenant 
enffa^ements.  Did  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  fail  to  brine; 
his  weak  ones  home  it  would  be  much  to  his  dis- 
honour. '*  Those  that  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept," 
he  says,  "  and  none  of  them  is  lost  but  the  son  of  per- 
dition, that  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled."  So 
Satan  only  had  his  own.  How  the  wolf  would  howl 
over  one  sheep  branded  with  the  Saviour's  name  were 
he  to  fall  a  prey  to  his  teeth !  What  malignant  hi- 
larity and  derision  there  would  be  among  the  infernal 
spirits  if  the  good  Shepherd  failed  to  bring  home  one 
lost  sheep  whom  he  had  rescued !  The  joy  among  the 
angels  of  God,  they  would  say,  was  premature.  The 
Son  of  Man,  they  would  say,  had  sought,  found,  but 
failed  to  save  the  lost.  Then  the  weaker  the  victim 
the  keener  would  the  satire  be.  Eibald  lips  might 
shout  forth  the  taunt,  "  He  saved  the  healthy,  the  halt 
he  could  not  save."  It  would  thus  be  more  discredit 
to  Christ  to  lose  a  weak  one  than  a  strong  one,  or 
for  one  lame  sheep  to  be  lost  than  if  some  of  the 
healthier  of  them  should  perish;  but  there  is  no 
danger  of  such  a  calamity.  The  oversight  of  the 
Sliepherd  secures  the  flock.  They  are  all  numbered, 
and  each  one  in  particular  is  known  to  him.  Our  Lord 
is  a  shepherd  who  loves  his  sheep  so  well,  that  were  one 
of  them  taken  and  held  between  the  jaws  of  a  lion  he 
would  run  to  the  rescue,  and  rend  the  lion  as  David 
did  of  old.  He  would  slay  the  Hon  and  the  bear  to  get 
his  poor  little  one  saved  from  the  teeth  of  the  devourer. 
You  shall  not  die,  but  live.  "  Oh,"  say  you,  "  but  I 
can  hardly  think  it.     How  can  I  preserve  myself?" 


320  Christian  Energy. 

No,  you  cannot.  In  your  weakness  lies  your  great 
strength.  Jesus  Christ  will  be  sure  to  cover  you  with 
his  power,  so  than  when  you  are  utterly  defenceless 
you  shall  be  most  efficiently  defended.  "Ah,"  says 
another,  "  I  have  had  a  weary  life  of  it  hitherto." 
Yes,  but  you  have  brighter  days  to  come.  Some  of 
God's  children  after  living  in  the  joyous  sunlight  all 
tlieir  lives,  as  they  draw  near  the  closing  scene,  have 
felt  much  darkness  and  depression  of  spirits.  This  in 
no  degree  perils  their  security ;  they  will  wake  up  all 
right  in  the  morning.  But,  then,  others  of  God's 
children  have  passed  most  of  their  days  under  a  cloud, 
till  the  gloom  seemed  to  settle  on  their  visage  and  ob- 
scure even  the  radiance  of  their  hope ;  and  yet  when 
the  hour  of  their  departure  was  at  hand  the  mists  and 
fogs  have  all  dispersed,  light  has  streamed  into  their 
souls,  and  their  sweet  peace  and  sacred  joy  have  been 
like  an  overflowing  tide.  The  very  ones  that  went 
limping  and  mom'uing,  while  they  were  on  their  pil- 
grimage, have  played  the  man  and  displayed  the  faith 
of  Christians  most  wondrously  when  the  trial  that  they 
dreaded  all  their  life  long  overtook  them.  Just  as 
Ready-to-Halt  left  his  crutches  behind,  they  have  begun 
to  sing  and  rejoice  when  they  were  departing.  Like 
clear  shining  after  rain ;  like  a  brilliant  sunset  after  a 
stormy  day,  at  eventide  it  was  light  with  them ;  and, 
methinks,  it  will  be  so  with  many  of  you.  And  as  for 
thee,  O  child  of  sorrow,  I  am  not  unmindful  of  thy 
sighs.  Do  you  tell  me  that  your  days  have  been  spent 
in  mourning,  and  full  often  you  have  wet  your  couch 
with  tears  ?  'Tis  true ;  but  know  this,  you  are  not  the 
only  weeping  one  in  the  family — 


Lame  Sheep.  321 

*'  Oil !  deem  not  they  are  bless'd  alone 
Whose  lives  a  peaceful  tenor  keep; 
The  Power  who  pities  man  has  shown 
A  blessing  for  the  eyes  that  weep." 

There  are  some  flowers  that  must  be  grown  in  the 
shade.  I  believe  God  made  and  adapted  them  to 
flourish  most  in  umbrageous  spots.  Some  ferns  never 
thrive  so  well  as  in  some  little  corner  of  the  brook 
where  the  damp  continually  washes  them.  Perhaps 
you  are  like  one  of  those  flowers  or  ferns,  planted  in  a 
soil  that  suits  your  growth.  Well,  if  it  be  so,  mur- 
mur not  at  your  lot.  The  gloom  that  hovers  over  you 
may  help  the  peace  of  your  heart.  I  have  known 
women  pure  and  pious,  for  whom  the  sunny  scenes  of 
life  have  had  no  charms ;  but  their  bright  faces,  their 
beaming  eyes,  and  their  benevolent  hearts  have  shone 
with  a  beautiful  brilliance  as  they  have  flitted  about 
like  angels  in  the  chambers  of  the  sick,  the  wards  of 
the  hospital,  or  among  the  couches  of  the  wounded 
and  the  dying.  Now,  consider  him  who  was  the  Man 
of  Sorrows ;  but  his  spirit  was  not  crushed.  In  the 
midst  of  dire  distress  he  said,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be 
troubled  neither  let  it  be  afraid."  And,  beloved,  do  not 
be  unmindful  of  the  comfort  you  may  derive  under 
any  aflliction,  when  you  trace  it  to  the  will  of  God. 
If  you  suffer  as  an  evil  doer,  if  it  is  your  OAvn  fault, 
the  scourge  that  chastens  you  will  invite  no  pity,  and 
the  conscience  that  reproaches  you  will  aggravate  your 
pain.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  can  trace  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  in  a  cross  or  a  calamity,  your  course  is  clear 
directly.  It  would  be  folly  to  repine;  your  wisdom 
is  to  resign   yourself   entirely    to    his  will.     Bear  it 


322  Christian  Energy, 

patiently,  and  God  will  reward  thee  plenteonsly.  Thy 
prayer  shall  come  up  before  him  acceptably,  and  the 
answer  shall  come  down  speedily,  when  you  would 
rather  glorify  the  Lord  than  gratify  yourself. 

It  is  not  for  me  to  say  what  particular  purpose  there 
may  be  in  the  personal  afflictions  that  any  of  the 
sons  and  daughters  of  our  heavenly  Father  are  called 
to  bear ;  but  I  cannot  help  observing  that  the  peace- 
able fruits  of  righteousness  these  tried  ones  put  forth 
are  very  sweet  and  luscious.  Let  me  appeal  to  your 
own  selves.  Have  you  not  often  proved  the  truth  of 
those  words  of  the  psalmist,  '^Thou  hast  known  my 
soul  in  adversity "  %  And  is  it  not  so,  that  the  notice 
which  the  Lord  has  taken  of  you,  and  the  care  he  has 
exercised  over  you  have  made  you  love  him  more  ten- 
derly than  you  ever  did  before  ?  You  could  say  with 
David,  '^  Thy  right  hand  hath  holden  me  up,  and  thy 
gentleness  hath  made  me  great."  Oh,  what  prayer 
you  have  poured  out  wdien  his  chastening  was  upon 
you!  Such  unwonted  prayer,  I  say,  for  if  you  will 
turn  to  the  margin  of  your  Bibles,  in  the  twenty-sixth 
chapter  of  Isaiah,  at  the  seventeenth  verse,  you  will 
find  this  prayer  of  the  chastened  is  called  ^'  sweet 
speech."  And  truly  it  is  sweet,  and  the  love  that 
prompts  it  is  passing  sweet  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
I  marvel  not  that  he  lets  you  suffer  so  much  when 
your  suffering  yields  such  rich  perfume.  Well,  dear 
friends,  when  we  get  so  choice  a  compensation  now, 
what  shall  we  receive  hereafter  %  Surely  in  the  ages 
to  come  the  lowliest  of  worshippers  shall  sing  the 
loudest,  while  heaven's  resounding  mansions  ring  with 
shouts  of  sovereign  grace.     Their  soprano  notes  shall 


Lame  Sheep.  323 

rise  above  the  angels'  liarps,  and  the  full  tide  of  human 
voices  with  a  distinctness  like  this — ''  My  soul  doth 
magnify  the  Lord,  and  m^/  spirit  doth  rejoice  in  God 
my  Saviour."  The  personal  tribute  of  extraordinaiy 
love  and  gratitude  shall  thrill  out  its  solo,  and  then 
blend  with  the  general  chorus.  I  have  often  wished 
for  myself,  and  I  daresay  you  have  wished  the  same, 
that  your  voice  might  be  loudest  of  the  throng. 

And  now,  to  close,  let  us  read  our  text  again. 
^'  Wherefore  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down  and 
the  feeble  knees.  And  make  straight  paths  for  your 
J'eet,  lest  that  ivhich  is  lame  he  turned  out  of  the  ivay ;  hut 
let  it  rather  he  healedJ^  Do  see  to  it  that  ye  are  not 
neghgent  of  this  ministry  of  love.  Remember  how 
high  a  reputation  Job  got  in  his  day  for  the  care  he 
bestowed  on  those  who  were  frail  and  infirm.  Eliphaz 
the  Temanite  said  of  him,  '^Behold,  thou  hast  instructed 
many,  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  weak  hands. 
Thy  words  have  upholden  him  that  was  falling,  and 
thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble  hands."  And  do  not 
forget  the  reproof  which  the  Lord  gave  to  the  shepherds 
of  Israel :  "  The  diseased  have  ye  not  strengthened, 
neither  have  ye  healed  that  which  was  sick,  neither 
have  ye  bound  up  that  which  was  broken,  neither  have 
ye  brought  again  that  which  was  di'iven  away,  neither 
have  ye  sought  that  which  was  lost."  Above  all,  con- 
sider the  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  His  eye  was 
always  quick  to  spy  out  the  lame,  the  blind,  the  halt ; 
and  his  hand  was  always  stretched  out  immediately 
for  their  relief.  "He  went  about  doing  good,  and 
healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil ;  for  God 
>vas  with  him."     And  if  you  and  I,  beloved,  walk  with 


324  Christian  Energy. 

God  and  God  be  with  us,  our  godliness  will  sliow  itself 
in  the  pity  we  feel  and  the  kindness  we  show  to  the 
feeble  and  the  faulty,  the  cranky  and  the  crippled. 

The  Lord  bless  these  counsels  to  the  strong,  and 
these  cordials  to  the  weak :  and  may  we  all  come  to 
that  blessed  land  where  "  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say  I 
am  sick  :  the  people  that  dwell  therein  shall  be  forgiven, 
their  iniquity  "     Amen. 


^mf  ^it>  h  k^'t  m^  fmik^y 


The  time  is  short"— 1  Corinthians  vii.  29. 


^  ^  IIE  text  does  not  say  tliat  time  is  short.  That 
were  very  true.  Compared  with  eternity, 
time  at  the  very  longest  is  but  as  a  point. 
But  note  what  the  text  does  say — "  The 
time  is  short."  It  is  the  time  of  our  Ufe, 
the  space  of  our  opportunity,  the  Httle 
while  we  shall  be  upon  the  present  stage  of 
action,  that  is  short.  It  is  narrow  and  contracted,  as 
the  original  implies :  "  Behold,"  saith  the  Psalmist, 
"  thou  hast  made  my  days  as  a  hand-breath  and  mine 
aiie  is  as  nothino;  before  thee!"  Brief  is  the  season 
we  have  allotted  to  us,  brethren,  in  which  w^e  can  serve 
the  Lord  our  God. 

This  is  a  truth  which  everybody  believes,  knows,  and 
confesses.  It  is  trite  as  a  proverb  on  every  tongue ; 
yet  how  few  of  us  act  as  if  we  believed  it.  We  are 
conscious  of  the  precariousness  of  other  people's  lives, 
but  somehow  or  other  we  persuade  ourselves  that  our 
fiwn  time  is  not  quite  as  limited.  We  think  we  have 
^'  ample  time  and  verge  enough ;"  but  we  wonder  that 
our  neighbours  can  be  so  careless  and  prodigal  of  days  and 


326  Christian  Energy, 

years,  for  we  observe  the  ^Tinkles  on  tlieir  face,  and  de- 
tect the  grey  hairs  on  then'  head,  and  perceive  the  augu- 
ries of  death  in  their  mien,  and  we  doubt  not  they  will 
soon  have  to  render  in  their  account.  ^'  All  men  think 
all  men  mortal  but  themselves  "  is  a  night-thought  that 
may  well  startle  us,  as  we  rest  from  the  business  and  the 
bustle,  or  the  waste  and  wantonness  of  each  receding 
day.  Why  hide  ye  from  yourselves  the  waning  of  your 
own  life-work,  the  weakening  of  your  own  strength,  the 
weaving  of  vour  own  shrouds  ?  As  a  creature  you  are 
frail ;  as  an  inhabitant  of  the  world  you  are  exposed  ta 
casualties ;  as  a  man  there  is  an  appointed  time  for  you 
on  earth.  You  must  pass  off  with  the  tide,  you  must  be 
swept  away  with  the  generation.  "  The  time  is  short." 
Ask  the  angel  what  he  thinks  of  the  life  of  a  mortal, 
and  he  will  tell  you  that  he  remembers  when  the  first 
man  was  made,  and  since  then  the  earth  has  been 
changing,  ever  changing  its  tenants.  Peradventure  he 
is  baffled  to  recount  the  races  that  have  come  and 
gone,  the  sires  that  have  given  place  to  sons  in  count- 
less succession.  For  a  little  while  they  floated  on  the 
current,  then  they  sunk  beneath  the  stream.  At  first 
they  struggled  on  through  centuries,  after  that  they 
failed,  any  one  of  them,  to  attain  a  tenth  of  that  pris- 
tine age.  "  Short-lived !  "  saith  he,  "  they  seem  to  me 
as  leaves  upon  a  tree,  as  insects  on  the  earth,  as  flies  in 
the  air.  Like  the  grass  that  flourisheth  in  the  meadows, 
scarcely  have  I  gazed  upon  them  ere  they  are  cut  down, 
withered,  and  gone."  Or  if  you  never  meet  with  an 
angel  to  interrogate  him,  talk  famiharly  -s^ith  one  of 
the  trees  of  an  ancient  forest.  Ask  what  it  has  seen, 
and,  though  it  cannot  speak  in  tones  articulate,  you  can 


Bvipf  Life  is  here  our  Portion,  327 

lend  it  a  tongue,  and  it  will  tell  you  tliat  hundreds  of 
years  liave  passed,  and  history  has  accumulated,  from 
the  time  when  when  it  was  an  acorn,  till  the  time  when 
now  it  covers  half  an  acre  with  its  far-spreading 
foliacrc.  Yes,  the  oak  and  elm  can  tell  us  that  man  is 
but  an  infant  of  to-day.  Or  would  you  rather  take 
counsel  of  your  fellow  creatures,  then  ask  the  old  man 
*'  whose  wasting  oil  is  spent,  and  whose  hasty  sand  is 
ebbing  to  the  last,'* — ask  him  what  he  thinks  of  life. 
He  will  tell  you  that  when  he  was  a  boy  he  thought 
he  had  a  wealth  of  time  before  him.  So  heavily  did 
the  days  hang  on  his  hands  that  he  played  the  hours 
away,  and  was  glad  when  birthdays  told  of  the  year.'? 
that  were  gone.  His  strong  desire  it  was,  and  his 
panting  ambition,  to  get  loose  from  the  moorings  of 
childhood,  and  launch  out  into  the  great  wide  sea  of 
turmoil  and  enterprise :  but  now  he  looks  back  on  these 
seventy  years,  that  have  been  gradually  accumulating, 
as  a  dream.  Through  all  the  fitful  stages  of  life's 
journey  time  present  was  always  perplexing,  it  must  be 
past  before  it  is  understood.  Seems  it  not  to  him  as 
yesterday  when  he  left  his  father's  roof  to  be  an  ap- 
prentice ?  He  remembers  it  distinctly,  and  fondly  tells 
you  of  some  quaint  thing  that  happened  in  those  olden 
times.  How  short  a  while  since  the  bells  rang  out 
his  marriage-peal,  and  now  his  children  have  passed 
their  childhood;  and  his  children's  children  climb  his 
knee,  and  call  him  "  grandfather."  Yet  he  remembers 
wdien,  as  it  were  but  yesterday,  he  was  himself  a  little 
child,  and  his  grandsire  clasped  him  to  his  bosom.  My 
venerable  friends,  you  will  bear  witness  that  I  do  not 
exaggerate ;  mine  is  not  the  language  of  hyperbole ;  it 


^^^  Christian  Energi/. 

h  only  the  feeble  expression  of  a  forcible  experience. 
You  can  realise    more   vividly  tlian  I   can  paint  the 
sensation  of  looking  back  over  the  entire  span  of  three 
score  years  and  ten;  which  to  the  striplin..  appears  a 
very  long  life,  while  to  you  it  merely  seems\s  a  watch 
m  the  night.     And  yet,  perhaps,  there  are  among  you 
some  hoai-y  veterans,  some  elderly  matrons,  who  need  to 
be  remmded  that  the  time  is  short.     Present  health 
and  activity  may  tempt  you  to  forget  that  nature  in 
you   stands  on  the  verge    of   her   confine.      What   if 
yom-  frame  be  strong ;  what  if  the  bloom  still  lino-er  on 
jw  cheeks;  you  have  nearly  reached  the  god,  the 
allotted  term  that  mortals  cannot  pass!     I  have  seen 
fine  days  in  autumn;  the  air  as  soft  as  balmy  sprinc; 
but  they  gave  no  promise  of  another  summer.     I  knew 
the  season  was  too  far  advanced  for  winter  to  delay  its 
approach  much  longer.     So,  too,  my  aged  friend,  be 
qT  *h^'°"i"    "^   y"'^!-   departiu-e    is    drawing   near, 
bhoiild  five,  or  even  ten  years  more  be  gi'anted  you, 
how  quickly  they  must  pass  when  seventy  years  bv- 
gone  so  rapidly  have  fled !     The  remnant  of  your  days 
f     surely  cover  little  space  when  the  whole  compass 
ot  your  life  has  stretched  over  so  small  an  area.    Be  par- 
simonious of  minutes  now,  though  you  mav  have  been 
once  prodigal  of  years.     From  the  fag  end  of  life  you 
can   have  no  spare  time  to  parley  and  postpone;  to 
resolve  and  trifle  with  resolutions :  to  waste  and  squander 
golden  opportunities.     "The  time  is  short."     But  to 
estimate  this  oracle  truly  we  may  well  tui-n  from  the 
cycles  that  angels  have  witnessed,  the  centuries  that 
trees  have  flourished,  and  the  seasons  that  have  come 
and  gone  m  the  memory  of  our  sires,  to  consider  the 


Brief  Life  is  here  our  Portion,  329 

years  of  the  riglit  hand  of  the  Most  High.  Inquire 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  Take  counsel  of  the 
Eternal  God.  "  A  thousand  years  in  his  sight  are  hut 
as  yesterday  ichen  it  is  2?ast,  and  as  a  watch  in  the  nightJ" 
*'  One  day  is  toith  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a 
thousand  years  as  one  dayT  "  He  sitteth  upon  the  circle 
of  the  earth,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  are  as  grass- 
hoppers.^^ Oh  sirs,  what  ephemera  we  are;  what 
insects  of  the  hour!  Like  the  grass  we  spring  up, 
like  grass  we  are  mowed  down.  Compared  with 
the  lifetime  of  the  Eternal  what  is  our  Hfe?  Nay, 
there  is  no  comparison  ;  it  is  almost  too  insignifi- 
cant for  contrast.  ''My  days  are  like  a  shadow  that 
declineth;  and.  I  am  icithered  like  grass:  hut  thou,  0 
Lord,  slialt  endure  for  ever,  and  thy  remenihrance 
to  all  generations^  I  wish  I  had  power  to  impress 
this  truth  on  every  heart.  As  I  have  not  I  shall 
try  to  point  the  moral  it  suggests,  and  pray  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  may  seal  the  instruction  in  every 
heart. 

"The  time  is  short."  It  u-ams ;  it  suggests;  it 
inspires;  it  alarms. 

It  warns.  If  ye  knew  the  sterling  worth  of  time 
ye  would  shrink  from  the  smallest  waste  of  so  precious 
an  article.  Fools  say  that  time  is  long,  but  only 
fools.  They  say  that  time  is  made  for  slaves.  He 
alone  is  a  free  man  who  knows  how  properly  to  use  his 
time;  and  he  is  a  slave  indeed  who  finds  it  slavery 
to  pursue  his  calling  with  a  good  conscience,  and  serve 
his  God  w^ith  diligence,  fidelity,  and  zeal.  Knowing 
that  "  The  time  is  short "  you  and  I  have  not  au 
hour  to  squander  upon  unprofitable  amusements.    All 


330  Christian  Energy. 

amusements  are  necessarily  a  dissipation  of   strength 
and  a  misuse  of  time. 

There  are  some  diversions  which  afford  a  respite  from 
the  incessant  strain  of  labour  and  anxiety,  and  are  pro- 
fitable to  strengthen  the  mind  and  brace  up  the  nerves. 
These  are  not  only  allowable,  they  are  fit  and  proper. 
But  while  recreation  is  both  needful  and  expedient  to 
keep  the  mental  and  physical  powers  in  working  order, 
we  can  give  no  countenance  to  such  gambols  and  gam- 
blings as  rather  tend  to  enervate  than  to  invigorate  the 
constitution.     Popular  taste  displays  its  own  perverse- 
ness  in  seeking  to  extract  pleasure  from  folly  and  vice. 
Fashion  will  lend  its  sanction  to  many  a  pastime  that 
ill  becomes  any  wise,  rational,  intelligent  persons :  but 
the  Christian  in  his  relaxations  must  be  a  Protestant, 
seeking  healthy  impulse  and  avoiding  baneful  stimulant. 
The  time  is  short ;  we  cannot  afford  to  lose  it  in  sense- 
less talk,  idle  gossip,  or  domestic  scandals.     Nor  can  we 
afford  to  plan  a  round  of  empty  frivolities  to  while  away 
an  afternoon  or  an  evening,  as  the  manner  of  some  is. 
We  shudder  at  your  formal  calls  and  punctilious  visits. 
Our  time  is  too  precious   to  be   thus  frittered  away. 
Well  might  Cotton  Mather  complain  of  the  intrusion 
after  a  person  had  called  to  see  him,  as  people  will  call 
on  ministers,  as  though  their  time  were  of  no  import- 
ance.    *'  I  would  sooner  have  given  that  man  a  handful 
of  money,"  said  he,  "than  that  he  should  have  thus 
wasted  my  time."     You  count  it  little  to  trespass  on 
our  minutes,  but  in  so  doing  you  may  spoil  our  hours. 
Whether  you  think  it  or  not,  it  is  often  distracting  to 
be  molested  mth  trivial  things  in  the  midst  of  sacred 
engagements.     We  may  be  called  from  an  absorbing 


Brief  Life  is  here  our  Portion.  331 

study,  wc  may  be  rudely  Interrupted  wlien  our  knees 
are  i3ent  and  our  heart  is  lifted  up  to  God  in  niterces- 
sion ;  we   may  have  our  minds   hurried  off   from  the 
weio'htiest  matters  to  listen  to  the  most  frivolous  obser- 
vations.    It  is   said  of  Henry  Martin  that  he   never 
wasted  an  hour.     I  wish  the  same  could  be  said  of  us, 
that  we  wasted  neither  an  hour  of  our  own  time,  nor 
an  hour  of  other  people's  time.     Brethren,  the  tune  is 
too  short  to  make  a  desire  for  friendly  intercourse  an 
excuse  for  frothy  conversation.     It  requires  no  stretch 
of  imagination  to  picture  to  yoiu'selves  two  men  who  are 
both  believers  in  Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,  and 
accounted  faithful,   meeting  in  a  room,  and  gi'eeting 
each  other  as  friends.     They  will  surely   have  some- 
thincT  choice  to  talk  about.     All  heaven  is  full  of  God  s 
glory,  and  the  earth  is  full  of  his  riches.     There  is 
rano-e   enough   for  thought,  for  speech,  for  profitable 
converse.      Listen    awhile.      One    observes   that   the 
weather   is   very    cold.     ^^Yes,"    says    the   other,    '^I 
think  the  frost  is  still  very  sharp."     There  they  stick. 
They  have  nothing  further  to  say,  till  presently  one  ot 
them  resumes,  '^t  will  be  rather   slippery  travelhng 
to-nio-ht;"    to    which   comes   the   reply,  ^' I  dare  say 
many  horses  will  fall  down."     And  are  these  the  men 
of  whom  Peter  testifies  that  they  are  redeemed  from  a 
vain    conversation,   received  by   tradition    from   their 
fathers  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ?     Are  these 
men  who  have  been  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Spirit . 
Is  this  the  frivolity  that  becomes  the  heirs  of  heaven^ 
So  time  is  squandered,  and  the  faculty  of  speech  abused. 
There  is  an  ancient  prophecy  which  I  should  lo^^e  to  see 
fulfilled   in  modern  history.     In  "David's   Psalm  ot 


332  Christian  Energy, 

Praise  "  (only  one  psalm  is  so  entitled),  lie  says,  ^'  All  thy 
works  shall  praise  thee,  O  Lord,  and  thy  saints  shall 
bless  thee.  They  shall  speak  of  the  glory  of  thy  king- 
dom and  talk  of  thy  power ;  to  make  known  unto  the 
sons  of  men  his  mighty  acts  and  the  glorious  majesty  of 
his  kingdom."  By  such  converse  as  that,  beloved,  ye 
might  redeem  the  time  in  thesa  evil  days.  But  you 
are  afraid  of  being  charged  with  cant,  or  with  pushing 
religion  a  little  too  far.  Brethren,  it  is  high  time  we 
had  a  little  more  cant,  and  did  push  religion  a  little 
farther  than  has  been  our  wont ;  for  golden  opportuni- 
ties are  lost,  profitable  interchange  of  holy  thought  is 
lamentably  neglected.  In  days  of  yore,  ^'they  that 
feared  the  Lord  spake  often  one  to  another,  and  the 
Lord  hearkened  and  heard."  Not  much  of  this  prevails 
now  among  professing  Christians.  Little  enough  is 
spoken  worth  men's  hearing,  much  less  worth  God's 
hearing.  And  if  he  did  hear  it,  instead  of  putting  it 
down  in  '^  a  book  of  remembrance  "  and  saying,  ^'  They 
shall  be  mine,"  surely  in  his  infinite  mercy  he  would 
forbear  to  record  and  blot  out  of  memory  the  vain 
thoughts  and  vacant  words  which  could  only  be  a 
stigma  upon  their  characters.  By  the  brevity  of  time, 
then,  and  by  the  rapidity  of  its  flight,  I  admonish  you 
to  refrain  from  all  abuses  of  the  tongue.  Do  invest 
each  hour  in  some  profitable  manner,  that  when  past  it 
may  not  be  lost.  Let  your  lips  be  a  fountain  from 
which  all  streams  that  flow  shall  savour  of  iirace  and 
goodness. 

The  time,  moreover,  is  much  too  short  for  indecision 
and  vacillation.  Your  resolving  and  retracting,  your 
planning  and  scheming,  your  sleeping  and  dreaming, 


Brief  Life  is  here  our  Portion,  333 

your  starting  up  from  slumber  only  to  sink  down  into 
a  drowsier  state  than  before,  are  a  mockery  of  life,  and 
a  wilful  murder  of  time.  Of  how  many  of  you  is  it 
true  that  if  ever  you  did  entertain  a  noble  purpose  you 
never  found  a  convenient  season  to  follow  it  out.  On 
the  verge  of  conversion  sometimes,  you  have  halted  till 
your  convictions  have  grown  cool.  Ten  or  twenty 
years  ago  you  listened  to  the  appeal,  "  My  son,  give 
me  thy  heart";  and  you  answered,  "I  will";  but  to 
this  day  you  have  never  fulfilled  your  work.  "  Go 
work  in  my  vineyard,"  said  the  Master.  "I  go,  sir,'* 
was  your  prompt  reply.  Yet  you  have  never  been* 
To-day,  as  aforetime,  you  stand  idling.  Some  of  you, 
indeed  were,  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  in  a  more  hopeful 
condition  than  you  are  at  present.  What  account  can 
you  give  of  yourselves?  What  has  become  of  those 
intervening  years  ?  The  infinite  mercy  of  God  has  kept 
you  out  of  hell,  but  there  is  no  guarantee  that  his 
longsuffering  will  shield  you  from  destruction  another 
instant.  Oh,  sirs,  the  time  is  short,  the  business  urgent, 
the  crisis  imminent.  'Tis  very  madness  to  be  hectoring, 
hesitating,  and  halting  between  two  opinions.  Your 
vote,  sir,  before  the  poll  closes.  If  God  be  God,  serve 
him.  Decide  quick,  speak  sharp.  If  not,  take  the 
alternative, — serve  Baal.  Let  your  mind  be  made  up 
without  another  moment's  delay.  How  long,  how  long 
halt  ye — ah !  how  long  will  ye  have  to  halt  between 
two  opinions  %  And  you  Christian  people,  with  your 
grand  illusive  projects,  how  they  melt  away !  Some  of 
you  would  have  done  a  great  deal  that  is  useful  by  now 
if  you  had  not  dreamed  of  doing  so  much  that  is  im- 
posing.    Oh,   what   wonderful  plans  for  evangelising 


334  Christian  Energy, 

London,  for  converting  the  whole  continent  of  Europe 
to  Christ  float  in  the  brain,  evaporate  in  a  speech,  and 
nothing  is  done.  We  are  like  the  King  of  Russia  of 
olden  times,  who  always  wanted  to  take  a  second  step 
before  he  took  the  first.  We  are  always  projecting 
some  wonderful  scheme  that  proves  too  wonderful  ever 
to  be  carried  out.  So  we  dream  of  what  ought  to  be 
and  should  be,  of  what  might  be,  and  as  we  hope  may 
be.  Such  *'  dreams  are  the  children  of  an  idle  brain." 
The  dreamers  grow  listless,  and  nothing  is  done.  In 
the  name  of  the  eternal  God,  I  beseech  you,  if  you  love 
him,  rise  up  and  get  to  work.  Better  slay  a  single 
enemy  than  dream  of  slaughtering  an  army.  Better 
that  you  sow  a  single  grain  of  corn,  or  plant  a  single 
blade  of  grass,  than  dream  about  fertilising  the 
Sahara,  or  reclaiming  from  the  mighty  sea  untold 
acres  of  fertile  land.  Do  something,  sirs,  do  some- 
thing. It  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep,  for  the 
time  is  short. 

"The  time  is  short."  This  may  serve  to  warn  us 
against  another  folly;  that  of  speculating  upon  nice 
points  of  controversial  theology.  You  know  how  the 
school-men  used  to  debate  and  ^ATangle,  clash,  and  divide 
in  feuds  and  factions.  Fain  would  they  solve  the  query- 
how  many  angels  could  stand  on  the  point  of  a  needle, 
and  with  many  a  proposition  no  less  sophistical  or 
absurd  would  they  weary  themselves.  Strangely  indeed 
was  the  ingenuity  of  men  taxed  to  find  subjects  for 
discussion  in  the  dark  days  of  those  dull  doctors  of 
learning.  There  is  a  little  of  the  spirit  abroad  now. 
Ministers  will  devote  whole  sermons  to  the  discussion 
of  some  crotchet  or  quibble  that  does  not  signify  the 


Brief  Life  is  here  our  Portion,  335 

turn  of  a  hair  practically  to  anybody  in  the  universe. 
I  have  generally  noticed  that  the  less  important  the 
point  is,  the  more  savagely  will  some  persons  defend  it, 
as  if  the  world  might  go  to  rack  and  ruin,  and  all  the 
sinners  in  it  go  blindfold  to  perdition,  and  the  work  of 
salvation  must  stand  still  to  have  this  point  discussed. 
One  brother,  who  meets  me  occasionally,  can  never  be 
five  minutes  in  my  company,  but  what  he  attacks  me 
upon  the  question  of  free  agency  and  predestination  ; 
and  I  told  him  the  last  time  I  saw  him,  that  I  would 
have  it  out  with  him  one  of  these  days,  but  I  must  defer 
it  till  after  the  day  of  judgment,  for  I  was  too  busy  to 
talk  to  him  about  that  just  now.  And  I  do  feel  so 
about  a  great  many  questions.  There  are  brethren 
w^ho  can  fully  explain  the  book  of  Revelation,  though  I 
generally  find  that  they  exclaim  one  against  the  other, 
till  they  declaim  each  other  off  the  face  of  the  earth. 
But  I  would  sooner  be  able  to  proclaim  the  cross  of 
Christ,  and  explain  the  gospel  of  Matthew,  Mark, 
Luke,  and  John,  than  decipher  the  imagery  of  Ezekiel, 
or  the  symbols  of  the  Apocalypse.  Blessed  is  he  who 
can  expound  the  mysteries.  I  have  not  any  doubt 
about  his  blessedness ;  but  I  am  perfectly  satisfied  with 
another  blessedness,  namely,  if  I  can  bring  sinners  to 
Jesus,  and  teach  the  saints  some  practical  truths  which 
may  guide  them  in  daily  life.  It  seems  to  me  the  time 
is  much  too  short  to  go  up  in  a  balloon  with  specula- 
tions, or  to  go  down  into  the  mines  of  profound  thought, 
to  bring  up  some  odds  and  ends  and  scraps  of  singular 
knowledge.  We  want  to  save  souls,  and  conduct  them 
to  that  heaven  where  God  unfolds  his  presence  and 
shines  eternal  day.    This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  pressing 


336  Christian  Energy. 

demand  upon  us  now  that  the  time  is  short,  and  the 
night  Cometh  when  ''  no  man  can  work." 

The  time  is  short ;  let  this  admonish  us,  brethren,  to 
singleness  of  purpose.     We  must  have  only  one  aim. 
Had  we  plenty   of  time,  we  might  try  two  or   three 
schemes   at  once,  though  even   then  we  should  most 
probably  fail  for  want  of  concentrating  our  energies ; 
but  as  we  have  very  little  time,  we  had  better  economise 
it  by  attending  to  one  thing.     The  man  that  devotes 
all  his  thought  and  all  his  strength  to  the  accomplish- 
ment  of  one  reasonable  object  is  generally  successful. 
My  soul,  bend  thyself  down,  and  lay  thyself  out  for  the 
glory  of  God.     Be  this  the  one  aim  of  thy  entire  being. 
Form  yom-  friendships  and  order  your  occupations  so  as 
to  fulfil  this  first  highest  duty  of  life.     Be  it  your  one 
sole  motive  to  live  for  his  honour,  and,  if  necessary, 
even  to  die  to  promote  his  renown  among  the  sons  of 
men.     "Present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice."    Attune 
your  souls  to  the  great  Hallelujah — "  While  I  live  will 
I  praise  the  Lord;  I  will  sing  praises  unto  my  God 
while    I   have  my   being;    Let   everything   that  hath 
breath  praise  the  Lord;  Bless  thou  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul."     Oh,  my  brethren  !  this  sublime  enthusiasm  will 
work  wonders.   In  vain  you  dissipate  your  strength  and 
fritter  away  your  opportunities  by  dividing  your  atten- 
tion.    You  want  to  be  a   Christian;  meanwhile  your 
heart  is  set  upon  getting  riches.     You  would  store  yom» 
mind  with  the  learning  and  wisdom  of  the  world,  you 
wish  to  gain  repute  as  a  good  talker  in  company  and  a 
convivial  guest  at  the  social  board.     Ambition  prompts 
you  to  seek  fame  among  your  fellows.     Veiy  well,  I 
shall  not  denounce  any  one  of  these  things,  but  I  would 


Brief  Life  is  here  our  Fortlon,  337 

use  every  persuasive  to  induce  you  who  are  believers  in 
Christ  to  renounce  the  world.  If  Christ  has  bought 
you  with  his  blood,  and  redeemed  you  from  this  present 
evil  world,  he  has  henceforth  a  claim  on  you  as  his 
servant,  and  it  is  at  your  peril  you  take  up  with  any 
pursuits  that  are  inconsistent  with  a  full  surrender  of 
yourself  and  your  service  to  him.  You  belong  to  him ; 
live  wholly  to  him.  The  reason  why  the  majority  of 
Christians  never  attain  to  any  eminence  in  the  divine 
life  is  because  they  let  the  floods  of  their  life  run  away 
in  a  dozen  little,  trickling  rivulets,  wdiereas  if  they 
cooped  them  up  into  one  channel,  and  sent  that  one 
stream  rolling  on  to  the  glory  of  God,  there  w^ould  be 
such  a  force  and  power  about  their  character,  their 
thoughts,  their  efforts,  and  their  actions,  that  they 
would  "live  wdiile  they  lived." 

"  The  time  is  short."  This  suggests.  Do  you 
know  wdiat  reflection  this  fact  suggested  to  me? 
Surely,  then,  thought  I,  I  have  some  opportunity  to 
follow  out  the  work  of  faith,  the  patience  of  hope  and 
the  labour  of  love,  though  not  the  opportunity  I  once  had. 
Then  picturing  to  myself  an  ideal  of  a  short  life  all 
used,  nothing  wasted,  all  consecrated,  nothing  profaned, 
I  seemed  to  see  a  little  child,  a  little  boy  giving  his 
young  heart  to  Christ.  I  saw  the  lad  believing  in  Jesus 
while  yet  beneath  his  father's  roof  and  under  his 
mother's  care.  No  sooner  saved  himself  than  he  began 
at  once  to  serve  God  after  a  boy's  way,  and  still  in- 
creasing in  intelligence  and  energy  as  a  stripling,  and 
afterwards  as  a  }'Oung  man,  from  the  very  first  he 
devoted  himself  wdth  all  the  intensity  of  his  being.  So 
diligent  and  persevering  was  he  that  he  lost  no  time. 

22 


338  Christian  Energy. 

So  jealously  did  he  watch  his  own  heart,  and  so  far  was 
he  from  falling  into  sin,  that  there  were  no  dreary 
intervals  spent  in  -wandering  and  retracing  his  steps  in 
backsliding  and  repenting  of  the  evil,  in  getting  luke- 
warm and  rekindling  former  ardour.  With  my  mind's 
eye  I  followed  that  young  man  living  a  holy  life  through 
a  succession  of  years,  getting  up  to  the  highest  possible 
platform  of  spirituality,  and  keeping  there,  and  all  the 
while  blessed  w^itli  such  abundance  of  the  graces  and 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  God  as  should  make  him  bring 
forth  much  fruit  to  the  glory  of  the  Father,  do  much 
for  the  honour  of  Jesus,  prove  a  great  blessing  to  the 
church,  bear  a  rich  testimony  to  the  world,  and  diffuse 
saving  benefits  to  the  souls  of  men.  This  was  my  ideal 
of  a  vessel  fit  for  the  blaster's  use.  I  lino-ered  lovin^lv 
upon  it.  The  child  became  a  man.  His  life  was  brief. 
It  was  soon  over.  Our  days  on  earth  are  a  shadow ; 
but  they  may  happily  be  radiant  as  they  pass  and  leave 
a  trail  of  light  behind.  Might  not,  then,  God  himself 
from  his  eternal  dwelling-place  look  down  on  the  tran- 
sient career  I  have  sketched  with  a  measure  of  admi- 
ration? Tlie  slender  threads  of  fleeting  moments  are 
w^orked  up  into  the  goodly  fabric  of  a  complete  bio- 
graphy. Endowed  with  one  talent — time — and  that 
endowment  sparse  I  The  gift  so  prized  as  to  be  econo- 
mised ;  so  looked  after  that  it  is  never  squandered ;  so 
usefully  employed  that  its  judicious  expenditure  can 
never  be  vainly  regretted:  so  profitably  invested  that 
the  faithful  stew^ard  welcomes  the  advent  of  his  Lord, 
ready  and  anxious  to  give  an  account.  This  is  as  I 
would  wish  to  be.  Some  of  you  that  are  unconverted 
can  never  hope  to  receive  the  greeting  that  awaits  such 


Brief  Life  is  here  our  Portion, 


339 


a  faitliful  servant.     You  have  lost  the  golden  oppor- 
tunity.     You   have  sunk   your    patrimony   in  riotous 
living.     But  are  there  not  children  here  to  whom  this 
is  possible^  and  youths  who  might  convert  my  day-dream 
into  a  narrative  ?     Oh  for  men  and  women  with  one 
ambition    and    one    enterprise,    to    glorify  the    Lord. 
Ardently  do  I  desire  that  God  shoukl  be  glorified  in 
me,  and  that  not  in  a  small  measure.     I  have  prayed 
and  I  do  pray  him  to  make  the  most  he  can  make  of 
me — to  do  it  anyhow.     What  if  to  this  end  I  must  be 
cast   into  the  furnace  of   affliction  and  suffer  for  his 
sake  !     What  if  my  honour  should  be  trampled  in  the 
dust  and  my  name  become  a  hissing  and  a  by-word,  and 
a  reproach  among  the  sons  of  men,  while  the  witness 
of  my  integrity  is  on  high?     Here  am  I,  O  Lord,  to 
do  aught,  to  bear  aught  that  thou  shalt  bid.     Only  do 
get  as  much  glory  to  thine  own  name  as  can  be  out  of 
such  a  poor  creature  as  I  am.     Who  will  join  me  in 
this  petition?     Vows  made  in  our  own  strength  are 
vain.     But   I   solemnly  charge  each  Christian  young 
man  to  foster  this  aspiration.     In  the  name  of  him  who 
has  redeemed  you  with  his  blood,  gird  up  the  loins  of 
vour  mind.     Survey  the  course  you  have  to  run.     Pre- 
pare for  the  good  fight  of  faith,  in  which  you  are  to 
engage.     Live  to  the  utmost  possible   consecration  of 
your  entire  manhood  in  its  triple  nature — spirit,  soul, 
and  body.     Yield  yourself  up  unreservedly  to  the  Lord 
Jesus   Christ.     Do  not  stop  to  parley.     The  time  is 
short.     "  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with 
thy  might,  for  there  is  no  work  nor  device,  nor  know- 
ledge, nor  wisdom  in  the  grave  whither  thou  goest." 
<*The  time  is   short."    This   inspires   us.    It 


840  Christian  Energi/, 

ought  to  fire  us  ^vitll  zeal  for  immediate  action.  The 
sun  posts  on,  the  sands  run  do^yn.  Now  is  the  accepted 
time.  Let  those  who  love  the  Lord  be  prompt.  The- 
time  to  do  the  deeds  that  thou  must  do,  or  leave  thenx 
undone,  flies  swiftly  past.  Be  quick.  Say  not  I  will 
do  this  by-and-by.  Dispatch  it  at  once.  Other  duties- 
await  thee.  Brief  is  the  space  allotted  thee  for  all. 
Are  your  children  converted?  Pray  with  them  to- 
night. Let  not  to-morrow  go  without  putting  your 
arms  about  their  necks,  and  kneeling  down  with  them 
devoutly,  and  praying  fervently  that  God  would  save 
their  souls.  It  is  the  King's  business ;  it  demands 
haste.  "  The  time  is  short"  for  others  as  well  as  your- 
self. A  dear  brother  told  me  a  week  or  two  ago  that  a 
man  who  worked  for  him  frequently  brought  in  goods 
when  they  were  finished,  and  he  thought  that  next 
time  the  man  came  in  he  would  speak  to  him  abont  his 
soul.  When  he  came,  however,  business  absorbed  the 
employer's  attention,  and  the  man  passed  away.  He 
felt,  he  did  not  know  exactly  why,  pricked  in  his  con- 
science, and  resolved  that,  as  he  came  twice-a-week,  on 
the  next  occasion  he  would  inquire  as  to  his  eternal 
interests ;  but  it  was  too  late.  Listead  of  coming 
again  a  messenger  brought  tidings  that  he  was  dead.. 
Startled  by  the  news,  he  could  find  no  comfort  in 
regrets,  though  he  bewailed  as  one  who  could  not  for- 
give himself  a  hundred  wasted  opportunities  in  the 
presence  of  one  keen  self-reproach.  Oh  that  an  inspi- 
ration would  constrain  you  to  serve  the  Lord  now  I 
While  you  are  meditating  a  fine  chance  some  day  you 
are  making  a  foul  mess  at  this  hour.  Every  time  the 
clock  ticks  it  seems  to  say  "now."      The  time  is  so 


Brief  Life  is  here  oar  Portion,  341 

^liort  that  the  matter  is  urgent.  Do  not  wait,  young 
man,  to  preach  Jesus  till  you  have  had  more  instruc- 
tion. Begin  at  once.  You  that  mean  to  do  something 
for  the  poor  of  London  when  you  have  hoarded  up 
some  more  money,  spend  your  money  now;  do  it  at 
once.  You  that  mean  to  leave  a  large  sum  to  chari- 
ties when  you  die,  defer  it  not.  Be  your  own  executors. 
Lay  out  the  capital  at  once  :  get  some  joy  and  comfort 
in  seeing  how  it  is  done.  Now  is  the  time  to  carry  a 
good  purpose  to  good  effect.  Before  you  were  saved 
the  message  to  you  was,  "To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his 
voice,  harden  not  your  heart."  After  you  are  saved  the 
message  to  you  is,  "  To-day  obey  his  voice,  and  serve 
the  Lord  your  God  with  all  your  heart  and  soul  and 
strength."  *^  The  time  is  short."  !Make  the  most 
of  it.^ 

*'  The  time  is  short."     I  want  to  rino-  this  sentence 

o 

louder  and  louder  into  your  ears.  Oh  let  it  inspire 
you  to  pray  for  immediate  conversions.  I  rejoice  to 
know  that  our  beloved  friends,  Messrs.  Moody  and 
Sankey,  are  coming  to  London  to  work  for  Christ.  God 
grant  success  to  all  their  labours.  May  they  gather  in 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  souls.  But  I  have  beea 
pained  to  meet  with  some  who  are  expecting  to  get 
converted  when  they  come.  Is  not  such  procrastina- 
tion perilous  ?  Dare  any  of  you  run  the  risk  of  living 
till  then?  Will  you  wilfully  abide  in  wicked  unbelief 
for  a  single  hour  ?  Can  you  brook  the  thought  of  re- 
maining month  after  month  in  jeopardy  of  your  soul  ] 
Is  it  safe  to  tempt  the  Lord  and  provoke  the  anger 
of  the  Most  High  ?  Oh  sirs,  while  you  flatter  your- 
selves with  pleasing  prospects  you  are  beguiling  your 


342  Clu'istlan  Energy. 

hearts  mth  a  reckless  presumption  !  We  want  you  to 
be  converted,  and  no  time  can  be  more  suitable  than 
this  present  time.  Forsake  your  sin  immediately.  Do 
not  turn  back  to  dally  with  it  a  little  longer.  Believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  lay  hold  on  the  promise 
of  eternal  life  without  any  more  ado.  You  may  never 
see  another  morrow,  or  the  desire  that  whets  your  appe- 
tite now  may  fail  you  then.  This  is  our  prayer,  that 
jou  may  now  be  brought  into  the  fold  of  Christ  before 
the  year  closes,  before  the  sun  sets,  before  the  Sabbath 
ends. 

But  there  are  other  considerations.     Seeincr  the  time 

o 

is  short,  let  us  bear  with  patience  the  ills  that  vex  us. 
Are  we  very  poor  ?  The  time  is  short.  Does  the  bitter 
cold  pierce  through  our  scanty  garments  ?  The  time 
is  short.  Is  consumption  beginning  to  prey  on  our 
trembling  frame?  The  time  is  short.  Are  we  un- 
kindly treated  by  our  kinsfolk?  Do  our  comrades 
revile,  and  our  neighbours  mock  us?  The  time  is 
short.  Have  we  to  bear  evil  treatment  from  an  un-^ 
generous  world  ?  The  time  is  short.  Come  there  cruel 
taunts  to  try  our  tempers  ?  The  time  is  short.  The 
train  is  in  motion.  We  are  travelling  at  express  speed. 
We  shall  soon  be  beyond  the  reach  of  all  the  inci- 
dents and  accidents  that  disturb  and  distract  us.  As 
we  travel  home  to  our  Father's  house  the  distance 
diminishes,  and  we  begin  to  sight  the  city  of  the 
blessed,  till  we  think  of  ''the  home  over  there.^^  **The 
time  is  short."  It  is  needless  to  murmur  or  repine, 
Why  trouble  yourselves  about  what  you  will  do  a 
month  or  two  hence  ?  You  will  probably  not  be  here ; 
you  will  be  in  heaven.     Your  eyes   will  have  ''  beheld 


Brief  Life  is  here  our  Portion.  343 

the  King  in  his  beauty ;  you  ^vill  have  seen  the  land 
that  is  very  far  off,"  for  *'  The  time  is  short." 

"The  way  may  be  rough,  but  it  cannot  be  long; 
So  smooth  it  with  hope  and  cheer  it  with  song." 

Worklly-mindedness  ill  becomes  us  -vvho  have  con- 
fessed that  \iQ  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  eartli. 
The  time  is  short  in  which  we  can  hold  any  possessions 
in  this  terrestrial  sphere.  Then  let  us  not  love  any- 
thing here  below  too  fondly.  We  brought  nothing  into 
this  world,  and  it  is  certain  Ave  can  carry  nothing  out. 
Survey  your  broad  acres,  but  remember  you  will  not 
long  be  able  to  walk  across  them.  Look  on  your 
plenteous  crops,  but  ere  long  another  shall  reap  the 
profit  of  those  fields.  Count  your  gold  and  silver,  but 
know  that  wealth,  greedily  as  it  is  sought,  wall  not  give 
you  present  immunity  from  sickness  and  sorrow, 
neither  wdll  it  secui'e  your  welfare  when  called  to  quit 
your  frail  tenement.  Trust  in  the  living  God.  Love 
the  Lord,  and  let  eternal  things  absorb  your  thoughts 
and  engage  your  affections.  "  The  time  is  short :  it 
remaineth,  that  both  they  that  have  wives  be  as  though 
they  had  none ;  and  they  that  weep,  as  though  they 
wept  not ;  and  they  that  rejoice,  as  though  they  re- 
joiced not ;  and  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing 
it ;  for  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away." 

Are  these  gloomy  reflections  ?  Nay,  dear  brethren, 
the  fact  that  the  time  is  short  should  inspire  us  whu 
are  of  the  household  of  faith  with  the  most  joyous  ex- 
pectations. Do  you  really  believe  in  the  everlasting 
kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ'? 
Do  you  really  believe  it — that  your  head  is  to  wear  a 


344  Chi-istlan  Energy/. 

cro"\^ai  of  life  that  fadetli  not  away?  Do  you  really 
believe  it — that  these  feet  of  yours,  all  shod  mth  silver 
sandals,  will  stand  upon  that  street  of  pure  trans- 
parent gold  ?  Do  you  really  believe  it — that  these 
hands  shall  pluck  celestial  fruits  from  trees  whose 
leaves  can  ne\'er  wither,  and  that  you  shall  lie  down  in 
the  spice-beds  in  the  gardens  of  the  blessed  ?  Do  you 
believe  it — that  ,  these  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  that 
day  when  he  comes  in  his  glory,  and  that  these  bones 
shall  rise  again  from  the  grave,  and  your  bodies  shall 
be  endowed  with  an  incorruptible  existence  ?  "  Yes," 
say  you,  "  we  do  believe  it,  and  believe  it  intensely  too." 
Well,  then,  I  would  that  ye  realised  the  reality  as  so 
near,  so  very  near,  that  you  were  waiting  expectant  of 
its  fulfilment.  Who  would  cry  and  fret  about  the 
passing  troubles  of  a  day  when  he  saw  the  heavens 
open,  beheld  the  beckoning  hand,  and  heard  the  voice 
that  called  him  hence.  Oh  that  the  glory  might  come 
streaming  into  your  soul  till  you  forget  the  darkness 
of  the  way !  Oh  that  the  breeze  from  these  goodly 
mountains  would  fan  yoii !  Oh  that  the  spray  from 
that  mighty  ocean  would  refresh  you  !  Oh  that  the 
music  of  those  bells  of  heaven  in  yonder  turrets  would 
enliven  you  !  Then  would  ye  speed  your  way  towards 
the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God,  inspired 
with  sacred  ardour  and  dauntless  courage.  But  the 
nno;odlv  are  not  so.  It  is  to  them  I  must  address  the 
last  word,  *^  The  time  is  short."  This  alarms  us ;  and 
well  indeed  it  may  on  their  account.  Let  me  toll  a 
knell.  It  is  a  dismal  knell  I  have  to  toll  for  the  un- 
(•onverted  man,  to  whom  life  has  been  a  joy,  for  he  has 
prospered  in  the  world.     You  have  got  it  at  last.     You 


Brief  Life  is  here  our  Portion.  345 

have  succeeded  in  the  enterprise  on  wliich  you  set  your 
heart.     You  have  bought  the  estate  that  you  longed 
to  secure.     It  is  a  fine  place  certainly ;  but  you  have 
only  got  it  for  a  short  term,   sir — two  or  three  years ! 
Would  you  have   taken  in   on  tliat  temi  ?     "  Oh,  not 
I,"  say  you,   "  I  would    not   have   taken   it   at    nine 
hundred  and  ninety-nine  years  lease.    Freeholds  for  me ! 
Freeholds  for  me !    Nothing  short  of  a  freehold  I"    Did 
I  say  three  years  ?     Nay,  there  is  not  a  man  beneath 
the  sun  that  can  guarantee  that  you  will  hold  it  three 
•weeks.     "  The  time  is  short."     Drive  down  the  broad 
avenue  ;  walk  round  the  park ;  look  into  the  old  feudal 
mansion ;  but  the  time   is  short,  very  short,  and  your 
tenure  veiy  limited.    You  have  spread  your  canvas,  you 
have  plied  your  sinews,  you  have  exacted  the  utmost  of 
your  brains,  and  you  have  gained   your  object.     You 
are  possessed  of  real  property.     It  is  bond  fide.     What 
next  ?     Why,  make  your  will.     The  thing  is  urgent. 
The  time  is  short.    But  what  have  you  not  done  ?    You 
have  not  believed  in  Christ.     You  have  not  embraced 
the  gospel.     You  have  not  found  salvation.     You  have 
not  laid  hold  on  eternal  life.     You  have  not  a  hope  to 
solace  you  when  your  strength  fails   and  you  pant  for 
breath.     How  few  the  opportunities  that   remain !     I 
look   back   twenty   years    of   my   life    and  I  see   my 
weekly    sermons    bound    in    twenty   volumes.     I   can 
hardly  realise  the  fact  that  I  have  been  preaching  for 
twenty  years.    Some  of  you  have  attended  my  ministry 
all  tlie  while.    Another  year  has  almost  ended ;  another 
volume  has  just  accumulated.     Well,  not  many  of  you 
will  hear  another  twenty  years'   sermons.     This  is  not 
a  wild  conjecture.     The  statistics  of  mortality  reduce 


346  Christian  Energy. 

contingencies  and  result  in  certainty.  Among  tliis  mass 
of  people  we  may  positively  predict  the  speedy  exit  of 
a  certain  proportion,  and  the  resistless  force,  like  wave 
o'er  wave,  will  soon  bear  ns  away — 

"  And  am  I  born  to  die, 
To  lay  this  body  down  ? 
And  must  my  trembling  spirit  fly 
Into  a  world  unknown  ? 

"  Soon  as  from  earth  I  go, 
What  will  become  of  me  ? 
Eternal  happiness  or  woe 
Must  then  my  portion  be." 

Eun  your  chance,  careless,  callous,  void  of  conscience. 
It  comes  at  length.  You  ail  a  little,  your  trifling  in- 
disposition does  not  yield  to  treatment.  The  symptoms 
grow  serious.  The  disease  is  dangerous.  Your  death 
is  imminent.  Pain  unnerves  you.  Terror  distracts 
you.  Your  family,  your  friends  look  at  you  with  help- 
less pity.  The  doctor  has  just  left  you  in  dismay. 
Send  for  the  priest  or  fetch  the  parson.  But  what  can 
they  do  for  you  unless  you  believe  in  Jesus?  'Tis 
over,  the  last  struggle !  Then  picture  yourself  to 
yourself — a  lost  spirit,  asking  for  a  drop  of  water  to 
cool  its  tongue !  That  will  be  your  portion,  sinner, 
*^  Except  ye  repent  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  Be- 
think you,  sirs ;  what  a  short  step  there  is  between  you 
and  death.  What  a  short  step  between  you  and  hell, 
unless  you  are  delivered  by  a  great  ransom.  Do  you 
still  imagine  that  there  is  time  enough  and  to  spare.  I 
beseech  you,  do  not  cherish  so  vain  a  thought.  It  may 
be  you  suspect  me  of  exaggerating.     That  I  cannot  do. 


Br'ii'f  Life  is  here  our  Portion,  347 

Time  is  still  rushing  on,  swift  but  silent.  While  wc 
speak  th-e  minutes  pass,  the  hour  is  soon  gone,  the  day 
is  almost  spent^  I  charge  you,  then,  by  the  Ever 
Blessed,  now  listen  to  the  warning ;  escape  from  sin ; 
get  out  of  that  broad  road  which  leads  to  destruction  ; 
believe  in  Jesus;  la}-  hold  on  eternal  life.  May  the 
Spirit  of  God  arouse  you.  May  these  words  be  blessed 
to  you.  They  should  be  put  more  forcibly  if  I  knew  how. 
With  all  the  fervour  of  my  soul  I  entreat  you,  for  I 
know  your  everlasting  interests  are  in  imminent 
jeopardy.  God  grant  you  may  not  linger  longer,  lest 
haply  you  linger  too  long,  and  perish  in  your  lingering. 
^'  The  time  is  short." 

In  a  little  while  there  will  be  a  concourse  of  persons 
in  the  streets.     Methinks  I  hear  some  one  enquiring, 
*'  What  are  all  these  people  w^aitlng  for  ?  "     "  Do  you 
not  know?     He  is  to  be  buried  to-day."     "And  who  is 
that?"     "It  is  Spurgeon."     "What!    the  man  that 
preached   at  the  Tabernacle?"      "Yes;    he  is  to  be 
bui'ied  to-day."      That  will  happen  very  soon.     And 
when  you  see  my  coffin  carried  to  the  silent  grave,  I 
should  hke  every  one  of    you,  wdiether  converted  or 
not,  to  be  constrained  to  say,  "  He  did  earnestly  urge 
us  in  plain   and   simple  language   not  to  put  off  the 
consideration  of  eternal  things.     He  did  entreat  us  to 
look  to  Christ.     Now  he  is  gone,  our  blood  is  not  at  his 
door  if  we  perish."     God  grant  that  you  may  not  have 
to  bear  the  bitter  reproach  of   your  own  conscience^ 
But  as  I  feel  the  time  is  short,  I  wdll  stir  you  up  so  long 
as  I  am  in  this  Tabernacle ;  and  I  do  pray  the  Lord  to 
bless  the  word  every  time  we  preach  it  from  this  plat- 
form.    Oh,  that  some  souls  may  be  saved,  that  Jesus 


348  Christum  Energy 

Christ  may  be  glorified,  Satan  defeated,  and  heaven 
filled  with  saved  ones. 

"  'Tis  not  for  man  to  trifle.     Life  is  brief 
And  sin  is  here. 
An  age  is  but  the  falling  of  a  leaf, 
A  dropping  tear. 
We  have  no  time  to  sport  away  the  hours  ; 
All  must  be  earnest  in  a  world  like  ours. 

"  Not  many  lives,  but  only  one,  have  we — 
Frail,  fleeting  man  ; 
How  sacred  should  that  one  life  ever  be — 
That  narrow  span ! 
Day  after  day  filled  up  with  blessed  toil, 
Hour  after  hour  still  bringing  in  new  spoil.'''i 


F:i^?more  and  Alabaster,  Steam  Printers,  31,  little  Britain,  E.C. 


WORKS  BY   C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

PUBLISHED   BY  PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER, 

4,    PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS,    E.G. 


TREASURY    OF    DAVID:    Containing    an    Original 

Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Psalms ;  a  Collection  of  Illustrative 
Extracts  from  tbe  whole  range  of  Literature ;  a  series  of 
Homiletical  Hints  upon  almost  every  verse  ;  and  list  of  Writers 
upon  each  Psalm.  By  C.  H.  Spukgeon.  Yol,  I.,  containing 
Psalms  I.  to  XXVI.     Price  8s.     Eighth  Thousand. 

In  liis  preface  to  Lange's  New  Commentary  on  the  Psalms,  Dr.  Schaff,  the 
New  York  editor,  thus  refers  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  recently  published  work: 
**  The  most  important  homiletical  and  practical  Avork  of  the  age  on  the  Psalter 
is  the  '  Treasury  of  David,'  by  Charles  H.  Spurgeon.  Full  of  the  force  and 
genius  of  this  celebrated  preacher,  and  rich  iii  selections  from  the  entire  range 
of  literature,  especially  from  the  Puritan  divines." 

"  No  man,  whatever  his  theological  predilections  may  be,  who  has  a  spark 
of  justice  in  him,  will  hesitate  to  pronounce  the  work  of  great  ment,  revealing 
an  intellect  of  remarkable  vivacity  and  "sigour,  and  a  soul  aflame  with  religious 
earnestness." — Horn  Hist. 

"The  comments  and  expositions  aboimd  in  rich,  racy,  and  suggestive- 
remarks,  and  they  have  a  strong  flavour  of  the  homiletic  and  practical  expo- 
sition with  which  Mr.  Spirrgeon  is  accustomed  to  accompany  his  public  reading 
of  Holy  Scripture.  There  is  an  intensity  of  belief,  a  fulness  of  assent  to  the 
great  points  of  Calvijiistic  orthodoxy  which  our  author  would  not  be  true  to 
himself  if  he  attempted  to  conceal.  The  brief  introductions  are  very  well  done, 
and  the  abundant  apparatus  criticjis,  the  list  of  hundreds  of  writers  on  the 
Psalms,  whose  meditations  have  been  laid  under  contribution  to  enrich  the 
work,  render  this  commentary  on  twenty-six  of  thom  one  of  the  most  volu- 
minous in  existence.  At  all  events,  the  volume  will  be  an  encyclopaedia  ot 
Tefcrcnce.  "We  trust  that  Mr.  Spurgion  may  be  encouraged  to  persevere  in  this 
work,  as  he  has  been  in  almost  every  Christian  enterprise  with  which  his  name 
is  associated."— ii/Z^Js/j  Quarterly  Jievietv. 


Vol.  II.,  Psalms  XXVII.  to  LII.    Price  8s. 

Sixth  Thousand. 

"  We  know  of  no  work  on  the  Psalms  at  all  comparable  to  this.  The 
very  marrow  of  most  other  expositions  and  commentaries  extant  is  brought 
together  here,  in  addition  to  Mr.  iSpurgeon's  own  characteristic  cumments,  and 
all  who  are  acquainted  with  his  pulpit  services  will  know  how  rich  and  forceful 
these  conunenis  are.  The  extent  of  his  researches  maj"  be  estimated  fi-om  the 
fact  that  between  five  and  six  hundred  authors  are  quoted  in  this  volume,  and 
that  the  list  includes  the  names  of  the  oldest  English  expositors,  and  of  the 
men  who  represent  the  learning  and  laborious  investigation  of  our  own  times. 
The  work  is  indeed  a  '  Treasury.'  ....  We  have  no  doubt  that  it  will 
.secure  for  itself  '  immortaUtj','  and  that  '  Spurgeon  on  the  Psalms,'  will  be  a 
standard  work  to  be  found  in  every  Biblical  library  for  generations  hence." — 
Literary  World. 

Vol.  III.,  Psalms  LIII.  to  LXXVIII.    Price  8s. 

Sixth  Thousand. 

"  If  the  eloquent  Baptist  preacher  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  had 
produced  nothing  but  these  volumes  he  would  certainly  be  entitled  to  the 

Thanks  of  all  Bible  readers Mr.  Spurgeon  evidently  considers 

that  there  is  something  more  important  to  be  done  in  the  pulpit  than  discussing 
creeds,  and  as  the  expositions  of  the  Psahus  given  by  him  to  his  congregation 
on  Sunday  mornings  fonn  the  basis  of  the  present  work,  there  is  much  more  of 
experimental  than  of  doctrinal  teaching,  and  where  he  does  touch  upon  doc- 
trinal points  his  remarks  are,  in  the  main,  of  a  character  that  might  be  uttered 
by  any  Evangelical  clergj-man  in  the  land."— TAe  Hock. 

Vol.  IV,  Psalms  LXXIX  to  CIII.    Price  8s. 

Third  Thousand. 

"  We  are  convinced  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  doing  an  inestimable  sei-vice  to  the 
Church  in  compiHng  this  work.  The  years  will  come  when  as  a  preacher  he  will 
be  a  tradition,  and  grandfathers  will  describe  to  their  son's  children  the  Aisits 
they  paid  to  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  the  style  and  character  of  the  sermon, 
the  impression  produced  by  the  man,  and  the  crowd  of  hearers,  and  the  story  will 
lose  none  of  its  interest  in  the  telLng;  but  such  fame  slowly,  steadily  dimiiushes, 
and  surely  fades  into  the  faintest  possible  outlines.  It  will  be  impossible  for 
futui-e  generations  to  estimate  the  intiuence  which  Mr.  Spurgeon,  as  a  man  of 
speech  and  action,  exerted  in  his  own  day;  nor  wiU  the  innumerable  volumes  of 
sermons  which  have  been  issued,  and  still  continue  to  appear,  present  any  fair 
means  by  which  a  critical  judgment  of  his  mental  vigour  can  be  obtained.  Mr. 
Spurgeon,  like  every  great  man,  is  so  much  more  than  his  works  ;  but  we  believe 
that  this  "Treasury  of  David"  will  do  more  to  win  the  admiration  of  future 
generations,  and  to  sustain  its  author's  reputation  than  anj-  other  of  the  multi- 
plied works  to  Avhichhe  has  set  his  hand.  It  will  Kve.  There  is  nothing  like  it 
in  the  English  language,  and  it  supplies  a  desideratum  which  most  ministers 
have  felt.  We  tmst  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  will  be  spared  in  the  fulness  of  strength 
to  complete  what  must  be  regarded  by  all  thoughtful  judges  as  his  magnum 
opus.'' — jf'Ae  Enylish  Independent. 

"  This  fourth  volume  treats  of  Psalms  seldom  commented  upon,  and  yet 
among  the  richest  in  instniction  and  pathos.  It  is  strange  how  many  of  the 
Psalms  have  been  overlooked  or  left  without  full  exposition,  and  this  fact 
makes  Mr.  Spurgeon' s  work  the  more  valuable,  as  it  makes  it  also  the  more 
difB.cult  to  write.  Mr.  Spurgeon  shows  here  the  same  wealth  of  illustrative 
extracts,  of  racy  English,  and  of  Evangelical  truth  as  in  his  previous  volumes. 
The  homiletical  hints  are  taken  from  almost  every  verse,  and  will  be  helpful, 
not  only  to  '  village '  preachers,  but  to  preachers  of  town  and  city — to  whom  a 
'hint'  is  often  more  precious  than  a  sermon  itself.  We  trust  the  author  will 
be  favoured  to  finish  his  work  very  soon.  When  complete,  it  will  be  a  magnum 
opus,  to  wbich  multitudes  will  resort  for  beauty  and  strength." — Freeman, 


3 

THE  INTERPRETER;  or  Scripture  for  Family  Wor- 
ship :  beiiif,'  bclcctcd  passages  of  the  word  of  God  for  every  raoruiug  and 
evening-  throughout  the  year,  accompanied  by  a  running  coinment  and 
suitable  Hymns.  By  C.  H.  Spvrgeon.  Cloth  25s.,  Persian  Morocco  32s., 
Turkey  Morocco  42s.    Hymn  Book,  Is. 

*•  Calculated  to  be  of  great  value  to  the  many  -who  require  guidance  in 
conducting  family -worship. "—Z/ie  Churchman's  Monthly  Fenny  Jlayazine. 

"  The  impress  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  genius  is  observable  in  the  very  felicitous 
arrangement  of  the  passages  of  Scripture  as  well  as  in  the  characteristic  running 
comments,  in  -which  latter,  by  the  way,  ^Ir.  Spurgeon's  theological  views  come 
prominently  to  the  front."— i'/ie  Christian  Family. 

MORNING  BY  MORNING;  or,  Daily  Readings  for  the 

Family    or    the    Closet.     By    C.    H.   Spukglon.    Price  3s.   6d.      60th 

Thousand. 
"Those -who  have  learned  the  value  of  morning  devotion, -will  highly  prize 
these  helps.     All  -who  love  a  full-orbed  gospel,  vigorous,  varied  thought,  and 
a  racy  style,  -will  appreciate  this  \ol\xinc."—l{er.J.  Ant/us,  D.U.,  lieyeut's  Park 
College. 

"  The  matter  is  -wide  in  its  range,  -with  a  dash  of  freshness,  the  -nork being 
entirely  original.  There  is  nothnig  crude  or  duubtfiil  in  the  sentiment  or 
doctrine  in  either  the  readings  or  the  1  ynins.  They  are  the  honest,  heartfelt, 
outspoken  heart-breathings  of  a  devoted  .servant  of  Uod,  desiring  to  help  others 
on  their  journey  heavenwards.'' — Wcaleyan  Times. 

EVENING  BY  EVENING ;  or,  Readings  at  Eventide  fcr 

the  Family  or  the  Closet.  By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  3s;  6d.  40th  Thousand. 
"Ever  since  I  became  acquLiinted  -with  Mr.  Spurgeon's  'Morning  by 
Morning,'  I  have  reckoned  it  altogether  priceless,  not  only  myself  using  it 
every  day  -with  joy  and  profit,  but  sending  it  abroad  to  members  of  my  family 
in  distant  lands,  giving  it  as  a  present  to  friend  after  friend,  and  in  other  -ways 
endeavouring  to  extend  the  kuowkdge  and  use  of  it  on  every  side.  On  learning 
that  '  Evening  by  Evening  '  was  published,  hoAV  gladly  I  bade  it  -wekoiue  !  And 
1  can  humbly  commend  it  in  no  higher  terms  than  by  simply  saying  that  it -will 
be  foimil  a  tit  companion,  every  way,  for  its  forerunner  of  the  morning." — 
Charles  J.  Brown,  JJ.D.,  Edinburgh. 

THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE      PULPIT, 

Containing  the  Sermons  of  C.  II.  Spikcko-n,  preached  dui-ing  the  past 
twenty  vears.    Vols.  I.  and  II.,  6s.  6d.  each.    Vols.  III.  to  VI.,  7s.  each. 
Vol.  VII.,  8s.  6d..      Vols.  VIII.  to  XX.,  7s.  each.    The  Sermons  are 
published  every  Thursday  at  Id. ;  Monthly  Parts  at  6d.  each. 
*^*  The  Publishers  call  attention  to  the  remarkable  fact  that  they  ha-y-e  now- 
issued  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Sermons  weekly  for  twenty  years,  and  that  all  this  time 
the  circulatiou  has  not  only  been  very  large,  but  has  steadily  increased.    This 
unparalleled  fact,  unprecedented  in  the  pulpit  of  any  age  or  church,  speaks 
lor  itself,  and  is  a  higher  eulogium  than  the  most  friendly  reviewer  could 
pronounce.     It  is  also  noteworthy  that  an  equally  warm  reception  has  been 
given  to  the  American  Edition,  and  that  the  Dutch,  German,   Swedish,   and 
French  translations  have  commanded  an  extentive  sale  ;  and  the  Sermons  have 
been  acceptably  received  in  Welsh,  Danish,  and  ItaUan. 

FLASHES  OF  THOUGHT  ;  being  one  Thousand  Choice 

Extracts  from  the  Works  of  C.  II.  SriiioKOX.    Alphabetically  arranged, 
and  with  a  copious  Index.     Price  os. 
None  of  the  pas.sages  given  in  this  book  have  been  published  in  any  other 
volume  of  extracts  that  has  issued  liom  the  press.    They  form  an  entirely 
original  and  carefully-prepared  selection. 

"  A  thousand  exUacts,  bright  with  the  light  of  heaven,  sparkling  with -wit, 
rich  in  imagery,  beautiful  in  their  setting,  lorcible  in  style,  and  devoutly 
stimulating  in  tone,  make  up  a  voliune  ot  unique  merit." — General  BajptUt 
Maga:;inQ. 


TYPES  AND  EMBLEMS;  Being  a  Collection  of  Sermons 

preached  on  Sunday  and  Thm-sday  Evenings  at  the  Meiropolitau 
Tahernacle.    By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.     Ss. 

"This  vohime  is  the  first  of  the  issue.  It  -will  be  sure  to  be  a  favourite. 
*  Types  and  Emblems  '  are  attractive  themes,  and  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  hands  they 
neither  lack  sucgestiveness  nor  power.  All  his  well-known  quahties  as  a 
preacher  are  in  great  force  throughout  this  volume.''— Genera/  Baptist 
Magazine. 

TRUMPET  CALLS  TO  CHEISTIAN  ENERGY,  being  a 

Second  Series  of  Mr.  Sitrgeo's  Sunday  and  Thursday  Evening 
Sermons.    Price  3s.  6d. 

LECTURES   TO   MY  STUDENTS;   A   Selection  from 

Addresse-  delivered  to  the  Students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  Meti'opolitan 
Tabernacle.  By  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  President.  First  Series — 15th  Thousand. 
Price  -Is.  6d. 

"  "We  have  read  this  work  with  a  feeling  very  nearly  approaching  to  delight. 
Nothing  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  printed  has  so  thoroughly  pleased  us,  and  few 
of  his  works  are  calculated  to  be  of  greater  practical  service.  It  abounds  in 
words  of  wisdom ;  it  is  i  ich  ia  humour,  but  richer  in  human  and  spiritual 
experience." — Noyiconforinist . 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  selected  topics  of  practical  importance,  such  as  the  call 
to  the  ministry,  the  preacher's  private  prayer,  sermon  matter,  the  arrangement 
of  the  voice,  impromptu  speech,  the  choice  of  a  text,  and  the  like  ;  and  on  each 
and  all  of  the  themes  thKs  taken  up  he  has  much  to  say  that  is  worth  hearing, 
and  he  says  it  in  a  way  that  at  once  enlists  the  readei-'s  attention.  Every  pouit 
is  illustrated  in  a  forcible,  homely  style,  and  pulpit  anecdotes  of  the  most 
interesting  character  abound  in  these  pages." — The  Eock. 

GLEANINGS    AMONG   THE    SHEAVES.      By  C.  H. 

Spvegeon.     Cloth  Antique,  Price  Is.  6d.    Eourth  Edition. 

"  These  extracts  are  quite  Spurgeonic — racy,  rich,  and  rare,  both  as  to- 
style  and  matter— full  of  exquisite  consolation — faithful  advice — clear  analogies 
— poetic  touches — and  glorious  old  go>pel.  Wg  do  not  wonder  though  eight 
thousand  copies  were  disposed  of  on  the  day  of  publication,  and  we  trust  eighty 
times  eighty  thousand  will  find  their  way  to  the  religious  public.'' — Wetklij 
Review. 

OUR   OWN    HYMN   BOOK.     By  C.   H.   SPURGEON. 

Eoyal  32mo.  Cloth,  2s.  6d. ;  Ornamental  Boards,  gilt  edges,  3s. ;  Morocco, 
gUt,  5s.   Large  type  for  the  pulpit ;  cloth,  6s.  ;  roan,  7s. ;  morocco,  10s.  Cd. 
Double  columns  for  the  pew  ;  roan,  3s.  6d. ;  morocco,  6s.    Congregations- 
can  secure  advantageous  terms  by  application  to  the  Publishers  direct. 
A  cheap  edition  is  published  at  Is.  4d. 
It  is  believed  to  be,  all  things  considered,  the  largest,  cheapest,  and  most 
accurate  Hymn-book  in  the  English   language.     The  ministers  who  use  it 
uniformly  speak  of  it  in  the  warmest  terms  of  approval.    Specivien  Pages  of 
the  ra)  ious  editions  can  he  had  07i  application. 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK;    or,  Plain  Advice  for 

Plain  People.     By  C.  H.  Spurgeon.     Price  Is.,  cloth  Is.  6d.    230tk 

Thousand. 
"  Racy  and  pungent ;    very  plain,   and  to  the  purpose.     No  fear  as  to 
whether  it  will  be  read  or  not  by  those  into  whose  hands  it  may  fall.    If  Mr. 
Spurgeon  goes  on  at  this  rate  in  his  multiform  publications,  he  will  leave 
nothing  racy  unsaid." — Watchinan. 

"  "We  advise  our  readers  to  get '  John  Ploughman's  Talk,'  by  Spurgeon.  It 
discourses  of  twenty-four  every-day  topics  in  a  simple,  homely,  semi-humorous 
way  ;  and,  if  shrewd  practical  sense  were  something  to  be  imparted,  we  should 
say  this  book  would  nearly  stock  a  needy  reader  with  that  article  for  a  life- 
time."— California7i  Spare  Hour. 


^' 


DATE  DUE 

f 

f*^^'^^' 

•i 

itw^t 

1^ 

mI.1,. 

! 

^ 

DEMCO  38-297 

j.rVS't'^N./;^^^^ 


^^4j^»^^^^-^ 


