te. 


i 


Bey 


a 





The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 








TWELVE SERMONS 


CONVERSION 


BY 


Cad. Se oRGEON 


CHICAGO NEw YORK TORONTO 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


LONDON EDINBURGH 









AN OLD-FASHIONED CONVERSION. 


a AK Sermay 






. a 


; : 
_. DeELiverrD on Lorp’s-Day Morninc, Marcu 16TH, 1873, BY. 


 - C H.SPURGEON, 


Be AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON, 
Bae ; 





Me es Lo, all these things worketh God oftentimes with man, to bring back his soul 
- from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living.”—Job xxxiii. 29, 30.* 


__ Some people are wonderfully enamoured of anything that is old. An 
old coin, an old picture, an old book, or even a piece of antique 
_ rubbish, they will almost worship. The jingle of a rusty medal is. 
music to them, and “auld nick-nackets” are as precious as diamonds. _ 
It is wonderful what a little mouldiness and a few worm-holes will do 
in the way of increasing values. I confess I do not very greatly share 
_ in the feeling, at least it is no craze of mine; but, nevertheless, all 
things being equal, antiquity has its charms. Old, old stories of the 
_ days far past, when time was young, have a special interest ; they are 
as windows which permit us to gaze down the dim aisles of ages long . 
gone by—we look through them with mingled curiosity and awe. 
Tam about this morning to speak to you concerning an old conversion, 
- We shall rehearse an ancient story of the renewal and salvation of a 
soul. In our day we meet with professors who cry down everything of 
_ the present, and cry up everything of the former days, which they call me 
- the good old times. Such persons talk much about old-fashioned con- 
_ yersions and hold in great admiration the lives of believers of the old 
_ school. I shall this morning introduce you to an old-fashioned con- 
version, and explain the way in which men were brought to God not 
only hundreds, but thousands of years ago. I suppose that Elihu 
delivered this description of conversion about the time of Moses, or 
at the period when Israel was in Egypt, for almost general consent 
-- appropriates one of those dates to the Book of Job. The record we “oad 
shall read this morning, and study carefully, refers to the very very se 














© The real text is the whole passage from verse fourteen to thirty, and the reader 
_ is requested to turn to it before reading the sermon. 


No. 1,101 


Nay 





146° eh METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


oldest times... Let this fact: give additional interest’ to our, scetation. 
and if it does I am sure that we shall not lack for earnest attention, for 
the subject is of great intrinsic value. 

Kindly keep your Bibles open ; we have already read the chapter, but 
it will be needful to refer to it verse by verse. . 

I. The matter in hand is to compare an old-fashioned conversion ae 
those of the present time, and the first. note we shall strike is this: it 
is quite certain from the description given in this thirty-third chapter of 
Job that THE SUBJECTS OF CONVERSION WERE SIMILAR, and men in the 
far gone ages were precisely like mén in these times. The passage 
tells us nothing about the stature of mens” bodies, but as far as they 
were spiritually concerned the photograph which Elihu took is the por- 
trait of many of those who are brought to Jesus now, Reading the 
passage over, we find that men in those times needed converting ; for 
they were deaf to God’s voice (verse 14) ; they were obstinate in evil 
purposes (verse 17), and puffed up with pride. They needed chastening 
to arouse them to thought, and required sore distress to make them cry 
out for mercy (verses 19—22). They were very loth to say, “I have 
sinned,” and were not at all inclined to prayer. Nothing but sharp disci- 
pline could bring them to their senses, and even then they needed to be 
born again. Men in those days were sinful and yet proud ; sinful self 
and righteous self were both in power ; it was one part of conversion 
to withdraw them from their purposes of sin, and another part of 
their conversion to “ hide pride’ from them. Though they were sinful 
they thought that they were righteous, and though they were condemned 
by the law of God they still entertained the fond hope that they should 
by their own merits obtain the favour of the Most High. They were 
then, as they are now, poor as poverty and yet proud of their wealth, 
Publicans in sin, and yet Pharisees in boasting. 

It appears that in those days God was accustomed to speak to men 
and to be disregarded by them ; we are told that God spake “once, 
yea, twice,” and men perceived him not. Their presumptuous slum- 
bers were too deep to be broken by. the call of love. Samuel. said, 
“Here am I, for thou didst call me,” but they slept on in defiance of 
the Lord. 0, how frequently doth the Lord speak now to deaf ears! 
He calls, and men refuse, he stretches out his hands, and men. do not 
regard him ; but they are desperately set upon their sins, and sodden 
in carnal security, therefore they do despite to his grace, and ruin their 
own souls. 


In those ancient times, when a man was converted, the Lord himself 


must needs turn him, omnipotence itself was necessary to divide man 
from his folly, God’s speaking to the ear was not enough unless he 
followed it up with a powerful application to the heart. Man was too 
far gone to be healed by remedies. less than divine—he was utterly past 
hope unless Almighty love would come to the rescue ; verily the case is 
the same at this day, and each man répeats his fellow. As the fish 
still bites at the bait,'as the bird still ‘flies into the snare, as the beast 
is still taken in the pit, so is man still the dupe of his sins, and only 
the Lord can save him, Salvation was only wrought by the gracious 
influences of God’s Spirit in the days of Job, and it is only so accom- 
plished at this present hour. Men were lost then as now ; men thought 





; 





AN OLD-FASHIONED CONVERSION. 147 


they were not lost then, and they are equally conceited now. Into 
_ the house of the divine Physician the same class of persons enter as 
were welcomed and healed by him ages ago; he has the same blind 
eyes and deaf ears ‘to open, hearts still require to be transformed 
from stone to flesh, and leprosies to be exchanged for health by his 
Sovereign touch. The Spirit from the four winds breathed on a valley 
covered with dry bones in the days of the fathers, and he comes forth 
still to work upon the like scene of death. Man has not outgrown his 
sins. As it was in the beginning it is now, arid so it ever will be while 
that which is born of the flesh is flesh ; as were the sires such are 
their sons, and such will our sons be in their turn ; so that the process 
of conversion needs to. be the same, and “all. these things God 
-worketh «oftentimes with man.” 4 

II. The second note we shall strike is this, that in those olden times 
THE WORKER OF CONVERSION WAS THE SAME,—“ all these things God 
worketh.” The .whole process is by Elihu ascribed to God, and every 
Christian can bear witness that the Lord is the great worker now ; 
he turns us, and we are turned. We read in verse fourteen, that at 
first the Lord wrought upon men by speaking to them, once, yea, 
twice : he also brought truth home to their minds and instructed them ; 
and so changed their purposes and humbled their hearts. In the same 
manner the Lord worketh now. Conversion is a change which con- 
¢erns the mind, the affections, the spirit ; it is not a physical man- 
ipulation as some foolish persons fancy, who appear to think that 
God converts men by force, and turns them over as aman would roll a 
stone. The Lord operates upon men as men, not as blocks of wood ; 
God speaks to them, instructs them, reveals truth to them, encourages 
them to hope, and graciously influences them for good. Man is left 
free, for “ God speaketh once, yea, twice, yet man perceiveth it not,” 
and yet in God’s own wise and suitable manner, he is at length 
led to cry, “I have sinned and perverted that which is right, and it 
profited me not.” 

But in those times, as now, it was necessary that God should do 
more than speak to the outer ear, he therefore came nearer still, and by 
his Holy Spirit led men really to hear what he spake. He did not 
leave men to their wills, neither did he trust their conversion to the 
eloquence of preachers, or to the cogency of arguments, but he himself 
came and opened men’s ears, and pressed the truth home upon their 
understandings, and made it operative upon their entire nature. Man 
* was so proud that no one else could humble him but God ; and he was 
so wilful, that no one could withdraw him from his purpose but the 
Lord alone: but the Lord in condescension did the deed, and made 
the man obedient and humble. Indeed, the Lord is described in this 
‘chapter as the main cause of all the work accomplished. Whereas, a 
ransom was needed to deliver men from going down to the pit, it is the 
Lord’s voice which cried, “I have found a ransom,” Whereas, even 
when the ransom was found, men did not know it, and would not 
receive it ; it was God who sent a messenger, one of a thousand, to 
show unto man his uprightness, and to proclaim the great provision 
made for restoring man to his primeval state. It is the Lord whe 
delivers the soul from the pit, that man’s life may see the light. 









ont this “chaptar na is Goa that apes that pale, 
enlightens, consoles, renews and saves, from first to | 
ae alli in all. peine: is tne the Lord, it is not oe more neit ne 






font us, for, “if salvation were of subaoleds, he among us wane) " 

saved ¢ ? But he hath “laid help upon one that is mighty;” God 

also is our strength and our song, for he himself has become our s 

vation. He who has begun the good work will carry it on. -Chr 

is the Alpha, and Christ is the Omega, the “author and the finisher of 
our faith.” . So we have two points in this ancient conversion in which 
sit. was just like our own, the same men to be operated upon, and thi 
re same God to work the miracles of grace. 
III. The most interesting point to you will probably be the ene 
ss THE MEANS USED TO WORK CONVERSION IN THOSE DISTANT AGES WERE. 
ss VERY MUCH THE SAME AS THOSE EMPLOYED Now. There were dif- 

3 ferences in outward agencies, but the inward modus operandi was ‘the! 
same. There was a difference in the instruments, but the way of 
working wasthesame. Kindly turn to the chapter, at the fifteenth verse 5 
you find there that God first of all spoke to men, but they regarded him > 
not, and then he spoke to them effectually by means of a dream : “Ina 
dream, in avision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slum- 
berings upon the bed.”’ N ow, this was an extraordinary means of grace, 
seldom used now. In this the distant ages differ from the prese 
A dream, though it be in itself but the phantasm of sleep, may be 

~ employed by God to arouse the mind towards eternal things. Dream 
of death and judgment to come have frequently had ‘a very alarmin; 
effect upon the conscience, while visions of celestial glory have im- 
pressed the heart with desires after nail: bliss. As Dryden says of © 




































some men-—— 
“Tn sleep they fearful precipices tread ; 
Or, shipwreck'd, labour to some distant shore,” 


so others have in their slumbers shivered at the gates of hell, or even * 
been tossed upon its fiery waves, and the thoughts consequent upon such — 
dreams have, by God’s grace, occasionally been rendered permanently k 
useful, though I fear it is not often so. In the days of Elihu, however 
, dreams were much more frequently the way in which God spake, for 
there were few messengers from God to interpret his mind, no openly 
declared gospel, and few assemblies for instruction by hearing the word ; 
and what is more, there was then no written word of God. In those 
early times they had no inspired books at all, so that, lacking the Bible, 
and lacking the frequent ministrations of God’s servants, the Lord was. 
pleased to supply their deficiencies by speaking to men in the visions afl 
the night. J say again, we must not expect the Lord to return to the — 
general use of so feeble an ag gency now that he employs others which are _ 
far more effectual. It is much more profitable for you to have the word — 
in your houses which you can read at all times, and to have God’s — 
ministers to proclaim clearly the gospel of Jesus, than it would be to be © 
dependent upon visions of the night. 






4 





therefore, outwardly, 


; just the same: namely, in the word of God. God speaks 








different from what he speaks in the written word. If any 





God, put it away, it is an idle fancy not to be regarded, . Woe to 
















y wake up to find that nothing short of realities could save him. 


hen, in the old time, used to be by the word of God; it came ina 


those distant periods. 

‘seems from the chapter before us in the sixteenth verse, that men were 
stopped up! An old Puritan has mentioned seven forms of what he calls 
“ ear stoppers,” whichneed to be taken out of the human ear. They are 
frequently blocked up by ignorance ; they know not the importance 


to it; judging it to be an idle tale, they go their ways to their farms 
' and to their merchandise. Some ears are stopped up by unbelief; they 


: have heard the glad tidings of salvation, but they have not received it. 
as an infallible revelation from heaven, a message backed by divine | 
authority. Scepticism and philosophy, falsely so called, barricade Hare | 


gate against the assaults of Emmanuel’s captains, so that even the 
_ great battering-rams of the gospel prove powerless to force an entrance. 
_ “He could not do many mighty works then because of their unbelief !” 
Others ears are stopped up by impenitence ; the hardness of the heart 


--eauses a deadness of the ear. You may discharge the great cannons of 


the law in the ears of some men, but they will not stir ; the thunders 
of God startle the wild beasts of the wood, but impenitence is not 
- moved thereby. Thé gospel itself soundeth upon such ears with no 
_ more effect than upon a marble statue; the groans of Calvary are 
nothing tothem. Some ears are stopped by prejudice ; they have made 
up their minds as to what the gospel ought to be, and they will not 
hear it ds it is; they have set up for themselves a standard of what the 
truth should be, and that standard is a false one, for they have put 
bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter, darkness for light and light for 
darkness. Prejudices against the preacher, or against the denomina- 
‘tion are but forms of the same evil; they make men to be as Ulysses 
was when. his ears were sealed with wax, for they are even as deaf men. 
The entrance into many ears is also effectually barred by the love of 
sin. He who loves vice will not hear of repentance ; the lover of 
pleasure detests holy mourning; the licentious think holiness to be 
another name for slavery. The man who finds delight in sin is a deaf 





nerefore, may have changed, but still, - 
y the dream at night, or by the sermon on the Sabbath, 


in dreams, if so, he speaks to them all nothing more and 
ome to you and say, “I have dreamed this or that,” and it be not — ; 


the Scriptures, away with their dreams! If anything should occur = 
your own mind in vision which is not already revealed in the Book _ 






at man whose religion is the baseless fabric of dreams, he will one 


have the more sure word of testimony, unto which we do well if we — 
e heed as unto a light that shineth in a dark place. Conversions, 


different way, but it was the same word and the same truth. Atthis 
time faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, and —— 
at bottom that was precisely the way in which faith came to men in” 


~ Now, observe, that in addition to the external coming of the word, it — 


conyerted by having their ears opened by God. Alas, men’s ears are still 





and value of the truth, and, therefore they refuse to give earnest heed 



















150 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE... PULPIY. 


adder whom the wisest charmer cannot charm; the poison of asps is 
under his tongue, and .he cannot renounce his deadly hate of a gospel. 
which rebukes his evil ways. . It would be vain to teach cleanliness to 
the sow which wallows in the mire—it loves uncleanness, and after un- 
cleanness will it go. Some ears are stopped through pride ; the plain, . 
unflattering, humbling gospel of the sinner’s Saviour is not to their 
taste. The gospel for lost sinners, they think, is not addressed to them, . 
for they are almost good enough, and are by no means worthy of any, 
great blame, or in danger of any great punishment, When they , 
acknowledge their sinnership in words they feel it not in their hearts, . 
therefore they hear not the truth in the love of it. If the gospel-pipe 
could be tuned to notes of flattery, to praise the dignity of man, they 
would attend to its music, but a gospel for vulgar sinners! . How can. 
their noble souls endure it ? With their fine feathers all ruffled in. 
disdain, they turn away in arage. Alas! how many ears are stopped 
through -worldliness! If you stand in a street where the traffic is 
abundant—where the constant thunder of rumbling wheels creates a 
din—it would be difficult to preach so as to command an audience, 
for the abundant sound would prevent all hearing ; and, to a great, 
extent, the mass of mankind are just in that position as to the 
joyful sound of the gospel; the rumbling of the wheels of commerce, 
the noise of trade and the cries of competition, the whirl of cares 
and the riot of pleasures—all these drown the persuasive voice of 
heavenly love, so that men hear no more of it than they would hear 
a pin fall in the midst of a‘ hurricane at sea.. Only when God unstops 
the ear is the still small voice of truth heard in.the chambers of 
the heart. 

Now it is clear to every thoughtful person that all these ear-stoppers. 
existed in the olden times as well as now, and therefore the same work 
of opening the passage to the heart was necessarily performed. Dreams 
did not convert sinners of the patriarchal age, however vivid they might 
be, nor did prophetic warnings by themselves arouse them,—the hand 
of him who created the ear was needed to cleanse and circumcise it, ere 
the truth could find admission. 

Note the next sentence, he “sealeth their instruction.” That. was. 
the means of conversion in the olden times. God brought the truth 
down upon the soul as you press a seal upon the wax: you bear upon 
the seal to make the impress, and even thus the power of God pressed 
home the word. ‘Truth is heard by men, but they forget it unless the 
Holy Spirit takes the truth and puts it home, and lays his force upon 
it, and then it makes a stamp upon the conscience, upon the memory, 
and upon the entire manhood. Perhaps, also, by sealing here is meant 
confirming. A thing is sealed when it is established by testimony and 
witness : under hand and seal as we say. Now the Holy Spirit has a 
way of making truth to become manifest to men, and cogent upon their 
minds by bearing his witness with it ; so that they cannot help feeling 
that it istrue. He sets it in sucha light, that they cannot dispute it, but 
yield full consent to it, their conscience being overwhelmingly convinced. 

Dear friends, I pray God the Holy Spirit in this sense to seal home 
the word we speak to each one of you, that from hearers you may 
grow into believers. I know you will remain hearers only unless that 


AN OLD-FASHIONED CONVERSION: 154 


“sacred sealing shall take place ;° but let that come upon you and your 


soul will bear the gospel ‘stamped into its very texture, never more ’ 
to be effaced. If the Spirit of God thus seals you, you will be sealed 


indeed. 


By sealing is also sometimes meant preserving and setting apart, as” 


we seal up documents or treasures of great value, that they may be 


secure. In this’ sense the gospel needs sealing up in our hearts. We 
forget what we hear till God the Holy Ghost seals it in the soul, and 
then it is pondered and treasured up in the heart : it becomes to us a 


goodly pearl, a divine secret, a peculiar heritage. This sealing -is a’ 


main point in conversion. What thousands of sermons many of you’ 


have heard, but the instruction has never been sealed to you, and, ' 


therefore, you remain unsaved. I cannot bear to think of your unhappy 


case, and I beseech those who love the Lord to pray that our discourses,’ 


or the sermons of some one else, or the Bible itself, may be sealed of>’ 


the Lord. upon these my unhappy hearers, that they may be converted 


and saved. O for the Lord’s sealing hand upon men’s hearts! Send,’ 
Lord, by whomsoever thou wilt send, and by thy servant also. Give ‘ 
the hearing ear, and then engrave’ thy gospel upon an understanding | 


heart. Thou art able to do this, and in faith we seek it at thy hands; 


O Lord God of our salvation. In this manner men were converted in ° 


the olden times : ears were opened and hearts were sealed. 


It appears, also, that the Lord, in those days, employed providence as ° 


a help towards conversion—and that providence was often of a very 
gentle kind, for it preserved men from death. Read the eighteenth 
verse :— He keepeth back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing 
by the sword.” Many a man has had the current of his life entirely 
changed by an escape from imminent peril; solemn thoughts have 
taken possession of his formerly careless mind, and he has said to him- 


self, “ Has God preserved me from this danger, then let me be grateful _ 
to him. He must have had a purpose in my preservation, let me find ‘ 


out what it is, and thankfully endeavour to answer to it.” Have any 
of you, my hearers, escaped from shipwreck ? Is there one here who 
has escaped from accident upon the iron way ? Are you one of a handful 
who were snatched from between the very Jaws of death? Have you 
risen up from a fever which laid you very low? Are you now almost 


the only survivor of a family, all the members of which, except yourself, » 


have been taken away by consumption, or some other hereditary disease ? 
Are you a remarkable monument of sparing mercy ? Then, I pray you, 
let the long-suffering of God lead you to repentance, for it has led 
many before you, and it is intended that it should do the like for you. 
Yield to the gentle pressure of lovingkindness, even as the flowers 


yield their perfumes to the sunshine: do not need to be crushed: 


and bruised like Oriental spice beneath the pestle. Tenderly doth 
the Lord call you to himself, and say, “I have spared thee from the 


graye, I have also kept thy guilty soul from going down to hell, I have » 
placed thee to-day under the sound of the gospel; I am, by my servant, | 


calling upon thee to turn unto me and live. Wilt thou not hear me ? 
Thou art still on praying ground and pleading terms with me—wilt 
thou not consider all this?” Thus God speaketh now by actions, 
which speak more loudly than words, and it seems that in the same way 









But, then it seems hat) as Elihu puts it, sickn ~ mor 
‘effectual awakener i in the common run of cases. Observe the ninteent 
verse, “He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multi : 
of his bones with strong pain : so that his life abhorreth bread, and ie: 
soul dainty meat.’ Severe pain destroyed appetite and brought on 
extreme lassitude and distaste of life : but all this was’sent in mercy mn 
to fetch the wanderer home. Yes, men get space for thought when 
they are shut up in the chamber of sickness. While the mill-whee ns 
went on and on and on, they could not hear God speak, but when its” eS 
-hum is hushed the warning voice sounds. forth clearly. There in — 
silence the patient tosses on the bed, wakeful at night, and fearful by 
on day, and then conscience lifts up its esien'ad and will be heard : then, : 
























































“conscience, and he convinces the man of sin. How ee) some of us” a 
owe toa bed of sickness! I do not desire for any unconverted person : 
here that he should be ill, but if that would be the way to make him : 
think, repent, and believe, I could earnestly pray for it. I believe the 

Lord has often preached to men in hospitals who never heard him in — ake 
~ churches or chapels ; fever and cholera have been heard by those whom _ 
ministers could not reach. If we could banish pain and sickness from 
5; the world, it may be we should be robbing righteousness of two of her 
-_- most impressive evangelists. What Jonah was to Nineveh, sickness 
has been to many a man. Like Elijah also, it has cried in the soul, eG 
-“ Choose ye this day whom ye will serve.” Disease has been a grim ~ = E 
“orator for God, and with an eloquence not to be resisted, it has. made 
the hearts of men to bow before its message. If there are any here 
who have lately been thus afflicted, I would ask them whether God 
has blessed it to their souls. I earnestly pray that they may not be 
-* hardened by it, for in that case there is fear that God will say, 
“Why should ye.be smitten any more, ye will revolt more and | 
more!” and he may add, “I will let them alone, they are given 
unto idols. I havesmitten ‘them till their whole head i is sick, and “their. 
whole heart is faint. I have- made them to be so near death’s door, . 
that from the crown of the head even to the foot they are all wounds — 
and bruises through the chastenings of my rod. I will give them up, 
and no more will I deal with them ina way of grace.” Great God — 
have pity still, and make thy chastisements effectual to their souls. | 
Now, note well that we do not assert that all persons who are~ 

saved are awakened by sickness ; far from it, all that we are now 
‘taught is that many are so aroused, and that such was the case in the 
instance described by Elihu. 

In addition to this sickness, the person whom God saved was even 
brought to be apprehensive of death—* Yea, his soul draweth near unto 
the grave, and his life to the destroyers.”’ When aman is made to lie 
upon his bed on the brink of hell (°. look into another world, that 








sight may be sacredly blessed to him. ( O, it is no small thing to peer 
into eternity, and to make out, amid th horrid gloom, no shapes of hope 
but ghastly forms of, hideous woe. To have behind one the memory 
of a mis-spent life, to have above one an angry ae to have within: 










‘thie’ boay and the bane aby remorse, ane te 
1 one the bottomless pit, yawning with its lurid fires! What can 
be worse ?- ‘This side of hell, what can be worse than the tortures of an 
awakened conscience? This has sometimes made men wake up 
from, a hife-slumber and compelled them to cry, “ What must we do to. 
be saved ?” J eould wish that every man here, who has rem i 























: unmoved by gentler means, might have some such an experiencey It — 
were better for you to be saved so, as by fire, than not to be saved & all 
But, now, notice that all this ‘did not lead the person into comfort 5 
a although he was impressed by the dream and sickness, and so on} yet 
_ the ministry of some God-sent ambassador was wanted. “If there be 
a messenger with him,” that is a man sent of God—“an interpreter,” 
one who can open up obscure things and translate God’s mind into 
man’s language—“ one among a thousand,” for a true preacher, expert. 
in dealing with souls, is a rare person “to show unto man his upright- 
ness, then he is gracious unto him.” God could save souls without 
- ministers, but he does not often do is he could bring men to Jesus 
without the call from the lip of his sent servants, but ‘as a general rule 
conversion in the olden times needed the messenger and the inter- — 
preter, and it needs them still: “ How shall they believe on him of whom 
_ they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a preacher, and 
~ how shall they preach except they be sent.” I pray that many of you, 
_ dear brethren, who know the Lord, may become preachers to others; : 
that you may be such successful messengers of mercy to poor broken EAL 
hearts, that you may be to them picked and choice men like one out Sly 
i: thousand, I entreat you to pray for me also, that I may have a share, 
and a large share, in this blessed employment, and that to many God > 
may say through me; “ Deliver him from going down 2 the pit, for r 
' have found a ransom.’ 

TY. Fourthly, and aah too much brevity, THE OBJECTS AIMED AT 
IN THE OLD CONVERSIONS WERE JUST THE SAME as those that are aimed 
-at now-a-days. Will you kindly look at the seventeenth verse. The 

first thing that God had’ to do with the man was to withdraw him from | 
~ his purpose. He. finds him set upon sin, upon rebellion, upon carnal 
Ms - pleasure, upon everything that is selfish ‘and werldly ; and conversion 
_ turns him away from such evil purposes: it was so then, it 18 80 now. 
This turning of an obstinate will towards God and holiness i is, however, 
“no easy matter : to stay the sun in his course, or reverse the marches 
of the moon, would not be a harder task. 

The next object of the divine work was to hide pride from man, 
for man will stick to self-righteousness as long as he can. Never does 
limpet adhere to its rock more firmly than a sinner to his own merits, ie 
although indeed he has none. Like the old Greek hero in the = 
mythology, the natural man sits down upon the stone of self-esteem, a 
and Hercules himself cannot tear him from 1t. When he is even in Mh 
outward character vile, he still fancies that there is some good thing ae 
in him, and to that fancy he will tenaciously cling ; so that it is a work 
of divine power, an effort of the august omnipotence of heaven, to get 
a man away from his innate and desperate pride. 

Beloved, another great object of conversion is to lead man to a con- 
fession of his gin. © Hence we find it said in the twenty-seventh verse, 




































154. METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE. PULPIT. 


“ He looketh upon man, and if any say I have sinned, and perverted , 
that which was right, and it profited me not, he will deliver his soul. 
from going into the pit.” Man hates. confession to his God, I mean » 


humble, personal, hearty confession. He will go to a priest and answer 
all his filthy questions, but. he will not confess to the Lord. He will 
gabble over words which he calls a “ general confession,” but true, heart- 


felt confession he shrinks from—he will not come to the publican’s cry . 
if he can help it.. He will not say, frankly from his heart, “I have, 


sinned.” He will not own or confess the perverseness of his nature and 
say; “I have perverted that which is right ;”” nor can you: get him to 
own the folly and stupidity of his sin, so as to say, “it profited me not.” 
But conversion brings him to his knees, conversion pulls up the sluices of 
his'soul, and makes him pour out his confessions before the Most High ; 
and when this is done, then salvation has come to the man’s soul, for 
God desires man to put himself into the place of condemnation in order 
that he may be able to say to him, “I forgive thee freely.”” The Lord 
shuts us up to hopelessness and helplessness in order that he may come, 
as a God of grace, and display his abounding mercy. All our hope lies 
in him, and all other hopes are delusions. The great work in con- 
version is not to make people better, so that they may come to God 
on a good footing, it is to strip them completely and lay them low, 
so' that God may come to them when they are on a bad footing, or 
rather on no footing at all, but down in the dust at his feet. The Son 
of man is come to seek and to save that which is lost, but it wants God 
himself to convince men that they are lost; and the Spirit’s work 
of soul-humbling is just this,—to get man to feel so diseased that he 
will accept the physician; to get him to feel so poor that he will 
accept the charity of heaven; to get him to know that he is so 
stripped, that he will no longer be proud of his fig leaves, but will be 
willing to take the robe of righteousness which Christ has wrought out. 
Conviction is sent to kill the man, to break him in pieces, to bury him, 
to let him know his own corruption ; and all this as a preliminary to 
his quickening and restoration. We must see the bones in the valley 
to be dead and dry, or we shall not hear the voice out of the excellent 
glory, saying, “ Thus saith the Lord, ‘ Ye dry bones live !’”’ May God 
in his mercy teach us what all this means ; and may we all experience 
an old-fashioned conversion. 

Y. Fifthly, the process of. conversion in days of yore exactly 
resembled that which is wrought in us now as to ITS SHADES. The 
shadowy side wore the same sombre hues as now. First of all, the 
man refused to hear; God spake once, yea twice, and man regarded him 
not : here was obstinate rebellion. His heart was as an adamant stone. 
How trueisthat to-day! . Then came the chastening till the man’s bones 
were made to ache, and: he was fullof misery. It is often the same now. 
I acknowledge that I was brought to God by agony of soul. I have often 
said from this pulpit that no man ever steers his barque towards the port 
of peace till he is driven there by stress of weather. We never come 
to Christ till-we feel we cannot do without him. We must feel our 
poverty before we shall ever come and beg at the door of his mercy for 
help. The shades are the same, for the same imminence of danger which 
Elihu spoke of comes upon every sinner’s consciousness, more or less 





Pe ee a eS 





: _ AN OLD-FASHIONED CONVERSION... 155 
before he resorts to Jesus for refuge. The same bitter sense of sin comes 
over men still, and the same wonder at their own folly in having 
centinued in it. The same darkness still covers the sinner’s pathway,’ 
and the same inability to procure the light for himself; the same need 
of light from above, the same need of help from him who is mighty to: 
save. Ifany of you are passing just now through great darkness of soul; 

because you have not yet come to the light, but God is revealing your~: 
selves to yourselves, be comforted, for the same dark road has: been’ 

traversed by many of the saints before you, and it is a safe pathway,) 
leading to comfort in Jesus Christ. , Te oath 

VI. But now, sixthly and very briefly, again, THE LIGHTS ARE THE: 
SAME, eyen as the shades were the same. You will note in Elihu’s 
description, that the great source of all the light was this. :—“ Deliver’ 
him from going down to the pit, for I have found a ransom.” There. 
is not a glean of light in the case till you come to that divine word,—? 
and is it not sonow? Did you ever get any comfort for your troubled» 
souls till you were led to see the ransom found by God in Jesus Christ ?:. 
Did you ever know the value of the ransom for yourselves till God. 
spoke it home to you—“ Deliver ham from going down to the pit, for 7 
have found a ransom!” This is the central point of the sinner’s. 
hope—a, bleeding Saviour paying our ransom price in drops of 
blood, the dying Son of God achieving our redemption by his own 
death. Oh, dear souls, who are in the dark, if you want light, there 
is light nowhere but at the cross. Do not look within for light ; the 
only benefit of looking within is to be more and more convinced that all 
isdark asmidnight apart from Jesus. Look within if you want to despair, 
but if you wish for hope, look yonder to Calvary’s mountain, where the 
Son of God lays down his life that sinners may not die. _ Hear you from 
heaven the voice which saith, “I have found a ransom: That is the 
only reason why God delivers you, not because he has,seen any good 
thing in you, but because he has found a ransom’for you. Look 
where God looks, and your comfort will begin. 

Then this precious gospel being announced to the sinner, the comfors 
of it enters his soul in the exercise of prayer :—‘ He shall pray unto 
God, and he will be favourable unto him.” O, you can pray when 
you get to the cross; our prayers, before we see Christ, are poor poor 
things, but when we get to Calvary, and see the utmost ransom paid, 
and the full atonement made, then prayer becomes the utterance of a 
child to a father, and we feel quite sure it will speed. 

Next, it appears, that. the soul obtains comfort because God gave it 
his. righteousness—“ for he will render unto man his righteousness.” 
That righteousness which God expected God bestows ; that righteous- 
ness which man ought to have wrought out but could not, Christ 
‘works out; and God treats the believing man as if he were righteous, 
making him righteous in the righteousness of Christ. Here is another 
source of joy.. 

And then the man being led to a full confession of his sin in the 
twenty-seventh verse, the last cloud»upon his spirit is blown away 
and he is at perfect peace. God was gracious to the man described 
by Elihu. God himself became his light and his salvation, and he 
came forth into joy and liberty. There is nothing more full, of 













“really. think when God Sitendeec me that I 
traordinary instance: of his Sovereign love that ever ,» an : 
should | be bound even in heaven itself to tell to others how God : 
infinite. mercy had pardoned. in my case the biggest sinner that ever 
was forgiven, Now, every saved soul is led to feel just that, and to. 
~ exult and rejoice, and magnify the Lord with extreme surprise, because ea 
of his goodness. It seems it was so in Job’s day, and it issonow; the = 
- old conversions are the conversions of the period: the shades are the 
- game and the lights are the same. Be. 
VII. And last of all, which is the seventh point, THE RESULTS ARE _ 
THE SAME, for I think 1 hardly know a better description of the result 
fms d regeheration than that which is given: in the twenty-fifth verse: “His = 
25 Mesh: “shall be fresher than a child’s ; he shall return to the days ofhis 
youth.” He who was an old gidicied man in sin, and looked yet 
older through his sorrow, becomes born again, starts upon a new career » 
_ with a new life within him ; the health which had departed from his _ we 
soul comes back, the spring of spiritual juvenility wells up in him, 
- because God has ‘begotten him afresh and made him a new creature: 
“Old things have passed away, behold all things are become new!” 
“And with this change comes back joy. See the twenty-sixth verse : 
ee chill “aie, Bis: tae! srith fom for he will render unto man his ; 
righteousness ;”’ and the thirtieth verse: “'Lo bring back his soul 
from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living.” So that Lee 
_ the new spirit finds itself in a new world, in which it goeth forth with ~~ 
joy and is led forth with peace; the mountains and the hills break’ : 
forth before it into singing, and all the trees of the wood do clap 
their hands. It was so then; it is just the same now. O that the 
same blessed thing may happen to many here present at this time ! 
[have endeavoured to give a description of conversion, that you may 
see what it is to be renewed in heart, but I shall have failed of my in- 
tention unless many a knee shall be bent to God with this prayer, 
“© Spirit of God, renew my nature, change my heart : make my~ flesh — 
to be fresher than a child’s, make me a new creature in Christ Jesus.” 
Time is passing : we are getting now almost one-fourth through another 
year, and the year itself will soon fly away. I would speak to careless 
and thoughtless ones again, and ask them will it never be time tothink 
upon these things ? W ill it never be time to consider your ways ? Will 
it never be time to seek unto the Lord? Ye know not how near ye are 
to the grave’s brink. Do consider, I beseech you, and remember that 
the Lord waiteth to be gracious, that he delighteth in mercy, and if © 
you.seek him he will be found of you ; and this great conversion and 
regeneration, of which we have spoken at such length, shall be yours, 
and you shall see the face of God with joy even as they did of old. 
The Lord grant it to you for the Redeemer’s sake. Amen, 










































PORTIONS OF SCRIPTURE READ BEFORE SERMON—Psalm Biba A 
Job xxxiii. 14—30. 











Fy face ; 
a 1h aay 


Sermoy 
DELIVERED on Lorp’s-Day Monnine, Maron 57TH, 1876, BY : : fe 
C. H. SPURGEON, 


_ AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON, . 






yi 





Sonat 3 
Bee hae 






eee ad 


eee 





“And the hand of the Lord was with them; and a great number believed, and <! 
turned unto the Lord.”—Acts xi. 21. Se heey Sean 










_ Lux brethren who had dwelt together in church fellowship at Jerusa- _ 
_ lem were scattered abroad by persecution which arose about Stephen. — 
_- Their Master had told them that when they were persecuted in one — 
_ city they were to flee to another. They obeyed his command, and in 

the course of escape from persecution they took very long journeys— 
very long journeys: indeed for ‘that age of the world, when locomotion’ — 
was exceedingly difficult: but wherever they found themselves they _ 
began at once to preach Jesus Christ, so that the scattering of the — 
; disciples was also a scattering of good seed in broader’ fields: The — 
| malice of Satan was made the instrument of the mercy of God. Learn | 
_ from this, dear brethren, every:one of you, that wherever you are 
called to go you«should persevere in making known the name and 
: zospel of Jesus. Look upon this as your calling and occupation. You 
will not be scattered now by persecution, but should the demands of 
__ business carry you into different climes, employ your distant travel for 
_ ' qnissionary purposes. Providence every now and then bids you remove 
_ your tent, take care that wherever it 1s pitched you carry with you a - 
_ testimony for Jesus. At times the necessities of health require relaxa- 

-. tion and change of air, and this may take you to different places of 
f public resort: seize the opportunity to encourage the churches in such 
localities by your presence and countenance, and also endeavour to 
spread the knowledge of Jesus among those to whom you may be 
directed. The position which you occupy in society is not an accidental 

one ; it has not been decreed to you by a blind, purposeless fate ; there 

is predestination in it, but that predestination is wise, and looks — 
sowards a merciful end: you are placed where you are that you may be 

a preserving salt to those around, a sweet savour of Christ to all who 
know you. The methods of divine grace have ordained a happy con- 
rhe NO. 1,282, i 









- 





134 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


nection between you and the people with whom you associate; you are 
a messenger of mercy to them, a herald of good tidings, an epistle of 
Christ. The surrounding darkness needs you, and therefore it is 
written, “ Among whom ye shine as lights in the world.” You are 
intended. to warn and rebuke some, to entreat and encourage others. 
To you the mourner looks for comfort and‘ the ignorant for instruction ; 
let them never look in vain. Be the true friend of men, observe their 
condition before God. and endeavour to reclaim them from their 
wanderings. If Joceph was sent to Egypt that he might save his 
father’s house alive, you also are sent where you are for the sake of 
some hidden ones of the Lord’s chosen family. If Esther was placed 
in the court of a heathen king for the deliverance of her nation, so are 
you, my sister, called to occupy your present position for the good of 
the church of Christ. Look ye to it, brethren, lest ye miss your life’s 
object, and live in vain. It would be a sad thing indeed if you who 
profess to belong to Christ should be “ creation’s blot, creatien’s blank,” 
by having failed to work while it is called to-day. 

These good people of the early church, however, with all their zeal, 
were somewhat narrow-minded and hampered by their national preju- 
dices, for they preached at first to the Jews only, and it was very hard 
to make them see that the gospel was meant for the whole race of man, 
Gentiles as well as Jews. Their Master had said “Go ye into all the 
world, and preach the gospel to every creature,” and yet they began with 
preaching to the Jews only. Words could not have been plainer, and 
yet they missed their meaning. It is not to be wondered at that some 
in our day are still unable to preach .to men as men when we see how 
slow the early saints were to learn the lesson. Brethren, if there be 
any narrowness about our spirit, let us pray the Lord to take it away. 
We shall not, of course, be shackled as these Jews were by boasting 
Our nationality, but perhaps there may be classes of society of whom 
we despair, and therefore for whom we make no effort. We say, “It 
would be useless to attempt the conversion of such characters. I feel 
myself quite able to talk to other persons ; but although I am placed 
in the midst of these people I cannot bring my mind to speak with 
them about spiritual things, for I feel hopeless of success.” Beloved, 
may you be delivered from this snare, and learn to sow beside all 
waters. The Gentiles, though they were for awhile passed over by 
the brethren, turned out to be the most hopeful of all classes ; from 
the Gentile fields they reaped harvests such as were never gathered 
in Judea. Antioch with its Grecians became famous among Christian 
¢churches—there the church of Christ first took its name amid a 
revival of religion, when great multitudes believed and turned unto 
the Lord. God had from of old intended that the great majority 
of the election of grace should be gathered out of those very Gentiles 
whom even the apostles themselves scarcely ventured to address. 
Now then, my brother, in the light of this incident begin to work 
where as yet you have done nothing: begin to hope where hitherto you 
have despaired, throw out your best energies in that very direction in 
which you have felt most hampered, for there awaits you, to your own 

_ Intense surprise, a success which will amply reward you. You need 
not restrict yourselves to lands familiar with the plough, invade the 








“ CONVERSIONS DESIRED. © 185 


primeval forest, fell the ancient trees, and clear the broad acres: that 
“virgin soil will yield you harvests a hundredfold such.as you will never 
find in fields where others have laboured before you. If your spiritual 
mining is becoming a failure, open fresh lodes of the precious metal, 
for veins of treasure lie concealed in the unbroken ground. Launch 
out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught, and multitudes 
of fish shall crowd the net. It seems to me to be the obvious. teach- 
“ing of the text’ that wherever we are cast we should try to.do good, and — 
‘that we may hope for the largest success among the most neglected 
“portions of society. ; bet ke 
Coming closely to the text, I desire to press. upon you this morning, 
“with great earnestness, the need of the. conversion of men, and the 
desirableness that we should have many converted here, and I shall 
“want to suggest what we can do:to produce that result. In all these:I 
‘beg to be assisted by the’ Holy Spirit, without whose aid I-shal only 
exhibit my own weakness, and deaden those energies which I long to 
arouse. ‘These will be our heads: first, the end we aim.at, that.many 
‘may believe and turn unto the Lord; secondly, the power by which 
‘this can be attained, “The hand of the Lord was with. them”; thirdly, 
the deswrablencss of our olyect ; and, fourthly, how we may promote ats 
attainment. Liss (nig! Cuetnes ta a 
I, Let us speak upon THE END WHICH WE DESIRE. It may seem 
very commonplace, but it is in fact one of the grandest designs under 
heaven: hé who contemplates it has.a higher aim than philosopher, 
reformer, or patriot. He aims at that for which the Son of God both 
lived and died. We desire that men may believe, that is to say, first, that 
they may beheve the testimony of Jesus Christ to be true, for there are some 
- who have not reached as far as:that': they reject altogether the inspired 
Word, and to them the incarnation, the redemption, the resurrection, 
‘the glory, the second advent, are so many old wives’ fables. You to 
whom these truths are the light of your lives can scarcely realise the 
“power of unbelief of this kind, and yet’ some men live and die in its 
-gloom. We pray that they may be taught better, and that the evidence 
of these great facts may be forced home upon them. Alas, there are 
- many who profess to believe these things, but their only reason for, so 
‘doing is that they have been taught so from their childhood, and it is 
the current religion of the nation. They regard the inspiration of 
“Scripture, and soon, as matters about. which itis not. expedient. to 
“trouble themselves,—they do not care.one way or the other, but find it 
the easier and more respectable plan to admit the truth of the gospel, 
-and think no more about it. Such a vain complimentary belief is 
rather an insult'to our holy faith than a thing to be rejoiced in, But, 
dear friends, we want more than this faith of indifference, which is 
‘ jittle more than dishonest unbelief; we want men to believe for them- 
' selves, because they are personally convinced and have felt in themselves 
the saving power of Christ Jesus. We pray that nominal believers 
may treat the doctrines of revelation, not as dogmas, but as facts ; not 
as opinions, but as verities ; as surely facts as the events of history, as 
much verities as the actual incidents of: every day life ; for, alas, the 
grand doctrines of eternal truth are frequently treated as venerable 
nonentities, and have no effect whatever upon the conduct of those, who 









fact, or see their solemn bearings. It is shocking | ‘to reflect. tha 
au change in the weather has more effect on some men’s lives thar 
er dread alternative of heaven or hell. A woman’s glance affects them. 
more than the eye of God. We, therefore, desire to see men really and 
truly believing the facts of the gospel, in an honest, practical manner. 


us may savingly believe by putting their trust in the Lord Jesus Christ. 


_ bringing men to this, that they may believe in Jesus Christ by resting _ 


saves him. He makes the Saviour trustee of his spiritual estates, and. 
_ leaves himself and all his eternal interests in those dear hands which 


“ Behold he prayeth ” is one of the indications of a true convert. ‘The 


toes to eueive “eWean: Meeelases ike do dotrealee them as 
















We cannot, however, be content with this; we labour that those around — ” 





This is the grand saving act : the man brings his soul and commits it 
to Christ for safe keeping, and that entrusting of the soul to Jesus 











once were nailed to the cross. Oh, how we long to see the Holy Spirit 
& 
in him and trusting upon him. For this we live, for this we would be _ q 








content to die, that many might believe. 


The end we aim at is that men may so believe in Jesus that they 4 
may be altogether changed in fheir relation towards God, for “many 
believed and turned unto the Lord.” What does that mean? It means — 


_ that these heathen gave up their idols and began to worship the only — 


4 
E 
Bi. 
living and true God. We desire, dear hearers, that faith in the Lord — 
Jesus may lead you to give up the objects of your idolatrous love, your- 
selves, your money, your pleasures, the world, the flesh, the devil’; for . 
there be some whose God is their belly, and who glory in their shame, So 
When a man believes in Jesus Christ he puts away his false gods, — a 
and worships the great Father of spirits; he makes no inferior object 
the aim of his being, but henceforth lives for the glor x of God. This — . 
isa glorious turning, a complete conversion of the man’s heart and soul, 

_ To turn to God means not merely to forsake the false god for the 
true, but to turn from the love of sin. Sin lies that way, but God’s — 
glory lies in the opposite quarter. He who looks sinward has his back 
to God—he who looks Godward has his back to sin. It is blessed 
conversion when men turn from the folly of sin to the glory of God. 
With weeping and supplication do men so turn, confessing their wrong- 
doing, lamenting their transgressions, abhorring their evil lustings, 
desiring pardon, and hoping for renewal of their nature. Precious in. 
the sight of the Lord are the tears of penitence and the sighs of contrite 
hearts. We can never be satisfied with the results of our ministry — 
unless faith leads man to hearty repentance towards God, an intense 
loathing of their sins, and an actual forsaking of them. bine, 

To turn to God means that henceforth God shall be sought in prayer. 


aS . 
Rte) Fe yee 


Ee ene 


man who lives without prayer lives without God, but the man who 
has turned to God is familiar with the mercy-seat. What a turning — 
it is when the eye is turned upward to seek the Lord with the solemn. 
glancing of the eye, when none but God is near. To turn to God 
means to yield yourself obediently to his sway, to be willing te do what 

he bids, to think what he teaches, and to be what he commands. Faith 

is nothing unless it brings with it a willing and obedient mind. Wilful ~ 
rebellion is the child of unbelief, sincere ‘obedience is the offspring of 
humble believing. “They believed, and turned unto the Lord.” We — 












erlasting life; but he that believeth not is condemned already, 
because he hath not believed.” You say, “ Why make all this stir 














you and I are sent for something more than this, our work goes deeper 
and is more difficult ; it is not ours to wash the blackamoor, but to 
_ seek to change his skin ; we do not so much pray that the lion’ may be 













: of the outward conduct merely, but of the heart ; and if we do not see 


vain, and spent our strength for naught and in vain. If there are no 
ea believings and turnings to the Lord, we may get usto our secret 


~ the object—aim at it, saying, “ This one thing I do.” Praying in the 
- Holy Ghost, and depending upon his power, push on with this one sole 
object. Drive at it, you teachers in the Sabbath-school ; do not be 
oe satisfied with instructing the children, labour to have them converted. 
_ Drive at it, you preachers ; do not believe that you have done your 
- work when you have taught the people, you must never rest, till they 
believe in Jesus Christ. Pursue this end in every sermon or Sabbath- 
school address; throw your whole soul into this one object. Yours 
- tmoust not be a cold inculcation of an external morality, but a warm 
enthusiasm for an inward regeneration. You are not to bring men to 
believe in themselves and so become self-made men, but to lead them 





our end and aim, are we all alive to it? 

II. Secondly, let us consider THE PowpR BY WHICH THIS CAN BE 
- arraineD,—“ The hand of the Lord was with them.” None ever 
e _ believe in Jesus except those in whom God’s arm has been revealed, 
for Jesns says, “No man can come to me except the Father which hath 
sent me draw him.” But, brethren, in answer to prayer that power 
has been revealed among his people, ‘and is with them still, His arm 
is not shortened that he cannot save, neither has he withdrawn it from 


Fash 





' ear friends, when I Ones thus of oleae and fnanihe hte :; 
5 gome will say, “ Well, but that must be a very easy matter, only t te 
believe and turn.” Yes, my brethren, it appears simple, but it is mone 
ess vitally essential. “He that believeth on the Lord Jesus hath ; 


chambers and bewail ourselves before God because none have believed 
_ our report, and the arm of the Lord has not been revealed. There is — 


to believe in Jesus, and to become new creatures in him. There is” 





about it?” Just because upon this apparently little matter depends 
; the ‘present and eternal condition of the sinner. To believe and to 
_ turn to God is to be delivered from the present dominion of sin, and 
from the future punishment of it: to be without faith and without God — 
is to be without joy here and without hope hereafter. Brothers and 
_ sisters in Christ, this is what you and I must aim at in all our attempts 
to influence our ‘fellow men. It may be useful to reform them, but it 
is far better that grave should regenerate them. God speed. every 
- effort to promote sobriety, chastity, thrift, honesty, and morality ; but. 


tamed as that he may be turned into a lamb. It may be well to lop the _ 
branches of the tree of sin, but our business is to lay the axe at the _ 
root of the trees by leading men to turn to God. This is a change, not _ 


this result, if men do not believe and turn to God, we have laboured in : 3 






















138 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT, 


his church. Be encouraged while I suggest to you a few thoughts. 
The hand of God is upon many of our friends before we speak to 
then. It is most pleasant to me when I am seeing inquirers, to 
observe how God makes ready the hearts of my hearers. I am studying 
a certain subject, and praying to God for a blessing on it, and upstairs 
‘in a chamber, which I have never seen, one of my hearers is being 
maile ready for my message; he is smitten with a sense of sin, or 
tronbled with uneasy thoughts, or rendered hopeful of better things, 
and thus he is being made ready to accept the Christ whom I shall 
preach to him; yes, and ready to accept that particular form of the 
gospel message which the Spirit of God gave me when I preached. 
There on a sick bed will lie a woman painfully exercised with the sad 
memory of her sinful life, in order that when she comes up to the 
house of God every word may have power over her. Sickness and pain, 
shaine and poverty, often produce a condition of mind most hopeful for 
the reception of the gospel. A man well to do in circumstances has 
been ruined in business, he despairs of happiness below, and therefore 
comes to hear the gospel, made willing to seek his happiness above. 
Another has lately felt failures of bodily strength, and so has been 
warned that life is frail, and thus he is prepared to listen to the 
admonitions which speak of eternity. Courage, minister of God: you 
are nothing, but the Almighty God is with you. When you lift your 
hand to build the house of the Lord, omnipotence works with you, and 
makes your labour a success. Every revolution of those awful wheels, 
so ponderous that even the prophet said, “O wheel!” is working to 
accomplish the object which is near your heart. The stars in their 
courses fight for you. The stones of the field are in league with yon. 
Kiernal wisdom plans for you, infinite power works with you, boundless 
patience perseveres with you, and almighty love will conquer by you. 
“The hand of the Lord was with them.’ What more do we want ? 
Sow, brother, for God has ploughed. Go up and build, for God has 
prepared the stones and made ready the foundation. 

Moreover, the hand of the Lord is with his people in helping the 
teachers and preachers themselves. There are strange impulses which 
come over us at times, which make us think and say what otherwise 
had never crossed our minds, and these work with power upon men’s 
minds. If you will live to win souls it shall be given you in the self- 
same hour what ye shall speak. You will often say to an inquirer what 
you would not have beforehand arranged to say, but God, who knows 
that inquirer’s heart better than you do, has prevented your saying what 
you would have liked to have said, and has led you to say what you 
afterwards judged to be a mistake. My experience teaches me that 
we are often wise in our ignorance, and as often foolish in our wisdom. 
We have frequently done best when we felt that we did but badly. If 
we will but trust God and be whole-hearted in the winning of souls we 
shall have a power assisting us in our speech of which the greatest 
orator in the world is not aware. Speak in the House of Commons for 
a party, and you will have to look within for aid, but speak in the house ~ 
of the Lord and you may look upward for spiritual aid. The poet invokes 
the fabled muses, but for you, O servant of the Lord, there is real help 
from a higher source. Think of this, ye workers, and be encouraged. 





CONVERSIONS DESIRED, 139 


Besides providence and the gracious help by which good men speak, 
there is a distinct work of the Spirit of God upon the hearts of men 
where the gospel is preached. Not only is the Spirit in the Word, but 
over and above that, in his own elect God worketh most effectually, so, 
the truth is rendered irresistible. Let us never forget where our great 
strength lieth, for in this matter we must rely alone upon the Spirit of 
God. How often has God wrought in the power of his grace by making 
men feel the majesty of the word. They come, perhaps, to hear the 
preacher out of the idlest curiosity, they look for something which 
shall amuse them; but the truth comes home to them and searches 
their heart. Simple as the language is, “as if an angel spake they 
hear the solemn sound”; it goes through them like a dart, and they 
cannot help feeling, “ Surely God was there, and he spoke with me.” 

The Spirit of God makes men recollect their sins : they try to forget 
them, but sometimes they cannot ; sad memories steal over them, and 
wholesome regrets thrill their very souls. Men who have been giddy 
and careless, and forgetful, have on a sudden found themselves turning 
over the pages of their old diaries, and with thoughtfulness reviewing 
the past: all this leads to repentance and faith, That same Spirit 
makes men see the beauty of holiness; they cannot help admiring it, 
though they are far from it. They are charmed with the loveliness of 
the character of Jesus, and begin to feel that there is something about 
it which they would wish to imitate. When the preacher proclaims 
the way of salvation the same Spirit leads men to admire it, and to say 
within themselves, ‘There is something here which human wisdom 
could never have devised,” and they begin to long for a share in it. A 
wish takes possession of their heart, as though some strange bird from 
an unknown land had flown into their souls, and had amazed them with 
anew song. They do not know where the desire came from, but they 
feel strangely bound to entertain the stranger. Sometimes also the 
Spirit blows like a hurricane through men’s hearts, and they have been 
borne along by its power without the will to resist. As when a tempest 
rushes across the sea, and drives the frail bark before it helplessly, so 
have I known the divine Spirit sweep away the peace and quiet of the 
soul’s self-righteousness, stir up the deeps of inward trouble, make the 
soul ree] to and fro and stagger like a drunken man, and impel the heart 
forward to the iron-bound coast of self-despair, where every false hope 
and vain-glorious trust has been wrecked for ever. Glory be to God 
when this is the case, for then the soul is driven to cling to Jesus. 

Yes, brethren, it is not the preacher, and it is not altogether 
what the preacher says, but there is a power abroad, as potent as 
that by which the worlds were made. Unbelievers sometimes ask, 
“Where, is your God?” O sirs, if you once felt the power of 
the great Spirit you would never ask that question. “Since the 
fathers fell asleep,” say they, “all things continue as they were;” 
but this they willingly are ignorant of, that new creations are 
being wrought every day, that there are men and women alive in 
this world who are neither liars nor enthusiasts, who can declare 
that upon their spirit the eternal power and Godhead has operated 
and changed them, conquering them, and holding them henceforth 
as willing captives to its supreme majesty. Yes, brethren, there 






-. Imight say Sabbath by Sabbath, souls have been saved, and the shurch — 

has grown exceedingly, and God has been glorified. What we have - 
enjoyed we desire to retain—yea, we would have more. The Lod ‘| 
gays to us what he said to the church at Philadelphia, “Hold fast — oi 





et ibs we live we shall see great numbers converted to God, and God: 
be glorified. 


Tt is no new thing to you and to me to see many believing and turning 
to God. These two-and-twenty years God’s hand has been stretched a 4 


crown of soul winning, which we must hold fast, for we cannot endure : wr 


We desire this because, first of all, we desire to see truth, godliness, 
other families should be well-ordered? Oh, then, if there. were no- 


nobler reason, you may desire that men may ‘be converted, since con- — “ns 


to God. The peace which you yourselves enjoy through pardoned — 


briars give place to myrtles and rose, and deserts shall be turned into 


Ge ahd Ht the AeA, asl tha Candied lie od ae his peopl 
still. If it be not, then we shall see no believing and no o 
- God; but since it is still at work among us, let us work on, for as ae y 











III. Let us now dwell upon * THE DESIRABLENESS OF CONVERSIONS. 








out still: we have had no spasm of revival, we have not alternated — 
between furious spurts and sudden lulls, but ‘month by month, I think © 












? 






what thou hast, that no man take thy crown,” and our crown is the 






to lose it. This must be our crown, that we have preached the gospel, | 
both minister and church members, and have been all of us soul-winners. 







virtue, and holiness extended. Who among you does not? Does not 
every good man wish others to be good, every honest man wish others 
to be honest? Does not every man who loves his family desire that 


4 
te 


version is the ‘root of everything that is pure, and lovely, and of good | is 


report. 
You desire, too, that your fellow-creatures should be happy, but 
there is no such happiness as that which springs out of reconciliation — 


sin must surely make you desire that others may possess the same. 
If religion be indeed a source of perennial joy to yourself, you are _— 
inhuman if you do not wish others to drink of it. Brother,as you 
would make eyes sparkle, as you would make countenances radiant 
with delight, as I know you would spread gladness on all sides, desire 
above all things that your children, your relations, your neighbours, 
your friends, should be converted to God. Thus shall thorns and 


% 

S be 
en: 
NS CTY» 


gardens of the Lord. 

You also desire conversion, I am sure, because you feel the dreadful — 
hazard of unconverted men. You have not yet subscribed to the modern 
doctrine that these men and women around you are only two-leggedcats ~ 
and dogs and horses, and will ultimately die out and cease tobe. You 
believe in the God-given immortality of human souls, a heritage from a 


‘ which no man can escape, the noblest of all man’s endowments ; ; In itself 


necessities. You would have scant motives for desiring men’s conversion — 


pk 
the highest of all boons, though sin may pervert it into the direst of all ae 
» 
if you did not believe that there is another and everlasting state ; but, e 


believing that men live hereafter, and exist fer ever, you must, I am ae 


sure, be eager that men may escape from the wrath to come. Knowing pe 
the terrors of the Lord, you would persuade men; judging that there R 
is one of two things for them all, either “ These shall go away into 









PTR AN Os te PM are Wie Ag NR A pel aA le dy 
e eer Er artsy gece vaneh Ree 2 

; or else, * The righteous into life eter 

es you feel convinced that those about you 


partakers of life eternal. Look at any unconverted person, and your 
should be aroused. If I saw tokens of fever, or marks of 
onsumption in the face of any one I loved, I should be struck with 
alarm ; what, then, must I feel when I see damnation—as I do see it— 
he face of every unbeliever ? How is it that we are not more — 
_ distressed than we are when men are perishing in their sins? Why, 
my brethren, are we not more intent upon the conversion of men? 
_ Let these questions humble us and cause great searchings of heart. It 






sympathies 













_ is a shame to us that we have so little of the mind of Christ, so little 
compassion for men’s souls. : 


‘ 












_ in the walls of our Zion? They are unquarried yet, and we must, by 


_ born unto God, and we must pray that this may be accomplished by 
our instrumentality. 


s _ Seek conversions for Christ’s sake. You know the agony and bloody 


of 
x 


sweat ; shall these be spent in vain? You know the nailing to the 


__ unrewarded? You have thought over and trusted in the bitter pangs 
of your Redeemer’s death ; shall he not see of the travail of his soul ? 
_ Shall he not be satisfied ? These lost sheep are his sheep, for whom 
_ he shed his precious blood; these lost pieces of money are is money, 
and they bear his image and superscription ; shall they not be found ? 






_ has brothers, children of iis Father; do you not desire for Jesus’ sake 
that they should be brought home ? oe 
ey Dear friends, what joy it will be to yourselves if men believe and 
_ turn to the Lord by your: means. I put that motive last, and hope it 
__will not be the strongest, but it may yet be one of the liveliest. What 
_ joy it will be to yourselves if you see many converted! Somebody has 
asked, “ Ifthe heathen are not evangelised, what will become of them ?” 
I will put another question of a far more practical character. If you 
do not try to evangelise the heathen, what will become of you? Do not 
so much inquire about ‘hei destiny as your own, if you have no care 


for their salvation. He who never seeks the conversion of another is — 


_ in imminent danger of being damned himself. I do not believe in any 
man’s salvation who is wrapped up in self, assuredly he is not saved 
from selfishness. I cannot believe in any man’s possessing the Spirit 
of God who is indifferent to the condition of others, for one of the first 
fruits of the Spirit is love. Even as flowers at their very first bloom- 
ing shed their perfume, so do the saved ones in their earliest days of 





Moreover, brethren, self-preservation is a law of nature, and the 
_ Church can never preserve herself except by increasing from the world — 
_ by conversion. Where are the preachers for the next generation ? 

_ To-day they are amongst the ungodly, and we must labour to bring — 
them to God. Where are the stones that are to make the next course — 


~ God’s grace, excavate them. We who now labour for the Lord will 

_ soon goour ways. Our thrones and crowns are waiting for us, and the __ 

angels are beckoning us away; who will fillour places? Who will bear © 

_ the banner? Who will blow the trumpet? Who will wield the sword? _ 
_ We must find new champions in the ranks of the foe; they must be 


- eross and the shriek of “ Why hast thou forsaken me?” shall these be | 


_ These lost sons, away there spending their living in riotousness, are 












ot Peay 
t 


142 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


grace desire the good of their fellows. I know that one of my earliest | 


impulses when I first looked'to Christ. and lost the burden of my sin 
was to tell everybody around me of the blessings I had received, for I 
longed to make others as happy as I was. I do fear me that you who 
never try to win souls lack an essential part of the Christian character. 
I leave the question with your own consciences. 

IV. Fourthly, let us enquire, WHAT WE CAN DO TO PROMOTE CON- 
VERSIONS. Conversion is God’s work: it cannot be wrought without 
his hand. Without him we can do nothing. Our hand is far too puny 
for such a work ; the power of the first disciples and our own lies in 
the fact mentioned in the text,—“ The hand of the Lord was with 
them.” Still, there are certain circumstances under which that 
hand will work, and there are hindrances which will restrain it. 
Let us think awhile. First, then, if sinners are to be converted 
we must distinctly aim at it. As a rule, a man does what he tries 
to do, and not that which is mere by-play. The conversion of sin- 
ners is not one of those things which a man is likely to accomplish 
without intending it. Sometimes in the sovereignty of God a preacher 
who does not aim at conversion may nevertheless be made useful, 
for God works as he wills; but largely, and as a rule men do 
not win souls if they do not eagerly desire to do so. Fishing for 
men cannot be carried out by throwing in the net anyhow, without 
caring whether fish be caught or no, Few traders become rich by 
accident, they generally have to plod and work hard for money: and to 
be rich in treasures of saved souls you must aim at it and labour for it. 
Tam struck with astonishment as I think how many sermons are preached, 
how many Sunday-school addresses are given, how many religious books 
are written of which you are quite sure that the intention was not 
immediate conversion. It is thought that in some unknown way 
these good things may accidentally contribute to men’s salvation, but 
they are not aimed at as their present object. Ah, brother, if you want 
men to come to Christ you must preach Christ to them with all your 
heart, with this design, that immediately they may close in with Christ, 
and at once give their hearts to Jesus. Yes, and you are to pray that 
they may do so through the present effort which you are making 
for their good. There is the target, and if you continue to shoot into 
the air long enough an arrow may perhaps strike it; but, man alive, if 
you want to win the prize of archery you had better fix your eye upon 
the white and take your aim distinctly and with skill. If an individual 
would win souls he must bend his whole soul to it and make it the 
object of his whole energy. 

Next to that we must take care if we would have souls won that we 
press upon them the truths which God usually blesses. Shall I read to 
you the verse before my text? Here it is: “They spake unto the 
Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus, and the hand of the Lord was with 
them.” Now, if we do not preach Jesus Christ we shall not see souls 
saved. There are certain forms of doctrines which condemn themselves 
by working out their own extinction. Did you ever hear of a minister 
whose preaching leaned towards Unitarianism but what the congre- 
gation sooner or later began to diminish? Though many such 
preachers have been men of great ability, they have not as a rule been 


ee ae 
pees 


hh ae 





Re wee 





CONVERSIONS DESIRED. 143. 


able to keep the dead thing on its feet. You shall go into our ‘small 
towns, and you may find an ancient chapel which was once an Inde- 
pendent, or a Presbyterian, or it may be a Baptist chapel ; but if you 
see over the door “ Unitarian,” you have, as a rule, seen all that there 
is. There is neither church nor congregation worthy of the name ; 
frequently the place is never opened at all, and the grass grows knee 
deep on the path to the door. Even when these little places are used, 
you will generally find that they contain half a dozen nobodies who 
think themselves everybody as to intellect and culture. It is a religion 
of the utmost value to spiders, for those insects are able to spin their 
webs in the meeting-houses without fear. Who ever heard, who ever 
will hear of a Unitarian Whitfield, or a Socinian Moody gathering 
twenty thousand people to listen to a Christless gospel? It is a 
phenomenon which never has been seen and never will be. Men’s 
instincts lead them to turn away from a creed which contains so little 
which can solace the troubled soul. 

If we want souls saved we must equally avoid the modern intellec- 
tual system’ in all its phases. “Oh,” cries somebody, “ you should 
hear the great Mr. Bombast. It is—Oh, I cannot tell you what it is, 
but something very wonderful; it is an intellectual treat.” Just so ; 
but how many conversions are wrought by this wonderful display of 
genius ? How many hearts are broken by fine rhetoric? How many 
broken hearts are healed by philosophy ? So far as I have observed, I 
find that God does not save souls by intellectual treats. 

Certain views as to man’s future are equally to be kept clear of, if you 
would be the means of conversion. Diminish your ideas of the wrath 
of God and the terrors of hell, and in that proportion you. will 
diminish the results of your work. I could not conceive a Bunyan or 
a Baxter, or any other great soul-winner, falling into these new 
notions, or if he did there would be an end to his success, Other 
crotchets and novelties of doctrine are also to be let alone, for they are 
not likely to promote your object, but will most probably divert 
men’s attention from the vital point. Dear brothers and sisters, 
if you want a harvest, look well to your seed. Time was when gardeners 
threw all the little potatoes on one side for seed, and then they had bad 
crops; but now I have seen them pick out the very best and put them 
by. ‘“ We must have good seed,” say they. IfI had to sow my fields 
with wheat I would not take the tailcorn. I should grudge no expense 
about seed, for it would be false economy to buy any but the very best. 
Go preach, teach, and instruct with the best doctrine, even that of God’s 
word ; for depend upon it though the result is not in your hands, yet it 
very much depends upon what you teach. O, eternal and ever blessed 
Spirit, guide thy servants into all truth! 

Next to this, if you want to win souls for Christ, feel a solemn alarm 
about them. You cannot make them feel if you do not feel yourself. 
Believe their danger, believe their helplessness, believe that only Christ 
can save them, and talk to them as if you meant it. The Holy Spirit 
will move them by first moving you. If you can rest without their 
being saved they will rest too; but if you are filled with an agony for 
them, if you cannot bear that they should be lost, you will soon find 
that they are uneasy too. I hope you will get into such a state that you 





by Nantes ie ait ny iN din Xf ARN Re east Si a ee mel (6 eh F 
will dream about your child, or about your hearer perishing fo: 





Na Te i « 7 rt vey 


Christ, and start up at once and begin to ery, “ O God, give me rt 


or I die.” Then you will have converts; there. is no fear about that 
God does not send travail pangs to his servants without causing them — 


to abound in spiritual children. There will be new births to God 


when you are agonising for them. ; ; 
But, let me add, there must be mucn prayer. 1 delignt to be at 
prayer-meetings where the brethren will not let the Lord go except he 
- bless them, when a brother prays, choking as he speaks, tears rolling | 
down his cheeks as he pleads with God to have mercy on the sons of — 
men. I am always certain that sinners are ordained to be blessed when 
I see saints thus. compelled to plead with God for them. In your ~ 


closets alone, at your family altars, and in your gatherings for prayer 
be importunate, and the hand of the Lord must and will be with you. 


_ Cry aloud and spare not, plead as for your lives, and bring forth your 


strong arguments, for only by prevailing with God will you be enabled 
to prevail with men. 
Then there must be added to prayer direct personal effort on the part 
jf all of you. Great numbers may be saved by my preaching if the 
oly Spirit blesses it, but I shall expect larger numbers if you all turn 


_ preachers, if every brother and sister here becomes a witness for Christ. 


Are you indolent ? Are any of you beginning to sleep ?\ I charge you, 


wake up. By the love you bear to Jesus, and by the love you bear to 
your fellow men, begin at once to seek the conversion of those who 


dwell around you. O my beloved, do not become lukewarm. My 
heart fails me at the very thought. If you are earnest, I live; if you 
grow slothful, my spirit dies within me. 


Last of all, if you want to see many converts, expect them. “ Accord-— 


ing to your faith so be it unto you.” Look out for them; believe that 


God will bless every sermon, and go a-hunting after the sermon to see ie 
where the converts are. As a company of sutlers and camp-followers — 


generally follow every army, and after a battle go up to strip the slain, 
so if you cannot preach I would have you follow after the warriors to 


gather in the spoil. Noone needed to urge the voracious spoilers to’ 


prowl over the field of Sedan or Gravelotte, but now it even seems 
needful to persuade you to collect a far nobler prey. Come ye up, 
come ye up, ye servants of the Lord, and divide the spoil with the 
strong. Christ has fought your battle, his arrows have been sharp in 
the hearts of the King’s enemies, the two-edged sword has smitten right 
and left; come ye up, ye sons of Jacob, to the prey, and gather in the 
converts as your spoil. Speak, with the young converts, cheer the 
broken hearts, comfort the seekers, and bring into his palace trophies 
for your Lord. Verily, I say unto you, if ye look not for conversions 
neither shall ye obtain them, but then blame not the Lord; ye are 
not straitened in him, but in your own bowels. God bless you, beloved, 
and may we have a larger increase to this church during the next month 
than we have had for years past, that our God may have greater praise. 


z e 
PORTION OF SCRIPTURE READ BEFORE SERMON—<Acts Xi. 





Hymns rrom “Our Own Hymn Book ”’—887, 450, 331. 














CONVERSIONS ENCOURAGED. 








Fe ] Fae Pia 


A Sermon a 


s ae i | 7] ck 
_ DELIVERED on Lorv’s-Day Mornine, Marcu 12TH, 1876, BY _ 
sb) A f \ 1 eS Rit 


ot Be SPURGEON, 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON. 











he “But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if chow. fi 
a k him with all thy heart and with all thy soul. When thou art in tribulation, 





_ and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turntothe 
Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice; (for the Lord thy God isa 
erciful God ;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant 

hy fathers which he sware unto them.’’—Deuteronomy iv. 29 ---31. sO 











Last Sabbath-day the title of my discourse was “ Conversions desired,” 
and my earnest prayer to God has been that the effect of tius morning’s 
‘sermon may be conversions accomplished. I cannot be happy unlessI 
indulge the hope that some will this morning turn unto God with full — 
purpose of heart, led to do so by the power of divine grace. For thisI 
sought the Lord, and at this I resolved to aim. I asked myself, — 
“What is the most likely subject in the hand of the Holy Spirit to lead 
en to the Lord? Shall I preach the terrors of the Lord, or shall 1 
proclaim the sweetness of divine mercy? ach of these has its propa = 
use, but which will be most likely to answer our design to-day?” I 
_ remembered the fable of the sun and the wind. These rival powers — 
competed as to which could compel the traveller to cast away his cloak. 
The wind blew boisterously, and tugged at the garment as if it would 
tear it from the traveller’s shoulders, but he buttoned it the closer about 
him, and held it firmly with his hand. The battle was not to the strong — 
_ and threatening. Then the sun burst forth from behind a cloud, when 
the wind had ceased its blustering, and smiled upon the traveller with - 
_ warmth of kindness until he loosened his cloak, and by-and-by was glad — 
_ to take it off altogether: the soft, sweet influence of the sun had van- 
_ quished where the storm had raged in vain. So I thought, perhaps if 
__ I preach the tender mercy of God, and his readiness to forgive, it may 
be to my hearers as the warm beams of the sun to the traveller, 
and they will cast away the garments of their sin and self-righteousness. 

I know that the arrows of love are keen, and wound many hearts which 
are invulnerable to the sword of wrath. O that these sacred darts may 
can No. 1,283. f hy 






























146” METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


win the victory this day! When ships at sea apprehend a storm they 
will gladly make for an open harbour, but if it be doubtful whether 
they can enter the port they will rather weather the tempest than run 
the risk of being unable to enter the harbour’s mouth. Some havens 
can only be entered when the tide happens to be at the flood, and there- 
fore the captain will not venture: but when the welcome signals are 
flying and it is clear that there is plenty of water, and that they may 
safely run behind the breakwater, they hesitate no longer, but make sail 
for the shelter. Let seeking souls know this day that the Lord’s har- 
bour of refuge is open, the port of free grace can be reached, that there 
is sea room for the hugest transgressor, and love enough to float the 
greatest sinner into port. Ho, weather-beaten vessels, ye may come and 
welcome! There is no need that even for a solitary hour ye should run 
the risk of the tempest of almighty wrath ; you are invited to find shelter 
and to enjoy it now. 

It is rather singular that having these ideas floating in my mind, and 
desiring to preach free grace and abounding mercy, I should have found 
my text in Deuteronomy. Why, that is a book of the law, and is plenti- 
fully besprinkled with terrible threatenings, and yet I find a gospel theme 
in it: yea, and one of the very richest! As I read it I admired it for its 
Connection as well as for its own fulness, it seems to me so pleasant to 
find this lily among thorns. As in the wintry months of the opening 
year one finds a crocus smiling up from the cold soil and in its golden 
cup offering a taste of the sunlight which summer will more fully 
bring, so amid the ungenial pages of the law I see this precious gospel 
declaration, which like the spring flower assures us that God’s love is 
yet alive, and will bring us happier times. My thoughts also likened 
this passage to the water which leaped from the smitten rock, for the 
law is like a rock, and the Pentateuch is hard and stern as granite ; 
but here in its very bowels we find a crystal spring of which the thirsty 
may drink. I likened the text also to the manna lying on the desert 
sand, the bread of heaven glittering like a shining pearl upon the barren 
soil of the wilderness. Here amid the fiery statutes of the law, and 
the terrible judgments threatened by the God of Sinai you see this 
manna of mercy dropped about your tents this morning, as fresh, I hope, 
to you as if but newly fallen. May you eat of it and live for ever. 

Let us come to our text at once. The Lord here encourages sinners to 
turn to himself, and find abundant grace. He encourages sinners who 
had violated his plainest commandments, who had made idols, and so 
had corrupted themselves, and had consequently been visited with cap- 
tivity, and other chastisements—he invites them to turn from their evil 
ways and seek his face. I feel moved to say at the commencement of 
this discourse that if the text has any limited aspect, if it is to be 
vegarded as uttered to any special character among transgressors, it pecu- 
larly belongs to backsliders; for the people to whom it was first addressed 
were the people of God, but they had set up idols, and so had wandered ; 
and it is to them chiefly, though not to them exclusively, that these 
encouragements to repentance are presented. As probably there are 
some backsliders here who once stood in the church of God, but have 
been cut off therefrom, who once were very zealous and earnest in the 
cause of God, but have now become utterly indifferent to all religion. 





CONVERSIONS ENCOURAGH)). 147 


I charge such to take this text home to themselves. Take every syl- 
lable of it into your own heart, backslider. Read, mark, learn, and 
inwardly digest the same, and may the text bring you to your knees and 
to your God. It gives you a pointed invitation to return from your 
wanderings and end your weary backslidings by coming once more to 
your Father’s house, for he will not forsake you, nor destroy you, nor forget 
the covenant of mercy which he has made on your behalf. Happy are 
you that you may return; happy shall I be if you do return. I thought 
I would lay special stress upon this, because the Lord himself, and his 
ministers with him, rejoice more over one lost sheep that returns: to the 
Shepherd of souls than over ninety and nine that went not astray. There 
is rejoicing when a man finds a treasure which he never had before, but it 
is scarcely equal to the joy of the woman who found the piece of money 
which was hers already, but which she had lost. Glad is the house when 
the babe is born, but deeper is the joy when the lost son is found. My 
soul longs to see the Lord bring home his banished ones, and to be 
the means of gathering his scattered ones. 

Still, the text is fully applicable to all sinners—to all who have cor- 
rupted themselves and done evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke him 
to anger. The Ever-merciful encourages them to turn to him with full 
purpose of heart, by assuring them that he will not forsake them, There 
seems to me to be in the text three points which should induce an 
earnest seeking of his face at once, for here is, first, a téme mentioned ; 
secondly, a way appointed ; and thirdly, encowragement given. 

J. Kirst, then, in the text there is A TIME MENTIONED. Look at it. 
“Tf from thence thou shalt seek the Lord. ... When thouart in tribula- 
tion, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days.” 

The time in which the Lord bids you seek him, O you unforgiven 
ones, is first of all, “ from thence,” that is, from the condition into which 
you have fallen, or the position which you now occupy. According to 
the connection of the text, the offending Israelites were supposed to be 
in captivity, scattered among various nations, dwelling where they were 
compelled to worship gods of wood and stone, which could not see, nor 
hear, nor feel, nor eat, nor smell ; yet “from thence’”—from the unhallowed 
heathen villages, from their lone sorrows by the waters of Babylon, 
from their captivity in far-off Chaldea, they were bidden to turn unto 
the Lord and obey his voice. Their surroundings were not to be allowed 
to hinder their prayers. Perhaps, dear friend, at this time you are 
dwelling amongst ungodly relations; if you begin to speak about 
religion you are put down at once, you hear nothing that can help you 
in the way to better things, but very much that would hinder you ; 
nevertheless, do not delay, but “from thence,” even from thence seek you 
the Lord, for it is written: “If thou seek him he will be found of 
thee.” It may be you are living in a neighbourhood where every- 
thing is hostile to the gospel of Jesus Christ, and injurious even to 
your morals. Time was, and you may remember it with regret, when 
you were a child upon the knee of a pious mother, when you spent 
your Sabbaths in the Sunday-school, when the Bible was read in 
your house every day: but now all these helps are taken from you, 
and everything around is dragging you down to greater and yet greater 
sin. Do not, however, make this a reason for delay; as well might a 












¢ 


man refuse to go to aphysician because he lives in an unhealthy 
or a drowning man refuse the life-boat because a raging sea | ae 
- him. Hasten rather than slacken your speed. Do not tarry till your 
position improve ; do not wait till you move into a godly family, or live 
- Nearer to the means of grace, for if thou seek him “from thence” he __ 
will be found of thee. > | . sas ea 
But you will tell me that it is not so much your regret that others are _ 
ungodly among whom you dwell, but that you yourself are in a wretched 
- gondition of heart, for you have followed after one sin and another until 
evil has become a habit with you, and you cannot shake it off. Like 
a rolling thing before the whirlwind you are driven on; an awful force 
impels you from bad to worse. Arouse yourself, O man, for immediate _ 
action, for if you wait till you have conquered this evil force by your — 
own strength, if you delay to turn unto God until you are free from the 
dominion of sin, then assuredly you will wait for ever, and perish in ~ 



















i ft your folly. If you could vanquish evil by your own power you would _ om 
not need to seek the Lord, for you would have found salvation in your- 
ee. self; but be not so infatuated as to dream of such a thing. To-day, 


“from thence,” from the place where you now are, turn your face to 

our Father who is in heaven, and seek him through Jesus Christ. 
Recollect that hymn which ought to be sung every Sabbath-day in our 
 awwemblies— 

; “ Just as I am—and waiting not 
To rid my soul of one dark blot, 
To thee, whose blood can cleanse each spot, 
O Lamb of God, I come.” 


Every verse begins with “Just as I am,” and so must your prayer, 
your faith, your hope begin. The whole hymn commences “ Just as 
am,’ and so must your Christian life be started. es 
_ The Lord invites you as you are and where you are. Are you one of A: 
a godless family, the only one in the house who has felt any serious thought a 
at all? Come, then, and tarry not, for the Lord invites you. Are you the 
one man in a large workshop, where all the rest are irreligious ? Admire 
his sovereign grace, accept the call, and henceforth be the Lord’s, The 
Lord invites those of you who have gone to the ends of the earthinsin, and 
brought yourselves into captivity by your rebellion. To-day, even to- 
: day, he bids you seek him “with all your heart and with all your soul.” 
ch _ With regard to the time of turning, it is well worthy of our notice 
that we are specially encouraged to turn unto the Lord if we are in a 
painful plight. Our text says, “When thow art in tribulation.” Are 
you sick? Have you felt ill for some time? Does your weakness in- 
crease upon you? Are you apprehensive that this sickness may even “ 
| be unto death? When thou art in such tribulation then thou mayest aK 
af return to him. A sick body should lead us the more earnestly toseek = 
healing for our sick soul. Are you poor, have you come down from a oR 
comfortable position to one of hard labour and of scant provision? = 
When thou art in this tribulation then turn to the Lord, for he has sent 
thee this need to make thee see thy yet greater necessity, even thy need of = 
himself. The empty purse should make thee remember thy soul poverty, = 
the bare cupboard should lead thee to see the emptiness of all thy carnal = 
confidences, and accumulating debts should compel thee to calculate 


f 
a Aes 


) 
# 
ohne Es 

























he just verdict of society because you are vicious, dishonest, and dis- 


is shut, when all hands are held up against you, even then seek the 








and have brought your mother’s grey hairs with sorrow to the grave, 


__ to the Lord thy God. . 


Doubtless there are some people who will never be saved except they 
come into tribulation. Their substance must all be spent, and a mighty _ 


Ne famine must come upon them, the citizens of the far country must 


refuse them aid, and with hungry bellies they must stand at the trough ¥ 
and be willing to feed with the swine, or else it will never occur to them ae 


_ to say, “I will arise and go to my father.” No matter how deep your 
_ trouble, your safest and wisest course is to flee to God in Christ Ji esus, 
-and put your trust in him. 


to overtake you, then you may come to him: “ When thou art in 


last found them out, and had commenced to be a hell to them. The 
 manslayer has overtaken them, and is striking at them with terrible 
blows. “ Ah,” says one, “my great sins have provoked at last God, and 
all men may see what he has done unto me, for he has removed my 
choicest mercies from me. I despised a father’s instruction—that father 
is dead ; I did not value my mother’s tears--my mother sleeps under the 
‘sod. The dear wife who used to beg me to walk to the house of God 
_ with her; I slighted and treated her with unkindness, and death has 
removed her from my bosom. The little child that used to climb my 
_ knee and sing its little hymns, and persuade me to pray, has gone too! 
God has found me out at last, and begun to strip me. These are only 
the first drops of an awful shower of wrath from which I cannot 
escape. Alas, while one mercy after another is removed, my former 
_ joys have been embittered, and are joys no more. I go to the 
_ theatre as I used to do, but I do not enjoy it. I see beneath the paint 
and the gilt, and it seems a mockery of my woe. My old companions 
come to see me, and they would sing me the old songs, but I cannot bear 


ther ; their mirth grates on my ear—at times it seems to be mere 








; t is possible that your fais are” 
ment, Vente you are expecting to lose some whom « 
and this is like rending half yourself away. Onedear 

y cold in the tomb, and your heart is bleeding when you ) 
f this loss—and now another is sickening and will follow the first. 
n thou art in this tribulation, then be sure to seek the Lord, for 
pitying heart is open to thee, and he will sanctify this rief LOE uae 
oblest purposes. Is it possible that I speak to one whose sins have 

ecome so open as to have been punished by the lawof the land? Have _ 
‘ou lost your character? Will none employ you any longer? When 
_ thou art in this tribulation then turn to thy Lord, for he will receive a 
arth’s castaways, and make criminals his sons. Have you suffered from 


reputable? Are you at this time despised and looked down upon? Yet — 
-eyen to you would I say, when thou art in tribulation, when every door 


“Lord, and he will be found of you. If your father scarcely dares to _ 2 
think upon your name, if you have been a grief to your sister’s heart, — 


_ yet now, even in this shameful estate, when thou art in tribulation turn 


Notice further, when you feel that the judgments of God have begun ; oa 


tribulation and all these things—these threatened things—are come upon 
thee.” There are many in this world who feel as if their sin hadiat 


















ae one 
ee So 


a 
oe 
ee 


4 eS 


ao ae 


150 “METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 





idiotic yelling. I used to get alone and philosophise and. dote 
upon many things which afforded me comfort, but now I find no con- 
solation in them—I have no joy of my thoughts now. The world is 
dreary, and my soul is weary. I am in the sere and yellow leaf, and all 
the world is fading with me. What little joy I had before has utterly 
departed, and no new joy comes. I am neither fit for God nor fit for 
the devil. I can find no peace in'sin, and no rest in religion. Into the 
narrow way I fear I cannot enter, and in the broad way I am so jostled 
that I do not know how to pursue my course. Worst of all there is 
before me a dreadful outlook; I am filled with horrible apprehensions 
of the dread hereafter. I am afraid of the harvest which must follow the 
sad ‘seed sowing of my misspent life. I have a dread of death upon me; 
I know not: how near it may be, but it is too near, I know, and I am 
not prepared for it. I am overwhelmed with thoughts of the judgment 
to come. I hear the trump ringing in my ears when I am at my work. 
I hear the messengers of God’s justice summoning me and saying, 
‘Come to judgment, come to judgment, come away.’ A fearful sound 
is in mine ears, and I, whither shall I go?” Hear, O man, and be com- 
forted, for now is the appointed time for thee to seek'the Lord, for our 
text says, ‘‘ When all these things are come upon thee, if thou turn unto 
the Lord thy God, he will not forsake thee neither destroy thee.” 

There is yet one more word which appears to me to contain great 
comfort in it, and it is this, “even in the latter days.” This expression 
may refer to the latter days of Jewish history, though I can scarcely 
think it does, because the Jews are not now guilty of idolatry. I rather 
think it must refer to the latter days of any one of their captivities and 
in our case to the latter days of life. Looking around me I see that 
many of you are advanced in years, and if you are unconverted I thank 
God I am as free to preach Christ to you as if you had been children or 
young men. If you have spent sixty or seventy years in rebellion against 
your God, you may return “even in the latter days.” If your day is 
almost over, and you have arrived at the eleventh hour, when the sun 
touches the horizon, and evening s!alows thicken, still he may call 
you into his vineyard and at the close of the day give you your penny. 
He is longsuffermg and full of mercy, not willing that any should 
perish, and therefore he sends me out as his messenger to assure you that 
if you seek him he will be found of you, “even in the latter days.”  Itis 
a beautiful sight, though it is mingled with much sadness, to see a very 
old man become a babe in Christ. It is sweet to see him, after he has 
been so many years the proud, wayward, self-confident master of himself, 
at last learning wisdom, and sitting at Jesus’ feet. ‘They hang up in the 
cathedrals and public halls old banners which have long been carried by 
the enemy into the thick of the fight. If they have been torn by shot 
and shell, so much the more do the captors value them: the older the 
standard the more honour is it, it seems, to seize it as a trophy. Men 
boast when they have carried off— 


“The flag that braved a thousand years 
The battle and the breeze.” 


Oh, how I wish that my Lord and Master would lay hold on some of 
you worn-out sinners, you who have been set up by the devilas standards 





CONVERSIONS ENCOURAGED, 151 


of sin. © that the Prince of the kings of the earth would compel you te 
say, “ Love conquers even me.” ; 

I will not leave this head till I have said that it gives me great joy to 
be allowed to preach an immediate gospel to you—a gospel which bids. 
you turn unto God and find present salvation. Suppose for a moment 
that the gospel ran thus,—“ You, sinner, shall be saved in twelve months 
time if you turn to God.” Oh, sirs, I should count the days for you till 
the twelve months were gone. if it were written, “I will be found of 
you in March, 1877,” I should weary over you till the auspicious season 
arrived, and say, ‘“ Mayhap they will die before mercy’s hour has struck ; 
spare them, good Lord.” Yes, and if it were true that God would not 
hear you until next Sabbath-day I should like to lock you up and keep 
you out of harm’s way, if I could, till that time arrived, lest you should 
die before the promised hour. If there were any way of insuring your 
lives, though you had to give all that you have for your soul, you might be 
glad to insure your life till next Lord’s-day. But, blessed be God, the 
promise does not tarry; it is Now! “To-day if ye will hear his voice.” 
The gospel does not even bid you wait till you reach your home, or get 
to your bedside, but here and now, in that pew and at this moment, if 
you seek him with all your heart, and with all your soul, the Lord Jesus 
will be found of you, and present salvation shall be immediately enjoyed. 
Is it not encouraging to think that just now the Lord is waiting to be 
gracious. 

II.. But now, secondly, let us look at THE WAY APPOINTED. To find 
mercy, what are we bidden todo? “If from thence thou shalt seek the 
Lord thy God.” We have not, then, to bring anything to God, but to 
seek him. We have not to seek a righteousness to bring to him, nor 
seek a state of heart which will fit us for him, but to seek Aim at once. 
Sinner, you have offended God, none but God can forgive you, for the 
offences are against himself. Seek him, then, that he may forgive you. 
It is essential that you seek him as a real existence, and a true person, 
believing that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently 
seek him. It is all in vain to seek sacraments, you must seek him: it is 
idle to go through forms of prayer, or to utter customary phrases of 
devotion, you must seek fim. Your salvation lies in God, sinner, and 
your seeking must be after God. Do you understand this? It is not going 
to your priest or to your clergyman, or to your Bible or to your Prayer- 
book, or even to your knees in formal prayer ; but you must draw near 
to God in Christ Jesus, and he must be found of you as a man finds a 
treasure and takes it to be his own. ‘But where shall I find him ?” 
saith one. When they sought God of old they went to the mercy-seat, 
for there the Lord had promised to speak with them. Now, the Lord 
Jesus Christ is that mercy-seat, sprinkled with precious blood, and if you 
want to find God, you must seek him in the person of Jesus Christ. Is 
it not written : “ No man cometh unto the Father but by me!” Jesus 
is the one Mediator between God and man, and if you would find God, 
you must find him in the person of Jesus the Nazarene, who is also the 
Son of the Highest. You will find Jesus by believing him, trusting 
him, resting upon him. When you have trusted Jesus, you have found 
God in Jesus, for he hath said, “ He that hath seen me, hath seen the 
Father.’’ Then have you come to God when you have believed in Jesus 





~~ Christ, ; 
eS difficulties ! When God gives grace, how easy and how plain is 
believing. Salvation is not by doing, nor by being, nor by feeling, but — 





How see Nisa with ‘subbletion’ and 





re aa fie is ! ! 


simply by believing. Weare not to be content with self, but to seek the 
Lord. Being nothing in ourselves, we are to go out of ourselves to him. 
Being ourselves unworthy, we are to find worthiness in Jesus. 


. We are also to grasp the Lord as ours, for the text says, “Thou shalt 


seek the Lord thy God.” Sinners, that is a part of saving faith, to take 
God to be your-God ; if he is only another man’s God, he cannot save 
you; he must be yours, yours, assuredly yours, youre to trust and love” 


and serve all your days, or you will be lost. 


_ Now, mark God’s directions: “If thou seek ee with all thy heart 


and with all thy soul.” There must be no pretence about this seeking. 


If you desire to be saved, there must be no playing and toying, trifling 
and feigning. The search must be real, sincere, and earnest, fervent, 
intense, thorough-going, or it will be a ‘failure. Is this too much to 
ask? Surely if anything in the world deserves earnestness it is this. If — 


anything ought to arouse all a man’s powers to energy, it is the salvation a 


of his soul. "You cannot win gold and attain riches without being in > 


earnest in the pursuit : but what earnestness does this deserve? This 


obtaining eternal life, deliverance from eternal death, acceptance in the 
beloved, endless bliss ! ? Oh, men, if you sleep over anything, at any rate 
be awake here! If you trifle upon any matters of importance, yet here 
at any rate be serious, solemn, and earnest. Here there must be no 


idling and no delay. Note that there is a repetition in the text. “If 


thou seek him with ail thy heart and with all thy soul,’ we must be 


doubly in earnest, heart and soul must be in the pursuit. Half-hearted . 


seeking is no seeking at all. To ask for mercy from God and at the 
same time to be willing to be without it is a mere pretence of asking. 
If you are content to be put off with an inferior blessing, youare not seeking 
the Lord at all. I remember one who is now a member of this church 
who in a desperate fit of soul anxiety said solemnly to one of us, “I will 
never go to work again, I will neither eat nor drink till I have found 
the Saviour,’ and with that solemn resolve it was not long before he had 
found him. Oh, sirs, suppose you should be lost. Suppose you should 
perish while I am speaking! 1 know of no reason why your pulse should 
continue to beat, er your breath should remain in your nostrils, and if at 


this moment you were to die, at that selfsame instant you would plunge u 


amidst the flames of hell. Escape then at once. Even now make 
soul matters your sole concern. Whatever else you have to attend to, 
leave it alone, and attend first to this chief thing, the salvation of your 
soul. If a man were in a sinking vessel, he may have been a student 
of the classics, but he will not think of his stopping to translate an ode 
of Horace: he may have been a mathematician, but he will not sit down 
to work out an equation ; he will leap at once from the sinking vessel into 
the boat, for his object will be to save his life. And should. it not be so 
as to our eternal life? My soul, my soul, this must be saved, and with 
all my heart will I seek to God in Jesus Christ that I may find — 
salvation. 


a 











a : 


er. 
“ta 


The text further adds that we are to turn to him. Did you notice ne 


the thirtieth verse—* Jf thou turn to the Lord thy God.” It must be a 


e 






















turn. You are looking now towards the world—you must 
un opposite direction, and look Godward. It must not be an 
apparent turn, but a real change of the nature, a turning of the entire 
5 a turning with repentance for the past, with confidence in Christ 

_ for the present, and with holy desires for the future. Heart, soul, life, 
Speech, action, all must be changed. Except ye be converted ye cannot 
enter the kingdom of heaven. May God grant you such a turn as this, _ 
and to this end do you pray, “Turn me, and I shall beturned.” 
_ Then it is added, “and be obedient to his voice,” for we cannot be 
saved in disobedience: Christ is not come to save his people in their > 
sins, but from their sins. “If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat 
the good of the land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured si 
with the sword.” Do you see, my dear unconverted hearers, what God’s 
advice is to you? It is that now you obey his gospel, and bow before 
_ the sceptre of his Son Jesus. He would have you own that you have _ 
erred, and entreat to be kept from erring again. Your proud self-will 
must yield, and your self-confidence must be renounced, and you must — 
_ incline your ear and come unto him, “ Hear and your soul shall live.” 

_ This his Holy Spirit will grant you grace to do. This is the least that 
could be asked of you; you could not expect the great King to pardon 
rebels and allow them to continue in rebellion: he could not allow you 

to continue in sin and yet partake of his grace. You know that such 

a course would not be worthy of a holy God. . 
Do you feel inclined at this moment to turn to the Lord? Does 

_ * some gentle power, you have never felt before, draw you beyond your- 
self? Do you perceive that it would be well for you to be reconciled 
to your God and Father? Do you feel some kindlings of regret, 
some sparks of good desire? Then yield to the impulse: I trust it is 
the Holy Spirit within, working in you to will and todo of hisown — 
good pleasure. ‘Yield at once: completely yield, and he will lead you .- 
by a way you know not, and bring you to Jesus, and in him shall 

_ find peace and rest, holiness, happiness, and heaven. Let this be the 
happy day. Bend before the Spirit’s breath as the reed bows in the 








wind. Quench not the Spirit, grieve him no more— 





“ Lest slighted once the season fair “2 
Should ne’er return again.” 


_ Beware lest bleeding love should never woo again, lest pitying grace aM 
should never more entreat, and tender mercy should never more cast its . 


cords around you. The spouse said, “ Draw me, we will run after thee,” 

do you say the same. Behold, before you there is an open door, and 4 

within that door a waiting Saviour, will you perish on the threshold ? Oi 
III. Thirdly, the text contains VERY RICH ENCOURAGEMENTS. How af 


does it run? “For the Lord thy God is a merciful God; he will 
not forsake thee.’ Catch at that sinner, “He will not forsake thee.” If  / 

he were to say, “Let him alone, Ephraim is given unto idols,” it 

- would be all ever with you; but if you seek him he will not say, “ Let 

him alone,” nor take his Holy Spirit from you. You are not yet given 

‘up, I hope, or you would not have: been here this morning to hear this 
sermon, 

I thought when I woke this morning, and saw the snow and pitiless 


a 








154 ; METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE: PULPIT. 


sleet driven bya vehement wind, that it was a pity I had studied 
such a subject, for I would like to have the house crowded with sinners, 
and they are not so likely to come out in bad weather. Just then I. 
recollected that it was'upon just such a morning as this that I found the 
Saviour myself, and that thought gave me much courage in coming here. 
I thought the congregation cannot be smaller than that of which I made 
one on that happy day when I looked to Christ. I believe that many will. 
_ this morning be bought out and saved, for the Lord has not forsaken 
this congregation. I used to think he had given me up, and would not 
show me.mercy after so long seeking in vain ; but. he had not forsaken 
me, nor has he cast you off, O sinner! If you seek him with all your 
heart, you may rest assured he will not forsake you. 
»' And then it is added, “ Neither destroy thee.’ You have been afraid 
he would ; you have often thought the earth would open and swallow 
you; you have been afraid to fall asleep lest you should never wake 
again ; but the Lord will not destroy you ; nay rather he will reveal his 
saving power in you. 

There is a sweeter word still in the 29th verse: “ Thou shalt find him 
if thou seek him.” I wish I could sing, and could extemporize a bit of 
music, for then I would: stand here and sing those words : “Thou shalt 
find him if thou seek him.” At any rate, the words have sweet melody 
in them'to my ear and heart—“ ‘Thou shalt. find him if thou seek him.” 
I should like to whisper that sentence softly to the sick, and to shout it 
to the busy. It ought to linger long in your memories, and abide in 
your hearts—“ Thou shalt. find him if thou seek him.” What more, 
poor. sinner, what more dost thou want ? 

Then there are two reasons given: “ For the Lord thy God is a 
merciful God.” Oh, guilty soul, the Lord does not want to damn. 
you, he does not desire to destroy you.. Judgment is his strange work, 
Have you ever had. to’ chasten your child? ..When you have felt bound 
to punish severely by reason of a great fault, has it not been very hard 
work? You have said to yourself a hundred times over, “ What shall I 
do? ., What shall-I.do to escape from. the misery of causing pain to my 
dear child?” You.have been driven to chasten him,or you would not 
have done it. God never sends a sinner to hell till justice demands it. 
He finds no joy in ptinishing. He swears, “ As I live, saith the Lord, I 
have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth.” Look at the judge 
when he puts en’the black cap, does he.do so.with pleasure? Nay, some 
of our-judges speak with. choked utterance and with many tears when 
they say to the prisoner, “ You must: be taken to the pe from. whence 
you came, there to be hanged by the neck till you are dead.” God never 
puts on the black cap without his..heart. yearning for men. His mercy 
endureth for ever, and he delighteth in it. 

Notice how the Lord teacheth us his care even over the most guilty 
by the comparisons he makes. “ Whatman of you,” says he, “ having a 
sheep gone astray, will not go. after it until he find it? What man of 
you having,a, sheep that is fallen into a ditch will not pull it out ?” Any 
animal. which.,belongs to us, causes. us. concern if; we lose it, or it is in 
trouble. I noticed,the other night how.even. the, little kitten could not 
be missing without causing anxiety to the household. What calling and 
searching}, .Rongher natures might say, “if the kitten will keep. out of 


Boyes ter rx co 





CONVERSIONS ENCOURAGED. > ~ 155: 


‘doors all night, let it do so.” But the owner thought not so, for the 


night was cold and wet. I have seen great trouble when a bird has been. 
lost through the opening of a cage door, and many a vain struggle to 
catch it again. What a stir there is in the house about a little short-: . 
lived animal. We do not like te lose a bird, or a kitten, and do you, 
think the good God will willingly lose those whom he has made in his 

own image, and who are to exist for ever? I have used a very simple. 
and homely illustration, but it commends itself to the heart. You know 

what you would do to regain a lost: bird, and what will not God do te 

save a soul! An immortal spirit is better than ten thousand. birds. 

Does God care for souls? Ay, that he does, and in proof thereof Jesus 

has come to seek and to save the lost. The Shepherd cannot rest while 

one of his flock is in danger. “It is only one sheep! You have 

ninety-nine more, good man, why do you fret and bother yourself. 
about one?” He cannot be pacified. He is considering where that 

sheep may be. He imagines all sorts of perils and distresses. 

Perhaps it is lying on its back, and cannot turn over, or it has fallen 

into a pit, or is entangled among briars, or the wolf is ready to seize it. 

It is not merely its intrinsic value to him, but he is concerned for it 

because it is zs sheep, and the object of his care. Oh, soul, God has 

such a care for man. He waits to be gracious, and his Spirit goes forth 

towards sinners; therefore return to him. 

Now dwell upen that last argument—* He will not forget the covenant 
of thy fathers.” ‘The covenant always keeps open the path between 
God and man. The Lord has made a covenant concerning poor 
sinners with his Son Jesus Christ. He has laid help upon one that is 
mighty, and given him for a covenant to the people. He evermore 
remembers Jesus, and how he kept that covenant; he calls to mind 
his sighs, and tears, and groans, and death-throes, and he fulfils his 
promise for the great Sufferer’s sake. God’s grace has kept his covenant 
on the behalf of men: God is even eager to forgive that he may 
reward Christ, and give him to see of the travail of his soul. Now, 
hearken unto me, ye who are still unconverted. What solid ground 
there is here for your hope. If the Lord were to deal with you accord- 
ing to the covenant of works, what could he do but destroy you? But 
there is a covenant of grace made in Jesus Christ on the behalf of 
sinners, and all that believe in Jesus are interested in that covenant and 
are made partakers of the countless blessings which that covenant se- 
cures. Believe thou in Jesus. Cast thyself upon him, and by the 
covenant mercies of God thou shalt assuredly be saved. 

You have heard me preach like this before, have you not, a good 
many times? Yes, and I am sometimes fearful lest God’s people should 
grow tired of this kind of sermon: but then you need it over and over 
again. How many more times will some of ‘you want to be told this? 
How many more times must the great mercy of God be set before you? 
Are we to keep on inviting you again and again and again. and go back 
with no favourable answer from you? I have been questioning myself 
in the night watches about this, and I have said, “These people are 
unconverted, is it my fault? Do I fail in telling. them my. Lord’s 
message? Do I mar the gospel?” Well, I thought, “If it be so, yet 
I will charge them not to be partakers of my fault.” Brothers and 





~ fice; that if I stuttered and stammered you ought to be glad to hear it; 
or even if I told you in terms that were obscure you ought to be so | 
eager to know it that you would search out my meaning. In secret — 
- correspondence a cipher is often used, but inquisitive people soon discover 
it, ought there not to be yet more interest taken in the gospel? But, 
my friends, I do not speak obscurely. I am as plain a speaker as one 
_ might meet in a day’s march, and with all my heart I set Christ before 
you, and bid you trust him; will you do so this morning, or will you 
not? See how dark it is outside, even at noon-day. God has hung the | 
__very heavens in mourning. Never fear, the sun will soon break forth 
and light up the day ; and even so 






















“ Our hearts, if God we seek to know 
Shall know him, and rejoice ; 
His coming like the morn shall be, 
As morning songs his voice. 


So shall his presence bless our souls, 
And shed a joyful light ; 

That hallow’d morn shall chase away 
The sorrows of the night.” 





Portion oF ScriptuRE READ BEFORE SeRMoN—Deuteronomy iv. 





Bee _Hymws rrom “Our Own Hymn Book”—199, 555, 40. 





Bound in Cloth, 1s. 2d. post free. 


Bhs. ' 





Christ’s Glorious Achievements. The Bible and the Newspaper. 
Seven Wonders of Grace. Eccentric Preachers. 

& The Spare Half-Hour. | Good Cheer. 
The Mourner’s Comforter. ' Gleanings among the Sheaves. 


| If anyone wishes to know how Mr. Spurgeon can write, let him invest a 
shilling in one of these little books, and he will readily see how it is that their 
author can attract both readers and hearers.” —Bookseller. ’ 





PASSMORE & ALABASTER, 4, Paternoster Buildings; and all Booksellers. 





AAD ps 
ee : 
ra 


itn Gabernacle | 









OUR CHANGE OF MASTERS, 


A S rman 


DELIVERED ON Lorp’s-Day Mornine, JuLY 6TH, 1879, BY 


C HoSPURGEON, (3 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON, 











«Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness,” 
Romans vi, 18, 


__ Man was made to rule. In the divine original he was intended for a 
bs __ king, who should have dominion over the beasts of the field, andthe 
fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, He was designed to be the 
lord-lieutenant of this part of creation, and the form of his body and = 
the dignity of his countenance betoken it. He walks erect among the 
animals, while they move upon all-fours; he snbjugates and tames them 
_ to perform his will, and the fear and dread of him is upon all creatures, 
_ for they know their sovereign, Yet is it equally true that man was 
made to serve, At his beginning he was placed in the garden to — 
keep it, and to dress it, and so to serve his Maker. His natural feeble- _ 
ness, his dependence upon rain, and sun, and dew, his instinctive awe — 
of an unseen and omnipotent spirit, indicate that he is not the chief 
- of the universe, but a subordinate being, whose lot it is to serve. We 
-_.. find within man various powers and propensities seeking to get dominion 
over him, so that his mind also is capable of servitude, The appetites. 
which are essential for the sustenance of his bodily frame, even suchas 
eating and drinking, endeavour to master him, and if they can they __ 
will do so, and reduce him below the level of the swine. Man is in ~ 









part spirit, but he is also in part animal, and the animal strives to 
get dominion over the spiritual; and in many, many men it does so, ee 
till they are utterly degraded, Nothing can be worse than a soul = 
enslaved by such a body as that of man. The brutenature of manisthe 
worst sort of brute. There is no beast in wolf, or lion, or serpent os 


that is so brutish as the beast in man. Did I not tell you last Sabbath 
- day that whereas, according to the Levitical law, he that touched a = 
dead animal was unclean till the evening, he who touchedadead man 
was uaclean seyen days, for man is a seven times more polluting creature = 
than any of the beasts of the field when his animal nature ruleshim, = 
If evil aims at ruling man the good Spirit also strives with him, 
When God of his infinite mercy visits man by his Spirit, that Spirit do rh 
No. 1,482. - 








B72 _., METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


a 


not come as a neutral power to dwell quietly within man, and to share 
his heart with the Prince of Darkness, but he enters with full intent-to 
reign. Hence there is a conflict which cannot be ended by an armistice, 
but must be carried on to the end, and that end will be found either in 
the driving out of-the evil or in the thrusting jout of) the good; for one 
or the other, either the Prince of Darkness or the King of Light, will 
have dominion over man. Man must have a master: he cannot serve 
two masters, but he must serve one. Of all sorts of men this has been 
true, and it has perhaps been most clearly seen in those who were evi- 
dently made to lead their fellow men : it is specially seen in such a man, 
for instance, as Alexander, a true king of men, so heroic and great- 
hearted that one does not wonder that -armies, were fired with en- 
thusiasm by his presence, and drove everything before them. Alexander 
conquered the world, and yet on occasions he became the captive of 
drunkenness and the bondsman of his passionate temper. At such 
times the king of men,,.the vanquisher: of armies, was little better than a 
raving maniac. Look for further illustration at the busts of the emperors 
of Rome, the masters of the world ;’study their faces, and mark what 
grovelling creatures they must have heen. Rome had many slaves, but 
he who wore her purple was the most in bonds. No slave that ground 
at the mill, or died in the amphitheatre, was more in bondage than such 
men as Tiberius and Nero, who were the bond-slaves of their passions. 
High rank does not save a man from being under a mastery: neither 
does learning nor philosophy deliver men from this bondage, for the 
teachers of liberty have not. themselves been free, but it has hap- 
pened as the apostle saith,“ While they promise them liberty they 
themselves are the servants of corruption.” Solomon himself, with all 
his wisdom, played the fool, exceedingly, and though he was the most. 
sagacious ruler of his age he became for awhile completely subject to his 
fleshly desires. 

Man is born to be’a servant, and a servant he must be. Who shall be 
his master. ?,, That is the question. Our text proves the point with which 
I have started, for it speaks of “ being made free from sin,” and in the 
same breath it adds, ““Ye became the servants of righteousness.” There 
is no interregnum : there does not appear to be a moment left- for an 
independent state, but out of one servitude we pass into another. Do 
not think I made a mistake in the use of the word servitude ; I might 
have translated the Greek word by that of slave, and have been correct. 
“ Being made free from sin, ye were enslaved to righteousness.” The 
apostle makes an excuse for using the figure, and says, “I speak after the 
manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh.” He did not 
know how else to desvribe it, for when we come from under the absolute 
power of sin we come at once into a like subjection to righteousness ; as 
we were governed and swayed by the love of sin, so we become in a 
similar manner*subject to the forces of grace and truth. As sin took 
possession of us and controlled our acts, so grace claims us as ‘its own, 
takes possession of us, and rules us with an absolute sway. Man passes 
from one master to another, but he is always in subjection: | Freewill I 
have often heard of, but. I have never seen it. I have’ met’ with will, 
and plenty of it, but it has either been led captive by sin or held in 

blessed bonds of grace. The passions drive it hither and thither like a 





» OUR CHANGE OF MASTERS...) 373, 


rolling thing before a. whirlwind:; or the understanding sways it, and, 
then, according as the understanding is darkened or enlightened, the. will, 
acts for good or evil. In any case the bit is in its mouth, and it is 
guided by a power. beyond itself, sey eles ay geal itt 
«However, I leave that question, and call attention this. morning first, 
of. all to-our change of masters—“ Being, made free from sin, we, become, 
the servants. of righteousness ’’: secondly; to the reasons for that change s 
and thirdly, to the-consequences of that change. | - ergs ener 
«I. We begin. with OUR. CHANGE OF MASTERS. We must. haye a, 
master, but some of us by divine grace have made a change of masters 
infinitely to our advantage. In describing this inward revolution we; 
will begin with a word or two-upon,our old master. The.apostle says in. 
the verse preceding our text, “ Ye were the servants of sin.” How true 
that is!, Those of us who now believe, and are free from sin, were all, 
without exception the servants of, sin. We were not all alike enslaved, 
but we were all under bondage. Sin has its liveried servants., Did you: 
eyer see a man dressed in the full livery of sin? A fine suit, I warrant; 
you! - Sin clothes its slave with rags, with shame, and often with disease. 
When fully dressed in Satan’s uniform the sinner is abominable, even to, 
his fellow sinners. . If you want to see sin’s'liveried servants dressed out 
in their best or their worst, go to the prison, and you will find them 
there; or go to the dens of infamy in this great city, or to the liquor- 
bars, or to the ,places of vicious amusement, and you will find them. 
there. -Many, of them wear the badge of the devil’s drudgery upon, 
their backs in poverty and rags, upon their faces in the blotches born. . 
of drunkenness, and in their,very bones in the consequences of their vice.. 
Satan has regimentals for his soldiers, and they are worthy of the service., 

But great fulks have many servants who are out of livery, and so-has 
sin. We were not all open transgressors before our new birth, though: 
we were all the servants of sin. There are many slaves of evil whom you 
would not know to, be such if you only saw the surface of their charac-, 
ters. They do not swear, or, steal, or commit adultery, or even break the 
Sabbath outwardly ; on the contrary, they are most moral in. their con-; 
duct. ‘They are the servants of sin, but they are secretly so, for fear of 
rebuke; they are non-professing sinners and yet sincerely in love with 
sin. They stood up and sung the hymn just now, they bowed their 
heads in prayer, and they are now listening to the sermon, and no one 
will know.the difference between them and the servants of Christ by 
their exterior; but at heart, they reject the Son of God, and refuse to 
believe in him, for they love the pleasures of sin and the wages of un- 
righteousness. A kind of. selfish caution, restrains them from overt acts 
of transgression, but their heart loves not God, and their desires are not, 
towards his ways. O, my dear hearer, if thou art setting up thine own 
righteousness in thy soul as an anti-Christ against God’s Christ, if thou 
art kicking against the sway of the Divine Spirit, if thou arb secretly 
living in sin, if thou art following out some sweet sin in secret, even 
though thou darest to appear in the livery of Christ, yet still thou art 
the slave of sin. Hypocrites are worse slaves than any: others, because 
they are laid under the restraints of religious men without enjoying their 
congolations, and they practise the sins of the ungodly without their 
pleasures. Every bypocrite.is a fool and a coward; he has not the wilJ 








" Sor serve the Lod and a he has not’ the couraie to serve ‘the devil tne uke 
- and out, These go-betweens are of all sorts of people the most to be ¢ 
a pitied and the most to be blamed. ee 
As long as we are unbelievers we are the servants of sin, but we are 
“not all outdoor servants of sin, Sin has its domestic servants who keep 
quiet, as well as its soldiers who beat the drum, Many keep their sin to 
themselves: nobody hears of them in the street, they raise no public 
 seandal, and yet at heart they are the faithful followers of wickedness) 


and rebellion, Their idols are set up in secret chambers, but they are 


_ heartily loved. Their desires and aspirations are all selfish, but they try 
_to conceal this fact even from themselves; they will not serve God, they 


will not bow before his Son, and yet they would shrink from avowing 
their rebellion. They are amiable, admirable, and excellent in their 


outward deportment; but they are the indoor servants of Satan for all 
that, and their heart is full of enmity against God. Some of us confess 


that, it was so with us. When none found fault with us we were, never- 


theless, rotten in heart. We used to pray, but it was a mockery of God ; 
_ we went up to God’s house, but we regarded not his word, and yet in all 
this we prided ourselves that we were Tighteous, 


There are, however, many believers, who were once outdoor servants of 
Satan, sinning openly and in defiance of all law. I thank God that there 


‘are some here who are now the servants of Christ, upon whom I can 


look with great delight, although they were once the open, overt, zealous, 


diligent servants of the devil. Now they are washed, renewed, and 
» sanctified, Glory be to God for it. Oh that the Lord would bring some — 
more great sinners inside this house and turn them into great saints, for 


bold offenders make zealous lovers of Jesus when he puts away their sins. 
They love much because they have had much forgiven, and inasmuch as 
they desperately sinned so do they devoutly love; and their surrender to 


Christ is as entire and unreserved as their former surrender to the service 


of evil. In this let God be praised, Still, let us all humbly bow before 


the truth we are now speaking of, and own with great humiliation of 


spirit that we were the servants of sin. 

In passing on we notice next the expression of the apostle, “ Being 
made free from sin.” Through divine grace we have been led to trust 
the Lord Jesus Christ for eternal salvation, and having done so we are 
at this moment free from sin. Come you who trust the Saviour’s 
name, and rejoice in the words before us, for they.describe you. You are 
made free from sin—not you shall be, but you ave. In what sense 
is this true? 

First, in the sense of condemnation. The believer is no more con- 


_ demned for sin, Your sin was laid on Christ of old, and he as your 


scapegoat took it all away. ‘There is therefore now no condemnation 
to them which are in Christ Jesus.” You are acquitted and justified 
throngh the Lord your righteousness. Clap your hands for joy! It is 
a mercy worth ten thousand worlds. You are made free from the 
damning powec of sin, now and for ever. 

Next, you are made free from the guilt of sin. As you cannot be con- 
demned go does the trath go further, you cannot even be accused ; your 
transgression is forgiven you, your sin is covered. ‘As far as the ‘east is 
from the west, so far hath he remvuyed our transgressions from us.” 


J ie SA 
Pe ee ere 





EY ft eh 3 peren die Mi OTe: 
PRS Oe Na Os DR ae A ee eee 













om 3 : AP REE SY i ite) 2 





that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who 


’ 





s moment—*“ made free from sin,” 







be cast into hell, for Jesus has suffered in your stead, and the justice of 
God is satisfied, As a believer in Christ, for you there is no bottomless 






prepared for you before the foundation of the world,” 
Nor is this all. You are made free from sin as to its reigning power, 
_and this is a point in which you greatly delight. Sin once said to you, 


___ times sin stands in your way when grace says “Go,” and then you would 
gladly run but sin opposes and hinders; and yet you will not yield to its 


__ that sin shall not be lord of your life, for you are not under the law but 
under grace. Sin hides itself in holes and corners of your nature, skulks 
-in the dark about the streets of Mansoul, plots and plans if it can to 
_ get the mastery over you; but it never shall: it is cast out of the 
throne, and the Holy Ghost sits there ruling your nature, and there he 
will sit until you shall be perfected in holiness, and shall be caught up 
to dwell with Christ for ever and ever. 

_ © Made free from sin.” I wish I could now leave off preaching, and 





_ thought; chewing the cud as you farmers say, and getting the juice out 


a of this rich pasturage. “Made free from sin!” Why, as I pronounce 





when he leaped upon British soil in Canada, After all his running 
through the woods, and crossing of hills and rivers, he was free! How 
he leaped for joy! How he cried with delight! Even so did we exult 
in our liberty when at the first our Lord Jesus set us free. You who 
_were never slaves, and never felt the taskmaster’s lash, you do not know 
_ the value of liberty ; and so in spiritual things, if you have never felt the 
_ slavery of sin, and have never escaped therefrom into the good land of 
_ grace where Christ hath made you free indeed, you do not know the 
joy of the redeemed. I am free! I am free! I am free!—I that 
was once a slave to every evil desire! J am made free by omnipo- 
tent love! I have escaped from the taskmaster’s fetters, and I am 
the Lord’s free man! Let all the angels praise my redeeming Lord. 
_ Let all the spirits before the throne praise the Lord, who.hath led 





his people out of bondage, for he is good, for’ his mercy endureth for 


ever. 
Now, how came we to be free? We have become free in three ways. 
First, by purchase, for our Saviour has paid the full redemption money for 
us, and there is not a halfpenny due upon us. Blessed be his name, there 
is no mortgage on his inheritance; the price is all paid and we are 
Christ’s unencumbered property for ever. Here we stand at this moment 
free, because we are ransomed, and we know that our Redeemer liveth, 


. 





ke 


ho shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect? It is God that 

1, Who is he that condemneth? It.is Christ that died, yea 

o maketh intercession for us.” You are delivered from sin’s guilt at 
A 

_ You are in consequence free from the punishment ofsin, You shall never oe 


Ly 


pit, for you no undying worm, for you no fire unquenchable; but, guilty — 
as you are by nature, Christ hath made you so completely clean that for — 
you is reserved the “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inheritthe kingdom 


© Go,” and you went: it says “Go” now, but you do not go. Some- — 


demands, for grace holds dominion, You push, you struggle, you resolve — 


- get into a quiet pew, and sit down with you and meditate upon that | 


those blessed words I feel like an escaped negro in the old slave days 


















eH eae 


















wi 





aonant COE a 


878 METROPOLITAN ‘TABERNACLE PULPIT, | 


Our body, soul, and spirit are all-bought with a price, and in our com 
ee manhood we are Christ’s. ~ 

Next, we are free by power as well as by purchase. Just as the Tsk 
ited were the Lord’s own people, but he had to’ bring them out of Egypt 
with a high hand and.an outstretched arm, so has the Lord by power 
broken the neck.of sin and brought us up from the dominion of the-old 
Pharaoh of evil and set’ us free. The Spirit's power, the same’ power 
‘which raised Christ from the dead, ay, the same power which made the 
heavens andthe earth, hath delivered ‘us, and we are the ransomed of 
the Lord. 

‘And then we are free by privilege. “Unto as many as believed i m, 
to them gave he the-privilegeto become the sons of God.’ God has de- 
clared ‘us free. His own‘royal, majestic, and divine decree has bidden 
the’ prisoners go forth. The Lord himself looseth the prisoners, and 
declares that they shall no more be held-in captivity. Price and power 
and privilege meet together in our liberty. 

How came we to be free? I will tell you another story. We are free 
in ‘a strange way. According to the chapter in which we find our text 
we are free because we have died. If a slave dies his master’s possession 
in hiinis ended. The tyrant can rule no longer, death has relaxed his 
hold. “ He that is dead is free from sin.” ‘Sin comes to me and asks 
me why I do not obey its desires. I have a reply ready. “Ah, Master 
Sin, I am dead! I died some thirty years ago, and I do not belong 
to you any more. What have you to do with me ?”, Whenever the 
Lord brings a man to die in Christ. the blessed, heavenly death: unto 
sin, how hath sin any more dominion over him? He is clear from his 
old master, because he'is dead. Our old master: lives to us, but we do 
not live to him. He may make what suit he pleases, we will not acknow- 
ledge his right. Some of us have made a public claim of our freedom 
by death, for we have been buried, and the apostle saith, ‘‘ Know ye not, 
that so many of us a8 were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into 
his death ? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: 
that like as Christ was raised up from the. dead by the glory ofthe Father, 
even so we also should walk in newness of life.” We do not trust in the 
burial of baptism, for we know that there would have been no truth in it 
if we had not been dead first ; but still it is a blessed sign to us that in- 
asmuch as we died we have also been buried. Whenever the devil comes 
to us we can each one say to him, “T am no servant of yours, I died and 
was buried, did you not see me laid in the liquid tomb?” Oh, it isa 
blessed thing’ when the Lord enables us to feel a clear asssurance that 
vur baptism was not a mere form, but the instructive token of a work 
within the soul wrought by the divine Spirit, which set us free from the 
thraldom of sin. ids 

A third thing has happened to us: we have risen again. » According to 
Paul’s teaching we have risen in the resurrection of Christ : a new. life 
has been given to us: we are new creatures in Christ Jesus. Weare 
not the same people that we once were; old things have passed away, 
behold all things have become new. If some of you were to meet your 
old selves you would not know yourselves, would you? My old self does 
not know me, and cannot make me out. Iam dead to him as to: his 
reigning power, avd buried too, so that I can never be his subject, ner 


-OUR CHANGE OF MASTERS. 379 


vean he-ever be the king of my heart, yet he struggles to dwell within me, 
‘and ‘seems to have as many lives as a cat. Every now and then my. old 
-Self sneeringly cries to my true self, “ What a fool you are.” My true 
‘self answers, ‘“‘ No, I was a fool when you had sway, but now I have come 
to my right mind.” Sometimes that old self whispers, “There: is no 
reality in faith,” and the new self replies, “There is no: reality.in the 
things which are seen. This world is a shadow, but heaven: is eternal.” 
“Ah,” says the old self, “ you are a hypocrite.”  ‘“ No,’’ says. the new 
self, “I was false when I was under your power, but. now I am honest 
and true.” Yes, brethren, we are risen with Christ: with him we died 
and were buried, and with him we are risen, and hence we are. free. 
-What slave would remain under the dominion of a. master if he could 
say, “I died, sir: you cannot own me now, for your ownership. only 
extended over one life. I was buried; did you own me when I was 
-buried? I have risen again, and my new life is not yours; I am not 
the same man that I was, and. you have no rights over me.” We have 
-undergone this wondrous death and resurrection, and so we can say this 
morning with heartfelt joy, “ We are made free from sin.” 

We are also free from sin in our. hearts: we do not. love it now, but 
loathe the thought of it. We are free from sin as to our new nature: 
it cannot sin because it is born of God. . We are free from sin as to God’s . 
‘purpose about. us, for he will present us ere long blameless and faultless 
before his presence with exceeding great joy. We do not belong to sin; 
we refuse to serve sin; we are made free from it by the grace of God. 

. Now, the third part of this change of masters is this—“ ye became the 
servanis of righteousness.” So we have done, and we. are now. in the 
possession of righteousness and under its rule. A righteous God has 
made us die to sin: a righteous God has redeemed us: a new and 
and righteous life has been infused into us, and now righteousness rules 
and reigns in us. We do not belong to ourselves, but we yield ourselves 
up entirely to the Redeemer’s sway through his Spirit, and the more 
completely he rules us the better. The text: says we are enslaved to 
righteousness, and so we wish to be. We wish we were so enslaved that 
we could not even will a wrong thing nor wishan evil thing. Wedesire 
to give ourselves up wholly and absolutely to the divine ‘sway, so that the 
right, and the true, and the good may hold us in perpetual bonds. We 

_ abandon ourselves to the supremacy of God, and we find our liberty in 
being entirely subjected to the will of the Most High. This is a.change 
of masters with which I know that some of you are well acquainted. I 
am afraid, however, that others of you. know nothing about it. May 
the Lord grant that you may be made to know it before you go to sleep 
to-night. May you be delivered from the black tyrant and brought into 
the service of the Prince of Peace, and that straightway. 

II. Secondly, let us survey. the REASONS FOR OUR CHANGE. How.do 
we justify this change of masters? A man who makes frequent shifts is 
not good for much. But we changed our old master because he never had 
any right to us, and we were illegally detained by him. Why should sin 
have dominion over us? Sin did not make us, sin does not feed us, sin 
has no right to us whatever ; we never owed it.a moment’s homage; we 
are not debtors to the flesh to live after the flesh. Our old master cannot. 
summon us. for desertion, for he stole our services. Besides, our old 


















METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT, — 
a Nee ee, e 
ee 


master was as bad as bad could be. You never saw his portrait ; but he 


that would paint a picture of sin would have to put upon the canvas all the 


_ monstrosities that ever existed, and all the horrors that were ever imagined, — 


and these would have to be exaggerated and condensed into one, before 


they could fairly depict the deformity of sin. Sin is worse than the devil, 
for sin made the devil a devil ; he would have been an angel if it had not — 


been for sin. Oh, who would serve the destroying tyrant who of old cast 
down even the stars of light and turned angels into fiends? We ran 


away from our old master because we had never any profit at his hands. 


The apostle says, “What fruit had he then?” Ask the drunkard, 
‘What did you get by the drink ?”” Who hath woe? Who hath red- 


ness of the eyes? Ask the spendthrift what he gained by his debauchery. © | 


He would hardly like to tell you, and I certainly should not like to repeat 
his tale. Ask any man that lives in sin what he has gained by it, and 
you will find it is all loss ; sin is evil and only evil, and that continually, 


_. We have tound that out, and therefore we have quitted the old master, 


and taken up. with the new. Beside that, our old master, sin, brought 


us shame, ‘There was no honour in serving him. His work is called by — 
Paul, “those things whereof ye are now ashamed.” We are in the sight 


of God, ay, and in our own sight, ready to blush scarlet at the very 
thought of the evil in which we once took delight. Sin is a grovelling, 
mean, despicable thing, and we are ashamed of having been connected 
with it. Moreover, its wages are death, and this is dreadful to think 
upon. Sin at one time was pleasant to us, but when we found out that 


sin Jed its servants down to hell, and plunged them into fire unquench- 
able, we renounced its rule, and found another lord, 


But why did we take up with our new Master? We could not help it, 
for it was he that set us free; it was he that bought us, it was he that 


fought for us, it was he that brought us into liberty, Ah, if you could — 


see him you would not ask us why we became his servants. “In the first 
place, we owe ourselves wholly to him; and in the next place, if we did 
not, he is so altogether lovely, so matchless, and so charming, that if we 
had a free choice of masters we would chouse him a thousand times over, 


for he is the crown and glory of mankind, among the sons there is none 


to be compared to him. 

If you want us to justify our service of him, we tell you that his ser- 
vice is perfect freedom and supreme delight. We have had to suffer a 
little sometimes when his enemy and ours has barked at us; and the un- 
godly have called us ill names, but we count it honour to suffer for Jesus’ 


sake: for he is so sweet, and so good, that if we had a thousand lives, | 


and could give each one away by a martyr’s death, we count him worthy 
of those lives, so sweet is he to our hearts’ love, Why have we taken 
our new Master? Why, because he gives us even now a present pay- 
ment in his service. If there were no hereafter we would be satisfied 
with the present delight he gives us, but in addition to that he has 
promised us, as a future reward, life eternal at his right hand. We 
think, therefore, that we have more than sufficient reason for becoming 
the servants of Jesus Christ, who is made of God unto us righteousness. 
Dear hearers, how I wish that you would all enter my Lord’s service by 
taith in his name. 

fIl. In the third place, and very practically, I want to talk to those 






















a 


nized this? I know numbers of Christian people—I hope they are 
Christian people, for in some points they seem as if they were—but if I 
7 _ were asked to look at their lives, and give an opinion as to whom they 


_ selves.” To whom does their time belong ? “To themselves.” To whom 





a - give to God? If they are rather generous they give him the candle- 
_ ends and the parings of the cheese, and little odds and ends, threepenny- 
bits, and things they do not want, and can give without missing them. 

_ There are hundreds of professors who never gaye God anything that 
cost them a self-denial; no, not so much as going without a dish on the 
table, or a picture on the wall, or aring on the finger. There are numbers 


_ boots than on Christ, and many women who spend more on the feathers 
_ and the flowers which deck their bonnets than on their Saviour. Yes, 
and I have heard of men who said they were perfect, and yet they were 


_ dying and being damned and missionaries without support, and yet these 
absolutely perfect men are piling up gold and letting the cause of Christ 
___&top for means. It is not my theory of perfection, nay, it does not seem 
to me to come up to the idea of a common Christian who says he is not 
his own. If you are really saved, brethren, not a hair of your heads 
belongs to yourselves: Christ’s blood has either bought you or it has not, 
and ifit has, then you are altogether Christ’s, every bit of you, and you 
are neither to eat nor drink, nor sleep, but for Christ. ‘ Whatsoever ye 
do, do.all to the glory of God.” Have you ever got a hold of that? 
Just as a negro used to belong to the man that bought him, every inch of 


- him, so you are the slave of Christ ; you bear in your body the brand of ~ 


the Lord Jesus, and your glory and your freedom lie therein, That is 
the first consequence of being set free from sin,—ye became the servants 
of righteousness. 


What next? Why, because you are Christ’s his very name is dear to 


~ you. You are not so his slave that you would escape from his service 


if you could; no, but you would plunge deeper and deeper into it. You | 


want to be more and more the Lord’s. His very name is sweet to you, 
If you meet with the poorest person who belongs to Christ you love him, 
and though perhaps some who are like Christ in other respects may have 
awkward tempers, you put up with their infirmities for his sake. Where 
there is anything of Christ there your love goes forth. I remember when 
I left the village where I first preached I felt that if I had met a dog 
that came from Waterbeach I should have petted him; and such is the 
love we have for Christ that the lowest and weakest thing that belongs 
him we love for his sake: the very sound of his name is music to us, and 
_ those who do not love him we cannot endure. Haydn, the great musician, 
one day walked down a London street and turning into a music-seller’s 
shop, he asked the salesman if he had any select and beautiful music ? 





ho are servants of God upon THE CONSEQUENCES OF THIS CHANGE. 
Y have become the servants of righteousness, and the first conse-_ 
ence is that you belong wholly to your Lord? Have you recog- | 





belong, I should be compelled to say, “They seem mostly to belong — y ef 
_to themselves.” To whom does their property belong? “To them- 


_ does their talent belong? “To themselves.” As far as I can see they = 3 
_ lay all out upon themselves, and live for themselves. And what do they 


of professing Christians who spend a deal more on the soles of their — 


_ worth half a million of money, and were hoarding up more! Sinners 
























Pe? er Se ee ali we ie! 


[eg BT ee Ne Sith da 


$82 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIR. / 
\ 


“ Well sir,” said he, “I have some sublime music by Mr. Haydn.” “ Oh,” 
said Haydn, “I'll have nothing to do with that.’ “Why, sir, you 
come to buy music and will have nothing to do with Mr. Haydn’s com- 
position! What fault can you find with it?” ‘I can find a great deal 
of fault with it, but I will not argue with you: I do not want any of 
his music.” “'Then,’”.said: the shopkeeper, “I have other music, but 
it is not for such as you,” and he turned his back on him. A thorough 
enthusiast grows impatient of those who do not. appreciate what he so 
much admires. If we love Jesus we shall sometimes feel an impatient 
desire to get away from those who know him not. You do not 
love Christ? What kind of man can you be to be so blind, so dead ? 
You can be no friend of mine if you are not a friend of Christ’s. I 
would do anything for your good, but you cannot yield me delight or 
be my bosom friend unless: you love my Lord, for he has engrossed my 
heart and taken entire possession of my spirit. If you have thus become 
a servant of righteousness you will weary of that which does not help 
you in his service, but. the name of your Master will be as choicest 
music to you. * 

And now, dear friends, let me mention another result. All your 
members are henceforth reserved for Christ. What does the apostle say? 
“When ye were the servants of sin ye were free from righteousness.” 
When Satan was your master you did not care about Christ, did you ? 
You had no respect for him, and if anybody brought the words of Jesus 
before you you said, ‘Take them away—I do not want to hear them.” 
You went wholly in for evil. Now, just in the same way yield yourself 
up wholly to Christ, and say, “ Now, Satan, when I was yours I did not 
yield obedience to Jesus, and now that I am Christ’s I-can yield no obe- 
dience to you.” If Satan brings sin before you, say, “I cannot see it: my 
eyes aré Christ’s:” and if he would charm you with the sweet sound of 
temptation say, “ I cannot hear it: my ears are Christ’s.” “Oh,” saith 
he, “ seize on this delight.” You answer, “I cannot reach it; my hands 
are Christ’s.” “ But taste this sweet draught,” saith he. You say, “I 
cannot take it, my lips are Christ’s, my mouth is Christ’s, all my members 
are Chrict’s.”  “ Well, but you can form a judgment, cannot you, about 
this error?” ‘No, I do not want to know anything about it; my 
understanding is Christ’s.” “Oh, but hear this new thing.” “No, [ 
do not want to hear it ; I have found Christ, who is new enough for me; 
I do not want your novel discoveries ; I am dead to them. . I do not want 
to be worried with arguments which dishonour my Lord: take them away, 
When I was a servant of sin I would not meddle with the truth, and now 
that I am a servant of Christ I will not trifle in the opposite direction ; 
I have done with all but Jesus.” 

Think, my brethren, when we were servants of sin in what way we 
served it; for just as we used to serve sin, so ought we to work for 
Jesus. I do not speak te all here present, but I speak to many who were 
sinners of an open kind; how did you serve sin? I will answer for 
them. ‘They did not require to be egged on to it; they did not want 
any messenger of the devil to plead with them and urge them to unholy 
pleasures and unclean delights. Far from it; some even of their own 
companions thought them too imprudent. Now, dear friends, you ought 
mot to want your ministers or Christian friends to stir you up to good 





Fels wih} 2S Goat Ae Ban. CANS 
i : : oe 


ee 


OUR CHANGE OF MASTERS. 383 


works ; yon ought to be just as eager after holiness as you were after sin. ’ 
Evil was very sweet to you once. You used to watch for the day: when 

you could indulge in asweet sin ; did you not? When the time was coming 

round when you could take a deep draught of iniquity you took thealmanack 

and looked for it as a child for his holidays. You did not mind travel- 

ling from town to town to make a round of dissipation. Brother, serve 

Christ in the same way. May his Holy Spirit help you to do'so. Watch 

for opportunities of doing good; do not need whipping to duty. In- 

stead of requiring to be urged forward in evil we needed holding back : 

did we not? Our parents had to put the rein upon us! Sometimes 

mother would say, “John, do not so,” and father would ery, “ My boy, 

do not this.” We wanted a deal of restraint. I wish I hada band of 

Christians round me who needed holding back in the service of Christ: 

IT have not met with that sort yet. I am prepared with any kind of curb 

when I meet with a high-mettled Christian, who goes at too great a rate 
in his Lord’s service. For the most part my Master’s horses are fonder 
of getting into the stables than out into the hunting field. I have not 
met with one who has done too much for the Lord. I shall never be 
guilty of too much work myself; I wish I could go like the wind. in 
serving Jesus. 

Brethren, be just’ as hot to honour Christ as you once were to dis- 
honour him. As you have given the devil first-rate service, let Christ 
have the same. You recollect in the days of your sin, some of you 
who went in fer it thoroughly, that you never stood at any expense— 
did you? Oh no, if you wanted pleasure in sin, away went the five 
pounds, and the hundreds. How often do I meet with men,, particu- 
larly those given to drink, who get pounds in their pockets and 
never know how they go; but they will never leave off till all is spent, 
be it little or much. ‘Poor fools, poor fools. Yet I wish we could serve 
Jesus Christ thus unstintedly. No expense should be reckoned so long 
as we can honour him and bless his name. © Bring’ forth the alabaster 
box; break it, never mind the chips and pieces ; pour out the oil, and 
let Jesus have it all, It was thus I served Satan and thus would I 
serve Christ. ae 

Ay, and the poor slaves-of sin not only do’not stop at expense, but 
they are not.frightened by any kind of loss. See how many lose their 
characters for the sake of one short hour of sini.. How many are wring- 
ing their hands now because none will trust them, and they are cut off 
from decent society because of one: short-lived: sin. ‘They ruin their 
peace and think nothing of it. A quiet conscience is the brightest of 
ewels out they fling it away td enjoy their sin. They will lose their 

ealth; too, for the sake of indulging their passions. The devil says, 
“Drink, drink ;. drink yourselves blind ;”” and they do it as eagerly as if it 
were for their good. They are martyrs for Satan. Never did a Zulu fling 
himself upon death for his king so recklessly as these servants of Satan 
“yield themselves for his service. They will do anything; they will 
destroy their health, and, what is worst of all, destroy their souls for ever 
for the sake of sin’s brief delights... They know that there is a hell, they 
know that the wrath of God abideth for ever on guilty. men, but they 
risk all and lose all for sin. In that same way should we serve ‘our Lord, 
Be willing to lose character for him ; be willing to lose health for him ; 





. be pte to ee life for him ; be. willing to lose all, at by any ean . 
may glorify him whose servant you have become. ; 











Oh, who will be my Master’s servant? Here he comes t Do: you not 


- their wounds, and his hands are still bejewelled with the marks of the 


nails. This is your Master, and these are the insignia of his love for — 
you. What service will you render him? That of a mere professor, 


who names his name but loves him not? That of a cold religionist, who 


renders unwilling service out of fear? I pray you, brethren, do not so — 
_ dishonour him. I lift the standard this morning to enlist beneath the 


“banner of Christ those who will henceforth be Christ’s men from head to 
foot; and happy shall the church be, and happy the entire Israel of God 


if a chosen number shall enlist and remain true to their colours. We 
__ need no more of your nominal Christians, your lukewarm Christians, 


- whom my Master spues out of his mouth: we need men on fire with 
love, all over consecrated, intensely devoted, who, by the slavery from 
which they have escaped, and by the liberty into which they have entered, 

are under bond to spend and be spent for the name of Jesus, till they 
have filled the earth with his glory, and made all heaven ring with kis 
praise. The Lord bless you, beloved, for Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


PoRTION OF ScaIPTURE READ BEFORE SERMON—Romans Vi. 


Hymns From “Our Own Hymn Boox.”—116 (Song II.), 653, 
119 (Song III.) 





Cloth Gilt, 3s. 6d. 


“A GOoOoDnD sTART.” 


A Boox ror Younc MEN aND WoMEN, 
BY 


C. H. SPURGEON. 


With Prefatory Note by SIR GEORGE WILLIAMS 
(FOUNDER OF THE Y.M.C.A.). ; 


° 
; The Christian Age says: “Cannot be too widely circulated among the generation 
which is prowing up round us.’ 





PASSMORE & ALABASTER, 4, Paternoster Build'ngs, and all Bookeellers. 





ee Bee him 7 ? He wears upon his head no diadem but the crown of thorns; | 
_ adown his cheeks you see the spittle flowing, his feet are still rubied with 


eer e 


Nese, 
x 


i 


ee EP a 


he sat 
hte fale 


x 


Ee Oe So 


te 


EXPERIENCE AND A 
DIVINITY. 


: vs : 
A Ser mort 
_ DELIVERED on Lorp’s-DAY Morwine, Ocroser 26TH, 1884, BY 


C. HS PURGEON, | 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON. 



















“For they themselves show of us what manner of entering in we had unto you, and 
ont _ how ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God; and to wait for his” 
___ Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from 
___ the wrath to come.”’—1 Thessalonians i. 9, 10., 6 j 
Lak, iS 








_ In Thessalonica the conversions to the faith were remarkable. Paul 
came there without prestige, without friends, when he was in the very 
lowest condition; for he had just been beaten and imprisoned at Philippi, — 

_ and had fled from that city. Yet it mattered not in what condition the 

mbassador might be ; God, who worketh mighty things by weak instru- 
ments, blessed the word of his servant Paul. No doubt when the | 
apostle went into the synagogue to address his own countrymen he had — 
great hopes that, by reasoning with them out of their own Scriptures, 
might convince them that Jesus was the Christ. He soon found that 
only a few would search the Scriptures and form a judgment onthe = 
point; but the bulk of them refused, for we read of the Jews of Berea, — eee 
to whom Paul fled from Thessalonica, “These were more noble than 
those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness 
_ of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were 
so.” Paul must have felt disappointed with his own’ countrymen ; * 
indeed, he had often cause to do so. His heart was affectionately 
warm toward them, but their hearts were very bitter towards him,,— 
reckoning him to be a pervert and an apostate. But if he seemed to — 
a fail with the Jews, it is evident that he was abundantly successful with 
2 _ the Gentiles. These turned from their idols to serve the living God, 
and their turning was so remarkable that the Jews charged Paul and ~ 
Silas with turning the world upside down. Bess So gh 

. Tn those days there was a good deal of practical atheism abroad, and 
therefore the wonder was not so much that men left their idols, as that 
iret : they turned unto the living God. It became a maiter of talk all over the 
Bie city, and the Jews in their violence helped to make the matter more 
notorious; for the mobs in the street and the attack upon the house 


No. 1,806, 













578 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


of Jason all stirred the thousand tongues of rumour. Everybody 
spoke of the sudden appearance of three poor Jews, of their remarkable 
teaching in the synagogue, and of the conversion of a great multitude 
of devout Greeks, and of the chief women not afew. It was no small 
thing that so many had come straight away from the worship of Jupiter 
_ and Mercury to worship the unknown God, who could not be seen, nor 
imaged ; and to enter the kingdom of one Jesus who had been crucified. 
It set all Macedonia and Achaia wondering; and as with a trumpet- 
blast it aroused all the dwellers in those regions. Every ship that sailed 
from Thessalonica carried the news of the strange ferment which was 
moving the city; men were caring for religion, and were quitting old 
beliefs for a new and better faith. Thessalonica, situated on one of the 
great Roman roads, the centre of a large trade, thus became a centre 
for the gospel. Wherever there are true conversions there will be more 
or less of this kind of sounding forth of the gospel. It was especially 
so at Thessalonica; but it is truly so in every church where the Spirit 
of God is uplifting men from the dregs of evil, delivering them from 
drunkenness, and dishonesty, and uncleanness, and worldliness, and 
making them to become holy and earnest in the cause of the great 
Lord. There is sure to be a talk when grace triumphs. This talk is a 
great aid to the gospel: it is no small thing that men should have their 
attention attracted to it by its effects; for it is both natural and just 
that thoughtful men should judge of doctrines by their results; and if 
the most beneficial results follow from the preaching of the word, pre- 
judice is disarmed, and the most violent objectors are silenced. 

You will notice that in this general talk the converts and the 
preachers were greatly mixed up :—“ For they themselves show of us 
what manner of entering in we had unto you.” I do not know that it 
is possible for the preacher to keep himself distinct from those who 
profess to be converted by him. He is gladly one with them in love to 
their souls, but he would have it remembered that he cannot. be 
responsible for all their actions. Those who profess to have been con- 
verted under any ministry have it in their power to damage that ministry 
far more than any adversaries can do. ‘“ There!” says the world, 
when it detects a false professor, “this is what comes of such 
preaching.” They judge unfairly, I know; but most men are in 
a great hurry, and will not examine the logic of their opponents ; while 
many others are so eager to judge unfavourably, that a very little truth, 
or only a bare report, suffices to condemn both the minister and his 
doctrine. Every man that lives unto God with putity of life brings 
honour to the gospel which converted him, to the community to 
which he belongs, and to the preaching by which he was brought to 
the knowledge of the truth; but the reverse is equally true in the 
zase of unworthy adherents. Members of churches, will you kindly 
think of this? Your ministers share the blame of your ill conduct 
if ever you disgrace yourselves. I feel sure that none of you wish to 
bring shame and trouble upon your pastors, however careless you 
may be about your own reputations.. Oh, that we could be freed from 
thuse of whom Paul says, “‘ Many walk, of whom I have told you often, 
and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of 
Christ - whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose 








_ & SUMMARY OF EXPERIENCE AND A BODY OF DIVINITY. 579 


glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.” When these are in 
a church they are its curse. The Thessalonians were not such : they 
were such a peopie that Paul did not blush to have hiiself impli- 
cated in what they did. He was glad to say that the outsiders “show 
of us what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned 
to God from‘tdols, to-serve the living and true God, and to wait for his 
Son from heay¥en.” 

- Quitting this line of thought, I would observe that these two verses 
struck me as being singularly full. Oceans of teaching are to be found 
in them. A father of the church in the first ages was wont to cry, “I 
adore the infinity of Holy Scripture.” That remark constantly rises 
from my lips when I am studying the sacred Word. This book is more 
than a book,—it is the mother of books, a mine of truth, a mountain of 
meaning. It was an ill-advised opinion which is imputed to the Mahom- ~ 
medans at the destruction of the. Alexandrian Library, when they 
argued that everything that was good in it was already in the Koran, 
and therefore it might well be destroyed. Yet it is true with regard to 
the inspired Word of God, that it contains everything which appertains 
to eternal life. It is a revelation of which no man can take the measure, 
it compasses heaven and earth, time and eternity. The best evidence of 
its being written by an Infinite mind is its own infinity. Within a few of 
its words there lie hidden immeasurable meanings, even as perfume 
enough to sweeten leagues of space may be condensed into a few drops of 
otto of roses. 

The first part of my text contains a summary of Christian experience 
and the second part contains a body of divinity. Here is ample room. 
and verge enough. It is not possible to exhaust such a theme. 

I. The first part of the text contains A SUMMARY OF EXPERIENCE ; 
“ What manner of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to 
God from idols to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son 
from heaven.” Here we have in miniature the biography of a Christian 
man. 

It begins, first, with the entering in of the word,—* What manner of 
entering in we had unto you.” When we preach the word you listen, 
and, so far, the word is received.. This is a very hopeful circum- 
stance. Still, the hearing with the, outward ear is comparatively 
a small matter; or, at least, only great because of what may follow from 
it. The preacher feels even with some who listen with attention that 
he is outside the door; he is knocking, and he hopes that he is heard 
within; but the truth is not yet received, the door remains shut, an en- 
. trance is not granted, and in no case can he be content to speak with 
“the person outside the door ; he desires an entrance for the Word. 
All is fruitless until Christ entereth into the heart. I have seen the 
: following: the door has been a little opened, and the man inside has come 
to look at the messenger, and more distinctly to hear what he may have 
to say; but he has taken care to put the door on the chain, or hold ib with 
his hand, for he ig not yet ready to admit the guest who is 80 desirous 
of entertainment. The King’s messenger has sometimes tried to put 
his foot within when the door has stood a little open, but he has not 
always been successful, and has not even escaped from a painful hurt 
when the door has been forced back with angry violence.. We have 











called again and again with our message, but we have b 
besieged a walled city, and were driven from the gates; | j 
reward, for when the Holy Spirit sweetly moved the hard. hou: the ¢ 
gates have opened of their own accord, and we have been received : 
joyfully. We hawe heard the hearty cry, “Let the truth come in! 
Let the gospel come in! Let Christ come in! Whatever there is in. 
him we are willing to receive ; whatever he demands we are willing to 
as give; whatever he offers us we are glad to accept. Come and welcome! 

ts The guest-chamber is prepared. Come and abide in our house for 


,>? yi 









ever! 
The truth has its own ways of entrance; but in general it first affects 
the understanding. The man says, “I see it: I see how God is just, 
and yet the J ustifier of him that believeth in J esus. I see sin laid on 
Christ that it may not be laid on me, and I perceive that if I believe in 
Jesus Christ my sins are put away by his atonement.” To many all that | 
_ is wanted is that they should understand this fundamental truth; for 
their minds are prepared of God to receive it. Only make it plain and 
_ they catch at it as a hungry man at a piece of bread. They discover in 
the gospel of our Lord Jesus the very thing for which they have been 
- looking for years, and so the truth enters “by the door of the ynder- 
standing. . 
Then it usually commences to work upon the conscience, conscience 
being the understanding exercised upon moral truth. The man sees 
himself a sinner, discovering guilt that he was not aware of; and he is 
thus made ready to receive Christ’s pardoning grace. He sees that — 
to have lived without thinking of God, without loving God, without 
serving God was a great and grievous crime : he feels the offensiveness ie 
| of this neglect. He trembles; he consents unto the law that it is good, 
é and he allows that, if the law condemns him, he is worthy to be con- 
- demned. 

When it has thus entered into the understanding and affected the 
‘conscience, the word of God usually arouses the emotions. Fear is 
awakened, and hope is excited. The man begins to feel as he never felt 

before. His whole manhood is brought under the heavenly spell ; his — 
, very flesh doth creep in harmony with the amazem: nt of his soul. He 
wonders and dreads, weeps and quivers, hopes and doubts ; but no 
emotion is asleep ; life is in all. When a tear rises to his eye he brushes 
it away, but it is soon succeeded by another, Repentance calls forth 
one after another of these hersentinels. The proud manis broken down ; 
the hard man is softened. The love of God in providing a Saviour, the 
unsearchable riches of divine grace in passing by transgression, iniquity, | 
and sin,—these things amaze and overwhelm the penitent. "He finds 
himself "suddenly dissolved, where aforetime he was hard as adamant ; 
for the word is entering into him, and exercising its softening power. 
By-and-by the entrance is complete ; ; for the truth carries the central. 
castle of Mansoul, and captures his heart. He who once hated the gospel 
now loves it. At first he loves it, hoping that it may be his, though fear- 
ing the reverse ; yet owning that if it brought no blessing to himself, 
yet it was a lovable and desirable thing. By- and-by the man ventures 
to grasp it, encouraged by the word that bids him lay hold on eternal life. 
One who in digging his land finds a treasure, first looks about for fear 















ok 1e one else sho 

mn. saref lly. and at length he bears it in his bosom to his own home. 
So is it with the gospel ; when a man finds it by the understanding, he 

soon embraces it with his heart ; and, believe me, if it once gets into the - 

heart, the arch-enemy himself will never get it out again. Ob, that such _ 


an entrance with the gospel might commence the spiritual life of all here _ 












i 





q 


themselves show of us what manner of entering in we had unto you, and. 


came a turning, a decided turning. The man has come so far in — 
carelessness, so far in sin and unbelief; but now he pauses, and he 


_____ he had turned his back. Conversion is the turning of a man com- 


version is to turn to God decidedly and distinctly by an act and deed of 
_ the mind and will. In some senses we are turned: but in others, like 


entrance into your heart. You must not be content with a reformation ; 
there must be a revolution: old thrones must fall, and a new king must — 
‘reign. Is it so with you? 
___ These Thessalonians tnrned from their idols. Do you tell me that 
you have no idols? Think again, and you will not be quite so sure. The 
streets of London are full of fetich worship, and almost every dwelling — 
is a joss-house crammed with idols. Why, multitudes of men are — 
| circular idols of gold and silver are much sought after. They 
are very devoutly worshipped by some, and great things are said — 
_. concerning their power. I have heard the epithet of * almighty” 
_ ascribed to an American form of these idols. Those who do 
not worship gold may yet worship rank, name, pleasure, or honour., 
Most worship self, and I do not know that there is a more degrading 
| form of worship than for a man to put himself upon a pedestal and 
_. bow down thereto and worship it. You might just as well adore cats 


afte 





5 yourselves. No wooden image set up by the most savage tribe — 
can be more ugly or degrading than our idol when we adore ourselves, 
‘ Men worship Bacchus still. Do not tell me they do not: why, there is 
_a temple to him at every street corner. While every other trade is 
content with a shop or a warehouse, this fiend has his palaces, in which 
plentiful ‘libations are poured forth in his honour. The gods of 

. unchastity and vice are yet among us. It would be a shame even to ~ 
speak of the things which are done of them in secret. The lusts of the, 
flesh are served even by many who would not like to have it known. 
_ We have gods many and lords many in this land. God grant that 
we may see, through the preaching of the gospel, many turning 
from sich idols. If you love anything better than God you are 
_ idolaters: if there is anything you would not give up for God it 
is your idol: if there is anything that you seek with greater fervour 





_ present who are as yet unsaved. i 
__ What comes next? Well, the second stage is conversion. “hey eco 


how ye turned from idols to serve the living and true God.” There 


____ these Thessalonians, we turn. It is not conversion to think that you 
__will turn, or to promise that you will turn, or resolve that you will turn, — ie 


es _ but actually and in very deed to turn, because the word has hada true __ 


Ee 


he 







worshipping hot calves of gold, but gold in a more portable shape. - Small 


ia, 


and crocodiles with the ancient Egyptians as pay your life’s homage to 










uld claim it ; anon he dares to examine his prize 


ri 


, _ deliberately turns round, and faces in that direction to which hitherto 


_ pletely round, to hate what he loved and to love what he hated. Con- 


i 





“i 






4 
a 


a 
Z 


7 


ya, NE nee a 


582 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT, 


_ than you seek the glory of God, that is your idol, and conversion means 
a turning from every idol. 

But then that is not enough, for some men turn from one idol to 
another. If they do not worship Bacchus they become teetotalers. and 
possibly they worship the golden calf, and become covetous. When 
men quit covetousness they sometimes turn to profligacy. A change of 
false gods is not the change that will save: we must turn unto God, 
‘to trust, love, and honour him, and him alone. 

After conversion comes service. True conversion causes us “ to serve 
the living and true God.” To serve him means to worship him, to 
‘obey him, to consecrate one’s entire being to his honour and glory, and 
to be his devoted servant. 

We are, dear friends, to serve the “living” God. Many men have a 
‘dead God still. They do not feel that he hears their prayers, they do 
not feel the power of his Spirit moving upon their hearts and lives. 
They never take the Lord into their calculations; he never fills 
‘them with joy, nor even depresses them with fear ; God is unreal and 
inactive to them. But the true convert turns to the living God, who 
is everywhere, and whose presence affects him at every point of his 
being. This God he is to worship, obey, and serve. 

Then it is added, to serve the fue God; and there is no serving a true 
God with falsehood. Many evidently serve a false god, for they utter 
words of prayer without their hearts, and that is false prayer, unfit for 
the true God, who must be worshipped in spirit and in truth. When 
men’s lives are false and artificial they are not a fit service for the God 
of truth. A life is false when it is not the true outcome of the soul, 
when it is fashioned by custom, ruled by observation, restrained by selfish 
motives, and governed by the love of human approbation. What a man 
does against his will is not in truth done by himself at all. If the will 
is not changed the man is not converted, and his religious life is not true. 
He that serves the true God acceptably does it with delight; to him sin 
is misery, and holiness is happiness. This is the sort of service which 
we desire our converts to render: we long to see rebels become sons. 
Oh the sacred alchemy of the Holy Spirit, who can turn men from being 
the slaves of sin to become servants of righteousness! 

Carefully notice the order of life’s progress: the entering in of the 
word produces conversion, and this produces service. Do not put those 
things out of their places. If you are converts without the word en- 
tering into you, you are unconverted; and if professing to receive the 
word you are not turned by it, you have not received it. If you claim 
to be converted, and yet do not serve God, you are not converted; 
and if you boast of serving God without being’ converted, you are 
not serving God. ‘The three things are links which draw on each 
other. 

A fourth matter follows to complete this Christian biography, namely, 
waiting—*'To wait for his Son from heaven.” That conversion which 
is not followed up by waiting is’ a false conversion, and will come to 
nothing. We wait, dear brethren, in the holy perseverance of faith; 
having begun with Christ Jesus our Lord we abide in him; we trust, 
and then we wait. We do not look upoa salvation as a thing which 
requires a few minutes of faith, and then all is over; salvation is the 


‘ 


f 
‘ 





A SUMMARY OF EXPERIENCE AND « sUDY OF DIVINITY. 583 


business of our lives. We receive salvation in an instant, but we work 

it out with fear and trembling all our days. He that is saved continues 

to be saved, and goes on to be saved from day to day, from every sin and 

from every form of evil. We must wait upon the Lord, and renew the 

strength of the life which he has imparted. As a servant waiteth on — 

ois alas or a courtier upon his king, so must we wait upon the 
ord. 

This waiting also takes the shape of living in the future. Aman who 
waits is not living on the wages of to-day, but on the recompenses of a 
time which is yet. to come; and this is the mark of the Christian, that his 
life is spent in eternity rather than in time, and his citizenship is not 
of earth but of heaven. He has received a believing expectancy which 
makes him both watch and wait. He expects that the Lord Jesus will 
come a second time, and that speedily. He has read of his going up 
into heaven, and he believes it; and he knows that he will so come in 
like manner as he went up into heaven. For the second advent he looks 
with calm hope: he does not. know when it may be, but he keeps 
himself on the watch as a servant who waits his lord’s return. He hopes 
it may be to-day, he would not wonder if it were to-morrow, for he is 
always looking for and hasting unto the coming of the Son of God. 
The coming of the Lord is his expected reward. He does not expect to 
be rewarded by men, or even to be rewarded of God with temporal 
things in this life, for he has set his affection upon things yet to be re- 
vealed, things eternal and infinite. In the day when the Christ, shall 
come, and the heavens which have received him shall restore him to our 
earth, he shall judge the world in righteousness, and his people with his 
truth, and then shall our day break and our shadows flee away... The 
true believer lives in this near future ; his hopes are with Jesus on his 
throne, with Jesus crowned before an assembled universe. 

The convert has come to this condition, he is assured of his salvation, 
See how he has been rising from the time when he first held the door 
ajar! He is assured of his salvation ; for Paul describes him as one 
who is delivered from the wrath to come; and therefore he looks with 
holy delight to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. . Once he was afraid 
of this, for he feared that he would come to condemn him ; but now he 
knows that when the Lord appears his justification will be made plain to 
the eyes of all men. ‘Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun, in 
the kingdom of their Father.” -And so he cries, “ Even so, come Lord 
Jesus!” He would hasten rather than delay the appearing of the Lord. 
He groans in sympathy with trayailing creation for the manifestation of 
the sons of God. He cries with all the redeemed host for the day of the 
Saviour’s glory. He could not do this were he not. abundantly assured 
that the day would not seal his destruction, but reveal his full salvation. 

Here, then, you have the story of the Christian man briefly summed 
up, and I think you will not find a passage of merely human writing 
which contains so much in go small acompass. It hay anspeakable 
wealth packed away into a narrow casket. Do you understand it? 
Is this the outline of your life? If it is not, the Lord grant that 
his word may have an entrance into you this moruing, that you, may 
now believe in Jesus Christ and then wait for his glorious appearing. 

. II. I shall want you to be patient with me while I very. briefly 








te 
x 
Fs, 


“fn. ere 


ri “petold ie ane half of this great iat 
we have multum in parvo, much in little; A BODY OF DIVINITY packed 
away ina nutshell. “To wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised | ¢ 
_ from the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.’ 
To begin my body of divinity, I see here, first, the Deity of Chrisi. — 
“To wait for his Son.” “His Son.” God has but one Son in. the sy 
highest sense. The Lord Jesus Christ has given to all believers power — 


to become the sons of God, but not in the sense in which he, and he 
alone, is the Son of God. “Unto which of the angels said he at any 


time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee?” ‘‘ When he 
_ bringeth in the First-begotten into the world he saith, Let all the angels 


of God worship him.” The Eternal Filiation is a mystery into which it 


1s better for us never to pry. Believe it; but how it is, or how it could 


be, certainly it is not for you or for me to attempt to explain. There is 
one “Son of the Highest,’’ who is “ God, of the substance of the Father, 


_ begotten before all worlds,” whom we with all our souls adore, and own 


to be most truly God; doing so especially every time in the benediction 


we associate him with the Father and with the Holy Spirit as the one 


God of blessing. 


Side by side with this in this text of mine is his humanity. «Fis 
Son, whom he raised from the dead.” It is for man to die. God abso- 


lutely considered dieth not; he therefore took upon himself our mortal 


frame, and was made in fashion as a man; then willingly for our sakes 


he underwent the pangs of death, and being crucified, was dead, and 


so was buried, even a5 the rest of the dead. He was truly man, “of a 
reasonable soul, and human flesh subsisting”: of that we are confident. 


There has been no discussion upon that point i in these modern times, but . 
there was much questioning thereon in years long gone; for what is 


there so clear that men will not doubt it or mystify | it? With us there 
is no question either as to his Deity, which fills us with reverence; or 
his manhood, which inspires us with joy. He is the Son of God and 
the Son of Mary. He, as God, is “immortal, invisible”; and yet for 
our sakes he was seen of men and angels, and in mortal agony yielded 
up the ghost. He suffered for our salvation, died upon the cross, 
and was buried in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, being verily and 
truly man. 

Notice a third doctrine which is here, and that is the wnity of the 
Divine Person of our Lord; for while the apostle speaks of Christ as 
God's Son from heaven, and as one who had died, he adds, “even 


Jesus”: that is to say, one known, undivided Person. Although he 


be God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ. There is but one 
Person of our blessed and adorable Lord: “one altogether ; not by con- 
fusion of substance, but by unity of Person.” He is God, he is man; 
perfect God and perfect man; and, as such, Jesus Christ, the one Mediator 
between God and man. ‘There have been mistakes about this also made 
in the church, though I trust not by any one of us here present. We 
worship the Lord Jesus Christ in the unity of his divine Person as the 
one Saviour of men. 








es even to a greater degree 





















Furthermore, in our text we perceive a doctrine about ourselves very _ 


plainly implied, namely, that men by nature are guilty, for otherwise 
they would not have needed Jesus, a Saviour. They were lost, and so 













o came from heaven to earth bore the name of Jesus, “for he — 
ve his people from their sins.” It is clear, my brethren, that 
re under the divine wrath, otherwise it could not be said, 
MA ath delivered us from the wrath to come.” We who are now 
delivered were once “children of wrath, even as others.” Andwhenwe 
are delivered it is a meet song to sing, “O Lord, I will praise thee: 
though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou — 
_ comfortedst me.” We were guilty, else we had not needed a propitia- 
_ tion by the Saviour’s death: we were lost, else we had not needed one — 
ho should seek and save that which is lost; and we were hopelessly . 
lost, otherwise God himself would not have shared our nature to work 
the mighty work of our redemption. That truth is in the text, anda — 
- great deal more than I can mention just now. Dares tex: 
But the next doctrine, which is one of the fundamentals of the 
- gospel, is that the Lord Jesus Christ died for these fallen men. Hecould — 
~ not have been raised from the dead if he had not died. That death was 
painful, and ignominious; and it was also substitutionary: “for the 
transgression of my people was he stricken.” In the death of Christ 
_ lay the essence of our redemption. I would not have you dissociate 
his life from his death, it comes into his death as an integral part of it; 
for as the moment we begin to live we, in a sense, begin to die, so the 
_. Man of Sorrows lived a dying life, which was all preparatory to his 
passion. He lived to die, panting for the baptism wherewith he was to 
be baptized, and reaching forward to it. But it was especially, though = 
_ not'only, by his death upon the cross that Jesus put away our sin, 
_ Without shedding of blood there is no remission of sin. Not even K 
the tears of Christ, nor the labours of Christ could have redeemed us if he 
had not given himself for us an offering and a sacritice. ‘“ Die he, or — 
justice must,” or man must die. It was his bowing the head and giving - 
up of the ghost which finished the whole work. “It is finished” could 
not have been uttered except by a bleeding, dying Christ. His death 
is our life. Let us always dwell upon that central truth, and when — 
we are preaching Christ risen, Christ reigning, or Christ coming, let 
us never so preach any of them as to overshadow Christ crucified. 
“We preach Christ crucified.” Some have put up as their ensign, — 
_ “We preach Christ. glorified” ; and we also preach the same ; but yet 
_ to us it seems that the first and foremost view of Jesus by the sinner is ‘a 
as the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world. There- 
fore do we preach first Christ crucified, while at the same time wedo y: 
not forget that blessed hope of the child of God,—namely, Christ in 














6 
























glory soon to descend from heaven. . Re 
‘The next doctrine I see in my text is the acceptance of the death of B 

Christ by the Father. “ Where is that?” say you. Look! “ Whom he ~ s 
raised from the dead.” Not only did Jesus rise from the dead, but the . 
Father had a distinct hand therein. God as God gave the token of his et 

_ acceptance of Christ’s sacrifice by raising him from the dead. It is true, iN 


as we sometimes sing, ? 


“Tf Jesus had not paid the debt, 
He ne’er had been at freedom set,” ie 


~The Surety would have been held in prison to this day if he had not 





PRN ee 


586 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


discharged his suretyship engagements, and wiped out all the liabilities 
of his people. Therefore it is written, “He was delivered for our 
offences, and was raised again for our justification.” In his glorious 
uprising from the dead lies the assurance that we are accepted, 
accepted in the Beloved: the Beloved being himself certainly accepted 
because God brought him again from the dead. “as 

Further on, we have another doctrine, among many more. We have © 
here the doctrine of our Lord’s resurrection, of which we spake when we 
mentioned the acceptance of his offering. Christ is risen from the dead. 
I pray you, do not think of the Lord Jesus Christ as though he were 
now dead. It is well to dwell upon Gethsemane, Golgotha, and Gab- 
batha ; but pray remember the empty tomb, Emmaus, Galilee, and 
Olivet. It is not well to think of Jesus as for ever on the cross or in 
the tomb. ‘ He is not here, but-heis risen.” Ye may “come and see the 
place where the Lord lay,” but he lies there no longer ; he hath burst 
the bands of death by which he could not be holden; for it was not 
possible that God’s holy One could see corruption. The rising of Jesus 


from the dead is that fact of facts which establishes Christianity upon 


an historical basis, and at the same time guarantees to all believers their 
own resurrection from the dead. He is the firstfruits and we are the 
harvest. 

Further, there is here the doctrine of Ais ascension : “ to wait for his 
Son from heaven.” It is clear that Jesus is in heaven, or he could not 
come from it. He has gone before us as our Forerunner. He has gone 
to his rest and reward; a cloud received him out of sight; he has 
entered into his glory. 

I doubt not our poet is right when he says of the angels— 


“They brought his chariot from on high, 
To bear him to his throne ; 
Clapped their triumphant wings and cried, 
‘I'he glorious work is done!’ ” 


That ascension of his brought us the Holy Spirit. He “led captivity 
captive, and received gifts for men,” and he gave the Holy Ghost as the 
largess of his joyous entry to his Father’s courts, that. man on earth 
might share in vhe joy of the Conqueror returning from the battle. 
“Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; 
and the King of glory shall come in,” was the song of that bright day, 

But the text tellsus more: not only that he has gone into heaven, but 
that he remains there; for these Thessalonians were expecting him to 
come “ from heaven,” and therefore he was there. What is he doing? 
“T go to prepare a place for you.” . Whatis hedoing? He is interceding 
with authority before the throne. What is he doing? He is from 
yonder hill-top looking upon his chureh, which is as a ship upon the sea 
buffeted by many a.storm. In the middle watch ye shall see him walk- 
ing on the waters; for he perceives the straining of the oars, the leakage 
of the timbers, the rending of the sails, the dismay of the pilot, the 
trembling of the crew; and he will come unto us, and save us. He is 
sending heavenly succours to his weary ones; he is ruling all things for 
the salvation of his elect, and the accomplishment of his purposes 
Glory be to his blessed name! | 








4 SUMMARY OF EXPERIENCE AND A BODY OF DIVINITY. 587 


Jesus is in heaven with saving power, too, and that also is in the text : 
“ His Son fiom heaven, even Jesus, which delivereth us from the wrath 
to come.” J alter the translation, for it is a present participle in the 
case of each verb, and should run, “ Even Jesus, delivering us from the 
wrath coming.” He isat this moment delivering. <‘ Wherefore also he 
is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing 
he ever liveth to make intercession for them.” He is away in heaven, 
but he is not divided from us; he is working here the better because he 
is there. He has not separated himself from the service and the con- 
flict here below; but he has taken the post from which he can best 
observe and aid. Like some great commander who in the day of battle 
commands a view of the field, and continues watching, directing, and so 
winning the fight, so is Jesus in the best place for helping us. Jesus is 
the master of legions, bidding his angels fly hither and thither, where 
their spiritual help is needed. My faith sees him securing victory in 
the midst of the earth. My God, my King, thou art working all things 
gloriously from thy vantage ground, and ere long the groans and strifes 
of battle shall end in Hallelujahs unto the Lord God Omnipotent! 
Christ’s residence in the heavens isclearly in the text. 

Here is conspicuously set forth the second coming, a subject which 
might well have occupied all our time,—“To wait for his Son from 
heaven.” Every chapter of this epistle closes with the Second Advent. 
Do not deceive yourselves, oh ye ungodly men who think little of Jesus 
of Nazareth! The day will come when you will change your minds about 

‘him. As surely as he died, he lives, and as surely as he lives he will 
come to this earth again! With an innumerable company of angels, with 
blast of trumpet that shall strike dismay into the heart of all his enemies, 
Jesus comes! And when he cometh there shall be a time of judgment, 
and the rising again of the dead, and “ Every eye shall see him, and 
they also which pierced him: andall the kindreds of the earth shall wail 
because of him.”” He may come to-morrow! We know not the times and 
the seasons; these things are in the Father’s keeping ; but that he comes 
is certain, and that he will come as athief in the night to the ungodly is 
certain too. Lay no flattering unction to your souls as though when he 
was crucified there was an end of him; it is but the beginning of his deal- 
ings with you, though you reject him. “Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, 
‘and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. 
Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.” 

A further doctrine in the text is that Christ is a deliverer—“< Jesus 
delivering us from the wrath coming.” What a blessed name is this! 
Deliverer! Press the cheering title to your breast. He delivereth by 
himself bearing the punishment of sin. He has delivered, he is deliver- 
ing, he always will deliver them that put their trust in him. 

But there was something to be delivered from, and. that is, the 
coming wrath, which is mentioned here, Oh,” saith one, “ that is a 
long way off, that wrath to come!” If it were a long way off it were 
‘wise for you to prepare for it. He'is unsafe who will be destroyed most 
certainly, however distant that destruction may be. A wise man should 
not be content with looking as an ox doth, as far as his eye can carry 

-him, for there is so much beyond, as sure as that which is seen. But 

“tis not far-off wrath which is here mentioned; the text saith; “who 





t | METROPOLITAN ‘TABER 












‘detivereth us fron the wrath coming ” 
~ coming; for wrath is even now upon. he ae ve for the 
‘Jews who had rejezted Christ, the apostle says of them in the sixteenth 

verse of the next chapter, “ Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that 

they might be saved, to fill up their sins ‘alway: for the wrath is come upon — 
them to the uttermost.” ‘The siege of Jerusalem, and the blindness of © 

Israe], are a terrible comment upon these words. “ Indignation and 

wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, - 

of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile.” It is said of ev ery one that 

believeth not in Christ Jesus, that “the wrath of God abideth on him.” — a 

“God is angry with the wicked every day.” This wrath abideth upom 
- some of you. Itis the joy of believers that they are delivered from 
this wrath which is daily coming upon unbelievers, and would come 

upon themselves if they had not ‘been delivered from it by the atoning — 

sacrifice. 















eA 

¥ There is evidently in the text the doctrine of a great division between 
- menand men. “He hath delivered us.” All men have not faith, and — 

tere therefore all men are not delivered from wrath. ‘l'o-day there is sucha 
.. division ; the “ condemned-already ” and the “ justified” are living side 


_ by side; but ere long the separation shall be more apparent. While 
y some will go away into everlasting ‘punishment, the people of God 
_ will be found pardoned and absolved, and so will be glorified for  __ 


ever. 2 
Lastly, there is here the doctrine of assurance. Some say,“ How | 
are you to know that you are saved?” It can be known; it ought to — 


be known. “Surely,” cries one, “it is presumption to say that you are 
sure.” It is presumption to live without knowing that you are de-— 
livered from wrath. Here the apostle speaks of it as a thing well 
known, that “ Jesus delivers us from the wrath coming.” He does not 


Sy een 


say “if,” or “perhaps,” but he writes that it is so, and therefore he’ 
knew it, and we may know it. My brother, you may know that you are 

24) saved. “That would make me inexpressibly happy,” cries one. She 
AM so, and that is one of the reasons why we would have you know it this 
day. God saith, “He that believeth in him hath everlasting life,” and — 


therefore the believer may be sure that he has it. Our message is, — 
“He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth 
not shal: be damned.” God make you to escape that dreadful doom! 
May you be delivered from the wrath which is coming fur Jesus’ sake. 
Amen. 


an 


: 
Cloth, Qs. 4 
a 


WE ENDEAVOURS 


Unirorm with “WORDS OF WISDOM FOR DAILY LIFE.” 
By C. H. SPURGEON. 


PASSMORE & ALABASTER, Paternoster Buiipines, Lonpon, E.C, 






4 


FOR THE FREE, AND HOPE FOR THE BOUND. 


A Seren 


_ Inrenpep ror Reapine on Lorp’s-pay, NoveMBER 20TH, 1887, 


1 


DELIVERED BY 


C. H. SPURGEON, 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON, 


On Lorp’s-pay Mornine, NovEMBER 6TH, 1887. 





__ “He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bands ~ 
sunder. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful . 
works to the children of men! For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars | 
of iron in sunder.’’—Psalm evii. 14—16. aon 


. Bac: _ My anxious, prayerful desire this morning is, that some who have been | 
x in the condition described in the text may come out of it into full re-_ 
_ demption. They have been too long in prison; and now the silver — 
_, trumpet sounds—liberty to the captives. Jesus has come into the 
_ world to break the gate of brass, and to cut the bars of ironin sunder. 
_ Oh, that my prayer might be heard for those who are in bondage! I 
oe trust that some of those who are now immured in the dungeon of — 
_ despondency will say “Amen” to my prayer; and if they are praying 
inside, and we are praying outside, and the Lord Jesus Christ himself 
comes to open the prison doors, then there will be a Jubilee before long. 
This passage, of course, literally alludes to prisoners held in durance 
sah by their fellow-men. What a sad world man has made this earth! 
With superfluity of naughtiness man has multiplied his Bastilles! As 
__ if there were not misery enough to the free, he invents cells and chains! 
 One’s blood boils when standing in those living graves in which tyrants _ 
= have buried their victims out of sight and hearing! Could the most | 
fierce of wild beasts display such cruelty to their kind as men have 


val . . ° f Wy 
, shown to men? By the horrors of such imprisonments one must esti- 4 
i 
bre 
‘: 

















ia 
















mate the joy of being set free. To God it is a glory that, in the order — 
of his providence, he often provides a way of escape for the oppressed. 
Cruel dynasties have been overthrown, tyrants have been hurled from 
their thrones, and then enlargement has come to those who were _ 


eat 
‘ 


roa 
Pees 





 straitly shut up. Liberated ones should indeed “praise the Lord for 
his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.” a 
_ But the various scenes in this Psalm were intended to describe RS: 
spiritual conditions. The second verse is a key to the whole song:/ 
“ Let the redeemed of the Lord say so.” The deliverance here intended — 


No. 1,992. 


2g 






ft “as ih © RON ; mwa eee UN NPT Fo 7 7 4 a m2 ual ays tas) Saar Abi UT NEA ee ik 
"1 ‘ een i eh eae Din 





626 - METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


is one which is brought to us by redemption, and comes by the way of 
the great sacrifice upon Calvary. We are redeemed with the precious 
blood of him who surrendered his own liberty for our sakes, and con- 
sented to be bound and crucified that he might set us free. My grateful 
heart seems to hear him saying again, as he did in the garden of Geth- 
semane, ‘If ye seek me; let these go their way.” His consenting to be 
bound brought freedom to all those who put their trust in him. 

I shall endeavour, as God shall. help me, to speak of the text 
spiritually, and we will consider it under the heading of three ques- 
tions: first, Who are the favoured men of whom the text speaks? 
Secondly, How has this remarkable deliverance been wrought? Thirdly, 
What shall be done about it? The text tells us how to act. “Oh that 
men would praise the Lord for his goodness!”’ 

I. First, let us ask: WHO ARE THESE FAVOURED MEN ? 

These favoured yersons were guilty men, as you will see by the con- 
text— Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned 
the counsel of the Most High.” Hear this, ye sinful ones, and take 
heart! God has wrought great wonders for a people whom it seemed im- 
possible for him to notice. If they came into prison through rebellion, 
you would expect him to leave them there. Yet rebels are set free by an 
act of immeasurable grace. The Redeemer has received gifts for men, 
“yea, for the rebellious also.” These men were despisers of God’s 
word ; was there a gospel of freedom for them? Yes. It is for them 
that Jehovah, in abounding grace, has wrought miracles of mercy. 

The persons described by the Psalmist were guilty of overt acts: they 
were in actual rebellion against the commands of the Most High. Their 
rebellion was not a single hasty act; their entire lives were a con- 
tinnance of their wicked revolt. From their childhood they went astray; . 
in their youth they provoked the Lord; and in their manhood they 
disobeyed him more and more. They were in open opposition to their 
Creator, Benefactor, and Lord. I have no doubt that I am speaking to 
many who must own that they have been actual and wilful transgressors 
against the Lord of love. They have turned unto him the back, and 
not the face: they have not been servants, but rebels. 

The persons here spoken of were as evil in their hearts as in their 
lives, for they ‘‘contemned the counsel of the Most High.” Perhaps 
they intellectually rejected the teaching of Holy Scripture, and scorned 
to receive what the Lord revealed. They refused to yield their under- 
standings to infallible teaching ; but judged their own thoughts to be 
better than the thoughts of God. The counsel of, the Most High, 
though marked by the sublimity of him from whom it came, appeared 
to them to be less high than their own soaring theories ; and therefore 
they despised it. To some men any doctrine is more acceptable than 
that of Scripture. They gladly hear what doubters say, but they will 
not hear what God the Lord shall speak. His counsel of instruction, 
his counsel of command, his counsel of promise—his whole counsel they 
cast away from them, and they take counsel of their own conceit. 

Now this actual and mental sin, when it is brought home to a man’s 
awakened conscience, fills him with dismay. Because he has transgressed. 
with hand and heart, the convinced sinner is in sore dismay. O my 
hearer, are you in distress this day through your own fault? Do you 








SONY FOR THE FRER, AND HOPE FOR THE BOUND. 627 


wonder that you are in trouble? Did you expect to go in the way of 
evil, and yet to be happy ? Did you never hear those words, “ There is 
no peace, saith my God, unto the wicked”? Know you not that they 
are “‘like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up 
mire and dirt” ? Now that you find yourself taken in the thorns of 
your own folly, are you at all surprised? The Scripture saith, “ Hast 
thou not procured this unto thyself?” Are not these the wages of 
sin? Thank God you have not yet received more’ than the earnest- 
money of that terrible wage: but, depend upon it, sin is a hard pay- 
master. Sin and sorrow are wedded in the very nature of things, and 
there is no dividing them. They that sow iniquity shall reap the same. 
Turn as it may, the river of wickedness at last falls into the’sea of 
wrath. He that sins must smart unless a Saviour can be found to be 
his Surety, and to smart for him. 

So, then, these people who were set free were by nature guilty men, 
who could not have deserved the divine interposition. Hear this, ye 
consciously guilty, you that are condemning yourselves, and confessing 
your faults! This is good news for you, even for you. The Lord sets 
free the men whose own hands have forged their manacles. This is 
free grace indeed! These marvels of delivering love were performed, 
not for the innocent in their misfortune, but for the guilty in their 
rebellion. ‘ Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.” 

Go a little further, and you will notice that these persons were doomed 
men, for they “sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death.” It means 
that they were in the condemned cell, waiting for execution. No light 
could come to them, for their condemnation was clear; no escape could 
be hoped for, not a ray of hope came from any direction. In a short 
time they must be taken out to execution, so that the shadow of their 
death fell with its damp, dread, deadening influence upon their spirits. 
Do I address any such this morning? Ah, my friend, I can sympathize 
with you as you sit here, and feel that you aredoomed! I, too, have felt 
that sentence of death within me. I knew myself to be “ condemned 
already,” because I had not believed on the Son of God. I recollect 
how those words “condemned already” rang in my ears, as I should 
think the bell of St. Sepulchre’s used to sound in the ears of the con- 
demned in Newgate, warning them that the time was come to go out 
upon the scaffuld. When the shadow of eternal wrath falls upon the 
heart, nothing worse can be imagined ; for the conscience bears sure 
witness that God is just when he judges, condemns, and punishes. 
When a man feels the shadow of death upon him, infidel arguments are 
silenced, se!f-conceited defences are banished, and the heart consents to 
the justice of the law which declares, “The soul that sinneth, it shall 
die.” My brethren, who remember being in this state of conscious 
condemnation, will join me in praying for those who are now in that 
condition, for they need our pity and love. O my hearers, condemned 
in your own consciences, take heart, and hope; for you are the sort of 
people whom Jehovah in his grace delights to set free! Those doomed 
‘ones were the men of whom our text sings, “ He brought them out. of 
darkness and the shadow of death.” It is your condemned condition 
which needs free mercy; and, behold, the Lord meets your need in his 
boundless grace! To the doomed the Lord God in Christ Jesus will give 


free pardon this morning. I speak with great confidence, for my 

jg in the God of love. The Lord is going to hear prayer for you, sinners. — 
You shall be brought from under the black cloud which now threatens = 
you with overwhelming tempest; you shall come forth from the con- — ; 
demned cell, not to execution, but to absolution. Blessed be the name _ 

of the Lord, he passeth.by transgression, and doth it justly through the — 
atonement of his Son! 7 9 ene 
But next, these persons were bound men; for they “sat in darkness 
and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron.” Their a 
afflictions were like iron, hard and cold, and such they could not break t 








from. The iron entered into their souls; the rust fretted the flesh, oh 

and poisoned the blood. They were bound in a double sense : affliction ie 
within, and iron without. It is a terrible thing when a man feels that 

hs he is lost, and that he cannot get away from destruction. An evil habit re: 
has got him within its iron grasp, aud will not relax its hold. Even “ 
though he would, he cannot loose himself from the thraldom of his sin. of 
_. He has become a slave, and there is no escape for him’ “Omy God!” 
ey he cries, “what can I do?” The more he strains, the faster the iron 
: seems to hold him. His attempts to be free from evil only proveto  — 
oy ‘him how much enslaved he is. What an awful compound is described 4 
es in the text—“ affliction and iron”! The bondage is mental and physical 3) 
me too. The enslaved spirit and the depraved flesh act and react upon each 
other, and hold the poor struggling creature asin aniron net. Hecannot 
WA break off his sins, he cannot rise to a better life. I know that some of : 


(= 


you who are here at this time are in this case. You long to be delivered, 
but you are unable io cut the cords which hold you. You are greatly 
troubled day after day, and cannot rest; and yet you get no farther. 
You are striving to find peace, but peace does not come; you are labour- 
‘ing after emancipation from evil habits; but the habits hold you still ! 
‘ Friend thus bound, to you I have to tell the glad news that Jesus 
Christ has come on purpose that he might proclaim the opening of the 
prisons to them that are bound. “ He hath broken the gates of brass, 
and cut the bars of iron in sunder.” God is able to liberate men from 
every bond of sin over which they mourn. Wouldst thou be free? 


pe Sia oe | 


— 


# pl ie 4 
fe ak tein - 
ey ee A es 


tees t 
ey Poe 


He will open the door. There is no habit so inveterate, there is no 
passion so ferocious, but God can deliver you from it. If you will but 
trust in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, his grace is a hammer that can oi 


break your chains. Let Jesus say, “ Loose him, and let him go,” and 
not even devils can detain you. Christ’s warrant runs over the whole 
universe ; and, if he makes you free, you will be free indeed. . 
To advance another step, these persons were weary men ; for we read of 
them, ‘‘he brought down their heart with labour.” This does not happen 
to all in the same degree, but to some of us this labour was exceedingly 
grinding and exhausting. Our hearts were lofty, and needed briaging 
down; and the Lord used means to do it. With some, temporal 
circumstances go wrong: where everything used to prosper, everything 
appears to be under a blight. From abundance they descend to want. 
Perhaps the health also begins to give way, and from being strong and 
hearty men they become sickly and feeble. How often this tames 
proud spirits! If it be not outward sorrow, it is within that they 
labour till their heart is brought low. They cannot rest, and yet they 


3 


SEE, One ee ae 


s 


a a 












ies for ease: they go to the theatre, they bo 
, they laugh, they dance, they plunge into vice; but — 
| off the burden of their ‘sin, it will not be removed. 
giraffe, when the lion has leaped upon him, bears his enemy 
is shoulders, and cannot dislodge him even though he rushes — 
ss the wilderness like the wind, so the sinner is being devoured by _ 
8 sin while he madly labours to shake it off. While the unconverted. 
k to rest themselves, they do but increase their weariness. They 
_ labour, ay, labour as in the very fire; but itis labour in vain. In — 
_ vain do they hasten to every religious service, and attend to every 
_ sacred ceremony. In vain do they try to mourn; how can they put 
feeling into a heart of stone? If they could, they would make their 
_ tears for ever flow, and their prayers for ever rise ; but, to their horror, — 
_ they accomplish nothing. The whip of the law sounds, and they must — 
_ get to their tasks ayain; but the more they do, tle more they are undone. — 
_ Like one that, having fallen into a slough, sinks all the deeper into the Me 
_ mire through every struggle that he makes, so do they fall lower and 
lower by their efforts to rise. I understand those awful strugglings of 
‘yours, so desperate and yet so unavailing. God is bringing down your 
heart with labour; but have you not had enough of this? Do you not 
remember that love-word, ‘Come unto me, all ye that labour and are — 
- heavy-laden, and I will give you rest’’? Sweet promise ; will you not 
_ believe it, and avail yourselves of it ? Will you not come to Jesus, and  —s_— 
~ take the rest which he gives? How I wish you would come this very = 
_ day! I beseech the Holy Spirit to turn you to Jesus. The Lord has ~ 
- come forth with power to draw you, and to bring you away from your — 
weariness unto the sweet rest which remains for the people of God. — 
Poor doves, fly no further ; return to your Noah! These of whom we ~ 
speak at this time were as weary men as ever you can be, but Jesus gave 
_ them rest; why should he not give rest to you? Though bad, and 
banned, and bound, and burdened, there is yet hope; forthe Lord can 
set you free. + ay 
eae Again, these persons were downcast men—‘ they fell down, and there. 
was none to help.” “ We cannot go on any longer,” say they, “it is 
useless to exert ourselves. We cannot escape God’s wrath, and yet we 
cannot bear it. We are at our wits’ end. There is no use in our 
trying to be better. We must give it up in despair.” “They fell 
down ;” this shows that they were quite spent. The captive has been 
grinding at the mill till he cannot go another round; even the lash 
cannot make him take another step—he falls in faintness, as though life — 
had gone. So have we known men forced to acknowledge that they are 


die 





































“ without strength.” This was always true, but they did not always feel 
it. Now they have come to this, that, if heaven could be had for one " 
more effort, and hell escaped for one more good work, yet they could 
not do it. They fall down, and there they lie, a heap of helplessness, = 


dead in trespasses and sins. Where is now the boasted power of their 
free-will? Now it is to you who have fallen down, even to you, that 
the word of this salvation is sent. The Lord Jesus delights to lift up 
those that lie at his feet. He is a great overturner: “ He hath put 
down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.” 
He that flies aloft on the eagle’s wings of pride shall be brought 








630 _ METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


low by the shafts of vengeance; but he that humbles himself to 
the dust shall be lifted up. He that has fallen down, and lies in the 
dust at the feet of Jesus, lies on the doorstep of eternal life. The Lord 
will give power to the weak, and increase strength to those who have 
no might. I rejoice when T hear any one of you own to his weakness, 
since the Lord Jesus will now show forth his power in you. 

In fact, these persons were helpless men: “'They fell down, and there 
was none to help.” What a word that is— None to help”! The 
proverb says, “ God helps those that help themselves.” There is a sort 
of trath in it; but I venture to cover it with afar greater truth : “God 
helps those that cannot help themselves.” When there is none to help 
thee, then God will help thee. ‘There was none to help ”—no priest, 
no minister, not even a praying wife, or a praying mother, could now 
do anything; the man felt that human helpers were of no avail. His 
bed was shorter than that he should stretch himself upon it, and his 
covering was narrower than that he should wrap himself up in it. Now 
he saw that there was no balm in Gilead, there was no physician there ; 
and he looked to a higher place than Gilead for balm and medicine. 
The balm for such a wound as his must come from heaven, for on earth 
there was “none to help.” This is a fitting epitaph to be placed over 
the grave of self-righteousness. This also is the death-knell of priest- 
craft, birthright membership, and sacramentarianism. The conscience 
sees that there is ‘none to help.” Is this your case? Then you are 
the men in whom God will work the marvels of his grace, and bring 
you out where you shall walk in light and peace. 

There was only one good point about these people—they did at last 
take to prayng: ‘“‘Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble.” - 
was not much of a prayer to hear; it was too shrill to be musical; 
was too painful to be pleasant. “ They cried,” like one in sore monde 
they cried, like a child that has lost its mother ; “ they cried,” like some 
poor wounded animal in great pain. Do you ‘tell me that you cry, but 
that your cry is a very poor one? I know it, and I am glad to hear you 
say so, for the less you think of your cry the more God will think of it. 
Do you value yourself according to your prayers? Then your prayers 
have no value in them. When you think that your prayers are only 
broken words, and hideous moans, and wretched desires, then you begin 
to form a right estimate of them, and thus you are on true ground, 
where the Lord of truth can meet you. “They cried.” Was it any 
credit to them to cry? Why, no, it was what they were forced to do! 
They would not have cried to the Lord even then if they could have 
done anything else. They cried when their hearts had been brought so 
low that they fell down. It is a good fall when a man falls on his 
knees. O my dear hearer, whatever else you do, or do not do, are you 
crying to God in secret for his grace? Then, as surely as the Lord 
liveth, you shall come out into liberty. A praying man shall never be 
sent to perdition. There is that about prayer which makes it a token 
for good, a pledge of blessings on the road, a door of hope in dark hours. 
Where is the man that cries? Where is the man that prays? That 
is the man of whom it shall be said, and of others like him, “The Lord 
brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their 
bands in sunder.” 








peat 


OPE SAT OO aks Ry 





SONG FOR THE FREE, AND HOPE FOR THE BOUND. | 631 


‘May the Lord bless the description which I have given, so that some 
of }ou may see yourselves as in a looking-glass, and be encouraged to 
hope that the Lord will save you as he has saved others like you! If 
you do see yourself in the text, take home the comfort of it, and make 
use of it. Do not look at it, and say, “ This belongs to somebody else.” 
You bondaged brother, you self-despairing sinner, you are the man for 
whom Christ went up to the cross! If you saw a letter directed to 
yourself, would you not open it? I should think so. The other day a 
poor woman had a little help sent to her, by a friend, in a letter. She, 
was in great distress, and she went to that very friend begging for a few 
shillings. ‘‘ Why,” said the other, ‘I sent you money yesterday, by an 
order in a letter!” “Dear, dear!” said the poor woman, “that must 
be the letter which I put behind the looking-glass!” Just so; and 
there are lots of people who put God’s letters behind the Jooking-glass,. 
and fail to make use of the promise which is meant for them. Come, 
all ye that labour and are heavy-laden, come and taste my Master’s 
love, yea, take of it freely, and be filled with heavenly rest! 

II. Secondly, may God’s Spirit go with us while we answer the 
question: How HAS THIS DELIVERANCE BEEN WROUGHT? You that 
have been set free should tell how you were emancipated. Let me tell 
my story first. It was the gladdest news I ever heard when it was told 
me that Jesus died in my stead. I sat down in my misery, hopeless 
of salvation, ready to perish, till they told me that there was One who 
loyed me, and for love of me was content to yield his life for my 
deliverance. Wonder of wonders, he had actually borne the death- 
penalty forme! ‘They said that the Lord of glory had become man to 
save men, and that if I trusted him I might know assuredly that he 
nad suffered in my stead, and so had blotted out my sins. I marvelled 
much as I heard this ; but I felt that no one could have invented ‘news 
so strange. It surpassed all fiction that the offended God should him- 
self take my nature, and in the person of the Lord Jesus Christ should 
pay my debts, and suffer for my sins, and put those sins away. I 
heard the blessed tidings—there was some comfort even in hearing it— 
but I believed it, and clutched at it as for life. Then did I begin to 
live. I believe that truth to-day: all my hope lies there. If any of 
you wonder that I show fight for the substitutionary sacrifice of Christ, 
you may cease to wonder. Would not any one of you stand up for his wife 
and ebildren ? This truth is more to me than wife and children, it is 
everything tome. I am a damned man to all eternity if Christ did not 
die for me. I will put it no more softly than that. If my Redeemer 
has not borne my sins in his own body on the tree, then I shall have to 
bear them in my own body in the place of endless misery. I have no 
shade of a hope anywhere but in the sacrifice of Jesus ; I cannot, there- 
fore, give up this truth: I had sooner give up my life. I heard that 
the Son of God had suffered in my stead that I might go free: I 
believed it, and I said to myself, “‘ Then I have no business to be sitting 
here in darkness and in the shadow of death.” I shook myself from my 
lethargy, 1 arose, and went out of my prison ; aud as I moved to go 
eut, a light shone round about me, and my fetters fell clanking to the 
ground. What glorious musical instruments they were! The very 
things that had galled me so long now brought me joy. I found that 












ahd iron nieates pick I ponent could never Abe Fa 


wonderful; I thought I must be dreaming, I very soon kne 
‘surety that: it was I myself. The cold night air blew down the street of i 








_ of its own accord. I could not believe that it was true, it ‘see 


my daily care, and I said, “ Oh, yes, I am still on earth, and it is true, 


and I am free from despair, and delivered from the curse!” This is — 
how I came out to liberty: I believed in Jesus my Redeemer. To-day, 


‘ 
4s 
t 


my dear brothers and sisters here, hundreds of them, would each one 
tell the story in a different way, but it would come to the same thing. 


Follow me while we goa little into Scriptural detail, and learn from ie 


- David how the Lord sets free the captives. 
First, our deliverance was wrought by the Lord himself. Listen : 


“THE brought them out of darkness.” Write that “HE” in capital 


letters, Mr. “Printer. Have you in the house any specially large letters ? 
Tf so, set up that word in the most prominent type you have:—“ HE 
brought them out of darkness.” Read also the sixteenth verse :—“ HE 
hath broken the gates of brass.” Did the Lord s-nd an angel to 
liberate us? No; HE came himself in the person of his dear Son. 


When the Lord Jesus Christ had paid our enormous debt, did he leave 


us to accept our quittance entirely of our own free will, apart from his 
grace? Ah, no! the Holy Spirit came, and made us willing in the day — 
‘of his power! “HE,” “HEH,” “HE” wrought all the work for as, 
and all our works 77 us. ‘‘ HE brought them out of darkness and the ~ 
















cr 
ho 


oe 


shadow of death.” ‘Oh that men would praise the Lord, for HE hath 
ri ty 


broken the gates of brass.” It is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous 
in our eyes. “There is no salvation worth the having which has not the 
nand of the Godhead. in it. It needs Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to 


save a soul, None but the Trinity can deliver a captive soul from the ~ 


chains of sin and death and hell. Jehovah himself saves us. 

Next, the Lord did ut aione—“ He hath broken the gates of brass.” 
Nobody else was there to aid in liberating the prisoner. When our 
Lord Jesus trod the winepress, he was alone. When the Spirit of God 


came to work in us eternal life, he wrought alone. Instruments are 


condescendingly used to convey the word of life, but the life of the 
word is wholly of God. As to the divine Father, is it not true of “ his 
own will begat he us by the word of truth”? He is the Author of 
our spiritual life, and he alone. None can share the work of our sgal- 
vation with him, and none can divide the glory. Ho, you that are 


_ captives, are you looking for some man to help you? Remember, I 


pray you, that there is “none to help.” ‘Salvation is of the Lord.” 


Remember that verse, “‘ Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends — 


of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else ;” that is to say, 
there is none else in the work of salvation except God. O soul, if thou 


hast to do with Christ Jesus, thou must have him at the beginning, 


thou must have him in the middle, thou must have him in the end, 
and thou must have him to fill up every nook and corner from the first 
to the last. He alone hath done it. 

Note, too, that what he did was done by the Lord's own goodness ; 
for the Psalmist says, “Oh that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness!” His goodness took the form of mercy ; as it is said in 


the first verse of this psalm, “‘O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is 


ee 
i. 


cali 


i 
f 


bs 


44 


SNe, ee 


st Ae Fad, See Da 









Ue Sey GN ie Bide ONY, 
endureth for ever!” It must have been mercy, 

















_ from God as well as an appeal to God. Even prayer for mercy is not a 


: ‘upon them, and driven and drawn them to pray. 


“No sinner can be 
Beforehand with thee ; 
Thy grace is most sovereign, 


Most rich, and most free.” \ 






___pass by the transgressions of the remnant of his people. 

Note, once again, that while we are describing this great deliverance, 
__-we cannot help seeing that the Lord effected it most completely. What 
did he do? Did he bring them out of darkness? That was to give 


them light. Yes; but a man that is chained is only a little better off 







_ for getting light, for then he can see his chains all the more. Notice 
_ what follows—“and out of the shadow of death”: so the Lord gave 





longer brood over their darkened spirits. Yes, but when ‘a man has 
light and life, if he is still in bondage, his life may make him feel his 
bondage the more vividly, and his light may make him long the more 
for liberty. But it is added, “and he brake their bands in sunder,” 
: which means lberty. The Lord gave light, life, and liberty—these 


and then say, “I have done enough for you. I must stop midway,” 
2 Dear heart, if the Lord comes to your prison, he will not merely light a 


__. lamp in your dungeon, though that were something: he will not merely 


but he will break your chains, and bring you out into the liberty where- 
‘ with Christ makes men free. He will finish his emancipating work. 
Do it, Lord; do it now! Help men to believe in Jesus at this 
moment ! 


When the Lord does this, he does this everlastingly. He “ brake their 
bands in sunder.” When a man was set free from prison in the old 


| it blessed were as undeserving as they were 
They were guilty, guilty in action, and guilty in thought; 
Tebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel x 
ost High ; yet he came, and set them free. You andl arealways 
ig to know before we give alms to beggars, “Are they deserv- 
“y people?” God gives the alms of his grace only to the undeserving. _ 
We respond to those who have a claim upon us; God remembers those 
by who have no claim whatever upon him. “ Ah,”, says one, “but the | 
_ people did cry!” TI know they did ; but they did not even do that till 
_ he first of all brought down their heart with labour. Prayer is a gift 


cause, but a result. Grace is at the back of prayer, and at the base of | 
prayer. These prisoners would not have prayed if God had not wrought | 


___ So it has been with others, and therefore have I hope that it will be 
so with you, my beloved hearers, In the greatness of his goodness I 
trust my Lord will come and save you. It is not your goodness, but 
_ his goodness, which is the cause of hope: not your merit, but his mercy — 
is his motive for blessing you. How greatly do I rejoice to remember 
that the Lord delighteth in mercy! It is his joy to pardon sin, and — set 


them /ife as well as light. That “shadow of death” is gone, it can no 


pee at 


‘, three things. God does nothing by halves. He does not begin to save, 


revive your spirit, and give you more life, though that were something; — 


There is one more point which I want you to notice very carefully. 















Fa 


a 


a pee eer ee 


oo 


wae 


, 634 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


‘times when they used iron chains, the smith came, and took the chains © 
off, and then they were hung up upon the walls. Haye you never been 
in ancient prisons, and seen the fetters and manacles hanging up ready 
for use; ay, for use upon, those who have already worn such jewellery 
before, if they should come that way again? This is not the case 
here; for he “brake their bands in sunder.” Note this right well, 
O child of God, you were once shut up as with gates of brass, and 
bars of iron, and the devil thinks that one of these days he wili get 
you behind those gates again! But he never will, for the Lord “hath 
broken the gates of brass.” All the powers of darkness cannot shut us 
up with broken gates ! Satan thinks he will imprison usagain; but the 
bars of iron are cut in sunder. The means of our captivity are no 
longer available. My mind carries me to a certain scene, and my eye 
almost beholds it. Behold Samson, the hero of Israel, shut in within 
the walls of Gaza. The Philistines boast, “ Now will he be our captive.” 
He slept till midnight, and then he arose. He found that he was shut 
up within the city, and so he went to the gate. That gate was barred 
and locked ; but what mattered it? Israel’schampion bowed his great 
shoulders down to the gate: he took hold of both the posts, gave a 
tremendous heave, and in an instant tore up the whole construction 
from the earth in which it had been firmly placed. “ He lifted the 
doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with 
them, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top 
of a hill that is before Hebron.” See in this thing a symbol of what our 
Lord Jesus Christ did when he arose from the dead. He carried away 
all that which held. us captive—posts, and bar, and all. “He led 
captivity captive.” 

When our Lord had led us forth from our prison, he said to him- 
self, “‘ They shall never be shut up again, for now I will make sure 
work of it,” and therefore he brake the gates of brass, and cut the bars of 
iron in sunder. How then can any child of God be shut up within the 
Gaza of sin again? Howshall we be condemned when the Lord hath put 
away our sin for ever? No, the liberty received is everlasting liberty : 
we shall not see bondage any more. Oh, dear souls, 1 do want you to 
lay hold on this! You doomed and ouilty men, you downcast and 
wearied men, there is everlasting salvation for you; not that which will 
save you to-day, and will let you go back to your bondage to-morrow; 
but that which will make you the Lord’s free men forever! If thou 
believest that Jesus is the Christ, if thou believest in him to save thee, 
thou shalt be saved. It is not said half-saved, but saved. <‘ He that 
believeth and is baptized shall be saved.” That cannot admit that we 
should go to hell. Jesus says, “I give unto my sheep eternal life; and 
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my 
hand.” “He hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron 
in sunder.” Lord, help some poor souls to sing this song to-day, and 
receive at this moment everlasting salvation ! 

III. I close with a practical question: WHAT IS TO BE DONE ABOUT 
THis? If such people as we have described have been brought into 
liberty, what is to be done about it? Ido not want to tell you what 
to do, I would have you do it by instinct. Fain would I, like Miriam, 
take a timbrel, and go first, and bid all the sons and daughters of Israel 








Ve Ae ae Sirs tls in ts ew Dyer ee. eee a pie Pin Se 4) Boa AL! ge OOM | 
Leaks we . } had oa Ws) pe: a m\ ‘ 


- 


SONG FOR THE FREE, AND HOPE FOR THE BOUND. 635 


follow me in this song: “Sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed 
gloriously. He hath brought out his captives, and set his people free.” 
It naturally suggests itself to the liberated spirit to magnify the Lord. 
So the Psalmist put it, ‘Oh that men would praise the Lord for his 
goodness !” 

First, then, if the Lord has set any of you free—record it. See how 
David wrote it down. Write it in your diary; write it so that friends 
may read it. Say, “The Lord hath done great things for us.” 

When you have recorded it, then praise God. Praise God with all 
your heart. Praise God every one of you. Praise God every day. 
When you have praised God yourselves, then entreat others tu join with 
you. The oratorio of God’s praise needs a full choir. I remember, 
years ago, a bill connected with a religious service of a very pretentious 
character, and on this bill it promised that the Hallelujah Chorus should 
be sang before the sermon. The friend who led the singing for me at 
that time came in to me, and asked if I could spare him. “See here,” 
said he, “a person has come from the service which has been advertised 
to say that they have nobody to sing the Hallelujah Chorus. The 
minister wants me to go down and do it.” I answered, “ Yes; by all 
means go. Ifyou can sing the Hallelujah Chorns alone, don’t throw 
yourself away on me.” Then we smiled, and at last broke out into a 
laugh; it was too much for our gravity. Surely for a man to think that 
he can sufficiently praise God alone is much like attempting to sing the 
Hallelujah Chorus as a solo. The Psalmist therefore utters that great 
“Oh!” ‘*Oh that men would praise the Lord!” I do not think he 
said “men;”’ for the word ‘‘men” is in italics: the translators are 
accountable for it. He means: Oh that angels, oh that cherubim and 
seraphim would praise the Lord! Oh that all creatures that have 
breath would praise the Lord for his goodness! Even that would not 
be enough, but let the mountains and the hills break forth before him 
into singing, and let all the trees of the wood clap their hands. Let 
the sea roar and the fulness thereof, the world and they that dwell 
therein. With a great “Oh!” with a mighty sigh over the holy 
business, which was far too great for himself, David felt moved to call 
upon all others to praise the Lord. 

I close with that; my brothers, my sisters, you that have been saved, 
praise God! Praise him with the blessings he has lavished on you. 
I described them in three ways. With your lghé praise him: the more 
you know, the more you see, the more you understand, turn it all into 
praise. Next, with your /ife praise him—with your physical life, with 
your mental life, with your spiritual life: with life of every sort even 
unto eternal life praise the Lord. uiberty has been given us; let 
our freedom praise him. Belike that man who was made straight, who 
went out of the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God. God 
has made you free, feel free to praise him: and if men will not give 
you leave to praise, take French leave ; yea, take heavenly leave, and 
praise God anywhere and everywhere. Hark! how they sing the sougs 
of Bacchus and of Venus in the streets, and even wake us up in the 
night: why may not we sing God’s praises in the same public fashion? 
We must praise him! We will praise him! We do praise him! We 
shall praise him for ever and ever ! 


















ifs  Biaibe bi with the tear he tae ‘chatieed, with the tips a 
4a with the lives he has spared. A little while ago you could not 
cheerful word, but now you can rejoice in God. Let those lips, from — 
: which he has taken the muzzle of dumb despair, be opened in his | 
_ praise. Praise him with all the talents he has lent you. If you have’ 
any power of thought, if you have any fluency of speech, praise him, 
If you have any voice of song, praise him. If you have health and | 
strength, praise him. Let every limb of your body praise him: those 
members which were servants of sin, let them be instruments of 
; righteousness unto God. Praise him with your substance. Let your 
gold and silver, ay, and your bronze, praise him. Praise him with all 
that yon have, and with ail that you are, and with all that you hope 
to be. Lay your all upon the altar. Make a whole burat-offering of 
it. Praise him with all the influence you have. If he has delivered 
you from the shadow of death, let your shadow, like that of Peter, fe 
become the instrument of God’s healing power to others. Teach others 
to praise God. Influence them by your example. Fill your house with 
music from top to bottom; perfume every room with the fragrance of 
living devotion. Make your houses belfries, and be yourselves the bells 
for ever ringing out the loud praises of the Lamb of God. He bore 









eg eos ak 





your sins, bear you his praises. He died for you, therefore live for _ i 
him. He has heard your prayers, let him hear your praises. Let us te 
together sing “ Hallelujah to God and the Lamb. ” Let us stand upon 
our feet, and with one voice and heart let us sing: Bee 
“ Praise God, from whom all blessings flow, ¥4 

Praise him all creatures here below, e,” 

Praise him above, ye heavenly host, . ee 

Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.” ‘4 ae 


PorTION OF SCRIPTURE READ BEFORE SeRMON—Psalm cvii. 1—32. 





Moe i 


Me Hymns From “Our Own Hymn Boox”—906, 126, 136 (Song IL). ag 
Na a sae ae an 7 
a Cloth Gilt, Qs. | 
Words of Wisdom for Daily Life. 
: Uniform with “WORDS OF GHEER FOR DAILY LIFE.” | ‘a 
Contents :—What is Pride? A Drama in Five Acts. Going 


through the Fire. The Evils of Sloth. Sleep,.a Gift of God. 
Capital Punishment. Profit and Loss. Have Courage. Be 
Sober. Show your Colours, &c. 


we pi By C. H. SPURGEON. 


eee 





PASSMORE & ALABASTER, Paternoster Buixpincs, Lonpon, E.C. 















- YOUNG MAN, IS THIS FOR YOU? 


i A Sermon Ree 
Dettverep on Lorp’s-pay Moryine, Janvary 157TH, 1888, BY | 


Co He SPURGEON: 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON. 










__“ And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city called Nain; and many — 
_ of his disciples went with him, and much people. Now when he came nigh to the gate 
_ of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother, and 
she was a widow: and much people of the city was with her. And when the Lord saw 
her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not. And he came and touched 
____the bier: and they that bare him stood still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, 
_ Arise. And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him 
ane to his mother. And there came a fearon all: and they glorified God, saying, That a 
__ great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited his people. And this 
rumour of him went forth throughout all Judea, and throughout all the region round — 
___ about.”’—Luke vii. 11—17. i 
















_ Bznorp, dear brethren, the overflowing, ever-flowing power of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. He had wrought a great work upon the cen- 
_ turion’s servant, and now, only a day after, he raises the dead. “It | 
came to pass the day after, that he went into a city called Nain.” ~ 
- Day unto day uttereth speech concerning his deeds of goodness. Did 
he save your friend yesterday? His fulness is the same; if you seek 
him, his love and grace will flow to you to-day. He blesses thisday, __ 
and he blesses the day after. Never is our divine Lord compelled to 

pause until he has recruited his resources; but virtue goeth out of 
him for ever. These thousands of years have not diminished the 
_ aboundings of his power to bless. 

Behold, also, the readiness and naturalness of the outgoings of his 
life-giving power. Our Saviour was journeying, and he works 
E - miracles while on the road: ‘‘He went into a city called Nain.” It 
___-was incidentally, some would say accidentally, that he met the funeral 
procession ; but at once he restored to life this dead young man. Our 

blessed Lord was not standing still, as one professionally calledin; he 
does not seem to have come to Nain at any one’s request for the dis- 
play of his love; but he was passing through the gate into the city, 

_ for some reason which is not recorded. See, my brethren, how the 
Lord Jesus is always ready to save! He healed the woman who 
touched him in the throng when he was on the road to quite another 
_ person’s house. The mere spillings and droppings of the Lord’s cup 
of grace are marvellous. Here he gives life to the dead when he is 
en route; he scatters his mercy by the roadside, and anywhere and 
everywhere his paths drop fatness. No time, no place, can find Jesua 
meet No. 2,003. 





ee 


“ 












‘ 





26 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


unwilling or unable. When Baal is on a journey, or sleepeth, his 
deluded worshippers cannot hope for his help; but, when Jesus 
journeys or sleeps, a word will find him ready to conquer death, or 
quell the tempest. 

It was a remarkable incident, this meeting of the two processions at 
the gates of Nain. If some one with a fine imagination could picture 
it, what an opportunity he would have for developing his poetical . 
genius! I venture on no such effort. Yonder a procession descends 
from the city. Our spiritual eyes see death upon the pale horse coming 
forth from the city gate with great exultation. He has taken another 
captive. Upon that bier behold the spoils of the dread conqueror! 
Mourners by their tears confess the victory of death. Like a general 
riding in triumph to the Roman capitol, death bears his spoils to the 
tomb. What shall hinder him? Suddenly the procession is 
arrested by another: a company of disciples and much people are 
coming up the hill. We need not look at the company, but we may 
fix our eyes upon one who stands in the centre, a man in whom low- 
liness was always evident, and yet majesty was never wanting. It 
is the living Lord, even he who only hath immortality, and in him 
death has now met his destroyer. The battleis short and decisive; no 
blows are struck, for death has already done his utmost. With a 
finger the chariot of death is arrested; with a word the spoil is taken 
from the mighty, and the lawful captive is delivered. Death flies 
defeated from the gates of the city, while Tabor and Hermon, which 
both looked down upon the scene, rejoice in the name of the Lord. 
This was a rehearsal upon a small scale of that which shall happen 
by-and-by, when those who are in their graves shall hear the voice of 


“the Son of God and live: then shall the last enemy be destroyed. Only 


let death come into contact with him who is our life, and it is com- 
pelled to relax its hold, whatever may be the spoil which it has cap- 
tured. Soon shall our Lord come in his glory, and then before the 
gates of the New Jerusalem we shall see the miracle at the gates 
of Nain multiplied a myriad times. 

Thus, you see, our subject would naturally conduct us to the doc- 
trine of the resurrection of the dead, which is one of the foundation 
stones of our most holy faith. That grand truth I have often declared 
to you, and will doso again and again; but at this time I have selected 
my text for a very practical purpose, which concerns the souls of some 
for whom I am greatly anxious. The narrative before us records a 
fact, a literal fact, but the record may be used for spiritual instruction. 
All our Lord’s miracles were intended to be parables: they were in- 
tended to instruct as well as to impress: they are sermons to the eye, 
just as his spoken discourses were sermons to the ear. We see here 
how Jesus can deal with spiritual death; and how he can impart 
spiritual life at his pleasure. Oh, that we may see this done this 
morning in the midst of this great assembly ! 

I. I shall ask you first, dear friends, to reflect that THE SPIRITUALLY 
DEAD CAUSE GREAT GRIEF TO THEIR GRACIOUS FRIENDS. If an ungodly 
man is favoured to have Christian relatives, he causes them much 
anxiety. As a natural fact, this dead young man, who was being 
carried out to his burial, caused his mother’s heart to burst with 








4 7 


f 


YOUNG MAN, I8 THIS FOR You? 27 


grief. She showed by her tears that her heart was overflowing with 
sorrow. The Saviour said to her, ‘‘ Weep not,” because he saw how 
deeply she was troubled. Many of my dear young friends may be 
_ deeply thankful that they have friends who are grieving over them. 
It is a sad thing that your conduct should grieve them; but it is a 
hopeful circumstance for you that you have those around you who do 
thus grieve. If all approved of your evil ways, you would, no doubt, 
continue in them, and go speedily to destruction; but it is a blessing 
that arresting voices do at least a little hinder you. Besides, it may 
yet be that our Lord will listen to the silent oratory of your mother’s 
tears, and that this morning he may bless you for her sake. See how 
the evangelist puts it: ‘‘ When the Lord saw her, he had compassion 
on her, and said unto her, Weep not.” And then he said to the young 
man, ‘‘ Arise.” 

Many young persons who are in some respects amiable and hopeful, 
nevertheless, being spiritually dead, are causing great sorrow to those 
who love them best. It would perhaps be honest to say that they do not 
intend to inflict all this sorrow ; indeed, they think it quite unnecessary. 
Yet they are a daily burden to those whom they love. Their conduct 
is such that when it is thought over in the silence of their mother’s 
chamber, she cannot help but weep. Her son went with her to the 
house of God when he was a boy, but now he finds his pleasure in a 
very different quarter. Being beyond all control now, the young man > 
does not choose to go with his mother. She would not wish to deprive 
him of his liberty, but she laments that he exercises that liberty so 
unwisely ; she mourns that he has not the inclination to hear the Word 
of the Lord, and become a, servant of his mother’s God. She had 
hoped that he would follow in his father’s footsteps, and unite with 
the people of God; but’ he takes quite the opposite course. She has 
seen a good deal about him lately which has deepened her anxiety: 
he is forming companionships and other connections which are sadly 
harmful to him. He has a distaste for the quietude of home, and he 
has been exhibiting to his mother a spirit which wounds her. It may 
be that what he has said and done is not meant to be unkind; but it. 
is very grievous to the heart which watches over him so tenderly. She 
sees a growing indifference to everything that is good, and an uncon- 
cealed intention to see the vicious side of life. She knows.a little, and 

fears more, as to his present state, and she dreads that he will go 
from one sin to another till he ruins himself for this life and the next, 
O friends, it is to a gracious heart a very great grief to have an un- 
converted child; and yet more so if that child is a mother’s boy, her 
only boy, and she a desolate woman, from whom her husband has been 
snatched away. ‘To see spiritual death rampant in one so dear is a 
sore sorrow, which causes many a mother to mourn in secret, and pour 
out her soul before God. Many a Hannah has become a woman of a 
sorrowtul spirit through her own child. How sad that he who should 
have made her the gladdest among women has filled her life with 
bitterness! Many a mother has had so to grieve over her son as almost 
to cry, ‘‘ Would God he had never been born!” It is so in thousands 
of cases. If it be so in your case, dear friend, take home my words 
¢o yourself, and reflect upon them. 














_- METROPOLITAN 


dead to God, dead to Christ, dead to the Holy Spirit. It is sad, indeed, 


that you should be dead to those divine truths which are the delight 


‘The cause of griet lies here: : we mourn that shay pele, be in neh rata 
' ease. In the story before us the mother wept because her son was — 
Ee and we sorrow because our young friends are spiritually dead. _ 
There is a life infinitely higher than the life which quickens- our 
_ material bodies; and oh that all of you knew it! You, who are un- 
- renewed, do not know anything about this true life. Oh, how we 
__-wish you did! Tt seems to us a dreadful thing that you should be 








and strength of our souls; dead to those holy motives which keep us yea 
back from evil, and spur us on to virtue; dead to those sacred joys 
which often bring us very near the gates of heaven. We cannot look 


‘at a dead man, and feel joy in him, whoever he may be: a corpse. 


however delicately dressed, is a sad sight. "We cannot look upon you, 


_ ye poor dead souls, without erying out, ‘‘ O God, shall it always be so ? 


Shall not these dry bones live? Wilt thou not quicken them?’ The 


apostle speaks of one who lived in pleasure, and he said of her, “She _ 


is dead while she liveth.” Numbers of persons are dead in reference 


to all that is truest, and noblest, and most divine; and yet in other 


respects they are full of life and activity. Oh, to think that they 


should be dead to God, and yet so full of jollity and energy! Marvel 
not that we grieve about them. — 


We also mourn because we lose the help and comfort which they ought to 


bring us. This widowed mother no doubt mourned her boy, not only 


because he was dead, but because in him she had lost her earthly 
stay. She must have regarded him as the staff of her age, and the 
comfort of her loneliness. ‘‘ She was a widow”: I question if anv- 
body but a widow understands the full sorrow of that word. We may 
put ourselves by sympathy into the position’ of one who has lost her 
other self, the partner of her life; but the tenderest sympathy cannot 
fully realize the actual cleavage of bereavement, and the desolation of 
love’s loss. ‘‘She was a widow”’—the sentence sounds like a knell. 
Still, if the sun of her life was gone, there was a star shining; she 


had a boy, a dear boy, who promised her great comfort. He would, © ue 


no doubt, supply her necessities, and cheer hyr loneliness, and in him 
her husband would live again, and his name would remain among the» 
_ living in Israel. She could lean on him as she went to the synagogue; _ 


she would have him to come home from his work at evening, and 
keep the little home together, and cheer her hearth. Alas! that star 


is swallowed up in the darkness. He is dead, and to-day he is borne ~ 


to the cemetery. It is the same spiritually with us in reference to our 
unconverted friends. With regard to you that are dead in sin, we feel 
that we miss the aid and comfort which we ought to receive from you 
in our service of the living God. We want fresh labourers in all sorts 
of places—in our Sunday-school work, our mission among the masses, 
and in all manner of service for the Lord we love! Oursis a gigantic 


burden, and we long for our sons to put their shoulders to it. We did 


look forward to see you grow up in the fear of God, and stand side by 
side with us in the great warfare against evil, and in holy labour for 
the Lord Jesus; but you cannot help us, for you are yourselves on 
the wrong side. Alas, alas! you hinder us by causing the world te 


f 









ho those young men are acting!” We have to spend 
nd prayer, and effort over you which might usefully have 









Nl around us is very pressing, but you do not share it with us: 
are perishing from lack of knowledge, and you do not help us. 
deavouring to enlighten them. . 












a 
eae” b 
ae 





nor she to him, for he is on the bier, ‘a dead man carried out.” Omy 





you; but they cannot hold any spiritual communion with you, nor you 





~ 


- mingle heart with heart in the appeal of faith to God as to the cares 
_ which prowl around your home. O young man, when your mother’s 
_ heart leaps for joy because of the love of Christ shed abroad in her — 
_ soul, you cannot understand her joy. Her feelings are a mystery to 
_ you. If youare a dutiful son, you do not say anything disrespectful — 
_ about her religion; but yet you cannot sympathize in its sorrows or 

_its joys. Between your mother and you there is upon the best things 









weeping over your corpse. I remember, in the hour of overwhelming 
_ anguish when I feared that my beloved wife was about to be taken 
_ from me, how I was comforted by the loving prayers of my two dear 


young men! I should have looked in vain for holy fellowship, and 
for aid at the throne of grace. Alas! inmany a household the mother 
_  ¢annot have communion with her own son or daughter on that point 
_ which is most vital and enduring, because they are spiritually dead, 
' _ while she has been quickened into newness of life by the Holy Spirit. 
Moreover, spiritual death soon produces manifest causes for sorrow. In 
_ the narrative before us the time had come when her son’s body must 
_ be buried. She could not wish to have that dead form longer in the 
home with her. It is a token to us of the terrible power of death, 
that it conquers love with regard to the body. Abraham loved his 
_ Sarah; but after a while he had to say to the sons of Heth, ‘Give 
me a possession of a burying-place with you, that I may bury my 
dead out of my sight.” It happens in some mournful cases that 
__ character becomes so bad that no comfort in life can be enjoyed while 
__ the erring one is within the home circle. We have known parents 
who have felt that they could not have their son at home, so drunken, 
so debauched had he become. Not always wisely, yet sometimes 
almost of necessity, the plan has been tried of sending the incorrigible 
youth to a distant colony, in the hope that when removed from per- 
nicious influences he might do better. How seldom so deplorable an 
experiment succeeds! I have known mothers who could not think of 
their sons without feeling pangs far more bitter than those they 
endured at their birth. Woe, woe to him who causes such heart-broak | 





DSi ag 


‘forth for others. Our care for yonder great dark world which 


. Surther grief ts that we can have no ‘fellowship with them. The mother S 
at Nain could have no communion with her dear son now that he was 
dead, for the dead know not anything. He can never speak to her, 


iends, certain of you have dear ones whom you love, and they love & 


_ with them. You never bow the knee together in private prayer, nor 


a gulf as wide as if you were actually dead on the bier, and she stood ~ 


sons: we had communion not only in our grief, but in our confidence 

in the living God. We knelt together and poured out our hearts unto 
_ God, and we were comforted. How I blessed God that I had in my 

children such sweet support! But suppose they had been ungodly _ 
























sae 


we " rs es ti 
PoE St tee Pip aue ee ac) 
OS aan a ie oe NP Ee eI, 


Sore tocar 
ES es ean 


bs 
ao) ae 


y 








30 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPI¥. 


What an awful thing it is when love’s best hopes gradually die 
down into despair, and loving desires at last put on mourning, 
and turn from prayers of hope to tears of regret! Words of admo- 
nition call: forth such passion and blasphemy that prudence almost 
silences them. Then have we before us the dead young man carried 
out to his grave. A sorrowful voice sobs out, ‘‘He is given unto 
idols, let him alone.” Am I addressing one whose life is now preying 
upon the tender heart of her that brought him forth? Do I speak 
to one whose outward conduct has at last become so avowedly wicked 
that he is a daily death to those who gave him life? O young man, 
can you bear to think of this? Are you turned to stone? I cannot 
yet believe that you contemplate your parents’ heart-break without 
bitter feelings. God forbid that you should ! 

We also mourn because of the future of men dead in sin. This mother, 
whose son had already gone so far in death that he must be buried out 
of sight, had the further knowledge that something worse would befall 
him in the sepulchre to which he was being carried. It was impossible 
for her to think calmly of the corruption which surely follows at the 
heels of death. When we think of what will become of you who 
refuse the Lord Christ we are appalled. ‘‘ After death the judgment.” 
We could more readily go into details as to a putrid corpse than we 
could survey the state of a soul lost for ever. We dare not linger at 
the mouth of hell; but we are forced to remind you that there is a 
place “‘where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.” 
There is a place where those must abide who are driven from the 
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. It is an 
unendurable thought, that you should be “cast into the lake of fire, 
which is the second death.” Ido not wonder that those who are not 
honest with you are afraid to tell you so, and that you try yourself to 
doubt it; but with the Bible in your hand, and a conscience in your 
bosom, you cannot but fear the worst if you remain apart from Jesus 
and the life he freely gives. If you continue as you are, and persevere 
in your sin and unbelief to the end of life, there is no help for it but 
that you must be condemned in the day of judgment. The most 
solemn declarations of the Word of God assure you that ‘he that 
believeth not shall be damned.” It is heart-breaking work to think 
that this should be the case with any one of you. You prattled at 
your mother’s knee, and kissed her cheek with rapturous love; why, 
then, will you be divided from her for ever? ‘Your father hoped that 
you would take his place in the church of God; how is it that you do 
not even care to follow him to heaven? Remember, the day comes when 
“‘one shall be taken, and the other left.” Do you renounce all hope 
of being with your wife, your sister, your mother, at the right hand of 
God? You cannot wish them to go down to hell with you; have you 
no desire to go to heaven with them? ‘Come, ye blessed,” will be 
the voice of Jesus to those who imitated their gracious Saviour; and 
“‘Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels,” must be the sentence upon all who refuse to 
be made like the Lord. Why will you take your part and lot with 
accursed ones ? 

Lao not know whether you find it easy to hear me this morning. 


ROU pee ies ot S702 ery ¥ 
t Be eel at ALES nk to 
els rt ea UNIONS 





A wy 
i } 


YOUNG MAN, I8 THIS FOR You? 31 





I find it very hard to speak to you, because my lips are not able to 
express my heart’s feelings. Oh that I had the forceful utterance of 
an Isaiah, or the passionate lamentations of a Jeremiah, with which 
' to arouse your affections and your fears! Still, the Holy Spirit can 
use even me, and I beseech him so to do. It is enough. J am sure 
you see that the spiritually dead cause great grief to those of their 
family who are spiritually alive. 

If. Now let me cheer you while I introduce the second head of my 
discourse, which is this: FoR SUCH GRIEF THERE IS ONLY ONE HELPER: 
BUT THERE IS A HELPER. This young man is taken out to be buried; 
but owr Lord Jesus Christ met the funeral procession. Carefully note 
the “ coincidences,” as sceptics call them, but as we call them “ provi- 
dences ” of Scripture.’ This is a fine subject for another time. Take — 
this one case. How came it that the young man died just then? How 
came it that this exact hour was selected for his burial? Perhaps. 
because it was evening; but even that might not fix the precise 
moment. Why did the Saviour that day arrange to travel five-and- 
twenty miles, so as to arrive at Nain in the evening? How came it 
to pass that he happened just then to be coming from a quarter which 
naturally led him to enter at that particular gate from which the dead 
would be borne? See, he ascends the hill to the little city at the 
same moment when the head of the procession is coming out of the 
gate! He meets the dead man before the place of sepulture is reached. 
A little later and he would have been buried; a little earlier and he 
would have been at home lying in the darkened room, and no one 
might have called the Lord’s attention to him. The Lord knows how 
to arrange all things; his forecasts are true to the tick of the clock. 
I hope some great purpose is to be fulfilled this morning. I do not 
know why you, my friend, came in here on a day when I am dis- 
coursing on this particular subject. You did not think to come, perhaps, 
but here you are. And Jesus has come here too; he has come here 
on purpose to meet you, and quicken you to newness of life. There 
is no chance about it, eternal decrees have arranged it all, and we 
shall soon see that it isso. You being spiritually dead are met by 
him in whom is life eternal. 

The blessed Saviour saw all at a glance. Out of that procession he 
singled out the chief mourner, and read her inmost heart. He was 
always tender to mothers. He fixed his eye on that widow; for he 
knew that she was such, without being informed of the fact. The 
dead man is her only son: he perceives all the details, and feels 
them all intensely. O young man, Jesus knows all about you. 
Nothing is hid from his infinite mind. Your mother’s heart and 
yours are both open to him. Jesus, who is invisibly present this 
morning, fixes his eyes on you at this moment. He has seen the 
tears of those who have wept for you. He sees that some of them 
despair of you, and are in their great grief acting like mourners at 
- your funeral. 

Jesus saw it all, and, what was more, entered into it all. Oh, how we 
ought to love our Lord that he takes such notice of our griefs, and 
especially our spiritual griefs about the souls of others! You, dear 
teacher, want your class saved: Jesus sympathizes with you. You, 








‘ae. dont ‘have: peor” very rer to win souls. 
this you are workers together with God. Jesus knows a 
_ travail of soul, and he is at one with us therein. Our travail is 
his own travail rehearsed in us, according to our humble meas 
__/’ When Jesus enters into our work it cannot fail. Enter, O Lord, into a 
my work at this hour, I pray thee, and bless this feeble word to my — 
hearers! I know that hundreds of believers are saying, “Amen.” 
How this cheers me! oe! 









— 











. Our Lord proved how he entered into the sorrowful state of things ‘bye first “ 
saying to the widow, ‘“‘ Weep not.” At this moment he says "to ae 
you who are praying and agonizing for souls, ‘Do not despair! 4 
_ Sorrow not as those who are without hope! I mean to bless ‘¥OUs ae 
You shall yet rejoice over life given to the dead.” Let us take heart _ 





and dismiss all unbelieving fear. af 
Our Lord then went to the bier, and just laid his finger upon it, and 
ss they that bare tt stood still of their own accord. Our Lord hasa way of 
Bee. making bearers stand still without a word. Perhaps to-day yonder 
aS? young man is being carried further into sin by the four bearers of his 


a natural passions, his infidelity, his bad company, and his love of strong __ 
Boy 7 drink. It may be that pleasure and pride, wilfulness and wickedness _ 
ae are bearing the four corners of the bier; but our Lord can, by his 
mysterious power, make the bearers stand ‘still. Evil influences have 
es become powerless, the man knows not how. r 
When they stood quite still, there was a hush. The disciples stood - — 
around the Lord, the mourners surrounded the widow, and the two 
crowds faced each other. There was a little space, and ‘Jesus and the rae 
dead man were in the centre. The widow pushed away her veil, and ~ 
gazing through her tears wondered what was coming. The J ews 
who came out of the city halted as the bearers had done. Hush! © 
Hush! What will nz do? In that deep silence the Lord heard the 
unspoken prayers of that widow woman. I doubt not that her soul 
began to whisper, half in hope, and half in fear—‘‘Oh, that he would 
raise my son!” At any rate, Jesus heard the flutter of the wings of 
desire if not of faith. Surely her eyes were speaking as she gazed 
_ on Jesus, who had so suddenly appeared. Here let us be as quiet as 
“sie the scene before us. Let us be hushed for a minute, and pray God — 
; to raise dead souls at this time. (Here followed a pause, much silent 
prayer, and many tears.) 
IiI.. That hush was not long, for speedily the Great Quickener 
entered upon his gracious work. This is our third point: Jxsus 18 
ABLE TO WORK THE MIRACLE OF LIFE-GIVING. Jesus Christ has life in 








mle a 


— 
< 


i, himself, and he quickeneth whom he will (John v. 21). Such life is 
a there in him that ‘‘he that liveth and believeth in him, though he were 
i dead, yet shall he live.” Our blessed Lord immediately went up to the 
e bier. What lay before him? It was a corpse. He could derive no asd 
. from that lifeless form. The spectators were sure that he was dead, for 
; Ki they were carrying him out to bury him, No deception was possible, for 


his own mother believed him dead, and you may be sure that if there 
ate had been a spark of life in him she would not have given him up to 
a the jaws of the grave. There was then no hope—no hope from the 
eg dead man, no hope from any one in the crowd either of bearers or of 








They were all powerless alike. Even so, you, O sinner, 
ve yourself, neither can any of us, or all of us save you. 

s no help for you, dead sinner, beneath yon skies; no help in 
olf or in those who love you best. But, lo, the Lord hath laid 








r it, for you are dead in sins. There you lie, dead on the bier, 
and nothing but the sovereign power of divine omnipotence can put 
he venly life into you. Your help must come from above. 











m personally: ‘‘Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.” © Master, 
“personally speak to some young man this morning; or, if thou wilt, 
‘speak to the old, or speak to a woman; but speak the word home to 
em. We mind not where the Lord’s voice may fall. Oh that it would 
yw call those around me, for I feel that there are dead ones all 
er the building! I stand with biers all about me, and dead ones on 
em. Lord Jesus, art thou not here? What is wanted is thy personal 
ll. Speak, Lord, we beseech thee! 
‘Young man,” said he, ‘‘arise;” and he spake as tf the man had 
en ale. This is the gospel way. He did not wait till he saw signs 
life before he bade him rise; but to the dead man he said, ‘‘ Arise.” 
his is the model of gospel preaching: in the name of the Lord , 
Jesus, his commissioned servants speak to the dead as if they were 
ve. Some of my brethren cavil at this, and say that it is incon- 
tent and foolish; but all through the New Testament it is even so. — 
here we read, ‘‘ Arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee 
ht.” Ido not attempt to justify it; it is more than enough for me. 
that so I read the Word of God. We are to bid men believe on the 
_ Lord Jesus Christ, even though we know that they are dead in sin, 
and that faith is the work of the Spirit of God. Our faith enables us 
-God’s name to command dead men to live, and they do live. We 
bid unbelieving man believe in Jesus, and power goes with the Word, 
and God’s elect do believe. It is by this word of faith which we 
each that the voice of Jesus sounds out to men. The young man 
10 could not rise, for he was dead, nevertheless did rise when Jesus 
ade him. Even so, when the Lord speaks by his servants the gospel 
command, ‘ Believe and live,” is obeyed, and men live. 
' But the Saviour, you observe, spoke with his own authority— Young 
man, J say unto thee, Arise.” Neither Elijah nor Elisha could thus 
_ have spoken; but he who spoke thus was very God of very God. 
_ Though veiled in human flesh, and clothed in lowliness, he was that 
same God who said, ‘‘ Let there be light, and there was light.” If 
ny of us are able by faith to say, ‘‘ Young man, Arise,” we can only 
say it in jis name—we have no authority but what we derive from 
- kim. Young man, the voice of Jesus can do what your mother cannot. 
- How often has her sweet voice wooed you to come to Jesus, but wooed 
m vain! Oh, that the Lord Jesus would inwardly speak to you! Oh, 
that he would say, ‘‘ Young man, Arise.” I trust that while I am 
1 peaking the Lord is silently speaking in your hearts by his Holy 
Spirit. I feel sure that it is even so. Ifso, within you a gentle 
yvement of the Spirit is inclining you to repent and yield your heart 
Jesus. This shall be a blessed day to the spiritually dead young 


Soe ae 





























on one that is mighty. If Jesus wants the least help you cannot | we 


hile the bier stood still, Jesus spoke to the dead young man, spoke 





84) METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


man, if now he accepts his Saviour, and yields himself up to be. 
renewed by grace. No, my poor brother, they shall not bury you! 

I know you have been very bad, and they may well despair of you; 

but while Jesus lives we cannot give you up. 

The miracle was wrought straightway: for this young man, to the 
astonishment of all about him, sat up. His was a desperate case, but. 
death was conquered, for he sat up. He had been called back from 
the innermost dungeon of death, even from the grave’s mouth; but 
he sat up when Jesus called him. It did not take a month, nora 
wéek, nor an hour, nay, not even five minutes. Jesus said, ‘‘ Young, 
man, Arise.” And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak.” . In. 
an instant the Lord can save a sinner. Ere the words I speak can. 
have more than entered your ear, the divine flash which gives you 
eternal life can have penetrated your breast, and you shall be a new 
creature in Jesus Christ, beginning to live in newness of life from this . 
hour, no more to feel spiritually dead, or to return to your old corruption. 
New life, new feeling, new love, new hopes, new company shall be 
yours, because you have passed from death unto life. Pray God that 
it may be so, for he will hear us. 

IV. Our time has gone, and although we have a wide subject we 
may not linger. I must close by noticing that THIS WILL PRODUCE — 
VERY GREAT RESULTS. To give life to the dead is no little matter. 

The great result was manifest, first, in the young man. Would you 
like to see him as he was? Might I venture to draw back the sheet. 
from his face? See there what death has done. He was a fine young 
man. To his mother’s eye he was the mirror of manhood! What — 
a pallor is on that face! Howsunken are the eyes! You are feeling 
sad. I see you cannot bear the sight. Come, look into this grave, 
where corruption has gone further in its work. Cover himup! We 
eannot bear to look at the decaying body! But when Jesus. Christ 
has said, ‘‘ Arise,” what a change takes place! Now you may look 
at him. His blue eye has the light of heaven in it; his lips are. 
coral red with life; his brow is fair and full of thought. Look at his 
healthy complexion, in which the rose and the lily sweetly contend for 
mastery. What a fresh look there is about him, as of the dew of 
the morning! He has been dead, but he lives, and no trace of death, 
is on him. While you are looking at him he begins to speak. 
What music for his mother’s ear! What did he say? Why, that I, 
eannot tell you. Speak yourself as a newly-quickened one, and then 
I shall hear what you'say. I know what / said. I think the first. 
word I said when I was quickened was, ‘‘ Hallelujah.”’ Afterwards, 
I went: home to my mother, and told her that the Lord had met with. 
me. No words are given here. It does not quite matter what those 
words are, for any words proved him to be alive. If you know the 
Lord, Ibelieve you will speak of heavenly things. I do not believe 
that our Lord Jesus has a dumb child in his house: they all speak to 
him, and most of them speak of him, The new birth reveals itself in 
confession of Christ, and praise of Christ. I warrant you, that his. 
mother, when ‘she heard him: speak, did not criticize what he. said. 
She did not say, ‘‘That sentence is ungrammatical.” She was too 
glad to hear him speak at all, that she did not examine all the 





YOUNG MAN, I8 THIS FOR Yor? 36 


expressions which he used. Newly-saved souls often talk in a way whick 
after years and experience will not justify.. You often hear it said of 
@ revival meeting, that there was a good deal of excitement, and cer- 
tain young converts talked absurdly. That is very likely: but if 
genuine grace was in their souls, and they bore witness to the Lord 
Jesus, I for one would not criticize them very severely. Be glad if 
you can see any proof that they are born again, and mark well their 
_ future lives. To the young man himself a new life had begun—life 
from among the dead. ; 
A new life also had begun in reference to his mother. What a great 
result for her was the raising of her dead son! Henceforth he would 
be doubly dear. Jesus helped him down from the bier, and delivered 
him to his mother. We have not the words he used; but we are sure 
that he made the presentation most gracefully, giving back the son to 
the mother as one presents a choice gift. With a majestic delight 
which always goes with his condescending benevolence, he looked on 
that happy woman, and his glance was brighter to her than the light 
of the morning, as he said to her, ‘‘ Receive thy son.’ The thrill of, 
her heart was such as she would never forget. Observe carefully that 
our Lord, when he puts the new life into young men, does not want to 
take them away with him from the home where their first duty lies. 
Here and there one is called away to be an apostle or a missionary ; 
but usually he wants them to go home to their friends, and bless their 
parents, and make their families happy and holy. He does not pre- 
sent the young man to the priest, but he delivers him to his mother. 
Do not say, ‘“‘I am converted, and therefore I cannot go to business 
any more, or try to support my mother by my trade.” That would 
prove that you were not converted at all. You may go for a mis- 
sionary in a year or two’s time if you are fitted for it; but you must 
not make a dash at a matter for which you are not prepared. For the 
present go home to your mother, and make your home happy, and 
charm your father’s heart, and be a blessing to your brothers and 
sisters, and let them rejoice because ‘‘he was dead, and is alive again; 
he was lost, and is found.” 
- What was the next result? ‘Well, all the neighbours feared and 
glorified God. If yonder young man who last night was atthe music- 
hall, and a few nights ago came home very nearly drunk; if that 
young man is born again, all around him will wonder at it. If that 
young man who has got himself out of a situation by gambling, or 
some other wrong-doing, is saved, we shall all feel that God is very 
near us. If that young man who has begun to associate with evil 
women,, and to fall into other evils, is brought to be pure-minded and 
gracious, it will strike awe into those round about him. . He has led 
many others astray, and if the Lord now leads him back it will make 
a great hubbub, and men will enquire as to the reason of the change, 
and will see that there is a power in religion after all. Conversions 
are miracles which never cease. These prodigies of power in the 
moral world are quite as remarkable as prodigies in the material 
world. We want conversion, so practical, so real, so divine, that those 
who doubt will not be able to doubt, because they see in them the hand 


@f.God. tn '" . iia ie 

















a 
i. 
Bates 
Betis j 





them, but the rumour of it went everywhere. Who can tell? Ifa | 
_ ~ gonvert is made this morning, the result of that conversion may be felt — 
_ for thousands of years, if the world stands so long; ay, it shall be felt 





ve % Res ’ 1 OEE ir bigot vey * ; nets Ns 
| ‘METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE > ON ise 


f] 


- Finally, note that it not only surprised the neighbours and impress 





when a thousand thousand years have passed away, even throughout 


3 - eternity. Tremblingly have I dropped a smooth stone into the lake 
this morning. It has fallen from a feeble hand and from an earnest _ 
heart. Your tears have shown that the waters are stirred. I perceive 


the first circlet upon the surface. Other and wider circles will follow 


as the sermon is spoken of and read. When you go home and tell © 


what God has done for your soul, there will be a wider ring; and if 
it should happen that the Lord should open the mouth of one of this 
-mnorning’s converts to preach his word, then no one can tell how wide 


the circle will become. Ring upon ring will the word spread itself, 


until the shoreless ocean of eternity shall feel the influence of this 


-morning’s word. No, I am not dreaming. According to our faith so 


shall it be. Grace this day bestowed by the Lord upon one single 


beseech you, for Jesus Christ’s sake, pray much for me. Amen. 


Porrion oF ScrIPTURE READ BEFORE SERMON—Luke vii. 


OREM at ouaret el Oia e au en ie 
BOOKS OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


FOR CHRISTIAN WORKERS. 


The WEEKLY REVIEW says :—“ These extracts are quite Spurgeonic— . 


racy, rich, and rare, both as to style and matter—full of exquisite consolation, 
faithful advice, clear analogies, poetic touches, and glorious old gospel.” 





FLASHES OF THOUGHT. _ 1,000 Choice Extracts... 5/- 
THE’ .SALT-CELLARS. |) * SiieHomely nokee 2 vols.) ao eee 
SPURGEON'S © GEMS...) ieee) aan ee 


FEATHERS “FOR ARROWS oa) 0 ay oo ac a 
ILLUSTRATIONS AND MEDITATIONS... ...  .. 2/6 


BARBED ARROWS ... aN aoe era He sxe 2/6 


GLEAMINGS AMONG THE SHEAVES... ... 0... Ife | 





Lonpon: PASSMORE & ALABASTER, 4, Paternoster Buildings, E.C, — 


oo 






j 


>. w+ 


ite Ee 


— 
5 a ats ee 


Ne 


\ ‘S 
i Sense 
fait reset oe oh 
hy Ye 


Aaa 


soul may affect the whole mass of humanity. God grant his blessing, _ 
even life for evermore. Pray much for a blessing. My dear friends,I 


fig PAS ee 
OG ee eae 


2 


Pe ee 


atest 
"PF ,) = <¥ 


i 


e 


Je Ne al 


<3 EP oS 
we Se 


< 
Fs 
Lo oy, 


Sse 












| THE MAINTENANCE OF GOOD WORKS. 


¢ 


Bo A Sermon , eo 
ca Dextverep on Lor’s-pay Morwine, SePremBer 2Np, 1888, BY ue i 


C. H. SPURGEON, 1 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON. 














_. _ **For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, Gisohedient, deceived, serving divers 
lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. But 
_ -aiter that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man appeared, not by 
_ works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, 
by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on 
us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour ; that being justified by his grace, we 
should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. This isa faithful saying, — 
and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believedin  __ 
_ God might be careful to maintain good works. These things are good and profitable —__ 
_ unto men.’’—Titus iii. 3—8. At, 
_ lLasr Thursday evening my sermon was based upon the contrast, in 
_ the second chapter of Ephesians, between the expressions ‘“‘not of 
works” and ‘created in Christ Jesus unto good works.” I tried to — 
_ show the true place of good works in connection with salvation. Many — 
___ of you were not present then, and I felt that the subject was of such _ 
extreme importance that I must return to the same line of thought __ 
in this greater congregation. I shall endeavour by another text, 
which contains the same contrast, to set before you the usefulness, the — 
_ benefit, yea, and the absolute necessity for our abounding in good 
_ works, if indeed we are saved by faith in Christ Jesus. 
___ Let us come at once to our text. Our apostle tells us that we are. 
to speak evil of no man, but to show meckness unto all men; and he cs 
adds this as an all-sufficient reason—we ourselves also were sometimes 
like the very worst of them. When we look upon the world at this 
* day, it pains us by its folly, disobedience, and delusion. He that. 
knows most of this modern Babylon, whether he observes the richer 













































- or the poorer classes of society, will find the deepest cause for grief. ay 
-_- But we cannot condemn with bitterness, for such were some of. us. a 
__ Not only can we not condemn with bitterness, but we look upon our t 
sinful fellow-creatures with great compassion, for such were some id 


of us. , Yea more, we feel encouraged to hope for ungodly men, even 
se for the foolish and disobedient, for we ourselves also were, not long mi 
_ . ago, like them. We feel that we must give the thought of our heart Nea 
‘and the energy of our lives to the great work of saving men, outof 
es, gratitude to the Lord our God, who, in his kindness and love, has saved © 

us. “I amaman,” said one, ‘and everything that has to do with 


No. 2,042. ca. 










ce Sn METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 
men concerns me.”: ile ‘his: child of Goa adds, to this, a3 La am also a 
sinful man, and owe my cleansing to the loving favour of the Lord. 

I was in the same mire of sin as these are in; and if lam now washed. 
in the laver of regeneration, and renewed by. the Holy Ghost, I owe it 
all to sovereign grace, and am bound by love to man and love to God 
to seek the cleansing and renewal.of my fellow-men.” yes that have 
wept over our own sin will always be most ready to weep over the sins. 
of others. If you have judged yourselves with candour, you will not 
judge others with severity. You will be more ready to pity than to. 
condemn, more anxious to hide a multitude of sins than to punisk a 
single sinner. I will give little for your supposed regeneration if 
there is not created in you a tender heart, which can truly say— 


“My God, I feel the mournful scene ; 
My bowels yearn o’er dying men ; 
And fain my pity would reclaim, 
And snatch the firebrands from the flame.” 


With this feeling towards mankind at large, we are led to consider 
the divine remedy for sinfulness, and to look with pleasure upon what 
God has devised for the creation of holiness in a fallen race. He at 
first created man a pure and spotless being. When he placed Adam 
in the garden, he made a friend of him; and though Adam has fallen, 
and all his race are depraved, God is still aiming at the same thing, 
namely, to create holy beings, purified unto himself, to be a peculiar 
people, zealous for good works. What has the Lord done? What is 
he still doing to this end? How far have we participated in those 
processes of grace which work towards this glorious design ? 

I ask your attention this morning while I speak, first, of what we 
were; and here let the tears stand in your eyes : secondly, of what has 
been done for us ; and here let grace move in your hearts: and, thirdly, 
of what we wish to do; and here let care be seen in your lives. 

I. First, beloved, let us think for a few minutes only oF wHaT 
WE ONCE WERE. Think, I say, with tears of repentance in our eyes 
‘‘ For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, 
serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, 

and hating one another.” The apostle does not say, ‘“ Ye your- 
selves,” as if he spoke to Titus and the believing Oretians, but we our- 
selves, thus including himself. Beloved apostle, thou dost humbly 
present to us this bitter cup of confession, drinking of it thyself with 
us, and putting thyself on a level with us—“ We ourselves also.” 
Come, then, pastor, elders, deacons, and members of the church, you 
that have served your Lord for many a hesitate not to join in 
this humiliating confession, 

A threefold set of evils is here described. The first set consists of 
the evils of the mind: ‘*We were sometimes foolish, disobedient, 
deceived.” We were foolish. We thought we knew, and therefore 
we didnot learn. We said, ‘‘We see,” and therefore we were blind, 
and would not come to Jesus for sight. We thought we knew better 
than God; for our foolish heart was darkened, and we imagined our- 
selves to be better Judges of what was good for us than the Lord our 
God. We refused heavenly warnings because we dreamed that sin 








ue i 


THE MAINTENANCE OF GOOD WORKS. ‘ 495 


was pleasant and profitable. We rejected divine truth because. we 
did not care to be taught, and disdained the lowly position of a disciple 
sitting at Jesus’ feet. Our pride proved our folly. What lying things 
we tried to believe! We put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; 
darkness for light, and light for darkness. In thought, desire, 
language, and action ‘‘ we were sometimes foolish.” Some of us were 
manifestly foolish, for we rushed headlong into sins which injured us; 
- and have left that in our bones which years have not been sufficient to 
remove. very lover of vice is a fool writ large. O my brother, I 
suppose you have no photograph of yourself as you used to be; but if 
you have, take it down, and study it, and bless God that he has made 
you to differ.so greatly from your former self! 

In addition to being foolish, we are said to have been disobedient ; 
and so we were, for we forsook the commands of God. We wanted 
our own will and way. We said, ‘‘ Who is the Lord, that we should 
obey his voice?” There is a touch of Pharaoh about every one of us. 
Obedience is distasteful to the obstinate; and we were such. “TI 
knew,” said God, ‘‘ that thou wast very obstinate, and hadst an iron 
sinew.” Our necks by nature refuse to bow to the yoke of our 
Creator. We would, if we could, be the lords of providence, for we 
are not content with the divine allotment. We wish that we were the 
legislators of the universe, that we might give license to our own lusts, 
and no longer be hampered with restrictions. To the holy law of God 
“we were disobedient. Ah, how long some of us were disobedient to 
the gospel! We heard it as though we heard it not; or when it did 
touch the heart, we did not allow its influence to remain. Like water, 
which retains no mark of a blow, so did we obliterate the effect of 
truth. We were determined not to be obedient to the faith of the 
Lord Jesus. We were unwilling to yield God his due place either in 
providence, law, or gospel. 

Paul adds that we were deceived, or led astray. As sheep follow 
one another, and go away from the pasture, so did we follow some 
chosen companion, and would not follow the good Shepherd. We 
were deceived. Perhaps we were deceived in our thoughts, and made 
to believe a lie; certainly we were deceived in our idea of happiness ; 
we hoped to find it where it does not exist, we searched for the living 
among the dead. We were the dupes of custom and of company. We 
were here, there, and everywhere in our actions: no more to be relied 
upon than lost sheep. 

Children of God, remember these errors of your minds, lay them — 
upon your consciences, and let your souls plead guilty to them; for 
I feel assured that we have all, in some measure, been in this triple 
condition—foolish, disobedient, deceived. 

The next bundle of mischief is found in the evils of our pursuits. The 
apostle says we were “serving divers lusts and pleasures.” ‘The word 
for ‘‘serving ’? means being under servitude. We were once the slaves 
of divers lusts and pleasures. By /usts we understand desires, longings, 
ambitions, passions. Many are these masters, and they are all tyrants. 

Some are ruled by greed for money ; others crave for fame; some are 
‘enslayed by lust for power ; others by the lust of the eye; and many 
by the lusts of the flesh. We were born slaves, and we live slaves 


etl thd Seva Tabara ubacipatan us. No man can 
bondage than to be enslaved by his own evil desires. cass 
hh ‘We were also the bond-slaves of pleasure. pick alas! that, we 
were so far infatuated as to call it pleasure! Looking back at our” 
former lives, we may well be amazed that we could once take pleasure t 
in things whereof we are now ashamed. The Lord has taken the very 
name of our former idols out of our mouths. Some who are now e* 
_ saints were once the slaves of drunkenness, or of “chambering and EG 
_ wantonness.”” Some were given up to evil company and rioting, or 
to pride and self-seeking. Many are the evils which array themselves _ 
_ in the silken robes of pleasure, that they may tempt the hungry heart — 
‘of man. Once we took pleasure in those sins which are now our misery — 
hs as we look back on them. O my brethren, we dare not deny our base 
-_. original! To-day we drink from the well of holiness undefiled plea- 
sures which delight our souls; but we blush as we remember that 
aforetime yonder foul and putrid pools seemed sweet to our vitiated 
taste. Like Nebuchadnezzar in the failure of his mind, we fed among 
‘i beasts in the madness of our sin. Unlike the Egyptians, who loathed 
to drink of the river when God had smitten it with his curse, we took 
all the more delight in draughts of unhallowed pleasure because it 
yielded a fearful intoxication to know that we were daring to defy 











i 
: 





ew 


Sig 
CS be 





a a law. 
‘ie Do not let me talk about these things this morning while you 
ae listen to me without feeling. I want you to be turning over fey 
ase pages of your old life, and ” joining with Paul and the rest of us. 
aa in our sad confession of former pleasure in evil. A holy man was wot 


to carry with him a book which had three leaves in it, but never a word. 
The first leaf was black, and this showed his sin ; the second wasred, 
and this reminded him of the way of cleansing by blood; while the 

_- third was white, to show how clean the Lord can make us. I beg you 
just now to study that first black page. Itisall black; andasyoulook 
at it, it shows blacker and blacker. What seemed at onetime to bea 
little white darkens down as it is gazed upon, till it wears the deepest 
shade of all. Ye were sometimes erring in your minds and in your 
pursuits. Is not this enough to bring the water into your eyes, O ye 
that now follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth ? 

The apostle then mentions the evils of our hearts. Here you must dis- — 
criminate, and judge, each one for himself, how far the accusation lies. 
He speaks of ‘‘livingin malice and envy, hatefuland hating one another.” 
That is to say, first, we harboured anger against those who had done us 





evil; and, secondly, we lived in envy of those who appeared to have ‘ 
hs more good than we had ourselves. The first sin is very common: 
a many abide year after year in the poisonous atmosphere of an angry 


spirit. All are not alike in this, for some are naturally easy and 
placable; but in all of us there is that proud spirit which resents injuries, 
and would revenge them. Men may sin against God, and we are not 
indignant ; but if they sin against us, we are very angry. To the spirit 
of Christ iti is natural and even delightful to forgive: but such is not 
; the spirit of the world. I have heard of men who would not forgive | 
their own children, and of brothers who were implacable towards each 
other. This is the spirit of the devil. Revenge is the delight of the - 


















s in return for injury is the luxury of : 
distinction between the heirs of God and tl 
f wrath is this: the unregenerate are in the power of self, 
e, but the regenerate are under the dominion of Christ 
love. Thou mayest'judge thyself by this, whether thy prevai 
s that of wrath or of love: if thou art given to anger, thou ar 
d of wrath; and if thou art full of love, thou art a child of God, 
ose name is love. God help us to stamp out the last spark of per- 
sonal animosity! Let us remove the memories of injury, as the 
incoming tide washes out the marks on the sand. If any of youhave ~ 
putes in your family, end them at once, cost what it may. How — 
nm you love God whom you have not seen if you do not love your 
rother whom you have seen? Grace makes a great change in this 
-espect in those who by nature are malicious. 1k ah NE 
_ The other form of evil is envy of those who seem to have more of _ 
ood than we have. Frequently envy attacks men because of their _ 
wealth. How dare they have luxuries when we are poor? Atother 
times envy spits its venom against a man’s good repute, when he 
happens to be more praised than we are. How can any man venture 
_ to be better thought of than we are? Truly this is the spirit of the © 
__ devil, the spirit which now worketh in the children of disobedience. 
- The child of God is delivered from envy by the grace of God; andif | 
it ever does arise, he hates himself for admitting it. He would wish __ 
_ to see others happy, even if he were unhappy himself. If he be inthe ~ eS 
_ depths of poverty, he is glad that everybody is not so pinched ashe 
is. If he has received unjust censure, he is willing to hope that there 
_ was some mistake; and he is glad that everybody is not quite sa / 
unfairly dealt with. He rejoices in the praise of others, and triumphs — 
in their success. What! do you wince at this, and feel that you have — 
not reached so far? May grace enable you to get into this spirit, for _ 
it is the spirit of Jesus! SOLES 8 ae : 
Beloved, sin takes different shapes in different people, but it is in — 
_usall. This darkness once beclouded those who to-day shine like stars — 
among the godly. Sin is often restrained by circumstances, and yet — 
it is in the heart. We ought not to take credit to ourselves because _ 
of our freedom from evils into which we had no chance of falling. We 
have not been so bad as others because we could not be. A certain 
- boy has run away from home. Another boy remained at home. Taso es % 
he, therefore, a better child? Listen! he had broken his leg, and 









































































could not get out of bed. That takes away all the credit of his — a 
staying at home. Some men cannot sin in a certain direction, and — on 

then they say to themselves, ‘‘ What excellent fellows we are toabstain : 
from this wickedness!” Sirs, you would have done it if you could, 
‘¥ and therefore your self-praise is mere flattery. Had you been placed 
in the same position as others, you would have acted as others have — 


ees done, for your heart goes after the same idols. Sin in the heart of every 
- man defiles everything that he does. Even if an ungodly man should 
_ do what in itself might be a good action, there is a defilement in his = 
‘motive which taints it all. You cannot draw pure water froma foul = 
well. As is the heart, such is the life. Listen to this, ye that have ! 
never passed under the processes of divine grace. See what you are, 








vt ‘ Ln Ri Y 
‘ j ‘ ‘ ee TE abst 
. 


“498 \ METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, PULPIT. 
and where you are, if left to yourselves, and ery to the Lord to save 


UW. , 
II. Now for a more cheerful topic. We are now to think or wHar 
HAS BEEN DONE FoR vs; and here let us feel the movements of grace in 
our hearts. What has been done for us? 
First, there was a divine interposition. ‘*The kindness and love 
of God our Saviour toward man appeared.” Man was in the dark, 
plunging onward to. blacker midnight every step he took. I do not 
tind, as I read history, any excuse for the modern notion that men 
are longing for God, and labouring to find him. No, the sheep were 
never seeking the Shepherd, but all were going astray. Men every- 
where turn their backs to the light, and try to forget what has been 
handed down by their forefathers: they are everywhere feeling after 
a great lie which they may raise to the throneof God. We do not by 
nature long after God, nor sigh for his holiness. The gracious Lord 
came in uncalled for and unsought, and in the bounty of his heart, 
and in the great love of his nature, he determined to save man. 
Methinks I hear him say, ‘‘ How shall I give thee up?” He sees 
mankind resolved to perish unless an almighty arm shall intervene ; 
.and he interposes in fulness of pity and power. You know how, in 
many ways, the Lord has intervened on our behalf; but, especially, 
you remember how he came down from heaven, took our nature, lived 
among us, mourned our sin, and bore it in his own body on the tree. 
You know how the Son of God interposed in that grand Avatar, that 
- marvellous incarnation in which the Word became flesh, and dwelt 
among us. Then oroke he what would else have been an everlasting 
_darkness; then snapped he the chain which must have fettered our 
humanity throughout all the ages. The love and kindness of God our 
Saviour, which had always existed, at length ‘“‘appeared”’ when God, 
in the pergon of his Son, came hither, met our iniquities hand to hand, 
and overcame their terrible power, that we also might overcome. 
Note well that there was a divine salvation. In consequence of the 
interposition of Jesus, believers are described as being saved: ‘‘ not by 
-works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his 
. mercy he saved us.” Hearken to this. There are men in the world 
who are saved: they are spoken of, not as ‘‘to be saved,” not as 
to be saved when they come to die, but saved even now—saved 
from the dominion of the evils which we described under our first 
head: saved from folly, disobedience, delusion, and the like. Who- 
-soever believeth in the Lord Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to 
be the propitiation for sin, is saved from the guilt and power of sin. 
He shall no longer be the slave of his lusts and pleasures; he is saved 
from that dread bondage. He is saved from hate, for he has tasted love, 
and learned to love. He shall not be condemned for all that he has 
hitherto done, for his great Substitute and Saviour has borne away 
the guilt, the curse, the punishment of sin; yea, and sin itself. O my 
hearer, if thou believest in the Lord Jesus Christ this morning, thou 
art saved! As surely as once thou wast lost, being led astray, so 
surely art thou now saved, if, thou art a believer, being found by the 
great Shepherd, and brought back again upon his shoulders. 1 beg 
you to get hold of this truth, that according to his me sy the Lord 











THE } AINTENANCE OF GOOD WORKS. 499 


_ has saved us who believe in Jesus. ‘Will you tell me, or rather tell 
yourselves, whether you are saved or not? If you are not saved, you 
are lost; if you are not already forgiven, you are already condemned. 
You are in the ruin of fallen nature, unless you are renewed by the 
Holy Ghost. You are a slave to sin, unless your liberty has been 
procured by the great ransom. Examine yourselves on these points, 
and follow me in the next thought. 

There was a motive for this salvation. Positively, “‘ According to his 
mercy he saved us”; and negatively, ‘‘Not by works of righteous- 
ness which we have done.” Brethren, we could not have been saved 

_at the first by our works of righteousness ; for we had not done any. 
“‘ No,” says the apostle, ‘“‘ we were foolish, disobedient, deceived,” and 
therefore we had no works of righteousness, and yet the Lord inter- 
posed and saved us. Behold and admire the splendour of his love, 
that ‘‘He loved us even when we were dead in sins.” He loved us, 
‘and therefore quickened us. God does not come to men to help them 
when they are saving themselves; but he comes to the rescue when 
they are damning themselves. When the heart is full of folly and 

disobedience, the good God visits it with his favour. He comes, 
not according to the hopefulness of our character, but according to 
his mercy ; and mercy has no eye except for guilt and misery. The 
grace of God is not even given according to any good thing that we 
have done since our conversion: the expression before us shuts out 
all real works of righteousness which we have done since regenera- 
tion, as all supposed ones before it. The Lord assuredly foreknew 
these works, but he also foreknew our sins. He did not. save us 
according to the foreknowledge of our good works, because these works 
are a part of the salvation which he gave us. As well say that a 
physician healed a sick man, because he foreknew that he would be 
better; or that you give a beggar an alms, because you foresee that 
he would have the. alms. Works of righteousness are the fruit of 
salvation, and the root must come before the fruit. The Lord saves 
his people out of clear, unmixed, undiluted mercy and grace, and for 
no other reason. ‘‘I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, 
and I will have compassion on whom I will have:compassion. So. 
then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God; 
that sheweth mercy.” Oh, how splendidly is the grace of God séen. 
in the whole plan of salvation! How clearly is it seen in our cases, 
for ‘‘ we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived,” 
yet he saved us, ‘‘not by works of righteousness which we have done, 
but according to his mercy”! Will not some self-convicted sinner 
find comfort here? O despairing one, does not a little hope come in 
by this window? Do you not see that God can save you on the 
ground of mercy? He can wash you and renew you according to the: 
sovereignty of his grace. On the footing of merit you are hopelessly 
lost, but on the ground of mercy there is hope. era 

Observe, next, that there was a power by which we were sawed, ‘He 
saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy 
Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our 
Saviour.””? The way in which we are delivered from the dominion of 
sin is by the work of the Holy Ghost. This adorable Person is very 









a See nee from our nature—a life which is a new creation of Go 
We are saved, not by evolution, but by creation. The Spirit of God | 

_ ereates us anew in Christ Jesus unto good works. We experience re- 
_ generation, which means—being generated over again, or born again. — 
_ Remember the result of this as set forth in covenant terms—‘“A new 
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and 
IT will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you 
an heart of flesh.” This great process is carried out by the Holy Ghost. 








BS h 


‘Gad ae very od “This divine Being comes ‘tb ‘us, ar 
‘born again. By is eternal power and Godhead, he gi 
new nature, a life which could not grow out of our former life, 


After we are regenerated, he continues to renew us; our thoughts, 


feelings, desires, and acts are constantly renewed. Regeneration as 

_ the commencement of the new creation can never come twice to any 
man, but renewal of the Holy Ghost is constantly and perpetually — 
repeated. The life once given is revived: the light once kindled is — 


fed with holy oil, which is poured upon it continually. The new-born 
life is deepened and increased in force by that same Holy Spirit who 


first of all created it. See then, dear hearers, that the only way to — 
holiness is to be made anew, and to be kept anew. The washing of 


regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost are both essential. 


The name of Jesus has been engraved in us, even on our hearts, but 
it needs to be cut deeper and deeper, lest the letters be covered up 


by the moss of routine, or filled up by the bespatterings of sin. We 
are saved ‘‘by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy 
Ghost ”’—one process in different stages. This is what our God has 
done for us; blessed be his name! Being washed and renewed we 
are saved. 

There is also mentioned a, blessed privilege which comes to us by Jesus 


Christ. The Spirit is shed on us abundantly by Jesus Christ, and we | 


are ‘‘justified by his grace.” Both justification and sanctification 
come to us through the medium of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Holy 


‘Spirit is shed on us abundantly ‘‘ through Jesus Christ our Saviour.” 


Beloved, never forget that regeneration is wrought in us by the Holy 
Spirit, but comes to us by Jesus Christ. We do not receive any 
blessing apart from our Lord Jesus. In all works of the Spirit, 


whether regeneration or renewal, it is the Lord Jesus who is putting 


forth his power, for he saith, ‘Behold, I make all things new.’ 
The Mediator is the conduit-pipe through which grace supplies us day 
by day with the water of life. Everything is by Jesus Christ. 
Without him was not anything made that was made, either in grace 
or in nature. We must not think it possible for us to receive anything 


_ from God apart from the appointed Mediator. But, oh, think of it! 


—in Jesus Christ we are to-day abundantly anointed by the Holy Spirit ; 
the sacred oil is shed upon us abundantly from. him who is our Head. 
Weare sweet to God through the divine perfume of the Holy Spirit 
who comes to us by Jesus Christ. This day we are just in the sight 
of God in Christ’s righteousness, through which we are “ justified by 

ace.’’ Jehovah sees no sin for which he must punish us; he has 
said, ‘‘ Take away his filthy garments from him, and set a fair mitre 
upon his head”; and this is done. We are accepted in the Beloved, 






















ed fro the power and onl of sin. Wha a high ata is : 
this! Can we ever sufficiently praise God for it? 
Or e more, there comes out of this a divine result. We become to- du ze 
with Christ Jesus, and so heirs of a heavenly estate; and 
1 out of this heirship there grows a hope which reaches forward to 
he ternal future with exceeding j joy. We are “made heirs according’ 
o the hope of eternal life.” Think of that! What a space there is 
reen ‘‘ foolish, disobedient, deceived ”—right up to “heirs accord- 
o the hope of eternal life ” ! Who thought of bridging this great 
[? Who but God? With what power did he bridge it? | How, ‘ 
db t by the divine power and Godhead of the Holy Ghost? Where — 
as the bridge found by which the chasm could be crossed? The 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, who loved us and gave himself for pe 
has made a way over the once ‘impassable deep. 
_ Ihave thus very briefly set before you an outline of the work of | 
grace within the human heart. Do you understand it? Have you 
ever felt it? Do you feel the life of regeneration pulsing Bee ee rE 
this morning { ? Will you not bless God “for it? 


























** We raise our Father’ s name on high, 
Who his own Spirit sends 
To bring rebellious strangers nigh, | 
And turn his foes to friends.” 







3 Ie : \ / 
ee e TI. We will now speak of wHAT-WE wisH TO DO; and here let us 
show care in our lives. Mark well these words, “ This’ is a faithful 
saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they 
which have believed in God might be careful to: maintain, good works. 
__‘These things are good and profitable unto men.’ 

-—s “Be careful to maintain good works.” This precept is full in its. 
meaning. In another Scripture you are told to be careful for nothing, | 
but here you are bidden to be careful to maintain good oe We. 
read, “casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you”’: but do 
not cast off your care to maintain good works. You have a number. 
‘of cares about you; slip a bridle over their heads, and train them to 
plough in the field of good works. Do not let care be wasted over — 
food and raiment and such temporary matters—these may be left _ 
with God; but take sacred cares upon you—the cares of holy and 
gracious living. Yoke your best thoughts to the car of holiness—‘ be : 


Se 
careful to maintain good works.”  . : 










What are good works? The term is greatly inclusive. Of course . 
we number in the list works of charity, works of kindness and “4 
benevolence, works of piety, reverence, and holiness. Such works as 
~ comply with the two tables of command are good works. Works of 
obedience are good works. What you do because God bids you do 
os it, is a good work. Works of love to Jesus, done out of a desire for 
‘i his glory, these are good works. The common actions of every-day 
: life, when they are well done, with a view not to merit, but out of i 
gratitude—these are good works. ‘‘Be careful to maintain good 
works” of every sort and kind. You are sure to be working in some | xy 








{ 


502 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIY. 


way, mind that your works are good works. If you have commenced, 
well, be careful to maintain good works; and if you have maintained 
them, go on to increase them. I preached last Thursday night as now 
—salvation by grace, and by grace alone; and if I know how to speak 
plainly, I certainly did speak plainly then, and I hope I do so now. 
Remember, you are saved by grace, and not by works of righteous- 
ness; but after you are saved there comes in this precept, ‘‘ Be careful 
to maintain good works.” 

This precept is special in its direction. To the sinner, that he may 
be saved, we say not a word concerning good works, except to 
remind him that he has none of them. ‘To the believer who is saved, 
we say ten thousand words concerning good works, beseeching him te 
bring forth much fruit, that so he may be Christ’s disciple. There is 
all the difference between the living and the dead: the living we 
arouse to work; the dead must first receive life. Exhortations which 
may most fittingly be addressed to the regenerate may be quite out 
of place when spoken to those who are under the power of unbelief, 
and are strangers to the family of grace. The voice of our text is 
to them that have believed in God; faith is pre-supposed as the 
absolutely indispensable foundation of good works. You cannot work 


jthat which will please God if you are without faith in him. As 
/there is no coming to God in prayer without believing that he is 
and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him, so 


there is no bringing any other sacrifice to him without a faith suitable 
tothe business in hand. For living works you must have a living 
faith, and for loving works you must have a loving faith. When we 
know and trust God, then with holy intelligence and sacred confidence 
we work his pleasure. Good works must be done freely: God wants 
not slaves to grace his throne; he seeks not from us the forced works 
ef men in bondage. He desires the spontaneous zeal of consecrated 


\. souls who rejoice to do his will, because they are not their own, but 


bought with the precious blood of Jesus. It is the heartiness of our 
work which is the heart of it. To those who have renewed hearts, 
this exhortation is addressed—“ Be careful to maintain good works.” 
This precept is weighty in importance, for it is prefaced thus: ‘This. 
is a faithful saying.” ‘This is one among four great, matters thus de- 
scribed. It is not trivial, it is not a temporary precept which belongs 


to an extinct race and a past age. ‘‘ This is a faithful saying’—a true 
Christian proverb, ‘that they which have believed in God might be 
careful to maintain good works.” . Let the ungodly never say that we 


who believe in free grace think lightly of a holy life. O you who are 
the people of my care, I charge you before God and the holy angels that, 
in proportion as you hold the truth of doctrine, you follow out the 
purity of precept! You hold the truth, and you know that salvation 
is not of man, nor of man’s work: it is not of merit, but of mercy, not 
of ourselves, but of God alone; I beseech you to be as right in practice 
as in doctrine, and therefore be careful to maintain good-works. Dogs 
will open their mouths, but do not find bones for them: the enemies 
of the faith will cavil at it, but do not give them ground of accusation. 
May.God the Holy Spirit help you so to live that they may be ashamed, 
having no evil thing to say of you! 








THE MAINTENANCE OF GOOD WORKS. 503 


Tam afraid that this precept of being careful to maintain good ° 
works is neglected in practice, or else the apostle would not have said to 
Titus, ‘‘ These things I will that thou affirm constantly.” Titus must. 
repeat perpetually the precept which commands the careful main-' 
tenance of good works. Beloved, I fear that preachers often think 
too well of their congregations, and talk to them as if they were all 
perfect, or nearly so. I cannot thus flatter you. I have been astounded 
when I have seen what professing Christians can do. How some dare 
call themselves followers of Jesus I cannot tell! Itis horrible. We 
condemn Judas, but his fellow is to be found in many. Our Lord is 
still sold for gain. He still has at his heels sons of perdition who 
kiss him and betray him. There are still persons in our churches who 
need to have the ten commandments read to them every Sabbath-day. 
It is not a bad plan of the Church of England, to put up the ten 

commandments near the communion table where they can be clearly 
seen. Some people need to see them; though I am afraid, when they 
come in their way, they wink hard at some of the commands, and 
go away and forget that they have seen them: Common morality 
is neglected by some who call themselves Christians. 

My brethren, such things ought not to be, but as long as they are 
80 we must hear Paul saying: ‘‘I will that thou affirm constantly 
- that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain 
good works.” Certain people turn on their heel, and say, ‘That is 
legal talk. The preacher is preaching up works instead of grace.” 
What! will you dare to say that? I will meet you face to face at 
God’s right hand at the last day if you dare to insinuate so gross a 
libel. Dare you say that I do not preach continually salvation by the 
grace of God, and by the grace of God only? Having preached 
salvation by grace without a moment’s hesitation, I shall also 
continually affirm that they which have believed in God must be 
“eareful to maintain good works.” : 

This, mark you, is supported by argument. The apostle presses 
home his precept by saying: ‘“‘ These things are good and profitable 
unto men.” He instances other things which are neither good nor 
profitable, namely, ‘‘ Foolish questions, and genealogies, and con- 
tentions, and strivings about the law.” In these days some are 
occupied with questions about the future state, instead of accepting 
the plain testimony of Scripture, and some give more prominence 
to speculations drawn from prophecy than to the maintaining of ~ 
good works. I reverence the prophecies; but I have small patience 
with those whose one business is guessing at their meaning. One 
whose family was utterly unruly and immoral met with a Christian 

friend, and said to him: “Do you quite seo the meaning of the 
Seven Trumpets?’ ‘‘ No,’ answered his friend, ‘I do not; and if 
you looked more to your seven children the seven trumpets would 
suffer no harm.” To train up your children and instruct your 
servants, and order your household aright, are ‘things which are 
good and profitable unto men.” A life of godliness is better than the 
understanding of mysteries. The eternal truth of God is to be 
defended at all hazards, but questions which do not signify the turn 
of a hair to either God or man may be left to settle themselves. ‘‘ Be 












Hag careful to nates ae Works? whether vou are ab 


- astrong man in Christ J esus. A holy household is as a 
church of God. Children brought up in the fear of God are as corr 
% stones polished after the similitude of a palace. You, husbands and 

wives, that live together in holy love, and see your children serving ry 
ee God, you adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour! Tradesmen who are | 
BF. esteemed for integrity, merchants who bargain to their own hurt but ll 
change not, dealers who can be trusted in the market with uncounted — ig 
. 

4 

r 








- gold, your acts are good and profitable both to the church and to the 
__. world! Men are won to Christ when they see Christianity embodied — 
in the good and the true. But when religion is a thin veneer ora 
ne “mere touch of tinsel, they call it “humbug”; and rough asthe word = 
is, itis worthy of “the contemptible thing which it describes. If our 
religion comes from the very soul, if our life is the life of Christ in us, 
ie and we prove that we have new hearts and right spirits by acting the 
honourable, the kindly, the truly Christian part, these things are ‘good 
and profitable unto those who watch us, for they may induce them 
to seek for better things. 
I pray you, my beloved, be careful to maintain good works. I 
thus stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance : if your minds 
were not pure I would not stir them up, for it would be of no use 








___ to raise the mud which now lies quiet. I stir you up because Tam | 
not afraid to do so, but am sure that it willdo you good. You will take ~ 
home this exhortation, and you will say, each one to himself, “‘ What _ ‘a 
- ean I do more for Jesus? How can I walk more worthy of my pro- 
___ fession? How can I be careful to maintain good works?” Somay 
God bless you!  oeh ce 
' _ You who do not believe in God, who have not come to trust in his 


ay | dear Son, Iam not talking to you. To you, I must say, first, that 

you must be made new creatures. Ido not talk to a crab- -tree, and *. nm 
say, ‘Bear apples.’ It cannot. The tree must first become good 
__ before the fruit can be good. ‘Ye must be born again.” You will “3 
ay" never be better till you are made new creatures. You must be 
-__ spiritually slain, and then made alive again. There must be an end 
Siang _ of you, and there must be a beginning of Christ in you. God grant 
» that this may happen at once, and may you immediately believe in 
hae the Lord Jesus! Amen. 





Cloth Gilt, Qs, a 


Words of Warning for Daily Life. 


Uniform with “ WORDS OF WISDOM FOR DAILY LIFE,”. 


_ 
i BY C. H. SPURGEON. 

PASSMORE & ALABASTER, Paternoster Burtpines, Lonnon, E.C. 
ay 


hoy Maho ‘ 
: 2) eR 

is ni A~ 
ie wet “3 












Pee oy RIPE AND. "PARDON, 1 


LIVERED ON Lorp’s-pay Mornine, Aveusr 25TH, 1889, BY 


fe 


rey: women si SPURGEON, 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON. — 


s 


And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he 
ickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.’’—Colossians ii. 13, 










HE teaching of this verse is much the.same as that in preceding 
rses; but the apostle does not hesitate to dwell again and again 
n the important matters of quickening and forgiveness. These lie 
the foundation. Ministers of Christ cannot too often go over the 
sential points: their hearers cannot too often hear vital truths. Our 
il memories and dull understandings require line upon line, precept 
ipon precept, in reference to fundamental truths: our apprehension 
f them is far too feeble, and can never be too vivid. . ee 
‘o find instances of the work of God in quickening souls and in 
yardoning sins, Paul does not look far afield. In the text he says, 
“And you,’ and, according to the Revised Version, he repeats the _ 
word further on, and the passage runs thus, “‘ You, being dead through 
your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, you, I say, did — 
i quicken together with him.” He points personally to the saints at — 
‘Colosse. We are not about to consider a prophecy to be fulfilled in — 
_ the millennium, neither are we speaking of matters which concern the - 
“unknown dwellers in the: moon. No; the theme belongs to you, 
‘to you, I say, if indeed you be the people of God. You are speci. 
mens of the divine work: you hath he quickened, you hath he par. | 
_doned. It is profitable for us to be engaged upon matters which ~ Fao) 
- eoncern us. I shall speak to you of those things which I have tasted 
and handled of the good word of life, and itis my firm belief that, tothe 
most of you, these matters are familiar in your mouths as household 
words. If not, I grieve over you. Let none of us be content unless 
the works of the Holy Spirit are manifest in us. What bootsittome = 
if another man receive life and pardon, if I am cast for death, and 
ie still under condemnation? Press forward, my beloved, to a 
ersonal enjoyment of these chief blessings of the covenant of grace— 
life in Jesus, forgiveness through his blood. Let every part of the 
sermon have a finger pointed at yourselves. Hear it speak to you, 
even to you. : 
Biel» INO. 2,101. 













































458 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


In the text we have the conjunction of two things—quickening and 
forgiveness. We will consider these things in connection with each 
other. Their order it may be difficult to lay down: in the text they 
are described as if they were the same thing. Which comes first, 
the impartation of the new life, or the blotting out of sin? Is not 
pardon first? Doth God pardon a dead man? How can he give the 

life which is the proof of pardon to the man who is not forgiven? On 
the other hand, if a man has not spiritual life sufficient to make him 
feel his guilt, how can he cry for pardon? And if it be unsought, 
how shall it be received? A man may be spiritually alive so as to be 
groaning under the pollution and the burden of sin, and yet he may not 
have received by taith the remission of sins. In the order of our 
experience, the reception of life comes before the enjoyment of pardon. 
We are made to live spiritually, and so we are made to repent, to 
confess, to believe, and to receive forgiveness. First, the life which 
sighs under sin, and then the life which sings concerning pardon. 
Misery is first felt, and then mercy is received. 

Following the line of experience, we shall notice concerning the 
favoured ones of God, first, what they were: ‘“‘ You, being dead in your 
sins and the uncireumcision of your flesh.’ Secondly, we shall note 
what has been done in them: ‘‘ Hath he quickened together with him”; 
and then, thirdly, what he hath done for them: ‘‘ Having forgiven you 
all trespasses:”’ May the Holy Ghost lead us into these truths, and 
give us the life of God and the rest of faith! 

I. First, ther, consider WHAT THEY WERE. Beloved, they were all 
by nature children of wrath, even as others. There is no distinction 
in the condition of natural men before the law. We all fell in Adam. 
Weare all gone out of the way, and have all become unprofitable. 
Any difference which now exists has been made by divine grace; but 
by nature we are all in the same condemnation, and all tainted by the 
same depravity. 

‘Where were we when the Lord first looked on us? Answer.—We 
were dead according to the sentence of the law. The Lord had said, ‘In 
the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die’’; and Adam did 
die the moment that he ate of the forbidden fruit, and his posterity 
died in him. What is death natural? It is the separation of the 
body from the soul, which is its life. What is death spiritual? It is 
the separation of the soul from God, who is its life. It had been the 
very life of Adam to be united to God; and when he lost his union of 
heart with God, his spirit underwent.a dreadful death. This death is 
upon each one of us by nature. Above this comes in the dreadful fact, 
that ‘‘ He that believeth not 1s condemned already.” The position of 
every unbeliever is that of one who is dead by law. As far as the 
liberties, and privileges, and enjoyments of heavenly things are con- 
cerned, he is written among the dead. His name is registered among 
the condemned. Yet, beloved, while we are under the sentence of 
death, the Lord comes to us in almighty grace, and quickens us inte 
newness of life, forgiving us all trespasses. Are you trembling because 
of your condemned condition under the law? Do you recognize the 
tremendous truth that death is the sure and righteous result of sin? 
Then to you, even to you, the life-giving, pardoning word is sent in the 








LIFE AND PARDON. ; 459 | 


_ »preaching of the everlasting gospel... Oh that you may believe, and so 
escape from condemnation ! 
_ These favoured people were dead through the action of their sin. Sin 
stupefies and kills. Where it reigns, the man is utterly insensible to 
spiritual truth, feeling, and action; he is dead to everything that is 
holy in the sight of God. He may have keen moral perceptions, but 
he has no spiritual feelings. Men differ widely as to their moral 
qualities; all men are not alike bad, especially when measured. in 
reference to their fellow-men; some may even be excellent and praise- 
worthy, viewed from that standpoint. But to spiritual things all men 
are alike dead. Look at the multitude of our hearers; to. what 
- purpose do we preach to them? You may declare the wrath of God 
against the godless, but what do they care? You may speak of 
Jesus’ love to the lost ; how little it affects them! Sin is not horrible, 
and salvation is not precious, to them. They may not controvert your, 
teaching ; but they have no sensible apprehension of truth: it does 
not come home to them as a matter of any consequence. Let eternal 
things drift as they may, they are perfectly content so long as they 
can answer those three questions—‘‘ What shall we eat? what shall 
we drink? and wherewithal shall we be clothed?” No higher 
question troubles their earth-bound minds. They may entertain some 
hking towards theological study and Bible-teaching, as a matter of 
education; but they do not view the truths revealed in Scripture as 
matters of overwhelming importance. They trifle; they delay; they 
set on one side the things which make for their peace. . Their religion 
has no influence upon their thoughts and actions: they are dead. Sin 
has slain them. I see them mingled with this great congregation 
like corpses sitting upright among the living. I look out upon the 
masses of this vast city and upon the innumerable hosts of populous 
countries, and I see a measureless cemetery, a dread domain of death; 
a region without life. 

One point must be noticed here, which makes this spiritual death the 
more terrible: they are dead, but yet responsible. If men were literally 
dead, then they were incapable of sin; but the kind of death of which 

“we speak involves a responsibility none the less, but all the greater. 
Tf I say of a man that he is such a liar that he cannot speak the 
truth, do you therefore think him blameless? No; but you judge 
him to be all the more worthy of condemnation because he has lost 
‘the very sense which discerns between a truth and a lie. If we say 
of a certain man, as we have had to do, ‘‘ He is a rogue ingrained ; 
he is so tricky that he cannot deal honestly, but must always be 
_cheating”’; do you therefore excuse his fraud, and pity him ? Far from 
it. His inability is not physical, but moral inability, and is the con- 
sequence of his own persistence inevil. Thelaw is as much binding 
upon the morally incapable as upon the most sanctified in nature. If, 
through a man’s own perversity, he wills to reject good and love evil, 
the blame is with himself. He is said to be dead in sin, not in the 
sense that he is irresponsible, but in the sense that he is so evil that 
he will not keep the law of God. If a man were brought to-morrow 
before the Lord*Mayor, and he were accused of theft; suppose he 
should say, ‘‘My lord, I ought to be set free, for | am such a rascal 























__, the more punishment ? O sinners, dead in sin, you are not SO de 
2 thereby to be free from the guilt of breaking God’s command, 


_ care whether he should be set free or hanged, but could even joke ‘ 


‘that I ahi: see an iebtala’s ina shop ‘pat what my fi e S 
hold upon it’; would not the judge give such a worthless pers 





? 
rejecting Christ; but you heap upon yourselves mountains of g 
every day that you abide in this condition. 
The ungodly are so dead as to be careless as to their ee Tada all 
gracious things are despised of them. Sometimes they attend religious 
services; but they get angry if the preacher presses them too hard. 
have known them vow that they will never hear the man again 
‘because he is so personal. Pray, sirs, ‘what is a preacher to be but 
personal? If he shoots, is he to have no target, and take no aim: ee 
What is our very office and business for, but to deal personally with — 
you about your sins? In ungodly men there is an utter reckless-_ 

ness as to their condition before God. They know that they may — 
die, they know that if they die they will be lost; but they try to 
forget these facts. The ostrich is said to bury its ‘head in the sand — 
so as not to see the hunter, and then to fancy that it is safe. Thus ~ 
do men fancy that, by forgetting the danger, they escape it. Some — 
of you have lived in carelessness until grey hairs are on your head. — 
Will you still risk your souls? Alas, you look more anxiously after — 












a battered sixpence, which you miss from your pocket, than after your _ 


immortal soul! If you miss a ring from your finger while sitting — 3 
here, you are more concerned about it than about your eternal dee 

How foolish! How dead are you to all just judgment and prudence! 
It is your soul, your own soul, your only soul, your never-dying soul, 
to which we beg you to pay attention, and yet you can hardly have 
patience with us. If a prisoner in the condemned cell had no sort of | 


j 









about the scaffold and the executioner, you would feel that only — 
by an extreme act of mercy could such a person be pardoned. — 
Nay, if he cares nothing for the penalty, let him bear it: so man : 
would say, and there would be justice in it. Yet God spake not so — 

in reference to some of us; for while we were in a condition of callous- — 
ness the grace of God came to us, and by quickening us, gave us bo : 
be anxious, and led us to pray. 

The text adds that we were dead in the uncircumeision of our flesh. t 
need not dwell upon the external figure here employed; its meaning — 
is clear enough. ‘The uncircumcision of our flesh means that we were — 
not in covenant with God: it shows also the abiding of our filthiness 
upon us; the willingness of our souls to be aliens from the common- — 
wealth of Israel, without God in the world. ‘This is where we were — 
in the uncircumcision of our flesh; and yet the grace of God found us 
out. Oh, I could paint the man! He is anxious about this world, but — 
what cares he for the world to come? He is a master of his own trade, 
and he prospers in it; but for his God, and his service, he spares not an ~ ¥ 
hour’s consideration. He cries, ‘‘ The covenant of grace, what is that?” 
And he turns on his heel, like Pilate, when he had said, ‘‘ What is : 
truth?” As to having any sense of the constant presence of God, 
and his deep indebtedness to God, and of the sweetness of being 
pardoned, and the bliss of enjoying the love of God, and walking with — j 


‘ 


es 









‘D PARDON, 







a t, he cries, “ Oh, yes, that i 
e nothing else to do; let them find delig 
‘ him God is nothing, heaven is nothing, hell les 
He passes by Calvary itself, where God in human fles 
it redemption, and it is nothing to him. The wail fro 
never hears, though it asks him this question—“ Is it 
0 you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if there be any 
like unto my sorrow!’’ What cares he for the wounds of his - 
best lover? He has no concern about any purchase made by 
eemer, or of any death especially on his behalf, or any re- 
ction with Christ which he may hope to enjoy. The man is dead 
tO ith, and glory, and immortality. The low and the grovelling = 
harm him, but the pure and the noble find him dead to their claims. _ 
‘et to such, even to such, does sovereign grace approach. Unbought, 
imsought, it cometh according to that word of Scripture, ‘‘I am found — 
hem that sought me not.” inp a 
rain, spiritually the ungodly are dead, and utterly incapable of 
waning life for themselves, Could any of you, with the utmost diligence, 
ite life, even the lowest form of it? To aman who is dead, could — 
impart life? You might galvanize his limbs into a kind of motion; 
real life, the pulsing of the heart, the heaving of the lungs, could 
create it ? You know you cannot! Much less can the dead man him- 
if create life within himself. The man without Christ is utterly unable 
to quicken himself, We are “ without strength,” unable to do anything 
as of ourselves, and while we are in this condition grace comes to us. 
Alas, there remains one more point! Man may be described as 
ad and becoming corrupt. After a while the dead body shows symptoms 
decay: this is vice in its beginning. Leave the corpse where it is, 
and it will become putrid, polluting the air, and disgusting every 
sense of the living. ‘Bury my dead out of my sight,” is the cry of 
e most affectionate mother or wife. And so it is with many ungodly 
men. Some of them are restrained from the grosser vices, just as 
= igyptian. bodies were, by spices, preserved from rottenness. By = | 
_ example, by instruction, by fear, by surroundings, many are kept 



























































iety. Towards God they are dead as ever; but towards man they 
no more objectionable than the mummies in yonder cases in the 
itish Museum. But this embalming of the dead with spices of 
morality, has not been carried out with hosts of those around us. 
They rot above ground: their blasphemies pollute the air, their 
ewdness infects our streets, their revelry makes night hideous. The 
tendency of dead flesh is towards the corruption which shows itself 
in loathesome actions. The mercy is, that where even this has taken 
place, where the foul worm of vice has begun its awful work, in 
runkenness, in blasphemy, in dishonesty, or in uncleanness of life— 
even there the quickening Spirit.can come. As life came to Lazarus, 
who had been dead four days, so can spiritual life come to those who 
have fallen into the noisomeness of open transgression. Leaving 
- this painful matter, let us be filled with deep humility ; for such were 
in days not long since: but let us also be filled with hope for 
ers; for he who quickened us can do the same for them. 
























¥ j Vent ES 






cw LBL, ik Say ont 


462 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


II. And now, secondly, WHAT HAS BEEN DONE IN us? What 
hath God wrought ? 

We have been quickened. To tell you, exactly, how quickening 
is worked in us, is quite beyond my power. The Holy Spirit comes to 
aman when he is dead in sin, and he breathes into him a new and 
mysterious life. We do not know how we receive our natural life: 
how the soul comes into the body we know not. Do you suppose that 
spiritual life in its beginning will be less mysterious? Did not our » 
Lord say, ‘‘ The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the 
sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it 
goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit”? Thou knowest 
not the way of the Spirit, nor how he breathes eternal life. We know, 
however, that as soon as life comes, our first feeling is one of pain and 
uneasiness. In the case of persons who have been nearly drowned, 
when they begin to revive they experience very unpleasant sensations. 
Certainly the parallel holds good in spiritual things. Now, the man... 
sees sin to be an exceeding great evil. He is startled by the dis- 
covery of its foulness. He was told all about it, and yet he knew 
nothing to purpose; but now sin becomes a load, a pain, a horror. 
As dead, he felt no weight; but as quickened, he groans beneath a | 
load. Now he begins to cry, ‘‘O wretched man that I am! who shall 
deliver me?” Now the angels see him on his knees in private. 
Behold, he prayeth! ‘God be merciful to me a sinner,” is his hourly 
sigh. Now, also, he begins to struggle against his evil habits: he 
addicts himself to Bible reading, to praying, and to hearing the Word 
of God. He is for a while desperately earnest. Alas, he goes back to 
his old sin! Yet he cannot rest: again he seeks the Lord. With some 
men a large part of their early spiritual life has been taken up with : 
agonizing strivings and painful endeavours to free themselves from the 
chains of sin. They have had to learn their weakness by their failures ; 
but the grace of God has not failed. Some, even for years after their 
conviction by the Spirit of God, have had no comfortable sense of 
pardon, but very much conflict with sin: yet, still, the life of God 
has never been utterly quenched within them. Their struggles have 
proved that the heavenly germ was alive, and was painfully resisting 
the forces of evil. Men themselves act as if they tried to put out 
the light which grace has kindled; but they cannot effect their 
purpose. When once they have been disturbed in their nest, the Lord 
has not allowed them to settle down in it again. Their once sweet sin 
has become bitter as wormwood to them. We have known men under 
conviction go further into sin to drown their convictions; just as a 
whale, when harpooned, will dive into the depths. But they come up 
again, and again are wounded: they cannot escape. In the biography 
of a man of God, who in his early days was a terrible drunkard, 
we find that, in struggling against intoxication, he was frequently 
beaten ; and there appears in his diary a long blank of which he says, 
“‘Four years anda half elapsed, and no account rendered! What can 
have been the cause of this chasm? Sin! Yes, sin‘of the blackest 
dye, of the deepest ingratitude to the Father of mercies!” The 
wanderer was restless and unhappy in sin. The life within was, like 
Jonah, thrown into the depths of the sea; but it hated its condition, 








\ 
LIFE AND PARDON. 463 


et and struggled to rise out of it. God will not leave the life he has 


given, even under the worst conditions. 

_ But quickening leads to far more than this. By-and-by the new 
life exercises its holy senses, and is more clearly seen to be life. The 
man begins to see that his only hope is in Christ, and he tries humbly 
to hide himself beneath the merit of the Lord Jesus. He does not 
dare to say, “I am saved,” but he deeply feels that if ever he is 
saved it must be through the blood and righteousness of the Lord 


_ Jesus. Now also he begins to pray, pleading the precious blood; 


now he hopes, and his hope looks only through the windows of his 
Lord’s wounds. He looks for mercy only through the atoning sacrifice. 
By-and-by he comes to trust that this mercy has really come to him, 


_and that Jesus had him on his heart when he suffered on the tree. By 


a desperate effort he throws himself on Christ, and determines to lie at 
his feet, and, if he must perish, to perish looking unto Jesus. This is 
a glorious resolve. See him after a while as he rises up into peace, 
and joy, and consecration! His life now being joined to that of his 


2 Lord, he rejoices that he is never to be separated from him. I think I. 


héar him say, ‘‘I see it all now. The Lord Jesus bore my sin and | 
carried it away. I died because he died. I live because he lives. The 
Lord accepts me, because he accepts his Son, and thus I am ‘ accepted 
in the Beloved.’ ” o 
Henceforth the quickened man tries to live for Christ, out of gratitude; 
this is the nature of the life he has received. He strives to grow up 
into Christ, and to become like his Lord in all things. | Henceforth 
he and his Lord are linked together in an everlasting union, and the 
cause of Jesus is the one thing for which he lives, and for which he 


' would be content to die. Blessed be God, I am not talking any new 


things to you: you know what I mean. For these forty years have I 
felt these things, and many of you have felt them longer still. At_ 
first the struggling light within you revealed to you nothing but your 
darkness ; but now you see Jesus, and see yourselves alive in him with 
a life eternal and heavenly. Blessed be the Lord who hath raised 
Jesus from the dead, and hath quickened us in him and with him! 
III. Now we come to the third point, upon which I pray for a 
renewed unction from the Holy One. Let us consider, in the last place, 
WHAT HAS BEEN DONE FoR us: ‘“‘ Having forgiven you all trespasses.” 
Believing in Christ Jesus, I am absolved. I am clear, I am clear 
before the Lord. ‘There is therefore now no condemnation to them 
which are in Christ Jesus.’ This is the most joyful theme that I can 
bring before you. And I want you to notice, first, that pardon 1s a 
dive act. “‘ Having forgiven all trespasses.’’ Who does that? Why, 
he that quickened you. I/showed just now thatnonecould quicken a dead 
man but God only ; for the giving of life is an act which is exclusively 
the Lord’s own: and the same God who gives us spiritual life also grants 
us pardon from his throne. He sovereignly dispenses pardons. We need 
not go to any human priest to seek absolution, for we may go at once to 
God who alone hath sovereign right to execute the death-sentence. or 
to pardon the offender. He alone can grant it with sure effect. If 
any man should say, absolvo te (I absolve thee), I would take it for 
what it was worth, and its worth would not be much. But if HK 





vx n 

A Bs lta: AS: hee offended, then am I ee : 
Cathe to his name, who is a God ready to pardon! What lis 
received in receiving forgiveness from God! Oh, my hearer, if. : 
have done wrong to your fellow-man, ask his forgiveness, as you. 
are bound to do; and if you get it, be thankful, and feel as if a 
| weight were removed from your conscience. But, ‘after all, what is 


this compared with being forgiven all trespasses by God ‘himself ? 


' This can calm the ruffled sea of the soul; yea, still its fiercest tempest. __ 


This can make you sleep at nights, instead of tossing to and fro upon 


a pillow, which conscience turns to stone beneath your aching head. — 
This gives the gleaming eye, the beaming face, the bounding heart. — 


This brings heaven down to earth, and lifts us near to heaven. The | 


Ms Lord hath blotted out our sins, and thus he has removed the bitterest 











fountain of our sorrows. Pardon from God is a charter of Lhe 


_ testament of felicity. 


God’s pardon is a gift most free. Look at the text, and note that tie 
pardon comes to persons who are dead in sin. They were utterly un- 
worthy, and did not even seek mercy. The Lord who comes to men ~ 


_ when they are dead in sin, comes to quicken them and to pardon 


them; not because they are ready, but because HH is ready. Hearken, 


O man! If in thy bosom there is at this moment a great stone instead _ 


of a heart of flesh; if thou art paralyzed as to all good things; if 


there is only enough life in thee to make thee feel thy terrible in- 
_ capacity for holiness and fellowship with God, yet God can pardon 


thee, even as thou art, and where thou art. We were in that condi- 





tion, my brethren, when the Lord came to us in love. ‘‘ When we ~ 


were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.” 


- We saw that Jesus died, we believed in him as able to save, and we 


received the forgiveness of sins. Forgiveness is free. The Lord 
looks for no good thing in the sinner; but he gives him every good 
thing. O my hearer, if the Lord looked for good in thee, he could 


_ not find it. He looks for nothing thou canst do, and nothing” 


thou canst feel, and nothing thou canst resolve to do or feel; but he — 
shows mercy because he delighteth in mercy. He passes by iniquity, 
transgression, and sin, because it is his nature to be gracious. The 


cause of divine pardon i is in God himself, and in his dear Son. It is 


not in thee, O sinner! Being dead in the uncircumcision of thy flesh, 
what canst thou do? He quickens thee and he pardons thee; yea, he 
is all in all to thee. Wonders of grace! When I get upon this 
subject I do not need to give you illustrations, nor to find out choice 
phrases; the glorious fact stands forth in its own native beauty : 
infinite pardon from an infinite God, given because of his own merci- 
fulness and the merit of his beloved Son, and not because of anything 


» whatsoever in the man whom he pardons. ‘But the man repents,”” 


says one. Yes, I know; but God gives him repentance. ‘‘ But he 
confesses sin.” Yes, I know it; for the Lord leads him to acknow- 
ledge his trespasses. All and everything which looks like a condition 
of pardon, is also given by the free and sovereign grace of God, and 
given freely, without money and without price. 

I want you to notice how universal is this pardon in reference to all 


s eee 





1 


His ee 








trespasses.”” Consult your memory, 
trespasses, if you dare. That one black night! 
on spot, indelible, never to be concealed? In many — 
one special sin breeds more distress than a thousand others. _ 
rime has left a deeper scar than any other. In vain you cry, — 
ous spot!” Should you wash that hand, it would incar- — 
line ten thousand Atlanties, and yet it would remain a scarlet spot, — 
to be erased for ever. No process known to men can wash out ne 
‘stain. But God’s infinite merey can put away that hideous, un- — 
itionable crime, and it shall be as though it had never been. — 
oly, however, you do not so much remember any one transgression 
he whole heap of them. Certainly, a multiplicity of minor sings _ 
ed together tower upward like a great Alp, although no one offence _ 
nay seem so notable as to demand mention. We have sinned every — 
day, and every hour, and almost every moment of every hour: how 
umberless our transgressions! Our sins of omission are beyond all — 
compute. But all these, too many for you to remember, too many for | 
me to number, are forgiven to the man in Christ: ‘‘ Having forgiven — 
you all trespasses’’—al/, not one excepted. Thou hast sins not yet 
known and confessed—but they are forgiven; for the blood cleanseth 
from all sin. : 
-I should like to help your memory by reminding you of your sins ~ 
‘before conversion. Blessed is he whose sin is covered. One does not - 4 
wish to uncover it. ‘‘ Lord, remember not the sins of my youth, nor 
my transgressions.” The child of God, who has long been rejoicing _ 
in faith, has need still to pray that ; for our sins may vex our boneslong __ 
after they have been removed from our consciences: the consequences 
of a sin may fret us after the sin itself is forgiven. 
z _ Then think of your sins after conviction, You were struck down on 
a certain day with a great sense of sin, and you hurried home and — 
 eried upon your knees, ‘‘O God, forgive me 1” Then you vowed you 
would never do the like again; but you did. The dog returned to his 
vomit. You began to attend a place of worship, you were very 
_ diligent in religious duties; but on a sudden you went back to your 
old companions, and your old ways. If your sin was drink, you 
thought you had mastered it, and could be very moderate ; but a fierce 
thirst came upon you, which you could not resist, and you were soon - 
as drunken as ever. Remember this with shame. Or it may have 
- been a more deliberate. backsliding; and deliberation greatly adds to 
the sin of sins. Without being particularly tempted, you began to 
-.hanker after your old pleasures, and almost to despise yourself for 
having denied yourself their indulgence. I know a man who was 
_ present at a prayer-meeting and was so wrought upon that he prayed; 
put afterwards he said that he would never go into such a place again, 

_ for fear he should again be overcome. Think of being afraid to be 
led aright: ashamed to go to heaven! Ah friends, we have been 
 pullocks unaccustomed to the yoke, dogs that have slipped their 
collars, horses that Lave kicked over the traces. Sins after conviction, shy 
as doing despite to divine love, are very grievous trespasses. Like i 
‘the moth, you had your wings singed in the candle, and yet you flew 
back to the flame: if you had perished in it, who could have pitied 






















































































466 ' METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


you? Yet, after such folly, the Lord had mercy on you: “ Having ~ 
forgiven you all trespasses.”’ . 

\A still worse set of sins must be remembered, sins after conversion, 
sins after you have found peace with God, after you have enjoyed 
high fellowship with Jesus. O brothers and sisters, these are cruel 
wounds for our Lord! These are evils which should melt us to tears 
even to hear of them. What! pardoned and then sin again! Beloved 
of the Lord, and still rebelling! You sang so sweetly, 


““Thy will be done; thy will be done; ” 


and then went home and murmured! You talked to others about evil 
temper, and yet grew angry. You are old and experienced, and yet 
no boy could have been more imprudent! O God, we bless thee for 
the morning and the evening lamb; for thy people need the sacrifice 
perpetually! We need a morning sacrifice, lest the night have gathered 
aught of evil; and we require an evening sacrifice for the sins of the 
day. 

Dwell for a while upon the large blessing of the text. Whatever 
your sins may have been, if you are a believer in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, God has quickened you together with him, and has forgiven 
you all trespasses. He pardons most effectually. Ask God about your 
sins, and he says, ‘“‘ Their sins and their iniquities will I remember 
no more!” If God himself does not remember them, they are most 
effectually removed. Ask Holy Scripture where they are, and 
Hezekiah tells you, ‘‘ Thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.” 
Where is that? God sees everything and everywhere, and therefore 
everywhere is before his face; if, therefore, he casts our sins behind 
his back, he throws our sins into “‘the nowhere’: they cease to exist. 
‘‘ In those days, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought 
for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall 
not be found.’ Surely this is enough to set all the bells of your heart 
a-ringing. 

Remember, also, dear friends, that this pardon 1s most perfect. He 
does not commute the punishment, but he pardons the crime. He 
does not pardon and then confine for life, nor pardon to-day and 
punish to-morrow: this were not worthy of a God. The pardon 
is given, and never revoked: the deed of grace is done, and it can 
never be undone. God will not remember the sin which he has 
blotted out, nor condemn the offender whom he has absolved. 
O believer, the Lord so fully absolves thee, that all thy sin, which 
might have shut thee out of heaven, shall not even hinder thy way 
thither! All that sin of thine, which might have filled thee with 
despair, shall not even fill thee with dismay. The Lord shall wipe the 
tear from thine eyes, as he has washed the sin from thy person. Even 
the very stain of sin shall be removed. Remember what he says of 
scarlet and crimson sins. Does he say, ‘‘I will wash them so that 
nothing shall remain beyond a pale red’? Does he say, ‘‘I will wash 
them till nothing shall remain but a slight rosy tint’’?? No; he says, 
‘They shall be as wool: I will make them white as snow.” The 
Almighty Lord will do his work of remission in an absolutely perfect 
style, and not a shadow of a spot shall remain. 











LIFE AND PARDON. i 467- 


»Here is a point that I must dwell upon for a moment, namely, that. 
this pardon shall be seen to be perfectly consistent with justice. If I 
were pardoned, and felt that God had weakened the foundations of 
his moral government by winking at evil, I should feel insecure 
in my pardoned state, and should have no rest. If the justice 
of God were in the. least infringed by my forgiveness, I should 
feel like a felon towards the universe, and a robber of God, But 
I bless God. that he pardons sin in strict connection with. justice. . 
Behold the costly system by which this was effected. He himseli. 
came hither in the person of his dear Son; he himself became man, 
and dwelt among us ; he himself took the load of his people’s sin; he 
bare the sin of many, and was maqe a curse for us. He put away 
both sin and the curse by his wondrous sacrifice. The marvel of 
heaven and earth, of time and eternity, is the atoning death of Jesus 
Christ. This is the mystery that brings more glory to God than all 
creation, and all providence. How could it be that he should be slain 
for sinners, the just for the unjust, to bring us to God? To finish 
transgression, and make an end of sin, was a labour worthy of his 
Godhead, and Christ has perfectly achieved it, by his sufferings and 
death. You had no fiction before you when, just now, you sang 
concerning him, 
“ Jesus was punish’d in my stead, 

Without the gate my Surety bled 

To expiate my stain: 
On earth the Godhead deign’d to dwell, 
And made of infinite avail 
The sufferings of the man.” 


Now are we justly forgiven ;, and the throne of God is established. By 
his death as our Substitute our Lord Jesus has set forth the righteous 
severity of God as well as his boundless mercy. To us justice and. 
mercy seemed opposed, but in Jesus we see them blended. We bless 


the Lord for his atoning sacrifice, and feel an infinite satisfaction in 


the fact that none can dispute the validity of a pardon which comes 
to us signed by the hand of the eternal King, and counter-signed by 
the pierced hand of him who bare our sins in his own body on the 
tree, and gave for those sins a complete vindication of the law which 
we had broken. 

Note well the last consideration upon this point of the forgiveness 
of all trespasses. It ought to make you feel unutterably happy. 
Henceforth, your pardon is bound up with the glory of Christ. If your 
pardon does not save you, then Christ is no Saviour. If, resting in 
him, your sin is not forgiven, then he undertook a fruitless errand 
when he came to save his people from their sins. Every drop of Christ’s 
blood demands the eternal salvation of every soul that is washed in it. 
The Godhead and manhood of Christ, and all the glory of his mediator- 
ship, stand up and claim for every believer that he shall be delivered 
from sin. What! did he bear sin, and shall we bear it? Nay: if 
the Lord hath found in him a ransom, his redeemed are free. Since 
to save me, who was once dead in sin and in the uncircumcision of my 
fiesh, has become the glory of Christ, I am sure I shall be saved, for 
he will not tarnish his own name. 0 believer, to ‘bring you homie: 











feta Lpot,. or Watkin or 7 aa sok bine 
of your Saviour, and he will not fail, or be disco ag 
neither lose his life-work, nor his death throes. God f 
yet. this must be, unless you who are quickened Laas wil 











sts New, let us just think of this: we are forgiven. Ido noe mean all 
ine of you; for if you are out of Christ, you have no part in this grand 
absolution. May the Lord have mercy upon you, quicken you to-day 
and bring you to Christ! But as many as are trusting in Christ, 
_ and so are living in union with him, you are forgiven, A person 
- who has been condemned by the law, and then has received a free 
pardon, walks out of the prison, and goes where he pleases, There poe? 
4s a policeman. Does he fear him? No, he has afree pardon, and = 
the policeman cannot touch him. But there are a great many lee - 
who know him, and know him to be guilty. That does not matter; ‘4 
he has a free pardon, and nobody can touch him. He cannot be tried — a 

; 






















_ again, however guilty he may have been; the free pardon has wiped — : 
the past right out. Now, to-day, child of God, thou beginnest anew; 
thou art clean, for he has washed thee, and has done the work right i 
well. We have washed our robes and made them white in the blood ; 
of the Lamb, therefore shall we be before the throne of God and 
praise him. ‘What could we do less than praise him day and night? a 
__. When shall we ever stop? ‘When we are in his temple, free from all ; 
danger of future sin and trial, we will for ever praise him who hath = 
forgiven us all trespasses. I charge you, let us meet in heaven, all of 
us. Some have dropped in here this morning from all parts of theta 

country, and from America, and we may never meet again on earth. © 

- Let us meet around the throne in heaven, and sing “unto him that 

loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood.” God grant 
‘that we may. Who wants to be left out? Is there one person “here 
__-who would like to be shut out in that day? I pray you, enterinat 
sence, : ae 
“Come guilty souls, and flee away 








me” Like doves to Jesus’ wounds; : vs 
me c This is the welcome gospel-day, & 
ce ; Wherein free grace abounds.” Romer) 
A ; —ee_esesessssss » a 
. g 
ay Cloth Gilt, 2s, 2 


m “COME, YE. CHILDREN 


-Unirorm wir “WORDS OF WISDOM FOR DAILY LIFE.” 


By C. H. SPURGEON, 


PASSMORE & ALABASTER, Paternoster Burtpines, Lonpon, E.C. 


a‘ 








| DELIVERED BY 


C. H. SPURGEON, 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON. 

















«6 And a certain woman named a Ty ia, a seller of purple, of the city of Tyas: Ww. ‘ich 
_ worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto 
: things which were spoken of Paul.’’—Acts xvi. 14. i 
We may laudably exercise curiosity with regard to the first proclam 
tion of the gospel in our own quarter of the globe. We are ha 
that history so accurately tells us, by the pen of Luke, when first t 
gospel was preached in Europe, and by whom, and who was the first 
‘convert brought by that preaching to the Saviour’s feet. I half envy 
_ Lydia that she should be the leader of the European band; yet I fee. 
right glad that a woman led the van, and that her household followed i 
_ go closely in the rear. iad 
_ _ God has made great use of women, and greatly honcued them in 
the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Holy women 
_ ministered to our Lord when he was upon the earth, and since th : 
time much sacred work has been done by their patient hands. _ 
Man and woman fell together; together they must rise. After the G 
“resurrection, it was a woman who was first commissioned to carry the — 
glad tidings of the risen Christ; and in Europe, where woman wasin 
future days to be set free from many of the trammels of the Hast, it 
seems fitting that a woman should be the first believer. Not “only, | ; 
however, was Lydia a sort of first-fruit for Europe, but she probably — 
also became a witness in her own city of Thyatira, in Asia. We do not 
know how the gospel was introduced into that city; but we are in- 
_ formed of the existence of a church there by the message of the 
_. ascended Christ, through his servant John, to ‘the angel of the church — 
in Thyatira.” Very likely Lydia became the herald of the gospel in - 
her native place. Let the women who know the truth proclaim it; 
for why should their influence be lost? ‘The Lord giveth the word ; 
the women that publish the tidings are a great host.” Woman can be i 
as powertul for evil as for good: we see it in this very church of 
Thyatira, where the woman Jezebel, who called herself a prophetess, 
sought to seduce many from the fnith. Seeing; then, that the devil es 
No. 2,222. ! 



























































Mie” as ae 
ieee eit der) a) 1a 
Rhee 


482 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


@ 
employs women in his service, let those women whom God has called 
by his grace be doubly earnest in seeking to prevent or undo the 
mischief that others of their sex are working. If not called to public 
service, all have the home-sphere wherein they can shed forth the 
aroma of a godly life and testimony. 

If the gospel does not influence our homes, it is little likely to make 
headway amongst the community. God has made family piety to be, 
as it were, a sort of trade-mark on religion in Kurope; for the very 
first convert brings with her all her family. Her household believed, 
pnd were baptized with her. You shall notice in Europe, though I do 
not mean to say that it is not the same anywhere else, that true 
godliness has always flourished in proportion as family religion has 
been observed. They hang a bell in a steeple, and they tell us that 
it is our duty to go every morning and every evening into the steeple- 
house there to join in prayer; but we reply that our own house is 
better for many reasons; at any rate, it will not engender superstition 

for us to pray there. Gather your children together, and offer prayer 
and supplication to God in your own room. 

‘‘ But there is no priest.” Then there ought to be. Every man 
should be a priest in his own household; and, in the absence of a 
godly father, the mother should lead the devotions. Every house 
should be the house of God, and there should be a church in every 
_ house; and when this is the case, it will be the greatest barrier 
against priestcraft, and the idolatry of holy places. Family prayer 
and the pulpit are the bulwarks of Protestantism. Depend upon it, 
when family piety gces down, the life of godliness will become very low- 
In Europe, at any rate, seeing that the Christian faith began with a 
converted household, we ought to seek after the conversion of all our 
families, and to maintain within our houses the good and holy practice 
of family worship. 

Lydia, then, is the first European convert, and we will review her 
history so far as we have it in Holy Writ. Towards her conversion 
four things co-operated, upon which we will speak briefly. First, the 
working of providence ; secondly, the working of Lydia herself ; thirdly, the 
working of Paul; and fourthly, the working of the Holy Spirit. 

I. First, notice THE WORKING OF PROVIDENCE. When-I was in 
Amsterdam, I visited the works of a diamond-cutter, where I saw 
many large wheels and much powerful machinery at work ; and I must 
confess that it seemed very odd that all that great array of apparatus 
should be brought to bear upon a tiny bit of crystal, which looked like 
a fragment of glass. Was that diamond worth so much that a whole 
factory should be set to work to cut its facets, and cause it to sparkle? 
So the diamond-cutter believed. Within that small space lay a 
gem which was thought worthy of all this care and labour. That 
diamond may be at this time glistening upon the finger or brow of 
royalty! Now, when I look abroad upon providence, it seems pre- 
posterous to believe that kingdoms, dynasties, and great events should 
all be co-operating and working together for the accomplishment of 
the divine purpose in the salvation of God’s people. But they are so 
working. It might have seemed preposterous, but it was not so, that 
these great wheels should all be working for the cutting of a single 








od 


LYDIA, THE FIRST EUROPEAN CONVERT. 483 


diamond; and it is not preposterous, however it may seem s0, to say 
that all the events of providence are being ordered by God to effect 
the salvation of his own people, the perfecting of the precious jewela 
which are to adorn the crown of Christ for ever and ever. 
__ In the case before us, the working of God’s providence is seen, 
first of all, em bringing Paul to Philippi. Wydia is there. I do not 
know how long she had been there, nor exactly what brought her 
there; but there she is, selling her purple, her Turkey-red cloth. Paul 
must come there, too, but he does not want to come; he has not, 
indeed, had any desire to come there. He has a kind of prejudice 
hanging about him still, so that, though he is willing to preach to the 
Gentiles, he scarcely likes to go out of Asia among those Gentiles of 
the Gentiles over in Kurope. He wants to preach the word in Asia. 
Very singularly, the Spirit suffers him not, and he seems to have a 
cold hand laid on him to stop him when his heart is warmest. He 
is gagged; he cannot speak. ‘‘Then I will go into Bithynia,” he 
says; but when he starts on the journey, he is distinctly told that 
there is no work for him to do there. He must not speak for his 
Master in that region, at least not yet: ‘“‘the Spirit suffered him ' 
not.” He feels himself to be a silenced man. What is. he to do? 
He gets down to Troas on the verge of the sea, and there comes to him 
_the vision of a man of Macedonia, who prayed him, saying, ‘‘Come 
over into Macedonia, and help us.” He infers that he must go across 
to Macedonia. A ship is ready for him; he has a free course, a 
favourable passage, and he soon arrives at Philippi. God brings Paul 
to the spot where Lydia was, in this strange and singular manner. 
But the working of providence was quite as much manifested 
in, bringing Lydia there; for Lydia was not originally at Philippi. 
She was a seller of purple, of Thyatira. Thyatira was a city famous 
for its dyers. They made a peculiar purple, which was much prized 
by the Romans. Lydia appears to have carried on this business. She 
was either a widow, or perhaps had had no husband, though she 
may have gathered a household of servants about her. She comes 
over to Philippi across the sea. I think I see them bringing the great 
rolls of red cloth up the hill, that she may sell at Philippi the cloth 
which she has made and dyed at Thyatira. Why does she come Just at 
this season? Why does she come just when Paul is coming? Why does 
she come to Philippi? Why not to Neapolis? Why not press on to 
Athens? Why not sell her cloth over at Corinth? Whatever reason 
she might have given for her choice, there was one cause, of ‘which 
she was ignorant, which shaped her action, and brought her to Philippi 
at. that time. God had a surprise in store for her. She and Paul 
have to meet. It does not matter what their will is; their wills 
shall be so moved and actuated by the providence of God that they 
shall cross each other’s path, and Paul shall preach the gospel to Lydia. I 
wot it never entered into Lydia’s heart, when she left Thyatira with her 
purple bales, that she was going to find Jesus Christ over at Philippi R 
neither did Paul guess, when he saw, in a vision, a man of Macedonia, 
and heard him say, ‘“‘ Come over into Macedonia, and help us,” that 
the first person he would have to help would not be a man of 
Macedonia at all, but a woman of Thystira; and that the congregation | 


PRE UAIA henaelt Sorarunld He jash a eemdnnL OE ae ste r 
the side of the little stream that runs through Phi pp v 


Paul nor Lydia knew what God was about to do; bu 
understands the end from the beginning, and times his acts. 0 
at dence to meet our doepert needs in the wisest way. si 


«“ His wisdom is sublime, 
His heart profoundly kind; : 
God never is before his time, 
And never is behind.” 














: What an odd thing it seemed that this woman should be a wort 4 NEY 
_ of Thyatira in Asia, and Paul must not go and preach in Asia; and ~ 


yet, when he comes to Macedonia, the first person who hears him is a 


woman of Asia! Why, you and I would have said, “If the woman 


belongs to Thyatira, let her stop at home, and let Paul go there ; 
that is the shortest cut.” Notso. The woman of Thyatira must go 
to Philippi, and Paul must go to Philippi too. This is God’s plan; 


and if we knew all the circumstances as God knows them, we should — 
doubtless admire the wisdom of it. Perhaps the very peculiarity of 


the circumstances made Paul more alert to seize the opportunity at 


into contact with one another here; for the man, who was a commercial 


___ traveller, was too careless ever to attend a place of worship in London. 
But to sell his goods he went to Ireland, where, also, went the evan- | 
_ gelist to preach the gospel; and being somewhat at a loss to know 
what to do with his time, he no sooner saw the name of a preacher 


from London announced, than he determined to attend the service, and 
there he met with Christ. We can see how natural this was in the 
case of which we know all the particulars, and it was doubtless as 


well arranged in the case of Lydia and Paul. 


Now, I should not wonder to-night if there are a number of provi- 
dences that have worked together to bring some of my hearers into 
their places at this time. What brought you to London, friend? It 
was not your intention to be in this city. Coming to London, what 
brought you to this part of it? What led you to be at this service ? 
And why was it that you did not come on one of the Sundays when 
the preacher would have been here if he could, but could not be here. 


by reason of his weakness? Because, it may be, that only from these 


lips can the word come to you, and only to-night, and you must come 


-to this place. Perhaps there is some one who preaches the gospel. 


much better in the town where you live; or, peradventure, you have 


had opportunities of hearing the same preacher near your own door, ~ 
and you did not avail yourself of them; and yet God has brought you~ 


here. J, wish we watched providences more. ‘‘ Whoso is wise, and will 


Se es 
EPS es tes 
Se anes gd ee 3 


_ Philippi than he would have been had he gone on to Thyatira; perhaps 
_ the isolation of the strange city made Lydia yearn more after spiritual 
things. God can answer a dozen ends by one act. One of our evan- 
gelists tells of a man who was converted in a small Irish town, and it 
was afterwards discovered that he, and the preacher who led him to — 
Christ, resided but a few hundred yards from each other in London. — 
They had never met in this great city, where neighbours are strangers” 
to each other ; nor was it likely that they ever would have been brought — 


— 


. 
eS ett ta 
PP Ne! Ce ae ee 


3, 


= 


aed ae 


ea, 
) 


Peer ee ey 

















Me 











ao a ; 
y shall understand the lovingkindn 
uld meet with you, and convert you 
warrant you that you will be a believer in providence 
, es, God guided my steps. He directed my path, and he 
ight me to the spot where Jesus met with me, and opened m 
at I might receive the gospel of his grace.” Be of goo 
, you ministers of the gospel! Providence is always working 
u while you are working for God. I have often admired the 
uge of Mahomet, when in the battle of Ohod he said to his 
's, pointing to their foes, ‘‘Charge them! I can hear the 
wings of the angels as they hasten to our help.” That was a delusion. 
on his part, for he and his men were badly beaten; but it is no 
sion in the case of the servants of Christ. We can hear the wings 
of the angels. We may hear the grinding of the great wheels of — 
‘providence as they revolve for the help of the preacher of the gospel. oi 
ything is with us when we are with God. Who can be against 
is? The stars in their courses fight for the servants of God; and all — 
gs, great and small, shall bow before the feet of him who trod the 
waves of the Sea of Galilee, and still is Master of all things, and 
ruleth all things to the accomplishment of his divine purposes. 
So much, then, for the working of providence. . eta 
_ Il. The next thing is, rue worxine or Lyp1a. God’sintentionis 
_ that Lydia shall be saved. Yet, you know, no woman was ever saved) 
against her will. God makes us willing in the day of his power, and 
is the way of his grace not to violate the will, but sweetly to 
ercome it. Never will there be anybody dragged to heaven by the 
ears: depend upon that. We shall go there with all our hearts and _ 
all our desires. What, then, was Lydia doing ? BP 
Having by God’s grace been made willing, the first thing was that she 
ept the Sabbath. She was a proselyte, and she kept the seventh day. 
she was away from Thyatira, and nobody would know what she would’ 
0, yet she observed the Lord’s-day carefully. She was abroad when 
‘she was at Philippi, but she had not left God behind her. I have known © re 
some English people, when they once reached the Continent, go rattling — 
along, Sundays and week-days, as if God did not live on the Continent, 
nd as if at home they only observed the Sabbath because they 
appened to be in England, which is very probably the case with a 
ood many. When they get away they say, ‘‘ When you are at Rome, 
ou must do as Rome does; ”’ and so they take their pleasure on God’s 
day. It was not so with Lydia. There was no selling of purple 
hat day; she regarded the Sabbath, Oh, I would to God that every 
me would regard the Sabbath! May God grant that it may never be 
ken away from us! There is a plot now to make some of you work 
li the seven days of the week, and you will not get any more pay for 
even days than you get for six. Stand out against it, and preserve 
our right to rest upon God’s day. The observance of one day in 
seven as a day of rest materially helps towards the conversion of men, oeey 
ecause then they are inclined to think. They have the opportunity to i) 
hear, and, if they choose to avail themselves of it, the probabilities are 
that God will bless the hearing, and they will be saved. : 
Now, notice next that, not only did Lydia observe the Sabbath, but 





































































































A486 . METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT, 


she went up to the place of worship. It was not avery fine place. I donot 
suppose there was any building. It may have been a little temporary 
oratory put up by the river side; but very probably it was just on the 
bank of the’ river that they met together. It does not appear that 
there were any men, but only a few women. They only held a prayer- 
- meeting: “‘ where prayer was wont to be made.” But Lydia did not 
stop away from the gathering. She might easily have excused her- 
self after her long journey, and the wearying work of setting up a 
new establishment; but her heart was in this matter, and so she 
found it no drudgery to meet where prayer was offered. She did not 
say, ‘‘I can read a sermon at home,” or, ‘‘I can read in the Book of 
the Law indoors.’ She wished to be where God’s people were, how- 
ever few, or however poor they might be. She did not go to the 
gorgeous heathen temple at Philippi, but she sought out the few 
faithful ones that met to worship the true God. Now, dear friends, 
do the same. You that are not converted, still attend the means of 
grace, and do,not go to a ‘place simply because it is a fine building, 
and because there is a crowd, but go where they are truly worshipping 
God in spirit and in truth.. If they should happen to be very few and 
very poor, yet go with them, for in so doing you are in the way of 
blessing. I think you will yet have to say, ‘‘Being in the way, God 
met with me.’ If it is what some call ‘‘only a prayer-meeting”, you 
will do well to go. Some of the best blessings that men have ever 
gained have been received at prayer-meetings. Ii we would meet 
with God, let us seek him diligently, ‘‘not forsaking the assembling 
- of ourselves together, as the manner of some is.”” Though you cannot 
save yourself, or open your own heart, you can at least do what Lydia 
did: observe the Sabbath, and gather together with God’s people. 

Lydia being there with the assembly, when Paul began to speak, 
we find that she attended to the things that were spoken, which is another 
thing that we can do. It is very ill when people come up to the — 
house of God, and do not attend. I have never had to complain of 
people not attending in this house since the day I first preached in it; 
but I have been in places of worship where there seemed to be any- 
thing but attention. How can it be expected that there will be a 
blessing when the pew becomes a place to slumber in, or when the 
mind is active over the farm, or in the kitchen, or in the shop, for- 
getting altogether the gospel which is being preached to the outward 
ear? If you want a blessing, attend with all your might to the word 
that is preached; but of that we will speak more by-and-by. 

So far we have spoken upon the working of providence ‘and the 
working of Lydia. 

Ill. Now, next, raz workine oF Pavy; for this was necessary too. 
In order to the conversion of men, it is necessary that the person who 
aims at their conversion should work as if it all depended upon him, 
though he knows that he cannot accomplish the work. We are to 
seek to win souls with as much earnestness, and prudence, and zeal, 
as if everything depended upon ourselves; and then we are to leave 
all with God, knowing that none but the Lord can save a single soul. 

Now, notice, Paul, wishing for converts, is judicious in the chorce of 
the place where he will go.to look after them. He goes to the spot 






LYDIA, THE FIRST EUROPEAN CONVERT. | 487 
where there should be a synagogue. He thinks that where people 
have a desire to pray, there he will find the kind of people who will be 
‘ready to hear the word. So he selects devout people, devout worship- 
pers of the one God, that he may go and speak to them about Christ: 
if It is sometimes our plain duty to publish the word from the: housetop 
to the careless crowd; but I think you will generally find that more 
success comes when those, on whose hearts the Spirit of God-has already 
begun to work, are sought out and instructed. “When Christ sent out 
i his disciples on their first journey, he told them; when’ they entered a 
a town, to ‘‘ Enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye‘go | 
thence ;” evidently showing that, even amongst those who do not know 
it the truth, there are some whose hearts are prepared to receive it, who 
are of a devout spirit, and in that sense are worthy. These are the 
people who should first be sought after. In the same limited sense was 
Cornelius, to whom Peter was sent, worthy to hear the glad tidings of 
great joy. His reverent spirit was well pleasing to God; for we read, 
a “Thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had in remembrance in 
| the sight of God.” ‘We must not, of course, think that these things 
give any claim to salvation; but rather that they are the expression 
; of hearts prepared to receive the message of salvation, seeking the 
Lord, ‘‘if haply they might feel after him, and find him.’’ One of our 
greatest difficulties in these days is, that so many have lost all re- 
2. verence for authority of any kind, even God’s: having risen against 
é human despotism, they also foolishly try to break God’s bands asunder. 
i We are cast back on the infinite power of God when we come to deal 
with such people; but when we meet with others who are willing te 
listen and pray, we know that God has already begun to work. Now, 
dear worker, choose the person who is evidently pointed out to you by 
2 God’s gracious providence. Choose judiciously, and try to speak with 
i those with whom you may hopefully speak, and trust that God will 
3 bless the word. 
When Paul goes down to the river, you notice that he is very 
judicious as to his manner of introducing his subject. He did not preach 
at all. He found only a few women; and to stand up and preach to 
them, as he did to the crowds at Corinth, or at Athens, might have 
seemed absurd; but we read this: “ We sat down, and spake unto 
-\ the women which resorted thither.” He took his seat on the river’s 
| bank, where they were ‘all sitting still, and at prayer, and he began 
| _— just to have a talk. A sermon would have been out of place; but a 
talk was the right sort of thing. So he talked the gospel into them. 
Now, be careful of the way in which you go to work with people; for 
much‘ of the result must depend upon that. Some people can be 
preached right away from Christ ; for the moment you begin to preach 
they say, ‘Oh, thank you, I do not. want any of your sermon! 
‘Perhaps you could slip a word in edgowise ; just drop a seed in a 
crack ; or leave a word with them, just one word. Say at once, “Tf you 
do not want-any preaching, I do not want to preach to you: I am not 
‘so fond of preaching as all that ; but Tread a very curious story 1n the 
newspapers the other day!” And then tell the story, and wrap the 
gospel up in it. If they do not want pills, do not give them pills, 
Give them'a bit of sugar. They will take the sugar, and when they 


Sr An eex 


Se 2a les, ier Sree) banat Bree erent 









sr ipiee it, ers will * a 2 pill ade I rachbion: thi: al 
opportunities of doing good through not being wide | 
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.” Paul theref 
down, and has a friendly talk with the women who resorted tk 
: ‘But whether Paul preached, or whether Paul talked, it was all He 
game: he was judicious as to the matter of his discourse. — He had but i 
one subject, and that was Christ ; the Christ who had met him on the a 
way to Damascus, and changed his heart ; the Christ who was able 
still to save; the Christ who bled upon the cross, to bring men fa? 5 
God, and cleanse them in his blood; the Christ in heaven, interceding 
for sinners; the Christ waiting, to be gracious. Paul would not end f 5 
e, 








‘his talk without saying, ‘‘Trust him: trust him. He that believeth 
in him hath everlasting life.” So, whether he preached or whether 
he talked, it was the same story of Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 
‘That is how Paul worked. He might have acted very differently. If 
his heart had not been all aflame for Jesus, he would very likely not 
have spoken at all, or if he had, it would have been a commonplace 
remark about the weather. He might have been eager to learn the 
method by which the beautiful purple dye was obtained, and not 
have remembered that gospel message, written by Isaiah ‘long ago, — 
which would come with special force to the hearts of his hearers: 


# 
etl) 


ae ‘“‘ Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though ~ i 
wa they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.” He might have been a 
ae so interested in his enquiries about Thyatira as to forgetto speak ofthe 
_-—s way to the city of light. A dozen subjects might have claimed atten. __ 
Hie tion, if his heart had not been set upon one object. He could have «a 
ee spoken of his journeys, and even of his plans, without actually preach- 
aad ing Christ to her. He might have spoken about the gospel, as I fear — 4 
swe often do, and not have spoken the gospel itself. Some sermons 
Bee which I have heard, though faultlessly orthodox, have contained 
nothing that could convert anybody; for there has been nothing to 4 
ae touch the conscience or heart. Others, though very clever and pro- — 
Ann found, have had no possible bearing on the needs of the hearers; and 
sg it. was little wonder that they were without result. ButIam sure’ 


ee Paul’s talk would aim straight at the centre of the target: itwasevidently 
aes addressed to the heart; for we are told that it was with the heart 
aaa Lydia heard it. Atter all, it is not our most orderly discourses, 
-—s- nor our aptest illustrations, which bring people to Christ; but some 
‘a little sentence which is slipped in unawares, or some burning word 
which comes straight out of our own heart’s experience. There would — 
be sure to be many such that day in that earnest simple talk by the | 
river side. Let us multiply such conversations, if we would win more | 
5 Lydias for the church. : 

\ IV. But, now, fourthly—and here is the main point—let us notice 
u | THE WORKING OF THE Spirit or Gop. Providence brings Paul and — 
ve Lydia together. Lydia comes there because she observes the Sabbath, __ 
pe and loves the place of worship. Paul comes there because he loves 
to win souls, and, like his Master, is on the watch for stray sheep. But 
it would have been a poor meeting for them if the Spirit of God had not 
been there also, So we next read of Lydia: ‘‘ Whose heart the Lord 
a opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul,” 


ey 


& 


<3 = 
a 


ir eS 
BS Pg ae 














Lord can open a human heart; for he 
8 well what key will fit it. What means. 
the case of Lydia, I do not know; but I will tell yc 
ight have happened. Perhaps she had lost her husband; 
a woman’s heart has been opened by that great gash. Th 
ul has been taken away, and she has turned to God. Perh ps7 4 
sband was spared to her; but she had lost a child. Oh, how | 
a babe has been sent here on purpose to entice its mother to the 
ies ; a lamb taken away that the sheep might follow the Shepherd! | 
aps she had had bad trade; the price of purple may have fallen. 
may have been half afraid she would fail in business. I have 
wn such trouble open some people’s hearts. Perhaps she had had _ 
rosperity ; possibly the purple had gone up in price. I have known — 
ome so impressed with God’s temporal blessings that they have been 
_ ready to think of him, and to turn to him. I do not know; I cannot 
guess, and I have no right to guess what it was. But I know that — 
_ God has very wonderful ploughs, with which he breaks up the hard — 
- soil of human hearts. When I have been through the Britannia Iron 
_ Works, at Bedford, I have wondered at the strange clod-crushers, 
clod-breakers, and ploughs, made there by the Messrs. Howard; and 
‘God has some marvellous machines in his providence for turning up me 
the soil of our hearts. I cannot tell what he has done to you, dear 
‘triend, but I do trust that whatever has happened has been opening op 
the soil, so that the good seed may drop in. It was the Spirit of God — 
who did it, whatever the instrument may have been, and Jydia’s 
_ heart was “opened.” Opened to what? To attend. ‘She attended © 
_ unto the things which were spoken of Paul.” 
So, first, her heart was opened ¢o listen very intently. She wanted to 
eatch every word. She did as some of you do, put her hand to her 
_ ear, for fear she should not hear all that was spoken. There are many 
__ ways of listening. Some people listen with both their ears, allowing 
_ it to go in at one ear and out at the other; like that wit, who, when 
he was being seriously spoken to, and yet seemed very inattentive, at 
length wearied the friend who was discoursing. ‘I am afraid itis 
_ not doing you much good,” he said. “No,” came the reply; “but I 
_ think it will do this gentleman some good,” pointing to one who sat _ 
beside him, “ for as it has gone in at this side it has gone out at the 
other.” Oh, how I wish that you had only one ear, so that the truth you 
__ hear could never get out again after it had once got in! Well did the | 
Lord speak through Isaiah the prophet unto the people, ‘‘ Hearken 
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good.” Many people can 
listen for an hour or two to a scientific lecture, or a political speech, , 
oa without feeling in the least weary; they can even go to the theatre, 
and sit there a whole evening without dreaming of being tired; yet 
_ they complain if the sermon is a minute beyond the appointed time. ey 
They seem to endure the preaching as a sort of penance, scarcely mi 
hearing the words, or, at least, never imagining that the message can oS 
_ have any application to their own case. a 
| Lydia’s heart was so opened ‘that she attended”, that is, she ar 
listened to the word of salvation until she began to desire it. It is 
se always a pleasure to entertain guests who relish the food placed before 





















































































VOPLION bee SUS ee SO ee ed ee ee 
¥ vn Sine Bia ype 


490 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


them ; and it is a great joy to preach to those who are eagerly hungering 
after the truth. But how heart-breaking a task it is to keep con- 
tinually praising the pearl of great price to those who know not its 
value, nor desire its beauty! Daniel was a man ‘greatly beloved” ; 
the Hebrew word there employed means “a man of desires.” He was 
not one of your conceited, self-satisfied individuals. He longed and 
yearned for better things than he had yet attained, and hence was 
‘“‘ greatly beloved.’ God loves people to thirst after him, and to 
desire to know his love and power. Let us explain the gospel as 
we may, if there is no desire in the heart, our plainest messages are 
lost. A ’man said, about something he wished to make clear, ‘‘ Why, 
it is as plain as ABC!” “Yes,” said a third party, “but the 
man you are talking to is DEF.” So, some of our hearers seem 
to turn away from the Word of God. But when a person says, ‘I 
want to find salvation; I want to get Christ this very day; and Lam 
going to listen with the determination that, I will find out the way of 
salvation ;’’ surely, if the things spoken are the same things that 
Paul spoke of, few in that condition will go out of the house without 
finding salvation. liydia’s heart was opened to attend to the gospel, 
that is, to desire it. 

But, next, her heart was opened to understand it. It is wonderful 
how little even well-educated people sometimes understand of the 
gospel when it is preached in the simplest manner. One is constantly 
being astounded by the misapprehensions that persons have as to the 
way of salvation. But Lydia had grasped the truth. ‘‘ Thanks be 
to God,” she said, ‘‘I see it. Jesus Christ suffered in our stead; and 
we, by an act of faith, accept him as our Substitute, and we are saved 
thereby. I have it. I never saw it before. I read about a paschal 
lamb, and the sprinkling of the blood, and the passing over of the 
houses where the blood was sprinkled. I could not quite make it out. 
Now I see, if the blood be sprinkled upon me, God will pass over me, 
according to his word, ‘When I see the blood, I will pass over you.’ ” 
She attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul, so as to 
understand them. 

But more than that; her heart was so opened that she attended to 
the gospel so as ¢o accept it. ‘‘ Ah!” she said, ‘now I understand 
it, I will have it. Christ for me! Christ for me! That blessed 
Substitute for sinners! Is that all I have to do, simply to trust him ? 
Then I will trust him. Sink or swim, I will cast myself upon him 
now.” She did so there and then. There was no hesitating. She 
believed what Paul said; that Jesus was the Son of God, the ap: 
‘pointed propitiation for sin, and that whosoever believed on him 
should then and there be justified; and she did believe in him, and 
she was justified ; as you will be, my friend, if you will believe in him 
at this moment. You, too, shall have immediate salvation, my dear 
sister sitting yonder, if you will come, like this Lydia of old, and just 
take Christ to be yours, and trust him now. She attended unto the 
things which were spoken of Paul, so that she accepted Christ. 

Having done that, she went further: her heart was so won, that 
she was, by the Spirit, led to obey the word, and avow her faith. 
Paul told her that the gospel was this—‘‘ He that believeth and is 


a 





& 
‘4 
Fig 

i 


| 


LYDIA, THE FIRST EUROPEAN CONVERT. - 491. 


baptized shall be saved.” He said to. her, ‘“‘My commission: is, 
‘Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature, — 
He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.’”” Perhaps she said, 
“But why must I be baptized?” He said, “Asa testimony ofyour 
obedience to Christ, whom you take to be your Master and your Lord; 
and as a type of your being one with him in his burial. You are to. 
be buried in water as he was buried in the tomb of J oseph; and you . 
are to be raised up out of the water even as he rose again from the 
dead, This act is to be a token and type to you of your oneness with . 
him in his death and burial and resurrection.” What did Lydia say ? 
Did she say, ‘“‘ Well, I think I must wait a little while: the water is 
cold”? Did she say, “I think I must ask about it; I must consider. 
it”? No, not at all. Paul tells her that this is Christ’s ordinance, 
and she at once replies, ‘‘ Here am I, Paul, let me be baptized, and 
my servants, too, and all that belong to my household, for they also 
believe in Jesus Christ. Let us have the baptism at once.” ‘There 
and then “she was baptized, and her household.” She did at once 
obey the heavenly message, and she became a baptized believer. She 
was not ashamed to confess Christ. She had not known him long; 
but what she did know of him was so blessed and joyous to her soul, 
that she would have said, if she had known the hymnu— Pe 


“Through floods and flames, if Jesus lead, 
Pll follow where he goes; 
‘Hinder me not,’ shall be my cry, 
Though earth and hell oppose.” 


You can imagine her saying, ‘Did he go down into the Jordan, and 
say, ‘Thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness’? Then I will go 
where he leads the way, and be obedient to him, and say to all the 
world, ‘I, too, am a follower of the crucified Christ.’ ”’ Re a es 

-Now, lastly, after Lydia was baptized, she became an enthusiastic 
Christian. She said to Paul, ‘‘ You must come home with me. I 
know you have not anywhere to go. Come along; and there is your 
friend Silas. I have plenty of room for him; and Timothy too; and 
Luke also. We can make room for the four of you among the purple 
bales, or somewhere ; but, at any rate, I have house-room for you four, 
and I have heart-room for forty thousand of you. I wish I could take 
in the whole church of God.” Dear good woman that she was, she 
felt that she could not do too much for the men who had been made 
a blessing to her; for she regarded what she did to them as done to 
their Lord and Master. They might have said, ‘No, really, we: 
cannot trouble you. . You have ‘the household. You have all, this 
business to look after.”” ‘‘Yes,’’ she would answer, ‘‘I know that. It 
is very kind of you to excuse yourselves ; but you must come.” ‘‘No,” 
Paul might urge, ‘‘my dear good woman, I am going to find out 
some tent-makers, and make tents with them. We will find a lodging’ 
where we have been.” ‘‘Ah!” she would say, ‘‘ but I mean to have 
you. You must come to my home.” ‘She constrained us.” She would 
probably put it thus: “ Now, I shall not think that you fully believe 
in me if you do not come home with me, Come, you baptized me, 
and by that very act you professed that you considered that I was a: 








2 

long as you ils ‘and I Se make you as 
at last Paul yields to her constraint, an 
- glad they would all be, and what praise te 
household! I hope that the generous spirit, whic 
art of the first convert in Europe, will always continue 
verts of Europe till the last day. I trust that when they ar 
not merely to entertain God’s ministers, but to help all Go 
of, every sort, they may be ready and willing to do it for Christ’s 
for love shall fill them with a holy hospitality, and an earnest | 
to bless the children of God. Love one another, brothers and s 
ae do good to one another, as you have opportunity ; for so 
you be worthy followers of Lydia, the first pens convert, rons 
heart the Lord opened. 
; The Lord open your hearts, for his name’s sake! Amen, r 
































Portion or SoripruRE READ BEFORE SERMON—ACcts xvi. 





‘Hymns rrom “Our Own Hymn Boox”—531, 560, 589, 


\ 






x. H. Spurgeon’s Popular Books. : 






i 


EVERYBODY'S BOOK: | Ne 


C. H. Spurgeon’s Pilgrim’s Guide. A word for all times and all 

‘seasons. Paper covers, 1s, Handsomely bound in Cloth, 2s, mA 

ion. GOOD. START; BB: 
aes A Book for Young Men and Women. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. With 
Bye Introductory Note by Sir GrorGE WILLIAMS. - i 


oe er 
it al Sai 


__ GLorious THEMES FOR SAINTS AND SINNERS. mi 
ae _ Crown 8vo., 3s, 6d. : me 





‘ = \ ‘ * BS) 
a PASSMORE & ALABASTER, Paternoster Burtpines, Lonpon, E,C, 

















hey : 





| SEVEN NOW.” 


‘Irreypep ror Reapine on Lorp’s-pay, Marcu 27rx, 1892, 


1% 











DELIVERED BY 


C. H. SPURGEON, 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON, 





On Lord’s-day Evening, February 8th, 1891. 
















** Riven now.’’—John xi. 22. i kone ee 


\ ; 
I wore that there are a great many persons here who are interested 
in the souls of those around them. We shall certainly never exer-- 
cise faith concerning those for whose salvation we have no care. I 
trust, also, that we are diligent in looking after individuals, especially _ 
those who are amongst our own family and friends. This was what. 
Martha did; her whole care was for her brother. It is often easier 
_ to have faith that Christ can save sinners in general, than to believe — 
_ that he can come into our own home, and save some particular mem- 
- ber of our household. But, oh, the joy when this comes’ to pass; 
____when we are able to kneel beside some of our loved ones, and rejoice _ 
with them in being made alive by the power of the Holy Ghost! | 
_ We cannot expect to have this privilege, however, unless like Martha 
we send our prayer to Jesus, and go to meet him, and tell him of our 
need. In the presence of Christ it seems very natural to trust him 
even at the worst extremity. It is when we are at our wits’ end that 
he delights to help us. When our hopes seem to be buried, then it is 
that God can give us a resurrection, When our Isaac is on the altar, 
_ then the heavens are opened, and the voice of the Eternal is heard. 
Art thou giving way to despair concerning thy dear friend? Art 
_ thou beginning to doubt thy Saviour, and to complain of his delay ? 
_ Be sure that Jesus will come at the right time, though he must be the 
ey judge of which is the best time for him to appear. 
Martha had a fine faith. If we all had as much honest belief in. 
































Christ as she had, many a man, who now lies dead in his sins, would, ere y 
long, hear that voice which would call him forth from his tomb, and ee 
restore him unto his friends. Martha’s faith had to do with a dreadful J 





ease. Her brother was dead, and had been buried, but her faith still = 

lived; and in spite of all things which went against her, she believed — 

_ in Christ, and looked to him for help in her extremity. Her faith — 
py * No. 2,249. ° ten ie! | 





146 Poe SPOOL EAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


went to the very sds of the gulf, and she said, ‘‘ But I know, that eves 
now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee.” 
} Still, Martha had not so much faith as she thought she had. But a 
few hours after she had confessed her confidence in the power of the 
Lord Jesus, or perhaps it was only a few minutes, she stood at the 
grave of her brother, and evidently doubted the wisdom of him she 
professed to trust. She objected to the stone being removed; and, 
strong in the admitted facts of the case, she urged her reason, and 
said, ‘‘ Lord, by this time he stinketh.”’ Well, but, Martha, you said, 
not very long ago, ‘‘I know that even now the Christ can interpose.” 
Yes, she said it, and she believed it in the way in which most of 
us believe; but when her faith was sharply tried by a matter of 
fact, she did not appear to have had all the faith she professed I 
suspect this also is true of most of us.. We often fancy our confidence 
in Christ is much stronger than it really is. I think I have told you 
of my old friend, Will Richardson, who said, when he was seventy- 
five years of age, that it was a very curious thing, that all the winter 
through, he thought he should like to be a-harvesting, or out in the 
hay-field, because he felt so strong. He imagined that he could do 
as much as any of the youngsters. ‘‘ But,” he said, ‘‘do you know, 
Mr. Spurgeon, when the summer comes, I do not get through the hay- 
making; and when the autumn comes, I find I have not sufficient 
strength for reaping?”’ So it often is in spiritual things. When we 
are not called upon to bear the trouble, we feel wonderfully strong; 
but when the trial comes, very much of our boasted faith is gone in 
smoke. Take heed that ye examine well your faith; let it be true 
and real, for you will need it all. 

However, Christ did not take Martha at her worst, but at her best. 
When our Lord says, “ According to your faith be it unto you,” no 
does not mean ‘‘ According to your faith in its ebb,” but ‘‘ According 
to your faith in its flood.”” He reads the thermometer at its highest 
point, not at its lowest; not even taking the ‘‘ mean temperature ’”’ of 
our trust. He gives us credit for our quickest pace; not counting our 
slowest, nor seeking to discover our average speed in this matter of 
faith. Christ did for Martha all she could have asked or believed; 
her brother did rise again, and he was restored to her, and to his 
friends, In thy case, too, O thou trembling, timorous believer, the 
Lord Jesus will take thee at thy best, and he will do for thee great 
guage, seeing that thou desirest to believe greatly, and that thy prayer 
is, “ Lord, I ‘believe ; help thou mine unbelief ! ” 

"The point upon which Martha chiefly rested, when she expressed 
her faith, was the power of Christ in intercession with his Father. 
*‘T know,” said she, ‘that, even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of 
God, God will give it thee.” Since the omnipotence of God could be 
claimed, she felt no anxiety as to the greatness of the request, 
“ Whatsoover” was asked could easily be gained, if it was only asked 
by him who never was denied. Beloved in the Lord, our Christ is’ still 
alive, and he is still pleading. Can you believe, even now, that what- 
ever he shall ask of God, God will give it him, and give it you for his 
dear Son’s sake ? What an anchorage is the intercession of Christ! 
“He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God 








~ AF 


ee ee ee ee 





ee Pees aD 


‘EVEN NOW.” 147 


by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.” Here 
is a grand pillar to rest the weight of our souls upon: ‘He ever liveth 
to make intercession for them.” Surely, we may have great faith in 
him who never wearies, and who never fails; who lives, indeed, for no 
other purpose than to plead for those who trust in his dying love, and 
in his living power. ‘ Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that 
died, yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand 
of God, who also maketh intercession for us.” Fall back upon the 
intercessory power of Christ in every time of need, and you will ‘find 


_eomfort that will never fail you. 


It is a grand thing to have faith for the present, not bemoaning the 
past, nor dreaming of some future faith which we hope may yet: be 
ours. The present hour is the only time we really possess. The past 
is gone beyond recall. If it has been filled with faith in God, we'can 
no more live on that faith now than we can live to-day on the bread 
we ate last week. If, on the contrary, the past has been marred by 
our unbelief, that is no reason why this moment should not witness a 
grand triumph of trust in the faithful Saviour. Let us not excuse our 
present lack of faith by the thought of some future blessing. No 
confidence which we may learn to put in Christ, in the days to come, 
can atone for our present unbelief. If we ever mean to trust him, 
why should we not do so now, since he is as worthy of our belief now 
as he ever will be, and since what we miss now we miss beyond reeall. 


“ The present, the present is all thou hast 
For thy sure possessing, 
Like the patriarch’s angel, hold it fast, 
Till it give its blessing.” 


In this verse, ‘‘ I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of 
God, God will give it thee,”’ I want to fix your attention only on the 
two words, “Even now.” | We have just sung— 


«‘Pass me not, O tender Saviour, 
Let me love and cling to thee; 
I am longing for thy favour ; 
When thou comest, call for me: 
Even me.” 


Our hymn was, “Even me.” The sermon is to be ‘‘ Even now.” If 
you have been singing ‘‘Even me,” and so applying the truth to 
your own case, say also, with an energy of heart that will take no 
denial, ‘‘ Even now,” and listen with earnest expectation to that gospel 
which is always in the present tense: ‘‘ While it is said, To-day if 
ye will hear his voice, harden not your heart, as in the provocation.” 
Remember, too, that this is not only the preacher’s word, for the Holy, 
Ghost saith, “‘To-day’”’: “‘ Even now.” nih 

T shall use these words, first, in reference to those who are concerned, 
about the souls of others, as Martha was about her dead brother. Believe 
that Christ can save even now. Then I shall speak to you who are 
somewhat concerned about your own souls. You believe, perhaps, that) 
Christ can save. I want you to be persuaded that he can save you even, 
now; that is to say, at this exact hour and minute, going by the clock, 
















co you, are in hie same Sieion as Martha, Ican oe out sev: 
of likeness which should encourage you to persevere. You, mot 
have prayed for your boy; you, father, have pleaded for your girl; 
you, dear wife, have been much in prayer for your husband; you, — 
beloved teacher, have frequently brought your class before God ; and — 
‘cag yet there is a bad case now pressing upon your mind, and your heart 
is heavy about some dear one, whose condition seems hopeless. I 
_ want you to believe that now, even now, Christ can grant your prayer, 





_ to moisten his parched tongue and lips. I sorrowed as though I was 
- about to die myself; but in spite of all that, I believe even now that 
_ thou canst help me; even now.’ Alas! there are many griefs in 








and save that soul; that now, even now, he can give you such a 

blessing that the past delay shall be more than recompensed to you. 
There is one, for instance, in whom we are deeply interested, — 
and we can say that the case has cost us great sorrow. So Martha 
could have said of Lazarus. ‘‘ Blessed Master’, she might have said, Wi 
“my brother took the fever ”’—(for I should think it was a fever oe 
that he had)—‘‘ and I watched him; I brought cold water from the 
: 


well, and I laved his burning brow; T was by his bedside all night. 


f 
I never took off my clothes. Nobody knows how my heart was wrung 
with anguish as I saw the hot beaded drops upon his brow, and tried 


the world like this. A mother says, ‘ Nobody knows what I have ~ 
suffered through that son of mine. I shall die of a broken heart 


because of his conduct.” ‘No one can tell,” says a father, ‘‘ what 


grief that daughter of mine has caused me. I have sometimes wished 
that she had never been born.’”’ There have been many, many such ~ 
stories told into my ear, in which a beloved one has been the cause 
of anguish and agony untold to gracious, loving hearts. To those 


_. so sorely troubled I now speak. Can you believe that even now the 


living Intercessor is ‘‘mighty to save”? It may be that you are 

at this moment trembling on the verge of the blessing you so long 

have sought. God give you faith to grasp it ‘‘even now”?! 3 
With other persons we are met with a fresh difficulty. Zhe casehas 

already disappointed us. That is how some of you have found it, is it 

not? ‘ Yes,” you say, ‘‘I have prayed long for a dear friend, and I 

believed, some time ago, that my prayer was heard, and that there 

was a change for the better; indeed, there was an apparent change ; 

but it came to nothing.” You are just like Martha. She kept saying 

to herself, ‘“‘ Christ willcome. Brother is very ill, but Jesus will come 


before he dies; I know he will. It cannot be that he will stay away 


much longer; and when he comes, Lazarus will soon be well.” Day — 
after day, Mary and she sent their messenger to look toward the 
Jordan, to see if Jesus was not coming. But he did not come. It 
must have been a terrible disappointment to both these sisters; enough — 
to stagger the strongest faith they had ever had in the sympathy of 
Christ. But Martha got the better of it, and she said, ‘‘ Even now, 
though disappointed so bitterly, I believe that thou canst do whatso- 
ever thou wilt.”” Learn from Martha, my discouraged brother, You 


PS 
‘ Hold 
Ete Aga 











a mere disappointment, and disappeared, like the 
sun. But can you not believe over the head of your 
ut, and say, ‘‘I believe even now, even now”? Blessed — 
faith be, if it gets ‘so far. Fee 5) 
erhaps further difficulties have met us. We have attempted tohelp 
2», and the case has proved our own helplessness. ‘‘ Ah, yes,” says 
t exactly describes me. I never felt so helpless in my life. 
me all that I can do, and it amounts to nothing. Ihave been 
in my example. I have been prayerful in my words. I have 
be very patient and longsuffering. I have tried to induce my beloved. 
one to go and listen to the gospel here and there. I have put holy 
in his way, and all the while I have seized opportunities to plead 
with him, often with tears in my eyes, and I can do nothing!, Lam 
dead beat.”’ Yes, that is just where Martha got to; she had done 
_ everything, and nothing seemed to be of the least use. None of the 
medicines she applied seemed to soothe the sufferer, She had gone 
down the village, perhaps to the house of “Simon the leper, who was a © 
_ friend of hers, and he possibly advised some new remedies ; but nothing : 
seemed to make the least difference. Her brother got worse and worse, 
until she saw that, though she had nursed him back to health the last — 
_ time he had been ill, she was now utterly powerless. Then he died. — 
‘Yet, even though things had gone so far as that, she had faith in — 
_ Christ. In like manner, your case is beyond your skill; but can you~ Ba 
not believe that, even now, the end of nature will be the beginning 
of grace; can you not even now feel that you shall find that word true, 
“He shall not fail” ? Christ never did fail yet, and he never will, | 
- When all the doctors give a patient up, the Great Physician can step in _ 
and heal. Can you believe concerning your friend “even now”? - 
__ But perhaps you are in a worse plight still. The case has been given _ 
wp. I think I hear one kind, gracious soul, whose hope has been 
~~ erushed, say. “ Well, sir, that is just what we have come to about my 
boy. We held a little family meeting, and said we must get him to go 
away to Australia, if we can. If he will only go to America, or some- 
where abroad, it will be a relief to have him out of-our sight. He keeps 
coming home intoxicated, and gets brought before the magistrates. 
He is a disgrace to us. He is ashame to the name he bears. We 
have given him up.” Martha had come to this. She had given heron 
_ prother up, and had actually buried him; yet she believed in the | 
power of Christ. Ah, there are many people that are buried alive! I 
do not know that such a thing ever happens in the cemetery; but I _ 
know it happens in our streets and homes. Many are buried morally, 
and given up by us before God gives them up. And, somehow, it is often 
the given-up people that God delights to bless. Can you believe that 
even now, even now, prayer can be heard, that even now the Holy — 
Ghost can change the nature, and that even now Christ can save the 
% soul? Believest thou this? I shall rejoice if thou canst, and thou toe er: 
_ ghalt rejoice ere long. : j ‘es aaa 
----—s«#But there is still a lower depth. Here is one who is much con- | Rie 
cerned about an individual, and the case is loathsome. ‘Though we 


























. 














































ne paca ra 


i 


150 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIL. 


loved him once,” he says, “ his character has now become such that 
itis pestilential to the family. He leads others astray. We cannot 
think of what he has done without the very memory of his life 
‘Spreading a taint over our conscience, and over our mind.” There 
are persons alive in the world, who are just masses of living putridity. 
There may be such here. I should be glad if a word I said could 
reach them. It isa shocking thing that there are men and women, 
‘made in the image of God, with talents and ability, with capacity and 
conscience, who, nevertheless, seem to live for nothing else but to 
indulge their licentious passions, and to lead others into vices which 
else they had never known. There must come an awful day of 
reckoning to such when ‘the Christ of God shall sit upon the throne, 
and shall weigh before all men the secret doings of libertines, of 
debauched men, and depraved women. If any of you have such a 
one related to you, can you believe that even now Christ can raise 
that one? Yours is just the same sort of case as Martha had. 
She could have said, ‘‘ Brother is buried: worse than that, he 
stinketh.”’ She did not like to say that of dear Lazarus, her own 
brother, but she could not help saying it. And there are some men, 
of whom we are compelled to say, no matter how much our love 
seeks to shield them, that their character stinks. But can you still 
believe that, even now, there is hope that God can intervene, an@ 
that grace can save? Why, my dear friend, you and I know that it 
isso! Ido believe it; we must all believe it. If it comes to a case very 
near and dear to you, and you begin to be a little bit staggered, 
recollect what you used to be yourselves—not openly so depraved, 
perhaps, but inwardly quite the same, and take hope for these foul 
men and women from the remembrance of what you were: ‘‘and such 
were some of you; but ye are washed.” When John Newton used to 
preach at St. Mary Woolnoth, he always believed in the possibility 
of the salvation of the worst of his hearers; for he had been himself 
one of the vilest of the vile. When he was very old, and they said, 
‘Dear Mr. Newton, you are too old to preach; you had better not 
go into the pulpit now,” he said, ‘‘ What! shall the old African 
blasphemer, who has been saved by grace, leave off preaching the 
gospel while there is breath in his body? Never.” I think while 
there is breath in the body of some of us, we must go on telling the 
gospel; for, if it saved us, it can save the worst of sinners. We are 
bound to believe that even now Christ can save even the most horrible 
and the most vile. 


% Tale blood’ oats kanal bestoel bak taaaee 
His blood availed for me.’’ 


Perhaps there is even a more desperate difficulty still, with reference 
to someone whom we would fain see living for God. The case 1s beyond 
our reach. ‘* Yes,” that brother quickly answers, ‘‘now you have come 
‘to my trouble. I do not even know where my boy is; he ran away, 
and we have not heard from him for years. How can I help him?” 
Why, believe that ‘‘ even now ”’ Christ can speak to him, and save him! 
He can send his grace where we can send our love. The great difficulty 
which lies like a stone at the door of the sepulchre will not prevent 





f 
ae 
, 


“Zs 


Pinas 


ES RE ENP a Ce eI 05 


Ns ee ee 


‘“ EVEN NOW.” . 151 


him speaking the life-giving word. He has all forces at his com- 
mand, and when he says the word, the stone shall be rolled away, and 
the son that is lost shall be found; the dead shall be made alive 
again, Though you cannot reach your son, or your daughter, Christ 
can meet with them... ‘The Lord’s hand is not shortened, that it 
cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear.” Though 
your prodigal boy or your wandering girl be at the end of the earth, 
Christ can reach them, and save them. “Haye faith in God.” « Even 
now ”’ Christ can aid you. 


“ Faith, mighty faith, the promise sees, 
CEs au: And looks to God alone, )' - 
aula Laughs at impossibilities, ete 
Git a4 And says, ‘It shall be done.’ ”” 


_ Iknow there are some Christian people who have drifted into the 
terribly wicked state of giving up their relatives as hopeless. There 
was a brother here, who is now in heaven, a good, earnest Christian 
man, whose son had treated him very shockingly indeed, and the father, 
justly indignant, felt it right to give his son up. He had often tried 
to help him, but the young man was so scandalous a scapegrace that I 
did not wonder that the old man turned him away. But one night, 
_as I was preaching here, I spoke in something like the same way in 
which I have spoken now; and the next morning the old man’s arm 
was about his child’s neck. He could not help himself; he felt he 
must go and find his son out, and seek again to reclaim him. It 
seemed to have been the appointed time for that boy’s salvation, for 
it pleased God that within a few months that son died, and he passed 
away with a good hope, through grace, that he had been brought to 
his Saviour’s feet by his father’s. love. If any of you have a very 
bad son, go after him, seeking, until by the grace of God, you shall 
find him. And you that have grown hopeless about. your relatives, 
you must try not to give them up. If other people cast them off, you 
must not, for they are allied to you by the ties of blood. Seek them 
out. You are the best person in the world to seek them, and the 
most likely to find them, if you can believe that even now, when the 
worst has come to the worst, ‘‘even now,” almighty grace can step in, 
and save the lost soul. 

Oh, that some here may have faith to claim at this moment the 
salvation of their friends! May desire be wrought into expectancy, 
‘and hope become certainty! Like Jacob at Jabbok, may we lay hold 
of God, saying, ‘‘I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.” To 
such faith the Lord will give a quick response. He that will not be 
‘denied shall not be denied. My friend, Hudson Taylor, who has done 
such a wonderful work for China, is an instance of this. Brought up 


in a,godly home, he, as a young man, tried to imitate the lives of his 
parents, and failing in his own strength to make himself better, he 


swung to the other extreme, and began to entertain sceptical notions. 


One day, when his mother was from home, a great yearning after her 


boy possessed her, and she went up to her room to plead with God 
that ‘‘even now” he wouldsave him. If I remember aright, she said 
that she would not leave the room until she had the assurance that her 











: eee pone be tio to Christ, 


she rose quite certain that all was well, a 
was saved. What was he doing at that time 


as to Altea he Mier into his father’s reeves ah 


asks: ; 80, seeing a narrative tract, he took it up ne the ea 
reading the story, and putting it down when the sermon part of os 


began. As he read, he came to the words ‘the finished work of | 
Christ ”, and almost ’at the very moment in which his mother, who. Si 
was miles away, claimed his soul of God, light came into his heart. _ 
He saw that it was by the finished work of Christ that he was to be 
saved; and kneeling in his father’s library, he sought and found the ~ 


life of God. Some days afterwards, when his mother returned, he 


said to her, ‘‘I have some news to tell you.” ‘Oh, I know what it 


is!’ she answered, smiling, ‘‘ You have given yourself to God.” ‘* Who 


told you?” he asked, in astonishment. ‘ God told me,” she said, and 
together they praised him, who, at the same moment, gave the faith to 


_ the mother, and the life to the son, and who has since made him such 


a blessing to the world. It was the mother’s faith, claiming the bless- 


ing ‘even now”, that did it. I tell you this remarkable incident that 


many others may "be stirred up to the same immediate and importunate 
desire for the salvation of their children and relatives. There are some 








things we must always pray for with submission as to whetheritis 


_ the will of God to bestow them upon us: but for the salvation of men 


and women we muy ask without a fear. God delights to save and to 
bless; and when the faith is given to us to expect an immediate answer 


to such a prayer, thrice happy are we. Seek such faith even now,I | 


beseech you, ‘‘ even now.’ 

II. But, in the second place, I want to speak very earnestly to- 
any here who ong, concerned about their own souls. Jesus can save 
you “even now.” CAN WE BELIEVE THIS FOR OURSELVES? Can you 
expect the Lord, even while you hear these words, to speak to you the 


word of power, and bring you forth from your sleep of sin ? 
‘For some of you, the time is late, very late; yet it is not too late. You — 


are getting into years, my friend. I want you to believe that even now 
Christ can save you. I often notice the number of old people who come 
to the Tabernacle. Iam glad to see the aged saints; but amongst 


so many elderly people, no doubt, there are some unsaved sinners, 


whose grey hairs are not a crown of glory, but a fool’s cap. But, 
however old you are, though you are sixty, seventy, eighty, or even 
ninety years of age, yet ‘even now” Christ can give you life. Blessed 
be God for that! But it is not altogether the years that trouble you ; 
it is your sins. As I have already said, if you have gone to the very 
extremity of sin, you may believe that, after all these years of wan- 
dering, the arms of free grace are still open to receive you ‘even 
now.” ‘There is an old proverb, “It is never too late to mend.” It 
is ever too late for us to mend ourselves, but it is never too late for 
Christ to mend us. Christ can make us new, and it is never too late 
for him to do it. If you come to him, and trust him, he will receive 
you “even now.” ; 





“ HVEN Now.” 153 


_ By the longsuffering of God, there vs a time left to.you, in which you 
may turn to him. What a thousand mercies it is that “even now” 
is a time of mercy to you: it might have been the moment of your 
everlasting doom! You have been in accidents ; you have been within 
- an inch of the grave many times; you have been ill, seriously ill; you 
_ have been well-nigh given up for dead; and here you are yet alive, 
and still an enemy to God! Plucked by his hand from fire and flood, 
and, mayhap, from battle; delivered from fever and cholera, and still 
- ungrateful, still rebelling, still spending the life that grace has lent 
you in resisting the love of God! Long years ago you should have 
believed in Christ, but the text is ‘‘even now.”’ Do not begin to say, ° 
‘“‘I believe that God could have saved me years ago;” there is no 
faith in that. Do not meet my earnest plea, by saying, ‘‘I believe 
that God can save me under such-and-such conditions.” Believe that 
he can save you now, up in the top gallery there, just as you are. You 
came in here careless and thoughtless; yet, even now, he can save 
you. Away yonder, quite a man of the world, free and easy,- destitute 
of all religious inclinations though you may be, he can save you even 
now. O God, strike many a man down, as thou didst Saul of Tarsus, 
and change their hearts by thine own supreme love, as thou canst do 
it, even now, on the very spot where they sit or stand! 

But though God waits to be gracious to you, though you have yet 
time to repent, remember, it 1s but a time, therefore sevze it. Your oppor- 
tunity will not last for ever. I believe that even now God can save ; 
but if you reject Christ, there will come a time when salvation will be 
impossible, On earth, as long as aman desires to be saved, he may 
be saved: while there is life there is hope. I believe that, if a man’s 
breath were going from his body, if he could then look to Christ, he 


would live. But— 


“There are no acts of pardon passed 
In the cold grave, to which we haste ; 
But darkness, death, and long despair, 
Reign in eternal silence there.” 


Do not venture on that last leap without Christ; but even now, ere 
the clock strikes another time, fly to Jesus. Trust him ‘‘ even now.” 

It is a time of hope. Even now, there is still every opportunity and 
every preparation for the sinner's salvation. ‘‘ Behold, now is the ac- 
cepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation.” Shall I give you 
some reasons for believing that ‘“‘even now” is a time of hope? 
There are many good arguments which may be brought forward, in 
order to banish the thought of despair. : 

First, the gospel is still preached. The old-fashioned gospel is not 
dead yet. There are a great many who would like to muzzle the mouths 
of God’s ministers; but they never will. The old gospel will live when 
they are dead; and, because it is still preached to you, you may believe 
and live. What is the old gospel? It is that, seeing you are helpless 
to save yourself, or bring yourself back to God, Christ came to restore 
you ; that he took those sins of yours, which were enough to sink you 
to hell, and bore them on the cross, that he might bring you to heaven. 
If you will but trust him, even now, he will deliver you from the curse 


Ty 






* 3) 
ae at will never end; tors again it 
i ieveth on the Son hath everlasting hfe 7 a th 
preached, there is hope for you. When there is no hop 
no presentation of the gospel. God must, by an e 

: preaching of the gospel ere he can suspend the fulfilment o 
promise to every soul that believeth. Since there i is a seepel, take if 
* take it now, even now. God help you so to do! : fi 
(In the second place, I know there is hope now, “even now’ h 
A Christ still lives, He rose from the dead, no more to die, and he is a 
strong as ever. “I am he that liveth and was dead,” he saith, “and be 
Ase hold, Iam alive for evermore. Amen.” Those words were spoken to the % 
_ Apostle John, and when he saw him, he said that ‘‘ His head and his. 
ies were white like wool, as white as snow;”’ but when the Spouse ‘ 










ae 
















saw him, she said, “ His locks, are bushy, and ‘black as a raven.” Yekyi 
. both saw. truly; z ohn’s vision of the white hair was to show that — 
_ Christ is the Ancient of Days; but the view of the spouse was to show - 
his everlasting youth, his unceasing strength and power to save. If — 
there is any difference in him, Christ is to-day more mighty to save 
than he was when Martha saw him. He had not then completed 
the work of our salvation, but he has perfectly accomplished it — 
now; and therefore there is hope for everyone who trusts in him. — 
Btn MEY: Lord has gone up yonder where a prayer will find him, with 
_ the keys of death and hell jingling at his girdle, and with tie 


_ “eternal power and Godhead” he will save you, and save you even 
now, on the spot, before you leave this house. 

Moreover, I know that this is a time of hope, in the next omar 
because the precious blood still has power. All salvation is through the 
blood of the Lamb. Still— 


‘There is a fountain filled with blood, 
Drawn from Immanuel’s veins Bo 
and still, ‘even now,”— {a 
See “ Sinners, plunged beneath that flood, 
ane 3? Lose ali their guilty stains.” ; 
‘oi The endless efficacy of the atoning sacrifice is the reason why you may ir 
come and believe in Jesus, ‘‘even now.” If that blood had diminished 
in its force, I should not dare to speak as I do; but I can, “ even 
now,’ say with confidence,— 
** Dear dying Lamb, thy precious blood ; , 
Shall never lose its power, a oe 


Till all the ransomed church of God . 
Be saved to sin no more.’ 


How many have already entered into glory by the blood of the Lain hi 


. ei 


<<" 











.. When a man comes to die, nothing else will do for him but this: our 
i own works are a poor staff for us when we pass through the river. 





All those who are now in the land of light have but one confidence, 
ha and but one song: they stand upon the merit of Jesus Christ, and 
they praise the Lamb who was slain, by whose blood they have - 










{EVEN NOW.” 155 


‘been cleansed and sanctified. There is no other way of salvation but 
that. ‘Even now” that blood has virtue to take away your sin. 
Christ is a sufficient Saviour, because his death has unexhausted power. 
Believe that he can save you ‘“ even now.” ; 
_. Again, I would remind you that ‘even now” is a time of hope to 
you, because the Spirit still can renew. He is yet at work, regene. 
rating and sanctifying. He came down at Pentecost to dwell with his 
people, and he has never gone back again. He is still in the church. 
te ~ Sometimes we feel his mighty power more than at other times, but he is 
3. always at work. Oh, you that do not know anything about the power 
a _ of the Holy Ghost, let me tell you that this is the most wonderful 
: phenomenon that can ever be observed! Those of us, who have seen ~ 
and known his mighty energy, can bear testimony to it. In my 
retirement, at Menton, during the last few weeks, if you had seen 
me, you would have found me sitting every morning, at half-past nine 
o’clock, at my little table, with my Bible, just reading a chapter, and 
offering prayer, my family prayer with the little group of from forty 
to fifty friends, who daily gathered for that morning act of worship. 
There they met, and the Spirit of God was manifestly moving among 
them, converting, cheering, comforting. It was because, of no effort — 
of mine; it was simply the Word, attended by the Spirit of God, 
binding us together, and binding us all to Christ. And here, in this’ 
house, for seven-and-thirty years, have I in all simplicity preached 
this old-fashioned gospel. I have just kept to that one theme; con- 
tent to know nothing else amongst men; and where are they that have 
preached new gospels? They have been like the mist upon the moun- 
tain’s brow. ‘They came, and they have gone. And so it will always 
' be with those who preach anything else but the Word of God; for 
wi nothing will abide but the mount itself, the everlasting truth of the 
xy gospel to which the Holy Ghost bears witness. That same Holy 
y Ghost is able to give you a new heart “even now”’, to make you a 
new creature in Christ Jesus at this moment. Believest thou this? 
Once more. I know that ‘“‘even now” Christ can save you, and I 
pray you to believe it, for the Mather 1s still waiting to recewe 
% yeturning prodigals. Still, as of old, the door is open, and the best 
m robe hangs in the hall, ready to be put upon, the shoulders of the son 
who comes back from the far country, even though he returns reeking 
with the odour of the swine-trough. How longingly the Father looks 
along the road, to see whether at length some of you are turning 
homeward! Ah! did you but know the joy that awaits those who 
Ai ‘come, and the feast which would load the welcoming table, you would 
“A “even now” say, ‘I will arise, and go to my Father.” You should 
' have returned long ago; but blessed be his love, which ‘‘ even now ”’ 
: _ waits to clasp you to his heart! : 
-  * fast of all, faith is but the work of a moment. Believe and. live. 
Thou hast nothing to do; thou needest no preparations: come'as thou 
art, without a single plea, but that he bids thee come, Come now, 
‘even now.” If Christ were far away, the time that is left to some 
| of you might be too short to reach him; if there were many things 
a which first of all you had to do, your life might close before they were 
i half done; if faith had to grow strong betore it received salvation, 




















Jue 





156 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. ~ | 


you might be in the place of eternal despair before your faith had 
time to be more than a mere mustard seed. But Christ is not far 
away; he is in our midst, he is by your side. You have nothing to 
do before you trust him, he has done all; and however weak your 
faith, if it but comes in contact with Christ, it will convey to you 
instant blessing. ‘‘ Kven now’ you may be saved for ever; for— 


“The moment a sinner believes, 
And trusts in his crucified God, 
His pardon at once he receives, 
Redemption in full, through his blood.” 


Surely all these are sufficient reasons why ‘‘even now” is a time of 
hope to you; may it also be a time of blessing! It shall be so if 
thou wilt but at this instant cast thyself on Christ. He says to thee 
that, if thou wilt but believe, thou shalt see the glory of God. Martha 
saw that glory. Thou shalt see it too if thou hast like precious faith. 

I long that God would give me some souls to-night, on this first 
occasion when I have met an evening congregation since my return 
from the sunny South. I desire earnestly that he would set the bells 
of heaven ringing because sinners have returned, and heirs of glory 
have been born into the family of grace. I stirred you up to pray 
this morning. Pray mightily that this word to-night, simple but 
pointed, may be blessed to many. 


Portion oF ScRIPTURE READ BEFORE SERMON—John xi. 


Hymns rrom ‘“‘Our Own Hymn Boox”—95 (Part II.), 607, 612. 


BY) CoC Sis RG EO INe 


FEATHERS FOR ARROWS; 


Or, Illustrations for Preachers and Teachers from my Note Book. 
Cloth, 2s. 6d. 


ILLUSTRATIONS AND MEDITATIONS; 


Or, Flowers from a Puritan’s Garden. Distilled and Dispensed 
by C, H. Spurcron. Cloth, 2s. 6d. 


FLASHES OF THOUGHT; 
Being One Thousand Choice Extracts from the Works of 
C. H. Spurcron. Alphabetically arranged, and with a copious 
Index. Price, 5s. 





Lonpon: PASSMORE & ALABASTER, 4, Paternoster Buildings, E.C. 








Metropotitan Gubernacle Dulpit. 








BELIEF, BAPTISM, BLESSING. 


4 Sermay 


Intenpep For REapine on Lorp’s-pay, SepremBEr 25TH, 1892, 





C. H. SPURGEON, 


AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON, 


On Lord’s-day Evening, February 9th, 1890. 


‘* And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and was 
baptized, he and all his, straightway. And when he had brought them into his house, ~ 
he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.??— 
Acts xvi. 33, 34. 


THE gospel, attended by the Spirit of God, is always victorious; but 
it is very pleasant to make notes of its victories. The gospel came to 
Lydia, a devout woman, who was one given to prayer, and who wor- 
shipped God, although she did not know the Lord Jesus Christ. She 
was a woman of tender heart, and she was soon won. The Lord 
gently knocked at the door of her heart, and it was opened. She 
heard Paul’s plain preaching, she received the truth, was baptized, 
and became the corner-stone of the church at Philippi. ‘‘ Well,” says 
one, ‘‘that is an instance of what the gospel does with delicate, 
tender, gentle natures.” Now, here is an old soldier; he has been in 
the wars, he has earned distinction, and has been appointed to the 
office of jailor at Philippi, an office of some importance under the 
Roman Emperor. He is a man who knows the sight of blood; he is 
of a coarse, though apparently honest, disposition. He keeps prison- 
ers, and that is not an office that brings much gentleness with it; 
and he is under very stern law. He himself carries out strict dis- 
cipline in the prison. He is as hard as a bit of the lower millstone. 
What will the gospel do with him? Brethren, it triumphed as much 
in the jailor at Philippi as it did in the lady from Thyatira; and 
while it won its way into the heart of the dealer in purple, it also 
worked its way into the heart of the dealer in crimson, who had often 
shed precious blood. The victory over the rough Philippian jailor 
was as illustrious as the victory over the gentle and devout Lydia. 

I want specially to call your attention to this point; the Philippian 
jailor stands before us as one who was converted, and baptized, and 
who brought forth useful fruit all in the compass of an hour or so. 
“ Straightway,” says my text. It also says, “‘ The same hour of the 


No. 2,275. 












is own ee, by sev ne ‘ae men Rhee? hours 
ic d thrust into the i inner preens and whose feet he. had 
~ the stocks. ; en 
Ina great many cases, conversion may be said to bea ae or 
do not think that it really is so; but it appears to be so: _ There i 
the early training, there is the awakening of conscience, there is the: 
seeking to find Christ, the struggling, the little light, the dim hope, _ 
_ the faith like a grain ‘of mustard seed, by-and-by a little confidene 
- afterwards faith more clear, and then, after a long time, comes th 
public avowal of the joy and peace received through believing. W. 
_ have a great many people round us who are very slow. Why it is, 1 
_ do not know; for this is not a slow age. People are fast enough about — 
the things of this world. We cannot travel fast enough. rape! 
must be done at express speed; but in the things of God there are 
-numbers of persons who are as slow as snails. Ihaveoften wondered __ 
how the snail got into the ark; he must have started very early to 
- getin. Iam thankful that he did get in, however, as certainlyasthe _ 
hare or the gazelle; and many of our crawling friends, I trust, willbe 
_ found in heaven, and will be really saved, although they are a long 
while in coming to Christ. It takes a long time to get some of basic 
even a small distance on the road towards a comfortable assurance of 
salvation. ; 
-_. [have no doubt that the work of grace is very gradual in some. “4 
rie bretpiles it is like the sunrise in this country. I am sure that you _ 
'-—s cannot tell, on foggy mornings, when the sun does rise. I have 
a sometimes questioned whether he ever does rise in England; atall — 
events, I have seen very little of him for the last few days. I believe 
that the sun has been seen in England; I take it as a matter of trust 
_ that that ruddy wafer that I saw the other day really was the sun; 
although it is a great contrast to the king of day who rules in the 
sunny South. Who can tell when he begins to shine upon the earth? 
There is.a little grey light, by-and-by a little more, and a little more, 
and at last you can say that the sun has fairly risen. So it is with — br 
some Christians. There is a tiny gleam of light, and then a little 
: 



































more light, and then a further ray of light; but it is only after a 
considerable time that you can say that the full light has really come __ 
into their souls. Yet, mark you, there is a moment when the sun’s _ 
‘dise first appears above the horizon. There is a moment when the 
circle of the sun is really first visible, just an instant, the smallest 
portion of time; and, in conversion, there must be a time in which 
death has gone, and life has come; and that must be as sharp a 
division as the razor’s edge could make. There really cannot be any-— 
thing between life and death. The man is either dead or alive; and 
’ there must be some point at which he ceases to be dead, and becomes _ 
living. A man cannot be somewhere between condemnation and 
Fy justification; there is no land in between. The man is either con- 
ze demned on account of sin, or he is justified through the righteousness _ 
Pe of Christ; he cannot be between those two states; so that, after all, 














Do 
4 
: 
: 


fa tk 





BELIEF, BAPTISM, BLESSING. 459 


in its essence, salvation must be an instantaneous thing. It may be, 
it will be, surrounded by a good deal that seems to lead up to it, and 
makes it appear to be gradual; but, in reality, if you get to the root 
of the matter, there is a turning-point, well-defined and sharp, and if 
not clear to you, it is clear to the Great Worker, who has wrought in. 
the heart that is changed from death to life, and from condemnation 
through sin to justification through Jesus Christ. pu 
I. In this Philippian jailor’s case, everything is sharp, clear, - 
distinct. In considering it, I will first call your attention to the fact 
that HERE IS A PERSON CONVERTED AT ONCE. / 
This man’s conversion was wrought at once. There was no previous 
thought. There is nothing that I can imagine in his previous life that 
led up to it. He had not been plied with sermons, instructions, 
invitations, entreaties. Probably, up to that night, he had never 
even heard the name of Jesus Christ; and what he did hear was that 


’ these two men, who had come to Philippi preaching Christ, were to 


be treated with severity, and kept safely. Therefore, he thrust them | 
into the inner dungeon, and made their feet fast in the stocks. All 
his previous education’ was un-Christian, if not anti-Christian. AI 
his former life, whatever may have been his Roman virtues, was quite 
clear of anything like Christian virtue. He knew nothing about that. 
Nothing could be a greater contrast than the ethics of Rome and the 
teachings of Christ. This jailor was a good Roman, but he was 
nothing of a Christian when he thrust the apostles into prison; and 
yet, before the sun again rose, there was not a better Christian any- 
where than that man was. He had passed from death unto life; he 
was resting on the Christian foundation; he was the possessor of 
Christian graces. Hear that, ye who have never thought of Christ ;. 


‘and let any man, who came in here to-night a total stranger to true 


religion, pray that the like may be the case with him, that ere the 
midnight bell shall toll, he, too, may find the Saviour. : 
What do you think impressed this man? I think, in part, 1t may 
have been the behaviour of Paul and Silas. They had no curses on their 
lips when he made their feet fast in the stocks. They used no ribald 
language when he thrust them into the innermost cell. They let fall 
words, I do not doubt, the like of which he had never heard; and 
their patience, their cheerfulness, their dauntless courage, their holy 
joy, must all have struck him. They belonged to a different order of 
prisoners from any he had ever seen before. The jail at Philippi had 
never held the like of these before, and the jailor could not make them 
out. He went to bed that night with many thoughts of a new 
character. Who were these men? Who was this Jesus of whom 
they spoke ? ; ; 
Then, in the middle of the night, a singular miracle was wrought. 
The prison is shaken by an earthquake. The keeper rises. The 
risoners must have gone; for the doors are open. He had not care- 
essly left them unbolted; he had fastened them before he went to 
bed; but they are all open, and the prisoners are without chains ; 
they will get away, and he will have to suffer for it. He puts the 


sword to his own breast; he is about to kill himself, when, just at 
that moment, he hears a loud voice crying, ‘‘ Do thyself no harm : 


ue 





460 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


for we are all here.” What a surprise for him! What a revulsion 
of feeling those words caused! ‘‘ We are all here.” He thinks to 
himself, ‘‘ Truly there is a God; it must be the God'of Paul and Silas 
who has wrought this miracle.” He begins to tremble; he has lived 
without knowing this God; he has ill-treated the messengers of this 
God, He brings them out; he respectfully addresses them, ‘Sirs,’’ ' 
he earnestly cries to them, ‘“‘ What must I do to be saved?” The 
idea of being lost has come over him. It is not that he is afraid to } 
die, for he was about to put himself to death; but he is afraid of * 
what is to follow after death. He is a lost man, and therefore he 
asks, ‘‘ What must I do to be saved?” 

Now it is that he ¢s plainly told the way of salvation. It was put with 
great brevity, ‘‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved, and thy house.” Probably he did not understand it when he 
heard it; and so ‘‘ they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to 
all that were in his house.’’ His wife, his children, his servants, 
whoever made up his household, all gathered round the two preachers ; 
and they explained the way of salvation, salvation by faith on Christ, 
salvation by the atoning sacrifice of Christ, salvation by faith in the 
precious blood of Christ. Paul and Silas doubtless told the company 
that whosoever believed in Jesus should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life. The jailor believed it, believed every word of it; and he 
was therefore saved, and saved at once. If you have never heard the 
gospel before, and you hear it to-night, and believe in Christ, ° 
you will be saved at once. If you have been hitherto a total stranger 
to all good things, yet, if you now receive the blessed tidings of mercy 
through the Son of God, pardon through his shed blood, you shall go 
out of this house justified, saved, saved in an instant, saved by the 
simple act of faith. It is a happy circumstance that the gospel is so 
simple. ‘There are certain preachers who seem as if they must 
mystify it, like the negro, who said, ‘‘ Brethren, I have read you a 
chapter, and now I will confound it.”” No doubt there are many who 
are always making out the gospel to be a very difficult thing to 
understand ; philosophical, deep, and so on; but it was meant for the 
common people, it was given not merely for the élite, the learned, the 
instructed, but, ‘‘the poor have the gospel preached to them,” and the 
gospel is suitable to be preached to the poor. This is the gospel, 
‘‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy 
house.” Trust Christ; and if thou dost, thou shalt be saved. 

II. Secondly, HERE IS A PERSON CONFESSING HIS FAITH AT ONOE. 
‘“‘ He was baptized, he and all his, straightway.” 

Should a person be baptized as soon as he believes? As a rule, 
yes; but there may be good reasons why he should not be. There 
was no good reason for delay in this man’s case, for, in the first place, 
his conversion was clear as noonday. Paul had no question about it. 
The man was really converted. Silas felt sure of it, too; and they 
did not hesitate to baptize him and all his household, for they all 
believed in God. Remember how it was with Philip and the eunuch. 
That Ethiopian nobleman said, ‘‘ See, here is water: what doth hinder 
me to be baptized?’ Philip replied, ‘‘ If thou believest with all thine 
heart, thou mayest.’ That being so, they went down both into the 


BELIEF, BAPTISM, BLESSING. 461 





_ water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him there an 
then. It the baptizer believes that the proteee of faith in Chist te 
sincere, then he may not hesitate. If he has any doubt about that 
if he is afraid that the confession is made in ignorance, or made with- 
put due thought, then it may be incumbent upon him to wait a while; 
but otherwise, he must do as Ananias did to Saul of Tarsus, he must 
baptize him upon profession of his faith, as soon as he applies. The 
jailor’s conversion, then, was clear. 
In his case, also, there was no other reason for delay. In the case ot 
many young persons, there are reasons for delay. I remember, in my 
4 Own case, my parents not believing in the baptism of believers, and I, 
ry being between fifteen and sixteen years of age, thought it my duty 


I waited until I had obtained it. Sometimes it will be right on the 
part of other young people to do the same. There may be reasons, 
and practical reasons for delay, physical, moral, spiritual; I cannot 
go into them all at this time. A man may be excusable who, though 
- a believer, is not immediately baptized, seeing that he intends to be 
as soon as it would be fitting and right and decorous, and, in connec- 
tion with other duties, a right thing. But there was no reason for 
delay in the jailor’s case. The man was his own master, and his 
children and his servants had no difficulty in gaining his consent to 
their baptism, seeing that he himself was about to lead the way in 
confessing Christ in the Scriptural fashion. 

In this man’s case, note also, that he was not hindered by selfish 
considerations. Had the jailor been like some people that I know of, 
he would have found plenty of reasons for delaying his baptism. 
First, he would have said, ‘“‘ Well, it is the middle of the night. 
Would you have me baptized at this hour?’’ He would have said 
that he did not know that there were conveniences for baptism, for it 
is so easy to find it inconvenient when you do not like it. He might 
also have said, ‘‘I do not know how the magistrates will like it.” 

He did not care about the magistrates. Perhaps he would lose his 
situation. He did not take his situation into consideration. Then, 
what would the soldiers in the Philippian colony say when they heard 
that the jailor had been baptized into the name of Christ? Oh, the 
guffaws of the guard-room, the jokes that there would be all over 
Philippi! This brave man did not take those things into considera- 
tion; or if he did, he dismissed them in a moment. It was right for 
him, now that he believed in Christ, to confess his faith in Christ; and 
he would do it, and he would do it “‘straightway.”’ Ah, dear friends, 
there are some of you here who have never come out as Christians ! 
You are what I call the rats behind the wainscot, or the black beetles 
that come out at night, when there is nobody about, to get a bit of 
food, and then go back again. You never say what you are; you 
never come out on Christ’s side. I am not going to condemn you; I 
wish that you would condemn yourselves, however, for I think that 
you ought to judge that you are acting a very mean part. The 
promise of eternal life is not made to a faith which is never avowed. 


Ba 

- to consult my father and mother, and ask their counsel and advice. 
: I think I did right; I did not expect them to see with me, but I did 
: expect them to give me their loving concurrence, which they did; and 





ee a ee 







tion.” Our Lond own Seu are, a WLOOe, 
confess me before men, him will I confess also b 
which is in heaven;’’ and he also said, in conne 
confession, “ but whosoever shall deny me” (which _ mu 
a \ whosoever does not confess me) ‘before men, him will I< 
before my Father which i is in heaven.” If you have ioe faith eno’ 




















faith enough in Christ to take you to heaven, for it is rite 
cerning the place of doom, ‘the fearful’’, that is, the cowardly, 
_ unbelieving, shall have their part in the lake which hoes 
fire and brimstone.”’ is 





















The fact was, this man was in downteght earnest, and hamtoane he. R. 
- would not delay his baptism. He had enlisted in the army of Christ, — 
and he would wear Christ’s regimentals straightway. I wish that. . 
some who profess conversion, or who profess to desire to be converted, 
-. -were.as much in earnest as this jailor was. ‘‘ Well,” says one, ‘‘do ‘ 
not be tov severe upon us; I hope that I am a Christian, although i 
‘aave never confessed Christ yet.’”” Why do you not confess Christ, 
- if you belong to him? I spoke like this to.a man who had been, 
- according to his own confession, twenty years a Christian. He had — 
never joined the church; he had never made any open profession of 
religion; and when I spoke to him, what do you think he saidtome? 
He said, “He that believeth shall not make -haste.” ‘© Well. 0 ag 
replied, “if you were to be baptized, and to join the church to-morrow 
morning, I do not think that there would be much haste in it as you © 
have been a believer twenty years; but a much more suitable text for — 
you would be this word of the Psalmist, ‘I made haste, and delayed 
not—to keep thy commandments.’ ”’ 

“Well,” says another, ‘“ I have put it off a little while, and see 
_ “A little while!” Is that what you allow your boy to say to you? 
You say to him, “ J ohn, go up into the city for me on an errand.” 
In about an hour afterwards, you see him still at home, and you ask 
why he has not done your bidding, and he says, ‘‘ Father, I have put 
f it off a little while.” I think it is likely that you would make him © 
., recollect that excuse, and not repeat it. Butif you were to see him 
Be. still about the house, hour after hour, and he said to you that he was 
not disobedient, but he had some little things of his own that he wanted 
| to see to first, I fancy you would teach him what a son’s duty is. A 

| servant of that kind would probably have to finda new master very __ 
quickly ; and do you call yourself a servant of Christ when youhave 
been putting off confessing him by being baptized, putting it off, ane i) 
putting it off, until, as far as I can see, you are as far off obedience bos ag 
your Lord’s command as ever you were? This jailor, ‘the same hour 
of the night’? made confession of his faith, ‘‘and was baptized, he 
and all his, straightway,” and soon they were all sitting down with: 
Paul and Silas at a love-feast, enjoying happy fellowship with the — 
people of God. Dear friend, ‘4 you are converted, do not stand back | 











x 


noel 


ESE ay ee en Se ee CT 


ay 


Soe 


poor soul somewhere near y 







‘BELIEF, BAPTISM, BLESSING. — es 468 


from confessing Christ. You rob your minister of his wages; for it 


is his reward to hear that God has blessed your soul. ‘You are also 
robbing the church. If you have aright to stand out, and not confess: 
‘Christ, everybody else has the same right; and where would there be 
any confession of Christ, or any visible church, or any ordinances, or 
any minister? If you have a right not to come to baptism, and the 


‘Lord’s Supper, every other Christian has a right to neglect these 


things also. Then, why were these ordinances instituted at all? 
What is Christ in his own house? Is he Master, or are you the 
master; and do you take liberty to do or not do just what you 
please? Come along, and let my text be true of all of you who believe, 


“He was baptized, he and all his, straightway.” 


Ill. Now, thirdly, HERE Is A PERSON USEFUL AT ONOE, Useful? 
What could he do? - 

Well, he did all he could. First, he performed an act of mercy: “He 
took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes.” 
Dear, good men, they were covered all over with the marks of the 
Roman rods. They had been beaten black and blue, and the blood ° 
had flowed freely. I think I see how tenderly the jailor washed their 
stripes. It was before he was baptized that he brought forth fruits 
meet for repentance. The ill-used ministers needed washing; how 
could their wounds be healed unless they were properly washed? 
‘With all the dust and dirt of the street and the grit of the prison- 
house in the weals and the wounds, how could they heal? ‘‘He 
washed their stripes.” I like to read these words. I am sure Paul 
and Silas must have enjoyed to have their stripes washed by one who, 
a little while ago, had been so rough with them. I do not know that’ 
he could have done anything better to show his sincere repentance. 

He washed their stripes ; and when he had done that, and had been 
baptized, we read that he brought them into his house, and set meat 
before them. Thus, he exercised hospitality. He used his hands and 
his bath in washing the disciples; now he uses his table, his larder, 
and his dining-room to entertain them. What more could he do? 
Seeing that it was the middle of the night, I cannot think of anything 


more that he could do. So now, if you love the Lord, if you have only 


just believed in him, begin to do something for him at once. It is a 
pity that we have so many Christian people, so-called, who do nothing 
for Christ, literally nothing. They have paid their pew-rent, perhaps ; 
and that is all Christ is to have out of them! He dies for them, 
redeems them with his precious blood, and they have done nothing for © 
him in return. ‘I do not know what I could do,” says one. I know 
you could do something. ‘This jailor, within the boundaries of his 
prison, can do the most needful thing for Paul and Silas ; and you, 
within the boundaries of this house, can do something for Jesus 
Christ: I would ask you, if you have only to-night believed in Christ, 
do something for him to-night. By speaking to your wife, or children, 
or seryants, or neighbours, do something for Christ to-night. There 
is probably no minister shut up in prison in any part of your house, 
and needing to have his stripes washed. If not, there may be some 
7 ou that wants a little help. Do an act of 


sharity for Christ’s sake. Or there may be some child of God whose 





464 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. 


heart you could cheer to-night. Do an act of hospitality for some 
needy saint, and so show your gratitude for what the Lord has done 
for you. You must do something for Christ if you are a real Christian. 

We want to have a church in which all the members do some- 
thing, in which all do all they can, in which all are always doing all 
they can, for this is what our Lord deserves to have from a living, 
loving people bought with his precious blood. If he has saved me, I 
will serve him for ever and ever; and whatever lies in my power to 
do for his glory, that it shall be my delight to do, and to do at 
once. Oh, if some of you get saved to-night, when you get home, 
there will be a difference in your house! Ah, and within a day or 
two, even your cat will know that there is a change in you! KHvery- 
body in the house will know that you are different from what you 
were. When a man who has been a drinker gets saved, or one who 
has been accustomed to use bad language, or one who has given way 
to passion, or a Sabbath-breaker, or a godless, Christless wretch,— 
when he gets converted, it is as if hell were turned into heaven, and 
the devil transformed into an angel. God make it so with any such 
who are here, by the working of sovereign grace! 

I seem, at this moment, to recollect that morning when I found the 
Saviour. It was a cold snowy morning; and I remember standing 
before the fire, leaning on the mantel-shelf, after I got home, and my 
mother spoke to me, and I heard her say outside the door, “ There is 
a change come over Charles.” She had not had half-a-dozen words 
with me; but sho saw that I was not what I had been. I had been 
dull, melancholy, sorrowful, depressed; and when I had looked to 
Christ, the appearance of my face was changed; I had a smile, a 
cheerful, happy, contented look at once, and she could see it; and a 
few words let her know that her melancholy boy had risen out of his 
despondency, and had become bright and cheerful. May some such 
change as that pass over you! 

IV. Here is one thing more to finish with. . Fourthly, HERE Is A 
PERSON PERFECTLY HAPPY AT ONCE. When the jailor had brought 
Paul and Silas into his house, ‘‘ he set meat before them, and rejoiced, 
believing in God with all his house.” 

Oh, that was a happy, happy time! ‘ He rejoiced, believing in 
God with all his house.” He rejoiced that he was saved. His heart kept 
beating ‘‘ Hallelujah! hallelujah! hallelujah!” As he sat at that 
table with his two strange guests, he had indeed cause for joy. His 
sin was forgiven; his nature was changed; he had found a Saviour; 
he had given up his idol gods, and he rejoiced, believing in God. 
He had been told to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. He was no 
Unitarian. He believed Jesus Christ to be God; and he rejoiced, 
believing in God with all his heart. 

And then he rejoiced that all his household were saved. What a 
delight it was to see all his household converted! There was his 
wife. If she had not been converted, it would have been a very 
awkward thing for him to have asked Paul and Silas in to that 
midnight meal. She would have said, “I do not want prisoners 
coming into my best parlour, and eating up all the cold meat.” She 
would not have liked it; as a prudent housewife, she would have 





: 


. | BELIEF, BAPTISM, BLESSING. 465 


objected to it. But there was Mrs. Jailor waiting on them all with a 
holy happiness, a new kind of cheerfulness. I do not know whether 
they had any boys or girls. It may be, or may not be; but however 


_ many there were in his household, children or servants, they all 


believed, “‘believing in God with all his house.” They were all 
baptized, too, the sons and daughters, and the servants also, for they 


‘were included in the household. I do not like it when you count up 


your household, and leave out Mary Ann, the little servant girl, the 
last you have had in. You treat her as a drudge; but if she has 
come into your family, reckon her to be a part of your household; 
and pray God that they may all be converted—Jane and Mary, your 
own children, and the other people’s children who have come into 
your houses to do necessary domestic work for you. 

The jailor’s rejoicing was also a seal of the Spirit upon his fidelity. 
Would it not be delightful for him to sit down with the two preachers 
of the Word in the middle of the night? Those two men must haye 
had good appetites. They had probably had nothing to eat for many 
hours, and they had been lying in their dreadful dungeon with their 
feet in the stocks, after having been cruelly beaten; so they were 
prepared to eat, whether it was the middle of the night or the middle 
of the day. And the rest of the family came, and sat down at the 
table with them, and all rejoiced. Such a night in a prison had 
never been known before. The jailor ‘‘ rejoiced, believing in God 
with all his house.” 

I think that I heard a friend over there fetch a deep sigh as I quoted 
those last words of my text. I know what it meant; it meant that he 
has not all his house converted. Ah, dear brother, I cannot sympa- 
thize with you by experience; for I thank God that I have had all my 
house brought to Christ; but it must be a great sorrow to have that 
biggest boy of yours acting as he does, or to have that dear girl, of 
whom you had such bright hopes, turning aside to crooked ways! 
Let me ask you a question—Have you had faith about your house ? 
Remember that Paul said to the jailor, ‘‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.” May God give you 
faith about your house! You have had faith about yourself, and you 
are saved; exercise faith about your children; cry to God to give you 
faith about them. Pray belieyingly that they may be led to have 
faith for themselves, and so may be saved. 

Oh, that all in this great assembly may meet in heaven! You who 
have heard the Word these many years, may you to-night believe in 
Christ, and live! You who have never listened to it before, may you 
also come to Christ, and believe in him, as the jailor did; and like 
him, you shall be saved! The Lord shall have all the praise and the 
glory; but oh, that he would work this miracle of mercy to-night! 


Let us pray for it. Amen. 





466 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT. y 
' / 


Lxposition by C. MH. Spurgeon, 
ACTS XVI, 9—34. 


Verse 9. And a vision appeared to Paul in the night ; There stood a man of 
Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us. 

Our dreams often follow the leading thoughts of the day; or, if not of 
the day, yet the chief thoughts that are upon the mind. Paul dreams 
about mission work, for his heart is in it. I should not wonder if some 
before me, who are deeply engaged in earnest Christian work, have often 
dreamt about their Suuday-school, or their mission-station. Where the 
mind goes when we are awake, it often goes when we are asleep. This 
vision that appeared to Paul was supernatural; and was an indication of 
what God wanted him to do. 


10. And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into 
Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the 
gospel unto them. 

In the vision, the man prayed, ‘‘ Come over into Macedonia, and help 
us.” The best help that Paul could render to the Macedonians was ‘‘ to 
preach the gospel unto them.” The best help you can give men socially is 
to help them religiously ; and the best religious help is to preach the gospel 
to them. 

11,12. Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a straight course to 
Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis ; and from thence to Philippi, which 
is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in that 
city abiding certain days. 

Waiting to know what they were todo. In God’s work, we are not to 
go on in blundering haste. Sometimes, a little waiting may be good for 
us ; and by waiting, we may find out the true path of success. 


13. And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer 
was wont to be made; 

Some quiet corner, where good people were wont to gather by the brook 
to pray. 

13. And we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted thither. 

This was probahly the first religious meeting of Christians that was ever 
held in Europe. It is remarkable that it was a prayer-meeting, a prayer- 
meeting attended by women, a prayer-meeting to which two ministers 
came, and preached the gospel to the women who resorted thither. To 
be able to be present at a prayer-meeting ought always to be reckoned a 

.great privilege to all of us who are Christians. In this way the gospel 
first came to us; in this way the gospel will be best preserved to us; and 
in this way we may best obtain guidance from God as to how we may carry 
the gospel to others. 

14,15. <And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of 
Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that 
she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. And when she wes 
baptized, 

She seems to have become,a believer in Christ, and to have been baptized 
at once. 

15. And her household, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be 
faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there. And she con- 
strained us. 

Lydia was evidently a woman of some property. The purple which she 
sold was an expensive article. She seems to have been engaged in business 





tas 





“EXPOSITION. ee iis 


pn her own account; and when Paul met with her, she was far off from 
- her workshop and her home. She had a house, therefore, in the place to 


which she had come to sell her purple; and she “constrained”? the men of 
God to make use of her house, and to tarry there. Thus was Christianity — 
brought into Europe, for which we praise the name of the Lord. 


16. And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed 
with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her masters much gain by 
'soothsaying : 

She professed to tell fortunes, and to speak under inspiration.. She was 
really ‘‘ possessed” by an evil spirit. 


_ 17, 18. The same followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are 
the servants. of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation. 
And this did she many days. But Paul, being grieved, turned and said to the 
spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he 
came out the same hour. 

Here was an evil spirit ‘bearing witness to the truth of God, and it 
grieved Paul. When you hear a bad man ridiculing religion, do not be 
surprised; what else could you expect from him? But if you heard the 
devil recommending Christ, then you ought to be grieved, for the Lord 
Jesus does not want patronage or praise from Satan. Men would begin to 
suspect that Christ was in league with Saten, if Satan began to speak well 
of Christ. Dread to be spoken well of by ungodly men; for there is great 
danger in such praise. There may be a motive at the bottom of the flattery 
which may be full of mischief. Paul, being grieved, silenced the demon, 
and cast him out of the damsel. Like his Lord, he would not allow the. 
devil to testify concerning himself and his mission. 


19, 20. And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, 
they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the market-place unto the 
rulers, and brought them to the magistrates, 

They dragged them into the Forum, the place where the courts usually 
sat, and brought them before the magistrates, ‘‘ saying’”—what? ‘These 
men ‘ave cured a demoniac, they have performed a miracle, and cast a 
devil out of a young woman”? Oh! no; there would have been no wrong 
in that, so they must invent a charge. What do they say ? 

20, 21. Saying, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city, 
and teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, 
being Romans, 

They did not know that Paul himself was a Roman citizen, or they surely 
would not have brought such a charge as that againet him. 


22. And the multitude rose wp together against them: and the magistrates 
rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat them. 

They beat them first, and tried them afterwards, That is often the rule 
with those who persecute God’s peuple: let them be hanged out of the 
way, and then we will enquire what they teach. 

23—25. And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them 
into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely : who, having received such a 
charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks. 
And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God : 

Another prayer-meeting, and a praise-meeting, too. There were only two 
persons at it; but they “ prayed, and sang praises unto God. 

25. And the prisoners heard them. 


Paul and Silas were in the lower prison. The sound of their prayer and 
praise rose up through the different tiers of cells where other prisones were 


confined. 


468 METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE PULPIT, 


26. And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of - 
the prison were shaken: and immediately all the doors were opened, and every 
one’s bands were loosed. 

. This was no common earthquake. An ordinary earthquake might have . 
brought the prison down about their ears ; but it would not have loosed the 
bands of the prisoners, 


27. And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the 
' prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself, sup- 
' posing that the prisoners had been fled. 
_ For the law was that, if a jailor lost a prisoner, he was to suffer whatever 
penalty the prisoner would have suffered. He therefore knew that, in all 
probability, his own life would be taken; and, strange to say, to save his 
life he would kill himself. Suicide is ever absurd and unreasonable. The 
worst that could happen to him would be to die by the sword of justice ; 
and to escape from that, he tries to die by the sword of a suicide. 

28. But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no harm: for we 
are all here. 

Every prisoner was loosed from his bands, but not one had escaped ; nor 
had any even attempted to escape, which was avother miracle; for men 
who see their bands broken, and the prison doors open, are pretty sure to 
run away. These men did not, for a heavenly charm was upou them. They 
kept in their cells, so that Paul could cry out to the jailor, ‘* Do thyself no 
harm: for we are all here.” 

29. Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, 

Conscious of the supernatural, compelled to feel the hand which he had 
mever perceived before, he hastened into the inner prison, where he had 
thrust the servants of Christ ; 

29. And fell down before Paul and Silas, 

Whow he had handled so roughly just now; 

, 80. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, 

What a word to address to those who were still in his charge as prisoners ! 

30—34. What must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house. And they spake unto him 
the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house. And he took them the 
same hour of the night, and washed their stripes ; and was baptized, he and all 
his, straightway. And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat 
before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house. 


May God give to many of us to know the happy experience of that’ 
believing, baptized, and blessed household! 


Hymns From ‘Our Own Hymn Boox ’’—660, 670, 674. 


Cloth, Qs. 


"WE CEN DEAVOUR: 


UniForRM witH ‘““WORDS OF WISDOM FOR DAILY LIFE.” 
BY C. H. SPURGEON. 


PASSMORE & ALABASTER, Paternoster Burtpines, Lonpon, E.C. 











337105 





eImIOFTeED ‘obstq, URS 
sonueay Ad B HS 
NUWHLaY BAL JO HOUNHO Asula 





"81780 . $68 / voll 
| Spurgeon, C. H. (charles Haddon), 1834- 
| Iwelve sermons on conversion. 





Ee MAE 
~ m fea fay ry oS RF 
u CONOVE; 
BT Spurgeon, Charles Haddon, 1834-1892, 
780 Twelve sermons on conversion. Chicago, 


S68 Fleming H. Revell [n.d.] 
lv. (various pagings) 22cm. 


1. Conversion=--Sermons. I. Title. 


337105 


) CCSC/ehw 


Panacea preset ape rel eA RD 


EPs SUL AT 
Say 


ees 


aa 


Sree seeate 
Stetson ee 


eerestst 


Saas 


ees. 


Se 
Soares 
SEE Preps 
sera 
SEE eo 
SS 
SaaS 


a 


I, 


bys 
1354 
Seah 


at 


Poo 


eas 


Ts SSE 
oy 
aides 


debates 
Wilts 


at 


Hi 


if 
it ; 


i 


Te" 
Tebelele: 
ninth ieeteiittee 
He manitean 


PE eats 


seismic de ys 


a} 


relate 
ae aah eg uit 
usa pee 
Tabettrratattaten test 
i atthe Bass oR 
eeaiheah IA 


+3 a stay 
f i a 
th senhie 
ae 
Stee SHRUG DATs 
Bean a ot 
STS Bite Ts te 


area tee 
oi BS 


LE UOSURE ae 





