BV 


£l8 


M 


m 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 

Shelf-.i-E'-iS 

UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


TWO   SERMONS. 


y 


.i^' 


REV.  A.  B,'  EARLE,   D.  D. 

Author  of  "The  Morning  Hour,"  "  Bringing  in  Sheaves,** 
"The  Rest  of  Faith/^  etc. 


^     hy       And  they  went  forth  and  preached  every where.^iWar^  l6  :  20, 


r%/^    j/He  that  winneth  souls  is  wise. — Ps.  11:30, 


1  '    ■  l^y'^-   A 


BOSTO:^:^ 
JAMES    H.    EARLE,    PUBLISHER, 
178  Washington  Street. 
1884. 


j"^ 


:P^^^\^ 


^3e  Library 

<->^  Congress 

Washington 


Copyright,  1884, 
Bv  James  H.  Earlb, 


TO  THE  READER. 


f^  AM  now  seventy-two  years  of  age ;  have 
a  preached  fifty-three  years;  held  union 
meetings  with  twenty-two  denominations ; 
preached  twenty  thousand  six  hundred 
and  sixty-five  times,  and  hope  to  preach 
ten  years  longer. 

In  compliance  with  the  wish  of  many 
friends,  1  have  selected  two  familiar 
sermons,  the  one  preached  as  my  twenty- 
thousandth  sermon ;  the  other  at  eleven 
o'clock,  watch-night,  Dec.  31,  1883,  and 
send  them,  as  far  as  I  am  able,  to  all 
who  have  labored  with  me  in  Revival 
Work^  and  to  others  who  may  read  them 
as  my  Frie7idly  Greeting,  May  the  Holy 
Spirit    accompany    them ! 

A.  B.  EARLE. 

Nciutoity  Mass.^  Jt^itey  J8S4. 


TWO  SERMONS. 


THE  CHURCH  PREFERRED. 


"If  I  prefer  not  Jerusalem  above  my  chief  joy." 

Ps.  137 : 6. 

[O  one  could  persuade  himself  that 
these  pious  Jews  referred  simply 
to  having  a  home  in  the  city  of  Jeru- 
salem. There  must  have  been  some 
other  attraction  that  rendered  the  city 
so  dear  to  them.  The  very  name  sug- 
gested to  them  the  Divine  presence. 
In  Ezekiel  48  135,  God  has  given  the 
city  a  name  full  of  tender  memories  : 
"The   name   of   the  city  from  that  day 


8  SERMON. 


shall  be,  The  Lord  is  there/'  This 
was    the    attraction,    no    doubt. 

No  place  so  dear  to  them,  as  the 
place  where  God's  honor  dwelt.  No 
place  where  God  had  so  often  revealed 
Himself  and  shown  them  His  glory, 
as    in    that    city 

I  propose  to  place  the  word  Church 
in  this  text  where  Jerusalem  stands, 
and  read  it,  ''  I  prefer  the  Church  of 
God   above   my   chief   joy.'* 

Not  any  one  denomination,  but  the 
people  of  God,  using  the  word  in  the 
same  sense  that  the  martyr  Stephen 
did  in  Acts  7:38,  "This  is  He  that 
was  in  the  Church  in  the  wilder- 
ness.'' 

This   allusion   was   not   to  a  denomi- 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED,  9 

nation,    but    to   the    people    and    cause 
of   God   in   the   wilderness. 

Using  the  word  in  this  broad  sense, 
I  purpose  to  state  a  few  reasons  why 
we  should  prefer  and  love  the  Church 
more  than  we  love  anything  else  in 
this  world.  More  than  we  love  par- 
ents or  children,  husband  or  wife, 
property  or  pleasure,  or  even  life 
itself,    next   to    our    Redeemer 

Has    Done    More. 

The  Church  has  done  more,  and  is 
now  doing  more,  for  this  world,  than 
all  other  organizations  united.  The 
Church  is  the  strong  basis  on  which 
all  permanent  reforms  must  rest  for 
support.     It    is  the   light  of   the  wolrd, 


lO  SERMON. 


he    salt    of   the  earth,  the  great  wheel 
in    the    basement. 

Forty  or  fifty  years  ago,  a  temper- 
ance society  was  formed,  that  ignored 
the  Bible  and  prayer  in  their  meet- 
ings. Their  motto  was,  *^Away  with 
the  Bible,  away  with  prayer  from  our 
meetings.  We  are  going  to  reform 
the  world.''  But  did  they  reform  the 
world  1  The  organization  was  a  mere 
rocket,  that  exploded  and  went  out  in 
sparks,  for  the  want  of  a  basis  to 
rest  upon.  So  it  has  been,  and  so  it 
will  be,  till  time  ends.  All  reforms 
that  do  not  rest  on  the  Bible  and 
Christianity  as  a  basis,  must  come 
to    naught. 

Paul     wrote     to     Timothy     that     he 


THE    CHURCH   PREFERRED.  II 

might  ''know  how  to  behave  himself 
in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the 
Church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar 
and   ground    of   the   truth." 

Pillars  are  used  to  sustain  heavy 
burdens.  When  Samson  removed  the 
two  main  pillars  upon  which  that  im- 
mense flat  roof  rested,  the  whole  build- 
ing fell,  causing  the  death  of  a  great 
number  of  Philistines.  So  the  Church 
is    God's   great   burden-bearer. 

Missionary    Societies. 

Every  missionary  society  seeking  the 
salvation  of  men,  has  had  its  origin 
in  the  Church.  These  societies  have 
usually  originated  in  small  prayer- 
meetings,    or    with    a     few     Christians 


12  SERMON. 


while  looking  over  the  wants  of  the 
world.  God  says  of  the  Church,  ''All 
my  springs  are  in  thee/'  Like  our 
great  rivers  which  can  be  traced  to 
some    small    spring. 

Who  has  not  admired  the  beautiful 
Susquehanna  River  near  its  outlet } 
There  it  is,  deep,  broad,  and  majestic, 
with  large  vessels  on  its  bosom.  But 
as  we  trace  its  crooked  course  among 
the  Pennsylvania  hills,  winding  our 
way  through  the  State  of  New  York, 
until  we  reach  the  village  of  Coopers- 
town, —  near  that  village  is  a  little  clus- 
ter of  springs.  There  is  the  origin  of 
this  great  river.  So  the  Bible  and  mis- 
sionary societies  through  the  Church  of 
Christ  started  from  small  beginnings. 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED,  13 

One  of  these  organizations,  now 
sending  its  saving  power  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth,  preaching  Christ  to  mil- 
lions of  lost  men,  had  its  origin  with 
thirteen  members,  starting  with  thir- 
teen   dollars    in    the    treasury. 

I  found,  in  Oregon  and  Nevada, 
great  shafts  extending  from  this  par- 
ent society.  To  these  were  attached 
cogs,  and  pulleys,  and  wheels,  all 
moved  by  the  organization  at  home  ; 
like  an  immense  factory  with  its 
looms  and  spindles,  employing  thou- 
sands of  laborers,  with  one  great 
wheel  in  the  basement  moving  them 
all 

The  Church  is  that  great  wheel  in 
the  basement,   which  under   the  mighty 


14  SERMON. 


Spirit  is  moving   the   moral   machinery 
of   the    world. 

Every    Minister. 

The  Church  has  furnished  every  one 
of  Christ's  ministers  now  on  the  walls 
of  Zion,  or  in  the  great  missionary 
field,  *^  bringing  in  the  sheaves."  With- 
draw the  entire  ministry  of  God  from 
their  great  work,  and  a  mighty  arm  of 
reform  is  taken  away.  The  Church 
has  translated,  and  is  translating,  the 
Bible  into  all  languages,  and  is  giving 
it  to  all  nations.  What  should  we  do 
without  the  Bible }  And  what  would 
the   earth   be   without   it } 


THE    CHURCH   PREFERRED.  15 

Financially. 

The  Church  has  done  more,  finan- 
cially, for  this  world  than  everything 
else.  Some  people  complain  that  it 
costs  so  much  to  build  meeting-houses, 
and  support  ministers.  But  look  at  it 
for  a  moment.  Suppose  a  decree 
should  come  forth  from  God,  that  not 
a  minister,  or  Christian,  or  house  of 
worship,  should  ever  be  found  within 
fifty  miles  of  this  place.  How  much 
would  property  be  worth  here }  Who 
would  wish  to  live  here }  We  should 
see  what  I  saw  in  Charleston,  S.  C, 
soon  after  the  late  war.  Inside  the 
windows  of  those  beautiful  homes, 
worth  from  ^5000  to  $50,000  each,  this 


1 6  SERMON. 


notice,    **To   Let/'     *^To   Let/^     So   it 

would  be  here,  and  everywhere  else, 
without  Christianity  and  the  Bible. 
Much  as  it  costs  to  build  meeting- 
houses and  support  ministers,  we  have 
more  than  every  dollar  we  have  paid 
out,  in  the  enhanced  value  of  our 
property. 

Jacob's  father-in-law  got  hold  of  this 
great  truth  in  his  day.  After  Jacob 
had  served  14  years  for  his  two  wives, 
he  said  to  his  father,  he  must  go  to 
his  kindred.  But  his  father  made  it 
an  object  for  him  to  remain  another 
year ;  and  changing  his  wages  again 
and  again,  kept  him,  in  all,  twenty 
years,  then  gave  as  a  reason  for 
keeping   him    so    long,    that    ''  God    had 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED,  I? 

dealt   well    with    him ''   on    Jacob's   ac- 
count. 

How  true  to  the  life  this  has  been 
and  is  still,  to  the  ends  of  the  earth! 
Some  of  these  husbands,  when  you 
decided  to  marry,  selected  a  pious, 
godly  young  lady  to  share  your  joys 
and  sorrows.  You  showed  good  judg- 
ment in  the  selection  if  she  was  will- 
ing to  be  united  for  life  with  an 
unconverted  man.  But  after  a  while 
she  said  gently,  ''Husband,  it  is  lonely 
on  communion-days  to  have  you  ab- 
sent ;  and  besides,  our  children  are 
growing  up,  and  ought  to  hear  their 
father's  voice  in  prayer."  But  you 
finally  said,  ''My  wife,  if  we  are  going 
to   live    pleasantly   together,   you   must 


1 8  SERMON. 


not  talk  to  me  so  much  about  reli- 
gion. Have  your  religion,  but  don't 
talk  to  me  about  it.*'  You  silenced 
her.  Yet  when  you  went  to  the  office, 
or  store,  or  bank,  she  was  in  her 
closet,  saying,  "O  God,  take  care  of 
my  husband ;  protect  and  keep  him 
in  his  business.*'  Her  prayer  was  the 
lightning-rod  that  drew  off  the  red 
cloud  of  wrath  that  hung  over  your 
head.  Little  do  you  know  how  much 
you  owe  to  those  prayers.  Won't  you 
say  to  her  to-day,  "I  will  never 
speak  unkindly  to  you  again  about 
religion"  } 

God  spares  a  family,  a  town,  a 
country,  because  He  has  redeemed 
ones    in    it.     He    would    spare    Sodom 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED.  1 9 

and  Gomorrah  if  ten  righteous  men 
could  be  found  in  them.  So  that  the 
Church,  faulty  as  it  is,  has  done 
more,  and  is  now  doing  more,  for  this 
world  than  all  other  organizations  put 
together,  and  for  this  reason  should 
be   preferred   and   cherished. 

"Lord,   Thy   Church   is   still   Thy   dwelling, 
Still   is   precious   in   Thy   sight; 
Judah's   temple   far   excelling, 
Beaming  with  the  gospel's   light." 

The    Mother    of    All. 

The  Church  is  the  mother  of  all  re- 
deemed souls.  *^  Jerusalem  which  is 
from  above,  is  free,  which  is  the 
mother  of  us  all.''  Not  a  part  of 
Christ's   children,   but   of   them   all 


20  SERMON, 


Far  distant  be  the  day  when  I 
speak  ill  of  my  mother.  I  think  I 
should  love  and  venerate  my  mother, 
if  there  were  rum-blotches  on  her 
face.  What  if  she  has  faults  ?  She 
is  my  mother,  with  all  her  faults. 
She  gave  me  birth,  and  nursed  and 
cared  for  me,  when  I  was  weak  and 
helpless.  Now,  when  I  am  grown  to 
be  a  man,  shall  I  forget  or  neglect 
her  1  How  soon  a  man  sinks  himself 
in  the  esteem  of  his  neighbors,  who 
goes  about  speaking  ill  of  his  mother, 
or   neglects   her ! 

The  Church  is  my  spiritual  mother. 
I  was  born  into  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  through  her  pains  and  soul- 
travail.     She   baptized   and   nursed    me 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED.  21 

when  I  was  too  weak  to  render  her 
much  help.  If  I  have  done  the 
Church  but  little  good,  she  has  done 
me  a  world  of  good.  Let  no  re- 
deemed one  speak  ill  of  his  spiritual 
mother,  although  she  has  so  many 
faults. 

Christ's    Bride. 

The  Church  is  Christ's  bride.  He 
has  betrothed  her  to  Himself  forever. 
He  says  even  to  the  backsliding  Chris- 
tian, "  Return,  ye  backsliding  daughter, 
for  I  am  married  unto  thee.''  I  am 
amazed  at  His  choice.  It  is  more 
surprising  to  me,  than  it  would  have 
been  if  Prince  Albert  had  passed  by 
the  queen,  and  all  the  royal  families, 
and   proposed    marriage   to    a   girl   in   a 


22  SERMON. 


country  poorhouse,  paying  her  bills, 
clothing  and  educating  her,  then  uni- 
^ting  with  her  in  marriage.  Would 
not  every  one  have  been  surprised  at 
his  choice  ?  Look  at  Christ's  choice 
for*  a  bride.  Passing  by  the  higher 
order  of  beings  (the  fallen  angels), 
that  sinned  before  we  did,  and  fixing 
His  eternal  love  on  this  poorhouse 
world.  He  found  His  bride  owing  ten 
thousand  talents,  and  with  nothing  to 
pay.  He  took  her  in  her  rags  and 
pollution,  paid  her  debts,  clothed,  and 
educated   her. 

How  wonderful  this  choice!  But  it 
is  His  choice.  The  love  between 
Christ  and  His  bride  is  a  reciprocal 
love.     He   loved  her   and   died  for  her, 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED,  23 

and  she  loved  Him  well  enough  to 
die  for  Him.  She  has  done  it,  and 
will    do    it   again    if   necessary. 

There  is  a  sense  in  which  every 
soul  is  married  to  Christ  at  conver- 
sion, and  yet,  in  a  grander  sense, 
*the  marriage  ceremony  is  yet  to  come 
off.  His  betrothed  bride  is  now  sing- 
ing,   as   she   waits    for   that    day:  — 

"  O,   what   wonder  !     How   amazing  I 
Jesus,   glorious    King   of   Kings, 
Deigns   to   call    me   His   beloved ; 
Let   me    rest   beneath   His   wings." 

I  understand  the  Divine  order  to 
be  this  :  When  Christ's  bride  is  ready, 
so  that  she  can  say,  ^^Amen,  even 
so  come,  Lord  Jesus!"  then  Christ 
will    descend  to   a  point   overhead,  with 


24  SERMON. 


the  virgin  angels,  and  all  those  who 
will  have  reached  Heaven  before  with 
Him.  The  saints  then  living  on  the 
earth  will  undergo  a  change  equiva- 
lent to  death,  and  be  caught  up  to 
meet  those  who  had  gone  before,  with 
the  Heavenly  Bridegroom  among  them. 
Then,  by  the  light  of  the  world  on 
fire,  the  grand  marriage  ceremony 
will  take  place.  The  angels  have  a 
set  piece  to  sing,  only  suitable  to 
sing  on  that  occasion.  I  do  not 
know  the  tune,  —  I  shall  know  that 
when  I  hear  it,  —  but  the  words  I 
know  now.  They  are  these:  —  ''Let  us 
rejoice  and  be  glad,  for  the  marriage 
of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  His  wife 
has    made     herself     ready.'*      At     that 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED.  2$ 

time  all  the  redeemed  will  receive 
their  resurrected  bodies.  None  before, 
none  afterward.  This  change  will  take 
place  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  when  the  trumpet  shall 
sound.  No  doubt  Abraham,  with  all 
the  saints  in  Heaven,  are  looking  for- 
ward to  that  day  with  great  interest. 
Then,  for  a  ^  little  time,  the  palace 
chamber,  Heaven,  will  be  vacated. 
For  aught  we  know,  all  the  saints  and 
angels  then  in  Heaven  will  go  forth 
with  the  Bridegroom  to  celebrate  His 
marriage.  Then  I  think  Christ  will 
take  His  bride  to  His  Father's,  —  to 
her  palace  chamber,  her  many-man- 
sioned  home,  where  the  Father  will 
give    Him   a  grand  reception,  with  His 


26  SERMON, 


bride,   in    all    her    beauty,    leaning    on 
His   arm. 

Then  this  marriage  song  can  be 
sung : — 

"Ascend,  beloved,   to    the  joy, 
The   festal   day   has   come; 
To-day   the   Lamb   doth   feast   His  own, 
To-day    He   with   His  bride   sits  down. 
To-day  puts   on  the   spousal   crown 
In   the   great   upper   room." 

Live    with    Them. 

One  more  reason  why  we  should 
love  the  Church  more  than  we  love 
anything  else.  Among  all  that  we 
love  and  esteem  on  earth,  pre-emi- 
nently above  them  all,  should  stand 
the  Church  of  the  Living  God,  because 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED,  2/ 

we    expect    to    live    with    the    Church 
forever. 

No  one  expects  to  Hve  with  husband 
or  wife,  parent  or  children,  or  earthly 
friends,  long.  More  than  one  of  us 
know  the  bitter  import  of  those  tender 
words  of  Andrew  Fuller  : 

"  There   once   did   live   a   heart   that   cared  for  me, 
I   loved   and  was   again   beloved   in   turn. 
Hei'  tender  soul  would   soothe   my  rising  grief, 
And  wipe  my   tears  and   mix  them   with  her   own. 
But   she  is   not,   and   I   am  left  to   weep  unheeded, 
And   to   serve   alone." 

Let  me  urge  all  to  make  the  most 
of  each  other's  society,  for  it  must  be 
short.  But  with  the  Church  we  expect 
to  live  forever.  If  we  are  to  live 
with   the   people    of    God   forever,    how 


28  SERMON. 


important  that  we  love  them  !  It 
would  be  hell  enough  to  be  united  in 
marriage,  even  for  a  short  life,  with 
a  person  we  did  not  love.  But  to 
live  with  Christians  eternally,  and  yet 
not  love  them,  would  be  an  intolera- 
ble   hell. 

We  should  suffer  more  than  a  man 
did  on  a  certain  river.  He  had  plen- 
ty of  mioney,  and  was  really  having  a 
drunken  spree ;  not  in  the  gutter,  but 
having  what  he  called  a  good  time. 
Hearing  the  bell  ring  on  a  steamer, 
he  stepped  on  board  and  was  soon 
sailing  on  its  proud  waters.  But  hear- 
ing beautiful  singing  on  the  forepart 
of  the  vessel,  he  inquired  of  the  cap- 
tain   what    singing    he    had   on   board, 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED.  2g 

and  was  answered,  **  Sabbath  -  school 
singing,  sir/'  *' Sabbath -school,"  said 
he.  ''Is  this  not  such  a  steamer?'* 
**Not  at  all,"  was  the  reply.  ''Cap- 
tain," he  said,  "you  must  set  me  on 
shore,  if  it  costs  me  twenty  dollars. 
I  had  as  soon  be  in  hell  as  to  hear 
this    Sabbath-school    singing." 

Suppose  this  man  had  been  taken 
into  heaven  at  once,  and  on  the  first 
minute  after  his  arrival  there,  Abra- 
ham, and  Moses,  and  the  heavenly 
ones  had  commenced  singing,  "  Glory 
to  the  Lamb !  Glory  to  the  Lamb ! 
Our  sins  are  washed  away  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb."  The  poor  man 
would  have  inquired,  "  Are  there  none 
but    Christians    here  ?      I    never    loved 


30 


SERMON, 


Christians.  I  have  never  known  the 
Lamb/'  There  is  no  place  where  he 
would  suffer  more  than  he  would 
among  the  redeemed,  without  love  to 
them.  It  would  be  cruelty  on  the 
part  of  God  to  keep  a  man  in  heaven 
that  did  not  love  the  Church  above 
his  chief  joy.  So  important  is  this 
love  to  the  people  of  God,  that  it  is 
marked  in  the  Bible  as  one  of  the 
clearest  evidences  of  a  change  of  heart. 
"We  know  that  we  have  passed  from 
death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the 
brethren.''  None  could  be  happy  in 
Heaven,  however  moral  and  correct  in 
life,  without  this  change  in  his  affec- 
tions. How  important,  then,  that  we 
possess    the   spirit    of    this    text;    that 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED,  3 1 

we  become  sure  we  prefer  Jerusalem 
above  our  chief  joy,  so  that  we  can 
say,  — 

"Beyond  my  highest  joy, 

I  prize   her  heavenly  ways; 
Her  sweet  communion,   solemn  vows, 

Her  hymns   of  love   and  praise.'* 

Let  US  inquire,  in  the  light  of  this 
subject,  how  one  will  act  if  he  loves 
the    Church   more   than    anything   else? 

Will  Unite  with  Them. 

If  he  prefers  the  Church  above  his 
chief  joy,  he  will  seek  the  first  oppor- 
tunity to  unite  with  them.  One  of 
the  first  inquiries  will  be,  *^When  will 
there  be  an  opportunity  for  me  to 
unite    with   this    Church }     I   desire   to 


32  SERMON. 


obey  Christ  in  his  ordinances/*  Christ 
says,  John  14:23:  ''If  a  man  love  me 
he  will  keep  my  words.'*  He  will 
wish  to  obey  Christ.  The  spirit  of 
obedience  will  govern  him.  He  may 
make  mistakes,  but  will  obey  Christ 
in  all  things  as  far  as  he  understands 
His  will.  It  is  a  bad  symptom  when 
a  man  claims  to  be  a  Christian,  and 
yet  neglects  the  ordinances  of  the 
gospel.  I  am  afraid  of  that  hope  that 
does  not  lead  its  possessor  to  a  strict 
obedience  to  Christ's  commands,  as 
far   as   he   understands   them. 

Do  I  address  any  one  whose  letter 
is  in  your  trunk  at  home }  Or  did 
you  come  away  without  your  letter  of 
dismission ;    and    yet    have    lived   here  • 


THE    CHURCH    PREFERRED.  33 

three  or  six  months  ?  If  you  love 
Christ  you  will  send  for  your  letter 
at  once.  If  you  have  lost  your  Church 
relation,  will  you  not  confess  your 
way  back,  and  live  with  the  people  of 
God?  You  will  do  this  if  you  ^^ pre- 
fer Jerusalem  above  your  chief  joy." 
Obedience  to  Christ's  commands  is 
one  of  the  evidences  of  a  renewed 
heart. 

Share    tpie    Burdens. 

We  shall  wish  to  share  the  burdens 
of  the  Church  if  we  love  it.  One  of 
the  first  inquiries  will  be,  ^^  Have  we 
enough  to  make  out  our  Pastor's  sal- 
ary }  If  not,  double  m.y  subscription." 
So  about  the  place  of  worship.  And 
so     about      everything     pertaining     to 


34  SERMON, 


Christ's  cause.  He  will  not  do  as  a 
rich  church-member  did  where  I  was 
holding  meetings.  The  Church  sus- 
tained preaching  among  them  by  an 
average ;  that  is,  each  one  paid  accord- 
ing to  his  means.  This  brother  stood 
this  for  a  few  years,  then  concluded 
he  could  go  to  Heaven  without  so 
much  expense,  so  asked  and  received 
his  dismission  from  the  Church.  He 
said  to  me,  '*I  get  along  first-rate 
now;  it  don't  cost  me  half  as  much 
as  when  I  was  a  church-member.  I 
pay  two  dollars  to  the  Baptists,  and 
two  dollars  to  the  Congregationalists, 
and  get  along  easy  now.'*  Think  of 
such  a  poor,  lean  soul  trying  to  get 
to   Heaven   on   an  emigrant-train.     But 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED,  35 

a  true  Christian  will  desire  to  share 
the  burdens  of  the  Church.  It  will 
be  pleasant  to  call  upon  him  for  help, 
he  gives  so  heartily  and  cheerfully. 
''He   loveth    a   cheerful   giver." 

Other    Organizations. 

If  he  joins  any  other  organization, 
and  its  meeting  occurs  at  the  same 
time  of  a  regular  prayer-meeting,  he 
will  say  to  its  members,  ''I  shall  not 
be  with  you  to-night,  it  is  our  regular 
prayer  -  meeting."  ''  Prayer  -  meeting," 
they  say,  ''what  is  that  to  our  organ- 
ization ! "  He  replies,  "  I  love  our  or- 
ganization. I  am  one  of  you,  and  one 
with  you,  heart  and  hand,  but  I  do  not 
love   it   as  I    do  the  Church.     If  either 


36  SERMON, 


must  be  neglected,  everything  else  be- 
fore the  Church.  I  shall  always  be  with 
you  when  it  does  not  interfere  with 
the  appointments  of  the  Church.  I  love 
the  Church  more  than  anything  else/* 

Speak    Tenderly. 

If  he  sees  faults,  or  something  he 
thinks  is  wrong  in  the  Church,  he 
will  speak  tenderly  about  it.  It  will 
grieve  him.  He  will  weep  over  it, 
but  yet  he  will  speak  of  it  with  great 
tenderness.  Love  to  Christ's  Church 
will    cover   a    multitude    of   faults. 

Everything  will  appear  differently  to 
us  if  our  hearts  are  filled  with  warm 
love  to  the  people  and  cause  of  God. 
I    will    give    an    illustration :    In    a   rer- 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED.  37 

tain  town,  after  commencing  a  union 
meeting,  I  learned  that  there  had 
been  a  division  in  the  Baptist  church, 
so  serious  that  one  of  the  deacons, 
and  several  of  the  prominent  mem- 
bers, had  left,  determined  not  to  walk 
with  them  any  more.  Just  as  I  was 
closing  the  meeting  one  evening,  with 
a  large  congregation  present,  one  of 
these  members  asked  me  in  great 
earnestness  to  request  the  congrega- 
tion to  wait,  —  that  he  desired  to  give 
the  Baptist  church  a  ''blowing  up." 
I  asked  him  if  he  would  not  defer 
it,  as  it  would  be  an  injury  to  our 
meetings.  He  replied,  ''I  will  do  it 
to  please  you,  but  they  deserve  it." 
A    few    nights    after    this,    his    uncon- 


38  SERMON. 


verted  wife  was  kneeling  for  prayers. 
I  hesitated  to  ask  him  to  pray,  know- 
ing that  a  man  could  not  pray  as  he 
ought,  who  felt  and  talked  like  that. 
I  finally  asked  him  to  pray  for  her, 
thinking  his  religion  might  be  covered, 
as  our  fathers  used  to  cover  a  knot, 
or  Uve  coal,  in  ashes  to  keep  fiie,  be- 
fore matches  were  invented.  The 
prayer  had  the  effect  to  open  a  draft 
to  the  old  fire  of  love  in  his  heart. 
His  wife  was  converted,  his  heart 
became  warm  with  love  to  the 
Church.  Before  the  meetings  closed, 
he  came  to  me  and  said,  ''I  have 
been  thinking  about  that  matter  of 
giving  the  Baptist  church  a  *  blowing 
up,'  and  have   concluded   to  come  back 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED.  39 

to  the  church  if  they  will  take  me, 
and  say  nothing  about  their  wrong 
doing."  The  whole  thing  appeared 
different  to  him  as  soon  as  he  could 
say,  ''I  prefer  Jerusalem  above  my 
chief    joy/' 

Christians  look,  and  feel,  and  speak 
differently  when  their  hearts  glow  with 
love  to  Christ  and  His  people.  *' Ex- 
cept a  man  has  the  spirit  of  Christ, 
he  is  none  of  His.'*  This  is  the 
spirit    of   great   tenderness. 

His    Last    Will. 

With  this  love  in  his  heart,  he 
will  remember  the  Church  in  some  of 
her  wants  in  his  last  will  and  testa- 
ment,   although    it    is    much    better    to 


40    '  SERMON, 


give  all  we  can  spare  while  living. 
But  if  we  have  something  left,  we 
shall  not  forget  the  Church  in  our 
wills. 

Christ  made  His  will  in  reference 
to  His  mother,  a  few  hours  before 
His  death.  Although  the  nails  were 
in  His  hands  and  feet,  seeing  His 
mother  before  Him,  and  John  stand- 
ing near  by,  He  asked  John  if  he 
was  willing  to  take  care  of  His 
mother  after  His  death,  inquiring  of 
her  at  the  same  time  if  it  would  be 
agreeable  for  her  to  make  her  home 
with  John.  The  words  of  Christ  are 
these, —  John  19  :  26,  27  :  "  Woman  ! 
behold  thy  son";  and  to  John,  "Be- 
hold   thy   mother." 


THE    CHURCH  PREFERRED.  4^ 


The  meaning  of  these  words  was 
so  well  understood  by  John  and  Mary, 
both,  that  *'from  that  hour  that  dis- 
ciple took  her  unto  his  own  home." 
Christ  could  not  die  until  he  had  in 
His  last  will  provided  for  His  mother. 
Have  any  of  you  written  your  last 
will  and  testament  ?  Have  you,  like 
Christ,  remembered  your  mother  (the 
Church),  in  that  will  ?  If  not,  will 
you  alter  that  will  to-morrow?  Would 
it  not  be  a  painful  thought  (if  pain 
could  be  in  heaven),  through  the 
endless  ages,  that  in  disposing  of  our 
property  we  had  forgotten  the  Church 
of  Christ? 

Let  me  say,  in  conclusion,  to  all, 
may  I    come   in   memory  and    stand  by 


42  SERMON, 


your  side  when  you  make  your  last 
will  and  testament,  and  whisper  this 
text  in  your  ear,  —  ^'I  prefer  Jerusalem 
above   my   chief   joy?" 

Will  you  not,  then,  as  you  cause 
your  will  to  be  written,  which  disposes 
of  your  property,  remember  the  Church 
in  some  of  her  wants,  with  such  a 
legacy  that  it  will  be  pleasant  to 
review  when  you  are  walking  the 
golden  streets?  —  a  legacy  through 
which  you  will  say  in  the  best  pos- 
sible manner,  ''I  prefer  Jerusalem 
above  my  chief  joy/'  Then  it  may, 
with  propriety,  be  said  of  you,  —  "By 
it,    he   being   dead   yet    speaketh." 

Amen. 


THE  IMPORTANT  HOUR. 


THE  IMPORTANT  HOUR. 


**  Father,  the   hour  is  come."  —  John  i^.j, 

T%X  Q W  evident  it  is,  Christ  knew  his 
J©(,  Father  would  understand  Him ! 
He  does  not  say,  '^  Father,  I  have 
got  into  trouble  down  here.  I  have 
met  a  formidable  and  unexpected  diffi- 
culty in  my  mediatorial  work,  —  some- 
thing we  had  not  arranged  for." 
Nothing  of  the  kind;  but,  *' Father, 
the  hour  we  talked  about  long  before 
we    made   the    first    angel ;    that    hour 


46  SERMON, 


when  I  was  to  bear  the  sins  of  my 
people  in  my  own  body  on  the  tree ; 
the  hour  around  which  was  to  gather 
all  the  great  events  in  my  mediatorial 
work,  and  all  to  depend  upon  its 
results ;  at  last  I  have  reached  the 
important   hour/* 

The  word  hour,  in  this  passage, 
does  not  mean  sixty  minutes  of  time, 
but  a  crisis  or  point  in  Christ's  media- 
torial work,  where  all  these  events 
centered,  and  depended  upon  its 
results.  This  rendered  it  the  most 
important  hour  in  the  world's  history. 
I  will  speak  of  a  few  of  these  events, 
and  show  as  clearly  as  I  can  how 
much  importance  can  be  crowded  into 
a   little   point   of   time. 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR,  47 

Great  Struggle. 
This  was  the  long-anticipated  hour 
of  Christ's  great  struggle  with  the 
powers  of  darkness.  It  had  been  an 
ticipated  for  ages.  No  doubt  Satan 
had  looked  forward  to  that  hour  with 
the  greatest  interest  for  thousands  of 
years,  and  made  all  his  arrangements 
to  meet  and  overcome  Christ  if  pos- 
sible, then.  He  knew,  for  it  had 
been  a  matter  of  prophecy  given  to 
the  world,  that  at  that  hour,  in  an 
important  sense,  the  Father  would 
forsake  the  Son,  and  the  disciples 
flee  away  from  Him,  and  that,  too, 
when  humanity  was  almost  crushed 
beneath  the  load  of  our  sins.  It  is 
written,    ''The  shepherd   shall    be    smit- 


48  SERMON. 


ten,  and  the  sheep  scattered."  Satan, 
no  doubt,  said,  ^^That  will  be  my  time 
to  defeat  the  plan  of  salvation.  If 
ever  I  conquer  and  overcome  the  Son 
of  God,  I  must  do  it  at  that  hour." 
Satan  has  often  made  great  mistakes, 
and  I  am  not  sure  but  he  had  strong 
hopes  of  defeating  the  whole  plan  of 
redemption    at    that    hour. 

That  I  am  right  in  this  suggestion, 
go  with  me  in  thought  to  the  Garden 
and  mark  the  circumstances.  As  the 
fearful  struggle  drew  near,  Christ 
called  for  watchers.  Leaving  the  most 
of  the  disciples  in  one  part  of  the 
Garden,  He  took  Peter,  James,  and 
John  to  another  part,  to  act  as 
watchers,    telling     them    at    the    same 


THE   IMPORTANT  HOUR.  49 

time  that  His  soul  was  in  such  agony 
as  takes  life.  O,  what  an  hour ! 
And  what  an  experience  for  Jesus ! 
He  did  not  ask  to  be  saved  from 
Calvary;  He  came  into  the  world  to 
go  to  Calvary ;  but,  sustained  that  He 
might  reach  Calvary  alive,  He  must 
be  Divinely  sustained,  or  die  in  the 
Garden,  and  a  dead  Christ  be  nailed 
to   the   Cross. 

We  are  told  that  an  "angel  ap- 
peared, strengthening  Him.*'  This  was 
what  He  wanted,  and  what  He  prayed 
for  and  received.  With  this  needed 
strength  He  was  ready  to  go  to  the 
Cross  and  die.  Going  forth  He  met 
Judas,  with  his  soldiers  and  clubs, 
and   said   to   him,    '*  Judas,  you   do    not 


so  SERMON, 


need  soldiers  or  clubs.  This  is  your 
hour.  I  am  at  your  disposal  now.*' 
The  scene  was  awfully  grand ;  so 
much  so,  that  the  soldiers  went  back- 
ward and  fell  to  the  ground,  but  ral- 
lied again  and  led  Him  to  the  Cross, 
and   nailed    Him   to   it. 

What  an  hour  was  this  to  Christ,  the 
Lord  of  Lords  and  King  of  Kings. 
With  the  nails  in  His  hands  and 
feet,  His  disciples  fled  away,  and  His 
Father's  face  hidden  from  Him.  The 
bitterest  ingredient  in  this  cup  of  suf- 
fering was  the  hiding  of  His  Father's 
face.  This  was  the  red  cup  of  Divine 
wrath  poured  into  the  bosom  of  the 
Son.  O,  how  terrible!-  ''My  God!  My 
God!    why  hast  Thou  forsaken   me?" 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR.  5^ 

Angels  had  never  seen  anything 
like  this.  They  had  seen  legions  of 
their  brethren  put  in  chains  and 
hurled  over  the  battlements  of  Heaven, 
the  destruction  of  the  old  world,  and 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  destroyed  by 
fire,  but  had  never  seen  such  terri- 
ble  wrath   as   this. 

After  calling  for  drink,  and  vinegar 
mingled  with  gall  had  been  put  to 
His  lips,  He  cried,  ''  It  is  finished,** 
and  gave  up  the  ghost.  This  ended 
the  great  struggle  with  the  powers  of 
darkness.  The  long-anticipated  hour 
was   now    passed. 

Open   Door. 

At  that  hour  it  was  to  be  deter- 
mined    whether     the     door     of     hope, 


$2  SERMON. 


opened  to  the  world  through  the 
promise  of  Christ,  should  be  kept 
open  through  the  triumph  of  Christ. 
Suppose  a  failure  on  the  part  of 
Christ  (we  have  a  right  to  a  suppo- 
sition), and  that  Satan  had  kept  Christ 
in  the  grave,  as  he  evidently  meant 
to  do,  beyond  the  appointed  time  ? 
Suppose  Sunday  morning  had  come, 
and  Christ  was  still  in  the  grave  ? 
That  he  had  not  been  a  match  for  the 
formidable  difficulties  connected  with 
this  part  of  the  work  of  redemption? 
What  would  have  been  the  announce- 
ment made  in  the  Christian  pulpits  in 
and  about  Jerusalem  ?  Would  not  every 
pulpit  been  draped  in  deep  mourn- 
ing,    and    every    minister    have    cried, 


THE   IMPORTANT   HOUR,  53 

"All  is  lost!  All  is  lost!  The  door 
of  hope,  opened  to  the  world  through 
the  promise  of  Christ,  is  forever 
closed  through  the  failure  of  Christ." 
But,  thanks  be  to  God,  all  was  safe 
in  the  hand  of  the  Mediator.  No 
such  announcement  was  made.  It  was 
there  He  led  the  captive  devil  in 
chains,  and  spoiled  principalities  and 
powers,  and  made  a  show  of  them 
openly,    triumphing   over   them    in   it. 

"The   powers   of  darkness  leagued  in  vain 
To   bind   His   soul   in   death; 
He   shook  their   kingdom  when   He  fell, 
With   His  expiring  breath." 

Connecting   Link. 
That    hour    also    formed    the    grand 
connecting  link    between    the   old    and 


54  SERMON, 


new  dispensations.  The  priesthood 
under  the  Law  ended  at  the  Cross, 
and  the  Gospel  dispensation  com- 
menced there.  On  the  one  side  of 
the  Cross  stood  the  ministers  of  the 
Law,  ready  to  offer  a  turtle-dove,  or 
a  young  pigeon,  or  a  lamb,  upon  a 
Jewish  altar,  and  on  the  other  the 
twelve  apostles,  ready  to  go  forth 
with  their  message  of  salvation; — the 
one  to  be  dismissed,  and  the  other 
to  be  commissioned.  At  that  hour 
Christ  did  practically  say  to  the  priest- 
hood under  the  Law,  "  You  have 
finished  your  ministry ;  you  have  done 
it  well,  and  you  are  dismissed  from 
the  priesthood ;  and  you  are  dismissed 
forever.     The  Law  has   been   a   schooU 


THE   IMPORTANT   HOUR,  55 

master  to  lead  the  world  to  me,  and 
here  I  am,  the  great  Antitype  to  whom 
these  types  and  shadows  have  been 
steadily  pointing  for  ages.  '  I  am  He 
that  should  come.'  No  more  blood 
upon  Jewish  altars ;  no  more  slain 
beasts    or   birds   for   sacrifice." 

Thus  ended  the  old  dispensation. 
Jesus  then  turning  to  the  twelve 
apostles  said,  "Go  ye  into  all  the 
world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every 
creature.  He  that  believeth  and  is 
baptised,  shall  be  saved ;  and  he  that 
believeth   not    shall    be    damned." 

The  Cross  was  the  link  that  joined 
the  two  dispensations  together.  The 
one  could  not  be  perfect  without  the 
other.       A     long    line     of     saints     had 


56  SERMON. 


"died  in  faith,  not  having  received 
the  promises,  but  had  seen  them  afar 
off  and  embraced  them,  God  having 
provided  some  better  thing  for  us,  that 
they  without  us  should  not  be  made 
perfect/'  The  Old  Testament  re- 
quires the  New,  and  the  New  the  Old. 
Neither  is  perfect  without  the  other. 
If  we  were  to  give  an  intelligent 
heathen  the  Old  or  New  Testament, 
he  would  soon  ask  for  the  other  part 
of  the  book.  The  Cross  was  the 
golden  link  that  united  them.  So  that 
we  can  sing  with  full  hearts,  around 
the   Cross,  — 

"Love's  redeeming  work  is   done, 
Fought  the   fight,   the   battle   won 
Lo  1   our  Sun's  eclipse  is   o  'er, 
Lo !   He   sets  in   blood  no  more." 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR.  57 

Future  Happiness. 
One  more  event  depended  on  the 
result  of  that  hour.  This  I  will  speak 
of  with  great  reverence  and  humility, 
but  I  so  understand  the  plan  of  re- 
demption. The  future  happiness  of 
the  millions  who  were  that  day  in 
heaven  depended  upon  Christ's  meet- 
ing the  demands  of  the  Law  for  them 
then.  No  atonement  had  been  made 
for  Abraham,  and  Moses,  and  the  long 
line  of  saints  then  in  heaven.  Christ 
had  not  died  a  number  of  times,  but 
once  for  all.  They  had  been  received 
into  heaven  on  the  strength  of  an 
atonement  Christ  promised  to  make, 
but  had  not  yet  made  it.  Christ  had 
entered     into     a     covenant     with     the 


58  SERMON, 


Father,  that  when  the  Law  demanded 
satisfaction  He  would  render  it;  that 
He  would  suffer, — the  just  for  the 
unjust.  That  hour  had  now  come; 
Christ  must  now,  if  ever,  become  the 
end  of  the  Law  for  righteousness ;  not 
only  for  every  one  who  should  believe 
on  Him,  but  for  all  who  had  believed 
on    Him. 

No  doubt  this  great  truth  was  well 
understood  by  the  redeemed  in  heaven, 
—  that  Christ  was  that  day  to  die  for 
them,  and  that  their  future  happiness 
depended  on  Christ's  meeting  every 
claim  the  perfect  Law  of  God  had  ever 
held  against  them,  and  doing  it  that 
day.  O,  what  an  exceptional  day 
that    was    in    heaven!     Y\o     such    day 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR.  59 

was  ever  experienced  there.  Two  of 
their  number, —  Moses,  the  great  law- 
giver, and  EHjah,  the  Old  Testament's 
greatest  prophet, —  were  sent  to  inquire 
of  Jesus  (so  I  think),  if  He  was  going 
to  be  able  to  carry  it  through.  We 
get  some  idea  of  the  object  of  their 
mission,  by  a  few  words  overheard  by 
the  three  disciples  on  the  Mount  of 
Transfiguration.  They  heard  Moses 
and  Elijah  speak  to  Jesus  of  the  de- 
cease (that  is,  the  death)  that  he 
should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem.  The 
object  of  their  visit,  then,  was  some- 
thing in  reference  to  His  death  that 
deeply  interested  all  the  heavenly  ones. 
What  an  intense  interest  must  have 
been   felt    to    hear   the    report  of   these 


60  SERMON. 


two  men  on  their  return!  No  day  or 
hour  like  this  was  ever  known  in 
heaven.  They  could  look  on  and  wit- 
ness the  agony  of  Christ,  but  what 
could  they  do  ?  Christ  must  tread  the 
wine-press  of  His  Father^s  wrath  alone. 
I  think  no  song  was  heard,  nor  harp- 
string  touched  in  heaven,  from  Friday 
noon  until  Sunday  morning.  We  are 
told  that  there  was  silence  in  heaven 
for  a  little  space.  Could  anything  be 
more  suitable  than  for  all  heaven  to 
suspend  their  songs  and  hold  in 
silence  their  golden  harps,  when  Christ 
went  to  the  Cross  for  them?  They 
knew,  about  noon,  that  the  nails  had 
entered  Christ's  hands  and  feet,  and 
no  doubt  heard  His  groans  as  He  cried 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR,  6l 

out:  ''My  God!  My  God!  Why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me?"  They  then  un- 
derstood more  fully  than  ever  before 
what  atonement  meant,  and  what  a 
dreadful   thing   sin    is. 

Sometime  in  the  afternoon,  Christ, 
after  saying  "I  thirst,"  and  vinegar, 
mingled  with  gall  had  been  held  to 
His  lips,  cried,  ''It  is  finished,"  and 
gave  up  the  ghost.  What  tidings  were 
to  reach  heaven  that  evening.^ — "Jesus 
is  dead!  Jesus  is  dead!"  Some  of  us 
remember  the  sadness  and  gloom  that 
rested  on  us  when,  just  before  mid- 
night, the  bells  rang  out  over  this 
and  other  lands,  "James  A.  Garfield 
is  dead!"  The  whole  country  seemed 
draped    in    deep    mourning.     But    how 


62  SERMON. 


must  it  have  sounded  in  heaven  to 
hear  angels  and  archangels,  with  mil- 
lions of  saints  around  the  throne, 
saying,  ''  Jesus  is  dead !  Jesus  is  dead ! '' 
The  body  was  placed  in  a  sepul- 
chre Friday  evening,  as  we  reckon 
the  days  of  the  week.  All  night 
Friday  night,  and  all  day  and  night 
Saturday,  Jesus  was  in  the  sweet 
repose  of  the  grave.  What  a  topic 
of  conversation  all  this  time  in  heaven 
was  the  resurrection  of  that  body ! 
That  was  to  be  the  crowning  act  of 
redemption.^  Early  Sunday  morning  the 
Father  sent  one  of  the  angels  to 
roll  the  stone  from  the  sepulchre. 
Not  to  assist  in  raising  Christ  from 
the   dead ;   that   must  be  His  own   act. 


THE   IMPORTANT   HOUR,  63 

What  thoughts  must  have  filled  the 
mind  of  that  angel,  as  he  folded  his 
wings  and  sat  down  on  that  stone,  in 
utter  helplessness,  so  far  as  raising 
that  body  was  concerned  !  Think  of 
millions  of  the  bright  ones  looking 
upon  that  dead  form,  lying  in  that 
open  sepulchre,  knowing,  as  they  did, 
that  they  must  come  out  of  heaven 
unless  that  body  rose  from  the  dead 
that  very  morning.  Yet  they  could 
do  nothing  towards  it.  Could  an  hour 
be  crowded  with  more  importance  to 
the  heavenly  ones  }  How  many  times 
during  those  three  days  must  the 
question  have  been  asked,  ^*Will  He 
rise }  Will  He  rise }  Will  He  break 
the  bars  of    death?     Will   He   rob   the 


64  SERMON. 


grave  of  its  victory,  so  that  our  bod- 
ies that  are  sleeping  in  their  dusty 
beds  will  rise  in  the  morning  of  that 
great  day,  when  the  trumpet  shall 
sound  ?*' 

But,  thanks  be  to  God  and  the 
Lamb,  forever.  While  the  harps  of 
gold  were  silent,  and  the  angel  sat 
on  the  stone  at  the  sepulchre,  and 
millions  of  smiling  eyes  were  bending 
over  the  battlements  of  glory,  all 
waiting  the  results  of  that  hour,  Christ 
walked  out  of  the  sepulchre  in  the 
presence  of  heaven  and  earth,  as  if 
He  had  risen  from  a  sweet  night's 
repose.  There  He  stood,  the  Con- 
queror of  earth  and  hell,  holding  the 
keys   of  life   and  death.     Oh,  the  lean- 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR.  65 

ness  of  language  to  describe  the  scene 
that  followed  in  heaven  around  the 
throne  of  God  that  morning.  Never 
did  angels  or  men  know  such  an  hour. 
This  was  the  hour  of  victory  for  Him- 
self and  His  people.  ''He  lives!  He 
lives!'*  was  no  doubt  heard  all  over 
the  heavenly  city.  ''Heaven  is  ours 
forever.  Take  your  golden  harps,  and 
sing  your  sweetest  songs.  'Glory  to 
the  Lamb !  Glory  to  the  Lamb !  * 
Our  sins  are  washed  away,  not  only 
by  the  blood,  but  by  the  resurrection 
of   the    Lamb.'' 

"He   broke   the   bars   of   death, 
Which  none   e'er  broke   before ; 

And   rose   in   conquering   majesty, 
To   stoop   to   death   no   more." 


66  SERMON-. 


Here  the  angels  met  Him  to  accom- 
pany Him  to  His  Father's  right  hand 
in  heaven.  Yet  He  remained  for  forty 
days  before  He  was  '^received  up  into 
glory,"  to  remove  all  doubt  about  His 
resurrection,  and  arrange  the  affairs 
of  His  kingdom  on  earth.  How  long 
these  forty  days  must  have  seemi^d 
to  the  heavenly  ones  before  they 
could  see  and  welcome  Him  back, 
after  such  a  mission  and  such  a 
victory!  But  the  hour  came  at  last 
for  Him  to  go  up  to  His  throne 
above.  This  was  to  be  another  unu& 
ual  day  in  heaven,  —  a  day  of  great 
joy   among   all    the    heavenly    hosts. 

"They  brought   His   chariot  from  the   skies, 
To  bear   Him   to   His   throne ; 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR.  6/ 

Clapped   their   glad   wings    and   cried, 
The   glorious   work  is  done." 

Is  it  possible  for  language  to  de- 
scribe His  entrance  through  the  gates 
of  pearl?  Is  it  too  much  to  believe 
that  all  heaven  went  out  to  meet 
Him,  and  came  in  with  Him,  crying 
out  as  they  enter:  ''Lift  your  heads, 
O  ye  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye 
everlasting  doors,  and  the  King  of 
Glory  shall  come  in."  ''Who  is  this 
King  of  Glory.?"  "The  Lord  of  Hosts, 
He   is    the    King   of    Glory." 

Great  and  brave  men  have  had 
receptions  on  earth,  but  what  a  recep- 
tion  Christ  must  have  had  when  He 
returned  victorious  from  earth,  to  be 
crowned      "King     of     Glory!"      With 


68  SERMON. 


what  rapture  and   delight  they  sang,  as 
the  crown  was  placed  upon  His  head, 

"  Crown   Him  !    Crown    Him ! 
Crowns   become   the  victors*   brow." 

Well  might  the  Saviour  say,  when 
He  uttered  this  text:  '* Father,  the 
hour  is  come";  not  an  hour  of  great 
importance  is  come,  but  the  hour 
that  swallows  up  all  other  hours  since 
time  began  in  its  far-reaching  results, — 
reaching  back  through  the  long  list 
of  ages,  and  meeting  every  demand 
the  perfect  law  of  God  had  ever  held 
against  those  who  had  believed  in  a 
promised  Saviour,  and  put  their  trust 
in  him,  and  forward  in  its  saving 
power  to  all  who  should  believe  on 
Christ   through    their   wor4 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR,  69 

Thus  Christ  ''died  once  for  all." 
O,  the  importance  that  connected  itself 
with  that  point  in  the  mediatorial 
work   of   our    Redeemer ! 

In  the  light  of  this  single  thought, 
let  me  show,  as  clearly  as  possible, 
that  what  was  true  of  Christ  at  that 
crisis  in  His  work,  has  been  true  of 
nations  and  individuals  in  all  ages  of 
the   world. 

A  Crisis. 

A  crisis  is  reached,  and  at  that 
.point,  victory  or  defeat,  life  or  death, 
follows.  Our  first  parents  reached 
such  a  point.  No  doubt  they  had 
often  passed  that  forbidden  tree,  with 
no  thought  or  wish  to  touch  it.  But 
at    last    the    crisis    came,    and    life    or 


70  SERMON. 


death  must  follow  the  decision  of  an 
hour.  It  is  evident  that  our  mother, 
Eve,  while  looking  the  forbidden  tree 
carefully  over,  felt,  at  first,  a  gentle 
desire  come  over  her  to  taste  of  the 
forbidden  fruit,  yet  had  no  idea  of 
doing  it.  But  the  desire  increased 
upon  her  until  she  reached  such  a 
crisis,  that  upon  the  one  action  of 
that  woman's  will  hung  the  destiny 
of  this  world.  O,  if  she  had  hurried 
away,  saying,  ''  Life !  Life !  Eternal 
Life!''  She  was  as  yet  unstained  by - 
sin,  and  in  a  state  to  walk  and  talk 
with  God  as  we  walk  and  talk  with 
each  other.  The  question  in  her 
mind  seemed  to  be,  ^' Shall  I  taste 
of   it    and    run    the    risk    of    dying,    or 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR,  7 1 

refuse  and  be  safe?"  She  was  able  to 
stand,  yet  free  to  fall.  O,  what  an 
hour  in  the  history  of  this  world  ! 
But  the  evil  prevailed.  She  said,  ^'I 
will  taste  of  it."  The  deed  was  done. 
She  fell,  and  in  that  fall  all  our 
blood  was  poisoned,  and  this  world 
became  a  great  grave-yard.  Not  one  of 
her  unborn  children  could  be  saved 
without  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God 
upon  the  Cross.  How  much  impor- 
tance attached  itself  to  that  single  act ! 

The  Signers. 

So  it  was  with  the  signers  of  the 
Declaration  of  Independence.  In  that 
old  hall  stood  a  table  with  that  mem- 
orable   document    on  it ;    a    sober   look- 


T2  SERMON, 


looking  class  of  men  about  it,  with 
the  question  before  them,  ''Shall  we 
sign  it,  and  if  need  be,  seal  it  with 
our  blood?"  The  decision  was  made. 
They  signed  it,  and  thus  this  nation 
was  born.  The  decisive  hour  came, 
and  God  had  raised  up  men  for  that 
hour.  And  so,  for  more  than  a  cen- 
tury, when  in  our  history  we  have 
reached  a  crisis,  there  have  been 
men  for  the  crisis.  We  still  live. 
'^The   government    is    still   safe.'' 

With  Individuals. 
It  is  the  same  with  individual  respon- 
sibility.    We  reach  a  point  in  our  lives 

"  That   marks  the  destiny   of    man 
For  glory  or   despair." 

We   hear   the   calls  and  warnings   of 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR,  73 

the  Gospel,  and  reject  them,  and  yet 
we  may  be  saved.  This  may  be  re- 
peated many  times,  and  it  not  be  too 
late.  But  an  hour  is  reached  at  last 
when  we  cannot  say  ^'No,"  once  more, 
and  be  saved.  The  decision  then  is 
final.  The  destiny  of  the  soul  is  then 
fixed    forever. 

"There   is   a  line  by  us   unseen 

That   crosses   every   path, 
The   hidden   boundary   between 

God's   patience   and   His   wrath. 

That  fearful  line  may  be  near  your 
feet,  or  may  have  been  already  crossed. 
"My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with 
man."  How  dangerous  to  resist  His 
strivings  !  Christ  said  to  Jerusalem,  ''  O 
that    thou   hadst  known,    even   thou,   at 


74  SERMON, 


least,  in  this,  thy  day,  the  things  that 
belong  unto  thy  peace.  But  now  they 
are  hid  from  thine  eyes."  Too  late! 
Too  late!  How  dreadful  the  thought, 
that  we  may  find  out  that  we  are 
lost   when    it   is   too   late   to   be   saved. 

A  young  lady  deeply  convicted  of 
her  sins,  was  urged  to  accept  Christ 
at  once,  but  she  hesitated,  and  finally 
decided  to  attend  one  more  ball  before 
becoming  a  Christian.  She  went  to 
the  ball,  but  the  Spirit  left  her.  Not 
long  after,  she  went  into  a  decline, 
and  died  without  hope.  ''I  called;  ye 
refused."  The  stretched-out,  bleeding 
hand    refused  ' 

Am  I  not  addressing  those  who 
have  said  "No,  no,"  to  the  calls  of  the 


THE    IMPORTANT   HOUR.  75 

Gospel  from  your  earliest  moment  ? 
Has  not  Christ  been  rejected  every 
day  of  your  lives  ?  Do  you  know  cer- 
tainly this  is  not  the  hour  of  final 
decision  ?  The  unseen  line  may  be 
crossed  this  hour.  O,  the  importance 
of  the  decision  you  make  now !  Does 
not  the  Holy  Spirit  whisper,  ''The 
hour  is  come"?  Do  not  say,  then, 
''Go  thy  way  for  this  time,"  lest  it 
should  prove  to  be  the  last  time  you 
can    say    "No,"    and    be    saved. 

When  the  crisis  came  Christ  met  it 
and  triumphed  over  it.  Will  yot  not 
do  the  same  .'^  "I  have  set  life  and 
death  before  you,  therefore  choose 
life."  Will  you  not  now  silentl}^  but 
solemnly  say,  putting  your  veracity  and 


76  SERMON. 


honor  in  the  decision,  '^  Jesus,  I  ac- 
cept Thee  as  my  Saviour,  and  will 
serve  Thee  from  this  hour ;  whether 
my  path  is  light  or  dark,  rough  or 
smooth,  still  I  will  obey  and  serve 
Thee   the   remainder   of  miy   days"? 

May  Jesus  give  you  strength  and 
grace  to  trust  Him  and  carry  out 
this  vow,  and  I  be  permitted  to  meet 
you  in  heaven  and  hear  you  say, 
*'That  was  the  hour  of  decision  and 
victory/' 

*^The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ   be   with   you   all." 

Amen, 


By  Rev.  A.  B.  EARLE,  D.  D. 


The  Morning  Hour.     For  Family  Devotions  and  Private  Medi 
trtion.     Contains  a  portion  of  Scripture,  with  suggestive  spiritual  Ex 
p,)sition,  and  a  brief  Hj^mn  for  every  Day  of  the  Year.   Elegant  octavo 
Cloth,  $2.00;  half  leather,  $2.50;  full  Turkey,  $4.00. 
'*  Its  comments  are  everywhere  full  of  the  marrow  of  the  gospel."  — 

Congregationalist^  {Boston.) 

Bringing  in  Sheaves.    The  outgrowth  of  the  author's  long  expe- 
rience in  gospel  work.    12mo,    Cloth.     With  steel  portrait.    $1.25. 
"  One  of  the  most  remarkable  books  ever  given  to  the  public."  —  West- 
ern Recorder,  {Louisville-) 

The  Rest  of  Faith.  Shows  how  the  soul  may  abide  in  sweet  and 
constant  rest  in  all  the  care  of  the  daily  life.  Cloth,  40  cts. ;  gilt  edges, 
60  cts. ;  full  Russia,  90  cts. 

"  Meets  the  deep  longings  of  the  hungry  soul."  —  Watchman  and  Re- 
flector., {Boston.) 

Abiding  Peace.  Has  been  written  to  meet  the  latest  diffici  [ties 
and  objections  in  respect  to  the  doctrine  of  perfect  deliverance  irom 
unrest  and  condemnation,  and  to  enable  the  Christian  to  enjoy  abiding 
peace  in  the  daily  life.    18mo.    Cloth,  50  cts. 

Work  of  an  Evangelist.  A  Review  of  Fifty  Years  in  the  Min- 
istry. Together  with  The  Fiftieth  Anniversary  Sermon,  delivered  in 
Tremont  Temple,  Boston.    Cloth,  25  cts. ;  papeir,  10  cts. 

The  Title  Examined ;  or,  How  may  I  Know  I  am  a  Christian? 
A  book  for  inquirers,  and  for  every  Christian  who  would  be  sure  of  liis 
title  to  heaven.    18mo.    Cloth,  25  ct.s. ;  paper,  10  cts. 

Revival  Hymns.  Contains  those  Hymns,  with  the  addition  of  a 
few  tunes,  suited  to  seasons  of  special  religious  effort.  Large  type 
and  convenient  size.    Cloth,  25  cts. ;  paper,  10  cts. ;  8vo,  leather,  90 *ets. 

Why  Not  Now  ?  A  searching  Tract  for  the  Carelesss  and  the 
Anxious.    25  cents  per  dozen. 

Growing,  because  Abiding.     Answers  important  Questions  in 

regard  to  the  rest  of  faith.    25  cents  per  dozen. 

Ten  Evidences  of  Conversion;  with  Ten  Questiens  for  Self- 
Examination.     10  cents  per  dozen. 


•#*  Any  of  the  above  works  mailed^  postpaid.,  on  receipt  of  pric" 
Descriptive  Catalogue  of  our  Publications  free. 

JAiUCS  H.  SARI.B,  PnblisKer, 

tT8  'Washington  Street    Boston,  UTas^ 


BOOKS  FOR  CHRISTIAN  WORKERS 


Hand-Book  of  Bevivals.    By  Rev.  H.  C.  Fish,  D.D.     12mo. 

Cloth.     $1.50. 

Treats  every  element  of  revival  work,  —  indications,  hindrances, 
objections,  means,  and  methods ;  preaching,  prayer,  and  singing;  evan- 
gelists, inquirers,  converts,  Sunday  schools,  &c. 

"  There  is  not  in  thia  work,  so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  discover, 
any  single  phase  belonging  to  a  genuine  revival  left  unnoticed."  — 
Christian  at  Work,  {New  York.) 

i>^Mging  in  Sheaves.    By  Rev.  A.  B.  Earle,   D.D.     With 

Portfiiit.    12mo.    Cloth.    $1.50. 

This  work,  drawn  from  the  author's  experience,  is  invaluable  to  all 
who  would  be  successful  workers  for  Christ 

'*  Nothing  has  for  a  long  time  been  published,  better  adapted  to 
arouse  holy  zeal  in  the  cause  of  Christ."  —  Methodist,  {New  York.) 

Revivals,  and  How  to  Promote  Them.     By  Rer.  Orson 

Parker.    12mo.    With  Portrait.    Cloth.    $1.75. 

This  work  is  the  fruit  of  the  author's  experience  in  revivals  for  forty 
years,  and  is  intended  to  be  a  practical  guide  in  revival  T7ork. 
-*It  is  a  volume  for  the  hour."  —  Zion's  Herald. 

Harvest  "Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  illustrated  in  Rev. 
E.  P.  Hammond  s  labors  in  England,  Scotland,  and  America.  l2mo. 
Cloth.    $1.00. 

Bevival  Sermons.  By  Rev.  Emerson  Andrews.  12mo.  Cloth. 
With  Portrait.    $1  25. 

This  volume  contains  flfly-four  condensed  sermons  by  this  revival 
preacher. 

liife,  Labors,  and  Bible  Studies  of  Rev.  George  P. 

Pentecost.     Edited  by  P.  C.   Headley,  under  Mr.  Pentecost^s 
supervision.    12mo.    With  Portrait.    $1.50. 

Mr.  Pentecost's  life  has  been  one  of  remarkable  interest.  His  Bit^o 
readings,  for  richness  and  suggestiveness,  are,  as  Joseph  Cook  says  oi 
them,  "  mountain  summits  laden  with  the  dew  of  Hermon." 


%*  Any  of  the  above  books  mailed,  postpaid,  on  receipt  of  prt7t6» 
^pscripiive  Catalogue  of  our  Publications  free. 

JAMCS   TL.  SARIif:,  Publisk^r* 

178  Washiaston  Street,  Boftton,  Mass. 


BOOKS    OP   BIOGRAPHY. 


James  A    Garfield.      By    C.   C.  CoflSn,    (War   Correspondent 

'•  Carleton.'")    With  Portrait.    Illustrated.    12mo.    $1.50. 

The  Life  of  General  Garfield,  written  by  an  author  of  such  brilliant 
reputation,  should  be  in  every  library. 

'*  Admirably  told."  —  Senator  Geo.  F.  Hoar. 

"Exceedingly  satisfactory."  — i/r5.  General  Garfield* 

Charles  Jewett,  M.  D.     By  Wiliiam  M.  Thayer,  author  of  Lives 
of  Lincoln,  Washington,  Garfield,  &c.    With  Portrait.    12mo.    $1.50. 
Dr.  Jewett's  brilliant  talents,  his  wit  and  humor,  and  his  consecration 

to  the  M'ork,  have  given  him  the  foremost  place  among  Temperance 

workers  at  home  and  abroad. 
"  Immensely  entertaining."  —  Rev.  T-  L.  Cvf/ler,  D.D.,  in  New  York 

Evangelist. 

Charles  Sumner.  By  William  L.  Cornell,  LL.  D.,  and  Bishop 
Gilbert  Haven,  D.D.  With  the  leading  Eulogies.  With  Portrait. 
Illustrated.    12mo.    Cloth.    $1.50. 

These  Eulogies,  by  the  leadin?  men  of  the  nation,  are  masterpieces 
of  thought  and  expression,  invaluable  to  every  professional  man,  stu- 
dent, and  public  speaker. 

Phineas  Stowe  and  Bethel  Work.    Compiled  by  Rev.  H.  A. 

Cooke.    12mo.    Cloth,  gilt  and  black.    $1.50. 

The  story  of  Mr.  Stowe's  work  among  the  sailors,  the  intemperate, 
and  the  fallen,  is  full  of  inspiration,  and  is  as  thrilling  as  a  novel. 

"  Happily  adapted  to  preserve  the  memory  of  a  singularly  useful  and 
noble  life,  and  to  stimulate  emulation  of  the  rare  virtues  that  shone  in 
the  character  of  Phineas  Stowe."  —  Daily  Advertiser,  (Boston.) 

Life,  Letters,  and  Way^de  Gleanings.    By  Mrs.  B.  H. 

Crane.    Octavo.    $2.00. 

Mrs.  Crane  gives  not  only  the  history  of  a  family  and  a  life,  but  she 
has  interwoven  recollections  of  the  olden  time,  incidents  and  lessons  of 
great  interest  and  value. 

"  A  charming  book  for  the  home  and  fireside." — Watchman.  (Boston.) 

Log-Cabin  to  "White  House.  By  W.  M.  Thayer,  author  of 
"  The  Bobbin  Boy,"  '•  Pioneer  Boy,"  &c.    12mo.    $1,50. 

A  Boys'  Life  of  President  Garfield.  Fascinating  and  invaluable  to 
boys  and  young  men. 


%*  Any  of  these  books  mailed,  postpaid,  on  receipt    of  price 
J>e6criptive  Catalogue  of  our  Publications  f^ee.  ' 

Ja:m;£S    H.  £ARX.£,  Publlslier, 

178  Washington  Street,  Boston,  Maa^- 


DEVOTIONAL    BOOKS. 


Motlier   Munroe  ;   or,  The  Shining  Path.    By  Mrs.  Mary  D. 

James.    Handsome  16mo.     With  Portrait.    75  cts. 

The  record  ef  the  life  of  one  of  the  most  saintly  women  of  the  age. 

"  Perfect  trust  and  perfect  rest  seemed  the  sole  tenants  of  her  heart." 
»~- President  Wm.  F.  Warren,  D.D. 

Lessons    of  Trust.      By  L.   B.  E.,  author  of  "  How  I    Found 

Jesus."    Elegant  16mo.    Cloth,  75  cts. ;  paper,  40  cts. 

For  all  who  would  serve  the  Lord  with  gladness.  Abounds  in  com- 
fort and  helpfulness  for  hours  of  trouble  and  temptation. 

"  From  significant  initial  letters,  we  suppose  the  volume  is  from  the 
pen  of  the  accomplished  and  devout  wife  of  the  publisher.  It  is  a  de- 
lightful and  profitable  manual  for  hours  of  meditation."— <^zon"5  Herald^ 
(Boston.) 

The  Blood  of  Jesus.      By  Rev.  William  Reid,  D.  D.     18mo. 

Cloth,  35  cts. 

Very  clearly  and  helpfully  sets  forth,  In  language  *hat  all  can  under- 
stand, the  ground  of  peace  with  God. 

The  Gift  of  God.     By  Theodore  Monod.     16mo.    Cloth.    50  cts. 

*'  Simple,  clear,  and  very  sweet  presentations  of  Christ,  God's  un- 
speakable Gift."  — iVet^  Fork  Christian  Advocate, 

Calls  to  Christ.     By  Rev.  W.  R.  Nicoll,   M.A.     16mo.     Cloth. 

50  cts. 

Designed  for  Christian  workers  in  the  awakening  of  the  unconverted. 

Little  Ones  in  the  Fold.     By  Rev.  E.  P.  Hammond.    16mo. 

Cloth.  60  cts. 

Contains  many  instances  of  conversion  of  children,  and  enforces  the 
duty  and  hopefulness  of  work  to  bring  them  to  Jesus  early'in  life. 

The  Best  of  Faith.     By  Rev.  A.  B.  Earle,  D.D.    Cloth.   40  cts. 

Unfolds  the  believer's  privilege,  and  shows  how  the  soul  may  abide  in 
sweet  rest,  amid  all  the  cares  and  temptations  of  life. 


*#*  Any  of  the  above  books  mailed,  postpaid,  on  receipt  of  price* 
Descriptive  Catalogue  of  our  Publications  free. 

JAIII£S    H.  IDARIiC:,  Publisher, 

ITS  Washington  Street,  Boston,  Mass. 


