Weighed and Wanting 


Or, The Ten Commandments 


D. L. MOODY 


“TexeL: Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting, Ms 


Fleming H. Revell Company 
Chicago : New York : Toronto 
Publishers of Evangelical Literatwe 





Copyright, 1898, by The Bible Institute 


Contents 


PAGE 
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS G . . . . 6 
WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES Q . 6 5 5S 
THE First COMMANDMENT c 2 5 . . 18 
THE SECOND CoMMANDMENT 9 5 5 . 5 OH 
THE THIRD COMMANDMENT ; 5 . : 5 
THE FourtH COMMANDMENT 6 o 9 5 AG 
THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT : 5 b : - 63 
THE SIxTH COMMANDMENT . ° ° . 6 0 
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT , 3 . s 5 TY 
THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT. 5 7 5 ies! 
THE NINTH COMMANDMENT . . . . ole 
THE TENTH COMMANDMENT : 5 a . . 105 
THE HANDWRITING BLOTTED OuT 6 . . . 119 


5 





THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. 


IRM OVOVONS velo ee ire 


I, THOU SHALT NAVE NO OTIIER GODS BEFORE ME, 

Il, THOU SHALT NOT MAKE UNTO THEE ANY GRAVEN 
IMAGE, OR ANY LIKENESS OF ANY THING THAT IS IN HEAVEN 
ABOVE, OR ‘IHAL IS IN THE EARTH BENEATH, OR THAT ES IN 
THE WATER UNDER THE EARTH: THCU SHALT NOT BOW 
DOWN THYSELF TO THEM, NOR SERVE THEM: FUR I THE 
Lorb TITY GOD AM A JEALOUS GOD, VISITING THE INIQUITY 
OF ‘FUE FATHERS UPON THE CHILDREN UNTO THE THIRD 
AND FOURTH GENERATION OF THEM THAT HATE ME; AND 
SHEWING MERCY UNTO TIIOUSANDS OF THEM THAT LOVE 
Mr, AND KEEP My COMMANDMENTS. 

(Il. Tou SHALT NOT TAKE THE NAME OF THE Lorp 
THY GOD IN VAIN; FOR THE LORD WILL NOT HOLD 111M 
GUILTLESS THAT TAKETH IIS NAME IN VAIN, 

IV. REMEMBER THE SABRATH DAY, TO KEEP IT HOLY. 
SIX DAYS SHALT THOU LABOUR, AND DO ALL THY WORK: 
BUT THE SEVENTIIT DAY 1S THE SABBATH OF THE LORD THY 
GOD: IN IT THOU SHALT NOT DO ANY WORK, THOU, NOR THY 
SON, NOR THY DAUGHTER, THY MANSERVANT, NOR THY MAID- 
SERVANT, NOR THY CATTLE, NOR THY STRANGER THAT IS 
WITHIN THY GATES: FOR IN SIX DAYS THE LORD MADE 
HEAVEN AND EARTH, THE SEA, AND ALL THAT IN THEM IS, 
AND RESTED THE SEVENTH DAY: WHEREFORE THE LORD 
BLESSED THE SABBATIIT DAY AND ITALLOWED IT, 

V. HonourR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER: THAT 
THY DAYS MAY BE LONG UPON THE LAND WHICH THE LoRD 
THY GOD GIVETH THEE. 

VI. THOU SHALT NOT KILL. 

VII. THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT ADULTERY. 

VIII. THOU SHALT NOT STEAL. 


IX. THOU SHALT NOT PILAR FALSE WITNESS AGAINST 
THY NEIGHBOUR, 

X. THOU SHALT NOT COVET THY NRIGHBOUR’S HOUSE, 
THOU SHALT NOT COVEF THY NEIGHSOUR’S WIFE, NOR HIS 
MANSERVANT, NOR HIS MAIDSERVANT, MOR HIS OX, NOR HIS 
ASS, NOR ANY THING THAT 13 THY NIIGH3OUR’S, 





Weighed in the Balances 


In the fifth chapter of Daniel we read the history ofF 
King Belshazzar. One chapter tells us all we know 
about him. One short sight of his career is all we 
have. He bursts in upon the scene and then disap- 
pears. 


THE EASTERN FEAST. 


We are told that he made a great feast to a thousand 
of his lords, and drank wine before them. In those 
days a feast would sometimes last for six months in 
Eastern countries. How long this feast had been go- 
ing on we are not told, but in the midst of it, he 
“commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels 
which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the 
temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king, and his 
princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink 
therein. Then they brought the golden vessels that 
were taken out of the temple of the house of God 
which was at Jerusalem; and the king, and his princes, 
his wives, and his concubines, drank in them. They 
drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, 
of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.” 

While this impious act was being committed, “in 
the same hour came forth fingers of a man’s hand, and 
wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of 
the wall of the king’s palace; and the king saw the 
part of the hand that wrote.” We are not told at 

7 


8 Weighed and Wanting 


what hour of the day or the night it happened. Per- 
haps it was midnight. Perhaps nearly all the guests 
were more or less under the influence of drink; but 
they were not so drunk but that they suddenly became 
sober as they saw something that was supernatural— 
a handwriting on the wall, right over the golden 
candlestick. 

Every face turned deathly pale. “The king’s counte- 
nance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so 
that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees 
smote one against another.” In haste he sent for his 
wisest men to come and read that handwriting on the 
wall. They came in one after another, and tried to 
make it out; but they could not interpret it. The 
king promised that whoever could read it should be 
made the third ruler in the kingdom; that he should 
have gifts, and that a gold chain should be put round 
his neck. But the wise men tried in vain. The king 
was greatly troubled. 

At last, in the midst of the consternation, the queen 
came in, and she told the monarch, if he would only 
send for one who used to interpret the dreams of 
Nebuchadnezzar, he could read the writing and tell 
him the interpretation thereof. So Daniel was sent 
for. He was very familiar with it. He knew his 
Father’s handwriting. 

“This is the writing that was written, JZene, Mene, 
Tekel, Upharsin. This is the interpretation of the 
thing: Mene—God hath numbered thy kingdom and 
finished it. 7ekel—Thou art weighed in the balances, 
and art found wanting. Peres—Thy kingdom is di- 
vided, and given to the Medes and Persians.” 


Weighed in the Balances 9 


If some one had told the king an hour before that 
the time had come when he must step into the bal- 
ances and be weighed, he would have laughed at the 
thought. But the vital hour had come. 

The weighing was soon over. The verdict was an- 
nounced, and the sentence carried out. ‘In that 
night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain, 
and Darius the Median took the kingdom.” Darius 
and his army came marching down those streets. 
There was a clash of arms. Shouts of war and victory 
rent the air. That night the king’s blood mingled 
with the wine of the banquet hall. Judgment came 
upon him unexpectedly, suddenly: and _ probably 
ninety-nine out of every hundred judgments come in 
this way. Death comes upon us unexpectedly; it 
comes upon us suddenly. 

Perhaps you say: “I hope Mr. Moody is not going 
to compare me with that heathen king.” 

I tell you that a man who does evil in these Gospel 
days is far worse than that king. We live in a land of 
Bibles. You can get the New Testament for a nickel, 
and if you haven’t got a nickel you can get it for noth- 
ing. Many societies will be glad to give it to you free. 
We live in the full blaze of Calvary. We live on this 
side of the cross, but Belshazzar lived more than five 
hundred years on the other side. He never heard of 
Jesus Christ. He never heard about the Son of God. 
He never heard about God except, perhaps, in connec- 
tion with his father’s remarkable vision. He probably 
had no portion of the Bible, and if he had, probably he 
didn’t believe it. He had no godly minister to point 
him to the Lamb of God. 


10 Weighed and Wanting 


Don’t tell me that you are better than that king. 
believe that he will rise in judgment and condemn 
many of us. 


All this happened long centuries ago. Let us get 
down to this century, to this year, to ourselves. We 
will come to the present time. Let us imagine that 
now, while I am preaching, down come some balances 
from the throne of God. They are fastened to the 
very throne itself. It is a throne of equity, of justice. 
You and I must be weighed. I venture to say this 
would be a very solemn audience. ‘There would be no 
trifling. There would be no indifference. No one 
would be thoughtless. 

Some people have their own balances. A great 
many are making balances to be weighed in. But after 
all we must be weighed in God’s balances, the balances 
of the sanctuary. It is a favorite thing with infidels to 
set their own standard, to measure themselves by other 
people. But that will not do in the Day of Judgment. 
Now we will use God's law asa balance weight, When 
men find fault with the lives of professing Christians, 
it is a tribute to the law of God. 

“Tekel.” It is a very short text. It is so short I 
am sure you will remember it: and that is my object, 
just to get people to remember God's own Word. 


GOD'S HANDWRITING. 


Let me call your attention to the fact that God 
wrote on the tables of stone at Sinai as well as on the 
wall of Belshazzar’s palace. 

These are the only messages to men that God has 


Weighed in the Balances it 


written with His own hand. He wrote the command- 
ments out twice, and spoke them aloud in the hearing 
of Israel. 

If it were known that God Himself was going to 
speak once again to man, what eagerness and excite- 
ment there would be. For nearly nineteen hundred 
years He has been silent. No inspired message has 
been added to the Bible for nearly nineteen hundred 
years. How eagerly all men would listen if God 
should speak once more. Yet men forget that the 
Bible is God’s own Word, and that it is as truly His 
message to-day as when it was delivered of old. The 
law that was gven at Sinai has lost none of its so- 
lemnity. Time cannot wear out its authority or the 
fact of its authorship. 

I can imagine some one saying—‘**I won’t be weighed 
by that law. I don’t believe in it.” 

Now men may cavil as much as they like about other 
parts of the Bible, but I have never met an honest man 
that found fault with the Ten Commandments. Infidels 
may mock the Lawgiver and reject Him who has de- 
livered us from the curse of the law, but they can’t 
help admitting that the commandments are right. 
Renan said that they are for all nations, and will re- 
main the commandments of God during all the centu- 
ries. 

If God created this world, He must make some laws 
to govern it. In order to make life safe we must have 
good laws; there is not a country the sun shines upon 
that does not possess laws. Now this is God's law. 
It has come from on high, and infidels and skeptics 
have to admit that it is pure. Legislatures nearly all 


12 Weighed and Wanting 


over the world adopt it as the foundation of their legal 
systems. 

“The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the 
soul: the testimony of the Lord is pure, making wise 
the simple: the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing 
the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, en- 
lightening the eyes.” 

Now the question for you and me is—are we keeping 
these commandments? Have we fulfilled all the re- 
quirements of the law? If God made us, as we know 
He did, He had a right to make that law; and if we 
don’t use it aright it would have been better for us if 
we had never had it, for it will condemn us. We shall 
be found wanting. The law is all right, but are we 
right ? 





AN INFIDEL’S TESTIMONY. 


It is related of a clever infidel that he sought an ac- 
quaintance with the truths of the Bible, and began to 
read at the books of Moses. He had been in the habit 
of sneering at the Bible, and in order to be able to re- 
fute arguments brought by Christian men, he made up 
his mind, as he knew nothing about it, to read the 
Bible and get some idea of its contents. After he had 
reached the Ten Commandments, he said to a friend: 

“T will tell you what I wsed to think. I supposed 
that Moses was the leader of a horde of banditti; that, 
having a strong mind, he acquired great influence over 
a superstitious people; and that on Mount Sinai he 
played off some sort of fireworks to the amazement of 
his ignorant followers, who imagined in their fear and 
superstition that the exhibition was supernatural. I 


Weighed in the Balances Has 


have been looking into the nature of that law. I have 
been trying to see whether I could add anything to it, 
or take anything from it, so as to make it better. Sir, 
Teannot! It is perfect! 

“The first commandmenc directs us to make the 
Creator the object of our supreme love and reverence. 
That is right. If He be our Creator, Preserver, and 
Supreme Benefactor, we ought to treat Him, and none 
other, as such. The second forbids idolatry. That cer- 
tainly is right. The third forbids profanity. The 
fourth fixes a time for religious worship. If there be 
a God, He ought surely to be worshipped. It is suit- 
able that there should be an outward homage signifi- 
cant of our inward regard. If God be worshipped, it 
is proper that some time should be set apart for that 
purpose, when all may worship Him harmoniously, and 
without interruption. One day in seven is certainly 
not too much, and I do not know that it is too little. 

“The fifth commandment defines the peculiar duties 
arising from family relations. Injuries to our neighbor 
are then classified by the moral law. They are divided 
into offences against life, chastity, property, and char- 
acter; and I notice that the greatest offence in each 
class is expressly forbidden. Thus the greatest injury 
to life is murder; to chastity, adultery; to property, 
theft; to character, perjury. Now the greatest offence 
must include the least of the same kind. Murder 
must include every injury to life; adultery every in- 
jury to purity; and so of the rest. And the moral 
code is closed and perfected by a command forbidding 
every improper desire in regard to our neighbors. 

“T have been thinking, Where did Moses get that 


14 Weighed and Wanting 


law? I have read history. The Egyptians and the 
adjacent nations were idolaters; so were the Greeks 
and Romans; and the wisest or best Greeks or Romans 
never gave a code of morals like this. Where did 
Moses obtain that law, which surpasses the wisdom and 
philosophy of the most enlightened ages? He lived at 
a period comparatively barbarous; but he has given a 
law in which the learning and sagacity of all subsequent 
time can detect no flaw. Where did he obtain it? 
He could not have soared so far above his age as to 
have devised it hiniself. I am satisfied where he ob- 
tained it. It came down from heaven. It has con- 
vinced me of the truth of the religion of the Bible.” 

The infidel, (now an infidel no longer), remained to 
his death a firm believer in the truth of Cliistianity. 

We call it the “ Mosaic” Law, but it has been well 
_ said that the commandments did not originate with 
Moses, nor were they done away with when the Mosaic 
Law was fulfilled in Christ, and many of its ceremonies 
and regu/ations abolished. We can find no trace of 
the existence of any lawmaking body in those early 
times, no parliament or congress that built up a system 
of laws. It has come down to us complete and finished, 
and the only satisfactory account is that which tells us 
that God Himself wrote the commandments on tables 
of stone. 


BINDING TO-DAY. 


Some people seem to think we have got beyond the 
commandments. What did Christ say? ‘ Think not 
that I am come to destroy the law and the prophets; I 
am not come to destroy but to fulfil. For verily I say 


Weighed in the Balances 15 


unto you, Till heaven and earth pass away, one jot or 
one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be 
fulfilled.” The commandments of God given tu Moses 
in the Mount at Horeb are as binding to-day as ever 
they have been since the time when they were pro- 
claimed in the hearing of the people. The Jews said 
the law was not given in Palestine, (which belonged to 
Israel), but in the wilderness, because the law was for 
all nations. 

Jesus never condemned the law and the prophets, 
but He did condemn those who did not obey them. 
Because He gave new commandments it does not fol- 
low that He abolished the old. Christ’s explanation of 
them made them all the more searching. In His Ser- 
mon on the Mount He carried the principles of the 
commandments beyond the mere letter. He unfolded 
them and showed that they embraced more, that they 
are positive as well as prohibitive. The Old Testa- 
ment closes with these words: ‘* Remember ye the law 
of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in 
Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments. 
Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the 
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: and 
he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, 
and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I 
come and smite the earth with a curse.” 

Does that look as if the law of Moses was becoming 
obsolete ? 

' The conviction deepens in me with the years that the 
old truths of the Bible must be stated and restated in 
the plainest possible language. I do not remember 
ever to have heard a sermon preached on the command 


1d Weighed and Wanting 


ments. I have an index of two thousand five hundred 
sermcns preached by Spurgeon, and not one of them 
selects its text from the first seventeen verses of Exo- 
dus xx. The people must be made to understand that 
the Ten Commandments are still binding, and that 
there is a penalty attached to their violation. We do 
not want a gospel of mere seutiment. ‘The Sermon on 
the Mount did not blot out the Ten Commandments. 

When Christ came He condensed the statement of 
the law into this form: ‘Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul and 
with all thy strength and with all thy mind; and thy 
neighbor as thyself.” Paul said: ** Love is the fulfill- 
ing of the law.” But does this mean that the detailed 
precepts of the Decalogue are superseded, and have be- 
come back numbers? Does a father cease to give chil- 
dren rules to obey because they love him? Does a 
nation burn its statute books because the people have 
become patriotic? Not at all. And yet people sj eak 
as if the commandments do uot hold for Christians be- 
cause they have come to love God. Paul said: “ Do 
we then make void the Jaw through faith? God for- 
bid. Yea, we establish the law.” It still holds good. 
The commandments are necessary. So long as we 
obey, they do not rest heavy upon us; but as soon as 
we try to break away, we find they are like fences to 
keep us within bounds. Horses need bridles even after 
they have been properly broken in. 

“ We know that the law is good if a man use it law- 
fully ; knowing this, that the law is not made for a 
righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for 
the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, 


Weighed in the Balances 17 


fos murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for 
manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile 
themselves with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for 
perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that 
is contrary to sound doctrine.” 

Now, my friend, are you ready to be weighed by this 
law of Gud? <A great many people say that if they 
keep the commandments, they do not ueed to be for- 
given and saved through Christ. But have you kept 
them? I will admit that if you perfectly keep the 
commandments, you do not need to be saved by Christ; 
but is there a man in the wide world who can truly say 
that he has done this? Young lady, can you say: “I 
am ready to be weighed by the law”? Can you, young 
man? Will you step into the scales and be weighed 
one by one by the Ten Commandments ? 

Now face these Ten Commandments honestly and 
prayerfully. See if your life is right, and if you are 
treating God fairly. God’s statutes are just, are they 
not? If they are right, let us see if we are right. Let 
us pray that the Holy Ghost may search each one of us. 
Let us get alone with God and read His law—read it 
carefully and prayerfully, and ask Him to show us our 
sins and what He would have us to do. 


First Commandment 
‘“THOU SHALT HAVE NO OTHER GODS BEFORE ME.” 


Mx friend, are you ready to be weighed against this 
commandinent? Have you fulfilled, or are you willing 
to fulfil, all the requirements of this law? Put 
it into one of the scales, and step into the other. Is 
your heart set upon God alone? Have you no other 
God? Do you love Him above father or mother, the 
wife of your bosom, your children, home or land, 
wealth or pleasure ? 

If men were true to this commandment, obedience 
to the remaining nine would follow naturally. It is 
because they are unsound in this that they break the 
others. 

FEELING AFTER GOD. 


Philosophers are agreed that even the most primitive 
races of mankind reach out beyond the world of matter 
to a superior Being. It is as natural for man to feel 
after God as it is for the ivy to feel after a support. 
Hunger and thirst drive him to seek for food, and 
there is a hunger of the soul that needs satisfying, 
too. Man does not need to be commanded to wor- 
ship, as there is not a race so high or so low in the 
scale of civilization but has some kind of a god. What 
he needs is to be directed aright. 

This is what the first commandment is for. Before 
we can worship intelligently, we must know what or 
whom to worship. God does not leave us in ignorance. 

18 


First Commandment 19 


When Paul went to Athens, he found an altar dedicated 
to “An Unknown God,” and he proceeded to tell of 
Him whom we worship. When God gaye the eom- 
mandments to Moses, He commenced with a declara- 
tion of His own character, and demanded exclusive 
recognition. “I am the Lord thy God, which have 
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the 
house ef bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods be- 
fore me.” 

The Rev. Dr. Dale says these words have great signifi- 
cance. ‘The Jews knew Jehovah as the God who had 
held back the waves like a wall while they fled across 
the sea to escape the vengeance of their enemies; they 
knew Him as the God who bad sent thunder, and 
lightning, and hail, plagues on cattle, and plagues on 
men, to punish the Egyptians and to compel.them to 
let the children of Israel go; they knew Him as the 
God whose angel had slain the firstborn of their op- 
pressors, and filled the land from end to end with 
death, and agony, and terror. He was the same God, 
so Moses and Aaron told them, who by visions and 
voices, in promises and precepts, had revealed Himself 
long before to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. We learn 
what men are from what they say and from what they 
do. A biography of Luther gives a more vivid and 
trustworthy knowledge of the man than the most 
philosophical essay on his character and creed. The 
story of his imprisonment and of his journey to Worms, 
his Letters, his Sermons, and his Table-Talk, are worth 
more than the most elaborate speculations about him. 
The Jews learned what God is, not from theological 
dissertations on the Divine attributes, but from the 


20 Weighed and Wanting 


facts of a Divine history. They knew Him for them. 
selves in His own acts and His own words.” 

Some one asked an Arab: “ How do you know that 
there is a God?” ‘ How do I know whether a man or 
a camel passed my tent last night?” he replied. God’s 
footprints in nature and in our own experience are the 
best evidence of His existence and character. 


THE ISRAELITES WERE EXPOSED TO DANGER. 


Remember to whom this commandment was given, 
and we shall see further how necessary it was. The 
forefathers of the Israelites had worshipped idols, not 
many generations back. They had recently been de- 
livered out of Egypt, a land of many gods. The 
Egyptians worshipped the sun, the moon, insects, ani- 
mals, etc. The ten plagues were undoubtedly meant 
by God to bring confusion upon many of their sacred 
objects. The children of Israel were going up to take 
possession of a land that: was inhabited by heathen, 
who also worshipped idols. There was therefore great 
need of such a commandment as this. There could be 
no right relationship between God and man in those 
days any more than to-day, until man understood that 
he must recognize God alone, and not offer Him a divided 
heart. 

If He created us, He certainly ought to have our 
homage. Is it not right that He should have the first 
and only place in our affections ? 


NO COMPROMISE. 


This is one matter in which no toleration can be 
shown. Religious liberty is a good thing, within cer- 


First Commandment 21 


tain limits. But it is one thing to show toleration to 
those who’ agree on essentials, and another, to those 
who differ on fundamental beliefs. They were willing 
to admit any god to the Roman Pantheon. One reason 
why the early Christians were persecuted was that they 
would not accept a place for Jesus Christ there. Na- 
poleon is said to have entertained the idea of having 
separate temples in Paris for every known religion, so 
that every stranger should have a place of worship 
when attracted toward that city. Such plans are di. 
rectly opposed to the Divine one. God sounded no un- 
certain note in this commandment. It is plain, unmis- 
- takable, uncompromising: 

We may learn a lesson from the way a farmer deals 
with the little shoots that spring up around the trunk 
of an apple tree. They look promising, and one who 
has not learned better might welcome their growth. But 
the farmer knows that they will draw the life-sap from 
the main tree, injuring its prospects so that it will pro- 
duce inferior fruit. He therefore takes his axe and his 
hoe, and cuts away these suckers. The tree then gives 
a more plentiful and a finer crop. 


GOD’S PRUNING-KNIFE. 


“Thou shalt not” is the pruning-knife that God uses. 
From beginning to end, the Bible calls for whole- 
hearted allegiance to Him. There is to be no compro- 
mise with other gods. 

It took long years for God to impress this lesson upon 
the Israelites. He called them to be a chosen nation. 
He made them a peculiar people. But you will notice 
in Bible history that they turned away from Him con- 


, 


22 Weighed and Wanting 


tinually, and were punished with plague, pestilence, war 
and famine. Their sin was not that they renounced 
God altogether, but that they wanted to worship other 
gods beside Him. Take the case of Sulomon as an ex- 
ample of the whole nation. Ile married heathen wives 
who turned away his heart after other gods, and built 
high places for their idols, and lent countenance to 
their worship. That was the history of frequent turn- 
ings of the whole nation away from God, until finally 
He sent them into captivity in Babylon and kept them 
there for seventy years. Since then the Jews have 
never turned to other gods. 

Hasn't the church to contend with the same difficulty 
to-day? There are very few who in their hearts do not 
believe in God, but what they will not do is give Him 
exclusive right of way. Missionaries tell-us that they 
could easily get converts if they did not require them 
to be baptized, thus publicly renouncing their idols. 
Many a person in our land would become a Christian 
if the gate was not so strait. Christianity is too strict 
forthem. They are not ready to promise full allegiance 
to God alone. Many a professing Christian is a stum- 
bling-block because his worship is divided. On Sunday 
he worships God; on week days God has little or no 
place in his thoughts. 


FALSE GODS IN AMERICA TO-DAY. 


You don’t have to go to heathen lands to-day to find 
false gods. America is full of them. Whatever you 
make most of is your god. Whatever you love more 
than God is your idol. Many a man’s heart is like 
some Kaffirs’ huts, so full of idols that there is hardly 


First Commandment 23 


room to turn around. Rich and poor, learned and un- 
learned, all classes of men and women are guilty of this 
sin. ‘The mean man buweth down, and the great man 
humbleth himself.” 

A man may make a god of himself, of a child, of a 
mother, of some precious gift that God has bestowed 
upon him. He may forget the Giver, and let his heart 
go out in adoration toward the gift. 

Many make a god of pleasure; that is what their 
hearts are set on. If some old Greek or Roman came 
to life again and saw men in a drunken debauch, would 
he believe that the worship of Bacchus had died out? 
_ If he saw the streets of our large cities filled with har- 
lots, would he believe that the worship of Venus had 
ceased ? 

Others take fashion as their god. ‘They give their 
time and thought to dress. They fear what others will 
think of them. Do not let us flatter ourselves that all 
idolaters are in heathen countries. 

With many it is the god of money. We haven’t got 
through worshipping the golden calf yet. If a man 
will sell his principles for gold, isn’t he making it a god? 
If he trusts in his wealth to keep him from want and 
to supply his needs, are not riches his god? Many a 
man says, “Give me money, and I will give you heaven. 
What care I for all the glories and treasures of heaven? 
Give me treasures here! I don’t care for heaven! I 
want to be a successful business man.” How true are 
the words of Job: “If I have made gold my hope, or 
have said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence; if 
I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because 
mine hand had begotten much; if I beheld the sun 


24 Weighed and Wanting 


when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness; 
and my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth 
hath kissed my hand: this also were an iniquity to 
be punisied by the judge: for I should have denied the 
God that is above.” 

But all false gods are not as gross as these. There 
is the atheist. He says that he does not believe in God; 
he denies His existence, but he can’t help setting up 
sone other god in His place. Voltaire said, “If there 
were no God, it would be necessary to invent one.” 
So the atheist speaks of the Great Unknown, the First 
Cause, the Infinite Mind, ete. Then there is the dezst. 
He is a man who believes in one God who caused all 
things: but he doesn’t believe in revelation. He only 
accepts such truths as can be discovered by reason. 
He doesn’t believe in Jesus Christ, or in the inspira- 
tion of the Bible. Then there is the pantheist, who 
says: “I believe that the whole universe is God. He 
is in the air, the water, the sun, the stars”; the liar 
and the thief included. . 


MOSES’ FAREWELL MESSAGE. 


Let me call your attention to a verse in the thirty- 
second chapter of Deuteronomy, thirty-first verse: “ For 
their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies them- 
selves being judges.” 

These words were uttered by Moses, in his farewell 
address to Israel. He had been with them forty years. 
He was their leader and instructor. All the blessings 
of heaven came to them through him. And now the 
old man is about to leave them. If you have never 
read his speech, do so. It is one of the best sermons 


‘ 


first Commandment 25 


in print. I know few sermons in the Old or New 
Testament that compare with it. 

I can see Moses as he delivers this address. His 
natural activity has not abated. He still has the vigor 
of youth. His long white hair flows over his shoulders, 
and his venerable beard covers his breast. He throws 
down the challenge: ‘Their rock is not as our Rock, 
even our enemies themselves being judges.” 

Has the human heart ever been satisfied with these 
false gods? Can pleasure or riches fill the soul that is 
empty of God? How about the atheist, the deist, the 
pantheist 2? Whatdo they look forward to? Nothing! 
Man’s life is full of trouble; but when the billows of 
affliction and disappointment are rising and rolling 
over them, they have no God to call upon. ‘ They 
shall cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense ; 
but they shall not save them at all in the time of their 
trouble.” Therefore I contend “ their rock is not as 
our Rock.” 

My friends, when the hour of affliction comes, they 
call in a minister to give consolation. When I was 
settled in Chicago, I used to be called out to attend 
many funerals. I would inquire what the man was in 
his belief. If I found out he was an atheist, or a deist, 
or a pantheist, when I went to the funeral and in the 
presence of his friends said one word about that man’s 
doctrine, they would feel insulted. Why is it that in a 
trying hour, when they have been talking all the time 
against God—why is it that in the darkness of afflic- 
tion they call in believers in that God to administer 
consolation? Why doesn’t the atheist preach no here- 
after, no heaven, no God, in the hour of affliction ? 


26 Weighed and Wanting 


This very fact is an admission that “their rock is 
not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being 
judges.” 

The deist says there is no use in praying, because 
nothing can change the decrees of deity; God never 
answers prayer. Is his rock as our Rock? 

The Bible is true. There is only one God. How 
many men have said to me: ‘Mr. Moody, I would 
give the world if I had your faith, your consolation, 
the hope you have with your religion.” 

Isn’t that a proof that their rock is not as our Rock? 

Some years ago I went into a man’s house, and when 
I commenced to talk about religion he turned to his. 
daughter and said: ‘ You had better leave the room. 
I want to say a few words to Mr. Moody.” When she 
had gone, he opened a perfect torrent of infidelity 
upon me. “ Why did you send your daughter out of 
the room before you said this?”’ I asked. “ Well,” he 
replied, “I did not think it would do her any good to 
hear what I said.” 

Is his rock as our Rock? Would he have sent his 
daughter out if he really believed what he said? 


NO CONSOLATION EXCEPT IN GOD. 


No. There ig no satisfaction for the soul except in 
the God of the Bible. We come back to Paul’s words, 
and get consolation for time and eternity :—‘* We know 
that an idol is nothing in the world, aud that there is 
none other God but one. For though there be that are 
called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be 
gods many, and lords many,) yet to us there is but one 
God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him; 


First Commandment 29 


and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and 
we by Ilim.” 

My friend, can you say that sincerely? Is all your 
hope centred on God in Christ? Are you trusting Him 
alone? Are you ready to step into the scales and be 
weighed against this first commandment? 


WHOLE-HEARTED ALLEGIANCE. 


God will not accept a divided heart. He must be 
absolute monarch. There is not room in your heart for 
two thrones. Christ said: **No man can serve two 
masters; for either he will hate the one and love the 
other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the 
other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.” Mark 
you, He did not say—‘tNo man shall serve. . . . 
Ye shall not serve . . . .”’, but “No man can 
serve. . . . Ye can not serve. . . .” That 
means more than a command; it means that you can- 
not mix the worship of the true God with the worship 
of another god any more than you can mix oil and 
water. It cannot be done. There is not room for any 
other throne in the heart if Christ is there. If worldli- 
ness should come in, godliness would go out. 

The road to heaven and the road to hell lead in dif- 
ferent directions. Which master will you choose to 
follow? Bean ont-and-out Christian. ‘ Him only shalt 
thou serve.” Only thus can you be well pleasing to 
God. The Jews were punished with seventy years of 
captivity because they worshipped false gods. They 
have suffered nearly nineteen hundred years because 
they rejected the Messiah. Will you incur God’s dis- 
pleasure by rejecting Christ tuo? He died to save you. 


28 Weighed and Wanting 


Trust Tlim with your whole heart, for with the heart 
man believeth unto righteousness. 

I believe that when Christ has the first place in our 
hearts—when the kingdom of God is first in everything 
—we shall have power, and we shall not have power 
until we give Ilim His rightful place. If we let some 
false god come in and steal our love away from the God 
of heaven, we shall have no peace or power. 


Second Commandment 


‘THOU SHALT NOT MAKE UNTO THEE ANY GRAVEN IMAGE, 
OR ANY LIKENESS OF ANY THING THAT IS IN HEAVEN ABOVE, 
OR THAT IS IN THE EARTH BENEATH, OR THAT IS IN THE WATER 
UNDER THE EARTH: THOU SHALT NOT BOW DOWN THYSELF TO 
THEM, NOR SERVE THEM: FOR I THE LORD THY GOD AM A 
JEALOUS God, VISITING THE INIQUITY OF THE FATHERS UPON 
THE CHILDREN UNTO THE THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION OF 
THEM THAT HATE ME; AND SHEWING MERCY UNTO THOUSANDS 
OF THEM THAT LOVE ME, AND KEEP My COMMANDMENTS.”’ 


THE first commandment, which we have just consid- 
ered, points out the one true object of worship; this 
commandment is to tell us the right way in which to 
worship. The former commands us to worship God 
alone; this calls for purity and spirituality as we ap- 
proach Him. The former condemns the worship of 
false gods; this prohibits false forms. It relates more 
especially to outward acts of worship; but these are 
only the expression of what is in the heart. 

Perhaps you will say that there is no trouble about 
this weight. We might go off to other ages or other 
lands, and find people who make images and bow down 
to them; but we have none here. Let us see if this is 
true. Let us step into the scales and see if we can turn 
them when weighed against this commandment. 

I believe this is where the battle is fought. Satan 
tries to keep us from worshipping God aright, and from 
making Him first in everything. If I let some image 

29 


30 Weighed and Wanting 


made by man get into my heart and take the place of 
God the Creator, it is a sin. I believe that Satan is 
willing to have us worship anything, however sacred,— 
the Bible, the crucifix, the church,—if only we do not 
worship God Himself. 

You cannot find a place in the Bible where a man 
has been allowed to bow down and worship any one 
but the God of heaven and Jesus Christ His Son. In 
the Book of Revelation, when an angel came down to 
John, he was about to fall down and worship him, but 
the angel would not let him. If an angel from heaven 
is not to be worshipped, when you find people bowing 
down to pictures, to images, even when they bow down 
to worship the cross, it ts a sin. There are a great 
many who seem to be carried away with these things. 
“Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.” “Thou 
shalt not bow down thyself to any graven image.” God 
wants us to worship Him only, and if we do not be- 
lieve that Jesus Christ is God manifest in the flesh we 
should not worship Him. I have no more doubt about 
the divinity of Christ than I have that I exist. 

Worship involves two things: the internal belief, and 
the external act. We transgress in our hearts by hav- 
ing a wrong conception of God and of Jesus Christ be- 
fore ever we give public expression in action. As some 
one has said, it is wrong to have loose opinions as well 
as to be guilty of loose practices. ‘That is what Paul 
meant when he said: “ We ought not to thnk that the 
Godhead is like unto gold or silyer or stone, graven by 
art or man’s device.” The opinions that some people 
hold about Christ are not in accordance with the Bible, 
and are real violations of this second commandment. 


Second Commandment 31 


A QUESTION. 


The question at once arises—is this commandment 
intended to forbid the use of drawings and pictures of 
created things altogether? Some contend that it 
does. They point to the Jews and the Mohammedans 
as a proof. ‘The Jews have never been much given to 
art. The Mohammedans to this day do not use designs 
of aniinals, ete., in patterns. But I do not agree with 
them. I think God only meant to forbid images and 
other representations when these were intended to be 
used as objects of religious veneration. ‘Thou shalt 
not make unto thee. . . . Thou shalt not bow down 
thyself to them, nor serve them.” In Exodus we are 
told that God ordered the bowls of the golden candle- 
stick for the tabernacle to be made “like unto almonds, 
with a knop and a flower”; and the robe of the ephod 
had a hem on which they were to put a bell and a 
pomegranate alternately. How could God order some- 
thing that broke this second commandment? 

I believe that this commandment is a call for spiritual 
worship. It is in line with Christ’s declaration to that 
Samaritan woman—God is a spirit, and they that 
worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth.” 

This is precisely what is difficult for men to do. 
The apostles were hardly in their graves before they 
began to put up images of them, and to worship relics. 
People have a desire for something tangible, something 
that they can see. It is so much easier to live in the 
sense than in the spirit. ‘That is why there is a demand 
for ritualism. Some people are born Puritans; they 
want a simple form of worship. Others think they 


32 Weighed and Wanting 


cannot get along without forms and ceremonies that 
appeal to the senses. And many a one whose heart is 
not sincere before God takes refuge in these forms, and 
eases his conscience by making an outward show of re- 


ligion. 
The second commandment is to restrain this desire 
and tendency. S 


God is grieved when we are untrue to Him. God is 
Love, and He is wounded when our affections are trans- 
ferred to anything else. The penalty attached to this 
commandment teaches us that man has to reap what he 
sows, whether good or bad; and not only that, but his 
children have to reap with him. Notice that punish- 
ment is visited upon the children unto the third or the 
fourth generation, while mercy is shown unto thousands, 
or (as it is more correctly) unto the thousandth genera- 
tion. 


THE FOLLY OF IMAGES, 


Think for a moment, and you will see how idle it is 
to try to make any representation of God. Christians 
have tried to paint the Trinity, but how can you depict 
the Invisible? Can you draw a picture of your own 
soul or spirit or will? Moses impressed it upon Israel 
that when God spake to them out of the midst of the 
fire they saw no manner of similitude, but only heard 
His voice. 

A picture or image of God must degrade our con- 
ception of Him. It fastens us down to one idea, 
whereas we ought to grow in grace and in knowledge. 
It makes God finite. It brings Him down to our level. 
It has given rise to the horrible idols of India ard 


e 


Second Commandfnent 33 


China, because they fashion these images according to 
their own notions. How would the president feel if 
Americans made such hideous objects to resemble him 
as they make of their gods in heathen countries? 
Isaiah bore down with tremendous irony upen the fully 
of idel makers: upon the smith who fashi ned gods 
with tongs and hammers; and upon the carpenter who 
took a tree, and used part of it for a fire to warm lim- 
self and roast his meat, and made part cf it in the 
figure of a man with his rule and plave and compass, 
and called it his god and worshipped it. ‘ A deceived 
heart hath turned him aside.” 

A man must be greater than anything he js able to 
make or manufacture. What folly then to think of 
worshipping such things! 

The tendency of the human heart to represent God 
by something that appeals to the senses is the origin of 
all idolatry. It leads directly to image-worship. At 
first there may be no desire to worship the thing itself, 
but it inevitably ends in that. As Dr. MacLaren says: 
“Enlisting the senses as allies of the spirit is ri-ky 
work. They are apt to fight for their own hand when 
they once begin, and the history of all symbotical and 
ceremonial worship shows that the experiment is much 
more likely to end in sensualizing religion than in 
spiritualizing sense.” 


PICTURES AND IMAGES. 


But some one says— I find pictures are a great lie!p 
to me, and images. I know that they are not them- 
selves sacred, but they help me in my devotiovs to fix 
my thoughts on God.” © 


34 Weighed and Wanting 


When Dr. Trumbull was in Northfield, he used an 
illustration that is a good answer to this. Ile said, 
“Suppose a young man were watching from a window 
for his absent mother’s return, with a wish to eateh the 
first glimpse of her approaching face. Would he be 
wise or foolish in putting up a photograph of her on 
the window-frame before him, as a help to bear her in 
mind as he looks for her coming? As there can be no 
doubt about the answer to that question, so there can be 
uo doubt that we can best come into communion with 
God by closing our eyes to everything that can be seen 
with the natural eye, and opening the eyes of our spirit 
to the sight of God the Spirit.” 

I would a great deal sooner have five minutes com- 
munion with Christ than spend years before pictures 
and images of Him. Whatever comes between my 
soul and my Maker is not a help to me, but a hin- 
drance. God has given different means of grace by 
which we can approach Him. Let us use these, and 
not seek for other things that He has distinctly for- 
bidden. 

Dr. Dale says that in his college days he had an en- 
graving of our Lord hanging over his mantlepiece. 
“The calinness, the dignity, the gentleness, and the 
sadness of the face represented the highest conceptions 
which I had in those days of the human presence of 
Christ. I often looked at it, and seldom without being 
touched by it. I discovered in the course of a few 
months that the superstitious sentiments were gradu- 
ally clustering about it, which are always created by 
the visible representations of the Divine. The engrav- 
ing was becoming to me the shrine of God manifest in 


Second Coamandinent 35 


wie fiesh, aud I understood the growth of idolatry. 
The visible symbol is at first a symbol and nothing 
more ; it assists thougit; it stirs passion. At last it is 
identified with the God whom it represents. If, every 
day, I bow before a crucifix in prayer, if I address it as 
though it were Christ, though I know it is not, I shall 
come to feel for it a reverence and love which are of 
the very essence of idolatry.” 

Did you ever stop to think that the world has not a 
single picture of Christ that has been handed down to 
us from His disciples? Who knows what He was like? 
The Bible does not tell us how He looked, except in 
one or tivo isolated general expressions as when it says 
— His visage was so marred more than any man, and 
His form more than the sons of men.” We don't know 
anything -definite about Tlis features, the color of His 
hair and eyes, and the other details that would help te 
give a true representation. What artist can tell us? 
He left no keepsakes to Ilis disciples. His clothes 
were seized by the Roman soldiers who crucified Him. 
Not a solitary thing was left to be handed down among 
His followers. Doesn't it look as if Cliist left no 
relics lest they should be held sacred and worshipped ? 

History tells us further that the early Christians 
shrank from making pictures and statues of any kind 
of Christ. They knew Him as they had seen Him 
after His resurrection, and had promises of His con- 
tinued presence that pictures could not make any more 
real. 

I have seen very few pictures of Christ that do not 
repel me more or less. I sometimes think that it is / 
wrong to have pictures of Him at all. 


36 Weighed and Wanting 


Speaking of the crucifix Dr. Dale says: ‘It makes 
our worship and prayer unreal. We are adoring a 
Christ who does not exist. He is not on the cross 
now, but on the throne. Ilis agonies are passed for- 
ever. Ile has risen from the dead. We is at the right 
hand of God. If we pray to a dying Chiist, we are 
praying not to Christ Himself, but to a mere remem- 
brance of Him. The injury which the crucifix has 
inflicted on the religious life of Christendom, in en- 
couraging a morbid and unreal devotion, is absolutely 
incalculable. It has given us a dying Christ instead 
of a living Christ, a Christ separated from us by many 
centuries instead of a Christ nigh at hand.” 


THE INDWELLING CHRIST. 


No one can say that we have nowadays any need of 
such things. “ Behold I stand at the door, and knock: 
if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will 
come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with 
me.” If Christ is in our hearts, why need we set Him 
before our eyes? ‘Where two or three are gathered 
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.” 
If we take hold of that promise by faith, what need is 
there of outward symbols and reminders? If the King 
Himself is present, why need we bow down before 
statues supposed to represent Him? To fill His place 
with an image (some one has said,) is like blotting the 
sun out of the heavens and substituting some ether 
light in its place. ‘You cannot see Him through 
chinks of ceremonialism; or through the blind eyes of 
erring man; or by images graven with art and man’s 
device; or in cunningly devised fables of artificial an 


Second Commandment oF 


perverted theology. Nay, seek Him in His own Word, 
in the revelation of Himself which He gives to all who 
walk in His ways. So you will be able to keep that 
admonition of the last word of all the New Testament 
revelation: ‘Jittle children, keep yourselves from 
idols.’” 

I believe many an earnest Christian would be found 
wanting if put in the balances against this command- 
ment. “ Tekel” is the sentence that would be written 
against them, because their worship of God and of 
Christ. is not pure. May God open our eyes to the 
danger that is creeping more and more into public 
worship throughout Christendom! Let us ever bear 
in mind Christ’s words in the fourth chapter of John’s 
gospel, which show that true spiritual worship is not 
a matter of special times and special places because it 
is of all times and all places: 

‘“ Believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither 
in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the 
Father. But the hour cometh, and now is, when the 
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship Him. 
God is a Spirit: and they that worship Him must wor- 
ship Him in spirit and in truth.” 


Third Commandment 


«*THOU SHALT NOT TAKE THE NAME OF THE LoRD THY Gob 
IN VAIN; FOR THE LORD WILL NOT HOLD HIM GUILTLESS THAT 
TAKETH HIS NAME IN VAIN.” 


I was greatly amazed not long ago in talking to a 
man who thought he was a Christian, to find that 
once in a while, when he got angry, he would swear. I 
said: “My friend, I don’t see how you can tear down 
with one hand what you are trying to build up with 
the other. I don't see how you can profess to be a 
child of God and let those words come out of your 
lips.” 

IJe replied: “Mr. Moody, if you knew me you 
would understand. I have avery quick temper. I 
inherited it from my father and mother, and it is un- 
controllable ; but my swearing comes only from the 
lips.” 

When God said, “TI will not hold him guiltless that 
takes My name in vain,” He meant what He said, and 
I don’t believe any one can be a true child of God who 
takes the name of God in vain. What is the grace of 
God for, if it is not to give me control of my temper 
so that I shall not lose control and bring down the 
curse of God upon myself? When a man is born of 
God, God takes the “‘swear” out of him. Make the 
fountain good, and the stream will be good. Let the 
heart be right; then the language will be right; the 
whole life will be right. But no man can serve God 

38 i 


Third Commandment 39 


and keep His law until he is born of God. There we 
see the necessity of the new birth. 

To take God’s nama “in vain” means either (1) 
lightly, without thinking, flippantly ; or (2) profanely, 
deceitfully. 


y 


USING GOD’S NAME IRREVERENTLY. 


I think it is shocking to use God’s name with so 
little reverence as is common nowadays, even among 
professing Christians. We are told that the Jews held 
it so sacred that the covenant name of God was never 
mentioned amongst them except once a year by the 
high priest on the Day of Atonement, when he went 
into the holy of holies. Whata contrast that is to the 
familiar use Christians make of it in public and private 
worship! We are apt to rush into God's presence, and 
rush out again, without any real sense of the reverence 
and awe that is due Him. We forget that we are on 
holy ground. 

Do you know how often the word “reverend” oe- 
curs in the Bible? Only once. And what is it used 
in connection with? God’s name. Psalm cxi. 9: 
“ HOLY AND REVEREND 18 His NAME.” So important 
did the Jewish rabbis consider this commandment that 
they said the whole world trembled when it was first 
proclaimed on Sinai. 


USING GOD'S NAME PROFANELY. 


But though there is far too much of this frivolous, 
familiar use of God’s name, the commandment is 
broken a great deal more by profanity. Taking the 
name of God in vain is blasphemy. Is there a swear- 


40 Weighed and Wanting 


ing man who reads this? What would you do if you 
were put into the balances of the sanctuary, if you 
had to step in opposite to this third commandment ? 
Think a moment. Have you been taking God’s name 
in vain to-day ? 

I do not believe men would ever have been guilty of 
swearing unless God had forbidden it. They do not 
swear by their friends, their fathers or mothers, their 
wives or children. They want to show how they de- 
spise God's law. 

A great many men think there is nothing in swear- 
ing. Bear in mind that God sees something wrong in 
it, and He says He will not hold men guiltless, even 
though society does. 

I met a man sometime ago who told me he had 
never sinned in his life. He was the first perfect man 
I had ever met. I thought I would question him, and 
began to measure him by the law. I asked him: “ Do 
you ever get angry?” ‘ Well,” he said, “ sometimes I 
do; but I have a right to do so. It is righteous indig- 
nation.” ‘Do you swear when you get angry?” He 
admitted he did sometimes. ‘ Then,” I asked, “are 
you ready to meet God?” “Yes,” he replied, “ be- 
cause I never mean anything when I swear.” 

Suppose I steal a man’s watch and he comes after 
me. 

“Yes,” I say, “I stole your watch and pawned it, 
but I did not mean anything by it. I pawned it and 
spent the money, but [did not mean anything by tt.” 

You woild smile at and deride such a statement. 

Ah, friends! You cannot trifle with God in that 
way. Even if you swear without meaning it, it is for- 


Third Commandment 41 


bidden by God. Christ said: “ Every idle word that 
men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in 
the day of judgment; for by thy words thou shalt be 
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.” 
You will be held accountable whether your words are 
idle or blasphemous. 

A SENSELESS HABIT. 

The habit of swearing is condemned by all sensible 
persons. It has been called “the most gratuitous of 
all sins,” because no one gains by it; it is “not only. 
sinful, but useless.” An old writer said that when 
the accusing angel, who records men’s words, flies up 
to heaven with an oath, he blushes as he hands it in. 

When a man blasphemes, he shows an utter con- 
tempt for God. I was in the army during the war, and 
heard men cursing and swearing. Some godly woman 
would pass along the ranks looking for her wounded. 
son, and not an oath would be heard. They would not 
swear before their mothers, or their wives, or their sis. 
ters; they had more respect for them than they had 
for God! 

Isn’t it a terrible condemnation that swearing hel¢. 
its own until it came to be recognized as a vulgar 
thing, a sin against society? Men dropped it then, 
who never thought of its being a sin against God. 

There will be no swearing men in the kingdom of 
God. They will have to drop that sin, and repent of 
it, before they see the kingdom of God. 


HOW TO KEEP FROM SWEARING. 


Men often ask: ‘“ ITow can I keep from swearing?” 
I will tell you. If God puts His love into your 


FY 


42 Weighed and Wanting 


heart, you will have no desire to curse Him. If you 
have much regard for God, you will no more think of 
cursing Him than you would think of speaking lightly 
or disparagingly of a mother whom you love. But the 
natural man is at enmity with God, and has utter con- 
tempt for His law. When that law is written on his 
heart, there will be no trouble in obeying it. 

When I was out west about thirty years ago, I was 
preaching one day in the open air, when a man drove 
up in a fine turn-out, and after listening a little while to 
what I was saying, he put the whip to lis fine-looking 
steed, and away he went. I never expected to see him 
awain, but the next night he came back, and he kept on 
coming regularly night after night. 

I noticed that his forehead itched—yon have noticed 
people who keep putting their hands to their fore- 
heads ?—he didn’t want any one to see him shedding 
tears—of course not! It is not a manly thing to shed 
tears in a religions meeting, of course! 

After the meeting I said toa gentleman: ‘ Who is 
that man who drives up here every night? Is he inter- 
ested?” “Tnterested! I should think not! You 
should have heard the way he talked about you to- 
day.” “ Well,” I said, “ that is a sign he is interested.” 

If no man ever has anything to say against you, your 
Christianity isn’t worth much. Men said of the Mas- 
ter, “ He has a devil,” and Jesus said that if they had 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much 
more them of his household. 

I asked where this man lived, but my friend told me 
not to go to see him, for he would only curse me. I 
said: “It takes God to curse a man; man can only 


Third Commandment 43 


bring curses on his own head.” T found out where he 
lived, and went to see him. He was the wealthiest 
man within a hundred miles of that place, and had a 
wife and seven beautiful children. Just as I got to his 
gate I saw him coming out of the front door. I 
stepped up to him and said: “This is Mr. , 1 be- 
lieve?” He said: “Yes, sir; that is my name.” 
Then he straightened up and asked—“ What do you 
want?” “ Well,” I said, “I would like to ask you a 
question, if you won't be angry.” Well, what is it?” 
“IT am told that God has blessed you above all men in 
this part of the country ; that He has given you wealth, 
a beautiful Christian wife, and seven lovely children. 
I do not know if it is true, but I hear that all He gets 
in return is cursing and blasphemy.” He said, “ Come 
in; come in.” I went in. Now,” he said, “ what 
you said out there is true. If any man has a fine wife 
I am the man, and J have a lovely family of children, 
and God has been good to me. But do you know, we 
had company here the other night, and I cursed my 
wife at the table, and did not know it till after the 
company had gone. I never felt so mean and con- 
temptible in my life as when my wife told me of it. 
She said she wanted the floor to open and let her down 
out of her seat. If I have tried once, I have tried a 
hundred times to stop swearing. You preachers don’t 
know anything about it.” “ Yes,” I said, “I know all 
about it; I have been a drummer.” ‘ But,” he said, 
“you don’t know anything about a business-man’s 
troubles. When he is harassed and tormented the 
whole time, he can't help swearing.” ‘Oh, yes,” I 
said, “he can. I know something about it. I used to 





44 “Weighed and Wanting 


swear myself.” “What! You used to swear?” he 
asked; “how did you stop?” ‘I never stopped.” 
“Why, you don't swear now, do you?” “No; T have 
not sworn for years.” “How did you stop?” “T 
never stopped. It stopped itself.” ’ He said, “I don’t 
understand this.” “No,” I said, “I know you don’t. 
But I came up to talk to you, so that you will never 
want to swear again as long as you live.” 

I began to tell him about Christ in the heart; how 
that would take the temptation to swear out of a man, 

“Well,” he said, “how am I to get Christ?” “Get 
right down here and tell Him what you want.” “But,” 
he said, “I was never on my knees in my life. I have 
been cursing all the day, and I don’t know how to pray 
or what to pray for.” “ Well,” I said, “it is mortify- 
ing to have to call on God for mercy when you have 
never used His name except in oaths; but He will not 
turn you away. Ask God to forgive you if you want 
to be forgiven.” 

Then the man got down and prayed—only a few 
sentences, but thank God, it is the short prayers, after 
all, which bring the quickest answers. After he prayed 
he got up and said: “ What shall I do now?” JI said, 
“Go down to the church and tell the people there that 
you want to be an out-and-out Christian.” ‘I cannot 
do that,” he said; “I never go to church except to 
some funeral.” ‘Then it is high time for you to go 
for something else,” I said. 

After a while he promised to go, but did not know 
what the people would say. At the next church 
prayer-meeting, the man was there, and I sat right in 
front of him. He stood up and put his hands on the 


Third Commandment 45 


settee, and he trembled so much that I could feel the 
settee shake. He said: 

“My friends, you know all about me. If God can 
save a wretch like me, I want to have you pray for my 
salvation.” 

That was thirty odd years ago. Sometime ago I was 
back in that town, and did not see him; but when I 
was in California, a man asked me to take dinner with 
him. I told him that I could not do so, for I had an- 
other engagement. Then he asked if I remembered 
him, and told me his name. ‘ Oh,” I said, “tell me, 
have you ever sworn since that night you knelt in your 
drawing-room, and asked God to forgive you?” “No,” 
he replied, “I have never had a desire to swear since 
then. It was all taken away.” 

He was not only converted, but beeame an earnest, 
active Christian, and all these years has been serving 
God. That is what will take place when a man is born 
of the divine nature. 

Is there a swearing man ready to put this command- 
ment into the scales, and step in to be weighed? Sup- 
pose you swear only once in six months ora year—sup- 
pose you swear only once in ten years—do you think 
God will hold you guiltless for that act? It shows 
that your heart is not clean in Ged’s sight. What are 
you going to do, blasphemer? Would you not be found 
wanting? You would be like a feather in the balance. 


\ 


Fourth Commandment 


‘REMEMBER THE SABBATH DAY, TO KEEP IT HOLY. SIX 
DAYS SHALT THOU LABOR, AND DO ALL THY WORK: BUT THE 
SEVENTH DAY IS THE SABBATH OF THE LORD THY GOD: IN IT 
THOU SHALT NOT DO ANY WORK, THOU, NOR THY SON, NOR THY 
DAUGHTER, THY MANSERVANT, NOR THY MAIDSERVANT, NOR 
THY CATTLE, NOR THY STRANGER THAT IS WITHIN THY GATES: 
FOR IN SIX DAYS THE LORD MADE HEAVEN AND EARTH, THE 
SEA, AND ALL THAT IN THEM IS, AND RESTED THE SEVENTH 
DAY: WHEREFORE THE LORD BLESSED THE SABBATH DAY, AND 


” 


HALLOWED IT. 


THERE has been an awful letting-down in this country 
regarding the sabbath during the last twenty-five years, 
and many a man has been shorn of spiritual power, 
like Samson, becanse he is not straight on this question. 
Can you say that you observe the sabbath properly ? 
You may be a professed Christian: are you obeying 
this commandinent? Or do you neglect the house of 
God on the sabbath day, and spend your time drinking 
and carousing in places of vice and crime, showing 
contempt for God and His law? Are you ready to 
step into the scales? Where were you last sabbath? 
How did you spend it? 

I honestly believe that this commandment is just as 
binding to-day as it ever was. I have talked with men 
who have said that it has been abrogated, but they have 
never been able to point to any place in the Bible 
where God repealed it. When Christ was on earth, 
He did nothing to set it aside; He freed it from the 
traces under which the scribes and Pharisees had put 


to) 
av 


Fourth Commandment 47 


it, and gave it its true place. “ The sabbath was made 
for man, not man for the sabbath.” It is just as prac- 
ticable and as necessary for mei to-day as it ever was 
—in fact, more than ever, because we live in such an 
intense age. 

The sabbath was binding in Eden, and it has been in 
force ever since. This fourth commandment begins 
with the word “remember,” showing that the sabbath 
already existed when God wrote this law on the tables 
of stone at Sinai. IIow can men claim that this one 
commandment has been done away with when they will 
admit that the other nine are still binding? 

I believe that the sabbath question to-day is a vital 
one for the whole country. It is the burning question 
of the present time. If you give up the sabbath the 
church goes; if you give up the church the home goes; 
and if the home goes the nation goes. That is the di- 
rection in which we are traveling. 

The church of God is losing its power on account of 
so many people giving up the sabbath, and using it to 
promote selfishness. 


HOW TO OBSERVE THE SABBATH. 


“Sabbath” means “rest,” and the meaning of the 
word gives a hint as to the true way to observe the day. 
God rested after creation, and ordained the sabbath as 
a rest for man. He blessed it and hallowed it. ‘“ Re- 
member the rest-day to keep it holy.” It is the day 
when the body may be refreshed and strengthened 
after six days of labor, and the soul drawn into closer 
fellowship with its Maker. 

True observance of the sabbath may be considered 


48 Weighed and Wanting 


under two general heads: cessation from ordinary 
secular work, and religious exercises. 


I.— CESSATION FROM SECULAR WORK. 


A man ought to turn aside from his ordinary employ: 
ment one day in seven. ‘There are many whose occu- 
pation will not permit them to observe Sunday, but they 
should observe some other day as a sabbath. Saturday 
is my day of rest because I generally preach on Sun- 
day, aud I look forward to it as a boy does to a holiday. 
God knows what we need. 

Ministers and imissionaries often tell me that they 
take no rest-day; they do not need it because they are 
in the Lord’s work. That is a mistake. When God 
was giving Moses instructions about the building of the 
tabernacle, He referred especially to the sabbath, and 
gave injunctions for its strict observance; and later, 
when Moses was conveying the words of the Lord to 
the children of Israel, he interpreted them by saying 
that not even were sticks to be gathered on the sab- 
bath to kindle fires for smelting or other purposes. In 
spite of their-zeal and haste to erect the tabernacle, the 
workmen were to have their day of rest. The com- 
mand applies to ministers and others engaged in Chris- 
tian work to day as much as to those Israelite workmen 
of old. 


WORKS OF NECESSITY AND OF EMERGENCY. 


In judging whether auy work may or may not be law- 
fully done on the sabbath, find out the reason and ob- 
ject for doing it. Exceptions are to be made fur works 
of necessity and works of emergency. By “works of 


Fourth Commandment 49 


necessity’ I mean those acts that Christ justified when 
He approved of leading one’s ox or ass to water. 
Watchmen, police, stokers on board steamers, and 
many others have engagements that necessitate their 
working on the sabbath. By “works of emergency” I 
mean those referred to by Christ when He approved of 
pulling an ox or an ass out of a pit on the sabbath day. 
In case of fire or sickness a man is often called on to 
do things that would not otherwise be justifiable. 

A Christian man was once urged by his employer to 
work on Sunday. “Does not your Bible say that if 
your ass falls into a pit on the sabbath, you may pull 
him out?” “Yes,” replied the other; ‘but if the ass 
had the habit of falling into the same pit every sab- 
bath, I would either fill up the pit or sell the ass.” 

Every man must settle the question as it effects un- 
necessary work,.with his own conscience. 

No man should make another work seven days in the 
week. One day is demanded for rest. A man who has 
to work the seven days has nothing to look forward to, 
and life becomes humdrum. Many Christians are guilty 
in this respect. 


SABBATH TRAVELING. 


Take, for instance, the question of sabbath traveling. 
I believe we are breaking God's laws by using the cars 
on Sunday and depriving conductors and others of 
their sabbath. Remember the fourth commandment 
expressly refers to “the stranger that is within thy 
gates.” Doesn't that touch sabbath travel ? 

But you ask, * What are we to do? How are we 
to get to church?” 


50 Weighed and Wanting 


{ reply, on foot. It will be better for you. Once 
when I was holding meetings in London, in my igno- 
rance I made arrangements to preach four times in 
different places one sabbath. After I had made the 
appointments I found I had to walk sixteen miles; but 
I walked it, and I slept that night with a clear con- 
science. I have made it a rule never to use the cars, 
and if I have a private carriage, I insist that horse and 
man shall rest on Monday. I want no hackman to rise 
up in judgment against me. 

My friends, if we want to help the sabbath, let busi- 
ness men and Christians never patronize cars on the 
sabbath. I would hate to own stock in those compan- 
ies, to be the means of taking the sabbath from these 
men, and have to answer for it at the day of judgment. 
Let those who are Christians at any rate endeavor to 
keep a conscience void of offence on this point. 


SABBATH TRADING. 


There are many who are inclined to use the sabbath 
in order to make money faster. This is no new sin. 
The prophet Amos hurled his invectives against op- 
pressors who said, ‘ When will the new moon be gone, 
that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may 
set forth wheat?” 

Covetous men have always chafed under the re- 
straint, but not until the present time do we find that 
they have openly counted on sabbath trade to make 
money. We are told that many street car companies 
would not pay if it were not for the sabbath traffic, and 
the sabbath edition of newspapers is also counted upon 
as the most profitable. 


Fourth Commandment g1 


The railroad men of this country are breaking down 
with softening of the brain, and die at the age of fifty 
or sixty. They think their business is so important 
that they must run their trains seven days in the week. 
Business men travel on the sabbath so as to be on hand 
for business Monday morning. But if they do so God 
will not prosper them. 

Work is good for man and is commanded, “ Six days 
shalt thou labor”; but overwork and work on the sab- 
bath takes away the best thing he has. 


NECESSARY AND BENEFICIAL. 


The good effect on a nation’s health and happiness 
produced by the return of the sabbath, with its cessa- 
tion from work, cannot be overestimated. It is needed 
to repair and restore the body after six days of work. 
It is proved that a man can do more in six days than 
in seven. Lord Beaconsfield said: ** Of all divine in- 
stitutions, the most divine is that which secures a day 
of rest for man. I hold it to be the most valuable 
blessing conceded to man. It is the corner-stone of 
all civilization, and its removal might affect even the 
health of the people.” Mr. Gladstone recently told a 
friend that the secret of his long life is that amid all 
the pressure of public cares he never forgot the sab- 
bath, with its rest for the body and the soul. The con- 
stitution of the United States protects the president in 
his weekly day of rest. He has ten days, “Sundays 
excepted,” in which to consider a bill that has been 
sent to him for signature. Every workingman in the 
republic ought to be as thoroughly protected as the 
president. If workingmen got up a strike against un- 


52 Weighed and Wanting 


necessary work on the sabbath, they would have the 
sywpathy of a good many. ‘ 

“Our bodies are seven-day clocks,’ says Talmage, 
‘and they need to be wound up, and if they are not 
wound up they run down into the grave. No man can 
continuously break the sabbath and keep his physical 
and mental health. Ask aged men, and they will tell 
you they never knew men who continuously broke the 
sabbath, who did not fail in mind, body, or moral prin- 
ciples.” 

All that has been said about rest for man is true for 
working animals. God didn’t forget them in this com- 
man iment, and man should not forget them either. 


II.— RELIGIOUS ACTIVITY. 


But “rest” does not mean idleness. No man enjoys 
idleness for any length of time. When one goes on a 
vacation, one does not lie around doing nothing all the 
time. Ward work at tennis, hunting, and other pur- 
suits fills the hours. A healthy mind must find some- 
thing to do. 

Hence the sabbath rest does not mean inactivity. 
“Satan ‘finds some mischief still for idle hands to 
do.” The best way to keep off bad thoughts and to 
avoid temptation is to engage in active religious exer- 
cises. 

As regards these. we should avoid extremes. On the 
one hand we find a rigor in sabbath observance that is 
nowhere commanded in Scripture, and that reminds 
one of the formalism of the Pharisees more than of the 
spirit of the gospel. Such strictness does more harm 
than good. It repels people and makes the sabbath a 





Fourth Commandment 53 


burden. On the other hand we shouid jealously 
guard against a loose way of keeping the sabbath. 
Already in many cities it is profaned opeuly. 

When I was a boy the sabbath lasted from sundown 
on Saturday to sundown on Sunday, and I remember 
how we boys used to shout when it was over. It was 
the worst day in the week to us. I believe it can be 
made the brightest day in the week. Every child 
ought to be reared so that he shall be able to say, with 
a friend, that he would rather have the other six days 
weeded out of his memory than the sabbath of his 
childhood. 


PUBLIC WORSHIP. 


Make the sabbath a day of religious activity. First 
of all, of course, is attendance at publie worship. 
“There is a discrepancy,” says John McNeill, “ be- 
tween our creed about the sabbath day and our actual 
conduct. In many families, at ten o'clock on the sab- 
bath, attendance at church is still an open question. 
There is no open question on Monday morning— John, 
will you go to work to-day ?’” 

A minister rebuked a farmer for not attending 
church, and said, “You know Joln you are never ab- 
sent from market.” 

“O,” was the reply, “ we must go to market.” 

Some one has said that without the sabbath the 
church of Christ could not, as a visible organization, 
exist on earth. Another has said that “we need to be 
in the drill of observance as well as in the liberty of 
faith.’ Human nature is so treacherous that we are 
apt to omit things altogether unless there is some 


64. Weighed and Wanting 


special reason for doing them. A man is not likely to 
worship at all unless he has regularly appointed times 
and means for worship. Family and private devotions 
are almost certain to be omitted altogether unless one 
gets into the habit, and has a special time set apart 
daily. 


A REMINISCENCE, 


I remember blaming my mother for sending me to 
church on the sabbath. On one occasion the preacher 
had to send some one into the gallery to wake me up. 
I thought it was hard to have to work in the field all 
the week, and then to be obliged to go to church and 
hear a sermon I didn’t understand. I thought I 
wouldn’t go to church any more when I got away from 
home; but I had got so in the habit of going that I 
couldi’t stay away. After one or two sabbaths, back 
again to the house of God I went. There I first found 
Christ, and I have often said since, 

“‘ Mother, I thank you for making me go to the house 
of God when I didn’t want to go.” 

Parents, if you want your children to grow up and 
honor you, have them honor the sabbath day. Don’t 
let them go off fishing, and getting into bad company, 
or it won’t be long before they will come home and 
curse you. I know few things more beautiful than to 
see a father and mother coming up the aisle with their 
daughters and sons, and sitting down together to hear 
the Word of God. It is a good thing to have the 
children; not in some remote loft or gallery, but ina 
gocd place, well in sight. Though they cannot under- 
stand the sermon now, when they get older they won't 


Fourth Commandment 55 


desire to break away, they will continue attending pub- 
lie worship in the house of God. 

But we must not mistake the means for the end. 
We must not think that the sabbath is just for the sake 
of being able to attend meetings. There are some peo- 
ple who think they must spend the whole day at meet- 
ings or private devotions. The result is that at night- 
fall they are tired out, and the day has brought them 
no rest. The number of church services attended 
ought to be measured by the person’s ability to enjoy 
them and get good from them, without being wearied. 
Attending meetings is not the only way to observe the 
sabbath. The Israelites were commanded to keep it 
in their dwellings as well as in holy convocation. ‘The 
home, that centre of so great influence over the life 
and character of the people, ought to be made the scene 
of true sabbath observance. 


HOME OBSERVANCE. 


Jeremiah classified godless families with the heathen : 
“Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee 
not, and upon the families that call not on thy name: 
for they have eaten up Jacob, devoured him, and con- 
sumed him, and have made his habitation desolate.” 

Many mothers have written to me at one time or an- 
other to know what to do to entertain their children 
on the sabbath. The boys say, “I do wish ‘twas 
aight,” or, ‘I do hate the sabbath,” or, “I do wish the 
sabbath was over.” It ought to be the happiest day in 
the week to them, one to be looked forward to with 

pleasure. In order to this end, many suggestions 
might be followed. Make family prayers especially 


56 Weighed and Wanting 


attractive by having the children learn some verse or 
story fiuin the Bible. Give more time to your children 
than yeu can give on week days, reading to them and 
perlap~ tuking them to walk in the afternoon or even- 
ing. Show by your conduct that the sabbath is a de 
light. aid they will soon catch your spirit. Set aside 
some time tor religious instruction, without making this 
a task. You can make it interesting for the clildrer 
by telling Bible stories and askiug them to guess the 
names uf the cuaracters. Have Sunday games for the 
younger children. Picture books, puzzle maps of Pal- 
estine, ete., can be easily obtained. Sunday albums 
and Suuday clocks are other devices. Set aside attrac- 
tive bouks fur the sabbath. not letting the children have 
these during the week. By doing this, the children 
ean be brought to look forward to the day with eager- 
ness aud pleasure. 


PRIVATE OBSERVANCE. 


Apart from pubic and family observance, the indi- 
vidual ought to devote a portion of the time to hisown 
edification. Prayer, meditation, reading, ought not to 
be fergotten. Think of men devoting six days a week 
to their body, which will soon pass away, and begrudg- 
ing @ne day to the soul. whiich will live on and on for- 
ever! Is it too much fur God to ask for one day to be 
devoted to the growth and training of the spiritual 
senses, when the other senses are kept busy the other 
six days? 

If your circumstances permit, enguge in some defi- 
nite Christian werk.—such as teaching in Sunday 
school, or visiting the sick. Do all the good you can. 


Fourth Commandment 57 


Sin keeps no sabbath, and no more should good deeds. 
There is plenty of opportunity in this fallen world to 
perform works of merey and religion. Make your sab- 
bath down here a foretaste of the eternal sabbath that 
is in store for believers. 

You want power in your Christian life,do you? You 
want Holy Ghost power? You want the dew of 
heaven on your brow? You want to see men convicted 
and converted? I don't believe we shall ever have 
genuine conversions until we get straight on this law 


of God. 


SABBATH DESECRATION. 


Men seem to think they have a right to change the 
holy day into a holiday. The young have more temp- 
tations to break the sabbath than we had forty years 
ago. There are three great temptations: first, the 
trolley car, that will take you cff into the country for 
a nickel to have a day of recreation; secorid, the 
bieyele, which is leading a good many Christian men to- ; 
give up their sabbath and spend the day on excursions; _ 
and the third, the Sunday newspaper. 

Twenty years ago Christian people in Chicago would 
have been horrified if any one had prophesied that all 
the theatres would be open every sabbath; but that is 
what has come to pass. If it had been prophesied 
twenty years ago that Christian men would take a 
wheel and go off on Sunday morning and be gone all 
day on an excursion, Christians would have been horri- 
fied and would have said it was impossible ; but that is 
what is going on to-day all over the country. 


58 Weighed and Wanting 


THE SUNDAY NEWSPAPER. 


With regard to the Sunday newspaper, I know all 
the arguments that are brought in its favor—that the 
work on it is done during the week, that it is the 
Monday paper that causes Sunday work, and so on. 
But there are two hundred thousand newsboys selling 
the paper on Sunday. Would you like to have your 
boy one of them? Men are kept running trains in 
order to distribute the papers. Would you like your 
sabbath taken away from you? If not, then practise 
the Golden Rule, and don’t touch the papers. 

Their contents make them unfit for reading any day, 
not to say Sunday. Some New York dailies advertise 
Sunday editions of sixty pages. Many dirty pieces of 
scandal in this and other countries are raked up and 
put into them. “Eight pages of fun!”—that is 
splendid reading for Sunday, isn’t it? Even when a 
so-called sermon is printed, it is completely buried by 
the fiction and news matter. It is time that ministers 
went into their pulpits and preached against Sunday 
newspapers if they haven’t done it already. Put the 
man in the scales that buys and reads Sunday papers. 
After reading them for two or three hours he might go 
and hear the best sermon in the world, but you couldn't 
preach anything into him. Wis mind is filled up with 
what he has read, and there is no room for thoughts of 
God. I believe that the archangel Gabriel himself 
could not make an impression on an audience that has 
its head full of such trash. If you bored a hole intoa 
man’s head, you could not inject any thoughts of God 
and heaven. 


Fourth Commandment 59 


I don’t believe that the publishers would allow their 
own children to read them. Why then should they 
give them to my children and to yours ? 

A merchant who advertises in Sunday papers is not 
keeping the sabbath. It is a master-stroke of the devil 
to induce Christian men to do this in order to make 
trade for Monday. But if a man makes money, and 
yet his sons are ruined and his home broken up, what 
has he gained ? 

Ladies buy the Sunday papers and read the adver- 
tisements of Monday bargains to see what they can 
buy cheap. Just so with their religion. They are 

‘willing to have it if it doesn’t cost anything. 

If Christian men and women refused to buy them, if 
Christian merchants refused to advertise in them, they 
would soon die out, because that is where they get 
most of their support. 

They tell me the Sunday paper has come to stay, 
and I may as well let it alone. Never! I believe it is 
a great evil, and I shall fight it while I live. I never 
read a Sunday paper, and wouldn’t have one in my 
house. They are often sent me, but I tear them up 
without reading them. I will have nothing to do with 
them. They do more harm to religion than any other 
one agency I know. Their whole influence is against 
keeping the sabbath holy. They ‘are an unnecessary 
evil. Can't a man read enough news on week days 
without desecrating the sabbath ? We had no Sunday 
papers till the war came, and we got along very well 
withont them. They have been increasing in size and 
in number ever since then, and I think they have been 
lowering their tone ever since. If you believe that, 


60. Weighed and Wanting 


help to fight them too. Stamp them out, beginning 
with yourself. 


PUNISHMENT OR BLESSING? 


No nation has ever prospered that has trampled the 
sabbath in the dust. Show me a nation that has done 
this, and I will show you a nation that has got in it 
the seeds of ruin and decay. I believe that sabbath 
desecration will carry a nation down quicker than any- 
thing else. Adam brought marriage and the sabbath 
with him out of Eden, and neither can be disregarded 
withont suffering. When the children of Israel went 
into the Promised Land God told them to let their 
land rest every seven years, and He would give themas 
much in six years as in seven. For four hundred and 
ninety years they disregarded that law. But mark 
you, Nebuchaduezzar came and took them off irto 
Babylon, and kept them seventy years in captivity, and 
the land had its seventy sabbaths of rest. Seven times 
seventy is four hundred and ninety. So they did not 
gain much by breaking this law. You can give God 
His day, or He will take it. 

On the other hand, honoring the fourth command- 
ment brings blessing. “If thou turn away thy foot 
from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy 
day ; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the 
Lord, honorable ; and shalt honor Him, not doing thine 
own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking 
thine own words (‘thine own’ as contrasted with what 
God enjoins), then shalt thou delight thyself in the 
Lord ; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high 
places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage 


Fourth Commandment 6i 


of Jacob thy father, fur the mouth of the Lord hath 
spoken it.” 

I do not know what will become of this republic if 
we give up our Christian sabbath. If Satan can break 
the conscience down on one point, he can break it down 
on all. When I was in France in 1867, I could not 
tell one day from the other. On Sunday stores were 
open and buildings were erected, the same as on other 
days. See how quickly that country went down. One 
hundred years ago France and England stood abreast 
in the march of nations. Where do they stand to-day? 
_ France undertook to wipe out the sabbath, and has 
pretty uearly wiped itself out, while England belts the 
globe. 


A FIRM STAND. 


We have a fighting chance to save this nation, and 
what we want is men and women who have moral 
courage to stand up and say: 

“No, I will not touch the Sunday paper, and all the 
influence I have I will throw dead against it. I will 
not go away on Saturday evening if I have to travel on 
Sunday to get back. I will not do unnecessary work 
on the sabbath. I will do all I can to keep it holy as 
God commanded.” 

But some one says: “ Mr. Moody, what are you going 
to do? I have to work seven days & week or starve.” 

Then starve! Wouldn't it be a grand thing to have 
a martyr in the nineteenth century? “The blood of 
the martyrs is the seed of the church.” Some one says 
the seed is getting very low; it has been a long time 
since we have had any seed. I would give something 


62 Weighed and Wanting 


to erect a monument to such a martyr to his fidelity to 
God’s law. I would go around the world to attend his 
funeral. 

We want to-day men who will make up their minds 
to do what is right, and stand by it if the heavens tum. 
ble on their heads. What is to become of Christian 
Associations and Sunday Schools, of churches and 
Christian Endeavor Societies, if the Christian sabbath 
is given up to recreation, aud made a holiday? Hasn’t 
the time come to call a halt if men want power with 
God? Let men call you narrow and bigoted, but be 
man enough to stand by God’s law, and you will have 
power and blessing. That is the kind of Christianity 
we want just now in this country. Any man can go 
with the crowd, but we want men who will go against 
the current. 

Sabbath-breaker, are you ready to step into the 
scales ? 


Fifth Commandment 


‘‘HONOR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER: THAT THY DAYS 
MAY BE LONG UPON THE LAND WHICH THE LORD THY GOD GIv- 
ETH THEE.”’ 


WE are living in dark days on this question too. It 
really seems as if the days the apostle Paul wrote about 
are upon us: “In the last days perilous times shall 
come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves, cov- 
etous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to par- 
ents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, de- 
spisers of those that are good, . . . .” If Paul 
was alive to-day, could he have described the present 
state of affairs more truly? There are perhaps more 
men in this country that are breaking the hearts of 
their fathers and mothers, and trampling on the law of 
God, than in any other civilized country in the world. 
How many sons treat their parents with contempt, and 
make light of their entreaties? A young man will 
have the kindest care from parents; they will watch 
over him, and care for all his wants; and some bad 
companion will come in and sweep him away from them 
in a few weeks. How many young ladies have married 
against their parents’ wishes, and have gone off and 
made their own life bitter! I never knew one case 
that did not turn out badly. They invariably bring 
ruin upon themselves, unless they repent. 

63 


64 Weighed and Wanting 


BEGIN IN THE HOME. 


The first four commandments deal with our relations 
to God. They tell us how to worship and when to 
worship; they forbid irreverence and impiety in word 
and act. Now God turns to our relations with each 
other, and isn’t it significant that He deals first with 
family life? ‘God is going to show us our duty to our 
neighbor. How does He begin? Not by telling us 
how kings ought to reign, or how soldiers ought to 
fight, or how merchants ought to conduct their business, 
but how boys and girls ought to behave at home.” 

We can see that if their home life is all right, they 
are almost sure to fulfil the law both in regard to God 
and man. Parents stand in the place of God to their 
children in a great many ways until the children arrive 
at years of discretion. If the children are true to theit 
parents, it will be easier for them to be true to God. 
He used the human relationship as a symbol of our re- 
lationship to Him both by creation aud by grace. God 
is our Father in heaven. We are His offspring. 

On the other hand, if they have not learned to be 
obedient and respectful at home, they are likely to have 
little respect for the law of the land. It is all in the 
heart; and the heart is prepared at home for good or 
bad conduct outside. The tree grows the way the twig 
is bent. 

“Honor thy father and thy mother.” That word 
“honor” means more than mere obedience—a child 
may obey through fear. It means love and affection, 
gratitude, respect. We are told that in the east the 
words “father” and “ mother” include those who are 


Fifth Commandment 65 


“superiors in age, wisdom and in civil or religious sta- 
tion,” so that when the Jews were taught to honor 
their father and mother it included all who were placed 
over them in these relations, as well as their parents. 
Isn’t there a crying need for that saine feeling to-day ? 
The Jawlessness of the present time is a natural conse- 
quence of the growing absence of a feeling of respect 
for those in authority. 


HONOR THY MOTHER. 


It has been pointed out as worthy of notice that this 
commandinent enjoins honor for the mother, and yet in 
eastern countries to the present day woman is held of 
little account. When I was in Palestine a few years 
ago, the prettiest girl in Jericho was sold by her father 
in exchange for a donkey. In many ancient nations, 
just as in certain parts of heathendom to-day, the par- 
ents are killed off as soon as they become old and feeble. 
Can't we see the hand of God here, raising the woman 
to her rightful position of honor ont of the degrada- 
tion into which she had been dragged by heathenisin ? 

“Honor thy father and thy mother that thy days 
may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God 
giveth thee.” I believe that we must get back to the 
old truths. You may make light of it, and langh at it, 
young man, but remember that God has given this 
commandment, and you cannot set it aside. If we get 
back to this law, we shall have power and blessing. 


TEMPORAL BLESSING OR CURSE. 


I believe it to be literally true that our temporal con- 
dition depends on the way we act upon this command- 


66 Weighed and Wanting 


ment. “Woner thy father and mother, (which is the 
first commandment with promise), that it may be well 
with thee, and that thou mayest live long on the 
earth.” ‘Tlonor thy father and thy mother, as the 
Lord thy God hath commanded thee; that thy days 
may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, 
in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.” 
“Cursed is he that setteth light by his father or 
mother.” “ Whoso eurseth lis father or mother, his 
lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness.” It would 
be easy to multiply texts from the Bible to prove this 
truth. Experience teaches the same thing. A good, 
loving son generally turns out better than a refractory 
son. Obedience and respect at home prepare the way 
for obedience to the employer, and are joined with 
other virtues that help toward a prosperous career, 
crowned with a ripe, honored old age. Disobedience 
and disrespect for parents are often the first steps —in the 
downward track. Many a criminal has testified that 
this is the point where he first went astray, I have 
lived over sixty years, and I have learned one thing if 
I have learned nothing else—that 10 man or woman 
who dishonors father or mother ever prospers. 

Young man, young woman, how do you treat your 
parents? Tell me that, and [ will tell yon how you are 
voing to get on in life. When I hear a young man 
speaking coutemptuously of his grey-haired father or 
mother, I say he has sunk very low indeed. When I 
see a young man as polite as any gentleman can be 
when he is out in society, but who snaps up his mother 
and speaks unkindly to his father, I would not give the 
snap of my finger for his religion, If there is any man 


Fifth Commandment 67 


or woman on earth that ought to be treated kindly and 
tenderly, it is that loving mother or that loving father. 
If they cannot have your regard through life, what re- 
ward are they to have for all their care and anxiety? 
Think how they loved you and provided for you in 
your early days. 


A MOTHER'S LOVE. 


Let your mind go back to the time when you were 
il. Did your mother neglect you? When a neighbor 
came in and said, “ Now, mother, you go and lie down ; 
you have been up fora week; I will take your place 
for a night "did she do it? No; and if the poor 
worn body foreed her to it at last, she lay watching, 
and if she heard your voice, she was at your side di- 
rectly, anticipating all your wants, wiping the perspira- 
tion away from your brow. If you wanted water, how 
soon you got it! She would gladly have taken the 
disease into her own body to save you. Tler love for 
you would drive her to any lengths. No matter to 
what depths of vice and misery you have sunk, no mat- 
ter how profligate you have grown, she has not turned 
you out of her heart. Perhaps she loves you all the 
more because you are wayward. She would draw you 
back by the bands of a love that never dies. 


VILIAL INGRATITUDE. 


When I was in England, I read of a man who pro- 
fessed to be a Christian, who was brought before the 
magistrate for not supporting his aged father. He had 
let him go to the workhouse. My friends, Pd rather 
be. content with a crust of bread and a drink of water 


68 Weighed and Wanting 


than let my father or mother go to the workhouse. 
The idea of a professing Christian duing such a thing! 
God have merey on such a godless Cliristianity as that! 
Tt is a withered up thing, and the breath of heaveu will 
drive it away. Don't profess to love God and do a 
thing like that. 

A friend of mine told me of a poor man who had 
sent his son to schodl in the city. One day the father 
was hauling some wood into the city, perhaps to pay” 
his boy’s bills. The young man was walking down the 
street with two of his school friends, all dressed in 
the very height of fashion. IJlis father saw him, and 
was so glad that he left his wood, and went to the side- 
walk to speak to him. But the boy was ashamed of 
his father, who had on his old working clothes, and 
spurned him, and ae : 

“JT don’t know you.” 

Will such a young man ever amount to anything ? 
Never! 

I remember a very promising young man whom I 
had in the Sunday school in Chicago. His father was 
a confirmed drunkard, and his mother took in washing 
to educate her four children. This was her eldest son, 
and I thought that he was going to redeem the whole 
family. But one day a thing happened that made him 
go down in my estimation. 

The boy was in the high school, and was a very 
bright scholar. One day he stood with his mother at 
the cottage door—it was a poor house, but she could 
not pay for their schvoling. and feed and clothe her 
children, and hire a very good louse too, out of her earn- 
ings. When they were talking a young man from the 


Fifth Conimandment 69 


high school came up the street, and this boy walked 
away from his mother. Next day the young man said : 

“Who was that I saw you talking to yesterday ?” 

“Oh, that was my washerwoman.” 

I said: “Poor fellow! He will never amount to 
anything.” 

That was a good many yearsago. I have kept my 
eye on him. He has gone down, down, down, and 
now he is just a miserable wreck. Of course he would 
go down. Ashamed of his mother that loved him and 
toiled for him, and bore so much hardship for him! 
I cannot tell you the contempt I had for that one 
act. 

Let us look at 


A BRIGHTER PICTURE. 


Some years ago I heard of a poor woman who sent 
her boy to school and college. When he was to grad- 
uate, he wrote his mother to come, but she sent back 
word that she could not because her only skirt had 
already been turned once. She was so shabby that 
she was afraid he would be ashamed of her. He wrote 
back that he didn’t care how she was dressed, and 
urged so strongly that she went. He met her at the sta- 
tion, and took her to a nice place tostay. The day came 
for his graduation, and he walked down the broad aisle 
with that poor mother dressed very shabbily, and put 
her into one of the best seats in the house. To her 
great surprise he was the valedictorian of the class, and 
he carried everything before him. He won a prize, and 
when it was given to him, he stepped down before the 
whole audience, and kissed his mother, and said: 


70 Weighed and Wanting 


“ Tlere, mother, here is the prize. It is yours. J 
would not have had it if it had not been for you.” 

Thank God for such a man! 

The oue glimpse the Bible gives us of thirty out of 
the thirty-three years of Christ’s life on earth shows 
that He did not come to destroy this fifth command- 
ment. ‘Ihe secret of all those silent years is embodied 
in that verse in Luke’s Gospel—* And He went down 
with them and came to Nazareth, and was subject to 
them.” Did He not set an example of true filial love 
and care when in the midst of the agonies of the cross 
He made provision for His mother? Did He not con- 
demn the miserable evasions of this law by the Phari- 
sees of Ilis own day: 

“Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as it 
is written, This people honoreth me with their lips, 
but their heart is far from me. But in vain do 
they worship me, teaching as their doctrines the pre- 
ceptsof men. . . . Full welldo ye reject the com- 
mandment of God, that ye may keep your tradition. 
For Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother ; 
‘and, He that speaketh evil of father or’mothier, let him 
die the death; but ye say, If a man shall say to his 
father or his mother, That wherewith thou mightest have 
been profited by me, is Corban, (that is to say, Given to 
God), ye no longer suffer him to do aught for his 
father or his mother: making void the word of God by 
your tradition, which ye have delivered.” 

I have read of one heathen custom in China, which 
would do us credit in this so-called Christian country. 
On every New Year’s morning each man and boy, from 
the emperor to the lowest peasant, is said to pay a visit 


Fifth Commandment 73 


to his mother, carrying her a present varying in value 
according to his station in life. He thanks her for all 
she has done for him, and asks a continuance of her 
favor another year. Abraham Lincoln used to say: 
“ All I have I owe to my mother.” 

TI would rather die a hundred deaths than have my 
children grow up to treat me with scorn and contempt. 
I would rather have them honor me a thousand times 
over than have the world honor me. I would rather 
have their esteem and favor than the esteem of the 
whole world. And any man who seeks the honor and 
esteem of the world, and doesn’t treat his parents right, 
is sure to be disappointed. 


AN EXHORTATION. 


Young man, if your parents are still living treat 
them kindly. Do all you can to make their declining 
years sweet and happy. Bear in mind that this is the 
only commandment that you may not always be able to 
obey. As long as you live, you will be able to serve 
God, to keep the sabbath, to obey all the other com- 
mandments, but the day comes to most men when 
father and mother die. What bitter feelings you will 
have when the opportunity has gone by, if you fail to 
show them the respect and love that is their due! How 
long is it since you wrote to your mother? Perhaps 
you have not written home for months, or it may be 
for years. How often I get letters from mothers urg- 
ing me to try and influence their sons ! 

Which would you rather be—a Joseph or an Ab- 
salom? Joseph wasn’t satisfied until he had brought 
his old father down into Egypt. He was the greatest 


Fz Weighed and Wanting 


man in Egypt, next to Pharaoh; he was arrayed in the 
finest garments; lhe had Pharaoh's ring on his hand, 
and a gold chain about his neck, and they cried before 
him, * Bow the knee.” Yet when he heard Jacob was 
coming, he hurried out to meet him. He wasn’t 
ashamed of the old man, with his shepherd's clothes. 
What a contrast we see in Absalom. ‘That young man 
broke his father’s heart by his rebellion, and the Jews 
are said to throw a stone at Absalom’s pillar to the 
present day, whenever they pass it, as a token of their 
horror of Absalom’s unnatural conduct. 

Come, now, are you ready to be weighed? If you 
have been dishonoring your father and mother, step 
into the scales and see how quickly you will be foune 
wanting. See how quickly you will strike the beam. 
T don’t know any man who is mueh lighter than one 
who treats his parents with contempt. Do you disobey 
them just as much as you dare? Do you try to deceive 
them? Do you call them old-fashioned, and sneer at 
their advice? How do you treat that venerable father 
and praying mother? 

You may be a professing Christian, but I wouldn’t 
give much for your religion unless it gets into your life 
and teaches you how to live. I wouldn't give'a snap 
of my finger for a religion that doesn’t begin at home 
and regulate your conduct toward your parents. 


Sixth Commandment 
“THOU SHALT NOT KILL.” 


I USED to say: “What is the use of taking up a law 
like this in an audience where, probably, there isn'ta 
man who ever thought of, or ever will commit, mur- 
der?” But as one gets on in years, he sees many a - 
murder that is not outright killing. I need not alla 
person to be a murderer. If I get so angry that I wish ° 
a man dead, I am a murderer in God's sight. God 
looks at the heart and says he that hateth his brother — 
is a murderer. 

First let usesee what this commandment does not 
mean. 

It does not forbid the killing of animals for food and 
for other reasons. Millions of rams and lambs and 
turtle-doves must have been killed every year for sacri- 
fices under the Mosaic system. Christ Himself ate of 
the Passover lamb, and we are told definitely of cases 
where He ate fish Himself and provided it for His dis- 
ciples and the people to eat. 

It does not forbid the killing of burglars, etc., in 
self-defence. Directly after the giving of the Ten 
Commandments, God laid down the ordinance that if 
a thief be found breaking in and be smitten that he 
die, it was pardonable. Did not Christ justify this idea 
of self-defence when He said: “If the goodman of 
the house had known in what watch the thief would 
come, he would have watched, and would not have 
suffered his house to be broken up’’? 

73 


74 Weighed and Wanting 


It does not forbid capital punishment. God Him- 
self set the death penalty upon violations of each of the 
first. seven commandments, as well as for other crimes. 
God said to Noah after the deluge—** Whoso sheddeth 
man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed”; and the 
reason given is just as true to-day as it was then—* for 
in the image of God made He man.” 

What it does forbid is the wanton, intentional taking 
of human life under wrong motives and circumstances. 
Man is made in God’s image. Ile is built for eternity. 
He is more than a mere animal. His life ought there- 
fore to be held sacred. Once taken, it can never be 
restored. In heathen lands human Hfe is no more 
sacred than the life of animals; even in Christian lands 
there are heartless and selfish men wh® hold it cheap; 
but God has invested it with a high value. An infidel 
philosopher of the eighteenth century said: ‘In the 
sight of God every event is alike important; and the 
life of a man is of no greater importance to the universe 
than that of an oyster.” “Where is the crime,” he 
asked, “of turning a few ounces of blood out of their 
channel?” Such language needs no answer. 


THE VALUE OF A MAN. 


Let me give you a passage from II. LL. Hastings: 
“A friend of mine visited the Fiji Islands in 1844, and 
what do you suppose an infidel was worth there then? 
You could buy a man for a musket, or if you paid 
money, for seven dollars, and after you had bought him 
you could feed him, starve him, work him, whip him, 
or eat him—they generally ate them, unless they were 
so full of tobacco they could not stomach them! But 


Sixth Commandment 7S 


if you go there to-day you could not buy a man for seven 
million dollerc. There are no men for sale there now. 
What has made the difference in the price of human- 
ity? The twelve hundred Christian chapels scattered 
over that island tell the story. The people have 
learned to read that Book which says: ‘Ye were not 
redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold, 
but with the precious blood of Christ’; and since they 
learned that lescon, no man is for sale there.” 

Men tell me that the world is getting so ~uch bet- 
ter. We talk of our American civilization. We or- 
get the alarming increase or crime in our midst. It 
is said that thare is no civilized country on the globe 
where murder is so fr2quently committed and so seldom 
punished. 


SUICIDE. 


There is that other kind of murder that is increasing 
at an appalling rate among us—suicide. There have 
been infidels in all ages who have advocated it as a 
justifiable means of release from trial and difficulty ; 
yet thinking men, as far back as Aristotle, have gener- 
ally condemned it as cowardly and unjustifiable under 
any conditions. No man has a right to take his own 
life from such motives any more than the life of an- 
other. 

It has been pointed out that the Jewish race, the 
people of God, always counted length of days as a 
blessing. The Bible does not mention one single in- 
stance of a good man committing suicide. In the four 
thousand years of Old Testament history it records 
only four suicides, and only one suicide in the New 


76 Weighed and Wanting 


Testament. Sanl, king of Israel, and his armor-bearer, 
Ahithophel, Zimri and Judas Iscariot are the five cases. 
Look at the references in the Bible to see what kind of 
men they were. 


OTHER KINDS OF MURDER. 


But I want to speak of other classes of murderers 
that are very numerous in this country, although they 
are not classified as murderers. The man who is the 
cause of the death of another through criminal care- 
lessness is guilty. The man who sells diseased meat; 
the saloou-keeper whose drink has maddened the brain 
of a criminal; those who adulterate food; the employer 
who jeopardizes the lives of employees and others by 
unsafe surroundings and conditions in harmful oceupa- 
tions,—they are all guilty of blood-where life is lost as 
a consequence. 

When I was in England in 1892, I met a gentleman 
who claimed that they were ahead of us in the respect 
they had for the law. “ We hang our murderers,” he 
said, “but there isn’t one out of twenty in your country 
that is hung.” I said, “ You are greatly mistaken, 
for they walk about these two countries unhung.” 
“What do you mean?” “TJ will tell you what I mean,” 
T said; “the man that comes into my house and runs a 
dagger into my heart for my money, Is a prince compared 
with a son that takes five years to kill me and the wife 
of my bosom. A young man who comes home night 
after night drunk, and when his mother remonstrates, 
curses her grey hairs and kills her by inches, is the 
blackest kind of a murderer.” 

That kind of thing is going on constantly all around 


Sixth Commandment vise 


us. One young man at college, an only son, whose 
mother wrote to him remoustrating against his gam- 
bling and drinking habits, took the letters out of the 
post-office, and when he found that they were from 
her, he tore them up without reading them. She said, 

“T thought I would die when I found I had lost my 
hold on that son.” 

If a boy kills his mother by his conduct, you can’t 
call it anything else than murder, and he is as truly 
guilty of breaking this sixth commandment as if he 
drove a dagger to her heart. If all young wen in this 
country who are killing their parents and their wives 
by inches, should be huug this next week, there would 
be a great many funerals. 

How are you treating your parents? Come, are you 
killing them? This sixth commandment follows very 
naturally after the fifth,—* Honor thy father and thy 
mother.” Don't put any thorns in their pillows and 
make their last days miserable. Bear in mind that the 
commandment refers not only to shcoting a man down 
in cold blood; but he is the worst murderer who goes 
on, month after month, year after year, until he has 
erowded the life out of a sainted mother and put a 
godly father under the sod. 


THE WORDS OF CHRIST. 


Let us look once again at the Sermon on the Mount, 
that men think so much of, and see what Christ had to 
say: ‘Ye have heard that it has been said by tiiem of 
old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shal] kill 
shall be in dauger of the judgment: but I say unto you, 
that whosoever is angry with his brother without a 


78 Weighed and Wanting 


cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whoso- 
ever shall say to his brother, Raca, (an expression of 
contempt), shall be in danger of the council: but who- 
soever shall say, Thou fool, (an expression of condem- 
nation), shall be in danger of hell fire.’ ‘Three de- 
grees of murderous guilt,” as has been said, “all of 
which can be manifested without a blow being struck ; 
secret anger—the spiteful jeer—the open, unrestrained 
outburst of violent abusive speech.” 

Again, what does Jolin say? ‘* Whosoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer 
hath eternal life abiding in him.” 

Did you ever in your heart wish a man dead? That 
was murder. Did you ever get so angry that you 
wished any one harm? Then you are guilty. I may 
be addressing some one who is cultivating an unforgiv- 
ing spirit. That is the spirit of the murderer, and 
needs to be rooted out of your heart. 

We can only read man’s acts—what they have done. 
God looks down into the heart. That is the birthplace 
and home of the evil desires and intentions that lead 
to the transgression of all God's laws. 

Listen once more to the words of Jesus: “From 
within, out of the heart of men, proceed EVIL 
THOUGHTS — ADULTERIES — FORNICATIONS—MURDERS 
— THEFTS — COVETOUSNESS — WICK EDNESS— DECEIT— 
LASCIVIOUSNESS—AN EVIL EYE—BLASPHEMY—PRIDE 
—FOOLISHNESS. . . .” 

May God purge our hearts of these evil things, if we 
are harboring them! Ah, if many of us were weighed 
now, we should find Belshazzar’s doom written against 
us— Tekel— wanting!” 


Seventh Commandment 
‘*THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT ADULTERY.” 


AN English army-officer in India who had been liv- 
ing an impure life went around one evening to argue 
religion with the chaplain. During their talk the 
officer said : 

“Religion is all very well, but you must admit that 
there are difficulties about the miracles, for instance.” 

The chaplain knew the man and his besetting sin, and 
quietly looking him in the face, answered: 

“ Yes, there are some things in the Bible not very 
plain, I admit; but the seventh commandment is very 
plain.” 


PLAIN SPEAKING. 


I would to God I could pass over this commandment, 
but I feel that the time has come to ery aloud and spare 
not. Plain speaking about it is not very fashionable 
nowadays. ‘Teachers of religion have by common 
consent banished from their public teaching all advice, 
warning or allusion in regard to love between the 
sexes,” says Dr. Stalker. These themes are left to 
poets and novelists to handle. In an autobiography 
recently published in England, the writer attributed no 
small share of the follies and vices of his earlier years 
to his never having heard a plain, outspoken sermon oa 
this seventh commandment. 

But though men are inclined to pass it by, God is 

79 


80 Weighed and Wanting 


not silent or indifferent in regard to it. When I hear 
any one make light of adultery and licentiousness, I 
take the Bible and see how God has let His curse and 
wrath come down upon it. ’ 

“Thou shalt not commit adultery. . . . For this 
is a heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished 
by the judges. For it is a fire that consumeth to de- 
struction, and would root outall mine increase. . . . 
By means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a 
piece of bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the 
precious life. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and 
his clothes not be burned? Can one go upon hot 
coals, and his feet not be burned? So he that goeth 
in to his neighbor's wife; whosoever toucheth her shall 
not be innocent. . . . Whoso committeth adultery 
with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it 
destroyeth his own soul. A wound and dishonor shall 
he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away. 

. . . Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not 
inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived : neither 
fornicators, nor adulterers, nor ef eminate, wor abusers 
of themselves with mankind shall inherit the kingdom 
of God. . . . But fornication, ind all uncleainess, 
let it not be once named among you, as becometh 
siiuts; neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jest- 
ing, which are not convenient: but rather giving 
thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremouger, nor 
unclean person hath any inheritance in the kingdom of 
Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain 
words: for because of these things cometh the wrath 
of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not ye 
therefore partakers withthem. . . . Whoremongers 


Seventh Commandment 83 


shall have their part in the lake which burneth with 
fire aud brimstone: which is the second death. . . 
For without are whoremongers. . . .” 

These are a few of thé threatenings and warnings 
contained in the old Book, up to its closing chapter. 
It speaks plainly, without compromise. 


MARRIAGE AND THE HOME. 


This commandment is God’s bulwark around mar- 
riage and the home. Marriage is one of the institutions 
that existed in Eden; it is older than the fall. It is 
the most sacred relationship that can exist between 
human beings, taking precedence even of the relation- 
ship of the parent and child. Some one has pointed 
out that as in the beginning God created one man and 
one woian, this is the true order for all ages. Where 
family ties are disregarded and dishonored, the results 
are always fatal. The home existed before the church, 
and unless the home is kept pure and undefiled, there 
can be no family religion and the chureh is in danger. 
Adultery and licentiousness have swept nation after na- 
tion out of existence. Did it not bring fire and brim- | 
stone from heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah? What 
carried Rome into ruin? The obscene frescoes and 
statues at Pompeii and Naples tell the tale. Where 
there is no sacredness around the home, population 
dwindles; family virtues disappear’ the children are 
corrupt from their very birth; the seeds of sure decay 
are already planted. In 1895 there were twenty-five 
thousand divorces in this country. I was on one of 
the fashionable streets of a prominent city some time 
ago, where every family except two in the whole street 


82 Weighed and Wanting 


had either a son or a daughter that had been divorced. 
Divorce and debauchery go hand in hand. We are not 
gaining much in turning away from this old law, are 
we? 


THE DEVIL'S COUNTERFEIT. 


Lust is the devil’s counterfeit of love. There is 
nothing more beautiful on earth than a pure love, and 
there is nothing so blighting as lust. I do not know 
of a quicker, shorter way down to hell than by adul- 
tery and the kindred sins condemned by this command- 
ment. The Bible says that with the heart man believ- 
eth unto righteousness, but “ whoredom and wine and 
new wine take away the heart.” Lust will drive all 
natural affection out of a man’s heart. For the sake 
of some vile harlot he will trample on the feelings and 
entreaties of a sainted mother and beautiful wife and 
godly sister. 

Young man, are you leading an impure life? Sup- 
pose God's scales should drop down before you, what 
would you do? Are you fit for the kingdom of heaven? 
You know very well that you are not. You loathe 
yourself. When you look upon that pure wife or 
mother, you say, 

“What a vile wretch Tam! The harlot is bringing 
me down to an untimely and dishonored grave.” 

May God show us what a fearful sin it is! The idea 
of making light of it! Ido not know of any sin that 
will make a man run down to ruin more quickly. I 
am appalled when I think of what is going on in the 
world; of so many young men living impure lives, and 
talking about the virtue of women as if it didn’t 


Seventh Commandment 83 


amount to anything. This sin is coming in upon us 
like a flocd at the present day. In every city there is 
an army of prostitutes. Young men by hundreds are 
being utterly ruined by this accursed sin. 


THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, 


I think that the most infernal thing the sun shines 
on in America is the way woman is treated after she 
has keen ruined by a man, often under fair promises of 
marriage. Some one said that when the prodigal son 
came home he had the best robe and the fatted calf, 
but what does the prodigal daughter get? Although she 
may have been more sinned against than sinning, she is 
cast out and ostracized by society. She is condemned 
to an almost hopeless life of degradation and shame, 
sinking step by step into a loathsome grave, unless she 
hurries her doom by suicide. But the wretch who has 
ruined her in body and soul, holds his head as high as 
ever, and society attaches no stain to him. If he had 
failed to pay his gambling debts or was detected cheat- 
ing at cards, he would promptly be dropped by society; 
but he may boast of his impure life, and his compan- 
ions will think nothing of it. Parents who would not 
allow their daugliters to become acquainted with a man 
who is rude in manners, sometimes do not hesitate to 
accept the society of men who are known to be impure. 

Talk about stealing—a man who steals the virtue of 
a woman is the meanest thief that ever was on the face 
of the earth! One who goes into your house and steals 
your money is a prince compared with a vile libertine 
who takes the virtue of your sister, or stealy the 
affection of your wife, and robs you of her; no sneak- 


84 Weighed and Wanting 


thief that ever walked the earth is so mean as he, 
How men pass laws to protect their property, but when 
that which is far nearer and'dearer to them than money 
is taken, it is made light of! If a man should push a 
young lady into the river and she should be drowned, 
the law would Jay hold of him, and he would be tried 
for murder and hung. But if he wins her affection and 
ruins her, and then casts her off, isn’t he worse than a 
murderer? There are some sins that are worse thar 
murder, and that is one of them. If some one should 
treat your wife or sister so, you would want to shoot 
him as you would a dog. Why do you not respect all 
women as you do your mother and sister? “ What law 
of justice forgives the obscene bird of prey, while it 
kicks out of its path the soiled and bleeding dove?” 


’ GOD'S COMING JUDGMENT. 


God has appointed a day when this matter will be set 
right. “Be not deceived: God is not mocked: what- 
soever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” He will 
render to every man according to his deeds. You may 
walk down the aisle of the church and take your seat, 
thinking that no one knows of your sin. But God is 
on the throne, aud He will surely bring you to judg- 
ment. Do you believe that. God will allow this infernal 
thing to go on,—women bearing all the blame while 
guilty nen go unpunished? God has appointed a day 
when He will judge this world in righteousness, and 
the day is fast approaching. 

If you are guilty of this sin, do not let the day pass 
until you repent. If you are living in some secret sin, 
or are fostering impure thoughts, make up your mind 


Seventh Commandment 85 


that by the grace of God you will be delivered. I 
don’t believe a man who is guilty of this sin is ever go- 
ing to see the kingdom of God unless he repents in 
sackcloth and ashes, and does all he can to make res- 
titution. 


AN EVIL HARVEST, 


Even in this life adultery and uncleanness bring 
their awful results, both physical and mental. The 
pleasure and excitement that lead so many astray at 
the beginning soon pass away, and only the evil re- 
mains. Vice carries a sting in its tail, like the score 
pion. The body is sinned against, and the body sooner 
or later suffers. ‘ Every sin that a man doeth is with- 
out the body: but he that committeth fornication sin- 
neth against his own body,” said Paul. Nature herself 
punishes with nameless diseases, and the man goes 
down to the grave rotten, leaving the effects of his sin 
to blight his posterity. There are nations whose man- 
hood has been eaten out by this awful scourge. 

It drags a man lower than the beasts. It stains the 
memory. I believe that memory is “the worm that 
never dies,” and the memory is never cleansed of ob- 
scene stories and unclean acts. Even ifa man repents 
and reforms he often has to fight the past. 

Lust gave Samson into the power of Delilah, who 
robbed him of his strength. It led David to commit 
murder and called down upon him the wrath of God, 
and if he had not repented le would have lost heaven. 
I believe that if Joseph had responded to the entice- 
ment of Potiphar’s wife, his light would have gone out 
in darkness. 


86 Weighed and Wanting 


It ends in one or other of two ways: either in re< 
morse and shame because of the realization of the loss 
of purity, with a terrible strugele against a hard task- 
master; or in hardness of heart, brutalizing of the 
finer senses, which is a more dreadful condition. 

We hear a good deal about intemperance nowadays. 
That sin advertises itself; it shows its marks upon the 
face and in the conduct. But this hides itself away 
under the shadow of the night. A man who tampers 
with this evil goes on step by step until his character 
is blasted, his reputation ruined, his health gone, and 
his life made as dark as hell. May God wake up the 
nation to see how this awful sin is spreading! 

Will any one deny that the house of the strange 
woman is ‘the way to hell, going down to the cham- 
bers of death,” as the Bible says? Are there not men 
whose characters have been utterly ruined for this life 
through this accursed sin? Are there not wives who 
would rather sink into their graves than live? Many 
a man went with a pure woman to the altar a few years 
ago, and promised to love and cherish her. Now he 
has given his affections to some vile harlot, and brought 
ruin on his wife and children ! 


ARE YOU GUILTY? 


Young man, young woman, are you guilty, even in 
thought? Bear in mind what Christ said: ‘ Ye have 
heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt 
not commit adultery: but I say unto you, That whoso- 
ever looketh on a woman to lust after her has com- 
mitted adultery with her already in bis heart.” How 
many would repent but that they are tied hand and 


Seventh Commandment 8; 


foot, and some vile harlot, whose feet are fastened in 
hell, clings to him and says: “If you give me up, I 
will expose you!” Can you step on the scales and 
take that harlot with you? 

If you are guilty of this awful sin, escape for your 
life. Ifear God’s voice while there is yet time. Con- 
fess your sin to Him. Ask Him to snap the fetters 
that bind you. Ask Him to give you victory over 
your passions. If your right eye offends, pluck it out. 
If your right hand offends, cut it off. Shake yourself 
like Samson, and say: 

“By the grace of God I will not go down to an 
adulterer’s grave.” 

There is hope for you, adulterer. There is hope for 
you, adulteress. God will not turn you away if you 
truly repent. No matter how low down in vice and 
misery you may have sunk, you may be washed, you 
may be sanctified, you may be justified in the name of 
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Remem- 
ber what Christ said to that woman which was a sin- 
ner— Thy sins are forgiven thee; thy faith hath saved 
thee; go in peace”; and to that woman that was taken 
in adultery—* Go, and sin no more.” 


Eighth Commandment 
‘*THOU SHALT NOT STEAL.”’ 


DurinG the time of slavery, a slave was preaching 
with great power. Tis master heard of it, and sent for 
him, and said: 

“T understand you are preaching ?” 

* Yes,” said the slave. 

“Well, now,” said the master, ‘I will give you all 
she time you need, and I want you to prepare a sermon 
on the Ten Co.umandments, and to bear down espe- 
cially on steaing, because there is a great deal of steal 
ing on the plantation.” 

The slave’s countenance fell at once. He said he 
wouldn’t like to do that; there wasn’t the warmth in 
that subject there was in others. 

I have noticed that people are satisfied when you 
preach about the sins of the patriarchs, but they don’t 
like it when you touch upon the sins of to-day. That 
is coming too near home But we need to have these 
old doctrines stated over and over again in our churches. 
Perhaps it is not necessary to speak here about the 
grosser violations of this eighth commandment, because 

.the law of the land looks after these; but a man or 
- woman can steal without cracking safes and picking 
pockets. Many a person who would shrink from taking 

» , what belongs to another person, thinks nothing of steal- 
ing from the government or from large public corpora- 
tions, such as street car companies. If you steal from 
-a rich man it is as much a sin as stealing from a poor 

88 


Eighth Commandment 89 


man. If you lie about the value of things you buy, are 
you not trying to defraud the storekeeper? “It is 
naight, it is naught, saith the buyer: but when he is 
gone his way, then he boasteth.” 

On the other hand, many a person who would not 
steal himself, holds stock in companies that make dis- 
honest profits; but “though hand join in hand, the 
wicked shall not go unpunished.” 

A young man in our Bible Institute in Chicago got 
cn the grip-car, and before the conductor came around 
to take the fare, they reached the Institute and he 
jumped off without paying his fare. In thinking over 
that act he said: “That was not just right. I had 
my ride and I ought to pay the fare.” 

He remembered the face of the conductor, and he 
went to the car barns and paid him the five cents. 

“Well,” the conductor said, “you are a fool not to 
keep it.” “No,” the young man said, “I am not. I 
got the ride, and I ought to have paid for it.” “ But it 
was my business to collect it.” ‘No, it was my busi- 
ness to hand it to you.” The conductor said, “J think 
you must belong to that Bible Institute.” 

I have heard few things said of the Institute that 
pleased me so much as that one thing. Not long after 
that the conductor came to the Institute and asked the 
student to come to see him. A cottage-meeting was 
started in his house; and not only himself but a number 
of others around there were converted as a result of 
that one act. 

You can hardly take up a paper now without read- 
ing of some cashier of a bank who has become a de- 
faulter, or of some large swindling operation that has 


go Weighed and Wanting 


ruined scores, or of some breach of trust, or frandulent 
failure in business. ‘These things are going on all over 
the land. 

I would to God that we could have all gambling 
swept away. If Christian men take the right stand, 
they can check it and break it up in a great many 
places. It leads to stealing. 


WHERE THE STREAM STARTS. 


The stream generally starts at home and in the 
school. Parents are woefully lax in their condem- 
nation and punishment of the sin of stealing. The 
child begins by taking sugar, it may be. The mother 
makes light of it at first, and the child's conscience is 
violated without any sense of wrong. By and by it is 
not an easy matter to check the habit, because it grows 
and multiplies with every new commission. 

The value of the thing that is stolen has nothing to 
say to the guilt of the act. Two people were once 
arguing upon this point, and one said: “ Well, you 
will not contend that a theft of a pin and of a dollar 
are the same to God?” “When you tell me the 
difference between the value of a pin and of a dollar to 
God,” said the other, “I will answer your question.” 

The value or amount is not what is to be considered, 
but whether the act is right or wrong. Partial obedience 
is not enough: obedience must be entire. The little 
indulgences, the small transgressions are what drive re- 
ligion out of the soul. They lay the foundation for the 
grosser sins. If you give way to little temptations, you 
will not be ale to resist when great temptations come 
to you. 


Eighth Commandment g) 


GOD'S WEIGHTS. 


Extortioner, are you ready to step into the scales? 
What will you do with the condemnation of God— 
“Thou has taken usury and increase, and thou hast 
greedily gained of thy neighbor’s by extortion, and 
hast forgotten me, saith the Lord God”? 

Employer, are you guilty of sweating your em- 
ployees? Have you defrauded the hireling of his 
wages? Have you paid starvation wages? “ Thou 
shalt not oppress a hired servant that is poor and 
needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy 
strangers that are in thy land within thy gates. . . . 
What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, 
and grind the faces of the poor? saith the Lord God 
of hosts. . . . Behold, the hire of the Jaborers 
who have reaped down your fields, which is of you Lept 
back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of them which have 
reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth.” 

And you, employee, have you been honest with your 
employer? Have you robbed him of his due by wasting 
your time when he was not looking? If God should 
summon you into His presence now, what would you 
say ? 

Let the merchant step into the scales. See if you 
will prove light when weighed against the law of God. 
Are you guilty of adulterating what you sell? Do you 
substitute inferior grades of goods? Are your adver- 
tisements deceptive? Are your cheap prices made pos- 
sible by defrauding your customers either in quantity 
or in quality? Do you teach your clerks to put a 
French or an English tag on domestic manufactures, 


g2 Weighed and Wanting 


antl then sell them as imported goods? Do you tell 
them to say that the goods are all wool when you know 
they are half cotton? Do you give short weight or 
measure? See what God says in Ilis Word: “Shall I 
count them pure with the wicked balances, and with 
the bag of deceitful weights? . . . . Thou shalt 
not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small: 
thou shalt not have in thy house divers measures, a 
great aud a small: but thou shalt have a perfect and 
just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou 
have: that thy days may be lengthened in the land 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee. . . . Ye 
shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, 
in weight, or in measure. Just balances, just weights, 
a just ephah and a just hin, shall ye have.” Are you 
like those who said: “ When will the new moon be 
gone, that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we 
may set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the 
shekel great, and falsifying the balances by deceit? 
that we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for 
a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?” 

“Show me a people whose trade is dishonest,” said 
Froude, “and J will show youa people whose religion is 
asham.” Unless your religion can keep you honest in 
your business, it isn’t worth much; it isn’t the right 
kind. God is a God of righteousness, and no true fol- 
lower of His can swerve one inch to the right or left 
without disobeying Him. 


STOLEN GOODS A BURDEN. 


T heard of a boy who stole a cannon-ball from a navy- 
yard. He watched his opportunity, sneaked into the 


Eighth Commandment 93 


yard, and secured it. But when he had it, he hardly 
knew what to do with it. It was heavy, and too large 
to conceal in his pocket, so he had to put it under his 
hat. When he got home with it, he dared not show it 
to his parents, because it would have led at once to his 
detection. He said in after years it was the last thing 
he ever stole. The story is told that one of Queen 
Victoria's diamonds valued at $600,000 was stolen from 
a jeweler’: window, to whom it had been given to set. 
A few months afterward a miserable man died a mis- 
erable death in a poor lodging-house. In his pocket 
was found the diamond and a letter telling how he had 
not dared to sell it lest it should lead to his discovery 
and imprisonment. It never brought him anything but 
anxiety and pain. 

Everything you steal is a curse to you in that way. 
The sin overreaches itself. A man who takes money 
that does not belong to him never gets any lasting com- 
fort. He has no reai pleasure, for he has a guilty con- 
science. He cannot look an honest man in the face. 
He loses peace of mind here, and ali hope of heaven 
hereafter. “As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and 
hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, and not 
by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and 
at his end shall bea fool. . . . Let no mango be- 
yond and defraud his brother in any matter; because 
that the Lord is the avenger of all such.” 

I may be speaking to some clerk who perhaps took 
five cents to-day out of his employer's drawer to buy a 
cigar; perhaps he took ten cents to get a shave, and 
thinks he will put it back to-morrow—no one will ever 
know it. If you have taken a cent, you are a thief. 


94 Weighed and Wanting 


Do you ever think how those little stealings may bring 
you to ruin? Let your employer find it out. If he 
doesn’t take you into court, he will discharge you. 
Your hopes will be blasted, and it will be hard work to 
get up again. Whatever condition you are in, do not 
take a cent that does not belong to you. Rather than 
steal, go up to heaven in poverty—go up to heaven 
from the poor-house. Be honest rather than go through 
the world in a gilded chariot of stolen riches. 


RESTITUTION. 


If you have ever taken money dishonestly, you need 
not pray God to forgive you and fill you with the Holy 
Ghost until you make restitution. If you have not got 
the money now to pay back, will to do it, and God ac- 
cepts the willing mind. 

Many a man is kept in darkness and unrest because 
he fails to obey God on this point. If the plough has 
gone deep, if the repentance is true, it will bring forth 
fruit. What use is there in my coming to God until I 
am willing to make it good, like Zacchzeus, if I have 
done any man wrong or have taken anything from him 
falsely? ‘If the wicked restore the pledge, give again 
that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, with- 
out committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall 
not die. None of his sius that he hath committed shall 
be mentioned unto him.” Confession and restitution 
are the steps that lead up to forgiveness. Until you 
tread those steps, you may expect your conscience to 
be troubled, your sin to haunt you. 

I was preaching in British Columbia some years ago, 
and a young man came to me, aud wanted to become a 


Eighth Commandment 95 


Uhristian. Ie had been smuggling opium into the 
States. 

“ Well, my friend,” I said, “ I don’t think there is any 
chance for you to become a Christian until you make 
restitution.” He said, “If I attempt to do that, I will 
fall into the clutches of the law, and I will go to the 
penitentiary.” “ Well,” I replied, “ you had better do 
that than go to the judgment-seat of God with that sin 
upon your soul, and have eternal punishment. The 
Lord will be very merciful if you set your face to do 
right.” 

He went away sorrowful, but came back the next 
day, and said: “I have a young wife and child, and all 
the furniture in my house I have bought with money I 
have got in this dishonest way. If I become a Chris- 
tian, that furniture will have to go, and my wife will 
know it.” “Better Jet your wife know it, and better 
let your home and furniture go.’ ‘ Would you come 
up and see my wife?” he asked; “I don’t know what 
she will say.” 

I went up to see her, and when I told her, the tears 
trickled down her cheeks, and she said: “ Mr. Moody, 
I will gladly give everything if my husband can be- 
come a true Christian.” 

She took out her pocketbook, and handed over her 
last penny. He had a piece of land in the United 
States, which he deeded over to the government. I do 
not know in all my backward track of any living man 
who has had a better testimony for Jesus Christ than 
that man. THe had been dishonest, but when the truth 
came to him that he must make it right before God 


96 Weighed and Wanting 


would help him, he made it right and then God used 
him wonderfully. 

No amount of weeping over sin, and saying that you 
feel sorry, is going to help it unless you are willing to 
confess, and make restitution. 


Ninth Commandment 


«THOU SHALT NOT BEAR FALSE WITNESS AGAINST THY NEIGH- 
BOR.” ; 


Two out of the Ten Commandments deal with sius 
that find expression by the tongue-—-the third com- 
mandment, which furlids taking God's name in vain, 
and this ninth commandment, which forbids false wit- 
ness against our neighbor. This two-fold prohibition 
ought to impress us as a solemn warning, especially as 
we find that the pages of Scripture are full of condem- 
nation of sins of the tongue. The Psalms, Proverbs 
and the epistle of James deal largely with the subject. 


TRUTH NECESSARY. 


Organized society of a degree higher than that of the 
herding of animals and flucking of birds dey ends so 
much upon the power of speech, that withent it we 
may say society weuld be impossible. Languige is an 
essential element in the social fabric. To fu'fil its pur- 
pose it must be trustworthy. Words must command 
confidence. Anything which undermines the truth 
takes (as it were) the mortar out of the building, and 
if general, must mean ruin. Paul said—* Wherefore 
putting away lying, speak every man truth to his 
neighbor: for we are members one of another.” Nute 
athe reason given—* we are members one of ané ther.” 
All community, all union and fellowship would be 

QT 


98 Weighed and Wanting 


shattered if a man did not know whether to believe his 
neighbor or not. 

The transgressions of this commandiment are very 
varied in fourm, and very frequent. Men and women 
of all ages have to guard against them. They include 
some of the most besetting sins. David said in his 
haste—" All men are liars.” Some one has remarked 
that if he had been living nowadays, he might say it 
without haste and not be very far wide of the truth. 


PERJURY. 


The bearing of false witness is forbidden, but this 
niust not be limited merely to testimony given in the 
law court or under oath. Isu’t it a condemnation that 
men have to be put under oath in order to make sure 
of their speaking the truth? As a legal offence, per- 
jgury—the bearing of false witness when under oath— 
is one of the most serious crimes that can be commit- 
ted. Nearly every civilized uation visits it with heavy 
punishment. Unless proinptly checked, it would shake 
the very foundatious of justice. 

Lying—uttering or acting falsehcod—and slander— 
the spreading of false reports tending to destroy the 
reputation of another—are two of the most common 
violations of this commandment. 


LYING. 
We have got nowadays so that we divide lies into 
white lies and black lies, society lies, business lies, etc. 
The Word of God knows no such letting-down of the 


standard. A lie is a lie, no matter what are the cir= 
cumstances under which it is uttered, or by whom. I 


Ninth Commandment 99 


have heard that in Siam they sew up the mouth of a 
confirmed liar. I am afraid if that was the custom in 
America, a good many would suffer. Parents should 
begin with their children while they are young and 
teach them to be strictly truthful at all times. There 
is a proverb: “A lie has no legs.” It requires other 
lies to support it. Tell one lie and you are forced to 
tell others to back it up. 


SLANDER. 


You don’t like to have any one bear false witness 
against you, or help to ruin your character or reputa- 
tion: then why should you do it to others? How 
public men are slandered in this country! None es- 
cape, whether good or bad. Judgment is passed upon 
them, their family, their character, by the press and by 
individuals who know little or nothing about them. 
If one tenth that is said and written about our public 
men was true, half of them should be hung. Slander 
has been called “tongue murder.” Slanderers are com- 
pared to flies that always settle on sores, but do not 
touch a man’s good parts. 

If the archangel Gabriel should come down to earth 
and mix in human affairs, I believe his character would 
be assailed inside of forty-eight hours. Slander called 
Christ a gluttonous man and a winebibber. He claimed 
to be the Truth, but instead of worshipping Him, men 
took Him and crucified Him. 

When any one spoke evil of another in the presence 
of Peter the Great, he used promptly to stop him, and 
gay: : 

“Well, now, has he not got a bright side? Tell me 


100 Weighed and Wanting 


what you know good of him. It is easy to splash mud, 
but I would rather belp a man to keep his coat clean.” 

I need not stop to run through the whole catalogue 
of sins that are related to these three. False rumor— 
exaggeration — misrepreseutation —insinuation—gossip 
—equivocation—holding back of the truth when it is 
due and right to tell it—disparagement—perversion of 
meaning: these are common transgressions of this ninth 
commandment, differing in form and degree of guilt 
according to the motive or manner of their expression. 
They bear false witness against a man before the 
tribunal of public opinion—a court whose judgment 
none of us escape. As so much of our life is passed 
in public view, any untruth that leads to a false judg- 
ment is a grievous wrong. 


A TEST OF TRUE RELIGION. 


Government of the tongue is made the test of true 
religion by James. “If any man among you seem to 
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth 
his own heart, this man’s religion is vain. . . . For 
in matiy things we offend all. If any man offend not 
in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to 
bridle the whole body.” Just as a doctor looks at the 
tongue and can tell the condition of the bodily health, 
so a man’s words are an index of what is within. 
Truth will spring from a good heart: falsehood and 
deceit from a corrupt heart. Wheu Auanias kept back 
part of the price of the land, Peter asked him— Why 
hath Satan filled THINE HEART to lie unto the Holy 
Ghost?” Satan is the father of lies and the nromoter 
of lies. 


Ninth Commandment 101 


FOR GOOD OR EVII.. 


The tongue can be an instrument of untold good or 
incalculable evil. Some one has said that a sharp 
tongue is the only edged tool that grows keener with 
constant use. ‘Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs; like 
a sharp razor, working deceitfully. . . . They 
have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; ad- 
ders’ poison is under their lips. . . . The mouth 
of a righteous man is a well of life: but violence 
covereth the mouth of the wicked. . . . A whole- 
some tongue is a tree of life: but perverseness therein 
is a breach in the spirit. . . .” Bishop Hall said 
that the tongues of busybodies are like the tails of 
Samson’s foxes-—they carry firebrands and are enough 
to set the whole field of the world in a flame. “ Be- 
hold, we put bits in the horses’ mouths that they may 
obey us; and we turn about their whole body. Behold 
also the ships, which though they be so great, and are 
driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with 
a very small helm, whithersoever the governor listeth. 
Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasteth 
great things. Behold how great a matter a little fire 
kindleth! And the tongue is a fire, a world of in- 
iquity: so is the tongue among our. members, that it 
defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course 
of nature; and it is set on fire of hell. For every kind 
of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of things 
in the sea, is tamed and hath been tamed by mankind: 
but the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, 
full of deadly poison. Therewith bless we God, even 
the Father; and therewith curse we men, which are 


102 Weighed and Wanting 


made after the similitude of God. Out of the same 
mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, 
these things ought not so to be. Doth a fountain send 
forth at the same time sweet water and bitter? Can 
the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries? either a 
vine figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and 
fresh. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge 
among you? let him shew out of a good conversation 
his works with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have 
bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and 
lie not against the truth.” 

Blighted hopes and blasted reputations are witness 
to its awful power. In many cases the tongue has 
murdered its victims. Can we not all recall cases 
where men and women have died under the wounds of 
calumny and misrepresentation? History is ful! of 
such cases. 


WORDS NEVER CALLED BACK. 


The most dangerous thing about it is that a word 
once uttered can never be obliterated. Some one has 
said that lying is a worse crime than counterfeiting. 
There is some hope of following up bad coins until 
they are all recovered; but an evil word can never be 
overtaken. The mind of the hearer or reader has 
been poisoned, and human devices cannot reach in and 
cleanse it. Lies can never be called back. 

A woman who was well known as a scandal-monger, 
went and confessed to the priest. He gave her a ripe 
thistle-top, and told her to go out and scatter the seeds 
one by one. She wondered at the penance, but 

~obeyed; then she came and told the priest. He next 


Ninth Commandment 103 


told her to go and gather again the scattered seeds. Ot 
course she saw that it was impossible. The priest used 
it as an object-lesson to cure her of the sin of scandal- 
ous talk. 


THE FATE OF THE LIAR AND SLANDERER, 


These sins are devilish, and the Bible is severe in its 
denunciations of them. It contains many solemn 
warnings. ‘* Thou shalt destroy them that speak leas- 
ing: the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man. 

The mouth of them that speak lies shall be 
stopped. Whoso privily slandereth his neighbor, him 
will I cut off. . . . Lying lips are an abomination 
to the Lord: but they that deal truly are His delight. 

By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by 
thy words thou shalt be condemned. . . . All liars 
shall have their part in the lake which burneth with 
fire and brimstone: which is the second death.” 
Whoso loveth and maketh a lie shall i in no wise enter 
into the new Jerusalem. 


HOW TO OVERCOME. 


“But, Mr. Moody,” you say, “how can I check my- 
self? how can I overcome the habit of lying and gos- 
sip?” A lady once said to me that she had got so into 
the habit of exaggerating that her friends said they 
could never understand her. 

The cure is simple, but not very pleasant. Treat it 
as a sin, and confess it to God and the man whom you 
have wronged. As soon as you catch yourself lying, go 
straight to the person and confess you have lied. Let 
your confession be as wide as your transgression. If 


104 Weighed and Wanting 


you have slandered or lied about any one in public, let 
your confession be public. Many a person says some 
mean, false thing about another in the presence of 
others, and then tries to patch it up by going to that 
person alone. That is not making restitution. IT need 
not go to God with cunfession until I have made it 
right with that person, if it is in my power to do so; 
He will not hear me. 

Hannah Moore’s method was a sure cure for scandal. 
Whenever she was told anything derogatory of another, 
her invariable reply was: 

“Come, we will go and ask if it be true.” 

The effect was sometimes ludicrously painful. The 
tale-bearer was taken aback, stammered out a qualifica- 
tion, or begged that no notice might be taken of the 
statement. But the good lady was inexorable. Off she 
took the scandal-monger to the scandalized to make in- 
quiry and compare accounts. 

It is not likely that anybody ventured a second time 
to repeat a gossipy story to Hannah Moore. 

My friend, how is it? If God should weigh you 
against this commandment, would you be found want- 
ing? “Thou shalt not bear false witness.” Are you 
innocent or guilty ? 


Tenth Commandment 


‘‘THOU SHALT NOT COVET THY NEIGHBOR'S HOUSE, THOU 
SHALT NOT COVET THY NEIGHBOR'S WIFE, NOR HIS MANSERV- 
ANT, NOR HIS MAIDSERVANT, NOR HIS OX, NOR IIIS ASS, NOR 
ANYTHING THAT IS THY NEIGIIBOR'S,"’ 


In the twelfth chapter of Luke our Saviour lifted 
two danger signals. ‘ Beware ye of the leaven of the 
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. . . . Take heed and 
beware of covetousuess.” 

The greatest dupe the devil has in the world is the 
hypocrite; but the next greatest is the covetous man, 
“for a man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of 
the things which he possesseth.” 

I believe this sin is much stronger now than ever be- 
fore in the world’s history. We are not in the habit of 
condemning it as a sin. In his epistle to the Thessa- 
lonians Paul speaks of “the cloke of covetousness.” 
Covetous men use it as a cloke, and call it prudence, 
and foresight. Who ever heard it confessed as a sin? 
I have heard many confessions, in public and private, 
during the past forty years, but never have I heard a 
man confess that he was guilty of this sin. The Bible 
does not tell of one man who ever recovered from it, 
and in all my experience I do not recall many who have 
been able to shake it off after it had fastened on them. 
A covetous man or woman generally remains covetous 
to the very end. 

We may say that covetous desire plunged the human 
race into sin. We can trace the river back from age 

105 


106 Weighed and Wanting 


to age until we get to its rise in Eden. When Eve saw 
that the forbidden fruit was good for food and that it 
was desirable to the eyes, she partock of it, and Adam 
with her. They were not satisfied with all that Ged 
had showered upon them, but coveted the wisdom of 
gods which Satan deceitfully told them might be ob- 
tained by eating the fruit. She saw,—she desired— 
then she touk! Three steps from innocence into sin. 


A SEARCHING COMMANDMENT. 


It would be absurd for such a law as this to be 
placed upon any human statute book. It conld never 
be enforced. ‘The officers of the law would be power- 
less to detect infractions. The outward conduct may 
be regulated, but the thonghts and intents of a man 
are beyond the reach of human law. 

But God can see behind outward actions. He can 
read the thoughts of the heart. Our innermost life, 
invisible to mortal eye, is laid bare before Him. We 
cannot deceive lim by external conformity. He is 
able to detect the least transgression and shortcoming, 
so that no man can shirk detection. God cannot be 
imposed upon by the cleanness of the outside of the 
cup and the platter. 

Surely we have here another proof that the Ten 
Commandments are not of human origin, but must be 
divine. 

This commandment, then, did not, even on the sur- 
face, confine itself to visible actions as did the preced- 
ing commandments. Even before Cliist came and 
showed their spiritual sweep, men had a commandment 
that went beneath public-conduct and touched the very 


Tenth Commandment 107 


springs of action. It directly prohibited—not the 
wrong act, but the wicked desire that prompted the 
act. It forbade the evil thought, the unlawful wish. 
It sought to prevent—not ouly sin, but the desire to 
sin. In God’s sight it is as wicked to set covetous 
eyes, as it is to lay thieving hands, upon anything that 
is not ours. 

And why? Because if the evil desire can be con- 
trolled, there will be no outbreak in conduct. Desires 
have been called “actions in the egg.” The desire in 
the heart is the first step in the series that ends in ac- 
tion. Kill the evil desire, and you successfully avoid 
the ill results that would follow upon its hatching and 
development. Prevention is better than cure. 

We must not limit covetousness to the matter of 
money. The commandment is not thus Hmited; it 
reads, “Thou shalt not covet . . . anything. . 

.” That word “anything” is what will condemr 
us. Though we do not join in the race for wealtl_ 
have we not sometimes a hungry longing for our neiga- 
bor’s goodly lands—fine houses,—beautiful clothes,— 
brilliant reputation,—personal accomplishments,—eas, 
circumstances,—comfortable surroundings? Have we 
not had the desire to increase our possessions or to 
change our lot in accordance with what we see in 
others? If so, we are guilty of having broken this 
law. 


GOD'S THOUGHTS ABOUT COVETOUSNESS. 


Let us examine a few of the Bible passages that bear 
down on this sin, and see what are God’s thoughts 
about it. 


108 Weighed and Wanting 


“ Know sje not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the 
kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, 
nor idolaters, nor adullerers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of 
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, NOR COVETOUS, nor 
drunkards, nor revilers, nov extortioners, shall inherit the 
kingdom of God.” 

Notice that the covetous are named between thieves 
and drunkards. We lock up thieves, and have no 
merey on them. We loathe drunkards, and consider 
them great sinners against the law of God as well as 
the law of the laud. Yet there is far more said in the 
Bible against covetousness than against either stealing 
or drunkenness. 

Covetousness and stealing are almost like Siamese 
twins—they go together so often. In fact we might 
add lying, and make them triplets. ‘The covetous 
person is a thief in the shell. The thief is a covetons 
person out of the shell. Let a covetous person see 
something that he desires very much; let an oppor- 
tunity of taking it be offered; how very soon he will 
break through the shell and come out in his true char- 
acter as a thief.’ The Greek word translated “ covet- 
ousness” means—an inordinate desire of getting. 
When the Gauls tasted the sweet wines of Italy, they 
asked where they came from, and never rested until 
they had overrun Italy. 

“ For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean 
person, nor covetous man, who is an tdolater, hath any in- 
heritance in the kingdom of Christ and God.” 

There we have the same truth repeated ; but notice 
that covetousness is called idolatry. The covetous man 
worships Mammon, not God. 


Tenth Commandment 109 


“ Moreover thou shalt provide ov't of all the people able 
men, such as fear God, men of truth, HATING COVETOUS- 
NESS; and place such over them, to be rulers of thou- 
sands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers 
of tens.” 

Isn’t it extraordinary that Jethro, the man of the 
desert, should have given this advice to Moses? How 
did he learn to beware of covetousness? We honor 
men to-day if they are wealthy and covetuus. We 
elect them to office in church and state. We often say 
that they will make better treasurers just because we 
know them to be covetous. But in God's sight a 
covetous man is as vile and black as any thief or 
drunkard. David sail: ‘“ The wicked boasteth of his 
heart's desire, and blesseth the covetous, whom the 
Lord abhorreth.” I am afraid that many who profess 
to have put away wickedness also speak well of the 
covetous. 


A SORE EVIL. 


“ He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver ; 
nor he that loveth abundance with increase: this is also 
vanity. When goods increase, they are increased that eat 
them: and what good ts there to the owners thereof, saving 
the beholding of them with their eyes? The sleep of the 
laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but 
the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep. 
There ts a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, 
namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to thetr hurt.” 

Isn't that true? Is the covetous mau ever satisfied 
with his possessions? Aren’t they vanity? Does he 


110 Weighed and Wanting 


have peace of mind? Don’t selfish riches always bring 
hurt? 

The folly of covetousness is well shown in the fol- 
lowing extract: “If you should see a man that had 
a large pond of water, yet living in continual thirst, 
nor suffering himself to drink half a draught for fear of 
lessening his pond; if you should see him wasting his 
time and strength in fetching more water to his pond, 
always thirsty, yet always carrying a bucket of water 
in his hand, watching early and late to catch the drops 
of rain, gaping after every cloud, and running greedily 
into every mire and mud in hopes of water, and always 
studying how to make every ditch empty itself into 
the pond; if you should see him grow grey in these 
anxious labors, and at last end a thirsty life by fall- 
ing into his own pond, would you not say that such a 
one was not only the author of his own disquiet, but 
was foolish enough to be reckoned among madmen ? 
But foolish and absurd as this character is, it does not 
represent half the follies and absurd disquiets of the 
covetous man.” 

T have read of a millionaire in France, who was a 
miser. In order to make sure of his wealth, he dug a 
cave in his wine cellar so large and deep that he could 
go down into it with a ladder. The entrance had a 
door with a spring lock. After a time, he was missing. 
Search was made, but they could find no trace of him. 
At last his house was sold, and the purchaser discov- 
ered this door in the cellar. He opened it, went down, 
and found the miser lying dead on the ground, in the 
midst of his riches. The door must have shut aceiden- 
tally after him, and he perished miserably. 


Tenth Commandment lly 


A TEMPTATION AND A SNARE. 


“ They that will be, (that is, desire to be), rich fall into 
temptation and a snare, and into muny foolish and hurt- 
Sul lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.” 

The Bible speaks of the deceitfulness of two things 
—‘the deceitfulness of sin” and “ the deceitfulness of 
riches.’ Riches are like a mirage in the desert, which 
has all the appearance of satisfying, and lures on the 
traveler with the promise of water and shade; but he 
only wastes his strength in the effort to reach it. 
So riches never satisfy: the pursuit of them always 
turns out a snare. 

Lot coveted the rich plains of Sodom, and what did 
he gain? After twenty years spent in that wicked 
city, he had to escape for his life, leaving all his wealth 
behind him. 

What did the thirty pieces of silver do for Judas? 
Weren't they a snare ? 

Think of Bulaam. We is generally regarded as a 
false prophet, but I do not find that any of his prophe- 
cies that are recorded are not true; they have been lit- 
erally fulfilled. Up to a certain point his character 
shone magnificently, but the devil finally overcame 
him by the bait of covetousness. He stepped over a 
heavenly crown for the riches and honors that Balak 
promised him. He went to perdition backwards. His 
fuce was set toward God, but he backed into hell. He 
wanted to die the death of the righteous, but he did 
not live the life of the righteous. It is sud to see so 
many who know God, miss everything for riches. 

Then consider the case of Gehazi. There is another 


112 Weighed and Wanting 


man who was drowned in destruction and perdition by 
covetousness. He got more out of Naaman than he 
asked for, but he also got Naaiman’s leprosy. Think how 
he forfeited the friendship of his master Elisha, the man 
of God! So to day lifelong friends are separated by 
this accursed desire. Homes are broken up. Men are 
willing to sell out peace and happiness for the sake of 
a few dollars. 

Didn't David fall into foolish and hurtful lusts? He 
saw Bathsheba, Uriah’s wife, and she was “very beau- 
tiful to look upon,” and David became a murderer and 
an adulterer. The guilty longing hurled him into the 
deepest pit of sin. He had to reay bitterly as he had 
sowed. 

I heard of a wealthy German out west, who owned a 
lumber mill. He was worth nearly two millions of dol- 
lars, but his covetousness was so great that he once 
worked as a common laborer carrying railroad ties all 
day. It was the cause of his death. 

“And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have 
sinned ayainst the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus 
have I done: When I saw among the spoils a goodly Baby- 
lonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a 
wedye of yold of fifty shekels weiyht, then I COVETED THEM, 
and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in 
the midst of my tent, and the silver under tt.” 

He saw—he coveted—he took—he hid! The covet- 
ous eye was what led Achan up to the wicked deed 
that brought sorrow and defeat upon the camp of 
Israel. ; 

We know the terrible punishment that was meted 
out to Achan. God seems to have set danger signals 


Tenth Commandment ile: 


at the threshold of each new age. It is remarkable how 
socn the first outbreaks of covetousness occurred. 
Think of Eve in Eden, Achan just after Israel lad 
eutered the Promised Land, Ananias and Sapphira in 
the early Christian Church. 


A ROOT EXTRACTOR. 


“ For the love of money is the root of all evil. which 
while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, 
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.” 

The Revised Version translates it—“a root of all 
kinds of evil.” This tenth commandment has therefore 
been aptly called a ‘root-extractor,” because it would 
tear up and destroy this root. Deep down in our cor- 
rupt nature it has spread. No one but God can rid us 
of it. 

Matthew tells us that the deceitfulness of riches 
chokes the Word of God. Like the Mississippi river, 
which chokes up its mouth by the amount of soil it 
carries down. Isn't that true of many business-men 
today? They are so engrossed with their affairs that 
they have not time for religion. They lose sight of 
their soul and its eternal welfare in their desire to 
amass wealth. They do not even hesitate to sell their 
souls to the devil. How many a man says, ‘* We must 
make money, and if God’s law stands in the way, brush 
it aside.” 

The word “lucre” occurs five times in the New 
Testament, and each time it is called “ filthy lucre.” 

“A root of all kinds ef evil.” Yes, because what 
will not men be guilty of when prompted by the desire 
to he rich? Greed for gold leads men to commit vio- 


114 Weighed and Wanting 


lence and murder, to cheat and deceive and steal. It 
turns the heart to stone, devoid of all natural affection, 
cruel, unkind. How many families are wrecked over 
the father’s will! The scramble for a share of the 
wealth smashes them to pieces. Covetous of rank and 
position in society, parents barter sons and daughters 
in ungodly marriage. Bodily health is no considera- 
tion. ‘The uncontrollable fever for gold makes men re- 
nounce all their settled prospects, and undertake haz- 
ardous journeys—no peril can drive them back. It 
destroys faith and spirituality, turning men’s minds and 
hearts away from God. It disturbs the peace of the 
community by prompting to acts of wrong. Covetous- 
ness has more than once led nation to war against 
nation for the sake of gaining territory or other mate- 
rial resources. It is said that when the Spaniards came 
over to conquer Peru, they sent a message to the king, 
saying, ‘‘Give us gold, for we Spaniards have a disease 
that can only be cured by gold.” 

Dr. Boardman has shown how covetousness leads to 
the transgression of every one of the ccmmandments, 
and I cannot do better than quote his words: ‘ Covet- 
ing tempts us into the violation of the first command- 
ment, worshipping Mammon in addition to Jehovah. 
Coveting tempts us into a violation of the second com- 
mandment, or idolatry. The apostle Paul expressly 
identifies the covetous man with an idolater: ‘Covet- 
ousness, which is idolatry.’ Again: Coveting tempts us 
into violation of the third commandment, or sacrile- 
gious falsehood: for instance, Gehazi, lying in the mat. 
ter of his interview with Naaman the Syrian, and Ana- 
nias and Sapphira, perjuring themselves in the matter 


Tenth Commandment 115 


of the community of goods. Again: Coveting tempts 
us into the violation of the fourth commandment, or 
Sabbath-breaking. It is covetousness which encroaches 
on God's appointed day of sacred rest, tempting us to 
run trains for merely secular purposes, to vend tobacco 
and liquors, to hawk newspapers. Again: Coveting 
tempts us into the violation of the fifth commandment, 
or disrespect for authority; tempting the young man 
to deride his early parental counsels, the citizen to 
trample on civic enactments. Again: Covetousness 
tempts us into vivlation of the sixth commandment, or 
murder. Recall how Judas’ love of money lured him 
into the betrayal of his Divine Friend into the hand 
of His murderers, his lure being the paltry sum of—say 
—fifteen dollars. Again: Covetousness tempts us into 
the violation of the seventh commandment, or adultery. 
Observe how Scripture combines greed and lust. Again: 
Covetousness tempts us into the violation of the eighth 
commandment, or theft. Recall how it tempted Achan 
to steal a goodly Babylonish mantle, and two hundred 
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels 
weight. Again: Covetousness tempts us into the vio- 
lation of the ninth commandment, or bearing false wit. 
ness against our neighbor. Recall how the covetous- 
Less of Ahab instigated his wife Jezebel to employ sons 
of Belial to bear blasphemous and fatal testimony against 
Naboth, saying, ‘Thou didst curse God and the king.” 


HOW TO OVERCOME, 


You ask me how you are to cast this unclean spirit 
out of your heart? I think I can tell you. 
In the first place, make up your mind that by the 


116 Weighed and Wanting 


grace of God you will overcome the spirit of selfish- 
ness. You must overcome it, or it will overcome you. 
Paul said: ‘“Mortify therefore your members which 
are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordi- 
nate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, 
which is idolatry: for which things’ sake the wrath of 
God cometh on the children of disobedience.” 

T heard of a rich man who was asked to make a con- 
tribution on behalf of some charitable object. The 
text was quoted to him—‘“ He that hath pity upon the 
poor lendeth unto the Lord; and that which he hath 
given will He pay him again.” He said that the 
security might be good enough, but the credit was too 
long. He was dead within two weeks. The wrath of 
God rested upon him as he never expected. 

If you find yourself getting very miserly, begin to 
scatter, like a wealthy farmer in New York state I 
heard of. He was a noted miser, but he was converted. 
Soon after, a poor man who had been burned out and 
had no provisions, came to him for help. The farmer 
thought lhe would be liberal and give the man a ham 
from his smoke-house. On his way to get it, the 
tempter whispered to him: 

“Give him the smallest one you have.” 

He had a struggle whether he would give a large or 
a small ham, but finally he took down the largest he 
could find. 

“You are a fool,” the devil said. 

“Tf you don’t keep still,” the farmer replied, “I will 
give him every ham I have in the smoke house.” 

Mr. Durant told me he woke up one morning to find 
that he was a rich man, and he said that the greatest 


Tenth Commandment 117 


struggle of his life then took place as to whether he 
would let money be his master, or he be master of 
money, Whether he would be its slave, or make it a 
slave to him. At last he got the victory, and that was 
how Wellesley College came to be built. 

In the next place, cultivate the spirit of content- 
ment. ‘Let your conversation be without covetous- 
ness; and be content with such things as ye have: for 
He hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. 
So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, 
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me.” 

Contentment is the very opposite of covetousness, 
which is continually craving for something it does not 
possess. “Be content with such things as ye have,” 
not worrying about the future, because God has prom- 
ised never to leave or forsake you. What does the 
child of God want more than this? I would rather 
have that promise than all the gold of the earth. 

Would to God we might all be able to say with 
Paul—*TI have coveted no man’s silver, or gold, or 
apparel.” The Lord had made him partaker of His 
grace, and he was soon to be a partaker of Ilis glory, 
and earthly things looked very small. ‘ Godliness 
with contentment is great gain,” he wrote to Timothy; 
“having food and raiment, therewith let us be content.” 
Observe that he puts godliness first. No worldly gain 
can satisfy the human heart. Roll the whole world in, 
and still there would be room. 

May God tear the scales off our eyes if we are 
blinded by this sin. Oh, the folly of it, that we should 
set our heart’s affections upon anything below! For 
we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain 


118 Weighed and Wanting 


we can carry nothing out. . . . Be thou notafraid 
when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is 
increased; for when he dieth he shall take nothing 
away: his glory shall not descend after him.” 





The Handwriting Blotted Out 


WE have now considered the Ten Commandments, 
and the question for each one of us is—are we keeping 
them? If God should weigh us by them, would we be 
found wanting or not wanting? Do we keep the law, 
the whole law? Are we obeying God with all our 
heart? Do we render Him a full and willing obedi- 
ence? 


ONE LAW, NOT TEN. 


These ten commandments are not ten different laws; 
they are one law. If I am being held up in the air by 
a chain with ten links and I break one of them, down 
I come, just as surely as if I break the whole ten. If 
I am forbidden to go out of an enclosure, it makes no 
difference at what point I break through the fence. 
“Whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet offend 
in one point, he is guilty of all.” “The golden chain 
of obedience is broken if one Jink is missing.” 

We sometimes hear people pray to be preserved from 
certain ‘sins, as if they were in no danger of commit- 
ting others. 1 firmly believe that if a man begins by 
wilfully breaking one of these commandments it is 
much easier for him to break the others. J know-of a 
gentleman who had a confidential clerk, and insisted on 
his going down Sunday morning to work on his books. 
The young man had a good deal of principle, and at 

119 


120 Weighed and Wanting 


first refused, but he was anxious to keep in the good 
graces of his empleyer and finally yielded. Ife had 
not done that a great while before he speculated in 
stocks, and becaine a defaulter for $120,000. ‘Phe em- ° 
ployer had him arrested and put in the penitentiary for 
ten years, but I believe he was just as guilty in the 
sight of God as that young man, for he led him to take 
the first step on the downward road. You remember 
the story of a soldier who was smuggled into a for- 
tress in a load of hay, and opened the gates to his com- 
rades. Every sin we commit opens the door for other 
sins. 


ALL HAVE COME SHORT. 


For fifteen hundred years man was under the law, 
and no one was equai to it. Christ came and showed 
that the commandments went beyond the mere letter; 
and can any-one since say that he has been able to 
keep them in his own strength? As the plummet is 
held up, we sce how much we are out of the perpen: 
dicular. As we measure ourselves by that holy stand. 
ard, we find how much we are lacking. As a child 
said, when reproved by her mother and told that she 
ought to do right: “ How can I do right when there is 
no ‘right’ in me?” All have sinned and come short 
of the glory of God. There is none righteous, no, not 
one. 

I do not say that all are equally guilty of gross viola- 
tions of the commandments. It needs a certain 
amount of reckless courage openly to break a law, 
human or divine; but it is easy to crack them, as the 
child said. Jt has been remarked that the life of many 


The Handwriting Blotted Out 1 


professors of religion is full of fractures that result 
from little sins, little acts of temper and selfishness. It 
is possible to crack a costly vase so finely that it can- 
not be noticed by the observer; but let this be doue 
again and again in different directions, and some day 
the vase will go to pieces ata touch. When wehear 
of some one who has had a lifelong reputation for good 
character and consistent living, suddenly falling into 
some shameful sin, we are shocked and puzzled. If we 
knew all, we would find that only the fall has been 
sudden, that he has been sliding toward it for years. 
Away back in his life we should find numerous cracked 
commandments. His exposure is only the falling of 
the vase to pieces. 


FALSE WEIGHTS. 


Men have all sorts of weights that they think are go- 
ing to satisfy, but they will find that they are alto- 
gether vanity, and lighter than vanity. 

The moral man is as guilty as the rest. His morality 
cannot save him. “Except ye repent, ye shall all 
likewise perish. . . . Except ye be converted, and 
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the 
kingdom of heaven.” I have often heard good people 
say that our meetings were doing good, they were 
reaching the drunkards, and gamblers, and harlots ; 
but they never realized that they needed the grace of 
God for themselves. 

Nicodemus was probably one of the most moral men 
of his day. He was a teacher of the law. Yet Christ 
said to him: “ Except a man be born again, he cannot 
see the kingdom of God.” It is much easier to reach 


124 Weighed and Wanting 


was a Lamb without spot or blemish, Ilis atoning death 
is efficacious for you and me. He had no sin of His 
own to atone for, and so God accepted His sacrifice. 
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every 
one that believeth. We are righteous in God's sight 
because the righteousness of God which is by faith in 
Jesus Christ is unto all and upon all them that be- 
lieve. 

¥f we had to live forever with our sins in the hand- 
writing of God on the wall, it would be hell on earth. 
But thank God for the gospel we preach! If we re- 
pent, our sins will all be blotted out. “ You, being 
vead in your sins, hath He quickened tegether with 
fim, having forgiven you all your trespasses, blotting 
out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, 
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, 
nailing it to His cross!” 


LOVE THE FULFILLING OF THE LAW. 4 


If the love of God is shed abroad in your heart, you 
will be able to fulfil the law. Paul reduced the com- 
mandments to one: ‘ Love is the fulfilling of the law.” 
Some one has written the following : 

“Love to God will admit no other God. 

“Love resents everything that debases its object by 
representing it by an image. 

“Love to God will never dishonor His name. 

“ Love to God will reverence His day. 

“ Love to parents makes one honor them. 

“ Hate, not love, is a murderer. 

“Lust, not love, commits adultery. 

“Love will give, but never steal. 


The Handwriting Blotted Out 125 


“ Love will not slander or lie. 
‘“‘Love’s eye is not covetous.” 


ARE YOU READY? 


It is the height of madness to turn away and run the 
risk of being called by God to judgment and have no 
hope in Christ. Now is the day and hour to accept 
salvation, and then He will be with you. Do you step 
aside and say: “I’m not ready yet. I want a little 
more time to prepare, to turn the matter over in my 
mind”? Well, you have time, but bear’in mind it is 
only the present; you do not know that you will bave 
to-morrow. Wasn’t Belshazzar cut off suddenly? 
Would he have believed that that was going to be his 
last night, that he would never see the light of another 
sun? That banquet of sin dicn’t close as he expected. 
As long as you delay youare in danger. If you don’t 
enter into the kingdom of heaven by God’s way, you 
eannot enter aS au. You must accept Christ as your 
Savior, or you will never be fit to be weighed. 

My friend, have you got Him? Will you remain as 
you are and be found wanting, or will you accept Christ 
aud be ready for the summons? “This is the record, 
that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is 
in fis Som. He that hath the Son hath life: and he 
that hath not the Son of God hath not life.” 

May God open your heart to receive His Son now! 


Wo R KS. BY 648 
CAMPBELL MORGAN 


THE CRISES OF THE 
CHRIST. 


8vo, cloth, net, $2.00. 


THE SPIRIT OF Gop. 
12mo, cloth, $1.25. 

A FIRST CENTURY 

MESSAGE TO TWEN- 


TIETH CENTURY 
CHRISTIANS. 


12mo, cloth, net, $1.00. 


Gop's METHODS 
WITH Man; 


In Trme— Past, Pres- 
ENT AND FUTURE. 


With colored chart. 
12mo, paper, 50 cents, 
Cloth, $1.00, 


WHEREIN Have WE 
ROBBED Gop? 


MALACHI's MESSAGE TO 
THE MEN oF To-Day. 


12mo, cloth, 75 cents. 


Gon's PERFECT 
WILL. 
16mo, cloth, 50 cents. 


LIFE PROBLEMS, 
Littize Booxs SERIEs. 
Long 16mo, 50 cents, 

THE TEN 

COMMANDMENTS. 


Stupies in THE Law 
OF MOSES AND THE Law 
or CHRIST. 


12mo, cloth, 50 cents. 


DISCIPLESHIP. 
LitTLe Booxs Series. 
Long 16mo, cloth, 50c. 


THE HIDDEN YEARS 
AT NAZARETH. 


Quiet Hour Series. 
18mo, cloth, 25 cents. 


THE TRUE ESTI- 
MATE OF LIFE. 


12mM0, paper, 1§ cents. 
Cloth, 75 cents, net. 


“ALL THINGS NEw" 
A MessaGE To New 
ConveERTS. 
16m0, paper, 10 cents. 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMF iNY 


PUBLISHERS 





Tai 


Wiwt dh 


CHRIST SERIES 


By ANDREW MURRAY 


Wi1TH CHRIST 

IN THE 

SCHOOL OF PRAYER. 
THOUGHTS ON OUR 
TRAINING FOR THE MIn- 
ISTRY OF INTERCESSION. 


ABIDE IN CHRIST. 
THOUGHTS ON THE 
BveEssep LIFE oF FEL- 
LOWSHIP WITH THE 
Son oF Gop. 


Like CHRIST. 
THOUGHTS ON THE 
BLESSED LIFE or Con- 
FORMITY TO THE 
Son oF Gop. 


HOLY IN CHRIST. 
THOUGHTS ON THE 
CaLLinG oF Gop’s 
CHILDREN TO BE Hoty 
as He 1s Hoty. 


THE MASTER'S 

INDWELLING. 
NorTHFIELD 
ADDRESSES, 1895. 


THE SPIRIT OF 
CHRIST. 


THOUGHTS ON THE 
INDWELLING OF THE 
Hoty Spirit 

IN THE BELIEVER AND 
THE CHURCH, 


Comprising the six great 
works in connection with 
which the author attained 
such world-wide favor asa 
writer of helpful and spir- 
itual devotional works. 
The bindings are unique 
and attractive, and the 
price, which, in view of the 
fact that this is the author- 
ized edition, upon which 
royalties are paid to the 
author, was already aston- 
ishingly low, has now been 
still further reduced. 


16mo, cloth, each, 35 cts.¢ 
the set of six volumes, boxed, 
$2.00, 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 
CHICAGO NEW YORK TORONTO 


PUBLISHERS OF EVANGELICAL LITERATURB 





