Book li^3 , 

GopyiightF. 


COPYRIGHT  DEPOSm 


What  Do  The  Prophets  Say  ? 


BY 


-f^' 


C.  I.  SCOFIELD,  D.  D. 


Author  of  "Rightly  Dividing  the  Word  of  Truth,"  "The  New  Life 

in  Christ  Jesus,"  The  Scofieid  Correspondence  Bible 

Course,  etc.,  and  Editor  of  the  Scofieid 

Reference  Bible 


The  Sunday  School  Times  Company 
Philadelphia 


Copyright,  1916, 
by  The  Sunday  School  Times  Company 


Copyright,  1918, 
by   C.   I.    Scofield 


DEC  30  1S18 

^Cl.Ar)J  11.08 


To 

My  Friend 

ALWYk   BALL,    JUNIOR, 

whose  generous  fellowship  and  constant  affection 
have  done  so  much  to  make  possible  such  work 
as  I  have,  by  God's  grace,  been  enabled  to  do,  I 
dedicate  this  book  as  a  token  of  gratitude. 

C.     L    SCOFIELD. 

Easter,  igi8, 
GreyshingleSf 
Douglaston,  Long  Island,  N,  Y, 


FOREWORD 

THAT  the  human  race  is  in  a  supreme  crisis  is  obvi- 
ous to  the  dullest  intelligence.  Nothing  like  it 
has  ever  marked  the  long  life  of  humanity  on  the  earth. 
It  is  impossible  to  restrain  the  effort  to  find  the  meaning 
of  it  all.  No  one  is  really  either  satisfied  with  or  con- 
vinced by  the  easy  solutions  proposed  by  a  shallov^  op- 
timism. For  thirty  years  these  prophets  of  peace  without 
righteousness  have  assured  us  that  great  and  serious  wars 
were  ended  forever;  and  yet  we  are  in  the  greatest  and 
most  serious  of  all  wars.    What  does  it  all  mean? 

The  Christian  believes  that  somehow,  somewhere,  the 
answer  is  in  the  writings  of  the  Prophets — writings  au- 
thenticated by  Jesus  Christ  (Luke  16:31;  24:27,  44), 
and  by  hundreds  of  literal  fulfilments.  But  these  writ- 
ings, plain  and  explicit  in  themselves,  have  been  forced 
into  meanings  utterly  foreign  to  the  language  used,  in 
the  effort  to  make  them  apply  to  the  Church  instead  of 
to  Israel;  or  have  been  the  ready  resort  of  unscholarly 
fanatics. 

Surely  it  is  timely  that  a  sane  and  reasonable  inter- 
pretation of  those  writings  should  be  found.  This  book 
is  a  sincere  effort  to  present  such  an  interpretation,  after 
thirty-five  years  of  earnest  study. 


C   I.    SCOFIELD. 


Greyshingles,  Douglaston,  L.  I. 
Easter,  19 18, 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

I.  Does  theBibleThrow Light  onThisWar?      9 

II.     The  Prophet 21 

III.  The  Ethical  Message 27 

IV.  The  Messiah Z7 

V.     The  Vision  of  the  Kingdom 53 

VI.  The  Prophetic  Ministry  of  Jesus  Christ     75 

VII.  The  Prophetic  Message  of  the  Acts.  ...     99 

VIII.     Prophecy  in  the  Epistles Ill 

IX.     The  Revelation 127 

X.     The  Last  Seven  Years  of  the  Age 141 

XL     Earth's  Gk)LDEN  Age 159 


As  a  convenience  to  the  reader,  almost  every  passage  of  Scripture 
referred  to  throughout  this  hook  is  given,  in  whole  or  in  part,  in 
the  footnotes.  And  the  reader  will  find  that,  for  his  further  con- 
venience, the  same  Scripture  material  is  repeated  over  and  over 
again  in  these  footnotes,  so  that  he  may  have  constantly  before  him, 
without  having  to  turn  pages  or  look  up  references  in  his  Bible, 
the  Word  of  God  on  which  this  book  is  based. 

A  Scripture  Index  at  the  end  of  the  book  will  enable  one  to 
find  the  location  of  every  Scripture  passage  here  discussed;  the 
Topical  Index  locates  many  details  of  prophecy  on  which  God's 
Word  throws  light. 

7 


I.    DOES  THE  BIBLE  THROW  LIGHT 
ON  THIS  WAR? 

WHAT  significance,  if  any,  has  the  great  war 
now  raging  over  Europe  and  the  East  in  the 
light  of  prophecy?  May  it  be  confidently  af- 
firmed that  this  particular  war  is  mentioned  in 
the  prophetic  Word?  If  it  be  true  that  ''prophecy  is 
history  written  beforehand"  it  might  well  seem  a  strange 
thing  if  a  war  wholly  without  parallel  in  human  history 
should  be  passed  without  notice  in  the  Scriptures.  With 
such  light  as  I  have,  I  shall  try  to  meet  the  question  fairly. 
I  hold  no  new  or  peculiar  theories  of  prophetic  inter- 
pretation, nor  have  I  any  novel  doctrine  in  the  interests 
of  which  I  might  be  tempted  to  force  favorable  applica- 
tions of  obscure  predictions. 

Perhaps  no  other  one  thing  has  done  so  much  to  bring 
the  study  and  teaching  of  prophecy  into  its  present  evi- 
dent neglect  as  too  hasty  generalizations.  The  method 
is  easy;  it  dispenses  with  long  and  arduous  study  and 
reflection;  and  often  serves  to  make  a  desired  point. 
But  it  is  not  convincing,  and  the  conclusions  so  reached 
are  soon  invalidated  by  the  discovery  of  other  passages 
which  can  by  no  means  be  brought  into  harmony  with 
them. 

All  such  conclusions  are  reached  in  disregard  of  the 
great  inspired  rule  governing  prophetical  interpretation, 
'^Knowing  this  first,  that  no  prophecy  of  the  Scripture 
is  of  its  own  interpretation''  (2  Pet.  1 :  20,  Version  of 
1911), — that  is,  no  prophecy  is  to  be  interpreted  ''by 
itself,"  but  in  harmony  with  the  whole  body  of  pre- 
diction on  any  given  subject.  What  a  safeguard  of  san- 
ity that  is !  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that,  had  Peter's 
rule  been  observed  we  should  have  had,  with  some  minor 
disagreements  no  doubt,  a  majestic  consensus  of  inter- 
pretation of  the  body  of  predictive  prophecy. 


-^ 


10  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 

In  all  fairness,  however,  it  must  be  said  that  not  the 
faddists  only,  but  the  very  men  who  carefully  avoid 
every  savor  of  fanaticism,  and  pride  themselves  on  sanity 
as  their  honorable  characteristic,  have  been  sinners  also 
against  Peter's  rule.  The  common  misinterpretation  of 
the  numerous  and  explicit  predictions  of  the  Lord's  re- 
turn, that  he  comes  for  the  believer  at  death,  may  serve 
to  illustrate  this.  The  most  superficial  study  of  the 
passages  would  have  shown  that  whatever  they  mean 
they  cannot  mean  that. 

The  first  thing  which  Peter's  rule  does  for  us  is  to 
send  us  to  the  Bible  with  our  questions  about  the  future. 
We  speak  sometimes  of  ''far-seeing"  men.  Apart  from 
inspiration  there  are  no  such  men.  Merely  human  at- 
tempts to  forecast  the  future  have  always  been  put  to 
shame  by  the  event.  Urquhart  has  brought  together  a 
number  of  striking  illustrations  of  this.  At  crises  in 
human  affairs  the  ablest  men  of  the  time  have  spoken 
with  assurance  of  the  outcome.  In  no  instance  was  the 
attempt  successful.  Just  now  many  about  us  are  essay- 
ing the  never  accomplished  task.  We  are  told  that  so 
shocked  is  humanity  by  the  carnage  and  suffering  of 
the  present  struggle  that  it  will  never  tolerate  another 
war.  We  are  told  that  the  inevitable  outcome  of  this 
desperate  struggle  will  be  the  federation  of  nations  in 
*'the  United  States  of  the  World."  But,  even  if  that  come 
to  pass,  it  will  not  insure  the  peace  of  the  peoples.  The 
federation  known  as  the  United  States  of  America  did 
not  safeguard  those  States  from  a  long  and  bloody  war. 
Our  question  then  is  to  be  put  to  Holy  Writ.  If  there  is 
no  answer  there,  there  is  no  answer  anywhere. 

But  an  honest  application  of  Peter's  rule  sends  us  to 
the  whole  body  of  revealed  truth  concerning  the  future. 
Not  that  all  prophecy  has  to  do  with  the  political  future 
of  the  nations  of  the  earth ;  but  all  prophecy  must  be 
searched  that  such  parts  of  the  whole  as  bear  upon  that 
future  may  be  gathered  into  our  thought.  For  prophecy, 
like  all  revealed  truth,  is  vitally  interrelated.  Scripture 
is  to  be  thought  of  not  as  an  edifice  built  of  separate 
stones,  but  as  a  stately  tree,  built  of  interlaced  fibers — ^a 
growth,  not  a  structure.     I  propose,  therefore,  in  sub- 


DOES  THE  BIBLE  THROW  LIGHT  ON  THIS  WART    11 

sequent  chapters,  such  a  survey  of  the  prophetic  Word 
as  will  put  us  at  the  right  point  of  vision  for  the  finding 
of  our  answer.  Surely  such  an  attempt  to  see  in  due 
and  sober  proportion  what  it  has  pleased  God  to  reveal 
of  the  future  of  our  race  is  well  worth  our  thought  at 
the  present  tremendous  moment. 

To  say  what  may  be  the  significance  of  this  unprece- 
dented world-war  requires  more  than  a  citation  of  some 
supposedly  applicable  text.  For  prophecy  on  the  great 
world-scale  deals  in  epochs,  and  sweeps  centuries  into 
its  ken.  Prophecy  has  to  do  with  great  periods  called 
"ages.''  We  are  living  to-day  in  two  of  these  ages ; 
two  streams  of  prophecy  have  met  and  flow  on  together, 
but  do  not  mingle.  These  are,  the  *'Times  of  the  Gen- 
tiles,'' and  the  Church  Age. 

Of  the  first,  Daniel  is  the  chief  prophet;  of  the  sec- 
ond, Christ.  And  it  is  to  be  carefully  noted  that  Christ 
authenticates  Daniel,  and  sends  us  to  him  for  informa- 
tion (Matt.  24:15). 1 

It  is  Christ,  moreover,  who  gives  us  both  the  name 
and  the  sign  of  the  times  oi  the  Gentiles : 

''And  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled"  (Luke 
21:24). 

Obviously  the  words  refer  to  the  political  rule  of  the 
Gentiles ;  and  the  specific  sign  which  marks  the  presence 
and  continuance  of  the  rule  is  Gentile  domination  over 
Jerusalem.  This  enables  us  to  fix  with  certainty  the 
beginning  of  the  ''times  of  the  Gentiles."  For  the  first 
Gentile  overlord  of  Jerusalem  was  Necco,  king  of  Egypt 
(2  Chron.  36:3-5).^  But  his  authority  was  short  lived 
and   negligible.      With   the   conquest   of   Jerusalem  by 

^  When  ye  therefore  shall  see  Eliakim    his    brother    king    over 

the    abomination    of    desolation,  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and  turned 

spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  proph-  his    name    to    Jehoiakim.      And 

et,  stand  in  the  holy  place,  (who-  Necho  took  Jehoahaz  his  broth- 

so  readeth,  let  him  understand:)  er,  and  carried  him  to  Egypt. 

— Matt.   24  :  15.  Jehoiakim  was  twenty  and  five 

*And   the   king   of   Egypt   put  years    old    when,  he    began    to 

him     down     at    Jerusalem,     and  reign,     and    he    reigned    eleven 

condemned   the   land   in   a  hun-  years  in  Jerusalem :   and  he  did 

dred  talents  of  silver  and  a  tal-  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight 

ent   of   gold.  of  the  Lord  his  God. — 2  Chron. 

And  the  king  of  Egypt  made  36 :  3-5. 


12  V/HAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYF 

Nebuchadnezzar,  606  B.  C,  began  the  period,  of  more 
than  two  thousand  five  hundred  years'  duration,  in  which 
we  are  Hving,  and  of  which  the  present  world-war  may 
be  the  beginning  of  the  end. 

Two  things  mark  in  Scripture  the  beginning  of  a 
new  dispensation — miracle,  and  a  new  prophetic  revela- 
tion. With  the  captivity  of  Judah  began  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  it  was  then,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
rule  of  the  Gentiles  over  the  earth,  that  to  Daniel  was 
revealed  in  broad  outline  the  whole  course  of  that  epoch, 
and  with  minute  detail  its  end  (Dan.  2:1-45;  7:1-27; 
9:20-27;  11:36  to  12:3).^ 

The  outline  of  Gentile  world  rule  is  simple.  Four 
great  empires  are  to  dominate  the  scene;  and  these  are 
of  easy  identification  to  the  student  of  history,  first,  by 
the  order  of  their  succession,  and,  secondly,  by  the  char- 
acteristics given  them  in  the  prophecy.  Empires  in  just 
the  order  given  by  Daniel  have  arisen,  haz^e  possessed 
the  characters  ascribed  to  them  by  Daniel,  and  have 
passed  away.  The  event  has  exactly  justified  the  fore- 
view.  The  Babylon  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  Medo-Persia, 
the  Greece  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  Rome  have  come 
and  gone. 

And  still  not  altogether  gone.  Strange  as  the  state- 
ment may  at  first  sight  seem,  we  are  not  done  wdth  the 
Roman  Empire  yet. 

According  to  the  Danielic  foreview  the  fourth  or 
Roman  Empire  passes  through  four  distinct  phases. 
These  are : 

1.  The  "iron"  period  (Dan.  2:40;  7:7),''  fulfilled  in 
the  history  of  Rome  during  the  centuries  of  grov/th, 
union,  and  conquest. 

2.  The  division  into  two,  symbolized  by  the  two  legs 

^  This     Scripture     material     is  After  this  I   saw  in  the  night 

discussed   in  detail   in  the  later  visions,     and     behold     a     fourth 

chapters.  beast,  dreadful  and  terrible,  and 

*  And  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  strong   exceedingly  ;    and    it   had 

be  strong  as  iron  :  forasmuch  as  great  iron  teeth  :  it  devoured  and 

iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and  sub-  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped  the 

dueth    all    things:    and    as    iron  residue  with  the  feet  of  it:  and 

that   breaketh   all  these,   shall   it  it     zvas     diverse     from     all     the 

break    in    pieces    and    bruise. —  beasts  that  were  before  it ;  and 

Dan.  2:40.  it  had  ten  horns. — Dan,  7:  7' 


DOES  THE  BIBLE  THROW  LIGHT  ON  THIS  WAR?    13 

of  the  Image  Vision  and  fulfilled  in  the  division  of  the 
empire  into  Eastern  and  Western. 

3.  The  period  of  further  division  and  of  deterioration 
(2:41,  42)^  resulting  in  the  present  national  world- 
system  with  the  iron  of  the  imperium  mingled  with  the 
''brittle"  (not  ''miry/'  as  in  Authorized  Version)  element 
of  the  fluctuant  popular  will,  as  in  the  constitutional 
monarchies  and  republics  which  have  come  into  exist- 
ence in  that  which  was  formerly  the  great  fourth  Em- 
pire of  Rome.  Thus,  by  a  necessary  historical  sequence 
not  at  all  depending  on  some  arbitrary  system  of  sup- 
posed chronology  based  upon  the  dates  of  the  decrees 
of  Cyrus  or  Darius,  we  are  brought  down  to  our  own 
time.  The  division  territorially,  and  deterioration  in 
respect  of  power  held  to  obedience  to  one  will,  has  come 
to  pass.  We  are  living  in  the  day  of  it,  and  it  is  the 
nations  formed  out  of  ancient  Rome  that  are  (with  the 
exception  of  Russia)  engaged  to-day  in  the  war  of  wars 
— which  may  indeed  be  the  death  struggle  of  the  present 
world  system. 

For  the  Prophecy  of  Daniel,  confirmed  by  our  Lord's 
own  testimony,  and  reinforced  by  that  other  great  book 
of  the  end-time.  The  Revelation,  is  clear  that  what  fol- 
lows the  Third  Period  of  the  Fourth  Empire,  the  period 
of  division  and  deterioration,  is  the  kingdom  which  the 
God  of  the  heaven  sets  up,  the  kingdom  which  has  no 
successor,  but  endures  forever  (2:44,  45).^ 

But  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  end-time  of  the 

°  And  whereas  thou  sawest  the  never    be    destroyed :     and    the 

feet    and    toes,    part    of    potters'  kingdom    shall    not    be    left    to 

clay,  and  part  of  iron,  the  king-  P^^^r  people    but  it   shall  break 

dom  shall  be  divided;  but  there  J"  "^T^^  and  consume  all  these 

,    „    ,       .      .^      r    ^t,        ,  -t,  kmgdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  for 

shall    be    m    it    of    the    strength  ^^^ 

of  the  iron,   forasmuch   as  thou  Forasmuch  as  thou  sawest  that 

sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry  the    stone    was    cut    out    of    the 

clay.  mountain     without     hands,     and 

And   as  the   toes   of   the    feet  that  it  brake  in  pieces  the  iron, 

were  part   of   iron,   and  part   of  the   brass,    the    clay,    the    silver, 

clay,    so    the    kingdom    shall    be  and    the    gold;    the    great    God 

partly  strong,  and  partly  broken,  hath    made    known    to    the    king 

— Dan.    2:41,42.  what    shall    come    to   pass    here- 

/And    in    the    days    of    these  after:  and  the  dream  is  certain, 

kings   shall   the   God    of   heaven  and    the    interpretation    thereof 

set   up   a   kingdom,   which    shall  sure. — Dan.  2 :  44,  45. 


14 


IVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


last  phase  of  the  history  of  that  which  once  was  Rome, 
and  is  now  the  nations  at  war,  forms  a  period  in  itself, 
of  which  prophecy  gives  us  a  detailed  description : 

4.  The  period  of  the  end  of  the  Times  of  the  Gen- 
tiles (Dan.  7:8,  19-26;  9:26,  27;  11:36)J 

The  detail  will  be  given  in  chapters  which  are  to  fol- 
low. I  must  be  permitted  again  to  lay  emphasis  upon 
Peter's  rule,  and  to  say  once  more  that  it  is  folly  to  hope 


■^  I  considered  the  horns,  and, 
behold,  there  came  up  among 
them  another  little  horn,  before 
whom  there  were  three  of  the 
first  horns  plucked  up  by  the 
roots :  and,  behold,  in  this  horn 
were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  man, 
and  a  mouth  speaking  great 
things. — Dan.  7  :  8. 

Then  I  would  know  the  truth 
of  the  fourth  beast,  which  was 
diverse  from  all  the  others,  ex- 
ceeding dreadful,  whose  teeth 
were  of  iron,  and  his  nails  of 
brass ;  which  devoured,  brake  in 
pieces,  and  stamped  the  residue 
with  his  feet ; 

And  of  the  ten  horns  that 
were  in  his  head,  and  of  the 
other  which  came  up,  and  be- 
fore whom  three  fell ;  even  of 
that  horn  that  had  eyes,  and  a 
mouth  that  spake  very  great 
things,  whose  look  was  more 
stout   than   his   fellows. 

I  beheld,  and  the  same  horn 
made  war  with  the  saints,  and 
prevailed   against  them ; 

Until  the  Ancient  of  days 
came,  and  judgment  was  given 
to  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  ; 
and  the  time  came  that  the 
saints  possessed  the  kingdom. 

Thus  he  said,  The  fourth 
beast  shall  be  the  fourth  king- 
dom upon  earth,  which  shall  be 
diverse  from  all  kingdoms,  and 
shall  devour  the  whole  earth, 
and  shall  tread  it  down,  and 
break  it  in  pieces. 

And  the  ten  horns  out  of  this 
kingdom  are  ten  kings  that  shall 
arise :  and  another  shall  rise 
after  them ;  and  he  shall  be  di- 


verse from  the  first,  and  he  shall 
subdue  three  kings. 

And  he  shall  speak  great 
words  against  the  Most  High, 
and  shall  wear  out  the  saints 
of  the  Most  High,  and  think  to 
change  times  and  laws  :  and  they 
shall  be  given  into  his  hand  un- 
til a  time  and  times  and  the 
dividing  of  time. 

But  the  judgment  shall  sit, 
and  they  shall  take  away  his 
dominion,  to  consume  and  to  de- 
stroy it  unto  the  end. — Dan.  7: 
ig-26. 

And  after  threescore  and  two 
weeks  shall  Messiah  be  cut  off, 
but  not  for  himself :  and  the 
people  of  the  prince  that  shall 
come  shall  destroy  the  city  and 
the  sanctuary ;  and  the  end 
thereof  shall  be  with  a  flood, 
and  unto  the  end  of  the  war 
desolations    are    determined. 

And  he  shall  confirm  the  cov- 
enant with  many  for  one  week : 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  week 
he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and 
the  oblation  to  cease,  and  for 
the  overspreading  of  abomina- 
tions he  shall  make  it  desolate, 
even  until  the  consummation, 
and  that  determined  shall  be 
poured  upon  the  desolate. — Dan. 
g :  26,  27. 

And  the  king  shall  do  accord- 
ing to  his  will ;  and  he  shall 
exalt  himself,  and  magnify  him- 
self above  every  god,  and  shall 
speak  marvellous  things  against 
the  God  of  gods,  and  shall  pros- 
per till  the  indignation  be  ac- 
complished :  for  that  that  is  de- 
termined shall  be  done. — Dan. 
11:  36. 


DOES  THE  BIBLE  THROW  LIGHT  ON  THIS  WAR?    15 

to  understand  prophecy  from  the  study  of  fragments.  It 
is  only  in  the  field  of  Bible  study  that  any  such  false 
hope  is  entertained.  In  no  other  department  of  human 
inquiry  is  it  expected  that  clear  and  convincing  knowl- 
edge may  be  secured  by  the  method  which  has  been  aptly 
called  ''grasshopper''  study. 

I  have  mentioned,  for  example,  in  a  preceding  para- 
graph, ''the  kingdom  which  the  God  of  heaven  sets  up'' 
after  the  Gentile  rule  over  the  earth  is  ended.  But, 
obviously,  that  raises  the  whole  question  of  that  king- 
dom— what  it  will  be,  and  how  it  will  come.  The  mere 
statement  might  well  mean  a  half-dozen  different  things 
to  as  many  different  readers.  There  is  no  short  cut  to 
sound  results  in  Bible  study  any  more  than  in  the  study 
of  other  fields. 

It  may,  however,  be  helpful  to  present  in  outline  the 
prophetic  testimony  concerning  the  end-time  of  Gentile 
rule  over  the  earth,  taking  up  throughout  this  book  the 
proof  in  detail. 

1.  The  age  ends  in  catastrophe.  No  prophetic  voice 
describes  the  end  of  the  "times  of  the  Gentiles"  in  the 
peaceful  terms  which  uninspired  forecasters  in  pulpits 
and  newspapers  have  made  familiar.  Daniel  says  that 
the  end  "shall  be  with  a  flood" ;  and  that,  "unto  the  end 
wars  and  desolations  are  determined."  The  Lord  Jesus 
finds  in  the  Biblical  history  of  the  flood,  and  of  the  de- 
struction of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  suited  pictures  of 
the  end-time  of  the  age.  "As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah." 
"As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot."  The  significance  is 
terrible.  The  age  which  ended  with  the  flood  was  pros- 
perous, busy,  famous,  wicked,  and  though  warned  was 
unheeding  (Dan.  9:26;  Luke  17:26-30;  Gen.  4:21,  22; 
6:4;  Matt.  24:37-39).^    When  the  astonished  disciples 

®  And  after  threescore  and  two  And  as  it  was  in  the  days  of 

weeks   shall   Messiah  be  cut  off,  Noe,   so   shall   it  be   also   in   the 

but    not    for    himself :    and    the  days  of  the  Son  of  man. 

people   of   the   prince   that   shall  They  did  eat,  they  drank,  they 

come  shall  destroy  the  city  and  married   wives,  they   were   given 

the     sanctuary ;     and     the     end  in   marriage,   until   the    day   that 

thereof    shall    he    with    a    flood,  Noe    entered    into    the   ark,    and 

and    unto    the    end    of    the    war  the    flood    came,    and    destroyed 

desolations      are      determined. —  them  all. 

Dan.  g :  26.  Likewise  also  as  it  was  in  the 


16 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


would  know  details  of  place  and  time,  our  Lord  referred 
them  to  Armageddon  (Luke  17:37;  Rev.  19:17-21).^ 
His  foreview  of  the  end  of  the  age  includes  wars, 
famines,  and  pestilences,  as  the  mere  ''beginning  of 
sorrows''  (Matt.  24:6-8),^^  and  these  deepen  into  the 
great  tribulation  which  in  turn  is  brought  to  a  close  only 
by  the  appearing  of  Christ  in  glory  and  the  battle  of 


days  of  Lot ;  they  did  eat,  they 
drank,  they  bought,  they  sold, 
they   planted,   they   builded ; 

But  the  same  day  that  Lot 
went  out  of  Sodom  it  rained 
fire  and  biimstone  from  heaven, 
and  destroyed  tiiem  all. 

Even  thus  shall  it  be  in  the 
day  when  the  Son  of  man  is 
revealed. — Liike    17:26-30. 

And  his  brother's  name  was 
Jubal :  he  was  the  father  of  all 
such  as  handle  the  harp  and 
organ. 

And  Zillah,  she  also  bare 
Tubal-cain,  an  instructor  of 
every  artificer  in  brass  and  iron  : 
and  the  sister  of  Tubal-cain  zvas 
Naamah. — Gen.    4  :  21,  22. 

There  were  giants  in  the  earth 
in  those  days ;  and  also  after 
that,  when  the  sons  of  God  came 
in  unto  the  daughters  of  men, 
and  they  bare  children  to  them, 
the  same  became  mighty  men 
which  were  of  old,  men  of  re- 
nown.— Gen.  6:4. 

But  as  the  days  of  Noe  were, 
so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  man  be. 

For  as  in  the  days  that  were 
before  the  flood  they  were  eat- 
ing and  drinking,  marrying,  and 
giving  in  marriage,  until  the  day 
that  Noe  entered  into  the  ark, 

And  knew  not  until  the  flood 
came,  and  took  them  all  away  ; 
so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the 
Son    of   man    be. — Matt.    24 :  37- 

39- 

"  And  they  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  Where,  Lord  ?  And 
he  said  unto  them,  Wheresoever 
the  body  is,  thither  will  the 
eagles  be  gathered  together. — 
Luke    17  •■  37- 


And  I  saw  an  angel  standing 
in  the  sun ;  and  he  cried  with  a 
loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the 
fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of 
heaven.  Come  and  gather  your- 
selves together  unto  the  supper 
of  the  great  God  ; 

That  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of 
kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains, 
and  the  flesh  of  mighty  men, 
and  the  flesh  of  horses,  and  of 
them  that  sit  on  them,  and  the 
flesh  of  all  men,  both  free  and 
bond,  both  small  and  great. 

And  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the 
kings  of  the  earth,  and  their 
armies,  gathered  together  to 
make  war  against  him  that  sat 
on  the  horse,  and  against  his 
army. 

And  the  beast  was  taken,  and 
with  him  the  false  prophet  that 
wrought  miracles  before  him, 
with  which  he  deceived  them 
that  had  received  the  mark  of 
the  beast,  and  them  that  wor- 
shipped his  image.  These  both 
were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of 
fire   burning  with   brimstone. 

And  the  remnant  were  slain 
with  the  sword  of  him  that  sat 
upon  the  horse,  which  sword 
proceeded  out  of  his  mouth  :  and 
all  the  fowls  were  fiilled  with 
their    flesh. — Rev.    ig  :  17-21. 

^^  And  ye  shall  hear  of  wars 
and  rumours  of  wars :  see  that 
ye  be  not  troubled  :  for  all  these 
things  must  come  to  pass,  but 
the  end  is  not  yet. 

For  nation  shall  rise  against 
nation,  and  kingdom  against 
kingdom :  and  there  shall  be 
famines,  and  pestilences,  and 
earthquakes,    in   divers   places. 

All  these  are  the  beginning  of 
sorrows. — Matt.    24  :  6-8. 


DOES  THE  BIBLE  THROW  LIGHT  ON  THIS  WAR?    17 


Armageddon  (Matt.  24 :  15-30;  Rev.  19:  ll-21).ii  Then, 
and  not  till  then,  the  ''Stone  cut  out  without  hands'' 
smites  upon  its  feet  the  image  of  Nebuchadnezzar's 
dream — ^the  image  in  which  the  whole  period  of  Gentile 


^^  When  ye  therefore  shall  see 
the  abomination  of  desolation, 
spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  proph- 
et, stand  in  the  holy  place,  (who- 
so readeth,  let  him  understand:) 

Then  let  them  which  be  in 
Judsea   flee    into   the   mountains : 

Let  him  which  is  on  the  house- 
top not  come  down  to  take  any 
thing  out  of  his  house  : 

Neither  let  him  which  is  in 
the  field  return  back  to  take  his 
clothes. 

And  woe  unto  them  that  are 
with  child,  and  to  them  that  give 
suck  in  those  days  ! 

But  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be 
not  in  the  winter,  neither  on 
the  sabbath  day  : 

For  then  shall  be  great  tribu- 
lation, such  as  was  not  since  the 
beginning  of  the  world  to  this 
time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be. 

And  except  those  days  should 
be  shortened,  there  should  no 
■flesh  be  saved :  but  for  the 
elect's  sake  those  days  shall  be 
shortened. 

Then  if  any  man  shall  say 
unto  you,  Lo,  here  is  Christ,  or 
there  ;   believe  it  not. 

For  there  shall  arise  false 
Christs,  and  false  prophets,  and 
shall  shew  great  signs  and  won- 
ders :  insomuch  that,  if  it  were 
possible,  they  shall  deceive  the 
very    elect. 

Behold,  I  have  told  you  be- 
fore. 

Wherefore  if  they  shall  say 
unto  you,  Behold,  he  is  in  the 
desert ;  go  not  forth  :  behold,  he 
is  in  the  secret  chambers ;  be- 
lieve it  not. 

For  as  the  lightning  cometh 
out  of  the  east,  and  shineth 
even  unto  the  west ;  so  shall  also 
the  coming  of  the  Son  of 
man   be. 

For  wheresoever  the  carcass 
is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gath- 
ered together. 


Immediately  after  the  tribula- 
tion of  those  days  shall  the  sun 
be  darkened,  and  the  moon  shall 
not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars 
shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the 
powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be 
shaken  : 

And  then  shall  appear  the 
sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in 
heaven :  and  then  shall  all  the 
tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and 
they  shall  see  the  Son  of  man 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
with  power  and  great  glory. — 
Matt.    24 :  15-30. 

And  I  saw  heaven  opened, 
and  behold  a  white  horse ;  and 
he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called 
Faithful  and  True,  and  in  right- 
eousness he  doth  judge  and 
make  war. 

His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of 
fire,  and  on  his  head  were  many 
crowns ;  and  he  had  a  name 
written,  that  no  man  knew,  but 
he  himself. 

And  he  was  clothed  with  a 
vesture  dipped  in  blood  :  and  his 
name  is  called  The  Word  of 
God. 

And  the  armies  which  were 
in  heaven  followed  him  upon 
white  horses,  clothed  in  fine 
linen,  white  and   clean. 

And  out  of  his  mouth  goeth 
a  sharp  sword,  that  with  it  he 
should  smite  the  nations ;  and 
he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod 
of  iron :  and  he  treadeth  the 
winepress  of  the  fierceness  and 
wrath    of   Almighty   God. 

And  he  hath  on  his  vesture 
and  on  his  thigh  a  name  writ- 
ten, KING  OF  KINGS,  AND 
LORD  OF  LORDS. 

And  I  saw  an  angel  standing 
in  the  sun ;  and  he  cried  with 
a  loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the 
fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of 
heaven.  Come  and  gather  your- 
selves together  unto  the  supper 
of  the  great  God  ; 


18 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


world  power  is  set  forth  (Dan.  2:34,  35)^^;  and  then, 
and  not  till  then,  is  the  kingdom  of  the  ''God  of  heaven" 
set  up.  The  ''Stone"  delivers  the  destructive  blow  before 
it  becomes  a  great  power,  and  ''fills  the  whole  earth" 
(Dan.  2:35,  44,  45).-^^  In  no  sense  can  the  destructive 
blow  be  said  to  have  fallen  at  the  first  advent  of  Christ, 
for  the  smiting  is  upon  the  feet  of  the  image — the  last 
form  of  the  fourth  or  Roman  empire,  and  that  empire 
had  not  entered  upon  the  period  of  division  at  the  time 
of  the  first  advent. 

2.  So  far  as  the  prophetic  Word  has  spoken  there  is 
not  the  least  warrant  for  the  expectation  that  the  nations 
engaged  in  the  present  gigantic  struggle  will  or  can 
make  a  permanent  peace.     It  is   fondly  dreamed  that 


That  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of 
kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains, 
and  the  flesh  of  mighty  men,  and 
the  flesh  of  horses,  and  of  them 
that  sit  on  them,  and  the  flesh 
of  all  men,  both  free  and  bond, 
both  small  and  great. 

And  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the 
kings  of  the  earth,  and  their 
armies,  gathered  together  to 
make  war  against  him  that  sat 
on  the  horse,  and  against  his 
army. 

And  the  beast  was  taken,  and 
with  him  the  false  prophet  that 
wrought  miracles  before  him, 
with  which  he  deceived  them 
that  had  received  the  mark  of 
the  beast,  and  them  that  wor- 
shipped his  image.  These  both 
were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of 
fire  burning  with  brimstone. 

And  the  remnant  were  slain 
with  the  sword  of  him  that  sat 
upon  the  horse,  which  sword 
proceeded  out  of  his  mouth  :  and 
all  the  fowls  were  filled  with 
their  flesh. — Rev.  ig:  11-21. 

"  Thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone 
was  cut  out  without  hands, 
which  smote  the  image  upon  his 
feet  that  were  of  iron  and  clay, 
and  brake  them  to  pieces. 

Then  was  the  iron,  the  clay, 
the  brass,  the  silver,  and  the 
gold,   broken   to   pieces  together, 


and  became  like  the  chaff  of  the 
summer  threshingfloors ;  and  the 
wind  carried  them  away,  that  no 
place  was  found  for  them  :  and 
the  stone  that  smote  the  image 
became  a  great  mountain,  and 
filled  the  whole  earth. — Dan.  2 : 
34,  35' 

^^  Then  was  the  iron,  the  clay, 
the  brass,  the  silver,  and  the 
gold  broken  to  pieces  together, 
and  became  like  the  chaff  of  the 
summer  threshingfloors  ;  and  the 
wind  carried  them  away,  that  no 
place  was  found  for  them  :  and 
the  stone  that  smote  the  image 
became  a  great  mountain,  and 
filled  the  whole  earth.  .  .  . 

And  in  the  days  of  these  kings 
shall  the  God  of  heaven  set  up 
a  kingdom,  which  shall  never  be 
destroyed :  and  the  kingdom 
shall  not  be  left  to  other  peo- 
ple, but  it  shall  break  in  pieces 
and  consume  all  these  kingdoms, 
and  it  shall  stand  for  ever. 

Forasmuch  as  thou  sawest 
that  the  stone  was  cut  out  of 
the  mountain  without  hands,  and 
that  it  brake  in  pieces  the  iron, 
the  brass,  the  clay,  the  silver, 
and  the  gold ;  the  great  God  hath 
made  known  to  the  king  what 
shall  come  to  pass  hereafter : 
and  the  dream  is  certain,  and 
the  interpretation  thereof  sure. 
—Dan.   2:  35,44,45' 


DOES  THE  BIBLE  THROW  LIGHT  ON  THIS  WAR?    19 

out  of  all  the  suffering-  and  carnage  and  destruction  of 
this  war  will  be  born  such  a  hatred  of  war  as  will  bring 
to  pass  a  federation  of  the  nations — the  United  States 
of  the  World — in  which  will  exist  but  one  army,  and 
that  an  international  police,  rather  than  an  army. 

For  once  there  is  some  correspondence  between  a 
popular  dream  and  the  prophetic  Word.  For  that  word 
certainly  points  to  a  federated  world-empire  in  the  end- 
time  of  the  age.  But  that  federation  is  headed  up  in  the 
''little  horn''  of  Daniel;  the  ''abomination  of  desolation" 
of  our  Lord's  great  prophetic  discourse  (Matt.  24: 
15)1^;  the  "man  of  sin"  of  Paul  (2  Thess.  2:8-10)^^; 
the  beast  out  of  the  sea  of  Revelation  13.^^  But  the  peace 
which  for  a  little  time  results  is  that  of  universal  sub- 
jection to  earth's  last  and  most  hateful  despot,  and  it 
ends  in  Armageddon  (Rev.  19:  11-21).^^ 

It  is,  of  course,  possible,  nay,  probable  that  some  tem- 
porary truce  may  end,  or  suspend  for  a  time,  the  present 
world-war,  for  ten  kingdoms  will  exist  at  the  end-time 
in  the  territory  once  ruled  over  by  Rome.  But  it  will 
probably  be  a  brief  truce,  for  it  is  in  precisely  that  state 
of  the  old  world  that  the  Little  Horn  comes  into  the 


"  When  ye  therefore  shall  see  heads  and  ten  horns,   and  upon 

the    abomination    of    desolation,  his  horns  ten  crowns,  and  upon 

spoken  of  by   Daniel  the  proph-  his  heads  the  name  of  blasphemy 

et,     stand     in     the     holy     place,  .... 

(whoso   readeth,   let   him   under-  And  there  was  given  unto  him 

stand:) — Matt.  24:15.  a    mouth    speaking    great   things 

^^  And  then  shall  that  Wicked  and  blasphernies ;  and  power  was 
be  revealed,  whom  the  Lord  given  unto  him  to  continue  forty 
shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of  and  two  months. 
his  mouth,  and  shall  destroy  And  he  opened  his  mouth  in 
with  the  brightness  of  his  com-  blasphemy  against  God,  to  bias- 
ing :  pheme  his  name,  and  his  taber- 

Even    him,    whose    coming    is  nacle,    and    them    that    dwell    in 

after  the  working  of  Satan  with  heaven. 

all    power    and    signs    and    lying  And  it  was  given  unto  him  to 

wonders,  make   war   with   the   saints,   and 

And    with    all    deceivableness  to    overcome   them :    and    power 

of  unrighteousness  in  them  that  was  given  him  over  all  kindreds, 

perish ;     because    they     received  and  tongues,  and  nations, 

not   the  love   of   the   truth,   that  And    all   that    dwell   upon   the 

they   might  be   saved. — 2   Thess.  earth   shall   worship   him,   whose 

2:8-10.  names    are    not    written    in    the 

^^  And   I   stood  upon  the   sand  book   of  life  of  the   Lamb  slain 

of  the  sea,  and  saw  a  beast  rise  from     the     foundation     of     the 

up  out  of  the  sea,  having  seven  world. — Rev.    13 :  i,  5,  6,  7,  8. 


20  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVf 

scene.  His  appearance  rekindles  the  flames  of  war,  for 
he  swiftly  brings  under  his  rule  three  of  the  ten  king- 
doms. He  will  be  the  consummate  genius  of  the  race 
of  Adam.  Of  him  Antiochus  Epiphanes  and  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  were  but  adumbrations,  and  with  him  on  the 
stage  the  final  tragedy  advances  with  incredible  swift- 
ness. 

3.  But  across  the  awful  chasm  of  a  war-cursed  earth 
into  which  Gentile  world-power  plunges, — is  possibly 
even  now  plunging, — rises  the  blessed  vision  of  the  king- 
dom to  be  set  up  by  the  ''God  of  heaven.''  And  this,  and 
not  the  story  of  Gentile  tyranny  and  bloodshed,  and  of 
the  tragic  and  pathetic  failure  of  the  Gentiles  to  govern 
the  world  in  righteousness,  forms  the  great  theme  of 
prophecy.  When  the  prophets  describe  the  coming  king- 
dom their  pens  are  dipped  in  glory.  Then — and,  oh, 
how  blessedly  near  it  may  be ! — earth  shall  have  the 
golden  age  dreamed  of  by  all  the  poets,  and  longed  for 
by  all  who  have  loved  humanity.  Then  shall  all  the 
ways  of  God  be  justified ;  then  shall  be  born  the  men 
and  women  whose  intellects,  disenthralled  of  sin,  shall 
produce  a  civilization  the  beauty  and  power  of  which 
we  cannot  now  imagine,  for,  ''the  creation  itself  also 
shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into 
the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.'' 


II.     THE  PROPHET 

THE  Hebrew  prophet  is  an  arresting  figure. 
Lonely,  antagonizing  kings  and  priests ;  austere, 
seeking  no  disciples;  persecuted,  invulnerable 
alike  to  bribes  and  threats;  frequently  passing 
on  to  martyrdom,  master  through  the  Spirit  of  every 
form  of  literary  expression,  a  patriot  filled  with  passion- 
ate love  for  Israel, — no  men  have  appeared  in  human 
history  more  lofty  in  character  or  of  higher  courage. 

The  prophet  formed  no  part  of  the  organized  life  of 
the  Hebrew  Commonwealth.  He  bore  no  office  which 
constituted  him  a  prophet.  The  normal  agency  for  the 
communication  of  the  Divine  will  in  special  emergencies 
lay  in  a  promise'  to  the  priesthood : 

''And  there  I  will  meet  with  thee,  and  I  will  commune 
with  thee  from  above  the  mercy  seat,  from  between  the 
two  cherubims  which  are  upon  the  ark  of  the  testimony, 
of  all  things  which  I  will  give  thee  in  commandment  unto 
the  children  of  Israel"  (Exod.  25:22). 

But  communion  with  God  is  a  spiritual  act.  The  High 
Priest  had  the  privilege  of  that  communion  as  represent- 
ing the  people  before  God,  but  that  privilege  of  necessity 
supposed  a  High  Priest  in  happy,  humble  fellowship  with 
God.  Even  the  believer  of  to-day,  who  is  in  possession 
of  the  written  Word  of  God,  and  who  is  indwelt  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  must  himself  be  spiritual  before  he  can 
comiprehend  the  deeper  meanings  and  messages  of  that 
Word.  "He  that  is  spiritual  judgeth''  (1  Cor.  2: 15)  is 
still  the  inflexible  condition.  It  was,  therefore,  when  the 
priests  became  mere  performers  of  a  ritual,  unspiritual, 
avaricious,  conceiving  the  religion  of  Jehovah  to  lie  in 
external  acts  and  ceremonies,  that  prophets  appeared. 
The  appearing  tJt  Israel  of  a  prophet  always  meant  that 
Jehovah  had  a  controversy  mth  his  people. 

21 


22  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

It  is  most  instructive  to  note  the  qualifications  of  a 
prophet.  In  the  beginning  he  was  called  ''the  man  of 
God"  (for  example,  1  Sam.  2:27).^  It  was  not  a 
divinely  bestowed  designation ;  it  was  the  unconscious 
testimony  of  the  people  among  whom  he  lived  to  his  life 
and  character.  I  have  been  told  that  some  years  ago 
''Billy"  Sunday  wrote  a  letter  to  the  late  Major  Cole, 
the  evangelist,  addressing  it,  "To  the  Man  of  God,  Ad- 
rian, Michigan."  When  that  letter  reached  Adrian  there 
was  neither  delay  nor  hesitation  in  its  delivery.  Within 
an  hour  it  was  in  Major  Cole's  hands.  Adrian  knew 
that  "a  man  of  God"  dwelt  in  their  midst. 

Then  this  man  of  God  came  to  be  called  the  ''seer,'' 
the  man  who  could  see  (for  example,  2  Sam.  24:  11).^ 
Like  Moses  he  "endured  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible." 
He  was  a  man  whose  eyes  God  had  opened  (Num. 
24:3),^  and  God  could  do  that  because  he  was  ''a  man 
of  God."  And  so,  being  God's  man  in  Israel,  and  having 
for  that  reason  the  vision  of  God,  he  became  a  "prophet" 
— Jehovah's  spokesman  to  Israel. 

It  has  been  well  said  that  the  Hebrew  prophet  was  not 
primarily  so  much  a  foreteller  as  a  forthteller — a  fear- 
less, inspired  voice  of  rebuke,  instruction  in  righteous- 
ness, exhortation,  and  warning.  And  this  part  of  his 
ministry  concerned  not  only  the  individual  conscience  of 
the  Israelite,  but  even  more  the  corporate  life  and  con- 
duct of  Israel  the  nation.  He  was  invariably  a  patriot 
burning  with  the  conviction  that  to  his  nation  had  been 
given  a  priestly  and  spiritual  relation  to  the  Gentile 
nations  as  representing  the  one  and  only  true  God,  and 
the  blessedness  of  that  people  whose  God  was  Jehovah. 
He  knew  that  while  nations  rose  and  fell,  the  little  com- 
monwealth of  Israel  had  but  to  abide  in  obedience  and 


^  And    there    came    a    man    of  Lord     came    unto    the    prophet 

God  unto  Eli,  and  said  unto  him,  Gad,   David's  seer. — 2  Sam.   24 : 

Thus     saith    the    Lord,     Did     I  jj 

plainly  appear  unto  the  house  of  3  .     ,   ,            ,           ,  .     _-^_i,i. 

thy    father,    when   they   were   in  ^^^^^  ^^  [^^^  "P  ^'^  parable. 

Egypt     in     Pharaoh's     house?—  and  said,  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor 

/  Sam.  2:27.  hath    said,    and   the   man   whose 

^  For  when   David   was   up   in  eyes  are  open  hath  said. — Num. 

the    morning,    the    word    of    the  24 :  j. 


THE  PROPHET  23 

loyalty  to  her  unseen  King,  to  rest  secure  and  invulner- 
able under  his  protection  (Psa.  89:  18  and  preceding).* 

The  primary  ministry  of  the  prophets,  therefore,  was 
patriotic  and  intensely  ethical.  They  saw  peace  for  Israel 
only  through  righteousness  (Isa.  32:  17,  for  example).® 
Nothing  else  would  answer.  On  that  high  condition  and 
no  other  would  Jehovah  throw  about  the  land  which  he 
had  given  to  his  people  the  invisible  wall  of  his  protec- 
tion; on  that  condition  and  no  other  should  the  people 
be  at  peace  among  themselves;  on  that  condition  and  no 
other  might  the  individual  Israelite  be  at  peace  in  his 
own  soul.  In  no  part  of  the  Scriptures  does  the  ethical 
demand  rise  to  greater  heights.  The  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  is  but  the  ethical  teaching  of  the  prophets  lifted 
to  its  highest  potency. 

But  along  with  this  inflexible  demand  for  righteous- 
ness, the  prophets  revealed  attributes  and  characteristics 
in  God  so  lovely,  so  tender,  so  faithful,  that  to  remain 
in  ignorance  of  the  prophetic  writings  is  to  deprive  the 
soul  of  a  vision  of  God  which  every  soul  of  man  deeply 
needs. 

The  patriotic  and  ethical  messages  of  the  prophets  fell 
upon  ears  grown  dull  of  hearing.  The  little  nation  had 
become  rich  and  ambitious.  False  prophets  abounded, 
and  then  as  now  their  message  w^as,  'Teace,  peace.'' 
They  were  pleasantly  optimistic  while  the  true  prophets 
were  warning  of  judgment  and  captivity.  To  the  stern- 
est and  most  unsparing  of  his  own  prophets  Jehovah 
said,  "And,  lo,  thou  art  unto  them  as  a  very  lovely  song 
of  one  that  hath  a  pleasant  voice,  and  can  play  well  on 
an  instrument :  for  they  hear  thy  w^ords,  but  they  do  them 
not."  The  people  felt  the  power  of  Ezekiel  and  flocked 
to  hear  him,  as  we  do  to-day  under  like  circumstances. 

It  is  then,  when  warnings  and  pleadings  are  unheeded, 
that  predictive  prophecy  awakes,  and  the  future  is  re- 
vealed.   A  familiar  and  striking  illustration  of  this  prin- 

*  For  the  Lord  is  our  defence,  ness    shall    be    peace ;    and    the 

and  the   Holy   One   of   Israel   is  effect  of  righteousness  quietness 

our  king. — Psalm   8g  :  i8.  and     assurance    for     ever. — Isa. 

^And   the   work   of   righteous-  32 :  17. 


24  WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

ciple  is  the  ^rreat  ''Immanuel"  prediction  of  Isaiah  7: 
10-14.^ 

Under  the  menace  of  an  impending  invasion  of  Judah 
by  Samaria,  leagued  with  Syria,  Isaiah  sought  to  bring 
King  Ahaz  back  to  faith  in  Jehovah.  He  was  given  the 
unprecedented  privilege  of  himself  choosing  a  sign  that 
might  serve  as  a  support  to  his  faith.  The  king  refused 
even  to  ask.  And  then  came  the  burst  of  predictive 
prophecy,  the  supreme  ''sign,''  not  to  the  apostate  king, 
but  to  the  "house  of  David" ;  the  ''sign"  that  made  every 
maiden  descendant  of  David  from  that  time, — for  the 
"sign''  has  no  time-note, — the  possible  mother  of  the 
Messiah. 

And  these  men,  thus  raised  up  of  God,  left  to  suc- 
ceeding generations  a  body  of  writings  unsurpassed  if 
not  unequaled  in  all  literature,  sacred  or  secular,  in  the 
great  qualities  of  simplicity,  directness,  striking  imagery, 
biting  invective,  and  lofty  splendor  of  eloquence.  Au- 
thenticated by  Jesus  Christ  and  by  the  inspired  writers 
of  the  New  Testament ;  quoted,  declared  to  be  in  many 
respects  fulfilled,  but  holding  also  a  far  greater  body  of 
prediction  as  yet  unfulfilled ;  called  by  the  Apostle  Peter 
"a  light  that  shineth  in  a  dark  place"  to  w^hich  we  of 
this  age  "do  well"  that  we  "take  heed" — there  is  yet  a 
neglect  of  the  prophetic  writings  which  has  no  parallel 
in  our  attitude  toward  any  other  great  and  serious  liter- 
ature. 

It  is  impossible  tO'  overstate  the  loss  to  spirituality,  to 
comprehension  of  God  in  himself  and  in  his  immutable 
purposes  toward  the  earth  and  the  race  of  men,  resulting 
from  this  stupid  neglect  of  nearly  one-fourth  in  bulk 
of  the  Bible. 

The  fundamental  factors  of  human  life  are  unchang- 
ing, and  the  apparent  changes  are  superficial.     It  has 

*  Moreover     the     Lord     spake  O  house  of  David ;  7^  it  a  small 

again  unto  Ahaz,  saying,  thing  for  you  to  weary  men,  but 

Ask  thee   a  sign   of  the  Lord  will  ye  weary  my  God  also? 
thy    God ;    ask    it    either    in    the  Therefore    the    Lord    himself 

depth,   or  in  the  height   above.  shall  give  you  a  sign  ;  Behold,  a 

But  Ahaz  said,  I  will  not  ask,  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a 

neither  will  I  tempt  the  Lord.  son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Im- 

And    he    said.    Hear   ye    now,  manuel. — Isa.    y :  10-14. 


THE  PROPHET  25 

been  the  fond  dream  of  modern  optimism  that  civiHza- 
tion — that  civihzation  which  until  yesterday  we  have  been 
accustomed  to  call  "Christian'' — had  modified  primitive 
human  nature.  The  present  world-war  has  completely 
undeceived  us.  Man  has  not  changed,  nor  has  God. 
What  God  thought  in  the  times  of  the  prophets  he  thinks 
now.  Quite  apart,  therefore,  from  the  predictive  element 
in  prophecy,  the  revelation  through  the  prophets  of  the 
mind  of  God,  and  of  the  divine  nature  and  motives  has 
a  permanent  and  altogether  inestimable  value. 

Christians  in  myriads,  and  strangest  of  all,  ministers 
of  the  Word,  thus  remain  in  willing  ignorance  of  this 
great  body  of  truth. 

Of  preaching  men  this  statement  would  be  incredible 
if  it  were  not  so  patently  true.  For  no  greater  preach- 
ers have  appeared  among  men  than  the  Hebrew  prophets. 
The  prophetic  writings  are  for  the  most  part  sermons. 
It  is  amazing  that  the  teachers  of  homiletics  do  not 
enrich  their  instructions  from  these  masterly  discourses. 
Surely  one  would  think  it  might  be  worth  while  to  set 
students  to  the  work  of  a  reverent  analysis  of  such 
sermons  as  those  of  Jeremiah  In  the  Gate  of  the  ^King's 
House;  or  the  first  sermon  of  Isaiah  to  Backslidden 
Israel;  or  Jeremiah's  sermon  on  The  Broken  Covenant. 
Is  anything  in  sermonic  literature  better  worth  study 
than  Isaiah's  discourse  on  The  Stretched-out  Hand? 
Might  it  not  be  a  most  rewarding  use  of  a  little  time 
for  preachers  to  study  the  art  of  Isaiah's  sermon  on 
The  Six  Woes?  Has  anything  in  the  way  of  sermonic 
introduction  been  better  done  than  Isaiah's  leading  up 
to  his  theme  in  that  sermon  ? 

Still  more  surprising  is  it  that  the  predictive  element 
in  prophecy,  so  far  as  this  remains  unfulfilled,  should 
engage  so  sHght  an  interest  in  those  whom  God  would 
fain  take  into  his  confidence.  For  prophecy,  while  refus- 
ing any  satisfaction  to  mere  curiosity,  does,  nevertheless, 
give  in  broad  and"  clear  outline  the  program  of  the  future 
of  the  earth  and  of  human  life  and  destiny  thereon. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  prophetic  writings 
have  been  wounded  in  the  house  of  their  friends.  Sane 
and  thoughtful  men  have  turned  in  weariness  or  disgust 


26  WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

from  the  wild  interpretations  of  well-meaning  but  ill- 
taught  men.  To  these  wild  interpreters  the  most  remote 
analogy  between  a  prophecy  and  some  passing  or  histori- 
cal event  has  been  sufficient  warrant  for  declaring  a  ful- 
filment. The  so-called  ''historical"  interpretation  of  the 
Apocalypse,  which  finds  in  historic  events  the  fulfilment 
of  explicit  predictions  having  no  real  likeness  to  the 
alleged  fulfilment,  may  serve  as  illustrating  this  dogmatic 
but  wholly  imaginary  kind  of  prophetic  interpretation. 

But  the  evil  of  so-called  ''spiritualizing''  of  prophecies, 
which  came  over  into  Protestantism  from  Rome,  is  the 
greater  cause  of  the  neglect  of  these  writings.  That 
interpretation  which  finds  in  the  Qiristian  Church  the 
fulfilment  of  the  numerous  and  explicit  predictions  which 
the  prophets  themselves  declare  relate  to  Israel,  and  to 
the  kingdom  covenanted  to  David  and  his  seed,  suffi- 
ciently explains  the  common  attitude  of  neglect  toward 
prophecy.  For  no  other  writings,  Divine  or  human,  are 
thus  interpreted.  No  one  even  proposes  to  interpret  a 
statute,  or  a  contract,  or  a  friendly  letter,  by  a  method 
so  grotesque;  and  the  consequence  of  the  attempt  seri- 
ously to  apply  that  method  to  prophetic  interpretation 
results,  by  a  law  of  the  human  mind,  in  utter  weariness 
and  confusion. 

Approach  these  writings  as  all  other  writings  are 
approached ;  give  these  great  preachers  enough  reverence 
to  suppose  that  they  were  as  capable  of  using  language 
in  its  ordinary  meaning  as  other  preachers  and  writers  ; 
follow  Peter's  great  rule  of  interpreting  every  prediction 
in  harmony  with  all  the  other  predictions  on  that  sub- 
ject (2  Pet.  1:  19-21)'^;  bring  to  the  study  a  reverent 
desire  to  know,  not  merely  that  which  is  coming  to  pass, 
but  the  mind  of  God  about  life,  and  you  will  surely  find 
Prophecy  a  mine  of  richest  spiritual  treasure. 

^  Knowing  this  first,  that  no  any  private  interpretation. — 2 
prophecy  of  the  scripture  is  of       Pet.  i :  20, 


III.    THE  ETHICAL  MESSAGE 

ISRAEL  failed  in  not  fulfilling  the  purpose  for  which 
she  had  been  set  apart.    Because  of  this  failure,  the 
prophets  were  called  upon  to  deliver  their  ethical 
message.     It  will  be  well  for  us  to  have  in  clear 
vision  the  purpose  for  which  God  had  set  apart  Israel. 

From  the  creation  of  man  to  the  call  of  Abram  the 
race  is  treated  as  a  unit.  Future  racial  distinctions  are 
indicated  in  the  declarations  concerning  the  sons  of  Noah 
(Gen.  9:  25-27)/  but  prior  to  the  call  of  Abram  the  cov- 
enants of  God  conditioning  human  life  had  a  universal 
application,  as  had  also  the  divine  requirements.  The 
first  eleven  chapters  of  Genesis  recount  three  distinct 
testings  of  humanity  under  three  specific  covenants. 

The  Edenic  Covenant  (Gen.  2:  15-17)^  conditioned  the 
life  of  man  in  innocency — unfallen  man.  Made  lord  of 
creation,  placed  in  a  perfect  environment,  given  absolute 
liberty  in  the  use  of  all  things  needful  for  his  full  devel- 
opment, and  such  occupation  as  guarded  him  from  the 
curse  of  idleness,  one,  and  only  one,  prohibition  limited 
his  freedom;  he  must  not  know  evil.  He  deliberately 
violated  that  prohibition  ( 1  Tim.  2 :  14)  ,^  with  conse- 
quences disastrous  to  the  race  of  which  he  was  the  father 


^  And     he     said,     Cursed     he  And  the  Lord  God  commanded 

Canaan ;    a   servant    of   servants  the  man,  saying,   Of  every  tree 

shall  he  be  unto  his  brethren.  of  the  garden  thou  mayest  freely 

And   he   said,    Blessed    he   the  eat : 

Lord  God  of  Shem ;  and  Canaan  But  of  the  tree  of  the  knowl- 

shall  be  his  servant.  edge  of  good  and  evil,  thou  shalt 

God     shall     enlarge     Japheth,  not  eat  of  it :  for  in  the  day  that 

and   he  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  thou    eatest    thereof    thou    shalt 

of  Shem ;   and   Canaan   shall   be        surely  die. Gen    2 :  15-17, 

his  servant. — Gen.   9 ;  25-27.  ^  *    j    a  j                         ^       -      a 

'  And  the   Lord   God  took  the  ^"^  ^^^^  w^s  not  deceived, 

man,  and  put  him  into  the  gar-  but   the    woman   being    deceived 

den  of  Eden  to  dress  it  and  to  was     in     the     transgression. — i 

keep   it.  Tim,    2 :  14. 

27 


28 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


and  head  (Rom.  5:12;  Psa.  14:  1,2;  51:  5;  1  Cor.  2 :  14; 
15:22).^ 

The  Adamic  Covenant  (Gen.  3:  14-19)^  conditions  the 
life  on  the  earth  of  a  fallen  race.  Physical  death  is  the 
end  of  life.  Toil  is  given  as  a  condition  of  maintain- 
ing life.  But  upon  this  dark  result  of  the  fall  of  man 
shines  the  great  evangelic  promise  of  the  Satan-Bruiser — 
the  Seed  of  the  woman.  The  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil  awoke  conscience,  and  the  moral  testing  of  the  race 
under  conscience  was  the  requirement  that  man  should  do 
good  and  not  evil.  The  result  after  two  thousand  years 
was  given  in  the  divine  declaration :  ''God  saw  that  the 
wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every 
imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil 
continually"  (Gen.  6:5).  The  judgment  of  the  Flood 
ended  not  conscience,  indeed,  but  the  testing  of  man 
under  conscience.  This  Adamic  Covenant,  the  testing  of 
man  under  conscience,  has  still  a  racial  obligation  upon 


*  Wherefore,  as  by  one  man 
sin  entered  into  the  world,  and 
death  by  sin ;  and  so  death 
passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all 
have  sinned. — Rom.  5  ;  12. 

The  fool  hath  said  in  his 
heart.  There  is  no  God.  They 
are  corrupt,  they  have  done 
abominable  works,  there  is  none 
that  doeth  good. 

The  Lord  looked  down  from 
heaven  upon  the  children  of  men, 
to  see  if  there  were  any  that 
did  understand,  and  seek  God. — 
Psalm  14 :  i,  2. 

Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  in- 
iquity ;  and  in  sin  did  my  mother 
conceive  me. — Psalm  31 :  5. 

But  the  natural  man  receiveth 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 
God :  for  they  are  foolishness 
unto  him  :  neither  can  he  know 
them,  because  they  are  spiritually 
discerned. — /    Cor.    2:14. 

For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even 
so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive. — /  Cor.   15:22. 

°  And  the  Lord  God  said  unto 
the  serpent,  Because  thou  hast 
done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above 
all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast 


of  the  field  ;  upon  thy  belly  shalt 
thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat 
all  the  days  of  thy  life. 

And  I  will  put  enmity  between 
thee  and  the  woman,  and  be- 
tween thy  seed  and  her  seed  ;  it 
shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou 
shalt  bruise  his  heel. 

Unto  the  woman  he  said,  I  will 
greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and 
thy  conception ;  in  sorrow  thou 
shalt  bring  forth  children,  and 
thy  desire  shall  he  to  thy  hus- 
band, and  he  shall  rule  over  thee. 

And  unto  Adam  he  said.  Be- 
cause thou  hast  hearkened  unto 
the  voice  of  thy  wife,  and  hast 
eaten  of  the  tree,  of  which  I  com- 
manded thee,  saying,  Thou  shalt 
not  eat  of  it :  cursed  is  the  ground 
for  thy  sake  ;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou 
eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life, 

Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall 
it  bring  forth  to  thee,  and  thou 
shalt  eat  the  herb  of  the  field  ; 

In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt 
thou  eat  bread,  till  thou  return 
unto  the  ground ;  for  out  of  it 
wast  thou  taken  :  for  dust  thou 
art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  re- 
turn.— Gen.  $:  14-19. 


THE  ETHICAL  MESSAGE  29 

those  who  know  neither  the  law  nor  the  Gospel,  but  it 
brings  as  in  the  days  of  the  Flood  only  condemnation 
(Rom.  2:12,  et  seq.).^ 

The  Covenant  to  Noah  (Gen.  9:  5,  6y  established  the 
principle  of  human  government,  the  rule  of  man  over 
men.  It  is  still  the  charter  of  all  civil  government;  for 
the  right  to  take,  judicially,  human  life  is  the  highest 
function  of  government.  Obviously  the  responsibility 
was  to  govern  righteously,  and  the  result  was  Babel  and 
the  judgment  of  the  confusion  of  tongues. 

With  the  migration  of  the  survivors  of  the  Flood  and 
their  posterity  began  the  division  of  humanity  into  tribes 
and,  ultimately,  nations.  These,  w4th  the  single  excep- 
tion of  the  family  of  Shem,  who  had  been  set  apart  for 
a  special  relation  to  God  in  the  Noahic  Covenant  (Gen. 
9:26,  27),^  soon  became  idolaters,  and  lost  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  true  God.  In  Romans  1:21-23^  the  steps 
of  that  utter  apostasy  are  traced,  and  the  moving  cause 
disclosed:  ''They  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their 
knowledge," — literally,  ^'did  not  approve  God''  (Rom. 
1:28). 

Hitherto,  wath  one  exception  (the  confusion  of 
tongues,  Gen.   11:6-9)^^  the  solidarity  of  the  Adamic 

^  For  as  many  as  have  sinned  ®  Because  that,  when  they  knew 

without    law    shall    also    perish       God,   they   glorified    him    not   as 

without    law :    and    as    many    as       ^^^^  neither  were  thankful ;  but 

have  sinned  in  the  law  shall  be  ^^^^^^  Y^^^  .^^.  ^^5^^  imagma- 
•   J     J  u     xi-     1  D  .^        tions,  and  their  foolish  heart  was 

judged  by  the  law.— 7^c7m.  2:  12.       darkened 

^And    surely    your    blood     of  Professing    themselves    to    be 

your  lives  will  I  require  ;  at  the  wise,   they   became   fools, 

hand    of   every   beast   will   I   re-  And  changed  the  glory  of  the 

quire  it,  and  at  the  hand  of  man  ;  uncorruptible  God  into  an  image 

at     the     hand     of     every    man's  made    like    to    corruptible    man, 

brother  will  I  require  the  life  of  and    to     birds,     and     fourfooted 

man.  beasts,     and    creeping    things. — 

Whoso   sheddeth  man's  blood,  Rom.  i :  21-23. 

by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  :  ^^  And  the  Lord  said.   Behold, 

for  in  the  image  of  God  made  he  the  people  is  one,  and  they  have 

man. — Gen.  9  :  5,  6.  all  one  language  ;  and  this  they 

^And  he  said.  Blessed   he  the  begin    to    do    and    now    nothing 

Lord  God  of  Shem;  and  Canaan  will    be    restrained    from    them, 

shall  be  his  servant.  which  they  have  imagined  to  do. 

God  shall  enlarge  Japheth,  and  Go    to,    let   us    go    down,    and 

he    shall    dwell    in   the    tents    of  there    confound    their   language, 

Shem ;   and  Canaan  shall  be  his  that    they    may    not    understand 

servant. — Gen.  9  :  26^  2/.  one  another's  speech. 


30 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


race  had  been  preserved.  But  noAv  God  begins  to  act 
upon  the  special  promise  to  Shem:  ''God  shall  enlarge 
Japheth,  and  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem"  (Gen. 
9:27).  One  of  the  Semitic  stock,  Abram,  is  called  out 
of  Ur  in  Chaldea  that  in  and  through  him  and  his  seed 
the  great  redemptive  purposes  of  God  toward  the  whole 
race  might  be  worked  out.  In  Abraham,  and  in  the 
Abrahamic  Covenant  (Gen.  12:1-3;  13:15,  16;  15:18 
and  preceding) ^^  the  nation  which  came  to  be  called 
Israel,  after  the  grandson  of  Abraham,  to  whom  the 
Abrahamic  Covenant  was  confirmed  (Gen.  28:13  et 
seq.)^'^  was  set  apart  to  a  special  work  on  behalf  of 
Jehovah  with  the  whole  of  humanity  as  the  objective. 
This  breadth  of  the  divine  intent  is  the  sufficient  answer 
to  the  charge  of  partiality  in  the  choice  of  Israel  whidh 
is  sometimes  ignorantly  brought  (Gen.  12  :  3  ;  Isa.  2  :  2-4 ; 
5:26;  9:1,2;  Jer.  16:19;  Joel  3:9,  10).^^ 


So  the  Lord  scattered  them 
abroad  from  thence  upon  the 
face  of  all  the  earth  :  and  they 
left  off  to  build  the  city. 

Therefore  is  the  name  of  it 
called  Babel ;  because  the  Lord 
did  there  confound  the  language 
of  all  the  earth  ;  and  from  thence 
did  the  Lord  scatter  them  abroad 
upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth. — 
Gen.  II :  6-g. 

"  Now  the  Lord  had  said  unto 
Abram,  Get  thee  out  of  thy 
country,  and  from  thy  kindred, 
and  from  thy  father's  house, 
unto  a  land  that  I  will  shew 
thee : 

And  I  will  make  of  thee  a 
great  nation,  and  I  will  bless 
thee,  and  make  thy  name  great ; 
and  thou  shalt  be  a  blessing : 

And  I  will  bless  them  that 
bless  thee,  and  curse  him  that 
curseth  thee :  and  in  thee  shall 
all  families  of  the  earth  be 
blessed. — Gen.   12:1-3. 

For  all  the  land  which  thou 
seest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and 
to  thy  seed  for  ever. 

And  I  will  make  thy  seed  as 
the  dust  of  the  earth  :  so  that  if 
a  man  can  number  the  dust  of 
the    earth,    iJien    shall    thy    seed 


also  be  numbered. — Gen.  13:15, 
16. 

In  the  same  day  the  Lord 
made  a  covenant  with  Abram, 
saying,  Unto  thy  seed  have  I 
given  this  land,  from  the  river 
of  Egypt  unto  the  great  river, 
the  river  Euphrates. — Gen.  15: 
18. 

"  And,  behold,  the  Lord  stood 
above  it,  and  said,  I  am  the  Lord 
God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and 
the  God  of  Isaac :  the  land 
whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee  will 
I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed. — Gen. 
28 :  13. 

^"And  I  will  bless  them  that 
bless  thee,  and  curse  him  that 
curseth  thee :  and  in  thee  shall 
all  families  of  the  earth  be 
blessed. — Gen.  12:3. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
the  last  days,  that  the  mountain 
of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  es- 
tablished in  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  shall  be  exalted  above 
the  hills ;  and  all  nations  shall 
flow  unto  it. 

And  many  people  shall  go  and 
say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up 
to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  to 
the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob ; 
and  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways. 


THE  ETHICAL  MESSAGE 


31 


The  nation  descended  from  Abraham  was  chosen  to  be : 

1.  A  witness  to  the  unity  of  God  in  the  midst  of  uni- 
versal idolatry  (Deut.  6:4;  Isa.  43 :  10,  11.)^^ 

2.  To  illustrate  to  the  nations  the  blessedness  of  that 
people  whose  God  is  Jehovah  (Deut.  33:26-29.)^^ 

3.  To    receive   and    transmit    the    divine    revelations. 
(Rom.  3:  1,  2;  Deut.  4:  5,  6  et  seq.)^^ 


and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths : 
for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth 
the  law,  and  the  word  of  the 
Lord    from    Jerusalem. 

And  he  shall  judge  among  the 
nations,  and  shall  rebuke  many 
people  :  and  they  shall  beat  their 
swords  into  plowshares,  and 
their  spears  into  pruning  hooks  : 
nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword 
against  nation,  neither  shall  they 
learn  war  any  more. — Isa.  2: 
2-4. 

And  he  will  lift  up  an  en- 
sign to  the  nations  from  far, 
and  will  hiss  unto  them  from 
the  end  of  the  earth :  and,  be- 
hold, they  shall  come  with  speed 
swiftly. — Isa.   5  :  26. 

Nevertheless  the  dimness  shall 
not  he  such  as  was  in  her  vexa- 
tion, when  at  the  first  he  lightly 
afflicted  the  land  of  Zebulun  and 
the  land  of  Naphtali,  and  after- 
ward did  more  grievously  afflict 
her  by  the  way  of  the  sea,  be- 
yond Jordan,  in  Galilee  of  the 
nations. 

The  people  that  walked  in 
darkness  have  seen  a  great  light : 
they  that  dwell  in  the  land  of 
the  shadow  of  death,  upon  them 
hath  the  light  shined. — Isa.  9 : 
I,  2. 

O  Lord,  my  strength,  and  my 
fortress,  and  my  refuge  in  the 
day  of  affliction,  the  Gentiles 
shall  come  unto  thee  from  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  and  shall  say, 
Surely  our  fathers  have  inher- 
ited lies,  vanity,  and  things 
wherein  there  is  no  profit. — Jer. 
16 :  19. 

Proclaim  ye  this  among  the 
Gentiles  ;  Prepare  war,  wake  up 
the  mighty  men,  let  all  the  men 


of  war  draw  near;  let  them 
come  up  : 

Beat  your  plowshares  into 
swords,  and  your  pruning  hooks 
into  spears  :  let  the  weak  say,  I 
am  strong. — Joel  3  :  9,  10. 

'*Hear,  O  Israel:  The  Lord 
our  God  is  one  Lord. — Deiit.  6 : 
4- 

Ye  are  my  witnesses,  saith 
the  Lord,  and  my  servant  v/hom 
I  have  chosen  :  that  ye  may 
know  and  believe  me,  and  under- 
stand that  I  am  he :  before  me 
there  was  no  God  formed, 
neither  shall  there  be  after  me. 

I,  even  I,  am  the  Lord ;  and 
beside  me  there  is  no  saviour. — 
Isa^  43  :  10,  II. 

^^  There  is  none  like  unto  the 
God  of  Jeshurun,  who  rideth 
upon  the  heaven  in  thy  help, 
and  in  his  excellency  on  the 
sky. 

The  eternal  God  is  thy  refuge, 
and  underneath  are  the  ever- 
lasting arms :  and  he  shall 
thrust  out  the  enemy  from  be- 
fore thee ;  and  shall  say,  De- 
stroy them. 

Israel  then  shall  dwell  in 
safety  alone :  the  fountain  of 
Jacob  shall  he  upon  a  land  of 
corn  and  wine  ;  also  his  heavens 
shall  drop  down  dew. 

Happy  art  thou,  O  Israel : 
who  is  like  unto  thee,  O  people 
saved  by  the  Lord,  the  shield  of 
thy  help,  and  who  is  the  sword 
of  thy  excellency !  and  thine 
enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto 
thee ;  and  thou  shalt  tread  upon 
their  high  places. — Deut.  33 :  26- 
29. 

^^What  advantage  then  hath 
the  Jew?  or  what  profit  is  there 
of  circumcision  ? 


2>2  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 

4.  To  bring-  forth  the  Messiah ;  Seed  of  the  woman 
(Gen.  3:15/1^  ^^^^1  ^j  Abraham  (Gen.  21:3;  Matt. 
1:1;  Gal.  3:16)i^  son  of  David  (Matt.  1:1)^^  Son 
of  God  (Luke  1:35)-^  and  Son  of  man  (Matt.  16: 
13).-i 

In  the  first  and  second  of  these  trusts  committed  to 
the  chosen  nation  there  was  conspicuous  failure.  Again 
and  again  the  people  fell  into  idolatry,  thus  breaking* 
down  in  their  testimony  to  the  unity  and  spirituality  of 
God.  The  immoral  and  unrighteous  conduct  so  rife  in 
Israel  broke  down  the  national  testimony  to  the  blessed- 
ness of  that  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord.  Another 
grave  fault  was  manifested  in  a  constant  tendency  to 
depart  from  the  separateness  enjoined  upon  the  nation 
as  the  subjects  of  their  unseen  King,  Jehovah,  For  Israel 
was  a  Theocracy.  Set  between  Gentile  powers  mightier 
than  they,  and  which  were  constantly  increasing  in  power, 
the  divine  legislation  upon  which  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel  was  organized  provided  for  neither  army  nor  fort- 
ress. And,  so  long  as  loyalty  to  Jehovah  and  the  spirit 
of  obedience  remained,  no  hostile  foot  crossed  the  fron- 

Much   every  way :   chiefly,  be-  The    book    of    the    generation 

cause  that  unto  them  were  com-  of     Jesus     Christ,     the     son     of 

mitted    the    oracles     of    God. —  David,    the    son    of   Abraham. — 

Rom.    3  :  i,  2.  Matt,  i :  i. 

Behold,     I     have    taught    you  Now  to  Abraham  and  his  seed 

statutes  and  judgments,  even  as  were    the    promises    made.      He 

the    Lord    my    God    commanded  saith   not.    And   to    seeds,    as    of 

me,  that  ye  should  do  so  in  the  many,  but  as  of  one.  And  to  thy 

land  whither  ye  go  to  possess  it.  seed,    which    is    Christ. — Gal.    3  : 

Keep  therefore  and  do  them;  16. 
for    this    is    your    wisdom    and  ^^  The  book  of  the  generation 

your  understanding  in  the  sight  of     Jesus     Christ,     the     son     of 

of  the  nations,  which  shall  hear  David,    the    son    of   Abraham. — 

all      these      statutes,      and      say,  Matt.  1:1. 

Surely    this    great    nation    is    a  ^^  And  the  angel  answered  and 

wise   and   understanding   people.  said  unto   her,   The   Holy   Ghost 

— Dent.  4:5,6.  shall    come   upon   thee,    and    the 

^'  And    I    will    put    enmity    be-  power  of  the  Highest  shall  over- 

tween  thee  and  the  woman,  and  shadow  thee  :  therefore  also  that 

between  thy  seed  and  her  seed  ;  holy   thing   which    shall  be  born 

it  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  of  thee   shall  be  called  the   Son 

shalt   bruise    his    heel. — Gen.    3:  of  God. — Luke  i :  33. 
J 5'  '^^  When    Jesus    came    into    the 

^®And     Abraham     called     the  coasts    of    Caesarea    Philippi,    he 

name   of  his   son  that  was  born  asked      his       disciples,       saying, 

unto   him,   whom    Sarah   bare   to  Whom    do    men    say    that    I    the 

him,  Isaac. — Gen,  21:  3.  Son  of  man  am? — Matt.  16:13. 


THE  ETHICAL  MESSAGE 


33 


tiers  of  Palestine.  An  unseen  Power  guarded  Immanuers 
land. 

These  failures  constituted  the  grounds  of  Jehovah's 
controversy  with  Israel — a  controversy  in  which  the 
prophets  were  the  spokesmen  for  Israel's  King.  That 
controversy,  which  I  can  but  summarize,  followed  the 
lines  of  the  great  warning  passage,  Deuteronomy  28: 
15-19,  etseq.;  29:  24-28,22 

It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that,  when  the  greater 
of  the  writing  prophets  appeared,  the  preliminary  and 
warning  chastisements  of  the  disobedient  nation  foretold 
in  the  Deuteronomic  passage  had  already  fallen.  Al- 
ready, in  Elijah's  time,  the  warning  drought  had  been 
sent  (Deut.  28:23,  24;  1  Kings  17:  1),^^  and  the 
land  had  been  invaded  (Deut.  28:25;  1  Kings  14:25, 
26). 2^     There  remained  but  the  alternatives  of  the  re- 


^-  But  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
if  thou  wilt  not  hearken  unto  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  to 
observe  to  do  all  his  command- 
ments and  his  statutes  which  I 
command  thee  this  day  ;  that  all 
these  curses  shall  come  upon 
thee,  and  overtake  thee  : 

Cursed  shalt  thou  he  in  the 
city,  and  cursed  shalt  thou  he  in 
the  field. 

Cursed  shall  he  thy  basket 
and   thy   store. 

Cursed  shall  he  the  fruit  of 
thy  body,  and  the  frujt  of  thy 
land,  the  increase  of  thy  kine, 
and  the  flocks  of  thy  sheep. 

Cursed  shalt  thou  he  when 
thou  comest  in,  and  cursed  shalt 
thou  he  when  thou  goest  out. — 
Deut.    28 :  15-19. 

Even  all  nations  shall  say, 
Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done 
thus  unto  this  land  ?  what  mean- 
eth  the  heat  of  this  great  anger? 

Then  men  shall  say.  Because 
they  have  forsaken  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers, 
which  he  made  with  them  when 
he  brought  them  forth  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt : 

For  they  went  and  served 
other      gods,      and      worshipped 


them,  gods  whom  they  knew 
not,  and  zvhom  he  had  not  given 
unto  them  : 

And  the  anger  of  the  Lord 
v/as  kindled  against  this  land, 
to  bring  upon  it  all  the  curses 
that  are  written  in  this  book : 

And  the  Lord  rooted  them 
out  of  their  land  in  anger,  and 
in  wrath,  and  in  great  indigna- 
tion, and  cast  them  into  another 
land,  as  it  is  this  day. — Deut. 
29  :  24-28. 

^And  thy  heaven  that  is  over 
thy  head  shall  be  brass,  and  the 
earth  that  is  under  thee  shall  he 
iron. 

The  Lord  shall  make  the  rain 
of  thy  land  powder  and  dust : 
from  heaven  shall  it  come  down 
upon  thee,  until  thou  be  de- 
stroyed— Deut.   28  :  23,  24. 

And  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  who 
was  of  the  inhabitants  of  Gilead, 
said  unto  Ahab,  As  the  Lord  God 
of  Israel  liveth,  before  whom 
I  stand,  there  shall  not  be  dew 
nor  rain  these  years,  but  ac- 
cording to  my  word. — /  Kings 
17 :  I. 

^  The  Lord  shall  cause  thee  to 
be  smitten  before  thine  enemies : 
thou     shalt     go     out     one     way 


34  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

pentance  of  the  nation  or  the  foretold  expulsion  from 
the  land.  And  this  was  the  urgent  warning-  note  of  the 
prophetic  testimony.  Jehovah  would  no  longer  stultify 
his  holiness  by  continuing  as  his  representative  among 
the  Gentile  nations  a  people  in  no  sense  better  than  they. 

Israel  had  failed  Jehovah,  but  it  should  be  borne  in 
mind  that  Israel  was  disowned  and  sent  into  captivity 
because  of  sin.  Jehovah  rests  his  condemnation  of  the 
nation  upon  no  narrow  ground,  no  mere  tribal  failure. 
''Thou  hast  made  me  to  serve  with  thy  sins"  (Isa.  43: 
24).  ''Your  iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and 
your  God,  and  your  sins  have  hid  his  face  from  you, 
that  he  will  not  hear"  (Isa.  59:2).  "Yea,  all  Israel 
have  transgressed  thy  law,  even  by  departing,  that  they 
might  not  obey  thy  voice;  therefore  the  curse  is  poured 
upon  us,  and  the  oath  that  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses 
the  servant  of  God,  because  we  have  sinned  against  him" 
(Dan.  9:11). 

No  distinction  can  be  made  in  this  respect  between  the 
ethical  messages  of  the  prophets  who  prophesied  in  the 
northern  kingdom  and  those  who  were  sent  to  Judah. 
The  broad  ground  of  condemnation  in  both  cases  is  the 
same.    Both  Ephraim  and  Judah  had  sinned. 

But  in  these  messages  of  rebuke  there  is  such  a  dis- 
closure of  the  mind  of  God  concerning  human  conduct 
as  invests  the  prophetic  writings  with  a  permanent  and 
intensely  vital  interest. 

The  central  word  of  the  prophets  is  righteousness. 
Israel  was  a  people  under  law;  that  is,  a  people  from 
whom  Jehovah  demanded  righteousness  as,  under  grace, 
he  bestows  righteousness  through  faith  (Rom.  3:19- 
22). 25 

against    them,    and    flee     seven  house ;   he   even  took   away  all : 

ways  before  them  :  and  shalt  be  and  he  took  away  all  the  shields 

removed   into   all    the   kingdoms  of     gold     which     Solomon     had 

of  the    earth. — Dent.    28:25.  made. — /  Kings  14:25,26. 

And    it   came    to    pass    in    the  ^  Now    we    know    that    what 

fifth    year    of    king    Rehoboam,  things    soever   the    law    saith,    it 

that     Shishak     king     of     Egypt  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the 

came  up  against  Jerusalem  :  law :   that   every   mouth   may   be 

And  he  took  away  the  treas-  stopped,   and   all  the  world  may 

ures  of  the  house   of  the   Lord,  become  guilty  before  God. 

and  the  treasures  of  the   king's  Therefore  by  the  deeds  of  the 


THE  ETHICAL  MESSAGE  35 

But  Israel  was  making  righteousness  to  consist  in 
formal  religion  instead  of  in  right  faith  evidenced  by 
right  conduct.  It  is  a  mistake  that  millions  of  formal 
religionists  are  making  in  this  day.  The  refusal  of  God 
to  accept  that  substitution  is  expressed  by  his  prophets 
with  an  emphasis  that  has  in  it  an  element  of  scorn. 

It  should  be  remembered  that  while  Israel  was  substi- 
tuting religious  formalism  for  righteousness,  it  was  still 
the  religion  given  at  Sinai.  It  was  still  a  far  cry  to  the 
day  when  the  Pharisee  would  'be  going  up  to  the  temple 
to  pray  ''with  himself'  (Luke  18:  11)^6  ^^d  to  boast  of 
fasting  and  tithe-paying.  All  that  came  later.  The  re- 
ligion that  Jehovah  would  not  accept  as  righteousness 
was  scrupulously  according  to  Leviticus. 

The  reproach  of  Jehovah  was  not  that  his  altars  were 
forsaken,  but  that  the  sacrifices  were  without  faith,  and 
offered  by  unclean  hands. 

"To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices 
unto  me  ?  saith  the  Lord :  I  am  full  of  the  burnt  offerings 
of  rams,  and  the  fat  of  fed  beasts.'' 

''Bring  no  more  vain  oblations ;  incense  is  an  abomina- 
tion unto  me;  the  new  moons  and  sabbaths,  the  calling 
of  assemblies,  I  cannot  aw^ay  with ;  it  is  iniquity,  even 
the  solemn  meeting." 

As  over  against  a  ritual  righteousness,  the  prophets 
by  the  word  of  the  Lord  insist  on  a  righteousness  of 
conduct.  But  this  insistence,  while  absolute  and  unquali- 
fied, is  cast  in  a  form  of  expression  which  shows  how 
tenderly  Jehovah  yearned  over  his  people.  A  lovely 
illustration  of  both  the  insistence  and  the  tenderness  is 
the  beautiful  parable  of  the  Vineyard  of  Jehovah  (Isa. 
5  :  7,  and  preceding)  .^'^ 

law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justi-        them  that   believe  :    for  there   is 
fied    in    his    sight:    for    by    the       no   difference.— i^om.   3:19-22. 

law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  _    ^^^t.  ^^^""-fru- ^^^^^    r^A 

T^   ,  .1        •   1  .  f  Drayed   thus   with   himself,    God, 

But  now  the  righteousness  of  i  ^hank  thee,  that   I   am  not  as 

God    without    the    law    is    mani-  other  men  are,  extortioners,  un- 

fested,    being    witnessed    by    the  just,  adulterers,   or  even  as  this 

law  and  the  prophets  ;  publican. —-Li^^^   18  :  11. 

77            ,1,          .  i_^                        i  For  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord 
Even  ^  the     righteousness     of  ^f  ^osts  is  the  house  of  Israel, 
God  which  IS  by  faith  of  Jesus  and  the  men  of  Tudah  his  pleas- 
Christ    unto    all    and    upon    all  ant    plant :    and    he    looked    for 


36  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY^ 

The  words  of  Micah  (6:8)  may  be  taken  as  a  sum- 
mary of  the  righteousness  demanded,  on  behalf  of  Jeho- 
vah, by  the  prophets:  "And  what  doth  the  Lord  require 
of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 
humbly  with  thy  God  ?''  Or,  as  given  through  Zechariah 
(8:16,  17)  >^^ 

Plain  honesty  in  all  dealings,  chastity,  humility,  rev- 
erence, penitence — these  are  the  qualities  which  are  em- 
phasized as  those  which,  under  law,  make  a  people 
acceptable  with  God,  and  for  the  lack  of  which  the 
nation,  after  his  long  forbearance,  must  endure  the  chas- 
tisement of  captivity  and  dispersion. 

judgment,     but     behold     oppres-       cute  the  judgment  of  truth  and 

sion;   for  righteousness,  but  be-  P^^^^^^?  r^""  ^^^^/ ' 

And  let  none  of  you  imagine 

hold  a  cry. — Isa.  3  :  7,  evil   in   your   hearts   against   his 

^«  These  are  the  things  that  ye  neighbour ;    and    love    no    false 

,    „    J        c'       1  oath :    for    all    these    are    things 

shall   do;    Speak  ye   every   man  that    I    hate,    saith    the    Lord.— 

the  truth  to  his  neighbour;  exe-  Zech.   8 :  16,  17. 


IV.    THE  MESSIAH 


IN  mere  bulk  the  ministry  of  the  Old  Testament  proph- 
ets to  their  own  time,  the  controversy  of  Jehovah 
with  his  people,  far  exceeds  that  devoted  to  predic- 
tion. The  great  predictive  messages,  indeed,  grow^ 
out  of  the  condition  of  Israel  at  the  time  when  the  prophet 
appears,  and  are  for  the  instruction  and  comfort  of  the  na- 
tion in  view  of  the  coming  captivities  and  dispersion. 
Typical  passages  are  Isaiah  7  :  10-14,^  where  the  refusal  of 
the  wicked  King  Ahaz  to  put  God  to  a  test  which  might 
have  restored  his  faith  brought  forth  the  great  Messianic 
prediction  of  the  Virgin's  Son;  chapters  60  and  61  ^  of 
the  same  book,  where  predictions  of  approaching  dis- 
ciplinary judgments  are  followed  by  wonderful  assur- 


^  Moreover  the  Lord  spake 
again  unto   Ahaz,  saying, 

Ask  thee  a  sign  of  the  Lord 
thy  God ;  ask  it  either  in  the 
depth,  or  in  the  height  above. 

But  Ahaz  said,  I  will  not  ask, 
neither  will  I  tempt  the  Lord. 

And  he  said,  Hear  ye  now, 
O  house  of  David ;  Is  it  a  small 
thing  for  you  to  weary  men,  but 
will  ye  weary  my  God  also  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord  himself 
shall  give  you  a  sign ;  Behold,  a 
virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a 
son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Im- 
manuel. — Isa.  y  .'10-14. 

^  Arise,  shine ;  for  thy  light  is 
come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
is  risen  upon  thee. 

For,  behold,  the  darkness  shall 
cover  the  earth,  and  gross  dark- 
ness the  people :  but  the  Lord 
shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  his 
glory  shall  be  seen  upon  thee. 

And  the   Gentiles   shall   come 


to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the 
brightness  of  thy  rising.  Etc. — 
Isa.    60. 

The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is 
upon  me ;  because  the  Lord  hath 
anointed  me  to  preach  good  tid- 
ings unto  the  meek ;  he  hath 
sent  me  to  bind  up  the  broken- 
hearted, to  proclaim  liberty  to 
the  captives,  and  the  opening  of 
the  prison  to  them  that  are 
bound ; 

To  proclaim  the  acceptable 
year  of  the  Lord,  and  the  day 
of  vengeance  of  our  God ;  to 
comfort   all  that  mourn ; 

To  appoint  unto  them  that 
mourn  in  Zion,  to  give  unto  them 
beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy 
for  mourning,  the  garment  of 
praise  for  the  spirit  of  heavi- 
ness ;  that  they  might  be  called 
trees  of  righteousness,  the  plant- 
ing of  the  Lord,  that  he  might 
be  glorified.    Etc. — Isa.  61. 


37 


38 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


ances  of  the  perpetuity  of  the  Divine  covenants   with 
Israel  (for  example,  59:20,  21).^ 

The  great  themes  of  predictive  prophecy  are  the  com- 
ing of  Messiah ;  the  future  restoration  of  Israel  to  the 
land,  the  national  conversion  ( Jer.  31 :  6-12)^ ;  the  exalta- 
tion of  the  nation  to  be  first  of  the  nations;  and  the 
blessing  of  the  whole  earth  in  the  kingdom  of  Messiah. 
Then,  overleaping  all  intervening  ''times"  and  ''ages,'' 
predictive  prophecy  goes  to  the  end  of  the  present  age 
and  gives  the  detail  of  all  this  the  "great  and  dreadful'' 
day  of  Jehovah;  the  rise  of  the  man  of  sin;  the  great 
tribulation ;  the  second  advent  of  Christ ;  the  regathering 
of  the  elect  race,  Israel;  the  judgment  of  the  Gentile 
nations ;  and  the  setting  up  of  the  kingdom  predicted 
and  described  by  the  Old  Testament  prophets.  The 
present  church  age,  which  fills  a  parenthesis  or  gap  in 


'  And  the  Redeemer  shall  come 
to  Zion,  and  unto  them  that  turn 
from  transgression  in  Jacob, 
saith  the  Lord. 

As  for  me,  this  is  my  cove- 
nant with  them,  saith  the  Lord ; 
My  spirit  that  is  upon  thee,  and 
my  words  which  I  have  put  in 
thy  mouth,  shall  not  depart  out 
of  thy  mouth,  nor  out  of  the 
mouth  of  thy  seed,  nor  out  of 
the  mouth  of  thy  seed's  seed, 
saith  the  Lord,  from  henceforth 
and  for  ever. — Isa.  59  •  ^o,  2i. 

*For  there  shall  be  a  day,  that 
the  watchmen  upon  the  mount 
Ephraim  shall  cry,  Arise  ye,  and 
let  us  go  up  to  Zion  unto  the 
Lord  our  God. 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord ;  Sing 
with  gladness  for  Jacob,  and 
shout  among  the  chief  of  the 
nations:  publish  ye,  praise  ye. 
and  say,  O  Lord,  save  thy  peo- 
ple, the  remnant  of  Israel. 

Behold,  I  will  bring  them  from 
the  north  country,  and  gather 
them  from  the  coasts  of  the 
earth,  and  with  them  the  blind 
and   the   lame,   the   woman   with 


child  and  her  that  travaileth 
with  child  together:  a  great 
company  shall  return  thither. 

They  shall  come  with  weep- 
ing, and  with  supplications  will 
I  lead  them  :  I  will  cause  them 
to  walk  by  the  rivers  of  waters 
in  a  straight  way,  wherein  they 
shall  not  stumble :  for  I  am  a 
father  to  Israel,  and  Ephraim  is 
my  firstborn. 

Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
O  ye  nations,  and  declare  it  in 
the  isles  afar  off,  and  say.  He 
that  scattered  Israel  will  gather 
him,  and  keep  him,  as  a  shep- 
herd doth  his  flock. 

For  the  Lord  hath  redeemed 
Jacob,  and  ransomed  him  from 
the  hand  of  him  that  was 
stronger  than  he. 

Therefore  they  shall  come  and 
sing  in  the  height  of  Zion,  and 
shall  flow  together  to  the  good- 
ness of  the  Lord,  for  wheat, 
and  for  wine,  and  for  oil,  and 
for  the  young  of  the  flock  and 
of  the  herd  :  and  their  soul  shall 
be  as  a  watered  garden ;  and 
they  shall  not  sorrow  any  more 
at  all. — Jer.  31:6-12. 


THE  MESSIAH 


39 


the  Old  Testament  predicted  order  of  events,  was  veiled 
from  the  Old  Testament  prophets  (Eph.  3:  1-11).^ 

It  is  the  Messianic  Message  which  transcends  all  others 
in  importance,  not  only  because  all  salvation  was  to  be 
wrought  out  by  Christ,  but  also  because  all  the  other 
predicted  events  have  to  do  with  His  advents  and  His 
authority.  It  is  Christ  who  regathers  Israel ;  Christ  who, 
by  His  personal  manifestation,  converts  Israel  (Hosea 
2:  14-17)^;  Christ  who  destroys  Israel's  enemies  at  Arma- 
geddon (Rev.  19:  11  et  seq.)'^;  Christ  who  reigns  over 
the  earth  during  the  kingdom  age  (Isa.  9:6,  7;  Luke 
1 :  33)^;  David's  Son,  Son  of  God,  Son  of  man,  Son  of 
Abraham. 


^  For  this  cause  I  Paul,  the 
prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you 
Gentiles, 

If  ye  have  heard  of  the  dis- 
pensation of  the  grace  of  God 
which  is  given  me  to  you-ward  : 

How  that  by  revelation  he 
made  known  unto  me  the  mys- 
tery ;  (as  I  wrote  afore  in  few 
words, 

Whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye 
may  understand  my  knowledge 
in  the   mystery   of  Christ) 

Which  in  other  ages  was  not 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto 
his  holy  apostles  and  prophets 
by  the  Spirit  ; 

That  the  Gentiles  should  be 
fellowheirs,  and  of  the  same 
body,  and  partakers  of  his  prom- 
ise in   Christ  by  the  gospel : 

Whereof  I  was  made  a  minis- 
ter, according  to  the  gift  of  the 
grace  of  God  given  unto  me  by 
the  effectual  working  of  his 
power. 

Unto  me,  who  am  less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this 
grace  given,  that  I  should  preach 
among  the  Gentiles  the  un- 
searchable  riches  of   Christ ; 

And  to  make  all  men  see  what 
is  the  fellowship  of  the  mystery, 
which  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  hath  been  hid  in  God, 
who  created  all  things  by  Jesus 
Christ : 


To  the  intent  that  now  unto 
the  principalities  and  powers  in 
heavenly  places  might  be  known 
by  the  church  the  manifold  wis- 
dom of  God, 

According  to  the  eternal  pur- 
pose which  he  purposed  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord. — Eph.  3 :  i-ii. 

*  Therefore,  behold,  I  will  al- 
lure her,  and  bring  her  into  the 
wilderness,  and  speak  comfort- 
ably unto  her. 

And  I  will  give  her  her  vine- 
yards^ from  thence,  and  the  val- 
ley of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope : 
and  she  shall  sing  there,  as  in 
the  days  of  her  youth,  and  as  in 
the  day  when  she  came  up  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt. 

And  it  shall  be  at  that  day, 
saith  the  Lord,  that  thou  shalt 
call  me  Ishi ;  and  shalt  call  me 
no  more  Baali. 

For  I  will  take  away  the 
names  of  Baalim  out  of  her 
mouth,  and  they  shall  no  more 
be  remembered  by  their  name. — 
Hosea  2 :  14-17. 

'^  And  I  saw  heaven  opened, 
and  behold  a  white  horse ;  and 
he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called 
Faithful  and  True,  and  in  right- 
eousness he  doth  judge  and  make 
war. — Rev.  ig  :  11. 

®  For  unto  us  a  child  is  born, 
unto  us  a  son  is  given  :  and  the 
government  shall  be  upon  his 
shoulder :  and  his  name  shall  be 


40  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVf 

The  prophetical  books  are  arranged  in  our  Bibles  in 
the  order  of  the  fulness  of  the  treatment  of  the  pro- 
phetic themes,  and  not  in  their  chronological  order.  This 
has  given  rise  to  the  division  into  major,  or  greater, 
and  minor,  or  lesser  prophets ;  a  division  based  upon  the 
bulk  or  volume  of  the  writings.  The  better  division  is 
that  based  upon  the  captivities  of  Israel,  and  is  into 
prophets  before  the  exile,  prophets  during  the  exile,  and 
prophets  to  the  restored  remnant  (Haggai,  Zechariah, 
Malachi).  Taking  the  prophets  in  this  order  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Messianic  revelation  is  progressive  and  har- 
monious. It  should  be  remembered  that  Messianic  proph- 
ecy did  not  begin  with  the  Hebrew  writing-prophets. 
They  but  added  detail  to  a  body  of  revelation  concerning 
a  coming  One  which,  in  type  and  testimony,  had  been 
growing  from  the  very  creation  of  Adam — nay,  from 
the  material  creation,  for  the  sun  itself  is  a  type  of  Him. 
And,  to  use  a  figure,  the  prophets  but  added  to  and  comr 
pleted  a  portrait  of  the  coming  Messiah  the  first  lines 
of  which,  and  many  an  added  touch,  had  been  already 
put  upon  the  canvas. 

The  Sun  of  righteousness  (Mai.  4:2)^;  the  second 
Man  (1  Cor.  15  :  47) ^^  the  last  Adam  (1  Cor.  15:45)^1; 
the  Seed  of  the  woman   (Gen.  3:  15;  Gal.  4:4)^^;  the 

called      Wonderful,      Counsellor,  and    grow   up    as   calves    of   the 

The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  stall. — Mai.  4  :  2. 

Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace.  ^®  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth, 

Of   the    increase    of    his    gov-  earthy :    the   second   man   is  the 

ernment  and  peace  there  shall  be  Lord   from  heaven. — /   Cor.   15 : 

no    end,    upon    the    throne    of  47- 

Da\id,    and   upon    his    kingdom.  "And    so    it    is    written.    The 

to   order   it,   and   to   establish   it  ^rst  man  Adam  was  made  a  liv- 

with  judgment  and  with  justice  ing    soul ;    the    last    Adam    was 

from   henceforth   even  for  ever.  ^«^^     ^     quickening     spirit.— I 

The   zeal   of  the   Lord   of  hosts  ^^u/^'i^'    -u        .  >      k. 

•  n         r  ^u-         r        ^    x  *•  "And    I    Will    put    enmity   be- 

will  perform  this.-/.a.  9:  6  7-  ,^^^^  ^^ee  and  the  woman,  and 

And   he    shall    reign   over   the  ^^^^^^^  ^^     ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^. 

houseof  Jacob  for  ever;  and  of  .^    ^j^^jj    ^^^-^^    thy    head,    and 

his   kingdom   there   shall   be   no  ^j^^^  ^j^^^  ^^^-^^  his  heel—Gen. 

end. — Luke  i :  33.  ^  .  j. 

•But   unto   you   that    fear   my  '3^^   ^^en   the   fulness   of  the 

name  shall  the  Sun  of  righteous-  time   was  come,   God  sent   forth 

ness    arise    with    healing    in    his  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made 

wings;    and    ye    shall    go    forth,  under  the  law. — Gal.  4:4. 


THE  MESSIAH  41 

lamb  of  Abel  (Gen.  4:4)^^;  the  Son  of  Abraham  (Gen. 
12 :  3)^^  ;  the  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek  (Gen. 
14:  18;  Heb.  7:  11  and  preceding)  ^^;  the  Ladder  of  Ja- 
cob (Gen.  28:12,  13;  John  1:51)^^  the  Dehverer  hke 
Moses  (Acts  7 :  35)^' ;  the  Prophet  Hke  unto  Moses  (Acts 
7:?>7y^\  the  victorious  Captain  Hke  Joshua;  the  Priest 
after  the  manner  of  Aaron,  but  after  the  order  of  Mel- 
chizedek; the  Mercy  seat,  shewbread,  candlestick,  golden 
altar  of  incense,  and  every  other  object  in  the  tabernacle; 
Son  of  Abraham — so,  and  in  like  manner,  had  the  Types 
been  telling  the  story  of  Messiah.  And  Baalam  had  seen 
the  Star  out  of  Jacob;  and  Jacob  had  seen  Shiloh;  and 
David  had  seen  his  great  Son ;  and  Job  had  declared  his 
faith  that  his  Redeemer  would  stand  at  the  latter  day 
upon  the  earth.  This,  and  much  more,  had  been  painted 
into  the  Portrait  before  the  writing  prophets  took  up 
the  brush. 

But  in  the  Prophets  whatever  was  vague  in  the  inti- 
mations down  the  ages  concerning  a  coming  One  becomes 
definite.  Sharpness  of  outline  is  a  prophetic  character- 
istic.   Messiah  is  to  be  of  the  stock  of  David  (Isa.  7 :  13 ; 

"And   Abel,    he   also   brought  And,   behold,   the   Lord    stood 

of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock  and  above    it,    and    said,    I    am    the 

of    the    fat    thereof.      And    the  Lord     God      of     Abraham     thy 

Lord  had  respect  unto  Abel  and  father,    and   the    God    of   Isaac ; 

to  his  offering.— (7^n.  4:4-  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to 

^*And    I   will   bless  them   that  thee   will   I   give   it,   and   to   thy 

bless   thee,    and   curse   him   that       seed. Gen.  28 :  12,  13. 

curseth  thee:   and  in  thee   shall  a  '  -,  ,  ^    '^:^i,  „^A  i,-^    \T^^iUr 

u   *.u     f  ^'^'  r,  r.f  4-1,       ^^^^v,   u^  And  he  saitn  unto  nim.  Verily, 

U.^.!^^^      t'  ^^^^'  '^  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Hereafter 

-And     Melchizedek     king     of  ^f    shall    see    heaven    open     and 

Salem  brought   forth   bread  and  '^^  angels  of  God  ascenaing  and 

wine;   and  he  ^d'as  the  priest  of  descending    upon    the     Son     of 

the  most  high  God,-Gen.  14 :  18.  '^^^'-^.""^Z  '^^'' 

If    therefore    perfection    were  "This   Moses   whom   they   re- 

by  the  Levitical  priesthood,   (for  fused,  saying,  Who  made  thee  a 

under  it  the  people  received  the  ruler  and  a  judge?  the  same  did 

law,)     what     further    need     was  God  send  to  he  a  ruler  and  a  de- 

there  that  another  priest  should  hverer  by  the  hand  of  the  angel 

rise  after  the  order  of  Melchise-  which    appeared   to    him    in    the 

dec,  and  not  be  called  after  the  hush.—Acts  7 '-  ^5- 

order   of   Aaron. — Heh.    7:11.  ^^  This    is    that    Moses,    which 

^®  And  he  dreamed,  and  behold  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 

a  ladder  set  up  on  the  earth,  and  A  prophet   shall   the   Lord   your 

the  top  of  it  reached  to  heaven  :  God   raise  up  unto  you  of  your 

and   behold   the    angels    of    God  brethren,     like     unto     me ;     him 

ascending  and  descending  on  it.  shall  ye  hear. — Acts  7:  37. 


42 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYr 


9:7;  Jer.  23:5,  6;  33:  15-17;  Matt.  1:1;  Luke  l:32)i^ 
He  is  to  be  born  in  the  city  of  David,  Bethlehem  (Mic. 
5:2),-^  of  a  virgin  mother  (Isa.  7:  13,  14;  Luke  1:34, 
35).^^  And  yet  His  name  is  called  Wonderful,  Counsel- 
lor, The  mighty  God,  The  Everlasting  Father,  The  Prince 
of  Peace  (Isa.  9:6).  Still  more  wonderful,  the  One  of 
this  mighty  Name  is  to  be  He  who  will  sit  ''Upon  the 
throne  of  David,  and  upon  his  kingdom,  to  order  it,  and 
to  establish  it  with  judgment  and  with  justice  from  hence- 
forth even  for  ever"  (Isa.  9:7). 

These  details  in  the  portrait  of  the  Christ,  added  by 
the  prophets,  exclude  all  possibility  of  imposture.     It  is 


^^  And  he  said,  Hear  ye  now, 
O  house  of  David ;  Is  it  a  small 
thing  for  you  to  weary  men,  but 
will  ye  weary  my  God  also  ? — 
Isa.  7  ■  13- 

Of  the  increase  of  his  govern- 
ment and  peace  there  shall  he 
no  end,  upon  the  throne  of 
David,  and  upon  his  kingdom, 
to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it 
with  judgment  and  with  justice 
from  henceforth  even  for  ever. 
The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
will  perform  this. — Isa.  9 .'  7. 

Behold,  the  days  come,  saith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise  unto 
David  a  righteous  Branch,  and 
a  King  shall  reign  and  prosper, 
and  shall  execute  judgment  and 
justice  in  the  earth. 

In  his  days  Judah  shall  be 
saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell 
safely :  and  this  is  his  name 
whereby  he  shall  be  called,  THE 
LORD  OUR  RIGHTEOUS- 
NESS.—y^r.  23:  5.6. 

In  those  days,  and  at  that 
time,  will  I  cause  the  Branch  of 
righteousness  to  grow  up  unto 
David ;  and  he  shall  execute 
judgment  and  righteousness  in 
the  land. 

In  those  days  shall  Judah  be 
saved,  and  Jerusalem  shall  dwell 
safely :  and  this  is  the  name 
wherewith  she  shall  be  called. 
The  Lord  our  righteousness. 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord ; 
David  shall  never  want  a  man  to 


sit  upon  the  throne  of  the  house 
of   Israel. — Jer.   33:  1 5-17- 

The  book  of  the  generation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of 
David,  the  son  of  Abraham. — 
Matt.  I :  I. 

He  shall  be  great,  and  shall 
be  called  the  son  of  the  High- 
est :  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give 
unto  him  the  throne  of  his  father 
David. — Luke  i :  32. 

''But  thou,  Beth-lehem  Eph- 
ratah,  though  thou  be  little 
among  the  thousands  of  Judah, 
yet  out  of  thee  shall  he  come 
forth  unto  me  that  is  to  be 
ruler  in  Israel ;  whose  goings 
forth  have  been  from  of  old, 
from  everlasting. — Micah  5 ;  2. 

*^  And  he  said.   Hear  ye  now, 

0  house  of  David ;  Is  it  a  small 
thing  for  you  to  weary  men,  but 
will   ye   weary   my   God   also  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord  himself 
shall  give  you  a  sign;  Behold, 
a  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear 
a  son,  and  shall  call  his  name 
Immanuel. — Isa.   7 :  13,  14. 

Then  said  Mary  unto  the 
angel,  How  shall  this  be,  seeing 

1  know  not  a  man  ? 

And  the  angel  answered  and 
said  unto  her.  The  Holy  Ghost 
shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the 
power  of  the  Highest  shall  over- 
shadow thee  :  therefore  also  that 
holy  thing  which  shall  be  born 
of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son 
of  God. — Luke   i :  34,  35- 


THE  MESSIAH 


43 


open  toi  any  man  to  say,  "I  am  the  Christ,"  but  it  is  not 
possible  for  any  man  to  arrange  before  his  birth  that  he 
shall  be  born  in  Bethlehem  in  Judea,  of  a  virgin  mother, 
of  the  stock  of  King  David.  And  it  is  noteworthy  that 
the  Pharisees  and  rulers  of  the  Jews,  hating  Christ  with 
all  the  rancor  of  rehgious  prejudice,  and  accusing  Him 
falsely  of  many  things,  never  once  questioned  that  any 
one  of  the  prophetic  details  was  wanting  to  the  fulfil- 
ment by  Him  of  these  great  predictions — except  at  the 
first,  when  they  still  supposed  Jesus  to  be  a  Galilean. 

Two  kinds  of  experience  awaited  the  Messiah  upon 
earth,  suflfering  and  glory  (Luke  24:  25-27). ^^  Both  of 
these  aspects  of  His  manifestation  the  prophets  saw  and 
foretold.  But  the  way  in  which  these  experiences  would 
be  related  to  each  other  they  did  not  see,  for  the  New 
Testament  church  was  not  in  the  vision  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment prophet  (Eph.  3:  1-10).^^  That  the  prophets  were 
exercised  by  the  seeming  utter  contradiction  of  the  two 
revelations  concerning  Messiah  we  are  assured  by  an 
inspired  apostle   (1   Pet.   1:19,   11).^^     For  how  could 


^  Then  he  said  unto  them,  O 
fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  be- 
lieve all  that  the  prophets  have 
spoken : 

Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suf- 
fered these  things,  and  to  enter 
into  his  glory  ? 

And  beginning  at  Moses  and 
all  the  prophets,  he  expounded 
unto  them  in  all  the  scriptures 
the  things  concerning  himself. 
— Luke  24  :  25-27. 

^'  For  this  cause  I  Paul,  the 
prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you 
Gentiles, 

If  ye  have  heard  of  the  dis- 
pensation of  the  grace  of  God 
which  is  given  me  to  you- ward  : 

How  that  by  revelation  he 
made  known  unto  me  the  mys- 
tery ;  (as  I  wrote  afore  in  few 
words. 

Whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye 
may  understand  my  knowledge 
in  the  mystery  of  Christ) 

Which  in  other  ages  was  not 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto 


his  holy  apostles  and  prophets 
by  the   Spirit  ; 

That  the  Gentiles  should  be 
fellowheirs,  and  of  the  same 
body,  and  partakers  of  his  prom- 
ise in   Christ  by  the  gospel : 

Whereof  I  was  made  a  minis- 
ter, according  to  the  gift  of  the 
grace  of  God  given  unto  me  by 
the  effectual  working  of  his 
power. 

Unto  me,  who  am  less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this 
grace  given,  that  I  should  preach 
among  the  Gentiles  the  un- 
searchable riches   of   Christ ; 

And  to  make  all  men  see  what 
is  the  fellowship  of  the  mys- 
tery, which  from  the  beginning 
of  the  world  hath  been  hid  in 
God,  who  created  all  things  by 
Jesus  Christ : 

To  the  intent  that  now  unto 
the  principalities  and  powers  in 
heavenly  places  might  be  known 
by  the  church  the  manifold  wis- 
dom of  God. — Eph.  3 :  i-io. 

**  But  with  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without 


44  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVf 

the  Christ  be  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with 
f^rief,  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  and  also  a  king, 
reigning  as  the  heir  to  the  throne  of  David  in  the  fulness 
of  His  divine  power  and  glory?  How  could  Isaiah  53 
be  reconciled  with  Isaiah  11  and  66?  And  tliis  most 
natural  perplexity  of  the  prophets  was  quieted,  not  an- 
swered. It  was  revealed  to  them  that  the  things  to  which 
they  bore  witness  were  for  a  distant  fulfilment.  ''Unto 
w^hom  it  was  revealed,  that  not  unto  themselves  but  unto 
us  did  they  minister." 

This  apparent  contradiction,  completely  reconciled  as 
the  two  advents  come  into  view, — the  advent  to  suffer, 
and  the  advent  to  rule, — illustrates  the  fact  that  very 
much  of  the  Higher  Criticism  is  due  to  ignorance  of 
prophecy.  An  instance  in  point  is  the  hypothesis  of  two 
Isaiahs, — that  is,  the  higher  critical  theory  that  the  book 
of  Isaiah  as  we  now  have  it  must  have  been  written  by 
two  different  men,  one  before  the  captivity,  the  other 
seventy  years  later.  As  every  student  of  prophecy  knows, 
the  first  39  chapters  of  Isaiah  have  to  do  with  the  sins 
of  Israel  and  the  impending  captivities.  Beginning  with 
chapter  40  the  prophet's  vision  sweeps  on  to  the  day  of 
Israel's  restoration  from  a  world-wide  dispersion,  con- 
version, and  establishment  in  Palestine,  never  again  to 
be  moved.  It  is  Isaiah's  vision  of  the  kingdom.  What 
wonder  that  his  style  rises  from  sternness  to  triumph? 
Washington's  messages  to  Congress,  while  President  of 
a  free  nation,  dififer  in  style  from  his  letter  to  Congress 
from  Valley  Forge ;  but  no  one  but  a  higher  critic  would 
infer  two  Washingtons. 

Not  until  Messiah  had  appeared  and  had  been  rejected 
by  the  Jews  was  any  adequate  explanation  given  of  the 
paradox  in  which  the  prophetic  testimony  was  left,  that 
David's  mighty  Heir  should  also  be  the  man  on  the  cross 
of  the  Twenty-second  Psalm,  the  iniquity-bearer  of  Isaiah 
Fifty-three.     That  explanation  came   from  the  lips  of 

blemish     and     without     spot. — i  when  it  testified  beforehand  the 

Pet.  1 :  19.  sufferings    of     Christ,     and    the 

Searching  what,  or  what  man-  glory  that  should  follow. — J  Pet. 

ner  of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  i :  ii. 
v/hich   was  in   them   did   signify. 


THE  MESSIAH  45 

the  Messiah  himself.  In  the  parables  recorded  in  Mat- 
thew 13  there  is  the  foreview  of  an  age  intervening  be- 
tween the  sufferings  and  the  glory — the  long  period  of 
time  in  which  we  live.  During  this  age  are  to  be  accom- 
plished certain  ''mysteries''  of  the  kingdom  which  had 
not  been  revealed  to  the  Old  Testament  prophets  (Matt. 
\2>\  17).'^^  These  accomplished,  the  Old  Testament  pre- 
dictions are  again  to  be  taken  up,  and  Messiah  revealed 
in  His  glory  in  the  kingdom  age  which  follows  the  ''Mys- 
teries.'' These  things  will  appear  clearly  when  we  come 
to  the  greater  messages  of  the  New  Testament  prophets. 

The  prophetic  testimony  to  the  humiliation  and  suffer- 
ing of  Messiah  is  especially  voiced  through  David  and 
Isaiah.  The  Twenty-second  Psalm  is  a  vivid  picture  of 
death  by  crucifixion.  The  bones  out  of  joint  (v.  14),^® 
the  profuse  perspiration  caused  by  intense  suffering  (v. 
14), ^"^  strength  exhausted  and  intense  thirst  (v.  15),^^ 
the  hands  and  feet  pierced  (v.  16),^^  are  all  incidental 
to  death  by  crucifixion.  The  desolate  cry,  *'My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  uttered  by  our  Lord 
from  the  cross  is  taken  from  this  Psalm.  If  there  were 
no  other  proof  of  prophetic  inspiration  this  Psalm  alone 
would  be  conclusive. 

Another  prediction  of  the  sufferings  of  Messiah  is  the 
familiar  Fifty-third  of  Isaiah.  Like  the  Twenty-second 
Psalm  this  great  vision  also  closes  with  the  note  of  tri- 
umph and  victory.  This  v^rilling  Sufferer  shall  see  of 
the  birth-pangs  of  His  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied  (v.  11)^^; 
just  as  in  the  Psalm  of  crucifixion  the  cry  from  the  very 

2°  For   verily   I    say   unto   you,  a     potsherd;     and     my     tongue 

That   many   prophets   and   right-  cleaveth  to   my  jaws ;    and  thou 

eous    men    have    desired    to    see  hast^brought  me  into  the  dust  of 

those   things  which  ye   see,   and  deatn.— P.'a/m  22:15. 

have  not  seen  them;  and  to  hear  ''For    dogs     have    compassed 

those  things  which  ye  hear,  and  P^^ ''  ^¥  assembly  of  the  wicked 

have  not  heard  them.-Matt.  rs:  ^^LVl^,!^- '   tHhTat^ 


IT- 

26    27 


22 :  16. 


I  am  poured  out  like  water,  'so  tt       i.   1^              r  ^t,      4...^   „:i 

^*.A    ^11    ^,     u                         4.      £  ^  He   shall   see   of  the   travail 

and    all    my    bones    are    out    of  ^^  ^-^   ^^^^j    ^^^^   ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^^3. 

joint :  my  heart  is  like  wax ;   it  fi^j  .  b,.  j^is  knowledge  shall  my 

IS    melted    m    the    midst    of    my  righteous  servant  justify  many; 

bowels.— Psalm  22:14.  for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities. 

*®  My  strength  is  dried  up  like  — Isa.  33:  11. 


46  WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

mouth  of  the  lion  is,  "I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my 
brethren :  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation  will  I  praise 
thee''  (v.  22),  and  triumph  is  in  the  declaration,  *'For 
the  kingdom  is  the  Lord's :  and  he  is  the  governor  among 
the  nations"  (v.  28). 

There  is,  it  may  be  added,  a  clear  prophetic  testimony 
to  the  meaning  of  the  sufferings  of  Messiah.  "He  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our 
iniquities."  Nor  do  the  prophets  leave  room  for  modern 
dilutions  of  the  doctrine.  If  it  be  urged,  as  it  sometimes 
is,  that  the  true  meaning  is :  'Tie  suffered  on  account  of 
our  transgressions,"  the  answer  of  the  prophet  is,  "The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  And  the 
prophetic  testimony  is  at  one  with  the  apostolic.  "Who 
his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree, 
that  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live  unto  righteous- 
ness, by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed"  (1  Pet.  2:  24). 

By  far  the  larger  part  of  the  prophetic  testimony  to 
the  coming  One  has  to  do  with  His  manifestation  in  glory 
on  the  earth  during  the  kingdom  age.  His  heavenly  glory 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  earth  (John  17:5)^^ 
is  not  the  theme  of  the  prophets,  though  His  deity  is 
fully  recognized  (for  example,  Isa.  9:  6,  7).^^  His  glory 
is  that  of  the  incarnate  God,  reigning  in  full  manifesta- 
tion of  His  divine  glory  over  the  kingdom  covenanted  to 
David  (Isa.  9:6,  7;  11:1-12;  Jer.  23:5,  6;  33:14-17; 
Amos  9:11;  Micah  5:2;  Zech.  14:9)  .^^  

^^  And  now.  O  Father,  glorify  from  henceforth  even  for  ever. 

thou  me  with  thine  own  self  with  The   zeal   of  the   Lord   of  hosts 

the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  will  perform  this. — Isa.  g :  6,  7. 

before  the  world  was. — John  17 1  ^^And   there   shall  come   forth 

5.  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse, 

32^  as  Pqj.    yyxi\.o    us    a    child    is  and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of 

born,    unto   us   a   son   is   given :  his  roots ; 

and     the    government    shall    be  And    the    spirit    of    the    Lord 

upon     his     shoulder :     and     his  shall  rest  upon  him,  the  spirit  of 

name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  wisdom   and   understanding,    the 

Counsellor,  The  mighty  God,  The  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the 

everlasting    Father,    The    Prince  spirit   of  knowledge   and  of  the 

of   Peace.  fear  of  the  Lord  ; 

Of  the  increase  of  his  govern-  And  shall  make  him  of  quick 

ment    and   peace    there    shall    he  understanding  in  the  fear  of  the 

no     end,    upon    the    throne    of  Lord :    and    he    shall    not   judge 

David,    and    upon    his   kingdom,  after     the     sight     of    his     eyes, 

to   order   it,   and  to    establish   it  neither   reprove   after  the  hear- 

with  judgment  and  with  justice  ing  of  his  ears: 


THE  MESSIAH 


47 


To  Zechariah  is  given  the  revelation  of  both  advents 
of  Messiah,  His  advent  to  suffer  and  His  advent  to  reign. 

''Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion;  shout,  O  daugh- 
ter of  Jerusalem :  behold  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee :  he 
is  just,  and  having  salvation ;  lowly,  and  riding  upon  an 


But  with  righteousness  shall 
he  judge  the  poor,  and  reprove 
with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the 
earth :  and  he  shall  smite  the 
earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth, 
and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips 
shall  he  slay  the  wicked. 

And  righteousness  shall  be  the 
girdle  of  his  loins,  and  faithful- 
ness the  girdle  of  his  reins. 

The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with 
the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall 
lie  down  with  the  kid  ;  and  the 
calf  and  the  young  lion  and  the 
fatling  together;  and  a  little 
child  shall  lead  them. 

And  the  cow  and  the  bear 
shall  feed;  their  young  ones 
shall  lie  down  together :  and  the 
lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox. 

And  the  sucking  child  shall 
play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and 
the  weaned  child  shall  put  his 
hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den. 

They  shall  not  hurt  nor  de- 
stroy in  all  my  holy  mountain  : 
for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea. 

And  in  that  day  there  shall 
be  a  root  of  Jesse,  which  shall 
stand  for  an  ensign  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek : 
and  his  rest  shall  be  glorious. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  that  the  Lord  shall  set 
his  hand  again  the  second  time 
to  recover  the  remnant  of  his 
people,  which  shall  be  left,  from 
Assyria,  and  from  Egypt,  and 
from  Pathros,  and  from  Cush, 
and  from  Elam,  and  from 
Shinar,  and  from  Hamath,  and 
from  the  islands  of  the  sea. 

And  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign 
for  the  nations,  and  shall  assem- 
ble the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and 
gather  together  the  dispersed  of 
Judah  from  the  four  corners  of 
the  earth. — Isa.  11:1-12. 


Behold,  the  days  come,  saith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise  unto 
David  a  righteous  Branch,  and 
a  King  shall  reign  and  prosper, 
and  shall  execute  judgment  and 
justice  in  the  earth. 

In  his  days  Judah  shall  be 
saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell 
safely :  and  this  is  his  name 
whereby  he  shall  be  called,  THE 
LORD  OUR  RIGHTEOUS- 
NESS.—/er.  23:  5,6. 

Behold,  the  days  come,  saith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  perform 
that  good  thing  which  I  have 
promised  unto  the  house  of 
Israel  and  to  the  house  of  JudaH, 

In  those  days,  and  at  that 
time,  will  I  cause  the  Branch  of 
righteousness  to  grow  up  unto 
David ;  and  he  shall  execute 
judgment  and  righteousness  in 
the  land. 

In  those  days  shall  Judah  be 
saved,  and  Jerusalem  shall  dwell 
safely :  and  this  is  the  name 
wherewith  she  shall  be  called, 
The  Lord  our  righteousness. 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord : 
David  shall  never  want  a  man  to 
sit  upon  the  throne  of  the  house 
of  Israel. — Jer.  33 :  14-17. 

In  that  day  will  I  raise  up 
the  tabernacle  of  David  that  is 
fallen,  and  close  up  the  breaches 
thereof:  and  I  will  raise  up  his 
ruins,  and  I  will  build  it  as  in 
the  days  of  old. — Amos  9 ;  //. 

But  thou,  Beth-lehem  Eph- 
ratah,  though  thou  be  little 
among  the  thousands  of  Judah, 
yet  out  of  thee  shall  he  come 
forth  unto  me  that  is  to  be  ruler 
in  Israel ;  whose  goings  forth 
have  been  from  of  old,  from 
everlasting. — Micah  5  .'  2. 

And  the  Lord  shall  be  king 
over  all  the  earth  :  in  that  day 
shall  there  be  one  Lord,  and  his 
name  one. — Zech.  14 :  9. 


48  IVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

ass,  and  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass"  (Zech.  9:9).  It 
is  impossible  to  ''spiritualize"  away  the  literal  meaning 
of  this  prophecy,  because  it  was  fulfilled  with  absolute 
literalness  at  the  first  advent  (Matt.  21 :  1-11 ;  with  par- 
allel accounts  in  Mark  11  :  1-10;  Luke  19:  29-38).^^ 

But  hbw  marked  the  contrast  in  Zechariah's  vision  of 
the  second  advent.  It  introduces  the  "great  and  dreadful 
day  of  the  Lord"  (Mai.  4:5),  and  every  detail  speaks, 
not  of  meekness  and  lowliness,  but  of  resistless  power. 

**And  his  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the  mount 
of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east,  and  the 
mount  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof  toward 
the  east  and  toward  the  west,  and  there  shall  be  a  very 
great  valley ;  and  half  of  the  mountain  shall  remove 
toward  the  north,  and  half  of  it  toward  the  south,  .  .  . 
and  the  Lord  my  God  shall  come,  and  all  the  saints  with 
thee.  .  .  .  And  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth: 
in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Lord.  .  .  .  And  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  that  every  one  that  is  left  of  all  the  nations 
which  came  against  Jerusalem  shall  even  go  up  from 
vear  to  year  to  worship  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts" 
(Zech.  14:4,  5,9,  16). 

Aniios  also  testifies  to  the  exaltation  of  Messiah  at  his 
second  advent : 

^  And   when    they    drew    nigh  And    the    disciples    went,    and 

unto  Jerusalem,  and  were  come  did   as   Jesus   commanded   them, 

to    Bethphage,    unto    the    mount  And  brought  the  ass,  and  the 

of   Olives,   then   sent   Jesus  two  ^P^^      and     put     on    them    their 

disciples,  clothes,      and      they      set      hiin 

Saying    unto    them.    Go    into  '^^^^^'^                       ,    multitude  ' 

the  village  over  against  you,  and  ^p^.^^^    ^^eir    garments    in    the 

straightway  ye  shall  find  an  ass  ^ay  ;   others  cut  down  branches 

tied,  and  a  colt  with  her:  loose  from     the     trees,     and     strawed 

them,  and  bring   them  unto   me.  them  in  the   way 

And    if    any    man    say    aught  And  the  multitudes  that  went 

unto  you   ye  shall  say,  The  Lord  before,  and  that  followed,  cried, 

hath  need  of  them;  and  straignt-  saying,    Hosanna   to   the   son    of 

'''^J'l,^''^  u^'^^  ^^"^  l^^'"^'     ,          .  ^avid  :  Blessed  is  he  that  com- 

All     this     was     done,     that     it  eth    in    the    name    of   the    Lord; 

might     be     fulfilled     which     was  Hosanna   in  the  highest, 

spoken  by  the  prophet,  saying.  And  when   he   was  come   into 

Tell  ye  the  daughter  of  Sion,  Jerusalem,      all     the     city     was 

Behold,    thy    King   cometh    unto  moved,  saying.  Who  is  this  ? 

thee,  meek,  and  sitting  upon  an  And  the   multitude   said.   This 

ass,    and   a   colt   the    foal   of  an  is  Jesus  the  prophet  of  Nazareth 

^^s-  of  Galilee. — Matt.  21:  i-ii. 


THE  MESSIAH 


49 


"In  that  day  will  I  raise  up  the  tabernacle  of  David 
that  is  fallen,  and  close  up  the  breaches  thereof ;  and  I 
will  raise  up  his  ruins,  and  I  will  build  it  as  in  the  days 
of  old"  (Amos  9:  11).  And  here,  as  in  the  prophecy  of 
Zechariah,  there  is  no  possibility  of  giving  the  words  a 
figurative  interpretation,  for  the  passage  is  quoted  in 
the  New  Testament  and  appHed  to  the  return  of  the 
Lord  (Acts  15:13-18).-'^^^ 

The  Messianic  Message  of  the  Prophets — surely  their 
greatest  message — may  be  thus  summarized :  They  fore- 
saw and  foretold  a  coming  One  who  should  be  both  Son 
of  God  and  Son  of  David  (Isa.  7:13,  14:  9:6,  7).^^ 
At  His  first  advent,  born  in  the  city  of  David,  Bethlehem ; 
coming  to  Israel  "meek  and  lowly'';  rejected  by  the  rulers 
of  His  nation ;  He  fulfils  the  Abrahamic  covenant  of  re- 
demption (Gen.  12:3;  Gal.  3:16)^^  by  enduring  the 
cross,  being  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  a  vicarious 
sacrifice  for  us. 


'^And  after  they  had  held 
their  peace,  James  answered, 
saying,  Men  and  brethren, 
hearken  unto  me : 

Simeon  hath  declared  how 
God  at  the  first  did  visit  the 
Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a 
people  for  his  name. 

And  to  this  agree  the  words 
of  the  prophets ;  as  it  is  written, 

After  this  I  will  return,  and 
will  build  again  the  tabernacle 
of  David,  which  is  fallen  down ; 
and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins 
thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up: 

That  the  residue  of  men 
might  seek  after  the  Lord,  and 
all  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  my 
name  is  called,  saith  the  Lord, 
who   doeth  all  these  things. 

Known  unto  God  are  all  his 
works  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world. — Acts  15:13-18. 

''  And  he  said,  Hear  ye  now, 
O  house  of  David ;  7^  it  a  small 
thing  for  you  to  weary  men, 
but  will  ye  weary  my  God  also  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord  himself 
shall    give  you   a   sign;    Behold, 


a  virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear 
a  son,  and  shall  call  his  name 
Immanuel — Isa.    7  :  13,  14. 

For  unto  us  a  child  is  born, 
unto  us  a  son  is  given :  and  the 
government  shall  be  upon  his 
shoulder :  and  his  name  shall  be 
called  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
The  mighty  God,  The  everlast- 
ing Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace. 

Of  the  increase  of  his  govern- 
ment and  peace  there  shall  be 
no  end,  upon  the  throne  of 
David,  and  upon  his  kingdom ; 
to  order  it,  and  to  establish^  it 
with  judgment  and  with  justice 
from  henceforth  even  for  ever. 
The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
will    perform    this. — Isa.    g  :  6,  7. 

'''  And  I  w411  bless  them  that 
bless  thee,  and  curse  him  that 
curseth  thee :  and  in  thee  shall 
all  families  of  the  earth  be 
blessed. — Gen.  12:  3. 

Now  to  Abraham  and  his  seed 
were  the  promiises  made.  He 
saith  not,  And  to  seeds,  as  of 
many ;  but  as  of  one,  And  to  thy 
seed,  which  is  Christ. — Gal.  $: 
16. 


so 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


At  His  second  advent,  appearing  in  divine  glory  (Zech. 
14:4;  Matt.  24 :  27,  30)  ,^^  He  regathers  and  converts  dis- 
persed Israel  (Ezek.  20:35-44),^^  and,  upon  the  throne 
of  David,  with  Jerusalem  as  the  capital,  reigns  over  the 


^  And  his  feet  shall  stand  in 
that  day  upon  the  mount  of 
Olives,  which  is  before  Jeru- 
salem on  the  east,  and  the  mount 
of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the 
midst  thereof  toward  the  east 
and  toward  the  west,  and  there 
shall  be  a  very  great  valley ; 
and  half  of  the  mountain  shall 
remove  toward  the  north,  and 
half  of  it  toward  the  south. — 
Zech.   14 :  4. 

For  as  the  lightning  cometh 
out  of  the  east,  and  shineth  even 
unto  the  west ;  so  shall  also  the 
coming  of  the  Son  of  man  be. 

And  then  shall  appear  the  sign 
of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven : 
and  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of 
the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall 
see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power 
and  great  glory. — Matt.  24  :  27, 
30. 

^®  And  I  will  bring  you  into 
the  v/ilderness  of  the  people,  and 
there  will  I  plead  with  you  face 
to  face. 

Like  as  I  pleaded  with  your 
fathers  in  the  wilderness  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  so  will  I  plead 
with  you,  saith  the  Lord  God. 

And  I  will  cause  you  to  pass 
under  the  rod,  and  I  will  bring 
you  into  the  bond  of  the  cove- 
nant : 

And  I  will  purge  out  from 
among  you  the  rebels,  and  them 
that  transgress  against  me :  I 
will  bring  them  forth  out  of  the 
country  where  they  sojourn,  and 
they  shall  not  enter  into  the  land 
of  Israel :  and  ye  shall  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord. 


As  for  you,  O  house  of  Israel, 
thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  Go  ye, 
serve  ye  every  one  his  idols,  and 
hereafter  also,  if  ye  will  not 
hearken  unto  me :  but  pollute  ye 
my  holy  name  no  more  with 
your  gifts,  and  with  your  idols. 

For  in  mine  holy  mountain, 
in  the  mountain  of  the  height  of 
Israel,  saith  the  Lord  God,  there 
shall  all  the  house  of  Israel,  all 
of  them  in  the  land,  serve  me: 
there  will  I  accept  them,  and 
there  will  I  require  your  offer- 
ings, and  the  firstfruits  of  your 
oblations,  with  all  your  holy 
things. 

I  will  accept  you  with  your 
sweet  savour,  when  I  bring  you 
out  from  the  people,  and  gather 
you  out  of  the  countries  wherein 
ye  have  been  scattered ;  and  I 
will  be  sanctified  in  you  before 
the  heathen. 

And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
the  Lord,  when  I  shall  bring  you 
into  the  land  of  Israel,  into  the 
countr>''  for  the  which  I  lifted 
up  mine  hand  to  give  it  to  your 
fathers. 

And  there  shall  ye  remember 
your  ways,  and  all  your  doings, 
wherein  ye  have  been  defiled ; 
and  ye  shall  lothe  yourselves  in 
your  own  sight  for  all  your  evils 
that  ye  have  committed. 

And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
the  Lord,  when  I  have  wrought 
with  you  for  my  name's  sake, 
not  according  to  your  wicked 
ways,  nor  according  to  your  cor- 
rupt doings,  O  ye  house  of 
Israel,  saith  the  Lord  God. — 
Esek.  20:  35'44' 


THE  MESSIAH 


51 


earth  in  the  kingdom  (Isa.  9:7;  11 : 1-12;  2:1-4;  Matt. 

25:31).*° 


^^  Of  the  increase  of  his  gov- 
ernment and  peace  there  shall 
be  no  end,  upon  the  throne  of 
David,  and  upon  his  kingdom, 
to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it 
with  judgment  and  with  justice 
from  henceforth  even  for  ever. 
The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
will  perform  this. — Isa.  9  ;  7. 

And  there  shall  come  forth  a 
rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse, 
and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of 
his   roots  : 

And  the  spirit  of  the  ^  Lord 
shall  rest  upon  him,  the  spirit  of 
wisdom  and  understanding,  the 
spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the 
spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the 
fear  of  the  Lord. 

And  shall  make  him  of  quick 
understanding  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord :  and  he  shall  not  judge 
after  the  sight  of  his  eyes, 
neither  reprove  after  the  hearing 
of  his  ears : 

But  with  righteousness  shall 
he  judge  the  poor,  and  reprove 
with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the 
earth :  and  he  shall  smite  the 
earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth, 
and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips 
shall  he  slay  the  wicked. 

And  righteousness  shall  be 
the  girdle  of  his  loins,  and  faith- 
fulness the  girdle  of  his  reins. 

The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with 
the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall 
lie  down  with  the  kid ;  and  the 
calf  and  the  young  lion  and  the 
fatling  together;  and  a  little 
child  shall  lead  them. 

And  the  cow  and  the  bear 
shall  feed ;  their  young  ones 
shall  lie  down  together :  and  the 
lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox. 

And  the  sucking  child  shall 
play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and 
the  weaned  child  shall  put  his 
hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den. 

They  shall  not  hurt  nor  de- 
stroy in  all  my  holy  movmtain : 
for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea. 


And  in  that  day  there  shall 
be  a  root  of  Jesse,  which  shall 
stand  for  an  ensign  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek: 
and  his  rest  shall  be  glorious. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  that  the  Lord  shall  set 
his  hand  again  the  second  time 
to  recover  the  remnant  of  his 
people,  which  shall  be  left,  from 
Assyria,  and  from  Egypt,  and 
from  Pathros,  and  from  Cush, 
and  from  Elam,  and  from 
Shinar,  and  from  Hamath,  and 
from  the  islands  of  the  sea. 

And  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign 
for  the  nations,  and  shall  assem- 
ble the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and 
gather  together  the  dispersed  of 
Judah  from  the  four  corners  of 
the   earth. — Isa.    11:1-12. 

The  word  that  Isaiah  the  son 
of  Amoz  saw  concerning  Judah 
and   Jerusalem. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
the  last  days,  that  the  mountain 
of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  es- 
tablished in  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  shall  be  exalted  above 
the  hills ;  and  all  nations  shall 
flow  unto  it. 

And  many  people  shall  go  and 
say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up 
to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  to 
the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob  ; 
and  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways, 
and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths : 
for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the 
law,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord 
from  Jerusalem, 

And  he  shall  judge  among  the 
nations,  and  shall  rebuke  many 
people :  and  they  shall  beat  their 
swords  into  plowshares,  and 
their  spears  into  pruninghooks  : 
nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword 
against  nation,  neither  shall  they 
learn  war  any  more. — Isa.  2: 
1-4. 

When  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall 
he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory.— Maf?.   25:  si. 


52 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


The  New  Testament  carries  the  foreview  of  the  king- 
dom of  Messiah  to  its  glorious  consummation  in  the 
restoration  of  humanity  and  the  earth  to  the  kingdom  of 
God,  even  the  Father  ( 1  Cor.  15  :  24-28)  ^^  The  kingdom 
of  the  Son  of  David  does  not  end,  for  it  becomes  one 
w^ith  the  universal  rule  of  God. 


^*  Then  cometh  the  end,  when 
he  shall  have  delivered  up  the 
kingdom  to  God,  even  the 
Father  ;  when  he  shall  have  put 
down  all  rule  and  all  authority 
and  power. 

For  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath 
put  all  enemies  under  his  feet. 

The  last  enemy  that  shall  be 
destroyed  is  death. 

For    he    hath    put    all    things 


under  his  feet.  But  when  he 
saith,  All  things  are  put  under 
him,  it  is  manifest  that  he  is  ex- 
cepted, which  did  put  all  things 
under  him. 

And  when  all  things  shall  be 
subdued  unto  him,  then  shall 
the  Son  also  himself  be  subject 
unto  him  that  put  all  things 
under  him,  that  God  may  be  all 
in  all. — /  Cor.  13:  24-28. 


V.     THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 

TWO  forms  of  the  Divine  rule  over  the  earth  are  to 
be   distinguished   in    Scripture,   the  kingdom   of 
heaven,  and  the  kingdom  of  God.     The  first  is 
Messiah's  kingdom ;  the  kingdom  of  David's  son 
(2  Sam.  7 :  10-17 ;  Psa.  89 :  3,  4,  20-36 ;  Matt.  1:1;  Luke 
1 :  31-33  ;  Acts  15  :  13-17). ^    Its  sphere  is  the  earth  (Isa. 


^  Moreover  I  will  appoint  a 
place  for  my  people  Israel,  and 
will  plant  them,  that  they  may 
dwell  in  a  place  of  their  own, 
and  move  no  more ;  neither  shall 
the  children  of  wickedness  af- 
flict them  any  more,  as  before- 
time, 

And  as  since  the  time  that  I 
commanded  judges  to  he  over 
my  people  Israel,  and  have 
caused  thee  to  rest  from  all 
thine  enemies.  Also  the  Lord 
telleth  thee  that  he  will  make 
thee  an  house. 

And  when  thy  days  be  ful- 
filled, and  thou  shalt  sleep  with 
thy  fathers,  I  will  set  up  thy 
seed  after  thee,  which  shall  pro- 
ceed out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I 
will  establish  his  kingdom. 

He  shall  build  an  house  for 
my  name,  and  I  will  stablish  the 
throne  of  his  kingdom  for  ever. 

I  will  be  his  father,  and  he 
shall  be  my  son.  If  he  commit 
iniquity,  I  will  chasten  him  with 
the  rod  of  men,  and  with  the 
stripes  of  the  children  of  men  : 

But  my  mercy  shall  not  de- 
part away  from  him,  as  I  took 
it  from  Saul,  whom  I  put  away 
before  thee. 

And  thine  house  and  thy  king- 
dom shall  be  established  for 
ever  before  thee :  thy  throne 
shall  be  established  for  ever. 

According  to  all  these  words, 


and  according  to  all  this  vision, 
so  did  Nathan  speak  unto  David. 
— 2  Sam.  7 :  10-17. 

I  have  made  a  covenant  with 
my  chosen,  I  have  sworn  unto 
David  my  servant. 

Thy  seed  w411  I  establish  for 
ever,  and  build  up  thy  throne  to 
all    generations.      Selah. — Psalm 

89 :  S,  4- 

I  have  found  David  my  serv- 
ant ;  with  m.y  holy  oil  have  I 
anointed  him : 

With  whom  my  hand  shall 
be  established :  mine  arm  also 
shall  strengthen  him. 

The  enemy  shall  not  exact 
upon  him ;  nor  the  son  of 
wickedness  afflict  him. 

And  I  will  beat  down  his  foes 
before  his  face,  and  plague  them 
that  hate  him. 

But  my  faithfulness  and  my 
mercy  shall  be  with  him  :  and  in 
my  name  shall  his  horn  be  ex- 
alted. 

I  will  set  his  hand  also  in  the 
sea,  and  his  right  hand  in  the 
rivers. 

He  shall  cry  unto  me,  Thou 
art  my  father,  my  God,  and  the 
rock  of  my  salvation. 

Also  I  will  make  him  my  first 
born,  higher  than  the  kings  of 
the  earth. 

My  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him 
for  evermore,  and  my  covenant 
shall  stand  fast  with  him. 


S3 


54 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


11:9;  Jer.  23  :  5-8 ;  Matt.  6 :  10)  .^  The  kingdom  of  God  is 
the  great  inclusive  kingdom,  and  may  be  defined  as  the 
rule  of  God  (Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit)  over  the  uni- 
verse, the  sphere  of  nature,  and  especially  over  all  moral 
intelligences,  angelic  or  human. 


His  seed  also  will  I  make  to 
endure  for  ever,  and  his  throne 
as  the  days  of  heaven. 

If  his  children  forsake  my 
law,  and  walk  not  in  my  judg- 
ments ; 

If  they  break  my  statutes,  and 
keep  not  my  commandments  ; 

Then  will  I  visit  their  trans- 
gression with  the  rod,  and  their 
iniquity  with  stripes. 

Nevertheless  my  lovingkind- 
ness  will  I  not  utterly  take  from 
him,  nor  suffer  my  faithfulness 
to  fail. 

My  covenant  will  I  not  break, 
nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone 
out  of  my  lips. 

Once  have  I  sworn  by  my 
holiness  that  I  will  not  lie  unto 
David. 

His  seed  shall  endure  for 
ever,  and  his  throne  as  the  sun 
before  me. — Psalm  89  :  20-36. 

The  book  of  the  generation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of 
David,  the  son  of  Abraham. — 
Matt.   I :  I. 

And,  behold,  thou  shalt  con- 
ceive in  thy  womb,  and  bring 
forth  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his 
name  JESUS. 

He  shall  be  great,  and  shall 
be  called  the  son  of  the  High- 
est :  and  the  Lord  God  shall 
give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his 
father  David  : 

And  he  shall  reign  over  the 
house  of  Jacob  for  ever  ;  and  of 
his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no 
end. — Luke  i :  31-33. 

And  after  they  had  held  their 
peace,  James  answered,  saying, 
Men  and  brethren,  hearken  unto 
me  : 

Simeon  hath  declared  how 
God  at  the  first  did  visit  the 
Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a 
people  for  his  name. 


And  to  this  agree  the  words 
of  the  prophets  ;  as  it  is  written. 

After  this  I  will  return,  and 
will  build  again  the  tabernacle 
of  David,  which  is  fallen  down  ; 
and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins 
thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up  : 

That  the  residue  of  men  might 
seek  after  the  Lord,  and  all  the 
Gentiles,  upon  whom  my  name 
is  called,  saith  the  Lord,  who 
doeth  all  these  things. — Acts  15  •' 
13-17- 

^  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  de- 
stroy in  all  my  holy  mountain  : 
for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea.  — Isa.  u : 
9. 

Behold,  the  days  come,  saith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise  vmto 
David  a  righteous  Branch,  and 
a  King  shall  reign  and  prosper, 
and  shall  execute  judgment  and 
justice  in  the  earth. 

In  his  days  Judah  shall  be 
saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell 
safely :  and  this  is  his  name 
whereby  he  shall  be  called,  THE 
LORD  OUR  RIGHTEOUS- 
NESS. 

Therefore,  behold,  the  days 
come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  they 
shall  no  more  say.  The  Lord 
liveth,  which  brought  up  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt ; 

But,  The  Lord  liveth,  which 
brought  up  and  which  led  the 
seed  of  the  house  of  Israel  out 
of  the  north  country,  and  from 
all  countries  whither  I  had 
driven  them ;  and  they  shall 
dwell  in  their  own  land. — Jer. 
23 :  5-8. 

Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will 
be  done  in  earth,  as  it  is  in 
heaven. — Matt.  6:10. 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 


55 


The  kingdom  of  God  "comes  not  with  outward  show*' 
(Luke  17:20),  but  is  chiefly  that  which  is  inward  and 
spiritual  (Rom.  14:  17)^;  whereas  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  organic,  and  is  to  be  manifested  in  glory  on  the  earth 
(Matt.  25  :  31 ;  19  :  28).^  Since  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
the  earthly  sphere  of  the  kingdom  of  God  (Matt.  6:  10)^ 
the  two  have  much  in  common,  and  hence  many  parables 
are  spoken  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  Matthew,  and 
of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  Mark  and  Luke.  It  is  the 
omissions  which  are  significant.  In  the  kingdom  of  God 
there  are  neither  tares    (Matt.    13:24-30,   36-43)^  nor 


^  For  the  kingdom  of  God  is 
not  meat  and  drink ;  but  right- 
eousness, and  peace,  and  joy  in 
the    Holy    Ghost. — Rom.    14  :  17 - 

*When  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall 
he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory. — Matt.   BS'- Si. 

And  Jesus  said  unto  them, 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye 
which  have  followed  me,  in  the 
regeneration  when  the  Son  of 
man  shall  sit  in  the  throne  of 
his  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon 
twelve  thrones,  judging  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel. — Matt. 
19 :  28. 

^  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy 
will  be  done  in  earth,  as  it  is  in 
heaven. — Matt.    6  :  10. 

®  Another  parable  put  he  forth 
unto  them,  saying,  The  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  likened  unto  a  man 
which  sowed  good  seed  in  his 
field: 

But  while  men  slept,  his  enemy 
came  and  sowed  tares  among  the 
wheat,  and  went  his  way. 

But  when  the  blade  was 
sprung  up,  and  brought  forth 
fruit,  then  appeared  the  tares 
also. 

So  the  servants  of  the  house- 
holder came  and  said  unto  him. 
Sir,  didst  not  thou  sow  good 
seed  in  thy  field?  from  whence 
then   hath   it  tares? 

He  said  unto  them.  An  enemy 
hath  done  this.  The  servants 
said  unto  him.  Wilt  thou  then 
that  we  go  and  gather  them  up? 


But  he  said,  Nay ;  lest  while 
ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root 
up  also  the  wheat  with  them. 

Let  both  grow  together  until 
the  harvest :  and  in  the  time  of 
harvest  I  will  say  to  the  reapers, 
Gather  ye  together  first  the 
tares,  and  bind  them  in  bundles 
to  burn  them :  but  gather  the 
wheat  into  my  barn. — Matt.  13; 
24-30. 

Then  Jesus  sent  the  multitude 
away,  and  went  into  the  house  : 
and  his  disciples  came  unto  him, 
saying.  Declare  unto  us  the  par- 
able of  the  tares  of  the  field. 

He  answered  and  said  unto 
them.  He  that  soweth  the  good 
seed  is  the  Son  of  man; 

The  field  is  the  world ;  the 
good  seed  are  the  children  of 
the  kingdom ;  but  the  tares  are 
the  children  of  the  wicked  one ; 

The  enemy  that  sowed  them 
is  the  devil ;  the  harvest  is  the 
end  of  the  world  :  and  the  reap- 
ers are  the  angels. 

As  therefore  the  tares  are 
gathered  and  burned  in  the  fire  ; 
so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  this 
world. 

The  Son  of  man  shall  send 
forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall 
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all 
things  that  offend,  and  them 
which  do   iniquity ; 

And  shall  cast  them  into  a 
furnace  of  fire :  there  shall  be 
wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 

Then  shall  the  righteous  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom 
of  their  Father.     Who  hath  ears 


56  WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 

bad  fish  (Matt.  13:47-50)7  On  the  other  hand  the  citi- 
zens of  the  kingdom  of  God  are  not  perfected  till  they 
shall  ''see  him  as  he  is"  (1  John  3:2)  and  therefore 
the  parable  of  the  leaven  is  spoken  of  both  kingdoms 
( Matt.  13  :  33  ;  Luke  13  :  20,  21 )  .^  There  can  be  neither 
tares  nor  bad  fish  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  while  both  are 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  its  present,  or  mystery, 
form.  No  other  of  the  many  confusions  of  things  that 
dififer  has  wrought  so  disastrously  in  Biblical  interpreta- 
tion as  making  of  one  meaning  all  passages  in  which  the 
''kingdom  of  God,"  the  "kingdom  of  heaven,"  and  the 
"church"  occur. 

We  must  remember  also  that  "the  kingdom  of  heaven" 
is  used  both  of  the  millennial  kingdom  of  the  Messiah, 
to  be  ushered  in  by  His  personal  coming  and  of  the  sphere 
of  Christian  profession  as  described  in  the  parables  of 
Matthew  13. 

And  even  in  the  millennial  kingdom  on  earth,  when 
Christ  is  reigning*  with  a  rod  of  iron,  not  all  men  will  be 
His  willing  subjects.  There  cannot  in  that  age  be  any 
"unbelievers"  on  earth,  for  Christ  will  be  manifested 
in  glory,  and  unbelief  therefore  will  be  impossible.  But 
there  will  be  those  who,  hating  God,  sullenly  obey  Christ 
the  King.     Those  referred  to  in  Revelation  20:  7-9^  are 

to  hear,  let  him  hear. — Matt.  1$  -'  And    again    he    said,    Where- 

3^-43-  unto   shall   I   liken  the  kingdom 

^  Again,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  of  God? 

is  like  unto  a  net    that  was  cast  j^    is    like    leaven,    which    a 

into    the    sea,    and    gathered    of  ^^^^^    ^^^^    ^^^    ^-^    -^   ^^^^^ 

'Ivhich!  when  it  was  full,  they  ^^^^ures  of  meal,  till  the  whole 

drew    to    shore,    and    sat    down.  was   leavened.— Lti^^    13:20,21. 

and  gathered  the  good  into  ves-  And  ^yhen  the  thousand  years 

sels,  but  cast  the  bad  away.  fre     expired      Satan     shall     be 

So   shall   it  be   at   the   end   of  loosed  out  of  his  prison, 

the  world  :  the  angels  shall  come  And    shall   go   out   to    deceive 

forth,  and  sever  the  wicked  from  the  nations  which  are  in  the  four 

among  the  just,  quarters   of  the   earth,    Gog  and 

And  shall  cast  them  into  the  Magog,  to  gather  them  together 

furnace   of   fire:    there   shall   be  to  battle:  the  number  of  whom 

wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth. —  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea. 

Matt.  13:47-50.  And    they    went    up    on    the 

®  Another     parable     spake     he  breadth   of  the   earth,   and  com- 

unto     them  ;     The     kingdom     of  passed    the    camp    of    the    saints 

heaven  is  like  unto  leaven,  which  about,  and  the  beloved  city  :  and 

a  woman  took,  and  hid  in  three  fire  came  down  from  God  out  of 

measures  of  meal,  till  the  whole  heaven,    and    devoured    them. — 

was  leavened. — Matt.   13:33.  Rev.  20:  7-9. 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM  57 

simply  God-haters.  They  will  yield  an  outward  obedi- 
ence, for  disobedience  will  then  be  instantly  judged. 

Earth  may  be  considered  as  a  revolted  province  of  the 
great  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven  as 
the  appointed  means  for  the  restoration  of  the  divine 
authority  in  the  earth.  This  purpose  is  thus  definitely 
defined : 

'Then  cometh  the  end,  when  he  [Christ]  shall  have 
delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father ;  when 
he  shall  have  put  down  all  rule  and  all  authority  and 
power.  For  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies 
under  his  feet  .  .  .  and  when  all  things  shall  be  sub- 
dued unto  him  [Christ],  then  shall  the  Son  also  himself 
be  subject  unto  him  that  put  all  things  under  him,  that 
God  may  be  all  in  all"  (1  Cor.  15 :  24,  25,  28). 

That  is  the  ultimate  terminus  toward  which  all  king- 
dom truth  moves.  The  dominion  over  the  earthly  crea- 
tion, lost  by  the  ''first  man  Adam,"  is  restored  in  and 
by  the  "last  Adam." 

The  great  theme  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets  is  the 
kingdom  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  David.  Except  the  evan- 
gelic  messages   of    Isaiah    (Isa.    53),^^   and    Zechariah 

^^  Who   hath   believed   our   re-  All   we   like   sheep   have  gone 

port  ?   and  to   whom   is  the  arm  astray ;    we    have    turned    every 

of  the  Lord  revealed?  one   to    his   own    way;    and   the 

For   he   shall   grow   up  before  Lord     hath     laid     on     him     the 

him  as  a  tender  plant,  and  as  a  iniquity  of  us  all. 

root    out   of    a   dry    ground  :    he  He  was  oppressed,  and  he  was 

hath    no    form    nor    comeliness :  afflicted,   yet   he   opened   not   his 

and    when    we    shall    see    him,  mouth :  he  is  brought  as  a  lamb 

there     is     no     beavity     that     we  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep 

should  desire  him.                _  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so 

He    is    despised    and    rejected  he  openeth  not  his  mouth. 

of  men ;  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  He  was  taken  from  prison  and 

acquainted   with   grief :    and   we  from   judgment :    and   who   shall 

hid   as   it   were   our   faces   from  declare   his   generation  ?    for   he 

him ;   he   was   despised,    and   we  was   cut   off   out   of  the  land   of 

esteemed  him  not.  the  living :  for  the  transgression 

Surely     he     hath     borne     our  of   my   people   was    he   stricken, 

griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows :  And   he  made  his  grave   with 

yet^  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,  the  wicked,  and  with  the  rich  in 

smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted.  his  death  ;  because  he  had  done 

But  he  was  wounded  for  our  no  violence,  neither  was  any  de- 
transgressions,  he  was  bruised  ceit  in  his  mouth. 
for  our  iniquities :  the  chastise-  Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to 
ment  of  our  peace  was  upon  bruise  him ;  he  hath  put  him  to 
him  ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  grief ;  when  thou  shalt  make 
healed.  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he 


58  IVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 

(Zech.  3  : 8;  4:6;  12:  10;  13:  1),^^  the  prophetic  vision 
of  Messiah  is  usually  of  a  great  King.  The  King  and 
His  earth  kingdom  fill  the  scene.  The  Messiah,  though 
'Trnmanuel" — God  with  us,  is  also  born  of  a  virgin  of 
the  'iiouse  of  David''  (Isa.  7:  13,  14). 

In  Isaiah  9 : 6  and  7,  a  declaration  concerning  the 
Coining  One  is  at  once  so  explicit  and  so  inclusive  of 
His  Deity,  of  His  humanity  through  a  natural  birth,  and 
of  His  kingship  as  to  exclude  any  possible  attempt  to  in- 
terpret it  in  a  so-called  ''spiritual''  or  allegorical  sense. 

'*For  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given: 
and  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder :  and  his 
name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  mighty 
God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace.  Of 
the  increase  of  his  government  and  peace  there  shall  be 
no  end,  upon  the  throne  of  David,  and  upon  his  kingdom, 
to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it  with  judgment  and  with 
justice  from  henceforth  even  for  ever.  The  zeal  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  will  perform  this.'' 

The  expression,  'Throne  of  David,"  is  as  severely 
historical  and  geographical  as  ''throne  of  the  Caesars." 

This  great  passage  may  be  taken  as  the  norm  of  the 
Old  Testament  prophetic  teaching  concerning  the  king- 
shall  see  his  seed,  he  shall  pro-  ant  the  BRANCH. — Zech.  3: 
long  his  days,   and  the  pleasure        S. 

of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  Then  he   answered   and   spake 

hand  ^■'"^^    ^^^^'    saying,     This    is    the 

He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  Jf^,^^  ^^  the  Lord  unto  Zerub- 
his  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied:  ^^^^^'  ^^^P-^i  ^ot  by  might,  nor 
by  his  knowledge  shall  my  right-  ^y  power,  but  by  my  spirit,  saith 
eous   servant   jSstify   many;    for       ^^^^  ^J^^^.  oi  hosts.— Zech.   4:6. 

he  shall  bear  their  iniquities.  ,    ^^^    ]   ^'^^-a^ '''''' a  ''P°''      ^^ 

r^.        r             .„    J    A-   -A      u-  house    of   David,    and   upon   the 

Therefore    will    I    divide    him  inhabitants     of     Jerusalem,     the 

a  portion  ^ith  the  great,  and  he  i.^^  ^f               ^^^   ^^  supplica- 

shall    divide   the   spoil   with   the  ^ions :  and  they  shall  look  upon 

strong;  because  he  hath  poured  „,^  ^^om  they  have  pierced,  and 

out  his  soul  unto  death :  and  he  ^hey    shall    mourn    for    him,    as 

was    numbered    wlth^  the    trans-  ^^^  mourneth   for  his  only  son, 

gressors,  and  he  bare  the  sm  of  ^^^    g^all    be    in    bitterness    for 

many,  and  made  intercession  for  j^i,^  ^3  ^^^  ^hat  is  in  bitterness 

the  transgressors.— /^a.  5 J.  for   his  firstborn.— Z^r/t.    12:  10. 

/^Hear    now,     O    Joshua    the  In   that   day   there   shall   be   a 

high  priest,  thou,  and  thy  fellows  fountain    opened    to    the    house 

that    sit    before    thee:    for    they  of  David  and  to  the  inhabitants 

are  men    wondered   at:    for,   be-  of    Jerusalem    for    sin    and    for 

hold,  I  will  bring  forth  my  serv-  uncleanness. — Zech.  13:  i. 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM  59 

dom  of  Christ.  The  child  is  "born" ;  the  Son  is  ''^iven." 
W^hat  exquisite  accuracy !  There  was  a  point  in  time 
when  the  child  began  to  be ;  the  Son  is  eternal,  and  could 
be  "given,"  but  not  "born." 

And  the  passage  is  also  typical  of  all  the  prophetic 
teaching  about  Messiah  and  His  kingdom  in  that,  while 
asserting  both  the  Deity  and  humanity  of  the  King,  it 
links  His  kingdom  with  earth,  with  Israel,  and  with  the 
Davidic  Covenant.  What  is  added  elsewhere  is  detail. 
But  it  is  detail  of  such  intense  interest,  and  so  essential 
to  any  comprehensive  view  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
that  it  must  be  here  summarized. 

The  Davidic  Covenant  (2  Sam.  7:  16,  17,  and  preced- 
ing),^^ which  is  the  foundation  declaration  of  kingdom 
truth,  is  specific  as  to  five  things :  David  is  to  have  a 
"house,"  that  is,  a  posterity ;  a  "throne,"  the  symbol  of 
royal  authority ;  a  "kingdom"  or  sphere  of  rule,  and  this 
in  perpetuity;  and  all  this  with  one  condition :  disobedi- 
ence in  the  Davidic  family  is  to  be  visited  with  chastise- 
ment, but  not  by  the  annulment  of  the  Covenant  (Psa. 
89:  30-36).^^  The  Eighty-ninth  Psalm  is  the  Divine  con- 
firmation of  the  Davidic  Covenant  by  the  oath  of  Je- 
hovah. 

It  is  most  interesting  to  see,  and  of  vital  moment  to 
the  right  interpretation  of  the  prophetic  testimony,  that 
the  Davidic  Covenant,  as  conditioning  the  kingdom  fore- 
told by  them,  enters  the  New  Testament  unchanged.  The 
angelic  annunciation  to  Mary,  the  virgin  of  the  house  of 

^  And    thine    house    and    thy  gression  with  the  rod,  and  their 

kingdom  shall  be  established  for  iniquity  with  stripes, 

ever    before    thee :    thy    throne  Nevertheless     my     lovingkind- 

shall  be  established  for  ever.  ness  will  I  not  utterly  take  from 

According  to  all  these  words,  ^"^^   nor  suffer  my   faithfulness 

and  according  to  all  this  vision,  ^^  J.     '                     .^  x 

so  did  Nathan  speak  unto  David.  My  covenant  will  I  not  break, 

—2   Sam    7-  i6  17  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^°^^ 

13  rr   I.-*       t--ij       '   £         1  o^t  of  my  lips. 

^li  his   children    forsake   my  ^^^^    ^^^^    j    ^^^^^    ^      ^^ 

law,   and  walk  not  m  my  judg-  holiness  that  I  will  not  lie  unto 

ments ;  'Dd.Yid. 

If  they  break  my  statutes,  and  His     seed     shall     endure     for 

keep  not  my  commandments ;  ever,  and  his  throne  as  the  sun 

Then  will  I  visit  their  trans-  before  me. — Psalm  89 :  30-36. 


60 


IV HAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


David,  appointed  to  be  mother  of  the  ''Child"  (Isa.  9: 
6),^^  is  an  explicit  confirmation  of  that  covenant. 

''And,  behold,  thou  shalt  conceive  in  thy  womb,  and 
bring  forth  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus.  He 
shall  be  great,  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest : 
and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his 
father  David :  and  he  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob 
for  ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end" 
(Luke  1:31-33). 

The  eleventh  chapter  of  Isaiah  is  one  of  the  descrip- 
tive passages  into  which  a  kind  of  summary  of  all  the 
prophetic  kingdom  testimony  is  gathered.  It  follows  a 
description   (Isa.  10:20-34)^^  of  the  events  immediately 


^*  For  unto  us  a  child  is  born, 
unto  us  a  son  is  given  :  and  the 
government  shall  be  upon  his 
shoulder :  and  his  name  shall  be 
called  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting 
Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace. — 
Isa.  9 ;  6. 

^^  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
in  that  day,  titaf  the  remnant  of 
Israel,  and  such  as  are  escaped 
of  the  house  of  Jacob,  shall  no 
more  again  stay  upon  him  that 
smote  them  ;  but  shall  stay  upon 
the  Lord,  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel,  in  truth. 

The  remnant  shall  return, 
even  the  remnant  of  Jacob,  unto 
the  mighty   God. 

For  though  thy  people  Israel 
be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  yet  a 
remnant  of  them  shall  return : 
the  consumption  decreed  shall 
overflow   with    righteousness. 

For  the  Lord  God  of  hosts 
shall  make  a  consumption,  even 
determined,  in  the  midst  of  all 
the  land. 

Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord 
God  of  hosts,  O  my  people  that 
dwellest  in  Zion,  be  not  afraid 
of  the  Assyrian  :  he  shall  smite 
thee  with  a  rod,  and  shall  lift 
up  his  staff  against  thee,  after 
the  manner  of   Egypt. 

For  yet  a  very  little  while, 
and  the  indignation  shall  cease, 
and  mine  anger  in  their  destruc- 
tion. 


And  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall 
stir  up  a  scourge  for  him  accord- 
ing to  the  slaughter  of  Midian 
at  the  rock  of  Oreb  :  and  as  his 
rod  zvas  upon  the  sea,  so  shall 
he  lift  it  up  after  the  manner  of 
Egypt. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  that  his  burden  shall 
be  taken  away  from  off  thy 
shoulder,  and  his  yoke  from  off 
thy  neck,  and  the  yoke  shall  be 
destroyed  because  of  the  anoint- 
ing. 

He  is  come  to  Aiath,  he  is 
passed  to  Migron  ;  at  Michmash 
he  hath  laid  up  his  carriages ; 

They  are  gone  over  the  pas- 
sage ;  they  have  taken  up  their 
lodging  at  Geba ;  Ramah  is 
afraid ;  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  fled. 

Lift  up  thy  voice,  O  daughter 
of  Gallim  :  cause  it  to  be  heard 
unto   Laish,   O  poor  Anathoth. 

Madmenah  is  removed ;  the 
inhabitants  of  Gebim  gather 
themselves  to  flee. 

As  yet  shall  he  remain  at  Nob 
that  day :  he  shall  shake  his 
hand  against  the  mount  of  the 
daughter  of  Zion,  the  hill  of 
Jerusalem. 

Behold,  the  Lord,  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  shall  lop  the  bough 
with  terror :  and  the  high  ones 
of  stature  shall  be  hewn  down, 
and  the  haughty  shall  be  hum- 
bled. 

And    he    shall    cut    down    the 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 


61 


preceding  the  coming  in  glory  of  the  Branch  of  Jesse. 
Those  events  are  more  particularly  described  by  Daniel 
in  his  seventh  chapter,^^  and  in  Revelation  19:  11-21.^^ 


thickets  of  the  forest  with  iron, 
and  Lebanon  shall  fall  by  a 
mighty   one. — Isa.    10:20-34. 

^^  In  the  first  year  of  Belshaz- 
zar  king  of  Babylon  Daniel  had 
a  dream  and  visions  of  his  head 
upon  his  bed  :  then  he  wrote  the 
dream,  and  told  the  sum  of  the 
matters. 

Daniel  spake  and  said,  I  saw 
in  my  vision  by  night,  and,  be- 
hold, the  four  winds  of  the 
heaven  strode  upon  the  great 
sea. 

And  four  great  beasts  came 
up  from  the  sea,  diverse  one 
from  another. 

The  first  was  like  a  lion,  and 
had  eagle's  wings  :  I  beheld  till 
the  wings  thereof  were  plucked, 
and  it  was  lifted  up  from  the 
earth,  and  made  stand  upon  the 
feet  as  a  man,  and  a  man's  heart 
was  given  to  it. 

And  behold  another  beast,  a 
second,  like  to  a  bear,  and  it 
raised  up  itself  on  one  side,  and 
it  had  three  ribs  in  the  mouth 
of  it  between  the  teeth  of  it : 
and  they  said  thus  unto  it.  Arise, 
devour  much  flesh. 

After  this  I  beheld,  and  lo 
another,  like  a  leopard,  which 
had  upon  the  back  of  it  four 
wings  of  a  fov^^l ;  the  beast  had 
also  four  heads ;  and  dominion 
was  given  to   it. 

After  this  I  saw  in  the  night 
visions,  and  behold  a  fourth 
beast,  dreadful  and  terrible,  and 
strong  exceedingly ;  and  it  had 
great  iron  teeth  :  it  devoured 
and  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped 
the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it : 
and  it  was  diverse  from  all  the 
beasts  that  were  before  it ;  and 
it  had  ten  horns. 

I  considered  the  horns,  and, 
behold,  there  came  up  among 
them  another  little  horn,  before 
whom  there  were  three  of  the 
first  horns  plucked  up  by  the 
roots :  and,  behold,  in  this  horn 


were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  man, 
and  a  mouth  speaking  great 
things. 

I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were 
cast  down,  and  the  Ancient  of 
days  did  sit,  whose  garment  was 
white  as  snow,  and  the  hair  of 
his  head  like  the  pure  wool  :  his 
throne  was  like  the  fiery  flame, 
and  his  wheels  as  burning  fire. 

A  fiery  stream  issued  and 
came  forth  from  before  him : 
thousand  thousands  ministered 
unto  him,  and  ten  thousand 
times  ten  thousand  stood  before 
him  :  the  judgment  was  set,  and 
the  books  were  opened. 

I  beheld  then  because  of  the 
voice  of  the  great  words  which 
the  horn  spake :  I  beheld  even 
till  the  beast  was  slain,  and  his 
body  destroyed,  and  given  to  the 
burning  flame. 

As  concerning  the  rest  of  the 
beasts,  they  had  their  dominion 
taken  away  :  yet  their  lives  were 
prolonged  for  a  season  and  time. 

I  saw  in  the  night  visions, 
and,  behold,  one  like  the  Son  of 
man  came  with  the  clouds  of 
heaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient 
of  days,  and  they  brought  him 
near  before  him. 

And  there  was  given  him 
dominion,  and  glory,  and  a  king- 
dom, that  all  people,  nations, 
and  languages,  should  serve  him  : 
his  dominion  is  an  everlasting 
dominion,  which  shall  not  pass 
away,  and  his  kingdom  that 
which  shall  not  be  destroyed. 

I  Daniel  was  grieved  in  my 
spirit  in  the  midst  of  my  body, 
and  the  visions  of  my  head  trou- 
bled me. 

I  came  near  unto  one  of  them 
that  stood  by,  and  asked  him 
the  truth  of  all  this.  So  he 
told  me,  and  made  me  know  the 
interpretation  of  the  things. 

These  great  beasts,  which  are 
four,  are  four  kings,  which  shall 
arise  out  of  the  earth. 


62 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


But  the  saints  of  the  most 
High  shall  take  the  kingdom, 
and  possess  the  kingdom  for 
ever,  even  for  ever  and  ever. 

Then  I  would  know  the  truth 
of  the  fourth  beast,  which  was 
diverse  from  all  the  others,  ex- 
ceeding dreadful,  whose  teeth 
were  of  iron,  and  his  nails  of 
brass;  ivhich  devoured,  brake  in 
pieces,  and  stamped  the  residue 
with  his  feet  ; 

And  of  the  ten  horns  that 
zvere  in  his  head,  and  of  the 
other  which  came  up,  and  before 
whom  three  fell ;  even  of  that 
horn  that  had  eyes,  and  a  mouth 
that  spake  very  great  things, 
whose  look  was  more  stout  than 
his    fellows. 

I  beheld,  and  the  same  horn 
made  war  with  the  saints,  and 
prevailed  against  them  ; 

Until  the  Ancient  of  days 
came,  and  judgment  was  given 
to  the  saints  of  the  most  High  ; 
and  the  time  came  that  the 
saints  possessed  the  kingdom. 

Thus  he  said,  The  fourth  beast 
shall  be  the  fourth  kingdom 
upon  earth,  which  shall  be  di- 
verse from  all  kingdoms,  and 
shall  devour  the  whole  earth, 
and  shall  tread  it  down,  and 
break  it  in  pieces. 

And  the  ten  horns  out  of  this 
kingdom  are  ten  kings  that  shall 
arise :  and  another  shall  rise 
after  them  ;  and  he  shall  be  di- 
verse from  the  first,  and  he  shall 
subdue  three  kings. 

And  he^  shall  speak  great 
words  against  the  most  High, 
and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of 
the  most  High,  and  think  to 
change  times  and  laws :  and 
they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand 
until  a  time  and  times  and  the 
dividing   of  time. 

But  the  judgment  shall  sit, 
and  they  shall  take  away  his 
dominion,  to  consume  and  to  de- 
stroy it  unto  the  end. 

And  the  kingdom  and  domin- 
ion, and  the  greatness  of  the 
kingdom  under  the  whole 
heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the 
people  of  the  saints  of  the  most 


High,  whose  kingdom  is  an  ever- 
lasting kingdom,  and  all  domin- 
ions shall  serve  and  obey  him. 

Hitherto  is  the  end  of  the 
matter.  As  for  me  Daniel,  my 
cogitations  much  troubled  me, 
and  my  countenance  changed  in 
me :  but  I  kept  the  matter  in  my 
heart. — Dan.  7. 

^'  And  I  saw  heaven  opened, 
and  behold  a  white  horse ;  and 
he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called 
Faithful  and  True,  and  in  right- 
eousness he  doth  judge  and 
make  war. 

His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of 
fire,  and  on  his  head  were  many 
crowns ;  and  he  had  a  name 
written,  that  no  man  knew,  but 
he  himself. 

And  he  was  clothed  with  a 
vesture  dipped  in  blood  :  and  his 
name  is  called  The  Word  of 
God. 

And  the  armies  which  were 
in  heaven  followed  him  upon 
white  horses,  clothed  in  fine 
linen,   white   and   clean. 

And  out  of  his  mouth  goeth 
a  sharp  sword,  that  with  it  he 
should  smite  the  nations  :  and  he 
shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of 
iron :  and  he  treadeth  the  wine- 
press of  the  fierceness  and 
wrath   of  Almighty  God. 

And  he  hath  on  his  vesture 
and  on  his  thigh  a'  name  writ- 
ten, KING  OF  KINGS,  AND 
LORD  OF  LORDS. 

And  I  saw  an  angel  standing 
in  the  sun ;  and  he  cried  with 
a  loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the 
fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of 
heaven,  Come  and  gather  your- 
selves together  unto  the  supper 
of  the  great  God ; 

That  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of 
kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains, 
and  the  flesh  of  mighty  men, 
and  the  flesh  of  horses,  and  of 
them  that  sit  on  them,  and  the 
flesh  of  all  men,  both  free  and 
bond,  both  small  and  great. 

And  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the 
kings  of  the  earth,  and  their 
armies,  gathered  together  to 
make  war  against  him  that   sat 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 


63 


The  Remnant  of  Israel  turns  to  the  Lord,  the  battle  of 
Armageddon  follows,  and  then  the  kingdom  is  set  up. 

In  the  kingdom  description  of  Isaiah   11/^  let  it  be 
noted  that : 


on  the  horse,  and  against  his 
army. 

And  the  beast  was  taken,  and 
with  him  the  false  prophet  that 
wrought  miracles  before  him, 
with  which  he  deceived  them 
that  had  received  the  mark  of 
the  beast,  and  them  that  wor- 
shipped his  image.  These  both 
were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of 
fire  burning   with  brimstone. 

And  the  remnant  were  slain 
with  the  sword  of  him  that  sat 
upon  the  horse,  which  sword 
proceeded  out  of  his  mxouth  :  and 
all  the  fowls  were  filled  with 
their  flesh. — Rev.  ig:  11-21. 

'^  And  there  shall  come  forth  a 
rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse, 
and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of 
his  roots : 

And  the  spirit  of  the  ^  Lord 
shall  rest  upon  him,  the  spirit  of 
wisdom  and  understanding,  the 
spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the 
spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  ; 

And  shall  make  him  of  quick 
understanding  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord :  and  he  shall  not  judge 
after  the  sight  of  his  eyes, 
neither  reprove  after  the  hearing 
of  his  ears  : 

But  with  righteousness  shall 
he  judge  the  poor,  and  reprove 
with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the 
earth :  and  he  shall  smite  the 
earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth, 
and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips 
shall  he  slay  the  wicked. 

And  righteousness  shall  be  the 
girdle  of  his  loins,  and  faithful- 
ness the  girdle  of  his   reins. 

The  wolf  also  shall  dvv^ell  with 
the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall 
lie  down  with  the  kid ;  and  the 
calf  and  the  young  lion  and  the 
fatling  together ;  and  a  little 
child  shall  lead  them. 

And  the  cow  and  the  bear 
shall    feed;    their    young    ones 


shall  lie  down  together  ;  and  the 
lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox. 

And  the  sucking  child  shall 
play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and 
the  weaned  child  shall  put  his 
hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den. 

They  shall  not  hurt  nor  de- 
stroy in  all  my  holy  mountain : 
for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the 
waters  cover  the  sea. 

And  in  that  day  there  shall 
be  a  root  of  Jesse,  which  shall 
stand  for  an  ensign  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek  : 
and  his  rest  shall  be  glorious. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  that  the  Lord  shall  set 
his  hand  again  the  second  time 
to  recover  the  remnant  of  his 
people,  which  shall  be  left,  from 
Assyria,  and  from  Egypt,  and 
from  Pathros,  and  from  Cush, 
and  from  Elam,  and  from  Shinar, 
and  from  Hamath,  and  from  the 
islands  of  the   sea. 

And  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign 
for  the  nations,  and  shall  assem- 
ble the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and 
gather  together  the  dispersed  of 
Judah  from  the  four  corners  of 
the  earth. 

The  envy  also  of  Ephraim 
shall  depart,  and  the  adversaries 
of  Judah  shall  be  cut  off :  Eph- 
raim shall  not  envy  Judah,  and 
Judah  shall  not  vex  Ephraim. 

But  they  shall  fly  upon  the 
shoulders  of  the  Philistines  to- 
ward the  west ;  they  shall  spoil 
them  of  the  east  together:  they 
shall  lay  their  hand  upon  Edom 
and  Moab ;  and  the  children  of 
Ammon  shall  obey  them. 

And  the  Lord  shall  utterly 
destroy  the  tongue  of  the  Egyp- 
tian sea ;  and  with  his  mighty 
wind  shall  he  shake  his  hand 
over  the  river,  and  shall  smite  it 
in  the  seven  streams,  and  make 
men  go  over  dryshod. 


64  WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

(1)  The  King  is  Davidic  (v.  1)  ;  (2)  His  power  is  the 
seven-fold  fulness  of  the  Spirit  (v.  2)  ;  (3)  the  key- 
word of  the  kingdom  reign  is  righteousness  (vs.  3-5)  ; 
(4)  the  result  of  the  reign  of  righteousness  is  peace  (vs. 
6-9,  for  these  are  eternally  related  as  cause  and  effect 
(Isa.  32:  17)^^;  (5)  the  extent  of  the  kingdom  is  *'the 
earth"  (v.  9)  ;  (6)  Israel  is  restored  to  the  land  (vs. 
10-12)  ;  (7)  the  divided  nation  becomes  one  (v.  13). 

And  this  is  also  the  order  of  events  in  Jeremiah's 
predictions  concerning  the  kingdom : 

''I  will  gather  the  remnant  of  my  flock  out  of  all  coun- 
tries whither  I  have  driven  them,  and  will  bring  them 
again  to  their  folds ;  and  they  shall  be  fruitful  and  in- 
crease .  .  .  and  they  shall  fear  no  more,  nor  be  dis- 
mayed, neither  shall  they  be  lacking,  saith  the  Lord. 
Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise 
unto  David  a  righteous  Branch,  and  a  King  shall  reign 
and  prosper,  and  shall  execute  judgment  and  justice  in 
the  earth.  In  his  days  Judah  shall  be  saved,  and  Israel 
shall  dwell  safely :  and  this  is  his  name  whereby  he  shall 
be  called.  The  Lord  our  righteousness''  (Jer.  23:  3-6). 

Verses  7  and  8  -^  describe  the  regathering  of  the  nation 
announced  in  verse  3.  And  the  restoration  of  Israel  to 
the  land  in  connection  with  the  establishment  of  Mes- 
siah's kingdom  is  a  great  and  constant  theme  of  the 
Prophets  (Isa.  49:8-13;  52:1-12;  Jer.  31:7-25;  Ezek. 
36:  16-38). 21 

And    there    shall    be   an   high-  seed  of  the  house  of  Israel  out 

way  for  the  remnant  of  his  peo-  of  the  north   country,  and   from 

pie,    which    shall    be    left,    from  all     countries     whither     I     had 

Assyria  ;  like  as  it  was  to  Israel  ^j^iven    them ;     and    they    shall 

'"1  \v.^  1^^^^   %^  fet.^.r'^''^  ?r        dwell    in    their    own    land.-/^r. 
of  the   land   of   Egypt. — Jsa.    ii.        ^^         o 

*^  And  the  work  of  righteous-  ""*'%;  Ij^-         ..    .i.     t      j     t 

ness    shall    be    peace;    and    the  ''Thus  saith  the  Lord,   In   an 

effect  of  righteousness  quietness  acceptable    time    have    I    heard 

and     assurance     for    ever. — Isa.  thee,   and  in  a  day  of  salvation 

j^ ;  //.  have   I   helped  thee  :   and   I   will 

^^  Therefore,   behold,   the  days  preserve  thee,  and  give  thee  for 

come,   saith  the   Lord,  that  they  a  covenant  of  the  people,  to  es- 

shall    no    more    say,    The    Lord  tablish    the    earth,    to    cause    to 

liveth,     which     brought    up     the  inherit  the  desolate  heritages ; 

children    of    Israel    out    of    the  That   thou   mayest   say   to   the 

land   of   Egypt.  prisoners,  Go  forth  ;  to  them  that 

But,    The    Lord    liveth,    which  are    in    darkness.      Shew    your- 

brought   up   and    which    led    the  selves.     They   shall   feed  in   the 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 


65 


ways,  and  their  pastures  shall 
be  in  all  high  places. 

They  shall  not  hunger  nor 
thirst ;  neither  shall  the  heat  nor 
sun  smite  them  :  for  he  that 
hath  mercy  on  them  shall  lead 
them,  even  by  tJie  springs  of 
water  shall   he   guide  them. 

And  I  will  make  all  my  moun- 
tains a  way,  and  my  highways 
shall  be  exalted. 

Behold,  these  shall  come  from 
far :  and,  lo,  these  from  the 
north  and  from  the  west ;  and 
these  from  the  land  of  Sinini. 

Sing,  O  heavens;  and  be  joy- 
ful, O  earth ;  and  break  forth 
into  singing,  O  mountains :  for 
the  Lord  hath  comforted  his 
people,  and  will  have  mercy 
upon  his  afflicted. — Isa.  49  :  8-13. 

Awake,  awake ;  put  on  thy 
strength,  O  Zion ;  put  on  thy 
beautiful  garments,  O  Jeru- 
salem, the  holy  city :  for  hence- 
forth there  shall  no  more  come 
into  thee  the  uncircumcised  and 
the  unclean. 

Shake  thyself  from  the  dust ; 
arise,  and  sit  down,  O  Jeru- 
salem :  loose  thyself  from  the 
bands  of  thy  neck,  O  captive 
daughter  of  Zion.    Etc. — Isa.  52: 

I'J2. 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord ;  Sing 
with  gladness  for  Jacob,  and 
shout  among  the  chief  of  the 
nations :  publish  ye,  praise  ye, 
and  say,  O  Lord,  save  thy  peo- 
ple, the  remnant  of  Israel. 

Behold,  I  will  bring  them  from 
the  north  country,  and  gather 
them  from  the  coasts  of  the 
earth,  and  with  them  the  blind 
and  the  lame,  the  woman  with 
child  and  her  that  travaileth 
with  child  together :  a  great 
company  shall  return  thither. 

They  shall  come  with  weep- 
ing,  and  with  supplications  will 
I  lead  them  :  I  will  cause  them 
to  walk  by  the  rivers  of  waters 
in  a  straight  way,  wherein  they 
shall  not  stumble :  for  I  am  a 
father  to  Israel,  and  Ephraim  is 
my  firstborn. 

Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
O  ye  nations,  and  declare  it  in 


the  isles  afar  off,  and  say.  He 
that  scattered  Israel  will  gather 
him,  and  keep  him,  as  a  shep- 
herd doth  his  flock. 

For  the  Lord  hath  redeemed 
Jacob,  and  ransomed  him  from 
the  hand  of  him  that  was 
stronger  than  he. 

Therefore  they  shall  come  and 
sing  in  the  height  of  Zion,  and 
shall  flow  together  to  the  good- 
ness of  the  Lord,  for  wheat, 
and  for  wine,  and  for  oil,  and 
for  the  young  of  the  flock  and  of 
the  herd :  and  their  soul  shall 
be  as  a  watered  garden ;  and 
they  shall  not  sorrow  any  more 
at  all.  ... 

And  there  is  hope  in  thine 
end,  saith  the  Lord,  that  thy 
children  shall  come  again  to 
their  own  border.  .  .  . 

Set  thee  up  waymarks,  make 
thee  high  heaps :  set  thine  heart 
toward  the  highway,  even  the 
way  which  thou  wentest :  turn 
again,  O  virgin  of  Israel,  turn 
again   to    these   thy    cities.  .  .   . 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
the  God  of  Israel ;  As  yet  they 
shall  use  this  speech  in  the  land 
of  Judah  and  in  the  cities 
thereof,  when  I  shall  bring 
again  their  captivity  ;  The  Lord 
bless  thee,  O  habitation  of  jus- 
tice,  and  mountain    of  holiness. 

And  there  shall  dwell  in 
Judah  itself,  and  in  all  the  cities 
thereof  together,  husbandmen, 
and  they  that  go  forth  with 
flocks. 

For  I  have  satiated  the  weary 
soul,  and  I  have  replenished 
every  sorrowful  soul. — Jer.  31 : 
7-25. 

.  .  .  For  I  will  take  you  from 
among  the  heathen,  and  gather 
you  out  of  all  countries,  and  will 
bring  you  into  your  own  land. 

Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean 
water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
clean :  from  all  your  filthiness, 
and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I 
cleanse  you. 

A  new  heart  also  will  I  give 
you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put 
within  you  :  and  I  will  take  away 
the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh. 


66 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


It  is  dbvious  that  none  of  these  events  took  place  at 
the  first  advent  of  Christ — the  advent  to  suffer.  Dis- 
persed Israel  was  not  regathered ;  the  nation  then  in 
Palestine  refused  to  recognize  Christ  as  the  promised 
king;  they  refused  no  less  emphatically  to  give  Him  the 
name,  "Our  Righteousness"  (Rom.  10 :  3)  ;  nor  has  Israel 
*'dvv^elt  safely''  in  the  land. 

The  same  order  of  events  is  again  repeated  in  Jere- 
miah 33 :  1-17,^^  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  was  given  to 
comfort  and  assure  the  Prophet  in  his  imprisonment; 
the  King  sets  up  His  kingdom  and  Israel  is  regathered. 


and  I  will  give  you  an  heart  of 
flesh. 

And  I  will  put  my  spirit  within 
you,  and  cause  you  to  walk  in 
my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep 
my    judgments,    and    do    them. 

And  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land 
that  I  gave  to  your  fathers  ;  and 
ye  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will 
be  your  God.  Etc. — Esek.  36: 
16-38. 

^^  Moreover  the  word  of  the 
Lord  came  unto  Jeremiah  the 
second  time,  while  he  was  yet 
shut  up  in  the  court  of  the 
prison,    saying,  .  .  . 

And  I  will  cause  the  captivity 
of  Judah  and  the  captivity  of 
Israel  to  return,  and  will  build 
them,  as  at  the  first.   .  .   . 

Thus  saith  the  Lord ;  Again 
there  shall  be  heard  in  this 
place,  which  ye  say  shall  be 
desolate  without  man  and  with- 
out beast,  ^^'^n  in  the  cities  of 
Judah,  and  in  the  streets  of 
Jerusalem,  that  are  desolate, 
without  man,  and  without  in- 
habitant, and  without  beast, 

The  voice  of  joy,  and  the 
voice  of  gladness,  the  voice  of 
the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice 
of  the  bride,  the  voice  of  them 
that  shall  say,  Praise  the  Lord 
of  hosts  :  for  the  Lord  is  good ; 
for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever : 
and  of  them  that  shall  bring 
the  sacrifice  of  praise  into  the 
house  of  the  Lord.      For   I   will 


cause  to  return  the  captivity 
of  the  land,  as  at  the  first,  saith 
the  Lord. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  ; 
Again  in  this  place,  which  is 
desolate  without  man  and  with- 
out beast,  and  in  all  the  cities 
thereof,  shall  be  an  habitation 
of  shepherds  causing  their  flocks 
to  lie  down. 

In  the  cities  of  the  mountains, 
in  the  cities  of  the  vale,  and  in 
the  cities  of  the  south,  and  in 
the  land  of  Benjamin,  and  in  the 
places  about  Jerusalem,  and  in 
the  cities  of  Judah,  shall  the 
flocks  pass  again  under  the 
hands  of  him  that  telleth  them, 
saith  the   Lord. 

Behold,  the  days  come,  saith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  perform 
that  good  thing  which  I  have 
promised  unto  the  house  of 
Israel  and  to  the  house  of 
Judah. 

In  those  days,  and  at  that 
time,  will  I  cause  the  Branch  of 
righteousness  to  grow  up  unto 
David ;  and  he  shall  execute 
judgment  and  righteousness  in 
the  land. 

In  those  days  shall  Judah  be 
saved,  and  Jerusalem  shall  dwell 
safely :  and  this  is  the  name 
wherewith  she  shall  be  called, 
The  Lord  our  righteousness. 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord : 
David  shall  never  want  a  man 
to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  the 
house  of  Israel. — Jer.  33:1-17- 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 


67 


Ezekiel  again  and  again  repeats  the  order  of  events 
which  accompany  the  estabHshment  of  the  kingdom 
(Ezek.  28:25,  26;  34:11-31;  36:1-12,  24-38;  37:1-28; 
39: 25-29). 23 


^Thus  saith  the  Lord  God: 
When  I  shall  have  gathered  the 
house  of  Israel  from  the  people 
among  whom  they  are  scattered, 
and  shall  be  sanctified  in  them 
in  the  sight  of  the  heathen,  then 
shall  they  dwell  in  their  land 
that  I  have  given  to  my  servant 
Jacob. 

And  they  shall  dwell  safely 
therein,  and  shall  build  houses, 
and  plant  vineyards ;  yea,  they 
shall  dwell  with  confidence, 
when  I  have  executed  judgments 
upon  all  those  that  despise  them. 
' — Ezek.  28  :  25,  26. 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord  God ; 
Behold,  I,  even  I,  will  both 
search  my  sheep,  and  seek  them 
out. 

As  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his 
flock  in  the  day  that  he  is  among 
his  sheep  that  are  scattered ;  so 
will  I  seek  out  my  sheep,  and 
will  deliver  them  out  of  all 
places  where  they  have  been 
scattered  in  the  cloudy  and  dark 
day. 

And  I  will  bring  them  out 
from  the  people,  and  gather 
them  from  the  countries,  and 
will  bring  them  to  their  own 
land,  and  feed  them  upon  the 
mountains  of  Israel  by  the 
rivers,  and  in  all  the  inhabited 
places  of  the  country.  .  .  . 

And  I  will  set  up  one  shep- 
herd over  them,  and  he  shall 
feed  them,  even  my  servant 
David ;  he  shall  feed  them,  and 
he  shall  be  their  shepherd. 

And  I  the  Lord  will  be  their 
God,  and  my  servant  David  a 
prince  among  them ;  I  the  Lord 
have  spoken  it.  .  .  . — Ezek.  34  : 

Also,  thou  son  of  man,  proph- 
esy unto  the  mountains  of  Is- 
rael, and  say,  Ye  mountains  of 
Israel,  hear  the  word  of  the 
Lord : 


Thus  saith  the  Lord  God ; 
Because  the  enemy  hath  said 
against  you,  Aha,  even  the  an- 
cient high  places  are  ours  in 
possession  :   .  .  . 

For,  behold,  I  am  for  you, 
and  I  will  turn  unto  you,  and 
ye  shall  be  tilled  and  sown: 

And  I  will  multiply  men  upon 
you,  all  the  house  of  Israel, 
even  all  of  it :  and  the  cities 
shall  be  inhabited,  and  the 
wastes   shall   be   builded  : 

And  I  will  multiply  upon  you 
man  and  beast ;  and  they  shall 
increase  and  bring  fruit :  and 
I  will  settle  you  after  your 
old  estates,  and  will  do  better 
unto  you  than  at  your  begin- 
nings :  and  ye  shall  know  that 
I  am  the  Lord. 

Yea,  I  will  cause  men  to  walk 
upon  you,  even  my  people  Is- 
rael ;  and  they  shall  possess 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  their 
inheritance,  and  thou  shalt  no 
more  henceforth  bereave  them 
of  men. — Ezek.    36:1-12. 

For  I  will  take  you  from 
among  the  heathen,  and  gather 
you  out  of  all  countries,  and 
will  bring  you  into  your  own 
land. 

Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean 
water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall 
be  clean :  from  all  your  filthi- 
ness,  and  from  all  your  idols, 
will   I   cleanse   you. 

A  new  heart  also  will  I  give 
you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put 
within  you :  and  I  will  take 
away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your 
flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  an 
heart  of  flesh. 

And  I  will  put  my  spirit  with- 
in you,  and  cause  you  to  walk 
in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep 
my  judgments,  and  do   them. 

And  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land 
that    I    gave    to    your    fathers; 


68 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


and  ye  shall  be  my  people,  and  I 
will  be  your  God     .     .     . 

And  the  desolate  land  shall  be 
tilled,  whereas  it  lay  desolate 
in  the  sight  of  all  that  passed 
by. 

And  they  shall  say,  This  land 
that  was  desolate  is  become  like 
the  garden  of  Eden,  and  the 
waste  and  desolate  and  ruined 
cities  are  become  fenced,  and 
are    inhabited. 

Then  the  heathen  that  are 
left  round  about  you  shall  know 
that  I  the  Lord  build  the  ruined 
places,  and  plant  that  that  was 
desolate :  I  the  Lord  have  spo- 
ken it,  and  I  will  do  it.  .  .  . — 
E:::ek.    36:  24-38. 

The  hand  of  the  Lord  was 
upon  me,  and  carried  me  out 
in  the  spirit  of  the  Lord,  and 
set  mc  down  in  the  midst  of  the 
valley  which  was   full  of  bones. 

And  caused  me  to  pass  by 
them  round  about :  and,  behold, 
there  were  very  many  in  the 
open  valley ;  and,  lo,  they  were 
very  dry. 

And  he  said  unto  me.  Son  of 
man,  can  these  bones  live?  And 
I  answered,  O  Lord  God,  thou 
knowest.  .  .  . 

Then  he  said  unto  me,  Son  of 
man,  these  bones  are  the  whole 
house  of  Israel :  behold,  they 
say,  Our  bones  are  dried,  and 
our  hope  is  lost :  we  are  cut  ofif 
for  our  parts. 

Therefore  prophesy  and  say 
unto  them.  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God  ;  Behold,  O  my  people,  I 
will  open  your  graves,  and  cause 
you  to  come  up  out  of  your 
graves,  and  bring  you  into  the 
land  of  Israel. 

And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
the  Lord,  when  I  have  opened 
your  graves,  O  my  people,  and 
brought  you  up  out  of  your 
graves.  .   .  . 

And  say  unto  them,  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  God ;  Behold,  I 
will  take  the  children  of  Israel 
from  among  the  heathen,  whith- 
er they  be  gone,  and  will  gather 
them  on  every  side,  and  bring 
them   into   their   own   land : 


And  I  will  make  them  one  na- 
tion in  the  land  upon  the  moun- 
tains of  Israel  ;  and  one  king 
shall  be  king  to  them  all :  and 
they  shall  be  no  more  two  na- 
tions, neither  shall  they  be  di- 
vided into  two  kingdoms  any 
more  at  all  : 

Neither  shall  they  defile  them- 
selves any  more  with  their  idols, 
nor  with  their  detestable  things, 
nor  with  any  of  their  transgres- 
sions :  but  I  will  save  them  out 
of  all  their  dwelling  places, 
wherein  they  have  sinned,  and 
will  cleanse  them  :  so  shall  they 
be  my  people,  and  I  will  be 
their  God. 

And  David  my  servant  shall 
be  king  over  them  ;  and  they  all 
shall  have  one  shepherd ;  they 
shall  also  walk  in  my  judg- 
ments, and  observe  my  statutes, 
and  do  them. 

And  they  shall  dwell  in  the 
land  that  I  have  given  unto  Ja- 
cob my  servant,  wherein  your 
fathers  have  dwelt ;  and  they 
shall  dwell  therein,  even  they, 
and  their  children,  and  their 
children's  children  for  ever : 
and  my  servant  David  shall  be 
their  prince   for  ever. 

Moreover  I  will  make  a  cove- 
nant of  peace  with  them ;  it 
shall  be  an  everlasting  covenant 
with  them :  and  I  will  place 
them,  and  multiply  them,  ,  and 
will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the 
midst   of   them   for   evermore. 

My  tabernacle  also  shall  be 
with  them  :  yea,  I  will  be  their 
God,  and  they  shall  be  my  peo- 
ple. 

And  the  heathen  shall  know 
that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  Is- 
rael, when  my  sanctuary  shall 
be  in  the  midst  of  them  for 
evermore. — Ezek.    37  :  1-28. 

Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord 
God  ;  Now  will  I  bring  again  the 
captivity  of  Jacob,  and  have 
mercy  upon  the  whole  house  of 
Israel,  and  will  be  jealous  for 
my  holy  name  ; 

After  that  they  have  borne 
their  shame,  and  all  their  tres- 
passes  whereby   they   have   tres- 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 


69 


The  book  of  Daniel  has  a  distinctive  message  covering 
the  long  period  of  Gentile  world-rule.  It  is  now  mere 
history  that,  from  the  time  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of 
Babylon,  610  B.  C,  to  this  present  time,  the  government 
of  the  world  has  been  in  Gentile  hands.  To  this  long 
period  of  time  our  Lord  gave  a  name,  and  a  sign : 

'Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  under  foot  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled"  (Luke 
21:24).  It  is  still  the  "times  of  the  Gentiles,''  and 
Jerusalem  is  still  ''trodden  under  foot  of  the  Gentiles." 

Daniel  is  the  prophet  of  "the  times  of  the  Gentiles." 
Carried  away  to  Babylon,  his  long  life  extended  from 
the  reign  of  Nebuchadnezzar  to  that  of  Cyrus.  Interpret- 
ing a  dream  of  King  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  2:  31-45),^^ 


passed  against  me,  when  they 
dwelt  safely  in  their  land,  and 
none  made  them  afraid. 

When  I  have  brought  them 
again  from  the  people,  and  gath- 
ered them  out  of  their  enemies' 
lands,  and  am  sanctified  in  them 
in  the  sight  of  many  nations ; 

Then  shall  they  know  that  I 
am  the  Lord  their  God,  which 
caused  them  to  be  led  into  cap- 
tivity among  the  heathen :  but 
I  have  gathered  them  unto  their 
own  land,  and  have  left  none  of 
them  any  more  there. 

Neither  will  I  hide  my  face 
any  more  from  them :  for  I  have 
poured  out  my  spirit  upon  the 
house  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord 
God. — Ezek.    39  :  25-29. 

^  Thou,  O  king,  sawest,  and 
behold  a  great  image.  This 
great  image,  whose  brightness 
was  excellent,  stood  before 
thee ;  and  the  form  thereof  was 
terrible. 

This  image's  head  was  of  fine 
gold,  his  breast  and  his  arms 
of  silver,  his  belly  and  his 
thighs  of  brass, 

His  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part 
of  iron  and  part  of  clay. 

Thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone 
was  cut  out  without  hands, 
which  smote  the  image  upon  his 
feet  that  were  of  iron  and  clay, 
and  brake  them  to  pieces. 


Then  was  the  iron,  the  clay, 
the  brass,  the  silver,  and  the 
gold,  broken  to  pieces  together, 
and  became  like  the  chaff  of  the 
summer  threshingfloors ;  and  the 
wind  carried  them  away,  that 
no  place  was  found  for  them : 
and  the  stone  that  smote  the 
image  became  a  great  mountain, 
and  filled  the  whole  earth. 

This  is  the  dream ;  and  we 
will  tell  the  interpretation  there- 
of before  the  king. 

Thou,  O  king,  art  a  king  of 
kings :  for  the  God  of  heaven 
hath  given  thee  a  kingdom, 
power,   and  strength,   and  glory. 

And  wheresoever  the  children 
of  men  dwell,  the  beasts  of  the 
field  and  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 
hath  he  given  into  thine  hand, 
and  hath  made  thee  ruler  over 
them  all.  Thou  art  this  head  of 
gold. 

And  after  thee  shall  arise  an- 
other kingdom  inferior  to  thee, 
and  another  third  kingdom  of 
brass,  which  shall  bear  rule  over 
all  the  earth. 

And  the  fourth  kingdom  shall 
be  strong  as  iron :  forasmuch  as 
iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and  sub- 
dueth  all  things:  and  as  iron 
that  breaketh  all  these,  shall  it 
break   in   pieces   and  bruise. 

And  whereas  thou  sawest  the 
feet   and   toes,   part   of   potters' 


70 


IVHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


it  was  given  to  Daniel  to  see  the  entire  course  of  Gentile 
world  domination  to  the  end.  He  saw  four  world  em- 
pires fulfilled :  in  Babylon ;  Medo-Persia ;  the  Greek  em- 
pire of  Alexander,  with  its  division  into  four  parts ;  and 
Rome.  He  saw  no  other  Gentile  world  empire,  and  all 
attempts  to  establish  one  have  failed,  and  are  doomed  to 
failure.  He  saw  Rome  divided,  first  into  two  parts  and 
then  into  ten  (vs.  33,  40-43).-^  The  division  into  two 
was  fulfilled  in  the  Eastern  Empire  with  its  capital  at 
Constantinople,  and  the  Western  Empire  with  its  capital 
at  Rome.  He  saw  these  (symbolized  by  the  two  legs 
of  the  image)  deteriorate  and  divide — a  division  ulti- 
mately into  ten  kingdoms  occupying  the  territory  once 
covered  by  the  undivided  Roman  Empire. 

And  then  a  startling  and  supernatural  event  swung 
into  the  prophet's  ken.  The  ten  final  kingdoms  of  the 
Gentiles  go  down  in  catastrophe.    A  "stone  cut  out  with- 


clay,  and  part  of  iron,  the  king- 
dom shall  be  divided ;  but  there 
shall  be  in  it  of  the  strength 
of  the  iron,  forasmuch  as  thou 
sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry 
clay. 

And  as  the  toes  of  the  feet 
were  part  of  iron,  and  part  of 
clay,  so  the  kingdom  shall  be 
partly  strong,  and  partly  broken. 

And  whereas  thou  sawest  iron 
mixed  with  miry  clay,  they  shall 
mingle  themselves  with  the  seed 
of  men :  but  they  shall  not 
cleave  one  to  another,  even  as 
iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay. 

And  in  the  days  of  these 
kings  shall  the  God  of  heaven 
set  up  a  kingdom,  which  shall 
never  be  destroyed :  and  the 
kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to 
other  people,  but  it  shall  break 
in  pieces  and  consume  all  these 
kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  for 
ever. 

Forasmuch  as  thou  sawest 
that  the  stone  was  cut  out  of 
the  mountain  without  hands,  and 
that  it  brake  in  pieces  the  iron, 
the  brass,  the  clay,  the  silver, 
and    the    gold ;    the    great    God 


hath  made  known  to  the  king 
what  shall  come  to  pass  here- 
after :  and  the  dream  is  cer- 
tain, and  the  interpretation 
thereof    sure. — Dan.    2:31-43. 

^^  His  legs  of  iron,  his  feet 
part    of   iron    and   part    of   clay. 

And  the  fourth  kingdom  shall 
be  strong  as  iron  :  forasmuch  as 
iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and  sub- 
dueth  all  things:  and  as  iron 
that  breaketh  all  these,  shall  it 
break  in  pieces  and  bruise. 

And  whereas  thou  sawest  the 
feet  and  toes,  part  of  potters* 
clay,  and  part  of  iron,  the  king- 
dom shall  be  divided  ;  but  there 
shall  be  in  it  of  the  strength  of 
the  iron,  forasmuch  as  thou 
sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  miry 
clay. 

And  as  the  toes  of  the  feet 
zvere  part  of  iron,  and  part  of 
clay,  so  the  kingdom  shall  be 
partly  strong,  and  partly  broken. 

And  whereas  thou  sawest  iron 
mixed  with  miry  clay,  they  shall 
mingle  themselves  with  the  seed 
of  men :  but  they  shall  not 
cleave  one  to  another,  even  as 
iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay. — 
Dan.    2 :  33,  40-43- 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM  71 

out  hands''  smites  the  image  into  a  destruction  likened 
unto  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floor.  There  is 
no  reconstruction  of  Gentile  world  power.  But  the  sphere 
of  earth  government  so  long  filled  with  Gentile  empires 
and  kingdoms  gives  place  to  quite  another  rule : 

*'And  in  the  days  of  these  kings  shall  the  God  of  heaven 
set  up  a  kingdom,  which  shall  never  be  destroyed :  and 
the  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  other  people,  but  it  shall 
break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  these  kingdoms,  and  it 
shall  stand  for  ever." 

It  is  from  this  passage  that  the  designation  ''kingdom 
of  heaven"  comes. 

The  Prophecy  of  Daniel  adds  many  most  important 
details,  especially  of  the  time  of  the  end  of  Gentile  domin- 
ion, into  which  we  cannot  now  enter.  But  Daniel's 
greatly  important  contribution  to  the  message  of  the 
prophets  concerning  the  kingdom  is  in  his  order  of  time. 
First,  the  four  world  empires  of  the  Gentiles;  second, 
the  deterioration  and  division  of  the  fourth  world  empire 
into  two  and  ultimately  into  ten;  third,  the  setting  up 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  after  the  catastrophic  destruc- 
tion of  the  ten. 

It  is  certain  that  nothing  of  this  came  to  pass  at  the 
advent  of  Messiah  to  suffer.  The  fourth  empire,  Rome, 
was  in  the  zenith  of  its  strength,  and  had  undergone 
neither  deterioration  nor  division.  Gentile  world-power 
does  not  change  into  the  kingdom  of  the  God  of  heaven 
by  the  transfer  of  individuals  from  one  to  the  other,  as 
by  the  gradual  conversion  of  the  Gentile  world.  The 
end  of  Gentile  world-power  is  sudden,  destructive,  over- 
whelming. And  this  is  also  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  of  His  apostles  (Luke  17:26-32;  1  Thess.  5:1-4; 
2Thess.  1:6-10). 26 

^®  And   as   it   was   in   the   days  days  of  Lot ;  they  did  eat,  they 

of   Noe,    so    shall    it   be    also    in  drank,    they    bought,    they    sold, 

the  days  of  the  Son  of  man.  they  planted,   they  builded ; 

They  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  But    the    same    day    that    Lot 

married  wives,  they  were  given  went    out    of    Sodom    it    rained 

in   marriage,   until   the   day   that  iire  and  brimstone  from  heaven, 

Noe    entered    into    the    ark,    and  and  destroyed  them  all. 

the    flood    came,    and    destroyed  Even   thus   shall   it  be   in  the 

them  all.  day    when    the    Son    of    man    is 

Likewise  also  as  it  was  in  the  revealed. 


72 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


Passing  over  much  of  ,^reat  interest  in  other  of  the 
prophets,  note  a  brief  mention  of  the  kingdom  prophecies 
of  Zechariah.  His  twelfth  chapter-'^  gives  a  graphic  pic- 
ture of  the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem  and  the  battle  of 
Armageddon    (comp.    Isa.    10;   Rev.    19),    followed   by 


In  that  day,  he  which  shall 
be  upon  the  housetop,  and  his 
stuif  in  the  house,  let  him  not 
come  down  to  take  it  away  :  and 
he  that  is  in  the  field,  let  him 
likewise  not   return  back. 

Remember  Lot's  wife. — Luke 
17 :  26-32. 

But  of  the  times  and  the  sea- 
sons, brethren,  ye  have  no  need 
that  I  write  unto  you. 

For  yourselves  know  perfect- 
ly that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so 
cometh   as  a  thief  in  the  night. 

For  when  they  shall  say. 
Peace  and  safety ;  then  sudden 
destruction  cometh  upon  them, 
as  travail  upon  a  woman  with 
child  ;  and  they  shall  not  escape. 

But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in 
darkness,  that  that  day  should 
overtake  you  as  a  thief. — / 
Thess.  5 ;  1-4. 

Seeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing 
with  God  to  recompense  tribu- 
lation to  them  that  trouble  you  ; 

And  to  you  who  are  troubled 
rest  with  us,  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from 
heaven   with   his   mighty   angels. 

In  flaming  fire  taking  venge- 
ance on  them  that  know  not 
God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gos- 
pel of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : 

Who  shall  be  punished  with 
everlasting  destruction  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from 
the  glory  of  his  power; 

Vv'hcn  he  shall  come  to  be 
glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to 
be  admired  in  all  them  that  be- 
lieve (because  our  testimony 
among  you  was  believed)  in  that 
day. — 2    Thess.    1 :  6-10. 

"^The  burden  of  the  word  of 
the  Lord  for  Israel,  saith  the 
Lord,  which  stretcheth  forth  the 
heavens,  and  layeth  the  founda- 
tion of  the  earth,  and  formeth 
the  spirit  of  man  within  him. 


Behold,  I  will  make  Jerusalem 
a  cup  of  trembling  unto  all  the 
people  round  about,  when  they 
shall  be  in  the  siege  both  against 
Judah  and  against  Jerusalem. 

And  in  that  day  will  I  make 
Jerusalem  a  burdensome  stone 
for  all  people :  all  that  burden 
themselves  with  it  shall  be  cut  in 
pieces,  though  all  the  people  of 
the  earth  be  gathered  together 
against  it. 

In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  I 
will  smite  every  horse  with  as- 
tonishment, and  his  rider  with 
madness  :  and  I  will  open  mine 
eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah, 
and  will  smite  every  horse  of 
the  people  with  blindness. 

And  the  governors  of  Judah 
shall  say  in  their  heart,  The  in- 
habitants of  Jerusalem  shall  he 
my  strength  in  the  Lord  of  hosts 
their  God. 

In  that  day  will  I  make  the 
governors  of  Judah  like  a  hearth 
of  fire  among  the  wood,  and  like 
a  torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf;  and 
they  shall  devour  all  the  people 
round  about,  on  the  right  hand 
and  on  the  left :  and  Jerusalem 
shall  be  inhabited  again  in  her 
own  place,  even  in  Jerusalem. 

The  Lord  also  shall  save  the 
tents  of  Judah  first,  that  the 
glory  of  the  house  of  David  and 
the  glory  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  do  not  magnify  them- 
selves against  Judah. 

In  that  day  shall  the  Lord  de- 
fend the  inhabitants  of  Jerusa- 
lem ;  and  he  that  is  feeble  among 
them  at  that  day  shall  be  as 
David  ;  and  the  house  of  David 
shall  be  as  God,  as  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  before  them. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  that  I  will  seek  to  de- 
stroy all  the  nations  that  come 
against  Jerusalem. 


THE  VISION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 


73 


the  repentance  and  conversion  of  the  Jews,  and  this 
(Zech.  14)  by  the  coming  of  the  Lord  in  glory  and  the 
great  declaration : 

''And  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth  .  .  . 
And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  every  one  that  is  left  of 
all  the  nations  which  came  against  Jerusalem  shall  even 
go  up  from  year  to  year  to  worship  the  King,  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  and  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles  .  .  .  Yea, 
every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  in  Judah  shall  be  holiness 
unto  the  Lord  of  hosts/' 

The  kingdom  of  the  Prophets,  then,  is  founded  upon 
the  Davidic  Covenant  (2  Sam.  7:10-17)^^;  is  heavenly 
in  origin  and  principles,  and  in  the  Person  of  the  King 
(Dan.  2:44)^^;  is  set  up  on  the  earth,  with  Jerusalem 


And  I  will  pour  upon  the 
house  of  David,  and  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplica- 
tions :  and  they  shall  look  upon 
me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and 
they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one 
mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and 
shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him, 
as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for 
his  firstborn. 

In  that  day  shall  there  be  a 
great  mourning  in  Jerusalem,  as 
the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon 
in  the  valley  of  Megiddon. 

And  the  land  shall  mourn, 
every  family  apart ;  the  family  of 
the  house  of  David  apart,  and 
their  wives  apart ;  the  family  of 
the  house  of  Nathan  apart,  and 
their  wives  apart ; 

The  family  of  the  house  of 
Levi  apart,  and  their  wives  apart ; 
the  family  of  Shimei  apart,  and 
their  wives  apart ; 

All  the  families  that  remain, 
every  family  apart,  and  their 
wives  apart. — Zech.  12. 

'®  Moreover  I  will  appoint  a 
place  for  my  people  Israel,  and 
will  plant  them,  that  they  may 
dwell  in  a  place  of  their  own, 
and  move  no  more ;  neither  shall 
the  children  of  wickedness  afflict 
them   any   more,    as   beforetime, 

And  as  since  the  time  that  I 
commanded   judges    to    be    over 


my  people  Israel,  and  have 
caused  thee  to  rest  from  all 
thine  enemies.  Also  the  Lord 
telleth  thee  that  he  will  make 
thee  an  house. 

And  when  thy  days  be  ful- 
filled, and  thou  shalt  sleep  with 
thy  fathers,  I  will  set  up  thy 
seed  after  thee,  which  shall  pro- 
ceed out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I 
will    establish    his    kingdom. 

He  shall  build  an  house  for 
my  name,  and  I  will  stablish  the 
throne  of  his  kingdom  for  ever. 
I  will  be  his  father,  and  he 
shall  be  my  son.  If  he  commit 
iniquity,  I  will  chasten  him  with 
the  rod  of  men,  and  with  the 
stripes  of  the  children  of  men : 

But  my  mercy  shall  not  de- 
part away  from  him,  as  I  took 
it  from  Saul,  whom  I  put  away 
before   thee. 

And  thine  house  and  thy  king- 
dom shall  be  established  for 
ever  before  thee ;  thy  throne 
shall  be  established  for  ever. 

According  to  all  these  words, 
and  according  to  all  this  vision, 
so  did  Nathan  speak  unto  Da- 
vid.— 2  Sam.  7 :  10-17. 

^®  And  in  the  days  of  these 
kings  shall  the  God  of  heaven 
set  up  a  kingdom,  which  shall 
never  be  destroyed :  and  the 
kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  oth- 
er people,  hut  it  shall  break  in 


74 


JVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


as  the  capital  (Isa.  2:  1-4)^^  is  first  established  over  re- 
gathered  and  converted  Israel,  extending  then  over  the 
earth;  and  is  established  by  power,  not  persuasion  (Isa. 
9:7;  Luke  1:32).^^ 


pieces  and  consume  all  these 
kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  for 
ever. — Dan.  2 :  44. 

^^  The  word  that  Isaiah  the 
son  of  Amoz  saw  concerning 
Judah   and    Jerusalem. 

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
the  last  days,  that  the  mountain 
of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  es- 
tablished in  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tains, and  shall  be  exalted  above 
the  hills ;  and  all  nations  shall 
flow  unto  it. 

And  many  people  shall  go  and 
say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up 
to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  to 
the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob  ; 
and  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways, 
and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths  : 
for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth 
the  law,  and  the  word  of  the 
Lord   from  Jerusalem. 


And  he  shall  judge  among  the 
nations,  and  shall  rebuke  many 
people:  and  they  shall  beat  their 
swords  into  ploughshares,  and 
their  spears  into  pruninghooks : 
nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword 
against  nation,  neither  shall  they 
learn  war  any  more. — Isa.  2: 
1-4. 

^^  Of  the  increase  of  his  gov- 
ernment and  peace  there  shall 
be  no  end,  upon  the  throne  of 
David,  and  upon  his  kingdom, 
to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it 
with  judgment  and  with  justice 
from  henceforth  even  for  ever. 
The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
will  perform  this. — Isa.  9 ;  7. 

He  shall  be  great,  and  shall 
be  called  the  son  of  the  High- 
est :  and  the  Lord  God  shall 
give  unto  him  the  throne  of 
his    father    David. — Luke    1:32, 


VI.    THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF 
JESUS  CHRIST 

THE  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  His  incarnation  is  ap- 
pointed to  a  three-fold  ministry,  indicated  by  the 
titles.  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  He  is  the 
*Trophet  like  unto  me"  foretold  by  Moses 
(Deut.  18:15;  Acts  7:37)^— that  is,  the  Prophet  who 
introduces  a  new  order  (John  1:17).^  But  He  does 
not  at  once  introduce  the  new  order — grace.  ''Made 
of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law"  (Gal.  4:4)  He 
begins  His  prophetic  ministry  to  a  people  also  under  law 
by  the  ofifer  of  Himself  as  the  One  to  whom  all  the  Old 
Testament  prophets  bore  witness,  the  King  ''meek  and 
lowly"  (Matt.  21:4,  5)  in  whom  the  kingdom  was  now 
"at  hand." 

Like  the  Old  Testament  prophets  Jesus  Christ  is  first 
of  all  a  forthteller,  and,  as  with  them,  it  is  the  refusal 
of  His  message  by  the  Jews  which  calls  out  His  predictive 
ministry.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  strikes  the  ethical 
note  of  the  elder  prophets,  but  lifts  it  to  its  highest 
potency.  There  is  not  a  ray  of  grace  in  it,  nor  a  drop 
of  blood.  Tested  by  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  the  high- 
est attainment  of  humanity  in  the  reach  after  righteous- 
ness utterly  fails.  The  Beatitudes  describe  the  character 
that  alone  brings  happiness,  but  not  the  admirers  of  pov- 
erty of  spirit,  meekness,  spiritual  hunger  and  thirst, 
mercifulness,  and  purity  of  heart,  but  the  possessors  of 
these  supreme  graces,  are  the  "blessed." 

In  this  ethical  ministry  the  two  ideas  of  the  kingdom 

'  The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God 

up    unto    thee    a    Prophet    from  raise  up  unto  you  of  your  breth- 

the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy  breth-  ren,  like  unto  me ;  him  shall  ye 

ren,    like    unto    me ;    unto    him  hear. — Acts  7 :  37. 

ye  shall  hearken. — Deut.  18 :  15.  ^  For    the    law    was    given    by 

This  is  that  Moses,  which  said  Moses,  hut  grace  and  truth  came 

unto   the   children   of   Israel,    A  by  Jesus  Christ. — John  i :  17. 

7S 


76 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVr 


of  God  and  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  blend.  For  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  bring  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
(1  Cor.  15:24-28),^  and  the  true  subjects  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  that  is,  true  beHevers  in  Christ,  are  al- 
ready in  the  kingdom  of  God. 

In  considering  the  prophetic  ministry  of  Christ  it  is 
of  the  last  importance  to  bear  in  mind  that,  like  the  proph- 
ets of  old.  His  ministry  was  primarily  to  Israel  (Matt. 
10:  5-7).^  For  it  is  always  true  that  blessing  to  Gentiles 
comes  through  Israel  (Isa.  11:10;  Rom.  11:17,  24, 
25).^  It  is  so  in  all  kingdom  truth,  and  it  is  so  in  all 
Gospel  truth,  and  the  formula  is  ever,  "To  the  Jew  first, 
and  also  to  the  Gentile'^  (Rom.  1 :  16;  2:  9,  10;  Acts  13 : 
46).^  Perhaps  the  most  important  passage  for  the  guid- 
ance of  the  student  of  the  Gospels  is  Romans  15 : 8: 


^  Then  cometh  the  end,  when 
he  shall  have  delivered  up  the 
kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Fath- 
er ;  when  he  shall  have  put 
down  all  rule  and  all  authority 
and   power. 

For  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath 
put   all   enemies   under   his    feet. 

The  last  enemy  that  shall  be 
destroyed    is   death. 

For  he  hath  put  all  things 
under  his  feet.  But  when  he 
saith  all  things  are  put  under 
him,  it  is  manifest  that  he  is 
excepted,  which  did  put  all 
things  under  him. 

And  when  all  things  shall  be 
subdued  unto  him,  then  shall  the 
Son  also  himself  be  subject  un- 
to him  that  put  all  things  under 
him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all. 
— I    Cor.    13  :  24-28. 

■*  These  twelve  Jesus  sent 
forth,  and  commanded  them, 
saying,  Go  not  into  the  way  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  into  any  city 
of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not : 

But  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep 
of  the  house  of  Israel. 

And  as  ye  go,  preach,  saying, 
The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand. — Matt.    lo :  5-7. 

^  And  in  that  day  there  shall 
be  a  root  of  Jesse,  which  shall 
stand  for  an  ensign  of  the  peo- 
ple ;    to    it    shall    the    Gentiles 


seek  :  and  his  rest  shall  be  glo- 
rious.— Isa.    11:10. 

And  if  some  of  the  branches 
be  broken  off,  and  thou,  being 
a  wild  olive  tree,  were  graffed 
in  among  them,  and  with  them 
partakest  of  the  root  and  fat- 
ness of  the  olive  tree. — Rom. 
II :  17. 

For  if  thou  wert  cut  out  of 
the  olive  tree  which  is  wild  by 
nature,  and  wert  graffed  con- 
trary to  nature  into  a  good  olive 
tree :  how  much  more  shall 
these,  which  be  the  natural 
branches,  be  graffed  into  their 
own  olive  tree? 

For  I  would  not,  brethren, 
that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of 
this  mystery,  lest  ye  should  be 
wise  in  your  own  conceits ;  that 
blindness  in  part  is  happened  to 
Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  be  come  in. — Rom.   11: 

24-25- 

^  For  I  am  not  ashamed  of 
the  gospel  of  Christ :  for  it  is 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
to  every  one  that  believeth ;  to 
the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the 
Greek. — Rom.    i :  16. 

Tribulation  and  anguish,  upon 
every  soul  of  man  that  doeth 
evil,  of  the  Jew  first,  and  also 
of  the  Gentile ; 

But  glory,  honour,  and  peace, 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    77 

'*Now  I  say  that  Jesus  Christ  was  a  minister  of  the 
circumcision  for  the  truth  of  God,  to  confirm  the  prom- 
ises made  unto  the  fathers :  and  that  the  Gentiles  might 
glorify  God  for  his  mercy/' 

The  Gentile  position  is  stated  in  Ephesians  2:12: 

''Wherefore  remember,  that  ye  being  in  time  past 
Gentiles  ...  ye  were  without  Christ,  being  aliens  from 
the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  cov- 
enants of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in 
the  world/' 

The  Jew  had  (and  has)  ''promises";  and  coupled  with 
these  are  prophetic  declarations  of  mercy  to  the  Gentiles, 
as  Paul  abundantly  shows  in  Romans  9,  10,  and  11. 

To  confirm  the  promises  to  Israel,  and  to  bring  in 
mercy  to  the  hopeless  and  godless  Gentile,  Christ's  earthly 
ministry  v/as  addressed.  As  son  of  David  He  offers  the 
kingdom  to  the  Jews;  as  son  of  Abraham  He  dies  for 
both  Jew  and  Gentile  (Gen.  12:3;  Matt.  1:1;  Gal.  3: 
13,  14).'^  If  this  distinction  is  firmly  held  the  prophetic 
ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus  will  be  cleared  of  confusion. 

He  begins  with  the  kingdom :  the  church  is  not  men- 
tioned until  His  rejection  as  King  is  evident. 

New  Testament  prophecy  begins  with  John  the  Bap- 
tist. His  theme  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  That  which 
the  Old  Testament  prophet  saw  afar  off,  John  announces 
as  ''at  hand."  That  phrase  ''at  hand"  has  acquired  in 
Scripture  usage  a  definite,  almost  technical,  meaning. 
It  signifies,  not  that  the  thing  or  event  so  announced  must 

to  every  man  that  worketh  good,  all     families     of    the     earth    be 

to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  blessed. — Gen.    I2 :  3. 

Gentile Rom    2:  9  10  The  book  of  the  generation  of 

Then      Paul      and      Barnabas  J^^us  Christ    the  son  of  David, 


waxed    bold,    and    said,    It    was 


the     son     of     Abraham. — Matt. 


necessary  that  the  word  of  God  *  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from 

should  first  have  been  spoken  to  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made 

you :  but  seeing  ye  put  it   from  a   curse   for  us :    for   it   is   writ- 

you,    and    judge    yourselves    un-  ten.    Cursed    is    every    one    that 

worthy    of    everlasting    life,    lo,  hangeth  on  a  tree : 

we   turn   to   the    Gentiles.— ^cf.y  ,    That    the    blessing    of    Abra- 

^^  ham    might    come    on    the    Gen- 

7  A    J    T       -11    ii           1            1  tiles  through  Jesus  Christ;  that 

And    I    will   bless    them   that  ^^    j^ig^t    receive    the    promise 

bless   thee,    and   curse   him   that  of    the    Spirit    through    faith.— 

curseth  thee  :   and  in  thee  shall  Gal,    3 :  13,  14. 


7^ 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


immediately  appear,  but  that  it  is  the  next  thing  in  the 
revealed  program.  When,  for  example,  Paul  wrote  his 
letter  to  the  Philippians  the  Lord  was  ''at  hand"  (Phil. 
4:5).  After  nineteen  hundred  years  He  is  still  ''at  hand/' 
for  His  descent  into  the  air  to  receive  His  church  (1 
Cor.  15:  51,  52;  1  Thess.  4:  14-17)^  is  still  the  next  event 
in  the  revealed  program. 

That  the  present  Church  Age  would  intervene  before 
the  return  of  the  King  in  glory  to  set  up  the  Messianic 
kingdom  of  heaven  was,  like  the  church  itself,  "a  mys- 
tery hid  in  God''  (Eph.  3:  1-11).^  The  true  church  is 
revealed  in  Scripture  in  an  absolutely  timeless  way,  unre- 
lated to  earthly  events,  because  it  is  in  the  earth  as  a 
heavenly  thing,  pilgrim  and  stranger  ( 1  Pet.  2:11;  Heb. 
3:1;  Phil.  3 :  20;  1  Pet.  1 : 4).i«    Hid  in  God  also  were 


^Behold,  I  shew  you  a  mys- 
tery; We  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed, 

In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump: 
for  the  trumpet  shall  sound, 
and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  in- 
corruptible, and  we  shall  be 
changed. — /    Cor.    15:51,52. 

For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  even  so 
them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus 
will    God    bring    with    him. 

For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
which  are  alive  ayid  remain 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
shall  not  prevent  them  which 
are   asleep. 

For  the  Lord  himself  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump 
of  God  :  and  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall   rise   first : 

Then  we  which  are  alive 
and  remain  shall  be  caught  up 
together  with  them  in  the 
clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the 
air :  and  so  shall  we  ever  be 
with  the   Lord. — i   Thess.  4 :  14- 

^  How  that  by  revelation  he 
made   known  unto   me  the   mys- 


tery; (as  I  wrote  afore  in  few 
words, 

Whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye 
may  understand  my  knowledge 
in  the  mystery  of  Christ) 

Which  in  other  ages  was  not 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto 
his  holy  apostles  and  prophets 
by  the    Spirit ; 

That  the  Gentiles  should  be 
fellowheirs,  and  of  the  same 
body,  and  partakers  of  his  prom- 
ise in  Christ  by  the  gospel ;  .  .  . 
— Eph.  3  :  i-ii. 

^°  Whereas  angels,  which  are 
greater  in  power  and  might, 
bring  not  railing  accusation 
against  them  before  the  Lord. 
— I    Pet.    2:  II. 

Wherefore,  holy  brethren,  par- 
takers of  the  heavenly  calling, 
consider  the  Apostle  and  High 
Priest  of  our  profession,  Christ 
Jesus. — Heb.  3 :  i. 

For  our  conversation  is  in 
heaven ;  from  whence  also  we 
look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord 
Jesus     Christ. — Phil.     3:20. 

To  an  inheritance  incorrupti- 
ble, and  undefiled,  and  that  fad- 
eth  not  away,  reserved  in 
heaven   for  you. — /  Pet.   1:4. 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    79 

certain  ''mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven''  (Matt. 
13:11-17)^^  to  be  fulfilled  during-  the  church  age.  To 
the  church  ''the  Lord  is  at  hand"  every  moment  "till 
he  come"  (Phil.  4:  5  ;  1  Cor.  11 :  26).^'^  But  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  not  now  "at  hand"  because  many  predicted 
events  must  be  fulfilled  before  the  return  of  the  King  in 
glory.  Meantime  the  church  pursues  her  pilgrim  w^ay, 
added  to  by  those  who  are  outcalled  by  the  Gospel  of 
God's  free  grace  (Acts  IS  :  14;  2  :  A7)P  Meantime,  also, 
the  "mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven"  are  being  ful- 
filled. 

The  present  age,  in  other  words,  is  a  parenthesis  in  the 
prophetic  order,  and  was  hidden  from  the  Old  Testament 
prophets.  They  saw  "the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the 
glories  that  should  follow"  confused  in  one  horizon  (1 
Pet.  1 :  10-12)/^    Christ  revealed  the  truth  of  the  present 


^^  He  answered  and  said  unto 
them,  Because  it  is  given  unto 
you  to  know  the  mysteries  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but 
to   them   it   is   not   given. 

For  whosoever  hath,  to  him 
shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have 
more  abundance  :  but  whosoever 
hath  not,  from  him  shall  be 
taken   away   even   that   he   hath. 

Therefore  speak  I  to  them  in 
parables :  becaiise  they  seeing 
see  not ;  and  hearing  they  hear 
not,  neither  do  they  understand. 

And  in  them  is  fulfilled  the 
prophecy  of  Esaias,  which  saith, 
By  hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and 
shall  not  understand ;  and  see- 
ing ye  shall  see,  and  shall  not 
perceive  : 

For  this  people's  heart  is 
waxed  gross,  and  their  ears  are 
dull  of  hearing,  and  their  eyes 
they  have  closed ;  lest  at  any 
time  they  should  see  with  their 
eyes,  and  hear  with  their  ears, 
and  should  understand  with 
their  heart,  and  should  be  con- 
verted, and  I  should  heal  them. 

But  blessed  are  your  eyes, 
for  they  see  :  and  your  ears,  for 
they   hear. 

For  verily  I  say  unto  yovi, 
That   many  prophets  and   right- 


eous men  have  desired  to  see 
those  things  which  ye  see,  and 
have  not  seen  them;  and  to 
hear  those  things  which  ye 
hear,  and  have  not  heard  them. 
— Matt.   IS  :  11-17. 

^^  Let  your  moderation  be 
known  unto  all  men.  The  Lord 
is    at    hand. — Phil,    4  :  3. 

For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this 
bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do 
shew  the  Lord's  death  till  he 
come. — I   Cor.   11:26. 

^^  Simeon  hath  declared  how 
God  at  the  first  did  visit  the 
Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a 
people   for  his  name. — Acts  15: 

^4'       ,  , 

Praising  God,  and  having  fa- 
vour with  all  the  people.  And 
the  Lord  added  to  the  church 
daily  such  as  should  be  saved. 
— Acts  2  :  47. 

^*  Of  which  salvation  the 
prophets  have  inquired  and 
searched  diligently,  who  proph- 
esied of  the  grace  that  should 
come  tmto  you : 

Searching  what,  or  what  man- 
ner of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
which  w^as  in  them  did  signify, 
when  it  testified  beforehand  the 
sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the 
glory  that  should  follow. 


80  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

age — the  age  of  the  outcalHng  of  the  church,  and  of 
the  ''mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven" — as  interven- 
ing between  His  sufferings  and  His  kingdom  glory. 

But  He  did  not  lift  the  veil  that  hid  this  age  until  it 
had  become  evident  that  the  nation  to  whom  He  had,  in 
literal  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  come,  had  rejected  Him. 
The  turning  point  from  the  preaching  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  as  ''at  hand"  to  the  entrance  of  the  Lord  into  the 
sphere  of  predictive  prophecy  is  recorded  in  Matthew  11, 
12.  The  Twelve  are  warned  of  hatred  and  treachery 
(10:  17),^'^  and  the  cities  which  had  witnessed  His  might- 
iest w^orks  are  appointed  unto  judgment  (11:20-24).^* 
But  what  is  supremely  significant  is  that  He  no  longer 
announces  the  king'dom  as  "at  hand,"  but  turns  from 
the  nation  to  the  individual  in  the  new  message : 

"Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and 
learn  of  me;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart:  and 
ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls." 

It  is  now  personal  relationship  with  Himself  that  counts. 
The  earthly  blessings  promised  to  Israel  are  postponed 
(Deut.  30:  1-10;  Jer.  33:  14-26;  Acts  15:  14-17).^^  There 

Unto    whom    it    was   revealed.  But  I  say  unto  you,  It  shall  be 

that    not    unto    themselves,    but  more     tolerable     for     Tyre     and 

unto    us    they    did    minister   the  Sidon    at   the   day    of   judgment 

things,   which  are   now  reported  than   for  you. 

unto    you    by    them    that    have  And   thou,    Capernaum,   which 

preached    the    gospel    unto    you  art  exalted  unto  heaven,  shalt  be 

with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  brought    down    to    hell :    for    if 

from   heaven ;   which   things   the  the    mighty    works,    which    have 

angels     desire     to     look     into. —  been    done    in    thee,    had    been 

/    Peter    1:10-12.  done    in    Sodom,    it   would   have 

^  But     beware     of    men  :     for  remained  until  this  day. 

they   will  deliver  you  up  to   the  But    I    say   unto   you,    That   it 

councils,   and   they   will   scourge  shall   be   more   tolerable   for   the 

you  in   their  synagogues. — Matt.  land    of    Sodom    in    the    day    of 

10:  17.  judgment,  than   for  thee. — Matt. 

^^  Then    began    he    to    upbraid  11:20-24. 

the    cities    wherein    most    of    his  ^'  And    it    shall    come    to    pass, 

mighty    works    were    done,    be-  when  all  these  things  are  come 

cause  they  repented  not :  upon  thee,  the  blessing  and  the 

Woe     unto      thee,      Chorazin,  curse,   which    I   have   set   before 

woe    unto    thee,    Bethsaida !    for  thee,    and    thou    shalt    call    thetn 

if  the  mighty  works,  which  were  to   mind   among  all   the   nations, 

done   in   you,   had  been   done   in  whither  the  Lord  thy  God  hath 

Tyre     and     Sidon,     they     would  driven  thee, 

have  repented  long  ago  in  sack-  And     shalt     return     unto     the 

cloth   and  ashes.  Lord    thy   God,    and    shalt    obey 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    81 


remained  the  formal  offer  of  Himself  ''meek  and  lowly," 
strangely  miscalled  ''the  triumphal  entry''  (Matt.  21: 
1-11),^®  but  to  His  disciples  the  words  are  of  His  ap- 
proachino-  death  and  resurrection. 


his  voice  according  to  all  that  I 
command  thee  this  day,  thou 
and  thy  children,  with  all  thine 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul  ; 

That  then  the  Lord  thy  God 
will  turn  thy  captivity,  and  have 
compassion  upon  thee,  and  w^U 
return  and  gather  thee  from  all 
the  nations,  whither  the  Lord 
thy  God  hath  scattered  thee. 

If  any  of  thine  be  driven  out 
unto  the  outmost  parts  of  heav- 
en, from  thence  will  the  Lord 
thy  God  gather  thee,  and  from 
thence  will  he  fetch  thee : 

And  the  Lord  thy  God  will 
bring  thee  into  the  land  which 
thy  fathers  possessed,  and  thou 
shalt  possess  it ;  and  he  will  do 
thee  good,  and  multiply  thee 
above  thy  fathers. 

And  the  Lord  thy  God  will 
circumcise  thine  heart,  and  the 
heart  of  thy  seed,  to  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  that 
thou  rpayest  live. 

And  the  Lord  thy  God  will 
put  all  these  curses  upon  thine 
enemies,  and  on  them  that  hate 
thee,   which   persecuted  thee. 

And  thou  shalt  return  and 
obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and 
do  all  hi*^  commandments  which 
I   command  thee  this  day. 

And  the  Lord  thy  God  will 
make  thee  plenteous  in  every 
work  of  thine  hand,  in  the  fruit 
of  thy  body,  and  in  the  fruit  of 
thy  cattle,  and  in  the  fruit  of 
thy  land,  for  good  :  for  the  Lord 
will  again  rejoice  over  thee  for 
good,  as  he  rejoiced  over  thy 
fathers : 

If  thou  shalt  hearken  unto  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  to 
keep  his  commandments  and  his 
statutes  which  are  written  in 
this  book  of  the  law,  and  if  thou 
turn  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
with  all  thine  heart,  and  with 
all   thy   soul. — Dent.   30:1-10. 


Behold,  the  days  come,  saith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  perform 
that  good  thing  which  I  have 
promised  unto  the  house  of  Is- 
rael and  to  the  house  of  Judah. 

In  those  days,  and  at  that 
time,  will  I  cause  the  Branch  of 
righteousness  to  grow  up  unto 
David ;  and  he  shall  execute 
judgment  and  righteousness  in 
the    land. 

In  those  days  shall  Judah  be 
saved,  and  Jerusalem  shall  dwell 
safely :  and  this  is  the  name 
wherewith  she  shall  be  called, 
The  Lord  our  righteousness.  .  .  . 
— Jer.  S3  :  14-26. 

Simeon  hath  declared  how 
God  at  the  first  did  visit  the 
Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a 
people  for  his  name. 

And  to  this  agree  the  words 
of  the  prophets :  as  it  is  writ- 
ten, 

After  this  I  will  return,  and 
will  build  again  the  tabernacle 
of  David,  which  is  fallen  down  ; 
and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins 
thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up  : 

That  the  residue  of  men 
might  seek  after  the  Lord,  and 
all  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  my 
name  is  called,  saith  the  Lord, 
who  doeth  all  these  things. — 
Acts    15:  14-17. 

^^.  .  .  And  a  very  great  multi- 
tude spread  their  garments  in  the 
way ;  others  cut  down  branches 
from  the  trees,  and  strawed 
them   in   the  way. 

And  the  multitudes  that  went 
before,  and  that  followed,  cried, 
saying,  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of 
David  :  Blessed  is  he  that  com- 
eth  in  the  name  of  the  Lord ; 
Hosanna    in   the    highest. 

And  when  he  was  come  into 
Jerusalem,  all  the  city  was 
moved,  saying.  Who  is  this? 

And  the  multitude  said,  This 
is  Jesus  the  prophet  of  Nazareth 
of   Galilee. — Matt.   21:1-11. 


82 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


The  subjects  of  the  predictions  uttered  by  the  Christ 
are  (chiefly)  concerning  the  kingdom  of  heaven  during 
the  interval  between  the  rejection  of  the  King  and  His 
return  in  glory;  His  own  death  and  resurrection;  judg- 
ment ;  the  church ;  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and,  especially,  the 
great  prophetic  message  which  we  call  the  Olivet  Dis- 
course (Matt.  24:  1-51 ;  25:  1-46;  Luke  21 :  5-36).^^ 


"  And  Jesus  went  out,  and  de- 
parted from  the  temple :  and 
his  disciples  came  to  him  for 
to  shew  him  the  buildings  of  the 
temple. 

And  Jesus  said  unto  them. 
See  ye  not  all  these  things? 
verily  I  say  unto  you,  There 
shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone 
upon  another,  that  shall  not  be 
thrown   down. 

And  as  he  sat  upon  the  mount 
of  Olives,  the  disciples  came 
unto  him  privately,  saying,  Tell 
us,  when  shall  these  things  be? 
and  what  shall  be  the  sign  of 
thy  coming,  and  of  the  end  of 
the  world? 

And  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  them,  Take  heed  that  no 
man   deceive  you. 

For  many  shall  come  in  my 
name,  saying,  I  am  Christ ;  and 
shall  deceive  many. 

And  ye  shall  hear  of  wars 
and  rumours  of  wars :  see  that 
ye  be  not  troubled  :  for  all  these 
things  must  come  to  pass,  but 
the  end  is  not  yet. 

For  nation  shall  rise  against 
nation,  and  kingdom  against 
kingdom :  and  there  shall  be 
famines,  and  pestilences,  and 
earthquakes,  in  divers  places. 

All  these  are  the  beginning  of 
sorrows. 

Then  shall  they  deliver  you 
up  to  be  afflicted,  and  shall 
kill  you :  and  ye  shall  be  hated 
of  all  nations  for  my  name's 
sake. 

And  then  shall  many  be  of- 
fended, and  shall  betray  one  an- 
other, and  shall  hate  one  an- 
other. 

And  many  false  prophets  shall 
rise,  and  shall  deceive  many. 


And  because  iniquity  shall 
abound,  the  love  of  many  shall 
wax   cold. 

But  he  that  shall  endure  unto 
the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved. 

And  this  gospel  of  the  king- 
dom shall  be  preached  in  all 
the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all 
nations ;  and  then  shall  the  end 
come. 

When  ye  therefore  shall  see 
the  abomination  of  desolation, 
spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  proph- 
et, stand  in  the  holy  place  (who- 
so readeth,  let  him  under- 
stand :) 

Then  let  them  which  be  in 
Judsea   flee   into   the   mountains : 

Let  him  which  is  on  the 
housetop  not  come  down  to  take 
any  thing  out  of  his  house : 

Neither  let  him  which  is  in 
the  field  return  back  to  take  his 
clothes. 

And  woe  unto  them  that  are 
with  child,  and  to  them  that 
give   suck  in   those   days ! 

But  pray  ye  that  your  flight 
be  not  in  the  winter,  neither  on 
the   sabbath   day : 

For  then  shall  be  great  tribu- 
lation, such  as  was  not  since  the 
beginning  of  the  world  to  this 
time,  nor  ever  shall  be. 

And  except  those  days  should 
be  shortened,  there  should  no 
flesh  be  saved :  but  for  the 
elect's  sake  those  days  shall  be 
shortened. 

Then  if  any  man  shall  say 
unto  you,  Lo,  here  is  Christ,  or 
there ;    believe    it    not. 

For  there  shall  arise  false 
Christs,  and  false  prophets,  and 
shall  shew  great  signs  and  won- 
ders :   insomuch  that,   if  it  were 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    83 


possible,  they  shall  deceive  the 
very   elect. 

Behold,  I  have  told  you  be- 
fore. 

Wherefore  if  they  shall  say 
unto  you,  Behold,  he  is  in  the 
desert ;  go  not  forth  :  behold,  he 
is  in  the  secret  chambers ;  be- 
lieve  it   not. 

For  as  the  lightning  cometh 
out  of  the  east,  and  shineth 
even  unto  the  west ;  so  shall 
also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of 
man  be. 

For  wheresoever  the  carcase 
is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gath- 
ered together. 

Immediately  after  the  tribu- 
lation of  those  days  shall  the 
sun  be  darkened,  and  the  moon 
shall  not  give  her  light,  and 
the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven, 
and  the  powers  of  the  heavens 
shall  be  shaken  : 

And  then  shall  appear  the 
sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in 
heaven :  and  then  shall  all  the 
tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and 
they  shall  see  the  Son  of  man 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
with  power  and  great  glory. 

And  he  shall  send  his  angels 
with  a  great  sound  of  a  trump- 
et, and  they  shall  gather  to- 
gether his  elect  from  the  four 
winds,  from  one  end  of  heaven 
to  the  other. 

Now  learn  a  parable  of  the 
fig  tree ;  When  his  branch  is  yet 
tender,  and  putteth  forth  leaves, 
ye   know   that   summer   is  nigh : 

So  likewise  ye,  when  ye  shall 
see  all  these  things,  know  that 
it  is  near,  even  at  the  doors. 

Verily  I  say  unto  you,  This 
generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all 
these  things  be  fulfilled. 

Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away,  but  my  words  shall  not 
pass  away. 

But  of  that  day  and  hour 
knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the 
angels  of  heaven,  but  my  Fath- 
er   only. 

But  as  the  days  of  Noe  were, 
so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  man  be. 


For  as  in  the  days  that  were 
before  the  flood  they  were  eat- 
ing and  drinking,  marrying,  and 
giving  in  marriage,  until  the 
day  that  Noe  entered  into  the 
ark. 

And  knew  not  until  the  flood 
came,  and  took  them  all  away  ; 
so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  man  be. 

Then  shall  two  be  in  the 
field ;  the  one  shall  be  taken,  and 
the    other   left. 

Two  women  shall  he  grind- 
ing at  the  mill ;  the  one  shall  be 
taken,  and  the  other  left. 

Watch  therefore  :  for  ye  know 
not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth 
come. 

But  know  this,  that  if  the 
goodman  of  the  house  had 
known  in  what  watch  the  thief 
would  come,  he  would  have 
watched,  and  would  not  have 
suffered  his  house  to  be  broken 
up. 

Therefore  be  ye  also  ready : 
for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think 
not  the  Son  of  man  cometh. 

Who  then  is  a  faithful  and 
wise  servant,  whom  his  lord 
hath  made  ruler  over  his  house- 
hold, to  give  them  meat  in  due 
season  ? 

Blessed  is  that  servant,  whom 
his  lord  when  he  cometh  shall 
find  so  doing. 

Verily  I  say  unto  you,  That 
he  shall  make  him  ruler  over 
all  his  goods. 

But  and  if  that  evil  servant 
shall  say  in  his  heart,  My  lord 
delay eth   his   coming ; 

And  shall  begin  to  smite  his 
fellowservants,  and  to  eat  and 
drink  with  the  drunken ; 

The  lord  of  that  servant  shall 
come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh 
not  for  him,  and  in  an  hour 
that  he  is  not  aware  of. 

And  shall  cut  him  asunder, 
and  appoint  him  his  portion 
with  the  hypocrites :  there  shall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
teeth. — Matt.  24  :  1-51. 

Then  shall  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  vir- 
gins,   which    took    their    lamps, 


84 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


and     went     forth    to     meet    the 
bridegroom. 

And  five  of  them  were  wise, 
and   five  were   foolish. 

They  that  were  foolish  took 
their  lamps,  and  took  no  oil 
with  them  : 

But  the  wise  took  oil  in  their 
vessels   with   their   lamps. 

While  the  bridegroom  tarried, 
they  all  slumbered  and  slept. 

And  at  midnight  there  was  a 
cry  made,  Behold,  the  bride- 
groom cometh ;  go  ye  out  to 
meet  him. 

Then  all  those  virgins  arose, 
and  trimmed  their  lamps. 

And  the  foolish  said  unto  the 
wise,  Give  us  of  your  oil ;  for 
our  lamps  are  gone  out. 

But  the  wise  answered,  say- 
ing, Not  so;  lest  there  be  not 
enough  for  us  and  you  :  but  go 
ye  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and 
buy  for  yourselves. 

And  while  they  went  to  buy, 
the  bridegroom  came ;  and  they 
that  were  ready  went  in  with 
him  to  the  marriage :  and  the 
door  was  shut. 

Afterward  came  also  the  oth- 
er virgins,  saying.  Lord,  Lord, 
open  to  us. 

But  he  answered  and  said, 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know 
you  not. 

Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know 
neither  the  day  nor  the  hour 
wherein  the  Son  of  man  com- 
eth. 

For  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
as  a  man  travelling  into  a  far 
country,  who  called  his  own 
servants,  and  delivered  unto 
them   his   goods. 

And  unto  one  he  gave  five 
talents,  to  another  two,  and  to 
another  one ;  to  every  man  ac- 
cording to  his  several  ability ; 
and  straightway  took  his  jour- 
ney. 

Then  he  that  had  received  the 
five  talents  went  and  traded 
with  the  same,  and  made  them 
other  five  talents. 

And  likewise  he  that  had  re- 
ceived two,  he  also  gained  other 
two. 


But  he  that  had  received  one 
went  and  digged  in  the  earth, 
and  hid  his  lord's  money. 

After  a  long  time  the  lord  of 
those  servants  cometh,  and  reck- 
oneth   with   them. 

And  so  he  that  had  received 
five  talents  came  and  brought 
other  five  talents,  saying,  Lord, 
thou  deliveredst  unto  me  five 
talents :  behold,  I  have  gained 
beside  them  five  talents  more. 

His  lord  said  tmto  him,  Well 
done,  thou  good  and  faithful 
servant  :  thou  hast  been  faithful 
over  a  few  things,  I  will  make 
thee  ruler  over  many  things : 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy 
lord. 

He  also  that  had  received 
two  talents  came  and  said,  Lord, 
thou  deliveredst  unto  me  two 
talents :  behold,  I  have  gained 
two    other   talents    beside   them. 

His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well 
done,  good  and  faithful  serv- 
ant :  thou  hast  been  faithful 
over  a  few  things,  I  will  make 
thee  ruler  over  many  things : 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy 
lord. 

Then  he  which  had  received 
the  one  talent  came  and  said, 
Lord,  I  knew  thee  that  thou  art 
an  hard  man,  reaping  where 
thou  hast  not  sown,  and  gath- 
ering where  thou  hast  not 
strawed  : 

And  I  was  afraid,  and  went 
and  hid  thy  talent  in  the  earth  : 
lo,  there  thou  hast  that  is  thine. 

His  lord  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  Thou  wicked  and 
slothful  servant,  thou  knewest 
that  I  reap  where  I  sowed  not, 
and  gather  where  I  have  not 
strawed  : 

Thou  oughtest  therefore  to 
have  put  my  money  to  the  ex- 
changers, and  then  at  my  com- 
ing I  should  have  received  mine 
own   with  usury. 

Take  therefore  the  talent 
from  him,  and  give  it  unto  him 
which  hath  ten  talents. 

For  unto  every  one  that  hath 
shall  be  given,  and  he  shall 
have  abundance :   but   from  him 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    85 


that  hath  not  shall  be  taken 
away   even  that   which  he  hath. 

And  cast  ye  the  unprofitable 
servant  into  outer  darkness : 
there  shall  be  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth. 

When  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall 
he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory : 

And  before  him  shall  be  gath- 
ered all  nations :  and  he  shall 
separate  them  one  from  another, 
as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep 
from  the  goats  : 

And  he  shall  set  the  sheep 
on  his  right  hand,  but  the  goats 
on  the  left. 

Then  shall  the  King  say  un- 
to them  on  his  right  hand, 
Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father, 
inherit  the  kingdom  prepared 
for  you  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world : 

For  I  was  an  hungred,  and 
ye  gave  me  meat :  I  was  thirsty, 
and  ye  gave  me  drink :  I  was 
a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in : 

Naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  :  I 
was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me :  I 
was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto 
me. 

Then  shall  the  righteous  an- 
swer him,  saying,  Lord,  when 
saw  we  thee  an  hungred,  and 
fed  theef  or  thirsty,  and  gave 
thee  drink? 

When  saw  we  thee  a  stran- 
ger, and  took  thee  in?  or  naked, 
and  clothed  theef 

Or  when  saw  we  thee  sick, 
or  in  prison,  and  came  unto 
thee? 

And  the  King  shall  answer 
and  say  unto  them,  Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  Inasmuch  as  ye  have 
done  it  unto  one  of  the  least 
of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have 
done   it   unto    me. 

Then  shall  he  say  also  unto 
them  on  the  left  hand.  Depart 
from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire,  prepared  for  the 
devil  and  his  angels : 

For  I  was  an  hungred,  and  ye 
gave  me  no  meat:  I  was  thirsty, 
and  ye  gave  me  no  drink : 


I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took 
me  not  in :  naked,  and  ye 
clothed  me  not  :  sick,  and  in 
prison,    and    ye    visited    me    not. 

Then  shall  they  also  answer 
him,  saying,  Lord,  when  saw  we 
thee  an  hungred,  or  athirst,  or 
a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick, 
or  in  prison,  and  did  not  min- 
ister  unto   thee  ? 

Then  shall  he  answer  them, 
saying.  Verily  I  say  unto  you. 
Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  to 
one  of  the  least  of  these,  ye 
did   it  not  to   me. 

And  these  shall  go  away  into 
everlasting  punishment :  but  the 
righteous  into  life  eternal. — 
Matt.  25 :  1-46. 

And  as  some  spake  of  the 
temple,  how  it  was  adorned  with 
goodly  stones  and  gifts,  he  said, 

As  for  these  things  which  ye 
behold,  the  days  will  come,  in 
the  which  there  shall  not  be  left 
one  stone  upon  another,  that 
shall  not  be  thrown  down. 

And  they  asked  him,  saying. 
Master,  but  when  shall  these 
things  be?  and  what  sign  will 
there  he  when  these  things  shall 
come  to  pass? 

And  he  said.  Take  heed  that 
ye  be  not  deceived :  for  many 
shall  come  in  my  name,  saying, 
I  am  Christ ;  and  the  time  draw- 
eth  near :  go  ye  not  therefore 
after   them. 

But  when  ye  shall  hear  of 
wars  and  commotions,  be  not 
terrified :  for  these  things  must 
first  come  to  pass ;  but  the  end 
is   not   by   and   by. 

Then  said  he  unto  them,  Na- 
tion shall  rise  against  nation, 
and   kingdom   against   kingdom : 

And  great  earthquakes  shall 
be  in  divers  places,  and  famines, 
and  pestilences ;  and  fearful 
sights  and  great  signs  shall 
there  be  from  heaven. 

But  before  all  these,  they 
shall  lay  their  hands  on  you. 
and  persecute  you,  delivering 
you  up  to  the  synagogues,  and 
into  prisons,  being  brought  be- 
fore kings  and  rulers  for  my 
name's    sake. 


86 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAVr 


1.  Consequent  upon  the  rejection  of  the  King,  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  which  had  been  announced  by  John 
the  Baptist  (Matt.  3 : 2),2o  by  Christ  (Matt.  4:  17),^^  and 


And  it  shall  turn  to  you  for 
a  testimony. 

Settle  it  therefore  in  your 
hearts,  not  to  meditate  before 
what  ye  shall   answer : 

For  I  will  give  you  a  mouth 
and  wisdom,  which  all  your  ad- 
versaries shall  not  be  able  to 
gainsay   nor  resist. 

And  ye  shall  be  betrayed 
both  by  parents,  and  brethren, 
and  kinsfolks,  and  friends  ;  and 
some  of  you  shall  they  cause  to 
be  put  to  death. 

And  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all 
men  for  my  name's  sake. 

But  there  shall  not  an  hair 
of  your  head   perish. 

In  your  patience  possess  ye 
your  souls. 

And  when  ye  shall  see  Jeru- 
salem compassed  with  armies, 
then  know  that  the  desolation 
thereof  is  nigh. 

Then  let  them  which  are  in 
Judaea  flee  to  the  mountains ; 
and  let  them  which  are  in  the 
midst  of  it  depart  out ;  and  let 
not  them  that  are  in  the  coun- 
tries  enter  thereinto. 

For  these  be  the  days  of 
vengeance,  that  all  things  which 
are  written  may  be  fulfilled. 

But  woe  unto  them  that  are 
with  child,  and  to  them  that 
give  suck,  in  those  days !  for 
there  shall  be  great  distress  in 
the  land,  and  wrath  upon  this 
people. 

And  they  shall  fall  by  the 
edge  of  the  sword,  and  shall  be 
led  away  captive  into  all  na- 
tions :  and  Jerusalem  shall  be 
trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles, 
until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
be   fulfilled. 

And  there  shall  be  signs  in 
the  sun,  and  in  the  moon,  and 
in  the  stars ;  and  upon  the  earth 
distress  of  nations,  with  per- 
plexity ;  the  sea  and  the  waves 
roaring ; 


Men's  hearts  failing  them  for 
fear,  and  for  looking  after  those 
things  which  are  coming  on  the 
earth  :  for  the  powers  of  heaven 
shall   be   shaken. 

And  then  shall  they  see  the 
Son  of  man  coming  in  a  cloud 
with   power  and  great  glory. 

And  when  these  things  begin 
to  come  to  pass,  then  look  up, 
and  lift  up  your  heads ;  for  your 
redemption  draweth  nigh. 

And  he  spake  to  them  a  par- 
able ;  Behold  the  fig  tree,  and 
all  the  trees ; 

When  they  now  shoot  forth, 
ye  see  and  know  of  your  own 
selves  that  summer  is  now  nigh 
at   hand. 

So  likewise  ye,  when  ye  see 
these  things  come  to  pass,  know 
ye  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is 
nigh   at   hand. 

Verily  I  say  unto  you.  This 
generation  shall  not  pass  away, 
till  all  be  fulfilled. 

Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away :  but  my  words  shall  not 
pass  away. 

And  take  heed  to  yourselves, 
lest  at  any  time  your  hearts  be 
overcharged  with  surfeiting,  and 
drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this 
life,  and  so  that  day  come  upon 
you  unawares. 

For  as  a  snare  shall  it  come 
on  all  them  that  dwell  on  the 
face  of  the  whole  earth. 

Watch  ye  therefore,  and  pray 
always,  that  ye  may  be  account- 
ed worthy  to  escape  all  these 
things  that  shall  come  to  pass, 
and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of 
man. — Luke   21:5-36. 

^^  And  saying,  Repent  ye  :  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand. — Matt.    3 :  2. 

"  From  that  time  Jesus  began 
to  preach,  and  to  say.  Repent : 
for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
at  hand. — Matt.  4  :  17. 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    87 

by  the  twelve  (Matt.  10 1?),^^  as  ''at  hand/'  enters  the 
period  during  which  certain  ''mysteries"  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  are  to  be  fulfilled.  These  are  described  in 
seven  parables  gathered  into  Matthew  13.  A  ''mystery'' 
in  Scripture  is  a  divine  purpose  hitherto  hidden,  but  now 
revealed. 

The  seven  parables  of  Matthew  13,  called  by  our  Lord 
"mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  taken  together, 
describe  the  result  of  the  presence  of  the  Gospel  in  the 
world  during  the  present  age,  that  is  the  time  of  seed 
sowing  w^hich  began  with  our  Lord's  personal  ministry, 
and  ends  with  the  "harvest"  (Matt.  13  :  40-43)  .^^  Briefly, 
that  result  is  the  mingling  of  tares  and  wheat,  good  fish 
and  bad,  children  of  the  kingdom  and  children  of  the 
evil  one,  in  the  sphere  of  Christian  profession.  It  is  that 
which  we  have  been  calling  "Christendom."  True  "chil- 
dren of  the  kingdom"  are  there,  but  mingled  with  them, 
and  so  closely  resembling  them  that  the  "servants"  cannot 
be  trusted  to  distinguish  them,  are  mere  professors.  So 
great  is  the  danger  to  souls  involved  in  mere  profession 
that  our  Lord's  teaching  now  abounds  in  solemn  warn- 
ings (Matt.  7:22;  20:16;  21:28-31;  23:13-38).2^ 

"  And   as  ye   go,  preach,   say-  So  the  last  shall  be  first,  and 

ing,   The   kingdom  of  heaven   is  the  first  last :  for  many  be  called, 

at   hand. — Matt.    lo :  7.  but    few    chosen. — Matt.    20 :  16. 

^  As    therefore   the   tares    are  But   what   think   ye?      A   cer- 

gathered  and  burned  in  the  fire,  tain  man  had  two  sons ;  and  he 

so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  this  came  to  the  first,  and  said.  Son, 

world.  go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard. 

The    Son    of    man    shall    send  He  answered  and  said,  I  will 

forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall  not :  but  afterward  he  repented, 

gather    out    of    his    kingdom    all  and    v/ent. 

things    that    offend,     and    them  And   he   came   to   the   second, 

which  do   iniquity ;  and  said  likewise.     And  he  an- 

And    shall    cast    them    into    a  swered  and  said,  I  go,  sir :  and 

furnace    of   fire :    there   shall   be  went   not. 

wailing   and   gnashing   of   teeth.  Whether    of   them    twain    did 

Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  the    will    of    his    father  ?      They 

forth    as    the    sun    in    the    king-  say  unto   him.   The  first.     Jesus 

dom  of  their  Father.     Who  hath  saith    unto    them,    Verily    I    say 

ears    to    hear,    let    him    hear. —  unto    you,    That    the    publicans 

Matt.    13  :  40-43.                  ^  and  the  harlots  go  into  the  king- 

^  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  dom  of  God  before  you. — Matt. 

day,    Lord,    Lord,    have   we    not  21 :  28-31. 

prophesied    in    thy    name  ?    and  But  woe  unto  you,  scribes  and 

in  thy  name  have  cast  out  dev-  Pharisees,     hypocrites !     for    ye 

ils?  and  in  thy  name  done  many  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven 

wonderful   works? — Matt.   7:22.  against   men:   for  ye  neither  go 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


2.  The  Lord  predicted  His  own  death  at  the  hands  of 
wicked  men,  and  His  resurrection  after  three  days  (Matt. 
12 :  38-40 ;  17  :  22,  23 ;  20 :  17-19)  P 

3.  The  Lord  predicted  judgment  upon  persons  (Matt. 
25:46)-^;  cities  (Matt.  11:22-24;  23:37-39;  Luke  21: 
20-24)^';  and  nations  (Matt.  25:31-46).^^ 

again.  And  they  were  exceed- 
ing   sorry. — Matt.     17  :  22,  23. 

And  Jesus  going  up  to  Jeru- 
salem took  the  twelve  disciples 
apart  in  the  way,  and  said  unto 
them, 

Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusa- 
lem ;  and  the  Son  of  man  shall 
be  betrayed  unto  the  chief 
priests  and  unto  the  scribes,  and 
they  shall  condemn  him  to 
death, 

And  shall  deliver  him  to  the 
Gentiles  to  mock,  and  to  scourge, 
and  to  crucify  him :  and  the 
third  day  he  shall  rise  again. — 
Matt.   20 :  17-19. 

**  And  these  shall  go  away 
into  everlasting  punishment : 
but  the  righteous  into  life  eter- 
nal.— Matt.    25  :  46. 

-'  But  I  say  unto  you,  It  shall 
be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and 
Sidon  at  the  day  of  judgment 
than  for  you. 

And  thou,  Capernaum,  which 
art  exalted  unto  heaven,  shalt 
be  brought  down  to  hell :  for  if 
the  mighty  works,  which  have 
been  done  in  thee,  had  been 
done  in  Sodom,  it  would  have 
remained  until  this  day. 

But  I  say  unto  you,  That  it 
shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the 
land  of  Sodom  in  the  day  of 
judgment,  than  for  thee. — Matt. 
II :  22-24. 

O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou 
that  killest  the  prophets,  and 
stonest  them  which  are  sent  un- 
to thee,  how  often  would  I  have 
gathered  thy  children  together, 
even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her 
chickens  under  her  wings,  and 
ye  would  not ! 

Behold,  your  house  is  left 
unto   you   desolate. 

For   I   say   unto  yo^i.   Ye  shall 


in  yourselves,  neither  suffer  ye 
them  that  are  entering  to  go  in. 

Woe  unto  you,  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  hypocrites !  for  ye 
devour  widows*  houses,  and  for 
a  pretence  make  long  prayer : 
therefore  ye  shall  receive  the 
greater  damnation. 

Woe  unto  you,  scribes  and 
Pharisees,  hypocrites !  for  ye 
compass  sea  and  land  to  make 
one  proselyte,  and  when  he  is 
made,  ye  make  him  twofold 
more  the  child  of  hell  than  your- 
selves. .  .  . 

O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou 
that  killest  the  prophets,  and 
stonest  them  which  are  sent  un- 
to thee,  how  often  would  I  have 
gathered  thy  children  together, 
even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her 
chickens  under  her  wings,  and 
ye  would  not ! 

Behold,  your  house  is  left  un- 
to you  desolate. — Matt.  23: 
13-38. 

^'-^  Then  certain  of  the  scribes 
and  of  the  Pharisees  answered, 
saying.  Master,  we  would  see  a 
sign   from  thee. 

But  he  answered  and  said 
unto  them.  An  evil  and  adul- 
terous generation  seeketh  after 
a  sign  :  and  there  shall  no  sign 
be  given  to  it,  but  the  sign  of 
the  prophet  Jonas : 

For  as  Jonas  was  three  days 
and  three  nights  in  the  whale's 
belly ;  so  shall  the  Son  of  man 
be  three  days  and  three  nights 
in  the  heart  of  the  earth. — Matt. 
12:  38-40. 

And  while  they  abode  in  Gal- 
ilee, Jesus  said  unto  them.  The 
Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed 
into  the  hands  of  men  : 

And  they  shall  kill  him,  and 
the  third  day  he  shall  be  raised 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  lESUS  CHRIST    89 

4.  The  Lord  predicted  the  church  (Matt.  16:  13-18)^® 
as  being  yet  in  the  future :  ''I  will  build  my  church/' 


not  see  me  henceforth,  till  ye 
shall  say,  Blessed  is  he  that 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
— Matt.  23  :  37-39- 

And  when  ye  shall  see  Jeru- 
salem compassed  with  armies, 
then  know  that  the  desolation 
thereof    is    nigh. 

Then  let  them  which  are  in 
Judaea  flee  to  the  mountains ; 
and  let  them  which  are  in  the 
midst  of  it  depart  out ;  and  let 
not  them  that  are  in  the  coun- 
tries  enter  thereinto. 

For  these  be  the  days  of 
vengeance,  that  all  things  which 
are  written  may  be  fulfilled. 

But  woe  unto  them  that  are 
with  child,  and  to  them  that  give 
suck,  in  those  days !  for  there 
shall  be  great  distress  in  the 
land,  and  wrath  upon  this  peo- 
ple. 

And  they  shall  fall  by  the 
edge  of  the  sword,  and  shall  be 
led  away  captive  into  all  na- 
tions :  and  Jerusalem  shall  be 
trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles, 
until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
be  fulfilled. — Luke  21 :  20-24. 

^^  When  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall 
he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory : 

And  before  him  shall  be  gath- 
ered all  nations :  and  he  shall 
separate  them  one  from  another, 
as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep 
from  the  goats  : 

And  he  shall  set  the  sheep  on 
his  right  hand,  but  the  goats  on 
the   left. 

Then  shall  the  King  say  unto 
them  on  his  right  hand.  Come, 
ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you 
from  the  foundation  of  the 
world : 

For  I  was  an  hungred,  and 
ye  gave  me  meat :  I  was  thirsty, 
and  ye  gave  me  drink :  I  was  a 
stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in  : 


Naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  :  I 
was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me  :  I 
was  in  prison,  and  ye  came 
unto   me. 

Then  shall  the  righteous  an- 
swer him,  saying.  Lord,  when 
saw  we  thee  an  hungred,  and 
fed  theef  or  thirsty,  and  gave 
thee    drink  ? 

When  saw  we  thee  a  stran- 
ger, and  took  thee  in?  or  naked, 
and   clothed   theef 

Or  when  saw  we  thee  sick, 
or  in  prison,  and  came  unto 
thee? 

And  the  King  shall  answer 
and  say  unto  them.  Verily  I  say 
unto  you.  Inasmuch  as  ye  have 
done  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of 
these  my  brethren,  ye  have  done 
it    unto    me. 

Then  shall  he  say  also  unto 
them  on  the  left  hand,  Depart 
from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire,  prepared  for  the 
devil   and   his   angels : 

For  I  was  an  hungred,  and 
ye  gave  me  no  meat :  I  was 
thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no 
drink : 

I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took 
me  not  in  :  naked,  and  ye  clothed 
me  not :  sick,  and  in  prison,  and 
ye  visited  me  not. 

Then  shall  they  also  answer 
him,  saying.  Lord,  when  saw  we 
thee  an  hungred,  or  athirst,  or 
a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick, 
or  in  prison,  and  did  not  min- 
ister unto  thee? 

Then  shall  he  answer  them, 
saying,  Verily  I  say  unto  you. 
Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  to 
one  of  the  least  of  these,  ye 
did  it  not  to  me. 

And  these  shall  go  away  into 
everlasting  punishment :  but  the 
righteous  into  life  eternal. — 
Matt.    25 :  31-46. 

^^  When  Jesus  came  into  the 
coasts  of  Csrsarea  Philippi,  he 
asked  his  disciples,  saying, 
Whom  do  m.en  saj'  that  I  the 
Son   of  m.an   am  ? 


90 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


Only  once  more,  and  that  in  respect  of  discipline,  does 
Christ  refer  to  this  new  purpose. 

He  uses  a  word  for  this  new  thing,  ecclesia=''t\\3.t 
which  is  called  out,''  which,  in  itself,  may  be  applied  to 
any  called  out  assembly.  It  is  used  of  Israel  in  the 
wilderness  (Acts  7:38),^^  and  also  of  the  tumultuous 
town  meeting  in  Ephesus  (Acts  19:32,  translated  ''as- 
sembly" ).^^  But  our  Lord  went  no  farther  than  the 
announcement  of  a  purpose.  All  else  concerning  this 
new  thing  was  another  ''mystery  hid  in  God''  and  re- 
vealed through  the  apostle  Paul  (Eph.  3:  1-11).^^ 

5.  Jesus  Christ  predicted  the  course  and  end  of  this 
age.  As  to  the  latter  His  testimony  w^as  clear  and  uni- 
form, the  age  ends  in  catastrophe.  To  illustrate  this  our 
Lord  goes  back  to  the  two  catastrophic  judgments  of 
the  flood,  and  of  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the 
plain  (Luke  17 :  26-37).^^ 


And  they  said,  Some  say  that 
thou  art  John  the  Baptist:  some, 
Elias ;  and  others,  Jeremias,  or 
one  of  the  prophets. 

He  saith  unto  them,  But  whom 
say  ye  that   I   am  ? 

And  Simon  Peter  answered 
and  said,  Thou  art  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  the  living  God. 

And  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  Blessed  art  thou,  Si- 
mon Bar-jona:  for  flesh  and 
blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto 
thee,  but  my  Father  which  is 
in    heaven. 

And  I  say  also  unto  thee. 
That  thou  art  Peter,  and  upon 
this  rock  I  will  build  my  church  ; 
and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not 
prevail  against  it. — Matt.  i6: 
13-18. 

^^  This  is  he,  that  was  in  the 
church  in  the  wilderness  with 
the  angel  which  spake  to  him 
in  the  thount  Sina,  and  with 
our  fathers :  who  received  the 
lively  oracles  to  give  unto  us. — 
Acts  7 :  38. 

'^^  Some  therefore  cried  one 
thing,  and  some  another:  for 
the  assembly  was  confused  ;  and 
the  more  part  knew  not  where- 
fore they  were  come  together. — 
/^rf.v   TQ :  32. 


^"  See  footnote  on  page  78  of 
this  chapter  for  the  Scripture. 

^"  And  as  it  was  in  the  dayr. 
of  Noe,  so  shall  it  be  also  in 
the  days  of  the  Son  of  man. 

They  did  eat,  they  drank,  they 
married  wives,  they  were  given 
in  marriage,  until  the  day  that 
Noe  entered  into  the  ark,  and 
the  flood  came,  and  destroyed 
them  all. 

Likewise  also  as  it  was  in  the 
days  of  Lot ;  they  did  eat,  they 
drank,  they  bought,  they  sold, 
they  planted,  they   builded ; 

But  the  same  day  that  Lot 
v/ent  out  of  Sodom  it  rained  fire 
and  brimstone  from  heaven,  and 
destroyed    them    all. 

Even  thus  shall  it  be  in  the 
day  when  the  Son  of  man  is 
revealed. 

In  that  day,  he  which  shall 
be  upon  the  housetop,  and  his 
stuff  in  the  house,  let  him  not 
come  down  to  take  it  away  :  and 
he  that  is  in  the  field,  let  him 
likewise   not  return  back. 

Remember   Lot's    wife. 

Whosoever  shall  seek  to  save 
his  life  shall  lose  it :  and  whoso- 
ever shall  lose  his  life  shall  pre- 
serve  it. 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    91 


In  the  great  Olivet  Discourse  (Matt.  24:  35;  Luke  21 : 
5-36)^^  our  Lord  enters  into  detail,  especially  with  ref- 
erence to  the  ruin  and  catastrophe  of  the  end  time.  The 
question  of  the  disciples  which  drew  out  the  prophecy, 
the  circumstances  and  places  which  environed  our  Lord's 
answer,  and  the  form  of  the  answer  all  combine  to  mark 
the  discourse  as  a  part  of  Christ's  ministry  to  Israel  as 
''a  minister  of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth  of  God,  to 
confirm  the  promises  made  unto  the  fathers/'  The  whole 
atmosphere  of  the  discourse  is  Jewish. 

It  is  obvious  that  a  confirmation  of  the  promises  to 
the  fathers  concerning  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom 
according  to  the  Davidic  Covenant  (2  Sam.  7:4-16),^^ 
confirmed  by  the  oath  of  Jehovah  (Psa.  89:  3-6,  20-37),^« 
and  by  the  angel  Gabriel  (Luke  1 :  32,  33),^''^  was  neces- 
sary, for  Christ  had  announced  His  approaching  death. 
He  was  going  back  to  heaven  without  having  regathered 
dispersed  Israel,  and  without  re-establishing  the  theocracy 
over  Israel.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  disciples 
gathered  by  our  Lord  during  His  earth-ministry  were 


I  tell  you,  in  that  night  there 
shall  be  two  men  in  one  bed ; 
the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the 
other   shall   be   left. 

Two  women  shall  be  grinding 
together ;  the  one  shall  be  taken, 
and  the  other  left. 

Two  men  shall  be  in  the  field  ; 
the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the 
other  left. 

And  they  answered  and  said 
unto  him,  Where,  Lord?  And 
he  said  unto  them,  Wheresoever 
the  body  is,  thither  will  the 
eagles  be  gathered  together. — 
Luke    17 :  26-37. 

^  See  footnote  on  page  85  of 
this  chapter  for  the  Scripture. 

^^  .  .Moreover  I  will  appoint 
a  place  for  my  people  Israel,  and 
will  plant  them,  that  they  may 
dwell  in  a  place  of  their  own, 
and  move  no  more  ;  neither  shall 
the  children  of  wickedness  af- 
flict them  any  more,  as  before- 
time.  .  .  . 

And  when  thy  days  be  ful- 
filled, and  thou  shalt  sleep  with 


thy  fathers,  I  will  set  up  thy 
seed  after  thee,  which  shall  pro- 
ceed out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I 
will  establish  his  kingdom. 

He  shall  build  an  house  for 
my  name,  and  I  will  stablish  the 
throne  of  his  kingdom  for 
ever.   ... 

And  thine  house  and  thy  king- 
dom shall  be  established  for  ever 
before  thee  :  thy  throne  shall  be 
established  for  ever. — 2  Sam. 
7:  4-16. 

^®  I  have  made  a  covenant 
v/ith  my  chosen,  I  have  sworn 
unto  David  my  servant. 

Thy  seed  will  I  establish  for 
ever,  and  build  up  thy  throne  to 
all  generations.  Selah.  .  .  . — 
Psahn    89  :  3-6,    20-37. 

^^  He  shall  be  great,  and  shall 
be  called  the  Son  of  the  High- 
est :  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give 
unto  him  the  throne  of  his 
father   David  : 

And  he  shall  reign  over  the 
house  of  Jacob  for  ever ;  and  of 
his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no 
end. — Luke    i :  32,  33. 


92 


JVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


Jews  who  had  received  Him  as  the  Messiah :  ''Thou  art 
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God''  had  been  Peter's 
confession  of  faith  approved  by  the  Master  (Matt.  16: 
16).^^  That  He  should  go  through  death  and  resurrec- 
tion back  to  the  Father  leaving  that  tremendous  body  of 
promises  unfulfilled  was  staggering  enough  in  itself; 
that  He  should  leave  it  unconfirmed,  unrenewed,  would 
have  been  the  death  of  Jewish  faith  in  Him. 

Leaving  the  temple  for  the  last  time,  and  predicting 
its  destruction,  He  went  to  the  mount  of  Olives.  As  the 
temple  stood  for  the  past  of  Israel,  so  the  mount  of 
Olives  stood  for  the  nation's  future.  For  Zechariah  in 
his  vision  of  the  second  coming  of  Messiah  and  the 
establishment  of  the  kingdom  (Zech.  12,  13,  14)  had  said, 
''And  his  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the  mount  of 
Olives.  .  .  .  And  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the 
earth  in  that  day"  (Zech.  14:  4-21).^^  The  very  localities 
confirm  the  Jewish  interpretation  of  the  Discourse,  if 
such  confirmation  were  required  where  all  is  so  evidently 
Jewish  (Matt.  24:15-31).^^ 


^And  Simon  Peter  answered 
and  said,  Thou  art  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  the  living  God. — 
Matt.    i6:  i6. 

^®And  his  feet  shall  stand  in 
that  day  upon  the  mount  of 
Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusa- 
lem on  the  east,  and  the  mount 
of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the 
midst  thereof  toward  the  east 
and  toward  the  west,  and  there 
shall  he  a  very  great  valley ; 
and  half  of  the  mountain  shall 
remove  toward  the  north,  and 
half  of  it  toward  the   south. 

And  ye  shall  flee  to  the  val- 
ley of  the  mountains ;  for  the 
valley  of  the  mountains  shall 
reach  unto  Azal :  yea,  ye  shall 
flee,  like  as  ye  fled  from  be- 
fore the  earthquake  in  the  days 
of  Uzziah  king  of  Judah ;  and 
the  Lord  my  God  shall  come, 
and  all  the  saints  with  thee.  .  .  . 

And  the  Lord  shall  be  king 
over  all  the  earth  :  in  that  day 
shall  there  be  one  Lord,  and  his 
name    one.   .  .   . — Zech.    14:4-21. 


*^  When  ye  therefore  shall 
see  the  abomination  of  desola- 
tion, spoken  of  by  Daniel  the 
prophet,  stand  in  the  holy  place, 
(whoso  readeth,  let  him  under- 
stand :) 

Then  let  them  which  be  in 
Judaea    flee    into   the   mountains : 

Let  him  which  is  on  the 
housetop  not  come  down  to  take 
any  thing  out  of  his  house ; 

Neither  let  him  which  is  in 
the  field  return  back  to  take  his 
clothes. 

And  woe  unto  them  that  are 
with  child,  and  to  them  that 
give   suck   in  those  days ! 

But  pray  ye  that  your  flight 
be  not  in  the  winter,  neither  on 
the    sabbath    day : 

For  then  shall  be  great  tribu- 
lation, such  as  was  not  since  the 
beginning  of  the  world  to  this 
time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be. 

And  except  those  days  should 
be  shortened,  there  should  no 
flesh  be  saved  ;  but  for  the  elect's 
sake  those  days  shall  be  short- 
ened. 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    93 

Briefly,  Jesus  said  that  the  age  should  be  one  of  wars, 
famines,  pestilences,  and  it  should  end  in  the  reign  of 
the  beast,  the  abomination  predicted  by  Daniel  the  prophet, 
and  in  the  great  tribulation.  But  immediately  after  the 
great  tribulation  He,  the  Lord,  would  return  in  power 
and  great  glory  and  then  would  He  sit  upon  the  throne 
of  His  glory.  Then  the  dispersed  elect  nation  should 
be  regathered.  His  Jewish  disciples,  who  had  been 
promised  judgships  over  the  twelve  tribes  (Matt. 
19:  27,  28)^^  in  the  kingdom-time  had  not  been  deceived ; 
all  should  be  fulfilled  (compare  Acts  15:  14-17).'*^ 

But  these  very  Jewish  disciples  were  to  have  new  rela- 
tionships, to  Himself  and  to  humanity,  in  quite  another 
and  different  body  of  believers,  to  whom  He  had  referred 


Then  if  any  man  shall  say 
unto  you,  Lo,  here  is  Christ,  or 
there ;  believe  it  not. 

For  there  shall  arise  false 
Christs,  and  false  prophets,  and 
shall  shew  great  signs  and  won- 
ders ;  insomuch  that,  if  it  were 
possible,  they  shall  deceive  the 
very   elect. 

Behold,  I  have  told  you  be- 
fore. 

Wherefore  if  they  shall  say 
unto  you,  Behold,  he  is  in  the 
desert ;  go  not  forth  :  behold,  he 
is  in  the  secret  chambers ;  be- 
lieve if  not. 

For  as  the  lightning  cometh 
out  of  the  east,  and  shineth  even 
unto  the  west ;  so  shall  also  the 
coming  of  the  Son   of  man  be. 

For  wheresoever  the  carcase 
is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gath- 
ered  together. 

Immediately  after  the  tribu- 
lation of  those  days  shall  the 
sun  be  darkened,  and  the  moon 
shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the 
stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and 
the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall 
be    shaken  : 

^  And  then  shall  appear  the 
sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heav- 
en ;  and  then  shall  all  the 
tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and 
they  shall  see  the  Son  of  man 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
with   power   and    great    glory. 


And  he  shall  send  his  angels 
with  a  great  sound  of  a  trum- 
pet, and  they  shall  gather  to- 
gether his  elect  from  the  four 
winds,  from  one  end  of  heaven 
to  the  other. — Matt.  24 :  IS'S^- 

^  Then  answered  Peter  and 
said  unto  him,  Behold,  we  have 
forsaken  all,  and  followed  thee ; 
what   shall   we   have   therefore? 

And  Jesus  said  unto  them, 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye 
which  have  followed  me,  in  the 
regeneration  when  the  Son  of 
man  shall  sit  in  the  throne  of 
his  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon 
twelve  thrones,  judging  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel — Matt. 
19 :  27,   28. 

*^  Simeon  hath  declared  how 
God  at  the  first  did  visit  the 
Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a 
people  for  his  name. 

And  to  this  agree  the  words  of 
the   prophets ;    as   it    is   written. 

After  this  I  will  return,  and 
will  build  again  the  tabernacle 
of  David,  which  is  fallen  down ; 
and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins 
thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up  : 

That  the  residue  of  men 
might  seek  after  the  Lord,  and 
all  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  my 
name  is  called,  saith  the  Lord, 
who  doeth  all  these  things. — 
Acts   15  :  14-17 ' 


94 


IVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVr 


as  ''my  church/'  In  the  future  kingdom  the  Twelve  are 
to  be  judges  over  the  restored  tribes  of  Israel  (Matt. 
19:  27,  28)^^:  In  the  Church  they  are  foundation  stones, 
Christ  Himself  being-  the  chief  corner  stone  (Eph.  2:  20; 
1  Pet.  2:4-7).^^  The  time  had  not  come  to  unveil  that 
mystery.  The  cross  must  be  endured  and  redemption 
accomplished  before  the  new  dispensation  of  grace  could 
come  in.  Nay,  more,  the  Holy  Spirit  must  come  to  inaug- 
urate that  dispensation,  to  unite  the  redeemed  into  one 
body,  and  to  explain  the  new  order.  All  this  was  near, 
but  belonged  to  the  ''many  things''  which  Jesus  would 
fain  have  said,  only  the  disciples  "could  not  bear"  them 
yet  (John  16:12,  13).^^ 

But  He  could  and  would  lay  the  foundation  of  it  all. 

Two  days  after  uttering  the  great  Olivet  Discourse, 
confirming  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers  concerning 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  as  to  be  duly  fulfilled  when  He 
should  return  in  glory  (Matt.  25:31;  comp.  Acts  2:25- 
36;  15:  14-17),^^  the  Lord  again  met  His  disciples.    But 


**  Then  answered  Peter  and 
said  unto  him,  Behold,  we  have 
forsaken  all,  and  followed  thee  ; 
what    shall    we    have   therefore? 

And  Jesus  said  unto  them, 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye 
which  have  followed  me,  in  the 
regeneration  when  the  Son  of 
man  shall  sit  in  the  throne  of 
his  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon 
twelve  thrones,  judging  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel. — Matt. 
ig :  27,  28. 

**  And  are  built  upon  the  foun- 
dation of  the  apostles  and  proph- 
ets, Jesus  Christ  himself  being 
the  chief  corner  stone. — Eph. 
2 :  20. 

To  whom  coming,  as  unto  a 
living  stone,  disallowed  indeed 
of  men,  but  chosen  of  God,  and 
precious, 

Ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are 
built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an 
holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spir- 
itual sacrifices,  acceptable  to 
God  by  Jesus  Christ. 

Wherefore  also  it  is  contained 
in   the    scripture,    Behold,    I    lay 


in  Sion  a  chief  corner  stone, 
elect,  precious :  and  he  that  be- 
lieveth  on  him  shall  not  be  con- 
founded. 

Unto  you  therefore  which  be- 
lieve he  is  precious ;  but  unto 
them  which  be  disobedient,  the 
stone  which  the  builders  disal- 
lowed, the  same  is  made  the 
head   of   the   corner. — i   Pet.   2: 

4-7: 

^  I  have  yet  many  things  to 
say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear 
them    now. 

Howbeit  when  he,  the  Spirit 
of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide 
you  into  all  truth  :  for  he  shall 
not  speak  of  himself ;  but  what- 
soever he  shall  hear,  that  shall 
he  speak :  and  he  will  shew  you 
things    to     come. — John     16 :  12, 

*^When  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall 
he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory. — Matt.    23:31. 

For  David  speaketh  concern- 
ing him,  I  foresaw  the  Lord 
always  before  my  face,  for  he  is 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    95 


not  now  on  Jewish  ground,  nor  in  the  midst  of  Jewish 
earthly  things,  as  the  temple,  or  on  the  mount  of  Olives. 
Gathering  them  in  ''an  upper  chamber,''  as  it  were  away 
from  earth.  He  ate  with  them  the  Passover ;  the  Jewish 
feast  which  was  emphatically  associated,  typically,  with 
His  own  sacrifice  as  ''the  Lamb  of  God''  (John  1:36; 
1  Cor.  5:7),^''  and  with  the  separation  of  a  redeemed 
people  from  the  scene  about  them,  unto  a  pilgrim  path- 
wav  to  a  promised  inheritance  (Exod.  12:  12,  13;  11:7; 
12:11,  41,  42).^« 


on  my  right  hand,  that  I  should 
not   be   moved : 

Therefore  did  my  heart  re- 
joice, and  my  tongue  was  glad; 
moreover  also  my  flesh  shall 
rest  in  hope  : 

Because  thou  wilt  not  leave 
my  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou 
suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see 
corruption. 

Thou  hast  made  known  to  me 
the  ways  of  life ;  thou  shalt 
make  me  full  of  joy  with  thy 
countenance. 

Men  and  brethren,  let  me 
freely  speak  unto  you  of  the  pa- 
triarch David,  that  he  is  both 
dead  and  buried,  and  his  sepul- 
chre  is   with   us   unto   this   day. 

Therefore  being  a  prophet, 
and  knowing  that  God  had  sworn 
with  an  oath  to  him,  that  of  the 
fruit  of  his  loins,  according  to 
the  flesh,  he  would  raise  up 
Christ  to   sit   on   his  throne ; 

He  seeing  this  before  spake 
of  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 
that  his  soul  was  not  left  in  hell, 
neither  his  flesh  did  see  cor- 
ruption. 

This  Jesus  hath  God  raised 
up,  whereof  we  all  are  wit- 
nesses. 

Therefore  being  by  the  right 
hand  of  God  exalted,  and  hav- 
ing received  of  the  Father  the 
promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 
hath  shed  forth  this,  which  ye 
now  see  and  hear. 

For  David  is  not  ascended 
into  the  heavens :  but  he  saith 
himself,  The  Lord  said  unto  my 
Lord,  Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand, 


Until  I  make  thy  foes  thy 
footstool. 

Therefore  let  all  the  house  of 
Israel  know  assuredly,  that  God 
hath  made  that  same  Jesus, 
whom  ye  have  crucified,  both 
Lord  and  Christ. — Acts  2:25-36. 

Simeon  hath  declared  how  God 
at  the  first  did  visit  the  Gentiles, 
to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for 
his  name. 

And  to  this  agree  the  words 
of  the  prophets;  as  it  is  writ- 
ten. 

After  this  I  will  return,  and 
will  build  again  the  tabernacle 
of  David,  which  is  fallen  down  ; 
and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins 
thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up  : 

That  the  residue  of  men 
might  seek  after  the  Lord,  and 
all  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  my 
name  is  called,  saith  the  Lord, 
who  doeth  all  these  things. — 
Acts  15 :  14-17- 

*^  And  looking  upon  Jesus  as 
he  walked,  he  saith.  Behold  the 
Lamb    of    God! — John    1:36. 

Purge  out  therefore  the  old 
leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new 
lump,  as  ye  are  unleavened.  For 
even  Christ  our  passover  is  sac- 
rificed   for   us. — I    Cor.    5 ;  7, 

*^  For  I  will  pass  through  the 
land  of  Egypt  this  night,  and 
will  smite  all  the  firstborn  in  the 
land  of  Egypt,  both  man  and 
beast ;  and  against  all  the  gods 
of  Egypt  I  will  execute  judg- 
ment :  I  am  the  Lord. 

And  the  blood  shall  be  to  you 
for  a  token  upon  the  houses 
where  ye   are :   and  when   I   see 


96  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

The  Passover  supper  finished,  our  Lord  performed 
an  act  of  singular  beauty  and  significance.  Taking  the 
Passover  bread  and  wine  He  ofave  them  to  His  disciples 
as  memorials  of  His  own  sacrifice;  memorials  of  a 
finished  redemption.  And,  in  thus  doing,  He  placed 
Himself  and  them  morally  on  this  side  of  the  cross. 
''Take,  eat;  this  is  my  body."  ''This  is  my  blood  of 
the  new  covenant''  (Heb.  8:  10-13).  Out  of  the  Pass- 
over which  started  Israel  upon  a  pilgrim  pathway,  He 
fashioned  the  feast  of  the  church  which  also  is  a  pilgrim 
company :  ''strangers  and  pilgrims."  In  all  that  wonder- 
ful discourse  in  the  upper  chamber,  as  also  in  the  high 
priestly  prayer  (John  14:1  to  17:26),  there  is  not 
one  distinctively  Jewish  note.  He  makes  it  clear  that 
the  end  of  the  pathway  of  the  new  body,  the  church, 
is  not  the  kingdom  on  the  earth,  over  restored  and  con- 
verted Israel,  and  over  the  nations  of  the  Gentiles,  but 
to  be  received  unto  Himself  away  from  the  earth  (John 
14:3;  1  Thess.  4:  14-16).^^  These  men  will,  indeed,  re- 
turn with  Him  in  glory  to  sit  with  Him  on  their  twelve 
thrones;  but  meantime  He  is  going  away  to  prepare  a 
"place"  for  the  eternal  home  of  the  new  pilgrim  host 

the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you,  ing    them    out    of    the    land    of 

and  the  plague  shall  not  be  upon  Egypt :  this  is  that  night  of  the 

you  to  destroy  you,  when  I  smite  Lord  to   be   observed   of   all   the 

the   land    of    Egypt. — Exod.    12:  children  of  Israel  in  their  gen- 

12,  IS.  erations. — Exod.    12:41,    42. 

But   against    any   of   the   chil-  *^  And   if   I   go   and  prepare   a 

dren    of   Israel   shall   not   a   dog  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again, 

move  his  tongue,  against  man  or  and    receive    you    unto    myself; 

beast :    that   ye    may    know    how  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be 

that  the  Lord  doth  put  a  differ-  also. — John  14:3. 

ence  between  the  Egyptians  and  For   if   we   believe   that   Jesus 

Israel. — Exod.    11:7.  died    and    rose    again,    even    so 

And    thus     shall     ye     eat     it ;  them   also   which   sleep   in   Jesus 

with    your    loins    girded ;    your  will   God  bring  with  him. 

shoes    on    your    feet,    and    your  For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 

staff  in  your  hand  ;  and  ye  shall  the   word   of  the   Lord,   that   we 

eat  it  in  haste  :  it  is  the  Lord's  which  are  alive  and  remain  unto 

passover. — Exod.    12:  11.  the    coming    of    the    Lord    shall 

And    it    came    to    pass   at    the  not     prevent     them     which     are 

end    of    the    four    hundred    and  asleep. 

thirty  years,  even  the  selfsame  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  de- 
day  it  came  to  pass,  that  all  the  scend  from  heaven  with  a  shout, 
hosts  of  the  Lord  went  out  from  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel, 
the   land   of    Egypt.  and  with  the  trump  of  God  :  and 

It  is  a  night  to  be  much   ob-  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first, 

served  unto  the  Lord  for  bring-  — /  Thess.  4:  14-16. 


THE  PROPHETIC  MINISTRY  OF  JESUS  CHRIST    97 

And  then  comes  the  new  promise,  of  which  in  all 
Scripture  before  there  had  been  no  hint  or  intimation : 

''And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come 
again,  and  receive  you  unto  myself ;  that  where  I  am, 
there  ye  may  be  also''  (John  14:  1-3). 

A  new  promise,  for  a  new  body  of  believers,  without 
a  sign,  without  a  time  note,  and  unrelated  to  other  pro- 
phetic events. 

And  this  promise,  taken  up  by  the  pen  of  inspiration 
after  our  Lord's  departure  and  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  becomes  the  ''blessed  hope"  of  the  pilgrim  church. 


VII.  THE  PROPHETIC  MESSAGE  OF  THE  ACTS 


THE  Lord  Jesus  went  to  the  Cross  after  having 
reaffirmed,  in  the  great  OHvet  Discourse,  the  old 
promise  to  the  fathers  of  Israel  of  a  Messiah  who 
should  truly  sit  upon  the  throne  of  David,  accord- 
ing to  the  covenant  confirmed  by  the  oath  of  Jehovah 
and  renewed  through  the  angel  Gabriel  (2  Sam.  7:  1-17; 
Psa.  89:^3,  4,  20-39;  Luke  1:30-33;  Matt.  24:29-31, 
37-51 ;  25 :  31)^ ;  and  after  giving  to  the  church  so  soon 
to  be  formed  a  wholly  new  promise  of  a  coming  which 
would  not,  like  the  coming  to  establish  His  kingdom, 


\  .  .  Now  therefore  so  shalt 
thou  say  unto  my  servant  David, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I 
took  thee  from  the  sheepcote, 
from  following  the  sheep,  to  be 
ruler  over  my  people,  over  Is- 
rael: 

And  I  was  with  thee  whither- 
soever thou  wentest,  and  have 
cut  off  all  thine  enemies  out  of 
thy  sight,  and  have  made  thee  a 
great  name,  like  unto  the  name 
of  the  great  men  that  are  in 
the    earth. 

Moreover  I  will  appoint  a 
place  for  my  people  Israel,  and 
will  plant  them,  that  they  may 
dwell  in  a  place  of  their  own, 
and  move  no  more ;  neither 
shall  the  children  of  wicked- 
ness afflict  them  any  more,  as 
beforetime, 

And  as  since  the  time  that  I 
commanded  judges  to  he  over 
my  people  Israel,  and  have 
caused  thee  to  rest  from  all  thine 
enemies.  Also  the  Lord  telleth 
thee  that  he  will  make  thee  an 
house. 

And  when  thy  days  be  ful- 
filled, and  thou  shalt  sleep  with 
thy    fathers,    I    will    set    up    thy 


seed  after  thee,  which  shall  pro- 
ceed out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I 
will    establish   his    kingdom. 

He  shall  build  an  house  for 
my  name,  and  I  will  stablish  the 
throne  of  his  kingdom  for  ever. 

I  will  be  his  father,  and  he 
shall  be  my  son.  If  he  commit 
iniquity,  I  will  chasten  him  with 
the  rod  of  men,  and  w4th  the 
stripes  of  the  children  of  men  : 

But  my  mercy  shall  not  de- 
part away  from  him,  as  I  took 
it  from  Saul,  whom  I  put  away 
before    thee. 

And  thine  house  and  thy  king- 
dom shall  be  established  for  ever 
before  thee :  thy  throne  shall 
be  established  for  ever.  .  .  . — 
2  Sam.  7 :  1-17. 

I  have  made  a  covenant  with 
my  chosen,  I  have  sworn  unto 
David   my   servant. 

Thy  seed  will  I  establish  for 
ever,  and  build  up  thy  throne  to 
all  generations.  Selah. — Psalm 
89:3,   4- 

I  have  found  David  my  serv- 
ant;  with  my  holy  oil  have  I 
anointed  him  :   .  .   . 

Also  I  will  make  him  my  first 
born,  higher  than  the  kings  of 
the    earth. 


99 


100 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


My  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him 
for  evermore,  and  my  covenant 
shall    stand    fast    with    him. 

His  seed  also  will  I  make  to 
endure  for  ever,  and  his  throne 
as    the    days    of   heaven.    .    .    . 

Once  have  I  sworn  by  my 
holiness  that  I  will  not  lie  unto 
David. 

His  seed  shall  endure  for  ever, 
and  his  throne  as  the  sun  before 
me. 

It  shall  be  established  for 
ever  as  the  moon,  and  as  a  faith- 
ful witness  in  heaven.  Selah. 
.  .  . — Psalm  8q  :  20-39. 

And  the  angel  said  unto  her, 
Fear  not,  Mary :  for  thou  hast 
found    favour    with    God. 

And,  behold,  thou  shalt  con- 
ceive in  thy  womb,  and  bring 
forth  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his 
name    JESUS. 

He  shall  be  great,  and  shall 
be  called  the  Son  of  the  High- 
est :  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give 
unto  him  the  throne  of  his 
father    David. 

And  he  shall  reign  over  the 
house  of  Jacob  for  ever ;  and  of 
his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no 
end. — Luke     i :  30-33- 

Immediately  after  the  tribu- 
lation of  those  days  shall  the 
sun  be  darkened,  and  the  moon 
shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the 
stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and 
the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall 
be  shaken  : 

And  then  shall  appear  the 
sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heav- 
en :  and  then  shall  all  the  tribes 
of  the  earth  mourn,  and  they 
shall  see  the  Son  of  man  com- 
ing in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with 
power  and  great  glory. 

And  he  shall  send  his  angels 
with  a  great  sound  of  a  trum- 
pet, and  they  shall  gather  to- 
gether his  elect  from  the  four 
winds,  from  one  end  of  heaven 
to    the    other. — Matt.    24  :  29-31. 

But  as  the  days  of  Noe  zvere, 
so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the 
Son   of   man   be. 

For  as  in  the  days  that  were 
before  the  flood  they  were  eat- 
ing and  drinking,  marrying,  and 


giving  in  marriage,  until  the 
day  that  Noe  entered  into  the 
ark, 

And  knew  not  until  the  flood 
came,  and  took  them  all  away  ; 
so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the 
Son   of   man   be. 

Then  shall  two  be  in  the  field ; 
the  one  shall  be  taken,  and  the 
other   left. 

Two  women  shall  be  grind- 
ing at  the  mill  ;  the  one  shall 
be  taken,   and  the   other  left. 

Watch  therefore  :  for  ye  know 
not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth 
come. 

But  know  this,  that  if  the 
goodman  of  the  house  had 
known  in  what  watch  the  thief 
would  come,  he  would  have 
watched,  and  would  not  have 
suffered  his  house  to  be  broken 
up. 

Therefore  be  ye  also  ready : 
for  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  think 
not  the  Son  of  man  cometh. 

Who  then  is  a  faithful  and 
wise  servant,  whom  his  lord 
hath  made  ruler  over  his  house- 
hold, to  give  them  meat  in  due 
season  ? 

Blessed  is  that  servant,  whom 
his  lord  when  he  cometh  shall 
find  so  doing. 

Verily  I  say  unto  you.  That 
he  shall  make  him  ruler  over 
all   his  goods. 

But  and  if  that  evil  servant 
shall  say  in  his  heart,  My  lord 
delayeth    his    coming ; 

And  shall  begin  to  smite  his 
fellowservants,  and  to  eat  and 
drink   with   the   drunken ; 

The  lord  of  that  servant  shall 
come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh 
not  for  him,  and  in  an  hour 
that   he  is  not  aware   of. 

And  shall  cut  him  asunder, 
and  appoint  him  his  portion 
with  the  hypocrites  :  there  shall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
teeth. — Matt.    24  :  37-51. 

And  he  shall  send  his  angels 
with  a  great  sound  of  a  trump- 
et, and  they  shall  gather  togeth- 
er his  elect  from  the  four  winds, 
from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the 
other. — Matt.  25:  31. 


THE  PROPHETIC  MESSAGE  OF  THE  ACTS        101 

bring  Him  to  the  earth,  but  only  into  the  air  that  He 
might  receive  His  church  unto  Himself.  This  new  prom- 
ise was  not  connected  with  the  earth,  but  specifically  with 
*'a  place"  in  the  heavens  which  He  was  going  to  ''pre- 
pare." 

The  resurrection  of  Jesus  after  three  days  and  nights 
restored  Him  to  His  disciples  for  forty  days.  The  events 
of  those  davs,  so  far  as  they  are  recorded,  are  set  forth 
in  Matthew' 28;  Mark  16;  Luke  24,  and  John  20  and  21. 
The  twenty-first  chapter  of  John  has  a  relation  backward 
and  forward,  connecting  the  discipleship  which  had  been 
on  Jewish  ground  with  the  new  service  upon  which  those 
same  men  would  presently  enter  as  members  of  His  new 
body,  the  church. 

It  is  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that  we  learn  the 
subjects  of  our  Lord's  supplementary  instructions  to  His 
disciples  during  the  forty  days  of  His  sojourn  with  them 
until  His  Ascension.  Those  instructions  concerned  the 
doctrine  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  the  imminent  advent 
of  another  Divine  Person,  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  new 
service  under  the  Holy  Spirit's  power  (Acts  1:1-8).^ 
It  is  evident  that  precisely  those  instructions  should,  at 
just  that  time,  be  given  to  the  men  about  to  be  entrusted 
with  a  mission  which  would  very  soon  take  them  out  of 

*  The    former    treatise    have    I  For  John  truly  baptized   with 

made,  O  Theophilus,  of  all  that  water ;  but  ye  shall  be  baptized 

Jesus    began    both    to    do    and  with   the   Holy  Ghost   not  many 

teach.                          ^          ,  .  ,     ,  days  hence. 

Until    the    day    m    which    he  ^^en     they     therefore     were 

was    taken    up      after    that    he  ^^^^^    together,    they    asked    of 

through    the     Holy     Ghost     nad  ^^              •         ^^^^    ^il^  ^hou  at 

given    commandments    unto    the  ,,.  '   .    -^    S^\^^      '„„:*,  ^.u^\.:*.^ 

apostles   whom   he   had   chosen:  f'^  time  restore  again  the  king- 

To     whom     also     he     shewed  ^"""^  l""  J^^^^}^       .     .t, 

himself   alive    after    his   passion  An^d  he  said  unto  them,  It  is 

by    many    infallible    proofs,    be-  not   for  you  to   know  the  times 

ing    seen    of    them    forty    days,  or  the  seasons,  which  the  Fath- 

and  speaking  of  the  things  per-  er  hath   put   in   his   own   power, 

taining  to  the  kingdom  of  God  :  But    ye    shall    receive    power, 

And,   being  assembled   togeth-  after    that    the    Holy    Ghost    is 

er  with  them,  commanded  them  come    upon    you :    and    ye    shall 

that     they     should     not     depart  be    witnesses    unto    me    both    in 

from    Jerusalem,    but    wait    for  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judaea,  and 

the     promise     of     the      Father,  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the  utter- 

which,   saith   he,  ye   have   heard  most    part    of    the    earth. — Acts 

of  me.                      '  I :  i-S. 


102  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 

Jewish  thoughts  and  limitations  and  launch  them  upon 
a  world-wide  evangelization. 

First  of  all,  they  would  need  to  know  the  wider,  larger, 
truth  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Jews,  and  having  the 
Jewish  hope  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven — a  hope  just 
fully  confirmed  by  the  Olivet  Discourse  (Matt.  24  and  25  ; 
Luke  21),  the  instructions  of  the  Forty  Days  would 
remind  them  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  its  earth  work 
accomplished,  would  merge  in  the  universal  kingdom  of 
God  (1  Cor.  15:24-28).^ 

One  point,  and  one  only,  was  left  out  of  these  instruc- 
tions of  our  Lord — the  time  when  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
would  begin  its  work  of  restoring  the  earth  to  the  great, 
inclusive,  kingdom  of  God.  This  omission  became,  there- 
fore, the  subject  of  a  very  natural  question :  ''Wilt  thou 
at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel?''  It  is 
noteworthy,  first,  that  our  Lord  did  not  rebuke  this 
question ;  and,  secondly,  that  His  answer  left  whole  and 
entire  the  Jewish  hope:  'It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the 
times  or  the  seasons,  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his 
own  power." 

One  great  body  of  truth,  about  to  become  of  supreme 
importance  from  the  prophetical  and  dispensational  point 
of  view — that  concerning  the  church,  was  not  a  part  of 
the  instructions  of  the  Forty  Days.  The  church,  apart 
from  the  prophetic  word  'T  will  build  my  church''  (Matt. 
16:  18),^  remained  a  "mystery  hid  in  God"  (Eph.  3:9, 
10).^     The  unfolding  of  that  mystery  was  reserved  to 

^  Then   cometh  the   end,   when  And   when  all  things  shall  be 

he    shall   have    delivered    up   the  subdued    unto     him,    then     shall 

kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Fath-  the  Son  also  himself  be  subject 

er ;  when  he  shall  have  put  down  unto    him    that    put    all    things 

all    rule    and    all    authority    and  under  him,  that  God  may  be  all 

power.  in    all. — /    Cor.    15 :  24-28. 

For    he    must    reign,    till    he  *  And    I    say    also    unto    thee, 

hath   put   all   enemies   under  his  That   thou   art   Peter,   and   upon 

feet.  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church  ; 

The  last   enemy   that  shall  be  and  the   gates   of   hell   shall   not 

destroyed  is  death.  prevail  against  it. — Matt.  16:  18. 

For    he    hath    put    all    things  ^  And    to    make    all    men    see 

under    his    feet.      But    when    he  what    is    the    fellowship    of    the 

saith   all   things    are   put   under  mystery,  v/hich  from  the  begin- 

him,    it    is    manifest    that    he    is  ning    of    the    world    hath    been 

excepted,     which     did     put     all  hid     in    God,     who    created    all 

things  under  him.  things   by  Jesus   Christ : 


THE  PROPHETIC  MESSAGE  OF  THE  ACTS        103 


the  Apostle  Paul,  to  whom  also  was  entrusted  the  expo- 
sition of  the  doctrines  of  grace  (Eph.  3:  1-10).^ 

These  disciples,  rich  in  preparation  of  soul  through 
three  years  of  close  fellowship  with  the  Lord,  and  now 
enriched  in  truth  through  the  instruction  of  the  Forty 
Days,  must  yet  wait.  One  thing  they  lacked,  the  filling 
and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  so  supremely  essential 
was  this  enduement  for  the  new  ministry  that  all  other 
qualifications  must  wait  for  it.  What  presumption,  then, 
for  any  one  following  them  in  the  ministry  of  the  grace 
of  God  to  suppose  that  a  smattering  of  book  learning 
will  suffice !  The  powder  of  the  new  service  was  to  be 
the  Holy  Spirit;  the  method  a  witnessing.  A  witness 
must  have  first-hand  knowledge  of  that  concerning  which 
he  speaks.    Hearsay  will  not  do. 

But  the  disciples  must  begin  at — or  "from''  Jerusalem,. 
"To  the  Jew  first"  (Rom.  1:  16;  2:9)^  is  the  Biblical 
order,  but  the  Jewish  ministry  of  the  Apostles  as  recorded 
in  the  first  nine  chapters  of  The  Acts  has  a  still  more 
distinctive  character. 


To  the  intent  that  now  unto 
the  principalities  and  powers  in 
heavenly  places  might  be  known 
by  the  church  the  manifold  wis- 
dom  of   God. — Eph.   3 :  9,  10. 

^  For  this  cause  I  Paul,  the 
prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you 
Gentiles,  If  ye  have  heard  of 
the  dispensation  of  the  grace  of 
God  which  is  given  me  to  you- 
ward : 

How  that  by  revelation  he 
made  known  unto  me  the  mys- 
tery ;  (as  I  wrote  afore  in  few 
words, 

Whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye 
may  understand  my  knowledge 
in    the    mystery    of    Christ) 

Which  in  other  ages  was  not 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto 
his  holy  apostles  and  prophets 
by  the  Spirit ; 

That  the  Gentiles  should  be 
fellowheirs,  and  of  the  same 
body,  and  partakers  of  his  prom- 
ise in  Christ  by  the  gospel  : 

Whereof  I  was  made  a  min- 
ister,   according   to    the    gift    of 


the  grace  of  God  given  unto 
me  by  the  effectual  working  of 
his  power. 

Unto  me,  who  am  less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this 
grace  given,  that  I  should  preach 
among  the  Gentiles  the  un- 
searchable  riches   of   Christ ; 

And  to  make  all  men  see 
what  is  the  fellowship  of  the 
mystery,  which  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world  hath  been 
hid  in  God,  who  created  all 
things   by   Jesus   Christ : 

To  the  intent  that  now  unto 
the  principalities  and  powers  in 
heavenly  places  might  be  known 
by  the  church  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God. — Eph.  5 ;  i-io. 

'  For  I  am  not  ashamed  of 
the  gospel  of  Christ :  for  it  is 
the  power  of  God  unto  salva- 
tion to  every  one  that  believeth  ; 
to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the 
Greek. — Rom.    i :  16. 

Tribulation  and  anguish,  up- 
on every  soul  of  man  that  doeth 
evil,  of  the  Jew  first,  and  also 
of   the    Gentile. — Rom.    2  :  g. 


104 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


In  Luke  19:12-14^'^  this  special  ministry  is  foretold 
in  the  form  of  a  parable — one  of  the  parables  of  the 
postponed  kingdom.  Christ,  the  ''nobleman"  of  the  par- 
able, goes  away  to  receive  the  investiture — the  formal 
appointment — of  a  kingdom  (Dan.  7:13-18;  Rev.  5: 
1-10),^  and  is  to  return.     But  during  His  absence  the 


» He  said  therefore,  A  cer- 
tain nobleman  went  into  a  far 
country  to  receive  for  himself  a 
kingdom,  and  to  return. 

And  he  called  his  ten  serv- 
ants, and  delivered  them  ten 
pounds,  and  said  unto  them, 
Occupy    till    I    come. 

But  his  citizens  hated  him, 
and  sent  a  message  after  him, 
saying.  We  will  not  have  this 
man  to  reign  over  us. — Luke 
ig :  12-14. 

*'  I  saw  in  the  night  visions, 
and,  behold,  one  like  the  Son  of 
man  came  with  the  clouds  of 
heaven,  and  came  to  the  An- 
cient of  days,  and  they  brought 
him  near  before  him. 

And  there  was  given  him  do- 
minion, and  glory,  and  a  king- 
dom, that  all  people,  nations, 
and  languages,  should  serve 
him :  his  dominion  is  an  ever- 
lasting dominion,  which  shall 
not  pass  av/ay,  and  his  kingdom 
that  which  shall  not  be  de- 
stroyed. 

I  Daniel  was  grieved  in  my 
spirit  in  the  midst  of  my  body, 
and  the  visions  of  my  head 
troubled  me. 

I  came  near  unto  one  of  them 
that  stood  by,  and  asked  him 
the  truth  of  all  this.  So  he 
told  me,  and  made  me  know  the 
interpretation   of   the   things. 

These  great  beasts,  which  are 
four,  are  four  kings,  which  shall 
arise  out  of  the  earth. 

But  the  saints  of  the  most 
High  shall  take  the  kingdom, 
and  possess  the  kingdom  for 
ever,  even  for  ever  and  ever. — 
Dan.    7 .'  13-18. 

And  I  saw  in  the  right  hand 
of  him  that  sat  on  the  throne  a 
book  written  within  and  on  the 
backside,  scaled  vrith  seven  seals. 


And  I  saw  a  strong  angel  pro- 
claiming with  a  loud  voice,  Who 
is  worthy  to  open  the  book, 
and  to   loose  the   seals  thereof? 

And  no  man  in  heaven,  nor 
in  earth,  neither  under  the 
earth,  was  able  to  open  the  book, 
neither  to  look  thereon. 

And  I  wept  much,  because 
no  man  was  found  worthy  to 
open  and  to  read  the  book, 
neither  to  look  thereon. 

And  one  of  the  elders  saith 
unto  me,  Weep  not :  behold,  the 
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Juda,  the 
Root  of  David,  hath  prevailed 
to  open  the  book,  and  to  loose 
the    seven    seals    thereof. 

And  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the 
four  beasts,  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb  as  it 
had  been  slain,  having  seven 
horns  and  seven  eyes,  which  are 
the  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent 
forth    into    all    the    earth. 

And  he  came  and  took  the 
book  out  of  the  right  hand  of 
him  that  sat  upon  the  throne. 

And  when  he  had  taken  the 
book,  the  four  beasts  and  four 
and  twenty  elders  fell  down  be- 
fore the  Lamb,  having  every 
one  of  them  harps,  and  golden 
vials  full  of  odours,  which  are 
the   prayers    of   saints. 

And  they  sung  a  new  song, 
saying.  Thou  art  worthy  to  take 
the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals 
thereof :  for  thou  wast  slain, 
and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God 
by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kin- 
dred, and  tongue,  and  people, 
and  nation  ; 

And  hast  made  us  unto  our 
God  kings  and  priests :  and  we 
shall  reign  on  the  earth. — Rev. 
5'  I- JO. 


THE  PROPHETIC  MESSAGE  OP  THE  ACTS        105 

'"citizens"  who  are  to  be  the  subjects  of  the  returning 
King,  whom  they  have  already  rejected  in  the  days  of  His 
flesh,  send  after  Him  still  another  message  of  rejection. 
This  sending  implies  that  a  new  appeal  has  been  made 
to  the  "citizens"  on  behalf  of  the  absent  King.  It  is 
precisely  that  appeal  and  the  story  of  its  rejection  which 
is  told  in  the  first  seven  chapters  of  Acts. 

The  message  is  not  the  distinctive  Gospel  message  for 
this  age,  ''Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou 
shalt  be  saved"  (Acts  16:  31),  with  its  strictly  individual 
application,  but  deals  with  the  corporate  guilt  of  the  Jews 
in  rejecting  their  Messiah,  Jesus,  appeals  to  corporate 
or  national  repentance,  and  promises  that  upon  condition 
of  such  repentance  Jesus  Christ  will  return  (Acts  3: 
19-21.1^    Revised  Version). 

Peter  in  his  first  sermon,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
faces  directly  the  inevitable  Jewish  objection  that  Jesus 
could  not  be  the  Messiah  because  He  had  not  fulfilled  the 
promises  to  Israel  concerning  the  kingdom.  It  was  the 
very  difficulty  which  Jesus  had  answered,  so  far  as  His 
own  disciples  were  concerned,  in  the  Olivet  Discourse; 
and  Peter,  addressing  the  Jewish  multitude,  gives  exactly 
the  same  solution. .  The  promises  \Vill  be  fulfilled  by  the 
risen  Christ.  If  it  were  true  that  Israel  had  been  mis- 
taken in  expecting  a  kingdom  which,  while  fully  spiritual, 
was  to  be  also  visible  and  material,  this  was  the  place 
and  time  to  say  so.  But  neither  in  this  place  and  time, 
nor  in  any  other,  does  a  single  line  of  inspiration  say  so. 
On  the  contrary,  the  Apostle  affirms  that  David  himself, 
being  a  prophet,  foresaw  that  through  a  resurrection, 
God,  who  had  confirmed  the  Davidic  Covenant  with  an 
oath  (2  Sam.  7:5-17;  Psa.  89:3,  4,  20-37),^^  "would 
raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  throne." 


^°  Repent     ye     therefore,     and  whom   the   heaven   must   receive 

turn   again,   that  your   sins   may  until    the    times    of    restoration 

be    blotted    out,    that    so    there  o^  all  things    whereof  God  spake 

may    come    seasons    of    refresh-  ^J  ^he  mouth  of  his  holy  propxi-^ 

•«^    ^4-1,                             r    ^t,  ets  that  have  been  from  of  old. 

ing    from    the    presence    of    the  _^^^^    3:19-^1,    Revised    Ver- 

Lord ;    and    that    he    may    send  sion. 

the    Christ    who    hath    been    ap-  ^i  i^or   the   Scripture   text,    see 

pointed     for    you,     even    Jesus :  footnote  1  on  pages  99,   100. 


106  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVr 

In  the  second  sermon,  that  at  the  Beautiful  Gate,  Peter 
adds  to  his  former  demonstration  that  Christ  in  resurrec- 
tion will  sit  upon  the  throne  of  David  (comp.  Luke  1  : 
30-33),^-  the  tremendous  promise  that  if  Israel  will  then 
repent  the  "times  of  restitution"  will  begin,  and  the  King 
will  again  be  sent  (Acts  3:  19-21).^^ 

It  is  noteworthy  that  along  with  the  corporate  appeal 
to  the  nation  as  such  there  is,  in  all  this  post-pentecostal 
preaching,  the  ofifer  of  mercy  to  the  individual : 

"Then  said  Peter  unto  them,  Repent  and  be  baptized 
every  one  of  you  .  .  .  and  with  many  other  w^ords  did 
he  testify  and  exhort,  saying,  Save  yourselves  from 
[literally,  'from  among']  this  untoward  generation" 
(Acts  2:37-41).  "Unto  you  first  God,  having  raised 
up  his  Son  Jesus,  sent  him  to  bless  you,  in  turning  away 
ei'ery  one  of  you  from  his  iniquities"  (Acts  3:26). 

But  the  appeal  is  to  Israel  corporately.  And,  alas ! 
the  answer  was  soon  forthcoming.  In  the  command  laid 
upon  the  apostles  no  longer  to  preach  in  that  name  (Acts 
4:  13-22;  5:28-33),^^  but  still  more  emphatically  in  the 

^"  And  the  angel  said  unto  her,  his  holy  prophets  since  the  world 

Fear   not,   Mary:    for  thou   hast  began. — Acts   3:19-21. 

found   favour  with   God.  ^*  Now     when     they     saw     the 

And,    behold,   thou    shalt   con-  boldness  of  Peter  and  John,  and 

ceive    in    thy    womb,    and    bring  perceived    that    they    were    un- 

forth   a   son,   and   shalt   call   his  learned  and  ignorant  men,  they 

name  JESUS.  marvelled;  and  they  took  knowl- 

He    shall   be   great,    and   shall  edge  of  them  that  they  had  been 

be   called  the   Son  of  the   High-  with   Jesus.  •  •  •  ^   /    , 

est:    and    the    Lord    God    shall  ^nd    they    called    them,    and 

give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his  commanded   them    not   to    speak 

father  David.  ^^  ^^^  ^'^^  teach  in  the  name  of 


And    he   shall    reign    over   the 


Jesus.  .  .  . — Acts   4 :  13-22. 


house     of    Jacob     forever;     and  ^^y^^^^    ^'^.J'T    ""'l  '^T^^^I 

of    his    kingdom    there    shall    be  command  you  that  ye  should  not 

no   ^nd.—Luke   1:30-33^  l^^?    '"^   l^'^    ''^^?%'  i^""^'  ^^^' 

13  13          ^         ^i_       r               J   u  hold,    ye    have    filled    Jerusalem 

Repent  ye  therefore,  and  be  ..^i^h   your   doctrine,    and    intend 

converted     that    your    sms    may  ^^   bring  this   man's  blood   upon 

be   blotted    out,    when   the   times  us 

of    refreshing    shall    come    from  ^hen     Peter     and     the     other 

the  presence  of  the  Lord;  apostles  answered  and  said.  We 

And  he  shall  send  Jesus  Christ,  ought   to   obey   God   rather   than 

which   before  was   preached   un-  men. 

^°  y^'^  •  The  God  of  our  fathers  raised 

Whom    the    heaven    must    re-  up    Jesus,    whom    ye    slew    and 

ceive  until  the  times  of  restitu-  hanged  on  a  tree. 

tion    of    all    things,    which    God  Him    hath    God    exalted    with 

hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his    right   hand    to    be   a    Prince 


THE  PROPHETIC  MESSAGE  OF  THE  ACTS        107 

martyrdom  of  Stephen,  the  ''citizens"  sent  after  the 
''nobleman''  the  message,  "We  will  not  have  this  man 
to  reign  over  us." 

It  has  been  beautifully  suggested  by  F.  W.  Boyle,  of 
San  Jose,  Costa  Rica,  that  in  this  great  final  appeal  to 
the  Jews  we  are  to  find  an  answer  to  the  cross-prayer 
of  our  Lord,  "Father,  forgive  them;  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do"  (Luke  23:34).  He  points  out  the  em- 
phasis which  Peter  puts  upon  the  spiritual  unconscious- 
ness of  the  Jews  who  were  guilty  of  the  blood  of  Jesus : 
"And  now,  brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye 
did  it,  as  did  also  your  rulers"  (Acts  3:  17).  This  is 
most  helpful.  But  that  very  preaching  stripped  away 
forever  the  excuse  of  ignorance.  It  was  a  second  rejec- 
tion of  the  Messiah. 

In  the  summing  up  by  the  Apostle  James  of  the  result 
of  the  gathering  at  Jerusalem  which  has  come  to  be 
called  the  first  council,  and  where,  certainly,  not  only 
"the  apostles  and  elders,"  but  also  the  Holy  Spirit  were 
present  (Acts  15:  28)/^  occurs  what  has  been  called, 
"dispensationally  the  most  important  passage  in  the  New 
Testament." 

The  contention  of  "certain  men  which  came  down  from 
Judaea"  to  Antioch,  that  circumcision  "after  the  manner 
of  Moses"  was  essential  to  salvation  (Acts  15:  1),  a  con- 
tention carried  on  also  by  "certain  of  the  sect  of  the 
Pharisees  which  believed,"  gave  occasion  to  the  gathering 
at  Jerusalem,  the  record  of  which  we  have  in  Acts  15. 
The  question  submitted  to  the  council,  however,  went 
beyond  the  mere  rite  of  circumcision  and  put  in  issue 
the  whole  "law  of  Moses"  (v.  5)  as  related  to  the  Chris- 
tian church.  Was  Christianity  a  ritual  religion,  or  one 
in  which  the  believer,  already  made  righteous  through 
faith  in  a  righteousness  so  perfect  that  nothing  could  be 
added,  was  "not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace"? 

and   a   Saviour,   for  to   give   re-  were  cut  to  the  heart,  and  took 

pentance  to   Israel,  and  forgive-  counsel   to    slay   them. — Acts   5  '■ 

ness   of   sins.  28-33. 

And   we  are   his  witnesses   of  ^^  For   it   seemed   good   to   the 

these  things ;  and  so  is  also  the  Holy   Ghost,    and   to   us,   to   lay 

Holy    Ghost,    whom     God    hath  upon     you     no     greater     burden 

given  to  them  that  obey  him.  than    these    necessary    things. — 

When    they    heard    that,    they  Acts   15 :  28. 


108  IVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

The  decision  was  for  liberty ;  and  the  argument  against 
which  the  legalists  could  say  nothing  was  that  urged  by 
Peter — the  fact  that  God,  without  circumcision  or  any 
other  act  in  addition  to  simple  faith  in  Christ,  had  be- 
stowed the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  Gentile  converts  (vs. 
7-11).  It  is  noteworthy,  as  against  the  contention  of  a 
few  in  this  day  that  the  new  liberty  was  for  the  Gentiles 
only,  while  Jewish  believers  were  to  go  on  with  cere- 
monialism, that  Peter  (v.  11)  puts  Jews  upon  the  same 
ground. 

But  back  of  the  legal  contention  lay  still  in  the  minds 
of  many  Jewish  believers  the  old  difficulty  of  how  to 
believe  in  a  Messiah  who  had  gone  back  to  heaven  with- 
out having  fulfilled  the  kingdom  promises ;  and  the  great 
prophetic  passage  meets  that  difficulty  precisely  as  our 
Lord  had  met  it  in  the  Olivet  Discourse,  and  as  Peter 
had  met  it  in  the  Pentecostal  sermon — the  kingdom  was 
postponed,  not  abandoned,  nor  ''spiritualized"  into  some- 
thing bearing  no  resem^blance  to  the  promises  to  the 
fathers.  But  the  passage  is  of  exceeding  value  in  that 
it  not  only  reaffirms  the  Davidic  promise,  but  that  it  gives 
the  relation  of  this  age  to  the  kingdom  age  which  is  to 
follow  this  age. 

''Simeon  hath  declared  [Acts  15:7-11]  how  God  at  the 
first  [literally,  *for  the  first  time']  did  visit  the  Gentiles, 
to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  his  name.  And  to  this 
agree  the  words  of  the  prophets ;  as  it  is  written  [Amos 
9:  11-15  ^^],  After  this  I  will  return,  and  will  build  again 
the  tabernacle  of  David,  which  is  fallen  dowm;  and  I 

^*  In   that  day   will   I   raise   up  shall    drop    sweet   wine,    and    all 

the  tabernacle  of  David  that  is  the  hills  shall  melt, 

fallen,  and  close  up  the  breaches  And    I    will    bring    again    the 

thereof;  and  I  will  raise  up  his  captivity    of    my    people    of    Is- 

ruins,  and   I   will  build   it  as  in  rael,    and    they    shall    build    the 

the   days   of   old:  waste   cities,   and   inhabit   them; 

That    they    may    possess    the  and   they   shall   plant   vineyards, 

remnant  of  Edom,  and  of  all  the  and  drink  the  wine  thereof  ;  the}'^ 

heathen,    which    are    called    by  shall  also  make  gardens,  and  eat 

my    name,    saith    the    Lord    that  the  fruit  of  them. 

doeth  this.  And    I    will    plant    them   upon 

Behold,   the   days   come,   saith  their    land,    and    they    shall    no 

the  Lord,  that  the  plowman  shall  more  be  pulled   up  out   of  their 

overtake     the     reaper,     and     the  land   which    I    have   given   them, 

treader  of  grapes  him  that  sow-  saith  the   Lord  thy   God. — Amos 

eth     seed;     and    the    mountains  ^:ii-i^. 


THE  PROPHETIC  MESSAGE  OP  THE  ACTS        109 

will  build  again  the  ruins  thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up : 
that  the  residue  of  men  might  seek  after  the  Lord,  and 
all  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  my  name  is  called,  saith  the 
Lord,  who  doeth  all  these  things''   (15:  14-17). 

What  Peter  began  the  church  has  carried  on.  Wher- 
ever the  Gospel  has  been  preached  among  the  Gentiles 
in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  some  have  believed — 
never,  anywhere,  all.  Jerusalem  was  not  converted,  nor 
Rome,  nor  Antioch,  but  there  a  people  for  His  name  was 
called  out.  That  is  the  Divine  program  for  this  age. 
When,  in  the  thought  and  intent  of  God,  that  process  is 
complete  (Rom.  11:25-27),^'^  Jesus  Christ  will  return 
and  set  up  the  Messianic  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  then, 
and  never  till  then,  will  there  be  a  converted  world.  The 
earth  shall  indeed  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,  but  the  prophet  who  tells  us 
that,  tells  us  also  when  it  shall  be:  'Tn  that  day*'  when 
the  Branch  shall  be  king,  and  Israel  restored  to  her 
ancient  land  (Isa.  11:9-12).^^ 

It  is  important  to  note  that  the  prophetic  element  in 
The  Acts  concerns  the  reconciliation  of  a  postponed  king- 
dom with  the  promises  made  to  Israel  through  the  Old 
Testament  prophets.  The  church  is  not  the  subject  of 
the  prophetic   testimony   of   that   book.     Churches  are 

^"  For    I    would   not,   brethren,  stand  for  an  ensign  of  the  peo- 

that   ye    should    be    ignorant    of  pie ;    to     it     shall    the    Gentiles 

this   mystery,   lest  ye   should   be  seek:   and  his  rest  shall  be  glo- 

wise  in  your  own  conceits  ;  that  rious. 

blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  ^nd  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 

Israel,   until   the   fulness   of   the  ^^at    day,    that    the    Lord    shall 

""  Ant%o^  TlsrV  shall  be  -^  ^^  ^-^  ^^-^  ^^^  — ^ 
saved :    as    it    is   written,    There 


time  to  recover  the  remnant  of 
shall   come  out   of   Sion  the  de-        ^is  people,   which   shall   be   left, 


liverer,  and  shall  turn  away  un-  ^^om  Assyria,   and   from   Egypt, 

godliness  from  Jacob:  and    from     Pathros,    and    from 

For  this  is  my  covenant  unto  Cush,  and  from  Elam,  and  from 

them,    when    I    shall   take    away  Shinar,   and   from   Hamath,   and 

their  sins. — Rom.  ii :  25-27.  from  the  islands  of  the  sea. 

^®  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  de-  And  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign 

stroy  in  all   my  holy  mountain :  for    the    nations,    and    shall    as- 

for   the    earth    shall    be    full    of  semble    the    outcasts    of    Israel, 

the   knowledge   of  the   Lord,    as  and     gather     together    the     dis- 

the  waters  cover  the  sea.  persed   of  Judah   from  the   four 

And   in   that   day    there    shall  corners   of   the   earth. — Isa.    ii  : 

be   a  root  of  Jesse,   which   shall  g-12. 


no  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVr 

everywhere  in  the  book,  but  the  unfolding  of  the  doc- 
trine  of  the  church,  as  also  of  her  prophetic  future, 
awaits  the  pen  of  the  great  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles.  His 
conversion,  ministry,  sufferings — the  story  of  these,  fills 
the  second  and  larger  part  of  The  Acts.  In  the  Epistles 
and  The  Revelation  prophecy  tells  the  story  of  the  Church. 


VIII.     PROPHECY  IN  THE  EPISTLES 

ON  THE  night  of  His  betrayal,  in  the  upper  cham- 
ber discourse,  our  Lord  said : 
'T  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but 
ye  cannot  bear  them  now.     Howbeit  when  he, 
the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all 
truth"  (John  16:12). 

That  this  promised  revelation  would  contain  a  pre- 
dictive element  was  also  announced  by  our  Lord :  ''What- 
soever he  [the  Holy  Spirit]  shall  hear,  that  shall  he 
speak:  and  he  will  shew  you  things  to  come"  (John 
16:13). 

When  we  turn  to  the  Epistles  we  see  that  the  prom- 
ised revelation  of  new  truth  concerns  the  new  body,  the 
church.  In  the  one  hundred  and  fourteen  chapters  com- 
posing the  Acts  and  the  Epistles  the  kingdom  is  men- 
tioned but  twenty-five  times,  and  always  by  the  larger 
spiritual  designation  of  the  kingdom  of  God;  while  the 
church  is  mentioned  in  the  same  chapters  eighty-nine 
times.  In  the  great  Epistle  to  the  Romans  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  mentioned  but  once  in  the  sixteen  chapters. 
It  is  the  church  which  fills  the  scene. 

Our  Lord  was  Himself  the  first  Prophet  of  the  church. 
After  His  rejection  as  Israel's  king  had  become  manifest, 
Jesus  with  His  disciples  departed  into  Galilee,  and  there 
uttered  the  first  word  of  Scripture  concerning  the  church  : 
'T  will  build  my  church."  In  their  very  terms  these 
words  were  prophetic  and  indicated  a  purpose  to  be 
accomplished  in  the  future.  They  pointed  neither  to  the 
past  nor  to  the  present.  Christ  did  not  say,  'T  have  been 
building,"  or,  'T  am  building,"  but  ^T  will  build"  (Matt. 
16:18). 

It  is  most  significant  that,  ''From  that  time  forth 
began  Jesus  to  shew  unto  his  disciples,  how  that  he  must 
go  unto  Jerusalem,  and  suffer  many  things  of  the  elders 

111 


112 


IVHAl^  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVr 


and  chief  priests  and  scribes,  and  be  killed,  and  be 
raised  again  the  third  day''  (Matt.  16:18,  21).  But, 
lest  there  should  be  any  ground  for  the  conclusion  that 
''church"  and  "kingdom"  were  synonymous  terms,  or 
the  church  be  taken  as  fulfilling  the  promxise  of  the 
kingdom,  our  Lord's  prediction  was  almost  immediately 
followed  by  the  kingdom-picture  of  the  transfiguration 
(Matt.  17 :  1-13).^  Our  Lord  declared  it  to  be  a  showing 
forth  of  "the  Son  of  man  coming  in  his  kingdom"  (Matt. 
16:28).- 

The  kingdom  elements  set  forth  by  the  prophets  are 
all  present  in  the  Transfiguration:  (1)  the  Son  of  man 
appearing  in  glory  (Matt.  25:31),^  accompanied  by  two 
classes  of  glorified  saints — those  who  had  passed  into 
heaven  through  death,  like  Moses  (1  Cor.  15:22,  23),^ 


^  And  after  six  days  Jesus 
taketh  Peter,  James,  and  John 
his  brother,  and  bringeth  them 
up  into  an  high  mountain  apart. 

And  was  transfigured  before 
them  :  and  his  face  did  shine  as 
the  sun,  and  his  raiment  was 
white    as   the    light. 

And,  behold,  there  appeared 
unto  them  Aloses  and  Elias  talk- 
ing with  him. 

Then  answered  Peter,  and 
said  unto  Jesus,  Lord,  it  is  good 
for  us  to  be  here :  if  thou  wilt, 
let  us  make  here  three  taber- 
nacles ;  one  for  thee,  and  one 
for  Moses,  and  one  for  Elias. 

While  he  yet  spake,  behold, 
a  bright  cloud  overshadowed 
them  :  and  behold  a  voice  out  of 
the  cloud,  which  said,  This  is 
my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  1  am 
well   pleased ;    hear  ye   him. 

And  when  the  disciples  heard 
it,  they  fell  on  their  face,  and 
were  sore  afraid. 

And  Jesus  came  and  touched 
them,  and  said,  Arise,  and  be 
not  afraid. 

And  when  they  had  lifted  up 
their  eyes,  they  saw  no  man, 
save   Jesus   only. 

And  as  they  came  down  from 
the  mountain,  Jtsus  charged 
them,   saying.   Tell   the  vision   to 


no  man,  until  the  Son  of  man 
be    risen    again    from   the    dead. 

And  his  disciples  asked  him, 
saying.  Why  then  say  the  scribes 
that  Elias  must  first  come? 

And  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  them,  Elias  truly  shall  first 
come,  and  restore  all  things. 

But  I  say  unto  you.  That 
Elias  is  come  already,  and  they 
knew  him  not,  but  have  done 
unto  him  whatsoever  they  listed. 
Likewise  shall  also  the  Son  of 
man   suffer   of  them. 

Then  the  disciples  understood 
that  he  spake  tmto  them  of  John 
the     Baptist. — Matt,     i/  :  1-13. 

^  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  There 
be  some  standing  here,  which 
shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they 
see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in 
his    kingdom. — Matt.    16  :  28. 

^  Wlien  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall 
he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory. — Matt.    25  :  51. 

*  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even 
so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made 
alive. 

But  every  man  in  his  own 
order :  Christ  the  firstfruits ; 
afterward  they  that  are  Christ's 
at  his  coming. — /  Cor.  13 :  22. 
23- 


PROPHECY  IN  THE  EPISTLES 


113 


and  those  who  had  been  translated  without  seeing  death, 
like  Elijah  (1  Cor.  15:  51-53;  1  Thess.  4:  14-17).'^  (2) 
The  scene  is  on  the  earth,  because  the  kingdom  is  to  be 
set  up  on  the  earth  (Jer.  23:5;  Zech.  9:7-15)/^  (3) 
Men  in  the  flesh  will  form  part  of  the  kingdom  as  repre- 


^  Behold,  I  shew  you  a  mys- 
tery ;  We  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed. 

In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump : 
for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and 
the  dead  shall  be  raised  in- 
corrupiible,  and  we  shall  be 
changed. 

For  this  corruptible  must  put 
on  incorruption,  and  this  mor- 
tal must  put  on  immortality. — 
I    Cor.    15:51-53: 

For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  even  so 
them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus 
will   God   bring  with   him. 

For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
which  are  alive,  and  remain 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
shall  not  prevent  them  which 
are   asleep. 

For  the  Lord  himself  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump 
of  God :  and  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall  rise  first : 

Then  we  which  are  alive  and 
remain  shall  be  caught  up  to- 
gether with  them  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air : 
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with 
the  Lord. — i  Thess.  4 :  14-17. 

^  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith 
the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise  unto 
David  a  righteous  Branch,  and 
a  King  shall  reign  and  prosper, 
and  shall  execute  judgment  and 
justice  in  the  earth. — Jer.  23:  5. 

And  I  will  take  away  his  blood 
out  of  his  mouth,  and  his  abom- 
inations from  between  his  teeth  : 
but  he  that  remaineth,  even  he, 
shall  be  for  our  God,  and  he 
shall  be  as  a  governor  in  Judah, 
and  Ekron  as  a  Jebusite. 

And  I  will  encamp  about  mine 
house  because  of  the  army,  be- 


cause of  him  that  passeth  by, 
and  because  of  him  that  return- 
eth  :  and  no  oppressor  shall  pass 
through  them  any  more :  for 
now  have  I  seen  with  mine  eyes. 

Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter 
of  Zion ;  shout,  O  daughter  of 
Jerusalem  :  behold,  thy  King 
Cometh  unto  thee :  he  is  just, 
and  having  salvation  ;  lowly,  and 
riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a 
colt  the   foal  of  an  ass. 

And  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot 
from  Ephraim,  and  the  horse 
from  Jerusalem,  and  the  battle 
bow  shall  be  cut  off :  and  he 
shall  speak  peace  unto  the  hea- 
then :  and  his  dominion  shall 
be  from  sea  even  to  sea,  and 
from  the  river  even  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth. 

As  for  thee  also,  by  the  blood 
of  thy  covenant  I  have  sent 
forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the 
pit  wherein  is  no  water. 

Turn  you  to  the  strong  hold, 
ye  prisoners  of  hope :  even  to- 
day do  I  declare  that  I  will 
render  double  unto  thee ; 

When  I  have  bent  Judah  for 
me,  filled  the  bow  with  Ephraim, 
and  raised  up  thy  sons,  O  Zion, 
against  thy  sons,  O  Greece,  and 
made  thee  as  the  sword  of  a 
mighty  man. 

And  the  Lord  shall  be  seen 
over  them,  and  his  arrow  shall 
go  forth  as  the  lightning :  and 
the  Lord  God  shall  blow  the 
trumpet,  and  shall  go  with 
whirlwinds   of  the   south. 

The  Lord  of  hosts  shall  de- 
fend them ;  and  they  shall  de- 
vour, and  subdue  with  sling 
stones ;  and  they  shall  drink, 
and  make  a  noise  as  through 
wine ;  and  they  shall  be  filled 
like  bowls,  and  as  the  corners 
of    the    altar. — Zech.    p ;  7-15. 


114 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


sented  by  Peter,  James,  and  John;  and,  (4)  the  mission 
of  the  kingdom  is  ministry  to  the  multitudes  of  earth 
(vs.  14-17). 

But  with  the  announcement  of  the  future  purpose, 
''I  will  build  my  church,"  and  with  the  picture-parable 
of  the  kingdom,  now  postponed  to  the  coming  of  the 
king  in  glory,  the  church  was  left  by  Christ  an  unex- 
plained ''mystery  hid  in  God''  (Eph.  3:  1-11). "^ 

It  is  to  the  Epistles  that  we  look  for  the  unfolding 
of  that  mystery.  Distinctively,  the  revelation  of  church 
truth  was  committed  to  Paul  (Eph.  3:  1-11.)^  Through 
him  we  learn  that  the  church  is  the  body  of  Christ, 
formed  by  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit  (1  Cor.  12:  12-14)^; 
a  body  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head,  and  all  believers,  at 
and  from  Pentecost,  are  the  members  (Eph.  1 :  22,  23)^; 
that  this  body  is  not  an  organization,  with  Christ  as  pres- 


"^  For  this  cause  I  Paul,  the 
prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you 
Gentiles, 

If  ye  have  heard  of  the  dis- 
pensation of  the  grace  of  God 
which  is  given  me  to  you-ward  : 

How  by  that  revelation  he 
made  known  unto  me  the  mys- 
tery ;  (as  I  wrote  afore  in  few 
words, 

Whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye 
may  understand  my  knowledge 
in  the  mystery  of  Christ) 

Which  in  other  ages  was  not 
made  known  unto  the  sons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto 
his  holy  apostles  and  prophets 
by  the  Spirit ; 

That  the  Gentiles  should  be 
fellowheirs,  and  of  the  same 
body,  and  partakers  of  his  prom- 
ise in  Christ  by  the  gospel : 

Whereof  I  was  made  a  min- 
ister, according  to  the  gift  of 
the  grace  of  God  given  unto 
me  by  the  effectual  working  of 
his   power. 

Unto  me,  who  am  less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this 
grace  given,  that  I  should  preach 
among  the  Gentiles  the  un- 
searchable riches  of  Christ ; 

And  to  make  all  men  see  what 
is    the    fellowship    of    the    mys- 


tery, which  from  the  beginning 
of  the  world  hath  been  hid  in 
God,  who  created  all  things  by 
Jesus  Christ : 

To  the  intent  that  now  unto 
the  principalities  and  powers  in 
heavenly  places  might  be  known 
by  the  church  the  manifold  wis- 
dom   of    God. 

According  to  the  eternal  pur- 
pose which  he  purposed  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord. — Eph.  3:1-11. 

^  For  as  the  body  is  one,  and 
hath  many  members,  and  all  the 
members  of  that  one  body,  be- 
ing many,  are  one  body  :  so  also 
is  Christ. 

For  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all 
baptized  into  one  body,  whether 
we  be  Jews  or  Gentiles,  wheth- 
er we  be  bond  or  free ;  and 
have  been  all  made  to  drink 
into   one   Spirit. 

For  the  body  is  not  one  mem- 
ber,   but    many. — i    Cor.    12 :  12- 

14- 

®  And  hath  put  all  things  un- 
der his  feet,  and  gave  him  to 
he  the  head  over  all  things  to 
the  church, 

Which  is  his  body,  the  ful- 
ness of  him  that  filleth  all  in 
all. — Eph.    1 :  22,  23. 


PROPHECY  IN  THE  EPISTLES 


115 


ident,  or  king,  but  an  organism,  like  the  human  body, 
the  "members"  corresponding  not  to  the  citizens  of  a 
repubHc  or  the  subjects  of  a  kingdom,  bait  to  the  hands, 
feet,  eye,  ear,  of  the  human  body,  united  in  oneness  of 
life  (1  Cor.  12:14-21;  John  15:1-5;  1  John  5:11,  12)^^ 
to  the  risen  Head  in  the  glory. 

In  another  relation,  as  Eve,  taken  from  the  body  of 
Adam,  became  '''bone  of  his  bone,  flesh  of  his  flesh'' 
through  marriage,  so  the  church  is  the  destined  bride  of 
Christ,  "the  last  Adam"  (Gen.  2:21-23;  2  Cor.  11:  1,  2; 
Eph.  5:  28-33). 11 


^°  For  the  body  is  not  one 
member,    but   many. 

If  the  foot  shall  say,  Because 
I  am  not  the  hand,  I  am  not  of 
the  body ;  is  it  therefore  not  of 
the   body? 

And  if  the  ear  shall  say,  Be- 
cause I  am  not  the  eye,  I  am 
not  of  the  body ;  is  it  therefore 
not  of  the  body? 

If  the  whole  body  were  an 
eye,  where  were  the  hearing? 
If  the  whole  were  hearing, 
where  were  the   smelling? 

Bvit  now  hath  God  set  the 
members  every  one  of  them  in 
the  body,  as  it  hath  pleased 
him. 

And  if  they  were  all  one  mem- 
ber, where  were  the  body  ? 

But  now  are  they  many  mem- 
bers, yet  but  one  body. 

And  the  eye  cannot  say  unto 
the  hand,  I  have  no  need  of 
thee :  nor  again  the  head  to  the 
feet,  I  have  no  need  of  you. — 
/   Cor,    12 :  14-21. 

I  am  the  true  vine,  and  my 
Father    is    the    husbandman. 

Every  branch  in  me  that  bear- 
eth  not  fruit  he  taketh  away : 
and  every  branch  that  beareth 
fruit,  he  purgeth  it,  that  it  may 
bring  forth  more  fruit. 

Now  ye  are  clean  through  the 
word  which  I  have  spoken  unto 
you. 

Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you, 
As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit 
of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the 
vine ;  no  more  can  ye,  except  ye 
abide  in  me. 


I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the 
branches :  He  that  abideth  in 
me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same 
bringeth  forth  much  fruit :  for 
without  me  ye  can  do  nothing. 
— John    15  :  1-5. 

And  this  is  the  record,  that 
God  hath  given  to  us  eternal 
life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son. 

He  that  hath  the  Son  hath 
life ;  and  he  that  hath  not  the 
Son  of  God  hath  not  life. — 
I   John   5 :  II,  12. 

^^  And  the  Lord  God  caused  a 
deep  sleep  to  fall  upon  Adam, 
and  he  slept :  and  he  took  one 
of  his  ribs,  and  closed  up  the 
flesh    instead    thereof ; 

And  the  rib,  which  the  Lord 
God  had  taken  from  man,  made 
he  a  woman,  and  brought  her 
unto   the  man. 

And  Adam  said.  This  is  now 
bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of 
my  flesh :  she  shall  be  called 
Woman,  because  she  was  taken 
out    of    Man. — Gen.    2 :  21-23. 

Would  to  God  ye  could  bear 
with  me  a  little  in  my  folly : 
and  indeed  bear  with  me. 

For  I  am  jealous  over  you 
with  godly  jealousy:  for  I  have 
espoused  you  to  one  husband, 
that  I  may  present  you  as  a 
chaste  virgin  to  Christ. — 2  Cor. 
II :  I,  2. 

So  ought  men  to  love  their 
wives  as  their  own  bodies.  He 
that  loveth  his  wife  loveth  him- 
self. 

For  no  man  ever  yet  hated 
his    own    flesh ;    but    nourisheth 


116  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

In  yet  another  relation  the  church  ''groweth  unto  an 
holy  temple  in  the  Lord  .  .  .  for  an  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit''  (Eph.  2:  21,  22).  The  first  members 
of  this  body,  the  church,  were  the  disciples  of  our  Lord, 
gathered  out  of  Israel  by  His  personal  ministry.  These, 
baptized  by  the  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  (Acts  2: 
1-4),^-  were  the  first  ''members,"  but,  '*the  same  day  there 
were  added  unto  them  about  three  thousand  souls."  From 
that  day  to  this  the  growth  of  the  body  has  gone  on,  ''the 
Lord  adding  to  them  day  by  day  those  that  were  [or  are] 
being  saved"  (Acts  2:47,  Revised  Version). 

In  relation  to  the  world  the  believers  composing  the 
church  are  said  by  our  Lord  to  be  "in,"  but  not  "of"  it 
(John  17:  11,  16).^^  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that, 
though  believers,  alas!  too  often,  fail  to  manifest  this 
holy  separation  from  the  world,  it  is  still  true  that,  as 
taken  out  of  the  world  and  given  to  Christ  (John  17:6, 
11,  12,  16),^^  they  remain  His,  and  are  not  to  be  involved 
in  His  world-judgments.  They  may,  and  often  do,  lay 
aside  for  a  time  the  pilgrim  scrip  and  staff  (1  Pet.  2: 

and    cherisheth    it,    even    as   the  And  they  were  all  filled  with 

Lord  the   church :                          ^  the    Holy    Ghost,    and    began    to 

For    we    are    members    of   his  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the 

body,    of    his    flesh,    and    of   his  Spirit     gave    them    utterance. — 

bones.  Acts    2 :  1-4. 

For    this    cause    shall    a    man  ^^  ^*  I     have     manifested     thy 

leave  his  father  and  mother,  and  name  unto   the  men  which  thou 

shall    be    joined    unto    his    wife,  gavest    me    out    of    the    world : 

and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh.  thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest 

This   is  a   great   mystery:   but  them    me;    and   they   have    kept 

I    speak    concerning    Christ    and  thy  word. — John   17 :  6. 

the  church.  And    now    I    am    no    more    in 

Nevertheless  let  every  one  of  the  world,   but  these  are  in  the 

you    in    particular    so    love    his  world,  and  I  come  to  thee.  Holy 

wife    even    as   himself;    and   the  Father,   keep   through   thine  own 

wife   see   that   she   reverence  her  name  those  whom  thou  hast  giv- 

husband. — Eph.    5  ;  28-33.  en   me,    that   they    may   be    one, 

"  And  when   the  day   of   Pen-  as   we   are. 

tecost  was  fully  come,  they  were  While    I    was    with    them    in 

all  with  one  accord  in  one  place.  the   world,    I    kept   them   in   thy 

And    suddenly    there    came    a  name :    those    that    thou    gavest 

sound     from     heaven     as     of     a  me    I    have    kept,    and    none    of 

rushing    mighty    wind,     and     it  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  per- 

filled   all   the   house   where   they  dition  ;  that  the  scripture  might 

were  sitting.  be    fulfilled. — John    17:11,12. 

And  there  appeared  unto  them  They    are    not    of    the    world, 

cloven    tongues   like    as    of   fire,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world, 

and    it    sat    upon    each    of   them.  — John    17:16. 


PROPHECY  IN  THE  EPISTLES 


117 


11)/^  but  still  they  are  ''strangers  and  pilgrims"  in  rela- 
tion to  the  present  world-system. 

Taken  out  of  the  world  and  given  to  Christ,  the  believ- 
ers composing  the  church  are  by  Him  charged  with  a 
great  mission,  universal  in  its  scope,  to  the  world  out 
of  which  they  were  taken.  That  mission  is  to  ''preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature''  (Mark  16:  15)  ;  while  as 
"an  elect  race,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  people 
for  God's  own  possession,"  they  ''shew  forth  the  excel- 
lencies of  him  who  hath  called  them  out  of  darkness  into 
his  marvellous  light"  (1  Pet.  2:9,  19). 

It  is  made  clear  that  the  church  belongs  to  the  heavenly, 
as  Israel  to  the  earthly  sphere  (Eph.  1 :  3).^^  Her  inheri- 
tance is  in  heaven  (Eph.  1:11;  1  Pet.  1:4;  John  14:  2 ; 
Rom.  8:17)1^;  ^er  citizenship  is  there  (Phil.  3:20)^^ 
and  her  attitude  is  that  of  expectant  waiting  for  Christ 
to  receive  her  unto  Himself  (1  Thess.  1 : 9,  10;  Titus  2: 
13;  Phil.  3:20,21 ;  1  Cor.  15:  51,  52;  1  Thess.  4: 14-17).^^ 


^^  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech 
you  as  strangers  and  pilgrims, 
abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which 
war  against  the  soul. — /  Peter 
2 :  II. 

^^  Blessed  he  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  hath  blessed  us  with  all 
spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly 
places  in   Christ. — Eph.   i :  3. 

^~  In  whom  also  we  have  ob- 
tained an  inheritance,  being  pre- 
destinated according  to  the  pur- 
pose of  him  who  worketh  all 
things  after  the  counsel  of  his 
own    will. — Eph.    i :  11. 

To  an  inheritance  incorrupti- 
ble, and  undefiled,  and  that  fad- 
eth  not  av^^ay,  reserved  in  heav- 
en  for  you. — I  Pet.   1:4. 

In  my  Father's  house  are 
many  mansions :  if  it  were  not 
so,  I  would  have  told  you.  I 
go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you. — 
John  14 :  2. 

And  if  children,  then  heirs ; 
heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs 
with  Christ ;  if  so  be  that  we 
suffer  with  him,  that  we  may  be 
also  glorified  together. — Rom, 
8:17. 


^®  For  our  citizenship  is  in 
heaven ;  whence  also  we  wait 
for  a  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. — Phil.  3  :  20,  Revised  Ver- 
sion. 

"  For  they  themselves  shew 
of  us  what  manner  of  entering 
in  we  had  unto  you,  and  how 
ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to 
serve  the   living  and  true   God ; 

And  to  wait  for  his  Son  from 
heaven,  whom  he  raised  from 
the  dead,  even  Jesus,  which  de- 
livered us  from  the  wrath  to 
come. — I   Thess.    i :  g,  10. 

Looking  for  that  blessed  hope, 
and  the  glorious  appearing  of 
the  great  God  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus   Christ. — Titus   2 :  13. 

For  our  citizenship  is  in 
heaven ;  whence  also  we  wait 
for  a  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. — Phil.  3 :  20,  Revised 
Version. 

Who  shall  change  our  vile 
body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned 
like  unto  his  glorious  body,  ac- 
cording to  the  working  whereby 
he  is  able  even  to  subdue  all 
things  unto  himself. — Phil.  3: 
21. 


118 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


The  Epistles  distinguish  the  church  from  the  churches. 
The  body  of  Christ  is  composed  of  those  who  have  really 
believed  on  Him,  and  are  saved ;  the  churches  are  com- 
posed of  those  who  have  professed  to  believe,  or  who,  as 
children  of  professed  believers  have  been  baptized,  and  so 
are  accounted  to  be  Christians.  This  profession  may 
be  of  a  true  faith,  or  may  be  mere  church  membership. 

The  distinction,  like  all  distinctions  between  things  that 
differ  in  the  Word  of  God,  is  important,  but  it  is  espe- 
cially important  in  respect  of  church  truth.  For  the 
predictive  element  in  the  Epistles  and  Revelation  runs  in 
two  distinct  lines.  One  of  these  concerns  the  future  of 
the  true  ''church  which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him 
that  filleth  all  in  all"  (Eph.  1:23);  the  other  concerns 
the  mass  of  profession,  known  in  common  speech  as 
''Christendom."  Individually,  these  are  so  mingled  now, 
and  so  outwardly  alike,  like  the  wheat  and  tares  of  the 
second  "mystery  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven"  (Matt.  13: 
24-30,  36-43),^^  as  to  be  for  the  greater  part  indistin- 


Behold,  I  shew  you  a  mys- 
tery ;  We  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  ^ 

In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump : 
for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and 
the  dead  shall  be  raised  in- 
corruptible, and  we  shall  be 
changed. — i  Cor.  15  :  51,  52. 

For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  even  so 
them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus 
will   God  bring  with  him. 

For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain  unto 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall 
not  prevent  them  which  are 
asleep. 

For  the  Lord  himself  shall  de- 
scend from  heaven  with  a  shout, 
with  the  voice  of  the  archangel, 
and  with  the  trump  of  God :  and 
the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise 
first : 

Then  we  which  are  alive  and 
remain  shall  be  caught  up  to- 
gether with  them  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air: 
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with 
the   Lord. — /   Thess.   4:14-17. 


^^  Another  parable  put  he  forth 
unto  them,  saying,  The  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  likened  unto  a  man 
which  soweth  good  seed  in  his 
field: 

But  while  men  slept,  his  ene- 
my came  and  sowed  tares  among 
the  wheat,  and  went  his  way. 

But  when  the  blade  was 
sprung  up,  and  brought  forth 
fruit,  then  appeared  the  tares 
also. 

So  the  servants  of  the  house- 
holder came  and  said  unto  him. 
Sir,  didst  not  thou  sow  good 
seed  in  thy  field?  from  whence 
then  hath  it  tares? 

He  said  unto  them,  An  enemy 
hath  done  this.  The  servants 
said  unto  him,  Wilt  thou  then 
that  we  go  and  gather  them  up? 

But  he  said,  Nay ;  lest  while 
ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root 
up  also  the  wheat  with  them. 

Let  both  grow  together  until 
the  harvest :  and  in  the  time  of 
harvest  I  will  say  to  the  reap- 
ers, Gather  ye  together  first  the 
tares,  and  bind  them  in  bundles 
to    burn    them :    but    gather    the 


PROPHECY  IN  THE  EPISTLES 


119 


giiishable.  Nevertheless  prophecy  appoints  to  each  a 
future  strikingly  unlike.  Post-tribulationism,  or  the 
theory  that  the  true  church  goes  through  the  great  tribu- 
lation, is  due  to  confusion  at  this  point.  The  mass  of 
profession  does  go  through  the  great  tribulation — ^the 
church  which  is  His  body  does  not. 

The  chief  themes  of  prophecy  in  the  Epistles  are: 

1.  The  apostasy  of  the  professing  church. 

2.  The  ''Day  of  Christ''  and  the  rapture  (catching  up) 
of  the  true  church. 

3.  The  ''day  of  the  Lord''  and  revelation  of  the  man 
of  sin. 

1.  The  'iast  days"  are  to  witness  a  widespread  apos- 
tasy within  the  professing  church.     This  appears  from 
many  passages  of  which  the  chief  are :  Luke  18:8;  2 
Thess.  2 :  3,  7-12 ;  1  Tim.  4 :  1-3  ;  2  Tim.  3  :  1-9 ;  2  Pet.  3 
3-7;  1  John  2:  18-23;  Jude  3-19  ;2i  and  also  1  Tim.  6 
3-5;  2  Tim.  2:  17,  18;  4:3,  4;  2  Pet.  2:  1-22;  1  John  4 
1-5;  2  John  7-11;  3  John  9. 


wheat  into  my  barn, — Matt.  13  ■' 
24-30. 

Then  Jesus  sent  the  multitude 
away,  and  went  into  the  house  : 
and  his  disciples  came  unto  him, 
saying,  Declare  unto  us  the  par- 
able   of    the   tares    of   the    field. 

He  answered  and  said  unto 
them,  He  that  soweth  the  good 
seed  is  the  Son  of  man  ; 

The  field  is  the  world ;  the 
good  seed  are  the  children  of 
the  kingdom ;  but  the  tares  are 
the  children  of  the  wicked  one; 

The  enemy  that  sowed  them 
is  the  devil ;  the  harvest  is  the 
end  of  the  world ;  and  the  reap- 
ers are  the  angels. 

As  therefore  the  tares  are 
gathered  and  burned  in  the  fire  ; 
so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  this 
world. 

The  Son  of  man  shall  send 
forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall 
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all 
things  that  offend,  and  them 
which  do  iniquity  ; 

And  shall  cast  them  into  a 
furnace  of  fire :  there  shall  be 
wailing   and    gnashing   of   teeth. 


Then  shall  the  righteous  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom 
of  their  Father.  Who  hath  ears 
to  hear,  let  him  hear. — Matt. 
13  ■  36-43- 

^^  I  tell  you  that  he  will  avenge 
them  speedily.  Nevertheless 
when  the  Son  of  man  cometh, 
shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ? 
—Luke  18 :  8. 

Let  no  man  deceive  you  by 
any  means :  for  that  day  shall 
not  come,  except  there  come  a 
falling  away  first,  and  that  man 
of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of 
perdition. — 2  Thess.  2 :  S- 

For  the  mystery  of  iniquity 
doth  already  work  :  only  he  who 
now  letteth  will  let,  until  he  be 
taken  out  of  the  way. 

And  then  shall  that  Wicked 
be  revealed,  whom  the  Lord 
shall  consume  with  the  spirit  of 
his  mouth,  and  shall  destroy 
with  the  brightness  of  his  com- 
ing : 

Even  him,  whose  coming  is 
after  the  working  of  Satan  with 
all  power  and  signs  and  lying 
wonders, 


120 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYT 


And  with  all  deceivableness 
of  unrighteousness  in  them  that 
perish ;  because  they  received 
not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that 
they  might  be  saved. 

And  for  this  cause  God  shall 
send  them  strong  delusion,  that 
they  should  believe  a  lie  : 

That  they  all  might  be  damned 
who  believed  not  the  truth,  but 
had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness. 
— 2  Tliess.  2 :  7-12. 

Now  the  Spirit  speaketh  ex- 
pressly, that  in  the  latter  times 
some  shall  depart  from  the  faith, 
giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits, 
and  doctrines  of  devils  ; 

Speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy ; 
having  their  conscience  seared 
with  a  hot  iron  ; 

Forbidding  to  marry,  and 
commanding  to  abstain  from 
meats,  which  God  hath  created 
be  received  with  thanksgiving 
of  them  which  believe  and  know 
the  truth. — i  Tim.  4 :  1-3. 

This  know  also,  that  in  the 
last  days  perilous  times  shall 
come. 

For  men  shall  be  lovers  of 
their  own  selves,  covetous,  boast- 
ers, proud,  blasphemers,  diso- 
bedient to  parents,  unthankful, 
unholy, 

Without  natural  affection, 
truce-breakers,  false  accusers, 
incontinent,  fierce,  despisers  of 
those   that   are   good, 

Traitors,  heady,  highminded, 
lovers  of  pleasures  more  than 
lovers  of  God  ; 

Having  a  form  of  godliness, 
but  denying  the  power  thereof: 
from  such  turn  away.  .  .  . — 
2  Tim.  3 :  i-g. 

Knowing  this  first,  that  there 
shall  come  in  the  last  days  scoff- 
ers, walking  after  their  own 
lusts, 

And  saying.  Where  is  the 
promise  of  his  coming?  for 
since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all 
things  continue  as  they  were 
from  the  beginning  of  the  crea- 
tion. 

For  this  they  willingly  are 
ignorant  of,  that  by  the  word  of 


God  the  heavens  were  of  old, 
and  the  earth  standing  out  of 
the  water  and  in  the  water  : 

Whereby  the  world  that  then 
was,  being  overflowed  with 
water,    perished  : 

But  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
which  are  now,  by  the  same 
word  are  kept  in  store,  re- 
served unto  fire  against  the  day 
of  judgment  and  perdition  of 
ungodly    men. — 2    Pet.    3  :  3-7. 

Little  children,  it  is  the  last 
time  :  and  as  ye  have  heard  that 
antichrist  shall  come,  even  now 
are  there  many  antichrists ; 
whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the 
last  time.  .  .  . 

Who  is  a  liar  but  he  that 
denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ? 
He  is  antichrist,  that  denieth 
the  Father  and  the  Son. 

Whosoever  denieth  the  Son. 
the  same  hath  not  the  Father : 
{.huti  he  that  acknowledgeth  the 
Son  hath  the  Father  also. — 
I  John  2 :  18-23. 

.  .  .  And  Enoch  also,  the  sev- 
enth from  Adam,  prophesied  of 
these,  saying.  Behold,  the  Lord 
Cometh  with  ten  thousands  of 
his    saints, 

To  execute  judgment  upon  all, 
and  to  convince  all  that  are 
ungodly  among  them  of  all  their 
ungodly  deeds  which  they  have 
ungodly  committed,  and  of  all 
their  hard  speeches  which  un- 
godly sinners  have  spoken 
against   him. 

These  are  murmurers,  com- 
plainers,  walking  after  their  own 
lusts ;  and  their  mouth  speaketh 
great  swelling  words,  having 
men's  persons  in  admiration  be- 
cause of  advantage. 

But,  beloved,  -  remember  ye 
the  words  which  were  spoken 
before  of  the  apostles  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 

How  that  they  told  you  there 
should  be  mockers  in  the  last 
time,  who  should  walk  after 
their  own  ungodly  lusts. 

These  be  they  who  separate 
themselves,  sensual,  having  not 
the  Spirit. — Jnde  3-19. 


PROPHECY  IN  THE  EPISTLES 


121 


Apostasy — ''falling-  away,"  is  disbelief  of  revealed 
truth,  and  is  the  act  of  professed  Christians  who  deliber- 
ately reject  revealed  truth,  (1)  as  to  the  deity  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and,  (2),  redemption  through  His  atoning  sacri- 
fice (1  John  4:1-3;  Phil.  3:  18;  2  Pet.  2:  l).^^  Error 
concerning  truth  may  be  the  result  of  ignorance  (Acts 
19:  1-6).^^  Even  heresy  may  be  due  to  a  snare  of  Satan 
(2  Tim.  2:25,  26)-^  in  which  a  true  believer,  if  careless 
and  uninstructed,  may  be  caught.  Apostasy  does  not 
imply  an  openly  sinful  life,  or  a  departure  from  the  out- 
ward profession  of  Christianity.  The  apostate  may  be 
moral,  cultured,  kind  and  generous.  In  the  warnings 
aibove  cited  apostasy  is  traced  to  false  teachers,  and  their 
characteristics  are  given.  They  ''speak  great  swelling 
words" ;  they  "promise  liberty" ;  they  are  "of  the  world," 
and  "speak  of  the  world."    They  have  the  kind  of  success 


"  Beloved,  believe  not  every 
spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  wheth- 
er they  are  of  God :  because 
many  false  prophets  are  gone 
out  into  the  world. 

Hereby  know  ye  the  Spirit  of 
God  :  Every  spirit  that  confess- 
eth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in 
the  flesh  is  of  God : 

And  every  spirit  that  confess- 
eth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come 
in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God  :  and 
this  is  that  spirit  of  antichrist, 
whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it 
should  come ;  and  even  now  al- 
ready is  it  in  the  world. — i  John 
4  •  1-3' 

For  many  walk,  of  whom  I 
have  told  you  often,  and  now 
tell  you  even  weeping,  that  they 
are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of 
Christ.— Phil   3:  18. 

Wherefore  laying  aside  all 
malice,  and  all  guile,  and  hypoc- 
risies, and  envies,  and  all  evil 
speakings. — 2  Pet.  2  :  i. 

^•^  And  it  came  to  pass,  that, 
while  Apollos  was  at  Corinth, 
Paul  having  passed  through  the 
upper  coasts  came  to  Ephesus : 
and  finding  certain  disciples. 

He  said  unto  them,  Have  ye 
received    the    Holy    Ghost   since 


ye  believed  ?  And  they  said  un- 
to him,  We  have  not  so  much 
as  heard  whether  there  be  any 
Holy  Ghost. 

And  he  said  unto  them,  Unto 
what  then  were  ye  baptized  ? 
And  they  said.  Unto  John's  bap- 
tism. 

Then  said  Paul,  John  verily 
baptized  with  the  baptism  of  re- 
pentance, saying  unto  the  peo- 
ple, that  they  should  believe  on 
him  which  should  come  after 
him,  that  is,  on  Christ  Jesus. 

When  they  heard  this,  they 
were  baptized  in  the  name  of 
the   Lord  Jesus. 

And  when  Paul  had  laid  his 
hands  upon  them,  the  Holy 
Ghost  came  on  them ;  and  they 
spake  with  tongues,  and  proph- 
esied.— Acts    19  :  1-6. 

^*  In  meekness  instructing 
those  that  oppose  themselves ; 
if  God  peradventure  will  give 
them  repentance  to  the  acknowl- 
edging of  the  truth  ; 

And  that  they  may  recover 
themselves  out  of  the  snare  of 
the  devil,  who  are  taken  captive 
by  him  at  his  will. — 2  Tim, 
2 :  25,  26. 


122 


IV HAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVf 


which  they  value,  for  *'the  world  heareth  them"  (1  John 
2:18,  19;4:l-5).25 

2.  A  new  ^'dav,"  the  'May  of  Christ''  (1  Cor.  1:8; 
5  :  5 ;  2  Cor.  1:14;  Phil.  1:6,  10 ;  2 :  16)  -Ms  revealed  in 
connection,  always,  with  the  new  promise  of  the  return 
of  the  Lord  made  to  the  new  body  the  church,  in  the 
upper  chamber: 

"I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I  go  and 
prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  receive 
you  unto  myself ;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also." 

The  fulfilment  of  that  promise  is,  indeed,  the  great 
theme  of  prophecy  in  the  Epistles.  The  ''day  of  Christ" 
is  in  no  sense  a  ''phase"  or  "aspect"  of  the  ''day  of  the 
Lord,"  as  a  comparison  of  the  respective  passages  will 
show. 

According  to   the    Epistles   the   new   upper  chamber 


*^  Little  children,  it  is  the  last 
time  :  and  as  ye  have  heard  that 
antichrist  shall  come,  even  now 
are  there  many  antichrists ; 
whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the 
last  time. 

They  went  out  from  us,  but 
they  were  not  of  us  ;  for  if  they 
had  been  of  us,  they  would  r.o 
doubt  have  continued  with  us : 
but  they  went  out,  that  they 
might  be  made  manifest  that 
they  were  not  all  of  us. — /  John 
2:18.  19. 

Beloved,  believe  not  every 
spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  wheth- 
er they  are  of  God :  because 
many  false  prophets  are  gone 
out  into  the  world. 

Hereby  know  ye  the  Spirit  of 
God  :  Every  spirit  that  confess- 
eth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come 
in   the   flesh   is   of  God : 

And  every  spirit  that  confess- 
eth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come 
in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God  :  and 
this  is  that  spirit  of  antichrist 
whereof  ye  have  heard  that  it 
should  come ;  and  even  now  al- 
ready is  it  in  the  world. 

Ye  are  of  God,  little  children, 
and  have  overcome  them :  be- 
cause greater  is  he  that  is  in 
you,  than  he  that  is  in  the  world. 


They  are  of  the  world  :  there- 
fore speak  they  of  the  world, 
and  the  world  heareth  them. — 
I   John    4 :  1-5. 

^^  Who  shall  also  confirm  you 
unto  the  end,  that  ye  may  he 
blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. — /  Cor.  i :  8. 

To  deliver  such  an  one  unto 
Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the 
flesh,  that  the  spirit  may  be 
saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Jesus. — /   Cor.  5  ;  5. 

As  also  ye  have  acknowledged 
us  in  part,  that  we  are  your 
rejoicing,  even  as  ye  also  are 
ours  in  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Jesus. — 2  Cor.  i :  14. 

Being  confident  of  this  very 
thing,  that  he  which  hath  begun 
a  good  work  in  you  will  per- 
form it  until  the  day  of  Jesus 
Christ.— PM7.  1:6. 

That  ye  may  approve  things 
that  are  excellent ;  that  ye  may 
be  sincere  and  without  offence 
till  the  day  of  Christ. — Phil. 
I :  TO. 

Holding  forth  the  word  of 
life ;  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the 
day  of  Christ,  that  I  have  not 
run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in 
vain. — Phil.    2:  16. 


PROPHECY  IN  THE  EPISTLES  123 

promise  of  the  Lord's  return  will  be  fulfilled  in  connec- 
tion zvith  a  resurrection,  not  of  all  the  dead,  but  of  ^'they 
that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming"  (1  Cor.  15:20-23).^^ 

''Behold,  I  shew  you  a  mystery :  We  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump ;  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound, 
and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall 
be  changed.  For  this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorrup- 
tion"  (1  Cor.  15:51-53). 

The  Epistles  reveal  the  manner  of  the  fulfilment  of  the 
new  promise,  'T  will  receive  you  unto  myself."  '*But  I 
would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  concerning 
them  which  are  asleep,  that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others 
which  have  no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died 
and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus 
will  God  bring  with  him.  For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we  which  are  alive  and  remain 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall  not  precede  them  which 
are  asleep.  For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from 
heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel, 
and  with  the  trump  of  God ;  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall 
rise  first:  then  we  which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be 
caught  up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air :  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord" 
(1  Thess.  4:13-17). 

If  this  elaborate  description  of  the  manner  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  great  new  promise  to  the  new  body, 
the  church,  is  compared  with  the  confirmation  of  the  old 
promise  to  Israel  concerning  the  kingdom,  as  set  forth 
in  the  Olivet  Discourse  (Matt.  24:25),^^  it  will  be  seen 
that  all  is  contrast.     There  His  coming  is  preceded  by 


^^  But     now     is     Christ     risen  so   in    Christ   shall   all   be   made 

from  the  dead,   and  become  the  alive. 

n     .r     -.        r  .u         ^-u   ^     1     ^  But    every    man    m    his    own 

firstfrmts  of  them  that  slept.  ^^^^^ .     chHst     the     firstfruits ; 

For  since  by  man  came  death,  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's 


by  man  came  also  the  resurrec-        ^t    his    coming. — I    Cor.    15 :  20- 
tion  of  the  dead.  '^is  g^hold,  I  have  t 

For  as  in  Adam  all  die,   even        fore. — Matt.   24 :  ^5. 


124  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVr 

great  signs,  and  the  formula  is,  ''When  ye  shall  see/' 
Here  are  no  signs  whatever.  There,  He  is  accompanied 
by  angels;  here  there  is  no  mention  of  angels.  There 
His  coming  is  visible  to  ''every  eye'' ;  here  only  the  sleep- 
ing and  living  "in  Christ"  are  concerned.  There  His 
coming  is  to  the  earth ;  here  it  is  into  "the  air."  There 
His  coming  is  in  connection  with  the  "throne  of  his 
glory"  (Matt.  25:31)^^;  here  it  is  in  connection  with  a 
"place"  among  the  "many  mansions"  of  the  Father's 
house,  which  He  has  gone  away  to  prepare — literally 
"make  ready"  for  His  Bride.  It  is  by  no  means  to  be 
implied  that  the  departure  of  the  church  will  be  a  "secret 
rapture."    It  will  doubtless  shake  humanity  to  its  center. 

And,  in  the  Epistles,  this  new  promise — a  promise 
without  a  sign,  without  a  single  time-note,  becomes  the 
''blessed  hope"  (Titus  2:  13)^^  of  the  church.  The  Lord 
is  ever  "at  hand"  (Phil.  4:  S).^! 

And,  too,  this  "blessed  hope,"  timeless  and  signless, 
gives  the  true  attitude  of  the  believer,  "till  he  come" 
(1  Cor.  11:26).^^  The  words  which  describe  that  atti- 
tude are,  "looking"  (Titus  2:13;  Phil.  3:20),^^  "wait- 
ing" (Rom.  8:24,25;  1  Thess.  1:10).^^  Any  interpre- 
tation, therefore,  of  the  new  promise  of  His  coming  which 
makes  it  absurd,  or  a  mere  form  of  words  without  real 
substance,  actually  to  w^atch  and  wait  for  "his  Son  from 
heaven,"  is  condemned  by  that  very  fact.  It  is,  in  all 
practical  result,  saying,  "My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming." 

^*  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  ^^  For    our    citizenship    is    in 

come    in   his   glory,   and   all   the  heaven;    from    whence    also    we 

holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall  wait    for    a    Saviour,    the    Lord 

he    sit   upon   the   throne    of   his  Jesus    Christ.— PhiL    3:20,    Re- 

glory.— Matt.  25:  3i-  ^''ifl  ^^^^^^^-              ,   ,      , 
„ft  T      1  .          r          t          ,i         ,  '**l^or  we  are  saved  by  hope: 
s«  Looking     for     that     blessed  but    hope    that    is    seen    is    not 
hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  hope :    for    what    a    man    seeth, 
of  the  great   God  and   our  Sav-  why  doth  he  yet  hope  for? 
iour  Jesus   Christ. — Titus   2 :  13.  But   if   we   hope    for   that   we 
^^Let     your      moderation    "be  ^^^    ^^t,    then    do    we    with    pa- 
known  unto  all  men.     The  Lord  ^^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  it.— Rom.  8 :  24, 

is  at  hand. — Phil.  4:5.  ^^\  ,  ^  -^  r  i.-  c  r 
32  T7  r^  .  .1  •  -^J^d  to  wait  for  his  Son  from 
For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  heaven,  whom  he  raised  from 
bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  the  dead,  even  Jesus,  which  de- 
shew  the  Lord  s  death  till  he  livered  us  from  the  wrath  to 
come.—/    Cor.    11:26.  come.—/  Thess.  1:10. 


PROPHECY  IN  THE  EPISTLES 


US 


3.  The  ''day  of  the  Lord''  is  mentioned  in  two  ways : 
(1)  in  relation  to  the  order  of  events  in  unfulfilled  proph- 
ecy; (2)  to  assure  believers  that  they  are  not  ''of"  that 
day. 

The  ''day  of  the  Lord,"  described  in  Scripture,  both  in 
the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  in  terms  of  wrath  and 
judgment,  in  w^hich  it  is  in  absolute  contrast  with  the 
new  "day  of  Christ,"  is  mentioned  in  the  Epistles  in 
two  ways.  (1)  The  saints  of  the  church  are  assured 
that  they  are  not  of  "that  day."  That  is  a  "day  of  dark- 
ness, and  not  light"  (Amos  5:  18,  20;  Joel  2:2;  Zeph. 
1:  15),^^  but  the  believers  are  assured  that  "Ye  are  all 
sons  of  light,  and  sons  of  the  day :  we  are  not  of  the 
night,  nor  of  darkness"  (1  Thess.  5:1-8).^^  And  the 
"day  O'f  the  Lord"  is  a  day  of  wrath  (Zeph.  1:15),^"^ 
but,  "God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath"  (1  Thess. 
5:9),^^    And  (2)  the  "day  of  the  Lord"  is  said  to  be 


^^  Woe  unto  you  that  desire 
the  day  of  the  Lord !  to  what 
end  is  it  for  you?  the  day  of 
the  Lord  is  darkness,  and  not 
light. — Amos  5  •*  ^8. 

Shall  not  the  day  of  the  Lord 
be  darkness,  and  not  light? 
even  very  dark,  and  no  bright- 
ness in  it  ? — Amos  5  :  20. 

A  day  of  darkness  and  of 
gloominess,  a  day  of  clouds  and 
of  thick  darkness,  as  the  morn- 
ing spread  upon  the  mountains  : 
a  great  people  and  a  strong; 
there  hath  not  been  ever  the 
like,  neither  shall  be  any  more 
after  it,  even  to  the  years  of 
many    generations. — Joel   2 :  2. 

That  day  is  a  day  of  wrath, 
a  day  of  trouble  and  distress,  a 
day  of  wasteness  and  desolation, 
a  day  of  darkness  and  gloomi- 
ness, a  day  of  clouds  and  thick 
darkness. — Zeph.    1 :  15. 

^^But  of  the  times  and  the 
seasons,  brethren,  ye  have  no 
need  that  I  write  unto  you. 

For  yourselves  know  perfectly 
that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so 
cometh   as  a  thief  in  the  night. 

For  when  they  shall  say, 
Peace  and   safety ;  then  sudden 


destruction  cometh  upon  them, 
as  travail  upon  a  woman  with 
child ;  and  they  shall  not  escape. 

But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in 
darkness,  that  that  day  should 
overtake  you   as   a  thief. 

Ye  are  all  the  children  of 
light,  and  the  children  of  the 
day :  we  are  not  of  the  night, 
nor  of  darkness. 

Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as 
do  others ;  but  let  us  watch  and 
be   sober. 

For  they  that  sleep  sleep  in 
the  night ;  and  they  that  be 
drunken  are  drunken  in  the 
night. 

But  let  us,  who  are  of  the 
day,  be  sober,  putting  on  the 
breastplate  of  faith  and  love ; 
and  for  an  helmet,  the  hope  of 
salvation. — i  Thess.  5 :  1-8. 

^'^  That  day  is  a  day  of  wrath, 
a  day  of  trouble  and  distress,  a 
day  of  wasteness  and  desolation, 
a  day  of  darkness  and  gloomi- 
ness, a  day  of  clouds  and  thick 
darkness. — Zeph.  1:15. 

^  For  God  hath  not  appointed 
us  to  wrath,  but  to  obtain  salva- 
tion by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
— I  Thess,  5:9. 


126  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVF 

the  day  of  the  ''man  of  sin"  (Daniel's  ''little  horn/'  the 
"abomination  of  desolation"  of  the  Olivet  Discourse,  the 
"beast  out  of  the  sea"  of  Rev.  13)  ;  and  the  signs  which 
precede  the  "day  of  the  Lord"  are  given. 

Briefly,  then,  the  prophetic  element  in  the  Epistles  has 
to  do  with  the  apostasy  of  the  professing  church;  "the 
day  of  Christ" ;  the  taking  away  of  the  true  church,  ac- 
cording to  the  new  promise  (John  14:2,3)^^;  followed 
by  the  revelation  of  the  "man  of  sin"  and  the  "day  of 
the  Lord,"  in  which  the  true  church  has  no  part. 

And  what,  in  view  of  current  discussions,  is  of  tre- 
mendous importance,  is  the  outstanding  fact  that  not  once 
in  the  Epistles,  written  for  the  especial  instruction ,  warn- 
ing, and  encouragement  of  the  church,  is  the  great  tribu- 
lation so  much  as  mentioned! 

^^  In    my    Father's    house    are  And    if    I    go    and    prepare    a 

many   mansions :   if  it  were  not  P^^5^e  for  you,  I  will  come  again, 

^  ,,    ,  ,j  _  and    receive    you    unto    myself; 

so,    I    would   have   told   you.      I  that  where   I  am,   there  ye  may 

go   to  prepare   a  place  for  you.  be  also. — John  14 :  2,  j. 


IX.    THE  REVELATION 

THE  REVELATION  gathers  up  and  carries  on  to 
complete  fulfilment  all  the  visions  of  all  the 
prophets  concerning  the  future,  in  so  far  as  these 
were  not  fulfilled  at  the  first  advent  of  Jesus 
Christ.  In  addition  to  that  which  had  already  been  in 
the  prophetic  foreview  of  the  Epistles,  the  future  of  the 
church  is  revealed  from  the  end  of  the  first  century  to 
the  end  of  the  church  period. 

Taken  in  order,  the  predictive  portions  of  The  Reve- 
lation are  as  follows : 

L  ''The  things  which  are''  (Rev.  1 :  19),^  or  the  vision 
of  the  earth-history  of  the  visible,  or  professing,  church. 
This  prophecy  is  told  in  seven  messages  from  the  risen 
Christ  to  seven  selected  churches  then  existing  in  the 
Roman  province  of  Asia.  Taken  in  the  order  in  which 
they  appear  in  the  messages  (Rev.  2  and  3),  the  spiritual 
state  of  those  churches  corresponded  exactly  to  the 
average  spiritual  state  of  the  whole  professing  church 
as  the  same  would  develop  historically.  The  proof  of 
the  interpretation  which  finds  in  the  messages  to  the 
seven  churches  a  history  in  prophetic  form  of  the  visible 
church  from  the  close  of  the  apostolic  period  to  the  end, 
is  unanswerable,  for  it  consists  of  the  history  which  the 
church  has  actually  made.  The  church  has  passed 
through  the  conditions  described  in  the  seven  messages. 
It  is  not  meant  that  the  messages  had,  or  have,  no 
other  purpose.  Their  primary  use  was  to  reveal  to  those 
actual  churches  in  John's  day  those  things  in  which  the 
Lord  both  approved  and  disapproved  their  state.  Char- 
acteristically, He  mentions  first  the  things  which  He  could 
approve.    But  the  Christ  in  the  glory  also  rebukes  unspar- 

^  W^rite  the  things  which  thou        are,  and  the  things  which   shall 
hast  seen,  and  the  things  which        be  hereafter. —  Rev.  i :  i(^. 

127 


128  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 

ingly  whatever  He  finds  wrong.  In  the  promises  to  the 
overcomers  are  given  mighty  encouragements  to  those  in 
the  churches  who  may  overcome  in  respect  of  the  evils 
shown  to  exist  in  the  church  in  question.  A  second 
use  of  the  messages  is  that  by  them  any  local  church 
of  any  age  may,  if  it  be  in  earnest  to  amend  its  ways, 
test  its  spiritual  condition.  And  a  third  use  is  that  these 
messages  constitute  such  an  unfolding  of  the  mind  of 
Christ  about  life  and  service  as  that  any  Christian  may 
make  the  whole  message  personal,  and  test  himself  by  it. 

But  these  uses  are  secondary.  The  messages,  first 
of  all,  give  a  foreview  of  the  history  of  the  professing 
church.  It  is  the  divine  way  to  give,  at  the  beginning  of 
some  new  thing  which  God  is  doing  in  the  earth,  a  proph- 
ecy covering  its  future.  When  Israel  was  about  to  enter 
the  Land  of  Promise  the  whole  future  of  that  nation  was 
outlined  in  the  last  chapters  of  Deuteronomy.  It  has 
been  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  ''times  of  the  Gentiles''  God  gave,  in  the  Image 
Vision  of  Daniel  2,  and  in  the  Wild  Beast  Vision  of 
Daniel  7,  a  panorama  of  world-history  down  to  an  end 
not  yet  reached ;  and  that  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled 
with  absolute  precision  in  the  great  world  empires.  It 
would,  then,  be  strange  indeed  if  there  were  no  prophetic 
vision  of  church  history. 

Summarizing  the  seven  messages  to  the  seven  churches 
in  Asia,  it  may  be  said  that  in  the  first  of  the  messages, 
that  to  Ephesus,^  we  have  a  description  of  the  general  or 

'  Unto  the  angel  of  the  church  Nevertheless  I  have  somezvhat 
of  Ephesus  write ;  These  things  against  thee,  because  thou  hast 
saith  he  that  holdeth  the  seven  left  thy  first  love, 
stars  in  his  right  hand,  who  Remember  therefore  from 
walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  re- 
seven  golden  candlesticks ;  pent,  and  do  the  first  works  ;  or 

I    know    thy    works,    and    thy  else     I     will     come     unto     thee 

labour,    and    thy    patience,    and  quickly,     and    will    remove    thy 

how   thou    canst   not   bear   them  candlestick  out  of  his  place,  ex- 

which    are    evil :    and    thou    hast  cept  thou  repent, 

tried    them   which    say   they   are  But  this  thou   hast,  that  thou 

apostles,   and   are  not,   and  hast  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolai- 

found  them  liars :  tanes,  which  I  also  hate. 

And  hast  borne,  and  hast  pa-  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him 
tience,  and  for  my  name's  sake  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto 
hast  laboured,  and  hast  not  the  churches ;  To  him  that  over- 
fainted,  cometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the 


THE  REVELATION  129 

average  state  of  the  church  at  large  at  the  end  of  the 
first  century.  All  of  the  apostles  except  John  had  sealed 
their  faith  in  martyrdom.  As  to  actual  vigor  of  life  the 
condition  of  the  church  was  excellent.  Good  works 
abounded,  and  there  was  zeal  for  purity  of  doctrine  (Rev. 
2:2,  3).  But  a  change  had  taken  place  which,  if  not 
repented  of,  would  prove  fatal.  The  church  had  ''left'' 
first  love.  The  motive  back  of  all  that  abundant  service 
had  insensibly  changed  from  devotion  to  Christ  Himself 
(comp.  John  21:  15-17)  to  zeal  for  His  ''name"  (v.  3). 
There  was  a  great  "cause"  now — Christianity.  But  that 
which  alone  gives  value  to  service  is  the  personal  devoted- 
ness  of  first  love  (John  21:  15-17).^  And  so  serious  is 
the  loss  of  first  love,  that  no  fervency  of  zeal  in  service 
can  take  its  place.  'T  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and 
will  remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  his  place,  except  thou 
repent." 

First  love  has  been  defined  as  "complete  satisfaction 
of  the  heart  with  its  object."  There  is  no  outward  test 
of  it.  Surely  not  work,  nor  even  "labor,"  for  these 
abounded  still  at  Ephesus,  while  the  motive  was  His 
"name's  sake."  The  day  of  "denominations"  with  their 
claim  upon  Christian  loyalty  was  yet  in  the  far  future. 
The  rift  in  the  lute  that  was  to  widen  and  make  the  music 
mute  was  still  seemingly  slight.  It  was  still  possible  to 
repent,  and  do  the  "first  works."  This  seems  without 
doubt  a  reference  to  soul  winning. 

The  second  message,  that  to  Smyrna  (Rev.  2:8-11),^ 

tree    of    life,    which    is    in    the  time,   Simon,   son   of  Jonas,  lov- 

midst  of  the  Paradise  of  God. —  est  thou  me?  Peter  was  grieved 

Rev.  2 :  i'7.  because    he    said    unto    him    the 

^  So     when     they     had     dined,  third    time,     Lovest    thou    me  ? 

Jesus  saith  to   Simon~  Peter,   Si-  And    he    said    unto    him,    Lord, 

mon,   son   of  Jonas,   lovest  thou  thou    knowest    all    things ;    thou 

me  more  than  these?     He  saith  knowest  that  I  love  thee.     Jesus 

unto     him,     Yea,     Lord ;     thou  saith  unto  him.  Feed  my  sheep, 

knowest   that    I    love   thee.      He  — John   2i :  iS-i/- 

saith  unto  him.  Feed  my  lambs.  *  And    unto    the    angel    of   the 

He    saith    to    him    again    the  church  in  Smyrna  write ;   These 

second     time,     Simon,     son     of  things    saith    the    first    and    the 

Jonas,     lovest     thou     me?      He  last,    which    was    dead,    and    is 

saith  unto  him,  Yea,  Lord  ;  thou  alive  ; 

knowest   that   I   love   thee.      He  I  know  thy  works,  and  tribu- 

saith  unto   him.   Feed   my  sheep.  lation,    and    poverty,    (but    thou 

He   saith   unto   him   the   third  art  rich)   and  /  knozv  the  bias- 


130  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 

belongs  to  the  period  of  the  great  systematic  persecutions 
which  followed  the  close  of  the  apostolic  period,  and 
lasted  during  the  second  and  third  centuries.  Persecu- 
tion, relentless  and  cruel,  had  indeed  followed  the  exten- 
sion of  Christianity  throughout  the  Roman  Empire,  but 
such  assaults  upon  the  infant  church  were  local,  sporadic, 
and  usually  instigated  by  unbelieving  Jew^s.  But  during 
the  second  and  third  centuries  bitter  and  persistent  at- 
tempts were  made  by  the  imperial  authority,  and  in  every 
part  of  the  Roman  Empire,  to  exterminate  the  new^  faith. 
It  is  touching  to  see  that  this  message  has  only  com- 
mendation. The  great  Head  of  the  body  would  not 
rebuke  a  church  in  persecution. 

The  third  message  ^  has  an  unmistakable  application  to 
the  third  period  of  church  history — the  times  following 
the  alleged  conversion  of  Constantine,  under  whom 
Christianity  became  the  court  religion.  So  far  from  pro- 
fession of  faith  in  Christ  being  the  signal  for  persecution, 
it  now  became  the  condition  of  preferment.  Legions  of 
Roman  soldiers  w^ere  baptized  wnth  not  even  the  pretense 
of  conversion.     The  revenues  of  heathen  temples  were 

phemy   of  them   which   say  they  among  you,  where   Satan  dwell- 

are  Jews,   and   are   not,   but   are  eth. 

the   synagogue  of  Satan.  But     I     have     a     few     things 

Fear    none     of    those    things  against   thee,   because  thou   hast 

which  thou  shalt  suffer :  behold,  there    them    that    hold   the    doc- 

the  devil  shall  cast  some  of  you  trine     of     Balaam,     who     taught 

into     prison,     that    ye    may     be  Balac   to    cast    a   stumblingblock 

tried  ;   and   ye   shall   have   tribu-  before  the  children  of  Israel,  to 

lation   ten   days :    be   thou   faith-  eat  things   sacrificed  unto   idols, 

ful  unto   death,   and   I   will   give  and    to    commit    fornication, 

thee   a   crown    of  life.  So    hast    thou    also    them   that 

He  that  hath  an   ear,  let  him  hold   the   doctrine   of  the    Nico- 

hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  laitanes,   which  thing  I  hate, 

the  churches ;  He  that  overcom-  Repent ;    or    else    I    will    come 

eth  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  sec-  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will  fight 

ond  death. — Rev.   2:8-11.  against  them  with  the  sword  of 

*  And     to     the     angel     of    the  my  mouth, 

church      in      Pergamos      write ;  He  that  hath   an   ear,  let  him 

These  things  saith  he  which  hath  hear  what  the  Spirit   saith  unto 

the  sharp  sword  with  two  edges  ;  the  churches  ;  To  him  that  over- 

I   know  thy   works,   and  where  cometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the 

thou    dwellest,    even    where    Sa-  hidden     manna,     and    will    give 

tan's   seat   is:   and   thou   boldest  him   a   white   stone,    and   in   the 

fast  my  name,  and  hast  not  de-  stone     a     new     name     written, 

nied    my    faith,    even    in    those  which    no    man    knoweth    saving 

days    wherein    Antipas    was    my  he    that    receiveth    it. — Rev.    2: 

faithful   martyr,    who    was    slain  9-i7- 


THE  REVELATION  131 

used  to  endow  bishoprics.  Singularly  enough  there  was 
great  zeal  for  correct  doctrine,  along  with  an  utter  de- 
parture from  the  apostolic  simplicity  in  church  order. 
It  was  the  period  of  the  great  creeds. 

How  suited  the  message!  ''I  know  thy  works,  and 
where  thou  dwellest,  even  where  Satan's  throne  is  .  .  . 
where  Satan  dwelleth.''  Alas!  the  ''stranger''  and  *'pil- 
grim"  church  had  not  only  left  her  first  love  but,  un- 
cured  by  the  fires  of  her  persecution,  had  become  an 
earth-dweller.  Nay,  worse  than  that,  had  settled  down 
in  the  ''world,"  "where  Satan's  throne  is."  Satan  does 
not  reign  in  hell— that  is  the  place  of  his  eternal  punish- 
ment (Rev.  20:10).^  He  is  the  "prince"  and  "god" 
of  this  world  (John  14:30;  2  Cor.  4:4).'^  It  is  the 
world-system,  organized  upon  the  Satanic  principles  of 
avarice,  pride,  brute  force,  ambition — not  the  "world" 
of  men  nor  of  nature — into  which  the  church  settled 
down  in  the  fourth  century. 

The  fourth  message  pictures  a  condition  which  is  an 
inevitable  consequence  of  the  state  described  in  the  mes- 
sage to  Pergamos.  If  Christianity  as  represented  by 
the  professing  church  is  to  settle  down  in  the  world  it 
must  adjust  itself  to  worldly  conditions.  It  must  claim 
authority  both  to  teach  and  to  rule.  And  this  is  pre- 
cisely what  occurred  historically  in  the  centuries  fol- 
lowing the  professed  conversion  of  Constantine  until 
the  mighty  voice  of  Luther  called  men  back  to  the  Bible. 
Thyatira  has  every  essential  mark  of  the  Roman  apos- 
tasy.^   Conspicuous  for  charity  and  "works,"  and  by  no 

^  And   the   devil  that  deceived  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should 

them  was  cast   into  the  lake  of  shine  unto  them. — 2  Cor.  4 :  4. 

fire    and    brimstone,    where    the  *  And    unto    the    angel    of   the 

beast  and  the  false  prophet  are,  church  in  Thyatira  write ;  These 

and  shall  be  tormented  day  and  things    saith    the    Son    of    God, 

night   for   ever   and   ever. — Rev.  who   hath   his   eyes   like   unto   a 

20 :  10.  flame   of   fire,    and   his   feet   are 

'^  Hereafter    I     will    not    talk  like  fine  brass  ; 

much  with  you :    for  the  prince  I   know  thy  works,   and  char- 

of  this  world  cometh,   and  hath  ity,   and  service,   and   faith,   and 

nothing   in   me. — John    14 :  $0.  thy    patience,    and    thy    works  ; 

In  whom  the  god  of  this  world  and    the    last    to    be    more    than 

hath  blinded  the  minds  of  them  the    first. 

which  believe  not,  lest  the  light  Notwithstanding  I  have  a  few 

of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ,  things  against  thee,  because  thou 


132 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


means  destitute  of  faith  though  denying"  its  sufficiency  for 
salvation,  Rome  has  yet  been  a  true  Jezebel,  bringing 
pagan  practises  into  her  ritual;  assuming  authority  to 
teach ;  forming  unclean  alliances  with  the  nations,  and 
persecuting  the  true  church  (1  Kings  21:25).^ 

The  message,  however,  recognizes  in  that  mass  of 
apostate  profession  a  ''rest,''  or  remnant  (v.  24)  of  true 
believers,  and  to  this  remnant  the  risen  Christ  renews 
the  fiezir  promise  of  His  coming — the  upper  chamber 
promise  :  *''And  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star''  (v.  28). 
In  the  older  promise,  that  to  Israel,  His  return  is  likened 
to  the  rising  of  the  sun  (Mai.  4:2)}^  But  in  nature 
there  is  something  which  precedes  the  sun-rising;  it  is 
the  morning  star.  In  Malachi  the  rising  of  *'the  Sun 
of  righteousness"  ushers  in  the  terrible  ''day  of  the 
Lord,"  "that  shall  burn  as  an  oven"   (Mai.  4:1),^^  but 


sufferest  that  woman  Jezebel, 
which  calleth  herself  a  proph- 
etess, to  teach  and  to  seduce 
my  servants  to  commit  forni- 
cation, and  to  eat  things  sacri- 
ficed unto  idols. 

And  1  gave  her  space  to  re- 
pent of  her  fornication;  and  she 
repented   not. 

Behold,  I  will  cast  her  into 
a  bed,  and  them  that  commit 
adultery  with  her  into  great 
tribulation,  except  they  repent 
of  their  deeds. 

And  I  will  kill  her  children 
with  death  ;  and  all  the  church- 
es shall  know  that  I  am  he 
which  searcheth  the  reins  and 
hearts :  and  I  will  give  unto 
every  one  of  you  according  to 
your  works. 

But  unto  you  I  say,  and  unto 
the  rest  in  Thyatira,  as  many 
as  have  not  this  doctrine,  and 
which  have  not  known  the 
depths  of  Satan,  as  they  speak ; 
I  will  put  upon  you  none  other 
burden. 

But  that  which  ye  have  al- 
ready, hold  fast  till  I  come. 

And  he  that  overcometh,  and 
keepeth  my  works  unto  the  end, 


to  him  will  I  give  power  over 
the   nations  : 

And  he  shall  rule  them  with 
a  rod  of  iron  ;  as  the  vessels  of 
a  potter  shall  they  be  broken  to 
shivers :  even  as  I  received  of 
my  Father. 

And  I  will  give  him  the  morn- 
ing star. 

He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him 
hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto 
the    churches. — Rev.    2 :  i8-2g. 

^  But  there  was  none  like 
unto  Ahab,  which  did  sell  him- 
self to  work  wickedness  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord,  whom  Jeze- 
bel his  wife  stirred  up. — / 
Kings  21 :  25. 

^^  But  unto  you  that  fear  my 
name  shall  the  Sun  of  right- 
eousness arise  with  healing  in 
his  win,s:s ;  and  ye  shall  go  forth, 
and  grow  up  as  calves  of  the 
stall. — MoL  4:  2. 

"  For,  behold,  the  day  cometh, 
that  shall  burn  as  an  oven  ;  and 
all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that 
do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble : 
and  the  day  that  cometh  shall 
burn  them  up,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them 
neither  root  nor  branch. — Mai. 
4:  I. 


THE  REVELATION  133 

believers  are  not  ''appointed  unto  wrath'*  (1  Thess.  5: 
9)/^  and  true  believers,  even  in  Thyatira,  shall  be  given 
''the  morning-  star/' 

The  fifth  message,  that  to  Sardis  (Rev.  3:1-6)^^ 
speaks  of  the  Protestant  Reformation,  for,  historically, 
it  was  that  which  broke  the  long  night  of  the  dark  ages. 
The  keyword  is,  'T  have  not  found  thy  works  perfect 
[literally,  'fulfilled']  before  my  God."  There  was  a 
remarkable  arrest  in  the  progress  of  the  Reformation 
movement,  which  has  attracted  the  attention  of  the  secu- 
lar historians  of  this  period.  Macaulay  calls  attention 
to  the  "singular  fact"  that  after  having  gained  nearly 
half  of  Europe,  the  Reformation  not  only  ceased  to  gain, 
but  lost  nearly  half  of  that  which  it  had  gained.  The 
explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  almost  imme- 
diately the  movement  lost  unity.  Following  human  lead- 
ers, and  so  dividing  into  sects,  marked  by  a  bitter  and 
controversial  spirit,  it  is  small  wonder  that  the  one  work 
committed  to  the  church,  that  of  world-wide  evangeliza- 
tion, was  forgotten.  Forgotten,  too,  was  the  hope  and 
expectation  of  the  return  of  the  Lord,  until  the  dis- 
tinctive hope  of  the  church  (John  14:1-3;  1  Thess. 
4:  14-17)^^  became  confused  with  the  Jewish  expectation, 

^2  For  God  hath  not  appointed  in    Sardis    which    have    not    de- 

us  to  wrath,  but  to   obtain  sal-  filed   their   garments ;    and    they 

vation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  shall    walk    with    me    in    white : 

— I   Thess.   5  :  g.  for  they  are  worthy. 

^^  And   unto   the   angel   of   the  He  that  overcometh,  the  same 

church    in    Sardis    write ;    These  shall    be    clothed    in    white    rai- 

things    saith    he    that    hath    the  ment ;    and    I   will   not   blot    out 

seven    Spirits    of    God,    and   the  his    name    out    of   the    book    of 

seven  stars ;   I  know  thy  works,  life,  but  I  will  confess  his  name 

that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  before    my    Father,    and    before 

livest,  and  art  dead.  his  angels. 

Be    watchful,    and    strengthen  He  that  hath  an   ear,  let  him 

the    things    which    remain,    that  hear  what  the   Spirit  saith  unto 

are  ready  to  die  :  for  I  have  not  the   churches. — Rev.    3 :  1-6. 

found  thy  works  perfect  before  ^^  Let  not  your  heart  be  trou- 

God.  bled :    ye    believe    in    God,    be- 

Remember  therefore  how  thou  lieve   also   in   me. 

hast    received    and    heard,    and  In  my  Father's  house  are  many 

hold  fast,  and  repent.     If  there-  mansions :   if   it  were  not   so,   I 

fore  thou  shalt  not  watch,  I  will  would   have   told  you.      I   go   to 

come    on    thee    as    a   thief,    and  prepare  a  place  for  you. 

thou  shalt  not  know  what  hour  And    if    I    go    and    prepare    a 

I  will  come  upon  thee.  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again. 

Thou   hast   a    few   names   even  and    receive    you    unto    myself; 


134 


IV HAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 


and  the  whole  doctrine  fell  into  neglect  and  then  into  dis- 
belief.    Hence  the  warning: 

"If  therefore  thou  shalt  not  watch,  I  will  come  on 
thee  as  a  thief,  and  thou  shalt  not  know  what  hour  I 
\\\\\  come  upon  thee.''  Significant,  too,  in  the  light  of 
present  conditions,  the  weakening  of  the  old  faith  in 
the  authority  of  the  Bible,  and  the  decay  of  doctrine,  is 
the  warning:  ''Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things 
which  remain,  that  are  ready  to  die  .  .  .  remember  how 
thou  hast  received  and  heard."  Protestantism,  in  the 
grace  of  God,  had  received  an  open  Bible — always,  in 
any  state  of  the  church,  the  one  resource  for  faith. 

The  two  remaining  messages,  that  to  Philadelphia, 
and  the  final  message,  to  Laodicea  (Rev.  3:7-13;  3: 
14-22),^^  evidently  present  the  two-fold  state  of  Prot- 

for  thou  hast  a  little  strength, 
and  hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast 
not   denied   my   name. 

Behold,  I  will  make  them  of 
the  synagogue  of  Satan,  which 
say  they  are  Jews,  and  are  not, 
but  do  lie ;  behold,  I  will  make 
them  to  come  and  worship  be- 
fore thy  feet,  and  to  know  that 
I   have  loved  thee. 

Because  thou  hast  kept  the 
word  of  my  patience,  I  also  will 
keep  thee  from  the  hour  of 
temptation,  which  shall  come 
upon  all  the  world,  to  try  them 
that  dwell  upon  the   earth. 

Behold,  I  come  quickly :  hold 
that  fast  Vv^hich  thou  hast,  that 
no  man  take  thy  crown. 

Him  that  overcometh  will  I 
make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of 
my  God,  and  he  shall  go  no 
more  out :  and  I  will  write  upon 
him  the  name  of  my  God,  and 
the  name  of  the  city  of  my 
God,  which  is  new  Jerusalem, 
which  Cometh  down  out  of  heav- 
en from  my  God :  and  /  will 
write  upon   him  my   new   name. 

He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him 
hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto 
the    churches. — Rev.    3:7-13. 

And  unto  the  angel  of  the 
church  of  the  Laodiceans  write  ; 
These  things  saith  the  Amen, 
the    faithful    and    true    witness, 


that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may 
be   also. — John   14  :  1-3. 

For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  even  so 
them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus 
will  God  bring  with  him. 

For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain  tm- 
to  the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall 
not  prevent  them  which  are 
asleep. 

For  the  Lord  himself  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump 
of  God  :  and  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall  rise  first  : 

Then  we  which  are  alive  and 
remain  shall  be  caught  up  to- 
gether with  them  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air: 
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with 
the   Lord. — /    Thess.   4 :  14-17. 

^^And  to  the  angel  of  the 
church  in  Philadelphia  write : 
These  things  saith  he  that  is 
holy,  he  that  is  true,  he  that 
hath  the  key  of  David,  he  that 
openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth  ; 
and  shutteth,  and  no  man  open- 
eth ; 

I  know  thy  works :  behold,  I 
have  set  before  thee  an  open 
door,   and   no   man   can    shut    it  : 


THE  REVELATION  135 

estantism  at  the  end — a  differing-  state  found,  not  in 
any  one  sect,  but  in  all  the  sects.  In  all  there  are  Phila- 
delphians;  in  all  there  are  Laodiceans.  And  again  the 
interpretation  which  finds  in  the  messages  to  Philadel- 
phia and  to  Laodicea  prophetic  pictures  of  the  state  of 
the  Protestant  churches  at  the  end  of  the  church  period 
is  confirmed  by  the  indisputable  facts.  What  is  there 
prophesied  has  come  to  pass.  Not  merely  in  every 
denomination,  but  in  every  local  church,  this  division 
into  the  few  who  pray  and  witness  and  work,  and  the 
many  who  do  neither,  exists.  What  proportion  of  the 
members  in  any  church  habitually  attend  the  prayer  and 
missionary  meetings,  or  have  ever  brought  a  sinner  to 
Christ? 

In  the  message  the  Philadelphians  are  characterized 
by  faith :  ''thou  hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied 
my  name'' ;  and  by  ''a  little  strength"  (literally,  ''power"). 
To  such,  right  up  to  the  end,  is  promised  an  open  door, 
for  service,  and  exemption  from  the  great  tribulation: 
"Because  thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience,  I 
also  will  keep  thee  from  [literally,  'out  of]  the  hour 
of  temptation,  which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world  to 
try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth." 

It  is,  indeed,  and  quite  apart  from  this  specific  prom- 
ise, remarkable  that  any  should  have  supposed  it  pos- 
sible in  the  light  of  Scripture  for  the  true  church  to  go 

the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  clothed,   and   that  the   shame   of 

God ;  thy    nakedness    do    not    appear ; 

I   know  thy   works,   that  thou  and  anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye- 
art  neither  cold  nor  hot :  I  would  salve,   that  thou  mayest   see. 
thou  wert  cold  or  hot.  As  many  as   I  love,   I   rebuke 

So  then  because  thou  art  luke-  |^^   chasten :    be   zealous  there- 
warm,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  ^''^^'.^^V  ""^^^f'  ,      .   ..        . 
T        -11      ^         ^u             4.       r    _,  Behold,    1    stand   at   the   door, 
I    will    spue    thee    out    of    my  and  knock :  if  any  man  hear  my 
moutn.            ^  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will 

Because    tnou    sayest      I    am  come    in    to    him,    and   will    sup 

rich,   and   increased   with  goods,  with  him,  and  he  with  me. 

and  have  need  of  nothing;   and  To   him   that   overcometh   will 

knowest      not      that      thou      art  I    grant   to    sit    with   me   in    my 

wretched,     and     miserable,     and  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame, 

poor,   and  blind,   and  naked:  and     am     set     down     with     my 

I   counsel   thee  to   buy   of  me  Father  in  his  throne, 

gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him 

mayest  be   rich;   and  white   rai-  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto 

ment,      that      thou     mayest      be  the    churches. — Rev.    3 :  14-22. 


136 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


through  the  great  tribulation  (Matt.  24:21;  Jer.  30: 
4-7).^^  The  church  knows  much  tribulation  (Acts  14: 
22;  1  Pet.  4 :  12-19;  James  5:  1-9)/^  but  the  great  tribu- 


"  For  then  shall  be  great  trib- 
ulation, such  as  was  not  since 
the  beginning  of  the  world  to 
this  time,  nor  ever  shall  be. — 
Matt.    24:21. 

And  these  are  the  words  that 
the  Lord  spake  concerning  Is- 
rael   and    concerning   Judah. 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  We 
have  heard  a  voice  of  trembling, 
of  fear,  and  not  of  peace. 

Ask  ye  now,  and  see  whether 
a  man  doth  travail  with  child? 
wherefore  do  I  see  every  man 
with  his  hands  on  his  loins,  as 
a  woman  in  travail,  and  all 
faces   are  turned  into   paleness? 

Alas !  for  that  day  is  great, 
so  that  none  is  like  it :  it  is 
even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trou- 
ble ;  but  he  shall  be  saved  out 
of  it. — Jer.   30:  4-7. 

"  Confirming  the  souls  of  the 
disciples,  and  exhorting  them  to 
continue  in  the  faith,  and  that 
we  must  through  much  tribu- 
lation enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God. — Acts  14:22. 

Beloved,  think  it  not  strange 
concerning  the  fiery  trial  which 
is  to  try  you,  as  though  some 
strange  thing  happened  unto 
you : 

But  rejoice,  inasmuch  as  ye 
are  partakers  of  Christ's  suffer- 
ings ;  that,  when  his  glory  shall 
be  revealed,  ye  may  be  glad  also 
with   exceeding  joy. 

If  ye  be  reproached  for  the 
name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye; 
for  the  spirit  of  glory  and  of 
God  resteth  upon  you  :  on  their 
part  he  is  evil  spoken  of,  but 
on  your  part  he  is  glorified. 

But  let  none  of  you  suffer  as 
a  murderer,  or  as  a  thief,  or  as 
an  evildoer,  or  as  a  busybody 
in  other  men's  matters. 

Yet  if  any  man  suffer  as  a 
Christian,  let  him  not  be 
ashamed ;  but  let  him  glorify 
God   on  this  behalf. 

For  the  time  is  come  that 
judgment     must     begin     at     the 


house  of  God:  and  if  it  first 
begin  at  us,  what  shall  the  end 
he  of  them  that  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  God? 

And  if  the  righteous  scarcely 
be  saved,  where  shall  the  un- 
godly   and    the    sinner    appear? 

Wherefore  let  them  that  suf- 
fer according  to  the  will  of  God 
commit  the  keeping  of  their 
souls  to  him  in  well  doing,  as 
unto  a  faithful  Creator. — /  Pet. 
4  :  12-19. 

Go  to  now,  ye  rich  men,  weep 
and  howl  for  your  miseries  that 
shall   come   upon  you. 

Your  riches  are  corrupted,  and 
your  garments  are  motheaten. 

Your  gold  and  silver  is  can- 
kered ;  and  the  rust  of  them 
shall  be  a  witness  against  you, 
and  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it 
were  fire.  Ye  have  heaped  treas- 
ure  together   for   the   last   days. 

Behold,  the  hire  of  the  labour- 
ers who  have  reaped  down  your 
fields,  which  is  of  you  kept  back 
by  fraud,  crieth :  and  the  cries 
of  them  which  have  reaped  are 
entered  into  the  ears  of  the 
Lord    of    sabaoth. 

Ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  on 
the  earth,  and  been  wanton ;  ye 
have  nourished  your  hearts,  as 
in  a  day  of  slaughter. 

Ye  have  condemned  and  killed 
the  just ;  and  he  doth  not  resist 
you. 

Be  patient  therefore,  brethren, 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 
Behold,  the  husbandman  waiteth 
for  the  precious  fruit  of  the 
earth,  and  hath  long  patience 
for  it,  until  he  receive  the  early 
and  latter  rain. 

Be  ye  also  patient ;  stablish 
your  hearts  :  for  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  draweth  nigh. 

Grudge  not  one  against  an- 
other, brethren,  lest  ye  be  con- 
demned :  behold,  the  judge 
standeth  before  the  door. — 
James  5 :  /-p. 


THE  REVELATION 


137 


lation  is  never  once  mentioned  in  connection  with  the 
first  resurrection ;  never  mentioned  in  connection  with  the 
departure  of  the  church  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air  (1 
Thess.  4:  14-17)^^;  never  mentioned  at  all  in  the  Epis- 
tles, which  were  written  for  the  instruction  of  the  church ! 
On  the  contrary,  the  great  tribulation  is  both  judgment 
and  wrath,  and  the  church  is  promised  exemption  from 
both  (Rev.  14:15,  16;  15:7,  8;  16:1-21;  1  Thess.  5: 
1-9;  John  5  :2A)}^    And  perhaps  still  more  conclusively, 


^^  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  even  so 
them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus 
will  God  bring  with  him. 

For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain  unto 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall  not 
prevent  them   which   are   asleep. 

For  the  Lord  himself  shall  de- 
scend from  heaven  with  a  shout, 
with  the  voice  of  the  archangel, 
and  with  the  trump  of  God :  and 
the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise 
first: 

Then  we  which  are  alive  and 
remain  shall  be  caught  up  to- 
gether with  them  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and 
so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the 
Lord. — I  Thess.  4  :  14-1? • 

^^And  another  angel  came  out 
of  the  temple,  crying  with  a  loud 
voice  to  him  that  sat  on  the 
cloud.  Thrust  in  thy  sickle,  and 
reap :  for  the  time  is  come  for 
thee  to  reap ;  for  the  harvest  of 
the  earth  is  ripe. 

And  he  that  sat  on  the  cloud 
thrust  in  his  sickle  on  the  earth ; 
and  the  earth  was  reaped. — Rev. 
14 :  13,  16. 

And  one  of  the  four  beasts 
gave  unto  the  seven  angels  seven 
golden  vials  full  of  the  wrath 
of  God,  who  liveth  for  ever  and 
ever. 

And  the  temple  was  filled  with 
smoke  from  the  glory  of  God, 
and  from  his  power;  and  no 
man  was  able  to  enter  into  the 
temple,  till  the  seven  plagues  of 
the  seven  angels  were  fulfilled. 
— Rev.   15 :  7,  S, 


And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out 
of  the  temple  saying  to  the 
seven  angels.  Go  your  ways,  and 
pour  out  the  vials  of  the  wrath 
of  God  upon  the   earth. 

And  the  first  went,  and  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  earth ;  and 
there  fell  a  noisome  and  griev- 
ous sore  upon  the  men  which 
had  the  mark  of  the  beast,  and 
upon  them  which  worshipped 
his  image. 

And  the  second  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  sea ;  and 
it  became  as  the  blood  of  a  dead 
man:  and  every  living  soul  died 
in  the   sea. 

And  the  third  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  rivers  and 
fountains  of  waters ;  and  they 
became  blood. 

And  I  heard  the  angel  of  the 
v/aters  say,  Thou  art  righteous, 
O  Lord,  which  art,  and  wast, 
and  shalt  be,  because  thou  hast 
judged  thus. 

For  they  have  shed  the  blood 
of  saints  and  prophets,  and  thou 
hast  given  them  blood  to  drink ; 
for  they  are  worthy. 

And  I  heard  another  out  of 
the  altar  say,  Even  so,  Lord  God 
Almighty,  true  and  righteous  are 
thy  judgments. 

And  the  fourth  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  sun  ;  and 
power  was  given  unto  him  to 
scorch  men  with  fire. 

And  men  were  scorched  with 
great  heat,  and  blasphemed  the 
name  of  God,  which  hath  power 
over  these  plagues  :  and  they  re- 
pented not  to  give  him  glory. 


138 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVf 


in  the  portions  of  The  Revelation  which  describe  with 
curious  minuteness  the  events  which  make  up  the  great 
tribulation,  the  church  is  not  once  mentioned.     The  rea- 


And  the  fifth  angel  poured  out 
his  vial  upon  the  seat  of  the 
beast ;  and  his  kingdom  was  full 
of  darkness ;  and  they  gnawed 
their  tongues   for  pain, 

And  blasphemed  the  God  of 
heaven  because  of  their  pains 
and  their  sores,  and  repented  not 
of  their  deeds. 

And  the  sixth  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  great  river 
Euphrates ;  and  the  water  there- 
of was  dried  up,  that  the  way  of 
the  kings  of  the  east  might  be 
prepared. 

And  I  saw  three  unclean  spir- 
its like  frogs  come  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  out 
of  the  mouth  of  the  beast,  and 
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false 
prophet. 

For  they  are  the  spirits  of 
devils,  working  miracles,  zuhich 
go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the 
earth  and  of  the  whole  world, 
to  gather  them  to  the  battle  of 
that  great  day  of  God  Almighty. 

Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief. 
Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and 
keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he 
walk  naked,  and  they  see  his 
shame. 

And  he  gathered  them  togeth- 
er into  a  place  called  in  the 
Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon. 

And  the  seventh  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  into  the  air ;  and 
there  came  a  great  voice  out  of 
4he  temple  of  heaven,  from  the 
throne,  saying.  It  is  done. 

And  there  were  voices,  and 
thunders,  and  lightnings ;  and 
there  was  a  great  earthquake, 
such  as  was  not  since  men  were 
upon  the  earth,  so  mighty  an 
earthquake,  and  so  great. 

And  the  great  city  was  divid- 
ed into  three  parts,  and  the  cit- 
ies of  the  nations  fell  :  and  great 
Babylon  came  in  remembrance 
before  God,  to  give  unto  her  the 
cup  of  the  wine  of  the  fierceness 
of  his  wrath. 


And  every  island  fled  away, 
and  the  mountains  were  not 
found. 

And  there  fell  upon  men  a 
great  hail  out  of  heaven,  every 
stone  about  the  weight  of  a 
talent :  and  men  blasphemed 
God  because  of  the  plague  of 
the  hail ;  for  the  plague  thereof 
was   exceeding  great. — Rev.    i6: 

I-2I. 

But  of  the  times  and  the  sea- 
sons, brethren,  ye  have  no  need 
that  I  write  unto  you. 

For  yourselves  know  perfectly 
that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so 
Cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night. 

For  when  they  shall  say, 
Peace  and  safety ;  then  sudden 
destruction  cometh  upon  them, 
as  travail  upon  a  woman  with 
child ;  and  they  shall  not  escape. 

But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in 
darkness,  that  that  day  should 
overtake   you   as   a   thief. 

Ye  are  all  the  children  of 
light,  and  the  children  of  the 
day :  we  are  not  of  the  night, 
nor  of  darkness. 

Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as 
do  others  ;  but  let  us  watch  and 
be  sober. 

For  they  that  sleep  sleep  in 
the  night ;  and  they  that  be 
drunken  are  drunken  in  the 
night. 

But  let  us,  who  are  of  the  day, 
be  sober,  putting  on  the  breast- 
plate of  faith  and  love :  and  for 
an  helmet,  the  hope  of  salva- 
tion. 

For  God  hath  not  appointed 
us  to  wrath,  but  to  obtain  salva- 
tion by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
— I   Thess.   5  :  i-g. 

Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
He  that  heareth  my  word,  and 
believeth  on  him  that  sent  me, 
hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall 
not  come  into  condemnation : 
but  is  passed  from  death  unto 
life. — John   5  .*  24. 


THE  REVELATION  139 

son  is  obvious :  the  true  church  is  with  the  Lord,  and 
the  mass  of  Laodicean  profession,  utterly  apostate,  is 
no  longer  even  called  a  church,  but  ''Babylon/' 

The  Laodicean  spirit;  however,  is  one  of  boastfulness, 
of  pride  in  numbers  and  in  the  outward  apparent  pros- 
perity of  the  church.  With  all  this  groundless  optimism, 
there  is  utter  blindness  to  the  real  unspirituality  of  the 
mass  of  professing  church-members.  ''Because  thou  say- 
est,  I  am  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have  need 
of  nothing;  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art  wretched, 
and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked." 

The  result  is  lukewarmness,  and  the  end  rejection  by 
the  Lord  with  disgust :  ''So  then  because  thou  art  luke- 
warm, and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  thee  out  of 
my  mouth." 

Removing  the  real  believers  who  have  kept  His  word 
and  have  not  denied  His  name  before  the  great  tribula- 
tion (Rev.  3:  10;  1  Thess.  4:  U-l/),^^  the  mass  of  Lao- 
dicean lukewarmness  and  mere  profession  is  left  to  its 
horrors. 

^^  Because   thou   hast   kept  the  upon  all  the  world,  to  try  them 

word     of    my    patience,    I    also  that    dwell    upon     the    earth. — 

will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of  Rev.    S :  lo. 
temptation,     which     shall     come 


X.  THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE 

TO  the  Prophet  Daniel,  the  prophet  of  the  ''times  of 
the  Gentiles/'  was  given  through  the  angel  Ga- 
briel a  measure  of  time  from  the  first  year  of 
Darius  the  Mede,  first  king  of  the  second  or 
Medo-Persian  world  empire  (538  B.  C.),  to  the  full  estab- 
lishment of  Messiah's  kingdom  of  heaven  (Dan.  9:  1,  20- 
27).^  The  measure  is  given  in  a  series  of  sevens,  and  of 
these  there  are  to  be  seventy  (Dan.  9:24).     The  word 


*  In  the  first  year  of  Darius 
the  son  of  Ahasuerus,  of  the 
seed  of  the  Medes,  which  was 
made  king  over  the  realm  of 
the   Chaldeans.  .  .  . 

And  whiles  I  was  speaking, 
and  praying,  and  confessing  my 
sin  and  the  sin  of  my  people 
Israel,  and  presenting  my  sup- 
plication before  the  Lord  my 
God  for  the  holy  mountain  of 
my   God ; 

Yea,  whiles  I  was  speaking 
in  prayer,  even  the  man  Gabriel, 
whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision 
at  the  beginning,  being  caused 
to  fly^  swiftly,  touched  me  about 
the  time  of  the  evening  obla- 
tion. 

And  he  informed  me,  and 
talked  with  me,  and  said,  O 
Daniel,  I  am  now  come  forth 
to  gi\^  thee  skill  and  under- 
standing. 

At  the  beginning  of  thy  sup- 
plications, the  commandment 
came  forth,  and  I  am  come  to 
shew  thee;  for  thou  art  greatly 
beloved :  therefore  understand 
the  matter,  and  consider  the 
vision. 

Seventy  weeks  are  determined 
upon  thy  people  and  upon  thy 
holy  city,  to  finish  the  transgres- 
sion,   and    to    make    an    end    of 


sins,  and  to  make  reconcilia- 
tion for  iniquity,  and  to  bring 
in  everlasting  righteousness,  and 
to  seal  up  the  vision  and  proph- 
ecy, and  to  anoint  the  most 
Holy. 

Know  therefore  and  under- 
stand, that  from  the  going  forth 
of  the  commandment  to  restore 
and  to  build  Jerusalem  unto  the 
Messiah  the  Prince  shall  he 
seven  weeks,  and  threescore  and 
two  weeks :  the  street  shall  be 
built  again,  and  the  wall,  even 
in  troublous  times. 

And  after  threescore  and  two 
weeks  shall  Messiah  be  cut  off, 
but  not  for  himself :  and  the 
people  of  the  prince  that  shall 
come  shall  destroy  the  city  and 
the  sanctuary ;  and  the  end 
thereof  shall  be  with  a  flood, 
and  unto  the  end  of  the  war 
desolations    are    determined. 

And  he  shall  confirm  the  cov- 
enant with  many  for  one  week : 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  week 
he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and 
the  oblation  to  cease,  and  for 
the  overspreading  of  abomina- 
tions he  shall  make  it  desolate, 
even  until  the  consummation, 
and  that  determined  shall  be 
poured  upon  the  desolate. — Dan. 
9 :  I,  20-27, 


141 


142  PVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

'"weeks"  is  not  in  the  original,  which  speaks  only  of  sev- 
enty sevens.  But  the  process  of  fulfilment  makes  it  sure 
that  'Sveeks/'  that  is,  weeks  of  years — seven  years  to  a 
*'week"  is  right.  In  other  words  490  years  of  the  dealing 
of  God  with  His  chosen  people  were  to  interpose  between 
538  B.  C.  and  the  consummation  of  that  dealing  in  the 
establishment  of  the  kingdom.  But  the  prophecy  does 
not  say,  nor  may  it  be  inferred,  that  the  divine  dealing  is 
to  be  continuous — that  is,  without  interruption. 

Indeed,  certain  divisions  of  the  time  are  distinctly 
announced.  There  is,  first,  a  period  of  seven  sevens=49 
years  during  which  Jerusalem  is  to  be  rebuilt,  and  this 
was  fulfilled  as  we  are  told  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah. 
Secondly,  there  is  to  be  a  period  of  sixty-two  sevens 
=434  years  *'unto  the  Messiah''  who  is  to  be  *'cut  off.'' 
And  this  also  was  exactly  fulfilled  according  to  Biblical 
chronology.  Whatever  confusion  has  existed  at  that 
point  has  been  due  to  following  the  Ptolemaic  instead  of 
the  Biblical  chronology,  as  Anstey  in  his  ''Romance  of 
Biblical  Chronology"  (Association  Press,  New  York 
City)  has  shown. 

But  there  is  still  one  final  seven,  or  ''week,"  to  com- 
plete the  ''seventy  sevens"  or  490  years  of  the  divine 
dealing  with  Daniel's  people,  "To  finish  the  transgres- 
sion, and  to  make  an  end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconcilia- 
tion for  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteous- 
ness, and  to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to 
anoint  the  most  Holy  [place]."  But  this  consummation 
is  Kingdom  work,  as  we  know  from  the  abundant  testi- 
mony of  the  Prophets. 

We  are,  therefore,  confronted  with  the  question,  Why 
did  fulfilment  of  the  seventy  weeks'  prophecy  stop  short 
with  the  cutting  off  of  Messiah  at  the  end  of  the  sixty- 
ninth  week?  It  is  the  question  which  any  acceptable 
scheme  of  prophetic  interpretation  must  answer. 

The  Biblical  answer  is  to  be  found  in  our  Lord's  reve- 
lation concerning  His  departure,  return,  and  certain  "Mys- 
teries of  the  kingdom  of  heaven"  (that  is,  divine  secrets 
hitherto  hidden,  but  now  revealed)  which  must  be  ful- 
filled during  His  absence.  These  "mysteries"  are  gath- 
ered   into   the   thirteenth   chapter   of    Matthew.      From 


THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE         143 

these  it  becomes  evident  that  the  events  of  Daniel's  last, 
or  seventieth  *'seven/'  that  is,  seven  years,  constitute  a 
postponed  dealing — the  seventieth  week  of  seven  years 
is  cut  off,  and  separated  from  the  sixty-nine;  and  the 
interval,  already  of  nineteen  hundred  years'  duration, 
is  the  period  during  which  the  two  great  divine  secrets — 
the  outcalling  of  the  church,  and  the  mysteries  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  run  their  course.  Both  seem  well- 
nigh  completed.  If  this  is  true,  the  seventieth  week  of 
Daniel  is  upon  the  very  horizon. 

It  is  significant  that  our  Lord  in  His  great  prophetic 
discourse  from  the  Mount  of  Olives,  when  he  reaches 
the  time  of  the  end  refers  us  to  Daniel.  It  is  not  the 
way  of  God  to  discredit  His  prophets. 

*'When  ye  therefore  shall  see  the  abomination  of  deso- 
lation, spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  stand  in  the 
holy  place  (whoso  readeth  let  him  understand,)''  etc. 

Turning,  then,  to  Daniel's  ninth  chapter  we  find  the 
following : 

*'And  after  the  threescore  and  tw^o  weeks  shall  the 
anointed  one  be  cut  off,  and  shall  have  nothing :  and  the 
people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  shall  destroy  the 
city  and  the  sanctuary;  and  the 'end  thereof  shall  be 
with  a  flood"  (v.  26,  Revised  Version). 

Here  we  are  still  on  the  firm  ground  of  fulfilled  proph- 
ecy. After  the  cutting  off  of  Messiah,  fulfilled  in  the 
crucifixion  of  Christ,  the  Romans  came  against  Jeru- 
salem and  destroyed  city  and  temple,  as  predicted  by 
Daniel,  and  by  our  Lord.  But  the  passage  quoted  goes 
farther.  A  '^prince"  is  to  come  who  is  to  be  ''the  Abom- 
ination." And  now  we  know  from  whence  he  will  come, 
for  it  was  his  "people,"  the  Romans,  who  were  the  de- 
stroyers. He  will  not,  therefore,  be  a  Russian,  or  a 
German,  for  Rome  did  not  then  rule  those  regions; 
neither  will  he  be  a  Jew. 

And,  having  mentioned  the  man  w^ho  bulks  so  large  in 
all  prophecies  of  the  consummation  of  the  age  which 
follows  the  cutting  off  of  Messiah,  the  Spirit  takes  Dan- 
iel straight  across  the  centuries  to  the  ''end" — that  is  to 
say,  to  the  events  of  the  postponed  or  seventieth  week. 


144  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYt 

''And  even  unto  the  end  shall  be  war;  desolations  are 
determined"   (v.  26). 

The  ''end"  in  Daniel,  as  a  careful  reading  of  the 
passages  will  make  clear,  is  not  an  instant  of  time,  but 
a  period  of  time — the  seventieth  "week,"  that  is,  the 
last  seven  years  of  this  age.  Unto  this  "end,"  whatever 
easy  optimists  may  imagine,  "shall  be  war."  And  so  it 
has  been  from  the  date  of  the  prophecy  of  the  Seventy 
Weeks,  538  B.  C.  to  this  very  year — 2,454  years  of  war! 

Having  introduced  "the  prince  that  shall  come"  the 
Seventy  Weeks  prophecy  adds  a  word  as  to  his  doings: 

"And  he  shall  make  a  firm  covenant  with  many  for 
one  week"  (seven  years)  :  "and  in  the  midst  of  the 
week"  (that  is,  after  three  and  one-half  years)  "he  shall 
cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease;  and  upon 
the  pinnacle  of  abominations  [that  is,  'as  the  summit 
abomination']  one  that  maketh  desolate;  and  even  unto 
the  full  end,  and  that  determined,  shall  wrath  be  poured 
out  upon  the  desolator"  (Dan.  9 :  27). 

This  "wrath"  our  Lord  interprets : 

"For  then  shall  be  great  tribulation,  such  as  was  not 
since  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  this  time,  no,  nor 
ever  shall  be"  (Matt.  24:21).  And  the  supreme,  or 
"pinnacle"  abomination  of  the  "prince  that  shall  come" 
is  something  which  he  does  in  "the  holy  place."  What 
that  pinnacle  abomination  is  we  learn  from  express 
words  in  2  Thessalonians  2:  1-10: 

"Now  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  touching  the  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our  gathering  together 
unto  him ;  to  the  end  that  ye  be  not  quickly  shaken  from 
your  mind,  nor  yet  be  troubled,  either  by  spirit,  or  by 
word,  or  by  epistle  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  the 
Lord  is  just  at  hand;  let  no  man  beguile  you  in  any 
wise:  for  it  will  not  he,  except  the  falling  away  come 
first,  and  the  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdi- 
tion, he  that  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  against  all 
that  is  called  God  or  that  is  worshipped ;  so  that  he  sit- 
teth  in  the  temple  of  God,  setting  himself  forth  as  God. 
Remember  ye  not,  that,  when  I  was  yet  with  you,  I  told 
you  these  things?  And  now  ye  know  that  which  re- 
straineth,  to   the  end  that  he  may   be  revealed  in  his 


THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE         145 

own  season.  For  the  mystery  of  lawlessness  doth  al- 
ready w^ork :  only  there  is  one  that  restraineth  now,  until 
he  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  And  then  shall  be  revealed 
the  lawless  one,  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  slay  with  the 
breath  of  his  mouth,  and  bring  to  nought  by  the  mani- 
festation of  his  coming;  even  he,  whose  coming  is  accord- 
ing to  the  working  of  Satan  with  all  power  and  signs 
and  lying  wonders,  and  w^ith  all  deceit  of  unrighteous- 
ness for  them  that  perish ;  because  they  received  not  the 
love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved." 

Daniel's  ''prince  that  shall  come,"  our  Lord's  ''abom- 
ination,'' and  Paul's  "man  of  sin,"  all  refer  to  the  same 
person.  He  is  a  ruler,  in  political  sovereignty  over 
regions  which  include  Jerusalem.,  for  he  m.akes  a  covenant 
with  "many,"  who  can  only  be  unbelieving  Jews  in  Jeru- 
salem, permitting  the  restoration  of  the  temple  service 
("sacrifice  and  oblation,"  Dan.  9:27)^  for  one  "week." 
This  covenant  he  violates  in  the  middle  of  the  week, 
and  reaches  the  "pinnacle"  of  his  abominations  by  enter- 
ing the  holy  place  of  the  restored  temple  and  demanding 
human  worship.  From  this  time  the  "great  tribulation" 
begins  (Matt.  24:  21)^  and  runs  its  awful  course  of  three 
and  one-half  years — the  last  half  of  Daniel's  seventieth 
"week"  (Dan.  12:  11;  Jer.  30:7;  Dan.  12:  1;  Matt.  24: 
21).^     The  last  seven  years  of  the  present  age,  then, 

^  And  he  shall  confirm  the  cov-  Alas !  for  that  day  is  great,  so 

enant  with  many  for  one  week  :  that  none  is  like  it :   it  is  even 

and  in  the  midst  of  the  week  he  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble ;  but 

shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  he    shall   be   saved    out    of   it. — 

oblation   to    cease,    and    for   the  Jer.   so :  /. 

overspreading    of    abominations  And  at  that  time  shall  Michael 

he   shall   make  it  desolate,    even  stand  up,  the  great  prince  which 

until  the  consummation,  and  that  standeth  for  the  children  of  thy 

determined  shall  be  poured  upon  people :  and  there  shall  be  a  time 

the    desolate. — Dan.    9:27.  of    trouble,    such    as    never    was 

*  For  then  shall  be  great  trib-  since  there  w^as  a  nation  even 
ulation,  such  as  w^as  not  since  to  that  sam.e  time :  and  at  that 
the  beginning  of  the  world  to  time  thy  people  shall  be  deliv- 
this  time,  no.  nor  ever  shall  be.  ered,  every  one  that  shall  be 
' — Matt.    24  :  21.  found    written    in    the    book. — 

*  And   from  the  time  that  the       Dan.    12 :  i. 

daily    sacrifice    shall     be    taken  For  then  shall  be  great  tribu- 

away,  and  the  abomination  that  lation,  such  as  was  not  since  the 

maketh    desolate    set    up,    there  beginning   of  the  world  to   this 

shall  he  a  thousand  two  hundred  time,   nor   ever  shall  be. — Matt. 

and  ninety  days. — Dan.  12 :  11.  24  :  21. 


146 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


witness  the  rise,  reign,  and  destruction  of  the  fearful 
being-  thus  referred  to. 

But  before  the  vision  of  the  Seventy  Weeks  this  per- 
sonage has  been  revealed  to  Daniel.  In  the  Wild  Beast 
Vision  of   Daniel   7^  he  appears   as  the  ^'little   horn.'* 


^In  the  first  year  of  Belshaz- 
zar  king  of  Babylon  Daniel  had 
a  dream  and  visions  of  his  head 
upon  his  bed  :  then  he  wrote  the 
dream,  and  told  the  sum  of  the 
matters. 

Daniel  spake  and  said,  I  saw 
in  my  vision  by  night,  and,  be- 
hold, the  four  winds  of  the 
heaven  strove  upon  the  great 
sea. 

And  four  great  beasts  came 
up  from  the  sea,  diverse  one 
from   another. 

The  first  was  like  a  lion,  and 
had  eagle's  wings :  I  beheld  till 
the  wings  thereof  were  plucked, 
and  it  was  lifted  up  from  the 
earth,  and  made  stand  upon  the 
feet  as  a  man,  and  a  man's  heart 
was    given    to    it. 

And  behold  another  beast,  a 
second,  like  to  a  bear,  and  it 
raised  up  itself  on  one  side,  and 
it  had  three  ribs  in  the  mouth 
of  it  between  the  teeth  of  it : 
and  they  said  thus  unto  it,  Arise, 
devour  much  flesh. 

After  this  I  beheld,  and  lo 
another,  like  a  leopard,  which 
had  upon  the  back  of  it  four 
wings  of  a  fowl ;  the  beast  had 
also  four  heads ;  and  dominion 
was  given  to  it. 

After  this  I  saw  in  the  night 
visions,  and  behold  a  fourth 
beast,  dreadful  and  terrible,  and 
strong  exceedingly ;  and  it  had 
great  iron  teeth  :  it  devoured  and 
brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped 
the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it : 
and  it  zvas  diverse  from  all  the 
beasts  that  were  before  it ;  and 
it   had   ten  horns. 

I  considered  the  horns,  and, 
behold,  there  came  up  among 
them  another  little  horn,  before 
whom  there  were  three  of  the 
first  horns  plucked  up  by  the 
roots  :   and,  behold,   in  this  horn 


were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  man, 
and  a  mouth  speaking  great 
things. 

I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were 
cast  down,  and  the  Ancient  of 
days  did  sit,  whose  garment  was 
white  as  snow,  and  the  hair  of 
his  head  like  the  pure  wool : 
his  throne  was  like  the  fiery 
flame,  and  his  wheels  as  burning 
fire. 

A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came 
forth  from  before  him  :  thousand 
thousands  ministered  unto  him, 
and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thou- 
sand stood  before  him :  the 
judgment  was  set,  and  the  books 
were  opened. 

I  beheld  then  because  of  the 
voice  of  the  great  words  which 
the  horn  spake :  I  beheld  even 
till  the  beast  was  slain,  and  his 
body  destroyed,  and  given  to  the 
burning  flame. 

As  concerning  the  rest  of  the 
beasts,  they  had  their  dominion 
taken  away  :  yet  their  lives  were 
prolonged  for  a  season  and  time. 

I  saw  in  the  night  visions, 
and,  behold,  one  like  the  Son 
of  man  came  with  the  clouds  of 
heaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient 
of  days,  and  they  brought  him 
near  before  him. 

And  there  was  given  him  do- 
minion, and  glory,  and  a  king- 
dom, that  all  people,  nations,  and 
languages,  should  serve  him  :  his 
dominion  is  an  everlasting  do- 
minion, which  shall  not  pass 
away,  and  his  kingdom  that 
which  shall  not  be  destroyed. 

I  Daniel  was  grieved  in  my 
spirit  in  the  midst  of  my  body, 
and  the  visions  of  my  head  trou- 
bled me. 

I  came  near  unto  one  of  them 
that  stood  by,  and  asked  him  the 
truth    of   all    this.      So    he   told 


THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE 


147 


The  whole  course  of  the  ''times  of  the  Gentiles"  (Luke 
21:24),^  which  was  shown  to  King  Nebuchadnezzar 
as  an  imposing  image,  is  revealed  to  Daniel  under  the 
similitude  of  four  wild  beasts,  answering  to  the  four 
world  empires  of  the  image  vision,  but  exposing  the  true 
nature  of  Gentile  world-rule  as  rapacious  and  insatiable. 
Following  the  four  empires,  but  in  some  sense  a  continua- 
tion, or  revival  of  the  fourth,  or  Roman  empire,  Daniel 
sees  ten  kings  (7:7,  24) y  "And  the  ten  horns  out  of 
this  kingdom  are  ten  kings  that  shall  arise/'  But  Daniel 
particularly  ''would  know  the  truth"  concerning  a  "little 
horn  before  whom  there  were  three  of  the  first  horns 


me,  and  made  me  know  the  in- 
terpretation  of  the  things. 

These  great  beasts,  which  are 
four,  are  four  kings,  which  shall 
arise  out  of  the  earth. 

But  the  saints  of  the  most 
High  shall  take  the  kingdom, 
and  possess  the  kingdom  for 
ever,  even  for  ever  and  ever. 

Then  I  would  know  the  truth 
of  the  fourth  beast,  which  was 
diverse  from  all  the  others,  ex- 
ceeding dreadful,  whose  teeth 
zvere  of  iron,  and  his  nails  of 
brass ;  which  devoured,  brake  in 
pieces,  and  stamped  the  residue 
with  his  feet ; 

And  of  the  ten  horns  that 
were  in  his  head,  and  of  the 
other  which  came  up,  and  before 
whom  three  fell ;  even  of  that 
horn  that  had  eyes,  and  a  mouth 
that  spake  very  great  things, 
whose  look  was  more  stout  than 
his  fellows. 

I  beheld,  and  the  same  horn 
made  war  with  the  saints,  and 
prevailed  against  them ; 

Until  the  Ancient  of  days 
came,  and  judgment  was  given 
to  the  saints  of  the  most  High  ; 
and  the  time  came  that  the  saints 
possessed  the  kingdom. 

Thus  he  said.  The  fourth  beast 
shall  be  the  fourth  kingdom 
upon  earth,  which  shall  be  di- 
verse from  all  kingdoms,  and 
shall  devoiir  the  whole  earth, 
and  shall  tread  it  down,  and 
break  it  in  pieces. 


And  the  ten  horns  out  of  this 
kingdom  are  ten  kings  that  shall 
arise :  and  another  shall  rise 
after  them ;  and  he  shall  be  di- 
verse from  the  first,  and  he 
shall   subdue  three  kings. 

And  he  shall  speak  great 
words  against  the  most  High, 
and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of 
the  most  High,  and  think  to 
change  times  and  laws  :  and  they 
shall  be  given  into  his  hand  un- 
til a  time  and  times  and  the 
dividing   of  time. 

But  the  judgment  shall  sit, 
and  they  shall  take  away  his  do- 
minion, to  consume  and  to  de- 
stroy it  unto  the  end. 

And  the  kingdom  and  domin- 
ion, and  the  greatness  of  the 
kingdom  under  the  whole  heav- 
en, shall  be  given  to  the  people 
of  the  saints  of  the  most  High, 
whose  kingdom  is  an  everlast- 
ing kingdom,  and  all  dominions 
shall    serve   and    obey   him. 

Hitherto  is  the  end  of  the 
matter.  As  for  me  Daniel,  my 
cogitations  much  troubled  me, 
and  my  countenance  changed  in 
me :  but  I  kept  the  matter  in 
my   heart. — Dan.   /. 

^And  they  shall  fall  by  the 
edge  of  the  sword,  and  shall  be 
led  away  captive  into  all  na- 
tions :  and  Jerusalem  shall  be 
trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles, 
until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
be  fulfilled. — Luke  21:24. 


148  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAY? 

plucked  up  by  the  roots :  and,  behold,  in  this  horn  were 
eyes  like  the  eyes  of  a  man  [superior  discernment],  and 
a  mouth  speaking  great  things''  (Dan.  7:8). 

Daniel  is  answered  that  the  ''little  horn"  is  a  king  who 
shall  arise  after  the  ten  kings  have  begun  to  reign  over 
the  ten  kingdoms  into  which  the  former  Roman  empire 
shall  be  divided  in  the  time  of  the  end,  ''and  he  shall 
be  diverse  from  the  first  [the  ten  kings],  and  he  shall 
subdue  three  kings.  And  he  shall  speak  great  words 
against  the  most  High,  and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of 
the  most  High"  (Jews,  as  that  expression  shows),  and 
the  vision  ends  in  the  destruction  of  the  "little  horn," 
and  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

The  Revelation,  obediently  to  the  command  given  to 
the  Apostle  John,  to  "Write  the  things  w4iich  thou  hast 
seen,  and  the  things  which  are,  and  the  things  which  shall 
be  after  these''  (Rev.  1:19),  falls  into  three  general 
divisions,  and  these  again  into  sub-divisions. 

The  first,  or  "the  things  which  thou  hast  seen"  is 
chapter  1.  "The  things  which  are,"  the  churches  in  Asia, 
arranged  in  an  order  which  is  prophetic  of  the  whole 
history  of  the  Church  on  earth,  is  in  chapters  2  and  3. 

It  is,  however,  the  third  division  which  bulks  largest 
in  The  Revelation.  This  division  is  indicated  in  the 
command  to  "write"  by  the  words,  "the  things  which 
shall  be  after  these,"  that  is,  after  the  churches.  The 
church  period  ends  with  Thyatira  (Romanism),  Phila- 
delphia (the  true  believers  in  the  Protestant  churches), 
and  Laodicea  (the  mass  of  mere  profession  in  Prot- 
estantism), in  view.  In  Rome  there  is  a  "rest,"  or 
remnant  (Rev.  2  :  24)'^  of  true  believers.  These,  together 
with  the  Philadelphian  believers  throughout  the  Prot- 
estant churches,  are  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the 
air  (John  14:1-3;  1  Cor.  15:51,  52;  1  Thess.  4:14-17; 
Rev.  2:24-29;  4:  1),^  thus  leaving  on  the  earth  to  pass 

^  But  unto  you  I  say,  and  unto  ^  Let   not  your  heart  be  trou- 

the  rest  in  Thyatira,  as  many  as  bled  :  ye  believe  in  God,  believe 

have     not     this     doctrine,     and  also   in   me. 

which  have  not  known  the  depths  In  my  Father's  house  are  many 

of  Satan,  as  they  speak ;   I   will  mansions :    if   it   were   not   so,   I 

put  upon  you  none  other  burden.  would   have   told   you.      I   go   to 

— Rev.  2  :  24.  prepare  a  place   for  you. 


THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE 


149 


through  the  great  tribulation  the  mass  of  mere  Christian 
profession,  whether  Roman  or  Protestant.  Then  follows 
(deducting  certain  parenthetical  passages  which  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  narrative)  "the  things  which 
shall  be." 

And  these  are  the  very  things  which  Daniel  foretold 
concerning  the  end  of  the  ''times  of  the  Gentiles" — the 
end-time  of  this  age.  The  essential  difiference  is  that 
the  Patmos  vision  enters  more  into  detail.  The  central 
figure  is  still  the  ''prince  that  shall  come,"  the  "Little 
Horn,"  the  "abomination,"  the  "man  of  sin" ;  but  here 
he  is  the  "Beast"  (Rev.  13:  1-7).^ 


And  if  I  go  and  prepare  a 
place  for  you,  I  will  come  again, 
and  receive  you  unto  myself ; 
that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may 
be  also. — John  14  :  1-3. 

Behold,  I  shew  you  a  mys- 
tery ;  We  shall  not  all  sleep, 
but  we  shall  all  be  changed, 

In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump : 
for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and 
the  dead  shall  be  raised  in- 
corruptible, and  we  shall  be 
changed. — i   Cor.    15  -.51,  52. 

For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  even  so 
them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus 
will  God  bring  with  him. 

For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain  un- 
to the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall 
not  prevent  them  which  are 
asleep. 

For  the  Lord  himself  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump 
of  God :  and  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall   rise   first : 

Then  we  which  are  alive  and 
remain  shall  be  caught  up  to- 
gether with  them  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air : 
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the 
Lord. — /   Thess.  4:14-17. 


But  unto  you  I  say,  and  unto 
the  rest  in  Thyatira,  as  many 
as  have  not  this  doctrine,  and 
which  have  not  known  the 
depths  of  Satan,  as  they  speak ; 
I  will  put  upon  you  none  other 
burden. 

But  that  which  ye  have  al- 
ready hold   fast  till  I   come. 

And  he  that  overcometh,  and 
keepeth  my  works  unto  the  end, 
to  him  will  I  give  power  over 
the  nations : 

And  he  shall  rule  them  with 
a  rod  of  iron ;  as  the  vessels  of 
a  potter  shall  they  be  broken  to 
shivers :  even  as  I  received  of 
my   Father. 

And  I  will  give  him  the  morn- 
ing star. 

He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him 
hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto 
the  churches. — Rev.  2 :  24-2g. 

^  And  I  stood  upon  the  sand 
of  the  sea,  and  saw  a  beast  rise 
up  out  of  the  sea,  having  seven 
heads  and  ten  horns,  and  upon 
his  horns  ten  crowns,  and  upon 
his  heads  the  name  of  blas- 
phemy. 

And  the  beast  which  I  saw 
was  like  unto  a  leopard,  and  his 
feet  were  as  the  feet  of  a  bear, 
and  his  mouth  as  the  mouth  of 
a  lion  :  and  the  dragon  gave  him 
his  power,  and  Jiis  seat,  and 
great  authority. 


150 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


In  this  great  prophetic  picture  of  the  end  the  symbols 
which  have  already  appeared  in  Daniel,  and  which  have 
there  acquired  definite  meanings,  recur.  Again  we  have 
the  Gentile  world-power  in  ten  kingdoms ;  again  we  have 
these  federated  into  one  empire  which,  as  in  Daniel  7, 
is  itself  called  ''beast''  (comp.  Dan.  7:3,  5,  7;  Rev. 
13 :  1-3),^^  and  a  "beast''  emperor  rules  over  the  restored 
"beast"  empire  (Dan.  7:8;  Rev.  13 :  4-8)  }^    As  in  Dan- 


And  I  saw  one  of  his  heads 
as  it  were  wounded  to  death ; 
and  his  deadly  wound  was 
healed  :  and  all  the  world  won- 
dered   after   the   beast. 

And  they  worshipped  the 
dragon  which  gave  power  unto 
the  beast :  and  they  worshipped 
the  beast,  saying,  Who  is  like 
unto  the  beast  ?  who  is  able  to 
make  war  with  him? 

And  there  was  given  unto  him 
a  mouth  speaking  great  things 
and  blasphemies ;  and  power 
was  given  unto  him  to  con- 
tinue  forty  and  two  months. 

And  he  opened  his  mouth  in 
blasphemy  against  God,  to  blas- 
pheme his  name,  and  his  taber- 
nacle, and  them  that  dwell  in 
heaven. 

And  it  was  given  unto  him  to 
make  war  with  the  saints,  and 
to  overcome  them :  and  power 
was  given  him  over  all  kindreds, 
and  tongues,  and  nations. — Rev. 
13 :  1-7. 

^^And  four  great  beasts  came 
up  from  the  sea,  diverse  one 
from  another. 

And  behold  another  beast,  a 
second,  like  to  a  bear,  and  it 
raised  up  itself  on  one  side,  and 
it  had  three  ribs  in  the  mouth 
of  it  between  the  teeth  of  it : 
and  they  said  thus  unto  it, 
Arise,    devour    much   flesh. 

After  this  I  saw  in  the  night 
visions,  and  behold  a  fourth 
beast,  dreadful  and  terrible,  and 
strong  exceedingly ;  and  it  had 
great  iron  teeth :  it  devoured 
and  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped 
the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it : 
and  it  was  diverse  from  all  the 


beasts  that  were  before  it ;  and 
it    had    ten    horns. — Dan.    7 : 3, 

And  I  stood  upon  the  sand  of 
the  sea,  and  saw  a  beast  rise  up 
out  of  the  sea,  having  seven 
heads  and  ten  horns,  and  upon 
his  horns  ten  crowns,  and  upon 
his  heads  the  name  of  blas- 
phemy. 

And  the  beast  which  I  saw 
was  like  unto  a  leopard,  and  his 
feet  were  as  the  feet  of  a  bear, 
and  his  mouth  as  the  mouth  of 
a  lion  :  and  the  dragon  gave  him 
his  power,  and  his  seat,  and 
great    authority. 

And  I  saw  one  of  his  heads 
as  it  were  wounded  to  death ; 
and  his  deadly  wound  was 
healed :  and  all  the  world  won- 
dered    after    the    beast.  —  Rev. 

^^  I  considered  the  horns,  and, 
behold,  there  came  up  among 
them  another  little  horn,  before 
whom  there  were  three  of  the 
first  horns  plucked  up  by  the 
roots  :  and,  behold,  in  this  horn 
were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  man, 
and  a  mouth  speaking  great 
things. — Dan.  7 :  8. 

And  they  worshipped  the 
dragon  which  gave  power  unto 
the  beast :  and  they  worshipped 
the  beast,  saying,  Who  is  like 
unto  the  beast  ?  who  is  able  to 
make   war   with   him  ? 

And  there  was  given  unto 
him  a  mouth  speaking  great 
things  and  blasphemies ;  and 
power  was  given  unto  him  to 
continue  forty  and  two  months. 

And  he  opened  his  mouth  in 
blasphemy  against  God,  to  bias- 


THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE 


151 


iel  the  duration  of  his   full  power   is   ''forty  and  two 
months"  (Dan.  7:25;  Rev.  U:S)P 

The  Revelation  also  gives  the  full  detail  of  that  which 
makes  the  great  tribulation  to  be  a  time  of  unparalleled 
horror.  The  awful  tyranny  of  the  beast,  to  whom  has 
been  given  over  the  full  power  of  Satan,  and  who  is 
aided  by  the  antichrist,  the  *%east"  out  of  the  earth  (Rev. 
13:2-17),^^  is  but  one  element  in  that  horror.     Already 


pheme  his  name,  and  his  taber- 
nacle, and  them  that  dwell  in 
heaven. 

And  it  was  given  unto  him 
to  make  war  with  the  saints,  and 
to  overcome  them :  and  power 
was  given  him  over  all  kin- 
dreds, and  tongues,  and  nations. 
And  all  that  dwell  upon  the 
earth  shall  worship  him,  whose 
names  are  not  written  in  the 
book  of  life  of  the  Lamb  slain 
from  the  foundation  of  the 
world. — Rev.   13 :  4-8. 

"And  he  shall  speak  great 
words  against  the  most  High, 
and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of 
the  most  High,  and  think  to 
change. — Dan.    7 :  25. 

And  there  was  given  unto  him 
a  mouth  speaking  great  things 
and  blasphemies;  and  power 
was  given  unto  him  to  continue 
forty    and    two    months.  —  Rev. 

13  ■  5. 

^^  And  the  beast  which  I  saw 
was  like  unto  a  leopard,  and 
his  feet  were  as  the  feet  of  a 
bear,  and  his  mouth  as  the 
mouth  of  a  lion :  and  the  dragon 
gave  him  his  power,  and  his 
seat,  and  great  authority. 

And  I  saw  one  of  his  heads 
as  it  were  wounded  to  death ; 
and  his  deadly  wound  was 
healed  :  and  all  the  world  won- 
dered after  the  beast. 

And  they  worshipped  the 
dragon  which  gave  power  unto 
the  beast :  and  they  worshipped 
the  beast,  saying,  Who  is  like 
unto  the  beast?  who  is  able  to 
make  war  with  him  ? 

And  there  was  given  unto  him 
a  mouth  speaking  great  things 
and     blasphemies ;     and     power 


was  given  unto  him  to  continue 
forty  and  two   months. 

And  he  opened  his  mouth  in 
blasphemy  against  God,  to  blas- 
pheme his  name,  and  his  taber- 
nacle, and  them  that  dwell  in 
heaven. 

And  it  was  given  unto  him 
to  make  war  v/ith  the  saints,  and 
to  overcome  them :  and  power 
was  given  him  over  all  kin- 
dreds, and  tongues,  and  nations. 

And  all  that  dwell  upon  the 
earth  shall  worship  him,  whose 
names  are  not  written  in  the 
book  of  life  of  the  Lamb  slain 
from  the  foundation  of  the 
world. 

If  any  man  have  an  ear,  let 
him  hear. 

He  that  leadeth  into  captivity 
shall  go  into  captivity :  he  that 
killeth  with  the  sword  must  be 
killed  v/ith  the  sword.  Here  is 
the  patience  and  the  faith  of 
the  saints. 

And  I  beheld  another  beast 
coming  up  out  of  the  earth ;  and 
he  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb, 
and  he  spake  as  a  dragon. 

And  he  exerciseth  all  the 
power  of  the  first  beast  before 
him,  and  causeth  the  earth  and 
them  which  dwell  therein  to 
worship  the  first  beast,  whose 
deadly  wound  was  healed. 

And  he  doeth  great  wonders, 
so  that  he  maketh  fire  come 
down  from  heaven  on  the  earth 
in  the  sight  of  men, 

And  deceiveth  them  that  dwell 
on  the  earth  by  the  means  of 
those  miracles  which  he  had 
power  to  do  in  the  sight  of  the 
beast ;  saying  to  them  that  dwell 
on   the   earth,   that   they   should 


152 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


the  "trumpet"  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  and  now,  at 
the  beginning  of  the  last  half  of  Daniel's  seventieth 
"week"  of  this  age — the  three  and  one-half  years  of  the 
great  tribulation — the  seven  'Vials  of  the  wrath  of  God" 
(Rev.  16:  1-21)^^  are  poured  out  ''upon  the  earth/'    And 


make  an  image  to  the  beast, 
which  had  the  wound  by  a 
sword,  and  did  live. 

And  he  had  power  to  give 
life  unto  the  image  of  the  beast, 
that  the  image  of  the  beast 
should  both  speak,  and  cause 
that  as  many  as  would  not  wor- 
ship the  image  of  the  beast 
should  be  killed. 

And  he  causeth  all,  both  small 
and  great,  rich  and  poor,  free 
and  bond,  to  receive  a  mark  in 
their  right  hand,  or  in  their  fore- 
heads : 

And  that  no  man  might  buy 
or  sell,  save  he  that  had  the 
mark,  or  the  name  of  the  beast, 
or  the  number  of  his  name. — 
Rev.    13 :  2-17. 

"  And  I  heard  a  great  voice 
out  of  the  temple  saying  to  the 
seven  angels,  Go  your  ways,  and 
pour  out  the  vials  of  the  wrath 
of  God  upon  the  earth. 

And  the  first  went,  and  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  earth  ;  and 
there  fell  a  noisome  and  griev- 
ous sore  upon  the  men  which 
had  the  mark  of  the  beast,  and 
upon  them  which  worshipped  his 
image. 

And  the  second  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  sea  ;  and  it 
became  as  the  blood  of  a  dead 
man :  and  every  living  soul  died 
in  the  sea. 

And  the  third  angel  poured  out 
his  vial  upon  the  rivers  and 
fountains  of  waters ;  and  they 
became   blood. 

And  I  heard  the  angel  of  the 
waters  say.  Thou  art  righteous, 
O  Lord,  which  art,  and  wast,  and 
shalt  be,  because  thou  hast 
judged   thus. 

For  they  have  shed  the  blood 
of  saints  and  prophets,  and  thou 
hast  given  them  blood  to  drink  ; 
for  they  are  worthy. 


And  I  heard  another  out  of 
the  altar  say,  Even  so.  Lord  God 
Almighty,  true  and  righteous  are 
thy  judgments. 

And  the  fourth  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  sun  ;  and 
power  was  given  unto  him  to 
scorch  men  with  fire. 

And  men  were  scorched  with 
great  heat,  and  blasphemed  the 
name  of  God,  which  hath  power 
over  these  plagues :  and  they  re- 
pented not  to  give  him  glory. 

And  the  fifth  angel  poured  out 
his  vial  upon  the  seat  of  the 
beast ;  and  his  kingdom  was  full 
of  darkness ;  and  they  gnawed 
their  tongues  for  pain. 

And  blasphemed  the  God  of 
heaven  because  of  their  pains 
and  their  sores,  and  repented 
not  of  their  deeds. 

And  the  sixth  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  upon  the  great  nver 
Euphrates  ;  and  the  water  there- 
of was  dried  up,  that  the  way 
of  the  kings  of  the  east  might 
be   prepared. 

And  I  saw  three  unclean  spir- 
its like  frogs  come  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  out 
of  the  mouth  of  the  beast,  and 
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false 
prophet. 

For  they  are  the  spirits  of 
devils,  working  miracles,  which 
go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the 
earth  and  of  the  whole  world,  to 
gather  them  to  the  battle  of  that 
great  day  of  God  Almighty. 

Behold,  I  come  as  a  thief. 
Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and 
keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he 
walk  naked,  and  they  see  his 
shame. 

And  he  gathered  them  togeth- 
er into  a  place  called  in  the 
Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon. 

And  the  seventh  angel  poured 
out    his   vial    into   the   air;    and 


THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE         153 

in  this  fact  alone,  that  the  great  tribulation  is  a  mani- 
festation of  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  earth,  is  proof 
conclusive  that  the  church  is  no  longer  on  earth,  for  the 
church  is  not  ''appointed  unto  wrath/' 

It  must  be  remembered  that  these  judgments  upon  the 
earth  and  the  nations  have  nothing  to  do  with  individuals, 
as  such.  World-powers  are  creatures  of  time,  as  national 
organizations  are  mere  human  arrangements.  If,  there- 
fore, they  are  amenable  to  the  justice  of  God  at  all,  their 
judgment  must  come,  not  in  eternity,  but  in  time.  They 
fall  during  the  great  tribulation. 

To  all  this  is  added  *'the  spirits  of  demons,  working 
miracles''  (Rev.  16:  14;  comp.  2  Thess.  2:9,  10) .^^ 

A  complete  view  of  the  end-time  of  the  age  must 
include,  besides  the  reconstruction  of  the  Roman  empire 
in  ten  kingdoms  federated  under  the  Beast-emperor,  the 
religious  organization  called  in  the  Apocalypse,  ''Baby- 
lon." It  will  be  Laodicea  and  Thyatira — Protestantism 
and  Romanism  after  the  true  believers  out  of  both  have 
been  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air  ( 1  Thess.  4 :  14- 
17).^  Baby lon= "confusion"  is  the  mingling  of  both 
in  one  great  world-church.  Many  voices  of  influence  are 
pleading  now  for  such  a  union — the  sacrifice  of  truth 
to  seeming  expediency.     It  is  the  Beast  and  his  asso- 


there  came  a  great  voice  out  of  ent :    and   men   blasphemxcd    God 

the  temple  of  heaven,   from  the  because    of    the    plague    of    the 

throne,  saying,  It  is  done.  hail ;  for  the  plague  thereof  was 

And    there    were    voices,    and  exceeding  great. — Rev.   i6 :  1-21. 

thunders,    and    lightnings;     and  15  poj.   ^hey   are   the   spirits   of 

there    was    a    great    earthquake,  devils,   working   miracles,   which 

such  as  was  not  since  men  were  f^^th   unto   the   kings  of  the 

upon    the    earth,    so    mighty    an  ^^^^-^   ^^^   ^^   ^^^   ^^^^^   ^^^.j^ 

earthquake,  and  so  great.  .^   ^^^.u^^  irU^^   ^^  ^v.^  k^^+i^  ^-p 

And  the  great  city  was  divid-  \?  ^^^^^\  ^j^^^  ^ V  /  ai     •  1  . 

ed  into  three  parts,  and  the  cit-  that  great  day  of  God  Almignty. 

ies  of  the  nations  fell :  and  great  — ^^^-    ^^ '  ^^' 

Babylon    came    in    remembrance  Even    hi,m,    whose    coming    is 

before  God,  to  give  unto  her  the  after  the  working  of  Satan  with 

cup   of   the   wine    of   the   fierce-  all    power   and    signs    and   lying 

ness  of  his  wrath.  wonders, 

And    every    island    fled    away,  And    with    all    deceivableness 

and     the     mountains     were     not  of  unrighteousness  in  them  that 

found.  perish  ;  because  they  received  not 

And    there    fell    upon    men    a  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they 

great  hail  out  of  heaven,   every  might    be    saved. — 2    Thess.    2: 

stone  about  the  weight  of  a  tal-  9, 10. 


154 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


ciated  kings  who  turn  upon  and  rend  ''Babylon."  The 
Beast  will  brook  no  rival  worship,  even  though  it  be  but 
a  form   (Rev.  17:1-18;  18:  1-24) .^^ 

^^And  there  came  one  of  the 
seven  angels  which  had  the  sev- 
en vials,  and  talked  with  me, 
saying  unto  me,  Come  hither ;  I 
will  shew  unto  thee  the  judg- 
ment of  the  great  whore  that 
sitteth  upon  many  waters : 

With  whom  the  kings  of  the 
earth  have  committed  fornica- 
tion, and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth  have  been  made  drunk 
with  the  wine  of  her  fornication. 

So  he  carried  me  away  in  the 
spirit  into  the  wilderness  :  and  I 
saw  a  woman  sit  upon  a  scarlet 
coloured  beast,  full  of  names  of 
blasphemy,  having  seven  heads 
and  ten  horns. 

And  the  woman  was  arrayed 
in  purple  and  scarlet  colour,  and 
decked  with  gold  and  precious 
stones  and  pearls,  having  a  gold- 
en cup  in  her  hand  full  of  abom- 
inations and  filthiness  of  her 
fornication  : 

And  upon  her  forehead  zuas  a 
name  written,  MYSTERY,  BAB- 
YLON THE  GREAT,  THE 
MOTHER  OF  HARLOTS  AND 
ABOMINATIONS  OF  THE 
EARTH. 

And  I  saw  the  woman  drunk- 
en with  the  blood  of  the  saints, 
and  with  the  blood  of  the  mar- 
tyrs of  Jesus :  and  when  I  saw 
her,  T  wondered  with  great  ad- 
miration. 

And  the  angel  said  unto  me, 
Wherefore  didst  thou  marvel? 
I  will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of 
the  woman,  and  of  the  beast  that 
carrieth  her,  which  hath  the 
seven  heads  and  ten  horns. 

The  beast  that  thou  sawest 
was,  and  is  not ;  and  shall  as- 
cend out  of  the  bottomless  pit, 
and  go  into  perdition  :  and  they 
that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall 
wonder,  whose  names  were  not 
written  in  the  book  of  life  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world, 
when  they  behold  the  beast  that 
v/as,  and  is  not,  and  yet  is. 


And  here  is  the  mind  which 
hath  wisdom.  The  seven  heads 
are  seven  mountains,  on  which 
the  woman   sitteth. 

And  there  are  seven  kings : 
five  are  fallen,  and  one  is,  and 
the  other  is  not  yet  come  ;  and 
when  he  cometh,  he  must  con- 
tinue a  short  space. 

And  the  beast  that  was,  and 
is  not,  even  he  is  the  eighth,  and 
is  of  the  seven,  and  goeth  into 
perdition. 

And  the  ten  horns  which  thou 
sawest  are  ten  kings,  which  have 
received  no  kingdom  as  yet ;  but 
receive  power  as  kings  one  hour 
with  the  beast. 

These  have  one  mind,  and 
shall  give  their  power  and 
strength  unto  the  beast. 

These  shall  make  war  with  the 
Lamb,  and  the  Lamb  shall  over- 
come them :  for  he  is  Lord  of 
lords,  and  King  of  kings :  and 
they  that  are  with  him  are  called, 
and  chosen,   and   faithful. 

And  he  saith  unto  me.  The 
waters  which  thou  sawest,  where 
the  whore  sitteth,  are  peoples, 
and  multitudes,  and  nations,  and 
tongues. 

And  the  ten  horns  which  thou 
sawest  upon  the  beast,  these  shall 
hate  the  whore,  and  shall  make 
her  desolate  and  naked,  and  shall 
eat  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with 
fire. 

For  God  hath  put  in  their 
hearts  to  fulfil  his  will,  and  to 
agree,  and  to  give  their  king- 
dom unto  the  beast,  until  the 
words  of  God  shall  be   fulfilled. 

And  the  woman  which  thou 
sawest  is  that  great  city,  which 
reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the 
earth. — Rev.    17:1-18. 

And  after  these  things  I  saw 
another  angel  come  down  from 
heaven,  having  great  power ;  and 
the  earth  was  lightened  with  his 
glory. 


THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE 


155 


And  he  cried  mightily  with  a 
strong  voice,  saying,  Babylon  the 
great  is  fallen,  and  is  become  the 
habitation  of  devils,  and  the 
hold  of  every  foul  spirit,  and  a 
cage  of  every  unclean  and  hate- 
ful  bird. 

For  all  nations  have  drunk  of 
the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her 
fornication,  and  the  kings  of  the 
earth  have  committed  fornica- 
tion with  her,  and  the  merchants 
of  the  earth  are  waxed  rich 
through  the  abundance  of  her 
delicacies. 

And  I  heard  another  voice 
from  heaven,  saying.  Come  out 
of  her,  my  people,  that  ye  be 
not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and 
that  ye  receive  not  of  her 
plagues. 

For  her  sins  have  reached  unto 
heaven,  and  God  hath  remem- 
bered  her   iniquities. 

Reward  her  even  as  she  re- 
warded you,  and  double  unto  her 
double  according  to  her  works : 
in  the  cup  which  she  hath  filled 
fill  to  her  double. 

How  much  she  hath  glorified 
herself,  and  lived  deliciously,  so 
much  torment  and  sorrow  give 
her :  for  she  saith  in  her  heart, 
I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow, 
and  shall  see  no   sorrow. 

Therefore  shall  her  plagues 
come  in  one  day,  death,  and 
mourning,  and  famine  ;  and  she 
shall  be  utterly  burned  with  fire  : 
for  strong  is  the  Lord  God  who 
judgeth  her. 

And  the  kings  of  the  earth, 
who  have  committed  fornication 
and  lived  deliciously  with  her, 
shall  bewail  her,  and  lament  for 
her,  when  they  shall  see  the 
smoke  of  her  burning. 

Standing  afar  off  for  the  fear 
of  her  torment,  saying,  Alas, 
alas  that  great  city  Babylon, 
that  mighty  city  !  for  in  one  hour 
is  thy  judgment  come. 

And  the  merchants  of  the 
earth  shall  weep  and  mourn  over 
her;  for  no  man  buyeth  their 
merchandise   any  more : 

The  merchandise  of  gold,  and 
silver,  and  precious  stones,  and 


of  pearls,  and  fine  linen,  and 
purple,  and  silk,  and  scarlet,  and 
all  thyine  wood,  and  all  manner 
vessels  of  ivory,  and  all  manner 
vessels  of  most  precious  wood, 
and  of  brass,  and  iron,  and 
marble, 

And  cinnamon,  and  odours, 
and  ointments,  and  frankincense, 
and  wine,  and  oil,  and  fine  flour, 
and  wheat,  and  beasts,  and  sheep, 
and  horses,  and  chariots,  and 
slaves,   and  souls  of  men. 

And  the  fruits  that  thy  soul 
lusted  after  are  departed  from 
thee,  and  all  things  which  were 
dainty  and  goodly  are  departed 
from  thee,  and  thou  shalt  find 
them  no  more  at  all. 

The  merchants  of  these  things, 
which  were  made  rich  by  her, 
shall  stand  afar  off  for  the  fear 
of  her  torment,  weeping  and 
wailing. 

And  saying,  Alas,  alas  that 
great  city,  that  was  clothed  in 
fine  linen,  and  purple,  and  scar- 
let, and  decked  with  gold,  and 
precious  stones,  and  pearls ! 

For  in  one  hour  so  great 
riches  is  come  to  nought.  And 
every  shipmaster,  and  all  the 
company  in  ships,  and  sailors, 
and  as  many  as  trade  by  sea, 
stood  afar  off, 

And  cried  when  they  saw  the 
smoke  of  her  burning,  saying. 
What  city  is  like  unto  this  great 
city ! 

And  they  cast  dust  on  their 
heads,  and  cried,  weeping  and 
wailing,  saying,  Alas,  alas  that 
great  city  wherein  were  made 
rich  all  that  had  ships  in  the 
sea  by  reason  of  her  costliness ! 
for  in  one  hour  is  she  made 
desolate. 

Rejoice  over  her,  thou  heaven, 
and  ye  holy  apostles  and  proph- 
ets ;  for  God  hath  avenged  you 
on    her. 

And  a  mighty  angel  took  up 
a  stone  like  a  great  millstone, 
and  cast  it  into  the  sea,  saying. 
Thus  with  violence  shall  that 
great  city  Babylon  be  thrown 
down,  and  shall  be  found  no 
more  at  all. 


156 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


But  quite  apart  from  ''Babylon"  there  will  be  at  the 
end-time  a  true  testimony  to  God  and  to  his  Christ  in 
the  earth.  These  true  witnesses  come  into  view  in  the 
seventh  chapter  of  the  Revelation.  A  Jewish  remnant 
is  first  revealed  as  sealed,  and  after  that  ''a  great  multi- 
tude, which  no  man  could  number,  of  all  nations,  and 
kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,"  are  seen.  In  verse 
14  it  is  definitely  stated  that,  "these  are  they  which 
came  out  of  the  great  tribulation." 

The  very  last  of  the  last  days  of  this  age  are  involved 
in  some  measure  of  obscurity  in  the  prophecy.  Possibly 
this  is  the  appointed  method  of  impressing  our  minds 
with  the  fact  that  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  and  this 
present  age  end  in  a  whirlwind  of  confusion.  Putting 
together  the  passages  in  the  Old  Testament  prophets 
which  evidently  relate  to  the  Great  Tribulation  and 
Armageddon  (Jer.  30:4-7;  Dan.  12:1;  Matt.  24:21; 
Joel  2:11;  Isa.  10:28;  29:3;  Micah  1:6;  Joel  3:9; 
Rev.  18:  11-21),  ^"^^  ^^  and  the  passages  in  the  New  Testa- 


And  the  voice  of  harpers,  and 
musicians,  and  of  pipers,  and 
trumpeters,  shall  be  heard  no 
more  at  all  in  thee ;  and  no 
craftsman,  of  whatsoever  craft 
he  be,  shall  be  found  any  more 
in  thee  ;  and  the  sound  of  a  mill- 
stone shall  be  heard  no  more  at 
all  in  thee  ; 

And  the  light  of  a  candle  shall 
shine  no  more  at  all  in  thee  ;  and 
the  voice  of  the  bridegroom  and 
of  the  bride  shall  be  heard  no 
more  at  all  in  thee :  for  thy 
merchants  were  the  great  men 
of  the  earth ;  for  by  thy  sor- 
ceries were  all  nations  deceived. 

And  in  her  was  found  the 
blood  of  prophets,  and  of  saints, 
and  of  all  that  were  slain  upon 
the  earth. — Rev.   i8  :  1-24. 

"And  these  are  the  words 
that  the  Lord  spake  concerning 
Israel    and   concerning  Judah. 

For  thus  saith  the  Lord  ;  We 
have  heard  a  voice  of  trembling, 
of  fear,  and  not  of  peace. 

Ask  ye  now,  and  see  whether 
a  man  doth  travail  with  child? 
wherefore   do   I   see   every  man 


with  his  hands  on  his  loins,  as 
a  woman  in  travail,  and  all  faces 
are  turned  into  paleness? 

Alas !  for  that  day  is  great, 
so  that  none  is  like  it :  it  is 
even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble ; 
but  he  shall  be  saved  out  of  it. 
— Jer.  so  :  4-7. 

And  at  that  time  shall  Michael 
stand  up,  the  great  prince  which 
standeth  for  the  children  of  thy 
people :  and  there  shall  be  a 
time  of  trouble,  such  as  never 
was  since  there  was  a  nation 
eve7i  to  that  same  time  :  and  at 
that  time  thy  people  shall  be 
delivered,  every  one  that  shall 
be  found  written  in  the  book. — 
Dan.  12 :  i. 

For  then  shall  be  great  tribu- 
lation, such  as  was  not  since 
the  beginning  of  the  world  to 
this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be. 
— Matt.  24:  21. 

And  the  Lord  shall  utter  his 
voice  before  his  army :  for  his 
camp  is  very  great :  for  he  is 
strong  that  executeth  his  word  : 
for  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  great 


THE  LAST  SEVEN  YEARS  OF  THE  AGE         157 

ment  covering  the  same  ground,  so  much  may  be  dis- 
cerned : 

'^Babylon/'  the  apostate  world-church,  has  been  de- 
stroyed by  the  civil  power  headed  up  in  the  Emperor- 
Beast.  Life  is  allowed  no  conditions  of  prosperity  apart 
from  the  worship  of  the  Beast  and  his  image  (Rev.  13: 
16,  17).^^  There  is  another  ecclesiastical  despotism,  for 
all  power  is  bestowed  upon  the  Antichrist,  the  "false 
prophet/'  that  all  may  be  compelled  to  worship  the  Beast 
(Rev.  13:  12).^^  The  saints  of  Revelation  7,  especially 
the  Remnant  sealed  out  of  all  the  tribes,  who  have  turned 
to  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  are  terribly  persecuted. 

There  is  an  invasion  of  the  holy  land  from  the  North. 
The  words  ''Gog  and  Magog/'  with  geographical  desig- 
nations which  seem  to  warrant  that  conclusion  (Ezek. 
38:2),^^  have  been  well-nigh  universally  held  to  indicate 
that  Russia  heads  this  invasion.  It  is  far  from  impos- 
sible that  Japan  and  perhaps  China  swell  the  invading 
host.  The  Beast  and  his  power  seem  to  be,  at  first,  the 
objects  of  the  invasion.     The  hosts  approach  Jerusalem 

and  very  terrible ;  and  who  can  ^  And    he    causeth    all,     both 

abide  it? — Joel  2:11.  small   and  great,   rich  and  poor, 

He    is    come    to    Aiath,    he    is  free  and  bond,  to  receive  a  mark 

passed  to  Migron  ;  at  Michmash  in  their  right  hand,   or  in  their 

he  hath  laid  up  his  carriages. —  foreheads  : 

^^^'   ^^L^^'  .  ,  And   that   no   man   might   buy 

And  I  will  camp  against  thee        ^^    ^^jj^    ^^^.^    ^^    ^^^^    ^^^    ^^^ 

round  about,   and  will  lay  siege  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^^^ 

against  thee  with  a  mount,  and  ^^   ^^^    number    of   his    name.— 

I  will  raise  forts  against  thee. —  ^^„,    i^-  16  17 

Isa.  29:  3. 

Therefore  I  will  make   Sama-  ''And    he    exerciseth    all    the 

ria  as  an  heap  of  the  field,  and  power   of  the   first   beast   before 

as  plantings  of  a  vineyard  :  and  bim,  and  causeth  the   earth  and 

I    will    pour    down    the    stones  them     which     dwell    therein    to 

thereof   into    the    valley,    and    I  worship    the    first    beast,    whose 

will     discover     the     foundations  deadly     wound     was     healed. — 

thereof.— M/caTr   1:6,  ^^^-  13:12. 

Proclaim    ye    this    among   the  ^  Son    of    man,    set    thy    face 

Gentiles  ;   Prepare  war,  wake  up  against  Gog,  the  land  of  Magog, 

the  mighty  men,  let  all  the  men  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and 

of  war  draw  near;  let  them  come  Tubal,  and  prophesy  against  him. 

up. — Joel  J  .'p.  — Enek.  38:  2. 


158  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

(Isa.  10:  28-34).^^  It  is  then  that  the  obscurity  deepens, 
for  in  the  final  scene  the  Beast  and  False  Prophet  with 
their  armies  fight  with  the  invaders  against  the  heavenly 
armies  led  by  Messiah  in  glory.  This  is  Armageddon. 
It  is  the  end  not  only  of  the  Beast  and  his  system,  but 
of  all  Gentile  world  power.  It  is  possible  that  signs  in 
the  heavens  impress  both  the  invaders  and  the  Beast, 
driving  them  into  a  sudden  confederacy  against  God,  As 
to  the  fact  that  the  end  of  Gentile  supremacy  has  come 
there  is  no  obscurity.  The  earth-scene  is  now  cleared  for 
the  Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ. 

^^  He   is  come  to  Aiath,  he  is  As    yet    shall    he    remain    at 

passed  to  Migron ;  at  Michmash  Nob  that  day :  he  shall  shake  his 

he  hath  laid  up  his  carriages :  hand   against   the   mount   of  the 

They   are   gone  over  the   pas-  daughter    of    Zion,    the    hill    of 

sage:   they  have  taken  up  their  -^^^^^i^  i?*'.,      t      j    .i.     t      j     ir 

lodging     at     Geba ;     Ramah     is  ,    Behold,  the  Lord,  the  Lord  of 

afraid  ;  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  fled.  J^^sts,   shall   lop   the  bough   with 

_  _            ,           .        ^    ,        ,  terror:    and    the    high    ones    of 

Lift  up  thy  voice,  O  daughter  stature  shall  be  hewn  down,  and 

of  Galhm  :   cause  it  to  be  heard  the  haughty  shall  be  humbled, 

unto  Laish,  O  poor  Anathoth.  And    he    shall    cut    down    the 

Madmenah  is  removed  ;  the  in-  thickets  of  the  forest  with  iron, 

habitants  of  Gebim  gather  them-  and     Lebanon    shall    fall    by    a 

selves  to  flee.  mighty    one. — Isa.    lo  :  28-34. 


XL    EARTH'S  GOLDEN  AGE 

THERE  is  a  deathless  thing  in  the  heart  of  human- 
ity. Sometimes  there  is  with  it  the  dull  pain  of 
disappointed  expectation.  A  panacea  for  earth's 
ills  has  been  tried  and  failed.  Sometimes  it  finds 
speech :  ''How  long,  O  Lord,  how  long !"  Sometimes  it  is 
a  cry  out  of  the  darkness ;  sometimes  it  glows  with  faith. 

It  is  the  belief  that  there  must  yet  be  for  humanity  on 
this  earth  a  life,  a  corporate,  ordered  life,  a  life  not  for 
a  few  fortunate  and  powerful  ones,  but  a  life  for  all 
which  shall  be  rich  in  truth,  justice,  power,  and  love. 
No  dateless  centuries  of  lies,  injustice,  weakness,  and 
hate  have  been  able  to  extinguish  that  thing  in  the  heart 
of  humanity. 

And  now  and  again  men  thoughtful  and  wise  have 
striven  to  give  form  to  it^ — to  say  what  it  is  for  which 
the  heart  of  humanity  aches  and  longs ;  and  Plato  writes 
his  ''Republic,"  and  Campanella  his  *'City  of  the  Sun," 
and  Sir  Thomas  More  his  "Utopia,"  and  Bacon  his 
"New  Atlantis,"  and  Harrington  his  "Oceana."  And 
when  they  have  written,  time  counts  out  the  days  and 
years  and  they  are  still  as  before  years  of  war,  of  the 
ruthless  reign  of  the  strong  over  the  weak,  of  the  delu- 
sions of  a  shallow  optimism  which  shuts  its  eyes  to 
realities.  Such  "optimists"  patter  of  peace  when  there 
is  no  peace,  and  will  not  see  that  the  evils  from  which 
the  philosophers  would  save  us  are  all  as  old  as  the  race. 

There  is  absolutely  no  mystery  about  these  evils.  The 
oldest  brick  dug  from  a  Mesopotamian  mound  bears 
the  same  record  of  ambition,  pride,  greed,  which  are 
making  the  history  of  to-day.  And  we  turn  from  the 
beautiful  dreams  of  Plato  and  the  others  knowing  only 
too  well  how  impossible  they  are  of  accomplishment, 
how  certainly  even  if  once  established  they  w^ould  be 
doomed  by  the  rise  of  the  superman,  or  the  craft  of  the 
powerful  few. 

159 


160  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

And  not  only  are  the  facts  unchanged,  but  we  are 
absokitely  at  the  end  of  our  resources.  Every  method 
whereby  the  race  has  sought  to  realize  the  deathless 
vision  has  been  tried  to  the  dregs,  and  has  failed.  Forms 
of  government  from  despotism  to  democracy;  educa- 
tion— it  is  the  most  educated  of  the  nations  which  to-day 
are  engaged  in  the  most  brutal  of  wars;  legislation; 
even  ''religion/'  have  left  the  world-factors  unchanged. 

The  futility  of  the  ideal  commonwealths  of  Plato  and 
the  others  is  precisely  the  futility  of  all  superficial  op- 
timism— the  notion  that  for  the  common  good  men  are 
going  to  give  up  ambition,  greed,  and  pride.  We  read 
their  Utopias  with  a  little  sadness. 

The  race,  after  all,  is  one ;  and  it  is  a  kind  of  corporate 
logic  which  keeps  the  hope  of  a  golden  age  alive  in  the 
universal  human  mind.  It  is  the  conviction,  vague  and 
undefined  but  real,  that  the  divine  wisdom  and  power 
in  the  human  experiment  requires  a  majestic  vindica- 
tion— a  vindication  that  can  only  come  through  a  reign 
of  righteousness  and  love  in  the  human  social  order. 

Why  should  it  be  thought  incredible  that  God,  who 
recreated  the  earth  and  set  man  in  it  with  full  authority 
over  the  works  of  His  hands,  should  return,  at  the  end 
of  the  immense  drama  of  human  history,  to  His  original 
thought  and  purpose?  It  is  forgotten  too  easily  that 
there  is  a  ''second  man,''  another  and  a  "last  Adam." 
Might  it  not  be  well  to  ask.  Why  a  "second"  man?  Why 
another  ''Adam''?  and  to  demand  an  answer  in  larger 
terms  than  theology  has  ever  found — an  answer  of  cosmic 
breadth  and  o-randeur. 

And  this,  precisely,  is  the  answer  of  Scripture.  Not 
in  Plato,  nor  in  the  Yedas,  as  Max  Muller  thought,  still 
less  in  Hesiod,  are  we  to  look  for  the  true  theogony  of 
the  race — the  solution  of  the  pathetic  effort,  ever  fore- 
doomed to  tragic  failure,  of  the  race  to  achieve  its  own 
destiny  in  that  which  Paul  magnificently  calls  "the  lib- 
erty of  the  glory  of  the  sons  of  God"  (Rom.  8:  21).^ 

^  Because    the    creature    itself        glorious   liberty   of   the   children 
also  shall  be  delivered  from  the        of  God. — Rom,  8:  21, 
bondage   of   corruption   into    the 


EARTH'S  GOLDEN  AGE  161 

For  that  which  is  an  intellectual  ideal,  an  inner  urge 
toward  the  perfected  social  order  in  the  mind  of  the 
race,  and  has  sought  expression  in  the  Utopias,  stands 
boldly  forth  in  Scripture  as  a  revealed  purpose  of  God. 
The  golden  age  is  made  sure  by  the  covenants  and  prom- 
ises of  the  Almighty. 

Doubtless  the  whole  subject  has  been  made  an  offense 
to  many  sincere  and  well-meaning  students  of  the  Bible 
by  the  too  exclusively  Jewish  conception  of  the  ''age  to 
come''  in  controversies  over  it. 

That  the  coming  age  is  to  fulfil  the  Davidic  Covenant 
of  the  earth-rule  of  Messiah,  as  explained  by  the  Proph- 
ets and  confirmed  by  the  oath  of  Jehovah  and  the  mes- 
sage through  Gabriel,  is  most  true.  But  the  New  Testa- 
ment lifts  the  work  and  purpose  of  the  age  to  come 
into  a  breadth  and  majesty  far  beyond  the  promises  to 
Israel,  while  including — nay,  resting  upon,  those  prom- 
ises. For  the  thought  and  word  of  God  have  ever  an 
inner  and  vaster  content  than  appears  upon  the  surface. 
There  are  perpetual  surprises  in  the  interpretation  of 
Scripture  by  Scripture  as  the  student  follow^s  the  pro- 
gressive unfolding  of  the  Divine  will. 

The  Davidic  Covenant  is  indeed  to  be  fulfilled  in  the 
age  to  come,  but  a  vastly  grander  thing  is  fulfilled — the 
destiny  of  the  race. 

The  testimony  of  Scripture  to  this  great  consumma- 
tion may  be  summarized  as  follows : 

It  is  well  to  remember  that  all  the  answers  to  ques- 
tions concerning  an  age  to  come  must  be  drawn  from 
the  Scriptures.  If  there  is  to  be  yet  another  age,  or 
period  of  time  marked  oflf  for  a  special  dealing  of  God 
with  the  human  race,  our  only  possible  source  of  knowl- 
edge about  it  is  the  Bible. 

The  traditional  teaching,  in  which  Protestant  theology 
follows  that  of  Rome,  affirms  a  complete  conversion  of 
the  world  in  this  present  age  through  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel  by  the  church,  followed  by  the  return  of 
Christ,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  judgment  of 
the  ''great  white  throne,''  and  the  eternal  state. 

But  this  present  age  is  described  by  our  Lord  in  terms 
which  absolutely  exclude  the  possibility  of  a  universal 


162 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


conversion.  Wheat  and  tares  grow  together  till  the 
harvest,  and  the  tares  are  not  merely  unsaved  men  in 
the  world,  but  unsaved  men  within  the  very  sphere  of 
profession — ''among  the  wheat/'  So  like  to  true  behevers 
are  they  that  the  ''servants''  cannot  be  trusted  to  ''root 
them  up."  Good  fish  and  bad  are  together  in  the  very 
gospel  net.  And  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  the  "harvest 
is  the  end  of  the  age"  (Matt.  13:28-30,  37-43,  49,  50) .^ 
To  the  same  purport  is  the  picture  of  the  present  age 
and  of  its  end  in  the  parables  of  the  end-time,  which  is 
likened  to  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  to  the  Flood. 

But  especially  in  the  Olivet  discourse    (Matt.  24:1- 
30)^  our  Lord  addresses  Himself  to  the  very  task  of 


*  He  said  unto  them,  An  ene- 
my hath  done  this.  The  serv- 
ants said  unto  him,  Wilt  thou 
then  that  we  go  and  gather 
them   up? 

But  he  said,  Nay ;  lest  while 
ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root 
up  also  the  wheat  with  them. 

Let  both  grow  together  until 
the  harvest :  and  in  the  time  of 
harvest  I  will  say  to  the  reapers, 
Gather  ye  together  first  the  tares, 
and  bind  them  in  bundles  to 
burn  them :  but  gather  the  wheat 
into   my  barn. — Matt.    13  :  28-30. 

He  answered  and  said  unto 
them,  He  that  soweth  the  good 
seed  is  the  Son   of  man  ; 

The  field  is  the  world ;  the 
good  seed  are  the  children  of  the 
kingdom  ;  but  the  tares  are  the 
children  of  the  wicked  one; 

The  enemy  that  sowed  them 
is  the  devil ;  the  harvest  is  the 
end  of  the  world ;  and  the  reap- 
ers are  the  angels. 

As  therefore  the  tares  are 
gathered  and  burned  in  the  fire  ; 
so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  this 
world. 

The  Son  of  man  shall  send 
forth  his  angels,  and  they  shall 
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all 
things  that  offend,  and  them 
which  do  iniquity  ; 

And  shall  cast  them  into  a 
furnace  of  fire :  there  shall  be 
wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 


Then  shall  the  righteous  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom 
of  their  Father.  Who  hath  ears 
to  hear,  let  him  hear. — Matt.  13  : 
37-43- 

So  shall  it  be  at  the  end  of 
the  world  :  the  angels  shall  come 
forth,  and  sever  the  wicked  from 
among  the  just, 

And  shall  cast  them  into  the 
furnace  of  fire :  there  shall  be 
wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth. — 
Matt.    13  :  49,  50. 

*  And  Jesus  went  out,  and  de- 
parted from  the  temple :  and  his 
disciples  came  to  him  for  to 
shew  him  the  buildings  of  the 
temple. 

And  Jesus  said  unto  them, 
See  ye  not  all  these  things?  ver- 
ily I  say  unto  you,  There  shall 
not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon 
another,  that  shall  not  be  thrown 
down. 

And  as  he  sat  upon  the  mount 
of  Olives,  the  disciples  came 
unto  him  privately,  saying.  Tell 
us,  when  shall  these  things  be? 
and  what  shall  be  the  sign  of 
thy  coming,  and  of  the  end  of 
the  world  ? 

And  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  them,  Take  heed  that  no 
man  deceive  you. 

For  many  shall  come  in  my 
name,  saying,  I  am  Christ ;  and 
shall  deceive  many. 


EARTH'S  GOLDEN  AGE 


163 


describing  the  age,  its  end,  and  the  events  following 
the  end.  Wars,  pestilences,  famines,  false  Christs,  and 
persecutions  go  through  the  age  and  rise  to  their  most 
awful  potency  in  the  end,  which  is  the  "great  tribu- 
lation." 


And  ye  shall  hear  of  wars 
and  rumours  of  wars :  see  that 
ye  be  not  troubled :  for  all  these 
things  must  come  to  pass,  but 
the  end  is  not  yet. 

For  nation  shall  rise  against 
nation,  and  kingdom  against 
kingdom :  and  there  shall  be 
famines,  and  pestilences,  and 
earthquakes,   in   divers  places. 

All  these  are  the  beginning  of 
sorrows. 

Then  shall  they  deliver  you  up 
to  be  afflicted,  and  shall  kill  you : 
and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  na- 
tions for  my  name's  sake. 

And  then  shall  many  be  of- 
fended, and  shall  betray  one  an- 
other, and  shall  hate  one  an- 
other. 

And  many  false  prophets  shall 
rise,  and  shall  deceive  many. 

And  because  iniquity  shall 
abound,  the  love  of  many  shall 
wax  cold. 

But  he  that  shall  endure  unto 
the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved. 

And  this  gospel  of  the  king- 
dom shall  be  preached  in  all  the 
world  for  a  witness  unto  all  na- 
tions ;  and  then  shall  the  end 
come. 

When  ye  therefore  shall  see 
the  abomination  of  desolation, 
spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  proph- 
et, stand  in  the  holy  place,  (who- 
so readeth,  let  him  understand  :) 

Then  let  them  which  be  in 
Judaea  flee   into   the  mountains : 

Let  him  which  is  on  the  house- 
top not  come  down  to  take  any- 
thing^ out  of  his  house : 

Neither  let  him  which  is  in 
the  field  return  back  to  take  his 
clothes. 

And  woe  unto  them  that  are 
with  child,  and  to  them  that  give 
suck  in  those  days  ! 


But  pray  ye  that  your  flight 
be  not  in  the  winter,  neither  on 
the  sabbath   day : 

For  then  shall  be  great  tribu- 
lation, such  as  was  not  since  the 
beginning  of  the  world  to  this 
time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be. 

And  except  those  days  should 
be  shortened,  there  should  no 
flesh  be  saved :  but  for  the 
elect's  sake  those  days  shall  be 
shortened. 

Then  if  any  man  shall  say 
unto  you,  Lo,  here  is  Christ,  or 
there ;  believe  it  not. 

For  there  shall  arise  false 
Christs,  and  false  prophets,  and 
shall  shew  great  signs  and  won- 
ders ;  insomuch  that,  if  it  were 
possible,  they  shall  deceive  the 
very  elect. 

Behold,  I  have  told  you  be- 
fore. 

Wherefore  if  they  shall  say 
unto  you.  Behold,  he  is  in  the 
desert ;  go  not  forth  :  behold,  he 
is  in  the  secret  chambers ;  be- 
lieve it  not. 

For  as  the  lightning  cometh 
out  of  the  east,  and  shineth  even 
unto  the  west ;  so  shall  also  the 
coming  of  the   Son   of  man   be. 

For  wheresoever  the  carcase 
is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gath- 
ered together. 

Immediately  after  the  tribu- 
lation of  those  days  shall  the 
sun  be  darkened,  and  the  moon 
shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the 
stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and 
the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall 
be  shaken : 

And  then  shall  appear  the  sign 
of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven : 
and  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of 
the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall 
see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power 
and  great  glory. — Matt.  24 :  1-30. 


164  WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 

The  agencies  are  indeed  present  in  this  age  in  the 
Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  convicting,  regen- 
erating and  sanctifying  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which, 
if  received  by  faith,  w^ould  save  every  soul  of  man. 
But  faith  is  not  compulsory,  and  nigh  two  thousand 
years  of  preaching  have  demonstrated  that  as  the  age 
began  w^ith  an  outcalling  from  among  the  Gentiles  of 
''a  people  for  his  name''  (Acts  15:  14)^  so  it  has  gone 
on.  Glorious  victories  have  been  w^on  for  Christ,  but 
never,  anywhere,  have  all  the  hearers  been  converted. 
The  age  ends  in  catastrophe,  in  Armageddon,  in  the 
return  of  the  Lord  in  glory,  in  the  judgment  of  living 
Gentile  nations  preparatory  to  the  kingdom,  in  the  re- 
gathering  of  dispersed  Israel,  and  the  re-establishment 
of  the  Davidic  monarchy  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ 
the  Son  of  David  (Matt.  1:1;  Luke  1:30-33;  Acts 
15:14-17).^  The  Scripture  testimony  concerning  the 
age  to  come  may  be  thus  summarized : 

1.  Such  an  age  is  definitely  foretold  in  the  following 
Scriptures:  Matthew  12:32;  Mark  10:30,  with  Luke 
18:30;  Luke  20:35;  Ephesians  1:21;  Hebrews  6:5.« 

*  Simeon    hath    declared    how  tiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a  peo- 

God    at    the    first    did    visit    the  pie  for  his  name. 

Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a  And  to   this  agree  the  words 

people  for  his  name. — Acts   15:  of  the  prophets;  as  it  is  written, 

14.                                                   ^  After  this   I   will   return,   and 

^  The  book   of  the   generation  will    build    again   the   tabernacle 

of  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  Da-  of  David,  which  is  fallen  down; 

vid,  the  son  of  Abraham. — Matt.  and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins 

I :  I.  thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up  : 

And  the  angel  said  unto  her,  That  the  residue  of  men  might 

Fear  not,    Mary :    for  thou   hast  seek  after  the  Lord,  and  all  the 

found   favour  with   God.  Gentiles,  upon  whom  m.y  name  is 

And,   behold,   thou    shalt   con-  called,  saith  the   Lord,  who  do- 

ceive    in    thy    womb,    and    bring  eth    all   these   things. — Acts    15  ■ 

forth    a   son,   and  shalt   call   his  14-17- 

name  JESUS.  ^  And    whosoever    speaketh    a 

He   shall   be   great,    and    shall  word    against    the    Son    of   man. 

be   called  the   son   of  the   High-  it    shall    be    forgiven    him :    but 

est :  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  whosoever  speaketh   against   the 

unto  him  the  throne  of  his  fath-  Holy  Ghost,  it  shall  not  be  for- 

er    David  :  given  him,  neither  in  this  world, 

And   he    shall   reign    over   the  neither  in  the  world  to  come. — 

house  of  Jacob  for  ever;  and  of  Matt.    12:  32. 

his    kingdom   there    shall    be   no  But   he   shall   receive   an   hun- 

end. — Luke  i :  30-33.  dredfold      now      in      this      time, 

Simeon  hath  declared  how  God  houses,    and    brethren,    and    sis- 

at    the    first    did    visit   the    Gen-  ters,   and  mothers,  and  children, 


EARTH'S  GOLDEN  AGE  165 

In  all  these  passages  the  Greek  aion,  transliterated  by 
the  English  word  eon,  is  translated  in  the  Authorized 
Version  by  the  word  ''world."  It  never  means  ''world/' 
but  invariably,  in  Scripture  as  in  classical  Greek,  means 
''age,  dispensation/'  So  any  lexicon.  So,  also,  any 
authoritative  English  dictionary  definition  of  eon.  Ben- 
gel  truly  says :  "The  horologe  of  earth  is  no  measure 
for  the  eonloge  of  heaven/' 

2.  The  age  to  come  is  introduced  by  the  return  of 
the  Lord  in  power  and  glory.  He  is  accompanied  by 
the  sons  of  God,  also  in  glory.  These  sons  of  God  are 
they  who  have  "received  him"  during  this  age  (John 
1:  12,  I3)y'^  and  who,  if  sleeping  were  raised  in  bodies 
"like  unto  his  glorious  body"  (Phil.  3  :  20,  21),^  if  living, 
"changed"  into  the  same  likeness  (1  Cor.  15:51,  52)^ 
and  caught  up  "to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air"  (1  Thess. 
4:  14-17),^^  before  the  great  tribulation,  that  "hour  of 
temptation  which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world"  (Rev. 
3 :  10) .  Four  events  mark  the  beginning  of  the  age 
to  come.  (1)  The  taking  up  of  the  church  to  meet  the 
Lord  in  the  air  (1  Thess.  4:  14-17). ^^     (2)   The  judg- 

and    lands,     with    persecutions ;  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God. 

and  in  the  world  to  come   eter-  — John   i :  12,  13. 

nal  life. — Mark  10  :  30.  «  For    our    conversation    is    in 

Who   shall   not   receive   mam-  heaven;    from    whence    also    we 

fold   more   in  this  present   tirne,  look   for   the   Saviour,   the   Lord 

and   in   the   world   to    come   life  Jesus  Christ : 

tveT\astmg.--Luke   18:  jo.  ^j^^     ^^^iJ    ^j^ange    our    vile 

But   they   which    shall    be    ac-  ^^^^      ^^^^   ^^             ^^   fashioned 

counted    worthy    to    obtain    that  Hke  unto  his  glorious  body,  ac- 

world,  and  the  resurrection  from  cording  to  the  working  whereby 

tne  dead,  neither  marry    nor  are  j^e    is    able    even    to    subdue    all 

given  in  marriage—Lw^^  ^0.55-  things    unto    himself.— PAi7.    5; 

Far     above      all     principality,  ,^  J^ 

and  power,   and  might,   and  do-  "   9  -n  '1    1  ,     t     t. 

minion,  and  every  name  that  is  ,   ^^^^J"^'    I  ^i^^"^  T^i^   f"^^" 

named,   not    only   in   this   world,  l^"? ''    ^^  u^^u  u''''^^^^    !J^^^' 

but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come.  ^^^  ^^  shall  all  be  changed,^ 

— Eph.   1 :  21.  In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 

And     have*    tasted     the     good  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump  :  for 

word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the 

the   world   to    come. — Heh.    6 :  3.  dead    shall    be    raised    incorrup- 

^  But  as  many  as  received  him.,  tible,   and   we   shall   be   changed, 

to   them   gave   he   power   to   be-  — ^   ^^^-    ^5'5^^5^- 

come  the  sons   of  God,   even   to  ^°,  ^^  For    if    we    believe     that 

them  that  believe  on  his  name :  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even 

Which  were  born  not  of  blood,  so    them     also     which     sleep     in 

nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him. 


166 


WHAT  DO  THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


ment  of  the  living  Gentile  nations  who  for  near  thirty 
centuries  have  misgoverned  the  earth  in  greed,  pride, 
and  ceaseless  war  (Matt.  25:31-46).^^  (3)  The  regath- 
ering  of  God's  elect  people,  Israel  (Deut.  30:1-10; 
Matt.  24:  30,  31).^^    (4)  The  conversion  of  Israel  (Zech. 


For  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain  unto 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall 
not  prevent  them  which  are 
asleep. 

For  the  Lord  himself  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump 
of  God :  and  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall   rise  first : 

Then  we  which  are  alive  and 
remain  shall  be  caught  up  to- 
gether with  them  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air : 
and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with 
the   Lord. — i   Thess.  4  :  14,  I7- 

^^  When  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall 
he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his 
glory: 

And  before  him  shall  be  gath- 
ered all  nations :  and  he  shall 
separate  them  one  from  another, 
as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep 
from  the  goats : 

And  he  shall  set  the  sheep  on 
his  right  hand,  but  the  goats 
on  the  left. 

Then  shall  the  King  say  unto 
them  on  his  right  hand.  Come, 
ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you 
from  the  foundation  of  the 
world : 

For  I  was  an  hungred,  and  ye 
gave  me  meat :  I  was  thirsty, 
and  ye  gave  me  drink  :  I  was  a 
stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in : 

Naked,  and  ye  clothed  me :  I 
was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me :  I 
was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto 
me. 

Then  shall  the  righteous  an- 
swer him,  saying,  Lord,  when 
saw  we  thee  an  hungred,  and 
fed  theef  or  thirsty,  and  gave 
thee  drink? 


When  saw  we  thee  a  stranger, 
and  took  thee  in  ?  or  naked,  and 
clothed  theeF 

Or  when  saw  we  thee  sick, 
or  in  prison,  and  came  unto 
thee? 

And  the  King  shall  answer 
and  say  unto  them,  Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  Inasmuch  as  ye  have 
done  it  unto  one  of  the  least 
of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have 
done  it  unto  me. 

Then  shall  he  say  also  unto 
them  on  the  left  hand,  Depart 
from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire,  prepared  for  the 
devil   and   his  angels : 

For  I  was  an  hungred,  and 
ye  gave  me  no  m^eat :  I  was 
thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no 
drink : 

I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took 
me  not  in  :  naked,  and  ye  clothed 
me  not :  sick,  and  in  prison,  and 
ye  visited  me  not. 

Then  shall  they  also  answer 
him,  saying,  Lord,  when  saw  we 
thee  an  hungred,  or  athirst,  or 
a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick,  or 
in  prison,  and  did  not  minister 
unto  thee  ? 

Then  shall  he  answer  them, 
saying,  Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  not  to 
one  of  the  least  of  these,  ye 
did   it  not  to   me. 

And  these  shall  go  away  into 
everlasting  punishment :  but  the 
righteous  into  life  eternal. — 
Matt.   23 :  31-46. 

^^  And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
when  all  these  things  are  come 
upon  thee,  the  blessing  and  the 
curse,  which  I  have  set  before 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  call  them 
to  mind  among  all  the  nations, 
whither  the  Lord  thy  God  hath 
driven  thee, 

And  shalt  return  unto  the 
Lord    thy    God,    and    shalt    obey 


EARTH'S  GOLDEN  AGE 


167 


12:10;  Ezek.  20:33-38;  Rom.   11:25-27)."     (5)  The 


his  voice  according  to  all  that  I 
command  thee  this  day,  thou 
and  thy  children,  with  all  thine 
heart,   and   with  all  thy   soul ; 

That  then  the  Lord  thy  God 
will  turn  thy  captivity,  and  have 
compassion  upon  thee,  and  will 
return  and  gather  thee  from  all 
the  nations,  whither  the  Lord 
thy  God  hath  scattered  thee. 

If  any  of  thine  be  driven  out 
unto  the  outmost  parts  of  heav- 
en, from  thence  will  the  Lord 
thy  God  gather  thee,  and  from 
thence  will   he  fetch  thee  : 

And  the  Lord  thy  God  will 
bring  thee  into  the  land  which 
thy  fathers  possessed,  and  thou 
shalt  possess  it ;  and  he  will  do 
thee  good,  and  multiply  thee 
above  thy  fathers. 

And  the  Lord  thy  God  will 
circumcise  thine  heart,  and  the 
heart  of  thy  seed,  to  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  that 
thou  mayest  live. 

And  the  Lord  thy  God  will 
put  all  these  curses  upon  thine 
enemies,  and  on  them  that  hate 
thee,   which   persecuted   thee. 

And  thou  shalt  return  and 
obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and 
do  all  his  commandments  which 
I   command  thee  this  day. 

And  the  Lord  thy  God  will 
make  thee  plenteous  in  every 
work  of  thine  hand,  in  the  fruit 
of  thy  body,  and  in  the  fruit  of 
thy  cattle,  and  in  the  fruit  of 
thy  land,  for  good  :  for  the  Lord 
will  again  rejoice  over  thee  for 
good,  as  he  rejoiced  over  thy 
fathers : 

If  thou  shalt  hearken  unto 
the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God, 
to  keep  his  commandments  and 
his  statutes  which  are  written 
in  this  book  of  the  law,  and  if 
thou  turn  unto  the  Lord  thy  God 
with  all  thine  heart,  and  with 
all    thy    soul. — Deut.    50 .'  i-io. 

And  then  shall  appear  the  sign 
of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven : 
and  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of 
the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall 


see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power 
and  great  glory. 

And  he  shall  send  his  angels 
with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet, 
and  they  shall  gather  together 
his  elect  from  the  four  winds, 
from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the 
other. — Matt.    24  :  30,  31. 

^^  And  I  will  pour  upon  the 
house  of  David,  and  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplica- 
tions :  and  they  shall  look  upon 
me  whom  they  have  pierced, 
and  they  shall  mourn  for  him, 
as  one  mourneth  for  his  only 
son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness 
for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bit- 
terness for  his  firstborn. — Zech. 
12 :  10. 

As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God, 
surely  with  a  mighty  hand,  and 
with  a  stretched  out  arm,  and 
with  fury  poured  out,  will  I  rule 
over  you : 

And  I  will  bring  you  out  from 
the  people,  and  will  gather  you 
out  of  the  countries  wherein  ye 
are  scattered,  with  a  mighty 
hand,  and  with  a  stretched  out 
arm.,   and  with   fury  poured  out. 

And  I  will  bring  you  into  the 
wilderness  of  the  people,  and 
there  will  I  plead  with  you  face 
to  face. 

Like  as  I  pleaded  with  your 
fathers  in  the  wilderness  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  so  will  I  plead 
with  you,  saith  the  Lord  God. 

And  I  will  cause  you  to  pass 
under  the  rod,  and  I  will  bring 
you  into  the  bond  of  the  cov- 
enant : 

And  I  will  purge  out  from 
among  you  the  rebels,  and  them 
that  transgress  against  me :  I 
will  bring  them  forth  out  of  the 
country  where  they  sojourn,  and 
they  shall  not  enter  into  the 
land  of  Israel :  and  ye  shall 
know  that  I  am  the  Lord. — 
E^ek.    20 :  33-3S. 

For  I  would  not,  brethren, 
that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of 
this   mystery,   lest  ye   should   be 


168 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


filling  of  the  earth  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  (Isa.  11:9;  Hab.  2:  14;  Acts  15:  16,  17). ^^ 

3.  The  ^'righteousness"  which  is  the  ethical  keyword 
of  the  age  to  come  is  simply  right  doing.  The  pro- 
phetic descriptions  of  the  age  surprise  one  accustomed 
to  the  high  spiritual  standard  of  the  Epistles — the  ''fruit 
of  the  Spirit"  (Gal.  5:  22,  23).^^  The  practical  "right- 
eousness" of  the  age  to  come  is  summarily  expressed  in 
Micah  6:8:  "He  hath  showed  thee,  O  man,  what  is 
good,  and  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee, 
but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly 
with  thy  God?"  (Zech.  7:  9,  10;  8:  15-1 7.) ^^ 

The  end  of  wars,  the  protection  of  the  poor,  the 
widow,  and  the  orphan  (Psa.  72  :  2-4,  12-15),^^  the  inflex- 


wise  in  your  own  conceits ;  that 
blindness  in  part  is  happened  to 
Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  be  come  in. 

And  so  all  Israel  shall  be 
saved :  as  it  is  written,  There 
shall  come  out  of  Sion  the  De- 
liverer, and  shall  turn  away  un- 
godliness from  Jacob : 

For  this  is  my  covenant  unto 
them,  when  I  shall  take  away 
their    sins. — Rom.    11:25-27. 

^^  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  de- 
stroy in  all  my  holy  mountain : 
for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as 
the  waters  cover  the  sea. — Isa. 
11:9. 

For  the  earth  shall  be  filled 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover 
the    sea. — Hah.    2 :  14. 

After  this  I  will  return,  and 
will  build  again  the  tabernacle 
of  David,  which  is  fallen  down  ; 
and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins 
thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up  : 

That  the  residue  of  men  might 
seek  after  the  Lord,  and  all  the 
Gentiles,  upon  whom  my  name 
is  called,  saith  the  Lord,  who 
doeth  all  these  things. — Acts  15 : 
16,  17. 

'^  But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit 
is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering, 
gentleness,    goodness,    faith, 


Meekness,  temperance :  against 
such  there  is  no  law. — Gal.  3 : 
22,  23. 

"  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  saying,  Execute  true  judg- 
ment, and  shew  mercy  and 
compassions  every  man  to  his 
brother : 

And  oppress  not  the  widow, 
nor  the  fatherless,  the  stranger, 
nor  the  poor ;  and  let  none  of 
you  imagine  evil  against  his 
brother  in  your  heart. — Zech. 
7 :  9,  ro. 

So  again  have  I  thought  in 
these  days  to  do  well  unto  Jeru- 
salem and  to  the  house  of  Ju- 
dah :    fear  ye   not. 

These  are  the  things  that  ye 
shall  do ;  Speak  ye  every  man 
the  truth  to  his  neighbour  ;  exe- 
cute the  judgment  of  truth  and 
peace  in  your  gates  : 

And  let  none  of  you  imagine 
evil  in  your  hearts  against  his 
neighbour ;  and  love  no  false 
oath :  for  all  these  are  things 
that  I  hate,  saith  the  Lord. — 
Zech.    8 :  15-17. 

'^^  He  shall  judge  thy  people 
with  righteousness,  and  thy  poor 
with   judgment. 

The  mountains  shall  bring 
peace  to  the  people,  and  the 
little   hills,   by   righteousness. 

He  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the 
people,    he    shall    save    the    chil- 


EARTH'S  GOLDEN  AGE 


169 


ible  demand  for  just  dealing,  will  be  enforced  by  resist- 
less power.  It  is  the  age  of  the  ''rod  of  iron/'  What- 
ever the  inner  thought  of  man  may  be,  he  must  do  right 
or  die  (Isa.  11:4;  Psa.  2:9;  Rev.  2:27)}^  Inflexible 
justice,  inexorably  enforced:  ''They  shall  not  hurt  nor 
destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain/' 

4.  The  unseen  powers  of  evil,  headed  up  in  Satan, 
are  removed  from  the  scene  (Rev.  20:1-3)'^^  during 
the  entire  period. 

5.  At  His  first  advent,  while  preaching  to  Israel  the 
kingdom  as  "at  hand''  (Matt.  4:17;  10:5-7),^^  our 
Lord  demonstrated  in  seven  great  miracles  His  power 
to  deal  with  all  the  temporal  (as  well  as  the  eternal) 
consequences  of  sin.  He  healed  leprosy,  type  of  the 
loathsomeness  of  sin,  incurable  by  human  power;  palsy, 
the  helplessness  of  the  sinner;  fever,  the  restlessness  of 
sin;  stilled  a  tempest,  showing  power  over  nature;  cast 
out  demons ;  raised  from  the  dead,  and  healed  the  blind. 
Manifesting  in  full  sway  these  powers,  the  age  to  come 


dren  of  the  needy,  and  shall 
break  in  pieces  the  oppressor. — 
Psalm  72 :  2-4. 

For  he  shall  deliver  the  needy 
when  he  crieth ;  the  poor  also, 
and  him  that  hath  no  helper. 

He  shall  spare  the  poor  and 
needy,  and  shall  save  the  souls 
of   the   needy. 

He  shall  redeem  their  soul 
from  deceit  and  violence :  and 
precious  shall  their  blood  be  in 
his  sight. 

And  he  shall  live,  and  to  him 
shall  be  given  of  the  gold  of 
Sheba  :  prayer  also  shall  be  made 
for  him  continually ;  and  daily 
shall  he  be  praised. — Psalm  72  : 
12-15. 

"  But  with  righteousness  shall 
he  judge  the  poor,  and  reprove 
with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the 
earth :  and  he  shall  smite  the 
earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth, 
and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips 
shall  he  slay  the  wicked. — Isa. 
11:  4. 

Thou  shalt  break  them  with  a 
rod    of    iron ;    thou    shalt    dash 


them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's 
vessel. — Psalm,  2 :  g. 

And  he  shall  rule  them  with 
a  rod  of  iron ;  as  the  vessels  of 
a  potter  shall  they  be  broken 
to  shivers :  even  as  I  received 
of  my  Father. — Rev.  2 :  27. 

^°  And  I  saw  an  angel  come 
down  from  heaven,  having  the 
key  of  the  bottomless  pit  and  a 
great   chain   in   his   hand. 

And  he  laid  hold  on  the  dra- 
gon, that  old  serpent,  which  is 
the  Devil,  and  Satan,  and  bound 
him   a   thousand  years. 

And  cast  him  into  the  bot- 
tomless pit,  and  shut  him  up, 
and  set  a  seal  upon  him,  that 
he  should  deceive  the  nations  no 
more,  till  the  thousand  years 
should  be  fulfilled :  and  after 
that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little 
season. — Rev.   20 :  1-3. 

^^  From  that  time  Jesus  began 
to  preach,  and  to  say,  Repent : 
for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
at  hand. — Matt.  4  :  17. 

These  twelve  Jesus  sent  forth, 
and  commanded  them,  saying, 
Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gen- 


170 


IVHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAVr 


will  be  one  of  health  and  so  of  restored  longevity  (Isa. 
65:  18-20)  .22 

6.  But  these  are  merely  the  foundational  and  adminis- 
trative features  of  the  age  to  come.  They  are  largely 
negative — the  casting  out  of  the  present  causes  of  degen- 
eracy and  disease,  but  essential  to  that  which  is,  con- 
structively, the  glory  of  the  age  to  come.  For  that  age 
is  to  witness  the  ''manifestation  [apokalupsis=nnYcil' 
ing]  of  the  sons  of  God."  The  sons  of  God,  partakers 
of  the  Divine  nature  through  the  new  birth  (2  Pet.  1 : 
4), 2^  and  of  the  very  eternal  life  of  the  Son  of  God 
(John  3:16;  6:47;  Col.  3:4;  1  John  5:11,  12),^^  are 
''joint  heirs"  with  Him  who  is  "heir  of  all  things"  (Rom. 
8:17;  Col.  1:16;  Heb.  1:2).^^  As  He  was  veiled  in 
the  flesh  of  His  humiliation  so  that  only  faith  discerned 


tiles,  and  into  any  city  of  the 
Samaritans  enter  ye  not : 

But  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep 
of  the  house  of  Israel. 

And  as  ye  go,  preach,  saying, 
The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand. — Matt.    lo  :  5-7. 

"  But  be  ye  glad  and  rejoice 
for  ever  in  that  vi^hich  I  create  : 
for,  behold,  I  create  Jerusalem  a 
rejoicing,   and  her  people  a  joy. 

And  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusa- 
lem, and  joy  in  my  people:  and 
the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be 
no  more  heard  in  her,  nor  the 
voice  of  crying. 

There  shall  be  no  more  thence 
an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  old 
man  that  hath  not  filled  his 
days :  for  the  child  shall  die  an 
hundred  years  old  ;  but  the  sin- 
ner being  an  hundred  years  old 
shall  be  accursed. — Isa.  65  :  18- 
20. 

^  Whereby  are  given  unto  us 
exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises  :  that  by  these  ye  might 
be  partakers  of  the  divine  na- 
ture, having  escaped  the  corrup- 
tion that  is  in  the  world  through 
lust. — 2    Pet.    1 :  4. 

**  For  God  so  loved  the  world, 
that  he  gave  his  only  begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth 
in    him    should    not    perish,    but 


have  everlasting  life. — John  3  : 
16. 

Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
He  that  believeth  on  me  hath 
everlasting  life. — John  6 :  47. 

When  Christ,  who  is  our  life, 
shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also 
appear  with  him  in  glory. — Col. 
3:4- 

And  this  is  the  record,  that 
God  hath  given  to  us  eternal 
life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son. 

He  that  hath  the  Son  hath 
life ;  and  he  that  hath  not  the 
Son  of  God  hath  not  life. — 
I   John   5;  //,  12. 

^^  And  if  children,  then  heirs  ; 
heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs 
with  Christ ;  if  so  be  that  we 
suffer  with  him,  that  we  may  be 
also  glorified  together. — Rom.  8: 
17- 

For  by  him  were  all  things 
created,  that  are  in  heaven,  and 
that  are  in  earth,  visible  and  in- 
visible, whether  they  he  thrones, 
or  dominions,  or  principalities, 
or  powers :  all  things  were  cre- 
ated by  him,  and  for  him. — 
Col.   1 :  16. 

Hath  in  these  last  days  spoken 
unto  us  by  his  Son,  whom  he 
hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things, 
by  whom  also  he  made  the  world. 
—Heb.   1 :  2. 


EARTH'S  GOLDEN  AGE  171 

Him  as  the  Son  of  God,  so  the  sons  of  God  are  veiled — 
''the  world  knoweth  us  not''  (1  John  3:  1).^^ 

But  that  is  not  all.  Creation,  made  for  the  Son  and 
sons  of  God,  following  the  fortunes  of  the  ''first  man 
Adam'*  (1  Cor.  15:45)'^"^  has  been  "made  subject  to 
vanity''  ("emptiness"  of  the  real  objects  of  creation), 
(Rom.  8:20;  Eccl.  1:4-8).^^  From  the  entrance  of  sin 
to  the  very  end  of  the  present  age,  creation,  made  for 
the  sons  of  God  "waits"  for  the  unveiling  of  the  sons 
of  God.  Nature  does  not  give  up  her  greater  forces 
to  man  in  his  avarice,  his  ruthless  use  of  her  powers, 
his  unequal  distribution  of  her  benefits.  We  cannot 
reach  by  imagination  even  a  conception  of  the  reserves 
of  nature  never  to  be  given  up  except  to  the  Heir,  and 
the  joint  heirs.  Till  they  are  "unveiled"  and  on  the 
scene,  creation  "waits." 

At  no  point  does  the  divine  revelation  say  so  much, 
and  yet  with  an  impenetrable  reserve,  of  an  inconceiv- 
ably wonderful  age  awaiting  humanity  as  in  Romans 
8:  18-23,  with  Hebrews  2:  1-13.2^ 

^^  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  unto  the  place  from  whence  the 

the   Father  hath  bestowed  upon  rivers  come,  thither  they  return 

us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  again. 

sons  of  God :  therefore  the  world  All  things  are  full  of  labour ; 

knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  man  cannot  utter  it:  the  eye  is 

him  not. — i  John  3 :  i.  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the 

"  And    so    it    is    written.    The  ear    filled    with    hearing. — Eccl. 

first  man  Adam  was  made  a  liv-  i :  4-8. 

ing    soul ;    the    last    Adam    was  ^^  For   I   reckon   that  the   suf- 

made     a     quickening     spirit. — i  ferings  of  this  present  time  are 

Cor.  15 :  45.  not  worthy  to  he  compared  with 

^®  For  the   creature   was  made  the    glory    which    shall    be    re- 
subject  to   vanity,   not  willingly,  vealed   in   us. 
but  by  reason  of  him  who  hath  For    the    earnest    expectation 
subjected    the    same    in    hope. —  of  the  creature  waiteth   for  the 
Rom.  8 :  20.  manifestation    of    the    sons    of 

One  generation  passeth  away,  God. 

and  another  generation  cometh :  For    the    creature    was    made 

but   the   earth   abideth   for   ever.  subject  to   vanity,   not  willingly, 

The  sun  also  ariseth,  and  the  but  by  reason  of  him  who  hath 

sun  goeth  down,  and  hasteth  to  subjected   the  same   in  hope, 

his  place  where  he  arose.  Because     the     creature     itself 

The    wind    goeth    toward    the  also  shall  be  delivered  from  the 

south,    and    turneth    about    unto  bondage   of   corruption   into   the 

the  north  ;  it  whirleth  about  con-  glorious   liberty   of  the   children 

tinually,  and  the  wind  returneth  of   God. 

again   according  to   his    circuits.  For  we   know  that   the  whole 

All  the  rivers  run  into  the  creation  groaneth  and  travail- 
sea;    yet    the    sea    is    not    full;  eth   in  pain  together  until   now. 


172 


WHAT  DO   THE  PROPHETS  SAYf 


Incontestably  the  three  '"groans"  of  Romans  8 :  22-26 
still  continue.^^  All  the  discoveries  and  inventions  of 
man  have  not  silenced  one  of  them.  Creation  groans 
under  the  pains  of  unavailing  labor — the  pangs  that  bring 
forth  nothing;  we  ourselves,  though  we  have  the  first 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  groan  in  longing  for  the  redemption 


And  not  only  they,  but  our- 
selves also,  which  have  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  our- 
selves groan  within  ourselves, 
waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit, 
the  redemption  of  our  body. — 
Rom.   8 :  18-23. 

Therefore  we  ought  to  give 
the  more  earnest  heed  to  the 
things  which  we  have  heard, 
lest  at  any  time  we  should  let 
thefn    slip. 

For  if  the  word  spoken  by 
angels  was  stedfast,  and  every 
transgression  and  disobedience 
received  a  just  recompence  of 
reward ; 

How  shall  we  escape,  if  we 
neglect  so  great  salvation ;  which 
at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken 
by  the  Lord,  and  was  confirmed 
unto  us  by  them  that  heard 
him  ; 

God  also  bearing  them  wit- 
ness, both  with  signs  and  won- 
ders, and  with  divers  miracles, 
and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
according  to  his  own  will  ? 

For  unto  the  angels  hath  he 
not  put  in  subjection  the  world 
to  come,  whereof  we  speak. 

But  one  in  a  certain  place  tes- 
tified, saying,  What  is  man,  that 
thou  art  mindful  of  him?  or 
the  son  of  man,  that  thou  vis- 
itest   him  ? 

Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels ;  thou  crownedst 
him  with  glory  and  honour,  and 
didst  set  him  over  the  works  of 
thy   hands : 

Thou  hast  put  all  things  in 
subjection  under  his  feet.  For 
in  that  he  put  all  in  subjection 
under  him,  he  left  nothing  that 
is  not  put  under  him.  But  now 
we  see  not  yet  all  things  put 
under  him. 


But  we  see  Jesus,  who  was 
made  a  little  lower  than  the 
angels  for  the  suffering  of  death, 
crowned  with  glory  and  hon- 
our ;  that  he  by  the  grace  of 
God  should  taste  death  for  every 
man. 

For  it  became  him,  for  whom 
are  all  things,  and  by  whom 
are  all  things,  in  bringing  many 
sons  unto  glory,  to  make  the 
captain  of  their  salvation  perfect 
through   sufferings. 

For  both  he  that  sanctifieth 
and  they  who  are  sanctified  are 
all  of  one :  for  which  cause  he 
is  not  ashamed  to  call  them 
brethren, 

Saying,  I  will  declare  thy 
name  unto  my  brethren,  in  the 
midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing 
praise  unto   thee. 

And  again,  I  will  put  my  trust 
in  him.  And  again,  Behold  I 
and  the  children  which  God  hath 
given   me. — Heb.    2  :  1-13. 

^°  For  we  know  that  the  whole 
creation  groaneth  and  travaileth 
in    pain   together   until    now. 

And  not  only  they,  but  our- 
selves also,  which  have  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  our- 
selves groan  within  ourselves, 
waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit, 
the  redemption  of  our  body. 

For  we  are  saved  by  hope : 
but  hope  that  is  seen  is  not 
hope :  for  what  a  man  seeth, 
why  doth  he  yet  hope  for? 

But  if  we  hope  for  that  we 
see  not,  then  do  we  with  pa- 
tience wait  for  it. 

Likewise  the  Spirit  also  help- 
eth  our  infirmities  :  for  we  know 
not  what  we  should  pray  for  as 
we  ought :  but  the  Spirit  itself 
maketh  intercession  for  us  with 
groanings  which  cannot  be  ut- 
tered.— Rom.   8  :  22-26. 


EARTH'S  GOLDEN  AGE 


173 


of  the  body  to  be  wrought  by  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
for  His  church  (Rom.  8:22,  2Z]  Eph.  \:U),^^  and  the 
Spirit  within  us  intercedes  with  groanings  which  cannot 
be  uttered  (Rom.  8:26).^^  In  heaven,  the  Lord  waits. 
It  should  be  remembered  ( 1 )  that  both  the  great  tribu- 
lation, and  the  age  to  come  which  the  tribulation  intro- 
duces, are  periods  during  which  the  Gospel  wins  its 
greatest  triumphs  in  salvation.  Out  of  the  great  tribu- 
lation comes  the  Jewish  remnant  which  turns  to  Christ 
in  that  awful  time,  and  '*a  great  multitude,  which  no 
man  could  number,  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and 
people,  and  tongues'' — Gentiles^ — who  have  washed  their 
robes  in  the  blood.  We  number  converts  easily  enough 
now;  in  that, awful  time  they  become  innumerable  (Rev. 
7:4-10).^^    And  the  age  to  come  will  also  witness  an  all 


^^  For  we  know  that  the  whole 
creation  groaneth  and  travaileth 
in  pain  together  until  now. 

And  not  only  they,  but  our- 
selves also,  which  have  the  first- 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  our- 
selves groan  within  ourselves, 
waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit, 
the  redemption  of  our  body. — 
Rom.  8 :  22,  23. 

Which  is  the  earnest  of  our 
inheritance  until  the  redemption 
of  the  purchased  possession,  un- 
to the  praise  of  his  glory. — Eph. 
1 :  14. 

^^  Likewise  the  Spirit  also  help- 
eth  our  infirmities :  for  we  know 
not  what  we  should  pray  for  as 
we  ought :  but  the  Spirit  itself 
maketh  intercession  for  us  with 
groanings  which  cannot  be  ut- 
tered.— Rom.  8 :  26. 

^And  I  heard  the  number  of 
them  which  were  sealed :  and 
there  were  sealed  an  hundred 
and  forty  and  four  thousand  of 
all  the  tribes  of  the  children  of 
Israel. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Juda  were 
sealed  twelve  thousand.  Of  the 
tribe  of  Reuben  were  sealed 
twelve   thousand.      Of   the   tribe 


of  Gad  were  sealed  twelve  thou- 
sand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Aser  were 
sealed  twelve  thousand.  Of  the 
tribe  of  Nepthalim  were  sealed 
twelve  thousand.  Of  the  tribe 
of  Manasses  were  sealed  twelve 
thousand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Simeon  were 
sealed  twelve  thousand.  Of  the 
tribe  of  Levi  were  sealed  twelve 
thousand.  Of  the  tribe  of  Issa- 
char  were  sealed  twelve  thou- 
sand. 

Of  the  tribe  of  Zabulon  were 
sealed  twelve  thousand.  Of  the 
tribe  of  Joseph  were  sealed 
twelve  thousand.  Of  the  tribe 
of  Benjamin  were  sealed  twelve 
thousand. 

After  this  I  beheld,  and,  lo, 
a  great  multitude,  which  no  man 
could  number,  of  all  nations, 
and  kindreds,  and  people,  and 
tongues,  stood  before  the  throne, 
and  before  the  Lamb,  clothed 
with  white  robes,  and  palms  in 
their  hands ; 

And  cried  with  a  loud  voice, 
saying,  Salvation  to  our  God 
which  sitteth  upon  the  throne, 
and  unto  the  Lamb. — Rev.  7: 
4-10. 


174 


WHAT  DO   THE   PROPHETS  SAYf 


but  complete  conversion  of  the  human  family  (Acts  15: 
16,  17). 3^ 

But  alas !  an  inveterately  God-hating  residuum  of  the 
race  remains.  Satan  is  allowed  to  test  humanity  once 
more,  and  gathers  an  army  of  these  (Rev.  20:7-9).^^ 
The  final  judgment  of  the  wicked  ''dead"  follows,  and 
the  scene  is  cleared  for  the  new  heavens  and  the  new 
earth. 


^*  After  this  I  will  return,  and 
will  build  again  the  tabernacle 
of  David,  which  is  fallen  down  ; 
and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins 
thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up  : 

That  the  residue  of  men  might 
seek  after  the  Lord,  and  all  the 
Gentiles,  upon  whom  my  name 
is  called,  saith  the  Lord,  who 
doeth  all  these  things. — Acts  15 : 
16,  17. 

^^  And  when  the  thousand 
years  are  expired,  Satan  shall 
be  loosed  out  of  his  prison, 


And  shall  go  out  to  deceive 
the  nations  which  are  in  the 
four  quarters  of  the  earth,  Gog 
and  Magog,  to  gather  them  to- 
gether to  battle  :  the  number  of 
whom  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea. 

And  they  went  up  on  the 
breadth  of  the  earth,  and  com- 
passed the  camp  of  the  saints 
about,  and  the  beloved  city :  and 
fire  came  down  from  God  out  of 
heaven,  and  devoured  them. — 
Rev,    20 :  7-9. 


SCRIPTURE  INDEX 


GENESIS 

TEXT  PAGE 

2:  15-17 27 

2:  21-23 115 

3:  14-19 28 

3:  15   Z2,  40 

4:4   41 

4:  21,  22   15 

6:4   15 

6:5   28 

9:5,  6   29 

9:  25-27    27,  29,  30 

11  :  6-9  29 

12:  1-3 30,  41,  49,   11 

13:  15,   16 30 

14:  18 41 

15:  18   30 

21  :  3   .  , 32 

28:  12,   13   41 

EXODUS 

11:  7   95,  96 

12:  11,  41,  42   95,  96 

12:  12,   13   95,  96 

25:  22  21 

NUMBERS 
24:  3   22 

DEUTERONOMY 

4:5,  6 31 

6:4 31 

18:  15   75 

28:  15-19,  23,  24,  25    ZZ 

29:  24-28 ZZ 

30:  1-10 166,   167 

33:26-29 31 

1  SAMUEL 

2:  27   22 

2  SAMUEL 

7:  1-17 99 

7:4-16    91 

7:  5-17 105 

7:  10-17 53,   IZ 

7:  16,  17   59 

24:  11   22 


1  KINGS 

TEXT 

14:  25,  26   

> 

PAGE 

zz 

17  :  1    

33 

21: 25   

132 

2  CHRONICLES 
36:  3-5 11 


2 
14 
22 
22 
51 
72 
89 
89 
8 

89 
89 
89 
89 


PSALMS 

9   169 

1,  2  28 

28  46 

14,  15,  16 45 

5  .  28 

2-4,*  12-i5' !'.!!. *.'.'.*.V68.' 169 

3,  4 53,  99 

3-6 91 

18   23 

20-36 53 

20-37 53 

20-39    99,   100 

30-36 59 


1:4- 


ECCLESIASTES 


.171 


ISAIAH 

2:1-4    51,  74 

2:2-4 30 

2:  14-17  39 

5:7 35 

5  :  26   30 

7:  10-14    24,  37 

7:  13,   14   42,  49,  58 

9:1,  2   30 

9:6   42,  46,  60 

9:6,  7 39,  49 

9:7   42,  51,  74 

0:20-34 60 

0:  28   156,   157 

0:  28-54 158 

1    (,Z,  64 


1-12 46,  47,  51 

4   169 

9    54,   168 

9-12 109 


175 


176 


SCRIPTURE   INDEX 


TEXT  PAGE 

11  :  10 76 

29:  3   156,   157 

32:  17   23 

43:  10,   11    31 

43:  24   34 

49:  8-13 64,  65 

52:  1-12 64,  65 

53   56 

53:  11   45 

59:  2 34 

59:  20,  21    38 

60   2>7 

61    Z7 

65:  18-20  .  .' 170 

JEREMIAH 

16:  19   30 

23:  3-6 64 

23:  5   113 

23:  5,  6   42,  46,  47 

23:  5-8 54 

30:4-7 136,   156 

30:  7  145 

31  :  7-25    64,  65 

ZZ\  1-17 66 

ZZ:  14-17 46,  47 

2>Z'.  14-26 80,  81 

2>Z'.  15-17   42 

EZEKIEL 

20:  33-38 167 

20  :  35-44    50 

28:  25,  26   67 

34:  11-31 67 

Z6\  1-12 67 

36:  16-38 64,  66 

36:24-38 67,  68 

27  \  1-28 67,  68 

38:2   157 

DANIEL 

2:  31-45    69,   70 

2:  34-35   18 

2  :  40   12 

2:41,  42   13 

2:   44 72,,  74 

2:  44,  45    13,   18 

2:45   12 

7   61,   62,   146,   147 

7:  1-27 12 

7:7   12 

7:8   14,   148,  150 

7:  13-18   104 

7:  19-26 14 

7:25   151 

9:  1,  20-27    141,   144 

9:  11    34 


TEXT  PAGE 

9:  20-27 12 

9:26,  27   14,   15 

9:27   145 

11  :  36   14 

11  :  36—12:  3 12 

12:  1    145,   156 

JOEL 

2:2 125 

2:  11    156,   157 

3:9   156,   157 

3:9,   10   30 

AMOS 

5:  18-20 125 

9:11    46,  47,  48 

9:  11-15   108 

MICAH 

1:6   156,  157 

5:2   46,  47 

6:8   26 

HABAKKUK 

2:  14   168 

ZEPHANIAH 
1  :  15   125 

ZECHARIAH 
3:8   58 

4:6   58 

7:9,   10   168 

8:  15-17 168 

8:  16,   17   26 

9:  7-15 113 

9:9   48 

12   72,   72 

12:  10  58,   167 

13:  1   58 

14 72 

14:  4   50 

14:  4,  5,  9,   16   48 

14:  4-21   92 

14:9 46,  47 

MALACHI 

4:  1    132 

4:  2   40,   132 

4:5   48 

MATTHEW 

1  :  1    32,  53,  54,  77,  164 

3:2   86 

4:  17   86,   169 

6:  10   34,   55 

7:  22 87 

10:  5-7 76,   170 

10:  7  87 


SCRIPTURE  INDEX 


177 


TEXT  PAGE 

10:  17   80 

11  :  20-24 80 

11  :  22-24 88 

12:  32 164 

12:  38-40 88 

13:  11-17 79 

13:  17   45 

13:  24-30  55,   118 

13:  28-30  162 

13:  33   56 

13:  36-43  55,   118,   119 

13:  37-43,  49,  50 162 

13:40-43   87 

13:47-50 56 

16:  13-18 89 

16:  16   92 

16:  18   101,   111 

16:  18,  21    112 

16:  13   32 

16:28   112 

17:  1-13  112 

17:22   88 

19:  27,  28   92,  94 

19:28 55 

20:  16 87 

20:  17-19 88 

21:  1-11 48,  81 

21:4,  5   75 

21:28-31  87 

23:  13-38 87,  88 

23:  37-39 88,  89 

24:  1-30 162,  163 

24:  1-51  82 

24:  6-8 16 

24:  15   11,   19 

24:  15-30 17,  92 

24:21   136,   144,   145,   156 

24:25   122 

24:  27,  30   50 

24:  29-31   99,   100 

24:  30,  31   166,   167 

24:35   91 

24:  37-39 15 

25:  1-46 82,  85 

25:  31   51,  55,  94,  99, 

100,   112,   124 

25:  31-46  88,  89,   166 

25:  46   88 

MARK 

10:  30   164,   165 

11  :  1-10 48 

16:  15   117 

LUKE 

1  :  30-33 99,   100,   106,   164 

1  :  31-33 60 


TEXT  PAGE 

1  :  32   42,   74,  91 

1  :  33   39,  53,  54 

1  :  34,  35   42 

1  :  35   32 

13:  20,  21    56 

17:  20   55 

17:  26-30 15 

17:  26-32 71,  72 

17:  26-37 90,  91 

17:  37   16 

18:8   119 

18:  11   35 

18:  30   164,  165 

19:  12-14 104 

19:  29-38 48 

20:35   164,   165 

21  :  5-36 82,  85,  86,  91 

21  :  20-24 88,  89 

21:24   11,  69,   147 

23:  24  107 

JOHN 

1:  17  75 

1:  36 95 

1:51   41 

3:  16  170 

5:  24 137,   138 

6:47  170 

14:  1-3 97,   14S,   133 

14:  2  117 

14:  2,  3   126 

14:3   96 

14:30   131 

15:  1-5    115 

16:  12   Ill 

16:  12,   13   94 

16:  13   Ill,  165 

17:5   46 

17:  6,   11,   12,   16   116 

21:  15-17 129 

ACTS 

1:  1-8 101 

2:1-4 116 

2:25-36 94,  95 

2:  37-41   106 

2:47 79,   116 

3:  17 107 

3:  19-21    105,  106 

3:26   106 

4:  13-22 106 

5:  28-33  106 

7:35-37 41 

7:37  75 

7  :  38   90 

13:46   76,  77 

14:  22 136 


178 


SCRIPTURE  INDEX 


TEXT  PAGE 

15:  1  107 

15:  7-11  108 

15:  13-17 53,  54 

15:  13-18 49 

15:  14  79,  164 

15:  14-17 80,  81,  92,  94 

95,  109,  164 

15:  16,  17 168,  173,  174 

15:  28  107 

16:  31  105 

19:  1-6 121 

19:  32  90 

ROMANS 

1  :  16  76,  103 

1  :  21-23  29 

1  :  28  29 

2:9,  10  76,  77,  103 

2:  12 29 

3:1,  2  31 

3:  19-22 34 

5:  12  28 

8:  17  117,  170 

8:  18-23  171,  172 

8:  20 171 

8:  21  160 

8:  22,  23  173 

8:  24,  25  124 

8:26  172,  173 

10:  3  66 

11:24,  25  76 

11:25-27 109,  167,  168 

14:  17 55 

1  CORINTHIANS 

1:8 122 

2:  14  28 

2:  15  21 

5:5  122 

5:7  95 

11:  26  79,  124 

12:  12-14 114 

15:  20-23 122 

15:  22  28 

15:  22,  23  112 

15:24,  25,  26  57 

15:24-28 52,  76,  101 

15:45  40,  171 

15:47  40 

15:  51,  52  78,  117,  118, 

149,  165 
15:  51-53 113,  122 

2  CORINTHIANS 

1:  14   122 

4:4   131 

11:  1,  2   115 


GALATIANS 

TEXT  PAGE 

3:  13,   14   77 

3:  16 32 

4:4   40,  75 

5:  22,  23   168 

EPHESIANS 

1:3   117 

1  :  11    117 

1  :  14   173 

1  :  21   164,   165 

1  :  22,  23   114 

^:  12 77 

2  :  20   94 

2:  21,  22   116 

3:  1-10    43,   103 

3:  1-11    39,   7^,  90,   114 

3:9,   10   102 

5:  28-33 115,   116 

PHILIPPIANS 

1:6,  10  122 

2:  16  122 

3:  18  121 

3:20  78,  117,  124 

3:20,  21  117,  165 

4:5  78,  79,  124 

COLOSSIANS 

1  :  16 170 

3:  4   170 

1  THESSALONIANS 

1:9,  10  117 

1  :  10  124 

4:  13-17 122 

4:  14-16 96 

4:  14-17 78,  113,  117,  118 

133,  137,  148,  149,  165 

5:1-4 71,  72 

5:1-8 125 

5:  1-9 137,  138 

5:9  125,  133 

2  THESSALONIANS 

1:  6-10 71,  72 

2:  1-10 114 

2:  3,  7-12 119,   120 

2:8-10 19 

2:9,   10 153 

1  TIMOTHY 

2:  14   27 

4:1-3 119,   120 

6:  3-5 119 


SCRIPTURE  INDEX 


179 


2  TIMOTHY 

TEXT  PAGE 

2:  17,   18   119 

2:  25,  26   121 

3:1-9 119,   120 

4:   3,  4   119 

TITUS 
2:  13   117,   124 

HEBREWS 

1:20  170 

2:  1-13 171,   172 

3:1   78 

6:  5   164,   165 

7:  11   41 

8:  10-13  96 

JAMES 
5:  1-9 136 

1  PETER 

1:4   78,   117 

1  :  10-12 79,  80 

1:  11    44 

1  :  19   43 

2:4-7 94 

2:  9,   19   117 

2:4-7 94,  117 

2:  11   78,  117 

2:  24   46 

4:  12-19 136 

2  PETER 

1:4 170 

1  :  19-21 26 

1  :  20   9 

2:1   121 

2:  1-22 119 

3:  Z-7 119,   120 

1  JOHN 

2:  18,   19   122 

2:  18-23 119,   120 

3:  1   171 

3:2  56 


TEXT  PAGE 

4:1-3   121 

4:1-5 119,   122 

5:  11,   12   115,   170 

2  JOHN 

7-11 119 

3  JOHN 

9   119 

JUDE 
3:  19   119,  120 

REVELATION 

1:  19  127,  148 

2:  1-7 128,  129 

2:2,  3 129 

2:8-11  129,  130 

2:  9-17 130 

2:  18-29  132 

2:24 148 

2:  24-29 148,  149 

2:27  169 

3:  1-6 133 

3:  7-13 134 

3:  10  139,  165 

3:  14-22 134,  135 

5:  1-10 104 

7:4-10  173 

13  19 

13:  1-7 149,  150 

13:  2-17  151,  152 

13:4-8 150,  151 

13:  5  151 

13:  12,  16,  17 157 

14:  15,  16 137 

15:  7,  8  ..137 

16:  1-21  137,  138,  152,  153 

17:  1-18 154 

18:  1-24 154,  155,  156 

19:  11  39 

19:  11-21  17,  19,  60 

19:  17-21  16 

20:  1-3  169 

20:  7-9  56,  174 

20:  10 131 


TOPICAL  INDEX 


Aaron,  priest  after  the  manner  of, 
41. 

Abomination  of  desolation,  19,  126, 
143,  144,  145;  predicted  by 
Daniel,   93. 

Abrahamic   Covenant,   30. 

Acts  and  Epistles,  Church  men- 
tioned 89  times  in,  111;  Kingdom 
mentioned  only  25  times  in.  111. 

Acts,  prophetic  message  of,  99;  re- 
jection of  the  absent  King  in, 
105. 

Adam,  a  type  of  Christ,  115;  first 
man,  171;  last,  40;  lost  dominion 
of,    57. 

Adamic  Covenant,  218. 

Advent,  Christ's  first,  not  the  smit- 
ing of  the  feet  of  the  image,  18; 
first,  prophesied,  49;  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  101;  second,  prophesied, 
50,  51. 

Advents,  both,  in  Zechariah,  47,  48. 

"Age,"  course  and  end  of  this,  90; 
incorrectly  translated  "world," 
165;  last  seven  years  of  the,  141  ft'. 

Age  to  come,  beginning  of,  marked 
by  four  events,  165;  definitely 
foretold  in  the  Scriptures,  164; 
Gospel's  greatest  triumphs  in  sal- 
vation in,  173;  righteousness  in, 
168;  Scripture  testimony  con- 
cerning,  161    ft. 

Ages,  dark,  133. 

Ages   dealt  with  in  prophecy,   11. 

Ahaz,  prediction  to,  37. 

Aims,  Church,   11. 

Aion,  Greek  for  "Age,"   165. 

Alexander's  dream  of  a  world  em- 
pire, 70. 

Anstey's  "Romance  of  Biblical 
Chronology,"    142. 

Anti-Christ  aiding  the  beast,  151; 
the  false  prophet,   157. 

Apocalypse,  Historical  interpreta- 
tion of,  26. 

Apostate,  Laodicean  profession  ut- 
terly,  139. 

Apostles,  Jewish  ministry  of  the, 
103  ff. 

Armageddon,  16,  17,  19,  39,  63,  72, 
156,  158,  164. 

Army,  Israel  without  commission 
for,  32. 

"At  hand,"  meaning  of,  77. 

Authority  of  the  Bible,  weakened 
faith  in,  134. 


B 

Babylon,  a  religious  organization, 
153;  apostate  world-church,  de- 
stroyed by  the  Emperor-Beast, 
157;  as  a  world  empire,  70;  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  in  Gentile 
world-rule,  12;  Laodicean  profes- 
sion,  139. 

Baptism  of  the  Spirit,   114. 

Beast,  and  false  prophet  fighting  the 
Messiah,  158;  awful  tyranny  of 
the,  151;  destroys  religious 
"Babylon,"  153,  154,  157;  of 
Daniel  and  Revelation,  150;  out 
of  the  sea,  19,  126;  the  man  of 
sin,  149;  worship  of  the,  157. 

Beatitudes,    75. 

Beautiful  Gate,  Peter's '  Sermon  at, 
106. 

Believers,  a  new  body,  97;  true  sub- 
jects of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven, 
76. 

Bengel,  quoted,  165. 

Bible  a  growth,  not  a  structure,  10; 
authority  of,  weakened  faith  in, 
134. 

Blessed  Hope,  of  the  pilgrim 
Church,  Christ's  Coming,  97; 
without  sign  or  time-note,  124. 

Body  of  Christ,  118;  growing  since 
Pentecost,   116;   the  church,   114. 

Body  to  be  redeemed  at  the  coming 
of  the   Lord,    173. 

Boyle,  S.  W.,  interpretation  of 
prayer  on  the  cross,  107. 

Bride  of  Christ  the  church,  115. 


Campanella's  "City  of  the  Sun," 
159. 

Capital  punishment,  established  by 
God,  29. 

Catastrophe,  ends  ten  final  kingdoms, 
70;  to  end  this  age,  15,  90,  164. 

China,  perhaps  in  final  invasion  of 
the  Holy  Land,  157.^ 

Christ,  as  Prophet,  Priest  and  King, 
75;  authenticated  prophecies  of 
Scripture,  5,  11;  chief  prophet 
of  the  Church  Age,  11;  con- 
fessed as  the  Messiah,  92;  day 
of,  122,  126;  Head  of  the  church, 
114;  Nobleman  of  the  Postponed 
Kingdom,  104;  power  of  to  deal 
with  all  the  consequences  of  sin, 
169;    return   of   accompanied   b'y 


181 


182 


TOPICAL  INDEX 


the  sons  of  God  in  glory,  165; 
son  of  David,  164;  typified  by 
Adam,  115;  zeal  for  name  of, 
129. 

Christendom,  what  it  is,  87;  what 
it  means,  1 18. 

Christianity,  instead  of  Christ,  129; 
persecuted  by  Jews  and  Rome, 
130;  represented  by  the  profess- 
ing church,  131;  under  Constan- 
tine,  130. 

Christs,  false,  in  this  age,   163. 

Chronology,  Biblical  and  Ptolemaic, 
142. 

Church,  a  mystery  hid  in  God,  102, 
114;  and  Kingdom  not  synony- 
mous, 112;  Christ  the  Head  of, 
114;  confused  with  Israel,  5; 
converting  the  world  in  this  age 
unscriptural,  161;  distinguished 
from  the  churches,  118;  doctrine 
not  unfolded  in  Acts,  110;  ex- 
pectation of  Christ,  117;  first 
century,  129;  foundation  stones 
the  twelve  disciples,  94;  growing 
since  Pentecost,  116;  like  the 
human  body,  115;  mentioned  89 
times  in  Acts  and  the  Epistles, 
111;  mission  of  the,  117;  mystery 
unfolded  in  the  Epistles,  114;  new 
promise  to,  123;  not  an  organi- 
zation, but  an  organism,  114, 
115;  not  Israel,  26;  not  men- 
tioned until  Christ's  rejection 
evident,  77:,  not  the  Kingdom, 
26,  56;  not  the  subject  of  Acts* 
prophetic  testimony,  109;  not  to 
pass  through  the  tribulation,  119, 
153;  predicted  by  Christ,  89;  pro- 
fessing, foreview  of  its  history, 
128;  prophecies  in  Epistles  and 
Revelation,  110;  the  body  of 
Christ,  114;  the  bride  of  Christ, 
115;  to  be  received  unto  Christ, 
96;  truth  committed  to  Paul, 
114;  truth  not  part  of  Jesus' 
forty  days*  resurrection  instruc- 
tions, 102;  typified  by  Eve,  115; 
union  ending  in  Babylon,  153; 
unrelated  to  earthly  events,  78. 

Church  age,  a  ''mystery,"  78;  a 
parenthesis  in  history,  38. 

Churches  include  both  believers  and 
unbelievers,    118. 

Civilization  not  Christian,  25. 

Clay  in  present  national  world- 
system,    13. 

Cole,  Major,  letter  from  Billy  Sun- 
day to,  22. 

Constantine,  Christianity  under, 
130;  professed  conversion  of,  131. 

Conversion  at  Christ's  coming, 
166;  of  the  human  family  all 
but  complete  in  the  age  to  come, 
174;  of  the  world  in  this  age 
unscriptural,  161;  of  the  world 
not  to  bring  in  the  Kingdom,  71. 

Converted  world,  there  will  be,  109. 

Corporate  guilt  of  the  Jews,  105. 


Council  at  Jerusalem,  107. 

Covenant,  Davidic,  59,  105;  and  es- 
tablishment of  the  Kingdom,  91; 
reaffirmed  in  Olivet  Discourse, 
99;  renewed  through  Gabriel,  99; 
with  the  Jews,  144,  145. 

Covenants,  three  in  Genesis,  27. 

Creation  subject  to  vanity,   171. 

Creeds,  period  of  the  great,  131. 

Crisis   in   the   world   to-day,   5. 

Cross-prayer  of  our  Lord,  how  an- 
swered,  107. 

Crucifixion  of  Christ,  143. 


Daniel  authenticated  by  Christ,  11; 
chief  prophet  of  Times  of  the 
Gentiles,  11,  12,  69,  141;  contri- 
bution of  to  the  prophets,  71; 
image  vision  of,  128;  seventy 
weeks  of,  143;  seventieth  week 
of,  152;  wild  beast  vision  of,  128. 

Darius  the  Mede,  141. 

Dark  Ages,  the,  133. 

David,  Christ  the  son  of,  164;  fore- 
seeing Resurrection,  105;  throne 
of,  106;  throne  of  reaffirmed  in 
Olivet  Discourse,  99. 

Davidic  covenant,  59,  7Zt  91,  105, 
161. 

Davidic  monarchy  re-established, 
164. 

Davidic  promise  reaffirmed  in  coun- 
cil at  Jerusalem,  108. 

Day  of  Christ,  119,  122,  125,  126. 

Day  of  the  Lord,  119,  122',  125, 
126,  132. 

Dead  believers  raised  at  Christ's 
coming,  165. 

Death  of  believer  not  the  Lord's 
return,   10. 

Demons  working  miracles,  153. 

Denominations,  the  day  of,  129. 

Deuteronomy  foretelling  Israel's 
future,    128. 

Disciples,  gathered  by  our  Lord  in 
His  first  coming  were  Jews,  91, 
92;  to  have  judgeships  over  the 
Twelve  Tribes,  93. 

Discipleship  of  the  Twelve,  in  the 
new  body  the  Church,  101;  on 
Jewish  ground,    101. 

Disobedience  instantly  judged  dur- 
ing  the   millennium,    57. 

Dispensation,  of  grace,  inaugurated 
bY  the  Holy  Spirit,  94;  or  age, 
not  world,  165;  beginning  of  dif- 
ferent marked  by  miracle  and 
prophecy,    12. 

Dispersed  elect  nation  to  be  re- 
gathered,  93. 

Doctrine,  great  zeal  for,  131;  purity 
of,  129. 

E 

Earth,  a  revolted  province  of  the 
kingdom  of  God,  57;  to  be  filled 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  168. 


TOPICAL  INDEX 


183 


Ecclesia,  used  of  the  Church  and  of 
Israel,   90. 

Edenic   Covenant,   27. 

Education  not  the  solution  for  the 
world's  evils,  160. 

Elijah  a  tyoe  of  glorified  saints,  113. 

Empires,  world,  19,   70,   147. 

End  of  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles, 
14,  15. 

Enforcement  of  righteousness  and 
justice  in  the  age  to  come,   169. 

Eon,  or  "Age,"  165. 

Ephesus,  message  to,  128,  129. 

Epistles,  chief  themes  of  the  proph- 
ecy in,  119;  great  theme  of 
prophecy  in,  122;  great  tribula- 
tion not  mentioned  once  in,  126, 
137;  prophetic  element  in,  118, 
126;  revelation  of  new  truth  in, 
111;  unfolding  the  mystery  of 
the  Church,  114. 

Evangelization,  world-wide,  forgot- 
ten in  the  Reformation,   133. 

Eve  a  type  of  the  church,  115. 

Expectation  of  the  church,  117. 

Ezekiel's  kingdom  prophecies,  67. 


False  Christs  in  this  age,  163. 
False    prophet,    and    beast,    fighting 

against    the    Messiah,    158;    the 

Anti-Christ,  157. 
Famines  in  this  age,  16,  163. 
Federation  of  the  nations,  10,  19. 
Fever,    type    of    sin's    restlessness, 

169. 
First  advent,  Daniel's  prophecy  not 

fulfilled  in,  71;  events  mentioned 

that   did   not   take   place   at,   66; 

kingdom  at  hand  in,  169. 
First  century  church,  129. 
First  Resurrection,  great  tribulation 

never  mentioned  with,  137. 
Fish,    good    and    bad,    meaning    of, 

162. 
Flood  conditions  at  end  of  this  age, 

15,  162. 
Flood,    illustration    of    end    of    this 

age,  90;  judgment  of  the,   15. 
Forty  days  of  our  Lord's  resurrec- 
tion ministry,  101. 
Four      great      empires      dominating 

Gentile  world-rule,  12. 
Fulfilled  prophecy,   143. 


Gabriel,  and  establishment  of  the 
Kingdom,  91;  confirming  Davidic 
covenant,  161;  prophecy  through, 
141;  renewing  covenant,  99. 

Gentile  nations,  judgment  of  liv- 
ing, 164,  166;  world  empires  after 
the  first  four,  70;  world-power  in 
Armageddon,  158;  world-power  in 
ten  kingdoms,  150;  world-powers' 
end  sudden  and  destructive,  71; 


world-rule,   147;   world-rule   out- 
lined,   12. 

Gentiles,  blessing  to  come  through 
Israel,  76;  end  of  the  times  of 
the,  149,  156;  position  of  before 
and  after  grace,  77;  times  of  the, 
11,  69,  128,  141,  147. 

Glorified  saints  of  two  classes,   112. 

God  of  this  world,  131. 

God-haters  during  the  millennium, 
57. 

Gog  and  Magog,  157. 

Golden  Age,  20,   159. 

Good  fish  and  bad,  meaning  of,  162. 

Gospel  message  for  this  age,  105. 

Gospel,  preaching,  result  of,  109; 
greatest  triumphs  in  salvation,  in 
great  tribulation,  173. 

Government,  human,  established,  29. 

Grace,  bestows  righteousness 
through  faith,  34;  doctrines  of, 
entrusted  to  Paul,  103;  not  in- 
troducing Christ's  ministry,  75. 

Great  Tribulation,  16,  93,  144,  145, 
152,  165;  a  manifestation  of 
God's  wrath  upon  the  earth,  153; 
believers  exempted  from,  135  ff, 
139,  153;  details  of  in  Revela- 
tion, 151;  different  from  tribula- 
tion, 136,  137;  Gospel  wins  its 
greatest  triumphs  in,  173;  great 
m'ultitude  of  true  witnesses  com- 
ing out  of,  156;  not  mentioned 
in  the  Epistles,  126,  137;  to  end 
this  age,  163;  unbelieving  pro- 
fessing Christians  to  pass  through, 
149. 

Great  White  Throne  judgment  not 

at  end  of  this  age,  161. 
Greece,   as   a  world   empire,   70;   of 
Alexander   the   Great  in   Gentile 
world-rule,  12. 
Groans,  three  of  Romans,  8:  22-26, 
172. 

H 

Harrington's  **Oceana,"  159. 

Harvest  at  end  of  this  age,  162. 

Health  in  the  age  to  come,  170. 

Heavenly  sphere,  Israel's,  117;  the 
church's,  117. 

Hell,  Satan  not  reigning  in,  131. 

Heresy,  what  it  is,  121. 

Hesiod,    160. 

High-priestly  prayer  of  Jesus,  96. 

Higher  Criticism  due  to  ignorance 
of  prophecy,  44. 

Historical  interpretation  of  the 
Apocalypse,   2^6. 

Holy  Spirit,  advent  of  the,  101;  in- 
augurated the  dispensation  of 
grace,  94;  prediction  by,  prom- 
ised, 111;  groaning  intercession 
of  in  this  age,  173. 

Homiletics  in  prophetic  writings,  25. 

Horn,  little,   146,   148,   149. 

Human  body,  Church  like  the,   115. 

Human  government  established,  29. 


184 


TOPICAL  INDEX 


Hypocrisy,  of  the  professing  church, 
119,  126;  Roman,  shown  by 
Thyatira,  131;  what  it  is,  121. 


Idolatry,  Israel's  sin,  Z2. 

Image  vision   of  Daniel,   128. 

Immanuel  prediction  of  Isaiah  7,  24. 

Imposture  in  Messianic  prophecy  ex- 
cluded, 42,   43. 

Individual,  Christ's  new  message 
to,  80. 

Individual  message  offered  to  the 
Jews,  106. 

Iron,  in  present  national  world- 
system,  13;  period  of  Roman 
Empire,    12. 

Isaiah,  higher  critical  theory  of,  44. 

Israel,  belonging  to_  the  earthly 
sphere,  117;  Christ's  ministry 
primarily  to,  76;  Christ's  return 
to,  like  rising  of  the  sun,  132; 
confused  with  the  Church,  5; 
converted  at  Christ's  coming,  38, 
39,  166;  corporately  offered  the 
Kingdom,  106;  divided  becomes 
one  nation,  64;  earthly  blessings 
of  postponed,  80;  future  foretold 
in  Deuteronomy,  128;  invulner- 
able while  obedient  to  unseen 
King,  22,  23;  national  conver- 
sion, 38;  not  mistaken  in  expect- 
ing visible  and  material  kingdom, 
105;  not  the  church,  26;  old 
promise  to  concerning  the  King- 
dom, 123;  peace  for,  conditions 
of,  23;  pilgrim  pathway,  96; 
promises  to,  not  limiting  works 
and  purpose  of  the  age^  to  come, 
161;  regathered  at  Christ's  com- 
ing, 64,  74,  166;  renewed  offer 
of  the  King  to,  106;  second 
chance  of  to  accept  their  Messiah, 
107;  to  be  first  of  the  nations, 
38;  to  be  restored  to  the  Land, 
38,  64,  109;  to  bless  the  whole 
earth,  38;  was  God  partial  to, 
30. 


Jacob,  ladder  of,  41. 

James,  Apostle,  summing  up  of 
council  at  Jerusalem,   107. 

Japan,  perhaps  in  final  invasion  of 
the  Holy  Land,    157. 

Jeremiah's  kingdom  predictions,   64. 

Jerusalem,  capital  of  the  Kingdom 
7Z;  conquered  by  Nebuchadnez- 
zar, 11,  12;  destroyed  by  the 
Romans,  143;  disciples  must 
begin  at^  103;  during  the  Times 
of  the  Gentiles,  69;  final  attack 
upon,  72,  157,  158;  first  council 
at,  107;  Necco,  King  of  Egypt, 
first  Gentile  overlord  of,  11;  re- 
built,  142. 


Jew,  first,  and  also  to  the  Gentile, 
for  both  kingdom  and  Gospel 
truths,   76\   first  to  the,   103. 

Jews,  covenant  with  the,  144,  145; 
persecuting  Christianity,  130; 
remnant  of,  terribly  persecuted, 
157;  repentance  and  conversion 
of,  72,. 

Jewish,  conception  of  the  age  to 
come,  161;  expectation  and 
Lord's  return  confused,  133; 
hope  of  the  kingdom  met  whole 
and  entire  by  Jesus,  102;  minis- 
try of  the  Apostles,  103;  note, 
none  in  upper  chamber  discourse, 
96;  remnant  sealed,  156;  rem- 
nant turns  to  Christ  out  of  the 
great  tribulation,  173;  the  dis- 
course on  Olivet,  91. 

Jezebel,  Rome  a  true,   132. 

Job's   Messianic   Prophecy,   41. 

John  the  Baptist,  announcement  of 
the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  his,  86; 
begins  New  Testament  prophecy, 
77. 

Joshua,  victorious  captain  like,  41. 

Judgment,  of  the  "Great  White 
Throne,"  not  at  end  of  this  age, 
161;  of  living  Gentile  nations, 
164,  166;  of  the  wicked  dead, 
174. 

Judgments,  received  by  world  pow- 
ers during  the  great  tribulation, 
153;  trumpet,  in  the  earth,  152; 
world,  believers  not  involved  in, 
116. 

Justice  inexorably  enforced  in  the 
age  to  come,  169. 


K 


King,  Prophet,  and  Priest,  75. 

Kingdom,  and  Church  not  synony- 
mous, 26,  56,  112;  at  hand  at 
Christ's  first  advent,  169;  de- 
scription of  Isaiah,  11,  63;  men- 
tioned only  25  times  in  Acts  and 
the  Epistles,  111;  mission  of,  114; 
of  the  prophets  founded  upon 
the  Davidic  Covenant,  7Z,  91; 
on  earth  not  the  goal  of  the 
Church,  96;  Parables  of  the, 
104;  postponed,  not  abandoned, 
at  Jesus'  ascension,  108;  preach- 
ing, when  Christ  turned  away 
from,  80;  prophecies  of  Zecha- 
riah,  72  ft*. ;  shown  by  the  Trans- 
figuration, 112;  testimony  sum- 
marized in  Isaiah,  60;  the,  210; 
to  be  established  by  power,  not 
persuasion,  74;  to  be  set  up  on 
the  earth,  113;  to  extend  over 
the  earth,  74. 

Kingdom  age,   39,   46,   106. 

Kingdom  hope,  of  Israel  met  whole 
and   entire  by  Jesus,   102. 

Kingdom  keyword,  righteousness, 
64. 


TOPICAL  INDEX 


185 


Kingdom  of  God,  and  Kingdom  of 
Heaven,  13,  76,  102;  wider  than 
Jewish  truth,   102. 

Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  Kingdom 
of  God,  13,  76,  102;  and  King- 
dom of  God,  difference  between, 
53  ff. ;  announced  by  Christ,  86; 
announced  by  John  the  Baptist, 
77 y  86;  announced  by  the  Twelve, 
86,  87;  established,  141;  mys- 
teries of  the,  87,  142,  143;  not 
now  '*at  hand,"  79;  replacing  all 
other  earthly  kingdoms,  71; 
time  of  its  coming,   102. 

Kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ,   158. 

Kingship  to  be  set  up,   18. 


Land,  Israel  to  be  restored  to  her, 
109. 

Laodicea,  message  to,  134  ff . ;  and 
Thyatira,  the^  "Babylon"  relig- 
ious organization,   153. 

Laodicean  profession  utterly  apos- 
tate   139. 

"Last  Adam,"  Christ  the,   160. 

Last,    Christ  the,    160. 

Last  days,    119. 

Law,  not  grace,  began  Clirist's  min- 
istry, 75. 

Lawless  one,  145. 

Leprosy,  incurable,  type  of  sin,  169. 

Literal  fulfilments  of  Scripture 
prophecies,   5. 

Little  horn,  19,  146,  148,  149;  of 
Daniel,   19. 

Living  believers  changed  at  Christ's 
coming,   165. 

Longevity  in  the  age  to  come,   170. 

"Looking"  for  the  Lord's  return, 
124. 

Lord's  Supper,  meaning  of,  96. 

Lot,  as  in  the  days  of,  at  end  of 
this  age,   15. 

Love  more  important  than  zeal,  129. 

Luther,  calling  men  back  to  the 
Bible,  131. 

M 

Macaulay  on  arrest  in  the  Reforma- 
tion,  133. 

Magog  and  Gog,  157. 

Man  of  Sin,  19,  119,  126,  144,   145. 

Mason's  "New  Atlantis,"   159. 

Material  kingdom  to  be  Israel's,  105. 

Medo-Persia  in  Gentile  world-rule, 
12,  70,  141. 

Melchizedek,  priest  after  the  order 
of,  41. 

Messiah,  Christ  confessed  as,  92; 
cut  off,  142;  Seed  of  Abraham, 
Son  of  David,  Son  of  God,  and 
Son^  of  man,  ^2\  to  fulfill 
Davidic  covenant,  161;  to  sit  on 
throne  of  David,  reaffirmed  in 
Olivet  Discourse,  99. 


Messiah's  Kingdom  of  Heaven  es- 
tablished, 141. 

Messianic  message  of  the  Prophets, 
39;  prophecies,  varied,  40-42; 
prophecy  summarized,  49;  proph- 
ecy,  when   begun,   40. 

Millennial  kingdom  on  earth,  the 
nations  under,  56. 

Millennium,  after  the,  57. 

Miracles,  working  by  demons,  153. 

Mission,  of  the  church,  117;  of  the 
Kingdom,  114. 

Missionary  meetings  of  the  Church, 
how  many  attend,  135. 

More's  "Utopia,"  159. 

Morning  star  precedes  sun-rising, 
132. 

Moses,  a  type  of  one  class  of  glori- 
fied saints,  112;  deliverer  like, 
41;  prophecy  of  Christ,  75. 

Mount  of  Olives  in  prophecy,  48; 
standing  for  Israel's  future,  92. 

Muller,   Max,   160. 

Mystery,  form  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Heaven,  56;  in  the  Scripture, 
87;  of  the  Church,  90,  102,  114; 
of  the  Church  unfolded  in  the 
Epistles,    114. 

Mysteries  of  the  Kingdom,  79,  87, 
142.   143. 

N 

Name  of  Christ,  zeal  for,  129. 

Napoleon  Bonaparte,  20. 

National  .  conversion    of    the    world 

not  to  bring  in  the  Kingdom,  71. 
Nations,    judgment    of    the     living, 

166;  receiving  judgments  during 

the  great  tribulation,   153. 
Nature      withholding      her      greater 

forces    until    the    age    to    come, 

171. 
Nebuchadnezzar,    147;    commencing 

the    times    of    the    Gentiles,    69; 

conquest      of      Jerusalem,       12; 

dream,  69  ff. ;  image,  17. 
Necco,  King  of  Egypt,  first  Gentile 

overlord  of  Jerusalem,   11. 
New  heavens  and  new  earth,  174. 
New  promise,  not  of  Clirist's  return 

to  the  Church,   100;  of  Jesus  in 

upper      chamber,      97;      to      the 

Church,  99,  123,  126. 
New  Testament  prophecy,  beginning 

of,  77,  , 
Noah  conditions  at  end  of  this  age, 

15;   covenant  to,  29. 


O 


Olivet  discourse,  82,  91,  105,  123, 
126,143,162;  confirining  promises 
made  to  the  fathers  concerning 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  94; 
Jewish,  92',  reaffirming  old  prom- 
ise to  Israel,  99. 


186 


TOPICAL  INDEX 


optimism,  false,  23,  25,  159;  ground- 
less, in  Laodicean  church,  139; 
in   the   present   crisis   shallow,   5. 

Organism,  Church  an,   115. 

Organization,  Church  not  an,  114. 

Outcalling  frcmi  among  the  Gentiles 
of  "a  people  for  his  name,"  164; 
of  the  Church,   143. 


Palsy,  type  of  the  sinner's  helpless- 
ness,  169. 

Parable  of  the  bad  fish,  56;  of  the 
Kingdom,  55,  56,  87;  of  the 
leaven,  56;  of  the  tares,  55. 

Paradox  in  prophetic  testimony,  44. 

Passover,  bread  and  wine,  signifi- 
cance of,  96;  significance  in  the 
upper  chamber,  95. 

Paul,  church  truth  committed  to, 
114;  entrusted  with  doctrines  of 
grace,  103;  unfolding  the  mys- 
tery of  the  Church,  102,  103. 

Peace,  permanent,  not  possible  in 
this  age,  18;  under  the  Beast, 
19;  when  there  is  no  peace,  159; 
without  righteousness,  prophets 
of,   5. 

^Pentecost,  Peter's  sermon  on  day 
of,   105. 

Perdition,  son  of,  144. 

Pergamos,  message  to,   130,   131.  _ 

Persecutions  of  early  centuries, 
130;  to  continue  in  this  age, 
163. 

Pestilences  in  this  age,   16,   163. 

Peter's  confession  of  Christ  as  the 
Messiah,  92;  second  sermon, 
106;  sermon  on  Day  of  Pente- 
cost, 105. 

Philadelphia,  message  to,  134  ff. 

Pilgrim  pathway  of  the  Church,  95. 

Pilgrims  and  strangers,  the  Church, 
96. 

Plato's  "Republic,"  159. 

Post-tribulationism,   119. 

Poor  to  be  protected  in  the  age  to 
come,    168. 

Prayer-meetings  of  the  church,  how 
many   attend,    135. 

Prediction  by  the  Holy  Spirit  prom- 
ised, 111. 

Predictive  element  in  the  Epistles 
and  Revelation,  118. 

Predictive  prophecy,  23;  great 
themes  of,  38. 

Present  age  a  parenthesis  in  the 
prophetic  order,  79. 

Priest,  Prophet,  and  King,  75. 

Prince,  of  this  world,  131;  that  shall 
come,  the  man  of  sin,  149;  who 
is  to  come,  the  Abomination,  143, 
145. 

Professing  church,  foreview  of  its 
history,  128;  represents  Chris- 
tianity,  131. 


Profession  may  not  be  true  belief, 
118. 

Program,  Divine,  for  this  age,   109. 

Prophecies,  in  the  Epistles,  the  great 
theme  of,  122;  of  Scripture  au- 
thenticated by  Christ,  5. 

Prophecy,  fulfilled,  143;  human,  al- 
ways futile,  10;  in  the  Epistles, 
119;  nearly  one-fourth  of  the 
Bible,  24;  predictive,  23,  25. 

Prophet,  appearance  in  Israel,  mean- 
ing of,  21;  as  forthteller,  seer, 
patriot,  22;  false  message  of,  on 
peace,  23;  Priest,  and  King,  75; 
qualifications  of,   22. 

Prophetic  element  in  the  Epistles, 
126;  writings  mostly  sermons, 
25. 
Prophetical  Books,  how  arranged  in 
the  Bible,  40;  interpretation  gov- 
erned by  inspired  rule,  9. 

Prosperity,  in  Laodicean  church, 
139. 

Protestant^  Reformation,  133,  134.^ 

Protestantism,  and  Romanism  unit- 
ing in  Babylon,  153;  final  state 
of,  shown  in  messages  to  Phila- 
delphia and   Laodicea,    134,   135. 

Ptolemaic  chronology,   142. 


Race,  destiny  of  the,  to  be  fulfilled 
in  the  age  to  come,  161. 

Rapture,  great  tribulation  never 
mentioned  with,  137;  not  to  be 
secret,  124;  of  believers,  119, 
148,   165. 

Redemption  of  the  body  at  the  com- 
ing of  the  Lord,   173. 

Reformation,  Protestant,  13^. 

Regathering  of  Israel  at  Christ's 
coming,   64,   164,   166. 

Rejecting  the  King  through  Stephen, 
107. 

Rejection,  of  the  absent  King,  in 
parable,  105;  of  the  Messiah, 
Israel's  second,  107. 

Remnant,  Jewish,  sealed,  156;  Jew- 
ish, turns  to  Christ,  out  of  the 
great  tribulation,  173;  of  Israel 
at  Christ's  return,  6Z',  of  Jews, 
terribly  persecuted,  157;  of  true 
believers,   132. 

Restitution,  Times  of,   106. 

Restoration,  of  humanity  and  the 
earth,  52;  of  Israel,  64. 

Resurrection,  at  the  Lord's  return, 
123,  165;  foreseen  by  David, 
105. 

Return,  Christ's,  accompanied  by 
sons  of  God  in  glory,  165;  of 
the  Lord  and  the  Jewish  expec- 
tation confused,   133. 

Revelation,  Book  of,  12i7  ff. ;  church 
not  mentioned  in  the  details  of 
the  great  tribulation  in,  138; 
Historical   interpretation   of,  26\ 


TOPICAL  INDEX 


187 


on  history  of  the  church  on 
earth,  148;  on  the  great  tribula- 
tion, 151;  predictive  element  in 
the,   118. 

Righteousness,  the  central  word  of 
the  prophets,  32;  in  the  age  to 
come,   168. 

Risen  Christ  to  fulfill  Kingdom 
promises  to   Israel,    105. 

Rising  of  the  sun,  Christ's  return 
to  Israel,   132i. 

Rod  of  iron,  Christ  to  reign  with  a, 
56,  169. 

Roman  Empire,  four  phases  of,  12- 
14;  rersecutions  in,  130;  to  be 
reconstructed  in  ten  kingdoms, 
153;  to  be  revived,  147. 

Roman  hypocrisy,  shown  by  Thya- 
tira,  131. 

Romans'  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
143._ 

Romanism  and  Protestantism  unit- 
ing in  Babylon,   153. 

Rome,  ancient,  nations  formed  out 
of  in  war  to-day,  13;  as  a  world 
empire,  70;  in  Gentile  world- 
rule,   12. 

Russia  believed  to  head  invasion  by 
Gog  and  Magog,  157. 


Son    of    Abraham,    Son    of    David, 

Christ  as,   77. 
Son  of  God  eternal,  59. 
Son  of  perdition,   144. 
Sons   of  Go^d,   in   glory,  accompany- 
ing   Christ's    return,    165;    to    be 

manifested   in  the   age  to  come, 

170. 
Spirit,  baptism  of  the,   114. 
"Spiritual"  interpretation  of  Christ's 

kingship   excluded,   58. 
**Spiritualized,"  Kingdom,  not  to  be, 

108   . 
Spiritualizing  prophecies,  26. 
Star,  out  of  Jacob,  41. 
Stephen's  martyrdom,  significance  of 

107. 
Stone  cut  out  without  hands,  17,  70. 
Strangers  and  pilgrims,  the  Church, 

96,   117. 
Suffering   and    glory,    in    Messianic 

prophecy,  43;  of  Messiah,  45.^ 
Sullen    obedience   to    Christ    during 

the  millennium,  56. 
Sun,  a  type  of  Christ,  40;  rising  of, 

Christ's  return  to  Israel,  132. 
Sunday's,     Billy,     letter     to     Major 

Cole,  22. 


Saints,  glorified,  of  two  classes, 
112. 

Sardis,  message  to,  133. 

Satan,  gives  his  full  power  to  the 
beast,  115;  not  reigning  in  hell, 
131 ;  prince  and  god  of  this  world, 
131;  removed  in  the  age  to 
come,  169;  last  test  of  humanity 
at  the  end  of  the  age  to  come, 
174. 

Satan-Bruiser,  promise  of  the,  28. 

"Second  man,"  Christ  the,  40,  160. 

Secret  rapture  by  no  means  scrip- 
tural,  124. 

Seed  of  the  woman,  40. 

Sermon  on  the  Mount,  2Zy  75. 

Sevenl  churches  in  Revelation, 
127  ff. 

Seven  years,  last  of  the  age,  141  ff. 

Seventieth  week  of  Daniel's  proph- 
ecy, 143,  144. 

Seventy  sevens,  141;  of  Divine  deal- 
ing with  Daniel's  people,  142. 

Seventy  weeks,  when  fulfilled, 
142  ff. 

Sign,  given  to  Ahaz,  24;  none  for 
Christ's  coming  for  his  Church, 
^  97,   124. 

Signs,  in  the  heavens,  158;  preced- 
ing Christ's  coming,  123,  1214. 

Sin,  all  consequences  of,  dealt  with 
by   Christ,    169. 

Smyrna,  message  to,  129,  130. 

Social  order  perfected,  God's  re- 
vealed purpose,   161. 

Sodom  and  Gomorrah  conditions  at 
end  of  this  age,  15,  162. 


Tares  and  wheat  in  the  present 
age,  118,  162. 

Temple,  destroyed  by  the  Romans, 
143;  service  to  be  restored,  145; 
standing  for  Israel's  past,  92. 

Ten  kings,   147. 

Ten  kingdoms,  19,  20,  70,  150,  153. 

Theocracy,  Israel  a,  Z2\  over  Israel 
not  established  at  Christ's  first 
coming,  91. 

Throne,  of  Christ's  glory,  93,  124; 
of  David,  58,   99,   106. 

Thrones,  twelve,  for  the  twelve 
apostles,  96. 

Thyatira  and^  Laodicea,  the  "Baby- 
lon"  religious  organization,   153. 

Thyatira,  message  to,  131. 

Time  note,  none  for  Christ's  coming 
for  his  Church,  97. 

Time  of  the  coming  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  102. 

Times  of  Restitution,  106;  of  the 
Gentiles,  11,  14,  69,  128,  141, 
147,   149,  156. 

Transfiguration,  a  Kingdom  picture, 
112. 

Translated  without  seeing  death, 
glorified  saints,  113. 

Tribulation,  church  not  to  pass 
through,  119,  135  ff.  139,  153, 
different  from  great  tribulation, 
136,  137;  great,  93,  144,  145,  151, 
152,  153;  great,  not  mentioned  in 
the  Epistles,  126,  137;  great  mul- 
titude of  true  witnesses  coming 
out  of  great,  156;  unbelieving 
professing     Christians     to     pass 


188 


TOPICAL  INDEX 


through    great,    149;    see    Great 

Tribulation. 
"Triumphal    entry"     strangely    mis- 
called,   81. 
Trumpet    judgments    in    the    earth, 

152. 
Twelve   disciples,   foundation   stones 

of  the   Church,   94. 
Twelve     thrones,     for     the     twelve 

apostles,   96. 
Twelve  Tribes,  to  be  judged  by  the 

twelve  disciples,  93. 

U 

United  States  of  the  World,  10, 
19. 

Upper  Chamber  discourse.  111; 
promise  of  the  Lord's  return, 
122,  123,  132;  significance,  95. 

Utopia  God's  revealed  purpose,  161. 


Vedas,  160. 

\^ials  of  the  wrath  of  God,  152. 

Vineyard  of  Jehovah,  35. 

Virgin's  Son  predicted  to  Ahaz,  2)7. 

Visible  and  material  Kingdom  to  be 

Israel's,  105. 
V^isible,  Christ's  coming,   124. 

W 

"Waiting"    for    the    Lord's    return 

124. 
War,   ceaseless,    166;    present,    does 

the    Bible   throw    light   on.   9-20; 

present,   without   parallel   in   hu- 


man history,  9;  to  the  end  of 
this  age,  15,  16,  144,  163;  ended 
forever,  5;  ended  in  the  age  to 
come,   168. 

"Watching"  for  the  Lord's  return, 
.  124. 

Week,  Daniel's  seventieth,  152; 
meaning  seven  years,  142. 

Wheat  and  tares,  meaning  of,  162; 
of  the  present  age,   118. 

Wild  beast  vision  of  Daniel,  128, 
145. 

Witness  must  have  first-hand  knowl- 
edge,  103. 

World,  believers  in.  but  not  of, 
116;  church  or  Baoylon,  153;  em- 
pires, 19,  70,  147;  empires,  none 
after  the  first  four,  70;  incorrect 
translation  for  "age,"  165;  Satan, 
prince  and_  god  of ,  131;  to  be 
converted  in  this  age,  unscrip- 
tural,  161;^  to  be  converted, 
when,  109;  judgments,  believers 
not  involved  in,  116;  powers  re- 
ceiving judgments  during  the 
great  tribulation,  153;  war,  pres- 
,  ent,   19. 

W^orld-wide  evangelization  forgotten 
in  the  Reformation,  133. 

Worship,  of  the  beast,  157;  of  tke 
man  of  sin,   145. 

Wrath,  believers  not  appointed  unto, 
133. 


Zeal,   not   equal   to   love,    129. 

Zechariah's  kingdom  prophecies,  721 
ff. ;  vision  of  the  Messiah's  Sec- 
ond Coming,  92. 


