^^^-£ 


IWHAT  IS  YOUR 
HOPE? 


A   aUESTION  FOR   1857. 


'-;# 


BY  THE 

EEY.  J.  C.  RYLE,  B.  A., 

Christ  Church,  Oxford, 

RECTOR    OF    HELMINGHAM,   SUFFOLK. 
Author  of  "  Home  Truths;*  ''Keep  it  Holy^*  ^ij. 


ill 


fi       ^^  Good  hope  throvgh  grace!^ — 2  Thess.  ii.  16.      fl 

I       -^..^.^^^^ . I 

I 

SECOND  EDITION,  TENTH  THOUSAND.  !| 

I 

IPSWICH:       •  I 

WILLIAM  HUls'T,  STEAM  PRESS,  TAVERN  STREET.    || 

LONDON :  1 

WERTHEIM  &  MACINTOSH,  24,  PATERNOSTER  ROW.    I 

NISBET  &  Co.,  21,  BEUNERS  STREET.  I 

Price  Two  Shillings  per  Dozen.  S 

M.DCCC.LVI.  J| 


Now  TuUishing  in  Monthly  Farts,  pp.  48,  price  6d.  each. 


EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS  ON  THE  GOSPELS. 

FOB  FAMILY  AND  PRIVATE  USE. 

BY  THE  REV.  J.  C.  RYLE,  B.  A., 

CHRIST    CHUaCH,    OXFORD; 

KECTOR   OF  HELMINGHAM,   SUFFOLK; 
Author  of  "  Home  Truths"  Sfc. 

In  order  to  prevent  misapprehension,  it  seems  desirable  to  explain  the  character 
and  design  of  the  work  which  forms  the  subject  of  tliis  advertisement. 

The  work  now  advertised  is  a  continuous  series  of  short,  plain  "Expositions" 
of  the  four  Gospels,  in  regular  order  from  the  beginning  of  St.  Matthew.  The 
passages  expounded  Avill  not  exceed  an  average  length  of  ten  or  twelve  verses. 
The  Expository  Thoughts  will  not,  as  a  general  rule,  exceed  three  pages. 

The  author's  design  in  this  work  is  not  to  expound  every  verse  of  the  Gospels. 
He  has  thought  it  better  to  select  three  or  four  leading  points  in  each  passage, 
and  to  dwell  exclusively  on  them.  He  has  tried  in  each  *'  Exposition  "  to  place 
himself  in  the  position  of  one  who  is  addressing  a  mixed  company,  and  "  has 
but  a  short  time."  For  this  reason  he  has  constantly  left  unsaid  things  that 
might  have  been  said,  and  endeavoured  to  dwell  chiefly  on  the  things  needful 
to  salvation.     Brevity  and  thoughtfulness  have  been  his  gi'eat  aim. 

Commentaries  and  Expositions  of  Scripture  are  so  numerous  in  the  present 
day,  that  the  author  feels  it  necessary  to  say  something  as  to  the  class  of  readers 
whom  he  has  in  view  in  putting  forth  these  Expository  Thouglits. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  hoped  that  the  work  now  advertised  may  be  found 
suitable  for  use  at  family  prayers.  The  supply  of  works  adapted  for  this  purpose 
has  never  yet  been  equal  to  the  demand. 

In  the  next  place,  it  is  hoped  that  the  work  now  advertised  may  prove  an 
aid  to  those  who  visit  the  sick  and  the  poor.  The  number  of  persons  who  visit 
hospitals,  sick-rooms,  and  cottages,  with  an  earnest  desire  to  do  spiritual  good, 
is  now  very  great.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  proper  books  for  reading  on 
such  occasions  are  much  wanted. 

Last,  but  not  least,  it  is  hoped  that  the  work  now  advertised  may  not  be  found 
unprofitable  for  private  reading,  as  a  companion  to  the  Gospels.  There  are  not 
a  few  whose  callings  and  engagements  make  it  impossible  for  them  to  read  a  large 
portion  of  God's  Word  before  going  into  the  world  for  their  daily  work.  It  is 
thought  that  such  may  find  it  helpful  to  their  memories  to  have  a  few  leading 
points  set  before  their  minds  every  morning,  in  connection  with  what  they  read. 
A  little  Bible  truth  well  fastened  down  on  the  mind,  is  better  than  a  great 
quantity  scattered  loosely  and  lying  on  its  surface. 

The  Exposition  of  St.  Matthew  is  now  complete  in 
one  vol.,  price  6s.  cloth. 

***  Where  any  difficulty  is  experienced  in  procuring  this  Publication,  it  will  he 
fuj'warded  regularly  (post  free),  upon  application  to  the  Publisher,  at  Ipswich. 


WHAT  IS  YOUR  HOPE  ? 


^^Good  hope  through  grace !^ 

2  Thess.  II.  10. 


Header, 

You  see  a  question  at  the  head  of  this 
page.  In  asking  it  I  make  no  secret  of  my  meaning. 
I  want  you  to  consider,  ^^what  is  your  hope  about 
your  soul  ?  ^^ 

Another  year  in  our  short  lives  is  drawing  to  a 
close.  The  sand  is  running  quickly  out  of  the  glass. 
We  are  drifting  on  toward  death,  judgment,  and 
eternity.  A  few  more  winters  and  we  shall  be  gone. 
Surely  you  will  not  wonder  if  I  cry  aloud,  as  a 
spiritual  watchman,  and  say,  ^^what  is  your  hope 
about  your  soul  ?  ^^ 

^^I  hope^^  is  a  very  common  expression.  Everybody 
can  say,  ^^  I  hope.^^  On  no  subject  is  the  expression 
used  so  commonly  as  it  is  about  religion.  Nothing 
is  more  frequent  than  to  hear  men  turn  off  some 
home-thrust  at  conscience  by  this  convenient  form  of 
words,  ^^I  hope.^^ — ^^I  hope  it  will  be  all  right  at 
last.^^ — ^'  I  hope  I  shall  be  a  better  man  some  day.^' 
— ^^  I  hope  we  shall  all  get  to  heaven.'^ — But  why  do 
they  hope  ?  On  what  is  their  hope  built  ?  Too  often 
they  cannot  tell  you.  Too  often  it  is  a  mere  excuse 
for  avoiding  a  disagreeable  subject.  ^^  Hoping  '^  they 
-live  on.  ^^  Hoping  ^^  they  grow  old.  "  Hoping  ^^  they 
die  at  last,  —  and  find  too  often  that  they  are  lost 
for  ever  in  hell. 


4 

Reader,  I  ask  your  serious  attention  to  the  subject 
of  this  tract.  It  is  one  of  the  deepest  importance. 
^^  We  are  saved  by  hope."  (Rom.  viii.  24.)  Let  us, 
then,  make  sure  that  our  hope  is  sound. — Have  you 
a  hope  that  your  sins  are  pardoned,  your  heart  re- 
newed, and  your  soul  at  peace  with  God  ?  Then  see 
to  it  that  your  hope  is  ^^  good,"  and  ^^  lively,"  and  one 
that  ^^maketh  not  ashamed."  Consider  your  ways. 
Shrink  not  from  honest,  searching  inquiry  into  the 
condition  of  your  soul.  If  your  hope  is  good,  exami- 
nation will  do  it  no  harm.  If  your  hope  is  bad,  it 
is  high  time  to  know  it,  and  seek  a  better. 

There  are  five  marks  of  a  ^^  good  hope."  I  desire 
to  place  them  before  you  in  order.  Ask  yourself  what 
you  know  of  them.  Prove  your  own  state  by  them. 
Happy  is  he  who  can  say  of  each  of  these  marks, — 
'^  I  know  it  by  experience.  This  is  my  hope  about  my 
soul." 

I.  In  the  first  place,  a  good  hope  is  a  hope  that  a 
man  can  explain.  What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  ^^  Be 
ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh 
you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you."  (1  Pet.  iii. 
15.) 

If  your  hope  is  sound,  you  must  be  able  to  give 
some  account  of  it.  You  must  be  able  to  show  why, 
and  wherefore,  and  on  what  grounds,  and  for  what 
reason  you  expect  to  go  to  heaven  when  you  die.  Now 
can  you  do  this  ? 

Let  no  one  misunderstand  my  meaning.  I  do  not  say 
that  deep  learning  and  great  knowledge  are  needful  to 
salvation.  A  man  may  know  twenty  languages,  and 
have  the  whole  body  of  divinity  at  his  finger's  ends,  and 
yet  be  lost.  A  man  may  be  unable  to  read,  and  have 
a  very  weak  understanding,  and  yet  be  saved.  But  I 
do  say  that  a  man  must  know  what  his  hope  is,  and 
1)6  able  to  tell  us  its  nature.  I  cannot  believe  that  a 
man  has  got  a  thing,  if  he  knows  nothing  about  it. 


Once  more^  let  no  one  misunderstand  my  meaning. 
I  do  not  say  that  a  power  of  talking*  well  is  necessary 
to  salvation.  There  may  be  many  fine  words  on  a 
man^s  lips^  and  not  a  whit  of  grace  in  his  heart. 
There  may  be  few  and  stammering  words^  and  yet 
deep  feeling  within,  planted  there  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
There  are  some  who  cannot  speak  many  words  for 
Christ,  and  yet  would  die  for  Him.  But  for  all  this, 
I  do  say  that  the  man  who  has  a  good  hope  ought 
to  be  able  to  tell  us  why.  If  he  can  tell  us  no  more 
than  this,  that  ^^  he  feels  himself  a  sinner  and  has  no 
hope  but  in  Christ,^^  it  is  something.  But  if  he  can 
tell  us  nothing  at  all,  I  must  suspect  that  he  has  no 
real  hope. 

I  know  that  the  opinion  just  expressed  displeases 
many.  Thousands  can  see  no  necessity  for  that  clear 
knowledge,  which  I  believe  to  be  essential  to  a  saving 
hope.  So  long  as  a  man  goes  to  Church  on  Sunday, 
and  has  his  children  baptized,  they  think  we  ought  to 
be  content.  ^^  Knowledge,'^  they  tell  us,  ^^  may  be  very 
well  for  clergymen  and  professors  of  theology,  but  it 
is  too  much  to  require  it  of  common  men.^^ 

My  answer  to  all  such  people  is  short  and  simple. 
Where  in  the  whole  New  Testament  shall  we  find 
that  men  were  called  Christians,  unless  they  kne^v 
something  of  Christianity?  Will  any  one  try  to 
persuade  us,  that  a  Corinthian  Christian,  or  a  Colossian, 
or  Thessalonian,  or  Philippian,  or  Ephesian,  could  not 
have  told  us  what  was  his  hope  about  his  soul  ?  Let 
those  believe  it  who  will.  I,  for  one,  cannot.  I  be- 
lieve that  in  requiring  a  man  to  know  the  ground  of 
his  hope,  I  am  only  setting  up  the  standard  of  the 
New  Testament.  Ignorance  may  suit  a  Roman 
Catholic  well  enough.  He  belongs  to  what  he  believes 
is  the  true  Church  !  He  does  as  his  priest  tells  hina 
He  asks  no  more ! — But  ignorance  ought  never  to  be 
the   characteristic   of  a   Protestant   Christian.      He 


6 

ought  to  know  what  he  believes^  and  if  he  does  not 
know  he  is  in  a  bad  way. 

Reader^  search  your  heart,,  and  see  how  the  matter 
^stands  with  your  soul.  Can  you  tell  us  nothing  more 
than  this^  that  ^^you  hope  to  be  saved  ? ''  Can  you  give 
no  explanation  of  the  grounds  of  your  confidence? 
Can  you  show  us  nothing  more  satisfactory  than  your 
own  vague  expectation?  If  this  be  the  case^  you 
are  in  imminent  peril  of  being  lost  for  ever.  Like 
Ignorance^  in  Pilgrim^  s  Progress^  you  may  get  to  your 
journey^s  end^  and  be  ferried  by  Vain  Hope  over  the 
river^  without  much  trouble.  But  like^  Ignorance^  you 
may  find  to  your  sorrow  that  there  is  no  admission 
for  you  into  the  celestial  city.  None  enter  in  there 
but  those  who  know  what  they  have  believed.^ 

I  lay  down  this  principle  as  a  starting  pointy  and 
I  ask  you  to  consider  it  well.  I  know  that  there  are 
diflerent  degrees  of  grace  among  true  Christians.  I 
do  not  forget  that  there  are  many  whose  faith  is  very 


*  "  Now,  while  I  was  gazing  upon  all  these  things,  I  turned  my 
head  to  look  back,  and  saw  Ignorance  coming  up  to  the  river  side : 
but  he  soon  got  over,  and  that  without  half  the  difficulty  which  the 
other  two  men  met  with.  For  it  happened  that  there  was  then  in 
that  place  one  Valnhope,  a  ferry-man,  that  with  his  boat  helped  him 
over  :  so  he,  as  the  other  I  saw,  did  ascend  the  hill  to  come  up  to  the 
gate,  only  he  came  alone  ;  neither  did  any  man  meet  him  with  the 
least  encouragement.  When  he  was  come  up  to  the  gate,  he  looked 
up  to  the  writing  that  was  above,  and  then  began  to  knock,  supposing 
that  entrance  should  have  been  quickly  administered  to  him.  But  he 
was  asked  by  the  man  that  looked  over  the  top  of  the  gate,  '*  Whence 
come  you  ?  And  what  would  you  have  ?"  He  answered,  *'  I  have  ate 
and  drank  in  the  presence  of  the  King,  and  he  has  taught  in  our 
streets."  Then  they  asked  him  for  his  certificate,  that  they  might  go 
in  and  show  it  to  the  King.  So  he  fumbled  in  his  bosom  for  one,  and 
found  none.  Then  said  they.  Have  you  none  ?  But  the  man 
answered  never  a  word. 

So  they  told  the  King  ;  but  he  would  not  come  down  to  see  him,  but 
commanded  the  two  shining  ones,  that  conducted  Christian  and  Hope- 
ful to  the  City,  to  take  Ignorance  and  bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and 
have  him  away.  Then  they  took  him  up,  and  carried  him  through 
the  air  to  the  door  that  I  saw  in  the  side  of  the  hill,  and  put  him  in 
there.  Then  I  saw  that  there  was  a  way  to  hell,  even  from  the  gate 
of  heaven,  as  well  as  from  the  city  of  destruction." — BunyarCs 
Pilgrim^ s  Progress. 


weak^  and  whose  hope  is  very  small,  in  the  family  of  God. 
But  I  believe  confidently,  that  the  standard  of  require- 
ment I  have  set  up,  is  not  a  whit  too  high.  I  believe 
that  the  man  who  has  a  good  hope  will  always  be 
able  to   give  some  account  of  it. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  a  good  hope  is  a  hope 
that  is  drawn  from  Scripture.  What  says  David?  ^^I 
hope  in  thy  word/^  ^^  Remember  the  word  unto  thy 
servant,  upon  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope.^^ 
What  says  St.  Paul  ?  "  Whatsoever  things  were  writ- 
ten aforetime,  were  written  for  our  learning,  that  we 
through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  might 
have  hope.'^   (Psalm  cxix.  81,  49.  Rom.  xv.  4.) 

If  your  hope  is  sound,  you  ought  to  be  able  to  turtt 
to  some  text,  or  fact,  or  doctrine  of  God^s  word,  as  the 
source  of  it.  Your  confidence  must  arise  from  some- 
thing that  God  has  said  in  His  Bible,  and  that  your 
heart  has  received  and  believed. 

It-  is  not  enough  to  have  good  feelings  about  the 
state  of  our  souls.  We  may  flatter  ourselves  that  all 
is .  right,  and  that  we  are  going  to  heaven  when  we 
die,  and  yet  have  nothing  to  show  for  our  reason 
but  mere  fancy  and  imagination.  ^^The  heart  is  de- 
ceitful above  all  things.^^  ^^  He  that  trusteth  his  own 
heart  is  a  fool.^^ — I  have  frequently  heard  dying  people 
say,  that  ^^they  felt  quite  happy  and  ready  to  go.^^  I 
have  heard  them  say,  that  ^*^they  felt  as  if  they  craved 
nothing  in  this  world.^^  And  all  this  time  I  have 
remarked  that  they  were  profoundly  ignorant  of 
Scripture,  and  seemed  unable  to  lay  firm  hold  on  a 
single  truth  of  the  Gospel.  I  never  can  feel  comfort 
about  such  people.  I  am  persuaded  that  there  is 
something  wrong  in  their  condition.  Good  feelings 
without  Scripture  do  not  make  up  a  good  hope. 

It  is  not  enough  to  have  the  good  opinion  of  others 
about  the  state  of  our  souls.  We  may  be  told  by 
others  on  our  death-beds,  to  *^^keep  up  our  spirits^^  and 


8 

^^not  to  be  afraid/^  We  may  be  reminded  that  we  have 
lived  good  lives^  and  had  a  good  hearty  and  done  nobody 
any  harm^,  and  not  been  so  bad  as  many.  And  all 
this  time  our  friends  may  not  bring  forward  a  word  of 
Scripture^  and  may  be  feeding  ns  on  poison.  Such 
friends  are  miserable  comforters.  However  well  mean- 
ing, they  are  downright  enemies  to  onr  souls.  The 
good  opinion  of  others,  without  the  warrant  of  God^s 
word,  will  never  make  up  a  good  hope. 

Reader,  would  you  know  the  soundness  of  your 
own  hope  ?  Then  search  and  look  within  your  heart 
for  some  text,  or  doctrine,  or  fact  out  of  God's  book. 
There  will  always  be  some  one  or  more  on  which  your 
soul  hangs,  if  you  are  a  true  child  of  God.  The 
dying  thief  in  London,  who  was  visited  by  a  City 
Missionary,  and  found  utterly  ignorant  of  Chris- 
tianity, laid  hold  on  one  single  fact  in  the  Gospel, 
and  found  comfort  in  it.  That  fact  was  the  story  of 
the  penitent  thief.  '^  Sir,^'  he  said,  when  visited  the 
second  time,  *^^are  there  any  more  thieves  in  that  book, 
from  which  you  read  yesterday  T' — The  dying  Hindoo 
who  was  found  by  a  missionary  on  a  roadside^  had 
grasped  one  single  text  in  the  First  Epistle  of  St.  John^ 
and  found  in  it  peace.  That  text  was  the  precious  say- 
ing, ^^  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  cleanseth  us 
from  all  sin.'^ — This  is  the  experience  of  all  true 
Christians.  Unlearned,  humble,  poor,  as  many  of 
them  are,  they  have  got  hold  of  something  in  the 
Bible,  and  this  causes  them  to  hope.  The  hope 
which  ^^  maketh  not  ashamed  ^^  is  never  separate  from 
God^s  word. 

You  wonder  sometimes  that  ministers  press  you  so 
strongly  to  read  your  Bible.  You  marvel  that  they 
say  so  much  about  the  importance  of  preaching,  and 
urge  you  so  often  to  hear  sermons.  Cease  to  wonder. 
Marvel  no  more.  Our  object  is  to  make  you  ac- 
quainted with  God's  word.     We  want  you  to  have  a 


good  hope^  and  we  know  that  a  good  hope  must  be 
drawn  from  the  Scriptures.  Without  reading  or 
hearing  you  must  Uve  and  die  in  ignorance.  Hence 
we  cry^  "  Search  the  Scriptures.^^  ^'  Hear  and  your 
soul  shall  live.'^ 

Reader^  beware  of  a  hope  not  drawn  from  Scrip- 
ture. It  is  a  false  hope^  and  so  many  will  find  out 
to  their  cost.  That  glorious  and  perfect  book^  the  Bible^ 
however  men  despise  it_,  is  the  only  fountain  out  of 
which  man^s  soul  can  derive  peace.  Many  sneer  at 
the  old  book  while  livings  who  find  their  need  of  it 
when  dying.  The  Queen  in  her  palace  and  the 
pauper  in  the  work-house^ — the  philosopher  in  his 
study  and  the  child  in  the  cottage^ — must  all  be  con- 
tent to  seek  living  water  from  the  Bible^  if  they  are  to 
have  hope  at  all.  Honour  your  Bible.  Read  your  Bible. 
Stick  to  your  Bible.  There  is  not  on  earth  a  scrap  of 
solid  hope  for  the  other  side  of  the  grave^  which  is  not 
drawn  out  of  the  word.^ 

III.  In  the  third  place^  a  good  hope  is  a  hope 
that  rests  entirely  on  Jesus  Christ.  What  says  St. 
Paul  to  Timothy  ?  He  says  that  Jesus  Christ  ^^  is  our 
hope.^^  What  says  he  to  the  Colossians.  He  speaks 
of  ^^  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory.^^  (1  Tim.  i.  1. 
Coloss.  i.  27.) 

The  man  who  has  a  good  hope^  founds  all  his 
expectations  of  pardon  and  glory  on  the  mediation  of 
Jesus  the  Son  of  God.  He  knows  his  own  sinfulness. 
He  feels  that  he  is  guilty_,  wicked^  and  lost  by  nature. 


*  '*The  hope  of  eternal  life  is  a  hope  of  the  greatest  blessing  that 
can  be  conceived.  It  is  a  hope  bottomed  only  on  the  pure  word  of 
God.  When  you  examine  your  hearts,  you  find  some  hope  of  being 
saved,  and  that,  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  you  shall  stand  with  peace 
and  confidence  before  your  Judge.  Why  so  ?  Wherefore  do  you 
liope  for  this  ?  Is  it  not  because  God  hath  said  it  ?  Is  it  not  because 
the  God  that  cannot  lie  hath  spoken  it  ?  If  you  expect  to  be  saved 
upon  any  other  ground,  but  because  God  hath  said  it,  ye  must  change 
your  mind,  ere  you  be  saved  ;  for  ye  are  off  the  rock,  ye  are  off  the 
Bure  foundation  that  all  God's  Israel  must  rest  upon."    Traill, 


10 

But  he  sees  forgiveness  and  peace  with  God  offered 
freely  to  him  through  faith  in  Christ.  He  accepts 
the  offer.  He  casts  himself  with  all  his  sins  on  Jesus^ 
and  rests  on  Him.  Jesus  and  His  atonement  on  the 
cross^ — Jesus  and  His  righteousness, — Jesus  and  His 
finished  work, — Jesus  and  His  all-prevailing  inter- 
cession,— Jesus,  and  Jesus  only,  is  the  foundation  of 
the  confidence  of  his  soul. 

Reader,  beware  of  supposing  that  any  hope  is  good 
which  is  not  founded  on  Christ.  All  other  hopes  are 
built  on  sand.  They  may  look  well  in  the  summer 
time  of  health  and  prosperity,  but  will  fail  in  the  day 
of  sickness  and  the  hour  of  death.  ^^ Other  foundation 
can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus 
Christ.^^   (1  Cor.  iii.  11.) 

Church-membership  is  no  foundation  of  hope.  We 
may  belong  to  the  best  of  churches,  and  yet  never 
belong  to  Christ.  We  may  fill  our  pew  regularly 
every  Sunday,  and  hear  the  sermons  of  orthodox, 
ordained  clergymen,  and  yet  never  hear  the  voice  of 
Jesus,  or  follow  Him.  If  we  have  nothing  better  than 
church-membership  to  rest  upon,  we  are  in  a  poor 
plight.     We  have  nothing  solid  beneath  our  feet. 

Reception  of  the  sacraments  is  no  foundation  of 
hope.  We  may  be  washed  in  the  waters  of  baptism, 
and  yet  know  nothing  of  the  water  of  life.  We  may  go 
to  the  Lord's  table  every  Sunday  of  our  lives,  and  yet 
never  eat  Christ's  body  and  drink  Christ's  blood  by 
faith.  Miserable  indeed  is  our  condition,  if  we  can 
say  nothing  more  than  this.  We  possess  nothing  but 
the  outside  of  Christianity.  We  are  leaning  on  a  reed. 

Christ  Himself  is  the' only  true  foundation  of  a 
good  hope.  He  is  the  rock, — His  work  is  perfect. 
He  is  the  stone, — the  sure  stone, — the  tried  corner- 
stone. He  is  able  to  bear  all  the  weight  that  we  can 
lay  upon  Him.  He  that  buildeth  on  Him  shall  not 
be  confounded.   (1  Peter  ii.  6.) 


11 

This  is  the  point  on  which  all  true  saints  in  every 
age  have  been  entirely  agreed.  Differing  on  other 
matters^  they  have  been  of  one  mind  upon  this. 
Unable  to  see  alike  about  church  government^  and 
discipline^  and  liturgies^,  they  have  ever  seen  alike  about 
the  foundation  of  hope.  Not  one  of  them  has  ever 
left  the  world  trusting  in  his  own  righteousness. 
Christ  has  been  all  their  confidence.  They  have 
hoped  in  Him^  and  not  been  ashamed.^" 

Reader^  would  you  know  what  kind  of  death-beds 
a  minister  of  the  Gospel  finds  comfort  in  attending  ? 
Would  you  know  what  closing  scenes  are  cheering  to 
us,  and  leave  favourable  impressions  on  our  minds? 
We  like*  to  see  dying  people  making  much  of  Christ. 
So  long  as  they  can  only  talk  of  ^^the  Almighty/^  and 
^*^  Providence/^  and  ^*^God/^  and  ^^mercy"  we  must 
stand  in  doubt.  Dying  in  this  state,  they  give  no 
satisfactory  sign.  Give  us  the  men  and  women  who 
feel  their  sins  deeply,  and  cling  to  Jesus, — who  think 
much  of  His  dying  love, — who  like  to  hear  of  His 
atoning  blood, — who  return  again  and  again  to  the 
story  of  His  cross.  These  are  the  death-beds  that  leave 
good  evidence  behind  them.  For  my  part  I  had 
rather  hear  the  name  of  Jesus  come  heartily  from  a 
dying  relation's  lips,  than  see  him  die  without  a  word 

*  **  Consider  how  it  is  with  the  most  holy  and  eminent  saints  when 
dying.  Did  you  ever  see  or  hear  any  boasting  of  their  own  works  and 
performances  ?  They  may,  and  do  own  to  the  praise  of  his  grace,  what 
they  have  been  made  to  be,  what  they  have  been  helped  to  do  or  suffer 
for  Christ's  sake.  But  when  they  draw  near  to  the  awful  tribunal, 
what  else  is  in  their  eye  and  heart,  but  only  free  grace,  ransoming 
blood,  and  a  well  ordered  covenant  in  Christ  the  surety  }  They  cannot 
bear  to  have  any  make  mention  to  them  of  their  holiness,  their  own 
grace,  and  attainments." 

*'  He  is  a  wise  and  happy  man  that  can  anchor  his  soul  on  that  rock 
on  which  he  can  ride  out  the  storm  of  death.  Why  should  men  con- 
tend for  that  in  their  life  that  they  know  they  must  renounce  at  their 
death  ?  or  neglect  that  truth  now,  that  they  must  betake  themselves 
unto  then  }  It  is  a  great  test  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  about  the 
way  of  salvation,  when  it  is  generally  approved  by  sensible  dying 
men." —  Traill, 


13 

atout  Christy  and  then  be  told  by  an  angel  that  he 
was  saved. ^ 

IV.  In  the  fourth  place^  a  good  hope  is  a  hope 
that  is  felt  inwardly  in  the  heart.  What  says  St. 
Paul  ?  He  speaks  of  *^^hope  that  maketh  not  ashamed, 
because  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts. ^^ 
He  speaks  of  ^^  rejoicing  in  hope."   (Rom.  v.  5.  xii.  12.) 

The  man  who  has  a  good  hope  is  conscious  of  it. 
He  feels  within  him  something  that  another  man  does 
not.  He  is  conscious  of  possessing  a  well-grounded 
expectation  of  good  things  to  come.  That  conscious- 
ness may  vary  exceedingly  in  different  persons.  In 
one  it  is  strong  and  well-defined.  In  another  it  is 
feeble  and  indistinct. — It  may  vary  exceedingly  in 
different  stages  of  the  same  person^s  experience.  At 
one  time  he  may  be  full  of  *^  joy  and  peace  in  believ- 
ing.^' At  another  he  may  be  depressed  and  cast  down. 
But  in  all  persons  who  have  a  good  hope,,  in  a  greater 
or  less  degree,  this  consciousness  does  exist. 

I  know  well  that  this  truth  is  one  which  has  been 
fearfully  abused  and  perverted.  It  has  been  brought 
into  great  disrepute  by  the  fanaticism,  enthusiasm, 
and  extravagance  of  some  professing  christians.  Mere 
animal  excitement  has  been  mistaken  for  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  over-wrought  feelings  of  weak 
and  nervous  people  have  been  hastily  supposed  to  be 
the  result  of  grace.     And  then  has  come  in  the  devil. 


*  The  dying  words  of  Mr.  Ash,  the  Puritan,  are  well-deserving  of 
notice.  He  said,  *'  When  I  consider  my  best  duties,  I  sink,  I  die,  I 
despair.  But  when  I  think  of  Christ,  I  have  enough.  He  is  all  and 
in  all." 

The  words  of  Mr.  Cecil  shortly  before  his  death  are  very  remarkable. 
He  said,  "  I  know  myself  to  be  a  wretched,  worthless  sinner,  having 
nothing  in  myself  but  poverty  and  sin.  I  know  Jesus  Christ  to  be  a 
glorious  and  almighty  Saviour.  I  see  the  full  efficacy  of  His  atone- 
ment and  grace ;  and  I  cast  myself  entirely  on  Him,  and  wait  at  His 
footstool."  A  short  time  before  his  decease,  he  requested  one  of  his 
family  to  write  down  for  him  the  following  sentence  in  a  book,  *'None 
but  Christ,  none  but  Christ,  said  Lambert  dying  at  a  stake :  the  same 
in  dying  circumstances,  with  his  whole  heart,  saith  Richard  Cecil.*' 


1^. 

Contempt  has  been  poured  on  religious  feelings  of 
every  description.  Their  very  existence  has  been 
denied  and  scouted.  And  the  result  is^  that  the  very 
name  of  ^^  feelings ^^  in  religion  is  in  many  quarters 
dreaded  and  disliked. 

But  the  abuse  and  perversion  of  a  truth  must  never 
be  allowed  to  rob  us  of  the  use  of  it.  When  all  has 
been  said  that  can  be  said  against  fanaticism  and 
enthusiasm^  it  is  still  undeniable  that  religious  feelings 
are  plainly  described  in  Scripture.  The  word  of  God 
tells  us  that  the  true  Christian  has  ^^peace/'  and  '^^rest/^ 
and  *^^  joy/^  and  ''  confidence.^^  It  tells  us  of  some  who 
have  the  ^^witness  of  the  Spirit/' — of  some  who  ^^fear 
no  evil/' — of  some  who  enjoy  '^'^ assurance/^ — of  some 
who  ^Hvnow  whom  they  have  believed/' — of  some  who 
are  ^^persuaded  that  they  shall  never  be  separated  from 
the  love  of  God  in  Christ.^^  These  are  the  feelings  for 
which  I  contend.  This  is  that  sober^  inward  experience, 
in  which  I  see  nothing  extravagant,  enthusiastic, 
or  fanatical.  Of  such  feelings  I  say  boldly,  no  man 
need  be  ashamed.  I  go  further,  and  say  that  no  man 
has  a  good  hope,  who  does  not  know  something  of 
these  feelings  in  his  own  heart.  I  go  further  still,  and 
say  that  to  hold  any  other  doctrine  is  to  cast  dishonour 
on  the  whole  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Will  any  one  tell  us  that  God  ever  intended  a  true 
Christian  to  have  no  inward  consciousness  of  his  own 
Christianity?  Will  any  one  say  that  the  Bible 
teaches  that  people  can  pass  from  death  to  life,  be 
pardoned,  renewed,  and  sanctified,  and  yet  feel 
nothing  of  this  mighty  change  within?  Let  those 
think  it  who  will.  I  can  hold  no  such  doctrine.  I  would 
as  soon  believe  that  Lazarus  did  not  know  that  he  was 
raised  from  the  grave,  or  Bartimeus  that  he  was 
restored  to  sight,  as  believe  that  a  man  can  not  feel 
within  him  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Can  a  weary  man  lie  down  in  bed,  and  not  feel 

b2 


14 

rested?  Can  the  parched  traveller  in  an  African 
desert  drink  water^  and  not  feel  refreshed  ?  Can  the 
starved  sailor  in  arctic  regions  draw  near  to  the  fire, 
and  not  feel  warmed?  Can  the  half-naked,  hungry, 
homeless  wanderer  in  our  streets  be  clothed,  fed,  and 
housed,  and  not  feel  comforted?  Can  the  fainting 
sick  man  receive  the  healing  cordial,  and  not  feel 
revived  ?  I  cannot  believe  it.  I  believe  that  in  each 
case  something  will  be  felt.  Just  so  I  cannot  believe 
that  a  man  can  be  a  true  Christian,  if  he  does  not 
feel  something  within.  A  new  birth,  a  pardon  of  sins, 
a  conscience  sprinkled  with  Christ's  blood,  an  in- 
dwelling of  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  no  such  small  matters 
as  men  seem  to  suppose.  He  that  knows  anything 
of  them  will  feel  them.  There  will  be  a  real,  distinct 
witness  in  his  inward  man. 

Reader,  beware  of  a  hope  that  is  not  felt,  and  a 
Christianity  that  is  destitute  of  inward  experience. 
They  are  idols  of  the  present  day,  and  idols  before 
which  thousands  are  bowing  down.  Thousands  are 
trying  to  persuade  themselves  that  people  may  be 
bbrn  again,  and  have  the  Spirit,  and  yet  not  be 
sensible  of  it, — or  that  people  may  be  members  of 
Christ,  and  receive  benefit  from  Him,  who  have 
neither  faith  nor  love  towards  His  name.  These  are 
the  favourite  doctrines  of  modern  days !  These  be 
the  gods  which  have  taken  the  place  of  Jupiter,  and 
Mercury,  and  the  image  which  fell  down  from  heaven  ! 
These  be  the  last  new  deities  invented  by  poor,  weak, 
idolatrous  man !  From  all  such  idols  keep  yourself 
with  jealous  care.  Golden  as  their  heads  may  be, 
their  feet  are  no  better  than  clay.  They  cannot  stand. 
They  must,  sooner  or  later,  break  down.  Miserable 
indeed  are  the  prospects  of  those  who  worship  them ! 
Their  hope  is  not  the  hope  of  the  Bible.  It  is  the 
hope  of  a  dead  corpse.  Where  Christ  and  the  Spirit 
are,  their  presence  will  be  felt ! 


15 

Can  any  one  in  his  senses  suppose  that  the  apostle 
Paul  would  have  been  content  with  Christians  who 
knew  nothing  of  inward  feelings  ?  Can  we  fancy 
that  mighty  man  of  God  sanctioning  a  religion  which 
a  person  might  have^  and  yet  experience  nothing 
within  ?  Can  we  picture  to  ourselves  a  member  of 
one  of  the  churches  he  founded,  who  was  utterly 
unacquainted  with  peace,  or  joy,  or  confidence  towards 
God,  and  was  yet  approved  by  the  great  apostle  of  the 
Gentil  es  ?  Away  with  the  idea !  It  will  not  bear  reflec- 
tion for  a  moment.  The  testimony  of  Scripture  is  plain 
and  expUcit.  Talk  as  men  will  about  enthusiasm  and 
excitement,  there  are  such  things  as  feelings  in 
religion.  The  Christian  who  knows  nothing  of  them 
is  not  yet  converted,  and  has  everything  to  learn. 
The  cold  marble  of  a  Grecian  statue  may  well  be  unim- 
passioned.  The  dried  mummy  from  Egypt  may  well 
look  stiff  and  still.  The  stufled  beast  in  a  museum 
may  well  be  motionless  and  cold.  They  are  all  life- 
less things.  But  where  there  is  life,  there  will  always 
be  feeling.     The  good  hope  is  a  hope  that  can  be  felt. 

V.  In  the  last  place,  a  good  hope  is  a  hope  that  is 
manifested  outwardly  in  the  life.  Once  more,  what 
saith  the  Scripture  ?  ^^  Every  one  that  hath  this  hope 
in  Him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  is  pure.^^  (1 
John  iii.  3.) 

The  man  that  has  a  good  hope  will  show  it  in  all 
his  ways.  It  will  influence  his  life,  his  character,  and 
his  daily  conduct.  It  will  make  him  strive  to  be  a  holy, 
godly,  conscientious,  spiritual  man.  He  will  feel 
under  a  constant  obligation  to  serve  and  please  Him, 
from  whom  his  hope  comes.  He  will  say  to  himself, 
^^What  shall  I  render  to  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits 
to  me?^^  He  will  feel,  ^^I  am  bought  with  a  price,  let 
me  glorify  God  with  body  and  spirit,  which  are  His.^^ 
"Let  me  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath 
called  me  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light. 


I\ 


16 

Let  me  prove  tliat  I  am  Christ^s  friend^  by  keeping 
His  commandments/^  (1  Cor.  vi.  20.  1  Pet.  ii.  9. 
John  XV.  14.) 

This  is  a  point  of  infinite  importance  in  every  age. 
It  is  a  truth  which  is  always  assailed  by  Satan^  and 
needs  guarding  Avith  jealous  care.  Let  us  grasp 
it  firmly^  and  make  it  a  settled  principle  in  our 
religion.  If  there  is  light  in  a  house^  it  will  shine 
through  the  windows.  If  there  is  any  real  hope  in  a 
man^s  soul^  it  will  be  seen  in  his  ways.  Show  me 
your  hope  in  your  life  !  Where  is  it  ?  Wherein  does 
it  appear  ?  If  you  cannot  show  it^  you  may  be  sure 
it  is  nothing  better  than  a  delusion  and  a  snare. 

Reader^  the  times  demand  a  very  distinct  testimony 
from  all  ministers  on  this  subject.  The  truth  on  this 
point  requires  very  plain  speaking.  Settle  it  in  your 
minds  deeply^  and  beware  of  letting  it  go.  Let  no 
man  deceive  you  with  vain  words.  ^^  He  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  righteous."  ^^  He  that  saith  he  abideth 
in  Him^  ought  himself  also  so  to  walk^  even  as  He 
walked."  (1  John  ii.  6  ;  iii.  7.)  Tlie  hope  that  does 
not  make  a  man  honesty  honourable^  truthful^  sober^ 
meek^  kind^  and  faithful  in  all  the  relations  of  life, 
is  not  from  above.  It  is  only  ^^  the  talk  of  the  lips 
which  tendeth  to  penury."  ^'  He  that  boasteth  him- 
self of  a  false  gift,  is  like  clouds  and  wind  without 
rain."   (Prov.  xiv.  23 ;  xxv.  14.) 

There  are  some  in  the  present  day  who  flatter 
themselves  they  have  a  good  hope,  because  they 
possess  religious  knowledge.  They  are  acquainted 
with  the  letter  of  their  Bibles.  They  can  argue  and 
dispute  about  points  of  doctrine.  They  can  quote 
texts  by  the  score,  in  defence  of  their  own  theological 
opinions.  They  are  perfect  Benjamites  in  controversy, 
— they  can  sling  stones  to  a  hair-breadth,  and  not  miss. 
And  yet  they  have  no  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  no  charity, 
no  meekness,  no  gentleness,  no  humility,  nothing  of 


17 

the  mind  that  was  in  Christ.  And  have  these  people 
a  hope  ?  Let  those  believe  it  who  will^  I  dare  not  say- 
so.  I  hold  with  St.  Paul^  "Though  a  man  speak  with 
the  tongues  of  men  and  angels^  and  have  not  charity^ 
he  is  become  as  sounding  brass^  or  a  tinkling  cymbal. 
And  though  a  man  has  the  gift  of  prophecy^  and 
understands  all  mysteries^  and  all  knowledge,  and 
has  not  charity,  he  is  nothing.^'  Yes  !  hope  without 
charity  is  no  hope  at  all.   (1  Cor.  xiii.  1 — 3.) 

There  are  some  again  who  presume  to  think  they 
have  a  good  hope,  because  of  God^s  everlasting  elec- 
tion. They  persuade  themselves  that  they  were  once 
called  and  chosen  of  God  to  salvation.  They  take  it 
for  granted  that  there  was  once  a  real  work  of  the 
Spirit  on  their  hearts,  and  that  all  therefore  must  be 
well.  They  look  down  upon  others,  who  are  afraid 
of  professing  as  much  as  they  do.  They  seem  to 
think,  "we  are  the  people  of  God, — we  are  the  temple 
of  the  Lord, — we  are  the  favoured  servants  of  the 
Most  High, — we  are  they  that  shall  reign  in  heaven, 
and  none  beside.^'  And  yet  these  very  people  can  lie, 
and  cheat,  and  swindle,  and  be  dishonourable  !  Some 
of  them  can  even  get  drunk  in  private,  and  secretly 
commit  sins,  of  which  it  is  a  shame  to  speak  !  And 
have  they  a  good  hope?  Let  those  believe  it  who 
will,  I  cannot.  God  forbid  that  I  should  say  so  ! 
The  election  which  is  not  unto  sanctification,  is  not  of 
God,  but  of  the  devil.  The  hope  that  does  not  make 
a  man  holy,  is  no  hope  at  all. 

There  are  some  in  this  day,  who  fancj  they  have  a 
good  hope,  because  they  like  hearing  the  Gospel. 
They  are  fond  of  hearing  good  sermons.  They  will 
go  miles  to  listen  to  some  favourite  preacher.  They 
will  even  weep  and  be  much  affected  by  his  words. 
To  see  them  in  church  one  would  think,  "Surely  these 
are  the  disciples  of  Christ,  surely  these  are  excellent 
Christians  !  " — And  yet  these  very  people  can  plunge 


18 

into  every  folly  and  gaiety  of  the  world.  Night  after 
night  they  can  go  with  their  whole  heart  to  the  opera, 
the  theatre,  or  the  ball.  They  are  to  be  seen  on  the 
race-course.  They  are  forward  in  every  worldly  revel. 
Their  voice  on  Sunday  is  the  voice  of  Jacob,  but  their 
hands  on  week  days  are  the  hands  of  Esau. — And 
have  these  people  a  good  hope  ?  I  dare  not  say  so. 
"  The  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God."  The 
hope  that  does  not  prevent  conformity  to  the  world, 
is  no  hope  at  all.  '^  Whatsoever  is  born  of  God  over- 
Cometh  the  world."  (1  John  v.  4.) 

Reader,  beware  of  any  hope  that  does  not  exercise 
a  sanctifying  influence  over  your  heart,  life,  tastes, 
conduct,  and  conversation.  It  is  a  hope  that  never 
came  down  from  heaven.  It  is  mere  base  metal,  and 
counterfeit  coin.  It  needs  the  mint  stamp  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  will  never  pass  current  in  heaven. 
The  man  that  has  a  real  hope,  no  doubt,  may  be  over- 
taken by  a  fault.  He  may  stumble  occasionally  in 
his  practice,  and  be  drawn  aside  from  the  right  path 
for  a  while.  But  the  man  that  can  allow  himself  in 
any  wilful  and  habitual  breach  of  God's  law  is  rotten  at 
the  heart.  He  may  talk  of  his  hope  as  much  as  he 
pleases,  but  he  has  none  in  reality.  His  religion  is  a 
joy  to  the  devil,  a  stumbling  block  to  the  world,  a 
sorrow  to  true  Christians,  and  an  offence  to  God. — 
Oh  !  that  men  would  consider  these  things  !  Oh  ! 
that  many  would  use  some  such  prayer  as  this, 
"From  antinomianism  and  hypocrisy,  good  Lord, 
deliver  me  !  ^' 

Reader,  I  have  done  what  I  proposed  to  do.  I 
have  shown  you  the  live  leading  marks  of  a  sound, 
good  hope. — 1.  It  is  a  hope  that  a  man  can  explain. 
2.  It  is  a  hope  that  is  drawn  from  Scripture.  3.  It 
is  a  hope  that  is  founded  on  Christ.  4.  It  is  a  hope 
that  is  felt  within  in  the  heart.  5.  It  is  a  hope  that 
is  manifested  outwardly  in  the  life. — Such,  I  firmly 


19 

believe  is  the  hope  of  all  true  Christians,  of  every 
name,  and  church,  and  denomination,  and  people,  and 
tongue.  Such  is  the  hope  that  you  must  have,  if 
you  mean  to  go  to  heaven.  Such  is  the  hope  without 
which,  I  firmly  believe,  no  man  can  be  saved.  Such  is 
^^the  good  hope  through  grace.'^ 

Suffer  me  now  to  apply  the  whole  subject  to  your 
conscience  in  a  practical  way.  What  shall  it  profit 
you  and  me  to  know  truths,  unless  we  use  them? 
"What  shall  it  avail  you  to  see  the  real  nature  of  a 
good  hope,  unless  the  matter  be  brought  home  to 
your  own  soul  ?  This  is  what  I  now  propose  to  do, 
if  God  permit,  in  the  remainder  of  this  tract.  May 
the  Spirit  of  God  apply  my  words  to  your  heart  with 
mighty  power !  Man  may  speak,  and  preach,  and 
write,  but  God  alone  can  convert. 

1.  My  first  word  of  application  shall  be  a  question, 
I  offer  it  to  all  who  read  this  tract,  and  I  entreat  each 
reader  to  give  it  an  answer.  That  question  is,  "  What 
is  your  own  hope  about  your  soul  ?  ^^ 

I  do  not  ask  this  out  of  idle  curiosity.  I  ask  it  as 
an  ambassador  for  Christ,  and  a  friend  to  your  best 
interests.  I  ask  it  in  order  to  stir  up  self-inquiry, 
and  promote  your  spiritual  welfare.  I  ask,  ^*^  What  is 
your  hope  about  your  soul  ?  ^^ 

I  do  not  want  to  know  whether  you  go  to  church 
or  chapel.  There  will  be  no  account  of  these  dif- 
ferences in  heaven.  I  do  not  want  to  know  whether 
you  approve  of  the  Gospel,  and  think  it  very  right 
and  proper  that  people  should  have  their  religion,  and 
say  their  prayers.  All  this  is  beside  the  mark.  It  is 
not  the  point.  The  point  I  want  you  to  look  at  is 
this,  "  What  is  your  hope  about  your  soul  ?  ^^ 

It  matters  nothing  what  your  relations  think.  It 
matters  nothing  what  the  rest  of  the  parish  or  town 
approve.  The  account  of  God  will  not  be  taken  by 
towns,  or  by  parishes,  or  by  families.     Each   must 


20 

stand  forth  separately  and  answer  for  himself.  '^  Every- 
one of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God."  (Rom. 
xiv.  12.)  And  what  is  the  defence  you  mean  to  set 
up  ?  What  is  to  be  your  plea  ?  '^  What  is  your  hope 
about  your  soul  ?  " 

Time  is  shorty  and  is  passing  quickly  away.  Yet 
a  few  years^  and  we  shall  all  be  dead  and  gone.  The 
trees  perhaps  are  cut  down^  out  of  which  our  coffins 
will  be  made.  The  winding-sheets  perhaps  are  woven^ 
which  will  surround  our  bodies.  The  spades  perhaps 
are  made^  that  will  dig  our  graves.  Eternity  draws 
near.  There  ought  to  be  no  trifling.  What,  what 
is  your  hope  about  your  soul  ? 

Another  world  will  soon  begin.  Trade,  politics, 
money,  lands,  cottages,  palaces,  eating,  drinking, 
dressing,  reading,  hunting,  shooting,  drawing,  working, 
dancing,  feasting,  will  soon  be  at  an  end  for  ever. 
There  will  remain  nothing  but  a  heaven  for  some,  and 
a  hell  for  others.  What, — what  is  your  hope  about 
your  soul  ? 

Reader,  I  have  asked  my  question.  And  now. 
What  is  your  reply  ? 

Many  would  say,  I  believe,  if  they  spoke  the  truth, 
^^  I  don^t  know  anything  about  it.  I  suppose  I  am 
not  what  I  ought  to  be.  I  dare  say  I  ought  to  have 
more  religion  than  I  have.  I  trust  I  shall  have  more 
some  day.  But  as  to  any  hope  at  present,  I  really 
don^t  know." 

I  can  quite  believe  that  this  is  the  state  of  many. 
I  have  seen  enough  of  the  spiritual  ignorance  of  men 
to  fill  me  with  deep  sorrow.  I  am  convinced  that 
there  is  no  error  or  heresy  which  is  ruining  so  many 
souls,  as  the  heresy  of  ignorance.  I  am  convinced 
that  there  are  myriads  of  people  in  England  who  do 
not  even  know  the  A.  B.  C.  of  Christianity,  and  are 
nothing  better  than  baptized  heathen.  I  have  heard  of 
one  man,  in  his  last  days,  whose  only  hope  was,  ^^  that 


21 

he  had  always  kept  his  churchy  and  voted  for  the  blues/' 
I  have  heard  of  another_,  who  was  asked  on  his  death- 
bed where  he  hoped  to  go^  and  said^  ^^  he  hoped  he 
should  go  with  the  crowd/'  I  have  little  doubt 
that  there  are  thousands  of  people  in  this  country 
who  are  much  in  the  same  condition^,  knowing  nothing 
whatever  about  their  state  before  God.  Reader,  if 
this  be  your  state,  I  can  only  say,  May  God  convert 
you  !  May  God  awaken  you  !  May  God  open  your 
eyes  before  it  is  too  late  I"^ 

Look  at  that  man  who  goes  to  the  Bank  of  Eng- 
land on  a  dividend  day,  and  asks  to  be  paid  a  large 
sum  of  money.  Is  his  name  down  among  the  list  of 
people  to  be  paid  ?  No  !  Has  he  any  title  or  right 
to  claim  payment  ?  No !  He  has  none.  He  only 
knows  that  other  people  are  receiving  money,  and  that 
he  would  like  to  receive  some  too.  You  know  well 
that  you  would  call  the  man  out  of  his  mind.  You 
would  say  he  was  nothing  better  than  a  madman. 
But  stop  !  Take  care  what  you  are  saying  !  You  are 
the  real  madman,  if  you  mean  to  claim  heaven  at 
last,  when  you  have  no  title^  no  warrant,  no  ground 


♦  '*  When  we  deal  with  the  carnal,  secure,  careless  sinners,  (and 
they  are  a  vast  multitude,)  and  ask  them  a  reason  of  that  hope  of 
heaven  they  pretend  to,  is  not  this  their  common  answer ;  *'  I  live 
inoffensively  ;  I  keep  God's  law  as  well  as  I  can  ;  whenever  I  fail,  I 
repent,  and  beg  God's  merey  for  Christ's  sake;  my  heart  is  sincere, 
though  my  knowledge  and  attainments  be  short  of  others.*'  If  we  go 
on  further  to  enquire,  what  acquaintance  they  have  with  Jesus  Christ  ? 
what  application  their  souls  have  made  to  Him  ?  what  workings  of 
faith  on  Him  ?  what  use  they  have  made  of  His  righteousness  for 
justification  and  of  His  Spirit  for  sanctification  ?  what  they  know  of 
living  by  faith  on  Jesus  Christ?  we  are  barbarians  to  them.  And 
in  this  sad  state  thousands  in  England  live,  and  die,  and  perish 
eternally.  Yet  so  thick  is  the  darkness  of  the  age,  that  many  of  them 
live  here,  and  go  hence,  with  the  reputation  of  good  Christians ;  and 
some  of  them  may  have  their  funeral  sermon  and  praise  preached  by 
an  ignorant  flattering  minister ;  though  it  may  be  the  poor  creatures 
did  never,  in  the  whole  course  of  their  lives,  nor  at  their  deaths, 
employ  Jesus  Christ  so  much  for  an  entry  to  heaven,  purchased  by  his 
blood,  and  accessible  by  iaith  in  him,  as  a  poor  Turk  doth  Mahomet, 
for  a  room  in  his  beastly  paradise  I  " —  Traill. 


22 

of  hope  to  show.      Once  more  I  say.  May  God  open 
your  eyes  ! 

But  many,  I  believe,  would  reply  to  my  question 
that  ^^''they  have  hope/^  They  would  say,  "I  am  not 
so  bad  as  some,  at  any  rate.  I  am  no  heathen.  I 
am  no  infideh     I  have  some  hope  about  my  soul.^^ 

Reader,  if  this  be  your  case,  I  entreat  you  to  con- 
sider calmly  what  your  hope  really  is.  I  entreat  you 
not  to  be  content  with  saying,  like  the  parrot,  "I 
hope,— I  hope, — I  hope,'-* — but  to  examine  seriously 
into  the  nature  of  your  confidence,  and  to  make 
sure  work  that  it  is  well-founded. — Is  it  a  hope  you 
can  explain  ?  Is  it  scriptural  ?  Is  it  built  on  Christ  ? 
Is  it  felt  in  your  heart?  Is  it  sanctifying  to  your 
life  ? — All  is  not  gold  that  glitters.  I  have  warned 
you  already  that  there  is  a  false  hope  as  well  as  a 
true.  I  offer  the  warning  again.  I  beseech  you  to 
take  heed  that  you  be  not  deceived.  Beware  of  mistakes. 

There  are  ships  lying  quietly  in  Liverpool  and 
London  docks,  about  to  sail  for  every  part  of  the 
globe.  They  all  look  equally  trust-worthy,  so  long 
as  th^y  are  in  harbour.  They  have  all  equally  good 
names,  and  are  equally  well  rigged,  and  painted. 
But  they  are  not  all  equally  well-found,  and  equally 
safe.  Once  let  them  put  to  sea,  and  meet  with  rough 
weather,  and  the  difference  between  the  sound  and 
unsound  ships  will  soon  appear. — Many  a  ship  that 
looked  well  in  dock  has  proved  not  sea  worthy,  when  she 
got  into  deep  water,  and  has  gone  down  at  last,  with 
all  hands  on  board  !  Just  so  it  is  with  many  a  false 
hope.  It  has  failed  completely  when  most  wanted. 
It  has  broken  down  at  last,  and  ruined  its  possessor's 
soul.  Reader,  you  will  soon  have  to  put  to  sea.  I 
say  again,  beware  of  mistakes. 

I  leave  my  question  here.  I  earnestly  pray  that 
God  may  apply  it  to  the  hearts  of  all  who  read  this 
tract.     I  am  sure  it  is  much  needed.     I  believe  there 


23 

never  was  a  time  wlien  there  was  so  much  counterfeit 
religion  current^  and  so  many  ^^false  hopes  "  passing  off 
for  trae.  There  never  was  a  time  when  there  was  so 
much  high  profession^  and  so  little  spiritual  practice^ 
so  much  loud  talk  about  preachers^,  and  parties^,  and 
Churches^  and  so  little  close  walking  with  God^  and 
real  work  of  the  Spirit.  There  is  no  lack  of  blossoms 
in  Christendom^  but  there  is  an  awful  scarcity  of  ripe 
fruit.  There  is  an  abundance  of  controversial  theology^ 
but  a  dearth  of  practical  holiness.  There  are  myriads 
who  have  a  name  to  live^  but  few  whose  hearts  are 
really  in  the  work  of  Christy — few  whose  affections  are 
really  set  on  things  above.  There  will  be  some 
aAvful  failures  yet  in  many  quarters.  There  will  be 
still  more  awful  disclosures  at  the  last  day.  There 
are  many  hopes  now-a-days^  which  are  utterly  des- 
titute of  foundation.  Reader^  I  say^  for  the  last  time, 
beware  of  mistakes. 

2.  My  second  word  of  application,  shall  be  a  re-^ 
quest.  I  make  it  to  all  readers  of  this  tract,  who  feel 
they  have  no  hope,  and  desire  to  have  it.  It  is  a 
short,  simple  request.  I  entreat  them  to  seek  a  good 
hope  while  it  can  be  found. 

A  good  hope  is  within  the  reach  of  any  man,  if  he 
is  only  willing  to  seek  it.  It  is  called  emphatically  in 
Scripture,  a  '^  good  hope  through  grace.^^  It  is  freely 
offered,  even  as  it  was  freely  purchased.  It  may  be 
freely  obtained,  ^'  without  money  and  without  price.'^ 
Our  past  lives  do  not  make  it  impossible  to  obtain  it, 
however  bad  they  may  have  been.  Our  present  weak- 
ness and  infirmity  do  not  shut  us  out,  however  great 
they  may  be.  The  same  grace  which  provided  man- 
kind with  a  hope,  makes  a  free,  full,  and  unlimited 
invitation,  ^^Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of 
life  freely; — ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you;  seek, 
and  ye  shall  find.^^   (Rev.  xxii.  17. — Matt.  vi.  7.) 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  able,  and  willing  to  give 


24 


'^a  good  hope^^  to  all  who  really  want  it.  He  is  sealed 
and  appointed  by  God  tlie  Father  to  give  the  bread 
of  life  to  all  that  hunger^  and  the  water  of  life  to  all 
that  thirst.  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should 
all  fulness  dwell.  In  Him  there  is  pardon^  and  peace 
with  God,  bought  by  the  precious  blood  which  He 
shed  upon  the  cross.  In  Him  there  is  joy  and  peace 
for  any  believer,  and  a  solid,  well-grounded  expecta- 
tion of  good  things  to  come.  In  Him  there  is  rest 
for  the  weary,  refuge  for  the  fearful,  a  fountain  for 
the  unclean,  medicine  for  the  sick,  healing  for  the 
broken-hearted,  and  hope  for  the  lost.  Whosoever 
feels  labouring  and  heavy-laden  with  sin, — whosoever 
feels  anxious  and  distressed  about  his  soul, —  whoso- 
ever feels  afraid  of  death  and  unfit  to  die, — whosoever 
he  is,  let  him  go  to  Clwist,  This  is  the  thing  to  be 
done.  This  is  the  way  to  follow.  Whosoever  wants 
hope,  let  him  go  to  Christ. 

Reader,  if  you  really  want  to  enjoy  a  good  hope, 
seek  it  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  every 
encouragement  to  do  so.  The  Thessalonians  in  old 
time  were,  like  the  Ephesians,  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world. 
But  when  St.  Paul  preached  Jesus  to  them,  they  arose 
from  their  miserable  state,  and  became  new  men. 
God  gave  them  a  ^^  good  hope  through  grace.^'  The 
door  through  which  Manassah  and  Magdalene  entered, 
is  still  open.  The  fountain  in  which  Zacchaeus  and 
Matthew  were  washed,  is  still  unsealed.  Seek  hope 
from  Christ  and  you  shall  find  it. 

Seek  it  honestly  and  with  no  secret  reserve.  The 
ruin  of  many  is  that  they  are  not  fair  and  straight- 
forward. They  say  that  they  ^^try  as  much  as  they 
can,^'  and  that  they  really  ^^want  to  be  saved,^^  and 
that  they  really  ^^  look  to  Christ.^^  And  yet  in  the 
chamber  of  their  own  heart  there  lies  some  darling 
Bin,  to  which  they  privately  cling,  and  are  resolved 


25 

not  to  give  it  up.  They  are  like  Augustine,  who  said, 
^^Lord  convert  me  but  not  now/^  Seek  honestly, 
if  you  wish  to  find  a  good  hope. 

Seek  it  in  humble  prayer.  Pour  out  your  heart 
before  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  tell  Him  all  the  wants 
of  your  soul.  Do  as  you  would  have  done  had 
you  lived  in  Galilee  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and 
had  a  leprosy.  Go  direct  to  Christ,  and  lay  before 
Him  your  cares.  Tell  Him  that  you  are  a  poor,  sin- 
ful creature,  but  that  you  have  heard  He  is  a  gracious 
Saviour,  and  that  you  come  to  Him  for  hope  for  your 
soul.  Tell  Him  that  you  have  nothing  to  say  for 
yourself, — no  excuse  to  make,  nothing  of  your  own  to 
plead, — but  that  you  have  heard  that  He  ^^  receives 
sinners,^^  and  as  such  you  come  to  Him. 

Seek  it  at  once  without  delay.  Halt  no  more  be- 
tween two  opinions.  Do  not  linger  another  day. 
Cast  away  the  remnants  of  pride,  which  are  still 
keeping  you  back.  Draw  nigh  to  Jesus  as  a  heavy- 
laden  sinner,  and  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before 
you.  This  is  the  point  to  which  all  must  come  at 
last,  if  they  mean  to  be  saved.  Sooner  or  later  they 
must  knock  at  the  door  of  grace  and  ask  to  be  ad- 
mitted. Why  not  do  it  at  once? — Why  stand  still 
looking  at  the  bread  of  life  ?  Why  not  come  forward 
and  eat  it  ? — Why  remain  outside  the  city  of  refuge  ? 
Why  not  enter  in  and  be  safe  ? — Why  not  seek  hope 
at  once,  and  never  rest  till  you  find  it?  Never 
did  soul  seek  honestly  in  the  way  marked  out,  and 
fail  to  find  l"^ 


*  The  words  of  Traill  on  this  point  of  coming  to  Christ  by  faith, 
deserve  many  thoughts.  They  throw  light  on  a  subject  which  is  con- 
stantly misunderstood.  "  When  we  come  to  deal  with  a  poor, 
awakened  sinner,  who  seeth  his  lost  estate,  and  that  he  is  condemned 
by  the  law  of  God,  we  find  the  same  principles  (pride  and  ignorance) 
working  in  him.  We  see  him  sick  and  wounded  :  we  tell  him  where 
his  help  lies,  in  Jesus  Christ;  and  what  his  proper  work  is,  to  apply 
to  Him  by  faith.  What  is  his  answer  :  'Alas,'  says  the  man,  *  I  have 
been,  and  I  am  so  vile  a  sinner,  my  heart  is  so  bad,  and  so  full  of 


26 

Reader^  I  lay  my  request  before  you.  I  know  it 
deserves  attention.  I  pray  God  that  it  may  not  be  in 
vain. 

3.  My  last  word  of  application  shall  be  counsel. 
I  offer  it  to  all  who  have  really  obtained  ^'  good  hope 
through  grace/^  I  offer  it  to  all  who  are  really  leaning 
on  Christy  walking  in  the  narrow  way,  and  led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  I  ask  them  to  accept  advice  from  one 
who  hopes  that  he  is  '^^ their  brother  and  companion  in 
the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ."  I  believe 
the  advice  to  be  sound  and  good. 

If  you  have  a  good  hope,  be  jealous  and  watchful 
over  it.  Beware  that  Satan  does  not  steal  it  away  for 
a  season,  as  he  did  from  David  and  Peter.  Bewaie 
that  you  do  not  lose  sight  of  it  by  giving  way  to  in- 
consistencies, and  by  conformity  to  the  world.  Ex- 
amine it  often,  and  make  sure  that  it  is  not  becoming 
dim.  Keep  it  bright  by  daily  carefulness  over  your 
temper,  thoughts,  and  words.  •  Keep  it  healthy  by 
hearty,  fervent,  and  continual  prayer.  The  hope  of 
the  Christian  is  a  very  delicate  plant.  It  is  an  exotic 
from  above.  It  is  not  a  plant  of  natural  growth.  It  is 
easily  chilled  and  nipped  by  the  cold  frosts  of  this  world. 
Unless  watered  and  tended  carefully,  it  will  dwindle 
away  to  a  mere  nothing,  and  scarcely  be  felt  or  seen. 
None  find  that  out  so  painfully  as  dying  believers  who 


plagues  and  corruptions,  that  I  cannot  think  of  believing  on  Christ. 
But  if  I  had  but  repentance,  and  some  holiness  in  heart  and  life,  and 
such  and  such  gracious  qualifications,  I  would  then  believe'  This  his 
-answer  is  as  full  of  nonsense,  ignorance  and  pride,  as  words  can  contain 
or  express.  It  implies,  1. — *  If  I  were  pretty  well  recovered,  I  would 
employ  the  Physician,  Christ.  2. — There  is  some  hope  to  work  out 
these  good  things  by  myself,  without  Christ.  3. — When  I  come  to 
Christ  with  a  price  in  my  hand,  I  shall  be  welcome.  4. — I  can  come 
to  Christ  when  I  will.'  So  ignorant  are  people  naturally  of  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ;  and  no  words,  or  warnings,  or  plainest  instruction  can 
beat  into  men's  heads  and  hearts,  that  the  first  coming  to  Christ  by 
faith,  and  believing  on  Him,  is  not  a  believing  we  shall  be  saved  by 
Him,  but  a  believing  on  Him,  that  we  may  be  saved  by  Him." — 
Traill's  Works, 


27 

have  not  walked  very  closely  with  God.  They  find 
that  they  have  sown  thorns  in  their  dying  pillows^  and 
brought  clouds  between  themselves  and  the  sun. 

For  another  things  if  you  have  a  good  hope, 
keep  it  alivaijs  ready.  Have  it  at  your  right  hand, 
prepared  for  immediate  use.  Look  at  it  often,  and 
take  care  that  it  is  in  good  order.  Trials  often  break 
in  upon  us  suddenly,  like  an  armed  man.  Sicknesses 
and  injuries  to  our  mortal  frame  sometimes  lay  us 
low  on  our  beds,  without  any  warning.  Happy  is  he 
who  keeps  his  lamp  well  trimmed,  and  lives  in  the 
daily  sense  of  communion  with  Christ ! 

Did  you  ever  see  a  fire-engine  in  some  old  country 
place?  Did  you  ever  remark  how  often  it  lies  for 
months  in  a  dark  shed,  untouched,  unexamined,  and 
uncleaned  ?  The  valves  are  out  of  order.  The  leather 
hose  is  full  of  holes.  The  pumps  are  rusty  and  stiff. 
A  house  might  be  almost  burnt  to  the  ground,  before 
it  could  lift  a  pailful  of  water.  In  its  present  state  it 
is  a  well-nigh  useless  machine. 

Did  you  ever  see  a  ship  in  ordinary,  in  Portsmouth 
harbour  ?  The  hull  may  perhaps  be  good  and  sound. 
The  keel,  and  topsides,  and  timbers,  and  beams,  and 
decks,  may  be  all  that  you  could  desire.  But  she  is  not 
rigged,  or  stored,  or  armed,  or  fit  for  service.  It  would 
take  weeks  and  months  to  make  her  ready  for  sea.  In 
her  present  state  she  could  do  little  for  her  country^s 
defence. 

Reader,  the  hope  of  many  a  believer  is  like  that 
fire-engine,  and  that  ship.  It  exists.  It  lives.  It  is 
real.  It  is  true.  It  is  sound.  It  is  good.  It  came 
down  from  heaven.  It  was  implanted  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  But  alas  !  it  is  not  ready  for  use.  Its  possessor 
will  find  that  out,  by  his  own  want  of  joy  and  sensible 
comfort,  when  he  has  to  die.  Beware  that  your  hope 
be  not  a  hope  of  this  kind.  If  you  have  a  hope, 
keep  it  ready  at  hand. 


28 

For  another  things  if  you  have  a  good  hope, 
seek  and  pray  that  it  may  grow  more  and  more  strong 
every  year.  Do  not  be  content  with  a  day  of  small 
things.  Covet  the  best  gifts.  Desire  to  enjoy  full 
assurance.  Strive  to  attain  to  PauFs  standard,  and  to 
be  able  to  say,  ^^  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death  nor 
life,  shall  separate  me  from  the  love  of  God  which  is 
in  Jesus  Christ.^^ 

Believe  me,  this  part  of  my  counsel  is  one  that 
deserves  close  attention.  Believe  me,  the  things  before 
us  all  will  try  our  hope  of  what  sort  it  is.  Sickness 
and  death  are  solemn  things.  They  strip  off  all  the 
tinsel  and  paint  from  a  man's  religion.  They  discover 
the  weak  places  in  our  Christianity.  They  strain  our 
hopes  to  the  very  uttermost,  and  often  make  us  well 
nigh  despair.  Old  Christian,  in  Pilgrim^s  Progress, 
had  a  sore  trial  in  crossing  the  cold  river,  before  he 
entered  the  celestial  city.  Faithful  and  true  as  he  was, 
he  still  cried  out,  ^^  all  thy  billows  go  over  me,^^  and 
had  a  hard  struggle  to  keep  his  footing.  May  we  all 
lay  this  to  heart!  May  we  seek  to  know  and  feel  that 
we  are  one  with  Christ  and  Christ  in  us !  He  that 
has  hope  does  well.  But  he  that  has  assurance  does 
better.  Blessed  indeed  are  they  who  ^^  abound  in  hope 
through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.^^  (Bom.  xv.  13.) 

Finally,  if  you  have  a  good  hope,  be  thankful 
for  it,  and  give  God  daily  praise  who  has  made  you 
to  differ.  Why  have  you  been  taught  to  feel  your  sin 
and  nothingness,  while  others  are  ignorant  and  self- 
righteous?  Why  have  you  been  taught  to  look  to 
Jesus,  while  others  are  looking  to  their  own  goodness, 
or  resting  on  some  mere  form  ?  Why  are  you  longing 
and  striving  to  be  holy,  while  others  are  caring  for 
nothing  but  this  world  ?  Why  are  these  things  so  ? 
There  is  but  one  answer, — Grace,  grace,  free  grace, 
has  done  it  all.  For  that  grace  praise  God.  For  that 
grace  be  thankful. 


29 

Go  on  then  to  your  journey's  end,  '^  rejoicing  in  hope 
of  the  glory  of  God/^  Go  on  rejoicing  in  the  thought, 
that  though  you  are  a  poor  sinner^  Jesus  is  a  most 
gracious  Saviour^  and  that  though  you  have  trials  here 
for  a  little  season^  heaven  shall  soon  make  amends  for 

all. 

Go  on^  wearing  hope  as  a  helmet^  in  all  the  battles 
of  life, — a  hope  of  pardon,  a  hope  of  perseverance,  a 
hope  of  acquittal  in  the  judgment  day^  a  hope  of  final 
glory.  Put  on  the  breastplate  of  righteousness.  Take 
the  shield  of  faith.  Have  your  loins  girt  about  with 
truth.  Wield  valiantly  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  But 
never  forget, — as  ever  you  would  be  a  happy  Christian, 
— never  forget  to  put  on  the  helmet  of  hope.  (1  Thess. 
V.  8.) 

Go  on  in  spite  of  an  ill-natured  world,  and  be  not 
moved  by  its  laughter,  or  its  persecution,  its  slanders, 
or  its  sneers.  Comfort  your  heart  with  the  thought 
that  the  time  is  short,  the  good  things  yet  to  come, 
the  night  far  spent,  the  morning  without  clouds  at 
hand.  When  the  wicked  man  dies,  his  expectation 
perishes,  but  your  expectation  shall  not  deceive  you, 
— your  reward  is  sure. 

Go  on,  and  be  not  cast  down  because  you  are 
troubled  by  doubts  and  fears.  You  are  yet  in  the 
body.  This  world  is  not  your  rest.  The  devil  hates 
you,  because  you  have  escaped  from  him,  and  will  do 
all  he  can  to  rob  you  of  peace.  The  very  fact  that 
you  have  peace  is  an  evidence  that  you  feel  you  have 
something  to  lose.  The  true  Christian  may  ever  be 
discerned  by  his  warfare  quite  as  much  as  by  his  peace, 
and  by  his  fears  quite  as  much  as  by  his  hopes.  The 
ships  at  anchor  at  Spithead  may  swing  to  and  fro 
with  the  tide,  and  pitch  heavily  in  a  south-eastern 
gale.  But  so  long  as  their  anchors  hold  the  ground, 
they  ride  safely  and  have  no  cause  to  fear.  The  hope 
of  the  true  Christian  is  the  anchor  of  his  soul,  sure 


30 

and  steadfast,  (Heb.  vi.  19.)  His  heart  may  be  tossed 
to  and  fro  sometimes^  but  he  is  safe  in  Christ.  The 
waves  may  swell^  and  hffc  him  up  and  down^  but  he 
will  not  be  wrecked. 

Go  on^  and  ''  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to 
be  brought  to  you  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.^^ 
(1  Pet.  i.  13.)  Yet  a  little  time^  and  faith  shall  be 
changed  to  sights  and  hope  to  certainty.  You  shall  see 
even  as  you  have  been  seen^  and  know  even  as  you  have 
been  known.  A  few  more  tossings  to  and  fro  on  the 
sea  of  this  worlds — a  few  more  battles  and  conflicts 
with  our  spiritual  enemy^ — a  few  more  years  of  tears 
and  partings^  of  working  and  suff'ering^  of  crosses  and 
cares^  of  disappointments  and  vexations^ — and  then^ 
then  we  shall  be  at  home. — The  harbour  lights  are 
already  in  view.  The  haven  of  rest  is  not  far  ofi*. 
There  we  shall  find  all  that  we  have  hoped  for^  and 
find  that  it  was  a  million  times  better  than  our  hopes. 
There  we  shall  find  all  the  saints^ — and  no  sin^  no 
world^  no  money^  no  sickness^  no  deaths  no  devil- 
There,  above  all^  we  shall  find  Jesus^  and  be  ever  with 
the  Lord!  (1  Thess.  iv.  17.)  Let  us  hope  on.  It  is 
worth  while  to  carry  the  cross  and  follow  Christ. 
Let  the  world  laugh  and  mock,  if  it  will,  it  is  worth 
while  to  be  a  thorough,  decided  Christian.  I  say  again, 
let  us  hope  on. 

Header,  I  commend  these  things  to  your  attention. 
My  hearths  desire  for  your  soul  in  1857  may  be  ex- 
pressed in  few  words.  If  you  never  had  a  good  hope 
before,  may  you  find  it  this  year !  If  you  have  had  a 
good  hope,  may  you  this  year  have  it  more  abundantly  ! 

I  remain. 

Your  friend  in  the  Gospel, 

Helmingham,  J.  C.  EYLE. 

December,  1856. 


W.   HUNT,   STEAM    PRESS,   TA.VERN   STEEET,  IPSWICH. 


TEACTS    AND    OTHER    WORKS, 


BY    THE 


REV.   J.   C.   RYLE,    B.  A., 

PUBLISHED  BY  W.  HUNT,  TAVEKN  ST.,  IPSWICH. 


A  WORD  TO  THE  CHURCHES,     dtli  edition  20th  thousand.     Price  Is.  6d. 

per  dozen. 
ALL  IN  ALL.     A   Tract   on  Coloss.  iii.   11.      6th  edition,  25th  thousand. 

Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
ARE  YOU  AN  HEIR  ?  A  Question  for  Everybody.    6th  edition,  30th  thousand. 

Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
ARE  YOU  FORGIVEN  ?      A   Question  for  Everybody.     12th    edition,    60th 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
AN  IMPORTANT  QUESTION.     Are  You  Forgiven  ?     Small  paper  edition,  48 

pages,  with  notes.     Fancy  cover,  gilt  edges,  6d. 
ARE  YOU  HAPPY  ?     A  Question  for  everybody.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
ARE  YOU  HOLY?     A  Question  for  Everybody.    13th  edition,  66th  thousand. 

Pi'ice  2s.  per  dozen.  * 

ARE  YOU  READY?     10th  edition.     Price  Gd.  per  dozen. 
ARE  YOU  REGENERATE  ?      A  Question  for  the  Times.     6th  edition,  30th 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
ASSUliANCE.     2  Tim.  iv.  6,  7,  8.     With  Extracts  from  Writers  of  the  17th 

century.     5tli  edition,  price  3s.  per  dozen. 
BAXTER    AND    HIS    TLAIES ;     A  Lecture  delivered  February    1st,    1853. 

Neat  Wrapper,  price  3d. 
BE  NOT   SLOTHFUL,   BUT   FOLLOWERS.      A  Funeral  Sermon,  preached 

in  Helmingham  Cliurch.     6th  thousand,  price  Is. 
BE  ZEALOUS.     Tlioughts  on  Galatians  iv.   18.     6th  edition,  30th  thousand. 

Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
EISHOP    LATIMER.       A    Lecture   delivered   February   28th,    1853.     Neat 

wrapper,  price  4d. 
CHRIST  AND  THE  TWO  THIEVES.    Being  thoughts  on  Luke  xxiii.  39—43. 

10th  edition,  50th  tliousand.     Price  Is.  6d.  der  dozen. 
CONSIDER  YOUR  WAYS  !     A  Pastor's  Address  to  his  flock.     9th  edition, 

45th  thousand.    Price  2s.  per  dozen. 

CROSS,  (THE)     A  Tract  for  the  times.     8th  edition,  40th  thousand.     Price 
2s.  per  dozen. 

DO  YOU  PRAY  ?     A  Question  for  Everybody.     22nd  edition,  110th  thousand. 
Price  2s.  per  dozen. 

DO  YOU  WANT  A  FRIEND  ?     A  Christmas  Ti-act.     Price  Is.  per  dozen. 

FAITH'S  CHOICE.     A  Sermon  on  Hebrews  xi.  24 — 26.     4th  edition,  price  6d. 

GEORGE  WHITEFIELD.     A  Biographical  Lecture.     Price  3d. 

HAVE  YOU  THE  SPIRIT  ?     A  Question  for  Everybody.     10th  edition,  50th 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
HAVE  YOU  PEACE  ?     A  Question  for  the  Times.    6th  edition,  30th  thousand. 

Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
HOME  TRUTHS.  Being  Miscellaneous  Addresses  and  Tracts,  arranged,  revised, 

and   corrected   for   this  edition.        6  vols,  foolscap   8vo,    Illustrated  with 

Frontispieces  and  Vignette  Titles,  extra  cloth,  lettered.     Price  3s.  6d.  each. 

HOW  READEST  THOU?     A  Question  for  Everybody.      10th  edition,   50th 
thousand,  48pp.,  price  3s.  per  dozen. 

HOW  SHOULD  A  CHILD  BE  TRAINED?     Thoughts  on  Proverbs  xxii.  G. 
6th  edition.     Price  3d.  each,  or  2s.  6d.  per  dozen. 

I    HAVE    SOMEWHAT    TO    SAY   UNTO    THEE.     A  word  for  Eveiybody. 
16th  edition,  80th  thousand.  Price  Cd. 


Tracts  and  other  Works  by  the  Rev.  J.  C.  Eyle,  B.A. 


KEEP  IT  HOLY.     A  Tract  on  the  Sabbath  Day.     7th  edition,  35th  thousand. 

Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
LITTLE  AND  WISE.     An  Address  to  Children.     Small  8vo,  neat  wrapper, 

with  Engravings.     12tli  thousand.     Price  4d. . 
LIVING  OR  DEAD  ?  A  Question  for  Everybody.  20th  edition,  100th  thousand. 

Price  2s.  per  dozen: 
LOT*S  WIFE.    Thoughts  on  Luke  xvii.  32.  4th  edition,    20th  thousand.   Price 

2s.  per  dozen. 
OCCUPY  TILL  I  COME.     A  Tract  for  the  Times.    Bemg  Thoughts  on  Luke 

xix.  11 — 13.     20th  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
ONLY  ONE  WAY.     8th  edition,  40th  thousand.     Price  Is.  6d.  per  dozen. 
PLAIN  SPEAKING.     Two  Packets  of  Large  Type  Tracts,  each  contammg  40 

sorts.     Price  Is.  each ;  limp  cloth,  Is.  9d. 

PEACE  I  BE  STILL  I     A  Page  from  our  Lord's  History.     6th  edition,  30th 
thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 

PROVE  ALL  THINGS.     A  Tract  on  Private  Judgment.     8th  edition,  40th 
thousand.      Price  Is.  6d.  per  dozen. 

REGENERATION.     A  Tract  for  the  times.      104  pp.  foolscap  8vo,  4th  edition, 

12th  thousand.     Price  6d.  sewed  ;  limp  cloth  Is. 
REMEMBER  LOTl      13th  edition,  65th  thousand.     Price  Is.  6d.  per  dozen. 
RICH    AND    POOR.     A  Tract   for  the  times.     6th  edition,  30th  thousand. 

Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
SEED  CORN.     Being  an  assorted  Packet  of  One  Hundred  Hand-bills,  con- 
taining 48  sorts.     Price  8d. 
SERMONS  TO   CHILDREN.     A   6th  and  revised  edition.     In   fancy  cover. 

Price  6d. 
SHALL  YOU  BE  SAVED  ?     A  Question  for  Everybody.     12th  edition,  60th 

thousand.     Pi'ice  2s.  per  dozen. 
SPIRITUAL  SONGS.     Coloss.  iii.  16.     Being  100  Hymns  selected  by  the  Rev. 

J.  C.  Ryle.     In   glazed   wrapper,  price  9d.  each ;  or  in  fancy  cloth,  gilt 

edges,  price  Is.      7th  edition. 
ST.  PETER   AT   ANTIOCH.      A   Tract  for   the   Tunes.     4th   edition,    20th 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
STRIVE.     Thoughts  on  Luke  xvi.  24.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
THE  BISHOP,  THE  PASTOR,  AND  THE  PREACHER  ;  in  three  Biographical 

Lectures  :  with  ESSAY.     Cloth  extra,  price  2s. 
THE    READING  WHICH  IS  BLESSED.      Being   Thoughts  on   Revelation  i. 

1 — 3.     3rd  edition,  15th  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  doz. 
WATCH  1     A  Word  in  Season.     Being   Thoughts  on  the  Parable  of  the  Ten 

Virgins.     (Matt.  xxv.  1 — 13.)     10th  edition,  50th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 
WHAT  IS  THE  CHURCH  ?     A  Question   for  the  Times.     6th  edition,  30th 

thousand.     Price  3d.  each,  or  2s.  Od.  per  dozen. 
WHAT  IS  WANTED  ?     Being  thoughts  and  suggestions  on  some  of  the  chief 

Wants  of  the  Church  of  England  in  the  present  day.     2nd  revised  edition. 

Price  4d. 
WHAT  TIME  IS  IT?      Being  Thoughts  on  Romans   xiii.  12.     6th  edition, 

25th  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  doz. 
WHEAT  OR  CHAFF  ?     A  QuesUon  for  everybody.      13th  edition,  65th  thou- 
sand.    Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
WHERE  ART  THOU  ?     A  Question  for  everybody.     8th  edition,  40th  thou- 
sand.    Price  is.  6d.  per  dozen. 
WHITEFIELD,  GEORGE — A  Sketch  of  his  Tunes,  his  Life,  his  Religion,  and 

Preaching.     Neat  wrapper,  price  3d. 
YOUNG  MEN  EXHORTED.  A  Sermon  to  Young  Men,  preached  in  Helmingham 

Church.      5th  edition,  20th  thousand,  in  f'cap  8vo,  68  pp.  cloth  extra.  Is. ; 

neat  wrapper,  6d.  each. 


