Ti,4 


/  / 


/ 


LIBRftRY  OF  CONGRESS 

m 

0  015  845  496  8 


! 
What  The 

War  Teaches 

or 

The  Greatest 

Lessons  of 

1917 

R.  A.  TORREY 

Dean  of  Bible  Institute  of  Los  Angeles 

Price  5c  each ;  50c  dozen. 

THE  BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 

Bible  Institute  of  Los  Angeles 

536-558  South  Hope  Street 

Los  Angeles,   California. 

52^ 
'64 

\ 
1 

Copyright  1918 
By  R.  A.  Torrey 

py 

THE  GREATEST  LESSONS  OF  1917 

"We  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  me, 
while  it  is  day :  the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can 
work."     John  9:4. 

Our  subject  is,  "The  Greatest  Lessons  of  1917." 
You  will  find  the  text  in  John  9  :4,  "We  must  work 
the  works  of  Him  that  sent  me,  while  it  is  day: 
the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work."  You 
may  not  see  at  first  the  connection  between  the 
subject  and  the  text,  but  you  will  as  we  go  on,  and 
especially  as  we  close.  The  year  that  is  just  ending 
is  the  most  momentous  that  any  man  now  living 
has  ever  seen.  There  is  reason  to  suppose  that  1918 
will  be  still  more  momentous,  but  that  still  lies  in 
the  future,  about  which  it  is  not  very  safe  to  specu- 
late. The  day  in  which  we  are  living  is  the  day  of 
the  largest  opportunity  and  loudest  call  to  unstinted 
self-sacrifice  and  untiring  service.  I  would  rather 
live  today  than  any  day  of  this  old  world's  history. 
Every  year  has  its  lessons,  but  no  other  year  is  so 
rich  in  lessons  as  this. 

I.    THAT  THE  BIBLE  IS  THE  WORD  OF  GOD. 

The  first  great  lesson  that  1917  teaches  is  that 
the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God. 

There  has  always  been  abundant  proof  that  the 
Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  but  the  occurrences  of 
the  present  year  give  fresh,  up-to-date  illustration 
and  proof  that  it  is  so.  The  year  1917  proves  that 
the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God  in  three  ways: 

1.  First  of  all,  the  year  1917  proves  the  Bible  to 
be  the  Word  of  God  by  fulfilling  its  prophecies. 
Fulfilled  prophecy  is  conclusive  proof  that  the  Bible 
is  the  Word  of  God.  Any  book  that  has  the  power 
of  looking  centuries  into  the  future  and  predicting 
with  minuteness,  precision  and  accuracy  of  time 
person,  place  and  circumstance,  events  to  occur  cen- 
turies later,  must  have  for  its  Author  the  only  Being 
in  the  universe  that  knows  the  end  from  the  begin- 
ning, that  is,  God.  Three  lines  of  prophecy  have 
been  particularly  fulfilled  this  year : 

(1)  First,  prophecies  about  the  Jews.  There  are 
two  lines  of  prophecy  concerning  the  Jews  that 
have  been  fulfilled  in  a  striking  way  during  the  past 

'©•^"      FEB  i:bl9ia  .dci.A498484  ,^^     ( 


11» 


^^!<fo^ 


year.  'In  the  first  place,  prophecies  regarding  the 
sufferings  to  come  upon  the  Jews  in  consequence 
of  their  disobedience  to  the  revealed  will  of  God  as 
given  through  Moses.  In  Deut.  28:37,  41,  47,  48, 
58,  59,  64-67  we  read,  "And  thou  shalt  become  an 
astonishment,  a  proverb,  and  a  by-word,  among  all 
the  peoples  whither  Jehovah  shall  lead  thee  away. 
.  .  .  Thou  shalt  beget  sons  and  daughters,  but 
they  shall  not  be  thine ;  for  they  shall  go  into  cap- 
tivity. .  .  .  Because  thou  servdst  not  Jehovah 
thy  God  with  joyfulness,  and  with  gladness  of  heart, 
by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  all  things;  therefore 
shalt  thou  serve  thine  enemies  that  Jehovah  shall 
send  against  thee,  in  hunger,  and  in  thirst,  and  in 
nakedness,  and  in  want  of  all  things;  and  he  shall 
put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  thy  neck,  until  he  have  de- 
stroyed thee.  ...  If  thou  wilt  not  observe  to 
do  all  the  words  of  this  law  that  are  written  in  this 
book,  that  thou  mayest  fear  this  glorious  and  fearful 
name,  JEHOVAH  THY  GOD;  then  Jehovah  will 
make  thy  plagues  wonderful,  and  the  plagues  of  thy 
seed,  even  great  plagues  and  of  long  continuance, 
and  sore  sicknesses,  and  of  long  continuance. 
.  .  And  Jehovah  will  scatter  thee  among  all 
peoples,  from  the  one  end  of  the  earth  even  unto 
the  other  end  of  the  earth;  and  there  thou  shalt 
serve  other  gods,  which  thou  hast  not  known,  thou 
nor  thy  fathers,  even  wood  and  stone.  And  among 
:hese  nations  shalt  thou  find  no  ease,  and  there 
shall  be  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  thy  foot;  but  Jehovah 
will  give  thee  there  a  trembling  heart,  and  failing 
Df  eyes,  and  pining  of  soul;  and  thy  life  shall  hang 
in  doubt  before  thee ;  and  thou  shalt  fear  night  and 
day,  and  shalt  have  no  assurance  of  thy  life.  In 
:he  morning  thou  shalt  say.  Would  it  were  even, 
md  at  even  thou  shalt  say,  Would  it  were  morning; 
for  the  fear  of  thy  heart  which  thou  shalt  fear,  and 
for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou  shalt  see." 
rhese  predictions  made  so  many  thousand  years 
igo,  have  been  in  the  process  of  fulfillment  for  cen- 
:uries,  but  never  have  they  been  so  remarkably  ful- 
filled as  during  the  past  year,  notably  among  the 
fews  in  Poland,  but  also  in  other  lands.  In  the 
second  place,  a  second  line  of  prophecies  concern- 
ng  the  Jews  have  been  fulfilled  in  a  notable  manner 

3 


in  1917,  namely,  prophecies  Concerning  the  return- 
ing fullness  of  blessing  and  glory  that  is  to  come 
to  Israel,  and  their  return  to  their  native  land. 
These  promises  of  future  glory  for  Israel  have  for 
centuries  seemed  impossible  of  fulfillment,  but  today 
we  see  them  in  course  of  fulfillment  before  our  very 
eyes.  This  is  indicated  in  two  ways :  first,  by  the 
place  the  Jew  now  occupies  in  the  government  of 
nations.  There  is  not  time  to  go  into  this  in  detail, 
but  if  there  were  it  could  be  shown  that  to  an 
amazing  extent  the  leading  men  in  the  control  of 
the  government  and  commerce  and  international  re- 
lations of  England  and  France  and  Germany  are 
Jews.  The  man  who  stands  at  the  forefront  in 
Russia  at  the  present  time,  Trotzky,  is  a  Jew.  A 
Russian  friend  who  left  Petrograd  Nov.  29th  and 
who  is  well  informed  told  me  today  that  there  are 
forty  men  who  really  rule  there,  and  that  thirty  of 
these  forty  are  Jews  though  they  have  taken  Rus- 
sian names.  The  Jew  will  have  much  to  say  about 
the  settlement  of  the  present  war.  In  addition  to 
this,  we  have  the  recent  capture  of  Jerusalem  by  the 
English  forces,  and  England's  declaration  that 
Jerusalem  is  to  be  turned  over  to  the  Jews.  In  such 
things  as  these  there  is  the  clearest  indication  that 
we  are  well  on  the  way  toward  the  fulfillment  of 
the  seemingly  incredible  prophecies  of  the  Bible 
regarding  the  future  glory  of  the  Jew,  when  "the 
times  of  the  Gentiles"  shall  have  ended.  For  cen- 
turies Jerusalem  has  been  trodden  down  of  the 
nations  (that  is,  the  Gentile  nations),  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  predicted  it  would  be  (Luke  21 :24)  ;  and  now 
that  "the  times  of  the  Gentiles"  are  near  their  ful- 
fillment Jerusalem  is  apparently  about  to  pass  from 
the  Gentiles  back  to  the  Jew,  as  our  Lord  predicted 
it  would  (Luke  21:24). 

(2)  A  second  class  of  prophecies  has  been  ful- 
filled in  a  remarkable  way  during  the  year  that  is 
just  ending,  and  that  is  prophecies  concerning  war. 
The  Bible  declares  that  in  the  last  days  of  this  dis- 
pensation there  shall  be  a  multiplying  of  wars.  Our 
Lord  said,  "And  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  rumors 
of  wars;  see  that  ye  be  not  troubled;  for  these 
things  must  needs  come  to  pass;  but  the  end  is  not 
yet.    For  nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and  king- 

4 


J 


dom  against  kingdom;  and  there  shall  be  famines 
and  earthquakes  in  divers  places.  But  all  these 
things  are  the  beginning  of  travail."  (Matt.  24:6-8. 
See  also  Jer.  25  -.26-33.)  And  God  declared  through 
the  prophet  Daniel,  in  Dan.  9 :26,,  that  "Even  unto 
the  end  (i.  e.,  the  end  of  this  dispensation)  shall 
be  war."  A  short  time  ago  these  prophecies  seemed 
impossible  of  fulfillment.  Our  wise  men,  our  phil- 
osophers and  our  statesmen  said  that  a  great  war 
was  an  impossibility.  We  had  our  Hague  Confer- 
ences, and  built  our  Peace  Palaces,  and  on  the  very 
day  of  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  the  representatives 
of  different  nations  were  gathering  at  Geneva  for  a 
Peace  Conference.  Any  one  who  dared  to  say  that 
the  most  awful  war  in  the  world's  history  was  com- 
ing was  regarded  as  a  crank  and  a  fanatic.  A  few 
years  ago,  before  the  outbreak  of  the  present  war, 
The  Christian  Herald  wrote  to  me  and  to  different 
persons  in  this  country  and  across  the  water,  asking 
our  opinion  about  these  Peace  Movements,  and 
whether  we  thought  that  there  ever  could  be  another 
great  war.  In  answer  to  this  letter  of  inquiry,  I 
wrote  that  I  was  in  favor  of  anything  that  made 
for  peace  even  temporarily,  but  that  as  far  as  there 
never  being  another  great  war  was  concerned,  I 
knew  my  Bible  too  well  not  to  know  that  there  could 
not  be  permanent  peace,  but  that  there  was  ahead 
of  us  the  most  awful  war  in  all  the  world's  history. 
Many  regarded  me  as  a  crank  for  this  statement  of 
opinion,  but  where  are  we  today? 

(3)  There  is  a  third  class  of  prophecies  in  process 
of  fulfillment  this  year,  that  is,  prophecies  concern- 
ing the  last  days.  We  read  in  2  Tim.  3:1-5,  "But 
know  this,  that  in  the  last  days  grievous  times  shall 
come.  For  men  shall  be  lovers  of  self,  lovers  of 
money,  boastful,  haughty,  railers,  disobedient  to 
parents,  unthankful,  unholy;  without  natural  affec- 
tion, implacable  (or,  trucebreakers),  slanderers,  with- 
out self-control,  fierce,  no  lovers  of  good,  traitors, 
headstrong,  puffed  up,  lovers  of  pleasure  rather  than 
lovers  of  God;  holding  a  form  of  godliness  (Gott 
mit  uns),  but  having  denied  the  power  thereof." 
Until  comparatively  recently,  social  philosophers, 
theologians  and  popular  preachers  had  persuaded 
themselves,  and  sought  to  persuade  us,  that  we  were 

5 


hurrying  at  express  rate  toward  a  millennium  of 
universal  peace,  righteousness  and  love.  Any  one 
who  ventured  to  point  to  the  plain  predictions  of 
God's  Word  regarding  "the  last  days"  was  regarded 
as  belonging  "to  a  second-class  school  of  religious 
fanatics."  But  what  has  been  the  history  of  1917? 
It  is  pictured  exactly  in  these  ignored  or  despised 
words  of  Paul  which  I  have  just  read.  If  this  year 
1917  had  sat  before  the  camera  it  could  not  have 
been  more  accurately  photographed  than  it  is  here 
in  God's  camera. 

2.  The  year  1917  proves  the  Bible  to  be  the  Word 
of  God  in  a  second  way,  that  is,  by  illustrating  and 
confirming  its  teachings.  The  teachings  of  the  Bible 
that  have  been  illustrated  and  confirmed  this  year 
are  very  many.  I  will  call  your  attention  to  but  three. 
First  of  all,  1  John  2:17,  "And  the  world  passeth 
away,  and  the  lust  thereof;  but  he  that  doeth 
the  will  of  God  abideth  forever."  Every  year  for 
centuries  has  been  a  confirmation  of  this  verse,  but 
never  has  the  transitory  character  of  this  present 
world  been  more  wonderfully  illustrated  than  in  the 
year  1917,  when  dynasties  are  changing,  thrones  are 
tottering,  forms  of  government  are  crumbling  and 
dissolving,  fortunes  are  vanishing,  reputations  are 
going,  and  all  earthly  things  are  passing  away  in  a 
most  astounding  manner.  Second,  Jer.  17 :5,  "Thus 
saith  Jehovah :  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in 
man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  de- 
parteth  from  Jehovah."  We  have  been  trusting  in 
man,  putting  our  confidence  in  the  arm  of  flesh; 
we  have  depended  upon  our  great  statesmen,  our 
great  philosophers,  our  great  scientists,  and  our 
great  soldiers.  We  have  departed  from  God;  we 
have  ignored  Him  in  our  plans.  When  I  say  "we" 
I  mean  not  only  America,  but  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  And  the  arm  of  flesh  has  failed  us;  the 
unexpected  has  happened,  time  and  time  again.  Ruin 
has  overtaken  all  nations.  Men  have  been  wonder- 
ing why  God  did  not  stop  the  war.  If  men  choose 
to  put  their  trust  in  one  another  instead  of  in  Him, 
why  should  He  not  in  His  infinite  wisdom  and  right- 
eousness let  men  drink  to  the  dregs  the  bitter  cup 
which  they  have  mixed  for  themselves?  It  is  but 
a  fulfillment  of  His  own  Word.    In  the  third  place, 

6 


the  year  1917  has  wonderfully  illustrated  and  con- 
firmed the  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God  regarding 
the  essential  total  depravity  of  man  at  his  best 
natural  estate.  The  Bible  teaching  that  man,  until 
born  again,  is  at  enmity  with  God  (Rom.  8:7),  that 
his  will  is  perverse,  his  affections  corrupt,  and  his 
mind  blinded,  has  been  much  doubted  in  recent 
years,  it  has  been  held  to  be  a  false  representation 
of  human  nature,  but  the  events  of  1917  make  it 
as  clear  as  day  that  it  is  an  exact  picture  of  man  as 
he  is  without  God.  The  year  has  brought  clearly 
to  light  what  rulers  and  people  are  at  heart,  and 
what  has  been  brought  to  light  is  in  exact  accord- 
ance with  the  teaching  of  the  Bible, 

3.  The  year  1917  has  proved  the  Bible  to  be  the 
Word  of  God  in  a  third  way,  that  is  by  the  way  in 
which  the  Bible  meets  present  day  needs,  the  deepest 
needs  of  men  and  women  in  this  year  of  our  Lord 
1917.  To  what  book  shall  we  go  in  such  strange 
and  trying  days  as  these  are?  There  is  but  one 
book  to  which  we  can  go.  Last  Monday  there  was 
a  striking  editorial  in  the  Los  Angeles  Times.  The 
Los  Angeles  Times  is  not  supposed  to  be  a  religious 
paper,  but  the  editor  writes :  "The  Bible  is  the  one 
great  book  for  all  peoples  and  all  times.  In  it  is 
to  be  found  the  inspiration  for  all  civilization  and 
all  material  and  spiritual  advancement  of  individuals 
and  nations.  The  time  will  come  when  the  Bible 
will  be  read  and  studied,  not  only  in  Sunday-schools, 
but  in  all  the  public  schools  of  the  country.  The 
time  will  come  when  to  be  unacquainted  with  the 
Bible  and  the  wisdom  it  teaches  will  mark  a  man 
as  uneducated,  if  not  indeed  unfit  for  his  duty  to 
himself,  his  family,  and  to  society  at  large."  This 
statement  is  undoubtedly  true,  at  least  in  so  far 
as  it  says  that  "the  Bible  is  the  one  great  book  for 
all  peoples  and  all  times."  The  year  now  closing 
has  proved  this  beyond  a  question.  How  utterly  in- 
sufficient for  such  days  of  reality  and  storm  and 
stress  and  crisis  in  individual,  social,  commercial 
and  national  life  as  these,  are  such  shallow  and 
vapid  philosophies  as  Christian  Science,  Theosophy, 
New  Thought,  vSpiritualism  and  all  similar  mixtures 
of  bombast  and  hot  air,  but  how  all-sufficient  is  the 

7 


Divine   philosophy   of   God's   own   and   only   book — 
the  Bible. 

II.  THE  CERTAINTY  OF  THE  EXISTENCE, 

CUNNING  AND  POWER  OF  A 
PERSONAL  DEVIL. 
The  second  great  lesson  that  the  year  1917  teaches 
is  the  certainty  of  the  existence,  cunning  and  power 
of  a  personal  Devil.  Belief  in  the  existence  of  a 
personal  Devil  such  as  is  pictured,  not  in  Milton  or 
Goethe,  but  in  the  Bible,  had  well-nigh  died  out 
among  men,  but  the  events  of  the  past  year  can  be 
explained  only  by  postulating  his  existence.  How 
can  you  account  for  the  Kaiser  and  his  infamous 
generals.  Von  Bissing  and  the  rest,  except  by  seeing 
the  Devil  back  of  them,  just  such  a  Devil  as  the 
Bible  describes?  How  can  you  account  for  the 
abominable  utterances,  not  only  of  such  demonized 
philosophers  and  political  writers  as  Nietzsche, 
Treitschke,  and  Bernhardi,  but  of  such  hitherto 
highly  esteemed  critics,  theologians  and  philosophers 
as  Harnack,  Deissmann  and  Eucken,  except  by  dis- 
cerning a  very  brainy,  very  astute  Devil  back  of 
them?  It  is  not  hard  to  believe  in  a  personal  Devil 
today,  indeed,  it  is  a  mark  of  a  lack  of  logical  acu- 
men and  candor  not  to  believe  in  his  existence. 

III.  THAT   THERE   MUST    BE   A   HELL   IN 

THE  WORLD  TO  COME. 
The  third  great  lesson  of  the  year  1917  is  that 
there  must  be  a  hell  in  the  world  to  come.  In  re- 
cent years  men  have  had  no  faith,  or  a  very  hazy 
faith,  in  there  being  a  very  dreadful  hell  in  the 
world  to  come,  but  these  present  days  demand  Hell. 
What  else  can  compensate  for  the  nameless,  in- 
describable atrocities  committed  by  German  officers 
of  culture  and  intelligence  upon  the  women  and 
children  of  France  and  Belgium,  but  a  hell  as  awful 
as  that  described  in  the  Bible?  In  the  light  of  the 
events  of  the  present  year,  of  course,  there  is  a  hell. 
If  there  were  not,  there  would  be  a  strange  and 
unaccountable  lack  in  the  moral  order  of  the  uni- 
verse. If  I  did  not  believe  in  Hell  in  such  days  as 
these  it  would  be  difficult  for  me  to  believe  in  a  holy 
and  righteous  God. 

8 


IV.    THE  TERRIBLE  RESULTS  OF  THE  EVO- 
LUTIONARY HYPOTHESIS  WHEN  CAR- 
RIED TO  ITS  LOGICAL  CONCLUSIONS. 

The  fourth  important  lesson  of  the  year  1917  is 
the  terrible  results  of  the  evolutionary  hypothesis 
when  carried  to  its  inevitable  logical  conclusions. 
There  is  not  time  to  go  into  that  at  any  length, 
but  if  there  were  I  could  show  you  by  quotations 
from  Nietzsche,  Treitschke,  Bernhardi,  Klaus,  Wag- 
ner and  other  German  philosophers  and  political 
writers,  upon  whose  writings  lies  the  immediate  re- 
sponsibility for  the  present  war.  that  the  war  was 
the  direct  product  of  German  Neo-Darwinism.  For 
example,  Friedrich  Wilhelm  Nietzsche,  to  whose 
philosophy  more  than  that  of  any  one  else  the  Ger- 
man state  of  mind  that  led  to  this  war  is  due,  says 
in  his  book,  "The  Joyous  Wisdom,"  Section  7)11 :  "We 
children  of  the  future  do  not  by  any  means  think 
it  desirable  that  the  kingdom  of  righteousness  and 
peace  should  be  established  on  the  earth.  .  .  .  We 
rejoice  in  all  men  who,  like  ourselves,  love  danger, 
war,  and  adventure.  .  .  .  We  count  ourselves 
among  the  conquerors;  we  ponder  over  the  need  of 
a  new  order  of  things,  even  of  a  new  slavery — for 
every  strengthening  and  elevation  of  the  type  'man' 
also  involves  a  new  form  of  slavery."  Of  course, 
the  whole  meaning  of  this  is  that  the  survival  of 
the  fittest,  Darwinian  evolution  in  its  extremist  form, 
is  a  beneficial  thing,  and  demands  war  as  a  beneficial 
institution.  Klaus  Wagner,  in  his  book,  "War," 
page  183,  says,  "Unless  we  choose  to  shut  our  eyes 
to  the  necessity  of  evolution,  we  must  recognize  the 
necessity  of  war.  We  must  accept  war,  which  will 
last  as  long  as  development  and  existence ;  we  must 
accept  eternal  war."  Prof.  Ernst  Hasse  says  in  "Die 
Zukunft  des  Deutschen  Volkstums,"  page  126,  "  'War 
is  the  father  of  everything,'  says  Heraclitus.  It 
will  be  the  father  of  the  new  German  race  of  the 
future."  This  was  written  as  long  ago  as  1908. 
The  evolutionary  origin  of  this  opinion  is  evident  to 
any  one  familiar  with  evolutionary  teaching.  General 
von  Bernhardi  says  in  his  famous  book,  "Germany 
and  the  Next  War,"  to  which  many  attribute  the 
present  war  more  than  to  any  other  single  writing, 

9 


"The  efforts  directed  toward  the  abolition  of  war 
must  not  only  be  termed  foolish,  but  absolutely 
immoral,  and  must  be  stigmatised  as  unworthy  of 
the  human  race.  .  .  .  The  weak  nation  is  to  have 
the  same  right  as  the  powerful  and  vigorous  nation! 
The  whole  idea  represents  a  presumptuous  encroach- 
ment on  the  natural  laws  of  development."  Heinrich 
Treitschke,  whose  teachings  share  with  those  of 
Bernhardi  and  Nietzsche  the  dishonor  of  being 
chiefly  responsible  for  the  present  ruthless  war 
spirit  in  Germany,  says  in  his  book,  "Politics,"  Vol- 
ume 1,  page  121,  "The  Germans  let  the  primitive 
Prussian  tribes  decide  whether  they  should  be  put 
to  the  sword  or  thoroughly  Germanized.  Cruel  as 
these  processes  of  transformation  may  be,  they  are 
a  blessing  for  humanity.  It  makes  for  health  that 
the  nobler  race  should  absorb  the  inferior  stock." 
Of  course,  such  a  philosophy  is  clearly  evolutionary. 
No  one  can  read  the  writings  that  created  in  Ger- 
many the  spirit  that  led  to  this  war  and  that  in- 
spired the  methods  by  which  this  war  has  been  car- 
ried on.  without  seeing  that  this  war  is  the  harvest 
of  the  seed  that  Darwin  sewed  when  he  gave  to 
the  world  his  theory  of  Evolution  by  Natural  Se- 
lection, and  that  Herbert  Spencer  sowed  when  he 
gave  to  the  world  the  phrase,  "The  survival  of  the 
fittest"  and  the  philosophy  that  this  phrase  em- 
bodies. The  Germans  are  persuaded  that  they  are 
"the  fittest"  and  therefore  that  the  Belgians  and 
the  rest  of  "the  inferior  stock"  must  get  out,  and 
that  it  does  not  matter  much  how  they  are  exter- 
minated. This  may  seem  to  some  of  you  like  evolu- 
tionism gone  mad,  but  in  point  of  fact  it  is  only 
evolutionism  carried  to  its  logical  issue.  It  is  the 
direct  outcome  of  the  type  of  philosophy  that  has 
ruled  our  colleges  and  universities,  and  even  some 
of  our  theological  seminaries,  for  a  generation.  We 
are  talking  about  the  necessity,  for  our  safety's  sake, 
of  getting  the  German  language  out  of  our  schools ; 
it  is  far  more  necessary  for  our  safety,  and  for  the 
safety  of  the  whole  human  race,  that  we  get  this 
soulless,  cruel,  remorseless  philosophy  of  evolution- 
ism, the  egg  of  which  was  laid  in  England  and 
hatched  in  Germany,  out  of  our  universities,  colleges 
and  high  schools.     Sow  evolutionism   as  taught  by 

10 


Darwin  and  Spencer  and  you  reap  Nietzsche,  Treit- 
schke  and  Bernhardi,  and  then  you  find  you  reap 
the  present  war,  with  its  cruelty,  its  lust,  its  murder, 
its  rape,  its  agony,  its  death,  and  almost  universal 
dissolution  and  hell.  It  was  interesting  week  before 
last  to  hear  Prof.  Shailer  Matthews  saying  in  this 
city  that  the  German  philosophy  must  go,  when  there 
is  no  one  in  all  the  land  who  has  more  persistently 
labored  than  he  to  get  us  to  do  all  our  theological 
thinking  in  the  terms  of  German  philosophy  and  Ger- 
man criticism.  If  he  really  means  what  he  says,  he 
would  better  retract  and  recall  some  of  the  stuff 
which  he  has  been  sowing  broadcast  among  ministers 
and  theological  students  in  the  past  six  months. 

V.  THE  APPALLING  RESULTS  OF  GERMAN 
RATIONALISM  AND  DESTRUCTIVE 
CRITICISM. 
The  fifth  important  lesson  of  the  year  1917  is  the 
appalling  results  of  German  Rationalism  and  De- 
structive Criticism.  This  war  could  never  have  been 
if  an  increasingly  numerous  body  of  German  scholars 
since  1833,  when  David  Strauss  gave  to  the  world 
his  "Leben  Jesu,"  had  not  been  undermining  the 
faith  of  German  preachers,  and  through  them  the 
faith  of  the  German  people  in  the  Bible  as  the  iner- 
rant  Word  of  God.  If  the  German  rulers  and  people 
had  continued  to  believe  as  Luther,  whose  four  hun- 
dredth anniversary  we  celebrated  this  year,  taught 
them  to  believe,  then  this  war  never  would  have 
been.  But  David  Strauss,  Ferdinand  Baur,  Well- 
hausen  Graf,  Friedrich  Delitzsch  and  the  rest  have 
done  their  work,  and  behold,  the  war  and  its  shame 
and  its  agonies,  its  death,  its  destruction,  turning 
the  earth  that  was  fast  becoming  a  terrestrial  para- 
dise, into  a  terrestrial  Inferno,  and  this  same  Ra- 
tionalism, and  this  same  Destructive  Criticism,  de- 
structive in  more  senses  than  one,  we  are  teaching 
and  exploiting  and  supporting  in  our  theological 
seminaries  throughout  our  land  today,  Yale,  An- 
dover,  Union,  Newton,  Crozier,  Chicago  University, 
and  many  others.  Are  we  Americans  fools?  Can't 
we  lay  to  heart  a  lesson  that  is  written  so  large  over 
the  year  1917? 

11 


VI.     THE  INSUFFICIENCY   OF  INTELLECT- 
UAL CULTURE,  SCIENCE,  AND  PHILOS- 
OPHY TO   REGENERATE  THE  INDI- 
VIDUAL,   OR    BRING    IN    THE  ' 
KINGDOM   OF  GOD. 

The  sixth  great  lesson  of  the  year  1917  is  the  in- 
sufficiency of  intellectual  culture,  science,  and  phil- 
osophy, to  regenerate  the  individual,  or  bring  in  the 
kingdom  of  God.  In  recent  years  many  preachers 
and  churches  have  tried  to  substitute  regeneration 
by  culture  and  education  for  regeneration  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  working  through 
the  instrumentality  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  they 
have  sought  to  bring  in  the  kingdom  by  culture, 
science,  philosophy,  sociology,  instead  of  by  hasten- 
ing the  coming  of  the  King.  Indeed,  they  fancied 
they  could  dispense  with  the  King  altogether,  and 
have  the  kingdom  without  the  King's  coming.  The 
year  1917  proves  the  utter  futility  and  folly  of  all 
this.  Every  unprejudiced  scholar  knows  that  the 
highest  purely  intellectual  culture  in  recent  years 
has  been  in  Germany,  that  Germany  is  the  land  in 
which  what  is  called  science  and  philosophy  have 
blossomed  and  born  fruit  as  in  no  other  land.  Eng- 
land, Scotland  and  America  have  been  selecting  their 
brightest  men  and  sending  them  to  Germany  to 
complete  their  education.  Germany  illustrates  to  the 
full  what  science  and  philosoph  /  and  purely  intel- 
lectual culture  can  do,  and  behold  the  result !  Is 
Germany  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth?  No,  it  is 
the  kingdom  of  William,  the  Second,  and  the  Devil. 
The  leaders  in  Germany,  university  bred  men,  many 
of  them  university  professors,  are  displaying  the  most 
appalling  brutality,  the  most  conscienceless  lying, 
the  most  shocking  inhumanity,  the  most  astonishing 
disregard  for  the  most  sacred  rights  of  women  and 
children,  the  most  complete  moral  degenercy  the 
world  has  seen  for  centuries.  Germany's  "Super- 
man" when  he  is  unmasked  proves  to  be  the  Devil. 
From  this  time  on  Americans,  English  or  Scotch 
will  as  soon  think  of  sending  their  children  to  a 
smallpox  hospital  as  a  health  resort  as  to  Germany 
for  the  development  of  their  manhood. 

'•.  !  12 


VII.    THE  UTTER  FAILURE  OF  MAN  WITH- 
OUT GOD. 

The  seventh  great  lesson  of  the  year  1917  is  a 
lesson  every  year  since  the  fall  of  Adam  has  taught, 
but  this  year  with  peculiar  emphasis,  and  that  is, 
the  utter  failure  of  man  without  God.  For  years 
now  the  doctrine  that  has  been  most  popular  in 
many  circles  has  been  the  Doctrine  of  the  Dignity 
and  essential  Deity  of  Man.  It  has  not  been 
said  right  out,  perhaps,  but  it  has  been  im- 
plied in  much  that  has  been  said  in  poetry,  novels, 
science,  philosophy,  and  even  theology,  that  man  is 
sufficient  unto  himself  and  could  get  along  very 
nicely  without  God.  We  have  dropped  God  out  of 
our  science.  We  have  dropped  God  out  of  our 
philosophy.  We  have  dropped  God  out  of  our 
ethics.  We  have  dropped  God  out  of  our  statesman- 
ship, our  legislation,  our  education,  our  psychology, 
our  sociology.  Man  is  the  whole  thing.  "And  He 
that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  has  laughed"  (Ps.  2:4) 
and  said,  "Go  on  without  me  and  see  where  you 
will  get."  And  where  have  we  gotten?  To  Hell! 
Man  has  proved  an  utter  failure.  At  the  present 
time  he  has  proved  a  success  at  nothing  else  but 
at  destroying  his  fellowmen.  "Oh,  look  at  our  in- 
ventions," we  have  been  crying.  "Look  at  our  tele- 
graph and  telephone,  by  which  we  talk  to  people 
thousands  of  miles  away.  Look  at  our  steam  cars, 
by  which  we  fly  across  the  land.  Look  at  our  steam- 
ships, by  which  we  fly  across  the  water,  and  our 
aeroplanes,  by  which  we  fly  through  the  air  (and  kill 
innocent  little  children  at  school  and  babes  at  their 
mothers'  breasts),  and  our  submarines,  by  which  we 
fly  under  the  water."  Yes,  and  what  is  the  principal 
use  to  which  we  see  them  all  being  put  in  this  year 
of  grace  1917?  To  kill  men,  women,  and  innocent 
babes.  Man  is  an  utter  failure  left  to  himself.  We 
need  God.  Ignoring  God,  the  nations  of  the  earth 
have  plunged  into  war.  They  are  all  war-weary. 
They  all  want  to  quit,  but  nobody  knows  how,  except 
the  Russians,  and  they  are  making  the  worst  botch 
of  it  of  all.  We  need  God,  oh,  how  sorely  we  need 
God,  and  we  need  the  old  Gospel,  too,  the  Gospel 
of  Christ  crucified   for  His  enemies,  risen,  coming 

13 


again.     We  need  not  only  to  have  it  preached,  but 
applied  to  life. 

VIII.  THE    FOLLY    OF    LIVING    FOR    THE 
WORLD  AND  WHAT  THE  WORLD 

HAS  TO  GIVE. 
The  eighth  great  lesson  of  the  year  1917  is  the 
folly  of  living  for  the  world  and  what  the  world 
has  to  give.  God  is  always  crying,  "If  then  ye  be 
risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are 
above,  where  Christ  is  seated  on  the  right  hand  of 
God ;  set  your  affection  on  things  above,  not  on 
things  on  the  earth."  (Col.  3:1,  2.)  But  the  events 
of  the  present  year  have  been  crying  it  out  with  a 
voice  of  thunder.  See  how  thrones  and  governments 
are  toppling ;  see  how  fortunes  are  vanishing  into 
thin  air;  see  how  forms  of  governments  are  chang- 
ing and  passing;  see  how  men  are  dying;  see  how 
homes  are  going  to  pieces ;  see  how  reputations  are 
tumbling;  see  how  vast  armies  are  passing  from 
the  field  of  honor  into  the  shades  of  Sheol.  Oh, 
what  folly  in  such  days  as  these  to  live  for  money, 
honor,  fame,  pleasure,  or  anything  else  that  belongs 
to  this  fast  fading  mundane  sphere.  "Seek  the 
things  that  are  above,  where  Christ  is,  seated  at 
the  right  hand  of  God.  Set  your  mind  on  the 
things  that  are  above,  not  on  the  things  that  are 
upon  the  earth."     (Col.  3:1,2.) 

IX.  THE    COMING    OF    OUR    LORD    JESUS 

DRAWETH  NIGH. 
The  ninth  great  lesson  of  the  year  1917  is,  the 
Coming  of  Our  Lord  Draweth  Nigh.  The  present 
state  and  course  of  things  cannot  go  on  much  longer. 
Something  new,  altogether  new,  must  happen.  And 
to  the  thoughtful  man  the  only  new  thing  that  prom- 
ises any  permanent  solution  of  our  grave  and  over- 
whelming perplexities  and  embarrassments  is  the 
long-promised  coming  of  King  Emmanuel.  The  times 
are  ripe  for  it.  Furthermore,  these  are  just  such 
days  as  God  tells  us  will  immediately  precede  the 
rising  of  the  Morning  Star,  the  soon  rising  of  the 
Son  of  Righteousness  with  healing  in  His  wings,  the 

14 


glorious  coming  of  King  Jesus.  Let  me  read  you 
again  from  the  Bible  God's  description  of  the  days 
that  immediately  precede  the  coming  of  the  King: 
"But  know  this,  that  in  the  last  days,  grievous  times 
shall  come,  for  men  shall  be  lovers  of  self,  lovers  of 
money,  boastful,  haughty,  railers,  disojbedient  to 
parents,  unthankful,  unholy,  without  natural  affec- 
tion, implacable,  slanderers,  without  self-control, 
fierce,  no  lovers  of  good,  traitors,  headstrong,  puffed 
up,  lovers  of  pleasure  rather  than  lovers  of  God; 
holding  a  form  of  godliness,  but  having  denied  the 
power  thereof."  (2  Tim.  3:1-6).)  Now  turn  from 
that  dark  picture  that  is  being  fulfilled  right  before 
our  eyes,  and  look  at  another  that  begins  with 
great  darkness,  but  ends  in  unutterable  brightness 
and  glory,  Luke  21  :25-28.  "And  there  shall  be  signs 
in  sun  and  moon  and  stars ;  and  upon  the  earth  dis- 
tress of  nations,  in  perplexity  for  the  roaring  of  the 
sea  and  the  billows ;  men  fainting  for  fear,  and  for 
expectation  of  the  things  which  are  coming  on  the 
world :  for  the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken. 
And-  then  shall  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in 
a  cloud  with  power  and  great  glory.  But  when 
these  things  begin  to  come  to  pass,  look  up,  and 
lift  up  your  heads;  because  your  redemption  draweth 
nigh." 

X.    THE  FOLLY  OF  SETTING  DATES. 

The  tenth  lesson  that  the  year  1917  teaches  is 
closely  connected  with  the  ninth,  that  the  coming 
of  our  Lord  draweth  nigh,  and  should  always  be 
kept  in  mind  in  connection  with  that.  This  tenth 
lesson  is  the  folly  of  setting  dates  for  the  return  of 
our  Lord,  or  for  specific  events  connected  with  His 
return.  Our  Lord  Himself  has  warned  us  in  the 
most  solemn  way  that  we  must  not  presume  to  do 
this.  He  says,  "It  is  not  for  you  to  know  times  or 
seasons,  which  the  Father  hath  set  within  His  own 
authority"  (Acts  1:7).  The  year  1917  has  abounded 
to  a  hitherto  unexampled  degree  in  men  who  in 
defiance  of  God's  Word  have  presumed  to  more 
than  hint  that  Jesus  would  come  for  His  Church  at 
Pentecost  this  year,  and  when  Pentecost  had  passed 
they  taught  that  He  would  come  at  the  "Feast  of 
the    Trumpets"     in     September.      I    implored   one 

15 


brother  that  he  would  not  print  what  he  had  written 
on  this  subject,  which  was  plainly  unscriptural. 
Printed,  however,  it  was,  and  circulated  by  the  tens 
of  thousands,  resulting  in  the  delaying  of  God's 
work,  the  wasting  of  God's  money,  the  dishonoring 
of  God's  Word,  and  the  bringing  of  the  Blessed  Hope 
into  reproach,  and  now  in  thirty-six  hours  1917  will 
have  passed  into  history,  the  Lord  is  not  here  and 
Jesus  Christ  is  saying  again  in  a  voice  like  the  voice 
of  many  waters,  "It  is  not  for  you  to  know  times  or 
seasons,  which  the  Father  hath  set  within  His  own 
authority." 

XL    WE  MUST  WORK  THE  WORKS  OF  GOD 
WHILE    IT     IS    DAY,    FOR    THE    NIGHT 

COMETH  WHEN  NO  MAN  CAN  WORK. 
Now  we  come  to  the  eleventh  and  last  great  lesson 
that  this  year  1917  teaches  to  which  we  have  time 
to  listen  this  morning,  we  must  work  the  works  of 
Him  that  sent  Jesus  Christ  while  it  is  day :  the  night 
cometh,  when  no  man  can  work.  It  is  certain  that 
we  are  fast  hurrying  toward  the  end,  fast  hurrying 
toward  that  dark  night  that  shall  precede  the  sun- 
rise. Fast  hurrying  toward  the  night  when  no  man 
can  work.  Fast  hurrying  toward  the  closing  of  the 
days  of  opportunity  at  home  and  abroad.  If  you 
have  money  to  give,  give  it  now.  One  hundred 
dollars  now  will  mean  more  than  thousands  or  even 
millions  a  little  while  from  now.  Are  stocks  down 
now?  They  will  be  up,  up  in  the  air,  a  little  while 
from  now.  Have  you  prayers  to  pray?  Pray  them 
now.  They  won't  count  a  little  while  from  now. 
Have  you  souls  to  save?  Save  them  now.  Get  to 
work  at  it  at  once,  for  the  night  is  fast  hurrying  on 
when  no  man  can  work.  Have  you  sins  to  confess? 
Confess  them  and  put  them  away  before  the  sun 
goes  down  tonight.  Have  you  misunderstandings 
with  your  fellowmen  to  be  straightened  out?  Up 
and  at  it,  the  night  cometh  when  they  will  all  be 
asleep  and  you  cannot  reach  them.  Listen  once 
more  to  Jesus  as  He  says  again  in  the  words  of 
our  text,  "We  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that 
sent  me,  while  it  is  day:  the  night  cometh,  when 
no  man  can  work." 

16 


DR.  TORREY'S  WORKS 


STUDIES  IN  THE  LIFE  AND 
TEACHINGS  OF  OUR  LORD 

A  consecutive,  systematic  course  of  studies  in 
our  Lord's  life  and  teachings,  divided  into  140  les- 
sons, each  complete  in  itself,  and  adapted  either 
to  individual  or  class  use.  The  method  of  the  book 
is  that  of  modern  science;  first  a  discovery  of  the 
facts,  and  then  a  classification  of  the  teachings. 
Cloth   $1.50 


HOW  TO  WORK  FOR  CHRIST 

An  encyclopedia  of  all  the  approved  methods  of 
personal,  pastoral  and  evangelistic  work.  The  re- 
sult of  the  experience  of  years  in  pastoral,  evan- 
gelistic, missionary  and  open  air  work.  518  pages. 
Cloth    $2.50 


THE  BIBLE  AND  ITS  CHRIST 

A  book  for  today.  Dr.  Torrey's  addresses  to 
business,  professional  and  university  men.  They 
state  in  a  scholarly  but  popular  way  the  proof  that 
the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  that  Jesus 
Christ  arose  from  the  dead,  and  show  the  causes, 
consequences  and  cure  of  infidelity. 
Paper,    25c;    cloth,   75c 


THE  PERSON  AND  WORK  OF 
THE  HOLY  SPIRIT 

A  thorough  study  of  all  that  the  Bible  has  to 
teach  about  the  Person  and  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  tested  by  personal  experience.  It  discusses  fully 
and  frankly  all  the  modern  theories  and  vagaries  on 
this  important  subject,  and  subjects  them  to  the 
test  of  Scripture Cloth  $1.00 


BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 
536-558  South  Hope  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 


DR.  TORREY'S  WORKS 

(Continued) 


WHAT  THE  BIBLE  TEACHES 


The  only  book  of  its  kind.  All  that  the  Bible 
gives  on  each  of  the  great  doctrines  is  brought 
together  and  the  teaching  summarized.  Everything 
built  upon  a  thorough  study  of  each  passage  in  its 
context.  A  comprehensive  and  thorough  compen- 
dium of  the  teachings  of  the  Bible.  535  pages, 
large    8    vo „ Cloth    $2.50 


THE  RETURN  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS 


A  sane,  systematic  and  thorough  presentation 
of  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  regarding  the  Second 
Coming  of  Christ.  One  of  the  best  books  to  put  in 
the  hands  of  any  one  beginning  the  study  of  this 
subject  Paper,  30c;  cloth,  60c 


HOW  TO  BRING  MEN  TO  CHRIST 


A  plain,  simple,  forceful  treatise  on  the  subject 
of  personal  work.  It  was  Dr.  Torrey's  first  book 
and  has  had  a  very  large  sale.  Not  so  compre- 
hensive as  Personal  Work Paper,  15c;  cloth,  75c 


THE  SHEPHERD  PSALM 

By  Dr.  R.  A.  Torrey 

A  wonderful  exposition  of  this  famous  Psalm  in 
Dr.    Torrey's    masterly    style Paper    bound    25c 


BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 
536-558  South  Hope  St.,  Los  Angeles,  Cal. 


BOOKS   ON   THE   SIGNS  OF   THE 
TIMES 

THE  VOICE  OF  GOD 

By  Dr.  R.  A.  Torrey 

A  collection  of  Dr.  Torrey's  sermons  on  present 
day  subjects.     His  latest  work.    Bound  in  Cloth  $1.25 

OMINOUS  DAYS!  OR,  THE 
SIGNS  OF  THE  TIMES 

By  E.  L.  Langston.  Treats  of  Israel  and  the 
dispensations    Cloth    40c 

AT  HAND:    THINGS  WHICH  MUST 
SHORTLY  COME  TO  PASS 

An  outline  of  prophetic  future,  so  interesting 
that  once  begun  must  almost  be  finished  at  a  sit- 
ting.     A   masterly    exposition Cloth    85c 

GOD'S  OATH 

By  Ford  C.  Ottman.  A  practical  interpretation 
of  the  prophets  and  a  study  of  the  spiritual  life  of 
the   Old  and   New   Testaments Cloth  $1,25 

THE  EVOLUTION  OF  THE  KINGDOM 

By  William  B.  Riley.  Dr.  Riley  first  defines  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  then  gives  a  Scriptural  descrip- 
tion of  it.  Then  follow  chapters  on  the  tribulations 
and  the  translation,  the  kingdom  and  the  resurrec- 
tion body,  the  great  usurper's  short  reign,  the  Bib- 
lical order  of  millenial  events,  the  kingdom  of  God 
complete  "in  heaven,"  the  historical  ministry  of 
pre-millennialism,  and  the  significant  signs  of  the 
times    Cloth    75c 

FUTURE  EVENTS,  WITH  NUMEROUS 
PROPHETIC  DETAILS 

By  Walter  Scott.  Very  satisfactory  answers  to 
one  hundred  forty  questions  asked  by  eager  in- 
quirers, including:  "Will  the  Lord  come  personally 
or  by  the  spirit?"  "Will  the  Lord's  coming  be 
pre-millennial  or  post-millennial?"  "Will  evil  in- 
crease or  decrease  before  the  Lord  comes?"  and 
many  others  of  equal  interest Cloth  35c 

AFTER  CIVILIZATION— WHAT? 

By  Edward  G.  Rowland.  Bears  a  message  of 
the  weightiest  character,  one  which  is  of  the 
highest  importance  to  everyone  now  on  earth. 
Paper    15c 

THE  GREAT  APOSTACY  SET  IN 

By  A.  Sims.  Showing  the  falling  away  from 
sound  doctrine  among  the  professed  followers  of 
Christ    Paper   15c 

BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 
536-558  South  Hope  St.,   Los  Angeles,  Gal. 


mmnm^l.^^  CONGRESS 


BOOKS  AND  P..-._-  0  015  845  496  8   k 

"ISMS" 


WHY  I  AM  NOT  A  CHRISTIAN 
SCIENTIST 

By  Wm.  Evans.  Dr.  Evan's  lecture  presents 
some  of  the  most  potent  arguments  against  this 
false  doctrine  ever  penned.     Price. ..Paper  Bound  15c 

CHRISTIAN  SCIENCE  AND  DIVINE 
HEALING 

By  William  B.  Riley.  Shows  the  fallicy^^  of 
Christian  Science  and  true  teaching  of  James--5tl4, 
15,   16  Paper   10c 

MILLENNIAL  DAWNISM 

By  J.  M.  Haldeman.  The  blasphemous  religion 
which  teaches  the  annihilation  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
here   exposed   in  a   most   trenchant   way Paper   10c 

WHERE  ARE  THE  DEAD? 

By  F.  E.  Marsh.  Answer  to  Russelites  and 
others   who  believe  in   soul    sleeping Paper  6c 

THE  MORMONS  AND  THEIR  BIBLE 

By  M.  T.  Lamb.  The  object  of  this  book  is  to 
give  the  general  public  a  clearer  insight  into  the 
puzzling  problem  of  Mormonism Paper  25c 

IS  PRESENT  TONGUES  MOVEMENT 
OF  GOD? 

By  R.  A.  Torrey.  A  warning  word  from 
Dr.  Torrey  regarding  the  satanic  nature  of  this 
movement.      Price    3c 

SEVENTH-DAY  ADVENTISM  RENOUNCED 

By  D.  M.  Canright.  The  author  of  this  expose 
was  for  twenty-eight  years  a  prominent  minister 
and  writer  of  that   faith Cloth  $1.00;   paper  60c 

SPIRITUALISM  EXPOSED 

By  A.  Sims.  Scriptural  evidence  and  facts  of 
experience  showing  the  evil  nature  and  awful  ten- 
dencies   of    spiritism Paper    15c 

CONCERNING  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS— 
ESPECIALLY  TONGUES 

By  Philip  Mauro.  The  author  shows  the  im- 
portance of  commending  to  those  who  are  inter- 
ested in  the  Tongues  Movement  a  more  excellent 
way    Paper    10c 

THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  TIMES 

By  I.  M.  Haldeman.  Vivid  and  startling  por- 
trayals  of  present-day   conditions Cloth   75c 

BIOLA  BOOK  ROOM 
536-558  South  Hope  St.,  Los  Angeles,  CaL 


