03*'"''''*^^*—'''^  g— ^"^Jl^—— %a>— ^'"^J^— — %  J^— *— t.  Q, 


WHAT  TIME  IS  IT  ti 


1 

1 

1 
I 

il 


BEIl^G  THOUGHTS  ON  ROM.  XIII.  12. 

BY   THE 

RET.  J.  C.  KYLE,  B.  A., 

Christ  Church,  Oxford. 

RECTOR   OF    HELMINGHAM,    SUFFOLK. 

AUTHOR  OF  "ARE  YOU  HOLY,"  ETC. 


"  I  believe  you  are  as  sensible  as  I,  that  it  is  still  night :  but 
the  comfort  is,  it  draws  nigh  towards  that  bright  morning 
that  shall  make  amends." 

Letter  of  Archbishop  Leighton. 


SECOND  EDITION,    TENTH  THOUSAND. 

IPSWICH  : 

WILLIAM  HUNT,  TAVERN  STREET. 

LONDON : 

WERTHEIM  &  MACINTOSH,  24,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

NISBET  &  Co.,  21,  BERNERS  STREET. 


Price  Two  Shillings  per  Dozen. 


M.DCCC.LIV. 


THE  T     p    Q 

HARRISON 

COLLECTION  OF 

NINETEENTH  CENTURY 

BRITISH  SOCIAL  HISTORY 


WHAT  TIME  IS  IT  ? 


'^  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand:  let  us 
therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,  and  let 
us  put  on  the  armour  of  light.'' 

EoM.  XIII.  12. 

Reader, 

You  probably  know  the  story  of 
St.  PauVs  shipwreck.  (Acts  xxviii.)  You  remember 
how  the  apostle  and  his  companions  were  exceedingly 
tossed  with  a  tempest  for  thirteen  days.  Neither 
sun  nor  stars  in  many  days  appeared.  AH  hope  that 
they  should  be  saved  was  taken  away.  But  do  you 
recollect  that  when  the  fourteenth  night  was  come, 
about  midnight  the  shipmen  deemed  that  they  drew 
near  to  some  country  ?  They  scunded  and  found  it 
twenty  fathoms.  When  they  had  gone  a  little  further 
they  sounded  again  and  found  it  fifteen  fathoms. 
Then  fearing  lest  they  should  have  fallen  upon  rocks, 
they  cast  four  anchors  out  of  the  stern,  and  wished 
for  the  day.  Think  what  an  anxious  night  that  must 
have  been!  How  often  some  of  the  276  souls  on 
board  the  great  Alexandrian  corn-ship  must  have 
said,  How  goes  the  night?      What  time  is  it? 


You  have  probably  heard  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo. 
You  know  that  the  Duke  of  Wellington  fought  that 
battle  on  the  understanding  that  the  Prussians  would 
come  up  on  the  left  of  his  army,  and  help  him 
against  the  French.  But  the  way  was  long.  The 
roads  were  bad.  The  evening  was  drawing  on  before 
the  Prussians  could  appear  on  the  field.  In  the  mean 
time  the  battle  increased.  Hour  after  hour  our  forces 
were  thinned  by  the  furious  attacks  of  the  enemy. 
One  gallant  man  after  another  was  slain  or  carried 
away  wounded.  Think  what  an  anxious  afternoon 
that  must  have  been !  How  often  the  sun  and  the 
shadows  must  have  been  observed !  How  often  the 
watch  must  have  been  consulted,  and  the  general's 
eye  turned  to  the  left !  How  often  the  anxious  question 
must  have  risen  in  men's  minds.   What  time  is  it? 

You  have  probably  attended  the  sick-bed  of  some 
whom  jT-ou  tenderly  loved.  You  have  seen  them 
hovering  between  life  and  death,  and  have  passed 
weeks  of  painful  suspense.  You  have  sat  by  and 
w^atched  the  struggle  between  the  body  and  its  infir- 
mities, and  felt  the  miserable  helplessness  of  not 
being  able  to  do  anything  but  look  on.  And  do  you 
not  know  how  slowly  the  hours  roll  on  at  a  time  like 
this  ?  Have  not  the  clocks  and  watches  seemed  to 
stand  still,  and  the  sun  appeared  to  have  forgotten  to 
rise?  Have  you  not  often  said.  When  will  the  phy- 
sician come  again  ?  Will  the  morning  never  come  ? 
What  time  is  it? 

Reader,  you  and  I  are  in  a  world  which  is  rapidly 

rolling  on  towards  the  day  of  judgment.    There  is  an 

hour  before  us  all  when  the  earth  and  its  works  shall 

be  b  urned  up,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  shall  all 


stand  before  the  bar  of  Christ.  There  is  a  day  to 
come  whose  issues  are  of  far  more  importance  than 
those  of  shipwreck,  battle,  or  disease.  Surely  it  be- 
comes us  all  to  think  of  that  day.  Are  we  ready  for 
it?  Is  it  possible  that  we  may  live  to  see  it?  Is, it 
near,  or  is  it  far  off?      What  time  is  it? 

Come  with  me  this  day  and  consider  the  thoughts 
of  an  inspired  apostle  on  this  solemn  subject.  He 
says,  ^^  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand ;  let 
us  therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness  and  put  on 
us  the  armour  of  light."  These  words  ought  to  come 
home  to  our  consciences  like  the  blast  of  a  trumpet. 
They  ought  to  rouse  our  sleeping  minds  to  a  sense 
of  the  eternal  realities  which  are  before  us.  They 
call  upon  us  to  lay  aside  all  trifling,  lingering,  and 
carelessness  about  our  Christianity.  They  summon 
us  to  a  close  walk  with  Godc 

There  are  four  things  brought  before  my  mind  by 
the  words  just  quoted. 

I.  You  have  here  the  present  condition  of  the 
world, — It  is  night. 

II.  You  have  the  condition  of  the  rvorld  which  is 
yet  to  comCy — It  will  be  day.  ^ 

III.  You  have  the  particular  time  in  which  our 
lot  is  cast, — The  night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day  is  at 
hand. 

IV.  You  have  the  duty  of  all  believers  who  know 
the  time, — They  ought  to  cast  off  the  works  of  dark- 
ness, and  to  put  on  the  armour  of  light. 


Upon  each  of  these  four  points  I  have  something 
to  say. 

I.  First  of  all  let  us  consider  the  present  condi- 
tion of  the  world. 

The  apostle  Taul  calls  it  ^^night."  ''The  night,"  he 
says,  ''is  far  spent." 

I  have  no  doubt  that  word  seeins  strange  to  some 
persons.  They  think  it  wonderful  that  the  year  1854 
should  be  called  *'nirfit."  Thev  are  livin£>:  in  davs 
of  learning,  science,  civilization,  commerce,  freedom, 
and  knowledge.  Thev  see  around  them  thino-s  which 
their  forefathers  never  dreamed  of, — railways,  manu- 
iactories,  gas,  electricity,  steam-engines,  education 
ior  all,  and  clieap  books.  I  know  it  all,  and  am 
thankful  for  it.  Is  evertheless  I  say  that  in  the  things 
of  God  the  world  is  still  in  a  state  of  ''  night." 

I  believe  that  God  looks  down  on  this  globe  of  our's 
as  it  rolls  round  the  sun,  and  as  lie  looks  upon  it, 
He  pronounces  it  "  very  dark." 

I  believe  that  the  angels  go  to  and  fro  and  make 
report  of  all  they  see  on  our  earth,  and  their  constant 
report  is,  ''  very  dark." 

And  1  am  sure  that  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  in 
every  land  are  of  one  mind  on  this  subject.  They 
cry  and  sigh  lor  the  abominations  they  see  around 
them.     To  them  the  w^orld  appears  "  very  dark." 

Is  it  not  dark  in  heathen  lands?  There  are  two- 
thirds  of  the  whole  world  in  open  rebellion  against 
God  and  His  Christ.  Two  out  of  every  three  inhabit- 
ants of  the  globe  have  no  Bible,  no  Gospel,  no 
knowledge,  no  faith,  no  hope.  They  are  cruel, 
deceitful,  immoral,  unclean,  earthly,  sensual,  devilish, 
idolatrous,  superstitious.     Surely  that  is  night. 


Is  it  not  dark  in  many  ^professedly  Christian 
countries?  There  are  two-thirds  of  all  the  professing 
Christians  on  earth  who  are  unsound  in  the  faith. 
Their  religion  is  not  simply  scriptural.  They  have 
added  many  things  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the 
Bible.  They  have  left  out  many  things  which  the 
Bible  has  plainly  commanded.  There  are  millions 
w^ho  give  honour  to  the  Virgin  and  saints  instead  of 
Christ.  There  are  millions  of  baptized  people  who 
know  nothing  of  the  Bible,  and  have  not  the  slightest 
idea  of  the  salvation  contained  in  the  Gospel.  Surely 
that  is  night. 

Is  it  not  dark  in  our  own  country  at  this  present 
day  ?  How  much  of  sin  there  is  in  Protestant  Britain, 
and  how  little  of  God !  How  much  of  open  infidelity, 
heathenish  ignorance,  drunkenness,  Sabbath-breaking, 
swearing,  cheating,  lying,  covetousness,  is  weekly  cry- 
ing against  us  before  the  Lord  of  Hosts  !  How  many 
people  in  Great  Britain  go  to  no  place  of  worship  at  all ! 
How  manj^  go  to  church  and  chapel  merely  as  a  form  ! 
How  few  are  really  in  earnest  about  the  salvation  of 
their  souls!  How  few  have  any  evidence  to  shew  of  a 
saving  faith  in  Christ,  and  a  real  work  of  the  Spirit  in 
their  hearts !   Surely  even  among  ourselves  it  is  night. 

Is  there  not  7nuch  darkness  under  the  eyes  of 
every  true  believer  ?  Go  to  the  most  godly,  quiet, 
and  orderly  parish  in  our  land  at  this  moment.  Ask 
any  well-informed  child  of  God  residing  in  it,  how 
many  true  Christians  it  contains,  and  what  is  the 
proportion  of  the  converted  to  the  unconverted. 
Mark  well  the  answer  he  will  give.  1  doubt  if  you 
will  find  a  parish  in  Great  Britain  where  one  third  of 
the  people  are  converted.     And  if  such  be  the  report 


s 

of  parishes  which  are  like  the  green  tree,  what  muet 
be  the  state  of  things  in  the  dry.     Surely  it  is  night. 

Reader,  it  is  useless  to  deny  these  things.  Hum- 
bling as  it  may  be  to  the  pride  of  human  nature,  the 
word  of  the  apostle  is  strictly  true, — the  time  present 
is  night.  An  unconverted  man  may  not  perceive  it. 
A  graceless  man  may  not  comprehend  it.  The  blind 
eye  sees  no  difference  between  noon  and  midnight. 
The  deaf  ear  makes  no  distinction  between  discord 
and  sweet  music.  The  mortified  limb  has  no  feeling 
either  of  heat  or  cold.  But  I  do  believe  that  God's 
children  can  enter  into  the  meaning.  The  people  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  find  by  experience  that  it  is 
night. 

It  is  a  cold  time  to  believers.  They  meet  with  much 
to  chill  and  damp  their  zeal,  and  little  to  cheer  and 
warm  their  hearts.  They  have  to  put  up  with  many 
crosses  and  disappointments.  They  see  iniquity 
abounding,  and  their  own  love  is  apt  to  become  cold. 
And  why  ?     It  is  night. 

It  is  a  lonehj  time  to  believers.  They  find  little 
company  on  the  way  that  leads  to  heaven.  Here  and 
there  they  fall  in  with  one  who  loves  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  lives  by  faith.  A  few  of  God's  children  may  be 
found  in  one  town  and  a  few  in  another.  But  on  the 
whole  the  children  of  the  world  seem  like  the  Syrian 
army,  which  filled  the  country,  and  the  children  of 
God  are  like  a  few  scattered  sheep  in  a  wilderness. 
And  why?     It  is  night. 

It  is  a  dangerous  time  to  believers.  They  often 
stumble,  and  scarcely  discern  their  path.  They 
often  stand  in  doubt,  and  know  not  which  w^ay  to 
turn.    They  sometimes  see  not  their  tokens,  and  lose 


9 

sight  of  their  land-marks.  At  best  they  travel  on  in 
continual  fear  of  enemies.     And  why  ?     It  is  night. 

Reader,  I  ask  you  to  ponder  these  things.  If  time 
present  be  night,  you  will  not  wonder  if  we  ministers 
warn  Christians  to  watch  and  pray.  You  will  count 
it  no  strange  thing  if  we  tell  you  to  live  like  soldiers 
in  an  enemy's  country,  and  to  be  always  on  your 
guard. 

Reader,  sit  down  and  ask  yourself  whether  you 
find  this  world  in  which  you  live  to  be  night  or 
day.  Is  time  present  a  time  of  conflict  or  a  time 
of  ease?  Do  you  feel  that  your  best  things  are 
here  in  this  life,  or  that  your  best  things  are  yet 
to  come  ?  I  offer  these  questions  to  you  as  a  test  of 
your  spiritual  state.  I  place  them  before  you  as  a  gauge 
and  measure  of  your  soul's  condition.  1  tell  you 
plainly,  if  you  never  found  this  world  a  wilderness 
and  place  of  darkness,  it  is  an  evil  sign  of  your  state 
in  the  sight  of  God.  The  true  believer  will  find  the 
words  of  his  crucified  Lord  to  be  strictly  true,  ''in  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."  (John  xvi.  33.)  The 
true  believer,  like  his  Lord  and  Master,  will  be  made 
perfect  through  sufferings.  The  true  believer  will 
mourn  over  the  world  he  lives  in  as  a  world  in  re- 
bellion against  its  rightful  king.  Sin  will  grieve  him. 
Ungodliness  will  make  him  heavy  of  heart.  Like 
Lot  in  Sodom,  his  righteous  soul  will  be  daily  vexed 
with  much  that  he  sees  and  hears.  He  will  long 
for  the  time  when  the  day  shall  dawn,  and  the  shadows 
flee  away.     For  the  present  he  will  feel  it  is  night. 

Reader,  is  it  your  night  or  day  ? 

II.  Let  us  consider,  in  the  second  place,  the 
condition  of  the  world  which  is  yet  to  come. 


10 

The  apostle  Paul  calls  it  ''  day."  ''  The  day  is  at 
hand." 

The  time  here  spoken  of  is  the  time  to  which  every 
true  Christian  ought  to  look  forward, — it  is  the  time 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  come  again.  The 
present  state  of  things  in  the  Church  of  Christ  shall 
undergo  a  mighty  change, — a  change  so  great  that  it 
shall  be  like  the  turning  of  night  into  day. 

The  world  we  live  in  is  not  to  go  on  always  as  it 
does  now.  The  darkness  of  sin,  ignorance,  and 
superstition  is  not  always  to  cover  the  earth.  The 
sun  of  righteousness  shall  one  day  rise  with  healing 
in  his  wings.  The  Lord  Jesus  shall  come  again  with 
power  and  great  glory.  He  shall  return  on  the 
morning  without  clouds,  and  then  it  shall  be  'May." 

There  is  a  time  coming  when  the  devil  shall  be 
bound,  and  shall  no  longer  rule  in  this  world.  Sin 
and  all  its  consequences  shall  be  cast  out.  The 
groaning  creation  shall  rest  at  length.  The  wicked 
shall  be  shut  up  for  ever  in  their  own  place.  The 
saints  of  the  Most  High  shall  at  length  possess  the 
kingdom.  There  shall  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new 
earth,  wherein  shall  dwell  righteousness.  Surely 
that  will  be  ''day.'' 

There  is  a  time  coming  when  believers  shall  have 
joy  and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee 
far  away.  Every  tear  shall  be  wiped,  every  cross 
laid  down,  every  anxiety  removed,  every  bitter 
cup  taken  away.  Persecution,  temptation,  sickness, 
mourning,  parting,  separation,  and  death,  shall  be  at 
end.  Surely  that  will  be  sunshine.   It  will  be  "day." 

There  is  a  time  coming  when  the  whole  family  of 
Christ  shall  be  gathered  together.     They  shall  rise 


11 

from  their  narrow  beds  and  put  on  a  glorious  body. 
They  shall  awake  from  their  long  sleep  refreshed, 
strengthened,  and  far  more  beautiful  than  when  they 
lay  down.  They  shall  leave  behind  them  in  their 
graves  every  imperfection,  and  meet  without  spot  or 
wrinkle,  to  part  no  more.  Surely  that  will  be  a 
joyful  morning.     It  will  be  *May." 

There  is  a  time  coming  when  believers  shall  no 
longer  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face. 
They  shall  see  as  they  have  been  seen,  and  know  as 
they  have  been  known.  They  shall  cease  to  wrangle 
and  dispute  about  outward  matters,  and  shall  think 
of  nothing  but  eternal  realities.  They  shall  behold 
their  crucified  Lord  and  Saviour  with  the  eye  of 
sense,  and  no  longer  follow  Him  by  faith.  They 
shall  see  one  another  free  from  all  corruption,  and 
misunderstand  one  another's  motives  and  conduct  no 
more.    Surely  that  will  be  ^^day." 

I  see  here  great  comfort  for  every  believer  in 
Christ  who  reads  these  pages.  There  is  a  day  before 
yoUy  a  glorious  day.  You  sometimes  feel  now  as  if 
you  walked  in  darkness  and  had  no  light.  You  have 
often  a  hard  battle  to  fight  with  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil.  You  sometimes  fancy  you  will  never 
win  your  way  home,  and  must  faint  by  the  way. 
Your  flesh  and  heart  are  ready  to  fail.  You  are 
sorely  tempted  to  give  up  and  sit  down  in  despair. 
But  take  comfort  in  the  thought  of  things  yet  to 
come.  There  is  a  good  time  before  you.  Your  day 
has  yet  to  dawn. 

I  see  here  great  reason  why  many  professing 
Christians  should  tremble  and  be  afraid.  There  are 
many,  too  many  I  fear,  to  w^hom  the  time  to  come 


12 

will  be  anything  but  day.  There  are  many  whose 
happiness  is  evidently  all  below,  whose  treasure  is  all 
on  earth,  whose  brightest  time  is  now,  and  whose 
gloomiest  prospects  are  hereafter.  The  further  they 
look  on,  the  darker  everything  appears.  Old  age 
looks  dark, — sickness  looks  darker  still, — death  and 
judgment  look  darkest  of  all. 

Beloved  reader,  if  this  be  your  case,  I  warn  you 
plainly  there  must  be  a  change.  Your  views,  your 
tastes,  your  inclinations,  your  affections  must  be 
renewed  and  transformed.  You  must  learn  to  view 
the  world  that  now  is  and  that  which  is  to  come  in  a 
very  different  light.  Go  and  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus, 
and  ask  Him  to  teach  you  this  lesson.  Ask  for  the 
enlightening  Spirit  to  anoint  your  eyes  that  you  may 
see.  Ask  for  the  veil  to  be  taken  away,  that  you 
may  behold  everything  in  its  true  colours. 

I  know  well  that  Satan  labours  hard  to  prevent 
men  thinking  of  a  better  world  than  that  in  which 
we  now  live.  He  strives  to  turn  away  their  eyes 
from  the  coming  day.  He  would  fain  persuade  them 
that  it  is  impossible  to  do  their  duty  in  this  life,  and 
at  the  same  time  to  set  their  affections  on  things 
above.  He  whispers  to  people  that  we  ministers 
want  them  to  become  gloomy  hermits,  and  fanatical 
misanthropes,  and  that  if  they  listen  to  us  they  will 
become  unfitted  for  all  the  relations  of  life.  Against 
all  suggestions  of  Satan  I  warn  every  reader  to  be 
on  his  guard. 

I  bid  no  one  neglect  the  duties  of  his  station,  or 
forsake  the  post  which  God  has  called  him  to  fill.  I  en- 
courage no  one  in  moroseness  and  churlishness,  as  if 
there  was  nothing  to  be  thankful  for  in  this  world. 


13 

I  praise  no  one  who  refuses  his  affections  to  those 
with  whom  he  is  united  by  love,  friendship,  and 
relationship.  I  only  ask  that  the  believer  in  the 
New  Testament  should  live  by  a  New  Testament 
standard, — that  he  should  look  for  the  coming  of  the 
day  of  God,  and  wait  for  the  Son  of  God  from 
heaven,  and  love  his  Lord's  appearing. 

Reader,  I  abhor  all  extravagance  and  fanaticism 
on  the  subject  of  things  to  come.  I  have  no  opinion 
of  any  religion  which  makes  a  man  neglect  his 
business,  or  cease  to  love  wife,  children,  relations, 
and  friends.  I  only  ask  that  we  should  take  scriptural 
views  of  things  as  they  are,  and  things  as  they  yet 
will  be.  I  ask  that  we  should  see  our  present  evils 
and  mourn  over  them,  that  we  should  see  our  future 
good  things  and  long  for  them.  Let  us  honestly 
confess  that  sin  is  around  us,  and  long  to  be  delivered 
from  its  presence.  Let  us  honestly  confess  that 
holiness  is  one  day  to  spread  over  the  earth,  and  long 
for  it  to  come.  Let  us  never  be  ashamed  to  allow 
that  it  is  *^  night/'  and  that  we  want  it  to  be 
'Mav.'' 

Tell  me,  can  that  man  really  hate  sin,  who  does 
not  desire  to  see  it  swept  away  from  the  earth  ?  Can 
that  man  love  holiness  who  does  not  long  for  the 
lime  when  all  shall  know  the  Lord?  Can  that  man 
be  truly  united  to  Christ  by  faith  who  does  not  wish 
to  see  Christ,  and  to  be  with  Him  ?  Can  that  man 
be  a  saint  who  does  not  thirst  after  the  unmixed 
company  of  just  men  made  perfect?  Can  that  man 
be  in  earnest  who  daily  prays,  ^*  Thy  kingdom  come," 
and  yet  is  content  that  the  world  should  go  on  as  it 
is  without  any  change  ?     Oh !  no !  no !    These  things 

b2 


14 

are  impossible.     God's  true  children  will  want  to  be 
at  home.     They  will  wish  for  the  day. 

Eeader,  if  you  mean  to  be  saved,  you  must  learn 
to  view  time  present  as  ^' night,"  and  time  to  come  as 
'^  day."  You  must  learn  to  regard  the  other  side  of 
Jordan  as  the  home  of  your  soul,  and  this  side  as  a 
desert  land.  Time  present  must  be  your  wilderness, 
your  battle  field,  your  place  of  trial, — time  to  come 
must  be  your  Canaan,  your  rest,  your  Fathers 
house, — or  else  you  had  better  never  have  been  born. 

III.  In  the  third  place,  let  us  consider  the  par- 
ticular times  in  which  our  lot  is  cast. 

The  apostle  Paul  tells  us,  when  he  says,  ^^  The 
night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day  is  at  hand." 

I  believe  these  words  mean  that  the  last  order  of 
things  has  arrived,  the  last  stage  in  the  history  of 
the  Church  has  come.  The  law  and  the  prophets 
have  done  their  work.  The  Messiah  promised  at  the 
fall  has  appeared  and  provided  a  complete  salvation. 
The  last  revelation  of  God's  will  has  been  made. 
The  way  of  life  has  been  laid  open  to  all  mankind. 
No  further  message  from  heaven  to  earth  is  to  be 
expected  before  the  end.  No  more  books  of  Scripture 
are  to  be  written.  We  have  reached  the  last  watch 
of  the  night.  We  have  nothing  to  expect  now  but 
the  sun-rise  and  the  morning. 

Reader,  these  words,  which  were  true  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago,  are,  if  possible,  more  true  at  the 
present  time.  They  are  words  which  should  come 
home  with  increasing  power  to  the  Church  of  Christ 
every  year. — ^^  The  night  is  far  spent :  the  day  is  at 
hand." 


15 

I  am  one  of  those  who  think  '^  the  day  "  may  not 
be  so  far  off  as  some  seem  to  suppose.  I  am  unable 
to  put  away  the  idea  of  the  Lord's  return  in  glory  as 
an  event  which  ^'  of  course  "  cannot  be  in  our  times, 
as  some  men  say.  I  rather  think  I  see  tokens  of  the 
sun  being  near  the  horizon.  At  all  events  I  desire 
to  keep  in  special  remembrance  St.  James's  words, 
"  The  Judge  standeth  before  the  door," — ''  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh,"  and  St.  Peter's  words, 
^Uhe  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand."  (James  v.  8.  9. 
1  Peter  iv.  7.) 

I  am  no  prophet,  and  may  easily  be  mistaken.  I 
may  die  and  you  may  die  before  Christ  comes  and 
the  day  dawns.  But  I  appeal  to  every  thinking  man 
whether  there  are  not  "signs  of  the  times  "  which 
deserve  serious  attention.  I  ask  him  to  notice  the 
things  going  on  in  the  world,  and  to  consider  well 
what  they  are  intended  to  teach. 

Does  any  reader  ask  what  I  mean  by  "  signs  of  the 
times  ? "  Let  him  weigh  well  the  six  following  points, 
and  he  will  see  what  I  mean. 

1.  What  shall  we  say  to  the  missions  to  the 
heathen  which  have  been  set  on  foot  in  these  latter 
days?  Sixty  years  ago  the  Protestant  Churches 
seemed  thoroughly  asleep  on  the  subject  of  missions. 
There  was  hardly  a  single  missionary  sent  forth  to 
the  heathen  from  the  whole  of  Great  Britain.  The 
idea  of  preaching  the  Gospel  to  savages  and  idolaters 
was  ridiculed.  The  first  promoters  of  missions  were 
treated  coldly  by  many  who  ought  to  have  known 
better.  But  now  the  feeling  is  completely  changed. 
We  are  employing  hundreds  of  missionaries  in  every 


16 

quarter  of  the  globe.  And  what  saith  the  Scripture, 
*'  The  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached  in 
all  the  world ybr  a  mtness  unto  all  nations;  and 
then  shall  the  end  come."  (Matt.  xxiv.  14.) 

2.  What  shall  we  say  to  the  surprising  interest  taken 
in  the  Jewish  nation  in  these  latter  days?  Sixty 
years  ago  to  be  a  Jew  was  a  taunt,  and  a  bye-word, 
and  a  proverb.  No  man  cared  for  the  souls  of  the 
children  of  Abraham.  They  were  a  people  despised, 
and  scorned,  and  trampled  under  foot.  It  might 
truly  have  been  said,  ^^This  is  Zion,  whom  no 
man  seeketh  after."  (Jerem.  xxx.  17.)  But  now 
the  feeling  is  completely  changed.  The  spiritual 
interests  of  Jews  are  a  subject  of  deep  concern  to 
true  Christians.  The  civil  rights  of  Jews  are  cared 
for  even  to  an  extreme.  The  very  city  of  Jerusalem 
has  w^eight  in  the  councils  of  kings.  Yet  what  saith 
the  Scripture  ?  *'  Thou  shalt  arise  and  have  mercy 
upon  Zion,  for  the  time  to  favour  her,  yea  the  set 
time  is  come.  For  thy  servants  take  pleasure  in  her 
stones,  and  favour  the  dust  thereof.  So  the  heathen 
shall  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  all  the  kings  of 
the  earth  thy  glory.  When  the  Lord  shall  build  up 
Zion  he  shall  appear  in  his  glory."  (Psalm  cii. 
13—16.) 

3.  What  shall  we  say  to  the  wonderful  spread  of 
knorcledge  and  communication  betrveen  nations  in 
these  days  ?  Sixty  years  ago  to  find  a  poor  man 
who  could  read,  was  an  uncommon  thing.  In  a  few 
years    a  man  who  cannot  read  will  be  a  rare  sight. 

Sixty  years  ago  there  were  few  who  ever  travelled 


17 

beyond  the  bounds  of  their  own  county.  Now  every 
one  can  move  in  every  direction,  and  our  population 
is  like  a  swarm  of  bees  disturbed.  Steam  naviga- 
tion and  railways  have  altered  the  character  of 
society.  Time  and  space  are  made  nothing  of. 
Seas,  mountains,  and  rivers  are  no  longer  obstacles. 
God  separated  the  nations  in  the  day  of  Babel.  Man 
is  working  hard  to  make  them  all  one  again.  And 
what  saith  the  Scripture  ?  ^'  Shut  up  the  words  and 
seal  the  book,  turn  to  the  time  of  the  end :  many 
shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be  in- 
creased." (Daniel  xii.  4.) 

4.  What  shall  we  say  to  the  rears  and  shakings  of 
nations  which  we  have  seen  in  these  last  sixty  years  ? 
The  mightiest  empires  on  earth  have  been  shaken  to 
their  very  foundations.  Kings,  and  princes,  and 
great  men,  have  been  driven  from  their  high  posi- 
tion by  scores,  and  made  wanderers  on  the  face  of 
the  earth.  There  has  been  no  accounting  for  it  by 
any  human  reasoning.  These  movements  have  taken 
place  in  the  face  of  increased  knowledge,  civilization, 
and  desire  of  peace.  The  shock  came  from  beneath. 
And  what  saith  the  Scriptures  ?  ^'  Nation  shall  rise 
against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom  :  and 
there  shall  be  famine  and  pestilence  and  earthquakes 
in  divers  places.  All  these  are  the  beginning  of 
sorrows."  (Matt.  xxiv.  7,  8.) 

5.  What  shall  we  say  to  the  drying  up  of  the  Ma- 
hometan power  ?  Two  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago, 
men  doubted  whether  the  Turks  might  not  overrun 
Europe.      No   army   seemed   able  to  resist  them. 


18 

Province  after  province  fell  into  their  hands.  When 
Martin  Luther  in  his  sermons  wanted  an  illustration 
of  boundless  worldly  power,  he  would  choose  for  his 
example  ^'  the  Turkish  empire."  But  now  all  is 
changed.  Without  much  outward  violence  the  Ma- 
hometan strength  has  gradually  dwindled  away. 
There  has  been  a  collapse,  a  consumption,  a  worm 
at  the  heart  of  all  their  might.  In  spite  of  all  the 
help  of  Christian  allies,  the  Turkish  empire  is  like 
a  man  sick  of  a  sore  disease.  He  may  rally  for  a 
time  by  the  help  of  strong  remedies,  and  the  admis- 
sion of  new  elements  into  his  constitution,  but  he  will 
never  again  be  an  exclusive,  persecuting,  purely 
Mahometan  power.  The  days  of  pure,  intole- 
rant Mahometanism  seem  past  and  gone  for  ever. 
And  what  saith  the  Scripture?  I  quote  sym- 
bolical prophecy  with  reverence,  and  readily  allow 
I  may  be  wrong  in  its  application  ;  but  the  passage 
is  very  remarkable.  ^'  The  sixth  angel  poured 
out  his  vial  on  the  river  Euphrates ;  and  the 
waters  thereof  were  dried  up,  that  the  way  of  the 
kings  of  the  East  might  be  prepared.  And  I  saw 
three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs  come  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
beast,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false  prophet. 
For  they  are  the  spirits  of  devils,  working  miracles, 
which  go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  of 
the  whole  world,  to  gather  them  to  the  battle  of  that 
great  day  of  God  Almighty.  Behold  I  come  as  a 
thief.  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth  and  keepeth 
his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they  see  his 
shame.''  (Rev.  xvi.  12 — 15.) 

6.   What  shall  we  say  to  the  increased  attention  to 


19 

unfulfilled  'prophecy,  which  has  appeared  in  these 
latter  days  ?  Sixty  years  ago  there  were  few  who 
paid  any  attention  to  the  subject.  The  passages  in 
Scripture  which  speak  of  things  to  come  were  com- 
paratively neglected,  or  perverted  with  curious 
ingenuity  from  their  simple  meaning.  Now,  on  the 
contrary,  the  current  of  public  feeling  runs  strongly 
in  favour  of  prophetical  study.  Books  on  the  subject 
are  eagerly  bought  up.  Lectures  on  the  subject  are 
listened  to  with  increased  attention.  In  spite  of  the 
divisions  which  preterism  and  futurism^'  have  created, 
— in  spite  of  the  discredit  which  Millerites  in 
America  and  Irvingites  in  England  have  brought 
upon  the  whole  subject,  the  study  of  unful- 
filled prophecy  still  holds  its  ground.  But  what 
saith  the  Scriptures  ?  *'  The  words  are  closed  up 
and  sealed  till  the  time  of  the  end."  (Dan.  xii.  9.) 
The  words  seem  unfolding.  The  seal  seems  break- 
ing.    Can  the  end  be  far  off? 

Eeader,  I  place  these  points  before  you,  and  ask 
your  serious  attention  to  them.  I  know  we  are  all 
poor  judges  of  our  own  times.  We  are  apt  to 
exaggerate  the  importance  of  events  that  take  place 
under  our  own  eyes.  I  dare  say  if  we  had  lived  in 
Cromwell's  days,  or  under  the  first  French  revolution, 
we  should  have  thought  the  end  of  all  things  was  at 
hand.  But  still,  after  every  allowance,  I  think  the 
points  I  have  mentioned  deserve  solemn  considera- 
tion.    I  regard  them  as  signs  of  our  times. 

*  Freterism  is  the  system  of  prophetical  interpretation,  which 
considers  the  greater  part  of  the  prophecies  in  Revelation,  as  fulfilled 
and  past  already.  Futurism  is  the  system  which  considers  the  same 
prophecies  to  be  as  yet  unfulfilled. 


20 

I  am  far  from  saying  that  there  may  not  be 
wonderful  changes  yet  before  the  end.  I  think  it 
possible  there  may  be  a  time  of  trouble  and  conflict 
yet,  ^^such  as  never  was  since  there  was  a  nation." 
(Dan.  xii.  1.)  I  believe  there  may  yet  be  tribula- 
tion for  the  people  of  God,  '*such  as  was  not  since 
the  beginning  of  the  world."  (Matt.  xxiv.  21.)  But 
come  what  will,  I  see  a  deep  meaning  in  the  words, 
*'  the  night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day  is  at  hand." 

I  see  in  these  words  the  strongest  motive  for 
diligence  in  the  work  of  doing  good  to  souls.  Let 
us  make  more  haste  to  spread  the  Gospel  over  the 
world.  Let  us  take  more  pains  in  endeavouring  to 
sow  truth  at  home.  Let  us  labour,  if  possible,  to 
pluck  more  brands  from  the  burning.  The  time  is 
short.     The  night  is  far  spent:     The  day  is  at  hand. 

I  see  in  these  words  the  strongest  consolation  for 
the  believer  in  Christ  Jesus.  Oh  !  for  a  heart  to  lay 
hold  on  it  more  and  more. 

Yet  a  little  while,  and  believers  shall  part  for  ever 
with  disease.  The  sick  and  wearied  ones,  who  have 
mourned  over  their  seeming  uselessness  to  the 
church, — the  weak  and  infirm,  who  have  had  the  will 
to  labour,  but  not  the  power, — the  feeble  and  bed- 
ridden, who  have  waited  long-drawn  years  in  quiet 
chatnbers,  till  their  eyes  know  every  crack  and  speck 
on  their  walls, — all,  all  shall  be  set  free.  They 
shall  each  have  a  glorious  body  like  their  Lord's. 

Yet  a  little  while,  and  mourning  believers  shall 
part  for  ever  with  their  tears.  Every  wound  in  their 
hearts  shall  be  completely  healed.  Every  empty 
place  and  gap  in  their  affections  shall  be  entirely  filled 
up.     They  shall  find  that  those  who  have  died  in  the 


21 

Lord  were  not  lost,  but  gone  before.  They  sliall  see 
that  infinite  wisdom  arranged  every  bereavement,  by 
which  one  was  taken  and  another  left.  They  shall 
magnify  the  Lord  together  with  those  who  were  once 
their  companions  in  tribulation,  and  acknowledge  that 
He  did  all  things  well,  and  led  them  by  a  right  way. 

Yet  a  little  while,  and  believers  shall  no  more  feel 
that  they  are  alone.  They  shall  no  longer  be 
scattered  over  the  earth,  a  few  in  one  place,  and  a 
few  in  another.  They  shall  no  longer  lament  that 
there  are  so  few  to  speak  to,  as  a  man  speaketh  with 
his  friend, — so  few  who  are  of  one  mind,  and  travel 
with  them  in  the  one  narrow  way.  They  shall  be 
united  to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first- 
born. They  shall  join  the  blessed  company  of  all 
the  believers  of  every  name,  and  people,  and  tongue. 
Their  eyes  shall  at  length  be  satisfied  with  seeing. 
They  shall  see  a  multitude  of  saints  that  none  can 
number,  and  not  one  wicked  person  among  them. 

Yet  a  little  while,  and  working  believers  shall  find 
that  their  labour  was  not  in  vain.  The  ministers  who 
have  preached,  and  seemed  to  reap  no  fruit, — the 
missionaries  who  testified  of  the  Gospel,  and  none 
seemed  to  believe, — the  teachers  who  poured  into 
children's  minds  line  upon  line,  and  none  seemed  to 
attend, — all,  all  shall  discover  that  they  have  not 
spent  their  strength  for  nought.  They  shall  find 
that  the  seed  sown  can  spring  up^after  many  days, 
and  that  sooner  or  later  in  all  labouri^there  is  profit. 

Ah !  reader,  when  shall  these  things  be  ?  Truly 
we  may  say,  ''  Lord  God,  thou  knowest."  A  thous- 
and years  in  His  sight  are  as  one  day,  and  one  day 
as  a  thousand  years.     But  we  do  know  that  vet  a 


22 

little  while  he  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will 
not  tarry.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  the  last  sermon 
shall  be  preached, — the  last  congregation  break  up. 
Yet  a  little  while,  and  carelessness,  and  infidelity 
shall  cease,  perish,  and  pass  away.  The  believers 
among  us  w^ill  be  with  Christ,  and  the  unbelievers 
will  be  in  hell.  The  night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day 
is  at  hand. 

IV.  And  now  in  the  last  place,  let  me  speak  of 
the  practical  duty  of  all  believers  connected  with  the 
truths  we  have  just  considered. 

That  practical  duty  is  put  before  us  in  plain  words, 
— **  Let  us  therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness, 
and  let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  light." 

Reader,  the  word  **  therefore  "  is  often  used  by  the 
apostle  Paul  in  a  very  striking  and  forcible  way. 
Take  a  few  examples,  and  you. will  at  once  see  what 
I  mean. 

When  he  finishes  the  doctrinal  part  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Romans,  and  begins  his  practical  exhortation, 
what  is  his  language?  *'  I  beseech  you  therefore  by 
the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a 
living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  to  God."  (Rom. 
xii.  1.) 

When  he  has  preached  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
to  the  Corinthians,  how  does  he  wind  up  his  argu- 
ment? **  Therefore  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye 
stedfast,  unmovable."     (1  Cor.  xv.  58.) 

When  he  has  laid  a  mighty  foundation  of  doctrine 
for  the  Ephesian  Church,  how  does  he  proceed  to 
address  them  on  practical  duties?  *'  I  thereforey  the 
prisoner  of  the  Lord,  beseech  you  that  ye  walk  worthy 


23 

of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye  are  called."     (Ephes. 
iv.  1.) 

And  here,  as  in  other  places,  the  word  '^  therefore  " 
comes  ip^  upon  us  in  a  very  searching  and  forcible 
way.  **  Tiie  night  is  far  spent  and  the  day  is  at 
hand  :  let  us  therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness." 

Reader,  I  love  to  observe  how  closely  the  doctrine 
of  Christ's  second  coming  and  kingdom  is  bound  up 
with  personal  holiness.     I  marvel  that  any  can  re- 
gard the  second  advent  and  reign  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
as  merely  speculative  matters,  or  denounce  them  as 
unprofitable  subjects.     To  my  own  mind  they  seem 
eminently  practical,  cr  else  I  have  read  my  Bible  to 
very  little  purpose. 
I  Does  not  the  apostle  Paul  say  to  the  Philippians, 
'iLet  your  moderation  be  known  unto  all  men  :  the 
Lord  is  at  hand."  (Phil.  iv.  5.)     Does  he  not  say  to 
the  Colossians,  '*  Set  your  affections  on  things  above, 
nqt  on  things  on  the  earth.     For  ye  are  dead,  and 
yo^r  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.     When  Christ 
wlfll  is  our  life  shall  appear  then  shall  ye  also  appear 
with  him  in  glory.     Mortify  therefore  your  members 
which  are  upon  the  earth."  (Col.  iii.  2 — 5.)     Does 
not  he  bid  the  Hebrews  to  '^  Exhort  one  another,  and 
so  much  the  more  as  ye  see  the  day  approaching." 
(Heb.  X.  25.)     Does  not  St.  Peter  say,  '^  We  look 
for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness.      Wherefore   beloved  seeing  that  ye 
look  for  such  things,  be  diligent  that  ye  may   be 
found  of  him  in  peace  without  spot  and  blameless." 
(2  Peter  iii.  13,  14.)     These  texts  appear  to  me  to 
speak  with  no  uncertain  voice.     I   know   not  how 
their  force  can  be  evaded.     They  make  the  coming 


24 

of  Christ,  and  the  day  of  glory,  an  argument  for 
increased  holiness.  And  it  is  just  in  the  same  way 
that  St.  Paul  says,  *'  Let  us  cast  off  the  works  of 
darkness,  and  let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  light." 

Reader,  how  are  you  to  ^^cast  off  the  works  of 
darkness  ?  "     Listen  to  me,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

You  ought  to  lay  aside  everything  in  your  life  and 
habits  which  will  not  bear  the  light  of  Christ's 
appearing.  You  ought  to  make  it  a  principle  of 
conscience  to  do  nothing  you  would  not  like  to  be 
found  doing  when  Jesus  comes  again  to  gather  His 
people  together. 

This  is  a  searching  test  indeed.  The  application 
of  it  must  be  left  to  every  man's  own  heart.  Each 
must  judge  for  himself.  Each  must  prove  his  own 
works.  Each  must  set  up  an  assize  within  him,  and 
honestly  bring  his  ways  to  a  trial.  Oh !  for  a  will  to 
deal  fairly  and  justly  with  ourselves !  Oh !  for  a  daily 
readiness  to  judge  ourselves  that  we  be  not  judged 
of  the  Lord,  and  condemn  ourselves  that  we  be  not 
condemned  at  the  last  day  ! 

I  ask  every  reader  of  this  tract  to  bring  the  light 
of  the  day  of  Christ  to  bear  upon  his  inner  man. 
Set  your  years,  and  months,  and  weeks,  and  days, 
and  hours  in  the  full  blaze  of  that  day,  and  whatever 
thing  you  find  within  which  is  akin  to  darkness,  pluck  it 
out  and  cast  it  away.  Keep  up  no  questionable  habit. 
Make  no  compromise  with  doubtful  practices.  Break 
down  every  idol,  whether  great  or  small.  Cut  down 
every  grove,  and  cleanse  out  every  chamber  of  imag- 
ery. Cling  to  nothing  which  would  cost  you  a  blush 
under  the  eye  of  Christ.  Away  with  it  at  once,  lest 
He  come  suddenly  and  put  you  to  shame !    Oh !  that 


25 

He  may  never  say  of  any  reader's  heart  in  that  day, 
^'  This  heart  professed  to  be  a  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  but  thou  hast  made  it  a  den  of  thieves." 

Reader,  try  all  your  employment  of  time  by  the 
test  of  Christ's  second  coming.  Place  in  this  balance 
your  amusements,  your  books,  your  companions, 
your  manner  of  conversation,  your  daily  behaviour 
in  all  the  relations  of  life.  Measure  all  by  this 
measure, — ^*  The  night  is  far  spent  and  the  day  is  at 
hand.  Am  I  living  as  a  child  of  the  night,  or  as  one 
who  looks  for  the  day  ? "  Do  this,  and  you  will  cast 
off  the  works  of  darkness. 

But  how  are  you  to  put  on  the  armour  of  light  ? 
Listen  to  me  once  more,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

You  ought  to  aim  at  every  grace  ^nd  habit  which 
becomes  a  believer  in  Christ,  and  a  child  of  God,  and 
a  citizen  of  a  heavenly  kingdom.  You  ought  not  to 
leave  eminent  holiness  and  spirituality  to  a  few,  as 
if  none  but  a  few  favoured  ones  could  be  eminent 
saints.  You  ought  to  labour  to  wear  the  armour  of 
light  yourself,  the  girdle  of  truth,  the  breastplate  of 
righteousness,  the  helmet  of  hope,  and  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit.  (Ephes.  vi.  14 — 17.)  Wherever  you  may 
live,  and  whatever  may  be  your  trials, — however 
great  your  difficulties,  and  however  small  your  helps, 
— nothing  should  prevent  your  aiming  at  the  highest 
standard,  to  behave  like  one  who  believes  that  Christ 
is  coming  again. 

You  should  resolve,  by  God's  help,  so  to  live,  that 
the  day  of  Christ  shall  find  you  needing  as  little 
change  as  possible.  You  should  seek  to  have  tastes 
so  heavenly, — affections  so  spiritual, — a  will  so  sub- 
dued,—  a  mind  so   unworldly,  that  when  the  Lord 


26 

appears  you  may  truly  be  in  tune  for  His  kingdom. 
Verily  it  was  a  fine  saying  of  Dr.  Preston,  on  his  death- 
bed, *^  I  go  to  change  my  place  but  not  my  company." 

Ah !  reader,  I  fear  that  some  believers  will  be  far 
less  ready  for  the  day  of  Christ  than  others.  I  suspect 
that  some  will  have  a  far  more  abundant  entrance 
into  heaven  than  their  brethren, — more  boldness, 
more  confidence,  more  felt  readiness  for  the  company 
of  their  Lord.  Oh !  that  every  one  into  whose  hands 
tliis  tract  may  fall  may  so  walk  with  God,  that  like 
Enoch,  he  maj^-  be  only  translated  from  a  lower 
degree  of  communion  to  a  higher, — from  walking  bj^ 
i'aith  to  walking  bj^  sight.  This  would  be  putting  on 
the  armour  of  light. 

Let  there  be  light  in  your  heart  continual! j^,  Christ 
dwelling  there  b}^  faith, — felt,  known,  and  experienced 
by  your  soul.  Let  there  be  light  in  your  life  con- 
tinually, Christ  reflected  there,  followed,  imitated, 
and  copied.  Seek  to  be  a  light  in  the  world,  and 
nothing  less, — a  bright  light,  a  clear  light,  a  light 
that  men  can  see  afar  off.  Do  this,  and  you  will  put 
on  the  armour  of  light. 

Live  as  if  you  thought  Christ  might  come  at  any 
time.  Do  everything  as  if  you  did  it  for  the  last 
time.  Say  everything  as  if  you  said  it  for  the  last 
time.  Read  every  chapter  in  the  Bible  as  if  you  did 
not  know  whether  you  would  be  allowed  to  read  it 
again.  Pray  every  prayer  as  if  you  felt  it  might  be 
your  last  opportunity.  Hear  every  sermon  as  if  you 
were  hearing  once  and  for  ever.  This  is  the  way  to 
be  found  ready.  This  is  the  way  to  turn  Christ's 
second  appearing  to  good  account.  This  is  the  way 
to  put  on  the  armour  of  light. 


27 

1.  And  now  perhaps  this  tract  has  fallen  into  the 
liands  0?  some  car  elesSy  thoughtless,  unconverted  person. 
Header,  are  yon  that  man?  Then,  remember  these 
words,  ^'The  night  is  far  spent,  and  the  day  is 
at  hand." 

What  are  you  doing?  You  eat,  j^ou  drink, 
you  sleep,  you  dress,  you  work,  you  buy,  you  sell, 
you  laugh,  you  read,  but  you  do  nothing  for  your 
soul.  Hell  is  opening  its  mouth  for  you,  and  you 
are  careless.  Christ  is  coming  to  judge  the  world 
and  you  are  unprepared.  Time  hurries  on  and  j^ou 
are  not  ready  for  eternity.  Oh !  awake  to  a  sense  of 
your  danger  and  repent  this  day.  Awake  and  call 
upon  your  God  before  it  is  too  late  to  pray.  Awake 
and  seek  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  before  the  door  is 
shut,  and  the  day  of  wrath  begins.  Alas !  you  may 
be  thought  wise  and  clever  in  this  world,  but  living 
as  you  do  you  act  the  part  of  a  madman. 

2.  But  perhaps  this  tract  has  fallen  into  the  hands 
of  one  who  is  undecided  and  halting  between  tree 
opinions.  Reader,  are  you  that  man?  Then  remem- 
ber these  words,  **  The  night  is  far  spent  and  the  day 
is  at  hand." 

What  are  you  doing?  You  hear,  you  listen, 
you  wish,  you  desire,  you  mean,  you  intend,  you 
hope,  you  resolve,  but  you  go  no  further.  You 
see  the  ark,  but  you  will  not  go  in.  You  see  the 
bread  of  life,  but  you  do  not  eat  it.  You  wait.  And 
yet  time  gets  on.  The  devil  is  saying  over  you,  *'  I 
shall  have  this  soul  before  long."  Oh !  come  out  from 
the  world  and  linger  no  more.  Take  up  the  cross. 
Cast  away  vain  excuses.    Confess  Christ  before  men. 


28 

Beware,  I  say,  lest  you  make  up  your  mind  too  late. 
Again  I  say,  beware. 

3.  But  perhaps  this  tract  has  fallen  into  the  hands 
of  some  true  believer.  Reader,  are  you  that  man  ? 
Then  remember  these  words,  "  The  night  is  far  spent 
and  the  day  is  at  hand." 

I  ask  you  to  live  as  if  you  believed  the  words  we 
have  been  considering,  and  so  shew  the  world  you  think 
them  true.  The  nearer  you  draw  to  home,  the  more 
wakeful  you  ought  to  be.  The  more  you  realize  the 
second  personal  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  more 
lively  ought  your  Christianity  to  be. 

Ah !  reader,  it  is  but  too  true,  as  Legh  Richmond 
said  on  his  death-bed,  *^We  are  but  half  awake! 
We  are  but  half  awake !  "  The  best  of  us  need  to 
have  our  hearts  stirred  up  by  way  of  remembrance. 
Let  us  rub  the  sleepy  eyes  of  our  mind,  and  look 
the  speedy  coming  of  our  Master  full  in  the  face. 
Let  the  time  past  suffice  us  to  have  been  drowsy  and 
lazy  servants.  For  the  time  to  come  let  us  work 
like  those  who  feel,  ^'  The  Master  will  soon  be  here." 

I  remember  when  I  was  a  school-boy  I  could  wake 
up,  however  tired  with  a  long  journey,  when  I  begun 
to  draw  near  home.  Soon  as  I  saw  the  old  hills,  and 
trees,  and  chimnies,  the  sense  of  weariness  was  gone, 
and  I  was  all  alive.  The  prospect  of  soon  seeing 
much-loved  faces, — the  joy  of  thinking  of  a  family 
gathering,  all  this  was  able  to  drive  sleep  away. 
Surely  it  ought  to  be  the  same  with  us  in  the  matter 
of  our  souls.  The  night  is  far  spent  and  the  day  is 
at  hand.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  He  that  shall  come 
will  come,  and  will  not  tarry.     Then  let  us  cast  off 


29 

every  work  of  darkness.  Let  us  put  on  the  whole 
armour  of  light.  Let  us  be  ashamed  of  our  past 
drowsiness.     Let  us  awake,  and  sleep  no  more. 

I  remain, 

Your  affectionate  Friend, 

J.  C.  RYLE. 

Helminghaniy  Stoneham^ 

OcU,  1854. 


HYMN. 

The  church  has  waited  long, 

Her  absent  Lord  to  see ; 
And  still  in  loneliness  she  waits, 

A  friendless  stranger  she. 
AgQ  after  age  is  gone, 

Sun  after  sun  has  set; 
And  still  in  weeds  of  widowhood, 

She  weeps  a  mourner  yet. 

Come  then,  Lord  Jesus,  come  ! 

Saint  after  saint  on  earth. 

Has  lived,  and  loved,  and  died; 
And  as  they  left  us  one  by  one. 

We  laid  them  side  by  side. 
We  laid  them  down  to  sleep, 

But  not  in  hope  forlorn ; 
We  laid  them  but  to  ripen  there, 

'Till  the  last  glorious  morn. 

Come  then,  Lord  Jesus,  come! 


30 


The  serpent's  hrood  increase, 

The  powers  of  hell  grow  hold, 
The  conflict  thickens,  faith  is  low, 

And  love  is  waxing  cold. 
How  long,  0  Lord,  our  God, 

Holy,  and  true,  and  good, 
Wilt  thou  not  judge  thy  sufiering  chui'ch, 

Her  sighs,  and  tears,  and  hlood? 

Come  then.  Lord  Jesus,  come! 

We  long  to  hear  Thy  voice. 

To  see  Thee  face  to  face, 
To  share  Thy  crown  and  glory  then, 

As  now  we  share  Thy  grace. 
Should  not  the  loving  Bride 

The  absent  Bridegroom  mourn? 
Should  she  not  wear  the  weeds  of  grief 

Until  her  Lord  return  ? 

Come  then.  Lord  Jesus,  come ! 

The  whole  creation  gi'oans. 

And  waits  to  hear  that  voice. 
That  shall  restore  her  comeliness, 

And  make  her  wastes  rejoice. 
Come,  Lord,  and  wipe  away 

The  curse,  the  sin,  the  stain. 
And  make  this  blighted  world  of  our  s. 

Thine  own  fair  world  again ! 

Come  then,  Lord  Jesus,  come ! 


H.  BONAR. 


HUNT,    PRINTER,   IPSWICH. 


WOIIKS  BY  THE  llEY.  J.  C.  IIYLE,  B.  A., 

Published  by  William  Hunt,  Ipswich. 
A  Word  to  the  Churches.    4th  Edition,  20th  Thousand 

Price  Is.  6d.  per  dozen. 
All    in   All.     A.  Tract  on  Coloss.  iii.  11.     5th  edition,   25th 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Are  You  an  Heir?   A  Question  for  Everybody.    6th  edition, 

30th  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Are  You  Forgiven  ?      a.   Question    for    Everybody.       12th 
Edition,   60tli  Thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 

An  Important  Question.     Are  You  Forgiven  ?     Small  paper 

edition,  48  pages,  with  notes.     Fancy  cover,  gilt  edges,  6d. 
Are  You  Holy?      A  Question  for  Everybody.     12th edition, 

60th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 
Are  You  Regenerate  ?     A  Question  for  the  times.     Being  a 

portion  of  a  larger  work  on  Regeneration.     Price  2s.  per  doz. 

5th  Edition,  25th  Thousand. 
Assurance.    2  Tim.  iv.  6,  7.  8.     With  Notes  and  Extracts  from 

Writers   of  the  seventeenth  century.     18mo.  cloth  limp.     4th 

edition,  revised,  price  Is. 
Baxter  and  his  Times ;  A  Lecture  delivered  February  1st, 

1853.     Neat  Wrapper,  price  3d. 

Be  not  Slothful,  but  Followers.  A  Funeral  Sermon,  preached 

on  Sunday,  July  29th,   1846,  in    Helmingham   Church.     3rd 

thousand,  price  Is. 

Be  Zealous.      Thoughts  on  Galatians  iv.  18.     6th  edition,  30th 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Bishop  Latimer.     A  Lecture  delivered  February  28th,  1853 
Neat  wrapper,  price  4d. 

Christ  and  the  Two  Thieves.    Being  thoughts  on  Luke 

xxiii.  39 — 43.     10th  edition,  50th  thousand.     Is.  6d.  per  doz 
Consider  Your  Ways  !     A  Pastor's  Address  to  his  flock.  9th 

edition,  45th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 
Cross    (the)       A   Tract  for   the   Times.     6th   edition,    30th 

Thousand.     2s.  per  dozen. 
Do  You  Pray?      A  Question  for  1852.     20th  edition,  lOOth 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  doz. 

Faith's  Choice.  A  Sermon  on  Hebrews  xi.  24 — 26.  Fourth 
Edition,  Price  6d. 

Have  You  the  Spirit  ?  A  Question  for  1854.  lOth  edition, 
50th  thousand. 

ELome  Truths.  Being  Miscellaneous  Addresses  and  Tracts, 
arranged,  revised,  and  corrected  for  this  edition.  Illustrated 
with  an  Engraving  of  Helmingham  Church,  and  Vignette  Title. 
5th  edition,  foolscap  8vo,  cloth  extra,  price  3s.  6d. 

SECOND  SERIES — with  engraving  of  Helmingham  Rectory 
and  Vignette.     3rd  edition,  price  3s.  6d. 

THIRD  SERIIES — with  engraving  of  Interior  of  Helmingham 
Church  and  Vignette.     2nd  edition,  price  3s.  6d. 


Tracts  and  other  Works,  by  Rev.  J.  C.  Ryle. 


How  Readest  Thou?  A  Question  for  everybody.  10th  edition, 
50th  thousand,  48pp.,  price  3s.  per  dozen. 

How  should  a  Child  be  Trained?     Thoughts  on  Proverbs 
xxii.  6.     4th  edition.     Price  3d.  each,  or  2s.  6d.  per  dozen, 

I  Have  Somewhat  to  Say  unto  Thee.    A  word  for  every 

body.     14th  edition,  80th  thousand.     Price  6d.  per  dozen. 
Little  and  Wise.     An  Address  to  Children.     Small  8vo,  neat 

wrapper,  Illustrated  with  appropriate  Engravings.^  8th  thousand 

Price  4d. 
Livinff  or  Dead?     A  Question  for  Everybody.     18th  edition, 

90th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 
Occupy  till  I  come.     A  Tract  for  the  Times.    Being  Thoughts 
on  Luke  xix.  11 — 13.    20th  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Plain    Speaking.     A    Packet  of   Forty    Large   Type   Tracts. 

2nd   edition.     Price  Is,  ;  limp  cloth,  Is.  9d. 
Peace  !   be  Still  !     A  Page  from  our  Lord's  History.     Fourth 

edition,  Twentieth  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Prove  all    Things.       A  Tract   on    Private   Judgment.      8th 

edition,  40th  thousand.     Is.  6d.   per  doz. 
Regeneration.      A   Tract   for  the  Times.      104   pp.  foolscap 

8vo,  4th  edition,  12th  thousand.  Price  6d.  sewed;  limp  cloth  Is. 
Remember  Lot !  12th  edition,  60th  thousand.  Is.  6d.  per  doz. 
Sermons  to  Children.     A  6th  and  revised  edition  of  *'  Seeking 

the  Lord  Early,"  and  "Children  Walking  in  Truth."     In  fancy 

cover,  price  6d. 
Shall   You  be    Saved  ?     A  Question  for  Everybody.     12th 

edition,  60th  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Spiritual  Songs.     Coloss.  iii.  16.     Being  62  Hymns  not  to  be 

found  in  the  Hymn  Books  most  commonly  used.     Selected  by 

the  Rev.  J.  C.  Ryle.     In  glazed  wrapper,  price  6d.  each  ;  or  in 

fancy  cloth,  gilt  edges,  price  8d.     4th  edition. 

The  Bishop,  the  Pastor,  and  the  Preacher ;  in  three  Bio- 
graphical Lectures  :  with  an  Introductory  ESSAY  on  some  of 
the  chief  WANTS  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND  in 
the  present  day.     Frontispiece,  cloth  extra,  price  2s. 

Watch !  A  Word  in  Season.  Being  thou^jhts  on  the  Parable 
of  the  Ten  Virgins.  (Matt.  xxv.  1  —  13.)  9th  edition,  45th 
thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 

What  is  the  Church  ?  A  Question  for  the  Times.  6th  edition, 
30th  thousand.     Price  3d.  each,  or  2s.  6d.  per  dozen. 

Wheat  or  Chaff?  A  Question  for  Everybody.  12th  Edition, 
60th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 

Where  Art  Thou  ?  A  Question  for  Everybody.  8th  edition, 
40th  thousand.     Price  Is.  6d.  per  dozen. 

Whitefield,  Georg^e— A  Sketch  of  his  Times,  his  Life,  his 
Religion,  his  Preaching,  and  his  actual  Work  on  Earth. 
Foolscap  8vo.,  neat  wrapper,  price  3d. 

Young  Men  Exhorted.  A  Sermon  to  young  men,  preached 
in  Helmingham  Church.  5th  edition,  20th  thousand,  in  f 'cap 
8vo,  68  pp,  cloth  extra.  Is.  ;  neat  wrapper,  6d.  each. 


