_ ‘What think ye of Christ?” 
oe oe 


+ 


& SBRMON 


PREACHED FROM MATTHEW «siru. 42. 


KENNINGTON COMMON, 


IN THE YEAR, 1739, 


BY THE 


Reb. Mr. Crorge Whitefield, A. B. 


LATE OF PEMBROKE CCLLEGE, OXFORD. ° 


fflontreal : 


PRINTED BY GEORGE PEREINS BULL, OLD-MAR RET. 


1OaH 
Dears 


© 


SBRMON, ke. 


“ What think ye of Christ ??’—Matt. xxii. 42 


{ 

WHEN it pleased the eternal Son of God to taber- 
nacle amongst us, and to come preaching the glad ti- 
dings of salvation to a fallen world, different opinions 
were entertained by different parties concerning bim. 
As to his person, some said he was Moses, others that 

| he was Elias, Jeremiah, or one of the ancient prophets; 
few acknowledged him to be what he really was, God 
blessed for evermore. As to his doctrine, though the 
common people, being free from prejudice, and persua- 
ded of the blessed effects of his going about to do good, 
for the generality, heard him gladly, and ¢aid that he 
was a good man; yet the envious, worldly-minded, 
self-righteous governors and teachers of the Jewish 
. Church, being grieved 2t his success on one hand, and 
unable, as having never been taught of God, to under. 
: stand the purity of his precepis, en the other, notwith- 
" standing our Lord spake as never man spake, and did 
| such miracles as no one could possibly do, unless God : 
was with him, yet they not only were so infatuated as 
i tosay, that he deceived the people, but also were so 
| blasphemous as to affirm, that he was in league with 
the devil himself, and cast out devils by Beelzebub the 
prince of them. Nay, our Lord's own brethren and 
“i kinsmen, according to the flesh, were so blinded by pre- 
judice and unbelief, that on a certain day, when he went 
out to teach the multitudes in the fields, they sent to 
take bold on him, urging this as a reason for ther 
| conduct, viz —that he was beside himself, 
| Thus was the King and Lord of Glory judged by 
i man’s judgment, when made manifest in the flesh. Far 
| be it from any of his ministers to expect any better 
T treatment, No, if we come in the spirit and power of 


“4 i 4 -* ? ° rae ot noe ak are ea:tiee 
our master, in this, as in every other part of his suffer- 


igs, we@ wast follow bis steps. The like reproughes 


| e039 a 


4 


which were cast-on him, will be thrown on us alto.— 
Those that received our Lord and his doctrine, will re- 
eeiveand hear us for hisname’s sake. The poor, blessed 
be God, as our present meetings abundantly testify, will 
receive the Gospel, and the common people hear us 
gladly; whilst those that are sitting in Moses’s chair, 
and love to wear long robes, being ignorant-of the 
righteousness which is of God by faith in Christ Jesus, 
and having never felt the power of God upon their own 
hearts, will be continually crying out against us as 
madmen, deceivers of the people, ney moreover, as 
acting under the influence of evil spirits. 

But he is unworthy the name of a minister of the 
gospel of peace, whois unwilling, not only to have bis 
name cast out as evil, but also to die for the truths of 
the Lord Jesus. tis the character of birelings and 
false prophets, who care not for the sheep, to have all 
men speak well of them. “ Blessed are you,” says our 
Lord to his first apostles, and in them to all succeeding 
ministers,“¢ when men speak all manner of evil agains 
you falsely, for my name's cake,”? And indeed it is im- 
possible but such cfences must come, for men will al- 
ways jucge of others according to the principles from 
which they act themselves. And if they care not to 
yield obedience to the doctrines which we deliver, they 
must necessarily, in self-defence, speak against the 
preachers, lest,they should be asked that question which 
the Pharisees of old feared to have retorted on them, if 
they confessed that John was a prophet, viz.— W hy 
then did you not believe in him. 

In all'such cases we have nothing todo but to search 
our own hearts ; and if we can assure our conscienceé 
pefore God, that we act with a single eye to his glory, 
we are cheerfully to go on in our work, and not in the 
least to regard what men or devils can do unto us. 

Butto return. You bave heard what various thoughts 
were handed about concerning Jesus Christ, whilst 
here on earth; nor is he otherwise treated, now he is 
exalted to sit down at the right hand of his Father in 
heaven. A stranger to Christianity, was he to hear 
that we all profess to hold one Lord, would naturaliy 


wore 


3 
t 
3 
2 
j 


tere 


5 


infer that we all thought and spoke one and the same 
thing about him. But, alas! to our shame be it men- 
tioned, though Christ be not divided in himself, yet pro- 
fessors are sadly divided in their thoughts about him. 
And that not only as to the circumstantiais o1 religion, 
but also as to those essential truths which must neces- 
sarily be received and believed by us, if ever we hope 
to be heirs of eternal salvation. 

Some, and that I fear a multitude which no man can 
easily number, there are amongst us, who call them. 
selves Christians, and yet seldom or never think of Je- 
sus Christ at all. They can think of their shops and 
their farms, their plays, their balls, their assemblies and 
horse-races, entertainments which directly tend to ex- 
clude religionout of the world, but as for Christ, the au- 
thorand finisher of faith, the Lord who has borght them 
with his precious blood, aud who alone is worthy of all 
their thoughts, he alone is shunned with all the arts of 
business aad amusement, and therefore far from all.— 


Believe me, O ye earthly, sensual, carnally-minded pru-- 


fessors, how little soever you may think of Christ now, 
or however industriously you strive to keep him out of 
your thougats, by pursuing the lust of the eye, the lust 
of the flesh, and the pride of life, yet thera is a time 
coming when you will wish you had thought of Christ 
more, and of your profits and pleasures Jess. For the 
gay, the polite, the rich, also must die, as well as others, 
and leave their pomps,. their vanities, and all their 
wealth behind them. And, oh! what thoughts you will 
eutertain concerning Jesus Christ in that hour ! 

But I must not pursue these reflections ; they would 
carry me too far fromthe main design of this discourse, 
which is to shew what those, who are truly desirous to 
know how to worship God in spirit and in truth, ought 
to think concerning Jesus Christ, whom God has seut 
to be the end of the law for righteousness to all them 
that believe in his name. 

I trust, my brethren, you are more noble than to think 
me too strict or scrupulods in thus attempting to regy- 


late even your thoughts about Jesus Christ. For by our. 


thoughts, as well as by our words and actions, are we 


to be judged at the great day. And in vain do we hope 
to believe in or worship Christ aright, unless the prin- 
ciples, on which our faith and practice are founded, are 
agreeable to the form of sound words, delivered to us 
in the scriptures of truth. 

Besides, many deceivers are gone abroad in the 
world; mere heathen morality, and not the purity and 
perfection of Jesus Christ, is preached in most of our 
churches. If Christ be mentioned, it is only by the bye. 
And how should people think rightly of Jesus Christ, 
of whom they have scarcely heard ? . Bear with me a 
little then, whilst, in order to inform your consciences, 
I ask you a few questions concerning Jesus Christ, for 
there is no other name given under heaven whereby 
we can be saved, but his. 

And first. —W hat think you about the person of 
Christ ? Whose son is he? This is the question our 
Lord puts to the Pharisees, in the word following the 
text; and never was it more necessary to repeat this 
question than in these last days, for numbers that are 
called after the name of Christ, and I fear many that 
pretend to preach him, are so far advanced in the blas. 
phemer’s chair, as openly to deny that he is really, 
truly, and properly God. But no one that ever was 
partaker of his spirit, will thus speak lightly of him. 
No, if our Lord’s true disciples are asked, as Peter 
and his brethren were, But whom say ye that [ am ? 
They will reply, without hesitation, Thou art Christ the 
Son of the ever-living God. For the confession of our 
Lord's divinity is the rock upon which he builds his 
church, Was it possible to take this away, the gates 
of hell would quickly prevail against it. My brethren, 
if Jesus Christ be not very God of very God, I would 
never preach the gospel of Christ again ! For it would 
not be Gospel, that is to say, glad tidings of salvation; 
it would be only a system of mere morality ; and if so, 
Seneca, Cicero, or any of the heathen philosophers, 
_ would be as good a Saviour as Jesus of Nazareth. It 
is the divinity of our Lord that gives the efficacy to his 
death, and makes him such an high priest as became us, 


Sta i ro et beck } i i 
viz. one who by the infinite merits of his sufferings could 


~e-lC CUO — bel el 


vi 


make a full, perfect and sufficient sacrifice, satisfaction 
and oblation for the sins of the whole world. And 
whatsoever minister of the church of England makes 
use of her forms, and eats of her bread, and yet holds 
not this doetrine, as I fear too many such are not only 
creptin, but countenanced and preferred amongst us, 
such an one belongs only to the synagogue of satan. 
He is not achild or minister of God, No, he is a wolf 
in sheep’s clothing. He is none other than a child and 
minister of that wicked one the devil. 

Many will think these hard sayings : But I think it 
no breach of charity to affirm, that an Arian or a Soci- 
nian, cannot bea Christian. For the one would make 
us believe Jesus Christ is only a created God, which is 
a self-contradiction ; and the other would have us look 
on him only as a good man, and, instead of owaing his 
death to be an atonement for the sins of the world, 
would persuade us that Christ died only to seal the truth 
of his doctrine with his blood! But if Jesus Christ be 
not more than a mere man, nay, if he be not truly God, 
he was indeed, as accounted by the Jews, the greatest 
hiasphemer that ever appeared in the world, for he ac- 
cepted of divine adoration from the man that had been 
born blind,aswe read, Johnix 38, And hesaid, Lord, 
I believe. Andheworshipped him. W hich must be un- 
derstood of religious adoration, as coming of faith in 
him. Besides, if Christ be not properly God, our faith 
is vain, we are yet in oursins; for no created being, 
though of the highest order, could possibly merit anv 
thing at God’s hands, No,.it was our Lord s divinity 
that alone qualified him to take away the sins of the 
world : and therefore, we hear that St. John pronoun- 
ces so positively, that the wond, i. e. Jesus Christ, was 
not only with God, but was God. Fer the iike reason, 
§t. Paul says, that he was in. the form of God, that in 
him dwelt all the fulness of the God-head bodily. Nay,, 
Jesus Christ himself assumes the title which God gave 
to himself when he sent Moses to deliver his people 
Israel, before Abraham was, says he, IT am. And again, 
I and my Father are one. Which last words, though. 
our modern infidels would evade and wrest, as they de, 


the other scriptures, to their own damnation, yet it is 
evident the Jews understood as though by them he 
made himself equal with God, otherwise, why did they 
stone him as a blasphemer ? Now, why should it be 
thought a breach of charity to affirm, that those who 
deny the divinity of Jesus Christ, in the strictest sense 
of the word, cannot be Christians? for they are greater 
infidels than the devils themselves; they confessed that 
they knew who he was, even the holy ene of God.— 
‘hey not only believe, but, which is more than the un- 
believers of this generation do, they tremble! And was 
it possible for Arius and Socinus, those arch-heretics, 
to be released from those chains of darkness under 
which they are now reserved, till the judgment of the 
yreat day, and to appear in this congregation, I am 
persuaded they would iaformus, that Hell had convinced 
them of the divinity of Jesus Christ, and they would 
advise all their followers to renounce their principles, 
lest they should come into the same place, and thereby 
increase their and each other’s torment. 

But 2dly. What think you of the manhood or incar- 
natioa of Christ 2 For Christ was not only God, but he 
was God and man in person. ‘Thus run the text and 
context: “ When the Pharisees wre gathered toge- 
thor, Jesus asked them, saying, What think ye of Christ ? 
Whose son is he ? They say unto him, the Son of Da- 
vid. How then,” says our divine Master, “ does David 
in spirit call him Lord ?’* From which passage it is 
evident that we do not think rightly of the person of 
Jesus Christ, unless we believe him to be perfect God 
aud perfect man, of a reasonable soul and human flesh 
subsisting. 

For it is on this account that he is called Christ, or 
the annointed, i. e. oe who through his own voluntary 
offer was set apart by the Father, and strengthened and 
qualified by the annointing or communication of the 
Holy Ghost, to be a Mediator between him and offend- 
ing man. 

"The reason, or first cause, why the Son of God took 

an him onr nature. was the fall of our firet parents. 


RPiS RRLEEE LIER eaters 5 


I hope there is no one here present so absurdly atheis- 


tical as to think that man made himself, No, it was 
God that made us, and not we ourselves. Aud I would 
willingly think that no one would be so blasphemous 
as (o suppose, that if God did make us, he made us such 
creatures as we now find ourselves tobe; for tbis 
would begis iag God’s word the lie, which tells us, that in 
the image of God, not in the image of the devil, which 
we now bear on our souls, made he man. Far be it 
from us to think otherways, than that as God made 
man, so he made him perfect. He placed him in the 
garden of Kden, and condescended to enter into cove- 
nant wit him, promising him eternal life upon condi- 
tions of an unsinning obedience of faith, and threaten- 
ing eternal death, if he broke his law of love, by eat- 
ing the forbidden fruit. 

Man did eat, and thereby involved both himself and 
ns in that curse, which God the righteous judge had 
declared the consequence of his disobedience. But here 
begins that mystery of godliness, God manifested in 
the flesh, to destroy the works of the devil? For, sing’, 
O heavens, aud rejoice O earth! Jesus, the only begot- 
ten Son of God, begotten of the Father before all 
worlds, God of God, light of light, very God of very 
God, offers to die to make an atonement for his trans- 
gression, and to fulfil all righteousness in his stead. But 
because it was impossible for him to do and suffer this 
as he was God, and since man had offended, it was ne- 
cessary it should be done by man, rather than we should 
perish, This everlasting God, this Prince of Peace, 
this ancient of days, in the fulness of time, had a body 
prepared for him, and became an infant of a span long. 
In this body he performed a complete obedience to the 
jaw of God, whereby he, in our stead, fulfilled the co- 
yenant of works, and at last became subject to death, 
even the death upon the cross; that as God he might 
satisfy, and as man he might obey and suffer and being 
God and man in one person, might thereby procure ap 
union between God and his fallen creatures. 

And now what think ye of this love of Christ? Do 
not you think it was wondrous great, especially when 
you consider that we were Christ's bitter enemies, and 
ihat he would have been infinitely haopy in himself, 


10 


though we had perished for ever. Whatever you may 
thin’: of it, I know the blessed angels, who are not so 
mucucorverned in this mystery of godliness as we, 
think most highiy of it. They do, they will desire to 
look into and admire it through all eternity. Why, Oh 
why, ye sinners, will you not think of this love of 
Christ? surely it must melt down the most hardened 
heart. Whilst [ am speaking, the thoughts of this in- 
finitely condescending Jove fires and warms my soul ! 
1 could dwell on it for ever. But it is expedient for 
you that 1 should ask you another question concerning 
Jesus Christ. 

3dly.—W hat think you of being justified by Jesus 
Christ ? I believe I can answer for some of you; but 
many, I fear, think to be justified, or looked upon as 
righie>sus in God's sight, without Jesus Christ. All 
such ‘ill find themselves mostdreacfully mistaken; for 
out of Christ, God is aconsuming fire! Others satisfy 
themselves with thinking that Christ was God and man, 
and that he came into the world to save sinners in gene- 
ral: Whereas their chief thoughts ought to be how 
they may be assured that Jesus Christ came into the 
world to save them in particular. ‘The life | now live 
in the flesh says the apostle, is by faith of the Son of 
God, who !oved mk, and gave himself for mr; observe 
for mE! For it is this immediate application of Jesus 
Christ to our own hearts, that renders his merits etfiec- 
tual to our eternal salvation. If Christ be not truly 
Emmanuel,or God with us, hecannot be the author and 
finisher of our faith and salvation. Others there are 
who go still further; for they think that Jesus Christ is 
God-man, and that heis to be received into their hearts, 
and tiat they can be justified in God’s sight only in and 
through him; but then they believe in him only as in 
part their Saviour. They are for doing what they can 
themselves, and then they will accept of Jesus Christ 
to make up the deficiencies of their righteousness. — 
This is the sum and substance of our modern divinity, 
And, was it possible for me to know the thoughts of 
most that hear me this dav, I believe they would tell 
mv this is the foundation they have laid, and built upoa 


)1 


for some years, for their eternal salvation. Is it not 
then high time,my brethren, for you to entertain quite 
different thoughts concerning justification by Jesus 
Christ ? Forif you think thus, you are in the case 
with those unhappy Jews, who went about establishing 
their own righteousness, and would not submit to, and 
consequently never attained that righteousness which 
is of God, by faith in Christ Jesus our Lord. What 
think you then, my brethren, if I tell you that we are 
to ba justified freely through faith in Jesus Christ with- 
out any regard to any works or fitness foreseen in us 
at all ? For salvation is the free giftof God. I know 
no fitness in man, but a fitness to be thrown into the 
inke of fire and brimstone for ever. Our righteousness, 
i: God's sight, is but as filthy rags; He cannot away 
with it, Our holiness, if we have any, is not the cause, 
but the effect of our justification in God's sight. We 
love God, because He first loved us. We must not 
come to God as the proud Pharisees did, bringing in. 
as it were, a reckoning of our services ; but we must 
come in the temper and language of the poor publican, 
smiting upon our breast, and saying, God be merciful 
to me a sinner! Then shall we find, and know for a 
truth, that Jesus Christ justifies us whilst we are un- 
godly, and that he came not to call the righteous, but 
sianers to repentance. The poor in spirit, who are 
willing to renounce their own righteousness and rely 
wholly on the righteousness of Jesus Christ, they only 
can be received as members of his church and kingdom. 
The righteousness, the whole righteousness of Jesus 
Christ is to be imputed to us, instead of our own ; for 
we are not under the law, but under grace. And as 
many as walk after this rule, peace be on them ; for 
they, and they only, are the true Israel of God. In the 
great work of man’s redemption, boasting is entirely 
excluded, which could not be, if one of our works was 
to be joined with the merits of Christ. Our salvation 
is allof God, from the beginning to the end. It is not 
of works, lest any man should boast. Man has no hand 
in it, Ttis Christ that is to be made to us of God the 


Father, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and eter. 


12 


nal redemptioa. Hisactive as well as passive obedience 
is most freely given to poor sinners. He has fulfilled 
all righteousness for us, that we might be made the 
righteousness of God in him. All that we have todo, 
is to lay hold of this righteousness by faith. And in 
that very moment, when we do apprehend it by a lively 
faith, in that very moment shall we be assured, that 
the blood of Jesus Christ has cleansed us from all sin. 
For the promise is to us, and to our children, and as 
many as the Lord our God shall call. If we, and our 
whole houses believe, we shall be saved as well as 
the jailor and his house; for the righteousness of 
Christ is an everlasting, as well as a perfect righteous- 
ness, It is as effectual to all them that believe in him 
now, as it was formerly, andso it will be till time sball 
be no more. 

Search the scriptures, as the Bereans did, and see 
whether these things are notso. Search St. Paul’s epis- 
tles to the Romans and Galatians, and there you will 
find this doctrine so plainly taught you, that unless you 
have eyes that see not, he that rans may read. Search 
the eleventh article of our church, and there you will 
find the opinion of onr wise reformers in this matter; 
for thus speaks the article.—“ We are accounted righ- 
teous before God, only for the merits of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own 
works or deservings.” — 

This doctrine of our free justification by faith in 
Christ Jesus, however censured and evil spoken of by 
our present masters in Israel, was highly esteemed hy 
our wise fore-fathers. For, in the following words of 
the fore-mentioned article, it irs called a most whole- 
some doctrine, and very full of comfort; and so in- 
deed it is, to all that are weary and heavy laden, and 
are traly willing to find rest in Jesus Christ. 

This is gospel, this is glad tidings of great joy to all 
thut feel themselves poor, lost, undone, damned sinners. 
Ho! ‘every one that thirsteth, come unto the water of 
life. and drink freely: Come and buy without money 
ani without price. Behold a fountain opened in your 
Saviour’s side, for sin, and for all uncleauness, Look 


13 


unto him whom you have pierced. Look unto him by 
faith, and verily you shall be sayed, though you came 
hither only to ridicule and blaspheme, and never thought 
of God or of Christ before. 

Not that you must think God will save you, because, 
or on account of your faith; for faithis a work, and 
then you would be justified for your works; but when 
I tell you we are to be justified by faith, I mean, that 
faith is the instrument whereby the sinner receives the 
redemption of Jesus Christ into his own soul: and who- 
soever receives such a faith, for it is the free gift of 
God, he may lift up his head with boldness ; he needs 
not fear; heis passed from death to life, and shall not 
come into condemnation. This is the gospel which we 
preach: Ifany man or angel preach any other doctrine 
than this, of our being freely justificd through faith in 
Christ Jesus, we have the authority of the great apos. 
ue to pronounce him accursed. 

And now, my brethren, what think you of this focl- 
ishness of preaching ? To you that have tasted the good 
word of life, and been enlightened to see the riches of 
God's free grace in Christ Jesus, | am persuaded it is 
precious, and has distilled like the dew intoyour souls. 
And oh, that all were like-minded ; but I fear numbers 
are ready to go away contradicting and blaspheming. 
Tell me, are there not many of you saying within your- 
selves, “‘ This is a licentious doctrine ; this preacher is 
opening a door for encouragemeniin sin?’ But this 
does not surprise or terrify me at all. Itisastale an. 
tiquated objection, as old as the doctrine of justification 
itself. And which, by the way, is not much to the cre- 
dit of those who urge it now, it was first made by ao 
infidel. St. Paui, in his epistle to the Romans, after 
he had, in the five first chapters, most plainly proved 
the doctrine of justification by faith only, in the sixth 
brings in an unbeliever#seying, Shail we continue in 
sin then, that grace may abound? But as he rejected 
such an inference with a God forbid, so do 1: Fur the 
faith which we preach is not a dead speculative faith, 
‘an assenting to a thing credible, as credible,” as it is 
eommouly deiined. -It is nota fails of the head only, 


erp Oren me : ope. 


k4 


but of the heart. Itis a living principle, wrought in 
the soul by the spirit of the ever-living God, convincing 
the sinner of his lost undone condition by nature, 
enabling him to lay hold on the perfect righteousness 
of Jesus Christ, freely offered him in the gospel, and 
contiuually exciting him, out of a principle of love and 
gratitude, to shew forth the same, by abounding in 
every good word and work. ‘This is the sum and sub- 
stance of the doctrine that has been delivered : And if 
this belicentious doctrine, judgeye. No, my brethren, 
this is not decrying all good works, but teaching you 
how to do the same froma proper principle. For to 
use the words of our church in another of her articles, 
“ Works done before the grace of Christ,and the 
inspiration of the spirit, are not pleasant to God, for- 
asmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ 5 ra- 
ther, for that they are not done as God has willed and 
commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they 
have the nature of sin.” So that they, who bid you 
do and then believe, are just as wise as those who would 
persuade you to builda beautiful magnificent house, 
without laying any foundation. 

The doctrine of our free justification by faith in 
Christ Jesus, like other gospel truths, may and will be 
abused by men of corrupt minds, and reprobate con- 
cerning the faith; but they who receive the truth of 
God in the love of it, will always be showing their 
taith by their works. For this reason, St. Paul, after 
telling the Ephesians, that by grace they were saved 
through faith; not of works, lestany man should boast; 
immediately adds, For we are his workmanship, crea- 
ted in Christ Jesus unto good works. And in his epis. 
tle to Titus, having given him directions, chap. iii. 7, 
to tell people that they were justified by grace, he di- 
rectly subjoins, verse 8, Iwill that thou affirm con- 
stantly, that they which have believed in God, might 
be careful to maintain good works, A greeably to this, 
we are told in our twelfth article, that “ albeit that 
good works, which are the fruits of faith, and follow 
after justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure 
the severity of Gud's judgment, yet are they pleasing 


6 


and acceptable to God through Christ, and do spring 
necessarily out of a true and lively faith, insomuch, 
that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known 
a3 a tree discerned by the fruit.” 

Oh! what would I give that this article was duly 
understood, and preached by all that have subscribed 
to it! Theark of the Lord would not then be driven, 
into the wilderness, nor so many dissent from the 
church of England. I am fully persuaded, that it is 
not so much on account of our rites and ceremonies, as 
of our not preaching the truth as it isin Jesus, that 
many of our churches ave become so empty of true 
believers. Did not we fall from our established doc- 
trines, few, comparatively speaking, would fail from 
the established church. Where Christ is preached, 
though it be in achurch or common, dissenters of all 
denominations have, and do most freely come: but if 
our clergy will preach only the law, and not show the 
way of saivation by faith in Chrst Jesus, that is, the 
gospel, the charge of schism, at the day of judgment, I 
fear, will chiefly. lie at their door. The true sheep of 

‘hrist know the voice of Christ's true shepherds, and 
strangers they will not hear. 

Observe, my dear brethren, the words of the article. 
Good works “* are the fruits of faith, and follow after 
justification.”” How then can they go before, or any 
way be the cause of it? No, our persons must be jus- 
tified before our performances can be accepted. God 
bad respect to Abel before he had respect to his offer- 
ing; and therefore the righteousness of Jesus Christ 
must be freely imputed to, and apprehended by us, thro’ 
faith, before we can offer an acceptable sacrifice to God. 
Kor out of Christ, as Lintimated before, God is a con- 
suming fire; and whatsoever is not of faith in Christ, 
is sin. 

‘Lhe grand cause of people’s mistaking the doctrine 
of free justification, 1 believe is owing to their not 

rightly considering the diffe erent persons St. Paul and 
St James wrote to inth eirepistles, as also the different 
kinds of justification each of them writes about. The 
former every where asserts, and that with line upon 


f 
€ 
aq 
i 
4 
i 
at 
t 
i 
Hy. 
ae, 
ae 
i 
‘ 
4 
ia 
sf 
x) 
4 iu 
fe 
\ 
) 
ey 
22) 
iw 
e 
| 
a 
ae 
4 
i 
| 
4 
t 
hi 
a 
He | 
i¥ 
he 
ia 
10] 
He 
a 
Hl 
ou 
: ; 
i 


ann a 


= m ars bd 


16 


fine, and argument upon argument, that weare justified 


by faith only. The latter puts this question, Was not 


Abraham justified by works ? From whence many have 


blended and joined together faith and works, in order 
to justify us in the sight of God. But this is a mistake 
allover ; for St. Paul was writing to the Jewish pro- 


.selytes, who sought righteousness by the works, not 


only of the ce emonial, but also of the moral law. But 
he tells them, they were to look for justification in 
God’s sight only, through the perfect righteousuessof 
Jesus Christ, apprehended by faith. St. James wrote 
to such who abused the doctrine of free justification, 
and presumed they should be saved, (as numbers among 
us do now,) upon their barely professing to believe in 
Jesus Christ. These the holy apostle endeavours wise 
ly to convince, that such a faith was no more'like that 
which bringeth salvation, (han aputrifying careaseis like 
a living man; and therefore it behoved all who would 
be blessed with faithful Abraham, to shew forth their 
faith by their works. as hedid. For, was not Abraham 
‘ustified by works? says he, i.e. Did he not prove 
that his faith was a trae justifying faith, by which 
it brought forth good works ? From whence itis plain, 
that St. James is talking of a justification before men. 
Shew me, says he, that is, demonstrate to me, or give 
me evidence, that thou hast a true faith, by thy works. 
Whereas St. Paul is talking only of our being justified 
in the sight of God; and thus he proves that Abraham 
was justified before ever the moral or ceremonial law 
was given tothe Jews; for itis written, Abraham be- 
lieved in the Lord, and it was counted to him for righ- 
teousnes3. 

Take the substance of what has been said on this 
head in the few following words. Every man that is 
gaved. is justified three ways. ist. Meritoriously, by 
the death of Jesus Christ: It is the blood of Jesus 
Christ that cleanses us from ail sin. 2dly. Instramen- 
tally, by faith : Faith is the means or instrument where- 
by the merits of Jesus Christ are applied to the sinner s 


heart, Yeareall the children o: God, by faith in 
Obrist Jesus, Id/y, Weare justiied declaratively, by 


\t 


good works, that is, good works declare and prove, 
both to ourselves and the world, that our faith is a true 
saving faith. 

It may not be improper to illustrate this doctrine by 
an example or two. I suppose no one will pretend to 
say that there was any fitness in Zaccheus the publican, 
when he came to see Jesus, out of no better a principle 
than that whereby, perhaps, thousands are led to hear 
me preach, I mean curiosity. But Jesus Christ pre- 
vented and called him by his free grace, and sweetly, 
but most powerfully, inclined him to obey that call, as 
I pray God he may influence all you that hear me this 
day. Zaccheus received our Lord joyfully into his house 
und at the same time, by faith, received him into his 
heart, Zaechews was then freely justified ia the sight 
of God, But behold the iramediate fruits of that oh 
tification ! He stands forth in the midat, and as beiere 
he had believed in his heart, he now makes confession 
with his mouth, unto salvation; Behold, Lord, the half 
of my goods [ give to the poor; aud if I have taken 
any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore 
him four fold. And thus it will be with every poor 
sinner, as soon as ever God’s dear Son is revealed in 
him by a living faith. He will have no rest in his spirit 
till, out of love and gratitude for what God has done 
for his soul, he shews forth his faith by his works. 

Again, I suppose every body will grant that there 
was no fitness for salvation in the persecutor Saul, no 
more than there is in those persecuting zealots of these 
last days, who are already breathing threateninys, and, 
if it were in their power, would breathe out slaughters 
also against the disciples of the Lord. Now our Lord, 
we know, freely prevented him by his grace ; Oh that 
he may also effectually call the persecutors of this ge: 
neration ! and when, by a light from heaven, he struck 
him to the ground, at the same time, by his spirit, he 
‘pricked him to the heart, convinced him of sin, and 
caused him to cry out, Who art thou, Lord ? Christ 
replies, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest. Faith then 
was instantaneously given him, and behold immediate- 
ly Paul cries out, Lord, what wouldst thou have me t 


18 


do? And so willevery poor soul that belteves on the 
Lord Jesus with his whole heart, He will be asking, 
Lord, what shall I dofor thee? Lord what wouldst 
thou have me to do ? Not to justify himself, but only 
to evidence the sincerity of his love and thankfulness 
to his all merciful high priest, for plucking him as a 
firo brand out of the fire. 

Perhaps many self-righteous persons among you may 
flatter yourselves, that you are not so wicked as either 
Zaccheus or Saul was, and consequently there is a 
greater fitness for salvation in you than in them; but 
if you think thus, indeed you think more highly of 
yourselves than you ought to think ; for, by nature, we 
are all alike, all equally fallen short of the glory of 
God, all equally dead in trespasses and sins ; and there 
needs the same almighty power to be exerted in con- 
verting any one of the most sober, good-natured, moral 
persons here present, as there was in converting the 
publican Zaccheus, or that persecutor Saul, And was 
it possible for you to ascend into the highest heavens, 
nud to enquire of the spirits of just men made pertect, 
I am persuaded they would tell you, that this doctrine 
is from God. But we havea most sure word of pro. 
phecy, to which we would do well to take heed, as unto 
a light shining in a dark place. My brethren, the word 
is nigh you. Search the Scriptures. Beg of God to 
make you willing to be saved in this day of his power, 
and you shall all be taught of God. For it is not flesh 
and blood, but the spirit of Jesus Christ that alone can 
reveal these things unto you. 

Fourthly & lastly, What think you of Jesus Christ's 
being formed within you ? for whom Christ justifies, 
them he also sanctifies: although he find, yet he does 
not leave us unholy: a true Christian may not so pro- 
perly be said to live, as Jesus Christ to live in bim, for 
they only who are led by the spirit of Christ, who is 
God, are the sons of Ged. 

As I observed before, so { tell you again, the faith 
which we preach is not a dead, but a lively active faith 
wrought in the soul, and working a thorough change, 
by the power of the [oly Ghost, in the whole man.— 


i 
, 


19 


Unless Christ be thus in you, notwithstanding you may 
be orthodox as to the foregoing principles, notwith- 
standing you may have good desires, and attend con- 
stantly on the means of grace, yet, in St. Paul’s opini- 
on, you are out of a state of salvation. Know ye not, 
says the apostle to the Corinthians, a church famous for 
its gifts, above any church under heaven, that Christ is 
in you, viz., by his spirit, unless you are reprobates ? 

For Christ came not only to deliver us fromthe guilt, 
but also from the power of our sins, Till he has done 
this, however he may be a saviour to others, we can 
have no assurance or well-grounded hope that he has 
aaved us. For it is by receiving his blessed spirit into 
our hearts, aud hearing him witnessing with our spirits, 
that we can be certified of our being sealed unto the 
day of redemption. 

This, it must be confessed, is a great mystery; but 
marvel not at my asking you, what you think of Christ 
being formed within you ? for either God must change 
his nature or ours. For, as in Adam we all have spi- 
titually died, so all that are effectually saved, must by 
Christ, be spiritually made alive. His only end in dying 
and rising again, and interceding for us now in heaven, 
is to redeem us from the misery of our fallen nature, 
and, by the operations of his blessed spirit, to make us 
meet to be partakers of the heavenly inheritance with 
the saints in light. None but those that are thus chang- 
ed by his grace here, shall appear with him in glory 
hereafter. 

Examine yourselves therefore, my bretbern, whe- 
ther you are in the faith ; prove your own selves, and 
think it not sufficient to say in your creed, I believe in 
Jesus Christ, for you do not believe ; you are liars, you 
are reprobates, you are ina state of death, you take 
God's name in vain, and, when you call him Father, 
your prayers are turned into sin, unless you believe 


in Christ, so as to have your life and nourishment 


from him as the branches receive life and nourishment 
from the vine, or the members of the body natural from 
the head. : 

I know, indeed, the men ofthis generation deny 


there is any such thing as spititaal sensation, or aught 
to be experienced like feeling Christ within them, 
But, alas! to what a dreadful condition would such 
reduce us! even to the state of the abandoned bea. 
thens, who St. Paul tells us, were past feeling, But 
the same apostle plainly declares, that as God is not 
far from everyone of us,80, if haply we fee! after him, 
he will be found of us, And again he teaches, that 
our Lord and Head is not untouched with the feeling 
of our infirmities, and that we ought also to have our 
several senses exercised, to discern good from evil. 
¥ may add here also, that, in our office for the visita- 
tion of the sick, the minister prays, that the Lord may 
make the sick person know and feel that there is no 
other name given under heaven to man, in whom, and 
through waom he may receive health and salvation, 
but ouly the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

For there !s a spiritual as well as a natural or cor- 
poreal feeling. And though this is not communicated 
to us in such asensible manner as outward objects affect 
our outward senses, yet it is asreal as any outward sen- 
sations, and its proper objects may be as truly felt and 
discerned by the soul, as any other can be felt by. the 
body ; all that are born again of God know that i lie not, 

What think ye, sirs, did Naaman feel when he was 
cured of his leprosy ! did the woman feel virtue com- 
ing out of Jesus Christ, when she touched ihe hein of 
his garment, and was cured of her disease !so surely 
mayest thou feel, O sinner, when Jesus dwelleth in thy 
heart. I privy God to make you all to know and feel 
this, ere you depart hence, and for evermore : 

Oh! my brethern, my heart is enlarged towards you: 
I trust I feel something of that hiiden but powerful 
presence of Christ, which Tam preaching to you, In- 
deed it is sweet, indeeditis exceeding comfortable. 
Allthe harm I wish you, that without cause are my en- 
emies, is, that you feit the like. Believe me, though 
it would be hell to my soul to return to a natural state 
again, yei i would willingly change states. with you 
fora little while, that you might feel what itis to have 
Jesus Christ dwelling in your hearts by faith, Oh, 


a 
ee ge 
. 


— 
ee — 
. 


81 


do not tarn your backs, do not letthe devil hurry you 
away be not afraid of conviction, Do not think 
worse of the doctrine, because preached without the 
church-walls. Our Lord, in the da. sof his flesh, 
preached on a mount, aship,a field; and I am persua- 
ded many have felt his gracious presence here. In. 
deed we speak what we know. Oh,do not reject 
the kingdom of God against yourselves ! be so wise 
as to receive our witness. 1 cannot, I will xot let 
yongo. Stay a while, and letus reason together. 
However lightly you may esteem your souls, | know 
our Lordhas an unspeakable value for them. He 
thought them worthy of his precious biood: I beseech 
you therefore, O sinners, be ye reconciled to God. 1 
hope you do not fear being accepted in the beloved. 
Behold he calls you; behold he prevents and follows 
you vith his merey. 

And because many of you would notcome toa church, 
behold he has sent forth his servants into the highways 
aud hedges, to compel you to come in. Remember 
then, that, at such an hour of such a day, in sucha 
year, in this place, you were alltold what you oughtto 
think concerning Jesus Christ. If you now perish, it 
will not be for lack of knowledge. I am free from 
the bloodof you all. You cannot say I have been 
preaching damnation to you. You cannot say I have, 
like legal preachers, been requiring you to make brick 
without straw. I have not bid you make yourselves 
saints, and then come to God; but I have offered .you 
salvation on as cheap terms.as you can desire. Ihave 
offered you Christ's whole wisdom, Christ’s whole 
righteousness, Christ's whole sanctification andeternal 
redemption, if you will but believe in him. If you say 
yon cannot believe, you say Tight ; for faith, as well as 
every other blessing, is the gift of God. But then it 
is free to all that confess themselves sinners, and:sin- 
eerely ask itin his dear Son’s name. Ask, then, and 
it shall be given you; seek, and you shall.find ; knock, 
and adoor of mercy shall be opened unto you. For if 
Christ has given himself, will he not give you. iaith, 
whereby alone his merits can be applied to your hearts? 


22 


Alas ! why do we not entertain more worthy, more lo- 
ving thoughts of Christ? Ordo you think he will 
have mercy on others, and not on you? But are you 
‘ot sinners ? And did not Jesus Christ come into the 
world to save sinners? If you say you are the chief of 
sinners, | answer, that will be no hindrance to your 
enlvation; indeed it will not, if you lay hold on him by 
faith. Read the evangelist, and see how kindly he be- 
haved to his disciples, who fled from and denied him. 
Go tell my brethren, says he; he does not say, go tell 
those traitors, but, go tell my brethren, and Peter. As 
though he had said, go tell my brethren in general, 
and poor Peter in particular, that T am risen again. Oh, 
comfort his drooping heart; tell him I am reconciled 
to him. Bid him weep no more so bitterly ; for though 
with oaths and curses he thrice denied me, yet I died 
for his sins, and I am risen again for his justification. 
I freely forgive all. ‘Thus slow to anger, and of great 
kindness, was our all-merciful high priest. And do 
you think he has changed his nature, and forgets poor 
sinners, now he is exalted to the right-hand of God? 
No, he is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, 
and sitteth there only to make intercession for us. 
Come then, ye harlots, come then ye publicans, come 
ye mostabandoned sinners, come and believe on Jesus 
Christ. Though the whole world despise and cast you 
out, yet he will not disdain to take you up, Oh 
amazing! Oh infinitely condescending love ! Even 
you he will not be ashamed to call his brethren. And 
Oh! how will you escape, if you neglect such a glo- 
rious Offer of salvation ? What would the damned spirits 
now in the prison of hell, give, if Christ was so freely 
offered to their souls ?. And why are we not lilting-op 
onr eyes in torments ? Does any one, out of this great 
multitude, dare say he does not deserve damnation ? If 
not, why are we left, and others taken away by death ? 
W hat is this, but an instance of God’s free grece, and 
sign of his good will towards us? Oh then, let Goi’s 
goodness lead us to repentance | Ch, let there be joy 
in heaven over some of us repenting ! Though we are 
in a field, yet lam persuaded the blessed angels are 


- 


signe 


wil 


ill, 


now hovering around us, and long, as the heart pant- 
eth after the water-brooks, to sing a song of praise and 
joy for your conversion, Blessed be God, I hope 
their joy will be fulfilled. An awful silence appears 
amongst us, and [ have good hope that the words, 
which the Lord has enabled me to speak in your ears 
this day, have not altogether fallen to the ground, 
Your tears and deep atiention are an evidence that the 
Lord God is amongst us ofa truth. Come, ye P hari. 
sees, come and see, in spite of your satanical rage and 
fury, the Lord Jesusis getting himself the victory. 
And, brethren, J speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, 
if but one soul of you, by the blessing of God, be 
brought to think savingly of Jesus Christ this day, I 
care not, if my encmies were permitted to thrust me 
into an inner prison, and put my feet fast in the stocks 
as soon as I have delivered this sermon. Brethren, 
my heart's desire and prayer to God for you all, is, that 
you may be saved. For this cause I follow my master 
without the camp. I care not how much c} this sacred 
reproach I bear, so that some of you be converted from 
the error of your ways, I rejoice, yea, end will rejoice. 
Ye men, ye devils, do your worst! When Christ, who 
is our life,and whom | have now been preaching, shall 
appear J, also, together with his despised little ones, 
shall appear with him in glory, And then what will 
you think of Christ ? I know what you will think of him 
you will then think him to be the fairest among ten 
thousand. You will then think and fcel him to be a 
just though asin-avenging judge. Oh then be ye per- 
suaded to kiss him, lest he be angry, and you be banish- 
ec for ever from the presence of his glory. Behold 
come lo you, as theangels did to Lot. My brethren flee, 
flee for your lives, haste, linger no longer in your spi- 
ritual Sodom ; for otherways you will be eternally des- 
troyed. Numbers, no doubt, amongst you may regard 
meno more than Lot’s sons-in-law regarded him, If 
am persuaded I seem to you asone that mocks; but I 
speak the truth in Christ, ] lie not; as sure as fire and 
brimstono rained from the Lord out of heaven, to des- 


troy Sodom and Gomorrah seo surely, at the great day 


24, 


shall the vials of God’s wrath be ponred ont,upon you, 
if you do not think seriously, and act agreeably to the 
gospel of the Lord’s Christ. Behold Ihave told you 
before. 1 pray God, all you that forget him may seri- 
ously think on what has been said, before he pluck 
you away, and there be none to deliver you. Amen. 


Budi, Printer, Old Market-plaes. 


