U>A%  Cburcb  institute^ 

TitVSr.  ALLOWED  for  READING,  14  Days. 

lU  after  the  expiration  of  14-  days,  the 
work  is  demanded  by  the  Librarian  and  NOT 
RETURNED,  a  fine  of  Id.  PER  DAY 
will  be  incurred. 

(Rul^  23.) 


mtmm 


WHAT 
GOOD  WILL  IT  DO  t 


A   QUESTION   ABOUT  THE 

DISESTABLISHMENT   OF  THE  CHURCH   OF    ENGLAND, 

EXAMINED  AND   ANSWERED. 


REY.   J.   C.   RYLE,   M.A., 

HON.    CANON   OF   NORWK 

■adhroki',  and  Rurnl  Dean  of 


HON.    CANON   OF  NORWICH, 
Vicar  of  Ftradhroh-,  and  Rurnl  Dean  of  Hoxne,  Sufolk. 


'The  thing  as  it  is." — Job  xx\i.  23. 


THIRD     EDITION. 


WILLIAM     HUNT    AND     COMPANY 

HOLLES  STREET,    CAVENDISH   SQUARE  ; 

AND     ALDINE     CHAMBERS,     PATERNOSTER     ROW. 

1872. 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO  ? 


rHERE  is  a  subject  much  talked  of  just  now,   about 
which   I   wish    to   say  a  few  words.     That   subject 
^  the  Disestablishment  of  the  Church  of  England. 

The  subject  is  one  of  real  inportance,  and  demands  the 
iimediate  attention  of  Churchmen.  A  Society  has  been 
timed  for  the  express  purpose  of  promoting  Disestablish- 
lent,  and  has  many  active  supporters.  Mr.  Miall,  M.P. 
)r  Bradford,  has  brought  forward,  in  the  House  of  Com-' 
ions,  a  motion  for  Disestablishing  the  Church  of  England, 
nd,  though  defeated,  had  ninety-six  votes  on  his  side.  In 
lort  there  is,  in  full  operation,  an  organized  crusade  against 
16  Establishment  The  campaign  has  begun.  These 
re  facts  which  every  Churchman  ought  to  know.  It  is 
)Ily  to  ignore  them. 

The  world  is  fond  of  saying  that  clergymen  cannot 
ive  an  honest  and  disinterested  opinion  about  this  sub- 
let.    "  They  are  only  fighting  for  the  loaves  and  fishes," 

the  cry.  Well,  the  world  may  say  what  it  pleases :  I 
rn  getting  too  old  to  care  for  such  charges.  I  only 
ire  for  the  spread  of  truth,  and  I  shall  not  shrink  from 
iving  my  opinion,  and  showing  "  the  thing  as  it  is." 


4  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  ^ 

In  handling  the  subject  I  shall  say  nothing  about  th 
justice,  or  wisdom,  or  honesty  of  Disestablishment,  thoug 
I  might  say  a  good  deal.  I  shall  stick  close  to  one  simp] 
question : — that  question  is,  "  What  good  will  it  do  ? " 

Let  us  then  suppose  that  Parliament  resolves  some  da 
to  Disestablish  the  Church  of  England,  as  it  has  alread 
Disestablished  the  Church  of  Ireland.  Let  us  suppos 
that  an  Act  of  Parliament  is  passed  by  which  the  coi 
nection  between  Church  and  State  is  dissolved  for  eve 
and  the  State  takes  possession,  as  far  as  it  can,  of  tl: 
property  of  the  Church.   What  would  the  consequences  be 

The  practical  consequences  of  Disestablishment,  I  tal 
it,  would  be  something  of  this  kind : — 

(1)  The  Bishops  would  cease  to  be  Peers  of  the  Realr 
and  to  sit  in  the  House  of  Lords. 

(2)  The  income  of  the  Bishops  and  clergy,  from  tithes  ar 
lands,  would  be  appropriated  by  the  State,  and  applied 
other  purposes,  as  fast  as  the  present  receivers  of  it  died  o 

(3)  In  process  of  time  there  would  be  nothing  left  to  tl 
Church,  out  of  all  her  present  possessions,  except  the  churcl 
buildings,  the  pew-rents,  a  life-interest  in  the  income 
the  Bishops  and  clergy  for  a  few  years,  and  the  endo^ 
ments  of  the  last  two  centuries.  This  property,  on  tl 
principles  of  the  Irish  Act,  would  probably  be  left  to  tl 
Church  of  England.  Some  wild  and  rabid  Liberation isi 
I  believe,  have  coolly  proposed  that  the  clergy  shall  1 
stripped  of  their  life-incomes,  and  turned  into  the  stre( 
as  paupers,  the  very  day  the  Disestablishing  Act  passe 
They  have  also  proposed  that  parish  churches  shall  1 
taken  away  from  Episcopalians,  and  applied  to  oth 
uses!  Whether  they  are  to  be  put  up  to  auction  ai 
ijold  to  the  highest  bidder,  or  turned  into  Librarii 
Museums,  Mechanics'  Institutes  or  Music  Halls,  I  do  n 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  0 

n  know.     I  decline  however  to  notice  such  stuff  as  this. 

iitil  the  House  of  Commons  is  very  unlike  any  House 

hich  has  ever  been  elected  in  this  country,  it  will  never 

motion  such  a  policy,  or  ignore  vested  interests.     There 

no  earthly  reason  why  the  Church  of  England  should 

e  treated  more  hardly  than  the  Church  of  Ireland. 

After  Disestablishment  all  churches  and  sects  would  be 

;ft  on  a  dead  level  of  equality.     No  favour  or  privilege 

ould  be  granted  by  the  State  to  one  more  than  another, 

'he  State  itself  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  religion, 

nd  would    leave  the  supply  of  it  to  the   principles   of 

-ee-trade  and  the  action  of  the  voluntary  system.     In  a 

'ord,  the  Government  of  England  would  allow  all  its 

iibjects  to  serve  God  or  Baal, — to  go  to  heaven  or  to  heU, — 

ast  as  they  please.     The  State  would  take  no  cognizance 

f  spiritual  matters,  and  would  look  on  with  Epicurean 

idifference  and  unconcern.     The  State  would  continue  to 

are  for  the  bodies  of  its  subjects,  but  it  would  entirely 

^iiore  their  souls. 

This,  so  far  as  I  can  make  out,  is  the  state  of  things 
rhich  the  Liberationists  wish  to  bring  about  in  Great 
3ritain.  This  is  the  end  and  object  of  all  their  talk,  and 
loise,  and  organization,  and  agitation.  This  is  the  delight- 
ul  condition  of  matters  which  Mr.  Miall  and  his  com- 
)anions  want  to  set  up  in  the  land.  This  is  what  they 
nean  when  they  talk  of  "  Disestablishment."  Let  them 
leny  it  if  they  can. 
Now  let  us  consider  quietly,  what  good  will  all  this  do  ? 
will  proceed  step  by  step,  and  examine  six  broad  ques- 
ions  one  by  one.  I  will  assume  that  Distablishment 
tctually  takes  place.     I  will  then  ask : — 

I.     What  good  will  it  do  to  Dissenters  ? 


6  WHAT   GOOD   WILL    IT   DO. 

II.     What  good  will  it  do  to  the  Church  ? 
I* 

III.  What  good  will  it  do  to  the  tithe-payers  ? 

IV.  What  good  will  it  do  to  the  poor  ? 

V. .    What  good  will  it  do  to  the  cause  of  Christia 
charity  ? 

VI.     What  good  will  it  do  to  the  State  ? 

I  shall  try  to  answer  each  of  these  questions  in  order. 

I.  First  of  all,  What  good  will  Disestablishment  do  i 
the  Dissenters  ?  I  answer  that  question  without  th 
slightest  hesitation.     It  will  do  them  no  good  at  all. 

I  take  up  this  point  first  because  it  comes  first  in  orde 
The  DissenterS;,  as  a  body,  are  the  chief  agitators  fc 
Disestablishment.  They  evidently  think  that  it  would  b 
greatly  for  their  benefit,  and  would  improve  their  positioi 
1  venture  to  think  that  they  are  totally  and  entirely  mis 
taken.     I  will  give  my  reasons  for  saying  so. 

Would  Disestablishment  destroy  the  Church  of  Englanc 
and  take  the  great  rival  of  Dissenters  completely  out  o 
the  way  ?  Would  it  leave  the  Dissenters  a  clear  field,  anc 
throw  the  whole  population  into  their  hanfts  ?  It  woul( 
do  nothing  of  the  kind  !-f— Unless  the  House  of  Com 
mons  resolves  to  proscribe  the  use  of  the  Liturgy, — U 
make  it  penal  to  be  an  Episcopalian, — to  confiscate  th< 
property  of  Churchmen,  on  the  principles,  of  Frencl 
Communism, — and  to  imprison  and  shoot  clergymen  wh( 
work  harder  than  others,  on  the  principles  of  Sheffielc 
rattening, — unless  the  House  of  Commons  does  this,  tht 
Church  of  England  wiU  never  be  killed  by  Disestablish- 
ment. The  Dissenters  would  soon  find  that  the  old  Church 
when  Disestablished,  was  not  dead,  but  alive. 


WHAT   GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  7 

Disestablishment  would  not  even  ruin  the  Church 
nancially.  The  pew-rents  and  offertories  would  still 
main:  Parliament  could  not  take  them. — The  endow- 

ents  of  the  last  two  centuries  would  still  remain : 
arliament,  on  the  principles  of  the  Irish  Act,  would  not 
luch  them. — The  life-interests  of  the  Bishops  and  clergy, 
1  the  same  principles,  would  still  remain.  A  judicious 
'Stem  of  life  ii;surance  or  commutation,  such  as  certain  lay 
hurchmen  in  Lombard  Street  could  soon  devise,  would 
an  those  life-interests  into  a  very  large  capital  for 
ivestment,  if  safe  investment  could  be  found. — In  short, 
lough  sorely  crippled  and  impoverished,  the  Church  of 
Ingland  would  not  be  ruined.  We  could  still  get  on,  and 
ould  get  on,  though  many  of  us  might  have  to  reduce 
ur  expenditure.  The  Liberationists  would  soon  discover, 
fter  robbing  and  plundering  us  as  much  as  they  could, 
aat  we  were  not  quite  bankrupt.  We  should  maintain 
ur  position,  in  spite  of  our  poverty,  and  not  die.  Let 
he  Dissenters  remember  that. 

Disestablishment  would  not  affect  the  influence  of  the 
.'hurch  in  great  towns  in  the  slightest  appreciable  degree, 
'he  tithe-receiving  clergy  in  rural  districts  would  doubtless 
3se  half  their  income  by  life  insurance  or  commutation, 
-nd  be  sorely  hampered.  But  the  clergy  in  most  large  cities, 
v'ho  depend  on  pew-rents,  Easter  offerings,  and  offertories, 
.s  a  body,  would  be  quite  as  well  off  after  Disestablishment 
IS  they  were  before.  "  The  great  towns  govern  the  coun- 
ry,"  we  are  continually  told.  Yet  in  most  great  towns  the 
Jhurch  would  be  as  powerful  as  ever !  Once  more  I  say, 
et  the  Dissenters  remember  that. 

Disestablishment  would  not  make  the  bulk  of  English- 
men/orsa^e  the  Church  of  England  and  become  Baptists, 
Independents,   Presbyterians,   or   Methodists.      It   would 


8  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

not  fill  the  chapels  and  empty  the  churches.  It  woi 
not  make  the  aristocracy,  or  the  upper  and  mid( 
classes,  burn  their  Prayer-books,  desert  Oxford  a 
Cambridge  ministers,  and  fall  in  love  with  extempc 
prayer.  Not  a  bit  of  it !  The  vast  majority  of  Chun 
men  would  stick  to  Bishops,  rectors,  vicars,  curat 
liturgical  worship,  and  the  old  paths  of  the  Church 
England,  closer  and  tighter  than  ever.  They  would  ma 
more  of  their  poor  old  Church  in  her  adversity  than  th 
ever  did  in  her  prosperity.  They  would  love  her  bett 
and  open  their  purses  more  liberally,  when  they  saw  1 
in  plain  attire,  than  they  ever  did  when  she  was  cloth 
in  purple  and  fine  linen.  In  point  of  number  of  adhere] 
I  verily  believe  Disestablishment  would  soon  prove  a  de 
loss  to  Dissenters,  and  not  a  gain. 

Disestablishment  would  not  give  more  liberty  to  D 
senters,  or  enable  them  to  do  anything  which  they  cam 
d*(5  now.  No  Christians  on  earth  have  such  a  plethora 
civil  and  religious  liberty  as  the  English  Nonconformi 
have  in  the  present  day.  They  have  far  more  freedom  th 
Churchmen !  They  can  build  chapels  anywhere,  prea 
anywhere,  gather  congregations  anywhere,  worship  in  a 
way,  and  serve  God  in  any  way,  no  man  forbidding  the 
while  Churchmen  are  checked  and  stopped  by  laws  a 
restrictions  at  every  turn.  What  in  the  world  could  t 
Dissenters  do  more,  if  the  Church  was  Disestablish 
to-morrow  ?  I  do  not  suppose  they  would  ask  leave 
shoot  or  hang  all  the  clergy,  to  "  improve  us  off  the  face 
the  earth,"  to  confiscate  the  cathedrals  and  parish  church' 
and  to  compel  the  millions  of  English  men  and  worn 
who  now  go  to  church  to  go  to  chapel,  on  pain  of  deal 
But,  short  of  this,  I  know  of  nothing  they  cannot  do  no 
They  have  free  liberty  to  make  all  Englishmen  Dissente 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  9 

they  can  ;  and  what  more  do  tliey  want  ?  The  disso- 
ion  of  the  union  of  Church  and  State  would  do 
5senters  no  good  at  all. 

[n  saying  all  this  I  would  not  be  misunderstood.  I 
claim  the  slightest  feeling  of  ill-will  towards  Dissen- 
s.  I  have  not  the  least  desire  to  interfere  with  them, 
respect  their  conscientious  convictions,  even  when  I 
.nk  them  mistaken.  I  am  thoroughly  thankful  for  any 
3d  they  do.  I  wish  to  let  them  alone,  and  to  allow  them 
work  and  worship  in  their  own  way.  I  only  express 
r  own  firm  conviction  that  Disestablishment  would  do 
3  Dissenters  no  good,  but  great  harm.  In  their  own 
oerest  they  had  better  be  quiet  and  let  us  alone. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  What  good  will  Disestablish- 
3nt  do  to  the  Church  of  England  "^  My  answer  is 
'o-fold.  It  will  do  it  a  little  good  and  a  gi'eat  deal  of 
brm. 

The  advocates  of  Disestablishment,  I  am  well  aware,  are 
nd  of  telling  us  that  their  movement  is  all  for  our  real 
Ivantage  !  They  mean  us  no  harm :  not  they !  They 
ve  the  Church  of  England,  but  dislike  its  connection 
ith  the  State.  The  Liberationist  agitators  are  in  reality 
ar  best  friends,  and  we  ought  to  be  exceedingly  obliged 
them  for  their  disinterested  labours  for  our  benefit ! 
iirave  words  these !  and  I  heartily  believe  that  some  of 
lose  who  use  them  mean  what  they  say.  But  they  utterly 
lil  to  convince  me.  At  the  risk  of  being  told  that  I  am 
nly  caring  for  "the  loaves  and  fishes,"  I  will  give  my 
easons. 

The  good  that  Disestablishment  would  do  the  Church 
f  !England  i^  very  small.  It  would  doubtless  give  us 
Qoire  liberty,  and  enable  us  to  effect  many  useful  reforms. 


10  WHAT   GOOD  WILL  IT  DO. 

It  would  bring  the  laity  forward  into  their  rightful  positi( 
from  sheer  necessity.  It  would  give  us  a  real  and  proper 
constituted  Convocation.  It  would  lead  to  an  increase 
Bishops,  a  division  of  dioceses,  and  a  reconstruction 
our  cathedral  bodies.  It  would  make  an  end  of  Crov 
jobs  in  the  choice  of  Bishops,  and  upset  the  whole  syste 
of  patronage.  It  would  destroy  all  sinecure  offices,  ai 
drive  all  drones  out  of  the  ecclesiastical  hive.  It  wou 
enable  us  to  make  our  worship  more  elastic,  and  ) 
ritual  better  suited  to  the  times.  All  these  are  ^ai 
unquestionably,  but  gains  whose  value  must  not  be  3xa 
gerated. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  harm  that  Disestablishment  wou 
do  to  the  Church  of  England  is  very  great  indeed.  It  wou 
sorely  impoverish  the  thousands  of  the  rural  clergy,  who 
income  depends  on  tithes,  and  would  make  it  iltimate 
necessary  to  diminish  their  number  by  at  least  one  half, 
consolidate  half  the  livings,  and  put  an  end  to  half  the  3€ 
vices.  The  voluntary  system  in  rural  districts  is  notorious 
an  entire  failure.  It  would  tax  the  energies  of  a  Disesta 
lished  Church  most  heavily  to  keep  up  an  Episcop 
ministry  outside  the  towns. — It  would  immensely  cripp 
the  power  of  the  Church  of  England  to  do  much  for  t) 
Evangelization  of  the  heathen  and  the  general  spread  of  ti 
Gospel.  "  Sustentation  funds  "  would  absorb  three-quarte 
of  the  Church's  attention;  and  we  should  find  it  hard  enouj 
to  maintain  our  position,  and  much  harder  to  extei 
our  lines. — Last,  but  not  least.  Disestablishment  wou 
almost  certainly  lead  to  divisions,  schisms,  and  possib 
disruption  in  the  Episcopal  body.  Of  course  this  goes  f 
nothing  with  some  Christians,  who  seem  to  think  ,th 
divisions  and  schisms  are  very  nice  things,  and  that  mull 
plication  of  sects  is  the  nearest  thing  to  heaven  up( 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO.  11 

th.  I  content  myself  with  remarking  that  Jesus  Christ 
3,  "  A  house  divided  against  itself  cannot  stand."  The 
'6  divisions  among  Christians  the  greater  the  weakness, 
the  smaller  the  influence  of  Christianity !  To  promote 
increase  of  division  among  English  Christians  is  the 
3st  way  to  help  the  Pope,  the  infidel,  and  the  devil. 

will  not  waste  words  on  those  who  tell  us  that  the 

jlish  clergy,  after  Disestablishment,  would  preach  better, 

write  better,  and  speak  better,  and  work  better  than 

jT  do  now,  and  that,  like  wild  elephants,  we  should  all 

made  tamer  and  more  useful  by  starving.     Anybody 

make  assertions  like  these ;  but  assertions  are  worth 

ling  when  they  are  contradicted  by  plain  facts.     I  do 

see  that  the  American  Episcopalians  over  the  water, 

•  have  no  connection  with  the  State,  are  a  bit  better 

ichers  and  workers  than  the  clergy  of  the  English 

iblishment.     Above  all,  I  do  not  see   that   English 

iconformist  ministers,  as  a  body,  are  at  all  superior,  in 

iching  or  working,  to  the  clergy  of  the  English  Estab- 

3d  Church. 

1  short,  the  assertion  of  the  advocates  of  Disestablish- 
it,  that  this  movement  would  do  the  Church  of 
land  good,  appears  to  me  utterly  destitute  of  foun- 
on.  An  ounce  of  facts  is  better  than  a  pound  of 
)ries.  Free  Churches  are  very  fine  things  to  talk  about, 
look  very  fine  at  a  distance ;  but  matters  are  not  always 
ne  inside.  The  good  that  Disestablishment  would  do 
he  Church  of  England  is  comparatively  small  and  very 
3rtain.  The  harm  that  it  would  do  is  very  certain  and 
^  great.  The  advocates  of  Disestablishm^t  may  say 
.t  they  please  about  wishing  to  do  us  good,  but  they 
5t  not  expect  us  to  believe  them.  They  had  better 
3  that  line  of  argument  altogether.     The  man  who 


12  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

tries  to  Disestablish  the   Church  of  England  is,  in 

judgment,  an  enemy  of  the  Church,  and  not  a  friend. 

-*■  >. 

III.  In  the  third  place,  what  good  will  Disestab 
ment  do  to  the  tithe-payers  ?  I  answer  that  ques 
very  decidedly.  It  wiU  not  do  them  the  slightest  | 
whatever. 

This  is  a  point  that  needs  clearing  up.  It  tou 
men's  pockets,  and  therefore  they  feel  interested  abou 
Moreover  there  is  an  amazing  amount  of  ignoranc 
men's  minds  about  it.  I  have  not  a  doubt  that  n 
farmers  and  small  occupiers  of  land  in  England  are  u 
the  belief  that  if  Disestablishment  came  they  would 
great  deal  better  off  than  they  are  now.  They  are  sec. 
rejoicing  in  the  vision  of  "  no  more  Established  Chu 
no  more  parsons  to  take  rent-charge !  no  more  tithes ! 
much  more  money  in  our  pockets ! " 

Now  I  am  sorry  to  dispel  this  pleasing  vision,  but  ] 
obliged  to  do  it  Facts  are  stubborn  things,  and  ca 
be  evaded.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  "  reckoning  wit 
your  host."  I  recommend  tithe-payers,  who  are  gene 
sensible,  hard-headed  fellows,  to  look  at  the  subject  oi 
sides. '  "  Wait  a  bit,  my  friends,"  I  would  say :  "  don' 
in  a  hurry.  Before  you  help  to  destroy  the  unio 
Church  and  State,  consider  whether  the  destruction 
help  your  pockets."  You  think  it  will  I  tell  you  it 
not.     Let  us  see. 

It  is  a  fact  that  for  centuries  nearly  all  land  in  Eng  , 
has  been  subject  to  the  payment  of  tithes.  For  hum 
of  years  land  has  been  bought  and  sold,  let  and  h  I 
rented  and  farmed,  at  more  or  less  annual  payr  I 
according  to  the  amount  of  tithe.  Tithe  has  be-  | 
regular  charge,  which  has  been   taken   into  accour  I 

■:-  i 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO.  1* 

ry  agreement  between  landlord  and  tenant  for  many 

erations.     He  that  pays  no  tithe  pays  more  rent,  and 

ihat  pays  tithe  pays  less  rent.    Every  farmer  of  average 

je  knows  all  this  perfectly  well.     To  tell  them  such 

igs,  to  use  a  homely  phrase,  is  like  telling  them  that 

and  two  make  four,  or  that  there  are  twenty  shillings 

i  pound.     It  is  a  simple  fact,  which  is  known  from 

end  of  England  to  another. 

^Vell,  if  the  Church  of  England  is  disestablished  and 

sndowed,  it  is  plain  that  tithe-payment  will  either  be 

e  away  or  not.     The  clergy  of  course  will  cease  to  re- 

^e  the  tithes.     But  will  Parliament  do  away  with  the 

ment  of  tithes  altogether  ?  or  will  Parliament  decree 

t  tithes  shall  be  paid  to  some  other  purpose  than  the 

sport  of  the  clergy?     One  coui'se  or  another  must  be 

•pled,  and  in  either  case  the  tithe-payers  would  not 

Q  a  single  farthing. 

jet  us  suppose,  on  one  hand,  that  tithes  are  completely 
dished,  and  cease  to  be  paid.  At  once  every  landlord 
England  would  raise  his  rents,  and  on  every  principle 
justice  and  equity  would  have  a  right  to  do  so.  A  very 
e  thing  it  would  be  for  the  landlords,  and  a  very  pretty 
lition  it  would  be  to  their  incomes !  But  the  tenants 
uld  gain  nothing  at  all!  What  they  saved  in  tithes 
;y  would  lose  in  rent. 

Let  us  suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  tithes  are  not 
Dlished  when  Disestablishment  comes,  but  applied  to 
ne  other  purpose  than  the  support  of  the  clergy.  Well, 
they  are  not  abolished,  there  is  an  end  of  the  whole 
estion.  Disestablishment  would  evidently  do  no  good, 
I  that  case,  to  the  pockets  of  tithe-payers.  They  would 
I  just  where  they  were  before ! 

I  defy  any  advocate  of  Disestablishment  to  show  any 
<  3ape  from  these  conclusions. — Some  tell  us  they  would 


14  WHAT  GOOD  WILI:  IT  DO. 

apply  the  tithes  to  the  payment  of  poor-rates  and  high'v 
rates.  Where  would  be  the  good  of  this  ?  At  once 
landlords  would  raise  their  rents.  Land  is  now  let 
hired  subject  to  pajnment  of  poor-rates  and  highway-K 
and  they  make  a  regular  deduction  from  the  rent.  1 
off  the  burden  of  poor-rates  and  highway-rates,  an( 
course  the  rent  would  be  raised  ! — Some  would-be  phi 
thropists  tell  us  they  would  apply  the  tithes  to  pu 
objects,  such  as  harbours  of  refuge,  public  parks  for  g 
towns,  museums,  lunatic  asylums,  and  the  like.  Pu 
objects,  indeed  !  What  benefit  would  rural  tithe-payers 
from  them  ?  What  would  a  Suffolk  tithe-payer  care 
harbours  at  Filey  or  Dover,  or  parks  and  museum; 
Wolverhampton  or  Oldham?  His  tithe-money  wc 
annually  go  away  for  objects  which  would  do  him  no  g 
at  all.  I  suspect  in  a  few  years  the  tithe-payers  wc 
get  sick  of  the  new  system,  and  would  wish  the  old  sysi 
could  be  set  up  again.  •• 

Let  us  add  to  all  this,  that  the  Episcopal  clerg}^! 
deprived  of  the  tithes  in  a  rural  parish,  would  of  coi 
cease  to  pay  any  rates,  except  for  his  house  and  garc 
At  present  the  clergyman  is  often  the  largest  rate-payei 
the  parish.  In  future  what  he  used  to  pay  must  be  m: 
up  by  the  other  rate-payers. — Let  us  remember  besi 
that  without  the  tithes  the  rural  clergyman  would  in  no 
cases  be  obliged  to  curtail  his  expenses,  and  to  spend  mi 
less  in  the  parish  than  he  does  now.  In  either  case 
tithe-payers  would  suffer,  and  the  parish  would  lose  m 
than  it  gained  by  Disestablishment.  There  is  an  old  fal 
which  tells  of  a  man  killing  his  goose  for  the  sake  of  ' 
golden  eggs  she  laid.  Of  course  he  found  that  he  ne 
got  another  egg  !  I  often  think  of  that  fable  when  I  h< 
of  rural  tithe-payers  clamouring  for  Disestablishment, 
any  rate  it  would  do  them  no  good.  * 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO.  15 

Y.  In  the  fourth  place,  what  good  would  Disestablish- 
nt  do  to  the  poor?  I  answer  that  inquiry  without 
itation.  It  would  not  only  do  them  no  good,  but  would 
them  great  harm. 

Chis  is  a  very  serious  question.  "  The  poor  shall  never 
se  out  of  the  land."  To  "remember  the  poor"  is  a  plain 
imand  of  Scripture.  AU  changes,  whether  political  or 
iesiastical,  which  tend  to  injure  the  poor,  are,  on  the 
y  face  of  them,  objectionable.  This  is  the  heaviest 
ictment  I  bring  against  the  whole  Disestablishment 
cement.  It  would  inflict  grievous  damage,  both  tem- 
al  and  spiritual,  on  the  agricultural  poor,  the  very  poor 
)  of  all  classes  in  England  deserve  most  consideration. 
')isestablishment  would  injure  the  poor  temporally.  I 
llenge  any  man  to  deny  that  in  thousands  of  rural 
ishes  throughout  England  the  clergyman  is  the  means 
doing  an  immense  amount  of  temporal  good  to  the 
r.  Where  is  the  well-ordered  parish  in  which  the 
gyman's  house  is  not  the  mainspring  of  a  large  ma- 
lery  of  charity  to  men's  bodies  ? — Who  does  not  know 
b  it  is  the  clergyman  who  in  every  well-ordered  parish 
aturally  expected  to  take  the  lead  about  clothing-clubs, 
3-clubs,  boot-clubs,  coal-clubs,  soup-clubs,  blanket-clubs, 
a  hundred  other  means  of  helping  the  poor  ? — Who 
3  not  know  that  in  every  well-ordered  parish  the  clergy- 
1  is  ready  to  be  the  unpaid  friend  of  every  one  who 
ds  a  friend,  whether  in  the  way  of  money,  or  advice, 
jympathy, — and  the  friend  of  poor  dissenters  as  well 
)oor  church-goers  ? — I  defy  any  one  to  deny  this.  The 
ntity  of  temporal  good  which  the  agricultural  poor 
ive  from  the  clergy  at  present,  is  something,  I  suspect, 
■vhich  dwellers  in  towns,  and  Liberationist  orators  on 
|1  forms,  have  not  the  slightest  idea.     It  is  good  which 


16  WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO. 

is  done  quietly,  and  unostentatiously,  without  parade 
blowing  of  trumpets.  But  it  is  done ;  and  the  last  d 
alone  will  declare  the  full  extent  of  it. 

Well,  there  will  be  an  end  of  a  great  deal  of  this 
Disestablishment  comes.  Stripped  of  more  than  half  ] 
professional  income,  reduced  to  be  the  minister  of  t 
Episcopalians  alone  in  his  parish,  the  rural  clergyman  'w 
of  course  cease  to  do  what  he  once  did  for  the  poor, 
most  cases  he  would  not  be  able  to  do  much,  if  he  b 
the  will.  He  must  rigidly  confine  himself  to  the  memb 
of  his  own  congregation.  If  any  man  thinks  this  woi 
be  a  nice  change,  and  an  advantage  to  the  rural  parish 
I  beg  leave  to  differ  from  him  entirely.  The  destructi 
of  the  Establishment  would  inflict  immense  tempo 
damage  on  the  poor. 

Disestablishment  would  do  great  spiritual  harm 
the  poor.  Stripped  of  a  large  part  of  her  present  endc 
ments,  the  Church  of  England  would  be  able  to  do  far  1 
than  she  now  does  for  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdc 
whether  at  home  or  abroad.  Aggressive  measures 
the  evangelization  of  mining  and  manufacturing  popu 
tions,  the  building  of  new  churches  and  schools,  the  forr 
tion  of  new  districts  in  poor  neighbourhoods, — all  th 
things  would  either  be  entirely  stopped  or  greatly  curtail 
With  a  rural  clergy  deprived  of  more  than  half  their 
come,  with  town  congregations  obliged  to  give  liberally 
support  the  Church  in  the  country,  the  Church's  po\ 
of  doing  good  to  souls  would  be  painfully  lessened  2 
diminished.  To  sustain  her  without  extending,  to  keep  1 
alive  without  increasing,  to  live  without  much  grow 
would  require  the  utmost  exertions  of  her  children.  N( 
would  suffer  so  much  from  this  state  of  things  as  the  p( 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  voluntary  system,  on  wh 


WHAT   GOOD   WILL    IT   DO.  17 

I  great  measure  the  Church  would  be  thrown,  after  Dis- 

I  iblishment,  is  a  total  and  entire  failure.     Dr.  Parker, 

1  eminent  Nonconformist  minister,  calls  it ''  a  miserable 

i  ure."     It  is  a  failure  in  the  United  States  of  America, 

i  spite  of  all  the  wealth  and  energy  of  the  Americans. 

3re  are  myriads  of  poor  in  New  York  and  in  the  back- 

)ds  who  are  just  like  sheep  without  a  shepherd. — It  is  a 

I  ure  in  England  among  the  Nonconformists  at  this  day. 

I  th  all  their  many  privileges  and  advantages,  they  can 

ther  pay  their  ministers  sufficiently  in  rural  districts,  nor 

vide  sufficient  chapels  for  poor  neighbourhoods.    Above 

they  cannot  provide  day-schools  for  their  own  poor 

.dren,  and  are  obliged  to  confess  it !     At  the  eleventh 

ir  they  have   supported   an  "Education  Act,"  which 

ers  schools  to  be  built  by  a  compulsory  rate,  and  by 

loing  they  have  practically  admitted  that  the  voluntary 

:em  has  thoroughly  broken  down. 

cannot  get  over  facts  like  these.     I  advise  every  poor 

a  in  England  who  is  urged  to  sign  a  petition  for  Dis- 

iblishment,  to  think  twice  before  he  signs,  and  to  ask 

'hat  good  will  it  do  to  the  poor?"     Disestablish  the 

arch  of  England,  and  the  very  first  to  suffer  from  it 

M  be  the  poor.     In  the  interests  of  the  poor,  if  there 

e  no  other  reasons,  I  see  no  good,  but  immense  evil  in 

establishment. 

^.  In  the  fifth  place,  what  good  would  Disestablish- 
it  do  to  the  cause  of  peace  and  charity  "^  I  shall 
wer  that  question  very  decidedly.      It  would  do  no 

|i  d  at  all. 

I  ?he  quantity  of  stuff,  and  nonsense,  and  silly  romantic 

^  bish,  which  is  talked  on  this  point,  is  very  curious. 

I-  3re  are  many  innocent -minded  people,  I  believe,  both 

B 


18  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

Cliurclimen  and  Dissenters,  who  really  tliink  that,  if  1 
union  of  Church  and  State  were  dissolved,  English  Chi 
tians  would  get  on  far  more  happily  and  comfortably  tb 
they  do  now.  There  would  be  no  more  jealousies, 
envyings,  or  rivalries,  or  wranglings,  or  squabblings, 
quarrelling,  or  party  spirit !  Ephraim  would  no  longer  -^ 
Judah,  nor  Judah  Ephraim !  The  whole  Christian  be 
in  Great  Britain  would  become  a  great  Evangelical  alliai 
and  happy  family !  Baptists,  and  Independents,  and  Pi 
byterians,  and  Episcopalians,  would  fraternize  lovin^ 
and  exchange  pulpits !  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  preach 
St.  Paul's,  and  the  Bishop  of  London  in  the  Metropoli 
Tabernacle!  Such  are  the  visions  with  which  mi 
worthy  Christian  laymen  amuse  themselves,  and  e^ 
laymen  who  do  not  approve  of  Disestablishment.  Tl 
regard  it  as  a  painful  operation,  like  drawing  a  tooth,  i. 
they  are  very  sorry  it  should  ever  be  performed.  But 
operation  once  over,  and  the  tooth  once  out,  they  rei 
believe  we  shall  all  be  much  happier  and  better  frie: 
for  it.  Like  little  children  after  a  quarrel,  we  should  j 
"  kiss  and  be  friends." 

Now  I  believe  nothing  whatever  of  the  kind.  I  am 
for  unity,  wherever  it  can  be  obtained,  and  I  wo 
willingly  make  large  sacrifices  in  order  to  obtain  it. 
think  the  present  divided  state  of  English  Christian 
disgrace  to  religion.  I  disclaim  the  slightest  symypa 
with  those  who  think  that  you  cannot  have  too  m: 
sects  and  denominations,  and  that  it  does  not  matter  a 
where  you  worship  or  what  you  hear  preached.  I  wan 
see  more  unity,  and  I  should  like  to  see  more  uniform 
But,  for  all  this,  I  have  not  the  slightest  faith  in  ui 
being  promoted  by  force  and  plunder  and  spoliation ; 
levelling  down.      Charity  and  peace  among  Christi 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  19 

11   never   be   brought   about  by  violence.      Peace  be- 

een   Episcopalians  and   Dissenters  is    about  the    last 

inof  which  will  result  from  Disestablishment.     It  will 

ike  a  breach  that  will  never  be  built  up. 

Let  us  just  take  a  practical  common-sense  view  of  the 

itter  in  hand.     Let  us  suppose  that  Mr.  Miall  and  his 

napanions,  by  the  aid  of  the  English  Dissenters,  succeed 

carrying  out  the   Disestablishment  of  the  Church  of 

Lgland.     Let  us   suppose  that  some  reckless  House  of 

mmons,  and  some  popularity-hunting  Prime  Minister, 

^e  way  at  length  to  Mr.  MialFs  importunity,  and  pass 

Disestablishing  Act  for  the  Church  of  England,   like 

it  which  was  passed  for  the  Church  of  Ireland.     Such 

event  could  only  take  place,  I  believe,  after  years  of 

schievous  strife  and   agitation,  and  after  hundreds  of 

3n  conflicts  between  Churchmen  and   chapel-goers  all 

ir  the  land.     Will  any  man   in  his   sober  senses  tell 

that  this  miserable  long-drawn  strife  would  promote 

ity?     Would  it  not  rather  leave  behind  it  festering 

es  that  would  never  be  healed  ?     Of  course  it  would  ! 

would  make  unity  between  English  Episcopalians  and 

ir  adversaries  an  impossibility  for  several  generations. 

costly   China  plate  would    be   broken.      It   might 

haps  be  riveted,  but  it  could  never  be  mended  again. 

But  this  is  not  all.    Suppose  that  the  Disestablishing  Act 

ds  to  deprive  the  rural  clergy,  who  depend  on  tithes, 

half  their  incomes,  as   it   certainly  would.     Suppose 

t  thousands  of  quiet  country  rectors   and  vicars  are 

denly  obliged  to  reduce  their   expenditure,  to  alter 

ir  style  of  living,  to  take  away  their  boys  from  good 

cols,  to  give  their  girls  an  inferior  education,  and  t® 

rifice  a  great  many  comforts;   and  all  this  in  conse- 

unce  of  the  attacks  of  Mr.  Miall  and  the  Dissenters. 


20  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

Suppose  all  this  to  take  place.  Will  any  man  pretej 
to  say  that  there  could  possibly  be  much  harmony  ai 
friendly  feeling  between  Churchmen  and  chapel-goers 
such  a  condition  of  things  ?  It  is  absurd  to  expect, 
For  centuries  there  would  be  a  gulf  between  Episcopalia 
and  non-Episcopalians  in  England,  which  nothing  woi 
fill  up.     Disestablishment  would  be  the  grave  of  unity. 

"  It  ought  not  to  be  so," — some  innocent-minded  m 
may  say. — "The  union  of  Church  and  State  is  not  essent 
to  Christianity.     Men  may  surely  differ  about  it  and  ke 
friends.     When  the  battle  is  over,  why  not  forgive  a 
forget  ? " — What  ought  to  be,  is  a  vague  phrase,  which  I  v 
not  stop  to  discuss.    What  would  be,  is  another  questic 
and  from  my  observation  of  human  nature  I  have  a  V( 
decided   opinion  about  it.     Believers  who  hold  differc 
views  on  non-essential  points  in  religion  can  get  on  v* 
comfortably  so  long  as  they  are  tolerant,  and  do  not  assa 
each  other,  and  tread  on   one  another's  toes.     But  ' 
moment  A  begins  to  say  to  B,  "  I  shall  try  to  half-r 
your  Church,  and  to  get  half  your  income  taken  awo 
it  is  nonsense  to  expect  any  more  friendship  bet  wear 
and  B  ! — The  Bible  commands  us  to  "  forgive  our  enem 
to  do  good  to  them  that  hate  us,  and  to  pray  for  those  t 
despitefully  use  us."     But  the  Bible  nowhere  says  t 
we  are  to  regard  our  enemies  as  beloved  brothers  2 
friends      The  Bible  says,  "  If  any  man  take  thy  coat, 
him  take  thy  cloak  also."     But  the  Bible  nowhere  sj  i 
that  we  are  to  regard  the  man  who  has  violently  tal 
our  coats  and  cloaks  as   an  honest  man,  and  to  sh{ 
hands  with  him  as  a  dear  friend. 

For  my  own  part,  I  can  truly  say  that  for  thirty  yc 
I  have  laboured  hard  to  promote  unity  and  good  feel 
between  Churchmen  and  Nonconformists.     I  have  g 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  21 

far  in  this  direction  that  I  have  often  been  blamed, 

iiied,  and  slandered  by  my  brother  Churchmen,  as  half 

Dissenter.     I  have  gone  on  steadily  nevertheless,  and 

ve  always  said  that  Dissenters  deserve  much  kindness 

tl  consideration,  because  the  Church's  neglect  has  made 

em  what  they  are.     But  if  Dissenters  will  not  let  the 

mrch  alone,  and  will  not  rest  till  they  have  destroyed 

e  Establishment,  I  give  up  all  hopes  of  unity.     You 

nnot  get  on  comfortably  with  men  who  have  deliberately 

:iven  to  upset  your  Church,  and  to  take  away  half  your 

come  ! — Go-operation  in   future  would   be   almost  im- 

'Ssible.    The  Bible  Society  and  the  London  City  Mission 

)uld  suffer  heavily.     From  the  day  that  the  Church  of 

agland  is  disestablished  there  will  be  an  end  of  much 

lity  between  Episcopalians  and  their  dissenting  adver- 

ries.     There  is  little  enough  now,  and  after  Disestablish- 

ent   there   will    be   much   less.      It   is    my   deliberate 

dgment  that  those  who  labour  to  destroy  the  union  of 

lurch  and  State  in  England,  under  the  vain  idea  of 

itting  all  Churches  and  sects  on  a  dead  level,  are  making 

lity  and  good  feeling  between  Church  and  chapel  im- 

)ssible  for  two  hundred  years. 

VI.  In  the  last  place  what  good  would  Disestablishment 
)  to  the  State.  My  answer  is  short  and  decided.  It 
ould  do  it  no  good,  but  very  great  harm. 

This  question  is  far  too  wide  and  complicated  to  be 
Illy  discussed  in  a  tract.  But  I  shall  try  to  throw  a  little 
^ht  on  it.  If  I  can  only  show  that  the  dissolution  of 
le  union  of  Church  and  State  involves  far  more  serious 
)nsequences  than  most  of  its  advocates  dream  of,  I 
lall  be  content.  Such  clap-trap  phrases  as  "  non-inter- 
rencewith  spiritual  matters," — "unsectarian  legislation," 


22  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

— "allowing  no  special  privilege  to  any  denomination," 
"adopting  tlie  principles  of  free  trade  in  religion," 
"  leaving  all  Churches  and  sects  to  themselves/' — "  taki 
no  cognizance  of  any  but  secular  matters," — all  these  { 
fine  high-sounding  expressions,  and  look  very  pretty 
theory.  But  the  moment  you  begin  to  work  them  out 
practice,  you  find  grave  objections  rising  up  in  your  w; 
objections  that  cannot  be  got  over. 

To  begin  with.  Scripture  teaches  plainly  that  God  ni 
everything  in  this  world,  that  He  deals  with  nations  as  th 
deal  with  Him,  that  national  prosperity  and  national  decli 
are  ordered  by  Him,  that  wars,  pestilences  and  famin 
are  part  of  His  providential  government  of  the  world, 
and  that  without  His  blessing  no  nation  can  prosp 
Now  do  we  believe  all  this  or  not  ?  If  we  do  believe 
it  is  simply  absurd  to  say  that  Governments  have  nothi 
to  do  with  religion,  and  that  they  may  safely  ignore  G< 
That  often  quoted  text,  "My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  worl 
has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  matter  in  hand.  WL 
our  Lord  spoke  these  words  He  simply  meant  to  tea 
Pilate  that  His  kingdom  was  not  a  secular  kingdom,  Ukt 
Roman  Emperor's,  and  that  it  was  not  maintained 
propagated,  like  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  by  the  swo: 
But,  to  say  that  our  Lord  meant  that  "  Governments  W( 
never  to  support  or  countenance  religion,"  is  a  preposterc 
and  unwarrantable  interpretation  of  Script  are.  Whetl 
men  like  to  see  it  or  not,  I  believe  it  is  the  first  duty 
a  State  to  honour  and  recognize  God.  The  governme 
that  refuses  to  do  this,  in  order  to  save  itself  troul 
and  to  avoid  favouring  one  Church  more  than  another,  m 
think  it  is  doing  a  very  "  smart "  and  politic  thing.  Bu 
believe  its  line  of  procedure  is  ofiensive  to  the  Most  Hi^ 
atid  eminently  calculated  to  draw  down  His  displeasure, 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  23 

Again,  reason  itself  points  out  that  the  moral  standard 

(  a  nation's  subjects,  is  the  grand  secret  of  its  prosperity. 

( .Id  mines,  and  manufactures,  and  scientific  discoveries, 

J  d  eloquent  speeches,  and  commercial  activity,  and  demo- 

( itic  institutions,  are  not  enough  to  make  or  to  keep 

:  tions  great.    Tyre,  and  Sidon,  and  Carthage,  and  Athens, 

d  Rome,  and  Venice,  and  Spain,  and  Portugal,  had  plenty 

such  possessions  as  these,  and  yet  fell  into  decay.     The 

lews  of  a  nation's  strength  are,  truthfulness,  honesty, 

briety,  purity,  temperance,  economy,  diligence,  brotherly 

ndness,  charity  among  its  inhabitants.     Let  those  deny 

is  who  dare. — And  will  any  man  say  that  there  is  any 

rcr  way  of  producing  these  characteristics  in  a  people 

an  by  encouraging,  and  fostering,  and  spreading,  and 

aching  pure  Scriptural  Christianity?      The  man  who 

ys  there  is  must  be  an  infidel. — Then,  if  these  things  are 

,  the  first  duty  of  a  State  ought  to  be  to  encourage  and 

juntenance  religion  among  its  subjects  in  every  possible 

ay.    Does  a  State  want  its  subjects  to  be  provident,  truth- 

d,  diligent, temperate,  honest,  moral,  and  charitable  ?  Does 

or  does  it  not  ?  If  it  does  it  ought  to  support  religion.  To 

anish  vice  and  yet  not  cherish  virtue, — to  spend  public 

loney  on  building  jails  and  yet  not  encourage  churches, 

1,  to  say  the  least,  an  absurdly  inconsistent  policy.     The 

lore  true  religion  the  better  subjects !     The  more  good 

abjects  the   more   prosperity !     The  government  which 

;^ores  religion,  and  coolly  declares  that  it  does  not  care 

whether  its  subjects  are  Christians  or  not,  is  guilty  of  an 

ct  of  suicidal  folly.     Ir religion,  even  in  a  temporal  point 

f  view,  is  the  worst  enemy  of  a  nation. 

Once  more,  the  practical  consequences  which  logically 
esult  from  carrying  out  the  principle  of  Disestablishment, 
ire  so  monstrous  and  appalling,  that  one  can  hardly  believe 


24  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

that  people  who  clamour  for  disconnecting  Church  a 
State,  have  ever  fully  considered  them.     Let  us  look 
them.     Grant  that  the  Church  is  Disestablished,  and  tl 
the  English  Government  resolves  to  have  nothing  more 
do  with  religion,  and  to  leave  it  to  the  voluntary  syste 
In  order  to  carry  out  this  principle  consistently,  the  Si 
cession  Acts  must  then  be  repealed,  and  our  Sovereig 
might  be  Papists  !    Our  Kings  and  Queens,  if  we  had  a 
more,  would  be  crowned  without  any  religious  servi 
Our  Parliaments  would  carry  on  their  proceedings  withe 
prayer.     Our  regiments  and  men  of  war  would  no  lon^ 
have  chaplains.     Our  prisons  and  workhouses  would  ha 
no  chaplains.     Even  the  religious  observance  of  Sund  i 
would  be  in  danger. — "  Nonsense  ! "  some  may  say.     " 
course  we  do  not  want  such  a  state  of  things.     We  or 
want  to  dissolve  the  union  between  the  State  and  t 
Church  of  England."    People  may  cry  "  Nonsense,"  if  th 
like,  but  they  will  never  prove  that  the  state  of  things 
have  just  described  will  not  be  the  logical  consequence 
Disestablishment,  if  followed  out  to  its  legitimate  co 
elusions.     After  Disestablishment,  the  State,  if  it  a( 
consistently,  must  either  leave  the  souls  of  soldiers,  sailo 
prison  and  workhouse  inmates  entirely  alone,  or  else  > 
must  get  over  the  difficulty  by  putting  up  chaplaincies 
public  tender,  and  jobbing  them  out  to  the  lowest  bidd( 
whether  he  be  Episcopalian,  Presbyterian,  Congregatio 
alist,  Socinian,  or  Papist !     There  is  no  other  course  op< 
to  us.     If  the  rulers  of  the  State,  after  Disestablishmei 
appoint  any  particular  chaplains  to  ships,  regiments,  wor 
houses,  and  jails,  they  are  at  once  open  to  the  charge 
showing  favour  to  one  denomination  more  than  anoth( 
Of  course  Mr.  Miall  and  his  companions  will  not  let  tl 
State  do  this ! 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO.  iJ 

The  example  of  the  United  States  and  the  Colonies  is 
t  the  slightest  reply  to  what  I  am  saying.  The  Americans 

not  entirely  separate  religion  and  the  State.  The 
nerican  Congress,  no  donbt,  has  a  chaplain,  and  is  opened 
th  prayer.  The  army  and  navy,  the  prisons  and  refor- 
itories  of  America  have  chaplains,  I  have  no  doubt, 
it  even  then  I  can  find  no  guarantee  that  these  chaplains 
ly  not  be  Sociriians  or  Papists  ! — And  after  all,  the  case 
America  only  shows  that  our  shrewd  cousins,  unlike 
\  Miall,  see  the  utter  uselessness  of  trying  to  carry  out 
3  principles  of  the  Liberationist  Society  to  their  logical 
;ults.  In  practice  even  a  new  country  like  America,  not 
tered  by  old  precedents,  finds  it  impossible  entirely  to 
lore  God.  I  cannot  quite  persuade  myself  that  what 
Qericans  find  impossible  will  ever  be  attempted  in 
igland.  When  Mr.  Miall  and  his  party  have  upset  the 
ion  of  Church  and  State,  they  will  have  to  connive  at 
'Ue  inconsistencies ! 

What  may  be  before  us  no  man  can  tell.  But  in  an  age 
e  our  own, — an  age  of  restlessness, — an  age  of  liberality, 
sely  so  called, — an  age  of  popularity  hunting, — an  age 
sensationalism  and  surprises, — an  age  of  idolatry  of  the 
)b, — an  age  of  contempt  for  old  things,  riierely  because 
3y  are  old, — an  age  of  spasmodic  feverish  zeal  for  new 
ings,  merely  because  they  are  new, — an  age  of  change 
•  the  sake  of  change, — an  age  of  laziness  and  apathy 
long  the  defenders  of  the  old  things,  and  of  earnestness 
d  perseverance  among  the  advocates  of  the  new, — in 
3h  an  age  I  shall  never  be  surprised  if  Disestablishment 
•lies.     When  it  does  come,  I  believe  it  will  inflict  such 

amount  of  damage  on  the  State,  as  the  mind, of  man 
'1  hardly  conceive.  I  declare  I  had  far  rather  see  the 
oiscopal  Establishment  upset,  and  the  Baptists  or  Inde- 


26  WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO. 

pendents  made  the  Established  Church  of  England,  tb 
see  the  State  ceasing  to  recognize  God.  I  had  far  rati 
see  our  next  Sovereign  crowned  in  Westminster  Abbey 
.  Mr.  Spurgeon,  or  Mr.  Binney,  or  Dr.  Gumming,  with 
extempore  prayer,  and  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbu 
standing  as  a  private  individual  in  the  crowd,  than  see  o 
Government  turning  its  back  on  Christianity  altogeth 

When  I  read  English  history,  I  see  plainly  that  t 
real  greatness  of  this  country  dates  from  the  Protesta 
Reformation.  I  see  that  it  was  under  Sovereigns  w 
ordered  the  Bible  to  be  translated  and  circulated — a 
under  Parliaments  which  ratified  the  Thirty-nine  Articl 
and  took  great  practical  interest  in  religion,  that  our  r 
tion  took  its  first  great  start  in  its  career  of  freedom,  Aveal 
and  power.  I  see  that  the  influence  of  England  ■v\ 
seldom  more  felt  in  Europe  than  it  was  in  the  days 
Oliver  Cromwell,  when  that  great  though  misguided  m 
threw  the  shield  of  England  over  persecuted  Protestai 
in  Savoy,  and  even  awed  the  Pope  by  interfering 
religious  matters.  Seeing  all  this,  I  will  never  belie 
that  Disestablishment  would  do  no  harm  to  the  State.  ( 
the  contrary,  I  believe  it  would  bring  down  God's  heavic 
judgments  on  this  realm.  The  Act  of  Parliament  whi 
dissolved  Church  and  State  would  do  great  damage 
the  Church ;  but  it  would  be  as  nothing  compared  to  t 
injury  it  would  ultimately  inflict  on  the  State. 

In  what  manner  God  would  punish  England,  if  Engli 
Governments  cast  off  all  connection  with  religion,  I  canr 
tell.  Whether  He  would  punish  us  by  some  sudden  blc 
such  as  defeat  in  war,  and  the  occupation  of  our  territo 
by  a  foreign  power, — whether  He  would  waste  us  aw 
gradually  and  slowly  by  placing  a  worm  at  the  roots 
our  commercial   prosperity, — whether   He   would  bre; 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  27 

to  pieces  by  letting  fools  rule  over  us  and  allowing 
rliaments  to  obey  them,  and  permitting  us  like  the 

dianites  to  destroy  one  another, — whether  He  would 
in  us  by  sending  a  dearth  of  wise  Statesmen  in  the 
per  ranks,  and  giving  the  reins  of  power  to  commu- 
;ts,  socialists,  and  mob-leaders, — all  these  are  points 
lich  I  have  no  prophetical  eye  to  see,  and  I  do  not 
3tend  to  determine.  God's  sorest  judgments,  the  au- 
nts said,  "  are  like  mill-stones, — they  grind  very  slowly 
t  they  grind  very  fine." — The  thing  that  I  fear  most 

my  country  is  gradual,  insensible  dry-rot  and  decay. 
it  of  one  thing  I  am  very  sure, — the  State  that  begins 

sowing  the  seed  of  national  neglect  of  God,  will  sooner 

later  reap  a  harvest  of  national  disaster  and  national 
in.  If  Disestablishment  comes,  it  will  do  no  hurt  to  the 
le  Church  of  Christ,  the  body  of  real  believers :  that  is 
yond  the  power  of  man  to  harm.  It  will  do  little  com- 
rative  injury  to  the  visible  Episcopal  Church  of  Eng- 
id:  though  impoverished  and  crippled  in  many  ways 
will  still  live  and  not  die.  But  it  will  do  boundless 
rm  to  the  State,  and  in  the  end  will  prove  the  ruin  of 

our  greatness. 

'I  have  now  answered  the  question  which  heads  this 
ict  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  I  have  done  it  honestly 
d  conscientiously,  and  have  carefully  avoided  any  ex- 
geration.  It  only  remains  for  me  to  wind  up  the  whole 
bject  by  a  few  words  of  friendly  advice  to  the  various 
isses  into  whose  hands  this  tract  may  fall. 
(1)  Some  of  my  readers  may  perhaps  be  men  who  make 
)  profession  whatever  in  religion,  and  care  neither  for 
urch  nor  chapel.  I  fear  there  are  many  such  men  in 
e  land,  and  I  suppose  there  always  will  be.     Pilate,  wha 


28  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

asked  sneeringly,  " What  is  truth?"  Gallic  who  thoug 
Christianity  was  only  a  "matter  of  words  and  names 
Festus  who  thought  it  a  "  superstition  concerning  o 
Jesus/' — all  these  have  never  wanted  successors.  Men 
this  sort,  of  course,  do  not  care  a  jot  whether  the  Chur 
of  England  is  disestablished  or  not. — "  It  is  all  the  same 
them.  Religion  is  not  a  thing  in  their  way." — Yet  even 
these  men  I  offer  a  word  of  counsel. 

Are  you  quite  sure  that  it  would  be  a  good  thing 
have  less  religion  in  England  than  there  is  now? 
course  if  the  Church  is  disestablished  and  impoverish 
there  will  be  less.  Now  are  you  quite  sure  you  will  li 
this  ?  Do  you  wish  your  wife,  your  children,  your  servan 
your  clerks,  your  tenants,  your  labourers,  your  partners 
business,  to  have  less  religion  and  to  become  more  godl( 
than  they  are  now?  I  should  like  that  question  to 
answered. 

If  you  do  not  wish  this  state  of  things  to  arise,  I  advi 
you  to  think  twice  before  you  allow  the  English  Chur 
Establishment  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  tithes  and  la 
to  be  taken  away.  Say  what  men  please,  this  must  ha 
the  effect  of  weakening  the  Church,  lessening  the  numl 
of  her  clergy,  and  reducing  the  whole  quantity  of  religi 
in  the  country  to  a  lower  level.  A  tree  once  felled  and  c 
down  can  never  be  put  up  again,  and  its  shade  and  beau 
may  be  regretted  in  vain.  If  you  stand  by  and  look  on  wi 
folded  arms,  careless  and  unconcern edj  while  men  are  sawi: 
in  two  the  connection  of  Church  and  State,  you  may  li 
to  find  out  too  late  that  you  committed  a  fatal  mistake. 

(2)  Some  of  my  readers  may  be  zealous  Churchme 
who  really  believe  it  would  be  a  good  thing  if  the  Chur 
was  disestablished.     There  are  many  men  of  this  class 
England,  some  very  "high,"  and  some  very  "low"  in  opini( 


<  •( 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  29 

lO  are  continually  building  castles  in  the  air  about  the 

hurch  of  the  future."     They  have  pleasing  visions  of  a 

\  e,  rich,  and   powerful   Church,  no  longer  fettered   by 

(  mection  with  the  State,  guided  by  perfect  Bishops,  no 

]  iger  interfered  with  by  naughty  Parliaments  and  wicked 

(  urts  of  Law,  possessing  perfect  unity,  and  able  to  do  a 

I  ndred  things  which  it  cannot  do  now.    To  these  amiable 

{ d  well-meaning  enthusiasts  I  offer  a  word  of  counsel. 

I  will  ask  them  to  remember  two  old  proverbs.     One 

i  rs,  "All  is  not  gold  that  glitters."   The  other  says,  "  Look 

1  fore  you  leap."     A  free  Church  is  a  fine  thing  to  talk 

{ out ;  but  it  is  not  always  so  free  as  it  appears.    There  are 

_( ler  chains,  and  screw-presses,  beside  those  of  Parliament 

d  the  Royal  supremacy.     The  frogs  in  the  fable  found 

lit  with  "  King  Log,"  because  he  lay  still  like  a  huge  inert 

iss,  and  did  nothing  at  all.     But  they  soon  found  that 

sCing  Stork  "  was  much  worse. — Appeals  to  Courts  of  Law 

ill  not  be  prevented  by  Disestablishment.  So  long  as  there 

8  rights  and  wrongs,  and  questions  of  place  and  salary, 

long  the  English  Courts  of  Law  will  be  open  to  Epis- 

ipalians  who  want  redress. — A  diminution  of  ministerial 

comes  is  a  very  serious  matter,  and  it  will  certainly 

company  Disestablishment  in  rural  parishes,  to  the  great 

image  of  the  Church's  power.    Let  no  Churchman  dream 

at  there  will  ever  be  Disestablishment  without  disen- 

>wment. — Last,  but  not  least,  unity  will  not  be  obtained 

If  dissolving  the  connection  of  Church  and  State.    There 

'  ill  be  divisions  of  opinion  among  English  Episcopalians 

ter  Disestablishment,  and  perhaps  far  more  serious  ones 

lan  there   ever  were  before.     Look   at  the  American 

piscopalian  Church  across  the  Atlantic.     They  have  no 

mnection  with  the  State.     But  they  have  not  attained 

srfect  unity. 


30  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

In  short,  I  advise  my  zealous  brethren  in  the  Church 
England,  who  are  hungering  and  thirsting  for  DisestabHs 
ment,  to  be  content  with  such  things  as  they  have,  to  ] 
well  alone,  and  to  do  nothing  rashly.  It  is  not  a  frier 
but  an  enemy,  who  is  whispering  to  them,  "  Break  off  t 
union  of  Church  and  State, — cast  thyself  down."  Let  the 
ask  the  wisest  Episcopalians  in  the  United  States  and 
the  Colonies  whether  they  advise  Disestablishment,  a: 
think  it  desirable  !  Let  them  beware,  lest  they  learn  t 
late,  by  painful  experience,  the  wisdom  contained  in  t 
famous  epitaph — ''  I  was  well :  I  would  be  better :  I  to- 
physic,  and  here  I  am."  I  always  think  of  that  epita] 
when  I  hear  of  an  English  Churchman  expressing  a  wi 
for  Disestablishment. 

(3)  Some  of  my  readers  perhaps  are  honest  Dissente'. 
who  have  been  told  by  the  itinerant  advocates  of  t" 
Liberationist  Society,  that  it  is  a  Christian  duty 
endeavour  to  disestablish  the  Church  of  England.  Their  ea 
have  been  filled  with  monstrous  stories  about  the  Churc 
until  they  regard  her  as  a  huge  public  nuisance  whi( 
ought  to  be  swept  away.  To  them  also  I  tender  a  fe 
words  of  friendly  advice. 

I  may  fairly  ask  to  be  heard  by  Dissenters.  I  am,  ai 
always  have  been,  what  is  called  a  "  low  Churchman." 
have  never  in  my  life  interfered  with  Dissenters,  or  tum( 
a  cold  shoulder  upon  them.  I  have  long  supported  tl 
Bible  Society  and  City  Mission,  and  have  spoken  by  the  sic 
of  Dissenting  ministers  on  their  platforms.  I  have  nev< 
refused  to  acknowledge  non-episcopal  services.  I  ha^ 
never  denied  that  Dissenters  have  done  and  are  doir 
much  good  to  souls.  I  have  never  vilified  them  or  d« 
nounced  them  as  schismatics.  To  none  of  these  thin^ 
will  I  plead  guilty.     When  therefore  I  offer  a  word  ( 


WHAT   GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  81 

vice  to  Dissenters,  I  may  ask  to  be  patiently  heard. 
I  advise  them,  for  one  thing,  to  use  their  own  good 
ase,  and  not  to  believe  all  the  gross  misstatements  that 
ne  Liberationists  are  continually  making  about  the 
lurch  of  England.  It  is  utterly  untrue  that  Disestablish- 
3nt  would  enable  the  State  to  save  twenty-six  millions 

annual  taxes.  The  whole  endowments  of  the  Church 
3  not  five  millions  a  year ! — It  is  utterly  untrue  that  the 
shops  are  rolling  in  wealth,  and  the  Clergy  are  overpaid, 
le  Bishops  have  so  many  demands  on  their  purses  that 
3y  can  hardly  make  both  ends  meet,  and  the  clergy,  if 
:omes  were  divided, have  not  three  hundred  a  year  a  piece ! 
It  is  utterly  untrue  that  the  Clergy  are  paid  by  the  State, 
that  the  people  are  taxed  to  pay  the  Clergy :  the  State 
ver  gave  the  Church  any  tithes  or  lands  at  all ! — It  is 
terly  untrue  that  the  Bishops  and  Clergy  are  "  State-made 
rsons,"  seeing  that  the  State  cannot  ordain  any  minister, 
d  the  Crown  can  only  nominate  as  Bishops,  men  who  are 
•eady  ordained. — It  is  utterly  untrue  that  the  Church 
ayers  are  "  State-made  prayers,"  seeing  that  the 
ayer-book  was  compiled  by  our  Protestant  Reformers. 
It  is  utterly  untrue  that  the  Prayer-book  is  a  mere 
)pish  book,  considering  that  the  greater  part  of  it  is 
.re  Scripture. — All  these  things  are  ridiculous  untruths, 
lich  it  is  a  shame  for  any  man  to  circulate,  and  a  dis- 
adit  to  any  man  to  believe.  May  I  not  ask  honest 
issenters,  when  they  hear  statements  such  as  these,  to 
ercise  their  own  good  sense,  and  to  put  the  simple 
Lestion,  "  Is  this  really  true  ? "     A  cause  which  can  only 

built  on  a  foundation  of  gross  misstatements,  is  a 
ry  unsatisfactory  cause  to  support.  A  readiness  to 
Heve  falsehoods  is  not  a  nice  character !  If  there  is 
lything  God  hates,  it  is  falsehood.     "Thou  shalt  not 


32  WHAT  GOOD   WILL   IT  DO. 

bear  false  witness,"  is  a  commandment  not  yet  repea 
For  another  thing,  I  advise  all  honest  Dissenters  to 
their  own  common  sense,  and  to  make  a  proper  distinct 
between  a  system  and  the  faults  of  those  who  work  a  syst' 
No  doubt  many  clergymen  are  worldly,  careless,  unc 
verted  men.    No  doubt  the  endowments  of  the  Establisl 
Church  are  not  always  well  employed.     No  doubt  so 
clergymen  are  half-sceptics  and  some  are  half-Papists, 
doubt  some  rural  parishes  are  sadly  neglected.     But 
this  does  not  prove  that  the  principle  of  an  Establisl 
Church  is  wrong.     This  state  of  things  will  not  be  cu 
by  dissolving  the  union  of  Church  and  State.     Are 
Dissenting  ministers  converted  men  ?     Do  no  Dissent 
ministers  ever  spend  their  incomes  badly  ?     Are  all  I 
senting  ministers  entirely  sound  in  the  faith,  and  free  fr 
any  erroneous  doctrine  ?     These  are  unpleasant  questio 
and  I  have  no  wish  to  press  them.     But  there  is  an  • 
proverb  which  says,  "  those  who  live  in  glass  houses  shoi 
not  throw  stones."     The  abuse  of  a  thing  is  no  argumt  i 
against  the  use  of  it.     The  occasional  inconsistency,  I 
unsoundness  of  clergymen,  in  so  large  a  Church  as  i 
Established  Church  of  England,  supplies  no  proof  that  t 
principle  of  an  Establishment  is  wrong  and  unsound. 

I  advise  honest  Dissenters,  for  another  thing,  to  reme: 
ber  the  broad  fact  that  many  of  their  forefathers  a 
predecessors,  among  Nonconformists,  were  strongly 
favour  of  an  Established  Church,  and  never  admitted  t 
i:)rinciple  that  Governments  should  ignore  God,  and  ha 
nothing  to  do  with  religion.  Owen,  and  Baxter,  a: 
Flavel,  and  Howe,  and  Matthew  Henry,  were  men  of  whc 
Nonconformists  are  justly  proud.  They  were  men  whc 
names  would  do  honour  to  the  rolls  of  any  Christi; 
Church.   Yet  every  one  of  these  good  men  was  strongly 

i 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  S3 

rar  of  the  connection  between  Church  and  State.  No 
1  loved  religious  liberty  more.  None  contended  more 
lestly  against  the  narrow-minded  requirements  of 
irchmen  in  their  day,  and  made  more  sacrifices  for 
iconformity  than  these  good  men.  Yet  none  of  them 
r  dreamed  of  maintaining  that  the  connection  of  Church 

State  was  "  an  adulterous  connection,"  or  that  Govern- 
its  had  nothing  to  do  with  religion.  Alas,  we  may  well 
,  "  How  is  the  fine  gold  become  dim ! "  I  firmly  believe 
t  if  Owen,  Baxter,  Howe,  Flavel,  and  Matthew  Henry 
Id  rise  from  their  graves  this  day,  they  would  be  among 
foremost  opponents  of  the  Liberationist  Society. 

ask  honest  Dissenters,  in  the  last  place,  to  consider 
etly  what  one  single  grievance  they  labour  under  now, 
;rhat  disability,  what  hardship,  what  disadvantage, — 
ch  would  be  removed  by  Disestablishment.  Let  them 
Qe  one  if  they  can.  I  declare  I  cannot  put  my  finger 
one.  They  may  possibly  complain  that  Nonconformist 
listers  are  not  made  so  much  of  as  Church  ministers,  and 
not  occupy  so  high  a  social  position.  Well,  if  that  really 

grievance,  I  defy  them  to  show  how  Disestablishment 
ild  remove  it.   The  plain  truth  is,  that  until  Dissenters 

persuade  the  great  bulk  of  the  English  people  to  give 
Episcopacy  and  the  Liturgy,  and  to  become  Baptists, 
iependents,  Presbyterians,  or  Methodists, — until   they 

do  this,  I  say,  they  will  never  prevent  the  bulk  of  the 
glish  people  making  much  of  their  own  ministers,  and 
ing  them  a  social  precedence.  The  alleged  grievance 
5  nothing  to  do  with  the  connection  of  Church  and 
ite,  and  Disestablishment  would  certainly  not  take  it 
ay.     Why  then  cannot  Dissenters  keep  quiet,  and  let 

Church  alone  ? 
(4)    And  now,  last  of  all,  this  tract  may  perhaps  be 

c 


34  WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO.  1 

read  by  some  honest  Churchmen  who  are  content  wi 
the  present  relations  of  Church  and  State,  and  have 
wish  to  see  them  changed.     To  them  also  I  shall  ofFei 
word  of  advice,  and  I  earnestly  hope  it  may  not  be  thro^ 
away. 

For  one  thing  we  must  awake  to  a  sense  of  the  dang 
in  which  we  stand  just  now,  and  must  work  hard  to  oppc 
our  enemies.  There  is  no  safety  in  apathy  If  otht 
combine,  we  must  combine.  If  others  agitate,  we  mi 
boldly  resist  the  agitation.  If  others  assert  falsehooi 
we  must  assert  truth.  If  others  flood  the  country  wi 
cheap  tracts  and  leaflets  attacking  the  Church,  we  mi 
meet  the  attack  by  a  counter-flood  of  cheap  literature 
the  Church's  defence.  "  Defence  not  defiance  "  must 
our  motto.  Controversies  and  conflicts  with  other  profet 
ing  Christians  are  odious  things.  But  the  conduct  of  t 
Liberationists  leaves  us  no  alternative.  K  they  will  n 
let  us  alone,  we  must  fight. 

We  have  nothing  whatever  to  fear  for  the  connection 
Church  and  State,  if  Churchmen  will  only  awake,  arii 
and  do  their  duty.  Twenty  thousand  clergymen  and  t< 
million  laymen  are  a  force  which  Mr.  Miall  and  his  coi 
panions  ought  never  to  overthrow.  But  we  must  combii 
organize,  work,  write,  speak,  and  spread  information ;  ai 
above  all,  we  must  not  go  to  sleep.  The  Churchman  wl 
folds  his  arms  in  our  camp,  and  says,  "Peace,  peac< 
anything  for  a  quiet  life :  let  things  take  their  course 
may  be  a  very  nice  amiable  Churchman,  but  he  is  i 
true  friend  to  the  Church  of  England.  I  declare  I  dre; 
the  laziness  of  Churchmen  more  than  the  whole  attac 
of  the  Liberation  Society. 

For  another  thing,  if  we  would  prevent  Disestablishmen 
we  must  spare  no  pains  to  reform  the  Church  of  Englan 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO.  35 

7e  need  reform:  there  is  no  mistake  about  that.  Our 
areformed  abuses  are  the  worst  foes  of  the  union  of 
hurch  and  State.  Our  large  undivided  dioceses,  our 
seless  cathedrals,  our  anomalous  and  ill-constituted  con- 
Dcation,  our  want  of  elasticity  in  liturgical  worship,  our 
liftless  adherence  to  old-fashioned  modes  of  evangeliza- 
on,  our  helpless  inability  to  arrange  systematic  coopera- 
on  of  clergy  and  laity,  our  barbarous  ecclesiastical  courts, 
-all  these,  and  not  a  few  more,  are  weak  points  in  our 
ne  of  defence,  which  skilful  enemies  are  not  slow  to 
stect.  They  are  points  in  which  reform  would'  not  be 
ifficult,  if  the  matter  was  not  trifled  with,  but  heartily 
id  earnestly  taken  up.  Oh,  that  God  would  raise  up 
iiong  us  some  powerful,  wise,  energetic  Church  reformer  ! 
hurch  reform  is  one  of  the  best  bulwarks  against  Church 
•isestablishment. 

We  all  know  what  is  done  on  board  a  man-of-war  when 
a  enemy  is  in  sight,  and  an  action  is  about  to  begin.  The 
ecks  are  cleared;  the  lumber  is  thrown  overboard;  every 
lan  is  sent  to  his  quarters ;  useless  passengers  and  non- 
)mbatants  are  put  under  hatches  or  consigned  to  the 
old.  It  is  high  time  to  do  the  same  with  the  Church  of 
ingland,  if  the  struggle  for  Disestablishment  is  at  hand. 
L  is  nonsense  to  ignore  the  weak  points  in  our  system. 
re  have  weak  points,  and  they  are  part  of  the  strength 
f  our  adversaries.  Let  us  strive  to  get  rid  of  them 
ithout  delay.  Let  us  resolutely  and  energetically  take 
p  the  subject  of  Church  Reform. 

I  leave  the  whole  subject  now  with  feelings  of  sorrow, 
grieve  to  think  that  English  Protestant  Christians  should 
e  on  the  point  of  wasting  time,  and  energy,  and  strength, 
nd  talents  in  such  a  miserable,  unprofitable  controversy 
s  this  about  Disestablishment !    If  ever  there  was  a  time 


36  WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  DO. 

when  British  Christians  should  cease  from  controvei 
and  unite  as  one  man,  in  order  to  resist  the  rising  fl- 
of  Popery  and  infidelity,  that  time  is  now.     Yet  thiis 
the  very  time  when  Mr.  Miall  and  the  Liberationist  b-^ 
choose  to  stir  up  strife  all  over  England,  for  the  m 
useless  and  unprofitable  cause  in  the  world, — a  cause- 1 
which  their  success  will  do  good  to  nobody,  and  do  hi 
to  many.     Well !  be  it  so.     The  Liberationists  are  sot\ 
the  wind,  and  they  must  reap  the  whirlwind.     They 
the  first  to  begin  the  miserable  strife,  and  the  blam 
all  the  wretched  consequences  must  lie  at  their  door.    '. 
when  I  think  of  the  ill-feeling  they  are  stirring  up, 
angry  passions  that  will  be  called  forth,  the  hard  W( 
that  will  be  spoken,  the  divisions  that  will  be  made 
ever  in  parishes,  the  sin  that  will  be  caused,  the  g 
that  will  be  for  ever  stopped,  and  the  harm  that  wil 
for  ever  done, — when  I  think  of  all  this,  I  cannot  1 
saying  with  a  wise  old  Statesman,  "  Why  cannot  you 
things  alone  T* 


P.S. — Since  the  day  when  I  began  to  write  this  paper,  son 
the  pomts  which  I  have  handled  have  received  such  remari 
illustration  from  public  events,  that  I  think  it  a  plain  dut 
invite  attention  to  them.  I  need  hardly  say,  when  I  spea 
"  public  events,"  that  I  refer  to  the  recent  illness  of  the  Prin 
Wales,  and  to  the  nature  and  amount  of  national  feeling  w 
that  illness  has  called  forth.  I  cannot  lay  down  my  pen  wit 
saying  a  few  words  about  the  subject. 


WHAT   GOOD   WILL   IT   DO.  o7 

Tl  is  notorious  that  there  are  men  in  Englaiid, — men  of  large 
inds,  of  highly-trained  intellects,  of  great  attainments  in  science, 
lie  writers,  powerful  speakers, — who  do  not  scruple  to  make 
;ht  of  "  national  religion,"  and  the  superintending  providence  of 
3d.  These  men  almost  scoff  at  the  idea  of  God  ordering  and 
anaging  public  events,  of  God  hearing  prayer  and  removing 
ils  in  answer  to  prayer,  of  the  usefulness  of  a  nation  humbling 
iell  before  God,  and  uniting  in  prayer  and  intercession.  I  say 
is  notorious  that  there  are  not  a  few  Englishmen  who  hold  such 
ews  as  these.  They  do  not  flatly  deny  the  existence  of  God ; 
it  they  place  what  they  call  the  "  laws  of  nature  "  above  God. 
o  one  can  read  with  attention  the  daily  and  weekly  newspapers, 
id  the  monthly  periodicals,  and  fail  to  see  that  there  are  among 
5  many  clever  men  of  this  kind,  men  who  are  gradually  sowing 
ischief  over  all  the  land. 

Now  I  ask  the  readers  of  these  pages  to  observe  the  remarkable 
yht  which  the  illness  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  has  thrown  on  the 
ue  value  of  the  views  I  have  just  described.  Let  them  notice 
te  following  facts. 

(1)  It  is  a  striking  fact  that,  during  the  ten  painful  days  of 
ispense,  when  the  Prince's  life  was  in  imminent  danger,  the  men 
ho  deny  God's  providence  and  the  usefulness  of  intercessory 
cayer,  were  almost  entirely  silent !  You  could  hardly  take  up  a 
lily  paper,  without  finding  something  about  "  heaven,"  "  God," 
Providence,"  "  a  nation's  prayers,"  "  a  people's  petitions,"  and 
le  like.  There  was  a  conspicuous  absence  of  the  least  attempt 
)  deny  that  there  was  a  God  in  heaven  who  could  do  more  for 
le  Prince  than  Dr.  Gull  or  Dr.  Jenner !  No  one  dared  to  tell 
s  that  God  could  not  interfere  with  the  "  laws  of  nature,"  and 
aat  it  was  useless  to  pray  for  the  Prince's  recovery !  Let  this 
let  not  be  forgotten. 

(2)  It  is  another  striking  fact,  that  the  views  of  these  unhappy 
len  who  sneer  at  God's  providence,  and  deny  the  usefulness  of 
irayer,  turned  out,  during  the  Prince's  greatest  danger,  to  be 
itterly  unacceptable  to  the  great  bulk  of  the  English  people, 
'jvery  one  seemed  glad  when  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  sent 
orth  a  form  of  prayer  and  intercession  for  the  Prince's  recovery. 


38  WHAT  GOOD  WILL  IT  DO. 

Telegraphic  wires  flashed  that  prayer,  like  lightning,  from  o 
end  of  the  realm  to  the  other,  and  no  one  dared  to  say  that  t 
wires  were  wrongly  employed.  Churchmen  and  Dissenters,  i 
once,  were  of  one  mind,  and  the  Prince  was  prayed  for  in  chapi 
as  well  as  in  churches.  The  great  heart  of  the  nation  was  stirr 
to  the  very  bottom,  and  gave  "  no  uncertain  sound,"  either  abc 
God's  providence  or  the  value  of  prayer.  In  short,  there  arc 
from  the  earth  in  a  week  an  enormous  mass  of  Christian  evidenct 
It  became  clear  as  daylight,  that  however  much  Englishmen  m 
admire  clever  sceptical  writers  in  the  day  of  ease  and  prosperil 
in  the  day  of  real  affliction  they  find  them  "  miserable  comforters 
They  are  obliged  then  to  confess  their  belief  in  a  God  of  proi 
dence,  and  a  God  who  hears  prayer. 

(3)  Last,  but  not  least,  it  is  a  striking  fact  that  even  in  foreij 
countries  the  attitude  of  the  pubhc  mind  in  England,  during  t 
Prince's  illness,  excited  much  attention.  No  one  dared  to  despi 
the  nation  for  exhibiting  such  belief  in  God's  providence  and  t] 
efficacy  of  intercessory  prayer.  On  the  contrary,  there  were  n 
wanting  proofs  that  Frenchmen  would  be  glad  to  see  as  mm 
national  faith  among  themselves  !  The  following  article,  translat( 
from  the  French  newspaper  La  France,  and  copied  into  the  Tm 
of  Monday,  December  18th,  deserves  attentive  perusal,  and  speaJ 
for  itself : — 

"  La  France  says : — 

"  Political  life  is  suspended  in  England.  One  sole  anxiety  a 
sorbs  all  minds — the  health  of  the  Prince  of  Wales.  An  enti 
nation,  which  is  still  impressed  with  strong  convictions,  turns 
God  and  partakes  of  the  grief  which  afflicts  its  Sovereign,  who; 
son  is,  perhaps,  about  to  die  Ajid  yet  the  Prince  of  Wales  a 
peared  to  be  far  from  popular.  He  possessed  neither  the  qualitii 
nor  the  defects  which  old  Albion  admires  or  tolerates,  and  tl 
English  people  were  sometimes  disinclined  to  regard  in  him  tl 
nominal  master  of  their  destinies,  the  future  guardian  of  thj 
Charter  which  is  the  basis  of  their  liberties.  But  when  death  ws 
threatening  him  the  whole  of  Great  Britain  was  at  once  excite* 
In  its  patriotic  loyalty  all  errors  and  mistakes  were  forgotten,  an 
nothing  was  remembered  but  the  danger  which  threatened  tl 
Heir  to  the  Crown.    What  a  spectacle  and  what  a  lesson!    Tl 


WHAT  GOOD  WILL   IT  BO.  39 

rince  of  Wales  is  dying,  and  yet  upon  the  other  side  of  the 

iaannel  no  one  laughs,  no  one  insults  the  high-placed  personage 

ruck  down  by  sickness.   The  Princess  of  Wales  quits  the  bedside 

the  dying  man,  not  to  seek  necessaiy  repose,  but  to  hasten  to 

e  church  to  pray  and  to  listen  to  prayers — and  no  one  laughs. 

le  Queen,  whom  calumny  sought  to  wound  but  the  other  day, 

leels  with  her  veil  of  widowhood  beside  the  probable  death-bed 

her  first-born — and  no  one  laughs.      The  Council — Messrs. 

nice,  Gladstone,  Forster,  the  Lord  President  and  Lord  Chancellor, 

whom  England  holds  in  highest  esteem  for  talent,  or  position, 

for  age,  which  is  also  a  dignity — address  themselves  to  the 

'chbishop  of  Canterbury  and  call  upon  him  to  prepare  'new 

Tns  of  prayer  to  appeal  to  the  Almighty  on  behalf  of  his  Royal 

ighness  the  Prince  of  Wales.'      And  the  people,  instead  of 

Dcking  at  this,  rush  to  obtain  copies  of  these  prayers,  and  re- 

lat  them  in  their  places  of  worship.      Lutherans,  Calvinists, 

I  athodists,  Anglicans,  Catholics,  Jews,  all  implore  the  Deity  to 

olong  the  days  of  the  future   Sovereign  of  England.      This 

ople  has  the  courage,  the  good  sense,  not  to  disown  either  its 

story,  its  past,  its  Government,  or  its  God,  and  yet  it  is  a  free 

Dple  among  all — who  will  dispute  that  ?   Such  a  spectacle  affects 

greatly,  and  we  look  around  us  with  bitterness.     In  vain,  alas ! 

we  look  for  one  of  these  powerful  bonds  of  union  upon  which 

might  rely  in  a  moment  of  trial,  and  which  might  unite  a 

bion  in  a  common  sentiment.     We  have  no  greater  faith  in  men 

in  we  have  in  God.     There  is  disunion  even  in  our  churches. 

id  yet  we  are  always  talking  of  our  unity,  and  declaring  that 

are  the  envy  of  other  nations  on  that  account.     Is  not  this  one 

our  self-complacent  illusions  ?     Switzerland,  the  United  States, 

i  England,  those  three  countries  where  the  dignity  of  man  is 

well  understood,  retain  respect  for  the  governing  principle; 

iy  accept  public  prayer  and  humble  themselves ;  we  in  our  dis- 

ers  and  misfortunes  could  think  of  nothing  but  mutual  recrim- 

;tion,  and  blush  to  address  a  prayer  to  God.  Is  that  an  advance  ? 

3  may  be  allowed  to  doubt  itA^   Faith  has  never  derogated  from 

tiU's  dignity,  it  has  never  rendered  him  less  desirous  of  liberty. 

I  iio  would  dare  to  say  that  England  had  abased  itself  because  it 

[  :iiakes  of  the  grief  which  afflicts  the  family  that  governs  it,  because 

i  )beys  its  natural  chiefs  who  direct  it  to  pray,  as  it  would  obey  them 


40  What  good  will  it  do. 

if  they  called  upon  it  to  fight  and  to  sacrifice  itself  for  the  pre 
servation  of  its  old  liberties  ?  Since  we  are  talking  so  much  a 
present  about  reforming  ourselves,  let  us  begin  by  learning  tha 
affectionate  respect  for  authority  of  which  England  is  at  thi 
moment  affording  us  so  striking  an  example.  And  if  the  Britial 
Monarchy  should  appear  to  our  Kepublican  intolerance  a  ba* 
model,  let  us  look  towards  the  Amerian  Republic.  All  who  hav 
visited  the  United  States  can  afl&rm  that  the  expression  of  sympatli 
with  the  rulers,  a  belief  in  God,  and  even  the  outward  practice  < 
religion  are  not  incompatible  with  Republican  virtues.  At  Nw 
York  and  at  New  Orleans  prayers  were  offered  up  for  Presideu 
Lincoln,  as  to-day  prayers  are  offered  up  throughout  the  thre 
kingdoms  for  the  Prince  of  Wales.  When  shall  we  learn  how  t 
pray,  all  together,  for  any  one  ?  " 

In  the  fece  of  such  facts  as  these,  I  cannot  help  hoping  that  n 
English  Parliament  will  ever  be  found  so  misguided  as  to  vote  fo 
the  Disestablishment  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  the  diasc 
lution  of  the  union  of  Church  and  State.  When  the  Governmen 
of  this  great  Empire  ceases  to  recognize  God  and  ignores  religioi 
I  shall  begin  to  despair  of  my  country.  The  country  which  retuni 
to  Parliament  a  majority  of  members  who  wish  the  State  to  har 
nothing  to  do  with  God  and  religioUj  must  be  a  country  givK 
over  to  judicial  blindness.  From  such  a  blindness,  good  Loft 
deliver  us !  The  illness  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  I  firmly  believi 
has  done  great  things  for  the  maintenance  of  Monarchical  Inafe 
tutions  among  us.  I  trust  it  may  also  help  to  remind  Englishme 
that  it  is  not  a  bad  thing  to  have  an  Established  Church. 

Stradhrohe  Vicarage, 

20th  December,  1871, 


LONDON  :  WILLIAM  HUNT  AND  COMPANY, 

S3,  Holies  Street,  Cav^ndiah  Sqaare ;  and  Aldine  Chambers,  Paternoster  Row, 


