


Se RPes 





nay 




























fis 








fo 
ees 

















ponte 


Stitt St 
er eteet . 224 ob ete = Se 


Stesetraces 


Stn tM eee 
‘Se rrats 2 


Pesto =p 
ete eA, ett Stk 
een neler ackeee tte eae 





See 


j 
7 
‘ 
¢ 
i 
i 
4 
, 





a a, j 1) FE ' 4, j 
) y in) ‘ \ , / nigh ae D v4 - 
A { iT un ,. Lay Af ; J a wall , fs) ; 
ray : Cay, c 
Pipi Ek ya Vn PR Aunts } Pig 
en ae tai A. 0 


4 : ‘4 Ae! a; ‘ i + : 
f Lv & ‘ PEL v4 ot Wie dae & a Lis 
“Binh ay, ai Hin WA 7%) i Mh U ek ust 

nu ie ee ta Rok pele ye 79 

Bt PA my } 

Val 5 a ' 10> 





nO Le Tai ie. ; te 4 
it uy ve 4 rn rte 
; ta nye f : > . | 
roar is tinh Ae me iN ee is c 


i" \@) ye 
rt We We va ts x ae ry 


i 


cH 


slag i a 


is ii 
ay | s 
% 
i t 
ony 
Jf 
7 
7 
' 
af 
4 


Cho's CAho in the Bible 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Princeton Theological Seminary Library 


httos://archive.org/details/whoswhoinbiblediO0Oflet 









Who's Who in the 6 


Hl Directory of Scriptural Charac 


S “e 
DEC 10 1925. 





BY 
Rev. E. Fletcher Allen, MW. H. 


G.P. Putnam’s Sons 
New York & London 
The Rnickerbocker Press 
1925 


Copyright, 1925 
by 
E. Fletcher Allen 





Made in the United States of America 


Foreword 


TuIs collection of brief biographies does not pre- 
tend to include every name that was mentioned in 
the Scriptures or in contemporaneous history. It 
has been compiled on the basis that is laid down 
in present-day dictionaries of biography: the in- 
dividual mentioned must have some claim to in- 
clusion. He (or she) must have counted in some 
particular manner in the historical development of 
religious history or religious thought. The contri- 
bution may have been small or isolated, and, for the 
immediate moment, have been seemingly incon- 
sequential—but little happenings have frequently 
blossomed into a great magnitude when time has 
passed and the judgment of centuries has been 
formed. Matrutas, for instance, filled an honor- 
able post. He was numbered with the Twelve— 
but he did nothing. He, as an individual, counts 
little, but as an example he counts much. It is 
unfortunate for him, perhaps; but so long as Christ- 
ianity persists he will be the example of the futility 
of conventional government not informed by the 
Divine Spirit. The Twelve were lacking their com- 
plete number after Judas went. There was a break 
in their organization. Simply to preserve a united 
company at its full complement, Matthias was elect- 


Vv 


Vi Foreword 


ed, and that is all we know about him. He might 
well be taken as a practical warning to the Churches 
to be extraordinarily careful of the qualities of 
priests. The rest of the Twelve were prophets of 
the Lord. Matthias undoubtedly had other estim- 
able qualities; but the Spirit had not drawn him to 
devoted and inevitable service. The honor, the 
distinction, the elevation of the hierarchy perhaps 
appealed; but the essential quality was lacking. He 
is more to be remembered as the man chosen by men 
who held what was obviously Paul’s rightful place; 
for it is Paul whom we instinctively include in the 
number of the immediate disciples of our Lord. 

Some readers will perceive that the greatest figure 
in religious history is not included. Not to avoid 
controversy especially, but because of the very com- 
pass of this little book, no biography of our Lord is 
given. In the nature of things it must be so. For 
an understanding of the significance of Jesus, there 
are myriad books, simple and profound, readily 
available; and, above all that is written, is the monu- 
ment of the Christian Faith with its millions of 
adherents; the deepening morality and Christ-sense 
in Humanity which explain and bespeak Him. 

Concerning the references, it is sufficient to say 
that the sources quoted are not necessarily the 
earliest references to particular individuals but are 
connected in some way with an occurrence or inci- 
dent of major importance. A cross-reference Bible 
is generally available to such as will be interested in 
this book, and, the lead once given, can be followed 
easily. 


Foreword Vil 


As a student, the writer not infrequently. found 
himself wishing there were some handbook of reason- 
able price but of critical accuracy which would give 
the salient facts concerning the careers of the im- 
portant people of the Bible. He was not seeking 
other people’s opinions concerning the characters, 
particularly, but a readable concise analysis of their 
works and significance. The idea of preparing such 
a handbook himself was suggested to him, and an 
enjoyable year has been occupied in the work. 

There is a singular value to the constant changing 
from one period to another that was necessary. If 
the book is read consecutively, as well as being used 
as a reference, the reader will perhaps find that 
value for himself. Facts that once were orderly 
and progressive, but slightly unrelated, achieve a 
significant relativity. Isaiah, for example, somehow 
reaches with new force and with peculiarly apposite 
reasoning to the time of the Maccabees and to the 
time of our Lord. 

Traces of the influence of discarded cults crop up 
unexpectedly, to throw a strangely illuminating light 
on later civilization; and thereafter history 1s seen 
afresh. It becomes possible to say with understand- 
ing, ‘They went back, there,’ or, considering the 
trivial incident of a passing change, to say, “‘Here, 
they are building better than they know’’; and 
Biblical history takes on again the form of a great 
adventuring. 

So far as is possible, the subject matter of this book 
is drawn from the Scriptures; where that is not so, 
it has been made obvious; and, for the commerce of 


Vill Soreword 


the spirit, no other sources were necessary. By 
taking the great men and the great movements of the 
Scriptures through their various courses, the in- 
evitability of Christianity stands out plainly. 

It ceases to matter whether, as some say, Moses 
found his idea of God during his sojourn in Midian 
and came back to his people with the God of the 
Midianites, or whether he was driven into exile in 
order to appreciate the virtues of the God of his own 
people. Wherever Moses got the dominating in- 
spiration is somehow insignificant, academic. The 
great fact is that he returned capable of welding 
his people into a spiritual unity first, and then to 
bring about their coalition into a nation. But the 
spiritual unity preceded the national unity and has 
persisted long after the national unity disappeared 
under economic pressure. 

Facts that have been well known for many years, 
but because of their very familiarity have lost their 
appeal and ceased to reveal fundamental charac- 
teristics, are brightened again when seen in their 
relation to human beings who have all the frailty 
and elusiveness of the great majority. By being 
balanced, page by page almost, with characters 
separated by centuries in point of time, the people 
of the past become the people of the present and are 
strangely the same. 

It comes as a shock to realize that the Great War 
of the Old Testament was occasioned by incidents 
as trivial, seemingly, in the political economy of the 
world known to the Israelites as was the incident at 
Sarajevo only a few years ago. Kings then had the 


Foreword ix 


habit of seasonal warfare; the same dream of domina- 
tion; the same essential habit of forming alliances 
and counter-alliances; of buying loyalty and of try- 
ing to maintain the “balance of power”’ in their 
continents. It is illuminating, too, to grasp at last, 
that war was the habit of kings and was pursued 
much as Sport is pursued. ‘‘At the time when kings 
went forth to war” would, in a modern peaceful 
nation, correspond to—shall we say—the Football 
Season or the Baseball Season as a chronological 
reference. 

There is a wealth of suggestive homiletical material 
in the bare biographies of the characters of Scripture, 
which will be useful to teachers and students alike; 
and always it is modern. The peculiarities of suc- 
cession to the throne, the lightness with which 
assassination and usurpation were regarded, strike 
the imagination more forcibly when the biography 
is condensed. Assassination was by far the most 
popular means of assuring succession to any given 
throne, as will be seen from the most rapid reading 
of the biographies; and the thrills incident to na- 
tional history will recur. 

The very brevity of this handbook will probably 
do for the reader what it did for the writer—hold up 
the progress of particular study for the sheer enjoy- 
ment of reading on to the next chapter of the Scrip- 
tural account. 

And, when the chapter is finished, and the desire 
to read just for the pleasure of reading has been 
conquered (if it ought to be conquered, in view of the 
work in hand), there will remain the unbidden, self- 


X Foreword 


awakened comparison of past and present. All the 
concomitants of the late war are here; there is per- 
fect similarity both of personal and national conse- 
quences. 

Provided that the compilation of this handbook 
serves to stimulate the desire to read, in fuller and 
finer description, the stories as they are in the Scrip- 
tures, it will have served no mean purpose. If, by 
chance, it could serve to suggest that the Bible is 
the best text-book for kings and statesmen, that 
would be more than the writer would dare to hope. 

What he believes, from his own experience, is 
that many—both teachers and taught—will find 
that it is useful and gives an authenticated biography 
concisely, and in a form readily remembered, of all 
the characters who count. It is intended to econo- 
mize the time of those who have not sufficient leisure 
in which to extract the important information for 
themselves, but who wish to know what that infor- 
mation is; and to supply the means of ‘‘verifying 
references.”’ 


E. F. A. 


LONDON, 1924. 


CAho’s CAho in the Bible 












AD Nya i NU ACN 
ie Ay io Ad | 
CNN NR sii SLVR eto 
iy Wan nL at pi i) che (a 


The} 


‘ ss ‘i " ‘Vall 
aha EAS iyi ip ”, hy si 4 






ra me 5 5 ’ 
ae eu piu 








Xs ; H ve : 
i J ] | i oe at eh tek y 
AE CBee V7 Pita mie . 
pee #1) $8 . yt , Uy iat $) 4! hi ‘ PAY es hay ONG ae 
ot , Oy Pe Von CA a) SOA gare Ge TEAR En AV ie i 
ey J 4 “; , 4 q “A j Pe i bY: Hae ih 
aes “ Pie 4% h' 
a ; : . | | iif 
bites LEON Mi 
ut 4 \ Ae aa P| 
Y iN MN } 
Mai 4 i 7 t L 
fia gar gd 
cca ay 
\ tb” 
‘i 3 
ae iat 
tanith Pye 
) re ee Att 
Carr ee 
if { ior 
iy la We 
> ; : ia 
apy eB 
it tt, i 
what 
Biro) | ' . ; 
Thu, ? rf iy 
te eT ae | (ide 1M 
' Mee \ Babe O Ki 
a ie f gy’ : 
my : ryan ay 
: ’ biK4, 
hy 4 
i 





Who's Who in the Bible 


AARON .— Ex. 4:14 

Aaron was the head of the priesthood of Israel, 
who began his career well, as brother of Moses, but 
made the fatal mistake of trying to combine the 
goldsmith’s craft with religion. | When the Israelites 
in the Wilderness grew tired of waiting for Moses to 
return from Sinai, and loudly demanded a God they 
could see, Aaron pacified them by making a golden 
calf, which brought them no peace, but locked him 
out of the promised land. 

He had a strange career, full of promise and of 
error. When the time of the flight of Israel drew 
near, and Moses was sent to Pharaoh to demand 
their release, Aaron was appointed spokesman, both 
to the people of Israel and to Pharaoh. He was not 
acceptable to either, at first, and signs had to be 
given which established him as the chosen of God. 

Twelve princes ot the people laid their rods before 
the Ark with their names inscribed on them. Aaron 
also laid his rod before the Ark. With the morning 
it was discovered that Aaron’s rod had blossomed 
and was bearing ripe almonds, by which sign the 
people were convinced that he and his tribe, the 


3 


4 Wiho’s Who in the Bible 


tribe of Levi, were divinely appointed to the priest- 
hood. 

Thereafter he accompanied Moses on his visits to 
Pharaoh, and with him wrought the plagues, and on 
Pharaoh’s request removed them. 

In the later wars he was always at Moses’ right 
hand, upholding him against the Amalekites and the 
raiding hordes. ‘Too much authority, and a sense 
of his own importance, led him to combine with 
Miriam in antagonism to Moses’ leadership, on the 
basis that they too received direct revelation from 
God. In the resulting estrangement, it is worth 
noting that Aaron suffered the woman, Miriam, to 
take the blame. 

Because he failed to show the proper honor to God 
at Meribah Kadesh, Aaron was forbidden to enter 
the promised land, and in the presence of the assem- 
bly at Mount Hor, he was formally stripped of his 
priestly robes and disgraced. 

He died at Moserah, at the age of 123 years, and 
was succeeded in the priesthood by his son Eleazar. 


ABAGTHA.— Esther 1:10 


Very little is known of this young man, save that 
he appears in the book of Esther as one of the 
seven chamberlains whom King Xerxes (Ahasuerus) 
sent to summon the Queen Vashti to his banquet. 


ABEDNEGO.—Dan. 1:7 

This is aname given by the officers of Nebuchad- 
nezzar to Azariah, a friend of the prophet Daniel. 
He in common with his two friends Meshach (Mish- 


Abel 5 


ael) and Shadrach (Hananiah) had been advanced 
to high office, which brought them fame and posi- 
tion, and the favor of the king, but the fruits of 
office were not sweet enough to seduce them from 
the greater loyalty they owed to their God. There- 
fore, when Nebuchadnezzar, somewhat misled by 
his princes, took it on himself to build an image 
and to command every person in his kingdom to 
worship before it, these three and Daniel resisted the 
king, and refused to bow down and worship. The 
three were cast into the fire, to the secret sorrow 
of Nebuchadnezzar and the open glee of the scheming 
princes. ‘Their loyalty was well placed, however, 
and the king saw the miracle of them walking un- 
harmed in the midst of the flames. 


ABEL.—Gen. 4:2 


The first martyr to faith. He was the second son 
of Adam and Eve, and by calling a herdsman. The 
two sons offered sacrifices to God, and by some sign 
it was made manifest that God preferred the offering 
of Abel, not because of its nature, but because of the 
sincerity of its giver. 

Cain made a mean sacrifice, that cost him neither 
time nor trouble, while Abel chose the firstlings of 
his flock, perfect and costly, and of these the fattest. 
He sacrificed what cost him something, and because 
God read the inner meaning of the gift he signified 
his preference. Of this Cain became aware, and 
murdered his brother, thinking perhaps thereby to 
gain the favor of God more easily, and became an 
outcast instead. 


6 Cho's Who in the Bible 


ABIATHAR.—TJ Sam. 22:20 


A strange mixture of loyalty and scheming. 
There were several such characters in the Old Testa- 
ment, men who were capable of great sacrifice and 
devotion, but who could not carry straight to the end. 

Abiathar was a landowner of the city of Anathoth, 
in Benjamin, from which city came also Jeremiah. 
He was the son of the high priest Ahijah or Ahime- 
lech, and had an adventurous life. When the priests 
were massacred at Nob, he alone escaped, and joined 
David at Keilah, where he feared that David might 
do him harm, but was reassured, and the two men 
became close friends. This friendship stood Abia- 
thar in good stead later, when David was betrayed, 
for of the two culprits Joab was put to death, while 
Abiathar had his sentence of death commuted by 
Solomon to one of degradation, in remembrance of 
the former friendship. 

Before combining with Joab in treachery, Abiathar 
was of considerable service to David, bringing to him 
an ephod, which was the means of inquiring directly 
of God. Through this he was appointed one of 
David’s counselors. 

When there was trouble with Absalom, and David 
fled for his life, Abiathar tried to share the exile with 
him, but was commanded to stay where he was. 
Jonathan, Abiathar’s son, acted as messenger and 
carried to David the dispatches revealing Absalom’s 
secret plans. 

On Absalom’s defeat and death, Abiathar paved 
the way for David to return to the throne, but his 
devoted loyalty suffered a change soon after. David’s 


Abijah 7 


other son Adonijah commenced a new revolt, and 
whether Abiathar was looking more to the security 
of his own office or feared that the people would not 
follow David longer, he and the cunning general, Joab, 
lent themselves to high treason, supporting Adonijah. 

For this Joab was executed, and Abiathar was 
‘thrust out of the presence of the Lord’”’ by Solomon. 


ABIGAIL.—I Sam. 25:14 


The clever and beautiful wife of Nabal the Car- 
melite. David sent messengers to Nabal, before 
attacking him, and the messengers were dismissed 
with scant courtesy. Abigail, with more diplomacy, 
and perhaps with greater vision than her husband, 
herself went to David, secretly, to try to undo her 
husband’s mistake. She carried with her food and 
provisions for David and his followers, and gained 
such favor with David that he abandoned the attack 
on Nabal. 

This was the beginning of one of the great romances 
of the Bible, for ten days later Nabal died, and David 
married Abigail, who took her share of his tribula- 
tions, and watched and suffered with him during 
his life in Gath, was captured by the Amalekites, but 
quickly rescued, and finally lived in peace with David 
at Hebron, where she bore him a son, Daniel. 


ABIJAH (Abiam, Abijam).—2 Chr. 13:1 

One man, whose name is given differently in some 
manuscripts. There are also several characters of 
the same name but the subject of this note is the 
principal character and was King of Judah. Abiam 


8 Cho's ho tn the Bible 


was the eldest son of the favorite wife of Rehoboam, 
and so succeeded his father to the throne. It is 
difficult properly to appraise his value, for he reigned 
something like two years, and is alternatively de- 
scribed as one who ‘‘walked in the sins of his father”’ 
and as a great and good man. 

Whatever else may be said of him he was a great 
general and a good fighter. With a relatively small 
army of 400,000 men he met and put to rout an army 
of 800,000 under the command of Jeroboam, and of 
this vast army he succeeded in slaying half a million, 
and pressed his victory so well that he captured three 
cities of Israel, the kingdom of Jeroboam. 

He was a much married man, having fourteen 
wives and thirty-eight children. 


ABIMELECH.—Jud. 9:50 


A son of Gideon, and one of the Judges, who 
ascended the throne by blotting out his brothers. 
Determined to be ruler, he hired cutthroats and 
slew all but one of his seventy brothers. Jotham 
escaped the massacre, and stirred up antagonism to 
his brother among the Shechemites at Mt. Gerizim. 

Abimelech loved the fruits of office without its 
responsibilities and was practically an absentee 
king. Three years were quite enough of his reign 
for the people, but he had one faithful friend in 
Zebul, the governor of Shechem, who kept the non- 
resident Abimelech posted as to affairs. Conse- 
quently when Gaal, the Israelitish leader, gained 
ground in Shechem, Zebul pretended to comply with 
his designs, but furnished Abimelech with informa- 


Ahishat 9 


tion as to the growth and plans of the revolutionary 
movement, suggesting the means of checking it. 

Acting on this information, Abimelech attacked 
the city, and completely routed Gaal, whom he 
expelled, and then put to the sword as many of the 
citizens as fell into his hands. A certain number 
took refuge in the temple, thinking to escape the 
fury of the victorious leader, but he had no respect 
for either man or holy place, and burned the temple 
over their heads. 

Following up his campaign he attacked and be- 
sieged the town of Thebez, where a woman on the 
walls dropped a millstone on him as he paraded. 
Stricken, he ordered his armor bearer to kill him, lest 
he be disgraced by dying at the hands of a woman. 


ABISHAI—JI Sam. 26:7 


One of the most courageous and daring of David’s 
captains, one of David’s nephews, being the eldest 
son of his sister Zeremiah. 

Abishai was permanently adventurous, always 
seeking the dangerous road. When David went 
down to Saul’s camp, Abishai volunteered to accom- 
pany him, and was only prevented by David from 
striking Saul to the earth at one stroke. 

For his courage, Abishai was put in command of the 
second division of David’sarmy, winninga greatvictory 
against Edom in the Valley of Salt, as well as against 
the Ammonites and Syrians. With Joab he shared 
command of David’s army in the war with Absalom. 

There is a less attractive episode in Abishai’s 
adventures, for he, with Joab, treacherously mur- 


10 Cho’s Who in the Bible 


dered Abner, who had come to David offering 
allegiance and help, and by this act almost destroyed 
David’s campaign. 

His character is redeemed, however, by his devo- 
tion and fearlessness. The Philistine giant Ishbi- 
benob, whose spear-weighed 300 shekels of brass, 
had David at his mercy, when Abishai successfully 
undertook the rescue, and later with his own spear 
slew three hundred Philistines. 


ABNER.—I Sam. 14:50; IIT Sam. 3:8 


Jerome holds that Abner is the son of the Witch 
of Endor. At all events he was Saul’s captain of 
hosts, and when Saul died succeeded in forcing the 
allegiance of all the tribes except Judah to the weak 
king Ishbosheth. This of course meant war, so 
Abner marched out against David, but sought to 
save bloodshed by letting the champions of the 
armies decide the issue by single combat. Abner 
reluctantly slew Asahel, but the war went on, stead- 
ily progressing in David’s favor, so Abner ‘‘made 
himself strong in the house of Saul.’’ The spineless 
Ishbosheth accused Abner of trying to usurp the 
crown for himself, which may not have been entirely 
unfounded, but so disgusted Abner that he entered 
into negotiations with David to unite the kingdoms 
under one strong ruler. After preliminaries, to 
guarantee good faith, Abner was entertained by 
David at Hebron, where the compact was sealed, 
and Abner had just started his return journey when 
Joab returned from a raid. Remembering that the 
death of Asahel was still unavenged, and being jealous 


Abraham II 


of possible rivalry now that Abner was turning to 
David, he recalled Abner secretly, and with the 
assistance of Abishai, committed the heinous crime 
of murdering Abner at the gates of Hebron, which 
was actually a city of refuge, and wherein according 
to the law the blood avenger must hold his hand. 

David, hearing of the crime, pronounced the curse 
on Joab, and neither forgave nor forgot. Abner 
was buried at Hebron, David acting as chief mourner, 
and making the funeral oration. 

The death of Abner, in David’s camp, prevented 
the completion of David’s plans in secret. Ish- 
bosheth became aware of the plot, and the crisis was 
hastened, but despite the consequent disorganiza- 
tion, David was victorious and Ishbosheth was 
killed. (See Rechab.) By a singular coincidence the 
head of the defeated king was buried in the grave of 
his chiet captain. So Ishbosheth and Abner, having 
shared the same palace in life, shared the same grave. 


ABRAHAM (Abram).—Gen. 17:5; Gen. 11:27 


A man so devoted to God that he was willing to 
sacrifice his son on the altar, or to forsake his own 
home and go forth ‘‘not knowing whither he went,’ 
through many adventures and almost famine, trust- 
ing that his God would bring him safe through. His 
faith was accounted to him for righteousness. 

Abraham was the son of Terah, and his early home 
was Ur of the Chaldees. He married Sarai (later 
called Sarah), a close relative, in fact his half sister, 
and in his old age had a son Isaac, who was the actual 
founder of the chosen people. 


12 Cho's Who in the Bible 


Together with his nephew, Lot, he forsook Ur, and 
journeyed according to the divine command to 
Canaan. On the way of his travels he passed 
through Shechem and Bethel, where he built altars. 
Driven by famine to Egypt, he was in great danger, 
as the princes of Egypt carried news to Pharaoh of 
Sarai’s great beauty. To escape danger, Abraham 
said that Sarai was his sister, not his wife, and she 
was taken into the harem of Pharaoh, but was saved 
from harm by divine intervention. Abraham was 
showered with presents, but when plagues were 
sent upon the Egyptians (as a sign of the divine 
anger), and Abraham’s relation to Sarai was made 
known, Pharaoh hastened them out of his kingdom, 
with remonstrances, for the deception. 

Abraham and Lot returned to Bethel, with in- 
creased possessions. There they had disputes as to 
territory, and Lot, being given the choice of country, 
took the rich pasture land of the Jordan valley. 
Abraham remained in the district God had indicated, 
and resided at Hebron. 

Rebellion against the Elamites broke out in the 
Jordan valley, but was overcome, and Sodom and 
Gomorrah taken. Lot was captured and carried off. 
Abraham, with certain other leaders, joined the 
pursuit and won a victory, by night, at Dan. Lot 
was rescued, and much spoil taken, but Abraham 
refused to take any share of the booty, allowing it 
to be divided among his allies. 

Although Abraham had the divine promise of a 
son, Sarai was childless. A son was born to him by 
Hagar, and called Ishmael, but this was not the 


Absalom 13 


promised son. Nearly thirteen years later Abraham 
entertained angels unawares, and learned from them 
of the threatened destruction of Sodom and Gomor- 
rah, and of the renewal of the divine promise. Isaac 
was born to Sarai. At this time Abram was re- 
named Abraham, and Sarai renamed Sarah. 

Ishmael and Hagar were cast out from the house 
of Abraham. 

Abraham prospered and entered into a treaty with 
Abimelech, king of Gerar. 

When Isaac was a well-grown lad, God tested 
Abraham, commanding him to offer Isaac on the 
altar as a sacrifice. Abraham obeyed immediately, 
but by the Divine will was prevented from carrying 
his act to the death of Isaac, who was preserved to 
become the founder of Israel. 

Sarah died and Abraham married Keturah, by 
whom he had six sons who became the patriarchs of 
the Arabian tribes. He died aged 175 years, and was 
buried in the cave of Machpelah. 


ABSALOM.—2 Sam. 15:1 


The rash, charming son of David, who came into 
prominence first by taking revenge upon his brother 
Amnon for the outrage he committed on his sister 
Tamar. Absalom was David’s third son, with hopes 
of succeeding to the throne. When he had Amnon 
murdered he fled to the palace of Talmai, king of 
Geshur, where he was in exile for three years. Being 
pardoned and allowed to return home, but not into 
the presence of the king, his father, Absalom tried to 
persuade Joab to intercede for him. Joab refused 


14 ho’s Who in the Bible 


even to see Absalom, so Absalom ordered his servant 
to set fire to Joab’s crops, which brought Joab post 
haste to see what was the matter. Absalom inter- 
cepted him and persuaded him to plead with David 
on his behalf. The intercession was successful and 
Absalom returned. — 

He was so charming to the courtiers that they 
became his allies, and Absalom began to lay his plans 
for the usurpation of the throne, taking advantage 
of the misunderstanding that existed between king 
David and his captains. } 

Obtaining leave of absence from the court, he 
went through the country stirring up rebellion, which 
was so successful that David took refuge east of 
Jordan, deserting Jerusalem. Absalom arrived in 
Jerusalem, where Hushai, David’s faithful friend, 
played the rebel so well that he gained Absalom’s 
confidence, delayed him and upset his organization, 
sending messengers to David, who made a sudden 
attack, dividing his army into three divisions under 
Joab, Abishai and Ittai, whom he charged to deal 
gently with his son Absalom. The rebels lost the 
battle. Absalom, riding his mule beneath some 
trees, was caught in the fork of a branch by his head, 
and hung there. Joab being informed, without 
hesitation pierced the rebel prince through the heart. 
David grieved sorely when he heard of Absalom’s 
death, but Joab, out of his soldier’s experience, be- 
sought David to remember hismen. David, choking 
his grief, then addressed the soldiers, thanking them 
for their valor, dissembling his grief for the dead 
prince. 


Adam 15 


ACHAN.—Jos. 7:1 


A looter who broke the nation’s vow for his own 
ends, and paid the penalty. He was of the tribe of 
Judah, and son of Carmi. When Jericho was taken, 
although the city, and all the spoils that were taken, 
were devoted utterly to destruction (that is, were 
to be regarded as a sacrifice to God), Achan coveted 
certain trophies and spoils, which he stole and secret- 
ed. In so doing he broke a sacred vow taken by the 
nation as one body, which resulted in calamity falling 
on the people. The attack on Ai was repulsed, al- 
though it should have been easily successful, and 
the army lost 36 men. 

Realizing that something was wrong, other than 
generalship, the leaders caused lots to be drawn to 
see whose fault the disaster was. By a long process 
Achan was singled out, whereupon he confessed, and 
the stolen treasure was found hidden in his tent. 

Achan, his tent, goods, cattle, spoils, and children 
were stoned and later burnt in the Valley of Achor 
and the curse was removed. 


ADAM.—Gen. 3:17 


The first named created man. According to the 
Scriptures, while the earth was still without life, a 
barren wilderness, God created Adam out of the 
dust and breathed life into his nostrils. He was 
given care of Eden, and allowed to eat freely of its 
fruits, with the exception of the fruit of the tree of 
the knowledge of good and evil. 

The animals were created as his companions and 
assistants. These being insufficient, God caused him 


16 Ciiho’s Who in the Bible 


to go into a deep sleep, and from his side took a rib, 
from which he formed Eve, with whom Adam lived 
in a state of childlike innocence, until she, tempted 
by the serpent, and in turn tempting Adam, caused 
him to eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, so 
that they became like Gods, knowing good and evil, 
whereupon they became conscious of sin. 

They had however ‘‘become like Gods,” knowing 
the difference between good and evil, and lest they 
also eat of the tree of life, and so become immortal, 
they were cursed and driven out of the Garden, to 
earn their subsistence by hard work on lands which 
were made barren for their sake. 


ADONIJAH.—I Kn. 1-2 

An unfortunate, impulsive son of David. Adoni- 
jah was the fourth son, and followed his three 
elder brothers to a violent death. When Absalom 
died, Adonijah naturally regarded himself as being 
heir to the throne, in which assumption he seems to 
have been encouraged by his father, and the expec- 
tation was shared by the nation. Bath-sheba, how- 
ever, David’s new queen, gave birth to Solomon, and 
intrigued against Adonijah, who, knowing her in- 
tention to secure the throne for her own son, made a 
sudden attempt to secure the throne during David’s 
life. His scheme went well at first, for he acquired 
the assistance of the commander-in-chief, Joab, and 
the priest Abiathar. Everything promised so fa- 
vorably that Adonijah gathered a festival party at 
En-rogel where he was to be crowned. 

Nathan, the prophet, however heard of this and 


Ahab 17 


hastened to Bath-sheba, whom he easily aroused to 
action. She went straight to David, and reminded 
him of his promise to make Solomon king. During 
the interview Nathan also arrived, and cunningly 
supported her efforts. David renewed his promise 
to give the throne to Solomon, and took immediate 
steps to secure the succession. Despite Adonijah’s 
success with the army, the royal guard was loyal, 
and the leader of the guard took Solomon to the 
high priest to be anointed, which was done in the 
presence of an enthusiastic populace. 

Adonijah’s party naturally broke up in utter con- 
fusion when they learned how neatly they had been 
checkmated, and Adonijah himself fled to the altar 
for protection, and his life was spared by Solomon 
on the condition of future loyalty. 

Adonijah, however, did not quite relinquish his 
royal aspirations. When David was dead he sought 
Solomon’s consent to his marriage to Abishag the 
Shunammite woman who had been with David just 
before he died, cunningly persuading Solomon’s moth- 
er, Bath-sheba, to put his petition forward, saying 
‘Thou knowest the kingdom was mine.” The ruse 
was too obvious, however. What Adonijah really 
was doing amounted to high treason, which Solomon 
recognized, and for which Adonijah was executed. 


AHAB.—IJ Kn. 16:31 

An idolatrous, selfish king of Israel; son of Omri. 
At the instigation of his wife, Jezebel, he tried to sub- 
stitute the worship of Baal for the worship of God. 
For this and the murder of Naboth, vengeance was 


18 Cho's Who in the Bible 


slow to arrive, but sure. Ahab, having built him- 
self a gorgeous palace, wanted grounds to set it off 
and for that purpose the land of Naboth, near by, 
was ideal. Naboth being unwilling to sell, Ahab, 
again urged by Jezebel, murdered Naboth. The 
population were iricensed by the brutal murder, 
and Elijah the prophet pronounced the doom of both 
Ahab and his wife. 

Although so vicious a man, Ahab was a clever 
warrior. In the war with Syria, when Ben-hadad, 
the Syrian ruler, had fought a winning campaign, 
and was bringing the attack close home to Ahab, 
the invader made impossible demands on Ahab, 
which were refused. Ben-hadad thereupon made 
all his preparations for a great and final attack, but 
delayed for feasting. Ahab gathered about 7,000 
soldiers together and in a furious attack defeated 
the much more numerous army of Ben-hadad, and 
forced a treaty from him. He then pursued his 
policy of making treaties, and finally brought in most 
of the surrounding peoples in an alliance against the 
rapidly growing power of Assyria. They were not 
strong enough, however, to avert defeat at the hands 
of the Assyrians, and the alliances were broken up. 
As a consequence smaller wars broke out against the 
Syrians. The prophets sought to dissuade Ahab, 
but instead of listening to them he imprisoned them 
and carried on his battle. Believing that he would 
have a better chance of personal safety by being 
inconspicuous in the battle, Ahab took off his in- 
Signia, and drove a plain chariot, but he was not to 
escape, for a soldier ‘‘drew a bow at a venture’’ and 


Ahas 19 


shot Ahab between the folds of his armor, so that 
he slowly bled to death. 


AHAZ.—II Kn. 16:1 


A king of Judah, who believed more in alliance 
with Assyria than in the power of God. The son 
and successor of Jotham, he made a compact with 
Assyria when he came to the throne because he 
feared the alliance of Israel and Syria, and wished 
to resist the pressure they brought on him to enter 
their own alliance. 

Isaiah the prophet advised Ahaz to ignore the 
two powers, but Ahaz went his own way. What 
actually happened, of course, was that. instead of 
making Judah an ally of Assyria he made it a sub- 
ject, and consequently was compelled to pay ex- 
tortionate tribute and his people lived under fear 
and oppression. The Assyrians actually compelled 
Ahaz to journey in person to Damascus to pay 
tribute. Unfortunately his journey was not con- 
fined to the payment of the taxes they enacted, for 
learning the religion of the Assyrian people, Ahaz 
returned an apostate. He carried his excesses so 
far that he burned his sons in the fire, closed the 
temple, and destroyed the holy vessels, leading his 
people to an orgy of drunken idolatry, and establish- 
ing a régime of luxury and the shameless corruption 
of justice. 

The forces of Syria and Israel invaded his territory 
and took captive 200,000 of his people, whereupon he 
called on Assyria, his ally, to come to his aid. Their 
coming was a complete disillusionment to Ahaz, for 


20 Gbo’s Who in the Bible 


the Assyrians came not to fight for, but to fight 
against him, and he died utterly discredited. 


AHAZIAH 


There are two kings of the same name. 

(aye Kae t 

A king of Israel, son of Ahab, who followed the 
course of idolatrous worship of Baal, to his own 
undoing. 

(b) II Kn. 09:27 

A king of Judah, the youngest son of Jehoram, 
who was crowned king by popular acclamation, his 
brothers having been carried off by the Philistines 
and Arabians. 

Ahaziah died at the hand of Jehu. Joram, the 
King of Israel, continued the warfare that Ahab had 
begun, and Ahaziah, being Joram’s nephew, joined 
him. At the capture of Ramoth-gilead, Joram was 
wounded. This meant a serious reversal of the 
fortunes of war, and Ahaziah fled for his life, but was 
pursued by Jehu, and was slain. 


AHIJAH 

There are nine men of this name, two of whom 
play a moderately important part. 

(a) I Sam. 14:3 

A high priest (called Ahimelech in I Sam. 22:9) 
during the reign of Saul, who had reproved the king 
for his impatience before God, and who was en- 
countered by David as he fled from the king. 
David came to Ahijah for counsel, and the High 
Priest gave him both counsel and practical help. 


| Ahijah 21 


For food he gave him the shewbread, and for a 
weapon Goliath’s sword, which hung as a trophy 
before the altar. The incident was witnessed by 
Doeg, the Edomite, who was worshiping then. 
The news was carried to Saul who, in vengeance, 
charged Ahijah and 85 ‘‘of his father’s house”’ with 
conspiracy, condemning them to instant death, 
which sentence was willingly executed by Doeg. 

(b) I Kn. 11:29 

The Shilohite. Ahijah of Shiloh prophesied the 
rise and fall of Jeroboam I. 

Jeroboam, an ambitious, self-willed king, was met 
by the prophet in his journeying, and Ahiah en- 
deavored to consecrate and control the king’s 
ambition. The prophet, clad ina new garment, tore 
his robe into twelve pieces, ten of which he handed 
to the king, with the promise that on the death of 
Solomon the kingdom of ten tribes should be his. 

Jeroboam, on his accession, achieved his ambition, 
but did not develop the character the prophet 
desired. 

When Ahijah was an old man, and in retirement, 
and the king was in personal sorrow, fearing his son 
would die, he thought of the true prophet. The 
prophets around him were not to be relied on, but 
he remembered that Ahijah had told him the truth. 
He therefore sent his wife, disguised as a poor woman, 
to the old man. Ahijah, warned by God of the 
deception, ridiculed the paltry gifts she brought 
and the deception she practiced, and told her what 
she came to learn, saying that the mourners would 
greet her on her return, for the son was dead, and the 


22 Who's Who in the Bible 


doom of Jeroboam’s house was declared. This she 
found true to the letter when returning home. 


ALCIMUS.—A pocrypha, I Mac. 7:14 


The high priest nominated by Antiochus Eupator. 
He was unable to exercise his office, however, because 
of the power of Judas Maccabeeus. Therefore he 
went to Antioch to complain of the ‘‘lawless and un- 
godly men of Israel’? and to charge Judas Macca- 
beus with treason. This gained the king’s favor, 
and Demetrius was persuaded to send an army to 
establish Alcimus at Jerusalem and to punish the 
Maccabees. 

The invading army murdered the leaders in Jeru- 
salem and Judas Maccabzus fled into hiding. 
Alcimus was not popular with the people, who 
chafed under his rule, and were favorably disposed 
to Judas Maccabeus who was fighting a guerilla 
warfare in the outlying districts with some success. 
Alcimus again visited the king, whom he bribed by 
presents to send troops to Jerusalem. Judas escaped 
again however, and was free for a while, but later 
was killed and Alcimus exercised his office without 
hindrance. His hope was to unite the Jews and 
Greeks, and for that reason he ordered the destruc- 
tion of the wall of the sanctuary, but before the 
destruction was completed he died of paralysis. His 
period was about 163 B.C. 


AMAZIAH.—IJI Kn. 14:1 
A vainglorious king of Judah who succeeded to 


the throne after the assassination of his father 
Jehoash. Amaziah had such success in a little war 


Amos oye 


with Edom and Israel that he vaunted himself and 
challenged his neighbor Jehoash (who was the 
grandson of Jehu, and must not be confused with 
Amaziah’s father) to fight. Jehoash was sarcastic, 
but peacefully inclined because he knew his strength. 
Amaziah, however, smarting under the taunt rushed 
headlong into war, and to death. In the battle the 
forces of Judah were completely routed and Amaziah 
taken prisoner. Jehoash followed up his victory to 
the walls of Jerusalem, which he partly destroyed, 
and pillaged the city, taking captives. 

Amaziah was murdered, his death probably being 
due to popular disaffection consequent on the damage 
to the holy city. 


AMON .—JJ Kn. 21:19 


A king of Judah, son of Manasseh, who figures in 
the ancestry of the house of David, and also in the 
genealogy of our Lord. 

He was unworthy of this, however, for he carried 
on idolatrous practices which had been begun by his 
father Manasseh. Although Manasseh had re- 
pented, this repentance did not influence his son 
who seems to have gone so far as to offer human 
sacrifices to strange gods. 

Amon was killed as the result of a conspiracy 
which appears to have had its rise in the court, and not 
amongst the populace, probably the outcome of a 
desire to make religious reform possible. 


AMOS 


The prophet. He probably lived in the land of 
Judah, where he had a small flock of ungainly short- 


24 Wiho’s Who in the Bible 


footed sheep, who produced excellent wool. For 
further means of existence Amos sold the fruit of a 
few sycamore trees. From the narrative he appears 
to have been of moderate means but independent, 
and there is no evidence that he belonged to a 
particularly distinguished family. 

He journeyed from Judah to denounce the sins of 
Israel at Bethel, the religious capital of the northern 
kingdom, and his warrant for so doing was a direct 
call from God. 

Amos, who prophesied during the reign of Jero- 
boam, was alarmed by the Assyrian menace. Ama- 
ziah, however, the chief priest, accused Amos before 
the king of treason, and ordered him to quit the 
kingdom, fearing a popular revolt. This was quite 
natural, for Amos’ message would have found much 
acceptance among the poor and oppressed. The 
issue was joined between the highly influential 
politicians and the unknown prophet. 

For reply Amos predicted Amaziah’s utter de- 
struction and the destruction of Israel. After de- 
livering his final message to Israel, Amos departed 
to his home. 

His writings have a powerful, direct style, are full 
of illustrations that would be understood by the 
common people, and show an understanding mind 
inspired by God. 


ANANIAS. 

Altogether there are no fewer than nine people 
bearing this name. ‘Three stand out, and of these 
three two are in singular coincidence. 


Ananias 25 


(a) Acts 9:10 

Ananias, the follower of Jesus, who, in obedi- 
ence to a vision, found Saul of Tarsus in his blind- 
ness, baptized him, and restored his sight. 

(b) Acts 23:2 

The high priest to whom Paul, now renamed, 
was brought and who shortly afterwards appeared 
against Paul when he was charged before Felix. 

During the high priesthood of this Ananias there 
were quarrels between the Samaritans and the Jews 
which rendered him liable to lose his office. The 
Jews raided the Samaritan villages and Ananias 
was accused of being party to the raid. In his trial 
at Rome Ananias was only narrowly acquitted. He 
thereupon returned and carried on his office with 
rapacity and force, sending his servants to the 
threshing floors to collect the tithes by violent means. 
He defrauded the minor priests of their due share, 
leaving many to die of starvation. Paul called him 
a ‘‘whited wall.” 

His end was fitting. He was known to favor the 
Roman occupation. When rebellion broke out 
Jerusalem was taken and destroyed. Ananias, 
fearing for his life, took refuge, but he was found 
and murdered by a fanatical populace. 

(c) Acts 5:1 

The husband of Sapphira who fell dead at the 
rebuke of Peter. Three hours later Sapphira died 
also. The reason given is that Ananias withheld 
part of the price which he said he had given in its 
entirety to charity. The sin lay not in keeping 
part for himself but in denying that he did so. Peter 


26 Cho's Who in the Bible 


made it clear that he could keep part if he so wished, 
but having kept it he sinned in saying that he had 
retained nothing for himself. 


ANDREW.—John 1:40 


Was fishing with his brother, Simon Peter, in the 
Sea of Galilee when Jesus called him to be his disciple. 
According to the Acts of the Apostles, Andrew was 
originally a disciple of John the Baptist, and hearing 
the call ‘‘ Behold the Lamb of God,”’ not only followed 
Jesus himself but brought his brother to Jesus also. 

The two brothers were afterwards visited by Jesus, 
who healed Peter’s mother-in-law. 

Andrew assisted at the feeding of the five thousand, 
and it was due to his information that the boy with 
the loaves and fishes was discovered. 

With Philip, he brought the inquiring Greeks to 
Jesus’ notice. 

There are many traditions concerning Andrew, 
the principal account saying that Andrew was 
crucified at Patre by Ageas, the proconsul, on 
account of his preaching, which caused Avgeas’ wife 
to leave her husband. 


ANTIOCHUS IV (called Epiphanes). See A pocry- 
pha, II Mac. 


Ascended the throne of Syria about B.c. 175, and 
appears in II Maccabees. He visited Jerusalem 
to see Jason, the high priest, who had obtained his 
office by purchase. Jason was later supplanted by 
Menelaus, who paid more. 

Hearing that Antiochus was dead, Jason besieged 


Aguila 27 


Jerusalem, but the rumor was false, and Antiochus 
marched against Jason, taking Jerusalem and spoil- 
ing the temple. He madea second attack later, out 
of sheer wrath, burning the city and massacring the 
Jews, selling the women into slavery, and establish- 
ing an idolatrous religion. Some of the Jews 
escaped, with Judas Maccabeus, and the tribe of 
Judah opposed Antiochus in his effort to debase the 
religion, revolting under the leadership of Mattathias, 
and later under Judas Maccabzeus, who regained the 
territory, with the exception of the fortress of Jeru- 
salem, and restored the religion of the people. 

Antiochus died insane, probably as the result of 
his extreme debauchery. 


APOLLOS.—Acis 18:24 


An eloquent, educated Jew of Alexandria, who did 
much to spread Christianity. He visited Corinth 
where he was entertained by Priscilla and Aquila, 
who instructed him in the faith, and later he refuted 
the Jews who opposed Christianity, demonstrating 
that Jesus was the Messiah. 

It appears that because of his eloquence there were 
certain people of Corinth who called themselves ‘‘of 
his party”’ with the result that factions threatened 
to do harm to the cause, but this was prevented by 
Paul, and Apollos finally retired to Crete. He and 
Paul maintained their friendship. 


AQUILA.—Acts 18:2 


A Christian friend of Paul, who, with his wife 
Priscilla, fled from Rome when Claudius issued a 
decree expelling the Jews. 


28 Cho's Cho in the Bible 


Taking up residence in Corinth, he received Paul 
on his second missionary journey, later removed to 
Ephesus, where his house became the meeting place 
of the groups of Christians who composed the oa 
Church. 

The edict of Claudius seeming to be unim- 
portant, Aquila journeyed once more to Rome, 
to see Paul, from whom he again returned to 
Ephesus, possibly to prepare the city for Paul’s own 
coming. 


ARCHELAUS.— Mat. 2:22 


Son of Herod the Great, Governor of Judea. 

When Herod died, and the Jews at last got their 
way in the matter of being ruled directly from Rome, 
Herod’s sons became governors of the provinces. 
With them the folly of the Jewish politics became 
apparent. The Jews were not competent to make a 
state for themselves, and their religion soon made it 
impossible to live at peace under a foreign ruler. 
Their own idea was the rulership of God, and not 
the rulership of Rome. Friction naturally followed, 
and after friction, rebellion. 

Under Archelaus, who was by no means the 
strong man his father had proved to be, direct 
Roman rule came into operation, and with it tax- 
ation. Taxation being levied, a small revolt under 
Judas of Damala broke out. It was quelled like the 
snuffing out of a candle, but it served to produce a 
sect of revolutionaries, called the Zealots, who 
demonstrated the inevitability of conflict. 

Archelaus, unable to cope with the rising storm 


Asher 29 


and the difficulties of government, was deposed and 
died in exile. 


ARISTARCHUS.— Acts 19:29 


A co-worker with Paul, who was taken prisoner 
during the riot in Ephesus. He accompanied Paul 
from Troas to Jerusalem and thence to Rome, where 
he was with him during the imprisonment, and at 
the time the epistles to Colossians and Philemon 
were written. 

Tradition says that Aristarchius was martyred in 
Rome under Nero. 


ASA.—I Kn. 15:9 


A king of Judah, who sought to abolish idolatry. 
Being attacked by Baasha, the king of Israel, he sold 
the treasures of his palace and of the temple to pur- 
chase aid from Ben-hadad, king of Syria. Baasha 
was put to flight, and Asa enjoyed a long reign, in 
which he distinguished himself as a great warrior, 
defeating the Ethiopian forces. 

He made a great appeal to the people to purify 
their religion, gathering them in one great concourse, 
and exhorting them to loyalty to Jehovah. 


ASHER.—Gen. 30:13 


Jacob’s eighth son, the founder of the tribe of 
Asher. He had a great opportunity, rich lands and 
good crops, but was an indifferent leader, and could 
not use the opportunities that were plentifully be- 
stowed upon him, slowly fading into insignificance. 


30 Wiho’s Who in the Bible 


ASHTORETH (Astarte).—I Sam. 31:10 


A goddess of the Phoenicians, whose worship 
spread through Babylon and Assyria and to whom 
Solomon built a ‘‘high place.’”’ She was worshiped 
by some renegade Israelites also, and Saul’s armor 
was deposited in her temple by the Philistines. The 
rites of her worship were characterized by profligacy 
and debauchery. The shrine erected in worship of 
this goddess by Solomon was destroyed by Josiah. 


ATHALIAH.—JTI Kn. 11 


The idolatrous daughter of Ahab and Jezebel who 
married Jehoram, king of Judah, and strengthened 
the idolatrous worship of Baal, so that the temple 
of God was broken down. 

On the death of Ahaziah, Athaliah had all her 
grandchildren murdered, with the exception of 
Joash who escaped, and reigned as queen for several 
years. 

The high priest, Jehoiada, alarmed by her rule, 
won over the army, and bringing Joash to their midst, 
had him crowned king. Athaliah, hearing the up- 
roar, ran into the temple, and seeing what had taken 
place, sought to rally her own followers, crying 
‘““Treason.’’ Her appeal was fruitless, however, and 
she was taken out of the temple, in order that blood 
might not pollute it, and put to the sword. 


AZARIAH. 


There are more than twenty of this name in the 
Scriptures, many of them being high priests, one 


Balaam 31 


king of Judah (Uzziah), and some captains in the 
army. See Abednego. 


BAAL.—Jud. 2:11 


The name applied to local gods whose worship 
was finally overthrown by the Israelites and the 
worship of Jehovah substituted. 

The name means ‘‘owner,” e.g. ‘‘BAALZEBUB,” 
God of the flies, who was consulted by Ahaziah, 
king of Israel. 


BAASHA.—I Kn. 15:27 ff. 


A man of obscure birth who rose to be king of 
Israel, and reigned twenty-four years. He organized 
a plot against Nadab (son of Jeroboam), whom he 
killed, along with all Jeroboam’s descendants. 

He continued the forbidden ‘‘calf worship,” for 
which he was cursed by the prophet Jehu. March- 
ing against Asa, king of Judah, he was utterly 
defeated. 


BALAAM.— Num. 22 ff. 

A diviner or soothsayer of the Midianites who was 
paid by Balak, king of Moab, to curse Israel, and 
whose life was saved by his ass. 

When the Israelites approached Canaan, and the 
Canaanites were in fear of the invasion, the king sent 
for Balaam and after giving him great presents, 
commanded him to set forth and utter a curse on the 
chosen people. An angel, however, seeing Balaam 
with the rulers, countermanded the curse and 
Balaam dismissed the princes. They returned with 
greater gifts, and God having consented to Balaam’s 


30 Who's Who in the Bible 


journeying to the Israelites, but commanding him to 
speak according to His words, the soothsayer saddled 
his ass and departed. 

An angel stood in the way, whom Balaam did not 
see, but the ass, terrified by the vision, refused to 
move, consequently Balaam abused it, and the ass, 
finding voice, protested. Balaam then perceived 
the angel, who permitted him to proceed with the 
princes of Canaan, but to speak as he was directed. 

Seven altars were made ready, with offerings of 
calves and rams, but Balaam, being ordered by the 
King to curse the Israelites, rejoined, ‘‘How shall I 
curse him whom God hath not cursed,’’ and instead 
of pronouncing the doom of the people prophesied 
their increase. Balak grew furious, but Balaam con- 
tinued, and foretold the overthrow and destruction 
of Moab and Edom at their hands. He then de- 
parted, but was finally killed in a raid by the Israel- 
ites on Midian. 


BARABBAS.— Matt. 27:15 


A criminal who was in custody at the same time 
that Jesus was a prisoner. The high priests com- 
manded the people to demand the release of Barabbas 
when Pilate offered to release one man from prison 
in honor of the Passover. 


BARAK.—Jud. 4:6 
Deborah’s ally in the war with the Canaanites. 
Under her direction he made a flank attack on Sisera 
with 10,000 men, routing the army and pursuing 


Barnabas Be 


‘Sisera, who took refuge in the tent of Jael, whom he 
commanded to hide him. 

Jael, pretending to obey Sisera, covered him with a 
cloak, but while he slept drove a tent pin through 
his temples. When Barak arrived he was con- 
fronted with the dead body of his enemy. 


BAR-JESUS.— Acts 13:6 

A magician, friend of Sergius Paulus, who sought 
to refute Paul and Barnabas when they spoke before 
the proconsul. 

Bar-jesus, seeing that Sergius Paulus was deeply 
interested, and fearing that he might lose his office 
and perquisites, opposed the apostles openly, prob- 
ably working some magic, for he is accused of ‘‘per- 
verting the ways of the Lord.”’ Paul repaid him in 
his own coin, by striking him blind. This act con- 
vinced Sergius Paulus, who believed in the message 
of the Apostles. 


BARNABAS.—A cis 4:36 


Called apostle, but not one of the twelve. This is 
the new name given to Joseph of Cyprus by the 
apostles, a faithful landowner who sold some of his 
property and gave the proceeds to the apostles. He 
recommended Saul, after his conversion, to the elders 
at Jerusalem, and later brought him to Antioch 
where they were together for a year and had great 
success in spreading the gospel, prevailing on the 
Christians there to send funds to the brethren of Jeru- 
salem, who feared a famine. 


34 @iho’s Who in the Bible 


He later accompanied Paul on his first missionary 
journey, but owing to a dispute as to companions on 
the second journey, Barnabas and Paul separated, 
although they remained friends. 

Like Paul, Barnabas is reported to have been a 
self-supporting apostle. 


BARTHOLOMEW.—WMatt. 10:3 


One of the twelve apostles who is usually identified 
with Nathanael. Tradition credits him with the 
writing of a Gospel, and he is reputed to have died in 
Armenia. 


BARTIMAUS.—WR. 10:46 


A blind beggar at the gate of Jericho who, by his 
insistence and faith, obtained his sight through a 
miracle of healing performed by Jesus. 


BARUCH.—VJer. 36:26; 51:59 

A young nobleman, himself an inspired writer, 
and to whom certain books are ascribed, who acted 
as secretary to his friend Jeremiah the prophet. It 
was Baruch, the son of Neriah, who read the prophe- 
cies of desolation for Jeremiah in the temple. The 
writings were afterwards burned by Jehoiakim as a 
sign of his displeasure. 

When the people of Israel departed to Egypt they 
compelled Baruch and Jeremiah to accompany them. 
Tradition says that Baruch continued to live in 
Egypt until the death of Jeremiah, when he went 
to Babylon, where he resided until his death. 


Ben-hadad 35 


BATH-SHEBA.— II Sam. 11:2 


Formerly the wife of Uriah the Hittite (q. v.) and 
later of King David. An astute far-seeing woman of 
great discretion. In co-operation with Nathan the 
prophet she prevailed on David to establish her son, 
Solomon, on the throne. 


BENAIAH.—ITI Sam. 23:20 


One of David’s captains, who brought the 
‘““mighty men,’’ the King’s bodyguard, to the cause of 
Solomon. 

Ultimately he became the commander of the 
army, after he had obeyed orders to execute Joab, 
the former holder of that office, not so favorable to 
Solomon. 


BEN-HADAD. 


Three kings of Damascus bore this name. 

ay Kh 1'75-18 

Benhadad I was bought as an ally by Asa, king 
of Judah, against Baasha, king of Israel, who had 
declared war against him. 

(b) I Kn. 20 

Ben-hadad IT, not so great a general as his father, 
Ben-hadad I, whom he succeeded. Jn his wars with 
Ahab the Israelites were victorious and Ben-hadad 
was compelled to restore the cities taken by his 
father, and to grant to the victors the right to trade 
in Damascus. 

During his illness, Ben-hadad sent his servant 
Hazael to inquire of the prophet Elisha, who was in 


36 Cho's Who in the Bible 


Damascus, whether he would recover. MHazael, 
however, smothered the king and usurped the 
throne. 

(C) LR gee 

Ben-hadad III, son of Hazael, who lost all the 
Israelitish territory in waging war against Joash. 


BEN JAMIN.—Gen. 35: 16, 18 


Jacob’s youngest son. Rachel, his mother, who 
died when Benjamin was born, named him “‘ Benoni, ”’ 
which means ‘‘son of my sorrow”’ but the name was 
changed to Benjamin to escape the ill omen. 

At the time of the famine, when Joseph, un- 
known to his brethren, held high office in Egypt, 
he commanded the sons of Jacob to bring their 
youngest brother with them. Joseph and Benjamin 
were the children of Rachel, and therefore full 
brothers. 

On the second visit Benjamin accompanied his 
brethren, and Joseph dealt generously with him, 
revealing his identity. 


BEZALEL.—I Chr. 2:20 


The son of Uri, of the tribe of Judah, who was 
ordained to be chief designer and constructor of the 
tabernacle. In calling him to oversee the building 
of the tent of meeting, God endowed Bezalel with 
the necessary qualities for the carrying out of his 
task. 

In addition, Bezalel instructed his assistants in the 
art of architecture. 


Cain a7 


BUKKI.— Num. 34:22 


A son of Jogli, prince of the tribe of Dan, who was 
one of ten to whom was entrusted the division of 
Canaan among the twelve tribes. 


CAIAPHAS.—VJohn 11:40, 51 


The high priest of the Jews, a Sadducee, who 
played a great part in the persecution of Jesus. 

When our Lord was gaining power, Caiaphaswas the 
most powerful personality in the council which planned 
to repress him and check the popular movement. 

He advised the execution of Jesus, suggesting that 
he should be taken by subtlety. Judas was suborned, 
and Jesus arrested. The ensuing trial was a mockery 
of justice. Caiaphas trusted to false witnesses, but 
Jesus maintained a complete silence, and Caiaphas, 
growing fearful of the issue, demanded that Jesus say 
whether he was the Christ, the son of God. 

To this direct question Jesus replied, knowing 
that in so doing he was signing his own death war- 
rant. Caiaphas then rent his garments saying, ‘‘He 
hath spoken blasphemy.”’ 

Jesus was sentenced to death, and the sentence 
was confirmed by the Sanhedrin. 


CAIN .—Gen. 4:1 

The first murderer, and the builder of the first 
city. By occupation he was a tiller of the ground, 
and offered an unworthy sacrifice to God, of the 
fruits of the earth. His sacrifice being offered in an 
unwilling spirit, his offering was rejected, and Cain 
was rebuked. 


38 @ho’s Who in the Bible 


He thereupon murdered his brother Abel, whose 
offering had found favor, but was convicted by his 
brother’s blood which cried out from the ground, 
and was driven out, an exile. 

Being in fear of his life, he was promised protec- 
tion, and a brand was placed upon him. 

He went into the land of Nod, where he built a 
city. The story probably covers many generations 
of primitive conditions, and has been condensed and 
made to center around one individual by verbal 
transmission. 


CALEB.— Num. 13:6 


A man of whom it was written, ‘‘He wholly fol- 
lowed the Lord, the God of Israel.’”’ One of the 
scouts sent by Moses into the land of Canaan to 
espy the land and to report on the possibility of its 
capture. He, with Joshua, was alone in saying that 
Israel could conquer the inhabitants and take pos- 
session of the promised land. 

For his courage he was excluded from the Divine 
prohibition which fell on the others, preventing them 
entering the land, and was permitted to go forward. 

Later, claiming his heritage from Joshua, he had 
Hebron and the adjacent country assigned to him. 


CHEDORLAOMER.—Gen. 14 


King of Elam, and leader of the collected attack 
made by the alliance of states against the cities of 
Sodom and Gomorrah whose princes had rebelled. 
Chedorlaomer won the initial battle, capturing Lot, 
and despoiling the cities. Abraham, hearing of the 


Claudius Lypsias 39 


raid, pursued the enemy army, and defeated the raid- 
ers, rescuing his relative, and recapturing the booty. 


CLAUDIUS.—Acts 11:28 


A statesmanlike Roman Emperor who reigned 
from 41 to 54 A.D. He was weak and puny from 
birth, and suffered constant illness. During his 
reign Britain was invaded and occupied, and also in 
his era the great famine swept over the Roman 
Empire (see Acts I1: 28). 

The Jews were expelled from Rome under Claudius 
because of their quarrels (Acts 11:2). 

These are events whose dates establish the chrono- 
logy of much of the Scriptures, being verified by con- 
temporaneous history. 

Claudius was murdered in 54 A.D. in the month 
of October. 


CLAUDIUS LYSIAS.—<Acts 22:28 


A Roman military official in Jerusalem, who, with 
his troops, came to investigate the cause of a riot in 
which Paul the Apostle figured. He took Paul 
prisoner, fearing that he was an outlaw, and bound 
himin chains. Paul prevailed upon him and showed 
him his mistake. Being liberated, Paul was per- 
mitted to make a public speech which ended in the 
uproar breaking out again. Paul was then in danger 
of being tried by scourging, but escaped this tor- 
ture by announcing his Roman citizenship, which 
exempted him from such punishment. 

Claudius arranged a discussion between Paul and 
the Jewish leaders. The meeting broke up in con- 


40 Cho's Who in the Bible 


fusion because the Pharisees and Sadducees dis- 
agreed among themselves. When, following this 
episode, Claudius became aware of a plot to kill 
Paul, he sent him with a very strong military escort 
to Cesarea. 


CORNELIUS.—Acis ro:1 


According to tradition Cornelius was the founder 
of the church at Cesarea, where he was a centurion 
in the army. He was converted and baptized by 
Peter as the result of a series of visions. 


DAN.—Gen. 30: 6 


A son of Jacob, and founder of the tribe which 
bears his name. As an individual the Scriptures 
furnish no details of his history. 


DANIEL. 


Three persons bear this name in the Scriptures. 

(AQT LO aT 

David’s second son. 

(Deeks a2 

A priestly descendant of Ithamar, who returned 
with Ezra to Judea. 

(c) Dan. 1-6 

A young man of noble descent, to whom is 
ascribed the book that bears his name. He was 
carried into Babylon, with his friends Hananiah, 
Mishael and Azariah, by Nebuchadnezzar. Being 
treated as a favorite, special food was provided for 
him, which he refused to eat, asking the plainest of 


Darius AI 


food instead. The captives under this treatment 
proved of ‘‘fair appearance,’’ and showed themselves 
cleverer than Nebuchadnezzar’s magicians. When 
the seers of the court were unable to interpret 
Nebuchadnezzar’s dream of the image composed of 
many substances, Daniel was consulted, and inter- 
preted the vision. For this he was made ruler over 
Babylon. 

Nebuchadnezzar, who favored Daniel, died. Bel- 
shazzar, the succeeding king, being alarmed by the 
writing on the wall, and his magicians being un- 
able to interpret for him, sent for Daniel, who again 
was successful. For reward he was appointed the 
third ruler of the kingdom. 

In the reign of Darius, Daniel continued to grow 
in favor, which increased the jealousy of his enemies. 
Knowing Daniel’s stedfast devotion and deep re- 
ligion, his enemies approached Darius and prevailed 
11pon him to issue an edict that vows should be paid 
to no one, save the king, for a period of thirty days. 
Failure to obey the edict was punishable by being 
cast into a den of lions. 

As was expected Daniel continued to pay his vows 
to God, and because the law was inexorable, even 
against Darius’ personal feeling, Daniel was thrown 
into the den. He being delivered by a miracle, his 
enemies were thrown in in his place and suffered the 
fate they had intended for Daniel. 


DARIUS. 


(a) Dan. 11:1 
DARIUS THE MEDE, see under Daniel. 


42 Cho's Wiho in the Bible 


Gad abe iis 

Darius, Founder of the Persian empire, in 
whose reign the second temple of Jerusalem was 
completed. 

When Darius had secured the throne of Persia from 
the usurping pretender, which he did in a manner 
common to that period, by murder, there was a 
general rebellion of the composite peoples. Darius 
reconquered them one by one, and reconstructed his 
kingdom. 

Babylon, however, revolted again, and Darius was 
compelled to continue his warfare, which he did 
successiully, and even penetrated into Europe, 
probably as far as the Danube and Volga rivers. 

The Jews, during his reign, continued their work 
on the temple, and being challenged for their 
authority, stated that a decree had been issued on 
their behalf. This was found to be correct by Darius, 
who, fulfilling an early promise, now allocated cer- 
tain taxes to that purpose, as well as supplying cattle 
for the offerings in the temple. 


DAVID.—I Sam. 16:3; I Kn. 2:11 


(a) DAVID as a wanderer. 

The boy who, of all the kings, ultimately figures 
most prominently, was the youngest son of Jesse, of 
the tribe of Judah, who lived at Bethlehem. 

As a shepherd boy, during the war between the 
army of Saul and that of the Philistines, David 
appeared with a present for his brothers, and heard 
of the challenge of Goliath. Against much pressure, 
he prevailed on Saul to allow him to take up the 


Dabtd 43 


challenge. He persuaded Saul, by recounting the 
adventures he had had with the wild beasts, and, 
disdaining the heavy armor of a warrior, slew Goliath 
with a stone out of a sling. 

Thereafter, gaining Saul’s favor, he dwelt at the 
palace, and the famous friendship of David and 
Jonathan, Saul’s son, began. 

Saul, who was of an introspective, morbid disposi- 
tion, found relief and distraction in the harpist 
David, and advanced him constantly in his favor, 
David ultimately marrying Michal, Saul’s younger 
daughter. Distrust soon arose, however, possibly 
due to David’s prowess as a warrior and the praise 
he gained from the people, which seemed to belittle 
Saul. In his anger the king threw his spear at the 
young man. Jonathan interceded for him, but 
David fled, remaining in exile, at last finding refuge 
with Ahimelech, who gave him the shewbread to eat, 
and thereby ost his own life. 

David, hearing that the Philistines were attacking 
Keilah, gathered a band of followers around him and 
fought the invaders, winning a victory of which Saul 
heard, and thinking to entrap David, the king him- 
self appeared at Keilah. David learning that the 
inhabitants would surrender him to save their lives, 
escaped. After many adventures he applied to 
Nabal for food, which was refused. David resolved 
to take it by force, and to slay Nabal, but Abigail, 
Nabal’s wife, brought provisions, and saved her 
husband. On Nabal’s death David married Abigail. 

Saul still being vengeful, David spared his life 
when he was within an ace of death. Saul moved by 


A4 Wiho’s Who in the Bible 


the generous deed relented, but David, not trusting 
Saul, was later found in Philistia as a vassal of Achish. 
David was not allowed to join Achish in war with the 
Israelites and was sent back. On arrival at Ziklag he 
found that the Amalekites had raided the place. 
Pursuing them, he recaptured the spoils, from which 
he sent valuable presents to the elders of Judah, 
which strengthened his friendship. Soon afterwards, 
learning that Saul was slain in the war, David re- 
turned to his people and took up the kingdom. 

(b) Davin as king. 

The pronouncement of Samuel, who anointed 
David, being fulfilled, David’s first duty as king of 
Israel was to consolidate his people. Abner, Saul’s 
general, had taken Ishbosheth (Eshbaal), Saul’s son, 
to Mahanaim, and secured a kingdom for him across 
Jordan while David resided at Hebron. For some 
time David was kept busy defending his own country 
and Abner’s strength increased, so that an ultimate 
clash was inevitable. Abner, an astute general, wasa 
thorn in the side of David, until Eshbaal accused his 
commander of seeking to gain the crown for him- 
self, whereupon Abner proposed alliance with David. 
On his visit to David Abner was killed by Joab and 
news being spread, two of Eshbaal’s soldiers killed 
the king in his sleep, bringing the news, and the head 
of their victim, to David. David had the murderers 
executed and the head of Eshbaal was buried in the 
eravewith Abner. David nowruled over the whole of 
Israel. The Philistinesinvaded the country, but David 
escaped with considerable forces, and under divine 
guidance finally cleared the country of his enemies. 


David A5 


His next duty was to make the tribes into one 
nation, with a national consciousness. A predatory 
tribe still penetrated the Israelitish territory, with 
command of Jerusalem, which was protected by the 
fortress of Zion. Although this stronghold was 
reputed to be impregnable, David marched against 
it and succeeded in capturing it. The victory hada 
great significance, recognized by rulers outside his 
dominion, who, discerning in him a powerful enemy 
or a potential ally, sent him presents. Hiram, king 
of Tyre, supplied him with material and workers for a 
new palace. Jerusalem thus became the political 
center of the nation, and David, to make it also the 
religious center, brought there the ark of the cove- 
nant. 

David, a wise king and a great hero, delegated — 
much of his authority to his lieutenants, and estab- 
lished a royal bodyguard, which was the standing 
army of the country. Furthermore, he instituted a 
census for the purpose of military knowledge and for 
taxation. ‘The people showed their disagreement in 
this, and David received a divine reproof. On the 
whole, however, his reign was illustrious and became 
the great tradition of the people. 

(c) Davin’s declining years. 

Certain regrettable events of David’s earlier life 
detract from the beauty of his career. The inspired 
psalmist, the great warrior, the wise king, yet had 
to reckon with forces which he himself had loosed in 
his youth. He defeated the forces of Moab, Am- 
mon, and the Aramzan alliance, as well as Philistia 
and Syria, but trouble arose in his own household. 


46 Cho's Who in the Bible 


The prophet Nathan rebuked him for his intrigue 
with Bath-sheba and his complicity in the death of 
Uriah; although David confessed his sin and was 
penitent, the death of his child was foretold. Bath- 
sheba’s child died, but later she bore the king a son, 
Solomon. 

The king’s family became rebellious. Amnon 
outraged his half-sister Tamar, and was murdered 
by Absalom. Absalom, the beloved son of David, 
coveted the throne, rebelled, and was killed; Adonijah 
the eldest remaining son also revolted, and crowned 
himself king, trying to prevent Solomon’s inheriting 
the crown; he met a violent death under sentence 
from his half-brother Solomon, who was enthroned 
through the instrumentality of Nathan the prophet 
and David’s wife Bath-sheba. 

David died an old man, not without sin, and his 
final years were clouded by the defection of his own 
kin, but he was remembered as a just king and a 
wise ruler, the forerunner of a greater. 


DEBORAH .— Jud. 5:2 ff. 

An early heroine-queen of the Israelites, who freed 
her people from the oppression of the Canaanites. 
The tribe of Issachar, whose territory suffered most 
from the raiding bands, sent messengers demanding 
help, and the Israelites, rallying in a fairly united 
body under the leadership of Deborah, met and 
defeated the Canaanitish alliance under Sisera. 

Barak, Deborah’s ally, pursued Sisera, but 
found that he had been killed by Jael before his 
arrival. 


Dorcas A” 


DELILAH.—Jud. 16 
The woman, probably a Philistine, who fascinated 
Samson (q. v.) and betrayed him to his enemies. 


DEMAS.—Col. 4:14 

An apostate, who at one time was a co-worker with 
Paul. He is mentioned as a companion by Paul in 
his letters to the Colossians and to Philemon. In 
the second letter to Timothy it appears that while 
Paul was awaiting trial Demas succumbed to worldly 
pressure and deserted Christianity. 


DOEG.—I Sam. 21:7 ff. 

A runner attached to Saul’s army. The inter- 
view between David and Ahimelech [Ahijah] at Nob 
was witnessed by Doeg the Edomite who bore news 
to Saul of Ahimelech’s act of friendship to David. 

Saul, condemning Ahimelech to death for treason, 
found that the soldiers were reluctant to lay hands 
ontheholyman. Thetask was undertaken by Doeg, 
who not only killed Ahimelech, but massacred the 
population of the city of Nob, even slaughtering the 
cattle in his orgiastic ferocity. 


DORCAS.— Acts 9:36 


The alternative name of TABITHA, a woman dis- 
ciple living at Joppa, famed for her devotion and 
good works. She gave of her labor as well as of her 
goods. 

When she died at Joppa, the disciples there, hear- 
ing that Peter was at Lydda, sent messengers to him. 
When he arrived at Joppa he was told of the death 


48 Who's Who in the Bible 


of Dorcas, of her good works and her devotion. In 
testimony the widows whom she had aided showed 
to Peter the gifts she had bestowed on them. 

In the presence of the weeping women Peter raised 
Dorcas from the dead. 


EGLON.—Jud. 3:12 


A king of Moab. The divine agent of God’s anger 
against the Israelites, who had become idolatrous. In 
association with the Amalekites and Ammonites, 
Eglon took the city of Jericho, and held the Israelites 
in subjection for eighteen years. 

From his dominion they were released by Ehud, 
a Benjamite, who, pretending to take presents to 
Eglon, gained admission to the private chambers of 
the king, saying that he had a message to deliver 
from God. Immediately they were alone Ehud, a 
left-handed man, stabbed the king with a two-edged 
dagger, so forcibly that the haft itself was driven 
into the wound. Ehud made his escape and roused 
his countrymen, who surprised and defeated the 
Moabites. 


ELDAD.— Num. 11:26 


One of the 70 governors holding office under Moses. 

During the absence of Moses, who, with the other 
Elders, was inquiring of God, Eldad remained in 
carp with the wandering tribes, and, being moved 
by the spirit of God, prophesied. 

This brought him into conflict with Joshua, who 
felt that Eldad was usurping a power which belonged 
exclusively to Moses, and he laid information against 


Eli AQ 


Eldad when Moses returned. Moses, however, re- 
proved Joshua for his jealousy, saying, ‘‘Would God 
that all the Lord’s people were prophets, that the 
Lord would put his spirit upon them.”’ 


ELEAZAR.— Deut. 10:6 


The third son of Aaron and Elisheba. A priest 
and assistant to Aaron, whom he succeeded on his 
death. 

One of the census takers with Moses in the nurmber- 
ing of the people, and judge with Joshua in the 
apportionment of the land of Canaan to the twelve 
tribes. 


4 ELI—I Sam. 1:12 


A judge and high priest of Israel, of devout but 
wavering character, and unfortunate in his sons, 
Hophni and Phinehas, who, although they were 
priests, were disreputable and base. Eli, though 
aware of their conduct, instead of correcting their 
abuses contented himself with a mild reproof. He 
himself was therefore warned by the prophet, and 
rebuked for preferring his sons before God. In 
consequence of his weak conduct in this matter Eli 
was warned that his house must cease, and his sons 
should perish in one day. 

When the child Samuel was in the temple, the 
Lord appeared to him with a further warning to Elli. 
Eli, hearing the warning, did not protest against the 
divine decree, but awaited his doom. 

The Philistines attacked and defeated Israel, and 
Hophni and Phinehas brought the Ark of the Cove 


50 Cho's Who in the Bible 


nant from Shiloh, but the Philistines attacked once 
more, captured the Ark and slew the two sons of Eli. 
Eli, who awaited news at the gate of the city, 
overcome by the tragedy, fell and broke his neck. 


x ELIJAH.—II Kn. 1:6; I Kn. 17 

The prophet who saved Israel from heathenism. 

He was a picturesque figure in Israel, a man who 
had been raised in solitary places, of iron constitution 
so that he could withstand a forty days’ fast. Elijah 
was always plainly dressed in rough clothing of 
camel’s hair. His coming and going were indicative 
of his nature. He suddenly appeared, and as sud- 
denly departed. He talked with the people awhile, 
and was gone. 

During the time of his activities, Israel was in 
political alliance with Phoenicia, and Ahab had mar- 
ried Jezebel for political reasons. Jezebel brought 
her religion with her. Temples were erected to Baal 
at which foreign priests ministered. The prophets of 
Israel were persecuted and the worship of Jehovah 
was threatened. 

Elijah suddenly appeared before Ahab and pro- 
phesied drought. Immediately he had uttered his 
prophecy he disappeared, taking solitary refuge at 
the brook Cherith where he was fed by ravens until 
the brook dried up, when he went to Zarephath. 
Here he was ministered to by a poor widow, whose 
cruse contained little, but was kept supplied by the 
miraculous intervention of the prophet. The wid- 
ow’s son dying, Elijah raised the child again to life. 

Ahab, finding the drought continuous, sought 


Elijah 51 


Elijah in anger, but failed to discover him. For 
three years the drought was maintained, and 
Elijah appeared suddenly before Ahab’s steward, 
Obadiah, telling him to bring his master. From this 
meeting came the dramatic contest between the rival 
religions. 

Among the four hundred prophets of Baal, Elijah 
stood alone, flailing them with his sarcasm at the 
silence and impotence of their god, and rebuking 
the people for the dismantled altars of Jehovah. The 
prophets of Baal having failed, Elijah drenched his 
altar and sacrifice with water, and called upon 
Jehovah to manifest himself. Fire descended upon 
the altar and consumed sacrifice, water, and all. The 
people rose. The prophets of Baal were massacred. 
The drought ceased, but Elijah fled for his life, fear- 
ing the vengeance of Jezebel, taking refuge in the 
desert, where he received a new revelation. In 
neither earthquake, storm, nor fire was God to be 
found, but in the succeeding calm he heard the ‘“‘still 
small voice” ... the contrast between force and 
conscience. 

Returning to his labor he found Elisha at the 
plow and took him as companion and follower. 

His next appearance before Ahab was to rebuke the 
king for his duplicity and crime in connection with 
Naboth’s vineyard. Working on the incident, Elijah 
prophesied the overthrow of the king. 

When, later, the king was ill, he sent to the shrine 
of Baal to see if he would recover. Elijah met the 
messengers, and called down the fire of God on them. 
The third messenger bore a humbler question from 


52 Cho's ho in the Bible 


the king, but Elijah, answering before Ahab in 
person, repeated his word of destruction. 

Elijah now retired into the wilderness, and in the 
presence of Elisha was translated, investing Elisha 
with his power and sending him to continue the 
work. 


ELISHA.—J Kn. 19:16 


Son of Shephat of the tribe of Issachar. The suc- 
cessor of Elijah. 

Found plowing by the older prophet, when 
Elijah threw his mantle over the young man’s 
shoulders, Elisha accepted the call, and bidding 
farewell to his kin traveled with Elijah for several 
years. 

Unlike Elijah, Elisha was a town dweller, and 
friend and counselor of the kings of Israel, Judah, 
Moab, and Syria. 

His first act was to cleanse the waters of Jericho, 
but he was a man of quick temper and sudden ven- 
geance. Tradition is preserved which speaks of 
Elisha’s journeys, on one of which the mischievous 
children of the wayside jeered at him, ‘‘Go up, thou 
bald head,” doubtless referring to the translation of 
Elijah. By way of punishment, some forty of the 
boys perished in a raid by she-bears. 

For Elisha the ‘‘prophet’s chamber” was built by 
a rich woman of Shunem. In return, when the 
woman’s son died Elisha restored him to life. 

During famine Elisha transformed poison into 
food, and multiplied twenty barley loaves into 
sufficient sustenance for a hundred men. 


Enoch 5G 


He healed the Syrian Naaman of leprosy, refusing 
reward, but when the servant, Gehazi, sought to take 
the reward by trickery, Elisha caused the leprosy to 
descend upon him. 

During the war with Moab, Elisha provided water 
for the Israelitish army and warned the king of 
Syrian ambushes, so frustrating Ben-hadad, who, 
learning of the presence of Elisha, sent men to take 
him captive. | 

Elisha, however, visited blindness on his enemies, 
and led them into captivity, but, having taught them 
their lesson, released them. The invading king had 
also learned his lesson and the raiding ceased. 

Elisha did not confine his wanderings to his own 
country, nor was he blind to the sins of his people, 
but, infuriated by the apostasy of Ahab, anointed 
Hazael at Damascus to be the scourge of Israel. 
Disaster followed Israel for some time, and wars 
thinned and impoverished the people, but after a 
period of doubt and defeat Elisha enthused Joash to 
victory and the subsequent happiness of his people. 


ENOCH.—Gen. 5:18 


One of the early descendants of Adam. There are 
two possible calculations to be made from the 
accounts in Genesis; one makes him the ‘‘seventh 
- from Adam” and the other makes him the son of 
Cain, which suggests he is the third from Adam. 

Tradition invests Enoch with great activities. 
He was a preacher and prophet, commanding repent- 
ance and foretelling future events, possessed of 
supernatural powers and knowledge. His character, 


54 @iho’s Who in the Bible 


however, derives its chief significance from his friend- 
ship with God, and the account of his translation to 
heaven without knowing death. 


EPAPHRAS.—Col. 1:7 


A friend of St. Paul’s, and a fellow worker. As 
Paul’s representative he founded the church in 
Colosse, of which place he was a resident. It is 
probable also that he introduced Christianity to 
Hierapolis and Laodicea. 

He is spoken of as Paul’s fellow prisoner, for he 
visited Paul during his captivity, and took news of 
the church at Colosse to Rome, and consulted with 
him concerning the heresies that were gaining ground. 
The epistle of Paul to the Colossians is the outcome 
of this visit, being taken back to the church by 
Epaphras on his return home. 

Epaphras is an abbreviation of the name Epaphro- 
ditus, but the two should not be confused. (See 
Epaphroditus.) 


EPAPHRODITUS.—Phil. 2:25 


The ‘‘brother, fellow worker, and fellow soldier”’ 
of St. Paul, and messenger to the apostle with gifts 
from the Philippians during Paul’s first imprison- 
ment at Rome. His stay in Rome was an adventure 
for the faith, for Epaphroditus is recorded as hav- 
ing hazarded his life and been near to death, but 
he recovered. 

News of his illness having reached Philippi, his 
friends urged his return, and he was sent home by 
Paul to ease the minds of the people of the church 


Esau 55 


at Philippi, probably carrying the epistle to the 
Philippians with him. 


EPHRAIM.—Gen. 48:14 


The son of Joseph and Asenath, daughter of Poti- 
phera priest of On, therefore the grandson of Jacob. 
He was adopted by Jacob, and formally blessed as 
the firstborn. Founder of the tribe of Ephraim, the 
strongest of the tribes and the most difficult oppo- 
nents of David when he came to unite the people into 
a nation. 


ESARHADDON.—IT Kun. 19:37 


A king of Assyria, succeeding to the throne after 
Sennacherib his father. He reigned 13 years, and 
restored Babylon, which his father had destroyed. 
One of the most powerful kings of the North, a great 
general, and deeply religious. He subdued Syria, 
Babylon, Manasseh, and established Samaria as a 
colony, making three important expeditions against 
Egypt before he finally consolidated his hold on the 
territories of the North. Throughout, parallel with 
his military exploits, he garrisoned the cities of con- 
quered territories and appointed tributary rulers, 
and caused the temples to be re-established and 
restored. 


ESAU.—Gen. 25:25 

“The shaggy haired”’ is the best translation of this 
name of the hunter son of Isaac. ‘The most familiar 
incident in his life is the bartering of his birthright 


56 Ciiho’s Who in the Bible 


and his subsequent rivalry, enmity, and reconciliation 
to his brother Jacob. Esau however was a warrior 
of no little prowess, and is reputed to be the founder 
of the Edomites. He conquered and expelled the 
Horites from Seir, and established himself with his 
followers there. | 

He dispossessed himself by the sale of his birth- 
right, which was probably far more significant than is 
generally understood. With the sale of his birth- 
right Esau forfeited precedence at his father’s death, 
as well, perhaps, as the office of priest in the family, 
and certainly the double portion of his father’s goods. 
Esau’s inclinations and practices were essentially 
materialistic, and he attempted to recover his posi- 
tion in the family by taking to himself a wife (his 
third) of his own people, but Jacob, by subterfuge, 
discounted Esau’s return to favor, and he was 
condemned to live by war and hunting. Esau de- 
termined to wrest his possessions from Jacob by 
hunting and killing him, but after twenty years of 
enmity the brothers were reconciled and Esau retired 
to Seir. 


ESTHER.— Esth. 2:7 


A brave and beautiful woman, who risked death 
to save her people. She figures as one of the great 
women of the world, and as one of the most beautiful. 
The daughter of Abihail, and of the tribe of Ben- 
jamin, she was brought up, after the death of her 
parents, in the house of her cousin Mordecai, at 
Shushan, where, because of her charm, she became 
an inmate of the king’s palace. Vashti, the queen, 


€sekiel 57 


was divorced for disobedience, and Esther was ap- 
pointed by Xerxes, king of Persia, to take her place. 

In the territory of the king were a large number 
of Jews, fellow countrymen of Esther and Mordecai, 
in danger of massacre at the instigation and through 
the trickery of Haman, the court favorite. Haman’s 
conspiracies were frustrated by Esther and her cousin 
through Esther’s revealing her nationality to the king, 
who perceived that if his decree—obtained by false 
pretenses—were carried out his queen would suffer. 
Her disclosures completely turned the tables. Ha- 
man suffered the penalties he had devised for others, 
and Esther found her position strengthened, and with 
it the possibility of rendering service to her kinsmen. 

The Jews were allowed to take revenge on those 
who had plotted against them, and proclamations 
were made that Jewish festivals were to be instituted 
and maintained. Mordecai was elevated to the posi- 
tion and honors that previously belonged to Haman, 
and Esther continued in power and peace. 


EZEKIEL.— Ezek. 1:3 


The son of Buzi a priest of the line of Zadoc, who 
was carried into captivity with Jehoiakim. Ezekiel, 
who lived in his own house, organized a Jewish com- 
munity in exile, whom he served, subsequent to a 
call, by a divine vision. For some time at least 
Ezekiel was not in favor with his fellow exiles, for 
there are passages which reflect their resentment of 
his preaching, but it is certain that many were 
ultimately gathered round him and met at his house 
and responded to Ezekiel, who appears to have 


58 Wiho’s Who in the Bible 


been a man of very strong character and authority, 
undeterred by danger, or hardship, or even personal 
suffering in the pursuit of his mission. On the death 
of his wife, Ezekiel put aside his private sorrow, and 
continued his labors. ‘Tradition states that Ezekiel 
was murdered by a Jew whom he had censured for 
apostasy. \ 

His message to the people in captivity was natur- 
ally one of hope and repatriation, but his vision of 
the return was not as a sovereign race or as a nation, 
but rather as a religious community. He saw a 
people actually under the kingship of God, centered 
around the temple, which is minutely described by 
Ezekiel. The physical king is to be simply a figure- 
head, maintained as a sign of unity, but the actual 
ruler is to be the Lord God. In this conception of 
Israel as a people ruled by Jehovah, Ezekiel laid the 
foundation of a new thought in Israel, and the idea 
has persisted. Most of the later teaching echoes 
his restatement of the place of the tribes in the design 
of God’s purpose. 


EZRA.—Ez. 7 ff. 


A Jewish exile in Babylon during the reign of Cyrus. 
He was of priestly lineage, and played an important 
part in the period of reform and reconstruction of 
Jerusalem under the governorship of Nehemiah. 

In the book of Ezra the account is given of the 
kingly edict permitting such Jews as wished to return 
to Jerusalem. Some 40,000 availed themselves of 
the opportunity, under Joshua as high priest and 
Zerubbabel as governor. They found hostile neigh- 


€3ra 59 


bors and the building of the temple was suspended 
until the reign of Darius I and finally completed 
some twenty-three years after the Return. 

The returned community, however, developed 
decadent and apostate tendencies in religion, and 
suffered much privation and poverty, which con- 
trasted ill with the condition in which the Jews who 
still remained in Babylonia found themselves. It is 
in the reform of this condition that Ezra’s personal 
work was significant. 

He was a keen student of the Law, and of great 
literary activity among the happily situated Jews in 
Babylon, but distressed by the knowledge of affairs 
at Jerusalem, he prevailed on the king (Artaxerxes 
I) to permit a mission to his fellow countrymen for 
the purpose of enthusing and reforming them. By 
reason of favor at court he received permission for 
such as desired to undertake the mission to go, and 
to restore the services in the temple. Ezra gathered 
a company about him, and took the arduous journey, 
which lasted for several months, across the desert. 
Arrived at Jerusalem, Ezra found a condition worse 
than he believed. The people had no religious 
loyalty and before he could set them to work on the 
defenses of the city he had first to enthuse them 
with a religious spirit, and to re-establish the au- 
thority of the law. He accomplished the necessary 
religious and social reforms after much labor, and 
when the Jews were once more loyal to their religion 
and to God, he set them to the erection and rededi- 
cation of the walls of Jerusalem, which also was 
finally accomplished. 


60 Ciiho’s Who in the Bible 


FELIX.—Acts 23:24 


The procurator of Judea, probably appointed 
around the year 52 A.D., and brother of Pallas, who 
was in high favor at the court in Rome. Felix 
according to the Roman historians was a man of 
cruel and vicious habits, and a bad ruler. He was 
impressed by Paul’s preaching, but kept him in prison 
at first, hoping for a bribe as the price of liberty, but 
later, because of pressure from the Jews. 


FESTUS (PORCIUS).—Acts 26:24 


Successor, as procurator of Jerusalem, to Felix. 
His term of office was short but much more notable 
for statesmanship and wisdom than that of his 
predecessor. Paul respected him, because he re- 
fused at first to surrender him to the Jews, but Festus 
probably was weakening in his opposition to the 
Jewish enemies of Paul, for the apostle, obviously ex- 
pecting that ultimately Festus would pass him on to 
his enemies, appealed to Cesar, and was sent to Rome. 


GABRIEL.— Dan. 7:10 


One of the seven anchangels who lead the heavenly 
hosts. He is encountered in the Bible as the messen- 
ger of God sent to announce forthcoming events. 

He appeared twice to Daniel, once with the inter- 
pretation of a vision, and again to foretell disaster. 

In the New Testament he appeared to Zacharias, 
and announced the birth of a son, John the Baptist, 
to Elizabeth, Zacharias’ wife. 

Also he was sent to the Virgin Mary to announce 
the birth of Jesus. 


@allio 61 


GAD. 

(a) Gen. 30:11 

There are three persons of this name in the Old 
Testament. One was a local god in Canaan before 
the conquest of the country by the Israelites. 

(b) I Chr. 29:29 

Another was a prophet before David, and his 
counselor. He announced God’s anger with David 
on the taking of the census, and also advised the 
erection of an altar on Araunah’s threshing floor. 

(c) Gen. 35:26 

The most important character, however, is that 
Gad who was the founder of the tribe bearing his 
name. He was the son of Zilpah (Leah’s handmaid), 
by Jacob. The tribe which he founded was con- 
siderable in numbers and of a warlike disposition. 
They settled in Gilead, on the east side of the Jordan, 
after having assisted the other tribes in the conquest 
of Canaan. 

During the time of the Judges, Gilead was overrun 
by the Ammonites, but the country was delivered by 
Jephthah (q.v.). The tribe of Gad supported David 
in his troubles with Saul, and was an ally of Jero- 
boam, who established his capital (Penuel) in their 
territory. The Gadites were taken into captivity 
by Tiglath-Pileser when Ahaz was defeated by the 
confederation of the kings of Syria, Edom, and Israel. 


GALLIO.—Acts 18:12 ff. 

The proconsul of Achaia in the reign of the 
Emperor Claudius. St. Paul was brought before him 
on a trumped-up charge. Gallio, learning that there 


62 Cho's Who in the Bible 


was nothing criminal laid against the apostle, but 
that the dispute was one which the Jews, as a self- 
regulating community, could have decided for them- 
selves, drove the informers out of his presence. 

Tradition speaks of Gallio as a gentle ruler, and 
reports that he was executed by Nero. Another 
tradition recounts that he committed suicide, but 
neither is supported by accredited historians. 


GAMALIEL.— Acts 5:34 ff. 


A famous Pharisee, descendant of Hillel, and one 
of the most learned authorities on the Jewish Law 
in his generation. St. Paul was at one time a student 
under him. 

Gamaliel was a member of the Sanhedrin during 
the lifetime of Jesus, and was a tolerant, humane 
leader, interpreting the spirit of the law rather than 
its letter. In his dealings with the apostles he was 
just and kind. 


GEDALIAH.—Jer. 26:24 


The governor ‘‘of the poor’ under Nebuchad- 
nezzar, and friend of Jeremiah, whom he protected 
from his adversaries, and whose views he shared. 

Gedaliah was treacherously murdered after two 
months of office. 


GEHAZI.—II Kn. 5:20 ff. 


The man who ought to have been the successor of 
Elisha, but lacked the moral character. He was 
Elisha’s attendant, in the same way that Elisha 
attended Elijah. The Bible gives no account of his 


Gideon 63 


call, but we find him in close personal relationship 
with the prophet, and discussing the means of re- 
warding the Shunammite woman who had befriended 
Elisha in his flight. The woman refused social 
honors, but Gehazi reminded Elisha that she was 
childless. The prophet promised that she should bear 
ason. The prediction was fulfilled, but when the 
child was grown to bea youth he died, and the mother 
sought Elisha, who sent his servant with his own 
staff to work a miracle. There may be the first 
indication of Gehazi’s insincerity in the fact that his 
prayers availed nothing, but on Elisha’s arrival the 
miracle was performed. 

Like Elisha, Gehazi must have been well received 
at court, for there are accounts of his presence there. 

His greed and unscrupulousness, however, were 
speedily demonstrated. Elisha refused to receive 
reward from the Syrian general, Naaman, but 
Gehazi followed the general’s entourage to beg a 
trifling gift for his master and his supposed guests. 
He received his booty, and hidit. The prophet how- 
ever accused him of his treachery, and summarily 
cursed him with the leprosy that had been cleansed 
from Naaman. Thereafter we read nothing more 
of the man who might have been a great prophet, but 
preferred to be a petty rogue. 


 GIDEON.—Jud. 6 ff. 


A prophet and warrior who refused to become king 
of the Israelites. 

He appeared in a time of oppression. The Israel- 
ites had forsaken their worship of God, and had 


64 Wiho’s Who in the Bible 


turned to foreign gods. The Midianites invaded 
and terrorized them. During the time of national 
desolation an angel appeared to Gideon, as the mes- 
senger of God. Gideon asked him for a sign of his 
divine authority and it was given in the miraculous 
consumption by fire issuing from a rock of the offer- 
ings Gideon laid out. Thereafter, finally convinced 
that God had called him, Gideon undertook the 
restoration of Israel. He destroyed the altars to 
foreign gods, and established an army. When the 
Midianites descended again in force, he led out his 
army, but the vast number was reduced first to ten 
thousand men and finally to three hundred. Each 
of the soldiers was furnished with a torch, an earthen 
jar, and a horn. Carrying these with them, in a 
night attack on the invaders, the three hundred men 
at a signal broke the jars and allowed the torches to 
be seen. In the clamor of the blasts on the horns 
the Midianites became panic stricken and fled, with 
Gideon in pursuit, across Jordan. During the pursuit 
he found it necessary to halt his men for food and 
rest, but the inhabitants of the territory being 
unfriendly, Gideon threatened them with revenge on 
his return. Resuming the chase he overtook the 
Midianites and again defeated them. Returning, he 
exacted vengeance on the unfriendly peoples. 

The Israelites offered him kingship, which he re- 
fused, announcing that God was the king of Irsael. 
During his lifetime Gideon kept the Israelites loyal 
to their God, but on his death reaction onee 
more set in, and altars toother gods were reintro- 
duced. 


Habakkuk 65 


GOG.— Ezek. 38:2 


It is not generally realized that the three terrors of 
popular mythology, Og, Gog, and Magog, have their 
origin in reality and Biblical history, but such is the 
case. Gog, with whom we deal first alphabetically, 
was probably a leader of a horde of raiding adventur- 
ers who descended from the North on Israel, and is 
pictured as leading his host in warfare on the restored 
people, but disastrously defeated by divine inter- 
vention in the mountains of Canaan. Gog and 
Magog figure largely in the religious teachings of the 
Jews as being the leaders in the last futile assault on 
the Kingdom of God. 


GOLIATH.—I Sam. 17:43 


The giant champion of the Philistines who was 
slain by David. Goliath was six cubits and a span 
high (probably about ten feet) and in armor must 
have been a worthy champion of the invading forces. 
The test, whereby David and Goliath measured each 
other, and their respective armies, who watched the 
fight, was also reckoned a test of the strength of the 
gods of the combatants, and the issues involved were 
all decided in that single conflict. 

David having won, hung the trophies of sword, and 
probably other weapons, in the holy place at Nob, and 
the Philistines, believing their god was overthrown, 
accepted the result and fled. 


HABAKKUK.—(See book bearing his name) 


A prophet, probably resident in Jerusalem. Little 
is known concerning him as an individual, except 


66 Cho's Who in the Bible 


that from time to time, in moments of national 
emergency, he appeared, prophesied, and disap- 
peared again. He lived in a time of social oppres- 
sion, when morals were debased, the poor ravaged, 
religion held in contempt, and he sought a Divine 
interference. He received intimation that a new 
catastrophic manifestation of Divine justice would 
be given. The Chaldeans would devastate the land 
and destroy Jerusalem. Nothing could withstand 
them. 

Habakkuk watched the progress of the invader, 
who made conditions a thousand times worse than 
they were, and the prophet turned again to God, 
asking why the invader who was more wicked than 
the Israelites could go unpunished. Habakkuk 
retired to his watch tower, and, seeing the world in 
ruins, was commanded to write down the oracle 
which he received. He was told that the purpose 
of God was progressing, that it was near fulfilment. 
‘The just shall live in his faithfulness.’’ 

Moved by this the prophet spoke again, uttering 
the fivefold woes against pride, greed, cruelty, vice, 
and idolatry, and finally the song in glory of the 
power of God, his ultimate appearance to deliver 
Israel, and the wisdom of trust in him. 


HADAD.—I Kn. 11:14 


An Edomite prince, who fled from the campaign of 
extirpation prosecuted by Joab in the reign of David. 
Edom was captured, and Hadad took refuge with a 
neighboring king to whom he was related by mar- 
riage. On the death of David, Hadad returned as a 


Haggai 67 


deliverer to Edom, which he re-established during the 
reign (and to the disadvantage) of Solomon. 


HAGAR.—Gen. 16:1 


The Egyptian maid-servant of Sarah, Abraham’s 
wife. According to the custom of the time, when 
Sarah despaired of bearing children, she sent Hagar 
to Abraham as his concubine. Hagar vaunted her 
position to the irritation of Sarah, and was driven 
out, but, told in a vision to return, she obeyed, and 
gave birth to Ishmael. 

Isaac, however, the son “‘born through promise’’: 
to Sarah, turned Sarah against Hagar, and particu- 
larly against Ishmael, her son, because of fear and 
jealousy. Abraham was prevailed upon to send 
Hagar and her son once more into the wilderness, 
but the ‘‘angel of the Lord”’ was with her, and she 
was guided to Paran, where they settled. 


« HAGGAI.—(See book bearing his name) 


The prophet who encouraged the Jews in the 
reconstruction of the temple. So far as can be traced 
his activities were very limited as to time. Probably 
he preached for only a few months, and in the reign 
of Darius Hystaspes. So far as is known he was 
born in Babylon, but returned to Jerusalem, where he 
was associated with Zechariah. 

Haggai had the usual enemies of reconstruction 
opposed to him: popular indifference, a crowd of 
‘‘die-hards,’’ who believed that there could be no- 
thing to equal the good old days, and the company of 
critics who believed that ‘‘nothing could be done.” 


68 Cho's Who in the Bible 


As a result of his agitation, however, the temple 
was finally finished, about four years after the work 
was begun. 

He tackled the luxury lovers first, and pointed 
to the impoverished and paltry condition of the 
House of the Lord, contrasting it with the lavish 
embellishment of the houses of the Jews. The taunt 
went home, and there were recruits and donations to 
the work of the Temple. The die-hards, however, 
who had seen the beauty of the first Temple laughed 
the reconstructed Temple to scorn, but Haggai 
energized and finally silenced them by pointing to 
the disturbances in the political affairs of the sur- 
rounding nations. ‘The subject states were beginning 
to rebel against Persia, and the downfall of Persia 
might well have been the beginning of a new era of 
prosperity for the Israelites. Haggai prophesied that 
the ‘‘wealth of the nations’’ would flow to Jerusalem, 
and the Temple would be richer and more beautiful 
than ever before. But as time went on and distress 
continued, the carpers mocked, and Haggai found 
anew company to deal with. These he silenced by 
the just‘admonition that a protracted period of lazi- 
ness and luxury could not be overcome by a little 
righteous endeavor. The decay had been too long 
in existence to be remedied at once, but time 
would heal. 


HANANIAH.—Jer. 28:11 

There are a dozen people of this name mentioned 
in the Bible, the best known being the ‘‘lying pro- 
phet’’ whom Jeremiah gondemned for false prophecy. 


Hannah 69 


Hananiah, seeking popular approval, prophesied 
what the people wanted to hear, contrary to Jere- 
miah’s pessimism. ‘The false prophet, to appease and 
propitiate the people, staged a dramatic encounter 
with Jeremiah. Confronting him he prophesied that 
within two years the captive king (Jeconiah) and 
the people would return from Babylon, and bring 
back the treasures of the Temple with them. To 
give point to his prophecy he broke the yoke 
which the prophet Jeremiah carried, and said, ‘‘Thus 
saith the Lord: Even so will I break the yoke of 
King Nebuchadnezzar . . . from off the neck of all © 
the nations.” 

In reply Jeremiah refuted the prophecy, and in turn 
prophesied that because Hananiah had caused the 
people to trust in a lie he should die within the year. 
The prophecy was fulfilled. Hananiah died within 
the year. 


HANNAH.—TZ Sam. 2:1 


The wife of Elkanah, who, because she was child- 
less, came periodically to the temple at Shiloh, to pray 
that she might bear a child to her husband. In her 
importunity she vowed that if God would grant her 
a man-child he should be dedicated to the service of 
the Lord all the days of his life. As she was mutter- 
ing in the temple, Eli, the priest, mistook her fer- 
vency for intoxication, but, discovering his error, 
gave her his blessing and prayed with her for the 
blessing she implored. 

Samuel was born some time later, and was dedi- 
cated to the service of the temple immediately he 


70 @ho’s UWihs in the Bible 


was weaned. Thereafter she visited him regularly, 
bringing him vestments for his office. Subsequently 
Hannah bore five other children to Elkanah, three 
sons and two daughters. 


HAZAEL.—I Kn. 19:15 


A murderous usurper, but a successful general who 
succeeded Ben-hadad II. So far as it can exactly 
be ascertained from the Biblical account, Ben-hadad, 
being ill, sent Hazael to inquire of Elisha whether 
he would regain his health. Hazael, in his confer- 
ence with Elisha, arranged the murder of Ben-hadad. 

Elisha designated Hazael as the successor to Ben- 
hadad on the throne. 

Thereafter we discover Hazael fighting the com- 
bined forces of Joram and Ahaziah, leading the 
armies of Israel and Judah respectively, but the result 
of the battle is left unstated. However, subsequent 
events prove that Hazael was victorious and held the 
upper hand until his death. 


“HEROD THE GREAT.— Mai. 2 


The merciless son of Antipater. Despite his 
marked courage, brilliant mind, and undoubted prow- 
ess, Herod was ruled by an ungovernable passion, 
and towards the end of his life all generosity of char- 
acter had disappeared and he gave himself to the 
unrestrained expression of the cruelty inherent in 
him, most clearly demonstrated by the ruthless 
slaughter of the Innocents, a crime even more 
despicable than the murder of his wife Mariamme 


Herod Antipas 71 


and his own children. He did, however, secure 
safety for his people from foreign enemies, but not 
from himself. 

Herod made definite contributions to the well- 
being of the people, which are not generally credited 
to him. The Roman Empire was crowding in on 
Palestine, and Roman influence and power were 
inevitably destined to control. Therefore the cities 
built by Herod bore imperial titles; at the same time 
Herod jealously guarded the rights and privileges 
of the Jews. Until his death the Jews enjoyed 
practical self-government, but with a shortsighted- 
ness that could not have prevailed in Herod’s time, 
the Jews petitioned for direct Roman rule with the 
passing of Herod. This impetuous lack of vision 
they lived to regret. 


HEROD ANTIPAS.—WMai. 14:1 


A better ruler than Archelaus, but finally sharing 
the same fate. He isdescribed as the Tetrarch, ruler 
of Galilee. Our Lord called him a ‘‘fox,’’ in that 
he was a man who achieved his end by cunning rather 
than strength. His craftiness kept him on the throne 
for many years, but he offended the Jewish con- 
ventions by marrying his brother’s wife, Herodias, 
thus invoking the wrath and contempt of John 
the Baptist. The lustful marriage proved his defeat. 
Spurred on by the ambitions of his wife, who desired 
him to surpass Herod Agrippa, he appealed to Cesar 
for the prerogative of the royal title. The Emperor 
smelled treason in this request, and Herod was 
banished, and died in exile. 


72 Who's Wihs in the Bible 


HEROD AGRIPPA I.—Acts 12 


At one time the most renowned of the descendants 
of Herod the Great. Herod Agrippa was trained at 
the imperial court, and was fully versed in the life 
of a courtier. Brilliant, intriguing, and immoral as 
he was, he retained sufficient statesmanship to dis- 
suade Caligula from erecting a statue to himself in 
the Temple. It might have cost him his life and 
fortune to oppose the dictator, but it gained him a 
certain favor with Caligula’s successor, and, about 
the year 39 A.D., he was appointed to Jerusalem, 
where the Jews received him happily. At Rome he 
was already in favor. He gained the favor of most 
of the influential Jews by the persecution of the 
Christians, and it seemed that he would enjoy an 
undisturbed reign. His proposal to rebuild the 
walls of the city, however, was rejected, and his 
position became less secure as his personal vanity 
increased. He paraded his forces at Cesarea, preen- 
ing himself in pride before the populace, and ‘“‘at 
once vying with God and Cesar.’”’ Overtaken by a 
painful and terrible disease he died in tortured agony. 


HEZEKIAH.—TJI Kn. 20:12 


Son of and successor to Ahaz, king of Judah, 
Hezekiah was projected at once into a difficult situ- 
ation, but proved himself one of the greatest kings 
of Judah. Ahaz had submitted to vassalage, and 
was governed by Assyria, but at the time of Heze- 
kiah’s succession the Egyptians were using the rising 
unrest of the smaller kingdoms and stirring them to 
an effort for independence. The Assyrians were 


Hesekiah 73 


in trouble all round. The Israelites, the Egyptians, 
and the Babylonians (to the East) were all pressing 
against the yoke of Assyria. Hezekiah waited his 
favorable opportunity, which came soon after 
Sennacherib ascended to the throne of Assyria, and 
then joined the coalition against the oppressor. 
Isaiah, with his customary opposition to foreign 
alliances, protested against alliance with Egypt, but 
Hezekiah kept to his plans. When Philistia showed 
some unwillingness to act, Hezekiah invaded the 
territory and took the king prisoner, seizing the 
territory to add to his own kingdom. ‘The success 
was short-lived however, for Sennacherib took the 
offensive, and appeared before the kingdom. ‘There 
was little possibility of resistance. Inscriptions tell 
us that nearly a quarter of a million prisoners were 
captured by the invader and taken into captivity. 
Nearly fifty cities were overpowered, and the Egyp- 
tians, probably overwhelmed by the success of Sen- 
nacherib, failed to come to the assistance of their ally. 
Hezekiah, after the battle, received Sennacherib’s 
mission at Jerusalem, and once more abjectly sub- 
mitted to the vassalage that he sought to escape. 
Peace was secured at a heavy price, even the Temple 
doors had to be melted down to pay the tribute. 

In the religious life of his people, however, is the 
greatness of Hezekiah’s reform, and the real quality 
of theman. He destroyed the brazen serpent, which 
had become an object of worship, in the Temple, and 
wiped out idolatry from the outlying sanctuaries. 

When Sennacherib made a second invasion of the 
country, the invaders were either overcome in batile, 


74 Ciihe’s bo in the Bible 


or weakened by pestilence, for their armies were 
turned back. Hezekiah is credited in this with a 
great deliverance. Whether it was his generalship 
or the ravages of disease that secured the deliverance 
is not clearly known. 


HILKIAH. 


A very general name in the Old Testament. The 
best known of the men so named is the high priest 
who, during the rebuilding of the Temple, produced 
the Book of the Law (II Kn. 22:8). Hilkiah claims to 
have found the book, but concerning that there is 
some little doubt. In any event the high priest 
brought the book to the notice of Josiah, and it was 
made the basis of religious reforms. Hilkiah was 
the spokesman and leader of the deputation sent to 
Huldah to consult with him on the ‘‘discovery,’’ and 
later he led the reforms resulting from this discovery. 


HIRAM.—1IT Sam. 5:11 


The King of Tyre who befriended David, and gave 
him material for the construction of his palace, and 
sent workmen to carry out the erection. The friend- 
ship was cemented and became a political alliance 
when Solomon succeeded David to the throne. 
Gifts were exchanged between Solomon and Hiram, 
and it is recorded in I Kings that Solomon increased 
the territory of Hiram by ceding to him twenty cities 
of the land of Galilee. The gift did not altogether 
please Hiram, and he sought to show what a munifi- 
cent gift really was by returning six score talents of 
gold as an offering to Solomon. According to I 


DHoshea 75 


Chronicles, it is Hiram who cedes the cities, although 
the number is not stated. 


HOSEA.—(See book bearing his name) 


The son of Beeri, and a native of the northern 
kingdom. Hosea prophesied from the time of the 
fall of the house of Jeroboam to the outbreak of war 
with Syria. He was born into a troubled and dis- 
astrous time for his people. The glory of the king- 
dom consolidated by Jeroboam II was passing, and 
probably inspired by his contemporary, Amos, Hosea 
accused the northern kingdom of deserting God, and 
promised the consequent punishment. Hosea took 
familiar incidents, such as the use of the potter’s 
wheel, allegorically, driving his message home by 
appeal to things that are of common experience. 
It would seem also that he used his own domestic 
troubles as lessons to Israel, for he refers to the 
departure of his own wife, Gomer. However, Hosea 
could not let her depart; out of his love he sought 
her again, and restored her. The burden of his 
message to the nations is, that in like manner the 
favor of the Lord will return to Israel. 


HOSHEA.—II Kn. 15:30 


The king with whom ended the Kingdom of Israel. 
This last king of Israel, who reigned about the year 
732 B.C., appears to have had as little statesmanship 
as he had success. He came to power at a time when 
there were two factions in Samaria, one seeking 
alliance with Assyria, the other party opposing such 
alliance. Hoshea fell between two stools; trying 


76 CHho’s Who in the Bible 


to make the best of both parties, he made the worst of 
his kingdom. Originally inclined to Assyria, and in 
fact the ‘‘nominee’”’ of the Assyrians, he received 
support against the rival claims to the throne of 
Pekah, whom he defeated with the help of the Assy- 
rians. ‘Tiglath-Pileser, king of Assyria, who co-oper- 
ated with Hoshea died, and the Israelitish king, 
insecure in his own estate and inefficient in his states- 
manship, was readily compromised by the sedition of 
an Egyptian ruler, and joined the other party of his 
people, who were ready to rebel against Assyria and 
escape the heavy taxation. Shalmaneser IV, how- 
ever, who succeeded Tiglath-Pileser, was no less a 
general or capable a ruler than Tiglath-Pileser. He 
came suddenly down on the Israelites, captured the 
king, and laid siege to the capital. After two years 
of privation the people surrendered, and their sur- 
render was followed by wholesale deportations. The 
Assyrians had the habit of removing the population 
from captured countries—a quick and simple means 
of completely subjugating conquered territory. Shal- 
maneser died, and Sargon, a worthy successor, con- 
tinued the dismemberment of Israel, establishing 
an Assyrian governor in the province. In this 
manner Israel ended as a kingdom; the result was 
practically foretold by the prophets, who preached 
without ceasing against the futility of alliances with 
the surrounding nations. 


ISAAC.—Gen. 17:17 


The name means ‘‘he laughs,” and may, have 
some relation to the sense of confidence which is 


Ssaiah Tie | 


characteristic of Isaac. The son of Abraham and 
Sarah had a supreme test of his confidence in 
Abraham on the occasion when his father, obeying 
the inner call, took Isaac ‘‘to the land of Moriah,”’ 
there to be offered as a burnt sacrifice to God. 
Isaac’s unexpected, last minute escape, due to divine 
interference, is one of the most dramatic episodes in 
the Old Testament. 

Isaac married Rebekah, and for long the two 
were childless, but finally Esau and Jacob were born. 
Famine caused the family to migrate, and with the 
change Isaac profited tremendously, so that the 
Philistines, his neighbors, were envious of his 
wealth, and he was compelled to move once more. 
As an old man, and failing, Isaac prepared to bestow 
his blessings on Esau and Jacob, and, by the skill of 
Rebekah, the blessings were reversed, Esau receiving 
the ‘‘second son’s portion’’ and Jacob being treated 
as the firstborn. It is obvious that Isaac was of a 
weaker personality than his wife, for while he wished 
to undo what he had done in error, he was over- 
come and allowed his mistake to stand. The 
sons for long were enemies, but, finally being recon- 
ciled, the breach which had been caused by trick- 
ery and weakness was healed, and prosperity 
followed both. Isaac died at an advanced age 
at Hebron, and was buried by his sons in the cave 
of Machpelah. 


/“ ISAIAH.— Isa. 6:1 
The greatest of the prophets, whose work most 
probably dates about the eighth century before 


78 Ciho’s Who in the Btble 


Christ. Primarily concerned with the affairs of 
Judah, Isaiah at times prophesied to Israel. 

He was called to the vocation of prophet in the 
year ‘‘that King Uzziah died,” and it is by this state- 
ment that his activity is provisionally placed in the 
eighth century, although it is by comparative records 
and not by definite statements that the time is deter- 
mined. At all events it is certain that he lasted 
until Sennacherib invaded the kingdom. 

Isaiah obviously was a man of social importance, 
probably of a very good family. He spent most 
of his time in Jerusalem, and had easy approach to 
the king. 

In common with the majority of the prophets, 
Isaiah gave prophetic or symbolic names to his 
children, and in their names perpetuated his own 
teaching. | 

He foretold the destruction of the kingdom by 
foreign invaders, and proclaimed that the judg- 
ment of God would be visited on the tribes through 
the instrumentality of Tiglath-Pileser and his suc- 
cessors. Yet he prophesied that a ‘“‘remnant shall 
return” and so, to impress the gospel of hope on the 
people, named one of his children. It must be 
remembered that the Hebrews were accustomed 
to interpretative names, and when Isaiah’s son was 
seen and his name spoken, the prophecy would be 
recalled. 

Of the Book of Isaiah, which contains many of 
the prophecies of the man whose name it bears, it is 
unnecessary to say that it represents the finest of 
the Old Testament writings; its imagery and lofty 


Ishmael 79 


conception of God have done much to prepare the 
way for the Christian faith, and to prepare the devel- 
oping mind of the people for the final message of 
Isaiah—the love of God for his people, and His 
suffering with them. 


ISH-BOSHETH.—JTI Sam. 2:8 


The fourth son of Saul, who on the death of his 
father opposed David for many years. David drove 
him across the Jordan, where, deserted by Abner 
who was friendly to David, he was murdered by 
two of his officers. 


ISHMAEL (a).—Gen. 16:4 


The son of Abraham by Hagar, and the occasion 
of jealousy in Abraham’s household which resulted 
in Hagar and Ishmael being driven out of the camp. 
He is presented as the founder of the Tribe of 
Ishmael, a subsidiary race wandering over the less 
fertile places, never reaching serious importance 
in Palestine, and quickly fading into obscurity in 
the Scriptures, save for a few individuals. Finally 
the name Ishmaelite became synonymous with 
‘“‘enemy.”’ 


ISHMAEL (b).—JT Kn. 25:23 


Another and entirely different person from the son 
of Hagar, and a member of the household of David, 
who took the principal part in the murder of Gedaliah. 
Ishmael was opposed to the appointment of Gedaliah, 
by Nebuchadnezzar, as governor of Judea, and felt 
him lacking in devotion to his own people by accept- 


80 Cho's Who in the Bible 


ing the office under an alien king. Ishmael found a 
sinister supporter in the king of Ammon, who wanted 
either revenge or personal gain. It transpired how- 
ever that Gedaliah, entertained by Ishmael, was killed 
after a feast, and Ishmael took possession of the 
capital of the government, Mizpah. Seeking con- 
junction with the forces of Ammon, Ishmael was 
encountered by Gedaliah’s troops and defeated. 
Isumael escaped, but there is no further account of 
his life. It is of importance, however, to notice 
that Ishmael ran counter to the prophet Jeremiah, 
who supported Gedaliah, in whose memory an an- 
nual fast was instituted. Therefore it is probable 
that Ishmael was either mistaken in his loyalty, or 
that his motives were prompted by malice, re- 
venge, or ambition rather than by the service of his 
people. 


ISRAEL) _ 
+—JACOB § 

The son of Isaac and Rebekah, born in answer 
to prayer, originally called Jacob, the twin of Esau. 
He is reported as being of a mild disposition, a man 
who tended his flocks. He gained the advantage 
over Esau at an early age, trading on his brother’s 
hunger and simplicity, or heedlessness, and securing 
the rights of the firstborn, which were extended to 
him before the death of Isaac his father. On his 
father’s death he received the elder son’s portion 
of the patrimony, which included the land of Canaan, 
while Esau was consigned to the ‘‘rocky places,” 
there to act as a plundering vagrant. 


Gen. 25:21 ff. 


Jsrael (Jacob) 81 


The enmity which broke out on the final assump- 
tion by Jacob of Esau’s inheritance resulted in a 
hasty flight of the usurper, and on his way to Haran 
Jacob spent a night at Bethel, where, ina dream, he 
was assured of the watchful care of God, and to com- 
memorate the occasion he raised a cairn of stones. 
Arriving at Haran, he joined his uncle Laban, and 
was himself tricked into fourteen years of service. 
but finally proving himself more skilful than his 
uncle, Jacob was allowed to go, having considerably 
increased his wealth. Being now married to his 
cousin, and having an army of dependents and 
workpeople, and vast wealth to care for, Jacob 
sought reconciliation with Esau, which was success- 
fully accomplished. In the extremity of his danger, 
and apprehensive concerning the marauding forces of 
his brother, Jacob in solitude thought things through. 
This marks the turning point in his life. Previously 
ambitious and not disdaining craft and guile to 
serve his own purposes, Jacob underwent almost a 
complete change of heart. He discovered that not 
against his brother but against his God the real 
battle was taking place. It became, in the dark- 
ness, a real wrestling with a human being, and, as 
the outcome of the wrestling, Jacob emerged Israel 
—‘‘the perseverer with God,” with a different out- 
look, and a different ambition. Having made his 
peace with God, peace with his brother followed 
easily, and, though they did not journey together, the 
two brothers ceased their warfare. Esau went on to 
Seir, and Jacob to the valley lands of the Jordan, 
where he rested several years. Later he moved to 


82 Cho's ho in the Bible 


Shechem, where he lived for some years. Trouble 
with the Shechemites compelled still another journey, 
and once more he visited Bethel, where he added an 
altar to the shrine he had already erected. From 
Bethel he proceeded to Ephrath, where Rachel died 
in childbirth. Still a wanderer, he reached Hebron, 
and the life of Israel from this point merges into the 
history of his sons, particularly the son Joseph. 
Israel was advancing in years, his life had been one of 
constant change and wandering, and when now at last 
he was at home, his sons took up the stage, and the 
founder of the people of Israel slowly faded into semi- 
obscurity. 


JAEL.—Jud. 4:17 

A Kenite woman, wife of Heber, to whose tent 
Sisera fled on the occasion of his defeat. He sought 
the protection of a traditional friendship existing 
between the tribes, but found a treacherous death. 
Whatever the value of the assassination to the 
Israelites, the act of murder was a complete denial of 
loyalty and expected hospitality. Between the Ken- 
ites and the Canaanites a strong bond of inter-racial 
friendship existed, and it was with full assurance 
that Sisera trusted the Kenite leader. The act of 
Jael in slaying Sisera is praised in the song of Deborah, 
but it is naturally viewed from the standpoint of 
the Israelites, and the moral obligations of a hostess 
are not considered; it is perhaps based on the maxim 
that ‘‘the end justifies the means,” a philosophy 
found in certain Jewish customs which persisted to 
the time of Christ, and by him definitely condemned. 


James 83 


JAMES (a).— Mat. 4:21 

The son of Zebedee. An apostle, brother to 
John. The father of James was a prosperous fisher- 
man of Galilee. His mother was named Salome 
and was the sister of Mary, the mother of Jesus. 
James and John, therefore, were cousins of Jesus 
according to the general opinion. James worked 
in conjunction with Simon and Andrew at the 
trade of a fisherman, and was busy in this trade 
when Jesus called him to surrender himself and 
follow him. According to the enumeration of the 
disciples, James and John traveled together when 
the apostles, ‘“two by two,’’ went out to preach the 
gospel, and because of their energy in the cause 
these two received the name “Boanerges”’ from Jesus, 
which means ‘‘Sons of Thunder.” In close touch 
with Jesus at all times, James and John promised 
to be the most zealous of his disciples, a promise 
entirely fulfilled in John, but James died before his 
promise could be so completely made good in the 
cause. For his devotion he was delivered to martyr- 
dom by Herod Agrippa. 


JAMES (b).—WR. 15:40 

The son of Alphaeus, called ‘‘the Little’ in the 
Scriptures, probably an indication that he was of 
short stature, and not to distinguish his gifts and 
services from the other James. Some sense of un- 
fairness has been visited upon James, son of Alphaeus, 
by the corruption of his name into ‘‘ James the Less.”’ 
His mother, Mary, was one of the women who stood 
by the cross at the crucifixion, and later ran to the 


84 CAho’s Who in the Bible 


sepulcher. According to tradition James was a tax- 
gatherer, and probably his father was Alphaeus the 
father of Levi, later known as Matthew, the Apostle. 


JAMES (c).—Acis 15:13 

The brother of our Lord, who at first did not 
believe in Jesus, but being later converted through 
a special manifestation of Jesus after the crucifixion 
and resurrection, rose to a position of great influence 
in the early Church. He was the head of the Church 
in Jerusalem, where he was visited by St. Paul. 

In some writings he is called “‘the Just,’’ and was a 
Nazarite, eschewing strong drink and animal food. 

Concerning his death, tradition says that he was 
martyred by the Scribes and Pharisees, first being 
cast down from a pinnacle of the Temple, and, that 
not killing him outright, he was stoned and beaten to 
death. 

He is the author of the Epistle of James. 


JEHOASH 
JOASH 


Variant spellings of the same name. There are 
two men of this name, both kings, the one king of 
Judah, the other king of Israel. 

(a) II Kn. 11 

Jehoash, king of Judah, was the son of Ahaziah, 
and escaped the massacre of his brothers by Jehu 
and Athaliah. He was kept in secure concealment 
for several years, and at the age of seven was crowned 
king by the royal bodyguard, under the leadership of 
the high priest, Jehoiada, who maintained a strong 


Jebotachin 85 


influence over him during the early years of his 
reign. He later emancipated himself from Jehoiada. 
There is little known of his kingship, save that he was 
defeated by the Syrians, and that finally he was 
murdered by his officers. 

(Onde VIKG, L5cTO 

Jehoash, king of Israel, was of the line of Jehu, and 
during his reign the fortunes of the northern kingdom 
greatly improved. When Elisha was approaching 
death the king visited him to console him, and the 
prophet, still strong in his desire to serve his people, 
commanded the king to shoot an arrow towards 
Damascus, and then to strike the ground with the 
arrow. This was done three times, to signify the 
three victories of the king. Jehoash was a good 
general, and served his people well in the warfare 
against Damascus. Similarly he won an important 
victory against the kingdom of Judah, when the 
forces of that kingdom without warning and without 
provocation were turned against the Israelites. 


JEHOIACHIN.—I/ Kn. 24:8 


A king of Judah (who should be distinguished 
from Jehoiakim king of Judah). Jehoiachin suc- 
ceeded to the throne during the punitive invasion 
of Nebuchadnezzar directed against the revolting 
Jehoiakim, and surrendered after only three months’ 
reign. He was carried off, being but a youth, to 
Babylon, where he remained for over thirty years, 
until the death of Nebuchadnezzar. He thus be- 
came a popular hero of his people, a captive king, 
and almost a legend. He was always regarded as 


86 Cho's Who in the Bible 


the rightful king of Judah, and Ezekiel, who fostered 
this idea, sang a dirge for him. Being freed on the 
death of Nebuchadnezzar, he was endowed with a 
daily allowance from the succeeding king. 


JEHOIAKIM.—IT Kn. 23:36 


A king of Judah who was appointed practically at 
the bidding of Pharaoh-necho, but who was more in 
favor with the oppressing invaders than with the 
prophet Jeremiah. He turned back to the religious 
abuses that had been abolished by Josiah, and wasted 
the slight resources of the people already impover- 
ished by the tribute levies of the Egyptians in ex- 
travagant and wasteful building operations, in which 
compulsory labor was employed. As a protest 
against these abuses Jeremiah had Baruch read his 
earlier utterances in public, and the king showed how 
little regard he had for this protest by burning the roll 
and persecuting the prophets, which persecution 
resulted in the death of one prophet and the forced 
flight of Jeremiah. The prophet escaped only by 
the help of certain friends at court. 

The Egyptian oppression was followed by the 
worse oppression of the Babylonians, which the 
Israelites suffered for three years until Jehoiakim 
led a revolt. In the midst of the ensuing confusion 
Nebuchadnezzar sent bands of irregulars to worry 
the country. These having little effect on the people, 
they were followed by a trained army of regular 
soldiers who invaded Judah. Before the invaders 
reached Jerusalem, Jehoiakim died, and was suc- 
ceeded by his son Jehoiachin (q.v.). 


Jehoram 87 


JEHORAM (JORAM). 


Two kings, whose reigns coincided in time, one 
king of Israel, and the other king of Judah. 

REL ign62 OF 

The king of Israel was the son of Ahab, and suc- 
ceeded his brother Ahaziah to the throne. When 
he ascended, Moab was in revolt, and his first task 
was to deal with the rebellious people. In this he 
was partly successful, and the armies invaded Moab. 
The Moabites, however, aroused to a religious 
frenzy, seem to have turned again, and after the 
king of Moab had sacrificed his own son to the god of 
the Moabites, Chemosh, the rebels regained the 
offensive, and the Israelites retired without accom- 
plishing their purpose. 

The prophet Elisha was at the height of his power 
during the reign of Jehoram. 

Jehoram later engaged in other campaigns, was 
wounded at Ramoth-Gilead and retired to Jez- 
reel. Jehu, taking advantage of the king’s absence, 
stirred up revolt, was anointed ruler, and slew 
Jehoram. 

(b) II Kn. 8:16 

Jehoram, king of Judah, is a less important char- 
acter. A man of some personal courage, the son of 
Jehoshaphat. He was brother-in-law of Jehoram of 
Israel, through marriage with Athaliah, the daughter 
of Ahab and Jezebel. A somewhat dissolute king, 
he was unable to hold his territory. Edom success- 
fully seceded, and it was in the attempt to put down 
the revolt that Jehoram displayed one of the few 


88 Cho's Who in the Btble 


virtues he possessed. With a handful of loyal sup- 
porters he was surrounded by the enemy, but suc- 
ceeded in cutting a way through to escape. 


JEHOSHAPHAT.—I Kn. 22:43 


Son of Asa, and king of Judah, under whom the long 
standing hostility between Israel and Judah was 
ended. He caused reconciliation and co-operation 
through alliance and a political marriage, marrying 
his son Jehoram to Athaliah, daughter of Ahab, king 
of Israel. He ratified the alliance by supporting 
Ahab in the war against Syria, and Ahab’s successor 
against the Moabites, but found trouble in his own 
kingdom, due to the rising of the Edomites, a trouble 
which continued longer than his reign, and which un- 
der his son brought about complete separation of 
Edom from the kingdom. Jehoshaphat was as 
marked in his successful administration of domestic 
affairs as in his statesmanship with Israel, continuing 
the religious reform instituted by Asa, his father. 


JEHU.—II Kn. 0:2 


A plotting army captain under Jehoram, who by 
murder and usurpation became king of Israel. 
There had been long standing sedition in the army, 
probably to be laid at the door of the kings and their 
regrettable practices, beginning with Ahab and end- 
ing with Jehoram, and epitomized in the conduct 
of Jezebel. Oppression and the debasement of the 
religion of the country had made Jehu’s revolt possi- 
ble, and for the purpose of the kingdom Elisha was 
content to use Jehu. The prophet sometimes 


Sephthah 89 


accepted the maxim that ‘‘the end justifies the 
means’’—otherwise it is difficult to appreciate his 
act in anointing Jehu king after his storming of the 
throne. Jehu was ia command of the army at 
Ramoth-Gilead, when Jehoram fled home, wounded, 
and the plotters saw that the moment was ripe 
for their coup. It was executed with full success. 
Jehu was well received by the army, was anointed by 
the prophet, and the story of the famous ride to 
Jezreel and the death of Jehoram and his mother 
is well known. 

Jehu’s reign began moderately well for Israel, but 
ended in a series of disasters. His foreign allies 
failed him, and the spirit of the people turned 
against him, as foreseen by Hosea the prophet, 
who recognized that the crime of Jezreel rested on 
Jehu’s head, and that it would be avenged. 


JEPHTHAH.— Jud. 11:1 


One of the most romantic and tragic figures in the 
Old Testament. He began by being an outcast, was 
recalled and made king, but broke his heart through 
an excess of zeal which cost him the life of his 
daughter. 

Jephthah is spoken of as a man of valor, “‘the 
Gileadite,’ and was a nameless child, born out of 
wedlock. On account of his origin he was driven out 
of his tribe, but gathered together a company of ir- 
regular soldiers and lived as a bandit in Tob. His 
prowess must have won him renown, for when the 
Ammonites made war on Gilead, his countrymen 
sent messengers to beseech him to return and lead 


90 Who's Who in the Bible 


their forces. Jephthah accepted on condition that 
he was made ruler, provided that he was successful. 
The condition he laid down was accepted aforetime, 
and Jephthah was acclaimed head of his people. 
By the ‘“‘spirit of the Lord’’ Jephthah was successful 
in his warfare, and vowed in the midst of his cam- 
paign that, if he should prove finally successful, he 
would offer as a sacrifice to God whoever first came 
out of his house to welcome him. He was greeted 
on his victorious return by his only daughter. After 
two months preparation Jephthah kept his vow, 
and, perhaps because of his grief, turned again to 
warfare, meeting former allies who felt they had been 
slighted (or perhaps deprived of the chance of plun- 
der). He defeated the disgruntled Ephraimites, 
who fled in confusion, and were cut off at the fords. 
The fugitives sought to escape in the confusion that 
followed, being hard to distinguish from Jephthah’s 
army, but the famous test of ‘‘shibboleth’’ discov- 
ered them and they were practically exterminated. 
The password at the fords was ‘‘shibboleth,”’ a 
sound which the Ephraimites could not pronounce, 
saying ‘‘sibboleth”’ instead. 

Jephthah led his people for some six years, and 
died, and was buried in Gilead. 


JEREMIAH.—Jer. 1:1 


The mournful prophet, who has not yet risen to the 
place he deserves in the popular imagination. 
Jeremiah’s preaching was entirely colored by the 
exigencies of his own life and the deterioration of his 
people, and cannot properly be understood without 


Jeremiah gI 


some thought of the circumstances which called it 
forth. Had he lived in the present century he 
would probably have been called a ‘‘pro-Chaldean,”’ 
simply because he had the courage to say that it was 
not the fault of the invaders, but the fault of the 
Israelites that occasioned the downfall of his people. 

Jeremiah was born at Anathoth, a small town very 
near to Jerusalem, and was obviously a man of 
substance. From his home town he could look out 
over the surrounding country, and being a thought- 
ful man his spiritual vision corresponded to the wide 
horizon which he saw in nature. He had always a 
vision of a wider Israel. For this vision he suffered. 
He was reluctant to follow the call to become a 
prophet, probably because he knew his people and 
their decadence, but the call was insistent, and he 
obeyed. His message could not be other than dis- 
tasteful to his people, but he persevered. He fought 
his way through doubt to a settled faith and to 
resignation. 

Jerusalem during his life was a cosmopolitan city, 
where almost every form of foreign religion, heathen 
and pagan practices, idolatry, and license were to be 
found, and were quickly demoralizing the worship of 
the true God. The surrounding country was con- 
stantly harassed by warfare; first one outside power 
came, to be followed quickly by another. 

Jeremiah lived in several reigns—born while 
Manasseh was still carrying on his evil adminis- 
tration, and prophesying during the kingship of 
Josiah and his sons—covering a period of nearly 
forty years. He saw the terror of the Assyrians, 


92 Cho's ho in the Bible 


and the beginning of a promised reform of worship 
under Josiah, a reform that proved to be only ex- 
ternal. Under Josiah all the religion of Israel was 
centralized at Jerusalem. ‘The reform and super- 
vision promised much and accomplished little. 
Josiah fell in battle, and the Egyptians assumed the 
ascendency for a while, to give place to the Chaldean 
Nebuchadnezzar, the fated destroyer of Jerusalem. 
The oppressors restored debauchery and sordid 
practices in the captured territory. A sudden 
revolt by Jehoiakim called forth Jeremiah’s wrath 
and anger; the wonder is that he escaped the king’s 
vengeance. Ultimately, after many adventures and 
a few successes, Jerusalem was finally taken and 
completely destroyed. The Chaldeans wiped out 
the rebels, and carried off the remnants of the popu- 
lation into captivity. Jeremiah was forced to 
accompany them. Tradition says that he was 
murdered by his compatriots. 

His great and most significant contribution to the 
thought of the Jews is the insistent command to- 
wards the “‘inwardness”’ of religion, a church inde- 
pendent of a place, and a God who is not tied to a 
particular locality. 


JEROBOAM (a).—I Kn. 11:26 


There were two kings of Israel who bore this 
name. The first was the king who governed the 
northern kingdom when the division was made, a 
warlike and capable man, who continued in war- 
fare with Judah throughout his reign, but suffered 
for his persistence in what amounted to civil war by 


Jesse 93 


laying his own kingdom open to the raids of the 
Egyptians. 

Jeroboam was originally the chief officer command- 
ing the conscript labor under Solomon. He conspired 
to overthrow Solomon, but his plot being discovered 
he fled. He returned from Egypt when Rehoboam 
found himself in trouble with his leaders, and out of 
the resulting trouble wrested the northern kingdom 
from the power of Rehoboam. 

As king he was held in disfavor by the prophets 
because of his religious activities, which savored of 
idol-worship. 


JEROBOAM (b).—JI Kn. 14:23 

Was also a powerful prince, king of Israel, and 
grandson of Jehu. Under his leadership Israel suc- 
cessfully fought against the oppressive Syrians and 
recovered much of its territory. Apart from his 
warlike exploits, however, this Jeroboam was not 
held in high repute. The prophets Amos and 
Hosea accuse him of introducing the immoral prac- 
tices of other nations into the public worship and 
social life. 


JESSE.—I Sam. 17:12 


The father of David, who resided at Bethlehem. 
When an old man, his elder sons were fighting with 
the army, and Jesse sent David to the encampment 
of the Israelites with food and presents. The exploit 
of David in meeting and defeating the giant Philis- 
tine on his visit is well known, but it resulted in 
David being separated from his father for a long 


94 Cho’s Who in the Bible 


time, as David entered Saul’s service, and there is no 
mention of Jesse thereafter until, during David’s 
outlawry, Jesse and his family appear at the cave of 
Adullam. David puts his relatives in the care of the 
king of the Moabites, which is the last historical 
account of Jesse. In Isaiah, however, the prophetic 
reference to the ‘‘stock of Jesse’’ identifies the father 
of David as the ancestor of the promised Messiah. 


JEZEBEL.—II Kn. 9:30 


Israel’s evil genius. The daughter of Eth-Baal, 
king of Tyre, and identified with the Baal worship 
of that place, Jezebel became the wife of Ahab, 
king of Israel, as a political expedient. For nearly 
fifty years her influence persisted in the land of 
Israel, and there was constant degradation and 
perversion of the national religion due to her intro- 
duction of foreign gods and immoral practices. Her 
influence spread beyond Israel to Judah, through her 
daughter Athaliah. 

Even the most powerful demonstrations by the 
prophets could not abate her lust and anger or her 
determination to perpetuate the alien worship. The 
trial of strength between Elijah and the prophets 
of Baal simply aroused her to an increased frenzy 
against her adversaries. It was only when a more 
determined, and possibly as unscrupulous, opponent, 
in the person of Jehu, finally caused her death that 
the direct influence of Jezebel was ended, and even 
after her death there was a continuance of the evil 
that she had introduced. In the New Testament, 
Jezebel, in the guise of a prophetess, seeks to lead men 


Job 95 


to lust and dissipation. The reference may probably 

have been occasioned by the historical character. 
Jezebel met her death by force, together with her 

son Joram, at Jezreel, following the revolt of Jehu. 


JOAB.— II Sam. 2:18 


A kinsman of David, through Zeruiah. Joab was 
one of the most brilliant, and at the same time most 
loyal, generals of the king, and to him David owed 
much of his success and security. Joab vanquished in 
turn the army of Ish-bosheth, pretender to the throne, 
and the forces of the Jebusites, the Syrians, and 
the Ammonites, and again defeated the forces of the 
revolting Absalom. 

Modest in his victories and loyal in his friendship, 
Joab not infrequently ascribed the credit for his own 
victories to David himself. Even his murder of 
Abner may be regarded as intended to preserve David 
on the throne. For David’s sake, also, he effected 
the reconciliation with Absalom, but when Absalom 
continued his plotting against the throne Joab with- 
out hesitation removed him. But finally his alle- 
giance to the house of David and his insistence on the 
claims of the rightful heir to the throne cost him his 
life. ‘There were serious and malicious faults in his 
character, chief among which were habits not un- 
common in the great men of his time; he was cruel 
and vengeful, sparing none of his enemies. 


JOB.— Ezek. 14:14 
Very little is known concerning the man whose 
name is given to one of the books of the Bible, al- 


96 Cho's Who in the Bible 


though a few passages seem to show that he was a 
man living in the early days of the history of the 
Israelites, and was popularly esteemed for his 
patience and righteousness. The book is philosophy 
in poetic prose, and consists mainly of dialogues 
between Job and his friends. His friends grow 
increasingly bitter, but fail to prove to Job that his 
misfortunes can be held against God. Certainly 
neither misfortune nor argument turns the patriarch 
from his trust. 


JOHN THE BAPTIST.—Luke 1 


The son of Zacharias and Elisabeth, born accord- 
ing to promise, and a kinsman of Jesus. The Scrip- 
ture says that he was born in a “‘city of Judah”’ and 
that he was a Nazarite from birth. 

When he was grown he retired to the wilderness, 
where he lived on natural food, honey and locusts. 
It is obvious that he was well educated according 
to the Jewish custom, and that he knew the holy 
writings well; their language is the foundation of his 
forceful and fearless style. For some months he 
wandered through the country, much as the ancient 
prophets were wont to do, whose logical succes- 
sor he seems to be. He met with much success, 
and gathered large numbers of followers whom he 
baptized in anticipation of the coming Messiah. 
He then came to the more thickly populated regions, 
and the fire of his preaching increased. He pro- 
claimed the near approach of the kingdom of God, 
announcing to the nation that the time of its judg- 
ment was at hand. 


John the Apostle 97 


Jesus himself came to John, and was baptized. 
This must be taken as the public announcement ot 
bis mission, and was followed by the descent of the 
Holy Spirit. John identified Jesus, and commanded 
his followers to turn to him, while he himself was 
content to pass into obscurity. 

Probably the execution of John was due more to 
his preaching than to the whim of Herodias, but his 
reproof of Antipas in connection with his adulterous 
marriage with his brother’s wife may have been the 
excuse on which to arrange an execution already 


decided. 


JOHN THE APOSTLE.—WMA. 1:19 


John was a son of Zebedee, a fisherman who prob- 
ably lived at Bethsaida on the Sea of Galilee, and by 
marriage related to the family of Jesus. The mother 
of John is supposed to have been Salome, sister of 
Mary. 

The call of John to the service of Jesus and to 
become a “‘fisher of men’”’ was immediately obeyed, 
and John became one of the intimate associates of 
Jesus, being present on occasions when the particular 
companions of our Lord were the only apostles 
present. With his brother, James, John was sent 
out on special missions, and the brothers received 
the name ‘‘Boanerges,”’ i.e. Sons of Thunder, proba- 
bly as a token of their zeal for the cause, and their 
energy against the antagonists of Jesus. 

John was the companion of Peter on several 
occasions; they went together to the Temple gate 
on the occasion of the healing of the lame man. 


98 Cho’s Who in the Bible 


They appeared together before the Sanhedrin, and 
journeyed in company to Samaria to complete the 
reception of new believers, and to establish them in 
the Church by the laying on of hands. Together 
Peter and John begin the actual history of the 
Christian Church as co-leaders. 

John is ‘‘the disciple whom Jesus loved,” and 
wrote the Gospel which bears his name. He is also 
to be identified as the John of the Apocalypse. 

At the crucifixion, Jesus committed his mother 
into the care of John, in the words, ‘‘Woman, behold 
thy son” and ‘‘Behold thy mother.’’ With Peter, 
John was first at the tomb on the day of resurrection, 
and on the appearance of Jesus at the Sea of Tiberias 
John was the first to recognize him. 

According to tradition, which is recorded by 
Eusebius, John was banished to the Isle of Patmos, 
later returning to Ephesus, where he appointed 
Polycarp as Bishop of the Church in Smyrna, con- 
tinuing his own ministry there for a considerable 
period. At Ephesus, finally, he ‘‘fell asleep.” 

The belief that John did not die, but was trans- 
lated, persisted through many generations, and it was 
commonly reported that John did not die, but slept, 
the dust on his tomb rising and falling with his 
breathing. 

John made a distinct contribution to the theology 
of Christianity, insisting that all life must be looked 
at from the point of view of God. He is a kindly, 
searching teacher, and was obviously well educated, 
having knowledge of current philosophy that was 
not Christian, and refuting by clear argument and 


Jonah 99 


metaphor the doctrines that were antagonistic to the 
faith. It is to John that the Christian Church owes 
the perception of God as Light, Spirit, and Love. 
He established the idea of Jesus as “‘the Word,”’ and 
the idea of the Fatherhood of God, and summarized 
the value of the Christian religion in the words 
“eternal life.”’ 


JONAH.—JT Kn. 14:25 


According to the Scriptural references Jonah was 
the son of Amittai, or Amathi, and probably lived in 
the land of Zebulun. As a prophet he appears to 
have been active about the end of the 9th century 
before Christ, and prophesied the extension of the 
kingdom of Samaria, fulfilled in the reign of Jero- 
boam IT. 

Under the command of God, Jonah was sent to 
Nineveh, to denounce the fall of that city, but, 
expecting that God would withdraw his judgment 
of doom, Jonah became a fugitive, in order that God 
might not command him further. He escaped in a 
heathen ship from Joppa, but a consequent storm 
aroused the fears and superstition of the seamen 
with the result that Jonah, after a ballot and con- 
fession, was discovered as the one troubling the 
spirits, and was jettisoned. ‘The storm subsided, 
and the heathen crew, remembering Jonah’s con- 
fession, turned to worship the God who could rule 
anywhere. The account continues that Jonah was 
swallowed by a fish appointed by God for the pur- 
pose, remaining for three days and nights in his 
strange prison, and being liberated after prayer, 


100 CHho’s Who in the Bible 


He was cast up on an unknown shore, and made his 
way to Nineveh, where in a measure he performed 
his mission. ‘The people repented, and offered pray- 
ers to God, which repentance and prayers were 
accepted, to the anger of the prophet. 

In his anger, while he sheltered outside the city, 
he was the victim of a series of incidents, intended to 
educate him, and which are familiar to every reader 
of the Scriptures. Jonah has become one of the best 
known of the characters in the Bible. The experi- 
ences of the sheltering gourd, the killing of the plant 
by a grub, and the “inthought”’ of the prophet’s 
shade, leaving him at the mercy of a hot wind, 
served to bring him to a more charitable frame of 
mind. 


JONATHAN.—T Sam. 14 


There are nearly twenty persons bearing this name 
in the Scriptures, but the only one who rises to any 
importance among them is the heroic figure, who has 
come to be the personification of abiding friendship, 
Jonathan, son of Saul and friend of David. Jonathan, 
saul’s eldest son, was a clever general, commanding 
his father’s forces in the campaign against the forces 
of Philistia. He attacked the Philistine fortress at 
Geba with a thousand men, and so launched the 
real war against the oppressors. ‘There are accounts 
of Jonathan’s personal bravery which established him 
as a hero in the hearts of the Israelites, and so 
saved his life—which would have been forfeited had 
not the people prevented Saul carrying out a hasty 
vow. 


Joseph IOI 


But in later history Jonathan excels more as the 
loyal friend of David, contrary to the wish of his 
father. In this loyalty he displayed the virtues 
which endeared him to following generations, being 
content to sacrifice himself in a disinterested way, 
for the love and faithfulness he bore the future king 
David, and on Jonathan’s death in battle against 
the enemies of his country, David summed up his 
own despair in the famous echoing eulogy, ““Thy love 
to me was wonderful, passing love of women.”’ 


JOSEPH.—Gen. 30 ff. 


Son of Jacob and Rachel: Jacob’s eleventh and 
the elder of the two sons Rachel bore. In the later 
account of Genesis Jacob diminishes in importance 
and Joseph comes into prominence, due principally 
to the famine which attacked the neighborhood of 
Hebron during Joseph’s captivity in Egypt. 

Joseph, in his early youth, was held in favoritism 
by his father, which his brothers resented, and on the 
occasion of his being sent as messenger to them, by 
his father, as they tended the distant flocks, the 
elder brothers took the opportunity to be rid of him 
by selling him into captivity, bringing his garments 
covered in blood back to Jacob, that it might 
be believed that Joseph had died by misadven- 
ture. 

In Egypt, Joseph was bought by Potiphar, and by 
ability speedily won his way to rank and power in 
Potiphar’s household. Presumably being attractive 
of person, he suffered from a malicious and entirely 
unfounded accusation leveled at him by Potiphar’s 


102 Cho's Who in the Bthle 


wife—whose passion Joseph did not share. He was 
cast into prison, but again proved himself a man of 
ability, and though a prisoner rose to power again. 
Ultimately he was released on account of skill in 
interpreting dreams, foretelling a period of prosperity 
and a period of famine, which enabled the Egyptians 
to make provision against the calamity that was to 
come. For this Pharaoh raised him to be his second 
in command. When the foretold famine approached, 
Egypt was prepared, but the neighboring countries 
were driven by suffering to the purchase of corn 
from Egypt. Among the sufferers were Joseph’s 
own family, and his brothers came before him to buy 
corn. He recognized them, though they failed to 
recognize him in his court dress and with his newly 
acquired Egyptian manners. Pretending that they 
were spies, he drew from them information concern- 
ing his family and particularly concerning Benjamin, 
his brother. Causing their purchase price to be 
returned to them, he sent them back, retaining one 
brother as hostage for the appearance of Benjamin. 
The returning brothers later discovering their 
monies in the sacks feared to return, but persistent 
famine finally forced them to keep their word, and 
they returned with Benjamin. A similar trick was 
played on them. Money was placed in their sacks 
of corn, and in the sack which belonged to Benjamin 
Joseph placed his own cup. The brothers were 
pursued and overtaken and charged with theft. 
On their return Joseph revealed himself to them, and 
invited them all to take up their residence in Egypt, 
which they did. 


Joseph of Arimathea 103 


JOSEPH, husband of Mary.— Mat. 1:20 

The husband of Mary was a descendant of King 
David, living at Bethlehem but migrating later to 
Nazareth, where he carried on his trade as carpenter, 
returning on occasions to Bethlehem and to Jerusalem. 
At Nazareth he was betrothed to Mary. He appears 
as a deeply religious man, kind, keeping the feasts 
of the Israelites carefully, and obeying the laws 
of his religion. Before Jesus was born, Joseph, 
remembering the laws of his people, was on the point 
of disowning Mary, but sought to do it quietly 
and without public shame, but, being apprised of the 
truth of the matter, ministered to Mary, and, rather 
than leave her at Nazareth, to meet the taunts 
and gossip of the little town, he took her with him 
when he was summoned to Bethlehem, where he 
took care of the mother and her child. After this 
nothing more is heard of Joseph until the visit to 
Jerusalem to establish Jesus, at the age of twelve, as 
a “‘son of the Law,’ and then Joseph vanishes en- 
tirely, although tradition says that he died when 
Jesus was eighteen. 


JOSEPH OF ARIMATHAA.—WMR. 15:43 

A member of the Sanhedrin, very wealthy and 
devout, a secret disciple of Jesus. He was not 
a party to the condemnation of Jesus, but lacked the 
courage to oppose it; however, when the trial was 
over, and he awoke to his cowardice, he went in to 
Pilate and demanded the body of Jesus, which is not 
contrary to the practice that prevailed at that time. 
Interested parties, or relatives, were accustomed 


104 Who's Wiho in the Bible 


to purchase the bodies of those who were executed, to 
save them from the fate of being torn by vultures, 
and to give them burial. 

Obtaining the body, Joseph, assisted by Nicode- 
mus, buried Jesus in his own prepared tomb, hewn 
from the face of the rock. 


JOSEPH BARSABBAS.— Acts 1:23 


Traditionally accepted as one of the ‘‘Seventy,”’ 
and the disciple who was nominated (alternative to 
Matthias) to take the place of Judas among the 
Apostles. 


vy JOSHUA.—Ex. 17:9 


The leader of Israel who followed Moses. Joshua 
was of the tribe of Ephraim, and the son of Nun. 
He was a shrewd general and the lieutenant of 
Moses, whom he attended at Sinai. In the war 
with the Amalekites Joshua commanded the Israelit- 
ish forces, and later led the assault on Canaan. 
After he had acted as one of the spies, surveying the 
land, under his generalship the first blow was struck 
at Jericho, which resulted in a wedge being driven 
into the new land of the Israelites, and the campaign 
then went forward almost without interruption to a 
successful issue. 

It must be remembered that Joshua had a dual 
role, one to gain a country for his people, and the 
other to unite the people for the country. He had 
the task of pulling the various tribes together into 
some sort of unity with a common purpose, a task 
not easily understood as to its difficulties. 


Josiah 105 


As a judge of his people he was strict, himself held 
under rigid control, but he was just. 

On the division of the territory he naturally ac- 
companied his own tribe, of Ephraim, and died in 
their territory, being buried at Timnath-heres, in the 
hills of Ephraim. 


JOSIAH.— II Kn. 22:1 


King of Judah, who ascended the throne when only 
eight years of age. Sonof Amon. The misbehavior 
of the priests and people continued during the reign 
of Josiah for many years, following the practices 
connived at by his father Amon, but when Josiah was 
grown there was a sudden reversal of the situation 
subsequent to the discovery of the “‘Book of In- 
struction’’ in the Temple, whose demands for reform 
profoundly impressed the king on the public reading 
of its contents. The king and the people solemnly 
covenanted to pursue the reform. 

The principal act of significance in the reign of 
Josiah arose out of this reform, which was the cen- 
tralization of all religion at Jerusalem, and the destruc- 
tion or closure of all subsidiary shrines and altars. 

Josiah was a just, though ill-advised, king. No 
general himself, he took incompetent advice in regard 
to his warfare, and when the Assyrian empire was 
weakening and the Egyptians invaded Palestine 
with the object of adding to their territory, Josiah 
foolishly joined battle with them, to the great loss 
of the Israelites, and the hastening of his own end. 
He was, however, a king beloved of his people, and 
their mourning was deep and long. 


106 Cho's Who in the Bible 


JOTHAM (a).—Jud. 9:5 

The youngest son of Jerubbaal, who escaped the 
massacre of his brethren by Abimelech by hiding. 

On the assumption of the kingship of Shechem 
by Abimelech, Jotham suddenly appeared, and 
addressed the parable of the trees (Judges 9:8-20) 
to the assembled people, as an appeal to their sense of 
right and wrong. Afraid that the appeal would 
fall upon deaf ears, which it did, Jotham followed up 
his sermon by a curse against king and people. 
While the prayer failed, the curse was executed. 
Jotham thereupon fled for fear of Abimelech’s 
vengeance, and took refuge in Beer. 


JOTHAM (b).— JI Kn. 15:5 

King of Judah during the lifetime of Isaiah. As 
king he left little impression either on the destinies 
or the history of Judah, but, following his father, 
who was a leper, Jotham had a fairly long period 
of office, partly as viceroy, and later as actual king. 
He rebuilt and decorated one of the gates of the 
Temple, the sole act of his reign which is recorded. 
The invasion of Judah began just before his death. 


JUDAH.—Gen. 29:35 

He is recorded as the fourth son of Leah, and puta- 
tive founder of the tribe that bears his name. He 
was the son who proposed the sale of his brother 
Joseph, in order to save the boy from the murder- 
ous intentions of the others, and it was Judah who 
made the appeal for all his brethren, to Joseph, 
when later they met in Egypt. He succeeded to the 


Judas Iscariot 107 


rank of firstborn by reason of the defeat of his 
brethren and their disfavor with the rest of the 
family. 

Judah married a Canaanitish woman, Bath-shua, 
by whom he had three sons, Er, Onan, and Shelah, of 
whom two, Er and Onan, were slain because of their 
sins. Er’s widow in disguise caused Judah to visit 
her, and bore two, twin, sons to him, Perez and 
Zerah. 


JUDAS.— Mat. 13:55 


The Lord’s brother. A man of signal severity of 
moral zeal, and author of the Epistle of Jude. 


JUDAS BARSABBAS.—Acts 15:22 


A deputy, along with Silas, who accompanied Paul 
and Barnabas to Antioch, on the recommendation of 
the Church at Jerusalem, to investigate and report 
on the matter of the admission of Gentiles into the 
Christian faith. 


JUDAS ISCARIOT.—John 6:71 


One of the apostles and son of Simon Iscariot. 
Iscariot is a place name, signifying “‘man of Keri- 
oth,’’ which is a town in southern Judza. 

Judas was the business man and treasurer of the 
apostles, 

Either from motives of compelling Jesus to use the 
heavenly forces at his disposal and establish his king- 
dom quickly, or from motives of greed and cupidity, 
Judas did finally betray his Master to the chief priests 
for the current market value of an ordinary slave, 


108 Giho’s Who in the Bible 


i.e. thirty pieces of silver. There seems to be no 
excuse, and less reason, for the act of Judas, which 
stands out both in manner of perpetration and in the 
cunning of its development as the most diabolical 
of betrayals. Yet in the midst of his machinations 
there are signs that Judas was not fully persuaded. 
His determination wavered, and although he did 
finally carry his terrible bargain through he immedi- 
ately committed suicide. There is little doubt that 
he witnessed the progress of the trial and its awful 
consequences, and, overcome by remorse and clearer 
thought, attempted to expiate the wrong he had 
done. 


JUDITH.—See Book of Judith (in the Apocrypha). 


The daughter of Merari of the tribe of Simeon, and 
widow of Manasses. According to the Apocrypha, 
Judith was well esteemed by Holofernes, the Assyrian 
invader, and, trading on his favor, secured entry 
to his tent where she found him drunk, and, stealing 
his own sword, decapitated him, and fled with his 
head to her besieged compatriots; through this act 
of valor she became the deliverer of her people. 


KETURAH.—Gen. 25:1-4 
The wife of Abraham after the death of Sarah. 


KORAH.— Num. 16:17 


The leader of a rebellion directed against the 
authority of Moses and the power of the priestly tribe 
of the Levites. The revolt was in conjunction with 
Dathan and Abiram, who refused to appear before 


Lazarus 109 


Moses to answer for their sedition, and for that 
reason suffered a miraculous vengeance. 

Korah figures as being at the head of 250 princes, 
who opposed Moses and Aaron, and sought to over- 
throw the existing priests. <A test of divine pleasure 
was made, to the confusion and defeat of Korah, and 
the seditious leaders were consumed by the fire of the 
Lord. 


LABAN.—Gen. 29:5 

The son of Nahor and brother of Rebekah. ‘The 
father of Leah and Rachel he became father-in-law 
of the founder of Israel, Jacob. He appears in- 
frequently in the Scriptures. He personally be- 
trothed Rebekah to Isaac. Jacob fled to him at 
Haran, when fearful of Esau, and Jacob took up long 
service with Laban for the sake of Rachel, whom he 
wished to marry. At the termination of his service 
Jacob was a rich man, and Laban sought to restrain 
him from departure, but Jacob fled, and was pur- 
sued by Laban, though—probably realizing that a 
battle would work out more to his than to Jacob’s 
disadvantage—Laban calmed down when at last 
the fugitive was overtaken, and contented himselt 
with a homily on the proper return of hospitality. 

Laban’s character is not attractively presented in 
the Scriptures. He appears as a cunning, grasping, 
and insincere individual, although there are flashes 
of generosity in him. 


LAZARUS (a). 
A name used by our Lord in his parable of the 
rich man and the beggar. The name means God 


IIO Cho's dbo in the Bible 


has helped, which explains both the parable and the 
name. 


LAZARUS (b).—John 11:3 


The brother of Martha and Mary, and a friend of 
our Lord. Lazarus, who lived at Bethany, a village 
suburb of Jerusalem, was the subject of the most 
important miracle performed by Jesus. 

When Jesus left Jerusalem, in the last year of his 
ministry, because of the violence stirred up by the 
rulers, he was followed by the customary crowd 
of hearers. During his ministry to the people 
news was brought to him that Lazarus was ill. 
Two days later he died. Four days after the death 
of Lazarus, Jesus reached his friends’ house. Our 
Lord showed his power by raising Lazarus to life and 
restoring him to his home, but the fame of the miracle 
was so great that the priests and rulers in Jerusalem, 
terrified that Jesus should increase in power, deter- 
mined on his execution. 

Jesus therefore retired still further from Jerusalem, 
but shortly afterwards returned, again through 
Bethany, where he was greeted by the people with 
psalms and praise, and the following day he made 
a triumphal entry into Jerusalem. 


LEAH.—Gen. 29:21 


Jacob’s first wife, elder daughter of Laban, who 
tricked Jacob into marriage, rather than that she 
should be husbandless. Her sons were Reuben, 
Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar and Zebulun, and 


her daughter Dinah, She died before Jacob 


Lilith III 


went to Egypt, and was buried in the cave of 
Machpelah. 


LEVI.—Gen. 20:34 


Third son of Leah, by Jacob. According to the 
account in Genesis, it would appear that Levi, like 
Simeon, was of a warlike and bloodthirsty disposi- 
tion. When Dinah, their sister, was seduced by 
Shechem, who proposed marriage according to the 
demands and customs of her family, Simeon and Levi 
took matters into their own hands, and slew 
Shechem. 

As a tribe, the Levites were ultimately absorbed 
by the stronger tribe of Judah, and possibly because 
they rendered some peculiar service, their name 
became intimately associated with the ministers in 
the temple, although it is by no means clearly shown 
that all the Levites in the service of religion were 
actually descendants of the tribe of Levi; however, 
it is certain that the priesthood drew heavily on the 
tribe for its members. 


LILITH.—TIsa. 34:14 


Although this has come to be a personal name, 
it occurs only once in the Old Testament (Isaiah 34: 
14), and actually represents a mythical monster, 
of hairy body, which was especially dangerous to 
children, assuming a graceful female form, to attract 
infants to their doom. 

In tradition, Lilith was the first wife of Adam, 
before Eve was created. 

She is generally known as the mother of all demons. 


112 Cho's ho in the Bible 


LINUS.—JII Tim. 4:21 


Mentioned as sending greetings to Timothy in St. 
Paul’s letters. Most probably Linus was the first 
Bishop of Rome, as attested by Irenzus and Euse- 
bius. He held office for’ some ten or twelve 
years. 


LOT.—Gen. 11:27 ff. 


The son of Haran, Abraham’s brother. He left 
Ur with Abraham and accompanied him in much of 
his wandering, finally reaching Canaan. ‘The herds- 
men of Lot and Abraham quarreled over their 
charges, and as a result the two parted company. 
Lot went to Sodom, preferring the cities of the plain, 
whence he was carried away captive by Chedorlao- 
mer, and rescued by Abraham. After dwelling at 
Zoar for a while, he retired to the mountains, prob- 
ably the region later known as Moab. 

Lot is recorded as a man of little force of character 
but of a morality and righteousness above the 
average of his townsmen, for which reason he was 
permitted to escape the doom pronounced on the 
cities of the plain. 

Lot’s Wife. A curious woman, whose inquisitive- 
ness and disobedience were her undoing. Unable to 
restrain a backward glance at the holocaust that 
overtook the cities, she was turned to a pillar of 
salt. 

The Mountain of Sodom is a low range of crystal- 
lized salt cliffs not far from the Dead Sea, so weather- 
beaten as to appear like a human form. 


Che HMaccabees 113 


LUKE.—Col. 4:14 

The evangelist who joined St. Paul on his second 
Missionary Journey. He is the author of the Gospel 
which bears his name, and of the Acts of the Apostles. 
It is obvious that he spent much of his time with 
St. Paul on his travels. Probably having heard 
Paul, when he preached in whatever town Luke was 
studying medicine, he was converted and joined the 
body of Christian evangelists, although a Gentile. 

Not himself an eye witness, as he states in his 
Gospel, of the events in the life of Jesus, he collected 
all the information he could obtain, and wrote the 
Gospel in such a manner as to appeal to the Gentiles. 

Tradition says that he suffered martyrdom. 


LYDIA.— Acts 16:14 ff. 


A widow of Philippi, who sold purple garments, 
probably converted, with all her household, by Paul 
when he lodged in her house on his first visit to the 
city. She came from Thyatira, which was the 
center of her source of supply for the trade she carried 
on in the city, and takes her name from the province 
of Lydia, in which Thyatira was situated. 


THE MACCABEES. 


A Jewish family who engineered and led the revolt 
against Syria, and founded the dynasty of rulers in the 
State then formed. They came into prominence 
about the middle of the second century before Christ, 
and members of their family are mentioned down to 
within thirty years B.C. 

Mattathias (I Mac. 2). The instigator and first 


114 Wiho’s Wiho in the Bible 


leader of the Maccabzan revolt. When, under com- 
mand of Antiochus IV, the officers and Jews endeav- 
ored to revive heathen practices and sacrifices in 
the town of Modin, Mattathias raised his outcry, 
and, slaying the officers and a Jew who assisted at 
the sacrifice, razed the heathen altar. He then fled 
to the mountains, to begin the guerilla warfare that 
was to harass the government. 

Mattathias died after a little while of stormy 
rebellion, and left the progress of the cause in the 
hands of hissons. Two of his sons were killed almost 
immediately, but there remained three others to 
carry on. 

Judas—(I Mac. 3-9). It was through Judas called 
the Maccabee—otherwise ‘“‘the Hammerer’’—that 
the family ultimately became known as the Mac- 
cabees. Their family name hitherto had been 
Hasmoneus. Hewasa brilliant general, and laid his 
plans for the restoration of the true worship, and also 
for the liberation of the Jewish state. 

Judas successively defeated all the generals who 
were sent against him, from the smallest to the 
combination of the three most skilful generals under 
Lysias, the imperial chancellor of Antiochus IV. 
After this decisive victory, Judas cleansed the Temple 
of all trace of Syrian paganism and re-established 
the worship of Jehovah. Meanwhile, for another 
eighteen months or more, he continued his warfare 
against the enemy, while his brother slowly gathered 
the scattered Jews around him and restored them to 
Judea. ; 

With the re-establishment of the Temple worship, 


The Maccabees 115 


however, Judas found a tendency on the part of 
many of his followers to relinquish the struggle for 
an independent state. Consequently when Lysias, 
with an increased army, returned to the warfare, 
Judas was defeated. 

He had, however, restored the worship of the 
people, which was not again molested. 

Judas and many of his followers continued in 
revolt, unsatisfied so long as their country was under 
foreign dominion, and when Lysias retired to Syria 
Judas launched a new campaign against Alcimus the 
high priest, who had been established by Lysias. 
Demetrius had succeeded Antiochus IV, and sent 
a new army to put down the rebellion. The army 
was defeated, and when Nicanor, the general, threat- 
ened to burn down the Temple unless Judas were 
delivered, the faltering adherents again rallied round 
Judas. Nicanor was killed, and Judas was actually 
head of the State. He sent messengers to Rome ask- 
ing for assistance, and the Senate sent word to 
Demetrius commanding peace for the Jews, the allies 
of Rome! The message was delayed, however, and 
Judas by his appeal lost the hold he had gained 
on his wavering supporters. In battle with the 
Syrian armies he was killed at Elasa. 

Jonathan (I Mac. 9:23-12) who succeeded Judas, 
had at first an unfortunate period. His plans and 
campaigns went wrong, and the revolt seemed to be 
at an end, when Bacchides, the Syrian general, with- 
drew his army and gave Jonathan permission to 
maintain an army at Michmash. 

From that moment the rebels prospered. Jona- 


116 Gho’s Who in the Bible 


than, through wise foresight, supported Alexander 
Balas in his claim to the Syrian throne. Alexander 
succeeded, and Jonathan was suddenly lifted to a 
powerful position, as high priest anda prince of Syria, 
besides holding the governorship of Judea. 

Demetrius II defeated Alexander, and Jonathan 
instantly declared war against Demetrius, was 
bought off, his tribute remitted, and three provinces 
were added to his territory. From time to time 
Jonathan furthered his scheme of complete emanci- 
pation, and by strategy and warfare almost suc- 
ceeded. His hopes were almost realized when he 
was tricked by the general Trypho. Jonathan was 
subsequently executed, and the leadership of the 
revolt devolved on Simeon, his brother. 

Simon Maccabeus (I Mac. 13-16) found conditions 
precarious, but being rather a diplomat, and an 
eminently successful diplomat, he was able by 
scheming to refrain from warfare long enough to 
re-establish the strength and fighting forces of his 
people. Using every adverse circumstance in which 
the Syrians found themselves, Simon bartered with 
Demetrius for the complete emancipation of his 
people in exchange for a military alliance, which 
Demetrius had to ratify. So the independence of 
Judea was accomplished, and a great feast was 
convoked, and in the presence of the people Jona- 
than became high priest, and civil and military 
governor of a free state. The treaty with Rome was 
restored, and Judzea was in the fairway of prosperity. 
But Simon, having accomplished much for his 
people, was murdered by his son-in-law. 


The PMerline of the Maccabees 117 


THE DECLINE OF THE MACCABEES 


John Hyrcanus succeeded Simon, his father, 
and under his government the height of the Judean 
prosperity was reached, but though prosperity 
persisted through his life, the seeds of the ultimate 
downfall were already breaking into life. John, 
by strategy and shrewd political bargaining, ex- 
tended and consolidated his kingdom, finally freed 
his territory of the burden of paying tribute to 
Syria, and established a magnificent court, and 
contrary to the precedent of his family, died a 
natural death. The leadership then devolved on 
Aristobulus, who, according to the disposition of his 
father, should have held office only as high priest, 
while his mother retained the governorship of the 
state. Aristobulus, however, threw his mother 
into prison and starved her to death. With his 
brother Anitgonus, Aristobulus reigned conjointly 
for a while but had his brother “‘put away’’ and 
assumed the title ‘‘king.’”’ When he died Alexander 
Janne@éus was released trom prison. Alexander was 
brother to Aristobulus, and married his brother’s 
widow, taking the titles of king and high priest. 
He suffered defeat at the hands of the Egyptians, and 
but for the nervousness of Egypt in taking Judea 
as a province, would have sacrificed his people’s 
independence. Civil war followed Alexander’s am- 
bitions and it is said that some 50,000 Jews perished. 
On his death the government passed to his widow 
Alexandra who for a few years maintained a shadow 
of prosperity, but on her death civil war again 
developed, under Aristobulus II, who seized the 


118 Cho's Who in the Bible 


power from Hyrcanus II. In his term of office 
the finally disastrous campaign of Pompey re- 
duced the dominion of the Maccabees to ruins and 
practically marks the end of Judea as an independent 
state. Aristobulus was imprisoned and Hyrcanus 
IT was restored to what power remained. Judea 
was attached to Syria, and Pompey made restor- 
ation of some cities, and repaired the walls of Jeru- 
salem. Hyrcanus, however, was completely under 
the control of the Roman advisers. After various 
vicissitudes, in which he suffered much for his ill- 
advised judgment in taking sides in Roman disputes, 
Hyrcanus was taken prisoner by a revolutionary 
party and lost his ears. He later returned to 
Jerusalem and was executed by Herod for intrigue. 

The remaining members of the family occasionally 
stirred up revolt: Alexander, son of Aristobulus IT, 
collected an army but failed in warfare and was 
executed; Antigonus suffered a like fate, being be- 
headed by Antony on the command of Herod, a 
form of death which was meted out also to Alexandra. 
Aristobulus III, son of Alexander and Alexandra, a 
youth of great beauty and charm, was appointed 
high priest, but being too popular, was drowned at 
the command of Herod who also had Mariamme, the 
sister of Aristobulus, executed even though she had 
become his wife. 

90 the line of the Maccabees was ended by Herod, 
but the offspring of the Maccabees, through that 
same Herod and his wife Mariamme, were the ruling 
family in the persons of Herod of Chalcis and the 
Agrippas. 


SMlanasseh 119 


MALCHUS.—John 18:10 


The servant assaulted by Peter in the garden on 
the arrest of our Lord. The account of the scene in 
the garden of Gethsemane is completed only by 
comparison of the Gospels. The Gospel according 
to John gives the name of the high priest’s servant 
and the Gospel according to Luke alone mentions the 
healing of the ear. 

The incident would probably be reconstructed as 
showing that in the throng and excitement of the 
arrest Malchus showed too great a zeal in the interest 
of the high priest, and rushed forward to lay violent 
hands on Jesus, but was intercepted by Peter, who 
struck at him with the sword he was carrying. The 
blow was hurried, and instead of killing Malchus 
Peter inflicted a wound which nearly cost Malchus 
his ear. Jesus, however, touched the wound and it 
was healed. 


MANAEN.— Acts 13:1 


A Christian prophet at Antioch, and, according to 
the Acts of the Apostles, a foster brother of Herod 
Antipas. Probably a descendant of the Manaen 
who was befriended by Herod the Great. 


MANASSEH (a).—Gen. 41:51 
Son of Joseph, and putative founder of the tribe that 
was always in close union with the tribe of Ephraim. 


MANASSEH (b).—II Kn. 21:1 


King of Judah who restored heathen practices to 
the religion of his people. Following his father 


120 Ciiho’s Who in the Bible 


Hezekiah to the kingship, Manasseh reigned for 
approximately fifty years, according to the account in 
the scriptures, and undid the reforms that had been 
instituted by Hezekiah, rebuilding the altars to Baal, 
and returning to the practice of offering human 
sacrifices, which did not exclude the sacrifice ot his 
own son. 

It may be said in excuse for Manasseh that his 
kingdom was under Syrian domination and the 
oppressors would use every power they possessed 
to compel the adoption of their own customs, but 
the extent to which Manasseh carried his apostasy 
caused the historians of his people to acclaim him as 
the one most to be blamed for the final downfall 
of Judah. It is certain that he both permitted and 
instigated the reign of terror for the prophets, sub- 
jecting them to persecution. 


MANOAH.—Jud. 13:2 

The father of Samson. Manoah’s wife was child- 
less, but was promised a son, who should be a Naza- 
rite and dedicated to Jehovah. This promise was 
conveyed to her by a Divine messenger. Manoah 
appears to have been dubious, and the message was 
repeated when he was present, and in due course 
Samson was born and dedicated to Jehovah. 

Manoah, who was a Danite, cherished no love for 
the Philistine oppressors, and when later Samson 
sought an alliance with them, strongly objected. 
He did, however, accompany his son to Timnah 
and was later present at the marriage with 
Delilah. 


Hark 121 


MARK .—Acts 12:12 


John Mark, the author of the second Gospel, was a 
companion of Paul and Barnabas on their missionary 
journey. He seems to have been held in better esteem 
by Barnabas than by Paul, and to have been the cause 
of their separation. John Mark was the son of a 
Jewish woman, Mary, who had accepted the Chris- 
tian faith and lived at Jerusalem. Her house was 
visited on several occasions by Peter, and was used as 
a meeting-place for the Christians when they came 
together for prayer. 

John Mark was chosen as attendant to Paul, and 
Barnabas when they left Jerusalem for their first 
missionary journey, and he accompanied them 
through Cyprus, parting from them at Perga 
whence he returned to Jerusalem. 

On the second journey Barnabas wished John 
Mark again to accompany them, but Paul refused, 
and they separated. Barnabas took John Mark with 
him again to Cyprus. 

From his close association with Barnabas, Paul, and 
Peter, it is natural that Mark should have acquired 
much knowledge of the life of our Lord, and being an 
educated man he sought to make his knowledge avail- 
able to all Christians. He was cousin to Barnabas, 
as is shown in the Epistles of St. Paul, and obviously 
the estrangement was forgotten and reconciled, for he 
is recommended to the Colossians who seemed rather 
disposed to discredit him. Also, Peter recommends 
Mark as ‘‘his son,’’ which doubtless refers to their 
early association in Jerusalem. 

The Gospel according to Mark bears undoubted 


122 CHho’s Who in the Bible 


signs of the influence Peter had over Mark, and it is 
held among the Fathers of the early Church that 
Mark wrote his Gospel at least under the direct 
supervision of Peter, if not from his dictation. 


MARTHA.—Lu. 10:38-42 

The sister of Lazarus, who lived at Bethany, and 
whose house was always open to our Lord. Martha 
was the housekeeper, who in protest to our Lord 
complained of her sister Mary’s indifference to house- 
hold duties, and was gently reproved by Jesus for her 
hastiness. 


MARY.—The mother of Jesus.—John 2 


There is a scarcity of biographical information 
concerning Mary in the Scriptures, but there is a 
wealth of tradition and legend concerning her in other 
sources. 

According to the Scriptures, Mary was the 
‘‘espoused wife,’’ or the betrothed of Joseph, and the 
birth of our Lord was announced to her by the angel 
Gabriel. Immediately Mary sought her relative 
Elisabeth, who met her with an inspired greeting, 
herself awaiting the birth of the promised son, John 
the Baptist,and Mary replied with her ‘‘ Magnificat.” 
Mary returned to Nazareth after Elisabeth’s 
promised son was born, and accompanied Joseph to 
Bethlehem, where our Lord was born. 

When the forty days of purification were past, in 
accordance with the custom, Jesus was taken to 
the Temple, and ‘‘presented to the Lord,” with the 
sacrifice of poor people. Simeon blessed the Child, 


Harpy 123 


and, afterhis chant of praise—the Nunc Dimittis— 
prophesied that Mary would suffer through her child, 
foretelling the tribulation of Jesus’ ministry and 
death. 

Returning from the Temple to Bethlehem, Joseph 
and Mary took the child to Egypt, to escape the 
wrath of Herod. When Herod died, the family 
returned to Nazareth. 

When Jesus was twelve, he was again taken to 
Jerusalem, accompanied by Mary and _ Joseph. 
Then, for some eighteen years he was with Mary at 
Nazareth, during which time Joseph seems to have 
died, and the place of breadwinner to have been 
taken by Jesus. 

Mary’s “sword through her soul,’’ foretold by 
Simeon, was the time of inevitable anxiety and 
pain experienced during the ministry and suffering 
of our Lord. His preoccupation and stress, and 
neglect of food, must have troubled her, but not so 
much as the sudden change in Jesus’ attitude to her. 
There was no harshness in his changed position, but 
with the assumption of his ministry Jesus began to 
address his mother without the peculiar distinction 
to which she had been accustomed. Instead of 
‘“‘mother’’ Mary became “woman.’’ So even from 
the Cross he addressed her, ‘‘Woman, behold thy 
son,” putting her in the charge of the beloved apostle 
John. This address is not a sign of diminishing 
affection for Mary, but rather the elevation by Jesus 
of all people to the highest quality of his love. , 

Tradition says that Mary was miraculously born 
to Joachim and Anna, who were full of years and 


124 Ciho’s Who in the Bible 


childless, and that she was in the Temple, dedicated 
to God, until she was twelve, enjoying the ministry 
of angels. 


MARY.—The other Mary.— Mat. 27:61 


The mother of James the Little and of Joses, and 
probably the wife of Clopas. She was one of the 
women who followed Jesus through the country, 
ministering to him, and was present at the Crucifixion. 


MARY MAGDALENE.— Lz. 8:2 


A woman from whom Jesus had cast out the devils 
of her infirmity, and who thereafter ministered unto 
him and his disciples. She also was present at the 
Cross, and followed the body of Jesus to the burial, 
afterwards preparing spices for his entombment. 
Going to the grave on the first day of the week, she 
discovered it empty, and ran at once to Peter, fearing 
that the body of our Lord had been removed. With 
Peter and ‘‘that other disciple,’’ she returned to the 
tomb, and saw two angels, with whom she held con- 
verse, and, suddenly turning, saw Jesus, whom she 
confused with the gardener until he spoke. 

That this woman who, for her love and devotion, 
was signally honored by Jesus should be identified 
with another who, because of her sinful past, has 
been regarded as a harlot is unfortunate. There is no 
authority for the connection. 


MARY.—The sister of Martha.—Lu. 10:38-42 


Each time Mary is mentioned in the Gospels she is 
in a characteristically humble attitude. In contrast 


Mattheto 125 


with her sister, Martha, Mary was possessed of a 
deep spiritual perception of life, and of our Lord’s 
mission and ministry, and was stimulated to deep 
piety, which was not so questioning, or perhaps so 
practical as the affection of Martha, but which Jesus 
preferred as an expression of the eternal things. 
When Martha served in the house, Mary sat at the 
feet of Jesus, and when Jesus came to raise Lazarus, 
while Martha had some very practical suggestions 
to make, Mary in full confidence flung herself at his 
feet. So also, before his agony, Mary in lowly 
adoration anointed Jesus with ointment and wiped 
his feet with her hair, and again she was reproved, 
this time by Judas, but the reproof was silenced by 
Jesus, who prophesied that wherever he should be 
mentioned her act would also be remembered. 


MATTHEW.— Mat. 9:0 


A publican, or toll gatherer, who was also named 
Levi, and was called from his occupation by our Lord, 
to be a disciple. He was the son of Alphzus, and 
collected dues on the road from Damascus, his terri- 
tory being near Capernaum. Undoubtedly a rich 
man, his acceptance of discipleship meant a real 
personal sacrifice. After his call he gave a great 
feast in honor of Jesus, which incurred the wrath 
and enmity of the scribes. 

It is known that Matthew collected the sayings of 
Jesus methodically, and that he had a great know- 
ledge of the life and works of our Lord, as well as 
association with the disciples who, perhaps, were more 
intimate with him. It is therefore easily under- 


126 Cho’s Who in the Bible 


stood how the distinctive character of the Gospel 
according to Matthew was acquired; but whether 
the existing Gospel in its entirety is the exact 
work of Matthew is not quite certain. Reliable refer- 
ences to Matthew and his authorship of a Gospel are 
to be found in the early Church Fathers, and it is 
probable that much.of the Gospel is just as it was 
recounted by the disciple. 


MATTHIAS.—Acts 1:23-26 


The disciple who was elected to fill the place of 
Judas, in opposition to Joseph Barsabbas. His 
election was not very fruitful for the Christian cause, 
as little is heard of him save his election. The 
faithful, disliking the imperfect number of apostles, 
rushed hastily to fill the vacancy, which they did 
by a superstitious drawing of lots, and without 
waiting for the signification of the Divine will, con- 
trary to the command of Jesus. Matthias had, it is 
true, been with Jesus, but he had no spiritual claim 
to his election. Actually, the company of the 
Apostles was later completed by the addition of 
Paul, who entered their number in the manner laid 
down by Jesus—the manifestation of the Holy Spirit. 


MELCHIZEDEK.—Gen. 14:18 


A king of Salem who met Abraham on his return 
from the pursuit of Chedorlaomer, and entertained 
him, for which courtesy Abraham repaid him with 
one tenth of the spoils he had taken from the van- 
quished foe. Melchizedek is also described as a 
priest of the Most High God, in which connection he 


Menelaus 127 


is regarded throughout the Scriptures. The Epistle 
to the Hebrews states that Jesus was a “‘priest after 
the order of Melchizedek”’ distinguishing the priest- 
hood of Jesus as being superior to the existing priest- 
hood of the Levites and the descendants of Aaron, 
as Melchizedek was to the priests of his time. 


MENAHEM.—JI Kn. 15:14 


A usurper king of Israel in the later history of that 
kingdom, who seized the throne in face of the claims 
of Shallum. ‘The rival aspirants waged their warfare 
furiously for a time, but Menahem, being victorious, 
obtained possession of the shattered remains. He 
was however so weak and his territory so attenuated 
that the Assyrians invaded the country, and were 
bought off only by the provision of a tribute, which 
completely beggared the province. 


MENELAUS.—IT Mac. 3:4 


Mentioned in the second Book of Maccabees as 
the brother of Simon the Benjamite. He lived in the 
time of Antiochus Epiphanes, from whom he received 
the office of high priest on payment of a sum of 
money, and so caused the deposition of Jason. The 
office of high priest was open to purchase, in fact 
it was passed from one to another by this procedure 
quite normally, but in the case of Menelaus the ill 
was worse than normal, for, being unable to pay the 
sum when it was demanded, he robbed the Temple, 
and silenced his antagonists with the treasures so 
stolen. 

His office was not peaceful, for Jason sought to 


128 CHho’s Who in the Bible 


retake it, and, although Jason suffered defeat, Mene- 
laus was not permitted to enjoy his priesthood, for, 
within avery few years of his corrupt purchase of 
the position, Menelaus was executed by Antiochus 
Eupator. 


MEPHIBOSHETH.—I/ Sam. 4:4 


Son of Jonathan and grandson of Saul the king. 
He was still a young child when Saul was defeated, 
and being carried off in the flight of the royal family 
was seriously injured so that he was a cripple in both 
feet. This physical infirmity probably saved his life, 
for the transfer of the crown to another dynasty 
usually meant that former members of the royal 
family were put to death by the succeeding king, an 
unpleasant custom in Israel. David, however, 
spared the life of Mephibosheth, and of Ziba his 
steward, probably less from kindness than from the 
knowledge that he had little to fear from the pre- 
tensions of the child to the throne of his grandfather. 
David, more generous than other kings would have 
been, permitted Mephibosheth to enter into the 
inheritance of his family’s possessions, and enter- 
tained him as a guest at the court. 

Mephibosheth and Ziba, however, stayed at the 
court when David sought refuge during the rebellion 
of Absalom, and Ziba followed after David with a tale 
of Mephibosheth’s sympathy with the rebels. Be- 
lieving the steward, David transferred Mephibosh- 
eth’s possessions to Ziba, but, returning to Jerusalem, 
he heard the other side of the story. Being in doubt 
as to the honesty, or dishonesty, of either, he divided 


Hicah 129 


the possessions between the two. Obviously there 
was deep affection on the part of Mephibosheth 
towards David, for he was willing that the steward 
should have all the goods, being content that David 
had escaped with his life. 


MESHA.—IT Kn. 3 


King of: Moab, who overthrew the Israelites 
in the reign of Ahab, and regained the territory that 
had been conquered by Omri. For many years war- 
fare existed between the Moabites and Israel, but 
always went in favor of Mesha. Mesha on the one 
occasion which threatened defeat of his forces, aroused 
his troops to victorious frenzy by the living sacrifice 
of his own son on the city wall. 


MICAH (a).—(See book of Micah.) Jer. 26:18 


A prophet contemporaneous with Isaiah, who lived 
in Moresheth, a district some considerable distance 
from Jerusalem, which capital, however, he knew 
intimately, and against whose wasteful extravagance 
he utters his prophecies. For the most part he is 
concerned with the rich and luxury-loving people, 
who abuse and defraud the poor, and against whose 
heedlessness he affirms the vengeance of God. 

Unlike the other prophets, we know nothing of the 
call of Micah to prophesy. He simply springs up, 
preaches his short but powerful sermons, and is gone 
again, but that he left a profound impression on 
the people of his time, and on the religion of the 
Jews throughout the succeeding generations, is 
certain. 


130 Cho's Who in the Bible 


MICAH (b).—Jud. 17:1 

A thief, whose duplicity receives a singularly 
appropriate recompense. In the Book of Judges, it 
is recorded that Micah, who lived in Ephraim, stole 
the silver pertaining to his mother, and fled with it, 
but, hearing her curse, returned the plunder, from 
part of which a household god was made, which 
Micah established in his house, and he ordained one 
of his sons as priest. A wandering priest, however, 
persuaded Micah that it was more fitting to employ 
him. When he wasinstalled,agroupof acquaintances 
arrived, and later brought their tribe to the district 
and took possession of it. Also they stole Micah’s 
god, and set it up in a sanctuary. Micah’s protests 
were stopped by threat of worse things to happen, 
and the tribe of Dan was left with its first holy place. 


MICAIAH.—I Kn. 22 


A prophet, who prophesied before Ahab by com- 
mand regarding the welfare of a military campaign 
against the Syrians. Being somewhat fearful of 
the king the prophet tried to make his prophecy 
comfortable, but made a poor show of it, and was 
commanded to tell the truth. The truth was less 
palatable, for Micaiah prophesied disaster, and did 
not meet with favor. There were other ‘‘smooth- 
talkers’? around who prophesied success, and one 
was so exasperated that he struck Micaiah, who re- 
torted with an outburst against the lying prophets 
and against the violent individual in particular. 

Micaiah was kept prisoner until the king returned, 
but his prophecy was fulfilled to the letter. 


HMilcom 131 


MICHAEL.— Dan. 10:13; Rev. 12:7 


The archangel who opposed Satan over the dis- 
position of the body of Moses. Michael appears as 
the champion of Israel against the protecting angels 
of foreign nations. In the New Testament Michael 
is referred to as the leader of the forces of heaven 
against the powers of Satan, and is the symbol of the 
church militant. 


~ MICHAL.—I Sam. 19:11 ff. 

The young daughter of Saul who was betrothed 
to David in recognition of his prowess against the 
Philistines. 

When David’s reputation among the people grew, 
and troubled Saul, the king sought to take David, but 
Michal tricked the soldiers besieging the house, and 
arranged David’s escape. 

Michal, in David’s absence, was given by Saul to 
Paltiel, but later, in the period of David’s power, was 
returned to him, and Paltiel, for all his grief, was 
removed. 

Estrangement subsequently developed between 
David and Michal. There were several wives to 
share David’s affection, and the breach was widened 
by Michal’s remonstrance when David danced before 
the ark, in what Michal considered an unbecoming 
manner. 


MILCOM.—I Kn. 11:5 

The God of the Ammonites, for whom Solomon 
built a temple on the Mount of Olives. This temple 
was later destroyed by Josiah. 


132 Who's Who in the Bible 


~ MIRIAM.— Fx. 2:4 ff. 

Elder sister of Moses, who watched him while 
secreted in the rushes. She appears to have had 
some position as a prophetess among her people, and 
led them in their chant, at the Red Sea, to cele- 
brate their escape and victory. 

During the wanderings in the wilderness she con- 
spired with other malcontents against the leadership 
of Moses, preferring Aaron. For her disobedience 
she was stricken with leprosy, which, however, was 
cured by Moses, by prayer. Miriam died before the 
wandering was ended. 


MOLECH.—I Kn. 11:7 


Molech or, as the name may be variously 
spelled, Melech, Moloch, or even Milcom, was a 
foreign god, whose worship was somewhat widespread 
in Judah at various times. It would appear that 
the rites were instituted, or at least introduced, by 
no less a king than Solomon, who established a 
sanctuary on the Mount of Olives. The alien religion 
was subdued frequently, but as frequently broke out 
again. That it called for human sacrifices is evident 
from the act of Manasseh, who sacrificed his own son, 
and from the denunciation by the prophets, and the 
laws laid down for the ritual of the worship. 

The worship of Molech was centralized at To- 
pheth—the place of burning—where human sacrifices 
were cast into the well of fire. 

Josiah suppressed the religion for a while, but it 
was not until the Israelites were taken into captivity 
that it lost hold on their imagination and belief. 


SHloses 133 


MOSES.— Ex. 2:1-10. 

T.. His life: 

Moses was a child born of Israelitish parents during 
the period of slavery in Egypt, a time when the Israel- 
ites were growing too numerous to be held comforta- 
bly. Pharaoh therefore ordered that children should 
be killed as they were born. ‘The midwives, however, 
contrived Moses’ escape and he was hidden in a 
cradle of rushes by the river, watched over by Miriam 
his sister. Here he was discovered by Pharaoh’s 
daughter and adopted. 

When grown, he killed an Egyptian soldier who was 
abusing the slaves, and fled to Midian, where he 
tended the flocks of Jethro, a priest, and married 
Zipporah, his daughter. 

He was called to be the deliverer of his people, God 
appearing to him in the burning bush, and giving 
him instruction and promising the liberation of 
Israel. 

Moses, accompanied by Aaron, returned to Egypt, 
and gathered the leaders of the people together, to 
whom he delivered his message. From them he went 
to the king to plead for his people. Pharaoh refused 
to listen, though he pretended to consent after the 
visitation of several of the plagues, finally being 
compelled to a reluctant but binding consent by the 
death of the first-born. 

The departure of Israel, at first in military order 
without undue haste, became a flight when Pharaoh 
recovered from the fear of the plagues, and pursuit 
brought the two peoples almost into conflict at the 
shores of the Red Sea, which conflict Moses escaped 


134 Gho’s Who in the Bible 


by the miraculous crossing of the Israelites and the 
subsequent reunion of the waters which engulfed the 
threatening Egyptians. 

Thereafter, through the wilderness, Moses became 
the leader and law-giver to the wandering people, 
ultimately bringing them to the land of promise. 
For momentary disobedience Moses was punished by 
not being permitted to enter with his people into 
Canaan, but died on Mt. Nebo. 


2. His work: 


The principal work of Moses lies in the foundation 
of the abiding religion of Israel. Before him they 
had little if any knowledge of Jehovah as their God, 
but through the many manifestations of His presence 
and power, Moses interpreted Jehovah to them, and 
established the form and content of worship. 

At Sinai he ascended into the presence of Jehovah, 
and received the tablets of stone which contained the 
laws, or the Ten Commandments, but the Israelites 
were discontented at his long absence, and raised a 
false God. In wrath, on returning, Moses broke the 
tablets, and Jehovah punished the Israelites. 

The hosts moved forward under the leadership of 
Moses by Divine command, which was miraculously 
signified, as a pillar of cloud by day and a fire by 
night. 

As a statesman and a warrior, Moses had the dual 
task of welding his people, who were little more than 
a group of nomad tribes, full of personal and tribal 
jealousy, into one administrative unity, and of de- 
fending them against the attacks of unencumbered 


Paaman 135 


raiders who infested the territory through which he 
went. 

The task of feeding and providing for such a 
migration demanded genius not quite comprehended 
in an ordinary reading of the narrative, and adminis- 
tration that must be close and authoritative. Moses 
therefore enumerated the people, and from the census 
so taken he was able to make his plans. He learned 
the size of his army, and delegated such responsibility 
as he could, perfecting his plans as he went, so that 
when at last they reached the outskirts of the new 
country all was prepared, even to the secret service 
organization under Joshua. 

It is safe to say that without Moses there would 
have been no Israel, and had he not been loyal to the 
idea of God, which was later espoused by the Israelites, 
not only would ancient civilization have been im- 
measurably poorer, but the whole course of human 
effort and endeavor would have been essentially 
different. Moses served not only his own people, 
but the organization, thought, and religion of the 
whole of humanity. 


NAAMAN.—II Kn. 5 


A leprous general of the Syrian army who came 
to the prophet Elisha for healing. He had learned of 
the powers of the God of the Israelites through a 
captive, or slave, woman, and apparently made over- 
tures to Elisha to see if the foreign prophet would deal 
with one not his own countryman. Obviously he 
anticipated refusal, but the story is plain that Naaman 
visited Elisha either at his request or with his assent. 


136 Cho's Who in the Bible 


Naaman was not permitted to see the prophet, but 
was simply commanded, on arrival, to wash in the 
Jordan. Perhaps from a sense of dignity or feeling 
that a more spectacular miracle would have more 
lasting results, Naaman was reluctant to obey so 
simple a command. However, wise servants pre- 
vailed on him, and he was healed, afterwards con- 
fessing his faith in the ‘‘one God.” Believing that 
the God of Israel was powerless outside the territory of 
the Israelites he carried away two loads of earth with 
him, that he might worship Jehovahon hisown ground. 

Elisha refused the gift proffered by Naaman, but 
Gehazi, the prophet’s servant, overcome by greed, 
sought to take it by stealth, was discovered, and 
punished by leprasy (see Gehazt). 


NABAL. —/ Sam. 25:5 

The authentic ‘‘fool by name and fool by nature,’ 
who attempted to deprive David of his proper reward 
for safeguarding his flocks. The incident happened 
during the time of David’s outlawry, and Nabal, 
being drunk at the time, refused payment to David. 
The natural outcome, and David’s intention, was 
that Nabal would die for his insolence and trickery, 
but Nabal’s wife, Abigail, turned David from his 
intention with abundant provisions and pleading. 
Nabal’s name means fool; on which fact Abigail 
expounded to David. 

Her intervention mattered little, however, for 
Nabal, recovering his senses, and hearing of his 
narrow escape, was seized and died of a fit. Abigail 
subsequently became David’s wife. 


Srahash 137 


NABOTH.—I Kn. 21:1 


The proprietor of a vineyard near Ahab’s palace 
at Jezreel. Ahab, or particularly Ahab’s wife, 
Jezebel, saw in the vineyard an opportunity for 
extending the palace grounds, and sought to purchase 
it. Naboth refused, and for his refusal lost his life. 
By conspiracy Jezebel had Naboth convicted of 
treason and stoned to death, and Ahab sought to 
enter into possession of the sequestered territory, but 
was met by the prophet Elijah with a pronouncement 
of vengeance on his house. The prophet’s words 
were translated into fact and Jezebel died, together 
with Joram, by violence, at Jezreel. 


NADAB (a).— Ex. 6:23 

The eldest son of Aaron who was with Moses at 
Sinai, and was appointed priest, but on the day of his 
admission to the priesthood he died for some trans- 
gression of the ceremonial law. The account speaks 
of Nadab offering ‘“‘strange fire” at the altar, 
but exactly what is meant by the phrase is not 
clear. 


NADAB (b).—1 Kn. 14:20 

A king of Israel, whose reign was very short. 
Nadab, son of Jeroboam I, ascended to the throne 
on his father’s death, but was murdered by Baasha, a 
general in the army, who usurped the throne. 


NAHASH.—T Sam. 11 


King of Ammon, who was defeated by Saul, and 
cherished the defeat thereafter. Nahash was pecu- 


138 Cho's bho in the Bible 


liarly Oriental in his strength and methods. Having 
defeated the people at Jabesh-Gilead, he demanded 
the surrender of the fighting forces, and that they 
should be tortured by the destruction of their right 
eye. To add to the cruelty of the situation he gave 
them a period of days in which to consider their 
position. During the time allotted they sent for 
help, and Saul, hearing of their plight, offered sacri- 
fice, and distributed the parts of the beasts sacrificed 
as commands to the men of the tribes to gather to- 
gether and rescue their fellows. In the ensuing 
battle the forces of Ammon were routed. 

We hear later of Nahash aiding David when he 
was fighting against Saul, and his son, Shobi, carry- 
ing provisions to David at Mahanaim. 


NAHUM. 


Nothing is known either of the personality or the 
history of the prophet whose words come to us in 
the Book of Nahum, but he left his imprint on the 
thought and history of his people, and on the devel- 
opment of the idea of God. He shows God as the 
moral Avenger, of infinite patience and reliability, 
whose actions and purposes though delayed cannot 
be escaped. Although there is a direct reference to 
Nineveh in the prophecy, and the threat of devas- 
tation, the particular reference is so skilfully made 
into one of universal importance that the question 
of time and individuals is forgotten. Nahum makes 
a world-statement concerning the moral nature of 
God, His antagonism to all evil, and His protective 
care for those who love Him. 


RNaphtali 139 


NAOMI.— Ruth 1:2 ff. 


The woman of tragedy, who found comfort in the 
companionship of Ruth. She was the wife of 
Elimelech, of Bethlehem. She was driven with her 
family, by famine, into Moab, where her husband 
and sons died. Afterwards returning to her own 
country, she expressed the bitterness of her tragedy 
in response to the astonished greetings of her former 
neighbors by declining the name Naomi, which 
means pleasant, and suggesting in its place the name 
Mara (bitter) as an indication of the displeasure 
which God had shown against her. 


NAPHTALI.—Gen. 30:7 ff. 


The son of Jacob and Bilhah, handmaid to Rachel, 
who became the titular head of the tribe of Naph- 
tali. When the family of Jacob went to Egypt, 
Naphtali was the father of four sons, but the tribe 
of Naphtali was warlike and powerful when the time 
of the Exodus came. Naphtali being the sixth son of 
Jacob, the tribe was the sixth in order to receive 
its territory on possession of Canaan, and was allotted 
rich pasture land to the south of the Sea of Galilee, a 
land well settled, and possessing many cities. 
Through this territory ran the great trade roads and 
caravan routes, bringing much commerce through 
the province, but the very virtue of the land was a 
danger to the tribe. It is on that account that the 
Syrians in later Israelitish history were  per- 
manently oppressing Naphtali, and finally occupied 
the land, carrying the native population into 
captivity. 


140 Cho's Who in the Bible 


NATHAN.—JI Sam. 7 


A name commonly held in the Old Testament. ~ 
The most important of the individuals so called is 
the prophet Nathan attached to the household of 
David, who sought to dissuade the king from the 
project of building the Temple, and later, with the 
parable of the ewe-lamb, convicted David of sin in 
the matter of his irregular marriage with Bath-sheba. 
It is significant in this connection to note that the 
other NATHAN associated with the King is David’s 
own son by Bath-sheba, through whom the genealogy 
of our Lord is traced to David. 

Nathan the prophet, however, though fearless in 
his reprobation of David, remained his counselor 
and friend, and at the time when David’s son 
Adonijah sought to snatch the crown when David 
was growing old and feeble, Nathan was apprised of 
the plot, and by skill and adroitness he preserved 
the succession to Solomon. 

NATHANAEL.—John 21:2 © 

Aman of Cana of Galilee, who, being told by Philip 
that Jesus was the Messiah, expressed his doubt, 
but on seeing Jesus himself confessed him as the Son 
of God. To him with six others Jesus appeared 
after the Crucifixion. 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR(NEBUCHADREZZAR). Dan. 
rey 
King of Babylon. His name is sometimes spelled 
with ‘‘N”’ sometimes with “‘R.’’ It has been a 
generally accepted idea that these are two sepa- 


Nehemiah 141 


rate individuals, but this is not so. A great king 
and a successful warrior, Nebuchadrezzar is best 
remembered for his madness, and the peculiar 
vanities his insanity produced. 

He defeated the Egyptians who sought to retake 
Syria, and extended his kingdom considerably, cap- 
turing Jerusalem, but was compelled to relinquish 
his campaign because of internal political crises 
which demanded his return to Babylon. 


NECHO (Pharaoh).—JI Kn. 23:20 


The king of Egypt who sought to retake Syria, 
was successful in defeating Josiah, and pressed 
through the Palestinian country to war with Syria, 
but was defeated by Nebuchadrezzar. He, how- 
ever, extorted tribute from the Israelites during the 
time of his victories, and the Israelites were only 
successful in exchanging subjection to Necho for 
subjection to Nebuchadrezzar. 


NEHEMIAH.— Neh. 1-7 


A Jewish exile, son of Hacaliah, who was in favor 
at the court of Persia. He held the office of cup- 
bearer, and was later appointed governor of Judea. 
Arriving at Jerusalem, Nehemiah, distressed by the 
dilapidation of the walls and the Temple, drew 
labor, voluntary and otherwise, from the Jews and 
within a few months had restored the walls of the city. 
He then directed himself to the reform of the worship 
of his countrymen, which had fallen into as pitiable 
a state as their city walls, and returned to Persia. 

During his absence the Jews lost their semblance 


142 Giho’s Who in the Bible 


of reform, and the religious life of the community 
rapidly deteriorated, which fact must have come to 
the ears of Nehemiah, for he returned to Jerusalem 
and instituted a more vigorous campaign, in associa- 
tion with Ezra—which was not without forceful ex- 
pression—to establish on a really firm footing the 
worship ot God. 


~~ NICODEMUS.—John 3:1 


The elderly Pharisee who was half converted to 
belief in Jesus during the lifetime of our Lord, was 
able to rise above his cowardice only when he had 
witnessed the Crucifixion. 

During his early ministry Jesus had at least inter- 
ested Nicodemus to such an extent that the Pharisee 
sought him secretly, under the cover of darkness, 
to discuss certain doctrinal matters with him, and 
Nicodemus went away not quite convinced. 

Towards the end of his ministry, when Jesus was 
facing the expressed antagonism of the elders, and 
was being judged by the Sanhedrin, of which Nico- 
demus was a member, Nicodemus could only raise 
a mild protest against the unfairness of the trial, and 
lacked courage to protest against the sentence of death. 

After the Crucifixion, however, with Joseph of 
Arimathzea, Nicodemus saved Jesus from the grave 
of a thief and outcast, and gave his body a pompous 
burial. 


NICOLAS.— Acts 6:5 


A proselyte of Antioch who was appointed to 
minister to the colony of Jews in that city. 


Obadiah 143 


NIMROD.—Gen. 10:8-12 


“The mighty hunter before the Lord,” who is 
supposed to have been the ruler of ancient Babylon, 
and to have founded the Assyrian Empire. He was 
@ warrior, and devoted to hunting. According to 
accounts he was the son of ‘‘Cush.”’ 


¥ NOAH.—Gen. 5:20 


The hero of the deluge, who was saved from the 
universal condemnation on account of his righteous- 
ness. Being warned of the approaching vengeance 
of God, Noah was commanded to build an ark, and 
was permitted to finish and stock it before God 
opened the heavens and the fountains of water u1der 
the earth. 

He was given minute instructions as to the con- 
struction of the ark, and as to his conduct in it. 
There was given to him also the sign of the covenant 
with God in the rainbow. 

In another reference Noah is credited with having 
discovered the process of making wine. 


OBADIAH. 


Obadiah is avery common name in the Scriptures, 
and none of its bearers has any claim to particular 
distinction. Of the Obadiah who was the prophet 
and left some writings which are included in the Bible, 
practically nothing is known. ‘The date of the book 
is uncertain; it deals in the main with past events 
and their interpretation. 

The book interprets a crushing defeat which 
happened to Edom as a divine judgment, or just 


144 Ciho’s bho in the Bible 


retribution for sins committed. It then proceeds to 
a prophecy of the nearness of the approach of the 
kingdom of God, not in the Christian sense, but as 
a picture of God ruling over the people with Zion as 
the center of His kingdom. 


OG.— Deu. 3:1 ff. . 

Og was a giant king of Bashan whose territory 
included threescore cities. He was defeated, and 
his land appropriated by the Israelites, after battle 
at Edrei. 

Probably Og had palaces at his two principal cities, 
Ashtaroth and Edrei, and the dimensions of his 
“iron bedstead”’ (which in actuality may have been 
the tomb prepared in advance according to the 
custom of kings) were nine cubits long and four cubits 
wide. 

He was ultimately regarded in later Jewish mytho- 
logy and folk lore as the character typifying the giant 
forces which were overcome in the progress to the 
promised land. 

His kingdom passed into the possession of the 
tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half-tribe of 
Manasseh. 


OMRI.—I Kn. 16:16 


One of the most significant kings of Israel, who 
ascended to the throne, like many other kings, as a 
result of the assassination of the ruling monarch and 
a subsequent division in the ranks of the plotters. 
Omri was a general in the army of Elah, son of 
Baasha, and when the king was murdered by Zimri, 


Othniel 145 


another general, Omri’s soldiers acclaimed him king 
instead of Zimri. Civil war followed, and other 
pretenders arose, but Omri proved the most power- 
ful of the contending aspirants, and with sound 
military intelligence installed himself with Samaria 
as capital. 

King by fact, Omri strengthened his position by 
foreign alliances, and reduced Moab to impotence 
by warfare. 

With nations other than his allies, Omri went to 
war, not so successfully as he hoped. The Assyrians 
were too powerful for him, and the wars that began 
in the reign of Omri, and were continued through 
the reign of Ahab, ultimately spelled disaster. 


ONESIMUS.—Philem. 10 


A fugitive slave, whose name means “ profitable.”’ 
Onesimus escaped from his master’s service and went 
to Rome, where he was converted to Christianity 
by Paul, for whom he conceived a great affec- 
tion, so much so that Paul desired to keep him, 
but, learning from the slave of his master, St. Paul 
sent him back. Writing to his master, Philemon, 
Paul implored forgiveness for the runaway, and 
asked that the slave be permitted to return to 
him. 


OTHNIEL.—Jud. 1:13 

The son of Kenaz and nephew of Caleb. He was 
the first of the Judges, who administered the affairs 
of Israel during the kingless period. He was called 
of God to deliver his people from the oppression of 


146 Who's Who in the Bible 


the Mesopotamian forces which had lasted for several 
years. Othniel married his cousin Achsah, Caleb’s 
daughter. 


X PAUL.—Acts 7:58; Acts 9 

The apostle Paul was a Benjamite, and was earlier 
known as Saul, of Tarsus in Cilicia, and doubtless of 
a well-to-do family, for we know that he was by 
trade a tent-maker, and that on his journeys he 
lived in ‘‘his own hired house,’’ not being dependent 
on public offerings for his support. Moreover he 
was a highly educated man, and probably had been 
through the schools in Tarsus. His somewhat 
preferential treatment as a prisoner was due to 
these two facts: his social standing and his intellect. 
His Roman citizenship must also be taken into con- 
sideration in this connection, a citizenship distinct 
from the ‘‘naturalization’’ which certain Jews pur- 
chased. Paul was a free-born citizen, and as such 
had a Roman name; his family or Jewish name was 
“Saul,” but after having found it necessary to use 
the fact of his citizenship, the name ‘‘Saul’’ was 
abandoned, and ‘‘Paul’’ only used. 

Although he did not meet Jesus, Paul must have 
been at Jerusalem during the lifetime of our Lord, 
and was there a student under Gamaliel, showing 
himself antagonistic to Christianity, which he 
probably believed was undermining the true Jewish 
faith. He was a witness of, and consented to, the 
death of Stephen, and undertook a campaign of 
repression against the Christians. It was on his 
journey to Damascus in pursuance of his mission to 


Paul 147 


arrest the Christians there that he was converted by 
a Divine interposition and message. Being led into 
the city, converted, he was baptized by Ananias, 
and became as enthusiastic in his zeal for Christianity 
as formerly he had been against it. 

He accepted the call after due preparation and 
consideration, and was appointed by our Lord as 
the missionary to the Gentiles. He suffered his 
first persecution, appropriately enough, in Damascus 
itself, whence he escaped by being let down from the 
walls in a basket, and returned to Jerusalem, escaped 
again, as the result of a vision, and undertook a 
wandering tour as a missionary in his home neighbor- 
hood of Cilicia. 

His first actual missionary journey was from 
Antioch, with Barnabas and John Mark, to Cyprus, 
and Pamphylia. At Perga John Mark left the 
apostles, who later returned to Jerusalem for the 
purpose of discussing the status of the Gentiles. 

Paul’s second missionary journey was in company 
with Silas through Syria and Cilicia to Derbe and 
Lystra, making known the decrees of the Council of 
Jerusalem, where they were joined by Timothy, and 
continued through Galatia. At Troas Paul received 
the vision of the Macedonian who implored him “‘to 
come over and help us.’’ Paul therefore sailed for 
Macedonia, reaching Philippi, where he and Silas 
were itnprisoned. Released by an earthquake from 
their bonds, Paul made his claim for freedom on the 
grounds of Roman citizenship, and with Silas con- 
tinued to Thessalonica, and, leaving Timothy and 
Silas, pressed on to Athens and to Corinth. 


148 Who's Who in the Bible 


The third missionary journey covered familiar 
ground. Beginning at Antioch, the journey covered 
Galatia, Phrygia, Ephesus and Macedonia, Asia 
Minor and Miletus. 

Returning to Palestine, the missionary landed at 
Cesarea and stayed with Philip, later going again 
to Jerusalem to report his successes on his journeys. 
His presence in Jerusalem raised controversy and 
the old antagonism broke out. Paul was taken 
prisoner, and, appealing to Rome, was sent thither by 
sea, was shipwrecked on the coast of Malta, where 
he preached, and later reached Rome, where he 
was a privileged prisoner under guard for two years. 

So much we know definitely. The remainder of 
Paul’s life is open to some argument, according to 
the individual interpretation of his epistles. He 
purposed to go to Spain, but whether he did go 
or not is doubtful. We know that at one time 
or another he visited the scenes of his old cam- 
paigns, that he was released from prison, to become 
@ prisoner again, patiently awaiting death. Cred- 
ible tradition establishes Paul’s martyrdom, he being 
beheaded under Nero. 

His writings aud teaching —Paul began, and con- 
tinued, as a Jew, despite his mission to the Gentiles. 
His mind was steeped in the law and in Old Testa- 
ment history, but he had a wide and sympathetic 
understanding of the culture and civilization of the 
non-Jewish world. 

For some time he permitted philosophic discussions 
to enter into his ministry, seeking to convert by 
refutation, but at Corinth he saw the wastefulness of 


Pekah 149 


such a procedure, and limited his preaching to the 
fact of Christ and the Cross, its interpretation and its 
redemptive value. From Corinth the Epistles to 
the Thessalonians were sent, on the second mission- 
ary journey, during which period also the Epistle to 
the Galatians was written. 

On the third journey the two letters to the Corin- 
thians were sent, as well as the Epistle to the Romans. 

During his first imprisonment the letters to the 
Ephesians, Colossians and Philemon as well as 
Philippians were written, and in the period of his 
freedom Paul wrote the letter to Titus and probably 
to Timothy. On his second incarceration Paul wrote 
once rmnore to Timothy. 

Undoubtedly Paul is the greatest figure in the 
history of Christianity after the Crucifixion, both for 
his zeal in founding new churches and for his acumen 
and thought in defining the belief and attitude of 
Christianity towards the world. He developed the 
idea of the fatherhood of God and the sonship of 
Jesus, fighting against the Judaizers, who would 
have preferred to make Christianity merely a slight 
emendation of the older faith. 


PEKAH.—JI Kn. 15:25 


A soldier of Israel who, with the assistance of a 
small band of desperadoes, usurped the throne of 
Pekahiah, whom he murdered. He came to the 
throne of an impoverished nation, however, and was 
one of the last to hold it. The Assyrians were con- 
stantly exacting tribute, and Pekah attempted to 
organize a coalition against them in which several 


150 Cho's Who in the Bible 


of the surrounding powers joined, but Judah refused, 
and Pekah, with Rezin, invaded that province. 

Pekah’s plans failed and the Assyrians in revenge 
ravaged the whole country, taking many of the 
people captive. 

Seeing that their country would be entirely de- 
molished if Pekah continued to rule, the party who 
saw more hope in the friendship of Assyria than in 
antagonism, murdered Pekah. For this removal of 
the wasteful king Hoshea was principally responsible. 


PEKAHIAH.—JI Kn. 15:23 


King of Israel murdered by Pekah, of whom we 
know little save that he was not in the favor of God, 
since he continued the abuses initiated by Jeroboam 
I, and was murdered as already said. 


PEREZ.—Gen. 38:29 


The head of an exceedingly large family, which 
because of its number became a proverbial expres- 
sion in Judah. Perez was taken to be the type of 
a worthy man honored by many descendants, and 
figures in the lists of the forefathers of David, and 
consequently in the genealogy of our Lord. 


PETER.— Mat. 4:18 


Simon, called Peter, was the son of John, or Jonah, 
a native of Bethsaida. He was a fisherman, in 
partnership with Andrew, his brother, and was 
brought to Jesus by Andrew during the gathering of 
the people around John the Baptist. The meeting 
between our Lord and Peter, who was still called 


Peter 151 


Simon, was significant. Simon was promised the 
name Peter, meaning “‘rock,’’ a name which he had 
yet to justify. 

Peter was one of the first group of the disciples. 
There were just four of them, James and John, 
Simon (Peter) and Andrew, who began to follow 
Jesus on his journeys. Later, when the Apostles 
went in pairs, the brothers Andrew and Peter were 
generally together. 

Peter was an impulsive, enthusiastic apostle in 
the early days, following sudden impulses with an 
extravagance that was not entirely based on thought; 
but the change slowly wrought in him by our Lord 
finally established him in steadfastness. 

Though he denied his Lord, Peter was the out- 
spoken disciple who called him the Christ, and was 
one of the three before whom Jesus was transfigured. 

The great shame of Peter was in his denial of 
our Lord, but there is this to be said in extenuation. 
Peter was inflammable, he was impetuous, and 
though he repeatedly denied Jesus it can hardly be 
because of fear or because of considered disloyalty. 
We must remember that Peter was, with John, set 
apart from his fellow disciples. These two alone 
followed Jesus from the tragic scene in the Garden. 
They dared much. And Peter’s distress of mind 
must have been sufficient punishment and torture 
for his act. To him Jesus appeared on the Resurrec- 
tion morning, and at times subsequent to that hour. 

In the early history of the Church, Peter plays a 
ereat part. He was the undisputed leader and 
spokesman, and the change in his character is to be 


152 Cho’s Who in the Bible 


observed in the tenderness and sound judgment he 
showed towards the Samaritans and the Gentiles, 
generally when the question of their admission into 
the Church was discussed. What remnants of 
prejudice against the Gentiles remained was over- 
come by the vision he had at Joppa, and he subse- 
quently succeeded in overcoming a similar prejudice 
which remained among the elders at Jerusalem, 
when the dispute arose with Paul and Barnabas as 
the center. Though he seems to have wavered a 
little in this attitude to the Gentiles, and on one 
occasion at least showed a disposition to return to 
the position of the judaizers, Peter contributed 
much to the broad foundation of the Christian 
Church. 

Concerning his later life and activity we are de- 
pendent largely on tradition, which says that he 
went to Rome, and was crucified during the reign of 
Nero, being executed head downwards at his own 
request. 

His companion was Mark, who collected the 
material for his Gospel from Peter as they journeyed 
together. 

The Epistles of Peter show the apostle strongly 
imbued with the spirit of Jesus. 


PHILEMON.—Philem. 1 


A Colossian, in whose house the Christians met, 
and who was the owner of a runaway slave, who came 
to Paul after his conversion for guidance, and was 
sent home with a letter from Paul to his master. We 
gather from the letter that Philemon was a man of 


Philip the Evangelist 153 


considerable position and property, of a generous 
nature, who had been converted by Paul on one of his 
journeys. 


PHILETUS.—II Tim. 2:17 


A teacher who incurred Paul’s wrath by denying 
the resurrection of the body, attempting to interpret 
the resurrection as a spiritual conversion, not a token 
of the future life. Paul, in writing to Timothy, 
warned him against such a teaching, which could only 
serve to disintegrate the church. 


PHILIP.— Mat. 10:3 


A disciple called by Jesus during the early years 
of his ministry, and a neighbor of Peter and Andrew. 
Philip was not bold enough to approach Jesus, but 
waited for our Lord to call him. Philip has this 
distinction. He was selected by Jesus himself, but 
thereafter by his practical services was of consider- 
able assistance to the welfare of the disciples, and, 
though he waited himself to be called he was an ac- 
tive disciple, and brought his friend Nathaniel to 
Jesus. His labors were principally confined to Asia 
Minor, according to the Church Fathers, and it is 
said he was buried at Hierapolis. 


PHILIP THE EVANGELIST.—Acts 6:5 


One of the seven set apart by the Apostles to 
administer the affairs of the Church so that the 
Apostles might devote themselves to the matters 
spiritual of the people. Philip was a warm-hearted, 
generous Jew, who belonged to the Greek-speaking 


154 Cho's Who in the Btble 


colony, and went out as a missionary, almost pre- 
paring the way for Paul who later followed after. 
He traveled until he reached Cesarea, and, taking 
up his abode in that city, received Paul when he 
visited Caesarea on his way back to Jerusalem. 
Philip had four unmarried daughters, who were 
active in preaching the word. 


PHINEHAS.— Ex. 6:25; Jos. 24:33 


A grandson of Aaron, who succeeded his father 
Eleazar to the office of chief priest, and became of 
great power in Israel. For his act in executing two 
people who were introducing foreign religious prac- 
tices, the succession of the priesthood was assured 
to Phinehas and his house. 

During the war with the Midianites Phinehas 
accompanied the army as their priest, and was the 
leader of the tribes of the western territories in the 
controversy concerning the altars built by the other 
tribes. 

Taking their name from Phinehas, a group of 
priests after the exile based their claims to office on 
their descent from him. 


PILATE.—John 18:33 


Pontius Pilate was Procurator of Judea during the 
ministry of our Lord, and was constantly in difficul- 
ties with his subjects. The Jews waited on him 
with a delegation to redress some wrongs which they 
suffered, and Pilate refused to see them for some 
time, but finally was compelled to listen, as the Jews 
appealed to Tiberius. 


Pilate 155 


The Jews used this friction to compel Pilate to 
listen to them. He was becoming unpopular at 
Rome, and wished to delay his final removal from 
office as long as possible. Therefore, when the 
Sanhedrin demanded that Pilate pass sentence of 
death on Jesus they expected a ready agreement 
from him, but Pilate in turn demanded a sound 
reason for their request. In examining Jesus, to see 
if there was any justification for the charges brought 
against him by the Jews, Pilate played with philo- 
sophy, belittling any man who thought he had reached 
truth in the question ‘‘What is truth?” but trying 
at once to maintain peace with the Jews and to 
release the prisoner. The Jews insisted, however, 
and Pilate sent Jesus to Herod Antipas, who re- 
turned him to Pilate. The Jews returned to the 
attack with stronger accusations, and Pilate was 
compelled to agree, but tried again to release Jesus 
as it was the custom to set one prisoner free at the 
feast of the Passover. ‘The Jews preferred Barabbas, 
and Pilate tried a new compromise, that of chastis- 
ing and liberating a prisoner he felt was innocent. 
The Jews stormed him into acquiescence by say- 
ing, ‘‘If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesar’s 
friend,’ a threat which brought Pilate to an 
understanding of his possible punishment, and to 
consent. 

He did not, however, escape the danger he avoided. 
Further trouble arose and Pilate was sent for 
trial to Rome, and was not reappointed to his 
province. Tradition says that Pilate committed 
suicide. 


156 Cho's Who in the Bible 


POTIPHAR.—Gen. 29:1 


An Egyptian official who figures in the story of 
Joseph, probably the chamberlain of the royal 
household, or a person of great rank. Joseph was 
sold to him, and on being falsely accused by Poti- 
phar’s wife was thrown into prison. 


RACHEL.—Gen. 39:25—30 


The younger daughter of Laban, and second wife 
of Jacob, who for her husband’s sake opposed Laban, 
her father, and when the final breach came stole the 
household gods. She had two sons, Joseph and 
Benjamin, and died in giving birth to the latter. 
She was buried near Ephrath. 


RAHAB.—VJos. 2; cf. Mat. 1:5 


A woman of Jericho, who hid Joshua’s two spies 
when they came to investigate. The king heard of 
their arrival, and that they were in Rahab’s house, 
but she, having hidden them, told the messenger 
that they had departed, leaving no word of their 
destination. 

When danger was over, Rahab professed belief in 
God, and implored the spies to save her from the 
destruction that would fall on the city, which was 
promised, and Rahab escaped when the city was 
burned. 


RAPHAEL.— Tob. 3:17 


The healing angel sent to Tobit—the blind son of 
Naphtali—who married his son Tobias to a widow 


Rechab 157 


who had had seven previous husbands, all of whom 
had been killed by the evil spirit Asmozedus on their 
wedding days. 

Raphael instructed Tobias in wizardry, so defeating 
Asmodeus and restoring sight to Tobit. 

The healing angel appears in other apocryphal 
and apocalyptic literature, and is probably to be 
identified in Rev. &:3 in the phrase ‘‘another angel.”’ 


REBECCA (REBEKAH).—Gen. 22:23 


The wife of Isaac, selected for him by a servant of 
Abraham, who was dispatched to bring back a 
woman who should be the one appointed of God to 
be Isaac’s wife. The servant recognized her when 
she came to draw water, and offered assistance to 
him. 

Rebekah was the mother of Esau and Jacob, pre- 
ferring Jacob, and by subterfuge obtained for him 
the elder son’s portion. 


RECHAB.—IJ/ Sam. 4 


A warrior who, with his brother Baanah, was 
captain of scouting troops, and on the death of 
Abner sought to find favor with David by treacher- 
ously assassinating Ish-bosheth, Saul’s son, their 
king. 

Carrying the news to David however, they found 
that he had his own views on treachery, and quoted 
to them the reward he had given to one who brought 
news of Saul’s death. David thereupon commanded 
his personal attendants to execute judgment on 
Rechab and Baanah. 


158 Who's Who in the Bible 


RECHABITES.—(See Jer. 35) 


A company of religious enthusiasts who lamented 
the change that came over Israel through an estab- 
lished civilization. Feeling that towns and the 
concentration of their people into permanent settle- 
ments represented a decadent movement and a 
tacit departure from the laws of God, they preferred 
the nomad life. 

Following Jehonadab, son of Rechab, they institut- 
ed a rigorous and lengthy system of taboo, which 
explicitly forbade the drinking of wine, all agriculture, 
the building of permanent abodes, the planting of 
vineyards, and commanded the dwelling in tents 
throughout all time. 

The company, as well as the formalities, slowly 
dwindled and were lost in the irresistible growth of 
an established culture and civilization, though there 
were always some traces of the influence of the 
Rechabites. ‘They served a useful purpose in the 
early days, but as the natural growth of national 
purpose progressed their office diminished. 


REHOBOAM.—I Kn. 14:21 


The son of Solomon by Naamah, the Am- 
monitess. As king, succeeding his father, he was 
an intolerant and hard master, and constantly 
faced disaffection in his people, and open re- 
bellion harassed his reign. He made no serious 
contribution to the development of his kingdom, but, 
on the contrary, laid it open to the ravages of the 
Egyptians, who plundered the Temple and laid the 
country under tribute. 


Rispah 159 


REUBEN .—Gen. 29:32 


Jacob’s firstborn son, by Leah, who lost his 
patrimony because of an intrigue with his father’s 
concubine, and was cursed. The tribe of Reuben 
paralleled the progressive decay of its putative found- 
er. With every initial advantage it failed to make 
headway and sank into the status of a minor com- 
pany. 


REZIN.—II Kn. 16:5 


The last king of Damascus, and ally of Pekah, the 
revolting and murderous officer who became king 
of Israel. These allies fought against Ahaz, king 
of Judah, and Rezin is stated to have recovered 
much of his territory. They laid siege to Jerusalem, 
but Ahaz sought help from the Assyrians. Pekah 
was murdered, and Rezin fled to Damascus, which 
he defended for a year, but was later slain. 


REZON.—I Kn. 11:23 


An adversary of Solomon, who constantly waged 
a war of irritation against the Israelites. Rezon 
was the son of Eliada, and formerly an officer in the 
army of Hadadezer, king of Zobah, but, deserting 
him, he gathered his own company, and captured 
Damascus, where he founded the powerful kingdom 
which occasioned Israel much loss and damage. 


RIZPAH.—II Sam. 21:8 

One of Saul’s concubines, whose father was Aiah. 
She figured in two important episodes in the history 
of the Israelites. When Saul was succeeded for a 


160 Cho's Who in the Bible 


moment or two by Ish-bosheth as king, Abner, Saul’s 
general, took Rizpah by force, which brought the 
wrath of the king on Abner’s head. The act of ab- 
duction was a practical admission on the part of 
Abner that he was seeking the kingdom for himself. 
In the extremity that followed Abner plotted with 
David, and offered him the throne. 

During the time of famine, the interpreters laid the 
cause of the Divine displeasure at the door of Saul, 
who had subjected the Gibeonites to outrage, and 
restitution was demanded. The Gibeonites refused 
any compensation save that descendants of Saul 
should be subjected to public disgrace, and two of 
the sons of Saul, borne by Rizpah, were slain and 
their shame disclosed on Mt. Gibeah. They were left 
exposed until the sign of the land’s repentance was 
accepted by God, and His forgiveness indicated by the 
coming of rain. Rizpah had watched over the victims 
during the period of their exposure, and on the sign 
of Divine forgiveness was permitted to bury her sons. 


RUTH.— Mat. 1:5 

A Moabite woman, who figures as one of the 
ancestors of our Lord. Ruth, with Naomi and Orpah, 
lived in Moab, Naomi being Ruth’s mother-in-law 
and having left her own country because of famine. 
When Naomi wished to return to her own people, 
Ruth insisted on returning with her, and the two 
journeyed to Bethlehem, where Ruth was married 
to Boaz, and bore him Obed, the father of Jesse, 
through whom, with David, the descent of our Lord 
is traced in the Scriptures. 


Samson 161 


SALOME (a). 


The daughter of Herodias whose dancing procured 
for her mother the execution of John the Baptist. 
Salome isnot named in the Scriptures, but is identi- 
fied by other historians. 


SALOME (b).—Cf. Mat. 27:56; Mk. 15:40 

The wife of Zebedee, who was present at the Cruci- 
fixion, and later visited the tomb of our Lord. The 
identification of this Salome with the wife of Zebedee 


is made by the comparison of the gospels of Matthew 
and Mark. 


SAMSON.—Jud. 13-16 

A hero of Israel, and a judge, who fought what was 
practically a personal warfare against the Philistines. 
Samson being a child ‘‘of promise,’ was dedicated 
to God from his birth, as a Nazarite, and developed 
into a man of giant strength. He was, however, 
proud and vain of his strength, playing with temp- 
tations constantly, though he had sufficient warnings 
of their danger. 

The course of his weakening is skilfully portrayed 
in the Scripture, and is probably so told for the 
definite purpose of pointing a moral with political 
significance. Samson’s strength lay in his hair, 
which was sacred to God. Contrary to custom and 
the established policy of his people, Samson entered 
into a foreign marriage, taking Delilah, a Philistine 
woman, as wife. She, under pressure of her people, 
sought to discover wherein lay the strength of the 
man who was troubling the Philistines. Slowly 


162 Who's Who in the Bible 


Samson was beguiled into telling her, and she had 
his hair cut off while he was asleep, which meant the 
departure of his strength. He was imprisoned, his 
eyes put out, and he was used as a sport for the Philis- 
tines. With the growing of his hair, again, how- 
ever, Samson found strength returning and in his 
final revenge died gloriously, demolishing the temple 
of his tormentors. 

Samson’s life is somewhat dissociated from the 
national cause. His warfare is personal, and not 
for the purpose of freeing the country as a whole 
from bondage, although we read that he was a judge 
for twenty years, and destined to be a saviour of his 
people. There is, however, a political significance 
in the way the history is presented. It is directed 
against foreign marriages, against the temptation 
that besets both individuals and nations in the care- 
less use of strength and against indulgence and lux- 
ury. Additionally, there is the effort to present to 
the nation the returning favor of God, after repent- 
ance. 


SAMUEL.—TI Sam. 9 


A “‘judge”’ of Israel, and priest, who sought to 
prevent the Israelites forsaking the leadership of 
God, as he saw it, in their demand for a temporal 
monarch. 

Samuel, the son of Hannah the wife of Elkanah, 
was a child promised in response to the vow of his 
mother that any son she should bear would be de- 
voted to God. After his birth, Samuel was devoted 
to the temple service under Eli, and there received 


Sanballat 163 


the Divine call and the warning of the destruction of 
the house of Eli. Assuming the office of prophet, 
Samuel discovered Saul seeking the lost asses of his 
father, being led to him by Divine guidance. 

The Philistines had been defeated, and the country 
was free again, administered by sons of Samuel who 
were so corrupt that the people revolted and called 
for a king. Samuel, calling this clamor the rejec- 
tion of God as King, nevertheless submitted to the 
will of the people and Saul was selected by lot. 
Samuel, though he appointed Saul, by no means left 
the country to the newly elected king, but was the 
executive power behind him for some time, and in 
an adventure with the Philistines, where Saul had 
not implicitly obeyed the prophet, Samuel an- 
nounced to Saul his rejection by Jehovah, and the 
loss of his kingdom, a sentence repeated on Saul’s 
further disobedience in refusing to wipe out the 
Amalekites entirely. 

Samuel, seeking a successor to Saul, reviewed the 
whole of the sons of Jesse, finally selecting David. 

Thereafter Samuel figured less in the history of the 
people, and remained with his school of prophets at 
Ramah, where he died and was buried. 


SANBALLAT.— Neh. 2:10 


Nehemiah’s thorn in the flesh, jealous of Nehemiah’s 
influence and power in the Persian court. When 
Nehemiah undertook the reparations of the walls of 
Jerusalem, Sanballat and his friends engineered an 
attack to destroy the work that was going forward, 
but was defeated. Thereafter he made several 


164 Cho's iho in the Bible 


attempts on the life of Nehemiah, which likewise 
failed. 


SARAH.—Gen. 17:15 


The wife of Abraham, and also his half-sister, who, 
in their travels because of Abraham’s fear, was taken 
as wife by two kings—the king of Egypt and the 
king of Gerar—but restored to Abraham because of 
Divine interference. For a long time Sarah was 
childless, but when she was about 90 years of age 
Isaac was born to her, although, in accordance with 
the manner of the time, Abraham had taken second- 
ary wives, by whom he had had children. On the 
birth of Isaac Sarah’s jealousy was aroused, and she 
had Hagar and Ishmael driven from the camp, 
though Hagar was Abraham’s concubine and Ish- 
mael his son. Sarah died at the age of 127 and was 
buried in the cave of Macpelah. 


SARGON.—lIsa. 20:1 


King of Assyria. He overran the whole of the con- 
tiguous territory, capturing Samaria and carrying 
the people away into exile. He was not allowed to 
reign unmolested, for during the whole of his king- 
ship wars were in progress on one side or the other of 
his territory, and his incursions into Israel were in- 
terrupted. 

Disposing of other warfare, Sargon heard of the 
intrigue which had been completed between the king 
of Chaldzea and Hezekiah. An army was dispatched 
against the confederacy and succeeded in capturing 
the intervening states of Judah, Moab and Edom, 


Saul 165 


and Sargon became king of Babylon. He was killed 
about 705 B.C. 


SAUL.—I Sam. 10:2 


The son of Kish, and the first king of Israel. He 
was met with the assurance of the Divine favor by 
Samuel whilst he was searching for his father’s asses. 
Samuel told Saul that the asses had been found, and 
before parting company with the youth anointed 
him king. 

The first exploit in which he was concerned was 
the rescue of his countrymen from Nahash, who 
tormented his captives with the threat of the loss of 
their right eyes, and gave them time to dwell on the 
torture. Saul heard of this, and organized a relief 
force. 

Later, with his son Jonathan, Saul defeated the 
Philistines, but the victory was not complete, due to 
the inadvertent disobedience of Jonathan, who ate 
honey captured from the Philistines and which as 
spoils of war was religiously devoted to God. Only 
the petition of the people saved Jonathan from being 
sacrificed by his father, who had vowed that the 
guilty should suffer death. 

Saul himself was disobedient to the religious laws 
in his campaigns, for which disobedience he was 
rejected, with his house, and Samuel announced that 
the kingdom should depart from him. 

Samuel then chose David as the quick successor 
to Saul, and, from a happy and friendly beginning, 
the relationship between the two became that of 
enmity. It is probable that Saul suffered from 


166 Cho's Who in the Bible 


some nervous insanity, which was powerful at times, 
and quiescent at others, and David, as a musician, 
was called in to quell the dementia. David was 
advanced in favor, and proving his prowess in war, 
was married into Saul’s family, but his growing 
popularity turned Saul against him, and the last 
years of Saul’s reign were spent in vain efforts to get 
rid of David. Only insanity can account for the 
terrible measures of vengeance he took, such as the 
assassination of the entire body of priests at Nob, 
who had helped David. 

The manner of the death of Saul revealed the 
extremity of his passion and disappointment. He 
was facing the Philistines, on the plain of Megiddo. 
When he sought guidance for his warfare, there was 
no help forthcoming from the priests or the prophets. 
Even the witch of Endor, whom he commanded to 
summon the spirit of Samuel, was unable to give 
anything but a senseless message, and the battle 
began with Saul undecided. His sons were slain, 
and his armies in danger of defeat. Saul commanded 
his armor-bearer to kill him, but the command was 
disobeyed, and Saul fell on hisown sword. Thenext 
day the Philistines decapitated Saul and his sons, 
and left their bodies exposed on the walls of Beth- 
shan. 


SEGUB.—I/ Kn. 16:34 


The son of Hiel, the rebuilder of Jericho. 

The manner of the death of Segub is one of singu- 
lar importance. ‘There is very little doubt that he 
was a human sacrifice in the dedication of the newly 


Sennacherth 167 


restored city. It was an old Canaanitish custom, 
and probably a Hebrew custom also, to sacrifice 
human beings on the foundation of a new house. 
Remains have been found which establish this 
custom beyond doubt, and from the account in 
I Kings 16, it is obvious that Segub was offered in 
such a way. 

Children, either alive or after having been sacri- 
ficed previously, and sometimes adults, were buried 
in the hole of foundation of the structures of the city. 

Segub was sacrificed when the walls and gates of 
the new city were completed. 


SENNACHERIB.—IJI Kn. 18:13 


King of Assyria, son and successor to Sargon, 
whose wars he continued and completed, marching 
through Tyre and the plains of Phoenicia. The rest 
of Palestine was placed under heavy tribute. Sennach- 
erib defeated at Eltekeh the alliance of Egyptian 
and Judean forces, and thoroughly ravaged the 
country, taking 200,000 prisoners. 

Marching against Jerusalem, Sennacherib’s forces 
were miraculously dissipated, and he was compelled 
to retreat. 

Domestic troubles recalled him to Babylon, where 
for a long time victory swayed back and forth be- 
tween the Babylonian and the Assyrian forces. 
Sennacherib’s campaigns were too extended to be 
carried through to permanent success. When he 
won on one front, his enemies on another took advan- 
tage of the weak forces left to maintain the frontier, 
to harass Assyria. 


168 Gbho’s Who in the Bible 


Finally concentrating, Sennacherib laid Babylon 
in ruins. 

Nineveh owes its foundation as the principal city 
of the empire of the Assyrians to Sennacherib. 

He was murdered twenty-four years after ascending 
the throne. 


SERAIAH.—IJI Kn. 25:18; Ez. 7:1 
A high priest during the reign of Zedekiah, who 
was executed at the order of Nebuchadnezzar. 
According to the Book of Ezra he was an ancestor 
of Ezra. 


SHALLUM.—II Kn. 15:10 


King of Israel for one month. 

Shallum ascended the throne in succession to 
Zechariah, whom he murdered. Menahem, who 
followed Shallum, gained the kingship in precisely 
the same way. 

These three kings reigned in the time when the 
kingdom was rapidly degenerating and open anarchy 
was rife. 

Another Shallum was the father of Jeremiah. 


SHAMGAR.—Jud. 3:31 
One ot the heroes of Israel, who stnote 600 Phil- 
istines with an ox-goad. 


SHAMMAH.—TI Sam. 16:9 


The third son of Jesse, who was rejected by Samuel 
when the sons of Jesse were passed in review by the 
prophet. 


The Queen of Sheba 169 


SHEAR-JASHUB.— Isa. 7:3 

The symbolical name given by Isaiah to his son, 
which was intended to keep before the Israelites the 
promise of an ultimate redemption of the nation, and 
the return of God’s favor to them after the tribula- 
tions at the hands of the Assyrians had been suffered. 
The name means ‘‘a remnant shall return.”’ 


SHEBA.—IJTI Sam. 20 


A spineless pretender who sought to usurp the 
throne of David. By stirring up the private jeal- 
ousies of the tribes of Israel, Sheba thought he could 
engineer a revolt, but though he went on a tour of 
incendiary revolutionism throughout the kingdom 
he gained no supporters. 

Troops under Joab and Abishai pursued him to 
Abel-beth-maacah where he fortified himself with 
what few supporters he had. 

His defense was hopeless, and, rather than sur- 
render the town, his allies, under the leadership of a 
woman, put Sheba to death, and threw his head over 
the city’s defenses to Joab. 


SHEBA, THE QUEEN OF.—I Kn. 10:1 ff. 

The ruling monarch of the territory of the Sabzans, 
who visited King Solomon. The Scriptural account 
leads us to believe that she was attracted by the 
phenomenal wealth and grandeur of Solomon’s 
court, although Sheba wasarich country,and its people 
were extensive traders. There were few lands where 
their commerce did not reach, and it was mostly 
carried on in the most luxurious trades. The Sa- 


170 Giho’s Who in the Bible 


beans exported gold, rare spices, and cloths of ex- 
quisite quality. 

The visit of the Queen of Sheba was probably 
more in the nature of a diplomatic visit, in the 
interest of mutual trade. 

Tradition says that Solomon married her. 


SHEBNA.—II Kn. 18:18; Isa. 36:3 


One of the high officials under Hezekiah, who was 
reduced in rank following an inspired outburst 
against him by Isaiah. He was succeeded in his 
high office by Eliakim. 


SHEMAIAH.—TJ Kn. 12:22 


There are more than twenty-five persons of this 
name in the Scriptures, the principal Shemaiah being 
the prophet who co-operated with Ahijah in engineer- 
ing the revolution of the ten tribes from Jeroboam 
which resulted in the division of the kingdom. 


SHESHBAZZAR.— Ez. 1:8; 5:14 


The prince who received from Cyrus the holy 
vessels for the temple at Jerusalem, where he was 
governor. Itis recorded that healso laid the found- 
ations of the Temple. 


SHIMEI.—I Kn. 2:8 ff. 


A Benjamite, probably a kinsman of Saul, who 
hated King David and rejoiced to see him fleeing 
before the rebellious Absalom. Shimei met David 
on his flight, and with curse and vituperation ex- 


Silas 171 


pressed his enmity. David, however, returned 
triumphant, and Shimei, trying to make the best of 
the change of affairs, came for pardon, which was 
granted, subject to a prohibition that he was not to 
pass beyond the walls of Jerusalem. Some years 
later, either forgetting the prohibition, or believing 
that others had forgotten it, he went to Gath, on a 
slave mission. For his disobedience he was killed. 


SHISHAK.—IJ Kn. 11:40 


A king of Egypt to whom Jeroboam fled. Shishak 
pillaged Palestine, and sacked Jerusalem, in the 
time of Rehoboam. 


SHOBI.—JI Sam. 17:27 


An Ammonite prince, son of Nahash, king of 
Ammon, who gave refuge to David when he fled 
from Absalom. 


SILAS.—Acts 15:32; I Thes. 1:1 


A Christian who accompanied Judas Barsabbas 
as a delegate from the Apostolic Council to Antioch. 
Silas appears to have been a Roman citizen, which 
made him especially suitable to accompany Paul, as 
he did, on the second missionary journey, taking 
the place of Barnabas. 

Paul seems to have sent Silas on an independent 
journey to Philippi, but they joined again at Corinth. 

Silas is to be identified with Silvanus, the one 
name being used in the Acts of the Apostles, and the 
other occurring in the Epistles. 


172 Who's Wiho in the Bible 


Silas afterwards was the scribe, or secretary, to 
whom Peter dictated his first Epistle. 


SIMEON.—Gen. 20:33 


The second son of Jacob and Leah, and putative 
founder of the tribe bearing his name. 

The tribe of Simeon appears to have suffered 
seriously in warfare. At Sinai, in the census there 
taken, 59,300 fighting men were enumerated. At 
Moab these had dwindled to 22,200. 

Thereafter they were under the protection of 
Judah, and the tribe was finally established on the 
borders of the territory of Judah, until they were 
merged in that tribe, which is the probable end, and 
accounts for their final disappearance from the 
named tribes in subsequent history. 


SIMON MAGUS.—Acis 8:9 ff. 


A sorcerer of Samaria, who was converted by 
Philip and baptized, becoming a co-worker with 
Philip. When Peter and John visited Samaria, to 
strengthen the work done by Philip, Simon Magus, 
impressed by the miraculous baptism of the Holy 
Ghost, sought to buy the power from the apostles, 
and was so rebuked as to fall in frenzy before the 
apostles, imploring them to prevent the visitation of 
the wrath of God. 

Simon has been ‘‘the first born of satan’”’ through- 
out subsequent Christian history. The incident has 
been the theme of most of the Church Fathers, and 
the name of Simon Magus is invested with particular 
disgrace. 


Solomon 173 


SIMON. 


There are many bearers of this name, some of 
whom play an important part in the history of 
Christianity, but concerning whom there are few 
details. 

Among them are (a) Simon the Leper, Mat. 26:6, 
who was the friend and host of Jesus at Bethany, 
and probably related to Martha and Mary. 

(b) Simon, father of Judas Iscariot. John 6:71. 

(c) The Cyrenian who carried our Lord’s cross. 
Wat 27 132. 

(d) Peter’s host at Joppa, a tanner by trade. 
Acts 9:43. 


SISERA.— Jud. 4:2; 5 

The Canaanitish king, or captain (the reading is 
uncertain), who was overcome by Barak and fled to 
the tent of Jael, who should have given him sanctuary 
according to custom, but who treacherously slew 
him while he slept. 


SOLOMON.—I Kun. 1-11 


The son and successor of David. Bath-sheba, his 
mother, and Nathan, friend and counselor of David, 
undoubtedly held a strong hold over him. 

Solomon succeeded David principally because 
Bath-sheba engineered the nomination of her son in 
preference to all other sons of David, and success- 
fully defeated all conspiracy and revolt which sought 
to deprive her son of the throne. 

Quickly he marked himself as a wise and states- 


174 Who's Who in the Bible 


manlike king, consolidating the kingdom and per- 
fecting his military and diplomatic strength, using 
foreign alliances and commerce to this end. It was 
doubtless as a result of this wise policy that the 
Queen of Sheba’s visit occurred. 

He came to a kingdom that was fabulously rich, 
but Solomon seems to have been extravagant, not 
only in the use of money for public purposes, such 
as the Temple, which took seven years to build, and 
for which timber and materials were brought from 
great distances, but also in his own personal expen- 
diture. His palace took thirteen years to complete, 
and his wife enjoyed her own palace. Moreover he 
maintained an extensive court and harem. 

To provide for his needs he divided the kingdom 
into twelve sections and made each section respon- 
sible for one month’s supply. Labor he obtained 
by means of the forced levy. There is little doubt 
that this extravagance was at the foundation of the 
unrest that finally came to a climax under Jeroboam. 
Solomon was sending 10,000 men per month on 
what was practically slave work to Lebanon, a levy 
which the country could not stand, either economical- 
ly or spiritually. 

Solomon’s religious activity, however, consolidated 
the worship of the nation, and centered it around 
the Temple in Jerusalem. 

As a judge of his people Solomon was a wise and 
shrewd man with a deep insight into human nature. 
He was a man of high character and an idealist, but 
there was a weak strain of vanity and self-indulgence, 
with occasional outbursts of unrestrained anger. 


Stephen 175 


His fall he owes to the leniency and toleration with 
which he dealt with the invasion of his people by 
foreign worship, and the idolatry and paganism that 
were so encouraged. 


SOPATER.— Acts 20:4 


A fellow countryman of Paul’s, the son of Pyrrhus 
of Berea, and a companion of Paul through part 
of Asia as he journeyed to Jerusalem. 


SOSTHENES.— Acts 18:17 


The ruler of the Corinthian synagogue, who was 
attacked by the company when Paul was dismissed 
by Gallio, and who was probably converted by 
Paul, who calls him “brother” in his work with 
the people of Corinth. 


STEPHEN.— Acts 7 


One of the seven officials appointed by the elders 
at Jerusalem to distribute alms to the widows of the 
Greek-speaking Jews. Stephen became prominent 
not only in his charitable office, but as a prophet 
and evangelist and miracle worker. Stephen was 
accused of blasphemy by the antagonistic Jews, but 
made a sound defense. Nevertheless the Jews 
stoned him to death—illegally. 

Stephen, with true Christian spirit, implored the 
divine forgiveness of his murderers, and his spirit did 
much to spread the gospel throughout the surround- 
ing countries when the Christians were dispersed 
by the persecution that broke out in Jerusalem. 
Saul of Tarsus was present at the stoning, and it is 


176 Ciho’s Who in the Bible 


highly probable that Saul’s conversion was in large 
measure due to Stephen. 


TERTIUS.— Rom. 16:22 

A secretary of Paul’s, who wrote the Epistle to 
the Romans at his dictation, and added a personal 
signature and greeting. 


TERTULLUS.— Acts 24:1 


The hired lawyer who represented the Jews against 
Paul in his trial before Felix. 


THADDAUS.— Mat. 10:3; Mk. 3:18; Lu. 6:16; 
Acts 1:13 

One of the apostles in the lists given by Matthew 
and Mark, and probably the same as Judas the son 
of James, who figures in the lists according to Luke 
and the account of the apostles present in the upper 
room given in the first chapter of Acts. 

Tradition says that Thaddzus worked in Egypt, 
where he was buried, and that he suffered crucifixion. 


THEODOTUS.—III Mac. 1:2 
A plotter who sought, in vain, to murder King 
Ptolemy Philopator. 


THEOPHILUS.—Lu. 1:3 


The individual, probably a Christian official of 
the Roman government, for or to whom Luke wrote 
his Gospel and the Acts. 


THEUDAS.—Acts 5:36 ff. 
A rebel, used as an example in his argument by 
Gamaliel, when Peter and the other apostles were 


Thomas ity ie 


imprisoned and on trial before the Sanhedrin. 
Theudas apparently was a man who had pretended 
to power, and had gathered around him a body of 
some four hundred men, but his revolt was short- 
lived, and his followers slain or dispersed. 


THOMAS.—Mat. ro, but see John 14 


The doubting disciple. ‘Thomas is not the actual 
name he bore, although it has now become a name 
in common use. It was a name of familiarity, 
meaning ‘‘twin,’”’ and was undoubtedly used to dis- 
tinguish him from another bearing the same given 
name. As Thomas, however, the apostle has come 
down to us. The most general knowledge regarding 
Thomas concerns the manner of his reception of the 
news of the reappearance of our Lord after the Resur- 
rection. Thomas was not present when the risen 
Lord entered through closed doors to the apostles 
assembled in the room at Jerusalem, and he refused 
to believe the report. 

It was doubtless his feeling of pessimism and 
defeat that caused this rejection, for Thomas was 
not inclined to disbelief or disloyalty. On the 
contrary, on one occasion he shamed the rest of the 
company by reproving them for their timidity, and 
challenging them to accompany Jesus on his danger- 
ous mission with the words, ‘‘Let us also go, that we 
may die with him.” 

His doubts were removed. Our Lord appeared to 
Thomas later, and gave him the physical proof he 
wanted, the touch of his pierced hands and side, and 
later appeared to him also at the Sea of Galilee. 


178 Cho's Who in the Bible 


TIBERIUS.— Lu. 3:1 


A Roman emperor, in the fifteenth year of whose 
reign John the Baptist began to preach. ‘Tuiberius 
owed his throne to accident rather than merit, for 
the Emperor Augustus had nominated four others in 
turn to follow him. ‘These died, and Tiberius suc- 
ceeded, at first reigning with Augustus, later alone. 
Althougha good generalandruler, Tiberius felt it neces- 
sary to maintain his authority by frequent executions 
of people, who seemed likely to undermine his throne. 


TIGLATH-PILESER.—IJ Kn. 16 


The record of the activities of Tiglath-Pileser, 
found in the Second Book of Kings, is considerably 
supplemented by Assyrian records which show him 
to have been one of the most powerful and successful 
warriors of ancient history. He entered the field 
of Hebrew history at the request of Ahaz, who was 
troubled by the ravages of Pekah and Rezin. Ahaz, 
according to the record, was only twenty years of 
age when he ascended the throne, and found it 
necessary, early, to call for aid. He dispatched 
messengers with treasures from the Temple, and 
from his own palace, as offerings to Tiglath-Pileser, 
and to encourage his aid. The confederate kings, 
Pekah and Rezin, separated before the oncoming 
army of Tiglath-Pileser, and suffered defeat. As 
the outcome of his interference, the Assyrian king 
extended his kingdom by taking Damascus and 
slaying Rezin. He also occupied the domain of 
Pekah, conquering the northern territory of Israel, 
and carrying the people into captivity. 


Timothy 179 


In Damascus he received the homage of Ahaz. 

Throughout the lands adjacent to his own territory 
Tiglath-Pileser appears to have waged unceasing 
warfare. He completely subjugated Babylonia, pene- 
trated into Mesopotamia, Syria and Phcenicia, and 
laid the Sabeans and Arabians under tribute. He 
died, probably by violence, during a late expedition, 
having reigned for some fifteen or eighteen years. 
He made his capital at Nineveh. 


TIMOTHY.—Acts 16:1 


A young man of Lystra who joined Paul on the 
Apostle’s second missionary journey. His father 
was a Greek, but his mother, Eunice, was a con- 
verted Jewess. Timothy was by early training a 
Jew, but apparently had been converted some time 
before Paul, at the suggestion of the elders of the 
church at Lystra, took him as his companion for the 
remainder of the second missionary journey. He 
accompanied the Apostle through Macedonia, and 
was left at Berea while Paul continued. He rejoined 
Paul at Athens, to be sent on a special mission to the 
church at Thessalonica and to report progress in that 
place to Paul. This report he carried to Paul at 
Corinth, which occasioned the letters of Paul to the 
Thessalonians in which Timothy is mentioned. 

On the third missionary journey, Timothy with 
Erastus went to prepare the way, ahead of the 
Apostle, to Macedonia, where later he was joined 
once more by Paul. 

Later, Timothy was with Paul during the Apostle’s 
captivity, and must have journeyed with him, on his 


180 Cho's Who in the Bible 


release, to Asia. Timothy was left at Ephesus to 
superintend the government of the church there 
during Paul’s absence. 

When Paul was once more in prison, he sent for 
Timothy to join him. That Timothy reached the 
Apostle is fairly well established, but of his subse- 
quent history we have no knowledge. 


TIRHAKAH.—JI Kn. 19:9 


The king of Cush, who commenced a campaign 
against Sennacherib. He was not strong enough to 
defeat the Assyrian monarch, and his country was 
ravaged, but at least he made it impossible for 
the Assyrians to hold the territory they had con- 
quered. Warfare was continuous and fluctuating. 
The victory was to the Assyrians, but it was 
profitless. 


TITUS.—Gal. 2:3; Tit. 1:4; II Cor. 2:12 


A heathen converted to Christianity, around 
whom Paul waged his own struggle against the 
Judaizers, that is, against those Hebrew Christians 
who regarded Christianity as closed against all who 
had not first become Jews. Paul succeeded in 
winning the open door to the Gentiles. Titus 
accompanied Paul on his missionary journeys, and 
was the agent at Corinth for the collection of funds 
from the Christians there. 

With Timothy, Titus was distinguished by the 
close friendship of Paul, and constant service with 
him. ‘Titus was left to establish the church at 
Crete, and on Paul’s imprisonment we learn that 


Cpchicus 181 


Titus made haste to reach him, though he was later 
sent on another journey through Dalmatia. 


TRYPHON.—I Mac. 11-15 


A particularly stormy rebel, whose history and 
progress is one of murder and tumult. Originally 
an officer under Alexander Balas, Tryphon put for- 
ward Balas’ son Antiochus as king, in opposition to 
the unpopular Demetrius. Tryphon, however, want- 
ed the throne for himself. Therefore, having dis- 
posed of Demetrius by intrigue as he thought, he 
disposed of the other aspirants, Jonathan and 
Antiochus, by murder. Demetrius, however, was 
not quite out of the way, and marched against 
Tryphon. Demetrius was taken prisoner, but his 
brother Antiochus Sidetes continued against Try- 
phon, who was put to flight, and finally committed 
suicide. 


TUBAL-CAIN.—Gen. 4:22 


The instructor of all those who worked in metals. 
It is worth noting that the name Cain is the same 
as “‘Smith.”’ 


TYCHICUS.— Acts 20:4; Col. 4: 7 ff. 


One of Paul’s companions on the way to Jerusalem, 
and obviously frequently with the Apostle. It was 
by Tychicus that the letters to the Ephesians and 
Colossians were delivered, and he was to have been 
sent to Titus at Crete, perhaps to relieve him, or to 
take up the work there, but there is no account of 
this journey having been completed. 


182 Who's iho in the Bible 


Possibly Tychicus was to return to Titus at Crete 
after his visit to Ephesus, or else the Asian journey 
was substituted by the Apostle Paul as being more 
urgent. 


TYRANNUS.—Aets 19:9 


There is but slight reference to Tyrannus, but by 
a careful reading of the events prior to his appear- 
ance some reconstruction can be made. When Paul 
found the Jews at Ephesus very definite in their 
antagonism, he did his preaching at the school of 
Tyrannus, daily. 

School was finished for students very early in 
the day, and if, as is believed, Tyrannus was a 
schoolmaster, that would mean that Paul had a 
preaching station at his disposal after the early 
morning. 


URIAH (a).—II Sam. 11 


One of David’s valiant men, who lost his life 
through the very zeal of his service. David, the 
king, had betrayed Uriah, by intrigue with Bath- 
sheba his wife, while Uriah was away at war. Bath- 
sheba, being with child, informed the king of her 
condition, and David attempted to prevent discovery 
by making Uriah return home. ‘This Uriah refused 
to do, feeling that it would be cowardly to go down 
to his house while his companions were submitting to 
the rigors of the life of acampaign. Therefore David 
had Uriah put in “the forefront of the battle’’ that 
he might be killed. Uriah was killed, and David 
took Bath-sheba as his wife. 


Gs3iah 183 


URIAH (b).—Jer. 26:20 

A prophet who prophesied against both Judah and 
Jerusalem, and was persecuted. For his life he fled 
to Egypt but was pursued, and on the order of 
Jehoiakim was brought back, slain and buried in 
the “‘ graves of the common people.’’ 


URIEL.— Enoch 9:1 


The angel of the Lord. One of the watchers of 
God, and one of the four archangels. He was the 
one who showed Enoch the wonders of the heavens. 


UZZA.—IT Sam. 6:2 


The driver of the wagon bearing the ark from 
Kirjath-jearim, who died suddenly at Perez-uzzah. 
This sudden death was interpreted as the sign of 
the divine displeasure at the sacrilege in touching the 
ark, and led to long delay in bringing the ark to 
Jerusalem. 


UZZIAH.—IT Kn. 15 


The son of Amaziah, whom he followed as king of 
Judah, and who reigned for fifty-two years. Little is 
recorded of him, save that he fought against the 
Philistines and the Ammonites, as well as the nomad 
tribes; that his reign was good, and that he was 
aleper. The leprosy is reported to have been inflicted 
on him for an act of sacrilege. Uzziah attempted 
to exercise the office of priest, and to burn incense, for 
which outrage the disease was fastened upon him, 
and he was consequently confined to his palace. His 
son Jotham, as regent, was the actual ruler. 


184 Cho's Who in the Bible 


WITCH OF ENDOR.—I Sam. 28:7 


Although Saul punished sorcery with death, by 
killing those that “‘had familiar spirits,’ he was not 
sufficiently convinced of the rightness of his action, 
and on the occasion of great extremity sought the 
witch of Endor, and commanded her to invoke the 
spirit of Samuel in order to discover the means of 
defeating the Philistines. 

All the satisfaction he received, however, was an 
unintelligible message which was definite in one 
phrase only, that the might of the Lord had departed 
from him. 

Witchcraft, and all manner of sorcery and magic, 
were constantly practiced among the tribes, and 
magic played a large part in the imagination of the 
people, disappearing but slowly. The nomad tribes 
of Arabia still practice similar rites for the purpose 
of divination. 


ZACCH/EUS.—Lu. 10:1 ff. 


A rich publican who entertained our Lord. Of 
short stature, Zaccheus climbed into a tree when 
Jesus was passing, that he might attract attention, 
and being seen was called by our Lord to come down, 
that he might sup with him, to the consternation and 
disapproval of the multitude, which disapproval was 
refuted by both Zacchzeus and our Lord. 


ZACHARIAH (ZACHARIAS).—Lw. 1:5 


A priest in the temple, husband of Elisabeth, and 
father of John the Baptist. During his period of 
duty, in a vision, the Angel Gabriel announced to 


Zalmunna— Zebah 185 


Zachariah the birth and mission of his son. Za- 
chariah in unbelief was struck dumb, and only 
recovered his speech when the child was presented 
to him in the temple to be named. With returned 
speech, Zachariah uttered the ‘‘Benedictus’’ which 
has been part of the liturgy of the churches since. 

There are nine persons of this name in the Scrip- 
tures, none of whom other than the priestly father 
of John has much claim to distinction. 


ZADOK.—I Chr. 6:3 ff. 


A priestly descendant of Aaron, through Eleazar 
his son, and founder of a branch of the priesthood. 
Zadok was appointed to the priestly office by Solo- 
mon, succeeding Abiathar as chief priest because of 
the latter’s disloyalty. 

From the family of Zadok the high priests were 
appointed throughout succeeding history until some 
few years before the Christian era, and in fact only 
the family of Zadok were recognized as legitimate 
priests by a considerable section of the community. 


ZALMUNNA 
ZEBAH.—Jud. 8:18 ff. 

Kings of Midian, defeated and slain by Gideon. 
The victory is mentioned later in the scriptures and 
was evidently of considerable significance, probably 
marking a turning point in the development of the 
nation towards complete independence. 

The Midianites and their allies lost some hundred 
and twenty thousand men, and the kings Zebah and 
Zalmunna were captured. Questioning them, Gid- 


186 Cho's Who in the Btble 


eon found that they had put to death his own 
brothers, which act called for blood revenge, and 
Gideon commanded Jether his son to slay them. 
Jether being too young feared the task, and Gideon 
undertook it himself, thereafter being acclaimed 
judge. The preceding battle is the one made 
familiar by the strategy and courage of Gideon, who 
met a host with a handful of men. 


ZEBEDEE.— MR. 1:20 


A fisherman, who was apparently an important 
figure in his trade, and not only a worker himself, 
but one who engaged others to work for him. The 
father of James aud John, and married to Salome. 


ZEBUL.—Jud. 9:26 ff. 


One of the officers of Abimelech, who was appointed 
to the governorship of Shechem, and who, by cun- 
ning, was successful in overcoming the revolt of Gaal, 
though he had but few men at his disposal. 


ZEBULUN.—Gen. 30:20 


The tenth son of Jacob. Leah’s sixth child. He 
is the putative founder of three nomad families 
through his sons, Sered, Elon, and Jahleel, who 
migrated to Egypt. 

The actual tribe of Zebulun possessed fighting 
forces of about 57,000, according to the first census, 
all of whom died before the second counting. The 
male members of the tribe had, however, by that 
time increased, and though the men who were 


Zevdekiah 187 


counted at Sinai were lost, there were over 60,000 
others to be enumerated in the second census. 

The Zebulunites assisted in the battle against 
Sisera and were renowned for their bravery. 

Their territory was part of the fertileland of Galilee. 

Elon, a Zebulunite, was one of the minor judges. 


ZECHARIAH. 


In all there are upwards of thirty persons bearing 
this name in the Scriptures, the two principal charac- 
ters being the ones mentioned below. 


(a)—II Kn. 14:29 

King of Israel, who reigned for less than a year. 
He was the last descendant of Jehu to occupy the 
throne, but was assassinated shortly after his ascen- 
sion. With his death began the closing scenes of the 
kingdom of Israel, stormy with anarchy and revolt, 
oppression and disaster. 


(b)—ITI Chr. 26:5 

The prophet. He was instrumental in spurring on 
Joshua to the building of the temple, and worked in 
conjunction with Haggai. The Book of Zechariah 
is a series of visions, which reveal the divine dis- 
pleasure at the laxity of Israel, a call to action, and 
the image of a Jerusalem of great extent, safeguarded 
by Jehovah, who is as a wall of fire around the city. 


ZEDEKIAH (a).— £3. 17:13 ff. 
The third son of Josiah, and king of Judah, who 
reigned in Judah before its conquest by the Baby- 


188 Cho's ho in the Bible 


lonians. Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, and Jehoiachin had 
all preceded Zedekiah to the throne, and had suffered 
either deposition or death, and the country was 
decimated; the chief men of the people had been 
carried away into captivity, to suppress seditious 
activity against the Babylonians, and Zedekiah 
(originally Mattaniah) was appointed king of the 
few that remained. 

sedition was not extirpated however, and the men 
who remained constantly stirred up revolt against 
Nebuchadnezzar. Zedekiah, being too weak and too 
slight of mentality to lead his people in the way they 
ought to have gone, for peace and security, was 
compelled to be the figurehead for his plotting and 
foolish counselors, and despite the prophecies of 
Jeremiah, was intrigued into believing that Egypt 
would help Judah against Babylonia. 

Nebuchadnezzar, however, thoroughly defeated 
the alliance, and waged warfare for nearly two years 
against Judah, finally completing the conquest and 
carrying off the people into captivity. 

Zedekiah, trying to escape, was captured and 
brought to Nebuchadnezzar, who, with customary 
thoroughness, made him a royalexample. The king 
Zedekiah was compelled to witness the slaughter of 
his children and was then blinded and carried to 
Babylon in bonds. 


ZEDEKIAH (b).—Jer. 20:21 


A prophet contemporaneous with Jeremiah, who 
was opposed by Jeremiah for false prophecy and for 
immoral conduct. Zedekiah seems to have been 


Zerah 189 


one who stirred up in the hearts of the Israelites vain 
hopes of release from Babylon, and to have spread 
intrigue against Nebuchadnezzar. For his activities 
he was deported to Babylon, where he was tortured at 
the command of the king, by being roasted in the fire. 


ZELOPHEHAD.— Wu. 26:33; Jos. 17:3 


One of the tribe of Manasseh, who died during the 
wandering in the wilderness. He had no sons, but 
left several daughters, who, after considerable argu- 
ment, established their claim to enter into his pos- 
sessions. 


ZENAS.— Tit. 3:13 
A student of the law who was at Crete, and whom 
Paul requested to come to him. 


ZEPHANIAH —Zeph. 1 


A prophet during the reign of Josiah, whose 
utterances, delivered at infrequent intervals, are 
collected in the book bearing his name. Zephaniah 
was of royal descent, claiming Hezekiah as ancestor. 
As a prophet he proclaimed the coming judgment on 
his own people, and indeed on all the peoples of the 
earth, for their sins and idolatry. Heis marked bya 
singular moral earnestness, and seems to have drawn 
much of his inspiration from the prophecies of 
Isaiah, whom he much resembles. 


ZERAH (a).—IJI Chr. 14:9-15 
A Cushite, who invaded the country of Judah 
during the reign of Asa. The story of the invasion is 


190 CHho’s Cho in the Bible 


chiefly notable on account of the magnitude of the 
forces engaged. ‘The invading armies numbered one 
million, while they were opposed by forces under 
Asa stated to be over halt a million strong. The 
great probability is, however, that these figures are 
exaggerated and merely intend to convey the fact 
that the forces were immeasurably greater than had 
been known before. 


ZERAH (b). 


There are several other characters bearing the 
name Zerah in the Old Testament, none of whom 
has much claim to notice, save the younger of Judah’s 
twin sons (by Tamar) who is mentioned in the gen- 
ealogy of our Lord. (Mat. 1:3.) 


ZERUBBABEL.— Hag. 1:1 


Governor of Judah, who returned from the cap- 
tivity as a general. Of the house of David, he was 
the son of Shealtiel, and was hailed as one of the 
chosen leaders whose task should be the rebuilding of 
the temple. Zerubbabel accomplished this task, 
though he met with considerable opposition, and 
had to appeal to Darius for help. He was held in 
high honor by the people, who esteemed him in the 
light of a saviour, having the divine promise. 


ZIBA.—II Sam. 9:1-1I1 


One of the household of Saul, who later became 
counselor to David. He is reported as having a 
large family, and apparently was of considerable 
wealth, employing a score of servants. Through 


Zipporah IQI 


him David learned of the fate of the house of Saul, 
and from him also heard of Mephibosheth and of his 
retreat. Later, during the flight from Jerusalem, 
Ziba brought news to David that Mephibosheth 
was committing treason, for which information 
David bestowed on Ziba the possessions of the sup- 
posed traitor. On the king’s return home Mephi- 
bosheth cleared himself sufficiently, but only the 
half of his possessions were returned to him, Ziba 
continuing to hold the remainder. 


ZILPAH.—Gen. 29:24 


One of Leah’s slaves, given to her by her father 
Laban. Jacob took her as concubine, and she bore 
him two sons, Gad and Asher. 


ZIMRI.—I Kn. 16:9-20 


A usurper, who, after murdering the king, seized 
and held the throne of Israel for a week. He 
was in turn defeated by Omri, another officer in the 
army, and a much stronger claimant to the throne. 


ZIPPORAH.— Ex. 2:21; 4:24 


The Midianite wife of Moses, to whom she ee 
Gershom and one other son. 


THE END. 


; 


* 


kL 4 
ty Re 
A “J 


ee 





7 


ty 
ah 
ry 
Pods} 
4 
oe 
Hi 
F 
we 
| 





Date Due 




















iste ; E as a 
Fete este a ; thee * 
Bee! | gts 


Qeseuer 








