THE 

NEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

PRESENTED  BY 

-Rev.- 

-Wilton -Ee-r-le- 

Smith 

9.Q     Anpni«t. 

1Q17 

OLW 


WHOLLY    FOR   GOD 


"  To  be  IVHOLLY  FOR  CiOD  is  the  true  secret  of  the  inner  mystic 
life.  The  one  only  secret  of  the  mystics  is  their  secret  intercourse 
with  Go^. "— Tersteegen. 

"  Self  is  an  inward  life,  and  God  is  an  inward  Spirit  of  Life; 
therefore,  nothing  kills  that  which  must  be  killed  in  us^  or  quickens 
that  which  must  come  to  life  in  us,  but  the  inward  work  of  God  in 
the  soul,  and  the  inward  work  of  the  soul  in  God.  This  is  mystic 
religion."— V^iiA^WM  Law. 


WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

THE   TRUE   CHRISTIAN   LIFE 

%  Btxm  ai  ©^tracts  from  tfje  Writiugs 


WILLIAM    LAW 


Selected  and  with  an  Introduction,  by  tht 
Rev.    ANDREW  '  MURRAY 

AUTHOR   OF    "ai^IDE   IN   CIIRTSTi" 
FTC. 


NEW   YORK 
ANSON    D.    F.    RANDOLPH   &   CO.   INC. 

182  Fifth  Avenuf 


THE  NEW  YORK 

PUBLIC 

LIBRARY 

8^ 

1395 

ASTOR, 

LENOX    AND 

TILDEN 

FOUNDATIONS 

H 

1  9  1  7                      L 

CONTENTS 


Introduction 


PAGE 

xi 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  LOVE.— PART  I. 

1.  The  Spirit  of  Love  has  its  Ground  in  God    . 

2.  The  Spirit  of  Love  in  the  Creature  . 

3.  The  Perfection  of  the  Spirit  of  Love 

4.  The  Absolute  Necessity  of  the  Spirit  of  Love 

5.  Self  crucifies  Christ  .... 

6.  Of  Christ  our  Redeemer 

7.  Of  Purification  .... 

8.  The  Spirit  of  Love  the  Universal  Good 

9.  Love  is  of  God  .... 

10.  The  Spirit  of  Love  not  a  Notion,  but  a  Nature 

11.  The  Birth  of  Love     .... 

12.  Dying  to  Self  the  only  Way  to  the  Life  of  God 


11 
12 
13 

14 
16 
18 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  LOVE.— PART  II. 

1.  Of  the  Divine  Love  .             .....  23 

2.  Nature  only  exists  to  manifest  the  Goodness  of  God            .  24 

3.  God  is  an  Immutable  Will  to  all  Goodness  .  .  ,25 

4.  Of  the  Twofold  Life  of  the  Creature              ...  26 

5.  Of  the  Folly  of  Deism            .....  28 

6.  Of  the  Twofold  Life  of  Man  .....  29 

7.  Of  the  Immediate  Operation  of  the  Deity  in  the  Life  of  the 

Creature    .......  31 

8.  Of  the  Need  of  the  Perpetual  Operation  of  the  Spirit  of 

God  within  us        ......  32 

9.  The  Teaching  of   the   Established   Church   on   Perpetual 

Inspiration             ......  34 


VUl 


CONTENTS 


10.  Of  the  Seed  of  Heaven  bred  in  every  ISIan    . 

11.  The  Mystery  of  the  Inward  Life 
]  2.  The  "Witness  of  Nature  to  an  Inward  Life    . 

13.  The  Outward  reveals  the  Inward 

14.  The  Way  of  Salvation  .... 

15.  What  you  are  to  do  . 

16.  Where  you  are  to  seek  your  Salvation 

17.  In  what  you  are  to  find  your  Salvation 

18.  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven       .... 

19.  Jesus  Christ,  in  all  His  process,  our  only  Salvation 

20.  How  Christ's  Sufferings  save  us        . 

21.  Of  Christ  as  the  Second  Adam 

22.  The  Great  Difference  between  Knowing  and  Having 

23.  Two  Stages  in  the  Christian  Life 

24.  A  Personal  Application         .... 

25.  Of  the  Power  of  Divine  Love 

26.  Of  Light  and  Darkness  .... 

27.  Of  the  True  Nature  of  Self  .... 

28.  Of  Deliverance  from  the  Power  of  Self 

29.  Of  Faith  in  Christ  as  the  only  way  of  Deliverance  from 

Self 

30.  What  Faith  in  the  Lamb  of  God  means 

31.  Christ  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  Virtues  of  His  Character 

32.  Of  Covetousness         ..... 

33.  Of  the  total  Despair  of  Self  .... 

34.  Of  True  Resignation  to  God  apart  from  Feeling 

35.  The  Blessedness  of  total  Resignation  to  God 

36.  The  Absolute  Necessity  of  the  Death  of  Self 

37.  The  One  Infallible  Way  to  God        . 


THE  SPIRIT  OF  PRAYER 

1.  The  Vanity  of  Time  and  the  Riches  of  Eternity 

2.  The  Spirit  of  Prayer 

3.  Of  the  Creation  of  Man  in  the  Image  of  God 

4.  Man  in  Paradise 

5.  Of  the  Nature  of  Redemption 

6.  Of  the  Entrance  of  Evil  into  this  World 

7.  Of  the  Fall  of  the  Angels      . 

8.  Of  Chaos  and  the  Creation  of  this  World 

9.  Of  Love  as  the  Nature  of  God 
10.  The  Need  of  the  New  Birth 


CONTENTS 


IX 


11. 
12. 
13, 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 

20. 

21. 
22. 

23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 


37. 


How  Man  again  becomes  Partaker  of  the  Divine  Nature 

Of  Union  to  Christ   ..... 

Of  Christ  witliin  Us  .... 

Of  the  Life  of  Christ  in  the  Soul      . 

Of  the  Way  to  the  New  Birth 

Wherein  the  Salvation  of  Christ  consists 

How  the  Birth  of  Christ  is  to  be  effected  in  Us        . 

Of  turning  to  the  Heart  to  find  Christ  there 

The  Pearl  of  Eternity  is  the  Light  and  Spirit  of  God  withii 

thee  ...... 

The  Pearl  of  Eternity  is  the  Wisdom  and  Love  of  God 

within  thee  ..... 

The  Pearl  of  Eternity  is  the  Temple  of  God  within  thee 
The  Pearl  of  Eternity  is  the  Peace  and  Joy  of  God  with 

thee  ..... 

Of  the  way  to  obtain  this  Pearl  of  Eternity 
Of  Dependence  on  God's  Spirit 
Of  Nature  and  Grace 
Of  the  Old  and  New  Testament 
Of  the  Kingdom  of  God 
Of  Subjection  to  the  Spirit  of  God    . 
The  Need  of  Mortifying  Self 
Of  forsaking  All        .... 
Of  the  Love  of  our  Neighbour  in  and  for  God 
The  Necessity  of  Self-Denial 
The  True  Nature  and  Worth  of  Self-Denial 
Of  the   Danger  of  Trusting  in  our  Self-Denial,   and  the 

only  Way  to  escajie  this  Danger  . 
Of  an  Absolute  Dependence  upon  God 
Of  the  Effects  of  this  Absolute  Dependence  upon  God 
Of  the  one  Salvation,  and  the  Way  to  it      . 


PAGE 

122 
124 
125 
127 
128 
129 
131 
133 

135 

140 
142 

143 
144 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
150 
152 
154 
155 
156 

157 
158 
159 
161 


A  SERIOUS  CALL 

1.  True  Devotion  does  not  consist  in  the  performance  of  certain 

Religious  Duties  at  set  times,  but  in  the  Spirit  in  which 

the  Ordinary  Duties  of  common  life  are  performed  .       167 

2.  The  first  and  most  Fundamental  Principle  of  Christianity 

is  an  intention  to  please  God  in  all  our  actions.  It  is 
because  the  generality  of  Christians  have  no  such  inten- 
tion, that  they  so  fall  short  of  True  Devotion       .  .       1 74 


CONTENTS 


3.  The  want  of  True  Devotion,  arising  from  the  want  of  any 

intention  to  serve  God  to  the  very  best  of  our  powers, 

will  leave  us  Avithout  excuse  .  .  .  .180 

4.  True  Devotion  implies  a  life  devoted  to  God  everywhere, 

and  in  every  thing,  and  must  be  seen  in  every  calling 

in  life         .  .  .  .  .  .  .       133 

5.  Those  who  have  their  time  at  their  own  disposal,  have  a 

special  calling  to  devote  it  entirely  to  God's  service  -        .       190 

6.  True  Devotion  will  make  us  religiously  exact  in  the  use  of 

our  money  and  worldly  goods       .  .  .  .195 

7.  The  reason  that  so  many  people  make  no  progress  in 

religion,  is  from  the  want  of  religious  exactness  in  the 

use  of  their  money  .....       203 

8.  How  the  right  use  of  money  helps  in  the  perfecting  of 

Christian  character  .....       206 

9.  The  Blessedness  of  a  Life  wholly  devoted  to  God    .  .       213 

10.  Entire  Devotion  to  God  the  duty  of  every  Christian  .       221 

11.  The  more  exalted  our  Piety  the  greater  our  Happiness        .       226 

12.  The  Emptiness  of  all  Worldly  Pleasure        .  .  .234 

13.  The  Vanity  of  Worldly  Possessions  ....       237 

14.  Of  Special  Times  of  Prayer  .....       243 

15.  Of  Singing,  and  beginning  the  day  with  Thankfulness  and 

Praise         .......       249 

16.  Of  frequency  in  Prayer  ;  of  praying  for  Humility    .  ,       255 

17.  No  Humility  without  renouncing  both  Self  and  the  Spirit 

of  the  AVorld  .  .  .  .  .  .263 

18.  How  unfavourable  the  Spirit  in  which  men  are  educated  is 

to  the  growth  of  Humility   .  ,  .  .         .       271 

19.  How  in  the  Education  of  our  Daughters  the  Spirit  of  Pride 

is  fostered  ......       279 

20.  Much  Prayer  equally  desirable  for  all.     Of  Universal  Love        289 

21.  Of  Intercession,  and  the  blessing  it  brings  to  those  who 

engage  in  it  .  .  .  .  .  .301 

22.  Of  Prayer  for  entire  Resignation  to  the  Will  of  God  .       308 

23.  Of  the  particular  Confession  of  Sin  .  .  .  .316 

24.  Great  Devotion  the  noblest  Temper  of  the  noblest  Souls     .       321 


INTRODUCTION 

A  FEW  words,  first  of  all,  to  let  my  reader  know 
v/hat  has  given  rise  to  the  publication  of  this  volume. 
Last  winter  Dr.  Whyte  of  Edinburgh  gave  a  lecture 
on  William  Law,  in  which  he  directed  attention  to 
the  treasures  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  this  almost 
forgotten,  though,  as  he  styles  him,  "  quite  in- 
comparable author."  With  many  others  I  owe  Dr. 
Whyte  a  debt  of  gratitude  for  this  introduction  to  one 
of  the  most  powerful  and  suggestive  writers  on  the 
Christian  life  it  has  been  my  privilege  to  become 
acquainted  with.  The  present  volume  is  a  proof  of 
my  high  appreciation  of  his  teaching,  and  my  desire  to 
let  others  share  with  me  in  the  profit  to  be  derived 
from  it. 

Not  long  after  the  delivery  of  the  lecture,  a  volume 
of  selections  was  published,  with  the  title  Character 
aTid  Characteristics  of  William  Law,  Nonjuror  and  Mystic. 
Selected  and  Arranged,  with  an  Introduction  by  Alex- 
ander Whyte,  D.D.  (Hodder  &  Stoughton.)  I 
would  not  have  thought  of  now  publishing  this  volume, 
were  it  not  that  I  hoped  that  the  special  point  of 
view  from  which  these  extracts  have  been  made 
would  prove  an  attraction  to  some,  and  introduce  Law 


XU  INTRODUCTION 

to  readers  to  whom  the  larger  vohune  would  never  find 
its  way.  That  pomt  of  view  I  have  expressed  in  the 
title  as  the  True  Christian  Life.  I  know  of  no  writer 
who  equals  Law  in  the  clearness  and  the  force  with 
which  the  claims  of  God  on  man  are  asserted.  God  is 
all ;  God  must  have  all ;  God  alone  must  work  all :  round 
these  central  truths  all  his  teaching  gathers.  In  their 
light  he  convicts  the  religious  world  of  the  hollowness 
and  terrible  self-deception  of  the  Christianity  it  professes. 
He  proves  to  the  believer  no  less  how  little  he  has  lived 
as  one  who  is  wholly  devoted  to  God  in  every  action 
of  common  life,  how  little  he  has  made  exalted  and 
eminent  piety,  and  devotion  to  God,  his  one  study,  in  the 
same  way  that  a  man  of  the  world  does  with  his  busi- 
ness. And  what  is  more,  in  his  later  works  he  lays 
bare  the  root  and  source  of  all  this  evil  in  the  un- 
conquerable power  of  self,  and  shows  how  nothmg  but 
the  mighty,  immediate,  and  perpetual  operation  of  God 
on  the  soul  can  give  deliverance,  and  how  nothing  but 
the  having  the  very  spirit  and  humility,  and  love  of  the 
Lamb  of  God  within  can  ever  satisfy  either  God  or  our 
own  heart.  I  feel  confident  that  the  teaching  will  be 
a  stimulus  and  a  strength  to  many. 

William  Law  was  born  in  1686,  and  died  in  1761, 
at  the  age  of  seventy-five.  After  completing  his 
studies,  he  entered  Holy  Orders,  and  for  five  years  held 
a  Fellowship  in  Cambridge.  At  the  end  of  that  time, 
in  1716,  he  lost  his  Fellowship,  owing  to  his  refusal 
to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  (Jeorge  I.  His  loss 
of  all  hope  of  preferment  in  the  Church  has  been  its 
great  gain.  The  closing  of  the  door  to  active  work 
set  him  free  for  that  life  of  contemplation  and  prayer 
of  which   we  reap   the  fruit.      His  forsaking  all    for 


INTRODUCTION  Xlll 

what  he  deemed  faithfuhiess  to  conscience  helped  to 
intensify  that  separation  from  the  world,  and  that 
whole-hearted  allegiance  to  God  and  His  will  for  which 
he  was  to  be  snch  a  witness  and  advocate. 

His  earliest  books  were  controversial,  1717-1726, 
and  at  once  gave  him  a  name  as  an  author.  His  first 
practical  works  were — A  Practical  Treatise  upon  Christian 
Perfection  (1726)  and  A  Serious  Gall  to  a  Devout  and 
Holy  Life  (1729).  It  is  by  the  latter  of  these  works 
that  Law  is  best  known.  The  first  short  paragraph  of 
the  book  contains  the  text  into  the  exposition  and 
apphcation  of  which  the  writer  throws  his  whole  soul : 
"  Devotion  is  neither  private  nor  public  prayer ;  but 
prayers,  whether  private  or  public,  are  particular  parts 
of  devotion.  Devotion  signifies  a  life  given,  or  devoted, 
to  God!'  Throughout  the  volume  he  never  wearies 
of  illustrating  and  applying  the  two  statements  of  his 
text.  He  sees  men  deceiving  themselves  with  the 
thought  that  prayer  is  devotion :  he  proves  to  them, 
that  as  words  are  less  than  actions,  prayer  is  the  least 
part  of  devotion :  devotion  consists  in  a  life  given  up 
to  God.  And  what  this  means,  he  puts  in  such  a 
light,  both  from  Scripture  and  the  very  nature  of 
things,  that  every  serious  reader  must  confess  that 
he  has  but  little  realised  how  wholly  God  expects  us 
to  live  for  Him,  and  how  nothing  less  than  a  Hfe  with 
the  spirit  of  Christ's  commands  and  example  animating 
us  at  all  times  and  in  every  action  is  what  God  asks 
and  accepts.  The  word  "  wholly  unto  God,"  which  re- 
curs unceasingly,  is  the  keynote  of  the  book. 

As  I  have  read  and  re-read  the  first  ten  chapters  of 
the  book,  and  felt  how  difficult  it  is  to  realise,  even 
intellectually,  this  absolute  devotion  to  God,  I  have 


XIV  INTKODUCTION 

more  than  once  thought  that  if  a  minister  were  to  try 
and  reproduce  in  his  preaching  their  substance,  the 
result  would  in  more  than  one  way  be  a  surprise  to 
him.  He  would  be  surprised  to  find  how  difficult  it  is 
to  get  a  clear  and  full  grasp  of  that  high  standard 
of  living,  which  he  cannot  but  admit  is  nothing  more 
than  what  Christ  demands.  He  would  be  surprised 
at  his  own  want  of  success  in  conveying  to  his  hearers 
the  same  impression  of  intense  and  entire  devotion  to 
God's  will  and  pleasure  as  the  one  object  of  life.  He 
would  probably  be  surprised  at  discovering  how,  while 
he  thought  he  had  preached  holiness  and  the  imitation 
of  Jesus  Christ,  he  had  given  but  a  very  faint  im- 
pression of  the  unworldly,  the  heavenly  life,  which  it 
is  the  duty  of  every  Christian  to  lead.  He  would 
possibly  be  most  of  all  surprised  at  finding  how  little 
his  own  life  had  really  aimed  at,  not  to  say  had 
attained,  the  true  ideal,  set  before  us  in  Christ  Jesus. 

It  was  not  many  years  after  the  publication  of  this 
book  that  an  event  took  place  which  exercised  an 
unexpected  influence  on  the  life  of  Law.  This  was 
his  becoming  acquainted  with  the  works  of  the  German 
mystic,  Jacob  Boehme  or  Behmen.  Though  at  first 
he  found  much  in  the  writings  of  Behmen  that 
appeared  unintelhgible,  he  came  so  completely  under 
his  influence  that  he  gave  himself  up  entirely  to  the 
study  and  the  exposition  of  his  teaching.  The  mystic 
element  had  always  been  strong  in  Law's  nature. 
One  of  the  chief  marks  of  the  mystic  is,  that  he  seeks 
to  pierce  through  all  the  appearances  of  nature  to  the 
Great  Being  who  lives  and  moves  in  it  all.  The  Serious 
Call  is  proof  of  how  Law  had  learnt  to  see  God  in 
every  thing,  and  how  he  sought  to  bring  men  to  let 


INTRODUCTION  XV 

God  in  very  deed  be  their  All.  Behmen  taught  Law 
what  he  had  only  faintly  seen  before,  that  God  not  only 
is  All,  and  must  have  All,  but  that  He  alone  must  do 
All.  In  different  works  written  after  this  time, 
between  1737  and  1740,  the  influence  of  Behmen 
was  distinctly  visible,  and  the  substance  of  his  teaching 
given. 

Then  there  follows  an  interval  of  nine  years  (1740- 
1749)^  during  which  he  published  nothing.  He  ap- 
pears to  have  given  himself  to  that  intense  contem- 
plation and  fellowship  of  the  Unseen,  which  is  the 
only  way  in  which  eternal  things  can  come  with  their 
full  power  into  the  spirit,  and  can  so  impart  them- 
selves as  real  existences,  that  in  what  is  spoken  and 
written,  the  weight  and  the  fire  of  the  Eternal  makes 
itself  felt.  One  cannot  but  observe  this  in  the 
works  written  by  Law  after  this  season  of  silence. 
They  were — The  Spirit  of  Prayer  (Part  I.  in  1749  ; 
Part  II.,  1750);  The  Way  to  Divine  Knovjledgc, 
preparatory  to  a  new  edition  of  the  works  of  Behmen, 
1752;  The  Spirit  of  Love  (Parti.,  1752;  Part  II., 
1754).  In  all  these  books,  though  some  of  them  are 
quite  small,  one  feels  that  a  man  is  speaking  who 
does  not  deal  with  thoughts  and  conceptions  of  the 
truth,  but  in  whom  the  vision  of  the  spiritual  world 
has  been  opened,  and  through  whom  the  fire  of  the 
sanctuary  sheds  its  light  and  warmth.  One  feels 
impelled  to  pause  and  read  again,  and  to  confess  that, 
though  the  meaning  be  clear  and  plain,  there  is  a 
something  behind  that  draws  us  on  to  long  for  the  full 
possession  and  experience.  Of  these  later  works.  The 
Spirit  of  Prayer  and  The  Spirit  of  Love,  Dr.  Whyte 
says :   "  Christopher  Walton  does  not  exaggerate  one 


XVI  INTRODUCTION 

iota  when  he  says  that  Law's  readers  will  rise  up  from 
these  books,  saying,  These  are  the  two  best  books  in 
the  world !  .  .  .  I  have  laid  down  these  books  again 
and  again,  saying  with  Walton,  In  their  way,  and 
on  their  subjects,  show  me  another  two  books  like 
them  in  all  the  world." 

And  yet  I  fear  that,  with  many  who  might  be 
induced  to  begin  reading  them,  it  might  happen  as  it 
did  to  me,  when  The  Spirit  of  Prayer  came  into  my 
hands  some  years  ago,  in  regard  to  prayer,  as  it  is 
ordinarily  taught,  I  found  absolutely  nothing.  Dis- 
cussion in  regard  to  the  origin  of  nature  and  matter 
and  sin,  that  were  not  at  once  easily  apprehended,  and 
that  appeared  to  have  no  dii^ect  bearing  on  the  subject 
of  the  book,  deterred  an  unprepared  reader,  and  the 
book  was  laid  aside.  And  so  I  have  thought  it  might 
be  a  help  to  give  such  extracts  from  these  books,  as 
would  bring  his  more  direct  teaching  on  the  spiritual 
life  within  the  reach  of  all.  It  will,  I  am  sure,  be  the 
means  of  leading  some  to  get  the  original  works,  and 
study  Law's  teaching  on  the  Kingdom  of  Grace  in  its 
deep  and  wondrous  unity  with  the  Kingdom  of  Nature.^ 

The  spiritual  insight  into  the  truth  of  God  ac- 
quired by  Law,  under  Behmen's  guidance,  made  its 
influence  very  marked  and  felt  on  his  practical  teach- 
ing. The  difference  between  The  Serious  Call  and  The 
Spirit  of  Prayer  or  The  Spirit  of  Love  is  very  great. 
The  former  is  from  beginning  to  end  a  plea  for  God, 
in  which  every  duty  of  the  Christian  life  is  exhibited 
and  insisted  upon  with  the  voice  of  authority,  and  the 
motives   to   obedience   are   urged  with  all-convincing 

1  The  Spirit  of  Prayer  (Part   I.)  and    The  Spirit  of  Love  have 
been  publislied  in  sbillin^,'  volumes  by  Griffith  k  Farran. 


TXTEODUCTION  XVll 

argument.      But  there  is  one  thing  wanting.     Tu  the 
question  of  the  struggling  soul  who  feels  its  impotence, 
and  asks  for  strength   to    cast   aside   its   bonds,  and 
fulfil  what  is  demanded  of  it,  he  gives  no  answer.      Of 
the  power  that  comes  to  faith,  nothing  is  directly  said  ; 
of  the  grace  which  the  Holy  Spirit  works,  mention  is 
scarce  made.     In  the  later  works  the  tone  is  entirely 
different.      The  utter  corruption  and  impotence  of  our 
nature,  the  absolute  necessity  of  a  new  birth  as  an 
operation  of  God's  mighty  power  in  the  soul,  the  in- 
dwelling of  Christ  in  us,  are  preached  in  demonstration 
of  the  Spiiit  and  in  power.     And  these  are  passages 
in  which  the  nature,  the  simplicity,  the  necessity,  the 
alone  efficacy  of  faith  as  making  us  partakers  of  the  life 
and  power  of  Christ,  are  set  forth  with  singular  beauty. 
How  deeply  it  was  felt  by  some  in  Law's  own  day 
that  there  was  something  wanting  in  The  Serious  Call, 
is  evident  from  what  took  place  with  John  Wesley. 
His  biography  tells  us  that  he  had  been  some  twelve 
years   a  minister  before  he  found  that  salvation   by 
faith  of  which  he  afterwards  became  such  a  preacher. 
During  the  years  preceding  what  he  counted  his  con- 
version, Wesley  had  frequent  intercourse  with  Law, 
and  looked  up  to  him  as  a  teacher.     When  brought 
to  see  how  salvation  is  by  faith  alone,  he  wrote  Law 
a  letter,  reproaching  him  for  never  having  taught  him 
this  precious  truth.     Wesley  tells  him  that  for  two 
years  he  had  been  preaching  after  the  model  of   The 
Serious  Call  and   Christian    Perfection,   and   that    the 
result  had  been  to  convince  the  people  that  the  law 
of  God  was  holy,  but  that  when  they  attempted  to 
fulfil  it,  they  found  themselves  without  power.     And 
he  asks  La^v,  "  Why  did  I  scarce  ever  hear  you  name 
h 


XVlll  INTRODUCTION 

the  name  of  Christ  ?  Kever  so  as  to  ground  anything 
upon  faith  in  His  blood." 

Law  answers :  "  You  have  had  a  great  many  con- 
versations with  me,  and  you  never  were  with  me  for 
half  an  hour  without  my  being  large  upon  that  very 
doctrine  which  you  make  me  totally  silent  and 
ignorant  of.  ...  I  have  been  governed  through  all 
that  I  have  written  and  done  by  these  two  common, 
unchangeable  maxims  of  our  Lord :  '  Without  Me  ye 
can  do  nothing!  '  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  or  he 
My  disciple,  let  him  take  iqj  his  cross  and  follow  Me.' " 
These  two  texts  were  without  doubt  the  spirit  of  all 
Law  taught.  Christian  Perfection  and  The  Serious  Call 
are  little  else  than  an  extended  exposition  of  the 
second  of  the  two.  And  as  to  the  former,  he  did 
indeed  insist  upon  the  necessity  of  Divine  aid.  And 
yet  we  can  quite  understand  how  Wesley,  when  once 
he  came  to  the  light,  could  complam  that  Law  had 
never  pointed  out  to  him  the  unique  place  that  faith 
holds  in  God's  plan  of  salvation.  If  we  are  to  judge 
by  his  writings,  Law,  while  holding  that  we  are 
saved  by  faith,  had  not  yet  himself  learnt  what  self  is, 
and  what  the  vanity  is  of  all  self-effort,  and  what  the 
wondrous  power  of  Christ  is  in  him  that  believes.  I 
have  already  alluded  to  the  striking  passages  in  his 
later  works  so  infinitely  beyond  what  he  had  ever 
written  before. 

These  statements  in  regard  to  the  difference  between 
the  earlier  and  the  later  works  of  our  author  will 
account  for  my  not  having,  in  these  selections,  adhered 
to  the  chronological  order.  I  thought  that,  in  be- 
ginning with  The  Spirit  of  Love,  and  setting  before  my 
readers  some  of  the  ripest,  richest  fruit  first,  I  would 


INTRODUCTION  XTX 

tempt  them  on  tu  search  for  the  tree  on  which  that 
fruit  grew.  That  tree  they  will  find  in  The  Spirit  of 
Prayer,  and  its  teaching  on  Kegeneration  and  the 
Birth  from  Heaven.  In  the  strength  of  the  faith  of 
what  God  will  do,  we  may  then  go  on  to  The  Serious 
Call,  with  its  solemn,  heart-searching  exposition  of  true 
Christianity.  That  book  will  teach  us  what  the 
tendmg  and  pruning,  the  digging  and  dressing,  is  that 
is  needed  to  enable  the  tree  to  grow  and  bring  forth 
fruit  to  perfection. 

This  order  is  that  which  is  found  in  more  than  one 
of  the  New  Testament  Epistles.  The  high  state  and 
calling  of  the  Christian  in  Christ  is  first  expounded ; 
then  the  reader  is  led  on  into  everyday  life,  and 
shown  what  are  the  conditions  of  the  maintenance 
and  enjoyment  of  the  grace  bestowed  in  Christ.  Or, 
as  we  have  it  in  Ephesians,  the  first  half  lifts  us  into 
the  heavenly  places  with  the  life  in  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
the  second  brings  us  down  to  the  practical  duties  of 
life  on  earth,  with  its  cares  and  duties.  I  am  in  hopes 
that  even  so,  after  the  reader  has  been  encouraged 
and  quickened  in  the  heavenly  atmosphere  of  The 
Spirit  of  Love  and  Prayer,  he  will  go  down  at  the 
hand  of  The  Serious  Call  into  the  valley  of  humihation, 
to  see  what  is  still  wanting  in  his  life,  spirit,  and  con- 
duct, and  to  prove  that  the  previous  teaching  of  what 
God  and  faith  can  do  indeed  enable  a  man  to  live  and 
love  as  God  would  have  him  do. 

Law  is  known  as  a  mystic.  Dr.  Whyte  calls  him 
the  greatest  of  English  mystics.  The  deeper  insight 
into  spiritual  truth  which  his  later  works  reveal,  and 
the  higher  life  of  which  they  testify,  he  all  attributes 
to  the  teaching  of   the   great  German  mystic,  as  he 


XX  INTRODUCTION 

calls  liini,  "  The  heavenly  illuminated  and  blessed  man, 
Jacob  Behmen." 

That  we  be  not,  on  the  one  hand,  led  unaware 
into  error,  nor,  on  the  other,  be  prejudiced  against 
truth  by  undue  apprehension,  it  may  be  well  for  us 
to  consider  what  this  word  "  mystic  "  means. 

In  mysticism,  as  in  everything  human,  there  is  an 
admixture  of  good  and  evil.  Some  writers  give 
prominence  to  what  they  consider  its  errors  and 
dangers,  and  count  mysticism  in  principle  to  be 
untrue  and  unhealthy. 

In  the  Preface  to  Vaughan's  Hours  with  the  Mystics, 
the  author  writes :  "  Mysticism,  though  an  error,  has 
been  associated,  for  the  most  part,  with  a  measure  of 
truth  so  considerable,  that  its  good  has  greatly  out- 
weighed its  evil."  The  statement  that  what  is  at 
heart  an  error  should  effect  so  much  more  good  than 
evil,  cannot  but  strike  one  as  somewhat  strange.  It 
would  be  surely  more  correct  to  say :  Mysticism, 
because  it  is  at  root  a  truth,  its  good  has,  notwithstand- 
ing a  considerable  amount  of  error,  greatly  outweighed 
its  evil.  The  writer  of  Hours  with  the  Mystics  would 
wish  the  word  applied  to  the  error  in  mysticism  alone, 
and  thinks  that  St.  John  ought  not  to  be  called  a  mystic. 
In  this  case  we  should  need  another  word  to  express 
that  special  element  which  is  so  marked  a  character- 
istic of  the  apostle. 

"  Others,  looking  at  its  good,  which  even,  according 
to  Vaughan,  so  greatly  outweighs  the  evil,  noticing 
how  many  of  the  noblest  and  holiest  of  us  have 
breathed  its  spirit,  and  remembering  what  the  wonder- 
ful attraction  its  teaching  often  has  for  the  most 
earnest    and    thoughtful  minds,  maintain    that    there 


INTRODUCTION  XXI 

must  be  truth  in  its  root-principle,  and  that  its  errors 
must  be  put  to  the  account  of  human  weakness, 
and  the  difficulties  of  the  high  problem  with  which 
it  deals. 

Lange  says  {Hcrzog-Schaf  Cyclopcedia)  : — 

"Mysticism  has  been  defined  as  belief  in  an 
immediate  and  continuous  communication  between 
God  and  the  soul,  which  may  be  established  by  means 
of  certain  peculiar  religious  exercises;  as  belief  in 
an  inner  light,  which  may  almost  dispense  with  the 
written  revelation.  This  definition  identifies  mystic- 
ism too  closely  with  its  extravagances,  its  more  or 
less  imsound  developments,  and  overlooks  that  there 
is  a  mystical  element  in  all  true  religion,  hoth  objectively 
in  the  revelation  and  subjectively  in  the  faith.  Accord- 
ing to  common  acceptation,  mysticism  is  simply  a 
one-sided  development  of  that  element." 

It  is  evident  from  what  has  just  been  said,  that  it 
is  not  easy  to  define  what  mysticism  is.  It  is  not  a 
system  of  doctrine.  It  is  found  in  all  religious  systems  ; 
in  heathenism  and  pantheism,  as  well  as  in  Christi- 
anity. With  the  Church  of  Christ  it  is  not  a  sect  or 
party  ;  every  Church  has  its  representatives.  In  every 
complete  Christian  character  there  is  an  element  of 
mysticism.  It  is  the  outgrowth  of  a  certain  dis- 
position or  temperament,  which  ever  seeks  for  the 
deepest  ground  or  root  of  spiritual  things. 

The  close  connection  between  the  words  mystic  and 
mystery  will  help  us  to  understand  what  it  means.  In 
all  religion,  in  all  existence,  there  are  hidden  mysteries  : 
for  these  the  mystic  has  a  natural  affinity.  In  all  the 
mysteries  of  revelation  there  is  a  human  side,  which 
the  mind  of  man  can  master  and  reduce  to  a  system. 


XXU  INTRODUCTION 

There  is  another,  the  Divine  side,  which  human 
reason  cannot  grasp  or  express,  but  which  opens  itself 
to  the  faith  that,  in  contemplation  and  worship,  lives 
in  the  Invisible.  The  mystic  believes  in  a  Divine 
light  and  power  that  comes  on  the  soul  that  makes 
these  its  special  object.  The  moment  we  attempt 
to  formulate  what  the  spuitual  faculty  is  that  re- 
ceives this  communication,  in  how  far  it  may  be 
counted  a  real  revelation  of  God's  Spirit,  and  what  its 
relation  to  the  inspired  word,  we  come  upon  contro- 
verted ground.  What  we  have  said  is  enough  to 
indicate  very  generally  what  distinguishes  the  mystic 
from  the  ordinary  Christian. 

It  may  help  to  prepare  the  way  for  reading  these 
extracts  from  Law  with  profit,  to  mention  some  of  the 
chief  characteristics  of  his  teaching,  as  they  mark  the 
true  and  healthy  mysticism,  from  which  the  Church 
has  nothing  to  fear,  and  a  measure  of  which  is 
necessary  to  a  full  and  all-sided  development  of  the 
gifts  of  the  Spirit.  As  long  as  mysticism  is  regarded 
as  a  system  which  aims  at  making  all  whom  it  can 
reach  into  nothing  but  mystics,  it  is  no  wonder  it 
should  be  looked  on  with  apprehension.  But  if  once  it  be 
understood  that  mystics  have  a  special  gift  and  calling 
in  the  body  of  Christ,  that,  like  all  specialists,  their 
value  consists  in  their  devoting  themselves  to  one  side 
or  sphere  of  the  Divine  life,  thereby  to  benefit  those 
who  have  not  the  same  gift  or  calling,  and  that  the 
result  of  what  they  attain  must  become  the  common 
property  of  those  members  of  Christ's  body  whose 
talents  point  them  to  other  parts  of  the  great  field  of 
Christian  life  and  duty,  prejudice  will  be  lessened,  and 
the  immense  benefit  acknowledged  which  the  Church 


INTRODUCTION  XXIU 

has    from    the    presence    and   life    of    those  who    so 
intensely  witness  for  the  Unseen  and  Incomprehensible. 

1.  The  great  mystery  of  the  universe  is  God.  The 
mystic  seeks  for  God.  To  know  God,  to  realise  God, 
to  live  here  on  earth  in  conscious  fellowship  with 
Him,  to  love  God,  is  his  highest  aim.  "That  God 
may  be  all,"  is  the  truth  to  which  all  others  are  sub- 
ordinate. The  words  of  Scripture,  "  For  whom  are  all 
things,  and  through  whom  are  all  things,"  stand  in 
the  very  forefront  of  its  theology.  "  For  whom  all." 
Whether  it  be  in  nature  or  grace,  in  time  or  eternity, 
all  things  exist  only  for  God,  as  the  medium  through 
which  He  can  show  forth  His  power  and  goodness, 
and  so  be  glorified  in  the  beauty  and  happiness  of  His 
creatures.  "And  through  whom  all."  All  things 
glorify  God  only,  because  He  alone  works  in  them  what- 
ever is  good  and  right.  Just  as  these  two  truths  hold  in 
nature,  so  it  is  the  one  aim  of  religion  to  make  them 
true  in  our  lives.  Man  can  hve  all  for  God  as  by 
faith  he  pelds  himself  to  expect  all  through  God. 
To  know  and  enjoy  and  honour  God  thus,  must  be  the 
one  object  of  existence ;  to  aim  at  it  and  increasingly 
to  attain  to  it,  is  true  religion  and  true  happiness. 
Law  will  wonderfully  help  us  to  reahse  this.  His 
Serious  Call  will  teach  us  what  all  for  God  means. 
His  later  books,  what  all  through  God  can  be  to  us. 

2.  The  mystic  insists  especially  on  the  truth  that 
the  organ  by  which  God  is  to  be  known,  is  not  the 
understanding  but  the  heart ;  that  only  love  can  know 
God  in  truth.  Man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God.  We 
know  God  first  in  His  works.  From  these  we  rise  to 
His  attributes,  and  form  our  conceptions  of  how  these 
constitute    the  perfection  of  Him  we  seek  to  know. 


XXIV  INTllODUCTION 

But  behind  and  beyond  these  attributes  there  is  the 
Infinite  and  Incomprehensible  Being,  who  hides  Him- 
self in  a  light  that  is  inaccessible.  Even  so  there  is 
in  man,  who  was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  an  outer 
life  of  thoughts  and  feelings,  of  words  and  actions. 
From  these  we  go  inward  to  the  powers  from  whence 
they  come — the  understanding,  the  affection,  the  will. 
But  then  behind  these,  there  is  the  deep  centre  of  the 
soul,  what  Scripture  speaks  of  as  the  spirit,  and  at 
times  as  the  heart,  in  which  life  has  its  secret  roots, 
where  its  hidden  character  is  found,  and  from  whence  all 
the  issues  of  life  proceed.  This  is  that  inner  hidden 
sanctuary  of  man's  nature  which  corresponds  to  the 
mystery  of  the  Divine  Being,  whose  likeness  he  bears, 
and  which  God  created  specially  for  Himself  to  dwell 
in.  This  is  that  hidden  depth  which  none  but  He 
who  searches  the  hearts  can  fathom  or  know.  This 
is  the  seat  of  that  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in 
which  the  birth  of  the  Divine  life  creates  a  man  anew. 
Eeason  can  form  its  conceptions,  and  frame  its  image 
of  what  God  must  be ;  but  the  Hidden,  the  Incompre- 
hensible One  Himself,  reason  cannot  touch.  As  He  is 
in  Himself,  so  His  working  in  man :  His  dwelling  and 
His  dwelling-place  in  the  heart  are  a  mystery  too. 

One  of  the  great  reasons  that  our  religion  is  so 
powerless,  is  that  it  is  too  much  a  thing  of  reason  and 
sense.  We  place  our  dependence  on  the  intellectual 
apprehensions  of  truth,  and  the  influence  these  exert 
in  stirring  the  feelings,  the  desires,  and  the  will.  But 
they  cannot  reach  to  the  life,  to  the  reality  of  God, 
both  because  they  are  in  their  nature  unfitted  for 
receiving  God,  and  are  darkened  under  the  power  of 
sin.        Mysticism     insists    upon    this  —  and     presses 


INTRODUCTION  XXV 

unceasingly  the  cultivation  of  the  spiritual  faculty 
which  retires  within  itself,  and  seeks  in  patient 
waiting  for  God  by  faith  to  open  the  deepest  recesses 
of  its  being  to  His  presence. 

How  true  and  yet  how  little  understood  what  Law 
says :  "  Man's  intellectual  faculties  are  by  the  fall  in 
a  much  worse  state  than  his  natural  animal  appetites, 
and  want  a  much  greater  self-denial"  {Character,  57). 

"  When  the  call  of  God  to  repentance  first  rises  in 
thy  soul,  thou  are  to  be  retired,  silent,  passive,  and 
humbly  attentive  to  this  new  risen  Light  within  thee, 
by  wholly  stopping,  or  disregarding  the  workings  of  thy 
own  will,  reason,  and  judgment.  It  is  because  all 
these  are  false  counsellors,  the  sworn  servants,  bribed 
slaves  of  thy  fallen  nature,  they  are  all  born  and 
bred  in  the  kingdom  of  self ;  and  therefore  if  a  new 
kingdom  is  to  be  set  up  in  thee,  if  the  operation  of 
God  is  to  have  its  effect  in  thee,  all  these  natural 
powers  of  self  are  to  be  silenced  and  suppressed,  till 
they  have  learned  obedience  and  subjection  to  the 
Spirit  of  God'   {Spirit  of  Prayer,  §  28). 

"  If  nothing  can  do  any  good,  be  any  happiness  or 
blessing  but  only  God  Himself  in  His  holy  Being,  and 
if  God  cannot  communicate  Himself  to  you  under 
a  notion,  or  an  idea  of  reason,  but  only  as  a  degree 
of  life,  good,  and  blessing,  born  or  brought  to  life  in 
your  soul,  then  you  see  that  to  give  yourself  up  to 
reasoning  and  notional  conceptions  is  to  turn  from 
God,  and  wander  out  of  the  way  of  all  Divine  com- 
munication "  {Character,  p.  224;  see  also  pp.  185, 
197). 

We  can  now  understand  why  such  high  value  is 
attached  to  the  contemplative  life,  to  stillness  of  soul, 


XXVI  INTRODUCTION 

and  to  the  practice  of  the  presence  of  God.  It  is  as 
the  insufficiency  of  our  own  powers  of  thought  is 
deeply  felt,  and  their  activity  is  restrained,  that  the 
deeper  the  hidden  powers  of  our  nature  can  take 
their  place,  and  faith  can  exercise  its  highest  function 
as  a  faith  of  the  operation  of  God,  who  raised  Christ 
from  the  dead.  The  door  is  opened  for  God  to 
become  our  inward  life  as  truly  as  self  has  been  our 
very  inmost  life. 

3.  Another  point  in  which  the  mystic  seeks  to 
enter  into  the  hidden  mystery  of  God,  is  the  nature 
of  redemption.  There  are  two  views  we  find  in 
Scripture,  each  the  complement  of  the  other.  In  the 
one,  the  simpler,  more  outward  and  objective,  Christ  as 
our  representative  did  a  certain  work  for  us  which  He 
now  in  heaven  applies  to  us.  In  the  other,  the 
knowledge  of  Him  as  an  outward  person  and  of  His 
outward  work  is  considered  as  but  the  means  to  an 
end,  a  preparation  leading  up  to  the  inward  experience 
to  His  indwelling  in  us.  Law  says,  "  A  Christ  not  in 
us  is  the  same  as  a  Christ  not  ours ;  "  and  opens  up  with 
wonderful  clearness  and  power  what  this  Christ  in  us 
and  faith  in  Him  means.  He  shows  how,  in  the  very 
nature  of  things,  nothing  less  can  restore  that  life  of 
God  which  we  lost  in  Adam,  than  a  Christ  whose  life 
and  disposition  live  in  us  as  truly  as  that  of  Adam 
does. 

If  we  ask  what  Christ  in  us  means  ?  his  answer 
is,  that  that  which  constituted  Him  the  Christ,  made 
Him  acceptable  to  God,  and  enabled  Him  to  restore 
within  us  the  perfection  we  lost,  that  that  is  what  He 
must  be  in  us.  What  constitutes  Him  the  Lamb  of 
God  is  His  meekness,  His  humility,  His  resignation 


INTRODUCTION  XXVll 

to  God's  will.  And  no  faith  in  an  outward  Lamb  of 
God,  on  the  cross  or  on  the  throne,  can  possibly  save 
us,  except  as  it  restores  us  to  that  humility  before  God, 
that  resignation  to  His  w^ill,  which  is,  whether  in 
heaven  or  earth,  the  only  possible  way  of  entrance  into 
God's  presence. 

"  Our  salvation  consists  wholly  in  being  saved  from 
ourselves,  or  from  that  which  we  are  by  nature.  In 
the  whole  nature  of  things,  nothing  could  be  this 
salvation  or  Saviour  to  us,  but  such  an  Humility  of 
God  as  is  beyond  all  expression." 

"Every  man  has  within  him  a  redeeming  power, 
the  making  of  the  heavenly  life,  called  the  Lamb  of 
God.  This  is  the  great  trial  of  human  life,  whether 
a  man  will  give  himself  up  to  the  meekness,  the 
patience,  the  sweetness,  the  simplicity,  the  humihty  of 
the  Lamb  of  God.  This  is  the  whole  of  the  matter 
between  God  and  the  creature  "  {Character,  pp.  57,  66). 

"  Death  to  self  is  a  man's  only  entrance  into  the 
Church  of  Life,  and  nothing  but  God  can  give  death 
to  self.  Self  is  an  inward  life,  and  God  is  an  Inward 
Spmt  of  Life ;  therefore,  nothing  kills  that  which 
must  be  killed  in  us,  or  quickens  that  which  must 
come  to  life  in  us,  but  the  inward  work  of  God  in 
the  soul,  and  the  inward  work  of  the  soul  in  God. 
This  is  that  mystic  religion,  which,  though  it  has 
nothing  in  it  but  that  same  spirit,  that  same  truth, 
and  that  same  Hfe,  which  always  was  and  always 
must  be  the  religion  of  all  God's  holy  angels  and 
saints  in  heaven,  is  by  the  wisdom  of  this  world 
accounted  to  be  madness"  {Character,  etc.,  p.  60; 
see  also  the  very  beautiful  passage  on  the  only  way 
of   dying    to    self    being   by   receiving    the    patience, 


XXVm  INTKODUCTION 

meekness,  humility,  and  resignation  to  God's  will 
which  was  in  Christ  Jesus  into  our  hearts — Sjm-it 
of  Love,  Part  II.). 

It  is  just  this  element  of  mysticism  that  has  formed 
its  great  attraction  to  those  who  truly  thirst  for  God. 
Sin  would  be  nothing  if  it  were  not  sin  in  us,  inspiring 
and  ruHng  our  inmost  hie.  And  Christ  camiot  be 
a  complete  Sa^'iour  until  His  indwelling  and  inwork- 
ing  be  as  real  and  full  as  that  of  sin.  I  am  confident 
that  there  will  be  no  thoughtful  reader  of  La"\v,  who 
really  hungers  for  the  bread  of  heaven,  but  will  lay  down 
the  book  with  the  grateful  acknowledgment  that  he 
lias  a  deeper  insight  into  the  real  nature  of  Christ's 
work  and  indwelling,  and  a  stronger  hope  of  the  attain- 
ment of  what  so  often  appeared  to  be  beyond  his  reach. 

4.  Just  one  more  of  the  special  teachings  of 
mysticism.  It  is  summed  up  in  the  expression  that 
we  must  come  away  out  of  the  manifold  to  the 
simple,  out  of  multiphcity  to  unity,  from  the  cu'- 
cimiference  to  the  centre.  The  thought  runs  through 
its  whole  system,  and  is  the  key  to  the  right  appre- 
liension  of  much  of  its  teaching. 

This  truth  holds  in  reference  to  God.  Until  a 
soul  learns  to  see  how  entii-ely  God  is  the  centre  of  all, 
how  God  is  to  be  met  and  found  and  enjoyed  in  every 
thing,  so  that  nothing  in  heaven  or  earth  can  for  one 
moment  separate  from  Him,  it  never  can  have  perfect 
rest.  And  rest  in  God  is  the  first  duty  and  the  true 
bliss  of  the  creature.  You  have  Christians  who  devote 
themselves  most  diligently  to  the  study  of  God's  word, 
who  are  deUghted  with  every  new  truth  they  discover, 
or  every  new  light  in  wliich  an  old  truth  is  set  before 
them,  and  who  yet  scarce  ever  meet  the  one  Divine 


INTRODUCTION  XXIX 

Word,  who  speaks  in  power  within  tlieni.  You  have 
others  who  are  consumed  with  zeal  and  labour,  and  yet 
know  not  what  it  is  through  all  to  have  their  rest  in 
God.  We  need  to  be  brought  from  the  circumference 
to  the  living  centre ;  there  we  shall  be  rested  and  re- 
freshed, and  endued  with  the  power  of  a  Divine  strength 
to  do  our  work  in  the  power  of  the  eternal  world. 

This  truth  holds  in  reference  to  sin  In  Law's 
books  we  have  a  remarkable  illustration  of  this,  in  the 
distinct  advance  to  be  seen  in  his  teaching. 

In  The  Serious  Call,  individual  sins,  whether  of  life 
or  heart,  are  uncovered  and  exposed  with  convincing 
power.  Nothing  less  than  entire  conformity  to  God's 
requirement  and  Christ's  example  is  held  up  as  our 
only  standard,  or  hope  of  being  found  meet  for 
admission  to  heaven.  But  there  is  nothing  like  the 
laying  the  axe  to  the  root  of  the  tree,  the  tracking  of 
sin  to  its  one  source  and  beginning,  as  we  have  it  in 
the  later  books.  Behmen's  teaching  had  opened  up  to 
him  the  meaning  of  the  fall,  and  the  entire  corruption 
of  human  nature,  and  had  shown  him  that  there  is  but 
one  deliverance  from  sin,  and  that  is  the  deliverance 
from  self.  From  all  the  manifold  sins  he  had  learnt 
to  look  to  the  one  sin — incarnate  self.  He  points  out 
how  the  four  elements  of  self  or  fallen  nature — covet- 
ousness,  envy,  pride,  wrath — "  are  tied  together  in  one 
inseparable  band ;  they  mutually  generate  and  are 
generated  by  each  other  ;  they  have  but  one  common 
life,  and  must  all  of  them  live,  or  all  die  together " 
(The  Spirit  of  Love,  Part  I.).  "Self  is  the  whole  evil 
of  fallen  nature."  "  Self  is  the  root,  the  tree,  and  the 
branches  of  all  the  evils  of  our  fallen  state."  "  Self  is 
not  only  the  seat  and  habitation,  but  the  very  life  of 


XXX  INTRODUCTION 

sin ;  the  works  of  the  devil  are  all  wrought  in  self ;  it 
is  his  peculiar  workhouse ;  and  therefore  Christ  is  not 
come  as  a  Saviour  from  sin,  but  so  far  as  self  is  beaten 
down,  and  overcome  in  us  "  {Spirit  of  Prayer,  §  32). 

It  is  as  the  soul  in  this  light  is  led  to  turn  from 
the  hopeless  multiplicity  of  its  sins,  by  which  it  has 
been  distracted,  to  the  one  source  of  all,  that  it  will 
learn  how  hopeless  its  efforts  are,  and  see  its  need  of 
a  death  to  self  in  the  death  of  Christ  as  its  only  hope. 

This  truth  holds  especially  also  in  regard  to  faith. 
Law  says  {Spirit  of  Love,  Part  II.) :  "  I  would  have 
you  believe  that  the  reason  why  you,  or  any  one  else, 
are  for  a  long  time  vainly  endeavouring  after,  and 
hardly  ever  attaining  these  first-rate  virtues,  is  because 
you  seek  them  in  the  way  they  are  not  to  be  found,  in 
a  multiplicity  of  human  rules,  methods,  and  contrivances, 
and  not  in  that  simplicity  of  faith  in  which  those  who 
applied  to  Christ  immediately  obtained  that  which 
they  asked  of  Him." 

It  is  as  the  soul  is  led  to  see  that  in  God  is  the 
unity  and  centre  of  the  universe  and  of  our  life,  and 
thus  that  sin  is  nothing  but  our  having  turned  from 
this  God  to  self,  and  that  therefore  our  one  need  is  the 
deliverance  from  self,  that  it  will  discover  in  Christ 
a  new  meaning,  and  will  understand  ho^v  in  the  very 
nature  of  things  nothing  can  save  us  but  the  simplicity 
of  faith.  Christ  becomes  to  us  the  man  who  lived  the 
life  of  God  for  us  in  human  nature,  and  who  brings 
salvation  from  self  by  Himself  being  born  into  us,  and 
giving  us  a  life  of  God  in  which  self  is  swallowed  up 
as  darkness  is  swallowed  up  in  light.  This  life  must 
be  received ;  and  to  receive  it  nothing  avails  but  a 
true  desire  and  a  simple  faith. 


INTRODUCTION  XXXI 

Law  makes  clear  that  in  the  Christian  life  there 
are  two  stages — that  of  babes,  and  that  of  men  ;  that 
in  the  earlier  stage  our  great  duty  is  to  remove  hind- 
rances, and  to  prepare  the  way  for  God  to  set  up  His 
kingdom ;  and  that  it  is  only  as  we  are  faithful  in  the 
earlier  stage  that  we  shall  be  fitted  for  attaining  the 
full  outbirth  of  the  Divine  life  within  us.  "  Now,  this 
way  of  attaining  goodness  (by  rules  and  precepts), 
though  thus  imperfect,  is  yet  absolutely  necessary  in 
the  nature  of  the  thing,  and  must  first  have  its  time, 
work,  and  place  in  us.  Yet  it  is  only  for  a  time,  as 
the  law  was  a  schoolmaster  to  the  gospel."  All  this 
effort  is  only  to  bring  a  man  to  such  a  total  despair  of 
all  help,  from  human  means,  as  to  make  him  turn  to 
God  from  whom  alone  life  can  come.  Faith  becomes 
the  one  thing  needful.  ''When  the  Virgin  Mary 
conceived  the  birth  of  the  Holy  Jesus,  all  that  she  did 
toward  it  herself  was  only  this  single  act  of  faith  and 
resignation  to  God  :  '  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord  ; 
be  it  unto  me  according  to  thy  word.'  This  is  all 
that  we  can  do  toward  the  conception  of  that  new  man 
that  is  to  be  born  in  ourselves.  The  truth  is  easily 
consented  to.  But  this  is  not  enough :  it  is  to  be 
apprehended  in  a  deep,  full,  practical  assurance,  in 
such  a  manner  as  a  man  knows  and  helieves  that  he  did 
not  create  the  stars,  or  cause  life  to  rise  up  in  himself. 
Then  it  is  a  belief  that  puts  the  soul  into  a  right 
state,  and  that  makes  room  for  the  operation  of  God 
upon  it." 

Oh,  blessed  simplicity  of  the  Christian  life  !  May 
we  all  learn  its  blessed  secret.  Let  God  be  all  to  us. 
Let  Christ  be  all,  as  our  way  to  God,  as  God  working 
and  dwelling  in  us.     Let  faith  be  all  to  us,  the  simple 


XXXll  INTRODUCTION 

and  unceasing  turning  of  our  souls  to  Christ  Jesus ; 
and  out  of  the  multiplicity  of  our  strugglings  and 
wanderings  we  shall  by  faith  enter  into  the  rest  of 
God. 

Just  one  word  more  in  conclusion.  There  is  a 
great  deal  in  our  modern  habits  of  reading,  and  in  our 
rehgious  literature,  that  is  not  favourable  to  the  culti- 
vation of  that  habit  of  mind  which  is  needed  to  read 
Law  with  pleasure  or  profit.  Let  me  advise  all  those 
who  hope  by  a  cursory  perusal  to  master  his  thoughts, 
to  lay  the  book  aside.  But  if  we  are  prepared  in 
quiet  meditation  to  give  time  to  the  words  of  a  man, 
who  had,  more  than  most,  the  powers  of  the  invisible 
opened  up  to  him  and  resting  on  him,  to  do  their 
work  in  us,  we  shall,  I  am  confident,  be  richly 
rewarded.  And  I  am  much  mistaken  if  there  will 
not  be  many  of  the  readers  of  this  volume  who  turn 
back  time  after  time  to  dwell  again  on  words,  which, 
though  they  appear  so  simple  and  plain,  yet  will  be 
increasingly  felt  to  be  full  of  the  power  of  God  and  of 
eternity. 

ANDREW  MURRAY. 

Wellington,  dlst  Oct.  1893. 


THE    SPIRIT    OP    LOVE 

FIRST     PART 
{First  issued  as  an  Appendix  to  the  Sjnrit  of  Pratjer) 


IN   A  LETTER  TO  A  FRIEND 


By    WILLIAM    LAW,    M.A. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF   LOVE 

FIRST     PART 


"TI/TY  DEAR  FRIEND,— You  say,  "  There  is  nothing 
-*-'-*-  in  all  my  writings  that  has  more  affected  you 
than  that  spirit  of  love  that  breathes  in  them ;  and 
that  you  wish  for  nothing  so  much  as  to  have  a  living 
sensibility  of  the  power,  life,  and  religion  of  love.  But 
you  have  this  objection  often  rising  in  your  mind,  that 
this  doctrine  of  pure  and  universal  love  may  be  too 
refined  and  imaginary  ;  because  you  find  that,  however 
you  like  it,  yet  you  cannot  attain  to  it,  or  overcome  all 
that  in  your  nature  which  is  contrary  to  it,  do  what 
you  can ;  and  so  are  only  able  to  be  an  admirer  of  that 
love  which  you  cannot  lay  hold  of. 

This  objection  will  fall  into  nothing,  as  soon  as  you 
look  at  it  from  a  right  point  of  view ;  which  will  then 
be,  as  soon  as  you  have  found  the  true  ground  of  the 
nature,  power,  and  necessity  of  the  blessed  spirit  of 
love. 

1.  The  Spirit  of  Love  in  God. 

Now,  the  spirit  of  love  has  this  original.  God,  as 
considered  in  Himself,  in  His  holy  being,  before  any 
thing  is  brought  forth  by  Him,  or  out  of  Him,  is  only 


4  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

an  eternal  will  to  all  goodness.  This  is  the  one  eternal, 
immutable  God,  that  from  eternity  to  eternity  changeth 
not,  that  can  be  neither  more  nor  less,  nor  any  thing 
else,  but  an  eternal  will  to  all  the  goodness  that  is  in 
Himself,  and  can  come  from  Him.  The  creation  of 
ever  so  many  worlds,  or  systems  of  creatures,  adds 
nothing  to,  nor  takes  any  thing  from,  this  immutable 
God :  He  always  was,  and  always  will  be,  the  same 
immutable  will  to  all  goodness.  So  that  as  certainly 
as  He  is  the  Creator,  so  certainly  is  He  the  Blesser 
of  every  created  thing,  and  can  give  nothing  but  bless- 
ing, goodness,  and  happiness  from  Himself,  because  He 
has  in  Himself  nothing  else  to  give.  It  is  much  more 
possible  for  the  sun  to  give  forth  darkness,  than  for 
God  to  do,  or  be,  or  give  forth,  any  thing  but  blessing 
and  goodness. 

2.  The  Spirit  of  Love  in  the  Creature. 

This  is  the  ground  and  original  of  the  spirit  of 
love  in  the  creature ;  it  is,  and  must  be,  a  will  to  all 
goodness,  and  you  have  not  the  spirit  of  love  till 
you  have  this  will  to  all  goodness,  at  all  times,  and 
on  all  occasions.  You  may  indeed  do  many  works 
of  love,  and  delight  in  them,  especially  at  such  times 
as  they  are  not  inconvenient  to  you,  or  contradictory 
to  your  state,  or  temper,  or  occurrences  in  life.  But 
the  spirit  of  love  is  not  in  you,  till  it  is  the  spirit  of 
your  life,  till  you  live  freely,  willingly,  and  universally, 
according  to  it.  For  every  spirit  acts  with  freedom 
and  universally  according  to  what  it  is.  It  needs  no 
command  to  live  its  own  life,  or  be  what  it  is,  no  more 
than  you  need  bid  wrath  be  wrathful.  And  therefore, 
when  love  is  the  spirit  of  your  life,  it  will  have  the 


THE    SrililT    OF    LOVE  D 

freedom  and  universality  of  a  spirit ;  it  will  always 
live  and  work  in  love,  not  because  of  this  or  that,  here 
or  there,  but  because  the  spirit  of  love  can  only  love, 
wherever  it  is  or  goes,  or  whatever  is  done  to  it.  As 
the  sparks  know  no  inotion  but  that  of  flying  upwards, 
whether  it  be  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  or  in  the 
light  of  the  day ;  so  the  spirit  of  love  is  always  in  the 
same  course ;  it  knows  no  difference  of  time,  place,  or 
persons ;  but  whether  it  gives  or  forgives,  bears  or 
forbears,  it  is  equally  doing  its  own  delightful  work, 
equally  blessed  from  itself.  For  the  spirit  of  love, 
wherever  it  is,  is  its  own  blessing  and  happiness,  be- 
cause it  is  the  truth  and  reality  of  God  in  the  soul; 
and  therefore  is  in  the  same  joy  of  life,  and  is  the  same 
good  to  itself,  everywhere,  and  on  every  occasion. 

3.  The  Perfection  of  the  Spirit  of  Love. 

Oh^sir,  would  you  know  the  blessing  of  all  blessings  ? 
It  is  this  God  of  love  dv/olling  in  your  soul,  and  killing 
every  root  of  bitterness  which  is  the  paiii  and  torment 
of  every  eartlijy,  selfisli  love.  For  all  wants  are 
satisfied,  all  disorders  of  nature  are  removed,  no  life  is 
any  longer  a  burden,  every  xlay  is  a  day  of  peace,  every 
thjiig  vovL  niept  becomes  _  a  help  to  you,  because  every 
thing  you  see  or  do  is  all  done  in  the  sweet,  gentle 
element  of  love.  For  as  love  has  no  by-ends,  wills 
nothing  but  its  own  increase,  so  every  thing  is  as  oil  to 
its  flame ;  it  must  have  that  which  it  wills,  and  cannot 
be  disappointed,  because  every  thing  naturally  helps  it 
to  live  in  its  own  w^ay,  and  to  bring  forth  its  own 
work.  The  spirit  of  love  does  not  want  to  be  rewarded, 
honoured,  or  esteemed ;  its  only  desire  is  to  propag'ate 
itself,  and  become  the  blessing  and  happiness  of  every- 


6  WHOLLY    FOR   GOD 

tiling  that  wants  it.  And  therefore  it  meets  wrath, 
and  evil,  and  hatred,  and  opposition  with  the  same  one 
will  as  the  light  meets  the  darkness,  only  to  overcome 
it  with  all  its  blessings.  Did  you  want  to  avoid  the 
wrath  and  ill-will,  or  to  gain  the  favour  of  any  persons, 
you  might  easily  miss  of  your  ends ;  but  if  you  have 
no  will  but  to  all  goodness,  every  thing  you  meet,  be 
it  what  it  will,  must  be  forced  to  be  assistant  to  you. 
For  the.  wrath  of  an  enemy,  the  treachery  of  a  friend, 
and  every  other  evil,  only  helps  the  spirit  of  love  to  he 
more  triumphant,  to  live  its  own  life,  and  find  all  its 
own  blessings  in  a  higher  degree.  Whether,  therefore, 
you  consider  perfection  or  happiness,  it  is  all  included 
in  the  spirit  of  love,  and  must  be  so,  for  this  reason, 
because  the  infinitely  perfect  and  happy  God  is  mere 
love,  an  unchangeable  will  to  all  goodness ;  and  there- 
fore every  creature  must  be  corrupt  and  unhappy,  so 
far  as  it  is  led  by  any  other  will  than  the  one  will  to 
all  goodness.  Thus  you  see  the  ground,  the  nature, 
and  perfection  of  the  spirit  of  love. 

4.  The  Absolute  Necessity  of  the  Spirit 
of  Love. 

Let  me  now,  in  a  word  or  two,  show  you  the  neces- 
sity of  it :  now  the  necessity  is  absolute  and  unchange- 
able. No  creature  can  be  a  child  of  God,  but  because 
the  goodness  of  God  is  in  it ;  nor  can  it  have  any 
union  or  communion  with  the  goodness  of  the  Deity, 
till  its  life  is  a  spirit  of  love.  This  is  the  one  only 
band  of  union  betwixt  God  and  the  creature.  All 
besides  this,  or  that  is  not  this,  call  it  by  what  name 
you  will,  is  only  so  much  error,  fiction,  impurity,  and 
corruption,  got  into   the  creature.;    and  must   of  all 


THE    SnWT    OF    LOVE  7 

necessity  be  entirely  separated  from  it,  before  it  can 
have  that  purity  and  holiness  wliich  alone  can  see  God, 
or  find  the  divine  life.  For  as  God  is  an  immutable 
will  to  all  goodness,  so  the  divine  will  can  unite  or  work 
with  no  creaturely  will,  but  that  which  willeth  with 
Him  only  that  which  is  good.  Here  the  necessity  is 
absolute  ;  nothing  will  do  mstead  of  this  will ;  all  con- 
trivances of  holiness,  all  forms  of  religious  piety,  signify 
nothing  without  this  will  to  all  goodness. 

For  as  the  V7ill  to  all  goodness  is  the  whole  nature 
of  God,  so  it  must  be  the  whole  nature  of  every 
service,  or  religion,  that  can  be  acceptable  to  Him. 

For  nothing  serves  God,  or  worships  and  adores 
Him,  but  that  which  wills  and  worketh  with  Hini. 

For  God  can  delight  in  nothing  but  His  own  will, 
and  His  own  spirit,  because  all  goodness  is  included  in 
it,  and  can  be  nowhere  else. 

And  therefore  every  thing  that  followeth  an  own  will, 
or  an  own  spirit,  forsaketh  the  one  will  to  all  goodness  ; 
~and  whilst  it  doth  so,  hath  no  capacity  for  the  light 
and  Spirit  of  God.  The  necessity,  therefore,  of  the 
spirit  of  love  is  what  God  Himself  cannot  dispense 
with  in  the  creature,  no  more  than  He  can  deny  Him- 
self, or  act  contrary  to  His  own  holy  being.  But  as  it 
was  His  v/ill  to  all  goodness  that  brought  forth  angels, 
and  the  spirits  of  men,  so  He  can  will  nothing  in  their 
existence,  but  that  they  should  live  and  work,  and 
manifest  that  same  spirit  of  love  and  goodness  which 
brought  them  into  being.  Every  thing,  therefore,  but 
the  will  and  life  of  goodness,  is  an  apostasy  in  the 
creature,  and  is  rebellion  against  the  whole  nature  of 
God. 

There  is  no  peace,  nor  ever  can  be,  for  the  soul  of 


S  AVHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

man,  but  in  the  purity  and  perfection  of  its  first  created 
nature ;  nor  can  it  have  its  purity  and  perfection  in 
any  other  way  tlian  in  and  by  the  spirit  of  love.  For 
as  love  is  the  God  that  created  all  things,  so  love  is 
the  purity,  the  perfection,  and  blessing  of  all  created 
things ;  and  nothing  can  live  in  God  but  as  it  lives 
in  love. 

5.  Self  crucifies  Christ. 

Look  at  every  vice,  pain,  and   disorder  in  human 

nature  ;  it  is  in  itself  nothing  else  but  the  spirit  of  the 

creature  turned  from  the  universality  of  love  to  some 

^^,,     self-seeking  or  own  will  in  created  things.     So  that 

7  /   /love  alone  is,  and  only  can  be,  the  cure  of  every  evil ; 

^'  ^  y  ^  and  he  that  lives  in  the  purity  of  love  is  risen  out  of 

the  power  of  evil,  into  the  freedom  of  the  one  spirit  of 

heaven.       The   schools   have    given  us  very  accurate 

definitions  of  every  vice,  whether  it  be  covetousness, 

^ride,  wrath,  envy,  etc.,  and  shown  us  how  to  conceive 

tiiem   as  notionally  distinguished  from   one   another. 

But  the  Christian  has  a  much  shorter  way  of  knowing 

their  nature  and  power,  and  what  they  all  are,  and  do, 

in  and  to  himself.     For,  call  them  by  what  names  you 

will,  or  distinguish  them  with  ever  so  much   exactness, 

they  are  all,  separately  and  jointly,  just  that  same  one 

thing,  and  all  do  that  same  one  work,  as  the  scribes, 

the  Pharisees,  hypocrites,  and  rabble  of  the  Jews,  who 

crucified  Christ,  were  all  but  one  and  the  same  thing, 

and  all  did  one  and  the  same  work,  however  different 

they  were  in  outward  names.     If  you  would  therefore 

have  a  true  sense  of  the  nature  and  power  of  pride, 

wrath,  covetousness,  envy,  etc.,  they  are  in  their  whole 

nature  nothing  else  but  the  murderers  and  crucifiers  of 


THE    SPIllIT   OF    LOVE  9 

the  true  Christ  of  God.  ISTot  as  the  high  priests  did 
many  hundred  years  ago,  naihng  His  outward  humanity 
to  an  outward  cross,  but  crucifying  afresh  the  Son 
of  God,  the  holy  Immanuel,  who  is  the  Christ  that 
every  man  crucifies  as  often  as  he  gives  w^ay  to  wrath, 
pride,  envy,  or  covetousness,  etc.  For  every  temper  or 
passion  that  is  contrary  to  the  new  birth  of  Christ,  and 
keeps  the  holy  Immanuel  from  coming  to  life  in  the 
soul,  is,  in  the  strictest  truth  of  the  words,  a  murderer 
and  killer  of  the  Lord  of  life.  And  where  pride,  and 
envy,  and  hatred,  etc.,  are  suffered  to  live,  there  the 
same  thing  is  done  as  when  Christ  was  killed  and 
Barabbas  was  saved  alive.  The  Christ  of  God  was  not 
then  first  crucified  when  the  Jews  brought  Him  to 
the  cross ;  but  Adam  and  Eve  were  His  first  real 
murderers ;  for  the  death  which  happened  to  them  in 
the  day  that  they  did  eat  of  the  earthly  tree  was  the 
death  of  the  Christ  of  God,  or  the  divine  life  in  their 
souls. 

6.  Of  Christ  our  Bedeemer. 

Christ  had  never  come  into  the  world  as  a  second 
Adam  to  redeem  it  had  He  not  been  originally  the  life, 
and  perfection,  and  glory  of  the  first  Adam.  And  He 
is  our  atonement  and  reconciliation  with  God  ;  because, 
by  and  through  Him,  brought  to  life  in  us,  we  are  set 
again  in  that  first  state  of  holiness,  and  have  Christ 
again  in  us,  as  our  first  father  had  at  his  creation. 
For  had  not  Christ  been  our  first  Father,  as  a  birth  of 
life  in  Him,  Adam  had  been  created  a  mere  child  of 
wrath,  in  the  same  impurity  of  nature,  in  the  same 
enmity  with  God,  and  in  the  same  want  of  an  atoning 
Saviour,  as  we  are  at  this  day. 


10  WHOLLY    FOK    GOD 

For  God  can  have  no  delight  or  union  with  any 
creature,  but  because  His  well-beloved  Son,  the  express 
ima^e  of  His  person,  is  found  in  it. 

This  is  as  true  of  all  unfallen  as  of  all  fallen  creatures; 
the  one  are  redeemed,  and  the  other  want  no  redemp- 
tion, only  through  the  life  of  Christ  dwelling  in  them. 
For  as  the  Word,  or  Son  of  God,  is  the  Creator  of  all 
things,  and  by  Him  every  thing  is  made  that  was 
made,  so  every  thing  that  is  good  and  holy  in  unfallen 
angels  is  as  much  through  His  living  and  dwelling  in 
them,  as  every  thing  that  is  good  and  holy  in  redeemed 
man  is  through  Him.  And  He  is  just  as  much  the 
Preserver,  the  Strength,  and  Glory,  and  Life  of  all  the 
thrones  and  principalities  of  heaven,  as  He  is  the  Eight- 
eousness,  the  Peace,  and  Eedemption  of  fallen  man. 

This  Christ  of  God  hath  many  names  in  Scripture ; 
but  they  all  mean  only  this,  that  He  is,  and  alone  can 
be,  the  light,  and  life,  and  holiness  of  every  creature 
that  is  holy,  whether  in  heaven  or  on  earth.  Wher- 
ever Christ  is  not,  there  is  the  wrath  of  nature,  or 
nature  left  to  itself,  and  its  own  tormenting  strength 
of  life,  to  feel  nothing  in  itself  but  the  vain,  restless 
contrariety  of  its  own  working  properties.  This  ia 
the  one  only  origin  of  hell,  and  every  kind  of  curse 
and  misery  in  the  creature.  It  is  nature  without  the 
Christ  of  God,  or  the  spirit  of  love,  ruling  over  it. 
And  here  you  may  observe,  that  wrath  has  in  itself 
the  nature  of  hell ;  and  that  it  can  have  no  beginning 
or  power  in  any  creature,  but  so  far  as  it  has  lost 
the  Christ  of  God.  And  when  Christ  is  everywhere, 
wrath  and  hatred  will  be  nowhere.  Whenever,  there- 
fore, you  willingly  indulge  wrath,  or  let  your  mind 
work  in  hatred,  you  not  only  work  witliout  Christ,  but 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  11 

you  resist  Him,  and  withstand  His  redeeming  power 
over  you ;  you  do  in  reality  what  those  Jews  did 
wlien  they  said,  "  We  will  not  have  tliis  Man  to  reign 
over  us."  For  Christ  never  was,  nor  can  be,  in  any 
creature,  but  purely  as  a  spirit  of  love. 

In  all  the  universe  of  nature  nothing  but  heaven 
and  heavenly  creatures  ever  had,  or  could  have,  been 
known,  had  every  created  will  continued  in  that  state 
in  which  it  came  forth  out  of  and  from  God.  For 
God  can  will  nothing  in  the  life  of  the  creature  but  a 
creaturely  manifestation  of  His  own  goodness,  happi- 
ness, and  perfection.  And  therefore,  where  this  is 
wanting,  the  fact  is  certain  that  the  creature  hath 
changed  and  lost  its  first  state  that  it  had  from  God. 

7.  Of  Purification. 

Every  son  of  fallen  Adam  is  under  the  necessity  of 
working  and  striving  after  something  that  he  neither 
is  nor  hath  ;  because  the  life  of  man  has  lost  its  first 
unity  and  purity,  and  therefore  must  be  in  a  working 
strife,  tiU  all  contrariety  and  impurity  is  separated 
from  it,  and  it  finds  its  first  state  in  God. 

Purification,  therefore,  is  the  one  thing  necessary, 
and  nothing  will  do  in  the  stead  of  it.  But  man  is 
not  piuified  till  every  earthly,  wrathful,  sensual,  selfish, 
partial,  self-willing  temper  is  taken  from  him.  He  is 
not  dying  to  himself  till  he  is  dying  to  these  tempers ; 
and  he  is  not  alive  in  God  till  he  is  dead  to  them. 
For  he  wants  purification  only  because  .he  has  these 
tempers  ;  and  therefore  he  has  not  the  purification 
which  he  wants  till  they  are  all  separated  from  him. 
It  is  the  purity 'and  perfection  of  the  divine  nature 
that  must  be  brought  again  into  him  ;  because  in  that 


12  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

purity  and  perfection  he  came  forth  from  God,  and 
could  have  no  less,  as  he  was  a  child  of  God,  that  was 
to  be  blessed  by  a  life  in  Him,  and  from  Him.  For 
nothing  impure  or  imperfect  in  its  will  and  working 
can  have  any  union  with  God ;  nor  are  you  to  think 
that  these  words,  the  purity  and  perfection  of  God, 
are  too  high  to  be  used  on  this  occasion ;  for  they  only 
mean  that  the  will  of  the  creature,  as  an  offspring  of 
the  divine  will,  must  will  and  work  with  the  will  of 
God,  for  then  it  stands  and  lives  truly  and  really  in 
the  purity  and  perfection  ol  God ;  and  whatever  does 
not  thus  is  at  enmity  with. God,  and  cannot  have  any 
union  of  life  and  happiness  with  Him,  and  in  Him. 

8.  The  Spirit  of  Love  the  Universal  Good. 

Now,  nothing  wills  and  works  with  God  but  the 
spirit  of  love ;  because  nothing  else  works  in  God 
Himself.  The  Almighty  brought  fortli  all  nature  for 
this  only  end,  that  boundless  love  might  have  its  in- 
finity of  height  and  depth  to  dwell  and  work  in  ;  and 
all  the  striving  and  working  properties  of  nature  are 
only  to  give  essence  and  substance,  life  and  strength, 
to  the  invisible  hidden  spirit  of  love,  that  it  may  come 
forth  mto  outward  activity,  and  manifest  its  blessed 
powers ;  that  creatures  born  in  the  strength,  and  out 
of  the  powers  of  nature,  might  communicate  the  spirit 
of  love  and  goodness,  give  and  receive  mutual  delight 
and  joy  to  and  from  one  another.  All  below  this 
state  of  love  is  a  fall  from  the  one  life  of  God,  and  the 
only  life  in  which  the  God  of  love  can  dwell.  Partial- 
ity, self,  mine,  thine,  etc.,  are  tempers  that  can  only 
belong  to  creatures  that  have  lost  the  power,  presence, 
and  spirit  of  the  universal  good.     Tliey  can  have  no 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  13 

place  in  heaven,  nor  can  be  anywhere,  but  because 
heaven  is  lost.  Think  not,  therefore,  that  the  spirit 
of  pure,  universal  love,  which  is  the  one  purity  and 
perfection  of  heaven,  and  all  heavenly  natures,  has 
been,  or  can  be,  carried  too  high,  or  its  absolute 
necessity  too  much  asserted.  For  it  admits  of  no 
degrees  of  higher  or  lower,  and  is  not  in  being  till  it 
is  absolutely  pure  and  unmixed,  no  more  than  a  line 
can  be  straight  till  it  is  absolutely  free  from  all 
crookedness. 

9.  Love  is  of  God. 

To  return  to  our  chief  subject :  The  sum  of  all 
that  has  been  said  is  this :  All  evil,  be  it  what  it 
^vill,  all  misery  of  every  kind,  is  in  its  birth,  worldng, 
and  extent  nothing  else  but  nature  left  to  itself,  and 
under  the  divided  workings  of  its  own  hunger,  wrath, 
and  contrariety ;  and  therefore  no  possibility  for  the 
natural,  earthly  man  to  escape  eternal  hunger,  wrath, 
and  contrariety,  but  solely  in  the  way  as  the  gospel 
teacheth,  by  denying  and  dying  to  self.  On  the  other 
hand,  all  the  goodness  and  perfection,  all  the  happi- 
ness, glory,  and  joy  that  any  intelligent,  divine  creature 
can  be  possessed  of,  is,  and  can  be,  from  nothing  else 
but  the  invisible,  uncreated  light  and  Spirit  of  God 
manifesting  itself  in  the  properties  of  the  creaturely 
life,  iilliiig,  blessing,  and  uniting  them  all  in  one  love, 
and  joy  of  life. 

And  thus  agam :  no  possibility  of  man's  attaining 
to  any  heavenly  perfection  and  happiness,  but  only  in 
the  way  of  the  gospel,  by  the  union  of  the  divine  and 
human  nature,  by  man's  being  born  again  from  above, 
of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.     There  is  no  possibility 


14  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

of  any  other  way,  because  there  is  nothing  can  possibly 
change  the  first  properties  of  life  into  an  heavenly 
state,  but  the  presence,  and  working  power,  of  the 
Deity  united  with  and  working  in  them.  And  there- 
fore the  "  Word  was  made  flesh,"  and  must  of  all 
necessity  be  made  flesh,  if  man  is  to  have  an  heavenly 
nature. 

Now,  as  all  evil,  sin,  and  misery  have  no  beginning, 
nor  power  of  working,  but  in  the  manifestation  of 
nature  in  its  divided,  contrary  properties  ;  so  it  is 
certain  that  man  has  nothing  to  turn  to,  seek,  or  aspire 
after,  but  the  lost  spirit  of  love.  And  therefore  it  is 
that  God  only  can  be  his  Eedeemer  ;  because  God  only 
is  love ;  and  love  can  be  nowhere  else  but  in  God,  and 
where  God  dwelleth  and  worketh. 

10.  The  Spirit  of  Love  not  a  Notion, 
but  a  Nature. 

Now,  the  difficulty  which  you  find  in  attaining  to 
this  purity  and  universality  of  the  spirit  of  love,  is 
because  you  seek  for  it,  as  I  once  told  you,  in  the  way 
of  reasoning ;  you  would  be  possessed  of  it  only  from 
a  rational  conviction  of  the  fitness  and  amiableness  of 
it.  And  as  this  clear  idea  does  not  put  you  immedi- 
ately into  the  real  possession  of  it,  your  reason  begins 
to  waver,  and  suggests  to  you  that  it  may  be  only  a 
fine  notion,  that  has  no  ground  but  in  the  power  of 
imagination.  But  this,  sir,  is  all  your  own  error,  and 
as  contrary  to  nature  as  if  you  would  have  your  eyes 
do  that  which  only  your  hands  or  feet  can  do  for  you. 
The  spirit  of  love  is  a  spirit  of  nature  and  life ;  and 
all  the  operations  of  nature  and  life  are  according  to 
the  working  powers  of  nature ;  and  every  growth  and 


THE    SPIRIT    OF   LOVE  15 

degree  of  life  can  only  arise  in  its  own  time  and  place 
from  its  proper  cause,  and  as  the  genuine  effect  of  it. 
Nature  and  life  do  nothing  by  chance,  or  accidentally, 
but  every  thing  in  one  uniform  way.  Fire,  air,  and 
light  do  not  proceed  sometimes  from  one  thmg  and 
sometimes  from  another ;  but,  wherever  they  are,  they 
are  always  born  in  the  same  manner,  and  from  the 
same  working  in  the  properties  of  nature.  So,  in  Id^e 
manner,  love  is  an  immutable  birth,  always  proceeding 
from  the  same  cause,  and  cannot  be  in  existence  till 
its  own  true  parents  have  brought  it  forth. 

How  unreasonable  would  it  be  to  begin  to  doubt 
whether  strength  and  health  of  body  were  real  things, 
or  possible  to  be  had,  because  you  could  not  by  the 
power  of  your  reason  take  possession  of  them  !  Yet 
this  is  as  well  as  to  suspect  the  purity  and  perfection 
of  love  to  be  only  a  notion,  because  your  reason  can- 
not bring  forth  its  birth  in  your  soul.  For  reason 
has  no  more  power  of  altering  the  life  and  properties 
of  the  soul  than  of  altering  the  life  and  properties  of 
the  body.  That,  and  that  only,  can  cast  devils  and 
evil  spirits  out  of  the  soul,  that  can  say  to  the  storm, 
"  Be  still,"  and  to  the  leper,  "  Be  thou  clean." 

The  birth  of  love  is  a  form  or  state  of  life. 
Eeason  can  no  more  alter  or  exalt  any  one  property 
of  life  in  the  soul,  and  bring  it  into  its  perfect  state, 
than  it  can  add  one  cubit  to  the  stature  of  the  body. 
The  perfection  of  every  life  is  no  way  possible  to  be 
had,  but  as  every  flower  comes  to  its  perfection,  viz. 
from  its  own  seed  and  root,  and  the  various  degrees  of 
transmutation,  which  must  be  gone  through  before  the 
flower  is  found.  It  is  strictly  thus  with  tlio  perfec- 
tion of  the  soul ;  all  its  properties  of  life  must  have 


16  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

their  true  natural  birth  and  growth  from  one  another. 
The  first,  as  its  seed  and  root,  must  have  their  natural 
change  into  an  higher  state  ;  must,  like  the  seed  of 
the  llower,  pass  through  death  into  life,  and  be  blessed 
with  the  fire  and  light  and  spirit  of  heaven,  in  their 
passage  to  it ;  just  as  the  seed  passes  through  death 
into  life  blessed  by  the  fire  and  light  and  air  of  this 
world,  till  it  reaches  its  last  perfection,  and  becomes  a 
beautiful,  sweet-smelling  flower.  And  to  think  that 
the  soul  can  attain  its  perfection  any  other  way  than 
by  the  change  and  exaltation  of  its  first  properties  of 
life,  just  as  the  seed  has  its  first  properties  changed 
and  exalted  till  it  comes  to  have  its  flower,  is  a  total 
ignorance  of  the  nature  of  things. 

11.  The  Birth  of  Love. 

Hold  it,  therefore,  for  a  certain  truth,  that  you  can 
have  no  good  come  into  your  soul,  but  only  by  the  one 
way  of  a  birth  from  above,  from  the  entrance  of  the 
Deity  into  the  properties  of  your  own  souhsh  life. 
Nature  must  be  set  right,  its  properties  must  enter 
into  the  process  of  a  new  birth,  it  must  work  to 
the  production  of  light,  before  the  spirit  of  love  can 
have  a  birth  in  it.  For  love  is  delight,  and  delight 
cannot  arise  in  any  creature  till  its  nature  is  in  a 
delightful  state,  or  is  possessed  of  that  in  which  it 
must  rejoice. 

And  this  is  the  reason  why  God  must  become  man 
it  is  because  a  birth  of  the  Deity  must  be  found  in  the 
soul,  giving  to  nature  all  that  it  wants,  or  the  soul 
can  never  find  itself  in  a  delightful  state,  and  only 
working  with  the  spirit  of  love.  For  whilst  the  soul 
has  only  its  natural  life,  it  can  only  be  in  such  a  state 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  17 

as  nature,  without  God,  is  in,  viz.  a  mere  hunger,  want, 
contrariety,  and  strife  for  it  knows  not  what. 

Hence  it  is,  that  that  which  is  called  the  wisdom, 
the  honour,  the  honesty,  and  the  religion  of  the  natural 
man,  often  does  as  much  hurt  to  himself  and  others, 
as  his  pride,  ambition,  self-love,  envy,  or  revenge ;  and 
are  subject  to  the  same  humour  and  caprice ;  it  is 
because  nature  is  no  better  in  one  motion  than  in 
another,  nor  can  be  so,  till  something  supernatural  is 
come  into  it. 

We  often  charge  men,  both  in  Church  and  State, 
with  changing  their  principles ;  but  the  charge  is 
too  hasty ;  for  no  man  ever  did,  or  can,  change  his 
principles,  but  by  a  birth  from  above.  The  natural, 
called  in  Scripture  the  old  man,  is  steadily  the  same 
in  heart  and  spirit,  in  every  thing  he  does,  whatever 
variety  of  names  may  be  given  to  his  actions.  For 
self  can  have  no  motion  but  what  is  selfish  which 
way  soever  it  goes,  or  whatever  it  does,  either  in  Church 
or  State.  And  be  assured  of  this,  that  nature  in  every 
man,  whether  he  be  learned  or  unlearned,  is  this  very 
self,  and  can  be  notliing  else,  till  a  birth  of  the  Deity 
is  brought  forth  in  it.  There  is  therefore  no  possibility 
of  having  the  spirit  of  love,  or  any  divine  goodness, 
from  any  power  of  nature  or  working  of  reason.  It 
can  only  be  had  in  its  own  time  and  place ;  and  its 
time  and  place  is  nowhere  but  where  nature  is  over- 
come by  a  birth  of  the  life  of  God  in  the  properties  of 
the  soul.  And  thus  you  see  the  infallible  truth  and 
absolute  necessity  of  Christian  redemption ;  it  is  the 
most  demonstrable  thing  in  all  nature. 

The  Deity  must  become  man,  take  a  birth  in  the 
fallen  nature,  be  united  to  it,  become  the  life  of  it,  or 

2 


18  WHOLLY    FOR   GOD 

the  natural  man  must  of  all  necessity  be  for  ever  and 
ever  in  the  hell  of  his  own  hunger,  anguish,  contrariety, 
and  self-torment ;  and  all  for  this  plain  reason,  because 
nature  is,  and  can  be,  nothing  else  but  this  variety  of 
self-torment  till  the  Deity  is  manifested  and  dwelUug 
in  it. 

12.  Dying  to  Self  the  only  Way  to  the 
Life  of  God. 

And  now,  sir,  you  see  also  the  absolute  necessity 
of  the  gospel  doctrine  of  the  cross,  viz.  of  dying  to 
self,  as  the  one  only  way  to  life  in  God.  This 
cross,  or  dying  to  self,  is  the  one  morality  that  does 
man  any  good.  Fancy  has  as  many  rules  as  you  will, 
of  modelling  the  moral  behaviour  of  man ;  they  all 
do  nothing,  because  they  leave  nature  still  alive,  and 
therefore  can  only  help  a  man  to  a  feigned,  hypocritical 
art  of  concealing  his  own  inward  evil,  and  seeming  to 
be  not  under  its  power.  And  the  reason  why  it  must 
be  so  is  plain :  it  is  because  nature  is  not  possible  to 
be  reformed  ;  it  is  immutable  in  its  workings,  and  must 
be  always  as  it  is,  and  never  any  better,  or  worse,  than 
its  own  untaught  workings  are.  It  can  no  more  change 
from  evil  to  good  than  darkness  can  work  itself  into 
light.  The  one  work,  therefore,  of  morality  is  the  one 
doctrine  of  the  cross,  viz.  to  resist  and  deny  nature, 
that  a  supernatural  power,  or  divine  goodness,  may 
take  possession  of  it,  and  bring  a  new  light  into  it. 

In  a  word,  there  are,  in  all  the  possibility  of  things, 
but  two  states,  or  forms  of  life ;  the  one  is  nature,  and 
the  other  is  God  manifested  in  nature ;  and  as  God 
and  nature  are  both  within  you,  so  you  have  it  in 
your   power  to  live  and  work  with  which  you  will, 


Tire    SPreiT    OF    LOVE  19 

but  are  under  a  necessity  of  doing  either  the  one  or 
the  other.  Tliere  is  no  standmg  still;  life  goes  on, 
and  is  always  bringing  forth  its  realities,  which  way 
£03ver  it  gceth. 

In  a  word,  goodness  is  only  a  sound,  and  virtue  a 
mere  strife  of  natural  passions,  till  the  spirit  of  love  is 
the  breath  of  everything  that  lives  and  moves  in  the 
heart.  For  love  is  the  one  only  blessing,  and  good- 
ness, and  God  of  nature  ;  and  you  have  no  true  rehgion, 
are  no  worshipper  of  the  one  true  God,  but  in  and  by 
that  spirit  of  love  which  is  God  Himself  living  and 
working  in  you. 

But  here  I  take  off  my  pen,  and  shall  leave  the 
remaining  part  of  your  objection  to  another  opportunity. 
I  am,  etc. 

King's  Cliff,  Jane  16,  1752. 


THE   SPIRIT   OF   LOVE 

SECOND    PART 


IN    DIALOGUES 


By  WILLIAM  LAW,  M.A. 


THE   SPIRIT    OF   LOYE 

SECOND    PART 


THE   FIEST   DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN 

TJicogenes,  Eiisehius,  and  Theopliihis 


1.  Of  the  Divine  Love. 

Thcogenes. 

"HEAE  THEOPHILUS,  this  gentleman  is  Eusebius, 
•^  a  very  valuable  and  worthy  curate  in  my  neigh- 
bourhood ;  he  would  not  let  me  wait  any  longer  for 
your  second  letter  on  the  Spirit  of  Love,  nor  be  content 
till  I  consented  to  our  making  you  this  visit.  And 
indeed  we  are  both  on  the  same  errand,  and  in  equal 
impatience  to  have  your  full  answer  to  that  part  of 
my  objection  which  you  reserved  for  a  second  letter. 

Theophilus. — My  heart  embraces  you  both  with  the 
greatest  affection,  and  I  am  much  pleased  at  the 
occasion  of  your  coming,  which  calls  me  to  the  most 
delightful  subject  in  the  world,  to  help  both  you  and 
myself  to  rejoice  in  that  adorable  Deity,  whose  infinite 
being   is   an   infinity   of   mere   love,  an   unbeginning, 


24  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

never-ceasing,  and  for  ever  overflowing  ocean  of  meek- 
ness, sweetness,  deliglit,  blessing,  goodness,  patience, 
and  mercy ;  and  all  this,  as  so  many  blessed  streams 
breaking  out  of  the  abyss  of  universal  love.  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  a  triune  infinity  of  love  and 
goodness,  for  ever  and  ever,  giving  forth  nothing  but 
the  same  gifts  of  light  and  love,  of  blessing  and  joy, 
whether  before  or  after  the  fall,  either  of  angels  or 
men. 

2.  Nature  only  Exists  to  manifest  the 
Goodness  of  God. 

Look  at  all  nature,  through  all  its  height  and  depth, 
in  all  its  variety  of  working  powers,  it  is  what  it  is  for 
this  only  end,  that  the  hidden  riches,  the  invisible  powers, 
blessings,  glory,  and  love  of  the  unsearchable  God  may 
become  visible,  sensible,  and  manifest  in  it  and  by  it. 

Look  at  all  the  variety  of  creatures,  they  are  what 
they  are  for  this  only  end,  that  in  their  infinite  variety, 
degrees,  and  capacities  they  may  be  as  so  many  speak- 
ing figures,  living  forms  of  the  manifold  riches  and 
powers  of  nature,  as  so  many  sounds  and  voices, 
preachers  and  trumpets,  giving  glory,  and  praise,  and 
thanksgiving  to  that  Deity  of  love,  which  gives  life  to 
all  nature  and  creature. 

For  every  creature  of  unf alien  nature,  call  it  by 
what  name  you  will,  has  its  form,  and  power,  and 
state,  and  place  in  nature  for  no  other  end  but  to  open 
and  enjoy,  to  manifest  and  rejoice  in  some  share  of 
the  love,  and  happiness,  and  goodness  of  the  Deity, 
as  springing  forth  in  the  boundless  height  and  depth 
of  nature. 

Now  this  is  the  one  will  and  work  of  God,  in  and 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  25 

through  all  nature  and  creature.  From  eternity  to 
eternity  He  can  will  and  intend  nothing  towards  them, 
in  them,  or  by  them,  but  the  communication  of 
various  degrees  of  His  own  love,  goodness,  and  happi- 
ness to  them,  according  to  their  state,  and  place,  and 
capacity  in  nature.  This  is  God's  unchangeable  dis- 
position towards  the  creature ;  He  can  be  nothing  else 
but  all  goodness  towards  it,  because  He  can  be  nothing 
towards  the  creature  but  that  which  He  is,  and  was, 
and  ever  shall  be  in  Himself. 

3.  Goi  is  an  Immutable  Will  to  all 
Goodness. 

Theogenes. — Indeed,  Theophilus,  both  Eusebius  and 
myself  find  ourselves  incapable  of  thinking  any  other- 
wise of  God  than  as  the  one  only  good,  or,  as  you  express 
it,  an  eternal  immutable  will  to  all  goodness,  and  which 
can  will  nothing  else  to  all  eternity,  but  to  communi- 
cate good,  and  blessing,  and  happiness,  and  perfection 
to  every  life,  according  to  its  capacity  to  receive  it. 

Had  I  an  hundred  lives,  I  could  with  more  ease 
part  W'ith  them  all,  by  suffering  an  hundred  deaths, 
than  give  up  this  lovely  idea  of  God. 

For  to  know  that  love  alone  was  the  beginning  of 
nature  and  creature,  that  nothing  but  love  encompasses 
the  whole  universe  of  things,  that  the  governing  hand 
that  overrules  all,  the  watchful  eye  that  sees  through 
all,  is  nothing  but  omnipotent  and  omniscient  love, 
using  an  infinity  of  wisdom  to  raise  all  that  is  fallen 
in  nature,  to  save  every  misguided  creature  from  the 
miserable  works  of  its  own  hands,  and  make  happiness 
and  glory  the  perpetual  inheritance  of  all  the  creation, 
is  a  reflection  that  must  be  quite  ravishing  to  every 


26  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

intelligent  creature  that  is  sensible  of  it.  Thus  to 
think  of  God,  of  providence,  and  eternity,  while  we 
are  in  this  valley  and  shadow  of  death,  is  to  have  a 
real  foretaste  of  the  blessings  of  the  world  to  come. 

4.  Of  the  Twofold  Life  of  the  Creature. 

TheojyJiihis. — To  inquire  or  search  into  the  origin  of 
wrath,  is  the  same  thing  as  to  search  into  the  origin 
of  evil  and  sin :  for  wrath  and  evil  are  but  two  words 
for  one  and  the  same  thing. 

The  creature  can  have  no  beginning  or  sensibility 
of  wrath  in  itself,  but  by  losing  the  living  power,  the 
living  presence,  and  governing  operation  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  within  it ;  or,  in  other  words,  by  its  losing  that 
heavenly  state  of  existence  in  God,  and  influence  from 
Him,  which  it  had  at  its  creation. 

Now  no  intelligent  creature,  whether  angel  or  man, 
can  be  good  and  happy,  but  by  partaking  of,  or  having 
in  itself,  a  twofold  life.  Hence  so  much  is  said  in  the 
Scripture  of  an  inward  and  outward,  an  old  and  a  new 
man. — For  there  could  be  no  foundation  for  this  dis- 
tinction, but  because  every  intelligent  creature,  created 
to  be  good  and  happy,  must  of  all  necessity  have  a 
twofold  life  in  it,  or  it  cannot  possibly  be  capable  of 
goodness  and  happiness,  nor  can  it  possibly  lose  its 
goodness  and  happiness,  or  feel  the  least  want  of  them, 
but  by  its  breaking  the  union  of  this  twofold  life  in 
itself.  Hence  so  much  is  said  in  the  Scripture  of  the 
quickening,  raising,  and  reviving  the  inward  new  man, 
of  the  new  birth  from  above,  of  Christ  being  formed 
in  us,  as  the  one  only  redemption  and  salvation  of  the 
soul.  Hence  also  the  fall  of  Adam  was  said  to  be  a 
death,  that  he  died  the  day  of  his  sin,  though  he  lived 


THE    SPIRIT   OF   LOVE  27 

SO  many  hundred  years  after  it ;  it  was  because  his  sin 
broke  the  union  of  his  twofold  life,  and  put  an  end  to 
the  heavenly  part  of  it,  and  left  only  one  life,  the  life 
of  this  bestial,  earthly  world  in  him. 

Now  there  is,  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  an  absolute 
necessity  of  this  twofold  life  in  every  creature  that  is 
to  be  good  and  happy ;  and  the  twofold  life  is  this,  it 
must  have  the  life  of  nature  and  the  life  of  God  in  it. 
It  cannot  be  a  creature,  and  intelligent,  but  by  having 
the  life  and  properties  of  nature ;  that  is,  by  finding 
itself  to  be  a  life  of  various  sensibilities,  that  hath  a 
power  of  understandmg,  willing,  and  desiring :  this  is 
its  creaturely  life,  which,  by  the  creating  power  of 
God,  it  hath  in  and  from  nature. 

Now  this  is  all  the  life  that  is  or  can  be  creaturely, 
or  be  a  creature's  natural,  own  life ;  and  all  this  crea- 
turely natural  life,  with  all  its  various  powers  and 
sensibilities,  is  only  a  life  of  various  appetites,  hungers, 
and  wants,  and  cannot  possibly  be  anything  else. 
God  Himself  cannot  make  a  creature  to  be  in  itself, 
or  as  to  its  own  nature,  any  thing  else  but  a  state  of 
emptiness,  of  want,  of  appetite,  etc.  He  cannot  make 
it  to  be  good  and  happy,  in  and  from  its  natural  state ; 
this  is  as  impossible,  as  for  God  to  cease  to  be  the  one 
only  good.  The  highest  life,  therefore,  that  is  natural 
and  creaturely,  can  go  no  higher  than  this  ;  it  can 
only  be  a  bare  capacity  for  goodness  and  happiness, 
and  cannot  possibly  be  a  good  and  happy  life,  but  by 
the  life  of  God  dwelling  in  and  in  union  with  it.  And 
this  is  the  twofold  life,  that  of  all  necessity  must  be 
united  in  every  good,  and  perfect,  and  happy  creature. 

See  here  the  greatest  of  all  demonstrations  of  the 
absolute  necessity  of  the  gospel  redemption  and  salva- 


28  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

tion,  and  all  proved  from  the  nature  of  the  thing. 
There  can  be  no  goodness  and  happiness  for  any  in- 
telligent creature,  but  in  and  by  this  twofold  life ;  and 
therefore  the  union  of  the  divine  and  human  life,  or 
the  Son  of  God  incarnate  in  man,  to  make  man  again 
a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  is  the  one  only  pos- 
sible salvation  for  all  the  sons  of  fallen  Adam ;  that 
is,  of  Adam  dead  to,  or  fallen  from,  his  first  union 
with  the  divine  life. 

5.  Of  the  Polly  of  Deism. 

Deism  therefore,  or  a  religion  of  nature,  pretending 
to  make  man  good  and  happy  without  Christ,  or  the 
Son  of  God  entering  into  union  with  the  human  nature, 
is  the  greatest  of  all  absurdities.  It  is  as  contrary  to 
the  nature  and  possibilities  of  things,  as  for  mere 
emptiness  to  be  its  ov/n  fulness,  mere  hunger  to  be  its 
own  food,  and  mere  want  to  be  its  possession  of  all 
things.  For  nature  and  creature,  without  the  Christ 
of  God  or  the  divine  life  in  union  with  it,  is  and  can 
be  nothing  else  but  this  mere  emptiness,  hunger,  and 
want  of  all  that  which  can  alone  make  it  good  and 
happy.  For  God  Himself,  as  I  said,  cannot  make  any 
creature  to  be  good  and  happy  by  any  thing  that  is 
in  its  own  created  nature ;  and  however  high  or  noble 
any  creature  is  supposed  to  be  created,  its  height  and 
nobility  can  consist  in  nothing  but  its  higher  capacity 
and  fitness  to  receive  a  higher  union  with  the  divine 
life,  and  also  a  higher  and  more  wretched  misery  when 
left  to  itself,  as  is  manifest  by  the  hellish  state  of  the 
fallen  angels.  Their  high  and  exalted  nature  was  only 
an  enlarged  capacity  for  the  divine  life;  and  there- 
fore, when  this  life  was  lost,  their  whole  created  nature 


tiil:  spmiT  of  love  29 

was  nothing  else  but  the  height  of  rage  and  hellish 
distraction. 

A  plain  demonstration  that  there  can  be  no  happi- 
ness, blessing,  and  goodness  for  any  creature  in  heaven 
or  on  earth,  but  by  having,  as  the  gospel  saith,  Jesus 
Christ  made  unto  it  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  peace  with  God. 

6.  Of  the  Twofold  Life  of  Man. 

And  the  reason  is  this  :  it  is  because  goodness  and 
happiness  are  absolutely  inseparable  from  God,  and 
can  be  nowhere  but  in  God.  And,  on  the  other  hand, 
emptiness,  want,  insufficiency,  etc.,  are  absolutely  in- 
separable from  the  creature,  as  such ;  its  whole  nature 
cannot  possibly  be  any  thing  else,  be  it  what  or  where 
it  will,  an  angel  in  heaven,  or  a  man  on  earth ;  it  is 
and  must  be  in-  its  whole  creaturely  nature  and 
capacity  a  mere  hunger  and  emptiness,  etc.  And 
therefore  all  that  we  know  of  God,  and  all  that  we 
know  of  the  creature,  fully  proves  that  the  life  of  God 
in  union  with  the  creaturely  life  (which  is  the  gospel 
salvation)  is  the  one  only  possibility  of  goodness  and 
happiness  in  any  creature,  whether  in  heaven  or  on 
earth. 

Hence  also  it  is  enough  certain,  that  this  twofold 
life  must  have  been  the  original  state  of  every  intelli- 
gent creature,  at  its  first  coming  forth  from  God.  It 
could  not  be  brought  forth  by  God,  to  have  only  a 
creaturely  life  of  nature,  and  be  left  to  that ;  for  that 
would  be  creating  it  under  a  necessity  of  being  in 
misery,  in  want,  in  wrath,  and  all  painful  sensibilities. 
A  thing  more  unworthy  of  God,  and  more  impossible 
for   Him   to   do,  than   to   create   numberless   earthly 


30  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

animals  under  a  necessity  of  being  perpetually  pained 
with  liunger  and  thirst,  without  any  possibility  of 
finding  any  thing  to  eat  or  to  drink. 

For  no  creaturely  life  can,  in  itself,  be  any  higher 
or  better  than  a  state  of  want,  or  a  seeking  for  some 
thing  that  cannot  be  found  in  itself,  and  therefore, 
as  sure  as  God  is  good,  as  sure  as  He  would  have 
intelligent  beings  live  a  life  of  goodness  and  happiness, 
so  sure  is  it  that  such  beings  must  of  all  necessity,  in 
their  first  existence,  have  been  blessed  with  a  twofold 
life,  viz.  the  life  of  God  dwelling  in,  and  united  with, 
the  life  of  nature  or  created  life. 

Eusebius. — What  an  important  matter  have  you 
here  proved  in  the  necessity  and  certainty  of  this 
twofold  life  in  every  intelligent  being  that  is  to  be 
good  and  happy.  For  this  great  truth  opens  and 
asserts  the  certain  and  substantial  ground  of  the 
spiritual  life,  and  shows  that  all  salvation  is  and  can 
be  nothing  else,  but  the  manifestation  of  the  life  of 
God  in  the  soul.  How  clearly  does  this  give  the 
solid  distinction  between  inward  holiness  and  all  out- 
ward, creaturely  practices.  All  that  God  has  done 
for  man  by  any  particular  dispensations,  whether  by 
the  lav/,  or  the  prophets,  by  the  Scriptures,  or 
ordinances  of  the  Church,  are  only  as  helps  to  an 
holiness  which  they  cannot  give,  but  are  only  suited 
to  the  deatli  and  darkness  of  the  earthly,  creaturely 
life,  to  turn  it  from  itself,  from  its  own  workings,  and 
awaken  in  it  a  faith  and  hope,  a  hunger  and  thirst, 
after  that  first  union  with  the  life  of  the  Deity, 
which  was  lost  in  the  fall  of  the  first  father  of  man- 
kind. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOYE  31 

7.  Of  the  Immediate  Operation  of  the  Deity 
in  the  Life  of  the  Creature. 

Theopliilus. — How  unreasonable  is  it  to  call  per- 
petual inspiration  fanaticism  and  enthusiasm,  when 
there  cannot  be  the  least  degree  of  goodness  or  happi- 
ness in  any  intelligent  being,  but  what  is  in  its  whole 
nature,  merely  and  truly  the  breathing,  the  life,  and 
the  operation  of  God  in  the  life  of  the  creature  ?  For 
if  goodness  can  only  be  in  God,  if  it  cannot  exist 
separate  from  Him,  if  He  can  only  bless  and  sanctify, 
not  by  a  creaturely  gift,  but  by  Himself  becoming  the 
blessing  and  sanctification  of  the  creature,  then  it  is 
the  highest  degree  of  blindness  to  look  for  any  good- 
ness and  happiness  from  anything  but  the  immediate 
indwelling,  union,  and  operation  of  the  Deity  in  the 
life  of  the  creature.  Perpetual  inspiration,  there- 
fore, is  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  as  necessary  to  a 
life  of  goodness,  holiness,  and  happiness,  as  the 
perpetual  respiration  of  the  air  is  necessary  to  animal 
life. 

For  the  life  of  the  creature,  whilst  only  creaturely, 
and  possessing  nothing  but  itself,  is  hell ;  that  is,  it 
is  all  pain,  and  want,  and  distress.  Now  nothing  in 
the  nature  of  the  thing  can  make  the  least  alteration 
in  this  creaturely  life,  nothing  can  help  it  to  be  in 
light  and  love,  in  peace  and  goodness,  but  the  union 
of  God  with  it,  and  the  life  of  God  working  in  it, 
because  nothing  but  God  is  light,  and  love,  and 
heavenly  goodness.  And  therefore,  where  the  life  of 
God  is  not  become  the  life  and  goodness  of  the 
creature,  there  the  creature  cannot  have  the  least 
degree  of  goodness  in  it. 


32  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

8.  Of  the  Need  of  the  Perpetual  Operation 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  within  us. 

What  a  mistake  is  it  therefore  to  confine  inspira- 
tion to  particular  times  and  occasions,  to  prophets  and 
apostles,  and  extraordinary  messengers  of  God !  and 
to  call  it  enthusiasm,  when  the  common  Christian 
looks  and  trusts  to  be  continually  led  and  inspired  by 
the  Spirit  of  God.  For  though  all  are  not  called  to 
be  prophets  or  apostles,  yet  all  are  called  to  be  holy, 
as  He  who  hath  called  them  is  holy,  "  to  be  perfect 
as  their  heavenly  Father  is  perfect,  to  be  like-minded 
with  Christ,"  to  will  only  as  God  wills,  to  do  all  to 
His  honour  and  glory,  to  renounce  the  spirit  of  this 
world,  to  have  their  conversation  in  heaven,  to  set 
their  affections  on  things  above,  to  love  God  with  all 
their  heart,  soul,  and  spirit,  and  their  neighbour  as 
themselves. 

Behold  a  work  as  great,  as  divine,  and  supernatural, 
as  that  of  a  prophet  and  an  apostle.  But  to  suppose 
that  we  ought,  and  may  always  be  in  this  spirit  of 
holiness,  and  yet  are  not,  and  ought  not  to  be  always 
moved  and  led  by  the  breath  and  spirit  of  God  within 
us,  is  to  suppose  that  there  is  a  holiness  and  goodness 
which  comes  not  from  God ;  which  is  no  better  than 
supposing  that  there  may  be  true  prophets  and 
apostles  who  have  not  their  truth  from  God. 

Now  the  holiness  of  the  common  Christian  is  not 
an  occasional  thing,  that  begins  and  ends,  or  is  only 
for  such  a  time,  or  place,  or  action,  but  is  the  holiness 
of  that  which  is  always  alive  and  stirring  in  us,  namely, 
of  our  thoughts,  wills,  desires,  and  affections.  If, 
therefore,  these  are  always  alive  in  us,  always  driving 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  33 

or  governing  our  lives,  if  we  can  have  no  holiness  or 
goodness  but  as  this  life  of  tliouglit,  will,  and  affection 
works  in  us,  if  we  are  all  called  to  this  inward  holiness 
and  goodness,  then  a  perpetual,  always  existing  opera- 
tion of  the  Spirit  of  God  within  us  is  absolutely 
necessary.  For  v/e  cannot  be  inwardly  led  and 
governed  by  a  spirit  of  goodness,  but  by  being  governed 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  Himself.  For  the  Spirit  of  God 
and  the  spirit  of  goodness  are  not  two  spirits,  nor  can 
we  be  said  to  have  any  more  of  the  one  than  we  have 
of  the  other. 

Now  if  our  thoughts,  wills,  and  affections  need  only 
be  now  and  then  holy  and  good,  then,  indeed,  the 
moving  and  breathing  Spirit  of  God  need  only  now 
and  then  govern  us.  But  if  our  thoughts  and  affec- 
tions are  to  be  always  holy  and  good,  then  the  holy 
and  good  Spirit  of  God  is  to  be  always  operating  as  a 
principle  of  life  w^ithin  us. 

The  Scripture  saith,  "  We  are  not  sufficient  of  our- 
selves to  think  a  good  thought."  If  so,  tlien  we 
cannot  be  chargeable  with  not  thinking  and  willing 
ttiat  which  is  good,  but  upon  this  supposition,  that 
there  is  always  a  supernatural  power  within  us,  ready 
and  able  to  lielp  us  to  the  good  which  we  cannot  have 
from  ourselves. 

The  difference  then  of  a  good  and  a  bad  man  does 
not  lie  in  this,  that  the  one  wills  that  which  is  good, 
and  the  other  does  not ;  but  solely  in  this,  that  the 
one  concurs  with  the  living,  inspiring  Spirit  of  God 
within  him,  and  the  other  resists  it,  and  is  and  can  be 
only  chargeable  with  evil  because  he  resists  it 

Therefore  whether  you  consider  that  which  is  good 
or  bad  in  a  man,  they  equally  prove  the  perpetual 
3 


34  WHOLLY    FOE    GOD 

indwelling  and  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  within 
us,  since  we  can  only  be  bad  by  resisting,  as  we  are 
good  by  yielding  to,  the  Spirit  of  God ;  both  which 
equally  suppose  a  perpetual  operation  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  within  us. 

9.  The  Teaching  of  the  Established  Church 
on  Perpetual  Inspiration. 

Eusebius. — How  firmly  our  Established  Church 
adheres  to  this  doctrine  of  the  necessity  of  the 
perpetual  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  one 
only  source  and  possibility  of  any  degree  of  divine 
light,  wisdom,  virtue,  and  goodness  in  the  soul  of  man, 
how  earnestly  she  wills  and  requires  all  her  members 
to  live  in  the  most  open  profession  of  it,  and  in  the 
highest  conformity  to  it,  may  be  seen  by  many  such 
prayers  as  these  in  her  common,  ordinary,  public 
service. 

0  God,  forasmuch  as  without  Thee  we  are  not  able 
to  please  Thee,  grant  that  Thy  Holy  Spirit  may  in  all 
things  direct  and  rule  our  hearts. 

Again,  AVe  pray  Thee  that  Thy  grace  may  always 
prevent  and  follow  us,  and  make  us  continually  to  be 
given  to  all  good  works. 

Again,  Grant  to  us,  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee,  the 
spirit  to  think  and  do  always  such  things  as  be  right- 
ful, that  we,  v/ho  cannot  do  any  thing  that  is  good 
without  Thee,  may,  by  Thee,  be  enabled  to  live  accord- 
ing to  Tliy  will. 

Again,  Because  tlie  frailty  of  man,  wichout  Thee, 
cannot  but  fall,  keep  us  ever,  by  Thy  lielp,  from  all 
things  hurtful,  and  lead  us  to  all  things  profitable  to 
our  salvation,  etc. 


THE    SPIIJIT    OF    LOVE  35 

Again,  0  God,  from  whom  all  good  things  do  come, 
grant  to  us  Thy  humble  servants,  that  by  Thy  holy 
inspiration  we  may  think  those  things  that  be  good., 
and  by  Thy  merciful  guiding  may  perform  the  same. 

But  now  the  true  ground  of  all  this  doctrine  of  the 
necessity  of  the  perpetual  guidance  and  operation  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  lies  in  what  has  been  said  above,  of 
the  necessity  of  a  twofold  life  in  every  intelligent 
creature  that  is  to  be  good  and  happy.  For  if  the 
creaturely  life,  whilst  alone  or  left  to  itself,  can  only 
be  want,  misery,  and  distress,  if  it  cannot  possibly 
have  any  goodness  or  happiness  in  it,  till  the  life  of 
God  is  in  union  with  it,  as  one  life,  then  every  thing 
that  you  read  in  the  Scripture  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
as  the  only  principle  of  goodness,  opens  itself  to  you, 
as  a  most  certain  and  blessed  truth,  about  which  you 
can  have  no  doubt. 

10.  Of  the  Seed  of  Heaven  bred  in 
every  Man. 

Tlicophilus. — Let  me  only  add,  Eusebius,  to  what  you 
have  said,  that  from  this  absolute  necessity  of  a  twofold 
life  in  every  creature  that  is  to  be  good  and'  happy, 
we  may,  in  a  still  greater  clearness,  see  the  certainty 
of  that  which  we  have  so  often  spoken  of  at  other 
times,  namely,  that  the  inspoken  word  in  Paradise, 
the  bruiser  of  the  serpent,  the  seed  of  the  v/oman,  the 
Immanuel,  the  holy  Jesus  (for  they  all  mean  the  same 
thing),  is  and  was  the  only  possible  ground  of  salvation 
for  fallen  man.  For  if  the  twofold  life  is  necessary, 
and  man  could  not  be  restored  to  goodness  and  happi- 
ness but  by  the  restored  union  of  this  twofold  life  into 
its  first  state,  then  there  was  an  absolute  necessity, 


36  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  tliat  every  son  of  Adam 
should  have  such  a  seed  of  heaven  in  the  birth  of  his 
life,  as  could,  by  the  mediation  of  Christ,  be  raised 
into  a  birth  and  growth  of  the  first  perfect  man.  This 
is  the  one  original  power  of  salvation,  without  which 
no  external  dispensation  could  have  done  any  thing 
towards  raising  the  fallen  state  of  man.  For  nothing 
could  be  raised  but  what  there  was  to  be  raised,  nor 
life  be  given  to  any  thing  but  to  that  which  was  capable 
of  life.  Unless,  therefore,  there  had  been  a  seed  of  life, 
or  a  smothered  spark  of  heaven  in  the  soul  of  man, 
which  wanted  to  come  to  the  birth,  there  had  been  no 
possibility  for  any  dispensation  of  God  to  bring  forth 
a  birth  of  heaven  in  fallen  man. 

The  faith  of  the  first  patriarchs  could  not  have  been 
in  being,  Moses  and  the  prophets  had  come  in  vain, 
had  not  the  Christ  of  God  laid  in  a  state  of  hiddennocs 
in  every  son  of  man.  For  faith,  which  is  a  will  and 
hunger  after  God,  could  not  have  begun  to  be,  or  have 
any  life  in  man,  but  because  there  was  something  of 
the  divine  nature  existing  and  hid  in  man.  For 
nothing  can  have  any  longing  desire  but  after  its 
own  likeness,  nor  could  any  thing  be  made  to  desire 
God,  but  that  which  came  from  Him,  and  had  the 
nature  of  Him. 

The  whole  mediatorial  ofllce  of  Clirist,  from  His 
birth  to  His  sitting  down  in  power  at  tlie  riglit  hand 
of  God,  was  only  for  tliis  end,  to  help  man  to  a  life 
that  was  fallen  into  death  and  insensibility  in  him. 
And  therefore  His  mediatorial  power  was  to  manifest 
itself  by  way  of  a  new  birth.  In  the  nature  of  the 
thing  nothing  else  was  to  be  done,  and  Clirist  had  no 
other  way  to  proceed,  and  tliat  for  this  plain  reason. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  37 

because  life  was  the  thing  that  was  lost,  and  life, 
wherever  it  is,  must  be  raised  by  a  birth,  and  every 
birth  must  and  can  only  come  from  its  own  seed. 

But  if  Christ  was  to  raise  a  new  life  like  His  own 
in  every  man,  then  every  man  must  have  had,  originally, 
in  the  inmost  spirit  of  his  life,  a  seed  of  Christ,  or  Christ, 
as  a  seed  of  heaven,  lying  there  as  in  a  state  of  insensi- 
bility or  death,  out  of  which  it  could  not  arise  but 
by  the  mediatorial  power  of  Christ,  who,  as  a  second 
Adam,  was  to  regenerate  that  birth  of  His  own  life 
which  was  lost  in  all  the  natural  sons  of  Adam  the 
first. 

But  unless  there  was  this  seed  of  Christ  or  spark 
of  heaven  hidden  in  the  soul,  not  the  least  beo-inning; 
of  man's  salvation,  or  of  Christ's  mediatorial  office, 
could  be  made.  For  what  could  begin  to  deny  self, 
if  there  was  not  something  in  man  different  from  self  ? 
What  could  begin  to  have  hope  and  faith  and  desire 
of  an  heavenly  life,  if  there  was  not  something  of 
heaven  hidden  in  his  soul,  and  lying  therein  as  in  a 
state  of  inactivity  and  death,  till  raised  by  the  mediation 
of  Christ  into  its  first  perfection  of  life,  and  set  again 
m  its  true  dominion  over  flesh  and  blood. 

11.  The  Mystery  of  the  Inward  Life. 

Eusebius. — You  have,  TheophUus,  sufficiently  proved 
the  certainty  and  necessity  of  this  mxatter.  But  I 
should  be  glad  if  you  knew  how  to  help  me  to  some 
more  distinct  idea  and  conception  of  it. 

Theoiohilus. — An  idea  is  not  the  thing  to  be  here 
sought  for,  it  would  rather  hinder  than  help  your  true 
knowledge  of  it.  But  perhaps  the  following  similitude 
may  be  of  some  use  to  you. 


38  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

The  ten  commandments,  when  written  by  God  on 
tables  of  stone  and  given  to  man,  did  not  then  first 
begin  to  belong  to  man,  they  had  their  existence  in 
man,  were  born  with  him,  they  lay  as  a  seed  and  power  of 
goodness,  hidden  in  the  form  and  make  of  his  soul,  and 
altogether  inseparable  from  it,  before  they  were  shown  to 
man  on  tables  of  stone.  And  when  they  were  shown 
to  man  on  tables  of  stone,  they  were  only  an  outward 
imitation  of  that  which  was  inwardly  in  man,  though 
not  legible,  because  of  that  impurity  of  flesh  and  blood 
in  which  they  were  drowned  and  swallowed  up.  For 
the  earthly  nature  having  overcome  the  divinity  that 
was  in  man,  it  gave  commandments  of  its  own  to  man, 
and  required  obedience  to  all  the  lusts  of  the  flesh, 
the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life. 

Hence  it  became  necessary  that  God  should  give 
an  outward  knowledge  of  such  commandments  as  were 
become  inwardly  unknown,  unfelt,  and,  as  it  were,  shut 
up  in  death  in  the  soul. 

But  now,  had  not  all  that  is  in  these  commandments 
been  really  and  antecedently  in  the  soul,  as  its  own 
birth  and  nature,  had  they  not  still  lain  therein,  and, 
although  totally  suppressed,  yet  in  such  a  seed  or  remains 
as  could  be  called  forth  into  their  first  living  state,  in 
vain  had  the  tables  of  stone  been  given  to  man  ;  and 
all  outward  writing  or  teacliing  of  the  commandments 
had  been  as  useless  as  so  many  instructions  given  to 
beasts  or  stones.  If,  therefore,  you  can  conceive  how 
all  that  is  good  and  holy  in  the  commandments  lay 
hid  as  an  unfelt,  inactive  power  or  seed  of  goodness, 
till  called  into  sensibility  and  stirring  by  laws  written 
on  tables  of  stone  :  this  may  help  your  manner  of 
conceiving  and  believing  how  Christ,  as  a  seed  of  life. 


THE    SPIlilT    OF    LOVE  39 

or  power  of  salvation,  lies  in  the  soul,  as  its  unknown, 
hidden  treasure,  till  awakened  and  called  forth  mto 
life  by  the  mediatorial  office  and  process  of  the  holy 
Jesus. 

Again,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thy  heart,  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength, 
and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Now  these  two  pre- 
cepts given  by  the  written  word  of  God  are  an  absolute 
demonstration  of  the  first  original  perfection  of  man, 
and  also  a  full  and  invincible  proof  that  the  same 
original  perfection  is  not  quite  annihilated,  but  lies 
in  him,  as  an  hidden,  suppressed  seed  of  goodness, 
capable  of  being  raised  up  to  its  first  perfection.  For 
had  not  this  divine  unity,  purity,  and  perfection  of 
love  towards  God  and  man  been  man's  first  natural 
state  of  life,  it  could  have  nothing  to  do  with  his 
present  state.  For  had  any  other  nature,  or  measure, 
or  kind  of  love  began  in  the  first  birth  of  his  life,  he 
could  only  have  been  called  to  that. 

No  creature  has,  or  can  have,  a  call  to  be  above,  or 
act  above,  its  own  nature. 

Therefore,  as  sure  as  man  is  called  to  this  unity, 
purity,  and  perfection  of  love,  so  sure  is  it  that  it  was 
at  first  his  natural,  heavenly  state,  and  still  has  its 
seed  or  remains  within  him,  as  his  only  power  and 
possibihty  of  rising  up  to  it  again.  And  therefore, 
all  that  man  is  called  to,  every  degree  of  a  new  and 
perfect  life,  every  future  exaltation  and  glory  he  is  to 
have  from  the  mediation  of  Christ,  is  a  full  proof  that 
the  same  perfection  was  originally  his  natural  state, 
and  is  still  in  him  in  such  a  seed  or  remains  of 
existence,  as  to  admit  of  a  perfect  renewal. 

And  thus  it  is  that  you  are  to  conceive  of  the  holy 


40  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

Jesus,  or  the  Word  of  God,  as  the  hidden  treasure 
of  every  human  soul,  born  as  a  seed  of  the  Word, 
in  the  bu'th  of  the  soul  immured  under  flesh  and 
blood,  till  as  a  day-star  it  arises  in  our  hearts,  and 
changes  the  son  of  an  earthly  Adam  into  a  son  of  God. 
And  was  not  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God  in 
us  all,  antecedent  to  any  dispensation  or  written  word 
of  God,  as  a  real  seed  of  life  in  the  birth  of  our  own 
life,  we  could  have  no  more  fitness  for  the  gospel 
redemption,  than  the  annuals  of  this  world,  which 
have  nothing  of  heaven  in  them.  And  to  call  us  to 
love  God  with  all  our  hearts,  to  put  on  Christ,  to 
walk  according  to  the  Spirit,  if  these  things  had  not 
thek  real  nature  and  root  within  us,  would  be  as  vain 
and  useless  as  to  make  rules  and  orders  how  our 
eyes  should  smell  and  taste,  or  our  ears  should  see. 

12.  The  Witness  of  Nature  to  an  Inward 
Life. 

Now  this  mystery  of  an  inward  life  hidden  in  man, 
as  his  most  precious  treasure,  as  the  ground  of  all 
that  can  be  great  or  good  in  him,  and  hidden  only 
since  his  fall,  and  which  only  can  be  opened  and 
brought  forth  in  its  first  glory  by  Him  to  whom  all 
power  in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  given,  is  a  truth  to 
which  almost  every  thing  in  nature  bears  full  witness. 
Look  where  you  will,  nothing  appears  or  works  out- 
wardly in  any  creature,  or  in  any  effect  of  nature,  but 
what  is  all  done  from  its  own  inward  invisible  spirit, 
not  a  spirit  brought  into  it,  but  its  own  inward  spirit 
which  is  an  inward  invisible  mystery,  till  made  known, 
or  brought  forth  by  outward  appearances. 

The  sun  in  the  firmament  gives  growth  to  every 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  41 

thing  that  grows  in  the  earth,  and  life  to  every  thing 
that  lives  upon  it,  not  by  giving  or  imparting  a  life 
from  without,  but  only  by  stirring  up  in  every  thhig 
its  own  growth  and  its  own  life,  which  lay  as  in  a 
seed  or  state  of  death,  till  helped  to  come  out  of  it  by 
the  sun,  which,  as  an  emblem  of  the  Eedeemer  of  the 
spiritual  world,  helps  every  earthly  thing  out  of  its 
own  death,  into  its  own  highest  state  of  life. 

That  which  we  call  our  sensations,  as  seeing,  hear- 
ing, feeling,  tasting,  and  smelling,  are  not  things 
brought  into  us  from  without,  or  given  unto  us  by  any 
external  causes,  but  are  only  so  many  inborn,  secret 
states  of  the  soul,  w^hich  lie  in  their  state  of  hidden- 
ness,  till  they  are  occasionally  awakened  and  brought 
forth  into  sensibility  by  outward  occurrences.  And 
were  they  not  antecedently  in  the  soul,  as  states  and 
forms  of  its  own  life,  no  outward  objects  could  brmg 
the  soul  into  a  sensibility  of  them.  For  nothing  can 
have  or  be  in  any  state  of  sensation  but  that  which  it 
is,  and  hath  from  itself,  as  its  own  birth.  This  is  as 
certain,  as  that  a  circle  hath  only  its  own  roundness. 

The  stinkmg  gum  gives  nothing  to  the  soul,  nor 
brings  any  thing  into  sensibility,  but  that  which  was 
before  in  the  soul ;  it  has  only  a  fitness  to  awaken  and 
stir  up  that  state  of  the  soul,  which  lay  dormant 
before,  and  which,  when  brought  into  sensibility,  is 
called  the  sensation  of  bad  smelling.  And  the 
odoriferous  gum  hath  likewise  but  the  same  power, 
viz.  a  fitness  to  stu'  up  that  state  of  sensation  in  the 
soul,  which  is  called  its  delightful  smelling.  But  both 
these  sensations  are  only  internal  states  of  the  soul, 
which  appear,  or  disappear,  are  found,  or  not  found, 
just  as  occasions  bring  them  into  sensibility. 


42  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

Again,  the  greatest  artist  in  music  can  add  no  sound 
to  his  instrument,  nor  make  it  give  forth  any  other 
melody,  but  that  which  lieth  silently  hidden  in  it,  as 
its  own  inward  state. 

13.  The  Outward  reveals  the  Inward. 

Look  now  at  what  you  will,  whether  it  be  animate 
or  inanimate,  all  that  it  is,  or  has,  or  can  be,  it  is  and 
has  in  and  from  itself,  as  its  own  inward  state ;  and 
all  outward  things  can  do  no  more  to  it  than  the  hand 
does  to  the  instrument,  make  it  show  forth  its  own 
inward  state,  either  of  harmony  or  discord. 

It  is  strictly  thus  with  ourselves.  Not  a  spark  of 
joy,  of  wrath,  of  envy,  of  love,  or  grief,  can  possibly 
enter  into  us  from  without,  or  be  caused  to  be  in  us 
by  any  outward  thing.  This  is  as  impossible,  as  for 
the  sound  of  metals  to  be  put  into  a  lump  of  clay. 
And  as  no  metal  can  possibly  give  forth  any  other  or 
higher  sound  than  that  which  is  enclosed  within  it, 
so  v/e,  however  struck,  can  give  forth  no  other  or 
higher  sound,  either  of  loss,  hatred,  wrath,  etc.,  than 
that  very  degree  which  lay  before  shut  up  within  us. 

The  natural  state  of  our  tempers  has  variety  of 
covers,  under  which  they  lie  concealed  at  times,  both 
from  ourselves  and  others ;  but  when  this  or  that  acci- 
dent happens  to  displace  such  or  such  a  cover,  then 
that  which  lay  hid  under  it  breaks  forth.  And  then 
v/e  vainly  think  that  this  or  that  outward  occasion  has 
not  shown  us  how  we  are  within,  but  has  only  infused 
or  put  into  us  a  wrath,  or  grief,  or  envy,  which  is  not 
our  natural  state,  or  of  our  own  growth,  or  has  all  that 
it  has  from  our  own  inward  state. 

But  this  is  mere  blindness  and  self-deceit,  for  it  ia 


THE    SPIRIT    OF   LOVE  43 

as  impossible  for  the  mind  to  have  any  grief,  or  wrath, 
or  joy,  but  what  it  has  all  from  its  own  inward  state, 
as  for  the  instrument  to  give  forth  any  other  harmony 
or  discord  but  that  which  is  within  and  from  itself. 

Persons,  things,  and  outward  occurrences  may  strike 
our  instrument  improperly  and  variously,  but  as  we 
are  in  ourselves,  such  is  our  outward  sound,  whatever 
strikes  us. 

If  our  inward  state  is  the  renewed  life  of  Christ 
within  us,  then  every  thing  and  occasion,  let  it  be 
what  it  will,  only  makes  the  same  life  to  sound  forth 
and  shov7  itself ;  then  if  one  cheek  is  smitten,  we 
meekly  turn  the  other  also.  But  if  nature  is  alive, 
and  only  under  a  religious  cover,  then  every  outward 
accident  that  shakes  or  disturbs  this  cover  gives  leave 
to  that  bad  state,  whether  of  grief,  or  wrath,  or  joy, 
that  lay  hid  within  us,  to  show  forth  itself. 

But  nothing  at  any  time  makes  the  least  show  or 
sound  outwardly,  but  only  that  which  lay  ready  within 
us  for  an  outward  biith,  as  occasion  should  offer. 

What  a  miserable  mistake  is  it,  therefore,  to  place 
religious  goodness  in  outward  observances,  in  notions 
and  opinions  which  good  and  bad  men  can  equally 
receive  and  practise,  and  to  treat  the  ready  real 
power  and  operation  of  an  inward  life  of  God  in  the 
birth  of  our  souls  as  fanaticism  and  enthusiasm ;  when 
not  only  the  whole  letter  and  spirit  of  Scripture,  but 
every  operation  m  nature  and  creature  demonstrates 
that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  must  be  all  within  us,  or  it 
never  can  possibly  belong  to  us.  Goodness,  piety,  and 
holiness  can  only  be  ours,  as  thinking,  willing,  and 
desiring  are  ours,  by  being  in  us,  as  a  pov/er  of  heaven 
in  the  birth  and  growth  of  our  own  life. 


44  WHOLLY    FOR   GOD 

14.  The  Way  of  Salvation. 

And  now,  Eusebius,  how  is  the  great  controversy 
about  rehgion  and  salvation  shortened. 

For  since  the  one  only  work  of  Christ  as  your 
Eedeemer  is  only  this,  to  take  from  the  earthly  life  of 
flesh  and  blood  its  usurped  power,  and  to  raise  the 
smothered  spark  of  heaven  out  of  its  state  of  death 
into  a  powerful  governing  life  of  the  whole  man,  your 
one  only  work  also,  under  your  Eedeemer,  is  fully 
known.  And  you  have  the  utmost  certainty  what 
you  are  to  do,  where  you  are  to  seek,  and  in  what  you 
are  to  find  your  salvation. 

15.  What  you  are  to  do. 

All  that  you  have  to  do,  or  can  do,  is  to  oppose, 
resist,  and  as  far  as  you  can  to  renounce  the  evil 
tempers  and  workings  of  your  own  earthly  natiuT. 
You  are  under  the  power  of  no  other  enemy,  are  held 
in  no  other  captivity,  and  w^ant  no  other  deliverance, 
but  from  the  power  of  your  own  earthly  self.  This  is 
the  one  murderer  of  the  divine  life  within  you.  It  is 
your  own  Cain  that  murders  your  own  Abel.  Now 
every  thing  that  your  earthly  nature  does  is  under 
the  influence  oi  sclf-vv411,  self-love,  and  self-seeking, 
whether  it  carries  you  to  laudable  or  blameable 
practices,  all  is  done  in  the  nature  and  spirit  of  Cain, 
and  only  helps  you  to  such  goodness,  as  when  Cain 
slew  his  brotlier.  For  every  action  and  motion  of 
self  has  the  spirit  of  Antichrist,  and  murders  the  divine 
life  within  you. 

Judge  not  therefore  of  yourself  by  considering 
how  many  of  those  things  you  do  which  divines  and 


THE    SPUIIT    OF   LOVE  45 

moralists  call  virtue  and  goodness,  nor  how  much  you 
abstain  from  those  things  which  they  call  sin  and 
vice. 

But  daily  and  hourly,  in  every  step  that  you  take, 
see  to  the  spirit  that  is  within  you,  whether  it  be 
heaven  or  earth  that  guides  you.  And  judge  every 
thing  to  be  sin  and  Satan,  in  which  your  earthly 
nature,  own  love,  or  self-seeking  has  any  share  of  life 
in  you  ;  nor  think  that  any  goodness  is  brought  to  life 
in  you,  but  so  far  as  it  is  an  actual  death  to  the  pride, 
the  vanity,  the  wrath,  and  selfish  tempers  of  your 
fallen,  earthly  life. 

16.  Where  you  are  to  seek  your  Salvation. 

Again,  here  you  see  where  and  how  you  are  to  seek 
your  salvation,  not  in  taking  up  your  travelling  staff, 
or  crossing  the  seas  to  find  out  a  new  Luther  or  a  new 
Calvin,  to  clothe  yourself  with  their  opinions.  No. 
The  oracle  is  at  home  that  always  and  only  speaks  the 
truth  to  you,  because  nothing  is  your  truth  but  that 
good  and  that  evil  which  is  yours  within  you.  For 
salvation  or  damnation  is  no  outward  thing,  that  is 
brought  into  you  from  without,  but  is  only  that  which 
springs  up  within  you  as  the  birth  and  state  of  your 
own  life.  What  you  are  in  yourself,  vrhat  is  doing  in 
yourself,  is  all  that  can  be  either  your  salvation  or 
damnation. 

For  all  that  is  our  good,  and  all  that  is  our  bad,  has 
no  place  nor  power  but  within  us.  Again,  nothing 
that  we  do  is  bad,  but  for  this  reason,  because  it  resists 
the  po^iver  and  working  of  God  within  us  ;  and  nothing 
that  we  do  can  be  good  but  because  it  conforms  to  the 
Spirit  of  God  within  us.     And  therefore,  as  ail  that 


46  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

can  be  good  and  all  that  can  be  evil  in  ns  necessarily 
supposes  a  God  working  within  us,  you  have  the 
utmost  certainty  that  God,  salvation,  and  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  are  nowhere  to  be  sought  or  found  but 
within  you,  and  that  all  outward  religion,  from  the  fall 
of  man  to  this  day,  is  not  for  itself,  but  merely  for  the 
sake  of  an  inward  and  divine  life,  which  was  lost  when 
Adam  died  his  first  death  in  Paradise.  And  therefore 
it  may  well  be  said  that  "  circumcision  is  nothing,  and 
uncircumcision  is  nothing,"  because  nothing  is  wanted, 
and  therefore  nothing  can  be  available,  but  the  new 
creature  called  out  of  its  captivity,  under  the  death 
and  darkness  of  flesh  and  blood,  into  the  lidit,  life,  and 
perfection  of  its  first  creation. 

17.  In  what  you  are  to  find  your 
Salvation. 

And  thus  also  you  have  the  fullest  proof  in  what 
your  salvation  precisely  consists.  Not  in  any  historic 
faith,  or  knowledge  of  any  thing  absent  or  distant 
from  you ;  not  in  any  variety  of  restraints,  rules,  and 
methods  of  practising  virtues;  not  in  any  formality 
of  opinion  about  faith  and  works,  repentance,  forgive- 
ness of  sins,  or  justification  and  sanctification ;  not 
in  any  truth  or  righteousness  that  you  can  have  from 
yourself,  from  the  best  of  men  or  books ;  but  wholly 
and  solely  in  the  life  of  God,  or  Christ  of  God, 
quickened,  and  born  again  in  you,  or,  in  other  words, 
in  the  restoration  and  perfect  union  of  the  first  two- 
fold life  in  the  humanity. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  47 

18.  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven. 

You  know  we  have  often  spoken  of  eternal  nature, 
that  so  sure  as  tliere  is  an  eternal  God,  so  sure  is  it 
that  there  is  an  eternal  nature,  as  imiversal,  as  un- 
limited as  God  Himself,  and  everywhere  working 
where  God  is,  and  therefore  everywhere  equally 
existent,  as  being  His  kingdom  of  heaven,  or  outward 
manifestation  of  the  invisible  riches,  powers,  and 
glories  of  the  Deity. 

And  this  is  eternal  nature,  or  the  outbirth  of  the 
Deity,  called  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  viz.  an  mfinity, 
or  boundless  opening  of  the  properties,  powers,  wonders, 
and  glories  of  the  hidden  Deity,  and  this  not  once 
done,  but  ever  doing,  ever  standing  in  the  same  birth, 
for  ever  and  ever  breaking  forth  and  springing  up  in 
new  forms  and  openings  of  the  abyssal  Deity,  in  the 
powers  of  nature.  And  out  of  this  ocean  of  mani- 
fested pov/ers  of  nature,  the  will  of  the  Deity,  created 
hosts  of  heavenly  beings,  full  of  the  heavenly  wonders 
introduced  into  a  participation  of  the  infinity  of  God, 
to  live  in  an  eternal  succession  of  heavenly  sensations, 
to  see  and  feel,  to  taste  and  find  new  forms  of  delight 
in  an  inexhaustible  source  of  ever-changing  and  never- 
ceasing  wonders  of  the  divine  glory. 

Oh,  Theogenes !  What  an  eternity  is  this,  out  of 
which  and  for  which  thy  eternal  soul  was  created ! 
What  little  crawling  things  are  all  that  an  earthly 
ambition  can  set  before  thee !  Bear  with  patience  for 
a  while  the  rags  of  thy  earthly  nature,  the  veil  and 
darkness  of  flesh  and  blood,  as  the  lot  of  thy  inherit- 
ance from  father  Adam,  but  think  nothing  worth  a 
thought  but  that  which  will  bring  thee  back  to  thy 


48  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

first  glory,  and  land  thee  safe  in  tlie  region  of 
eternity. 

The  Deity  is  an  infinite  plenitude,  or  fulness  of 
riches  and  powers,  in  and  from  itself ;  and  it  is  only 
want  and  desire  that  is  excluded  from  it,  and  can 
have  no  existence  in  it.  And  here  lies  the  true 
immutable  distinction  between  God  and  nature,  and 
shows  why  neither  can  ever  be  changed  into  the 
other;  it  is,  because  God  is  an  universal  all;  and 
natiire,  or  desire,  is  an  univarsal  want,  viz.  to  be 
filled  with  God. 

Now,  as  nature  can  be  nothing  but  a  desire,  so 
nothing  is  in  or  done  in  any  natural  way,  but  as 
desire  does  it;  because  desire  is  the  all  of  nature. 
And  therefore  there  is  no  strength  or  substance,  no 
power  or  motion,  no  cause  or  effect  in  nature,  but 
what  is  in  itself  a  desire,  or  the  working  and  effect 
of  it. 

For  if  nature  is  mere  want,  and  has  nothing  in  it 
but  a  strength  of  want,  generated  from  the  three  self- 
tormenting  properties  of  a  desire ;  if  God  is  all  love, 
joy,  and  happiness,  an  infinite  plenitude  of  all  bless- 
ings, then  tlie  limits  and  bounds  of  good  and  evil,  of 
happiness  and  misery,  are  made  as  visibly  distinct, 
and  as  certainly  to  be  known,  as  the  difference 
between  a  circle  and  a  straight  line. 

To  live  to  desire,  that  is,  to  nature,  is  unavoidably 
entering  into  the  region  of  all  evil  and  misery ; 
because  nature  has  nothing  else  in  it ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  to  die  to  desire,  that  is,  to  turn  from 
nature  to  God,  is  to  be  united  with  the  infinite  source 
of  all  that  is  good,  and  blessed,  and  happy. 


THE    SPIEIT    OF    LOVE  49 

SECOND  DIALOGUE. 

19.  Jesus  Christ,  in  all  His  process,  our 
only  Salvation. 

TheojjJiilus. 

TAKE  this  matter  as  it  truly  is  in  itself,  viz.  God 
is  in  Himself  all  love  and  goodness,  therefore  can 
be  nothing  else  but  all  love  and  goodness  towards  fallen 
man,  and  that  fallen  man  is  subject  to  no  pain  or 
misery,  either  present  or  to  come,  but  vvhat  is  the 
natural,  unavoidable,  essential  effect  of  his  own  evil 
and  disordered  nature,  impossible  to  be  altered  by 
himself;  and  that  the  infinite,  never-ceasing  love  of 
God  has  given  Jesus  Christ,  in  all  His  process,  as 
the  highest  and  only  possible  means  that  heaven  and 
earth  can  afford  to  save  man  from  himself,  from  his 
own  evil,  misery,  and  death,  and  restore  to  him  his 
original  divine  life.  V/hen  you  look  at  this  matter 
in  this  true  light,  then  a  God,  all  love,  and  an  atone- 
ment for  sin  by  Clirist,  to  brmg  forth,  fulfil,  and 
restore  righteousness  in  the  creature  that  had  lost  it, 
has  every  thiug  in  it  that  can  make  the  providence 
of  God  adorable  and  the  state  of  man  comfortable. 

The  atonement  of  Christ  is  nothing  else  in  itself 
but  the  highest,  most  natural,  and  efficacious  means, 
through  all  the  possibility  of  things,  that  the  infinite 
love  and  wisdom  of  God  coudd  use  to  put  an  end  to 
sin,  and  death,  and  hell;  and  restore  to  man  his 
first  divine  state  or  life.  I  say,  the  most  natural, 
efficacious  means  through  all  the  possibilities  of 
nature;  for  there  is  nothing  that  is  supernatural, 
hoYv^ever  mysteiious,  in  the  whole  system  of  our 
redemption ;   every  part  of  it  has  its  ground  in  the 

4 


50  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

workings  and  powers  of  nature,  and  all  our  redemption 
is  only  nature  set  right,  or  made  to  be  that  which  it 
ought  to  be. 

There  is  nothing  that  is  supernatural  but  God 
alone ;  every  thing  besides  Him  is  from  and  subject 
to  the  state  of  nature :  it  can  never  rise  out  of  it, 
or  have  any  thing  contrary  to  it.  No  creature  can 
have  either  health  or  sickness,  good  or  evil,  or  any 
state  either  from  God  or  itself,  but  strictly  according 
to  the  capacities,  powers,  and  workings  of  nature. 

The  mystery  of  our  redemption,  though  it  comes 
from  the  supernatural  God,  has  nothing  in  it  but  what 
is  done,  and  to  be  done,  within  the  sphere  and  accord- 
ing to  the  powers  of  nature.  There  is  nothing  super- 
natural in  it,  or  belonging  to  it,  but  that  supernatural 
love  and  wisdom  which  brought  it  forth,  presides  over 
it,  and  will  direct  it,  till  Christ,  as  a  second  Adam,  has 
removed  and  extinguished  all  that  evil  which  the  first 
Adam  brouQ-ht  into  tlie  human  nature. 

And  the  whole  process  of  Jesus  Christ,  from  His 
being  the  inspoken  word,  or  bruiser  of  the  serpent, 
given  to  Adam,  to  his  birth,  death,  resurrection,  and 
ascension  into  heaven,  has  all  its  ground  and  reason 
in  this,  because  nothing  else  in  all  the  possibilities  of 
nature,  either  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  could  begin,  carry 
on,  and  totally  effect  man's  deliverance  from  the  evil 
of  his  own  fallen  nature. 

Thus  is  Christ  the  one  full,  sufficient  atonement  for 
the  sin  of  the  whole  world,  because  He  is  the  one  only 
natural  remedy  and  possible  cure  of  all  the  evil  that 
is  broke  forth  in  nature,  the  one  only  natural  life  and 
resurrection  of  all  that  holiness  and  happiness  that 
died  in  Adam.     And  seeing  all  this  process  of  Christ 


THE    SPIEIT    OF    LOVE  51 

is  given  to  tlie  v/orld,  from  the  supernatural,  antecedent, 
infinite  love  of  God,  therefore  is  it  that  the  apostle 
saith,  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  to 
Himself."  And  Christ  in  God  is  nothing  else  in  His 
whole  nature  Ijut  that  same  certain  and  natural  parent 
of  a  redemption  to  the  whole  human  nature,  as  fallen 
Adam  was  the  certain  and  natural  parent  of  a  miser- 
ahle  life  to  every  man  that  is  descended  from  him. 
With  this  only  difference,  that  from  fallen  Adam  we 
are  born  in  sin,  vvh ether  we  will  or  no,  but  we  cannot 
have  that  new  birth  which  Christ  has  all  power  to  bring 
forth  in  us,  unless  the  will  of  our  heart  closes  with  it. 
But  as  nothing  came  to  us  from  Adam,  but  accord- 
ing to  the  powers  of  nature,  and  because  he  was  that 
which  he  was,  with  relation  to  us  ;  so  it  is  with  Christ, 
and  our  redemption  by  Him  :  all  the  work  is  grounded 
in  and  proceeds  according  to  the  powers  of  nature,  or 
in  a  way  of  natural  efficacy  or  fitness  to  produce  its 
eiTecis;  and  every  thing  that  is  found  in  the  person, 
character,  and  condition  of  Christ  is  only  there  as  His 
true  and  natural  qualification  to  do  all  that  He  came 
to  do,  in  us,  and  for  us.  That  is  to  say,  Christ  was 
made  to  be  that  wdiich  He  was ;  He  was  a  seed  of  life 
in  our  first  fallen  father ;  He  lived  as  a  blesshig  of 
promise  in  the  patriarclis,  prophets,  and  Israel  of 
God ;  He  was  born  as  a  man  of  a  pure  virgin ;  He  did 
all  that  He  did,  whether  as  suffering,  dying,  conquer- 
ing, rising,  and  ascending  into  heaven,  only  as  so  many 
things,  which  as  naturally,  and  as  truly,  according  to 
the  nature  of  things,  qualified  Him  to  be  the  producer 
or  quickener  of  a  divine  life  in  us,  as  the  state  and 
condition  of  Adam  qualified  him  to  make  us  the  slavish 
children  of  earthly,  bestial  flesh  and  blood. 


52  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

This  is  the  comfortable  doctrine  of  our  redemption ; 
nothing  in  God  but  an  infinity  of  love  and  goodness 
towards  our  fallen  condition ;  nothing  in  Christ  but 
that  which  had  its  necessity  in  the  nature  of  things, 
to  make  Him  able  to  give  and  us  to  receive  our  full 
salvation  from  Him. 

20.  How  Christ's  Suflcerings  save  us. 

All  that  Christ  was,  and  did,  and  suffered  was 
infinitely  prized,  and  highly  acceptable  to  the  love  of 
God,  because  all  that  Christ  was,  and  did,  and  suffered 
in  His  own  person  v/as  that  which  gave  Him  full  pov/er 
to  be  a  common  Father  of  life  to  all  that  died  in 
Adam. 

Had  Christ  wanted  any  thing  that  He  was,  or  did, 
or  suffered  in  His  own  person,  He  could  not  have 
stood  in  that  relation  to  all  mankind  as  Adam  had 
done.  Had  He  not  been  given  to  the  first  fallen  man 
as  a  sesd  of  the  woman,  as  a  light  of  life,  ''  enlighten- 
ing every  man  that  comes  into  the  world,"  He  could 
not  have  had  His  seed  in  every  man,  as  Adam  had,  nor 
been  as  universal  a  Father  of  life,  as  Adam  was  of 
death.  Had  He  not  in  the  fitness  or  fulness  of  time 
become  a  man,  born  of  a  pure  virgin,  the  first  seed  of 
life  in  every  man  must  have  lain  only  as  a  seed,  and 
could  not  have  come  to  the  fulness  of  the  birth  of  a 
new  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  For  the  children  can  liave 
no  other  state  of  life  but  tliat  which  their  father  first 
had.  And  therefore  Christ,  as  the  Father  of  a  re- 
generated human  race,  must  first  stand  in  the  fulness 
of  that  human  state,  \vhich  was  to  be  derived  from 
Him  into  all  His  children. 

This  is  the  absolute  necessity  of  Christ's  being  all 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  53 

that  He  was  before  He  became  man ;  a  necessity 
arising  from  the  nature  of  the  thing.  Because  He 
could  not  possibly  have  had  the  relation  of  a  Father 
to  all  mankind,  nor  any  power  to  be  a  quickener  of  a 
life  of  heaven  in  them,  but  because  He  was  both  God 
in  Himself,  and  a  seed  of  God  in  all  of  them. 

Now  all  that  Christ  was,  and  did,  and  suffered,  after 
He  became  man,  is  from  the  same  necessity  founded 
in  the  nature  of  the  thing.  He  suffered  on  no  other 
account,  but  because  that  which  He  came  to  do  in  and 
for  the  human  nature  was,  and  could  be,  nothing  else 
in  itself  but  a  work  of  sufferings  and  death. 

A  crooked  line  cannot  become  straight  but  by 
having  all  its  crookedness  given  up,  or  taken  from  it. 
And  there  is  but  one  way  possible  in  nature  for  a 
crooked  line  to  lose  its  crookedness. 

Kow  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  stand  in  this 
kind  of  necessity.  He  was  made  man  for  our  salvation, 
that  is,  He  took  upon  Him  our  fallen  nature,  to  bring 
it  out  of  its  evil,  crooked  state,  and  set  it  again  in  that 
rectitude  in  which  it  was  created. 

Now  there  was  no  m.ore  two  ways  of  doing  this, 
than  there  are  two  ways  of  making  a  crooked  line  to 
become  straight. 

If  the  life  of  fallen  nature,  which  Christ  had  taken 
upon  Him,  was  to  be  overcome  by  Him,  then  every 
kind  of  suffering  and  dying  that  was  a  giving  up  or 
departing  from  the  life  of  fallen  nature,  vvas  just  as 
necessary,  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  as  that  the  line 
to  be  made  straight  must  give  up  and  part  with  every 
kind  and  degree  of  its  own  crookedness. 

And  therefore  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ 
were,  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  the  only  possible  way 


54  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

of  His  acting  contrary  to  and  overcoming  all  the  evil 
that  was  in  the  fallen  state  of  man. 

The  apostle  saith,  "  The  Captain  of  om-  salvation 
was  to  be  made  perfect  through  sufferings."  This  was 
the  ground  and  reason  of  His  sufferings :  had  He  been 
without  them,  He  could  not  have  been  perfect  in  Him- 
self, as  a  Son  of  man,  nor  the  restorer  of  perfection  in 
all  mankind.  But  why  so  ?  Because  His  perfection 
as  a  Son  of  man,  or  the  Captain  of  human  salvation, 
could  only  consist  in  His  acting  in  and  with  a  spirit 
suitable  to  the  first  created  state  of  perfect  man ;  that 
is,  He  must  in  His  spirit  be  as  much  above  all  the 
good  and  evil  of  this  fallen  world,  as  the  first  man  was. 

But  now.  He  could  not  show  that  He  was  of  this 
spirit,  that  He  was  above  the  world,  that  He  was  under 
no  power  of  fallen  nature,  but  lived  in  the  perfection 
of  the  first  created  man ;  He  could  not  do  this  but 
by  showing  that  all  the  good  of  the  earthly  life  was 
renounced  by  Him,  and  that  all  the  evil  which  the 
world,  the  malice  of  men  and  devils,  could  bring  upon 
Him,  could  not  hinder  His  living  wholly  and  solely  to 
God,  and  doing  His  will  on  earth  with  the  same  fulness 
as  angels  do  it  in  heaven. 

But  had  there  been  any  evil  in  all  fallen  nature, 
whether  in  life,  death,  or  hell,  that  had  not  attacked 
Him  with  all  its  force.  He  could  not  have  been  said  to 
have  overcome  it.  And  therefore  so  sure  as  Christ,  as 
the  Son  of  man,  was  to  overcome  the  world,  death,  hell, 
and  Satan,  so  sure  is  it  that  all  the  evils  which  they 
could  possibly  bring  upon  Him  were  to  be  felt  and 
suffered  by  Him,  as  absolutely  necessary,  in  the  nature 
of  tiie  thing,  to  declare  His  perfection,  and  prove  His 
superiority  over  them.     Surely,  my  friend,  it  is  now 


THE    SPIRIT    OF  LOVE  55 

enough  proved  to  you  how  a  God  all  love  towards 
fallen  man  must  love,  like,  desire,  and  delight  in  all 
the  sufferings  of  Christ,  which  alone  could  enable  Him, 
as  a  Son  of  man,  to  undo  and  reverse  all  that  evil 
which  the  first  man  had  done  to  all  his  posterity. 

E^cseUus. — Oh,  sir,  in  what  an  adorable  light  is  this 
mystery  now  placed.  Christ  suffering  and  dying,  as 
His  same  victory  over  death  and  hell,  as  when  He  rose 
from  the  dead  and  ascended  into  heaven. 

Tlieophilus. — Now  you  plainly  enough  see  wherein 
the  infinite  merits,  or  the  avaihng  efficacy  and  glorious 
power  of  the  suff'erings  and  death  of  Christ  consists ; 
since  they  were  that  in  and  through  which  Christ 
Himself  came  out  of  the  state  of  fallen  nature  and  got 
power  to  give  the  same  victory  to  all  His  brethren  of 
the  human  race. 

Wonder  not,  therefore,  that  the  Scriptures  so 
frequently  ascribe  all  our  salvation  to  the  sufferings 
and  death  of  Christ,  that  we  are  continually  referred 
to  them,  as  the  wounds  and  stripes  by  which  we  are 
healed,  as  the  blood  by  which  we  are  washed  from  our 
sins,  as  the  price  (much  above  gold  and  precious 
stones)  by  which  we  are  bought. 

It  is  because  Christ,  as  suffering  and  dying,  was  no- 
thing else  but  Christ  conquering  and  overcoming  all  the 
false  good  and  the  hellish  evil  of  the  fallen  state  of  man. 
His  resurrection  from  the  grave  and  ascension  into 
heaven,  though  great  in  themselves,  and  necessary 
parts  of  our  dehverance,  were  yet  but  the  consequences 
and  genuine  effects  of  His  sufferings  and  death.  These 
were,  in  themselves,  the  reality  of  His  conquest ;  all 
His  great  work  was  done  and  effected  in  them  and  by 
them,  and  His  resurrection  and  ascension  was  only  His 


56  WHOLLY   FOR   GOD 

entering  into  the  possession  of  that  which  His  suffer- 
ings and  death  had  gained  for  Him. 

Wonder  not,  then,  that  all  the  true  followers  of 
Christ,  the  saints  of  every  age,  have  so  gloried  in  the 
cross  of  Christ,  have  imputed  such  great  things  to  it, 
have  desired  nothing  so  much  as  to  be  partakers  of  it, 
to  live  in  constant  union  with  it.  It  is  because  His 
sufferings,  His  death,  and  cross  were  the  fulness  of  His 
victory  over  all  the  works  of  the  devil.  Not  an  evil 
in  flesh  and  blood,  not  a  misery  of  life,  not  a  chain  of 
death,  not  a  power  of  hell  and  darkness,  but  were  all 
baffled,  broken,  and  overcome  by  the  process  of  a  suffer- 
ing and  dying  Christ.  Well,  therefore,  may  the  cross 
of  Christ  be  the  glory  of  Christians. 

21.  Of  Christ  as  the  Second  Adam. 

Fiisehius. — This  matter  is  so  solidly  and  fully 
cleared  up,  that  I  am  almost  asliamed  to  ask  you  any 
thing  further  about  it.  Yet  explahi  a  little  more,  if 
you  please,  how  it  is  that  the  sufferings  and  death  of 
Christ  gave  Him  power  to  become  a  common  Father  of 
life  to  all  that  died  in  Adam  ?  Or  how  it  is  that  we, 
by  virtue  of  them,  have  victory  over  all  the  evil  of  our 
fallen  state  ? 

Thcoijliilus. — I  come  now  to  answer  your  question, 
viz.  How  it  is  that  the  sufferings  and  deatli  of  Christ 
gave  Him  full  power  to  become  a  common  Father  of 
life  to  all  tlioso  that  died  in  Adam  ?  Or  how  it  is 
that  we,  by  virtue  of  them,  are  delivered  out  of  all  the 
evils  of  our  fallen  state  ? 

The  fall  of  all  mankind  in  Adam  is  no  super- 
natural event  or  effect,  but  the  natural  and  necessary 
consequence  of  our  relation  to  him.      Could    Adam, 


THE    SriKIT    OF    LOVE  57 

at  his  fall  into  this  earthly  life,  have  absolutely  overcome 
every  power  of  the  world,  tlie  flesh,  and  tlie  devil,  in 
the  same  spirit  as  Christ  did,  he  had  been  his  own 
redeemer,  had  risen  out  of  his  fall,  and  ascended  into 
Paradise,  and  been  the  father  of  a  paradisiacal  offspring, 
just  as  Christ,  wdien  He  had  overcome  them  all,  rose 
from  the  dead,  and  ascended  into  heaven.  But  Adam 
did  not  do  this,  because  it  was  as  impossible,  in  the 
nature  of  the  thing,  as  for  a  beast  to  raise  itself  into 
an  angel.  If,  therefore,  man  is  to  come  out  of  his 
fallen  state,  tliere  must  be  something  found  out  that, 
according  to  the  nature  of  things,  hath  power  to  effect 
it.  For  it  can  no  more  be  done  supernaturally  by  any 
thing  else,  than  it  could  by  Adam. 

Now  the  matter  stood  thus,  the  seed  of  all  mankind 
was  in  the  loins  of  fallen  Adam.  This  v/as  unalter- 
able in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  and  therefore  all  man- 
kind must  come  forth  in  his  fallen  state. 

Neither  can  they  ever  be  in  any  state  whatever, 
whether  earthly  or  heavenly,  but  by  having  an  earthly 
man  or  a  heavenly  man  for  tlieir  latlier.  For  mankind, 
as  such,  must  of  all  necessity  be  born  of,  and  have  that 
nature  which  it  hath,  from  a  man.  And  this  is  the  true 
ground  and  absolute  necessity  of  the  one  Mediator,  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus.  For  seeing  mrdikind,  as  such,  must 
have  that  birth  and  nature  w^hich  they  have  from  man, 
seeing  they  never  could  have  had  any  relation  to 
Paradise,  or  any  possibility  of  partaking  of  it,  but 
because  they  had  a  paradisiacal  man  for  their  father, 
never  could  have  had  any  relation  to  this  earthly 
w^orld,  or  any  possibility  of  being  born  earthly,  but 
because  they  had  an  earthly  man  for  their  father  ;  and 
seeing  all  this  must  be    unalterably   ^o    for  ever,  it 


58  WHOLLY    FOK    GOD 

plainly  follows  that  there  was  an  utter  impossibility 
for  the  seed  of  Adam  ever  to  come  out  of  its  fallen 
state,  or  ever  have  another  or  better  life  than  they  had 
from  Adam,  unless  such  a  son  of  man  could  be  brought 
into  existence,  as  had  the  same  relation  to  all  man- 
kind as  Adam  had,  was  as  much  in  them  all  as  Adam 
was,  and  had  as  full  power,  according  to  the  nature  of 
things,  to  give  a  heavenly  life  to  all  the  seed  in 
Adam's  loins,  as  Adam  had  to  bring  them  forth  in 
earthly  flesh  and  blood. 

And  now,  sir,  that  Christ  was  this  very  Son  of 
man,  standing  in  the  same  fulness  of  relation  to  all 
mankind  as  Adam  did,  having  His  seed  as  really  in 
them  all  as  Adam  had,  and  as  truly  and  fully  quali- 
fied, according  to  the  nature  of  thincrs,  to  be  a  common 
and  universal  Father  of  life,  as  Adam  was  of  death,  to 
all  the  human  race,  shall,  in  a  word  or  two,  be  made 
as  plain  and  undeniable  as  that  two  and  two  are  four. 

The  doctrine  of  our  redemption  absolutely  asserts 
that  the  seed  of  Christ  was  sown  into  the  first  fallen 
father  of  mankind,  called  the  seed  of  the  woman,  the 
bruiser  of  the  serpent,  the  engrafted  word  of  life,  called 
again  in  the  gospel  "  that  light  which  lighteth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  the  world."  Therefore  Christ 
was  in  all  men,  in  that  same  fulness  of  the  relation 
of  a  Father  to  all  mankind,  as  Adam  the  first  was. 
Secondly,  Christ  was  born  of  Adam's  flesh  and  blood, 
took  the  human  nature  upon  Him,  and  therefore  stood 
as  an  human  creature  in  the  same  relation  to  mankind 
as  Adam  did.  Nothing,  therefore,  was  further  want- 
ing in  Christ,  to  make  Him  as  truly  a  natural  Fatlicr 
of  life  to  all  mankind  as  Adam  was  at  first,  but  God's 
appointment  of  Him  to  that  end. 


THE    SnriT    OF    LOVE  f)9 

For  as  Adam  could  not  havo  been  tlic  natural 
father  of  mankind  but  because  God  created  and  ap- 
pointed him  for  that  end,  so  Christ  could  not  have 
been  the  natural  Eegenerator  or  Eedeemer  of  an 
heavenly  life,  that  was  lost  in  all  mankind,  but  because 
God  had  appointed  and  brought  Him  into  the  world 
for  that  end.  Now  that  God  did  this,  that  Christ 
came  into  the  world  by  divine  appointment,  to  be  the 
Saviour,  the  resurrection,  and  life  of  all  mankind,  is  a 
truth  as  evident  from  Scripture,  as  that  Adam  was  the 
first  man. 

And  thus  it  appears,  in  the  utmost  degree  of  plain- 
ness and  certainty,  that  Christ  in  His  single  person 
was,  according  to  the  nature  of  things,  as  fully  qualified 
to  be  a  common  Eedeemer  as  Adam  was,  m  his  single 
person,  to  be  a  common  father  of  all  mankind.  He  had 
His  seed  in  all  mankind,  as  Adam  had ;  He  had  the 
human  nature,  as  Adam  had ;  and  He  had  the  same 
divine  appointment,  as  Adam  had.  But  Christ,  how- 
ever qualified  to  be  onr  Eedeemer,  could  not  be 
actually  such  till  He  had  gone  through  and  done  all 
that  by  which  our  redemption  was  to  be  effected. 

Adam,  hov/ever  qualified,  yet  could  not  be  the 
father  of  a  paradisiacal  offspring  till  he  had  stood  out 
his  trial,  and  fixed  himself  victorious  over  every  thing 
that  could  make  trial  of  him.  In  like  manner,  Christ, 
however  qualified,  could  not  be  the  Eedeemer  of  all 
mankind  till  He  had  also  stood  out  His  trial,  had 
overcome  all  that  by  which  Adam  was  overcome,  and 
had  fixed  Himself  triumphantly  in  that  Paradise  which 
Adam  had  lost. 

Nov/,  as  Adam's  trial  was,  whether  he  would  keep 
himself  in  his  paradisiacal  state,  above  and  free  from 


60  WHOLLY    FOE    GOD 

all  that  was  good  and  evil  in  this  earthly  world,  so 
Christ's  trial  was,  whether  as  a  Son  of  man,  and  loaded 
with  the  infirmities  of  fallen  Adam,  sacrificed  to  all 
that  which  the  rage  and  malice  of  the  world,  hell,  and 
devils  could  possibly  do  to  Him,  whether  He  in  the 
midst  of  all  these  evils  could  live  and  die  with  His 
spirit  as  contrary  to  them,  as  much  above  them,  as 
unhurt  by  them,  as  Adam  should  have  lived  in 
Paradise  ? 

And  then  it  was  that  every  thing  which  had  over- 
come Adam  was  overcome  by  Christ,  and  Christ's 
victory  did,  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  as  certainly 
and  fully  open  an  entrance  for  Him  and  all  His  seed 
into  Paradise,  as  Adam's  fall  cast  him  and  all  his  seed 
into  the  prison  and  captivity  of  this  earthly,  bestial 
v/orld. 

Thus  is  your  question  fully  answered ;  viz.  How 
and  why  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  enabled 
Him  to  be  the  Author  of  life  to  all  that  died  in 
Adam  ?  Just  as  the  fall  of  Adam  into  this  world, 
under  the  power  of  sin,  death,  hell,  and  the  devil, 
enabled  him  to  be  the  common  father  of  death,  that  is, 
was  the  natural,  unavoidable  cause  of  our  being  born 
under  the  same  captivity ;  just  so  that  life,  and  suffer- 
ings, and  death  of  Christ,  which  declared  His  breaking 
out  from  them  and  superiority  over  them,  must,  in  the 
nature  of  the  thing,  as  much  enable  Him  to  be  the 
common  Author  of  life,  tliat  is,  must  as  certainly  be 
the  full,  natural,  efficacious  cause  of  our  inheriting  life 
from  Him.  Because,  by  what  Christ  was  in  Himself, 
by  what  He  was  in  us,  by  His  whole  state,  character, 
and  the  divine  appointment,  we  all  had  that  natural 
union  with  Plim,  and  dependence  upon  Him,  as  our 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  61 

Head  in  the  way  of  redemption,  as  vre  had  with  Adam 
as  our  head  in  the  way  of  our  natural  birth.  So  that 
as  it  must  be  said  that,  because  Adam  fell,  we  must 
of  all  necessity  be  heirs  of  his  fallen  state ;  so,  with 
the  same  truth,  and  from  the  same  necessity  of  the 
thing,  it  must  be  said  that,  because  Christ  our  Head  is 
risen  victorious  out  of  our  fallen  state,  we,  as  His 
members,  and  having  His  seed  within  us,  must  be, 
and  are  made,  heirs  of  all  His  glory.  Because,  in  all 
respects,  we  are  as  strictly,  as  intimately  connected 
with  and  related  to  Him  as  the  one  Eedoemer,  as  we 
are  to  Adam  as  the  one  father,  of  all  mankind.  So 
that  Christ,  by  His  sufferings  and  death,  become  in  all 
of  us  our  wisdom,  our  righteousness,  our  justification, 
and  redemption,  is  the  same  sober  and  solid  truth,  as 
Adam,  by  his  fall,  become  in  all  of  us  our  foolishness, 
our  impurity,  our  corruption,  and  death. 

And  now,  my  friends,  look  back  upon  all  that  has 
been  said,  and  then  tell  me  w^hether  it  is  not  suffi- 
ciently proved  to  you  that  the  sufferings  and  death  of 
Christ  are  not  only  consistent  with  the  doctrine  of  a 
God  all  love,  but  are  the  fullest  and  most  absolute 
proof  of  it  ? 

Eusebius. — Indeed,  Theophilus,  you  have  so  fully 
done  for  us  all  that  we  wanted  to  have  done,  that  we 
are  now  ready  to  take  leave  of  you.  As  for  my  part, 
I  v/ant  to  return  home,  to  enjoy  my  Bible,  and  delight 
myself  with  reading  it  in  this  comfortable  light  in 
which  you  have  set  the  whole  ground  and  nature  of 
our  redemption.  I  am  now  in  full  possession  of  this 
glorious  truth,  that  God  is  mere  love,  the  most 
glorious  truth  that  can  possess  and  edify  the  heart  of 
man.     It  drives  every  evil  out  of  the  soul,  and  gives 


62  WHOLLY  FOR    GOD 

life  to  every  spark  of  goodness  that  can  possibly 
be  kindled  in  it.  Every  thing  in  religion  is  made 
amiable,  by  being  a  service  of  love  to  the  God  of  love. 

Therefore,  dear  Theophilus,  adieu :  God  is  love,  and 
he  that  hath  learnt  to  live  in  the  spirit  of  love,  hath 
learnt  to  live  and  dwell  in  God.  Love  was  the 
beginner  of  all  the  works  of  God,  and  from  eternity  to 
eternity,  nothing  can  come  from  God  but  a  variety 
of  wonders  and  works  of  love  over  all  nature  and 
creature. 

Theophilus, — God  prosper,  Eusebius,  this  spark  of 
heaven  in  your  soul ;  may  it,  like  the  seraphim's  coal 
taken  from  the  altar,  purify  your  heart  from  all  its 
uncleanness.  But,  before  you  leave  me,  I  beg  one 
more  conversation,  to  be  on  the  practical  part  of  the 
spirit  of  love ;  that  so  doctrine  and  practice,  hearing 
and  doing,  may  go  hand  in  hand. 


THE  THIED  DIALOGUE. 

22.  The  Great  Difference  between  Knowing 
and  Having. 

Eusebms. 

YOU  have  shown  great  good  will  towards  us, 
Theophilus,  in  desiring  another  meeting  before 
we  leave  you.  But  yet  I  seem  to  myself  to  have  no 
need  of  that  which  you  have  proposed  by  this  day's 
conversation.  For  this  doctrine  of  the  spirit  of  love 
cannot  have  more  power  over  me,  or  be  more  deeply 
rooted  in  me,  than  it  is  already.  It  has  so  gained 
and  got  possession  of  my  whole  heart,  tiiat  every  tiling 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  63 

else  must  be  under  its  dominion.  I  can  do  nothing 
else  but  love ;  it  is  my  whole  nature,  I  have  no  taste 
for  any  thing  else.  Can  this  matter  be  carried  higher 
in  practice  ? 

Theo]jhilus. — No  higher,  Euscbius.  And  was  this 
the  true  state  of  your  heart,  you  would  bid  fair  to 
leave  the  world  as  Elijah  did ;  or,  like  Enoch,  to  have 
said  of  you,  that  you  lived  wholly  to  love,  and  was 
not.  For  was  there  nothing  but  this  divine  love  alive 
in  you,  your  fallen  flesh  and  blood  would  be  m  danger 
of  being  quite  burnt  up  by  it.  What  you  have  said 
of  yourself,  you  have  spoken  in  great  sincerity,  but  in 
a  total  ignorance  of  yourself,  and  the  true  nature  of 
the  spirit  of  divine  love.  You  are  as  yet  only  charmed 
with  the  sight,  or  rather  the  sound,  of  it ;  its  real 
birth  is  as  yet  unfelt  and  unfound  in  you.  Your 
natural  complexion  has  a  great  deal  of  the  animal 
meekness  and  softness  of  the  lamb  and  the  dove,  your 
blood  and  spirit  are  of  this  turn ;  and  therefore  a  God 
all  love,  and  a  religion  all  love,  quite  transport  you ; 
and  you  are  so  delighted  with  it,  that  you  fancy  you 
have  nothing  in  you  but  this  God  and  religion  of 
love.  But,  my  friend,  bear  with  me,  if  I  tell  you 
that  all  this  is  only  the  good  part  of  the  spirit  of  this 
bestial  world  in  you,  and  may  be  in  any  unregenerate 
man  that  is  of  your  complexion.  It  is  so  far  from 
being  a  genuine  fruit  of  divine  love,  that,  if  it  be  not 
well  looked  to,  it  may  prove  a  real  hindrance  of  it,  as 
it  oftentimes  does,  by  its  appearhig  to  be  that  vdiich 
it  is  not. 

You  have  quite  forgot  all  that  was  said  in  the 
letter  to  you  on  the  spirit  of  love,  that  it  is  a  birth  in 
the  soul,  that  can  only  come  forth  in  its  proper  time 


64  WHOLLY    FOn    GOD 

and  place,  and  from  its  proper  causes.  Now,  nothing 
that  is  a  birth  can  be  taken  in  or  brought  into  the 
£Oul  by  any  notional  conception  or  delightful  appre- 
hension of  it.  You  may  love  it  as  much  as  you  please, 
think  it  the  most  charming  thing  in  the  world,  fancy 
every  thing  but  dross  and  dung  in  comparison  of  it, 
and  yet  have  no  more  of  its  birth  in  you,  than  the 
bhnd  man  has  of  that  light  of  which  he  has  got  a 
most  charming  notion.  His  blindness  still  continues 
the  same ;  he  is  at  the  same  distance  from  the  light, 
because  light  can  only  be  had  by  a  birth  of  itself  in 
seeing  eyes.  It  is  thus  with  the  spirit  of  love ;  it  is 
nowhere  but  v/here  it  rises  up  as  a  birth. 

Eusebius. — But  if  I  am  got  no  farther  than  this, 
what  good  have  I  from  giving  in  so  heartily  to  all 
that  you  have  said  of  this  doctrine  ?  And  to  what 
end  have  you  taken  so  much  pains  to  assert  and 
establish  it  ? 

Thcor)liilus. — Your  error  lies  in  this  :  you  confound 
two  things,  which  are  entirely  distinct  from  each  other. 
You  make  no  difference  betwixt  the  doctrine  that  only 
sets  forth  the  nature,  excellency,  and  necessity  of  the 
spirit  of  love,  and  the  spirit  of  love  itself;  which  yet 
are  two  things  so  different,  that  you  may  be  quite 
full  of  the  former,  and  at  the  same  time  quite  empty 
of  the  latter.  I  have  said  every  thing  that  I  could 
to  show  you  the  truth,  excellency,  and  necessity  of 
the  spirit  of  love :  it  is  of  infinite  importance  to  you 
to  be  well  established  in  the  belief  of  this  doctrine. 
But  all  that  I  have  said  of  it  is  only  to  induce  and 
encourage  you  to  buy  it  at  its  own  price,  and  to  give 
all  that  for  it  wliicli  alone  can  purchase  it.  But  if 
you  think  (as  you  plainly  do)  that  you  liave  got  it. 


THE    SPIKIT    OF   LOVE  65 

because  you  are  so  highly  pleased  with  that  which 
you  have  heard  of  it,  you  only  embrace  the  shadow, 
instead  of  the  substance,  of  that  which  you  ought  to 
have. 

Euscbms.- — YvHiat  is  the  price  that  I  must  give 
for  it  ? 

Theophilus. — You  must  give  up  all  that  you  are 
and  all  that  you  have  from  fallen  Adam ;  for  all  that 
you  are  and  have  from  him,  is  that  life  of  flesh  and 
blood  which  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

Euschius. — Proceed  as  you  please  to  lay  open  all  my 
defects,  in  the  spirit  of  love ;  for  I  am  earnestly  desirous 
of  being  set  right  in  so  important  a  matter. 

Theogcncs. — Let  me  first  observe  to  Theophilus, 
that  I  am  afraid  the  matter  is  much  worse  with  me 
than  it  is  mth  you.  For  though  this  doctrine  seems 
to  have  got  all  my  heart,  as  it  is  a  doctrine ;  yet  I 
am  continually  thrown  out  of  it  in  practice,  and  find 
myself  as  daily  under  the  power  of  my  old  tempers 
and  passions  as  I  was  before  I  was  so  full  of  this 
doctrine. 

23.  Two  Stages  in  the  Christian  Life. 

Theophilus. — You  are  to  know,  my  friends,  that 
every  kind  of  virtue  and  goodness  may  be  brought 
into  us  by  two  different  ways.  They  may  be  taught 
us  outwardly  by  men,  by  rules  and  precepts ;  and 
they  may  be  inwardly  born  in  us,  as  the  genuine 
birth  of  our  own  renewed  spirit.  In  the  former  way, 
as  we  learn  them  only  from  men,  by  rules  and  docu- 
ments of  instruction,  they  at  best  only  change  our 
outward  behaviour,  and  leave  our  heart  in  its  natural 
state,  and  only  put  our  passions  under  a  forced 
5 


06  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

restraint,  which  will  occasionally  break  forth  in  spite 
of  the  dead  letter  of  precept  and  doctrine.  Now  this 
way  of  learning  and  attaining  goodness,  though  thus 
imperfect,  is  yet  absolutely  necessary  in  the  nature  of 
the  thing,  and  must  first  have  its  time,  and  place,  and 
work  in  us.  Yet  it  is  only  for  a  time,  as  the  law  was 
a  schoolmaster  to  the  gospel.  We  must  first  be  babes 
in  doctrine,  as  well  as  in  strength,  before  wc  can  bo 
men.  But  of  all  this  outward  instruction,  whetlicr 
from  good  men  or  the  letter  of  Scripture,  it  must  be 
said,  as  the  apostle  saith  of  the  law,  that  "  it  maketh 
nothing  perfect."  And  yet  is  highly  necessary  in 
order  to  perfection. 

The  true  perfection  and  profitableness  of  the  holy 
written  word  of  God  is  fully  set  forth  by  St.  Paul  to 
Timothy :  "  From  a  child  (saith  he)  thou  hast  known 
the  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto 
salvation,  which  is  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  Now 
these  Scriptures  were  the  law  and  the  prophets,  for 
Timothy  had  known  no  other  from  his  youth.  And 
as  they,  so  all  other  Scriptures  since  have  no  other 
good  or  benefit  in  them  but  as  they  lead  and  direct 
us  to  a  salvation  that  is  not  to  be  had  in  themselves, 
but  from  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  Their  teaching  is 
only  to  teach  us  where  to  seek  and  to  find  the 
fountain  and  source  of  all  light  and  knowledge. 

Of  the  law,  saitli  the  apostle, "  it  was  a  schoolmaster 
to  Christ ;  "  of  the  prophets,  he  saith  the  same.  "  Ye 
have  (says  he)  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy ;  where- 
unto  you  do  well  that  ye  take  heed,  as  unto  a  light 
that  shineth  in  a  dark  place,  until  tlie  day  dawn,  and 
the  day  star  ariseth  in  your  hearts."  The  same  thing 
is  to  be  affirmed  of  the  letter  of  the  New  Testament ; 


THE    SPlltlT    OF    LOVE  G7 

it  is  but  our  schoolmaster  unto  Christ,  a  hght  hkc 
that  of  propliecy,  to  which  we  are  to  take  great  heed, 
until  Christ,  as  the  dawning  of  the  day,  or  the  day 
star,  ariseth  in  our  hearts.  Nor  can  the  thing  possibly 
be  otherwise ;  no  instruction  that  conies  under  the 
form  of  words  can  do  more  for  us  than  sounds  and 
words  can  do ;  they  can  only  direct  us  to  something 
that  is  better  than  themselves,  that  can  be  the  true 
light,  life,  spirit,  and  power  of  holiness  in  us. 

Eusebius. — I  cannot  deny  what  you  say,  and  yet 
it  seems  to  me  to  derogate  from  Scripture. 

Theophilus. — Would  you  then  have  me  to  say  that 
the  written  word  of  God  is  that  word  of  God  which 
liveth  and  abideth  for  ever ;  that  word  which  is  the 
wisdom  and  power  of  God ;  that  word  which  was 
with  God,  which  was  God,  by  whom  all  things  were 
made;  that  word  of  God  which  was  made  flesh  for 
the  redemption  of  the  world ;  that  word  of  God,  of 
which  we  must  be  born  again ;  that  word  which 
"  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world ; " 
that  word  which  in  Christ  Jesus  "  is  become  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification  in  us  ; "  would  you 
have  me  say  that  all  this  is  to  be  understood  of  the 
written  word  of  God  ?  But  if  this  cannot  possibly 
be,  then  all  tliat  I  have  said  is  granted,  namely, 
that  Jesus  is  alone  that  Word  of  God  that  can  be  the 
light,  life,  and  salvation  of  fallen  man.  Or  how  is  it 
possible  more  to  exalt  the  letter  of  Scripture,  than  by 
owning  it  to  be  a  true,  outward,  verbal  direction  to  the 
one  only  true  light  and  salvation  of  man  ? 

Suppose  you  had  been  a  true  disciple  of  John  the 
Baptist,  whose  only  office  was  to  prepare  the  way  to 
Christ,  how  could  you  have  more  magnified  his  office. 


68  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

or  declared  your  fidelity  to  him,  than  by  going  from 
his  teaching  to  be  taught  by  that  Christ  to  whom  he 
directed  you  ?  The  Baptist  was,  indeed,  a  "  burning 
and  a  shining  hght,"  and  so  are  the  holy  Scriptures ; 
but  "  he  was  not  that  light,  but  was  sent  to  bear 
witness  of  that  light.  That  was  the  true  light,  which 
lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world." 

What  a  folly  would  it  be  to  say  that  you  had 
undervalued  the  office  and  character  of  John  the 
Baptist,  because  he  was  not  allowed  to  be  the  light 
itself,  but  only  a  true  witness  of  it,  and  guide  to  it ! 
jSTow,  if  you  can  show  that  the  written  word  in  the 
Bible  can  have  any  other  or  higlier  office  or  power 
than  such  a  ministerial  one  as  the  Baptist  had,  I  am 
ready  to  hear  you. 

Eusebius. — There  is  no  possibility  of  doing  that. 

Theophihis. — But  if  that  is  not  possible  to  be  done, 
then  you  are  come  to  the  full  proof  of  this  point,  viz. 
that  there  are  two  ways  of  attaining  knowledge,  good- 
ness, virtue,  etc.,  the  one  by  the  ministry  of  outward, 
verbal  instruction,  either  by  men  or  books,  and  the 
other  by  an  inward  birth  of  divine  light,  goodness, 
and  vu-tue  in  our  own  renewed  spirit ;  and  that  the 
former  is  only  in  order  to  the  latter,  and  of  no 
benefit  to  us,  but  as  it  carries  us  farther  than  itself, 
to  be  united  in  heart  and  spirit  with  the  light,  and 
word,  and  Spirit  of  God.  Just  as  the  Baptist  had 
been  of  no  benefit  to  his  disciples,  unless  he  had  been 
their  guide  from  himself  to  Christ. 

But  to  come  now  closer  to  our  subject  in  hand. 

From  this  twofold  light  or  teaching  there  neces- 
sarily arises  a  twofold  state  of  virtue  and  goodness. 
For  such  as  the  teacher  or  teaching  is,  such  is  the 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  69 

state  and  manner  of  the  goodness  that  can  be  had 
from  it.  Every  effect  must  be  according  to  the  cause 
that  produces  it.  If  you  learn  virtue  and  goodness 
only  from  outward  means,  from  men  or  books,  you 
may  be  virtuous  and  good  according  to  time,  and 
place,  and  outward  forms ;  you  may  do  works  of 
humility,  works  of  love  and  benevolence,  use  times 
and  forms  of  prayer;  all  this  virtue  and  goodness 
is  suitable  to  this  kind  of  teaching,  and  may  very 
well  be  had  from  it.  But  the  spirit  of  prayer,  the 
spirit  of  love,  and  the  spirit  of  humility,  or  of  any 
other  virtue,  are  only  to  be  attained  by  the  operation 
of  the  light  and  Spirit  of  God,  not  outwardly 
teaching,  but  inwardly  bringing  forth  a  new-born 
spirit  within  us. 

24.  A  Personal  Application. 

And  now,  let  me  tell  you  both  that  it  is  much  to 
be  feared  that  you  as  yet  stand  only  under  this 
outward  teaching;  your  good  works  are  only  done 
under  obedience  to  such  rules,  precepts,  and  doctrines 
as  your  reason  assents  to,  but  are  not  the  fruits  of 
a  new-born  spirit  within  you.  But  till  you  are 
thus  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  minds,  your 
virtues  are  only  taught  practices,  and  grafted  upon  a 
corrupt  bottom.  Every  thing  you  do  will  be  a  mixture 
of  good  and  bad  ;  your  humility  will  help  you  to  pride, 
your  charity  to  others  will  give  nourishment  to  your 
ov/n  self-love,  and  as  your  prayers  increase,  so  will 
the  opinion  of  your  own  sanctity.  Because  till  the 
heart  is  purified  to  the  bottom,  and  has  felt  the  axe 
at  the  root  of  its  evil  (which  cannot  be  done  by  out- 


70  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

ward  instruction),  every  thing  that  proceeds  from  it 
partakes  of  its  impurity  and  corruption. 

Now,  that  Theogenes  is  only  under  the  law,  or 
outward  instruction,  is  too  plain  from  the  complaint 
that  he  made  of  himself.  For,  notwithstanding  his 
progress  in  the  doctrine  of  love,  he  finds  all  the 
passions  of  his  corrupt  nature  still  alive  m  him,  and 
himself  only  altered  in  doctrine  and  opinion. 

The  same  may  be  well  suspected  of  you,  Eusebius, 
who  are  so  mistaken  in  the  spirit  of  love  that  you 
fancy  yourself  to  be  wholly  possessed  of  it,  from  no 
other  ground  but  because  you  embrace  it,  as  it  were, 
with  open  arms,  and  think  of  nothing  but  livmg 
under  the  power  of  it.  Whereas,  if  the  spirit  of  love 
was  really  born  in  you  from  its  own  seed,  you  would 
account  for  its  birth  and  power  in  you  in  quite 
another  manner  than  you  have  here  done;  you  would 
have  known  the  price  that  you  had  paid  for  it,  and 
how  many  deaths  you  had  suffered,  before  the  spirit 
of  love  came  to  life  in  you. 

Eusebius. — But  surely,  sir,  imperfect  as  our  virtues 
are,  we  may  yet,  I  hope,  be  truly  said  to  be  in  a  state 
of  grace ;  and  if  so,  we  are  under  something  more  than 
mere  outward  instruction.  Besides,  you  very  well 
know  that  it  is  a  principle  with  both  of  us  to  expect 
all  our  goodness  from  the  Spirit  of  God  dwellmg  and 
working  in  us.  We  live  in  faith  and  hope  of  the 
divine  operation ;  and  therefore  I  must  needs  say  that 
your  censure  upon  us  seems  to  be  more  severe  than 
just. 

TheopJiilus. — Dear  Eusebius,  I  censure  neither  of 
you,  nor  have  I  said  one  word  by  way  of  accusation. 
So  far  from  it,  that  I  love  and  approve  the  state  you 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  71 

are  both  in.  Ifc  is  good  and  happy  for  Theogenes, 
that  he  feels  and  confesses  that  his  natural  tempers  are 
not  yet  subdued  by  doctrine  and  precept.  It  is  good 
and  happy  for  you  also,  that  you  are  so  highly  de- 
hghted  with  the  doctrine  of  love,  for  by  this  means 
each  of  you  have  your  true  preparation  for  further 
advancement.  And  though  your  state  has  this  differ- 
ence, yet  the  same  error  was  common  to  both  of  you. 
You  both  of  you  thought  you  had  as  much  of  the  spirit 
of  love  as  you  could  or  ought  to  have ;  and  therefore 
Theogenes  wondered  he  had  no  more  benefit  from  it ; 
and  you  wondered  that  I  should  desire  to  lead  you 
farther  into  it.  And  therefore,  to  deliver  you  from 
this  error,  I  have  desired  this  conference  upon  the 
practical  ground  of  the  spirit  of  love,  that  you  may 
neither  of  you  lose  the  benefit  of  that  good  state  in 
which  you  stand. 

Euscbius. — Pray  therefore  proceed  as  you  please. 
For  we  have  nothing  so  much  at  heait  as  to  have  the 
truth  and  purity  of  this  divine  love  brought  forth  in 
us.  For  as  it  is  the  highest  perfection  that  I  adore 
in  God,  so  I  can  neither  wish  nor  desire  any  thing  for 
myself,  but  to  be  totally  governed  by  it.  I  could  as 
willingly  consent  to  lose  all  my  being,  as  to  find  the 
power  of  love  lost  in  my  soul.  Neither  doctrine,  nor 
mystery,  nor  precept  has  any  delight  for  me,  but  as  it 
calls  forth  the  birth,  and  growth,  and  exercise  of  that 
Spirit,  which  doth  all  that  it  doth,  towards  God  and 
man,  under  the  one  law  of  love.  Whatever,  therefore, 
you  can  say  to  me,  either  to  increase  the  power, 
manifest  the  defects,  or  remove  the  impediments  of 
divine  love  in  my  £oul,  will  be  heartily  welcome  to 
me. 


72  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 


25.  Of  the  Power  of  Divine  Love. 

Theophilus. — I  apprehend  that  you  do  not  yet  know 
what  divme  love  is  in  itself,  nor  what  is  its  nature  and 
power  in  the  soul  of  man.  For  divine  love  is  perfect 
peace  and  joy,  it  is  a  freedom  from  all  disquiet,  it  is  all 
content  and  mere  happiness ;  and  makes  every  thing  to 
rejoice  in  itself.  Love  is  the  Christ  of  God ;  wherever 
it  comes,  it  comes  as  the  blessing  and  happiness  of 
every  natural  life,  as  the  restorer  of  every  lost  per- 
fection, a  redeemer  from  all  evil,  a  fulfiller  of  all 
righteousness,  and  a  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 
understanding.  Through  all  the  universe  of  things, 
nothing  is  uneasy,  unsatisfied,  or  restless,  but  because  it 
is  not  governed  by  love,  or  because  its  nature  has  not 
reached  or  attained  the  full  birth  of  the  spirit  of  love. 
For  when  that  is  done,  every  hunger  is  satisfied, 
and  all  complaining,  murmuring,  accusing,  resenting, 
revenging,  and  striving,  are  as  totally  suppressed  and 
overcome,  as  the  coldness,  thickness,  and  horror  of 
darkness  are  suppressed  and  overcome,  by  the  breaking 
forth  of  the  light.  If  you  ask  why  the  spirit  of  love 
cannot  be  displeased,  cannot  be  disappointed,  cannot 
complain,  accuse,  resent,  or  murmur,  it  is  because  divine 
love  desires  nothing  but  itself ;  it  is  its  own  good,  it 
has  all  when  it  has  itself,  because  nothing  is  good  but 
itself  and  its  own  working  ;  for  love  is  God ;  "  and  he 
that  dwelleth  in  God,  dwelleth  in  love  :  "  tell  me  now, 
Eusebius,  are  you  thus  blessed  in  the  spirit  of  love  ? 

Eusehius. — Would  you  have  me  tell  you  that  I  am 
an  angel,  and  without  the  infirmities  of  human  flesh 
and  blood  ? 

Theophilus. — No;  but   I  would  have  you  judge  of 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  73 

your  state  of  love  by  these  angelical  tempers,  and  not 
by  any  fervour  or  heat  that  you  find  in  yourself.  For 
just  so  much  and  so  far  as  you  are  freed  from  the  folly 
of  all  earthly  affections,  from  all  disquiet,  trouble,  and 
complaint  about  this  or  that,  just  so  much  and  so  far 
is  the  spirit  of  love  come  to  life  in  you.  For  divine 
love  is  a  new  life  and  new  nature,  and  introduces  you 
into  a  new  world ;  it  puts  an  end  to  all  your  former 
opinions,  notions,  and  tempers ;  it  opens  new  senses  in 
you,  and  makes  you  see  high  to  be  low,  and  low  to  be 
high  ;  wisdom  to  be  foohshness,  and  foolishness  wisdom  ; 
it  makes  prosperity  and  adversity,  praise  and  dispraise, 
to  be  equally  nothing.  "  When  I  was  a  child  (saith 
the  apostle),  I  thought  as  a  child,  I  spake  as  a 
child ;  but  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  childish 
things."  Whilst  man  is  under  the  power  of  nature, 
governed  only  by  worldly  wisdom,  his  life  (however  old 
he  may  be)  is  quite  childish ;  every  thing  about  him 
only  awakens  childish  thoughts  and  pursuits  in  him ; 
all  that  he  sees  and  hears,  all  that  he  desires  or  fears, 
likes,  or  dislikes ;  that  which  he  gets,  and  that  which 
he  loses ;  that  which  he  hath,  and  that  which  he  hath 
not,  serve  only  to  carry  him  from  this  fiction  of  e\dl 
to  that  fiction  of  good,  from  one  vanity  of  peace  to 
another  vanity  of  trouble.  But  when  divine  love  is 
born  in  the  soul,  all  childish  images  of  good  and  evil 
are  done  away,  and  all  the  sensibility  of  them  is  lost, 
as  the  stars  lose  their  visibility  when  the  sun  is  risen. 

26.  Of  Light  and  Darkness. 

TheogeTies. — That  this  is  the  true  power  of  the  spirit 
of   divine   love,  I   am  fully  convinced  from   my  own 


74  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

uneasiness  at  finding  that  my  natural  tempers  are  not 
overcome  by  it.  For  wheiice  could  I  have  this  trouble, 
but  because  that  little  dawning  that  I  have  of  the  spirit 
of  love  in  me  maketh  just  demands  to  be  the  one  light, 
breath,  and  power  of  my  life,  and  to  have  all  that  is 
within  me  overcome  and  governed  by  it.  And  there- 
fore, I  find,  I  must  either  silence  this  small  voice  of 
new  risen  love  within  me,  or  have  no  rest  from  com- 
plaints and  self-condemnation,  till  my  whole  nature  is 
brought  into  subjection  to  it. 

Theopliilus. — Most  rightly  judged,  Theogenes ;  and 
now  we  are  fairly  brought  to  the  one  great  practical  pomt, 
on  which  all  our  proficiency  in  the  spirit  of  love  entirely 
depends.  Namely,  that  all  tliat  we  are,  and  all  that  we 
have  from  Adam,  as  fallen,  must  be  given  up,  absolutely 
denied  and  resisted,  if  the  birth  of  divine  love  is  to  be 
brought  forth  in  us.  For  all  that  we  are  by  nature  is 
in  full  contrariety  to  this  divine  love,  nor  can  it  be 
otherwise  ;  a  death  to  itself  is  its  only  cure,  and  nothing 
else  can  make  it  subservient  to  good ;  just  as  darkness 
cannot  be  altered,  or  made  better  in  itself,  or  transmuted 
into  light,  it  can  only  be  subservient  to  the  light  by 
being  lost  in  it,  and  swallowed  up  by  it. 

Now  this  was  the  first  state  of  man  ;  all  the  natural 
properties  of  his  creaturely  life  were  hid  in  God, 
united  in  God,  and  glorified  by  the  life  of  God  mani- 
fested in  them;  just  as  the  nature  and  qualities  of 
darkness  are  lost  and  hid,  when  enlightened  and  glorified 
by  the  light.  But  when  man  fell  from  or  died  to  the 
divine  life,  all  the  natural  properties  of  his  creaturely 
life,  having  lost  their  union  in  and  with  God,  broke 
forth  in  their  own  natural  division,  contrariety,  and  war 
against  one  another ;  just  as  the  darkness,  when  it  has 


THE   SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  75 

lost  the  light,  must  show  forth  its  own  coldness,  horror, 
and  other  uncomfortable  qualities. 

When  God  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was 
light,"  no  change  happened  to  eternal  light  itself,  nor 
did  any  light  then  begin  to  be ;  but  the  darkness  of 
this  world  then  only  began  to  receive  a  power  or 
operation  of  the  eternal  light  upon  it,  which  it  had  not 
before ;  or  eternity  then  began  to  open  some  resemblance 
of  its  own  glory  in  the  dark  elements  and  shadows  of 
time.  And  thus  it  is  that  I  assert  the  priority  and 
glory  of  light,  and  put  all  darkness  under  its  feet,  as 
impossible  to  be  any  thing  else  but  its  footstool. 

The  Scripture  saith  that  "  God  dwelleth  in  the  light, 
to  which  no  man  can  approach;"  therefore  the  Scripture 
teacheth  that  light  in  itself  is  and  must  be  invisible  to 
man ;  that  it  cannot  be  approached  or  made  manifest 
to  him  but  in  and  by  something  that  is  not  hght.  And 
this  is  all  that  I  said,  and  the  very  same  thing  that  I 
said,  when  I  affirmed  that  hght  cannot  be  manifested, 
or  have  any  visibility  to  created  eyes,  but  in,  and 
through,  and  by  the  darkness. 

Light  as  it  is  in  itself  is  only  in  the  supernatural 
Deity ;  and  that  is  the  reason  why  no  man  or  any 
created  being  can  approach  to  it,  or  have  any  sensibility 
of  it,  as  it  is  in  itself.  And  yet  no  light  can  come  into 
this  world  but  that  in  which  God  dwelt  before  any 
world  was  created.  No  light  can  be  in  time,  but  that 
which  was  the  light  of  eternity.  If  therefore  the 
supernatural  light  is  to  manifest  something  of  its  in- 
comprehensible glory,  and  make  itself,  in  some  degree, 
sensible  and  visible  to  the  creature,  this  supernatural 
light  must  enter  into  nature,  it  must  put  on 
materiality. 


76  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

Eusebius. — What  is  it,  then,  that  you  understand 
by  the  materiality  of  Hght  ? 

Theophilus. — No  more  than  I  understand  by  the 
materiality  of  the  wisdom,  mercy,  and  goodness  of  God, 
when  they  are  made  intelligible  and  credible  to  me  by 
the  materiality  of  paper  and  ink,  etc.  For  light  is  as 
distinct  from,  and  superior  to,  all  that  materiality  in 
and  by  which  it  gives  forth  some  visibility  of  itself ; 
as  the  wisdom,  mercy,  and  goodness  of  God  are  distinct 
from,  and  superior  to,  all  that  written  materiality  in 
and  through  which  they  are  made,  in  some  degree, 
intelligible  and  credible  to  human  minds. 

The  incomprehensible  Deity  can  make  no  outward 
revelation  of  His  will,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  but  by 
articulate  sounds,  voices,  or  letters  written  on  tables 
of  stone,  or  such -like  materiality.  Just  so,  the  invisible, 
inaccessible,  supernatural  light  can  make  no  outward 
visibility  of  itself,  but  through  such  darkness  of 
materiality  as  is  capable  of  receiving  its  illumination. 
But  as  the  divine  will,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  when 
making  outward  revelation  of  themselves  by  the 
materiality  of  things,  are  not  therefore  material,  so 
neither  is  the  light  material,  when  it  outwardly  reveals 
something  of  its  invisible,  incomprehensible  splendour 
and  glory  by  and  through  the  materiality  of  darkness. 

Sight  and  visibility  is  but  one  power  of  light,  but 
light  is  all  power ;  it  is  life,  and  every  joyful  sensi- 
bility of  life  is  from  it.  "  In  Him  (says  the  apostle) 
was  light,  and  the  light  was  the  life  of  men."  Light 
is  all  things,  and  nothing.  It  is  nothing,  because  it  is 
supernatural ;  it  is  all  things,  because  every  good 
power  and  perfection  of  every  thing  is  from  it.  No 
joy  or  rejoicing  in  any  creature,  but  from  the  power 


THE    SPIKIT    OF    LOVE  77 

and  joy  of  light.  No  meekness,  benevolence,  or  good- 
ness, in  angel,  man,  or  any  creature,  but  where  light 
is  the  lord  of  its  life.  Life  itself  begins  no  sooner, 
rises  no  higher,  has  no  other  glory,  than  as  the  light 
begins  it  and  leads  it  on.  Sounds  have  no  softness, 
flowers  and  gums  have  no  sweetness,  plants  and  fruits 
have  no  growth,  but  as  the  mystery  of  hght  opens 
itself  in  them. 

Whatever  is  delightful  and  ravishing,  sublime  and 
glorious,  in  spirits,  minds,  or  bodies,  either  in  heaven 
or  on  earth,  is  from  the  power  of  the  supernatural 
L'ght,  opening  its  endless  wonders  in  them.  Hell  has 
no  misery,  horror,  or  distraction,  but  because  it  has  no 
communication  with  the  supernatural  light.  And  did 
not  the  supernatural  light  stream  forth  its  blessings 
into  this  world,  through  the  materiality  of  the  sun,  all 
outward  nature  would  be  full  of  the  horror  of  hell. 

And  hence  are  all  the  mysteries  and  vronders  of 
light,  in  this  material  system,  so  astonishingly  great 
and  unsearchable ;  it  is  because  the  natural  light  of 
this  world  is  nothmg  else  but  the  power  and  mystery 
of  the  supernatural  light,  breaking  forth  and  opening 
itself,  according  to  its  omnipotence,  in  all  the  various 
forms  of  elementary  darkness  which  constitute  this 
temporary  world. 

Theogenes. — I  could  willingly  hear  you,  Theophilus, 
on  this  subject  till  midnight,  though  it  seems  to  lead 
us  away  from  our  proposed  subject. 

Theophilus. — Not  so  far  out  of  the  way,  Theogenes, 
as  you  may  imagine  ;  for  darkness  and  light  are  the  two 
natures  that  are  in  every  man,  and  do  all  that  is  done 
in  him. 

The  Scriptures,  you  know,  make  only  this  division, 


78  WHOLLY    FOIl    GOD 

the  ^YOlks  of  darkness  are  sin,  and  they  who  walk  in 
the  light  are  the  children  of  God.  Therefore  light  and 
darkness  do  every  thing,  whether  good  or  evil,  that  is 
done  in  man. 

Ikeogencs. — What  is  this  darkness  in  itself,  or  where 
is  it? 

TheopJiilus. — It  is  everywhere,  where  thero  is  nature 
and  creature.  For  all  nature,  and  all  that  is  natural 
in  the  creature,  is  in  itself  nothing  else  but  darkness, 
whether  it  be  in  soul  or  body,  in  heaven  or  on  earth. 
And  therefore,  when  the  angels  (though  in  heaven)  had 
lost  the  supernatural  light,  they  became  imprisoned  in 
the  chains  of  their  own  natural  darkness.  If  you  ask 
why  nature  must  be  darkness,  it  is  because  nature  is 
not  God,  and  therefore  can  have  no  light,  as  it  is 
nature.  For  God  and  light  are  as  inseparable,  as  God 
and  unity  are  inseparable.  Every  thing,  therefore, 
that  is  not  God,  is  and  can  be  nothing  else  in  itself 
but  darkness ;  and  can  do  nothing  but  in,  and  under, 
and  according  to  the  nature  and  powers  of  darkness. 

Theogencs. — What  are  the  powers  of  darkness  ? 

TheopJiihis. — The  powers  of  darkness  are  the  work- 
ings of  nature  or  self :  for  nature,  darkness,  and  self 
are  but  three  dii'ierent  expressions  for  one  and  the 
same  thing. 

Nov/  every  evil,  v/icked,  wrathful,  impure,  unjust 
thought,  temper,  passion,  or  imagination,  that  ever 
stirred  or  moved  in  any  creature  ;  every  misery,  discon- 
tent, distress,  rage,  horror,  and  torment  that  ever 
plagued  the  life  of  fallen  man  or  angel,  are  the  very 
things  that  you  are  to  understand  by  the  powers  or 
workings  of  dailinci;:.,  riaturo,  or  self.  For  nothing  is  evil, 
wicked,  or  tormenting  but  that  which  nature  or  self  doth. 


THE    SPIEIT    OF    LOVE  79 

Theor/enes. — But  if  nature  is  thus  the  scat  and 
source  of  all  evil,  if  every  thing  that  is  bad  is  in  it 
and  from  it,  liow  can  such  a  nature  be  brought  forth 
by  a  God  who  is  all  goodness  ? 

Theophihis. — Xature  has  all  evil,  and  no  evil,  in 
itself.  Nature,  as  it  coujes  forth  from  God,  is  dark- 
ness without  any  evil  of  darkness  in  it ;  for  it  is  not 
darkness  without  or  separate  from  light,  nor  could  it 
ever  have  been  known  to  have  any  quality  of  darkness 
in  it,  had  it  not  lost  that  state  of  light  in  which  it 
came  forth  from  God,  only  as  a  manifestation  of  the 
goodness,  virtues,  and  glories  of  light.  Again,  it  is 
nature,  viz.  a  strife  and  coutrariety  of  properties  for 
this  only  end,  that  the  supernatural  good  might  thereby 
come  into  sensibility,  be  known,  found,  and  felt,  by 
its  taking  all  the  evil  of  strife  and  contrariety  from 
them,  and  becoming  the  union,  peace,  and  joy  of  them 
all.  Nor  could  the  evil  of  strife  and  contrariety  of 
Vv'ill  ever  have  had  a  name  in  all  the  universe  of 
nature  and  creature,  had  it  all  continued  in  that  state 
in  which  it  came  forth  from  God.  Lastly,  it  is  self, 
viz.  an  ov/n  life^  that  so,  tlirough  such  an  own  life,  the 
universal,  incomprehensible  goodness,  happiness,  and 
perfections  of  the  Deity  might  be  possessed  as  pro- 
perties and  qualities  of  an  own  life  in  creatarely 
finite  beings. 

And  thus,  all  that  is  called  nature,  darkness,  or 
self  has  not  only  no  evil  in  it,  but  is  the  only  true 
ground  of  all  possible  good. 

But  when  the  intelhgent  creature  turns  from  God 
to  self,  or  nature,  he  acts  unnaturally,  he  turns  from 
all  that  which  makes  nature  to  be  good ;  he  finds 
nature  only  as  it  is  in  itself,  and  without  God.     And 


80  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

then  it  is  that  nature,  or  self,  hatli  all  evil  in  it. 
Nothing  is  to  be  had  from  it,  or  found  in  it,  but  the 
work  and  working  of  every  kind  of  evil,  bas^eness, 
misery,  and  torment,  and  the  utmost  contrarieiy  to 
God  and  all  goodness.  And  thus,  also,  you  see  the 
plainness  and  certainty  of  our  assertion,  that  nature, 
or  self,  hath  all  evil,  and  no  evil,  in  it. 

27.  Of  the  True  Nature  of  Self. 

Theogenes. — I  plainly  enough  perceive  that  nature, 
or  self,  without  God  manifested  in  it,  is  all  evil  and 
misery.  But  I  would,  if  I  could,  more  perfectly 
understand  the  precise  nature  of  self,  or  what  it  is 
that  makes  it  to  be  so  full  of  evil  and  misery. 

Theophilus. — Covetousness,  envy,  pride,  and  wrath 
are  the  four  elements  of  self,  or  nature,  or  hell,  all 
of  them  inseparable  from  it.  And  the  reason  why  it 
must  be  thus,  and  cannot  be  otherwise,  is  because  the 
natural  life  of  the  creature  is  brought  forth  for  the 
participation  of  some  high,  supernatural  good  in  the 
Creator.  But  it  could  have  no  fitness  or  possible 
capacity  to  receive  such  good,  unless  it  was  in  itself 
both  an  extremity  of  want  and  an  extremity  of  desire 
of  some  high  good.  When,  therefore,  this  natural 
life  is  deprived  of  or  fallen  from  God,  it  can  be 
nothing  else  in  itself  but  an  extremity  of  want  con- 
tinually desiring,  and  an  extremity  of  desire  con- 
tinually wanting.  And  hence  it  is  that  its  whole 
life  can  be  nothing  else  but  a  plague  and  torment  of 
covetousness,  envy,  pride,  and  wrath,  all  which  is  pre- 
cisely nature,  self,  or  hell. 

Now  covetousness,  pride,  and  envy  are  not  three 
different   things,  but    only  three  different  names   for 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  81 

the  restless  workings  of  one  and  the  same  will  or 
desire,  which,  as  it  differently  torments  itself,  takes 
these  different  names,  for  nothing  is  in  any  of  them 
but  the  working  of  a  restless  desire ;  and  all  this 
because  the  natural  life  of  tlie  creature  can  do  nothing 
else  but  work  as  a  desire.  And  therefore,  when 
fallen  from  God,  its  three  first  births,  and  which  arc 
quite  inseparable  from  it,  are  covetousness,  envy,  and 
X3ride ;  it  must  covet,  because  it  is  a  desire  proceeding 
from  want ;  it  must  envy,  because  it  is  a  desire 
turned  to  self ;  it  must  assume  and  arrogate,  because 
it  is  a  desire  founded  on  a  real  want  of  exaltation, 
or  a  higher  state. 

Now  wrath,  which  is  a  fourth  birth  from  these 
three,  can  have  no  existence  till  some  or  all  of  these 
three  are  contradicted,  or  have  something  done  to 
them  that  is  contrary  to  their  will ;  and  then  it  is 
that  WTath  is  necessarily  born,  and  not  till  then. 

And  thus  you  see,  in  the  highest  degree  of  certainty, 
what  nature  or  self  is  as  to  its  essential  constituent 
parts.  It  is  the  three  forementioned,  inseparable 
properties  of  a  desire,  thrown  into  a  fourth  of  wrath 
that  can  never  cease,  because  their  will  can  never  be 
gratified.  For  these  four  properties  generate  one 
another,  and  therefore  generate  their  own  torment. 
They  have  no  outward  cause  nor  any  inward  power 
of  altering  themselves.  And,  therefore,  all  self,  or 
nature,  must  be  in  this  state  till  some  supernatural 
good  comes  into  it,  or  gets  a  birth  in  it.  And,  there- 
fore, every  pain  or  disorder  in  the  mind  or  body  of 
any  intelligent  creature  is  an  undeniable  proof  that 
it  is  in  a  fallen  state,  and  has  lost  that  supernatural 
good  for  which  it  was  created.  So  certain  a  truth 
6 


82  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

is  the  fallen  state  of  all  mankind.  And  here  lies 
the  absolute,  indispensable  necessity  of  the  one 
Christian  redemption.  Till  fallen  man  is  born  again 
from  above,  till  such  a  supernatural  birth  is  brought 
forth  in  him,  by  the  eternal  word  and  Spirit  of  God, 
he  can  have  no  possible  escape  or  deliverance  from 
these  four  elements  of  self  or  hell. 

Whilst  man  indeed  lives  amongst  the  vanities  of 
time,  his  covetousness,  envy,  pride,  and  wrath  may 
be  in  a  tolerable  state,  may  help  him  to  a  mixture 
of  peace  and  trouble ;  they  may  have  at  times  their 
gratifications  as  well  as  their  torments.  But  when 
death  has  put  an  end  to  the  vanity  of  all  earthly 
cheats,  the  soul  that  is  not  born  again  of  the  super- 
natural word  and  Spirit  of  God  must  find  itself 
unavoidably  devoured  or  shut  up  in  its  own  in- 
satiable, unchangeable,  self-tormenting  covetousness, 
envy,  pride,  and  wrath.  Oh,  Theogenes,  that  I  had 
power  from  God  to  take  those  dreadful  scales  from 
the  eyes  of  every  deist,  which  hinder  him  from 
seeing  and  feeling  the  infinite  importance  of  this 
most  certain  truth  ! 

Theogenes. — God  give  a  blessing,  Theophilus,  to 
your  good  prayer.  And  then  let  me  tell  you  that 
you  have  quite  satisfied  my  question  about  the  nature 
of  self.  I  shall  never  forget  it,  nor  can  I  ever 
possibly  have  any  doubt  of  the  truth  of  it. 

I  now  also  see  the  full  truth  and  certainty  of  what 
you  said  of  the  nature  and  power  of  divine  love; 
viz.  "  that  it  is  perfect  peace  and  joy,  a  freedom 
from  all  disquiet,  making  every  thing  to  rejoice  in 
itself.  That  it  is  the  Christ  of  God,  and  wherever 
it  comes,  it  comes  as  the  blessing  and  happiness  of 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  83 

every  natural  life ;  as  the  restorer  of  every  lost 
perfection ;  a  redeemer  from  all  evil ;  a  fulfiller  of 
all  righteousness ;  and  a  peace  of  God  which  passes 
all  understanding."  So  that  I  am  now  a  thousand 
times  more  than  ever  athirst  after  the  spirit  of  love. 
I  am  willing  to  sell  all,  and  buy  it ;  its  blessing  is 
so  great,  and  the  want  of  it  so  dreadful  a  state,  that 
I  am  even  afraid  of  lying  down  in  my  bed,  till  every 
working  power  of  my  soul  is  given  up  to  it,  wholly 
possessed  and  governed  by  it. 

Theophilus. — You  have  reason  for  all  that  you  say, 
Theogenes,  for  were  we  truly  affected  with  things 
as  they  are  our  real  good,  or  real  evil,  we  should  be 
much  more  afraid  of  having  the  serpents  of  covetous- 
ness,  envy,  pride,  and  wrath  well  nourished  and  kept 
alive  within  us,  than  of  being  shut  up  in  a  pest-house, 
or  cast  into  a  dungeon  of  venomous  beasts.  On  the 
other  hand,  we  should  look  upon  the  lofty  eloquence 
and  proud  virtue  of  a  Cicero  but  as  the  blessing  of 
storm  and  tempest,  when  compared  with  the  heavenly 
tranquillity  of  that  meek  and  lowly  heart  to  which 
our  Eedeemer  has  called  us. 

I  said  the  serpents  of  covetousness,  envy,  pride,  and 
wrath,  because  they  are  alone  the  real,  dreadful,  original 
serpents ;  and  all  earthly  serpents  are  but  transitory, 
partial,  and  weak  out-births  of  them.  All  evil,  earthly 
beasts  are  but  short-lived  images  or  creaturely  eruptions 
of  that  hellish  disorder  that  is  broke  out  from  the  fallen 
spiritual  world  ;  and  by  their  manifold  variety,  they 
show  us  that  multiplicity  of  evil  that  lies  in  the  w^omb 
of  that  abyss  of  dark  rage  which  {N.B.)  has  no  maker, 
but  the  three  first  properties  of  nature,  fallen  from 
God  and  working  in  their  own  darkness. 


84  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

So  that  all  evil,  mischievous,  ravenous,  venomous 
beasts,  though  they  have  no  life  but  what  begins  in 
and  from  this  material  world,  and  totally  ends  at  the 
death  of  tlieir  bodies,  yet  have  they  no  malignity  in 
their  earthly,  temporary  nature,  but  from  those  same 
wrathful  properties  of  fallen  nature,  which  live  and 
work  in  our  eternal  fallen  souls.  And,  therefore, 
though  they  are  as  different  from  us  as  time  from 
eternity,  yet,  wherever  we  see  them,  we  see  so  many 
infallible  proofs  of  the  fall  of  nature  and  the  reality 
of  hell.  For,  was  there  no  hell  broke  out  in  spiritual 
nature,  not  only  no  evil  beast,  but  no  bestial  life,  could 
ever  have  come  into  existence. 

But  to  return.  I  have,  I  hope,  sufficiently  opened 
unto  you  the  malignant  nature  of  that  self  which  dwells 
in  and  makes  up  the  working  life  of  every  creature 
that  has  lost  its  right  state  in  God — viz.  that  all  the 
evil  that  was  in  the  first  chaos  of  darkness,  or  that 
still  is  in  hell  and  devils,  all  the  evil  that  is  in  material 
nature  and  material  creatures,  whether  animate  or  in- 
animate, is  nothing  else,  works  in  and  with  nothing 
else,  but  those  first  properties  of  nature,  whicli  drive 
on  the  life  of  fallen  man  in  covetousncss,  envy,  pride, 
and  wrath. 

28.  Of  Deliverance  from  the  Power  of  Self. 

Theogcnes. —  I  could  almost  say  that  you  have  shown 
me  more  than  enough  of  this  monster  of  self,  though  I 
would  not  be  without  this  knowledge  of  it  for  half 
the  world.  But  now,  sir,  what  must  I  do  to  Idg  saved 
from  the  mouth  of  this  lion,  for  he  is  the  depth  of  all 
subtlety,  tlic  satan,  that  dcceiveth  the  whole  world  ? 
He  can  hide  himself  under  all  forms  of  goodness,  he 


y 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  85 

can  watch  and  fast,  write  and  instruct,  pray  much 
and  preacii  long,  give  alms  to  the  poor,  \dsit  the  sick, 
and  yet  often  gets  more  life  and  strength,  and  a  more 
unmoveable  abode,  in  these  forms  of  vu'tue,  than  he  has 
in  publicans  and  sinners. 

Enjoin  me,  therefore,  whatever  you  please,  all  rules, 
methods,  and  practices  will  be  welcome  to  me,  if  you 
judge  them  to  be  necessary  in  this  matter. 

ThcopMliLS. — There  is  no  need  of  a  number  of 
practices  or  methods  in  this  matter.  For  to  die  to 
self,  or  to  come  from  under  its  power,  is  not,  cannot  be 
done  by  any  active  resistance  we  can  malie  to  it  by  the 
powers  of  nature.  For  nature  can  no  more  overcome 
or  suppress  itself,  than  wrath  can  heal  wrath.  So  long 
as  nature  acts,  nothing  but  natural  works  are  brought 
forth,  and  therefore  the  more  labour  of  this  kind,  the 
more  nature  is  fed  and  strengthened  with  its  own 
food. 

But  the  one  true  way  of  dying  to  self  is  miost  simple 
and  plain ;  it  wants  no  arts  or  methods,  no  cells, 
monasteries,  or  pilgrimages ;  it  is  equally  practicable 
by  every  body ;  it  is  always  at  hand ;  it  meets  you  in 
every  thing ;  it  is  free  from  all  deceit ;  and  is  never 
Vv'ithout  success. 

If  you  ask  what  this  one,  true,  simple,  plain,  im- 
mediate, and  unerring  way  is ;  it  is  the  way  of  patience, 
meekness,  humility,  and  resignation  lo  God.  This  is 
the  truth  and  perfection  of  dying  to  self ;  it  is  nowhere 
else,  nor  possible  to  be  in  any  thing  else,  but  in  this 
st'ite  of  heart. 

Theogcnes. — The  excellency  and  perfection  of  these 
virtues  I  readily  acknowledge ;  but  alas,  sir,  how  Vv^ill 
this  prove  the  way  of  overcoming  self  to  be  so  simple, 


86  WHOLLY   FOR   GOD 

plain,  immediate,  and  unerring  as  you  speak  of  ?  For 
is  it  not  the  doctrine  of  almost  all  men  and  all  books, 
and  confirmed  by  our  own  woeful  experience,  that 
much  length  of  time,  and  exercise,  and  variety  of 
practices  and  methods  are  necessary,  and  scarce  suffi- 
cient to  the  attainment  of  any  one  of  these  four 
virtues  ? 

29.  Of  Faith  in  Christ  as  the  only  way 
of  deliverance  from  Self. 

Theophilus. — When  Christ  our  Saviour  was  upon 
earth,  was  there  anything  more  simple,  plain,  immediate, 
unerring  than  the  way  to  Him  ?  Did  scribes,  Pharisees, 
publicans,  and  sinners  want  any  length  of  time  or 
exercise  of  rules  and  methods  before  they  could  have 
admission  to  Him,  or  have  the  benefit  of  faith  in  Him  ? 

Theogenes. — I  don't  understand  why  you  put  this 
question,  nor  do  I  see  how  it  can  possibly  relate  to 
the  matter  before  us. 

Theophilus. — It  not  only  relates  to,  but  is  the  very 
heart  and  truth  of  the  matter  before  us;  it  is  not 
appealed  to  by  way  of  illustration  of  our  subject,  but 
it  is  our  subject  itself,  only  set  in  a  truer  and  stronger 
light.  For  when  I  refer  you  to  patience,  meekness, 
humility,  and  resignation  to  God  as  the  one  simple, 
plain,  immediate,  and  unerring  way  of  dying  to  self,  or 
being  saved  from  it ;  I  call  it  so  for  no  other  reason  but 
because  you  can  as  easily,  and  immediately,  without 
art  or  method,  by  the  mere  turning  and  faith  of 
your  mind,  have  all  the  benefit  of  these  virtues,  as 
publicans  and  sinners,  by  their  turning  to  Christ,  could 
be  helped  and  saved  by  Him. 

Theogenes. — But,  good  sir,  would  you  have  me  then 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  87 

believe  that  my  turning  and  giving  up  myself  to  these 
virtues  is  as  certain  and  immediate  a  way  of  my  being 
directly  possessed  and  blessed  by  their  good  power,  as 
when  sinners  turned  to  Christ  to  be  helped  and  saved 
by  Him  ?  Surely  this  is  too  short  a  way,  and  has 
too  much  of  miracle  in  it,  to  be  now  expected. 

Theopliiliis. — I  would  have  you  strictly  to  believe 
all  this,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  words.  And  also 
to  believe  that  the  reasons  why  you,  or  any  one  else, 
are  for  a  long  time  vainly  endeavouring  after,  and 
hardly  ever  attaining,  these  first-rate  virtues,  is  because 
you  seek  them  in  the  way  they  are  not  to  be  found, 
in  a  multiplicity  of  human  rules,  methods,  and  con- 
trivances, and  not  in  that  simplicity  of  faith  in  which 
those  who  applied  to  Christ  immediately  obtained  that 
which  they  asked  of  Him. 

"  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  refresh  you."  How  short,  and  simple, 
and  certain  a  way  to  peace  and  comfort,  from  the 
misery  and  burden  of  sin !  What  becomes  now  of 
your  length  of  time  and  exercise,  your  rules  and 
methods  and  roundabout  ways,  to  be  deHvered  from 
self,  the  power  of  sin,  and  find  the  redeeming  power 
and  virtue  of  Christ  ?  Will  you  say  that  turning  to 
Christ  in  faith  was  once  indeed  the  way  for  Jews  and 
heathens  to  enter  into  life,  and  be  delivered  from  the 
power  of  their  sins,  but  that  all  this  happiness  was  at  an 
end  as  soon  as  Pontius  Pilate  had  nailed  this  good 
Eedeemer  to  the  cross,  and  so  broke  off  all  immediate 
union  and  communion  between  faith  and  Christ  ? 

What  a  folly  would  it  be  to  suppose  that  Christ, 
after  His  having  finished  His  great  work,  overcome 
death,  ascended  into  heaven,  with  all  power  in  heaven 


88  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

and  on  earth,  was  become  less  a  Saviour,  and  gave  less 
certain  and  immediate  helps  to  those  that  by  faith 
turn  to  Him  now,  than  when  He  was  clothed  with  the 
infirmity  of  our  flesh  and  blood  upon  earth  ?  Has  He 
less  power,  after  He  has  conquered,  than  whilst  He 
was  only  resisting  and  fighting  with  our  enemies  ? 
Or  has  He  less  good  will  to  assist  His  Church,  His 
own  body,  now  He  is  in  heaven,  than  He  had  to  assist 
publicans,  sinners,  and  heathens,  before  He  was  glori- 
fied as  the  Eedeemer  of  the  world  ?  And  yet  this 
must  be  the  case,  if  our  simply  turning  to  Him  in  faith 
and  hope  is  not  as  sure  a  way  of  obtaining  imniediate 
assistance  from  Him  now,  as  when  he  was  upon  earth. 

Theogcncs. — You  seem,  sir,  to  me  to  have  stepped 
aside  from  the  point  in  question,  which  was  not, 
whether  my  turning  or  giving  myself  up  to  Christ, 
in  faith  in  Him,  would  not  do  me  as  much  good  as 
it  did  to  them  who  turned  to  Hhn  v/hen  He  was 
upon  earth  ?  But  whether  my  turning  in  faith  and 
desire,  to  patience,  meekness,  humiUty,  and  resignation 
to  God,  would  do  all  that  as  fully  for  me  now  as 
faith  in  Christ  did  for  those  who  became  His  disciples  ? 

Theopliilus. — I  have  stuck  closely,  my  friend,  to 
the  point  before  us.  Let  it  be  supposed  that  I  had 
given  you  a  form  of  prayer  in  these  words :  "  0 
Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world; 
or,  0  Thou  bread  that  camest  down  from  heaven ; 
or.  Thou  that  art  the  resurrection  and  the  life,  the 
light  and  peace  of  all  holy  souls,  help  me  to  a 
living  faith  in  Thee."  Would  you  say  that  this  was 
not  a  prayer  of  faith  in  and  to  Christ,  because  it 
did  not  call  Him  Jesus,  or  the  Son  of  God  ?  Answer 
me  plainly. 


THE    SPIKIT    OF    LOYK  89 

Thcogencs. — What  can  I  answer  you,  but  that  tliis 
is  a  most  true  and  good  prayer  to  Jesus,  the  Son  of 
the  living  God  ?  For  who  else  but  He  was  the 
Lamb  of  God,  and  the  bread  that  came  down  ? 

30.  What  Faith  in  the  Lamb  of  God 
means. 

TheopMlus. — Well  answered,  my  friend.  W^hen, 
therefore,  I  exhort  you  to  give  up  yourself  in  faith 
and  hope,  to  patience,  meekness,  humility,  and  resigna- 
tion to  God,  what  else  do  I  do  but  turn  you  directly 
to  so  much  faith  and  hope  in  the  true  Lamb  of  God  ? 
For  if  I  ask  you  what  tlie  Lamb  of  God  is  and  means^ 
must  you  not  tell  me  that  it  is  and  means  the  per- 
fection of  patience,  meekness,  humility,  and  resignation 
to  God  ?  Can  you  say  it  is  either  more  or  less  than 
this  ?  Must  you  not  therefore  say  that  a  faith  of 
hunger,  and  thirst,  and  desire  of  these  virtues  is  in 
S])irit  and  truth  the  one  very  same  thing  as  a  faith 
of  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  desire  of  salvation  through 
the  Lamb  of  God  ?  And,  consequently,  that  every 
sincere  wish  and  desire,  every  inward  inclination  of 
your  heart,  that  presses  after  these  virtues,  and  longs 
to  be  governed  by  them,  is  rai  immediate,  direct 
application  to  Christ,  is  worshipping  and  falling 
down  before  Him,  is  giving  up  yourself  unto  Him, 
and  the  very  perfection  of  faith  in  Him. 

If  you  distrust  my  words,  hear  the  words  of  Christ 
Himself :  "  Learn  of  Me  (says  He),  for  I  am  meek 
and  lowly  of  heart ;  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your 
souls."  Here  you  have  the  plain  truth  of  our  two 
points  fully  asserted — firsts  that  to  be  given  up  to, 
or  stand  in  a  desire  of  patience,  meekness,  humility, 


90  WHOLLY    FOll    GOD 

and  resignation  to  God,  is  strictly  the  same  thing  as 
to  learn  of  Christ,  or  to  have  faith  in  Him.  Secondly, 
that  this  is  the  one  simple,  short,  and  infallible  way 
to  overcome  or  be  delivered  from  all  the  malignity 
and  burden  of  self  expressed  in  these  words,  "  and 
ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls." 

And  all  this,  because  this  simple  tendency  or 
inward  inclination  of  your  heart  to  sink  down  into 
patience,  meekness,  humility,  and  resignation  to  God, 
is  truly  giving  up  all  that  you  are  and  all  that  you 
have  from  fallen  Adam;  it  is  perfectly  leaving  all 
that  you  have,  to  follow  and  be  with  Christ;  it  is 
your  highest  act  of  faith  in  Him,  and  love  of  Him, 
the  most  ardent  and  earnest  declaration  of  your 
cleaving  to  Him  with  all  your  heart,  and  seeking  for 
no  salvation  but  in  Him  and  from  Him.  And, 
therefore,  all  the  good  and  blessing,  pardon  and 
deliverance  from  sin,  that  ever  happened  to  any  one 
from  any  kind  or  degree  of  faith  and  hope,  and 
application  to  Christ,  is  sure  to  be  had  from  this 
state  of  heart,  which  stands  continually  turned  to 
Him  in  a  hunger  and  desire  of  being  led  and  governed 
by  His  spirit  of  patience,  meekness,  humility,  and 
resignation  to  God.  Oh,  Theogenes,  could  I  help  you 
to  perceive  or  feel  what  a  good  there  is  in  this  state 
of  heart,  you  would  desire  it  with  more  eagerness 
than  the  thirsty  hart  desireth  the  water-brooks,  you 
would  think  of  nothing,  desire  nothing,  but  constantly 
to  live  in  it.  It  is  a  security  from  all  evil  and  all 
delusion ;  no  difficulty  or  trial,  either  of  body  or 
mind,  no  temptation,  either  within  you  or  without  you, 
but  what  has  its  full  remedy  in  this  state  of  heart. 
You  have  no  questions  to  ask  of  any  body,  no  new 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  91 

way  that  you  need  inquire  after ;  no  oracle  that  you 
need  to  consult,  for  whilst  you  shut  up  yourself,  in 
patience,  meekness,  humility,  and  resignation  to  God, 
you  are  in  the  very  arms  of  Christ,  your  whole  heart 
is  His  dwelling-place,  and  He  lives  and  works  in 
you,  as  certainly  as  He  lived  in  and  governed  that 
body  and  soul  which  He  took  from  the  Virgin  Mary. 

31.  Christ  is  only  to  be  found  in  the 
Virtues  of  His  Character. 

Learn  whatever  else  you  will  from  men  and  books, 
or  even  from  Christ  Himself,  besides  or  without 
these  virtues,  and  you  are  only  a  poor  wanderer  in 
a  barren  wilderness,  where  no  water  of  life  is  to  be 
found.  For  Christ  is  nowhere  hut  in  these  virtues; 
and  where  they  are,  there  is  He  in  His  own  kingdom. 
From  morning  to  night  let  this  be  the  Christ  that 
you  follow,  and  then  you  will  fully  escape  all  the 
religious  delusions  that  are  in  the  world,  and  what 
is  more,  all  the  delusions  of  your  own  selfish  heart. 

For  to  seek  to  be  saved  by  patience,  meekness, 
humility  of  heart,  and  resignation  to  God,  is  truly 
coming  to  God  through  Christ;  and  when  these 
tempers  live  and  abide  in  you,  as  the  spirit  and  aim 
of  your  life,  then  Christ  is  in  you  of  a  truth,  and  the 
life  that  you  then  lead  is  not  yours,  but  Christ  that 
liveth  in  you.  For  this  is  following  Christ  with  all 
your  power;  you  cannot  possibly  make  more  haste 
after  Him,  you  have  no  other  way  of  walking  as  He 
walked,  no  other  way  of  being  like  Him,  of  truly 
believing  in  Him,  of  showing  your  trust  in  Him  and 
dependence  upon  Him,  but  by  wholly  giving  up  your- 


92  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

sslf  (0  tliat  which  He  waS;  viz.  to  patience,  meekness, 
humility,  and  resignation  to  God. 

Tell  me  now,  have  I  enough  proved  to  you  the 
short,  simple,  and  certain  way  of  destroying  that 
body  of  self  which  lives  and  works  in  the  four 
elements  of  covetousness,  envy,  pride,  and  wrath  ? 

32.  Of  Covetousness. 

Theogenes. — Enough  of  all  reason.  But  as  to 
covetousness,  I  thank  God  I  cannot  charge  myself 
with  it,  it  has  no  power  over  me — nay,  I  naturally 
abhor  it.  And  I  also  now  clearly  see  why  I  have 
been  so  long  struggling  in  vain  against  other  selfish 
tempers. 

TheojyJiil'US. — Permit  me,  my  friend,  to  remove  your 
mistake.  Had  covetousness  no  power  over  you,  you 
could  have  no  other  selfish  tempers  to  struggle 
against.  They  are  all  dead  as  soon  as  covetousness 
has  done  working  in  you.  You  take  covetousness 
to  relate  only  to  the  wealth  of  this  world.  But  this 
is  but  one  single  branch  of  it,  its  nature  is  as  large 
as  desire,  and  wherever  selfish  desire  is,  there  is  all 
the  evil  nature  of  covetousness. 

Now  envy,  pride,  hatred,  or  wrath  can  have  no 
possibility  of  existence  in  you,  but  because  there  is 
some  selfish  desire  alive  in  you  that  is  not  satisfied, 
not  gratified,  but  resisted  or  disappointed.  And 
therefore  so  long  as  selfish  tempers,  whether  of  envy, 
uneasiness,  complaint,  pride,  or  wrath,  are  alive  in 
you,  you  have  tEe^uBest  proof  that  all  these  tempers 
afe^bbrn  and  bred  in  and  from  your  own  covetousness ; 
that  is,  from  that  same  selfish  bad  desire  which,  when 
it  is   turned   to   the  wealth   of   this  world,  is  called 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  93 

covetousness.  ¥ov  all  these  four  elements  of  self, 
or  fallen  nature,  are  tied  together  in  one  inseparable 
band ;  they  mutually  generate,  and  are  generated  from 
one  another ;  they  have  but  one  common  life,  and 
must  all  of  them  live,  or  all  die  together.  This  may 
show  you  again  the  absolute  necessity  of  our  one 
simple  and  certain  way  of  dying  to  self,  and  the 
absolute  insufficiency  of  all  liuman  means  whatever 
to  eff'ect  it. 

S3.  Of  the  total  Despair  of  Self. 

For,  consider  only  this,  that  to  be  angry  at  our 
own  anger,  to  be  ashamed  of  our  own  pride,  and 
strongly  resolve  not  to  be  weak,  is  the  upshot  of  all 
human  endeavours ;  and  yet  all  this  is  rather  the  life 
than  the  death  of  self.  There  is  no  help  but  from 
a  total  despair  of  all  human  help.  When  a  man  is 
brought  to  such  an  inward  full  conviction,  as  to  have 
no  more  hope  from  all  human  means,  than  he  hopes 
to  see  with  his  hands  or  hear  with  his  feet,  then  it 
is  that  he  is  truly  prepared  to  die  to  self;  that  is, 
to  give  up  all  thoughts  of  having  or  doing  any  thing 
that  is  good  in  any  other  way  but  that  of  a  meek, 
humble,  patient,  total  resignation  of  himself  to  God. 
All  that  we  do  before  this  conviction  is  in  great 
ignorance  of  ourselves,  and  full  of  weakness  and 
impurity.  Let  our  zeal  be  ever  so  wonderful,  yet  if 
it  begins  sooner,  or  proceeds  farther,  or  to  any  other 
matter,  or  in  any  other  way  than  as  it  is  led  and 
guided  by  this  conviction,  it  is  full  of  delusion.  No 
repentance,  however  long  or  laborious,  is  conversion 
to  God  till  it  falls  into  this  state.  God  must  do  all, 
or  all  is  nothing.     But  God  cannot  do  all  till  all  is  ex- 


94  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

pected  from  Him.  And  all  is  not  expected  from  Him 
till,  by  a  true  and  good  despair  of  every  human  help, 
we  have  no  hope,  or  trust,  or  longing  after  any  thing 
but  a  patient,  meek,  humble,  total  resignation  to  God. 

And  now,  my  dear  friends,  I  have  brought  you  to  the 
very  place  for  which  I  desired  this  day's  conversation ; 
which  was  to  set  your  feet  upon  sure  ground  with 
regard  to  the  spirit  of  love.  For  all  that  variety  of 
matters  through  which  we  have  passed  has  been  only 
a  variety  of  proofs  that  the  spirit  of  divine  love  can 
have  no  place  or  possibiHty  of  birth  in  any  fallen 
creature  till  it  wills  and  chooses  to  be  dead  to  all  self, 
in  a  patient,  meek,  humble  resignation  to  the  good 
power  and  mercy  of  God. 

And  from  this  state  of  heart  also  it  is  that  the 
spirit  of  prayer  is  borne,  which  is  the  desire  of  the  soul 
turned  to  God.  Stand,  therefore,  steadfastly  in  this 
will,  let  nothing  else  enter  into  your  mind,  have  no 
other  contrivance,  but  every  where,  and  in  every  thing, 
to  nourish  and  keep  up  this  state  of  heart,  and  then 
your  house  is  built  upon  a  rock ;  you  are  safe  from 
all  danger ;  the  light  of  heaven  and  the  love  of  God 
will  begin  their  work  in  you,  will  bless  and  sanctify 
every  power  of  your  fallen  soul.  You  will  be  in  a 
readiness  for  every  kind  of  virtue  and  good  work,  and 
will  know  what  it  is  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

34.  Of  True  Resignation  to  God  apart 
from  Feeling. 

Theogenes. — But,  dear  Theophilus,  though  I  am  so 
delighted  with  what  you  say  that  I  am  loth  to  stop 
you,  yet  permit  me  to  mention  a  fear  that  rises  up  in 
me.     Suppose  I  should  find  myself  so  overcome  with 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  95 

my  own  darkness  and  selfish  tempers  as  not  to  be  able 
to  sink  from  them  into  a  sensibility  of  this  meek, 
humble,  patient,  full  resignation  to  God  ;  what  must  I 
then  do,  or  how  shall  I  have  the  benefit  of  what  you 
have  taught  me  ? 

Thcopliilus. — You  are  then  at  the  very  time  and 
place  of  receiving  the  fullest  benefit  from  it,  and  prac- 
tising it  with  the  greatest  advantage  to  yourself.  For 
though  this  patient,  meek  resignation  is  to  be  exercised 
with  regard  to  all  outward  things  and  occurrences  of 
life,  yet  it  chiefly  respects  our  own  inward  state,  the 
troubles,  perplexities,  weaknesses,  and  disorders  of  our 
own  fallen  souls.  And  to  stand  turned  to  a  patient, 
meek,  humble  resignation  to  God,  when  your  own  im- 
patience, wrath,  pride,  and  irresignation  attacks  your- 
self, is  a  higher  and  more  beneficial  performance  of  this 
duty,  than  when  you  stand  turned  to  meekness  and 
patience  when  attacked  by  the  pride,  or  wrath,  or  dis- 
orderly passions  of  other  people.  I  say,  stand  turned 
to  this  patient,  humble  resignation,  for  this  is  your 
true  performance  of  this  duty  at  that  time;  and 
though  you  may  have  no  comfortable  sensibility  of 
your  performing  it,  yet  in  this  state  you  may  always 
have  one  full  proof  of  the  truth  and  reality  of  it; 
and  that  is,  when  you  seek  for  help  no  other  way,  nor 
in  any  thing  else,  neither  from  men  nor  books,  but 
wholly  leave  and  give  up  yourself  to  be  helped  by  the 
mercy  of  God.  And  thus,  be  your  state  what  it  will, 
you  may  always  have  the  full  benefit  of  this  short  and 
sure  way  of  resigning  up  yourself  to  God.  And  the 
greater  the  perplexity  of  your  distress  is,  the  nearer 
you  are  to  the  greatest  and  best  relief,  provided  you 
have  but  patience  to  expect  it  all  from  God. 


96  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

Nothing  brings  you  so  near  to  divine  relief  as  the 
extremity  of  distress. 

For  the  goodness  of  God  hath  no  other  name  or 
nature,  but  the  helper  of  all  that  wants  to  be 
helped ;  and  nothing  can  possibly  hinder  your  finding 
this  goodness  of  God,  and  every  other  gift  and  grace 
that  you  stand  in  need  of ;  notliing  can  hinder  or  delay 
it  but  your  turning  from  the  only  fountain  of  life  and 
living  water,  to  some  cracked  cistern  of  your  own 
making ;  to  this  or  that  method,  opinion,  division,  or 
subdivision,  amongst  Christians,  carnally  expecting 
some  mighty  things,  either  from  Samaria  or  Jerusalem, 
Paul  or  Apollos,  which  are  only  and  solely  to  be  had 
by  worshipping  the  Father  in  spirit  and  truth ;  which 
is  then  only  done  when  your  whole  heart,  and  soul, 
and  spirit  trusts  v/holly  and  solely  to  the  operation  of 
that  God  within  you,  in  whom  we  live,  move,  and  have 
our  being.  And  be  assured  of  this,  as  a  most  certain 
truth,  that  we  have  neither  more  nor  less  of  the  divine 
operation  within  us,  because  of  this  or  that  outward 
form  or  manner  of  our  life,  but  just  and  strictly  in 
that  degree,  as  our  faith,  and  hope,  and  trust,  and 
dependence  upon  God  is  more  or  less  in  us. 

What  a  folly,  then,  to  be  so  often  perplexed  about 
the  way  to  God !  Nothing  is  the  way  to  God,  but 
our  heart.  God  is  nowhere  else  to  be  found,  and  the 
heart  itself  cannot  find  Him,  or  be  helped  by  any 
thing  else  to  find  Him,  but  by  its  own  love  of  Him, 
faith  in  Him,  dependence  upon  Him,  resignation  to 
Him,  and  expectation  of  all  from  Him. 

These  are  short,  but  full  articles  of  true  religion, 
which  carry  salvation  along  with  them,  which  make 
a  true  and  full  offering  and  oblation  of  our  whole  nature 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  97 

to  the  divine  operation,  and  also  a  true  and  full  con- 
fession of  the  Holy  Trinity  in  unity.  For  as  they  look 
wholly  to  the  Father,  as  blessing  us  with  the  operation 
of  His  own  word  and  Spirit,  so  they  truly  confess  and 
worship  the  Holy  Trinity  of  God.  And  as  they  ascribe 
all  to,  and  expect  all  from,  this  Deity  alone,  so  they 
make  the  truest  and  best  of  all  confessions,  that  there 
is  no  God  but  one. 

Your  foundation  standeth  sure,  whilst  you  look  for 
all  your  salvation  through  the  Father,  working  life  in 
your  soul  by  His  own  Word  and  Spirit,  which  dwell  in 
Him,  and  are  one  life,  both  in  Him  and  you. 

35.  The  Blessedness  of  total  Resignation 
to  Qod. 

Thcogenes. — I  can  never  enough  thank  you, 
Theopliilus,  for  this  good  and  comfortable  answer  to 
my  scrupulous  fear.  It  seems  now  as  if  I  could 
always  know  how  to  find  full  relief  in  this  humble, 
meek,  patient,  total  resignation  of  myself  to  God.  It 
is,  as  you  said,  a  remedy  that  is  always  at  hand, 
equally  practicable  at  all  times,  and  never  in  greater 
reality  than  when  my  own  tempers  are  making  war 
against  it  in  my  own  heart. 

You  have  quite  carried  your  point  with  me ;  the 
God  of  patience,  meekness,  and  love  is  the  one  God  of 
my  heart.  It  is  now  the  whole  bent  and  desire  of  my 
soul  to  seek  for  all  my  salvation  in  and  through  the 
merits  and  mediation  of  the  meek,  humble,  patient, 
resigned,  suffering  Lamb  of  God,  who  alone  hath  power 
to  brin^  forth  the  blessed  birth  of  these  heavenly 
virtues  in  my  soul.  He  is  the  bread  of  God  that  came 
7 


98  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

down  from  heaven,  of  which  the  soul  mast  eat,  or 
perish  and  pine  in  everlasting  hunger. 

He  is  the  eternal  love  and  meekness,  that  left  the 
bosom  of  His  Father,  to  be  Himself  the  resurrection  of 
meekness  and  love  in  all  the  darkened,  wrathful  souls 
of  fallen  men. 

What  a  comfort  is  it  to  think  that  this  Lamb  of 
God,  Son  of  the  Father,  Light  of  the  world,  who  is  the 
glory  of  heaven  and  the  joy  of  angels,  is  as  near  to  us, 
as  truly  in  the  midst  of  us,  as  He  is  in  the  midst  of 
heaven.  And  that  not  a  thought,  look,  and  desire  of 
our  heart,  that  presses  towards  Him,  longing  to  catch, 
as  it  were,  one  small  spark  of  His  heavenly  nature, 
but  is  in  as  sure  a  way  of  finding  Him,  touching  Him, 
and  drawing  virtue  from  Him,  as  the  woman  who  was 
healed  by  longing  to  touch  the  border  of  His  garment. 

This  doctrine  also  makes  me  quite  weary  and 
ashamed  of  all  my  own  natural  tempers,  as  so  many 
marks  of  the  beast  upon  me ;  every  whisper  of  my 
soul  that  stu-s  up  impatience,  uneasiness,  resentment, 
pride,  and  wrath  within  me,  shall  be  rejected  with  a 
"  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,"  for  it  is  his,  and  has  its 
whole  nature  from  him.  To  rejoice  in  a  resentment 
gratified,  appears  now  to  me  to  be  quite  frightful. 
For  what  is  it  in  reality  but  rejoicing  that  my  own 
serpent  of  self  has  new  life  and  strength  given  to  it, 
and  that  the  precious  Lamb  of  God  is  denied  entrance 
into  my  soul  ?  For  this  is  the  strict  truth  of  the 
matter.  For  to  give  in  to  resentment,  and  go  willingly 
to  gratify  it,  is  calling  up  the  courage  of  your  own 
serpent,  and  truly  helping  it  to  be  more  stout  and 
valiant,  and  successful  in  you.  On  the  other  hand,  to 
give  up  all  resentment  of  every  kind,  and  on  every 


THE   SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  99 

occasion,  however  artfully,  beautifully,  outwardly 
coloured,  and  to  sink  down  into  the  humility  of  meek- 
ness under  all  contrariety,  contradiction,  and  injustice, 
always  turning  the  other  cheek  to  the  sniiter,  however 
haughty,  is  the  best  of  all  prayers,  the  surest  of  all 
means,  to  have  nothing  but  Christ  living  and  w^orking 
in  you,  as  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  aw^ay  every 
sin  that  ever  had  power  over  your  soul. 

What  a  blindness  was  it  in  me  to  think  that  I  had 
no  covetousness,  because  the  love  of  pelf  was  not  felt 
by  me !  For  to  covet  is  to  desii'e ;  and  what  can  it 
signify  whether  I  desire  this  or  that  ?  If  I  desire 
any  thing  but  that  which  God  would  have  me  to  be 
and  do,  I  stick  in  the  mire  of  covetousness,  and  must 
have  all  that  evil  and  disquiet  living  and  w^orking  in 
me  which  robs  misers  of  their  peace  both  with  God 
and  man. 

Oh,  sweet  resignation  of  myself  to  God,  happy  death 
of  every  selfish  desire,  blessed  unction  of  a  holy  life, 
the  only  driver  of  all  evil  out  of  my  soul,  be  thou  my 
guide  and  governor  wdierever  I  go  !  Nothing  but  thee 
can  take  me  from  myself,  nothing  but  thee  can  lead 
me  to  God ;  hell  has  no  power  where  thou  art ;  nor 
can  heaven  hide  itself  from  thee.  Oh,  may  I  never 
indulge  a  thought,  bring  forth  a  w^ord,  or  do  any  thing 
for  myself  or  others,  but  under  the  influence  of  thy 
blessed  inspii'ation. 

Forgive,  dear  Theophilus,  this  transport  of  my  soul ! 
I  could  not  stop  it.  The  sight,  though  distant,  of  this 
heavenly  Canaan,  this  Sabbath  of  the  soul,  freed  from 
the  miserable  labour  of  self,  to  rest  in  meekness, 
humility,  patience,  and  resignation  under  the  Spirit  cf 
God,  is  like  the  joyful  voice  of  the  Bridegroom  to  my 


821 


100  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

soul,  and    leaves    no   wish    in    me    but  to  be  at  the 
marriage  feast  of  the  Lamb. 

36.  The  Absolute  Necessity  of  the  Death 
of  Self. 

Theopldlus. — Thither,  Theogenes,  you  must  certainly 
come,  if  you  keep  to  the  path  of  meekness,  humility, 
and  patience,  under  a  full  resignation  to  God.  But  if 
you  go  aside  from  it,  let  the  occasion  seem  ever  so 
glorious,  or  the  effects  ever  so  wonderful  to  you,  it  is 
only  preparing  for  yourself  a  harder  death.  For  die 
you  must,  to  all  and  every  thing  that  you  have  worked 
or  done  under  any  other  spirit  but  that  of  meekness, 
humility,  and  true  resignation  to  God.  Every  thing 
else,  be  it  what  it  will,  hath  its  rise  from  the  fire  of 
nature,  it  belongs  to  nothing  else,  and  must  of  all 
necessity  be  given  up,  lost,  and  taken  from  you  again 
by  fire,  either  here  or  hereafter. 

For  these  virtues  are  the  only  wedding  garment; 
they  are  the  lamps  and  vessels  well  furnished  with  oil. 

There  is  notliing  that  will  do  in  the  stead  of  them ; 
they  must  have  their  own  full  and  perfect  work  in 
you,  if  not  before,  yet  certainly  after  the  death  of  the 
body,  or  the  soul  can  never  be  delivered  from  its 
fallen,  wrathful  state.  And  all  this  is  no  more  than 
is  implied  in  this  Scripture  doctrine,  viz.  that  there  is 
no  possibility  of  salvation  but  in  and  by  the  birth  of 
the  meek,  humble,  patient,  resigned  Lamb  of  God  in 
our  souls.  And  when  this  Lamb  of  God  has  brought 
forth  a  real  birth  of  His  own  meekness,  humility,  and 
full  resignation  to  God  in  our  souls,  then  are  our 
lamps  trimmed,  and  our  virgin  hearts  made  ready  for 
the  marriage  feast. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    LOVE  101 

This  marriage  feast  signifies  the  entrance  into  the 
highest  state  of  union  that  can  be  between  God  and 
the  soul  in  this  life.  Or,  in  other  words,  it  is  the 
birthday  of  the  spirit  of  love  in  our  souls,  which,  when- 
ever we  attain,  will  feast  our  souls  with  such  peace 
and  joy  in  God  as  will  blot  out  the  remembrance  of 
every  thing  that  we  called  peace  or  joy  before. 

As  sure  as  the  light  of  God  is  absolutely  necessary 
to  make  nature  to  be  a  heavenly  kingdom  of  light  and 
love,  so  sure  and  certain  is  it  that  the  creaturely  life, 
that  is  fallen  from  God,  can  have  no  deliverance,  can- 
not have  a  birth  of  heavenly  light  and  love,  by  any 
other  possible  way  but  that  of  dying  to  self,  by  meek- 
ness, humility,  patience,  and  full  resignation  to  God. 

And  the  reason  is  this.  It  is  because  the  will  is 
the  leader  of  the  creaturely  life,  and  it  can  have 
nothing  but  that  to  which  its  will  is  turned.  And 
therefore  it  cannot  be  saved  from,  or  raised  out  of,  the 
wTath  of  nature,  till  its  will  turns  from  nature,  and 
wills  to  be  no  longer  driven  by  it.  But  it  cannot 
turn  from  nature,  or  show  a  will  to  come  from  under 
its  powder,  any  other  way  than  by  turning  and  giving 
up  itself  to  that  meekness,  humility,  patience,  and 
resignation  to  God,  which,  so  far  as  it  goes,  is  a  leaving, 
rejecting,  and  dying  to  all  the  guidance  of  nature. 

37.  The  One  Infallible  Way  to  God. 

And  thus  you  see  that  this  one  simple  way  is, 
according  to  the  immutable  nature  of  things,  the  one 
only  possible  and  absolutely  necessary  way  to  God. 
It  is  as  possible  to  go  two  contrary  ways  at  once,  as 
to  go  to  God  any  other  way  than  this.  But  what  is 
best  of  all,  this  way  is  absolutely  infallible;  nothing 


102  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

can  defeat  it.  And  all  this  infallibility  is  fully 
grounded  in  the  twofold  character  of  our  Saviour — 
(1)  As  He  is  the  Lamb  of  God,  a  principle  and  source 
of  all  meekness  and  humility  in  the  soul.  And  (2) 
as  He  is  the  light  of  eternity,  that  blesses  eternal 
nature,  and  turns  it  mto  a  kingdom  of  heaven. 

For,  in  this  twofold  respect,  He  has  a  power  of 
redeeming  us,  which  nothing  can  hinder ;  but,  sooner 
or  later.  He  must  see  all  His  and  our  enemies  under 
His  feet,  and  all  that  is  fallen  in  Adam  into  death 
must  rise  and  return  into  a  unity  of  an  eternal  life  in 
God. 

For  as  the  Lamb  of  God  He  has  all  power  to  bring 
forth  in  us  a  sensibility  and  a  weariness  of  our  ow^n 
wrathful  state,  and  a  willingness  to  fall  from  it  into 
meekness,  humility,  patience,  and  resignation  to  that 
mercy  of  God  which  alone  can  help  us.  And  when 
we  are  thus  weary  and  heavy  laden,  and  willing  to 
get  rest  to  our  souls  in  meek,  humble,  patient  resigna- 
tion to  God,  then  it  is  that  He,  as  the  light  of  God  and 
heaven,  joyfully  breaks  in  upon  us,  turns  our  darkness 
into  light,  our  sorrow  into  joy,  and  begins  that  kingdom 
of  God  and  divine  love  within  us,  which  will  never 
have  an  end. 

Need  I  say  any  more,  Theogenes,  to  show  you  how 
to  come  out  of  the  wrath  of  your  evil,  earthly  nature, 
into  the  sweet  peace  and  joy  of  the  spirit  of  love  ? 
Neither  notions,  nor  speculations,  nor  heat,  nor  fervour, 
nor  rules,  nor  methods,  can  brincj  it  forth.  It  is  the 
child  of  light,  and  cannot  possibly  have  any  birth  in 
you  but  only  and  solely  from  the  light  of  God  rising  in 
your  own  soul,  as  it  rises  in  heavenly  beings.  But 
the  light  of  God  cannot  arise,  or  be  found  in  you,  by 


THE    SPIKIT    OF    LOYE  103 

any  art  or  contrivance  of  your  own,  but  only  and 
solely  in  the  way  of  that  meekness,  humility,  and 
patience,  which  waits,  trusts,  resigns  to,  and  expects 
all  from  the  inward,  living,  life-giving  operation  of  the 
triune  God  within  you ;  creating,  quickening,  and  re- 
viving in  your  fallen  soul  that  birth,  and  image,  and 
likeness  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  in  which  the  first  father 
of  mankind  was  created. 

Theogcncs.  —  You  need  say  no  more,  Theophilus ; 
you  have  not  only  removed  that  difficulty  which 
brought  us  hither,  but  have,  by  a  variety  of  things, 
fixed  and  confirmed  us  in  a  full  belief  of  that  great 
truth  elsewhere  asserted,  namely,  That  there  is  but 
one  salvation  for  all  mankind,  and  that  is  the  life  of 
God  in  the  soul.  And  also,  that  there  is  but  one 
possible  way  for  man  to  attain  this  life  of  God. 

God  is  one,  human  nature  is  one,  salvation  is  one, 
and  the  way  to  it  is  one,  and  that  is  the  desire  of  the 
soul  turned  to  God. 

Therefore,  dear  Theophilus,  adieu.  If  we  seek  you 
no  more  in  this  life,  you  have  sufficiently  taught  us 
how  to  seek  and  find  every  kind  of  goodness,  blessing, 
and  happiness  in 

God  Alo^'e. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER 

OR, 

THE  SOUL  RISING  OUT  OF  THE  VANITY  OF  TIME 

INTO  THE 

RICHES     OF     ETERNITY 
By  WILLIAM  LAW,  M.A. 


105 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER 


CHAPTEE  I. 

TREATING    OF    SOME    IMATTERS    PREPARATORY    TO    THE 
SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER. 

1.  The  Vanity  of  Time,  and  the  Riches  of 
Eternity. 

THE  greatest  part  of  mankind,  nay,  of  Christians, 
may  be  said  to  be  asleep ;  and  that  particular 
way  of  life  which  takes  up  each  man's  mind,  thoughts, 
and  affections,  may  very  well  be  called  his  particular 
dream.  This  degree  of  vanity  is  equally  visible  in 
every  form  and  order  of  life.  The  learned  and  the 
ignorant,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  are  all  in  the  same 
state  of  slumber ;  only  passing  away  a  short  life  in 
a  different  kind  of  dream.     But  why  so  ? 

It  is  because  man  has  an  eternity  within  him,  is 
born  into  this  world,  not  for  the  sake  of  living  here, 
not  for  any  thing  this  world  can  give  him,  but  only  to 
have  time  and  place  to  become  either  an  eternal 
partaker  of  a  divine  life  with  God,  or  to  have  a 
hellish  eternity  amongst  fallen  angels ;  and,  therefore, 
every  man  who  has  not  his  eyes,  his  heart,  and  his 

107 


108  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

hands  continually  governed  by  this  twofold  eternity, 
may  be  justly  said  to  be  fast  asleep — to  have  no 
awakened  sensibility  of  himself.  And  a  life  devoted 
to  the  interests  and  enjoyments  of  this  world,  spent 
and  wasted  in  the  slavery  of  earthly  desires,  may  be 
truly  called  a  dream,  as  having  all  the  shortness, 
vanity,  and  delusion  of  a  dream ;  only  with  this  great 
difference — that  when  a  dream  is  over,  nothing  is  lost 
but  fictions  and  fancies ;  but  when  the  dream  of  life 
is  ended  only  by  death,  all  that  eternity  is  lost  for 
which  we  were  brought  into  being.  Now,  there  is  no 
misery  in  this  world,  nothing  that  makes  either  the 
life  or  death  of  man  to  be  full  of  calamity,  but  this 
blindness  and  insensibility  of  his  state  into  which  he 
so  willingly,  nay,  obstinately,  plunges  himself.  Every 
thing  that  has  the  nature  of  evil  and  distress  in  it 
takes  its  rise  from  hence.  Do  but  suppose  a  man  to 
know  himself;  that  he  comes  into  this  world  on  no 
other  errand  but  to  rise  out  of  the  vanity  of  time  into 
the  riches  of  eternity :  do  but  suppose  him  to  govern 
his  inward  thoughts  and  outward  actions  by  this  view 
of  himself,  and  then  to  him  every  day  has  lost  all  its 
evil;  prosperity  and  adversity  have  no  difference, 
because  he  receives  and  uses  them  both  in  the  same 
spirit;  life  and  death  are  equally  welcome,  because 
equally  parts  of  his  way  to  eternity. 

2.  The  Spirit  of  Prayer. 

For  poor  and  miserable  as  this  life  is,  we  have  all 
of  us  free  access  to  all  that  is  great,  and  good,  and  happy, 
and  carry  within  ourselves  a  key  to  all  the  treasures 
that  Heaven  lias  to  bestow  upon  us.     We  starve  in 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PKAYER  109 

the  midst  of  plenty,  groan  under  infirmities,  with  the 
remedy  in  our  own  hands. 

We  live  and  die  without  knowing  and  feeling  any 
thing  of  tlie  one  only  good,  whilst  we  have  it  in  our 
power  to  know  and  enjoy  it  in  as  great  a  reality  as 
we  know  and  feel  the  power  of  this  world  over  us : 
for  heaven  is  as  near  to  our  souls  as  this  earth  is  to 
our  bodies ;  and  we  are  created,  we  are  redeemed,  to 
have  our  conversation  in  it.  God,  the  only  good  of 
all  intelligent  natures,  is  not  an  absent  or  distant  God, 
but  is  more  present  in  and  to  our  souls  than  our  own 
bodies ;  and  we  are  strangers  to  heaven,  and  without 
God  in  the  world,  for  this  only  reason — because  we 
are  void  of  that  Spirit  of  Prayer,  which  alone  can, 
and  never  fails  to  unite  us  with  the  one  only  good, 
and  to  open  heaven  and  the  kingdom  of  God  within 
us. 

x\  root  set  in  the  finest  soil,  in  the  best  climate, 
and  blessed  with  all  that  sun  and  air  and  rain  can  do 
for  it,  is  not  in  so  sure  a  way  of  its  growth  to  per- 
fection, as  every  man  may  be,  whose  spirit  aspu^es 
after  all  that  which  God  is  ready  and  infinitely 
desirous  to  give  hini. 

For  the  sun  meets  not  the  springing  bud  that 
stretches  towards  him,  with  half  that  certainty,  as 
God,  the  Source  of  all  good,  communicates  Himself  to 
the  soul  that  longs  to  partake  of  Him. 

3.  Of  the  Creation  of  Man  in  the  Image 
of  God. 

We  are  all  of  us,  by  birth,  the  offspring  of  God,  more 
nearly  related  to  Him  than  we  are  to  one  another ; 
for  "  in  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  hav^e  our  being." 


110  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

The  first  man  that  was  broiio-ht  forth  from  God,  had 
the  Breath  and  Spirit  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost 
breathed  into  him,  and  so  he  became  a  living  soul. 
Thus  was  our  first  father  born  of  God,  descended  from 
Him,  and  stood  in  Paradise  in  the  image  and  likeness 
of  God.  He  was  the  image  and  likeness  of  God,  not 
with  any  regard  to  his  outward  shape  or  form,  for  no 
shape  has  any  likeness  to  God ;  but  he  was  in  the 
image  and  likeness  of  God,  because  the  Holy  Trinity 
had  breathed  Their  own  Nature  and  Spirit  into  him. 
And  as  the  Deity,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  are 
always  in  heaven,  and  make  heaven  to  he  everywhere ; 
so  this  Spirit,  breathed  by  Them  into  man,  brought 
heaven  into  man  along  with  it ;  and  so  man  was  in 
heaven  as  well  as  on  earth — that  is,  in  Paradise,  which 
signifies  a  heavenly  state,  or  Birth  of  Life. 

4.  Man  in  Paradise. 

Adam  had  all  that  divine  nature,  both  as  to  a 
heavenly  spirit,  and  heavenly  body,  which  the  angels 
have ;  but  as  he  was  brought  forth  to  be  a  lord  and 
ruler  of  a  new  world,  created  out  of  the  chaos  or  ruins 
of  the  kingdom  of  fallen  angels ;  so  it  was  necessary 
that  he  should  also  have  the  nature  of  this  new-created 
world  in  himself,  both  as  to  its  spirit  and  materiality. 
Hence  it  was  that  he  had  a  body  taken  from  this  new- 
created  earth,  not  such  dead  earth  as  we  now  make 
bricks  of,  but  the  blessed  earth  of  Paradise,  that  had 
the  powers  of  heaven  in  it,  out  of  which  the  Tree  of 
Life  itself  could  grow.  Into  the  nostrils  of  this  out- 
ward body  was  the  breath  or  spirit  of  this  world 
breathed ;  and  in  this  spirit  and  body  of  this  world, 
did  the  inward  celestial  spirit  and  body  of  Adam  dwell ; 


THE    SnrJT    OF    PllAYER  111 

it  was  the  medium  or  means  through  which  he  was 
to  have  commerce  with  this  world,  become  visible  to 
its  creatures,  and  rule  over  it  and  them.  Thus  stood 
our  first  father ;  an  angel  both  as  to  body  and  spirit 
(as  he  will  be  again  after  the  resurrection),  yet  dwell- 
ing in  a  body  and  spirit  taken  from  this  new-created 
world ;  which,  however,  was  as  inferior  to  him,  as 
subject  to  him,  as  the  earth  and  all  its  creatures  were. 
It  was  no  more  alive  in  him,  no  more  brought  forth 
its  nature  within  him,  than  Satan  and  the  serpent 
were  alive  in  him  at  his  first  creation.  He  was  to 
have  no  share  of  its  life  and  nature,  no  feeling  of  good 
or  evil  from  it ;  but  to  act  in  it  as  an  heavenly  artist, 
that  had  power  and  skill  to  open  the  wonders  of  God 
in  every  power  of  outward  nature. 

And  herein  lay  the  ground  of  Adam's  ignorance  of 
good  and  evil ;  it  was  because  his  outward  body,  and 
the  outward  world  (in  which  alone  was  good  and  evil), 
could  not  discover  their  own  nature,  or  open  their  own 
life  within  him,  but  were  kept  inactive  by  the  power 
and  life  of  the  celestial  man  within  it.  And  this  was 
man's  first  and  great  trial  ;  a  trial,  not  imposed  upon 
him  by  the  mere  will  of  God,  or  by  way  of  experiment ; 
but  a  trial  necessarily  implied  in  the  nature  of  his 
state ;  he  was  created  an  angel,  both  as  to  body  and 
spirit ;  and  this  angel  stood  in  an  outw^ard  body,  of  the 
nature  of  the  outward  world;  and  therefore,  by  the 
nature  of  his  state,  he  had  his  trial,  or  power  of 
choosing,  whether  he  would  live  as  an  angel,  using 
only  his  outward  body  as  a  means  of  opening  the 
wonders  of  the  outward  world  to  the  glory  of  his 
Creator ;  or  whether  he  would  turn  his  desire  to  the 
opening  of  the  bestial  life  of  the  outward  world  in 


112  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

himself,  for  the  sake  of  knowing  the  good  and  evil 
that  was  in  it.  The  fact  is  certain,  that  he  lusted 
after  the  knowledge  of  this  good  and  evil,  and  made 
use  of  the  means  to  obtain  it.  No  sooner  had  he  got 
this  knowledge,  by  the  opening  of  the  bestial  life  and 
sensibility  within  him,  but  in  that  day,  nay,  in  that 
instant,  he  died ;  that  is,  his  heavenly  spirit,  with  its 
heavenly  body,  were  both  extinguished  in  him  ;  but  his 
soul,  an  immortal  fire  that  could  not  die,  became  a  poor 
slave  in  a  prison  of  bestial  flesh  and  blood. 

5.  Of  the  Nature  of  Redemption. 

See  here  the  nature  and  necessity  of  our  redemption  ; 
it  is  to  redeem  the  first  angelic  nature  that  departed 
from  Adam ;  it  is  to  make  that  heavenly  spirit  and 
body  which  Adam  lost,  to  be  alive  again  in  all  the 
human  nature ;  and  this  is  called  regeneration. 

See  also  the  true  reason  why  only  the  Son,  or 
Eternal  Word  of  God,  could  be  our  Kedeemer ;  it  is 
because  He  alone,  by  whom  all  things  were  at  first 
made,  could  be  able  to  bring  to  life  again  that  celestial 
spirit  and  body  which  had  departed  from  Adam. 

The  necessity  of  our  regaining  our  first  heavenly 
body,  is  the  necessity  of  our  eating  the  Body  and  Blood 
of  Christ.  The  necessity  of  having  again  our  first 
heavenly  spirit,  is  declared,  by  the  necessity  of  our 
being  baptized  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  fall  is  nothing 
else  but  the  falling  of  our  soul  from  this  celestial  body 
and  spirit,  into  a  bestial  body  and  spirit  of  this  world. 
Our  rising  out  of  our  fallen  state,  or  Eedemption,  is 
nothing  else  but  the  regaining  our  first  angelic  spirit 
and  body,  which  in  Scripture  is  called  our  inward,  or 
"  new  man,  created  again  in  Christ  Jesus." 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  113 

See  here,  lastly,  the  true  ground  of  all  the  morti- 
fications of  flesh  and  blood  required  in  the  gospel ;  it 
is  because  this  bestial  life  of  this  outward  world  should 
not  have  been  opened  in  man ;  it  is  his  separation 
from  God,  and  death  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven;  and 
therefore  all  its  workings,  appetites,  and  desires  are  to 
be  restrained  and  kept  under,  that  the  first  heavenly 
life  to  which  Adam  died,  may  have  room  to  rise  up  in  us. 

6.  Of  the  Entrance  of  Evil  into  this  World. 

It  is  plain  that  the  command  of  God,  not  to  lust 
after,  and  eat  of  the  forbidden  tree,  was  not  an  arbi- 
trary command  of  God,  given  at  pleasure,  or  as  a  mere 
trial  of  man's  obedience ;  but  was  a  most  kind  and 
loving  information  given  by  the  God  of  Love  to  His 
new-born  offspring,  concerning  the  state  he  was  in 
with  regard  to  the  outer  world ;  warning  him  to  with- 
draw all  desire  of  entering  into  a  sensibility  of  its 
good  and  evil ;  because  such  sensibility  could  not  be 
had  without  his  immediate  dying  to  that  divine  and 
heavenly  life  which  he  then  enjoyed.  "Eat  not," 
says  the  God  of  Love,  "  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil,  for  in  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof,  thou 
wilt  surely  die." 

As  if  it  had  been  said,  "  I  have  brought  thee  into 
this  Paradise,  with  such  a  nature  as  the  angels  have 
in  heaven.  By  the  order  and  dignity  of  thy  creation, 
every  thing  that  lives  and  moves  in  this  world,  is 
made  subject  to  thee  as  to  their  ruler.  I  have  made 
thee  in  thy  outward  body  of  this  world,  to  be  for  a 
time  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  till  thou  hast 
brought  forth  a  numerous  offspring,  fit  for  that  king- 
dom which  they  have  lost." 
8 


114  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

7.  Of  the  Pall  of  the  Angels. 

"  Tlie  world  around  thee,  and  the  life  which  is  newly 
awakened  in  it,  is  much  lower  than  thou  art ;  of  a 
nature  quite  inferior  to  thine.  It  is  a  gross,  corrupt- 
ible state  of  things,  that  cannot  stand  long  before  Me ; 
but  must  for  a  while  bear  the  marks  of  those  creatures 
which  first  made  evil  to  be  known  in  the  creation. 

"  The  angels  that  first  inhabited  this  region,  where 
thou  art  to  bring  forth  a  new  order  of  beings,  were 
great  and  powerful  spirits,  highly  endowed  with  the 
riches  and  powers  of  their  Creator  ; — whilst  they  stood 
(as  the  order  of  creation  requkes)  in  meekness  and 
resignation,  under  their  Creator,  nothing  was  im- 
possible to  them ;  there  was  no  end  of  their  glorious 
powers  throughout  their  whole  kingdom ;  perpetual , 
scenes  of  light,  and  glory,  and  beauty  w^ere  rising  and 
changing  through  all  the  height  and  depth  of  their  Glassy 
Sea,  merely  at  their  will  and  pleasure  ;  but,  finding  w^hat 
wonders  of  light  and  glory  they  could  perpetually 
bring  forth ;  how  all  the  Powers  of  eternity,  treasured 
up  in  their  Glassy  Sea,  unfolded  themselves,  and  broke 
forth  in  ravishing  forms  of  wonder  and  delight,  merely 
in  obedience  to  their  call ;  they  began  to  admire  and 
even  adore  themselves,  and  to  fancy  that  there  was 
some  infinity  of  power  hidden  in  themselves,  which 
they  supposed  was  kept  under,  and  suppressed,  by 
that  meekness  and  subjection  to  God  under  which  they 
acted.  Fired  and  intoxicated  with  this  proud  imagina- 
tion, they  boldly  resolved,  with  all  their  eternal  energy 
and  strength,  to  take  their  kingdom,  with  all  its  glories, 
to  themselves,  by  eternally  abjuring  all  meekness  and 
submission    to    God.     No    sooner    did    their   eternal. 


THE    SPIIUT    OF    PKAYEll  115 

]jotent  desires  fly  in  this  direction  of  a  revolt  from 
God,  but  in  the  swiftness  of  a  thought  heaven  was 
lost ;  and  they  found  themselves  dark  spirits,  stripped 
of  all  their  light  and  glory :  instead  of  rising  up  above 
God  (as  they  hoped),  by  breaking  off  from  Him,  there 
was  no  end  to  their  eternal  sinking  into  new  depths 
of  slavery,  under  their  own  self-tormenting  natures. 

"As  a  wheel  going  down  a  mountain  that  has  no 
bottom,  must  continually  keep  on  its  turning,  so  are  they 
whirled  down  by  the  impetuosity  of  their  own  wrong- 
turned  wills  in  a  continual  descent  from  the  fountain 
of  all  glory,  into  the  bottomless  depths  of  their  own 
dark,  fiery,  working  powers.  In  no  hell,  but  what 
their  own  natural  strength  had  awakened ;  bound  in 
no  chains  but  their  own  unbending,  hardened  spirits ; 
made  such,  by  their  renouncing,  with  all  their  eternal 
strength,  all  meekness  and  subjection  to  God.  In 
that  moment  the  beautiful  materiality  of  their  king- 
dom, their  Glassy  Sea  in  which  they  dwelt,  was,  by 
the  wrathful,  rebellious  workings  of  those  apostate 
spirits,  broke  all  into  pieces,  and  became  a  black  lake, 
a  horrible  chaos  of  fire  and  wrath,  thickness  and  dark- 
ness, a  height  and  depth  of  the  confused,  divided, 
fighting  properties  of  nature." 

8.  Of  Chaos  and  the  Creation  of  this  World. 

"  My  created  fiat  stopped  the  v/orkings  of  these 
rebellious  spirits,  by  dividing  the  ruins  of  their  wasted 
kingdom  into  an  earth,  sun,  planets,  and  separated 
elements.  Had  not  this  revolt  of  angels  brought 
forth  that  disordered  chaos,  no  such  materiality  as  this 
outward    world    is  made  of    had    ever  been    known. 


116  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

Gross  compacted  earth,  stones,  rocks,  wrathful  fire 
here,  dead  water  there,  fighting  elements,  with  all 
tlieir  gross  vegetables  and  animals,  are  things  not 
known  in  Eternity,  and  will  be  only  seen  in  Time, 
till  the  great  designs  are  finished,  for  which  thou  art 
brought  forth  in  Paradise  ;  and  then  as  a  fire  awakened 
by  the  rebel  creature,  began  all  the  disorders  of  nature, 
and  turned  that  Glassy  Sea  into  a  chaos ;  so  a  last 
fire,  kindled  at  My  word,  shall  thoroughly  purge  the 
floor  of  this  world.  In  those  purifying  flames,  the 
sun,  the  planets,  the  air,  the  earth,  and  water,  shall 
part  with  all  their  dross,  deadness,  and  division,  and 
all  become  again  that  first,  heavenly  materiality,  a 
Glassy  Sea  of  everlasting  light  and  glory,  in  which 
thou  and  thy  offspring  shall  sing  hallelujahs  to  all 
eternity.  Look  not,  therefore,  thou  child  of  Paradise, 
thou  son  of  eternity !  look  not,  with  a  longing  eye, 
after  any  thing  in  this  outward  world ;  there  are  the 
remains  of  the  fallen  angels  in  it ;  thou  hast  nothing 
to  do  in  it,  but  as  a  ruler  over  it.  It  stands  before 
thee,  as  a  mystery  big  with  wonders ;  and  thou,  whilst 
an  angel  in  Paradise,  hast  power  to  open  and  display 
them  all.  It  stands  not  in  thy  sphere  of  existence ; 
it  is,  as  it  were,  but  a  picture,  and  transitory  figure 
of  things;  for  all  that  is  not  eternal,  is  but  as  an 
image  in  a  glass,  that  seems  to  have  a  reality  which 
it  hath  not.  The  life  which  springs  up  in  this  figure 
of  a  world,  in  such  an  infinite  variety  of  kinds  and 
degrees,  is  but  as  a  shadow ;  it  is  a  life  of  such  days 
and  years,  as  in  eternity  have  no  distinction  from  a 
moment.  It  is  a  life  of  such  animals  and  insects, 
as  are  witliout  any  divine  sense,  capacity,  or  fecliug. 
Their    natures    have  nothing  in    them,  but    what  I 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  117 

commanded  this  new   modelled  chaos,  this  order  of 
planets  and  fighting  elements,  to  bring  forth. 

"  In  heaven,  all  births  and  growths,  all  figures  and 
spiritual  forms  of  life,  though  infinite  in  variety,  are 
yet  all  of  a  heavenly  kind ;  and  only  so  many  mani- 
festations of  the  goodness,  wisdom,  beauty,  and  riches 
of  the  divine  nature.  But  in  this  new  modelled  chaos, 
where  the  disorders  that  were  raised  by  Lucifer  are 
not  wholly  removed,  but  evil  and  good  must  stand  in 
strife,  till  the  last  purifying  fire,  here  every  kind  and 
degree  of  life,  like  the  world  from  whence  it  springs, 
is  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil  in  its  birth. 

"  Therefore,  My  son,  be  content  with  thy  angelic 
nature ;  be  content,  as  an  angel  in  Paradise,  to  eat 
angels'  food,  and  to  rule  over  this  mixed,  imperfect, 
and  perishing  world,  without  partaking  of  its  corrupt- 
ible, impulse,  and  perishing  nature.  Lust  not  to  know 
how  the  animals  feel  the  evil  and  good  which  this 
life  affords  them :  for  if  thou  couldest  feel  what  they 
feel,  thou  must  be  as  they  are ;  thou  canst  not  have 
their  sensibility  unless  thou  hast  their  nature :  thou 
canst  not  at  once  be  an  angel  and  an  earthly  animal. 
If  the  bestial  life  is  raised  up  in  thee,  the  same  instant 
the  heavenly  birth  of  thy  nature  must  die  in  thee. 
Therefore,  turn  away  thy  lust  and  imagination  from  a 
tree  that  can  only  help  thee  to  the  knowledge  of  such 
good  or  evil,  as  belongs  only  to  the  animals  of  this 
outward  world,  for  nothing  but  the  bestial  nature  can 
receive  good  or  evil  from  the  stars  and  elements :  they 
have  no  power  but  over  that  life  which  proceeds  from 
them.  Eat,  therefore,  only  the  food  of  Paradise  ;  be 
content  with  angels'  bread ;  for  if  thou  eatest  of  this 
tree,  it  will  unavoidably  awaken  and  open  the  bestial 


118  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

life  within  thee;  and  in  that  moment  all  that  is 
heavenly  must  die,  and  cease  to  have  any  power  in 
thee.  And  thou  must  fall  into  a  slavery  for  life, 
under  the  divided,  fighting  powers  of  stars  and 
elements;  stripped  of  thy  angelic  garment,  that  hid 
thy  outward  body  under  its  glory,  thou  wilt  become 
more  naked  than  any  beast  upon  earth,  be  forced  to 
seek  from  beasts  a  covering,  to  hide  thee  from  the 
sight  of  thine  own  eyes.  A  shameful,  fearful,  sickly, 
wanting,  suffering,  and  distressed  heir  of  the  same 
speedy  death  in  the  dust  of  the  earth,  as  the  poor 
beasts,  whom  thou  wilt  thus  have  made  to  be  thy 
brethren." 

9.  Of  Love  as  the  Nature  of  God. 

God,  considered  in  Himself,  is  as  infinitely  separate 
from  all  possibility  of  doing  hurt,  or  willing  pain  to 
any  creature,  as  He  is  from  a  possibility  of  suffering 
pain  or  hurt  from  the  hand  of  a  man ;  and  this,  for 
this  plain  reason,  because  He  is  in  Himself,  in  His 
Holy  Trinity,  nothing  else  but  the  boundless  Abyss 
of  all  that  is  good,  and  sweet,  and  amiable ;  and  there- 
fore stands  in  the  utmost  contrariety  to  every  thing 
that  is  not  a  blessing ;  in  an  eternal  impossibility  of 
willing  and  intending  a  moment's  pain  or  hurt  to  any 
creature  ;  for,  from  this  unbounded  Source  of  good- 
ness and  perfection,  nothing  but  infinite  streams  of 
blessing  are  perpetually  flowing  forth  upon  all  nature 
and  creature,  in  a  more  incessant  plenty  than  rays 
of  light  stream  from  the  sun.  And  as  the  sun  has 
but  one  nature,  and  can  give  forth  nothing  but  the 
blessings  of  hght ;  so  the  Holy  Triune  God  has  but 
one  nature  and  intent  towards  all  the  creation,  which 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  119 

is,  to  pour  forth  the  richness  and  sweetness  of  His  divine 
perfections  upon  every  thing  that  is  capable  of  them, 
and  accordmg  to  its  capacity  to  receive  them. 

The  goodness  of  God  breaking  forth  into  a  desire  to 
communicate  good,  was  the  cause  and  the  beginning 
of  the  creation.  Hence  it  follows,  that  to  all  eternity 
God  can  have  no  thought  or  intent  towards  the  creature, 
but  to  communicate  good ;  because  He  made  the  creature 
for  this  sole  end,  to  receive  good.  The  first  motive 
towards  the  creature  is  unchangeable :  it  takes  its 
rise  from  God's  desire  to  communicate  good,  and  it  is 
an  eternal  impossibihty  that  any  thing  can  ever  come 
from  God,  as  His  will  and  purpose  towards  the  creature, 
but  that  same  love  and  goodness  which  first  created  it. 
He  must  always  will  that  to  it,  which  He  willed  at 
the  creation  of  it.  This  is  the  amiable  nature  of  God. 
He  is  the  Good,  the  unchangeable,  overflowing  Fountain 
of  good,  that  sends  forth  nothmg  but  good  to  all  eternity. 
He  is  the  Love  itself,  the  unmixed,  unmeasurable  Love, 
doing  nothing  but  from  love,  giving  nothing  but 
gifts  of  love,  to  every  thing  that  He  has  made  ;  requu'- 
ing  nothing  of  all  His  creatures,  but  the  spirit  and 
fruits  of  that  love,  which  brought  them  into  being. 

Oh,  how  sweet  is  this  contemplation  of  the  height 
and  depth  of  the  riches  of  divine  Love  !  With  what 
attraction  must  it  draw  every  thoughtful  man  to  re- 
turn love  for  love  to  this  overfiowmg  Fountain  of 
boundless  goodness  !  What  charms  has  that  rehgion, 
which  discovers  to  us  our  existence  in,  relation  to,  and 
dependence  upon  this  Ocean  of  divine  Love !  View 
every  part  of  our  redemption  from  Adam's  first  sin, 
to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  you  will  find 
nothing  but  successive  mysteries  of  that  first  love  which 


120  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

created  angels  and  men.  All  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel 
are  only  so  many  marks  and  proofs  of  God's  desiring  to 
make  His  Love  triumph,  in  the  removal  of  sin  and 
disorder  from  all  nature  and  creature.^ 

10.  The  Need  of  the  New  Birth. 

But  to  return,  and  consider  further  the  nature  of 
Adam's  fall. 

See  here  the  deep  ground  and  absolute  necessity  of 
that  new  birth  of  the  Word,  Son,  and  Spirit  of  God, 
which  the  Scripture  speaks  so  much  of.  It  is  because 
our  soul,  as  fallen,  is  quite  dead  to  and  separate  from 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  by  having  lost  the  Light  and 
Spirit  of  God  in  itself ;  and  therefore  is,  and  must  be, 
incapable  of  entering  into  heaven,  till  by  this  new 
birth,  the  soul  gets  again  its  first  heavenly  nature. 

If  thou  hast  nothing  of  this  birth  when  thy  body 
dies,  then  thou  hast  only  that  root  of  life  in  thee  which 
the  devils  have  ;  thou  art  as  far  from  heaven,  and  as 
incapable  of  it,  as  they  are  ;  thy  nature  is  their  nature, 
and  therefore  their  habitation  must  be  thine.  For 
nothing  can  possibly  hinder  thy  union  with  fallen 
angels,  when  thou  diest,  but  a  birth  of  that  in  thy 
soul,  which  the  fallen  angels  have  lost. 

Now,  that  the  soul,  as  fallen,  is  in  this  real  state  of 
death,  is  a  doctrine  not  only  plain  from  the  whole 
tenor  of  Scripture,  but  affirmed  in  all  systems  of 
divinity.  For  all  hold  and  teach,  that  man,  unre- 
deemed, must,  at  the  death  of  his  body,  have  fallen 
into  a  state  of  misery,  like  that  of  the  fallen  angels : 
but  how  can  this  be  true,  unless  it  be  true  that  the 
life  of  heaven  was  extinguished  in  the  soul  ?  and  that 

'  Spirit  of  Love,  Part  the  Second. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  121 

man  had  really  lost  that  Light  and  Spirit  of  God, 
which  alone  can  make  any  being  capable  of  living  in 
heaven  ?  All,  therefore,  that  I  have  here  and  else- 
where said,  concerning  the  death  of  the  soul  by  its 
fall,  and  its  wanting  a  real  new  birth  of  the  Son  and 
Holy  Spirit  of  God  in  it,  in  order  to  its  salvation, 
cannot  be  denied,  but  by  giving  up  this  great,  funda- 
mental doctrine,  namely,  That  man  in  his  fallen  state, 
and  unredeemed,  must  have  been  eternally  lost.  For  it 
cannot  be  true,  that  the  fall  of  man  unredeemed, 
would  have  kept  him  for  ever  out  of  heaven,  but 
because  his  fall  had  absolutely  put  an  end  to  the  life 
of  heaven  in  his  soul. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  cannot  be  true  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  his  Eedeemer,  and  does  deliver  him  from  his 
fallen  state,  unless  it  be  true  that  Jesus  Christ  helps 
him  to  a  new  birth  of  that  Light  and  Spirit  of  God, 
which  was  extinguished  by  his  fall.  For  nothing 
could  possibly  be  the  redemption,  or  recovery  of  man, 
but  regeneration  alone.  His  misery  was  his  having 
lost  the  Life  and  Light  of  heaven  from  his  soul,  and 
therefore  nothing  in  all  the  universe  of  nature,  but  a 
new  birth  of  that  which  he  had  lost,  could  be  his 
deliverance  from  his  fallen  state. 

And  therefore,  if  angels  after  angels  had  come  down 
from  heaven,  to  assure  him  that  God  had  no  anger  at 
him,  he  would  stdl  have  been  in  the  same  helpless 
s^ate  ;  nay,  had  they  told  him  that  God  had  pity  and 
compassion  towards  him,  he  had  yet  been  unhelped, 
because  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  nothing  could  make 
so  much  as  a  beginning  of  his  dehverance,  but  that 
which  made  a  beginning  of  a  new  birth  in  him,  and 
nothing   could   fully   effect    his    recovery,   but   which 


122  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

perfectly  finished  the  new  birth  of  all  that  heavenly 
life  which  he  had  lost. 

11.  How  Man  again  becomes  Partaker  of 
the  Divine  Nature. 

One  would  wonder  how  any  persons,  who  believe 
the  great  Mystery  of  our  redemption,  who  adore  the 
depths  of  the  divine  goodness,  in  that  the  Son  of  God, 
the  second  Person  in  the  Trinity,  became  a  man  Him- 
self, in  order  to  make  it  possible  for  man  by  a  birth 
from  Him,  to  enter  agam  into  the  kingdom  of  God, 
should  yet  seek  to,  and  contend  for,  not  a  real,  but 
a  figurative  sense  of  a  new  birth  in  Jesus  Christ.  Is 
there  any  thing  more  inconsistent  than  this  ?  Or  can 
any  thing  strike  more  directly  at  the  heart  of  the  whole 
nature  of  our  redemption  ?  God  became  man,  took 
upon  Him  a  birth  from  the  fallen  nature.  But  why 
was  this  done  ?  Or  wherein  lies  the  adorable  depth  of 
this  Mystery  ?  How  does  all  this  manifest  the  infinity 
of  the  divine  Love  towards  man  ?  It  is  because 
nothing  less  than  this  mysterious  incarnation  (which 
astonishes  angels)  could  open  a  way,  or  begin  a  possi- 
bility, for  faUen  man  to  be  born  again  from  above,  and 
made  again  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature.  It  was 
because  man  was  become  so  dead  to  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  that  there  was  no  help  for  him  through  all 
nature ;  no  powers,  no  abilities  of  the  higliest  order  of 
creatures,  could  kindle  the  least  spark  of  life  in  him, 
or  help  him  to  the  least  glimpse  of  that  heavenly 
light  which  he  had  lost.  Now,  when  all  nature  and 
creature  stood  round  about  Adam,  as  unable  to  help 
him  as  he  was  to  help  himself,  and  all  of  them  unable 
to  help  him  for  this  reason,  because  that  which  he  had 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  123 

lost  was  the  life  and  light  of  heaven ;  how  glorious, 
how  adorable,  is  that  Mystery,  which  enables  us  to 
say,  that  when  man  lay  thus,  incapable  of  any  relief 
from  all  the  powers  and  possibilities  of  nature,  that 
then  the  Son,  the  Word  of  God,  entered  by  a  birth 
into  this  fallen  nature,  that  by  this  mysterious  incar- 
nation, all  the  fallen  nature  might  be  born  again  of 
Him,  according  to  the  Spirit,  in  the  same  reality  as 
they  were  born  of  Adam  according  to  the  flesh.  Look 
at  this  Mystery  in  this  true  light,  in  this  plain  sense 
of  Scripture,  and  then  you  must  be  forced  to  fall  down 
before  it,  in  adoration  of  it.  For  all  that  is  great  and 
astonishing  in  the  goodness  of  God,  all  that  is  glorious 
and  happy  with  regard  to  man,  is  manifestly  contained 
in  it. 

For  this  new  birth  is  not  a  part,  but  the  whole 
of  our  salvation.  Every  thing  in  religion,  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end  of  time,  is  only  for  the  sake  of 
it.  Nothing  does  us  any  good,  but  either  as  it  helps 
forward  our  regeneration,  or  as  it  is  a  true  fruit,  or 
effect  of  it. 

All  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel,  all  the  benefits 
of  our  Saviour,  however  variously  expressed  in  Scrip- 
ture, all  centre  in  this  one  point,  that  He  is  become 
our  Light,  our  Life,  our  Eesurrection,  our  Holiness, 
and  Salvation ;  that  we  are  in  Him  new  creatures, 
created  again  unto  righteousness,  born  again  of  Him 
from  above,  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Every  thing  in 
the  gospel  is  for  the  sake  of  this  new  creature,  this 
new  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  nothing  is  regarded 
without  it. 


124  WHOLLY    FOR   GOD 


12.  Of  Union  to  Christ. 

"I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches."  Here 
Christ,  our  second  Adam,  uses  this  similitude  to 
teach  us  that  the  new  birth  that  we  are  to  have  from 
Him  is  real,  in  the  most  strict  and  literal  sense  of 
the  words,  and  that  there  is  the  same  nearness  of 
relation  betwixt  Him  and  His  true  disciples,  that 
there  is  betwixt  the  vine  and  its  branches ;  that  He 
does  all  that  in  us,  and  for  us,  which  the  vine  does 
to  its  branches.  Now,  the  life  of  the  vine  must  be 
really  derived  into  the  branches, — they  cannot  be 
branches  till  the  bkth  of  the  vine  is  brought  forth  in 
them.  And  therefore,  as  sure  as  the  birth  of  the 
vine  must  be  brought  forth  in  the  branches,  so  sure 
is  it  that  we  must  be  born  again  of  our  second  Adam. 
And  that  unless  the  Life  of  the  holy  Jesus  be  in  us 
by  a  birth  from  Him,  we  are  as  dead  to  Him  and  the 
kingdom  of  God,  as  the  branch  is  dead  to  the  vine* 
from  which  it  is  broken  off. 

Again,  our  blessed  Saviour  saith,  "  Without  Mo  yc 
can  do  nothing."  The  question  is,  when,  or  liov/  a 
man  may  be  said  to  be  without  Christ  ?  Consider 
again  the  vine  and  its  branches.  A  branch  can,  then, 
only  be  said  to  be  without  its  vine  when  the 
vegetable  life  of  the  vine  is  no  longer  in  it.  This  is 
the  only  sense  in  which  we  can  be  said  to  be  with- 
out Christ ;  when  He  is  no  longer  in  us,  as  a 
Principle  of  a  heavenly  life,  we  are  then  without 
Him,  and  so  can  do  nothing — that  is,  nothing  that 
is  good  or  holy. 

A  Christ  not  in  us  is  the  same  thing  as  a  Christ  not 
ours.      If  we  are  only  so  far  with  Christ  as  to  ov/n 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PEAYEll  125 

and  receive  the  history  of  His  birth,  person,  and 
character,  if  this  is  all  that  we  have  of  Him,  we  are 
as  much  without  Him,  as  much  left  to  ourselves, 
as  little  helped  by  Him,  as  those  evil  spirits  which 
cried  out,  "  We  know  Thee,  who  Thou  art,  the  Holy 
One  of  God."  For  those  evil  spirits,  and  all  the 
fallen  augels,  are  totally  without  Christ,  have  no 
benefit  from  Him,  for  this  one  and  only  reason, 
because  Christ  is  not  in  them ;  nothing  of  the  Son 
of  God  is  generated  or  born  in  them.  Therefore 
every  son  of  Adam  that  has  not  something  of  the 
Son  of  God  generated  or  born  within  him,  is  as  much 
without  Christ,  as  destitute  of  all  help  from  Him, 
as  those  evil  spirits  who  could  only  make  an  outward 
confession  of  Him. 

13.  Of  Christ  within  Us. 

It  is  the  language  of  Scripture  that  Christ  in  us  is 
our  hope  of  glory ;  that  Christ  formed  in  us — livmg, 
growing,  and  raising  His  own  Life  and  Spirit  in  us — 
is  our  only  salvation.  And,  indeed,  all  this  is  plain 
from  the  nature  of  the  thing,  for  since  the  serpent, 
sin,  death,  and  hell  are  all  essentially  within  us,  the 
very  growth  of  our  nature, — must  not  our  redemption^ 
be  equally  inward,  an  inward  essential  death  to  this 
state  of  our  souls,  and  an  inward  growth  of  a  contrary 
life  within  us  ?  If  Adam  was  only  an  outward  person, 
if  his  whole  nature  was  not  our  nature,  born  in  us, 
and  derived  from  him  unto  us,  it  would  be  nonsense 
to  say  that  his  fall  is  our  fall.  So,  in  like  manner, 
if  Christ  our  second  Adam  was  only  an  outward 
person,  if  He  entered  not  as  deeply  into  our  nature  as 
the  first  Adam  does,  if   we  have  not  as  really  from 


126  WHOLLY    FOll    GOD 

Him  a  new  inward,  spiritual  man,  as  we  have  outward 
flesh  and  blood  from  Adam,  what  ground  could  there 
be  to  say  that  our  righteousness  is  from  Him  as  our 
sin  is  from  Adam  ? 

Let  no  one  here  think  to  charge  me  with  disregard 
to  the  holy  Jesus,  who  was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary, 
or  of  setting  up  an  inward  Saviour  in  opposition  to 
that  outward  Christ  whose  history  is  recorded  in  the 
gospel.  No ;  it  is  with  the  utmost  fulness  of  faith 
and  assurance,  that  I  ascribe  all  our  redemption  to 
that  blessed  and  mysterious  Person  that  was  then 
born  of  the  Virgin  Mary ;  and  will  assert  no  inward 
redemption  but  what  wholly  proceeds  from,  and  is 
effected  by,  that  life-giving  Eedeemer  who  died  on 
the  Cross  for  our  redemption. 

Was  I  to  say  that  a  plant,  or  vegetable,  must 
have  the  sun  within  it,  must  have  the  life,  light,  and 
virtues  of  the  sun  incorporated  in  it,  that  it  has  no 
benefit  from  the  sun  till  the  sun  is  thus  inwardly 
forming,  generating,  quickening,  and  raising  up  a 
life  of  the  sun's  virtues  in  it,  would  this  be  setting 
up  an  inward  sun  in  opposition  to  the  outward  one  ? 
Could  any  thing  be  more  ridiculous  than  such  a 
charge  ?  For  is  not  all  that  is  here  said  of  an 
inward  sun  in  the  vegetable,  so  much  said  of  a 
power  and  virtue  derived  from  the  sun  in  the  firma- 
ment ?  So,  in  like  manner,  all  that  is  said  of  an 
inward  Christ,  inwardly  formed  and  generated  in  the 
root  of  the  soul,  is  only  so  much  said  of  an  inward 
life;  brought  forth  by  the  power  and  efficacy  of  that 
blessed  Clirist  who  was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 


THE    SPIWT    OF    PEAYER  12' 


CHAPTER  II. 


DISCOVERING  THE  TRUE  WAY  OF  TURNING  TO  GOD,  AND 
OF  FINDING  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN,  THE  RICHES 
OF  ETERNITY,  IN  OUR  SOULS. 

14.  Of  the  Life  of  Christ  in  the  Soul. 

THOU  hast  seen,  dear  reader,  the  nature  and 
necessity  of  regeneration.  Be  persuaded,  there- 
fore, fully  to  believe,  and  firmly  to  settle  in  thy  mind, 
this  most  certain  Truth,  that  all  our  salvation  consists 
in  the  manifestation  of  the  Nature,  Life,  and  Spirit  of 
Jesus  Clirist  in  our  inward  new  man.  This  alone  is 
Christian  redemption,  this  alone  delivers  from  the 
guilt  and  power  of  sin,  this  alone  redeems,  renews, 
and  regains  the  first  Life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man. 

Every  thing  besides  this  is  self,  is  fiClion,  is 
propriety,  is  own  will,  and,  however  coloured,  is  only 
thy  "  old  man  with  all  his  deeds."  Enter,  therefore, 
with  all  thy  heart  into  this  Truth,  let  thine  eye  be 
always  upon  it,  do  every  thing  in  view  of  it,  try  every 
thing  by  the  truth  of  it,  love  nothing  but  for  the 
sake  of  it.  Wherever  tliou  goest,  whatever  thou 
doest,  at  home  or  abroad,  in  the  field  or  at  church, 
do  all  in  a  desire  of  union  with  Christ,  in  imitation  of 
His  tempers  and  inclinations,  and  look  upon  all  as 
nothing  but  that  which  exercises  and  increases  the 
Spirit  and  Life  of  Christ  in  thy  soul.  From  morning 
to  niglit  keep  Jesus  in  thy  heart,  long  for  nothing, 
desire  nothing,  hope  for  nothing,  but  to  have  all 
that  is  within  thee  changed  into  the  spirit  and  temper 


128  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

of  the  holy  Jesus.  Let  this  be  thy  Christianity,  thy 
Church,  and  thy  religion. 

For  this  new  birth  in  Christ  thus  firmly  believed, 
and  continually  desired,  will  do  every  thing  that  thou 
wantest  to  have  done  in  thee ;  it  will  dry  up  all  the 
springs  of  vice,  stop  all  the  workings  of  evil  in  thy 
nature ;  it  will  bring  all  that  is  good  into  thee  ;  it  will 
open  all  the  gospel  within  thee,  and  thou  wilt  know 
what  it  is  to  be  taught  of  God.  This  longing  desire  of 
thy  heart  to  be  one  with  Christ,  will  soon  put  a  stop 
to  all  the  vanity  of  thy  life,  and  nothing  will  be  ad- 
mitted to  enter  into  thy  heart,  or  proceed  from  it,  but 
what  comes  from  God  and  returns  to  God :  thou  wilt 
soon  be,  as  it  were,  tied  and  bound  in  the  chains  of  all 
holy  affections  and  desires;  thy  mouth  will  have  a 
watch  set  upon  it,  thine  ears  would  willingly  hear 
nothing  that  does  not  tend  to  God,  nor  thine  eyes  be 
open  but  to  see  and  find  occasions  of  doing  good. 

In  a  word,  when  this  faith  has  got  both  thy  head 
and  thy  heart,  it  will  then  be  with  thee  as  it  was 
with  the  merchant  who  found  a  Pearl  of  great  price, 
it  will  make  thee  gladly  to  sell  all  thou  hast,  and  buy 
It.  For  all  that  had  seized  and  possessed  the  heart  of 
any  man,  whatever  the  merchant  of  this  world  had 
got  together,  whether  of  riches,  power,  honour,  learning, 
or  reputation,  loses  all  its  value,  is  counted  but  as 
dung,  and  willingly  parted  with  as  soon  as  this 
glorious  Pearl,  the  new  birth  in  Christ  Jesus,  is  dis- 
covered and  found  by  him. 

15.  Of  the  Way  to  the  New  Birth. 

But  thou  wilt  perhaps  say,  How  shall  this  great 
work,  the   birth   of   Christ,   be   effected   in   me  ?     It 


THE    SPirJT    OF    PEAYEH  129 

might  rather  be  said,  Since  Christ  has  an  infinite 
power  and  also  an  infinite  desire  to  save  mankind,  how 
can  any  one  miss  of  this  salvation  but  through  his 
own  unwillingness  to  be  saved  by  Him  ?  Consider, 
how  was  it  that  the  lame  and  blind,  the  lunatic  and 
leper,  the  publican  and  sinner,  found  Christ  to  be 
their  Saviour,  and  to  do  all  that  for  them,  which  they 
wanted  to  be  done  to  them  ?  It  was  because  they 
had  a  real  desire  of  having  that  which  they  asked 
for,  and  therefore,  in  true  faith  and  prayer,  apphed  to 
Christ,  that  His  Spirit  and  Power  might  enter  into 
them,  and  heal  that  which  they  wanted  and  desired  to 
be  healed  in  them.  Every  one  of  these  said  in  faith 
and  desire,  "  Lord,  if  Thou  wilt.  Thou  canst  make  me 
whole;'  And  the  answer  was  always  this,  "  According 
to  thy  faith,  so  be  it  done  unto  thee."  This  is  Christ's 
answer  now,  and  thus  it  is  done  to  every  one  of  us  at 
this  day,  as  our  faith  is,  so  is  it  done  unto  us.  And 
here  lies  the  whole  reason  of  our  falling  short  of  the 
salvation  of  Christ,  it  is  because  we  have  no  will  to  it. 

16.  Wherein  the  Salvation  of  Christ 
consists. 

But  you  will  say.  Do  not  all  Christians  desire  to 
have  Christ  to  be  their  Saviour  ?  Yes ;  but  here  is 
the  deceit :  all  would  have  Christ  to  be  their  Saviour 
in  the  next  world,  and  to  help  them  into  heaven  when 
they  die,  by  His  Power  and  Merits  with  God.  But 
this  is  not  willing  Christ  to  be  thy  Saviour ;  for  His 
salvation,  if  it  is  had,  must  be  had  in  this  world ;  if 
He  saves  thee,  it  must  be  done  in  this  life,  by  chang- 
ing and  altering  all  that  is  within  thee,  by  helping 
thee  to  a  new  heart,  as  He  helped  the  blind  to  see, 
9 


130  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

the  lame  to  walk,  and  the  dumb  to  speak.  For  to 
have  salvation  from  Christ,  is  nothing'  else  but  to  be 
made  like  unto  Him ;  it  is  to  have  His  humility  and 
meekness,  His  mortification  and  self-denial,  His  renun- 
ciation of  the  spirit,  wisdom,  and  honours  of  this 
world.  His  love  of  God,  His  desire  of  doing  God's  will, 
and  seeking  only  His  honour.  To  have  these  tempers 
formed  and  begotten  in  thy  heart,  is  to  have  salvation 
from  Christ;  but  if  thou  wiliest  not  to  have  these 
tempers  brought  forth  in  thee,  if  thy  faith  and  desire 
does  not  seek  and  cry  to  Christ  for  them  in  the  same 
reality  as  the  lame  asked  to  walk,  and  the  blind  to 
see,  then  thou  must  be  said  to  be  unwilling  to  have 
Christ  to  be  thy  Saviour. 

Again,  consider  how  it  was  that  the  carnal  Jew, 
the  deep-read  Scribe,  the  learned  Eabbi,  the  religious 
Pharisee,  not  only  did  not  receive,  but  crucified  their 
Saviour.  It  was  because  they  willed  and  desired  no 
such  Saviour  as  He  was,  no  such  inward  salvation  as 
He  offered  to  them ;  they  desired  no  change  of  their 
own  nature,  no  inward  destruction  of  their  own 
natural  tempers,  no  dehverance  from  the  love  of 
themselves,  and  the  enjoyments  of  their  passions; 
they  liked  their  state,  the  gratifications  of  their  old 
man,  their  long  robes,  their  broad  phylacteries,  and 
greetings  in  the  markets.  They  wanted  not  to  have 
their  pride  and  self-love  dethroned,  their  covetousness 
and  sensuality  to  be  subdued,  by  a  new  nature  from 
heaven  derived  into  them.  Their  only  desire  was  the 
success  of  Judaism,  to  have  an  outward  Saviour,  a 
temporal  Prince,  that  should  establish  their  law  and 
ceremonies  over  all  the  earth ;  and  therefore  they 
crucified  their  dear  Kedeemer,  and  would  have  none 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYEIl  131 

of  His  salvation,  because  it  all  consisted  in  a  change 
of  their  nature,  in  a  new  birth  from  above,  and  a 
kingdom  of  heaven  to  be  opened  within  them  by  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

Oh,  Christendom !  look  not  only  at  the  old  Jews, 
but  see  thyself  in  this  glass.  For  at  this  day  (Oh, 
sad  truth  to  be  told !)  a  Christ  within  us,  an  inward 
Saviour  raising  a  birth  of  His  own  Nature,  Life,  and 
Spirit  within  us,  is  rejected  as  gross  enthusiasm,  the 
learned  Eabbis  take  counsel  against  it.  The  pro- 
pagation of  Popery,  the  propagation  of  Protestantism, 
the  success  of  some  particular  Church,  is  the  salvation 
which  priests  and  people  are  chiefly  concerned  about. 

17.  How  the  Birth  of  Christ  is  to  be 
ejected  in  Us. 

But  to  return :  It  is  manifest  that  no  one  can  fail 
of  the  benefit  of  Christ's  salvation,  but  through  an 
unwillingness  to  have  it,  and  from  the  same  spirit 
and  temper  which  made  the  Jews  unwilling  to  receive 
it.  But  if  thou  wouldst  still  further  know  how  this 
great  work,  the  birth  of  Christ,  is  to  be  effected  in  thee, 
then  let  this  joyful  truth  be  told  thee,  that  this  great 
work  is  already  begun  in  every  one  of  us.  For  this 
holy  Jesus,  that  is  to  be  formed  in  thee,  that  is  to  be 
the  Saviour  and  new  life  of  thy  soul,  that  is  to  raise 
thee  out  of  the  darkness  of  death  into  the  Light  of 
Life,  and  give  thee  power  to  become  a  son  of  God, 
is  already  within  thee,  living,  stirring,  calling,  knock- 
ing at  the  door  of  thy  heart,  and  wantmg  nothing  but 
thy  own  faith  and  good- will,  to  have  as  real  a  birth 
and  form  in  thee  as  He  had  in  the  Virgin  Mary. 

For  the  eternal  Word,  or  Son  of  God,  did  not  then 


132  WHOLLY   FOB   GOD 

first  begin  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world  when  He 
was  born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judea ;  but  that  Word 
which  became  man  in  the  Virgin  Mary,  did,  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world,  enter  as  a  Word  of  life,  a  Seed 
of  salvation,  into  the  first  father  of  mankind, — was 
inspoken  into  him,  as  an  ingrafted  Word,  under  the 
name  and  character  of  the  "  Bruiser  of  the  serpent's 
head." 

Hence  it  is  that  Christ  said  to  His  disciples,  "  The 
Ivingdom  of  God  is  within  you ; "  that  is,  the  divine 
nature  is  within  you,  given  unto  your  first  father,  into 
the  light  of  his  life ;  and  from  him,  rising  up  in  the 
life  of  every  son  of  Adam. 

Hence,  also,  the  holy  Jesus  is  said  to  be  the  "  Light 
which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world." 
Not  as  He  was  born  at  Bethlehem,  not  as  He  had  a 
human  form  upon  earth ;  in  these  respects  He  could 
not  be  said  to  have  been  the  Light  of  every  man  that 
cometh  into  the  world.  But  as  He  was  that  Eternal 
Word,  by  which  all  things  were  created,  which  was 
the  Life  and  Light  of  all  things,  and  which  had  as 
a  second  Creator  entered  again  into  fallen  man,  as 
a  Bruiser  of  the  serpent,  in  this  respect  it  was  truly 
said  of  our  Lord,  when  on  earth,  that  "  He  was  that 
Light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the 
world."  For  He  was  really  and  truly  all  this,  as  He 
was  the  Immanuel,  the  God  with  us,  given  unto  Adam, 
and  in  him  to  all  his  offspring. 

When  our  blessed  Lord  conversed  with  the  woman 
at  Jacob's  well.  He  said  unto  her,  "  If  thou  knewest 
the  gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that  talketh  with  thee, 
thou  wouldst  have  asked  of  Him,  and  He  would  have 
given  thee  living  water."     How  happy  (may  any  one 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  133 

well  say)  was  this  woman  of  Samaria,  to  stand  so  near 
this  Gift  of  God,  from  whom  she  might  have  had  living 
water,  had  she  but  vouchsafed  to  have  asked  for  it ! 
But,  dear  Christian,  this  happiness  is  thme ;  for  this 
holy  Jesus,  "  the  Gift  of  God,"  first  given  into  Adam, 
and  in  him  to  all  that  are  descended  from  him,  is  the 
Gift  of  God  to  thee,  as  sure  as  thou  art  born  of 
Adam;  nay,  hast  thou  never  yet  owned  Him,  art  thou 
wandered  from  Him,  as  far  as  the  prodigal  son  from 
his  father's  house,  yet  is  He  still  with  thee,  He  is  the 
Gift  of  God  to  thee,  and  if  thou  wilt  turn  to  Him,  and 
ask  of  Him,  He  has  living  water  for  thee. 

18.  Of  turning  to  the  Heart  to  find  Christ 
there. 

Poor  sinner !  consider  the  treasure  thou  hast  within 
thee :  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  the  eternal  Word  of 
God,  lies  hid  in  thee,  as  a  spark  of  the  divine  nature, 
which  is  to  overcome  sin,  and  death,  and  hell,  within 
thee,  and  generate  the  life  of  heaven  again  in  thy  soul. 
Turn  to  thy  heart,  and  thy  heart  will  find  its  Saviour, 
its  God,  within  itself.  Thou  seest,  hearest,  and  feelest 
nothing  of  God,  because  thou  seekest  for  Him  abroad 
with  thine  outward  eyes ;  thou  seekest  for  Him  in 
books,  in  controversies,  in  the  church,  and  outward 
exercises,  but  there  thou  wilt  not  find  Him,  till  thou 
hast  first  found  Him  in  thy  heart.  Seek  for  Him  in  thy 
heart,  and  thou  wilt  never  seek  in  vain  ;  for  there  He 
dwelleth,  there  is  the  seat  of  His  Light  and  Holy  Spirit. 

Tor  this  turning  to  the  Light  and  Spirit  of  God 
within  thee,  is  thine  only  true  turning  unto  God ; 
there  is  no  other  way  of  finding  Him,  but  in  that  place 
where  He  dwelleth  in   thee.      For  though   God  be 


134  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

everywhere  present,  yet  He  is  only  present  to  thee  in 
the  deepest  and  most  central  part  of  thy  soul.  Thy 
natural  senses  cannot  possess  God,  or  unite  thee  to 
Him ;  nay,  thine  inward  faculties  of  understanding, 
will,  and  memory  can  only  reach  after  God,  but  cannot 
be  the  place  of  His  habitation  in  thee.  But  there  is  a 
root  or  depth  in  thee,  from  whence  all  these  faculties 
come  forth,  as  lines  from  a  centre,  or  as  branches  from 
the  body  of  the  tree.  This  depth  is  called  the  centre, 
the  fund  or  bottom,  of  the  soul.  This  depth  is  the 
unity,  the  eternity,  I  had  almost  said  the  infinity  of 
thy  soul,  for  it  is  so  infinite  that  nothing  can  satisfy 
it,  or  give  it  any  rest,  but  the  infinity  of  God. 

In  this  depth  of  the  soul  the  Holy  Trinity  brought 
forth  its  own  living  image  in  the  first  created  man, 
bearing  in  himself  a  living  representation  of  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  and  this  was  his  dwelling  in 
God  and  God  in  him.  This  was  the  kingdom  of  God 
within  him,  and  made  Paradise  without  him.  But  the 
day  that  Adam  did  eat  of  the  forbidden  earthly  tree, 
in  that  day  he  absolutely  died  to  this  kingdom  of 
God  within  him.  This  depth  or  centre  of  his  soul, 
having  lost  its  God,  was  shut  up  in  death  and  dark- 
ness, and  became  a  prisoner  in  an  earthly  animal,  that 
only  excelled  its  brethren,  the  beasts,  in  an  upright 
form,  and  serpentine  subtlety.  Thus  ended  the  fall  of 
man.  But  from  that  moment  that  the  God  of  mercy 
inspoke  into  Adam  the  Bruiser  of  the  serpent,  from 
that  moment  all  the  riches  and  treasures  of  the  divine 
nature  came  again  into  man,  as  a  Seed  of  salvation 
sown  into  the  centre  of  the  soul,  and  only  lieth  hidden 
there  in  every  man,  till  he  desires  to  rise  from  his 
fallen  state,  and  to  be  born  again  from  above. 


THE    SPIEIT    OF    PKAYER  135 

Awake,  then,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  CHEIST,  who 
from  all  eternity  hath  been  espoused  to  thy  soul,  shall 
give  thee  Light.  Begin  to  search  and  dig  in  thine 
own  field  for  this  Pearl  of  eternity,  that  lieth  hidden 
in  it ;  it  cannot  cost  thee  too  much,  nor  canst  thou 
buy  it  too  dear,  for  it  is  all,  and  when  thou  hast 
found  it,  thou  wilt  know  that  all  which  thou  hast  sold 
or  given  away  for  it  is  as  a  mere  nothing,  as  a  bubble 
upon  the  w^ater. 

19.  The  Pearl  of  Eternity  is  the  Light  and 
Sioirit  of  God  within  thee. 

But  I  will  now  show  a  little  more  distinctly  what 
this  Pearl  of  eternity  is.  First,  It  is  the  Light  and 
Spirit  of  God  within  thee,  which  has  hitherto  done 
thee  but  little  good,  because  all  the  desire  of  thy  heart 
has  been  after  the  light  and  spirit  of  this  world.  Thy 
reason  and  senses,  thy  heart  and  passions,  have  turned 
all  their  attention  to  the  poor  concerns  of  this  life, 
and  therefore  thou  art  a  stranger  to  this  Principle  of 
heaven,  this  riches  of  eternity,  within  thee.  For  as 
God  is  not,  cannot  be,  truly  found  by  any  worshippers 
but  those  who  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  so 
this  Light  and  Spirit,  though  always  within  us,  is  not, 
cannot  be,  found,  felt,  or  enjoyed  but  by  those  whose 
whole  spirit  is  turned  to  it. 

When  man  first  came  into  being,  and  stood  before 
God,  as  His  own  image  and  likeness,  this  Light  and 
Spirit  of  God  was  as  natural  to  him,  as  truly  the  light 
of  his  nature,  as  the  light  and  air  of  this  world  is 
natural  to  the  creatures  that  have  their  birth  in  it. 
But  when  man,  not  content  with  the  food  of  eternity, 


136  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

did  eat  of  the  earthly  tree,  this  Light  and  Spirit  of 
heaven  was  no  more  natural  to  him,  no  more  rose  up 
as  a  bii'th  of  his  nature,  but  instead  thereof,  he  was 
left  solely  to  the  light  and  spirit  of  this  world.  And 
this  is  that  death,  which  God  told  Adam  he  should  surely 
die,  in  the  day  that  he  should  eat  of  the  forbidden  tree. 

But  the  goodness  of  God  would  not  leave  man  in 
this  condition ;  a  redemption  from  it  was  immediately 
granted,  and  the  Bruiser  of  the  serpent  brought  the 
Light  and  Spirit  of  heaven  once  more  into  the  human 
nature.  Not  as  it  was  in  its  first  state,  when  man 
was  in  Paradise,  but  as  a  treasure  hidden  in  the  centre 
of  our  souls,  which  should  discover,  and  open  itself  by 
degrees,  in  such  proportion  as  the  faith  and  desires  of 
our  hearts  were  turned  to  it. 

This  Light  and  Spirit  of  God  thus  freely  restored 
again  to  the  soul,  and  lying  in  it  as  a  secret  source  of 
heaven,  is  called  grace,  free  grace,  or  the  supernatural 
gift,  or  power  of  God  in  the  soul,  because  it  was  some- 
thing that  the  natural  powers  of  the  soul  could  no 
more  obtain. 

Hence  it  is,  that  in  the  greatest  truth,  and  highest 
reality,  every  stirring*  of  the  soul,  every  ten(.leney  of 
the  heart  towards  God  and  goodness,  is  justly  and 
necessarily  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  the  grace 
of  God. 

It  is  because  this  first  Seed  of  life,  which  is  sown 
into  the  soul,  as  the  gift  or  grace  of  God  to  fallen 
man,  is  itself  the  Light  and  Spirit  of  God ;  and  there- 
fore every  stirring  or  opening  of  this  Seed  of  Life, 
every  awakened  thought  or  desire  that  arises  from  it, 
must  be  called  the  moving,  or  the  quickening  of  the 
Spirit  of  God;   and  therefore  that  new  man  which 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PKAYER  1^7 

arises  from  it,  must  of  all  necessity  be  said  to  be 
solely  the  work  and  operation  of  God. 

Hence  also  we  have  an  easy  and  plain  declaration 
of  the  true  meaning,  solid  sense,  and  certain  truth  of 
all  those  scriptures  which  speak  of  the  inspiration  of 
God,  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  power 
of  the  divine  Light,  as  the  sole  and  necessary  agents 
in  the  renewal  and  sanctification  of  our  souls,  and  also 
as  being  thmgs  common  to  all  men.  It  is  because 
this  Ssed  of  life,  or  Bruiser  of  the  serpent,  is  common 
to  all  men,  and  has  in  all  men  a  degree  of  life,  which 
is  in  itself  so  much  of  the  inspii\ation  or  Life  of  God, 
the  Spirit  of  God,  the  Light  of  God,  which  is  in  every 
soul,  and  is  its  power  of  becoming  born  again  of  God. 

Hence  also  it  is,  that  all  men  are  exhorted  not  to 
quench,  or  resist,  or  grieve  the  Spirit ;  that  is,  this 
Seed  of  the  Spirit  and  Light  of  God  that  is  in  all  men, 
as  the  only  source  of  good.  Again,  "  the  flesh  lusteth 
against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh." 
By  the  flesh,  and  its  lustings,  are  meant  the  mere 
human  nature,  or  the  natural  man,  as  he  is  by  the 
fall ;  by  the  Spirit  is  meant  the  Bruiser  of  tlie  serpent, 
that  Seed  of  the  Light  and  Spirit  of  God,  which  lietli 
as  a  treasure  hid  in  the  soul,  in  order  to  bring  forth 
the  life  that  was  lost  in  Adam.  Now,  as  the  flesh 
hath  its  life,  its  lustings,  whence  all  sorts  of  evil  are 
truly  said  to  be  inspired,  quickened,  and  stkred  up  in 
us ;  so  the  Spirit,  being  a  living  principle  within  us, 
has  its  inspiration,  its  breathing,  its  moving,  its  quick- 
ening, from  which  alone  the  divine  life,  or  the  angel 
that  died  in  Adam,  can  be  born  in  us. 

See  here,  in  short,  the  state  of  man  as  redeemed. 
He  has  a  spark  of  the  Light  and  Spirit  of  God,  as  a 


138  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

supernatural  gift  of  God  given  into  the  birth  of  his 
soul,  to  bring  forth  by  degrees  a  new  birth  of  that 
life  which  was  lost  in  Paradise. 

This  holy  Spark  of  the  divine  nature  within  him 
has  a  natural,  strong,  and  almost  infinite  tendency,  or 
reaching,  after  that  eternal  Light  and  Spirit  of  God, 
from  whence  it  came  forth.  It  came  forth  from  God, 
it  came  out  of  God,  it  partaketh  of  the  divine  nature, 
and  therefore  it  is  always  in  a  state  of  tendency  and 
return  to  God.  And  all  this  is  called  the  breathing, 
the  moving,  the  quickening,  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within 
us,  which  are  so  many  operations  of  this  Spark  of  life 
tending  towards  God. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Deity,  as  considered  in 
Itself  and  without  the  soul  of  man,  has  an  infinite, 
unchangeable  tendency  of  love  and  desire  towards  the 
soul  of  man,  to  unite,  and  communicate  its  own  riches 
and  glories  to  it,  just  as  the  spirit  of  the  air  without 
man,  unites  and  communicates  its  riches  and  virtues 
to  the  spirit  of  the  air  that  is  within  man ;  this  love 
or  desire  of  God  towardsthe  soul  of  man  is  so  great, 
that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son,  the  brightness  of 
His  glory,  to  take  the  human  nature  upon  Him,  in  its 
fallen  state,  that  by  this  mysterious  union  of  God  and 
man,  all  the  enemies  of  the  soul  of  man  might  be  over- 
come, and  every  human  creature  might  have  a  power 
of  being  born  again,  according  to  that  image  of  God  in 
which  he  was  first  created.  The  gospel  is  the  history 
of  this  love  of  God  to  man.  Inwardly,  he  has  a  Seed 
of  the  divine  Life  given  into  the  birth  of  his  soul,  a 
Seed  that  has  all  the  riches  of  eternity  in  it,  and  is 
always  wanting  to  come  to  the  birth  in  him,  and  be 
alive  in  God.     Outwardly,  he  has  Jesus  Christ,  who,  as 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  139 

a  Sun  of  rigliteousness,  is  always  casting  forth  His 
enlivening  beams  on  this  inward  Seed,  to  khidle  and 
call  It  forth  to  the  birth,  doing  that  to  this  Seed  of 
heaven  in  man,  ^yhich  the  sun  in  the  firmament  is 
always  doing  to  the  vegetable  seeds  in  the  earth. 

Consider  this  matter  in  the  following  similitude. 
A  grain  of  wheat  has  the  air  and  hght  of  this  world 
enclosed,  or  incorporated  m  it :  this  is  the  mystery  of 
its  life,  this  is  its  power  of  growing.  By  this  it  has 
a  strong  continual  tendency  of  uniting*  again  with  that 
ocean  of  light  and  air  from  whence  it  came  forth,  and 
so  it  helps  to  kindle  its  own  vegetable  life. 

On  the  other  hand,  that  great  ocean  of  light  and  air 
having  its  own  offspring  hidden  in  the  heart  of  the 
grain,  has  a  perpetual  strong  tendency  to  unite,  and 
communicate  with  it  again.  From  this  desire  of  union 
on  both  sides,  the  vegetable  life  arises,  and  all  the 
vii^tues  and  powers  contained  in  it. 

But  here  let  it  be  well  observed,  that  this  desire  on 
both  sides  cannot  have  its  effect  till  the  husk  and 
gross  part  of  the  grain  falls  into  a  state  of  corruption 
and  death ;  till  this  begins,  the  mystery  of  life  hidden 
in  it  cannot  come  forth.  The  application  may  here 
be  left  to  the  reader.  I  shall  only  observe,  that  we 
may  here  see  the  true  ground  and  absolute  necessity 
of  that  dying  to  ourselves,  and  to  the  w^orld,  to  which 
our  blessed  Lord  so  constantly  calls  all  His  followers. 
An  universal  self-denial,  a  perpetual  mortification  of 
the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the 
pride  of  life,  is  not  a  thing  imposed  upon  us  by  the 
mere  will  of  God,  is  not  required  as  a  punishment,  is 
not  an  invention  of  dull  and  monkish  spirits,  but  has 
its  ground  and  reason  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  and 


140  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

is  as  absolutely  necessary  to  make  way  for  the  new 
birth,  as  the  death  of  the  husk  and  gross  part  of  the 
grain  is  necessary  to  make  way  for  its  vegetable  life. 

20.  The  Pearl  of  Eternity  is  the  Wisdom 
and  Love  of  God  within  thee. 

But,  secondly,  this  Pearl  of  eternity  is  the  Wisdom 
and  Love  of  God  within  thee.  In  this  Pearl  of  thy 
serpent  Bruiser,  all  the  holy  nature,  spirit,  tempers, 
and  inclinations  of  Christ  lie  as  in  a  seed  in  the  centre 
of  thy  soul,  and  divine  wisdom  and  heavenly  love  will 
grow  up  in  thee,  if  thou  givest  but  true  attention  to 
God  present  in  thy  soul.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
is  hidden  also  in  the  depth  of  thy  nature,  the  root  or 
possibility  of  all  the  hellish  nature,  spirit,  and  tempers 
of  the  fallen  angels.  For  heaven  and  hell  have  each 
of  them  their  foundation  within  us ;  they  come  not 
into  us  from  without,  but  spring  up  in  us,  according  as 
our  will  and  heart  is  turned  either  to  the  Light  of  God, 
or  the  kingdom  of  darkness.  But  when  this  life,  which 
is  in  the  midst  of  these  two  eternities,  is  at  an  end, 
either  an  angel  or  a  devil  will  be  found  to  have  a 
birth  in  us. 

Thou  needest  not,  therefore,  run  here,  or  there,  say- 
ing, "  Where  is  Christ  ?  "  Thou  needest  not  say,  "  Who 
shall  ascend  into  heaven,  that  is,  to  bring  Christ  down 
from  above  ?  or  who  shall  descend  into  the  deep,  to 
bring  Christ  up  from  the  dead  ? "  for  behold  the  Word, 
which  is  the  Wisdom  of  God,  is  in  thy  heart ;  it  ia 
there  as  a  Bruiser  of  thy  serpent,  as  a  light  unto  thy 
feet,  and  lantern  unto  thy  paths.  It  is  there  as  a 
speaking  Word  of  God  in  thy  soul ;  and  as  soon  as 
thou  art  ready  to  hear,  this  eternal  speaking  Word 


THE   SPIRIT    OF    PEAYER  141 

will  speak  wisdom  and  love  in  thy  inward  parts,  and 
bring  forth  the  birth  of  Christ,  with  all  His  holy 
nature,  spirit,  and  tempers,  within  thee. 

Hence  it  is,  that  in  the  Christian  Church  there 
have  been  in  all  ages,  amongst  the  most  illiterate, 
both  men  and  women,  who  have  attained  to  a  deep 
understanding  of  the  mysteries  of  the  wisdom  and 
love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  what  wonder  ? 
Since  it  is  not  art  or  science,  or  skill  in  grammar  or 
logic,  but  the  opening  of  the  divine  Life  in  the  soul, 
that  can  give  true  understanding  of  the  things  of  God. 
This  Life  of  God  in  the  soul,  which  for  its  smallness 
at  first,  and  capacity  for  great  growth,  is  by  our  Lord 
compared  to  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  may  be,  and  too 
generally  is,  suppressed  and  kept  under,  either  by 
worldly  cares,  or  pleasures,  by  vain  learning,  sensuality, 
or  ambition. 

On  the  other  hand,  wherever  this  Seed  of  heaven 
is  suffered  to  take  root,  to  get  life  and  breath  ui  the 
soul,  whether  it  be  in  man  or  woman,  young  or  old, 
there  this  new-born  inward  man  is  justly  said  to  be 
inspii^ed,  enlightened,  and  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
because  his  whole  birth  and  life  is  a  birth  from  above, 
of  the  Light  and  Spirit  of  God,  and  therefore  all  that 
is  in  him  hath  the  nature,  spirit,  and  tempers  of 
heaven  in  it.  As  this  regenerate  life  grows  up  in 
any  man,  so  there  grows  up  a  true  and  real  knowledge 
of  the  whole  mystery  of  godliness  in  himself.  All 
that  the  gospel  teaches  of  sin  and  grace,  of  life  and 
death,  of  heaven  and  hell,  of  the  new  and  old  man,  of 
the  Light  and  Spirit  of  God,  are  things  not  got  by 
hearsay,  but  inwardly  known,  felt,  and  experienced  in 
the  growth  of  his  own  new-born  life.     He  has  then 


142  WHOLLY   FOR   GOD 

an  unction  from  above  which  teacheth  him  all  things, 
a  spirit  that  "  knoweth  what  it  ought  to  pray  for ; " 
a  spirit  that  "  prays  without  ceasing,"  that  is  risen 
with  Christ  from  the  dead,  and  has  all  its  conversa- 
tion in  heaven ;  a  spirit  that  hath  "  groans  and  sighs 
that  cannot  be  uttered ; "  that  travaileth  and  groaneth 
with  the  whole  creation  to  be  delivered  from  vanity, 
and  have  its  glorious  liberty  in  that  God  from  whom 
it  came  forth. 

21.  The  Pearl  of  Eternity  is  the  Temple 
of  God  within  thee. 

Again,  thirdly,  this  Pearl  of  eternity  is  the  Church, 
or  temple  of  God  within  thee,  the  consecrated  place  of 
divine  worship,  where  alone  thou  canst  worship  God 
"  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  In  spirit,  because  thy  spirit 
is  that  alone  in  thee,  which  can  unite  and  cleave  unto 
God,  and  receive  the  workings  of  His  divine  Spirit 
upon  thee.  In  truth,  because  this  adoration  in  spirit 
is  that  truth  and  reality,  of  which  all  outward  forms 
and  rites,  though  instituted  by  God,  are  only  the 
figure  for  a  time ;  but  this  worship  is  eternal. 

Accustom  thyself  to  the  holy  service  of  this  inward 
temple ;  in  the  midst  of  it  is  the  Fountain  of  living 
water,  of  which  thou  mayest  drink,  and  live  for  ever. 
There  the  mysteries  of  thy  redemption  are  celebrated, 
or  rather,  opened  in  life  and  power.  There  the  supper 
of  the  Lamb  is  kept ;  the  "  Bread  that  came  down  from 
heaven,  that  giveth  life  to  the  world,"  is  thy  true 
nourishment:  all  is  done,  and  known  in  real  ex- 
perience, in  a  living  sensibility  of  the  work  of  God  on 
the  soul.  There  the  birth,  the  life,  the  sufferings, 
the  death,  the  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  Christ, 


THE    SPIRIT    OF   PRAYER  143 

are  not  merely  remembered,  but  inwardly  found  and 
enjoyed  as  the  real  states  of  thy  soul,  which  has 
followed  Christ  in  the  regeneration.  When  once  thou 
art  well  grounded  in  this  inward  worship,  thou  wilt 
have  learnt  to  live  unto  God  above  time  and  place ; 
for  every  day  will  be  Sunday  to  thee,  and  wherever 
thou  goest,  thou  wilt  have  a  priest,  a  church,  and  an 
altar,  along  with  thee.  For  when  God  has  all  that 
He  should  have  of  thy  heart,  when  renouncing  the 
will,  judgment,  tempers,  and  inclinations  of  thy  old 
man,  thou  art  wholly  given  up  to  the  obedience  of 
the  Light  and  Spirit  of  God  within  thee,  to  will  only 
in  His  Will,  to  love  only  in  His  Love,  to  be  wise  only 
in  His  Wisdom ;  then  it  is  that  every  thing  thou  dost 
is  as  a  song  of  praise,  and  the  common  business  of  thy 
life  is  a  conforming  to  God's  will  on  earth,  as  angels 
do  in  heaven. 

22.  The  Pearl  of  Eternity  is  the  Peace 
and  Joy  of  God  within  thee. 

Fourthly,  and  lastly,  this  Pearl  of  eternity  is  the 
Peace  and  Joy  of  God  within  thee ;  but  can  only  be 
found  by  the  manifestation  of  the  Life  and  Power  of 
Jesus  Christ  in  thy  soul.  But  Christ  cannot  be  thy 
Power  and  thy  Life,  till,  in  obedience  to  His  call,  thou 
deniest  thyself,  takest  up  thy  daily  cross,  and  followest 
Him,  in  the  regeneration.  This  is  peremptory ;  it 
admits  of  no  reserve  or  evasion,  it  is  the  one  way  to 
Christ  and  eternal  life.  But  be  where  thou  wilt,  either 
here,  or  at  Eome,  or  Geneva,  if  self  is  undenied,  if 
thou  livest  to  thine  own  will,  to  the  pleasures  of  thy 
natural  lust  and  appetites,  senses  and  passions,  and  in 
conformity  to  the  vain  customs  and  spirit  of  this  world, 


144  WHOLLY   FOR   GOD 

thou  art  dead  whilst  thou  livest,  the  seed  of  the  woman 
is  crucified  within  thee,  CHEIST  can  profit  thee 
nothing,  thou  art  a  stranger  to  all  that  is  holy  and 
heavenly  within  thee,  and  utterly  incapable  of  finding 
the  Peace  and  Joy  of  God  in  thy  soul :  and  thus  thou 
art  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,  and  empty,  and  livest 
a  miserable  life  in  the  vanity  of  time ;  whilst  all  the 
riches  of  eternity,  the  Light  and  Spirit,  the  Wisdom 
and  Love,  the  Peace  and  Joy  of  God,  are  within  thee. 
And  thus  it  will  always  be  with  thee,  there  is  no 
remedy :  go  where  thou  wilt,  do  what  thou  wilt,  all 
is  shut  up,  there  is  no  open  door  of  salvation,  no  awaken- 
ing out  of  the  sleep  of  sin,  no  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  thy  corrupt  nature,  no  overcoming  of  the 
world,  no  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  no  joy  of  the  new 
birth  from  above,  till,  dying  to  thyself  and  the  world, 
thou  turn  est  to  the  Light,  and  Spirit,  and  Power  of 
God  in  thy  soul.  All  is  fruitless  and  insignificant, 
all  the  means  of  thy  redemption  are  at  a  stand,  all 
outward  forms  are  but  a  dead  formality,  till  this 
Fountain  of  Living  Water  is  found  within  thee. 

23.  Of  the  Way  to  Possess  this  Pearl 
of  Eternity. 

But  thou  wilt  perhaps  say,  How  shall  I  discover  this 
Eiches  of  eternity,  this  Light,  and  Spirit,  and  Wisdom, 
and  Peace  of  God,  treasured  up  within  me  ?  Thy  first 
thought  of  repentance,  or  desire  of  turning  to  God,  is 
thy  first  discovery  of  this  Light  and  Spirit  of  God 
within  thee ;  it  is  the  voice  and  language  of  the  Word 
of  God  within  thee,  though  thou  knowest  it  not.  It  is 
the  Bruiser  of  thy  serpent's  head,  thy  dear  Immanuel, 
who  is  beginning  to  preach  within  thee,  that  same  v/hich 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  145 

He  first  preached  in  public,  saying,  "  Eepent,  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  AY  hen,  therefore, 
but  the  smallest  instinct  or  desire  of  thy  heart  calleth 
thee  towards  God,  and  a  newness  of  life,  give  it  time 
and  leave  to  speak  ;  and  take  care  thou  refuse  not  Hun 
that  speaketh.  For  it  is  not  an  angel  from  heaven  that 
speaketh  to  thee,  but  it  is  the  eternal  speaking  Word 
of  God  in  thy  heart,  that  Word  which  at  first  created 
thee,  is  thus  beginning  to  create  thee  a  second  time 
unto  righteousness'  that  a  new  man  may  be  formed 
again  in  thee  in  the  image  and  likeness  of  God.  But 
above  all  things,  beware  of  taking  this  desire  of  repent- 
ance to  be  the  effect  of  thy  own  natural  sense  and 
reason,  for  in  so  doing  thou  losest  the  key  of  all  the 
heavenly  treasure  that  is  in  thee,  thou  shuttest  the 
door  against  God,  turnest  away  from  Him,  and  thy 
repentance  (if  thou  hast  any)  will  be  only  a  vain, 
unprofitable  work  of  thy  own  hands,  that  will  do  thee 
no  more  good  than  a  well  that  is  without  water.  But 
if  thou  takest  this  awakened  desire  of  turning  to  God 
to  be,  as  in  truth  it  is,  the  coming  of  Christ  in  thy 
soul,  the  working,  redeeming  power  of  the  Light 
and  Spirit  of  the  holy  Jesus  within  thee,  if  thou  dost 
reverence  and  adhere  to  it  as  such,  this  faith  will  save 
thee,  will  make  thee  whole  ;  and  by  thus  believing  in 
Christ,  though  thou  wert  dead,  yet  shalt  thou  live. 

Now,  all  dependeth  upon  thy  right  submission  and 
obedience  to  this  speaking  of  God  in  thy  soul.  Stop, 
therefore,  all  self-activity,  listen  not  to  the  suggestions 
of  thy  own  reason,  run  not  on  in  thy  own  will;  but 
be  retired,  silent,  passive,  and  humbly  attentive  to  this 
new-risen  Light  within  thee.  Open  thy  heart,  thine 
eyes,  and  ears,  to  all  its  impressions.  Let  it  en- 
10 


146  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

liglitcii,  teach,  frigliten,  torment,  judge,  and  condemn 
thee  as  it  pleaseth,  turn  not  away  from  it,  hear  all 
it  saith,  seek  for  no  relief  out  of  it,  consult  not  with 
llesh  and  blood,  but,  with  a  heart  full  of  faith  and 
resignation  to  God,  pray  only  this  prayer,  that  God's 
Kingdom  may  come,  and  His  Will  be  done  in  thy  soul. 
Stand  faithfully  in  this  state  of  preparation,  thus 
given  up  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  then  the  work  of 
thy  repentance  will  be  wrought  in  God,  and  thou  wilt 
soon  find  that  Ho  that  is  in  thee  is  much  greater  than 
all  that  are  against  thee. 

24.  Of  Dependence  on  God's  Spirit. 

But  that  thou  mayest  do  all  this  the  better,  and 
be  more  firmly  assured  that  this  resignation  to,  and 
dependence  upon,  the  working  of  God's  Spirit  within 
thee  is  right  and  sound,  I  shall  lay  before  thee  two 
great,  and  infallible,  and  fundamental  truths,  which 
will  bo  as  a  rock  for  thy  faith  to  stand  upon. 

First.  That  through  all  the  whole  nature  of  things, 
nothing  can  do,  or  be  a  real  good  to  thy  soul,  but  the 
operation  of  God  upon  it.  Secondly.  That  all  the  dis- 
pensations of  God  to  mankind,  from  the  fall  of  Adam 
to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  were  only  for  this  one 
end,  to  fit,  prepare,  and  dispose  the  soul  for  the 
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  it.  Those  two 
great  truths,  well  and  deeply  apprehended,  put  the 
soul  in  its  right  state,  in  a  continual  dependence  upon 
God,  in  a  readiness  to  receive  all  good  from  Him,  and 
will  be  a  continual  source  of  light  in  thy  mind. 
They  will  keep  thee  safe  from  all  errors,  and  false 
zeal  in  things  and  forms  of  religion, — from  a  sectarian 
spirit,  from  bigotry  and  superstition ;  they  will  teach 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PEAYER  147 

thee  the  true  dinercnce  between  the  means  and  the 
end  of  rehgion,  and  the  regard  thou  showcst  to  the 
she;]!  will  be  only  so  far  as  the  kernel  is  to  be  found 
in  it. 

25.  Of  Nature  and  Grace. 

Man,  by  his  fall,  had  broke  off  from  his  true  centre, 
his  proper  place  in  God,  and  therefore  the  Life  and 
operation  of  God  was  no  more  in  him.  He  was 
fallen  from  a  life  in  God,  into  a  life  of  self,  into  an 
animal  life  of  self-love,  self-esteem,  and  self-seeking 
in  the  poor  perishing  enjoyments  of  this  world.  This 
was  the  natural  state  of  man  by  the  fall.  He  was 
an  apostate  from  God,  and  His  natural  life  was  all 
idolatry,  where  self  \Yas  the  great  idol  that  was 
worshipped  instead  of  God.  See  here  the  whole  truth 
in  short.  All  sin,  death,  damnation,  and  hell  is 
nothing  else  but  this  kingdom  of  self,  or  the  various 
operations  of  self-love,  self-esteem,  and  self-seeking, 
which  separate  the  soul  from  God,  and  end  in  eternal 
death  and  hell. 

On  the  other  hand,  all  that  is  grace,  redem.ption, 
salvation,  sanctification,  spiritual  life,  and  the  new 
birth,  is  nothing  else  but  so  much  of  the  Life  and 
operation  of  God  found  again  in  the  soul.  It  is  man 
come  back  again  into  his  centre  or  place  in  God,  from 
whence  he  had  broke  off.  The  begmning  again  of  the 
Life  of  God  in  the  soul  was  then  first  made,  when  the 
mercy  of  God  inspoke  into  Adam  a  Seed  of  the  divine 
Life,  which  should  bruise  the  head  of  the  serpent, 
v/hich  had  wrought  itself  into  the  human  nature. 
Here  tlie  Kiii'^xloni  of  God  was  again  with  us,  though 
only  as  a  Seed ;  yet,  small  as  it  was,  it  was  yet   a 


148  WHOLLY    FOll    GOD 

degree  of  the  divine  Life,  which,  if  rightly  cultivated, 
would  overcome  all  the  evil  that  was  in  us,  and  make 
of  every  fallen  man  a  new-born  son  of  God. 

26.  Of  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 

All  the  sacrifices  and  institutions  of  the  ancient 
patriarchs,  the  Law  of  Moses,  with  all  its  types  and 
rites  and  ceremonies,  had  this  only  end :  they  were 
the  methods  of  divine  Wisdom  for  a  time,  to  keep  the 
hearts  of  men  from  the  wanderings  of  idolatry,  in  a 
state  of  holy  expectation  upon  God, — they  were  to 
keep  the  first  Seed  of  life  in  a  state  of  growth,  and 
make  way  for  the  further  operation  of  God  upon  the 
soul ;  or,  as  the  apostle  speaks,  to  be  as  a  schoolmaster 
[leading  us]  unto  Christ.  That  is,  till  the  birth,  the 
death,  the  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  Christ,  should 
conquer  death  and  hell,  open  a  new  Dispensation  of 
God,  and  baptize  mankind  afresh  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  fire  of  heaven.  Then,  that  is,  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  a  new  Dispensation  of  God  came  forth, 
which,  on  God's  part,  was  the  operation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  gifts  and  graces  upon  the  whole  Church. 
And  on  man's  part,  it  was  the  adoration  of  God  in 
"  spirit  and  in  truth."  Thus,  all  that  was  done  by 
God,  from  the  Bruiser  of  the  serpent  given  to  Adam, 
to  Christ's  sitting  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  was 
all  for  this  end,  to  remove  all  that  stood  between  God 
and  man,  and  to  make  way  for  the  immediate  and 
continual  operation  of  God  upon  the  soul.  And  that 
man,  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  born  again 
from  above,  should  absolutely  renounce  self,  and  wholly 
give  up  his  soul  to  the  operation  of  God's  Spirit,  to 
know,  to  love,  to  will,  to  pray,  to  worship,  to  preach. 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  149 

to  exhort,  to  use  all  tlie  faculties  of  his  mind,  and  all 
the  outward  things  of  this  world,  as  enlightened, 
inspired,  moved,  and  guided  by  the  Holy  Ghost;  who 
by  this  last  dispensation  of  God  w^as  given  to  be  a 
Comforter,  a  Teacher,  and  Guide  to  the  Church,  who 
should  abide  with  it  for  ever. 

27.  Of  the  Kingdom  of  God. 

This  is  Christianity,  a  Spiritual  Society,  not  because 
it  has  no  worldly  concerns,  but  because  all  its  members, 
as  such,  are  born  of  the  Spirit,  kept  ahve,  animated, 
and  governed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  It  is  constantly 
called  by  our  Lord  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  heaven, 
because  all  its  ministry  and  service,  all  that  is  done 
in  it,  is  done  in  obedience  and  subjection  to  that  Spirit 
by  which  angels  live  and  are  governed  in  heaven.^ 
Hence  our  blessed  Lord  taught  His  disciples  to  pray, 
that  His  Kingdom  might  come,  that  so  God's  will 
might  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven ;  which 
could  not  be,  but  by  that  same  Spirit  by  which  it  is 
done  in  heaven.  The  short  is  this :  the  kingdom  of 
self  is  the  fall  of  man,  or  the  great  apostasy  from  the 
Life  of  God  in  the  soul,  and  every  one,  wherever  he 
be,  that  liveth  unto  self,  is  still  under  the  fall  and 
great  apostasy  from  God.  The  Kingdom  of  Christ  is 
the  Spuit  and  Power  of  God,  dwelling  and  manifesting 
itself  in  the  birth  of  a  new  inward  man ;  and  no  one 
is  a  member  of  this  kingdom,  but  so  far  as  a  true 
birth  of  the  Spirit  is  brought  forth  in  him.  These 
two  kingdoms  take  in  all  mankind :  he  that  is  not  of 
one  is  certainly  in  the  other ;  dying  to  one,  is  living 
to  the  other. 

1  Way  to  Divine  Knowhchje,  etc. 


150  WHOLLY    FOE,    GOD 

28.  Of  Subjection  to  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Hence  we  may  gatlicr  these  following  truths : 
First.  Here  is  shown  the  true  ground  and  reason  of 
what  was  said  above,  namely,  that  when  the  call  of 
God  to  repentance  first  ariseth  in  thy  soul,  thou  art 
to  be  retired,  silent,  passive,  and  humbly  attentive  to 
this  new-risen  Light  within  thee,  by  wholly  stopping, 
or  disregarding  the  workings  of  thy  own  will,  reason, 
and  judgment.  It  is  because  all  these  are  false  coun- 
sellors, the  sworn  servants,  bribed  slaves  of  thy  fallen 
nature,  they  are  all  born  and  bred  in  the  kingdom 
of  self;  and  therefore  if  a  new  kingdom  is  to  be  set 
up  in  thee,  if  the  operation  of  God  is  to  have  its  effect 
in  thee,  all  these  natural  powers  of  self  are  to  be 
silenced  and  suppressed,  till  they  have  learned  obedi- 
ence and  subjection  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  Now,  this 
is  not  requiring  thee  to  become  a  fool,  or  to  give  up 
thy  claim  to  sense  and  reason,  but  is  the  shortest  way 
to  have  thy  sense  and  reason  delivered  from  folly, 
and  thy  whole  rational  nature  strengthened,  en- 
lightened, and  guided  by  that  Light,  which  is  Wisdom 
itself. 

A  child  that  obediently  denies  his  own  will  and 
own  reason  to  be  guided  by  the  will  and  reason  of  a 
truly  wise  and  understanding  tutor,  cannot  be  said  to 
make  himself  a  fool,  and  give  up  the  benefit  of  his 
rational  nature,  but  to  have  taken  the  shortest  way 
to  have  his  own  will  and  reason  made  truly  a  blessing 
to  him. 

29.  The  Need  of  Mortifying  Self. 

Secondly.  Hence  is  to  be  seen  the  true  ground 
and  necessity  of  that  universal  mortification  and  self- 


THE    SPirJT    OF    PRAYER  151 

denial  witli  regard  to  all  our  senses,  appetites,  tempers, 
passions,  and  judgments.  It  is  because  all  our  wliole 
nature,  as  fallen  from  the  Life  of  God,  is  in  a  state  of 
contrariety  to  the  order  and  end  of  our  creation,  a 
continual  source  of  disorderly  appetites,  corrupt  tempers, 
and  false  judgments.  And  therefore  every  motion  of 
it  is  to  be  mortiiied,  clianged,  and  purified  from  its 
natural  state,  before  we  can  enter  into  the  Kingdom 
of  God. 

Thus,  when  our  Lord  saith,  "  Except  a  man  hateth 
his  father  and  mother,  yea,  and  his  own  life,  he  can- 
not be  My  disciple,"  it  is  because  our  best  tempers 
are  yet  carnal,  and  full  of  the  imperfections  of  our 
fallen  nature.  The  doctrine  is  just  and  good ;  not  as 
if  father  and  mother  were  to  be  hated;  but  that  love, 
which  an  unregenerate  person,  or  natural  man,  hath 
towards  them,  is  to  be  hated ;  as  being  a  bUnd  self- 
love,  full  of  all  the  weakness  and  partiality  with 
which  fallen  man  loves,  honours,  esteems,  and  cleaves 
to  himself.  This  love,  born  from  corrupt  flesh  and 
blood,  and  polluted  with  self,  is  to  be  hated  and 
parted  with,  that  we  may  love  them  with  a  love  born 
of  God,  with  such  a  love,  and  on  such  a  motive, 
as  Christ  hath  loved  us.  And  then  the  disciple  of 
Christ  far  exceeds  all  others  in  the  love  of  parents. 

Again,  our  own  life  is  to  be  hated ;  and  the  reason 
is  plain,  it  is  because  there  is  nothing  lovely  in  it. 
It  is  a  legion  of  evil,  a  monstrous  birth  of  the  serpent, 
the  world,  and  the  flesh ;  it  is  an  apostasy  from  the 
Life  and  Power  of  God  in  the  soul;  a  life  that  is 
death  to  heaven,  that  is  pure  unmixed  idolatry,  that 
lives  wholly  to  self,  and  not  to  God,  and  therefore  all 
this  own  life  is  to  be  absolutely  haled,  all  this  self  is 


152  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

to  be  denied  and  mortified ;  the  nature,  spirit,  tempers, 
and  inclinations  of  Christ  are  to  be  brought  to  life  in 
us.  For  it  is  as  impossible  to  live  to  both  these  lives 
at  once,  as  for  a  body  to  move  two  contrary  ways  at 
the  same  time.  And  therefore  all  these  mortifications 
and  self-denials  have  an  absolute  necessity  in  the 
nature  of  the  thing  itself. 

30.  Of  forsaking  All. 

Thus,  when  our  Lord  further  saith,  unless  a  man 
forsake  "  all  that  he  hath,  he  cannot  be  My  disciple," 
the  reason  is  plain,  and  the  necessity  absolute ;  it  is 
because  all  that  the  natural  man  hath,  is  in  the 
possession  of  self-love,  and  therefore  this  possession  is 
to  be  absolutely  forsaken  and  parted  with.  All  that 
he  hath  is  to  be  put  into  other  hands,  to  be  given  to 
divine  Love,  or  this  natural  man  cannot  be  changed 
into  a  disciple  of  Christ.  For  self-love,  in  all  that  it 
hath,  is  earthly,  sensual,  and  devilish,  and  therefore 
must  have  all  taken  away  from  it ;  and  then  to  the 
natural  man  all  is  lost ;  he  hath  nothing  left,  all  is 
laid  down  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  And  then  all  things 
are  common,  as  soon  as  self-love  has  lost  the  possession 
of  them.  And  then  the  disciple  of  Christ,  "  though 
having  nothing,  yet  possesseth  all  things,"  all  that 
the  natural  man  hath  forsaken,  is  restored  to  the 
disciple  of  Christ  an  hundred-fold.  For  self-love,  the 
greatest  of  all  thieves,  being  now  cast  out,  and  all  that 
he  had  stolen  and  hidden  thus  taken  from  him,  and 
put  into  the  hands  of  divine  Love,  every  mite  becometh 
a  large  treasure,  and  Mammon  openeth  the  door  into 
everlasting  habitations.  This  was  the  spirit  of  the 
first  draught  of  a  Christian  Church  at  Jerusalem,  a 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYER  153 

Church  made  truly  after  the  pattern  of  heaven,  where 
the  love  that  reigns  in  heaven  reigned  in  it,  where 
divine  Love  broke  down  all  the  selfish  fences,  the  locks 
and  bolts  of  me,  mine,  my  own,  etc.,  and  laid  all  things 
common  to  the  members  of  this  new  Kingdom  of  God 
on  earth. 

Now,  though  many  years  did  not  pass  after  the  age 
of  the  apostles,  before  Satan  and  self  got  footing  in 
the  Church,  and  set  up  merchandise  in  the  House  of 
God,  yet  this  one  Heart,  and  one  Spirit,  which  then 
first  appeared  in  the  Jerusalem  Church,  is  that  one 
Heart  and  Spirit  of  divine  Love,  to  which  all  are  called, 
who  would  be  true  disciples  of  Christ.  And  though 
the  practice  of  it  is  lost  as  to  the  Church  in  general, 
yet  it  ought  not  to  have  been  lost;  and  therefore 
every  Christian  ought  to  make  it  his  great  care  and 
prayer,  to  have  it  restored  in  himself;  and  then, 
though  born  in  the  dregs  of  time,  or  living  in  Babylon, 
he  will  as  truly  be  a  member  of  the  first  heavenly 
Church  at  Jerusalem,  as  if  he  had  lived  in  it  in  the 
days  of  the  apostles.  This  Spirit  of  Love,  born  of  that 
celestial  Fire  with  which  Christ  baptizes  His  true 
disciples,  is  alone  that  Spirit  which  can  enter  into 
heaven,  and  therefore  is  that  Spirit  which  is  to  be  born 
in  us  whilst  we  are  on  earth. 

For  no  one  can  enter  into  heaven  till  he  is  made 
heavenly,  till  the  Spirit  of  heaven  is  entered  into  him. 
And  therefore  all  that  our  Lord  hath  said  of  deny- 
ing and  dying  to  self,  and  of  his  parting  with  all  that 
he  hath,  arc  practices  absolutely  necessary  from  the 
nature  of  the  thing. 


154  WHOLLY   FOR   GOD 

31.  Of  the  Love  of  our  Neighbour  in  and 

for  Clod. 

Because  all  turning  to  self  is  so  far  turning  from 
God,  and  so  much  as  we  have  of  self-love,  so  much  we 
have  of  a  hellish,  earthly  weight,  that  must  be  taken 
off,  or  there  can  be  no  ascension  into  heaven.  But 
thou  wilt  perhaps  say,  if  all  self-love  is  to  be  re- 
nounced, then  all  love  of  our  neighbour  is  renounced 
along  with  it,  because  the  commandment  is  only  "  to 
love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves."  The  answer  here 
is  easy,  and  yet  no  quarter  given  to  self-love.  There 
is  but  one  only  love  in  heaven,  and  yet  the  angels  of 
God  love  one  another  in  the  same  manner  as  they  love 
themselves.  The  matter  is  thus :  the  one  supreme, 
unchangeable  rule  of  love,  which  is  a  law  to  all  in- 
telligent beings  of  all  worlds,  and  will  be  a  law  to  all 
eternity,  is  this — viz.  that  God  alone  is  to  be  loved 
for  Himself,  and  all  other  beings  only  in  Him  and  for 
Him.  Whatever  intelligent  creature  lives  not  under 
this  rule  of  love,  is  so  far  fallen  from  the  order  of  his 
creation,  and  is,  till  he  returns  to  this  eternal  Law  of 
Love,  an  apostate  from  God,  and  incapable  of  the 
Kingdom  of  heaven. 

Now,  if  God  alone  is  to  be  loved  for  Himself,  then 
no  creature  is  to  be  loved  for  itself ;  and  so  all  self- 
love  in  every  creature  is  absolutely  condemned. 

And  if  all  created  beings  are  only  to  be  loved  in 
and  for  God,  then  my  neighbour  is  to  be  loved  as  I 
love  myself,  and  I  am  only  to  love  myself  as  I  love 
my  neighbour,  or  any  other  created  being, — that  is, 
only  in  and  for  God.  And  thus  the  command  of  loving 
our  neighbours  as  ourselves  stands  firm,  and  yet  all 


THE    SPIRIT    OF   PRAYER  155 

S3lf-love  is  plucked  up  by  the  roots.  But  what  is 
loviiig  any  creature  only  in,  and  for  God  ?  It  is  when 
we  love  it  only  as  it  is  God's  work,  image,  and  delight, 
when  we  love  it  merely  as  it  is  God's,  and  belongs  to 
Him  ;  this  is  loving  it  in  God :  and  when  all  that  we 
wish,  intend,  or  do  to  it,  is  done  from  a  love  of  God, 
for  the  honour  of  God,  and  in  conformity  to  the  Will 
of  God ;  this  is  loving  it  for  God.  This  is  the  one 
love  that  is,  and  must  be,  the  spirit  of  all  creatures 
that  live  united  to  God.  Now,  this  is  no  speculative 
refinement  or  fine-spun  fiction  of  the  brain,  but  the 
simple  truth,  a  first  law  of  nature,  and  a  necessary 
bond  of  union  between  God  and  the  creature.  The 
creature  is  not  in  God,  is  a  stranger  to  Him,  has  lost 
the  Life  of  God  in  itself,  whenever  its  love  does  not 
thus  begin  and  end  in  God. 

32.  The  Necessity  of  Self-Denial. 

The  loss  of  this  love  was  the  fall  of  man,  as  it 
opened  in  him  a  kingdom  of  self,  in  which  Satan,  the 
world,  and  the  flesh  could  all  of  them  bring  forth 
their  own  works.^  If,  therefore,  man  is  to  rise  from 
his  fall,  and  return  to  his  life  in  God,  there  is  an 
absolute  necessity  that  self,  with  all  his  brood  of  gross 
affections,  be  deposed,  that  his  first  love,  in  and  for 
which  he  was  created,  may  be  born  again  in  him. 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  to  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil.  Now,  self  is  not  only  the 
seat  and  habitation,  but  the  very  life  of  sin :  the  works 
of  the  devil  are  all  wrought  in  self;  it  is  his  peculiar 
V7orklioiiGo:  and  therefore  Christ  is  not  come  as  a 
Saviour  from  sin,  as  a  destroyer  of  the  works  of  the 
^  Spirit  of  Prayer,  Part  the  Second. 


156  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

devil  in  any  of  us,  but  so  far  as  self  is  beaten  down, 
and  overcome  in  us.  It  is  literally  true  what  our 
Lord  said,  that  "  His  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world ; " 
then  it  is  a  truth  of  the  same  certainty,  that  no  one  is 
a  member  of  this  kingdom,  but  he  that,  in  the  literal 
sense  of  the  words,  renounces  the  spirit  of  this  world. 
Christians  might  as  well  part  with  half  the  articles 
of  their  creed,  or  but  half  believe  them,  as  to  really 
refuse,  or  but  by  halves  enter  into  these  self-denials. 

For  all  that  is  in  the  creed,  is  only  to  bring  forth 
this  dying  and  death  to  all  and  every  part  of  the  old 
man,  that  the  Life  and  Spirit  of  Christ  may  be  formed 
in  us. 

Our  redemption  is  this  new  birth;  if  this  is  not 
done,  or  doing  in  us,  we  are  still  unredeemed.  And 
though  the  Saviour  of  the  world  is  come.  He  is  not 
come  in  us.  He  is  not  received  by  us,  is  a  stranger  to 
us,  is  not  ours,  if  His  Life  is  not  within  us.  His  Life 
is  not,  cannot  be,  within  us,  but  so  far  as  the  spirit  of 
the  world,  self-love,  self-esteem,  and  self-seeking  are 
renounced  and  driven  out  of  us. 

33.  The  True  Nature  and  Worth  of  Self- 
DeniaL 

Thirdly.  Hence  we  may  also  learn  the  true  nature 
and  worth  of  all  self-denials  and  mortifications.  As 
to  their  nature,  considered  in  themselves,  they  have 
nothing  of  goodness  or  holiness,  nor  are  any  real  parts 
of  our  sanctification ;  they  are  not  the  true  food  or 
nourishment  of  the  divine  Life  in  our  souls,  they  have 
no  quickening,  sanctifying  power  in  them ;  their  only 
worth  consists  in  this,  that  they  remove  the  impedi- 
ments of  holiness,   break    dov/n    that    which    stands 


THE    SPIKIT    OF    PKAYEll  157 

between  God  and  us,  and  make  way  for  the  quickening, 
sanctifying  Spirit  of  God  to  operate  on  our  souls : 
which  operation  of  God  is  the  one  only  thing  that 
can  raise  the  divine  Life  in  the  soul,  or  help  it  to  the 
smallest  degree  of  real  hoKness,  or  spiritual  life.  As 
in  our  creation  we  had  only  that  degree  of  a  divine 
Life  which  the  power  of  God  derived  into  us ;  as  then 
all  that  we  had,  and  were,  was  the  sole  operation  of 
God,  in  the  creation  of  us,  so  in  our  redemption,  or 
regaining  that  first  perfection  which  we  have  lost,  all 
must  be  again  the  operation  of  God.  Every  degree  of 
the  divine  Life  restored  in  us,  be  it  ever  so  small,  must 
and  can  be  nothing  else  but  so  much  of  the  Life  and 
operation  of  God  found  again  in  the  soul.  All  the 
activity  of  man  in  the  works  of  self-denial,  has  no 
good  in  itself,  but  is  only  to  open  an  entrance  for  the 
one  only  good,  the  Light  of  God,  to  operate  upon  us. 

34.  Of  the  Danger  of  Trusting  in  our  Self- 
Denial,  and  the  only  Way  to  avoid  this. 

Hence,  also,  we  may  learn  the  reason  why  many 
people  not  only  lose  the  benefit,  but  are  even  the 
worse  for  all  their  mortifications.  It  is  because  they 
mistake  the  whole  nature  and  worth  of  them.  They 
practise  them  for  their  own  sakes,  as  things  good  in 
themselves ;  they  think  them  to  be  real  parts  of  holi- 
ness, and  so  rest  in  them,  and  look  no  farther,  but 
grow  full  of  self-esteem  and  self-admiration  for  their 
own  progress  in  them.  This  makes  them  self-sufiicient, 
morose,  severe  judges  of  all  those  that  fall  short  of 
their  mortifications. 

And  thus  their  self-denials  do  only  that  for  them 
which  indulgences  do  for  other  people ;  they  withstand 


158  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

and  hinder  the  operation  of  God  upon  tlieir  souls,  and 
instead  of  being  really  self-denials,  they  strengthen 
and  keep  up  the  kiugdom  of  self. 

There  is  no  avoiding  this  fatal  error,  but  by  deeply 
entering  into  this  great  truth,  that  all  our  own  activity 
and  working  has  no  good  in  it,  can  do  no  good  to  us, 
but  as  it  leads  and  turns  us  in  the  best  manner  to  the 
Light  and  Spirit  of  God,  which  alone  brings  life  and 
salvation  into  the  soul.  "  Stretch  forth  thy  hand," 
said  our  Lord  to  the  "  man  that  had  a  withered  hand ; " 
he  did  so,  and  "  it  was  immediately  made  whole  as  the 
other." 

Now,  had  this  man  any  ground  for  pride,  or  a  high 
opinion  of  himself,  for  the  share  he  had  in  the  restor- 
ing of  his  hand  ?  Yet  just  such  is  our  share  in  the 
raising  up  of  the  spiritual  life  within  us.  All  that 
we  can  do  by  our  own  activity,  is  only  like  this  man's 
stretching  out  his  hand ;  the  rest  is  the  work  of  Christ, 
the  only  Giver  of  life  to  the  withered  hand,  or  the 
dead  soul.  "We  can  only,  then,  do  living  works,  when 
we  are  so  far  born  again  as  to  be  able  to  say  with  the 
apostle,  "  Yet  not  I,  but  Christ  that  liveth  in  me." 

35.  Of  our  Absolute  Dependence  upon  God. 

But  to  return,  and  further  show  how  the  soul  that 
feels  the  call  of  God  to  repentance,  is  to  behave  under 
it,  that  this  stirrin2j  of  the  divine  Power  in  the  soul 
may  have  its  full  effect,  and  bring  forth  the  birth  of 
the  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  are  to  consider  it 
(as  in  truth  it  is)  as  the  Seed  of  the  divine  nature 
within  us,  that  can  only  grow  by  its  own  strength  and 
union  with  God.  lb  is  a  divine  Life,  and  therefore 
can  grow  from  nolhing  but  divine  Power.     When  the 


THE    SPirJT    OF    PKAYER  159 

Virgin  Mary  conceived  the  birth  of  the  holy  Jesus,  all 
that  she  did  towards  it  herself  was  only  this  Biiigle 
act  of  faith  and  resignation  to  God:  "Behold  the  hand- 
maid of  the  Lord,  be  it  unto  me  according  to  Thy 
word."  This  is  all  that  we  can  do  towards  the 
conception  of  that  new  man  that  is  to  be  born  in 
ourselves.  Now,  this  truth  is  easily  consented  to,  and 
a  man  thinks  he  believes  it,  because  he  consents  to  it, 
or  rather,  does  not  deny  it.  But  that  is  not  enough : 
it  is  to  be  apprehended  in  a  deep,  full,  and  practical 
assurance,  in  such  a  manner  as  a  man  knows  and  be- 
lieves that  he  did  not  create  the  stars,  or  cause  life  to 
rise  up  in  himself.  Then  it  is  a  belief  that  puts  the 
soul  into  a  right  state,  that  makes  room  for  the 
operation  of  God  upon  it.  His  Light  then  enters 
with  full  power  mto  the  soul,  and  His  Holy  Spirit 
moves  and  directs  all  that  is  done  in  it,  and  so  man 
lives  again  in  God  as  a  new  creature. 

36.  Of  the  Effects  of  this  Absolute 
Dependence  upon  God. 

This  truth,  thus  firmly  believed,  will  have  these 
two  most  excellent  effects : 

First.  It  will  keep  the  soul  fixed,  and  continually 
turned  tovv-ards  God,  in  faith,  prayer,  desire,  confidence, 
and  resignation  to  Him,  for  all  that  it  wants  to  have 
done  in  it,  and  to  it ;  which  will  be  a  continual  source 
of  all  divine  virtues  and  graces.  The  soul  thus  turned 
to  God,  must  be  always  receiving  from  Him.  It  stands 
at  the  true  door  o{  all  divine  communications,  and  the 
Light  of  God  as  freely  enters  into  it  as  the  light  of 
the  sun  enters  into  the  air. 

Secondly.  It  will  fix  and  ground  the  soul  in  a  tiue 


160  WHOLLY   FOR   GOD 

and  lasting  self-denial.  For  by  thus  knowing  and 
owning  our  own  nothingness  and  inability,  that  we 
have  no  other  capacity  for  good  but  that  of  receiving 
it  from  God  alone,  self  is  wholly  denied,  its  kingdom 
is  destroyed ;  no  room  is  left  for  spiritual  pride  and 
self-esteem ;  we  are  saved  from  a  pharisaical  holiness, 
from  wrong  opinions  of  our  own  works  and  good  deeds, 
and  from  a  multitude  of  errors,  the  most  dangerous 
to  our  souls,  all  which  arise  from  the  something  that 
we  take  ourselves  to  be  either  in  nature  or  grace. 
But  when  we  once  apprehend  but  in  some  good  degree, 
the  All  of  God  and  the  nothingness  of  ourselves,  we 
have  got  a  Truth,  whose  usefulness  and  benefit  no 
words  can  express.  When  our  religion  is  founded  on 
this  Eock,  it  has  the  firmness  of  a  rock,  and  its  height 
reaches  unto  heaven.  The  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil  can  do  no  hurt  to  it ;  all  enemies  are  known, 
and  all  disarmed  by  this  great  Truth,  dwelling  in  our 
souls. 

It  is  the  knowledge  of  the  All  of  God  that  makes 
Cherubims  and  Seraphims  to  be  flames  of  divine  Love. 
Where  this  All  of  God  is  truly  known  and  felt  in  any 
creature,  there  its  whole  breath  and  spirit  is  a  fire  of 
love ;  nothing  but  a  pure,  disinterested  love  can  rise 
up  in  it,  or  come  from  it, — a  love  that  begins  and 
ends  in  God.  Where  this  love  is  born  in  any  creature, 
there  a  seraphic  life  is  born  along  with  it.  This  pure 
love  introduces  the  creature  into  the  All  of  God, — all 
that  is  in  God  is  opened  in  the  creature ;  it  is  united 
with  God,  and  hath  the  Life  of  God  manifested  in  it. 

There  is  but  one  salvation  for  all  mankind,  and  that 
is  the  Life  of  God  in  the  soul.  God  has  but  one  design 
or  intent  towards  all  mankind,  and  that  is  to  introduce 


THE    SPIRIT    OF    PRAYEll  161 

or  generate  His  own  Life,  Light,  and  Spirit  in  them, 
that  all  may  be  as  so  many  images,  temples,  and 
habitations  of  the  Holy  Trinity. 

87.  Of  the  one  Salvation,  and  the  Way 
to  it. 

Now,  there  is  but  one  possible  way  for  man  to 
attain  this  salvation,  or  Life  of  God  in  the  souL 
God  is  One,  human  nature  is  one,  salvation  is  one, 
and  the  Way  to  it  is  one ;  and  that  is,  the  desire  of 
the  soul  turned  to  God.  When  this  desire  is  alive, 
and  breaks  forth  in  any  creature  under  heaven,  then 
the  lost  sheep  is  found,  and  the  Shepherd  hath  it  upon 
His  shoulders.  Through  this  desire  the  poor  prodigal 
son  leaveth  his  husks  and  swine,  and  hasteth  to  his 
Father;  it  is  because  of  this  desire  that  the  Father 
seeth  the  son  while  yet  afar  off,  that  He  runs  out  to 
meet  him,  falleth  on  his  neck,  and  kisseth  him.  See 
here  how  plainly  we  are  taught  that  no  sooner  is  this 
desire  arisen  and  in  motion  towards  God,  but  the 
operation  of  God's  Spirit  answers  to  it,  cherishes  and 
welcomes  its  first  beginnings,  signified  by  the  Father's 
seeing  and  having  compassion  on  His  son,  whilst  yet 
afar  off, — that  is,  in  the  first  beginnings  of  his  desire. 
Thus  does  this  desire  do  all ;  it  brings  the  soul  to  God, 
and  God  iuto  the  soul;  it  unites  with  God,  it  co- 
operates with  God,  and  is  one  life  with  God. 

Oh  my  God,  just  and  good,  how  great  is  Thy  love 
and  mercy  to  mankind,  that  heaven  is  thus  every- 
where open,  and  Christ  thus  the  common  Saviour  to 
all  that  turn  the  desire  of  their  hearts  to  Thee !  Oh 
sweet  Power  of  the  Bruiser  of  the  serpent,  born  in 
every  son  of  man,  that  stirs  and  works  in  every  man, 
11 


162  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

and  gives  every  man  a  power,  and  desire,  to  find  his 
happiness  in  God  !  Oh  holy  Jesus,  heavenly  "  Light, 
that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world," 
that  redeemeth  every  soul  that  followeth  Thy  light, 
which  is  always  within  him !  Oh  Holy  Trinity, 
immense  Ocean  of  divine  Love,  in  which  all  mankind 
live,  and  move,  and  have  their  being !  None  are 
separated  from  Thee,  none  live  out  of  Thy  love,  but 
all  are  embraced  in  the  arms  of  Thy  mercy,  all  are 
partakers  of  Thy  divine  Life,  the  operation  of  Thy 
Holy  Spirit,  as  soon  as  their  heart  is  turned  to  Thee ! 

Oh  plain,  and  easy,  and  simple  way  of  salvation  ! 
wanting  no  subtleties  of  art  or  science,  no  borrowed 
learning,  no  refinements  of  reason,  but  all  done  by  the 
simple  natural  motion  of  every  heart,  that  truly  longs 
after  God.  For  no  sooner  is  the  finite  desire  of  the 
creature  in  motion  towards  God,  but  the  infinite 
desire  of  God  is  united  with  it,  co-operates  with  it. 
And  in  this  united  desire  of  God,  and  the  creature,  is 
the  salvation  and  life  of  the  soul  brought  forth.  For 
the  soul  is  shut  out  of  God,  and  imprisoned  in  its  own 
dark  workings  of  flesh  and  blood,  merely  and  solely 
because  it  desires  to  live  to  the  vanity  of  this  world. 
This  desire  is  its  darkness,  its  death,  its  imprisonment, 
and  separation  from  God. 

When,  therefore,  the  first  spark  of  a  desire  after  God 
arises  in  thy  soul,  cherish  it  with  all  thy  care,  give  all 
thy  heart  into  it ;  it  is  nothing  less  than  a  touch  of 
the  divine  Loadstone  that  is  to  draw  thee  out  of  the 
vanity  of  time  into  the  riches  of  eternity.  Get  up, 
therefore,  and  follow  it  as  gladly  as  the  wise  men  of 
the  east  followed  the  star  from  heaven  that  appeared 
to  them.     It  will  do  for  thee,  as  the  star  did  for  them ; 


THE    SPIKIT    OF    PRAYER  163 

it  will  lead  thee  to  the  birth  of  Jesus,  not  in  a  stable 
at  Bethlenem  in  Judea,  but  to  the  birth  of  Jesus  in 
the  dark  centre  of  thine  own  fallen  soul. 

I  shall  conclude  this  First  Part  with  the  words  of 
the  heavenly  illuminated  and  blessed  man  Jacob 
Behmen : 

"  It  is  much  to  be  lamented  that  we  are  so  blindly 
led,  and  the  truth  withheld  from  us  through  imaginary 
conceptions ;  for  if  the  divine  Power  in  the  inward 
ground  of  the  soul  was  manifest,  and  working  with  its 
lustre  in  us,  then  is  the  whole  Triune  God  present  in 
the  life  and  will  of  the  soul ;  and  the  heaven,  wherein 
God  dwelleth,  is  opened  in  the  soul ;  and  there,  in  the 
soul,  is  the  place  where  the  Father  begetteth  His  Son, 
and  where  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  from  the  Father 
and  the  Son. 

"  Christ  saith,  '  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world ;  he 
that  followeth  Me  walketh  not  in  darkness.'  He 
directs  us  only  to  Himself.  He  is  the  Morning  Star, 
and  is  generated  and  riseth  in  us,  and  shineth  in  the 
darkness  of  our  nature.  Oh  how  great  a  triumph  is 
there  in  the  soul  when  He  ariseth  in  it !  then  a  man 
knows,  as  he  never  knew  before,  that  he  is  a  stranger 
in  a  foreign  land." 


A   SERIOUS    CALL   TO    A   DEVOUT 
AND    HOLY   LIFE 


ADAPTED   TO   THE 


STATE   AND   CONDITION   OF   ALL   ORDEES 
OF   CHRISTIANS 


By  WILLIAM  LAW,  M.A. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL    TO    A    DEVOUT 
AND    HOLY    LIFE 


CHAPTER  I. 

CONCERNING    THE    NATURE    AND    EXTENT    OF    CHRISTIAN 
DEVOTION. 

(True  Devotion  does  not  consist  in  the  per- 
formance of  certain  Religious  Duties  at 
set  times,  but  in  the  Spirit  in  which  the 
Ordinary  Duties  of  common  life  are  per- 
formed.) 

DEVOTION  is  neither  private  nor  public  prayer; 
but  prayers,  whether  private  or  public,  are 
particular  parts  or  instances  of  devotion.  Devotion 
signifies  a  life  given,  or  devoted,  to  God. 

He  therefore  is  the  devout  man,  who  lives  no 
longer  to  his  own  will,  or  the  way  and  spirit  of  the 
world,  but  to  tlie  sole  will  of  God ;  who  considers  God 
in  every  thing,  who  serves  God  in  every  thing,  who 
makes  all  the  parts  of  his  common  life  parts  of  piety, 
by  doing  every  thing  in  the  name  of  God,  and  under 
such  rules  as  are  comformable  to  His  glory. 

167 


168  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

We  readily  acknowledge  that  God  alone  is  to  be 
the  rule  and  measure  of  our  prayers ;  that  in  them  we 
are  to  look  wholly  unto  Him,  and  act  wholly  for  Him  ; 
that  we  are  only  to  pray  in  such  a  manner,  for  such 
things,  and  such  ends,  as  are  suitable  to  His  glory. 

Now  let  any  one  but  find  out  the  reason  why  he  is 
to  be  thus  strictly  pious  in  his  prayers,  and  he  will 
find  the  same  as  strong  a  reason  to  be  as  strictly 
pious  in  all  the  other  parts  of  his  life.  For  there  is 
not  the  least  shadow  of  a  reason  why  we  should  make 
God  the  rule  and  measure  of  our  prayers ;  why  we 
should  then  look  wholly  unto  Him,  and  pray  accord- 
ing to  His  will ;  but  what  equally  proves  it  necessary 
for  us  to  look  wholly  unto  God,  and  make  Him  the 
rule  and  measure  of  all  the  other  actions  of  our  life. 
For  any  ways  of  life,  any  employment  of  our  talents, 
whether  of  our  parts,  our  time,  or  money,  that  is  not 
strictly  according  to  the  will  of  God,  that  is  not  for 
such  ends  as  are  suitable  to  Hie  ^lory,  are  as  great 
absurdities  and  failings,  as  prayers  that  are  not  ac- 
cording to  the  will  of  God.  For  there  is  no  other 
reason  why  our  prayers  should  be  according  to  the 
will  of  God,  w^hy  they  should  have  nothing  in  them 
but  what  is  wise,  and  holy,  and  heavenly ;  there  is  no 
other  reason  for  this,  but  that  our  lives  may  be  of  the 
same  nature,  full  of  the  same  wisdom,  holiness,  and 
heavenly  tempers,  that  we  may  live  unto  God  in  the 
same  spirit  that  we  pray  unto  Him.  .  .  . 

As  sure,  therefore,  as  there  is  any  wisdom  in  pray- 
ing for  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  sure  is  it  that  we  are  to 
make  that  Spirit  the  rule  of  all  our  actions ;  as  sure  as 
it  is  our  duty  to  look  wholly  unto  God  in  our  prayers, 
so  sure  is  it  that  it  is  our  duty  to  live  wholly  unto 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  169 

God  in  our  lives.  But  we  can  no  more  be  said  to  live 
unto  God,  unless  we  live  unto  Him  in  all  the  ordinary 
actions  of  our  life,  unless  He  be  the  rule  and  measure 
of  all  our  ways,  than  we  can  be  said  to  pray  unto 
God,  unless  our  prayers  look  wholly  unto  Him.  .  .  . 

It  is  for  want  of  knowing,  or  at  least  considering 
this,  that  we  see  such  a  mixture  of  ridicule  in  the 
lives  of  many  people.  You  see  them  strict  as  to  some 
times  and  places  of  devotion,  but  when  the  service  of 
the  church  is  over,  they  are  but  like  those  that  seldom 
or  never  come  there.  In  their  way  of  life,  their  manner 
of  spending  their  time  and  money,  in  their  cares  and 
fears,  in  their  pleasures  and  indulgences,  in  their  labour 
and  diversions,  they  are  like  the  rest  of  the  world.  .  .  . 
This  is  the  reason  why  they  are  the  jest  and  scorn  of 
careless  and  worldly  people ;  not  because  they  are 
really  devoted  to  God,  but  because  they  appear  to 
have  no  other  devotion  but  that  of  occasional 
prayers.  .  .  . 

And  indeed  there  cannot  any  thing  be  imagined 
more  absurd  in  itself,  than  wise,  and  sublime,  and 
heavenly  prayers,  added  to  a  life  of  vanity  and  folly, 
where  neither  labour  nor  diversions,  neither  time  nor 
money,  are  under  the  direction  of  the  wisdom  and 
heavenly  tempers  of  our  prayers.  ...  And  to  allow 
ourselves  in  any  ways  of  life  that  neither  are,  nor 
can  be  offered  to  God,  is  the  same  irreligion,  as  to 
neglect  our  prayers,  or  use  them  in  such  a  manner 
as  make  them  an  offering  unworthy  of  God. 

The  short  of  the  matter  is  this ;  either  reason  and 
religion  prescribe  rules  and  ends  to  all  the  ordinary 
actions  of  our  life,  or  they  do  not :  if  they  do,  then 
it  is  as  necessary  to  govern  all  our  actions  by  those 


170  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

rules,  as  it  is  necessary  to  worship  God.  For  if 
religion  teaches  us  any  thing  concerning  eating  and 
drinking,  or  spending  our  time  and  money ;  if  it 
teaches  us  how  we  are  to  use  and  contemn  the  world ; 
if  it  tells  us  what  tempers  we  are  to  have  in  common 
life,  how  we  are  to  be  disposed  towards  all  people ; 
how  we  are  to  behave  towards  the  sick,  the  poor,  the 
old,  the  destitute ;  if  it  tells  us  whom  we  are  to  treat 
with  a  particular  love,  whom  we  are  to  regard  with 
a  particular  esteem ;  if  it  tells  us  how  we  are  to  treat 
our  enemies,  and  how  we  are  to  mortify  and  deny 
ourselves ;  he  must  be  very  weak  that  can  think 
these  parts  of  religion  are  not  to  be  observed  with 
as  much  exactness,  as  any  doctrines  that  relate  to 
prayers. 

It  is  very  observable,  that  there  is  not  one  com- 
mand in  all  the  gospel  for  public  worship ;  and 
perhaps  it  is  a  duty  that  is  least  insisted  upon  in 
Scripture  of  any  other.  The  frequent  attendance  at 
it  is  never  so  much  as  mentioned  in  all  the  New 
Testament.  Whereas  that  religion  or  devotion  which 
is  to  govern  the  ordinary  actions  of  our  life,  is  to  be 
found  in  almost  every  verse  of  Scripture.  Our  blessed 
Saviour  and  His  apostles  are  wholly  taken  up  in 
doctrines  that  relate  to  common  life.  They  call  us. to 
renounce  the  world,  and  differ  in  every  temper  and 
way  of  life,  from  the  spirit  and  the  way  of  the  world : 
to  renounce  all  its  goods,  to  fear  none  of  its  evils,  to 
reject  its  joys,  and  have  no  value  for  its  happiness : 
to  be  as  new-born  babes,  that  are  born  into  a  new 
state  of  things :  to  live  as  pilgrims  in  spiritual  watch- 
ing, in  holy  fear,  and  heavenly  aspiring  after  another 
life :  to  take  up  our  daily  cross,  to  deny  ourselves,  to 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  171 

profess  the  blessedness  of  mourning,  to  seek  the  blessed- 
ness of  poverty  of  spirit :  to  forsake  the  pride  and 
vanity  of  riches,  to  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow, 
to  live  in  the  profoundest  state  of  humility,  to  rejoice 
in  worldly  sufferings :  to  reject  the  lust  of  the  flesh, 
the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life  :  to  bear 
injuries,  to  forgive  and  bless  our  enemies,  and  to  love 
mankind  as  God  loveth  them :  to  give  up  our  whole 
hearts  and  affections  to  God,  and  strive  to  enter 
through  the  strait  gate  into  a  life  of  eternal  glory. 

This  is  the  common  devotion  which  our  blessed 
Saviour  taught,  in  order  to  make  it  the  common  life 
of  all  Christians.  Is  it  not  therefore  exceeding  strange, 
that  people  should  place  so  much  piety  in  the  attend- 
ance upon  public  worship,  concerning  which  there 
is  not  one  precept  of  our  Lord's  to  be  found,  and  yet 
neglect  these  common  duties  of  our  ordinary  life,  which 
are  commanded  in  every  page  of  the  gospel  ? 

If  contempt  of  the  world  and  heavenly  affection  is 
a  necessary  temper  of  Christians,  it  is  necessary  that 
this  temper  appear  in  the  whole  course  of  their  lives, 
in  their  manner  of  using  the  world,  because  it  can 
have  no  place  anywhere  else.  If  self-denial  be  a 
condition  of  salvation,  all  that  would  be  saved  must 
make  it  a  part  of  their  ordinary  life.  If  humility  be 
a  Christian  duty,  then  the  common  life  of  a  Christian 
is  to  be  a  constant  course  of  humility  in  all  its  kinds. 
If  poverty  of  spirit  be  necessary,  it  must  be  the  spirit 
and  temper  of  every  day  of  our  lives.  If  we  are  to 
relieve  the  naked,  the  sick,  and  the  prisoner,  it  must 
be  the  common  charity  of  our  lives,  as  far  as  we  can 
render  ourselves  able  to  perform  it.  If  we  are  to  love 
our  enemies,  we  must  make  our  common  life  a  visible 


172  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

exercise  and  demonstration  of  that  love.  If  content 
and  thankfulness,  if  the  patient  bearing  of  evil  be 
duties  to  God,  they  are  the  duties  of  every  day,  and  in 
every  circumstance  of  our  life.  If  we  are  to  be  wise  and 
holy  as  the  new-born  sons  of  God,  we  can  no  other- 
wise be  so,  but  by  renouncing  every  thing  that  is 
foolish  and  vain  in  every  part  of  our  common  life.  If 
we  are  to  be  in  Christ  new  creatures,  we  must  show 
that  we  are  so,  by  having  new  ways  of  living  in  the 
world.  If  we  are  to  follow  Christ,  it  must  be  in  our 
common  way  of  spending  every  day. 

Thus  it  is  in  all  the  virtues  and  holy  tempers  of 
Christianity ;  they  are  not  ours  unless  they  be  the 
virtues  and  tempers  of  our  ordinary  life.  So  that 
Christianity  is  so  far  from  leaving  us  to  live  in  the 
common  ways  of  life,  conforming  to  the  folly  of 
customs,  and  gratifying  the  passions  and  tempers 
which  the  spirit  of  the  world  delights  in,  it  is  so  far 
from  indulging  us  in  any  of  these  things,  that  all  its 
virtues  which  it  makes  necessary  to  salvation  are  only 
so  many  ways  of  living  above  and  contrary  to  the 
world,  in  all  the  common  actions  of  our  life.  If  our 
common  life  is  not  a  common  course  of  humility,  of  self- 
denial,  renunciation  of  the  world,  poverty  of  spirit, 
and  heavenly  affection,  we  do  not  live  the  lives  of 
Christians.  .  .  . 

Now  to  have  right  notions  and  tempers  with  relation 
to  this  world,  is  as  essential  to  religion  as  to  have  right 
notions  of  God.  And  it  is  as  possible  for  a  man  to 
worship  a  crocodile,  and  yet  be  a  pious  man,  as  to 
have  his  affections  set  upon  this  world,  and  yet  be  a 
good  Christian.  .  .  . 

But  it  is  notorious  that  Christians  are  now  not  only 


A  SERIOUS    CALL  173 

like  other  men  in  their  frailties  and  infirmities,  this 
might  be  in  some  degree  excusable,  but  the  complaint 
is,  they  are  like  heathens  in  all  the  main  and  chief 
articles  of  their  lives.  They  enjoy  the  world,  and  live 
every  day  in  the  same  tempers,  and  the  same  designs, 
and  the  same  indulgences,  as  they  did  who  knew  not 
God,  nor  of  any  happiness  in  another  life.  You  may 
see  them  different  from  other  people,  so  far  as  to  times 
and  places  of  prayer,  but  generally  like  the  rest  of  the 
world  in  all  the  other  parts  of  their  lives:  that  is, 
adding  Christian  devotion  to  a  heathen  life.  I  have  the 
authority  of  our  blessed  Saviour  for  this  remark,  where 
He  says,  "  Take  no  thought,  saying,  What  shall  we 
eat  ?  or,  What  shall  we  drink  ?  or,  Wherewithal  shall 
we  be  clothed  ?  for  after  all  these  things  do  the 
Gentiles  seek."  ^  But  if  to  be  thus  affected  even  with 
the  necessary  things  of  this  life,  shows  that  we  are 
not  yet  of  a  Christian  spirit,  but  are  like  the  heathens, 
surely  to  enjoy  the  vanity  and  folly  of  the  world  as 
they  did,  to  be  like  them  in  the  main  chief  tempers 
of  our  lives,  in  self-love  and  indulgence,  in  sensual 
pleasures  and  diversions,  in  the  vanity  of  dress,  the 
love  of  show  and  greatness,  or  any  other  gaudy 
distinctions  of  fortune,  is  a  much  greater  sign  of  an 
heathen  temper.  And,  consequently,  they  who  add 
devotion  to  such  a  life,  must  be  said  to  pray  as  Chris- 
tians, but  live  as  heathens. 

1  Matt.  vi.  31,  32. 


174  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

CHAPTEE  11. 

AN  INQUIKY  INTO  THE  REASON,  WHY  THE  GENERALITY  OF 
CHRISTIANS  FALL  SO  FAR  SHORT  OF  THE  HOLINESS 
AND  DEVOTION  OF  CHRISTIANITY. 

(The  first  and  most  Fundamental  Principle  of 
Christianity  is  an  intention  to  please  God 
in  all  our  actions.  It  is  because  the 
generality  of  Christians  have  no  such 
intention,  that  they  so  fall  short  of  True 
Devotion.) 

IT  may  now  be  reasonably  inquired,  how  it  comes  to 
pass,  that  the  lives  even  of  the  better  sort  of 
people  are  thus  strangely  contrary  to  the  principles 
of  Christianity  ?  But  before  I  give  a  direct  answer  to 
this,  I  desire  it  may  also  be  inquired,  how  it  comes 
to  pass  that  swearing  is  so  common  a  vice  among 
Christians  ?  .  .  .  Now  I  ask,  how  comes  it  that  men 
are  guilty  of  so  gross  and  profane  a  sin  as  this  is  ? 
There  is  neither  ignorance  nor  human  infirmity  to 
plead  for  it ;  it  is  against  an  express  commandment, 
and  the  most  plain  doctrines  of  our  blessed  Saviour. 

Do  but  now  find  the  reason  why  the  generality  of 
men  live  in  this  notorious  vice,  and  then  you  will  have 
found  the  reason  why  the  generality  even  of  the  better 
sort  of  people  live  so  contrary  to  Christianity. 

Now  the  reason  of  common  swearing  is  this ;  it  is 
because  men  have  not  so  much  as  the  intention  to 
please  God  in  all  their  actions.  For  let  a  man  but 
have  so  much  piety  as  to  intend  to  please  God  in  all 
the  actions  of  his  life,  as  the  happiest  and  best  things 
in  the  world,  and  then  he  will  never  swear  more. 

It  seems  but  a  small  and  necessary  part  of  piety 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  175 

to  have  such  a  sincere  intontion  as  this ;  and  that  he 
has  no  reason  to  look  upon  himself  as  a  disciple  of 
Christ  who  is  not  thus  far  advanced  in  piety.  And 
yet  it  is  purely  for  want  of  this  degree  of  piety,  that 
you  see  such  a  mixture  of  sin  and  folly  in  the  lives 
even  of  the  better  sort  of  people.  .  .  . 

It  was  this  general  intention,  that  made  the  primi- 
tive Christians  such  eminent  instances  of  piety,  and 
made  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  saints,  and  all  the 
glorious  army  of  martyrs  and  confessors.  And  if  you 
will  here  stop,  and  ask  yourselves,  why  you  are  not  as 
pious  as  the  primitive  Christians  were,  your  own  heart 
will  tell  you,  that  it  is  neither  through  ignorance,  nor 
inability,  but  purely  because  you  never  thoroughly 
intended  it.  You  observe  the  same  Sunday  worship 
that  they  did ;  and  you  are  strict  in  it,  because  it  is 
your  full  intention  to  be  so.  And  when  you  as  fully 
intend  to  be  like  them  in  their  ordinary  common  life, 
when  you  intend  to  please  God  in  all  your  actions, 
you  will  find  it  as  possible,  as  to  be  strictly  exact  in 
the  service  of  the  Church.  And  when  you  have  this 
intention  to  please  God  in  all  your  actions,  as  the 
happiest  and  best  thing  in  the  world,  you  will  find  in 
you  as  great  an  aversion  to  every  thing  that  is  vain 
and  impertinent  in  common  life,  whether  of  business  or 
pleasure,  as  you  now  have  to  any  thing  that  is  profane. 
You  will  be  as  fearful  of  living  in  any  foolish  way, 
either  of  spending  your  time,  or  your  fortune,  as  you 
are  now  fearful  of  neglecting  the  public  worship.   .  .  . 

Let  a  tradesman  but  have  this  intention,  and  it  will 
make  him  a  saint  in  his  shop ;  his  everyday  business 
will  be  a  course  of  wise  and  reasonable  actions,  made 
holy  to  God,  by  being  done  in  obedience  to  His  will 


176  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

and  pleasure.  He  will  buy  and  sell,  and  labour  and 
travel,  because  by  so  doing  he  can  do  some  good  to 
himself  and  others.  But  then,  as  nothing  can  please 
God  but  what  is  wise,  and  reasonable,  and  holy,  so  he 
will  neither  buy  nor  sell,  nor  labour  in  any  other 
manner,  nor  to  any  other  end,  but  such  as  may  be 
shown  to  be  wise,  and  reasonable,  and  holy.  He  will 
therefore  consider,  not  what  arts,  or  methods,  or 
application,  will  soonest  make  him  richer  and  greater 
than  his  brethren,  or  remove  him  from  a  shop  to  a  life 
of  state  and  pleasure ;  but  he  will  consider  what  arts, 
what  methods,  what  application,  can  make  worldly 
business  most  acceptable  to  God,  and  make  a  life  of 
trade  a  life  of  holiness,  devotion,  and  piety.  This  will 
be  the  temper  and  spirit  of  every  tradesman ;  he 
cannot  stop  short  of  these  degrees  of  piety,  whenever 
it  is  his  intention  to  please  God  in  all  his  actions,  as 
the  best  and  happiest  thing  in  the  world.  And,  on  the 
other  hand,  whoever  is  not  of  this  spirit  and  temper 
in  his  trade  and  profession,  and  does  not  carry  it  on 
only  so  far  as  is  best  subservient  to  a  wise,  and  holy, 
and  heavenly  life,  it  is  certain  that  he  has  not  tbis 
intention ;  and  yet  without  it,  who  can  be  shown  to 
be  a  follower  of  Jesus  Christ  ? 

Again,  let  the  gentleman  of  birth  and  fortune  but 
have  this  intention,  and  you  will  see  how  it  will  carry 
him  froDi  every  appearance  of  evil,  to  every  instance 
of  piety  and  goodness.  He  cannot  live  by  chance,  or 
as  humour  and  fancy  carry  him,  because  he  knows 
that  nothing  can  please  God  but  a  wise  and  regular 
course  of  life.  ...  As  he  thus  removes  fjom  all 
appearance  of  evil,  so  he  hastens  and  aspires  after 
every  instance  of  goodness.     He  does  not  ask  what  is 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  177 

allowable  and  pardonable,  but  what  is  commendable 
and  praiseworthy.  He  does  not  ask  whether  God  will 
forgive  the  folly  of  our  lives,  the  mudness  of  our 
pleasures,  the  vanity  of  our  expenses,  the  richness  of 
our  equipage,  and  the  careless  consumption  of  our  time  ; 
but  he  asks,  whether  God  is  pleased  with  these  things, 
or  whether  these  are  the  appointed  ways  of  gaining 
His  favour  ?  He  does  not  inquire,  whether  it  be 
pardonable  to  hoard  up  money,  to  adorn  ourselves  with 
diamonds,  and  gild  our  chariots,  whilst  the  widov/  and 
the  orphan,  the  sick  and  the  prisoner,  want  to  be 
relieved ;  but  he  asks,  whether  God  has  required  these 
things  at  our  hands  ?  whether  we  shall  be  called  to 
account  at  the  last  day  for  the  neglect  of  them  ?  because 
it  is  not  his  intent  to  live  in  such  ways  as,  for  aught 
we  know,  God  may  perhaps  pardon ;  but  to  be  diligent 
in  such  ways  as  we  know  that  God  will  infallibly  reward. 

He  will  not  therefore  look  at  the  lives  of  Christians, 
to  learn  how  he  ought  to  spend  his  estate,  but  he  will 
look  into  the  Scriptures,  and  make  every  doctrine, 
parable,  precept,  or  instruction,  that  relates  to  rich 
men,  a  law  to  himself  in  the  use  of  his  estate. 

He  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  costly  apparel, 
because  the  rich  man  in  the  Gospel  was  clothed  with 
purple  and  fine  linen.  He  denies  himself  the  pleasures 
and  indulgences  which  his  estate  could  procure,  because 
our  blessed  Saviour  saith,  "  Woe  unto  you  that  are 
rich !  for  ye  have  received  your  consolation."  ^  He 
will  have  but  one  rule  for  charity,  and  that  will  be,  to 
spend  all  that  he  can  that  way,  because  the  Judge  of 
quick  and  dead  hath  said,  that  all  that  is  so  given,  is 
given  to  Him. 

^  Luke  vi,  24. 
12 


178  WHOLLY    FOR   GOD 

He  will  have  no  hospitable  table  for  the  rich  and 
wealthy  to  come  and  feast  with  him,  in  good  eating 
and  drinking ;  because  our  blessed  Lord  saith,  "  When 
thou  makest  a  dinner,  call  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy 
brethren,  neither  thy  kinsmen,  nor  thy  rich  neighbours  ; 
lest  they  also  bid  thee  again,  and  a  recompense  be 
made  thee.  But  when  thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the 
poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  the  blind  :  and  thou  shalt 
be  blessed  ;  for  they  cannot  recompense  thee  :  for  thou 
shalt  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just."  ^ 

Let  not  any  one  look  upon  this  as  an  imaginary 
description  of  charity,  that  looks  fine  in  the  notion, 
but  cannot  be  put  in  practice.  For  it  is  so  far  from 
being  an  imaginary,  impracticable  form  of  life,  that  it 
has  been  practised  by  great  numbers  of  Christians  in 
former  ages,  who  were  glad  to  turn  their  whole  estates 
into  a  constant  course  of  charity.  And  it  is  so  far 
from  being  impossible  now,  that  if  we  can  find  any 
Christians  that  sincerely  intend  to  please  God  in  all 
their  actions,  as  the  best  and  happiest  thin^  in  the 
world,  whether  they  be  young  or  old,  single  or  married, 
men  or  women,  if  they  have  but  this  intention,  it  will 
be  impossible  for  them  to  do  otherwise.  This  one 
principle  will  infallibly  carry  them  to  this  height  of 
charity,  and  they  will  find  themselves  unable  to  stop 
short  of  it.  .  .   . 

I  have  chosen  to  explain  this  matter,  by  appealing 
to  this  intention,  because  it  makes  the  case  so  plain, 
and  because  every  one  that  has  a  mind  may  see  it  in 
the  clearest  light,  and  feel  it  in  the  strongest  manner, 
only  by  looking  into  his  own  heart.  For  it  is  as  easy 
for  every  person  to  know  whether  he  intends  to  please 

^  Luke  xiv.  12,  13,  14. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  179 

God  in  all  his  actions,  as  for  any  servant  to  know 
whether  this  be  his  intention  towards  his  master. 
Every  one  also  can  as  easily  tell  how  he  lays  out  his 
money,  and  whether  he  considers  how  to  please  God 
in  it,  as  he  can  tell  where  his  estate  is,  and  whether 
it  be  in  money  or  land.  So  that  here  is  no  plea  left 
for  ignorance  or  frailty  as  to  this  matter ;  everybody 
is  in  the  light,  and  everybody  has  power.  And  no 
one  can  fail,  but  he  that  is  not  so  much  a  Christian, 
as  to  intend  to  please  God  in  the  use  of  his  estate. 

Here,  therefore,  let  us  judge  ourselves  sincerely ; 
let  us  not  vainly  content  ourselves  with  the  common 
disorders  of  our  lives,  the  vanity  of  our  expenses,  the 
folly  of  our  diversions,  the  pride  of  our  habits,  the 
idleness  of  our  lives,  and  the  wasting  of  our  time, 
fancying  that  these  are  such  imperfections  as  we  fall 
into  through  the  unavoidable  weakness  and  frailty 
of  our  natures ;  but  let  us  be  assured  that  these 
disorders  of  our  common  life  are  owing  to  this,  that 
we  have  not  so  much  Christianity,  as  to  intend  to 
please  God  in  all  the  actions  of  our  life,  as  the  best  and 
happiest  thing  in  the  world.  So  that  we  must  not 
look  upon  ourselves  in  a  state  of  common  and  pardon- 
able imperfection,  but  in  such  a  state  as  wants  the 
first  and  most  fundamental  principle  of  Christianity,  viz. 
an  intention  to  please  God  in  all  our  actions.  .  .  . 

So  that  the  fault  does  not  lie  here,  that  we  desire 
to  be  good  and  perfect,  but  through  the  weakness  of 
our  nature  fall  short  of  it ;  but  it  is,  because  we  have 
not  piety^^nough  to  intend  to  be  as  good  as  we  can, 
or  to  please  God  in  all  the  actions  of  our  life.  This 
we  see  is  plainly  the  case  of  him  that  spends  his  time 
in  sports  when  he  should  be  at  church ;  it  is  not  his 


180  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

want  of  power,  but  his  want  of  intention,  or  desire  to 
be  there.  .  .  . 

This  doctrine  does  not  suppose  that  we  have  no 
need  of  Divine  grace,  or  that  it  is  in  our  own  power  to 
make  ourselves  perfect.  It  only  supposes  that,  through 
the  want  of  a  sincere  intention  of  pleasing  God  in  all 
our  actions,  we  fall  into  such  irregularities  of  life  as  by 
the  ordinary  means  of  grace  we  should  have  power  to 
avoid ;  and  that  we  have  not  that  perfection  which  our 
present  state  of  grace  makes  us  capable  of,  because  we 
do  not  so  much  as  intend  to  have  it.  It  only  teaches 
us  that  the  reason  why  you  see  no  real  mortifica- 
tion or  self-denial,  no  eminent  charity,  no  profound 
humility,  no  heavenly  affection,  no  true  contempt 
of  the  world,  no  Christian  meekness,  no  sincere  zeal, 
no  eminent  piety  in  the  common  lives  of  Christians, 
is  this,  because  they  do  not  so  much  as  intend  to  be 
exact  and  exemplary  in  these  virtues. 


CHAPTEE    III. 

OF  THE  GREAT  DANGER  AND  FOLLY  OF  NOT  INTENDING 
TO  BE  AS  EMINENT  AND  EXEMPLARY  AS  WE  CAN,  IN 
THE    PRACTICE    OF    ALL    CHRISTIAN    VIRTUES. 

(The  want  of  True  Devotion,  arising  from  the 
want  of  any  intention  to  serve  God  to 
the  very  best  of  our  powers,  will  leave  us 
without  excuse.) 

ALTHOUGH  the  goodness  of  God,  and  His  rich 
mercies  in  Christ  Jesus,  are  a  sufficient  assurance 
to  us  that   He  will  be  merciful  to  our  unavoidable 


A   SERIOUS    CALL  181 

weaknesses  and  infirmities,  that  is,  to  such  failings  as 
are  the  effects  of  ignorance  or  surprise ;  yet  we  have 
no  reason  to  expect  the  same  mercy  towards  those  sins 
which  we  have  lived  in,  through  a  want  of  intention 
to  avoid  them. 

For  instance ;  the  case  of  a  common  swearer,  who 
dies  in  that  guilt,  seems  to  have  no  title  to  the  Divine 
mercy ;  for  this  reason,  because  he  can  no  more  plead 
any  weakness  or  infirmity  in  his  excuse,  than  the  man 
that  hid  his  talent  in  the  earth  could  plead  his  want 
of  strength  to  keep  it  out  of  the  earth. 

But  now  if  this  be  right  reasoning  in  the  case  of  a 
common  swearer,  that  his  sin  is  not  to  be  reckoned  a 
pardonable  frailty,  because  he  has  no  weakness  to 
plead  in  its  excuse,  why  then  do  we  not  carry  this  way 
of  reasoning  to  its  true  extent  ?  why  do  not  we  as 
much  condemn  every  other  error  of  life,  that  has  no 
more  weakness  to  plead  in  its  excuse  than  common 
swearing  ? 

For  if  this  be  so  bad  a  thing,  because  it  might  be 
avoided,  if  we  did  but  sincerely  intend  it,  must  not  then 
all  other  erroneous  ways  of  life  be  very  guilty,  if  we 
live  in  them,  not  through  weakness  and  inability,  but 
because  we  never  sincerely  intended  to  avoid  them  ? 

For  instance ;  you  perhaps  have  made  no  progress 
in  the  most  important  Christian  virtues,  you  have 
scarce  gone  half  way  in  humility  and  charity ;  now,  if 
your  failure  in  these  duties  is  purely  owing  to  your 
want  of  intention  of  performing  them  in  any  true  degree, 
have  you  not  then  as  little  to  plead  for  yourself,  and 
are  you  not  as  much  without  all  excuse,  as  the  common 
swearer?  .  .  . 

You,  it  may  be,  are  as  far  from  Christian  perfection, 


182  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

as  the  common  swearer  is  from  keeping  the  third  com- 
mandment ;  are  yon  not  therefore  as  much  condemned 
by  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  as  the  swearer  is  by 
the  third  commandment  ? 

You  perhaps  will  say,  that  all  people  fall  short  of 
the  perfection  of  the  gospel,  and  therefore  you  are 
content  with  your  failings.  But  this  is  saying  nothing 
to  the  purpose.  For  the  question  is  not,  whether 
gospel  perfection  can  be  fully  attained,  but  whether 
you  come  as  near  it  as  a  sincere  intention  and  careful 
diligence  can  carry  you.  Whether  you  are  not  in  a 
much  lower  state  than  you  might  be,  if  you  sincerely 
intended,  and  carefully  laboured,  to  advance  yourself 
in  all  Christian  virtues  ?  .  .  , 

The  sum  of  this  matter  is  this :  From  many 
passages  of  Scripture,  it  seems  plain,  that  our  salva- 
tion depends  upon  the  sincerity  and  perfection  of  our 
endeavours  to  obtain  it. 

Weak  and  imperfect  men  shall,  notwithstanding 
their  frailties  and  defects,  be  received,  as  having  pleased 
God,  if  they  have  done  their  utmost  to  please  Him. 

The  rewards  of  charity,  piety,  and  humility  will  be 
given  to  those  whose  lives  have  been  a  careful  labour  to 
exercise  these  virtues  in  as  high  a  degree  as  they  could. 

We  cannot  offer  to  God  the  service  of  angels ;  we 
cannot  obey  Ilim  as  man  in  a  state  of  perfection 
could ;  but  fallen  men  can  do  their  best,  and  this  is 
the  perfection  that  is  required  of  us ;  it  is  only  the 
perfection  of  our  best  endeavours,  a  careful  labour  to 
be  as  perfect  as  we  can. 

But  if  we  stop  short  of  this,  for  aught  we  know,  we 
stop  short  of  the  mercy  of  God,  and  leave  ourselves 
nothing  to  plead  from  the  terms  of  the  gospel.     For 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  183 

God  has  there  made  no  promises  of  mercy  to  the  sloth- 
ful and  negligent.  His  mercy  is  only  offered  to  our 
frail  and  imperfect,  but  best  endeavours,  to  practise  all 
manner  of  righteousness. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

WE  CAN  PLEASE  GOD  IN  NO  STATE,  OR  EMPLOYMENT  OF 
LIFE,  BUT  BY  INTENDING  AND  DEVOTING  IT  ALL  TO 
HIS    HONOUR    AND    GLORY. 

(True  Devotion  implies  a  life  devoted  to  God 
everywhere,  and  in  every  thing,  and  must 
be  seen  in  every  calling  in  life.) 

HAYING  in  the  first  chapter  stated  the  general 
nature  of  devotion,  and  shown  that  it  implies 
not  any  form  of  prayer,  but  a  certain  form  of  life,  that 
is  offered  to  God,  not  at  any  particular  times  or  places, 
but  everyv/here,  and  in  every  thing ;  I  shall  now  descend 
to  some  particulars,  and  show  how  we  are  to  devote 
our  labour  and  employment  unto  God. 

As  a  good  Christian  should  consider  every  place  as 
holy,  because  God  is  there,  so  he  should  look  upon 
every  part  of  his  life  as  a  matter  of  holiness,  because 
it  is  to  be  offered  unto  God. 

The  profession  of  a  clergyman  is  an  holy  profession, 
because  it  is  a  ministration  in  holy  things,  an  attend- 
ance at  the  altar.  But  worldly  business  is  to  be 
made  holy  unto  the  Lord,  by  being  done  as  a  service 
to  Him,  and  in  conformity  to  His  Divine  will. 

For  as  all  men,  and  all  things  in  the  world,  as  truly 


184  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

belong  unto  God,  as  any  places,  things,  or  persons, 
that  are  devoted  to  Divine  service,  so  all  thing's  are  to 
be  used,  and  all  persons  are  to  act  in  their  several 
states  and  employments,  for  the  glory  of  God. 

Men  of  worldly  business,  therefore,  must  not  look 
upon  themselves  as  at  liberty  to  live  to  themselves,  to 
sacrifice  to  their  own  humours  and  tempers,  because 
their  employment  is  of  a  worldly  nature.  But  they 
must  consider  that,  as  the  world  and  all  worldly  pro- 
fessions as  truly  belong  to  God,  as  persons  and  things 
that  are  devoted  to  the  altar,  so  it  is  as  much  the  duty 
of  men  in  worldly  business  to  live  wholly  unto  God, 
as  it  is  the  duty  of  those  who  are  devoted  to  Divine 
service. 

As  the  whole  world  is  God's,  so  the  whole  world  is 
to  act  for  God.  As  all  men  have  the  same  relation  to 
God,  as  all  men  have  all  their  powers  and  faculties 
from  God,  so  all  men  are  obliged  to  act  for  God,  with 
all  their  powers  and  faculties. 

As  all  things  are  God's,  so  all  things  are  to  be  used 
and  regarded  as  the  things  of  God.  For  men  to  abuse 
things  on  earth,  and  live  to  themselves,  is  the  same 
rebellion  against  God,  as  for  angels  to  abuse  things  in 
heaven  ;  because  God  is  just  the  same  Lord  of  all  on 
earth,  as  He  is  the  Lord  of  all  in  heaven. 

Things  may,  and  must  differ  in  their  use,  but  yet 
they  are  all  to  be  used  according  to  the  will  of  God. 

Men  may,  and  must  differ  in  their  employments, 
but  yet  tliey  must  all  act  for  the  same  ends,  as 
dutiful  servants  of  God,  in  the  right  and  pious  per- 
formance of  their  several  callings. 

Clergymen  must  live  wholly  unto  God  in  one  par- 
ticular way,  that  is,  in  the  exercise  of  holy  offices,  in 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  185 

the  ministration  of  prayers  and  sacraments,  and  a 
zealous  distribution  of  spiritual  goods. 

But  men  of  other  employments  are,  in  their  par- 
ticular ways,  as  much  obliged  to  act  as  the  servants 
of  God,  and  live  wholly  unto  Him  in  their  several 
callings. 

This  is  the  only  difiPerence  between  clergymen  and 
people  of  other  callings.  .  .  . 

As  there  is  but  one  God  and  Father  of  us  all, 
whose  glory  gives  light  and  life  to  every  thing  that 
lives,  whose  presence  fills  all  places,  whose  power  sup- 
ports all  beings,  whose  providence  ruleth  all  events ; 
so  every  thing  that  lives,  whether  in  heaven  or  earth, 
whether  they  be  thrones  or  principalities,  men  or 
angels,  they  must  all,  with  one  spirit,  live  wholly  to 
the  praise  and  glory  of  this  one  God  and  Father  of  them 
all.  .  .  . 

It  is  therefore  absolutely  necessary  for  all  Christians, 
whether  men  or  women,  to  consider  themselves  as 
persons  that  are  devoted  to  holiness,  and  so  order  their 
common  ways  of  life,  by  such  rules  of  reason  and  piety, 
as  may  turn  it  into  continual  service  unto  Almighty 
God.  .   .  . 

For  vain  and  earthly  desires  are  no  more  allowable 
in  our  employments,  than  in  our  alms  and  devotions. 
For  these  tempers  of  worldly  pride,  and  vain-glory, 
are  not  only  evil,  when  they  mix  with  our  good  works, 
but  they  have  the  same  evil  nature,  and  make  us 
odious  to  God,  when  they  enter  into  the  common 
business  of  our  employment.  If  it  were  allowable  to 
indulge  covetous  or  vain  passions  in  our  worldly 
employments,  it  would  then  be  allowable  to  be  vain- 
glorious   in    our    devotions.     But    as    our    alms   and 


186  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

devotions  are  not  an  acceptable  service,  but  when  they 
proceed  from  a  heart  truly  devoted  to  God,  so  our 
common  employment  cannot  be  reckoned  a  service  to 
Him,  but  when  it  is  performed  with  the  same  temper 
and  piety  of  heart. 

Most  of  the  employments  of  life  are  in  their  own 
nature  lawful ;  and  all  those  that  are  so  may  be  made 
a  substantial  part  of  our  duty  to  God,  if  we  engage  in 
them  only  so  far,  and  for  such  ends,  as  are  suitable  to 
beings  that  are  to  live  above  the  world,  all  the  time 
that  they  live  in  the  world.  This  is  the  only  measure 
of  our  application  to  any  worldly  business :  let  it  be 
what  it  will,  or  where  it  will,  it  must  have  no  more  of 
our  hands,  our  hearts,  or  our  time,  than  is  consistent 
with  a  hearty,  daily,  careful  preparation  of  ourselves 
for  another  life.  For  as  all  Christians,  as  such,  have 
renounced  this  world,  to  prepare  themselves,  by  daily 
devotion  and  universal  holiness,  for  an  eternal  state  of 
quite  another  nature,  they  must  look  upon  worldly 
employments,  as  upon  worldly  wants,  and  bodily  infir- 
mities ;  things  not  to  be  desired,  but  only  to  be  endured 
and  suffered,  till  death  and  the  resurrection  have  carried 
ns  to  an  eternal  state  of  real  happiness.  .  .  . 

If,  therefore,  a  man  will  so  live,  as  to  show  that  he 
feels  and  believes  the  most  fundamental  doctrines  of 
Christianity,  he  must  live  above  the  world ;  this  is  the 
temper  that  must  enable  him  to  do  the  business  of  life, 
and  yet  live  wholly  unto  God,  and  to  go  through  some 
worldly  employment  with  a  heavenly  mind.  And  it 
is  as  necessary  that  people  live  in  their  employments 
with  this  temper,  as  it  is  necessary  that  their  employ- 
ment itself  be  lawful.   .  .  . 

Now  the  only  way  to  do  this,  is  for  people  to  con- 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  187 

sider  their  trade  as  something  that  they  are  obliged 
to  devote  to  the  glory  of  God,  something  that  they  are 
to  do  only  in  such  a  manner  as  that  they  may  make 
it  a  duty  to  Him.  Nothing  can  be  right  in  business, 
that  is  not  under  these  rules. — The  apostle  commands 
servants  to  be  obedient  to  their  masters  "  in  singleness 
of  heart,  as  unto  Christ.  Not  with  eye-service,  as 
men-pleasers ;  but  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the 
will  of  God  from  the  heart ;  with  good  will  doing 
service,  as  unto  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men."  ^ 

This  passage  sufficiently  shows  that  all  Christians 
are  to  live  wholly  unto  God  in  every  state  and  condition, 
doing  the  work  of  their  common  calling  in  such  a 
manner,  and  for  such  ends,  as  to  make  it  a  part  of 
their  devotion  or  service  to  God.  For  certainly  if 
poor  slaves  are  not  to  comply  with  their  business  as 
men-pleasers,  if  they  are  to  look  wholly  unto  God  in 
all  their  actions,  and  serve  in  singleness  of  heart,  as 
unto  the  Lord,  surely  men  of  other  employments  and 
conditions  must  be  as  much  obliged  to  go  through 
their  business  with  the  same  singleness  of  heart ;  not 
as  pleasing  the  vanity  of  their  own  minds,  not  as 
gratifying  their  own  selfish  worldly  passions,  but  as 
the  servants  of  God  in  all  that  they  have  to  do.  For 
surely  no  one  will  say  that  a  slave  is  to  devote  his 
state  of  life  unto  God,  and  make  the  will  of  God  the 
sole  rule  and  end  of  his  service,  but  that  a  tradesman 
need  not  act  with  the  same  spirit  of  devotion  in  his 
business.  For  this  is  as  absurd,  as  to  make  it 
necessary  for  one  man  to  be  more  just  or  faithful 
than  another. 

It  is  therefore  absolutely  certain  that  no  Christian 
1  Eph.  vi.  5  ;    Col.  iii.  22,  23. 


188  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

is  to  enter  any  farther  into  business,  nor  for  any  other 
ends,  than  such  as  he  can  in  singleness  of  heart  offer 
unto  God,  as  a  reasonable  service.  For  the  Son  of 
God  has  redeemed  us  for  this  only  end,  that  we  should, 
by  a  life  of  reason  and  piety,  live  to  the  glory  of  God ; 
this  is  the  only  rule  and  measure  for  every  order  and 
state  of  life.  Without  this  rule,  the  most  lawful 
employment  becomes  a  sinful  state  of  life.  .  .  . 

If,  therefore,  we  desire  to  live  unto  God,  it  is 
necessary  to  brin^^{  our  whole  life  under  this  law,  to 
make  His  glory  the  sole  rule  and  measure  of  our  acting 
in  every  employment  of  life.  For  there  is  no  other 
true  devotion,  but  this  of  living  devoted  to  God  in  the 
common  business  of  our  lives.  .   .  . 

All  this  only  shows  us  the  great  necessity  of  such 
a  regular  and  uniform  piety,  as  extends  itself  to  all 
the  actions  of  our  common  life. — 

That  we  must  eat  and  drink,  and  dress  and  discourse, 
according  to  the  sobriety  of  the  Christian  spirit,  engage 
in  no  employments  but  such  as  we  can  truly  devote 
unto  God,  nor  pursue  them  any  farther  than  so  far  as 
conduces  to  the  reasonable  ends  of  a  holy  devout  life ; 
— That  we  must  be  honest,  not  only  on  particular 
occasions,  and  in  such  instances  as  are  applauded  in 
the  world,  easy  to  be  performed,  and  free  from  danger, 
or  loss,  but  from  such  a  living  principle  of  justice,  as 
makes  us  love  truth  and  integrity  in  all  its  instances, 
follow  it  through  all  dangers,  and  against  all  opposition  ; 
as  knowing  that  the  more  we  pay  for  any  truth,  the 
better  is  our  bargain,  and  that  then  our  integrity 
becomes  a  pearl,  when  we  have  parted  with  all  to 
keep  it  ; — That  we  must  be  humble,  not  only  in  such 
instances  as  are  expected  in  the  world,  or  suitable  to 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  189 

our  tempers,  or  confined  to  particular  occasions ;  but 
in  such  a  humility  of  spirit  as  renders  us  meek  and 
lowly  in  the  whole  course  of  our  lives,  as  shows  itself 
in  our  dress,  our  person,  our  conversation,  our  enjoy- 
ment of  the  world,  the  tranquillity  of  our  minds, 
patience  under  injuries,  submission  to  superiors,  and 
condescensions  to  those  that  are  below  us,  and  in 
all  the  outward  actions  of  our  lives.  That  we  must 
devote,  not  only  times  and  places  to  prayer,  but  be 
everywhere  in  the  spirit  of  devotion ;  with  hearts 
always  set  towards  heaven,  locking  up  to  God  in  all 
our  actions,  and  doing  every  thing  as  His  servants ; 
living  in  the  world  as  in  a  holy  temple  of  God,  and 
always  worshipping  Him,  though  not  v/ith  our  lips, 
yet  with  the  thankfulness  of  our  hearts,  the  holiness 
of  our  actions,  and  the  pious  and  charitable  use  of  all 
His  gifts ; — That  we  must  not  only  send  up  petitions 
and  thoughts  now  and  then  to  heaven,  but  must  go 
through  all  our  worldly  business  with  a  heavenly 
spirit,  as  members  of  Christ's  mystical  body ;  that, 
with  new  hearts  and  new  minds,  we  may  turn  an 
earthly  life  into  a  preparation  for  a  life  of  greatness 
and  glory  in  the  Kingdom  of  heaven.  Now  the  only 
way  to  arrive  at  this  piety  of  spirit,  is  to  bring  all 
your  actions  to  the  same  rule  as  your  devotions  and 
alms. 


190  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

CHAPTER  V. 

PERSONS  THAT  ARE  FREE  FROM  THE  NECESSITY  OF 
LABOUR  AND  EMPLOYMENTS  ARE  TO  CONSIDER  THEM- 
SELVES AS  DEVOTED  TO  GOD  IN  A  HIGHER  DEGREE. 

(Those  who  have  their  time  at  their  own 
disposal,  have  a  special  calling  to  devote 
it  entirely  to  God's  service.) 

&EEAT  part  of  the  world  are  free  from  the  neces- 
sities of  labour  and  employments,  and  have  their 
time  and  fortunes  in  their  own  disposal. 

But  as  no  one  is  to  live  in  his  employment  according 
to  his  own  humour,  or  for  such  ends  as  please  his  own 
fancy,  but  is  to  do  all  his  business  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  make  it  a  service  unto  God ;  so  those  who  have 
no  particular  employment  are  so  far  from  being  left  at 
greater  liberty  to  live  to  themselves,  to  pursue  their 
own  humours,  and  spend  their  time  and  fortunes  as 
they  please,  that  they  are  under  greater  obligations  of 
living  wholly  unto  God  in  all  their  actions. 

The  freedom  of  their  state  lays  them  under  a  greater 
necessity  of  always  choosing,  and  doing,  the  best  things. 

They  are  those,  of  whom  much  will  be  required, 
because  much  is  given  unto  them. 

A  slave  can  only  live  unto  God  in  one  particular 
way,  that  is,  by  religious  patience  and  submission  in 
his  state  of  slavery. 

But  all  ways  of  holy  living,  all  instances,  and  all 
kinds  of  virtue,  lie  open  to  those  who  are  masters  of 
themselves,  their  time,  and  their  fortune. 

It  is  as  much  the  duty,  therefore,  of  such  persons, 
to  make  a  wise  use  of  their  liberty,  to  devote  themselves 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  191 

to  all  kinds  of  virtue,  to  aspire  after  every  thing  that 
is  holy  and  pious,  to  endeavour  to  be  eminent  in  all 
good  works,  and  to  please  God  in  the  highest  and  most 
perfect  manner;  it  is  as  much  their  duty  to  be  thus 
wise  in  the  conduct  of  themselves,  and  thus  extensive 
in  their  endeavours  after  holiness,  as  it  is  the  duty  of 
a  slave  to  be  resigned  unto  God  in  his  state  of  slavery. 

You  are  no  labourer,  or  tradesman,  you  are  neither 
merchant  nor  soldier ;  consider  yourself,  therefore,  as 
placed  in  a  state  in  some  degree  like  that  of  good 
angels  who  are  sent  into  the  world  as  ministeriug 
spirits,  for  the  general  good  of  mankind,  to  assist, 
protect,  and  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of 
salvation. 

For  the  more  you  are  free  from  the  common  neces- 
sities of  men,  the  more  you  are  to  imitate  the  higher 
perfections  of  angels. 

Had  you,  Serena,  been  obliged,  by  the  necessities  of 
life,  to  wash  clothes  for  your  maintenance,  or  to  wait 
upon  some  mistress  that  demanded  all  your  labour,  it 
would  then  be  your  duty  to  serve  and  glorify  God,  by 
such  humility,  obedience,  and  faithfulness,  as  might 
adorn  that  state  of  life.  It  would  then  be  recom- 
mended to  your  care,  to  improve  that  one  talent  to  its 
greatest  height.  That  when  the  time  came,  that  man- 
kind were  to  be  rewarded  for  their  labours  by  the  great 
Judge  of  quick  and  dead,  you  might  be  received  with 
a  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,  enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  ^ 

But  as  God  has  given  you  five  talents,  as  He  has 
placed  you  above  the  necessities  of  life,  as  He  has  left 
you  in  the  hands  of  yourself,  in  the  happy  liberty  of 

1  Matt.  XXV.  21. 


192  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

choosing  the  most  exalted  ways  of  virtue ;  as  He  has 
enriched  you  with  many  gifts  of  fortune,  and  left  you 
nothing  to  do,  but  to  make  the  best  use  of  variety  of 
blessings,  to  make  the  most  ,of  a  short  life,  to  study 
your  own  perfection,  the  honour  of  God,  and  the  good 
of  your  neighbour ;  so  it  is  now  your  duty  to  imitate 
the  greatest  servants  of  God,  to  inquire  how  the  most 
eminent  saints  have  lived,  to  study  all  the  arts  and 
methods  of  perfection,  and  to  set  no  bounds  to  your 
love  and  gratitude  to  the  bountiful  Author  of  so  many 
blessings.  .  .  . 

This,  Serena,  is  your  profession.  For  as  sure  as 
God  is  one  God,  so  sure  it  is  that  He  has  but  one  com- 
mand to  all  mankind,  whether  they  be  bond  or  free, 
rich  or  poor ;  and  that  is,  to  act  up  to  the  excellency 
of  that  nature  which  He  has  given  them,  to  live  by 
reason,  to  walk  in  the  light  of  religion,  to  use  every 
thing  as  wisdom  directs,  to  glorify  God  in  all  His  gifts, 
and  dedicate  every  condition  of  life  to  His  service. 

This  is  the  one  common  command  of  God  to  all 
mankind.  If  you  have  an  employment,  you  are  to  be 
thus  reasonable,  and  pious,  and  holy  in  the  exercise  of 
it ;  if  you  have  time  and  a  fortune  in  your  own  power, 
you  are  obliged  to  be  thus  reasonable,  and  holy,  and 
pious  in  the  use  of  all  your  time,  and  all  your  fortune. 

The  right  religious  use  of  every  thing  and  every 
talent  is  the  indispensable  duty  of  every  being  that  is 
capable  of  knowing  right  and  wrong. 

For  the  reason  why  we  are  to  do  any  thing  as  unto 
God,  and  with  regard  to  our  duty  and  relation  to  Him, 
is  the  same  reason  why  we  are  to  do  every  thing  as 
unto  God,  and  with  regard  to  our  duty  and  relation 
to  Him. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  193 

That  which  is  a  reason  for  our  being  wise  and  holy 
in  the  discharge  of  all  our  business,  is  the  same  reason 
for  our  being  wise  and  holy  in  the  use  of  all  our 
money. 

As  we  have  always  the  same  natures,  and  are  every- 
where the  servants  of  the  same  God,  as  every  place  is 
equally  full  of  His  presence,  and  every  thing  is  equally 
His  gift,  so  we  must  always  act  according  to  the  reason 
of  our  nature ;  we  must  do  every  thing  as  the  servants 
of  God ;  we  must  live  in  every  place  as  in  His  pre- 
sence ;  we  must  use  every  thing  as  that  ought  to  be 
used  which  belongs  to  God. 

Either  this  piety,  and  wisdom,  and  devotion  is  to  go 
through  every  way  of  life,  and  to  extend  to  the  use  of 
every  thing,  or  it  is  to  go  through  no  part  of  life.  .  .  . 

If  it  is  our  glory  and  happiness  to  have  a  rational 
nature,  that  is  endued  with  wisdom  and  reason,  that  is 
capable  of  imitating  the  Divine  nature,  then  it  must  be 
our  glory  and  happiness  to  improve  our  reason  and 
wisdom,  to  act  up  to  the  excellency  of  our  rational 
nature,  and  to  imitate  God  in  all  our  actions,  to  the 
utmost  of  our  power.  They  therefore  who  confine 
religion  to  times  and  places,  and  some  little  rules  of 
retirement,  who  think  that  it  is  being  too  strict  and 
rigid  to  introduce  religion  into  common  life,  and  make 
it  give  laws  to  all  their  actions  and  ways  of  living,  they 
who  think  thus,  not  only  mistake,  but  they  mistake  the 
whole  nature  of  religion.  For  surely  they  mistake  the 
whole  nature  of  religion,  v/ho  can  think  any  part  of 
their  life  is  made  more  easy,  for  being  free  from  it. 
They  may  well  be  said  to  mistake  the  whole  nature  of 
wisdom,  who  do  not  think  it  desirable  to  be  always 
wise.     He  has  not  learnt  the  nature  of    piety,  who 

13 


194  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

thinks  it  too  much  to  be  pious  in  all  his  actions.  He 
does  not  sufficiently  understand  what  reason  is,  who 
does  not  earnestly  desire  to  live  in  every  thing  accord- 
ing to  it.  .  .   . 

Farther,  as  God  is  one  and  the  same  Being,  always 
acting  like  Himself  and  suitably  to  His  own  nature, 
so  it  is  the  duty  of  every  being  that  He  has  created, 
to  live  according  to  the  nature  that  He  has  given  it, 
and  always  to  act  like  Himself. 

It  is  therefore  an  immutable  law  of  God,  that  all 
rational  beings  should  act  reasonably  in  all  their 
actions ;  not  at  this  time,  or  in  that  place,  or  upon 
this  occasion,  or  in  the  use  of  some  particular  thing, 
but  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  on  all  occasions,  and  in 
the  use  of  all  things.  This  is  a  law  that  is  as  un- 
changeable as  God,  and  can  no  more  cease  to  be,  than 
God  can  cease  to  be  a  God  of  wisdom  and  order.  .  .  . 
The  intirmities  of  human  life  make  such  food  and 
raiment  necessary  for  us,  as  angels  do  not  want ;  but 
then  it  is  no  more  allowable  for  us  to  turn  these  neces- 
sities into  follies,  and  indulge  ourselves  in  the  luxury 
of  food,  or  the  vanities  of  dress,  than  it  is  allowable 
for  angels  to  act  below  the  dignity  of  their  proper 
state.  For  a  reasonable  life,  and  a  wise  use  of  our 
proper  condition,  is  as  much  the  duty  of  all  men,  as 
it  is  the  duty  of  all  angels  and  intelligent  beings. 
Our  blessed  Saviour  has  plainly  turned  our  thoughts 
this  way,  by  making  this  petition  a  constant  part  of 
all  our  prayers,  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is 
in  heaven."  A  plain  proof,  that  the  obedience  of 
men  is  to  imitate  the  obedience  of  angels,  and  that 
rational  beings  on  earth  are  to  live  unto  God,  as 
rational  beings  in  heaven  live  unto  Him. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  195 


CHAPTEE    VI. 

CONTAINING  THE  GREAT  OBLIGATIONS,  AND  THE  GREAT 
ADVANTAGES  OF  MAKING  A  WISE  AND  RELIGIOUS 
USE    OF    OUR    ESTATES    AND    FORTUNES. 

(True  Devotion  will  make  us  religiously- 
exact  in  the  use  of  our  money  and 
worldly  goods.) 

AS  the  holiness  of  Christianity  consecrates  all 
states  and  employments  of  life  unto  God,  as  it 
requires  us  to  aspire  after  an  universal  obedience, 
doing  and  using  every  thing  as  the  servants  of  God,  so 
are  we  more  especially  obliged  to  observe  this  rehgious 
exactness  in  the  use  of  our  estates  and  fortunes. 

The  reason  of  this  would  appear  very  plain,  if  we 
were  only  to  consider  that  our  estate  is  as  much  the 
gift  of  God  as  our  eyes  or  our  hands,  and  is  no  more 
to  be  buried  or  thrown  away  at  pleasure,  than  we  are 
to  put  out  our  eyes,  or  throw  away  our  hmbs  as  we 
please. 

But,  besides  this  consideration,  there  are  several 
other  great  and  important  reasons  why  we  should  be 
religiously  exact  in  the  use  of  our  estates. 

First,  Because  the  manner  of  using  our  money  or 
spending  our  estate  enters  so  far  into  the  business  of 
every  day,  and  makes  so  great  a  part  of  our  common 
life,  that  our  common  life  must  be  much  of  the  same 
nature  as  our  common  way  of  spending  our  estate. 
If  reason  and  religion  govern  us  in  this,  then  reason 
and  religion  hath  got  great  hold  of  us ;  but  if  humour, 
pride,  and  fancy  are  the  measures  of  our  spending  our 


196  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

estate,  then  humour,  pride,  and  fancy  will  have  the 
direction  of  the  greatest  part  of  our  life. 

Secondly,  Another  great  reason  for  devoting  all  our 
estate  to  right  uses,  is  this :  because  it  is  capable  of 
being  used  to  the  most  excellent  purposes,  and  is  so 
great  a  means  of  doing  good.  If  we  waste  it  we  do 
not  waste  a  trifle,  that  signifies  little,  but  we  waste 
that  which  might  be  made  as  eyes  to  the  blind,  as  a 
husband  to  the  widow,  as  a  father  to  the  orphan ;  we 
waste  that  which  not  only  enables  us  to  minister 
worldly  comforts  to  those  that  are  in  distress,  but 
that  which  might  purchase  for  ourselves  everlasting 
treasures  in  heaven.  So  that  if  we  part  with  our 
money  in  foolish  ways,  we  part  with  a  great  power  of 
comforting  our  fellow-creatures,  and  of  making  our- 
selves for  ever  blessed. 

If  there  be  nothing  so  glorious  as  doing  good,  if 
there  is  nothing  that  makes  us  so  like  to  God,  then 
nothing  can  be  so  glorious  in  the  use  of  our  money,  as 
to  use  it  all  in  works  of  love  and  goodness,  making 
ourselves  friends,  and  fathers,  and  benefactors,  to  all 
our  fellow-creatures,  imitating  the  Divine  love,  and 
turning  all  our  power  into  acts  of  generosity,  care,  and 
kindness  to  such  as  are  in  need  of  it. 

If  a  man  had  eyes,  and  hands,  and  feet,  that  he 
could  give  to  those  that  wanted  them ;  if  he  should 
either  lock  them  up  in  a  chest,  or  please  himself  with 
some  needless  or  ridiculous  use  of  them,  instead  of 
giving  them  to  his  brethren  that  were  blind  and  lame, 
should  we  not  justly  reckon  him  an  unhuman  wretch  ? 
If  he  should  rather  choose  to  amuse  himself  with 
furnishing  his  house  with  those  things,  than  to  entitle 
himself  to  an  eternal  reward,  by  giving  them  to  those 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  197 

that  wanted  eyes  and  hands,  might  we  not  justly 
reckon  him  mad  ? 

Now  money  has  very  much  the  nature  of  eyes  and 
feet ;  if  we  either  lock  it  up  in  chests,  or  waste  it  in 
needless  and  ridiculous  expenses  upon  ourselves,  whilst 
the  poor  and  the  distressed  want  it  for  their  necessary 
uses ;  if  we  consume  it  in  the  ridiculous  ornaments  of 
apparel,  whilst  others  are  starving  in  nakedness ;  we 
are  not  far  from  the  cruelty  of  him  that  chooses 
rather  to  adorn  his  house  with  the  hands  and  eyes 
than  to  give  them  to  those  that  want  them.  .  .  . 

Thirdly,  If  we  waste  our  money,  we  are  not  only 
guilty  of  wasting  a  talent  which  God  has  given  us,  we 
are  not  only  guilty  of  making  that  useless,  which  is  so 
powerful  a  means  of  doing  good,  but  we  do  ourselves 
this  further  harm,  that  w^e  turn  this  useful  talent  into 
a  powerful  means  of  corrupting  ourselves ;  because  so 
far  as  it  is  spent  wrong,  so  far  it  is  spent  in  the 
support  of  some  wrong  temper,  in  gratifying  some 
vain  and  unreasonable  desires,  in  conforming  to  those 
fashions,  and  pride  of  the  world,  which,  as  Christians 
and  reasonable  men,  we  are  obhged  to  renounce.  .  .  . 

For  so  much  as  is  spent  in  the  vanity  of  dress,  may 
be  reckoned  so  much  laid  out  to  fix  vanity  in  our 
minds.  So  much  as  is  laid  out  for  idleness  and  in- 
dulgence, may  be  reckoned  so  much  given  to  render 
our  hearts  dull  and  sensual.  So  much  as  is  spent  in 
state  and  equipage,  may  be  reckoned  so  much  spent 
to  dazzle  your  own  eyes,  and  render  you  the  idol  of 
your  own  imagination.  And  so  in  every  thing,  when 
you  go  from  reasonable  wants,  you  only  support  some 
unreasonable  temper,  some  turn  of  mind,  which  every 
good  Christian  is  called  upon  to  renounce. 


198  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

Every  exhortation  in  Scripture  to  be  wise  and 
reasonable,  satisfying  only  such  wants  as  God  would 
have  satisfied;  every  exhortation  to  be  spiritual  and 
heavenly,  pressing  after  a  glorious  change  of  our 
nature ;  every  exhortation  to  love  our  neighbour  as 
ourselves,  to  love  all  mankind  as  God  has  loved  them, 
is  a  command  to  be  strictly  religious  in  the  use  of  our 
money. 

Tliese  tempers,  and  this  use  of  our  worldly  goods, 
is  so  much  the  doctrine  of  all  the  New  Testament, 
that  you  cannot  read  a  chapter  without  being  taught 
something  of  it.  I  shall  only  produce  one  remarkable 
passage  of  Scripture,  which  is  sufficient  to  justify  all 
that  I  have  said  concerning  this  religious  use  of  all 
our  fortune. 

"  When  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  His  glory, 
and  all  the  holy  angels  with  Him,  then  shall  He  sit 
upon  the  throne  of  His  glory :  and  before  Him  shall  be 
gathered  all  nations  :  and  He  shall  separate  them  one 
from  another,  as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep  from 
the  goats :  and  He  shall  set  the  sheep  on  His  right 
hand,  but  the  goats  on  the  left.  Then  shall  the  King 
say  unto  them  on  His  right  hand.  Come,  ye  blessed  of 
My  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world :  for  I  was  an  hungred, 
and  ye  gave  Me  meat :  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  Me 
drink :  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  Me  in :  naked, 
and  ye  clothed  Me :  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  Me :  I 
was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  Me. — Then  shall  He 
say  unto  them  on  the  left  hand,  Depart  from  Me,  ye 
cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angels :  for  I  was  an  hungred,  and  ye  gave  Me  no 
meat :  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  Me  no  drink :  I  was 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  199 

a  Stranger,  and  ye  took  Me  not  in:  naked,  and  ye 
clothed  Me  not :  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited 
Me  not.  These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punish- 
ment :  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."  ^ 

I  have  quoted  this  passage  at  length,  because  if  one 
looks  at  the  way  of  the  world,  one  would  hardly  think 
that  Christians  had  ever  read  this  part  of  Scripture. 
For  what  is  there  in  the  lives  of  Christians,  that  looks 
as  if  their  salvation  depended  upon  these  good  works  ? 
And  yet  the  necessity  of  them  is  here  asserted  in  the 
highest  manner,  and  pressed  upon  us  by  a  lively 
description  of  the  glory  and  terrors  of  the  day  of 
judgment.   .   .   . 

You  own,  that  you  have  no  title  to  salvation,  if  you 
have  neglected  these  good  works  ;  because  such  persons 
as  have  neglected  them  are,  at  the  last  day,  to  be 
placed  on  the  left  hand,  and  banished  with  a  "  Depart, 
ye  cursed."  There  is,  therefore,  no  salvation  but  in 
the  performance  of  these  good  works.  Who  is  it, 
therefore,  that  may  be  said  to  have  performed  these 
good  works  ?  Is  it  he  that  has  sometime  assisted  a 
prisoner,  or  relieved  the  poor  or  sick  ?  This  would  be 
as  absurd  as  to  say,  that  he  had  performed  the  duties 
of  devotion,  who  had  some  time  said  his  prayers.  Is 
it,  therefore,  he  that  has  several  times  done  these 
works  of  charity  ?  This  can  no  more  be  said,  than 
he  can  be  said  to  be  the  truly  just  man,  who  had  done 
acts  of  justice  several  times.  What  is  the  rule,  there- 
fore, or  measure  of  performing  these  good  works  ? 
How  shall  a  man  trust  that  he  performs  them  as  he 
ought  ? 

Now  the  rule  is  very  plain  and  easy,  and  such  as 
1  Matt.  XXV.  31-46. 


200  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

is  common  to  every  other  virtue,  or  good  temper,  as 
well  as  to  charity.  Who  is  the  humble,  or  meek,  or 
devout,  or  just,  or  faithful  man  ?  Is  it  he  that  has 
several  times  done  acts  of  humility,  meekness,  de- 
votion, justice,  or  fidelity  ?  No ;  but  it  is  he  that 
lives  in  the  habitual  exercise  of  these  virtues.  In 
like  manner,  he  only  can  be  said  to  have  performed 
these  works  of  charity,  who  lives  in  the  habitual 
exercise  of  them  to  the  utmost  of  his  power.  He 
only  has  performed  the  duty  of  Divine  love,  who  loves 
God  with  all  his  heart,  and  with  all  his  mind,  and 
with  all  his  strength.  And  he  only  has  performed 
the  duty  of  these  good  works,  who  has  done  them  with 
all  his  heart,  and  with  all  his  mind,  and  with  all  his 
strength.  For  there  is  no  other  measure  of  our  doing 
good,  than  our  power  of  doing  it. 

The  Apostle  St.  Peter  puts  this  question  to  our 
blessed  Saviour :  "  Lord,  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin 
against  me,  and  I  forgive  him  ?  till  seven  times  ? 
Jesus  saith  unto  him,  I  say  not  unto  thee.  Until 
seven  times,  but.  Until  seventy  times  seven."  ^  Not 
as  if  after  this  number  of  offences  a  man  might  then 
cease  to  forgive ;  but  the  expression  of  seventy  times 
seven,  is  to  show  us  that  we  are  not  to  bound  our 
forgiveness  by  any  number  of  offences,  but  are  to 
continue  forgiving  the  most  repeated  offences  agauist 
us.   .   .   . 

Now  the  rule  of  forgiving  is  also  the  rule  of  giving : 
you  are  not  to  give,  or  do  good  to  seven,  but  to  seventy 
times  seven.  You  are  not  to  cease  from  giving, 
because  you  have  given  often  to  the  same  person,  or 
to  other  persons  ;  but  must  look  upon  yourself  as  much 
1  Matt,  xviii.  21,  22. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  201 

obliged  to  continue  relieving  those  that  continue  in 
want,  as  you  were  obliged  to  relieve  them  once  or 
twice.  Had  it  not  been  in  your  power,  you  had  been 
excused  from  relieving  any  person  once  ;  but  if  it  is  in 
your  power  to  relieve  people  often,  it  is  as  much  your 
duty  to  do  it  often,  as  it  is  the  duty  of  others  to  do  it 
but  seldom,  because  they  are  but  seldom  able.  He 
that  is  not  ready  to  forgive  every  brother,  as  often  as 
he  wants  to  be  forgiven,  does  not  forgive  like  a 
disciple  of  Christ.  And  he  that  is  not  ready  to  give  to 
every  brother  that  wants  to  have  something  given 
him,  does  not  give  like  a  disciple  of  Christ.  For  it 
is  as  necessary  to  give  to  seventy  times  seven,  to 
live  in  the  continual  exercise  of  all  good  works  to  the 
utmost  of  our  power,  as  it  is  necessary  to  forgive  until 
seventy  times  seven,  and  live  in  the  habitual  exercise 
of  this  forgiving  temper,  towards  all  that  want  it. 

And  the  reason  of  all  this  is  very  plain,  because 
there  is  the  same  goodness,  the  same  excellency,  and 
the  same  necessity  of  being  thus  charitable  at  one 
time  as  at  another.  It  is  as  much  the  best  use  of  our 
money,  to  be  always  doing  good  with  it,  as  it  is  the 
best  use  of  it  at  any  particular  time  ;  so  that  that 
which  is  a  reason  for  a  charitable  action,  is  as  good 
a  reason  for  a  charitable  life.  That  which  is  a  reason 
for  forgiving  one  offence,  is  the  same  reason  for  for- 
giving all  offences.  For  such  charity  has  nothing  to 
recommend  it  to-day,  but  what  will  be  the  same 
recommendation  of  it  to-morrow ;  and  you  cannot 
neglect  it  at  one  time,  without  being  guilty  of  the 
same  sin,  as  if  you  neglected  it  at  another  time. 

As  sure,  therefore,  as  these  works  of  charity  are 
necessary  to  salvation,  so  sure  is  it  that  we  are  to  do 


202  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

them  to  the  utmost  of  our  power ;  not  to-day,  or 
to-morrow,  but  through  the  whole  course  of  our  life. 
If,  therefore,  it  be  our  duty  at  any  time  to  deny  our- 
selves any  needless  expenses,  to  be  moderate  and 
frugal,  that  we  may  have  to  give  to  those  that  want, 
it  is  as  much  our  duty  to  do  so  at  all  times,  that  we 
may  be  farther  able  to  do  more  good.  For  if  it  is  at 
any  time  a  sin  to  prefer  needless  vain  expense  to 
works  of  charity,  it  is  so  at  all  times ;  because  charity 
as  much  excels  all  needless  and  vain  expenses  at 
one  time  as  at  another.  So  that  if  it  is  ever  necessary 
to  our  salvation,  to  take  care  of  these  works  of 
charity,  and  to  see  that  we  make  ourselves  in  some 
degree  capable  of  doing  them,  it  is  as  necessary  to  our 
salvation,  to  take  care  to  make  ourselves  as  capable  as  we 
can  be,  of  performing  them  in  all  the  parts  of  our  life. 
Either,  therefore,  you  must  so  far  renounce  your 
Christianity,  as  to  say  that  you  need  never  perform 
any  of  these  good  works ;  or  you  must  own  that  you 
are  to  perform  them  all  your  life  in  as  high  a  decree 
as  you  are  able.  There  is  no  middle  way  to  be  taken, 
any  more  than  there  is  a  middle  way  betwixt  pride 
and  humility,  or  temperance  and  intemperance.  If  you 
do  not  strive  to  fulfil  all  charitable  works,  if  you 
neglect  any  of  them  that  are  in  your  power,  and  deny 
assistance  to  those  that  want  what  you  can  give,  let  it 
be  when  it  will,  or  where  it  will,  you  number  yourself 
amongst  those  that  want  Christian  charity.  Because  it 
is  as  much  your  duty  to  do  good  with  all  that  you 
have,  and  to  live  in  the  continual  exercise  of  good 
works,  as  it  is  your  duty  to  be  temperate  in  all  that 
you  eat  and  drink. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  203 

CHAPTEE    VII. 

HOW  THE  IMPRUDENT  USE  OF  AN  ESTATE  CORRUPTS 
ALL  THE  TEMPERS  OF  THE  MIND,  AND  FILLS  THE 
HEART  WITH  POOR  AND  RIDICULOUS  PASSIONS, 
THROUGH  THE  W^HOLE  COURSE  OF  LIFE;  REPRE- 
SENTED   IN    THE    CHARACTER    OF    FLAYIA. 

(The  reason  that  so  many  people  make  no 
progress  in  religion,  is  from  the  want  of 
religious  exactness  in  the  use  of  their 
money.) 

IT  has  already  been  observed,  that  a  prudent  and 
reUgious  care  is  to  be  used  in  the  manner  of  spending 
our  money  or  estate,  because  the  manner  of  spending 
our  estates  makes  so  great  a  part  of  our  common  hfe, 
and  is  so  much  the  business  of  every  day,  that  accord- 
ing as  we  are  wise,  or  imprudent,  in  this  respect,  the 
whole  course  of  our  lives  will  be  rendered  either  very 
wise  or  very  full  of  folly. 

Persons  that  are  well  affected  to  religion,  that 
receive  instructions  of  piety  with  pleasure  and  satis- 
faction, often  wonder  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  they 
make  no  greater  progress  in  that  religion  which  they 
so  much  admire. 

Now  the  reason  of  it  is  this  :  it  is  because  religion 
lives  only  in  their  head,  but  scmetliing  else  has  pos- 
session of  their  hearts ;  and  therefore  they  continue 
from  year  to  year  mere  admirers  and  praisers  of  piety, 
without  ever  coming  up  to  the  reality  and  perfection  of 
its  precepts. 

If  it  be  asked  why  religion  does  not  get  pos- 
session of  their  hearts,  the  reason  is  this :   it  is  not 


204  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

because  they  live  in  gross  sins,  or  debaucheries,  for 
their  regard  to  religion  preserves  them  from  such 
disorders ;  but  it  is  because  their  hearts  are  constantly 
employed,  perverted,  and  kept  in  a  wrong  state  by 
the  indiscreet  use  of  such  things  as  are  lawful  to  be 
used.  .  .  . 

For  our  souls  may  receive  an  infinite  hurt,  and  be 
rendered  incapable  of  all  virtue,  merely  by  the  use  of 
innocent  and  lawful  things. 

What  is  more  innocent  than  rest  and  retirement  ? 
And  yet  what  more  dangerous  than  sloth  and  idle- 
ness ?  What  is  more  lawful  than  eating  and  drink- 
ing ?  And  yet  what  more  destructive  of  all  virtue, 
what  more  fruitful  of  all  vice,  than  sensuality  and 
indulgence  ? 

How  lawful  and  praiseworthy  is  the  care  of  a 
family  !  And  yet  how  certainly  are  many  people 
rendered  incapable  of  all  virtue,  by  a  worldly  and 
solicitous  temper  ! 

Now  it  is  for  want  of  religious  exactness  in  the  use 
of  these  innocent  and  lawful  things,  that  religion  cannot 
get  possession  of  our  hearts.  And  it  is  in  the  right 
and  prudent  management  of  ourselves,  as  to  these 
things,  that  all  tlie  arts  of  holy  living  chiefly  consist. 

Gross  sins  are  plainly  seen  and  easily  avoided  by 
persons  that  profess  rehgion.  But  the  indiscreet  and 
dangerous  use  of  innocent  and  lawful  things,  as  it  does 
not  shock  and  otl'end  our  consciences,  so  it  is  difficult 
to  make  people  at  all  sensible  of  the  danger  of  it.   .  .  . 

Flavia  and  Miranda  are  two  maiden  sisters,  that 
have  each  of  them  two  hundred  pounds  a  year.  They 
buried  their  parents  twenty  years  ago,  and  have  since 
that  time  spent  their  estate  as  they  pleased. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  205 

riavia  has  been  the  wonder  of  all  her  friends,  for 
her  excellent  management,  in  making  so  surprising 
a  figure  on  so  moderate  a  fortune.  Several  ladies 
that  have  twice  her  fortune  are  not  able  to  be  always 
so  genteel,  and  so  constant  at  all  places  of  pleasure 
and  expense.  She  has  every  thing  that  is  in  the  fashion, 
and  is  in  every  place  where  there  is  any  diversion.  .  .  . 

When  her  parents  died,  she  had  no  thought  about 
her  two  hundred  pounds  a  year,  but  that  she  had  so 
much  money  to  do  what  she  would  with,  to  spend 
upon  herself,  and  purchase  the  pleasures  and  gratifica- 
tions of  all  her  passions. 

And  it  is  this  setting  out,  this  false  judgment  and 
indiscreet  use  of  her  fortune,  that  has  filled  her  whole 
life  with  the  same  indiscretion,  and  kept  her  from 
thinking  of  what  is  right,  and  wise,  and  pious,  in  every 
thing  else. 

If  you  have  seen  her  delighted  in  plays  and  ro- 
mances, in  scandal  and  backbitmg,  easily  flattered, 
and  soon  affronted ;  if  you  have  seen  her  devoted  to 
pleasures  and  diversions,  a  slave  to  every  passion  in  its 
turn,  nice  in  every  thing  that  concerned  her  body  or 
dress,  careless  of  every  thing  that  might  benefit  her 
soul,  always  wanting  some  new  entertainment,  and 
ready  for  every  happy  invention  in  show  or  dress,  it 
was  because  she  had  purchased  all  these  tempers  with 
the  yearly  revenue  of  her  fortune. 

She  might  have  been  humble,  serious,  devout,  a 
lover  of  good  books,  an  admirer  of  prayer  and  retire- 
ment, careful  of  her  time,  diligent  in  good  works,  full 
of  charity  and  the  love  of  God,  but  that  the  imprudent 
use  of  her  estate  forced  all  the  contrary  tempers  upon 
her.  .  .  . 


206  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

More  men  live  regardless  of  the  great  duties  of 
piety,  through  too  great  a  concern  for  worldly  goods, 
than  through  direct  injustice.   .   .   . 

If  this  woman  would  make  fewer  visits,  or  that  not 
be  always  talking,  they  would  neither  of  them  find  it 
half  so  hard  to  be  affected  with  religion. 

For  all  these  things  are  only  little,  when  they  are 
compared  to  great  sins ;  and  though  they  are  little  in 
that  respect,  yet  they  are  great,  as  they  are  impedi- 
ments and  hindrances  of  a  pious  spirit. 

For  as  consideration  is  the  only  eye  of  the  soul,  as 
the  truths  of  religion  can  be  seen  by  nothing  else,  so 
whatever  raises  a  levity  of  mind,  a  trifling  spirit, 
renders  the  soul  incapable  of  seeing,  apprehending, 
and  relishing  the  doctrines  of  piety. 

Would  we  therefore  make  a  real  progress  in  re- 
ligion, we  must  not  only  abhor  gross  and  notorious 
sins,  but  we  must  regulate  the  innocent  and  lawful 
parts  of  our  behaviour,  and  put  the  most  common  and 
allowed  actions  of  life  under  the  rules  of  discretion  and 
piety. 


CHAPTEE  VIII. 

HOW  THE  WISE  AND  PIOUS  USE  OF  AN  ESTATE  NATUR- 
ALLY CARRIETH  US  TO  GREAT  RERFECTION  IN  ALL 
THE  VIRTUES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  ;  REPRESENTED 
IN    THE    CHARACTER   OF    MIRANDA. 

(How  the  right  use  of  money  helps  in  the 
perfecting  of  Christian  character.) 


A 


NY  one  pious  regularity  of  any  one  part  of  our 
life,  is  of  great  advantage,  not  only  on  its  own 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  207 

account,  but  as  it  uses  us  to  live  by  rule,  and  think  of 
the  government  of  ourselves. 

A  man  of  business,  tliat  has  brought  one  part  of  his 
affairs  under  certain  rules,  is  in  a  fair  way  to  take  the 
same  care  of  the  rest. 

So  he  that  has  brought  any  one  part  of  his  life 
under  the  rules  of  religion,  may  thence  be  taught  to 
extend  the  same  order  and  regularity  into  other  parts 
of  his  life.   .   .   . 

By  rule,  must  here  be  constantl}^  understood,  a 
religious  rule  observed  upon  a  principle  of  duty  to 
God.  .  .  . 

For  the  smallest  rule  in  these  matters  is  of  great 
benefit,  as  it  teaches  us  some  part  of  tlie  government 
of  ourselves,  as  it  keeps  up  a  tenderness  of  mind,  as 
it  presents  God  often  to  our  thoughts,  and  brmgs  a 
sense  of  religion  into  the  ordinary  actions  of  our 
common  life.   .   .   . 

It  would  be  easy  to  show  how  little  and  small 
matters  are  the  first  steps  and  natural  beginnings  of 
great  perfection. 

But  the  two  things  which,  of  all  others,  most  want 
to  be  under  a  strict  rule,  and  which  are  the  greatest 
blessings  both  to  ourselves  and  others,  when  they 
are  rightly  used,  are  our  time  and  our  money.  These 
talents  are  continual  means  and  opportunities  of 
doing  good. 

He  that  is  piously  strict,  and  exact  in  the  wise 
management  of  either  of  these,  cannot  be  long  ignorant 
of  the  right  use  of  the  other.  And  he  that  is  happy 
in  the  religious  care  and  disposal  of  them  both,  is 
already  ascended  several  steps  upon  the  ladder  of 
Christian  perfection. 


208  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

Miranda  (the  sister  of  Flavia)  is  a  sober,  reason- 
able Christian :  as  soon  as  she  was  mistress  of  her 
time  and  fortune,  it  was  her  first  thought  how  she 
might  best  fulfil  every  thing  that  God  required  of 
her  in  the  use  of  them,  and  how  she  might  make  the 
best  and  happiest  use  of  this  short  life.  She  depends 
upon  the  truth  of  what  our  blessed  Lord  hath  said, 
"  One  thing  is  needful,"  ^  and  therefore  makes  her  whole 
life  but  one  continual  labour  after  it.  She  has  but 
one  reason  for  doing  or  not  doing,  for  liking  or  not 
liking  any  thing,  and  that  is,  the  will  of  God.  She 
is  not  so  weak  as  to  pretend  to  add  what  is  called  the 
fine  lady  to  the  true  Christian ;  Miranda  thinks  too 
well  to  be  taken  with  the  sound  of  such  silly  words ; 
she  has  renounced  the  world,  to  follow  Christ  in  the 
exercise  of  humility,  charity,  devotion,  abstinence, 
and  heavenly  affections ;  and  that  is  Miranda's  fine 
breeding.  .  .  . 

Miranda  does  not  divide  her  duty  between  God, 
her  neighbour,  and  herself ;  but  she  considers  all  as 
due  to  God,  and  so  does  every  thing  in  His  name,  and 
for  His  sake.  This  makes  her  consider  her  fortune  as 
the  gift  of  God,  that  is  to  be  used,  as  every  thing  is 
that  belongs  to  God,  for  the  wise  and  reasonable  ends 
of  a  Christian  and  holy  life.  Her  fortune,  therefore, 
is  divided  betwixt  herself  and  several  other  poor 
people,  and  she  has  only  her  part  of  relief  from  it. 
This  is  the  spirit  of  Miranda,  and  thus  she  uses  the 
gifts  of  God ;  she  is  only  one  of  a  certain  number  of 
poor  people,  that  are  relieved  out  of  her  fortune, 
and  she  only  differs  from  them  in  the  blessedness  of 
giving. 

1  Luke  xi.  42. 


A   SERIOUS    CALL  200 

Excepting  her  victuals,  she  never  spent  ten  pounds 
a  year  upon  herself.  If  you  were  to  see  her,  you 
would  wonder  what  poor  body  it  was  that  was  so 
surprisingly  neat  and  clean.  She  has  but  one  rule 
that  she  observes  in  her  dress,  to  be  always  clean 
and  in  the  cheapest  things.  Every  thing  about  her 
resembles  the  purity  of  her  soul,  and  she  is  always 
clean  without,  because  she  is  always  pure  within. 

Every  morning  sees  her  early  at  her  prayers ;  she 
rejoices  in  the  beginning  of  every  day,  because  it 
begins  all  her  pious  rules  of  holy  living,  and  brings  the 
fresh  pleasure  of  repeating  them.  She  seems  to  be  as 
a  guardian  angel  to  those  that  dwell  about  her,  with 
her  watchings  and  prayers  blessing  the  place  where 
she  dwells,  and  making  intercession  with  God  for 
those  that  are  asleep.   .   .   . 

At  her  table  she  lives  strictly  by  this  rule  of  holy 
Scripture,  "  Whether  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatever  ye 
do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  ^  This  makes  her 
begin  and  end  every  meal,  as  she  begins  and  ends 
every  day,  with  acts  of  devotion :  she  eats  and  drinks 
only  for  the  sake  of  living,  and  with  so  regular  an 
abstinence,  that  every  meal  is  an  exercise  of  self- 
denial,  and  she  humbles  her  body  every  time  that  she 
is  forced  to  feed  it.  If  Miranda  was  to  run  a  race  for 
her  life,  she  would  submit  to  a  diet  that  was  proper 
for  it.  But  as  the  race  which  is  set  before  her  is  a 
race  of  holiness,  purity,  and  heavenly  affection,  which 
she  is  to  finish  in  a  corrupt,  disordered  body  of  earthly 
passions,  so  her  everyday  diet  has  only  this  one  end, 
to  make  her  body  fitter  for  this  spiritual  race.   .  .   . 

To  relate  her  charity,  would  be  to  relate  the  history 

1  1  Cor.  X.  31. 
14 


210  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

of  every  day  for  twenty  years ;  for  so  long  has  all  her 
fortune  been  spent  that  way.  She  has  set  up  near 
twenty  poor  tradesmen  that  had  failed  m  then- 
busmess,  and  saved  as  many  from  failing.  She  has 
educated  several  poor  children  that  were  picked  up  in 
the  streets,  and  put  them  in  a  way  of  an  honest 
employment.  As  soon  as  any  labourer  is  confined  at 
home  with  sickness,  she  sends  him,  till  he  recovers, 
twice  the  value  of  his  wages,  that  he  may  have  one 
part  to  give  to  his  family  as  usual,  and  the  other  to 
provide  things  convenient  for  his  sickness. 

If  a  family  seems  too  large  to  be  supported  by  the 
labour  of  those  that  can  work  in  it,  she  pays  their 
rent,  and  gives  them  something  yearly  towards  their 
clothing.  By  this  means,  there  are  many  poor 
families  that  live  in  a  comfortable  manner,  and  are 
from  year  to  year  blessing  her  in  their  prayers. 

If  there  is  any  poor  man  or  woman  that  is  more 
than  ordinarily  wicked  and  reprobate,  Miranda  has 
her  eye  upon  them ;  she  watches  their  time  of  need 
and  adversity ;  and  if  she  can  discover  that  they  are 
in  any  great  straits,  or  affliction,  she  gives  them  speedy 
relief.  She  has  this  care  for  this  sort  of  people, 
because  she  once  saved  a  very  profligate  person  from 
being  carried  to  prison,  who  immediately  became  a 
true  penitent. 

There  is  nothing  in  the  character  of  ]\Iiranda  more 
to  be  admired  than  this  temper.  For  this  tenderness 
of  affection  towards  the  most  abandoned  sinners  is  the 
highest  instance  of  a  Divine  and  godlike  soul.  .  .  . 

Miranda  considers  that  Lazarus  was  a  common 
beggar,  that  he  was  the  care  of  angels,  and  carried 
into  Abraham's  bosom.     She  considers  that  our  blessed 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  211 

Saviour  and  His  apostles  were  kind  to  beggars ;  that 
they  spoke  comfortably  to  them,  healed  their  diseases, 
and  restored  eyes  and  limbs  to  the  lame  and  blind ; 
that  Peter  said  to  the  beggar  that  wanted  an  alms 
from  him,  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none ;  but  such  as 
I  have  give  I  thee :  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of 
Nazareth,  rise  up  and  walk."  ^  Miranda,  therefore, 
never  treats  beggars  with  disregard  and  aversion ;  but 
she  imitates  the  kindness  of  our  Saviour  and  His 
apostles  towards  them ;  and  though  she  cannot,  like 
them,  work  miracles  for  their  relief,  yet  she  relieves 
them  with  that  power  that  she  hath ;  and  may  say, 
with  the  apostle,  "  Such  as  I  have  give  I  thee,  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ." 

It  may  be,  says  Miranda,  that  I  may  often  give  to 
those  that  do  not  deserve  it,  or  that  will  make  an  ill 
use  of  my  alms.  But  what  then  ?  Is  not  this  the 
very  method  of  Divine  goodness  ?  Does  not  God 
make  "  His  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good  "  ?  ^ 
Is  not  this  the  very  goodness  that  is  recommended  to 
us  in  Scripture,  that,  by  imitating  of  it,  we  may  be 
children  of  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven,  who 
"  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust "  ?  And 
shall  I  withhold  a  little  money,  or  food,  from  my 
fellow-creature,  for  fear  he  should  not  be  good  enough 
to  receive  it  of  me  ?  Do  I  beg  of  God  to  deal  with 
me,  not  according  to  my  merit,  but  according  to  His 
own  great  goodness ;  and  shall  I  be  so  absurd  as  to 
withhold  my  charity  from  a  poor  brother,  because  he 
may  perhaps  not  deserve  it  ?  Shall  I  use  a  measure 
towards  him,  which  I  pray  God  never  to  use 
towards  me  ? 

^  Acts  iii.  6.  -  Matt,  v.  45. 


212  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

Besides,  where  has  the  Scripture  made  merit  the 
rule  or  measure  of  charity  ?  On  the  contrary,  the 
Scripture  saith,  "  If  thy  enemy  hunger,  feed  him ;  if 
he  thirst,  give  him  drink."  ^ 

Now  this  plahily  teaches  us,  that  the  merit  of 
persons  is  to  be  no  rule  of  our  charity ;  but  that  we 
are  to  do  acts  of  kindness  to  those  that  least  of  all 
deserve  it.  For  if  I  am  to  love  and  do  good  to  my 
worst  enemies ;  if  I  am  to  be  charitable  to  them, 
notwithstanding  all  their  spite  and  malice ;  surely 
merit  is  no  measure  of  charity.  If  I  am  not  to  with- 
hold my  charity  from  such  bad  people,  and  who  are 
at  the  same  time  my  enemies,  surely  I  am  not  to  deny 
alms  to  poor  beggars,  whom  I  neither  know  to  be  bad 
people,  nor  any  way  my  enemies. 

You  will  perhaps  say,  that  by  this  means  I 
encourage  people  to  be  beggars.  But  the  same 
thoughtless  objection  may  be  made  against  all  kinds 
of  charities,  for  they  may  encourage  people  to  depend 
upon  them.  The  same  may  be  said  against  forgiving 
our  enemies,  for  it  may  encourage  people  to  do  us 
hurt.  But  when  the  love  of  God  dwelleth  in  you, 
when  it  has  enlarged  your  heart,  and  filled  you  with 
bowels  of  mercy  and  compassion,  you  will  make  no 
more  such  objections  as  these. 

When  you  are  at  any  time  turning  away  the  poor, 
the  old,  the  sick,  and  helpless  traveller,  the  lame,  or 
the  blind,  ask  yourself  this  question,  Do  I  sincerely 
wish  these  poor  creatures  may  be  as  happy  as  Lazarus, 
that  was  carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's  bosom  ? 
Do  I  sincerely  desire  that  God  would  make  them 
fellow-heirs  with  me  in  eternal  glory  ?     Now,  if  you 

1  Rom.  xii.  20. 


A    SERIOUS   CALL  213 

search  into  your  soul,  you  will  find  that  there  is 
none  of  these  notions  there;  that  you  are  wishmg 
nothing  of  this.  For  it  is  impossible  for  any  one 
heartily  to  wish  a  poor  creature  so  great  a  happiness, 
and  yet  not  have  a  heart  to  give  hiin  a  small  alms. 
For  this  reason,  says  Miranda,  as  far  as  I  can,  I  give 
to  all,  because  I  pray  to  God  to  forgive  all ;  and  I 
cannot  refuse  an  alms  to  those  whom  I  pray  God  to 
bless,  whom  I  wish  to  be  partakers  of  eternal  glory, 
but  am  glad  to  show  some  degree  of  love  to  such  as,  I 
hope,  will  be  the  objects  of  tlie  infinite  love  of  God. 
And  if,  as  our  Saviour  has  assured  us,  it  be  more 
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,  we  ought  to  look  upon 
those  that  ask  our  alms,  as  so  many  friends  and  bene- 
factors, that  come  to  do  us  a  greater  good  than  they 
can  receive,  that  come  to  exalt  our  virtue,  to  be 
witnesses  of  our  charity,  to  be  monuments  of  our  love, 
to  be  our  advocates  with  God,  to  be  to  us  in  Christ's 
stead,  to  appear  for  us  in  the  day  of  judgment,  and  to 
help  us  to  a  blessedness  greater  than  our  alms  can 
bestow  on  them. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

CONTATNTNG  SOME  KEFLECTIONS  UPON  THE  LIEE  OF 
MIRANDA,  AND  SHOWING  HOW  IT  MAY,  AND  OUGHT 
TO    BE    IMITATED    BY    ALL    HER    SEX. 

(The  Blessedness  of  a  Life  wholly  devoted 
to  God.) 

"VTOW  this  life  of  Miranda,  which  I  heartily  recom- 
-^^       mend    to  .  the    imitation   of    her    sex,   however 


214  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

contrary  it  may  seem  to  the  way  and  fashion  of  the 
world,  is  yet  suitable  to  the  true  spirit,  and  founded 
upon  the  plainest  doctrines  of  Christianity. 

To  live  as  she  does,  is  as  truly  suitable  to  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  as  to  be  baptized,  or  receive  the 
Sacrament. 

Her  spirit  is  that  whicli  animated  the  saints  of 
former  ages  ;  and  it  is  because  they  lived  as  she  does, 
that  we  now  celebrate  their  memories,  and  praise  God 
for  their  examples. 

There  is  nothing  that  is  whimsical,  trifling,  or  un- 
reasonable in  her  character,  but  every  thing  there 
described  is  a  right  and  proper  instance  of  a  solid  and 
real  piety. 

For  all  Miranda's  rules  of  living  unto  God,  of 
spending  her  time  and  fortune,  of  eating,  working, 
dressing,  and  conversing,  are  as  substantial  parts  of  a 
reasonable  and  holy  life,  as  devotion  and  prayer. 

For  there  is  nothing  to  be  said  for  the  wisdom 
of  sobriety,  the  wisdom  of  devotion,  the  wisdom  of 
charity,  or  the  wisdom  of  humihty,  but  what  is  as 
good  an  argument  for  the  wise  and  reasonable  use  of 
apparel. 

For  religion  is  as  deeply  concerned  in  the  one  as  in 
the  other. 

There  is  therefore  nothing  right  in  the  use  of 
clothes,  or  in  the  use  of  any  thing  else  in  the  world, 
but  the  plainness  and  simplicity  of  the  gospel.  Every 
other  use  of  things  (however  polite  and  fashionable  in 
the  world)  distracts  aud  disorders  the  heart,  and  is 
inconsistent  with  that  inward  state  of  piety,  that  purity 
of  heart,  that  wisdom  of  mind,  and  regularity  of 
affection,  which  Christianity  requireth. 


A    SERIOUS   CALL  215 

If  you  would  be  a  good  Christian,  there  is  but  one 
way, — you  must  live  wholly  unto  God :  and  if  you 
would  live  wholly  unto  God,  you  must  live  according 
to  the  wisdom  that  comes  from  God ;  you  must  act 
according  to  right  judgments  of  the  nature  and  value 
of  things  ;  you  must  live  in  the  exercise  of  holy  and 
heavenly  affections,  and  use  all  the  gifts  of  God  to  His 
praise  and  glory. 

Some  persons,  perhaps,  who  admire  the  purity  and 
perfection  of  this  life  of  Miranda,  may  say,  How  can  it 
be  proposed  as  a  common  example  ?  How  can  we 
who  are  married,  or  we  who  are  under  the  direction 
of  our  parents,  imitate  such  a  life  ? 

It  is  answered,  Just  as  you  may  imitate  the  life  of 
our  blessed  Saviour  and  His  apostles.  The  circum- 
stances of  our  Saviour's  life,  and  the  state  and  con- 
dition of  His  apostles,  were  more  different  from  yours, 
than  those  of  Miranda's  are ;  and  yet  their  life,  the 
purity  and  perfection  of  their  behaviour,  is  the 
common  example  that  is  proposed  to  all  Christians. 

It  is  their  spirit,  therefore,  their  piety,  their  love  of 
God,  that  you  are  to  imitate,  and  not  the  particular 
form  of  their  life. 

Act  under  God  as  they  did,  direct  your  common 
actions  to  that  end  which  they  did,  glorify  your  proper 
state  with  such  love  of  God,  such  charity  to  your 
neighbour,  such  humility  and  self-denial,  as  they  did ; 
and  then,  though  you  are  only  teaching  your  own 
children,  and  St.  Paul  is  converting  whole  nations,  yet 
you  are  following  his  steps,  and  acting  after  his 
example.  .  .  . 

As  for  those  who  are  altogether  in  their  own  hands, 
if  the  liberty  of  their  state  makes  them  covet  the  best 


216  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

gifts,  if  it  carries  them  to  choose  the  most  excellent 
ways,  if  they,  having  all  in  their  own  power,  should 
turn  the  whole  form  of  their  life  into  a  regular  exercise 
of  the  highest  virtues,  happy  are  they  who  have  «o 
learned  Christ ! 

All  persons  cannot  receive  this  saying.  They  that 
are  able  to  receive  it,  let  them  receive  it,  and  bless 
that  Spirit  of  God,  which  has  put  such  good  motions 
into  their  hearts. 

God  may  be  served  and  glorified  in  every  state 
of  life.  But  as  there  are  some  states  of  life  more 
desirable  than  others,  that  more  purify  our  natures, 
that  more  improve  our  virtues,  and  dedicate  us  unto 
God  in  a  higher  manner,  so  those  who  are  at  liberty 
to  choose  for  themselves  seem  to  be  called  by  God  to 
be  more  eminently  devoted  to  His  service. 

Ever  since  the  beginning  of  Christianity  there  have 
been  two  orders,  or  ranks  of  people,  amongst  good 
Christians. 

The  one  that  feared  and  served  God  in  the  common 
offices  and  business  of  a  secular  worldly  life : 

The  other,  renouncing  the  common  business,  and 
common  enjoyments  of  ■  life,  as  riches,  marriage, 
honours,  and  pleasures,  devoted  themselves  to  voluntary 
poverty,  virginity,  devotion,  and  retirement,  that  by 
this  means  they  might  live  wholly  unto  God,  in  the 
daily  exercise  of  a  Divine  and  heavenly  life. 

This  testimony  I  have  from  the  famous  ecclesiastical 
historian  Eusebius,  who  lived  at  the  time  of  the  first 
General  Council,  when  the  faith  of  our  Nicene  Creed 
was  established,  when  the  Church  was  in  its  greatest 
glory  and  purity,  when  its  bishops  were  so  many  holy 
fathers  and  eminent  saints. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  217 

"  Therefore,"  saith  he,  "  there  hath  been  instituted 
in  the  Church  of  Christ  two  ways,  or  manners,  of 
living.  The  one,  raised  above  the  ordinary  state  of 
nature,  and  common  ways  of  living,  rejects  wedlock, 
possessions,  and  worldly  goods,  and,  being  wholly  separate 
and  removed  from  the  ordinary  conversation  of  common 
life,  is  appropriated  and  devoted  solely  to  the  worship 
and  service  of  God,  through  an  exceeding  degree  of 
heavenly  love. 

"  They  who  are  of  this  order  of  people  seem  dead  to 
the  life  of  this  world,  and,  having  their  bodies  only 
upon  earth,  are  in  their  minds,  and  contemplations, 
dwelhng  in  heaven.  From  whence,  like  so  many 
heavenly  inhabitants,  they  look  down  upon  human  life, 
making  intercessions  and  oblations  to  Almighty  God  for 
the  whole  race  of  mankind.  And  this  not  with  the 
blood  of  beasts,  or  the  fat,  or  smoke,  and  burning  of 
bodies,  but  with  the  highest  exercises  of  true  piety, 
with  cleansed  and  puiified  hearts,  and  with  a  whole 
form  of  life  strictly  devoted  to  virtue.  These  are 
their  sacrifices,  which  they  continually  offer  unto  God, 
imploring  His  mercy  and  favour  for  themselves  and 
their  fellow-creatures. 

"  Christianity  receives  this  as  a  perfect  manner  of 
life. 

"  The  other  is  of  a  lower  form,  and,  suiting  itself 
more  to  the  condition  of  human  nature,  admits  of 
chaste  wedlock,  the  care  of  children  and  family,  of 
trade  and  business,  and  goes  through  all  the  employ- 
ments of  life  under  a  sense  of  piety,  and  fear  of  God. 

"  iSTow  they  who  have  chosen  this  manner  of  life 
have  their  set  times  for  retirement  and  spiritual 
exercises,  and  particular  days  are  set  apart  for  their 


218  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

hearing  and  learning  the  word  of  God.  And  this  order 
of  people  are  considered  as  in  the  second  state  of 
piety."  1 

Thus  this  learned  historian. 

If,  therefore,  persons  of  either  sex,  moved  with  the 
life  of  Miranda,  and  desirous  of  perfection,  should  unite 
themselves  into  Uttle  societies,  professing  voluntary 
poverty,  virginity,  retirement,  and  devotion,  living  upon 
bare  necessaries,  that  some  might  be  relieved  by  their 
charities,  and  all  be  blessed  with  their  prayers,  and 
benefited  by  their  example ;  or  if,  for  want  of  this,  they 
should  practise  the  same  manner  of  life,  in  as  high  a 
degree  as  they  could  by  themselves ;  such  persons 
would  be  so  far  from  being  chargeable  with  any 
superstition,  or  blind  devotion,  that  they  might  be 
justly  said  to  restore  that  piety,  which  was  the  boast 
and  glory  of  the  Church,  when  its  greatest  saints  were 
alive. 

Now,  as  this  learned  historian  observes,  that  it  was 
an  exceeding  great  degree  of  heavenly  love  that  carried 
these  persons  so  much  above  the  common  ways  of  life 
to  such  an  eminent  state  of  holiness  ;  so  it  is  not  to 
be  wondered  at,  that  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  should 
fill  the  hearts  of  many  Christians  with  this  high  degree 
of  love. 

For  a  religion  that  opens  such  a  scene  of  glory,  that 
discovers  things  so  infinitely  above  all  the  world,  that 
so  triumphs  over  death,  that  assures  us  of  such  man- 
sions of  bliss,  where  we  shall  so  soon  be  as  the  angels 
of  God  in  heaven  ;  what  wonder  is  it,  if  such  a  religion, 
such  truths  and  expectations,  should,  in  some  holy 
souls,  destroy  all  earthly  desires,  and  make  the  ardent 
1  Euseb.  Dem.  Evan.  1.  1.  c.  8. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  219 

love  of  heavenly  things  be  the  one  continual  passion 
of  their  hearts  ? 

If  the  rehgion  of  Christians  is  founded  upon  the 
infinite  humiliation,  the  cruel  mockings  and  scourgings, 
the  prodigious  sufferings,  the  poor,  persecuted  life,  and 
painful  death  of  a  crucified  Son  of  God ;  what  wonder 
is  it,  if  many  humble  adorers  of  this  profound  mystery, 
many  affectionate  lovers  of  a  crucified  Lord,  should 
renounce  their  share  of  worldly  pleasures,  and  give 
themselves  up  to  a  continual  course  of  mortification 
and  self-denial,  that  thus  suffering  with  Christ  here, 
they  may  reign  with  Him  hereafter  ? 

If  truth  itself  hath  assured  us  that  there  is  but  one 
thino;  needful,  what  wonder  is  it  that  there  should  be 
some  amongst  Christians  so  full  of  faith,  as  to  beUeve 
this  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  w^ords,  and  to  desire 
such  a  separation  from  the  w^orld,  that  their  care  and 
attention  to  the  one  thing  needful  may  not  be  inter- 
rupted. 

If  our  blessed  Lord  hath  said,  "  If  thou  wilt  be  per- 
fect, go  and  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor, 
and  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven  :  and  come  and 
follow  me ; "  ^  what  wonder  is  it,  that  there  should  be 
amongst  Christians  some  such  zealous  followers  of  Christ, 
so  intent  upon  heavenly  treasure,  so  desirous  of  per- 
fection, that  they  should  renounce  the  enjoyment  of 
their  estates,  choose  a  voluntary  poverty,  and  relieve 
all  the  poor  that  they  are  able  ? 

If  the  chosen  vessel,  St.  Paul,  hath  said,  "  He  that 

is  unmarried  careth  for  the  things  that  belong  to  the 

Lord,  how  he  may  please  the  Lord :  and  that  there  is 

this  difference  also  between  a  wife  and  a  virgin ;  the 

1  Matt.  xix.  21. 


220  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

unmarried  woman  careth  for  the  things  of  the  Lord, 
that  she  may  be  lioly  both  in  body  and  in  spirit ; "  ^ 
what  wonder  is  it,  if  the  purity  and  perfection  of  the 
virgin  state  hath  been  the  praise  and  glory  of  the 
Church  in  its  first  and  purest  ages  ?  that  there  have 
always  been  some  so  desirous  of  pleasing  God,  so  zealous 
after  every  degree  of  purity  and  perfection,  so  glad  of 
every  means  of  improving  their  virtue,  that  they  have 
renounced  the  comforts  and  enjoyments  of  wedlock,  to 
trim  their  lamps,  to  purify  their  souls,  and  wait  upon 
God  in  a  state  of  perpetual  virginity  ? 


CHAPTER  X. 

SHOWING  HOW  ALL  ORDERS  AND  RANKS  OF  MEN  AND 
WOMEN,  OF  ALL  AGES,  ARE  OBLIGED  TO  DEVOTE 
THEMSELVES    UNTO    GOD. 

(Entire  Devotion  to  God  the  duty  of  every 
Christian.) 

I  HAVE  in  the  foregoing  chapters  gone  through  the 
several  great  instances  of  Christian  devotion,  and 
shown  that  all  the  parts  of  our  common  life,  our  em- 
ployments, our  talents,  and  gifts  of  fortune,  are  all  to  be 
made  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God  by  a  wise  and  re- 
ligious use  of  every  thing,  and  by  directing  our  actions 
and  designs  to  such  ends  as  are  suitable  to  the  honour 
and  glory  of  God. 

I  shall  now  show  that  this  regularity  of  devotion, 
this  holiness  of  common  life,  this  religious  use  of  every 
^  1  Cor.  vii.  32-34. 


A    SEKIOUS    CALL  221 

thing  we  have,  is  a  devotion  that  is  the  duty  of  all 
orders  of  Christian  people.  .  .  . 

Everybody  acknowledges  that  all  orders  of  men  are 
to  be  equally  and  exactly  honest  and  faithful ;  there  is 
no  exception  to  be  made  in  these  duties,  for  any  private 
or  particular  state  of  life.  Now,  if  we  would  but  attend 
to  the  reason  and  nature  of  things,  if  we  would  but 
consider  the  nature  of  God,  and  the  nature  of  man,  we 
should  find  the  same  necessity  for  every  right  use  of 
our  reason,  for  every  grace,  or  religious  temper  of  the 
Christian  life ;  we  should  find  it  as  absurd  to  suppose 
that  one  man  must  be  exact  in  piety,  and  another  need 
not,  as  to  suppose  that  one  man  must  be  exact  in 
honesty,  but  another  need  not ;  for  Christian  humility, 
sobriety,  devotion,  and  piety  are  as  great  and  necessary 
parts  of  a  reasonable  life  as  justice  and  honesty.  But 
if  we  consider  mankind  in  a  higher  view,  as  God's  order 
or  society  of  rational  beings,  that  are  to  glorify  Him  by 
the  right  use  of  their  reason,  and  by  acting  comform- 
ably  to  the  order  of  their  nature,  we  shall  find  that 
every  temper  that  is  equally  contrary  to  reason  and 
order,  that  opposes  God's  ends  and  designs,  and  dis- 
orders the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  rational  world,  is 
equally  sinful  in  man,  and  equally  odious  to  God.   .   .  . 

Nothing  can  be  more  false  than  to  imagine,  that 
because  we  are  private  persons,  that  have  taken  upon 
us  no  charge  or  employment  of  life,  therefore  we  may 
live  more  at  large,  indulge  our  appetites,  and  be  less 
careful  of  the  duties  of  piety  and  holiness ;  for  it  is  as 
good  an  excuse  for  cheating  and  dishonesty.  Because 
he  that  abuses  his  reason,  that  indulges  himself  in  lust 
and  sensuahty,  and  neglects  to  act  the  wise  and  reason- 
able part  of  a  true  Christian,  has  every  thing  in  his  life 


222  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

to  render  him  hateful  to  God,  that  is  to  be  found  in 
cheating  and  dishonesty.  .  .  . 

Another  argument  to  prove  that  all  the  orders  of 
men  are  obliged  to  be  thus  holy  and  devout  in  the 
common  course  of  their  lives,  in  the  use  of  every  thing 
that  they  enjoy,  may  be  taken  from  our  obligation  to 
prayer. 

It  is  granted  that  prayer  is  a  duty  that  belongs  to 
all  states  and  conditions  of  men :  now,  if  we  inquire 
into  the  reason  of  this,  why  no  state  of  life  is  to  be 
excused  from  prayer,  we  shall  find  it  as  good  a  reason 
why  every  state  of  life  is  to  be  made  a  state  of  piety 
and  holiness  in  all  its  parts. 

For  the  reason  why  we  are  to  pray  unto  God,  and 
glorify  Him  with  hymns,  and  psalms  of  thanksgiving, 
is  this,  because  we  are  to  live  wholly  unto  God,  and 
glorify  Him  all  possible  ways.  It  is  not  because  the 
praises  of  words,  or  forms  of  thanksgiving,  are  more 
particularly  parts  of  piety,  or  more  the  worship  of  God 
than  other  things;  but  it  is  because  they  are  possible 
ways  of  expressing  our  dependence,  our  obedience  and 
devotion  to  God.  Now,  if  this  be  the  reason  of  verbal 
praises  and  thanksgivings  to  God,  because  we  are  to 
live  unto  God  all  possible  ways,  then  it  plainly  follows, 
that  we  are  equally  obliged  to  worship  and  glorify  God 
in  all  other  actions  that  can  be  turned  into  acts  of 
piety  and  obedience  to  Him.  And  as  actions  are  of 
much  more  significance  than  words,  it  must  be  a  much 
more  acceptable  worship  of  God,  to  glorify  Him  in  all 
the  actions  of  our  common  life,  than  with  any  little 
forms  of  words  at  any  particular  times. 

He  that  dares  not  say  an  ill-natured  word,  or  do  an 
unreasonable  thing,  because  he  considers  God  as  every- 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  223 

where  present,  performs  a  better  devotion  than  he  that 
dares  not  miss  the  church.  To  live  in  the  world  as  a 
stranger  and  a  pilgrim,  using  all  its  enjoyments  as  if 
we  used  them  not,  making  all  our  actions  so  many  steps 
towards  a  better  life,  is  offering  a  better  sacrifice  to 
God  than  any  forms  of  holy  and  heavenly  prayers.  .  .  . 

He  that  has  appointed  times  for  the  use  of  wise 
and  pious  prayers,  performs  a  proper  instance  of 
devotion ;  but  he  that  allows  himself  no  times,  nor 
any  places,  nor  any  actions,  but  such  as  are  strictly 
conformable  to  wisdom  and  hohness,  worships  the 
Divine  nature  with  the  most  true  and  substantial 
devotion.  For  who  does  not  know  that  it  is  better 
to  be  pure  and  holy,  than  to  talk  about  purity  and 
holiness  ?  Nay,  who  does  not  know  that  a  man  is 
to  be  reckoned  no  farther  pure  or  holy,  or  just,  than 
as  he  is  pure,  and  holy,  and  just  in  the  common  course 
of  his  life  ?  But  if  this  be  plain,  then  it  is  also  plain, 
that  it  is  better  to  be  holy,  than  to  have  holy  prayers. 

Prayers,  therefore,  are  so  far  from  being  a  sufficient 
devotion,  that  they  are  the  smallest  parts  of  it.  We 
are  to  praise  God  with  words  and  prayers,  because  it 
is  a  possible  way  of  glorifying  God,  who  has  given 
us  such  faculties,  as  may  be  so  used.  But  then  as 
words  are  but  small  things  in  themselves,  as  times  of 
prayer  are  but  little,  if  compared  with  the  rest  of  our 
lives ;  so  that  devotion  which  consists  in  times  and 
forms  of  prayer  is  but  a  very  small  thing,  if  compared 
to  that  devotion  which  is  to  appear  in  every  other 
part  and  circumstance  of  our  lives. 

Again :  as  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  worship  God  with 
forms  of  words,  and  to  observe  times  of  offering 
them  unto  Him,  so  it  is  the  smallest  kind  of  piety. 


224  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  as  it  is  more  difficult  to 
worship  God  with  our  substance,  to  honour  Him  with 
the  right  use  of  our  time,  to  offer  to  Him  the 
continual  sacrifice  of  self-denial  and  mortification ; 
as  it  requires  more  piety  to  eat  and  drink  only  for 
such  ends  as  may  glorify  God,  to  undertake  no  labour, 
nor  allow  of  any  diversion,  but  where  we  can  act  in 
the  name  of  God ;  as  it  is  more  difficult  to  sacrifice 
all  our  corrupt  tempers,  correct  all  our  passions,  and 
make  piety  to  God  the  rule  and  measure  of  all  the 
actions  of  our  common  life,  so  the  devotion  of  this 
kind  is  a  much  more  acceptable  service  unto  G-od,  than 
those  words  of  devotion  which  we  offer  to  him  either 
in  the  church  or  in  our  closet.   .  .   . 

Bended  knees,  whilst  you  are  clothed  with  pride ; 
heavenly  petitions,  whilst  you  are  hoarding  up  trea- 
sures upon  earth  ;  holy  devotions,  whilst  you  live  in 
the  follies  of  the  world ;  prayers  of  meekness  and 
charity,  whilst  your  heart  is  the  seat  of  spite  and  re- 
sentment ;  hours  of  prayer,  whilst  you  give  up  days 
and  years  to  idle  diversions,  impertinent  visits,  and 
foolish  pleasures ;  are  as  absurd,  unacceptable  services 
to  God,  as  forms  of  thanksgiving  from  a  person  that 
lives  in  repinings  and  discontent. 

So  that,  unless  the  common  course  of  our  lives  be 
according  to  the  common  spirit  of  our  prayers,  our 
prayers  are  so  far  from  being  a  real  or  sufficient  de- 
gree of  devotion,  that  they  become  an  empty  lip- 
labour,  or,  what  is  worse,  a  notorious  hypocrisy. 

Seeing,  therefore,  we  are  to  make  the  spirit  and 
temper  of  our  prayers  the  common  spirit  and  temper 
of  our  lives,  this  may  serve  to  convince  us  that  all 
orders  of   people  are  to   labour   and  aspire  after  the 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  225 

same  utmost  perfection  of  the  Christian  life.  For  as 
all  Christians  are  to  use  the  same  holy  and  heavenly 
devotions,  as  they  are  all  with  the  same  earnestness 
to  pray  for  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  is  it  a  sufficient 
proof  that  all  orders  of  people  are,  to  the  utmost  of 
their  power,  to  make  their  life  agreeable  to  that  one 
Spirit,  for  which  they  are  all  to  pray. 

As  certain,  therefore,  as  the  same  holiness  of  prayers 
requires  the  same  holiness  of  life,  so  certain  is  it  that  all 
Christians  are  called  to  the  same  holiness  of  life.  .  .   . 

Let  young  gentlemen  be  assured,  that  it  is  the 
one  only  business  of  a  Christian  gentleman,  to  dis- 
tinguish himself  by  good  works,  to  be  eminent  in  the 
most  sublime  virtues  of  the  gospel,  to  bear  with  the 
ignorance  and  weakness  of  the  vulgar,  to  be  a  friend 
and  patron  to  all  that  dwell  about  hun,  to  live  in  the 
utmost  heights  of  wisdom  and  holiness,  and  show 
through  the  whole  course  of  his  life  a  true  religious 
greatness  of  mind.  They  must  aspire  after  such  a 
gentility,  as  they  might  have  learnt  from  seeing  the 
blessed  Jesus,  and  show  no  other  spirit  of  a  gentle- 
man but  such  as  they  might  have  got  by  living  with 
the  holy  apostles.  They  must  learn  to  love  God 
with  all  their  heart,  with  all  their  soul,  and  with 
all  their  strength,  and  their  neighbour  as  themselves ; 
and  then  they  have  all  the  greatness  and  distinction 
that  they  can  have  here,  and  are  fit  for  an  eternal 
happiness  in  heaven  hereafter.  .  .  . 

For  the  Son  of  God  did  not  come  from  above  to 
add  an  external  form  of  worship  to  the  several  ways 
of  life  that  are  in  the  world,  and  so  to  leave  people 
to  live  as  they  did  before,  in  such  tempers  and  enjoy- 
ments as  the  fashion  and  spirit  of  the  world  approves ; 

15 


226  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

but  as  He  came  down  from  heaven  altogether  Divine 
and  heavenly  in  His  own  nature,  so  it  was  to  call  man- 
kind to  a  Divine  and  heavenly  life;  to  the  highest 
change  of  their  own  nature  and  temper;  to  be  born 
again  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  to  walk  in  the  wisdom 
and  light  and  love  of  God,  and  to  be  like  Him  to 
the  utmost  of  their  power ;  to  renounce  all  the  most 
plausible  ways  of  the  world,  whether  of  greatness, 
busmess,  or  pleasure ;  to  a  mortification  of  all  their 
most  agreeable  passions ;  and  to  live  in  such  wisdom, 
and  purity,  and  holiness,  as  might  fit  them  to  be 
glorious  in  the  enjoyment  of  God  to  all  eternity.  .  .  . 
For  as  sure  as  Jesus  Christ  was  wisdom  and  holi- 
ness, as  sure  as  He  came  to  make  us  like  Himself,  and 
to  be  baptized  into  His  Spirit,  so  sure  is  it  that  none 
can  be  said  to  keep  to  their  Christian  profession,  but  they 
who,  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  live  a  wise  and  holy 
ind  heavenly  life.  This,  and  this  alone,  is  Christianity ; 
an  universal  holiness  in  every  part  of  life,  a  heavenly 
wisdom  in  all  our  actions,  not  conforming  to  the  spirit 
and  temper  of  the  world,  but  turning  all  worldly  enjoy- 
ments into  means  of  piety  and  devotion  to  God. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

SHOWING  HOW  GREAT  DEVOTION  FILLS  OUR  LIVES  WITH 
THE  GREATEST  PEACE  AND  HAPPINESS  THAT  CAN  BE 
ENJOYED  IN  THIS  WORLD. 

(The  more  exalted  our  Piety,  the  greater 
our  Happiness.) 

SOME  people  will  perhaps  object,  tliat  all  these  rules 
of  holy  living  unto  God  in  all  that  we  do,  are  too 


A    SEllIOUS    CALL  22  t 

great  a  restraint  upon  human  life ;  that  it  will  be 
made  too  anxious  a  state,  by  thus  introducing  a  regard 
to  God  in  all  our  actions ;  and  that  by  depriving  our- 
selves of  so  many  seemingly  innocent  pleasures,  we 
shall  render  our  lives  dull,  uneasy,  and  melancholy. 

To  which  it  may  be  answered, 

First,  That  these  rules  are  prescribed  for,  and  will 
certainly  procure  a  quite  contrary  end.  That  instead 
of  making  our  lives  dull  and  melancholy,  they  will 
render  them  full  of  content  and  strong  satisfactions. 
That  by  these  rules  we  only  change  the  childish  satis- 
factions of  our  vain  and  sickly  passions  for  the  solid 
enjoyments  and  real  happiness  of  a  sound  mind. 

Secondly,  That  as  there  is  no  foundation  for  com- 
fort in  the  enjoyments  of  this  life,  but  in  the  assurance 
that  a  wise  and  good  God  governeth  the  world,  so  the 
more  we  find  out  God  in  every  thing,  the  more  we 
apply  to  Him  in  every  place,  the  more  we  look  up  to 
Him  in  all  our  actions,  the  more  w^e  conform  to  His 
will,  the  more  we  act  according  to  His  wisdom,  and 
imitate  His  goodness,  by  so  much  the  more  do  we 
enjoy  God,  partake  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  heighten 
and  increase  all  that  is  happy  and  comfortable  in 
human  life. 

Thirdly,  He  that  is  endeavouring  to  subdue,  and 
root  out  of  his  mind,  all  those  passions  of  pride,  envy, 
and  ambition  which  rehgion  opposes,  is  domg  more 
to  make  himself  happy,  even  in  this  life,  than  he  that 
is  contrivmg  means  to  indulge  them.  For  these  pas- 
sions are  the  causes  of  all  the  disquiets  and  vexations 
of  human  life :  they  are  the  dropsies  and  fevers  of  our 
minds,  vexing  them  with  false  appetites,  and  restless 
cravings  after  such   things  as   we  do  not  want,  and 


228  AVIIOLLY    FOR    GOD 

spoiling  our  taste  for  those  things  which  are  our 
proper  good.  .  .  . 

Most  people,  indeed,  confess  that  religion  preserves 
us  from  a  great  many  evils,  and  helps  us  in  many- 
respects  to  a  more  happy  enjoyment  of  ourselves ;  but 
then  they  imagine  that  this  is  only  true  of  such  a 
moderate  share  of  religion,  as  only  gently  restrains  us 
from  the  excesses  of  our  passions.  They  suppose  that 
the  strict  rules  and  restraints  of  an  exalted  piety  are 
such  contradictions  to  our  nature,  as  must  needs  make 
our  lives  dull  and  uncomfortable. 

This  objection  supposes  that  religion,  moderately 
practised,  adds  much  to  the  happiness  of  life ;  but 
that  such  heights  of  piety  as  the  perfection  of  religion 
requireth,  have  a  contrary  effect. 

It  supposes,  also,  that  the  happiness  of  life  consists 
in  a  mixture  of  virtue  and  vice,  a  mixture  of  ambition 
and  humility,  charity  and  envy,  heavenly  affection  and 
covetousness.  All  which  is  as  absurd  as  to  suppose 
that  it  is  happy  to  be  free  from  excessive  pains,  but 
unhappy  to  be  without  more  moderate  pains ;  or  that 
the  happiness  of  health  consisted  in  being  partly  sick 
and  partly  well. 

For  if  humility  be  the  peace  and  rest  of  the  soul, 
then  no  one  has  so  much  happiness  from  humility,  as 
he  that  is  the  most  humble.  If  there  is  any  peace  and 
joy  in  doing  any  action  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
he  that  brings  the  most  of  his  actions  to  this  rule  does 
most  of  all  increase  the  peace  and  joy  of  his  life.  .  .  . 

For,  first.  Piety  requires  us  to  renounce  no  ways  of 
life,  where  we  can  act  reasonably,  and  offer  what  we 
do  to  the  glory  of  God.  All  ways  of  life,  all  satisfac- 
tions and  enjoyments,  that  are  within  these  bounds, 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  229 

are  no  way  denied  us  by  the  strictest  rules  of  piety. 
Whatever  you  can  do,  or  enjoy,  as  in  the  presence  of 
God,  as  His  servant,  as  His  rational  creature  that  has 
received  reason  and  knowledge  from  Him ;  all  that 
you  can  perform  conformably  to  a  rational  nature,  and 
the  will  of  God,  all  this  is  allowed  by  the  laws  of 
piety.  And  will  you  think  that  your  life  will  be  un- 
comfortable unless  you  may  displease  God,  be  a  fool, 
and  mad,  and  act  contrary  to  that  reason  and  wisdom 
which  He  has  implanted  in  you  ?  .  .  . 

Who  would  complain  of  the  severe  strictness  of  a 
law  that,  without  any  exception,  forbad  the  putting  of 
dust  into  our  eyes  ?  Who  could  think  it  too  rigid,  that 
there  were  no  abatements  ?  Now  this  is  the  strictness 
of  religion;  it  requires  nothing  of  us  strictly,  or  without 
abatements,  but  where  every  degree  of  the  thing  is 
wrong,  where  every  indulgence  does  us  some  hurt. 

If  religion  commands  an  universal  charity,  to  love 
our  neighbour  as  ourselves,  to  forgive  and  pray  for  all 
our  enemies  without  any  reserve ;  it  is  because  all  de- 
grees of  love  are  degrees  of  happiness,  that  strengthen 
and  support  the  Divine  Kfe  of  the  soul,  and  are  as 
necessary  to  its  health  and  happiness,  as  proper  food 
is  necessary  to  the  health  and  happiness  of  the  body. 

If  religion  has  laws  against  laying  up  treasures 
upon  earth,  and  commands  us  to  be  content  with  food 
and  raiment,  it  is  because  every  other  use  of  the  world 
is  abusing  it  to  our  own  vexation,  and  turning  all  its 
conveniences  into  snares  and  traps  to  destroy  us.  It 
is  because  this  plainness  and  simplicity  of  Ufe  secures 
us  from  the  cares  and  pains  of  restless  pride  and  envy, 
and  makes  it  easier  to  keep  that  strait  road  that  will 
carry  us  to  eternal  life. 


230  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

If  religion  saith,  "  Sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to 
the  poor,"  it  is  because  there  is  no  other  natural  or 
reasonable  use  of  our  riches,  no  other  way  of  making 
ourselves  happier  for  them ;  it  is  because  it  is  as 
strictly  right  to  give  others  that  which  we  do  not 
want  ourselves,  as  it  is  right  to  use  so  much  as  our 
own  wants  require.  For  if  a  man  has  more  food  than 
his  own  nature  requires,  how  base  and  unreasonable  is 
it  to  invent  foolish  ways  of  wasting  it,  and  make  sport 
for  his  own  full  belly,  rather  than  let  his  fellow- 
creatures  have  the  same  comfort  from  food  which  he 
hath  had.  It  is  so  far,  therefore,  from  being  a  hard 
law  of  religion,  to  make  this  use  of  our  riches,  that  a 
reasonable  man  would  rejoice  in  that  religion  which 
teaches  him  to  be  happier  in  that  which  he  gives 
away,  than  in  that  which  he  keeps  for  himself ;  which 
teaches  him  to  make  spare  food  and  raiment  be 
greater  blessings  to  him,  than  that  which  feeds  and 
clothes  his  own  body.  .  .  . 

If  religion  calleth  us  to  a  life  of  watching  and 
prayer,  it  is  because  we  live  amongst  a  crowd  of 
enemies,  and  are  always  in  need  of  the  assistance  of 
God.  If  we  are  to  confess  and  bewail  our  sins,  it  is 
because  such  confessions  relieve  the  mind,  and  restore 
it  to  ease ;  as  burdens  and  weights  taken  off  the 
shoulders,  relieve  the  body,  and  make  it  easier  to 
itself.  If  we  are  to  be  frequent  and  fervent  in  holy 
petitions,  it  is  to  keep  us  steady  in  the  sight  of  our 
true  good,  and  that  we  may  never  want  the  happiness 
of  a  lively  faith,  a  joyful  hope,  and  well-grounded 
trust  in  God.  If  we  are  to  pray  often,  it  is  that  we 
may  be  often  happy  in  such  secret  joys  as  only  prayer 
can    give ;    in    such    communications    of    the    Divine 


A   SERIOUS    CALL  231 

Presence,  as  will  fill  our  minds  with  all  the  happiness 
that  beings  not  in  heaven  are  capable  of.  .  .  . 

If  religion  commands  us  to  live  wholly  unto  God, 
and  to  do  all  to  His  glory,  it  is  because  every  other 
way  is  living  wholly  against  ourselves,  and  will  end  in 
our  own  shame  and  confusion  of  face. 

As  every  thing  is  dark,  that  God  does  not  en- 
lighten ;  as  every  thing  is  senseless,  that  has  not  its 
share  of  knowledge  from  Him  ;  as  nothing  lives,  but  by 
partaking  of  life  from  Him;  as  nothing  exists,  but  because 
He  commands  it  to  be ;  so  there  is  no  glory  or  great- 
ness, but  what  is  of  the  glory  or  greatness  of  God.  .  .  . 

This  is  the  state  of  all  creatures,  whether  men  or 
angels :  as  they  make  not  themselves,  so  they  enjoy 
nothing  from  themselves :  if  they  are  great,  it  must 
be  only  as  great  receivers  of  the  gifts  of  God ;  their 
power  can  only  be  so  much  of  the  Divine  Power  acting 
in  them ;  their  wisdom  can  be  only  so  much  of  the 
Divine  Wisdom  shining  within  them ;  and  their  light 
and  glory,  only  so  much  of  the  light  and  glory  of  God 
shining  upon  them. 

As  they  are  not  men  or  angels,  because  they  had 
a  mind  to  be  so  themselves,  but  because  the  will  of 
God  formed  them  to  be  what  they  are ;  so  they  cannot 
enjoy  this  or  that  happiness  of  men  or  angels,  because 
they  have  a  mind  to  it,  but  because  it  is  the  will  of 
God  that  such  things  be  the  happiness  of  men,  and 
such  things  the  happiness  of  angels.  But  now  if  God 
be  thus  all  in  all ;  if  His  will  is  thus  the  measure  of 
all  things,  and  all  natures ;  if  nothing  can  be  done, 
but  by  His  power ;  if  nothing  can  be  seen,  but  by  a 
light  from  Him ;  if  we  have  nothing  to  fear,  but  from 
His  justice ;  if  we  have  nothing  to  hope  for,  but  from 


232  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

His  goodness ;  if  this  is  the  nature  of  man,  thus  help- 
less in  himself ;  if  this  is  the  state  of  all  creatures,  as 
well  those  in  heaven  as  those  on  earth ;  if  they  are 
nothing,  can  do  nothing,  can  suffer  no  pain,  nor  feel 
any  happiness,  but  so  far,  and  in  such  degrees,  as  the 
power  of  God  does  all  this ;  if  this  be  the  state  of 
things,  then  how  can  we  have  the  least  glimpse  of  joy 
or  comfort,  how  can  we  have  any  peaceful  enjoyment 
of  ourselves,  but  by  living  wholly  unto  that  God,  using 
and  doing  every  thing  conformably  to  His  will  ?  A 
life  thus  devoted  unto  God,  looking  wholly  unto  Him  in 
all  our  actions,  and  doing  all  things  suitably  to  His 
glory,  is  so  far  from  being  dull  and  uncomfortable, 
that  it  creates  new  comforts  in  every  thing  that  we  do. 

On  the  contrary,  would  you  see  how  happy  they 
are  who  live  according  to  their  own  wills,  who  cannot 
submit  to  the  dull  and  melancholy  business  of  a  life 
devoted  unto  God ;  look  at  the  man  in  the  parable,  to 
whom  his  lord  had  given  one  talent. 

He  could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  using  his  talent 
according  to  the  will  of  him  from  whom  he  had  it, 
and  therefore  he  chose  to  make  himself  happier  in  a 
way  of  his  own.  "  Lord,"  says  he,  "  I  knew  thee,  that 
thou  art  an  hard  man,  reaping  where  thou  hast  not 
sown,  and  gathering  where  thou  hast  not  strawed : 
and  I  was  afraid,  and  went  and  hid  thy  talent  in  the 
earth :  lo,  there  tliou  hast  that  is  thine." 

His  lord,  having  convicted  him  out  of  his  own 
mouth,  despatches  him  with  this  sentence :  "  Cast  the 
unprofitable  servant  into  outer  darkness :  there  sliall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  ^ 

Here  you  see  how  happy  this  man  made  himself, 

^  Matt.  XXV.  24,  25,  30. 


A   SERIOUS    CALL  283 

by  not  acting  wliolly  according  to  his  lord's  will.  It 
was,  according  to  his  own  account,  a  happiness  of 
murmuring  and  discontent :  I  knew  thee,  says  he,  that 
thou  wast  an  hard  man  :  it  was  a  happiness  of  fears 
and  appreliensions ;  I  was,  says  he,  afraid :  it  was  a 
liappiness  of  vain  labours  and  fruitless  travels ;  I 
went,  says  he,  and  hid  thy  talent ;  and  after  having 
been  awhile  the  sport  of  foolish  passions,  tormenting 
fears,  and  fruitless  labour,  he  is  rewarded  with  dark- 
ness, eternal  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 

Now  this  is  the  happiness  of  all  those  who  look 
upon  a  strict  and  exalted  piety,  that  is,  a  right  use  of 
their  talent,  to  be  a  dull  and  melancholy  state  of  life.  .  .  . 

On  the  other  hand,  would  you  see  a  short  descrip- 
tion of  the  happiness  of  a  life  rightly  employed,  wholly 
devoted  to  God,  you  must  look  at  the  man  in  the 
parable  to  whom  his  lord  had  given  five  talents. 
"  Lord,"  says  he,  "  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  five 
talents  ;  behold,  I  have  gained  beside  them  five  talents 
more.  His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  thou  good 
and  faithful  servant ;  thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a 
few  things,  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things : 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  lord." 

Here  you  see  a  life  that  is  wholly  intent  upon  the 
improvement  of  the  talents,  that  is  devoted  wholly 
unto  God,  is  a  state  of  happiness,  prosperous  labours, 
and  glorious  success.  Here  are  not,  as  in  the  former 
case,  any  uneasy  passions,  murmurings,  vain  fears, 
and  fruitless  labours.  The  man  is  not  toiling  and 
digging  in  the  earth  for  no  end  or  advantage ;  but 
his  pious  labours  prosper  in  his  hands,  his  happiness 
increases  upon  him ;  the  blessing  of  five  becomes  the 
blessing  of   ten  talents ;    and   he   is   received  with  a 


234  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

"  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant :  enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  lord." 

Now,  as  the  case  of  these  men  in  the  parable  left 
nothing  else  to  their  choice,  but  either  to  be  happy  in 
using  their  gifts  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  or  miserable  by 
using  them  according  to  their  own  humours  and  fancies  ; 
so  the  state  of  Christianity  leaves  us  no  other  choice. 

All  that  we  have,  all  that  we  are,  all  that  we  enjoy, 
are  only  so  many  talents  from  God :  if  we  use  them 
to  the  ends  of  a  pious  and  holy  life,  our  five  talents 
will  become  ten,  and  our  labours  will  carry  us  into  the 
joy  of  our  Lord ;  but  if  we  abuse  them  to  the  grati- 
fications of  our  own  passions,  sacrificing  the  gifts  of 
God  to  our  own  pride  and  vanity,  we  shall  live  here 
in  vain  labours  and  foolish  anxieties,  shunning  religion 
as  a  melancholy  thing,  accusing  our  Lord  as  a  hard 
master,  and  then  fall  into  everlasting  misery. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

THE  HAPPINESS  OF  A  LIFE  WHOLLY  DEVOTED  TO  GOD 
FARTHER  PROVED,  FROM  THE  VANITY,  THE  SENSUALITY, 
AND  THE  RIDICULOUS  POOR  ENJOYMENTS,  WHICH  THEY 
ARE  FORCED  TO  TAKE  UP  WITH  WHO  LIVE  ACCORDING 
TO  THEIR  OWN  HUMOURS.  THIS  REPRESENTED  IN 
VARIOUS  CHARACTERS. 

(The  Emptiness  of  all  Worldly  Pleasure.) 

TI7E  may  still  see  more  of  the  happiness  of  a  life 

»*        devoted   unto   God,   by  considering    tlie  poor 

contrivances  for  happiness,  and  the  contemptible  ways 


A   SERIOUS    CALL  235 

of  life,  which  they  are  thrown  into,  who  are  not  under 
the  directions  of  a  strict  piety,  but  seeking  after 
happiness  by  other  methods. 

If  one  looks  at  their  lives,  who  live  by  no  rule  but 
their  own  humours  and  fancies ;  if  one  sees  but  what 
it  is  which  they  call  joy,  and  greatness,  and  happiness  ; 
if  one  sees  how  they  rejoice,  and  repent,  change  and 
fly  from  one  delusion  to  another ;  one  shall  find  great 
reason  to  rejoice,  that  God  hath  appointed  a  strait  and 
narrow  way,  that  leadeth  unto  life ;  and  that  we  are 
not  left  to  the  folly  of  our  own  minds,  or  forced  to 
take  up  with  such  shadows  of  joy  and  happiness  as 
the  weakness  and  folly  of  the  world  has  invented.  I 
say  invented  ;  because  those  things  which  make  up  the 
joy  and  happiness  of  the  world  are  mere  inventions, 
which  have  no  foundation  in  nature  and  reason,  are 
no  way  the  proper  good  or  happiness  of  man,  no  way 
perfect  either  in  his  body,  or  his  mind,  or  carry  him 
to  his  true  end.  .  .  . 

Whether  we  consider  the  greatness  of  religion,  or 
the  littleness  of  all  other  things,  and  the  meanness  of 
all  other  enjoyments,  there  is  nothing  to  be  found,  in 
the  whole  nature  of  things,  for  a  thoughtful  mind  to 
rest  upon,  but  a  happiness  in  the  hopes  of  religion. 

Consider  now  with  yourself,  how  unreasonably  it  is 
pretended  that  a  life  of  strict  piety  must  be  a  dull  and 
anxious  state.  For  can  it,  with  any  reason,  be  said 
that  the  duties  and  restraints  of  rehgion  must  render 
our  lives  heavy  and  melancholy,  when  they  only  deprive 
us  of  such  happiness  as  has  been  here  laid  before  you  ? 

Must  it  be  tedious  and  tiresome  to  live  in  the  con- 
tinual exercise  of  charity,  devotion,  and  temperance, 
to  act  wisely  and  virtuously,  to  do  good  to  the  utmost 


236  WPIOLLY    FOR    GOD 

of  your  power,  to  imitate  the  Divine  perfections,  and 
prepare  yourself  for  the  enjoyment  of  God  ?  Must  it 
be  dull  and  tiresome  to  be  delivered  from  blindness 
and  vanity,  from  false  hopes  and  vain  fears,  to  im- 
prove in  holiness,  to  feel  the  comforts  of  conscience 
in  all  your  actions,  to  know  that  God  is  your  Friend, 
that  all  must  work  for  your  good,  that  neither  life 
nor  death,  neither  men  nor  devils,  can  do  you  any 
harm ;  but  that  all  your  sufferings  and  doings  that 
are  offered  unto  God,  all  your  watchings  and  prayers, 
and  labours  of  love  and  charity,  all  your  improve- 
ments, are  in  a  short  time  to  be  rewarded  with  ever- 
lasting glory  in  the  presence  of  God ;  must  such  a 
state  as  this  be  dull  and  tiresome  ?  .  .  . 

If  you  were  to  see  a  man  dully  endeavourmg  all 
liis  life  to  satisfy  his  thirst,  by  holding  up  one  and  tlie 
same  empty  cup  to  his  mouth,  you  would  certainly 
despise  his  ignorance. 

But  if  you  should  see  others  of  brighter  parts,  and 
finer  understandings,  ridiculing  the  dull  satisfaction  of 
one  cup,  and  thinking  to  satisfy  their  own  thirst  by 
a  variety  of  gilt  and  golden  empty  cups ;  would  you 
think  that  these  were  ever  the  wiser,  or  happier,  or 
better  employed,  for  their  finer  parts  ? 

Now  this  is  all  the  difference  you  can  see  in  the 
happiness  of  this  life. 

The  dull  and  heavy  soul  may  be  content  with  one 
empty  appearance  of  happiness,  and  be  continually 
trying  to  hold  one  and  the  same  empty  cup  to  his 
mouth  all  his  life.  But  then  let  the  wit,  the  great 
scholar,  tlie  fine  genius,  the  great  statesman,  the  polite 
gentleman,  lay  all  their  heads  together,  and  they  can 
only  show  you  more  and  various  empty  appearances 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  237 

of  hcippinesy ;  give  them  all  the  world  into  their 
hands,  let  them  cut  and  carve  as  they  please,  they  can 
only  make  a  greater  variety  of  empty  cups.  .  .  . 

And  if  all  that  is  in  the  world  are  only  so  many 
empty  cups,  what  does  it  signify  which  you  take,  or 
how  many  you  take,  or  how  many  you  have  ? 

If  you  but  use  yourself  to  such  meditations  as 
these,  to  reflect  upon  the  vanity  of  all  orders  of  life 
without  piety,  to  consider  how  all  the  ways  of  the 
world  are  only  so  many  diiierent  w^ays  of  error, 
blindness,  and  mistake ;  you  would  soon  find  your 
heart  made  wiser  and  better  by  it.  These  meditations 
would  aw^aken  your  soul  into  a  zealous  desire  of  that 
solid  happiness,  wdiich  is  only  to  be  found  in  recourse 
to  God. 


CHAPTEK  XIIL 

THAT  NOT  ONLY  A  LIFE  OF  ^'ANITY,  OR  SENSUALITY,  BUT 
EVEN  THE  MOST  REGULAR  KIND  OF  LIFE,  THAT  IS 
NOT  GOVERNED  BY  GREAT  DEVOTION,  SUFFICIENTLY 
SHOWS  ITS  MISERIES,  ITS  AVANTS  AND  EMPTINESS, 
TO  THE  EYES  OF  ALL  THE  WORLD.  THIS  REPRE- 
SENTED IN  VARIOUS  CHARACTERS. 

(The  Vanity  of  Worldly  Possessions.) 

IT  is  a  very  remarkable  saying  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  to  His  disciples,  in  these  words  :  "  Blessed 
are  your  eyes,  for  they  see ;  and  yoiu"  ears,  for  they 
liear."  ^  They  teach  us  two  things :  first.  That  the 
dulness  and  heaviness  of  men's  minds,  with  regard  to 

^  Matt.  xiii.  16. 


238  WHOLLY  i-uu  god 

spiritual  matters,  is  so  great,  that  it  may  justly  be 
compared  to  the  want  of  eyes  and  ears. 

Secondly,  That  God  had  so  filled  every  thing,  and 
every  place,  with  motives  and  arguments  for  a  godly 
life,  that  they  who  are  but  so  blessed,  so  happy  as  to 
use  their  eyes  and  their  ears,  nmst  needs  be  affected 
with  them. 

Now,  though  this  was,  in  a  more  especial  manner, 
the  case  of  those  whose  senses  were  witnesses  of  the 
life,  and  miracles,  and  doctrines,  of  our  blessed  Lord, 
yet  it  is  as  truly  the  case  of  all  Christians  at  this 
tune.  For  the  reasons  of  religion,  the  calls  to  piety, 
are  so  written  and  engraved  upon  every  thing,  and 
present  themselves  so  strongly,  and  so  constantly,  to 
all  our  senses  in  every  thing  that  we  meet,  that  they 
can  only  be  disregarded  by  eyes  that  see  not,  and  ears 
that  hear  not. 

What  greater  motive  to  a  religious  life,  than  the 
vanity,  the  poorness  of  all  worldly  enjoyments  ?  And 
yet  who  can  help  seeing  and  feeling  this  every  day  of 
his  life. 

What  greater  call  to  look  towards  God,  than  the 
pains,  the  sickness,  the  crosses  and  vexations  of  this 
life  ?  And  yet  whose  eyes  and  ears  are  not  daily 
witnesses  of  them? 

What  miracles  could  more  strongly  appeal  to  our 
senses,  or  what  message  from  Heaven  speak  louder  to 
us,  than  the  daily  dying  and  departure  of  our  fellow- 
creatures.  So  that  the  one  thing  needful,  or  the 
great  end  of  life,  is  not  left  to  be  discovered  l)y  fine 
reasoning  and  deep  reflections ;  but  is  pressed  upon 
us,  in  the  plainest  manner,  by  the  experience  of  all 
our  senses,  by  every  thing  that  we  meet  with  in  life. 


A    SElflOUS    CALL  Jlo'J 

Let  US  but  iutend  to  see  and  hear,  and  then  the 
whole  world  becomes  a  book  of  wisdom  and  instruction 
to  us ;  all  that  is  regular  in  the  order  of  nature,  all 
that  is  accidental  in  the  course  of  things,  all  the  mis- 
takes and  disappomtments  that  happen  to  ourselves, 
all  the  miseries  and  errors  that  we  see  in  other  people, 
become  so  many  plain  lessons  of  advice  to  us ;  teach- 
ing us,  w^ith  as  much  assurance  as  an  angel  from 
heaven,  that  we  can  no  ways  raise  ourselves  to  any 
true  happiness,  but  by  turning  all  our  thoughts,  our 
w'ishes,  and  endeavours,  after  the  happiness  of  another 
Hfe. 

It  is  this  right  use  of  the  world  that  I  would  lead 
you  into,  by  directing  you  to  turn  your  eyes  upon 
every  shape  of  human  folly,  that  you  may  thence  draw 
fresh  arguments  and  motives  of  living  to  the  best  and 
greatest  purposes  of  your  creation. 

And  if  you  would  but  carry  this  intention  about 
you,  of  profiting  by  the  follies  of  the  world,  and  of 
learning  the  greatness  of  religion,  from  the  littleness 
and  vanity  of  every  other  w^ay  of  life ;  if,  I  say,  you 
W'Ould  but  carry  this  intention  in  your  mind,  you 
would  find  every  day,  every  place,  and  every  person, 
a  fresh  proof  of  thek  wisdom,  who  choose  to  live 
wholly  unto  God.  You  would  then  often  return  home 
the-  wiser,  the  better,  and  the  more  strengthened  in 
religion,  by  every  thing  that  has  fallen  in  your  way.  .  .  . 

Look  now  at  that  condition  of  life,  which  draws  the 
envy  of  all  eyes. 

Negotius  is  a  temperate,  honest  man.  He  served 
his  time  under  a  master  of  great  trade,  but  has,  by 
his  own  management,  made  it  a  more  considerable 
busuiess  than  ever  it  was  before. 


240  WHOLLY    FOU    GOD 

As  money  is  continually  pouring  in  upon  him,  so 
he  often  lets  it  go  in  various  kinds  of  expense  and 
generosity,  and  sometimes  in  ways  of  charity. 

Negotius  is  always  ready  to  join  in  any  public  con- 
tribution. If  a  purse  is  making  at  any  place  where 
he  happens  to  be,  whether  it  be  to  buy  a  plate  for  a 
horse-race,  or  to  redeem  a  prisoner  out  of  gaol,  you  are 
always  sure  of  having  something  from  him.   .   .  . 

The  generality  of  people,  when  they  think  of 
happiness,  think  of  Negotius,  in  whose  life  every 
instance  of  happiness  is  supposed  to  meet;  sober, 
prudent,  rich,  prosperous,  generous,  and  charitable. 

Let  us  now,  therefore,  look  at  this  condition  in 
another,  but  truer  light. 

Let  it  be  supposed  that  this  same  Negotius  was  a 
j)ainful,  laborious  man,  every  day  deep  in  variety  of 
affairs ;  that  he  neither  drank  nor  debauched ;  but 
was  sober  and  regular  in  his  business.  Let  it  be 
supposed  that  he  grew  old  in  this  course  of  trading; 
and  that  the  end  and  design  of  all  this  labour,  and 
care,  and  application  to  business,  was  only  this,  that 
he  might  die  possessed  of  more  than  a  hundred 
thousand  pairs  of  boots  and  spurs,  and  as  many 
great  coats. 

Let  it  be  supposed  that  the  sober  part  of  the  world 
say  of  him,  when  he  is  dead,  that  he  was  a  great  and 
happy  man,  a  thorough  master  of  business,  and  had 
acquired  a  hundred  thousand  pairs  of  boots  and  spurs 
when  he  died. 

Now,  if  this  was  really  the  case,  I  believe  it  would 
be  readily  granted  that  a  life  of  such  business  was  as 
poor  and  ridiculous  as  any  that  can  be  invented.  But 
it  would   puzzle  any  one   to   show    that   a   man  has 


A    SEKIOUS    CALL  241 

spent  all  his  time  and  thoughts  in  business  and  hurry, 
that  he  might  die,  as  it  is  said,  worth  a  hundred 
thousand  pounds,  is  any  whit  wiser  than  he  who  has 
taken  the  same  pains  to  have  as  many  pairs  of  boots 
and  spurs  when  he  leaves  the  world. 

For  if  the  temper  and  state  of  our  souls  be  our 
whole  state ;  if  the  only  end  of  life  be  to  die  as  free 
from  sin,  and  as  exalted  in  virtue,  as  we  can;  if 
naked  as  we  came,  so  naked  are  we  to  return,  and  to 
stand  a  trial  before  Christ  and  His  holy  angels,  for 
everlasting  happiness  or  misery ;  what  can  it  possibly 
signify  what  a  m^an  had,  or  had  not,  in  this  world  ? 
What  can  it  signify  what  you  call  those  things  which 
a  man  has  left  behind  him ;  whether  you  call  them 
his  or  any  one's  else ;  whether  you  call  them  trees  or 
fields,  or  bu'ds  and  feathers ;  whether  you  call  them 
a  hundred  thousand  pounds,  or  a  hundred  thousand 
pairs  of  boots  and  spurs  ?  I  say,  call  them ;  for  the 
things  signify  no  more  to  him  than  the  names. 

Now,  it  is  easy  to  see  the  folly  of  a  life  thus  spent, 
to  furnish  a  man  with  such  a  number  of  boots  and 
spurs.  But  yet  there  needs  no  better  faculty  of 
seeing,  no  finer  understanding,  to  see  the  folly  of  a 
life  spent  in  making  a  man  a  possessor  of  ten  towns 
before  he  dies. 

For  if,  when  he  has  got  all  his  towns,  or  all  his 
boots,  his  soul  is  to  go  to  its  own  place  among  separate 
spirits,  and  his  body  be  laid  by  in  a  coffin,  till  the 
last  trumpet  calls  him  to  judgment ;  where  the  inquuy 
will  be,  how  humbly,  how  devoutly,  how  purely,  how 
meekly,  how  piously,  how  charitably,  how  heavenly, 
we  have  spoken,  thought,  and  acted,  whilst  we  were  in 
the  body ;  how  can  we  say  that  he  who  has  worn  out 

16 


242  WHOLLY    FOK    GOD 

his  life  in  raising  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  has 
acted  wiser  for  himself,  than  he  who  has  had  the 
same  care  to  procure  a  hundred  thousand  of  any 
thing  else  ? 

But  farther :  let  it  now  be  supposed  that  Negotius, 
when  he  first  entered  into  business,  happening  to  read 
the  Gospel  with  attention,  and  eyes  open,  found  that 
he  had  a  much  greater  business  upon  his  hands  than 
that  to  which  he  had  served  an  apprenticeship ;  that 
there  were  things  which  belong  to  man,  of  much  more 
importance  than  all  that  our  eyes  can  see ;  so  glorious, 
as  to  deserve  all  our  thoughts;  so  dangerous,  as  to 
need  all  our  care ;  and  so  certain,  as  never  to  deceive 
the  faithful  labourer  :  let  it  be  supposed  that  Negotius, 
believing  these  things  to  be  true,  entirely  devoted 
himself  to  God  at  his  first  setting  out  in  the  world, 
resolving  to  pursue  his  business  no  farther  than  was 
consistent  with  great  devotion,  humility,  and  self- 
denial  ;  and  for  no  other  ends,  but  to  provide  himself 
with  a  sober  subsistence,  and  to  do  all  the  good  that 
he  could,  to  the  souls  and  bodies  of  his  fellow- 
creatures;  let  it  therefore  be  supposed,  that  instead 
of  the  continual  hurry  of  business,  he  was  frequent  in 
his  retirements,  and  a  strict  observer  of  the  hours  of 
prayers ;  that,  instead  of  restless  desires  after  more 
riches,  his  soul  has  been  full  of  the  love  of  God  and 
heavenly  affection,  constantly  watching  against  worldly 
tempers,  and  always  aspiring  after  Divine  grace  ;  that, 
instead  of  worldly  cares  and  contrivances,  he  was  busy 
in  fortifying  his  soul  against  all  approaches  of  sin : 
now,  had  this  been  the  Christian  spirit  of  Negotius, 
can  any  one  say  that  he  had  lost  the  true  joy  and 
happiness  of  life  by  thus  conforming  to  the  spirit,  and 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  243 

living  up  to  the  hopes  of  the  gospel  ?  Can  it  be 
said  that  a  life  made  exemplary  by  such  virtues  as 
these,  which  keep  heaven  always  in  our  sight,  whicli 
both  delight  and  exalt  the  soul  here,  and  prepare  it 
for  the  presence  of  God  hereafter,  must  be  poor  and 
dull,  if  compared  to  that  of  heaping  up  riches,  which 
can  neither  stay  with  us,  nor  we  with  them  ? 

It  would  be  endless  to  multiply  examples  of  this 
kind,  to  show  you  how  little  is  lost,  and  how  much  is 
gained,  by  introducing  a  strict  and  exact  piety  into 
every  condition  of  human  life. 


CHAPTEE  XIV. 

CONCERNING  THAT  PART  OF  DEVOTION  WHICH  RELATES  TO 
TIMES  AND  HOURS  OF  PRAYER.  OF  DAILY  EARLY 
PRAYER  IN  THE  MORNING.  HOW  WE  ARE  TO  IMPROVE 
OUR  FORMS  OF  PRAYER,  AND  HOW  TO  INCREASE  THE 
SPIRIT  OF  DEVOTION. 

(Of  Special  Times  of  Prayer.) 

HAVING  in  the  foregoing  chapters  shown  the 
necessity  of  a  devout  spirit,  or  habit  of  mind, 
in  every  part  of  our  common  life,  in  the  discharge  of 
all  our  business,  in  the  use  of  all  the  gifts  of  God ;  1 
come  now  to  consider  that  part  of  devotion,  which 
relates  to  times  and  hours  of  prayer.  .  .  . 

Prayer  is  the  nearest  approach  to  God,  and  the 
highest  enjoyment  of  Him,  that  we  are  capable  of  in 
this  life. 

It    is    the  noblest  exercise  of   the  soul,  the    most 


244  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

exalted  use  of  our  best  faculties,  and  the  highest  imita- 
tion of  the  blessed  inhabitants  of  heaven. 

When  our  hearts  are  full  of  God,  sending  up  holy 
desires  to  the  throne  of  grace,  we  are  then  in  our 
highest  state,  we  are  upon  the  utmost  heights  of 
human  greatness  ;  we  are  not  before  kings  and  princes, 
but  in  the  presence  and  audience  of  the  Lord  of  all 
the  world,  and  can  be  no  his-her,  till  death  is  swallowed 
up  in  glory.   .   .   . 

The  first  thing  that  you  are  to  do,  when  you  are 
upon  your  knees,  is  to  shut  your  eyes,  and  with  a  short 
silence  let  your  soul  place  itself  in  the  presence  of 
God ;  that  is,  you  are  to  use  this,  or  some  other  better 
method,  to  separate  yourself  from  all  common  thoughts, 
and  make  your  heart  as  sensible  as  you  can  of  the 
Divine  Presence. 

Now,  if  this  recollection  of  spirit  is  necessary, — as 
who  can  say  it  is  not  ? — then  how  poorly  must  they 
perform  their  devotions,  who  are  always  in  a  hurry ; 
who  begin  them  in  haste,  and  hardly  allow  themselves 
time  to  repeat  their  very  form,  with  any  gravity  or 
attention  !  Theirs  is  properly  saying  prayers,  instead 
of  praying.   .  .   . 

At  all  the  stated  hours  of  prayer,  it  will  be  of  great 
benefit  to  you  to  have  something  fixed,  and  something 
at  liberty,  in  your  devotions. 

You  should  have  some  fixed  subject,  which  is  con- 
stantly to  be  the  chief  matter  of  your  prayer  at  that 
particular  time ;  and  yet  have  liberty  to  add  such 
other  petitions,  as  your  condition  may  then  require. 

For  instance :  as  the  morning  is  to  you  the  begin- 
nhig  of  a  new  life ;  as  God  has  then  given  you  a  new 
enjoyment  of  yourself,  and  a  fresh  entrance  into  the 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  245 

world;  it  is  highly  proper  that  your  first  devotions 
should  be  a  praise  and  thanksgiving  to  God,  as  for  a 
new  creation ;  and  that  you  should  offer  and  devote 
body  and  soul,  all  that  you  are,  and  all  that  you  have, 
to  His  service  and  glory. 

Eeceive,  therefore,  every  day  as  a  resurrection 
from  death,  as  a  new  enjoyment  of  life ;  meet  every 
rising  sun  with  such  sentiments  of  God's  goodness,  as 
if  you  had  seen  it,  and  all  things,  new  created  upon 
your  account :  and  under  the  sense  of  so  great  a  bless- 
ing let  your  joyful  heart  praise  and  magnify  so  good 
and  glorious  a  Creator. 

Let,  therefore,  praise  and  thanksgiving,  and  obla- 
tion of  yourself  unto  God,  be  always  the  fixed  and 
certain  subject  of  your  first  prayers  in  the  morning ; 
and  then  take  the  liberty  of  adding  such  other  devo- 
tions as  the  accidental  difference  of  your  state,  or  the 
accidental  difference  of  your  heart,  shall  then  make 
most  needful  and  expedient  for  you. 

For  one  of  the  greatest  benefits  of  private  devotion 
consists  in  rightly  adapting  our  prayers  to  those  two 
conditions, — the  difference  of  our  state,  and  the  differ- 
ence of  our  hearts. 

By  the  dinerence  of  our  state  is  meant  the  differ- 
ence of  our  external  state  or  condition,  as  of  sickness, 
health,  pains,  losses,  disappointments,  troubles,  particular 
mercies,  or  judgments,  from  God ;  all  sorts  of  kind- 
nesses, injuries,  or  reproaches  from  other  people. 

Now,  as  these  are  great  parts  of  our  state  of  life, 
as  they  make  great  difference  in  it  by  continually 
changing ;  so  our  devotion  will  be  made  doubly  bene- 
ficial to  us,  when  it  watches  to  receive  and  sanctify 
all  these  changes  of  our  state,  and  turns  them  all  into 


246  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

SO  many  occasions  of  a  more  particular  application 
to  God  of  such  thanksgiving,  such  resignation,  such 
petitions,  as  our  present  state  more  especially  requires. 

And  he  that  makes  every  change  in  his  state  a 
reason  of  presenting  unto  God  some  particular  petitions 
suitable  to  that  change,  will  soon  find  that  he  has 
taken  an  excellent  means  not  only  of  praying  with 
fervour,  but  of  living  as  he  prays. 

The  next  condition,  to  which  we  are  always  to  adapt 
some  part  of  our  prayers,  is  the  diflference  of  our 
hearts;  by  which  is  meant  the  different  state  of  the 
tempers  of  our  hearts,  as  of  love,  joy,  peace,  tranquil- 
lity, dulness  and  dryness  of  spirit,  anxiety,  discontent, 
motions  of  envy  and  ambition,  dark  and  disconsolate 
thoughts,  resentments,  fretfulness,  and  peevish  tempers. 

Now,  as  these  tempers,  through  the  weakness  of  our 
nature,  will  have  their  succession,  more  or  less,  even 
in  pious  minds ;  so  we  should  constantly  make  the 
present  state  of  our  heart  the  reason  of  some  particular 
application  to  God.   .   .   . 

Now,  though  people  of  leisure  seem  called  more 
particularly  to  this  study  of  devotion,  yet  persons  of 
much  business  or  labour  must  not  think  themselves 
excused  from  this,  or  some  better  method  of  improving 
their  devotion. 

For  the  greater  their  business  is,  the  more  need 
they  have  of  some  such  method  as  this,  to  prevent 
its  power  over  their  hearts,  to  secure  them  from 
sinking  into  worldly  tempers,  and  preserve  a  sense 
and  taste  of  heavenly  things  in  their  minds.  And  a 
little  time  regularly  and  constantly  employed  to  any 
one  use  or  end  will  do  great  things,  and  produce 
mighty  effects. 


A    SEEIOUS    CALL  247 

And  it  is  for  want  of  considering  devotion  in  this 
light,  as  something  that  is  to  be  nursed  and  cherished 
with  care,  as  something  that  is  to  be  made  part  of  our 
business,  that  is  to  be  improved  with  care  and  con- 
trivance, by  art  and  method,  and  a  diligent  use  of  the 
best  helps  ;  it  is  for  want  of  considering  it  in  this 
light  that  so  many  people  are  so  little  benefited  by  it, 
and  live  and  die  strangers  to  that  spirit  of  devotion 
which,  by  a  prudent  use  of  proper  means,  they  might 
have  enjoyed  in  a  high  degree. 

For  though  the  spirit  of  devotion  is  the  gift  of  God, 
and  not  attainable  by  any  mere  power  of  our  own,  yet 
it  is  mostly  given  to,  and  never  withheld  from,  those 
who,  by  a  wise  and  diligent  use  of  proper  means, 
prepare  themselves  for  the  reception  of  it. 

And  it  is  amazing  to  see  how  eagerly  men  employ 
their  parts,  their  sagacity,  time,  study,  application, 
and  exercise ;  how  all  helps  are  called  to  their  assist- 
ance, when  any  thing  is  intended  and  desired  in  worldly 
matters ;  and  how  dull,  negligent,  and  unimproved 
they  are ;  how  little  they  use  their  parts,  sagacity,  and 
abilities  to  raise  and  increase  their  devotion ! 

Mundanus  is  a  man  of  excellent  parts  and  clear 
apprehension.  He  is  well  advanced  in  age,  and  has 
made  a  great  figure  in  business.  Every  part  of  trade 
and  business  that  has  fallen  in  his  way  has  had  some 
improvement  from  him ;  and  he  is  always  contriving 
to  carry  every  method  of  doing  any  thing  well  to 
its  greatest  height.  Mundanus  aims  at  the  greatest 
perfection  in  every  thing.  The  soundness  and  strength 
of  his  mind,  and  his  just  way  of  thinking  upon  things, 
makes  him  intent  upon  removing  all  imperfections. 

The  one  only  thing  which  has  not  fallen  under  his 


248  WHOLLY    FOK    GOD 

improvement,  nor  received  any  benefit  from  his  judi- 
cious mind,  is  his  devotion :  this  is  just  in  the  same 
poor  state  it  was,  when  he  was  only  six  years  of  age, 
and  the  old  man  prays  now  in  that  little  form  of  words 
which  his  mother  used  to  hear  him  repeat  night  and 
morning.  .  .  . 

All  which  seems  to  be  owing  to  a  strange,  infatuated 
state  of  negligence,  which  keeps  people  from  con- 
sidering what  devotion  is.  For  if  they  did  but  once 
proceed  so  far  as  to  reflect  about  it,  or  ask  themselves 
any  questions  concerning  it,  they  would  soon  see  that 
the  spirit  of  devotion  was  like  any  other  sense  or 
understanding,  that  is  only  to  be  improved  by  study, 
care,  application,  and  the  use  of  such  means  and  helps 
as  are  necessary  to  make  a  man  a  proficient  in  any 
art  or  science.   .   .   . 

Devotion  is  nothing  else  but  right  apprehensions  of 
God,  and  right  affections  towards  Him. 

All  practices,  therefore,  that  heighten  and  improve 
our  true  apprehensions  of  God,  all  ways  of  life  that 
tend  to  nourish,  raise,  and  fix  our  affections  upon  Him, 
are  to  be  reckoned  so  many  helps  and  means  to  fill 
us  with  devotion. 

As  prayer  is  the  proper  fuel  of  this  holy  flame,  so 
we  must  use  all  our  care  and  contrivance  to  give 
prayer  its  full  power ;  as  by  alms,  self-denial,  frequent 
retirements,  and  holy  readings,  composing  forms  for 
ourselves,  or  using  the  best  we  can  get,  adding  length 
of  time,  and  observing  hours  of  prayer ;  changing,  im- 
proving, and  suiting  our  devotions  to  the  condition  of 
our  lives,  and  the  state  of  our  hearts. 

Those  who  have  most  leisure  seem  more  especially 
called  to  a  more  eminent  observance  of    these  holy 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  249 

rules  of  a  devout  life.  And  they  who,  by  the  necessity 
of  their  state,  and  not  through  their  own  choice,  have 
but  little  time  to  employ  thus,  must  make  the  best 
use  of  that  little  they  have.  For  this  is  tlie  certain 
v/ay  of  making  devotion  produce  a  devout  life. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

OF  CHANTING,  OR  SINGING  OF  PSALMS  IN  OUR  PRIVATE 
DEVOTIONS.  OF  THE  EXCELLENCY  AND  BENEFIT  OF 
THIS  KIND  OF  DEVOTION.  OF  THE  GREAT  EFFECTS  IT 
HATH  UPON  OUR  HEARTS.  OF  THE  MEANS  OF  PERFORM- 
ING IT  IN  THE  BEST  MANNER. 

(Of  Singing,  and  beginning  the  day  with 
Thankfulness  and  Praise.) 

YOU  have  seen,  in  the  foregoing  chapter,  what  means 
and  methods  you  are  to  use,  to  raise  and  improve 
your  devotion  ;  how  early  you  are  to  begin  your  prayers, 
and  what  is  to  be  the  subject  of  your  first  devotions 
in  the  morning. 

There  is  one  thing  still  remaining,  that  you  must 
be  required  to  observe,  not  only  as  fit  and  proper  to 
be  done,  but  as  such  as  cannot  be  neglected  without 
great  prejudice  to  your  devotions ;  and  that  is,  to 
begin  all  your  prayers  with  a  psalm. 

This  is  so  right,  is  so  beneficial  to  devotion,  has  so 
much  effect  upon  our  hearts,  that  it  may  be  insisted 
upon  as  a  common  rule  for  all  persons. 

I  do  not  mean  that  you  should  read  over  a  psalm, 
but  that  you  should  chant  or  sing  one  of  those  psalms, 
which  we   commonly  call    the  reading  psalms.      For 


250  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

singing  is  as  much  the  proper  use  of  a  psahn  as 
devout  supplication  is  the  proper  use  of  a  form  of 
prayer ;  and  a  psalm  only  read  is  very  much  like  a 
prayer  that  is  only  looked  over.  .  .  . 

You  are  therefore  to  consider  this  chanting  of  a 
psalm  as  a  necessary  beginning  of  your  devotions,  as 
something  that  is  to  awaken  all  that  is  good  and  holy 
within  you,  that  is  to  call  your  spirits  to  their  proper 
duty,  to  set  you  in  your  best  posture  towards  heaven, 
and  tune  all  the  powers  of  your  soul  to  worship  and 
adoration. 

For  there  is  nothing  that  so  clears  a  way  for  your 
prayers,  nothing  that  so  disperses  dulness  of  heart, 
nothing  that  so  purifies  the  soul  from  poor  and  little 
passions,  nothing  that  so  opens  heaven,  or  carries 
your  heart  so  near  it,  as  these  songs  of  praise. 

They  create  a  sense  and  delight  in  God,  they 
awaken  holy  desires,  they  teach  you  how  to  ask,  and 
they  prevail  with  God  to  give.  They  kindle  a  holy 
flame,  they  turn  your  heart  into  an  altar,  your  prayers 
into  incense,  and  carry  them  as  a  sweet-smelling 
savour  to  the  throne  of  grace.  .  .  . 

Secondly,  Let  us  now  consider  another  reason  for 
this  kind  of  devotion.  As  singing  is  a  natural  effect 
of  joy  in  the  heart,  so  it  has  also  a  natural  power  of 
rendering  the  heart  joyful. 

The  soul  and  body  are  so  united,  that  they  have 
each  of  them  power  over  one  another  in  their  actions. 
Certain  thoughts  and  sentiments  in  the  soul  produce 
such  and  such  motions  and  actions  in  the  body ;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  certain  motions  and  actions  of  the 
body  have  the  same  power  of  raising  such  and  such 
thoughts  and   sentiments   in    the  soul.     So    that,  as 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  251 

singing  is  the  natural  effect  of  joy  in  the  mind,  it 
is  as  truly  a  natural  cause  of  raising  joy  in  the  mind. 

As  devotion  of  the  heart  naturally  breaks  out  into 
outward  acts  of  prayer ;  so  outward  acts  of  prayer  are 
natural  means  of  raising  the  devotion  of  the  heart. 

It  is  thus  in  all  states  and  tempers  of  the  mind : 
as  the  inward  state  of  the  mind  produces  outward 
actions  suitable  to  it,  so  those  outward  actions  have 
the  like  power  of  raising  an  inward  state  of  mind 
suitable  to  them. 

As  anger  produces  angry  words,  so  angry  words 
increase  anger. 

So  that,  if  we  barely  consider  human  nature,  we 
shall  find  that  singing  or  chanting  the  psalms  is  as 
proper  and  necessary  to  raise  our  hearts  to  a  delight 
in  God,  as  prayer  is  proper  and  necessary  to  excite  in 
us  the  spirit  of  devotion.  Every  reason  for  one  is  in 
all  respects  as  strong  a  reason  for  the  other. 

If,  therefore,  you  would  know  the  reason  and 
necessity  of  singing  psalms,  you  must  consider  the 
reason  and  necessity  of  praising  and  rejoicing  in  God ; 
because  singing  of  psalms  is  as  much  the  true  exercise 
and  support  of  the  spirit  of  thanksgiving,  as  prayer  is 
the  true  exercise  and  support  of  the  spirit  of  devotion. 
And  you  may  as  well  think  that  you  can  be  devout  as 
you  ought,  without  the  use  of  prayer,  as  that  you  can 
rejoice  in  God  as  you  ought,  without  the  practice  of 
singing  psalms :  because  this  singing  is  as  much  the 
natural  language  of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  as  prayer 
is  the  natural  language  of  devotion.  .  .  . 

Now,  if  you  rightly  apprehend  the  union  of  the  soul 
and  body,  you  will  see  a  great  deal  into  the  reason 
and  necessity  of  all  the  outward  parts  of  religion. 


252  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

The  union  of  our  souls  and  bodies  is  the  reason 
both  why  we  have  so  little  and  so  nuich  power  over 
ourselves.  It  is  owing  to  this  union  that  we  have  so 
little  power  over  our  souls ;  for  as  we  cannot  prevent 
the  effects  of  external  objects  upon  our  bodies,  as  we 
cannot  command  outward  causes,  so  we  cannot  always 
command  the  inward  state  of  our  minds ;  because,  as 
outward  objects  act  upon  our  bodies  v/ithout  our  leave, 
so  our  bodies  act  upon  our  minds  by  the  laws  of  the 
union  of  the  soul  and  the  body :  and  thus  you  see  it 
is  owing  to  this  union  that  we  have  so  little  power 
over  ourselves. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  ov/ing  to  this  union  that 
we  have  so  much  power  over  ourselves.  For  as  our 
souls,  in  a  great  measure,  depend  upon  our  bodies ; 
and  as  we  have  great  power  over  our  bodies ;  as  we 
can  command  our  outward  actions,  and  oblige  ourselves 
to  such  habits  of  life  as  naturally  produce  habits  in 
the  soul ;  as  we  can  mortify  our  bodies,  and  remove 
ourselves  from  objects  that  inflame  our  passions ;  so 
we  have  a  great  power  over  the  inward  state  of  our 
souls.  .  .  . 

Now  from  this  you  may  also  see  the  necessity  and 
benefit  of  singhig  psalms,  and  of  all  the  outward  acts 
of  religion  ;  for  if  the  body  has  so  much  power  over 
the  soul,  it  is  certain  that  all  such  bodily  actions  as 
affect  the  soul  are  of  great  weight  in  religion.  Not 
as  if  there  was  any  true  worship,  or  piety,  in  the 
actions  themselves,  but  because  they  are  proper  to 
raise  and  support  that  spirit  which  is  the  true 
worship  of  God. 

Tliough,  therefore,  the  seat  of  religion  is  in  the 
heart,  yet   since  our  bodies    have  a  power  over  our 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  2oo 

hearts ;  since  outward  actions  both  proceed  from,  and 
enter  into  the  heart ;  it  is  plain  that  outward  actions 
have  a  great  power  over  that  religion  which  is  seated 
in  the  heart. 

We  are  therefore  as  well  to  use  outward  helps,  as 
inward  meditation,  in  order  to  beget  and  fix  habits  of 
piety  in  our  hearts.  .  .  . 

If  we  would  truly  prostrate  our  souls  before  God, 
we  must  use  our  bodies  to  postures  of  lowliness  :  if 
we  desire  true  fervours  of  devotion,  we  must  make 
prayer  the  frequent  labour  of  our  lips.  If  w^e  would 
banish  all  pride  and  passion  from  our  hearts,  we  must 
force  ourselves  to  aU  outward  actions  of  patience  and 
meekness.  If  we  would  feel  inward  motions  of  joy 
and  delight  in  God,  we  must  practise  all  the  outward 
acts  of  it,  and  make  our  voices  caU  upon  our  hearts. 

^N'ow,  therefore,  you  may  plainly  see  the  reason  and 
necessity  of  singing  of  psalms ;  it  is  because  outward 
actions  are  necessary  to  support  inward  tempers ;  and 
therefore  the  outward  act  of  joy  is  necessary  to  raise 
and  support  the  inward  joy  of  the  mind.  .  .  . 

I  have  been  the  longer  upon  this  head,  because  of 
its  great  importance  to  true  religion.  For  there  is 
no  state  of  mind  so  holy,  so  excellent,  and  so  truly 
perfect,  as  that  of  thankfidness  to  God ;  and  conse- 
quently nothing  is  of  more  importance  in  religion 
than  that  which  exercises  and  improves  this  habit 
of  mind.   .   .   . 

Would  you  know  who  is  the  greatest  saint  in  the 
world  ?  it  is  not  he  who  prays  most  or  fasts  most ;  it 
is  not  he  who  gives  most  alms,  or  is  most  eminent  for 
temperance,  chastity,  or  justice ;  but  it  is  he  who  is 
always  thankful  to  God,  who  wills  every  thing  that 


254  WHOLLY    FOR    TxOD 

God  willeth,  who  receives  every  thing  as  an  instance 
of  God's  goodness,  and  has  a  heart  always  ready  to 
praise  God  for  it. 

All  prayer  and  devotion,  fastings  and  repentance, 
meditation  and  retirement,  all  sacraments  and  ordi- 
nances, are  but  so  many  means  to  render  the  soul 
thus  divine  and  comformable  to  the  will  of  God,  and 
to  fill  it  with  thankfulness  and  praise  for  every  thing 
that  comes  from  God.  This  is  the  perfection  of  all 
vii'tues :  and  all  virtues  that  do  not  tend  to  it,  or  pro- 
ceed from  it,  are  but  so  many  false  ornaments  of  a 
soul  not  converted  unto  God. 

You  need  not,  therefore,  now  wonder  that  I  lay  so 
much  stress  upon  singing  a  psalm  at  all  your  devotions, 
since  you  see  it  is  to  form  your  spirit  to  such  joy  and 
thankfulness  to  God  as  is  the  highest  perfection  of  a 
divine  and  holy  life. 

If  any  one  would  tell  you  the  shortest,  surest  way 
to  all  happiness,  and  all  perfection,  he  must  tell  you 
to  make  a  rule  to  yourself,  to  thank  and  praise  God 
for  every  thing  that  happens  to  you.  .  .  . 

And  although  this  be  the  highest  temper  that  you 
can  aim  at,  though  it  be  the  noblest  sacrifice  that  the 
greatest  saint  can  offer  unto  God,  yet  it  is  not  tied  to 
any  time,  or  place,  or  great  occasion,  but  is  always  in 
your  power,  and  may  be  the  exercise  of  every  day. 
For  the  common  events  of  every  day  are  sufficient  to 
discover  and  exercise  this  temper,  and  may  plainly 
show  you  how  far  you  are  governed  in  all  your  actions 
by  this  thankful  spirit. 

And  for  this  reason  I  exhort  you  to  this  method  in 
your  devotion,  that  every  day  may  be  made  a  day 
of  thanksgiving,  and  that  the  spirit  of  nmrmur  and 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  255 

discontent  may  be  unable  to  enter  into  the  heart 
which  is  so  often  employed  in  singing  the  praises  of 
God. 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 

RECOMMENDING  DEVOTIONS  AT  NINE  O'CLOCK  IN  THE 
MORNING,  CALLED  IN  SCRIPTURE  THE  THIRD  HOUR 
OF  THE  DAY.  THE  SUBJECT  OF  THESE  PRAYERS 
IS    HUMILITY. 

(Of  frequency   in   Prayer;   of  praying  for 
Humility.) 

I  AM  now  come  to  another  hour  of  prayer,  which  in 
Scripture  is  called  the  third  hour  of  the  day  ;  but, 
according  to  our  way  of  numbering  the  hours,  it  is 
called  the  ninth  hour  of  the  morning. 

The  devout  Christian  must  at  this  time  look  upon 
himself  as  called  upon  by  God  to  renew  his  acts  of 
prayer,  and  address  himself  again  to  the  throne  of 
grace. 

There  is  indeed  no  express  command  in  Scripture 
to  repeat  our  devotions  at  this  hour.  But  then  it  is 
to  be  considered,  also,  that  neither  is  there  any  express 
command  to  begin  and  end  the  day  with  prayer.  So 
that  if  that  be  looked  upon  as  a  reason  for  neglecting 
devotion  at  this  hour,  it  may  as  well  be  urged  as  a 
reason  for  neglecting  devotion  both  at  the  beginning 
and  end  of  the  day.  .   .   . 

For  if  you  were  up  at  a  good  time  in  the  morning, 
your  first  devotions  will  have  been  at  a  proper  distance 
from  this  hour ;  you  w^ill  have  been  long  enougli  at 
other  business  to  make  it  proper  for  you  to  return  to 


256  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

this  greatest  of  all    business  —  the  raising  your  soul 
and  affections  unto  God.  .  .  . 

For  if  prayer  has  power  with  God,  if  it  looses  the 
bands  of  sin,  if  it  purifies  the  soul,  reforms  our  hearts, 
and  draws  down  the  aids  of  Divine  grace ;  how  can 
that  be  reckoned  a  small  matter,  which  robs  us  of  an 
hour  of  prayer  ?  .   .   . 

Now,  as  this  frequency  of  prayer  is  founded  in  the 
doctrines  of  Scripture,  and  recommended  to  us  by  the 
practice  of  the  true  worshippers  of  God ;  so  we  ought 
not  to  think  ourselves  excused  from  it,  but  where  we 
can  show  that  we  are  spending  our  time  in  such 
business,  as  is  more  acceptable  to  God  than  these 
returns  of  prayer. 

If  you  are  of  a  devout  spirit,  you  will  rejoice  at 
these  returns  of  prayer  which  keep  your  soul  in  a 
holy  enjoyment  of  God ;  which  change  your  passions 
into  divine  love,  and  fill  your  heart  with  stronger  joys 
and  consolations  than  you  can  possibly  meet  with  in 
any  thing  else. 

And  if  you  are  not  of  a  devout  spirit,  then  you  are 
moreover  obliged  to  this  frequency  of  prayer,  to  train 
and  exercise  your  heart  into  a  true  sense  and  feeling 
of  devotion. 

Now,  seeing  the  holy  spirit  of  the  Christian  religion, 
and  the  example  of  the  saints  of  all  ages,  call  upon 
you  thus  to  divide  the  day  into  hours  of  prayer ;  so  it 
will  be  highly  beneficial  to  you  to  make  a  right  choice 
of  those  matters  which  are  to  be  the  subject  of  your 
prayers,  and  to  keep  every  hour  of  prayer  appropriated 
to  some  particular  subject,  which  you  may  alter  or 
enlarge,  according  as  the  state  you  are  in  requires. 
By   this   means   you  will   have  an  opportunity  of 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  257 

being  large  and  particular  in  all  the  parts  of  any  virtue 
or  grace,  which  you  then  make  the  subject  of  your 
prayers.  And  by  asking  for  it  in  all  its  parts,  and 
making  it  the  substance  of  a  whole  prayer  once  every 
day,  you  will  soon  find  a  mighty  change  in  your  heart ; 
and  that  you  cannot  thus  constantly  pray  for  all  the 
parts  of  any  virtue  every  day  of  your  life,  and  yet  live 
the  rest  of  the  day  contrary  to  it. 

If  a  worldly-minded  man  was  to  pray  every  day 
against  all  the  instances  of  a  worldly  temper ;  if  he 
should  make  a  large  description  of  the  temptations  of 
covetousness,  and  desire  God  to  assist  him  to  reject 
them  all,  and  to  disappoint  him  in  all  his  covetous 
designs ;  he  would  find  his  conscience  so  much 
awakened,  that  he  would  be  forced  either  to  forsake 
such  prayers,  or  to  forsake  a  worldly  life.   .   .   . 

And  because  an  humble  state  of  soul  is  the  very 
state  of  religion,  because  humility  is  the  life  and  soul 
of  piety,  the  foundation  and  support  of  every  virtue 
and  good  work,  the  best  guard  and  security  of  all  holy 
affections, — I  shall  recommend  humility  to  you,  as 
highly  proper  to  be  made  the  constant  subject  of  your 
devotions,  at  this  third  hour  of  the  day ;  earnestly 
desiring  you  to  think  no  day  safe,  or  likely  to  end 
well,  in  which  you  have  not  thus  early  put  yourself  in 
this  posture  of  humility,  and  called  upon  God  to  carry 
you  through  the  day,  in  the  exercise  of  a  meek  and 
lowly  spirit. 

This  virtue  is  so  essential  to  the  right  state  of  our 
souls,  that  there  is  no  pretending  to  a  reasonable  or 
pious  life  without  it.  We  may  as  well  think  to  see 
without  eyes,  or  live  without  breath,  as  to  live  in  the 
spirit  of  religion  without  the  spirit  of  humility.  .  .  . 
17 


258  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

Humility  does  not  consist  in  having  a  worse  opinion 
of  ourselves  than  we  deserve,  or  in  abasing  ourselves 
lower  than  we  really  are ;  but  as  all  virtue  is  founded 
in  truth,  so  humility  is  founded  in  a  true  and  just 
sense  of  our  weakness,  misery,  and  sin.  He  that 
rightly  feels  and  lives  in  this  sense  of  his  condition, 
lives  in  humility. 

The  weakness  of  our  state  appears  from  our  inability 
to  do  any  thing  as  of  ourselves.  In  our  natural  state 
we  are  entirely  without  any  power ;  we  are  indeed 
active  beings,  but  can  only  act  by  a  power  that  is 
every  moment  lent  us  from  God.  .  .   . 

This  is  the  dependent,  helpless  poverty  of  our  state ; 
which  is  a  great  reason  for  humility.  For,  since  we 
neither  are,  nor  can  do  any  thing  of  ourselves,  to  be 
proud  of  any  thing  that  we  are,  or  of  any  thing  that 
we  can  do,  and  to  ascribe  glory  to  ourselves  for  these 
things,  as  our  own  ornaments,  has  the  guilt  both  of 
stealing  and  lying.  It  has  the  guilt  of  stealing,  as  it 
gives  to  ourselves  those  things  which  only  belong  to 
God ;  it  has  the  guilt  of  lying,  as  it  is  the  denying 
the  truth  of  our  state,  and  pretending  to  be  something 
that  we  are  not. 

Secondly,  Another  argument  for  humility  is  founded 
in  the  misery  of  our  condition. 

Now  the  misery  of  our  condition  appears  in  this, 
that  we  use  these  borrowed  powers  of  our  nature  to 
the  torment  and  vexation  of  ourselves,  and  our  fellow- 
creatures. 

God  Almighty  has  entrusted  us  with  the  use  of 
reason,  and  we  use  it  to  the  disorder  and  corruption 
of  our  nature.  We  reason  ourselves  into  all  kinds 
of   folly  and   misery,  and   make  our   lives   the   sport 


A    SEKIOUS    CALL  259 

of  foolish  and  extravagant  passions ;  seeking  after 
imaginary  happiness  in  all  kinds  of  shapes,  creating 
to  ourselves  a  thousand  wants,  amusing  our  hearts 
with  false  hopes  and  fears,  using  the  world  worse  than 
irrational  animals,  envying,  vexing,  and  tormenting 
one  another  with  restless  passions,  and  unreasonable 
contentions.   .   .   . 

And  perhaps  there  are  very  few  people  in  the  world 
who  would,  not  rather  choose  to  die,  than  to  have  all 
theii'  secret  follies,  the  errors  of  their  judgments,  the 
vanity  of  their  minds,  the  falseness  of  their  pretences, 
the  frequency  of  their  vain  and  disorderly  passions, 
their  uneasiness,  hatred,  envies,  and  vexations  made 
known  unto  the  world. 

And  shall  pride  be  entertained  in  a  heart  thus 
conscious  of  its  own  miserable  behaviour  ?  Shall  a 
creature  in  such  a  condition,  that  he  could  not  support 
himself  under  the  shame  of  being  known  to  the  world 
in  his  real  state, — shall  such  a  creature,  because  his 
shame  is  only  known  to  God,  to  holy  angels,  and  his 
own  conscience, — shall  he,  in  the  sight  of  God  and 
holy  angels,  dare  to  be  vain  and  proud  of  himself  ? 

Thirdly,  If  to  this  we  add  the  shame  and  guilt  of 
sin,  we  shall  find  a  still  greater  reason  for  humility. 

No  creature  that  had  lived  in  innocence  would  have 
thereby  got  any  pretence  for  self -honour  and  esteem ; 
because,  as  a  creature,  all  that  it  is,  or  has,  or  does,  is 
from  God,  and  therefore  the  honour  of  all  that  belongs 
to  it  is  only  due  to  God. 

But  if  a  creature  that  is  a  sinner,  and  under  the 
displeasure  of  the  great  Governor  of  all  the  world,  and 
deserving  nothing  from  Him  but  pains  and  punishments 
for  the  shameful  abuse  of  his  powers ;  if  such  a  creatui'e 


260  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

pretends  to  self-glory  for  any  thing  that  he  is  or  does, 
he  can  only  be  said  to  glory  in  his  shame.  .  .  . 

Have  our  sins  rendered  us  so  abominable  and  odious 
to  Him  that  made  us,  that  He  could  not  so  much  as 
receive  our  prayers,  or  admit  our  repentance,  till  the 
Son  of  God  made  Himself  man,  and  became  a  suffering 
Advocate  for  our  whole  race ;  and  can  we,  in  this  state, 
pretend  to  high  thoughts  of  ourselves  ?  Shall  we 
presume  to  take  delight  in  our  own  worth,  who  are 
not  worthy  so  much  as  to  ask  pardon  for  our  sins, 
without  the  mediation  and  intercession  of  the  Son  of 
God? 

Thus  deep  is  the  foundation  of  humility  laid  in  these 
deplorable  circumstances  of  our  condition ;  which  show 
that  it  is  as  great  an  offence  against  truth,  and  the 
reason  of  things,  for  a  man,  in  this  state  of  things,  to 
lay  claim  to  any  degrees  of  glory,  as  to  pretend  to  the 
honour  of  creating  himself.  If  man  will  boast  of  any 
thing  as  his  own,  he  must  boast  of  his  misery  and  sin  ; 
for  there  is  nothing  else  but  this  that  is  his  own  pro- 
perty. .  .  . 

When  you  have  by  such  general  reflections  as  these 
convinced  your  mind  of  the  reasonableness  of  humility, 
you  must  not  content  yourself  witli  this,  as  if  you  were 
therefore  humble,  because  your  mind  acknowledges 
the  reasonableness  of  humility,  and  declares  against 
pride.  But  you  must  immediately  enter  yourself  into 
the  practice  of  this  virtue,  like  a  young  beginner,  that 
has  all  of  it  to  learn,  that  can  learn  but  little  at  a  time, 
and  with  great  difficulty.  You  must  consider  that 
you  have  not  only  this  virtue  to  learn,  but  that  you 
must  be  content  to  proceed  as  a  learner  in  it  all  your 
time,  endeavouring  after  greater    degrees,  of    it,  and 


A    SEEIOUS    CALL  261 

practising  every  day  acts  of  humility,  as  you  every 
day  practise  acts  of  devotion. 

You  would  not  imagine  yourself  to  be  devout,  be- 
cause in  your  judgment  you  approved  of  prayers,  and 
often  declared  your  mind  in  favour  of  devotion.  Yet 
how  many  people  imagme  themselves  humble  enough, 
for  no  other  reason,  but  because  they  often  commend 
humility,  and  make  vehement  declarations  against 
pride !  .  .  . 

All  their  speeches  in  favour  of  humility,  and  all 
their  railmgs  against  pride,  are  looked  upon  as  so  many 
true  exercises  and  effects  of  their  own  humble  spirit. 

Whereas,  in  truth,  these  are  so  far  from  being  proper 
acts  or  proofs  of  humility,  that  they  are  great  argu- 
ments of  the  want  of  it. 

For  the  fuller  of  pride  any  one  is  himself,  the  more 
impatient  will  he  be  at  the  smallest  instances  of  it  in 
other  people.  And  the  less  humility  any  one  has  in 
his  own  mind,  the  more  will  he  demand  and  be 
delighted  with  it  in  other  people. 

You  must  therefore  act  by  a  quite  contrary  measure, 
and  reckon  yourself  only  so  far  humble,  as  you  impose 
every  instance  of  humility  upon  yourself,  and  never 
call  for  it  in  other  people, — so  far  an  enemy  to  pride, 
as  you  never  spare  it  in  yourself,  nor  ever  censure  it 
in  other  persons. 

Now,  in  order  to  do  this,  you  need  only  consider 
that  pride  and  humility  signify  nothing  to  you,  but 
so  far  as  they  are  your  own ;  that  they  do  you  neither 
good  nor  harm,  but  as  they  are  the  tempers  of  your 
heart. 

The  loving,  therefore,  of  humility,  is  of  no  benefit 
or  advantage  to  you,  but  so  far  as  you  love  to  see  all 


262  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

your  own  thoughts,  words,  and  actions  governed  by 
it.  And  the  hating  of  pride  does  you  no  good,  is  no 
perfection  in  you,  but  so  far  as  you  hate  to  harbour 
any  degree  of  it  in  your  own  heart. 

Now,  in  order  to  begin,  and  set  out  well,  in  the 
practice  of  humility,  you  must  take  it  for  granted  that 
you  are  proud,  that  you  have  all  your  life  been  more 
or  less  infected  with  this  unreasonable  temper. 

You  should  believe,  also,  that  it  is  your  greatest 
weakness,  that  your  heart  is  more  subject  to  it,  that 
it  is  so  constantly  stealing  upon  you,  that  you  have 
reason  to  watch  and  suspect  its  approaches  in  all  your 
actions. 

For  this  is  what  most  people,  especially  new  be- 
ginners in  a  pious  life,  may  with  great  truth  think  of 
themselves. 

For  there  is  no  one  vice  that  is  more  deeply  rooted 
in  our  nature,  or  that  receives  such  constant  nourish- 
ment from  almost  every  thing  that  we  think  or  do : 
there  being  hardly  any  thing  in  the  world  that  we 
want  or  use,  or  any  action  or  duty  of  life,  but  pride 
finds  some  means  or  other  to  take  hold  of  it.  So  that 
at  what  time  soever  we  begin  to  offer  ourselves  to 
God,  we  can  hardly  be  surer  of  any  thing,  than  that  we 
have  a  great  deal  of  pride  to  repent  of. 

If,  therefore,  you  find  it  disagreeable  to  your  mind 
to  entertain  this  opinion  of  yourself,  and  that  you 
cannot  put  yourself  amongst  those  that  want  to  be 
cured  of  pride,  you  may  be  as  sure  as  if  an  angel 
from  heaven  had  told  you  that  you  have  not  only 
much,  but  all  your  humility  to  seek. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  263 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

SHOWING  HOW  DIFFICULT  THE  PRACTICE  OF  HUMILITY 
IS  MADE,  BY  THE  GENERAL  SPIRIT  AND  TEMPER  OF 
THE  WORLD.  HOW  CHRISTIANITY  REQUIRETH  US  TO 
LIVE    CONTRARY    TO    THE    WORLD. 

(No  Humility  without  renouncing  both  Self 
and  the  Spirit  of  the  World.) 

EVERY  person,  when  he  first  applies  himself  to  the 
exercise  of  this  virtue  of  humility,  must,  as  I 
said  before,  consider  himself  as  a  learner — that  is,  to 
learn  something  that  is  contrary  to  former  tempers 
and  habits  of  mind,  and  which  can  only  be  got  by 
daily  and  constant  practice. 

He  has  not  only  as  much  to  do  as  he  that  has  some 
new  art  or  science  to  learn,  but  he  has  also  a  great 
deal  to  unlearn :  he  is  to  forget  and  lay  aside  his  own 
spirit,  which  has  been  a  long  while  fixing  and  forming 
itself ;  he  must  forget  and  depart  from  abundance  of 
passions  and  opinions,  which  the  fashion,  and  vogue, 
and  spirit  of  the  world  have  made  natural  to  him. 

He  must  lay  aside  his  own  spirit ;  because,  as  we 
are  born  in  sin,  so  in  pride,  which  is  as  natural  to  us 
as  self-love,  and  continually  springs  from  it.  And 
this  is  the  reason  why  Christianity  is  so  often  repre- 
sented as  a  new  birth,  and  a  new  spirit. 

He  must  lay  aside  the  opinions  and  passions  which 
he  has  received  from  the  world;  because  the  vogue 
and  fashion  of  the  world,  by  which  we  have  been 
carried  away  as  in  a  torrent,  before  we  could  pass 
right  judgments  of  the  value  of  things,  is,  in  many 
respects,  contrary  to  humility  ;  so  that  we  must  unlearn 


264  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

what  the  spirit  of  the  world  has  taught  us,  before  we 
can  be  governed  by  the  sj^irit  of  humility. 

Now,  according  to  the  spirit  and  vogue  of  this 
world,  whose  corrupt  air  we  have  all  breathed,  there 
are  many  things  that  pass  for  great  and  honourable, 
and  most  desirable,  which  yet  are  so  far  from  being 
so,  that  the  true  greatness  and  honour  of  our  nature 
consists  in  the  not  desiring  them. 

To  abound  in  wealth,  to  have  fine  houses,  and  rich 
clothes,  to  be  beautiful  in  our  persons,  to  have  titles 
of  dignity,  to  be  above  our  fellow-creatures,  to  com- 
mand the  bows  and  obeisance  of  other  people,  to  be 
looked  on  with  admiration,  to  overcome  our  enemies 
with  power,  to  subdue  all  that  oppose  us,  to  set  out 
ourselves  in  as  much  splendour  as  we  can,  to  live 
highly  and  magnificently,  to  eat,  and  drink,  and 
delight  ourselves  in  the  most  costly  manner,  these  are 
the  great,  the  honourable,  the  desirable  things  to 
which  the  spirit  of  the  world  turns  the  eyes  of  all 
people.  And  many  a  man  is  afraid  of  standing  still, 
and  not  engaging  in  the  pursuit  of  these  things,  lest 
the  same  world  should  take  him  for  a  fool.   .   .   . 

Notwithstanding  the  clearness  and  plainness  of 
these  doctrines  which  thus  renounce  the  world,  yet 
great  part  of  Christians  live  and  die  slaves  to  the 
customs  and  temper  of  the  world.  .  .  . 

From  this  quarter  arises  the  greatest  difficulty  of 
humility,  because  it  cannot  subsist  in  any  mind,  but 
so  far  as  it  is  dead  to  the  world,  and  has  parted  with 
all  desires  of  enjoying  its  greatness  and  honours.  So 
that  in  order  to  be  truly  humble,  you  must  unlearn 
all  those  notions  which  you  have  been  all  your  life 
learning  from  this  corrupt  spirit  of  the  world. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  26f) 

You  can  make  no  stand  against  the  assaults  of 
pride,  the  meek  affections  of  humility  can  have  no 
place  in  your  soul,  till  you  stop  the  power  of  the  world 
over  you,  and  resolve  against  a  blind  obedience  to  its 
laws.  .  .   . 

Our  blessed  Lord  Himself  has  fully  determined  this 
point  in  these  words  :  "  They  are  not  of  this  world,  as  I 
am  not  of  this  world."  ^  This  is  the  state  of  Christianity 
with  regard  to  this  world.  If  you  are  not  thus  out 
of,  and  contrary  to  the  world,  you  want  the  distin- 
guishing mark  of  Christianity ;  you  do  not  belong  to 
Christ,  but  by  being  out  of  the  world  as  He  was  out 
of  it. 

We  may  deceive  ourselves,  if  we  please,  with  vain 
and  softening  comments  upon  these  words ;  but  they 
are,  and  will  be  understood  in  their  first  simplicity 
and  plainness  by  every  one  that  reads  them  in  the 
same  spirit  that  our  blessed  Lord  spoke  them.  And 
to  understand  them  in  any  lower,  less  significant 
meaning,  is  to  let  carnal  wisdom  explain  away  that 
doctrine  by  which  itself  was  to  be  destroyed. 

The  Christian's  great  conquest  over  the  world  is 
all  contained  in  the  mystery  of  Christ  upon  the  cross. 
It  was  there,  and  from  thence,  that  He  taught  all 
Christians  how  they  were  to  come  out  of,  and  conquer 
the  world,  and  what  they  were  to  do  in  order  to  be 
His  disciples.  And  all  the  doctrines,  sacraments,  and 
institutions  of  the  gospel  are  only  so  many  explica- 
tions of  the  meaning,  and  applications  of  the  benefit,  of 
this  great  mystery. 

And  the  state  of  Christianity  implieth  nothing  else, 
but  an  entire,  absolute  conformity  to  that  spirit  which 

^  John  xvii.  16. 


266  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

Christ  showed  in  the  mysterious  sacrifice  of  Himself 
upon  the  cross.  .  .  . 

Thus  was  the  Cross  of  Christ,  in  St.  Paul's  days,  the 
glory  of  Christians ;  not  as  it  signified  their  not  being 
ashamed  to  own  a  Master  that  was  crucified,  but  as  it 
signified  their  glorying  in  a  religion  which  was  nothing 
else  but  a  doctrine  of  the  Cross,  that  called  them  to  the 
same  suffering  spirit,  the  same  sacrifice  of  themselves, 
the  same  renunciation  of  the  world,  the  same  humility 
and  meekness,  the  same  patient  bearing  of  injuries, 
reproaches,  and  contempts,  and  the  same  dying  to  all 
the  greatness,  honours,  and  happiness  of  this  world, 
which  Christ  showed  upon  the  cross. 

To  have  a  true  idea  of  Christianity,  we  must  not 
consider  our  blessed  Lord  as  suffering  in  our  stead,  but 
as  our  Eepresentative,  acting  in  our  name,  and  with 
such  particular  merit,  as  to  make  our  joining  with  Him 
acceptable  unto  God. 

It  was  for  this  reason  that  the  holy  Jesus  said  of 
His  disciples,  and  in  them  of  all  true  believers,  "  They 
are  not  of  the  world,  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  ^ 
Because  all  true  believers,  conforming  to  the  sufferings, 
crucifixion,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  live  no 
longer  after  the  spirit  and  temper  of  this  world,  but 
their  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God. 

This  is  the  state  of  separation  from  the  world,  to 
which  all  orders  of  Christians  are  called.  They  must 
so  far  renounce  all  worldly  tempers,  be  so  far  governed 
by  the  things  of  another  life,  as  to  show  that  they  are 
truly  and  really  crucified,  dead,  and  risen  with  Christ. 
And  it  is  as  necessary  for  all  Christians  to  conform  to 
this  great  change  of  spirit,  to  be  thus  in  Christ  new 
^  John  xvii.  14. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  267 

creatures,  as  it  was  necessary  that  Christ  should  suffer, 
die,  and  rise  again  for  our  salvation.  .  .  . 

Now,  as  it  was  the  spirit  of  the  world  that  nailed 
our  blessed  Lord  to  the  cross ;  so  every  man  that  has 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  that  opposes  the  world  as  He  did, 
will  certainly  be  crucified  by  the  world,  some  way  or 
other. 

For  Christianity  still  lives  in  the  same  world  that 
Christ  did ;  and  these  two  will  be  utter  enemies,  till 
the  kingdom  of  darkness  is  entirely  at  an  end. 

Had  you  lived  with  our  Saviour  as  His  true 
disciple,  you  had  then  been  hated  as  He  was  ;  and  if 
you  now  live  in  His  Spirit,  the  world  will  be  the  same 
enemy  to  you  now,  that  it  w^as  to  Him  then. 

"  If  ye  were  of  tlie  world,"  saith  the  blessed  Lord, 
"  the  w^orld  would  love  his  own ;  but  because  ye  are 
not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the 
world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you."  ^ 

We  are  apt  to  lose  the  true  meaning  of  these  words, 
by  considering  them  only  as  an  historical  description 
of  something  that  was  the  state  of  our  Saviour  and 
His  disciples  at  tliat  time.  But  this  is  reading  the 
Scripture  as  a  dead  letter ;  for  they  exactly  describe 
the  state  of  true  Christians  at  this,  and  at  all  other 
times,  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

For  as  true  Christianity  is  nothing  else  but  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  so,  whether  that  Spirit  appear  in  the 
person  of  Christ  Himself,  or  His  apostles,  or  followers 
in  any  age,  it  is  the  same  thing ;  whoever  hath  His 
Spirit  will  be  hated,  despised,  and  condemned  by  the 
world,  as  He  was. 

For  the  world  will  always  love  its  own,  and  none 

1  John  XV.  19. 


268  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

but  its  own :  this  is  as  certain  and  unchangeable,  as 
the  contrariety  betwixt  light  and  darkness. 

When  the  holy  Jesus  saith,  "  If  the  world  hate  you," 
He  does  not  add  by  way  of  consolation  that  it  may 
some  time  or  other  cease  its  hatred,  or  that  it  will  not 
always  hate  them  ;  but  He  only  gives  this  as  a  reason 
for  their  bearing  it,  "  Ye  know  that  it  hated  Me  before 
it  hated  you : "  ^  signifying  that  it  was  He,  that  is. 
His  Spirit,  that  by  reason  of  its  contrariety  to  the 
world,  was  then,  and  always  would  be,  hated 
by  it. 

You  will  perhaps  say,  that  tlie  world  has  now 
become  Christian,  at  least  that  part  of  it  where  we 
live ;  and  therefore  the  world  is  not  now  to  be  con- 
sidered in  the  same  state  of  opposition  to  Christianity 
as  when  it  was  heathen. 

It  is  granted,  the  world  now  professeth  Christianity. 
But  will  any  one  say  that  this  Christian  world  is  of 
the  spii^it  of  Christ  ?  Are  its  general  tempers  the 
tempers  of  Christ  ?  Are  the  passions  of  sensuality, 
self-love,  pride,  covetousness,  ambition,  and  vain-glory 
less  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  now  they  are 
amongst  Christians,  than  when  they  were  amongst 
heathens  ?  Or  will  you  say  that  the  tempers  and 
passions  of  the  heathen  world  are  lost  and  gone  ? 

Consider,  secondly,  what  you  are  to  mean  by  the 
world.  Now  this  is  fully  described  to  our  hands  by 
St.  John.  "  All  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the 
flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life,"  ^  etc. 
This  is  an  exact  and  full  description  of  the  world. 
Now,  will  you  say  that  this  world  is  become  Christian  ? 
But  if  all  this  still  subsists,  then  the  same  world  is 

1  John  XV.  18.  -  1  John  ii.  16. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  269 

now  in  being,  and  the  same  enemy  to  Christianity, 
that  it  was  in  St.  John's  days. 

It  was  this  world  that  St.  John  condemned,  as 
being  not  of  the  Father :  whether,  therefore,  it  out- 
wardly professeth,  or  openly  persecuteth  Christianity, 
it  is  still  in  the  same  state  of  contrariety  to  the  true 
spirit  and  holiness  of  the  gospel. 

And  indeed  the  world,  by  professing  Christianity,  is 
so  far  from  being  a  less  dangerous  enemy  than  it  was 
before,  that  it  has  by  its  favours  destroyed  more 
Christians  than  ever  it  did  by  the  most  violent 
persecution. 

We  must  therefore  be  so  far  from  considering  the 
world  as  in  a  state  of  less  enmity  and  opposition  to 
Christianity  than  it  was  in  the  first  times  of  the 
gospel,  that  we  must  guard  against  it  as  a  greater 
and  more  dangerous  enemy  now  than  it  was  in  those 
times. 

It  is  a  greater  enemy,  because  it  has  greater  power 
over  Christians  by  its  favours,  riches,  honours,  rewards, 
and  protection,  than  it  had  by  the  fire  and  fury  of  its 
persecutions. 

It  is  a  more  dangerous  enemy,  by  having  lost  its 
appearance  of  enmity.  Its  outward  profession  of 
Christianity  makes  it  no  longer  considered  as  an 
enemy,  and  therefore  the  generality  of  people  are 
easily  persuaded  to  resign  themselves  up  to  be 
governed  and  directed  by  it. 

How  many  consciences  are  kept  at  quiet,  upon  no 
other  foundation,  but  because  they  sin  under  the 
authority  of  the  Christian  world ! 

How  many  directions  of  the  gospel  lie  by  un- 
regarded, and  how  unconcernedly  do  particular  persons 


270  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

read  them,  for  no  other  reason  but  because  they  seem 
unregarded  by  the  Christian  world ! 

How  many  compliances  do  people  make  to  the 
Christian  world,  without  any  hesitation  or  remorse  ; 
which,  if  they  had  been  required  of  them  only  by 
heathens,  would  have  been  refused,  as  contrary  to  the 
holiness  of  Christianity ! 

Who  could  be  content  with  seeing  how  contrary 
his  life  is  to  the  gospel,  but  because  he  sees  that  he 
lives  as  the  Christian  world  doth  ? 

Who  that  reads  the  Gospel  would  want  to  be 
persuaded  of  the  necessity  of  great  self-denial,  humility, 
and  poverty  of  spirit,  but  that  the  authority  of  the 
world  has  banished  this  doctrine  of  the  Cross  ? 

There  is  nothing,  therefore,  that  a  good  Christian 
ought  to  be  more  suspicious  of,  or  more  constantly 
guard  against,  than  the  authority  of  the  Christian 
world.   .  .  . 

Need  a  man  do  more  to  make  his  soul  unfit  for  the 
mercy  of  God,  than  by  being  greedy  and  ambitious  of 
honour  ?  Yet  how  can  a  man  renounce  this  temper, 
without  renouncing  the  spirit  and  temper  of  the  world, 
in  which  you  now  live  ? 

How  can  a  man  be  made  more  capable  of  the 
spirit  of  Christ,  than  by  a  wrong  value  for  money  ? 
and  yet,  how  can  he  be  more  wrong  in  his  value  of 
it,  than  by  following  the  authority  of  the  Christian 
world  ? 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  271 

CHAPTEE  XYIII. 

SHOWING  now  THE  EDUCATION  WHICH  MEN  GENERALLY 
RECEIVE  IN  THEIR  YOUTH  MAKES  THE  DOCTRINES 
OF  HUMILITY  DIFFICULT  TO  BE  PRACTISED.  THE 
SPIRIT  OF  A  BETTER  EDUCATION  REPRESENTED  IN 
THE    CHARACTER    OF   PATERNUS. 

(How  unfavourable  the  Spirit  in  which 
men  are  educated  is  to  the  growth  of 
Humility.) 

ANOTHEE  difficulty  in  the  practice  of  humility 
arises  from  our  education.  We  are  all  of  us, 
for  the  most  part,  corruptly  educated,  and  then  com- 
mitted to  take  our  course  in  a  corrupt  world ;  so  that 
it  is  no  wonder  if  examples  of  great  piety  are  so 
seldom  seen. 

Great  part  of  the  world  are  undone  by  being  born 
and  bred  in  families  that  have  no  religion :  where 
they  are  made  vicious  and  u^-egular,  by  being  like 
those  with  whom  they  first  lived. 

But  this  is  not  the  thing  I  now  mean ;  the  educa- 
tion that  I  here  intend,  is  such  as  children  generally 
receive  from  virtuous  and  sober  parents,  and  learned 
tutors  and  governors. 

Had  we  continued  perfect,  as  God  created  the  first 
man,  perhaps  the  perfection  of  our  nature  had  been 
a  sufficient  self-instruction  for  every  one.  But  as 
sickness  and  diseases  have  created  tlie  necessity  of 
medicines  and  physicians,  so  the  change  and  disorder 
of  our  rational  nature  have  introduced  the  necessity 
of  education  and  tutors. 

And  as  the  only  end  of  the  physician  is  to  restore 


272  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

nature  to  its  own  state,  so  the  only  end  of  education 
is  to  restore  our  rational  nature  to  its  proper  state. 
Education,  therefore,  is  to  be  considered  as  a  reason 
borrowed  at  second-hand,  which  is,  as  far  as  it  can,  to 
supply  the  loss  of  original  perfection.  And  as  physic 
may  justly  be  called  the  art  of  restoring  health,  so 
education  should  be  considered  in  no  other  light,  than 
as  the  art  of  recovering  to  man  the  use  of  his  reason. 

Now,  as  the  instruction  of  every  art  or  science  is 
founded  upon  the  discoveries,  the  wisdom,  experience, 
and  maxims  of  the  several  great  men  that  have 
laboured  in  it ;  so  human  wisdom,  or  right  use  of  our 
reason,  whicli  young  people  should  be  called  to  by 
their  education,  is  nothing  else  but  the  best  experience, 
and  finest  reasonings,  of  men  that  have  devoted  them- 
selves to  the  study  of  wisdom,  and  the  improvement 
of  human  nature. 

All,  therefore,  that  great  saints,  and  dying  men, 
when  the  fullest  of  light  and  conviction,  and  after  the 
highest  improvement  of  their  reason,  all  that  they 
have  said  of  the  necessity  of  piety,  of  the  excellency 
of  virtue,  of  their  duty  to  God,  of  the  emptiness  of 
riches,  of  the  vanity  of  the  world  ;  all  the  sentences, 
judgments,  reasonings,  and  maxims  of  the  wisest  of 
philosophers,  when  in  their  highest  state  of  wisdom, 
should  constitute  the  common  lessons  of  instruction  for 
youthful  minds. 

This  is  the  only  way  to  make  the  young  and  ignorant 
part  of  the  world  the  better  for  the  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge of  the  wise  and  ancient. 

An  education  which  is  not  wholly  intent  upon  this, 
is  as  much  beside  the  point,  as  an  art  of  physic  that 
had  little  or  no  regard  to  the  restoration  of  health. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  273 

The  youths  that  attended  upon  Pythagoras,  So- 
crates, Plato,  and  Epictetus  were  thus  educated. 
Their  everyday  lessons  and  instructions  were  so  many 
lectures  upon  the  nature  of  man,  his  true  end  and  the 
right  use  of  his  faculties  ;  upon  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  its  relation  to  God,  the  beauty  of  virtue  and  its 
agreeableness  to  the  Divine  Nature  ;  upon  the  dignity 
of  reason,  the  necessity  of  temperance,  fortitude,  and 
generosity,  and  the  shame  and  folly  of  indulging  our 
passions. 

Now,  as  Christianity  has,  as  it  were,  new  created  the 
moral  and  religious  world,  and  set  every  thing  that  is 
reasonable,  wise,  holy,  and  desirable  in  its  true  point 
of  light ;  so  one  would  expect  that  the  education  of 
youth  should  be  as  much  bettered  and  amended  by 
Christianity,  as  the  faith  and  doctrines  of  religion  are 
amended  by  it. 

As  it  has  introduced  such  a  new  state  of  things, 
and  so  fully  informed  us  of  the  nature  of  man,  the 
ends  of  his  creation,  the  state  of  his  condition  ;  as  it 
has  fixed  all  our  goods  and  evils,  taught  us  the  means 
of  purifying  our  soids,  pleasing  God,  and  becoming 
eternally  happy  ;  one  might  naturally  suppose  that 
every  Christian  country  abounded  with  schools  for  the 
teaching,  not  only  a  few  questions  and  answers  of  a 
Catechism,  but  for  the  forming,  training,  and  practising 
youth  in  such  an  outward  course  of  life,  as  the  highest 
precepts,  the  strictest  rules,  and  the  sublimest  doctrines 
of  Christianity  require. 

An  education  under  Pythagoras,  or  Socrates,  had 
no  other  end  but  to  teach  you  to  think,  judge,  act, 
and  follow  such  rules  of  life  as  Pythagoras  or  Socrates 
used. 

18 


274  WHOLLY    FOE    GOD 

And  is  it  not  as  reasonable  to  suppose  that  a  Chris- 
tian education  should  have  no  other  end,  but  to  teach 
youth  how  to  think,  and  judge,  and  act,  and  live, 
according  to  the  strictest  laws  of  Christianity  ? 

At  least  one  would  suppose  that  in  all  Christian 
schools  the  teaching  youth  to  begin  their  lives  in  the 
spirit  of  Christianity,  in  such  severity  of  behaviour, 
such  abstinence,  sobriety,  humility,  and  devotion,  as 
Christianity  requires,  should  not  only  be  more,  but 
a  hundred  times  more  regarded,  than  any,  or  all  things 
else.  .  .  . 

But  alas  !   our  modern  education  is  not  of  this  kind. 

The  first  temper  that  we  try  to  awaken  in  children 
is  pride ;  as  dangerous  a  passion  as  that  of  lust.  We 
stir  them  up  to  vain  thoughts  of  themselves,  and  do 
every  thing  we  can  to  puff  up  their  minds  with  a  sense 
of  their  own  abilities. 

Whatever  way  of  life  we  intend  them  for,  we  apply 
to  the  fire  and  vanity  of  their  minds,  and  exhort  them 
to  every  thing  from  corrupt  motives.  We  stir  them 
up  to  action  from  principles  of  strife  and  ambition,  from 
glory,  envy,  and  a  desire  of  distinction  that  they  may 
excel  others,  and  shine  in  the  eyes  of  the  world. 

And  when  we  have  taught  them  to  scorn  to  be  out- 
done by  any,  to  bear  no  rival,  to  thirst  after  every 
instance  of  applause,  to  be  content  with  nothing  but 
the  highest  distinctions,  then  we  begin  to  take  comfort 
in  them,  and  promise  the  world  some  mighty  things 
from  youths  of  such  a  glorious  spirit.   .   .   . 

That  this  is  the  natiu^e  of  our  best  education  is  too 
plain  to  need  any  proof  ;  and  I  believe  there  are  few 
parents  but  would  be  glad  to  see  these  instructions 
daily  given  to  their  children.   .  .   . 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  275 

You  teach  a  child  to  scorn  to  be  outdone,  to  thu'ist 
for  distinction  and  applause  ;  and  is  it  any  wonder 
that  he  continues  to  act  all  his  life  in  the  same 
manner  ? 

Now,  if  a  youth  is  e^er  to  be  so  far  a  Christian  as 
to  govern  his  heart  by  the  doctrines  of  humility,  I 
would  fain  know  at  what  time  he  is  to  begin  it ;  or  if 
he  is  ever  to  begin  it  at  all,  why  we  train  him  up  in 
tempers  quite  contrary  to  it  ?  .  .   . 

I  know  it  is  said  in  defence  of  this  method  of 
education,  that  ambition,  and  a  desire  of  glory,  are 
necessary  to  excite  young  people  to  industry ;  and 
that  if  we  were  to  press  upon  them  the  doctrines  of 
humility,  we  should  deject  their  minds,  and  sink  them 
into  dulness  and  idleness. 

But  those  people  who  say  this,  do  not  consider 
that  this  reason,  if  it  has  any  strength,  is  full  as  strong 
against  pressing  the  doctrines  of  humility  upon  grown 
men,  lest  we  should  deject  their  minds,  and  sink  them 
into  dulness  and  idleness. 

For  who  does  not  see  that  middle-aged  men  want 
as  much  the  assistance  of  pride,  ambition,  and  vain- 
glory, to  spur  them  up  to  action  and  industry,  as 
children  do  ?  And  it  is  very  certain,  that  the  precepts 
of  humility  are  more  contrary  to  the  designs  of  such 
men,  and  more  grievous  to  theh^  minds  when  they  are 
pressed  upon  them,  than  they  are  to  the  minds  of 
young  persons. 

This  reason,  therefore,  that  is  given  why  children 
should  not  be  trained  up  in  the  principles  of  the  true 
humility,  is  as  good  a  reason  why  the  same  humility 
should  never  be  required  of  grown  men. 

Thii'dly,  Let  those  people  who  think  that  children 


276  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

would  be  spoiled,  if  they  were  not  thus  educated, 
consider  this : — 

Could  they  think  that,  if  any  children  had  been 
educated  by  our  blessed  Lord,  or  His  holy  apostles, 
their  minds  would  have  been  sunk  into  dulness  and 
idleness  ? 

Or  could  they  think  that  such  children  would  not 
have  been  trained  up  in  the  profoundest  principles  of 
a  strict  and  true  humility  ?  Can  they  say  that  our 
blessed  Lord,  who  was  the  meekest  and  humblest  Man 
that  ever  was  on  earth,  was  hindered  by  His  humility 
from  being  the  greatest  example  of  worthy  and  glorious 
actions  that  ever  were  done  by  man  ? 

Can  they  say  that  His  apostles,  who  lived  in  the 
humble  spirit  of  their  Master,  did  therefore  cease  to  be 
laborious  and  active  instruments  of  doing  good  to  all 
the  world  ? 

Paternus  lived  about  two  hundred  years  ago  ;  he 
had  but  one  son,  whom  he  educated  himself  in  his  own 
house.  As  they  were  sitting  together  in  the  garden, 
when  the  child  was  ten  years  old,  Paternus  thus 
began  to  him  : — 

The  little  time  that  you  have  been  in  the  world, 
my  child,  you  have  spent  wholly  with  me ;  and  my 
love  and  tenderness  to  you  has  made  you  look  upon 
me  as  your  only  friend  and  benefactor,  and  the  cause 
of  all  the  comfort  and  pleasure  that  you  enjoy  ;  your 
heart,  I  know,  would  be  ready  to  break  with  grief  if 
you  thought  this  was  the  last  day  that  I  should  live 
with  you. 

But,  my  child,  though  you  now  think  yourself 
mighty  happy,  because  you  have  hold  of  my  hand, 
you  are  now  in  the  hands,  and  under  the  tender  care 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  277 

of  a  much  greater  Father  and  Friend  than  I  am,  whose 
love  to  you  is  far  greater  than  mine,  and  from  whom 
you  receive  such  blessings  as  no  mortal  can  give.  .  .  . 

When  you  love  that  which  God  loves,  you  act  with 
Him,  you  join  yourself  to  Him  ;  and  when  you  love 
what  He  dislikes,  then  you  oppose  Him,  and  separate 
youi'self  from  Him.  This  is  the  true  and  the  right 
way :  think  what  God  loves,  and  do  you  love  it  with 
all  your  heart. 

First  of  all,  my  child,  worship  and  adore  God, 
think  of  Him  magnificently,  speak  of  Him  reverently, 
magnify  His  providence,  adore  His  power,  frequent  His 
service,  and  pray  unto  Him  frequently  and  constantly. 

Next  to  this,  love  your  neighbour,  which  is  all  man- 
kind, with  such  tenderness  and  affection  as  you  love 
yom'self.  Think  how  God  loves  all  mankind,  how 
merciful  He  is  to  them,  how  tender  He  is  of  them, 
how  carefully  He  preserves  them  ;  and  then  strive  to 
love  the  world,  as  God  loves  it. 

God  would  have  all  men  to  be  happy ;  therefore  do 
you  will  and  desire  the  same.  All  men  are  great 
instances  of  Divine  Love  ;  therefore  let  all  men  be 
instances  of  your  love. 

But  above  all,  my  son,  mark  this :  never  do  any 
thing  through  strife,  or  envy,  or  emulation,  or  vain- 
glory. Never  do  any  thing  in  order  to  excel  other 
people,  but  in  order  to  please  God,  and  because  it  is 
His  will  that  you  should  do  every  thing  in  the  best 
manner  that  you  can.  .  .  . 

Let  this,  therefore,  be  your  only  motive  and  spur 
to  all  good  actions,  honest  industry,  and  business,  to 
do  every  thing  in  as  perfect  and  excellent  a  manner 
as  you  can,  for  this  only  reason,  because  it  is  pleasing 


278  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

to  God,  who  desires  your  perfection,  and  writes  all 
your  actions  in  a  book.  When  I  am  dead,  my  son,  you 
will  be  master  of  all  my  estate,  which  will  be  a  great 
deal  more  than  the  necessities  of  one  family  require. 
Therefore,  as  you  are  to  be  charitable  to  the  souls  of 
men,  and  wish  them  in  the  same  happiness  with  you  in 
heaven,  so  be  charitable  to  their  bodies,  and  endeavour 
to  make  them  as  happy  as  you  upon  earth.   .  .   . 

But,  my  son,  observe  this  as  a  most  principal  thing, 
which  I  shall  remember  you  of  as  long  as  I  live  with 
you : — 

Hate  and  despise  all  human  glory,  for  it  is  nothing 
else  but  human  folly.  It  is  the  greatest  snare,  and 
the  greatest  betrayer,  that  you  can  possibly  admit  into 
your  heart. 

Love  humility  in  all  its  instances ;  practise  it  in  all 
its  parts,  for  it  is  the  noblest  state  of  the  soul  of  man ; 
it  will  set  your  heart  and  affections  right  towards  God, 
and  fill  you  with  every  temper  that  is  tender  and 
affectionate  towards  men. 

Let  every  day,  therefore,  be  a  day  of  humility ;  con- 
descend to  all  the  weaknesses  and  infirmities  of  your 
fellow-creatures,  cover  their  frailties,  love  their  excel- 
lencies, encourage  their  virtues,  relieve  their  wants, 
rejoice  in  their  prosperities,  compassionate  their  dis- 
tress, receive  their  friendship,  overlook  their  unkind- 
ness,  forgive  their  malice,  be  a  servant  of  servants,  and 
condescend  to  do  the  lowest  offices  to  the  lowest  of 
mankind.  .  .  . 

Remember  that  there  is  but  one  man  in  the  world, 
with  whom  you  are  to  have  perpetual  contention,  and 
be  always  striving  to  exceed  him,  and  that  is  your- 
self. .  .  . 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  279 

Thus  did  Paternus  educate  his  son. 

Can  any  one  now  think  that  such  an  education  as 
this  would  weaken  and  deject  the  minds  of  young 
people,  and  deprive  the  world  of  any  worthy  and 
reasonable  labours  ? 

It  is  so  far  from  that,  that  there  is  nothing  so  likely 
to  ennoble  and  exalt  the  mind,  and  prepare  it  for  the 
most  heroical  exercise  of  all  virtues. 

For  who  will  say  that  a  love  of  God,  a  desire  of 
pleasing  Him,  a  love  of  our  neighbour,  a  love  of  truth, 
of  reason,  and  virtue,  a  contemplation  of  eternity,  and 
the  rewards  of  piety,  are  not  stronger  motives  to  great 
and  good  actions  than  a  little  uncertain  popular  praise  ? 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  nothing  in  reality  that 
more  weakens  the  mind,  and  reduces  it  to  meanness 
and  slavery,  nothing  that  makes  it  less  master  of  its 
own  actions,  or  less  capable  of  following  reason,  than 
a  love  of  praise  and  honour. 


CHAPTEE    XIX. 

SHOWING  HOW  THE  METHOD  OF  EDUCATING  DAUGHTERS 
MAKES  IT  DIFFICULT  FOR  THEM  TO  ENTER  INTO  THE 
SPIRIT  OF  CHRISTIAN  HUMILITY.  HOW  MISERABLY 
THEY  ARE  INJURED  AND  ABUSED  BY  SUCH  AN  EDUCA- 
TION. THE  SPIRIT  OF  A  BETTER  EDUCATION,  REPRE- 
SENTED IN  THE  CHARACTER  OF  EUSEBIA. 

(How  in  the  Education  of  our  Daughters 
the  Spirit  of  Pride  is  fostered.) 

11HAT  turn  of  mind  which  is  taught  and  encouraged 
in  the  education   of  danghters,  makes  it  exceed- 
ingly difficult  for  them  to  enter  into  such  a  sense  and 


280  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

practice   of   humility,    as    the    spirit    of    Christianity 
requires. 

The  right  educatiou  of  this  sex  is  of  the  utmost  im- 
portance to  human  life.  There  is  nothing  that  is  more 
desirable  for  the  common  good  of  all  the  world.  For 
though  women  do  not  carry  on  the  trade  and  business 
of  the  world,  yet  as  they  are  mothers,  and  mistresses 
of  families,  that  have  for  some  time  the  care  of  the 
education  of  their  children  of  both  sorts,  they  are  en- 
trusted with  that  which  is  of  the  greatest  consequence 
to  human  life.  For  this  reason,  good  or  bad  women 
are  likely  to  do  as  much  good  or  harm  in  the  world, 
as  good  or  bad  men  in  the  greatest  business  of  life. 

For,  as  the  health  and  strength  or  weakness  of  our 
bodies  is  very  much  owing  to  their  methods  of  treat- 
ing us  when  we  were  young ;  so  the  soundness  or  folly 
of  our  minds  are  not  less  owmg  to  those  first  tempers 
and  ways  of  thinking,  which  we  eagerly  receive  from 
the  love,  tenderness,  authority,  and  constant  conversa- 
tion of  our  mothers.  .  .  . 

They  are  not  indeed  suffered  to  dispute  with  us  the 
proud  prizes  of  arts  and  sciences,  of  learning  and  elo- 
quence, in  which  I  have  much  suspicion  they  would 
often  prove  our  superiors  ;  but  we  turn  them  over  to 
the  study  of  beauty  and  dress,  and  the  whole  world 
conspires  to  make  them  think  of  nothing  else.  Fathers 
and  mothers,  friends  and  relations,  seem  to  have  no 
other  wish  towards  the  little  girl,  but  that  she  may 
have  a  fair  skin,  a  fine  shape,  dress  well,  and  dance  to 
admiration.  .  .  . 

And  what  makes  this  matter  still  more  to  be 
lamented  is  this,  that  women  are  not  only  spoiled  by 
J)his  education,  but  we  spoil  that  part  of  the  world, 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  281 

which  would  otherwise  furnish  most  instances  of  an 
eminent  and  exalted  piety. 

For  I  believe  it  may  be  affirmed,  that  for  the 
most  part  there  is  a  finer  sense,  a  clearer  mind,  a 
readier  apprehension,  and  gentler  dispositions  in  tliat 
sex  than  in  the  other. 

All  which  tempers,  if  they  were  truly  improved  by 
proper  studies  and  sober  methods  of  education,  would 
in  all  probability  carry  them  to  greater  heights  of 
piety,  than  are  to  be  found  amongst  the  generality  of 
men. 

For  this  reason,  I  speak  to  this  matter  with  so 
much  openness  and  plainness,  because  it  is  much  to 
be  lamented,  that  persons  so  naturally  qualified  to 
be  great  examples  of  piety,  should,  by  an  erroneous 
education,  be  made  poor  and  gaudy  spectacles  of  the 
greatest  vanity.  .  .  . 

For  personal  pride  and  affectation,  a  delight  in 
beauty  and  fondness  of  finery,  are  tempers  that  must 
either  kill  all  religion  in  the  soul,  or  be  themselves 
killed  by  it ;  they  can  no  more  thrive  together  than 
health  and  sickness. 

Some  people  that  judge  hastily  will  perhaps  here 
say,  that  I  am  exercising  too  great  a  severity  against 
the  sex :  but  more  reasonable  persons  will  easily  ob- 
serve, that  I  entirely  spare  the  sex,  and  only  arraign 
their  education ;  that  I  not  only  spare  them,  but  plead 
their  interest,  assert  their  honour,  set  forth  their  per- 
fections, commend  their  natural  tempers,  and  only 
condemn  that  education  which  is  so  injurious  to  their 
interests,  so  debases  their  honour,  and  deprives  them 
of  the  benefit  of  their  excellent  natures  and  tempers. 

Their  education,  I  profesS;  I  cannot  spare ;   but  the 


282  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

only  reason  is,  because  it  is  their  greatest  enemy ; 
because  it  deprives  the  world  of  so  many  blessings,  and 
the  Church  of  so  many  saints,  as  might  reasonably 
be  expected  from  persons  so  formed  by  their  natural 
tempers  to  all  goodness  and  tenderness,  and  so  fitted 
by  the  clearness  and  brightness  of  their  minds  to  con- 
template, love,  and  admire  every  thing  that  is  holy, 
virtuous,  and  divine. 

How  possible  it  is  to  bring  up  daughters  in  the 
more  excellent  way,  let  the  following  character  declare  : 

Eusebia  is  a  pious  widow,  well-born,  and  well-bred, 
and  has  a  good  estate  for  five  daughters,  whom  she 
brings  up  as  one  entrusted  by  God  to  fit  five  virgins 
for  the  Kingdom  of  heaven.  Her  family  has  the 
same  regulation  as  a  religious  house,  and  all  its 
orders  tend  to  the  support  of  a  constant  regular 
devotion.   .   .  . 

Eusebia  brings  them  up  to  all  kinds  of  labour  that 
are  proper  for  women,  as  sewing,  knitting,  spinning, 
and  all  other  parts  of  housewifery ;  not  for  their 
amusement,  but  that  they  may  be  serviceable  to  them- 
selves and  others,  and  be  saved  from  those  temptations 
which  attend  an  idle  life. 

She  tells  them,  she  had  rather  see  them  reduced  to 
the  necessity  of  maintaming  themselves  by  their  own 
work,  than  to  have  riches  to  excuse  themselves  from 
labour.  For  though,  says  she,  you  may  be  able  to 
assist  the  poor  without  your  labour,  yet  by  your  labour 
you  wiU  be  able  to  assist  them  more. 

If  Eusebia  has  lived  as  free  from  sin  as  it  is  pos- 
sible for  human  nature,  it  is  because  she  is  always 
watching  and  guarding  against  all  instances  of  pride. 
And  if  her  virtues  are  stronger  and  higher  than  other 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  283 

people's,  it  is  beccause  they  are  all  founded  in  a  deep 
liumility. 

My  children,  says  she,  when  your  father  died  I  was 
much  pitied  by  my  friends,  as  having  all  the  care  of  a 
family  and  the  management  of  an  estate  fallen  upon 
me. 

But  my  own  grief  was  founded  upon  another  prin- 
ciple ;  I  was  grieved  to  see  myself  deprived  of  so 
faithful  a  friend,  and  that  such  an  eminent  example 
of  Christian  virtues  should  be  taken  from  the  eyes  of 
his  children,  before  they  were  of  an  age  to  love  and 
follow  it. 

But  as  to  worldly  cares,  which  my  friends  thought 
so  heavy  upon  me,  they  are  most  of  them  of  our  own 
making,  and  fall  away  as  soon  as  w^e  know  ourselves.  .  .  . 

But,  my  children,  there  are  things  in  the  world 
which  pass  for  wisdom,  politeness,  grandeur,  happiness, 
and  fine  breeding,  which  show  as  great  ignorance 
of  ourselves,  and  might  as  justly  pass  for  thorough 
madness,  as  when  a  man  fancies  himself  to  be  glass 
or  ice.  .  .  . 

Every  thing  that  you  call  yours,  beside  this  spirit, 
is  but  like  your  clothing ;  something  that  is  only  to 
be  used  for  a  while,  and  then  to  end,  and  die,  and  wear 
away,  and  to  signify  no  more  to  you,  than  the  clothing 
and  bodies  of  other  people. 

But,  my  children,  you  are  not  only  in  this  manner 
spirits,  but  you  are  fallen  spirits,  that  began  your  life 
in  a  state  of  corruption  and  disorder,  full  of  tempers 
and  passions  that  blind  and  darken  the  reason  of  your 
mind,  and  incline  you  to  that  which  is  hurtful. 

Your  bodies  are  not  only  poor  and  perishing  like 
your  clothes,  but  they  are  like  infected  clothes,  that 


284  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

fill  you  with  all  diseases  and  distempers,  which  oppress 
the  soul  with  sickly  appetites  and  vain  cravings. 

So  that  all  of  us  are  like  two  beings,  that  have,  as 
it  were,  two  hearts  within  us ;  with  the  one  we  see, 
and  taste,  and  admire  reason,  purity,  and  holiness : 
with  the  other  we  incline  to  pride,  and  vanity,  and 
sensual  delights. 

This  internal  war  we  always  feel  within  us  more  or 
less :  and  if  you  would  know  the  one  thing  necessary 
to  all  the  world,  it  is  this ;  to  preserve  and  perfect  all 
that  is  rational,  holy,  and  divine  in  our  nature,  and  to 
mortify,  remove,  and  destroy  all  that  vanity,  pride, 
and  sensuality  which  springs  from  the  corruption  of 
our  state.  .  .  . 

As  to  your  bodies,  you  are  to  consider  them  as 
poor,  perishing  things,  that  are  sickly  and  corrupt  at 
present,  and  will  soon  drop  into  common  dust.  You 
are  to  watch  over  them  as  enemies  that  are  always 
trying  to  tempt  and  betray  you,  and  so  never  follow 
their  advice  and  counsel ;  you  are  to  consider  them 
as  the  place  and  habitation  of  our  souls,  and  so  keep 
them  pure,  and  clean,  and  decent ;  you  are  to  consider 
them  as  the  servants  and  instruments  of  action,  and 
so  give  them  food,  and  rest,  and  raiment,  that  they 
may  be  strong  and  healthful  to  do  the  duties  of  a 
charitable,  useful,  pious  life. 

Whilst  you  live  thus,  you  live  like  yourselves ;  and 
whenever  you  have  less  regard  to  your  souls,  or  more 
regard  to  your  bodies,  than  this  comes  to ;  whenever 
you  are  more  intent  upon  adorning  your  persons,  than 
upon  the  perfecting  your  souls,  you  are  much  more 
beside  yourselves  than  he  that  had  rather  have  a  laced 
coat  than  an  healthful  body. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  285 

For  this  reason,  my  children,  I  have  taught  you 
nothing  that  was  dangerous  for  you  to  learn ;  I  have 
kept  you  from  every  thing  that  might  betray  you  into 
weakness  and  folly ;  or  make  you  think  any  thing  fine, 
but  a  fine  mind ;  any  thing  happy,  but  the  favour  of 
God ;  or  any  thing  desirable,  but  to  do  all  the  good 
you  possibly  can.  .  .  . 

Consider  often  how  powerfully  you  are  called  to  a 
wtuous  life,  and  what  great  and  glorious  things  God 
has  done  for  you,  to  make  you  in  love  with  every  thing 
that  can  promote  His  glory.  .  .  . 

Whether  married,  therefore,  or  unmarried,  consider 
yourselves  as  mothers  and  sisters,  as  friends  and  rela- 
tions, to  all  that  want  your  assistance:  and  never  allow 
yourselves  to  be  idle,  whilst  others  are  in  want  of  any 
thing  that  your  hands  can  make  for  them. 

This  useful,  charitable,  humble  employment  of  your- 
selves, is  what  I  recommend  to  you  with  great  earnest- 
ness, as  being  a  substantial  part  of  a  wise  and  pious 
life.  And  besides  the  good  you  will  thereby  do  to 
other  people,  every  virtue  of  your  own  heart  will  be 
very  much  improved  by  it. 

For  next  to  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer,  there 
is  nothing  that  so  secures  our  hearts  from  foolish 
passions,  nothing  that  preserves  so  holy  and  wise  a 
frame  of  mind,  as  some  useful,  humble  employment  of 
ourselves. 

Never,  therefore,  consider  your  labour  as  an  amuse- 
ment that  is  to  get  rid  of  your  time,  and  so  may  be 
as  trilling  as  you  please;  but  consider  it  as  some- 
thing that  is  to  be  serviceable  to  yourselves  and 
others,  that  is  to  serve  some  sober  ends  of  life,  to 
save  and  redeem  your  time,  and  make  it  turn  to  your 


286  WHOLLY   FOR    GOD 

account  when  the  works  of  all  people  shall  be  tried 
by  fire.  .  .  . 

What  would  you  think  of  the  wisdom  of  him  that 
should  employ  his  time  in  distilling  of  waters,  and 
making  liquors  which  nobody  could  use,  merely  to 
amuse  himself  with  the  variety  of  their  colour  and 
clearness,  when  with  less  labour  and  expense  he  might 
satisfy  the  wants  of  those  who  have  nothing  to  drink  ? 
Yet  he  would  be  as  wisely  employed  as  those  that 
are  amusing  themselves  with  such  tedious  works  as 
they  neither  need,  nor  hardly  know  how  to  use  when 
they  are  finished ;  when  with  less  labour  and  expense 
they  might  be  doing  as  much  good  as  he  that  is  clothing 
the  naked,  or  visiting  the  sick. 

Be  glad,  therefore,  to  know  the  wants  of  the  poorest 
people,  and  let  your  hands  be  employed  in  making 
such  mean  and  ordinary  things  for  them,  as  their 
necessities  require.  By  thus  making  your  labour  a 
gift  and  service  to  the  poor,  your  ordinary  work  will 
be  changed  into  a  holy  service,  and  made  as  acceptable 
to  God  as  your  devotions. 

And  charity  is  the  greatest  of  all  virtues,  as  it 
always  was  the  chief  temper  of  the  greatest  saints ;  so 
nothing  can  make  your  own  charity  more  amiable  in 
the  sight  of  God,  than  this  method  of  adding  your 
labour  to  it. 

The  humility  also  of  this  employment  will  be  as 
beneficial  to  you  as  the  charity  of  it.  It  will  keep 
you  from  all  vain  and  proud  thoughts  of  your  own 
state  and  distinction  in  life,  and  from  treating  the 
poor  as  creatures  of  a  different  species.  By  accus- 
toming yourselves  to  this  labour  and  service  for  the 
poor,  as  the  representatives  of  Jesus  Christ,  you  will 


A    SEKIOUS    CALL  287 

soon  find  your  heart  softened  into  the  greatest  meek- 
ness and  lowliness  towards  them.  You  will  reverence 
their  estate  and  condition,  think  it  an  honour  to  serve 
them,  and  never  be  so  pleased  with  yourselves  as  when 
you  are  most  humbly  employed  in  their  service. 

Christianity  has  then  had  its  most  glorious  effects 
upon  your  hearts,  when  it  has  thus  changed  your 
spirit,  removed  all  the  pride  of  life  from  you,  and 
made  you  delight  in  humbhng  yourselves  beneath  the 
lowest  of  all  your  fellow-creatures.  .  .  . 

Love  poverty,  and  reverence  poor  people ;  as  for 
many  reasons,  so  particularly  for  this,  because  our 
blessed  Sa\T.our  was  one  of  the  number,  and  because 
you  may  make  them  all  so  many  friends  and  advocates 
with  God  for  you. 

Visit  and  converse  with  them  frequently ;  you  will 
often  find  simplicity,  innocence,  patience,  fortitude, 
and  great  piety  among  them ;  and  where  they  are  not 
so,  your  good  example  may  amend  them. 

Eejoice  at  every  opportunity  of  doing  an  humble 
action,  and  exercising  the  meekness  of  your  minds, 
whether  it  be,  as  the  Scripture  expresses  it,  in  washing 
the  saints'  feet,  that  is,  in  waiting  upon  and  serving 
those  that  are  below  you ;  or  in  bearing  with  the 
haughtiness  and  ill-manners  of  those  that  are  your 
equals,  or  above  you.  For  there  is  nothing  better 
than  humility ;  it  is  the  fruitful  soil  of  all  virtues ; 
and  every  thing  that  is  kind  and  good  naturally  grows 
from  it. 

Therefore,  my  children,  pray  for,  and  practise 
humility,  and  reject  every  thing  in  dress,  or  carriage, 
or  conversation  that  has  any  appearance  of  pride.  .   .   . 

Never,  therefore,  allow  yourselves  to  despise  those 


288  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

who  do  not  follow  your  rules  of  life ;  but  force  your 
hearts  to  love  them,  and  pray  to  God  for  them ;  and 
let  humility  be  always  whispering  it  into  your  ears, 
that  you  yourselves  would  fall  from  those  rules  to- 
morrow, if  God  should  leave  you  to  your  own  strength 
and  wisdom.   .  .   . 

A  very  ordinary  knowledge  of  the  spirit  of  Chris- 
tianity seems  to  be  enough  to  convince  us  that  no 
education  can  be  of  true  advantage  to  young  women, 
but  that  which  trains  them  up  in  humble  industry, 
in  great  plainness  of  life,  in  exact  modesty  of  dress, 
manners,  and  carriage,  and  in  strict  devotion.  For 
what  should  a  Christian  woman  be,  but  a  plain,  un- 
affected, modest,  humble  creature,  averse  to  every  thing 
in  her  dress  and  carriage  that  can  draw  the  eyes  of 
beholders,  or  gratify  the  passions  of  lewd  and  amorous 
persons  ?  .  .  . 

I  have  considered  the  nature  and  necessity  of 
humility,  and  its  great  importance  to  a  religious  life. 
I  have  shown  you  how  many  difficulties  are  formed 
against  it  from  our  natural  tempers,  the  spirit  of  the 
world,  and  the  common  education  of  both  sexes. 

These  considerations  will,  I  hope,  instruct  you  how 
to  form  your  prayers  for  it  to  the  best  advantage, 
and  teach  you  the  necessity  of  letting  no  day  pass, 
without  a  serious,  earnest  application  to  God,  for  the 
whole  spirit  of  humility :  fervently  beseeching  Him  to 
fill  every  part  of  your  soul  with  it,  to  make  it  the 
ruling,  constant  habit  of  your  mind,  that  you  may  not 
only  feel  it,  but  feel  all  your  other  tempers  arising 
from  it ;  that  you  may  have  no  thoughts,  no  desires, 
no  designs,  but  such  as  are  the  true  fruits  of  a  humble, 
meek,  and  lowly  heart. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  289 

That  you  may  look  for  nothing,  claim  nothing, 
resent  nothing  ;  that  you  may  go  through  all  the  actions 
and  accidents  of  life,  cahnly  and  quietly,  as  in  the 
presence  of  God,  looking  wholly  unto  Him,  acting 
wholly  for  Him :  neither  seeking  vain  applause,  nor 
resenting  neglects  or  affronts,  but  doing  and  receiving 
every  thing  in  the  meek  and  lowly  spirit  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

RECOMMENDING  DEVOTION  AT  TWELVE  O'CLOCK,  CALLED 
IN  SCRIPTURE  THE  SIXTH  HOUR  OF  THE  DAY.  THIS 
FREQUENCY  OF  DEVOTION  EQUALLY  DESIRABLE  BY 
ALL  ORDERS  OF  PEOPLE.  UNIVERSAL  LOVE  IS  HERE 
RECOMMENDED  TO  BE  THE  SUBJECT  OF  PRAYER  AT 
THIS  HOUR.  OF  INTERCESSION,  AS  AN  ACT  OF 
UNIVERSAL  LOVE. 

(Much  Prayer  equally  desirable  for  all.     Of 
Universal  Love.) 

IT  will  perhaps  be  thought  by  some  people,  that 
these  hours  of  prayer  come  too  thick ;  tliat  they 
can  only  be  observed  by  people  of  great  leisure,  and 
ought  not  to  be  pressed  upon  the  generality  of  men, 
who  have  the  cares  of  families,  trades,  and  employ- 
ments ;  nor  upon  the  gentry,  whose  state  and  figure 
in  the  world  cannot  admit  of  this  frequency  of  de- 
votion. And  that  it  is  only  fit  for  monasteries  and 
nunneries,  or  such  people  as  have  no  more  to  do  in 
the  world  than  they  have. 
To  this  it  is  answered, 

19 


200  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

First,  That  this  method  of  devotion  is  not  pressed 
upon  any  sort  of  people,  as  absolutely  necessary,  but 
recommended  to  all  people,  as  the  best,  the  happiest, 
and  most  perfect  way  of  life. 

And  if  a  great  and  exemplary  devotion  is  as  much 
the  greatest  happiness  and  perfection  of  a  merchant, 
a  soldier,  or  a  man  of  quality,  as  it  is  the  greatest 
happiness  and  perfection  of  the  most  retired  con- 
templative life,  then  it  is  as  proper  to  recommend  it 
without  any  abatements  to  one  order  of  men,  as  to 
another ;  because  happiness  and  perfection  are  of  the 
same  worth  and  value  to  all  people. 

It  is  certainly  very  honest  and  creditable  for  people 
to  engage  in  trades  and  employments ;  it  is  reasonable 
for  gentlemen  to  manage  well  their  estates  and  families, 
and  take  such  recreations  as  are  proper  to  their  state. 
But  then  every  gentleman  and  tradesman  loses  the 
greatest  happiness  of  his  creation,  is  robbed  of  some- 
thing that  is  greater  than  all  employments,  distinctions, 
and  pleasures  of  the  world,  if  he  does  not  live  more  to 
piety  and  devotion,  than  to  any  thing  else  in  the  world. 

Here  are,  therefore,  no  excuses  made  for  men  of 
business  and  figure  in  the  world.  First,  Because  it 
would  be  to  excuse  them  from  that  which  is  the 
greatest  end  of  living ;  and  be  only  finding  so  many 
reasons  for  making  them  less  beneficial  to  themselves, 
and  less  serviceable  to  God  and  the  world. 

Secondly,  Because  most  men  of  business  and  figure 
engage  too  far  in  worldly  matters ;  much  farther  than 
the  reasons  of  human  life,  or  the  necessities  of  the 
world  require. 

Merchants  and  tradesmen,  for  instance,  are  generally 
ten  times  farther  engaged  in  business  than  they  need ; 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  291 

which  is  so  far  from  being  a  reasonable  excuse  for 
their  want  of  time  for  devotion,  that  it  is  their  crime, 
and  must  be  censured  as  a  blameable  instance  of 
covetousness  and  ambition,  .  .  . 

If  a  merchant,  havhig  forborne  from  too  great 
business,  that  he  might  quietly  attend  in  the  service 
of  God,  should  therefore  die  worth  twenty  instead  of 
fifty  thousand  pounds,  could  any  one  say  that  he 
had  mistaken  his  calling,  or  gone  a  loser  out  of 
the  world  ? 

If  a  tradesman,  by  aspiring  after  Christian  perfec- 
tion, and  retiring  himself  often  from  his  business, 
should,  instead  of  leaving  his  children  fortunes  to 
spend  in  luxury  and  idleness,  leave  them  to  live  by 
their  own  honest  labour,  could  it  be  said  that  he  had 
made  a  wrong  use  of  the  world,  because  he  had  shown 
his  children  that  he  had  more  regard  to  that  which  is 
eternal,  than  to  this  which  is  so  soon  to  be  at  an 
end?  .  .  . 

Any  devotion  that  is  not  to  the  greater  advantage 
of  him  that  uses  it  than  any  thing  that  he  can  do  in 
the  room  of  it ;  any  devotion  that  does  not  procure  an 
infinitely  greater  good  than  can  be  got  by  neglecting 
it,  is  freely  yielded  up ;  here  is  no  demand  of  it.  .  .  . 

You  would  think  it  very  absurd  for  a  man  not  to 
value  his  own  health,  because  he  was  not  a  physician ; 
nor  the  preservation  of  his  limbs,  because  he  was  not 
a  bone-setter.  Yet  it  is  more  absurd  for  you,  Claudius, 
to  neglect  the  improvement  of  your  soul  in  piety, 
because  you  are  not  an  apostle,  or  a  bishop. 

Consider  this  text  of  Scripture :  "  If  ye  live  after 
the  flesh,  ye  shall  die ;  but  if  ye  through  the  Spirit  do 
mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  live.     For  as 


292  vnroLLY  for  gov 

many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the 
sons  of  God."  ^  Do  you  think  that  this  Scripture  does 
not  equally  relate  to  all  mankind  ?  Can  you  find  any 
exception  here  for  men  of  figure  and  estates  ?  Is  not 
a  spiritual  and  devout  life  here-  made  the  common 
condition  on  which  all  men  are  to  become  sons  of  God  ? 
Will  you  leave  hours  of  prayer  and  rules  of  devotion 
to  particular  states  of  life,  when  nothing  but  the  same 
spirit  of  devotion  can  save  you,  or  any  man,  from 
eternal  death  ?  .  .  . 

Again,  consider  this  doctrine  of  the  apostle :  "  For 
none  of  us,"  that  is,  of  us  Christians,  "  liveth  to  himself, 
and  no  man  dieth  to  hunself.  For  whether  we  live, 
we  live  unto  the  Lord ;  and  whether  we  die,  we  die 
unto  the  Lord.  For  to  this  end  Christ  both  died,  and 
rose,  and  revived,  that  He  might  be  Lord  both  of  the 
dead  and  living."  ^ 

Now,  are  you  excepted  out  of  the  doctrine  of  this 
text  ?  Will  you,  because  of  your  condition,  leave  it 
to  any  particular  sort  of  people,  to  live  and  die  unto 
Christ  ?  If  so,  you  must  leave  it  to  them  to  be 
redeemed  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ. 
For  it  is  the  express  doctrine  of  the  text,  that  for  this 
end  Christ  died  and  rose  again,  that  none  of  us  should 
live  to  himself.  It  is  not  that  priests,  or  apostles,  or 
monks,  or  hermits,  should  live  no  longer  to  themselves  ; 
but  that  none  of  us,  that  is,  no  Christian  of  what  state 
soever,  should  live  unto  himself. 

If,  therefore,  there  be  any  instances  of  piety,  any 
rules  of  devotion,  which  you  can  neglect,  and  yet  live 
as  truly  unto  Christ  as  if  you  observed  them,  this  text 
calls  you  to  no  such  devotion.     But  if  you  forsake 

^  Rom.  viii.  13,  14.  -  Rom.  xiv.  7,  8,  9. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  293 

such  devotion,  as  you  yourself  know  is  expected  from 
some  particular  sorts  of  people  ;  sucli  devoti(jn  as  you 
know  becomes  people  that  live  wholly  unto  Christ, 
that  aspire  after  great  piety ;  if  you  neglect  such 
devotion  for  any  worldly  consideration,  that  you  may 
live  more  to  your  own  temper  and  taste,  more  to  tlie 
fashions  and  ways  of  the  world,  you  forsake  the  terms 
on  which  all  Christians  are  to  receive  the  benefit  of 
Christ's  Death  and  llesurrection.  .  .  . 

And  if  you  leave  it  to  others  to  live  in  such  piety 
and  devotion,  in  such  self-denial,  humility,  and  temper- 
ance, as  may  render  them  able  to  glorify  God  in  their 
body,  and  in  their  spirit ;  you  must  leave  it  to  them 
also,  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  Blood  of  Christ.  .  .  . 

I  now  proceed  to  consider  the  nature  and  necessity 
of  universal  love,  which  is  here  recommended  to  be  the 
subject  of  your  devotion  at  this  hour.  You  are  here 
also  called  to  intercession,  as  the  most  proper  exercise 
to  raise  and  preserve  that  love. 

By  intercession  is  meant  a  praying  to  God,  and 
interceding  with  Him  for  our  fellow-creatures. 

Our  blessed  Lord  hath  recommended  His  love  to  us, 
as  the  pattern  and  example  of  our  love  to  one  another. 
As,  therefore.  He  is  continually  making  intercession 
for  us  all,  so  ought  we  to  intercede  and  pray  for  one 
another. 

"  A  new  commandment,"  saith  He,  "  I  give  unto 
you.  That  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have  loved  you. 
By  this  shall  all  men  Ivuow  that  ye  are  My  disciples, 
if  ye  have  love  one  to  another."  ^ 

The  newness  of  this  precept  did  not  consist  in  this, 
that  men  were  commanded  to  love  one  another ;  for 

^  John  xiii.  34.  3.5. 


294  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

this  was  an  old  precept,  both  of  the  law  of  Moses,  and 
of  nature.  But  it  was  new  in  this  respect,  that  it  was 
to  imitate  a  new,  and  till  then  unheard-of  example  of 
love ;  it  was  to  love  one  another,  as  Christ  had  loved 
us.  .  .  . 

There  is  no  principle  of  the  heart  that  is  more 
acceptable  to  God,  than  an  universal  fervent  love  to 
all  mankind,  wishing  and  praying  for  their  happiness ; 
because  there  is  no  principle  of  the  heart  that  makes 
us  more  like  God,  who  is  love  and  goodness  itself,  and 
created  all  beings  for  their  enjoyment  of  happiness. 

The  greatest  idea  that  we  can  frame  of  God,  is  when 
we  conceive  Him  to  be  a  Being  of  infinite  love  and 
goodness ;  using  an  infinite  wisdom  and  power  for  the 
common  good  and  happiness  of  all  His  creatures. 

The  highest  notion,  therefore,  that  we  can  form  of 
man  is  when  we  conceive  him  as  like  to  God,  in  this 
respect,  as  he  can  be ;  using  all  his  infinite  faculties, 
whether  of  wisdom,  power,  or  prayers,  for  the  common 
good  of  all  his  fellow-creatures ;  heartily  desiring  they 
may  have  all  the  happiness  they  are  capable  of,  and 
as  many  benefits  and  assistances  fron  him,  as  his  state 
and  condition  in  the  world  will  permit  him  to  give 
them. 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  what  a  baseness  and  iniquity 
is  there  in  all  instances  of  hatred,  envy,  spite,  and 
ill-will ;  if  we  consider  that  every  instance  of  them  is 
so  far  acting  in  opposition  to  God,  and  intending 
mischief  and  harm  to  those  creatures  which  God 
favours,  and  protects,  and  preserves,  in  order  to  their 
happiness !  An  ill-natured  man,  amongst  God's  crea- 
tures, is  the  most  perverse  creature  in  the  world,  acting 
contrary  to  that  love  by  which  himself  subsists,  and 


A    SEKIOUS    CALL  295 

which  alone  gives  subsistence  to  all  that  variety  of 
beings,  that  enjoy  life  in  any  part  of  the  creation. 

"  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you, 
do  ye  even  so  to  them."  ^ 

Now,  though  this  is  a  doctrine  of  strict  justice,  yet 
it  is  only  an  universal  love  that  can  comply  with  it. 
For  as  love  is  the  measure  of  our  acting  towards  our- 
selves, so  we  can  never  act  in  the  same  manner  towards 
other  people,  till  we  look  upon  them  with  that  love 
with  which  we  look  upon  ourselves. 

If  we  had  any  imperfection  in  our  eyes,  that  made 
us  see  any  one  thing  wrong,  for  the  same  reason  they 
would  show  us  an  hundred  things  wrong. 

So,  if  we  have  any  temper  of  our  hearts,  that 
makes  us  envious,  or  spiteful,  or  ill-natured  towards 
any  one  man,  the  same  temper  will  make  us  envious, 
and  spiteful,  and  ill-natured  towards  a  great  many 
more. 

If,  therefore,  we  desire  this  Divine  virtue  of  love, 
we  must  exercise  and  practise  our  hearts  in  the  love 
of  all,  because  it  is  not  Christian  love,  till  it  is  the 
love  of  all. 

Acts  of  love,  that  proceed  not  from  a  principle  of 
universal  love,  are  but  like  acts  of  justice  that  proceed 
from  a  heart  not  disposed  to  universal  justice. 

A  love  which  is  not  universal  may  indeed  have 
tenderness  and  affection,  but  it  hath  nothing  of  right- 
eousness or  piety  in  it ;  it  is  but  humour,  and  temper, 
or  interest,  or  such  a  love  as  publicans  and  heathens 
practise. 

Who,  therefore,  whose  heart  has  any  tendency  to- 
wards God,  would  not  aspire  after  this  Divine  temper, 

^  Matt.  vii.  12. 


29 G  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

which  so  changes  and  exalts  our  nature  into  an  union 
with  Him  ? 

How  should  we  rejoice  in  the  exercise  and  practice 
of  this  love,  which,  so  often  as  we  feel  it,  is  so  often 
an  assurance  to  us,  that  God  is  in  us,  that  we  act 
according  to  His  Spirit,  who  is  Love  itself !  But  we 
must  observe  that  love  has  then  only  this  mighty 
power  of  uniting  us  to  God,  when  it  is  so  pure  and 
universal  as  to  imitate  that  love  which  God  beareth  to 
all  His  creatures. 

God  willeth  the  happiness  of  all  beings,  though  it 
is  no  happiness  to  Himself.  Therefore  we  must  desire 
the  happiness  of  all  beings,  though  no  happiness 
cometh  to  us  from  it. 

God  equally  delighteth  m  the  perfections  of  all  His 
creatures ;  therefore  we  should  rejoice  in  those  perfec- 
tions, wherever  we  see  them,  and  be  as  glad  to  have 
other  people  perfect  as  ourselves.  .  .  . 

To  proceed  now  to  another  motive  to  this  universal 
love. 

Our  power  of  doing  external  acts  of  love  and  good- 
ness is  often  very  narrow  and  restrained.  There  are, 
it  may  be,  but  few  people  to  whom  we  can  contribute 
any  worldly  relief. 

But  though  our  outward  means  of  doing  good  are 
often  thus  limited,  yet  if  our  hearts  are  but  full  of 
love  and  goodness,  we  get,  as  it  were,  an  infinite 
power ;  because  God  will  attribute  to  us  those  good 
works,  those  acts  of  love,  and  tender  charities  which 
we  sincerely  desired,  and  would  gladly  have  performed, 
had  it  been  in  our  power. 

You  cannot  heal  all  the  sick,  relieve  all  the  poor ; 
you  cannot  comfort  all  in  distress,  nor  be  a  father  to 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  297 

all  the  fatherless  ;  you  cannot,  it  may  be,  deliver  many 
from  their  misfortunes,  or  teach  them  to  find  comfort 
in  God. 

But  if  there  is  a  love  and  tenderness  in  your  heart, 
that  delight  in  these  good  works,  and  excite  you  to  do 
all  that  you  can ;  if  your  love  has  no  bounds,  but  con- 
tinually wishes  and  prays  for  the  relief  and  happiness 
of  all  that  are  in  distress ;  you  will  be  received  by 
God  as  a  benefactor  to  those  who  have  had  nothing 
from  you  but  your  good  will  and  tender  affections. 

You  cannot  build  hospitals  for  the  incurable ;  you 
cannot  erect  monasteries  for  the  education  of  persons 
in  holy  solitude,  continual  prayer,  and  mortification : 
but  if  you  join  in  your  heart  with  those  that  do,  and 
thank  God  for  their  pious  designs ;  if  you  are  a  friend 
to  these  great  friends  to  mankind,  and  rejoice  in  theii' 
eminent  virtues ;  you  will  be  received  by  God  as  a 
sharer  of  such  good  works  as,  though  they  had  none 
of  your  hands,  yet  had  all  your  heart.  .  .  . 

Now,  there  is  nothing  that  so  much  exalts  our  souls, 
as  this  heavenly  love :  it  cleanses  and  purities  like  a 
holy  fire,  and  all  ill  tempers  fall  away  before  it.  It 
makes  room  for  all  virtues,  and  carries  them  to  their 
greatest  height.  Every  thing  that  is  good  and  holy 
grows  out  of  it,  and  it  becomes  a  continual  source  of 
all  holy  desires  and  pious  practices.  By  love,  I  do 
not  mean  any  natural  tenderness,  which  is  more  or 
less  in  people,  according  to  then-  constitutions ;  but  I 
mean  a  larger  principle  of  the  soul,  founded  in  reason 
and  piety,  which  makes  us  tender,  kind,  and  benevolent 
to  all  our  fellow-creatures,  as  creatures  of  God,  and 
for  His  sake. 

It  is  this  love,  that  loves  all  things  in  God,  as  His 


298  WHOLLY  roil  god 

creatures,  as  the  images  of  His  power,  as  the  creatures 
of  His  goodness,  as  parts  of  His  family,  as  members  of 
His  society,  that  becomes  a  holy  principle  of  all  great 
and  good  actions. 

The  love,  therefore,  of  our  neighbour  is  only  a 
branch  of  our  love  to  God.  For  when  we  love  God 
with  all  our  hearts,  and  with  all  our  souls,  and  with 
all  our  strength,  we  shall  necessarily  love  those  beings 
that  are  so  nearly  related  to  God,  that  have  every 
thing  from  Him,  and  are  created  by  Him  to  be  objects 
of  His  own  eternal  love.  If  I  hate  or  despise  any  one 
man  in  the  world,  I  hate  something  that  God  cannot 
hate,  and  despise  that  which  He  loves. 

And  can  I  think  that  I  love  God  with  all  my  heart, 
whilst  I  hate  that  which  belongs  only  to  God,  which 
has  no  other  master  but  Him,  which  bears  His  image, 
is  part  of  His  family,  and  exists  only  by  the  continuance 
of  His  love  towards  it  ? 

It  was  the  impossibility  of  this  that  made  St.  John 
say,  that  "  if  any  man  saith  he  loveth  God,  and  hateth 
his  brother,  he  is  a  liar."  ^ 

These  reasons  sufficiently  show  us  that  no  love  is 
holy  or  religious  till  it  becomes  universal. 

For  if  religion  require  me  to  love  all  persons,  as 
God's  creatures,  that  belong  to  Him,  that  bear  His 
image,  enjoy  His  protection,  and  make  parts  of  His 
family  and  household ;  if  these  are  the  great  and 
necessary  reasons  wliy  I  should  live  in  love  and 
friendship  with  any  one  man  in  the  world ;  they  are 
the  same  great  and  necessary  reasons  why  I  should  live 
in  love  and  friendship  with  every  man  in  the  world ; 
and,  consequently,  I  offend  against  all  these  reasons, 

^  1  John  iv.  20. 


A    SEKIOUS    CALL  290 

and  break  ihroiigii  all  these  ties  and  obligations, 
whenever  1  want  love  towards  any  one  man.  The 
sin,  therefore,  of  hating,  or  despising  any  one  man, 
is  like  the  sin  of  liating  all  God's  creation ;  and  tlie 
necessity  of  loving  any  one  man  is  the  same  necessity 
of  loving  every  man  in  the  world.  And  though  many 
people  may  appear  to  us  ever  so  sinful,  odious,  or 
extravagant  in  their  conduct,  we  must  never  look 
upon  that  as  the  least  motive  for  any  contempt  or 
disregard  of  them ;  but  look  upon  them  with  the 
greater  compassion,  as  being  in  the  most  pitiable  con- 
dition that  can  be. 

As  it  was  the  shis  of  the  world  that  made  the  Son 
of  God  become  a  compassionate  suffering  Advocate 
for  all  mankind,  so  no  one  is  of  the  spirit  of  Christ, 
but  he  that  has  the  utmost  compassion  for  sinners. 
Nor  is  there  any  greater  sign  of  your  own  perfection, 
than  when  you  find  yourself  all  love  and  compassion 
towards  them  that  are  very  weak  and  defective.  And, 
on  the  other  hand,  you  have  never  less  reason  to  be 
pleased  with  yourself,  than  when  you  find  yourself 
most  angry  and  offended  at  the  behaviour  of  others. 
All  sin  is  certainly  to  be  hated  and  abhorred,  wher- 
ever it  is ;  but  then  we  must  set  ourselves  against  sin, 
as  we  do  against  sickness  and  diseases,  by  showing 
ourselves  tender  and  compassionate  to  the  sick  and 
diseased. 

All  other  hatred  of  sin,  which  does  not  fill  the  heart 
with  the  softest,  tenderest  affections  towards  persons 
miserable  in  it,  is  the  servant  of  sin,  at  the  same  time 
that  it  seems  to  be  hating  it. 

And  there  is  no  temper  which  even  good  men  ought 
more  carefully  to  watch  and  guard  against,  than  this. 


300  .       Vf HOLLY    FOR    GOD 

For  it  is  a  temper  that  lurks  and  hides  itself  under  the 
cover  of  many  virtues,  and,  by  being  unsuspected,  does 
the  more  mischief. 

A  man  naturally  fancies  that  it  is  his  own  exceed- 
ing love  of  virtue  that  makes  him  not  able  to  bear 
with  those  that  want  it.  And  when  he  abhors  one 
man,  despises  another,  and  cannot  bear  the  name  of  a 
third,  he  supposes  it  all  to  be  a  proof  of  his  own  high 
sense  of  virtue,  and  just  hatred  of  sin. 

And  yet,  one  would  think  that  a  man  needed  no 
other  cure  for  this  temper  than  this  one  reflection : 

That  if  this  had  been  the  spirit  of  the  Son  of  God, 
if  He  had  hated  sin  in  this  manner,  there  had  been 
no  redemption  of  the  world ;  that  if  God  had  hated 
sinners  in  this  manner,  day  and  night,  the  world 
itself  had  ceased  long  ago.  .  .  . 

You  will  perhaps  say.  How  is  it  possible  to  love  a 
good  and  a  bad  man  in  the  same  degree  ? 

Just  as  it  is  possible  to  be  as  just  and  faithful  to  a 
good  man,  as  to  an  evil  man.  Now,  are  you  in  any 
difficulty  about  performing  justice  and  faithfulness  to 
a  bad  man  ?  Are  you  in  any  doubts,  whether  you 
need  be  so  just  and  faithful  to  him,  as  you  need  be  to 
a  good  man  ?  Now,  why  is  it  that  you  are  in  no 
doubt  about  it  ?  It  is  because  you  know  that  justice 
and  faithfulness  are  founded  upon  reasons  that  never 
vary  nor  change,  that  have  no  dependence  upon  the 
merits  of  men,  but  are  founded  in  tlie  nature  of 
things,  in  the  laws  of  God,  and  therefore  are  to  be 
observed  with  an  equal  exactness  towards  good  and 
bad  men.  .  .  . 

But  now,  if  the  want  of  a  true  and  exact  charity  be 
so  great  a  want,  that,  as  St.  Paul  saith,  it  renders  our 


A    SET^IOUS    CALL  301 

greatest  virtues  but  empty  sounds  and  tinkling  cymbals, 
how  highly  does  it  concern  us  to  study  every  art,  and 
practise  every  metliod  of  raising  our  souls  to  this  state 
of  charity !  It  is  for  this  reason  that  you  are  here 
desired  not  to  let  this  hour  of  prayer  pass  without 
a  full  and  solemn  supplication  to  God  for  all  tlie 
instances  of  an  universal  love  and  benevolence  to  all 
mankind ;  such  daily  constant  devotion  being  the  only 
likely  means  of  preserving  you  in  such  a  state  of  love 
as  is  necessary  to  prove  you  to  be  a  true  follower  of 
Jesus  Christ. 


CHAPTEE  XXI. 

OF  THE  NECESSITY  AND  BENEFIT  OF  INTERCESSION,  CON- 
SIDERED AS  AN  EXERCISE  OF  UNIVERSAL  LOVE. 
HOW  ALL  ORDERS  OF  MEN  ARE  TO  PRAY  AND 
INTERCEDE  WITH  GOD  FOR  ONE  ANOTHER.  HOW 
NATURALLY  SUCH  INTERCESSION  AMENDS  AND 
REFORMS    THE    HEARTS    OF    THOSE    THAT    USE    IT. 

Of  Intercession,  and  the  Blessing  it  brings 
to  those  who  engage  in  it. 

THAT  intercession  is  a  great  and  necessary  part 
of  Cliristian  devotion,  is  very  evident  from 
Scripture. 

The  first  followers  of  Christ  seem  to  support  all 
their  love,  and  to  maintain  all  their  intercourse  and 
correspondence,  by  mutual  prayers  for  one  another. 

St.  Paul,  whether  he  writes  to  churches  or  particular 
persons,  shows  his  intercession  to  be  perpetual  for 
them ;  that  they  are  the  constant  subject  of  his 
prayers.  .  .  . 


302  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

-  This  was  the  ancient  friendship  of  Christians, 
uniting  and  cementing  their  hearts,  not  by  worldly 
considerations  or  human  passions,  but  by  the  mutual 
communication  of  spiritual  blessings,  by  prayers  and 
thanksgiving  to  God  for  one  another. 

It  was  this  holy  intercession  that  raised  Christians 
to  such  a  state  of  mutual  love,  as  far  exceeded  all  that 
had  been  praised  and  admired  in  human  friendship. 
And  when  the  same  spirit  of  intercession  is  again 
in  the  world,  when  Christianity  has  the  same  power 
over  the  hearts  of  people  that  it  then  had,  this  holy 
friendship  will  be  again  in  fasliion,  and  Christians  will 
be  again  the  wonder  of  the  world,  for  that  exceeding 
love  which  they  bear  to  one  another. 

For  a  frequent  intercession  with  God,  earnestly  be- 
seeching Him  to  forgive  the  sins  of  all  mankind,  to 
bless  them  with  His  providence,  enlighten  them  with 
His  Spirit,  and  bring  them  to  everlasting  happiness,  is 
the  divinest  exercise  that  the  heart  of  man  can  be 
engaged  in. 

Be  daily,  therefore,  on  your  knees,  in  a  solemn, 
deliberate  performance  of  this  devotion,  praying  for 
others  in  such  forms,  with  such  length,  importunity, 
and  earnestness  as  you  use  for  yourself ;  and  you  will 
find  all  little,  ill-natured  passions  die  away,  your  heart 
grow  great  and  generous,  delighting  in  the  common 
happiness  of  others,  as  you  used  only  to  delight  in 
your  own. 

For  he  that  daily  prays  to  God,  that  all  men  may 
be  happy  in  heaven,  takes  the  likeliest  way  to  make 
him  wish  for,  and  delight  in  their  happiness  on  earth. 
And  it  is  hardly  possible  for  you  to  beseech  and 
entreat  God  to  make  any  one  happy  in  the  highest 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  303 

enjoyments  of  His  glory  to  all  eternity,  and  yet  be 
troubled  to  see  liini  enjoy  the  much  smaller  gifts  of 
God  in  this  short  and  low  state  of  human  life. 

For  how  strange  and  unnatural  would  it  be  to  pray 
to  God  to  grant  health  and  a  longer  life  to  a  sick  man, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  envy  him  the  poor  pleasure 
of  agreeable  medicines ! 

Yet  this  would  be  no  more  strange  or  unnatural 
than  to  pray  to  God  that  your  neighbour  may  enjoy 
the  highest  degrees  of  His  mercy  and  favour,  and  yet 
at  the  same  time  envy  him  the  little  credit  and  figure 
he  hath  amongst  his  fellow-creatures. 

When,  therefore,  you  have  once  habituated  your 
heart  to  a  serious  performance  of  this  holy  intercession, 
you  have  done  a  great  deal  to  render  it  incapable  of 
spite  and  envy,  and  to  make  it  naturally  delight  in 
the  happiness  of  all  mankind. 

This  is  the  natural  effect  of  a  general  intercession 
for  all  mankind.  But  the  greatest  benefits  of  it  are 
then  received,  when  it  descends  to  such  particular 
instances  as  our  state  and  condition  in  life  more 
particularly  require. 

For  there  is  nothing  that  makes  us  love  a  man  so 
much  as  praying  for  him ;  and  when  you  can  once  do 
this  sincerely  for  any  man,  you  have  fitted  your  soul 
for  the  performance  of  every  thing  that  is  kind  and 
civil  towards  him.  This  will  fill  your  heart  with  a 
generosity  and  tenderness  that  will  give  you  a  better 
and  sweeter  behaviour  than  any  thing  that  is  called 
fine  breeding  and  good  manners. 

By  considering  yourself  as  an  advocate  with  God 
for  your  neighbours  and  acquaintance,  you  would 
never  find  it  hard  to  be  at  peace  with  them  yourself. 


304  AYHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

It  would  be  easy  to  you  to  bear  with  and  forgive 
those  for  whom  you  particularly  implored  the  Divine 
mercy  and  forgiveness. 

Such  prayers  as  these  amongst  neighbours  and 
acquaintance  would  unite  them  to  one  another  in  the 
strongest  bonds  of  love  and  tenderness.  It  would 
exalt  and  ennoble  their  souls,  and  teach  them  to  con- 
sider one  another  in  a  higher  state,  as  members  of  a 
spiritual  society,  that  are  created  for  the  enjoyment  of 
the  common  blessings  of  God,  and  fellow-heirs  of  the 
same  future  glory.  .  .  . 

Ouranius  is  a  holy  priest,  full  of  the  spirit  of  the 
gospel,  watching,  labouring,  and  praying  for  a  poor 
country  village.  Every  soul  in  it  is  as  dear  to  him  as 
himself;  and  he  loves  them  all,  as  he  loves  himself, 
because  he  prays  for  them  all,  as  often  as  he  prays 
for  himself. 

If  his  whole  life  is  one  continual  exercise  of  great 
zeal  and  labour,  hardly  ever  satisfied  with  any  degrees 
of  care  and  watchfulness,  it  is  because  he  has  learned 
the  great  value  of  souls,  by  so  often  appearing  before 
God  as  an  intercessor  for  them.  .  .  . 

When  Ouranius  first  entered  into  Holy  Orders,  he 
had  a  haughtiness  in  his  temper,  a  great  contempt 
and  disregard  for  all  foolish  and  unreasonable  people; 
but  he  has  prayed  away  this  spirit,  and  has  now  the 
greatest  tenderness  for  the  most  obstinate  sinners ; 
because  he  is  always  hoping  that  God  will,  sooner 
or  later,  hear  those  prayers  that  he  makes  for  their 
repentance. 

The  rudeness,  ill-nature,  or  perverse  behaviour  of 
any  of  his  fiock,  used  at  first  to  betray  him  into 
impatience ;  but  now  it  raises  no  other  passion  in  ]iim, 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  305 

than  a  desire  of  being  npon  his  knees  in  prayer  to 
God  for  them. 

Thus  have  his  prayers  for  others  altered  and 
amended  the  state  of  his  own  heart.  .  .  . 

All  these  noble  thoughts  and  divine  sentiments  are 
the  effects  of  his  great  devotion ;  he  presents  every 
one  so  often  before  God  in  his  prayers,  that  he  never 
thinks  he  can  esteem,  reverence,  or  serve  those 
enough,  for  whom  he  implores  so  many  mercies 
from  God. 

Ouranius  is  mightily  afiected  with  this  passage  of 
holy  Scripture :  "  The  eftectual  fervent  prayer  of  a 
righteous  man  availeth  much."  ^ 

This  makes  him  practise  all  the  arts  of  holy  living, 
and  aspii'e  after  every  instance  of  piety  and  righteous- 
ness, that  his  prayers  for  his  flock  may  have  their  full 
force,  and  avail  much  with  God. 

For  this  reason,  he  has  sold  a  small  estate  that  he 
had,  and  has  erected  a  charitable  retirement  for  ancient 
poor  people,  to  live  in  prayer  and  piety,  that  his 
prayers,  being  assisted  by  such  good  works,  may 
pierce  the  clouds,  and  bring  down  l^lessings  upon 
those  souls  committed  to  his  care. 

Ouranius  reads  how  much  God  Himself  said  unto 
Abimelech,  concerning  Abraham :  "  He  is  a  prophet ; 
he  shall  pray  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  live."  ^ 

And  again,  how  He  said  of  Job :  "  And  My  servant 
Job  shall  pray  for  you :  for  him  will  I  accept."  ^ 

From    these    passages    Ouranius   justly    concludes, 

that  the  prayers  of  men  eminent  for  hoHness  of  Ufe 

have    an    extraordinary   power    with    God ;    that  He 

grants    to    other    people    such    pardons,    reliefs,    and 

1  James  v.  16.  ^  Gen.  xx.  7.  ^  Job  xlii.  8. 


i;U6  WHOLLY    FOK    GOD 

blessings,  through  their  prayers,  as  would  not  be 
granted  to  men  of  less  piety  and  perfection.  This 
makes  Ouranius  exceeding  studious  of  Christian 
perfection,  searching  after  every  grace  and  holy 
temper,  purifying  his  heart  all  manner  of  ways, 
fearful  of  every  error  and  defect  in  his  life,  lest  his 
prayers  for  his  flock  should  be  less  availing  with  God, 
through  his  own  defects  in  holiness. 

This  makes  him  careful  of  every  temper  of  his 
heart,  give  alms  of  all  that  he  hath,  watch,  and  fast, 
and  mortify,  and  live  according  to  the  strictest  rules 
of  temperance,  meekness,  and  humility,  that  he  may 
be  in  some  degree  like  an  Abraham  or  a  Job  in  his 
parish,  and  make  such  prayers  for  them,  as  God  will 
hear  and  accept. 

These  are  the  happy  effects  which  a  devout  inter- 
cession hath  produced  in  the  life  of  Ouranius. 

And  if  other  people,  in  their  several  stations,  were 
to  imitate  this  example,  in  such  a  manner  as  suited 
their  particular  state  of  life,  they  would  certainly  find 
the  same  happy  effects  from  it.  .  .  . 

If  all  people,  when  they  feel  the  first  approaches 
of  resentment,  envy,  or  contempt,  towards  others ;  or 
if  in  all  little  disagreements  and  misunderstandings 
whatever,  they  should,  instead  of  indulging  their 
minds  with  little  low  reflections,  have  recourse,  at 
such  times,  to  a  more  particular  and  extraordinary 
intercession  with  God,  for  such  persons  as  had  raised 
their  envy,  resentment,  or  discontent ;  this  would  be  a 
certain  way  to  prevent  the  growth  of  all  uncharitable 
tempers. 

If  you  were  also  to  form  your  prayer  or  intercession 
at  that  time,  to  the  greatest  degree  of  contrariety  to 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  IJO? 

that  temper  which  you  were  then  in,  it  would  be  an 
excellent  means  of  raising  your  heart  to  the  greatest 
state  of  perfection.  .  .  . 

This  would  be  sucli  a  triumph  over  yourself,  w<juld 
so  humble  and  reduce  your  heart  into  obedience  and 
order,  that  the  devil  would  even  be  afraid  of  tempting 
you  again  in  the  same  manner,  when  he  saw  the 
temptation  turned  into  so  great  a  means  of  amending 
and  reforming  the  state  of  your  heart.  .  .  . 

For  such  devotion  must  necessarily  either  destroy 
such  tempers,  or  be  itself  destroyed  by  them :  you 
cannot  possibly  have  any  ill  temper,  or  show  any 
unkind  behaviour  to  a  man,  for  whose  welfare  you  are 
so  much  concerned,  as  to  be  his  advocate  with  God  in 
private.  .  .  . 

You  think  it  a  small  matter  to  ridicule  one  man, 
and  despise  another ;  but  you  should  consider  whether 
it  be  a  small  matter  to  want  that  charity  towards 
these  people,  which  Christians  are  not  allowed  to  want 
towards  their  most  inveterate  enemies. 

For  you  cannot  possibly  despise  and  ridicule  that 
man,  whom  your  private  prayers  recommend  to  the 
love  and  favour  of  God.  .  .  . 

Intercession  is  not  only  the  best  arbitrator  of  all 
differences,  the  best  promoter  of  true  friendship,  the 
best  cure  and  preservative  against  all  unkind  tempers, 
all  angry  and  haughty  passions,  but  is  also  of  great 
use  to  discover  to  us  the  true  state  of  our  own  hearts. 

There  are  many  tempers  which  we  think  lawfid  and 
innocent,  which  we  never  suspect  of  any  harm ;  whicli, 
if  they  were  to  be  tried  by  this  devotion,  would  soon 
show  us  how  we  have  deceived  ourselves.  .  .  . 

I  have  laid  before  you  the  many  and  great  advan- 


308  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

tages  of  intercession.  You  have  seen  what  a  divine 
friendship  it  must  needs  beget  amongst  Christians  ; 
how  dear  it  would  render  all  relations  and  neighbours 
to  one  another ;  how  it  tends  to  make  clergymen, 
masters,  and  parents,  exemplary  and  perfect  in  all  the 
duties  of  their  station ;  how  certainly  it  destroys  all 
envy,  spite,  and  ill-natured  passions ;  how  speedily  it 
reconciles  all  differences ;  and  with  what  a  piercing 
liglit  it  discovers  to  a  man  the  true  state  of  his  heart. 
These  considerations  will,  I  hope,  persuade  you  to 
make  such  intercession  as  is  proper  for  your  state,  the 
constant,  chief  matter  of  your  devotion,  at  this  hour 
of  prayer. 


CHAPTER  XXIT. 

RECOMMENDING  DEVOTION  AT  THREE  o'CLOCK,  CALLED 
IN  SCRIPTURE  THE  NINTH  HOUR  OF  THE  DAY. 
THE  SUBJECT  OF  PRAYER  AT  THIS  HOUR  IS 
RESIGNATION  TO  THE  DIVINE  PLEASURE.  THE 
NATURE  AND  DUTY  OF  CONFORMITY  TO  THE  AVILL 
OF    GOD,    IN    ALL    OUR    ACTIONS    AND    DESIGNS. 

(Of  Prayer  for  entire  Resignation  to  the 
Will  of  God.) 

I  HAVE  recommended  certain  subjects  to  be  made 
the  fixed  and  chief  matter  of  your  devotions,  at 
all  the  hours  of  prayer  that  have  been  already 
considered. 

As  thanksgiving  and  oblation  of  yourself  to  God,  at 
your  first  prayers  in  the  morning;  at  nine,  the  great 
virtue  of  Christian  humility  is  to  be  the  cliief  part  of 
your    petitions.     At  twelve,  you  are  called  upon  to 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  309 

pray  for  all  the  graces  of  universal  love,  and  to  raise 
it  in  your  heart  by  such  general  and  particular  inter- 
cessions as  your  own  state  and  relation  to  other  people 
seem  more  particularly  to  require  of  you. 

At  this  hour  of  the  afternoon,  you  are  desired  to 
consider  tlie  necessity  of  resignation  and  conformity  to 
the  will  of  God,  and  to  make  this  great  virtue  the 
principal  matter  of  your  prayers. 

There  is  nothing  wise,  or  holy,  or  just,  but  the  great 
will  of  God.  This  is  as  strictly  true,  in  the  most 
rigid  sense,  as  to  say,  that  nothing  is  infinite  and 
eternal  but  God. 

No  beings,  therefore,  whether  in  heaven  or  on 
earth,  can  be  wise,  or  holy,  or  just,  but  so  far  as  they 
conform  to  this  will  of  God.  It  is  conformity  to  this 
will  that  gives  virtue  and  perfection  to  the  highest 
services  of  angels  in  heaven ;  and  it  is  conformity 
to  the  same  will  that  makes  the  ordinary  actions 
of  men  on  earth  become  an  acceptable  service  unto 
God. 

The  whole  nature  of  virtue  consists  in  conforming 
to,  and  the  whole  nature  of  vice  in  declining  from,  the 
will  of  God.  All  God's  creatures  are  created  to  fulfil 
His  will ;  the  sun  and  moon  obey  His  will,  by  the 
necessity  of  their  nature ;  angels  conform  to  His  will, 
by  the  perfection  of  their  nature  :  if,  tlierefore,  you 
would  show  yourself  not  to  be  a  rebel  and  apostate 
from  the  order  of  the  creation,  you  nuist  act  like 
beings  both  above  and  below  you;  it  must  be  the 
great  desire  of  your  soul,  that  God's  will  may  Ijo  done 
by  you  on  earth,  as  it  is  done  in  heaven.  It  must  Ix' 
the  settled  purpose  and  intention  of  your  heart,  to  will 
nothing-,  design   notliing,  do   nothing,  but  so  far  as  you 


310  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

have  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  that 
you  should  so  desire,  design,  and  do. 

It  is  as  just  and  necessary  to  live  in  this  state  of 
heart,  to  think  thus  of  God  and  yourself,  as  to  think 
that  you  have  any  dependence  upon  Him.  And  it 
is  as  great  a  rebellion  against  God,  to  think  that  your 
will  may  ever  differ  from  His,  as  to  think  that  you 
have  not  received  the  power  of  willing  for  Him. 

You  are  therefore  to  consider  yourself  as  a  being 
tliat  has  no  other  business  in  the  world,  but  to  be  that 
which  God  requires  you  to  be ;  to  have  no  tempers,  no 
rules  of  your  own,  to  seek  no  self -designs  or  self- 
ends,  but  to  fill  some  place,  and  act  some  part,  in 
strict  conformity  and  thankful  resignation  to  the 
Divine  pleasure. 

To  think  that  you  are  your  own,  or  at  your  own 
disposal,  is  as  absurd  as  to  think  that  you  created  and 
can  preserve  yourself.  It  is  as  plain  and  necessary 
a  first  principle,  to  believe  you  are  thus  God's,  that 
you  thus  belong  to  Him,  and  are  to  act  and  suffer  all 
in  a  thankful  resignation  to  His  pleasure,  as  to  believe 
that  in  Him  you  "  live,  and  move,  and  have  your 
being."  i 

Eesignation  to  the  Divine  will  signifies  a  cheerful 
approbation,  and  thankful  acceptance  of  everything 
that  comes  from  God.  It  is  not  enough  patiently  to 
submit,  but  we  must  thankfully  receive,  and  fully 
approve  of  everything,  that  by  the  order  of  God's 
providence  happens  to  us.  .  .  . 

This  resignation  to  the  Divine  will  may  be  considered 
in  two  respects  :  First,  as  it  signifies  a  thankful  approba- 
tion of  God's  general  providence  over  the  world ; 
^  Acts  xvii.  28. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  mi 

Secondly,  as  it  signifies  a  thankful  acceptance  of  His 
particular  providence  over  us. 

First,  Every  man  is,  by  the  law  of  his  creation,  by 
the  first  article  of  his  creed,  obliged  to  consent  to,  and 
acknowledge  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  in  His 
general  providence  over  the  whole  world.  He  is  to 
believe  that  it  is  the  effect  of  God's  great  wisdom  and 
goodness,  that  the  world  itself  was  formed  at  such  a 
particular  time,  and  in  such  a  manner;  that  the 
general  order  of  nature,  the  whole  frame  of  things,  is 
contrived  and  formed  in  the  best  manner.  He  is 
to  believe  that  God's  providence  over  states  and 
kingdoms,  times  and  seasons,  is  all  for  the  best ;  that 
tlie  revolutions  of  states  and  changes  of  empire,  the 
rise  and  fall  of  monarchies,  persecutions,  wars,  famines, 
and  plagues,  are  all  permitted  and  conducted  by  God's 
providence  to  the  general  good  of  man  in  this  state  of  trial. 

A  good  man  is  to  believe  all  this,  with  the  same 
fulness  of  assent  as  he  believes  that  God  is  in  every 
place,  though  he  neither  sees  nor  can  comprehend  the 
manner  of  His  presence. 

This  is  a  noble  magnificence  of  thought,  a  true 
religious  greatness  of  mind,  to  be  thus  affected  witli 
God's  general  providence,  admiring  and  magnifying 
His  wisdom  in  all  things ;  never  murmuring  at  the 
course  of  the  world,  or  the  state  of  things,  but  looking 
upon  all  around,  at  heaven  and  earth,  as  a  pleased 
spectator,  and  adoring  that  invisible  Hand,  which  gives 
laws  to  all  motions,  and  overrules  all  events  to  ends 
suitable  to  the  liighest  wisdom  and  goodness. 

It  is  very  common  for  people  to  allow  themselves 
great  liberty  in  finding  fault  witli  sucli  things  as  have 
oulv  God  for  their  cause. 


312  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

Every  one  thinks  he  may  justly  say,  what  a 
wretched  abominable  climate  he  lives  in.  This  man 
is  frequently  telling  you,  what  a  dismal  cursed  day  it 
is,  and  what  intolerable  seasons  we  have.  Another 
thinks  he  has  very  little  to  thank  God  for,  that  it  is 
hardly  worth  his  while  to  live  in  a  world  so  full  of 
changes  and  revolutions.  But  these  are  tempers  of 
great  impiety,  and  show  that  religion  has  not  yet  its 
seat  in  the  heart  of  those  that  have  them.  .  .  . 

As,  therefore,  when  we  think  of  God  Himself,  we 
are  to  have  no  sentiments  but  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving ;  so,  when  we  look  at  those  things  which  are 
under  the  direction  of  God,  and  governed  by  His 
providence,  we  are  to  receive  them  with  the  same 
tempers  of  praise  and  gratitude.  .   .  . 

You  cannot  therefore  look  upon  this  as  an  un- 
necessary high  pitch  of  perfection,  since  the  want  of 
it  implies  the  want,  not  of  any  high  notions,  but  of  a 
plain  and  ordinary  faith  in  the  most  certain  doctrines 
both  of  natural  and  revealed  religion. 

Thus  much  concerning  resignation  to  the  Divine 
will,  as  it  signifies  a  thankful  approbation  of  God's 
general  providence :  it  is  now  to  be  considered  as  it 
signifies  a  thankful  acceptance  of  God's  particular 
providence  over  us.  .  .  . 

It  is  as  much  by  the  counsel  and  eternal  purpose  of 
God  that  you  should  be  born  in  your  particular  state, 
and  that  Isaac  should  be  the  son  of  Abraham,  as  that 
Gabriel  should  be  an  angel,  and  Isaac  a  man.  .  .  . 

Had  you  been  anything  else  than  what  you  are,  you 
had,  all  things  considered,  been  less  wisely  provided 
for  than  you  are  now :  you  had  wanted  some  circum- 
stances and  conditions  that  are  best  fitted  to  make 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  813 

you  happy  yourself,  and  serviceable  to  the  glory 
of  God. 

Could  you  see  all  that  which  God  sees,  all  that 
happy  chain  of  causes  and  motives  which  are  to  move 
and  invite  you  to  a  right  course  of  life,  you  would  see 
something  to  make  you  like  that  state  you  are  in,  as 
fitter  for  you  than  any  other. 

But  as  you  cannot  see  this,  so  it  is  here  that  your 
Christian  faith  and  trust  in  God  is  to  exercise  itself, 
and  render  you  as  grateful  and  thankful  for  the 
happiness  of  your  state,  as  if  you  saw  every  thing  that 
contributes  to  it  with  your  own  eyes. 

But  now,  if  this  be  the  case  of  every  man  in  the 
world,  thus  blessed  with  some  particular  state  that  is 
most  convenient  for  hmi,  how  reasonable  is  it  for  every 
man  to  will  that  which  God  has  already  willed  for 
him ;  and  by  a  pious  faith  and  trust  in  the  Divine 
goodness,  thankfully  to  adore  and  magnify  that  wise 
Providence,  which  he  is  sure  has  made  the  best  choice 
for  him  of  those  things  which  he  could  not  choose  for 
himself !  .  .  . 

So  that,  whether  we  consider  the  infinite  goodness 
of  God,  that  cannot  choose  amiss  for  us,  or  our  own 
great  ignorance  of  what  is  most  advantageous  to  us, 
there  can  be  nothing  so  reasonable  and  pious,  as  to 
have  no  will  but  that  of  God's,  and  to  desire  nothing 
for  ourselves,  in  our  persons,  our  state,  and  condition, 
but  that  which  the  good  providence  of  God  appoints  us. 

Farther,  as  the  good  providence  of  God  thus  in- 
troduces us  into  the  world,  into  such  states  and 
conditions  of  life  as  are  most  convenient  for  us,  so 
the  same  unerring  wisdom  orders  all  events  and 
changes  in  the  whole  course  of  our  lives,  in  such  a 


314  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

manner,  as  to  render  them  the  fittest  means  to  exercise 
and  improve  our  virtue. 

Nothing  hurts  us,  nothing  destroys  us,  but  the 
ill  use  of  tliat  liberty  with  which  God  has  entrusted 
us.  .  .  . 

For  the  providence  of  God  is  not  more  concerned 
in  the  government  of  night  and  day,  and  the  variety 
of  seasons,  than  in  the  common  course  of  events  that 
seem  most  to  depend  upon  the  mere  wills  of  men. 
So  that  it  is  strictly  right  to  look  upon  all  worldly 
accidents  and  changes,  all  the  various  turns  and 
alternations  in  your  own  life,  to  be  as  truly  the  effects 
of  Divine  providence,  as  the  rismg  and  setting  of  the 
sun,  or  the  alternations  of  the  seasons  of  the  year. 
As  you  are,  therefore,  always  to  adore  the  wisdom  of 
God  in  the  direction  of  these  things ;  so  it  is  the  same 
reasonable  duty  always  to  magnify  God,  as  an  equal 
Director  of  every  thing  that  happens  to  you  in  the 
course  of  your  own  life. 

This  holy  resignation  and  conformity  of  your  will  to 
the  will  of  God  being  so  much  the  true  state  of  piety, 
I  hope  you  will  think  it  proper  to  make  this  hour  of 
prayer  a  constant  season  of  applying  to  God  for  so 
great  a  gift ;  that  by  thus  constantly  praying  for  it, 
your  heart  may  be  habitually  disposed  towards  it,  and 
always  in  a  state  of  readiness  to  look  at  every  thing 
as  God's,  and  to  consider  Him  in  every  thing;  that  so 
every  thing  that  befalls  you  may  be  received  in  the 
spirit  of  piety,  and  made  a  means  of  exercising  some 
virtue. 

There  is  nothing  that  so  powerfully  governs  the 
heart,  that  so  strongly  excites  us  to  wise  and  reason- 
able actions,  as  a  true  sense  of  God's  presence.      But 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  815 

as  we  cannot  see  or  apprehend  the  essence  of  God,  so 
nothing  will  so  constantly  keep  us  under  a  lively  sense 
of  the  presence  of  God,  as  this  holy  resignation  which 
attributes  every  thing  to  Him,  and  receives  every  thing 
as  from  Him. 

Could  we  see  a  miracle  from  God,  how  would  our 
thoughts  be  affected  with  an  holy  awe  and  veneration 
of  His  presence !  But  if  we  consider  every  thing  as 
God's  domg,  either  by  order  or  permission,  we  shall 
then  be  affected  with  common  things,  as  they  would 
be  who  saw  a  miracle. 

For  as  there  is  nothing  to  affect  you  in  a  miracle, 
but  as  it  is  the  action  of  God,  and  bespeaks  His 
presence ;  so,  when  you  consider  God  as  acting  in  all 
things,  and  all  events,  then  all  things  will  become 
venerable  to  you,  like  miracles,  and  fill  you  with  the 
same  awful  sentiments  of  the  Divine  presence. 

Now,  you  must  not  reserve  the  exercise  of  this  pious 
temper  to  any  particular  times  or  occasions,  or  fancy 
how  resigned  you  will  be  to  God,  if  such  or  such  trials 
should  happen.  For  this  is  amusing  yourself  with 
the  notion  or  idea  of  resignation,  instead  of  the  virtue 
itself. 

Do  not  therefore  please  yourself  with  thinking  how 
piously  you  would  act  and  submit  to  God  in  a  plague, 
or  famine,  or  persecution,  but  be  intent  upon  the 
perfection  of  the  present  day ;  and  be  assured,  that  the 
best  way  of  showing  a  true  zeal  is  to  make  little  things 
the  occasions  of  great  piety. 

Begin  therefore  in  the  smallest  matters,  and  most 
ordinary  occasions,  and  accustom  your  mind  to  the 
daily  exercise  of  this  pious  temper,  in  the  lov/est 
occurrences  of  life.     And  when  a  contempt,  an  affront, 


316  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

a  little  injury,  loss,  or  disappointment,  or  the  smallest 
events  of  every  day,  continually  raise  your  mind  to 
God  in  proper  acts  of  resignation,  then  you  may  justly 
hope  that  you  shall  be  numbered  amongst  those  that 
are  resigned  and  thankful  to  God  in  the  greatest  trials 
and  afflictions. 


CHAPTEK  XXIII. 

OF  EVENING  PRAYER.  OF  THE  NATURE  AND  NECESSITY 
OF  EXAMINATION.  HOW  WE  ARE  TO  BE  PARTICULAR 
IN  THE  CONFESSION  OF  ALL  OUR  SINS.  HOW  WE 
ARE  TO  FILL  OUR  MINDS  WITH  A  JUST  HORROR  AND 
DREAD    OF    ALL    SIN. 

(Of  the  particular  Confession  of  Sin.) 

1AM  now  come  to  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  which, 
according  to  the  Scripture  account,  is  called  the 
twelfth,  or  last  hour  of  the  day.  This  is  a  time  so 
proper  for  devotion,  that  I  suppose  nothing  need  be 
said  to  recommend  it  as  a  season  of  prayer  to  all  people 
that  profess  any  regard  to  piety. 

As  the  labour  and  action  of  every  state  of  life  is 
generally  over  at  this  hour,  so  this  is  the  proper  time 
for  every  one  to  call  himself  to  account  and  review  all 
his  behaviour  from  the  first  action  of  the  day.  The 
necessity  of  this  examination  is  founded  upon  the 
necessity  of  repentance.  For  if  it  be  necessary  to 
repent  of  all  our  sins,  if  the  guilt  of  unrepented  sins 
still  continue  upon  us,  then  it  is  necessary,  not  only 
that  all  our  sins,  but  the  particular  circumstances  and 
aggravations  of  them,  be  known,  and  recollected,  and 
brought  to  repentance. 


A    SEKIOUS    CALL  317 

The  Scriptui'e  saith,  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  He  is 
faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse 
us  from  all  unrighteousness." '  Which  is  as  much  as 
to  say,  that  then  only  our  sins  are  forgiven,  and  we 
cleansed  from  the  guilt  and  unrighteousness  of  them, 
when  they  are  thus  confessed  and  repented  of. 

There  seems  therefore  to  be  the  greatest  necessity, 
that  all  our  daily  actions  be  constantly  observed  and 
brought  to  account,  lest  by  a  negligence  we  load  our- 
selves with  the  guilt  of  unrepented  sins.  .  .  . 

You  would,  I  suppose,  think  yourself  chargeable 
with  great  impiety,  if  you  were  to  go  to  bed  without 
confessing  yourself  to  be  a  sinner  and  asking  pardon 
of  God ;  you  would  not  think  it  sufficient  that  you 
did  so  yesterday.  And  yet  if,  without  any  regard  to 
the  present  day,  you  only  repeat  the  same  form  of 
words  that  you  used  yesterday,  the  sins  of  the  present 
day  may  justly  be  looked  upon  to  have  had  no  repent- 
ance. For  if  the  sins  of  the  present  day  require  a 
new  confession,  it  must  be  such  a  new  confession  as  is 
proper  to  itself.  For  it  is  the  state  and  condition  of 
every  day  that  is  to  determine  the  state  and  manner 
of  your  repentance  in  the  evening ;  otherwise  the  same 
general  form  of  words  is  rather  an  empty  formality 
that  has  the  appearance  of  a  duty,  than  such  a  true 
performance  of  it  as  is  necessary  to  make  it  truly 
useful  to  you. 

Let  it  be  supposed  that  on  a  certain  day  you  have 
been  guilty  of  these  sins ;  that  you  have  told  a  vain 
lie  upon  yourself,  ascribing  something  falsely  to  your- 
self, through  pride;  that  you  have  been  guilty  of 
detraction,  and  indulged  yourself  in  some  degree  of 
1  1  John  i.  9, 


318  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

intemperance.  Let  it  be  supposed,  that  on  the  next 
day  you  have  lived  in  a  contrary  manner :  that  you 
have  neglected  no  duty  of  devotion,  and  been  the  rest 
of  the  day  innocently  employed  in  your  proper  busi- 
ness. Let  it  be  supposed,  that  on  the  evening  of  both 
these  days  you  only  use  the  same  confession  in  general, 
considering  it  rather  as  a  duty  that  is  to  be  performed 
every  night,  than  as  a  repentance  that  is  to  be  suited  to 
the  particular  state  of  the  day. 

Can  it  with  any  reason  be  said,  that  each  day  has 
had  its  proper  repentance  ?  Is  it  not  as  good  sense 
to  say,  there  is  no  difference  in  the  guilt  of  these 
days,  as  to  say  that  there  need  be  no  different  repent- 
ance at  the  end  of  them  ?  Or  how  can  each  of  them 
have  its  proper  repentance,  but  by  its  having  a  repent- 
ance as  large,  and  extensive,  and  particular  as  the 
guilt  of  each  day  ?  .  .  . 

And  I  have  entered  into  all  these  particulars,  only 
to  show  you,  in  the  plainest  manner,  that  examination 
and  a  careful  review  of  all  the  actions  of  the  day,  is 
not  only  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  good  rule,  but  as 
something  as  necessary  as  repentance  itself. 

If  a  man  is  to  account  for  his  expenses  at  night, 
can  it  be  thought  a  needless  exactness  in  him,  to  take 
notice  of  every  particular  expense  in  the  day  ? 

And  if  a  man  is  to  repent  of  his  sins  at  night,  can  it 
be  thought  too  great  a  piece  of  scrupulosity  in  him,  to 
know  and  call  to  mind  what  sins  he  is  to  repent  of  ?  .  .  . 

In  order  to  make  this  examination  still  farther 
beneficial,  every  man  should  oblige  himself  to  a  certain 
method  in  it.  As  every  man  has  something  particular 
in  his  nature,  stronger  inclinations  to  some  vices  than 
others,  some  infirmities  that  stick  closer  to  him,  and 


A    bEKlUUy    CALL  o  1  9 

are  liarder  to  be  conquered  than  others ;  and  as  it  is  as 
easy  for  every  man  to  know  this  of  himself,  as  to  know 
whom  lie  likes  or  dislikes ;  so  it  is  highly  necessary 
that  these  particularities  of  our  natures  and  tempers 
should  never  escape  a  severe  trial  at  our  evening 
repentance :  I  say,  a  severe  trial,  because  nothing  but 
a  rigorous  severity  against  these  natural  tempers  is 
Biifficient  to  conquer  them. 

They  are  the  right  eyes  that  are  not  to  be  spared ; 
but  to  be  plucked  out  and  cast  from  us.  For  as  they 
are  the  infirmities  of  nature,  so  they  have  the  strength 
of  nature,  and  must  be  treated  with  great  opposition, 
or  they  will  soon  be  too  strong  for  us. 

He,  therefore,  who  knows  himself  most  of  all  subject 
to  anger  and  passion,  must  be  very  exact  and  constant 
in  his  examination  of  this  temper  every  evening.  He 
must  find  out  every  slip  that  he  has  made  of  that  kind, 
whether  in  thought,  or  word,  or  action  ;  he  must  shame, 
and  reproach,  and  accuse  himself  before  God,  for  every 
thing  that  he  has  said  or  done  in  obedience  to  his  passion. 
He  must  no  more  allow  himself  to  forget  the  examina- 
tion of  this  temper,  than  to  forget  his  whole  prayers.  .  .  . 

Consider  next  your  own  particular  share  in  the  guilt 
of  sin.  And  if  you  would  know  with  what  zeal  you 
ought  to  repent  yourself,  consider  how  you  would 
exhort  another  sinner  to  repentance ;  and  what  re- 
pentance and  amendment  you  would  expect  from  him 
whom  you  judged  to  be  the  greatest  sinner  in  the  world. 

Now  this  case  every  man  may  justly  reckon  to  be 
his  own.  And  you  may  fairly  look  upon  yourself  to 
be  the  greatest  sinner  that  you  know  in  the  world. 

For  though  you.  may  know  abundance  of  people  to 
be  guilty  of  some  gross  sins,  with  which  you  cannot 


320  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

charge  yourself,  yet  you  may  justly  condemn  yourself 
as  the  greatest  sinner  that  you  know.  And  that  for 
these  following  reasons : 

First,  Because  you  know  more  of  the  folly  of  your 
own  heart,  than  you  do  of  other  people's  ;  and  can 
charge  yourself  with  various  sins,  that  you  only  know 
of  yourself,  and  cannot  be  sure  that  other  sinners  are 
guilty  of  them.  So  that,  as  you  know  more  of  the  folly, 
the  baseness,  the  pride,  the  deceitfulness  and  negligence 
of  your  own  heart,  than  you  do  of  any  one's  else,  so  you 
have  just  reason  to  consider  yourself  as  the  greatest 
sinner  that  you  know ;  because  you  know  more  of  the 
greatness  of  your  own  sins,  than  you  do  of  other  people's. 

Secondly,  The  greatness  of  our  guilt  arises  chiefly 
from  the  greatness  of  God's  goodness  towards  us,  from 
the  particular  graces  and  blessings,  the  favours,  the 
lights  and  instructions  that  we  have  received  from  Him. 

Now,  as  these  graces  and  blessings,  and  the  multitude 
of  God's  favours  towards  us,  are  the  great  aggravations 
of  our  sins  against  God,  so  they  are  only  known  to 
ourselves.  And  therefore  every  sinner  knows  more 
of  the  aggravations  of  his  own  guilt,  than  he  does  of 
other  people's  ;  and  consequently  may  justly  look  upon 
himself  to  be  the  greatest  sinner  that  he  knows. 

How  good  God  has  been  to  other  sinners,  what  light 
and  instruction  He  has  vouchsafed  to  them ;  what  bless- 
ings and  graces  they  have  received  from  Him ;  how 
often  He  has  touched  their  hearts  with  holy  inspirations, 
you  cannot  tell.  But  all  this  you  know  of  yourself ; 
therefore  you  know  greater  aggravations  of  your  own 
guilt,  and  are  able  to  charge  yourself  with  greater 
ingratitude,  than  you  can  charge  upon  other  people 

God  Almighty  knows  greater  sinners,  it  may  be,  than 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  P.  21 

you  are  ;  because  He  sees  and  knows  the  circuniHtauceB 
of  all  men's  sins :  but  your  own  heart,  if  it  is  faithful 
to  you,  can  disco^•er  no  guilt  so  great  as  your  own  ; 
because  it  can  only  see  in  you  those  circumstances  on 
which  great  part  of  the  guilt  of  sin  is  founded. 

You  may  see  sins  in  other  people  tliat  you  cainiot 
charge  upon  yourself ;  but  then  you  know  a  number  of 
circumstances  of  your  own  guilt  tliatyuu  cannot  lay  to 
their  charge. 

And  perhaps  that  person  that  appears  at  such  a  dis- 
tance from  your  virtue,  and  so  odious  in  your  eyes, 
would  have  been  much  better  than  you  are,  had  he  been 
altogether  in  your  circumstances,  and  received  all  the 
same  favours  and  graces  from  God  that  you  have. 

This  is  a  very  humbling  reflection,  and  very  proper 
for  those  people  to  make,  who  measure  their  virtue  by 
comparing  the  outward  course  of  their  lives  ^vith  that 
of  other  people's.  .  .  . 

A  serious  and  frequent  reflection  upon  these  things 
will  mightily  tend  to  humble  us  in  our  own  eyes,  make  us 
very  apprehensive  of  the  greatness  of  our  own  guilt,  and 
very  tender  in  censuring  and  condenniing  other  people. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

THE    COXCLUSIOX.     OF    THE    EXCELLEN'CY    AND    (HIEATXESS 
OF    A    DEVOUT    ST'I1!IT. 

(Great  Devotion  the  noblest  Temper  of  the 
noblest  Souls.) 

I  HAVE  now  finished  what  I  intended  in  tliis  treatise. 
I  have  explained  the  nature  of  devotion,  both  as  it 
signifies  a  life  devoted  to  God,  and  as  it  signifies  a 

21 


322  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

regular  method  of  daily  prayer.  I  have  now  only  to 
add  a  word  or  two  in  recommendation  of  a  life  governed 
by  this  spirit  of  devotion. 

For  though  it  is  as  reasonable  to  suppose  it  the 
desire  of  all  Christians  to  arrive  at  Christian  perfection, 
as  to  suppose  that  all  sick  men  desire  to  be  restored  to 
perfect  health ;  yet  experience  shows  us,  that  nothing 
wants  more  to  be  pressed,  repeated,  and  forced  upon 
our  minds,  than  the  plainest  rules  of  Christianity. 

Voluntary  poverty,  virginity,  and  devout  retirement, 
have  been  here  recommended  as  things  not  necessary, 
yet  highly  beneficial  to  those  that  would  make  the  way 
to  perfection  the  most  easy  and  certain.  But  Christian 
perfection  itself  is  tied  to  no  particular  form  of  life ; 
but  is  to  be  attained,  though  not  with  the  same  ease, 
in  every  state  of  life. 

So  that  the  whole  of  the  matter  is  plainly  this  : 
Virginity,  voluntary  poverty,  and  such  other  restraints 
of  lawful  things,  are  not  necessary  to  Christian  per- 
fection ;  but  are  much  to  be  commended  in  those  who 
choose  them  as  helps  and  means  of  a  more  safe  and 
speedy  arrival  at  it. 

It  is  only  in  this  manner,  and  in  this  sense,  that  I 
would  recommend  any  particularity  of  life ;  not  as  if 
perfection  consisted  in  it,  but  because  of  its  great 
tendency  to  produce  and  support  the  true  spirit  of 
Christian  perfection. 

But  the  thing  which  is  here  pressed  upon  all,  is  a  life 
of  a  great  and  strict  devotion  ;  which,  I  think,  has  been 
sufficiently  shown  to  be  equally  the  duty  and  happi- 
ness of  all  orders  of  men.  Neither  is  there  any  thing 
in  any  particular  state  of  life,  that  can  l)e  justly  pleaded 
as  a  reason  for  any  abatements  of  a  devout  spirit. 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  323 

But  beciiuse  in  this  polite  age  of  ours,  we  have  so 
lived  away  the  spirit  of  devotion,  that  many  seem  afraid 
even  to  be  suspected  of  it,  imagining  great  devotion  to 
be  great  bigotry :  tliat  it  is  founded  in  ignorance  and 
poorness  of  spirit :  and  that  little,  weak,  and  dejected 
minds  are  generally  the  greatest  proficients  in  it : 

It  shall  here  be  fully  shown,  that  great  devotion  is 
the  noblest  temper  of  the  greatest  and  noblest  souls ; 
and  that  they  wlio  think  it  receives  any  advantage  from 
ignorance  and  poorness  of  spuit,  are  themselves  not  a 
little,  but  entirely  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  devotion,  the 
nature  of  God,  and  the  nature  of  themselves.  .  .   . 

And  first,  who  reckons  it  a  sign  of  a  poor,  little 
mind,  for  a  man  to  be  full  of  reverence  and  duty  to 
his  parents,  to  have  tlie  truest  love  and  honour  for 
his  friend,  or  to  excel  in  the  liighest  instances  of 
gratitude  to  his  benefactor  ? 

Are  not  these  tempers  in  the  highest  degree,  in  the 
most  exalted  and  perfect  minds  ? 

And  yet  what  is  high  devotion,  but  the  highest 
exercise  of  these  tempers,  of  duty,  reverence,  love, 
honour,  and  gratitude  to  the  amiable,  glorious  Parent, 
Friend,  and  Benefactor  of  all  mankind  ? 

Is  it  a  true  greatness  of  mind,  to  i-everence  the 
authority  of  your  parents,  to  fear  the  displeasure  of 
your  friend,  to  dread  the  reproaches  of  your  benefactor  ? 
And  must  not  this  fear,  and  dread,  and  reverence  be 
mucli  more  just,  and  reasonable,  and  lionourable,  when 
they  are  in  the  highest  degree  towards  God  ? 

Now,  as  the  higher  these  tempers  are,  the  more  are 
they  esteemed  amongst  men,  and  are  allowed  to  be  s<j 
much  the  greater  proofs  of  a  true  greatness  of ^  mind  ; 
so   the   higher  and   greater    these   same   tempers   are 


324  AVHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

towards  God,  so  much  the  more  do  they  prove  the 
nobility,  excellence,  and  greatness  of  the  mind. 

So  that,  so  long  as  duty  to  parents,  love  to  friends, 
and  gratitude  to  benefactors,  are  thought  great  and 
honourable  tempers ;  devotion,  which  is  nothing  else 
but  duty,  love,  and  gratitude  to  God,  must  have  the 
highest  place  amongst  our  highest  virtues.  .   .   . 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  it  shall  here  be  made 
appear  by  variety  of  arguments,  that  indevotion  is 
founded  on  the  most  excessive  ignorance. 

And  first,  our  blessed  Lord,  and  His  apostles,  were 
eminent  instances  of  great  and  frequent  devotion. 
Now,  if  we  will  grant  (as  all  Christians  must  grant) 
that  their  great  devotion  was  founded  in  a  true  know- 
ledge of  the  nature  of  devotion,  the  nature  of  God, 
and  the  nature  of  man ;  then  it  is  plain,  that  all  those 
that  are  insensible  of  the  duty  of  devotion,  are  in  this 
excessive  state  of  ignorance,  they  neither  know  God, 
nor  themselves,  nor  devotion. 

For  if  a  right  knowledge  in  these  three  respects 
produces  great  devotion,  as  in  the  case  of  our  Saviour 
and  His  apostles ;  then  a  neglect  of  devotion  must  be 
chargeable  upon  ignorance.   .  .   . 

If  there  be  any  things  that  concern  us  more  than 
others,  if  there  be  any  truths  that  are  more  to  us  than 
all  others,  he  that  has  the  fullest  knowledge  of  these 
things,  that  sees  these  truths  in  the  clearest,  strongest 
light,  has,  of  all  others,  as  a  rational  creature,  the 
clearest  understanding,  and  the  strongest  parts. 

If,  therefore,  our  relation  to  God  be  our  greatest 
relation,  if  our  advancement  in  His  favour  be  our 
highest  advancement,  he  that  has  the  highest  notions 
of  the  excellence  of  this  relation,  he  that  most  strongly 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  325 

perceives  the  highest  worth,  and  great  vahie  of  holi- 
ness and  virtue,  that  judges  every  thing  little,  when 
compared  with  it,  proves  himself  to  be  master  of  the 
best  and  most  excellent  knowledge.  .  .  . 

If  a  gentleman  should  fancy  that  the  moon  is  no 
bigger  than  it  appears  to  the  eye,  that  it  shines  with 
its  own  light,  that  all  the  stars  are  only  so  many  spots 
of  light :  if,  after  reading  books  of  astronomy,  he 
should  still  continue  in  the  same  opinion,  most  people 
would  think  he  had  but  a  poor  apprehension. 

But  if  the  same  person  should  think  it  better  to 
provide  for  a  short  life  here,  than  to  prepare  for  a 
glorious  eternity  hereafter  ;  that  it  was  better  to  be  rich, 
than  to  be  eminent  in  piety  ;  his  ignorance  and  dulness 
would  be  too  great  to  be  compared  to  any  thing  else. 

There  is  no  knowledge  that  deserves  so  much  as 
tlie  name  of  it,  but  that  which  we  call  judgment. 

And  that  is  the  most  clear  and  improved  imder- 
standing,  which  judges  best  of  the  value  and  worth  of 
things.  All  the  rest  is  but  the  capacity  of  an  animal, 
it  is  but  mere  seeing  and  hearing. 

And  there  is  no  excellence  of  any  knowledge  in  us, 
till  we  exercise  our  judgment,  and  judge  well  of  the 
value  and  worth  of  things.  .  .  . 

If,  therefore,  God  be  our  greatest  good  ;  if  there  can 
be  no  good  but  in  His  favour,  nor  any  evil  but  in 
departing  from  Him  ;  then  it  is  plain,  that  he  who  judges 
it  the  Ijest  thing  he  can  do  to  please  God  to  the  utmost 
of  his  power,  who  worships  and  adores  Him  with  all 
his  heart  and  soul,  who  would  rather  have  a  pious  mind 
than  all  the  dignities  and  honours  in  the  world,  shows 
himself  to  be  m  the  highest  state  of  human  wisdom. 

To  proceed  :  We  know  how  our  blessed  Lord  acted 


326  WHOLLY    FOR    GOD 

in  a  human  body :  it  was  His  meat  and  drink  to  do 
the  will  of  His  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

And  if  any  number  of  heavenly  spirits  were  to  leave 
their  habitations  in  the  light  of  God,  and  be  for  a 
while  united  to  human  bodies,  they  would  certainly 
tend  towards  God  in  all  their  actions,  and  be  as 
heavenly  as  they  could,  in  a  state  of  flesh  and  blood. 

They  would  certainly  act  in  this  manner,  because 
they  would  know  that  God  was  the  only  good  of  all 
spirits  ;  and  that  whether  they  were  in  the  body,  or  out 
of  the  body,  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  they  must  have  every 
degree  of  their  greatness  and  happiness  from  God  alone. 

All  human  spirits,  therefore,  the  more  exalted  they 
are,  the  more  they  know  their  Divine  Original,  the 
nearer  they  come  to  heavenly  spirits ;  l^y  so  much  the 
more  will  they  live  to  God  in  all  their  actions,  and 
make  their  whole  life  a  state  of  devotion. 

Devotion,  therefore,  is  the  greatest  sign  of  a  great  and 
noble  genius  ;  it  supposes  a  soul  in  its  highest  state  of 
knowledge  ;  and  none  but  little  and  blinded  minds,  that 
are  sunk  into  ignorance  and  vanity,  are  destitute  of  it. 

If  a  human  spirit  should  imagine  some  mighty 
prince  to  be  greater  than  God,  we  should  take  liim  for 
a  poor,  ignorant  creature  ;  all  people  would  acknow- 
ledge such  an  imagination  to  be  the  height  of  stupidity. 

But  if  this  same  human  spirit  should  think  it 
better  to  be  devoted  to  some  mighty  prince,  than  to  be 
devoted  to  God,  would  not  this  still  be  a  greater  proof 
of  a  poor,  ignorant,  and  l.)linded  nature  ? 

Yet  this  is  what  all  people  do,  who  think  any  thing 
better,  greater,  or  wiser,  than  a  devout  life. 

So  that  which  way  soever  we  consider  this  matter,  it 
plainly  appears,  that  devotion  is  an  instance  of  great  judg- 


A    SERIOUS    CALL  327 

ment,  of  an  elevated  nature ;  and  the  want  of  devotion 
is  a  certain  proof  of  the  want  of  understanding.  .  .  . 

For  if  there  is  an  infinitely  wise  and  good  Creator, 
in  whom  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being,  whose 
pro^'idence  governs  all  things  in  all  places,  surely  it 
must  be  the  highest  act  of  our  understanding  to  con- 
ceive riglitly  of  Him ;  it  must  be  the  noblest  instance 
of  judgment,  the  most  exalted  temper  of  our  nature, 
to  worship  and  adore  this  universal  providence,  to 
conform  to  its  laws,  to  study  its  wisdom,  and  to  live 
and  act  everywhere,  as  in  the  presence  of  this  in- 
finitely good  and  wise  Creator. 

Now,  he  that  lives  thus,  lives  in  the  spirit  of  devotion. 

And  what  can  show  such  great  parts,  and  so  fine 
an  understanding,  as  to  live  in  this  temper  ? 

For  if  God  is  wisdom,  surely  he  must  be  the  wisest 
man  m  the  world,  who  most  conforms  to  the  wisdom 
of  God,  who  best  obeys  His  providence,  who  enters 
farthest  into  His  designs,  and  does  all  he  can,  that  God's 
will  may  be  done  on  eartli,  as  it  is  done  in  heaven. 

A  devout  man  makes  a  true  use  of  his  reason :  he 
sees  through  the  vanity  of  the  world,  discovers  the 
corruption  of  his  nature,  and  the  blindness  of  his 
passion.  He  lives  by  a  law  which  is  not  visible  to 
vulgar  eyes ;  he  enters  into  the  world  of  spirits ;  he 
compares  the  greatest  things,  sets  eternity  against 
time ;  and  chooses  rather  to  be  for  ever  great  in  the 
presence  of  God  when  he  dies,  than  to  have  the 
greatest  share  of  worldly  pleasure  whilst  he  Hves. 

There  is  nothing,  therefore,  that  shows  so  great  a 
genius,  nothing  that  so  raises  us  above  vulgar  spirits, 
nothing  that  so  plainly  declares  an  heroic  greatness  of 
mind,  as  trreat  devotion. 


328  WHOLLY    FOK    GOD 

Lastly;  courage  and  braveiy  are  words  -of-  a  great 
sound,  and  seem  to  signify  an  heroic  spirit ;.  but  yet 
humility,  which  seems  to  be  the  lowest,  meanest  part 
of  devotion,  is  a  more  certain  argument  of  a  noble  and 
courageous  mind. 

Foi-  humiUty  contends  with  greater  enemies,  is  more 
constantly  engaged,  more  violently  assaulted,  bears 
more,  sufters  more,  and  requires  greater  courage  to 
support  itself,  than  any  instances  of  worldly  bravery. 

A  man  that  dares  be  poor  and  contemptible  in  the 
eyes  of  the  world,  to  approve  himself  to  God ;  that 
resists  and  rejects  all  human  glory,  that  opposes  the 
clamour  of  his  passions,  that  meekly  puts  up  all 
injuries  and  wrongs,  and  dares  stay  for  his  reward  till 
the  invisible  hand  of  God  gives  to  every  one  their 
proper  places,  endures  a  much  greater  trial,  and  exerts 
a  nobler  fortitude,  than  he  that  is  bold  and  daring  in 
the  fire  of  battle.  .  .  . 

I  have  made  this  digression,  for  the  sake  of  those  who 
think  a  great  devotion  to  be  bigotry  and  poorness  of  spirit ; 
that  by  these  considerations  they  may  see  how  poor  and 
mean  all  other  tempers  are,  if  compared  to  it  ;  that  they 
may  see,  that  all  worldly  attainments,  whether  of  great- 
ness, wisdom,  or  bravery,  are  but  empty  sounds ;  and 
there  is  notning  wise,  or  great,  or  noble,  in 
an  human  spirit,  but  rightly  to  know  and 
heartily  worship  and  adore  the  great  God, 
that  is  the  support  and  life  of  all  spirits, 
whether  in  heaven  or  on  earth. 


MORRISON    AM)   GIBB,    PRINTKUS,    F.DINBLnCill. 


THE   NEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 
REFERENCE  DEPARTMENT 


This  book  is 
tak 

under  no  circumstances  to  be 
en  from  the  Building                           1 

1 

1^  K- 

Dfil  I 

aoT  ^    i^u 

1 

}M  Z 

)9^^  ?.  .  '^  , 

<3f 


