NYPL  RESEARCH  LIBRARIES 


3  3433  07994702  8 


m 


■^6 

WITH  CHRIST 


IN  THE 


SCHOOL  OF  PRAYER  ; 


CJougits  on  our  Erammgfor  tSei^mistrg 
of  $ntercei5!S(on» 


BY 

Rev.  ANDREW  MURRAY. 


*'LORD,    TEACH   US    TO    PRAY.' 


THE  RODGERS  COMPANY 


THE   NLW  YOBr 
PUBLIC  LIBRARY 


54  A 


ASTOR,   LENOX   AND 

TILDEN  FOUNDATIONS 

R  1921  L 


PREFACE. 


OF  all  the  promises  connected  with  the  command, 
"Abide  in  me,"  there  is  none  higher,  and  none 
that  sooner  brings  the  confession,  *'  Not  that  I  have 
already  attained,  or  am  already  made  perfect,"  than 
this  :  "If  ye  abide  in  me,  ask  whatsoever  ye  will,  and 
it  shall  be  done  unto  you. ' '  Power  with  God  is  the 
highest  attainment  of  the  life  of  full  abiding. 

And  of  all  the  traits  of  a  Hfe  Like  Christ  there  is 
none  higher  and  more  glorious  than  conformity  to 
Him  in  the  work  that  now  engages  Him  without 
ceasing  in  the  Father's  presence — His  all-prevailing 
intercession.  The  more  we  abide  in  Him,  and  grow 
unto  His  likeness,  will  His  priestly  life  work  in  us 
mightily,  and  our  life  become  what  His  is,  a  life  that 
ever  pleads  and  prevails  for  men. 

"  Thou  hast  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God." 
Both  in  the  king  and  the  priest  the  chief  thing  is 
power,  influence,  blessing.  In  the  king  it  is  the  power 
coming  downward  ;  in  the  priest,  the  power  rising 
upward,  prevailing  with  God.  In  our  blessed  Priest- 
King,  Jesus  Christ,  the  kingly  power  is  founded  on 
the  priestly  "  He  is  able  lo  save  to  the  uttermost,  be- 
cause He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession."  In  us, 
3 


Preface. 

His  priests  and  kings,  it  is  no  otherwise ;  it  is  in  inter- 
cession that  the  Church  is  to  find  and  wield  its  highest 
power,  that  each  member  of  the  Church  is  to  prove 
his  descent  from  Israel,  who  as  a  prince  had  power 
with  God  and  with  men,  and  prevailed. 

It  is  under  a  deep  impression  that  the  place  and 
power  of  prayer  in  the  Christian  life  is  too  little  un- 
derstood, that  this  book  has  been  written.  I  feel  sure 
that  as  long  as  we  look  on  prayer  chiefly  as  the  means 
of  maintaining  our  own  Christian  life,  we  shall  not 
know  fully  what  it  is  meant  to  be.  But  when  we  learn 
to  regard  it  as  the  highest  part  of  the  work  entrusted 
to  us,  the  root  and  strength  of  all  other  work,  we  shall 
see  that  there  is  nothing  that  we  so  need  to  study  and 
practise  as  the  art  of  praying  aright.  If  I  have  at  all 
succeeded  in  pointing  out  the  progressive  teaching  of 
our  Lord  in  regard  to  prayer,  and  the  distinct  refer- 
ence the  wonderful  promises  of  the  last  night  (John 
xiv.  i6)  have  to  the  works  we  are  to  do  in  His  Name, 
to  the  greater  works,  and  to  the  bearing  much  fruit, 
we  shall  all  admit  that  it  is  only  when  the  Church 
gives  herself  up  to  this  holy  work  of  intercession  that 
we  can  expect  the  power  of  Christ  to  manifest  itself 
in  her  behalf.  It  is  my  prayer  that  God  may  use  this 
little  book  to  make  clearer  to  some  of  His  children 
the  wonderful  place  of  power  and  influence  which  He 
is  waiting  for  them  to  occupy,  and  for  which  a  weary 
world  is  waiting,  too. 

In  connection  with  this  there  is  another  truth  that 
has  come  to  me  with  wonderful  clearness  as  I  studied 
the  teaching  of  Jesus  on  pra)^er.  It  is  this :  that  the 
4 


Preface. 

Father  waits  to  hear  every  prayer  of  faith,  to  give  us 
whatsoever  we  will,  and  whatsoever  we  ask  in  Jesus' 
name.  We  have  become  so  accustomed  to  limit  the 
wonderful  love  and  the  large  promises  of  our  God, 
that  we  cannot  read  the  simplest  and  clearest  state- 
ments of  our  Lord  without  the  qualifying  clauses  by 
which  we  guard  and  expound  them.  If  there  is  one 
thing  I  think  the  Church  needs  to  learn,  it  is  that  God 
means  prayer  to  have  an  answer,  and  that  it  hath  not 
entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  what  God 
will  do  for  His  child  who  gives  himself  to  believe  that 
his  prayer  will  be  heard.  God  hears  prayer ;  this  is 
a  truth  universally  admitted,  but  of  which  very  few 
understand  the  meaning,  or  experience  the  power.  If 
what  I  have  written  stir  my  reader  to  go  to  the  Mas- 
ter's words,  and  take  His  wondrous  promises  simply 
and  literally  as  they  stand,  my  object  has  been  at- 
tained. 

And  then  just  one  thing  more.  Thousands  have  in 
these  last  years  found  an  unspeakable  blessing  in 
learning  how  completely  Christ  is  our  life,  and  how 
He  undertakes  to  be  and  to  do  all  in  us  that  we  need. 
I  know  not  if  we  have  yet  learned  to  apply  this  truth 
to  our  prayer-life.  (  Many  complain  that  they  have  not 
the  power  to  pray  in  faith,  to  pray  the  efifectual  prayer 
that  availeth  much.  The  message  I  would  fain  bring 
them  is  that  the  blessed  Jesus  is  waiting,  is  longing, 
to  teach  them  this.  Christ  is  our  Hfe  ;  in  heaven  He 
ever  liveth  to  pray  ;  His  life  in  us  is  an  ever-praying 
life,  if  we  will  but  trust  Him  for  it.  Christ  teaches  us 
to  pray  not  only  by  example,  by  instruction,  by  com- 
5 


Preface. 

mand,  by  promises,  but  by  shozving  us  Himself,  the 
ever-living  Intercessor,  as  our  Life.  It  is  when  we 
believe  this,  and  go  and  abide  in  Him  forour  prayer- 
hfe,  too,  that  our  fears  of  not  being  able  to  pray  aright 
will  vanish,  and  we  shall  joyfully  and  triumphantly 
trust  our  Lord  to  teach  us  to  pray,  to  be  Himself  the 
life  and  the  power  of  our  prayer. 

May  God  open  our  eyes  to  see  what  the  holy  min- 
istry of  intercession  is  to  which,  as  His  royal  priest- 
hood, we  have  been  set  apart.  May  He  give  us  a 
large  and  strong  heart  to  believe  what  mighty  influ- 
ence our  prayers  can  exert.  And  may  all  fear  as  to 
our  being  able  to  fulfil  our  vocation  vanish  as  we  see 
Jesus,  living  ever  to  pray,  living  in  us  to  pray,  and 
standing  surety  for  our  prayer-life. 

Andrew  Murray. 


CONTENTS. 


LESSON  PAGE 

1.  Lord  !  teach  us  to  pray  ;  or.  The  Only  Teacher  .   .        9 

2.  In  spirit  and  truth  ;  or,  The  True  Worshippers  .   .      17 

3.  Pray  to  thy  Father,  which  is  in  secret  ;  or.  Alone 

with  God 24 

4.  After  this  manner  pray  ;  or,  The  Model  Prayer  .   .      32 

5.  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you  ;  or,  The  Certainty 

of  the  Answer  to  Prayer 40 

6.  How  much  more?    or,  The  Infinite  Fatherliness  of 

God 47 

7.  How  MUCH  more  the  Holy  Spirit;  or.  The  All-Com- 

prehensive Gift 56 

8.  Because  of  his  importunity  ;  or.  The  Boldness  of  God's 

Friends 63 

9.  Pray  the  Lord  of  the  Harvest;  or,  Prayer  provides 

Laborers 71 

10.  What  wilt  thou  ?  or.  Prayer  must  be  definite  ...      78 

11.  Believe  that  ye  have  received;  or.  The  Faith  that 

takes 85 

12.  Have  faith   in  God;    or.   The  Secret  of  Believing 

Prayer 93 

13.  By  Prayer  and  Fasting  ;   or.  The  Cure  of  Unbelief  101 

14.  When  ye  stand  praying,  forgive  ;  or,  Prayer  and  Love  110 

7 


Contents. 


LESSON  PAGB 

15.  If  two  agree  ;  or,  The  Power  of  United   Prayer  .  .    117 

16.  Speedily,  though  bearing  long;   or,   The   Power  of 

Persevering  Prayer 124 

17.  I  KNOW  that  Thou  hearest   me  always  ;   or.  Prayer 

in  Harmony  with  the  Being  of   God 135 

18.  Whose  is  this  image?   or.  Prayer   in   Harmony  with 

THE  Destiny  of  Man 143 

19.  I  go  unto  the  Father  :  or.  Power  for  Praying   and 

Working 150 

20.  That  the  Father  may  be  glorified;  or,  The   Chief 

End  of  Prayer 157 

21.  If  ye  abide  in  mr  ;  or,  The  All-Inclusive  Condition  165 

22.  My  words  in  you;  or,  The  Word  and  Prayer  ....    175 

23.  Bear  fruit,  that  the  Father  may  give  what  ye  ask  : 

OR,  Obedience  the  Path  to  Power  in   Prayer  .   .    182 

24.  In  my  Name;  or.  The  All-Prevailing  Plea 190 

25.  At  that  day  ;  or.  The  Holy  Spirit  and  Prayer  .  .   .    200 
2G.     I  have  prayed  for  thee;  or,  Christ  the  Intercessor  209 

27.  Father!  I  will;  or,  Christ  the  High  Priest.   ,   .   .    219 

28.  Father!  not  what  I  will;  or,  Christ  the  Sacrifice  226 

29.  According  to  His  will;  or,   Our  Boldness  in  Prayer  234 

30.  An  holy  priesthood  ;  or.  The  Ministry  of  Intercession  244 

31.  Pray  without  ceasing;  or,  A  Life  of  Prayer.   .   .   .    252 


George   Muller,    and   the   Secret   of  his   Power  in 

Prayer 259 

8 


lEitlj  Christ  in  t\t  Stfjoal  of  ^ragtr. 


FIRST  I.BSSON. 

**  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray  ;**  or,  The  Only  Teacher. 

And  it  came  to  pass,  as  He  was  praying  in  a  certain  place, 
that  when  He  ceased,  one  of  His  disciples  said  to  Him,  Lord, 
teach  us  to  pray, — LuKE  xi.  I. 

THE  disciples  had  been  with  Christ  and  seen  Him 
pray.  They  had  learned  to  understand  some- 
thing of  the  connection  between  His  wondrous  life  in 
public,  and  His  secret  life  of  prayer.  They  had  learned 
to  believe  in  Him  as  a  Master  in  the  art  of  prayer 
— none  could  pray  like  Him.  And  so  they  came  to 
Him  with  the  request,  "Lord,  teach  us  how  to  pray." 
And  in  after  years  they  would  have  told  us  that 
there  were  few  things  more  wonderful  or  blessed 
that  He  taught  them  than  His  lessons  on  prayer. 

And  now  still  it  comes  to  pass,  as  He  is  praying 
in  a  certain  place,  that  disciples  who  see  Him  thus 
engaged  feel  the  need  of  repeating  the  same  request, 
"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray."  As  we  grow  in  the  Chris- 
tian life,  the  thought  and  the  faith  of  the  Beloved 
Master  in  His  never-failing  intercession  becomes  ever 
9 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

more  precious,  and  the  hope  of  being  like  Christ 
in  His  intercession  gains  an  attractiveness  before 
unknown.  And  as  we  see  Him  pray,  and  remember 
that  there  is  none  who  can  pray  like  Him,  and  none 
who  can  teach  like  Him,  we  feel  the  petition  of  the 
disciples,  "Lord,  teach  us  to  pray,"  is  just  what  we 
need.  And  as  we  think  how  all  He  is  and  has,  how 
He  Himself  is  our  very  own,  how  He  is  Himself  our 
life,  we  feel  assured  that  we  have  but  to  ask,  and  He 
will  be  delighted  to  take  us  up  into  closer  fellow- 
ship with  Himself,  and  teach  us  to  pray  even  as  He 
prays. 

Come,  my  brothers !  Shall  we  not  go  to  the 
Blessed  Master  and  ask  Him  to  enrol  our  names 
too  anew  in  that  school  which  He  always  keeps  open 
for  those  who  long  to  continue  their  studies  in  the 
Divine  art  of  prayer  and  intercession  ?  Yes,  let  us 
this  very  day  say  to  the  Master,  as  they  did  of  old, 
"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray."  As  we  meditate,  we  shall 
find  each  word  of  the  petition  we  bring  to  be  full  of 
meaning. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray.'"  Yes,  to  pray.  That  is 
what  we  need  to  be  taught.  Though  in  its  begin- 
nings prayer  is  so  simple  that  the  feeblest  child  can 
pray,  yet  it  is  at  the  same  time  the  highest  and  holiest 
work  to  which  man  can  rise.  It  is  fellowship  with 
the  Unseen  and  Most  Holy  One.  The  powers  of  the 
eternal  world  have  been  placed  at  its  disposal.  It  is 
the  very  essence  of  true  religion,  the  channel  of  all 
blessings,  the  secret  of  power  and  life.  Not  only  for 
ourselves,  but  for  others,  for  the  Church,  for  the 
lo 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

world,  it  is  to  prayer  that  God  has  given  the  right  to 
take  hold  of  Him  and  His  strength.  It  is  on  prayer 
that  the  promises  wait  for  their  fulfilment,  the  king- 
dom for  its  coming,  the  glory  of  God  for  its  full  reve- 
lation. And  for  this  blessed  work,  how  slothful  and 
unfit  we  are.  It  is  only  the  Spirit  of  God  can  enable 
us  to  do  it  aright.  How  speedily  we  are  deceived 
into  a  resting  in  the  form,  while  the  power  is  wanting. 
Our  early  training,  the  teaching  of  the  Church,  the  in- 
fluence of  habit,  the  stirring  of  the  emotions — how 
easily  these  lead  to  prayer  which  has  no  spiritual 
power,  and  avails  but  little.  True  prayer,  that  takes 
hold  of  God's  strength,  that  availeth  much,  to  which 
the  gates  of  heaven  are  really  opened  wide — who 
would  not  cry,  Oh  for  some  one  to  teach  me  thus  to 
pray? 

Jesus  has  opened  a  school,  in  which  He  trains  His 
redeemed  ones,  who  specially  desire  it,  to  have  power 
in  prayer.  Shall  we  not  enter  it  with  the  petition. 
Lord  !  it  is  just  this  we  need  to  be  taught !  O  teach 
us  \.opray. 

"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray."  Yes,  tis,  Lord.  We  have 
read  in  Thy  Word  with  what  power  Thy  believing 
people  of  old  used  to  pray,  and  what  mighty  wonders 
were  done  in  answer  to  their  prayers.  And  if  this 
took  place  under  the  Old  Covenant,  in  the  time  of 
preparation,  how  much  more  wilt  Thou  not  now,  in 
these  days  of  fulfilment,  give  Thy  people  this  sure 
sign  of  Thy  presence  in  their  midst.  We  have  heard 
the  promises  given  to  Thine  apostles  of  the  power  of 
praj^er  in  Thy  name,  and  have  seen  how  gloriously 
II 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

they  experienced  their  truth  ;  we  know  for  certain, 
they  can  become  true  to  us  too.  We  hear  continu- 
ally even  in  these  days  what  glorious  tokens  of  Thy 
power  Thou  dost  still  give  to  those  who  trust  Thee 
fully.  Lord  !  these  all  are  men  of  like  passions  with 
ourselves  ;  teach  us  to  pray  so  too.  The  promises  are 
for  us,  the  powers  and  gifts  of  the  heavenly  world  are 
for  us.  O  teach  ns  to  pray  so  that  we  may  receive 
abundantly.  To  us  too  Thou  hast  entrusted  Thy 
work,  on  our  prayer  too  the  coming  of  Thy  kingdom 
depends,  in  our  prayer  too,  Thou  canst  glorify  Thy 
name;  "  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray."  Yes,  us,  Lord; 
we  offer  ourselves  as  learners;  we  would  indeed  be 
taught  of  Thee.     "  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 

"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray."  Yes,  we  feel  the  need 
now  of  being  taught  to  pray.  At  first  there  is  no 
work  appears  so  simple  ;  later  on,  none  that  is  more 
difficult ;  and  the  confession  is  forced  from  us  :  We 
know  not  how  to  pray  as  we  ought.  It  is  true  we 
have  God's  Word,  with  its  clear  and  sure  promises  ; 
but  sin  has  so  darkened  our  mind,  that  we  know  not 
always  how  to  apply  the  Word.  In  spiritual  things 
we  do  not  always  seek  the  most  needful  things  or 
fail  in  praying  according  to  the  law  of  the  sanctuary. 
In  temporal  things  we  are  still  less  able  to  avail  our- 
selves of  the  wonderful  liberty  our  Father  has  given 
us  to  ask  what  we  need.  And  even  when  we  know 
what  to  ask,  how  much  there  is  still  needed  to  make 
prayer  acceptable.  It  must  be  to  the  glory  of  God,  in 
full  surrender  to  His  will,  in  full  assurance  of  faith, 
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  with  a  perseverance  that, 

12 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

if  need  be,  refuses  to  be  denied.  All  this  must  be 
learned.  It  can  only  be  learned  in  the  school  of  much 
prayer,  for  practice  makes  perfect.  Amid  the  painful 
consciousness  of  ignorance  and  unworthiness,  in  the 
struggle  between  believing  and  doubting,  the  heav- 
enly art  of  effectual  prayer  is  learnt.  Because  even 
when  we  do  not  remember  it,  there  is  One,  the  Be- 
ginner and  Finisher  of  faith  and  prayer,  who  watches 
over  our  praying,  and  sees  to  it  that  i7i  all  who  trust 
Him  for  it  their  education  in  the  school  of  prayer 
shall  be  carried  on  to  perfection.  Let  but  the  deep 
undertone  of  all  our  prayer  be  the  teachableness  that 
comes  from  a  sense  of  ignorance,  and  from  faith  in 
Him  as  a  perfect  teacher,  and  we  may  be  sure  we 
shall  be  taught,  we  shall  learn  to  pray  in  power.  Yes, 
we  may  depend  upon  it,  He  teaches  to  pray. 

"  ZcT^,  teach  us  to  pray."  None  can  teach  like 
Jesus,  none  but  Jesus ;  therefore  we  call  on  Him, 
"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray."  A  pupil  needs  a  teacher 
who  knows  his  work,  who  has  the  gift  of  teaching, 
who  in  patience  and  love  will  descend  to  the  pupil's 
needs.  Blessed  be  God  !  Jesus  is  all  this,  and  much 
more.  He  knows  what  prayer  is.  It  is  Jesus,  pray- 
ing Himself,  who  teaches  to  pray.  He  knows  what 
prayer  is.  He  learned  it  amid  the  trials  and  tears  of 
His  earthly  life.  In  heaven  it  is  still  His  beloved 
work;  His  life  there  is  prayer.  Nothing  delights 
Him  more  than  to  find  those  whom  He  can  take 
with  Him  into  the  Father's  presence,  whom  He  can 
clothe  with  power  to  pray  down  God's  blessing  on 
those  around  them,  whom  He  can  train  to  be  His 
13 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

fellow-workers  in  the  intercession  by  which  the  king- 
dom is  to  be  revealed  on  earth.  He  knows  how  to 
teach.  Now  by  the  urgency  of  felt  need,  then  by  the 
confidence  with  which  joy  inspires.  Here  by  the 
teaching  of  the  Word,  there  by  the  testimony  of 
another  believer  who  knows  what  it  is  to  have  prayer 
heard.  By  His  Holy  Spirit  he  has  access  to  our 
heart,  and  teaches  us  to  pray  by  showing  us  the  sin 
that  hinders  the  prayer,  or  giving  us  the  assurance 
that  we  please  God.  He  teaches,  by  giving  not  only 
thoughts  of  what  to  ask  or  how  to  ask,  but  by 
breathing  within  us  the  very  spirit  of  prayer,  by 
living  within  us  as  the  Great  Intercessor.  We  may, 
indeed,  and  most  joyfully,  say,  "Who  teacheth  like 
Him?"  Jesus  never  taught  His  disciples  how  to 
preach,  only  how  to  pray.  He  did  not  speak  much 
of  what  was  needed  to  preach  well,  but  much  of 
praying  well.  To  know  how  to  speak  to  God  is 
more  than  knowing  how  to  speak  to  man.  Not 
power  with  men,  but  power  with  God  is  the  first 
thing.    Jesus  loves  to  teach  us  how  to  pray. 

What  think  you,  my  beloved  fellow-disciples! 
would  it  not  be  just  what  we  need,  to  ask  the  Master 
for  a  month  to  give  us  a  course  of  special  lessons  on 
the  art  of  prayer?  As  we  meditate  on  the  words 
He  spake  on  earth,  let  us  yield  ourselves  to  his  teach- 
ing in  the  fullest  confidence  that  with  such  a  teacher 
we  shall  make  progress.  Let  us  take  time,  not  only 
to  meditate,  but  to  pray,  to  tarry  at  the  foot  of  the 
throne,  and  be  trained  to  the  work  of  intercession. 
Let  us  do  so  in  the  assurance  that  amidst  our  stam- 
14 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

merings  and  fears  He  is  carrying  on  His  work  most 
beautifully.  He  will  breathe  His  own  life,  which  is 
all  prayer,  into  us.  As  He  makes  us  partakers  of 
His  righteousness  and  His  life,  He  will  of  His  inter- 
cession, too.  As  the  members  of  His  body,  as  a 
holy  priesthood,  we  shall  take  part  in  His  priestly 
work  of  pleading  and  prevailing  with  God  for  men. 
Yes,  let  us  most  joyfully  say,  ignorant  and  feeble 
though  we  be,  ''Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord !  who  ever  livest  to  pray,  Thou 
canst  teach  me  too  to  pray,  me  too  to  live  ever  to 
pray.  In  this  Thou  lovest  to  make  me  share  Thy 
glory  in  heaven,  that  I  should  pray  without  ceasing, 
and  ever  stand  as  a  priest  in  the  presence  of  my 
God. 

Lord  Jesus  !  I  ask  Thee  this  day  to  enrol  my 
name  among  those  who  confess  that  they  know  not 
how  to  pray  as  they  ought,  and  specially  ask  Thee 
for  a  course  of  teaching  in  prayer.  Lord  !  teach  me 
to  tarry  with  Thee  in  the  school,  and  give  Thee  time 
to  train  me.  May  a  deep  sense  of  my  ignorance, 
of  the  wonderful  privilege  and  power  of  prayer,  of 
the  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  Spirit  of  prayer, 
lead  me  to  cast  away  my  thoughts  of  what  I  think  I 
know,  and  make  me  kneel  before  Thee  in  true  teach- 
ableness and  poverty  of  spirit. 

And  fill  me,  Lord,  with  the  confidence  that  with 
such  a  teacher  as  Thou  art  I  shall  learn  to  pray. 
15 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

In  the  assurance  that  I  have  as  my  teacher,  Jesus, 
who  is  ever  praying  to  the  Father,  and  by  His 
prayer  rules  the  destinies  of  His  Church  and  the 
world,  I  will  not  be  afraid.  As  much  as  I  need  to 
know  of  the  mysteries  of  the  prayer-world,  Thou  wilt 
unfold  for  me.  And  when  I  may  not  know,  Thou 
wilt  teach  me  to  be  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to 
God. 

Blessed  Lord !  Thou  wilt  not  put  to  shame  Thy 
scholar  who  trusts  Thee,  nor,  by  Thy  grace,  would 
he  Thee,  either.    Amen. 


i6 


SECOND  LESSON. 

"  In  spirit  and  truth :  *'  or,  The  True  Worshippers. 

The  hour  Cometh^  and  now  is,  when  the  true  worship- 
pers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  truth;  for  such 
doth  the  Father  seek  to  be  His  worshippers.  God  is  a 
Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in 
spirit  and  truth. — John  IV.  23,  24. 

THESE  words  of  Jesus  to  the  woman  of  Samaria 
are  His  first  recorded  teaching  on  the  subject  of 
prayer.  They  give  us  some  wonderful  first  gUmpses 
into  the  world  of  prayer.  The  Father  seeks  worship- 
pers ;  our  worship  satisfies  His  loving  heart  and  is  a 
joy  to  him.  He  seeks  true  worshippers,  but  finds 
many  not  such  as  he  would  have  them.  True  wor- 
ship is  that  which  is  in  spirit  and  truth.  The  So7i  has 
come  to  open  the  way  for  this  worship  in  spirit  and  in 
truth,  and  teach  it  us.  And  so  one  of  our  first  lessons 
in  the  school  of  prayer  must  be  to  understand  what 
it  is  to  pray  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  to  know  how 
we  can  attain  to  it. 

To  the  woman  of  Samaria  our  Lord  spoke  of  a 
threefold  worship.  There  is  first,  the  ignorant  wor- 
ship of  the  Samaritans:  "Ye  worship  that  which 
ye  know  not."  The  second,  the  intelligent  worship 
of  the  Jew,  having  the  true  knowledge  of  God  : 
2  17 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

"  We  worship  that  which  we  know,  for  salvation  is  of 
the  Jews."  And  then  the  new,  the  spiritual  worship 
which  He  Himself  has  come  to  introduce:  "The 
hour  is  coming,  and  is  now,  when  the  true  worship- 
pers shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  truth.'' 
From  the  connection  it  is  evident  that  the  words 
"in  spirit  and  truth"  do  not  mean,  as  is  often 
thought,  earnestly,  from  the  heart,  in  sincerity.  The 
Samaritans  had  the  five  books  of  Moses  and  some 
knowledge  of  God  ;  there  was  doubtless  more  than 
one  among  them  who  honestly  and  earnestly  sought 
God  in  prayer.  The  Jews  had  ^the  true  full  revela- 
tion of  God  in  His  word,  as  thus  far  given;  there 
were  among  them  godly  men,  who  called  upon  God 
with  their  whole  heart.  And  yet  not  "  in  spirit  and 
truth,"  in  the  full  meaning  of  the  words.  Jesus  says, 
**  The  hour  is  coming^  and  now  is:''''  it  is  only  in 
and  through  Him  that  the  worship  of  God  will  be  in 
spirit  and  truth. 

Among  Christians  one  still  finds  the  three  classes 
of  worshippers.  Some  who  in  their  ignorance  hardly 
know  what  they  ask ;  they  pray  earnestly,  and  yet 
receive  but  little.  Others  there  are,  who  have 
more  correct  knowledge,  who  try  to  pray  with  all 
their  mind  and  heart,  and  often  pray  most  earnestly, 
and  yet  do  not  attain  to  the  full  blessedness  of  wor- 
ship in  spirit  and  truth.  It  is  into  this  third  class  we 
must  ask  our  Lord  Jesus  to  take  us ;  we  must  be 
taught  of  Him  how  to  worship  in  spirit  and  truth. 
This  alone  is  spiritual  worship  ;  this  makes  us  wor- 
shippers such  as  the  Father  seeks.     In  prayer  every- 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

thing  will  depend  on  our  understanding  well  and 
practising  the  worship  in  spirit  and  truth. 

*'  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  Him  must 
worship  Him  iit  spirit  and  truth."  The  first  thought 
suggested  here  by  the  Master  is  that  there  must  be 
harmony  between  God  and  His  worshippers  ;  such 
asGodis,  must  His  worship  be.  This  is  according 
to  a  principle  which  prevails  throughout  the  universe : 
we  look  for  correspondence  between  an  object  and 
the  organ  to  which  it  reveals  or  yields  itself.  The 
eye  has  an  inner  fitness  for  the  light,  the  ear  for 
sound.  The  man  who  would  truly  wership  God, 
would  find  and  know  and  possess  and  enjoy  God, 
must  be  in  harmony  with  Him,  must  have  the  capacity 
for  receiving  Him.  Because  God  is  Spirit.,  we  must 
worship  in  spirit.    As  God  is,  so  His  worshipper. 

And  what  does  this  mean  ?  The  woman  had  asked 
our  Lord  whether  Samaria  or  Jerusalem  was  the  true 
place  of  worship.  He  answers  that  henceforth  wor- 
ship is  no  longer  to  be  limited  to  a  certain  place : 
*'  Woman,  believe  Me,  the  hour  cometh,  when  neither 
in  this  mountain,  nor  in  Jerusalem,  shall  ye  worship 
the  Father."  As  God  is  Spirit,  not  bound  by  space 
or  time,  but  in  His  infinite  perfection  always  and 
everywhere  the  same,  so  His  worship  would  hence- 
forth no  longer  be  confined  by  place  or  form,  but 
spiritual  as  God  Himself  is  spiritual.  A  lesson  of 
deep  importance.  How  much  our  Christianity  suffers 
from  this,  that  it  is  confined  to  certain  times  and 
places  ?  A  man  who  seeks  to  pray  earnestly  in  the 
church  or  in  the  closet,  spends  the  greater  part  of  the 
19 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

week  or  the  day  in  a  spirit  entirely  at  variance  with 
that  in  which  he  prayed.  His  worship  was  the  work 
of  a  fixed  place  or  hour,  not  of  his  whole  being. 
God  is  a  Spirit;  He  is  the  Everlasting  and  Unchange- 
able One ;  what  He  is,  He  is  always  and  in  truth. 
Our  worship  must  even  so  be  in  spirit  and  truth 
His  worship  must  be  the  spirit  of  our  life ;  our  life 
must  be  worship  in  spirit  as  God  is  Spirit. 

"  God  is  a  Spirit ;  and  they  that  worship  Him 
must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  truth."  The  second 
thought  that  comes  to  us  is  that  this  worship  in  the 
spirit  must  come  from  God  himself.  God  is  Spirit ; 
He  alone  has  Spirit  to  give.  It  was  for  this  He 
sent  His  Son  to  fit  us  for  such  spiritual  worship  by 
giving  us  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  of  His  own  work 
that  Jesus  speaks  when  He  says  twice,  "The  hour 
Cometh,"  and  then  adds,  "and  is  now."  He  came  to 
baptize  with  the  Holy  Spirit ;  tlie  Spirit  could  not 
stream  forth  till  He  was  glorified  (John  i.  33  ;  vii.  37, 
38;  xvi.  7).  It  was  when  He  had  made  an  end  of 
sin,  and  entering  into  the  Holiest  of  all  with  His 
blood,  had  there  on  our  behalf  received  the  Holy 
Spirit  (Acts  ii.  33),  that  He  could  send  Him  down 
to  us  as  the  Spirit  of  the  Father.  It  was  when 
Christ  had  redeemed  us,  and  we  in  Him  had  received 
the  position  of  children,  that  the  Father  sent  forth 
the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  our  hearts  to  cry,  ''Abba, 
Father."  The  worship  in  spirit  is  the  worship  of 
the  Father  in  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  Spirit  of  Son- 
ship. 

This  is  the  reason  why  Jesus  here  uses  the  name 
20 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

of  Father.  We  never  find  one  of  the  Old  Testament 
saints  personally  appropriate  the  name  of  child  or 
call  God  his  Father.  The  worship  of  the  Father  is 
only  possible  to  those  to  whom  the  Spirit  of  the  Son 
has  been  given.  The  worship  iji  spirit  is  only  possi- 
ble to  those  to  whom  the  Son  has  revealed  the 
Father,  and  who  have  received  the  spirit  of  Sonship. 
It  is  only  Christ  who  opens  the  way  and  teaches  the 
worship  in  spirit. 

And  in  truth.  That  does  not  only  mean  in  sin- 
cerity. Nor  does  it  only  signify,  in  accordance  with 
the  truth  of  God's  Word.  The  expression  is  one  of 
deep  and  Divine  meaning.  Jesus  is  "  the  only-begot- 
ten of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth.^^  "The 
law  was  given  by  Moses ;  grace  and  truth  came  by 
Jesus  Christ."  Jesus  says,  ''lam  the  truth  and  the 
life."  In  the  Old  Testament  all  was  shadow  and 
promise  ;  Jesus  brought  and  gives  the  realty,  the  sub- 
stance, of  things  hoped  for.  In  Him  the  blessings 
and  powers  of  the  eternal  life  are  our  actual  posses- 
sion and  experience.  Jesus  is  full  of  grace  and  truth; 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  truth  ;  through  Him 
the  grace  that  is  in  Jesus  is  ours  in  deed  and  truth,  a 
positive  communication  out  of  the  Divine  life.  And 
so  worship  in  spirit  is  worship  t7i  truth  ;  actual  living 
fellowship  with  God  a  real  correspondence  and  har- 
mony between  the  Father,  who  is  a  Spirit,  and  the 
child  praying  in  the  spirit. 

What  Jesus  said  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  she 
could  not  at  once  understand.  Pentecost  was  needed 
to  reveal  its  full  meaning.     We  are  hardly  prepared 

21 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

at  our  first  entrance  into  the  school  of  prayer  to 
grasp  such  teaching.  We  shall  understand  it  better 
later  on.  Let  us  only  begin  and  take  the  lesson  as 
He  gives  it.  We  are  carnal  and  cannot  bring  God 
the  worship  He  seeks.  But  Jesus  came  to  give  the 
Spirit ;  He  has  given  Him  to  us.  Let  the  disposition 
in  which  we  set  ourselves  to  pray  be  what  Christ's 
words  have  taught  us.  Let  there  be  the  deep  con- 
fession of  our  inability  to  bring  God  the  worship  that 
is  pleasing  to  Him  ;  the  childlike  teachableness  that 
waits  on  Him  to  instruct  us ;  the  simple  faith  that 
yields  itself  to  the  breathing  of  the  Spirit.  Above  all, 
let  us  hold  fast  the  blessed  truth — we  shall  find  that 
the  Lord  has  more  to  say  to  us  about  it — that  the 
knowledge  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  the  revelation 
of  His  infinite  Fatherliness  in  our  hearts,  the  faith  in 
the  infinite  love  that  gives  us  His  Son  and  His  Spirit 
to  make  us  children,  is  indeed  the  secret  of  prayer  in 
spirit  and  truth.  This  is  the  new  and  living  way 
Christ  opened  up  for  us.  To  have  Christ  the  Son, 
and  the  Spirit  of  the  Son,  dwelling  within  us,  and  re- 
vealing the  Father,  this  makes  us  true,  spiritual  wor- 
shippers. 

' '  Lord  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord  !  I  adore  the  love  with  which  Thou 
didst  teach  a  woman,  who  had  refused  Thee  a  cup  of 
water,  what  the  worship  of  God  must  be.  I  rejoice 
in  the  assurance  that  Thou  wilt  no  less  now  instruct 
Thy  disciple,  who  comes  to  Thee  with  a  heart  that 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

longs  to  pray  in  spirit   and  in  truth.     O  my   Holy 
Master  !  do  teach  me  this  blessed  secret. 

Teach  me  that  the  worship  in  spirit  and  truth  is  not 
of  man,  but  only  comes  from  Thee  ;  that  it  is  not  only 
a  thing  of  times  and  seasons,  but  the  outflowing  of  a 
life  in  Thee.  Teach  me  to  draw  near  to  God  in 
prayer  under  the  deep  impression  of  my  ignorance 
and  my  having  nothing  in  myself  to  offer  Him,  and 
at  the  same  time  of  the  provision  Thou,  my  Saviour, 
makest  for  the  Spirit's  breathing  in  my  childlike 
stammerings.  I  do  bless  Thee  that  in  Thee  I  am  a 
child,  and  have  a  child's  liberty  of  access  ;  that  in 
Thee  I  have  the  spirit  of  Sonship  and  of  worship  in 
truth.  Teach  me,  above  all,  Blessed  Son  of  the 
Father,  how  it  is  the  revelation  of  the  Father  that 
gives  confidence  in  prayer ;  and  let  the  infinite  Father- 
liness  of  God's  heart  be  my  joy  and  strength  for  a  life 
of  prayer  and  of  worship.  Amen. 
23 


THIRD  LESSON. 

**  Pray  to  thy  Father,  which  is  in  secret ;  **  or, 
Alone  with  God. 

But  thou,  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thine  inner 
cha7nbcr,  and  having  shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy  Father 
which  is  in  secret,  and  thy  Father  which  seeth  in  secret 
shall  recompense  thee. — Matt  vi.  6. 

AFTER  Jesus  had  called  His  first  disciples,  He 
gave  them  their  first  public  teaching  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  ]\Iount.  He  there  expounded  to  them 
the  kingdom  of  God,  its  laws  and  its  life.  In  that 
kingdom  God  is  not  only  King,  but  Father  ;  He  not 
only  gives  all,  but  is  Himself  all.  In  the  knowledge 
and  fellowship  of  Him  alone  is  its  blessedness. 
Hence  it  came  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  revela- 
tion of  prayer  and  the  prayer-life  was  a  part  of  His 
teaching  concerning  the  New  Kingdom  He  came  to 
set  up.  Moses  gave  neither  command  nor  regulation 
with  regard  to  prayer ;  even  the  prophets  say  little 
directly  of  the  duty  of  prayer ;  it  is  Christ  who 
teaches  to  pray. 

And  the  first  thing  the  Lord  teaches  His  disciples 

is  that  they  must  have  a  secret  place  for  prayer  ; 

every  one  must  have  some  solitary  spot  where  he  can 

be  alone  with  his  God.     Every  teacher  must  have  a 

24 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

schoolroom.  We  have  learned  to  know  and  accept 
Jesus  as  our  only  teacher  in  the  school  of  prayer.  He 
has  already  taught  us  at  Samaria  that  worship  is  no 
longer  confined  to  times  and  places ;  that  worship, 
spiritual  true  worship,  is  a  thing  of  the  spirit  and  the 
life ;  the  whole  man  must  in  his  whole  life  wor- 
ship in  spirit  and  truth.  And  yet  he  wants  each  one 
to  choose  for  himself  the  fixed  spot  where  He  can 
daily  meet  Him.  That  inner  chamber,  that  solitary 
place,  is  Jesus'  schoolroom.  That  spot  may  be  any- 
where ;  that  spot  may  change  from  day  to  day  if  we 
have  to  change  our  abode  ;  but  that  secret  place 
there  must  be,  with  the  quiet  time  in  which  the  pupil 
places  himself  in  the  Master's  presence,  to  be  by  Him 
prepared  to  worship  the  Father.  There  alone,  but 
there  most  surely,  Jesus  comes  to  us  to  teach  us  to 
pray. 

A  teacher  is  always  anxious  that  his  schoolroom 
should  be  bright  and  attractive,  filled  with  the  light 
and  air  of  heaven ;  a  place  where  pupils  long  to 
come,  and  love  to  stay.  In  His  first  words  on  prayer 
in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  Jesus  seeks  to  set  the 
inner  chamber  before  us  in  its  most  attractive  light. 
If  we  listen  carefully,  we  soon  notice  what  the  chief 
thing  is  He  has  to  tell  us  of  our  tarrying  there. 
Three  times  He  uses  the  name  of  Father  ;  "  Pray  to 
thy  Father ;  "  "  Thy  Father  shall  recompense  thee  ; ' ' 
"  Your  Father  knoweth  what  things  ye  have  need 
of."  The  first  thing  in  closet-prayer  is:  I  must 
meet  my  Father.  The  light  that  shines  in  the  closet 
must  be  the  light  of  the  Father's  countenance.  The 
25 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

fresh  air  from  heaven  with  which  Jesus  would  have 
it  filled,  the  atmosphere  in  which  I  am  to  breathe 
and  pray,  is :  God's  Father-love,  God's  infinite 
Fatherliness.  Thus  each  thought  or  petition  we 
breathe  out  will  be  simple,  hearty,  childlike  trust  in 
the  Father.  This  is  how  the  Master  teaches  us  to 
pray ;  He  brings  us  into  the  Father's  living  presence. 
What  we  pray  there  must  avail.  Let  us  listen  care- 
fully to  hear  what  the  Lord  has  to  say  to  us. 

First,  '■'Pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secrety 
God  is  a  God  who  hides  Himself  to  the  carnal  eye. 
As  long  as  in  our  worship  of  God  we  are  chiefly 
occupied  with  our  own  thoughts  and  exercises,  we 
shall  not  meet  Him  who  is  a  Spirit,  the  unseen  One. 
But  to  the  man  who  withdraws  himself  from  all  that 
is  of  the  world  and  man,  and  prepares  to  wait  upon 
God  alone,  the  Father  will  reveal  Himself.  As  he 
forsakes  and  gives  up  and  shuts  out  the  world,  and 
the  life  of  the  world  and  surrenders  himself  to  be  led 
of  Christ  into  the  secret  of  God's  presence,  the  light 
of  the  Father's  love  will  rise  upon  him.  The  secrecy 
of  the  inner  chamber  and  the  closed  door,  the  entire 
separation  from  all  around  us,  is  an  image  of,  and  so 
a  help  to  that  spiritual  sanctuary,  the  secret  of  God's 
tabernacle,  within  the  veil,  where  our  spirit  truly 
comes  into  contact  with  the  Invisible  One.  And  so  we 
are  taught,  at  the  very  outset  of  our  search  after  the 
secret  of  effectual  prayer,  to  remember  that  it  is  in 
the  inner  chamber,  where  we  are  alone  with  the 
Father,  that  we  shall  learn  to  pray  aright.  The  Father 
is  in  secret ;  in  these  words  Jesus  teaches  us  where 
26 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

He  is  waiting  us,  where  He  is  always  to  be  found. 
Christians  often  complain  that  private  prayer  is  not 
what  it  should  be.  They  feel  weak  and  sinful,  the 
heart  is  cold  and  dark  ;  it  is  as  if  they  have  so  little 
to  pray,  and  in  that  little  no  faith  or  joy.  They  are 
discouraged  and  kept  from  prayer  by  the  thought 
that  they  cannot  come  to  the  Father  as  they  ought 
or  as  they  wish.  Child  of  God !  listen  to  your 
Teacher.  He  tells  you  that  when  you  go  to  private 
prayer  your  first  thought  must  be :  the  Father  is  in 
secret,  the  Father  waits  me  there.  Just  because 
your  heart  is  cold  and  prayerless,  get  you  into  the 
presence  of  the  loving  Father.  As  a  father  pitieth 
his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  you.  Do  not  be 
thinking  of  how  little  you  have  to  bring  God,  but 
of  how  much  He  wants  to  give  you.  Just  place 
yourself  before,  and  look  up  into  His  face  ;  think  of 
His  love,  His  wonderful,  tender,  pitying  love.  Just 
tell  Him  how  sinful  and  cold  and  dark  all  is ;  it  is 
the  Father's  loving  heart  will  give  light  and  warmth 
to  yours.  O  do  what  Jesus  says  :  Just  shut  the  door 
and  pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret.  Is  it  not 
wonderful?  to  be  able  to  go  alone  with  God,  the 
infinite  God.  And  then  to  look  up  and  say :  My 
Father ! 

^^  And  thy  Father  which  seeth  in  secret^  will  recom- 
pense theey  Here  Jesus  assures  us  that  secret 
prayer  cannot  be  fruitless  ;  its  blessing  will  show 
itself  in  our  life.  We  have  but  in  secret,  alone  with 
God,  to  entrust  our  life  before  men  to  Him  ;  He  will 
reward  us  openly ;  He  will  see  to  it  that  the  answer 
27- 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

to  prayer  be  made  manifest  in  His  blessing  upon  us. 
Our  Lord  would  thus  teach  us  that  as  infinite  Father- 
liness  and  Faithfulness  is  that  with  which  God  meets 
us  in  secret,  so  on  our  part  there  should  be  the 
childlike  simpHcity  of  faith,  the  confidence  that 
our  prayer  does  bringdown  a  blessing.  "He  that 
Cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  He  is  a  rewarder 
of  them  that  seek  Him."  Not  on  the  strong  or 
the  fervent  feehng  with  which  I  pray  does  the  bless- 
ing of  the  closet  depend,  but  upon  the  love  and 
the  power  of  the  Father  to  whom  I  there  entrust 
my  needs.  And  therefore  the  Master  has  but  one 
desire  :  Remember  your  Father  is,  and  sees  and 
hears  in  secret ;  go  there  and  stay  there,  and  go  again 
from  there  in  the  confidence  :  He  will  recompense. 
Trust  Him  for  it ;  depend  upon  Him  ;  prayer  to 
the  Father  cannot  be  vain;  He  will  reward  you 
openly. 

Still  further  to  confirm  this  faith  in  the  Father-love 
of  God,  Christ  speaks  a  third  word  :  "  Your  Father 
knoweth  what  thmgs  ye  have  need  of  bcfoj'e  ye  ask 
Him.''  At  first  sight  it  might  appear  as  if  this  thought 
made  prayer  less  needful ;  God  knows  far  better  than 
we  what  we  need.  But  as  we  get  a  deeper  insight 
into  what  prayer  really  is,  this  truth  will  help  much 
to 'strengthen  our  faith.  It  will  teach  us  that  we  do 
not  need,  as  the  heathen,  with  the  multitude  and  urg- 
ency of  our  words,  to  compel  an  unwilling  God  to 
listen  to  us.  It  will  lead  to  a  holy  thoughtfulness  and 
silence  in  prayer  as  it  suggests  the  question :  Does 
my  Father  really  know  that  I  need  this  ?  It  will, 
•28 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

when  once  we  have  been  led  by  the  Spirit  to  the  cer- 
tainty that  our  request  is  indeed  something  that, 
according  to  the  Word,  we  do  need  for  God's  glory, 
give  us  wonderful  confidence  to  say,  My  Father 
knows  I  need  it  and  must  have  it.  And  if  there  be 
any  delay  in  the  answer,  it  will  teach  us  in  quiet  per- 
severance to  hold  on ;  Father  !  Thou  knowest 
I  need  it.  O  the  blessed  liberty  and  simplicity  of 
a  child  that  Christ  our  Teacher  would  fain  cultivate 
in  us,  as  we  draw  near  to  God  ;  let  us  look  up  to 
the  Father  until  His  Spirit  works  it  in  us.  Let 
us  sometimes  in  our  prayers,  when  we  are  in  dan- 
ger of  being  so  occupied  with  our  fervent,  urgent 
petitions,  as  to  forget  that  the  Father  knows  and 
hears,  let  us  hold  till  and  just  quietly  say :  My  Father 
sees,  my  Father  hears,  my  Father  knows  ;  it  will 
help  our  faith  to  take  the  answer,  and  to  say  :  We 
know  that  we  have  the  petitions  we  have  asked  of 
Him. 

And  now,  all  ye  who  have  anew  entered  the  school 
of  Christ  to  be  taught  to  pray,  take  these  lessons, 
practice  them,  and  trust  Him  to  perfect  you  in  them. 
Dwell  much  in  the  inner  chamber,  with  the  door 
shut — shut  in  from  men,  shut  up  with  God  :  it  is  there 
the  Father  waits  you,  it  is  there  Jesus  will  teach  you 
to  pray.  To  be  alone  in  secret  with  the  Father  ; 
this  be  your  highest  joy.  To  be  assured  that  the 
Father  will  openly  reward  the  secret  prayer,  so  that 
it  cannot  remain  unblessed  ;  this  be  your  strength 
day  by  day.  And  to  know  that  the  Father  knows 
that  you  need  what  you  ask  ;  this  be  your  liberty  to 
29 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

bring  every  need,  in  the  assurance  that  your  God  will 
supply  it  according  to  His  riches  in  glory  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

''Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Saviour!  with  my  whole  heart  I  do  bless 
Thee  for  the  appointment  of  the  inner  chamber,  as 
the  school  where  Thou  meetest  each  of  Thy  pupils 
alone,  and  revealest  to  him  the  Father.  O  my  Lord  ! 
strengthen  my  faith  so  in  the  Father's  tender  love  and 
kindness,  that  as  often  as  I  feel  sinful  or  troubled  , the 
first  instinctive  thought  may  be  to  go  where  I  know 
the  Father  waits  me,  and  where  prayer  never  can  go 
unblessed.  Let  the  thought  that  He  knows  my  need 
before  I  ask,  bring  me,  in  great  restfulness  of  faith, 
to  trust  that  He  will  give  what  His  child  requires.  O 
let  the  place  of  secret  prayer  become  to  me  the  most 
beloved  spot  of  earth. 

And,  Lord  !  hear  me  as  I  pray  that  Thou  wouldest 
everywhere  bless  the  closets  of  Thy  believing  peo- 
ple. Let  Thy  wonderful  revelation  of  a  Father's 
tenderness  free  all  young  Christians  from  every 
thought  of  secret  prayer  as  a  duty  or  a  burden, 
and  lead  them  to  regard  it  as  the  highest  privilege 
of  their  life,  a  joy  and  a  blessing.  Bring  back  all 
who  are  discouraged,  because  they  cannot  find  ought 
to  bring  Thee  in  prayer.  O  give  them  to  under- 
stand that  they  have  only  to  come  with  their  empti- 
ness to  Him  who  has  all  to  give,  and  delights  to 
do  it.  Not,  what  they  have  to  bring  the  Father,  but 
30 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

what  the   Father  waits  to  give  them,  be  their  one 
thought. 

And  bless  especially  the  inner  chamber  of  all  Thy 
servants  who  are  working  for  Thee,  as  the  place 
where  God's  truth  and  God's  grace  is  revealed  to 
them,  where  they  are  daily  anointed  with  fresh  oil, 
where  their  strength  is  renewed,  and  the  blessings 
are  received  in  faith,  with  which  they  are  to  bless 
their  fellow-men.  Lord,  draw  us  all  in  the  closet 
nearer  to  Thyself  and  the  Father.  Amen. 
31 


FOURTH  LESSON. 

**  After  this  manner  pray ;  "  or  the  Model  Prayer. 

After  this    manner   therefore  pray  ye:     Our     Father 
which  art  in  heaven. — Matt.  VI.  9. 

EVERY  teacher  knows  the  power  of  example. 
He  not  only  tells  the  child  what  to  do  and  how 
to  do  it,  but  shows  him  how  it  really  can  be  done. 
In  condescension  to  our  weakness,  our  Heavenly 
Teacher  has  given  us  the  very  words  we  are  to  take 
with  us  as  we  draw  near  to  our  Father.  We  have 
in  them  a  form  of  prayer  in  which  there  breathe  the 
freshness  and  fulness  of  the  Eternal  Life.  So  simple 
that  the  child  can  lisp  it,  so  divinely  rich  that  it  com- 
prehends all  that  God  can  give.  A  form  of  prayer 
that  becomes  the  model  and  inspiration  for  all  other 
prayer,  and  yet  always  draws  us  back  to  itself  as  the 
deepest  utterance  of  our  souls  before  our  God. 

* '  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven  !  ' '  To  appre- 
ciate this  word  of  adoration  aright,  I  must  remember 
that  none  of  the  saints  had  in  Scripture  ever  ventured 
to  address  God  as  their  Father.  The  invocation 
places  us  at  once  in  the  centre  of  the  wonderful  reve- 
lation the  Son  came  to  make  of  His  Father  as  our 
Father,  too.  It  comprehends  the  mystery  of  redemp- 
32 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

tion — Christ  delivering  us  from  the  curse  that  we 
might  become  the  children  of  God.  The  mystery  of 
regeneration — the  Spirit  in  the  new  birth  giving  us 
the  new  life.  And  the  mystery  of  faith — ere  yet  the 
redemption  is  accomplished  or  understood,  the  word 
is  given  on  the  lips  of  the  disciples  to  prepare  them 
for  the  blessed  experience  still  to  come.  The  words 
are  the  key  to  the  whole  prayer,  to  all  prayer.  It 
takes  time,  it  takes  life  to  study  them ;  it  will  take 
eternity  to  understand  them  fully.  The  knowledge 
of  God's  Father-love  is  the  first  and  simplest,  but 
also  the  last  and  highest  lesson  in  the  school  of 
prayer.  It  is  in  the  personal  relation  to  the  living 
God,  and  the  personal  conscious  fellowship  of  love 
with  Himself  that  prayer  begins.  It  is  in  the  know- 
ledge of  God's  Fatherliness,  revealed  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  that  the  power  of  prayer  will  be  found  to  root 
and  grow.  In  the  infinite  tenderness  and  pity  and 
patience  of  the  infinite  Father,  in  His  loving  readi- 
ness to  hear  and  to  help,  the  life  of  prayer  has  its  joy. 
O  let  us  take  time,  until  the  Spirit  has  made  these 
words  to  us  spirit  and  truth,  filling  heart  and  life ; 
"Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven."  Then  we  are 
indeed  within  the  veil,  in  the  secret  place  of  power 
where  prayer  always  prevails. 

^^  Hallowed  be  Thy  name.^^  There  is  something 
here  that  strikes  us  at  once.  While  we  ordinarily 
first  bring  our  own  needs  to  God  in  prayer,  and  then 
think  of  what  belongs  to  God  and  His  interests,  the 
Master  reverses  the  order.  First,  Thy  name,  Thy 
kingdom,  Thy  will :  then,  give  ics^  forgive  us^  lead 
3  33 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

us,  dehver  21s.  The  lesson  is  of  more  importance 
than  we  think.  In  true  worship  the  Father  must  be 
first,  must  be  all.'  The  sooner  I  learn  to  forget  my- 
self in  the  desire  that  He  may  be  glorified,  the  richer 
will  the  blessing  be  that  prayer  will  bring  to  myself. 
No  one  ever  loses  by  what  he  sacrifices  for  the  Father. 

This  must  influence  all  our  prayer.  There  are  two 
sorts  of  prayer :  personal  and  intercessory.  The 
latter  ordinarily  occupies  the  lesser  part  of  our  time 
and  energy.  This  may  not  be.  Christ  has  opened 
the  school  of  prayer  specially  to  train  intercessors 
for  the  great  work  of  bringing  down,  by  their  faith 
and  prayer,  the  blessings  of  His  work  and  love  on 
the  world  around.  There  can  be  no  deep  growth  in 
prayer  unless  this  be  made  our  aim.  The  little  child 
may  ask  of  the  father  only  what  it  needs  for  itself; 
and  yet  it  soon  learns  to  say,  Give  some  for  sister, 
too.  But  the  grown-up  son,  who  only  lives  for  the 
father's  interest  and  takes  charge  of  the  father's  busi- 
ness, asks  more  largely,  and  gets  all  that  is  asked. 
And  Jesus  would  train  us  to  the  blessed  life  of  conse- 
cration and  service,  in  which  our  interests  are  all 
subordinate  to  the  Name,  and  the  Kingdom,  and  the 
Will  of  the  Father.  O  let  us  live  for  this,  and  let, 
on  each  act  of  adoration.  Our  Father  !  there  follow 
in  the  same  breath,  T/iy  Name,  T/iy  Kingdom,  T/iy 
Will ; — for  this  we  look  up  and  long. 

^^ Hallowed  be   Thy  naine.'^     What  name?    This 

new  name  of  Father.     The  word  Holy  is  the  central 

word  of  the  Old  Testament ;  the  name  Father  of  the 

New.     In  this  name  of    Love  all  the  holiness  and 

34 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

glory  of  God  are  now  to  be  revealed.  And  how  is 
the  name  to  be  hallowed?  By  God  Himself:  "/ 
will  hallow  My  great  name  which  ye  have  profaned." 
Our  prayer  must  be  that  in  ourselves,  in  all  God's 
children,  in  presence  of  the  world,  God  Himself 
would  reveal  the  holiness,  the  Divine  power,  the 
hidden  glory  of  the  name  of  Father.  The  Spirit 
of  the  Father  is  the  //t'/j/ Spirit ;  it  is  only  when  we 
yield  ourselves  to  be  led  of  Him,  that  the  name  will 
be  hallowed  in  our  prayers  and  our  lives.  Let  us 
learn  the -prayer:  "Our  Father,  hallowed  be  Thy 
name." 

"  Thy  kingdom  corned  The  Father  is  a  King  and 
has  a  kingdom.  The  son  and  heir  of  a  king  has 
no  higher  ambition  than  the  glory  of  his  father's 
kingdom.  In  time  of  war  or  danger  this  becomes  his 
passion  ;  he  can  think  of  nothing  else.  The  children 
of  the  Father  are  here  in  the  enemy's  territory, 
where  the  kingdom,  which  is  in  heaven,  is  not  yet 
fully  manifested.  What  more  natural  than  that,  when 
they  learn  to  hallow  the  Father-name,  they  should 
long  and  cry  with  deep  enthusiasm,  "Thy  kingdom 
come."  The  coming  of  the  kingdom  is  the  one  great 
event  on  which  the  revelation  of  the  Father's  glory, 
the  blessedness  of  His  children,  the  salvation  of  the 
world  depends.  On  our  prayers,  too,  the  coming  of 
the  kingdom  waits.  Shall  we  not  join  in  the  deep 
longing  cry  of  the  redeemed :  "  Thy  kingdom  come  ? " 
Let  us  learn  it  in  the  school  of  Jesus! 

"  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earths 
This  petition  is  too  frequently  applied  alone  to  the 
35 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

suffering  of  the  will  of  God.  In  heaven  God's  will 
is  done,  and  the  Master  teaches  the  child  to  ask  that 
the  will  may  be  done  on  earth  just  as  in  heaven  ;  in 
the  spirit  of  adoring  submission  and  ready  obedience. 
Because  the  will  of  God  is  the  glory  of  heaven,  the 
doing  of  it  is  the  blessedness  of  heaven.  As  the 
will  is  done,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  comes  into  the 
heart.  And  wherever  faith  has  accepted  the  Father's 
love,  obedience  accepts  the  Father's  will.  The  sur- 
render to,  and  the  prayer  for  a  life  of  heaven-like 
obedience,  is  the  spirit  of  child-like  prayer. 

"  Give  ns  this  day  our  daily  bread.''''  When  first 
the  child  has  yielded  himself  to  the  Father  in  the 
care  for  His  Name,  His  Kingdom,  and  His  Will,  he 
has  full  liberty  to  ask  for  his  daily  bread.  A  master 
cares  for  the  food  of  his  servant,  a  general  of  his 
soldiers,  a  father  of  his  child.  And  will  not  the 
Father  in  heaven  care  for  the  child  who  has  in  prayer 
given  himself  up  to  His  interests?  We  may,  indeed, 
in  full  confidence  say,  ' '  Father,  I  live  for  Thy  honor 
and  Thy  work  ;  I  know  Thou  carest  forme."  Conse- 
cration to  God  and  His  will  gives  wonderful  liberty 
in  prayer  for  temporal  things ;  the  whole  earthly  life 
is  given  to  the  Father's  loving  care. 

"  Ajid  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  also  have  forgiven 
our  debtors^  As  bread  is  the  first  need  of  the  body, 
so  forgiveness  for  the  soul.  And  the  provision  for 
the  one  is  as  sure  as  for  the  other.  We  are  children, 
but  sinners,  too ;  our  right  of  access  to  the  Father's 
presence  we  owe  to  the  precious  blood  and  the  for- 
giveness it  has  won  for  us.  Let  us  beware  of  the 
36 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

prayer  for  forgiveness  becoming  a  formahty ;  only 
what  is  really  confessed  is  really  forgiven.  Let  us  in 
faith  accept  the  forgiveness  as  promised ;  as  a 
spiritual  reality,  an  actual  transaction  between  God 
and  us,  it  is  the  entrance  into  all  the  Father's  love 
and  all  the  privileges  of  children.  Such  forgiveness 
as  a  living  experience,  is  impossible  without  a  for- 
giving spirit  to  others;  as  forgiven  expresses  the 
heavenward,  ^o  forgiving  the  earthward,  relation  of 
God's  child.  In  each  prayer  to  the  Father  I  must  be 
able  to  say  that  I  know  of  no  one  whom  I  do  not 
heartily  love. 

^^  And  lead  tis  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us 
from  the  evil  one y  Our  daily  bread,  the  pardon  of 
our  sins,  and  then  our  being  kept  from  all  sin  and  the 
power  of  the  evil  one,  in  these  three  petitions  all  our 
personal  need  is  comprehended.  The  prayer  for 
bread  and  pardon  must  be  accompanied  by  the  sur- 
render to  live  in  all  things  in  holy  obedience  to  the 
Father's  will,  and  the  believing  prayer  in  everything 
to  be  kept  by  the  power  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  from 
the  power  of  the  evil  one. 

Children  of  God  !  it  is  thus  Jesus  would  have  us  to 
pray  to  the  Father  in  heaven.  O  let  His  Name,  and 
Kingdom,  and  Will,  have  the  first  place  in  our  love ; 
His  providing,  and  pardoning,  and  keeping  love  will  be 
our  sure  portion.  So  the  prayer  will  lead  us  up  to 
the  true  child-life;  the  Father  all  to  the  child,  the 
Father  all  for  the  child.  We  shall  understand  how 
Father  and  child,  the  Thine  and  the  Our,  are  all  one, 
and  how  the  heart  that  begins  its  prayer  with  the 
37 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

God-devoted  Thine,  will  have  the  power  in  faith  to 
speak  out  the  Our,  too.  Such  praj^er  will,  indeed, 
be  the  fellowship  and  interchange  of  love,  always 
bringing  us  back  in  trust  and  worship  to  Him  who  is 
not  only  the  beginning,  but  the  end:  "For  Thine 

IS  THE  KINGDOM,  AND  THE  POWER,  AND  THE  GLORY, 

FOREVER,  Amen."  Son  of  the  Father,  teach  us  to 
pray,  "Our  Father." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


O  Thou  who  art  the  only  begotten  Son,  teach  us, 
we  beseech  Thee,  to  pray,  "Our  Father."  We 
thank  Thee,  Lord,  for  these  Living  Blessed  Words 
which  Thou  hast  given  us.  We  thank  Thee  for  the 
millions  who  in  them  have  learned  to  know  and  wor- 
ship the  Father,  and  for  what  they  have  been  to  us. 
Lord  !  it  is  as  if  we  needed  days  and  weeks  in  Thy 
school  with  each  separate  petition,  so  deep  and  full 
are  they.  But  we  look  to  Thee  to  lead  us  deeper 
into  their  meaning ;  do  it,  we  pray  Thee,  for  Thy 
name's  sake  ;  Thy  name  is  Son  of  the  Father. 

Lord  !  Thou  didst  once  say :  "  No  man  knoweth 
the  Father  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whom  the  Son 
willeth  to  reveal  Him."  And  again  :  ''  I  made  known 
unto  them  Thy  name,  and  will  make  it  known,  that 
the  love  wherewith  Thou  hast  loved  Me  may  be  in 
them."  Lord  Jesus!  reveal  to  us  the  Father.  Let 
His  name,  His  infinite  Father-love,  the  love  with 
which  he  loved  Thee,  according  to  Thy  prayer,  be 
38 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

IN  us.  Then  shall  we  say  aright,  "  Our  Father  !  " 
Then  shall  we  apprehend  Thy  teaching,  and  the  first 
spontaneous  breathing  of  our  heart  will  be:  "Our 
Father,  Thy  Name,  Thy  Kingdom,  Thy  Will."  And 
we  shall  bring  our  needs  and  our  sins  and  our  temp- 
tations to  Him  in  the  confidence  that  the  love  of  such 
a  Father  cares  for  all. 

Blessed  Lord !  we  are  Thy  scholars,  we  trust  Thee  ; 
do  teach  us  to  pray,  "Our  Father."    Amen. 
39 


FIFTH  LESSON. 

"  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you:  "  or,  Tlie  Cer= 
tainty  of  the  Answer  to  Prayer. 

Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  yon;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find; 
knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  yott;  for  every  one  that 
asketh  receiveth  ;  and  he  that  seeketh  findeth  ;  and  to  him 
that  knocketh  it  shall  be  opened. — Matt.  vii.  7,  8. 

Ye  ask,  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss. — ^Jas. 
iv.  3. 

OUR  Lord  returns  here  in  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  a  second  time  to  speak  of  prayer. 
The  first  time  He  had  spoken  of  the  Father  who  is 
to  be  found  in  secret,  and  rewards  openly,  and  had 
given  us  the  pattern  prayer  (Matt.  vi.  5-15).  Here 
He  wants  to  teach  us  what  in  all  Scripture  is  consid- 
ered the  chief  thing  in  prayer ;  the  assurance  that 
prayer  will  be  heard  and  answered.  Observe  how 
He  uses  words  which  mean  almost  the  same  thing, 
and  each  time,  repeats  the  promise  so  distinctly : 
"Ye  shall  receive,  ye  shall  find,  it  shall  be  opened 
unto  you  ; "  and  then  gives  as  ground  for  such  assur- 
ance the  law  of  the  kingdom:  "He  that  asketh, 
receiveth;  he  that  seeketh,  findeth;  to  him  that 
knocketh,  it  shall  be  opened.''^  We  cannot  but  feel 
40 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

how  in  this  sixfold  repetition  He  wants  to  impress 
deep  on  our  minds  this  one  truth,  that  we  may  and 
must  most  confidently  expect  an  answer  to  our 
prayer.  Next  to  the  revelation  of  the  Father's  love, 
there  is,  in  the  whole  course  of  the  school  of  pra}  er, 
not  a  more  important  lesson  than  this  :  Every  one 
that  asketh,  receiveth. 

In  the  three  words  the  Lord  uses,  ask,  seek,  knock, 
a  difference  in  meaning  has  been  sought.  If  such 
was  indeed  His  purpose,  then  the  first,  Ask,  refers 
to  the  gifts  we  pray  for.  But  I  may  ask  and  receive 
the  gift  without  the  Giver.  Seek  is  the  word  Scrip- 
ture uses  of  God  Himself;  Christ  assures  me  that  I 
can  find  Himself  But  it  is  not  enough  to  find  God 
in  time  of  need,  without  coming  to  abiding  fellow- 
ship :  Knock  speaks  of  admission  to  dwell  with 
Him  and  in  Him.  Asking  and  receiving  the  gift 
would  thus  lead  to  seeking  and  finding  the  Giver, 
and  this  again  to  the  knocking  and  opening  of  the 
door  of  the  Father's  home  and  love.  One  thing  is 
sure  :  the  Lord  does  want  us  to  count  most  certainly 
on  it  that  asking,  seeking,  knocking,  cannot  be  in 
vain  ;  receiving  an  answer,  finding  God,  the  opened 
heart  and  home  of  God,  are  the  certain  fruit  of 
prayer. 

That  the  Lord  should  have  thought  it  needful  in 
so  many  forms  to  repeat  the  truth,  is  a  lesson  of  deep 
import.  It  proves  that  He  knows  our  heart,  how 
doubt  and  distrust  toward  God  are  natural  to  us,  and 
how  easily  we  are  inclined  to  rest  in  prayer  as  a  reli- 
gious work  without  an  answer.  He  knows  too  how, 
41 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

even  when  we  believe  that  God  is  the  hearer  of  prayer, 
beheving  prayer  that  lays  hold  of  the  promise,  is 
something  spiritual,  too  high  and  difficult  for  the  half- 
hearted disciple.  He  therefore  at  the  very  outset  of 
His  instruction  to  those  who  would  learn  to  pray, 
seeks  to  lodge  this  truth  deep  into  their  hearts  : 
prayer  does  avail  much  ;  ask  and  ye  shall  receive ; 
eveiy  one  that  asketh,  receiveth.  This  is  the  fixed 
eternal  law  of  the  kingdom  ;  if  you  ask  and  receive 
not,  it  must  be  because  there  is  something  amiss  or 
wanting  in  the  prayer.  Hold  on  ;  let  the  Word  and 
Spirit  teach  you  to  pray  aright,  but  do  not  let  go  the 
confidence  He  seeks  to  waken  :  Every  one  that  ask- 
eth, receiveth. 

"Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you.^^  Christ  has  no 
mightier  stimulus  to  persevering  prayer  in  His  school 
than  this.  As  a  child  has  to  prove  a  sum  to  be  cor- 
rect, so  the  proof  that  we  have  prayed  aright  is,  the 
atiswer.  If  we  ask  and  receive  not,  it  is  because  we 
have  not  learned  to  pray  aright.  Let  every  learner 
in  the  school  of  Christ  therefore  take  the  Master's 
word  in  all  simplicity  :  Every  one  that  asketh,  receiv- 
eth. He  had  good  reasons  for  speaking  so  uncondi- 
tionally. Let  us  beware  of  weakening  the  Word 
with  our  human  wisdom.  When  He  tells  us  heavenly 
things,  let  us  believe  Him  ;  His  Word  will  explain 
itself  to  him  who  believes  it  fully.  If  questions  and 
difficulties  arise,  let  us  not  seek  to  have  them  settled 
before  we  accept  the  Word.  No ;  let  us  entrust  them 
all  to  Him ;  it  is  His  to  solve  them  ;  our  work  is 
first  and  fully  to  accept  and  hold  fast  His  promise. 
42 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Let  in  our  inner  chamber,  in  the  inner  chamber  of 
our  heart  too,  the  Word  be  inscribed  in  letters  of 
light :  Every  one  that  asketh,  receiveth. 

According  to  this  teaching  of  the  Master,  prayer 
consists  of  two  parts,  has  two  sides,  a  human  and  a 
Divine.  The  human  is  the  asking,  the  Divine  is  the 
giving.  Or,  to  look  at  both  from  the  human  side, 
there  is  the  asking  and  the  receiving — the  two  halves 
that  make  up  a  whole.  It  is  as  if  He  would  tell  us 
that  we  are  not  to  rest  without  an  answer,  because 
it  is  the  will  of  God,  the  rule  in  the  Father's  family  : 
every  childlike  believing  petition  is  granted.  If  no 
answer  comes,  we  are  not  to  sit  down  in  the  sloth 
that  calls  itself  resignation,  and  suppose  that  it  is  not 
God's  will  to  give  an  answer.  No ;  there  must  be 
something  in  the  prayer  that  is  not  as  God  would 
have  it,  childlike  and  believing:  we  must  seek  for 
grace  to  pray  so  that  the  answer  may  come.  It  is 
far  easier  to  the  flesh  to  submit  without  the  answer 
than  to  yield  itself  to  be  searched  and  purified  by 
the  Spirit,  until  it  has  learned  to  pray  the  prayer  of 
faith. 

It  is  one  of  the  terrible  marks  of  the  diseased  state 
of  Christian  life  in  these  days,  that  there  are  so  many 
who  rest  content  without  the  distinct  experience  of 
answer  to  prayer.  They  pray  daily,  they  ask  many 
things,  and  trust  that  some  of  them  will  be  heard,  but 
know  little  of  direct,  definite  answer  to  prayer  as  the 
rule  of  daily  life.  And  it  is  this  the  Father  wills  :  He 
seeks  daily  intercourse  with  his  children  in  listening 
to  and  granting  their  petitions.  He  wills  that  I  should 
43 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

come  to  Him  day  by  day  with  distinct  requests  ;  He 
wills  day  by  day  to  do  for  me  what  I  ask.  It  was 
in  His  answer  to  prayer  that  the  saints  of  old  learned 
to  know  God  as  the  Living  One,  and  were  stirred  to 
praise  and  love  (Ps.  xxxiv.,  Ixvi.  19,  cxvi.  i).  Our 
Teacher  waits  to  impirnt  this  upon  our  minds : 
prayer  and  its  answer,  the  child  asking  and  the  father 
giving,  belong  to  each  other. 

There  may  be  cases  in  which  the  answer  is  a  refu- 
sal, because' the  request  is  not  according  to  God's 
Word,  as  when  Moses  asked  to  enter  Canaan.  But 
still,  there  was  an  answer;  God  did  not  leave  His 
servant  in  uncertainty  as  to  His  will.  The  gods  of  the 
heathen  are  dumb  and  cannot  speak.  Our  Father  lets 
His  child  know  when  He  cannot  give  him  what  he 
asks,  and  he  withdraws  his  petition,  even  as  the  Son 
did  in  Gethsemane.  Both  Moses  the  servant  and 
Christ  the  Son  knew  that  what  they  asked  was  not 
according  to  what  the  Lord  had  spoken  ;  their  prayer 
was  the  humble  supplication  whether  it  was  not  pos- 
sible for  the  decision  to  be  changed.  God  will  teach 
those  who  are  teachable  and  give  Him  time,  by  His 
Word  and  Spirit,  whether  their  request  be  according 
to  His  will  or  not.  Let  us  withdraw  the  request,  if  it 
be  not  according  to  God's  mind,  or  persevere  till  the 
answer  come.  Prayer  is  appointed  to  obtain  the 
answer.  It  is  in  prayer  and  its  answer  that  the  inter- 
change of  love  between  the  Father  and  His  child 
takes  place. 

How  deep  the  estrangement  of  our  heart  from 
God  must  be,  that  we  find  it  so  difficult  to  grasp  such 
44 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

promises.  Even  while  we  accept  the  words  and 
believe  their  truth,  the  faith  of  the  heart,  that  fully 
has  them  and  rejoices  in  them,  comes  so  slowly.  It 
is  because  our  spiritual  life  is  still  so  weak,  and  the 
capacity  for  taking  God's  thoughts  is  so  feeble.  But 
let  us  look  to  Jesus  to  teach  us  as  none  but  He  can 
teach.  If  we  take  His  words  in  simplicity,  and  trust 
Him  by  His  Spirit  to  make  them  within  us  life  and 
power,  they  will  so  enter  into  our  inner  being,  that 
the  spiritual  Divine  reality  of  the  truth  they  con- 
tain will  indeed  take  possession  of  us,  and  we 
shall  not  rest  content  until  every  petition  we  offer  is 
borne  heavenward  on  Jesus'  own  words:  "Ask,  and 
it  shall  be  given  you." 

Beloved  fellow-disciples  in  the  school  of  Jesus! 
let  us  set  ourselves  to  learn  this  lesson  well.  Let 
us  take  these  words  just  as  they  were  spoken.  Let 
us  not  suflfer  human  reason  to  weaken  their  force. 
Let  us  take  them  as  Jesus  gives  them,  and  believe 
them. 

He  will  teach  us  in  due  time  how  to  under- 
stand them  fully ;  let  us  begin  by  implicitly  believing 
them.  Let  us  take  time,  as  often  as  we  pray,  to 
listen  to  his  voice  :  Every  one  that  asketh,  receiveth. 
Let  us  not  make  the  feeble  experiences  of  our  unbe- 
lief the  measure  of  what  our  faith  may  expect.  Let 
us  seek,  not  only  just  in  our  seasons  of  prayer,  but 
at  all  times,  to  hold  fast  the  joyful  assurance :  man's 
prayer  on  earth  and  God's  answer  in  heaven  are 
meant  for  each  other.  Let  us  trust  Jesus  to  teach  us 
so  to  pray  that  the  answer  can  come.  He  will  do  it 
45 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

if  we  hold  fast  the  word  He  gives  to-day:  "  Ask,  and 
ye  shall  receive." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


O  Lord  Jesus  !  teach  me  to  understand  and  believe 
what  Thou  hast  now  promised  me.  It  is  not  hid 
from  Thee,  O  my  Lord,  with  what  reasonings  my 
heart  seeks  to  satisfy  itself  when  no  answer  comes. 
There  is  the  thought  that  my  prayer  is  not  in  harmony 
with  the  Father's  secret  counsel ;  that  there  is,  per- 
haps, something  better  Thou  wouldest  give  me  ;  or 
that  prayer  as  fellowship  with  God  is  blessing  enough 
without  an  answer.  And  yet,  my  blessed  Lord,  I 
find  in  Thy  teaching  on  prayer  that  Thou  didst  not 
speak  of  these  things,  but  didst  say  so  plainly,  that 
prayer  may  and  must  expect  an  answer.  Thou  dost 
assure  us  that  this  is  the  fellowship  of  a  child  with 
the  Father :  the  child  asks  and  the  Father  gives. 

Blessed  Lord  !  Thy  words  are  faithful  and  true. 
It  must  be  because  I  pray  amiss  that  my  experience 
of  answered  prayer  is  not  clearer.  It  must  be  because 
I  live  too  little  in  the  Spirit,  that  my  prayer  is  too 
little  in  the  Spirit,  and  that  the  power  for  the  prayer 
of  faith  is  wanting. 

Lord  !  teach  me  to  pray.  Lord  Jesus  !  I  trust 
Thee  for  it ;  teach  me  to  pray  in  faith.  Lord  !  teach 
me  this  lesson  of  to-day:  Every  one  that  asketh, 
receiveth.     Amen. 

46 


SIXTH  I.ESSON. 

**  How  much  more?"  or,  The  Infinite  Fatherli- 
ness  of  God. 

Or  what  i?ian  is  there  of  you,  who,  if  his  son  ask  him 
for  a  loaf  will  give  hitn  a  stone ;  or  if  he  shall  ask  for  a 
fish^  will  give  him  a  serpent  ?  If  ye^  then,  being  evil^ 
know  how  to  give  good  gifts  tinto  your  children^  how  mtuh 
more  shall  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  give  good  things 
to  them  that  ask  Him  ? — Matt.  vii.   9-1 1. 

IN  these  words  our  Lord  proceeds  further  to  con- 
firm what  He  had  said  of  the  certainty  of  an 
answer  to  prayer.  To  remove  all  doubt,  and  show 
us  on  what  sure  ground  His  i^romise  rests,  He  appeals 
to  what  every  one  has  seen  and  experienced  here  on 
earth.  We  are  all  children,  and  know  what  we  ex- 
pected of  our  fathers.  We  are  fathers,  or  continually 
see  them;  and  every  where  we  look  upon  it  as  the 
most  natural  thing  there  can  be,  for  a  father  to  hear 
his  child.  And  the  Lord  asks  us  to  look  up  from 
earthly  parents,  of  whom  the  best  are  but  evil,  and 
to  calculate  how  much  more  the  heavenly  Father 
will  give  good  gifts  to  them  that  ask  Him.  Jesus 
would  lead  us  up  to  see  that  as  much  greater  as  God 
is  than  sinful  man,  so  much  greater  our  assurance 
ought  to  be  that  He  will  more  surely  than  any  earthly 
47 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

father  grant  our  childlike  petitions.  As  much  greater 
as  God  is  than  man,  so  much  surer  is  it  that  prayer 
will  be  heard  with  the  Father  in  heaven  than  with  a 
father  on  earth. 

As  simple  and  intelligible  as  this  parable  is,  so 
deep  and  spiritual  is  the  teaching  it  contains.  The 
Lord  would  remind  us  that  the  prayer  of  a  child  owes 
its  influence  entirely  to  the  relation  in  which  he 
stands  to  the  parent.  The  prayer  can  exert  that 
influence  only  when  the  child  is  really  living  in  that 
relationship  in  the  home,  in  the  love,  in  the  service 
of  the  Father.  The  power  of  the  promise,  "Ask, 
and  it  shall  be  given  you,"  lies  in  the  loving  relation- 
ship between  us  as  children  and  the  Father  in  hea- 
ven ;  when  we  live  and  walk  in  that  relationship, 
the  prayer  of  faith  and  its  answer  will  be  the  natural 
result.  And  so  the  lesson  we  have  to-day  in  the 
school  of  prayer  is  this:  Live  as  a  child  of  God, 
then  you  will  be  able  to  pray  as  a  child,  and  as  a 
child  you  will  most  assuredly  be  heard. 

And  what  is  the  true  child-life  ?  The  answer  can 
be  found  in  any  home.  The  child  that  by  preference 
forsakes  the  father's  house,  that  finds  no  pleasure  in 
the  presence  and  love  and  obedience  of  the  father, 
and  still  thinks  to  ask  and  obtain  what  he  will,  will 
surely  be  disappointed.  On  the  contrary,  he  to 
whom  the  intercourse  and  will  and  honor  and  love 
of  the  father  are  the  joy  of  his  life,  will  find  that  it  is 
the  father's  joy  to  grant  his  requests.  Scripture  says : 
"As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are 
the  children  of  God:"  the  childlike  privilege  of 
48 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

asking  all  is  inseparable  from  the  child-like  life 
under  the  leading  of  the  Spirit.  He  that  gives  him- 
self to  be  led  by  the  Spirit  in  his  life,  will  be  led  by 
Him  in  his  prayers,  too.  And  he  will  find  that 
Fatherlike  giving  is  the  Divine  response  to  childlike 
living. 

To  see  what  this  childlike  living  is,  in  which  child- 
like asking  and  believing  have  their  ground,  we  have 
only  to  notice  what  our  Lord  teaches  in  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  of  the  Father  and  His  children.  In  it 
the  prayer-promises  are  imbedded  in  the  life-precepts ; 
the  two  are  inseparable.  They  form  one  whole,  and 
he  alone  can  count  on  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise, 
who  accepts,  too,  all  that  the  Lord  has  connected 
with  it.  It  is  as  if  in  speaking  the  word,  "  Ask,  and 
ye  shall  receive,"  He  says,  I  give  these  promises  to 
those  whom  in  the  beatitudes  I  have  pictured  in  their 
childlike  poverty  and  purity,  and  of  whom  I  have 
said,  "They  shall  be  called  the  children  of  God" 
(Matt.  v.  3-9) :  to  children  who  "  let  your  light  shine 
before  men  that  they  may  glorify  your  Father  in 
heaven:  "  to  those  who  walk  in  love,  **that  ye  may 
be  children  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven,"  and 
who  seek  to  be  perfect,  * '  even  as  your  Father  in 
heaven  is  perfect ' '  (v.  45) :  to  those  whose  fasting 
and  prayer  and  almsgiving  (vi.  1-18)  is  not  before 
men,  but  "before  your  Father  which  seeth  in  secret ;  " 
who  forgive,  "  even  as  your  Father  forgiveth  you" 
(vi.  15);  who  trust  the  heavenly  Father  in  all  earthly 
need,  seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His 
righteousness  (vi.  26-32) ;  who  not  only  say,  Lord, 
4  49 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Lord,  but  do  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  hea- 
ven (vii.  2i).  Such  are  the  children  of  the  Father, 
and  such  is  the  life  in  the  Father's  love  and  service :  in 
such  a  childlife  answered  prayers  are  certain  and 
abundant. 

But  will  not  such  teaching  discourage  the  feeble 
one?  If  we  are  first  to  answer  to  this  portrait  of  a 
cliild,  must  not  many  give  up  all  hope  of  answers  to 
prayer  ?  The  difficulty  is  removed  if  we  think  again 
of  the  blessed  name  of  father  and  child.  A  child  is 
weak  ;  there  is  a  great  difference  among  children  in 
age  and  gift.  The  Lord  does  not  demand  of  us  a 
perfect  fulfilment  of  the  law  ;  no,  but  only  the  childlike 
and  whole-hearted  surrender  to  live  as  a  child  with 
Him  in  obedience  and  truth.  Nothing  more.  But, 
also,  nothing  less.  The  Father  must  have  the  wholQ 
heart.  When  this  js  given,  and  He  sees  the  child 
with  honest  purpose  and  steady  will  seeking  in  every- 
thing to  be  and  live  as  a  child,  then  our  prayer  will 
count  with  Him  as  the  prayer  of  a  child.  Let  any 
one  simply  and  honestly  begin  to  study  the  Sermon 
on  the  ]\Iount  and  take  it  as  his  guide  in  life,  and  he 
will  find,  notwithstanding  weakness  and  failure,  an 
ever-growing  liberty  to  claim  the  fulfilment  of  its 
promises  in  regard  to  prayer.  In  the  names  of  father 
and  child  he  has  the  pledge  that  his  petitions  will  be 
granted. 

This  is  the  one  chief  thought  on  which  Jesus  dwells 

here,  and  which  He  would  have  all  His  scholars  take 

in.    He  would  have  us  see  that  the  secret  of  effectual 

prayer  is  :  to  have  the  heart  filled  with  the  Father-love 

50 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

of  God.  It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  know  that  God  is 
a  Father :  He  would  have  us  take  time  to  come 
under  the  full  impression  of  what  that  name  implies. 
We  must  take  the  best  earthly  father  we  know  ;  we 
must  think  of  the  tenderness  and  love  with  which  he 
regards  the  request  of  his  child,  the  love  and  joy  with 
which  he  grants  every  reasonable  desire ;  we  must 
then,  as  we  think  in  adoring  worship  of  the  infinite 
Love  and  Fatherliness  of  God,  consider  with  hozv 
much  more  tenderness  and  joy  He  sees  us  come  to 
Him,  and  gives  us  what  we  ask  aright.  And  then, 
when  we  see  how  much  this  Divine  arithmetic  is 
beyond  our  comprehension,  and  feel  how  impossible 
it  is  for  us  to  apprehend  God's  readiness  to  hear  us, 
then  He  would  have  us  come  and  open  our  heart  for 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  shed  abroad  God's  Father-love 
there.  Let  us  do  this  not  only  when  we  want  to  pray, 
but  let  us  yield  heart  and  life  to  dwell  in  that  love. 
The  child  who  only  wants  to  know  the  love  of  the 
father  when  he  has  something  to  ask,  will  be  disap- 
pointed. But  he  who  lets  God  be  Father  always  and 
in  everything,  who  would  fain  live  his  whole  life  in 
the  Father's  presence  and  love,  who  allows  God  in 
all  the  greatness  of  His  love  to  be  a  Father  to  him, 
oh  !  he  will  experience  most  gloriously  that  a  life  in 
God's  infinite  Fatherliness  and  continual  answers  to 
prayer  are  inseparable. 

Beloved  fellow- disciple  !  we  begin  to  see  what  the 

reason  is  that  we  know  so  little  of  daily  answers  to 

prayer,  and  what  the  chief  lesson  is  which  the  Lord 

has  for  us  in  His  school.     It  is  all  in  the  name  of 

51 


Willi  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Father.  We  thought  of  new  and  deeper  insight  into 
some  of  the  mysteries  of  the  prayer- world  as  what 
we  should  get  in  Christ's  school ;  He  tells  us  the  first 
is  the  highest  lesson ;  we  must  learn  to  say  well, 
"Abba,  Father!"  "Our  Father  which  art  in 
heaven."  He  that  can  say  this,  has  the  key  to  all 
prayer.  In  all  the  compassion  with  which  a  father 
listens  to  his  weak  or  sickly  child,  in  all  the  joy  with 
which  he  hears  his  stammering  child,  in  all  the  gentle 
patience  with  which  he  bears  with  a  thoughtless 
child,  we  must,  as  in  so  many  mirrors,  study  the 
heart  of  our  Father,  until  every  prayer  be  borne  up- 
ward on  the  faith  of  this  Divine  word:  ^'Hozu  much 
more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  good  gifts  to 
them  that  ask  Him." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord  !  Thou  knowest  that  this,  though  it 
be  one  of  the  first  and  simplest  and  most  glorious 
lessons  in  Thy  school,  is  to  our  hearts  one  of  the 
hardest  to  learn:  we  know  so  little  of  the  love  of  the 
Father.  Lord  !  teach  us  so  to  live  with  the  Father 
that  His  love  may  be  to  us  nearer,  clearer,  dearer, 
than  the  love  of  any  earthly  father.  And  let  the 
assurance  of  His  hearing  our  prayer  be  as  much 
greater  than  the  confidence  in  an  earthly  parent,  as 
the  heavens  are  higher  than  earth,  as  God  is  infinitely 
greater  than  man.  Lord  !  show  us  that  it  is  only  our 
unchildlike  distance  from  the  Father  that  hinders  the 
52 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

answer  to  prayer,  and  lead  us  on  to  the  true  life 
of  God's  children.  Lord  Jesus  !  it  is  fatherhke  love 
that  wakens  childlike  trust.  O  reveal  to  us  the 
Father,  and  His  tender,  pitying  love,  that  we  may 
become  childlike,  and  experience  how  in  the  child- 
life  lies  the  power  of  prayer. 

Blessed  Son  of  God  !  the  Father  loveth  Thee  and 
hath  given  Thee  all  things.  And  Thou  lovest  the 
Father,  and  hast  done  all  things  He  commanded 
Thee,  and  therefore  hast  the  power  to  ask  all  things. 
Lord  !  give  us  Thine  own  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of  the 
Son.  Make  us  childlike,  as  Thou  wert  on  earth. 
And  let  every  prayer  be  breathed  in  the  faith  that  as 
the  heaven  is  higher  than  the  earth,  so  God's  Father- 
love,  and  His  readiness  to  give  us  what  we  ask,  sur- 
passes all  we  can  think  or  conceive.     Amen. 


NOTE.i 

"  Yotir  Father  which  is  in  heaven.''^  Alas  !  we 
speak  of  it  only  as  the  utterance  of  a  reverential 
homage.  We  think  of  it  as  a  figure  borrowed  from 
an  earthly  life,  and  only  in  some  faint  and  shallow 
meaning  to  be  used  of  God.  We  are  afraid  to  take 
God  as  our  own  tender  and  pitiful  father.  He  is  a 
schoolmaster,  or  almost  farther  off  than  that,  and 

1  From  Thoughts  on  Holiness,  by  Mark  Guy  Pearse.  What  is 
so  beautifully  said  of  the  knowledge  of  God's  Fatherliness  as 
the  starting-point  of  holiness  is  no  less  true  of  prayer. 

53 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

knowing  less  about  us— an  inspector,  who  knows 
nothing  of  us  except  through  our  lessons.  His  eyes 
are  not  on  the  scholar,  but  on  the  book,  and  all  alike 
must  come  up  to  the  standard. 

Now  open  the  ears  of  the  heart,  timid  child  of 
God  ;  let  it  go  sinking  right  down  into  the  innermost 
depths  of  the  soul.  Here  is  the  starting-point  of  holi- 
ness, in  the  love  and  patience  and  pity  of  our  heavenly 
Father.  We  have  not  to  learn  to  be  holy  as  a  hard 
lesson  at  school,  that  we  may  make  God  think  well 
of  us  ;  we  are  to  learn  it  at  home  with  the  Father  to 
help  us.  God  loves  you  not  because  you  are  clever, 
not  because  you  are  good,  but  because  He  is  your 
Father.  The  Cross  of  Christ  does  not  make  God 
love  us ;  it  is  the  outcome  and  measure  of  His  love 
to  us.  He  loves  all  His  children,  the  clumsiest,  the 
dullest,  the  worst  of  His  children.  His  love  lies  at 
the  back  of  everything,  and  we  must  get  upon  that  as 
the  solid  foundation  of  our  religious  life,  not  growing 
up  into  that,  but  growing  up  out  of  it.  We  must  begin 
there  or  our  beginning  will  come  to  nothing.  Do 
take  hold  of  this  mightily.  We  must  go  out  of  our- 
selves for  any  hope,  or  any  strength,  or  any  confi- 
dence. And  what  hope,  what  strength,  what  confi- 
dence, may  be  ours  now  that  we  begin  here,  your 
Father  which  is  ifi  heaven  / 

We  need  to  get  in  at  the  tenderness  and  helpful- 
ness which  lie  in  these  words,  and  to  rest  upon  it— 
your  Father.  Speak  them  over  to  yourself  until 
something  of  the  wonderful  truth  is  felt  by  us.  It 
means  that  I  am  bound  to  God  by  the  closest  and 
54 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

tenderest  relationship  ;  that  I  have  a  right  to  His  love 
and  His  power  and  His  blessing,  such  as  nothing  else 
could  give  me.  O  the  boldness  with  which  we  can 
draw  near !  O  the  great  things  we  have  a  right  to 
ask  for !  Your  Father.  It  means  that  all  His 
infinite  love  and  patience  and  wisdom  bend  over  me 
to  help  vie.  In  this  relationship  lies  not  only  the 
possibility  of  holiness ;  there  is  infinitely  more  than 
that. 

Here  we  are  to  begin,  in  the  patient  love  of  our 
Father.  Think  how  he  knows  us  apart  and  by  our- 
selves, in  all  our  peculiarities,  and  in  all  our  weak- 
nesses and  difficulties.  The  master  judges  by  the 
result,  but  our  Father  judges  by  the  effort.  Failure 
does  not  always  mean  fault.  He  knows  how  much 
things  cost,  and  weighs  them  where  others  only 
measure.  Your  Father.  Think  how  great  store 
His  love  sets  by  the  poor  beginnings  of  the  little 
ones,  clumsy  and  unmeaning  as  they  may  be  to 
others.  All  this  lies  in  this  blessed  relationship  and 
infinitely  more.  Do  not  fear  to  take  it  all  as  your 
own. 

55 


SEVENTH   I.ESSON. 

**How  much  more  the   Holy  Spirit;*'  or,  The 
AlI=Comprehensive   Gift. 

If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto 
your  children,  how  much  more  shall  the  heavenly  Father 
give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him  ? — LuKE  xi.  13. 

IN  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  the  Lord  had  ah'eady 
given  utterance  to  His  wonderful  How  much 
MORE  ?  Here  in  Luke,  where  He  repeats  the  ques- 
tion, there  is  a  difference.  Instead  of  speaking,  as 
then,  of  giving  good  gifts,  He  says,  "  How  much 
more  shall  the  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy 
Spirit?  "  He  thus  teaches  us  that  the  chief  and  the 
best  of  these  gifts  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  rather,  that 
in  this  gift  all  others  are  comprised.  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  the  first  of  the  Father's  gifts,  and  the  one  He 
delights  most  to  bestow.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  therefore 
the  gift  we  ought  first  and  chiefly  to  seek. 

The  unspeakable  worth  of  this  gift  we  can  easily 
understand.  Jesus  spoke  of  the  Spirit  as  "-the 
promise  of  the  Father;"  the  one  promise  in  which 
God's  Fatherhood  revealed  itself.  The  best  gift  a 
good  and  wise  father  can  bestow  on  a  child  on  earth 
is  his  own  spirit.  This  is  the  great  object  of  a  father 
56 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

in  education— to  reproduce  in  his  child  his  own  dis- 
position and  character.  If  the  child  is  to  know  and 
understand  his  father ;  if,  as  he  grows  up,  he  is  to 
enter  into  all  his  will  and  plans  ;  if  he  is  to  have  his 
highest  joy  in  the  father,  and  the  father  in  him, — he 
must  be  of  one  mind  and  spirit  with  him.  And  so  it 
is  impossible  to  conceive  of  God  bestowing  any 
higher  gift  on  His  child  than  this,  His  own  Spirit. 
God  is  what  He  is  through  His  Spirit;  the  Spirit 
is  the  very  life  of  God.  Just  think  what  it  means — 
God  giving  His  own  Spirit  to  His  child  on  earth. 

Or  was  not  this  the  glory  of  Jesus  as  a  Son  upon 
earth,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  was  in  Him  ?  At 
His  baptism  in  Jordan  the  two  things  were  united, — 
the  voice,  proclaiming  Him  the  Beloved  Son,  and  the 
Spirit,  descending  upon  Him.  And  so  the  Apostle 
says  of  us,  "  Because  ye  are  sons,  God  sent  forth  the 
Spirit  of  His  Son  into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba, 
Father."  A  king  seeks  in  the  whole  education  of 
his  son  to  call  forth  in  him  a  kingly  spirit.  Our 
Father  in  heaven  desires  to  educate  us  as  His  chil- 
dren for  the  holy,  heavenly  life  in  which  He  dwells, 
and  for  this  gives  us,  from  the  depths  of  His  heart, 
His  own  Spirit.  It  was  this  which  was  the  whole  aim 
of  Jesus  when,  after  having  made  atonement  with 
His  own  blood.  He  entered  for  us  into  God's  pres- 
ence, that  He  might  obtain  for  us,  and  send  down  to 
dwell  in  us,  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  the  Spirit  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  the  whole  life  and  love  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son  are  in  Him  ;  and  coming  down 
into  us,  He  lifts  us  up  into  their  fellowship.  As  Spirit 
57 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

of  the  Father,  He  sheds  abroad  the  Father's  love, 
with  which  He  loved  the  Son,  in  our  hearts,  and 
teaches  us  to  live  in  it.  As  Spirit  of  the  Son,  He 
breathes  in  us  the  childlike  liberty,  and  devotion,  and 
obedience  in  which  the  Son  lived  upon  earth.  The 
Father  can  bestow  no  higher  or  more  wonderful  gift 
than  this  :  His  own  Holy  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of  Son- 
ship. 

This  truth  naturally  suggests  the  thought  that  this 
first  and  chief  gift  of  God  must  be  the  first  and  chief 
object  of  all  prayer.  For  every  need  of  the  spiritual 
life  this  is  the  one  thing  needful :  the  Holy  Spirit. 
All  the  fulness  is  in  Jesus  ;  the  fulness  of  grace  and 
truth,  out  of  which  we  receive  grace  for  grace.  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  appointed  conveyancer,  whose 
special  work  it  is  to  make  Jesus  and  all  there  is  in 
Him  for  us  ours  in  personal  appropriation,  in  blessed 
experience.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  ; 
as  wonderful  as  the  life  is,  so  wonderful  is  the  provi- 
sion by  which  such  an  agent  is  provided  to  commu- 
nicate it  to  us.  If  we  but  yield  ourselves  entirely  to 
the  disposal  of  the  Spirit,  and  let  Him  have  His  way 
with  us,  He  will  manifest  the  life  of  Christ  within  us. 
He  will  do  this  with  a  Divine  power,  maintaining  the 
life  of  Christ  in  us  in  uninterrupted  continuity.  Surely, 
if  there  is  one  prayer  that  should  draw  us  to  the 
Father's  throne  and  keep  us  there,  it  is  this  :  for  the 
Holy  Spirit,  whom  we  as  children  have  received,  to 
stream  into  us  and  out  from  us  in  greater  fulness. 

In  the  variety  of  the  gifts  which  the  Spirit  has  to 
to  dispense.  He  meets  the  believer's  every  need. 
58 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Just  think  of  the  names  He  bears.  The  Spirit  of 
grace,  to  reveal  and  impart  all  of  grace  there  is  in 
Jesus.  The  Spirit  of  faith,  teaching  us  to  begin  and 
go  on  and  increase  in  ever  believing.  The  Spirit  of 
adoption  and  assurance,  who  witnesses  that  we  are 
God's  children,  and  inspires  the  confiding  and  confi- 
dent Abba,  Father  !  The  Spirit  of  truth  to  lead  into 
all  truth,  to  make  each  word  of  God  ours  in  deed  and 
in  truth.  The  Spirit  of  prayer,  through  whom  we 
speak  with  the  Father ;  prayer  that  must  be  heard. 
The  Spirit  of  judgment  and  burning,  to  search  the 
heart  and  convince  of  sin.  The  Spirit  of  holiness, 
manifesting  and  communicating  the  Father's  holy 
presence  within  us.  The  Spirit  of  power,  through 
whom  we  are  strong  to  testify  boldly  and  work  effec- 
tually in  the  Father's  service.  The  Spirit  of  glory, 
the  pledge  of  our  inheritance,  the  preparation  and 
the  foretaste  of  the  glory  to  come.  Surely  the  child 
of  God  needs  but  one  thing  to  be  able  really  to  live  as 
a  child  :  it  is  to  be  filled  with  this  Spirit. 

And  now,  the  lesson  Jesus  teaches  us  to-day  in  His 
school  is  this;  That  the  Father  is  just  longing  to  give 
Him  to  us  if  we  will  but  ask  in  the  childlike  depend- 
ence on  what  He  says  :  "  If  ye  know  to  give  good 
gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your 
heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask 
Him."  In  the  words  of  God's  promise,  * '  I  will  pour 
out  my  Spirit  abimdantly ;  "  and  of  His  command, 
''  Be  ye  filled  with  the  Spirit,"  we  have  the  measure 
of  what  God  is  ready  to  give,  and  what  we  may  obtain. 
As  God's  children,  we  have  already  received  the 
59 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Spirit.  But  we  still  need  to  ask  and  pray  for  His 
special  gifts  and  operations  as  we  require  them. 
And  not  only  this,  but  for  Himself  to  take  complete 
and  entire  possession  ;  for  His  unceasing  momentary 
guidance.  Just  as  the  branch,  already  filled  with  the 
sap  of  the  vine,  is  ever  crying  for  the  continued  and 
increasing  flow  of  that  sap,  that  it  may  bring  its  fruit 
to  perfection,  so  the  believer,  rejoicing  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  Spirit,  ever  thirsts  and  cries  for  more. 
And  what  the  great  Teacher  would  have  us  learn  is, 
that  nothing  less  than  God's  promise  and  God's  com- 
mand may  "be  the  measure  of  our  expectation  and 
our  prayer ;  we  must  be  filled  abundantly.  He  would 
have  us  ask  this  in  the  assurance  that  the  wonderful 
HOW  MUCH  MORE  of  God's  Father-love  is  the  pledge 
that,  when  we  ask,  we  do  most  certainly  receive. 

Let  us  now  believe  this.  As  we  pray  to  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit,  let  us  not  seek  for  the  answer  in  our 
feelings.  All  spiritual  blessings  must  be  received, 
that  is,  accepted  or  taken  in  faith. ^  Let  me  believe, 
the  Father  gives  the  Holy  Spirit  to  His  praying  child. 
Even  now,  while  I  pray,  I  must  say  in  faith  :  I  have 
what  I  ask,  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  is  mine.  Let  us 
continue  steadfast  in  this  faith.  On  the  strength  of 
God's  Word  we  know  that  we  have  what  we  ask. 
Let  us,  with  thanksgiving  that  we  have  been  heard, 

1  The  Greek  word  for  receiving  and  taking  is  the  same. 
"When  Jesus  said,  "  Kvery  one  that  asketh,  receiveth,'"  He  used 
the  same  verb  as  at  the  Supper,  "  Take,  eat,"  or  on  the  resur- 
rection morning,  '''■Receive,'^  accept,  take,  "the  Holy  Spirit." 
Receiving  not  only  implies  God's  bestowment,  but  our  accept- 
ance. 

60 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

with  thanksgiving  for  what  we  have  received  and 
taken  and  now  hold  as  ours,  continue  steadfast  in 
believing  prayer  that  the  blessing,  which  has  already 
been  given  us,  and  which  we  hold  in  faith,  may  break 
through  and  fill  our  whole  being.  It  is  in  such 
believing  thanksgiving  and  prayer,  that  our  soul 
opens  up  for  the  Spirit  to  take  entire  and  undis- 
turbed possession.  It  is  such  prayer  that  not  only 
asks  and  hopes,  but  takes  and  holds,  that  inherits 
the  full  blessing.  In  all  our  prayer  let  us  remember 
the  lesson  the  Saviour  would  teach  us  this  day,  that, 
if  there  is  one  thing  07t  earth  we  can  be  sure  of,  it  is 
this,  that  the  Father  desires  to  have  tis  filled  with  His 
Spirit,  that  He  delights  to  give  us  His  Spirit. 

And  when  once  we  have  learned  thus  to  believe  for 
ourselves,  and  each  day  to  take  out  of  the  treasure 
we  hold  in  heaven,  what  liberty  and  power  to  pray 
for  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  on  the  Church  of 
God,  on  all  flesh,  on  individuals,  or  on  special  efforts  ! 
He  that  has  once  learned  to  know  the  Father  in 
prayer  for  himself,  learns  to  pray  most  confidently  for 
others  too.  The  Father  gives  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
them  that  ask  Him,  not  least,  but  most,  when  they 
ask  for  others. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Father  in  heaven  !  Thou  didst  send  Thy  Son   to 
reveal  Thyself  to  us,  thy  Father-love,  and  all   that 
that  love  has  for  us.     And  He  has  taught  us,  that  the 
6i 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

gift  above  all  gifts  which  Thou  wouldest  bestow  in 
answer  to  prayer  is,  the  Holy  Spirit. 

O  my  Father  !  I  come  to  Thee  with  thi  prayer  ; 
there  is  nothing  I  would— may  I  not  s  /,  I  do — 
desire  so  much  as  to  be  filled  with  th  Spirit,  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  blessings  He  brir  ,  are  so  un- 
speakable, and  just  what  I  need.  H  .  .:.neds  abroad 
Thy  love  in  the  heart,  and  fills  it  ,.'ith  Thyself,  I 
long  for  this.  He  breathes  the  mind  and  life  of 
Christ  in  me,  so  that  I  live  as  He  did,  in  and  for  the 
Father's  love.  I  long  for  this.  He  endues  with 
power  from  on  high  for  all  my  walk  and  work.  I 
long  for  this.  O  Father !  I  beseech  Thee,  give  me 
this  day  the  fulness  of  Thy  Spirit. 

Father  !  I  ask  this,  resting  on  the  words  of  my 
Lord:  "How  much  more  .^he  Holy  Spirit."  I 
do  believe  tha"^.  Thou  hearest  my  prayer ;  I  receive 
now  what  I  ask;  Father!  x  jlaim  and  I  take  it;  the 
fulness  of  Thy  Spirit  as  n-'  I  receive  the  gift  this 

day  again  as  a  faith  gift ;  in  faith  I  reckon  my  Father 
works  through  the  Spirit  all  V?  has  promised.  The 
Father  delights  to  breathe  His  Spirit  into  His  wait- 
ing child  as  He  tarries  in  fellowship  with  Himself. 
Amen. 

62 


EIGHTH  LESSON. 

"  Because  of  his  importunity :  '*  or,  The  Boldness 
of  God's  Friends. 

And  He  said  unto  thei?i,  Which  of  you  shall  have  A 
FRIEND,  and  shall  go  to  him  at  midnight,  and  say  to  him. 
Friend,  lend  me  three  loaves ;  for  a  friend  of  mine  is 
come  to  me  from  a  journey,  and  I  have  nothing  to  set  before 
him  ;  and  he  from  within  shall  answer  and  say,  Trouble 
me  not  :  the  door  is  now  shut,  and  my  children  are  with  me 
in  bed ;  I  cannot  rise  and  give  thee.  I  say  unto  you 
though  he  will  not  rise  and  give  hv?i  because  he  is  HIS 
friend,  yet  because  of  his  importunity  he  will  rise  and 
give  him,  as  piany  as  he  needeth. — LUKE  Xi.  5-8. 

THE  first  teaching  lo  his  disciples  was  given  by- 
cur  Lord  in  tlie  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  It  was 
near  a  year  later  that  the  disciples  asked  Jesus  to 
teach  them  to  pray.  In  answer  He  gave  them  a 
second  time  the  Lord's  Prayer,  so  teaching  them 
what  to  pray.  He  then  speaks  of  how  they  ought  to 
pray,  and  repeats  what  he  formerly  said  of  God's 
Fatherliness  and  the  certainty  of  an  answer.  But  in 
between  He  adds  the  beautiful  parable  of  the  friend 
at  midnight,  to  teach  them  the  two-fold  lesson,  that 
God  does  not  only  want  us  to  pray  for  ourselves,  but 
63 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

for  the  perishing  around  us,  and  that  in  such  interces- 
sion great  boldness  of  entreaty  is  often  needful,  and 
always  lawful,  yea,  pleasing  to  God. 

The  parable  is  a  perfect  storehouse  of  instruction 
in  regard  to  true  intercession.  There  is,  first,  the 
love  which  seeks  to  help  the  needy  around  us :  "  ;«_y 
friend  is  come  to  me."  Then  the  need  which  urges 
to  the  cry:  ''  I  have  nothing  to  set  before  him." 
Then  follows  the  confidence  that  help  is  to  be  had : 
"which  of  you  shall  have  Sl.  friend ^  and  say,  Frietid, 
lend  me  three  loaves."  Then  comes  the  unexpected 
refusal;  "  I  can7iot  rise  and  give  thee."  Then  again 
\}i\Q perseverance  \}a?i\.\.2ik.^^  no  refusal:  "because  of 
his  importimity.'^  And  lastly,  the  reward  of  such 
prayer:  "  he  will  give  him  as  many  as  he  needeth^ 
A  wonderful  setting  forth  of  the  way  of  prayer  and 
faith  in  which  the  blessing  of  God  has  so  often  been 
sought  and  found. 

Let  us  confine  ourselves  to  the  chief  thought; 
prayer  as  an  appeal  to  the  friendship  of  God  ;  and 
we  shall  find  that  two  lessons  are  specially  suggested. 
The  one,  that  if  we  are  God's  friends,  and  come  as 
such  to  Him,  we  must  prove  ourselves  the  friends  of 
the  needy  ;  God's  friendship  to  us  and  ours  to  others 
go  hand  in  hand.  The  other,  that  when  we  come 
thus  we  may  use  the  utmost  liberty  in  claiming  an 
answer. 

There  is  a  two-fold  use  of  prayer:  the  one,  to 

obtain  strength  and  blessing  for  our  own  life  ;  the 

other,  the  higher,  the  true  glory  of  prayer,  for  which 

Christ  has  taken  us  into  his  fellowship  and  teaching, 

64 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

is  intercession,  where  prayer  is  the  royal  power  a 
child  of  God  exercises  in  heaven  on  behalf  of  others 
and  even  of  the  kingdom.  We  see  it  in  Scripture, 
how  it  was  in  intercession  for  others  that  Abraham 
and  Moses,  Samuel  and  Elijah,  with  all  the  holy  men 
of  old,  proved  that  they  had  power  with  God  and 
prevailed.  It  is  when  we  give  ourselves  to  be  a 
blessing  that  we  can  specially  count  on  the  blessing 
of  God.  It  is  when  we  draw  near  to  God  as  the 
friend  of  the  poor  and  the  perishing  that  we  may 
count  on  His  friendliness ;  the  righteous  man  who  is 
the  friend  of  the  poor  is  very  specially  the  friend  of 
God.  This  gives  wonderful  liberty  in  prayer.  Lord  ! 
I  have  a  needy  friend  whom  I  must  help.  As  a 
friend  I  have  undertaken  to  help  him.  In  Thee  I 
have  a  Friend  whose  kindness  and  riches  I  know  to 
be  infinite ;  I  am  sure  Thou  wilt  give  me  what  I  ask. 
If  I,  being  evil,  am  ready  to  do  for  my  friend  what  I 
can,  how  much  more  wilt  Thou,  O  my  heavenly 
Friend,  now  do  for  Thy  friend  what  he  asks? 

The  question  might  suggest  itself,  whether  the 
Fatherhood  of  God  does  not  give  such  confidence 
in  prayer  that  the  thought  of  His  friendship  can 
hardly  teach  us  anything  more :  a  father  is  more  than 
a  friend.  And  yet,  if  we  consider  it,  this  pleading 
the  friendship  of  God  opens  new  wonders  to  us. 
That  a  child  obtains  what  he  asks  of  his  father  looks 
so  perfectly  natural,  we  almost  count  it  the  father's 
duty  to  give.  But  with  a  friend  it  is  as  if  the  kindness 
is  more  free,  dependent,  not  on  nature,  but  on  sym- 
pathy and  character.  And  then  the  relation  of  a 
5  65 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

child  is  more  that  of  perfect  dependence  ;  two  friends 
are  more  nearly  on  a  level.  And  so  our  Lord,  in 
seeking  to  unfold  to  us  the  spiritual  mystery  of 
prayer,  would  fain  have  us  approach  God  in  this 
relation,  too,  as  those  whom  He  has  acknowledged 
as  His  friends,  whose  mind  and  life  are  in  sympathy 
with  His. 

But  then  we  must  be  living  as  His  friends.  I  am 
still  a  child,  even  when  a  wanderer ;  but  friendship 
depends  upon  the  conduct.  "Ye  are  my  friends  if 
ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you."  "Thou  seest 
that  faith  wrought  with  his  works,  and  by  works  was 
faith  made  perfect ;  and  the  scripture  was  fulfilled 
which  saith,  And  Abraham  believed  God,  and  he  was 
called  the  frieftd  of  God.^^  It  is  the  Spirit,  *' the 
same  Spirit,"  that  leads  us,  that  also  bears  witness 
to  our  acceptance  with  God;  ^^ likewise,  also,"  the 
same  Spirit  helpeth  us  in  prayer.  It  is  a  life  as  the 
friend  of  God  that  gives  the  wonderful  liberty  to 
say,  I  have  a  friend  to  whom  I  can  go  even  at  mid- 
night. And  how  much  more  when  I  go  in  the  very 
spirit  of  that  friendliness,  manifesting  myself  the  very 
kindness  I  look  for  in  God,  seeking  to  help  my 
friend  as  I  want  God  to  help  me.  When  I  come  to 
God  in  prayer.  He  always  looks  to  what  the  aim 
is  of  my  petition.  If  it  be  merely  for  my  own  comfort 
or  joy  I  seek  His  grace,  I  do  not  receive.  But  if  I 
can  say  that  it  is  that  He  may  be  glorified  in  my  dis- 
pensing His  blessings  to  others,  I  shall  not  ask  in 
vain.  Or  if  I  ask  for  others,  but  want  to  wait  until 
God  has  made  me  so  rich  that  it  is  no  sacrifice  or 
66 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer, 

act  of  faith  to  aid  them,  I  shall  not  obtain.  But  if  I 
can  say  that  I  have  already  undertaken  for  my  needy 
friend,  that  in  my  poverty  I  have  already  begun  the 
work  of  love,  because  I  know  I  had  a  friend  who 
would  help  me,  my  prayer  will  be  heard.  Oh,  we 
know  not  how  much  the  plea  avails  ;  the  friendship 
of  earth  looking  in  its  need  to  the  friendship  of  hea- 
ven :  "  He  will  give  him  as  much  as  he  needeth." 

But  not  always  at  once.  The  one  thing  by  which 
man  can  honor  and  enjoy  his  God  isy«zV/z.  Intercession 
is  part  of  faith's  training  school.  There  our  friend- 
ship with  men  and  with  God  is  tested.  There  it  is 
seen  whether  my  friendship  with  the  needy  is  so  real 
that  I  will  take  time  and  sacrifice  my  rest,  will  go 
even  at  midnight  and  not  cease  until  I  have  obtained 
for  them  what  I  need.  There  it  is  seen  whether  my 
friendship  with  God  is  so  clear  that  I  can  depend  on 
Him  not  to  turn  me  away,  and  therefore  pray  on 
until  He  gives. 

O  what  a  deep  heavenly  mystery  this  is  of  perse- 
vering prayer.  The  God  who  has  promised,  who 
longs,  whose  fixed  purpose  it  is  to  give  the  blessing, 
holds  it  back.  It  is  to  Him  a  matter  of  such  deep 
importance  that  His  friends  on  earth  should  know 
and  fully  trust  their  rich  Friend  in  heaven,  that  He 
trains  them,  in  the  school  of  answer  delayed,  to  find 
out  how  their  perseverance  really  does  prevail,  and 
what  the  mighty  power  is  they  can  wield  in  heaven, 
if  they  do  but  set  themselves  to  it.  There  is  a  faith 
that  sees  the  promise  and  embraces  it,  and  yet  does 
not  receive  it  (Heb.  xi.  13,  39).  It  is  when  the  an- 
67 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

swer  to  prayer  does  not  come,  and  the  promise  we 
are  most  firmly  trusting  appears  to  be  of  none  effect, 
that  the  trial  of  faith,  more  precious  than  of  gold, 
takes  place.  It  is  in  this  trial  that  the  faith  that  has 
embraced  the  promise  is  purified  and  strengthened 
and  prepared  in  personal  holy  fellowship  with  the 
living  God  to  see  the  glory  of  God.  It  takes  and 
holds  the  promise  until  it  has  received  the  fulfilment 
of  what  it  had  claimed  in  a  living  truth  in  the  unseen 
but  living  God. 

Let  each  child  of  God  who  is  seeking  to  work  the 
work  of  love  in  his  Father's  service  take  courage. 
The  parent  with  his  child,  the  teacher  with  his  class, 
the  visitor  with  his  district,  the  Bible  reader  with  his 
circle,  the  preacher  with  his  hearers,  each  one  who,  in 
in  his  little  circle,  has  accepted  and  is  bearing  the 
burden  of  hungry,  perishing  souls,— let  them  all  take 
courage.  Nothing  is  at  first  so  strange  to  us  as  that 
God  should  really  require  persevering  prayer,  that 
there  should  be  a  real  spiritual  needs-be  for  impor- 
tunity. To  teach  it  us,  the  Master  uses  this  almost 
strange  parable.  If  the  unfriendliness  of  a  selfish 
earthly  friend  can  be  conquered  by  importunity, 
how  much  more  will  it  avail  with  the  heavenly 
Friend,  who  does  so  love  to  give,  but  is  held  back  by 
our  spiritual  unfitness,  our  incapacity  to  posses  what 
He  has  to  give.  O  let  us  thank  Him  that  in  delaying 
His  answer  He  is  educating  us  up  to  our  true  posi- 
tion, and  the  exercise  of  all  our  power  with  Him, 
training  us  to  live  with  Him  in  the  fellowship  of  un- 
doubting  faith  and  trust,  to  be  indeed  the  friends  of 
68 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

God.  And  let  us  hold  fast  the  three-fold  cord  that 
cannot  be  broken :  the  hungry  friend  needing  the 
help,  and  the  praying  friend  seeking  the  help,  and 
the  Mighty  Friend,  loving  to  give  as  much  as  he 
needeth. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


O  my  Blessed  Lord  and  Teacher  !  I  must  come  to 
Thee  in  prayer.  Thy  teaching  is  so  glorious,  and 
yet  too  high  for  me  to  grasp.  I  must  confess  that  my 
heart  is  too  little  to  take  in  these  thoughts  of  the 
wonderful  boldness  I  may  use  with  Thy  Father  as  my 
Friend.  Lord  Jesus  !  I  trust  Thee  to  give  me  Thy 
Spirit  with  Thy  Word,  and  to  make  the  Word  quick 
and  powerful  in  my  heart.  I  desire  to  keep  Thy 
Word  of  this  day:  "  Because  of  his  importunity  he 
will  give  him  as  many  as  he  needeth." 

Lord  !  teach  me  more  to  know  the  power  of  per- 
severing prayer.  I  know  that  in  it  the  Father  suits 
Himself  to  our  need  of  time  for  the  inner  life  to  attain 
its  growth  and  ripeness,  so  that  His  grace  may  indeed 
be  assimilated  and  made  our  very  own.  I  know  that 
He  would  fain  thus  train  us  to  the  exercise  of  that 
strong  faith  that  does  not  let  Him  go  even  in  the  face 
of  seeming  disappointment.  I  know  He  wants  to 
lift  us  to  that  wonderful  liberty,  in  which  we  under- 
stand how  really  He  has  made  the  dispensing  of  His 
gift  dependent  on  our  prayer.  Lord  !  I  know  this  :  O 
teach  me  to  see  it  in  spirit  and  truth. 
69 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

And  may  it  now  be  the  joy  of  my  life  to  become 
the  almoner  of  my  Rich  Friend  in  heaven,  to  care 
for  all  the  hungry  and  perishing,  even  at  midnight, 
because  I  know  my  Friend,  who  always  gives  to  him 
who  perseveres,  because  of  his  importunity,  as  many 
as  he  needeth.    Amen. 

70 


NINTH  LESSON. 

«*  Pray  the  Lord  of  the  harvest ;  '*  or,  Prayer  pro- 
vides Laborers. 

Then  saith  He  unto  His  disciples^  The  harvest  truly  is 
plenteous^  but  the  laborers  are  few.  Pray  ye  therefore  the 
Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  He  will  send  forth  laborers  into 
into  His  harvest. — Matt.  ix.  37-38. 

THE  Lord  frequently  taught  His  disciples  that 
they  must  pray,  and  how ;  but  seldom  what  to 
pray.  This  He  left  to  their  sense  of  need,  and  the 
leading  of  the  Spirit.  But  here  we  have  one  thing 
He  expressly  enjoins  them  to  remember :  in  view 
of  the  plenteous  harvest,  and  the  need  of  reapers, 
they  must  cry  to  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  to  send  forth 
laborers.  Just  as  in  the  parable  of  the  friend  at  mid- 
night. He  would  have  them  understand  that  prayer  is 
not  to  be  selfish;  so  here  it  is  the  power  through 
which  blessing  can  come  to  others.  The  Father  is 
Lord  of  the  harvest ;  when  we  pray  for  the  Holy 
Spirit,  we  must  pray  for  Him  to  prepare  and  send 
forth  laborers  for  the  work. 

Strange,  is  it  not,  that  He  should  ask  His  disciples 
to  pray  for  this  ?    And  could  He  not  pray  Himself? 
And  would  not  one  prayer  of  His  avail  more  than  a 
71 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

thousand  of  theirs  ?  And  God,  the  Lord  of  the  har- 
vest, did  He  not  see  the  need?  And  would  not  He, 
in  His  own  good  time,  send  forth  laborers  without 
their  prayer  ?  Such  questions  lead  us  up  to  the  deepest 
mysteries  of  prayer,  and  its  power  in  the  Kingdom 
of  God.  The  answer  to  such  questions  will  convince 
us  that  prayer  is  indeed  a  power,  on  which  the  in- 
gathering of  the  harvest  and  the  coming  of  the 
Kingdom  do  in  very  truth  depend. 

Prayer  is  no  form  or  show.  The  Lord  Jesus  was 
Himself  the  truth  ;  everything  He  spake  was  the 
deepest  truth.  It  was  when  (see  ver.  36)  "He  saw 
the  multitude,  and  was  moved  with  compassion  on 
them,  because  the)'-  were  scattered  abroad,  as  sheep 
having  no  shepherd,"  that  He  called  on  the  disciples 
to  pray  for  laborers  to  be  sent  among  them.  He  did 
so  because  He  really  believed  that  their  prayer  was 
needed,  and  would  help.  The  veil  which  so  hides  the 
invisible  world  from  us  was  wonderfully  transparent 
to  the  holy  human  soul  of  Jesus.  He  had  looked 
long  and  deep  and  far  into  the  hidden  connection  of 
cause  and  effect  in  the  spirit  world.  He  had  marked 
in  God's  Word  how,  when  God  called  men  like 
Abraham  and  ]\Ioses,  Joshua  and  Samuel  and  Daniel, 
and  given  them  authority  over  men  in  His  name,  He 
had  at  the  same  time  given  them  authority  and  right 
to  call  in  the  powers  of  heaven  to  their  aid  as  they 
needed  them.  He  knew  that  as  to  these  men  of  old, 
and  to  Himself  for  a  time,  here  upon  earth,  the  work 
of  God  had  been  entrusted,  so  it  was  now  about  to 
pass  over  into  the  hands  of  His  disciples.  He  knew 
72 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

that  when  this  work  should  be  given  in  charge  to 
them,  it  would  not  be  a  mere  matter  of  form  or  show, 
but  that  on  them,  and  their  being  faithful  or  unfaith- 
ful, the  success  of  the  work  would  actually  depend. 
As  a  single  individual,  within  the  limitations  of  a 
human  body  and  a  human  life,  Jesus  feels  how  little 
a  short  visit  can  accomplish  among  these  wandering 
sheep  He  sees  around  Him,  and  He  longs  for  help  to 
have  them  properly  cared  for.  And  so  He  tells  His 
disciples  now  to  begin  and  pray,  and,  when  they  have 
taken  over  the  work  from  Him  on  earth,  to  make 
this  one  of  the  chief  petitions  in  their  prayer  :  That 
the  Lord  of  the  harvest  Himself  would  send  forth 
laborers  into  His  harvest.  The  God  who  entrusted 
them  with  the  work,  and  made  it  to  so  large  extent 
dependent  on  them,  gives  them  authority  to  apply  to 
Him  for  laborers  to  help,  and  makes  the  supply 
dependent  on  their  prayer. 

How  little  Christians  really  feel  and  mourn  the 
need  of  laborers  in  the  fields  of  the  world  so  white  to 
the  harvest.  And  how  little  they  beheve  that  our 
labor-supply  depends  on  prayer,  that  prayer  will 
really  provide  "as  many  as  he  needeth."  Not  that 
the  dearth  of  labor  is  not  known  or  discussed.  Not 
that  efforts  are  not  sometimes  put  forth  to  supply  the 
want.  But  how  little  the  burden  of  the  sheep  wan- 
dering without  a  Shepherd  is  really  borne  in  the  faith 
that  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  will,  in  answer  to  prayer, 
send  forth  the  laborers,  and  in  the  solemn  conviction 
that  without  this  prayer  fields  ready  for  reaping  wiU 
be  left  to  perish.  And  yet  it  is  so.  So  wonderful  is 
73 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  surrender  of  His  work  into  the  hands  of  His 
Church,  so  dependent  has  the  Lord  made  Himself  on 
them  as  His  body,  through  whom  alone  His  work 
can  be  done,  so  real  is  the  power  which  the  Lord 
gives  His  people  to  exercise  in  heaven  and  earth, 
that  the  number  of  the  laborers  and  the  measure  of 
the  harvest  does  actually  depend  upon  their  prayer. 

Solemn  thought !  O  why  is  it  that  we  do  not  obey 
the  injunction  of  the  Master  more  heartily,  and  cry 
more  earnestly  for  laborers  ?  There  are  two  reasons 
for  this.  The  one  is  :  We  miss  the  compassion  of 
Jesus,  which  gave  rise  to  this  request  for  prayer. 
When  believers  learn  that  to  love  their  neighbors  as 
themselves,  that  to  live  entirely  for  God's  glory  in 
their  fellow-men,  is  the  Father's  first  commandment 
to  His  redeemed  ones,  they  will  accept  of  the  perish- 
ing ones  as  the  charge  entrusted  to  them  by  their 
Lord.  And,  accepting  them  not  only  as  a  field  of 
labor,  but  as  the  objects  of  loving  care  and  interest, 
it  will  not  be  long  before  compassion  towards  the 
hopelessly  perishing  will  touch  their  heart,  and  the 
cry  ascend  with  an  earnestness  till  then  unknown  : 
Lord !  send  laborers.  The  other  reason  for  the 
neglect  of  the  command,  the  want  of  faith,  will  then 
make  itself  felt,  but  will  be  overcome  as  our  pity 
pleads  for  help.  We  believe  too  little  in  the  power 
of  prayer  to  bring  about  definite  results.  We  do  not 
live  close  enough  to  God,  and  are  not  enough  entirely 
given  up  to  His  service  and  Kingdom,  to  be  capable 
of  the  confidence  that  He  will  give  it  in  answer  to 
our  prayer.  O  let  us  pray  for  a  life  so  one  with 
74 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Christ,  that  His  compassion  may  stream  into  us,  and 
His  Spirit  be  able  to  assure  us  that  our  prayer  avails. 

Such  prayer  will  ask  and  obtain  a  twofold  blessing. 
There  will  first  be  the  desire  for  the  increase  of  men 
entirely  given  up  to  the  service  of  God.  It  is  a  terri- 
ble blot  upon  the  Church  of  Christ  that  there  are 
times  when  actually  men  cannot  be  found  for  the 
service  of  the  Master  as  ministers,  missionaries,  or 
teachers  of  God's  Word.  As  God's  children  make 
this  a  matter  of  supplication  for  their  own  circle  or 
Church,  it  will  be  given.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  now 
Lord  of  the  harvest.  He  has  been  exalted  to  bestow 
gifts — the  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  His  chief  gifts  are  men 
filled  with  the  Spirit.  But  the  supply  and  distribution 
of  the  gifts  depend  on  the  co-operation  of  Head  and 
members.  It  is  just  prayer  will  lead  to  such  co-opera- 
tion ;  the  believing  suppliants  will  be  stirred  to  find 
the  men  and  the  means  for  the  work. 

The  other  blessing  to  be  asked  will  not  be  less. 
Every  believer  is  a  laborer ;  not  one  of  God's  children 
who  has  not  been  redeemed  for  service,  and  has  not 
his  work  waiting.  It  must  be  our  prayer  that  the 
Lord  would  so  fill  all  His  people  with  the  spirit  of  de- 
votion, that  not  one  may  be  found  standing  idle  in 
the  vineyard.  Wherever  there  is  a  complaint  of  the 
want  of  helpers,  or  of  fit  helpers  in  God's  work, 
prayer  has  the  promise  of  a  supply.  There  is  no 
Sunday-school  or  district  visiting,  no  Bible  reading  or 
rescue  work,  where  God  is  not  ready  and  able  to 
provide.  It  may  take  time  and  importunity,  but  the 
command  of  Christ  to  ask  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  is 
75 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  pledge  that  the  prayer  will  be  heard  :  *'  I  say  unto 
you,  he  will  arise  and  give  him  as  many  as  he 
needeth." 

Solemn,  blessed  thought !  this  power  has  been 
given  us  in  prayer  to  provide  in  the  need  of  the  world, 
to  secure  the  servants  for  God's  work.  The  Lord  of 
the  harvest  will  hear.  Christ,  who  called  us  so 
specially  to  pray  thus,  will  support  our  prayers  offered 
in  His  name  and  interest.  Let  us  set  apart  time  and 
give  ourselves  to  this  part  of  our  intercessory  work. 
It  will  lead  us  into  the  fellowship  of  that  compassion- 
ate heart  of  His  that  led  Him  to  call  for  our  prayers. 
It  will  elevate  us  to  the  insight  of  our  regal  position, 
as  those  whose  will  counts  for  something  with  the 
great  God  in  the  advancement  of  His  Kingdom.  It 
will  make  us  feel  how  really  we  are  God's  fellow- 
workers  on  earth,  to  whom  a  share  in  His  work  has 
in  down-right  earnest  been  entrusted.  It  will  maks  us 
partakers  in  the  soul  travail,  but  also  in  the  soul  satis- 
faction of  Jesus,  as  we  know  how,  in  answer  to  our 
prayer,  blessing  has  been  given  that  otherwise  would 
not  have  come. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord  !  Thou  hast  this  day  again  given  us 
another  of  Thy  wondrous  lessons  to  learn.  We 
humbly  ask  Thee,  O  give  us  to  see  aright  the  spiritual 
realities  of  which  Thou  hast  been  speaking.  There 
is  the  harvest  which  is  so  large,  and  perishing,  as  it 
76 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

waits  for  sleepy  disciples  to  give  the  signal  for 
laborers  to  come.  Lord,  teach  us  to  look  out  upon  it 
with  a  heart  moved  with  compassion  and  pity.  There 
are  the  laborers,  so  few.  Lord,  show  us  how  terrible 
the  sin  of  the  want  of  prayer  and  faith,  of  which  this 
is  the  token.  And  there  is  the  Lord  of  the  harvest, 
so  able  and  ready  to  send  them  forth.  Lord,  show  us 
how  He  does  indeed  wait  for  the  prayer  to  which  He 
has  bound  His  answer.  And  there  are  the  disciples, 
to  whom  the  commission  to  pray  has  been  given  : 
Lord,  show  us  how  Thou  canst  pour  down  Thy  Spirit 
and  breathe  upon  them,  so  that  Thy  compassion  and 
the  faith  in  Thy  promise  shall  rouse  them  to  unceas- 
ing, prevailing  prayer. 

O  our  Lord  !  we  cannot  understand  how  Thou 
canst  entrust  such  work  and  give  such  power  to  men 
so  slothful  and  unfaithful.  We  thank  Thee  for  all 
whom  Thou  art  teaching  to  cry  day  and  night  for 
laborers  to  be  sent  forth.  Lord,  breathe  Thine  own 
Spirit  on  all  Thy  children,  that  they  may  learn  to  live 
for  this  one  thing  alone — the  Kingdom  and  glory  of 
their  Lord — and  become  fully  awake  to  the  faith 
of  what  their  prayer  can  accomplish.  And  let  all  our 
hearts  in  this,  as  in  every  petition,  be  filled  with 
the  assurance  that  prayer,  offered  in  loving  faith  in 
the  living  God,  will  bring  certain  and  abundant 
answer.     Amen. 

77 


TENTH  LESSON. 
*«  What  wilt  thou  ?  "  or,  Prayer  must  be  Definite. 

And  Jesus  answered  him,  and  said,  What  tvilt  thou  that 
2  should  do  unto  thee  ? — Mark  x.  51  ;  LuKE  xviii.  41. 

THE  blind  man  had  been  crying  out  aloud,  and 
that  a  great  deal,  "  Thou  Son  of  David,  have 
mercy  on  me."  The  cry  had  reached  the  ear  of  the 
Lord ;  He  knew  what  he  wanted,  and  was  ready  to 
grant  it  him.  But  ere  He  does  it,  He  asks  him: 
•'  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee?  "  He 
wants  to  hear  from  his  own  lips,  not  only  the  general 
petition  for  mercy,  but  the  distinct  expression  of  what 
his  desire  was.  Until  he  speaks  it  out,  he  is  not 
healed. 

There  is  now  still  many  a  suppliant  to  whom  the 
Lord  puts  the  same  question,  and  who  cannot  until  it 
has  been  answered,  get  the  aid  he  asks.  Our  prayers 
must  not  be  a  vague  appeal  to  His  mercy,  an  in- 
definite cry  for  blessing,  but  the  distinct  expression 
of  definite  need.  Not  that  His  loving  heart  does  not 
understand  our  cry,  or  is  not  ready  to  hear.  But  He 
desires  it  for  our  own  sakes.  Such  definite  prayer 
teaches  us  to  know  our  own  needs  better.  It  de- 
78 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

mands  time,  and  thought,  and  self -scrutiny  to  find  out 
what  really  is  our  greatest  need.  It  searches  us  and 
puts  us  to  the  test  as  to  whether  our  desires  are 
hones  L  and  real,  such  as  we  are  ready  to  persevere  in. 
It  leads  us  to  judge  whether  our  desires  are  according 
to  God's  Word,  and  whether  we  really  believe  that 
we  shall  receive  the  things  we  ask.  It  helps  us  to 
wait  for  the  special  answer,  and  to  mark  it  when 
it  comes. 

And  yet  how  much  of  our  prayer  is  vague  and 
pointless.  Some  cry  for  mercy,  but  take  not  the 
trouble  to  know  what  mercy  must  do  for  them. 
Others  ask,  perhaps,  to  be  delivered  from  sin,  but  do 
not  begin  by  bringing  any  sin  by  name  from  which 
the  deliverance  may  be  claimed.  Still  others  pray 
for  God's  blessing  on  those  around  them,  for  the  out- 
pouring of  God's  Spirit  on  their  land  or  the  world, 
and  yet  have  no  special  field  where  they  wait  and 
expect  to  see  the  answer.  To  all  the  Lord  says  : 
And  what  is  it  now  you  really  want  and  expect  Me  to 
do  ?  Every  Christian  has  but  limited  powers,  and  as 
he  must  have  his  own  special  field  of  labor  in  which 
he  works,  so  with  his  prayers  too.  Each  believer  has 
his  own  circle,  his  family,  his  friends,  his  neighbors. 
If  he  were  to  take  one  or  more  of  these  by  name,  he 
would  find  that  this  really  brings  him  into  the  train- 
ing-school of  faith,  and  leads  to  personal  and  pointed 
dealing  with  his  God.  It  is  when  in  such  distinct 
matters  we  have  in  faith  claimed  and  received 
answers,  that  our  more  general  prayers  will  be  be- 
lieving and  effectual. 

79 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

We  all  know  with  what  surprise  the  whole  civilized 
world  heard  of  the  way  in  which  trained  troops  were 
repulsed  by  the  Transvaal  Boers  at  Majuba.  And  to 
what  did  they  owe  their  success  ?  In  the  armies  of 
Europe  the  soldier  fires  upon  the  enemy  standing  in 
large  masses,  and  never  thinks  of  seeking  an  aim  for 
every  bullet.  In  hunting  game  the  Boer  had  learned 
a  different  lesson ;  his  practised  eye  knew  to  send 
every  bullet  on  its  special  message,  to  seek  and  find 
its  man.  Such  aiming  must  gain  the  daym  the  spirit- 
ual world  too.  As  long  as  in  prayer  we  just  pour 
out  our  hearts  in  a  multitude  of  petitions,  without 
taking  time  to  see  whether  every  petition  is  sent  with 
the  purpose  and  expecj  i  of  getting  an  answer, 
not  many  will  reach  the  mark.  But  if,  as  in  silence 
of  soul  we  bow  before  the  Lord,  we  were  to  ask  such 
questions  as  these  :  What  is  now  really  my  desire  ?  do 
I  desire  it  in  faith,  expecting  to  receive  ?  am  I  now 
ready  to  place  and  leave  it  in  the  Father's  bosom  ?  is 
it  a  settled  thing  between  God  and  me  that  I  am  to 
have  the  answer  ?  we  should  learn  so  to  pray  that 
God  would  see  and  we  would  know  what  we  really 
expect. 

It  is  for  this,  among  other  '"^asons,  that  the  Lord 
warns  us  against  the  vain  repetitions  of  the  Gentiles, 
who  think  to  be  heard  for  their  much  praying.  We 
often  hear  prayers  of  great  earnestness  and  fervor,  in 
which  a  multitude  of  petitions  are  poured  forth,  but 
to  which  the  Saviour  would  undoubtedly  answer 
"  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  ?  "  If  I 
am  in  a  strange  land,  in  the  interests  of  the  business 
80 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

which  my  father  owns,  I  would  certainly  write  two 
different  sorts  of  letters.  There  will  be  family  letters 
giving  expression  to  all  the  intercourse  to  which 
aflfection  prompts  ;  and  there  will  be  business  letters, 
containing  orders  for  what  I  need.  And  there  may 
be  letters  in  which  both  are  found.  The  answers 
will  correspond  to  the  letters.  To  each  sentence  of 
the  letters  containing  the  family  news  I  do  not  ex- 
pect a  special  answer.  But  for  each  order  I  send  I 
am  confident  of  an  answer  whether  the  desired  article 
has  been  forwarded.  In  our  dealings  with  God  the 
business  element  must  not  be  wanting.  With  our 
expression  of  need  and  s'-^.   of  love  and   faith  and 

consecration,  there  must le  pointed  statement  of 

what  we  ask  and  expect  to  receive;  it  is  in  the 
answer  that  the  Father  loves  to  give  us  the  token  of 
His  approval  and  acceptance. 

But  the  word  of  the  Master  teaches  us  more.  He 
does  not  say,  What  dost  thou  wish  ?  but,  What  dost 
thou  will?  One  often  wishes  for  a  thing  without 
willing  it.  I  wish  to  have  a  certain  article,  but  I  find 
the  price  too  high  ;  I  resolve  not  to  take  it ;  I  wish, 
but  do  not  will  to  have  it.  The  sluggard  wishes  to 
be  rich,  but  does  not  v,  ill  it.  Many  a  one  wishes  to 
be  saved,  but  perishes  because  he  does  not  will  it. 
The  will  rules  the  whole  heart  and  life  ;  if  I  really 
will  to  have  anything  that  is  within  my  reach,  I  do 
not  rest  till  I  have  it.  And  so,  when  Jesus  says  to  us, 
"What  wilt  thou?"  He  asks  whether  it  is  indeed 
our  purpose  to  have  what  we  ask  at  any  price,  how- 
ever great  the  sacrifice.  Dost  thou  indeed  so  will  to 
6  8i 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

have  it  that,  though  He  delay  it  long,  thou  dost  not 
hold  thy  peace  till  He  hear  thee  ?  Alas  !  how  many 
prayers  are  wishes,  sent  up  for  a  short  time  and  then 
forgotten,  or  sent  up  year  after  year  as  matter  of  duty, 
while  we  rest  content  with  the  prayer  without  the 
answer. 

But,  it  may  be  asked,  is  it  not  best  to  make  our 
wishes  known  to  God,  and  then  to  leave  it  to  Him 
to  decide  what  is  best,  without  seeking  to  assert  our 
will  ?  By  no  means.  This  is  the  very  essence  of  the 
prayer  of  faith,  to  which  Jesus  sought  to  train  His 
disciples,  that  it  does  not  only  make  known  its 
desire  and  then  leave  the  decision  to  God.  That 
would  be  the  prayer  of  submission,  for  cases  in  which 
we  cannot  know  God's  will.  But  the  prayer  of  faith, 
finding  God's  will  in  some  promise  of  the  Word, 
pleads  for  that  till  it  come.  In  Matthew  (ix.  28) 
we  read  Jesus  said  to  the  blind  man  :  ''Believe ye 
that  I  can  do  this?"  Here,  in  Mark,  He  says  :  "  What 
wilt  thou  that  I  should  do?  "  In  both  cases  He  said 
that  faith  had  saved  them.  And  so  He  said  to  the 
Syrophenician  woman,  too  :  ''Great  is  ihy  faith ;  be 
it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt.''''  Faith  is  nothing 
but  the  purpose  of  the  will  resting  on  God's  word, 
and  saying  :  I  must  have  it.  To  believe  truly  is  to 
will  firmly. 

But  is  not  such  a  will  at  variance  with  our  depend- 
ence on  God  and  our  submission  to  Him  ?  By  no 
means;  it  is  much  rather  the  true  submission  that 
honors  God.  It  is  only  when  the  child  has  yielded 
his  own  will  in  entire  surrender  to  the  Father,  that  he 
82 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

receives  from  the  Father  liberty  and  power  to  will 
what  he  would  have.  But,  when  once  the  believer 
has  accepted  the  will  of  God,  as  revealed  through 
the  Word  and  Spirit,  as  his  will,  too,  then  it  is  the 
will  of  God  that  His  child  should  use  this  renewed 
will  in  His  service.  The  will  is  the  highest  power  in 
the  soul ;  grace  wants  above  everything  to  sanctify 
and  restore  this  will,  one  of  the  chief  traits  of  God's 
image,  to  full  and  free  exercise.  As  a  son,  who  only 
lives  for  his  father's  interests,  who  seeks  not  his  own 
but  his  father's  will,  is  trusted  by  the  father  with  his 
business,  so  God  speaks  to  His  child  in  all  truth, 
"What  wilt  thou?"  It  is  often  spiritual  sloth  that, 
under  the  appearance  of  humility,  professes  to  have 
no  will,  because  it  fears  the  trouble  of  searching  out 
the  will  of  God,  or,  when  found,  the  struggle  of 
claiming  it  in  faith.  True  humility  is  ever  in  com- 
pany with  strong  faith,  which  only  seeks  to  know 
what  is  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  then  boldly 
claims  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  "  Ye  shall  ask 
what  ye  willy  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Lord  Jesus  !  teach  me  to  pray  with  all  my  heart 
and  strength,  that  there  may  be  no  doubt  with  Thee 
or  with  me  as  to  what  I  have  asked.  May  I  so  know 
what  I  desire  that,  even  as  my  petitions  are  recorded 
in  heaven,  I  can  record  them  on  earth  too,  and  note 
each  answer  as  it  comes.  And  may  my  faith  in  what 
83 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Thy  Word  has  promised  be  so  clear  that  the  Spirit 
may  indeed  work  in  me  the  liberty  to  will  that  it  shall 
come.  Lord  !  renew,  strengthen,  sanctify  wholly  my 
will  for  the  work  of  effectual  prayer. 

Blessed  Saviour !  I  do  beseech  Thee  to  reveal  to 
me  the  wonderful  condescension  Thou  showest  us, 
thus  asking  us  to  say  what  we  will  that  Thou 
shouldest  do,  and  promising  to  do  whatever  we  will. 
Son  of  God  !  I  cannot  understand  it;  I  can  only 
believe  that  Thou  hast  indeed  redeemed  us  wholly 
for  Thyself,  and  dost  seek  to  make  the  will,  as  our 
noblest  part,  Thy  most  efficient  servant.  Lord  !  I 
do  most  unreservedly  yield  my  will  to  Thee,  as  the 
power  through  which  Thy  Spirit  is  to  rule  my  whole 
being.  Let  Him  take  possession  of  it,  lead  it  into 
the  truth  of  Thy  promises,  aud  make  it  so  strong  in 
prayer  that  I  may  ever  hear  Thy  voice  saying  : 
"Great  is  thy  faith;  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou 
wilt."     Amen. 

84 


ELEVENTH  LESSON. 

••Believe  that  ye  have  received  ;  "  or,  The  Faith 
that  Takes. 

Therefore  I  say  ttnto  you,  All  things  whatsoever  ye  pray 
and  ask  for,  believe  that  ye  have  received  them,  and  ye  shall 
have  them. — MARK  xi.  24. 

WHAT  a  promise  !  so  large,  so  Divine,  that  our 
little  hearts  cannot  take  it  in,  and  in  every 
possible  way  seek  to  limit  it  to  what  we  think  safe  or 
probable ;  instead  of  allowing  it,  in  its  quickening 
power  and  energy,  just  as  He  gave  it,  to  enter  in,  and 
to  enlarge  our  hearts  to  the  measure  of  what  His 
love  and  power  are  really  ready  to  do  for  us.  Faith 
is  very  far  from  being  a  mere  conviction  of  the  truth 
of  God's  word,  or  a  conclusion  drawn  from  certain 
premises.  It  is  the  ear  which  has  heard  God  say 
what  He  will  do,  the  eye  which  has  seen  Him  doing 
it,  and,  therefore,  where  there  is  true  faith,  it  is  im- 
possible but  the  answer  must  come.  If  we  only  see 
to  it  that  we  do  the  one  thing  that  He  asks  of  us  as 
we  pray:  'Q'eia^yk  that  ye  have  received  ;  He  will  see 
to  it  that  He  does  the  thing  He  has  promised  :  "  Ye 
shall  have  them.''''  The  key-note  of  Solomon's 
prayer  (2  Chron.  vi.  4),  '"'  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God 
85 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

of  Israel,  who  hath  with  His  hands  fulfilled  that  which 
He  spake  with  His  viouth  to  my  father  David,"  is  the 
key-note  of  all  true  prayer:  the  joyful  adoration  of  a 
God  whose  hand  always  secures  the  fulfilment  of 
what  His  mouth  hath  spoken.  Let  us  in  this  spirit 
listen  to  the  promise  Jesus  gives  ;  each  part  of  it  has 
its  Divine  message. 

'^  All  things  whatsoever y  At  this  first  word  our 
human  wisdom  at  once  begins  to  doubt  and  ask; 
This  surely  cannot  be  literally  true?  But  if  it  be  not, 
why  did  the  Master  speak  it,  using  the  very  strongest 
expression  He  could  find:  "All  things  whatsoever." 
And  it  is  not  as  if  tliis  were  the  only  time  He  spoke 
thus ;  is  it  not  He  who  also  said,  "  If  thou  canst  be- 
lieve, ALL  THINGS  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth  ; " 
"  If  ye  have  faith,  nothing  shall  be  impossible  to 
you."  Faith  is  so  wholly  the  work  of  God's  Spirit 
through  His  word  in  the  prepared  heart  of  the  be- 
lieving disciple,  that  it  is  impossible  that  the  fulfil- 
ment should  not  come ;  faith  is  the  pledge  and 
forerunner  of  the  coming  answer.  Yes,  "  all  things 
WHATSOEVER  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer  believing,  ye 
received  The  tendency  of  human  reason  is  to  inter- 
pose here,  and  with  certain  qualifying  clauses,  "  if 
expedient,"  "  if  according  to  God's  will,"  to  break 
the  force  of  a  statement  which  appears  dangerous.  O 
let  us  beware  of  dealing  thus  with  the  Master's  words. 
His  promise  is  most  literally  true.  He  wants  His  oft- 
repeated  "  ALL  things"  to  enter  into  our  hearts,  and 
reveal  to  us  how  mighty  the  power  of  faith  is,  how 
truly  the  Head  calls  the  members  to  share  with  Him 
86 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

in  His  power,  how  wholly  our  Father  places  His 
power  at  the  disposal  of  the  child  that  wholly  trusts 
Him.  In  this  "all  things  "  faith  is  to  have  its  food 
and  strength  :  as  we  weaken  it  we  weaken  faith.  The 
WHATSOEVER  is  Unconditional :  the  only  condition  is 
what  is  implied  in  the  believing.  Ere  we  can  believe 
we  must  find  out  and  know  what  God's  will  is ; 
believing  is  the  exercise  of  a  soul  surrendered  and 
given  up  to  the  influence  of  the  Word  and  the 
Spirit;  but  when  once  we  do  believe  nothing  shall  be 
impossible.  God  forbid  that  we  should  try  and  bring 
down  His  all  things  to  the  level  of  what  we  think 
possible.  Let  us  now  simply  take  Christ's '' what- 
soever "  as  the  measure  and  the  hope  of  our  faith  : 
it  is  a  seed-word  which,  if  taken  just  as  He  gives  it, 
and  kept  in  the  heart,  will  unfold  itself  and  strike 
root,  fill  our  life  with  its  fullness,  and  bring  forth 
fruit  abundantly. 

"All  things  whatsoever  ye  pray  ajid  ask  for.''''  It 
is  in  prayer  that  these  "  all  things  "  are  to  be  brought 
to  God,  to  be  asked  and  received  of  Him.  The  faith 
that  receives  them  is  the  fruit  of  the  prayer.  In  one 
aspect  there  must  be  faith  before  there  can  be  prayer ; 
in  another  the  faith  is  the  outcome  and  the  growth  of 
prayer.  It  is  in  the  personal  presence  of  the  Saviour, 
in  intercourse  with  Him,  that  faith  rises  to  grasp  what 
at  first  appeared  too  high.  It  is  in  prayer  that  we 
hold  up  our  desire  to  the  light  of  God's  Holy  Will, 
that  our  motives  are  tested,  and  proof  given  whether 
we  ask  indeed  in  the  name  of*  Jesus,  and  only  for  the 
glory  of  God.  It  is  in  prayer  that  we  wait  for  the 
S7 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

leading  of  the  Spirit  to  show  us  whether  we  are 
asking  the  right  thing  and  in  the  right  spirit.  It  is  in 
prayer  that  we  become  conscious  of  our  want  of 
faith,  that  we  are  led  on  to  say  to  the  Father  that  we 
do  believe,  and  that  we  prove  the  reality  of  our  faith 
by  the  confidence  with  which  we  persevere.  It  is  in 
prayer  that  Jesus  teaches  and  inspires  faith.  He  that 
waits  to  pray,  or  loses  heart  in  prayer,  because  he 
does  not  yet  feel  the  faith  needed  to  get  the  answer, 
will  never  learn  to  believe.  He  who  begins  to  pray 
and  ask  will  find  'the  Spirit  of  faith  is  given  nowhere 
so  surely  as  at  the  foot  of  the  Throne. 

"  Believe  that  ye  have  received."  It  is  clear  that 
what  we  are  to  believe  is,  that  we  receive  the  very 
things  we  ask.  The  Saviour  does  not  hint  that  be- 
cause the  Father  knows  what  is  best  He  may  give  us 
something  else.  The  very  mountain  faith  bids  depart 
is  cast  into  the  sea.  There  is  a  prayer  in  which,  in 
everything,  we  make  known  our  requests  with  prayer 
and  supplication,  and  the  reward  is  the  sweet  peace 
of  God  keeping  heart  and  mind.  This  is  the  prayer 
of  trust.  It  has  reference  to  things  of  which  we 
cannot  find  out  if  God  is  going  to  give  them.  As 
children  we  make  known  our  desires  in  the  countless 
things  of  daily  life,  and  leave  it  to  the  Father  to  give 
or  not  as  He  thinks  best.  But  the  prayer  of  faith  of 
which  Jesus  speaks  is  something  different,  something 
higher.  When,  whether  in  the  greater  interests  of  tlie 
Master's  work,  or  in  the  lesser  concerns  of  our  daily 
life,  the  soul  is  led  to  see  how  there  is  nothing  that  so 
honors  the  Father  as  the  faith  that  is  assured  that  He 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

will  do  what  He  has  said  in  giving  us  whatsoever  we 
ask  for,  and  takes  its  stand  on  the  promise  as  brought 
home  by  the  Spirit,  it  may  know  most  certainly  that 
it  does  receive  exactly  what  it  asks.  Just  see  how 
clearly  the  Lord  sets  this  before  us  in  verse  23: 
"Whosoever  shall  not  doubt  in  his  heart,  but  shall 
believe  that  what  he  saith  cometh  to  pass,  he  shall 
have  it."  This  is  the  blessing  of  the  prayer  of  faith 
of  which  Jesus  speaks. 

"  Believe  that  ye  have  recived.''  This  is  the  word 
of  central  importance,  of  which  the  meaning  is  too 
often  misunderstood.  Believe  that  you  have  received  ! 
now,  while  praying,  the  thing  you  ask  for.  It  may 
only  be  later  that  3'ou  shall  have  it  in  personal 
experience,  that  you  shall  see  what  you  believe  ;  but 
now,  without  seeing,  you  are  to  believe  that  it  has 
been  given  you  of  the  Father  in  heaven.  The  receiv- 
ing or  accepting  of  an  answer  to  prayer  is  just  like  the 
receiving  or  accepting  of  Jesus  or  of  pardon,  a 
spiritual  thing,  an  act  of  faith  apart  from  all  feeling. 
When  I  come  as  a  supplicant  for  pardon,  I  believe 
that  Jesus  in  heaven  is  for  me,  and  so  I  receive  or  take 
Him.  When  I  come  as  a  supplicant  for  any  special 
gift,  which  is  according  to  God's  word,  I  believe  that 
what  I  ask  is  given  me  :  I  believe  that  I  have  it,  I 
hold  it  in  faith  ;  I  thank  God  that  it  is  mine.  "  If  we 
know  that  He  heareth  us,  whatsoever  we  ask,  we 
know  that  we  have  the  petitions  which  we  have  asked 
of  Him." 

''Afidye  shall  have  thein.^''  That  is,  the  gift  which 
we  first  hold  in  faith  as  bestowed  upon  us  in  heaven 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

will  also  become  ours  in  personal  experience.  But 
will  it  be  needful  to  pray  longer  if  once  we  know  we 
have  been  heard  and  have  received  what  we  asked  ? 
There  are  cases  in  which  such  prayer  will  not  be  need- 
ful, in  which  the  blessing  is  ready  to  break  through  at 
once,  if  we  but  hold  fast  our  confidence,  and  prove 
our  faith  by  praising  for  what  we  have  received,  in 
the  face  of  our  not  yet  having  it  in  experience.  There 
are  other  cases  in  which  the  faith  that  has  received 
needs  to  be  still  further  tried  and  strengthened  in 
persevering  prayer.  God  only  knows  when  every- 
thing in  and  around  us  is  fully  ripe  for  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  blessing  that  has  been  given  to  faith. 
Elijah  knew  for  certain  that  rain  would  come ;  God 
had  promised  it ;  and  yet  he  had  to  pray  the  seven 
times.  And  that  prayer  was  no  show  or  play ;  an  in- 
tense spiritual  reality  in  the  heart  of  him  who  lay 
pleading  there,  and  in  the  heaven  above  where  it  had 
its  effectual  work  to  do.  It  is  "through  faith  and 
patience  we  inherit  the  promises."  Faith  says  most 
confidently,  I  have  received  it.  Patience  perseveres 
in  prayer  until  the  gift  bestowed  in  heaven  is  seen  on 
earth.  "Believe  that  ye  have  receivedy  and  ye  shall 
havey  Between  the  have  received  in  heaven,  and  the 
shall  have  of  earth,  believe ;  believing  praise  and 
prayer  is  the  link. 

And  now,  remember  one  thing  more:  It  is  Jesus 
who  said  this.  As  we  see  heaven  thus  opened  to  us, 
and  the  Father  on  the  Throne  ofTering  to  give  us 
whatsoever  we  ask  in  faith,  our  hearts  feel  full  of 
shame  that  we  have  so  little  availed  ourselves  of  our 
90 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

privilege,  and  full  of  fear  lest  our  feeble  faith  still  fail 
to  grasp  what  is  so  clearly  placed  within  our  reach. 
There  is  one  thing  must  make  us  strong  and  full 
of  hope :  it  is  Jesus  who  has  brought  us  this  message 
from  the  Father.  He  Himself,  when  He  was  on 
earth,  lived  the  life  of  faith  and  prayer.  It  was  when 
the  disciples  expressed  their  surprise  at  what  He  had 
done  to  the  fig-tree,  that  He  told  them  that  the  very 
same  life  He  led  could  be  theirs  ;  that  they  could  not 
only  command  the  fig-tree,  but  the  very  mountain, 
and  it  must  obey.  And  He  is  our  life  :  all  He  was  on 
earth  He  is  in  us  now  ;  all  He  teaches  He  really 
gives.  He  is  Himself  the  Author  and  the  Perfecter 
of  our  faith :  He  gives  the  spirit  of  faith  ;  let  us  not 
be  afraid  that  such  faith  is  not  meant  for  us.  It  is 
meant  for  every  child  of  the  Father;  it  is  within 
reach  of  each  one  who  will  but  be  childlike,  yielding 
himself  to  the  Father's  Will  and  Love,  trusting  the 
Father's  Word  and  Power.  Dear  fellow-Christian  ! 
let  the  thought  that  this  word  comes  through  Jesus, 
the  Son,  our  Brother,  give  us  courage,  and  let  our 
answer  be:  Yea,  Blessed  Lord,  we  do  believe  Thy 
Word,  we  do  believe  that  we  receive. 

"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord  !  Thou  didst  come  from  the  Father 

to  show  us  all  His  Love,  and  all  the  treasures  of 

blessing  that   Love  is   waiting  to  bestow.      Lord  ! 

Thou  hast  this  day  again  flung  the  gate  so  wide 

91 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

open,  and  given  us  such  promises  as  to  our  liberty  in 
prayer,  that  we  must  blush  that  our  poor  hearts  have 
so  little  taken  it  in.  Is  has  been  too  large  for  us  to 
believe. 

Lord  !  we  now  look  up  to  Thee  to  teach  us  to  take 
and  keep  and  use  chis  precious  word  of  Tliine :  "  All 
things  whatsoever  ye  ask,  believe  that  ye  have  re- 
ceived." Blessed  Jesus  !  it  is  Thyself  in  whom  our 
faith  must  be  rooted  if  it  is  to  grow  strong.  Thy 
work  has  freed  us  wholly  from  the  power  of  sin,  and 
opened  the  way  to  the  Father ;  Thy  Love  is  ever 
longing  to  bring  us  into  the  full  fellowship  of  Thy 
glory  and  power;  Thy  Spirit  is  ever  drawing  us  up- 
ward into  a  life  of  perfect  faith  and  confidence ;  we 
are  assured  that  in  Thy  teaching  we  shall  learn  to 
pray  the  prayer  of  faith.  Thou  wilt  train  us  to  pray 
so  that  we  believe  that  we  receive,  to  believe  that  we 
really  have  what  we  ask.  Lord  !  teach  me  so  to 
know  and  trust  and  love  Thee,  so  to  live  and  abide 
in  Thee,  that  all  my  prayers  rise  up  and  come  before 
God  in  Thee,  and  that  my  soul  may  have  in  Thee 
the  assurance  that  I  am  heard.  Amen. 
92 


TWBIvFTH   I.ESSON. 

♦«Have  faith  in  God;"  or,  The  Secret  of  Be- 
lieving Prayer. 

Jesus^  answering,  said  unto  thetn,  HAVE  FAITH  IN  GoD. 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Whosoever  shall  not  doubt  in  his 
hearty  but  shall  believe  that  what  He  saith  cometh  to  pass  ; 
he  shall  have  it,  Therefo7'e  I  say  unto  you,  All  things 
whatsoever  ye  pray  a7id  ask  for,  believe  that  ye  have  received 
them,  and  ye  shall  have  them, — Mark  xi.  22-24. 

THE  promise  of  answer  to  prayer  which  formed 
our  yesterday's  lesson  is  one  of  the  most  won- 
derful in  all  Scripture.  In  how  many  hearts  it  has 
raised  the  question,  How  ever  can  I  attain  the  faith 
that  knows  that  it  receives  all  it  asks  ? 

It  is  this  question  our  Lord  would  answer  to-day. 
Ere  He  gave  that  wonderful  promise  to  His  disciples, 
He  spoke  another  word,  in  which  He  points  out 
where  the  faith  in  the  answer  to  prayer  takes  its  rise, 
and  ever  finds  its  strength.  Have  faith  in  God  : 
this  word  precedes  the  other,  Have  faith  in  the  pro- 
mise of  an  answer  to  prayer.  The  power  to  believe 
a  promise  depends  entirely,  but  only,  on  faith  in  ike 
promiser.  Trust  in  the  person  begets  trust  in  his 
word.  It  is  only  where  we  live  and  associate  with 
93 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

God  in  personal,  loving  intercourse,  where  God 
Himself  is  all  to  us,  where  our  whole  being  is  con- 
tinually opened  up  and  exposed  to  the  mighty  influ- 
ences that  are  at  work  where  His  Holy  Presence  is 
revealed,  that  the  capacity  will  be  developed  for  be- 
lieving that  He  gives  whatever  we  ask. 

This  connection  between  faith  in  God  and  faith  in 
His  promise  will  become  clear  to  us  if  we  think  what 
faith  really  is.  It  is  often  compared  to  the  hand  or 
the  mouth,  by  which  we  take  and  appropriate  what 
is  offered  to  us.  But  it  is  of  importance  that  we 
should  understand  that  faith  is  also  the  ear  by  which 
I  hear  what  is  promised,  the  eye  by  which  I  see  what 
is  offered  me.  On  this  the  power  to  take  depends. 
I  must  hear  the  person  who  gives  me  the  promise : 
the  very  tone  of  his  voice  gives  me  courage  to  be- 
lieve. I  must  see  him :  in  the  light  of  his  eye  and 
countenance  all  fear  as  to  my  right  to  take  passes 
away.  The  value  of  the  promise  depends  on  the 
promiser :  it  is  on  my  knowledge  of  what  the  pro- 
miser  is  that  faith  in  the  promise  depends. 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  Jesus,  ere  He  gives  that 
wonderful  prayer-promise,  first  says,  "  Have  faith 
IN  God."  That  is,  let  thine  eye  be  open  to  the 
Living  God,  and  gaze  on  Him,  seeing  Him  who  is 
Invisible.  It  is  through  the  eye  that  I  yield  myself 
to  the  influence  of  what  is  before  me ;  I  just  allow  it 
to  enter,  to  exert  its  influence,  to  leave  its  impression 
upon  my  mind.  So  believing  God  is  just  looking  to 
God  and  what  He  is,  allowing  Him  to  reveal  His 
presence,  giving  Him  time  and  yielding  the  whole 
94 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

being  to  take  in  the  full  impression  of  what  He  is  as 
God,  the  soul  opened  up  to  receive  and  rejoice  in 
the  overshadowing  of  His  love.  Yes,  faith  is  the  eye 
to  which  God  shows  what  He  is  and  does ;  through 
faith  the  light  of  His  presence  and  the  workings  of 
His  mighty  power  stream  into  the  soul.  As  that 
which  I  see  lives  in  me,  so  by  faith  God  lives  in 
me,  too. 

And  even  so  faith  is  also  the  ear  through  which 
the  voice  of  God  is  always  heard  and  intercourse 
with  Him  kept  up.  It  is  through  the  Holy  Spirit  the 
Father  speaks  to  us ;  the  Son  is  the  Word,  the  sub- 
stance of  what  God  says;  the  Spirit  is  the  living 
voice.  This  the  child  of  God  needs  to  lead  and  guide 
him;  the  secret  voice  from  heaven  must  teach  him, 
as  it  taught  Jesus,  what  to  say  and  what  to  do.  An 
ear  opened  toward  God,  that  is,  a  believing  heart 
waiting  on  Him  to  hear  what  He  says,  will  hear  Him 
speak.  The  words  of  God  will  not  only  be  the  words 
of  a  Book,  but,  proceeding  from  the  mouth  of  God, 
they  will  be  spirit  and  truth,  life  and  power.  They 
will  bring  in  deed  and  living  experience  what  are 
otherwise  only  thoughts.  Through  this  opened  ear 
the  soul  tarries  under  the  influence  of  the  life  and 
power  of  God  Himself  As  the  words  I  hear  enter 
the  mind  and  dwell  and  work  there,  so  through  faith 
God  enters  the  heart,  and  dwells  and  works  there. 

When  faith  now  is  in  full  exercise  as  eye  and  ear, 

as  the  faculty  of  the  soul  by  which  we  see  and  hear 

God,  then  it  will  be  able  to  exercise  its  full  power  as 

hand  and  mouth,  by  which  we  appropriate  God  and 

95 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

His  blessings.  The  power  of  reception  will  depend 
entirely  on  the  power  of  spiritual  perception.  For 
this  reason  Jesus  said,  ere  He  gave  the  promise  that 
God  would  answer  believing  prayer,  "Have  faith 
IN  God."  Faith  is  simply  surrender :  I  yield  myself 
to  the  impression  the  tidings  I  hear  make  on  me. 
By  faith  I  yield  myself  to  the  living  God.  His  glory 
and  love  fill  my  heart,  and  have  the  mastery  over  my 
life.  Faith  is  fellowship  ;  I  give  myself  up  to  the 
influence  of  the  friend  who  makes  me  a  promise,  and 
become  linked  to  him  by  it.  And  it  is  when  we 
enter  into  this  living  fellowship  with  God  Himself,  in 
a  faith  that  always  sees  and  hears  Him,  that  it  be- 
comes easy  and  natural  to  believe  His  promise  as  to 
prayer.  Faith  in  the  promise  is  the  fruit  of  faith  in 
the  promiser ;  the  prayer  of  faith  is  rooted  in  the  life 
of  faith.  And  in  this  way  the  faith  that  prays  effect- 
ually is  indeed  a  gift  of  God.  Not  as  something  that 
He  bestows  or  infuses  at  once,  but  in  a  far  deeper 
and  truer  sense,  as  the  blessed  disposition  or  habit  of 
soul  which  is  wrought  and  grows  up  in  us  in  a  life  of 
intercourse  with  Him.  Surely  for  one  who  knows  his 
Father  well,  and  lives  in  constant  close  intercourse 
with  Him,  it  is  a  simple  thing  to  believe  the  promise 
that  He  will  do  the  will  of  His  child  who  lives  in 
union  with  Himself. 

It  is  because  very  many  of  God's  children  do  not 
understand  this  connection  between  the  life  of  faith 
and  the  prayer  of  faith  that  their  experience  of  the 
power  of  prayer  is  so  limited.  When  they  desire 
earnestly  to  obtain  an  answer  from  God,  they  fix 
96 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

their  whole  heart  upon  the  promise,  and  try  their 
utmost  to  grasp  that  promise  in  faith.  When  they 
do  not  succeed,  they  are  ready  to  give  up  hope  ;  the 
promise  is  true,  but  it  is  beyond  their  power  fo  take 
hold  of  it  in  faith.  Listen  to  the  lesson  Jesus  teaches 
us  this  day :  Have  faith  in  God,  the  Living  God ; 
let  faith  look  to  God  more  than  the  thing  promised  ; 
it  is  His  love.  His  power,  His  living  presence  will 
waken  and  work  the  faith.  A  physician  would  say 
to  one  asking  for  some  means  to  get  more  strength 
in  his  arms  and  hands  to  seize  and  hold,  that  his 
whole  constitution  must  be  built  up  and  strengthened. 
So  the  cure  of  a  feeble  faith  is  alone  to  be  found  in 
the  invigoration  of  our  whole  spiritual  life  by  inter- 
course with  God.  Learn  to  believe  in  God,  to  take 
hold  of  God,  to  let  God  take  possession  of  thy  life, 
and  it  will  be  easy  to  take  hold  of  the  promise.  He 
that  knows  and  trusts  God  finds  it  easy  to  trust  the 
promise,  too. 

Just  note  how  distinctly  this  comes  out  in  the  saints 
of  old.  Every  special  exhibition  of  the  power  of 
faith  was  the  fruit  of  a  special  revelation  of  God. 
See  it  in  Abraham:  "And  the  zu  or d  of  the  Lord  came 
unto  Abram,  saying.  Fear  not,  Abram;  /  am  thy 
shield.  And  He  broicght  him  forth  abroad,  and  said 
.  .  .  And  HE  BELIEVED  THE  Lord."  And  later  again: 
"The  Lord  appeared  unto  him,  and  said  unto  him,  I 
am  God  Almighty.  And  Abram  fell  on  his  face,  and 
God  talked  with  him,  saying,  As  for  Me,  behold  my 
covenant  is  with  thee."  It  was  the  revelation  of 
God  Himself  that  gave  the  promise  its  living  power 
7  97 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

to  enter  the  heart  and  work  the  faith.  Because 
they  knew  God  these  men  of  faith  could  not  do 
anything  but  trust  His  promise.  God's  promise 
will  be  to  us  what  God  Himself  is.  It  is  the  man 
who  walks  before  the  Lord,  and  falls  upon  his  face 
to  listen  while  the  living  God  speaks  to  him,  who 
will  really  receive  the  promise.  Though  we  have 
God's  promises  in  the  Bible,  with  full  liberty  to  take 
them,  the  spiritual  power  is  wanting,  except  as  God 
Himself  speaks  them  to  us.  And  He  speaks  to  those 
who  walk  and  live  ivith  Him.  Therefore,  Have 
FAITH  IN  God:  let  faith  be  all  eye  and  ear,  the 
surrender  to  let  God  make  His  full  impression,  and 
reveal  Himself  fully  in  the  soul.  Count  it  one  of  the 
chief  blessings  of  prayer  to  exercise  faith  in  God,  as 
the  Living  Mighty  God,  who  waits  to  fulfill  in  us  all 
the  good  pleasure  of  His  will,  and  the  work  of  faith 
with  power.  See  in  Him  the  God  of  Love,  whose 
delight  it  is  to  bless  and  impart  Himself.  In  such 
worship  of  faith  in  God  the  power  will  speedily  come 
to  believe  the  promise,  too:  ''  All  things  whatso- 
ever YE  ask,  believe    THAT  YE  RECEIVE."        YeS, 

see  that  thou  dost  in   faith  make  God  thine  own ; 
the  promise  will  be  thine,  too. 

Precious  lesson  that  Jesus  has  to  teach  us  this  day. 
We  seek  God's  gifts  ;  God  wants  to  give  us  Himself 
first.  We  think  of  prayer  as  the  power  to  draw  down 
good  gifts  from  heaven  ;  Jesus  as  the  means  to  draw 
ourselves  up  to  God.  We  want  to  stand  at  the  door 
and  cry  :  Jesus  would  have  us  first  enter  in  and  real- 
ize that  we  are  friends  and  children.  Let  us  accept 
93 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  teaching.  Let  every  experience  of  the  littleness 
of  our  faith  in  prayer  urge  us  first  to  have  and  exer- 
cise more  faith  in  the  Hving  God,  and  in  such  faith  to 
yield  ourselves  to  Him.  A  heart  full  of  God  has 
power  for  the  prayer  of  faith.  Faith  in  God  begets 
faith  in  the  promise,  in  the  promise  too  of  an  answer 
to  prayer. 

Therefore,  child  of  God,  take  time,  take  time,  to 
bow  before  Hint^  to  wait  on  Hint  to  reveal  Himself. 
Take  time,  and  let  thy  soul  in  holy  awe  and  worship 
exercise  and  express  its  faith  in  the  Infinite  One,  and 
as  He  imparts  Himself  and  takes  possession  of  thee 
the  prayer  of  faith  will  crown  thy  faith  in  God. 

''Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


O  my  God  !  I  do  believe  in  Thee.  I  believe  in 
Thee  as  the  Father,  Infinite  in  Thy  Love  and  Power. 
And  as  the  Son,  my  Redeemer  and  my  Life.  And 
as  the  Holy  Spirit,  Comforter  and  Guide  and 
Strength.  Three-One  God,  I  have  faith  in  Thee. 
I  know  and  am  sure  that  all  that  Thou  art  Thou 
art  to  me,  that  all  Thou  hast  promised  Thou  wilt 
perform. 

Lord  Jesus  !  increase  this  faith.  Teach  me  to  take 
time,  and  wait  and  worship  in  the  Holy  Presence 
until  my  faith  takes  in  all  there  is  in  God  for  me. 
Let  it  see  Him  as  the  Fountain  of  all  Life,  working 
with  Almighty  Strength  to  accomplish  His  will  on 
the  world  and  in  me.  Let  it  see  Him  in  His  Love 
99 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

longing  to  meet  and  fulfil  my  desires.  Let  it  so  take 
possession  of  my  heart  and  life  that  through  faith 
God  alone  may  dwell  there.  Lord  Jesus,  help  me  ! 
with  my  whole  heart  would  I  believe  in  God.  Let 
faith  in  God  each  moment  fill  me. 

O  my  Blessed  Saviour  !  how  can  Thy  Church  glo- 
rify Thee,  how  can  it  fulfil  that  work  of  intercession 
through  which  Thy  kindom  must  come,  unless  our 
whole  life  be  faith  in  God.  Blessed  Lord  !  speak 
Thy  Word,  "  Have  faith  in  God,"  into  the  depths 
of  our  souls.    Amen. 

loo 


THIRTEENTH  LESSON. 
«*  Prayer  and  fasting ; "  or,  The  Cure  of  Unbelief. 

Then  came  the  disciples  to  Jesus  apart^  and  said^  IVhy 
could  not  we  cast  him  out  ?  And  Jesus  said  unto  them, 
Because  of  your  unbelief;  for  verily  I  say  tinto  you,  -(f  y^ 
have  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  nothing  shall  be 
impossible  to  you.  Howbeit  this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by 
grayer  and  fasting. — MATT.  xvii.  19-21. 

WHEN  the  disciples  saw  Jesus  cast  the  evil  spirit 
out  of  the  epileptic  whom  "they  could  not 
cure,"  they  asked  the  Master  for  the  cause  of  their 
failure.  He  had  given  them  ' '  power  and  authority 
over  all  devils,  and  to  cure  all  disease."  They  had 
often  exercised  that  power,  and  joyfully  told  how  the 
devils  were  subject  to  them.  And  yet  now,  while  He 
was  on  the  Mount,  they  had  utterly  failed,  That 
there  had  been  nothing  in  the  will  of  God  or  in  the 
nature  of  the  case  to  render  deliverance  impossible, 
had  been  proved  ;  at  Christ's  bidding  the  evil  spirit 
had  gone  out.  From  their  expression,  "Why  could 
we  not  ? "  it  is  evident  that  they  had  wished  and 
sought  to  do  so ;  they  had  probably  used  the  Mas- 
ter's name,  and  called  upon  the  evil  spirit  to  go  out. 
Their  efiforts  had  been  vain,  and,  in  presence  of  the 

lOI 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

multitude,  they  had  been  put  to  shame.  "Why 
could  we  not  ?  " 

Christ's  answer  was  direct  and  plain  :  "  Because  of 
your  unbelief."  The  cause  of  His  success  and  their 
failure,  was  not  owing  to  His  having  a  special  power 
to  which  they  had  no  access.  No  ;  the  reason  was 
not  far  to  seek.  He  had  so  often  taught  them  that 
there  is  one  power,  that  of  faith,  to  which,  in  the 
kingdom  of  darkness,  as  in  the  kingdom  of  God, 
everything  must  bow  ;  in  the  spiritual  world  failure 
has  but  one  cause,  the  want  of  faith.  Faith  is  the 
one  condition  on  which  all  the  Divine  power  can  enter 
into  man  and  work  through  him.  It  is  the  suscep- 
tibility of  the  unseen ;  man's  will  yielded  up  to,  and 
moulded  by,  the  will  of  God.  The  power  they  had 
received  to  cast  out  devils,  they  did  not  hold  in 
themselves  as  a  permanent  gift  or  possession  ;  the 
power  was  in  Christ,  to  be  received,  and  held,  and 
used  by  faith  alone,  living  faith  in  Himself.  Had 
they  been  full  of  faith  in  Him  as  Lord  and  Conqueror 
in  the  spirit  world,  had  they  been  full  of  faith  /;/  Him 
as  having  given  them  authority  to  cast  out  in  His 
name,  this  faith  would  have  given  them  the  victory. 
"Because  of  your  unbelief"  was,  for  all  time,  the 
Master's  explanation  and  reproof  of  impotence  and 
failure  in  His  Church. 

But  such  want  of  faith  must  have  a  cause  too. 
Well  might  the  disciples  have  asked :  "  And  why 
could  we  not  believe  ?  Our  faith  has  cast  out  devils 
before  this  ;  why  have  we  now  failed  in  believing?" 
The  Master  proceeds  to  tell  them  ere  they  ask : 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

*'  This  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  fasting-  and  prayer." 
As  faith  is  the  simplest,  so  it  is  the  highest  exercise 
of  the  spiritual  life,  where  our  spirit  yields  itself  in 
perfect  receptivity  to  God's  Spirit,  and  so  is  strength- 
ened to  its  highest  activity.  This  faith  depends 
entirely  upon  the  state  of  the  spiritual  life ;  only  when 
this  is  strong  and  in  full  health,  when  the  Spirit  of 
God  has  full  sway  in  our  life,  is  there  the  power  of 
faith  to  do  its  mighty  deeds.  And  therefore  Jesus 
adds  :  "  Howbeit  this  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  fast- 
ing and  prayer."  The  faith  that  can  overcome  such 
stubborn  resistance  as  you  have  just  seen  in  this  evil 
spirit  Jesus  tells  them,  is  not  possible  except  to  men 
living  in  very  close  fellowship  with  God,  and  in  very 
special  separation  from  the  world  in  prayer  and  fast- 
ing. And  so  He  teaches  us  two  lessons  in  regard  to 
prayer  of  deep  importance.  The  one,  that  faith  needs 
a  life  of  prayer  in  which  to  grow  and  keep  strong. 
The  other,  that  prayer  needs  fasting  for  its  full  and 
perfect  development. 

Faith  needs  a  life  of  prayer  for  its  full  growth.  In 
all  the  different  parts  of  the  spiritual  life  there  is  such 
close  union,  such  unceasing  action  and  re-action, 
that  each  may  be  both  cause  and  effect.  Thus  it  is 
with  faith.  There  can  be  no  true  prayer  without 
faith  ;  some  measure  of  faith  must  precede  prayer. 
And  yet  prayer  is  also  the  way  to  more  faith ;  there 
can  be  no  higher  degree  of  faith  except  through 
much  prayer.  This  is  the  lesson  Jesus  teaches  here. 
There  is  nothing  needs  so  much  to  grow  as  our  faith. 
"Your  faith  groweth  exceedingly,"  is  said  of  one 
103 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Church.  When  Jesus  spoke  the  words,  "  According 
to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you,"  He  announced  the  law 
of  the  kingdom,  which  tells  us  that  all  have  not 
equal  degrees  of  faith,  that  the  same  person  has  not 
always  the  same  degree,  and  that  the  measure  of 
faith  must  always  determine  the  measure  of  power 
and  of  blessing.  If  we  want  to  know  where  and  how 
our  faith  is  to  grow,  the  Master  points  us  to  the  throne 
of  God.  It  is  in  prayer,  in  the  exercise  of  the  faith  I 
have,  in  fellowship  with  the  living  God,  that  faith  can 
increase.  Faith  can  only  live  by  feeding  on  what  is 
Divine,  on  God  Himself. 

It  is  in  the  adoring  worship  of  God,  the  waiting  on 
Him  and  for  Him,  the  deep  silence  of  soul  that  yields 
itself  for  God  to  reveal  Himself,  that  the  capacity  for 
knowing  and  trusting  God  will  be  developed.  It  is  as 
we  take  His  word  from  the  Blessed  Book,  and  bring 
it  to  Himself,  asking  Him  to  speak  it  to  us  with  His 
living  loving  voice,  that  the  power  will  come  fully  to 
believe  and  receive  the  word  as  God's  own  word  to 
us.  It  is  in  prayer,  in  living  contact  with  God  in 
living  faith,  that  faith,  the  power  to  trust  God,  and  in 
that  trust,  to  accept  everything  He  says,  to  accept 
every  possibility  He  has  offered  to  our  faith,  will 
become  strong  in  us.  Many  Christians  cannot  under- 
stand what  is  meant  by  the  much  prayer  they  some- 
times hear  spoken  of :  they  can  form  no  conception, 
nor  do  they  feel  the  need,  of  spending  hours  with 
God.  But  what  the  Master  says,  the  experience  of 
His  people  has  confirmed,  men  of  strong  faith  are 
men  of  much  prayer. 

104 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

This  just  brings  us  back  again  to  the  lesson  we 
learned  when  Jesus,  before  telling  us  to  believe  that 
we  receive  what  we  ask,  first  said,  "  Have  faith  in 
God."  It  is  God,  the  living  God,  into  whom  our 
faith  must  strike  its  roots  deep  and  broad ;  then  it 
will  be  strong  to  remove  mountains  and  cast  out 
devils.  "  If  ye  have  faith,  nothing  shall  be  impossible 
to  you."  Oh  !  if  we  do  but  give  ourselves  up  to  the 
work  God  has  for  us  in  the  world,  coming  into  con- 
tact with  the  mountains  and  the  devils  there  are  to  be 
cast  away  and  cast  out,  we  should  soon  comprehend 
the  need  there  is  of  much  faith,  and  of  much  prayer, 
as  the  soil  in  which  alone  faith  can  be  cultivated. 
Christ  Jesus  is  our  life,  the  life  of  our  faith  too.  It  is 
His  life  in  us  that  makes  us  strong,  and  makes  us 
simple  to  believe.  It  is  the  dying  to  self  which  much 
prayer  implies,  in  closer  union  to  Jesus,  that  the 
spirit  of  faith  will  come  in  power.  Faith  needs  prayer 
for  its  full  growth. 

And  prayerneeds  fasting  for  its  full  growth  :  this  is 
the  second  lesson.  Prayer  is  the  one  hand  with 
which  we  grasp  the  invisible ;  fasting,  the  other, 
with  which  we  let  loose  and  cast  away  the  visible.  In 
nothing  is  man  more  closely  connected  with  the  world 
of  sense  than  in  his  need  of  food,  and  his  enjoyment 
gf  it.  It  was  the  fruit,  good  for  food,  with  which 
man  was  tempted  and  fell  in  Paradise.  It  was  with 
bread  to  be  made  of  stones  that  Jesus,  when  an  hun- 
gered, was  tempted  in  the  wilderness,  and  in  fasting 
that  He  triumphed.  The  body  has  been  redeemed  to 
be  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  it  is  in  body  as  well 
105 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

as  spirit,  it  is  very  specially,  Scripture  says,  in  eating 
and  drinking,  we  are  to  glorify  God.  It  is  to  be 
feared  that  there  are  many  Christians  to  whom  this 
eating  to  the  glory  of  God,  has  not  yet  become 
a  spiritual  reality.  And  the  first  thought  suggested  by 
Jesus'  w^ords  in  regard  to  fasting  and  prayer,  is,  that 
it  is  only  in  a  life  of  moderation  and  temperance  and 
self-denial  that  there  will  be  the  heart  or  the  strength 
to  pray  much. 

But  then  there  is  also  its  more  literal  meaning. 
Sorrow  and  anxiety  cannot  eat:  joy  celebrates  its 
feasts  with  eating  and  drinking.  There  may  come 
times  of  intense  desire,  when  it  is  strongly  felt  how 
the  body,  with  its  appetites,  lawful  though  they  be, 
still  hinder  the  spirit  in  its  battle  with  the  powers  of 
darkness,  and  the  need  is  felt  of  keeping  it  under. 
We  are  creatures  of  the  senses  :  our  mind  is  helped 
by  what  comes  to  us  embodied  in  concrete  form  ; 
fasting  helps  to  express,  to  deepen,  and  to  confirm 
the  resolution  that  we  are  ready  to  sacrifice  anything, 
to  sacrifice  ourselves,  to  attain  what  we  seek  for  the 
kingdom  of  God.  And  He  who  accepted  the  fasting 
and  sacrifi.ee  of  the  Son,  knows  to  value  and 
accept  and  reward  with  spiritual  power  the  soul  that 
is  thus  ready  to  give  up  all  for  Christ  and  His 
kingdom. 

And  then  follows  a  still  wider  application.  Prayer 
is  the  reaching  out  after  God  and  the  unseen ;  fasting, 
the  letdng  go  of  all  that  is  of  the  seen  and  temporal. 
While  ordinary  Christians  imagine  that  all  that  is  not 
positively  forbidden  and  sinful  is  lawful  to  them,  and 
io6 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

seek  to  retain  as  much  as  possible  of  this  world,  with 
its  property,  its  literature,  its  enjoyments,  the  truly 
consecrated  soul  is  as  the  soldier  who  carries  only 
what  he  needs  for  the  warfare.  Laying  aside  every 
weight,  as  well  as  the  easily  besetting  sin,  afraid 
of  entangling  himself  with  the  affairs  of  this  life,  he 
seeks  to  lead  a  Nazarite  life,  as  one  specially  set 
apart  for  the  Lord  and  His  service.  Without  such 
voluntary  separation,  even  from  what  is  lawful,  no 
one  will  attain  power  in  prayer:  this  kind  goeth  not 
out  but  by  fasting  and  prayer. 

Disciples  of  Jesus  !  who  have  asked  the  Master  to 
teach  you  to  pray,  come  now  and  accept  His  lessons. 
He  tells  you  that  prayer  is  the  path  to  faith,  strong 
faith,  that  can  cast  out  devils.  He  tells  you  :  "  If  ye 
have  faith,  nothing  shall  be  impossible  to  you  ;  "  let 
this  glorious  promise  encourage  you  to  pray  much. 
Is  the  prize  not  worth  the  price  ?  Shall  we  not  give 
up  all  to  follow  Jesus  in  the  path  He  opens  to  us 
here ;  shall  we  not,  if  need  be,  fast  ?  Shall  w  e  not  do 
anything  that  neither  the  body  nor  the  world  around 
hinder  us  in  our  great  life-work, — having  intercourse 
with  our  God  in  prayer,  that  we  may  become  men  of 
faith,  whom  He  can  use  in  His  work  of  saving  the 
world. 

"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


O  Lord  Jesus  !  how  continually  Thou  hast  to  re- 
prove us  for  our  unbelief !     How  strange  it  must 
107 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

appear  to  Thee,  this  terrible  incapacity  of  trusting  our 
Father  and  His  promises.  Lord  !  let  Thy  reproof, 
with  its  searching,  "  Because  of  your  unbelief,"  sink 
into  the  very  depths  of  our  hearts,  and  reveal  to  us 
how  much  of  the  sin  and  suffering  around  us  is  our 
blame.  And  then  teach  us,  Blessed  Lord,  that  there 
is  a  place  where  faith  can  be  learned  and  gained, — 
even  in  the  prayer  and  fasting  that  brings  into  living 
and  abiding  fellowship  with  Thyself  and  the  Father. 

O  Saviour  !  Thou  Thyself  art  the  Author  and  the 
Perfecter  of  our  faith  ;  teach  us  what  it  is  to  let  Thee 
live  in  us  by  Thy  Holy  Spirit.  Lord  !  our  efforts  and 
prayers  for  grace  to  believe  have  been  so  unavailing. 
We  know  why  it  was  :  we  sought  for  strength  in  our- 
selves to  be  given  from  Thee.  Holy  Jesus!  do  at 
length  teach  us  the  mystery  of  Thy  life  in  us,  and 
how  Thou,  by  Thy  Spirit,  dost  undertake  to  live  in 
us  the  life  of  faith,  to  see  to  it  that  our  faith  shall  not 
fail.  O  let  us  see  that  our  faith  will  just  be  a  part  of 
that  wonderful  pjayer-life  which  Thou  givest  in  them 
who  expect  their  training  for  the  ministry  of  interces- 
sion, not  in  word  and  thought  only,  but  in  the  Holy 
Unction  Thou  givest,  the  inflowing  of  the  Spirit 
of  Thine  own  life.  And  teach  us  how,  in  fasting  and 
prayer,  we  may  grow  up  to  the  faith  to  which  nothing 
shall  be  impossible.     Amen. 


NOTE. 


At  the  time  when  Blumhardt  was  passing  through 
his  terrible  conflict  with  the  evil  spirits  in  those  who 
io8 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

were  possessed,  and  seeking  to  cast  them  out  by- 
prayer,  he  often  wondered  what  it  was  that  hindered 
the  answer.  One  day  a  friend,  to  whom  he  had 
spoken  of  his  trouble,  directed  his  attention  to  our 
Lord's  words  about  fasting.  Blumhardt  resolved  to 
give  himself  to  fasting,  sometimes  for  more  than 
thirty  hours.  From  reflection  and  experience  he 
gained  the  conviction  that  it  is  of  more  importance 
than  is  generally  thought.  He  says,  "Inasmuch  as 
the  fasting  is  before  God,  a  practical  proof  that  the 
thing  we  ask  is  to  us  a  matter  of  true  and  pressing  in- 
terest, and  inasmuch  as  in  a  high  degree  it  strengthens 
the  intensity  and  power  of  the  prayer,  and  becomes 
the  unceasing  practical  expression  of  a  prayer  with- 
out words,  I  could  believe  that  it  would  not  be 
without  efficacy,  especially  as  the  Master's  words  had 
reference  to  a  case  like  the  present.  I  tried  it,  with- 
out telling  any  one,  and  in  truth  the  later  conflict  was 
extraordinarily  lightened  by  it.  I  could  speak  with 
much  greater  restfulness  and  decision.  I  did  not  re- 
quire to  be  so  long  present  with  the  sick  one  ;  and  I 
felt  that  I  could  influence  without  being  present." 
109 


FOURTEENTH  LESSON. 

'♦When   ye   stand  praying,  forgive;  or,  Prayer 
and  Love. 

And  whensoever  ye  stand  praying,  forgive^  ^f  y^  have 
aught  against  any  one  ;  that  your  Father  also  which  is  in 
heaven  may  forgive  you  your  trespasses. — MARK  xi.  25. 

THESE  words  follow  immediately  on  the  great 
prayer-promise,  "All  things  whatsoever  ye 
pray,  believe  that  ye  have  received  them,  and  ye  shall 
have  them."  We  have  already  seen  how  the  words 
that  preceded  that  promise,  "  Have  faith  in  God," 
taught  us  that  in  prayer  all  depends  upon  our  relation 
to  God  being  clear ;  these  words  that  follow  on  it 
remind  us  that  our  relation  with  fellow-men  must  be 
clear  too.  Love  to  God  and  love  to  our  neighbor  are 
inseparable  ;  the  prayer  from  a  heart,  that  is  either 
not  right  with  God  on  the  one  side,  or  with  men  on 
the  other,  cannot  prevail.  Faith  and  love  are  essen- 
tial to  each  other. 

We  find  that  this  is  a  thought  to  which  our  Lord 
frequently  gave  expression.  In  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  (Matt.  v.  23,  24),  when  speaking  of  the  sixth 
commandment,  He  taught  His  disciples  how  impos- 

IIO 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

sible  acceptable  worship  to  the  Father  was  if  every- 
thing were  not  right  with  the  brother;  "If  thou  art 
offering  thy  gift  at  the  altar,  and  there  rememberest 
that  thy  brother  hath  aught  against  thee,  leave  there 
thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  thy  way  ;  first  be 
reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  come  and  offer 
thy  gift."  And  so  later,  when  speaking  of  prayer  to 
God,  after  having  taught  us  to  pray,  "  Forgive  us  our 
debts,  as  we  also  have  forgiven  our  debtors,"  He 
added  at  the  close  of  the  prayer :  "  If  you  forgive  not 
men  their  trespasses,  neither  will  your  Father  forgive 
your  trespasses."  At  the  close  of  the  parable  of  the 
unmerciful  servant  He  applies  His  teaching  in  the 
words  :  "  So  shall  also  my  Heavenly  Father  do  unto 
you,  if  ye  forgive  not  every  one  his  brother  from 
your  hearts."  And  so  here,  beside  the  dried-up 
fig-tree,  where  He  speaks  of  the  wonderful  power  of 
faith  and  the  prayer  of  faith.  He  all  at  once,  appar- 
ently without  connection,  introduces  the  thought, 
* '  Whensoever  ye  stand  praying,  forgive,  if  ye  have 
aught  against  any  one  ;  that  your  Father  also  which 
is  in  heaven  may  forgive  you  your  trespasses."  It  is 
as  if  the  Lord  had  learned  during  His  life  at  Nazareth 
and  afterwards  that  disobedience  to  the  law  of  love  to 
men  was  the  great  sin  even  of  praying  people,  and 
the  great  cause  of  the  feebleness  of  their  prayer.  And 
it  is  as  if  He  wanted  to  lead  us  into  His  own  blessed 
experience  that  nothing  gives  such  liberty  of  access 
and  such  power  in  believing  as  the  consciousness 
that  we  have  given  ourselves  in  love  and  compassion, 
for  those  whom  God  loves. 
Ill 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

The  first  lesson  taught  here  is  that  of  a  forgiving 
disposition.  We  pray,  "Forgive,  even  as  we  have 
forgiven."  Scripture  says,  "  Forgive  one  another, 
even  as  God  also  in  Christ  forgave  you."  God's  full 
and  free  forgiveness  is  to  be  the  rule  of  ours  with 
men.  Otherwise  our  reluctant,  half-hearted  forgive- 
ness, which  is  not  forgiveness  at  all,  will  be  God's 
rule  with  us.  Every  prayer  rests  upon  our  faith  in 
God's  pardoning  grace.  If  God  dealt  with  us  after 
our  sins,  not  one  prayer  could  be  heard.  Pardon 
opens  the  door  to  all  God's  love  and  blessing; 
because  God  has  pardoned  all  our  sin,  our  prayer 
can  prevail  to  obtain  all  we  need.  The  deep  sure 
ground  of  answer  to  prayer  is  God's  forgiving  love. 
When  it  has  taken  possession  of  the  heart,  we  pray 
in  faith.  But  also,  when  it  has  taken  possession  of 
the  heart,  we  live  in  love.  God's  forgiving  disposi- 
tion, revealed  in  His  love  to  us,  becomes  a  disposi- 
tion in  us;  as  the  power  of  His  forgiving  love  shed 
abroad  and  dwelling  within  us,  we  forgive  even  as 
He  forgives.  If  there  be  great  and  grievous  injury  or 
injustice  done  us,  we  seek  first  of  all  to  possess  a 
Godlike  disposition ;  to  be  kept  from  a  sense  of 
wounded  honor,  from  a  desire  to  maintain  our  rights, 
or  from  rewarding  the  offender  as  he  has  deserved. 
In  the  little  annoyances  of  daily  life,  we  are  watchful 
not  to  excuse  the  hasty  temper,  the  sharp  word,  the 
quick  judgment,  with  the  thought  that  we  mean  no 
harm,  that  we  do  not  keep  the  anger  long,  or  that  it 
would  be  too  much  to  expect  from  feeble  human 
nature  that  we  should  really  forgive  the  way  God  and 

112 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Christ  do.  No,  we  take  the  command  Hterally, 
"■  Even  as  Christ  forgave,  so  also  do  ye."  The  blood 
that  cleanses  the  conscience  from  dead  works,  cleanses 
from  selfishness  too ;  the  love  it  reveals  is  pardoning 
love,  that  takes  possession  of  us  and  flows  through 
us  to  others.  Our  forgiving  love  to  men  is  the  evi- 
dence of  the  reality  of  God's  forgiving  love  in  us,  and 
so  the  condition  of  the  prayer  of  faith. 

There  is  a  second,  more  general  lesson  ;  our  daily 
life  in  the  world  is  made  the  test  of  our  intercourse 
with  God  in  prayer.  How  often  the  Christian,  when 
he  comes  to  pray,  does  his  utmost  to  cultivate  ceitaia 
frames  of  mind  which  he  thinks  will  be  pleasing.  He 
does  not  understand,  or  forgets,  that  life  does  not 
consist  of  so  many  loose  pieces,  of  which,  now  the 
one,  then  the  other,  can  be  taken  up.  Life  is  a  whole, 
and  the  pious  frame  of  the  hour  of  prayer  is  judged  of 
by  God  from  the  ordinary  frame  of  the  daily  life  of 
which  the  hour  of  prayer  is  but  a  small  part.  Not 
the  feeling  I  call  up,  but  the  tone  of  my  life  during 
the  day,  is  God's  criterion  of  what  I  really  am  and 
desire.  My  drawing  nigh  to  God  is  of  one  piece  with 
my  intercourse  with  men  and  earth  ;  failure  here  will 
cause  failure  there.  And  that  not  only  when  there 
is  the  distinct  consciousness  of  anything  wrong  be- 
tween my  neighbor  and  myself ;  but  the  ordinary 
current  of  my  thinking  and  judging,  the  unloving 
thoughts  and  words  I  allow  to  pass  unnoticed,  can 
hinder  my  prayer.  The  effectual  prayer  of  faith  comes 
out  from  a  life  given  up  to  the  will  and  the  love  of 
God.  Not  according  to  what  I  try  to  be  when  pray- 
8  113 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

ing,  but  what  I  am  when  not  praying,  is  my  prayer 
dealt  with  by  God. 

We  may  gather  these  thoughts  into  a  third  lesson : 
In  our  life  with  men  the  one  thing  on  which  every- 
thing depends  is  love.  The  spirit  of  forgiveness  is 
the  spirit  of  love.  Because  God  is  love,  He  forgives ; 
it  is  only  when  we  are  dwelling  in  love  that  we  can 
forgive  as  God  forgives.  In  love  to  the  brethren  we 
have  the  evidence  of  love  to  the  Father,  the  ground 
of  confidence  before  God,  and  the  assurance  that  our 
prayer  will  be  heard,  (i  John  iv.  20;  iii.  18-21,  23.) 
"  Let  us  love  in  deed  and  truth ;  hereby  shall  we 
assure  our  heart  before  Him.  If  our  heart  condemn 
us  not,  we  have  boldness  toward  God,  and  what- 
ever we  ask,  we  receive  of  Him."  Neither  faith  nor 
work  will  profit  if  we  have  not  love  ;  it  is  love  that 
unites  with  God,  it  is  love  that  proves  the  reality  of 
faith.  As  essential  as  in  the  word  that  precedes  the 
great  prayer-promise  in  Mark  xi.  24,  "  Have  faith  in 
God,"  is  this  one  that  follows  it,  "Have  love  to 
men."  The  right  relations  to  the  living  God  above 
me,  and  the  living  men  around  me,  are  the  conditions 
of  effectual  prayer. 

This  love  is  of  special  consequence  when  we  labor 
for  such  and  pray  for  them.  We  sometimes  give  our- 
selves to  work  for  Christ,  from  zeal  for  His  cause,  as 
we  call  it,  or  for  our  own  spiritual  health,  without 
giving  ourselves  in  personal  self-sacrificing  love  for 
those  whose  souls  we  seek.  No  wonder  that  our 
faith  is  feeble  and  does  not  conquer.  To  look  on 
each  wretched  one,  however  unlovable  he  be,  in  the 
114 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

light  of  the  tender  love  of  Jesus  the  Shepherd  seeking 
the  lost ;  to  see  Jesus  Christ  in  him,  and  to  take  him 
up,  for  Jesus'  sake,  in  a  heart  that  really  loves, — this, 
this  is  the  secret  of  beHeving  prayer  and  successful 
effort.  Jesus,  in  speaking  of  forgiveness,  speaks  of 
love  as  its  root.  Just  as  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
He  connected  his  teaching  and  promises  about  prayer 
with  the  call  to  be  merciful,  as  the  Father  in  heaven 
is  merciful  (Matt.  v.  7,  9,  22,  38-48),  so  we  see  it 
here ;  a  loving  life  is  the  condition  of  believing 
prayer. 

It  has  been  said  :  There  is  nothing  so  heart  search- 
ing as  believing  prayer,  or  even  the  honest  effort  to 
pray  in  faith.  O  let  us  not  turn  the  edge  of  that  self- 
examination  by  the  thought  that  God  does  not  hear 
our  prayer  for  reasons  known  to  Himself  alone.  By 
no  means.  '*  Ye  ask  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask 
amiss."  Let  that  word  of  God  search  us.  Let  us 
ask  whether  our  prayer  be  indeed  the  expression 
of  a  life  wholly  given  over  to  the  will  of  God  and  the 
love  of  man.  Love  is  the  only  soil  in  which  faith  can 
strike  its  roots  and  thrive.  As  it  throws  its  arms  up, 
and  opens  its  heart  heavenward,  the  Father  always 
looks  to  see  if  it  has  them  opened  towards  the  evil 
and  the  unworthy  too.  Li  that  love,  not  indeed  the 
love  of  perfect  attainment,  but  the  love  of  fixed  pur- 
pose and  sincere  obedience,  faith  can  alone  obtain 
the  blessing.  It  is  He  who  gives  himself  to  let  the 
love  of  God  dwell  in  him,  and  in  the  practice  of  daily 
life  to  love  as  God  loves,  who  will  have  the  power  to 
believe  in  the  Love  that  hears  his  every  prayer.  It  is 
115 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  Lamb,  who  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne ;  it  is 
suffering  and  forbearing  love  that  prevails  with  God 
in  prayer.  The  merciful  shall  obtain  mercy ;  the 
meek  shall  inherit  the  earth. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  prav." 


Blessed  Father  1  Thou  art  Love,  and  only  he  that 
abideth  in  love  abideth  in  Thee  and  in  fellowship 
with  Thee.  The  Blessed  Son  hath  this  day  again 
taught  me  how  deeply  true  this  is  of  my  fellowship 
with  Thee  in  prayer.  O  my  God  !  let  Thy  love,  shed 
abroad  in  my  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  be  in  me  a 
fountain  of  love  to  all  around  me,  that  out  of  a  life  in 
love  may  spring  the  power  of  believing  prayer.  O  my 
Father  !  grant  by  the  Holy  Spirit  that  this  may  be  my 
experience,  that  a  life  in  love  to  all  around  me  is  the 
gate  to  a  life  in  the  love  of  my  God.  And  give  me 
especially  to  find  in  the  joy  with  which  I  forgive  day 
by  day  whoever  might  offend  me,  the  proof  that  Thy 
forgiveness  to  me  is  a  power  and  a  life. 

Lord  Jesus  !  my  Blessed  Teacher  !  teach  Thou  me 
to  forgive  and  to  love.  Let  the  power  of  Thy  blood 
make  the  pardon  of  my  sins  such  a  reality,  that  for- 
giveness, as  shown  by  Thee  to  me,  and  by  me  to 
others,  may  be  the  very  joy  of  heaven.  Show  me 
whatever  in  my  intercourse  with  fellow-men  might 
hinder  my  fellowship  with  God,  so  that  my  daily  life 
in  my  own  home  and  in  society  may  be  the  school  in 
which  strength  and  confidence  are  gathered  for  the 
prayer  of  faith.     Amen. 

ii6 


FIFTEENTH  I^ESSON. 

"  If  two  agree ;  **  or,  The  Power  of  United  Prayer. 

Again  I  say  unto  yoic,  That  if  two  of  you  shall  agree  on 
earth  as  touching  any  thing  that  they  shall  ask,  IT  SHALL 
BE  DONE/i'r  thetn  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  For 
where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  Name,  there 
am  I  in  the  midst  of  them. — Matt.  xviii.  19,  20. 

ONE  of  the  first  lessons  of  our  Lord  in  His  school 
of  prayer  was  :  Not  to  be  seen  of  men.  Enter 
thy  inner  chamber ;  be  alone  with  the  Father.  When 
He  has  thus  taught  us  that  the  meaning  of  prayer  is 
personal  individual  contact  with  God,  He  comes  with 
a  second  lesson :  You  have  need  not  only  of  secret 
solitary,  but  also  of  public  united  prayer.  And  He 
gives  us  a  very  special  promise  for  the  united  prayer 
of  two  or  three  who  agree  in  what  they  ask.  As  a 
tree  has  its  root  hidden  in  the  ground  and  its  stem 
growing  up  into  the  sunlight,  so  prayer  needs  equally 
for  its  full  development  the  hidden  secrecy  in  which 
the  soul  meets  God  alone,  and  the  public  fellowship 
with  those  who  find  in  the  name  of  Jesus  their 
common  meeting-place. 

The  reason  why  this  must  be  so  is  plain.    The  bond 
that  unites  a  man  to  his  fellow-men  is  no  less  real 
117 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

and  close  than  that  which  unites  him  to  God :  he  is 
one  with  them.  Grace  renews  not  alone  our  relation 
to  God,  but  to  man  too.  We  not  only  learn  to  say 
*'  My  Father,"  but  "  Our  Father."  Notiiing  would  be 
more  unnatural  than  that  children  of  a  family  should 
always  meet  their  father  separately,  but  never  in  the 
united  expression  of  their  desires  or  their  love.  Be- 
lievers are  not  only  members  of  one  family,  but  even 
of  one  body.  Just  as  each  member  of  the  body 
depends  on  the  other,  and  the  full  action  of  the  spirit 
dwelling  in  the  body  depends  on  the  union  and  co- 
operation of  all,  so  Christians  cannot  reach  the  full 
blessing  God  is  ready  to  bestow  through  His  Spirit, 
but  as  they  seek  and  receive  it  in  fellowship  with 
each  other.  It  is  in  the  union  and  fellowship  of  be- 
lievers that  the  Spirit  can  manifest  His  full  power.  It 
was  to  the  hundred  and  twenty  continuing  in  one 
place  together,  and  praying  with  one  accord,  that  the 
Spirit  came  from  the  throne  of  the  glorified  Lord. 

The  marks  of  true  united  prayer  are  given  us  in 
these  words  of  our  Lord.  The  first  is  agreement  as 
to  the  thing  asked.  There  must  not  only  be  generally 
the  consent  to  agree  with  anything  another  may  ask: 
there  must  be  some  special  thing,  matter  of  distinct 
united  desire ;  the  agreement  must  be,  as  all  prayer, 
in  spirit  and  in  truth.  In  such  agreement  it  will 
become  very  clear  to  us  what  exactly  we  are  asking, 
whether  we  may  confidently  ask  according  to  God's 
will,  and  whether  we  are  ready  to  believe  that  we 
have  received  what  we  ask. 

The  second  mark  is  the  gathering  in,  or  into,  the 
ii8 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Name  of  Jesus.  We  shall  afterwards  have  much 
more  to  learn  of  the  need  and  the  power  of  the  Name 
of  Jesus  in  prayer ;  here  our  Lord  teaches  us  that  the 
Name  must  be  the  centre  of  union  to  which  believers 
gather,  the  bond  of  union  that  makes  them  one,  just 
as  a  home  contains  and  unites  all  who  are  in  it.  "  The 
Name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower ;  the  righteous 
runneth  into  it  and  escape."  That  Name  is  such  a 
reality  to  those  who  understand  and  believe  it,  that  to 
meet  within  it  is  to  have  Himself  present.  The  love 
and  unity  of  His  disciples  have  to  Jesus  infinite 
attraction ;  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  in  my 
Name,  thei^e  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them.'"  It  is  the 
living  presence  of  Jesus,  in  the  fellowship  of  His 
loving  praying  disciples,  that  gives  united  prayer  its 
power. 

The  third  mark  is,  the  sure  answer:  *'It  shall  be 
done  for  them  of  my  Father."  A  prayer-meeting  for 
maintaining  religious  fellowship,  or  seeking  our  own 
edification,  may  have  its  use ;  this  was  not  the 
Saviour's  view  in  its  appointment.  He  meant  it  as  a 
means  of  securing  special  answer  to  prayer.  A  prayer 
meeting  without  recognized  answer  to  prayer  ought 
to  be  an  anomaly.  When  any  of  us  have  distinct 
desires  in  regard  to  which  we  feel  too  weak  to  exer- 
cise the  needful  faith,  we  ought  to  seek  strength  in 
the  help  of  others.  In  the  unity  of  faith  and  of  love 
and  of  the  Spirit,  the  power  of  the  Name  and  the 
Presence  of  Jesus  acts  more  freely  and  the  answer 
comes  more  surely.  The  mark  that  there  has  been 
true  united  prayer  is  the  fruit,  the  answer,  the  receiv- 
119 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

ing  of  the  thing  we  have  asked  :  *'  I  say  unto  you, 
//  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven." 

What  an  unspeakable  privilege  this  of  united 
prayer  is,  and  what  a  power  it  might  be.  If  the  be- 
lieving husband  and  wife  knew  that  they  were  joined 
together  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  to  experience  his 
presence  and  power  in  united  prayer  (i  Peter) ;  if 
friends  believed  what  mighty  help  two  or  three  pray- 
ing in  concert  could  give  each  other ;  if  in  every 
prayer  meeting  the  coming  together  in  the  Name,  the 
faith  in  the  Presence,  and  the  expectation  of  the 
answer,  stood  in  the  foreground  ;  if  in  every  Church 
united  effectual  prayer  were  regarded  as  one  of  the 
chief  purposes  for  which  they  are  banded  together, 
the  highest  exercise  of  their  power  as  a  Church ;  if  in 
the  Church  universal  the  coming  of  the  kingdom,  the 
coming  of  the  King  Himself,  first  in  the  mighty  out- 
pouring of  His  Holy  Spirit,  then  in  His  own  glorious 
person,  were  really  matter  of  unceasing  united  crying 
to  God  ; — O  who  can  say  what  blessing  might  come 
to,  and  through,  those  who  thus  agreed  to  prove  God 
in  the  fulfilment  of  His  promise. 

In  the  Apostle  Paul  we  see  very  distinctly  what  a 
reality  his  faith  in  the  power  of  united  prayer  was. 
To  the  Romans  he  writes  (xv.  30) :  "I  beseech  you, 
brethren,  by  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that  ye  strive 
together  with  me  in  your  prayer  to  God  for  me."  He 
expects  in  answer  to  be  delivered  from  his  enemies, 
and  to  be  prospered  in  his  work.  To  the  Corinthians 
(2  Cor.  i.  11),  "  God  will  still  deliver  us,  ye  also  help- 
120 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

ing  together  on  our  behalf  by  your  supplications; '^ 
their  prayer  is  to  have  a  real  share  in  his  deliverance. 
To  the  Ephesians  he  writes:  "With  all  prayer  and 
supplication  praying  at  all  seasons  in  the  Spirit  for  all 
the  saints  and  on  my  behalf,  that  utterance  may  be 
given  unto  me."  His  power  and  success  in  his  min- 
istry he  makes  to  depend  on  their  prayers.  With  the 
Philippians  (i.  19)  he  expects  that  his  trials  will  turn 
to  his  salvation  and  the  progress  of  the  gospel 
^'through  your  supplications  and  the  supply  of  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  To  the  Colossians  (iv.  3)  he 
adds  to  the  injunction  to  continue  steadfast  in  prayer: 
"Withal  praying  for  us  too,  that  God  may  open  unto 
us  a  door  for  the  word."  And  to  the  Thessalonians 
(2  Thess.  iii.  i)  he  writes:  "Finally,  brethren,  pray 
for  us,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  may  run  and  be 
glorified,  and  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  un- 
reasonable men."  It  is  everywhere  evident  that  Paul 
felt  himself  the  member  of  a  body,  on  the  sympathy 
and  co-operation  of  which  he  was  dependent,  and  that 
he  counted  on  the  prayers  of  these  Churches  to  gain 
for  him,  what  otherwise  might  not  be  given.  The 
prayers  of  the  Church  were  to  him  as  real  a  factor  in 
the  work  of  the  kingdom,  as  the  power  of  God. 

Who  can  say  what  power  a  Church  could  develop 
and  exercise,  if  it  gave  itself  to  the  work  of  prayer 
day  and  night  for  the  coming  of  the  kingdom,  for 
God's  power  on  His  servants  and  His  word,  for  the 
glorifying  of  God  in  the  salvation  of  souls  ?  Most 
Churches  think  their  members  are  gathered  into  one 
simply  to  take  care  of  and  build  up  each  other.    They 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

know  not  that  God  rules  the  world  by  the  prayers  of 
His  saints  ;  that  prayer  is  the  power  by  which  Satan 
is  conquered  ;  that  by  prayer  the  Church  on  earth  has 
disposal  of  the  powers  of  the  heavenly  world.  They 
do  not  remember  that  Jesus  has,  by  His  promise, 
consecrated  every  assembly  in  His  Name  to  be  a  gate 
of  heaven,  where  His  Presence  is  to  be  felt,  and 
His  Power  experienced  in  the  Father  fulfilling  their 
desires. 

We  cannot  sufficiently  thank  God  for  the  blessed 
week  of  united  prayer,  with  which  Christendom  in 
our  days  opens  every  year.  As  proof  of  our  unity  and 
our  faith  in  the  power  of  united  prayer,  as  a  training- 
school  for  the  enlargement  of  our  hearts  to  take  in  all 
the  needs  of  the  Church  universal,  as  a  help  to  united 
persevering  prayer,  it  is  of  unspeakable  value.  But 
very  specially  as  a  stimulus  to  continued  union  in 
prayer  in  the  smaller  circles,  its  blessing  has  been 
great.  And  it  will  become  even  greater,  as  God's 
people  recognize  what  it  is,  all  to  meet  as  one  in  the 
Name  of  Jesus,  to  have  His  Presence  in  the  midst  of 
a  body  all  united  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  boldly  to 
claim  the  promise  that  it  shall  be  done  of  the  Father 
what  they  agree  to  ask. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord !  who  didst  in  Thy  high-priestly 
prayer  ask  so  earnestly  for  the  unity  of  Thy  people, 
teach  us  how  Thou  dost  invite  and  urge  us  to  this 

122 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

unity  by  Thy  precious  promise  given  to  united  prayer. 
It  is  when  we  are  one  in  love  and  desire  that  our 
faith  has  Thy  presence  and  the  Father's  answer. 

O  Father !  we  pray  for  Thy  people,  and  for  every 
smaller  circle  of  those  who  meet  together,  that  they 
may  be  one.  Remove,  we  pray,  all  selfishness  and 
self-interest,  all  narrowness  of  heart  and  estrange- 
ment, by  which  that  unity  is  hindered.  Cast  out  the 
spirit  of  the  world  and  the  flesh,  through  which  Thy 
promise  loses  all  its  power.  O  let  the  thought  of 
Thy  presence  and  the  Father's  favor  draw  us  all 
nearer  to  each  other. 

Grant  especially,  Blessed  Lord,  that  Thy  Church 
may  believe  that  it  is  by  the  power  of  united  prayer 
that  she  can  bind  and  loose  in  heaven  ;  that  Satan 
can  be  cast  out ;  that  souls  can  be  saved  ;  that  moun- 
tains can  be  removed ;  that  the  kingdom  can  be 
hastened.  And  grant,  good  Lord  !  that  in  the  circle 
with  which  I  pray,  the  prayer  of  the  Church  may  in- 
deed be  the  power  through  which  Thy  Name  and 
Word  are  glorified.  Amen. 
123 


SIXTEENTH  I.ESSON. 

* 'Speedily,  though  bearing  long:  "  or,  The  Power 
of  Persevering  Prayer. 

And  He  spake  a  pa7-able  tinto  ihem  to  the  end  that  they 
ought  always  to  pray ^  and  not  to  faint.  ,  .  .  j4fid  the  Lord 
saidj  Hear  what  the  tinrighteous  judge  saiih.  And  shall 
not  God  avejtge  His  own  elect,  zvhich  cry  to  Him  day  and 
nighty  and  He  is  long-suffering  over  ihem  ?  I  say  tinto 
you,  that  He  will  avenge  them  speedily. — LuKE  xviii.  1-8. 

OF  all  the  mysteries  of  the  prayer-world,  the  need 
of  persevering  prayer  is  one  of  the  greatest. 
That  the  Lord,  who  is  so  loving  and  longing  to  bless, 
should  have  to  be  supplicated  time  after  time,  some- 
times year  after  year,  before  the  answer  comes,  we  can- 
not easily  understand.  It  is  also  one  of  the  greatest 
practical  difficulties  in  the  exercise  of  believing  prayer. 
When,  after  persevering  supplication,  our  prayer  re- 
mains unanswered,  it  is  often  easiest  for  our  slothful 
flesh,  and  it  has  all  the  appearance  of  pious  submis- 
sion, to  think  that  we  must  now  cease  praying,  be- 
cause God  may  have  His  secret  reason  for  withhold- 
ing His  answer  to  our  request. 

It  is  by  faith  alone  that  the  difficulty  is  overcome. 
When  once  faith  has  taken   its   stand   upon   God's 
124 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Word  and  the  Name  of  Jesus,  and  has  yielded  itself 
to  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  to  seek  God's  will  and 
honor  alone  in  its  prayer,  it  need  not  be  discouraged 
by  delay.  It  knows  from  Scripture  that  the  power  of 
believing  prayer  is  simply  irresistible  ;  real  faith  can 
never  be  disappointed.  It  knows  how,  just  as  water, 
to  exercise  the  irresistible  power  it  can  have,  must  be 
gathered  up  and  accumulated,  until  the  stream  can 
come  down  in  full  force,  there  must  often  be  a  heap- 
ing up  of  prayer,  until  God  sees  that  the  measure  is 
full,  and  the  answer  comes.  It  knows  how,  just  as 
the  ploughman  has  to  take  his  ten  thousand  steps 
and  sow  his  ten  thousand  seeds,  each  one  a  part  of 
the  preparation  for  the  final  harvest,  so  there  is  a 
need-be  for  oft-repeated  persevering  prayer,  all  work- 
ing out  some  desired  blessing.  It  knows  for  certain 
that  not  a  single  believing  prayer  can  fail  of  its  effect 
in  heaven,  but  has  its  influence,  and  is  treasured  up 
to  work  out  an  answer  in  due  time  to  him  who  per- 
severeth  to  the  end.  It  knows  that  it  has  to  do  not 
with  human  thoughts  or  possibilities,  but  with  the 
word  of  the  living  God,  And  so,  even  as  Abraham 
through  so  many  years  "in  hope  believed  against 
hope,"  and  then  "through  faith  and  patience  inhe- 
rited the  promise,"  it  accounts  that  the  long-suffering 
of  the  Lord  is  salvation,  waiting  and  hasting  unto 
the  coming  of  its  Lord  to  fulfill  His  promise. 

To  enable  us,  when  the  answer  to  our  prayer  does 

not  come  at  once,  to   combine  quiet  patience  and 

joyful  confidence  in  our  persevering  prayer,  we  must 

specially  try  to  understand  the  two  words  in  which 

125 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

our  Lord  sets  forth  the  character  and  conduct,  not  of 
the  unjust  judge,  but  of  our  God  and  Father,  towards 
those  whom  He  allows  to  cry  day  and  night  to  Him : 
"  He  is  lo7ig- suffering  over  them ;  He  will  avenge 
them  speedily.''' 

He  will  avenge  them  speedily^  the  Master  says. 
The  blessing  is  all  prepared  ;  He  is  not  only  willing, 
but  most  anxious  to  give  them  what  they  ask  ;  ever- 
lasting love  burns  with  the  longing  desire  to  reveal 
itself  fully  to  its  beloved,  and  to  satisfy  their  needs. 
God  will  not  delay  one  moment  longer  than  is  abso- 
lutely necessary;  He  will  do  all  in  His  power  to 
hasten  and  speed  the  answer. 

But  why,  if  this  be  true  and  His  power  be  infinite, 
does  it  often  last  so  long  with  the  answer  to  prayer? 
And  why  must  God's  own  elect  so  often,  in  the 
midst  of  suffering  and  conflict,  cry  day  and  night? 
"He  is  long-suffering  over  them."  "Behold!  the 
husbandman  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the 
earth,  being  long-suffering  over  it,  till  it  receive  the 
early  and  the  latter  rain."  The  husbandman  does 
indeed  long  for  his  harvest,  but  knows  that  it  must 
have  its  full  time  of  sunshine  and  rain,  and  has  long 
patience.  A  child  so  often  wants  to  pick  the  half- 
ripe  fruit;  the  husbandman  knows  to  wait  till  the 
proper  time.  Man,  in  his  spiritual  nature,  too,  is 
under  the  law  of  gradual  growth  that  reigns  in  all 
created  life.  It  is  only  in  the  path  of  development 
that  he  can  reach  his  divine  destiny.  And  it  is  the 
Father,  in  whose  hands  are  the  times  and  seasons, 
who  alone  knows  the  moment  when  the  soul  or  the 
126 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Church  is  ripened  to  that  fulness  of  faith  in  which  it 
can  really  take  and  keep  the  blessing.  As  a  father 
who  longs  to  have  his  only  child  home  from  school, 
and  yet  waits  patiently  till  the  time  of  training  is  com- 
pleted, so  it  is  with  God  and  His  children  ;  He  is  the 
long-suffering  One  and  answers  speedily. 

The  insight  into  this  truth  leads  the  believer  to 
cultivate  the  corresponding  dispositions :  patience  and 
faith^  waiting  and  hasting,  are  the  secret  of  his  perse- 
verance. By  faith  in  the  promise  of  God  we  know 
that  we  have  the  petitions  we  have  asked  of  Him. 
Faith  takes  and  holds  the  answer  in  the  promise,  as 
an  unseen  spiritual  possession,  rejoices  in  it,  and 
praises  for  it.  But  there  is  a  difference  between  the 
faith  that  thus  holds  the  word  and  knows  that  it  has 
the  answer,  and  the  clearer,  fuller,  riper  faith  that 
obtains  the  promise  as  a  present  experience.  It  is  in 
persevering,  not  unbelieving,  but  confident  and  prais- 
ing prayer,  that  the  soul  grows  up  into  that  full  union 
with  its  Lord  in  which  it  can  enter  upon  the  posses- 
sion of  the  blessing  in  Him.  There  may  be  in  these 
around  us,  there  may  be  in  that  great  system  of  being 
of  which  we  are  part,  there  may  be  in  God's  govern- 
ment, things  that  have  to  be  put  right  through  our 
prayer,  ere  the  answer  can  fully  come :  the  faith  that 
has,  according  to  the  command,  believed  that  it  has 
received,  can  allow  God  to  take  His  time  ;  it  knows 
it  has  prevailed  and  must  prevail.  In  quiet,  persis- 
tent and  determined  perseverance  it  continues  in 
prayer  and  thanksgiving  until  the  blessing  come. 
And  so  we  see  combined  what  at  first  sight  appears 
127 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

so  contradictory;  the  faith  that  rejoices  in  the  answer 
of  the  unseen  God  as  a  present  possession,  with  the 
patience  that  cries  day  and  night  until  it  be  revealed. 
The  speedily  of  God's  long-suffering  is  met  by  the 
triumphant  but  patient  faith  of  His  waiting  child. 

Our  great  danger  in  this  school  of  the  answer  de- 
layed, is  the  temptation  to  think  that,  after  all,  it  may 
not  be  God's  will  to  give  us  what  we  ask.  If  our 
prayer  be  according  to  God's  word,  and  under  the 
leading  of  the  Spirit,  let  us  not  give  way  to  these 
fears.  Let  us  learn  to  give  God  time.  God  needs 
time  with  us.  If  we  only  give  Him  time,  that  is,  time 
in  the  daily  fellowship  with  Himself,  for  Him  to  ex- 
ercise the  full  influence  of  His  presence  on  us,  and 
time,  day  by  day,  in  the  course  of  our  being  kept 
waiting,  for  faith  to  prove  its  reality  and  to  fill  our 
whole  being,  He  Himself  will  lead  us  from  faith  to 
vision  ;  we  shall  see  the  glory  of  God,  Let  no  delay 
shake  our  faith.  Of  faith  it  holds  good:  first  the 
blade,  then  the  ear,  then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear. 
Each  believing  prayer  brings  a  step  nearer  the  final 
victory.  Each  beheving  prayer  helps  to  ripen  the 
fruit  and  bring  us  nearer  to  it ;  it  fills  up  the  measure 
of  prayer  and  faith  known  to  God  alone  ;  it  conquers 
the  hindrances  in  the  unseen  world ;  it  hastens  the 
end.  Child  of  God !  give  the  Father  time.  He  is 
long-suffering  over  you.  He  wants  the  blessing  to 
be  rich,  and  full,  and  sure  ;  give  Him  time,  while  you 
cry  day  and  night.  Only  remember  the  word:  "I 
say  unto  you,  He  will  avenge  them  speedily." 

The  blessing  of  such  persevering  prayer  is  un- 
128 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

speakable.  There  is  nothing  so  heart-searching  as 
the  prayer  of  faith.  It  teaches  you  to  discover  and 
confess,  and  give  up  everything  that  hinders  the 
coming  of  the  blessing ;  everything  there  may  be  not 
in  accordance  with  the  Father's  will.  It  leads  to 
closer  fellowship  with  Him  who  alone  can  teach 
to  pray,  to  a  more  entire  surrender  to  draw  nigh 
under  no  covering  but  that  of  the  blood,  and  the 
Spirit.  It  calls  to  a  closer  and  more  simple  abiding 
in  Christ  alone.  Christian  !  give  God  time.  He  will 
perfect  that  which  concerneth  you.  "  Long-suflfering 
— speedily,"  this  is  God's  watchword  as  you  enter 
the  gates  of  prayer :  be  it  yours  too. 

Let  it  be  thus  whether  you  pray  for  yourself,  or  for 
others.  All  labor,  bodily  or  mental,  needs  time  and 
effort :  we  must  give  up  ourselves  to  it.  Nature  dis- 
covers her  secrets  and  yields  her  treasures  only  to 
diligent  and  thoughtful  labor.  However  little  we  can 
understand  it,  in  the  spiritual  husbandry  it  is  the 
same :  the  seed  we  sow  in  the  soil  of  heaven,  the 
efiforts  we  put  forth,  and  the  influence  we  seek  to 
exert  in  the  world  above,  need  our  whole  being  :  we 
must  give  ourselves  to  prayer.  But  let  us  hold  fast 
the  great  confidence,  that  in  due  season  we  shall 
reap,  if  we  faint  not. 

And  let  us  specially  learn  the  lesson  as  we  pray  for 
the  Church  of  Christ.  She  is  indeed  as  the  poor 
widow,  in  the  absence  of  her  Lord,  apparently  at  the 
mercy  of  her  adversary,  helpless  to  obtain  redress. 
Let  us,  when  we  pray  for  His  Church  or  any  portion 
of  it,  under  the  power  of  the  world,  asking  Him  to 
9  129 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

visit  her  with  the  mighty  workings  of  His  Spirit  and 
to  prepare  her  for  His  coming,  let  us  pray  in  the 
assured  faith  :  prayer  does  help,  praying  always  and 
not  fainting  will  bring  the  answer.  Only  give  God 
time.  And  then  keep  crying  day  and  night.  "Hear 
what  the  unrighteous  judge  saith.  And  shall  not 
God  avenge  His  own  elect,  which  cry  to  Him  day 
and  night,  and  He  is  long-suffering  over  them.  I  say 
unto  you,  He  will  avenge  Ihem  speedily.''' 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


O  Lord  my  God  !  teach  me  now  to  know  Thy  way, 
and  in  faith  to  apprehend  what  Thy  Beloved  Son  has 
taught:  "He  will  avenge  them  speedily."  Let  Thy 
tender  love,  and  the  delight  Thou  hast  in  hearing  and 
blessing  Thy  children,  lead  me  implicitly  to  accept 
Thy  promise,  that  we  receive  what  we  believe,  that 
we  have  the  petitions  we  ask,  and  that  the  answer 
will  in  due  time  be  seen.  Lord  !  we  understand  the 
seasons  in  nature,  and  know  to  wait  with  patience  for 
the  fruit  we  long  for— O  fill  us  with  the  assurance 
that  not  one  moment  longer  than  is  needed  wilt  Thou 
delay,  and  that  faith  will  hasten  the  answer. 

Blessed  Master  !  Thou  hast  said  that  it  is  a  sign  of 
God's  elect  that  they  cry  day  and  night.  O  teach  us 
to  understand  this.  Thou  knowest  how  speedily  we 
grow  faint  and  weary.  It  is  as  if  the  Divine  Majesty 
is  so  much  beyond  the  need  or  the  reach  of  continued 
supplication,  that  it  does  not  become  us  to  be  too  im- 
130 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

portunate.  O  Lord  !  do  teach  me  how  real  the  labor 
of  prayer  is.  I  know  how  here  on  earth,  when  I  have 
failed  in  an  undertaking,  I  can  often  succeed  by 
renewed  and  more  continuing  effort,  by  giving  more 
time  and  thought:  show  me  how,  by  giving  myself 
more  entirely  to  prayer,  to  live  in  prayer,  I  shall 
obtain  what  I  ask.  And  above  all,  O  my  blessed 
Teacher  !  Author  and  Perfecter  of  faith,  let  by  Thy 
grace  my  whole  life  be  one  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God 
who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me — in  whom 
my  prayer  gains  acceptance,  in  whom  I  have  the  as- 
surance of  the  answer,  in  whom  the  answer  will  be 
mine.  Lord  Jesus  !  in  this  faith  I  will  pray  always 
and  not  faint.    Amen. 


NOTE. 

The  need  of  persevering  importunate  prayer  ap- 
pears to  some  to  be  at  variance  with  the  faith  which 
knows  that  it  has  received  what  it  asks  (Mark  xi.  24). 
One  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  life  is  the  harmony 
between  the  gradual  and  the  sudden,  immediate  full 
possession,  and  slow  imperfect  appropriation.  And 
so  here  persevering  prayer  appears  to  be  the  school 
in  which  the  soul  is  strengthened  for  the  boldness  of 
faith.  And  with  the  diversity  of  operations  of  the 
Spirit  there  may  be  some  in  whom  faith  takes  more 
the  form  of  persistent  waiting ;  while  to  others,  tri- 
umphant thanksgiving  appears  the  only  proper  ex- 
pression of  the  assurance  of  having  been  heard. 

In  a  very  remarkable  way  the  need  of  persevering 
131 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

prayer,  and  the  gradual  rising  into  greater  ease  in  ob- 
taining answer,  is  illustrated  in  the  life  of  Blumhardt. 
Complaints  had  been  lodged  against  him  of  neglect- 
ing his  work  as  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  and  devoting 
himself  to  the  healing  of  the  sick  ;  and  especially  his 
unauthorized  healing  of  the  sick  belonging  to  other 
congregations.  In  his  defence  he  writes  :  "I  simply 
ventured  to  do  what  becomes  one  who  has  the  charge 
of  souls,  and  to  pray  according  to  the  command  of 
the  Lord  in  James  i.  6,  7.  In  no  way  did  I  trust  to  my 
own  power,  or  imagine  that  I  had  any  gift  that  others 
had  not.  But  this  is  true,  I  set  myself  to  the  work  as 
a  minister  of  the  gospel,  who  has  a  right  to  pray.  But 
I  speedily  discovered  that  the  gates  of  heaven  were 
not  fully  opened  to  me.  Often  I  was  inclined  to  retire 
in  despair.  But  the  sight  of  the  sick  ones,  who  could 
find  help  nowhere,  gave  me  no  rest.  I  thought  of  the 
word  of  the  Lord :  '  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you ' 
(Luke  xi.  9,  10).  And  farther,  I  thought  that  if  the 
Church  and  her  ministers  had,  through  unblief,  sloth, 
and  disobedience,  lost  what  was  needed  for  the  over- 
coming of  the  power  of  Satan,  it  was  just  for  such 
times  of  leanness  and  famine  that  the  Lord  had 
spoken  the  parable  of  the  friend  at  midnight  and  his 
three  loaves.  I  felt  that  I  was  not  worthy  thus  at 
midnight,  in  a  time  of  great  darkness,  to  appear  before 
God  as  His  friend,  and  ask  for  a  member  of  my  con- 
gregation what  he  needed.  And  yet,  to  leave  him 
uncared  for,  I  could  not  either.  And  so  I  kept 
knocking,  as  the  parable  directs,  or,  as  some  have 
said,  with  great  presumption  and  tempting  God.  Be 
132 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

this  as  it  may,  I  could  not  leave  my  guest  unprovided. 
At  this  time  the  parable  of  the  widow  became  very 
precious  to  me.  I  saw  that  the  Church  was  the  widow, 
and  I  was  a  minister  of  the  Church.  I  had  the  right 
to  be  her  mouthpiece  against  the  adversary  ;  but  for 
a  long  time  the  Lord  would  not.  I  asked  nothing 
more  than  the  three  loaves  ;  what  I  needed  for  my 
guest.  At  last  the  Lord  listened  to  the  importunate 
beggar,  and  helped  me.  Was  it  wrong  of  me  to  pray 
thus  ?  The  two  parables  must  surely  be  applicable 
somewhere,  and  where  was  greater  need  to  be  con- 
ceived ? 

' '  And  what  was  the  fruit  of  my  prayer  ?  The  friend 
who  was  at  first  unwilling,  did  not  say,  Go  now,  I  will 
myself  give  to  your  friend  what  he  needs ;  I  do  not 
require  you  ;  but  gave  it  to  me  as  His  friend,  to  give 
to  my  gHest.  And  so  I  used  the  three  loaves  and  had 
to  spare.  But  the  supply  was  small,  and  new  guests 
came ;  because  they  saw  I  had  a  heart  to  help  them, 
and  that  I  would  take  the  trouble  even  at  midnight  to 
go  to  my  friend.  When  I  asked  for  them,  too,  I  got 
the  needful  again,  and  there  was  again  to  spare.  How 
could  I  help  that  the  needy  continually  came  to  my 
house?  Was  I  to  harden  myself,  and  say,  Why  do 
you  come  to  me  ?  there  are  larger  and  better  homes 
in  the  city,  go  there.  Their  answer  was,  Dear  sir,  we 
cannot  go  there.  We  have  been  there :  they  were 
very  sorry  to  send  us  away  so  hungry,  but  they  could 
not  undertake  to  go  and  ask  a  friend  for  what  we 
wanted.  Do  go,  and  get  us  bread,  for  we  suffer  great 
pain.  What  could  I  do  ?  They  spoke  the  truth,  and 
^33 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

their  suffering  touched  my  heart.  However  much 
labor  it  cost  me,  I  went  each  time  again,  and  got  the 
three  loaves.  Often  I  got  what  I  asked  much  quicker 
than  at  first,  and  also  much  more  abundantly.  But 
all  did  not  care  for  this  bread,  and  so  some  left  my 
home  hungry."  ^ 

In  his  first  struggles  with  the  evil  spirits,  it  took 
him  more  than  eighteen  months  of  much  prayer  and 
labor  before  the  final  victory  was  gained.  Afterwards 
he  had  such  ease  of  access  to  the  throne,  and  stood 
in  such  close  communication  with  the  unseen  world, 
that  often,  when  letters  came  asking  prayer  for  sick 
people,  he  could,  after  just  looking  upward  for  a 
single  moment,  obtain  the  answer  as  to  whether  they 
would  be  healed. 

1  From  Johann  Christopke  Blumhardt.  Ein  Lebensbild  von  F. 
Zundel. 


SEVENTEENTH  I.ESSON. 

**  I  know  that  Thou   hearest  me  always ;  *'  or 
Prayer  in  harmony  with  the  being  of  God. 

Father^  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  heardesi  me.  And  I 
knew  that  Thou  hearest  ifie  always. — JoHN  xi.  41,  42. 

Thou  art  my  Son;  this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee.  Ask 
ofme^  and  I  shall  give  Thee. — Ps.  ii.  7,  8. 

IN  the  New  Testament  we  find  a  distinction  made 
between  faith  and  knowledge.  "To  one  is  given, 
through  the  Spirit,  the  word  of  wisdom  ;  to  another 
the  word  of  knowledge,  according  to  the  same  Spirit ; 
to  another  faith,  in  the  same  Spirit."  In  a  child  or  a 
simple-minded  Christian  there  may  be  much  faith 
with  little  knowledge.  Childlike  simplicity  accepts 
the  truth  without  difficulty,  and  often  cares  little  to 
give  itself  or  others  any  reason  for  its  faith  but  this  : 
God  has  said.  But  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  we  should 
love  and  serve  Him,  not  only  with  all  the  heart,  but 
also  with  all  the  mind  ;  that  we  should  grow  up  into 
an  insight  into  the  Divine  wisdom  and  beauty  of  all 
His  ways  and  words  and  works.  It  is  only  thus  that 
the  believer  will  be  able  fully  to  approach  and  rightly 
to  adore  the  glory  of  God's  grace;  and  only  thus 
that  our  heart  can  intelligently  apprehend  the  trea- 
135 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

sures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  there  are  in  redemp- 
tion, and  be  prepared  to  enter  fully  into  the  highest 
note  of  the  song  that  rises  before  the  throne :  * '  O 
the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge  af  God  ! ' ' 

In  our  prayer-life  this  truth  has  its  full  application. 
While  prayer  and  faith  are  so  simple  that  the  new- 
born convert  can  pray  with  power,  true  Christian 
science  finds  in  the  doctrine  of  prayer  some  of  its 
deepest  problems.  In  how  far  is  the  power  of  prayer 
a  reality  ?  If  so,  how  God  can  grant  to  prayer  such 
mighty  power?  How  can  the  action  of  prayer  be 
harmonized  with  the  will  and  the  decrees  of  God? 
How  can  God's  sovereignty  and  our  will,  God's  lib- 
erty and  ours,  be  reconciled  ? — these  and  other  like 
questions  are  fit  subjects  for  Christian  meditation  and 
inquiry.  The  more  earnestly  and  reverently  w^e  ap- 
proach such  mysteries,  the  more  shall  we  in  adoring 
wonder  fall  down  to  praise  Him  who  hath  in  prayer 
given  such  power  to  man. 

One  of  the  secret  difficulties  with  regard  to  prayer, 
— one  which,  though  not  expressed,  does  often  really 
hinder  prayer, — is  derived  from  the  perfection  of 
God,  in  His  absolute  independence  of  all  that  is  out- 
side of  Himself.  Is  He  not  the  Infinite  Being,  who 
owes  what  He  is  to  Himself  alone,  who  determines 
Himself,  and  whose  wise  and  holy  will  has  deter- 
mined all  that  is  to  be  ?  How  can  prayer  influence 
Him,  or  He  be  moved  by  prayer  to  do  what  other- 
wise would  not  be  done  ?  Is  not  the  promise  of  an 
answer  to  prayer  simply  a  condescension  to  our  weak- 
136 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

ness  ?  Is  what  is  said  of  the  power — the  much-avail- 
ing power — of  prayer  anything  more  than  an  accom- 
modation to  our  mode  of  thought,  because  the  Deity 
never  can  be  dependent  on  any  action  from  without 
for  its  doings  ?  And  is  not  the  blessing  of  prayer 
simply  the  influence  it  exercises  upon  ourselves  ? 

In  seeking  an  answer  to  such  questions,  we  find 
the  key  in  the  very  being  of  God,  in  the  mystery  of 
the  Holy  Trinity.  If  God  was  only  one  Person,  shut 
up  within  Himself,  there  could  be  no  thought  of 
nearness  to  Him  or  influence  on  Him.  But  in  God 
there  are  three  Persons.  In  God  we  have  Father  and 
Son,  who  have  in  the  Holy  Spirit  their  living  bond  of 
unity  and  fellowship.  When  eternal  Love  begat  the 
Son,  and  the  Father  gave  the  Son  as  the  Second  Per- 
son, a  place  next  Himself  as  His  Equal  and  His 
Counsellor,  there  was  a  way  opened  for  prayer  and 
its  influence  in  the  very  inmost  life  of  Deity  itself. 
Just  as  on  earth,  so  in  heaven  the  whole  relation 
between  Father  and  Son  is  that  of  giving  and  taking. 
And  if  that  taking  is  to  be  as  voluntary  and  self- 
determined  as  the  giving,  there  must  be  on  the  part 
of  the  Son  an  asking  and  receiving.  In  the  holy  fel- 
lowship of  the  Divine  Persons,  this  asking  of  the  Son 
was  one  of  the  great  operations  of  the  Thrice  Blessed 
Life  of  God.  Hence  we  have  in  Psalm  ii  :  ♦'  This  day 
I  have  begotten  Thee  :  ask  of  me  and  I  will  give 
Thee."  The  Father  gave  the  Son  the  place  and  the 
power  to  act  upon  Him.  The  asking  of  the  Son  was 
no  mere  show  or  shadow,  but  one  of  those  life-move- 
ments in  which  the  love  of  the  Father  and  the  Son 
137 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

met  and  completed  each  other.  The  Father  had  de- 
termined that  He  should  not  be  alone  in  His  coun- 
sels; there  was  a  Son  on  whose  asking  and  accepting 
their  fulfilment  should  depend.  And  so  there  was  in 
the  very  Being  and  Life  of  God  an  asking  of  which 
prayer  on  earth  was  to  be  the  reflection  and  the  out- 
flow. It  was  not  without  including  this  that  Jesus 
said,  *'  I  knew  that  Thou  always  hearest  me."  Just 
as  the  Sonship  of  Jesus  on  earth  may  not  be  separated 
from  His  Sonship  in  heaven,  even  so  with  His  prayer 
on  earth,  it  is  the  continuation  and  the  counterpart  of 
His  asking  in  heaven.  The  prayer  of  the  man  Christ 
Jesus  is  the  link  between  the  eternal  asking  of  the 
only-begotten  Son  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  and 
the  prayer  of  men  upon  earth.  Prayer  has  its  rise  and 
its  deepest  source  in  the  very  Being  of  God.  In  the 
bosom  of  Deity  nothing  is  ever  done  without  prayer 
— the  asking  of  the  Son  and  the  giving  of  the  Father.* 
This  may  help  us  somewhat  to  understand  how  the 
prayer  of  man,  coming  through  the  Son,  can  have 
effect  upon  God.  The  decrees  of  God  are  not  deci- 
sions made  by  Him  without  reference  to  the  Son,  or 
His  petition,  or  the  petition  to  be  sent  up  through 
Him.  By  no  means.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  first- 
begotten,  the  Head  and  Heir  of  all  things  :  all  things 
were  created  through  Hint  and  imto  Him,  and  all 
things  consist  in  Him.  In  the  counsels  of  the  Father, 
the  Son,  as  Representative  of  all  creation,  had  always 
a  voice  ;  in  the  decrees  of  the  eternal  purpose  there 
was  always  room   left  for  the  liberty  of  the  Son  as 

1  See  this  thought  developed  in  R  L,ober,  Die  Lehre  vom  Gebet. 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Mediator  and  Intercessor,  and  so  for  the  petitions  of 
all  who  draw  nigh  to  the  Father  in  the  Son. 

And  if  the  thought  come  that  this  liberty  and  power 
of  the  Son  to  act  upon  the  Father  is  at  variance  with 
the  immutability  of  the  Divine  decrees,  let  us  not  for- 
get that  there  is  not  with  God  as  with  man,  a  past  by 
which  He  is  irrevocably  bound.  God  does  not  live 
in  time  with  its  past  and  future ;  the  distinctions  of 
time  have  no  reference  to  Him  who  inhabits  Eter- 
nity. And  Eternity  is  an  ever-present  Now,  in  which 
the  past  is  never  past,  and  the  future  always  present. 
To  meet  our  human  weakness,  Scripture  must  speak 
of  past  decrees,  and  a  coming  future.  In  reality,  the 
immutability  of  God's  counsel  is  ever  still  in  perfect 
harmony  with  His  liberty  to  do  whatsoever  He  will. 
Not  so  were  the  prayers  of  the  Son  and  His  people 
taken  up  into  the  eternal  decrees  that  their  effect 
should  only  be  an  apparent  one;  but  so,  that  the 
Father-heart  holds  itself  open  and  free  to  listen  to 
every  prayer  that  rises  through  the  Son,  and  that 
God  does  indeed  allow  Himself  to  be  decided  by 
prayer  to  do  what  He  otherwise  would  not  have 
done. 

This  perfect  harmony  and  union  of  Divine  Sover- 
eignty and  human  liberty  is  to  us  an  unfathomable 
mystery,  because  God  as  the  Eternal  One  tran- 
scends all  our  thoughts.  But  let  it  be  our  comfort 
and  strength  to  be  assured  that  in  the  eternal  fellow- 
ship of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  the  power  of  prayer 
has  its  origin  and  certainty,  and  that  through  our 
union  with  the  Son,  our  prayer  is  taken  up  and  can 
139 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

have  its  influence  in  the  inner  life  of  the  Blessed 
Trinity.  God's  decrees  are  no  iron  framework 
against  which  man's  liberty  would  vainly  seek  to 
struggle.  No.  God  Himself  is  the  Living  Love,  who 
in  His  Son  as  man  has  entered  into  the  tenderest 
relation  with  all  that  is  human,  who  through  the  Holy 
Spirit  takes  up  all  that  is  human  into  the  Divine  life 
of  love,  and  keeps  Himself  free  to  give  every  human 
prayer  its  place  in  His  government  of  the  world. 

It  is  in  the  daybreak  light  of  such  thoughts  that  the 
doctrine  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  no  longer  is  an  ab- 
stract speculation,  but  the  living  manifestation  of  the 
way  in  which  it  were  possible  for  man  to  be  taken  up 
into  the  fellowship  of  God,  and  his  prayer  to  become 
a  real  factor  in  God's  rule  of  this  earth.  And  we  can, 
as  in  the  distance,  catch  glimpses  of  the  light  that 
from  the  eternal  world  shines  out  on  words  such  as 
these:  "Through  Him  we  have  access  by  one 
Spirit  unto  the  Father." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Everlasting  God  !  the  Three-One  and  Thrice  Holy! 
in  deep  reverence  would  I  with  veiled  face  worship 
before  the  holy  mystery  of  Thy  Divine  Being.  And 
if  it  please  Thee,  O  most  glorious  God,  to  unveil 
aught  of  that  mystery,  I  would  bow  with  fear  and 
trembling,  lest  I  sin  against  Thee,  as  I  meditate  on 
Thy  glory. 

Father  !  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  bearest  this  name 
not  only  as  the  Father  of  Thy  children  here  on  earth, 
140 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

but  as  having  from  eternity  subsisted  as  the  Father 
with  Thine  only-begotten  Son.  I  thank  Thee  that  as 
Father  Thou  canst  hear  our  prayer,  because  Thou  hast 
from  eternity  given  a  place  in  Thy  counsels  to  the  ask- 
ing of  Thy  Son.  I  thank  Thee  that  we  have  seen  in 
Him  on  earth,  what  the  blessed  intercourse  was  He  had 
with  Thee  in  Heaven  ;  and  how  from  eternity  in  all 
Thy  counsels  and  decrees  there  had  been  room  left 
for  His  prayers  and  their  answers.  And  I  thank  Thee 
above  all  that  through  His  true  human  nature  on 
Thy  throne  above,  and  through  Thy  Holy  Spirit  in 
our  human  nature  here  below,  a  way  has  been  opened 
up  by  which  every  human  cry  of  need  can  be  taken 
up  into  and  touch  the  Life  and  the  Love  of  God,  and 
receive  in  answer  whatsoever  it  shall  ask. 

Blessed  Jesus  !  in  whom  as  the  Son  the  path  of 
prayer  has  been  opened  up,  and  who  givest  us  assu- 
rance of  the  answer,  we  beseech  Thee,  teach  Thy 
people  to  pray.  O  let  this  each  day  be  the  sign  of 
our  sonship,  that,  like  Thee,  we  know  that  the  Father 
heareth  us  always.    Amen. 


NOTE. 

*'  God  hears  prayer.^'  This  simplest  view  of 
prayer  is  taken  throughout  Scripture.  It  dwells  not 
on  the  reflex  influence  of  prayer  on  our  heart  and 
Hfe,  although  it  abundantly  shows  the  connection  be- 
tween prayer  as  an  act,  and  prayer  as  a  state.  It 
rather  fixes  with  great  definiteness  the  objective  or 
real  purposes  of  prayer,  to  obtain  blessing,  gifts, 
141 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

deUverances  from  God.  *  Ask  and  it  shall  be  given,' 
Jesus  says. 

"  However  true  and  valuable  the  reflection  may  be, 
that  God,  foreseeing  and  foreordaining  all  things,  has 
also  foreseen  and  foreordained  our  prayers  as  links 
in  the  chain  of  events,  of  cause  and  effect,  as  a  real 
power;  yet  we  feel  convinced  that  this  is  not  the  light 
in  which  the  mind  can  find  peace  in  this  great  sub- 
ject, nor  do  we  think  that  here  is  the  attractive  power 
to  draw  us  in  prayer.  We  feel  rather  that  such  a 
reflection  diverts  the  attention  from  the  Object 
whence  come  the  impulse,  life  and  strength  of  prayer. 
The  living  God,  cotemporary  and  not  merely  eternal,^ 
the  living,  merciful  Holy  One,  God  manifesting 
Himself  to  the  soul,  God  saying,  "  Seek  my  face ;  " 
this  is  the  magnet  that  draws  us,  this  alone  can  open 
heart  and  lips.  .  .  . 

"  In  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God  we  have  the  full 
solution  of  the  difficulty.  He  prayed  on  earth,  and 
that  not  merely  as  man,  but  as  the  Son  of  God  incar- 
nate. His  prayer  on  earth  is  only  the  manifestation 
of  His  prayer  from  all  eternity,  when  in  the  Divine 
counsel  He  was  set  up  as  the  Christ.  .  .  .  The  Son 
was  appointed  to  be  heir  of  all  things.  From  all 
eternity  the  Son  of  God  was  the  Way,  the  Mediator. 
He  was,  to  use  our  imperfect  language,  from  eternity 
speaking  unto  the  Father  on  behalf  of  the  world." — 
Saphir,  The  Hidden  Life,  cliap.  vi.  See  also  The 
Lord's  Prayer,  p.  12. 

1  Should  it  not  rather  be  cotemporary,  because  eternal,  in'the 
proper  meauing  of  this  latter  word  ? 
142 


EIGHTEENTH   LESSON. 

*«  Whose  is  this  image?  *'  or,  Prayer  in  harmony 
with  the  Destiny  of  Man. 

He  saith  unto  them,  Whose  is  this  image  and  superscrip' 
Hon  ? — Matt.  xxii.  20. 

Ajtd  God  saidj  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image ^  after  our 
likeness. — Gen.  i.  26. 

^  ^  \  1  rHOSE  is  this  image  ?  "  It  was  by  this  ques- 
VV  tioii  that  Jesus  foiled  his  enemies  when 
they  thought  to  take  Him,  and  settled  the  matter  of 
duty  in  regard  to  the  tribute.  The  question  and  the 
principle  it  involves  are  of  universal  application. 
Nowhere  more  truly  than  in  man  himself.  The 
image  he  bears  decides  his  destiny.  Bearing  God's 
image,  he  belongs  to  God ;  prayer  to  God  is  what 
he  was  created  for.  Prayer  is  part  of  the  wondrous 
likeness  he  bears  to  his  Divine  original ;  of  the  deep 
mystery  of  the  fellowship  of  love  in  which  the  Three- 
One  has  His  blessedness,  prayer  is  the  earthly  image 
and  likeness. 

The  more  we  meditate  on  what  prayer  is,  and  the 
wonderful  power  with  God  which  it  has,  the  more 
we  feel  constrained  to  ask  who  and  what  man  is, 
that  such  a  place  in  God's  counsels  should  have  been 
allotted  to  him.  Sin  has  so  degraded  him,  that  from 
143 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

what  he  is  now,  we  can  form  no  conception  of  what 
he  was  meant  to  be.  We  must  turn  back  to  God's 
own  record  of  man's  creation  to  discover  there  what 
God's  purpose  was,  and  what  the  capacities  with 
which  man  was  endowed  for  the  fulfilment  of  that 
purpose. 

Man's  destiny  appears  clearly  from  God's  language 
at  creation.  It  was  to  fill,  to  subdue,  to  have  domin- 
ion over  the  earth  and  all  in  it.  All  the  three  ex- 
pressions show  us  that  man  was  meant,  as  God's 
representative,  to  hold  rule  here  on  earth.  As  God's 
viceroy  he  was  to  fill  God's  place:  himself  subject  to 
God,  he  was  to  keep  all  else  in  subjection  to  Him. 
It  was  the  will  of  God  that  all  that  was  to  be  done 
on  earth  should  be  done  through  him :  the  history  of 
the  earth  was  to  be  entirely  in  his  hands. 

In  accordance  with  such  a  destiny  was  the  position 
he  was  to  occupy,  and  the  power  at  his  disposal. 
When  an  earthly  sovereign  sends  a  viceroy  to  a  dis- 
tant province,  it  is  understood  that  he  advises  as  to 
the  policy  to  be  adopted,  and  that  that  advice  is 
acted  on :  that  he  is  at  liberty  to  apply  for  troops 
and  the  other  means  needed  for  carrying  out  the 
policy  or  maintaining  the  dignity  of  the  empire.  If 
his  policy  be  not  approved  of,  he  is  recalled  to  make 
room  for  some  one  who  better  understands  his  sove- 
reign's desires  ;  as  long  as  he  is  trusted,  his  advice 
is  carried  out.  As  God's  representative,  man  was  to 
have  ruled ;  all  was  to  have  been  done  under  his 
will  and  rule ;  on  his  advice  and  at  his  request 
heaven  was  to  have  bestowed  its  blessing  on 
144 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

earth.  His  praj-er  was  to  have  been  the  wonderful, 
though  simple  and  most  natural  channel,  in  which 
the  intercourse  between  the  King  in  heaven  and  His 
faithful  servant  man,  as  lord  of  this  world,  was  to 
have  been  maintained.  The  destinies  of  the  world 
were  given  into  the  power  of  the  wishes,  the  will,  the 
prayer  of  man. 

With  sin  all  this  underwent  a  terrible  change: 
man's  fall  brought  all  creation  under  the  curse.  With 
redemption  the  beginning  was  seen  of  a  glorious 
restoration.  No  sooner  had  God  begun  in  Abraham 
to  form  for  Himself  a  people  from  whom  kings,  yea, 
the  Great  King,  should  come  forth,  than  we  see  what 
power  the  prayer  of  God's  faithful  servant  has  to  de- 
cide the  destinies  of  those  who  come  in  contact  with 
him.  In  Abraham  we  see  how  prayer  is  not  only,  or 
even  chiefly,  the  means  of  obtaining  blessing  for  our- 
selves, but  is  the  exercise  of  His  royal  prerogative  to 
influence  the  destinies  of  men,  and  the  will  of  God 
which  rules  them.  We  do  not  once  find  Abraham 
praying  for  himself  His  prayer  for  Sodom  and  Lot, 
for  Abimelech,  for  Ishmael,  prove  what  power  a  man 
who  is  God's  friend  has  to  make  the  history  of  those 
around  him. 

This  had  been  man's  destiny  from  the  first.  Scrip- 
ture not  only  tells  us  this,  but  also  teaches  us  how  it 
was  that  God  could  entrust  man  with  such  a  high 
calling.  It  was  because  he  had  created  him  in  his 
own  iynage  and  likeness.  The  external  rule  was  not 
committed  to  him  without  the  inner  fitness  :  the 
bearing  God's  image  in  having  dominion,  in  being 
lo  145 


With  Christ  in  the  School  cf  Prayer. 

lord  of  all,  had  its  root  in  the  inner  likeness,  in  his 
nature.  There  was  an  inner  agreement  and  harmony 
between  God  and  man,  an  incipient  Godlikeness, 
which  gave  man  a  real  fitness  for  being  the  mediator 
between  God  and  His  world,  for  he  was  to  be  pro- 
phet, priest  and  king,  to  interpret  God's  will,  to 
represent  nature's  needs,  to  receive  and  dispense 
God's  bounty.  It  was  in  bearing  God's  image  that 
he  could  bear  God's  rule;  he  was  indeed  so  like 
God,  so  capable  of  entering  into  God's  purposes,  and 
carrying  out  His  plans,  that  God  could  trust  him  with 
the  wonderful  privilege  of  asking  and  obtaining  what 
the  world  might  need.  And  although  sin  has  for  a 
time  frustrated  God's  plans,  prayer  still  remains  what 
it  would  have  been  if  man  had  never  fallen  :  the 
proof  of  man's  Godlikeness,  the  vehicle  of  his  inter- 
course with  the  Infinite  Unseen  One,  the  power  that 
is  allowed  to  hold  the  hand  that  holds  the  destinies 
of  the  universe.  Prayer  is  not  merely  the  cry  of  the 
suppliant  for  mercy ;  it  is  the  highest  forth-putting  of 
his  will  by  man,  knowing  himself  to  be  of  Divine 
origin,  created  for  and  capable  of  being,  in  kinglike 
liberty,  the  executor  of  the  counsels  of  the  Eternal. 

What  sin  destroyed,  grace  has  restored.  What  the 
first  Adam  lost,  the  second  has  won  back.  In  Christ 
man  regains  his  original  position,  and  the  Church, 
abiding  in  Christ,  inherits  the  promise:  "Ask  what 
ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  Such  a 
promise  does  by  no  means,  in  the  first  place,  refer  to 
the  grace  or  blessing  we  need  for  ourselves.  It  has 
reference  to  our  position  as  the  fruit-bearing  branches 
146 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

of  the  Heavenly  Vine,  who,  like  Him,  only  live  for 
the  work  and  glory  of  the  Father.  It  is  for  those  who 
abide  in  Him,  who  have  forsaken  self  to  take  up 
their  abode  in  Him  with  His  life  of  obedience  and 
self-sacrifice,  who  have  lost  their  life  and  found  it  in 
Him,  who  are  now  entirely  given  up  to  the  interests 
of  the  Father  and  His  kingdom.  These  are  they  who 
understand  how  their  new  creation  has  brought  them 
back  to  their  original  destiny,  has  restored  God's 
image  and  likeness,  and  with  it  the  power  to  have 
dominion.  Such  have  indeed  the  power,  each  in 
their  own  circle,  to  obtain  and  dispense  the  powers  of 
heaven  here  on  earth.  With  holy  boldness  they  may 
make  known  what  they  will :  they  live  as  priests  in 
God's  presence  ;  as  kings  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come  begin  to  be  at  their  disposal.^  They  enter  upon 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise:  "Ask  whatsoever  ye 
will,  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

Church  of  the  living  God  !  thy  calling  is  higher  and 

1 "  God  is  seeking  priests  among  the  sons  of  men.  A  human 
priesthood  is  one  of  the  essential  parts  of  His  eternal  plan.  To 
rule  creation  by  man  is  His  design  ;  to  carry  on  the  worship  of 
creation  by  man  is  no  less  part  of  His  design. 

"  Priesthood  is  the  appointed  link  between  heaven  and  earth, 
the  channel  of  intercourse  between  the  sinner  and  God.  Such 
a  priesthood,  in  so  far  as  expiation  is  concerned,  is  in  the  hands 
of  the  Son  of  God  alone  ;  in  so  far  as  it  is  to  be  the  medium  of 
communication  between  Creator  and  creature,  is  also  in  the 
hands  of  redeemed  men — of  the  Church  of  God. 

"God  is  seeking  kings.  Not  out  of  the  ranks  of  angels. 
Fallen  man  must  furnish  Him  with  the  rulers  of  His  universe. 
Human  hands  must  wield  the  sceptre,  human  heads  must  wear 
the  crown."— 7",%^  Rent  Veil,  by  Dr.  H.  Bonar. 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

holier  than  thou  knowest.  Through  thy  members,  as 
kings  and  priests  unto  God,  would  God  rule  the 
world ;  their  prayers  bestow  and  withhold  the  bless- 
ings of  heaven.  In  His  elect  who  are  not  just  content 
to  be  themselves  saved,  but  yield  themselves  wholly, 
that  through  them,  even  as  through  the  Son,  the 
Father  may  fulfil  all  His  glorious  counsel,  in  these 
His  elect,  who  cry  day  and  night  unto  Him,  God 
would  prove  how  wonderful  man's  original  destiny 
was.  As  the  image-bearer  of  God  on  earth,  the  earth 
was  indeed  given  into  his  hand.  When  he  fell,  all 
fell  with  him :  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and 
travaileth  in  pain  together.  But  now  he  is  redeemed ; 
the  restoration  of  the  original  dignity  has  begun.  It 
is  in  very  deed  God's  purpose  that  the  fulfilment  of 
His  eternal  purpose,  and  the  coming  of  His  kingdom, 
should  depend  on  those  of  His  people  who,  abiding 
in  Christ,  are  ready  to  take  up  their  position  in  Him 
their  Head,  the  great  Priest-King,  and  in  their 
prayers  are  bold  enough  to  say  what  they  will  that 
their  God  should  do.  As  image-bearer  and  repre- 
sentative of  God  on  earth,  redeemed  man  has  by  his 
prayers  to  determine  the  history  of  this  earth.  Man 
was  created,  and  has  now  again  been  redeemed,  to 
pray,  and  by  his  prayer  to  have  dominion. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Lord  !  what  is  man,  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him? 
and  the  son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  him  ?  for  Thou 
has  made  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  hast 
■    148 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

crowned  him  with  glory  and  honor.  Thou  madest 
him  to  have  dominion  over  the  work  of  Thy  hands  : 
Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet.  O  Lord  our 
Lord,  how  excellent  is  Thy  name  in  all  the  earth ! 

Lord  God  !  how  low  has  sin  made  man  to  sink. 
And  how  terribly  has  it  darkened  his  mind,  that  he 
does  not  even  know  his  Divine  destiny,  to  be  Thy 
servant  and  representative.  Alas  !  that  even  Thy 
people,  when  their  eyes  are  opened,  are  so  little 
ready  to  accept  their  calling  and  to  seek  to  have 
power  with  God,  that  they  may  have  power  with  men 
too  to  bless  them. 

Lord  Jesus !  it  is  in  Thee  the  Father  hath  again 
crowned  man  with  glory  and  honor,  and  opened  the 
way  for  us  to  be  what  He  would  have  us.  O  Lord, 
have  mercy  on  Thy  people,  and  visit  Thine  heritage  ! 
Work  mightily  in  Thy  Church,  and  teach  Thy  believ- 
ing disciples  to  go  forth  in  their  royal  priesthood,  and 
in  the  power  of  prayer,  to  which  Thou  hast  given 
such  wonderful  promises,  to  serve  Thy  kingdom,  to 
have  rule  over  the  nations,  and  make  the  name  of 
God  glorious  in  the  earth.  Amen. 
149 


NINETEENTH  LESSON. 

♦*  I  go  unto  the  Father  I  "  or,  Power  for  Praying 
and  Working. 

Verily,  verily^  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  believeth  on  vie, 
the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also  ;  and  GREATER  WORKS 
than  these  shall  he  do  ;  because  I  go  unto  my  Father.  And 
WHATSOEVER  YE  SHALL  ASK  in  my  Na?ne,  that  -will  I 
do. — John  xiv.  12,  13. 

AS  the  Saviour  opened  His  public  ministry  with 
His  disciples  by  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  so 
He  closes  it  by  the  Parting  Address  preserved  to  us 
by  John.  In  both  He  speaks  more  than  once  of 
prayer.  But  with  a  difference.  In  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount  it  is  as  to  disciples  who  have  only  just 
entered  His  school,  who  scarcely  know  that  God  is 
their  Father,  and  whose  prayer  chiefly  has  reference 
to  their  personal  needs.  In  His  closing  address  He 
speaks  to  disciples  whose  training  time  is  now  come 
to  an  end,  and  who  are  ready  as  His  messengers  to 
take  His  place  and  His  work.  In  the  former  the 
chief  lesson  is  :  Be  childlike,  pray  believingly,  and 
trust  the  Father  that  He  will  give  you  all  good  gifts. 
Here  He  points  to  something  higher:  They  are  now 
His  friends  to  whom  He  has  made  known  all  that  He 
has  heard  of  the  Father ;  His  messengers,  who  have 
entered  into  His  plans,  and  into  whose  hands  the  care 
of  His  work  and  kingdom  on  earth  is  to  be  entrusted. 
150 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

THey  are  now  to  go  out  and  do  His  works,  and,  in 
the  power  of  His  approaching  exaltation,  even 
greater  works:  prayer  is  now  to  be  the  channel 
through  which  that  power  is  to  be  received  for  their 
work.  With  Christ's  ascension  to  the  Father  a  new 
epoch  commences  for  their  working  and  praying  both. 

See  how  clearly  this  connection  comes  out  in  our 
text.  As  His  body  here  on  earth,  as  those  who  are 
one  with  Him  in  heaven,  they  are  now  to  do  greater 
works  than  He  had  done ;  their  success  and  their 
victories  are  to  be  greater  than  His.  He  mentions 
two  reasons  for  this.  The  one,  because  He  was  to  go 
to  the  Father,  to  receive  all  power  ;  the  other,  because 
they  might  now  ask  and  expect  all  in  His  Name. 
"Because  I  go  to  the  Father,  «;/^— notice  this  and — 
and,  whatever  ye  shall  ask,  I  will  do."  His  going  to 
the  Father  would  thus  bring  the  double  blessing : 
they  would  ask  and  receive  all  in  His  Name,  and  as  a 
consequence,  would  do  the  greater  works.  This  first 
mention  of  prayer  in  our  Saviour's  parting  words 
thus  teaches  us  two  most  important  lessons.  He 
that  would  do  the  works  of  Jesus  must  pray  in  His 
Name.  He  that  would  pray  in  His  Name  tnust  work 
in  His  Name. 

He  who  would  work  nmst pray  :  it  is  in  prayer  that 
the  power  for  work  is  obtained.  He  that  in  faith 
would  do  the  works  that  Jesus  did,  must  pray  in  His 
Name.  As  long  as  Jesus  was  here  on  earth,  He  Him- 
self did  the  greatest  works :  devils  the  disciples 
could  not  cast  out,  fled  at  His  word.  When  He  went 
to  the  Father,  He  was  no  longer  here  in  the  body  tQ 
151 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

work  directly.  The  disciples  were  now  His  body :  all 
His  work  from  the  throne  in  heaven  here  on  earth 
must  and  could  be  done  through  them.  One  might 
have  thought  that  now  He  was  leaving  the  scene 
Himself,  and  could  only  work  through  commissioners, 
the  works  might  be  fewer  and  weaker.  He  assures 
us  of  the  contrary:  ^^ Verily ^  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
He  that  believeth  on  me,  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he 
do  also,  and  he  shall  do  greater  works. "  His  ap- 
proaching death  was  to  be  such  a  real  breaking  down 
and  making  an  end  of  the  power  of  sin  ;  with  the 
resurrection  the  powers  of  the  Eternal  Life  were  so 
truly  to  take  possession  of  the  human  body  and  to 
obtain  supremacy  over  human  life ;  with  His  ascen- 
sion He  was  to  receive  the  power  to  communicate  the 
Holy  Spirit  so  fully  to  His  own ;  the  union,  the  one- 
ness between  Himself  on  the  throne  and  them  on 
earth,  was  to  be  so  intensely  and  divinely  perfect,  that 
He  meant  it  as  the  literal  truth :  "  Greater  works 
than  these  shall  he  do,  because  I  go  to  the  Father." 
And  the  issue  proved  how  true  it  was.  While  Jesus, 
during  three  years  of  personal  labor  on  earth,  gathered 
little  more  than  five  hundred  disciples,  and  the  most 
of  them  so  feeble  that  they  were  but  little  credit  to 
His  cause,  it  was  given  to  men  like  Peter  and  Paul 
manifestly  to  do  greater  things  than  He  had  done. 
From  the  throne  He  could  do  through  them  what  He 
Himself  in  His  humiliation  could  not  yet  do. 

But  there  is  one  condition  :  "  He  that  believeth  on 
me,  he  •  shall  do  greater  works,  because  I  go  to  the 
Father ;  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  Name, 
152 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

that  will  I  do.''  His  going  to  the  Father  would  give 
Him  a  new  power  to  hear  prayer.  For  the  doing  of 
the  greater  works,  two  things  were  needed :  His 
going  to  the  Father  to  receive  all  power,  our  prayer 
in  His  Name  to  receive  all  power  from  Him  again. 
As  He  asks  the  Father,  He  receives  and  bestows  on 
us  the  power  of  the  new  dispensation  for  the  greater 
works ;  as  we  believe,  and  ask  in  His  Name,  the 
power  comes  and  takes  possession  of  us  to  do  the 
greater  works. 

Alas  !  how  much  working  there  is  in  the  work  of 
God,  in  which  there  is  little  or  nothing  to  be  seen  of 
the  power  to  do  anything  like  Christ's  works,  not  to 
speak  of  greater  works.  There  can  be  but  one  rea- 
son :  the  believing  on  Him,  the  believing  prayer  in 
His  Name,  this  is  so  much  wanting.  O  that  every 
laborer  and  leader  in  church,  or  school,  in  the  work 
of  home  philanthropy  or  foreign  missions,  might 
learn  the  lesson  :  Prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  is  the 
way  to  share  in  the  mighty  power  which  Jesus  has 
received  of  the  Father  for  His  people,  and  it  is  in  this 
power  alone  that  he  that  believeth  can  do  the  greater 
works.  To  every  complaint  as  to  weakness  or  unfit- 
ness, as  to  difficulties  or  want  of  success,  Jesus  gives 
this  one  answer  :  "  He  that  believeth  on  me  shall  do 
greater  works,  because  I  go  to  the  Father,  and  what- 
soever ye  shall  ask  in  my  Name,  that  will  I  do''  We 
must  understand  that  the  first  and  chief  thing  for 
every  one  who  would  do  the  work  of  Jesus,  is  to 
believe  and  so  to  get  linked  to  Him,  the  Almighty 
One,  and  then  to  pray  the  prayer  of  faith  in  His 
153 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Name.  Without  this  our  work  is  but  human  and 
carnal ;  it  may  have  some  use  in  restraining  sin,  or 
preparing  the  way  for  blessing,  but  the  real  power  is 
wanting.  Effectual  working  needs  first  effectual 
prayer. 

And  now  the  second  lesson  :  He  who  would  pray 
7nust  work.  It  is  for  power  to  work  that  prayer  has 
such  great  promises  ;  it  is  in  working  that  the  power 
for  the  effectual  prayer  of  faith  will  be  gained.  In 
these  parting  words  of  our  blessed  Lord  we  find  that 
He  no  less  than  six  times  (John  xiv.  13,  14;  xv.  7, 
16  ;  xvi.  23,  24)  repeats  those  unlimited  prayer-prom- 
ises which  have  so  often  awakened  our  anxious  ques- 
tionings as  to  their  real  meaning:  '■'  whatsoeve7\^'' 
'' anythmg,''  '' what  ye  will,''  ^^  ask  and  ye  shall 
receive y  How  many  a  believer  has  read  these  over 
with  joy  and  hope,  and  in  deep  earnestness  of  soul 
has  sought  to  plead  them  for  his  own  need.  And  he 
has  come  out  disappointed.  The  simple  reason  was 
this  :  he  had  rent  away  the  promise  from  its  surround- 
ing. The  Lord  gave  the  wonderful  promise  of  the 
free  use  of  His  Name  with  the  Father  in  connection 
with  the  doi)ig  of  His  works.  It  is  the  disciple  who 
gives  himself  wholly  to  live  for  Jesus'  work  and  king- 
dom, for  His  will  and  honor,  to  whom  the  power 
will  come  to  appropriate  the  promise.  He  that  would 
fain  grasp  the  promise  when  he  wants  something  very 
special  for  himself,  will  be  disappointed,  because  he 
would  make  Jesus  the  servant  of  his  own  comfort. 
But  to  him  who  seeks  to  pray  the  effectual  prayer  of 
faith,  because  he  needs  it  for  the  work  of  the  Master, 
154 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

to  fiim  it  will  be  given  to  learn  it ;  because  he  has 
made  himself  the  servant  of  his  Lord's  interests. 
Prayer  not  only  teaches  and  strengthens  to  work  ; 
work  teaches  and  strengtiiens  to  pray. 

This  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  what  holds  good 
both  in  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  world.  Whoso- 
ever hath,  to  him  shall  be  given  ;  or,  he  that  is  faith- 
ful in  a  little,  is  faithful  also  in  much.  Let  us  with  the 
small  measure  of  grace  already  received,  give  our- 
selves to  the  Master  for  His  work ;  work  will  be  to 
us  a  real  school  of  prayer.  It  was  when  Moses  had 
to  take  full  charge  of  a  rebellious  people  that  he  felt 
the  need,  but  also  the  courage,  to  speak  boldly  to 
God  and  to  ask  great  things  of  Him  (Ex.  xxxiii.  12, 
15,  ]8).  As  you  give  yourself  entirely  to  God  for  His 
work,  you  will  feel  that  nothing  less  than  these  great 
promises  are  what  you  need,  that  nothing  less  is  what 
you  may  most  confidently  expect. 

Believer  in  Jesus  !  you  are  called,  you  are  ap- 
pointed, to  do  the  works  of  Jesus,  and  even  greater 
works,  because  He  has  gone  to  the  Father  to  receive 
the  power  to  do  them  in  and  through  you. 

Whatsoever  ^^  shall  ask  in  my  Name  that  will  I  do. 
Give  yourself,  and  live,  to  do  the  works  of  Christ, 
and  you  will  learn  to  pray  so  as  to  obtain  wonderful 
answers  to  prayer.  Give  yourself  and  live,  to  pray, 
and  you  will  learn  to  do  the  works  He  did,  and 
greater  works, <  With  disciples  full  of  faith  in  Him- 
self, and  bold  in  prayer  to  ask  great  things,  Christ 
can  conquer  the  world. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 
155 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

O  my  Lord  !  I  liave  this  day  again  heard  words 
from  Thee  which  pass  my  comprehension.  And  yet 
I  cannot  do  aught  but  in  simple  childlike  faith  take 
and  keep  them  as  Thy  gift  to  me  too.  Thou  hast 
said  that  in  virtue  of  Thy  going  to  the  Father,  he 
that  believeth  on  Thee  will  do  the  works  which 
Thou  hast  done,  and  greater  works.  Lord  !  I  wor- 
ship Thee  as  the  Glorified  One,  and  look  for  the  ful- 
filment of  Thy  promise.  May  my  whole  life  just  be 
one  of  continued  believing  in  Thee.  So  purify  and 
sanctify  my  heart,  make  it  so  tenderly  susceptible  of 
Thyself  and  Thy  love,  that  believing  on  Thee  may 
be  the  very  life  it  breathes. 

And  Thou  hast  said  that  in  virtue  of  Thy  going  to 
the  Father,  whatsoever  we  ask.  Thou  wilt  do.  From 
Thy  throne  of  power  Thou  wouldest  make  Thy  peo- 
ple share  the  power  given  Thee,  and  work  through 
them  as  the  members  of  Thy  body,  in  response  to 
their  believing  prayers  in  Thy  Name.  Power  in 
prayer  with  Thee,  and  power  in  work  with  men,  is 
what  Thou  hast  promised  Thy  people  and  me  too. 

Blessed  Lord  !  forgive  us  all  that  we  have  so  little 
believed  Thee  and  Thy  promise,  and  so  little  proved 
Thy  faithfulness  in  fulfilling  it.  O  forgive  us  that  we 
have  so  little  honored  Thy  all-prevailing  Name  in 
heaven  or  upon  earth.  Lord  !  teach  me  to  pray  so 
that  I  may  prove  that  Thy  Name  is  indeed  all-pre- 
vailing with  God  and  men  and  devils.  Yea,  teach 
me  so  to  work  and  so  to  pray  that  Thou  canst  glorify 
Thyself  in  me  as  the  Omnipotent  One,  and  do  Thy 
great  works  through  me  too.  Amen. 
156 


TWENTIETH  LESSON. 

"That  the  Father  may  be  glorified;"   or,  The 
Chief  End  of  Prayer. 

I  go  unto  the  Father.  And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in 
my  Name,  that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified 
in  the  Son. — JoHN  xiv.  13. 

nrHA  T  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  the  Son  ;  it 
■^  is  to  this  end  that  Jesus  on  His  throne  in  glory 
will  do  all  we  ask  in  His  Name.  Every  answer  to 
prayer  He  gives  will  have  this  as  its  object :  when 
there  is  no  prospect  of  this  object  being  obtained, 
He  will  not  answer.  It  follows  as  a  matter  of  course 
that  this  must  be  with  us,  as  with  Jesus,  the  essential 
element  in  our  petitions :  the  glory  of  the  Father  must 
be  the  aim  and  end,  the  very  soul  and  life  of  our 
prayer. 

It  w^as  so  with  Jesus  when  He  was  on  earth.  "I 
seek  not  mine  own  honor  :  I  seek  the  honor  of  Him 
that  sent  me ;  "  in  such  words  we  have  the  keynote 
of  His  life.  In  the  first  words  of  the  high-priestly 
prayer  He  gives  utterance  to  it :  "  Father,  glorify 
Thy  Son,  that  Thy  Son  may  glorify  Thee.^'  "■  I  have 
glorified  Thee  on  earth;  glorify  me  with  Thyself." 
The  ground  on  which  he  asks  to  be  taken  up  into 
157 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  glory  He  had  with  the  Father,  is  the  twofold  one : 
He  has  glorified  Him  on  earth;  He  will  still  glorify 
Him  in  heaven.  What  He  asks  is  only  to  enable  Him 
to  glorify  the  Father  more.  It  is  as  we  enter  into 
sympathy  with  Jesus  on  this  point,  and  gratify  Him 
by  making  the  Father's  glory  our  chief  object  in 
prayer  too,  that  our  prayer  cannot  fail  of  an  answer. 
There  is  nothing  of  which  the  Beloved  Son  has  said 
more  distinctly  that  it  will  glorify  the  Father  than 
this,  His  doing  what  we  ask ;  He  will  not,  therefore, 
let  any  opportunity  slip  of  securing  this  object.  Let 
us  make  His  aim  ours  :  let  the  glory  of  the  Father  be 
the  link  between  our  asking  and  His  doing  :  such 
prayer  must  prevail.^ 

This  word  of  Jesus  comes  indeed  as  a  sharp  two- 
edged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  of  sou 
and  spirit,  and  quick  to  discern  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  the  heart.  Jesus  in  His  prayers  on  earth, 
in  His  intercession  in  heaven,  in  His  promise  of  an 
answer  to  our  prayers  from  there,  makes  this  His  first 
object — the  glory  of  His  Father.  Is  it  so  with  us 
too  ?  Or  are  not,  in  large  measure,  self-interest  and 
self-will  the  strongest  motives  urging  us  to  pray  ?  Or, 
if  we  cannot  see  that  this  is  the  case,  have  we  not  to 
acknowledge  that  the  distinct,  conscious  longing  for 
the  glory  of  the  Father  is  not  what  animates  our 
prayers  ?    And  yet  it  must  be  so. 

Not  as  if  the  believer  does  not  at  times  desire  it. 
But  he  has  to  mourn  that  he  has  so  little  attained. 

^  See  in  the  note  on  George  Muller,  at  the  close  of  this  volume, 
how  he  was  led  to  make  God's  glory  his  first  object. 
158 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

And  he  knows  the  reason  of  his  failure  too.  It  was, 
because  the  separation  between  the  spirit  of  daily  life 
and  the  spirit  of  the  hour  of  prayer  was  too  wide. 
We  begin  to  see  that  the  desire  for  the  glory  of  the 
Father  is  not  something  that  we  can  awake  and  pre- 
sent to  our  Ivord  when  we  prepare  ourselves  to  pray. 
No  !  it  is  only  when  the  whole  life,  in  all  its  parts,  is 
given  up  to  God's  glory,  that  we  can  really  pray  to 
His  glory  too.  '''Do  all  to  the  glory  of  God,"  and, 
^^Ask  all  to  the  glory  of  God," — these  twin  com- 
mands are  inseparable :  obedience  to  the  former  is  the 
secret  of  grace  for  the  latter.  A  life  to  the  glory  of 
God  is  the  condition  of  the  prayers  that  Jesus  can 
answer,  "  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified." 

This  demand  in  connection  with  prevailing  prayer 
— that  it  should  be  to  the  glory  of  God— is  no  more 
than  right  and  natural.  There  is  none  glorious  but 
the  Lord  :  there  is  no  glory  but  His,  and  what  He 
layeth  on  His  creatures.  Creation  exists  to  show  forth 
His  glory;  all  that  is  not  for  His  glory  is  sin,  and 
darkness,  and  death  :  it  is  only  in  the  glorifying  of 
God  that  the  creatures  can  find  glory.  What  the  Son 
of  Man  did,  to  give  Himself  wholly.  His  whole  life, 
to  glorify  the  Father,  is  nothing  but  the  simple  duty 
of  every  redeemed  one.  And  Christ's  reward  will  be 
his  too.  Because  He  gave  Himself  so  entirely  to  the 
glory  of  the  Father,  the  Father  crowned  Him  with 
glory  and  honor,  giving  the  kingdom  into  His  hands, 
with  the  power  to  ask  what  He  will,  and,  as  Inter- 
cessor, to  answer  our  prayers.  And  just  as  we  be- 
come one  with  Christ  in  this,  and  as  our  prayer  is  part 
159 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

of  a  life  utterly  surrendered  to  God's  glory,  will  the 
Saviour  be  able  to  glorify  the  Father  to  us  by  the  ful- 
filment of  the  promise :  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,  / 
wi/l  do  ity 

To  such  a  life,  with  God's  glory  our  only  aim,  we 
cannot  attain  by  any  efifort  of  our  own.  It  is  only  in 
the  man  Christ  Jesus  that  such  a  life  is  to  be  seen  :  in 
Him  it  is  to  be  found  for  us.  Yes,  blessed  be  God  ! 
His  life  is  our  life  ;  He  gave  Himself  io^  us  ;  He  Him- 
self is  now  our  life.  The  discovery,  and  the  confes- 
sion, and  the  denial,  of  self,  as  usurping  the  place  of 
God,  of  self-seeking  and  self-trusting,  is  essential,  and 
yet  is  what  we  cannot  accomplish  in  our  own  strength. 
It  is  the  incoming  and  indwelling,  the  Presence  and 
the  Rule  in  the  heart,  of  our  Lord  Jesus  who  glorified 
the  Father  on  earth,  and  is  now  glorified  with  Him, 
that  thence  He  might  glorify  Him  in  us ; — it  is  Jesus 
Himself  coming  in,  who  can  cast  out  all  self-glorify- 
ing, and  give  us  instead  His  own  God-glorifying  life 
and  Spirit.  It  is  Jesus,  who  longs  to  glorify  the  Father 
in  hearing  our  prayers,  who  will  teach  us  to  live  and 
to  pray  to  the  glory  of  God. 

And  what  motive,  what  power  is  there  that  can 
urge  our  slothful  hearts  to  yield  themselves  to  our 
Lord  to  work  this  in  us?  Surely  nothing  more  is 
needed  than  a  sight  of  how  glorious,  how  alone 
worthy  of  glory  the  Father  is.  Let  our  faith  learn  in 
adoring  worship  to  bow  before  Him,  to  ascribe  to 
Him  alone  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the 
glory,  to  yield  ourselves  to  dwell  in  His  light  as  the 
ever-blessed,  ever-loving  One.  Surely  we  shall  be 
1 60 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

stirred  to  say,  "To  Him  alone  be  glory."  And  we 
shall  look  to  our  Lord  Jesus  with  new  intensity  of  de- 
sire for  a  life  that  refuses  to  see  or  seek  ought  but  the 
glory  of  God.  When  there  is  but  little  prayer  that 
can  be  answered,  the  Father  is  not  glorified.  It  is  a 
duty,  for  the  glory  of  God,  to  live  and  pray  so  that  our 
prayer  can  be  answered.  For  the  sake  of  God's 
glory,  let  us  learn  to  pray  well. 

What  a  humbling  thought  that  so  often  there  is 
earnest  prayer  for  a  child  or  a  friend,  for  a  work  or  a 
circle,  in  which  the  thought  of  our  joy  or  our  pleasure 
was  far  stronger  than  any  yearnings  for  God's  glory. 
No  wonder  that  there  are  so  many  unanswered 
prayers :  here  we  have  the  secret.  God  would  not 
be  glorified  when  that  glory  was  not  our  object.  He 
that  would  pray  the  prayer  of  faith,  will  have  to  give 
himself  to  live  literally  so  that  the  Father  in  all  things 
may  be  glorified  in  him.  This  must  be  his  aim  : 
without  this  there  cannot  be  the  prayer  of  faith. 
"How  can  ye  believe,"  said  Jesus,  "which  receive 
glory  of  one  another,  and  the  glory  that  cometh  from 
the  only  God  ye  seek  not  ?  "  All  seeking  of  our  own 
glory  with  men  makes  faith  impossible  :  it  is  the  deep, 
intense  self-sacrifice  that  gives  up  its  own  glory,  and 
seeks  the  glory  of  God  alone,  that  wakens  in  the  soul 
that  spiritual  susceptibility  of  the  Divine,  which  is 
faith.  The  surrender  to  God  to  seek  His  glory,  and 
the  expectation  that  He  will  show  His  glory  in  hear- 
ing us,  are  one  at  root:  He  that  seeks  God's  glory 
will  see  it  in  the  answer  to  his  prayer,  and  he  alone. 

And  how,  we  ask  again,  shall  we  attain  to  it  ?  Let 
II  i6i 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

us  begin  with  confession.  How  httle  has  the  glory  of 
God  been  an  all-absorbing  passion ;  how  little  our 
lives  and  our  prayers  have  been  full  of  it.  How  little 
have  we  lived  in  the  likeness  of  the  Son,  and  in  sym- 
pathy with  Him — for  God  and  His  glory  alone.  Let 
us  take  time,  until  the  Holy  Spirit  discover  it  to  us, 
and  we  see  how  wanting  we  have  been  in  this.  True 
knowledge  and  confession  of  sin  are  the  sure  path  to 
deliverance. 

And  then  let  us  look  to  Jesus.  In  Him  we  can  see 
by  what  death  we  can  glorify  God.  In  death  He 
glorified  Him ;  through  death  He  was  glorified  with 
Him.  It  is  by  dying,  being  dead  to  self  and  living  to 
God,  that  we  can  glorify  Him.  And  this— this  death 
to  self,  this  life  to  the  glory  of  God— is  what  Jesus 
gives  and  lives  in  each  one  who  can  trust  Him  for  it. 
Let  nothing  less  than  these— the  desire,  the  decision 
to  live  only  for  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  as  Christ 
did  ;  the  acceptance  of  Him  with  His  life  and  strength 
working  it  in  us  ;  the  joyful  assurance  that  we  can  live 
to  the  glory  of  God,  because  Christ  lives  in  us  ;  let 
this  be  the  spirit  of  our  daily  life.  Jesus  stands  surety 
for  our  living  thus;  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given,  and 
waiting  to  make  it  our  experience,  if  we  will  only 
trust  and  let  Him  ;  O  let  us  not  hold  back  through 
unbelief,  but  confidently  take  as  our  watchword— All 
to  the  glory  of  God  !  The  Father  accepts  the  will, 
the  sacrifice  is  well-pleasing  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  will  seal 
us  within  the  consciousness,  we  are  living  for  God  and 
His  glory. 

And  then  what  quiet  peace  and  power  there  will  be 
162 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

in  our  prayers,  as  we  know  ourselves,  through  His 
grace,  in  perfect  harmony  with  Him  who  says  to  us, 
when  He  promises  to  do  what  we  ask:  ''That  the 
Father  may  be  glorified  in  the  Son."  With  our  whole 
being  consciously  yielded  to  the  inspiration  of  the 
Word  and  Spirit,  our  desires  will  be  no  longer  ours, 
but  His  ;  their  chief  end  the  glory  of  God.  With  in- 
creasing liberty  we  shall  be  able  in  prayer  to  say : 
Father  !  Thou  knowest  we  ask  it  only  for  Thy  glory. 
And  the  condition  of  prayer-answers,  instead  of  being 
as  a  mountain  we  cannot  climb,  will  only  give  us  the 
greater  confidence  that  we  shall  be  heard,  because  we 
have  seen  that  praj'^er  has  no  higher  beauty  or  blessed- 
ness than  this,  that  it  glorifies  the  Father.  And  the 
precious  privilege  of  prayer  will  become  doubly 
precious  because  it  brings  us  into  perfect  unison  with 
the  Beloved  Son  in  the  wonderful  partnership  He 
proposes  :  "  Vou  ask,  and  I  do,  that  the  Father  may 
be  glorified  in  the  Son." 

"Lord  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord  Jesus  !  I  come  again  to  Thee.  Every 
lesson  Thou  givest  me  convinces  me  more  deeply 
how  little  I  know  to  pray  aright.  But  every  lesson 
also  inspires  me  with  hope  that  Thou  art  going  to 
teach  me,  that  Thou  art  teaching  me  not  only  to 
know  what  prayer  should  be,  but  actually  to  pray  as 
I  ought.  O  my  Lord  !  I  look  with  courage  to  Thee, 
the  Great  Intercessor,  who  didst  pray  and  dost  hear 
163 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

praj^er,   only  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified,    to 
teach  me  too  to  live  and  to  pray  to  the  glory  of  God. 

Saviour  !  to  this  end  I  yield  myself  to  Thee  again. 
I  would  be  nothing.  I  have  given  self,  as  already 
crucified  with  Thee,  to  the  death.  Through  the 
Spirit  its  workings  are  mortified  and  made  dead ; 
Tliy  life  and  Thy  love  of  the  Father  are  taking  pos- 
session of  me.  A  new  longing  begins  to  fill  my  soul, 
that  every  day,  every  hour,  that  in  every  prayer  the 
glory  of  the  Father  may  be  everything  to  me.  O  my 
Lord  !  I  am  in  Thy  school  to  learn  this  :  teach  Thou 
it  me. 

And  do  Thou,  the  God  of  glory,  the  Father  of 
glory,  my  God  and  my  Father,  accept  the  desire  of  a 
child  who  has  seen  that  Thy  glory  is  indeed  alone 
worth  living  for.  O  Lord  !  show  me  Thy  glory.  Let 
it  overshadow  me.  Let  it  fill  the  temple  of  my 
heart.  Let  me  dwell  in  it  as  revealed  in  Christ. 
And  do  Thou  Thyself  fulfil  in  me  Thine  own  good 
pleasure,  that  Thy  child  should  find  his  glory  in  seek- 
ing the  glory  of  his  Father.  Amen. 
164 


TWENTY-FIRST  I.ESSON. 

«*If  ye   abide    in  me;"    or,  The  Ali=inclusive 
Condition. 

If  ye  abide  in  me^  and  viy  coords  abide  in  you,  ask  what- 
soever ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you. — ^JoHN  xv.  7. 

IN  all  God's  intercourse  with  us,  the  promise  and 
its  conditions  are  inseparable.  If  we  fulfil  the 
conditions,  He  fulfils  tlie  promise.  What  He  is  to  be 
to  us  depends  upon  what  we  are  willing  to  be  to 
Him.  **  Draw  near  to  God,  and  He  will  draw  near 
to  you."  And  so  in  prayer  the  unlimited  promise, 
Ask  whatsoever  ye  will,  has  its  one  shnple  and  nat- 
ural condition,  if  ye  abide  in  me.  It  is  Christ  whom 
the  Father  always  hears  ;  God  is  in  Christ,  and  can 
only  be  reached  by  being  in  Him  ;  to  be  in  Him  is 
the  way  to  have  our  prayer  heard ;  fully  and  wholly 
ABIDING  IN  Him,  we  have  the  right  to  ask  whatso- 
ever we  will,  and  the  promise  that  it  shall  be  done 
unto  us. 

When  we  compare  this  promise  with  the  experi- 
ence of  most  believers,  we  are  startled  by  a  terrible 
discrepancy.  Who  can  number  up  the  countless 
prayers  that  rise  and  bring  no  answer  ?  The  cause 
must  be  either  that  we  do  not  fulfil  the  condition,  or 
God  does  not  fulfil  the  promise.  Believers  are  not 
165 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

willing  to  admit  either,  and  therefore  have  devised  a 
way  of-  escape  from  the  dilemma.  They  put  into  the 
promise  the  qualifying  clause  our  Saviour  did  not 
put  there — if  it  be  God's  will;  and  so  maintain  both 
God's  integrity  and  their  own.  O  if  they  did  but 
accept  it  and  hold  it  fast  as  it  stands,  trusting  to 
Christ  to  vindicate  His  truth,  how  God's  Spirit  would 
lead  them  to  see  the  Divine  propriety  of  such  a 
promise  to  those  who  really  abide  in  Christ  in  the 
sense  in  which  He  means  it,  and  to  confess  that  the 
failure  in  the  fulfilling  the  condition  is  the  one  suf- 
ficient explanation  of  unanswered  prayer.  And  how 
the  Holy  Spirit  would  then  make  our  feebleness  in 
13rayer  one  of  the  mightiest  motives  to  urge  us  on  to 
discover  the  secret,  and  obtain  the  blessing,  of,  full 
abiding  in  Christ. 

^^  If  ye  abide  in  mer  As  a  Christian  grows  in 
grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  he  is 
often  surprised  to  find  how  the  words  of  God  grow 
too,  in  the  new  and  deeper  meaning  with  which  they 
come  to  him.  He  can  look  back  to  the  day  when 
some  word  of  God  was  opened  up  to  him,  and  he 
rejoiced  in  the  blessing  he  had  found  in  it.  After  a 
time  some  deeper  experience  gave  it  a  new  meaning, 
and  it  was  as  if  he  never  had  seen  what  it  contained. 
And  yet  once  again,  as  he  advanced  in  the  Christian 
life,  the  same  word  stood  before  him  again  as  a  great 
mystery,  until  anew  the  Holy  Spirit  led  him  still 
deeper  into  its  Divine  fulness.  One  of  these  ever- 
growing, never-exhausted  words,  opening  up  to  us 
step  by  step  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  life,  is  the 
i66 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Master's  precious  "Abide  in  me."  As  the  union  of 
the  branch  with  the  vine  is  one  of  growth,  never- 
ceasing  growth  and  increase,  so  our  abiding  in  Christ 
is  a  life  process  in  which  the  Divine  life  takes  ever 
fuller  and  more  complete  possession  of  us.  The 
young  and  feeble  believer  may  be  really  abiding  in 
Christ  up  to  the  measure  of  his  light ;  it  is  he  who 
reaches  onward  to  the  full  abiding  in  the  sense  in 
which  the  Master  understood  the  words,  who  inherits 
all  the  promises  connected  with  it. 

In  the  growing  life  of  abiding  in  Christ,  the  first 
stage  is  that  of  faith.  As  the  believer  sees  that,  with 
all  his  feebleness,  the  command  is  really  meant  for 
him,  his  great  aim  is  simply  to  believe  that,  as  he 
knows  he  is  in  Christ,  so  now,  notwithstanding  un- 
faithfulness and  failure,  abiding  in  Christ  is  his  imme- 
diate duty,  and  a  blessing  within  his  reach.  He  is 
specially  occupied  with  the  love,  and  power,  and 
faithfulness  of  the  Saviour  :  he  feels  his  one  need  to 
be  believing. 

It  is  not  long  before  he  sees  something  more  is 
needed.  Obedience  and  faith  must  go  together. 
Not  as  if  to  the  faith  he  has  the  obedience  must  be 
added,  but  faith  must  be  made  manifest  in  obedience. 
Faith  is  obedience  at  home  and  looking  to  the  Master. 
Obedience  is  faith  going  out  to  do  His  will.  He  sees 
how  he  has  been  more  occupied  with  the  privilege 
and  the  blessings  of  this  abiding  than  with  its  duties 
and  its  fruit.  There  has  been  much  of  self  and  of 
self-will  that  has  been  unnoticed  or  tolerated :  the 
peace  which,  as  a  young  and  feeble  disciple,  he  could 
167 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

enjoy  in  beheving  goes  from  him ;  it  is  in  practical 
obedience  that  the  abiding  must  be  maintained  :  "  If 
ye  keep  my  commands,  ye  shall  abide  in  my  love." 
As  before  his  great  aim  was  through  the  mind,  and 
the  truth  it  took  hold  of,  to  let  the  heart  rest  on 
Christ  and  His  promises ;  so  now,  in  this  stage,  his 
chief  effort  is  to  get  his  will  united  with  the  will  of 
his  Lord,  and  the  heart  and  the  life  brought  entirely 
under  His  rule. 

And  yet  it  is  as  if  there  is  something  w^anting. 
The  will  and  the  heart  are  on  Christ's  side;  he 
obeys  and  he  loves  his  Lord.  But  still,  why  is  it  that 
the  fleshly  nature  has  yet  so  much  power,  that  the 
spontaneous  motions  and  emotions  of  tlie  inmost  be- 
ing are  not  what  they  should  be?  The  will  does  not 
approve  or  allow,  but  here  is  a  region  beyond  con- 
trol of  the  will.  And  why,  also,  even  when  there  is 
not  so  much  of  positive  commission  to  condemn, 
why  so  much  of  omission,  the  deficiency  of  that 
beauty  of  holiness,  that  zeal  of  love,  that  conformity 
to  Jesus  and  His  death,  in  which  the  life  of  self  is 
lost,  and  which  is  surely  implied  in  the  abiding,  as 
the  Master  meant  it?  There  must  surely  be  some- 
thing in  our  abiding  in  Christ  and  Christ  in  us,  which 
he  has  not  yet  experienced. 

It  is  so.  Faith  and  obedience  are  but  the  pithway 
of  blessing.  Before  giving  us  the  parable  of  the  vine 
and  the  branches,  Jesus  had  very  disthictly  told  what 
the  full  blessing  is  to  which  faith  and  obedience  are 
to  lead.  Three  times  over  He  had  said,  "  If  ye  love 
me,  keep  my  commandments,"  and  spoken  of  the 
i68 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

tlireefold  blessing  with  which  He  would  crown  such 
obedient  love.  The  Holy  Spirit  would  come  from 
the  Father ;  the  Son  would  manifest  Himself ;  the 
Father  and  the  Son  would  come  and  make  their 
abode.  It  is  as  our  faith  grows  into  obedience,  and 
in  obedience  and  love  our  whole  being  goes  out  and 
clings  itself  to  Christ,  that  our  inner  life  becomes 
opened  up,  and  the  capacity  is  formed  within  of  re- 
ceiving the  life,  the  spirit,  of  the  glorified  Jesus,  as  a 
distinct  and  conscious  union  with  Christ  and  with  the 
Father.  The  word  is  fulfilled  in  us:  "In  that  day 
ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  my  Father  and  ye  in  me, 
and  I  in  you."  We  understand  how,  just  as  Christ 
is  in  God,  and  God  in  Christ,  one  together  not  only 
in  will  and  in  love,  but  in  identity  of  nature  and  life, 
because  they  exist  in  each  other,  so  we  are  in  Christ 
and  Christ  in  us,  in  union  not  only  of  will  and  love, 
but  of  life  and  nature  too. 

It  was  after  Jesus  had  spoken  of  us  thus  through 
the  Holy  Spirit  knowing  that  He  is  in  the  Father, 
and  even  so  we  in  Him  and  He  in  us,  that  He  said, 
"Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you.  Accept,  consent  to 
receive  that  Divine  life  of  union  with  myself,  in  virtue 
of  which,  as  you  abide  in  me,  I  also  abide  in  you, 
even  as  I  abide  in  the  Father.  So  that  your  life  is 
mine  apd  mine  is  yours."  This  is  the  true  abiding, 
the  occupying  of  the  position  in  which  Christ  can 
come  and  abide ;  so  abiding  in  Him  that  the  soul 
has  come  away  from  self  to  find  that  He  has  taken 
the  place  and  become  our  life.  It  is  the  becoming 
as  little  children  who  have  no  care,  and  find  their 
169 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

happiness  in  trusting  and  obeying  the  love  that  has 
done  all  for  them. 

To  those  who  thus  abide,  the  promise  comes  as 
their  rightful  heritage:  Ask  whatsoever  ye  will.  It 
cannot  be  otherwise.  Christ  has  got  full  possession 
of  them.  Christ  dwells  in  their  love,  their  will,  their 
life.  Not  only  has  their  will  been  given  up  ;  Christ 
has  entered  it,  and  dwells  and  breathes  in  it  by  His 
Spirit.  He  whom  the  Father  always  hears  prays  in 
them;  they  pray  in  Him  :  what  they  ask  shall  be  done 
unto  them. 

Beloved  fellow-believer  !  let  us  confess  that  it  is 
because  we  do  not  abide  in  Christ  as  He  would  have 
us,  that  the  Church  is  so  impotent  in  presence  of  the 
infidelity  and  worldliness  and  heathendom,  in  the 
midst  of  which  the  Lord  is  able  to  make  her  more 
than  conqueror.  Let  us  believe  that  He  means  what 
He  promises,  and  accept  the  condemnation  the  con- 
fession implies. 

But  let  us  not  be  discouraged.  The  abiding  of  the 
branch  in  the  Vine  is  a  life  of  never-ceasing  growth. 
The  abiding,  as  the  Master  meant  it,  is  within  our 
reach,  for  He  lives  to  give  it  us.  Let  us  but  be  ready 
to  count  all  things  loss,  and  to  say,  "  Not  as  though  I 
had  already  attained  ;  I  follow  after,  if  that  I  may  ap- 
prehend that  for  which  I  also  am  apprehended  in 
Christ  Jesus."  Let  us  not  be  so  much  occupied  with 
the  abiding,  as  with  Him  to  whom  the  abiding  links 
us,  and  His  fulness.  Let  it  be  Him,  the  whole 
Christ,  in  His  obedience  and  humiliation,  in  His 
exaltation  and  power,  in  whom  our  soul  moves 
170 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

and  acts  ;  He  Himself  will  fulfill  His  promise  in  us. 
And  then  as  we  abide  and  grow  evermore  into  the 
full  abiding,  let  us  exercise  our  right,  the  will  to  enter 
into  all  God's  will.  Obeying  what  that  will  com- 
mands, let  us  claim  what  it  promises.  Let  us  yield 
to  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  show  each  of  us, 
according  to  his  growth  and  measure,  what  the  will 
of  God  is  which  we  may  claim  in  prayer.  And  let 
us  rest  content  with  nothing  less  than  the  personal 
experience  of  what  Jesus  gave  when  He  said.  "If  ye 
abide  in  Me,  ask  whatsoever  ye  will,  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Beloved  Lord  !  do  teach  me  to  take  this  promise 
anew  in  all  its  simplicity,  and  to  be  sure  that  the  only 
measure  of  Thy  holy  giving  is  our  holy  wiUing.  Lord  ! 
let  each  word  of  this  Thy  promise  be  anew  made 
quick  and  powerful  in  my  soul. 

Thou  sayest:  Abide  in  me!  O  my  Master,  my 
Life,  my  All,  I  do  abide  in  Thee.  Give  Thou  me  to 
grow  up  into  all  Thy  fulness.  It  is  not  the  effort  of 
faith,  seeking  to  cling  to  Thee,  nor  even  the  rest  of 
faith,  trusting  Thee  to  keep  me  ;  it  is  not  the  obedience 
of  the  will,  nor  the  keeping  the  commandments  ;  but 
it  is  Thyself  living  in  me  as  in  the  Father,  that  alone 
can  satisfy  me.  It  is  Thyself,  my  Lord,  no  longer 
before  me  and  above  me,  but  one  with  me,  and  abid- 
ing in  me  ;  it  is  this  I  need,  it  is  this  I  seek.  It  is 
this  I  trust  Thee  for. 

171 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Thou  sayest:  As^  whatsoever  ye  will!  Lord!  I 
know  that  the  life  of  full,  deep  abiding  will  so  renew 
and  sanctify  and  strengthen  the  will  that  I  shall  have 
the  light  and  the  liberty  to  ask  great  things.  Lord  ! 
let  my  will,  dead  in  Thy  death,  living  in  Thy  life,  be 
bold  and  large  in  its  petitions. 

Thou  sayest :  It  shall  be  dojie.  O  thou  who  art  the 
the  Amen,  the  Faithful  and  True  Witness,  give  me 
in  Thyself  the  joyous  (Confidence  that  Thou  wilt 
make  this  word  yet  more  wonderfully  true  to  me 
than  ever,  because  it  hath  not  entered  into  the  heart 
of  man  to  conceive  what  God  hath  prepared  for  them 
that  love  Him.     Amen. 


NOTE. 

On  a  thoughtful  comparison  of  what  we  mostly  find 
in  books  or  sermons  on  prayer,  and  the  teaching  of 
the  Master,  we  shall  find  one  great  difference :  the 
importance  assigned  to  the  answer  to  prayer  is  by  no 
means  the  same.  In  the  former  we  find  a  great  deal 
on  the  blessing  of  prayer  as  a  spiritual  exercise  even 
if  there  be  no  answer,  and  on  the  reasons  why  we 
should  be  content  without  it.  God's  fellowship  ought 
to  be  more  to  us  than  the  gift  we  ask  ;  God's  wisdom 
only  knows  what  is  best ;  God  may  bestow  some- 
thing better  than  what  He  withholds.  Though  this 
teaching  looks  very  high  and  spiritual,  it  is  remarka- 
ble that  we  find  nothing  of  it  with  our  Lord.  The 
more  carefully  we  gather  together  all  He  spoke  on 
prayer,  the  clearer  it  becomes  that  He  wished  us  to 
172 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

think  of  prayer  simply  as  the  means  to  an  end,  and 
that  tlie  answer  was  to  be  the  proof  that  we  and  our 
prayer  are  acceptable  to  the  Father  in  heaven.  It  is 
not  that  Christ  would  have  us  count  the  gifts  of  higher 
value  than  the  fellowship  and  favor  of  the  Father. 
By  no  means.  But  the  Father  means  the  answer  to 
be  the  token  of  His  favor  and  of  the  reality  of  our 
fellowship  with  Him,  "  To-day  thy  servant  knoweth 
that  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight,  my  lord,  O 
king,  in  that  the  king  hath  fulfilled  the  request  of 
his  servant." 

A  life  marked  by  daily  answer  to  prayer  is  the 
proof  of  our  spiritual  maturity ;  that  we  have  indeed 
attained  to  the  true  abiding  in  Christ ;  that  our  will 
is  truly  at  one  with  God's  will ;  that  our  faith  has 
grown  strong  to  see  and  take  what  God  has  prepared 
for  us  ;  that  the  Name  of  Christ  and  His  nature  have 
taken  full  possession  of  us ;  and  that  w^e  have  been 
found  fit  to  take  a  place  among  those  whom  God 
admits  to  His  counsels,  and  according  to  whose 
prayer  He  rules  the  world.  These  are  they  in  whom 
something  of  man's  original  dignity  hath  been  restored, 
in  whom,  as  they  abide  in  Christ,  His  power  as  the 
all-prevailing  Intercessor  can  manifest  itself,  in  w^hom 
the  glory  of  His  name  is  shown  forth.  Prayer  is  very 
blessed;  ^/le  answer  is  more  blessed  still,  as  the 
response  from  the  Father  that  our  prayer,  our  faith, 
our  will  are  indeed  as  He  would  wish  them  to  be. 

I  make  these  remarks  with  the  one  desire  of  lead-\ 
ing  my  readers  themselves  to  put  together  all  that    \ 
Christ  has  said  on  prayer,  and  to  yield  themselves  to   J 
173  ~ 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  full  impression  of  the  truth  that  when  prayer  is 
what  it  should  be,  or  rather  when  we  are  what  we 
should  be,  abiding  in  Christ,  the  answer  must  be  ex- 
pected. It  will  bring  us  out  from  those  refuges  where 
we  have  comforted  ourselves  with  unanswered  prayer. 
It  will  discover  us  the  place  of  power  to  which  Christ 
has  appointed  His  Church,  and  which  it  so  little  oc- 
cupies. It  will  reveal  the  terrible  feebleness  of  our 
spiritual  life  as  the  cause  of  our  not  knowing  to  pray 
boldly  in  Christ's  Name.  It  will  urge  us  mightily  to 
rise  to  a  life  in  the  full  union  with  Christ,  and  in  the 
fulness  of  the  Spirit,  as  the  secret  of  eflfectual  prayer. 
And  it  will  so  lead  us  on  to  realize  our  destiny  :  ''At 
that  day :  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  If  ye  shall 
ask  anything  of  the  Father,  He  will  give  it  you  in  my 
Name  :  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may 
be  fulfilled."  Prayer  that  is  really,  spiritually,  ift 
union  with  Jesus,  is  always  answered. 
174 


TWENTY-SECOND  LESSON. 
**My  words  in  you  ;  **  or,  The  Word  and  Prayer. 

If  ye  abide  in  me^  AND  MY  WORDS  ABIDE  IN  YOU, 
ask  whatsoever  ye  will  and  it  shall  be  done  zmto  you. — 
John  xv.  7. 

THE  vital  connection  between  the  word  and  prayer 
is  one  of  the  simplest  and  earliest  lessons  of  the 
Christian  life.  As  that  newly-converted  heathen  put 
it :  I  pray — I  speak  to  my  father ;  I  read — my  Father 
speaks  to  me.  Before  prayer,  it  is  God's  word  that 
prepares  me  for  it,  by  revealing  what  the  Father  has 
bid  me  ask.  In  prayer,  it  is  God's  word  strengthens 
me  by  giving  my  faith  its  warrant  and  its  plea.  And 
after  prayer,  it  is  God's  word  that  brings  me  the 
answer  when  I  have  prayed,  for  in  it  the  Spirit  gives 
me  to  hear  the  Father's  voice.  Prayer  is  not  mono- 
logue, but  dialogue  ;  God's  voice  in  response  to  mine 
is  its  most  essential  part.  Listening  to  God's  voice 
is  the  secret  of  the  assurance  that  He  will  listen  to 
mine.  **  Incline  thine  ear,  and  hear ;  "  "  Give  ear  to 
me;"  ''Hearken  to  my  voice;"  are  words  which 
God  speaks  to  man  as  well  as  man  to  God.  His 
hearkening  will  depend  on  ours ;  the  entrance  His 
words  find  with  me,  will  be  the  measure  of  the  power 
of  my  words  with  Him.  What  God's  words  are  to 
175 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

me,  is  the  test  of  what  He  Himself  is  to  me,  and  so 
of  the  uprightness  of  my  desire  after  Him  in  prayer. 

It  is  this  connection  between  His  word  and  our 
prayer  that  Jesus  points  to  when  He  says,  "  If  ye 
abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ask  whatso- 
ever ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  The 
deep  importance  of  this  truth  becomes  clear  if  w^e  no- 
tice the  other  expression  of  which  this  one  has  taken 
the  place.  More  than  once  Jesus  had  said,  "  Abide 
in  me  and  I  in  you^  His  abiding  in  us  was  the 
complement  and  the  crown  of  our  abiding  in  Him. 
But  here,  instead  of  "Ye  in  me  and  I  in  you,''''  He 
says,  "Ye  in  me  and  my  words  inyou.^''  His  words 
abiding  are  the  equivalent  of  Himself  abiding. 

What  a  view  is  here  opened  up  to  us  of  the  place 
the  words  of  God  in  Christ  are  to  have  in  our  spiritual 
life,  and  especially  in  our  prayer.  In  a  man's  words 
he  reveals  hitnself.  In  his  promises  he  gives  himself 
azuay,  he  binds  himself  to  the  one  who  receives  his 
promise.  In  his  commands  he  sets  forth  his  will, 
seeks  to  make  himself  master  of  him  whose  obedience 
he  claims,  to  guide  and  use  him  as  if  he  were  part  of 
himself.  It  is  through  our  words  that  spirit  holds  fel- 
lowship with  spirit,  that  the  spirit  of  one  man  passes 
over  and  transfers  itself  into  another.  It  is  through 
the  words  of  a  man,  heard  and  accepted,  and  held 
fast  and  obeyed,  that  he  can  impart  himself  to  another. 
But  all  this  in  a  very  relative  and  limited  sense. 

But  when  God,  the  infinite  Being,  in  whom  every- 
thing is  life  and  power,  spirit  and  truth,  in  the  very 
deepest  meaning  of  the  words, — when  God  speaks 
176 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

forth  Himself  in  His  words,  He  does  indeed  give 
Himself,  His  Love  and  His  Life,  His  Will  and  His 
Power,  to  those  who  receive  these  words,  in  a  reality 
passing  comprehension.  In  every  promise  He  puts 
Himself  in  our  power  to  lay  hold  of  and  possess ;  in 
every  command  He  puts  Himself  m  our  power  for  us 
to  share  with  Him  His  Will,  His  Holiness,  His  Per- 
fection. In  God's  Word  God  gives  us  Himself  ; 
His  Word  is  nothing  less  than  the  Eternal  Son,  Christ 
Jesus.  And  so  all  Christ's  words  are  God's  words, 
full  of  a  Divine  quickening  life  and  power.  "  The 
words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit  and  they 
are  life." 

Those  who  have  made  the  deaf  and  dumb  their 
study,  tell  us  how  much  the  power  of  speaking  de- 
pends on  that  of  hearing,  and  how  the  loss  of  hearing 
in  children  is  followed  by  that  of  speaking  too.  This 
is  true  in  a  wider  sense:  as  we  hear,  so  we  speak. 
This  is  true  in  the  highest  sense  of  our  intercourse 
with  God.  To  offer  a  prayer— to  give  utterance  to 
certain  wishes  and  to  appeal  to  certain  promises— is 
an  easy  thing,  and  can  be  learned  of  man  by  human 
wisdom.  But  to  pray  in  the  Spirit,  to  speak  words 
that  reach  and  touch  God,  that  affect  and  influence 
the  powers  of  the  unseen  world, — such  praying,  such 
speaking,  depends  entirely  upon  our  hearing  God's 
voice.  Just  as  far  as  we  listen  to  the  voice  and  lan- 
guage that  God  speaks,  and  in  the  words  of  God  re- 
ceive His  thoughts,  His  mind,  His  life,  into  our  heart, 
we  shall  learn  to  speak  in  the  voice  and  the  language 
that  God  hears.  It  is  the  ear  of  the  learner,  wakened 
12  177 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

morning  by  morning,  that  prepares  for  the  tongue  of 
the  learned,  to  speak  to  God  as  well  as  men,  as  should 
be  (Isa.  1.  4). 

This  hearing  the  voice  of  God  is  something  more 
than  the  thoughtful  study  of  the  Word.  There  may 
be  a  study  and  knowledge  of  the  Word,  in  which 
there  is  but  little  real  fellowship  with  the  living  God. 
But  there  is  also  a  reading  of  the  Word,  in  the  very 
presence  of  the  Father,  and  under  the  leading  of  the 
Spirit,  in  which  the  Word  comes  to  us  in  living  power 
from  God  Himself ;  it  is  to  us  the  very  voice  of  the 
Father,  a  real  personal  fellowship  with  Himself.  It  is 
the  living  voice  of  God  that  enters  the  heart,  that  brings 
blessing  and  strength,  and  awakens  the  response  of 
a  living  faith  that  reaches  the  heart  of  God  again. 

It  is  on  this  hearing  the  voice,  that  the  power  both 
to  obey  and  believe  depends.  The  chief  thing  is,  not 
to  know  what  God  has  said  we  must  do,  but  that 
God  Himself  sdiys  it  to  us.  It  is  not  the  law,  and  not 
the  book,  not  the  knowledge  of  what  is  right,  that 
works  obedience,  but  the  personal  influence  of  God 
and  His  living  fellowship.  And  even  so  it  is  not  the 
knowledge  of  whai  God  has  promised,  but  the  pre- 
sence of  God  Himself  as  the  promiser,  that  awakens 
faith  and  trust  in  prayer.  It  is  only  in  the  full  pre- 
sence of  God  that  disobedience  and  unbelief  become 
impossible. 

"  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you^ 

ask  whatsover  ye  will,  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

We  see  what  this  means.  In  the  words  the  Saviour 

gives  Himself.  We  must  have  the  words  in  tis,  taken 

178 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

up  into  our  will  and  life,  reproduced  in  our  disposi- 
tion and  conduct.  We  must  have  them  abiding  in 
us :  our  whole  life  one  continued  exposition  of  the 
words  that  are  within,  and  filling  us  ;  the  words  re- 
vealing Christ  within,  and  our  life  revealing  Him 
without.  It  is  as  the  words  of  Christ  enter  our  very 
heart,  become  our  life  and  influence  it,  that  our  words 
will  enter  His  heart  and  influence  Him.  My  prayer 
will  depend  on  my  life  :  what  God's  words  are  to  me 
and  in  me,  my  words  will  be  to  God  and  in  God.  If 
I  do  what  God  says,  God  will  do  what  I  say. 

How  well  the  Old  Testament  saints  understood 
this  connection  between  God's  words  and  ours,  and 
how  really  prayer  with  them  was  the  loving  response 
to  what  they  had  heard  God  speak  !  If  the  word 
were  a  promise,  they  counted  on  God  to  do  as  He  had 
spoken.  "Do  as  Thou  hast  said;"  "For  Thou, 
Lord,  hast  spoken  it;"  **  According  to  Thy  pro- 
mise :  "  "  According  to  Thy  word  :  "  in  such  expres- 
sions they  showed  that  what  God  spake  in  promise  was 
the  root  and  the  life  of  what  they  spake  in  prayer. 
If  the  word  was  a  command,  they  simply  did  as  the 
Loi'd had spokeit :  "So  Abram  departed  as  the  Lord 
had  spoken."  Their  life  was  fellowship  with  God, 
the  interchange  of  word  and  thought.  What  God 
spoke  they  heard  and  did ;  what  they  spoke  God 
heard  and  did.  In  each  word  He  speaks  to  us,  the 
whole  Christ  gives  Himself  to  fulfil  it  for  us.  For 
each  word  He  asks  no  less  that  we  give  the  whole 
man  to  keep  that  word,  and  to  receive  its  fulfilment. 

* '  If  my  words  abide  in  you  :  "  the  condition  is  sim- 
179 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

pie  and  clear.  In  His  words  His  will  is  revealed.  As 
the  words  abide  in  me,  His  will  rules  me ;  my  will 
becomes  the  empty  vessel  which  His  will  fills,  the 
willing  instrument  which  His  will  wields;  He  fills 
my  inner  being.  In  the  exercise  of  obedience  and 
faith  my  will  becomes  ever  stronger,  and  is  brought 
into  deeper  inner  harmony  with  Him.  He  can  fully 
trust  it  to  will  nothing  but  what  He  wills  ;  He  is  not 
afraid  to  give  the  promise,  "  If  my  words  abide  in 
you,  ask  whatsoever  ye  will,  it  shall  be  done  unto 
you."  To  all  who  believe  it,  and  act  upon  it,  He  will 
make  it  literally  true. 

Disciples  of  Christ  !  is  it  not  becoming  more  and 
more  clear  to  us  that  while  we  have  been  excusing 
our  unanswered  prayers,  our  impotence  in  prayer, 
with  a  fancied  submission  to  God's  wisdom  and  will, 
the  real  reason  has  been  that  our  own  feeble  life  has 
been  the  cause  of  our  feeble  prayers.  Nothing  can 
make  strong  men  but  the  word  coming  to  us  from 
God's  mouth  :  by  that  we  must  live.  It  is  the  word 
of  Christ,  loved,  lived  in,  abiding  in  us,  becoming 
through  obedience  and  action  part  of  our  being,  that 
makes  us  one  with  Christ,  that  fits  us  spiritually  for 
taking  hold  of  God.  All  that  is  of  the  world  passeth 
away  ;  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever. 
O  let  us  yield  heart  and  life  to  the  words  of  Christ, 
the  words  in  which  He  ever  gives  Himself,  the  per- 
sonal living  Saviour,  and  His  promise  will  be  our  rich 
experience  :  "  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide 
in  you,  ask  whatsoever  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you."— "Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 
i8o 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Blessed  Lord  !  Thy  lesson  this  day  has  again  dis- 
covered to  me  my  folly.  I  see  how  it  is  that  my 
prayer  has  not  been  more  believing  and  prevailing. 
I  was  more  occupied  with  my  speaking  to  Thee  than 
Thy  speaking  to  me.  I  did  not  understand  that  the 
secret  of  faith  is  this:  there  can  be  only  so  much 
faith  as  there  is  of  the  Living  Word  dwelling  in  the 
soul. 

And  Thy  word  has  taught  me  so  clearly :  Let 
every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak ;  let  not 
thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  anything  before  God. 
Lord,  teach  me  that  it  is  only  with  Thy  word  taken 
up  into  my  life  that  my  words  can  be  taken  into  Thy 
heart ;  that  Thy  word,  if  it  be  a  living  power  within 
me,  will  be  a  living  power  with  Thee ;  what  Thy 
mouth  hath  spoken  Thy  hand  will  perform. 

Lord  !  deliver  me  from  the  uncircumcised  ear. 
Give  me  the  opened  ear  of  the  learner,  wakened 
morning  by  morning  to  hear  the  Father's  voice. 
Even  as  Thou  didst  only  speak  what  Thou  didst 
hear,  may  my  speaking  be  the  echo  of  Thy  speaking 
tome.  ''When  Moses  went  into  the  tabernacle  to 
speak  with  Him,  he  heard  the  voice  of  One 
speaking  unto  him  from  off  the  mercy-seat."  Lord, 
may  it  be  so  with  me  too.  Let  a  life  and  character 
bearing  the  one  mark,  that  Thy  words  abide  and  are 
seen  in  it,  be  the  preparation  for  the  full  blessing : 
"  Ask  whatsoever  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto 
you."     Amen. 

i8i 


TWENTY-THIRD  LESSON. 

**  Bear  fruit,  that  the  Father  may  give  what  ye 

ask :"  or  Obedience  the  Path  to  Power 

in  Prayer. 

Ve  did  not  choose  me,  but  I  chose  you,  and  appointed  you, 
that  ye  should  go  and  bear  fruit,  and  that  yoitr  fruit  should 
abide ;  THAT  WHATSOEVER  YE  SHALL  ASK  the  Father 
in  my  name,  He  may  give  it  you. — John  xv.  i6. 

The  fervent  effectual  prayer  of  a  RIGHTEOUS  manavaileth 
much. — ^Jas.  v.  1 6. 

THE  promise  of  the  Father's  giving  whatsoever 
we  ask  is  here  once  again  renewed,  in  such  a 
connection  as  to  show  us  to  whom  it  is  that  such  won- 
derful influence  in  the  council  chamber  of  the  Most 
High  is  to  be  granted.  "I  chose  you,"  the  Master 
says,  "  and  appointed  you  that  ye  should  go  and  bear 
fruit,  and  that  your  fruit  should  abide  ;  "  and  then  He 
adds,  to  the  etid,  "  that  whatsoever  ye,"  the  fruit- 
bearing  ones,  "  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in  my  name. 
He  may  give  it  you."  This  is  nothing  but  the  fuller 
expression  of  what  He  had  spoken  in  the  words,  "  If 
ye  abide  in  me."  He  had  spoken  of  the  object  of 
this  abiding  as  the  bearing  "fruit,"  "more  fruit," 
*-much  fruit :  "  in  this  was  God  to  be  glorified,  and 
182 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  mark  of  discipleship  seen.  No  wonder  that  He 
now  adds,  that  where  the  reaUty  of  the  abiding  is 
seen  in  fruit  abounding  and  abiding,  this  would  ba 
the  qualification  for  praying  so  as  to  obtain  what  we 
ask.  Entire  consecration  to  the  fulfilment  of  our 
calling  is  the  condition  of  effectual  prayer,  is  the  key 
to  the  unlimited  blessings  of  Christ's  wonderful 
prayer-promises. 

There  are  Christians  who  fear  that  such  a  statement 
is  at  variance  with  the  doctrine  of  free  grace.  But 
surely  not  of  free  grace  rightly  understood,  nor 
with  so  many  express  statements  of  God's  blessed 
word.  Take  the  words  of  St.  John  ( i  John  iii.  22)  : 
"Let  us  love  in  deed  and  truth;  hereby  shall  we 
assure  our  heart  before  Him.  And  whatsoever  we 
ask  we  receive  of  Him,  because  we  keep  His  com- 
mandments, and  do  the  things  that  are  pleasing  in 
His  sight."  Or  take  the  oft-quoted  words  of  James: 
"The  fervent  effectual  prayer  of  a  righteous  man 
availeth  much ;  "  that  is,  of  a  man  of  whom,  accord- 
ing to  the  definition  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  can  be 
said :  "  He  that  doeth  righteousness,  is  righteous, 
even  as  He  is  righteous."  Mark  the  spirit  of  so 
many  of  the  Psalms,  with  their  confident  appeal  to 
the  integrity  and  righteousness  of  the  supplicant.  In 
Ps.  xviii.  David  says:  "The  Lord  rewarded  me 
according  to  my  righteousness ;  according  to  the 
cleanness  of  my  hands  hath  He  recompensed  me. 
...  I  was  upright  before  Him,  and  I  kept  myself 
from  mine  iniquity :  therefore  hath  the  Lord  recom- 
pensed me  according  to  my  righteousness."  (Ps. 
183 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

xviii  20-26.  See  also  Ps.  vii.  3-5,  xv.  1-2,  xvii.  3-6, 
xxvi.  1-6,  cxix.  121,  153.)  If  we  carefully  consider 
such  utterances  in  the  light  of  the  New  Testament, 
we  shall  find  them  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  ex- 
pHcit  teaching  of  the  Saviour's  parting  words  :  ''If 
ye  keep  my  commandments  ye  thall  abide  in  my 
love  ;  "  *  *  Ye  are  my  friends  if  ye  do  what  I  command 
you."  The  word  is  indeed  meant  literally:  '*  I  ap- 
pointed you  that  ye  should  go  and  bear  fruit, //^a/, " 
then,  "whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in  my 
name,  he  may  give  it  you." 

Let  us  seek  to  enter  into  the  spirit  of  what  the 
Saviour  here  teaches  us.  There  is  a  danger  in  our 
evangelical  religion  of  looking  too  much  at  what  it 
offers  from  one  side,  as  a  certain  experience  to  be 
obtained  in  prayer  and  faith.  There  is  another  side 
which  God's  word  puts  very  strongly,  that  of  obe- 
dience, as  the  only  path  to  blessing.  What  we  need 
is  to  realize  that  in  our  relationship  to  the  Infinite 
Being  whom  we  call  God,  who  has  created  and  re- 
deemed us,  the  first  sentiment  that  ought  to  animate 
us  is  that  of  subjection ;  the  surrender  to  His  supre- 
macy, His  glory,  His  will.  His  pleasure,  ought  to  be 
the  first  and  uppermost  thought  of  our  life.  The 
question  is  not  how  are  we  to  obtain  and  enjoy  His 
favor,  for  in  this  the  main  thing  may  still  be  self. 
But  what  this  Being  in  the  very  nature  of  things 
rightfully  claims,  and  is  infinitely  and  unspeakably 
worthy  of,  is  that  His  glory  and  pleasure  should  be 
my  one  object.  Surrender  to  His  perfect  and  blessed 
will,  a  life  of  service  and  obedience,  is  the  beauty 
184 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

and  the  charm  of  heaven.  Service  and  obedience, 
these  were  the  thoughts  that  were  uppermost  in  the 
mind  of  the  Son  when  He  dwelt  upon  earth.  Service 
and  obedience,  these  must  become  with  us  the  chief 
objects  of  desire  and  aim,  more  so  than  rest  or  light, 
or  joy  or  strength  :  in  them  we  shall  find  the  path  to 
all  the  higher  blessedness  that  awaits  us. 

Just  note  what  a  prominent  place  the  Master  gives 
it,  not  only  in  this  15th  chapter,  in  connection  with 
the  abiding,  but  in  the  14th,  where  He  speaks  of  the 
in-dwelling  of  the  Three-One  God.  In  verse  15  we 
have  it:  '''  If  yeXov^  me  keep  my  commandments^'''' 
and  the  Spirit  will  be  given  you  of  the  Father.  Then 
verse  21 :  "  He  that  hath  my  commandme^its  and 
keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me  ;  "  and  he  shall 
have  the  special  love  of  my  Father  resting  on  him, 
and  the  special  manifestation  of  Myself.  And  then 
again,  verse  23,  one  of  the  highest  of  all  the  exceed- 
ing great  and  precious  promises :  "  If  a  man  love  me 
he  will  keep  my  words,  and  the  Father  and  I  will 
come  and  take  up  our  abode  with  him."  Could 
words  put  it  more  clearly  that  obedience  is  the  way 
to  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  to  His  revealing  the 
Son  within  us,  and  to  His  again  preparing  us  to  be 
the  abode,  the  home  of  the  Father?  The  indwell- 
ing of  the  Three-one  God  is  the  heritage  of  them  that 
obey.  Obedience  and  faith  are  but  two  aspects  of 
one  act, — surrender  to  God  and  His  will.  As  faith 
strengthens  for  obedience,  it  is  in  turn  strengthened 
by  it :  faith  is  made  perfect  by  works.  It  is  to  be  feared 
that  often  our  efforts  to  believe  have  been  unavailing 
185 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

because  we  have  not  taken  up  the  only  position  in. 
which  a  large  faith  is  legitimate  or  possible, — that  of 
entire  surrender  to  the  honor  and  the  will  of  God. 
It  is  the  man  who  is  entirely  consecrated  to  God  and 
His  will  who  will  find  the  power  come  to  claim  every- 
thing that  His  God  has  promised  to  be  for  him. 

The  application  of  this  in  the  school  of  prayer  is 
very  simple,  but  very  solemn.  "I  chose  you,"  the 
Master  says,  "and  appointed  you  that  ye  should  go 
and  bear  fruit,"  much  fruit  (verses  5,  8),  "and  that 
your  fruit  should  abide,"  that  your  life  might  be  one 
of  abiding  fruit  and  abiding  fruitfulness,  "///«/"  thus, 
as  fruitful  branches  abiding  in  me,  "whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  of  the  Father  in  my  name,  He  may  give  it 
you."  O  how  often  we  have  sought  to  be  able  to 
pray  the  effectual  prayer  for  much  grace  to  bear 
fruit,  and  have  wondered  that  the  answer  came  not. 
It  was  because  we  were  reversing  the  Master's  order. 
We  wanted  to  have  the  comfort  and  the  joy  and  the 
strength  first,  that  we  might  do  the  work  easily  and 
without  any  feeling  of  difficulty  or  self-sacrifice.  And 
He  wanted  us  in  faith,  without  asking  whether  we 
felt  weak  or  strong,  whether  the  work  was  hard  or 
easy,  in  the  obedience  of  faith  to  do  what  He  said: 
the  path  of  fruit-bearing  would  have  led  us  to  the 
place  and  the  power  of  prevailing  prayer.  Obe- 
dience is  the  only  path  that  leads  to  the  glory  of  God. 
Not  obedience  instead  of  faith  nor  obedience  to  sup- 
ply the  shortcomings  of  faith ;  no,  but  faith's  obe- 
dience gives  access  to  all  the  blessings  our  God  has 
for  us.  The  baptism  of  the  Spirit  (xiv.  16),  the 
186 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

manifestation  of  the  Son  (xiv.  21),  the  indwelling  of 
the  Father  (xiv.  23),  the  abiding  in  Christ's  love  (xv. 
10),  the  privilege  of  His  holy  friendship  (xv,  14),  and 
the  power  of  all-prevailing  prayer  (xv.  16), — all  wait 
for  the  obedient. 

Let  us  take  home  the  lessons.  Now  we  know  the 
great  reason  why  we  have  not  had  power  in  faith  to 
pray  prevailingly.  Our  life  was  not  as  it  should  have 
been  :  simple  downright  obedience,  abiding  fruitful- 
ness,  was  not  its  chief  mark.  And  with  our  whole 
heart  we  approve  of  the  Divine  appointment :  men  to 
whom  God  is  to  give  such  influence  in  the  rule  of  the 
world,  as  at  their  request  to  do  what  otherwise  would 
not  have  taken  place,  men  whose  will  is  to  guide  the 
path  in  which  God's  will  is  to  work,  must  be  men 
who  have  themselves  learned  obedience,  whose 
loyalty  and  submission  to  authority  must  be  above  all 
suspicion.  Our  whole  soul  approves  the  law  :  obedi- 
ence and  fruit-bearing,  the  path  to  prevailing  prayer. 
And  with  shame  we  acknowledge  how  little  our  lives 
have  yet  borne  this  stamp. 

Let  us  yield  ourselves  to  take  up  the  appointment 
the  Saviour  gives  us.  Let  us  study  His  relation  to  us 
as  Master.  Let  us  seek  no  more  with  each  new  day 
to  think  in  the  first  place  of  comfort,  or  joy,  or  bless- 
ing. Let  the  first  thought  be  :  I  belong  to  the  Master^ 
Every  moment  and  every  movement  I  must  act  as  His 
property,  as  a  part  of  Himself,  as  one  who  only  seeks 
to  know  and  do  His  will.  A  servant,  a  slave  of  Jesus 
Christ, — let  this  be  the  spirit  that  animates  me.  I^ 
He  says,  * '  No  longer  do  I  call  you  servants,  but  I 
187 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

have  called  you  friends,"  let  us  accept  the  place  of 
friends  :  '*  Ye  are  my  friends  if  ye  do  the  things  which 
I  command  you." 

The  one  thing  He  commands  us  as  His  branches  is 
to  bear  fruit.  Let  us  live  to  bless  others,  to  testify  of 
the  life  and  the  love  there  is  in  Jesus.  Let  us  in  faith 
and  obedience  give  our  whole  life  to  that  which  Jesus 
chose  us  for  and  appointed  us  to — fruit-bearing.  As 
we  think  of  His  electing  us  to  this,  and  take  up  our 
appointment  as  coming  from  Him  who  always  gives 
all  He  demands,  we  shall  grow  strong  in  the  con- 
fidence that  a  life  of  fruit  bearing,  abounding  and 
abiding,  is  within  our  reach.  And  we  shall  under- 
stand why  this  fruit-bearing  alone  can  be  the  path  to 
the  place  of  all  prevailing  prayer.  It  is  the  man  who, 
in  obedience  to  the  Christ  of  God,  is  proving  that  he 
is  doing  what  his  Lord  wills,  for  whom  the  Father  will 
do  whatsoever  he  will :  "  Whatsoever  we  ask  we  re- 
ceive, because  we  keep  His  commandments,  and  do 
the  things  that  are  pleasing  in  His  sight." 

"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Master  !  teach  me  to  apprehend  fully  what 
I  only  partly  realize,  that  it  is  only  through  the  will  of 
God,  accepted  and  acted  out  in  obedience  to  His 
commands,  that  we  obtain  the  power  to  grasp  His  will 
in  His  promises  and  fully  to  appropriate  them  in  our 
prayers.  And  teach  me  that  it  is  in  the  path  of  fruit- 
bearing  that  the  deeper  growth  of  the  branch  into 
i88 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  Vine  can  be  perfected,  and  we  attain  to  that  per- 
fect oneness  with  Thyself  in  which  we  ask  whatsoever 
we  will. 

O  Lord  !  reveal  to  us,  we  pray  Thee,  how  with  all 
the  hosts  of  heaven,  and  with  Thyself  the  Son  on 
earth,  and  with  all  the  men  of  faith  who  have  glori- 
fied Thee  on  earth,  obedience  to  God  is  our  highest 
privilege,  because  it  gives  access  to  oneness  with  Him- 
self in  that  which  is  His  highest  glory — His  all- 
perfect  will.  And  reveal  to  us,  we  pray  Thee,  how, 
in  keeping  Thy  commandments  and  bearing  fruit  ac- 
cording to  Thy  will,  our  spiritual  nature  will  grow  up 
to  the  full  stature  of  the  perfect  man,  with  power  to 
ask  and  to  receive  whatsoever  we  will. 

O  Lord  Jesus  !  reveal  Thyself  to  us,  and  the  reality 
of  Thy  purpose  and  Thy  power  to  make  these  Thy 
wonderful  promises  the  daily  experience  of  all  who 
utterly  yield  themselves  to  Thee  and  Thy  words. 
Amen. 

189 


TWENTY-FOURTH   IvESSON. 
**  In  my  Name  ;  "  or,  The  AII=PrevaiIing  Plea. 

Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  IN  MY  NAME,  thai  "will  I  do.  If 
ye  shall  ask  vie  any  thing  in  MY  Name,  that  ivill  I  do. 
That  "whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  IN  MY  Name,  He 
may  give  it  yon.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  yon  ^  If  ye  shall 
ask  a7iything  of  the  Father,  He  will  give  it  you  IN  MY 
Name.  Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in  MY  Name  : 
ask,  and  ye  shall  receive.  In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  MY 
Name. — ^John  xiv.  13,  14,  xv.  16,  xvi.  23,  24,  26. 

HITHERTO  the  disciples  had  not  asked  in  the 
Name  of  Christ,  nor  had  He  Himself  ever  used 
the  expression.  The  nearest  approach  is,  "met 
together  in  my  Name."  Here  in  His  parting  words, 
He  repeats  the  word  unceasingly  in  connection  with 
those  promises  of  unlimited  meaning,  "  Whatsoever.'''' 
''Anything,'''  "  What  ye  zuill,^'  to  teach  them  and  us 
that  His  Name  is  our  only,  but  also  our  all-sufficient 
plea.  The  power  of  prayer  and  the  answer  depend 
on  the  right  use  of  the  Name. 

What  is  a  person's  name  ?  That  word  or  expression 
in  which  the  person  is  called  up  or  represented  to  us. 
When  I  mention  or  hear  a  name,  it  calls  up  before  me 
the  whole  man,  what  I  know  of  him,  and  also  the  im- 
pression he  has  made  on  me.  The  name  of  a  king 
190 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

incrudes  his  honor,  his  power,  his  kingdom.  His 
name  is  the  symbol  of  his  power.  And  so  each  name 
of  God  embodies  and  represents  some  part  of  the 
glory  of  the  Unseen  One.  And  the  Name  of  Christ 
is  the  expression  of  all  He  has  done  and  all  He  is  and 
lives  to  do  as  our  Mediator. 

And  what  is  it  to  do  a  thing  in  the  name  of  another  ? 
It  is  to  come  with  the  power  and  authority  of  that 
other,  as  his  representative  and  substitute.  We  know 
how  such  a  use  of  another's  name  always  supposes  a 
community  of  interest.  No  one  would  give  another 
the  free  use  of  his  name  without  first  being  assured 
that  his  honor  and  interest  were  as  safe  with  that 
other  as  with  himself. 

And  what  is  it  when  Jesus  gives  us  power  over  His 
Name,  the  free  use  of  it,  with  the  assurance  that 
whatever  we  ask  in  it  will  be  given  to  us  ?  The  ordi- 
nary comparison  of  one  person  giving  another,  on 
some  special  occasion,  the  liberty  to  ask  something 
in  his  name,  comes  altogether  short  here, — Jesus 
solemnly  gives  to  all  His  disciples  a  general  and  un- 
limited power  of  the  free  use  of  His  Name  at  all 
times  for  all  they  desire.  He  could  not  do  this  if  He 
did  not  know  that  He  could  trust  us  with  His  inter- 
-ests,  that  His  honor  would  be  safe  in  our  hands.  The 
free  use  of  the  name  of  another  is  always  the  token 
of  great  confidence,  of  close  union.  He  who  gives 
his  name  to  another  stands  aside,  to  let  that  other  act 
for  him  ;  he  who  takes  the  name  of  another,  gives  up 
his  own  as  of  no  value.  When  I  go  in  the  name  of 
another,  I  deny  myself,  I  take  not  only  his  name, 
191      . 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

but  himself  and  what  he  is,  instead  of  myself  and 
what  I  am. 

Such  a  use  of  the  name  of  a  person  may  be  in  virtue 
of  a  legal  union.  A  merchant  leaving  his  home  and 
business,  gives  his  chief  clerk  a  general  power,  by 
which  he  can  draw  thousands  of  pounds  in  the  mer- 
chant's name.  The  clerk  does  this,  not  for  himself, 
but  only  in  the  interests  of  the  business.  It  is  because 
the  merchant  knows  and  trusts  him  as  wholly  devoted 
to  his  interests  and  business,  that  he  dares  put  his 
name  and  property  at  his  command.  When  the  Lord 
Jesus  went  to  heaven.  He  left  His  work,  the  manage- 
ment of  His  kingdom  on  earth,  in  the  hands  of  His 
servants.  He  could  not  do  otherwise  than  also  give 
them  His  name  to  draw  all  the  supplies  they  needed 
for  the  due  conduct  of  His  business.  And  they  have 
the  spiritual  power  to  avail  themselves  of  the  Name 
of  Jesus  just  to  the  extent  to  which  they  yield  them- 
selves to  live  only  for  the  interests  and  the  work  of 
the  Master.  The  use  of  the  Name  always  supposes 
the  surrender  of  our  interests  to  Him  whom  we 
represent. 

Or  such  a  use  of  the  name  may  be  in  virtue  of  a 
life  union.  In  the  case  of  the  merchant  and  his 
clerk,  the  union  is  temporary.  But  we  know  how 
oneness  of  life  on  earth  gives  oneness  of  name:  a 
child  has  the  father's  name  because  he  has  his  life. 
And  often  the  child  of  a  good  father  has  been  honored 
or  helped  by  others  for  the  sake  of  the  name  he  bore. 
But  this  would  not  last  long  if  it  were  found  that  it 
was  only  a  name,  and  that  the  father's  character  was 
192 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

wanting.  The  name  and  the  character  or  spirit  must 
be  in  harmony.  When  such  is  the  case,  the  child  will 
have  a  double  claim  on  the  father's  friends:  the 
character  secures  and  increases  the  love  and  esteem 
rendered  first  for  the  name's  sake.  So  it  is  with 
Jesus  and  the  believer :  we  are  one,  we  have  one  life, 
one  Spirit  with  Him  ;  for  this  reason  we  may  come  in 
His  Name.  Our  power  in  using  that  Name,  whether 
with  God,  or  men,  or  devils,  depejids  on  the  -measure 
of  our  spiritual  life-imio7i.  The  use  of  the  name 
rests  on  the  unity  of  life  ;  the  Name  and  the  Spirit  of 
Jesus  are  one.i 

Or  the  union  that  empowers  to  the  use  of  the  name 
may  be  the  union  of  love.  When  a  bride  whose  life 
has  been  one  of  poverty,  becomes  united  to  the  bride- 
groom, she  gives  up  her  own  name,  to  be  called  by 
his,  and  has  now  the  full  right  to  use  it.  She  pur- 
chases in  his  name,  and  that  name  is  not  refused. 
And  this  is  done  because  the  bridegroom  has  chosen 
her  for  himself,  counting  on  her  to  care  for  his  inte- 
rests; they  are  now  one.  And  so  the  Heavenly 
Bridegroom  could  do  nothing  less ;  having  loved  us 
and  made  us  one  with  Himself,  what  could  He  do 
but  give  those  who  bear  His  name  the  right  to  pre- 

1  **  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  tny  Name,"  that  is,  in  tny  na- 
ture; for  things  with  God  are  called  according  to  their  nature. 
We  ask  in  Christ's  Name,  not  when  at  the  end  of  some  request 
we  say,  "  This  I  ask  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ,"  but  when  we 
pray  according  to  His  nature,  which  is  love,  which  seeketh  not 
its  own,  but  only  the  will  of  God  and  the  good  of  all  creatures. 
Such  asking  is  the  cry  of  His  own  Spirit  in  our  "hesLVis.— Jukes , 
The  New  Man, 

13  T93 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

sent  it  before  the  Father,  or  to  come  with  it  to  Him- 
self for  all  they  need.  And  there  is  no  one  who  gives 
himself  really  to  live  in  the  Name  of  Jesus,  who  does 
not  receive  in  ever-increasing  measure  the  spiritual 
capacity  to  ask  and  receive  in  that  Name  what  he 
will.  The  bearing  of  the  name  of  another  supposes 
my  having  given  up  my  own,  and  with  it  my  own 
independent  life ;  but  then,  as  surely,  my  possession 
of  all  there  is  in  the  name  I  have  taken  instead  of 
my  own. 

Such  illustrations  show  us  how  defective  the  com- 
mon view  is  of  a  messenger  sent  to  ask  in  the  name 
of  another,  or  a  guilty  one  appealing  to  the  name  of 
a  surety.  No,  Jesus  Himself  is  with  the  Father  ;  it  is 
not  an  absent  one  in  whose  name  we  come.  Even 
when  we  pray  to  Jesus  Himself,  it  must  be  in  His 
Name.  The  name  represents  the  person  ;  to  ask  in 
the  Name  is  to  ask  in  full  union  of  interest  and  life 
and  love  with  Himself,  as  one  who  lives  in  and  for 
Him.  Let  the  Name  of  Jesus  only  have  undivided 
supremacy  in  my  heart  and  life,  my  faith  will  grow 
to  the  assurance  that  what  I  ask  in  that  Name  cannot 
be  refused.  The  name  and  the  power  of  asking  go 
together ;  when  the  Name  of  Jesus  has  become  the 
power  that  rules  my  life,  its  power  in  prayer  with 
God  will  be  seen,  too. 

We  see  thus  that  everything  depends  on  our  own 
relation  to  the  Name  ;  the  power  it  has  on  my  life  is 
the  power  it  will  have  in  my  prayers.  There  is  more 
than  one  expression  in  Scripture  which  can  make 
this  clear  to  us.  When  it  says,  "  Do  all  in  the  Name 
194 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  we  see  how  this  is  the  coun- 
terpart of  the  other,  ''Ask  all.''  To  do  all  and  to  ask 
all  in  His  Name,  these  go  together.  When  we  read, 
**  We  shall  walk  in  the  Name  of  our  God,"  we  see 
how  the  power  of  the  Name  must  rule  in  the  whole 
life ;  only  then  will  it  have  power  in  prayer.  It  is 
not  to  the  lips,  but  to  the  life  God  looks  to  see  what 
the  Name  is  to  us.  When  Scripture  speaks  of  "  men 
who  have  given  their  lives  for  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  or  of  one  "ready  to  die  for  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,"  we  see  what  our  relation  to  the  Name 
must  be  :  when  it  is  everything  to  me,  it  will  obtain 
everything  for  me.  If  I  let  it  have  all  I  have  it  will 
let  me  have  all  it  has. 

"Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  Name,  that 
will  I  do."  Jesus  means  the  promise  literally.  Chris- 
tians have  sought  to  limit  it ;  it  looked  too  free ;  it 
was  hardly  safe  to  trust  man  so  unconditionally.  We 
did  not  understand  that  the  word  "  in  my  Name  "  is 
its  own  safeguard.  It  is  a  spiritual  power  which  no 
one  can  use  further  than  he  obtains  the  capacity  for  by 
his  living  and  acting  in  that  Name.  As  we  bear  that 
Name  before  men,  we  have  power  to  use  it  before 
God.  O  let  us  plead  for  God's  Holy  Spirit  to  show 
us  what  the  Name  means,  and  what  the  right  use  of 
it  is.  It  is  through  the  Spirit  that  the  Name,  which 
is  above  every  name  in  heaven,  will  take  the  place  of 
supremacy  in  our  hearts  and  life,  too. 

Disciples  of  Jesus  !  let  the  lessons  of  this  day  enter 
deep  into  your  hearts.  The  Master  says  :  Only  pray 
in  my  Name:  whatsoever  ye  ask  will  be  given.  Hea- 
195 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

ven  is  set  open  to  you ;  the  treasures  and  powers  of 
the  world  of  spirit  are  placed  at  your  disposal  on 
behalf  of  men  around  you.  O  come  and  let  us  learn 
to  pray  in  the  Name  of  Jesus.  As  to  the  disciples, 
He  says  to  us,  "  Hitherto  ye  have  not  asked  in  my 
Name :  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."  Let  each  disciple 
of  Jesus  seek  to  avail  himself  of  the  rights  of  his 
royal  priesthood,  and  use  the  power  placed  at  his 
disposal  for  his  circle  and  his  work.  Let  Christians 
awake  and  hear  the  message :  your  prayer  can  ob- 
tain what  otherwise  will  be  withheld,  can  accomplish 
what  otherwise  remains  undone.  O  awake,  and  use 
the  name  of  Jesus  to  open  the  treasures  of  heaven 
for  this  perishing  world.  Learn  as  the  servants  of 
the  King  to  use  His  Name :  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall 
ask  in  my  Name,  that  u^ill  I  do." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord  !  it  is  as  if  each  lesson  Thou  givest 
me  has  such  fulness  and  depths  of  meaning  that  if  I 
can  only  learn  that  one,  I  shall  know  how  to  pray 
aright.  This  day  I  feel  again  as  if  I  needed  but  one 
prayer  every  day :  Lord !  teach  me  what  it  is  to 
pray  in  Thy  name.  Teach  me  so  to  live  and  act, 
to  walk  and  speak,  so  to  do  all  in  the  Name  of  Jesus, 
that  my  prayer  cannot  be  anything  else  but  in  that 
blessed  Name  too. 

And  teach  me,  Lord  !  to  hold  fast  the  precious  pro- 
mise that  whatsoever  we  ask  in  Thy  Name,  Thou 
196 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

wilt  do,  the  Father  will  give.  Though  I  do  not  yet 
fully  understand,  and  still  less  have  fully  attained,  the 
wondrous  union  Thou  meanest  when  Thou  say  est,  in* 
MY  Name,  I  would  yet  hold  fast  the  promise  until  it 
fills  my  heart  with  the  undoubting  assurance  :  Any- 
thing in  the  Name  of  Jesus. 

O  my  Lord !  let  Thy  Holy  Spirit  teach  me  this. 
Thou  didst  say  of  Him,  "  The  Comforter,  whom  the 
Father  shall  send  in  my  Name."  He  knows  what  it 
is  to  be  sent  from  heaven  in  Thy  Name,  to  reveal  and 
to  honor  the  power  of  that  Name  in  Thy  servants,  to 
use  that  Name  alone,  and  so  to  glorify  Thee.  Lord 
Jesus  !  let  Thy  Spirit  dwell  in  me,  and  fill  me.  I 
would,  I  do  yield  my  whole  being  to  His  rule  and 
leading.  Thy  Name  and  Thy  Spirit  are  one  ;  through 
Him  Thy  Name  will  be  the  strength  of  my  life  and 
my  prayer.  Then  I  shall  be  able  for  Thy  Name's 
sake  to  forsake  all,  in  Thy  Name  to  speak  to  men 
and  to  God,  and  to  prove  that  this  is  indeed  the 
Name  above  every  name. 

Lord  Jesus  !  O  teach  me  by  Thy  Holy  Spirit  to 
pray  in  Thy  Name.     Amen. 


NOTE. 

"  What  is  meant  by  praying  in  Christ's  name?     It 
cannot  mean  simply  appearing  before  God  with  faith 
in  the  mediation  of  the  Saviour.     When  the  disciples 
197 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

asked  Jesus  to  teach  them  to  pray,  He  supplied  them 
with  petitions.  And  afterwards  Jesus  said  to  them, 
'*  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  Name." 
Until  the  Spirit  came,  the  seven  petitions  of  the 
Lord's  prayer  lay  as  it  were  dormant  within  them. 
When  by  the  Holy  Ghost  Christ  descended  into  their 
hearts,  they  desired  the  very  blessings  which  Christ 
as  our  High  Priest  obtains  for  us  by  His  prayer  from 
the  Father.  And  such  petitions  are  always  answered. 
The  Father  is  always  willing  to  give  what  Christ 
asks.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  always  teaches  and  influ- 
ences us  to  offer  the  petitions  which  Christ  ratifies 
and  presents  to  the  Father.  To  pray  in  Christ's 
name  is  therefore  to  be  identified  with  Christ  as  to 
our  righteousness,  and  to  be  idc7itified  with  Christ  in 
our  desires  by  the  indwellijig  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  To 
pray  in  the  Spirit,  to  pray  according  to  the  will  of  the 
Father,  to  pray  in  Chris fs  namCy  are  identical  ex- 
pressions.  The  Father  Himself  loveth  us,  and  is  will- 
ing to  hear  us  ;  two  intercessors,  Christ  the  Advo- 
cate above,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Advocate  with- 
in, are  the  gifts  of  His  love. 

* '  This  may  appear  at  first  less  consoling  than  a 
more  prevalent  one,  which  refers  prayer  in  Christ's 
name  chiefly  to  our  trust  in  Christ's  merit.  The  de- 
fect of  this  opinion  is,  that  it  does  not  combine  the 
intercession  of  the  Saviour  with  the  will  of  the  Father, 
and  the  indwelling  Spirit's  aid  in  prayer.  Nor  does 
it  fully  realize  the  mediation  of  Christ ;  for  the  medi- 
ation consists  not  merely  in  that  for  Christ's  sake  the 
Holy  Father  is  able  to  regard  me  and  my  prayer  ; 
198 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

but  also,  in  that  Christ  Himself  presents  my  petitions 
as  His  petitions,  desired  by  Him  for  me,  even  as  all 
blessings  are  purchased  for  me  by  His  precious 
blood. 

"  In  all  prayer,  the  one  essential  condition  is  that 
we  are  able  to  offer  it  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  as  accord- 
ing to  His  desire  for  us,  according  to  the  Father's 
will,  according  to  the  Spirit's  teaching.  And  thus 
praying  in  Christ's  name  is  impossible  without  self- 
examination,  without  reflection,  without  self-denial ; 
in  short,  without  the  aid  of  the  Spirit."— ►Sa/Z/zV, 
The  Lord's  Prayer,  pp.  141,  142. 
199 


TWENTY-FIFTH  I.BSSON. 
«« At  that  day :  "  or,  The  Holy  Spirit  and  Prayer. 

In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing.  Verily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  y oil,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my 
Name,  He  will  give  it  you.  Hitherto  have  ye  asked  nothing 
in  my  Name  :  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may 
be  full.  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  Name  ;  and  I  say 
not,  that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for  you  ;  for  the  Father 
Himself  loveth  you. — JOHN  xvi.  23-26. 

Praying  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of 
God. — JUDEi  20,  21. 

THE  words  of  John  (i  John  ii.  12-14)  to  little  chil- 
dren, to  young  men,  and  to  fathers,  suggest  the 
thought  that  there  often  are  in  the  Christian  life 
three  great  stages  of  experience.  The  first,  that  of 
the  new-born  child,  with  the  assurance  and  the  joy  of 
forgiveness.  The  second,  the  transition  stage  of 
struggle  and  growth  in  knowledge  and  strength ; 
young  men  growing  strong,  God's  word  doing  its 
work  in  them  and  giving  them  victory  over  the  Evil 
One.  And  then  the  final  stage  of  maturity  and  ripe- 
ness ;  the  fathers,  who  have  entered  deeply  into  the 
knowledge  and  fellowship  of  the  Eternal  One. 
In  Christ's  teaching  on  prayer  there  appear  to  be 
200 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

three  stages  in  the  prayer-life,  somewhat  analogous. 
In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  we  have  the  initial 
stage  :  His  teaching  is  all  comprised  in  one  word, 
Father.  Pray  to  your  Father,  your  Father  sees, 
hears,  knows,  and  will  reward  :  how  much  more  than 
any  earthly  father  1  Only  be  childlike  and  trustful. 
Then  comes  later  on  something  like  the  transition 
stage  of  conflict  and  conquest,  in  words  like  these : 
"  This  sort  goeth  not  out  but  by  fasting  and  prayer  ;  " 
"  Shall  not  God  avenge  His  own  elect  who  cry  day 
and  night  unto  Him?"  And  then  we  have  in  the 
parting  words,  a  higher  stage.  The  children  have 
become  men  :  they  are  now  the  Master's  friends,  from 
whom  He  has  no  secrets,  to  whom  He  says,  "All 
things  that  I  heard  from  my  Father  I  made  known 
unto  you  ;  "  and  to  whom,  in  the  oft- repeated  "what- 
soever ye  will,"  He  hands  over  the  keys  of  the  king- 
dom. Now  the  time  has  come  for  the  power  of 
prayer  in  His  Name  to  be  proved. 

The  contrast  between  this  final  stage  and  the  pre- 
vious preparatory  ones  our  Saviour  marks  most 
distinctly  in  the  words  we  are  to  meditate  on: 
^'Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in  my  Name ;  "  ''At 
that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  Name. ' '  We  know  what 
' '  at  that  day ' '  means.  It  is  the  day  of  the  outpouring 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  great  work  Christ  was  to  do 
on  the  cross,  the  mighty  power  and  the  complete  vic- 
tory to  be  manifested  in  His  resurrection  and  ascen- 
sion, were  to  issue  in  the  coming  down  from  heaven, 
as  never  before,  of  the  glory  of  God  to  dwell  in  men. 
The  Spirit  of  the  glorified  Jesus  was  to  come  and  be 

20I 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  life  of  His  disciples.  And  one  of  the  marks 
of  that  wonderful  spirit-dispensation  was  to  be  a 
power  in  prayer  hitherto  unknown— prayer  in  the 
Name  of  Jesus,  asking  and  obtaining  whatsoever  they 
would,  is  to  be  the  manifestation  of  the  reality  of  the 
Spirit's  indwelling. 

To  understand  how  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
was  indeed  to  commence  a  new  epoch  in  the  prayer- 
world,  we  must  remember  who  He  is,  what  His  work, 
and  what  the  significance  of  His  not  being  given 
until  Jesus  was  glorified.  It  is  in  the  Spirit  that  God 
exists,  for  He  is  Spirit.  It  is  in  the  Spirit  that  the  Son 
was  begotten  of  the  Father  :  it  is  in  the  fellowship  of 
the  Spirit  that  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one.  The 
eternal  never-ceasing  giving  to  the  Son  which  is  the 
Father's  prerogative,  and  the  eternal  asking  and  re- 
ceiving which  is  the  Son's  right  and  blessedness — it  is 
through  the  Spirit  that  this  communion  of  life  and 
love  is  maintained.  It  has  been  so  from  all  eternity. 
It  is  so  specially  now,  when  the  Son  as  Mediator  ever 
liveth  to  pray.  The  great  work  which  Jesus  began  on 
earth  of  reconciling  in  His  own  body  God  and  man, 
He  carries  on  in  heaven.  To  accomplish  this  He  took 
up  into  His  own  person  the  conflict  between  God's 
righteousness  and  our  sin.  On  the  cross  He  once  for 
all  ended  the  struggle  in  His  own  body.  And  then 
He  ascended  to  heaven,  that  thence  He  might  in  each 
member  of  His  body  carry  out  the  deliverance  and 
manifest  the  victory  He  had  obtained.  It  is  to  do  this 
that  He  ever  liveth  to  pray:  in  His  unceasing  inter- 
cession He  places  Himself  in  living  fellowship  with 
202 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  unceasing  prayer  of  His  redeemed  ones.  Or 
rather,  it  is  His  unceasing  intercession  which  shows 
itself  in  their  prayers,  and  gives  them  a  power  they 
never  had  before. 

And  He  does  this  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
Holy  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of  the  glorified  Jesus,  was  not 
(John  vii.  39),  could  not  be,  until  He  had  been  glori- 
fied. This  gift  of  the  Father  was  something  dis- 
tinctively new,  entirely  different  from  what  Old 
Testament  saints  had  known.  The  work  that  the 
blood  effected  in  heaven  when  Christ  entered  within 
the  veil,  was  something  so  true  and  new,  the  redemp- 
tion of  our  human  nature  into  fellowship  with  His 
resurrection-power  and  His  exaltation-glory  was  so 
intensely  real,  the  taking  up  of  our  humanity  in 
Christ  into  the  life  of  the  Three-One  God  was  an 
event  of  such  inconceivable  significance,  that  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  had  to  come  from  Christ's  exalted 
humanity  to  testify  in  our  hearts  of  what  Christ  had 
accomplished,  was  indeed  no  longer  only  what  He 
had  been  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  was  literally  true 
"the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  yet,  for  Christ  was  not  yet 
glorified."  He  came  now  first  as  the  Spirit  of  the 
glorified  Jesus.  Even  as  the  Son,  who  was  from 
eternity  God,  had  entered  upon  a  new  existence  as 
man,  and  returned  to  heaven  with  what  He  had  not 
before,  so  the  Blessed  Spirit,  whom  the  Son,  on  His 
ascension,  received  from  the  Father  (Acts  ii.  2)3)  into 
His  glorified  humanity,  came  to  us  with  a  new  life, 
which  He  had  not  previously  to  communicate.  Under 
the  Old  Testament  He  was  invoked  as  the  Spirit  of 
203 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

God :  at  Pentecost  He  descended  as  the  Spirit  of  the 
glorified  Jesus,  bringing  down  and  communicating 
to  us  the  full  fruit  and  power  of  the  accomplished 
redemption. 

It  is  in  the  intercession  of  Christ  that  the  continued 
efficacy  and  application  of  His  redemption  is  main- 
tained. And  it  is  through  the  Holy  Spirit  descending 
from  Christ  to  us  that  we  are  drawn  up  into  the  great 
stream  of  His  ever-ascending  prayers.  The  Spirit 
prays  for  us  without  words:  in  the  depths  of  a  heart 
where  even  thoughts  are  at  times  formless,  the  Spirit 
takes  us  up  into  the  wonderful  flow  of  the  life  of  the 
Three-One  God.  Through  the  Spirit,  Christ's  prayers 
become  ours,  and  ours  are  made  His :  we  ask  what 
we  will,  and  it  is  given  to  us.  We  then  under- 
stand from  experience,  "  Hitherto  ye  have  not  asked 
in  my  Name.  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my 
Name." 

Brother !  what  we  need  to  pray  in  the  Name  of 
Christ,  to  ask  that  we  may  receive  that  our  joy  may 
be  full,  is  the  baptism  of  this  Holy  Ghost.  This  is 
more  than  the  Spirit  of  God  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. This  is  more  than  the  Spirit  of  conversion 
and  regeneration  the  disciples  had  before  Pentecost. 
This  is  more  than  tlie  Spirit  with  a  measure  of  His 
influence  and  working.  This  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  the 
Spirit  of  the  glorified  Jesus  in  His  exaltation-power, 
coming  on  us  as  the  Spirit  of  the  indwelling  Jesus, 
revealing  the  Son  and  the  Father  within.  (John  xiv. 
16-23.)  It  is  when  this  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  not  of  our 
hours  of  prayer,  but  of  our  whole  life  and  walk,  when 
204 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

this  Spirit  glorifies  Jesus  in  us  by  revealing  the  com- 
pleteness of  His  work,  and  making  us  wholly  one 
with  Him  and  like  Him,  that  we  can  pray  in  His 
Name,  because  we  are  in  very  deed  one  with  Him. 
Then  it  is  that  we  have  that  immediateness  of  access 
to  the  Father  of  which  Jesus  says,  "  I  say  not  that  I 
will  pray  the  Father  for  you."  Oh  !  we  need  to  un- 
derstand and  believe  that  to  be  filled  with  this, 
the  Spirit  of  the  glorified  One,  is  the  one  need  of 
God's  believing  people.  Then  shall  we  realize  what 
it  is,  "  with  all  prayer  and  supplication  to  be  praying 
at  all  seasons  in  the  Spirit,"  and  what  it  is,  "  praying 
in  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of 
God."     '^At  that  day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  Name." 

And  so  once  again  the  lesson  comes  :  What  our 
prayer  avails,  depends  upon  what  we  are  and  what 
our  hfe  is.  It  is  living  in  the  Name  of  Christ  that  is 
the  secret  of  praying  in  the  Name  of  Christ  ;  living 
in  the  Spirit  that  fits  for  praying  in  the  Spirit.  It  is 
abiding  in  Christ  that  gives  the  right  and  power  to 
ask  what  we  will ;  the  extent  of  the  abiding  is  the 
exact  measure  of  the  power  in  prayer.  It  is  the 
Spirit  dwelling  within  us  that  prays,  not  in  words 
and  thoughts  always,  but  in  a  breathing  and  a  being 
deeper  than  utterance.  Just  so  much  as  there  is  of 
Christ's  Spirit  in  us,  is  there  real  prayer.  Our  lives, 
our  lives,  O  let  our  lives  be  full  of  Christ,  and  full  of 
His  Spirit,  and  the  wonderfully  unlimited  promises 
to  our  prayer  will  no  longer  appear  strange.  "  Hith- 
erto ye  have  asked  nothing  in  my  Name.  Ask,  and 
ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full.  At  that 
205 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

day  ye  shall  ask  in  my  Name.  Verily,  verily  I  say 
unto  you,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my 
Name,  He  will  give  it  you." 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


O  my  God  !  in  holy  awe  I  bow  before  Thee,  the 
Three  in  One.  Again  I  have  seen  how  the  mystery 
of  prayer  is  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  I 
adore  the  Father  who  ever  hears,  and  the  Son  who 
ever  lives  to  pray,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  proceeding 
from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  to  lift  us  up  into  the 
fellowship  of  that  ever-blessed,  never-ceasing  asking 
and  receiving.  I  bow,  my  God,  in  adoring  worship, 
before  the  infinite  condescension  that  thus,  through 
the  Holy  Spirit,  takes  us  and  our  prayers  into  the 
Divine  Life,  and  its  fellowship  of  love. 

O  my  Blessed  Lord  Jesus  !  teach  me  to  understand 
Thy  lesson,  that  it  is  the  indwelling  Spirit,  streaming 
from  Thee,  uniting  to  Thee,  who  is  the  Spirit  of 
prayer.  Teach  me  what  it  is  as  an  empty,  wholly 
consecrated  vessel,  to  yield  myself  to  His  being  my 
life.  Teach  me  to  honor  and  trust  Him,  as  a  living 
Person,  to  lead  my  life  and  my  prayer.  Teach  me 
specially  in  prayer  to  wait  in  holy  silence,  and  give 
Him  place  to  breathe  within  me  His  unutterable  in- 
tercession. And  teach  me  that  through  Him  it  is 
possible  to  pray  without  ceasing,  and  to  pray  without 
failing,  because  He  makes  me  partaker  of  the  never- 
ceasing  and  never-failing  intercession  in  which  Thou, 
206 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  Son,  dost  appear  before  the  Father.  Yea,  Lord, 
fulfil  in  me  Thy  promise.  ' '  At  that  day  ye  shall  ask 
in  my  Name.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  What- 
soever ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  Name,  that 
will  He  give."     Amen. 


NOTE. 

Prayer  has  often  been  compared  to  breathing  ;  we 
have  only  to  carry  out  the  comparison  fully  to  see 
how  wonderful  the  place  is  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
occupies.  With  every  breath  we  expel  the  impure 
air  which  would  soon  cause  our  death,  and  inhale 
again  the  fresh  air  to  which  we  owe  our  life.  So  we 
give  out  from  us,  in  confession  the  sins,  in  prayer  the 
needs  and  the  desires  of  our  heart.  And  in  drawing 
in  our  breath  again,  we  inhale  the  fresh  air  of  the 
promises,  and  the  love,  and  the  life  of  God  in  Christ. 
We  do  this  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the 
breath  of  our  life. 

And  this  He  is  because  He  is  the  breath  of  God. 
The  Father  breathes  Him  into  us,  to  unite  Himself 
with  our  life.  And  then,  just  as  on  every  expiration 
there  follows  again  the  inhaling  or  drawing  in  of  the 
breath,  so  God  draws  in  again  His  breath,  and  the 
Spirit  returns  to  Him  laden  with  the  desires  and 
needs  of  our  hearts.  And  thus  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the 
breath  of  the  life  of  God  and  the  breath  of  the  new 
life  in  us.  As  God  breathes  Him  out,  we  receive 
207 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Him  in  answer  to  prayer ;  as  we  breathe  Him  back 
again,  He  rises  to  God  laden  with  our  supplications. 
As  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  whom  the  Father  and  the 
Son  are  one,  and  the  intercession  of  the  Son  reaches 
the  Father,  He  is  to  us  the  Spirit  of  prayer.  True 
prayer  is  the  living  experience  of  the  truth  of  the 
Holy  Trinity.  The  Spirit's  breathing,  the  Son's  inter- 
cession, the  Father's  will,  these  three  become  one 
in  us. 

208 


TWENTY-SIXTH  LESSON. 

"I   have  prayed  for  thee;"   or,   Christ    the 
Intercessor. 

Btit  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not. — 
Luke  xxii.  32. 

I  say  unto  you ^  that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for  you, — 
John  xvi,  26. 

He  everliveth  to  j?iake  intercession. — Heb.  vii.  25. 

ALL  growth  in  the  spiritual  Hfe  is  connected  with 
the  clearer  insight  into  what  Jesus  is  to  us. 
The  more  I  realize  that  Christ  must  be  all  to  me,  and 
in  me,  that  all  in  Christ  is  indeed  for  me,  the 
more  I  learn  to  live  the  real  life  of  faith,  which, 
dying  to  self,  lives  wholly  in  Christ.  The  Christian 
life  is  no  longer  the  vain  struggle  to  live  right,  but 
the  resting  in  Christ  and  finding  strength  in  Him  as 
our  life,  to  fight  the  fight  and  gain  the  victory  of 
faith.  This  is  specially  true  of  the  life  of  prayer.  As 
it  too  comes  under  the  law  of  faith  alone,  and  is  seen 
in  the  light  of  the  fulness  and  completeness  there  is 
in  Jesus,  the  believer  understands  that  it  need  no 
longer  be  a  matter  of  strain  or  anxious  care,  but  an 
experience  of  what  Christ  will  do  for  him  and  in  him 
—  a  participation  in  that  life  of  Christ  which,  as  on 
14  209 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

earth ,  so  in  heaven,  ever  ascends  to  the  Father  as 
prayer.  And  He  begins  to  pray,  not  only  trusting  in 
the  merits  of  Jesus,  or  in  the  intercession  by  which 
our  unworthy  prayers  are  made  acceptable,  but  in 
that  near  and  close  union  in  virtue  of  which  He  prays 
in  us  and  we  in  Him.^  The  whole  of  salvation  is 
Christ  Himself :  He  has  given  Himiself  to  us  ;  He 
Himself  lives  in  us.  Because  He  prays,  we  pray  too. 
As  the  disciples,  when  they  saw  Jesus  pray,  asked 
Him  to  make  them  partakers  of  what  He  knew  of 
prayer,  so  we,  now  we  see  Him  as  intercessor  on  the 
throne,  know  that  He  makes  us  participate  with 
Himself  in  the  life  of  prayer. 

How  clearly  this  comes  out  in  the  last  night  of  His 
life.  In  His  high-priestly  prayer  (John  xvii.).  He 
shows  us  how  and  what  He  has  to  pray  to  the  Father, 
and  will  pray  when  once  ascended  to  heaven.  And 
yet  He  had  in  His  parting  address  so  repeatedly  also 
connected  his  going  to  the  Father  with  their  new  life 
of  prayer.  The  two  would  be  ultimately  connected  : 
His  entrance  on  the  work  of  His  eternal  intercession 
would  be  the  commencement  and  the  power  of  their 
neiv prayer- life  in  His  Name.  It  is  the  sight  of  Jesus 
in  His  intercession  that  gives  us  power  to  pray  in  His 
Name :  all  right  and  power  of  prayer  is  Christ's ; 
He  makes  us  share  in  His  intercession. 

1  See  on  the  difference  between  having  Christ  as  an  Advocate 
or  Intercessor  who  stands  outside  of  us,  and  the  having  Him 
within  us,  we  abiding  in  Him  and  He  in  us  through  the  Holy 
Spirit  perfecting  our  union  with  Him,  so  that  we  ourselves  can 
come  directly  to  the  Father  in  His  Name,  —the  note  from 
Beck  of  Tubingen. 

2IO 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

To  understand  this,  think  first  of  His  intercession: 
He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession.  The  work  of 
Christ  on  earth  as  Priest  was  but  a  beginning.  It 
was  as  Aaron  He  shed  His  blood  ;  it  is  as  Melchize- 
dek  that  He  now  lives  within  the  veil  to  continue  His 
work,  after  the  power  of  the  eternal  life.  As  Mel- 
chizedek  is  more  glorious  than  Aaron,  so  it  is  in  the 
work  of  intercession  that  the  atonement  has  its  true 
power  and  glory.  "  It  is  Christ  that  died  :  yea,  more, 
who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  maketh 
intercession  for  us."  That  intercession  is  an  intense 
reality,  a  work  that  is  absolutely  necessary,  and  with- 
out which  the  continued  application  of  redemption 
cannot  take  place.  In  the  incarnation  and  resurrec- 
tion of  Jesus,  the  wondrous  reconciliation  took  place, 
by  which  man  became  partaker  of  the  Divine  life  and 
blessedness.  But  the  real  personal  appropriation  of 
this  reconciliation  in  each  of  His  members  here  below 
cannot  take  place  without  the  unceasing  exercise  of 
His  Divine  power  by  the  head  in  heaven.  In  all  con- 
version and  sanctification,  in  every  victory  over  sin 
and  the  world,  there  is  a  real  forth-putting  of  the 
power  of  Him  who  is  mighty  to  save.  And  this  ex- 
ercise of  His  power  only  takes  place  through  His 
prayer :  He  asks  of  the  Father,  and  receives  from 
the  Father.  *'  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost, 
because  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession."  There 
is  not  a  need  of  His  people  but  He  receives  in  in- 
tercession what  the  Godhead  has  to  give  :  His  medi- 
ation on  the  throne  is  as  real  and  indispensable  as 
on  the  cross.    Nothing  takes  place  without  His  inter- 

211 


With  Christ  in  tlie  School  of  Prayer. 

cession ;  it  engages  all  His  time  and  powers,  is 
His  unceasing  occupation  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father. 

And  we  participate  not  only  in  the  benefits  of  this 
His  work,  but  in  the  work  itself.  This  because  we 
are  His  body.  Body  and  members  are  one :  "  The 
head  cannot  say  to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  of  thee." 
We  share  with  Jesus  in  all  He  is  and  has  :  ''The 
glory  which  Thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given  them." 
We  are  partakers  of  His  life,  His  righteousness,  His 
work:  we  share  with  Him  in  His  intercession  too  ;  it 
is  not  a  work  He  does  without  us. 

We  do  this  because  we  are  partakers  of  His  life : 
" Christ  is  our  life ;  "  "No  longer  I,  but  Christ  Hveth 
in  me."  The  life  in  Him  and  in  us  is  identical,  one 
and  the  same.  His  life  in  heaven  is  an  ever-praying 
life.  When  it  descends  and  takes  possession  of  us,  it 
does  not  lose  its  character ;  in  us  too  it  is  the  ever- 
f7^aying  life — a  life  that  without  ceasing  asks  and  re- 
ceives from  God.  And  this  not  as  if  there  were  two 
separate  currents  of  prayer  rising  upwards,  one  from 
Him,  and  one  from  His  people.  No,  but  the  sub- 
stantial life-union  is  also  prayer-union :  what  He 
prays  passes  through  us,  what  we  pray  passes  through 
Him.  He  is  the  angel  with  the  golden  censer: 
"Unto  Him  there  was  given  much  incense,"  the 
secret  of  acceptable  prayer,  "  that  He  should  add  it 
unto  the  prayers  of  all  the  saints  upon  the  golden 
altar."  We  live,  we  abide  in  Him,  the  Interceding 
One. 

The  Only-begotten  is  the  only  one  who  has  the 

212 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer 

right  to  pray,  to  Him  alone  it  was  said,  "Ask,  and  it 
shall  be  given  Thee."  As  in  all  other  things  the 
fulness  dwells  in  Him,  so  the  true  prayer-fulness  too  ; 
He  alone  has  the  power  of  prayer.  And  just  as  the 
growth  of  the  spiritual  life  consists  in  the  clearer  in- 
sight that  all  the  treasures  are  in  Him,  and  that  we 
too  are  ifi  Him,  to  receive  each  moment  what  we 
possess  in  Him,  grace  for  grace,  so  with  the  prayer- 
life  too.  Our  faith  in  the  intercession  of  Jesus  must 
not  only  be  that  He  prays  in  our  stead,  when  we  do 
not  or  cannot  pray,  but  that,  as  the  Author  of  our  life 
and  our  faith,  He  draws  us  on  to  pray  in  unison  with 
Himself.  Our  prayer  must  be  a  work  of  faith  in  this 
sense  too,  that  as  we  know  that  Jesus  communicates 
His  whole  life  in  us,  He  also  out  of  that  prayerfulness 
which  is  His  alone  breathes  into  us  our  praying. 

To  many  a  believer  it  was  a  new  epoch  in  his 
spiritual  life  when  it  was  revealed  to  him  how  truly 
and  entirely  Christ  was  his  life,  standing  good  as 
surety  for  his  remaining  faithful  and  obedient.  It 
was  then  first  that  he  really  began  to  live  2,  faith-life. 
No  less  blessed  will  be  the  discovery  that  Christ 
is  surety  for  our  prayer-life  too,  the  center  and  em- 
bodiment of  all  prayer,  to  be  communicated  by  Him 
through  the  Holy  Spirit  to  His  people.  **He  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  "  as  the  Head  of  the  body, 
as  the  Leader  in  that  new  and  living  way  which  He 
hath  opened  up,  as  the  Author  and  the  Perfecter  of  our 
faith.  He  provides  in  everything  for  the  life  of  His 
redeemed  ones  by  giving  His  own  life  in  them :  He 
cares  for  their  life  of  prayer,  by  taking  them  up  into 
213 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

His  heavenly  prayer-hfe,  by  giving  and  maintaining 
His  prayer-hfe  within  them.  ' '  I  have  prayed  for 
thee,"  not  to  render  thy  faith  needless,  but  "that  thy 
faith  fail  not : ' '  our  faith  and  prayer  of  faith  is  rooted 
in  His.  It  is,  **if  ye  abide  in  me,"  the  ever-hving 
Intercessor,  and  pray  with  me  and  in  me :  "  ask 
whatsoever  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you." 

The  thought  of  our  fellowship  in  the  intercession  of 
Jesus  reminds  us  of  what  He  has  taught  us  more 
than  once  before,  how  all  these  wonderful  prayer- 
promises  have  as  their  aim  and  their  justification,  the 
glory  of  God  in  the  manifestation  of  His  kingdom 
and  the  salvation  of  sinners.  As  long  as  we  only  or 
chiefly  pray  for  ourselves,  the  promises  of  the  last 
night  must  remain  a  sealed  book  to  us.  It  is  to  the 
fruit-bearing  branches  of  the  Vine  ;  it  is  to  disciples 
sent  into  the  world  as  the  Father  sent  Him,  to  live  for 
perishing  men ;  it  is  to  His  faithful  servants  and  in- 
timate friends  who  take  up  the  work  He  leaves 
behind,  who  have  like  their  Lord  become  as  the 
seed-corn,  losing  its  life  to  multiply  it  manifold  ;—  it  is 
to  such  that  the  promises  are  given.  Let  us  each  find 
out  what  the  work  is,  and  who  the  souls  are  entrusted 
to  our  special  prayers,  let  us  make  our  intercession 
for  them  our  life  of  fellowship  with  God,  and  we  shall 
not  only  find  the  promises  of  power  in  prayer  made 
true  to  us,  but  we  shall  then  first  begin  to  realize  how 
our  abiding  in  Christ  and  His  abiding  in  us  makes  us 
share  in  His  own  joy  of  blessing  and  saving  men. 

O  most  wonderful  intercession  of  our  Blessed  Lord 
Jesus,  to  which  we  not  only  owe  everything,  but  in 
214 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

which  we  are  taken  up  as  active  partners  and  fellow- 
workers  !  Now  we  understand  what  it  is  to  pray  in 
the  Name  of  Jesus,  and  why  it  has  such  power.  In 
His  Name,  in  His  Spirit,  in  Himself,  in  perfect  union 
with  Him.  O  wondrous,  ever  active,  and  most  effi- 
cacious intercession  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  !  when 
shall  we  be  wholly  taken  up  into  it,  and  always  pray 
in  it? 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord !  in  lowly  adoration  I  would  again 
bow  before  Thee.  Thy  whole  redemption  work  has 
now  passed  into  prayer  :  all  that  now  occupies  Thee 
in  maintaining  and  dispensing  what  Thou  didst  pur- 
chase with  Thy  blood  is  only  prayer.  Thou  ever 
livest  to  pray.  And  because  we  are  and  abide  in 
Thee,  the  direct  access  to  the  Father  is  always  open, 
our  life  can  be  one  of  unceasing  prayer,  and  the 
answer  to  our  prayer  is  sure. 

Blessed  Lord  !  Thou  hast  invited  Thy  people  to  be 
Thy  fellow-workers  in  a  life  of  prayer.  Thou  hast 
united  Thyself  with  Thy  people  and  makest  them  as 
Thy  body  share  with  Thee  in  that  ministry  of  inter- 
cession, through  which  alone  the  world  can  be  filled 
with  the  fruit  of  Thy  redemption  and  the  glory  of  the 
Father.  With  more  liberty  than  ever  I  come  to  Thee, 
my  Lord,  and  beseech  Thee  :  Teach  me  to  pray. 
Thy  life  is  prayer,  Thy  life  is  mine.  Lord  !  teach  me 
to  pray,  in  Thee,  like  Thee. 

And,  O  my  Lord !  give  me  specially  to  know,  as 
215 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Thou  didst  promise  Thy  disciples,  that  Thou  art  in 
the  Father,  and  I  in  Thee,  and  Thou  in  me.  Let  the 
uniting  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  make  my  whole  life 
an  abiding  in  Thee  and  Thy  intercession,  so  that  my 
prayer  may  be  its  echo,  and  the  Father  hear  me  in 
Thee  and  Thee  in  me.  Lord  Jesus  !  let  Thy  mind 
in  everything  be  in  me,  and  my  life  in  everything  be 
in  Thee.  So  shall  I  be  prepared  to  be  the  channel 
through  which  Thy  intercession  pours  its  blessing  on 
the  world.     Amen. 


NOTE. 

"  The  new  epoch  of  prayer  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  is 
pointed  out  by  Christ  as  the  time  of  the  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit,  in  which  the  disciples  enter  upon  a 
more  enlightened  apprehension  of  the  economy  of 
redemption,  and  become  as  clearly  conscious  of  their 
oneness  with  Jesus  as  of  His  oneness  with  the  Father. 
Their  prayer  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  is  now  directly  to 
the  Father  Himself.  ^  I  say  not  that  I  will  pray  lox 
you,  for  the  Father  Himself  loveth  you,'  Jesus  says  ; 
while  He  had  previously  spoken  of  the  time  before 
the  Spirit's  coming:  ''  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He 
\i\\\  give  you  the  Comforter.'  This  prayer  thus  has 
as  its  central  thought  the  insight  into  our  being 
united  to  God  in  Christ  as  on  both  sides  the  living 
bond  of  union  between  God  and  us  (John  xvii.  23: 
*  I  in  them  and  Thou  in  me '),  so  that  in  Jesus  we 
behold  the  Father  as  united  to  us,  and  ourselves  as 
216 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

united  to  the  Father.  Jesus  Christ  must  have  been 
revealed  to  us,  not  only  through  the  truth  in  the 
mind,  but  in  our  inmost  personal  consciousness  as 
the  living  personal  reconciliation,  as  He  in  whom 
God's  Fatherhood  and  Father-love  have  been  per- 
fectly united  with  human  nature  and  it  with  God. 
Not  that  with  the  immediate  prayer  to  the  Father,  the 
mediatorship  of  Christ  is  set  aside ;  but  it  is  no  longer 
looked  at  as  something  external,  existing  outside  of 
us,  but  as  a  real  living  spiritual  existence  within  us,  so 
that  the  Christ/or  tis,  the  Mediator,  has  really  become 
Christ  -iu  us. 

"  When  the  consciousness  of  this  oneness  between 
God  in  Christ  and  us  in  Christ  still  is  wanting,  or  has 
been  darkened  by  the  sense  of  guilt,  then  the  prayer 
of  faith  looks  to  our  Lord  as  the  Advocate,  who 
prays  the  Father /or  us.  (Compare  John  xvi.  26  with 
xiv.  16,  17,  ix.  20;  Luke  xxii.  32;  i  John  ii.  i.)  To 
take  Christ  thus  in  prayer  as  Advocate,  is  according 
to  John  xvi.  26  not  perfectly  the  same  as  the  prayer  in 
His  Name.  Christ's  advocacy  is  meant  to  lead  us  on 
to  that  inner  self-standing  life-union  with  Him,  and 
with  the  Father  in  Him,  in  virtue  of  which  Christ  is 
He  in  whom  God  enters  into  immediate  relation  and 
unites  Himself  with  us,  and  in  whom  we  in  all  cir- 
cumstances enter  into  immediate  relation  with  God. 
Even  so  the  prayer  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  does  not 
consist  in  our  prayer  at  His  command  :  the  disciples 
had  prayed  thus  ever  since  the  Lord  had  given  them 
His  '  Our  Father,'  and  yet  He  says,  *  Hitherto  ye 
have  not  prayed  in  my  Name.'  Only  when  the 
217 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

mediation  of  Christ  has  become,  through  the  indwell- 
ing of  the  Holy  Spirit,  life  and  power  within  us,  and  so 
His  7nmd,  as  it  found  expression  in  His  word  and 
work,  has  taketi  possession  of  aiid  filled  oicr persotial 
consciousness  and  will,  so  that  in  faith  and  love  we 
have  Jesus  in  us  as  the  Reconciler  who  has  actually 
made  us  one  with  God,  only  then  His  Name,  which 
includes  His  nature  and  His  work,  is  become  truth 
and  power  in  us  (not  only  for  us),  and  we  have  in  the 
Name  of  Jesus  the  free,  direct  access  to  the  Father 
which  is  sure  of  being  heard.  Prayer  in  the  Name 
of  Jesus  is  the  Hberty  of  a  son  with  the  Father,  just 
as  Jesus  had  this  as  the  First-begotten.  We  pray  in 
the  place  of  Jesus,  not  as  if  we  could  put  ourselves 
in  His  place,  but  in  as  far  as  we  are  in  Him  and  He 
in  us.  We  go  direct  to  the  Father,  but  only  as  the 
Father  is  in  Christ,  not  as  if  He  were  separate  from 
Christ.  Wherever  thus  the  inner  man  does  not  live 
in  Christ  and  has  Him  not  present  as  the  Living  One, 
where  His  word  is  not  ruling  in  the  heart  in  its  Spirit- 
power,  where  His  truth  and  life  have  not  become  the 
life  of  our  soul,  it  is  vain  to  think  that  a  formula 
like  'for  the  sake  of  Thy  dear  Son'  will  avail." — 
Christliche  Ethik,  von  Dr.  I.  T.  Beck,  Tubingen, 
iii.  39. 

218 


TWENTY-SEVENTH  IvESSON. 

"  Father,  I  will ;  "  or,  Christ  the  High  Priest. 

Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  Thou  hast  given  me 
may  be  with  me  where  I  am, — ^JOHN  xvii.  24. 

IN  His  parting  address,  Jesus  gives  His  disciples 
the  full  revelation  of  what  the  New  Life  was  to 
be,  when  once  the  kingdom  of  God  had  come  in 
power.  In  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in 
union  with  Him  the  heavenly  Vine,  in  their  going 
forth  to  witness  and  to  suffer  for  Him,  they  were  to 
find  their  calling  and  their  blessedness.  In  between 
His  setting  forth  of  their  future  new  life,  the  Lord 
had  repeatedly  given  the  most  unlimited  promises  as 
to  the  power  their  prayers  might  have.  And  now  in 
closing,  He  Himself  proceeds  to  pray.  To  let  His 
disciples  have  the  joy  of  knowing  what  His  interces- 
sion for  them  in  heaven  as  their  High  Priest  will  be, 
He  gives  this  precious  legacy  of  His  prayer  to  the 
Father.  He  does  this  at  the  same  time  because  they  as 
priests  are  to  share  in  His  work  of  intercession,  that 
they  and  we  might  know  how  to  perform  this  holy 
work.  In  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  on  this  last  night, 
we  have  learned  to  understand  that  these  astonishing 
prayer-promises  have  not  been  given  in  our  own 
behalf,  but  in  the  interest  of  the  Lord  and  His  king- 
219 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

dom  ;  it  is  from  the  Lord  Himself  alone  that  we  can 
learn  what  the  prayer  in  His  Name  is  to  be  and  to 
obtain.  We  have  understood  that  to  pray  in  His 
Name  is  to  pray  in  perfect  unity  with  Himself ;  the 
high-priestly  prayer  will  teach  all  that  the  prayer  in 
the  Name  of  Jesus  may  ask  and  expect. 

This  prayer  is  ordinarily  divided  into  three  parts. 
Our  Lord  first  prays  for  Himself  (v.  1-5),  then  for  His 
disciples  (6-19),  and  last  for  all  the  believing  people 
through  all  ages  (20-26).  The  follower  of  Jesus,  who 
gives  himself  to  the  work  of  intercession,  and  would 
fain  try  how  much  of  blessing  he  can  pray  down  upon 
his  circle  in  the  Name  of  Jesus,  will  in  all  humility 
let  himself  be  led  of  the  Spirit  to  study  this  wonder- 
ful prayer  as  one  of  the  most  important  lessons  of  the 
school  of  prayer. 

First  of  all,  Jesus  prays  for  Himself,  for  His  being 
glorified,  that  so  He  may  glorify  the  Father.  "  Fa- 
ther !  glorify  Thy  Son.  And  now,  Father,  glorify 
me."  And  He  brings  forward  the  grounds  on  which 
He  thus  prays.  A  holy  covenant  had  been  concluded 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  heaven.  The 
Father  had  promised  Him  power  over  all  flesh  as  the 
reward  of  His  work  :  He  had  done  the  work.  He  had 
glorified  the  Father,  and  His  one  purpose  is  now  still 
further  to  glorify  Him.  With  the  utmost  boldness 
He  asks  that  the  Father  may  glorify  Him,  that  He 
may  now  be  and  do  for  His  people  all  He  has  under- 
taken. 

Disciple  of  Jesus  !  here  you  have  the  first  lesson 
in  your  work  of  priestly  intercession,  to  be  learned 
220 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

from  the  example  of  your  great  High  Priest.  To 
pray  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  is  to  pray  in  unity,  in  sym- 
pathy with  Him.  As  the  Son  began  His  prayer  by 
making  clear  His  relation  to  the  Father,  pleading 
His  work  and  obedience  and  His  desire  to  see  the 
Father  glorified,  do  so  too.  Draw  near  and  appear 
before  the  Father  in  Christ.  Plead  His  finished  work. 
Say  that  you  are  one  with  it,  that  you  trust  on  it,  live 
in  it.  Say  that  you  too  have  given  yourself  to  finish 
the  work  the  Father  has  given  you  to  do,  and  to  live 
alone  for  His  glory.  And  ask  then  confidently  that 
the  Son  may  be  glorified  in  you.  This  is  praying  in 
the  Name,  in  the  very  words,  in  the  Spirit  of  Jesus,  in 
union  with  Jesus  Himself.  Such  prayer  has  power.  If 
with  Jesus  you  glorify  the  Father,  the  Father  will 
glorify  Jesus  by  doing  what  you  ask  in  His  Name.  It 
is  only  when  your  own  personal  relation  on  this  point 
like  Christ's,  is  clear  with  God,  when  you  are  glori- 
fying Him,  and  seeking  all  for  His  glory,  that,  like 
Christ,  you  will  have  power  to  intercede  for  those 
around  you. 

Our  Lord  next  prays  for  the  circle  of  His  disciples. 
He  speaks  of  them  as  those  whom  the  Father  has 
given  Him.  Their  chief  mark  is  that  they  have  re- 
ceived Christ's  word.  He  says  of  them  that  He  now 
sends  them  into  the  world  in  His  place,  just  as  the 
Father  had  sent  Himself.  And  He  asks  two  things 
for  them :  that  the  Father  keep  them  from  the  evil 
one,  and  sanctify  them  through  His  Word,  because 
He  sanctifies  Himself  for  them. 

Just  like  the  Lord,  each  believing  intercessor  has 

221 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

his  own  immediate  circle  for  whom  He  first  prays. 
Parents  have  their  children,  teachers  their  pupils, 
pastors  their  flocks,  all  workers  their  special  charge, 
all  believers  those  whose  care  lies  upon  their  hearts. 
It  is  of  great  consequence  that  intercession  should  be 
personal,  pointed  and  definite.  And  then  our  first 
prayer  must  always  be  that  they  may  receive  the 
word.  But  this  prayer  will  not  avail  unless  with  our 
Lord  we  say,  "  I  have  given  them  Thy  word  ;"  it  is 
this  gives  us  liberty  and  power  in  intercession  for 
souls.  Not  only  pray  for  them,  but  speak  to  them. 
And  when  they  have  received  the  word,  let  us  pray 
much  for  their  being  kept  fi-om  the  evil  one,  for  their 
being  sanctified  through  that  word.  Instead  of  being 
hopeless  or  judging  or  giving  up  those  who  fall,  let 
us  pray  for  our  circle,  "  Father  !  keep  them  in  Thy 
Name ;  "  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth."  Prayer 
in  the  Name  of  Jesus  availeth  much  :  "  What  ye  will 
shall  be  done  unto  you." 

And  then  follows  our  Lord's  prayer  for  a  stilUvider 
circle.  "  I  pray  not  only  for  these,  but  for  them  who 
through  their  word  shall  believe."  His  priestly  heart 
enlarges  itself  to  embrace  all  places  and  all  time,  and 
He  prays  that  all  who  belong  to  Him  may  every- 
where be  one,  as  God's  proof  to  the  world  of  the 
divinity  of  His  mission,  and  then  that  they  may  ever 
be  with  Him  in  His  glory.  Until  then,  "that  the  love 
wherewith  Thou  hast  loved  me  may  be  in  them,  and 
I  in  them." 

The  disciple  of  Jesus,  who  has  first  in  his  own  cir- 
cle proved  the  power  of  prayer,  cannot  confine  him- 

222 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

self  within  its  limits ;  he  prays  for  the  Church  universal 
and  its  different  branches.  He  prays  specially  for 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit  and  of  love.  He  prays  for  its 
being  one  in  Christ,  as  a  witness  to  the  world  that 
Christ,  who  hath  wrought  such  a  wonder  as  to  make 
love  triumph  over  selfishness  and  separation,  is  in- 
deed the  Son  of  God  sent  from  heaven.  Every 
believer  ought  to  pray  much  that  the  unity  of  the 
Church,  not  in  external  organizations,  but  in  spirit 
and  in  truth,  may  be  made  manifest. 

So  much  for  the  matter  of  the  prayer.  Now  for 
its  mode.  Jesus  says,  "Father!  I  will."  On  the 
ground  of  His  right  as  Son,  and  the  Father's  promise 
to  Him,  and  His  finished  work.  He  might  do  so.  The 
Father  had  said  to  Him,  "Ask  of  me,  and  I  will  give 
Thee."  He  simply  availed  Himself  of  the  Father's 
promise.  Jesus  has  given  us  a  like  promise :  "  What- 
soever ye  will  shall  be  done  unto  you."  He  asks  me 
in  His  Name  to  say  what  I  will.  Abiding  in  Him,  in 
a  living  union  with  Him  in  which  man  is  nothing  and 
Christ  all,  the  believer  has  the  liberty  to  take  up  that 
word  of  His  High  Priest  and,  in  answer  to  the  question, 
"  What  wilt  thou  .^  "  to  say, "  Father  !  I  will  all  that 
Thou  hast  promised."  This  is  nothing  but  true 
faith  ;  this  is  honoring  God  :  to  be  assured  that  such 
confidence  in  saying  what  I  will  is  indeed  acceptable 
to  Him.  At  first  sight,  our  heart  shrinks  from  the 
expression ;  we  feel  neither  the  liberty  nor  the  power 
to  speak  thus.  It  is  a  word  for  which  alone  in  the 
most  entire  abnegation  of  our  will  grace  will  be  given, 
but  for  which  grace  will  most  assuredly  be  given  to 
223 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

each  one  who  loses  his  will  in  his  Lord's.  He  that 
loseth  his  will  shall  find  it ;  he  that  gives  up  his  will 
entirely  shall  find  it  again  renewed  and  strengthened 
with  a  Divine  strength.  "Father  !  I  will  :  "  this  is 
the  keynote  of  the  everlasting,  ever-active,  all-pre- 
vailing intercession  of  our  Lord  in  heaven.  It  is  only 
in  union  with  Him  that  our  prayer  avails  ;  in  union 
with  Him  it  avails  much.  If  we  but  abide  in  Him, 
living,  and  walking,  and  doing  all  things  in  His 
Name ;  if  we  but  come  and  bring  each  separate  peti- 
tion, tested  and  touched  by  His  Word  and  Spirit,  and 
cast  it  into  the  mighty  stream  of  intercession  that 
goes  up  from  Him,  to  be  borne  upward  and  presented 
before  the  Father ; — we  shall  have  the  full  confidence 
that  we  receive  the  petitions  we  ask:  the  "Father! 
IwiW  will  be  breathed  into  us  by  the  Spirit  Him- 
self. We  shall  lose  ourselves  in  Him,  and  become 
nothing,  to  find  that  in  our  impotence  we  have  power 
and  prevail. 

Disciples  of  Jesus  !  called  to  be  like  your  Lord  in 
His  priestly  intercession,  when,  O  when !  shall  we 
awaken  to  the  glory,  passing  all  conception,  of  this 
our  destiny  to  plead  and  prevail  with  God  for  perish- 
ing men  ?  O  when  shall  we  shake  off  the  sloth  that 
clothes  itself  with  the  pretence  of  humility,  and  yield 
ourselves  wholly  to  God's  Spirit,  that  He  may  fill  our 
wills  with  light  and  with  power,  to  know,  and  to  take, 
and  to  possess  all  that  our  God  is  waiting  to  give  to 
a  will  that  lays  hold  on  Him. 

"Lord,  TEACH  us  to  pray." 
224 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

O  my  blessed  High  Priest !  whom  am  I  that  Thou 
shouldest  thus  invite  me  to  share  with  Thee  in  Thy 
power  of  prevaihng  intercession  ?  And  why,  O  my 
Lord !  am  I  so  slow  of  heart  to  understand  and  be- 
Heve  and  exercise  this  wonderful  privilege  to  which 
Thou  hast  redeemed  Thy  people  ?  O  Lord  !  give  Thy 
grace  that  this  may  increasingly  be  my  unceasing 
life-work — in  praying  without  ceasing  to  draw  down 
the  blessing  of  heaven  on  all  my  surroundings  on 
earth. 

Blessed  Lord  !  I  come  now  to  accept  this  my  call- 
ing. For  this  I  would  forsake  all  and  follow  Thee. 
Into  Thy  hands  I  would  believingly  yield  my  whole 
being :  form,  train,  inspire  me  to  be  one  of  Thy 
prayer-legion,  wrestlers  who  watch  and  strive  in 
prayer,  Israels,  God's  princes,  who  have  power  and 
prevail.  Take  possession  of  my  heart,  and  fill  it  with 
the  one  desire  for  the  glory  of  God  in  the  ingathering, 
and  sanctification,  and  union  of  those  whom  the 
Father  hath  given  Thee.  Take  my  mind  and  let  this 
be  my  study  and  my  wisdom,  to  know  when  prayer 
can  bring  a  blessing.  Take  me  wholly  and  fit  me  as 
a  priest  ever  to  stand  before  God  and  to  bless  in  His 
Name. 

Blessed  Lord  !  be  it  here,  as  through  all  the  spiritual 
life  :  Thou  all,  I  nothing.  And  be  it  here  my  ex- 
perience too  that  he  that  has  and  seeks  nothing  for 
himself,  receives  all,  even  to  the  wonderful  grace  of 
sharing  with  Thee  in  Thine  everlasting  ministry  of 
intercession.    Amen. 

15  225 


TWENTY-EIGHTH   I.ESSON. 

**  Father !  not  what  I  will ; »'  or,  Christ  the  Sac- 
rifice. 

And  He  said^  Abba^  Father^  all  things  are  possible  unto 
Thee  ;  remove  this  ctip  from  me  ;  howbeit  not  zvhat  I  will ^ 
but  xuhat  Thou  wilt. — MARK  xiv.  36. 

WHAT  a  contrast  within  the  space  of  a  few  hours  ! 
What  a  transition  from  the  quiet  elevation 
of  that,  *'  He  lifted  up  His  eyes  to  heaven,  and  said, 
Father  !  I  will,"  to  that  falling  on  the  ground  and 
crying  in  agony,  "My  Father  !  not  what  I  will."  In 
the  one  we  see  the  High  Priest  within  the  veil  in  His 
all-prevailing  intercession  ;  in  the  other,  the  sacrifice 
on  the  altar  opening  the  way  through  the  rent  veil. 
The  high-priestly  "Father  !  I  will,"  in  order  of  time 
precedes  the  sacrificial  "Father!  not  what  I  will;" 
but  this  was  only  by  anticipation,  to  show  what  the 
intercession  would  be  when  once  the  sacrifice  was 
brought.  In  reality  it  was  that  prayer  at  the  altar, 
**  Father !  not  what  I  will,"  in  which  the  prayer  before 
the  throne,  "Father!  I  will,"  had  its  origin  and  its 
power.  It  is  from  the  entire  surrender  of  His  will  in 
Gethsemane  that  the  High  Priest  on  the  throne  has 
the  power  to  ask  what  He  will,  has  the  right  to  make 
226 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

"His  people  share  in  that  power  too,  and  ask  what 
they  will.  — — 

For  all  who  would  learn  to  pray  in  the  school 
of  Jesus,  this  Gethsemane  lesson  is  one  of  the  most 
sacred  and  precious.  To  a  superficial  scholar  it  may 
appear  to  take  away  the  courage  to  pray  in  faith.  If 
even  the  earnest  supplication  of  the  Son  was  not 
heard,  if  even  the  Beloved  had  to  say,  "  Not  what  I 
WILL !  "  how  much  more  do  we  need  to  speak  so. 
And  thus  it  appears  impossible  that  the  promises 
which  the  Lord  had  given  only  a  few  hours  pre- 
viously, "Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,"  "Whatso- 
ever YE  WILL,"  could  have  been  meant  literally.  A 
deeper  insight  into  the  meaning  of  Gethsemane 
would  teach  us  that  we  have  just  here  the  sure  ground 
and  the  open  way  to  the  assurance  of  an  answer  to 
our  prayer.  Let  us  draw  nigh  in  reverent  and  adoring 
wonder,  to  gaze  on  this  great  sight — God's  Son  thus 
ofifering  up  prayer  and  supplications  with  strong  crying 
and  tears,  and  not  obtaining  what  He  asks.  He  Him- 
self is  our  Teacher,  and  will  open  up  to  us  the  mystery  of 
His  holy  sacrifice,  as  revealed  in  this  wondrous  prayer. 

To  understand  the  prayer,  let  us  note  the  infinite 
difference  between  what  our  Lord  prayed  for  as  a 
Royal  High  Priest,  and  what  He  here  supplicates 
in  His  weakness.  There  it  was  for  the  glorifying  of 
the  Father  He  prayed,  and  the  glorifying  of  Himself 
and  His  people  as  the  fulfilment  of  distinct  promises 
that  had  been  given  Him.  He  asked  what  He  knew 
to  be  according  to  the  word  and  the  will  of  the 
Father;  He  might  boldly  say,  "Father!  I  will." 
227 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Here  He  prays  for  something  in  regard  to  which  the 
Father's  will  is  not  yet  clear  to  Him.  As  far  as  He 
knows,  it  is  the  Father's  will  that  He  should  drink  the 
cup.  He  had  told  His  disciples  of  the  cup  He  must 
drink:  a  little  later  He  would  again  say,  "The  cup 
which  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  " 
It  was  for  this  He  had  come  to  this  earth.  But  when, 
in  the  unutterable  agony  of  soul  that  burst  upon  Him 
as  the  power  of  darkness  came  upon  Him,  and  He 
began  to  taste  the  first  drops  of  death  as  the  wrath  of 
God  against  sin,  His  human  nature,  as  it  shuddered 
in  presence  of  the  awful  reality  of  being  made  a 
curse,  gave  utterance  in  this  cry  of  anguish,  to  its 
desire  that,  if  God's  purpose  could  be  accomplished 
without  it,  He  might  be  spared  the  awful  cup :  "  Let 
this  cup  pass  from  me."  That  desire  was  the  evi- 
dence of  the  intense  reality  of  His  humanity.  The 
"  Not  as  I  will  "  kept  that  desire  from  being  sinful :  as 
He  pleadingly  cries,  *'  All  things  are  possible  with 
Thee,"  and  returns  again  to  still  more  earnest  prayer 
that  the  cup  may  be  removed,  it  is  His  thrice-repeated 
*'  Not  what  I  will  "  that  constitutes  the  very 
essence  and  worth  of  His  sacrifice.  He  had  asked 
for  something  of  which  He  could  not  say :  I  know  it 
is  Thy  will.  He  had  pleaded  God's  power  and  love, 
and  had  then  withdrawn  it  in  His  final  '*Thy  will 
BE  DONE."  The  prayer  that  the  cup  should  pass 
away  could  not  be  answered  ;  the  prayer  of  submis- 
sion that  God's  will  be  done  was  heard,  and  gloriously 
answered  in  His  victory  first  over  the  fear,  and  then 
over  the  power  of  death. 

228 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

It  is  in  this  denial  of  His  will,  this  complete  sur- 
render of  His  will  to  the  will  of  the  Father,  that 
Christ's  obedience  reached  its  highest  perfection.  It 
is  from  the  sacrifice  of  the  will  in  Gethsemane  that 
the  sacrifice  of  the  life  on  Calvary  derives  its  value. 
It  is  here,  as  Scripture  saith,  that  He  learned  obedi- 
ence, and  became  the  author  of  everlasting  salvation 
to  all  that  obey  Him.  It  was  because  He  there,  in 
that  prayer,  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross,  that  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him, 
and  given  Him  the  power  to  ask  what  He  will.  It 
was  in  that  "  Father  !  not  what  I  will,"  that  He  ob- 
tained the  power  for  that  other  "Father!  I  will." 
It  was  by  Christ's  submittal  in  Gethsemane  to  have 
not  His  will  done,  that  He  secured  for  His  people  the 
right  to  say  to  them,  ''Ask  whatsoever  ye  will."    ~ — ^ 

Let  me  look  at  them  again,  the  deep  mysteries  that 
Gethsemane  offers  to  my  view.  There  is  the  first: 
the  Father  offers  His  Well-beloved  the  cup,  the  cup 
of  wrath.  The  second  :  the  Son,  always  so  obedient, 
shrinks  back,  and  implores  that  He  may  not  have  to 
drink  it.  The  third  :  the  Father  does  not  grant  the 
Son  His  request,  but  still  gives  the  cup.  And  then 
the  last :  the  Son  yields  His  will,  is  content  that  His 
will  be  not  done,  and  goes  out  to  Calvary  to  drink 
the  cup.  O  Gethsemane  !  in  thee  I  see  how  my  Lord 
could  give  me  such  unlimited  assurance  of  an  answer 
to  my  prayers.  As  my  surety  He  won  it  for  me,  by 
His  consent  to  have  His  petition  unanswered. 

This  is  in  harmony  with  the  whole  scheme  of  re- 
demption. Our  Lord  always  wins  for  us  the  opposite 
229 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

of  what  He  suffered.  He  was  bound  that  we  might 
go  free.  He  was  made  sin  that  we  might  become 
the  righteousness  of  God.  He  died  that  we  might 
hve.  He  bore  God's  curse  that  God's  blessing 
might  be  ours.  He  endured  the  not  answering  of 
His  prayer  that  our  prayers  might  find  an  answer. 
Yea,  He  spake,  "  Not  as  I  will,'''  that  He  might  say 
to  us,  **  If  ye  abide  in  me  ask  what  ye  will ;  it  shall 
be  done  unto  you." 

Yes,  "  If  ye  abide  in  me ;  "  here  in  Gethsemane 
the  word  acquires  new  force  and  depth.  Christ  is 
our  Head,  who  as  surety  stands  in  our  place,  and 
bears  what  we  must  for  ever  have  borne.  We  had 
deserved  that  God  should  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  us,  and 
never  listen  to  our  cry.  Christ  comes,  and  suffers 
this  too  for  us  :  He  suffers  what  we  had  merited  ;  for 
our  sins  He  suffers  beneath  the  burden  of  that  unan- 
swered prayer.  But  now  His  suffering  this  avails  for 
me :  what  He  has  borne  is  taken  away  from  me  ; 
His  merit  has  won  forme  the  answer  to  every  prayer, 
if  I  abide  in  Him. 

Yes,  in  Him,  as  He  bows  there  in  Gethsemane,  I 
must  abide.  As  my  Head,  He  not  only  once  suf- 
fered for  me,  but  ever  lives  in  me,  breathing  and 
working  His  own  disposition  in  me  too.  The  Eter- 
nal Spirit,  through  which  He  offered  Himself  unto 
God,  is  the  Spirit  that  dwells  in  me  too,  and  makes 
me  partaker  of  the  very  same  obedience,  and  the 
sacrifice  of  the  will  unto  God.  That  spirit  teaches 
me  to  yield  my  will  entirely  to  the  will  of  the  Father, 
to  give  it  up  even  unto  the  death,  in  Christ  to  be  dead 
230 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

to  it.  Whatever  is  my  own  mind  and  thought  and 
will,  even  though  it  be  not  directly  sinful,  He  teaches 
me  to  fear  and  flee.  He  opens  my  ear  to  wait  in  great 
gentleness  and  teachableness  of  soul  for  what  the 
Father  has  day  by  day  to  speak  and  to  teach.  He 
discovers  to  me  how  union  with  God's  will  in  the 
love  of  it,  is  union  with  God  Himself ;  how  entire 
surrender  to  God's  will  is  the  Father's  claim,  the 
Son's  example,  and  the  true  blessedness  of  the  soul. 
He  leads  my  will  into  the  fellowship  of  Christ's 
death  and  resurrection:  my  will  dies  in  Him,  in  Him 
to  be  made  alive  again.  He  breathes  into  it,  as  a 
renewed  and  quickened  will,  a  holy  insight  into 
God's  perfect  will,  a  holy  joy  in  yielding  itself  to  be 
an  instrument  of  that  will,  a  holy  liberty  and  power 
to  lay  hold  of  God's  will  to  answer  prayer.  With  my 
whole  will  I  learn  to  live  for  the  interests  of  God  and 
His  kingdom,  to  exercise  the  power  of  that  will — 
crucified  but  risen  again — in  nature  and  in  prayer,  on 
earth  and  in  heaven,  with  men  and  with  God.  The 
more  deeply  I  enter  into  the  "  Father  !  not  what 
I  WILL  "  of  Gethsemane,  and  into  Him  who  spake  it, 
to  abide  in  Him,  the  fuller  is  my  spiritual  access  into 
the  power  of  His  "  Father  !  I  will."  And  the  soul 
experiences  that  it  is  the  will,  which  has  become 
nothing  that  God's  will  may  be  all,  which  now  be- 
comes inspired  with  a  Divine  strength  to  really  will 
what  God  wills,  and  to  claim  what  has  been  promised 
it  in  the  name  of  Christ. 

O  let  us  listen  to  Christ  in  Gethsemane,  as  He  calls, 
"  If  ye  abide  in  me,  ask  whatsoever  ye  will,  and  it 
231 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

shall  be  done  unto  you."  Being  of  one  mind  and 
spirit  with  Him  in  His  giving  up  everything  to  God's 
will,  living  like  Him  in  obedience  and  surrender  to 
the  Father  ;  this  is  abiding  in  Him  ;  this  is  the  secret 
of  power  in  prayer. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Lord  Jesus  !  Gethsemane  was  Thy  school, 
where  Thou  didst  learn  to  pray  and  to  obey.  It  is  still 
Thy  school,  where  Thou  leadest  all  Thy  disciples 
who  would  fain  learn  to  obey  and  to  pray  even  as 
Thou.  Lord  !  teach  me  there  to  pray,  in  the  faith 
that  Thou  hast  atoned  for  and  conquered  our  self- 
will,  and  canst  indeed  give  us  grace  to  pray  like 
Thee. 

O  Lamb  of  God  !  I  would  follow  Thee  to  Geth- 
semane, there  to  become  one  with  Thee,  and  to 
abide  in  Thee  as  Thou  dost  unto  the  very  death 
yield  Thy  will  unto  the  Father.  With  Thee,  through 
Thee,  in  Thee,  I  do  yield  my  will  in  absolute  and 
entire  surrender  to  the  will  of  the  Father.  Conscious 
of  my  own  weakness,  and  the  secret  power  with 
which  self-will  would  assert  itself  and  again  take  its 
place  on  tlie  throne,  I  claim  in  faith  the  power  of  Thy 
victory.  Thou  didst  triumph  over  it  and  deliver  me 
from  it.  In  Thy  death  I  would  daily  live ;  in  Thy  life 
I  would  daily  die.  Abiding  in  Thee,  let  my  will, 
through  the  power  of  Thine  eternal  Spirit,  only  be 
the  tuned  instrument  which  yields  to  every  touch  of 
232 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  will  of  my  God.  With  my  whole  soul  do  1  say 
with  Thee,  and  in  Thee,  ''  Father  !  not  as  I  will,  but 
as  Thou  wilt." 

And  then.  Blessed  Lord  !  open  my  heart  and  that 
of  all  Thy  people,  to  take  in  fully  the  glory  of  the 
truth,  that  a  will  given  up  to  God  is  a  will  accepted 
of  God  to  be  used  in  His  service,  to  desire,  and  pur- 
pose, and  determine,  and  will  what  is  according  to 
God's  will.  A  will  which,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  the  indwelling  God,  is  to  exercise  its  royal  pre- 
rogative in  prayer,  to  loose  and  to  bind  in  heaven  and 
upon  earth,  to  ask  whatsoever  it  will,  and  to  say  it 
shall  be  done. 

O  Lord  Jesus  !  teach  me  to  pray.     Amen. 
233 


TWENTY-NINTH  LESSON. 

•♦If  we  ask  according  to  His  will ;  "  or,  Our  Bold» 
ness  in  Prayer. 

And  this  is  the  boldness  which  we  have  toward  Hijn^  that^ 
if  we  ASK  ANYTHING  ACCORDING  TO  HiS  WILL,  He 
heareth  us.  Attd  if  we  know  that  He  hear  us,  WHATSO- 
EVER WE  ASK,  we  know  that  wE  HAVE  THE  PETITIONS 
which  we  have  asked  of  Him. — i  John  v.  14,  15. 

ONE  of  the  greatest  hindrances  to  believing  prayer 
is  with  many  undoubtedly  this :  they  know  not 
if  what  they  ask  is  according  to  the  will  of  God.  As 
long  as  they  are  in  doubt  on  this  point,  they  cannot 
have  the  boldness  to  ask  in  the  assurance  that  they 
certainly  shall  receive.  And  they  soon  begin  to 
think  that,  if  once  they  have  made  known  their 
requests,  and  receive  no  answer,  it  is  best  to  leave  it 
to  God  to  do  according  to  His  good  pleasure.  The 
words  of  John,  If  we  ask  anything  accordi7ig  to  His 
zvill,  He  heareth  us,"  as  they  understand  them,  make 
certainty  as  to  answer  to  prayer  impossible,  because 
they  cannot  be  sure  of  what  really  may  be  the  will  of 
God.  They  think  of  God's  will  as  His  hidden  counsel 
— how  should  man  be  able  to  fathom  what  really  may 
be  the  purpose  of  the  all-wise  God. 
This  is  the  very  opposite  of  what  John  aimed  at  in 
234 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

writing  thus.  He  wished  to  rouse  us  to  boldness,  to 
confidence,  to  full  assurance  of  faith  in  prayer.  He 
says,  "  This  is  the  boldness  which  we  have  toward 
Hi7n,''^  that  we  can  say:  Father  !  Thou  knowest  and 
I  know  that  I  ask  according  to  Thy  will :  I  know 
Thou  hearest  me.  "  This  is  the  boldness,  that  if  we 
ask  anything  according  to  His  will,  He  heareth  us." 
On  this  account  He  adds  at  once :  "  If  we  know  that 
He  heareth  us  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know,^''  through 
this  faith,  "that  we  have,"  that  we  now  while  we 
pray  receive  "the  petition,"  the  special  things,  "we 
have  asked  of  Him."  John  supposes  that  when 
we  pray,  we  first  find  out  if  our  prayers  are  according 
to  the  will  of  God.  They  may  be  according  to  God's 
will,  and  yet  not  come  at  once,  or  without  the  perse- 
vering prayer  of  faith.  It  is  to  give  us  courage  thus 
to  persevere  and  to  be  strong  in  faith,  that  He  tells 
us :  This  gives  us  boldness  or  confidence  in  prayer,  if 
we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will.  He  heareth 
us.  It  is  evident  that  if  it  be  a  matter  of  uncertainty 
to  us  whether  our  petitions  be  according  to  His  will, 
we  cannot  have  the  comfort  of  what  He  says,  "We 
know  that  we  have  the  petitions  which  we  have  asked 
ofHim." 

But  just  this  is  the  difficulty.  More  than  one  be- 
liever says :  "  I  do  not  know  if  what  I  desire  be 
according  to  the  will  of  God.  God's  will  is  the  pur- 
pose of  His  infinite  wisdom :  it  is  impossible  for  me 
to  know  whether  He  may  not  count  something  else 
better  for  me  than  what  I  desire,  or  may  not  have 
some  reasons  for  withholding  what  I  ask. ' '  Every  one 
235 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

feels  how  with  such  thoughts  the  prayer  of  faith,  of 
which  Jesus  said,  "Whosoever  shall  believe  that 
these  things  which  he  saith  shall  come  to  pass,  he 
shall  have  whatsoever  \\q  saith,"  becomes  an  impos- 
sibility. There  may  be  the  prayer  of  submission, 
and  of  trust  in  God's  wisdom  ;  there  cannot  be  the 
prayer  of  faith.  The  great  mistake  here  is  that  God's 
children  do  not  really  believe  that  it  is  possible  to 
know  God's  will.  Or  if  they  believe  this,  they  do  not 
take  the  time  and  trouble  to  find  it  out.  What  we 
need  is  to  see  clearly  in  what  way  it  is  that  the  Father 
leads  His  waiting,  teachable  child  to  know  that  his 
petition  is  according  to  His  will.^  It  is  through  God's 
holy  word,  taken  up  and  kept  in  the  heart,  the  life, 
the  will ;  and  through  God's  Holy  Spirit,  accepted  in 
His  indwelling  and  leading,  that  we  shall  learn  to 
know  that  our  petitions  are  according  to  His  will. 

Through  the  word.  There  is  a  secret  will  of  God, 
with  which  we  often  fear  that  our  prayers  may  be  at 
variance.  It  is  not  with  this  will  of  God,  but  His  will 
as  revealed  in  His  word,  that  we  have  to  do  in 
prayer.  Our  notions  of  what  the  secret  will  may 
have  decreed,  and  of  how  it  might  render  the  answers 
'to  our  prayers  impossible,  are  mostly  very  erroneous. 
Childlike  faith  as  to  what  He  is  willing  to  do  for  His 
children,  simply  keeps  to  the  Father's  assurance, 
that  it  is  His  will  to  hear  prayer  and  to  do  what  faith 
in  His  word  desires  and  accepts.  In  the  word  tlie 
Father  has  revealed  in  general   promises  the  great 

J  See  this  illustrated  in  the  extracts  from  George  Muller  at 
the  end  of  this  volume. 

236 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

principles  of  His  will  with  His  people.  The  child 
has  to  take  the  promise  and  apply  it  to  the  special 
circumstances  in  His  life  to  which  it  has  reference. 
Whatever  he  asks  within  the  limits  of  that  revealed 
will,  he  can  know  to  be  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
and  he  may  confidently  expect.  In  His  word,  God 
has  given  us  the  revelation  of  His  will  and  plans 
with  us,  with  His  people,  and  with  the  world,  with 
the  most  precious  promises  of  the  grace  and  power 
with  which  through  His  people  He  will  carry  out  His 
plans  and  do  His  work.  As  faith  becomes  strong 
and  bold  enough  to  claim  the  fulfilment  of  the  general 
promise  in  the  special  case,  we  may  have  the  assur- 
ance that  our  prayers  are  heard:  they  are  according  to 
God's  will.  Take  the  words  of  John  in  the  verse  fol- 
lowing our  text  as  an  illustration:  "If  any  man  see 
his  brother  sinning  a  sin  not  unto  death,  he  shall-  ask 
and  God  will  give  him  life.'"  Such  is  the  general 
promise  ;  and  the  believer  who  pleads  on  the  ground 
of  this  promise,  prays  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
and  John  would  give  him  boldness  to  know  that  he 
has  the  petition  which  he  asks. 

But  this  apprehension  of  God's  will  is  something 
spiritual,  and  must  be  spiritually  discerned.  It  is  not 
as  a  matter  of  logic  that  we  can  argue  it  out :  God 
has  said  it ;  I  must  have  it.  Nor  has  every  Christian 
the  same  gift  or  calling.  While  the  general  will 
revealed  in  the  promise  is  the  same  for  all,  there  is  for 
each  one  a  special  different  will  according  to  God's 
purpose.  And  herein  is  the  wisdom  of  the  saints,  to 
know  this  special  will  of  God  for  each  of  us,  accord- 
237 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

ing  to  the  measure  of  grace  given  us,  and  so  to  ask  in 
prayer  just  what  God  has  prepared  and  made  possi- 
ble for  each.  It  is  to  communicate  this  wisdom  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  us.  The  personal  applica- 
tion of  the  general  promises  of  the  word  to  our 
special  personal  needs— it  is  for  this  that  the  leadifig 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given  us. 

It  is  this  union  of  the  teaching  of  the  word  and 
Spirit  that  many  do  not  understand,  and  so  there  is  a 
twofold  difficulty  in  knowing  what  God's  will  may  be. 
Some  seek  the  will  of  God  in  an  inner  feeling  or  con- 
viction, and  would  have  the  Spirit  lead  them  without 
the  word.  Others  seek  it  in  the  word,  without  the 
living  leading  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  The  two  must  be 
united :  only  in  the  word,  only  in  the  Spirit,  but  in 
these  most  surely,  can  we  know  the  will  of  God,  and 
learn  to  pray  according  to  it.  In  the  heart  the  word 
and  Spirit  must  meet :  it  is  only  by  indwelling  that  we 
can  experience  their  teaching.  The  word  must  dwell, 
must  abide  in  us  :  heart  and  life  must  day  by  day  be 
under  its  influence.  Not  from  without,  but  from 
within,  comes  the  quickening  of  the  word  by  the 
Spirit.  It  is  only  he  who  yields  himself  entirely  in 
his  whole  life  to  the  supremacy  of  the  word  and  the 
will  of  God,  who  can  expect  in  special  cases  to 
discern  what  that  word  and  will  permit  him  boldly  to 
ask.  And  even  as  with  the  word,  just  so  with  the 
Spirit :  if  I  would  have  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  in 
prayer  to  assure  me  what  God's  will  is,  my  whole  life 
must  be  yielded  to  that  leading ;  so  only  can  mind 
and  heart  become  spiritual  and  capable  of  knowing 
238 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

God's  holy  will.  It  is  he  who,  through  word  and 
Spirit,  lives  in  the  will  oi  God  by  doing  it,  who  will 
know  to  pray  according  to  that  will  in  the  confidence 
that  He  hears  us. 

Would  that  Christians  might  see  what  incalculable 
harm  they  do  themselves  by  the  thought  that  because 
possibly  their  prayer  is  not  according  to  God's  will, 
they  must  be  content  without  an  answer.  God's 
word  tells  us  that  the  great  reason  of  unanswered 
prayer  is  that  we  do  not  pray  aright :  "  Ye  ask  and 
receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss."  In  not  granting 
an  answer,  the  Father  tells  us  that  there  is  something 
wrong  in  our  prayer.  He  wants  to  teach  us  to  find  it 
out  and  confess  it,  and  so  to  educate  us  to  true  believ- 
ing and  prevailing  prayer.  He  can  only  attain  His 
object  when  He  brings  us  to  see  that  we  are  to  blame 
for  the  withholding  of  the  answer ;  our  aim,  or  our 
faith,  or  our  life  is  not  what  it  should  be.  But  this 
purpose  of  God  is  frustrated  as  long  as  we  are  content 
to  say  :  It  is  perhaps  because  my  prayer  is  not  accord- 
ing to  His  will  that  He  does  not  hear  me.  O  let  us 
no  longer  throw  the  blame  of  our  unanswered 
prayers  on  the  secret  will  of  God,  but  on  our  own 
praying  amiss.  Let  that  word,  "  Ye  receive  not,  be- 
cause ye  ask  amiss,"  be  as  the  lantern  of  the  Lord, 
searching  heart  and  life  to  prove  that  we  are  indeed 
such  as  those  to  whom  Christ  gave  His  promises  of 
certain  answers.  Let  us  believe  that  we  caji  know  if 
our  prayer  be  according  to  God's  will.  Let  us  yield 
our  heart  to  have  the  word  of  the  Father  dwell  richly 
there,  to  have  Christ's  word  abiding  in  us.  Let  us 
239 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Hve  day  by  day  with  the  anointing  which  teacheth  all 
things.  Let  us  yield  ourselves  unreservedly  to  the 
Holy  Spirit  as  He  teaches  us  to  abide  in  Christ,  to 
dwell  in  the  Father's  presence,  and  we  shall  soon 
understand  how  the  Father's  love  longs  that  the  child 
should  know  His  will,  and  should,  in  the  confidence 
that  that  will  includes  all  that  His  power  and  love 
have  promised  to  do,  know  too  that  He  hears  the 
petitions  which  we  ask  of  Him.  "  This  is  the  bold- 
ness which  we  have,  that  if  we  ask  anything  according 
to  His  will,  He  heareth  us." 

"Lord  teach  us  to  pray." 


Blessed  Master !  with  my  whole  heart  I  thank  Thee 
for  this  blessed  lesson,  that  the  path  to  a  life  full 
of  answers  to  prayer  is  through  the  will  of  God. 
Lord  !  teach  me  to  know  this  blessed  will  by  living  it, 
loving  it,  and  always  doing  it.  So  shall  I  learn  to 
offer  prayers  according  to  that  will,  and  to  find  in 
their  harmony  with  God's  blessed  will,  my  boldness 
in  prayer  and  my  confidence  in  accepting  the  answer. 

Father  !  it  is  Thy  ivill  that  Thy  child  should  enjoy 
Thy  presence  and  blessing.  It  is  Thy  will  that 
everything  in  the  life  of  Thy  child  should  be  in 
accordance  with  Thy  will,  and  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
should  work  this  in  Him.  //  is  Thy  will  that  Thy 
child  should  live  in  the  daily  experience  of  distinct 
answers  to  prayer,  so  as  to  enjoy  living  and  direct 
fellowship  with  Thyself.  It  is  Thy  will  that  Thy 
240 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Name  should  be  glorified  in  and  through  thy  chil- 
dren, and  that  it  will  be  in  those  who  trust  Thee.  O 
my  Father !  let  this  Thy  will  be  my  confidence  in  all 
I  ask. 

Blessed  Saviour  !  teach  me  to  believe  in  the  glory 
of  this  will.  That  will  is  the  eternal  love,  which  with 
Divine  power  works  out  its  purpose  in  each  human 
will  that  yields  itself  to  it.  Lord  !  teach  me  this. 
Thou  canst  make  me  see  how  every  promise  and 
every  command  of  the  word  is  indeed  the  will  of 
God,  and  that  its  fulfilment  is  secured  to  me  by  God 
Himself.  Let  thus  the  will  of  God  become  to  me 
the  sure  rock  on  which  my  prayer  and  my  assurance 
of  an  answer  ever  rest.     Amen. 


NOTE. 

There  is  often  great  confusion  as  to  the  will  of  God. 
People  think  that  what  God  wills  must  inevitably 
take  place.  This  is  by  no  means  the  case.  God  wills 
a  great  deal  of  blessing  to  His  people,  which  never 
comes  to  them.  He  wills  it  most  earnestly,  but  they 
do  not  will  it,  and  it  cannot  come  to  them.  This  is 
the  great  mystery  of  man's  creation  with  a  free  will, 
and  also  of  the  renewal  of  His  will  in  redemption, 
that  God  has  made  the  execution  of  His  will,  in  many 
things,  dependent  on  the  will  of  man.  Of  God's  will 
revealed  in  His  promises,  so  much  will  be  fulfilled  as 
i6  241 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

our  faith  accepts.  Prayer  is  the  power  by  which  that 
comes  to  pass  which  otherwise  would  not  take  place. 
And  faith,  the  power  by  which  it  is  decided  how 
much  of  God's  will  shall  be  done  in  us.  When  once 
God  reveals  to  a  soul  what  He  is  willing  to  do  for  it, 
the  responsibility  for  the  execution  of  that  will  rests 
with  us. 

Some  are  afraid  that  this  is  putting  too  much  power 
into  the  hands  of  man.  But  all  power  is  put  into  the 
hands  of  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  key  of  all  prayer 
and  all  power  is  His,  and  when  we  learn  to  under- 
stand that  He  is  just  as  much  one  with  us  as  with  the 
Father,  and  that  we  are  also  just  as  much  one  with 
Him  as  He  with  the  Father,  we  shall  see  how  natural 
and  right  and  safe  it  is  that  to  those  who  abide  in  Him 
as  He  in  the  Father,  such  power  should  be  given.  It  is 
Christ  the  Son  who  has  the  right  to  ask  what  He 
will :  it  is  through  the  abiding  in  Him  and  His  abid- 
ing in  us  (in  a  Divine  reality  of  which  we  have  too 
little  apprehension)  that  His  Spirit  breathes  in  us 
what  He  wants  to  ask  and  obtain  through  us.  We 
pray  in  His  Name ;  the  prayers  are  really  ours  and 
as  really  His. 

Others  again  fear  that  to  believe  that  prayer  has 
such  power  is  limiting  the  liberty  and  the  love  of  God. 
O  if  we  only  knew  how  we  are  limiting  His  liberty 
and  His  love  by  not  allowing  Him  to  act  in  the  only 
way  in  which  He  chooses  to  act,  now  that  He  has 
taken  us  up  into  fellowship  with  Himself — through 
our  prayers  and  our  faith.  A  brother  in  the  ministry 
once  asked,  as  we  were  speaking  on  this  subject, 
242 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

whether  there  was  not  a  danger  of  our  thinking  that 
that  our  love  to  souls  and  our  willingness  to  see  them 
blessed  were  to  move  God's  love  and  God's  willing- 
ness to  bless  them.  We  were  just  passing  some  large 
water-pipes,  by  which  water  was  being  carried  over 
hill  and  dale  from  a  large  mountain  stream  to  a  town 
at  some  distance.  Just  look  at  these  pipes  was  the 
answer  ;  they  did  not  make  the  water  willing  to  flow 
downwards  from  the  hills,  nor  did  they  give  it  its 
power  of  blessing  and  refreshment ;  this  is  its  very 
nature.  All  that  they  could  do  is  to  decide  its  direc- 
tion ;  by  it  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  said  they  want 
the  blessing  there.  And  just  so,  it  is  the  very  nature 
of  God  to  love  and  to  bless.  Downward  and  ever 
downw^ard  His  love  longs  to  come  with  its  quicken- 
ing and  refreshing  streams.  But  He  has  left  it  to 
prayer  to  say  where  the  blessing  is  to  come.  He  has 
committed  it  to  His  believing  people  to  bring  the 
living  water  to  the  desert  places  :  the  will  of  God  to 
bless  is  dependent  upon  the  will  of  man  to  say  where 
the  blessing  must  descend.  Such  honor  have  His 
saints."  "  And  this  is  the  boldness  which  we  have 
toward  Him,  that  if  we  ask  anything  according  to 
His  will,  He  heareth  us.  And  if  we  ktiow  that  He 
hear  us,  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have 
the  petitions  which  we  have  asked  of  Him." 
243 


THIRTIETH  LESSON. 

*'An  holy  priesthood;*'     or,   The   Ministry    of 
Intercession. 

An  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  tip  spiritual  sacrifices  accept- 
able to  God  by  Jesus  Christ. — i  Peter  ii.  5. 

Ye  shall  be    named  the  Priests    of  the   Lord. — IsAIAH 
Ixi.  6. 


•  •  T^HE  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me  ;  be- 
1  cause  the  Lord  hath  anointed  me."  These 
are  the  words  of  Jesus  in  Isaiah.  As  the  fruit  of  His 
work  all  redeemed  ones  are  priests,  fellow-partakers 
with  Him  of  His  anointing  with  the  Spirit  as  High 
Priest.  "  Like  the  precious  ointment  upon  the  beard 
of  Aaron,  that  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  gar- 
ments." As  every  son  of  Aaron,  so  every  member  of 
Jesus'  body  has  a  right  to  the  priesthood.  But  not 
every  one  exercises  it ;  many  are  still  entirely  igno- 
rant of  it.  And  yet  it  is  the  highest  privilege  of  a 
child  of  God,  the  mark  of  greatest  nearness  and  like- 
ness to  Him,  "who  ever  liveth  to  pray."  Do  you 
doubt  if  this  really  be  so  ?  Think  of  what  constitutes 
priesthood. 

There  is,  first,  the  woi^k  of  the  priesthood.    This 
has  two  sides,  one  Godward,  the  other  manward. 
244 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

"  Every  priest  is  ordained  for  men  in  things  pertaining 
to  God''  (Heb.  v.  i) ;  or,  as  it  is  said  by  Moses 
(Deut.  X.  8,  see  also  xxi.  5,  xxxiii.  10;  Mai.  ii.  6)  : 
"The  Lord  separated  the  tribe  of  Levi,  to  stand 
before  the  Lord  to  minister  unto  Him,  and  to  bless 
His  Name:'  On  the  one  hand,  the  priest  had  the 
power  to  draw  nigh  to  God,  to  dwell  with  Him  in  His 
house,  and  to  present  before  Him  the  blood  of  the 
sacrifice  or  the  burning  incense.  This  work  he  did 
not  do,  however,  on  his  own  behalf,  but  for  the  sake 
of  the  people  whose  representative  he  was.  This  is 
the  other  side  of  his  work.  He  received  from  the 
people  their  sacrifices,  presented  them  before  God, 
and  then  came  out  to  bless  in  His  Name,  to  give  the 
assurance  of  His  favor  and  to  teach  them  His  law. 

A  priest  is  thus  a  man  who  does  not  at  all  live  for 
himself.  He  lives  with  God  ajid  for  God.  His  work 
is  as  God's  servant  to  care  for  His  house,  His  honor, 
and  His  worship,  to  make  known  to  men  His  love 
and  His  will.  He  lives  with  men  and  for  men  (Heb. 
v.  2).  His  work  is  to  find  out  their  sin  and  need, 
and  to  bring  it  before  God,  to  offer  sacrifice  and 
incense  in  their  name,  to  obtain  forgiveness  and 
blessing  for  them,  and  then  to  come  out  and  bless 
them  in  His  Name.  This  is  the  high  calling  of  every 
behever.  ''  Such  honor  have  all  His  saints."  They 
have  been  redeemed  with  the  one  purpose  to  be  in 
the  midst  of  the  perishing  millions  around  them  God's 
priests,  who  in  conformity  to  Jesus,  the  Great  High 
Priest,  are  to  be  the  ministers  and  stewards  of  the 
grace  of  God  to  all  around  them. 
245 


With  Christ  in  tlie  School  of  Prayer. 

And  then  there  is  the  lualk  of  the  priesthood,  in  har- 
mony with  its  work.  As  God  is  holy,  so  the  priest 
was  to  be  especially  holy.  This  means  not  only 
separated  from  everything  unclean,  but  holy  unto 
God,  being  set  apart  and  given  up  to  God  for  His 
disposal.  The  separation  from  the  world  and  setting 
apart  unto  God  was  indicated  in  many  ways. 

It  was  seen  in  the  clothing:  the  holy  garments, 
made  after  God's  own  order,  marked  them  as  His 
(Ex.  xxviii.).  It  was  seen  in  the  command  as  to 
their  special  purity  and  freedom  from  all  contact  from 
death  and  defilement  (Lev.  xxi.  22).  Much  that  was 
allowed  to  an  ordinary  Israelite  was  forbidden  to 
them.  It  was  seen  in  the  injunction  that  the  priest 
must  have  no  bodily  defect  or  blemish  ;  bodily  per- 
fection was  to  be  the  type  of  wholeness  and  holiness 
in  God's  service.  And  it  was  seen  in  the  arrange- 
ment by  which  the  priestly  tribes  w^ere  to  have  no 
inheritance  with  the  other  tribes  ;  God  was  to  be  their 
inheritance.  Their  life  was  to  be  one  of  faith  :  set^ 
apart  unto  God,  they  were  to  live  on  Him  as  well  as 
for  Him. 

All  this  is  the  emblem  of  what  the  character  of  the 
New  Testament  priest  is  to  be.  Our  priestly  power 
with  God  depends  on  our  personal  life  and  walk. 
We  must  be  of  them  of  w^hose  walk  on  earth  Jesus 
says,  "They  have  not  defiled  their  garments." 

In  the  surrender   of  what  may  appear  lawful  to 

others   in   our  separation  from  the  world,  we  must 

prove  that  our  consecration  to  be  holy  to  the  Lord  is 

whole-hearted  and  entire.     The  bodily  perfection  of 

246 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  priest  must  have  its  counterpart  in  our  too  being 
"  without  spot  or  blemish;  "  "  the  man  of  God  per- 
fect, throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works," 
"  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  nothing"  (Lev.  xxi.  17- 
21 ;  Eph.  V.  27  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  7  ;  Jas.  i.  4).  And  above 
all,  we  consent  to  give  up  all  inheritance  on  earth  ;  to 
forsake  all,  and  like  Christ  to  have  only  God  as  our 
portion  :  to  possess  as  not  possessing,  and  hold  all 
for  God  alone ;  it  is  this  marks  the  true  priest,  the 
man  who  only  lives  for  God  and  his  fellow-men. 

And  now  ^/le  way  to  the  priesthood.  In  Aaron  God 
had  chosen  all  his  sons  to  be  priests  :  each  of  them 
was  a  priest  by  birth.  And  yet  he  could  not  enter 
upon  his  work  without  a  special  act  of  ordinance — 
his  consecration.  Every  child  of  God  is  priest  in 
right  of  his  birth,  his  blood  relationship  to  the  Great 
High  Priest ;  but  this  is  not  enough,  he  will  exer- 
cise his  power  only  as  he  accepts  and  realizes  his 
consecration. 

With  Aaron  and  his  sons  it  took  place  thus  (Ex. 
xxix.):  After  being  washed  and  clothed,  they  were 
anointed  with  the  holy  oil.  Sacrifices  were  then 
offered,  and  with  the  blood  the  right  ear,  the  right 
hand,  and  the  right  foot  were  touched.  And  then 
they  and  their  garments  were  once  again  sprinkled 
with  the  blood  and  the  oil  together.  And  so  it  is  as 
the  child  of  God  enters  more  fully  into  what  the 
Blood  and  the  Spirit  of  which  he  already  is  par- 
taker, are  to  him,  that  the  power  of  the  Holy  Priesthood 
will  work  in  him.  The  blood  will  take  away  all  sense 
of  unworthiness  ;  the  Spirit,  all  sense  of  unfitness. 
247 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Let  us  notice  what  there  was  new  in  the  application 
of  the  blood  to  the  priest.  If  ever  he  had  as  a  penitent 
brought  a  sacrifice  for  his  sin,  seeking  forgiveness 
the  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  altar,  but  not  on  his 
person.  But  now,  for  priestly  consecration,  there  was 
to  be  closer  contact  with  the  blood ;  ear  and  hand 
and  foot  were  by  a  special  act  brought  under  its 
power,  and  the  whole  being  taken  possession  of  and 
sanctified  for  God.  And  so,  when  the  believer,  who 
had  been  content  to  think  chiefly  of  the  blood 
sprinkled  on  the  mercy-seat  as  what  he  needs  for 
pardon,  is  led  to  seek  full  priestly  access  to  God,  he 
feels  the  need  of  a  fuller  and  more  abiding  experience 
of  the  power  of  the  blood,  as  really  sprinkling  and 
cleansing  the  heart  from  an  evil  conscience,  so  that 
he  has  "no  more  conscience  of  sin"  (Heb.  x.  2),  as 
cleansing  from  all  sin.  And  it  is  as  he  gets  to  enjoy 
this,  that  the  consciousness  is  awakened  of  his  won- 
derful right  of  most  intimate  access  to  God,  and 
of  the  full  assurance  that  his  intercessions  are  ac- 
ceptable. 

And  as  the  blood  gives  the  right,  the  Spirit  gives 
the  power,  and  fits  for  believing  intercession.  He 
breathes  into  us  the  priestly  spirit— burning  love  for 
God's  honor  and  the  saving  of  souls.  He  makes  us 
so  one  with  Jesus  that  prayer  in  His  Name  is  a  reality. 
He  strengthens  us  to  believing,  importunate  prayer. 
The  more  the  Christian  is  truly  filled  with  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  the  more  spontaneous  will  be  his  giving 
himself  up  to  the  life  of  priestly  intercession.  Be- 
loved fellow-Christians !  God  needs,  greatly  needs, 
248 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

priests  who  can  draw  near  to  Him,  who  Hve  in  His 
presence,  and  by  their  intercession  draw  down  the 
blessings  of  His  grace  on  others.  And  the  world 
needs,  greatly  needs,  priests  who  will  bear  the 
burden  of  the  perishing  ones,  and  intercede  on  their 
behalf. 

Are  you  willing  to  offer  yourself  for  this  holy 
work  ?  You  know  the  surrender  it  demands— nothing 
less  than  the  Christ-like  giving  up  of  all,  that  the 
saving  purposes  of  God's  love  may  be  accomplished 
among  men.  Oh,  be  no  longer  of  those  who  are  con- 
tent if  they  have  salvation,  and  just  do  work  enough 
to  keep  themselves  warm  and  lively.  O  let  nothing 
keep  you  back  from  giving  yourselves  to  be  wholly 
and  only  priests— nothing  else,  nothing  less  than  the 
priests  of  the  Most  High  God.  The  thought  of  un- 
worthiness,  of  unfitness,  need  not  keep  you  back.  In 
the  Blood,  the  objective  power  of  the  perfect  redemp- 
tion works  in  you  :  in  the  Spirit^  its  full  subjective 
personal  experience  as  a  divine  life  is  secured.  The 
Blood  provides  an  infinite  worthiness  to  make  your 
prayers  most  acceptable :  The  Spirit  provides  a 
Divine  fitness,  teaching  you  to  pray  just  according  to 
the  will  of  God.  Every  priest  knew  that  when  he 
presented  a  sacrifice  according  to  the  law  of  the 
sa?ictuary,  it  was  accepted :  under  the  covering  of  the 
Blood  and  Spirit  you  have  the  assurance  that  all 
the  wonderful  promises  to  prayer  in  the  Name  of 
Jesus  will  be  fulfilled  in  you.  Abiding  in  union  with 
the  Great  High  Priest,  "  you  shall  ask  what  you  will, 
and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."  You  will  have  power 
249 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

to  pray  the  effectual  prayer  of  the  righteous  man  that 
availeth  much.  You  will  not  only  join  in  the  general 
prayer  of  the  Church  for  the  world,  but  be  able 
in  your  own  sphere  to  take  up  your  special  work  in 
prayer — as  priests,  to  transact  it  with  God,  to  receive 
and  know  the  answer,  and  so  to  bless  in  His  Name. 
Come,  brother,  come,  and  be  a  priest,  ojily  priest,  all 
priest.  Seek  now  to  walk  before  the  Lord  in  the  full 
consciousness  that  you  have  been  set  apart  for  the 
holy  Ministry  of  Intercession.  This  is  the  true 
blessedness  of  conformity  to  the  image  of  God's  Son. 

"Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


0  Thou  my  blessed  High  Priest,  accept  the  conse- 
cration in  which  my  soul  now  would  respond  to  Thy 
message. 

1  believe  in  the  Holy  Priesthood  of  Thy 
Saints,  and  that  I  too  am  a  priest,  with  power  to 
appear  before  the  Father,  and  in  the  prayer  that 
avails  much  bring  down  blessing  on  the  perishing 
around  me. 

I  believe  in  the  Power  of  Thy  Precious  Blood 
to  clease  from  all  sin,  to  give  me  perfect  confidence 
toward  God,  and  bring  me  near  in  the  full  assurance 
of  faith  that  my  intercession  will  be  heard. 

I  believe  in  the  Anointing  of  the  Spirit,  coming 

down   daily  from  Thee,   my  Great  High  Priest,    to 

sanctify  me,  to  fill  me  with  the  consciousness  of  my 

priestly  calling,  and  with  love  to  souls,  to  teach  me 

250 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

what  is  according  to  God's  will,  and  how  to  pray  the 
prayer  of  faith. 

I  believe  that,  as  Thou  my  Lord  Jesus  art  Thyself 
in  all  things  my  life,  so  Thou,  too,  art  the  Surety 
FOR  MY  Prayer-life,  and  wilt  Thyself  draw  me  up 
into  the  fellowship  of  Thy  wondrous  work  of  inter- 
cession. 

In  this  faith  I  yield  myself  this  day  to  my  God,  as 
one  of  His  anointed  priests,  to  stand  before  His  face 
to  intercede  in  behalf  of  sinners,  and  to  come  out  and 
bless  in  His  Name. 

Holy  Lord  Jesus !  accept  and  seal  my  consecration. 
Yea,  Lord,  do  Thou  lay  Thy  hands  on  me,  and  Thy- 
self consecrate  me  to  this  Thy  holy  work.  And  let 
me  walk  among  men  with  the  consciousness  and  the 
character  of  a  priest  of  the  Most  High  God. 

Unto  Him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our 
sins  IN  His  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  God  and  His  Father ;  to  Him  be 
glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 
251 


THIRTY-FIRST  LESSON. 
"Pray  without  ceasing;'*  or,  A  Life  of  Prayer. 

Rejoice  evermore.     Pray  luiihout  ceasing.    In  everything 
give  thanks. — j  Thess.  V.  i6,  17,  18. 

OUR  Lord  spake  the  parable  of  the  widow  and 
the  unjust  judge  to  teach  us  that  men  ought  to 
pray  always  and  not  feint.  As  the  widow  persevered 
in  seeking  one  definite  thing,  the  parable  appears  to 
have  reference  to  persevering  prayer  for  some  one 
blessing,  when  God  delays  or  appears  to  refuse.  The 
words  in  the  Epistles,  which  speak  of  continuing 
instant  in  prayer,  continuing  in  prayer  and  watching 
in  the  same,  of  praying  always  in  the  Spirit,  appear 
more  to  refer  to  the  whole  life  being  one  of  prayer. 
As  the  soul  is  filling  with  the  longing  for  the  mani- 
festation of  God's  glory  to  us  and  in  us,  through  us 
and  around  us,  and  with  the  confidence  that  He  hears 
the  prayers  of  His  children,  the  inmost  life  of  the 
soul  is  continually  rising  upward  in  dependence  and 
faith,  in  longing  desire  and  trustful  expectation. 

At  the  close  of  our  meditations  it  will  not  be  diffi- 
cult to  say  what  is  needed  to  live  such  a  life  of  prayer. 
The  first  thing  is  undoubtedly  the  entire  sacrifice  of 
the  life  to  God's  kingdom  and  glory.  He  who  seeks 
to  pray  without  ceasing  because  he  wants  to  be  very 
252 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

pious  and  good,  will  never  attain  to  it.  It  is  the  for- 
getting of  self  and  yielding  ourselves  to  live  for  God 
and  His  honor  that  enlarges  the  heart,  that  teaches 
us  to  regard  everything  in  the  light  of  God  and  His 
will,  and  that  instinctively  recognizes  in  everything 
around  us  the  need  of  God's  help  and  blessing,  an 
opportunity  for  His  being  glorified.  Because  every- 
thing is  weighed  and  tested  by  the  one  thing  that  fills 
the  heart — the  glory  of  God,  and  because  the  soul 
has  learned  that  only  what  is  of  God  can  really  be 
to  Him  and  His  glory,  the  whole  life  becomes  a  look- 
ing up,  a  crying  from  the  inmost  heart,  for  God  to 
prove  His  power  and  love,  and  so  show  forth  His 
glory.  The  believer  awakes  to  the  consciousness 
that  he  is  one  of  the  watchmen  on  Zion's  walls,  one 
of  the  Lord's  remembrancers,  whose  call  does  really 
touch  and  move  the  King  in  heaven  to  do  what 
would  otherwise  not  be  done.  He  understands  how 
real  Paul's  exhortation  was,  **  praying  always  with  all 
prayer  and  supplication  in  the  Spirit  for  all  the  saints 
and  forme,"  and  "continue  in  prayer,  withal  praying 
also  for  us."  To  forget  oneself,  to  live  for  God  and 
His  kingdom  among  men,  is  the  way  to  learn  to  pray 
without  ceasing. 

This  life  devoted  to  God  must  be  accompanied  by 
the  deep  confidence  that  our  prayer  is  effectual.  We 
have  seen  how  our  Blessed  Lord  insisted  upon  no- 
thing so  much  in  His  prayer-lessons  as  faith  in  the 
Father  as  a  God  who  most  certainly  does  what  we 
ask.  "Ask  and  ye  shall  receive;"  count  confi- 
dently on  an  answer,  is  with  Him  the  beginning  and 
253 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

the  end  of  His  teaching  (compare  Matt.  vii.  8  and 
John  xvi.  24).  In  proportion  as  this  assurance  mas- 
ters us,  and  it  becomes  a  settled  thing  that  our  pray- 
ers do  tell  and  that  God  does  what  we  ask,  we  dare 
not  neglect  the  use  of  this  wonderful  power  :  the 
soul  turns  wholly  to  God,  and  our  life  becomes 
prayer.  We  see  that  the  Lord  needs  and  takes  time, 
because  we  and  all  around  us  are  the  creatures  of 
time,  under  the  law  of  growth  ;  but  knowing  that  not 
one  single  prayer  of  faith  can  possibly  be  lost,  that 
there  is  sometimes  a  needs-be  for  the  storing  up  and 
accumulating  of  prayer,  that  persevering  prayer  is 
irresistible,  prayer  becomes  the  quiet,  persistent  liv- 
ing of  our  life  of  desire  and  faith  in  the  presence  of 
our  God.  O  do  not  let  us  any  longer  by  our  reason- 
ings limit  and  enfeeble  such  free  and  sure  promises 
of  the  living  God,  robbing  them  of  their  power,  and 
ourselves  of  the  wonderful  confidence  they  are  meant 
to  inspire.  Not  in  God,  not  in  His  secret  will,  not  in 
the  limitations  of  His  promises,  but  in  us,  in  our- 
selves is  the  hindrance  ;  we  are  not  what  we  should 
be  to  obtain  the  promise.  Let  us  open  our  whole 
heart  to  God's  words  of  promise  in  all  their  simpli- 
city and  truth  ;  they  will  search  us  and  humble  us  ; 
they  will  lift  us  up  and  make  us  glad  and  strong. 
And  to  the  faith  that  knows  it  gets  what  it  asks, 
prayer  is  not  a  work  or  a  burden,  but  a  joy  and 
a  triumph ;  it  becomes  a  necessity  and  a  second 
nature. 

This  union  of  strong  desire  and  firm  confidence 
again  is  nothing  but  the  life  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within 
254 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

us.  The  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  us,  hides  Himself  in 
the  depths  of  our  being,  and  stirs  the  desire  after  the 
Unseen  and  the  Divine,  after  God  Himself.  Now  in 
groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered,  then  in  clear  and 
conscious  assurance  ;  now  in  special  distinct  petitions 
for  the  deeper  re\^elation  of  Christ  to  ourselves,  then 
in  pleadings  for  a  soul,  a  work,  the  Church  or  the 
world,  it  is  always  and  alone  the  Holy  Spirit  who 
draws  out  the  heart  to  thirst  for  God,  to  long  for  His 
being  made  known  and  glorified.  Where  the  child 
of  God  really  lives  and  walks  in  the  Spirit,  where  he 
is  not  content  to  remain  carnal,  but  seeks  to  be  spir- 
itual, in  everything  a  fit  organ  for  the  Divine  Spirit  to 
reveal  the  life  of  Christ  and  Christ  Himself,  there  the 
never-ceasing  intercession-life  of  the  Blessed  Son 
cannot  but  reveal  and  repeat  itself  in  our  experience. 
Because  it  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ  who  prays  in  us,  our 
prayer  must  be  heard  ;  because  it  is  we  who  pray  in 
the  Spirit,  there  is  need  of  time,  and  patience,  and 
continual  renewing  of  the  prayer  until  every  obstacle 
be  conquered,  and  the  harmony  between  God's  Spirit 
and  ours  is  perfect. 

But  the  chief  thing  we  need  for  such  a  life  of  un- 
ceasing prayer  is,  to  know  that  Jesus  teaches  us  to 
pray.  We  have  begun  to  understand  a  little  what 
His  teaching  is.  Not  the  communication  of  new 
thoughts  or  views,  not  the  discovery  of  failure  or 
error,  not  the  stirring  up  of  desire  and  faith,  of  how- 
ever much  importance  all  this  be,  but  the  taking  us 
up  into  the  fellowship  of  His  own  prayer-life  before 
the  Father— this  it  is  by  which  Jesus  really  teaches. 
255 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

It  was  the  sight  of  the  praying  Jesus  that  made  the 
disciples  long  and  ask  to  be  taught  to  pray.  It  is  the 
faith  of  the  ever-praying  Jesus,  whose  alone  is  the 
power  to  pray,  that  teaches  us  truly  to  pray.  We 
know  why  :  He  who  prays  is  our  Head  and  our  Life. 
All  He  has  is  ours  and  is  given  to'us  when  we  give 
ourselves  all  to  Him.  By  His  blood  He  leads  us  into 
the  immediate  presence  of  God.  The  inner  sanctuary 
is  our  home,  we  dwell  there.  And  He  that  lives  so 
near  God,  and  knows  that  He  has  been  brought  near 
to  bless  those  who  are  far,  cannot  but  pray.  Christ 
makes  us  partakers  with  Himself  of  His  prayer- 
power  and  prayer-life.  We  understand  then  that  our 
true  aim  must  not  be  to  work  much,  and  have  prayer 
enough  to  keep  the  work  right,  but  to  pray  much 
and  then  to  work  enough  for  the  power  and  blessing 
obtained  in  prayer  to  find  its  way  through  us  to  men. 
It  is  Christ  who  ever  lives  to  pray,  who  saves  and 
reigns.  He  communicates  His  prayer-life  to  us:  He 
maintains  it  in  us  if  we  trust  Him.  He  is  surety  for  our 
praying  without  ceasing.  Yes,  Christ  teaches  to  pray 
by  showing  how  He  does  it,  by  doing  it  in  us,  by  lead- 
ing us  to  do  it  in  Him  and  like  Him.  Christ  is  all,  the 
life  and  the  strength  too  for  a  never  ceasing  prayer-life. 
It  is  the  sight  of  this,  the  sight  of  the  ever-praying 
Christ  as  our  life,  tliat  enables  us  to  pray  without 
ceasing.  Because  His  priesthood  is  the  power  of  an 
endless  life,  that  resurrection-life  that  never  fades  and 
never  fails,  and  because  His  life  is  our  life,  praying 
without  ceasing  can  become  to  us  nothing  less  than 
the  life  joy  of  heaven.  So  the  Apostle  says:  "  Re- 
256 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

joice  evermore  :  pray  without  ceasing  :  in  everything 
give  thanks."  Borne  up  between  the  never-ceasing 
joy  and  the  never-ceasing  praise,  never-ceasing  prayer 
is  the  manifestation  of  the  power  of  the  eternal  Hfe, 
where  Jesus  always  prays.  The  union  between  the 
Vine  and  the  branch  is  in  very  deed  a  prayer-union. 
The  highest  conformity  to  Christ,  the  most  blessed  par- 
ticipation in  the  glory  of  His  heavenly  life,  is  that  we 
take  part  in  His  work  of  intercession :  He  and  we  live 
ever  to  pray.  In  the  experience  of  our  union  with 
Him,  praying  without  ceasing  becomes  a  possibility, 
a  reality,  the  holiest  and  most  blessed  part  of  our 
holy  and  blessed  fellowship  with  God.  We  have  our 
abode  within  the  veil,  in  the  presence  of  the  Father. 
What  the  Father  says,  we  do  ;  what  the  Son  says,  the 
Father  does.  Praying  without  ceasing  is  the  earthly 
manifestation  of  heaven  come  down  to  us,  the  fore- 
taste of  the  life  where  they  rest  not  day  or  night 
in  the  song  of  worship  and  adoration. 

"  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray." 


O  my  Father,  with  my  whole  heart  do  I  praise 
Thee  for  this  wondrous  life  of  never-ceasing  prayer, 
never-ceasing  fellowship,  never-ceasing  answers,  and 
never-ceasing  experience  of  my  oneness  with  Him 
who  ever  lives  to  pray.  O  my  God  !  keep  me  ever  so 
dwelling  and  walking  in  the  presence  of  Thy  glory, 
that  prayer  may  be  the  spontaneous  expression  of  my 
life  with  Thee. 

17  257 


With  Christ  in  the  School  of  Prayer. 

Blessed  Saviour !  with  my  whole  heart  I  praise 
Thee  that  Thou  didst  come  from  heaven  to  share 
with  me  in  my  needs  and  cries,  that  I  might  share 
with  Thee  in  Thy  all-prevailing  intercession.  And  I 
thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  taken  me  into  the  school 
of  prayer,  to  teach  the  blessedness  and  the  power  of 
a  life  that  is  all  prayer.  And  most  of  all,  that  Thou 
hast  taken  me  up  into  the  fellowship  of  Thy  life  of  in- 
tercession, that  through  me  too  Thy  blessings  may 
be  dispensed  to  those  around  me. 

Holy  Spirit !  with  deep  reverence  I  thank  Thee  for 
Thy  work  in  me.  It  is  through  Thee  I  am  lifted  up 
into  a  share  in  the  intercourse  between  the  Son  and 
the  Father,  and  enter  so  into  the  fellowship  of  the  life 
and  love  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  Spirit  of  God  1  perfect 
Thy  work  in  me ;  bring  me  into  perfect  union  with 
Christ  my  Intercessor.  Let  Thine  unceasing  indwell- 
ing make  my  life  one  of  unceasing  intercession.  And 
let  so  my  life  become  one  that  is  unceasingly  to  the 
glory  of  the  Father  and  to  the  blessing  of  those 
around  me.    Amen. 

258 


NOTES. 


GEORGE   MULLER,  AND   THE   SECRET  OF 
HIS  POWER  IN  PRAYER. 

WH:EN  God  wishes  anew  to  teach  His  Church  a  truth  that 
is  not  being  understood  or  practised,  He  mostly  does  so 
by  raising  some  man  to  be  iu  word  and  deed  a  living 
witness  to  its  blessedness.  And  so  God  has  raised  up  in  this 
nineteenth  century,  among  others,  George  Muller  to  be  His  wit- 
ness that  He  is  indeed  the  Hearer  of  prayer.  I  know  of  no  way 
in  which  the  principal  truths  of  God's  word  in  regard  to  prayer 
can  be  more  effectually  illustrated  and  established  than  a  short 
review  of  his  life  and  of  what  he  tells  of  his  prayer-experiences. 
He  was  born  iu  Prussia  on  the  25th  of  September,  1805,  and  is 
thus  now  eighty  years  of  age.  His  early  life,  even  after  having 
entered  the  University  of  Halle,  as  a  theological  student,  was 
wicked  iu  the  extreme.  lycd  by  a  friend  one  evening,  when 
just  twenty  years  of  age,  to  a  prayer  meeting,  he  was  deeply 
impressed,  and  soon  after  brought  to  know  the  Saviour.  Not 
long  after  he  began  reading  missionary  papers,  and  in  course 
of  time  oSered  himself  to  the  IvOndon  Society  for  promoting 
Christianity  to  the  Jews.  He  was  accepted  as  a  student,  but 
soon  found  that  he  could  not  in  all  things  submit  to  the  rules  of 
the  Society,  as  leaving  too  little  liberty  for  the  leading  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  connection  was  dissolved  in  1830  by  mutual 
consent,  and  he  became  the  pastor  of  a  small  congregation  at 
Teignmouth.  In  1832,  he  was  led  to  Bristol,  and  it  was  as  pas- 
tor of  Bethesda  Chapel  that  he  was  led  to  the  Orphan  Home 
and  other  work,  in  connection  with  which  God  has  so  remark- 

259 


Notes. 

ably  led  him  to  trust  His  word  and  to  experience  how  God  ful- 
fills that  word. 

A  few  extracts  in  regard  to  his  spiritual  life  will  prepare  the 
way  for  what  we  specially  wish  to  quote  of  his  experiences  in 
reference  to  prayer. 

"  In  connection  with  this  I  would  mention,  that  the  Lord  very 
graciously  gave  me,  from  the  very  commencement  of  my  divine 
life,  a  measure  of  simplicity  and  of  childlike  disposition  in 
spiritual  things,  so  that  whilst  I  was  exceedingly  ignorant  of 
the  Scriptures,  and  was  still  from  time  to  time  overcome  even 
by  outward  sins,  yet  I  was  enabled  to  carry  most  minute  mat- 
ters to  the  Lord  in  prayer.  And  I  have  found  '  godliness  profit- 
able unto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and 
of  that  which  is  to  come  '  Though  very  weak  and  ignorant, 
yet  I  had  now,  by  the  grace  of  God,  some  desire  to  benefit 
others,  and  he  who  so  faithfully  had  once  served  Satan,  sought 
now  to  win  souls  for  Christ." 

It  was  at  Teignmouth  that  he  was  led  to  know  how  to  use 
God's  word,  and  to  trust  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  Teacher  given 
by  God  to  make  that  word  clear.     He  writes  :  — 

"  God  then  began  to  show  me  that  the  word  of  God  alone  is 
our  standard  of  judgment  in  spiritual  things  ;  that  it  can  be  ex- 
plained only  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  that  in  our  day.  as  well  as 
in  former  times,  He  is  the  Teacher  of  His  people.  The  office  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  I  had  not  experimentally  understood  before  that 
time. 

"  It  was  my  beginning  to  understand  this  latter  point  in  par- 
ticular, which  had  a  great  eflfect  on  me  ;  for  the  Lord  enabled 
me  to  put  it  to  the  test  of  experience,  by  laying  aside  commen- 
taries, and  almost  every  other  book,  and  simply  reading  the 
word  of  God  and  studying  it. 

"  The  result  of  this  was,  that  the  first  evening  that  I  shut  my- 
self into  my  room,  to  give  myself  to  prayer  and  meditation  over 
the  Scriptures,  I  learned  more  in  a  few  hours  than  I  had  done 
during  a  period  of  several  months  previously. 

"  But  the  particular  difference  was  that  I  received  real  strength 
for  my  soul  in  so  doing:  I  now  began  to  try  by  the  test  of  the  Scrip- 
tures the  things  which  I  had  learned  and  seen,  and  found  that 
only  those  principles  which  stood  the  test  were  of  real  value." 
260 


Notes. 

Of  obedience  to  the  word  of  God,  he  write  as  follows,  in  con- 
nection with  his  being  baptized  : — 

"It  had  pleased  God,  in  His  abundant  mercy,  to  bring  my 
mind  into  such  a  state,  that  I  was  wilhng  to  carry  out  into  my 
life  whatever  I  should  find  in  the  Scriptures.  I  could  say,  '  I 
will  do  His  will,'  and  it  was  on  that  account,  I  believe,  that  I 
saw  which  '  doctrine  is  of  G<?^.'— And  I  would  observe  here,  by 
the  way,  that  the  passage  to  which  I  have  just  alluded  (John 
vii.  17)  has  been  a  most  remarkable  comment  to  me  on  many 
doctrines  and  precepts  of  our  most  holy  faith.  For  instance : 
"Resist  not  evil ;  but  whosoever  shall  smite  thee  on  thy  right 
cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also.  And  if  any  man  will  sue 
thee  at  the  law,  and  take  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy  cloak 
also.  And  whosoever  shall  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile,  go  with 
him  twain.  Give  to  him  that  asketh  thee,  and  from  him  that 
would  borrow  of  thee,  turn  not  thou  away.  I^ove  your  enemies, 
bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and 
pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you,  and  persecute  you ' 
(Matt.  V.  39-44).  'Sell  that  ye  have  and  give  alms'  (L,uke  xii. 
33^.  '  Owe  no  mau  any  thing,  but  to  love  one  another '  (Rom. 
xiii.  8).  It  may  be  said, '  Surely  these  passages  cannot  be  taken 
literally,  for  how  then  would  the  people  of  God  be  able  to  pass 
through  the  world?'  The  state  of  mind  enjoined  in  John  vii. 
17  will  cause  such  objections  to  vanish.  Whosoever  is  willing 
TO  ACT  OUT  these  commandments  of  the  Lord  literally,  will, 
1  believe,  be  led  with  me  to  see  that  to  take  them  literally  is 
the  will  of  God.— Those  who  do  so  take  them  will  doubtless 
often  be  brought  into  difficulties,  hard  to  the  flesh  to  bear,  but 
these  will  have  a  tendency  to  make  them  constantly  feel  that 
they  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  here,  that  this  world  is  not 
their  home,  and  thus  to  throw  them  more  upon  God,  who  will 
assuredly  help  us  through  any  difficulty  into  which  we  may  be 
brought  by  seeking  to  act  in  obedience  to  His  word." 

This  implicit  surrender  to  God's  word  led  him  to  certain 
views  and  conduct  in  regard  to  money,  which  mightily  influ- 
enced his  future  life.  They  had  their  root  in  the  conviction  that 
money  was  a  Divine  stewardship,  and  that  all  money  had 
therefore  to  be  received  and  dispensed  in  direct  fellowship  with 
God  Himself.  This  led  him  to  the  adoption  of  the  following 
261 


Notes. 

four  great  rules :  i.  Not  to  receive  any  fixed  salary,  both  because 
iu  the  collecting  of  it  there  was  ofteu  much  that  was  at  variance 
with  the  freewill  oflferiug  with  which  God's  service  is  to  be 
maintained,  and  in  the  receiving  of  it  a  danger  of  placing  more 
dependence  on  human  sources  of  income  than  iu  the  living  God 
Himself.  2.  Never  to  ask  any  human  being  for  help,  however 
great  the  need  might  be,  but  to  make  his  wants  known  to  the 
God  who  has  promised  to  care  for  His  servants  and  to  hear  their 
prayer.  3.  To  take  this  command  (Luke  xii.  33)  literally,  ''Sell 
that  thou  hast  and  give  alms,  and  never  to  save  up  money,  but  to 
spend  all  God  entrusted  to  him  on  God's  poor,  on  the  work  of 
His  kingdom.  4.  Also  to  take  Rom.  xiii.  8,  "Owe  no  man  any- 
thing," literally,  and  never  to  buy  on  credit,  or  be  in  debt  for 
anjrthing,  but  to  trust  God  to  provide. 

This  mode  of  living  was  not  easy  at  first.  But  Muller  testifies 
it  was  most  blessed  in  bringing  the  soul  to  rest  in  God,  and 
drawing  it  into  closer  union  with  Himself  when  inclined  to 
backslide.  "  For  it  will  not  do,  it  is  not  possible ,  to  live  in  sin,  and 
at  the  same  time,  by  co7nmu7iion  with  God,  to  draw  dow,i  frotn 
heaven  everything  one  needs  for  the  life  that  7iow  is." 

Not  long  after  his  settlement  at  Bristol,  "  The  Scriptural 
Knowledgk  Institution  for  Home  and  Abroad"  was  estab- 
lished for  aiding  in  Day,  Sunday-School,  INIission  and  Bible 
work.  Of  this  Institution  the  Orphan  Home  work,  by  which 
Mr.  Muller  is  best  known,  became  a  branch.  It  was  iu  1S34  that 
his  heart  was  touched  by  the  case  of  an  orphan  brought  to 
Christ  in  one  of  the  schools,  but  who  had  to  go  to  a  poorhouse 
where  its  spiritual  wants  would  not  be  cared  for.  Meeting 
shortly  after  with  a  life  of  Franke,  he  writes  (Nov.  20,  1835): 
*'  To-day  I  have  had  it  very  much  laid  on  my  heart  no  longer 
merely  to  think  about  the  establishment  of  an  Orphan  Home, 
but  actually  to  set  about  it,  and  I  have  been  very  much  in 
prayer  respecting  it,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  Lord's  mind. 
May  God  make  it  plain."  And  again,  Nov.  25  :  "I  have  been 
again  much  in  prayer  yesterday  and  to-day  about  the  Orphan 
Home,  and  am  more  and  more  convinced  that  it  is  of  God. 
INIay  He  in  mercy  guide  me.  The  three  chief  reasons  are— i. 
That  God  may  be  glorified,  should  He  be  pleased  to  furnish  me 
with  the  means,  in  its  being  seen  that  it  is  not  a  vain  thing  to 
262 


Notes. 

trust  Him ;  and  that  thus  the  faith  of  His  children  may  be 
strengthened.  2.  The  spiritual  welfare  of  fatherless  and 
motherless  children.    3.  Their  temporal  welfare." 

After  some  months  of  prayer  and  waiting  on  God,  a  house 
was  rented,  with  room  for  thirty  children,  and  in  course  of 
time  three  more,  containing  in  all  120  children.  The  work  was 
carried  on  in  this  way  for  ten  years,  the  supplies  for  the  needs 
of  the  orphans  being  asked  and  received  of  God  alone.  It  was 
often  a  time  of  sore  need  and  much  prayer,  but  a  trial  of  faith 
more  precious  than  of  gold  was  found  unto  praise  and  honor 
and  glory  of  God.  The  I,ord  was  preparing  His  servant  for 
greater  things.  By  His  providence  and  His  Holy  Spirit,  Mr. 
Muller  was  led  to  desire,  and  to  wait  upon  God  till  he  received 
from  Him  the  sure  promise  of  ^15,000  for  a  Home  to  contain 
300  children.  This  first  Home  was  opened  in  1849.  In  1858,  a 
second  and  third  Home,  for  950  more  orphans,  was  opened, 
costing  ^35,000.  And  in  1869  and  1870,  a  fourth  and  a  fifth  Home, 
for  850  more,  at  an  expense  of  ^^50,000,  making  the  total  num- 
ber of  the  orphans  2,100. 

In  addition  to  this  work,  God  has  given  him  almost  as  much 
as  for  the  building  of  the  Orphan  Homes,  and  the  maintenance 
of  the  orphans,  for  other  work,  the  support  of  schools  and  mis- 
sions, Bible  and  tract  circulation.  In  all  he  has  received  from 
God,  to  be  spent  in  His  work,  during  these  fifty  years,  more 
than  one  million  pounds  sterling.  How  little  he  knew,  let  us 
carefully  notice,  that  when  he  gave  up  his  little  salary  of  ^^30  a 
year  in  obedience  to  the  leading  of  God's  word  and  Holy  Spirit, 
what  God  was  preparing  to  give  him  as  the  reward  of  obedience 
and  faith;  and  how  wonderfully  the  word  was  to  be  fulfilled  to 
him  :  "  Thou  hast  been  faithful  over  few  things ;  I  will  set  thee 
over  many  things." 

And  these  things  have  happened  for  an  ensample  to  us.  God 
calls  us  to  be  followers  of  George  Muller,  even  as  he  is  of  Christ. 
His  God  is  our  God;  the  same  promises  are  for  us;  the  same 
service  of  love  and  faith  in  which  he  labored  is  calling  for  us  on 
every  side.  I,et  us  in  connection  with  our  lessons  in  the  school 
of  prayer  study  the  way  in  which  God  gave  George  Muller  such 
power  as  a  man  of  prayer  :  we  shall  find  in  it  the  most  remark- 
able illustration  of  some  of  the  lessons  which  we  have  been 
263 


Notes. 

studying  with  the  blessed  Master  in  the  word.  "We  shall 
specially  have  impressed  upon  us  His  first  great  lesson,  that  if 
we  will  come  to  Him  in  the  way  He  has  pointed  out,  with  defi- 
nite petitions,  made  known  to  us  by  the  Spirit,  through  the 
word  as  being  according  to  the  will  of  God,  we  may  most  confi- 
dently believe  that  whatsoever  we  ask  it  shall  be  done. 

Prayer  and  thk  Word  of  God. 

"We  have  more  than  once  seen  that  God's  listening  to  our 
voice  depends  upon  our  listening  to  His  voice.  (See  I^essons  22 
and  23.)  We  must  not  only  have  a  special  promise  to  plead, 
when  we  make  a  special  request,  but  our  whole  life  must  be 
under  the  supremacy  of  the  word  :  the  word  must  be  dwelling 
in  us.  The  testimony  of  George  MuUer  on  this  point  is  most 
instructive.  He  tells  us  how  the  discovery  of  the  true  place  of 
the  word  of  God,  and  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  with  it,  was  the 
commencement  of  a  new  era  in  his  spiritual  life.  Of  it  he 
writes  :  — 

"  Now  the  scriptural  way  of  reasoning  would  have  been  :  God 
Himself  has  condescended  to  become  an  author,  and  I  am 
ignorant  about  that  precious  book  which  His  Holy  Spirit  has 
caused  to  be  written  through  the  instrumentality  of  His  ser- 
vants, and  it  contains  that  which  I  ought  to  know,  and  the 
knowledge  of  which  will  lead  me  to  true  happiness  ;  therefore 
I  ought  to  read  again  and  again  this  most  precious  book,  this 
book  of  books,  most  earnestly,  most  prayerfully,  and  with  much 
meditation  ;  and  in  this  practice  I  ought  to  continue  all  the  days 
of  my  life.  For  I  was  aware,  though  I  read  it  but  little,  that  I 
knew  scarcely  anything  of  it.  But  instead  of  acting  thus,  and 
being  led  by  my  ignorance  of  the  word  of  God  to  study  it  more,  my 
difficulty  in  understanding  it,  and  the  little  enjoyment  I  had  in 
it,  made  me  careless  of  reading  it  (for  much  prayerful  reading 
of  the  word  gives  not  merely  more  knowledge,  but  increases 
the  delight  we  have  in  reading  it)  ;  and  thus,  like  many  be- 
lievers, I  practically  preferred,  for  the  first  four  years  of  my 
divine  life,  the  works  of  uninspired  men  to  the  oracles  of  the 
living  God.  The  consequence  was  that  I  remained  a  babe,  both 
in  knowledge  and  grace.  In  knowledge,  I  say;  for  all  true 
264 


Notes. 

knowledge  must  be  derived,  by  the  Spirit,  from  the  word.  And 
as  I  neglected  the  word,  I  was  for  nearly  four  years  so  ignorant, 
that  I  did  not  clearly  know  even  the  /undamental  points  of  our 
holy  faith.  And  this  lack  of  knowledge  most  sadly  kept  me 
back  from  walking  steadily  in  the  ways  of  God.  For  when  it 
pleased  the  Lord  in  August,  1829,  to  bring  me  really  to  the 
Scriptures,  my  life  and  walk  became  very  different.  And 
though  ever  since  that  I  have  very  much  fallen  short  of  what  I 
might  and  ought  to  be,  yet  by  the  grace  of  God  I  have  been 
enabled  to  live  m.uch  nearer  to  Him  than  before.  If  any  be- 
lievers read  this  who  practically  prefer  other  books  to  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  and  who  enjoy  the  writings  of  men  much  more  than 
the  word  of  God,  may  they  be  warned  by  my  loss.  I  shall  con- 
sider this  book  to  have  been  the  means  of  doing  much  good, 
should  it  please  the  I^ord,  through  its  instrumentality,  to  lead 
some  of  His  people  no  longer  to  neglect  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
but  to  give  them  that  preference  which  they  have  hitherto  be- 
stowed on  the  writings  of  men. 

"  Before  I  leave  this  subject,  I  would  only  add  :  If  the  reader 
understands  very  little  of  the  word  of  God,  he  ought  to  read  it 
very  much  ;  for  the  Spirit  explains  the  word  by  the  word.  And 
if  he  enjoys  the  reading  of  the  word  little,  that  is  just  the  reason 
why  he  should  read  it  much  ;  for  the  frequent  reading  of  the 
Scriptures  creates  a  delight  in  them,  so  that  the  more  we  read 
them,  the  more  we  desire  to  do  so. 

"Above  all,  he  should  seek  to  have  it  settled  in  his  own  mind 
that  God  alone  by  His  Spirit  can  teach  him,  and  that  therefore, 
as  God  will  be  inquired  of  for  blessings,  it  becomes  him  to  seek 
God's  blessing  previous  to  reading,  and  also  whilst  reading. 

"He  should  have  it,  moreover,  settled  in  his  mind  that 
although  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  best  and  sufficient  Teacher,  yet  that 
this  Teacher  does  not  always  teach  immediately  when  we  desire 
it,  and  that  therefore  we  may  have  to  entreat  Him  again  and 
again  for  the  explanation  of  certain  passages ;  but  that  He  will 
surely  teach  us  at  last,  if  indeed  we  are  seeking  for  light  prayer- 
fully, patiently,  and  with  a  view  to  the  glory  of  God."  1 

1  The  extracts  are  from  a  work  in  four  volumes,  The  Lord's 
Dealings  with.  George  Muller.    J.  Nisbet  &  Co.,  I,ondon. 
265 


Notes. 

We  find  in  his  journal  frequent  mention  made  of  his  spending 
two  and  three  hours  in  prayer  over  the  word  for  the  feeding  of 
his  spiritual  life.  As  the  fruit  of  this,  when  he  had  need  of 
strength  and  encouragement  in  prayer,  the  individual  promises 
were  not  to  him  so  many  arguments  from  a  book  to  be  used 
with  God,  but  living  words  which  he  had  heard  the  Father's 
living  voice  speak  to  him,  and  which  he  could  now  bring  to  the 
Father  in  living  faith. 

Prayer  and  thk  Wii,i,  of  God. 

One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  with  young  believers  is  to 
know  how  they  can  find  out  whether  what  they  desire  is  accord- 
ing to  God's  will.  I  count  it  one  of  the  most  precious  lessons 
God  wants  to  teach  through  the  experience  of  George  MuUer, 
that  He  is  willing  to  make  known,  of  things  of  which  His  word 
says  nothing  directly,  that  they  are  His  will  for  us,  and  that  we 
may  ask  them.  The  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  not  without  or 
against  the  word,  but  as  something  above  and  beyond  it,  in 
addition  to  it,  without  which  we  cannot  see  God's  will,  is  the 
heritage  of  every  believer.  It  is  through  the  Word,  and  the 
WORD  ALONE,  that  the  Spirit  teaches  applying  the  general 
principles  or  promises  to  our  special  need.  And  it  is  the 
Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  alone,  who  can  really  make  the  word 
a  light  on  our  path,  whether  the  path  of  duty  in  our  daily  walk, 
or  the  path  of  faith  in  our  approach  to  God.  Let  us  try  and 
notice  in  what  child-like  simplicity  and  teachableness  it  was 
that  the  discovery  of  God's  will  was  so  surely  and  so  clearly 
made  known  to  His  servant. 

With  regard  to  the  buildiug  of  the  first  Home  and  the  assur- 
ance he  had  of  its  being  God's  will,  he  writes  in  May,  1850,  just 
after  it  had  been  opened,  speaking  of  the  great  difficulties  there 
were,  and  how  little  likely  it  appeared  to  nature  that  they 
would  be  removed  :  "  But  while  the  prospect  before  me  would 
have  been  overwhelming  had  I  looked  at  it  naturally,  I  was 
never  even  for  once  permitted  to  question  how  it  would  end. 
For  as  from  the  beginning  T  was  sure  it  was  the  zvzll  of  God  that 
I  should  go  to  the  work  of  building  for  Him  this  large  Orphan 
Home,  so  also  from  the  beginning  I  was  as  certain  that  the 
266 


Notes. 

whole  would  be  finished  as  if  the  Home  had  been  already  filled. 
The  way  in  which  he  found  out  what  was  God's  will,  comes 
out  with  special  clearness  in  his  account  of  the  building  of  the 
second  Home  ;  and  I  ask  the  reader  to  study  with  care  the  les- 
son the  narrative  conveys  : — 

"  Dec.  5,  1850.— Under  these  circumstances  I  can  only  pray 
that  the  lyord  in  His  tender  mercy  would  not  allow  Satan  to 
gain  an  advantage  over  me.  By  the  grace  of  God  my  heart 
says  :  L,ord,  if  I  could  be  sure  that  it  is  Thy  will  that  I  should  go 
forward  in  this  matter,  I  would  do  so  cheerfully ;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  if  I  could  be  sure  that  these  are  vain,  foolish,  proud 
thoughts,  that  they  are  not  from  Thee,  I  would,  by  Thy  grace, 
hate  them,  and  entirely  put  them  aside. 

"My  hope  is  in  God  :  He  will  help  and  teach  me.  Judging, 
however,  from  His  former  dealings  with  me,  it  would  not  be  a 
strange  thing  to  me,  nor  surprising,  if  He  called  me  to  labor  yet 
still  more  largely  in  this  way. 

"  The  thoughts  about  enlarging  the  Orphan  work  have  not 
yet  arisen  on  account  of  an  abundance  of  money  having  lately 
come  in  ;  for  I  have  had  of  late  to  wait  for  about  seven  weeks 
upon  God,  whilst  little,  very  little  comparatively,  came  in,  i.  e., 
about  four  times  as  much  was  going  out  as  came  in  ;  and,  had 
not  the  L,ord  previously  sent  me  large  sums,  we  should  have 
been  distressed  indeed. 

"  Lord  !  how  can  Thy  servant  know  Thy  will  in  this  matter? 
Wilt  Thou  be  pleased  to  teach  him  ? 

"  Decejnber  11.— During  the  last  six  days,  since  writing  the 
above,  I  have  been,  day  after  day,  waiting  upon  God  concern- 
ing this  matter.  It  has  generally  been  more  or  less  all  the  day 
on  my  heart.  When  I  have  been  awake  at  night,  it  has  not 
been  far  from  my  thoughts.  Yet  all  this  without  the  least 
excitement.  I  am  perfectly  calm  and  quiet  respecting  it.  My 
soul  would  be  rejoiced  to  go  forward  in  this  service,  could  I  be 
sure  that  the  Lord  would  have  me  to  do  so  ;  for  then,  nothwith- 
stauding  the  numberless  difi&culties,  all  would  be  well ;  and  His 
Naine  would  be  magnified. 

"  Oa  the  other  hand,  were  I  assured  that  the  I^ord  would 
have  me  to  be  satisfied  with  my  present  sphere  of  service,  and 
that  I  should  not  pray  about  enlarging  the  work,  by  His  grace 
267 


Notes. 

I  could  without  an  effort,  cheerfully  yield  to  it ;  for  He  has 
brought  me  into  such  a  state  of  heart,  that  I  only  desire  to 
please  Him  iu  this  matter.  Moreover,  hitherto  I  have  not 
spoken  about  this  thing  even  to  my  beloved  vi-ife,  the  sharer  of 
my  joys,  sorrows  and  labors  for  more  than  twenty  years  ;  nor  is 
it  likely  that  I  shall  do  so  for  some  time  to  come  ;  for  I  prefer 
quietly  to  wait  on  the  I,ord,  without  conversing  on  this  subject, 
in  order  that  thus  I  may  be  kept  the  more  easily,  by  His  bless- 
ing, from  being  influenced  by  things  from  without.  The  bur- 
den of  my  prayer  concerning  this  matter  is,  that  the  Lord 
would  not  allow  me  to  make  a  mistake,  and  that  He  would 
teach  me  to  do  His  will. 

"  December  26.— Fifteen  days  have  elapsed  since  I  wrote  the 
preceding  paragraph.  Kvery  day  since  then  I  have  continued 
to  pray  about  this  matter,  and  that  with  a  goodly  measure  of 
earnestness,  by  the  help  of  God.  There  has  passed  scarcely  an 
hour  during  these  days,  in  which,  whilst  awake,  this  matter 
has  not  been  more  or  less  before  me.  But  all  without  even  a 
shadow  of  excitement.  I  converse  with  no  one  about  it. 
Hitherto  have  I  not  even  done  so  with  my  dear  wife.  From 
this  I  refrain  still,  and  deal  with  God  alone  about  the  matter, 
in  order  that  no  outward  influence  and  no  outward  excitement 
may  keep  me  from  attaining  unto  a  clear  discovery  of  His  will, 
I  have  the  fullest  and  most  peaceful  assjirance  that  He  will  clearly 
show  me  His  will.  This  evening  I  have  had  again  an  especial 
solemn  season  for  prayer,  to  seek  to  know  the  will  of  God. 
But  whilst  I  continue  to  entreat  and  beseech  the  I^ord,  that  He 
would  not  allow  me  to  be  deluded  in  this  business,  I  may  say  I 
have  scarcely  any  doubt  remaining  on  my  mind  as  to  what  will 
be  the  issue,  even  that  I  should  go  forward  in  this  matter.  As 
this,  however,  is  one  of  the  most  momentous  steps  that  I  have 
ever  taken,  I  judge  that  I  cannot  go  about  this  matter  with  too 
much  caution,  prayerfulness,  and  deliberation.  I  am  in  no 
hurry  about  it.  I  could  wait  for  years,  by  God's  grace,  were 
this  His  will,  before  even  takiug  one  single  step  towards  this 
thing,  or  even  speaking  to  any  one  about  it  ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  I  would  set  to  work  to-morrow,  were  the  Lord  to  bid  me 
do  so.  This  calmness  of  mind,  this  having  no  will  of  my  own 
in  the  matter,  this  only  wishing  to  please  my  Heavenly  Father 
268 


Notes. 

In  it,  this  only  seeking  His  and  not  my  honor  in  it ;  this  state  of 
heart  I  say,  is  the  fullest  assurance  to  me  that  my  heart  is  not 
under  a  fleshly  excitement,  and  that  if  I  am  helped  thus 
to  go  on,  /  shall  know  the  will  of  God  to  the  full  But,  while 
I  write  this,  I  cannot  but  add  at  the  same  time,  that  I  do  crave 
the  honor  and  the  glorious  privilege  to  be  more  and  more  used 
by  the  I,ord. 

"  I  desire  to  be  allowed  to  provide  scriptural  instruction  for  a 
thousand  orphans,  instead  of  doing  so  for  300.  I  desire  to  ex- 
pound the  Holy  Scriptures  regularly  to  a  thousand  orphans, 
instead  of  doing  so  to  300.  I  desire  that  it  may  be  yet  more 
abundantly'  manifest  that  God  is  still  the  Hearer  and  Answerer 
of  prayer,  and  that  He  is  the  living  God  now  as  He  ever  was  and 
ever  will  be,  when  He  shall  simplj',  in  answer  to  prayer,  have 
condescended  to  provide  me  with  a  house  for  700  orphans  and 
with  means  to  support  them.  This  last  consideration  is  the 
most  important  point  in  my  mind.  The  Lord's  honor  is  the 
principal  point  with  me  in  this  whole  matter  ;  and  just  because 
this  is  the  case,  if  He  would  be  more  glorified  by  not  going  for- 
ward in  this  business,  I  should  by  His  grace  be  perfectly  con- 
tent to  give  up  all  thoughts  about  another  Orphan  House. 
Surely  in  such  a  state  of  mind,  obtained  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
Thou,  O  my  Heavenly  Father,  wilt  not  sttffer  Thy  child  to  be  mis- 
taken, much  less  deluded.  By  the  help  of  God  I  shall  continue 
further  day  by  day  to  wait  upon  Him  in  prayer,  concerning  this 
thing,  till  He  shall  bid  me  act. 

"■Jan.  2,  1851.— A  week  ago  I  wrote  the  preceding  paragraph. 
During  this  week  I  have  still  been  helped  day  by  day,  and  more 
than  once  every  day,  to  seek  the  guidance  of  the  Lord  about 
another  Orphan  House.  The  burden  of  my  prayer  has  still 
beeu ,  that  He  in  His  great  mercy  would  keep  me  from  making 
a  mistake.  During  the  last  week  the  book  of  Proverbs  has  come 
in  the  course  of  my  Scripture  reading,  and  my  heart  has  been 
refreshed  in  reference  to  this  subject  by  the  following  passages  : 
*  Trust  in  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart ;  and  lean  not  unto 
thine  own  understanding.  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  Him, 
and  He  shall  direct  thy  paths'  (Prov.  iii.  5,  6).  By  the  grace  of 
God  I  do  acknowledge  the  Lord  in  all  my  ways,  and  in  this 
thing  in  particular  ;  I  have  therefore  the  comfortable  assurance 
269 


Notes. 

that  He  will  direct  my  paths  concerning  this  part  of  my  service, 
as  to  whether  I  shall  be  occupied  in  it  or  not.  Further  :  '  The 
integrity  of  the  upright  shall  preserve  them '  (Prov.  xi.  3).  By 
the  grace  of  God  I  ain  upright  in  this  business.  My  honest  pur- 
pose is  to  get  glory  to  God.  Therefore  I  expect  to  be  guided 
aright.  Further :  '  Commit  thy  works  unto  the  Lord,  and  thy 
thoughts  shall  be  established '  (Prov.  xvi.  3).  I  do  commit  my 
works  unto  the  Lord,  and  therefore  expect  that  my  thoughts 
will  be  established.  My  heart  is  more  and  more  coming  to  a 
calm,  quiet,  and  settled  assurance,  that  the  L,ord  will  condescend 
to  use  me  still  further  in  the  orphan  work.  Here,  Lord,  is  Thy 
servant." 

When  later  he  decided  to  build  two  additional  houses,  Nos.  4 
and  5,  he  writes  thus  again  :  — 

"Twelve  days  have  passed  away  since  I  wrote  the  last  para- 
graph. I  have  still  day  by  day  been  enabled  to  wait  upon  the 
Lord  with  reference  to  enlarging  the  Orphan  work,  and  have 
been  during  the  whole  of  this  period  also  in  perfect  peace,  which 
is  the  result  of  seeking  in  this  thing  only  the  Lord's  honor  and 
the  temporal  and  spiritual  benefit  of  my  fellow-men.  Without 
an  effort  could  I  by  His  grace  put  aside  all  thoughts  about  this 
whole  affair,  if  only  assured  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  I 
should  do  so  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  would  at  once  go  forward, 
if  He  would  have  it  be  so.  I  have  still  kept  this  matter  entirely 
to  myself  Though  it  be  now  about  seven  weeks,  since  day  by 
day,  more  or  less,  my  mind  has  been  exercised  about  it,  and 
since  I  have  been  daily  praying  about  it,  yet  not  one  human 
being  knows  of  it.  As  yet  I  have  not  even  mentioned  it  to  my 
dear  wife,  in  order  that  thus,  by  quietly  waiting  upon  God,  I 
might  not  be  influenced  by  what  might  be  said  to  me  on  the 
subject.  This  evening  has  been  particularly  set  apart  for  prayer, 
beseeching  the  Lord  once  more  not  to  allow  me  to  be  mistaken 
in  this  thing,  and  much  less  to  be  deluded  by  the  devil.  I  have 
also  sought  to  let  all  the  reasons  against  building  another 
Orphan  House,  and  all  the  reasons  /or  doing  so  pass  before  my 
mind  :  and  now  for  the  clearness  and  definiteness,  write  them 
down.    .   .   . 

"  Much,  however,  as  the  nine  previous  reasons  weigh  with 
me,  yet  they  would  not  decide  me  were  there  not  one  more.  It 
270 


Notes. 

is  this.  After  having  for  months  pondered  the  matter,  and 
having  looked  at  it  in  all  its  bearings  and  with  all  its  diiBculties, 
and  then  having  been  finally  led,  after  much  prayer,  to  decide 
on  this  enlargement,  my  mind  is  at  peace.  The  child  who  has 
again  and  again  besought  His  Heavenly  Father  not  to  allow 
him  to  be  deluded,  nor  even  to  make  a  mistake,  is  at  peace, 
perfectly  at  peace  concerning  this  decision  ;  and  has  thus  the 
assurance  that  the  decision  come  to,  after  much  prayer  during 
weeks  and  months,  is  the  leading  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and 
therefore  purposes  to  go  forward,  assuredly  believing  that  he 
will  not  be  confounded,  for  he  trusts  in  God.  Many  and  great 
maybe  his  difficulties  ;  thousands  and  ten  thousands  of  prayers 
may  have  ascended  to  God,  before  the  full  answer  may  be  ob- 
tained ;  much  exercise  of  faith  and  patience  may  be  required  ; 
but  in  the  end  it  will  again  be  seen,  that  His  sei-vant,  who  trusts 
in  Him,  has  not  been  confounded." 

Prayer  and  the  Geory  of  God. 

We  have  sought  more  than  once  to  enforce  the  truth,  that 
while  we  ordinarily  seek  the  reasons  of  our  prayers  not  being 
heard  in  the  thing  we  ask  not  being  according  to  the  will  of 
God,  Scripture  warns  us  to  find  the  cause  in  ourselves,  in  our 
not  being  in  the  right  state  or  not  asking  in  the  right  spirit. 
The  thing  may  be  in  full  accordance  with  His  will,  but  the  ask- 
ing, the  spirit  of  the  supplicant,  not ;  then  we  are  not  heard. 
As  the  great  root  of  all  sin  is  self  and  self-seeking,  so  there  is 
nothing  that  even  in  our  more  spiritual  desires  so  effectually 
hinders  God  in  answering  as  this  :  we  pray  for  our  own  pleasure 
or  glory.  Prayer  to  have  power  and  prevail  must  ask  for  the 
glory  of  God  ;  and  he  can  only  do  this  as  he  is  living  for  God's 
glory. 

In  George  Muller  we  have  one  of  the  most  remarkable  in- 
stances on  record  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  leading  a  man  deliber- 
ately and  systematically,  at  the  outset  of  a  course  of  prayer,  to 
make  the  glorifjdng  of  God  his  first  and  only  object.  Let  us 
ponder  well  what  he  says,  and  learn  the  lesson  God  would 
teach  us  through  him  : — 

"  I  had  constantly  cases  brought  before  me,  which  proved  that 
271 


Notes. 

one  of  the  especial  things  which  the  children  of  God  needed  in 
our  day,  was  to  have  their  faith  strengtlie7ied> 

"  I  longed,  therefore,  to  have  something  to  point  my  brethren 
to,  as  a  visible  proof  that  our  God  and  Father  is  the  same  faith- 
ful God  as  ever  He  was  ;  as  willing  as  ever  to  prove  Himself  to 
be  the  living  God  in  our  day  as  formerly,  to  all  -who  put  their 
trust  in  Him. 

"  My  spirit  longed  to  be  instrumental  in  strengthening  their 
faith,  by  giving  them  not  only  instances  from  the  word  of  God, 
of  His  willingness  and  ability  to  help  all  who  rely  upon  Him, 
but  to  shoiv  them  by  proofs  that  He  is  the  same  in  our  day.  I 
knew  that  the  word  of  God  ought  to  be  enough,  and  it  was  by 
grace  enough  for  me ;  but  still  I  considered  I  ought  to  lend  a 
helping  hand  to  my  brethren. 

"I  therefore  judged  myself  bound  to  be  the  servant  of  the 
Church  of  Christ,  in  the  particular  point  in  which  I  had  ob- 
tained mercy;  namely,  in  being  able  to  take  God  at  His  word 
and  rely  upon  it.  The  first  object  of  the  work  was,  and  is  still : 
that  God  might  be  magvified  by  the  fact  that  the  orphans  under 
my  care  are  provided  with  all  they  need,  only  by  prayer  and 
faith^  without  any  one  being  asked  ;  thereby  it  may  be  seen  that 

God  is  FAITHFUL  STILL,  AND  HEARS  PRAYER  STILL. 

"  I  have  again  these  last  days  prayed  much  about  the  Orphan 
House,  and  have  frequently  examined  my  heart ;  that  if  it  were 
at  all  my  desire  to  establish  it  for  the  sake  of  gratifying  myself, 
I  might  find  it  out.  For  as  I  desire  only  the  Lord's  glory  I  shall 
be  glad  to  be  instructed  by  the  instrumentality  of  my  brother, 
if  the  matter  be  not  of  Him. 

"  When  I  began  the  Orphan  work  in  1835,  my  chief  object  was 
the  glory  of  God,  by  giving  a  practical  demonstration  as  to 
what  could  be  accomplished  simply  through  the  instrumentality 
of  prayer  and  faith,  in  order  thus  to  benefit  the  Church  at  large, 
and  to  lead  a  careless  world  to  see  the  reality  of  the  things  of 
God,  by  showing  them  in  this  work,  that  the  living  God  is  still, 
as  4,000  years  ago,  the  living  God.  This  my  aim  has  been 
abundantly  honored.  Multitudes  of  sinners  have  been  thus 
converted,  multitudes  of  the  children  of  God  in  all  parts  of  the 
world  have  been  benefited  by  this  work,  even  as  I  had  antici- 
pated. But  the  larger  the  work  has  grown,  the  greater  has 
272 


Notes. 

been' the  blessing,  bestowed  in  the  very  way  in  which  I  looked 
for  blessing :  for  the  attention  of  hundreds  of  thousands  has 
been  drawn  to  the  work ;  and  many  tens  of  thousands  have 
come  to  see  it.  All  this  leads  me  to  desire  further  and  further 
to  labor  on  in  this  way,  in  order  to  bring  yet  greater  glory  to  the 
Name  of  the  L,ord  That  He  7nay  be  looked  at ^  magnified,  admired, 
trusted  in,  relied  on  at  all  times,  is  my  aim  in  this  service  ;  and 
so  particularly  in  this  intended  enlargement.  That  it  may  be 
seen  how  much  one  poor  man,  simply  by  trusting  in  God,  can 
bring  about  by  prayer ;  and  that  thus  other  children  of  God 
may  be  led  to  carry  on  the  work  of  God  in  dependence  upon 
Him  ;  and  that  children  of  God  may  be  led  increasingly  to  trust 
in  Him  in  their  individual  positions  and  circumstances,  there- 
fore I  am  led  to  this  further  enlargement." 

Prayer  and  Trust  in  God. 

There  are  other  points  on  which  I  would  be  glad  to  point  out 
what  is  to  be  found  in  Mr.  MuUer's  narrative,  but  one  more  must 
suffice.  It  is  the  lesson  of  firm  and  unwavering  trust  in  God's 
promise  as  the  secret  of  persevering  prayer.  If  once  we  have, 
in  submission  to  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  in  the  word,  taken 
hold  of  God's  promise,  and  believed  that  the  Father  has  heard 
us,  we  must  not  allow  ourselves  by  any  delay  or  unfavorable 
appearances  to  be  shaken  in  our  faith. 

"  The  full  answer  to  my  daily  prayers  was  far  from  being 
realized ;  yet  there  was  abundant  encouragement  granted  by 
the  I,ord,  to  continue  in  prayer.  But  suppose,  even,  that  far  less 
had  come  in  than  was  received,  still,  after  having  come  to  the 
conclusion,  upon  scriptural  grounds,  after  much  prayer  and 
self-examination,  I  ought  to  have  gone  on  without  wavering,  in 
the  exercise  of  faith  and  patience  concerning  this  object ;  and 
thus  all  the  children  of  God,  when  once  satisfied  that  anything 
which  they  bring  before  God  in  prayer,  is  according  to  His  will, 
ought  to  continue  in  believing,  expecting,  persevering  prayer 
until  the  blessing  is  granted.  Thus  am  I  myself  now  waiting 
upon  God  for  certain  blessings,  for  which  I  have  daily  besought 
Him  for  ten  years  and  six  months  without  one  day's  intermis- 
sion. Still  the  full  answer  is  not  yet  given  concerning  the  con- 
i8  273 


Notes. 

version  of  certain  individuals,  though  in  the  meantime  I  have  re- 
ceived many  thousands  of  answers  to  prayer.  I  have  also 
prayed  daily  v^ithout  intermission  for  the  conversion  of  other 
individuals  about  ten  years,  for  others  six  or  seven  years,  for 
others  from  three  or  tw^o  years  ;  and  still  the  answer  is  not  yet 
granted  concerning  those  persons,  while  in  the  meantime  many 
thousands  of  my  prayers  have  been  answered,  and  also  souls 
converted,  for  whom  I  have  been  praying.  I  lay  particular 
stress  on  this  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  may  suppose  that  I 
need  only  to  ask  of  God,  and  receive  at  once  ;  or  that  I  might 
pray  concerning  anything,  and  the  answer  would  surely  come. 
One  can  only  expect  to  obtain  answers  to  prayers  which  are  ac- 
cording to  the  mind  of  God  ;  and  even  then  patience  and  faith 
may  be  exercised  for  many  years,  even  as  mine  are  exercised, 
in  the  matter  to  which  I  have  referred  ;  and  yet  am  I  daily  con- 
tinuing in  prayer,  and  expecting  the  answer,  and  so  surely  ex- 
pecting the  answer,  that  I  have  often  thanked  God  that  He  will 
surely  give  it,  though  now  for  nineteen  years  faith  and  patience 
have  thus  been  exercised.  Be  encouraged,  dear  Christians,  with 
fresh  earnestness  to  give  yourselves  to  prayer,  if  you  can  only 
be  sure  that  you  ask  things  which  are  for  the  glory  of  God. 

"  But  the  most  remarkable  point  is  this,  that  ^6,  6s.  bd.  from 
Scotland  supplied  me,  as  far  as  can  be  known  now,  with  all  the 
means  necessary  for  fitting  up  and  promoting  the  new  Orphan 
Houses.  Six  years  and  eight  months  I  have  been  day  by  day, 
and  generally  several  times  daily,  asking  the  Lord  to  give  me 
the  needed  means  for  this  enlargement  of  the  Orphan  work, 
which,  according  to  calculations  made  in  the  spring  of  1861, 
appeared  to  be  about  fifty  thousand  pounds,  but  which  at  a  later 
period  was  found  to  be  about  fifty-eight  thousand  pounds  :  the 
total  of  this  amount  I  had  now  received.  I  praise  and  magnify 
the  IvOrd  for  putting  this  enlargement  of  the  work  into  my 
heart,  and  for  giving  me  courage  and  faith  for  it ;  and  above  all, 
for  sustaining  my  faith  day  by  day  without  wavering.  When 
the  last  portion  of  the  money  was  received,  I  was  no  more 
assured  concerning  the  whole,  than  I  was  at  the  time  I  had  not 
received  one  single  donation  towards  this  large  sum.  I  was  at 
the  beginning,  after  once  having  ascertained  His  mind,  through 
most  patient  and  heart-searching  waiting  upon  God,  as  fully 
274 


Notes. 

lassured  that  He  would  bring  it  about,  as  if  the  two  houses,  with 
their  hundreds  of  orphans  occupying  them,  had  been  already 
before  me.  I  make  a  few  remarks  here  for  the  sake  of  young 
believers  in  connection  with  this  subject  :  i.  Be  slow  to  take 
new  steps  in  the  Lord's  service,  or  in  your  business,  or  in  your 
families  :  weigh  everything  well ;  weigh  all  in  the  light  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures  and  in  the  fear  of  God.  2.  Seek  to  have  no 
will  of  your  own,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  mind  of  God,  regard- 
ing any  steps  you  propose  taking,  so  that  you  can  honestly  say 
you  are  willing  to  do  the  will  of  God,  if  He  will  only  please  to 
instruct  ycu.  3.  But  when  you  have  found  out  what  the  will  ot 
God  is,  seek  for  His  help,  and  seek  it  earnestly,  perseveringly, 
patiently,  believingly,  expectantly  ;  and  you  will  surely  in  His 
own  time  and  way  obtain  it. 

"  To  suppose  that  we  have  difficulty  about  money  only  would 
be  a  mistake  :  there  occur  hundreds  of  other  wants  and  of  other 
difficulties.  It  is  a  rare  thing  that  a  day  occurs  without  some 
difficulty  or  some  want ;  but  often  there  are  many  difficulties 
and  many  wants  to  be  met  and  overcome  the  same  day.  All 
these  are  met  by  prayer  and  faith,  our  universal  remedy  ;  and 
we  have  never  been  confounded.  Patient,  persevering,  believ- 
ing prayer,  offered  up  to  God,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
has  always,  sooner  or  later,  brought  the  blessing.  I  do  not 
despair,  by  God's  grace,  of  obtaining  any  blessing,  provided  I 
can  be  sure  it  would  be  for  any  real  good,  and  for  the  glory  of 
God." 

275 


•^»«  ^SbKB°  CB  OB..HTMBN. 


This  book  is  " 


nder 


taken  «ro«* 


,  circumstances 
the  BuUding 


