WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED  AND  WON.


K


WOMEN  WHO  HAVE

WORKED  AND  WON


WOMEN  WHO  HAVE
WORKED  AND  WON


THE   LH^^E-STORY


OK


MRS.    SPURGEON,    MRS.   BOOTH-TUCKER,
F.  R.  HAVERGAL,  AND   RAMABAI


BY

JENNIE   CHAPPELL

author  of
'four  noble  women,'  'noble  work  by  noble  women'


FULLY  ILLUSTRATED


LONDON

S.  W.    PARTRIDGE    &   CO.    LTD.

8  &   9   PATERNOSTER   ROW


-^


4


PREFACE.


FN  bringing  before  our  readers  the  sketches  of  Women
^  who  have  Worked  and  Won  contained  in  the  following
pages,  we  could  scarcely,  even  had  that  been  our  object,
have  gathered  together  a  group  of  lives  more  diverse  as  to
worldly  circumstance.  The  career  of  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker,
that  Amazon  of  the  Holy  War,  who  travelled  half  over
the  world,  speaking  to  crowded  audiences,  withstanding
hostility,  and  perpetually  in  the  blaze  of  publicity,  affords
the  greatest  possible  contrast  to  that  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's
invalid  wife,  for  whom  the  violet-like  seclusion  of  an
unknown  girlhood  was  but  exchanged,  with  a  brief  in-
terval, for  the  life-long  hermitage  of  a  sick-room.  While
Frances  Havergal,  the  darling  of  a  refined  Christian  home,
where  love  that  was  almost  adoration  and  devout  piety
shed  their  combined  rays  around  her  from  the  first  to  the
last  hours  of  her  life,  seems  at  the  opposite  social  pole  from
Ramabai,  the  heathen-born,  the  despised  widow  of  India.
Yet  the  same  Spirit  was  moving  in  them  all.  Conscious
tliat  the  union  of  the  human  soul  with  its  Divine  Source  is
the  one  condition  of  a  happy,  useful  life,  each  made  it  her
cl/ief  aim  to  win  others  to  this  blessedness.  Their  methods
differed  as  widely  as  their  characters  and  surroundings.
Probably  each  would,  in  some  minor  details,  have  failed
,'  0  approve  of  the  others,  but  in  the  higher  plane  they  were


n


PREFACE


all  one.     In  fields  of  usefulness  so  diverse,  all  were  alike
loyal  followers  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  lived

•'....  through  Him
A  new,  a  noble  life,
A  life  in  spirit  with  their  Lord,
Above  earth's  party-strife."

United  also  were  they  in  their  belief  in,  and  experiences
of,  the  power  of  prayer.  Nothing  strides  the  reader,  in
studying  one  after  another  of  these  four  lives,  more  than  the
similarity  of  their  testimony  to  the  readiness  of  a  loving
Father  to  hear  and  answer  whenever  His  child  calls  to  Him.
Every  one  of  these  good  women  could  record  instances,
commonly  called  marvellous,  of  unmistakable  answers  to
individual,  and  often  minutely  personal  petitions.  It  was
mainly  this  happy  assurance  of  Divine  help  constantly
within  reach  of  the  feeblest,  that  inspired  them  to  be  ,
women  who  worked,  and  this  perpetual  drawing  upon
strength  mightier  than  their  own  that  at  last  crowned
them,  despite  the  difficulties  that  beset  us  all,  as  women
who  have  won.

Jennie  Chappell.


CONTENTS.


rAGB

9
i8


29

38

49


MRS.    C.    H.    SPURGEON—

1.  When  'Love  took  up  the  Harp  of  Life

2.  An  Ideal  Pastor's  Wife    .

3.  The  Prisoner  of  Pain

4.  A  Tree  of  the  Lord's  own  Planting     .

5.  Walking  Alone        .  •  •  •

EMMA    BOOTH-TUCKER—  ^

1.  'A  Sweet  and  Pleasant  Child'  .  .  -5

2.  'A  sort  of  Hunt'  for  the  Lost.  •  •       63

3.  '  There  was  no  one  like  Her  ! ' .  -74

4.  'Dead  upon  the  Field'    .  .  •  •         3

FRANCES    RIDLEY    HAVERGAL —

1.  Outward  Sunshine,  Inward  Clouds  .  •       93

2.  Gleams  of  Light     .  •  •  .10°

3.  With  Voice  and  Pen        .  •  •  .107

4.  'Only  for  Thee!'  .  .  •  •  •     ^^4

PUNDITA    RAMABAI —

1.  A  Forest  Child       .           •           •  •

2.  The  Hindu  Wife  and  Widow    .  .           .132

3.  A  Bold  Project  •     M^i

4.  Its  Walls  'Salvation'  and  its  gates  'Praise'.      146


126


WOMEN  WHO  HAVE
WORKED   AND   WON,


JJXrs.  C  %  Spiu'scoiu


CHAPTER    I.

WHEN    '  LOVE   TOOK   UP  THE    HARP   OF   LIFE.'

FOR  all  the  purposes  of  the  biographer,  Airs.   Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  seems  to  have  begun  to  live  only
when  her  existence  came  first  within  the  orbit  of  that
wonderful  personality  by  which  it  was  destined  thence-,
forward  to  be  inspired  and  absorbed.

For  twenty-one  years  Susannah  Thompson  led  a  life
of  such  uneventful  privacy  that  of  her  childhood  and
youth  we  have  little  to  relate.

She  was  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Robert  Thompson,  of
Falcon  Square,  E.C.,  and  with  her  parents  was  accustomed
to  attend  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  Southwark.  Here
the  chief  thing  that  seems  to  have  impressed  her  childish
mind  was  the  cock-robin-like  side-view  of  the  senior
leacon,  as  it  was  presented  to  her  gaze  Sunday  after
Sunday  in  the  open  desk  immediately  below  the  pulpit  I
This  was  owing  to  the  fact  that  he  was  a  "  short,  stout
man,"  who  still  wore  the  silk  stockings  and  knee-breeches
of  a  previous  generation.     His  "  rotund  body,  perched  on


lo       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

undraped  legs,  was,  moreover,  clothed  in  a  long-tailed
coat,"  and  "  when  he  chirped  out  the  verses  of  the  hymn
in  a  piping,  twittering  voice,"  little  Susie  thought  the
likeness  complete.

But  another  object  in  this  memorable  place  of  worship
which  in  the  interval  between  prayers  and  sermon  con-
tinually excited  the  little  girl's  nnagination  was,  strange
to  say,  that  pulpit  where  hereafter  was  to  rise  the  sun  and
glory  of  her  earthly  existence.

Without  staircase,  or  visible  entrance,  this  rostrum  hung
upon  the  chapel  wall  like  a  swallow's  nest.  "  One  moment,"
Mrs.  Spurgeon  tells  us,  "  the  big  box  would  be  empty  ;
the  next — if  I  had  but  glanced  down  at  Bible  or  hymn-
book,  and  raised  my  eyes  again — there  was  the  preacher,
comfortably  seated,  or  standing  ready  to  commence  the
service  !  1  found  it  very  interesting,  and  though  I  knew
there  was  a  matter-of-fact  door  .  .  .  this  knowledge  was
not  allowed  to  interfere  with,  or  even  explain,  the  fanciful
notions  I  loved  to  indulge  in  concerning  that  mysterious
entrance  and  exit."

Thus,  unheralded  and  suddenly,  on  December  i8,  1853,
young  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  stepped  into  that  pulpit,
and  into  "  little  Susie's  "  life.

He  was  to  preach  both  morning  and  evening,  with  a
view  to  being  chosen  as  permanent  pastor  of  the  then
vacant  church.  But  although  the  friends  (Mr.  and  Mrs.
Olney)  with  whom  Miss  Susie  was  just  then  staying
went  to  the  forenoon  service,  the  young  lady  herself  did
not  accompany  them,  having  somewhat  of  a  prejudice
against  the  "  boy  preacher  "  on  account  of  his  extreme
youth,  for  Charles  Spiirgeon  was  at  that  time  not  out  of
his  teens.

The  morning  congregation,  however,  was  so  poor,  that
Mr.  Olney,  fearing  the  young  stranger  might  feel  dis-
couraged, did  all  he  could  to  collect  a  larger  gathering  for
the  later  service.  The  Olney  family,  of  course,  went  in
full  force,  and  their  guest  could  not  do  otherwise  than
accompany  them.

Once  again,  as  so  often  before,  Susie  Thompson's  ex-
pectant  gaze   was  riveted   upon   the    "  swallow's  nest "


MRS.  C,   H.   SPURGEON  n

pulpit,  and  into  her  view  there  stepped  a  figure  that  at
first  sight  gave  her  a  disagreeable  shock.

The  lad's  countrified  manner  and  attire,  liis  loose  crop
of  somewhat  unkempt  dark  hair,  a  physiognomy  that  in-
adequately suggested  the  mental  and  spiritual  gifts  which
lay  behind,  his  big,  antiquated  black  satin  "  stock,"  and
the  appalling  blue  pocket-handkerchief  with  white  spots
that  he  grasped  in  his  hand,  all  more  or  less  offended  the
maiden's  fastidious  taste,  and  diverted  her  mind  from  the
unmistakable  power  and  earnestness  of  the  address  which
he  delivered.

Only  one  phrase  of  the  whole  sermon  remained  in  her
mind,  and  that  because  of  its  singularity  ;  for  he  likened
the  body  of  Christians  to  "  living  stones  in  the  Heavenly
Temple  perfectly  joined  together  with  the  vermilion
cement  of  Christ's  blood  "—scarcely  an  improvement,  we
venture  to  think,  on  the  more  chaste  scriptural  symbol
which  evidently  suggested  it.

However,  Miss  Thompson  was  not  so  unfavourably
impressed  by  the  "  boy  preacher  from  VVaterbeach  "  but
that  she  was  willing  to  go  and  hear  him  again.  Introduced
by  their  mutual  friends,  the  Olneys,  she  became  personally
acquainted  with  him.  Gradually  her  prejudice  wore
away,  and  his  earnestness  began  to  make  an  impression
on  her.  Indeed,  before  very  long  the  pendulum  of  senti-
ment had  swung  so  far  in  an  opposite  direction  from  the
first  aversion,  that,  Spurgeon  being  settled  at  New  Park
Street  Chapel,  we  find  our  young  lady  exerting  herself
most  strenuously  to  collect  money  for  a  proposed  enlarge-
ment of  the  building.  She  got  together  for  this  purpose
no  less  than  one  hundred  pounds.     This  speaks   volumes.

It  was  but  four  months  from  the  date  of  Charles
Spurgeon's  first  appearance  at  New  Park  Street,  when
his  acquaintance  with  Susannah  had  become  sufficiently
advanced  to  permit  of  his  presenting  her  with  a  book —
of  course,  to  her  great  surprise.

This  volume  was  an  illustrated  copy  of  The  Pilgrim's
Progress,  and  contained  the  inscription,  "  Miss  Thompson,
/vith  desires  for  her  progress  in  the  blessed  pilgrimage,
from  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  April  20,  1854."


12       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

Mrs.  Spurgeon  in  after  years  declared  her  belief  that  the
young  pastor  had  at  that  time  no  other  thought  than  to
help  a  struggling  soul  heavenward.  But  we  know  how,
in  pure  and  ardent  natures,  the  earthly  and  heavenly  love
become  so  readily  intertwined  and  so  mutually  enkindling
that  it  is  ofttimes  difficult  to  perceive  the  dividing  line.
We  are  not  unprepared,  therefore,  to  learn  that  Miss  Thomp-
son was  "  greatly  impressed  "  by  Mr.  Spurgeon's  concern
for  her,  and  that  "  the  book  became  very  precious  as  well
as  helpful  to  her  soul."

A  little  later,  she  was  drawn  to  consult  him  as  to  her
state  before  God.  Conversations  upon  her  spiritual  wel-
fare ensued,  and  ultimately  she  is  able  to  record  that  she
was  led  "  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the
Cross  of  Christ  for  the  peace  and  pardon  my  weary  soul
was  longing  for."

After  that,  she  tells  us,  she  was  happier  than  she  had
been  at  any  time  since  the  days  when,  at  the  Poultry
Chapel,  her  heart  had  experienced  its  first  stirrings  towards
the  Divine  life,  and  although  she  little  dreamed  of  the
great  joy  that  was  speeding  towards  her,  the  steady
development  of  a  friendship  between  her  and  her  pastor
may  have  lent  its  quota  to  that  blessedness  of  which  she
speaks.

The  intimacy  seems  to  have  progressed  with  fair  rapidity.
Less  than  three  months  subsequent  to  the  gift  of  The
Pilgrim's  Progress  occurred  the  grand  opening  of  the
Crystal  Palace  at  Sydenham,  when  a  party  of  New  Park
Street  friends  was  made  up  to  witness  the  ceremony,
and  included  both  the  young  people  in  whom  we  are
interested.

They  occupied  some  raised  seats  in  a  good  position  for
viewing  the  spectacle,  and  while  Miss  Thompson  and  her
companions  beguiled  the  waiting  time  with  talking  and
laughter,  their  pastor  was  seen  to  be  improving  his  spare
moments  in  dipping  into  a  book.  This  proved  to  be  a
volume  of  Martin  Tupper's  Proverbial  Philosophy,  then
but  recently  published.

Suddenly,  he  turned  to  Miss  Thompson,  and  handing
her  the  book,  with  his  finger  marking  a  particular  page,  he


MRS.   C.   H.   SPURGEON  I3

asked,  "  What  do  you  think    of   the  poet's  suggestion  in

those  verses  ?  "

With  a  deepening  flush  upon  her  cheeks,  the  young  girl
noticed  that  the  chapter  was  headed  "  On  Marriage."  and
the  lines  especially  pointed  out  to  her  were  these—

"  Seek  a  good  wife  of  thy  God,  for  she  is  the  best  gift  of  His  Providence  ;
Yet  ask  not  in  bold  confidence  that  which  He  hath  not  promised  :
Thou  knowest  not   His  good   will;    be    thy   prayer    then   submissive
thereunto ;  .  ,

And  leave  thy  petition  to  His  mercy,  assured  He  will  deal  well  with

thee.  ,     .  ,.  .  .  ^,

If  thou  art  to  have  a  wife  of  thy  youth,  she  is  now  living  on  the  earth  ;
Therefore  think  of  her,  and  pray  for  her  weal  1 "

As  she  reached  this  point,  there  came  a  soft,  low  whisper
in  her  ear : — "  Do  you  pray  for  him  who  is  to  be  your
husband?"  ^    ^.

Thus  delicately  conveyed,  the  hidden  meanmg  of  this
query  was  not  misunderstood.  Little  of  the  brilliant  pro-
cession did  Susannah  Thompson  that  day  behold,  few
words  of  the  speeches  entered  her  ears.  Her  whole  soul
had  been  filled  with  a  new  and  all-absorbing  emotion.

"  Will  you  come  and  walk  round  the  Palace  with  me  ?  "
whispered  some  one,  as  the  spectators  began  to  leave  their

seats.

Miss  Thompson  consented ;  friends  were  obligingly
obli\nous  of  their  disappearance,  and  the  pair  wandered
long  and  blissfully  through  the  Palace,  round  about  the
gardens,  and  as  far  as  the  lake,  where  antediluvian  monsters
placidly  witnessed  the  newest  and  oldest  thing  on  earth—
the  first  enthralling  ecstasies  of  "  love's  young  dream."

"During  that  walk,  I  believe,"  wrote  Mrs.  Spurgeon  nearly
half-a-century  afterwards,  "  God  Himself  united  our  hearts
in  indissoluble  bonds  of  true  affection,  and,  though  we
knew  it  not,  gave  us  to  each  other  for  ever.  From  that
time  our  friendship  grew  apace,  and  quickly  ripened  into
deepest  love — a  love  which  lives  in  my  heart  to-day  as
truly,  aye,  and  more  solemnly  and  strongly  than  it  did  in
those  early  davs  ;  for  though  God  has  seen  fit  to  call  my
beloved  up  to  higher  service.  He  has  left  me  the  consolation
of  still  loving  him  with  all  my  heart,  and    believing  our


14       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

love  shall  be  perfected  when  we  meet  in  that  blessed  Land
where  Love  reigns  supreme  and  eternal."

Young  men ,  however,  were  discreet  and  maidens  demure
in  those  old-fashioned  days,  and  although  a  unanimous
"  understanding  "  was  arrived  at  that  memorable  June
day  in  the  Crystal  Palace,  it  was  not  until  two  months
later  that  Charles  Spurgeon  formally  "  proposed  "  to  the
lady  of  his  choice.

The  spot  which  this  incident  glorified  and  endeared  for
ever  to  both  their  hearts  was  a  prosaic  little  London  back-
garden,  attached  to  the  residence  of  Miss  Thompson's
grandfather,

"  To  this  day,"  writes  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  forty  years  later.
"  I  think  of  that  old  garden  as  a  sacred  place,  a  paradise
of  happiness,  since  there  my  beloved  sought  me  for  his
very  own,  and  told  me  how  much  he  loved  me."  This
confession,  she  adds,  was  "  wonderful,"  and  asks,  "  Was
there  ever  quite  such  bliss  on  earth  before  ?  "

Being  a  truly  good,  Christian  girl,  Susannah  fully  realized
her  happiness  as  a  gift  from  God,  and  kneeling  alone  in  her
room,  she  praised  and  thanked  Him,  with  happy  tears,
for  His  great  mercy  "  in  giving  her  the  love  of  so  good  a
man."

Soon  after,  Miss  Thompson  requested  baptism  at  the
hands  of  her  pastor  and  fiance.  The  confession  of  faith
which  she  made  as  a  preliminary  to  this  ordinance  touched
him  deeply  for  its  true  spirituality  of  tone.  "  I  could
weep  with  joy  (as  I  certainly  am  doing  now),"  he  wrote  in
his  reply,  "  to  think  that  my  beloved  can  so  well  testify
to  a  work  of  grace  in  her  soul."

He  went  on  to  encourage  her  with  his  assurance  that
she  must  indeed  be  one  of  God's  chosen — which  at  the
outset  of  their  acquaintance  he  had  feared  she  might  not
be,  for,  said  he,  "  If  the  Lord  had  intended  your  destruc-
tion. He  would  not  have  told  you  such  things  as  these,  nor
would  He  enable  you  so  unreservedly  to  cast  yourself  upon
His  faithful  promise.  .  .  .  Dear  purchase  of  a  Saviour's
blood,  you  are  to  me  a  Saviour's  gift,  and  my  heart  is
full  to  overflowing  with  the  thought  of  such  continued
goodness.  .  .  .    Whatever   .befall    us,   trouble,   adversity,


MRS    C.   H.   SPURGEON  15

sickness  or  death,  we  need  not  fear  a  final  separation,  either
from  each  other  or  from  our  God."

The  baptism  of  Miss  Thompson  was  performed  as
quietly  as  circumstances  would  allow,  but  that  the  actual
position  of  affairs  was  not  absolutely  unsuspected  by  others
than  immediate  relatives  was  suggested  by  a  rather
amusing  incident.

Preceding  the  young  lady  in  the  list  of  candidates  for
the  examination  "  before  the  church,"  was  an  old  man
named  Johnny  Dear.  When  he  had  been  passed  and  was
departed,  an  elderly  dame  at  the  back  of  the  room  was
heard  to  whisper — "  I  suppose  it  will  be  '  sister  dear  '
next !  "

It  may  be  a  comfort  to  some  young  people  who  read
these  pages  to  learn  that  even  such  a  love  as  that  between
Charles  and  Susannah,  inspired  and  blessed  hy  God  as  it
undoubtedly  was,  did  not  run  its  course  with  perfectly
unruffled  smoothness.  For  both  were  human,  and  the
thoughtlessness  of  the  young  preacher  and  the  sensitive
pride  of  the  maiden  on  one  occasion  brought  about  what,
with  some  natures,  might  have  been  a  serious  misunder-
standing.

On  this  occasion,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  to  preach  in  a  large
hall  at  Kennington,  and  Miss  Thompson  went  with  him  in
a  cab.

An  immense  crowd  was  thronging  the  entrance  and  the
staircase,  through  which  the  preacher  himself ,  in  the  absence
of  any  private  entrance,  had  to  force  his  way.  So  great
was  the  crush  that  his  poor  little  fiancSe  was  somehow
separated  from  him,  and,  terrible  to  relate,  he  never  missed
her  /  Turning  in  at  a  side-door,  which  presumably  led  to
the  vestry,  he  passed  from  her  sight  without  another  word
or  look,  and  left  her  struggling  helplessly  among  a  mass  of
strangers.

Worse  still,  he  was-  so  occupied  with  the  message  he  had
to  deliver,  that  he  actually  for  the  time  forgot  her  ex-
istence. Hurt  beyond  expression,  bewildered,  then  angry,
the  young  girl  straightway  turned  back  without  entering
the  building,  and  carried  her  wounded  heart  home  to  her
mother.


i6       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

The  slight  and  only  glimpse  we  at  this  point  catch  of
Susannah  Thompson's  mother  goes  far  to  explain  the
sweetness  of  character  possessed  by  Mr.  Spurgeon's  wife.

"  She  wisely  reasoned,"  the  latter  relates,  "  that  my
chosen  husband  was  no  ordinary  man,  that  his  whole  life
was  absolutely  dedicated  to  God  and  His  service,  and  that
I  must  never,  never  hinder  him  by  trying  to  put  myself
first  in  his  heart."

Susannah,  who  had  akeady  much  good  sense,  was
gradually  calmed  and  softened  by  her  mother's  soothing
words,  and  by  the  time  Charles  returned,  in  a  state  of
great  anxiety  about  Susie,  Susie  was  ready  to  forgive  his
negligence,  not  unashamed  in  her  inmost  heart  of  having
so  quickly  doubted  and  taken  offence  at  him,  when  not
the  least  unkindness  was  intended.  It  was  a  hard  lesson,
as  she  owns,  but  it  was  learnt  then  hy  heart,  and  never  again
did  she  seek  to  assert  any  right  to  her  lover's  time  and
attention  when  they  were  claimed  by  his  service  to  God.

"  The  end  of  this  Httle  '  rift  in  the  lute,'  "  to  use  Mrs.
Spurgeon's  own  beautiful  similitude,  "  was  ...  an  in-
crease of  that  fervent  love  which  can  look  a  misunder-
standing in  the  face  till  it  melts  away  and  vanishes,  as  a
morning  cloud  before  the  ardent  glances  of  the  sun."

Miss  Thompson's  next  experience  was  a  visit  to  Col-
chester to  make  the  acquaintance  of  her  prospective  father
and  mother-in-law,  always  something  of  an  ordeal  to  a
timid  young  girl.  If,  however,  Charles  Spurgeon's  fiancSe
felt  any  nervousness,  her  fears  were  soon  dispelled  by  the
hearty  and  affectionate  welcome  which  she  then  received.
She  was  entertained,  and  petted,  and  taken  to  see  every
object  and  place  of  interest  in  all  the  neighbourhood,  but
owing  to  the  superlative  delight  of  her  lover's  society,  no
distinct  remembrance  of  any  incident  of  that  halcyon  time
was  carried  away.  "  The  joy  of  being  all  day  long  with
my  beloved,  and  this  for  three  or  four  days  together,
was  enough  to  fill  my  heart  with  gladness,  and  render  me
oblivious  of  any  other  pleasure."

It  is  good  to  see  this  girl  and  boy — for  they  were  no
more — so  deeply  and  frankly  in  love  with  one  another,
but  better  still  to  know  that    though   other  earthly  joys


MRS.   C.    H.   SPURGEON  17

were   obscured    by   this  overmastering   bliss,   the   young
people  never  lost  sight  of  its  Source  and  Giver.

Shortly  after  Miss  Thompson's  return  home,  her  betrothed
wrote  as  follows  : —

"  My  own  doubly-dear  Susie,

"  How  much  we  have  enjoyed  in  each  other's
society  !  It  seems  almost  impossible  that  I  can  either
have  conferred  or  received  so  much  happiness.  I  feel  now,
like  you,  very  low  in  spirits.  ...  Let  us  take  heed  of
putting  ourselves  too  prominently  in  our  own  hearts,  but
let  us  commit  our  way  unto  the  Lord.  '  What  I  have  in
my  own  hand,  I  usually  lose,'  said  Luther,  '  but  what  I  put
into  God's  Hand,  is  still,  and  ever  will  be,  in  my  possession.' "

The  first  parting  of  any  length  between  this  devoted
pair  was  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  went  on  a  preaching  tour  into
Scotland— in  those  days  farther  off  from  London  than  it
is  now.  While  he  was  away  he  constantly  wrote  letters,
in  which,  the  happy  recipient  relates,  "Little  rills  of  tender-
ness run  between  the  sentences,  hke  the  singing,  dancing
waters  among  the  boulders  of  a  brook.  ...  To  the  end
of  his  beautiful  life  it  was  the  same,  his  letters  were  always
those  of  a  devoted  lover  as  well  as  of  a  tender  husband  '.
not  only  did  the  brook  never  dry  up,  but  the  stream  grew
deeper  and  broader,  and  the  rhythm  of  its  song  waxed
sweeter  and  stronger."

It  was  during  these  pre-nuptial  days  that  Miss  Thompson
attempted,  at  her  lover's  request,  her  first  piece  of  literary
work.  This  was  to  compile  for  him  a  selection  of  extracts
from  the  writings  of  the  Puritan  Divine,  Thomas  Brooks.
The  young  girl's  critical  taste  was  both  tested  and  trained
by  the  direction  to  mark  every  paragraph  and  sentence
that  struck  her  as  "  particularly  sweet,  or  quaint,  01
instructive."

This  seems  simple  enough,  but  so  new  was  the  task
that  to  her  it  appeared  most  important  and  diiificult.
That  it  was  performed  with  discrimination  and  to  Mr.
Spurgeon's  satisfaction  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the
little  volume  was  ultimately  published  under  the  some-


i8        WOMEN    WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND    WON

what  playful  title  of  "Smooth  Stones  taken  from  Ancient
Brooks."

Thus  pleasantly  sped  the  year  1855.  Their  favourite
meeting-place  was  the  Crystal  Fountain  in  the  newly-
opened  palace  of  glass  on  S3-denham  Hill.  With  palpitating
heart  the  young  girl  would  wait  for  the  whispered  message
in  the  chapel  aisle  at  the  close  of  the  week-night  service —
"  Three  o'clock  to-morrow  !  "  and  joyfully  would  she,  when
the  longed-for  hour  arrived,  set  out  on  her  walk  from  the
Brixton  Road  to  keep  that  happy  tryst.

But  another  appointment  was  swiftly  approaching.
The  young  people's  engagement,  notwithstanding  Mr.
Spurgeon's  youth,  was  not  unduly  prolonged.  The
wedding-day  was  fixed  for  the  first  week  of  the  next  new
year.


CHAPTER    H.

AN   IDEAL    pastor's    WIFE.

TF  there  were  any  truth  in  the  adage  that  "  Happy  is  the
-^  bride  that  the  sun  shines  on,"  the  married  life  of
Mrs.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  would  not  have  been
among  the  most  blessed,  for  her  wedding-day,  January  8,
1856,  was,  we  are  told,  "  dark,  damp,  and  cold."

That  was  the  outward  weather.  Inwardly  "  most  of  its
hours  were  veiled  in  a  golden  mist,"  through  which  they
afterwards  looked  to  memory  "  luminous  but  indistinct."

Susannah  knelt  by  her  bedside  in  the  early  morning,
"  awed  and  deeply  moved  b}^  a  sense  of  the  responsibilities
to  be  taken  up  that  day,  yet  happy  beyond  expression  that
the  Lord  had  so  favoured  her."  And  there,  alone  with
God,  she  earnestly  sought  "  strength  and  blessing  and
guidance   for   the   new  life   opening   before  her."

Multitudes  assembled  at   New  Park  Street  Chapel  to '
witness  the  interesting  ceremony.     The  building  was  filled
to  overflowing,  and  those  who  were  imable  to  gain  ad-
mittance waited  in  the  streets  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  the
bride  and  bridegroom  in  such  numbers  that  traffic  in  the


i


AN   EARLY    PORTRAIT  OF   MR.    AND   MRS.    SPURGEON,    TAKEN
IN  THEIR   HOME.


20       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

vicinity  of  the  chapel  was  practical!}'  brought  to  a  stand-
still, and  the  aid  of  a  special  body  of  police  was  required
to  prevent  accidents.

The  young  bride,  very  simply  attired,  drove  to  New  Park
Street  in  a  cab  with  her  father,  astonished  to  find  herself
gazed  at  almost  as  though  she  had  been  a  royal  princess,
and  wondering  if  the  people  all  knew  what  a  marvellous
bridegroom  she  was  going  to  meet.

The  ceremony  was  performed  by  "  dear  old  Dr.  Alexander
Fletcher,"  and  then  amid  the  enthusiastic  cheering  of
crowds,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  drove  away  to  start  on
their  brief  honeymoon  tour.

Some  of  the  sights  they  gazed  upon  together  during  that
blissful  ten  days  in  Paris  are  sketched  for  us  by  Mrs.
Spurgeon's  pen,  with  a  grace  and  vividness  which  justifies
her  husband's  discrimination  in  encouraging  the  develop-
ment of  her  literary  gift.

Of  La  Sainte  Chapelle,  which  Mrs.  Spurgeon  described
as  "  a  little  heaven  of  stained  glass,"  she  says:  "Its  loveli-
ness looked  almost  celestial  as  we  stood  enwrapped  in  its
radiance,  the  light  of  the  sinking  sun  glorifying  its  matchless
windows  into  a  very  dream  of  dazzling  grace  and  harmony
of  colour."

In  the  crypt  of  the  Pantheon,  once  a  temple,  now  a  church,
they  saw  the  tombs  of  Rousseau,  Voltaire,  and  others,
and  heard,  "  with  something  like  fear,  the  thunderous  echo
which  lurks  there.  ...  It  is  very  loud  and  terrible,  like  a
cannon  fired  off,  and  it  gives  one  quite  an  uncanny  feeling
to  hear  such  a  deafening  roar  down  in  the  bowels  of  the
earth."

The  view  from  St.  Cloud  she  pronounces  "  glorious."
"The  Seine  flowed  far  below,  the  suburbs  of  the  city  lay
beyond  ;  Mont  Valerien  on  the  right,  Paris  straight  before
one's  eyes,  with  the  gilded  dome  of  the  Invalides  shining
in  the  clear  air ;  St.  Sulpice,  and  the  Pantheon,  and  count-
less towers  and  spires  forming  landmarks  in  the  great  sea
of  houses  and  streets,  the  twin  heights  of  Montmartre
and  Pere  la  Chaise  in  the  background  ;  all  these  grouped
together  and  viewed  from  the  hill,  formed  an  indescribably
charming  picture."


MRS.   C.   H.   SPURGEON  21

As  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  familiar  with  Paris  and  spoke
French  fluently,  the  delight  of  both  was  miituallv  increased
by  her  ability  to  act  as  guide  to  the  various  spots  of  interest,
and  years  afterwards  her  husband  wrote  to  her  during
one  of  his  visits  alone  to  the  gay  capital  :  "  My  heart
flies  to  you,  as  I  remember  my  first  visit  to  this  city  under
your  dear  guidance.  I  love  you  now  as  then,  only  multiplied
many  times."

On  returning  home  the  young  couple  commenced  house-
keeping in  a  small  residence  in  the  New  Kent  Road.  As
is  always  the  case  in  hearts  where  God  rules,  their  own
happiness  made  them  long  to  reach  out  in  help  and  joy  to
others.  From  the  outset  they  denied  themselves  in  order
to  contribute  to  the  support  and  education  of  one  young
man  who  was  being  prepared  for  the  ministry.  To  provide
such  training  for  suitable  and  earnest  young  men  was  already
a  dear  dream  of  Charles  Spurgeon's  heart,  and  this  first
student  for  whom  they  so  gladly  "  planned  and  pinched  "
was  the  nucleus  of  the  future  Pastors'  College.

So  real  was  this  self-sacrifice  that  at  times  during  those
early  days  the  young  preacher  and  his  wife  had  a  difficulty
in  making  ends  meet,  and  to  "  tie  a  bow  "  was  an  unimagined
luxury.

In  a  special  period  of  need  there  occurred  to  them  one
of  those  marvellous  supplies  which  a  le^s  sceptical  age
would  have  called  a  miracle,  but  which  we  meet  in  every
record  of  the  lives  of  God's  trusting  children.

"  Some  demand  came  in  for  payment,"  writes  Mrs.
Spurgeon — "  I  think  it  must  have  been  a  tax  or  rate,  for
I  never  had  bills  owing  to  tradesmen — and  we  had  nothing
wherewith  to  meet  it.  What  a  distressing  condition  of
excitement  seized  us !  '  Wifey,  what  can  we  do  ?  I
must  give  up  hiring  the  horse  and  walk  to  New  Park
Street  every  time  I  preach  !  '  '  Impossible  !  '  I  replied.
'  With  so  many  services  you  simply  could  not  do  it.'
Long  and  anxiously  we  pondered  over  wa3S  and  means,
and  laid  our  burden  before  the  Lord,  entreating  Him  to
come  to  our  aid.  And  of  course  He  heard  and  answered,
for  He  is  a  faithful  God.  That  night,  or  next  day,  a
letter  was  received  containing  ;/^20  for  our  own  use,  and


22        WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

we  never  knew  who  sent  it,  save  that  it  came   in  answer
to  prayer !  "

How  happy  were  the  peaceful  Sabbath  evenings  of  that
first  wedded  year,  when,  the  labours  of  the  day  being  over,
the  weary  young  preacher  would  rest  in  an  easy-chair  by
the  fireside,  while  his  little  wife  nestled  on  a  low  stool  at
his  feet,  and  sought  to  soothe  and  refresh  his  spirit  by
reading  aloud  !  Sometimes  the  volume  chosen  would  be
Christian  poetry,  but  there  were  occasions  when  the  pastor's
tender  conscience  (and,  we  venture  to  add,  overwrought
nerves  !)  sought  the  self-flagellation  of  Baxter's  Reformed
Pastor,  and  he  would  sob  over  his  shortcomings,  while  the
sj^mpathetic  girl  cried  too,  because  she  "  loved  him.  and
wanted  to  share  his  grief."

But  tears  are  the  heritage  of  all,  and  even  those  blissful
months  were  not  wholly  undimmed  by  them.  Not  indeed
on  account  of  any  lack  of  love  or  tenderness  on  the  husband's
part  towards  his  j'oung  wife — she  had  by  this  time  learned
to  laugh  at  even  the  absorption  of  mind  that  now  and  then
caused  him  to  ceremoniously  shake  hands  with  her  in  his
own  vestry,  with  a  cool  "  How  are  you  ?"  as  if  to  a  stranger
— but  his  frequent  absences  from  home  on  preaching
engagements  were  a  sore  trial  to  her.

How  we  can  go  with  her,  as  she  paced  up  and  down  the
little  front  passage  late  at  night,  longing  and  listening  for
his  return,  praj'ing  with  trembling  heart  that  the  train
might  bring  him  safely,  and  rushing  to  the  door  in  an
ecstasy  of  relief  and  thankfulness  the  moment  his  footstep
was  heard  outside  !

Once,  when  he  was  leaving  her,  she  broke  down  and
sobbed  at  the  thought  of  the  coming  hours  of  loneliness.
But  he  tenderly  reminded  her  that  she  was  offering  him
as  a  sacrifice  to  God,  in  thus  letting  him  go  from  her  to
preach  the  Gospel,  and  must  not  spoil  it  by  weeping.

She  took  the  reproof  at  once  to  heart,  and,  ever  after,
the  half -bantering  query,  "  What,  crying  over  your  lamb,
\v\iey  ?  "  would  keep  back  the  rising  tears,  at  least  until
the  parting  was  over.

One  very  striking  incident  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon's
early  married  life  we  must  not  omit.


MRS.   C   H.   SPURGEOxM  23

On  a  certain  Saturday  evening  the  pastor  had  \vrestled
long  but  vainly  with  the  text  from  which  he  wished  to
speak  the  following  day.  He  was  utterly  worn  out  and
dispirited.  He  sat  up  long  past  his  usual  hour  for  retiring,
but  his  mind  seemed  completely  blank  on  the  subject.
Only  his  wife's  promise  to  arouse  him  very  early  in  the
morning  to  renew  his  efforts  at  length  induced  him  to  go
to  bed  and  get  the  rest  he  so  much  needed.

In  the  early  hours  of  Sunday,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  herself
awakened  by  the  sound  of  his  voice.  He  was  preaching
in  his  sleep,  and,  wonderful  to  relate,  was  giving  a  clear,
fresh,  and  forceful  exposition  of  the  very  verse  which  had
baffled  him  the  night  before  1

It  was  a  quaint  situation— the  preacher  himself  asleep,
the  solitary  hearer  intensely  wide  awake,  listening  to  his
unconscious  discourse  with  trembling  eagerness,  fearful  of
letting  one  precious  word  slip.

She  had  meant  to  keep  awake  till  it  was  time  to  call
her  husband,  but  while  going  over  and  over  in  her  mind
the  points  she  was  so  anxious  to  remember,  she,  not  un-
naturally, dropped  off  again,  and  they  both  slept  on  until
with  a  cry  of  dismay  Mr.  Spurgeon  sprang  up  to  find  the
time  he  had  hoped  to  spend  in  preparation  already  past.

What  was  his  amazement  and  joy  to  hear  from  the  lips
of  his  \vife  the  extraordinary  result  of  the  "  unconscious
cerebration  "  that  had  been  going  on  while  his  body  was
in  a  state  of  repose  !  "  Why,  that's  just  what  I  wanted  !  "
he  exclaimed.  "  That  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  whole
verse  !  ...  It  is  wonderful !  "

"  And  we  both,"  adds  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  "  praised  the
Lord  for  so  remarkable  a  manifestation  of  His  power  and

love."

On  September  20,  1856,  the  young  people  found  them-
selves the  parents  of  twin  sons.  Needless  to  say  the
advent  of  the  babies  was  hailed  with  joy.  Charles  and
Thomas  were  the  names  chosen  for  them,  and  great  were
the  hopes  of  what,  given  to  God  and  trained  for  Him,
those  precious  children  might  some  day  do  for  the  world.

Meanwhile,  the  ever-increasing  numbers  of  those  who
crowded  to  hear  the  famous  young  preacher    suggested


24       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

the  desirability  of  finding  a  larger  building  in  which  his
powers  might  have  fuller  scope.  After  some  negotiation,
the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  capable  of  seating  ten  or
twelve  thousand  people,  was  secured  for  Sunday  evening
services.  And  on  October  19,  just  one  month  after  the
birth  of  the  twins,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  full  of  prayerful  anticipa-
tion of  the  great  task  before  him,  left  home  to  preach  in
that  immense  building  for  the  first  time.

Alone  on  her  sofa,  in  the  Sabbath  evening  stillness,  his
wife  was  thinking  of  him,  and  of  the  darling  little  ones
asleep  at  her  side  — "  dreaming,"  she  says,  "  of  all  sorts
of  lovely  possibilities  and  pleasures"— when  she  was  startled
by  the  unaccustomed  sound  of  wheels  stopping  at  the
garden  gate.  It  was  far  too  early  for  the  preacher  to  be
coming  back,  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  wondered  much  who  the
arrival  could  be.

Soon,  a  deacon  from  the  chapel  entered  the  room,  his
grave  and  embarrassed  air  portending  serious  news  to  the
frightened  young  wife.  What  could  it  be  ?  What  had
happened  ?'  She  begged  him  to  tell  her  quickly,  her
thoughts  doubtless  reverting  to  those  occasions  when  the
strain  of  addressing  large  congregations  had  reduced  her
dear  one  to  the  verge  of  fainting.

It  was  a  terrible  tale  which  the  good  deacon  was  forced

to  unfold.

The  Music  Hall  was  crammed  to  overflowing,  when,
during  the  hush  of  the  second  prayer,  wild  cries  had  sud-
denly rent  the  air—"  Fire  !  "  "  The  galleries  are  givmg
way  !  "     "  The  place  is  falling  !  "     "  Fire— Fire  !  "

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  the  scene  of  awful  confusion
at  once  created.  People  struggling  and  fighting  their  way
to  the  doors,  some  in  the  excess  of  terror  even  flingmg
themselves  over  the  balconies  upon  the  seething  mass
below.  With  marvellous  self-possession  the  young  preacher,
believing  the  panic  to  be  groundless,  besought  his  audience
to  be  calm,  and  tried  to  go  on  with  the  service.  But  his
efforts  were  unavailing.  The  tragic  result  of  the  episode
was  the  death  of  seven  persons  and  the  injury  of  many
others,  while  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself,  after  being  for  some
time  unconscious,  was  carried    home   to    his  wife  a  mere


26       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

wreck  of  the  buoyant  and  hopeful  young  man  who  had
left  her  little  over  an  hour  before.  The  bitterest  drop  in
his  cup  was  the  conviction  that,  the  alarm  having  been
utterly  unfounded,  the  whole  disaster  was  the  work  of
the  Evil  One,  acting  either  upon  the  malice  or  cupidity  of
his  emissaries,  and  uncontrollable  anguish  of  mind,  that
at  one  time  seemed  to  threaten  reason  itself,  overcame
him.

At  length,  however,  light  was  restored,  ana  the  dedication
service  of  the  twin  babies  was  performed  amid  the  returning
health  and  hopefulness  of  the  young  parents.

The  following  year  they  removed  to  Helensburgh
House,  Nightingale  Lane,  Clapham,  then  a  countrified
spot,  where  a  large,  rambling,  half-wild  garden  was  a
delight  to  them  both.

The  house  was  very  old,  but  its  quaintness  was  half  its
charm,  and  the  grounds  were  almost  unique  in  possessing
a  well  nearly  five  hundred  feet  deep.  Some  former  owner,
with  both  money  and  perseverance,  had  had  such  firm  faith
that  water  would  eventually  be  reached,  that  he  persisted
in  borings  being  continued  down  to  and  through  the
solid  rock,  till  the  efforts  of  his  workmen  were  at  last
rewarded  by  a  gush  of  water,  "  pure,  sparkling,  and  cold
as  ice."  So  delicious  was  it,  that  in  Mrs.  Spurgeon's
time  neighbours  frequently  sent  jugs  to  Helensburgh
House,  begging  to  have  them  filled  from  this  spring.

Here,  although  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  strength  had  never  been
fully  restored  since  that  terrible  shock  of  the  Music  Hall
disaster,  she  passed  what  she  decided,  on  looking  back
upon  them,  were  the  least  shadowed  years  of  her  married
life.  Tending  the  garden,  taming  the  wild  song-birds  in
which  it  abounded,  and  wandering  in  the  pleasant  green
lanes  in  the  neighbourhood,  free  from  the  too  great  ob-
servation, flattering  but  not  always  welcome,  to  which  the
popular  pastor  and  his  wife  had  in  the  New  Kent  Road
been  subjected,  the  life  of  the  young  couple  was  at  that
time  an  ideally  happy  one.

The  large  sale  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons,  the  generous
treatment  of  his  publishers,  and  an  increased  income  from
his  pastorate,  rendered  possible  the  purchase  of   the  free-


MRS,   C.    H.   SPURGEON


27


hold  of  Helensburgh  House,  and  the  carrying  out  of  im-
provements which  otherwise  it  might  not  have  been  worth
while  to  make.

An  amusing  incident  occurring  during  the  early  days  of
residence  in  Nightingale  Lane,  proves  that  the  ability  to


HELENSBURGH    HOUSE,    NIGHTINGALE   LANE,    CLAPHAM.


keep  a  gardener  and  to  take  holiday  trips  is  not   always
an  unmixed  joy.

Returning  to  their  beloved  garden,  after  a  short  absence,
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  found  that  the  man  left  in  charge
had  made  groat  preparations  to  welcome  them.  But
these,  to  their  horror,  had  included  the  painting  of  certain
ancient  stone  vases  and  stucco  work  a  brilliant  combination


28        WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

of  blue  and  yellow  !  "  Only  dear  Mr.  Spurgeon,"  writes
his  fond  wife,  "  could  have  managed  to  get  them  restored
to  their  former  purity  without  hurting  the  feelings  of  the
well-meaning  gardener."

It  was  at  Helensburgh  House  that  the  Spurgeons  had
the  pleasure  of  entertaining  John  Ruskin.  He  was  a
neighbour,  and  frequently  attended  Mr.  Spurgeon's
ministry.  On  one  occasion,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  was
recovering  from  an  illness,  the  great  teacher  came  to  see
him,  bringing  the  characteristic  offering  of  two  choice
engravings  and  some  bottles  of  rare  wine.

On  seeing  the  preacher  lie  weak  and  prostrate  on  the
sofa,  Ruskin  flung  himself  on  his  knees  beside  him,  and
"  embracing  him  with  tender  affection  and  tears,"  ex-
claimed :  "  My  brother  !  my  dear  brother,  how  grieved
I  am  to  see  you  thus  !  "

In  the  pure,  sweet  air  of  the  Clapham  of  the  "  fifties  "
the  twin  boys  grew  and  flourished  apace.  Often  unable,
owing  to  the  weak  state  of  her  health,  to  attend  evening
service  at  the  Tabernacle,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  would  devote
the  sacred  hour  to  reading  to  and  teaching  her  darling
children.  Her  son  Thomas  directly  traces  his  conversion
to  these  early  lessons,  and  years  afterwards  she  was  able
with  deep  thankfulness  to  write :  "  Happy  mother !
whose  two  beloved  sons  count  it  their  highest  honour  to
spend  and  be  spent  in  the  service  of  God  !  "

But  it  was  in  her  intense  love  for  her  husband  that
Mrs.  Spurgeon  then,  as  ever,  found  her  chief  joy.  Writing
long  aftenvards,  when  suffering  the  deprivations  of  a
confirmed  invalid,  she  says:  "I  may  here  record  my  heart-
felt gratitude  to  God  that  for  a  period  of  ten  blessed  years
I  was  permitted  to  encircle  him  with  all  the  comforting
care  and  tender  affection  which  it  was  in  a  wife's  power
to  bestow.  Afterwards,  God  ordered  it  otherwise.  He
saw  lit  to  reverse  our  position  to  each  other,  and  for  a
long  season,  suffering  instead  of  service  became  my  daily
portion,  and  the  care  of  comforting  a  sick  wife  fell  upon
my  beloved."

As  long  as  her  health  admitted,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  faithfully
fulfilled  the  duties  of  a  pastor's  wife.     Especially  was  her


MRS.   C.    H.    SPURGEON  29

symj^athy  and  loving  wisdom  appreciated  by  the  female
candidates  for  baptism.  She  would  counsel,  cheer,  and
advise  them  in  preparation  for  that  imjwrtant  rite,  and
when  the  hour  for  immersion  came,  the  courtly  dignity  and
inimitable  modesty  with  which  she  assisted  tlie  trembling
neophytes  was  "  the  admiration  of  all  who  beheld  her."

"  To  this  day."  writes  the  Rev.  Thomas  Spurgeon,
"  many  greet  me  with  such  glad  words  as  these  :  '  She  led
lue  to  the  baptismal  pool,  you  know,  and  I  shall  never
forget  her  loving  words  to  me.'  "

That  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  wifely  devotion  was  fully  appre-
ciated, the  following  inscription  in  the  first  volume  of  a
sot  of  Calvin's  Commentaries,  presented  by  her  to  the
pastor,   will  testify —

"  The  volumes  making  up  a  complete  set  of  Calvm  were
a  gift  to  me  from  my  own  most  dear  and  tender  wife.
Blessed  may  she  be  among  women.  How  much  of  comfort
and  strength  she  has  ministered  unto  me  it  is  not  in  my
power  to  estimate.  She  has  been  to  me  God's  best  earthly
gift,  and  not  a  httle  even  of  Heavenly  treasure  has  come
to  me  by  her  means.  She  has  often  been  as  an  angel  of
God  unto  me.

"C.  H.  Spurgeon."


CHAPTER    HI.

THE    PRISONER   OF    PAIN.

TT  was  in  the  year  1868  that  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  tailing
*-  health  became  so  alarmingly  worse  as  to  cause  a
complete  breakdown.  An  operation  was  performed  under
the  direction  of  the  distinguished  surgeon.  Sir  James
Simpson,  of  Edinburgh,  but  although  her  hfe  was  prolonged
thereby,  she  was  thenceforward  doomed  to  the  secluded
existence  of  an  invalid.

One  of  the  bitterest  privations  which  such  a  condition
entailed  was  that  of  being  no  longer  able  to  accompany
her  husband  on  his  holiday  trips  to  the  Continent.     After


30       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

thirteen  years  of  married  life,  the  pastor's  wife  was  the
same  tender-hearted  "  Susie  "  who  had  such  hard  work
to  keep  from  weeping  over  her  sacrificial  "  lamb,"  and
these  partings  were  a  constantly  recurring  wrench  to  her
clinging  affections.  Added  to  this  natural  loneliness  was
at  one  period  the  torture  of  nervous  terrors  at  night.
Thoughts  of  burglars,  fire,  and  other  imaginations  of  a
similar  nature  that  will  occur  when  bod^/  and  mind  are
alike  worn  by  sickness,  made  the  hours  of  darkness  a
horror  to  her.

One  night,  when  dwelling  upon  the  two  texts,  "  What
time  I  am  afraid,  I  will  trust  in  Thee,"  and  "  I  will  trust
and  not  be  afraid,"  Mrs.  Spurgeon  suddenly  realized  that
"  '  What  time  '  meant  '  now,'  when  the  creaking  of  a  piece
of  furniture  startles  me,  and  the  very  thought  of  the  bark
of  a  dog  strikes  terror  to  my  heart."

"  1  will  trust  in  Thee  !  "  murmured  the  timid  soul,
and  as  she  said  it  deliverance  came.  "  '  I  will  trust,  and
not  be  afraid.'  I  surrendered  myself  and  all  my  belongings
to  the  Father's  keeping,  and,"  she  writes,  "  I  have  had  no
more  gloomy  fancies,  or  midnight  watchings.  I  have  laid
me  down  in  peace  and  slept,  because  '  He  only  made  me
to  dwell  in  safety.'  "

There  is  no  recipe  for  nervous  fears  to  be  compared  with
this,  and  many  a  one  besides  Mrs.  Spurgeon  has  proved  its
efi&cacy  ;  but  this  glimpse  of  weakness  makes  the  subject
of  our  sketch  appear  very  human  and  lovable.

The  silver  lining  to  these  separations  between  the  fond
couple  was  doubtless  to  be  found  in  the  lovely  letters  to
which  they  necessarily  gave  rise.  No  wife  could  possibly
have  craved  more  tender  outpourings  of  affection  than
those  which  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  showered  in  such
lavish  profusion  upon  his  suffering  "  wifey."

Nothing,  for  example,  could  be  more  lover-like  than  the
following,  written  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  when,  during  her
absence  in  Brighton  for  the  operation  above  named,  her
husband  had  been  superintending  the  rebuilding  of  Helens-
burgh House — which  took  place  about  this  time — and  the
refurnishing  of  his  wife's  rooms  in  particular.


MRS.   C.    H.    SPURGEON  31

"  My  own  Dear  Sufferer,

"  I  am  pained  indeed  to  learn  from  T 's  kind

note  that  you  are  still  in  so  sad  a  condition.  Oh,  may
the  ever-merciful  God  be  pleased  to  give  you  ease  !

"  I  have  been  quite  a  long  round  to-day — if  a  '  round  '
can  be  '  long.'  First  to  Finsbury,  to  buy  the  wardrobe, —
a  beauty.  I  hope  you  will  live  long  to  hang  your  garments
in  it,  every  thread  of  them  precious  to  me  for  your  dear
sake.  Next  to  Hewlett's,  for  a  chandelier  for  the  dining-
room.  Found  one  quite  to  my  taste  and  yours.  Then  to
Negretti  and  Zambra's  to  buy  a  barometer  for  my  own
very  fancy,  for  I  have  long  promised  to  treat  myself  to
one.  On  the  road  I  obtained  the  Presburg  biscuits,  and
within  their  box  I  send  this  note,  hoping  it  may  reach
you  the  more  quickly.  They  are  sweetened  with  my  love
and  prayers.

"  The  bedroom  will  look  well  with  the  wardrobe  in  it  ;
at  least,  so  I  hope.  It  is  well  made,  and  I  believe,  as
nearly  as  I  could  tell,  precisely  all  you  wished  for.  Joe  "
(Mr.  Joseph  Passmore  had  given  this  as  a  present)  "  is
very  good,  and  should  have  a  wee  note  whenever  darling
feels  she  could  write  it  without  too  much  fatigue  ;  but
not  yet.  I  bought  also  a  table  for  you,  in  case  you  should
have  to  keep  your  bed.  It  rises  or  falls  by  a  screw,  and
also  winds  sideways,  so  as  to  go  over  the  bed,  and  then
has  a  flap  for  a  book  or  a  paper,  so  that  my  dear  one  may
read  or  write  in  comfort  while  lying  down.  I  could  not
resist  the  pleasure  of  making  this  little  gift  to  my  poor
suffering  wifey,  only  hoping  it  might  not  often  be  in
requisition,  but  might  be  a  help  when  there  was  a  needs-be
for  it.  Remember,  all  I  buy  I  pay  for.  I  have  paid  for
everything  as  yet  with  the  earnings  of  my  pen,  graciously
sent  me  in  time  of  need.  It  is  my  ambition  to  leave
nothing  for  you  to  be  anxious  about.  I  shall  find  the  money
for  the  curtains,  etc.,  and  you  will  amuse  yourself  by  giving
orders  for  them  after  your  own  delightful  taste.

"  I  must  not  write  more  ;  and  indeed  matter  runs  short
except  the  old,  old  story  of  a  love  which  grieves  over  you
and  would  fain  work  a  miracle  and  raise  you  up  to  perfect


32       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

health.  I  fear  the  heat  afflicts  j'ou.  Well  did  the  Elder
say  to  John  in  Patmos  concerning  those  who  are  before
the  throne  of  God,  '  Neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them
nor  any  heat.'

"  Yours  to  love  in  Ufe  and  death  and  eternally,

"  C.  H.  S."

Mrs.  Spurgeon's  keen  sense  of  the  beautiful  in  Nature,
and  her  ability  to  take  pleasure  in  small  things,  were  also
a  source  of  much  delight  to  her  in  her  secluded  life.

One  summer  day  we  find  her  noticing  with  something
approaching  rapture,  "  on  one  of  the  broad-leaved  grasses,
a  rain-drop  sparkling  like  a  diamond,  and  by  its  side  had
settled  a  large  and  beautiful  greenish -blue  fly.  The  safety
of  the  drop  was  secured  by  its  position  on  the  leaf,  and
from  this  crystal  goblet  so  cunningly  contrived  and  balanced
the  insect  was  drinking,  with  full  enjoyment  and  satis-
faction. .  .  .  Looking  long  and  lovingly,"  the  invalid
thought  she  learned  this  lesson —

"  Te.ich  tliem  that  not  a  leaf  can  grow.
Till  life  from  Thee  within  it  flow,
That  not  a  drop  of  dew  can  be,
O  Fount  of  being,  save  by    Ihee."

Another  time  she  was  charmed  as  a  child  in  having
succeeded  in  tempting  a  "  Red  Admiral  "  butterfly  to
settle  on  a  bursting  egg-plum  in  her  hand,  and  so  be
carried  down  the  garden  in  triumph.  "The  exquisite  con-
trast of  colour,"  said  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  "  was  perfect  between
the  topaz-hued  fruit  and  the  regal  robes  of  the  quivering
little  beauty  upon  it,  while  her  fairy-like  poise  on  the  plum,
and  the  alternate  opening  and  folding  of  her  gorgeous
wings  were  details  which  completed  the  fascination  of  the
beholders."  And  she  realized  a  fellowship  of  feeling  with
the  poet  Wordsworth,  when  he  writes —

"To  me  the  meanest  flower  that  blows  can  give
Thoughts  that  do  often  lie  too  deep  for  tears."

Thus  was  a  spiritual  and  poetic  nature  ever  drawn
heavenward  by  the  innocent  loveliness  that  lies  all  around
us  upon  God's  earth.


I


MRS.    C.   H.   SPURGEON  33

Sometimes  the  tender  lessons  drawn  from  bird  or  flower
were  a  means  of  blessing  to  others,  as  was  notably  the  case
in  the  story  of  "  The  Lark's  Nest,"  which  was  embodied
in  one  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund  Reports.

Rambling  in  a  meadow  near  their  home  one  day,  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  came  upon  a  lark's  nest  with  eggs  in
it,  almost  hidden  among  the  long  grass.  Having  carefully
peeped  at  the  treasure  they  went  away,  determined,  if
possible,  to  watch  the  progress  of  the  hatching  brood.
But  what  was  their  horror  next  day  to  see  that  several
cows  had  been  turned  into  the  meadow  to  graze  !  This
must  mean  inevitable  destruction  to  the  birdies'  lowly
home  ;  and  quite  anxiously  Mrs.  Spurgeon  revisited  the
spot  as  soon  as  she  could  to  see  how  the  little  family  had
fared.

Some  readers  may  be  able  in  imagination  to  share  the
relief  which  she  felt  to  find  the  nest  intact,  and  the  nest-
lings alive  and  safe  !  The  grass  had  been  closely  cropped
all  round,  but  the  lark's  home  had,  almost  miraculously
as  it  seemed,  been  preserved  from  the  devouring  mouths
and  clumsy  hoofs  of  the  huge  creatures  which  had  trampled
so  near  it.  From  this  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  ready  pen  wove
a  parable  of  our  Father's  providence.

The  little  story,  in  due  course,  was  read  to  a  dying
woman,  whose  fatherless  little  ones  lay  a  heavy  burden
upon  her  heart.  It  came  as  a  message  from  God,  and  so
cheered  her  last  hours  that  she  died  happily  confiding  in
the  goodness  of  Him  who  has  even  the  falling  sparrow  in
His  care.

The  widow's  faith  was  justified,  her  four  baimies  were
all  provided  for  by  a  relative,  and  for  years  aftenvards
they  all  sent  tiny  donations  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund,
"  for  mother's  sake."  Even  by  and  by,  from  a  new  home
in  Canada,  came  little  remembrances  from  "  Birdie  No.  i,"
or  "  Birdie  No.  2,"  to  show  that  "  The  Lark's  Nest  "  was
not  forgotten.

Their  story  was  in  its  turn  related  in  a  subsequent  report,
and  this  again  reached  the  hands  of  another  poor  mother
whom  death  was  calling  from  her  dear  ones.  In  this  case,
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  message  of  the

c


34       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND  WON

birds  was  the  means  not  only  of  comforting  the  dying
one's  heart,  but  of  turning  it  towards  God.  Thus,  Mrs.
Spurgeon  had  the  happiness  of  knowing  that  her  Httle
parable  was  doubly  blessed,  and  how  much  of  unknown
good  it  may  have  done,  eternity  only  can  show.

Possessing  such  an  instinct  for  beauty,  and  the  spiritual
truths  of  which  it  is  the  garment,  we  are  not  surprised  to
find  that  the  subject  of  our  sketch  was  attracted  to  the
production  of  literary  work.

Mrs.  Spurgeon's  magnum  opus  was  of  course  the  editing,
and  no  inconsiderable  share  in  the  writing,  of  her  illustrious
husband's  Autobiography.  This  work,  in  four  large
volumes,  contains  many  interesting  and  charmingly
written  chapters  by  the  pastor's  wife.  In  addition  to  this,
however,  she  published  a  series  of  three  little  devotional
books — A  Cluster  of  Camphire,  or  Words  of  Cheer  and
Comfort  for  Sick  and  Sorrowful  Souls,  A  Carillon  of  Bells,
and  A  Basket  of  Summer  Fruit.

The  graceful  and  poetic  touch  of  the  author  is  well
illustrated  in  the  opening  words  of  A  Carillon  of  Bells.
"  '  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,  .  .  .  how  shall  He
not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ? '  Dear  Lord,
faith's  fingers  are  touching  the  keys  of  this  carillon  of
sweet  bells  this  morning,  and  making  them  sing  jubilantly
to  the  praise  of  Thy  gracious  name  !

"How  shall  He  not!
How  shall  He  not !

He  that  spared  not !
How  shall  He  not !  "

"  What  a  peal  of  absolute  triumph  it  is  !  Not  a  note  of
doubt  or  uncertainty  mars  the  Heavenly  music.  Awake,
my  heart,  and  realize  that  it  is  thy  faith  which  is  making
such  glorious  melody.  .  .  .  These  silver  bells  have  truly
the  power  to  scare  away  all  evil  things."

The  attractiveness  of  these  little  volumes  was  enhanced
by  their  dainty  get-up  ;  shape,  tint  of  covers,  and  outward
embellishment  being  in  every  respect  most  artistic.  Her
husband  used  to  say,  with  a  twinkle  in  his  eye,  that  her
books  were  much  superior  to  his  in  taste  and   finish,  but


1


MRS.   C.    H.    SPURGEON  35

that  he  was  not  without  serious  misgivings  as  to  the
contents  !

A  friend  and  frequent  visitor  after  the  Spurgeons'  re-
moval to  "  Westwood,"  relates  an  incident  in  which  the
pastor's  admiration  for  his  wife's  taste  led  to  one  of  the
many  witticisms  for  which  he  was  noted.

Sitting  at  tea  with  the  pair  was  one  of  the  Tabernacle
deacons,  a  silk  mercer,  noticeable  for  the  brilliant  auburn
shade  of  his  beard.  Repeating  to  the  latter  a  compli-
mentary remark  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  respecting  the  artistic
arrangement  of  goods  in  the  mercer's  window,  Mr.  Spurgeon
added,  "  But  I  can't  imagine  how  a  man  of  your  exquisite
taste  in  colours  could  have  chosen  red  whiskers  !  "

"  Golden,  you  mean !  "  rejoined  the  mercer,  good-
humouredly.

"  Golden  !  "  responded  Mr.  Spurgeon  instantly,  "  then
I'll  pledge  my  word  it  is  twenty-two  carrot  !  "

Mrs.  Spurgeon  wrote  her  cheering  words  for  fellow-
Christians  out  of  the  wealth  of  her  own  experience.  Again
and  again  had  she  proved  the  Father's  loving  care  for  His
children  in  small  things  as  well  as  great.  But  in  none  of
the  incidents  which  we  might  easily  multiply  is  that  minute
care  so  wonderfully  exemplified  as  in  the  story  of  her  wish
for  "  an  opal  ring  and  a  piping  bullfinch."

It  was  during  one  of  the  invalid's  serious  attacks  of
illness  that  she  half-jokingly  mentioned  to  her  husband
her  longing  for  these  two  luxuries.  But  even  he,  tender
as  he  was,  and  solicitous  to  gratify  her  every  possible  desire,
did  not  seriously  consider  the  question  of  procuring  either
the  jewel  or  the  bird.

But  not  long  after,  he  came  into  her  room  with  a  small
box  in  his  hand  and  delight  upon  his  face.  "  There  is
your  opal  ring,  my  darling  !  "  hn  said,  and  then  told  the
astonishing  tale  of  how  an  old  lady  he  had  once  seen  when
she  was  ill  had  sent  a  note  to  the  Tabernacle  to  say  that
she  wished  to  give  Mrs.  Spurgeon  a  little  present,  if  some
one  could  be  sent  to  fetch  it.

Mr.  Spurgeon's  private  secretary  accordingly  went,  and
received  from  the  old  lady's  hands  a  small  parcel,  which
on  being  opened  was  found  to  contain  an  opal  ring  !


36       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

As  if  this  were  almost,  had  it  stood  alone,  too  wonderful
to  believe,  the  gift — to  the  Spurgeons  beyond  doubt  a
proof  of  gracious  indulgence  to  the  sick  one  from  the  Lord
Himself — was  shortly  after  followed  by  the  arrival  of  the
coveted  bullfinch,  and  in  quite  as  singular  a  manner.

Mrs.  Spurgeon  had  been  removed  to  Brighton,  there  to
undergo  the  operation  to  which  we  have  already  alluded.
While  she  was  away,  the  wife  of  a  sick  friend  of  the  pastor's
asked  him  to  give  a  home  to  her  pet  songster,  whose  piping
was  too  much  for  the  sufferer.  "  I  would  give  him  to
none  but  Mrs.  Spurgeon,''  she  said  ;  "  Bully  will  interest
and  amuse  her  in  her  loneliness  while  you  are  so  much
away  from  her."

We  can  imagine  the  pleasure  with  which  Mr.  Spurgeon
carried  the  bird  to  Brighton,  and  the  joy  with  which  it
was  received.  We  can  hardly  be  surprised  that  the  pastor's
comment  to  his  wife  was,  "  I  think  you  are  one  of  your
Heavenly  Father's  spoiled  children,  and  He  just  gives  you
whatever  you  ask  for."

Allowing  that  this  conclusion  bears  somewhat  hardly
on  many  who  are  as  undoubtedly  God's  children,  but
nevertheless  do  not  have  every  wish  gratified,  we  leave
the  remarkable  story  on  record  for  our  readers  to  furnish
their  own  theory  with  regard  to  it.  Mrs,  Spurgeon  herself
says:  "If  our  faith  were  stronger  and  our  love  more  perfect,
we  should  see  far  greater  marvels  than  these  in  our  daily
lives."

On  September  21,  1874,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  had  the  joy  of
being  present  at  the  baptism  of  her  two  sons.  The  cere-
mony was  of  course  performed  by  their  father  at  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  and  an  immense  crowd  of
spectators  were  present.

The  thankful  and  happy  mother  was  presented  by  the
church  on  this  occasion  with  an  illuminated  address,
commemorating  the  goodness  of  "  Our  gracious  Lord  that
it  should  have  pleased  Him  to  use  so  greatly  the  pious
teachings  and  example  of  our  dear  sister,  Mrs.  Spurgeon,
to  the  quickening  and  fostering  of  the  Divine  life  in  the
hearts  of  her  twin  sons."

But  doubtless  the  greatest  blessing,  the  most   unfailing


<
o
o


PI

G


'^1  ^  '» ;


•  1    tj!'i'


'fit


^i-:::

'^^.


X

o

6
o

D


!?feS%l


38        WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

solace  and  alleviation  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  invalid  seclusion
which  was  ever  bestowed  upon  her,  was  that  which  arose
from  her  many  years  of  loving  service  for  the  Book  Fund.
The  story  of  this  inspired  work  we  must  rviserve  to  speak
of  in  a  separate  chapter.


CHAPTER    IV.

A   TREE   OF   THE    LORD's   OWN    PLANTING.

'T^HE  inception  of  the  Book  Fund  scheme  dates  from  the
-*-      summer  of  1875.

In  that  year  Mr.  Spurgeon  finished  the  first  volume  of
his  Lectures  to  my  Students.  Lying  on  the  couch  in  her
husband's  study,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  eagerly  perused  the  proof-
sheets.

"  How  do  you  like  it  ?  "  asked  the  pastor.

"  I  wish,"  was  the  enthusiastic  reply,  "  that  I  could
place  it  in  the  hands  of  every  minister  in  England."

The  author  of  John  Ploughman  was  nothing  if  not
practical.  He  promptly  struck  the  iron  while  it  was  hot
by  rejoining,  "  Then  why  not  do  so  ?     How  much  will  you

Now  it  just  happened  that  in  a  drawer  upstairs  was  a
pile  of  crown-pieces,  which  it  had  been  a  kind  of  hobby
with  Mrs.  Spurgeon  to  withdraw  from  circulation  whenever
they  fell  into  her  hands.  She  little  guessed  all  through
those  years  for  what  purpose  the  cumbrous,  medal-like
coins  were  being  reser\^ed  !  She  went  to  her  hoard,  and
counted  the  money  out.  There  was  exactly  sufficient  to
pay  for  one  hundred  copies  of  her  husband's  book.  She
at  once  resolved  to  offer  the  treasured  coins  to  the  Lord,
and  "in  that  moment  .  .  .  the  Book  Fund  was  inaugurated."

The  next  number  of  the  Sword  and  Trowel  contained  an
invitation  to  poor  Baptist  ministers  to  apply  for  gratuitous
copies  of  Lectures  to  my  Students.  They  responded  so
freely,  that  Mrs.  Spurgeon  distributed  two  hundred  of  the


MRS.   C.    H.   SPURGEON  39

volumes   instead   of    the   one   hundred    she    had    at    first
contemplated.

The  next  month  Mr.  Spurgeon  inserted  in  his  magazine
a  brief  appeal  to  friends  who  would  like  to  help  in  this
work  of  free  circulation.  "  Cannot  something  be  done  to
provide  ministers  with  books  ? "  he  asked.  "  If  they
cannot  be  made  rich  in  money,  they  ought  not,  for  their
people's  sake,  to  be  starved  in  soul."

This  resulted  in  a  generous  response,  and  the  scheme
was  soon  officially  known  as  "  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund."

It  was  an  interesting  coincidence  that  just  about  the
time  that  the  pastor's  invalid  wife  was  watching  the  early
development  of  her  plan  for  helping  needy  ministers,  she
was  also  carefully  cherishing  a  tiny  lemon-plant  grown
from  a  pip  placed  some  months  before  in  a  garden-pot.
The  idea  suggested  itself  that  the  seedling  was  a  fitting
emblem  of  her  embryo  Fund,  and  thenceforward  the  two
were  inseparably  connected  in  her  mind.

At  first  this  notion  was  the  source  of  a  good  deal  of
merry  teasing  from  the  mirthful  twins,  who  would  saucily
ask  whether  any  lemons  had  yet  appeared.  But  "  You'll
see,"  answered  their  mother,  "  the  Lord  will  send  me
hundreds  of  pounds  for  this  work  yet."

Friends  outside  were  rather  charmed  with  the  poetical
fancy,  and  would  send  donations  as  ''  A  few  drops  of  water
for  the  lemon-plant,"  or  "  Another  leaf  for  your  tree."

In  little  over  twelve  months  the  tiny  tree  boasted  no
less  than  twenty-one  leaves,  and  one  of  the  boys,  who  was
clever  enough  to  not  only  draw  but  engrave,  executed  a
small  picture  of  it  for  insertion  in  the  magazine.  And  the
growth  of  the  Fund  kept  pace  with  the  plant.

The  receiving  of  the  gifts  of  subscribers,  the  sending
out  of  the  parcels  of  books,  and  the  arrival  of  the  letters
of  delighted  thanks  which  were  evoked,  combined  to  con-
stitute a  source  of  perpetual  interest  and  pleasure  to  the
invalid.  "  The  gold,"  she  wrote,  "  has  seemed  to  lose  its
earthly  dross  when  consecrated  to  Him,  and  has  often
shed  a  light  as  of  Heaven's  own  golden  streets  upon  my
pathway  !  Coming  in  seasons  of  great  pain  and  suffering,
these  gifts  have  been  like  precious  anodynes  to  soothe


40       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

my  weary  spirit  and  hush  my  restless  thoughts.  .  ,  .  They
have  almost  charmed  away  my  sorrow,  by  teaching  me
to  plan  for  others' joy,  and  .  ,  .  leading  to  blessed  commerce
with  Heaven,  by  supplying  frequent  occasions  for  prayer
and  praise."

One  little  girl  wrote  : — "  Dear  Mrs.  Spurgeon, — I  shall
be  eleven  years  old  to-morrow,  and  papa  says  it  will  be
your  silver  wedding-day.  I  have  not  a  present  worth
sending  you,  but  I  should  hke  to  send  you  half-a-crown
towards  a  book  for  some  poor  minister  who  cannot  buy
books  for  himself.  My  papa  is  a  minister,  and  I  know
how  pleased  he  is  if  we  make  him  a  present  of  a  book,  but
mamma  says  there  are  scores  of  ministers  who  have  no
one  to  make  them  presents  of  books  except  you.  I  wish
I  could  send  you  ever  so  much  more.  Papa  and  mamma
hope  you  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  will  live  to  see  your  golden
wedding.  I  shall  be  grown  up  by  that  time,  and  perhaps
have  more  money  ;  then  I  can  give  you  what  will  send
more  than  one  book.     Yours  affectionately,  Nellie."

Several  times  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  helped  by  large  gifts
of  books  and  cards  from  publishers  ;  and  one  friend  sent
an  annual  Easter  Gift  of  a  generous  quantity  of  note-
paper  and  envelopes,  all  prettily  stamped  with  initials  and
address,  for  the  Book  Fund  correspondence.  The  same
friend  subsequently  sent  parcels  of  stationery  for  enclosure
with  the  books  for  the  use  of  poor  ministers.

The  year  Frances  Havergal  died,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  decided
to  send  out  as  long  as  she  could  afford  it  the  poetess'
beautiful  little  work  on  Consecration — that  "  pearl  of
books,"  as  Mrs.  Spurgeon  called  it — as  an  extra  blessing
with  every  parcel  dispatched.

In  the  year  1880  the  lemon-tree  was  found  to  have
attained  a  height  of  seven  feet,  while  the  Book  Fund  had
distributed  considerably  over  20,000  volumes.

Very  touching  were  many  of  the  letters  of  application
and  tributes  of  thanks  which  found  their  way  to  Mrs.
Spurgeon's  hands.  The  appalling  fact  was  revealed  that
many  ministers'  incomes  were  far  below  a  hundred  a  year  !
No  wonder  that  such  confessions  as  the  following  were
common : —


MR.   AND   MRS.   SPURGEON    IN   THEIR  GARDEN.


42        WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

"  I  have  little  to  spend  on  books.  My  salary  is  only
£60  per  annum,  so  that  when  a  new  book  comes  it  is  like
bread  to  the  hungry.  I  do  not  say  this  to  make  you
think  I  am  a  martyr — if  so  I  am  a  very  happy  one,  for
I  have  chosen  willingly  Christ's  service,  and  my  very  wants
are  a  means  of  grace  to  me."

"  Dear  Mrs,  Spurgeon, — I  have  this  morning  enjoyed
the  almost  forgotten  luxury  of  inspecting  and  handling  a
parcel  of  new  books.  ...  As  I  sat  with  your  books
spread  before  me,  a  gleam  of  the  old  happiness  returned,
and  I  was  glad  to  find  that  my  old  love  had  not  been  quite
starved  nor  crushed  to  death."

Another,  as  warmly,  but  somewhat  less  sadly,  wrote  : —
"  The  parcel  of  books  has  arrived  safely.  No  words  of
mine  can  express  my  gratitude  to  you  for  so  rich  a  gift.
It  is  the  most  valuable  present  I  have  received  during  my
twenty  years'  ministry.  .  .  .  May  the  Lord  Jesus  bless  you
more  and  more,  and  spare  you  many,  many  years,  and
send  you  friends  and  give  you  joy  in  seeing  this  noble
work  growing  by  your  hands  !  If  those  who  contribute
of  their  wealth  only  knew  the  gladness  awakened  in  our
hearts,  the  stimulus  and  food  supplied  to  weary,  jaded
minds,  the  instruction  and  precious  truth  which  find  their
way  into  our  sermons,  and  which  in  turn  cheer  and  bless
many  other  souls  through  these  noble  presents,  they  would
feel  themselves  more  than  recompensed  even  in  this
world,  and  before  the  Master  shall  say  '  Well  done !  '  "

But  there  were  some  that  suggested,  in  their  very  grati-
tude, needs  more  urgent  even  than  the  want  of  books.
For  example,  one  poor  minister  says : —

"  When  I  witness  the  self-denial,  and  hard,  unremitting
labour  to  which  my  wife  cheerfully  submits  herself  to
keep  our  household  moving  in  comfort  in  the  sphere  God
has  given,  I  cannot  with  any  pleasure  add  to  her  difficulty
by  purchasing  the  books  I  often  covet,  though  this
doubtless  hinders  the  freshness  and  variety  of  my  ministry."

Another,  with  still  greater  frankness,  wrote : — "  I  never
dare  now  to  think  of  a  new  book.  Two  or  three  times  I
have  begun  to  save  a  little  money  towards  the  purchase
of  a  long-coveted  work,  but  every  time  it  has  gone  for


MRS.   C.   H.   SPUKGEON  43

sometliing  else.  John,  or  little  Harry  or  Walter,  must
have  boots,  or  mother  is  ill,  or  the  girls'  frocks  are  getting
shabby,  and  so  the  precious  volumes  are  still  unattainable."

Glimpses  into  the  lives  of  poor  ministers  as  letters  such
as  these  afforded  suggested  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  mind  the
need  for  another  fund.  Thus  was  presently  started  the
Pastors'  Aid  Society,  which,  running  side  by  side  with  the
Book  Fund,  assisted  poor  ministers  with  grants  of  money
in  times  of  special  adversity,  as  well  as  of  clothing  both
new  and  second-hand.

When  it  came  to  be  known  that  sometimes  a  pastor's
children  were  forced  to  lie  in  bed  while  their  clothes  were
washed  because  they  did  not  possess  a  change,  friends
came  forward  who  thought  it  a  joy  to  subscribe  to  this
Fund  in  both  coin  and  kind,  as  well  as  to  that  for  providing
books.

The  letters  of  thanks  these  gifts  evoked  were  even  more
touching  than  those  received  in  response  to  the  parcels
of  books,  though  revealing  a  most  deplorable  state  of  things
in  some  cases.

A  friend  in  Scotland  having  sent  a  regular  supply  of
soft  woollen  shawls,  one  of  these  was,  said  the  recipient,
"  a  strangely  acceptable  present,  as  you  will  see  when  I
tell  you  that  last  winter  I  so  much  needed  a  large  scarf
or  plaid  such  as  Scotchmen  wear,  that  my  wife  cut  her
shawl  (of  the  same  kind  as  the  one  now  sent,  but  a  different
colour)  to  make  this  said  wrap,  and  now,  as  the  winter
is  upon  us  and  she  requires  such  a  comfort,  it  comes  !  "

One  might  indeed  devote  a  whole  chapter  to  incidents
showing  how  marvellously  in  ntimberless  instances  did  the
presents  sent  fit  in  detail  the  needs  of  the  particular  persons
to  whom  they  were  dispatched.

"  You  must  have  been  Divinely  directed  what  to  send,"
wrote  one  grateful  recipent.  "  Only  about  ten  days  ago
my  dear  wife  said  tliat  she  really  ought  to  have  a  water-
l)roof  cloak  ;  we  both  agreed  that  it  was  quite  needful,
but  how  to  get  one  was  the  difiiculty  ;  when,  lo  !  on
opening  your  parcel,  almost  the  first  thing  we  came  across
was  the  very  garment  we  had  been  talking  about,  and  it
fits  splendidly  !  "


44       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

"Was  this,"  asks  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  "a  mere  matter  of
chance,  think  you  ?  "

Another  time  she  wrote  : — "  A  mother  put  on  a  dress
which  I  had  sent  her,  and  found  that,  i^  measurements
had  been  taken,  its  proportions  could  not  have  been  more
correct.  Her  children  were  in  the  room,  all  delighted  to
see  how  nice  she  looked,  when  her  eldest  girl  thoughtfully
said,  '  Mother,  what  puzzles  me  is,  how  Mrs.  Spurgeon
knows  our  fit  for  boots  and  dresses,  and  all  those  things
she  sends  us  ;  it  is  as  if  they  had  been  made  for  us  !  '
'  My  darling,'  was  the  answer,  '  Mrs.  Spurgeon  herself
could  not  know,  but  our  God  does,  and  He  put  it  into  her
heart  to  send  just  the  things  suitable  for  us.'  "

One  more  instance,  and  surely  our  readers  will  be  ready
to  agree  with  Mrs.  Spurgeon  that  the  Father  by  whom
even  the  hairs  of  our  head  are  numbered  was  specially
watching — if  there  could  be  such  a  thing  as  speciality
with  the  Infinite  ! — over  the  distribution  of  the  bounty
committed  to  her  trust.

There  reached  her,  on  one  occasion,  a  huge  package  of
gentlemen's  clothes,  the  whole  of  an  extensive  and  valuable
wardrobe,  sufficient  in  quantity  to  supply  substantial
outfits  to  six  or  seven  poor  pastors.  It  was  unsolicited
and  unexpected,  and  at  the  moment  Mrs.  Spurgeon  felt
rather  at  a  loss  as  to  its  disposal.  But  almost  immediately
after  came  letters  of  appeal  from  six  different  applicants,
disclosing  such  pressing  need  that  the  almoner  could  but
exclaim,  "  The  Lord  must  have  meant  these  coats  and  vests
and  beautiful  under-garments  for  these  special  people  !  "

One  of  those  who  shared  in  this  bounty  wrote  : — "  I  had
been  asking  God  to  send  me  a  pair  of  new  shoes  and  a  pair
of  trousers,  and  how  to  begin  to  thank  Him  I  do  not  know."

Besides  clothing,  the  money  gifts  disbursed  amounted  to
an  average  of  £350  per  annum,  and  •  represented  assistance
in  every  variety  of  need.  Doctors'  bills  were  paid  in
innumerable  cases,  food  and  medicine  procured,  comforts
provided  for  the  new  baby  and  its  mother,  or  the  little
gathered  flower  laid  decently  away  under  the  turf  without
privation  to  those  who  were  left.  How  many  heavy
burdens  were  lightened,  how  many  precious  lives  prolonged


A


MRS.   C.    H.   SPURGEON  45

by  the  timely  help  of  the  Pastors'  Aid  Fund,  He  only
knows  from  whom  its  inspiration  came.

And  still  the  lemon-tree  flourished.  "  It  is  brought  up
to  the  house,  ma'am,"  said  the  gardener  one  day.  "  It's
making  a  deal  of  new  wood."  While  to  the  Book  Fund,
and  the  Pastors'  Aid  Fund,  and  the  clothing  supply  was
added  another  branch  of  usefulness,  the  regular  grant  of
The  Sword  and  Trowel  to  a  number  of  poor  ministers
unable  to  afford  to  buy  it  themselves  ;  and  other  off-shoots
were  still  to  follow.

The  year  1878  was  a  season  of  great  suffering  to  Mrs.
Spurgeon.  Her  chronic  malady  reached  a  crisis  at  that
time,  through  which  it  at  one  period  seemed  doubtful  if
she  would  survive.

It  was  during  these  days  of  pain  and  darkness  that  she
who  had  so  often  been  strangely  and  sweetly  comforted  by
unlooked-for  messages  from  her  Heavenly  Father,  received
one  of  the  loveliest  through  the  simple  vehicle  of  an  oaken
log  burning  upon  her  fire.

After  describing  her  trouble  of  mind  one  very  gloomy
day,  as  she  strove  in  vain  to  understand  what  seemed  the
hard  dealings  of  Providence  in  permitting  her  service  to
be  so  often  hindered  by  ill-health,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  goes  on
to  say  : —

"  For  a  while  silence  reigned  in  the  little  room  ....
Suddenly  I  heard  a  sweet,  soft  sound,  a  little  clear  musical
note,  like  the  tender  trill  of  a  robin  beneath  my  window.
'  What  can  it  be  ?  '  I  said  to  my  companion,  who  was  dozing
in  the  firelight ;  '  surely  no  bird  can  be  singing  out  there
at  this  time  of  the  year  and  night  !  '  We  listened,  and
again  heard  the  faint,  plaintive  notes,  so  sweet,  so  melodi-
ous, yet  mysterious  enough  to  provoke  for  a  moment  our
undisguised  wonder.  Presently  my  friend  exclaimed,  *  It
comes  from  the  log  on  the  fire  !  '  and  we  soon  ascertained
that  her  surprised  assertion  was  correct.  The  fire  was
letting  loose  the  imprisoned  music  from  the  old  oak's
inmost  heart.  Perchance  he  had  garnered  up  this  song
in  the  days  when  all  went  well  with  him,  when  birds  twit-
tered merrily  on  his  branches,  and  the  soft  sunlight  flecked
his  tender  leaves  with  gold  ;  but  he  had  grown  old  since


46       WOMEN    WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

then,  and  hardened  ;  ring  after  ring  of  knotty  growth  had
sealed  up  the  long-forgotten  melody  until  the  fierce  tongues
of  the  flame  came  to  consume  his  callousness  and  the
vehement  heat  of  the  fire  wrung  from  him  at  once  a  song
and  a  sacrifice.

"  *  Oh  !  '  thought  I,  *  when  the  fire  of  affliction  draws
songs  of  praise  from  us,  then  indeed  are  we  purified  and
our  God  glorified  !  Perhaps  some  of  us  are  like  this  old
oak  log — cold,  hard,  and  insensible  ;  we  should  give  forth
no  melodious  sounds  were  it  not  for  the  fire  which  kindles
round  us,  and  releases  tender  notes  of  trust  in  Him,  and
cheerful  compliance  with  His  will.  As  I  mused,  the  fire
burned  and  my  soul  found  sweet  comfort  in  the  parable
so  strangely  set  forth  before  me.  Singing  in  the  fire  !
Yes,  God  helping  us,  if  that  is  the  only  way  to  get  harmony
out  of  these  hard,  apathetic  hearts,  let  the  furnace  be
heated  seven  times  hotter  than  before.' "

Thus  did  the  gracious,  poetic  soul  draw  honey  from  the
humblest  flowers  that  bloomed  around  her  path.

Once  more  the  suffering  abated,  and  eagerly  did  Mrs.
Spurgeon  resume  her  beloved  work.  Year  by  year  was  pub-
lished the  cheering  record  of  growing  usefulness.  Ministers
of  all  denominations  were  assisted.  In  one  year,  amongst
thousands  of  others,  applications  were  received  from  and
granted  to  Quakers,  Waldensians,  Irvingites,  Moravians,
and  a  Unitarian.  Even  members  of  the  Anglican  section
of  the  Church  of  England  were  not  loth  to  avail  themselves
of  the  opportunity  of  enriching  their  minds  with  Lectures
to  my  Students  or  The  Treasiiry  of  David,  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon
records  the  fact  that  some  of  the  most  courteous  and  grace-
fully appreciative  letters  of  thanks  she  received  were  those
from  clergymen.

The  countries  to  which  parcels  of  books  and  packets  of
sermons  were  dispatched  were  as  diversified  and  wide
apart  as  the  religious  views  of  the  recipients — India,
America,  China,  Labrador,  Jamaica,  the  West  Indies,
Natal,  Newfoundland,  Buenos  Ayres,  every  comer  of  the
globe  was  visited  by  these  ever-welcome  gifts.  The  cor-
respondence entailed  was  enormous,  the  average  number
of  letters  received  per  month  being  about  five  hundred,


MRS.   C.    H.   SPURGEON  47

and  once  the  total  for  four  weeks  reached  the  amazing
number  of  seven  hundred  and  fifty-five.

As  in  the  annals  of  every  work  carried  on  in  childlike
faith  from  the  pure  motive  of  love  to  God  and  desire  to
help  the  needy,  the  story  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund
abounds  in  instances  of  gifts  that  came,  unasked,  save  of
Him ;  sweet  surprises,  and  timely  deliverances  from
threatened  debt  which  cannot  be  ascribed  to  anything  but
Divine  intervention.  Donations  of  £25  or  £50  from
individuals  were  comparatively  common,  and  on  one
memorable  occasion  a  friend  called  with  a  cheque  for
£100,  just  before  the  arrival  of  a  quarterly  account  for
expenditure  so  unexpectedly  heavy  that  a  sleepless  night
of  anxiety  would  have  been  the  inevitable  result  but  for
this  merciful  provision.  "  Before  I  called,  He  answered,"
is  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  thankful  record.  "  And  though  trouble
was  not  very  distant,  He  had  said,  '  It  shall  not  come  nigh
thee.'  O,  my  soul,  bless  thou  the  Lord  and  forget  not
this  His  loving  '  benefit !  '  "

By  the  close  of  the  year  1880  the  lemon- tree  had  reached
the  height  of  seven  feet.  It  had  also  developed  some  sharp
thorns,  which  found  a  parallel  in  sundry  experiences  in
connection  with  the  Book  Fund,  causing  its  owner  to
exclaim,  "  Dear  emblem  tree,  are  you  so  true  to  your
mystical  character  as  all  that  ?  "

Some  of  these  prickings  were  inflicted  by  the  donors  of
books  from  their  own  libraries.  There  were  instances,  of
course,  in  which  most  valuable  additions  were  by  this
means  made  to  the  parcels  sent  out,  but  there  was  the
usual  tendency  among  the  "  benevolent  "  to  clear  lumber
off  their  shelves  by  dispatching  it  to  Mrs,  Spurgeon.

The  lady  almoner  thought  the  depths  of  disappointment
from  this  source  had  been  reached  when  a  French  Grammar,
Mangnall's  Questions,  and  Advice  to  a  Newly-Married  Pair
had  been  received  as  aids  to  pulpit  preparation.  But
soon  after  came  The  Complete  Housewife  and  Accomplished
Gentlewoman's  Companion,  published  in   1766.

"  After  this,"  she  says,  "  I  thought  I  might  have  borne
anything,  but  to-day  has  brought  me  a  sharper  experi-
ence. ...    I  had  received    an   anonymous  note,  bidding


48       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

me  expect  the  arrival  of  a  case  of  books  for  the  '  Clerical
Library,'  '  Carriage  paid  as  far  as  possible.'  With  much
anxiety  I  awaited  the  advent  of  the  case.  When  it  made
its  appearance  its  size  was  so  imposing  that  I  did  not
grudge  the  nine  shillings  I  had  to  pay  for  transit,  con-
fidently hoping  to  find  many  choice  treasures  in  the  con-
tents      But    the   case   was   chiefly   filled  with   old

hymn-books,  works  by  Unitarians,  and  books  against
Believers'  Baptism."

Mrs.  Spurgeon's  justifiable  chagrin  at  such  a  slap  in  the
face  might  well  be  imagined,  especially  as  she  was  com-
pelled to  disappoint  several  longing  applicants,  to  whom
she  had  promised  a  share  in  the  hoped-for  treasure.

Occasionall}^  also,  painful  rebuffs  were  deaJt  to  her
kind  heart  even  by  those  whom  she  desired  to  benefit.
A  few  ministers  so  strangely  misunderstood  the  spirit  of
her  service  that  the  gifts  were  either  "  claimed  as  a  right
or  disdained  as  a  charity."  But,  after  all,  the  thorns  on
the  tree  were  few  and  far  between  compared  with  its  foliage
and  flowers.

The  last  record  we  have  of  the  lemon-tree  is  in  1895,
when  it  had  reached  a  height  of  eleven  feet,  while  it  measiued
seven  feet  across.  The  total  receipts  of  the  Book  Fund
up  to  the  same  date  were  £23,500,  in  addition  to  many
thousands  distributed  through  the  Pastors'  Aid  Fund,
together  with  the  substantial  total  of  the  fund  "  For  General
use  in  the  Lord's  Work,"  and  also  the  value  of  books
and  clothes  given  by  friends.

Writing  at  the  close  of  twenty  years'  labour,  when  a
magnificent  total  of  199,315  volumes  had  been  distributed,
Mrs.  Spurgeon  writes — keeping  up  the  symbolism  between
the  fund  and  the  tree — "  The  great  central  stem  is,  meta-
phorically. The  Book  Fund  itself,  out  of  which  all  the
branches  have  naturally  grown,  and  with  which  they  all
continue  to  be  vitally  connected.  Springing  from  the
main  trunk,  and  almost  rivalling  it  in  strength  and  use-
fulness, is  the  largest  limb  of  the  tree,  which  represents
The  Pastors'  Aid  Fund.  This,  in  its  turn,  has  thrown
out  the  widely-spreading  branch  from  which  the  well-
filled  boxes  of  The  Westwood  Clothing  Society  have  dropped


MRS.   C.  H.   SPURGEON  49

into  many  a  poor  pastor's  home.  Peering  between  the
thickly-interlaced  foliage  I  s]:)y  a  sturdy  bough  bearing
the  inscription  Home  Distribution  of  Sermons,  and  an
equally  vigorous  off-shoot  dedicated  to  The  Circitlaiion  of
Sermons  Abroad,  while  the  topmost  twigs,  on  whicli  /  can
plainly  read  the  words  Foreign  Translations  of  Sermons,
bid  fair  to  rival  in  all  respects  their  older  companions."

Perhaps  we  cannot  do  better  than  close  this  chapter
of  our  sketch  with  a  few  verses  from  the  conclusion  of  a
cheerful  poem  on  the  Book  Fund  and  the  lemon-tree  which
"  darling  son  Tom  "  sent  his  mother  when  he  was  in  New
Zealand.

"From  what  a  very  tiny  seed

The  glorious  Book  Fund  grew  ;
To  what  proportions  it  would  reach

Not  e'en  its  planter  knew.
♦  »  *  *  *

And  now  the  Fund  Tree  firmly  stands
With  shacle,  and  sap,  and  scent ;

A  tree  of  knowledge — all  its  leaves
For  Pastors'  blessing  meant.

Live  on,  live  on,  dear  lemon-tree

Be  never  moribund.
Fit  emblem  from  the  very  first

Of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Fund."


CHAPTER    V.

WALKING   ALONE.

OVER  the  closing  years  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  life  space
forbids  us  to  linger.
On  January  31,  1892,  the  light  of  her  eyes,  the  chosen
of  her  youth,  and  the  no  less  fond  lover  of  her  grey  hairs,
was  taken  from  her.  It  is  not  for  us  to  venture  to  describe
the  anguish  of  that  bereavement ;  but  many  years  before,
in  one  of  those  pictures  or  parables  by  means  of  which
this  sensitively  organized  woman  so  many  times  received
spiritual  teaching,  a  foreshadowing  had  been  given  her  of

D


so       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

the  manner  in  which  her  soul  should  be  sustained  when  the
dreaded  moment  came.

At  the  time  of  her  great  sorrow,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  re-
called as  almost  prophetic  the  words  iii  which  she  had
recorded  a  memorable  natural  phenomenon  of  the  year
1881,  during  one  of  her  husband's  health-seeking  visits  to
the  south  of  France.

"  At  3.30  P.M.,"  she  wrote — the  exact  date  is  not  given,
but  the  circumstance  will  be  in  the  memory  of  many  of
our  readers — "  midnight  had  taken  the  place  of  day,  and
spread  its  sable  \vings  over  the  earth  prematurely.  Nothing
could  be  seen  all  around  but  black,  lowering  masses  of
dense  darkness,  which  hung  like  fimeral  palls  from  the
sky,  and  now  and  again  lifted  their  heavy  folds  only  to
reveal  a  deeper  gloom  beyond.  Not  a  ray  of  heaven's
light  pierced  this  dreadful  overshadowing,  and  a  stillness
more  awesome  than  that  of  real  night  hushed  all  familiar
sounds.

"  Into  this  dismal  murkiness  came  two  letters  from
Mentone,  telling  of  a  placid  sea,  warm  breezes,  and  clear,
bright  skies — letters  so  full  of  joy  and  good  news  and
glad  delight,  that  for  the  moment  the  unbidden  tears
would  gather  from  the  sheer  longing  I  had  to  be  in  the
sunshine  too  !  But  when  the  shutters  were  closed  and
the  curtains  drawn,  and  the  dreary  scene  without  excluded,
I  found  I  still  had  light  in  my  dwelling,  for,  like  a  star,
better  seen  from  the  depths  of  a  well  than  from  higher
ground,  shone  the  conspicuous  mercy  that  my  beloved
was  spared  this  doleful  experience.  I  knew  that  the
fearful  darkness  could  not  spread  its  black  wings  as  far  as
the  Riviera,  and  I  blessed  God  for  the  comfortable  cer-
tainty that  *  over  there  '  the  beauty  and  splendour  of  an
unclouded  sky  were  doing  their  sweet,  restful  work  on  a
tired  heart  and  brain.  So  my  gloom  was  dispelled  by  the
light  of  my  husband's  happiness,  and  the  sunbeams
imprisoned  in  his  precious  letters  had  travelled  a  thousand
miles  to  turn  my  night  into  day  !

"  I  wonder  if  this  is  a  faint  picture  of  the  comfort  where-
with God  consoles  His  bereaved  children  by  enabling  them
to  realize  the  unspeakable  blessedness  of  those  who  have


MRS.   C.   H.    SPURGEON  51

'  gone  before.'  Temporary  separations  by  distance  are
but  the  foreshadowing  of  a  sterner  parting,  which,  sooner
or  later,  must  divide  us  from  those  whose  love  seems  to  be
our  very  life.  Happy  they  who  can  look  beyond  the  grim
darkness  of  such  a  sorrow  to  the  unsullied  light  and  bliss
which  the  hope  of  eternal  reunion  affords  !  "

This  was  ever  the  one  unbroken  string  of  her  harp  of
joy,  in  which,  like  the  pathetic  figure  of  "  Hope  "  con-
ceived by  Mr.  G.  F.  Watts,  the  heart-wning  widow  still
found  heavenly  music.  We  see  the  same  thought  con-
stantly recurring  in  all  she  wrote  on  the  subject  of  her
great  loss  through  the  twelve  solitary  years  that  remained
of  her  life.

Before  long  she  was  able  to  testify  :  "  In  my  deep  and
increasing  loneliness  I  still  found  sweetest  comfort  in  praising
God  for  His  will  concerning  my  beloved  and  myself,  and
have  even  been  able  to  thank  Him  for  taking  His  dear
servant  from  this  sorrowful  land  of  sin  and  darkness  to  the
bliss  and  glory  of  His  eternal  presence.  .  .  .  Many  a
time,  when  the  weight  of  my  dreadful  loss  seemed  as  if  it
must  crush  me,  it  has  been  lifted  by  the  remembrance  that
in  heaven  my  dear  one  is  now  perfectly  praising  his  Lord,
and  that  if  I  can  sing  too,  I  shall  even  here  on  earth  be
joining  him  in  holy  service  and  acceptable  worship."

It  had  been  a  source  of  joy  to  the  devoted  couple  that
on  Mr.  Spurgeon's  last  visit  to  Mentone  his  wife  had
accompanied  him  ;  thus  their  wish  of  many  unsatisfied
years  was  granted,  and  together  they  gazed  upon  those
scenes  of  beauty  which  previously  Mrs.  Spurgeon  had  only
known  through  her  husband's  description  of  them.  But
this  added  poignancy  to  the  grief  of  the  one  left  behind,
when,  staying  for  a  while  as  the  guest  of  Mr.  Hanbury  in
his  palatial  home  at  La  Martola,  she  constantly  came  upon
new  treasures — something  "  more  rare,  costly  or  beautiful  "
than  she  had  ever  seen  before,  and  her  first  impulse  was
to  f.o  and  tell  him  about  it,  and  bring  him  to  share  her
pleasure.  Then,  remembering  that  he  was  gone,  her  grief
would  awaken  again  with  terrible  intensity,  till  it  was
borne  in  upon  her  that  our  Lord's  estimate  of  true  affection
was  expressed  in  the  words,  "If  ye  loved  Me,  ye  would


52       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

rejoice,"  and  she  strove  to  calm  the  passionate  yearning
of  her  spirit  by  dwelHng  on  the  thought  that  no  matter
how  she  longed  to  share  with  him  the  loveliness  all  around
her,  he  was  "  with  Christ,  which  is  far  httter."

In  1895  the  balm  of  Divine  healing  had  so  far  accom-
plished its  blessed  work  that  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  able  to
write  :  "  The  thought  of  my  dear  one's  happiness  in  Heaven
alwaj'S  brings  soothing  to  my  heart,  be  its  pain  never  so
fierce.  There  is  a  likeness  of  him  in  the  study  just  over
against  where  he  used  to  sit — so  natural,  so  life-like,  that
for  these  three  years  I  have  averted  my  eyes  from  it  when
entering  the  room  rather  than  have  the  fountain  of  tears
and  grief  continually  unlocked.  But  I  am  now  beginning
to  school  myself  to  look  up  in  his  dear  face,  and  say,  with
hands  uplifted  to  God  in  praise,  '  I  give  thee  joy,  beloved,
that  thou  art  with  Him  ! '"

It  was  during  this  year  that  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  while
visiting  Bexhill,  learned  that  the  town  possessed  no  Baptist
Chapel.  It  occurred  to  her  to  busy  herself  in  establishing
one  as  a  memorial  of  her  husband.  Soon,  through  the
instrumentality  of  her  prayers  and  work,  a  school-chapel
was  opened,  and  two  years  later  she  had  the  privilege  of
laying  the  foundation-stone  of  a  handsome  building,
erected  "To  the  glory  of  God,  and  in  perpetual  remembrance
of  her  beloved  husband's  blameless  hfe,  forty  years'  public
ministrj^  and  still  continued  proclamation  of  the  Gospel
by  his  printed  sermons."

In  1899,  on  February?  8,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  held  a  reception
in  the  basement  of  the  Tabernacle,  where,  in  one  day,
she  received  no  less  than  £6,367  towards  the  Rebuilding
Fund.

Thus  the  years  of  separation  wore  on,  cheered  by  the
presence  of  both  her  sons  and  the  love  of  a  ^^dde  circle  of
friends.  Her  constant  companion  was  Miss  E.  H.  Thome,
with  whom  she  enjoyed  a  close  and  happy  intimacy
for  nearly  forty  years.  As  long  as  strength  w^ould  permit
Mrs.  Spurgeon  continued  to  work  for  her  beloved  Book
Fund,  with  its  many  branches,  and  also  to  expend  much
loving  care  upon  the  selection  of  the  daily  texts  for  "  Spur-
geon's  Illustrated  Almanack,"  which  had  been  her  pleasant


From  aj>hoto.  by\


MRS.    SPURGEON.


\_Messrs.  Ai^-etti  iSr"  Z umbra.


54       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

task  for  about  thirty  years.  But  the  special  occupation
of  her  widowhood  was,  of  course,  her  biography  of  her
husband,  to  which  we  have  already  alluded,  a  work  in
four  large  volumes,  in  the  compilation  of  which  she
was  assisted  by  Mr.  Spurgeon's  private  secretary,  Mr.
Harrald.

In  the  summer  of  1903  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  seized  by
the  malady,  the  result  of  a  chill,  from  which  she  never
really  recovered.  She  did  not  leave  her  bed  again.  Early
in  September  it  was  believed  that  every  day  might  be  her
last,  yet  she  lingered  for  nearly  two  months.

Miss  Thorne  was  her  constant  and  devoted  nurse.
One  day,  when  growing  steadily  weaker,  the  invalid  asked,
"  Whom  shall  I  see  next  ?  "  referring  to  the  many  friends
who  craved  the  privilege  of  a  farewell  visit.

"  Whom  would  you  like  to  see,  darling  ?  "  inquired
Miss  Thome.

Her  face  radiant  with  deathless  love,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  at
once  exclaimed,  "  My  husband  !  "

The  weary  waiting  time  was  fast  drawing  to  its  close.
On  October  17  the  Rev.  Thomas  Spurgeon  received  from
his  dying  mother  her  blessing  for  himself  and  his  twin
brother.  "  The  blessing — the  double  blessing  of  your
father's  God  be  upon  you  !  "  she  murmured,  and  bade  him
a  tender  farewell.

Later  still,  with  clasped  hands,  she  breathed,  "  Blessed
Jesus  !     Blessed  Jesus !     I  can  see  the  King  in  His  Glory  !  "

In  the  forenoon  of  Thursday,  October  22,  1903,  a  notice
was  placed  outside  the  Tabernacle  to  announce  that
"Mrs.    C.    H.    Spurgeon    entered    Heaven    at    8.30    this


mornmg."


The  crowded  funeral  service,  which  was  conducted  by
the  Rev.  Archibald  Brown  and  the  Rev.  C.  B,  Sawday,
was  divested,  as  far  as  possible,  of  the  usual  sombre
trappings  of  grief.  No  black  horses  drew  the  many  mourn-
ing carriages,  no  crape  or  hat-bands  were  seen,  and  there
was  no  black  border  to  the  special  sheet  of  hymns.

Concluding  his  touching  and  appropriate  address,  Mr.
Brown  reminded  his  hearers,  in  words  with  which  we  may
fitly  bring  this  sketch  of  a  true  woman  and  devoted  workei


MRS.   C.   H.   SPURGEON  55

to  a  close,  that,  in  the  early  days  of  their  mutual  love,
Mr.  Spurgeon's  frequent  word  to  his  dear  one  would  be —
"  Meet  me  at  the  Palace,"  and  the  Crystal  Fountain  was
the  appointed  spot.

"  The  phrase,"  said  Mr.  Brown,  "  seemed  to  glow  with
prophetic  fire.  The  tryst  is  kept,  and  there  is  glory  at  the
fountain  to-day."


(Bnwm  Bootlj^CucIur.


CHAPTER    I.

'  A   SWEET   AND    PLEASANT   CHILD.*

IT  seems  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  in  the  annals  of
Christian  workers,  in  the  history  of  the  rise  and
progress  of  the  many  rehgious  sects  and  organizations  in
existence  to-day,  the  Booth  family  and  their  achievements
are  absolutely  unique.

Other  reformers  may  have  been  as  enthusiastic  and
capable  as  "  The  General,"  but  none  have  ^^delded  so
mighty  and  far-reaching  a  power  for  the  regeneration  of
the  world.  Many  have  been  unmarried  or  childless,  or  ham-
pered with  a  partner  uncongenial  towards  their  aims  and
ideals.  Thus  their  influence  has  been  limited  to  the  com-
paratively few  with  whom  they  could  come  into  personal
touch,  and  their  work  when  they  were  called  away  passed
into  other  hands  and  the  guidance  of  different  minds.
But  General  Booth,  enabled  by  the  perfect  sympathy  of
his  wife  to  bring  up  his  large  family  in  complete  accord
with  the  one  absorbing  motive  of  his  life,  has,  as  it  were,
extended  himself  into  every  part  of  the  world.  His  own
flesh  and  blood,  inspired  by  his  own  thoughts  and  feelings,
rendering  him  as  loyal  obedience  as  the  very  members  of
his  own  body,  are  carrying  on  his  work  all  over  the  civilized
globe.  The  Salvation  Army  resembles  a  huge  banyan- tree,
of  which  every  branch  springing  from  the  parent  stem

56


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  57

strikes  roots  into  the  earth  and  shoots  forth  branches  of
its  own  as  an  independent  tree  while  still  in  living  connection
with  the  main  trunk.

We  cannot  all  be  banyan-trees, — God  has  a  place  and  a
use  for  plants  and  shrubs  of  every  kind, — but  we  must
perforce  admire  this  colossal  and  beneficent  growth,  and
one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  fruitful  of  the  offspring
stems  was  the  consecrated  life  of  the  General's  second
daughter,  Emma,  afterwards  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker,  widely
known  as  "  The  Consul."

Born  in  i860,  Emma  Booth's  birth  and  infancy  were
singularly  coincident  with  her  mother's  first  printed  ex-
position and  personal  example  of  the  right  of  women,  if
so  called,  to  publicly  expound  the  Scriptures.

A  very  short  time  before  this  little  daughter  saw  the
light,  Mrs.  Booth's  mind  had  been  deeply  exercised  in
producing  a  pamphlet  in  defence  of  an  American  woman-
evangelist  whose  work  had  been  the  subject  of  hostile
criticism.  When  the  baby  was  but  three  months  old,
the  mother  made  her  debut  in  her  husband's  pulpit,  de-
livered a  sermon,  and  thus  began  her  own  career  as  a
preacher.  From  that  time  forward  her  thoughts  were
filled  with  her  new  work,  and  if  ever  an  infant  may  be
considered  to  have  imbibed  any  particular  tendency  of
disposition  witli  its  earliest  natural  sustenance,  Emma
Booth  must  have  thus  drawn  into  her  veins  a  desire  to
spread  the  Gospel.

In  common  with  other  members  of  this  remarkable
family,  little  Emma  professed  conversion  at  an  extremely
tender  age,  and  the  really  serious  view  which  she  took  of
her  responsibilities  may  be  judged  from  the  fact  that  even
her  dolls  were  thencefonvard  condemned  to  a  severely
Puritanical  style  of  dress.  "  I  feel  that  we  must  be  so
careful,"  said  the  small  mother  to  a  friend  who  vainly
tempted  her  with  the  offer  of  a  flounce  to  a  doll's  frock,
"  even  in  trifles  like  that.  We  must  not  even  dress  our
dollies  in  worldly  clothes."

She  was  exceedingly  fond  of  these  said  dolls,  never-
theless, and  one  of  the  handsomest  she  possessed  was
given  her  under  very  interesting  circumstances.


58       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

Among  Emma's  mates  at  a  small  day-school  which  for
a  time  she  attended  was  a  motherless  child  of  somewhat
deficient  intellect,  who,  because  of  her  general  unattractive-
ness,  had  become  the  object  of  the  derision  and  persecution
of  her  thoughtless  school-fellows.  It  was  a  touching  proof
of  the  maternal  tenderness  of  Emma's  heart,  and  an  earnest
of  her  future  work  among  the  uncared-for  masses,  that
she  soon  took  this  poor  little  creature  under  her  wing,
washed  her  face,  did  her  hair,  and  defended  her  from  the
teasing  to  which  she  had  previously  been  subjected.  The
large  doll  above  mentioned  was  a  gift  from  this  child's
father,  in  token  of  his  gratitude  for  Emma's  kindness  to
his  little  one.

Some  years  later,  but  while  still  in  her  early  teens,
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Booth  allowed  this  daughter  to  have  a  live
protege  in  place  of  her  ere  while  beloved  dolls.

To  comfort  the  last  moments  of  a  poor  woman  whom
she  had  been  in  the  habit  of  visiting,  Emma  promised  to
look  after  her  youngest  child,  a  boy  of  about  two  years  old.
Being  permitted  to  have  the  little  fellow  in  her  own  care
under  her  father's  roof,  the  young  girl  spared  no  trouble
in  faithfully  fulfilling  her  trust.  She  even  washed  his
little  socks  ^^dth  her  own  hands,  and  when  he  was  restless
at  night  would  walk  up  and  down  the  room  with  him  in
her  arms  that  no  one  else  in  the  house  might  be  disturbed.
Through  her  loving  tact  the  child  became  in  course  of  time
a  permanent  inmate  of  the  General's  home,  and  was  treated
as  one  of  the  family.  He  is  now  the  "  Major  Secunda,"
one  of  the  Army's  medical  officers  in  India,

It  is  needless  to  say  that,  when  necessity  arose,  Emma
devotedly  mothered  her  own  small  sisters  and  brothers.
"  I  can  safely  leave  all  the  younger  children  in  her  and
Willie's  charge,"  \wote  Mrs.  Booth,  when  the  little  girl
was  only  about  eleven  years  old.

At  this  age,  being  not  quite  satisfied  with  the  complete-
ness of  her  earlier  conversion,  Emma  once  more  gave  her-
self to  God  and  His  service.  Although,  owing  to  excessive
nervousness  and  timidity,  she  did  not  speak  in  public  or
to  adults  until  quite  grown-up,  she  began  to  hold  meet-
ings for  children  in  her  own  home  when  only  thirteen  years


EMMA   BOOTH   PRAYING   IN    THE   COTTAGE   WITH    THE   FISHER   FOLK.


6o       WOMEN    WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

old.  On  these  occasions  the  practical  young  evangelist
of  cleanliness  as  well  as  godliness  would  wash  and  brush
up  the  members  of  her  congregation  in  the  scullery  before
introducing  them  to  the  school-room  where  the  service
was  to  be  held.

"  I  loved  children,"  she  said.  "  I  longed  to  help  them,
I  was  not  afraid  of  children,  but  grown-up  people."

And,  having  excluded  even  the  members  of  her  own
family  with  the  exception  of  her  younger  sister,  Eva,  she
would  sing,  pray,  and  talk  with  the  little  urchins  she
thus  gathered  in,  until  she  absolutely  brought  them  to  the
penitent  form  in  tears.

But  retiring  as  was  Emma's  natural  disposition,  she
could  be  bold  and  courageous  when  her  sense  of  duty
compelled.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  strong  feeling  of
personal  importance  and  responsibility  which  the  General
and  his  wife  appear  to  have  cultivated  in  all  their  children
was  a  great  support  in  many  crises  when  young  people
differently  brought  up  would  have  failed  through  a  lower
estimate  of  their  own  powers.

On  one  occasion  Emma  actually  ventured  to  separate
boys  whom  she  saw  fighting  in  the  Park  opposite  her  home,
and  talked  to  them  until  she  effected  a  reconciliation.

Another  time,  when  in  the  country,  she  ran  after  a
boy  who  was  driving  a  donkey-cart  and  cruelly  beating
his  little  steed.  Remonstrances  proving  ineffectual,  she
seized  the  reins  and  stopped  the  cart.  Then,  snatching
the  stick  from  the  angry  young  ruffian,  she  soundly
chastised  him  with  it  about  his  head  and  face.

The  boy  appears  to  have  been  too  much  astonished  to
make  any  resistance,  and  finally  he  was  prevailed  upon  to
kneel  down  with  the  little  lady  in  the  sandy  road,  and  pray
for  forgiveness.  Then,  promising  never  to  ill-treat  his
donkey  again,  he  offered  to  drive  her  home.  On  the  way
Emma  told  him  how  to  bathe  the  bruises  her  wholesome
beating  had  caused,  and  thereafter  the  reformed  lad
looked  upon  her  as  one  of  his  best  friends.

Once  when  Emma  was  staying  at  the  seaside  apart
from  her  parents,  she  heard  of  a  fisherman  who  was  in
the  habit  of  boiling  his  lobsters  alive.     The  thought  of


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  6i

such  cruelty  was  agony  to  her,  but  instead  of  suffering  in
hcljjless  silence,  as  most  children  would  have  done,  the
future  Consul  set  off  at  once  to  put  a  stop  to  it.  Alone
she  visited  the  fisherman's  cottage,  and  prayed  and  pleaded
with  him  and  his  wife  until  they  promised,  with  contrition,
never  to  commit  such  barbarity  again.

A  sensitive  conscientiousness  as  well  as  a  tender  heart
was  a  marked  characteristic  of  Emma  Booth's  childhood.

Adjutant  Parkins,  once  the  maid  "  Polly  "  of  the  Booth
household,  testifies  that  had  Miss  Emma  been  sent  up  to
bed  supperless  as  punishment  for  some  childish  fault,  no
amount  of  persuasion  would  have  induced  her  to  touch  a
single  bite  of  anything  taken  up  to  her  on  the  sly.  And
Emma  herself  has  said  that  when  her  mother  was  away
from  home,  and  she  was  left  more  or  less  in  charge  of
the  younger  ones,  she  used  to  "  imagine  mamma  was  in
the  room  all  the  time,  and  could  see  everything  that  was
done."

On  another  occasion,  having  been  sent  with  her  nurse  to
have  a  tooth  out,  Emma's  courage  at  the  crucial  moment
utterly  broke  down,  and  she  left  the  surgery  without  having
had  the  operation  performed.

On  the  way  home,  however,  it  suddenly  occurred  to  her
that  her  disobedience  to  her  parents'  wishes  might  have
"hurt  the  dentist  in  his  soul."  Then  conscientiousness  and
that  exalted  opinion  of  the  weight  of  her  own  personal  in-
fluence which  we  have  before  remarked,  actually  triumphed
over  natural  fear,  and  the  child  went  bravely  back,  con-
fessed her  anxiety  to  the  dentist,  and  had  the  tooth  re-
moved forthwith.  The  gentleman,  we  are  told,  was
touched  to  tears  by  the  concern  expressed  for  the  well-
being  of  his  soul,  and  assured  his  Httle  patient  that  if  any
harm  had  been  inflicted  it  was  more  than  atoned  for  by
the  prompt  and  practical  repentance  which  had  followed.

But  for  an  absolutely  self -oblivious  regard  for  the  feelings
of  another,  one  anecdote  told  of  Emma  Booth  when  scarcely
more  than  an  infant  goes  beyond  anything  we  have  ever
heard  or  read.  Mrs.  Booth  having  had  occasion  to  give
her  little  daughter  a  whipping,  the  child  was  anxious
for   days  afterwards  lest  her  mother's  own   hand   should


fi^


62       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

have  been  injured  by  the  severity  of  the  blows  it  had
inflicted  !

After  this,  it  is  needless  to  assure  our  readers  that  as  a
daughter  Emma  Booth  was  conspicuous  for  devoted  filial
affection.  "  If  mamma  was  resting,  Emma  would  keep
the  house  quiet,  and  would  sit  on  the  stair  to  prevent  any
one  passing  the  door ;  if  mamma  was  troubled,  Emma
would  try  in  every  way  to  help  and  cheer  her.  She  spent
her  life  in  planning  and  arranging  how  she  could  best  spare
her  mother  trouble,  and  bring  her  joy."

And  these  loving  ministrations  were  warmly  appreciated.
Mrs.  Booth  was  aware  of  the  moral  superiority  of  her
own  carefully-trained  children  over  ordinary  young  people,
nor  was  she  afraid  of  letting  them  know  her  good  opinion
of  them.

Writing  on  one  occasion  when  away  from  home,  to
Emma,  who  was  suffering  from  one  of  those  attacks  of
low  spirits  to  which,  from  nervous  weakness,  she  was
prone,  Mrs.  Booth  said  : — "  I  am  quite  willing  to  admit
that  most  girls  of  sixteen  would  feel  very  much  as  you  did
about  Katie  coming,  my  being  away,  etc.  But  then,  my
Emma  is  not  one  of  these  '  most  girls.'  She  has  more
sense,  more  dignity  of  character,  and  above  all  more
religion.  She  only  got  into  the  dumps,  and  for  once  felt
and  spoke  like  '  one  of  the  foolish  women.'  "

We  might  easily  multiply  stories  of  Emma  Booth's
unselfishness,  helpfulness,  and  remarkably  early  piety.
A  lady  who  was  governess  to  the  Booth  children  for  some
years  assures  us  that  Emma  talked  frequently  about  her
conversion  and  religious  experience.  "  Always  modestly
and  unaffectedly,  3'et  with  no  uncertainty,"  writes  this
witness.  "  One  day  I  said  to  her,  '  Emma,  you  are  a  very
happy  little  girl ;  you  look  happy,  and  you  are  so  often
smiling  !  '  'Oh  yes,'  she  replied,  gently,  '  don't  you  think
it  is  because  I  am  a  Christian  child  ?  You  have  often  told
me  it  is  the  Christian  who  is  happy-'  Then  after  thinking
a  little  she  went  on,  '  Now  a  child  who  does  not  love  Jesus
cannot  really  look  happy.'  Indeed,  she  had  a  very  sweet
smile,  though  she  was  such  an  earnest,  grave  little  maiden.
She  always  felt  the  responsibility  of  being  an  elder  sister,


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  63

and   used    to  say,   '  You   see   the    little  ones  will    copy


me.


This  lady  also  relates  that  one  of  the  first  steps  that  led
to  the  ultimate  conversion  of  her  own  mother  was  the
incident  of  little  Emma  and  one  of  her  sisters  kneeling
one  on  either  side  of  her,  holding  her  hands  and  praying
for  her,  when  one  day  she  called  at  their  home.

"  She  stands  before  me,"  the  governess  concludes,  "  just
a  sweet  and  pleasant  child,  always  loving,  always  unselfish,
with  ever  the  ready  word  '  Never  mind  me.'  Surely  with
the  life  and  character  of  such  a  Mother  in  Israel,  her
children  shall  rise  up  to  call  her  blessed."


CHAPTER    II.

'  A   SORT   OF   HUNT  '    FOR   THE    LOST.

"pMMA  BOOTH'S  public  ministration  seems  to  have
^-^  actually  commenced  at  the  age  of  ten,  though
shortly  afterwards  a  severe  accident  to  her  hand,  which
shattered  her  nervous  system,  interrupted  her  work  for
many  years.

Her  first  testimony  was  given  at  an  experience  meeting
held  after  a  poor  children's  tea  at  Bethnal  Green.

ALfter  some  hesitation,  owing  to  a  remembered  fault
during  the  day,  Emma  stood  up,  and,  strengthened  by
inward  prayer,  faltered,  with  the  tears  rolling  down  her
cheeks — "  I  cannot  say  much,  but  I  can  say  I  love  Jesus.
I  have  many  trials,  but —

'When  fierce  temptations  try  my  heart,
I'll  sing,  Jesus  is  mine !
And  so,  though  tears  at  times  may  start,
I'm  singing  all  the  time.'"

She  retained  to  the  last  a  firm  belief  in  the  efficacy  of
tears,  having  many  times  proved  that  a  falling  tear  would
do  more  towards  softening  a  hard  heart  than  many
exhortations.


64        WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED    AND    WON

Very  soon  after  this,  Emma  made  her  second  appearance,
and  briefly  addressed  a  hall  full  of  the  roughest  East  End
children.  Following  her  elder  sister  and  brother,  she
spoke  very  simply  and  lovingly  from  the  words,  "  Suffer
the  little  children  to  come  unto  Me."  Ana  many  children,
we  are  told,  sought  the  Saviour  that  evening.

For  the  reason  mentioned  above,  this  was  little  Emma's
last  platform  effort  for  many  a  long  day,  though  in  private
she  constantly  sought  to  win  souls.

It  was  about  this  time  that  she  made  her  first  personal
convert — a  Jewish  child.  Having  made  this  little  girl's
acquaintance  one  day  when  out  bowling  her  hoop,  a  warm
friendship  sprang  up  between  them,  and  Emma  was  allowed
to  accept  invitations  to  visit  at  her  new  friend's  house.

Soon  after,  the  little  Jewess  was  called  upon  to  undergo
a  severe  operation  to  one  of  her  eyes,  and  so  helped  and
strengthened  was  she  by  Emma's  earnest  prayers  on  her
behalf,  that  it  resulted  in  a  confession  of  belief  in  the
Christian's  Saviour.

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  meetings  which  Emma
used  to  hold  for  poor  children  in  her  own  home,  and  we
find  that  she  seemed  always  able  to  pray  with  as  well  as
for  any  one  in  whose  welfare  she  was  interested,  and  though
unable  to  address  audiences  at  the  public  Holiness  meetings
which  her  brother  and  sister  attended,  she  was  able  to  lift
her  voice  in  supplication  for  the  anxious  ones.

When  she  was  about  fifteen,  Emma  had  what  was
probably  her  first  personal  dealing  with  one  of  the  adult
"  masses."

She  was  on  her  way  to  the  Mission  Hall  in  Hackney,
where  a  meeting  was  to  be  held,  when  she  noticed  a  rough-
looking  man  leaning  dejectedly  against  a  wall.  Something
whispered  to  the  young  girl  that  this  man's  need  was  very
great,  and,  mastering  her  timidity,  she  crossed  over  to
him,  and  talked  to  him  until  she  persuaded  him  to  go  to
the  meeting  with  her.

But,  as  this  episode  seemed  to  mark  another  decision-
point  in  Emma's  early  life,  we  will  continue  the  story  in
her  own  words.

"  That  night  that  man  was  saved.     I  found  afterwards


EMMA   BOOTH   AS   A   YOUNG   GIRL.


66       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

that  he  was  a  prodigal  boy — a  boy  who  had  been  away
from  home  for  years.  Though  a  man  now,  he  had  left  it
when  quite  young.  I  asked  him  if  he  would  like  me  to  go
home  with  him.  He  was  crying  ver^'  much.  He  had
been  telling  out  the  long  catalogue  of  sins  at  Christ's  feet ;
but  a  new  ray  of  happiness  lit  up  his  face  as  we  trotted  off
together  to  find  that  little  mother's  home.  Of  course,
not  being  there  you  would  not  understand  my  feelings,
but  I  shall  never  forget  the  impression  that  little  mother's
face  made  upon  my  heart.  She  was  very  short,  and  her
face  was  very  wan.  As  she  lifted  her  arms  to  get  them
round  this  long-lost  boy's  neck,  I  thought  she  would  never
have  succeeded,  for  he  was  a  very  big  man  indeed.  As
he  knelt  down  at  her  feet  she  put  her  arms  round  him,
and  their  tears  mingled  together.  As  she  talked  to  him
some  of  the  sentences  seemed  written  upon  my  heart,
never  to  be  effaced.  '  With  every  blessing  I  have  asked
at  my  breakfast  I  have  prayed  for  you  ;  and  every  time
I  have  been  out  in  the  open  air  I  have  looked  for  you  !
Indeed,  all  my  life,  Ben,  has  been  a  sort  of  hunt  after  you.'

"  As  I  left  them  there,  weeping  and  praising  God  together,
and  went  home,  I  looked  up  through  the  darkness  of  that
night  into  Christ's  face,  and  said,  '  Lord,  let  that  be  so
with  me  ;  whatever  I  have  and  am,  let  that  be  my  ex-
perience, known  in  Heaven,  and  known  amongst  all  who
shall  know  me  down  here,  that  my  whole  life  may  be  '  a
sort  of  hunt '  after  those  Thou  didst  die  to  redeem —
whether  eating  or  drinking,  single  or  married,  or  whatever
comes  to  me — that  I  may  be  able  to  say  equally,  when  I
recognize  the  prodigals  whom  Thou  shalt  help  even  me
to  bring  home,  my  whole  existence  has  been  a  '  sort  of  hunt '
after  them,  and  that  my  supreme  joy  was  in  their  salvation."

Earnestly,  indeed,  and  strenuously  did  Emma  Booth
seek  to  fulfil  this,  her  girlhood's  ideal.  Having  received
from  no  less  an  authority  than  the  late  Sir  Morell  Mackenzie
the  assurance  that  she  was  gifted  with  one  of  the  best
throats  he  had  ever  known  for  public  speaking,  she  prayed
and  strove  earnestly  for  power  to  overcome  her  peculiar
shrinking  from  platform  testimon3^  But  it  was  not  until
she  was  seventeen  years  of  age — early  enough,  one  may


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  67

say,  for  ordinary  mortals,  but  abnormally  late  for  one  of
the  Booth  family — that  Emma  at  length  conquered  this
repugnance  and  came  out  boldly  in  the  same  kind  of  work
in  which  her  sisters  and  brothers  had  already  been  long
engaged.

Her  first  appearance  was  at  St.  Leonards,  and  aston-
ished her  relatives,  who  were  unprepared  for  so  sudden  an
accession  of  courage.

As  so  many  times  before  in  her  young  life,  it  was  love
and  sympathy  for  another  which  wrought  the  victory.
A  "  good  little  woman  evangelist  "  was  struggling  in  the
poorer  parts  of  that  fashionable  3easide  town  with  a  lot
of  rough  people  and  insufficient  support.  Emma  Booth
promised  to  help  her,  but  did  not  go  so  far  as  to  say  she
would  take  a  service.

The  evangelist  was  therefore  as  much  surprised  as  any-
body when,  on  the  Sunday  evening,  Emma,  obeying  an
inward  impulse,  ascended  the  rostrum,  gave  out  a  hymn,
and  subsequently  announced  her  text.

This  was  the  third  verse  of  the  tenth  chapter  of  Isaiah,
and  the  ice  once  broken  she  spoke  with  a  fluency  and
apparent  ease  that  betrayed  little  of  the  "  unutterable
things  "  which,  she  afterwards  confessed  to  her  mother,
she  was  feeling  inside.

The  meeting  was  a  great  success,  five  souls  being  induced
to  seek  salvation.  And  from  that  time  forward  Emma's
rich,  persuasive  voice,  with  that  originality  of  ideas  and
wonderful  forcefulness  of  expression  which,  her  biographer
tells  us,  "  combined  to  mark  her  out  as  one  of  Nature's
orators,"  was  heard  with  increasing  frequency  at  the
meetings  of  the  "  Christian  Mission."

When  Emma  was  eighteen  that  mission  was  definitely
organized  into  the  Salvation  Army  of  world-wide  fame,
and  it  was  her  taste  chiefly  that  assisted  Mrs.  Booth  in  the
selection  of  that  becoming  "  Hallelujah  "  bonnet  which
may  have  had  not  a  little  to  do  with  the  success  and
popularity  of  the  whole  scheme.

When  Emma  Booth  was  twenty  years  old,  it  seemed
necessary  to  the  General  and  his  wife  that  some  sort  of
training  should    be   bestowed   upon   their  young  soldiers


68       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

before  the  latter  could  be  properly  equipped  for  sending
out  to  fight  the  world.

The  first  house  devoted  to  the  purpose  of  a  Training
Home  was  the  very  one  in  which  Emma  had  passed  so
many  of  her  childish  years,  and  where  her  first  meetings
for  neglected  little  ones  were  held.  And  Emma  herself,
mature  in  character  and  religious  experience,  though  so
young  in  years,  was  appointed  Matron  of  the  female
department.

One  of  the  earliest  "  cadets  "  to  come  under  the  girlish
"  Mother's  "  influence  was  the  present  Mrs.  "  Colonel  "
Wilson.  She  now  writes : — "  From  the  first  she  exercised
a  Divine  influence  upon  us  all  ;  to  me  she  became  the
ideal  of  all  that  was  womanly  and  Christ-like.  .  .  .
Her  lectures  in  those  days  were  more  like  Bible-readings.
She  clung  to  her  Bible,  and  taught  us  from  it,  giving  us
whole  chapters  to  learn  by  heart.  ,  .  .  Often  would  we
be  bathed  in  tears  while  she  spoke  to  us  on  the  love  of
God  in  Christ  to  souls,  and  a  passion  for  sinners  was  kindled
in  our  hearts  that  made  us  willing  to  go  through  loneliness
and  difficulty,  fearing  nothing.

"  She  inspired  the  nervous  and  fearful  with  confidence
by  assuring  us  that  she  was  praying  and  believing  for  our
triumph;

"  She  never  discouraged  any  one,  however  dark,  or
tiresome,  or  wayward.  Her  life  made  us  detest  meanness
or  selfishness,  to  hate  sin  in  every  form."

It  was  unceasingly  impressed  upon  these  young  soldiers
that,  in  the  language  of  St.  Paul,  the  old  man  with  his
deeds  must  be  crucified,  so  that  they  should  cease  to  lust
after  the  flesh,  being  delivered  from  all  desire  for  worldly
aggrandizement,  pleasure,  or  ease,  from  all  love  of  money,
care  about  praise  and  esteem,  and  satisfaction  in  anything
which  was  not  fulfilment  of  duty  and  honourable  to  God.

The  mornings  in  the  Training  Homes  were  usually  de-
voted to  Bible-study  and  the  learning  of  sacred  "  songs  "
from  the  Army  "  song-book."  The  first  chapter  to  be
committed  to  heart  was  the  fifty-third  of  Isaiah.  Miss
Booth  at  this  time  trained  a  Songsters'  Brigade,  which
she  subsequently  took  with  her  on  a  tour  in  the  north  of


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  69

England   and   Scotland   to   raise   funds   for   the  Training
Home.

In  the  afternoons  the  cadets,  under  the  title  of  the
"  Cellar,  Gutter,  and  Garret  Brigade,"  visited  the  dwellers
in  the  slums.  Here  the  nature  of  their  work  may  be
fittingly  described  by  quoting  some  simple  verses  by  the
pen  of  the  Training  Home  Mother  herself.

"Cioing  down  with  gladness  at  tlie   Master's  call,
Going  down  to  seek  and  save  the  worst  of  all,
Going  down  to  bid  the  sinning  sin  no  more.
Going  down  to  point  their  eyes  to  Canaan's  shore-


Going  down  to  share  the  widow's  lonely  lot,
Going  down  that  I  may  rock  the  outcast's  cot,
Going  down  to  clasp  the  orphan  to  my  breast,
Toiling  hard  that  I  may  bring  the  toilers  rest.

Going  down  to  make  the  shimmer's  dwelling  neat,
Going  down  to  clothe  the  children's  naked  feet,
Going  down  where  eyes  of  mercy  seldom  see,
Going  down  to  make  the  poor  a  cup  of  tea.


Going  down  that  I  may  send  the  lost  ones  up,
Going  down  that  by  and  by  with  Christ  they'll  sup,
Going  down  while  life  shall  last — still  deeper  down,
Finding  precious  jewels  for  my  Master's  crown."

When  one  remembers  what  all  this  really  meant  for  the
girl  cadets — dressing  in  old.  shabby  clothes  that  the  poorest
might  feel  thoroughly  at  home  with  them,  sometimes  with
an  old  shawl  in  lieu  of  a  bonnet — tramping  weary  miles
through  vilest  streets,  boldly  entering  the  dens  of  the  worst
characters,  sitting  often  upon  the  floors  (and  such  floors  !)
to  wash  babies  whose  rags  had  not  been  removed  from
their  poor  little  vermin-eaten  bodies  for  days — tending
the  most  loathsome  and  long-neglected  of  sick  persons,
facing  the  return  of  drunken  parents  or  infuriated  husbands
— we  cannot  but  heartily  endorse  Miss  Booth's  exclamation,
"  They  are  real  heroines  !  "

In  the  evenings  came  the  Home  Holiness  and  Experience
meetings,  when  all  shyness,  diffidence  and  reserve  as  to


70       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

even  the  most  sacred  and  inmost  feelings  were  to  be  over-
come. Not  least  among  the  disciplinary  severities  of  the
soldiers'  training  must  have  been  the  agonies  of  this
Protestant  confessional.  But  we  a^e  assured  that  it  was
not  uncommon  under  stress  of  the  emotions  then  evoked
for  the  young  people  to  stand  up,  and,  bathed  in  tears,  to
voluntarily  expose  their  own  hidden  inconsistencies  and
failures  which  no  one  had  previously  perceived.

The  happiness  of  the  cadets  and  their  affection  for  the
Home  was,  however,  evinced  by  "  spontaneous  outbursts
of  joyous  praise  to  God  whenever  one  of  the  Staff  officers
appeared  in  the  midst  of  an  assembled  company  of  them,
or  when  even  the  name  of  the  Training  Home  was
mentioned."

When  the  Training  Home  was  removed  into  much  larger
and  more  commodious  quarters,  Miss  Booth  still  maintained
her  responsible  position  ;  she  cared  tenderly  for  the  bodies
as  well  as  the  souls  of  those  under  her  charge,  even  to
tasting  the  cadets'  food  to  see  if  it  were  of  regulation
quality,  and  visiting  their  dormitories  at  night  to  assure
herself  that  they  were  sufficiently  warm  in  bed.

"  Her  impartiality  was  no  less  remarkable  than  her
individual  care  for  each.  If  there  was  any  danger  of  a
Training  Home  girl  going  wrong,  Mother  would  leave  no
stone  unturned  to  save  the  tempted  one.  .  .  .  Her  chief
thought  in  those  days  was  undoubtedly  for  the  women
she  was  training  for  the  world's  salvation,  but  she  always
found  time  to  sympathize  with,  and  pray  for,  the  aged,  the
poor,  and  the  suffering."

Miss  Booth's  day's  work  at  that  time  is  thus  described
by  one  of  her  Staff : —

"  She  used  to  come  in  the  morning,  meet  her  Heads  of
Departments,  hurry  through  the  most  pressing  of  her
letters,  and  then  go  into  the  lecture-room,  to  use  every
fibre  of  her  being  in  the  most  intense  sort  of  public  speaking
for  an  hour ;  then  come  out,  take  a  cup  of  cocoa,  and  go
straight  at  her  '  Personals '  (interviews  with  cadets)  for
the  rest  of  the  day.

"  Her  lectures  were  always  forceful  and  original.  She
has  cultivated  the  art  of    saying  deep  things  simply,  of


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  71

making  all  matters  whereon  she  dwells  clear  to  minds
unwonted  to  close  thought.  She  gathers  illustrations
diligently  from  walks  of  life  daily  familiar  to  her  listeners."

The  same  writer  testifies  to  Miss  Booth's  self-forgetfulness
in  the  interests  of  those  whose  spiritual  life  she  felt  to  be
dependent  upon  her,

"  Few  Field  girls  but  can  recall,  for  the  help  and  cheer
of  their  owti  hours  of  weakness  and  weariness,  more  than
one  day  when  they  saw  Miss  Booth  leaning  on  a  chair,
almost  too  exhausted  to  stand,  through  the  fiery  address
she  would  give  them  ;  or  some  time  when  they  crept
into  her  room  for  the  '  Personal,'  grieving  silently  over
the  bandaged  brow  and  throbbing  temples  which  she
was  disregarding  in  her  passionate  eagerness  for  their
advancement."

Indomitable  energy,  that  natural  combativeness  of
temperament  which  resists  all  opposition  whether  from
within  or  without,  and  in  any  cause  makes  the  victorious
fighters  of  the  world,  was  as  strong  in  this  fragile  woman
as  in  the  other  members  of  her  family.

An  instance  of  this  trait,  though  belonging  to  a  later
period  of  Miss  Booth's  career,  may  well  be  given  here.

On  one  occasion  she  had  been  invited  to  conduct  a
Sunday's  Campaign  in  the  town  of  Reading,  where,  owing
to  serious  riots  which  a  previous  visit  of  Salvationists
had  provoked,  a  bye-law  had  been  framed  forbidding
processions  after  dark.

After  an  arduous  day's  work,  resulting  in  the  conversion
of  fifty-two  men  and  women,  Miss  Booth,  exhausted  as
she  was,  at  eleven  p.m.  proposed  a  march  through  the
town.  Some  one  reminded  her  of  the  bye-law.  This
clinched  the  argument.  "  Oh,  bother  the  bye-law  !  "  she
exclaimed.  "  Let's  show  the  people  we  are  anxious  about
their  souls  !  "

Accordingly,  the  band,  the  soldiers  and  the  converts
lined  up,  and,  accompanied  by  the  warlike  lady,  paraded
the  streets  till  one  o'clock  next  morning.

This  incident  well  illustrates  the  unquenchable  zeal  and
the  impatience  of  secular  control  which  characterized  at
that    time    the    leaders    of   the   Army  movement.     This


72        WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

spirit  was  readily  imbibed  by  that  class  of  persons  from
which  most  of  the  early  converts  were  drawn,  and  much
stone-throwing  and  mud-flinging  was  the  result.  But  the
ardour  of  neither  soldiers  nor  officers  was  in  any  way
damped  thereby.

During  the  eight  j^ears  that  Emma  Booth  held  the  im-
portant position  of  Mother  to  the  Salvation  Army  Training
Home,  no  less  than  seven  hundred  girls  and  women  came
under  her  influence,  and  she  made  a  separate  life-study  of
every  one.  Like  her  father  and  mother,  she  evidently
included  among  her  many  and  varied  gifts  of  mind  and
heart  the  faculty  for  reading  human  nature.

Another  who  saw  her  often  during  those  early  days  at
the  Training  Home  writes  : — "  Her  (Miss  Emma  Booth's)
enthusiasm  and  encouragement  were  unfailing.  How  often
her  smile  smoothed  away  difficulties  here  as  elsewhere,
and  her  cheery  words  chased  away  many,  many  clouds
from  the  young  cadets,  who  often  trembled  in  view  of
what  was  expected  from  them  in  their  singing  and  musical
work  as  well  as  in  connection  with  the  ordinary  work  of
'  Officers.' "

We  are  told  that  the  young  "  Mother  "  very  seldom  gave
cqt  order  to  any  one  under  her  control.  She  ruled  solely
by  love,  and  it  was  necessary  only  for  her  to  express  a
wish,  and  the  result  was  an  immediate  and  affectionate
response.

This  power  is  the  more  remarkable  when  we  consider
how  strict  and  unremitting  was  the  discipline  maintained
among  those  who  offered  themselves  as  candidates  for  the
work  of  the  Army.  Miss  Booth's  own  description  of  the
training  of  these  cadets  tells  us  that  they  were  "  taught
and  continually  reminded  that  true  religion  consists  in
pure,  unselfish  love  towards  God,  their  comrades,  and  a
dying  world.  Anything  approaching  self-gratification  was
to  be  spumed,  and  the  utmost  and  most  constant  self-
denial  and  the  taking  up  of  the  cross,  however  new  or
painful  that  cross  may  be,  was  daily  urged  upon  them.
They  were  taught  to  rest  on  nothing  less  than  the  immediate
assurance  of  forgiveness  of  sins  and  cleansing  from  im-
purity ;  that  as  holy  men  and  women  and  representatives


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  73

of  God  they  must  abandon  hatred  and  avoid  the  appearance
of  all  bitterness,  wrath,  malice,  revenge,  harshness,  evil-
speaking,  evil-thinking,  tale-bearing,  and  all  that  would
offend  or  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit."

The  "  Mother "  soon  perceived  the  weak  point  of  each
cadet,  and  devoted  all  her  tact  and  wisdom,  with  love  and
patience,  to  remedying  it.  The  private  "  Personal  "  talks
already  alluded  to,  with  their  heart-searching  questions,
elicited  confessions,  and  faithful  advice — all  absolutely
secret  and  sacred  to  herself  and  the  one  they  most  concerned
— were  the  principal  means  to  this  end.  But  she  also  advised
them  to  embroider  across  their  red  jerseys  the  name  of  the
virtue  they  most  lacked — such  as  "Courage"  for  the  timid,
"  Faith  "  for  the  wavering,  a  constant  reminder  to  them-
selves and  others  of  their  special  failing.

Albeit,  whatever  the  methods  which  Miss  Booth  em-
ployed for  the  moulding  and  strengthening  of  her  cadets
in  the  wavs  of  righteousness  and  rules  of  the  Army,  there
seems  no  doubt  that  she  possessed  in  general  their  hearty
obedience  and  most  loyal  love.  So  long  as  it  was  possible,
she  kept  up  a  personal  correspondence  with  each  "  soldier  "
when  the  latter  left  the  Training  Home  for  the  "  field."

Most  of  these  letters  were  autograph,  and  were  individual
answers  to  special  difficulties.  But  occasionally  a  circular
address  would  be  sent.  Here  is  part  of  one  of  them,
addressed  to  "  Sisters  in  the  Field,"  a  fair  specimen  of
both  matter  and  style  : —

"  You  remember,  dear  girls,  it  was  Goodness  we  looked
upon  as  the  one  and  all-important  necessity  when  in  the
Training  Home.  On  that  hangs  all  the  rest.  Without  it
you,  and  any  effort  you  may  make,  must  come  to  naught ;
but  while  your  hearts  are  perfectly  right,  and  your  lives
are  being  lived  with  the  one  view  of  bringing  pleasure  and
glory  to  Him,  it  matters  not  what  may  come  to  you  before
next  Christmas.  You  are  blessedly  safe  in  the  Master's
own  keeping,  and  if  He  is  for  you,  who  can  be  against  you  ?

"  Only  look  sufficiently  into  your  own  inner  lives,  which
are  lived  by  each  one  of  us  openly  before  Him  from  whom
no  secrets  are  hid.  Be  quite  certain  that  all  is  as  He  would
like  it  to  be  in  your  hearts,  then,  in  faith  more  confident


74       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

than  you  have  ever  before  exercised,  lay  hold  of  the  strength
Heaven  ever  offers  to  such  as  take  it  by  force,  and  rush
into  the  New  Year  battles  with  a  heart  set  upon  victory.

"...  God  still  loves  the  whole  world.  He  sent  His  Son
to  live  and  die  that  He  might  seek  and  save  every  creature
in  it,  and  to-day  He  wants  daughters  who  shall  so  catch
that  spirit  that  their  entire  lives  may  be  lived  with  no  less
object  than  to  seek  the  end  of  that  life — the  salvation  of
all  the  lost."

With  such  aims  and  inspirations  as  the  foregoing  words
express.  Miss  Booth  wielded  an  immense  power  for  good
over  men  as  well  as  women  who  came  under  her  influence.
Although  she  took  no  pains  to  promulgate  theories  as  to
the  equality  or  superiority  of  the  feminine  mind,  she  proved
herself  in  daily  practice  an  efficient  commander  of  both
sexes.  The  male  cadets  respected  and  obeyed  her  as
unquestioningly  as  did  the  girls.  One  who  knew  her  in-
timately says  : — "  With  a  temperament  emphatically
masterful  and  militant,  she  did  the  things  that  other
women  talk  about."


CHAPTER    HI.

*  THERE    WAS   NO   ONE    LIKE    HER  !  *

OTRONG  leader,  capable  organizer,  militant  officer  as
^  she  undoubtedly  was,  Emma  Booth  was  nevertheless
a  truly  womanly  woman.  In  her  twenty-seventh  year
came  to  her  woman's  most  precious  heritage  of  a  good
man's  love,  and  she  accepted  it  with  joy.

Already  there  had  been  working  for  some  years  with
the  Army  in  India  a  gentleman  of  education  and  refine-
ment, formerly  occupying  a  high  position  in  the  Civil
Service,  by  name  Frederick  Tucker.  Convinced  of  the
essential  necessity  of  a  closer  approach  to  the  Hindoo  on
the  social  plane  than  is  usually  attempted  by  Christian
missionaries,  he  had  adopted  the  native  costume  and  sub-
sisted on  native  food  ;  he  walked  barefoot  Hke  the  Indian


MRS.   BOOTH-TUCKER  AND   HKR   FAiULY.


76       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

fakir,  and  carried  the  begging-bowl  which  is  a  distinguish-
ing badge  of  the  Hindoo  holy  man.  He  had  also  endured
a  month's  imprisonment  for  obeying  what  he  believed  to
be  the  law  of  God  in  opposition  to  a  law  of  man.

In  1887  the  splendid  donation  of  £5000  was  given  by  an
unknown  friend  for  the  furtherance  of  the  work  of  the
Salvation  Army  in  India  ;  and  General  Booth  decided  that
fifty  additional  officers  should  be  at  once  dispatched.  A
large  proportion  of  these  were  to  be  women,  and  among
them  Miss  Booth  was  selected  to  take  a  foremost  place.
Major  Tucker  came  to  England  to  superintend  the  getting
together  of  this  contingent,  and  then  for  the  first  time
became  acquainted  with  the  young  Mother  of  the  Training
Home.

The  moral,  spiritual  and  intellectual  gifts  with  which
Emma  Booth  was  so  richly  endowed  were  united  to  physical
attractions  of  no  mean  order.  Her  enthusiasm  over  this
new  development  of  the  work  in  India,  and  her  eagerness  to
throw  herself  heart  and  soul  into  it,  charmed  Major  Tucker  ;
her  ability  as  a  ruler  commanded  his  admiration,  his
admiration  warmed  into  "  something  stronger  and  more
ardent  "  still,  and  at  length  he  besought  Miss  Emma  for
her  love.

Nothing  more  suitable  in  every  way  than  such  a  union
could  well  be  imagined,  and  after  a  brief  period  of  con-
sideration the  engagement  was  made  known.

It  is  good  to  find  that  there  was  some  real  and  very
human  love-making  between  these  two.  Miss  Booth  had
always  been  addicted  to  slipping  charming  httle  pencilled
notes  into  the  hands  of  those  she  specially  cared  for,
telling  them  what  she  had  no  opportunity  of  saying  verbally.
One  of  these  found  its  way  into  the  hand  of  her  fiayice,  in
which  she  declared  that  having  once  let  her  heart  go,  his
love  was  nowhere  as  compared  with  hers  !  Of  course,  no
lover  could  let  such  a  challenge  as  that  pass.  So  a  few
moments  later,  she  was  reading  the  following  reply  : —

"As  taper  to  the  noonday  sun,
As  seedling  to  the  tree,
As  million  sand-grains  are  to  one,
As  dewdrop  to  the  sea:


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCK'ER  77

TIuis  measure  thou  tliy  love  with  mine,

And  know  by  these  indeed,
That  thus  much  more  is  mine  than  thine,

And  doth  all  bounds  exceed.
It  rises  higher  than  the  skies,

'Twill  last  on  after  death  ;
My  love  thy  rivalry  defies,

It  grows  with  eveiy  breath."

It  was  on  April  lo,  1888,  that  General  Booth's  birthday
and  the  wedding  of  his  daughter  Emma  were  simultaneously
celebrated  at  the  Army  Congress  Hall,  Clapton,  in  the
presence  of  five  thousand  enthusiastic  sympathizers.

That  dramatic  touch  with  which  the  Salvation  Army  so
well  knows  how  to  appeal  to  a  primary  instinct  of  human
nature,  impressing  the  spectator  through  his  eyes  as  well
as  his  ears,  was  on  this  memorable  occasion  supj)lied  by
the  striking  appearance  of  the  bridegroom.

Major  Frederick  Tucker  appeared  on  the  platform  in
Oriental  attire — the  calico  robe  of  the  fakir,  or  Hindoo
begging  friar,  surmounted  by  a  scarlet  jacket  and  a  turban
bearing  the  badge  of  the  Salvation  Army.  His  feet  were
bare,  as  to  conciliate  the  natives  of  India  he  had  in  every
respect  conformed  to  their  customs,  and  his  begging-
bowl  lay  at  his  side.  The  bride  was  still  dressed  in  her
dark  blue  European  uniform,  relieved  for  this  one  im-
portant ceremony  by  a  white  sash  inscribed  with  the
word  "  Hallelujah,"  but  it  was  understood  that,  once  in
India,  she  too  had  determined  to  adopt  native  costume,
eat  curried  rice  with  her  fingers,  and  walk  shoe-and-
stockingless  over  the  burning  tropical  roads.  However,
love  delights  to  share  to  the  uttermost  the  life  of  the  loved
one,  and  Emma  Booth  was  supremely  happy  in  all  the
prospect  that  lay  before  her.

In  her  speech  after  the  ceremony  she  said :  "  When  they
came  to  ask  me  what  was  to  be  the  motto  of  the  day,  I
took  a  little  time  to  think  and  gather  up  the  feelings  of  my
heart,  and  I  could  not  find  a  better  expression  of  them
than  this  one  word  '  Hallelujah  !  '  "

The  only  cloud  upon  the  joyful  wedding-day  of  Emma
Booth  was  the  serious  condition  of  her  dear  mother's
health.      But  a  short  time  previously  the  terrible  nature


78       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

of  Mrs.  Booth's  illness  had  been  declared  by  a  specialist,
and  as  she  entertained  the  strongest  objection  to  under-
going an  operation,  her  friends  and  relatives  could  not
conceal  from  themselves  the  sad  certainty  that  the  days
of  that  precious  life  were  already  numbered.

Nevertheless,  the  brave  "  Mother  of  the  Army  "  gave
her  daughter — the  one  who  had  perhaps  seemed  pre-
eminently her  own — to  the  Indian  missionary  and  his
far-away  work,  with  an  heroic  smile.  In  a  touching  and
eloquent  address,  she  admitted  to  the  assembled  thousands
that  "  When  the  contemplation  of  this  union  was  first
put  before  me,  I  confess  I  found  more  of  the  mother  left
in  me  than  I  had  imagined.  I  thought  the  mother  was
almost  swallowed  up  in  the  soldier.  I  found,  however,
that  there  was  much  of  the  mother  left.  There  was  a  great
deal  of  that  natural  clinging  to  my  precious  child,  who  has
been  to  me  more  than  a  daughter  ;  who  in  time  of  sickness
and  during  the  absence  of  her  beloved  father,  and  in
seasons  of  family  affliction,  has  been  to  me  as  a  husband
and  friend.  When  this  marriage  came  before  me,  and  I
saw  at  a  glance  what  it  involved,  and  as  I  thought  of  her
value  to  the  war  in  this  country,  and  especially  to  those
who  are  so  dear  to  me  and  to  my  principles — our  female
officers  all  over  the  world — I  staggered.  The  first  impulse
was  to  resist,  and  say,  '  No,  it  cannot  be  !  '  Then  I  re-
membered, '  But  she  is  not  yours  ;  you  gave  her  at  her
birth,  and  you  have  given  her  ever  since.  You  have  kept
her  on  the  altar,  and  now  God  wants  to  go  a  step  in  advance
of  your  notions  of  what  3^ou  think  will  be  for  her  physical
well-being,  are  you  going  to  draw  back  ?  '  I  looked  up  to
Heaven  and  said,  '  No,  Lord,  she  is  Thine.  Whatever  it
may  cost,  Thou  shalt  have  her  for  this  particular  service
if  Thou  dost  want  her.'  "

So,  the  "  wedding  banquet  "  over,  the  wedding  gifts,
amounting  to  some  ;£5ooo  for  the  carrying  on  of  the  foreign
work  of  the  Army,  received,  and  farewells  uttered.  Com-
mander and  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  departed  to  their  Oriental
field.

Arrived  in  Bombay,  the  bride  took  the  Hindoo  name
of    Raheeman,    which    signifies    "  Mercy,"    and    at    once


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  79

commenced  her  new  work  with  all  her  accustomed
enthusiasm.

Before  long  she  left  Bombay  to  visit  Ceylon,  where  she
addressed  crowded  meetings,  being  received  with  delight
and  affection  everywhere.  From  one  village,  a  contingent
of  red-coated  Army  soldiers  walked  out  ten  miles  in  the
cool  of  the  morning  to  meet  "  Commissioner  Raheeman's  "
party.  They  seated  the  lady  in  their  village  "war-chariot"
— an  antiquated  rush-bottomed  chair  turned  upside  down
and  lashed  to  two  poles — and  there  was  quite  a  rivalry  as
to  who  should  have  the  honour  of  acting  as  "war-horses"
to  carry  her.

From  Ceylon  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  travelled  to  South
India,  where  she  held  a  number  of  interesting  meetings.
But  her  Indian  career  was  for  the  time  being  brought  to
an  abrupt  close  by  the  sorrowful  news  from  England  of
the  increase  of  her  mother's  malady,  and  her  need  of  the
presence  and  ministrations  of  her  daughter.  "  Raheeman  "
therefore  returned  to  England,  and  remained  with  Mrs.
Booth  until  the  latter  was  released  from  her  sufferings  by
death  in  October  1890.

This  period  of  absence  from  her  husband  and  the  de-
voted workers  in  India  was  a  great  trial  to  the  Com-
missioner, but  it  occasioned  the  sending  of  many  beautiful
and  much-prized  letters  to  those  she  had  left  behind.  In
one  of  these,  to  a  Staff -Captain  in  the  Army,  she  wrote: —

"  I  am  more  and  more  convinced  that  in  order  to  do
anything  in  India  we  must  be  enthusiastically  in  love  with
its  people,  and  I  believe  God  will  hear  my  cry,  and  make
out  of  my  Training  Home  lassies  some  of  the  truest  heroines
He  has  ever  owned,  who  shall  by  His  might  produce  out
of  their  Indian  sisters  hundreds  more.  ...  I  love  you
all  with  a  love  unspeakable,  and  look  forward,  with  a
longing  that  I  cannot  express,  to  the  time  when  I  shall  be
in  your  midst,  fighting  for  you  and  with  you  all,  whether
Europeans  or  natives,  as  one  family."

As  soon  as  possible  after  her  mother's  death  Mrs.
Booth-Tucker  sailed  back  to  India,  and  again  was  Ceylon
the  scene  of  some  of  her  most  memorable  gatherings.

One  of  the  most  interesting  of  these  was  a  feast  given  to


8o       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

fifteen  hundred  beggars  in  Colombo,  on  Commissioner
Raheeman's  birthday.  The  guests  on  this  occasion  in-
cluded 500  men,  650  women,  and  360  children,  of  whom
many  were  blind,  crippled,  lepers,  or  diseased  in  other
ways.  No  wonder  a  spectator  wrote  ;  "  Somehow,  looking
at  the  beggars,  it  made  one  feel  Jesus  Christ's  religion  more
real  here  than  in  England."  It  was  truly  an  ideal  feast,
surely  after  our  Saviour's  own  heart.  Thus  fed  and  com-
forted— though  the  viands  were  nothing  more  sumptuous
than  rice  and  curry — these  poor  creatures  must  have  found
it  easy  to  believe  the  assurances  of  "  Commissioner  Fakir
Singh  "  (Booth -Tucker),  that  God  loved  them  and  the
Salvation  Army  loved  them,  and  it  would  be  good  for  them
to  have  food  for  their  starving  souls  as  well.

Mrs.  Booth-Tucker's  second  visit  to  India  was,  however,
destined  to  be  almost  as  brief  as  her  first.  Landing  already
worn  and  wasted  by  her  long  period  of  nursing  and  her
grievous  bereavement,  the  toils  and  privations  of  her  work
in  so  trying  a  climate  proved  too  much  for  her  strength.
This  Christian  Amazon  was  but  a  woman,  and  her  appetite
completely  failing,  her  friends  with  keen  pain  saw  her
grow  thinner  and  weaker  day  by  day.  The  General  was
appealed  to,  and  he  ordered  her  immediate  return  to
England.  This  time,  so  precarious  seemed  her  condition
of  health,  that  both  her  husband  and  her  sister  Lucy
accompanied  her.

Even  then  her  heart  yearned  passionately  towards  the
great  dark  land  with  its  teeming  millions.  "  Cheer  up  !  "
she  said  to  one  of  the  officers  she  was  leaving  behind,
"  I  am  coming  back  again,  and  you  will  be  true."

Short  as  was  Commissioner  Raheeman's  time  of  service
in  India,  it  was  long  enough  to  leave  behind  an  abiding
fragrance  of  love  and  Christ-like  deeds.

"  You  will  scarcely,"  writes  one  officer,  "  find  one  home
or  mud-hut  Officers'  Quarters  in  India  without  a  photo  of
the  Consul.  Again  and  again  some  Indian  lassie  officer  has
asked  permission  to  cut  out  from  some  American  or  other
Salvation  Army  publication  a  photo  of  the  Consul,  and
has  carried  it  away  as  a  treasure ;  and  the  reason  why  is,
that  among  all  the  officers  in  India,  European  and  Indian,


.-Si


MRS.    BOOTH-TUCKEK   AS    KAHEtMAN.


82       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

and    especially    among    the    lassies,    our    sainted    Consul
Raheeman  was  their  ideal  saint  and  woman  of  God."

Wrote  another  : — "  We  had  only  been  a  little  time  in
India  when  the  Canadian  contingent  was  to  join  us,  and,
oh,  how  anxious  Raheeman  was  that  they  should  feel
thoroughly  at  home  with  us !

"  She  would  gather  us  round  her  and  say,  '  Now,  there
must  be  no  party  feeling  ;  they  are  mine,  just  as  you  are.
Commissioner  and  I  do  not  agree  on  all  points,  yet  there
is  no  division  between  us.  So  you  and  the  dear  Canadians
will  not  see  eye  to  eye  on  everything,  yet  there  need  be
no  division  between  you.     You  can  be  truly  united  !  '  .  .  .

"  She  had  wonderful  hands.  I  can  feel  the  touch  of  her
fingers  still,  as  she  stroked  my  face  and  told  me  she  was
going  home  to  Mrs.  Booth.  .  .  .

"  Ah,  there  was  no  one  like  her  !  "

Thousands  were  longing  and  praying  for  Raheeman's
speedy  restoration  to  health  and  to  the  work  in  India,
but  the  General  was  advised  by  the  doctors  that  on  no
account  must  his  daughter  again  risk  her  life  in  a  tropical
climate,  and  he  therefore  appointed  her  husband  to  the
Foreign  Secretaryship  at  the  International  Head-quarters
in  London.

Here,  then,  for  the  next  few  years  Commander  and  Mrs.
Booth-Tucker  resided,  and  here  were  born  to  them  several
of  the  dear  children,  nine  in  all,  with  which  their  imion
was  blessed.

Three  of  these  precious  gifts  were  recalled  to  Heaven
in  infancy,  but  six  still  live  to  mourn  their  mother's
loss.  The  eldest,  a  handsome  boy,  Frederick  Kristo  Das,
is  gifted  with  musical  taste.  He  plays  the  piano  and
violin,  and  also  a  comet  in  the  Staff  Band.  The  next,
Catherine  Motee,  is  also  musical,  and  at  the  age  of  twelve
she  composed  the  air  for  a  Christmas  Carol  of  which  her
father  wrote  the  words.  This  song  has  been  sung  by  the
Army.  Mina  is  a  delicate,  "angelic"  child,  with  pathetic
brown  eyes.  Lincoln  is  a  bonny  boy,  possessing  a  wonderful
crop  of  curly  hair — all  the  Booths  have  magnificent  dark
hair — and  is,  apparently,  more  distinctly  human  than  his
sister  Mina ;  for  when  about  five  years  old    he  one  day


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  83

asked  his  school-teacher  if  he  could  tell  mamma  that  he
had  been  "  as  good  as  an  angel,  or  only  as  good  as  a  good
boy  ?  "  John  Myron,  the  youngest  boy,  has,  we  are  told,
"  beautiful  eyes,"  which  are  a  birthright.  The  baby-girl,
Muriel,  was  only  five  months  old  when  her  mother  died.

To  these  children  "  Consul  "  Booth-Tucker  was  a  most
devoted  mother.  Although  the  exigencies  of  "  the  War  "
demanded  frequent  and  prolonged  absences  from  home,
she  was  careful  to  leave  utterly  trustworthy  persons  in
charge,  who  could  be  relied  on  to  carry  out  her  own  wise
arrangements  and  to  let  her  hear  of   her  little  ones  every

day.

Although  her  training  of  the  children  was  systematically
in  accordance  with  Army  principles  and  the  rule  of  non-
worldliness,  "  she  did  not  consider  it  superfluous  to  buy
them  pretty  things,"  nor  wrong  to  dress  them  with  becom-
ing taste.  Whenever  at  home  she  delighted  to  give  them
their  Saturday  night  tubbing  as  well  as  their  Sunday
evening  Bible-reading.  She  was  well  adapted  for  a  truly
domestic  life  had  not  Providence  called  her  to  a  public
career,  for  "  she  was  an  excellent  needlewoman,  and  would
cut  and  make  a  dress  or  trim  a  hat  as  deftly  as  she  could
make  a  pudding  or  write  an  article."

It  is  needless  to  add  that  the  children  of  Consul  Booth-
Tucker  were  from  their  earliest  years  trained  as  "  Soldiers,"
and  that  their  mother's  highest  ambition  for  them  was
that  they  should  ultimately  become  officers  in  the  Salvation
Army.


CHAPTER    IV.

*  DEAD    UPON   THE    FIELD.'

IN  the  year  1896,  painfully  memorable  in  the  annals  of
the  Salvation  Army  for  the  revolt  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Ballington  Booth  from  the  control  of  the  General,  and
their  consequent  relinquishment  of  the  posts  which  they
had  held  under  him.  Major  and  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  were


84       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

appointed  in  their  place  to  take  charge  of  the  work  in
America.

Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  at  once  made  a  most  favourable
impression  upon  the  Americans,  her  intellectual  gifts,
charming  personality,  and  unbounded  energy  being  all  of  a
quality  which  they  could  readily  appreciate.

The  influence  of  the  Army  in  the  United  States  had
naturally  been  considerably  shaken  by  the  episode  above-
mentioned,  and  the  first  work  of  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  was
to  travel  up  and  down  the  length  and  breadth  of  the
great  continent,  explaining  to  crowded  audiences  the  prin-
ciples and  aims  of  the  organization  and  endeavouring  to
re-establish  public  confidence.

In  this  task  she  was  more  than  successful.  Her  favourite
lecture,  entitled  "  Love  and  Sorrow,"  was  given  in  half-a-
hundred  American  towns  and  cities.  It  was  accompanied
by  illustrations  of  the  work  of  the  Salvation  Army  as  set
forth  by  the  stereopticon,  living  pictures,  and  descriptive
music  and  songs,  and  although  occupying  nearly  three
hours  to  deliver,  the  attention  of  the  hearers  was  invariably
maintained  to  the  last.  In  many  places  it  was  repeated
by  special  request,  and  its  effect  was  to  strengthen
the  numbers  of  the  Army's  supporters  and  break  down
prejudice  wherever  heard.

But  whatever  public  claims  there  may  have  been  upon
her  time  and  strength,  the  Consul,  as  we  must  now  call
her,  never  lost  an  opportunity  of  personal  dealing  with
troubled  souls.  Whether  in  the  evangelistic  meetings  of
the  Army,  on  the  street  car,  in  the  railway  train,  or  visiting
the  homes  of  the  suffering  poor,  she  was  the  same  enthusiast
for  winning  converts  as  ever.

Her  confidence  in  her  own  gift  of  power  over  those  with
whom  she  came  in  contact,  early  developed  and  encouraged
in  her  childhood's  home,  was  undoubtedly  used  by  God
for  the  blessing  of  others.  She  expected  to  be  able  to
influence  even  the  most  hardened  sinners,  and  she  was
rarely  disappointed.  The  most  obdurate  were  again  and
again  melted  to  penitence  and  tears  by  her  appeals.

On  one  occasion  the  Consul  visited  Sing-Sing  Prison,
expressly  to  see  and  soften  a  young  criminal  who  seemed


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER


85


Utterly  inaccessible  to  good  influence.  Ihis  lad-he  was
indeed  scarcely  more  than  a  child  in  years— had  lately  been
sentenced  to  the  longest  possible  term  of  imprisonment
for  no    less  a  crime  than  the  deliberate  murder  of  a  boy


PLEADING   WITH   THE   YOUNG   MURDERER.

companion,  but  nothing  seemed  able  to  break  through  his

sullen  indifference.  .  .      ,  .  •     ,  •

Having  obtained  permission  to  visit  the  prisoner  in  his
cell  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  began  by  telling  him  about  her
owtI  dear  boy  at  home,  "  almost  as  big  as  you,"  and  gently


86       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

assuring  him  how  much  she  longed  to  comfort  him.  Then
she  spoke  to  him  of  his  own  mother,  who  had  died  when
he  was  a  baby.

"  Just  fancy  I'm  your  mother,"  she  said,  "  and  tell  me
what  is  in  your  heart."

Soon  this  lad,  who  had  seemed  to  judge,  and  warders,
and  even  the  prison  chaplain,  as  hard  as  a  mill-stone,  was
wiping  his  irrepressible  tears  on  the  Consul's  own  hand-
kerchief. She  prayed  with  him,  and  promised  to  think  of
him  and  pray  for  him  again  at  a  certain  hour  that  night.
She  gave  him  a  Testament,  and  he  smiled  when  she  bade
him  good-bj'e.

The  warder  who  had  witnessed  the  scene  was  scarcely
less  impressed  than  the  boy  himself.  He  willingly  promised
to  try  and  follow  up  the  good  work  that  had  been  begun,
and  there  is  reason  to  hope  that  the  unhappy  young  convict
has  started,  even  in  prison,  a  new  and  better  life.

Mourners  evervwhere,  especially  bereaved  parents,
found  in  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  a  ready  and  tender  sympathizer.
She  was  never  too  busy  to  write  a  letter  of  condolence  to
any  among  the  officers  of  the  Army  who  had  lost  a  child.

Among  the  many  hymns  and  sacred  songs  of  which  she
was  the  author,  none  probably  were  the  vehicle  of  more
comfort  than  some  verses  which  she  had  specially  printed
on  a  card  to  send  to  all  who  were  enduring  the  same  kind
of  sorrow  as  that  which  she  had  already  more  than  once
passed  through.

From  her  earliest  years,  as  we  know,  childhood  had  held
a  very  tender  place  in  Emma  Booth's  heart.  An  orphanage,
sheltering  at  one  time  between  twenty  and  thirty  little
ones,  had  been  carried  on  in  connection  with  the  Training
Home.  In  America  the  Army  Orphanages  were  to  the
Consul  an  ever-fresh  delight,  and  she  took  as  much  interest
in  arranging  the  details  of  their  management  as  in  planning
for  her  own  precious  children  at  home.

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  rescue  of  fallen  women  was
an  object  for  which  the  Consul  felt  the  keenest  solicitude,
and  one  of  the  last  of  her  public  duties  was  to  open  a  new
Rescue  Home  in  Buffalo.

The  Working  Men's  Hotels,  where  for    from  five  cents


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  87

{2\d.)  and  upwards  a  poor  man  can  be  decently  and  comfort-
ably lodged  for  the  night,  the  Hotels  for  Women  on  the
same  plan,  the  Industrial  Homes  for  the  Unemployed,  the
Land  Colonies  for  the  establishment  of  Country  Homes  for
the  City  Poor,  each  and  ever^-  department  of  the  Army's
colossal  schemes  for  "  Social  Relief "  received  the  warmest
sympathy  and  the  most  intelligent  oversight  from  this
gifted  lady,  who  was  so  eminently  adapted  to  occupy  the
position  of  female  head  of  the  Army  in  America.

Travelling  North,  South,  East,  and  West,  to  inspect
institutions  and  colonies,  encourage  the  workers,  inaugurate
new  developments,  and  everywhere  conduct  meetings  for
the  extension  of  the  Army  and  the  salvation  of  souls,
the  day  at  length  arrived  when,  all  unknowingly.  Consul
Booth -Tucker  set  out  upon  that  fateful  journey  from  which
she  was  never  to  return.

Before  leaving  New  York  for  the  last  time  she  conducted
a  remarkable  meeting  in  one  of  the  largest  theatres  of  the
notorious  "  Bowery,"  a  district  of  the  city  given  up  entirely
to  the  Yankee  "  Hooligan  "  and  criminal  of  every  shade
and  type.

Dressed  entirely  in  scarlet,  in  honour  of  what  was  termed
the  "  Red  Crusade,"  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  took  her  stand
upon  the  platform,  beside  an  empty  coffin,  which  had  been
borrowed  for  the  purpose,  and  spoke  powerfully  to  the
thousands  present  on  the  awful  certainty  of  approaching
death  and  judgment.  Thirty-one  persons  on  this  occasion
professed  conversion.

This  was  on  Sunday.  On  the  following  Wednesday  the
Consul  addressed  a  Council  of  Field  Officers  at  the  National
Head-quarters,  and  she  is  reported  to  have  spoken  with  a
freedom  and  power  which  even  those  who  have  heard  her
oftenest  had  seldom  known.

On  Thursday,  October  8,  she  after  breakfast  prayed  as
usual  with  her  children  in  her  own  bedroom  ;  then,  as  the
four  elder  ones  started  for  school,  she  kissed  them  "  gocd-
bye  " — for  the  last  time.

Later  in  the  day,  she  left  New  York  on  that  fatal
"  Western  Tour."

During  the  next  three  weeks  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker's  life,


88       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

as  so  often  before,  was  a  constant  round  of  travelling,
visiting,  and  holding  public  meetings.  Buffalo,  Bradford,
Du  Bois,  Punxsuta^\^ley,  and  Titusville  were  in  turn
refreshed  by  the  presence  and  voice  of  the  beloved  Consul.

The  next  halting-place  on  the  list  was  St.  Louis.  One
of  the  daily  papers  of  that  city  welcomed  her  in  the  follow-
ing graceful  terms  : —

"  A  light  in  the  window  !

"  There  are  many  human  lights — men  and  women  who
by  the  warm  light  of  love  are  calling  wanderers  home.
Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  is  such  a  one.

"  A  woman  whose  work  of  rescue  has  the  approval  of
both  God  and  man.  A  woman  whose  daily  life  is  based
on  those  beautiful  lines —

'  Brightly  beams  our  Father's  mercy  from  His  lighthouse  ever  more,
But  He  gives  to  us  the  keeping  of  the  lights  along  the  shore.'

"  Because  of  her  work  on  behalf  of  God's  erring  ones,
The  World  bids  Emma  Booth-Tucker  welcome.

"  May  her  life  be  blessed,  even  as  she  is  blessing  the
lives  of  many,  and  may  she  long  remain  a  light  in  the
window  !  "

At  St.  Louis  the  Consul  spoke  to  business  men  in  the
Merchants'  Exchange — a  distinction  never  before  enjoyed
by  a  woman  speaker — and  subsequently  delivered  to  a
crowded  audience  in  the  Odeon  Music  Hall  her  great
lecture  on  "  Want,  Waste,  and  Work."  Her  own  account
of  these  events  was  penned  to  her  father  when  once  more
on  the  railroad^the  last  autograph  letter  he  ever  received
from  her.  It  was  delivered  to  him  some  days  after  the
sad  news  of  her  death.

"  On  the  train,

October  20,  1903.

"  My  Precious  General,

"  I  am  still  on  the  wing.  We  were  at  St.  Louis  on
Sunday,  where  we  had  in  some  respects  a  rather  remarkable
day.  The  entire  feeling  of  the  city  has  been  distinctly
diferent  since  your  visit.     The  sympathy  is  most  marked.


EMMA  BOOTH-TUCKER  89

I  had  the  big  Odeon  Music  Hall  in  the  afternoon,  and  the
crowd  was  splendid.

"  I  spoke  for  '  fifteen  minutes  '  (stretched  a  little)  in  the
Merchants'  Exchange,  a  huge  marble  structure.  No
woman,  they  say,  has  ever  been  heard  there  before.  This
was  on  Saturday  at  noon,  and  quite  a  number  of  leading
men  turned  up  at  the  Odeon  the  next  day.

"  Good-night !  Would  that  you  were  here,  so  that  I
could  say  it,  and  hear  all  you  would  like  to  say,  and  then
start  off  again  to  try  and  carry  out  your  wishes  with  better
success  as

"  Your  unfailing  Emma."

Surely  the  devotion  of  an  affectionate  daughter  to  an
honoured  father,  and  the  loyal  obedience  of  a  military
officer  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  were  never  so  combined
before  !

From  St,  Louis  the  Consul  proceeded  to  the  Army's  Land
Colony,  "  Amity,"  in  Colorado.  Hither  a  number  of  poor
city  families,  comprising  a  population  of  some  three  hundred
persons,  have  been  transplanted  from  poverty  and  squalor
to  a  healthful,  happy  Hfe  of  farming,  on  a  beautiful,  fertile
stretch  of  land  some  3,500  feet  above  the  sea  level.  Here,
in  the  "  Cherry  Tree  Orphanage,"  built  by  the  colonists
themselves  for  city  waifs,  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker  held  her  last
meeting,  and  had  the  joy  of  seeing  forty-six  persons  "  kneel-
ing at  the  mercy-seat."

It  was  at  "  Amity  "  Station  the  Consul  stepped  into  the
train  which  was  destined  to  carry  her  to  the  Eternal  Shore.
She  was  accompanied  by  Colonel  Thomas  Holland,  and
her  own  private  secretary.  Ensign  Hester  Dammes.  In
two  days  she  hoped  to  meet  her  husband  in  Chicago,  but
her  journey  was  to  have  another  and  a  nearer  end.

At  Topeka  she  was  met  by  Colonel  Addie,  the  officer  in
charge  of  the  South-Western  Province,  to  whom  she  had
wired  her  desire  for  an  interview.  He  rode  with  her  as
far  as  Kansas  City,  discussing  the  affairs  of  the  Army,
and  he  also  sang  to  her  a  new  hymn  which  he  had  recently


90       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

composed    for    an    old    tune.     The    subject    was    sudden
death.     Two  hnes  of  the  chorus  ran —

"You  can  never  tell  when  your  death-bell's  tolling,
You  can  never  tell  when  your  end  may  be."

And  the  last  verse  pleased  the  Consul  so  much  that  she
had  it  three  times  over —

"  Time  and  place  will  cease  to  know  you,
Men  and  things  will  pass  away ;
You'll  be  moving  on  to-morrow,
You  are  only  here  to-day."

The  Colonel  subsequently  said  that  while  with  the  Consul
during  these  last  hours  of  her  earthly  life,  he  was  much
impressed  by  "  the  air  of  other- worldliness  about  her."
It  were  rather,  he  tells  us,  "  the  voice,  the  look,  the  touch,
the  words  of  an  angel,  than  of  a  human  being."

On  parting  from  Colonel  Addie  at  Kansas  City,  after
utilizing  the  brief  stoppage  there  to  visit  a  new  Industrial
Home  which  the  Army  had  lately  acquired,  Mrs.  Booth-
Tucker,  resuming  her  journey  towards  Chicago,  busied
herself  for  some  time  in  dictating  correspondence.

For  the  sake  of  quietness  she  was  seated  for  the  time
being  in  an  unoccupied  tourist  sleeping  car  near  the  front
of  the  train,  but  the  coach  in  which  preparations  had  been
made  to  pass  the  night  was  in  the  rear.  After  a  while  she
dismissed  her  secretary,  and  sat  chatting  with  Colonel
Holland  only.

At  about  ten  minutes  past  nine  she  rose  to  retire  to
her  sleeper,  and  was  in  the  act  of  making  her  way  thither,
when  the  train  came  to  a  standstill  with  an  awful  crash,
and  the  Consul  and  Colonel  Holland  were  buried  in  the
debris  of  the  wrecked  car.

Emma  Booth-Tucker  was  never  conscious  again.

Two  terrible  blows  on  the  head,  either  one  being  sufficient
to  have  proved  fatal,  rendered  her  condition  hopeless  from
the  first,  and  two  hours  later  she  was  "  promoted  to  glory."

The  accident  occurred  near  Dean  Lake,  on  the  evening
of  October  28,  1903,  and  the  Consul  breathed  her  last  at
Marceline,  Missouri,  a  few  miles  further  along  the  line,  in
the  train  sent  to  the  lelief  of  the  injured.     It  is  not  too


EMMA   BOOTH-TUCKER  91

much  to  say  that  the  shock  of  the  Consul's  death  sent  a
thrill  throughout  the  whole  world.  For  wherever  the
Salvation  Army  has  planted  its  banner,  thither  the  sorrowful
news  was  swiftly  flashed,  and  everywhere  it  was  received
with  deepest  grief.

The  anguish  of  the  Consul's  own  near  relations  is  too
recent  and  too  sacred  for  us  to  dwell  upon  ;  but,  true  to
their  convictions  of  duty,  they  one  and  all  were  able  to
rise  so  far  above  all  personal  considerations  as  to  make
the  utmost  use  of  every  incident  of  the  funeral  arrange-
ments with  the  object  of  saving  souls.  No  touching  or
dramatic  adjunct  was  omitted  that  might  serve  to  make
the  tragic  death  of  Emma  Booth-Tucker  as  effective  as
had  been  her  strenuous  life.

Conveyed  in  its  funeral  casket  from  Chicago  back  to
New  York,  the  body  lay  in  state  both  at  the  Carnegie
Music  Hall  and  at  the  Assembly  Hall  of  the  Salvation
Army.  At  Chicago  three  thousand  persons  were  present
at  the  memorial  service,  and  listened  to  Commander
Booth-Tucker's  heroic  address  on  the  work  and  character
of  his  departed  wife.  In  New  York  uncounted  thousands
more  filed  past  the  flower-laden  bier,  where,  dressed  in
full  Army  uniform,  canopied  by  the  Army  flag,  with  her
well-worn  Bible  and  Hallelujah  bonnet  lying  at  her  feet,
the  mortal  remains  of  the  Consul  formed  the  centre  of
one  of  the  most  pathetic  and  impressive  services  ever  held
in  that  city.

Wreaths  and  messages  of  sympathy  had  poured  in
from  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor.  Persons  of  every
shade  of  religious  opinion  and  almost  every  civilized
nationality  united  in  their  tributes  of  affection  for  the  dead
Consul  and  sympathy  for  her  bereaved  family.

The  crowds,  the  enthusiasm,  the  manifestations  of  grief
were  all  repeated  a  few  days  later,  when  the  casket  was
finally  consigned  to  earth.  Only  the  funeral  of  General
Grant  could  be  said  to  have  created  more  widespread
feeling  among  all  classes  of  society.

At  the  grave-side.  Commander  Booth -Tucker  was  en-
abled to  address  the  audience  at  great  length,  and  even
the  little  twelve-year-old  daughter,  disciplined  thus  early


92       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

in  Army  fortitude,  came  forward  and  sang  a  hymn  over
her  mother's  coffin.  The  funeral  service  lasted  two  hours,
and  it  was  estimated  that  ten  thousand  persons  stood
throughout.

In  London,  the  Congress  Hall  at  Clapton  was  the  scene
of  memorial  tributes  scarcely  less  striking  than  those
exhibited  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic.  Here  the
patriarchal  figure  of  the  General  himself  was  the  cynosure
of  interest  and  sympathy.  Supported  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Bramwell-Booth  and  his  youngest  daughter,  Lucy  (Mrs.
Booth-Hellberg),  the  venerable  head  of  the  Salvation
Army  uttered  a  heart-stirring  speech,  in  which  the  brilhant
virtues  of  the  departed  Consul,  as  a  Soldier,  a  Woman,  a
Wife,  a  Mother,  and  a  Daughter,  were  eloquently  set  forth,
and  her  noble  example  made  the  text  of  a  powerful  appeal.

It  is  said  that  La  Tour  d'Auvergne,  the  first  grenadier
of  France,  is  still  on  the  rolls  of  the  fighting  strength  of
the  French  Army,  and  at  the  periodic  Roll  Call,  in  answer
to  his  name  come  back  the  words,  "  Dead  on  the  Field."

This  incident  suggested  to  an  officer  in  the  Salvation
Army  some  touching  verses  to  the  memory  of  Consul
Emma  Booth-Tucker,  and  with  the  first  and  last  of  these
our  brief  sketch  may  fittingly  close.

"  Warrior  Spirit,  bold  and  daring.
Others'  hardships  ever  sharing,
Spirit  that  would  never  yield,
Fighting,  suffering,  on  the  Field.


While  our  Army  Flag  keeps  waving,
While  immortal  souls  we're  saving,
On  our  Roll  shall  stand  revealed —
'Consul,  dead  upon  the  Field.'"


Jfmncts  Ixiiilcu  l^i&crgaL


%

CHAPTER    I.

OUTWARD    SUNSHINE,    INWARD   CLOUDS.

"pEW  children  could  be  born  into  more  favourable
-^  conditions  of  life  than  those  which  surrounded  the
early  days  of  the  little  girl  who  first  saw  the  light  at  Astlcy
Rectory,  in  Worcestershire,  on  December  14,  1836.

Frances  Ridley  Havergal  was  the  youngest  child  of  the
Rev.  William  Henry  Havergal,  and  Jane,  his  wife.  Her
sisters  numbered  three,  and  she  had  two  brothers.

Mr.  Havergal,  physically,  is  described  by  one  of  his
early  parishioners  as  "  a  lithesome  man — not  a  lithesomer
in  England."  He  could  when  young  walk  three  miles  in
twenty-five  minutes,  and  he  "  never  touched  the  stiles —
he'd  go  clean  over  them."  Mentally,  he  was  singularly
gifted  in  musical  composition,  as  it  is  scarcely  necessary
to  tell  any  one  who  studies  the  names  attached  to  the  tunes
in  any  of  our  church  hymnals.  As  a  pastor,  the  same
old  friend  mentioned  above  testifies  that  "  He  do  be  in  and
out  of  the  houses  all  the  week,  and  that  fetched  them  to
church  on  the  Sunday ;  and  he  do  be  as  frequent  to
Dissenters  as  to  t'others."

Mrs.  Havergal,  we  are  assured  bj^  one  who  knew  her
intimately  during  the  early  part  of  her  married  life,  pos-
sessed great  beauty,  and  was  noticeable  for  ' '  the  brightness
of  her  expression  and  the  sparkle  of  her  eye,"  which  little

93


94        WOMEN  WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

Frances  inherited.  That  she  was  also  a  woman  of  deeply
Christian  character,  quotations  from  her  correspondence,
and  the  records  of  her  patience  and  resignation  during
the  long  and  painful  illness  which  ended  her  life  at  a
comparatively  early  age,  abundantly  testifv.

The  subject  of  our  present  sketch  was  therefore  born
to  a  goodly  heritage  from  both  her  parents.  Her  second
Christian  name  was  given  her  by  her  godfather,  the  Rev,
W.  H.  Ridley,  a  hneal  descendant  of  the  martyred  Bishop,
and  with  it  may  have  come  an  influence  towards  that  strong
Protestantism,  linked  with  a  passionate  attachment  to  the
Church  of  England,  for  which  Frances  was  conspicuous
throughout  her  life.  This  feeling  she  expressed  in  one  of
her  poems  : —

"But  what  the  R.  doth  represent
I  value  and  revere,
A  diamond  clasp  it  seems  to  be,
On  golden  chains,   enlinking  me
In  loyal  love  to  England's  hope,
The  Church  I  hold  so  dear."

Like  so  many  rarely  gifted  children,  Frances  was  re-
markably precocious,  and  in  accordance  with  the  custom
of  fifty  or  sixty  years  ago,  her  education  was  commenced
as  soon  almost  as  she  could  speak.

Her  eldest  sister  Miriam  was  her  first  teacher,  and  she
describes  her  two-year-old  pupil  as  an  extremely  pretty
child,  with  "  fair  complexion,  light  curling  hair,  and  bright
expression."  At  that  age  the  little  creature  could  already
talk  fluently,  and  learned  reading,  spelling,  and  one  of
Jane  Taylor's  rhymes  for  half-an-hour  every  morning.  In
the  afternoon  twenty  or  thirty  stitches  of  needlework  and
a  text  of  Scripture  were  the  appointed  task.

The  play-study  of  the  kindergarten  was  at  that  time
unknown,  but  probably  to  little  Frances'  quick  intelligence
those  early  studies  were  no  hardship,  while  between  times
she  frolicked  in  the  large  Rectory  garden  with  her  pet  dog.

She  was  still  but  an  infant  when  she  began  to  sing  hymns,
in  imitation  of  her  father,  who  possessed,  in  addition  to
musical  genius,  a  "  sweet,  lovely  voice."     At  three  years


96       WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

old  she  could  read  easy  books  with  sufficient  ease  to  enjoy
them,  and  would  frequently  take  refuge  under  a  table  to
finish  some  absorbing  tale.

On  her  fourth  birthday,  little  Frances,  strange  to  relate,
was  brought  down  after  dinner  to  dessert  crowned  with  a
wreath  of  hay-leaves — singularly  prophetic  of  the  poetic
fame  that  lay  before  her.

Her  active  brain  being  always  eager  for  learning,  the
child  acquired  considerable  knowledge  of  the  German
language  by  taking  care  to  be  always  in  the  drawing-room
while  a  professor  was  giving  lessons  to  her  sisters.  At
seven  years  old  she  wrote  her  first  simple  rhymes,  natur-
ally a  reflection  of  the  teaching  she  was  accustomed  to
receive,  and  a  forecast  of  the  many  hymns  from  her  fluent
pen  which  should  resound  throughout  the  churches  of  our
land  in  years  to  come  : —

"Sunday  is  a  pleasant  day,

When  we  to  church  do  go  ;
For  there  we  sing,  and  read  and  pray,
And  hear  the  sermon  too.

On  Sunday  hear  the  village  bells ;

It  seems  as  if  they  said,
Go  to  the  church  where  the  pastor  tells

How  Christ  for  man  has  bled.

And  if  we  love  to  pray  and  read

While  we  are  in  our  youth.
The  Lord  will  help  us  in  our  need,

And  keep  us  in  His  truth."

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  remarkable  correctness  of
the  rhythm  of  these  lines  is  only  marred  by  a  syllable  too
many  in  line  three  of  verse  two.  This  suggests  that  the
word  "  father  "  may  have  originally  occupied  the  place  of
"  the  pastor,"  which  would  have  been  only  natural  as
well  as  true.

Frances,  like  her  father,  was  "  lithesome,"  a  buoyant,
fairy-like  sunbeam  of  a  child,  "  sometimes  a  little  wilful
and  troublesome  from  mere  excess  of  animal  spirits,  but
always  affectionate  and  grateful  for  any  little  treat."  She
was  intensely  fond  of  Nature — blue  sky,  sunshine,  and  the


FRANCES    RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  97

loveliness  of  green,  waving  trees  having  the  most  powerful
influence  over  her,  often  quieting  her  restless  spirit  and
soothing  her  with  the  peace  of  God  when  the  loving  ex-
hortations of  her  friends  had  but  little  effect.  She  read
all  the  poetry  that  came  in  her  way,  and  was  scarcely
eight  years  old  when  she  lighted  upon  Cowper's  lines
upon  the  beauty  of  the  varied  creations  in  God's  world,
ending —

"  My  Father  made  them  all  ! "

Instantly  there  awakened  in  the  child's  heart  an  intense
longing  to  make  these  words  her  own.  Again  and  again
they  recurred  to  her,  haunting  her  with  the  idea  of  an
unattainable  bliss,  and  causing  her  to  say  to  herself  a
dozen  times  a  day,  "  Oh,  if  God  would  but  make  me  a
Christian  before  the  summer  comes !  "  because  she  so
longed  to  enjoy  His  beautiful  works  to  the  uttermost.

But,  alas  !  the  popular  theology  of  that  day,  ignoring
the  fact  that  our  Saviour  taught  His  followers  that  they
must  be  "  converted "  in  order  to  "  become  as  little
children,"  demanded  of  the  httle  ones  themselves  the
moral  convulsion  known  as  "  conversion,"  and  this,  for
years,  stood  between  the  child  Fanny  and  her  Saviour's
waiting  love.

None  guessed  the  spiritual  hunger  and  darkness  which
often  overshadowed  that  bright  spirit,  few  could  have
imagined  how  the  young  heart  was  yearning  for  conscious
union  with  the  great  Father,  and  was  ever  held  back  by
inability  to  "become  a  Christian"  according  to  the  stereo-
typed experience  on  which  her  parents'  creed  insisted.

•'  My  general  notion,"  she  writes,  in  her  autobiography
of  these  seeking  years,  "  was  that  I  didn't  love  God  at  all,
and  was  very  bad  and  wicked  altogether ;  that  if  I  went
on  praying  very  much,  something  would  come  to  me  and
change  me  all  at  once,  and  make  me  like  many  whom  I
read  about  and  a  few  whom  I  saw."

Especially  the  monthly  administration  of  the  Lord's
Supper  so  intensified  the  child's  longing  to  come  to  God,
that,  being  forbidden  to  be  present  even  as  a  spectator,
she  would  listen  to  the  service  through  the  closed  vestry

G


98       WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

door,  and  sob  as  she  felt  that  it  was  not  for  her.  But,  like
so  many  another  sensitive  and  highly-strung  child,  Frances
could  not  confide  these  sorrows  to  even  those  nearest  and
dearest  ones,  the  lovehness  of  whose  lives,  in  contrast  to
the  severity  of  their  theories,  had  been  chiefly  instrumental
in  arousing  the  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness  with
which  her  young  soul  was  filled.

When  eleven  years  old,  Frances  lost  her  mother.  Her
sorrow  was  overwhelming,  but  she  has  regretfully  confessed
that  she  "  did  not,  would  not,  see  God's  hand  "  in  the
bitter  stroke,  and  that  it  left  her  worse  than  it  found  her
as  regards  her  spiritual  condition.  Yet  this  hardened
young  sinner — as  she  even  in  after  j'ears  sincerely  believed
herself  to  have  been — wrote  at  this  time  in  her  little  book
of  poems :

"Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  hath  heard,
Neither  can  man's  heart  conceive,
The  blessed  things  God  hath  prepared
For  those  who  love  Him  and  believe."

And  again —

"Oh  !  had  I  the  wings  of  a  dove,

Soon,  soon  would  I  be  at  my  rest ;
I  would  fly  to  the  Saviour  I  love,

And  there  would  I  lie  on  His  breast."

So  the  years  of  childhood  passed  on.  Frances  seems  to
have  privately  read  her  Bible  and  prayed  with  more  than
moderate  regularitj^  and  not  infrequently  cried  herself  to
sleep  at  night  over  that  hopeless  conviction  of  her  own
great  wickedness  of  heart  which  even  at  twenty-two  years
of  age  she  records  with  special  thankfulness,  as  an  evidence
of  having  been  kept  from  the  "  deadly  error  "  of  daring  to
think  herself  "  as  good  as  others."

In  the  spring  of  1850  these  spasms  of  secret  grief  seem
to  have  resolved  themselves  into  an  almost  settled  melan-
choly. Over  the  spirit  of  the  young  girl  just  entering  her
teens  there  came  a  strange  new  sense  of  the  vanity  of
life  and  earth  and  everj-thing  but  "  the  one  thing,"  and
when  alone,  she  often  sat  and  thought  about  it  all  until
she  wept.     Lying  awake  in  bed  she  spent  many  an  hotir


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  99

earnestly,  and  as  it  seemed  to  her  poor  bewildered  little
mind,  vainly,  praying  for  that  gift  of  "  faith  " — so  vaguely
understood — without  which  she  had  been  taught  to  believe
that  salvation  would  be  impossible.

In  August  of  that  year,  Frances  for  the  first  time  went
to  boarding-school.

The  lady  under  whose  care  she  was  placed — a  Mrs.  Teed,
of  Belmont — was  a  devoutly  Christian  woman,  who  knowing
that  that  half-year  would  be  the  finale  of  a  long  course  of
school-work,  was  most  anxious  that  it  should  be  a  time
of  great  spiritual  blessing  to  her  pupils.  She  constantly
prayed  and  spoke  with  the  girls,  both  collectively  and  in-
dividually, concerning  their  souls,  with  the  result  that
many  conversions  occurred.  The  two  who  were  Frances'
favourite  companions  were  among  those  whose  hearts
were  specially  touched.

One  of  these,  a  girl  named  Mary,  seems  to  have  been  the
first  to  show  Frances  a  better  way  than  constantly  brooding
over  her  own  guilt.  She  reminded  her  of  the  unconditional
invitation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  every  little  child,  and
sweetly  begged  her,  if  she  really  felt  that  she  was  still  a
child,  to  go  straight  to  Jesus  Himself,  and  tell  Him  that
she  desired  to  love  Him,  and  could  not ;  assuring  her  that
He  would  teach  her.  This  sound  advice  Frances  acted
upon  "  in  darkness  and  trembling,"  but  the  dawn  of  joy
was  not  yet.

Her  other  favourite  school- fellow,  one  whom  she  owns
she  "  loved  with  a  perfectly  idolatrous  affection,"  was
"  Diana."  This  young  maiden — "  the  sunbeam  of  the
school" — was  one  who  had,  like  Frances,  been  wishing  and
praying  for  forgiveness  a  long  time.  One  day,  towards
the  close  of  the  term,  a  realization  of  the  Saviour's  love
suddenly  burst  upon  her,  and  her  joy  was  at  once  visible
in  both  face  and  voice.

As  soon  as  possible  Diana  sought  her  friend  Fanny,  and
told  her  all  her  gladness,  repeating  the  "  good  news  "
which  Mary  had  already  spoken.  "  Only  come  to  Him,
and  He  will  receive  you.  Even  now  He  loves  you,  though
you  don't  know  it."

But  Frances  went  home  for  the  Christmas  holidays  still


loo     WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

"  in  the  dim  twilight  of  miserable  and  even  disappointed
longing."

Early  in  the  next  year  she  summoned  courage  to  confide
her  trouble  to  Miss  Cooke,  the  lady  who  soon  afterwards
became  her  loving  step-mother.  The  latt'^r  hopefully
assured  Frances  of  her  firm  belief  that  so  great  a  desire  for
forgiveness  was  certain  to  be  very  shortly  fulfilled,  and
urged  her  to  commit  her  soul  trustfully  to  the  Saviour  at
once.

This  suggestion  brought  the  child  the  first  gleam  of
hope  with  regard  to  rehgion  which  her  fourteen  years  had
ever  experienced,  and  for  a  few  days  she  was  actually
happy.  A  frequent  renewing  of  that  giving  up  of  her  soul
to  Christ  which  had  produced  the  joy  was  able  to  recall  it,
and  we  may  fairly  record  that  the  long-delayed  "conversion"
had  at  last  taken  place.

After  the  summer  vacation  of  that  year,  Frances  went
to  a  new  school,  but  before  the  term  was  ended  a  severe
attack  of  erysipelas  in  the  head  and  face  put  a  stop  to  all
her  studies  for  many  months.

To  one  with  so  great  a  love  for  learning  this  was  a
terrible  trial,  but  Frances  was  able  to  w^ite  to  her  friend,
Elizabeth  Clay : — "  Still,  I  am  sure  it  will  all  be  right ;
and  if  I  receive  good  things  at  the  hand  of  such  a  Father,
shall  I  murmur  at  such  a  drawback,  which  is  only  to  teach
me  a  lesson  I  must  learn  after  all  ?  "


CHAPTER    II.

GLEAMS   OF   LIGHT.

IN  November  1852,  Mr.  Havergal's  eyesight,  which  had
for  some  time  been  failing,  became  so  much  worse
as  to  lead  him  to  visit  Germany  to  consult  an  eminent
oculist.  His  newly-wedded  wife  and  his  daughter  Frances
accompanied  him.

As  they  decided  to  remain  abroad    some  considerable
time,  it  was  arranged  that  the  young  girl  should  attend


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  loi

the  "  Louisenschule  "  in  Dusseldorf,  while  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Havergal  travelled.

Among  the  one  hundred  and  ten  scholars  at  that  school,
Frances  had  reason  to  believe  herself  the  only  one  who
cared  for  religion.  Different  indeed  from  the  gospel-
saturated  atmosphere  at  Belmont !  But,  she  decided,
"  very  bracing."  She  earnestly  tried  to  bear  witness  for
Christ  and  to  win  others,  and  a  considerable  amount  of
persecution  followed,  without  any  known  good  result
among  her  companions.

Still  she  felt  that  these  ungenial  surroundings  had  made
her  "  come  out  more  boldly  and  decidedly  on  the  Lord's
side "  than  she  might  have  done  for  years  under  other
circumstances.

As  regards  her  studies,  she  came  off  with  flying  colours.
Her  own  account  of  the  last  examination  is  given  in  a
letter  to  the  young  friend  mentioned  above.  "  In  the
Louisenschule,  when  a  girl  has  not  learnt  everything  (as
you  know  I  did  not),  she  receives  merely  her  testimony,
but  no  number.  This  half-year,  however,  it  seems  that  all
the  masters,  in  council  assembled,  were  so  very  pleased
with  the  Engliinderin' s  (English  girl's)  papers  and  conduct,
that  they  agreed  to  break  their  rule  for  once,  and  honour
me  with  Numero  I.,  a  thing  which  they  had  never  done
before  !  "

The  summer  of  1853  found  Frances  at  Obercassel,
boarding  with  the  Pastor  Schulze-Berge  and  his  wife,  the
former  being  for  the  time  her  tutor.  With  him  she
studied  French  and  German  Literature,  the  poets,  and
Universal  History.  She  was  exceedingly  happy  with  this
good  pastor  and  "  frau  pastorin,"  and  as  a  noble  German
family  resided  at  Obercassel.  to  whose  "  court "  the  brilliant
and  charming  young  English  girl  was  frequently  invited,
she  had  an  opportunity  of  becoming  acquainted  with  many
members  of  the  German  aristocracy.  Pastor  Schulze-
Berge's  report  of  his  interesting  pupil,  written  to  her  sister
many  years  afterwards,  declares  that  "  sho  showed  from
the  first  such  application,  such  rare  talent,  such  depth  of
comprehension,  that  I  can  only  speak  of  her  progress  as
extraordinary.  .  .  .  What  imprinted  the  stamp  of  nobility


I02      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

upon  her  whole  being,  and  influenced  all  her  opinions,  was
her  true  piety,  and  the  deep  reverence  she  had  for  her
Lord  and  Saviour,  whose  example  penetrated  her  young
hfe  through  and  through."

At  the  age  of  eighteen  Frances  was  conlirmed.  She
had  long  been  thinking  of  and  preparing  for  this  solemn
time,  and  a  detailed  account  of  the  ceremony  and  her  own
emotions  was  found  among  the  sealed  papers  left  to  be
opened  by  her  sister  after  her  death.  In  her  manuscript
book  of  poems,  under  date  of  that  memorable  day,  she
wrote —

"Oh  !    'Thine  for  ever,'  what  a  blessed  thing
To  be  for  ever  His  who  died  for  me  !
My  Saviour,  all  my  life  Thy  praise  I'll  sing,
Nor  cease  my  song  throughout  eternity."

Notes  and  verses  found  among  her  papers  prove  that
she  was  in  the  habit  of  renewing  this  vow — to  her  so
deep  and  real  an  act  of  consecration — every  year  until
her  death.

Returning  home,  Frances  not  only  continued  her  studies
with  unabated  energy,  but  began  to  contribute  poetic
enigmas  and  charades  to  those  little  publications  of  the
period  called  "Pocket-books"  and  "Keepsakes."  Up  till
past  the  middle  of  the  last  century  these  annuals  afforded
almost  the  only  available  opening  to  the  young  aspirant
for  the  honours  of  literature,  and  the  prizes  which  they
offered,  Frances,  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Sabrina  "  or
"  Zoide"  (for  no  budding  poet  in  those  modest  days  ever
dreamed  of  blazoning  out  his  own  real  identity),  often
obtained.  If  the  reward  took  the  form  of  money,  Frances,
in  imitation  of  her  father's  custom  of  devoting  the  pro-
ceeds of  his  musical  compositions  to  God's  work,  sent  it  to
the  Church  Missionary  Society.

In  the  spring  of  1856  came  her  first  visit  to  the  home
of  her  married  sister,  Ellen,  now  Mrs.  Shaw,  of  Celbridge
Lodge,  County  Kildare,  Ireland.  Here  she  took  all  hearts
by  storm.

A  young  Irish  school-girl,  invited  with  others  to  spend
an  afternoon  with  the  EngUsh  visitor,  describes   the  en-


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  103

trance  of  Frances  into  the  drawing-room.  "  Carolling  like
a  bird  "  she  "  flashed  into  the  room  !  Flashed  !  Yes,  1
sav  the  word  advisedly— flashed  in  like  a  burst  of  sunshme,
like  a  hillside  breeze,  and  stood  before  us,  her  fair,  sunny
curls  falling  round  her  shoulders,  her  bright  eyes  dancing
her  fresh,  sweet  voice  ringing  through  the  room.  I  shall
never  forget  that  afternoon— never !  I  sat  perfectly
spellbound  as  she  sang  chant  and  hymn  with  marvellous
sweetness,  and  then  played  two  or  three  pieces  of  Handel,
which  thrnied  me  through  and  through.  .  .  .  As  we
walked  home  down  the  shady  avenue,  one  and  another
said—'  Oh,  isn't  she  lovely  ?  and  doesn  t  she  sing  like  a
bom  angel?'  'I  love  her,  I  do;  and  I'd  follow  her
every  step  of  the  way  back  to  ^England,  if  I  could!
'  Oh,  she's  a  real  Colleen  Bawn  !  '  "

Another  of  the  class  felt  aU  the  time  that  there  must  be
the  music  of  God's  own  love  in  that  fair  singer  s  heart,  and
that  so  there  was  joy  in  her  face,  joy  in  her  words  ]oy  m
her  ways.  And  the  secret  cry  went  up  from  that  young
Irish  heart—"  Lord,  teach  me,  even  me,  to  know  and  love

Thee  too."  ,     ,  .    <.        j         ^  >>  ^f  ^

This  living  yet  unspoken  gospel,  this     good  news     ot  a
glad  heart,  beaming  through  the  whole  personality,  is  the
most  powerful  of  aU  preaching.     But  Frances  Havergal
beHeving   intensely  in  the  definite,   verbal  utterance  of
one's  own  confession  of  faith  before  others   and  of  direct
appeals  to  them,  deplored  very  sadly  m  after  years  that
she  had  not  spoken  out  more  freely  to  those  impressionable
young  Irish  girls.     On  a  subsequent  visit   a  smging-class
was  formed,  which  she  and  they  mutually  enjoyed,  but  a
few  years  after,  as  she  sat  by  the  sick-bed   of   the  most
gifted  of  them  all,  the  girl  confessed  that  m  those  happy
summer  evenings  when  their  young  leader  used   to  walk
down  the  avenue  with  them  after  class,  she  had  Imgered,
longing  and  hungering  for  a  word  "  about  the  Saviour
instead   of    "pleasant,   general   remarks   fbou^   ^he   nice
hymns  and  tunes."     Others,  eventually,  led  the  seeking
soul  to  God,  but,  "  Ah,  Miss  Frances,"  she  said,     I  ought

to  have  been  yours  !"  ^^^„^f

This  was  a  lesson  which  the  young  lady  never   forgot.


I04      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

In  after  life  she  strove  earnestly  to  let  no  opportunity
slip,  to  allow  no  one  who  came  even  for  a  few  minutes
within  the  range  of  her  speech,  whether  in  the  way  of
business  or  pleasure,  to  pass  on  without  some  plain  words
on  the  subject  of  salvation  and  the  state  of  the  soul  before
God.

With  this  decision  came  also  the  resolution  never  to
use  her  beautiful  voice — one  of  the  many  gifts  of  this
richly-endowed  nature — for  any  purpose  but  "  singing  the
Gospel."  "  You  cannot  be  all  for  Him,"  she  writes,  "  as
long  as  your  voice  is  not  for  Him.  Which  shall  it  be  ?
All  for  Him,  or  partly  for  Him  ?  Answer  that  to  Him
whom  you  call  Master  and  Lord."

Taking  the  view  that  everything  not  distinctly  and
obviously  in  the  sendee  of  the  Lord  must  be  more  or  less
on  the  opposite  side,  all  secular  music  became  taboo  to
her.  Even  "  mildly  sacred  songs  "  seemed  unsatisfactory,
and  as  life  advanced  she  adopted  the  rule  of  singing  the
words  of  Scripture  almost  exclusively.  She  even  endorsed
with  delight  the  behef  of  one  enthusiastic  young  friend,
that  a  severe  cold  on  the  chest,  caught  the  very  evening
that  the  latter,  after  some  doubts,  had  consented  to  take
part  in  a  secular  concert,  was  a  direct  sign  that  such  a
performance  was  un pleasing  to  God.

Although  outwardly  so  brimful  of  life  and  spirits,
Frances  Havergal  appears  to  have  never  possessed  really
good  health.  After  reading  of  the  impression  of  joy  and
radiance  which  her  looks  conveyed,  it  is  strange  to  find
her  experiencing  a  morbid  thrill  of  delight  at  fancying,
from  the  flushed  appearance  of  her  face  in  the  glass
one  evening,  that  she  might  possibly  be  the  victim  of
consumption  !

The  strong  common-sense  of  the  present  day  has  routed
the  feeble  sentimentality  of  "  the  fifties."  Now,  as  good
a  Christian  girl  as  Frances  would  rejoice  at  the  prospect
of  a  long  life  of  useful  service,  but  the  religious  literature
and  thought  of  half-a-century  ago  set  forth  the  superior
attractiveness  of  early  death  and  a  speedy  entrance  into
the  realms  of  bliss.

Of  course  the  subject  of  our  present  sketch  was  an  earnest


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  105

Sunday  School  teacher.  She  kept  a  sort  of  diary  of  her
scholars,  whom  she  dearly  loved,  and  as  this  is  dated  from
1846  to  i860,  it  would  appear  that  she  first  undertook  so
responsible  a  position  when  between  nine  and  ten  years
old  !  In  this  age  of  constantly  advancing  efficiency  in  all
who  attempt  to  instruct  the  young,  such  a  state  of  affairs
seems  inconceivable,  but  other  instances  could  be  men-
tioned of  well-brought-up  children  of  that  period,  especially
clergymen's  daughters,  beginning  to  teach  the  small
villagers  in  their  neighbourhood  at  a  remarkably  early
age.  Presumably,  all  that  was  required  was  instruction
in  spelling  out  the  Bible,  and  committing  to  memory
verses  of  Scripture  and  hymns.  We  should  have  further
supposed  the  discipline  difficulty  to  have  been  unheard-
of  in  those  primitive  and  well-ordered  days,  but  the
young  teacher  herself  says,  "  At  one  time  I  had  desperateljr
up-hill  work,  for  mine  was  then  the  worst  class  in  the  school,
and,  out  of  fourteen,  only  a  small  minority  were  even
hopeful."  But  surely,  when  this  experience  was  reached,
Frances  herself  was  past  childhood.

In  i860,  Mr.  Havergal,  after  fifteen  years'  work  at  St.
Nicholas,  Worcester,  removed  to  the  little  country  parish
of  Shareshill.  This  was  chiefly  for  the  benefit  of  his  own
health.  One  of  the  first  improvements  his  coming  effected
was  the  abolition  of  the  Sunday  post.  This  was  a  question
on  which  Frances  always  felt  very  keenly  that  many
Christian  people  did  not  realize  their  responsibilities.
"  *  No  manner  of  work,'  "  she  wrote,  shortly  before  her
death,  "  must  include  postal  delivery,  and  it  is  not  right
to  ignore  it."

About  this  time  she  was  at  last  able  to  say  that  she  had
"  lost  that  weary  bondage  of  doubt,  and  almost  despair,
which 'chained  me  for  so  many  years.  I  have  the  same
sins  and  temptations  as  before,  and  I  do  not  strive  against
them  more  than  before,  and  it  is  often  just  as  hard  work.
But,  whereas  I  could  not  see  why  I  should  be  saved,  I  now
cannot  see  why  I  should  not  be  saved  if  Christ  died  for  all.
.  .  .  His  death  is  really  my  confidence,  and  I  have  tasted
the  sweetness  of  one  new  thing — praise  /  "

Yet,  before  long,  we  find  her  "  borne  back  into  all  the


io6      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

old  difficulties  of  the  way,  with  many  sin-made  aggrava-
tions." "  I  think,"  she  adds,  in  her  autobiographical
record  of  all  her  inner  life,  "  the  great  root  of  all  my
trouble  and  alienation  is  that  I  do  not  now  make  an
unreserved  surrender  of  myself  to  God,  and  until  this  is
done  I  shall  know  no  peace.  I  am  sure  of  it.  I  have  so
much  to  regret ;  a  greater  dread  of  the  opinion  of  worldly
friends,  a  loving  of  the  world,  and  proportionate  cooling
in  heavenly  desire  and  love."

She  had  been  singing  in  the  Philharmonic  Concerts,  and
feared  that  the  pleasure  which  public  applause  gave  her
was  hindering  her  spiritual  progress.  Therefore,  when
ill-health  interrupted  these  performances,  she  accepted  it
as  a  sign  from  God.  "  No  one,"  she  declares,  "  professing
to  be  a  Christian  at  all,  could  possibly  have  had  a  more
cloudy,  fearing,  doubting,  sinning,  and  wandering  heart-
history  than  mine  has  been  through  many  years."

The  comment  of  her  sister  and  biographer,  Maria  V.  G.
Havergal,  upon  these  confessions  is  :  "  Deep  borings,  even
down  into  darksome  depths,  often  precede  the  supply  of
unfailing  springs  of  refreshing  water.  Thus  my  dear  sister
knew  much  of  doubt  and  gloom,  so  that  she  might  be  able
to  comfort  others  and  reveal  to  them  God's  deep  teachings
in  the  darkness."

It  was  Frances'  custom  to  pray  in  private  three  times  a
day.  She  kept  a  paper  in  her  Bible,  with  the  subject  of
each  prayer-hour  carefully  arranged.  Those  of  the  earlier
devotions  were  mainly  for  spiritual  gifts  and  graces ;  those
of  the  evening  for  pardon,  for  a  vision  of  her  own  sinfulness,
and  against  the  special  weakness  of  drowsiness  in  the
morning,  to  which  her  delicate  health  and  need  of  rest
rendered  her  liable.  Had  she  been  granted  wisdom  to
substitute  for  the  latter  petition  a  prayer  against  her
tendency  to  over-work,  a  valuable  life  might  have  been
prolonged.  As  it  was,  her  feverish  energy  impelled  her  to
drive  a  fragile  body  to  its  utmost  limit  of  endurance,  dis-
tressing a  kind  old  servant,  and  doubtless  many  another
who  loved  her,  by  getting  to  her  Latin  books  long  before
breakfast,  and  using  up  every  odd  minute  in  some  kind  of
work  or  study.


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  107

Frequent  breaks-down  in  health  and  the  enforced  idle-
ness of  being  "  laid  up  "  were  the  natural  result.  It  was
a  poor  economy  of  life,  at  best.


CHAPTER    III.

WITH    VOICE   AND    PEN.

HAVING    dwelt    at   length    upon  the  inner,  spiritu^
development  of  Frances  Havergal  from  childhood
to  maturity,  we  will   now  turn  our  attention  to  her  in-

Her  first  accepted  contribution  to  a  real  magazine  appears
to  have  been  her  well-known  hymn  "  I  gave  my  life  for
Thee,"  It  was  suggested  to  her  during  a  visit  to  Germany
in  1858,  through  casually  sitting  down  to  rest  opposite
that  picture  of  the  Crucifixion  which  usually  bears  this
motto.  The  verses  flashed  upon  her  like  an  inspiration,
and  she  at  once  noted  them  down  on  a  scrap  of  paper.
But  she  was  not  pleased  with  the  result,  and  tossed  it  into
the  fire.  As,  however,  the  paper  feU  out  unharmed,  she
decided  to  keep  it.  Some  time  after  she  showed  them  to
her  father,  who  was  so  favourably  impressed  that  he  wrote
the  tune  "  Baca  "  speciaUy  to  go  with  them.

These  verses  subsequently  appeared  in  Good  Words,  ana
occasioned  a  request  from  the  editor  for  further  poetical
contributions  from  the  same  pen.  .

The  first  cheque  the  young  authoress  received  she
characteristically  devoted  entirely  to  sacred  uses.  Ihe
bulk  of  the  money  she  gave  to  her  dear  father  (he
accepted  the  love,  but  not  the  cheque),  hoping  to  further
some  one  or  other  of  the  religious  objects  he  had  always
at  heart,  and  the  remainder  she  divided  between  similar

works.  .  ,

The  delight  of  this  first  achievement  was,  however,
but  the  forerunner  of  a  keen  disappointment.  Not  from
any  failure  of  literary  success,  but  because  the  over-taxed
mind  was  too  much   for  the   frail  body.     The  doctors


io8      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

fiat  was,  "  She  must  choose  between  writing  and  living.
She  can't  do  both."

Thus  for  nine  years  the  pen  was  laid  aside.  When,  after
this  interval  of  waiting,  Frances  published  her  first  book,
The  Ministry  of  Song,  she  regarded  the  delay  not  as  the
result  of  any  error  in  self-management,  but  as  the  direct
interposition  of  the  Divine  Will,  "  because  He  knows
best  what  will  really  ripen  and  further  His  work  in  us."

The  precise  date  when  Frances  first  discovered  her
wonderful  gift  for  musical  composition  does  not  appear,
but  it  was  evidently  somewhere  between  '60  and  '65.

Towards  the  close  of  the  latter  year  she  revisited  her
friends  in  Germany,  and  took  the  opportunity  of  obtaining
the  opinion  of  the  German  musician,  Hiller,  on  the  merits
of  her  work.  This  was  at  the  earnest  desire  of  her  former
tutor,  Pastor  Schulze-Berge,  but  sorely  against  her  own
inclination,  because,  she  modestly  confesses,  "  I  expected
nothing  but  utter  quenching  from  such  a  man."

Her  father  and  step-mother  were  at  that  time  staying
at  Bonn,  and  the  latter  accompanied  Frances  to  an
appointed  interview  with  the  great  composer.

He  received  them  kindly,  and  then  in  silence  proceeded
to  examine  the  volume  of  melodies  which  the  young  lady
had  submitted  for  his  verdict.

When  about  three-quarters  through,  he  suddenly  asked,
"  What  instruction  have  you  had  ?  "

"  I  told  him,"  Frances  relates,  "  of  Hatherley's  having
corrected  my  first  six  songs,  and  my  having  a  musical
father,  to  whom  I  occasionally  referred  difficult  points,
and  with  whom  I  had  musical  talk  in  general.  '  I  do  not
care  anything  about  that,'  said  he.  '  I  mean,  what  regular
musical  course  have  you  gone  through,  and  under  what
professor  ?  '  I  told  him  I  had  done  nothing  of  the  sort.
He  looked  very  hard  at  me,  as  if  to  see  if  I  was  telling  the
truth,  and  then  turned  back  to  my  music,  saying,  '  In  that
case  I  find  this  very  remarkable  !  '  "

The  professor  subsequently  told  Frances  that  although
he  saw  no  sign  of  great  creative  power  in  her  melodies,  he
was  astonished  at  her  harmonies.  "It  is  something  sin-
gular," he  said,  "  to  find  such  grasp  of  the  subject,  such


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  109

power  of  harmonization,  except  where  there  has  been  long
and  thorough  study  and  instruction ;  here  I  can  give
ahuost  unlimited  praise."

On  being  asked  whether  there  was  promise  enough  in
her  efforts  to  make  it  advisable  for  her  to  devote  herself
to  music  as  a  life-work,  he  replied  that  he  could  sincerely
and  unhesitatingly  say  that  there  was.

Hiller  recommended  to  Frances  a  book  of  exercises,
which  she  conscientiously  determined  to  go  through  before
attempting  any  more  composition.  Of  course  she  had,
in  an  amateur  way,  studied  harmony  years  before — chiefly
by  reading  as  much  of  a  treatise  on  the  subject  as  she  could
grasp  last  thing  every  night  before  going  to  bed,  and  work-
ing out  the  exercises  in  her  head  before  falling  asleep —
but  the  amazement  and  almost  scepticism  of  the  great
man  on  hearing  that  she  had  been  through  no  regular
"  academical  course,"  was  an  immense  compliment.

Needless  to  say,  this  gifted  musician-poetess  was  an
exquisite  pianist.  Her  sister  says  :  "  Often  she  sang  for  me
her  recitative  and  air  to  the  words  in  Isaiah  xii.  .  .  .  The
third  verse,  '  Therefore  with  joy,'  etc.,  was  real  water-
music  ;  the  notes  seemed  sparkles  of  water  dropping  gladly,
and  the  illusion  was  so  perfect  that  one's  soul  seemed
refreshingly  sprayed  with  joy."

We  may  here  mention  that  this  elder  sister,  Maria,  had
often  anticipated  she  might  have  Frances  to  play  and
sing  to  her  when  she  was  dying,  little  thinking  the  younger
one  would  be  called  first.  Yet,  during  the  long  and  painful
months  that  Maria  lay  sick  unto  death,  the  memory  of  those
lovely  melodies  again  and  again  returned  to  her  with  such
extraordinary  vividness  that  it  was  sometimes  difficult  for
her  to  realize  that  she  was  not  listening  to  them  with  her
outward  ears.  It  seems  scarcely  fanciful  to  imagine  that
the  blessed  spirit  of  the  departed  was  allowed  thus  to
communicate  with  the  mind  of  the  dear  one  left  behind,
and  soothe  her  sufferings  in  the  very  way  that  they  had
been  wont  to  promise  one  another  should  be.  Many  an
hour  of  pain  was  beguiled  to  Maria  Havergal  by  these
wonderful  mental  reproductions  of  her  sister's  music.

Frances'  touch,  we  are  told,  was  instinct  with  soul,  as


no      WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

was  also  her  singing.  A  pupil  of  Beethoven  once  pro-
nounced her  rendering  of  the  Moonlight  Sonata  "  perfect  "  ;
and  her  memory  was  such  that  she  would  play  through
Handel  and  much  of  Beethoven  and  Mendelssohn  without
any  notes.

The  Rev.  W.  H.  Havergal  died  on  Easter  Tuesday  morn-
ing, 1870,  aged  seventy-seven.  It  was  quite  unexpectedly,
from  apoplexy.

"...  There  was  no  last  word  of  love,

So  suddenly  on  us  the  sorrow  fell ;
His  bright  translation  to  the  home  above

Was  clouded  with  no  shadow  of  farewell  ;
His  last  Lent  evening  closed  with  praise  and  prayer,
And  then  began  the  songs  of  endless  Easter  there,"

It  was  soon  after  her  father's  death  that  Frances  began
preparing  Havergal's  Psalmody  for  the  press.  This  book
was  afterwards  largely  used  in  connection  with  the  Rev.
C.  B.  Snepp's  Hymnal,  Songs  of  Grace  and  Glory,  to  which
compilation  Frances  herself  contributed  several  original
compositions.

In  nothing  did  she  miss  the  comradeship  and  counsel
of  her  dearly-loved  father  more  than  in  his  advice  about
her  music.  One  morning,  shortly  after  her  bereavement,
she  was  puzzling  over  some  difficult  point  which  he  coidd
at  once  have  made  clear  to  her,  when  there  flashed  into
her  mind  the  words,  "  Thou  art  the  Helper  of  the  fatherless."
This  was  instant  comfort  to  her,  and  she  formed  the  habit
of  seeking  Divine  help  in  both  her  musical  and  poetic
composition,  accepting  the  thoughts  and  ideas  that  came
to  her  as  sent  direct  from  God.

"  Writing  is  praying  with  me,"  she  told  a  friend ;  "  for
I  never  seem  to  ^vrite  even  a  verse  by  myself,  and  feel  like
a  little  child  writing.  You  know  a  child  would  look  up  at
every  sentence,  and  say,  '  And  what  shall  I  say  next  ?  '
That  is  just  what  I  do  ;  I  ask  that  at  every  line  He  would
give  me,  not  merely  thoughts  and  power,  but  also  every
word,  even  the  very  rhymes.  Very  often  I  have  a  most
distinct  and  happy  consciousness  of  direct  answers."

Of  course  it  was  a  deep  joy  to  this  consecrated  young


FRANCES    RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  in

genius  to  hear  of  her  poems  or  music  being  used  and  blessed
by  God,  and  she  fully  realized  the  high  privUege  that  was

hers.  ,,  .     ^

"  Literal  '  singing  for  Jesus,'  "  she  wrote,  is  to  me,
somehow,  the  most  personal  and  direct  commission  I  hold
from  my  beloved  Master  ;  and  my  opportunities  for  it  are
often  most  curious,  and  have  been  greatly  blessed  ;  every
hne  in  my  little  poem  '  Singing  for  Jesus '  is  from  personal
experience."

In  this  connection  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  relate
one  instance  of  the  kind  of  work  for  her  Master  which  she
was  able  so  often  to  accomplish,  and  also  of  a  strangely
granted  prayer.

Frances  Havergal,  than  whom  a  more  loyal  soul  never
lived,  was  accustomed  to  pray  especially  for  our  dear
Queen  Victoria's  youngest  child,  and  one  day,  when  re-
vising the  proofs"'  of  her  elegantly  got-up  volume  Life
Mosaic,  with  its  exquisite  coloured  illustrations  of  Alpine
flowers  and  scenery  by  the  Baroness  Helga  von  Cramm,
she  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  I  should  so  like  to  send  one  to  the
Princess  Beatrice !  "

There  seemed,  however,  to  be  no  means  of  approach  to
her  Royal  Highness,  and  Frances  made  the  matter  a
subject  of  special  petition.

During  a  subsequent  visit  to  London,  she  was  present
at  an  amateur  musical  evening,  where  she  was  much
interested  by  the  beautiful  singing  of  an  Italian  lady.

Presently  Frances  herself  was  invited  to  sing,  and  after
rendering  one  of  Handel's  compositions,  was  persuaded  to
give  the  company  a  song  of  her  own.  ^     ^

She  chose,  "  Whom,  having  not  seen,  ye  love.'         She
always  sang  so  rejoicingly,"  says   her  sister,  "  the  words
'  Though  now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice,
up  the  scale  of    joy,  and  then  the  deep  adoring  thrill,
'  With  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.'  "

As  she  left  the  piano,  the  Italian  lady,  her  eyes  full  of
tears,  whispered,  "Miss  Havergal,  I  envy  you!  Your
words  and  face  tell  me  you  have  something  I  have  not.

A  pleasant  correspondence  followed  this  interview,  and
when  it  transpired  that  the  lady  was  well  acquamted  with


112      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

the  Princess  Beatrice,  Frances  ventured  to  make  her  the
intermediary  of  her  longed-for  offering  to  her  Roj^al  High-
ness. The  book  was  graciously  accepted,  and  in  return
the  Princess  sent  the  poetess  her  photograph,  with  her
autograph  written  beneath  it,  and  a  pleasant  assurance
that  she  admired  the  poetry.

Long  after,  the  surviving  sister  was  gratified  to  see  an
extract  from  Frances'  lines  on  "  September,"  enwreathed
by  the  same  Princess  in  heather  and  autumnal  leaves,  in
her  artistic  Birthday  Book.

Frances'  intense  sense  of  what  we  may  almost  call
"  verbal  inspiration  "  as  regarded  her  compositions,  enabled
her  to  take  all  experiences  connected  with  them  in  a  spirit
of  complete  submission,  believing  everything,  good  or
bad,  to  be  equally  an  ordering  of  the  Divine  Will.

Thus,  when  a  fire  occurring  at  her  publisher's  totally
destroyed  the  results  of  six  months'  labour,  of  which  she
had  no  copy  or  even  a  memorandum  to  assist  her  memory,
she  took  it  that  she  had  been  too  anxious  to  get  the  book
done  (it  was  an  Appendix  to  Songs  of  Grace  and  Glory),
that  she  might  hasten  on  to  other  work  of  her  "  owa.
choosing  and  planning."  Therefore  she  thanked  God  for
mercifully  giving  her  another  opportunity  of  doing  these
hymns  more  patiently  and  more  for  Him.

In  the  same  spirit  she  regarded  as  an  especial  mark  of
Divine  favour  a  relapse  after  the  serious  attack  of  typhoid
fever  which  had  almost  proved  fatal  in  '74  and  '75.  Lament-
ing that  in  the  earlier  part  of  her  illness  she  had  not  "glorified
Him  in  the  fires,"  because  "  after  I  had  lost  all  my  strength,
I  could  not  bear  the  pain  without  moaning  and  crying  out,
and  showing  eagerness  for  remedies,"  she  felt  that  a
recurrence  of  illness  was  a  proof  of  God's  pardon  and  a
gracious  opportunity  of  learning  the  "  turned  lesson  "
over  again.

In  the  limited  space  at  our  disposal,  it  would  be  im-
possible to  give  extracts  from  the  melodious  poems  which
have  made  the  name  of  Frances  Havergal  so  widely  known
and  dearly  loved  both  in  this  country  and  across  the  seas.
We  must  content  ourselves  with  mentioning  a  few  of  her
works.


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  113

The  Ministry  of  Song  was,  as  we  have  already  indicated,
her  first  volume  of  poetry,  and  was  published  in  1869.
This  was  followed  by  companion  volumes,  Under  the
Surface  and  Under  His  Shadow,  in  all  of  which  the  heart-
experiences  of  the  writer  as  well  as  her  spiritual  revelations
and  inspirations  are  set  forth,  as  one  reviewer  expressed
it,  "  with  truth,  delicacy,  and  sweetness."  "  Each  poem,"
said  a  well-known  religious  weekly,  speaking  of  Under  the
Surface,  "  is  a  life-song  and  a  heart-story,"  and  every  one
breathes  that  profound  devotion  to  a  personal  Saviour
which  was  the  joy  of  the  writer's  radiant  Ufe.  The  power
for  good  of  these  books  can  be  hardly  over-estimated,  for
they  have  reached  a  circulation  of  hundreds  of  thousands,
and  no  one  can  read  them  without  being  spiritually
uplifted.

But,  perhaps,  in  the  devotional  world,  Miss  Havergal's
prose  works  have  had  even  greater  popularity  than  her
poems.  Kept  for  the  Master's  Use,  a  little  book,  which  it
is  hardly  necessary  to  remind  our  readers  has  for  its  text
the  twelve  couplets  of  F.  R.  H.'s  own  universally  sung
Consecration  hymn,  is  a  Christian  classic,  endorsed  in  its
noble  aspirations  by  the  most  devout  souls  in  every  de-
nomination. My  king,  or  Daily  Thoughts  for  the  King's
Children,  is  scarcely  less  widely  appreciated ;  this,  and
three  companion  volumes  of  the  same  series — Royal
Commandments,  Royal  Bounty,  and  Loyal  Responses — show
most  wonderful  typical  meanings  in  innumerable  little-
noticed  passages  of  the  Old  Testament,  particularly  in  the
history  of  King  David.  Miss  Havergal  displays  striking
insight — sometimes  one  is  almost  tempted  to  call  it
ingenuity — in  discovering  hidden  allusions  to  the  relation
of  Christ's  servants  to  their  Lord.  The  Royal  Invitation  and
Starlight  through  the  Shadows  are  also  somewhat  on  these
her  favourite  lines.

A  tender  lover  of  children.  Miss  Havergal  could  not  be
content  to  leave  them  without  a  share  in  the  Divine  feast.
Little  Pillows,  being  Good  Night  Thoughts  for  the  Little
Ones,  has  had  great  vogue  ;  Morning  Bells,  being  Waking
Thoughts  for  the  Little  Ones,  scarcely  less  so,  and  Morning
Stars,  or  Names  of  Christ  for  His  Little  Ones,  follows  them

H


114      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

closely.  Bruey,  the  story  of  "  a  Little  Worker  for  Christ,"
has  been  much  liked,  and  The  Four  Happy  Days  is  a  pretty
story  in  which  under  the  name  of  "  Annie  "  the  authoress
tells  the  experiences  of  her  own  child-life,  especially  those
relating  to  the  death  of  her  mother.

Of  the  hymns,  sacred  songs,  innumerable  articles  for  maga-
zines, the  booklets  and  the  papers  on  all  kinds  of  religious
topics  which  flowed  from  Miss  Havergal's  untiring  pen,  we
can  only  speak  in  passing.  Her  private  correspondence
was  also  voluminous,  and  it  is  in  letters  to  individuals  that
her  sweetness  of  manner,  intense  earnestness,  and  bright,
practical  piety  are  ofttimes  seen  at  their  best.


CHAPTER   IV.

*  ONLY   FOR  THEE  !

FRANCES  HAVERGAL'S  life  was  not  only  richly
dowered  with  natural  gifts,  but  her  circumstances
were  in  every  way  of  the  most  happy  and  favoured.  She
was  an  illustration  of  the  truth  that  from  those  to  whom
much  is  given  much  will  be  required  ;  nor  did  she  disap-
point Him  who  had  so  lavished  blessings  upon  her  that
she  might  as  abundantly  impart  to  others.

In  addition  to  the  privilege  of  being  surrounded  by
relatives  and  friends  of  a  high  degree  of  Christian  excel-
lence, and  persons  of  aU  classes  who  regarded  her  wher-
ever she  went  with  loving  admiration,  she  possessed  the
advantage  of  complete  freedom  from  all  the  sordid
and  depressing  cares  of  lower  middle-class  life,  and  the
opportunity  of  frequent  travel  in  delightful  companj^.

In  girlhood,  as  we  have  seen,  she  enjo3'ed  a  long  sta}?  in
Germany,  visiting  several  interesting  spots.  This  was
iollowed  by  visits  to  her  sister's  home  in  Ireland.  But  a
greater  event  was  Frances'  first  sight  of  Switzerland,
whither  she  journeyed,  in  May  1869,  with  her  brother-in-
law,  Mr.  Crane,  his  wife  and  eldest  daughter.     As  usual,


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  ti5

she  carefully  wrote  in  her  diary  of  every  scene  she  looked
upon,  and  all  the  emotions  to  which  it  gave  rise.  Some
of  her  descriptions  are  gems  of  word-painting.

Thus  she  describes  the  Rhine  Falls:—"  It  was  fascinating
to  look  down  on  the  wild  rapids,  sheets  of  glass-like  trans-
parency, flowing  swiftly  over  rock  tables ;  then  a  sudden
precipice  below  water,  which  might  go  down  to  any  depth,
only  that  you  are  not  looking  down  into  darkness,  but
into  emerald  and  snow  mingled  and  transfused  mar-
vellously. .  .  .  You  look  up,  and  see  masses  of  bright
water  hurled  everlastingly,  irresistibly  down,  down,  down,
with  a  sort  of  exuberance  of  the  joy  of  utter  strength  :  you
look  across,  and  see  shattered  diamonds  by  millions  leaping
and  glittering  in  the  sunshine ;  you  look  down,  and  it  is  a
tremendous  wrestling  and  overcoming  of  flood  upon  flood,
all  the  more  weirdly  grand  that  it  is  half  hidden  in  the
clouds  of  spray."

During  this  tour  Frances  enjoyed  the  realization  of  her
childhood's  dream  and  longing,  and  beheld  snow  mountains
for  the  first  time.  She  was  deeply  impressed.  "  I  never
saw  anything  material  and  earthly,"  she  writes,  "  which
so  suggested  the  ethereal  and  heavenly  .  .  .  and  one  could
better  fancy  them  to  be  the  visible  foundations  of  the
invisible  celestial  city,  bearing  some  wonderful  relation  to
its  transparent  gold  and  crystal  sea,  than  only  snow  and
granite."

From  Switzerland  she  soon  after  travelled  back  to  the
Highlands  of  Scotland,  the  scenery  of  which  pleased  her

greatly.

In  187 1  Frances  again  visited  Switzerland  with  her
friend  Elizabeth  Clay.  They  had  a  most  delightful  tour
Qf  several  weeks'  duration,  and  our  poetess  rapturously
pictures  an  Alpine  dawn  and  sunrise  :— "  When  we  came
oul  we  saw  the  '  daffodil  sky  '  which  Tyndall  describes—
in  the  east  a  calm  glory  of  expectant  light  as  if  something
positively  celestial  must  come  next,  instead  of  merely  the
usual  sun.  In  the  south-west  the  grand  mountains  stood,
white  and  perfectly  clear,  as  if  they  might  be  waiting  for
the  resurrection,  with  the  moon  shining  pale  and  radiant
over  them,  the  deep  Rhone  valley  dark  and  grave-like  in


n6     WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

contrast  below.  As  we  got  higher,  the  first  rose-flush
struck  the  Mischabel  and  Weisshom,  and  Monte  Leon
came  to  Ufe  too  ;  it  was  real  rose-fire,  delicate  yet  intense.
The  Weisshom  was  in  its  full  glory,  looking  more  perfectly
lovely  than  any  earthly  thing  I  ever  saw.  When  the
tip  of  the  Matterhom  caught  the  red  light  on  its  evil-
looking  rocky  peak,  it  was  just  like  a  volcano,  and
looked  rather  awful  than  lovely,  giving  one  the  idea  of
an  evil  angel,  impotently  wrathful,  shrinking  away  from
the  serene  glory  and  utter  purity  of  a  holy  angel,  which
that  Weisshom  at  dawn  might  represent,  if  anything
earthly  could."

1872  finds  our  mountain-clamberer  on  the  top  of  Snowdon.
Wales,  she  declared,  no  more  suffers  in  comparison  with
Switzerland  "  than  a  forget-me-not  beside  a  rose."  Her
favourite  mountain  verse  was,  "  Unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  do
we  give  thanks,  for  that  Thy  name  is  near  Thy  wondrous
works  declare."

In  1873  Frances  was  back  again  in  her  beloved  Switzer-
land, this  time  with  her  friends  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Snepp,  and
their  daughter  Emily.  It  was  during  this  visit  that  her
high  spirits  and  delight  in  physical  activity  nearly  led  to
sad  disaster.  She  had  a  perfect  passion  for  "  glissading  "
down  icy  slopes,  and  excitement  on  one  occasion  getting
the  better  of  discretion,  she  and  her  guide  were  all  but
precipitated  into  a  fathomless  abyss.  It  was  Mr.  Snepp's
presence  of  mind  that  saved  their  lives.

In  1874  Switzerland  was  again  revisited,  in  company  of
her  niece  and  other  friends.  A  word-picture  of  "  Sunset
on  the  Faulhorn  "  was  the  gem  of  her  "  circular  letters  "
home  during  this  tour,  but  it  is  too  long  to  be  quoted
here.

1875  was  the  year  of  Miss  Havergal's  serious  illness,
and  subsequent  relapse,  already  alluded  to,  and  she  did
not  leave  England,  but  appears  to  have  had  a  pleasant
autumnal  sojourn  at  picturesque  Whitby.  The  following
summer,  however,  found  her  escorting  her  sister  Miriam  to
the  beauties  of  the  Alps.

It  was  during  this  sojourn  that,  at  Champery,  Frances
became  acquainted  with  the  Baroness  Helga  von  Cramm,


FRAN'CES    RIDLEY    HAVKRGAL.


Ii8     WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

a  gifted  artist,  in  collaboration  with  whom  she  soon  after
published  an  exquisite  series  of  cards,  bearing  Alpine
views  and  verses.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  last
glimpse  of  Switzerland.

In  1878,  Somersetshire,  Devonshire,  and  Wales  were
all  visited.  It  was  from  the  lovely  "  Welsh  nest,"  at
Caswell  Bay,  Swansea,  that  in  June  of  the  following  year
her  soul  winged  its  way  to  the  glories  of  the  Heavenly
Land.

During  all  these  journeys,  wherever  she  went  and
whenever  she  stopped,  this  zealous  evangelist  seized  every
opportunity  of  speaking  of  the  Saviour  to  all  around  her.
The  sunny  beauty  of  her  countenance,  so  often  remarked,
the  unaffected  joyousness  of  her  manner,  and  her  merry
laugh,  were  ever  the  greatest  possible  recommendations  of
the  religion  she  preached.

She  was  always  ready  to  give,  not  only  the  little  books
and  papers  she  invariably  carried  with  her  for  the  purpose,
but  her  own  time  and  energy — herself,  in  fact — to  any  whom
she  felt  she  might  by  any  means  help.

At  Ormont  Dessus,  during  one  of  her  Swiss  tours,  she
willingly  gave  up  best  part  of  a  morning  which  she  had  in-
tended to  employ  in  writing  a  poem,  to  talk  to  a  labouring
man  and  his  sons  who  crossed  her  path.  This  opportunity
was  a  direct  answer  to  her  prayer  to  be  made  "  just  as
willing  to  do  any  little  bit  of  work  for  Him  .  ,  .  simple
and  unseen,  as  this  other  piece  of  work  which  might  win
something  of  man's  praise."

Soon  after  her  return  from  this  holiday,  Frances,  though
actually  in  the  first  stages  of  typhoid  fever,  put  herself  to
considerable  inconvenience  to  see,  during  a  railway  journey,
a  young  stranger  whom  her  sister  had  written  her  was
needing  help.  "  It  will  be  well  worth  any  fatigue,"  she
said,  "  if  I  can  comfort  her."

When  visiting  at  the  houses  of  relatives  or  friends  it  was
the  same  thing.  The  sen^ants  of  the  family  and  the
cottagers  around  alike  adored  the  sweet-voiced,  sunshiny
lad}^  who  spoke  to  them  so  winningly  about  higher  things.
"  Bible-readings  in  the  servants'  hall,  kind  talks  alone,
and  helpful  prayers,  are  all  remembered."


FRANCES    RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  119

F.  R.  H.'s  own  account  of  how  she  came  to  write  her
most  popular  hymn —

"  Take  my  life  and  let  it  be
Consecrated,  Lord,  to  Thee,"

is  a  fair  instance  of  the  way  in  which  she  worked  for  her
Master  when  enjoying  the  hospitahty  of  friends.

"  T  went  for  a  little  visit  of  five  days.  There  were  ten
persons  in  the  house,  some  unconverted  and  long  prayed
for,  some  converted  but  not  rejoicing  Christians.  He  gave
me  the  prayer,  '  Lord,  give  me  all  in  this  house  !  '  And
He  just  did  !  Before  I  left  the  house  every  one  had  got  a
blessing.  The  last  night  of  my  visit  I  was  too  happy  to
sleep,  and  passed  most  of  the  night  in  praise,  and  renewal
of  my  own  consecration,  and  these  little  couplets  formed
themselves  and  chimed  in  my  heart  one  after  another,  till
they  finished  with,  '  Ever,  only,  ALL  for  Thee  !  '  "

Again:  '"  I  was  at  a  large  regular  London  party  lately,
and  I  was  so  happy.  He  seemed  to  give  me  'the  secret  of
His  presence,'  and  of  course  I  sang  '  for  Jesus,'  and  did
not  I  have  dead  silence  >  Afterwards  I  had  two  really
important  conversations  with  strangers  ;  one  seemed  ex-
tremely surprised  at  finding  himself  quite  easily  drifted
from  the  badinage  with  which  he  started  into  a  right-down
personal  talk  about  his  personal  danger  and  his  only  hope
of  safety  ;    he  took  it  very  well,  and  thanked  me."

In  her  correspondence.  Miss  Havergal  of  course  found
abundant  opportunities  for  introducing  the  one  paramount
topic  of  interest ;  both  in  communicating  to  other  Christians
the  helpful  revelations  and  rich  Biblical  "  finds  "  which
were  sent  to  her  by  her  Master,  and  in  urging  the  blessedness
of  the  consecrated  life  upon  those  who  had  not  yet  tasted
its  joys.  To  her  own  large  circle  of  nephews  and  nieces
she  was  indeed  a  guiding,  guardian  angel.

To  one  little  child  she  writes  : —


<(


Dearest  '  little  thing,'

"Let  the  Lord  lead  you,  let  Him  have  you  altogether.
And,  dear  pet,  blessing  hardly  ever  comes  alone  ;  if  He


I20     WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

has  the  joy  of  winning  you  altogether  for  Himself,  He
won't  stop  there;  He  will  do  more,  He  is  doing  so  here.  .  .  .
I  feel  most  deeply  for  you.  Keep  very  close  to  Jesus,  my
darling,  and  ask  JHim  never  to  let  you  take  back  what  you
have  now  given  Him.  Be  His  entirely,  without  any
reserve,  and  He  will  be  yours  entirely."  .  .  .

Of  course,  so  widely-popular  a  writer  received  shoals  of
letters,  from  shoals  of  persons,  on  all  possible  subjects,
both  relevant  and  irrelevant,  especially  from  would-be
authors,  who  calmly  asked  to  have  their  MSS.  carefully
read  and  criticized,  without  the  least  regard  to  the  time
and  labour  that  must  be  expended  upon  them.

The  following  is  a  specimen  of  the  multifarious  requests
that  reached  her,  by  one  post : —

"  Request  for  contribution  to  Irish  Church  Advocate.
Hymns  for  special  New  Year  Services  wanted.  To  write
cards  suitable  for  mourners.  For  set  of  six  more  '  Marching
Orders.'  Request  for  poems  to  illustrate  six  pictures.
For  prayer,  S3'mpathy  and  counsel  (two  sheets  crossed).
Two  sheets  from  a  septuagenarian,  requiring  thought.
Request  to  write  a  book  suitable  for  Unitarians.  Sundry
inquiries  and  apologies  from  one  who  had  been  printing
her  verses  with  another  author's  name.  Request  to  re-
print an  article,  with  four  explanatory  enclosures.  Also  to
revise  a  proof,  and  add  my  opinion.  To  revise  many
sheets  of  musical  manuscripts.  Three  requests  to  supply
cards  for  Bazaars.  Advice  wanted  how  to  get  articles
inserted  in  magazines.  To  recommend  pupils.  To  pro-
mote a  new  magazine.  To  give  opinion  on  an  oratorio.
Some  long  poems  in  manuscript  to  revise  and  advise  thereon.
Besides  packets  of  leaflets  and  cards  wanted."

To  partially  meet  such  overwhelming  pressure,  a  circular
was  printed,  giving  numbered  answers  to  the  most  con-
stantly recurring  queries,  which  could  be  marked  ac-
cording to  the  correspondent's  particular  question  or
questions.  But  even  with  the  relief  this  afforded,  many
hours  a  day  were  unavoidably  occupied  in  replying  to
individuals  whose  special  needs  could  not  be  brought
under  any  general  heading.     Of  course,  appeals  for  spiritual


FRANCES    RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  121

advice  were  always  answered  personally  and  at  full  length.
The  amount  of  Bible-noting  and  marking,  and  also  of
diary-writing  which  Miss  Havergal's  marvellously  active
pen  also  accomplished  is  simply  astonishmg.  At  the
beginning  of  the  last  year  of  her  life  a  friend  sent  her  a
little  Journal  of  Mercies,  in  which  she  took  great  delight
in  entering  whichever  "  mercy  "  seemed  uppermost  in  her
mind  for  each  day,  "  not  one  in  a  thousand,  though  !  she
characteristically  comments.

It  often  happens  that  the  pen  and  the  needle  are  not
equaUy  favoured  by  the  same  hand.  One  is  therefore
rather  surprised  to  find  that  Frances  Havergal  was  an
accomplished  needlewoman.  Her  work,  we  are  told,  '  was
exquisite,  from  the  often  despised  darmng  to  the  most
delicate  lace-work  and  embroidery."  She  actually  con-
fessed "  I  do  like  getting  a  whole  pile  of  socks  to  mend
when  'l  visit  busy  mothers ;  and  at  missionary  working
parties  it  amused  me  to  see  my  plam-sewmg  handed  round.
But  as  we  once  heard  a  gifted  lady  remark—  It  a
woman  has  brains,  she  ought  to  be  able  to  do  everytJnng
better  than  one  who  has  not !  "  And  records  of  the  varied
accomplishments  of  feminine  geniuses  seem  to  bear  this  out.

The  mention  of  embroidery  and  lace-work  suggests  the
inquiry  as  to  how  much  of  outward  adornment  this  apostle
of  entire  consecration  deemed  allowable  to  a  Christian.  ^^

Speaking  on  her  couplet  "  Take  my  silver  and  my  gold,
she  said:  "As  He  has  entrusted  to  me  a  body  for  my  special
charge,  I  am  bound  to  clothe  that  body  with  His  silver  and
gold  so  that  it  shall  neither  suffer  from  cold  nor  bnng
discredit  upon  His  cause  !  .  .  .  H  the  King's  daughter  is
to  be  '  all  glorious  within,'  she  must  not  be  outwardly  a
fright'  I  must  dress  both  as  a  lady  and  a  Christian.
The  question  of  cost  I  see  very  strongly,  and  do  not  con-
sider myself  at  liberty  to  spend  on  dress  that  which  might
be  spared  for  God's  work."  (This  latter  remark  would
certainly  apply  as  well  to  time  as  to  money/)  She  adds :
"  By  dressing  unremarkably,  yet  with  a  generally  pleasmg
effect,  no  attention  is  distracted.  ...  But  I  shaU  always
ask  for  guidance  in  all  things."

Her  jewellery  Miss  Havergal  had  long  ago  given  up  to


122      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

be  sold  for  the  benefit  of  a  missionary  society,  with  the
exception  of  one  or  two  brooches  for  actual  use,  and  sundry
small  memorials  of  departed  friends,  which  she  "  redeemed  "
for  their  value  in  cash.  But  the  fact  that  she  brought  as
a  gift  for  a  friend  when  returning  from  one  of  her  Swiss
tours  a  locket  of  "  crystal  and  amethyst,"  with  the  re-
mark that  "  The  very  words  '  crystal  and  amethyst '  are
like  a  far  gleam  from  the  heavenly  city,"  shows  that  she
did  not  consider  the  wearing  of  precious  stones  to  be  an
inherently  sinful  thing.

Temperance  work  ever  claimed  the  warmest  advocacy
of  F.  R.  H.'s  tongue  and  pen.  She  appears  to  have
realized  increasingly  the  imperative  need  of  total  abstin-
ence among  Christian  workers,  for  while,  when  visiting
Switzerland  in  1871,  she  records  the  mutual  drinking  in
"  red  wine  "  of  a  toast  with  some  friendly  Italians  who
lunched  one  day  at  the  same  spot  as  she  and  her  companion,
her  chapter  on  "  Take  my  lips  "  in  Kept  for  the  Master's
Use,  which  was  completed  not  long  before  her  death,
concludes  with  these  words: — "I  only  say  here,  you  who
have  said,  *  Take  my  lips,'  stop  and  repeat  that  prayer
next  time  you  put  that  to  your  lips  which  is  binding  men
and  women  hand  and  foot,  and  delivering  them  over,
helpless,  to  Satan  !  Let  those  words  pass  once  more  from
your  heart  out  through  3^our  lips,  and  I  do  not  think  you
will  feel  comfortable  in  letting  the  means  of  such  infernal
work  pass  in  through  them."

It  was  Temperance  work,  indeed,  that  was  uppermost
in  Miss  Havergal's  mind  during  the  very  last  weeks  of  hei
life,  and  it  was  her  enthusiasm  in  this  particular  cause
which  prompted  the  indiscretion  as  regards  health  that
directly  brought  on  her  fatal  illness.

It  was  at  Caswell  Bay,  on  May  21,  1879,  ^^^^  Frances
Havergal  fulfilled  an  engagement  to  meet  some  men  and
boys  on  the  village  bank,  to  speak  to  them  on  the  subject
of  taking  the  pledge.

Ever  since  her  serious  illness  in  '74  and  '75,  her  health,
never  robust,  had  been  more  delicate  than  ever,  and  what
were  termed  "  feverish  attacks,"  and  supposed  to  arise
mainly  from,  debility,  were  of  frequent  occurrence.     The


FRANCES   RIDLEY   HAVERGAL  123

greatest  care  should  have  been  taken  that  she  was  never
exposed  to  the  risk  of  catching  cold.  But  on  this  particular
occasion  a  most  unfortunate  spot  was  chosen  for  the
meeting  it  was  a  day  of  rain  and  mist,  and  after  standing
a  long  time  in  the  damp,  Miss  Havergal  returned  "  wet

and  chilly."  ,     ,

Next  day  she  felt  poorly,  but  not  bad  enough  to  remain
indoors;  the  day  after,  however,  as  the  sense  of  chill
increased,  she  was  seen  by  a  doctor.  On  May  24  she  was
confined  to  her  bed,  yet  no  one  suspected  that  this  attack
of  indisposition  was  to  prove  any  more  serious  than  many
of  apparently  the  same  sort  which  had  preceded  it.

On  the  26th  she  used  her  pen  for  the  last  time,  to  correct
a  proof  of  Morning  Stars.  Still  she  was  not  suffering,  and
even  her  doctor  did  not  anticipate  danger.  Not  until  the
eighth  day  subsequent  to  the  fatal  chill  did  distressing
symptoms  make  their  appearance.  Then  "  jever  and
internal  inflammation  came  rapidly  on,  and  aU  the
symptoms  and  agony  of  peritonitis."

From  that  time  forward  there  was  Uttle  rehef  from  pam,
and  "  all  remedies  failed."  .

Her  brother  and  sisters  were  sent  for,  and  quickly  came.
They  sang  to  her  and  prayed  with  her  as  she  could  bear  it
during  the  succeeding  days,  and  she  thanked  them,  and  all
about  her,  most  sweetly  for  their  kindness.  But  her
constant  thought  was  of  rapturous  joy  that  the  meetmg
with  her  King,  for  which  all  her  life  she  had  been  longing,
was  actually  at  last  drawing  near.

"  Beautiful !  Too  good  to  be  true  !  "  she  said,  when  one
of  her  doctors  told  her  that  probably  she  would  go  that
very  day  ;  and  she  was  heard  to  murmur,  "  So  beautiful
to  go  !  "  again  and  again  during  the  last  hours.

At  length,  early  on  Whit  Tuesday,  June  3,  release  came.
A  few  minutes  before  the  end,  she  was  able  to  sing,  "  clearly,
though  faintly,"  a  verse  of  the  hymn,  "  Jesus,  I  will  trust
Thee  !  "  to  her  own  tune  "  Hermas."  _

And  then,  to  quote  Miss  Maria  Havergal's  description  ot
the  closing  scene  :— "  For  ten  minutes  we  watched  that
almost  visible  meeting  with  her  King,  and  her  countenance
was  so  glad,  as  if  she  were  already  talking  to  Him.     Ihen


124      WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON
she  tried  to  sing,  but  after  one  sweet,  high  note, '  He-


her  voice  failed,  and  as  her  brother  commended  her  soul
into  her  Redeemer's  hand,  she  passed  away.  Our  precious
sister  was  gone — satisfied — glorified — within  the  palace  of
her  King  !  "

The  remains  of  the  "  sweet  singer "  were  carried  to
Astley,  to  be  buried  beside  those  of  her  beloved  father.  A
golden  star,  of  Banksia  roses,  and  a  poet's  wreath  of
laurel  and  bay  were  conspicuous  among  the  many  floral
tributes  laid  upon  her  grave.  It  had  been  a  dark  and
stormy  day,  but  just  as  the  burial  service  was  ending  the
hearts  of  the  many  mourners  were  comforted  by  a  gleam
of  June  sunshine,  and  the  birds  burst  into  melody  all
around.

Upon  the  north  side  of  the  family  tomb,  under  the
branches  of  a  fir-tree  planted  by  her  father,  is  the
inscription  : —

FRANCES    RIDLEY    HAVERGAL,

YOUNGEST  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  REV.  W.  H.  HAVERGAL,
AND  JANE  HIS  WIFE.

Born  at  Astley  Rectory,  14th  December  1836.     Died  at
CasweU  Bay,  Swansea,  3rd  June  1879.     Aged  42.

By  her  writings  in  piose  and  verse,  she,  "  being  dead,  yet  speaketh."

"  The  blood  of  jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all

sin." — I  John  i.  7.


Photo.  l'y\      THE  GRAVE  OF   FRANCES   KlULEY    HAVERGAL.     Ul.  K.  Ucmsvjonh.


CHAPTER    I.

A    FOREST   CHILD.

RIGHTLY  and  fairly  to  judge  the  character  of  any
human  being,  one  should  be  well  acquainted  with
his  family  history  for  several  generations  before  he  was
born.  This  being  in  most  cases  impossible,  it  is  better,
obviously,  to  judge  very  mercifully,  or  not  at  all.  Con-
cerning the  subject  now  before  us,  the  almost  unique
personality  of  the  Hindu  lady,  Pundita  Ramabai,  we  must,
to  discover  the  earliest  perceivable  trace  of  her  mental  and
spii"itual  origin,  go  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  last  century.

At  that  period,  a  young  Brahmin  student  at  Poona,
Ananta  Shastri  by  name,  chanced — "  eternal  God  that
chance  did  guide  " — to  have  for  his  tutor  in  Sanskrit  a
gentleman  who  was  also  tutor  to  one  of  the  roj-al  Princesses.
How  it  came  about  that  this  little  lady  was  thus  taught
we  are  not  informed,  for  at  that  time  it  was  a  thing  almost
undreamed-of  in  India  for  a  woman  to  learn  so  much  as
to  read  and  write.  However,  Ananta  Shastri  was  much
impressed  by  the  fact  that  a  girl  actually  could  be  taught
as  well  as  a  boy,  and  conceived  the  wild  and  revolutionary
idea  that  he  would  like  an  educated  wife  !

His  own  course  of  study  completed,  the  young  Brahmin
returned  to  his  home  in  the  Mangalore  district,  full  of  a
generous  enthusiasm  to  impart  to  the  girl-bride  who  was

126


PUNDITA   RAMABAI  127

waiting  for  him  all  he  himself  had  attained.  But  neither
the  maiden  herself  nor  Shastri's  mother  was  inclined  to
give  him  any  encouragement.  "  He  will  be  wanting  to
teach  a  primer  to  the  chickens  next  !  "  they  derisively  said.

So  he  was  forced  to  relinquish  his  hopes.

In  course  of  years,  Ananta  Shastri's  children  grew  up,
and  his  wife  died.  At  about  forty  years  of  age,  being  an
earnest  and  devout  man,  he  undertook  a  pilgrimage  to  one
of  the  sacred  rivers  of  India.  Bathing  one  morning  in  its
waters,  he  met  with  a  fellow-pilgrim  of  his  own  caste.
The  latter  was  a  man  with  several  daughters  to  dispose  of,
who,  having  learned  a  few  particulars  as  to  the  clan  and
position  of  the  stranger,  agreed,  gladly  enough,  to  give
him  in  marriage  a  fine  little  girl  of  nine  years  old.

Needless  to  say,  the  wishes  of  the  child  or  her  mother
were  not  deemed  of  any  account  whatever.  She  was  soon
prepared  for  her  journey  of  nine  hundred  miles  to  her
future  home,  and  Ananta  Shastri  set  out  to  return,  all  his
blighted  hopes  of  an  educated  wife  springing  once  more
into  life.

This  time,  although  he  bargained  with  his  mother  that
he  should  teach  his  Httle  bride  to  read,  he  still  found  the
opposition  of  relatives  and  fellow-Brahmins  so  great  that
at  last  he  carried  her  off  to  a  rude  home  in  the  forest,
where  they  could  pursue  their  studies  unmolested.  Here
many  a  night  the  tiny  wife  lay  under  her  quilt,  shaking
with  terror  at  the  howls  of  the  wild  beasts  that  prowled
around,  while  Ananta  Shastri,  like  a  true  knight,  kept  guard
with  drawn  sword  outside.  He  seems  indeed  to  have
treated  her  with  a  tender  and  chivalrous  solicitude  that
invests  the  strange  story  with  the  beauty  of  tnie  romance,
and  must  have  taught  love  to  the  child's  young  heart
while  her  mind  was  imbibing  the  Puranas'  sacred    lore.

As  time  passed  on,  and  the  girl  bride  became  the  mother
of  a  son  and  daughters,  their  father,  now  an  old  man,
adhering  to  his  enlightened  views  with  regard  to  education,
caused  them  all,  impartially,  to  be  instructed  in  reading,
writing,  and  the  sacred  learning  of  the  Brahmins.  His
wife  gladly  aided  him  in  teaching  her  children,  but  so
utterly  did  his  friends  disapprove  of  such  revolutionary


128      WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

proceedings,  that  Ananta,  finding  himself  socially  ostracized,
took  up  a  permanent  abode  in  the  forest.

Here,  in  April  1858,  was  born  to  this  singular  pair  their
youngest  child,  a  Httle  girl,  who  was  given  the  name  of
Ramabai.  This  means  "  sister  of  Rama,"  the  goddess  of
light — an  unconscious  prophecy  of  her  future  life,  for
truly  has  Ramabai  been  a  light  to  those  who  for  ages  had
sat  in  impenetrable  gloom.

The  child  was  unusually  bright  and  intelligent.  Early
taught  by  a  fond  mother  in  the  scriptures  of  Hinduism,
she  at  the  age  of  twelve  years  had  committed  to  memory
no  less  than  eighteen  thousand  verses  from  these  sacred
writings.  Sanskrit,  the  language  in  which  they  are  written,
thus  became  perfectly  famihar  to  her.  From  hearing  her
parents  speak  Marathi,  she  became  fluent  in  this  dialect
also,  as  well  as  Kanarese,  Hindustani  and  Bengali,  which
she  acquired  during  the  wanderings  of  the  family.

Along  with  Ananta  Shastri's  advanced  ideas  on  the  subject
of  female  education,  he  held  opinions  differing  from  those
of  his  co-religionists  as  to  the  child-marriage  of  girls.
Therefore,  we  find  Ramabai  at  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  of
age  still  living  with  her  parents,  sister,  and  brother  at
home.  On  other  points,  however,  the  family  observed  the
utmost  strictness  in  regard  to  Brahminical  usages.  On
one  occasion,  during  a  sea-voyage  of  three  days*  duration,
when  meals  prepared  in  accordance  with  their  own  caste
codes  could  not  be  obtained,  they  all  not  only  fasted
totally  from  all  solid  food,  but  did  not  relieve  their  thirst
by  a  single  drop  of  water,  lest  it  should  contain  ceremonial
defilement.

In  advanced  age  the  good  old  pundit  was  overtaken  by
poverty,  infirmity  and  blindness,  the  first-named  affliction
resulting  more  or  less  from  too  lavish  hospitality  towards
religious  pilgrims  and  students.  Then  came  the  terrible
famine  of  1874-77.  The  family  of  Ananta  Shastri,  though
so  well  versed  in  the  sacred  learning  of  the  Brahmins,
possessed  no  secular  education  by  which  money  might  be
earned,  and  to  engage  in  any  kind  of  manual  labour  would
involve  loss  of  caste — to  them,  an  inconceivable  degrada-
tion.    So,  beheving  their  misfortunes    to    be  the  punish-


PUNDITA   RAMABAI  129

ment  for  some  unknown  sin,  there  was  nothing  left  for
them  but  to  endeavour  to  propitiate  the  gods,  and  so
secure  "  a  change  of  luck."

This  they  essayed  by  spending  a  large  proportion  of  the
little  money  that  remained  to  them  in  alms  to  Brahmin
priests,  and  in  pilgrimages  to  sacred  tanks  and  streams;
also  in  gifts  to  astrologers,  from  whom  they  hoped  to
learn  the  mind  of  the  gods  concerning  them.  Their
constant  prayer  was  for  wealth,  learning  and  renown,
which  they  believed  would  be  showered  upon  them  from
heaven,  without  any  more  practical  efforts  on  their  own
part.  Yet,  though  the  gods  of  brass  and  stone  were
dumb,  the  cry  of  these  poor,  earnest,  sincere  people  had
entered  the  ears  of  Him  who  alone  could  help,  and  the
answer  was  already  on  its  way,  though  only  to  be  received
in  this  world  by  the  youngest  of  the  group.

To  human  sight  things  went  from  bad  to  worse.  Cloth-
ing, jewellery,  silver-ware,  even  the  cooking  vessels  of
copper  and  brass  were  sold — not  to  procure  food,  but  to
give  yet  more  alms  to  the  obdurate  deities,  while  the
family  lived  sparingly  on  grain  of  the  coarsest  kind.
Ramabai's  brother,  a  fine  young  fellow  a  few  years  older
than  herself,  fasted  so  continuously  in  the  hope  of  winning
divine  favour  that  his  constitution  was  injured  beyond
recovery.

At  length  the  last  coin  was  spent,  the  last  handful  of
nee  gone,  and  this  sad  little  group  of  five  who  so  helplessly
loved  one  another  realized  that  the  time  to  die  of  starvation
had  indeed  come.  They  decided  to  meet  the  end  hidden
in  the  depths  of  the  forest,  and  thither  they  accordingly
retreated.

But  release  from  suffering  was  tardy.  For  eleven  days
and  nights  they  lingered,  subsisting  miserably  on  leaves,
water,  and  a  few  wild  dates.  At  length  a  voluntary
death  by  drowning  in  a  sacred  tank,  which  is  regarded  as
a  meritorious  rather  than  a  sinful  action  by  the  Hindus,
was  decided  upon  to  put  an  end  to  these  hopeless  and
protracted  sufferings.

The  dear  old  father  resolved  to  die  first,  and  bade  a
solemn  farewell  to  his  children  one  by  one.      The  turn  of

I


I30      WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

his  youngest,  the  girhsh  Ramabai,  came  last.  That
touching  scene  can  be  described  in  none  but  her  own
simple  words  : —

"  I  shall  never  forget  his  last  injunctions  to  me.  His
blind  eyes  could'  not  see  my  face,  but  he  hold  me  tight  in
his  arms,  and  stroking  my  head  and  cheeks,  he  told  me  in
a  few  words  broken  by  emotion  to  remember  how  he
loved  me,  and  how  he  had  taught  me  to  do  right,  and  never
to  depart  from  the  way  of  righteousness.  His  last  loving
command  to  me  was  to  lead  an  honourable  life  if  I  Uved
at  all,  and  to  serve  God  all  my  life.  He  did  not  know  the
only  true  God,  but  served  the — to  him — unknown  God
with  all  his  heart  and  strength  ;  and  he  was  very  desirous
that  his  children  should  serve  Him  to  the  last.  '  Remember,
my  child,'  he  said, '  you  are  my  youngest,  my  most  beloved
child.  I  have  given  you  into  the  hand  of  our  God  ;  you
are  His,  and  to  Him  alone  you  must  belong,  and  serve
Him  all  your  Hfe.'  "

But  the  God  whom  he  thus  ignorantly  worshipped,  and
the  movings  of  whose  Spirit  he  in  darkness  faithfully
obeyed,  preserved  the  good  old  man  from  suicide.  Ananta
Shastri's  son  at  this  critical  hour  rose  up  and  bravely
said  he  would  renounce  all  caste  pride,  and  do  an}^  honest
work  that  he  could  find  to  support  his  parents.  The  old
Brahmin  was  persuaded  to  give  up  his  idea  of  death  in  the
sacred  tank,  and  though  almost  too  weak  to  move,  the
pitiable  httle  group  made  their  way  out  of  the  jungle  and
once  more  sought  the  abodes  of  man.

In  a  village  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  which  they
reached  after  two  days'  weary  and  painful  journeying,  the
family  at  first  took  refuge  in  a  temple,  but  the  priests,
whose  religion  teaches  little  pity  for  the  weak  and  suffering,
turned  them  out.  The  next  day  they  found  temporary
refuge  in  a  ruin,  and  a  young  Brahmin  gave  them  some
food.

Here,  after  a  few  days'  illness,  Ananta  Shastri's  release
came.  Alone,  his  son  carried  the  body  out  beyond  all
human  habitations,  and  buried  it  according  to  the  directions
of  the  sacred  code.

The  same  day  the  mother  was  taken  ill,  but  she  lingered


PUNDITA   RAMAI3AI  131

for  some  weeks.  Though  the  young  man  found  himself
by  this  time  too  weak  to  work  even  if  he  could  have  ob-
tained employment,  they  were  still  too  proud  to  beg,  and
lived  wretchedly  on  what  was  given  them  by  kind-hearted
neighbours.  Once,  towards  the  last  days  of  her  life,  the
sick  woman  suffered  so  terribly  from  hunger  that  she  sent
Ramabai  to  the  house  of  a  Brahmin  lady  to  beg  a  piece
of  coarse  cake.

Although  kindly  received,  the  young  girl  could  not  force
her  tongue  to  frame  the  humiliating  request ;  but  her
silence  and  irrepressible  tears  spoke  for  her,  and  the  bread
was  given.  Alas  !  it  was  too  late  to  be  of  any  service
to  the  dying  woman.  A  few  days  later  the  three  young
wanderers  were  orphans  indeed.

Ramabai  feels  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  as  to  the  salvation,
through  God's  loving  mercy,  of  both  her  parents.  Speaking
in  America,  years  after  their  death,  she  said,  "  If  any  one
wishes  to  say  that  my  father,  so  eager  to  learn  of  God,
and  my  mother,  so  tender  and  sweet,  have  gone  to  hell
because  no  Christian  ever  reached  them  with  the  glad
tidings  of  Christ,  I  have  only  to  tell  you  never  to  say  so  in
my  presence,  for  I  will  not  hear  it,  and  I  cannot  bear  it."

We  will  not  linger  longer  over  this  saddest  part  of
Ramabai's  life.  The  elder  sister  was  the  next  victim  of
starvation,  and  Ramabai  and  her  brother  were  left  to
struggle  on  alone.  They  travelled  on  foot,  without  shelter
from  the  cold  at  night  or  the  heat  by  day,  to  the  northern
boundary  of  India,  then  back  to  the  east  as  far  as  Calcutta.
Sometimes  the  young  man  got  work  to  do  at  wretchedly
low  wages,  but  even  this  was  most  precarious,  and  most
of  the  time  the  pair  were  still  on  the  verge  of  star\'ation.

Two  results,  however,  that  were  good  came  of  these
weary  trampings — the  sister  and  brother  gradually  lost
faith  in  the  Hindu  religion,  and  gained,  through  what  they
saw  and  heard,  increased  enthusiasm  in  the  cause  of  the
down-trodden  Hindu  woman.

They  began  to  speak  publicly  on  the  subject,  endeavour-
ing to  enlist  the  sympathy  of  their  co-religionists.  Ramabai
herself,  so  young  and  so  gifted,  attracted  such  attention
among  the  Brahmins  of  Calcutta,  which  city  they  eventu-


132      WOMEN   WHO   HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

ally  reached,  that  she  was  invited  to  appear  before  a
solemn  conclave  of  Pundits.  These  wise  men  were  so
much  amazed  at  the  girl's  learning — mistress  of  seven
languages,  as  well  as  of  the  sacred  books — that  they  con-
ferred on  her  the  title  of  "  Sarasvati,"  or  ''  Goddess  of
Wisdom,"  and  permitted  her,  the  only  woman  ever  so
honoured,  to  be  called  "  Pundita."

Thenceforth  poverty  and  privation  were  of  the  past.
Together  Ramabai  and  her  brother  travelled  throughout
Bengal,  holding  meetings  on  the  education  and  emancipa-
tion of  woman.  Notwithstanding  the  opposition  their
father  had  endured,  and  the  scepticism  of  the  Brahmins  of
his  day  as  to  the  possibility  of  cultivating  female  intellect,
a  concrete  example  of  what  could  be  done  in  the  person
of  the  Sarasvati  was  everywhere  received  with  enthusiasm
and  generously  supported.

But  the  mutual  happiness  of  this  devoted  pair  was
all  too  short-lived.  Ramabai' s  brother  was  taken  ill  in
Calcutta,  and  his  strength,  wasted  by  years  of  privation
and  hardship,  soon  succumbed.  His  last  thoughts  were
for  his  young  unprotected  sister.  "  God  will  take  care  of
me,"  she  said,  to  comfort  him.

"  If  God  cares  for  us,"  said  he,  "  I  fear  nothing."

So  he  passed  away,  and  Ramabai  was  left  alone.


CHAPTER    II.

THE    HINDU   WIFE   AND   WIDOW.

TO  the  fact  that  Marathi  women  are  not  confined  in
the  zenana,  as  are  most  of  their  sex  in  the  North-
Wost  and  other  parts  of  India,  is  chiefly  owing  the  liberty
with  which  Ramabai  Sarasvati  moved  among  the  Brahmins
of  the  more  southern  provinces.  But  she  showed  herself
of  so  independent  a  mind  as  to  assert  her  freedom  from
the  bonds  of  caste,  by  remaining  unmarried  until  she  was
twenty-two  years  of  age,  and  then  uniting  herself  to  a  man
of  her  own  choice.


RAMABAI   AND    HER   DAUGHTER   MANORAMA.


134      WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND    WON

Ramabai's  husband  was  a  Bengali  gentleman,  a  graduate
of  Calcutta  University,  Bipin  Bihari  Medhavi,  M.A.,
whom,  to  the  scandalization  of  the  women  round  about,
she  dared  to  call  by  his  first,  or  as  we  should  say,  his
"  Christian "  name.  Such  familiarity  with  the  exalted
being  whom  a  Hindu  wife  is  taught  to  regard  as  "  like
unto  a  god,"  was  surely  enough  to  make  their  hair  stand
on  end.

For  less  than  two  years  the  pair  led  a  happy  hfe  in  the
husband's  home  in  Assam,  during  which  time  a  baby  girl
was  born  to  them.  She  was  a  welcome  gift — not  disliked
or  despised,  or  regarded  as  a  misfortune,  as  a  first-born
daughter  usually  is  in  India.  And  she  was  named
Manorama,  or  "  Heart's  Joy,"  to  signify  her  parents'  love
for  her.

Before  little  Manorama  was  twelve  months  old,  her
father  was  stricken  down  by  cholera,  and  once  more
Ramabai  was  called  to  suffer  the  agony  of  bereavement.

This  time  her  loss  placed  her  in  what,  under  ordinary
circumstances,  would  have  been  the  most  painful  condition
imaginable  to  a  high-caste  Hindu  woman — that  of  a
widow  without  a  son.  But  the  Sarasvati's  education,  her
emancipation  from  the  tyranny  of  caste,  and  her  know-
ledge of  the  world  gave  her  a  tremendous  advantage,
and  rising  bravely  above  her  own  grief,  she  set  herself  to
alleviate  the  sufferings  of  her  sisters  in  sorrow.

Often  as  we  have  heard  of  the  extreme  sadness  of  the
lot  of  the  Indian  widow,  the  reasons  which  have  brought
about  this  deplorable  state  of  things  are  not  clear  to  all
our  minds.  It  is  naturally  a  puzzle  to  many  how  the
"  mild  Hindu,"  whose  Vedas  teach  him  to  "  consider  the
life  of  ever^'  animal  as  precious  as  his  own,"  and  who  has
actually  founded  a  hospital  for  disabled  horses,  dogs,
bullocks  and  monkey's,  can  be  so  inhumanly  cruel  to  infants
and  women  of  his  own  race.

The  cause  lies  in  the  calumniation  of  women  by  the
Hindu  Scriptures.

In  most  Oriental  countries  woman  is  regarded  as  im-
measurably the  inferior  of  man.  Even  the  Jews  before
the  time  of  our   Lord   were  not  untouched  by  this  idea,  '


PUNUITA  RAMABAI  I35

though  it  never  reached  the  pitch  of  absolute  brutality  as
in  India  at  the  present  day.  The  Hindu  is  taught  by  his
sacred  writings  that  man  is  everything  that  is  noble  and
good,  but  woman,  his  temptress,  as  naturally  prone  to
all  evil.  No  doubt  it  is  the  sin  of  our  first  mother  that
has  borne  bitter  fruit  in  the  misery  of  countless  millions
of  her  daughters.  Woman,  according  to  the  Hindu  Vedas,
is  vain,  immodest,  unfaithful,  and  her  heart  "  more  de-
ceitful than  that  of  a  viper."

Therefore  the  urgent  need  of  every  possible  restraint
to  keep  her  fairly  within  the  rules  of  decent  behaviour.
Hence,  the  early  marriage,  and  the  subsequent  impnson-
ment  in  the  zenana.  A  gentleman  who  allows  his  daughters
to  remain  unmarried  after  ten,  or  at  the  utmost  twelve
years  old,  is  thought  to  have  disgracefully  neglected  his
duty  towards  them.  Vast  numbers  are  consequently
married  as  mere  infants,  sometimes  to  boys  of  their  own
age,  but  often  to  men  of  mature  years.  To  get  a  girl
married  to  a  Brahmin  is  considered  so  specially  meritonous
an  act,  that  some  unscrupulous  youths  of  that  sacred
caste  go  about  the  country'  marrying  all  and  sundry,
accepting  bridal  gifts  from  parents,  and  departing  to  be
heard  of  no  more.  Occasionally  one  of  these  much-
married  beings  will  have  over  a  hundred  nominal  waves
aU  of  whom  are  plunged  in  the  horrors  of  widowhood
should  he  untimely  die.

As  a  rule,  the  betrothed  girl  goes  away  to  her  husband  s
home  long  before  she  reaches  a  marriageable  age,  that  she
may  be  prepared  for  the  duties  of  wifehood  by  her  hus-
band's mother.  Then  her  troubles  begin.  Sometimes  the
mother-in-law  is  considerate  and  kind,  but  too  often  she
is  tyrannical  and  hard  to  satisfy,  and  occasionally,  especi-
ally if  it  should  happen  that  her  son  is  not  pleased  with
the  bride  chosen  for  him,  she  treats  the  poor  little  creature
with  bitter  cruelty.  In  any  case,  the  lonclmess  of  the
child-wife,  torn  from  her  mother  and  all  whom  she  loves,
and  sent'  perhaps  hundreds  of  miles  away  to  a  home
among  strangers,  may  be  imagined.  ^        ^u

Yet  marriage  is  looked  forward  to  with  more  hope  than
terror  by  most  little  Hindu  giris,  for  they  know  it  will  be  a


136      WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON"

time  of  feasting  and  merriment,  of  sweetmeats,  fireworks,
and  the  donning  of  gay  clothes,  when  each  one  for  a
brief,  bright  season  is  a  centre  of  interest  and  petting,
and  reigns  as  a  little  queen.  Of  the  long  years  of  misery
that  may  follow  their  innocent  young  hearts  know
nothing.

The  position  even  of  the  most  beloved  wife  is  to  our
Western  minds  one  of  humiliating  servility.  Her  main
business  is  to  prepare  her  husband's  food  and  to  serve
him  with  it,  meekly  standing  by  till  he  has  finished,  then
gratefully  making  her  own  meal  from  what  he  has  been
pleased  to  leave  upon  the  dish,  A  current  Mohammedan
tradition  sufficiently  pictures  the  Oriental  ideal  of  a  good
wife.

"  A  woman  was  one  day  seen  sitting  half  in  the  sunshine
and  half  in  the  shade.  By  her  side  was  a  vessel  full  of  hot
water  and  another  of  cold.  Also,  close  by,  was  a  stick,
a  piece  of  rope,  and  a  small  heap  of  broken  bricks.

"  On  being  asked  the  meaning  of  all  this,  she  replied  :
'  My  husband  is  a  grass-cutter,  and  I  know  not  whether
at  this  moment  he  is  at  work  in  the  sunshine  or  in  the
shade.  I  want  to  sympathize  with  him  whichever  it  may
be.  And  I  know  not  whether,  on  his  return,  he  will  need
hot  water  or  cold,  so  I  have  prepared  both.  Also,  should
he  be  in  a  bad  humour,  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  he
will  choose  to  chastise  me  with  a  stick  or  a  rope's  end,  or
if  he  would  prefer  to  throw  bricks  at  me.  So  I  have  got
them  all  ready  for  his  hand.

"  When  Mahomet  heard  this,  he  said  here  was  indeed  a
good  woman,  who  deserved  to  go  to  heaven."

The  one  way  in  which  a  Hindu  woman  may  raise  herself
in  the  general  estimation  is  by  becoming  the  mother  of  sons.
Having  "  looked  upon  the  face  of  a  living  son  "is  to  a
man  a  passport  to  future  blessedness,  while  a  husband
having  died  sonless  has  no  right  to  heaven  or  immortality.
Therefore  the  wife  who  confers  this  boon  on  her  husband
places  him  under  an  obligation  which  he  is  free  to  reward
by  gifts  of  sweetmeats,  jewellery,  and  fine  dresses,  these
being  the  only  goods  which  the  inferior  mind  of  a  woman
is  supposed  to  appreciate.     He  is  indeed  commanded  by


PUNDITA   RAMARAI  137


the  Vedas  to  take  care  that  she  is  made  happy,  that  his
welfare  and  that  of  the  children  she  bears  him  may  not
suffer.  She  may  even,  after  giving  her  husband  one  or
tvvo  sons,  venture  to  present  him  with  a  daughter,  without
fear  that  the  helpless  mite  will  be  cradled  in  the  nearest
well,  or  "accidentally"  furnish  a  meal  for  the  night-
urowling  beasts  of  prey.  tt-  j

Should  her  sons  live  to  man's  estate,  the  lot  of  the  Hindu
woman  reaches  its  highest  possible  pmnacle  of  bhss  for
she  rules  supreme  over  them,  and  their  wives  and  families.
A  son  is  commanded  alwavs  to  honour  his  mother.

But  even  a  favoured  wife  has  not  for  a  moment  her
husband's  trust.  She  is  believed  to  be  always  liable  to
betray  him  unless  closely  watched.  Hence  the  excessive
severity  of  her  seclusion.  Ramabai  relates  the  story  of
a  lady  who,  seeing  from  a  window  that  her  little  son—
her  only  one— was  in  imminent  peril  in  the  street  impul-
sively rushed  out  to  save  him.  If  anything  could  have
excused  the  violation  of  purdah  rules  it  was  surely  such
an  emergency  as  this.  But  although  the  husband,  on
hearing  of  the  incident,  did  not  openly  blame  her,  she  was

seen  alive  no  more.  ,      ,      j     •      i„

Another  wife  was  killed  by  her  jealous  husband  simply
because  a  glimpse  of  her  back  had  been  accidenta  ly  seen
by  another  man  through  an  open  door,  she  herself  being
wholly  unconscious  of  the  circumstance.

Such  then  is  the  condition  of  the  happy  wife  m  India-
she  who  by  securing  the  eternal  bli  ,s  of  her  lord  has  won
the  approval  of  himself  and  his  relations— classed  by
Hindu  Shastras  among  the  valuable  female  properties  of
her  husband,  such  as  "  cows,  mares,  she-camels,  slave
girls,  she-goats  and  ewes;"  and,  say  they,  Let  a  wife
who  wishes  to  perform  sacred  ablution,  wash  the  feet  of
her  husband  and  drink  the  water  !  "  .    ,^     ,  ,      ,  ,,

But  on  the  reverse  side  of  the  picture  is  the  fate  of  the
sonless  wife  ;  and  that  of  the  sonless  widow  is  darkest  of
all.  Nothing  can  be  more  sad  than  the  wholly  unmerited
sufferings  of  the  child-widow  whose  husband  has  died  before
the  consummation  of  their  marriage.  This  gravest  of  al
misfortunes,  is  very  liable  to  occur  when  the  betrothal  of


138      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

mature  or  even  elderly  men  to  mere  babies  is  not  un-
common.

To  be  thus  left  a  widow  is  considered  a  sure  sign  that  in
a  previous  state  of  being  the  poor  little  girl  committed
some  fearful  crime,  for  which  not  she  alono  but  the  man
who  was  unlucky  enough  to  marry  her  has  had  to  suffer —
he  being  hurried,  sonless,  to  a  hopeless  doom  on  her  account.
The  feelings  with  which  she  is  regarded  by  his  relations
can  therefore  be  conceived.

Some  sad  day  the  child  is  suddenly  snatched  from  her
companions,  her  pretty  clothes  and  ornaments  all  stripped
off,  and  her  rich  dark  hair  shorn  close  to  her  head.  This
disfiguring  shaving  is  repeated  by  some  castes  every  two
weeks,  for  they  believe  that  the  widow's  long  tresses  would
"  bind  her  husband's  soul  in  hell !  "  She  is  then  clad  in
a  single  coarse,  ugly  garment,  to  mortify  her  vanity  ;  her
tinkling  silver  bangles  and  sparkling  gems  are  confiscated
to  humble  her  pride,  while  the  scantiest  food  and  frequent
fastings  are  ordained  for  the  subduing  of  the  evil  passions
with  which  her  young  soul  is  believed  to  be  filled.  The
hardest  work,  the  vilest  names,  and  the  most  brutal  blows
are  henceforward  her  daily  portion — for  is  she  not  in
essence  a  murderess  ?  She  may  never  again  join  in  any
festivity,  she  may  not  even  be  seen  at  a  family  gathering,
for  her  touch  is  pollution,  the  sight  of  her  an  omen
of  ill-luck.  And  this  as  long  as  her  dife  lasts,  for  re-
marriage is  strictly  forbidden.  No  wonder  that  many
of  the  unhappy  creatures  seek  relief  from  their  miseries
in  suicide.

The  practice  of  burning  alive  the  widow  on  her  husband's
funeral  pyre  was  put  an  end  to,  as  is  well  known,  as  far
back  as  1829,  but  "  cold  suttee,"  as  a  leading  reformer  has
well  named  it,  still  remains.  Said  a  Hindu  widow  to  a
European  friend  ;  "  The  English  have  abolished  suttee,
but,  alas,  neither  the  English  nor  the  angels  know  what  goes
on  in  our  houses,  and  the  Hindus  not  only  do  not  care,
but  think  it  good."

Another  widow  touchingly  said  :  "  Bruised  and  beaten,
we  are  like  dry  husks  of  sugar-cane  from  which  the  sweetness
has  all  been  extracted."


I40      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

This  then  was  the  class  to  which  Ramabai  herself  now
belonged,  and  whose  earnest  champion  she  had  become.

It  was  years  before,  when  a  mere  child  herself,  that  the
Pundita's  sympathies  had  been  first  aroused  on  behalf  of
the  victims' of  Hindu  notions  about  women.

In  part  of  her  father's  house  there  lived  a  man  with  his
mother  and  his  young  wife  of  sixteen.  The  poor  girl's
heartrending  cries  when  brutally  beaten  for  some  trifling
fault  filled  the  happier  child  with  an  indignation  that
after  nearly  thirty  years  was  keenly  remembered.  She
believes  it  was  her  first  call  to  the  service  of  her  ill-used
sisters.

Later,  the  troubles  of  a  friend,  a  high- caste  young  lady
named  Rukhmaibai,  confirmed  the  Pundita  in  her  longing
to  see  Indian  women  placed  in  a  less  unfair  position  with
regard  to  marriage.

Rukhmaibai  was  a  well-educated  girl,  betrothed  in  her
childhood  to  a  boy  of  her  own  age  on  the  understanding
that  he  was  to  receive  education  equal  to  her  own.  Her
relations  must  have  been  among  the  few  who  sympathized
\vith  the  enlightened  views  of  Ananta  Shastri,  for  she  was
also  allowed  to  remain  at  home  till  she  was  nineteen  years
of  age.  Then,  when  her  young  husband  claimed  her,  it  was
found  that  his  parents  had  neglected  their  part  of  the
contract.  He  was  illiterate,  and  in  many  ways  quite
repulsive  to  his  bride.

Rukhmaibai  appealed  against  the  union,  but  even  an
English  judge  was  compelled  to  come  to  the  decision  that
as  the  law  stood  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  order  the
girl  to  join  her  husband,  or  endure  six  months'  imprison-
ment. She  chose  the  latter  alternative,  but  subsequently
a  compromise  was  effected,  and  by  bearing  the  cost  of  the
trial,  and  paying  the  disappointed  bridegroom  2000  rupees
wherewith  to  marry  another  wife,  she  was  released.

But  Ramabai' s  first  real  -protegee  was  a  poor  little  arab
of  the  streets,  a  Brahmin  child  cast  out  by  her  husband's
relations  after  his  death,  and  who  had  been  able,  chiefly
owing  to  extreme  lack  of  physical  beauty,  to  lead  a  virtuous
if  starving  hfe,  up  to  the  age  of  twelve  years.

This  homeless  wanderer  Ramabai  took  under  her  pro-


PUNDITA   RAMABAI  141

tection,  and  she  is  now  leading  a  happy  and  useful  life  as
a  Christian  Bible- woman.

But  there  were  myriads  of  others — in  1891  the  number
of  widows  in  India  was  estimated  at  23,000,000 — many  of
them  quite  young  girls  and  children,  in  similarly  wretched
case,  and  Ramabai  could  not  rest  till  she  had  wrought
some  practical  work  for  the  alleviation  of  their  lot.


CHAPTER    III.

A    BOLD    PROJECT.

ALL  this  time,  though,  like  her  father,  Ramabai  was  in
her  loving  sympathy  for  suffering  unconsciously  follow-
ing "the  Light  that  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the
world,"  she  knew  not  the  source  of  her  good  impulses  nor
who  was  guiding  her.  But  she  had  already  heard  of  the
Christian  religion,  and  was  deeply  interested  in  it,  inso-
much that  she  procured  a  Bible  and  began  to  study  its
teachings.

For  a  while,  after  her  husband  died,  Ramabai  supported
herself  and  her  little  daughter  by  lecturing  on  the  Education
of  Women.  Her  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Hindu
scriptures  enabled  her  to  assert  that  their  most  ancient
teaching  enjoined  that  women  should  be  taught,  and  this
the  Brahmins  were  unable  to  deny.  She  was  so  favourably
received,  especially  in  Poona,  that  a  society  of  high-caste
Marathi  ladies  was  actually  formed,  with  branches  in
various  cities,  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  encouraging
the  education  of  girls  and  postponing  marriage  to
maturity.

In  1882  Ramabai  spoke  on  these  subjects  before  a
British  Commission  on  the  question  of  Education  in  India  ;
and  the  President  was  so  much  impressed  by  her  views,
and  the  clear  and  able  way  in  which  she  stated  them,
that  he  had  them  translated  from  Marathi  and  printed
in  English.


142      WOMEN  WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

Soon  after  this,  the  Fundi ta  conceived  the  idea  of  further
improving  her  education,  and  acquainting  herself  with
the  EngHsh  language  and  literature  by  a  visit  to  these
islands.

A  Christian  mission  at  Poona  recommended  her  and
her  little  daughter  to  the  hospitality  of  an  Anglican  Sister-
hood at  Wantage.  Here  she  was  received,  and  remained
for  a  year,  studying  English  and  the  Christian  Scriptures,
with  the  result  that  before  leaving  she  had  embraced  the
Christian  faith,  and  with  her  little  Manorama  was  baptized
according  to  the  rites  of  the  Church  of  England.

After  this  twelvemonth's  preparation,  Ramabai  accepted
the  post  of  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at  the  Cheltenham  Ladies'
College,  which  she  held  for  a  year  and  a  half,  continuing
her  own  studies  at  the  same  time.

It  is  interesting  to  learn  that,  even  in  our  cold,  damp,
and  variable  chmate,  this  Brahmin  lady  faithfully  adhered
to  the  rules  as  to  diet  in  which  she  had  been  brought  up.
Never  did  she  taste  fish,  flesh,  fowl,  or  even  an  egg,  for
that  contains  the  germ  of  life  which  is  so  sacred  in  the
estimation  of  Hindus.  Nor  can  we  suppose  that  this  was
any  great  piece  of  self-denial,  for  the  sight  and  smell  of
meat  is  most  disgusting  to  those  who  have  never  tasted
anything  but  fruit  and  grain.  She  was  also  a  strict
abstainer  from  alcoholic  beverages.

When  Ramabai  had  been  at  the  Cheltenham  College  a
year  and  a  half,  she  was  invited  by  a  fellow-countrywoman,
Anandibai  Joshi,  of  Poona,  to  go  and  see  the  latter  receive
her  medical  degree  in  Philadelphia.  Thus  was  another
new  world  opened  before  the  Pundita's  eager  gaze.

The  late  Miss  Frances  Willard's  picture  of  our  heroine
in  early  womanhood  is  as  graphic  and  graceful  as  one  might
expect.  After  stating  that  Ramabai  can  trace  her  Brahmin
ancestry  for  a  thousand  years,  she  tells  us  that  the  Pundita
has  "dark  grey  eyes,  full  of  light,  a  straight  nose,  with  a
tiny  tattoo  between  the  brows,  mobile  lips,  close-cut
blue-black  hair,  and  perfect  white  teeth."  She  dressed,
we  are  told,  in  grey  silk,  very  simply  made,  with  a  boyish,
turn-down  collar,  and  a  white  "  chuddah  "  or  native  shawl
draping  her  head  and  shoulders.


PUNDITA   RAMABAI  143

In  personal  characteristics  she  is  "  full  of  archness  and
repartee,  handling  our  English  tongue  with  a  precision
attained  by  but  few  of  us  who  are  to  the  manner  born."
Yet  in  disposition  she  is  "incarnate  gentleness,  combined
with  celerity  of  apprehension,  swiftness  of  mental  pace  and
adroitness  of  logic."

To  which  fascinating  description  Miss  Willard's  mother,
in  her  diary  of  that  memorable  visit,  added  : — "  Pundita
Ramabai  is  a  marvellous  creation.  She  has  a  surprisingly
comprehensive  intellect ;  is  as  open  to  perceive  truth  as  a
daisy  to  the  sun  ;  with  face  uplifted,  she  marches  straight
into  its  effulgence,  caring  for  nothing  so  she  find  the  eternal
truth  of  the  eternal  God — not  anxious  what  that  truth
may  be."  Tenderness  towards  all  living  creatures  is  also
one  of  Ramabai's  winning  traits  ;  "  even  of  flowers  she
thinks  we  ought  to  let  them  grow  and  to  admire  them  in
their  bright  living  beauty  rather  than  to  pull  them  from
their  stems.  The  wearing  of  birds  on  bonnets  seems  to
her  a  pitiable  vulgarity."

This,  then,  was  the  woman  who  took  to  America,  the
land  where  above  all  others  our  sex  is  crowned  with
honour,  her  harrowing  story  of  the  Hindu  wife  and
widow.

Ramabai  at  once  found  a  true  friend  in  Rachel  Bodley,
A.M.,  M.D.,  the  Dean  of  the  Women's  Medical  College  in
Philadelphia,  and  the  early  death  of  Dr.  Bodley's  former
Hindu  pupil,  Anandibai  Joshi,  soon  after  her  graduation,
seemed  to  draw  the  American  lady's  heart  the  more  closely
to  this  second  freedom-seeking  Asiatic.

The  Pundita' s  sojourn  in  America  extended  to  three
years.  During  that  time  she  took  every  opportunity  of
studying  the  educational  methods  of  that  country,  and
especially  the  kindergarten  system,  which  greatly  aroused
her  interest.  She  also  travelled  much,  with  a  view  to
enlisting  public  sympathy  in  the  important  scheme  which
was  now  definitely  shaping  itself  in  her  mind.

This  was  nothing  less  than  the  founding  of  a  school  where
Hindu  widows  of  high  caste  could  be  received  and  educated
by  their  own  countrywomen  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable
them  to  earn  their  own  living  when  their  school  course  was


144      WOMEN   WHO   HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

finished.  Especially  did  Ramabai  hope  to  train  teachers
who  might  be  received  into  native  homes,  and  even  pene-
trate the  seclusion  of  the  zenana  itself  with  the  light  of
knowledge  and  truth.

With  this  end  in  view  she  addressed  drawing-room
meetings  everywhere,  and  larger  audiences  whenever  she
could,  evoking  enthusiasm  and  gaining  supporters  among
the  most  cultured  and  intellectually  advanced  of  American
women  in  all  sections  of  the  Christian  Church.

While  with  Dr.  Bodley,  Ramabai  also  wrote  her  deeply
interesting  book,  The  High-Caste  Hindu  Woman,  which  is
unique,  as  throwing  light  upon  the  existing  condition  of
things  from  the  inside,  which  could  only  be  done  in  an
absolutely  accurate  and  reliable  manner  by  one  who  had
actually  lived  from  childhood  in  the  midst  of  the  abuses
of  which  she  so  graphically  speaks.  To  this  volume
Dr.  Rachel  Bodley  added  an  admirable  preface.

This  work  further  aroused  the  sympathies  of  American
women,  and  as  the  profits  arising  from  the  sale  of  it  were —
and  still  are — devoted  to  the  cause  which  Ramabai  had  at
heart,  she  was  able  to  start  at  once  on  the  production  of
educational  material  for  her  projected  school.  Before
leaving  America  she  had  sufficient  money  to  purchase
about  six  hundred  electrotype  plates  for  the  illustration
of  her  complete  series  of  books,  which  were  to  comprise  a
primer,  five  graduated  reading-books,  a  geography,  and  a
natural  history — the  first  series  of  the  kind  for  girls  ever
published  in  India.

But  perhaps  the  most  valuable  fruit  of  Ramabai's
visit  to  America  was  the  formation  in  1887  of  the  "  Rama-
bai Association,"  to  which  is  almost  entirely  owing  the
Pundita's  ultimate  ability  to  realize  the  dream  of  her  life.
The  head-quarters  of  the  Association  were  in  Boston,  the
President  and  Vice-Presidents  included  representatives  of
five  religious  denominations,  the  Board  of  Trustees  secured
some  of  the  best  business  intellect  of  that  city,  and  the
Executive  Committee  was  composed  entirely  of  women.
The  object  of  the  Ramabai  Association  was  the  formation
of  "  circles  "  in  every  part  of  the  States,  which  should
pledge  themselves  to  provide  a  certain  sum  annually  for


PUNDITA   RAMABAI  145

ten  years,  to  start  and  maintain  a  home  and  school  in
India  for  high-caste  widows.

After  travelling  and  speaking  throughout  Canada  and
in  most  of  the  cities  on  the  Pacific  coast,  Ramabai  bade
good-bye  to  her  generous  Transatlantic  entertainers  in
November  1888,  and  set  out  for  her  Indian  home,  via
San  Francisco  and  Hong  Kong.

Parting  from  her  true  friend,  Dr.  Rachel  Bodley,  the
Pundita  begged  her  to  remind  the  readers  of  her  book  that
"  it  was  out  of  Nazareth  that  the  Blessed  Redeemer  of
mankind  came  ;  that  great  reforms  have  again  and  again
been  wrought  by  instrumentalities  that  the  world  despised.
Tell  them  to  help  me  to  educate  the  high-caste  child-
widows,  for  I  solemnly  believe  that  this  hated  and  despised
class  of  women,  educated  and  enlightened,  are  by  God's
grace  to  redeem  India,"

Ramabai's  personal  humility  (indelible  mark,  perhaps,  of
her  race  and  sex),  notwithstanding  her  courage  and  high
aspirations,  is  well  illustrated  by  her  own  comparison.
"  Christ,"  she  once  said,  "  came  to  give  different  gifts  to
different  people.  Some  He  made  prophets ;  some  He
made  preachers ;  some  He  made  teachers.  Since  I  have
become  a  Christian  I  have  thought  He  has  given  me  the
gift  of  being  a  sweeper.  I  want  to  sweep  away  some  of
the  old  difficulties  that  lie  before  the  missionaries  in  their
efforts  to  reach  our  Hindu  widows."

After  making  the  most  of  her  opportunities  whilst
journeying  to  still  further  enlarge  the  circle  of  her  sym-
pathizers, the  Pundita  landed  in  Bombay  early  in  the
year  1889.

Here  was  awaiting  her  the  welcome  of  her  little  Mano-
rama,  now  about  eight  years  old,  who  had  arrived  in  India
from  England  a  short  time  before  in  the  care  of  one  of  the
Sisters  from  Wantage.  Asked  by  a  friend  why  she  had
not  left  the  child  to  finish  her  education  in  England,
Ramabai  said,  "  I  want  her  to  grow  up  among  her  people,
to  know  them  as  they  are,  and  to  prepare  herself  for
the  work  there  is  before  her.  If  I  left  her  in  England,
she  would  grow  up  to  be  an  English  girl,  and  not  one
of  us."


146      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE  WORKED   AND   WON

So  truly  does  this  pioneer  of  female  education  in  India
realize  that  to  make  culture  and  Christianity  really  accept-
able to  the  Hindus,  it  must  be  shown  to  be  perfectly
compatible  with  the  retention  of  native  customs  in  regard
to  both  food  and  dress.

In  this  spirit,  therefore,  and  with  the  broadest  ideas
upon  most  subjects,  Ramabai,  in  the  spring  of  1889,
opened  her  Widows'  Home  in  the  busy  Anglo-Indian  city
of  Bombay.


CHAPTER   IV.

ITS   WALLS    '  SALVATION  '    AND    ITS    GATES    '  PRAISE.*

CHARADA  SAD  AN,  or  "Abode  of  Wisdom,"  was  the
^  somewhat  high-sounding  name,  attractive  to  Oriental
ears,  which  Ramabai  gave  to  her  boarding-school.

She  commenced  with  two  pupils,  one  of  whom  was
a  poor  young  widow  who  had  three  times  essayed  to  put
an  end  to  her  own  wretched  existence,  and  was  only
deterred  by  the  fear  that  even  if  she  did  so  she  might
again  be  bom  a  woman.  An  efficient  helper  was  found  in
Miss  Soonderbai  Powar,  another  Hindu  lady  reformer,  who
has  visited  England  in  the  interests  of  a  suppression  of
the  Opium  Traffic,  and  an  elementary  study  of  three
languages,  Marathi,  Sanskrit,  and  English,  was  at  once
commenced.

As  to  the  ground  which  the  Sharada  Sadan  was  to
take  with  regard  to  the  delicate  and  difficult  question  of
religion,  Ramabai  had  definitely  made  up  her  mind.
Strict  neutrality  she  believed  to  be  the  only  practicable
position.

Already  it  had  been  proved  that  Christian  missions
were  of  small  avail  as  affording  refuge  for  the  high-caste
widow.  Their  avowed  object  being  the  conversion  of  the
heathen,  no  Hindu  woman  with  any  regard  for  the  faith
of  her  fathers  would  be  willing  to  place  herself    under


PUNDITA   RAMABAI  147

proselytizing  influences  for  the  sake  of  material  comforts.
If  we  substitute  the  term  "  loyal  Brahmin  "  for  that  of
"  obstinate  idolater,"  which  is  too  often  used  to  describe
faithful  souls  who  are  not  ready  to  at  once  embrace  a,  to
them,  new  and  false  religion,  we  shall  be  the  better  able  to
sympathize  with  their  position.  The  worthiest  are  not
the  soonest  won  ;  it  is  the  thin  rock-soil  which  produces
the  quickest  crop.

Ramabai  felt  that  to  make  her  school  an  institution  for  the
promulgation  of  Christianity  would  defeat  its  primary  object.
Therefore,  she  pledged  herself  to  her  Brahmin  friends
that  the  utmost  liberty  should  be  accorded  to  all  inmates
of  her  Home  to  maintain  their  own  religion,  and  facilities
afforded  for  the  performance  of  all  sacred  rites  and  for  the
strictest  observation  of  the  customs  of  caste.  And  although
she  claimed  equal  liberty  for  herself  and  her  assistant  to
worship  in  accordance  with  their  own  Christian  belief,  she
promised  that  no  pressure  whatever  should  be  brought  to
bear  upon  the  minds  of  her  pupils.

Certain  well-intentioned  persons  were  disposed  to  find
fault  with  this  arrangement,  as  we  know  there  have  been
teachers  foolish  enough  to  promise  non-interference  with
the  religious  ideas  of  Hindu  pupils,  and  then  break  their
word  ! — a  course  which  must  inflict  more  injury  upon  the
cause  they  wish  to  serve  than  the  work  of  many  missionaries
can  undo.     But  Ramabai  was  faithful.

The  school  increased  rapidly,  and  in  1892  the  "  Abode  of
Wisdom  "  was  removed  to  Poona,  as  being  in  every  way
a  more  desirable  locality  for  the  purpose.

A  delightful  description  of  this  new  home  is  given  by
Mrs.  Helen  S.  Dyer,  who  visited  it  on  the  occasion  of  the
opening  ceremonies,  and  to  whose  charming  book,  Pundita
Ramabai  ;  the  Story  of  Her  Life,  we  are  indebted  for  much
of  the  information  contained  in  this  sketch.

The  bungalow,  she  tells  us,  stands  in  a  garden,  which  is
"  dotted  here  and  there  with  fine  shade  trees,  the  gold
mohur,  the  plumeria,  and  others,  which  are  covered  with
gorgeous  flowers  in  their  season.  Roses  and  lilies,  jasmine
and  elemanta,  variegated  crotons,  caladiums,  bougainvillea,
and  the  hundred  and  one  tropical  shrubs  that  are  cherished


148      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

greenhouse  plants  in  our  colder  atmosphere,  luxuriate  in
the  beautiful  climate  of  the  Deccan  of  India.  ...  A  shaded
fernery  planted  around  a  fountain  close  to  the  house
affords  a  cool  retreat  for  the  heat  of  the  day.  .  .  .  The
pupils  came  and  went  everywhere,  learned  their  lessons
in  groups  in  the  drawing-room,  or  walked  in  the  garden
by  twos  and  threes,  gathered  roses  and  lihes  for  each
other  and  the  visitors,  made  wreaths  of  jasmine,  and  decked
each  other's  hair."

A  glimpse  of  Paradise  indeed  to  the  child-widow,  whose
portion  had  previously  been  that  of  a  hated  outcast,  to
whom  everything  pleasant  was  to  be  rigorously  denied  !

"  I  wish  them,"  said  Ramabai,  "  to  see  the  contrast  in
everything  where  love  rules,  I  wish  them  to  become
acquainted  with  as  many  good  people  as  possible  ;  to
learn  what  the  outside  world  is  like  from  pictures  and
books  ;  and  to  enjoy  the  wonderful  works  of  God,  as  they
ramble  in  the  garden,  study  with  the  microscope,  or  view
the  heavens  from  the  little  veianda^i  on  the  roof."

No  wonder  that  the  girls  followed  their  dear  friend  and
teacher  aU  about  the  bungalow,  and  "  clustered  around
her  like  bees !  "  No  wonder  that  her  good-night  kiss
was  a  boon  on  no  account  to  be  missed,  but  to  be
claimed  twice  over  if  a  little  innocent  scheming  could
compass  it !  No  marvel,  either,  that  the  religion  which
was  known  to  be  the  source  of  all  this  sweet  motherly
kindness  should  ere  long  begin  to  attract  some  of  the
young  hearts  thus  within  the  range  of  its  tender  in-
fluence.

It  was  the  custom  of  Ramabai  to  meet  with  her  com-
panion-helper, Soonderbai,  and  her  httle  Manorama,  for
Bible-reading  and  pra3'er  every  morning  before  the  duties
of  the  day  were  begun.  If  any  of  the  pupils  voluntarily
chose  to  join  them,  they,  of  course,  were  not  forbidden.
As  time  went  on  not  a  few  did  so,  and  by  the  spring  of
1893  quite  half  the  widows  in  the  Sharada  Sadan  had
formed  the  habit  of  attending  this  family  worship,  several
apparently  being  deeply  impressed.

When  the  Brahmin  supporters  of  the  school  heard  of
this  they  were  indignant.     They  wished  the  pupils  to  be


>


n


>
ca
o

c


n

o

r

z

r:
O

•y'.

cr
c
n

C


150     WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

kept  to  the  strictest  observance  of  the  Hindu  religion,  but
not  to  be  free  to  attend  Christian  services.  This,  Ramabai
pointed  out,  was  not  that  absolute  neutrality  which  had
been  laid  down  as  one  of  the  fundamental  rules  of  the
institution.  She  appealed  to  the  parent  committee  in
America,  and  was  of  course  upheld  by  them.

About  twenty-five  girls,  however,  were  withdrawn  from
the  school  by  those  in  authority  over  them,  and  bitter
tears  were  shed.  Ramabai  knew  that  many  were  going
back  to  hardship  and  ill-usage  which  would  seem  more
unendurable  to  the  poor  things  than  ever,  and  some
even  to  the  imminent  danger  of  moral  iniin.  The  case  of
one  girl,  a  Gujerathi,  whom  Ramabai  had  adopted  as  her
own,  was  so  desperate  that  the  principals  of  the  school
had  recourse  to  unusual  stratagems  to  rescue  her.

These,  which  never  overstepped  the  bounds  of  strict
legality,  were  successful,  and  so  enraged  the  leading  Hindus
of  the  Bombay  Presidency  that  the  extinction  of  the
Sharada  Sadan  seemed  at  one  time  imminent.  But
Ramabai  was  staunchly  supported  by  her  American
friends,  and  the  storm  was  weathered.

Meditating  much  upon  plans  for  the  continued  support
of  her  school,  the  Sarasvati  hit  upon  the  idea  of  starting
a  fruit  farm.  A  suitable  piece  of  land  having  been  found
at  Khedgaon,  about  forty  miles  south  of  Poona,  the  trustees
of  the  American  Fund  were  applied  to  for  help.  This  they
were  reluctantly  compelled  to  refuse,  as  such  money  could
not  legally  be  used  for  the  purchase  of  land.  Copies  of
Ramabai's  appeal  were,  however,  sent  round  to  several
friends.

Greatly  disappointed  at  this  refusal,  Ramabai  went  to
Bombay  to  try  and  raise  money  on  her  own  life  insurance,
but  without  success.  Returning  to  Poona,  heavy-hearted,
she  noticed,  as  the  train  rushed  along,  a  tiny  bird  sitting
on  the  branch  of  a  tree,  undisturbed  by  the  fiery  monster
with  all  its  smoke  and  noise.  Then  she  "  thought  of  what
the  Bible  said  about  the  sparrow,  and  felt  ashamed  of  her
lack  of  faith."

On  reaching  home  she  reminded  her  teachers  that
although  she  had  so  failed  they  had  a  rich  Father  in  heaven


PUNDITA   RAMA15A1  15'

who  would  yet  give  them  that  farm  ;  and  she  and  her
friend  Soonderbai  agreed  to  pray  together,  remembering
our  Saviour's  promise,  for  the  money  wherewith  to  pur-

clllSG   it

'"  Not'  long  after,"  she  writes,  "  I  was  awakened  very
early  in  the  morning,  and  a  cablegram  from  America  put
into  my  hand.  I  trembled,  fearing  I  knew  not  what,  but
raised  my  heart  in  prayer  to  God  to  help  me  bear  whatever
the  cablegram  contained.     I  opened  it,  and  the  farm  was

mine !"  j  j   i.     u

Half-a-dozen  American  friends  had  responded  to  her
appeal  with  sufficient  generosity  to  start  a  special  fund
for  the  acquiring  of  the  longed-for  farm ;  other  contribu-
tions were  subsequently  added,  and  in  1894  the  purchase
of  the  land  was  an  accomplished  fact.

By  degrees  the  spot  was  cleared,  and  planted  with
fruit  trees  and  various  crops,  but  one  rocky  portion  still
remained  unutilized.  What  it  was  reserved  for  was
presently  to  be  seen.  .

The  terrible  famine  of  1897  aroused  m  Ramabai  a
passionate  desire  to  do  something  for  the  rescue  of  tha
hundreds  of  young  widows  whom  she  knew  to  be  exposed
to  even  worse  perils,  in  such  a  crisis,  than  those  of  starva-
tion only.  The  difficulties  in  the  way  were  tremendous,
but  at  length  she  resolved  to  travel  to  the  Central  Provmces,
where  the  distress  was  the  greatest ;  and  money  for  her
needs  began  to  flow  in.

Having  found  shelter  for  the  first  sixty  girls  and  women
she  gathered  in,  Ramabai  told  their  pathetic  story  m  a
letter  to  the  Bombay  Guardian,  and  this,  being  reprinted
in  pamphlet  form,  was  circulated  largely  not  only  in
India,  but  also  in  England  and  America,  with  the  result
that  still  more  support  was  given.

An  outbreak  of  bubonic  plague,  however,  put  a  stop  to
the  reception  of  famine  victims  at  the  Sharada  Sadan,  and
arrested  the  erection  of  new  premises  at  Poona  for  tlieir
accommodation.

At  once  Ramabai's  thoughts  turned  to  the  piece  of
unoccupied  land  at  Khedgaon.  Permission  from  America
was  cabled  for,  and  promptly  obtained,  and    grass  huts


152      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

were  speedily  built  to  shelter  the  poor  outcasts.  The
pupils  at  the  Sharada  Sadan  were  as  enthusiastic  as  their
dear  teacher  on  behalf  of  these  poor  sisters.  They  willingly
denied  themselves  food  to  help  to  provide  for  the  famine-
stricken,  and  when  Ramabai  appealed  to  them  for  volunteer
mothers  for  several  very  tiny  children  who  had  been
brought  in  along  with  older  ones,  the  response  was  ready
and  tender.

At  a  camp-meeting,  some  six  months  before  the  famine
was  thought  of,  Ramabai  had  felt  strangely  prompted  to
ask  God  for  the  apparently  impossible  boon  of  an  increase
of  the  fifteen  spiritual  children  (converts)  which  up  to
that  time  He  had  given  her,  to  two  hundred  and  twenty-
five  !  It  seemed  almost  madness  to  dream  of  obtaining,
let  alone  of  providing  for  so  many,  yet  the  desire  was
urgent,  and  the  words  coming  into  her  mind,  "  Behold,
I  am  the  Lord,  the  God  of  all  flesh  ;  is  there  anything
too  hard  for  Me  ?  "  convinced  her  that  it  was  to  be
granted.

Now  the  way  was  made  open.  When  the  famine  was
over,  and  Ramabai  had  placed  in  various  mission  orphanages
all  of  the  rescued  ones  that  she  could,  she  found  herself
with  just  three  hundred  girls  to  whom  she  was  free  to
teach  the  Gospel.  In  less  than  ten  months  from  the
commencement  of  her  famine-campaign,  ninety  of  these
rescued  ones  were  baptized  as  Christians.

About  this  time,  after  ten  years'  existence,  the  original
school  was  able  to  report  that  fourteen  pupils  had  been
trained  as  teachers,  nine  of  whom  were  occupying  good
positions,  two  having  opened  schools  of  their  own.  Of
eight  trained  nurses,  five  were  in  employment.  Seven
girls  had  become  matrons,  two  were  housekeepers,  and  ten
had  happy  homes  of  their  o^vn.  Of  the  three  hundred  and
fifty  widows  who  had  been  in  the  home  a  longer  or  shorter
period,  forty-eight  had  become  Christians  through  the
unconscious  influence  of  the  principals,  twenty-three  of
whom  were  voluntary  Christian  workers,  all  retaining
their  Hindu  customs  and  dress.

Ramabai's  hope,  however,  that  at  the  expiration  of
these  ten  years  of  support  pledged  by  the  Boston  Association


PUNDITA   RAMABAI  153

the  Hindus  themselves  would  be  sufficiently  enlightened
to  take  up  the  work,  was  not  fulfilled.

In  1898  she  therefore  paid  a  second  visit  to  America,
the  result  of  which  was  that  the  Ramabai  Association  was
re-organized,  and  started  afresh  on  a  satisfactory  basis.

Meanwhile  a  new  building  at  Khedgaon  was  being
erected  to  accommodate  the  great  increase  of  scholars ;
a  new  friend,  a  Miss  Abrams,  an  American  missionary,
being  in  charge  of  the  settlement  there.

After  a  busy  time  of  mingled  trial  and  encouragement,
and  a  brief  visit  to  England,  Ramabai  reached  India  again
in  time  for  the  dedication  of  these  new  premises.  They
are  called  by  their  foundress,  "  Mukti,"  which  means
"  Salvation  "  ;  while  "  Praise  the  Lord "  in  Marathi
characters  is  inscribed  over  the  principal  gate.  A  large
number  of  missionaries  and  Christian  friends  were  gathered
on  this  occasion,  as  well  as  the  entire  establishment  from
the  parent  school  at  Poona.  To  this  building  was  added
a  special  rescue  home  for  those  women  who  had  been
injured  and  deserted  by  wicked  men.

Mrs.  Helen  S.  Dyer,  who,  with  her  husband,  visited
Khedgaon  in  1899,  describes  the  flourishing  state  of  the
Mukti  home,  both  as  to  its  temporal  and  spiritual  work,
and  the  many  industries  which  were  being  carried  on  ;
dairy-work  (promoted  by  a  special  gift  of  money  to  buy
cows,  from  a  lady  in  England),  oil-making,  the  cultivation
of  grain  and  red  pepper,  and  the  weaving  of  sarees  upon
hand-looms,  being  among  the  most  profitable.  The  under-
taking is  thus  to  a  large  extent  self-supporting,  but  it
has  been  from  time  to  time  greatly  helped  by  those  almost
miraculous  gifts,  arriving  exactly  when  most  needed,  which
the  history  of  every  good  work  can  record.

Another  clever  stroke  of  business  carried  through  by
Ramabai's  practical  wisdom  was  the  purchase  of  a  farm
hard  by  the  Mukti  settlement,  which  belonged  ^o  a  liquor-
dealer,  and  was  in  danger  of  becoming  the  site  of  a  liquor-
shop.  On  this  vacant  spot  Ramabai  invited  the  hawkers
from  the  surrounding  country  to  establish  a  weekly
bazaar.  This  has  been  a  great  success,  and  quite  a  boon
to  the  neighbourhood,  the  nearest  having  previously  been


154      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

eight  miles  away.  When  the  people  are  assembled  here
to  buy  and  sell,  a  splendid  opportunity  is  afforded  of
telling  them  the  story  of  the  Gospel.

In  1900  a  recurrence  of  famine  once  more  taxed  Rama-
bai's  resources  to  the  uttermost,  but  many  of  the  converted
girls  who  were  themselves  rescued  in  the  preceding  famine
gladly  helped  to  tend  the  poor  victims  that  were  brought
in,  many  of  them  suffering  from  loathsome  diseases  re-
sulting from  starvation  and  neglect.

Among  the  older  native  women  who  helped  at  this  dis-
tressing time,  were  three  whose  love  and  zeal  their  leader
specially  records  with  warmest  praise.  They  were  named
Gangabai,  Kashibai,  and  Bhimabai.  These  travelled
hundreds  of  miles  on  foot  and  unprotected,  enduring  great
hardships  in  their  search  for  starving  girl- outcasts,  to
gather  them  into  the  shelter  of  Ramabai's  home.

Not  least  among  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  rescuing
the  poor  young  creatures  was  the  almost  unconquerable
suspicion  and  fear  with  which  they  often  regarded  their
would-be  benefactors.  Ignorant  heathen  acquaintances,
as  well  as  those  who  wilfuUy  planned  their  ruin,  had  filled
their  minds  with  horrible  stories  of  the  selfish  and  cruel
purposes  to  which  they  would  be  sacrificed  if  once  they  fell
into  the  hands  of  the  Christians.  It  was  the  work  of
months,  and  sometimes  years,  to  make  them  believe,  for
instance,  that  they  were  not  being  fed  and  fattened  that
oil  might  by  and  by  be  extracted  from  their  bodies  by
roasting  or  grinding  in  a  mill !  Nothing  is  more  eloquent
of  the  usual  social  condition  of  the  child-widow,  than  the
fact  that  it  seems  almost  impossible  for  her  to  conceive
the  idea  of  being  cared  for  and  loved.  But  this  is  the
heavenly  lesson  which,  above  all  others,  Ramabai's  school
was  founded  to  teach.

With  a  few  extracts  from  the  Report  issued  in  that  year
we  must  draw  to  a  close.

Ramabai  says  : — "  Five  hundred  and  eighty  girls  in  the
Mukti  Sadan,  and  sixty  in  the  Kripa  Sadan  (Rescue
Home)  are  being  trained  to  lead  a  useful  Christian  life.  .  .  .
Including  the  hundred  girls  of  the  Sharada  Sadan,  I  have
altogether    nearly   seven   hundred    and   fifty   girls   under


-.^-l^


//


'^


CHUNDRABAI,
THE    HEAD    TEACHER    AT    RAMABAl's   COLLEGE.


IS6      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

training.  .  .  .  The  Sharada  Sadan  has  trained  seventy
teachers  and  workers  in  the  past  eleven  years,  and  the
Mukti  school  has  trained  nearly  eighty  girls  to  earn  their
own  living  in  the  past  three  years ;  eighty-live  of  the  old
and  new  girls  have  found  work  in  their  own  mother  in-
stitutions, and  sixty-five  of  the  old  girls  are  either  married
or  earning  their  living  as  teachers  and  workers  in  different
places.  ...  I  have  had  a  hundred  requests  from  mission-
aries and  superintendents  of  schools  to  give  them  trained
teachers,  Bible-women,  or  matrons.  I  have  had  quite
as  many,  perhaps  more,  requests  from  young  men  to  give
them  educated  wives.  It  will  not  be  difficult  to  find  good
places  and  comfortable  homes  for  all  these  young  girls
when  the  proper  time  comes.  .  .  .  My  aim  is  to  train  all
those  girls  to  do  some  work  or  other.  Over  two  hundred
of  the  present  number  have  much  intelligence,  and  promise
to  be  good  school  teachers  after  they  receive  a  few  years'
training.  Thirty  of  the  bigger  girls  have  joined  a  training
class  for  nurses.  .  .  .  More  than  sixty  have  learned  to
cook  very  nicely.  .  .  .  Forty  girls  have  learned  to  weave
nicely  ;  and  more  than  fifty  have  learned  to  sew  well  and
make  their  own  garments.  The  rest,  small  and  large,  are
learning  to  do  some  work  with  '  the  three  R's.'

"  Most  of  my  helpers  have  joined  the  Bible  Training
Class  taught  by  Miss  Abrams.  .  .  .  Out  of  this  Bible
Training  Class  I  hope  there  will  rise  a  trained  band  of
Bible- women,  who  will  take  the  Gospel  to  their  sisters  in
their  own  homes.  Some  girls  have  already  begun  to  go
about  in  the  villages  around  here.  They  are  working  as
Zenana  Bible-women  and  Sunday  School  teachers  in  their
spare  time."

Chundrabai,  Ramabai's  head  teacher,  whose  portrait
is  given  on  page  155,  was  herself  a  widow  at  twelve
years  old.  But  being  singularly  favoured  in  possessing  a
mother  wise  and  strong-minded  enough  to  insist  on  send-
ing the  child,  first  to  a  mission  school  in  Bombay,  and
subsequently  to  the  Sharada  Sadan  to  be  educated  to
support  herself,  her  life  was  preserved  from  much  of  the
suffering  that  would  otherwise  have  been  her  lot.

A  recent  visitor   to  the  colony  of  rescued  ones   reports


PUNDITA   RAMABAI  '57

that  Ramabai's  family  now  consists  ot  no  fewer  than
eighteen  hundred  widows.  Most  of  those  preserved  from
the  last  great  famine  will  bear  the  traces  of  that  ternble
time  to  their  lives'  end.  Many  were  already  beyond  possi-
bility of  rescue  when  brought  to  Mukti,and  only  the  five
hundred  small  graves  in  the  cemetery  there  bear  witness
to  the  efforts  unavailingly  made  to  save  them.

Ramabai  begs  every  friend  who  visits  her  from  this
favoured  land  of  ours  to  remember  her  in  her  immense
work  and  responsibility  with  their  sympathy  and  prayers.
So  impressive  is  the  sight  of  her  needy  children  and  the
loving  care  she  bestows  on  them,  that  she  rarely  appeals

in  vain.  ■    t-     i     j

Writing  quite  lately  to  one  of  her  supporters  m  England,
the  Pundita  says  :— "  Try  as  I  will  I  cannot  maintain  this
large  company  of  eighceen  hundred  people  with  less  than
150/.  per  week  ;  this  works  out  at  less  than  threepence  per
head  per  day.  To  try  to  do  with  less  is  to  starve  the
children,  and  send  them  about  almost  naked."  But
surely  one-and-ninepence  a  week— less  than  the  cost  of
maintaining  many  a  pet  animal  in  England— seems  mar-
vellously httle  with  which  to  feed,  lodge  and  clothe  a  child  ;
4/.  los.  per  annum  only,  to  save  a  girl-widow  from  despair
and  admit  her  into   the  paradise  of  a  loving  Christian

home.

In  the  midst  of  all  her  cares  and  responsibihties,
Ramabai,  the  trusting  child  of  a  loving  Father,  keeps
always  sunny  and  young.  A  recent  gift  from  England,
coming  at  a  time  of  great  necessity,  enabled  her  to  dis-
pense new  sarees,  long  needed,  to  her  huge  family.  The
little  widows  received  the  bright  new  garments  with
rejoicing,  but  Ramabai's  heart  was  so  light  and  glad  that
she  playfully  dressed  herself  up  in  one  of  the  smartest  of
them,  a  bright  green  (her  own  dress  is  usually  of  pure
white),  and  thus  disguised,  and  with  her  head  covered,  paid
a  surprise  visit  to  the  room  of  one  of  her  teachers,  who  for
several  minutes  did  not  guess  who  the  stranger  was  !  The
peals  of  laughter  among  the  tiny  widows  who  shared  m
this  innocent  joke  must  have  seemed  like  the  music  of
heaven  to  tliose  who  heard.


IS8      WOMEN   WHO    HAVE   WORKED   AND   WON

It  was  while  these  new  sarees  were  being  distributed  that
one  of  the  elder  giris  said  to  Miss  Abrams,  "  We  don't
want  sarees,  or  anything  else  ;  we  only  want  Bibles.  Do
give  us  a  Bible  !  "  "  Wouldn't  you  rather,"  asked  one  of
the  helpers,  "have  a  big  feast  instead  of  a  Bible?"
"  No,"  replied  the  girls,  who  were  inmates  of  the  Rescue
Home  ;  '*  for  that  would  be  only  one  day's  pleasure,  but
this  food  for  our  soul  will  take  us  to  heaven."

Soon  after,  through  the  kindness  of  a  member  of  the
Society  of  Friends,  their  wish  was  gratified.  Twelve
hundred  copies  of  the  Word  of  God  in  Marathi,  neatly
bound  in  cloth,  arrived  as  a  present  to  Khedgaon.  On  the
following  Sunday  the  platform  of  the  Mukti  Church  was
decorated  with  green  leaves  and  pot  plants,  and  given  up
to  the  precious  books.  Nine  hundred  were  presented  that
day  to  girls  who  were  able  to  read  them,  and,  we  are  told,
"  The  dehght  of  the  children  knew  no  bounds."

In  June  igoo  Ramabai's  daughter,  Manorama,  who  was
educated  at  the  expense  of  one  of  her  mother's  many
friends,  at  the  Chesbrough  Seminary,  North  ChUi,  New
York,  returned  to  India  to  relieve  her  mother  and  learn
the  details  of  the  work.  She  has  been  appointed  Vice-
Principal  of  the  Sharada  Sadan.  We  are  sure  that  all
who  read  this  brief  sketch  of  the  gifted  Sarasvati's  noble
undertaking  will  wish  for  both  mother  and  daughter  many
years  of  happy  comradeship  in  their  blessed  work.


THE  END


LORIMEK   AND  CHALMERS,    PKINTEKS,    EDINBURGH.


S.  W.  PARTRIDGE  &  CO.:S
CATALOGUE

.      .      OF      .      .

POPULAR   ILLUSTRATED    BOOKS.
Classified  according  to  Price.


8   &    g,    PATERNOSTER    ROW.    LONDON,    E.C.


Catalogue  of  Books  Published


6s.  each.

Large  Crown  8vo.    Cloth  Boards,  gilt  top.
Adam  Argham.     By  Mrs.  S  R.  Graham  Clark.    430  pages.

A  Wife  Worth  Winning.     By  C.  E.  C.  Weigall.    344  pages.
Twelve  Illustrations.

Old  Readmoney's  Daughter.     By  L.  T.  Meade.    332  pages.
Twelve  Illustrations.

The  Letter  Killeth.     By  A.  C.  Inchbold.    310  pages.


Japan  :  From  the  Old  to  the  New.     By  R.  G.  Webster,  LL.B.,
J. P.     With  16  Illustrations  on  art  paper.     Demy  Svo.


5s.  each.

"  Empire  "  Series.

Demy  Svo,    432  pages.     Illustrations  in  Colour.     Handsomely  hound  in
Cloth  Boards,  Olivine  Edges.

"  Not  Out ! "     A  Public-School  Story      By  Kent  Carr.

Playing  the  Game  !     A  Public-School  Story.    By  the  same
•     Author.
Steve  Young;  or,  The  Voyage  of  the  "Hvalross"  to  the  Icy

Seas.     By  Geo.  Manville  Fenn.
Trapper  Dan.     A  Story  of  the  Backwoods.    By  Geo.  Manville

Fenn.
A  Wilful  Maid.     By  Evelyn  Everett- Green.

Dead  Man's  Land;  or.  The  Adventures  of  Certain  and  Un-
certain Whites  and  Blacks  at  Zimbambangwe,  the  Ancient  Home
of  Gold.  By  Geo.  Manville  Fenn.  Large  Svo.  Fully  illustrated.
Cloth  boards,  gilt  edges.

To  Win  or  to  Die  ;  A  Tale  of  the  Klondyke  Gold  Craze.  By
the  same  Author.     Uniform  with  the  above.

In  the  Mahdi's  Grasp.     By  the  same  Author.    Uniform  with

the  above.
Cap'n  Nat's  Treasure  :  A  Tale  of  Old  Liverpool.    By  Robert

Leighton.     Eight  Illustrations.     Large  Svo.     Cloth,  gilt  edges.

Cuthbert  Hartington  :  A  Tale  of  Two  Sieges.  By  G.  A.
Henty.     Large  Svo.     Six  Illustrations.     Cloth  boards,  giit  edges.

■  The  Two  Babylons ;  or,  The  Papal  Worship  proved  to  be  the
Worship  of  Nimrod  and  his  Wife.  With  61  Illustrations  from
Nineveh,  Babylon,  Egypt,  Pompeii,  etc.  By  the  late  Alexander
Hislop.    Demy  Svo.     Cloth  extra,


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.


New  5s.  Library.

D..yS.o.      01^.0^^^^  ^u.^^.      Bouj^^in  Hanson.,  aoa

The  Three-Cornered  House.     By  Evelyn  Everett-Green.

Vashti  Savage.     By  Sarah  Tytler.

Cuthbert  Hartington  :    a  Tale  of  Two  Sieges.     By  Geo.  A.

The  Lady  of  the  Forest.     By  L.  T.  Meade.

The  Better  Part.    By  Annie  S.  Swan.


3s.  6d.  each.

Large  Crown  8vo.    Illustrated.    Cloth  Boards,  with  "ilt  top
Through  Surging  Waters.     By  Harry  Davaes.    "
A  Girl  s  Stronghold.     Bv  E.  F.  Pollard
The  Boy's  Book  of  the  Sea.    By  W.  H.  Simmonds.
•"^  To^bI?"^"'^"^  ''   ^  S^-^  °^  ^-^lan  Tyranny.      By
An  Earl  without  an  Earldom.    By  Scott  Graham."
Done  and  Dared  in  Old  France.    By  Deborah  Alco'ck.        .

Just  Pe?cv  A  X  \""'/r.^'  ^'^^'  ^^^"-  ^-^^-  "^-^-"o--
Just  1-ercy.    a  Tale  of  Dickton  School.    By  H.  S  Whltln^

Old  Wenyon's  WiU.  B.  John  A.,„ortZZ^,,.
Morajhan  Monoy.  By  A.  St.  John  Adcook.  Twelve  lUastra-
rt!j*"'°'f  "^"T*^  "°"'°-      ^5'  ^'^'y  Everett-Green.

A  Lady  of  High  Degree.     By  Jennie  Chappell.
Pllgnms  0    the  Night     By  Sarah  Doadney  '  Frontispiece.
^'prfoS  »'  "'^  "Kingfisher."     By  Alfred  E.^Knight.
"^"Inus^rZ""'"-  Schoolmistress.    By  Morice  Gerard.  Twelve


Catalogue  of  Books  Published


DS»    DQ,  63,Cn    (continued).

The  Story  of  the  Bible.  Arranged  In  Simple  Style  for  Young
People.  New  Edition.  Demy  8vo.  620  pages.  Eight  beautiful
pictures  in  colours,  and  more  than  100  other  Illustrations.  Cloth
extra,  3s.  6d.     Gilt  edges,  bevelled  boards,  4s.  6d.

The  Pilgrim's  Progress.  By  John  Bunyan.  Illustrated  with  55
full-page  and  other  Engravings.  Crown  4to.  Cloth  extra,  3s.  6d.
Gilt  edges,  5s.     Padded  Watered  Silk,  6s.  6d.


Partridge's  Children's  Annual.

Conducted  by  the  Editor  of  "The  Children's  Friend."

A  handsome  and  attractive  production,  with  cover  printed  in  10  Colours  and
Varnished,  12  Full-page  Pictures  iti  Colour,  a)id  every  page  containini;
artistic  Illustrations.  Short  Stories  by  Mrs.  Molesworth  arid  other  well-
known  writers.    Paper  Boards,  Cloth  Back,  3s.  6d.

2s.  6d.  each.

"  Girls'   Imperial  Library.''^

By  Popular  Authors.      Large  Crown  8vo.      330  pages.      Six    Illustrations
printed  in  photo  brown.     Handsomely  bound  in  Cloth  Boards

(Books  marked  with  an  asterisk  are  also  bound  with  Gilt  edges,  3s.  each.)

*A  Girl  of  the  Fourth.    A  Story  for  School  Girls.     By  A.  M.

Irvine.
*Her  Little  Kingdom.     By  Laura  A.  Barter-Snow.
*Evan  Grayle's  Daughters.     By  Isabel  Suart  Robson,  Author

of  "  The  Fortunes  of  Eight,"  etc.
*The  Lady  of  the  Forest.    By  L.  T.  Meade.
*Cliff  House  :  A  Story  for  Schoolgirls.    By  A.  M.  Irvine.
The  Ways  of  a  Girl :   or,  The  Story  of  One  Year.    By  M.  F.

Hutchinson.
Those  Berkeley  Girls.    By  Lillias  Campbell  Davidson.
♦The   Heart   of  Una  Sackville.     By  Mrs.  George  de  Home

Vaizey.
*Carol  Carew  ;  or,  An  Act  of  Imprudence.    By  Evelyn  Everett-
Green,  Author  of  "  The  Three-Cornered  House,"  etc.
Gladys's  Repentance ;  or,  Two  Girls  and  a  Fortune.    By  Edith

C.  Kenyon.
Ursula  ;  or, "  A  Candidate  for  the  Mhiistry."    By  Laura  A.  Barter-
Snow.
Uncle  Joshua's  Heiress ;   or.  Which  shall  it  be  ?    By  Lillias
Campbell  Davidson,


By  S.  W.  Partridge  <§•  Co.


2S.     6d.     each     (continued).
•■GIRL'S    IMPERIAL    LIBRARY"   {continued).

*MolIy  :  The  Story  of  a  Wayward  Girl.    By  Harriet  E.  ColvIUe.
Love's  Golden  Thread.     By  Edith  C.  Kenyon.

Sydney  Lisle ;  or,  The  Heiress  of  St.  Quentln.    By  Dorothea
Moore.

The  Fortunes  of  Eight ;  or,  The  House  In  Harford  Place.    By
Isabel  Suart  Robson.

The  Little  Missis.     By  Charlotte  Skinner.

A  Girl's  Battle.     By  Lillias  Campbell  Davidson.

*A  Girl  in  a  Thousand.     By  Edith  C.  Kenyon.

Agnes  Dewsbury.     By  Laura  A.  Barter-Snow.

Monica's  Choice.     By  Flora  E.  Berry.


T/ie  "  True   Grit''  Series.

Large  Crown  8vo.      320  pages.     Fully  Illustrated.      Handsomely  Bound  in

Cloth  Boards.
(Books  marked  with  an  asterisk  are  also  bound  with  Gilt  edges,  3s.  each  )

*"  Sandfly  "  ;  or,  In  the  Indian  Days.     By  F.  B.  :'''orester.
*The  Master  of  the  Rebel  First.    A  Story  of  School  Life,    By

J.  Howard  Brown.

A  Hero  King :  a  Story  of  the  Days  of  King  Alfred.     By  E.  F.
Pollard.

Stirring  Sea  Fights,     a  Book  for  British  Boys.    By  J.  Cuthbert
Hadden.

Sappers  and  Miners  ;  or,  the  Flood  Beneath  the  Sea.    By  Geo.
Mamville  Fenn.

*In  Honour's  Cause.     By  Geo.  Manville  Fenn.

The  Hidden  City  :  A  Story  of  Central  America.    By  Walter  C.
Rhoades.

The  Lion  of  Wessex  ;  or.  How  Saxon  Fought  Dane.     By  Tom
Bevan.

*rhe  Scarlet  Judges,     a  Tale  of  the  Inquisition  in  the  Nether-
lands.     By  Eliza  F.  Pollard.

*By  Seashore,  Wood  and  Moorland.     By  Edward  Step,  F.L.S.
Author  of  ' '  Wayside  Flowers,  "etc.


Catalogue  of  Books  Published


^S,     DQ.     63.cn     [continued).
THE    "TRUE    GRIT"    SERIES     {continued).

*Rob  Harlow's  Adventures  :  A  Story  of  the  Grand  Chaco.    By
Geo.  Manville  Fenn.

A  Boy  of  the  First  Empire.    By  Elbridge  S.  Brooks.

Smoking  Flax.     By  Silas  K.  Hocking.    Twelve  Illustrations.

*Nature  Walks  and  Talks.     By  T.  Carreras.      Large  Crown
8vo.     Many  Illustrations.     Cloth  boards.

Nature  in  all  her  beauty  and  fascination  is  depicted  here  by
word-pictures  and  illustrations.

The  Boy's  Life  of  Nelson.  By  J.  Cuthbert  Hadden.  Large
Crown  8vo.  300  pages.  Beautiful  coloured  frontispiece  and  eight
illustrations  on  art  paper.

In  the  Misty  Seas  :  A  Story  of  the  Sealers  of  Behring  Strait.
By  Harold  Bindloss.

Two  Barchester  Boys :  A  Tale  of  Adventure  in  the  Malay
States.    By  K.  M.  Eady.

*True  Grit :   A  Story  of  Adventure  in  West  Africa.    By  Harold
Bindloss.     Six  Illustrations.

The  Yellow  Shield;  or,  A  Captive  in  the  Zulu  Camp.  By
William  Johnston.     Six  Illustrations.

A  Desert  Scout :  A  Tale  of  Arabi's  Revolt.     By  Wm.  Johnston.

*Cormorant  Crag  :  A  Tale  of  the  Smuggling  Days.    By  G.  Man-
ville Fenn.     Eight  Illustrations  by  W.  Rainey,  R.I.

The  Parting  of  the  Ways.     By  J.  L.  Hornibrook.

The  Crystal  Hunters  :  A  Boy's  Adventure  in  the  Higher  Alps.
By  G.  Manville  Fenn.

First  in  the  Field  :  A  Story  of  New  South  Wales.  By  G.
Manville  Fenn.    416  pages.

The  Two  Henriettas.     By  Emma  Marshall.

From  School  to  Castle.  Illustrated.  Large  Crown  8vo.
Cloth  Boards.     By  Charlotte  Murray.

Coral  :  A  Sea  Waif  and  her  Friends.     268  pages.      Six  lUustra
tions.     Cloth  Boards.     By  the  same  author.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  S-  Co.


2S.     6d.     each     (continued).

Come,  Break  your  Fast :  Dally  Meditations  for  a  Year.  By
Rev.  Mark  Guy  Pearse.  Large  Crown  8vo.  554  pages.  With
Portrait.    Cloth  boards.

Eric  Strong :  Not  Forgetting  his  Sisters.  Bright  and  Original
Talks  to  Boys  and  Girls.  By  Rev.  Thos.  Phillips.  B.A.,  of  Blooms-
bury  Central  Church,  London.     With  autograph  portrait.

The  Earnest  Life.  By  Silas  K.  Hocking.  Crown  8vo.  192
pages.      With  portrait  and  autograph.      Cloth  boards.

Stories  of  Self-Help  :  Recent  and  Living  Examples  of  Men
Risen  from  the  Ranks.     By  John  Alexander.     Well  Illustrated.

A  Young  Man's  Mind.     By    J.  A.  Hammerton.    Crown  8vo.

Cloth  extra,  gilt  top.
The  Romance  of  the   Bible.     The  Marvellous  History  of  the

British  and  Foreign   Bible    Society.     By  Charles  F    Bateman.

Crown  and  Empire  :  A  Popular  Account  of  the  Lives,  Public
and  Domestic,  of  Edward  VII.  and  Queen  Alexandra.  By  Alfred
E.  Knight.     Large  Crown  8vo.     336  pages.     Cloth  boards.

Our  Rulers  from  William  the  Conqueror  to  Edward  VII.
By  J.  Alexander.      Foolscap  4to.      Cloth  gilt.

The  Great  Siberian  Railway  :  What  I  saw  on  my  Journey.  By
Dr.  F.  E.  Clark.  Crown  8vo.  213  pages,  Sixty-five  first-class
Illustrations  on  art  paper,  and  a  Map.     Handsomely  bound.

Chaplains  at  the  Front.  Incidents  in  the  Life  of  a  Chaplain
during  the  Boer  War,  1899-1900.     By  Owen  Spencer  Watkins.

James  Flanagan  :  The  Story  of  a  Remarkable  Career.  By
Dennis  Crane.     Fully  Illustrated.     Cloth  boards.    2s.  6d.  net.


Ferrar  Fentons  Translations  of  the  Holy  Scriptures
in  Modern  English.

Cloth,  2s.  6d.  each  net.    Paste  Grain,  3s.  6d.  each  net.

Vol.     I.— The  Five  Books  of  Moses.
Vol.   II.— The  History  of  Israel.
Vol.  III.— The  Books  of  the  Prophets.
Vol.  IV.— The  Psalms,  Solomon,  and  Sacred  Writers.
Vol.  V. — The  New  Testament,

The  Complete  Bible  in  Modern  English,   Incorporating  the
above  five  volumes.     Cloth  extra,  gilt  top.     los.  net.


8  Catalogue  oj  Books  Published

2S.     6d.    each    {continued).

My  Bible  Picture  Book.  Contains  i6  full-page  coloured  and
many  other  Illustrations.  With  descriptive  stories  from  the  Old
and  New  Testaments.   Size  ii  by  8  inches.   In  bright  cloth  binding.

Following  Jesus :  A  Bible  Picture  Book  for  the  Young.  Size,
13J  by  10  inches.  Contains  12  beautifully  coloured  Old  and  New
Testament  Scenes,  with  appropriate  letterpress  by  D.J.D.

Brought  to  Jesus :  A  Bible  Picture  Book  for  Little  Readers.
Contains  12  New  Testament  Scenes,  printed  in  colours,  Size
13^  by  10  inches.     Handsome  coloured  boards,

Bible  Pictures  and  Stories  :  Old  and  New  Testament.    In  one

Volume.    Bound  in  cloth  boards,  with  8g  full-page  Illustrations.
Potters :  their  Arts  and  Crafts.     Historical,  Biographical  and

Descriptive.    By  John  C.  Sparks  and  Walter  Gandy.     Crown  8vo.

Copiously  Illustrated.    Cloth  extra.
The  Story  of  Jesus.     For  Little  Children.     By  Mrs.  G.  E.

Morton.     Large  8vo.     340  pages.      Eight  pictures  in  best  style  of

colour-work,  and  many  other  Illustrations.      Handsomely  bound

in  cloth  boards.
Victoria  :  Her  Life  and  Reign.    By  Alfred  E.  Knight.    Crown

8vo.     384  pages.     Cloth  extra,  2s.  6d. ;  cloth,  gilt  edges,  3s.  6d.

2s.  each.

T/ie  Home  Library.

Crown  8vo.    320  pages.    Handsome  Cloth  Covers.    Fully  Illustrated.
(Books  marked  with  an  asterisk  are  also  bound  with  Gilt  edges,  2S.  6d.  each.)  •

*A  Little  Bundle  of  Mischief.     By  Grace  Carlton.

*By  Creek  and  Jungle  :  Three  Chums  in  the  Wilds  of  Borneo.

By  John  K.  Leys.
*A  Gentleman  of  England  :  A  Story  of  the  Days  of  Sir  Philip

Sidney.    By  E.  F.  Pollard.

*  Dorothy  ;  or.  The  Coombehurst  Nightingale.    By  E.  M.  Alford.

*  Three  Chums  ;  or.  The  Little  Blue  Heart.    By  E.  M.  Stooke.

'Neath  April  Skies  ;  or,  Hope  amid  the  Shadows.    By  Jennie

Chappell.
Under  the  Roman  Eagles.    By  Amyot  Sagon,

^Helena's  Dower;   or,  A  Troublesome   Ward.     By    Eglanton
Thorne.
The  Red  Mountain  of  Alaska.     By  Willis  Boyd  Allen.

*rrue  unto  Death  :  a  Story  of  Russian  Life.    By  E.  F.  Pollard.

By  Bitter  Experience  :  A  Story  of  the  Evils  of  Gambling.    By
Scott  Graham.


By  S.  W,  Partridge  *  Co,


CtS,     63.cn     (continued).

THE    HOME    LIBRARY   (continued).

Love    Conquereth ;     or,    The    Mysterious   Trespasser.      By

Charlotte  Murray,
White  Ivory  and  Black,  and  other  Stories  of  Adventure  by  Sea
and  Land.      By  Tom   Bevan,  E.    Harcourt   Burrage,   and  John
Higginson.
*The  Adventures  of  Don  Lavington ;  or,  In  the  Days  of  the

Press  Gang.     By  G.  Manville  Fenn.
*Roger  the  Ranger  :  A  Story  of  Border  Life  among  the  Indians.
By  E.  F.  Pollard.
Brave  Brothers ;  or,  Young  Sons  of  Providence.    By  E.  M.
Stooke.
*The  Moat  House  ;  or  Celia's  Deceptions.     By    Eleanora  H.

Stooke.
*The  White  Dove  of  Amritzir :  A  Romance  of  Anglo-Indian
Life.     By  E.  F.  Pollard.
In  Battle  and  Breeze  :  Sea  Stories  by  G.  A.  Henty, G.  Manville

Fenn,  and  J.  Higginson.
Crag  Island  ;  or.  The  Mystery  of  Val  Stanlocli.    By  W.  Murray

Graydon.
Edwin,  the  Boy  Outlaw  ;  or.  The  Dawn  of  Freedom  in  England.
A  Story  of  the  Days  of  Robin  Hood.     By  J.  Frederick  Hodgetts.

Neta  Lyall.     By  Flora  E.  Berry,  Author  of  "  In  Small  Corners,"

etc.     Six  Illustrations.
The  Lion  City  of  Africa.      By  Willis  Boyd  Allen.
The  Better  Part.    By  Annie  S.  Swan.
John  :  A  Tale  of  the  Messiah.    By  K.  Pearson  Woods.
Leaders  into  Unknown  Lands.  By  A.  Montefiore-Brice,  F.G.S.

Lights  and  Shadows  of  Forster  Square.      By  Rev.  E.   H.

Sugden,  M.A.
The  Martyr  of  Kolin  ;    A  Story  of  the  Bohemian  Persecution.

By  H.  O.  Ward.
Morning  Dew-Drops  :    A  Temperance  Text  Book.    By  Clara

Lucas  Balfour.
Mark  Desborough's  Vow.    By  Annie  S.  Swan.
My  Dogs  in  the  Northland.    By  Egerton  R.Young.    288  pages.
Norman's  Nugget.    By  J.  Macdonald  Oxley,  B.A.


10  Catalogue  of  Books  Published

LiS,     QSiCri    [continued).
THE    HOME    LIBRARY   (continued).

A  Puritan  Wooing :  A  Tale  of  the  Great  Awakening  in  New

England.     By  Frank  Samuel  Child.
The  Strait  Gate.    By  Annie  S.  Swan.

Stuart's  Choice  ;  or  Castleton's  "  Prep."    By  Charlotte  Murray.
Under  the  Sirdar's  Flag.    By  William  Johnston.
Wardlaugh  ;    or,  Workers  Together.    By  Charlotte  Murray.
Alfred  the  Great :  The  Father  of  the  English.    By  Jesse  Page.


Library  of  Standard  Works  by  Famous  ^Authors.

Crown  8vo.    Bound  in  handsome  Cloth  Boards,     Well  Illustrated,
(Books  marked  with  an  asterisk  are  also  bound  with  Gilt  edges,  2S.  6d.  each.)

The  Children  of  the  New  Forest.    By  Captain  Marryat.

The  Starling.     By  Norman  McLeod.
*Hereward  the  Wake.     By  Charles  Kingsley.

The  Heroes.     By  Charles  Kingsley.

The  Channings.     By  Mrs.  Henry  Wood.

Ministering  Children.    By  M.  L.  Charlesworth.

The  Water  Babies.     A  Fairy  Tale  for  a  Land  Baby.     By
Charles  Kingsley.
*Hans  Andersen's  Fairy  Tales.

The  Old  Lieutenant  and  His  Son.    By  Norman  McLeod.

Coral  Island.     By  R.  M.  Ballantyne.

Nettie's  Mission.    By  Alice  Gray.

Home  Influence  :    A  Tale  for  Mothers.    By  Grace  Aguilar.

The  Gorilla  Hunters.    By  R.  M.  Ballantyne.
*What  Katy  Did.     By  Susan  Coolidge.

Peter  the  Whaler.    By  W.  H.  G.  Kingston.

Melbourne  House.  By  Susan  Warner.
*The  Lamplighter.  By  Miss  Cummins.
^Grimm's  Fairy  Tales.

The  Swiss  Family  Robinson  :  Adventures  on  a  Desert  Island.
*Tom  Brown's  School-Days.      By  an    Old  Boy.
*Little  Women  and  Good  Wives.    By  Louisa  M.  Alcott.

The  Wide,  Wide  World.    By  Susan  Warner.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  ii


2S.     each     {continued).
LIBRARY  py  STANDARD  WORKS  by  FAMOUS  AUTHORS  {contd.)

Danesbury  House.     By  Mrs.  Henry  Wood.
Stepping  Heavenward.     By  E.  Prentiss.
John  Halifax,  Gentleman.     By  Mrs.  Craik.
*Life  and  Adventures  of  Robinson  Crusoe.    By  Daniel  Defoe.
Naomi ;  or,  The  Last  Days  of  Jerusalem.    By  Mrs.  Webb.
The  Pilgrim's  Progress.     By  John  Bunyan.
Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.     By  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe.
Westward  Ho  1     By  Charles  Kingsley.

"  Great  Deeds  "  Series.

Large  Crown  8vo.    320  pages.    Full  oj  Illuttratiotu .    Handsomely  bound
in  Cloth  Boards.     2s.  each.     {Also  with  Gilt  edges,  2s.  6d.  each.)

Heroes  of   our    Empire  :    Gordon,  Clive,  Warren    Hastings,

Havelock,  and  Lawrence.
Heroes  who  have  Won  their  Crown  :  David  Livingstone  and

John  Williams.

Great  Works  by  Great  Men.     By  F.  M.  Holmes.

Brave  Deeds  for  British  Boys.     By  C.  D.  Michael.

Two  Great  Explorers  :  The  Lives  of  Fridtjof  Nansen,  and

Sir  Henry  M.  Stanley.
Heroes  of  Land  and  Sea  :  Firemen  and  their  Exploits,  and

the  Lifeboat.  ^^^

Bunyan's  Folk  of  To-day  ;  or,  The  Modern  Pilgrim's  Progress.

By  Rev.  J.  Reid  Howatt.    Twenty  Illustrations.    Crown  8vo.  cloth

extra.
Bible  Light  for  Little  Pilgrims.     A  Coloured  Scripture  Picture

Roll.     Contains  12  beautifully  coloured  Old  and  New  Testament

Scenes,  with   appropriate  texts.     Mounted  on  Roller  for  hanging.
Platform,  Pulpit  and  Desk  :    or,  Tools  for  Workers.    Being

148  Outline  addresses  on  all  Phases  of  the  Temperance  Movement

for  all  Ages  and  Classes.     By  W.  N.  Edwards,  F.C.S.     With  an

Introduction  by  Canon  Barker.     Crown  8vo.     300  pages.
Bible  Picture  Roll.     Contains  a  large  Engraving  of  a  Scripture

Subject,  with  letterpress  for  each  day  in  the  month.     Mounted  on

Roller  for  hanging.
Love,  Courtship,  and  Marriage.     By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.

Crown  8vo.     152  pages.     Embellished  cloth  cover,  2s.  net,     Full

gilt  edges,  2s.  6d.  net.


12  Catalogue  of  Books  Published

Is.  6d.  each.

Partridge's  Eighteenpenny  Series.

Or  Charming  Stories  for  Holiday  and  Firesidb  Reading.
Crown  8vo.       160  pages.       Weil  Illustrated  and  Attractively   Bound.

The  Home  of  His  Fathers.     By  Lillias  Campbell  Davidson.

A  Great  Patience.     By  L.  Moberley.

A  Late  Repentance.     By  Hannah  B.  Mackenzie.

Shepherds  and  Sheep.     By  E.  Stuart- Langford.

A  Noble  Champion.     By  David  Hobbs.

T/ie   Up-to-Date    Library.

Of  Thick  Crown  8t/o.  Volumes.    320  pages.    Many  Illustrations.
Cloth  Boards.
(Books  marked  with  an  asterisk  are  also  bound  with  gilt  edges,  2s.  each.)

*The  Boy  from  Cuba,     a  School  Story.    By  Walter  Rhoades.

Through  Grey  to  Gold.     By  Charlotte  Murray.

The  Wreck  of  the  Providence.    By  E.  F.  Pollard.
*Dorothy's  Training.     By  Jennie  Chappell.

Manco,  the  Peruvian  Chief.     By  W.  H.  G.  Kingston.
*Muriel  Malone  ;  or,  From  Door  to  Door.    By  Charlotte  Murray.

A  Polar  Eden.     By  Charles  R.  Kenyon.

Her  Saddest  Blessing.     By  Jennie  Chappell.
*Ailsa's   Reaping ;    or,  Grape  Vines  and  Thorns.     By  Jennie
Chappell.

A  Trio  of  Cousins :  A  Story  of  English  Life  in  1791.    By  Mrs.
G.  E.  Morton.

Mick  Tracy,  the  Irish  Scripture  Reader.

Grace  Ashleigh.      By  Mary  D.  R.  Boyd.

Without    a    Thought ;    or,    Dora's    Discipline.       By   Jennie
Chappell.

Edith  Oswald  ;  or.  Living  for  Others.    By  Jane  M.  Kippen.

A  Bunch  of  Cherries.     By  J.  W.  Kirton.

A  Village  Story.      By  Mrs.  G.  E.  Morton.
*The   Eagle  Cliff.      By  R.  M.  BaUantyne.

More  Precious  than  Gold.      By  Jennie  Chappell.

The  Slave  Raiders  of  Zanzibar.     By  E.  Harcourt  Burrage.

Ester  Ried.      By  "  Pansy."
*Avice  :   A  Story  of  Imperial  Rome.    By  E.  F.  Pollard.

The  Kin^s  Daughter.      By  "  Pansy."

The  Foster  Brothers  ;  or.  Foreshadowed.    By  Mrs.  Morton.

The  Household  Angel.     By  Madeline  Leslie.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  13


Is,     6d.     each     [continued).

THE    UP-TO-DATE    LIBRARY   (continued).

The  Green  Mountain  Boys  :    A  Story  of  the  American  War  of

Independence.     By  E.  F.  Pollard.
A  Way  in  the  Wilderness.      By  Maggie  Swan.

Miss  Elizabeth's  Niece.     By  M.  S.  Haycroft.

The  Man  of  the  House.    By  "  Pansy."

Olive  Chauncey's  Trust :    a  Story  of  Life's  Turning  Points

By  Mrs.  E.  R.  Pitman.
Whither  Bound  ?  a  Story  of  Two  Lost  Boys.  By  Owen  Landor.

Three  People.     By  "  Pansy."

Chrissy's  Endeavour.    By  "  Pansy."

*The  Young  Moose  Hunters.    By  C.  A.  Stephens.

Eaglehurst  Towers.    By  Emma  Marshall.

Uncle  Mac,  the  Missionary.    By  Jean  Perry.    Six  Illustrations

by  Wal.  Paget  on  art  paper.     Cloth  boards.
Chilgoopie  the  Glad  :  a  Story  of  Korea  and  her  Children.     By

Jean  Perry.     Eight  Illustrations  on  art  paper.     Cloth  boards,

The  Man  in  Grey ;  or,  More  about  Korea.    By  Jean  Perry.

More  Nails  for  Busy  Workers.    By  C.  Edwards,     Crown  8vo.

196  pages.     Cloth  boards.
The  Angel  and  the  Demon  ;  and  other  Stories.  By  E.Thomey-

croft  Fowler.     Cloth  gilt.     Eight  Illustrations.
Insects  :  Foes  and  Friends.    By  W.  Egmont  Kirby,  M.D.,  F.L.S.

3a  pages  of  Colouied  Illustrations.     Cloth  boards.
Queen  Alexandra :  the  Nation's  Pride.      By   Mrs.   C.   N.

Williamson.    Crown  8vo.    Tastefully  bound,     is.  6d  net.
King  and   Emperor :    the   Life-History  of  Edward  VII.    By

Arthur  Mee.     Crown  8vo.     Cloth  boards,     is.  6d.  net.

William  McKinley:     Private  and   President.    By  Thos.  Cox
Meech.     Crown  8vo.    160  pages,  with  Portrait,     is.  6d.  not.

Studies  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.    His  Character,  His  Spirit

Himself.    By  R.  E.  Speer.     Cloth,  gilt  top.     is  6d.  net.
Studies  of  the  Man  Paul.      By  Robert  E.  Speer.    Lon?  8vo.

304  pages.     Cloth  gilt.     is.  6d.  net.
Wellington  :   the  Record  of  a  Great  Military  Career.    By  A.  E.

Knight.    Crown  8vo,     Cloth  gilt,  with  Portrait,     is.  6d.  net.
Baden-Powell :  The  Hero  of  Mafeking.    By  W.  Francis  Altken

Qrgwn  8vo.    Cloth  gilt,  with  Portrait:    W.  6d.  net


14  Catalogue  of  Books  Published

Is.     OQ.     63.cn    [contintud).
The  'British  'Boys'  Library.

Fully  Illustrated.    Crown  8vo.    768  pages.    Cloth  extra.

Dick's  Daring  ;  or,  The  Secret  of  Toulon.    By  A.  H.  Biggs.

Through  Flame  and  Flood.    Stories  of  Heroism  on  Land  and
Sea.     By  C.  D.  Michael.

Never    Beaten  I      A  Story  of  a  Boy's  Adventures  in  Canada.
By  E,  Harcourt  Burrage,  Author  of  "Gerard  Mastyn,"  etc.

The  Adventures  of  Ji.      By  G.  E.  Farrow,  Author  of  "  The
Wallypug  of  Why."

Missionary  Heroes:  Stories  of  Heroism  on  the  Missionary  Field.
By  C,  D.  Michael.

Brown  Al  ;  or,  a  Stolen  Holiday.    By  E.  M.  Stooke.

The  Pigeons'  Cave :  A  Story  of  Great  Orme's  Head  in  1806.
By  J.  S.  Fletcher.

Robin  the  Rebel.     By  H.  Louisa  Bedford.

Runaway  Rollo.     By  E.  M.  Stooke.

Success :  Chats  about  Boys  who  have  Won  It.  By  C.  D.  Michael.

Well  Done  1     stories  of  Brave  Endeavour.     Edited  by  C.  D.
Michael.

Major  Brown  ;  or,  Whether  White  or  Black,  a  Man.    By  Edith
S.  Davis.

Noble  Deeds :  Stories  of  Peril  and  Heroism.    Edited  by  C.  D.
Michael.

Armour   Bright.     The  Story  of  a  Boy's  Battles,     By  Lucy
Taylor.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  S-  Co.  15

Is.     6d.    each     {continued).
The   "British   Girls'   Library.

Fully  Illustrated,    Crown  8vo.     160  pages.    Cloth  extra.

Little  Gladwise.    The  Story  of  a  Waif.     By  Nellie  Cornwall.

A  Family  of  Nine  !    By  E.  C.  Phillips.

Alice  and  the  White  Rabbit :  Their  Trips  Round  about  London.
By  Brenda  Girvin.

The  Tender  Light  of  Home.    By  Florence  WiUmot.

Friendless  Felicia  :    or,  a  Little  City  Sparrow.    By  Eleanora
H.  Stooke.

Keziah  in  Search  of  a  Friend.     By  Noel  Hope.

Her  Bright  To-Morrow.     By  Laura  A.  Barter-Snow.

Rosa's  Mistake  ;  or,  The  Chord  of  Self.    By  Mary  Bradford-
Whiting.

The  Mystery  Baby  ;  or,  Patsy  at  Fellside.    By  Alice  M.  Page.

Zillah,  the  Little  Dancing  Girl.    By  Mrs.  Hugh  St.  Leger.

Patsie's  Bricks.    By  L.  S.  Mead.

Salome's  Burden  ;  or.  The  Shadow  on  the  Homes.  By  Eleanora
H.  Stooke.

Heroines  :  True  Tales  of  Brave  Women.    By  C.  D.  Michael.

Granny's  Girls.    By  M.  B.  Manwell.

The  Gipsy  Queen.    By  Emma  Leslie.

Kathleen  ;  or,  A  Maiden's  Influence.    By  Julia  Hack.

Queen  of  the  Isles.    By  Jessie  M.  E.  Saxby.


Picture  Books,

Sue  9  by  7  inches.    Coloured  and  numerous  other  Illustrations.    Handsome
Coloured  Cover,  Paper  Boards  with  Cloth  Back.

Happy  and  Gay :    Pictures  and  Stories  for  Every  Day.      By
D.  J.D,

Stories  of  Animal  Sagacity.    By  D.  J.  D.


i6  Catalogue  of  Books  Published


Is.     6d.    each     (continued).

*^The  World's  Wonders''  Series,

Crown  8vo.    160  pages.    Copiomly  Illustrated,    Handsome  Cloth  Covers.

The  Conquest  of  the  Air  :  The  Romance  of  Aerial  Navigation.
By  John  Alexander.

Surgeons    and    their    Wonderful    Discoveries.     By  F.  M.
Holmes.

The  Life-Boat :  Its  History  and  Heroes.    By  F.  M.  Holmes.

Firemen  and  their  Exploits.  With  an  account  of  Fire  Brigades
and  Appliances,    By  F.  M.  Holmes.

The   Romance   of   the  Savings   Banks.     By  Archibald  G.
Bowie.

The  Romance  of  Glass  Making.    A  Sketch  of  the  History  of
Ornamental  Glass.     By  W.  Gandy.

The  Romance  of  the  Post  Office  :  Its  Inception  and  Won-
drous Development.    By  Archibald  G.  Bowie.

Marvels  of  Metals.    By  F.  M.  Holmes.

Triumphs  of  the  Printing  Press.    By  Walter  Jerrold.

Electricians  and  their  Marvels.    By  Walter  Jerrold.

Naturalists  and  their  Investigations.  By  George  Day,  F.R.M.S.


Illustrated  Reward  Books.

Crown  8vo.    160  pages.    Cloth  extra.    Fully  Illustrated.

Bethesda  Chapel.    A  Story  of  the  Good  Old  Times,    By  Rev.
C.  Leech,  D.D.

Donald's  Victory.    By  Lydia  Phillips,

A  Red  Brick  Cottage.    By  Lady  Hope.

Marchester  Stories.    By  Rev.  C.  Herbert,

Sister  Royal.    By  Mrs.  Haycraft.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  S-  Co.  ly

Is,    6d.     each     {continued).
Popular  Missionary  Biographies.

Crown  8vo.    160  pages.    Cloth  extra.    Pvlly  Illustrated.

Two  Lady  Missionaries  in  Tibet :  Miss  Annie  R.  Taylor  and

Dr.  Susie  Rijnhart  Moyes.     By  Isabel  S.  Robson.
Dr.  Laws  of  Livingstonia,    By  Rev.  J.  Johnston.
Grenfell  of  Labrador.    By  Rev.  J.  Johnston.
Johan  G.  Oncken  :  His  Life  and  Work.  By  Rev.  J.  Hunt  Cooke
The  Christianity  of  the  Continent.    By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S.
Missionaries  I  have  Met,  and  the  Work  they  have  Done.

By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S.
James  Chalmers,  Missionary  and  Explorer  of  Rarotonga  and

New  Guinea.     By  William  Robson.
Griffith  John,  Founder  of  the  Hankow  Mission,  Central  China.

By  William  Robson.

Robert  Morrison  :  The  Pioneer  of  Chinese  Missions.  By  William

J.  Townsend.
Amid  Greenland  Snows ;   or,  The  Early  History  of  Arctic

Missions.     By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S.
Bishop  Patteson  :  The  Martyr  of  Melanesia.    By  same  Author.
Captain  Allen  Gardiner  :  Sailor  and  Saint.  By  same  Author.
The  Congo  for  Christ :  The  Story  of  the  Congo  Mission.    By

Rev.  J.  B.  Myers.
David   Brainerd,  the  Apostle  to  the  North-American  Indians.

By  Jesse  Page.  F.R.G.S.
David  Livingstone.     By  Arthur  Montefiore-Brice.
From  Kafir  Kraal  to  Pulpit :  The  Story  of  Tiyo  Soga,  First

Ordained  Preacher  of  the  Kafir  Race.     By  Rev.  H.  T.  Cousins.
Japan  :  and  its  People.    By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S.
John  Williams  :  The  Martyr  Missionary  of  Polynesia.    By  Rev.

James  Ellis.
James  Calvert ;  or,  From  Dark  to  Dawn  In  Fiji.  By  R.  Vernon.
Lady  Missionaries  in  Foreign  Lands.    By  Mrs.  E.  R.  Pitman.
Missionary  Heroines  in  Eastern  Lands.  By  Mrs.  E.  R.  Pitman.

Robert  Moffat :  The  Missionary  Hero  of  Kuruman.    By  David

J.  Deane.
Samuel  Crowther :  The  Slave  Boy  who  became  Bishop  of  the

Niger.    By  Jesse  Page.  F.R.G.S.
Thomas  J.  Comber  :   Missionary  Pioneer  to  the  Congo.     By

Rev.  J.  B.  Myers.
William  Carey :  The  Shoemaker  who  became  the  Father  and

Founder  of  Modern  Missions     By  Rev.  J.  B.  Myers,
Henry  Martyn.    By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S.  b


1 8  Catalogue  of  Books  Published

lS»    UCl.     C3.cn     {continued).
Popular  Biographies,

Croum  8vo.    Cloth  Boards.    Fully  Illustrated.

John  Wesley.     By  Rev.  Arthur  Walters.

Women  of  Worth.  Sketches  of  the  Lives  of  the  Queen  of
Roumania  ("  Carmen  Sylva  "),  Frances  Power  Cobbe,  Mrs.  J.  R.
Bishop,  and  Mrs.  Bramwell  Booth.     By  Jennie  Chappell,

George  Miiller  :  The  Modern  Apostle  of  Faith.  By  Fred  G.
Warne.

Life-Story  of  Ira  D.  Sankey,  The  Singing  Evangelist.  By
David  Williamson,

Great  Evangelists,  and   the  Way  God  has  Used  Them.

By  Jesse  Page.
Women  who  have  Worked  and  Won.    The  Life  Story  of
Mrs.  Spurgeon,  Mrs.  Booth-Tucker,  F.  R.  Havergai,  and  Ramabai.
By  Jennie  Chappell.

John  Bright :  Apostle  of  Free  Trade.    By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S.

The  Two  Stephensons.    By  John  Alexander.

J.  Passmore  Edwards :  Philanthropist.  By  E.  Harcourt  Burrage.

Dwight  L  Moody  :  The  Life-work  of  a  Modem  Evangelist.  By
Rev.  J.  H.  Batt.

Noble  Work  by  Noble  Women  :  Sketches  of  the  Lives  of  the
Baroness  Burdett-Coutts,  Lady  Henry  Somerset,  Miss  Sarah  Robin-
son, Mrs.  Fawcett,  and  Mrs.  Gladstone.     By  Jennie  Chappell.

Four  Noble  Women  and  their  Work  :  Sketches  of  the  Life  and
Work  of  Frances  Willard,  Agnes  Weston,  Sister  Dora,  and  Catherine
Booth.     By  Jennie  Chappell.

The  Canal  Boy  who  became  President.  By  Frederick  T.
Gammon.

Florence  Nightingale  :  The  Wounded  Soldier's  Friend.  By
Eliza  F.  Pollard.

Four  Heroes  of  India :  Clive,  Warren  Hastings,  Havelock,
Lawrence.     By  F.  M.  Holmes.

General  Gordon :  The  Christian  Soldier  and  Hero.  By  G.
Barnett  Smith.

Heroes  and  Heroines  of  the   Scottish  Covenanters.    By

J.  Meldrum  Dryerre,  LL.B.,  F.R.G.S.
John  Knox  and  the  Scottish  Reformation.    By  G.  Barnett

Smith.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  19


Is.     6d.    each    {continued).

POPULAR    BIOGRAPHIES   (continued).

Philip  Melancthon  :  The  Wittemberg  Professor  and  Theologian
of  the  Reformation.     By  David  J.  Deane.

The  Slave  and  his  Champions  :  Sketches  of  Granville  Sharp,
Thomas  Clarkson,  William  Wilberforce,  and  SirT.  F.  Buxton.  By
CD.  Michael.

C.  H.  Spurgeon  :  His  Life  and  Ministry.  By  Jesse  Page,  F.R.G.S.

Two  Noble  Lives  :  John  Wicliffe,  the  Morning  Star  of  the
Reformation  ;  and  Martin  Luther,  the  Reformer.  By  David  J.
Deane.     208  pages.

William  Tyndale  :  The  Translator  of  the  English  Bible.  By  G.
Barnett  Smith.

The  Marquess  of  Salisbury  :  His  Inherited  Characteristics
Pohtical  Principles,  and  Personality.     By  W.  F.  Aitken.

Joseph    Parker,    D.D.  :   His  Life  and  Ministry.    By  Albert

Dawson.
Hugh  Price  Hughes.     By  Rev.  J.  Gregory  Mantle.

R.  J.  Campbell,  M.A.  ;  Minister  of  the  City  Temple,  London.
By  Charles  T.  Bateman.

Dr.  Barnardo  :  "  The  Foster-Father  of  Nobody's  Children."  By
Rev.  J.  H.  Batt.

W.  Robertson  NicoU,  LL.D.  ;  Editor  and  Preacher.    By  Jane

Stoddart.
F.  B.  Meyer  :  His  Life  and  Work.    By  Jennie  Street.
John  Clifford,  M.A.,  B.Sc,  LL.D.,  D.D.   By  Chas.T.  Bateman.

Thirty  Years  in  the  East  End.  A  Mar\'ellous  Story  of  Mission
Work.    By  W.  Francis  Aitken.

Alexander  Maclaren,  D.D.  :  The  Man  and  His  Message.  By
Rev.  John  C.  Carlile.

Lord  Milner.    By  W.  B.  Luke.

Lord  Rosebery,  Imperialist.    By  J.  A.  Hammerton.

Joseph  Chamberlain  :  A  Romance  of  Modern  Politics.  By
Arthur  Mee.

General  Booth  :    The  Man  and  His  Work.    By  Jesse  Page,

F.R.G.S.
Torrey  and  Alexander:    The  Story  of  their  Lives.      By  J.

Kennedy  Maclean.      Crown   8vo.      Illustrated.      Imitation   cloth,

IS.  net.    Cloth  boards,     is.  6d.  net.

Sir  John  Kirk  :  The  Children's  Friend.  By  John  Stuart.
Crown  8vo.    Cloth  boards,  is.  6d.  net,


20  Catalogue  of  Books  Published

Is.     DCl,    CSCrl     {continued).
^^  Onward  ^^  Temperance  Library,

Crown  8vo.    Illuitratei,    Cloth  extra.
The  Bird  Angel.    By  Miss  M.  A.  Paull.

"  One  of  Miss  Paull's  most  delightful  stories."

Lyndon  the  Outcast.    By  Mrs.  Clara  Lucas  Balfour.
Ronald  Clayton's  Mistake.    By  Miss  M.  A.  Paull.

"  It  is  a  capital  book  to  place  in  the  bands  of  working  lads."

Nearly  Lost,  but  Dearly  Won.    By  Rev.  T.  P.  Wilson,  M.A.,
Author  of  "  Frank  Oldfield,"  etc.


Is.  each.

Devotional  Classics.

A  New  Series  of  Devotional  Books  by  Standard  Authors.  Well  printed  on
good  paper.  Size  6^  by  4\  inches.  Beautifully  bound  in  Cloth  Boards,
Is.  each,  Net  ;  Leather,  2s.  each,  Net.     (Not  illustrated.)

The  Imitation  of  Christ.    By  Thomas  k  Kempis.

The  Holy  War.    By  John  Bunyan.


Letters  on  the  Simple  Life.  By  the  Queen  of  Roumania,  Marie
Corelli,  Madame  Sarah  Grand,  "John  OHver  Hobbes,"  Sir  A.
Conan  Doyle,  The  Bishop  of  London,  Canon  Hensley  Henson,
Sir  J.  Crichton  Browne,  Rev.  S.  Baring-Gould,  Dr.  Robertson
Nicoll,  etc.  Crown  8vo  i6o  pages.  With  Autographs  of  con-
tributors in  fac-simile.  Imitation  Linen,  6d  net.  Cloth  boards,
IS.  net.     (Not  illustrated.)

Uncrowned  Queens.     By  Charlotte  Skinner.    Cloth  boards,  is.
Golden  Words  for  Every  Day.     By  M.  Jennie  Street,    is.
Novelties,  and    How    to    Make   Them  :     Hints  and  Helps

in  providing  occupation   for   Children's   Classes.       Compiled   by

Mildred  Duff,     Full  of  illustrations.     Cloth  boards,  is.
In  Defence  of  the  Faith  :    The  Old  Better  than  the  New.

By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer.     Cloth  boards,     is.  net.
Ingatherings  :    A  Dainty  Book  of  Beautiful  Thoughts.  Compiled

by  E.  Agar.    Cloth  boards,  is.  net.     (Paper  covers,  6d.  net).
The   New   Cookery   of  Unproprietary  Foods,     By  Eustace

Miles,  M.A.     192  pages,     is.  net.
The  Child's  Book  of  Health.  By  W.N.  Edwards,  F.C.S.  \s.neL


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  2i


Is.     63.Ch     [continued).
One  Shilling  ^ward  'Books,

Fully  Illustrated.    Crown  8vo.    Cloth  extra,
"Tubby";  or,  Right  about  Face.     By  J.  Howard  Brown.
Alan's  Puzzle  ;  or,  The  Bag  of  Gold.    By  F.  M.  Holmes.
Auntie  Amy's  Bird  Book.     By  A.  M.  Irvine.
The  Ivory  Mouse  :  A  Book  of  Fairy  Stories.    By  Rev.  Stanhope

E.  Ward.
Billy's    Hero ;   or,  The  Valley  of  Gold.    A  Story  of  Canadian

Adventure.     By  Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall.
The  Straight  Road.     By  Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall.
One  Primrose  Day.     By  Mrs.  Hugh  St.  Leger.
The  Reign  of  Lady  Betty.    By  Kent  Carr.
The  Whitedown  Chums.     By  Jas.  H.  Brown.
Sweet  Nancy.     By  L.  T.  Meade.
Secrets  of  the  Sea.    By  Cicely  Fulcher.
Norman's  Oak.     By  Jennie  Chappell.
A  Fight  for  Life,  and  other  Stories.     By  John  R.  Newman.
The  Fairyland  of  Nature.     By  J.  Wood  Smith.
True  Stories  of  Brave  Deeds.    By  Mabel  Bowler.
The  Mystery  of  Mamie.    By  Jennie  Chappell.
Gipsy  Kit ;  or,  The  Man  with  the  Tattooed  Face.    By  Robert

Leighton.
Dick's  Desertion  ;  A  Boy's  Adventures  in  Canadian   Forests.

By  Marjorie  L.  C.  Pickthall.
The  Wild  Swans  ;  or,  The  Adventure  of  Rowland  Cleeve.    By

Mary  C.  Rowsell.
George  &  Co.  ;  or.  The  Choristers  of  St.  Anselm's.  By  Spencer

T.  Gibb.
Caravan  Cruises  :  Five  Children  in  a  Caravan.  By  Phil  Ludlow
Little  Chris  the  Castaway.     By  F.  Spenser.
The  Children  of  the  Priory.    By  J.  L.  Hornibrook.
Tom  and  the  Enemy.    By  Clive  R.  Fenn.
Ruth's    Roses.     By  Laura  A.  Barter-Snow.
In  Paths  of  Peril.      By  J.  Macdonald  Oxley.
Pets  and  their  Wild  Cousins  :  Now  and   True   Stories    of

Animals.    By  Rev.  J.  Isabell,  F.E.S.
Other  Pets  and  their  Wild  Cousins.   By  Rev.  J.  IsabeU,  F.E.S
Sunshine  and  Snow.    By  Harold  Bindloss.
Donalblane  of  Darien.    By  J,  Macdonald  Oxley,
Crown  Jewels.     By  Heather  Grey.


22  Catalogue  of  Books  Published

1S»    CSCn     {continued).
ONE    SHILLING    REWARD    BOOKS   {continued).

All  Play  and  No  Work.     By  Harold  Avery.

Always  Happy ;  or,  The  Story  of  Helen  Keller.     By  Jennie

Chappell.
Birdie  and  her  Dog,  and  other  Stories  of  Canine  Sagacity.    By

Miss  Phillips  (Mrs.  H.  B.  Looker).
Bessie  Drew  ;  or.  The  Odd  Little  Girl.    By  Amy  Manifold.
Cola  Monti ;  or,  The  Story  of  a  Genius.    By  Mrs.  Craik,  Author

of  "John  Halifax,  Gentleman."
The  Children  of  Cherryholme.    By  M.  S.  Haycraft.
Harold  ;  or.  Two  Died  for  Me.    By  Laura  A.  Barter-Snow.
Indian  Life  in  the  Great  North-West.    By  Egerton  R.  Young.

Jack  the  Conqueror;  or.  Difficulties  Overcome.  By
Mrs.  C.  E.  Bowen.

Lost  in  the  Backwoods.    By  Edith  C.  Kenyon.

The  Little  Woodman  and  his  Dog  Caesar.  By  Mrs.  Sher-
wood.

Roy's  Sister ;    or.  His  Way  and  Hers.    By  M.  B.  Manwell.


Partridge's  Shilling   Library.


Crown  8vo.     136  pages.     Illustrations  printed  on  Art  Paper.    A      Undid
Series  of  Stories  for  Adults.

Robert  Musgrave's  Adventure  :  A  Story  of  Old  Geneva.     By

Deborah  Alcock.
The  Taming  of  the  Rancher  :    A  Story  of  Western  Canada.

By  Argyll  Saxby.
"  Noodle  "  :  From  Barrack  Room  to  Mission  Field.    By  S.  E.

Burrow.
The  Lamp  in  the  Window.    By  Florence  E.  Bone.
Out  of  the  Fog.     By  Rev.  J.  Isabell,  F.E.S.
Fern  Dacre ;  A  Minster  Yard  Story.    By  Ethel  Ruth  Boddy.
Through  Sorrow  and  Joy  :  A  Protestant  Story.    By  M.  A.  R.
A  Brother's  Need.    By  L.  S.  Mead.

Is.  each  net.

{Not  Illustrated).

Partridge's  Popular  Reciter.  Old  Favourites  and  New.  208
pages.  Crown  8vo.  Imitation  Cloth,  is.  net ;  Cloth  Boards,
IS.  6d.  net.

Partridge's  Humorous  Reciter  (uniform  with  Partridge's  Popular
Reciter).    Imitation  Cloth,  is.  cat ;  Cloth  boards,  is.  6d.  net.    .


By  S.  W.  Partridge   &  Co.  23

Is.     63,Cn     {continued).
Cheap  sprints  of  Popular  Books  for  the  Young.

Crown  8vo.     160  pages.    Illustrated,    Cloth  Boards,  Is.  each,
Carola's  Secret.     By  Ethel  F.  Heddle.
The  Golden  Doors.     By  M.  S.  Haycraft.
Marigold's  Fancies.     By  L.  E.  Tiddeman.
Andrew  Bennett's  Harvest.    By  Lydia  Phillips.

The  Thane  of  the  Dean.  A  Story  of  theXimeof  the  Conqueror.

By  Tom  Bevan.
Nature's  Mighty  Wonders.    By  Rev.  Richard  Newton.

Hubert  Ellerdale :    A  Tale  of  the  Days  of  WicUffe.    By  W.

Oak  Rbind.
Our  Phyllis.     By  M.  S.  Haycraft.
The  Maid  of  the  Storm  :  a  Story  of  a  Cornish  Village.    By

Nellie  Cornwall.
Philip's  Inheritance  ;  or,  Into  a  Far  Country.    By  F.  Spenser.
The  Lady  of  the  Chine.    By  M.  S.  Haycraft.
In  the  Bonds  of  Silence.    By  J.  L.  Hornibrook.
A  String  of  Pearls.    By  E.  F.  Pollard.

Elsie  Macgregor ;  or,  Margaret's  Little  Lass.  By  Ramsay  Guthrie.
Hoyle's  Popular  Ballads  and  Recitations.    By  William  Hoyle.
Heroes  All  !     a  Book  of  Brave  Deeds.    By  C.  D.  Michael.
The  Old  Red  Schoolhouse.    By  Frances  H.  Wood.
Christabel's  Influence.    By  J.  Goldsmith  Cooper.
Deeds  of  Daring.      By  C.  D.  Michael.
Everybod/s  Friend.     By  Evelyn  Everett-Green.
The  Bell  Buoy.     By  F.  M.  Holmes.

Vic  :  A  Book  of  Animal  Stories.    By  A.  C.  Fryer,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A.
In  Friendship's  Name.    By  Lydia  Phillips.
Nella  ;  or.  Not  My  Own.    By  Jessie  Goldsmith  Cooper.
Blossom  and  Blight.    By  M.  A.  PauU.
Aileen.     By  Laura  A.  Barter-Snow.
Satisfied.     By  Catherine  Trowbridge.
Ted's   Trust.      By  Jennie  Chappell.
A  Candle  Lighted  by  the  Lord.    By  Mrs.  E.  Ross.
Alice  Western's  Blessing.    By  Ruth  Lamb.
Tamsin  Rosewarne  and  Her  Burdens.    By  Nellie  Cornwall.
Raymond  and   Bertha.    By  Lydia  Phillips.
Gerald's  Dilemma.    By  Emma  Leslie.
Fine  Gold  ;  or,  Ravenswood  Courteuay.    By  Emma  Marshall.


24  Catalogue  of  Books  Published


Is.     6d.cn     (contintied).

CHEAP  REPRINTS  OF  POPULAR  BOOKS  FOR  THE  YOUNG

(continued),
Marigold.    By  Mrs.  L.  T.  Meade.
Jack's  Heroism.    By  Edith  C.  Kenyon.
Her  Two  Sons  :  A  Story  for  Young  Men  and  Maidens.    By

Mrs.  Charles  Garnett.
Rag  and  Tag.    By  Mrs.  E.  J.  Whittaker.
The  Little  Princess  of  Tower  Hill.    By  L.  T.  Meade.
Clovie  and  Madge.    By  Mrs.  G.  S.  Reaney.
Ellerslie  House  :    A  Book  for  Boys.    By  Emma  Leslie.
Like   a   Little   Candle ;    or,  Bertrand's  Influence.    By  Mrs.

Haycraft.
Louie's  Married  Life.    By  Sarah  Doudney.
The  Dairyman's  Daughter.    By  Legh  Richmond.
Bible  Jewels.    By  Rev.  Dr.  Newton.
Bible  Wonders.    By  the  same  Author.
The  Pilgrim's  Progress.    By  John  Bunyan.    416  pages.    Eight

coloured  and  46  other  Illustrations.
Our  Duty  to  Animals.   By  Mrs.  C.  Bray.


Books  for  Christian  Workers.


Large  Crown  16mo.    128  pages.    Chastely  bound  in  Cloth  Boards.

7s,  eacn.

The  Home  Messages  of  Jesus.    By  Charlotte  Skinner.

Deeper  Yet :    Meditations  for  the  Quiet  Hour.    By  Clarence  E.

Eberman.
The  Master's  Messages  to  Women.    By  Charlotte  Skinner.
Royal  and  Loyal :  Thoughts  on  the  Two-fold  Aspect  of  the

Christian  Life.     By  Rev.  W.  H.  Griffith-Thomas.
Thoroughness  :    Talks  to  Young  Men.    By  Thain  Davidson,

D.D.
Some  Secrets  of  Christian  Living.    By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer.
The  Overcoming  Life.    By  Rev.  E.  W.  Moore.
Marks  of  the  Master.    By  Charlotte  Skinner.
Some  Deeper  Things.    By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer.
Steps  to  the  Blessed  Life.    By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer.
Daybreak  in  the  Soul.    By  Rev.  E.  W.  Moore.
The  Temptation  of  Christ.    By  C.  Arnold  Healing,  M.A.
For  Love's  Sake.    By  Charlotte  Skinner.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  25


Is.    63,Cn     {continued).
Eivery one's  Library.

A  re-issue  of  Standard  Works  in  a  cheap  jorm,  containing  from  320
to  500  pages,  printed  in  the  best  style;  with  Illustrations  on  art  paper,
and  tastefully  bound  in  Cloth  Boards.     Is.  each.

The  Starling.     By  Norman  McLeod.

The  Children  of  the  New  Forest.    By  Captain  Marryat.

Danesbury  House.     By  Mrs.  Henry  Wood.

Granny's  Wonderful  Chair.    By  Frances  Browne.

Hereward  the  Wake.    By  Charles  Kingsley.

The  Heroes.     By  Charles  Kingsley.

Ministering  Children.    By  M.  L.  Charlesworth.

Peter  the  Whaler.    By  W.  H.  G.  Kingston.

The  Channings.    By  Mrs.  Henry  Wood.

Melbourne  House.    By  Susan  Warner.

Alice  in  Wonderland.

The  Lamplighter.    By  Miss  Cummins.

What  Katy  Did.    By  Susan  Coolidge.

Stepping  Heavenward.    By  E.  Prentiss.

Westward  Ho  !    By  Charles  Kingsley.

The  Water  Babies.    By  the  Same  Author.

The  Swiss  Family  Robinson.

Grimm's  Fairy  Tales.    By  the  Brothers  Grimm.

The  Coral  Island.    By  R.  M.  Ballantyne.

Hans  Andersen's  Fairy  Tales.

John  Halifax,  Gentleman.    By  Mrs.  Craik.

Little  Women  and  Good  Wives.    By  Louisa  M.  Alcott.

Tom  Brown's  Schooldays.    By  an  Old  Boy.

The  Wide,  Wide  World.    By  Susan  Warner.

Life  and  Adventures  of  Robinson  Crusoe.    By  Daniel  Defoe»

Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.    By  H.  B.  Stowe.

The  Old  Lieutenant  and  His  Son.    By  Norman  McLeod.


26  Catalogue  of  Books  Published

Is.     G3.cn     {continmd).
New  Series  of  One  Shilling  Picture  Books,

Size  70J  by  8  inches.  96  pages.  Coloured  Frontispiece  and  numerous  other
illustrations.  Handsomely  bound  in  Paper  Boards,  covers  printed  in  10
colours  and  varnished.

Playmates.     By  Uncle  Maurice.

Frolic  and  Fun :    Pictures  and  Stories  for  Everj'one.      By  Aunt
Ruth.

My  Dollies'  A. B.C.    By  Uncle  Jack.
Merry  Madcaps !    By  Aunt  Ruth.
By  the  Silver  Sea.    By  R.  V.
Funny  Folk  in  Animal  Land.    By  Uncle  Frank.
A  Trip  to  Storyland.    By  R.  V.
Holiday  Hours  in  Animal  Land.    By  Uncle  Harry.
Animal  Antics  !    By  the  Author  of  "  In  Animal  Land  with  Louis
Wain."

Happy  Days.    By  R.  V.

Tell  Me  a  Tale!    A  Picture  Story  Book  for  Little  Children.

ByJ.  D.
Little  Snow-shoes'  Picture  Book.    By  R.  V.
In  Animal  Land  with  Louis  Wain.
Pussies  and  Puppies.    By  Louis  Wain.

Scripture  Picture  Books.

Old  Testament  Heroes.    By  Mildred  Duff.

Feed  My  Lambs.    Fifty-two  Bible  Stories  and  Pictures.    By  the

Author  of  "  The  Friends  of  Jesus."
Bible  Pictures  and  Stories  :    old  Testament.    By  D.  J.  D.
Bible   Pictures  and   Stories :     New  Testament.     By  James

Weston  and  D.  J.  D.
The  Life  of  Jesus.    By  Mildred  Duff,    iia  pages.

Gentle  Jesus.  \  „.,,„.  ^    ,    ■^      x.

Four  Bible  Picture  Books  beauti-      (

fully  printed  in  colours  with     ""

descriptive  letterpress.


Jesus  the  Good  Shepherd.
The  Prodigal  Son.
The  Prophet  Elijah.


Commendations  from  all  parts  of  the  world  have  reached


5


1


v^yommenaations  irom  aii  pans   oi    lae  woriu  uavc  rcauucu  /

Messrs.  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  upon   the   excellence   of   their  (,

Picture  Books.     The  reading  matter  is  high-toned,  helpful,  and  /  i.

amusing,  exactly  adapted  to  the  requirements  of  young  folks;
while  the  Illustrations  are  by  first-class  artists,  and  the  paper  is
thick  and  durable.  Bound  in  attractive  coloured  covers,  they
form  a  unique  series.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.  27

9d.  each.

S^Qnepenny  Series  of  Illmtrated  Books.

96  Paget.    Crown  8vo.    Illustrated.    Handsome  Cloth  Covert.

Dick  Lionheart.     By  Mary  Rowles  Jarvis.

A  Regular  Handful :   or,  Ruthie's  Charge.   By  Jennie  Chappell.

Little  Bunch's  Charge  ;  or  True  to  Trust.    By  Nellie  Cornwall.

Mina's  Sacrifice  ;  or,  The  Old  Tambourine.    By  Helen  Sawer.

Our  Den.     By  E.  M.  Waterworth.

Only  a  Little  Fault!    By  Emma  Leslie.

Polly's  Hymn  ;  or,  Travelling  Days.    By  J.  S.  Woodhouse.

Frank    Burleigh  :      or,  Chosen  to  be  a  Soldier.       By  Lydia

Phillips.
Lost  Muriel ;    or,  A  Little  Girl's  Influence.      By  C.  J.  A.  Opper-

mann.
Kibbie  &  Co.     By  Jennie  Chappell.

Marjory  ;  or,  What  Would  Jesus  Do  ?   By  Laura  A.  Barter- Snow.
Brave  Bertie.    By  Edith  C.  Kenyon.
The  Little  Slave  Girl.  By  Eileen  Douglas.
Marjorie's  Enemy  :  A  Story  of  the  Civil  War  of  1644.    By  Mrs.

Adams.
Lady  Betty's  Twins.    By  E.  M.  Waterworth.
A  Venturesome  Voyage.    By  F.  Scarlett  Potter.
Out  of  the  Straight;    or.  The  Boy  who  Failed  and  the  Boy

who  Succeeded.     By  Noel  Hope.
Bob  and  Bob's  Baby.    By  Mary  E.  Lester.
Robin's  Golden  Deed.    By  Ruby  Lynn.
The  Little  Captain  :  A  Temperance  Tale.    By  Lynde  Palmer.
The  Runaway  Twins  :   or,  The  Terrible  Guardian.    By  Irene

Clifton.
Grandmother's  Child.    By  Annie  S.  Swan.
Dorothy's  Trust.     By  Adela  Frances  Mount.
Grannie's  Treasures  :   and  how  they  helped  her.     By  L.  E.

Tiddeman.
His  Majesty's  Beggars.    By  Mary  E.  Ropes.
Love's  Golden  Key.    By  Mary  E.  Lester.
Faithful  Friends.    By  C.  A.  Mercer.
Only  Roy.     By  E.  M.  Waterworth  and  Jennie  Chappell.
Aunt  Armstrong's  Money.     By  Jennie  Chappell.
The  Babes  in  the  Basket ;  or,  Daph  and  Her  Charge.
Birdie's  Benefits  ;    or,  A  LitUe  Child  Shall  Lead  Them.    By

Ethel  Ruth  Boddy.


28  Catalogue  of  Books  Published

9d.     each     {continued).
NINEPENNY  SERIES  OF  ILLUSTRATED  BOOKS  {continued).

Carol's    Gift ;  or,  "  What  Time  I  am  Afraid  I  wiU  Trust  la

Thee."     By  Jennie  Chappell.
Cripple  George  ;  or,  God  has  a  Plan  for  Every  Man.    A  Tem-

perance  Story.     By  John  W.  Kneeshaw.
Cared  For  ;  or,  The  Orphan  Wanderers.    By  Mrs.  C.  E.  Bowen.
A  Flight  with  the  Swallows.    By  Emma  Marshall.
The  Five  Cousins.    By  Emma  Leslie.
For  Lucy's  Sake.    By  Annie  S.  Swan.
Giants  and  How  to  Fight  Them.     By  Dr.  Newton.
How  a  Farthing  Made  a  Fortune  ;    or.  Honesty  is  the  Best

Policy.     By  Mrs.  C.  E.  Bowen.

How  Paul's  Penny  became  a  Pound.    By  Mrs.  Bowen.
How  Peter's  Pound  became  a  Penny.     By  the  same  Author,
John  Blessington's  Enemy  :  A  Story  of  Life  in  South  Africa.

By  E.  Harcourt  Burrage.
John  Oriel's  Start  in  Life.    By  Mary  Howitt.
The  Man  of  the  Family.    By  Jennie  Chappell.
Mattie's  Home;  or.  The  Little  Match-girl  and  Her  Friends.
Nan  ;  or,  the  Power  of  Love.    By  Eliza  F.  Pollard.
Phil's  Frolic.      By  F.  Scarlett  Potter.
Paul :  A  Little  Mediator.    By  Maude  M.  Butler.
Rob  and  I ;  or.  By  Courage  and  Faith.    By  C.  A.  Mercer.
A  Sailor's  Lass.      By  Emma  Leslie.
Wen  from  the  Sea.    By  E.  C.  PhiUips  (Mrs.  H.  B.  Looker).


^5


6d.  each.

«

The  Marigold  Series.

An  unequalled  series  of  Standard  Stories,  printed  on  good  laid  paper.
Imperial  8vo.  128  pages.  Illustrated  covers  with  vignetted  design
printed  in  eight  colours.    Price  6d.  each,  net. .

Pride   and    Prejudice,      By  The    Wide,    Wide    World.

Jane  Austen,  By  Susan  Warner.

From  Jest  to  Earnest.     By
E.  P.  Roe.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.


29


OU.     63.cn     {continued).
New  Series  of  Sixpenny  Picture  Books,


Crown  4to,      With  Coloured  Frontispiece  and  many  other  Illustrations.
Handsomely  bound  in  Paper  Boards,  with  cover  printed  in  ten  colours.

Two  in  a  Tub  !    By  Aunt  Ruth.

Little  Tot's  A.B.C.     By  Uncle  Jack.

Full  of  Fun  !     Pictures  and  Stories  for  Everyone.     By  Uncle
Maurice.

Hide  and  Seek.    Stories  for  every  Day  in  the  Week.    By  the

same  Author.
Playtime  I     A  Picture  Book  for  Boys  and  Girls.
Off  to  Toyland !    By  Uncle  Jack.
Going  A-Sailing!    By  J.  D.
Little  Snowdrop's  Bible  Picture  Book.
Sweet  Stories  Retold.     A  Bible  Picture  Book.
Happy  Times  I     A  Picture  Book  of  Prose  and  Rhymes.
The  Good  Shepherd.
The  Parable  of  the  Sower.
The  Child  Moses.
Sampson  and  the  Lion.


Four  Bible  Picture  Books
with  coloured  illustra-
tions.


Mother's  Sunday  A.B.C.     a  Little  Book  of  Bible  Pictures,
which  can  be  coloured  by  hand.


T/ie  "  Re^  Dave  "  Series.


New  and  Enlarged  Edition.     Handsomely  bound  in  Cloth  Boards

Well  Illustrated.


Greypaws  :  The  Astonishing  Ad-
ventures of  a  Field  Mouse.  By  Paul
Creswick.

The  Squire's  Young  Folk.     By

Eleanora  H.  Stooke.
The   Christmas    Children  :    A

Story  of  the  Marshes.    By  Dorothea

Moore.
Brave     Toviak.        By      Argyll

Sazby.
The  Adventures    of    Phyllis.

By  Mabel  Bowler.
A    Plucky    Chap.        By    Louie

Slade.
Almost  Lost.     By  Amethyst.


By   Dorothea
H.    C.


Jepthah's  Lass.
Moore.

Kitty    King.     By    Mrs.
Knight.

The  Duck  Family  Robinson.
By  A.  M.  T.

"  Roast  Potatoes  I "  A  Temper-
ance Story.  By  Rev.  S.  N.  Sedg-
wick, M.A.

His  Captain.  By  Constancia
Sergeant.

"  In  A  MiNDiK !  "  By  Keith  Mar-
low.

Uncle  Jo's  Old  Coat.  By
Eleanora  H.  Stooke.


30


Catalogue  oj  Books  Published


6d.     each    {continued).
THE  "RED  DAVE"   SERIES  (contimud).


The  Cost  of  a  Promise.     By

M.  I.  Hurrell.
Farthing  Dips  ;  or,  What  can  I

do  ?    By  J.  S.  Woodhouse.
Roy   Carpenter's  Lesson.     By

Keith  Marlow.

Gerald's  Guardian.  By  Charles

Herbert.

Where  a  Qdeen  once  Dwelt.

By  Jetta  Vogel.

Wilful  Jack.   By  M.  I.  Hurrell.

Willie  the  Waif.     By  Minie

Herbert,
A  Little  Town  Mouse.

The  Little  Governess.

Puppy-Dog  Tales.

Mother's  Boy.

That  Boy  Bob.

Buy  Your  own  Cherries.

Left    in    Charge,    and    other

Stories.

A  Threefold  Promise.
The  Four  Young  Musicians.


Two  Little  Girls  and  What

They  did.

A  Sunday  Trip  and  What  Came

of  it.     By  E.  J.  T'.omanes.

Little  Tim  and  His  Picture.

By  Beatrice  Way.
Midge.     By  L.  E.  Tiddeman.

The    Conjurer's    Wand.       By

Henrietta  S.  Streatfeild.
Benjamin's  New  Boy.

Enemies  :  a  Tale  for  Little  Lads

and  Lasses.

Cherry  Tree  Place.

Joe  and  Sally:  or,  A  Good  Deed

and  its  Fruits.
The  Island  Home.

Chrissy's  Treasure.

Lost  in  the  Snow.

Red  Dave  :   or  What  Wilt  Thon

have  Me  to  Do  ?
Dick  and  His  Donkey.

Jessie  Dyson.

Come  Home,  Mother.


4d.  each.

Cheap  ''Tansy''  Series.


Imperial  8vo.    64  pages.    Many  Illustratio7is.     Cover  printed  in  five  colours.
By  Annie  S.


The  Strait  Gate

Swan.

Mark  Desborough's  Vow,     By
Annie  S.  Swan.

Her  Saddest  Blessing.

Miss    Priscilla    Hunter,    and

other  Stories.

Wild  Bryonie.

AviCE,  A  Story  of  Imperial  Rome,

From  Different  Standpoints,

Those  Boys.

Christie's  Christmas.


Four  Girls  at  Chautauqua.

Julia  Ried.

Echoing  and  Re-echoing,

Cunning  Workmen.

Tip  Lewis  and  His  Lamp,

Household  Puzzles.

The  Randolphs.

Wise  to  Win  ;  or  The  Master
Hand.

A  New  Graft  on  the  Family

Tree.
The  Man  of  the  House.


By  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.


31


4d.     each     {continued).
7he  Young  Folks'  Library

Of  Cloth-bound  Books.     With  Coloured  Frontispiece.    64  pages.
Well  Illustrated.    Handsome  Cloth  Covers.


LiTTLK  Jack  Thrdsh.
A  LiTTLB  Boy's  Toys.
Thb  Pearly  Gates.
The  Little  Woodman.
Ronald's  Reason.
A  Bright  Idea,


Sybil  and  her  Live  Snowball.

The  Chorch  Mouse.

Dandy  Jim.

A  Troublesome  Trio.

Perry's  Pilgrimage.

NiTA  ;    or,  Among  the  Brigands.


3d.  each.

New  Pretty  ''Gift-'Book  "  Series.


With  Beautiful  Coloured  Frontispiece,  and  many  other  Illustrations,
Paper  Boards,  Covet  printed  in  eight  Colours  and  Varnished,  3d.  each.

Size  6  by  5  inches.

By  the  Sea.


Jack  and  Jill's  Picture  Book.

Lady  -  Bird's     Pictures      and

Stories,
Playtime  Joys  »or  Girls   and

Boys.

Dolly's  Picture  Book.


Toby  and  Kit's  Animal  Book.
••  Pets  "  and  •*  Pickles."
Our  Little  Pets'  Alphabet.
Bible  Stories--Old  Testament.
Bible  Stories-New  Testament.


Paternoster  Series  oj  Popular  Stories.

Ah  entirely  New  Series  of  Books,  Medium  8vo.  in  size,  32  pages,  fully  illustrated.
Cover  daintily  printed  in  two  Colours.     Id,  each.    Titles  as  follows :


Alice  in  Wonderland.
The  Dairyman's  Daughter.
Robin's     Golden     Deed.       By

Ruby  Lynn.

The  Basket  of  Flowers.
Buy  Your  Own  Cherries.     By

John  Kirton.
Jennett  Cragg  :  A  Story  of  the

Time  of  the  Plague.   By  M.  Wright.
"Our  Father."    By  Al'cb  Grey.
Rab  and  His  Friends.     By  Dr.

John  Brown.
The  Scarred  Hand.     By  Ellen

Thorneycroft  Fowler.
The  Gipsy   Queen.     By  Emma

Leslie.
A  Candle  Lighted  by  the  Lord.

By  Mrs.  Ross.

Grandmother's      Child.        By
Anolfi  S.  Swaa.


The  Babes  in  thb  Basket  ;  or,

Dapb  and  her  Charge.
Jenny's  Geranium  ;  or,  The  Prize

Flower  of  a  London  Court.

The  Little  Princess  of  Tower

Hill.    By  L.  T.  Meade,

The  Gold  Thread.  By  Norman
Macleod,  D.D,

Through  Sorrow  and  Joy.  By
M.  A.  R.

The  Little  Woodman  and  his
Dog  CsBsar.    By  Mrs.  Sherwood.

Cripple  George.  By  J.  W.
Kneeshaw,

Rob  and  L     By  C.  A.  Mercer.

Dick  and  his  Donkey.  By  Mrs.

Bowen.

The  Light  of  the  Gospel.


32  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.'s  Catalogue.

Partridge  s  Popular  Illustrated  Monthlies.

"  A  word  of  emphatic  praise  sbcnld  be  given  to  the  old-established  and  ezoellent
magazines  of  Messrs.  Partridge  and  Co.  They  ought  to  hold  their  own  against  the
great  competition,  for  they  are  eminently  sound,  healthy,  and  Interesting."—
British  Weekly.

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  surpass  these  magazines.  All  have  mafohed  with  the  times."
—Daily  Telegraph.

"There  are  no  more  attractive  Annual  Volnmes  than  those  issued  by  S.  W.  Partridge
and  Co." — The  Christiak.

The  British  Workman,  a  fully  Illustrated  Magazine  contain-
ing popular  Articles  and  Stories  on  Temperance,  Thrift,  etc.,
biographies  of  eminent  Self-made  Men ;  specially  written  book
reviews,  and  much  information  of  value  to  the  sons  of  toil.

id.  Monthly.
The  Yearly  Volume,  144  pages  full  of  Ulnstcations,  oolonred  paper  boards,
Is.  Od. ;  cloth,  28. 6d.

The  Family  Friend.    A  beautifully  Illustrated  Magazine  for  the

Home  Circle,  with  Serial  and  Short  Stories  by  popular  Authors,

Helpful  Articles  and  Reviews,  expert  Hints  on  Health,  Cookery,

Gardening,  etc.  id.  Monthly.

The  Yearly  Volume,  in  coloured  paper  boards  and  cloth  back,  li,  Bd.
cloth,  2b.;    gilt  edges,  28.  6d.

The  Friendly  Visitor.  A  Magazine  for  the  people,  full  of  enter-
taining reading  with  sound  religious  teaching  in  the  form  of  story,
article,  and  poem.  Printed  in  good  type  and  fully  illustrated.
Just  the  paper  for  "  the  Quiet  Hour."  id.  Monthly.

The  Yearly  Volume  coloured  paper  boards  and  cloth  back,  li.  Bd.;   cloth,
28. ;    gilt  edges,  28.  Bd.

The  Children's  Friend.      50th  year.     A  world-wide  Favourite.

Charming  School  Stories.     Tales  from  History  and  of  Adventure.

Beautiful  Pictures.     Helpful  Competitions.    "  The  Play-Hour,"  an

international  companionship  for  boys  and  girls,  etc.     id.  Monthly.

The  Yearly  Volume,  coloured  paper  boards,  with  cloth  back  and  excellent
coloured  frontispiece,  l8.  6d. ;    cloth,  28. ;    gilt  edges,  2s<  Bd.

The  Infants'  Magazine.     No  other  periodical  can  be  compared

with  The  Infants'  Magazine  for  freshness,  brightness,  and  interest.
Full  of  bright  pictures  and  merry  reading  to  delight  and  instruct
the  little  ones.     Easy  Painting  and  Drawing  Competitions.

id.  Monthly.

The  Yearly  Volume,  colo'-'red  paper  boards,  with  cloth  back  and  beautifully
coloured  frontispiece  l8.  Bd. ;    cloth,  28. ;    gilt  edges,  28.  Bd.

The   Band   of   Hope   Review.     The    Leading    Temperance

Periodical  for  the  Young,  containing  Serial  and  Short  Stories,

Concerted  Recitations,  Prize  Competitions,  etc.     Should  be  in  the

hands  of  all  Band  of  Hope  Members.  Jd.  Monthly.

The  Yearly  Volume,  coloured  paper  boards.  Is. ;  cloth  boards,  Is.  Bd.


O.


-"O'NGs^...     0EC22t978


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERCITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


HV  Chappell,   Jennie

27  Women  \dio  have  worked  and

C4.  won


I2>
