Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



f 



■Mili 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 



II 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 

WHAT IT IS NOTj AND WHAT IT IS. 

(2 Cob. vi. 17.) 



BT TUB 



REV. J. C. EYLE, M.A., 

Vicar of Stradhrokef 
Honorary Canon of Norwichf and Sural Dean of Eoxne^ Suffolk. 

AUTHOR OF "RZPOSITORT TBOUOHTS/' BTe. ,>>^ 

MAY \flQ . 

With Revision and AddftioHl^? \ \^ fO 
WILLIAM HUNT AND COMPANY, 

12, PATEENOSTEB ROW. 

XPBWICU: WILLIAM HUNT, TAYBKN BTBKKT. 

1878. 
/A / 



I 



■ nl 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 



" Come ont from among them, and be ye separate, 
Baith the Lord." — 2 Cor. vi. 17. 



The two little words which head this page 
touch a subject of vast importance in religion. 
That subject is the great duty of separation 
from the world. This is the point which St. 
Paul* had in view when he wrote to the Corin- 
thians, " Come out, — be separate." 
The subject ia on^ >n\:\j^ ^'^^aax^^^ >c^^>^^^ 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 7 

fessing Christians declaring loudly that we must 
not be " narrow and exclusive," and that there 
is no harm in many things which the holiest 
saints of old thought bad for their souls. That 
we may go anywhere, and do anything, and 
spend our time in anything, and read anything, 
and keep any company, and plunge into 
anything, and all the while may be very 
good Christians, — this, this is "the maxim 
of thousands. Tn a day like this I think 
it good to raise a warning voice, and invite 
attention to the teaching of God*s Word. It 
is written in that Word, " Come out, and be 
separate.'* 

There are four points which I shall try to 
show my readers in examining this mighty 
subject. 



Il 




I. First, I shall try to show ut^^ ... 
is a source of great danger to the soul. 

II. Secondly, I shall tiy to show what i$ 
not meant ly sqparaiion from the worUL 

III. Thirdly, I shaD try to show in what 
real separation from (he foorld eonmsts. 

rV. Fourthly, I shall try to show (he eeoret 
of victory over the worUL 

And now, before I go a single step fiirther, 
let me warn every reader of this paper that he 
will never understand this subject unless he 
jBrst understands what & true Christian is. If 
you are one of those unhappy people who think 
everybody is a Christian who goes to a place 
1^ worship^ no matter how he lives, ox njW^V^ 
lABrjron will care little abowX.'^ ^^\? 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 9 

ration from the world." But if you read your 
Bible, and are in earnest about your soul, you 
will know that there are two classes of Chris- 
tians, — converted and unconverted. You will 
know that what the Jews were jamong the 
nations under the Old Testament, this the true 
Christian is meant to be under the New. You 
will understand what I mean when I say that 
true Christians are meant, in like manner, to be 
a " peculiar people " under the Gospel, and that 
there must be a difference between believers 
and unbelievers. To you, therefore, I make a 
special appeal this day. While many avoid the 
subject of separation from the world, and many 
positively hate it, and many are puzzled by it, 
give me your attention while I try to show you 
"the thing as it is." (Job xxvi. 3.) 



C0NFOKM1TY. 

iiiE show that tlic wffi-ld 

nger to the soul. 

it remembered, I do not 
Bwld on the face of which 
I oving. He that pretends 
which God has created in 
:)r the earth beneath, ia in 
I'a soul, says that which is 
surd. On the contrary, the 
, — the niountaius, the val- 
— the seas, lakes, aad rivers, 
^table creation, — all are iu 
d. All are full of lessons 
d power, and all proclair 
it made us is divine." T' 
is in itself sinful and 
say. 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 11 

When I speak of " the world " in this paper, I 
mean those people who care only, or chiefly, for 
this world's things, and neglect the world to 
come, — ^the people who are always thinking 
more of earth than of heaven, more of time 
than of eternity, more of the body than of the 
soul, more of pleasing man than of pleasing 
Grod. It is of them and their ways, habits, 
customs^ opinions, practices, tastes, aims, spirit, 
and tone, that I am speaking, when I speak 
of " the world." This is the world from which 
St. Paul tells us to " Come out and be separate." 

Now that the world, in this sense, is an enemy 
to the soul, the well-known Church Catechism 
teaches us at its very beginning. It tells us 
that there are three things which a baptized 
Christian is bownd \jo ^^TkSsvxskR.^ «»^ '^1?^'^ "'^^^^^ 



the world." All three are terrible fo 
hree must be overcome, if we would be 
at, whatever men please to tliink 
Catechism, we shall do well to turn 
mony of Holy Scripture. If the t 
ibout to quote do not prove that the 
source of danger to the soul, there 
ling in words, 

) Let us hear what St. Paul says : — 
ie not conformed to this world : but 



WOELDLY CONFORMrry. 13 

" Christ gave Himself for ns, that He might 
deliver us from this present evil world." (Gal. 
i. 4.) 

"In time past ye walked according to the 
course of this world." (Eph. ii 2.) 

"Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this 
present world." (2 Tim. iv. 10.) 

(J) Let us hear what St. James says : — 

" Pure religion and undefiled before God and 
the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and 
widows in their afllietion, and to keep himself 
unspotted from the world." (James i 27.) 

**Know ye not that the friendship of the 
world is enmity with God ? Whosoever there- 
fore will be a friend of the world is the enemy 
of God." (James iv. 4.) 

(c) Let us hear what St. John says : — 



41 JC' 



^es^ 



atx' 



a^Ocve 






^.eA^-^l>^^'--^ 



.^e.-J.'*^''/':* Go^ 



oi 



A 0»® 






apc' 



/Qv 



Ai:) 



^t^^^^"^ , 









^Sd!^ 



\ 



U^^*: .. «s«''\\^fi»e 



..1\xc5 



t\>e5 









<^ 



00^ 



(j<« 



ilfiOtJ^' 



.eie 






oi 



GnA 



WORLDLY CONFOEMITY. 15 

whole world lieth in wickedness." (1 John 
V. 19.) 

(d) Let us hear lastly what the Lord Jesus 
Christ says : — 

"The cares of this world choke the word, 
and it becometh unfruitful.** (Matt. xiii. 22.) 

"Ye are of this world: I am not of this 
world." (John viiL 23.) 

'* The Spirit of truth ; whom the world can- 
not receive, because it seeth Him not, neither 
knoweth Him." (John xiv. 1 7.) 

"If the world hate you, ye know that it 
hated Me before it hated you." (John xv. 
18.) 

" If ye were of the world, the world would 
love his own : but because ye are not of the 
world, but I have chosen you out of the 



« 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY, 



world, therefore the world hatetli you." (John 
XV. 19.) 

" In the world ye shall have tribulation : 
but be of good cheer; I have overcome tha | 
worUJ." (John svL 33.) 

" Tlicy are not of the world, even as I am 
not of the world." (John xvii. 16.) - 

I make no comment on these twenfy-one 
tests. They speak for themselves. If any one 
can read them carefully, and fail to see that- 
the world is an enemy to the Christian, and 
that there is an utter opposition between the 
friendship of the world and the friendship of 
Christ, he is past the reach of argument, and 
it is waste of time to reason with him. To 
eyes they contain a lesson as clear as tl 
at noon day. 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 37 

I turn from Scripture to matters of fact and 
experience. I appeal to any old Christian who 
keeps his eyes open, and knows what is going 
on in the churches. I ask him whether it be 
not true that nothing damages the cause of 
religion so much as "the world.*' It is not 
open sin, or open unbelief, which robs Christ 
of His professing servants, so much as the love 
of the world, the fear of the world, the cares 
of the world, the business of the world, the 
money of the world, the pleasures of the world, 
and the desire to keep in with the world. — 
This is the great rock on which thousands of 
young people are continually making shipwreck. 
They do not object to any article of the Chris- 
tian faith. They do not deliberately choose 
evil, and openly rebel against God. They hope 

B 



18 WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 

somehow to get to heaven at last; and they 
think it proper to have some religion. But 
they cannot give up their idol : they must have 
the world, And so after running well and 
bidding fair for heaven while boys and girls, 
they turn aside when they become men and 
women, and go down the broad way which 
leads to destruction. They begin with Abraham 
and Moses, and end with Demas and Lot's wife. 
The last day alone will prove how many 
souls the world has slain. Hundreds will be 
found to have been trained in religious families, 
and to have known the Gospel from their very 
childhood, and yet missed heaven. They left 
the harbour of home with bright prospects, and 
launched forth on the ocean of life with a 
^^her^s blessing and q. mother'^ prayers, and 



WORLDLY CONFOKMITY. 19 

then got out of the right course through the 
seductions of "the world," and ended their voyage 
in shallows and in misery. It is a sorrowful 
story to tell ; bat, alas, it is only too common ! 
I cannot wonder that St Paul says, " Come out 
and be separate." 

II. Let me now try to show what does not 
constitute separation from the world. 

The point is one which requires clearing up. 
Thero are many mistakes made about it You 
will sometimes see sincero and well-meaning 
Christians doing things which God never in- 
tended them to do, in the matter of separation 
from the world, and honestly believing that they 
are in the path of duty. Their mistakes oftexj^ 
do great hamu TViey ^n^ c^^^^^^ *^^ "^^"^ 






tWOi 






„t W 









cross- 



^ewai 



i*a ' 



ttoTi 



■Calk 



it » 1 



.ftte 



» ' 






«B 



JoVoE 

XV.e« '•'° 
to V»" 



vvst 



, th»l' 









,imV°' 



itttf 



ligW 



al>o»' ^ 



Matio" 



cotni 



mo" 



»o»" 



flOtl 



,14. 



C»irteli*-"""V---^"** 



„V« "i' ' 



ot1c»S 



.,Oo»«° 



WORLDLY CONFOEMITY. 21 

sions, and business. He did not forbid men to 
be soldiers, sailors, lawyers, doctors, merchants, 
bankers, shop-keepers, or tradesmen. There is 
not A word in the New Testament to justify 
such a line of conduct. Cornelius the centurion, 
Luke the physician, Zenas the lawyer, are ex- 
amples to the contrary. Idleness is in itself a 
sin. A lawful calling is a remedy against temp- 
tation. "If any man will not work, neither 
shall he eat" (2 Thess. iii 10.) To give up 
any business of life, which is not necessarily 
sinful, to the wicked and the devil, from fear of 
getting harm from it, is lazy cowardly behaviour. 
The right plan is to carry our religion into our 
business, and not to give up business under 
the specious pretence that it interferes with our 
religion. 



22 ■\VOKU)LY COSFOHMnr, 

(ft) When St. Paul said, " Come out and be 
separate," he did not mean that Christians ought 
to decline all intercourse with unconverted 
people, and refuse to go into their BOeiety. 
There ia uo warrant for such conduct in the 
New Testament. Our Lord and His disciples 
did not refuse to go to a marriage feast, or to 
sit at meat at a Pharisee's table. St. Paul does 
not say, " If any of them that believe not bid 
yoQ to a feast," yon mufit not go, but only tells 
us how to behave if we do go, (1 Cor. x. 27.) 
Moreover, it is a dangerous thing to b^n 
judging people too closdy, and settling who are 
converted and who are not, and what society 
is godly and what ungodly. We are enre to 
make mistakes. Above all, such a course of 
Jj/h would cub us off from many o^^itunities 



WORLDLY CONFORMITy. 23 

of doing good. If we carry our Master with 
us wherever we go, who can tell but we may 
" save some," and get no harm ? 

(c) When St. Paul says "Come out and be 
separate," he does not mean that Christians 
ought to talvo no interest in anything on earth 
except religion. To neglect science, art, litera- 
ture, and politics, — to read nothing which is 
not dii-ectly spiritual, — to know nothing about 
what is going on among mankind, and never to 
look at a newspaper, — to care nothing about the 
government of one's country, and to be utterly 
indifferent as to the persons who guide its 
counsels and make its laws, — all this may seem 
very right and proper in the eyes of some 
people. But I take leave to think that it v«. ^ija^ 
idJ^ seWsb neglect o£ dv\\.^- ^^ -^^n^^^^^ 



24 WORLDLY CONFOEMITY. 

Ihe value of good govemmeut, as one of tbe | 
" raaiu helps to our "living a quiet and peaceable 
life in all godliness and honesty." (1 Tim. ii. 2.) 
St. Paul was uot ashamed to read heathen 
writers, and to quote their words in his speeches 
and writing. St. Paul did not Ihink it beneath 
him to show an acquaintance with the laws and 
customB and callings of the world, in the illus- 
trations he gave from thein. Christians who 
plume themselves on their ignorance of secnlar 
things are precisely the Christians who hiing 
religion into contempt I knew the case of a 
blacksmith who would not come to hear his 
clergyman preach the Gospel, until he fonnd 
out that he knew the properties of iron. Thf 
he came. 
(i^ When St Paul said, "Come out ar 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 25 

separate," he did not mean that Christians 
should be singular, eccentric, and peculiar in 
their dress, manners, demeanour, and voice. 
Anything which attracts notice in these mat- 
ters is most objectionable, and ought to be 
carefully avoided. To wear clothes of such a 
colour, or made in such a fashion, that when 
you go into company every eye is fixed on you, 
and you are the object of general observation, 
is an enormous mistake. It gives occasion to 
the wicked to ridicule religion, and looks self- 
righteous and affected. There is not the slightest 
proof that our Lord and His apostles, and 
Priscilla, and Persis, and their companions, did 
lot dress and behave just like others in their 
>wn ranks of life. On the other hand, one of 
le many chargea o>xc \ot^ \srcssjgi. '^'^xsii^^ ^^^^^ 



teries," and "enlarging Liie uviviv 
garments," so as to be "seen of 
xxiiL 6.) True sanctity and sane 
less are entirely dififerent things, 
ry to show their unworldliness by w 
icuously ugly clothes, — or by speak 
ining, snuffling voice, — or by afifect 
iural slavishness, humility, and gra 
ler, — miss their mark altogether, an 
occasion to the ememies of the I 



^^^^ itrniy of monks, nuns, an 
Separation of ibis kind is not accordi 
mind of Christ He says distinctly in 
prayer, " I pray not that Thou shoulc 
them out of the world, but that Thou s 
keep them from the evil." (John xa 
rhere is not a word in the Acts or Epii 
KK)mmend such a separation. True Ix 
e always represented as mixing in the 
ing their duty in it^ and ai/^-*'* ' 



UC IQ Hi ail J. v»^^^ 



ing the power of grace to overcome e^ 
') Last, but not least, when St. Paul 
me out and be separate,'' he did not 
Christians ought to withdraw from 
irch in which there are unconverted 
3, or to refuse to worship in compan; 
T who are not believers, or to keep 
m the Lord's table if any ungodly pec 
to it. This is a very common but 

T«i./>^o iq not a text 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 29 

and gave him the Lord's Supper. He has 
taught us in the parable of the wheat and 
tares that converted and unconverted will be 
together till the harvest, and cannot be divided. 
In his Epistles to the Seven Churches, and in 
all St Paul's Epistles, we often see faults and 
corruptions mentioned and reproved, but we are 
never told that they justify desertion of the 
assembly, or neglect of ordinances. In short, 
we must not look for a perfect Church, a per- 
fect congregation, and a perfect company of 
communicants, until the marriage supper of the 
Lamb. If others are unworthy Churchmen, or 
unworthy partakers of the Lord's Supper, the 
sin is theirs and not ours: we are not their 
judges. But to separate ourselves from Church 
assemblies, and deprive o\^\^^^^ ^^ ^C^Jssi^^jssi^ 



30 WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 

ordinances, because others use them unworthily, 
is to take up a foolish, unreasonable, and un- 
scriptural position. Tt is not the mind of 
Christ, and it certainly is not St. Paul's idea 
of separation from the world. 

I commend these six points to the calm con- 
sideration of all who wish to understand the 
subject of separation from the world. About 
each and all of them far more might be said 
than I have space to say in this paper. About 
each and all of them I have seen so many 
mistakes made, and so much misery and un- 
happiness caused by those mistakes, that I 
want to put Christians on their guard. I want 
them not to take up positions hastily, in the 
zeal of their " first love," which they will after- 
wards be obliged to give up. 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 31 

I leave this part of my subject with two 
pieces of advice, which I offer especially to 
young Christians. I advise them, for one thing, 
if they really desire to come out from the world, 
to remember that the shortest path is not always 
the path of duty. To quarrel with all our un- 
converted relatives, to cut all our old friends, 
to withdraw entirely from mixed society, to 
live an exclusive life, to give up every act of 
courtesy and civility for the direct work of 
Christ,— all this may seem very right, and may 
satisfy our consciences and save us trouble. 
But I venture a doubt whether it is not often 
a selfish, lazy, self-pleasing line of conduct, and 
whether the true cross and true line of duty 
may not be to depy ourselves, and adopt a very 
different course o? ^'cXioxi,— \ ^^\s»^ s^c^k^^^sss. 



LY CONPOEMITY. 

I ley want to come out fram 
1 agaiust a sour, morose, un- 

ilcnsant, bearish demeanour, 
:t that there is such a thing 
i It the Word." (1 Peter iiL 
trive to show unconverted 

principles, whatever may be 
make tbera cheerful, amiable, 
selfish, considerate for others, 
an interest in everything that 
if good report In short, let 
ss Beparation between us and 
nany things, as I shall sc 

" separate ; " but let us ' 
)aration of the right so^ 
ided by such separa' 



WOBLDIiY CONFORMITY. 33 

occasion to say that our separation is foolish, 
senseless, ridiculous, unreasonable, uncharitable, 
and unscriptural. 

III. In the third place I shall try to show 
what tme separation from the world really is. 

I take up this branch of my subject with a 
very deep sense of its diflSculty. That there is 
a certain line of conduct which aU true Chris- 
tians ought to pursue with respect to "the 
world, and the things of the world," is very 
evident. The texts already quoted make that 
plain. The key to the solution of that ques- 
tion lies in the word "separation." But in 
what separation consists it is not easy to show. 
On some points it is not hard to lay down 
particular rules ; on oWcl^'^ '-^ Sa» Sssj^^^^^^^^ *^^ 

c 



3i WOBLDLY CONFOEUITT. 

do more than state general principles, find leave 
every one to apply them accordiug to his posi- 
tion in life. Tiu3 ia what I shall now attempt 
to do. 

{a) Pirat and foremost, he that desires to 
"coma out from the world, and be eepamte," 
must steadily and habihtally refuse to he guided 
by the world's standard of right and vrrong. 

The rule of the bulk of mankind ia to go 
■with the stream, to do as others, to follow the 
faahion, to keep in with the common opinion, 
and to set your watch by the town-clock. The 
true Christian will never he content with such 
a rule as that. He will simply ask, "Wha* 
saith the Scripture? What is written in • 
Word of God!"— He will maintain firmly 
Jtotbing can be right which God aays is 



WOiaJ)LY CONFOBMITY. 35 

and that the custom and opinion of his neigh- 
bours can never make that to be a trifle which 
God calls serious, or that to be no sin which 
God calls sin. He will never think lightly of 
such sins as drinking, swearing, gambling, lying, 
cheating, swindling, or breach of the seventh 
commandment, because they are common, and 
many say. Where is the mighty harm? — That 
miserable argument, — "Everybody thinks so, 
everybody says so, everybody does it^ every- 
body will be there," — ^goes for nothing with 
him. Is it condemned or approved by the 
Bible ? That is his only question. If he 
stands alone in the parish, or town, or congi-e- 
gation, he will not go against the Bibla If he 
Las to come out from the crowd, and take up 
a position by himself^ \v^ \^'^ \>kSiv»*^i5S5L^JoL.^sss'2^^^ 



S6 WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 

rather tlian disobey the Bible. This is genaine 
Scriptural separation. 

(h) He that desirea to "come out from the 
world and be separate," must he very careful 
how he spends his leisure time. 

This is a. point which at first sight appeals 
of little importance. But the longer I live the 
more I am persuaded that it deserves most 
serious attention. Honourable occupation and 
lawful business are great safeguards to the 
soul, and the time that is spent upon them 
is comparatively the time of our least dangeir. 
The devil finds it hard to get a hearing from a 
busj' mail. But when the day's work is over, 
and the time of leisure arrives, then comes ti 
hoar oi temptation. 
J do not hesitatte to wata everj man 



WORLDLY COHPORMITY. 37 

wants to live a Chrislian life, to be very careful 
how he spends his evenings. Evening is the 
time when we are natnrallj disposed to unbend 
after the labours of the day ; and evening is 
the time when the Christian is too often tempted 
to lay aside his armour, and consequently gets 
trouble on his souL " Then cometh the devil," 
and with the devil the world. — ^Evening is the 
time when the poor man is tempted to go to 
the public-house, and fall into sin. — Evening is 
the time when the tradesman too often goes to 
the Inn parlour, and sits for hours hearing and 
seeing things which do him no good. — Evening 
is the time which the higher classes choose 
for dancing, card playing, and the like; and 
consequently never get to bed till late at 
night If we love out wvi^s>> %».^ ^^^^^ ^^^ 



WORLDLY COKFOHMTTY. 

worldly, let us mind liow we spend 
eniogs. Tell me how a man spends his 
gs, and I can generally tell wliat , his 
iter iB, 

3 true Christian will do well to make it a 
sd rule never to waste his eveninga. What- 
others may do, let him resolve always to 
:e time for quiet, calm thought, — for Bible- 
ling and prayer. The rule will prove a hard 
to keep. It may bring on him the chai^o 
seing unsocial and over-strict. Let him not 
id that. Any cross of this kind is better 
n habitual late hours in company, hurried 
yers, sloveuly Bible-reading, and a bad con- 
:nce. Even if he stand alone in his pari- 
own, let him not depart from his rule. 
Sad himself in a minority, and be tb 



WORLDLY CONFOBMITY. 39 

ft peculiar man. But this is genuine Scriptural 
separation. 

(c) He that desires to "come out from the 
world and be separate," must steadily and hahi-- 
tually determine not to he swallowed up and 
absorbed in the business of the woi^ld, 

A true Christian will strive to do his duty 
in whatever station or position he finds him- 
self and to do it weli Whether statesman, or 
merchant, or banker, or lawyer, or doctor, or 
tradesman, or farmer, he will try to do his 
work so that no one can find occasion for fault 
in him. But he will not allow it to get be- 
tween him and Christ If he finds his business 
beginning to eat up his Sundays, his Bible- 
reading, his private prayer, and to bring clouds 
between him and heaven^V^'^ ^^ ^^^^'''^:^^ss^ 



,.„..»^ """■'"""■ 



8°' , , or gold." ^^' ,. God,'''"- 

n,E cost may "• , tli»n l"* 

"" ,,f my*!"? " ,„ aU tM= '"' 

"it---".-::! ■•- 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 41 

aelf-denial. But this is genuine Scriptural 
separation. 

(d) He that desires to "come out from the 
world and be separate " must steadily abstain 
from all amiisements and recreations which are 
inseparably connected ivith sin. 

This is a hard subject to handle, and I 
approach it with pain. But I do not think I 
should be faithful to Christ, and faithful to my 
office as a minister, if I did not speak very 
plainly about it^ in considering such a matter 
as separation from the world. 

Let me, then, say honestly, that I cannot 
understand how any one who makes any pre- 
tence to real vital religion can allow himself 
to attend races and theatres. Conscience, no 
doubt, is a strange things and ^n^\:^ \siK». -«C5>^^ 



irus Willi ^^ 

e my own opinion for what it is wor 
:reat my readers to consider seriously 
iay. 

That to look at horses running at fuU 
in itself perfectly harmless, no sensit 
ill pretend to deny. That many plays, 
hakespeare'Sy are among the finest pro( 
)f the human intellect, is equally un( 
3ut all this is beside the question. T 
'^-- TinrRA.racing and th 



WOBLDLY CONFORMITY. 43 

80 invariably accompanies the race and the 
play, that you cannot go to the amusement 
without helping sid. 

I entreat all professing Christians to remem- 
ber this, and to take heed what they do. I 
warn them plainly that they have no right to 
shut their eyes to facts which every intelligent 
person knows, for the mere pleasure of seeing 
a horse-race, or listening to good actors or 
actresses. I warn them that they must not 
talk of separation from the world, if they can 
lend their sanction to amusements which are 
invariably connected with gambling, betting, 
drunkenness, and fornication. These are the 
things which "God will judge." — "The end of 
these things is death." Hard words these, 
no doubt ! But are they txq^ \x\ss^\ "^ ''s&K^^ 



lieatre with them. But we irjust lai 
n first principles. Is the world a 
the soul or is it not? Are we tc 
ut from the world or are we not? 
:re questions which can only be answ( 
)ne way. 

If we love our souls we must have i 
;o do with amusements which are boi 
.vith sin. Nothing short of this can b( 
genuine scriptural separation from the w 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 45 

No sensible Christian will ever think of con- 
demning all recreations. In a world of wear 
and tear like that we live in, occasional un- 
bending and relaxation are good for alL Body 
and mind alike require seasons of lighter occu- 
pation, and opportunities of letting ofif high 
spirits, and especially when we are young. 
Exercise itself is a positive necessity for the 
preservation of mental and bodily health. I 
see no harm in cricket, rowing, running, and 
other manly athletic recreations. I find no 
fault with those who play at chess and such- 
like games of skilL We are all fearfully and 
wonderfully made. No wonder the poet says, — 

"Strange that a harp of thousand strings 
Should keep in tune so long." 

Anything which streng|t\i'^\i^ T^sssM^^^VkX^^^s^'^^^- 




FOKMITY. 

i, and muscles, and 
rist's work, so long as 
a blessing, and ought 
Anything which will 
thoughts from their 
a healthy manner, is 

these innocent things 
aust watch against, if 
from the world." He 



WOBLDLY CONFOEMITY. 47 

doses. In nothing is this so true as it is in 
the matter of recreations. The use of them is 
one thing, and the abuse of them is another. 
The Christian who uses them must know when 
to stop, and how to say, "Hold 1 enough!" — ^Do 
they interfere with his private religion ? Do 
they take up too much of his thoughts and 
ilttention ? Have they a secularizing effect on 
his soul ? Have they a tendency to pull him 
down to earth 1 Then let him hold hard and 
take care. All this will require courage, self- 
denial, and firmness. It is a line of conduct 
which will often bring on us the ridicule and 
contempt of those who know not what modera- 
tion is, and who spend their lives in making 
trifles serious things and serious things trifles. 
But if we mean to come out fecvEOL ^iciSk -^^^s^^^ 



43 WOKLULY CONPORMITY. 



J 



we must not mind this. We must be "tenff 
perate" even in lawful things, whatever others 
may think of us. This ia genuine Scriptural 
separation. 

(/) Last, but not least, he that desires to 
"coma out from the world and be separate" 
must be careful how lie allows himself in friend- 
ships, intimacies, and close relationships with 
vwrldly people. 

We cannot help meeting many unconverted 
people as long as we live. M'e carmot avoid 
having intercourse with them, and doing busi- 
ness with them, unless " we go out of the 
■world." (1 Cor. t. 10.) To treat them with 
the utmost courtesy, kindness, and charity, 
whenever we do meet them, is a positive dut 
J^ui acquaiatance is one thing, and intir 



WOELDLY CONFOBMITY. 49 

friendship is quite another. To seek their 
society without cause, to choose their company, 
to cultivate intimacy with them, is very dan- 
gerous to the souL Human nature is so con- 
stituted that we cannot be much with other 
people without effect on our own character. 
The old proverb will never fail to prove true, 
— " Tell me with whom a man chooses to live, 
and I will tell you what he is." The Scripture 
says expressly, "He that walketh with wise 
men shall be wise; but a companion of fools 
shall be destroyed." (Prov. xiii. 20.) If then 
a Christian, who desires to live consistently, 
chooses for his friends those who either do 
not care for their souls, or the Bible, or God, 
or Christ, or holiness, or regard them as of 
secondary importance, it seem^a t^ \ss& ^ssj^;^^- 



■1 



50 WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 

sible for him to prosper in his religioa He 
will soon find that their ways are not his ways^ 
nor their thoughts his thoughts, nor their tastes 
his tastes ; and that, nnless they change^ he 
must give up intimacy with them. In short, 
there must be separation. Of conrse such sepa- 
ration will be painfoL But if we have to 
choose between the loss of a friend and the 
injury of our souls, there ought to be no doubt 
in our minds. If iriends will not walk in the 
narrow way with us, we must not walk in the 
broad way to please them. But let us dis- 
tinctly understand that to attempt to keep up 
close intimacy between a converted and an 
unconverted person, if both are consistent with 
their natures, is to attempt an impossibility. 
The principle here laid down ought to be 



WOBLDLY CONFORMITY. 51 

carefully remembered by all unmarried Chris- 
tians, in the choice of a husband or wife. I 
fear it is too often entirely forgotten. Too 
many seem to think of everything except reli- 
gion in choosing a partner for life, or to suppose 
that it will come somehow as a matter of 
course. Yet when a praying, Bible-reading, 
God-fearing, Christ-loving, Sabbath -keeping 
Christian marries a person who takes no in- 
terest whatever in serious religion, what can 
the result be but injury to the Christian, or 
immense unhappiness? Health is not infec- 
tious, but disease is. As a general rule in such 
cases, the good go down to the level of the 
bad, and the bad do not come up to the level 
of the good. — The subject is a delicate one, and 
I do not care to dwell u^ou \\i. 'SiXiJ^^OKss. "V '^^^ 




52 WOBLDLY CONFOBMITY. 

confidently to eveiy iminamed Christiaii man 
or woman, — if you love your soul, if you do 
not want to fall away and backdidei if you do 
not want to destroy your own peace and com- 
fort for life, resolve never to many any person 
who is not a thorough Christian, whatever the 
resolution may cost you. You had better die 
than marry an unbeliever. Stand to this reso- 
lution, and let no olie ever persuade you out 
of it. Depart from this resolution, and you 
will find it almost impossible to " come out and 
be separate." You will find you have tied a 
mill-stone round your own neck in running the 
race towards heaven ; and if saved at last it 
will be " so as by fire." (I Cor. iii. 15.) 

I offer these six general hints to all who wish 
^ Allow St. Paul's advice, and to -^ come out 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 53 

from the world and be separate." In giving 
them, I lay no claim to infallibility ; but I be- 
lieve they deserve consideration and attention. 
I do not forget that the subject is full of diffi- 
culties, . and that scores of doubtful cases are 
continually arising in a Christian's course, in 
which it is very hard to say what is the path 
of duty, and how to behave. Perhaps the 
following bits of advice may be found useful. — 
In all doubtful cases we should first pray for 
wisdom and sound judgment. If prayer is 
worth anything, it must be specially valuable 
when we desire to do right, but do not see 
our way. — In all doubtful cases let us often 
try ourselves by recollecting the eye of God. 
Should I go to such and such a place, or do 
such and such a thing, if I \^^\^ NJt^'cs^^s^ ^^^ 



WOELDLY CONFORMITY. 55 

by trying to show the secrets of real victory over 
the world. 

To come out from the world of course is 
not an easy thing. It cannot be easy so long 
as human nature is what it is, and a busy devil 
is always near us. It requires a constant 
struggle and exeition ; it entails incessant con- 
flict and self-denial ; it often places us in exact 
opposition to members of our own families, to 
relatives and neighbours ; it sometimes obliges 
us to do things which give great Offence, and 
bring on us ridicule and petty persecution. 
It is precisely this which makes many hang 
back and shrink from decided religion. They 
know they are not right ; they know that they 
are not so "thorough" in Christ's service as 
ihey ought to be, and iVvsrj fe.^ n^s^^^^s^s&ss^s^s^^^ 



'o> 




much religion to be liappy in the world, and 
too much worldliness to be happy in their 
religion. I fear this is a vezj common oaae^ if 
the truth were known* 

Yet there are some in eyeiy age who. seem 
to get the victory over the world. They dbme 
out decidedly from its ways^ and are unmirtak- 
ably separate. They are independent of itg 
opinions, and unshaken by its opposition. They 
move on, like planets, in an orbit of their own, 
and seem to rise equally above the world* 
smiles and frowns. And what are the sec* 
of their victory ? I will set them down« 
Tbe £i8t secret of victory over tb 



WORLDLY CONFOBMITY. 67 

is a right heart. By that I mean a heart 
renewed, changed and sanctified by the Holy 
Ghost, — a heart in which Christ dwells, a heart 
in which old things have passed away, and all 
things become new. The grand mark of such 
a heart is the bias of its tastes and affections. 
The owner of such a heart no longer likes the 
world, and the things of the world, and there- 
fore finds it no trial or sacrifice to give them 
np. He has no longer any appetite for the 
company, the conversation, the amnsements, 
the occupations, the books which he once loved, 
and to ''come out" from them seems natural 
to him. Great indeed is the expulsive power 
of a new principle ! Just as the new spring- 
buds in a beech hedge push off the old leaves 
and make them quietly ML \j5k ^^ ss5s^!k^^ ^^ 



68 



WOELDLY CONFORMITT. 



does the new heart of a believer invaiialjly 
affect his tastea and likings, aud make him 
drop many things which he ouce loved and 
lived in, becauae he now likes them no more. 
Let him that wants to "come out from the 
■world and be separate," make sure firat and 
foremost that he has got a new heart. If the 
heart is really right, everything else will he 
right in time. "If thine eye he single, thy 
whole body shall be full of light." (Matt. vi. 
22.) If the affections are not right, there never 
will be right action. 

(J) The second secret of victory over the 
world is a lively pradicnl faith iu unseen things. 
What saith the Scripture : " This is the victory 
that ovei'conieth the world, even onr faith' 
<f John V. 4.) To attaia and keep up the h 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 59 

of looking steadily at invisible things, as if 
they were visible, — to set before our minds 
every day, as grand realities, our souls, God, 
Christ, heaven, hell, judgment, eternity, — to 
cherish an abiding conviction that what we do 
not see is just as real as what we do see, and 
ten thousand times more important,— this, this 
is one way to be conquerors over the world. 
This was the faith which made the noble army 
of saints, described in the eleventh chapter of 
Hebrews, obtain such a glorious testimony from 
the Holy Ghost. They all acted under a firm 
persuasion that they had a real God, a real 
Saviour, and a real home in heaven, thougli 
unseen by mortal eyes. Armed with this faith, 
a man i*egards this world as a shadow compared 
with the world to come, wii t^Rvx?^ Xsisi^iS.Sss^*'^^^ 



CO WORLDLY CONFOEMTTY. ■ 

praise or blame, its enroity or its rewards. Let 
iiini that wants to come out from the world 
and be separate, but slirinks and hangs back 
for fear of the things seen, pray and strive to 
have this faith. "All things are possible to 
him that believes." (Mark ix. 23.) Like Mosea, 
ho will find it possible to forsake Egypt, seeing 
Him that is invisible. Like Mosea, he will not 
care what he loses and who is displeased, be- 
cause he sees afar off, like one looking through 
a telescope, a substantial recompense of reward. 
(Heb. xi. 26.) 

(c) The third and last secret of victory over 
tlie world, is to attain and cultivate the habit 
of holdly confessing Christ on all proper occa- 
sions. In saying this I would not be mistakr 
^ want no one to blow a ttompet before ^ 



WOELDLY CONFORMITY. 61 

and thrust his religion on others at all seasons. 
But I do wish to encourage all who strive to 
come out from the world to show their colours, 
and to act and speak out like men who are not 
ashamed to serve Christ. A steady, quiet asser- 
tion of our own principles, as Christians, — an 
habitual readiness to let the children of the 
world see that we are guided by other rules 
than they are, and do not mean to swerve from 
them, — ^a calm, firm, courteous maintenance of 
our own standard of things in every company, 
— all this will insensibly form a habit within 
us, and make it comparatively easy to be ''a 
separate man." It will be hard at first, no 
doubt, and cost us many a struggle; but the 
longer we go on, the easier will it be. Eepeated 
acts of confessing Christ VfUI '^xaisiSij^ ^^s^ss^^. 



WOELDLY CONFORMITY. 



1 

4 



68 

Habits once formed will produce a settled 
character. Our characters once known, we 
shall be saved much trouble. Men will know 
what to expect from us, and will count it no 
straojie thing if they see us living the lives of 
separate peculiar people. He that grasps the 
nettle moat firmly will always be less hurt 
than the man who touches it with a trembling 
hand. It is a great thing to bo able to say 
" No " decidedly, but courteously, when asked to 
do anything which conscience says is WTong_ 
He that shows his colours boldly from the first, 
and is never ashamed to let men see "whose 
he is and whom he serves," will soon find that 
he has overcome the world, and will be let 
alone. Bold confession is a long step towapd*/ 
y/ctory. 



WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 63 

It only remains for me now to conclude the 
whole subject with a few short words of appli- 
cation. The danger of the world ruining the 
soul, — the nature of true separation from the 
world, — ^the secrets of victory over the world, 
are all before the reader of this paper. I now 
ask him to give me his attention for the last 
time, while I try to say something directly for 
his personal benefit. 

(1) My first word shall be a question. Eeader, 
are you overcoming the world, or are you over- 
come by it? Do you know what it is to "come ' 
out from the world and be separate," or are you 
yet entangled by it, and conformed to it ? If 
you have any desire to be saved, I entreat you 
to answer this question. 

If you know nothing of " se^ataJLvcwN^' ^^'^jc^ 




04 




it* 



;tb 



that ?»'■ 
j»oS«- „ tW ■"» ,,itl. »' » wW" 

-WH"" ,, set. ' , A^** ,.„. 




WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 65 

and dressing, and ball-going, and theatres, and 
races, and cards, and gambling. Eeader, what 
will you do when all these things have passed 
away for ever? How can you possibly be 
happy in an eternal heaven, where holiness is 
all in all^ and worldliness has no place ? Oh^ 
consider these things, and be wise! Awake, 
and break the chains which the world has 
thrown around you. Awake, and flee from the 
wrath to come. 

(2) My second word shall be a counsel. 
Beader^ if you want to come out from the 
worlds but know not what to do, take the 
advice which I give you this day. Begin by 
applying direct, as a penitent sinner, to our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and put your case in His 
hands. Pour out your heart b^fe^^"^caft^ ^^^ij^ 



i 






WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 67 

Eeader, once more I say, Go direct to Christ 
with the prayer of faith, and put yourself 
wholly and unreservedly in His hands. Hard 
as it may seem to you now to come out from 
the world and be separate, you shall find that 
with Jesus nothing is impossible. Tou, even 
you, shall overcome the world. 

(3) My third and last word shall be en- 
couragement. Eeader, if you have learned by 
experience what it is to come out from the 
world, I can only say to you. Take comfort, 
and persevere. You are in the right road ; you 
have no cause to be afraid. The everlasting 
hills are in sight. Your salvation is nearer 
than when you believed. Take comfort, and 
press on. 

Ko doubt you have had vci^j^x^^ '^N^rss^j^^-.'*';^^:^ 



6S WOELDLY COMFOHMTTV. ^M 

made many a false step. Tou have sometimes 
felt ready to feint, and been half disposed to 
go back to Egypt. But your Master has nevec 
entirely left you, and He will never suifer you 
to be "tempted above that you are able to 
bear," Then persevere steadily in your sepa- 
ration from the world, and never be ashamed 
of standing alone. Settle it firmly in your 
mind that the most decided Chiistians are 
always the happiest, and remember tliat no 
one ever said at the end of his course, that 
he had been too holy, and lived too near to God. , 

Hear, last of all, what ia written in the . 
Scriptures of truth : — 

"Whosoever shall confess Me before men, 
him shall the Son of man also confess before 
^ -tie angels of God." (Luke xil. 8.) -3 



WORLDLY CONFOEMITY. 69 

"There is no man that hath left house, or 
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, 
or childreo, or lands, for my sake, and the 
gospel's, 

" But he shall receive an hundred-fold now 
in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, 
and mothers, and children, and lands, with per- 
secutions; and in the world to come eternal 
life." (Mark X. 29, 30.) 

"Cast not away therefore your confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward. 

"For ye have need of patience, that, after 
ye have done the will of God, ye might receive 
the promise. 

"For yet a little while, and He that shall 
come will come, and will not tarry." (Heb. 
X. 35—37.) 



iBiOt* 



C»«"" 



rotJ9 



«cte 



,-,ttet> 






«4 "»'"' 



0*. ' 



.,e«" 



i,y4- 



sots- .^ fwl-- 



- cT»** . 



,aW6 



i?«* 



of*" 
«*■ 



>:n:^-i2^!!:;r^-'°°"- 



WOEEDLY CONFORMITY. 71 

(a) Concerning haU-goingt I only ask Christians to 
jndge the amusement by its tendencies and accom- 
paniments. To say there is anything morally wrong 
in the mere bodily act of dancing would be absnrd. 
David danced before the ark. Solomon said, " There 
is a time to dance." (Eccles. iii. 4.) Jast as it is 
natural to lambs and kittens to frisk about, so it 
seems natural to young people, all over the world, to 
jump about to a lively tune of music. If dancing 
were taken up for mere exercise, if dancing took 
place at early hours, it would be needless and absurd 
to object to it. But everybody knows that this is not 
what is meant by modefn halhgoing! This is an 
amusement which involves very late hours, extrava- 
gant dressing, and an immense amount of frivolity, 
vanity, jealousy, unhealthy excitement, and vain con- 
versation. Who would like to be found in a modem 
ball-room when the Lord Jesus Christ comes the 
second timeP Who that has taken much part in 
balls, as I myself once did, before I knew better, can 
deny that they have a most dissipating effect on the 
mind, like opium-eating and dram-drinking on the 



72 WORLDLY CONFORMITY. 

body ? I cannot withhold my opinion that ball-going 
is one of those worldly amusements which "war 
against the soul," and which it is wisest and best to 
give up. And as for those parents who urge their, 
sons and daughters, against their wiUs and inclina- 
tions, to go to balls, I can only say that they are 
taking on themselves a most dangerous responsibility, 
, I and risking great injury to their children's souls. 

;ij . (h) Concerning cord-pZaym^r, my judgment is much 

ifi the same. I ask Christian people to try it by its 

I tendencies and consequences. Of course it would be 

ij nonsense to say there is positive wickedness in an 

!| innocent game of cards, for diversion, and not for 

money. I have known instances of old people, of 
lethargic and infirm habit of body, unable to work or 
read, to whom cards in an evening were really useful, 
to keep them from drowsiness, and preserve their 
health. But it is vain to shut our eyes to facts. If 
masters and mistresses once begin to play cards in 
the parlour, servants are likely to play cards in the 
kitchen; and then comes in a whole train of evils. 
Moreover, from simple card-p\aym^ \iSi ^^^^^rate 



WOELDLY CONFORMITY. 73 

gambling there is but a chain of steps. If parents 
teach young people that there is no harm in the 
first step, they must never be surprised if they go on 
to the last. x. 

I give these opinions with much diffidence. Hay no 
claim to infallibility. " Let every one be persuaded 
in his own mind." But, considering all things, it is 
my dehberate judgment that the Christian who 
wishes to keep his soul right, and to ''come out 
from the world," will do wisely to have nothing to do 
with card-pla3nLng. It is a habit which seems to grow 
on some people so much that it becomes at last a 
necessity, and they cannot live without it. " Madam,"^ 
said Bomaine to an old lady at Bath, who declared 
she could not do without her cards, — ''Madam, if this 
is the case, cards are your god, and your god is a 
very poor one." • Surely in doubtful matters like 
these it is well to give our souls the benefit of the 
doubt, and to refrain. 

(c) Concerning field-sports 1 admit that it is not 
easy to lay down a strict rule. I cannot go the length 
of some, and say that galloping across country, or 



74 TVOELDLT CONFOEMITr. 

shooting gjoiiBP, partridges, or plieasauLi, or catching 
Balmon or tront, ars ia themselvea positively sinful 
occnpationB, and distinct marks oE an nnconvertcd 
heart. There are many persona, I know, to whom 
Tiolent out-door exercise and complete diveraion of 
mind ore absolute neceasities, for the preservation of 
their bodily aid mental health. Bat in all these 
matters the chief question is one of degree. Much 
depends on the company men arc throivii into, and 
the extent to which the thing is carried. The great 
danger lies in excess. It is possible to be infemperoie 
about hunting and shooting, as well as abont drinking. 
We are commanded in Scripture to be " temperate in 
all things," if we would so run as to obtain ; and those 
who are addicted to field-sports should not forget this 

The question, however, is one shout which Chris- 
tiana must be careful in expressing an opinion, and 
moderate in their judgments. The man who oaa 
neither ride, nor shoot, nor throw a fly, is hardlj 
qualified to speak dispassionately about snch matters. 
It b cheap and easy work to condemn others for doinji 



i 



WOBLELY CONFOEMITT. 



75 



things which you cannot do yourself, and are utterly 
unahle to enjoy ! One thing only is perfectly certain, 
— all intemperance or excess is sin. The man who 
is wholly absorbed in field-sports, and spends all 
his years in such a manner that he seems to think 
God only created him to be a ''hunting, shooting, 
and fishing animal," is a man who at present knows 
very little of Scriptural Christianity. It is written, 
"Where your treasure is, there will your heart be 
also." (Matt. vi. 21) 



@Bork0 bg th^ asmt ^ttthor. 



Expository Thoughts on the Gospels. 

Designed for Family and FriTate Beading, with the Text com- 
plete, and oopioua Notes. 

St. Matthew. Extra doth. Ob. 

St. Mask. Uniform with the abore. 6a, 

St. liUKS. YoLI. 6s. 6d. 

St. LuKS. Yol.n. 78. 

St. Johv. Y6L I. 0b. 6d. 

St. Jomr. Vol. n. Ob. 6d. 

St. JoHV. YoLm. 8b. 

Also in half Moroeeo,«U an excess of St. per volu9U, In extra half Morocco 
binding, at5s.6d.; or whoU Tttrkep Morocco, 6s. 6d. per vdnmte. 

Knots Untied. 

Being Plain Statements on Disptited Points in Beligion itom the 
Stand-point of an Evangelical Churchman. Large Post 8to. 
600pp. Fourth Enlarged Edition. Extra doth, 7s. 6d. 





— ■ i 


Old Paths. 

Christiamly from Om Btaod-point af 
BeuDd EditioD. Eitn ifotli, 7k. 6d. 

Holiness, 


f (he -weightjer matten cd 
Unlied.") Lmge PoBtevD. 

1 & Fiefoce for tlic Tini«. 
.i]x,8a,Bd. 


Fnurth edit 


ion, BniftU 


9ro., ortra di 



Bible Inspiration: 

iU Beslily and Natme. BsBOnd a^Oau. m& Oophma M 
Clath boBida, IB. Sd. 



Assurance. 

(2Tim.iT. 6,7,8.) Wia NoIm and Eittact* (Mm Writen of Uis 
17th ceatuiT. Beventh edition, enlugcd. Cloth, li. 



Bishops and Clergy of Other Days. 

with sn latmductioo oD Uie Real MeriU of tli 
Puritaiu. Ciona Sra., extra doUi, 4a. 



Church Reform, 



PATERNOSTER ROW. 



Coming Events and Present Duties. 

Being MisceUaneous Sermons and AddreBses on Prophetical 
Subjects; arranged, revised, and corrected. Second edition. 
Grown 8yo. Sa. 6d. 

Home Truths. 

A re-issue of the Misoellaneotis Writings of the Bev. Canon Byle, 
M. A., revised and adapted to this work. Ck)mplete in Four vols. 
Extra cloth, red edges, 18s. 

Home Truths. 

Being the Miscellaneous Writings revised and corrected especially 
for this work. Sixth edition. Fcap 8vo., extra cloth, lettered. 
Eight Series. Each illustrated with a Frontispiece and Vignette 
Title. Each volume, Ss. 6d. 

The same in sets only, eight vols., extra doth, gilt edges, 25s. 

Hymns for the Church on Earth. 

By the Bev. Canon Byle, M.A. An entirely New and Enlarged 
Edition of 400 Hymns. In various cloth bindings, 4s. 6d., 6s., and 
in Morocco, 10s. 

Hymns for the Church on Earth. 

Being 300 Hymns, for the most part of Modem date. Selected 
and arrlmged by the Bev. Canon Byle, M.A. In larsre type. 
Tenth edition. 

In small Svo., llack clothe red edges^is.; limp clot\ for invalids^ 4«.; 
black antique^ As. 6d.; violet and extra cloth antique, gilt edges, 6s. ; 
Turkey Morocco, \Qs. Qd, Sttssia and other bindings, for presentation . 



The Additional Hymn -Book. 

Being ThiTG Hundred Hymns ftir Fablic Wonhip, most or them 
not to bef'tund in the CollHtJoDd Dammool; uaed. IjuDp cJotlj, 
ed.: incttadDtli, thin booMg. ed. ; oloUi bouds, la. 

Spiritual Songs. 

Colon. Hi. i>. Being One Handled Bjnuia, not to be ftnmd in 
tbe liymn boo^ most oominonly used. Selected by the Ber. 
Cnnon Rfl?, M.A. Fifteenth eolaixed edition. Seiiel I., ^ued 
wrapper. Si.; dofli, Is. BBtlai n., ^lued wiappec, IR.; limf 



The Two Bears, 

And other BetmoBB (or Chnarco. With BliutretioDs by Daliit 
Extra doth. Is. 6d. 

Young Men Exhorted. 

AoAddrraBtoYonngMen. Tenth Edition. Pcap Bvo., Wpt 
cloth ezim, In. 'r thilM vrappsr, fld. 



'. O. Bute may be oiujnrd on 



FAIEBNOSTEK aOIT. 



