IZ 


mo 


D"n0bQA5M 


#fJ6 


Evangelical  tract  society,  j  £j0t  59 

Petersbnrg,  Va.  \ 


YOU  MUST  PRAY. 

UY    THE    REV.    J.    C.    KYLE,    B.  A. 


Reader,  if  you  wish  to  have  your  soul  saved,  there  is  one 
thing  which  you  must  never  forget  to  do,  you  must  pray. 

Prayer  alone  cannot  save  your  soul.  Only  Christ  Jesus 
can  do  that.  His  blood  and  nothing  else  can  cleanse  away 
sins.  But  prayer  is  the  only  way  by  which  men  can  make 
known  their  wants  to  God.  If  a  man  wants  his  sins  par- 
doned, he  must  pray. 

Of  all  the  means  of  grace,  prayer  is  by  far  the  most  impor- 
tant. A  man  may  reach  heaven  without  learning,  or  books, 
or  knowledge,  but  no  man  ever  reached  heaven  without 
prayer. 

Prayer  is  the  life-breath  of  a  man's  soul.  Without  it  we 
may  have  a  name  to  live,  and  be  counted  Christians,  but  we 
are  dead  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  feeling  that  we  must  cry 
to  God  for  mercy  and  peace  is  a  mark  of  grace,  and  the  habit 
of  spreading  before  him  our  soul's  wants  is  an  evidence  that 
we  have  the  spirit  of  adoption. 

Prayer  is  the  appoiuted  way  to  obtain  relief  of  our  spirit- 
ual necessities,  it  opens  the  treasury,  and  sets  the  fountain 
flowing.     If  we  have  not,  it  is  because  we  ask  not. 

Prayer  is  the  way  to  procure  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit 
upon  our  hearts.  Jesus  has  promised  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
Comforter.  He  is  ready  to  come  down  with  all  his  precious 
gifts,  renewing,  sanctifying,  purifying,  strengthening,  cheering, 
encouraging,  enlightening,  teaching,  directing,  guiding  into 
all  truth.     But  then  "He  waits  to  be  entreated." 

Reader,  believe  me,  if  your  soul  is  to  be  saved,  you  must 
pray.  God  has  no  dumb  childreu.  If  you  are  to  resist  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  you  must  pray  :  it  is  vain  to 
look  for  strength  in  the  hour  of  trial,  if  it  has  not  been 
sought  for.  You  may  be  thrown  with  those  who  uever  do  it  ; 
you  may  have  to  sleep  in  the  same  room  with  some  one  who 
never  asks  anything  of  God ;  still,  mark  my  words,  "you 
must  pray." 


#1oG 


Hollinger  Corp. 
PH  8.5 


